2 March 1996
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER-ELECTTHE HON JOHN HOWARD MPVICTORY SPEECH 1996 FEDERAL ELECTIONTHE WENTWORTI HOTEL, SYDNEY
E O E..............
Can I say to you, and my first words are addressed to all of the&nbsp;people of Australia, that I am very conscious of the enormous respotnsibility that has been placed upon rie and upon my colleagues by the verdict of the Australian people today.
I feel many emotions tonight, but the deepest emotion of all I feel is that of hunility that the Australian people have given me the privilege of leading the Government of this country and I want to say that the Government that I will lead will be a Government not only for the people who voted for us but also for the people who voted against us.
Eleven years ago when I was unsuccessful in an election I said in my concession speech that the things that united Australians were infinitely more important and more enduring than the things that divided Australians.
That has always been my political credo,&nbsp;and it will be a political credo that I will carry forward in the governance of this country over the next three years.
I want to thank Paul Keating for his gracious words. I want to wish Paul Keating and Annita and their family a good health and happiness in the future. Can I say that although we have been vigorous opponents be has been a great warrior for his own political cause and display&nbsp;our differences that is something that I recognise.
I owe thanks to many people and I will come to that in a moment. I want to make it clear that although uniting the Australian people will be the cornerstone of my approach in Government, we have been elected with a mandate, a very powerful mandate.
And whilst I will seek at all times unity and a common point of view, we have not been elected to be just a pale imitation of the Government that we have replaced.
We have been given this emphatic mandate tonight because there have been many things that have been left undone that need to be attended to and addressed. We need to implement the programme on which we were elected and I want to make it very clear that there will be an&nbsp;absolute determination with fairness and understanding and to do that and to do it with resolution and without qualification.
I want to thank all of my colleagues and I especially wish to thank Tim Fischer and the National Party. I will lead a Coalition in Government as I have led a Coalition in Opposition, and I look forward to working very closely with Tim Fischer as the Deputy Prime Minister of australia. To all of my Parliamentary colleagues, I say thank you. And I particularly want to extend my thanks to the Liberal Party organisation; to Tony Staley the Federal President; to Andrew&nbsp;Robb and Ron Walker the honorary federal treasurer and the many other members of the organisation who have worked so tirelessly.
Can I say it is an immensely proud moment for me tonight to lead back into Government the Liberal Party of Australia. We have endured sixteen years without a federal electoral victory and tonight is an immensely proud and wonderful moment.
And in celebrating the miracle of democracy that we can peacefully and respectfully transfer power through the ballot box and through no other device, let us also as Liberals and as Liberal supporters celebrate the magnificent win that we've had tonight.
It is a victory for those who voted Liberal in the past and for those who are by habit swinging voters, and it is a victory that has also embraced many traditional Labor Party areas of Australia. And when you look at the swings in Western Sydney and in some of the&nbsp;areas...( inaudible)..; and I look at the magnificent result in Queensland that wonderful result in South Australia and the way in which the Liberal Party held its very high proportion of seats in&nbsp;Victoria and the early returns in Western Australia are very encouraging. It is a comprehensive endorsement of the philosophy and the approach of the Liberal Party.
And to all of you who have endured the barbs and the insults and you've heard your Party being written off, I want to say to the rank and file of the Liberal Party, you have endured far too many years in the political wilderness. And tonight it is a victory that we all share. It is not mine alone, it is mine because I was given from the moment I became the leader of the Liberal Party just over a year ago, I was given the most magnificent loyalty and support by my&nbsp;Parliamentary cnlleagues and all of the members of the organisation. And I say from the bottom of my heart how grateful I am for that support and that loyalty because that is ( inaudible)....
I said when I launched our campaign only a few weeks ago that one of the great features of the Liberal Party is that it was owned by no section of the Australian community and our only obligation is to give good Government to all of the Australian people.
And it will be my intention and my commitment that from now I and my colleagues will devote our all to delivering good government, to doing good things, and for delivering the maximum degree of unity and cohesion to the Australian people.
There is something special about being an Australian and today I experience along with everybody else I had to queue up to cast my vote, and the bloke in front of me turned around and said, " oh, hello". He had a Labor Party how to vote ticket he didn't have a Liberal one&nbsp;and he said, " It's nice to meet you but I'm not going to vote for you!" And that is, can I say, that is a celebration of what Australia is all about.
And the very last thing that I want to say is a special word of thanks to some people who've been very close to me over the past months. I want to thank my own personal staff. The personal staff of a Party leader carry enormous burdens and responsibilities and I am&nbsp;personally very very grateful to all of my staff for the magnificent job that they have done.
They have shared the disappointments and tonight they share the exhilaration of this remarkable victory.
And lastly, can I say to my wife Janetle and to my three children, Melanie, Tim and Richard, of all the things these four people in the world, they have kept me going and they have sustained me and they have shared the difficulties as well as the successes of politics. And&nbsp;anybody in public life should always remember the contribution of their families and I unhesitatingly express not only my affection but also my enormous gratitude to my wife and my three children for what they have done for me and what they continue to mean to me.
And my very last words are to all of the people of Australia, to my fellow Australians, I am both deeply moved and I understand very very deeply and very profoundly the responsibility that has been given to me tonight. And I can but make a simple promise and a simple commitment, that from now on I will do all I can to advance the welfare of all of the Australian people.
I will focus on tbose things that bind us together, I will focus on our strengths, I will defend the interests and the values and the principles of this countty both domestically and internationally. There is something very special, there is something unique about our nation and about being Australian and I commit myself and my future Government to the service of all of the Australian people.
Thank you.


Tuesday 26 March 1996 
The Regent, Sydney 
E&amp;OE... 
Thank you very much to you lan, Ladies and Gentlemen, I appreciate very very much the warm and generous words of welcome from your President. I understand that I am the first Liberal Prime Minister in history to address the Business Council of Australia. I'm also, if my memory serves me correctly, addressing you in precisely the venue in which the Business Council was launched in 1983 and as I look around the room I see many people that I've had a long association with some = tetching
back to those now dim distant days when the Coalition was last in Government, some that I'd made the acquaintance of more recently. 
But, I do very sincerely value the chance that I have tonight so early in the life of the new Government to address such a representative gathering of the chief executives and the leaders of major busincss organisations and of major comipanies in Australia representing the whole gammit of business, commercial and industrial endeavour in
our country. 
And in doing so I want to present a few very simple themes. I want to say how very conscious I am of the responsibility we carry. We are the beneficiaries of a remarkable degree of goodwill in the Australian community. I recognse as a practicing politician of 22 years standing that goodwill in a political context is a very transient quality and one has to work very hard to gain it and one can lose it very,
very, quickly and I'm very conscious of that. 
I'm also conscious of the broad national responsibility that any Prime Minister, any Leader of the Government, carries and there are many dimensions to good governmnent. This morning 1 had the opportunity of meeting the leaders of the five major welfare organisations in Australia bodies such as the Salvation Army and the Society of St
Vincent de Paul to talk about the problem of youth homnelessness. 
Tonight I have the opportunity of addressing the wealth generators in Australia. The two things do intersect not just because I've met the leaders of both on the one day but without wealth being generated the capacity to care for the less fortunate in our community simply isn't there. And sometimes people who talk about the need to care for the less fortunate lose sight of the fact that we have responsibilities to ensure that wealth continues to be generated. 
I'm also conscious as an Australian political leader of the immense pride all of us feel in Australian achievements. Tonight that has a special significance because the Oscars announced earlier this evening represent the pinnacle of Australian achievement in that area. To take out five of them is a remarkable tribute to a remarkable industry and an industry that has done great things to refurbish, and strengthen, and promote that important sense of national pride which is so
tremendously important to all of us. 
It is true, as lan said in his introduction, that a change of Government carries a great deal of significance. I said on the night of the election that although it would be the goal of my Government to govern for all of the community and for those who voted against us, as well as those who voted for us, I have no intention of leading a
Government that is going to be a pale imitation of the Government that we replaced. 
There are a number of specific areas of economic policy that will be very different under our administration. But there will also be some stylistic changes which are equally important. One of the unfortunate features, I believe, of the latter years of the former Government this didn't apply so much to its early years in office was the way in which government decisions were made on the basis of awarding mates and of
punishing political enemies. The old idea of playing favourites that you doled out the favours to those who overtly supported you and you threatened, and on occasions actually delivered retribution, to those who didn't support you. And I know that there are many people in this room who had some experience of that. I think that is a very
regrettable feature of the latter years of the former Government.
I think in a broader sense there is also a mood developing in Australia. Some call it Spolitical correctness. Some call it social censorship. Some simply call it intimidatory attitudes towards free speech. I think we had developed a very unhealthy mood in Australia that certain subjects were absolutely off limits and that you couldn't hope to talk about them in a rational open fashion without being branded as some kind of bigot or as a person carrying prejudice. 
Now that is not, let me assure you, an invitation or a clarion call to the insensitive, to the intolerant in our community to feel that they can indulgence in any kind of insensitive language. But I think it is a recognition that the strength of any democratic society is a rigid adherence to that great injunction of Voltaire: that I may not agree
with what he says but I will defend to the death his right to say it.
I think we did, on occasions, in relation to a number of subjects reach a situation where it was very difficult for some to speak their minds without being branded in that very negative, in that very pejorative fashion. 
I have set a number of important economic goals for the new government of Australia and your President has touched on some of those. It is important, if we are to have any hope of bringing about a sustained reduction in uncrnployment and particularly in the unacceptably high level youth unemployment in Australia it is necessary to remove some of the present speed limits on economic growth in Australia. 
There are many causes of those speed limits but by far the biggest single constraint under which the Australian economy continues to operate is the size of our current account deficit. I can almost recite in my sleep, having gone through a very long election campaign, the nature of the current account deficit problem and it falls easily
from my lips to say that in 1995 it was the largest in the OECD, larger even than Mexico's. 
Now that, of course, Is a problem and a challenge which has been inherited by the new Government. And I don't think it comes aIasny surprise to anybody in this audience for me to say that the tackling of that problem involves achieving a great deal of success on two fronts. One of those is a much greater success in the area of microeconomic reform, or as John Prescott, I think, renamied it very effectively some
years ago much greater progress in reducing the cost of doing business. And the challenge of that is very heavy on me and very heavy on all members of the new Oovernment. And I accept very openly that one of the things that you will be entitled to judge us by in three years time, or whenever the next election occurs, one of the things that you will be entitled to judge us by is the progress that we've made on that particular front. 
And central in our view to tackling the challenge of reducing business costs is, of course, to do something about the arthritic character of Australia's labour market. Now, I imagine that many of you in this room have head me make many speeches over the years about reforming Austraia's labour market and if there is one thing that over the last decade L'vc talked about more than any other single thing, even more
than my passion for cricket, is my very strong commitment to brinS about reform to Australia's labour market. 
Let me say very calmnly, but in very deliberate termis, that if the word mandate means anything, if people vote for any policy) ever, at any election, then I would argue with all the strength I can muster that the Australian people did vote on the 2nd of March, in voting for us, they did vote to change Australia's industrial relations system. And I d&amp; have a very strong commitment, a very strong personal commitment, and my new Government has a very strong collective commitment to changing Australia's industrial relations system. 
I don't say that in any antagonistic sense to the trade union movement. Relations between us and the trade union movement will be different from the relations between the former govetnment and the trade union movement but that doesn't mean that the trade union movement will be entrirely shut-out from consultation. It doesn't mean that I reject the role of the trade union movement as representing the interests of those
Australians, dwindling though they now be in number, who choose to belong to trade unions. Nor do I deny the historic role of trade unions in Australia's industrial development. Nor do I deny the fact that in recent years a number, but not all trade union leaders have adopted different attitudes which have made a far more positive contribution to the development of an intelligent rational economic debate in
Australia. 
My argument is not with mainstream trade unionism or mainstream trade unionists. My argument is not with the right of people to gather together collectively and have their point of view put collectively if that is their choice. My argument is with the
current system which confers a legal monopoly on the bargaining process on the organised trade union movement in Australia. My desire is to change that monopoly to end it. My desire is to givc free, effective, open choice to Individuals within the framework of guaranteeing minimum conditions and providing effective protection against exploitation. 
But it goes a bit further than that. My aim is grounded in a far more optimistic view about the future of AustralIan society than that wvhich is emanated from some leaders of the union movement and from the mouths of many members of the former government. You will all be very conscious of the dispute involving the employees of the CP. A subsidiary at Weipa. 
I think many of you will remember the rhetoric that was used by some leaders of the trade union movement at that particular time when reference was made to lines being drawn in the sand, of the inflicting of pain on Australian companies and the battle cries at that particular time many of you will remember. I think many of you will also remember that at the time of that dispute, certainly I do, an interview with one of the employees at Weipa, a truck driver, who had signed one of the contracts and I've never forgotten the interview he gave on early morning radio in which he spoke of the change that had come over his attitude towards his employment after he had signed the contract, of how his contribution to the company was valued more highly as a result, of how he felt he was making a contribution to the furture of the company and how his whole attitude to his work, and to his job and to
his responsibilities had altered. And when I listened to both of those contributions to that debate, a few months ago, I reflected to myself that in the case of those who were talking about inflicting pain and drawing lines in the sand 1 was hearing the voices of the past, so far as Australia's industrial relations system was concerned. And when I
listened to that truck driver at Weipa I was listening to the voice of the fuxture. A far more optimistic, co-operative future and a future that sees a common purpose and a fusion of interests between employer-, and employees at the individual enterprise level. 
So, Ladies and Gentlemen, we are very strongly committed to implementing our industrial relations policy. That is not said belligerently, but it is said determinately. We do have the authority the people gave us on the 2nd of March to implement that policy. It was spelt out very clearly. It was spelt out very openly. And it is our
intention to present the legislation giving effect to that policy including the alterations to the unfair dismissal laws, including the changes to compulsory unionism, including the restoration of the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act. It is our intention to present till of that legislation as one consolidated package shortly after Parliament meets on 30th April. Arnd we intend to go ahead with that legislation. We think of all the economic reforms that were voted for on the 2nd of March. None is more important, none is more significant, to Australia's future. 
The only other thing that I wish to say about that package is that it will be implemented in a spirit of goodwill towards all sections of the commnunity. It is not a package designed to reduce the living standards of Australian workers. There is never any merit in anybody advocating reduced living standards for Australian workers. There is no merit for a Coalition Government, there is no merit for a business leader.
I think all of us want to sec people with higher real incomes and rising living stndards but we recognise that those goals can only be achieved if we bring about a more competitive, a more productive economy and more productive workplaces and that is the foundation of the goals that we set ourselves in the area of industrial relations 
Mr Chairman, it's not only, of course, industrial relations where we have responsibilities. The other clement of tackling the current account deficit is. of course, to do something about Australia's very low level of savings. And that is why we have made a very strong cormitment. The Treasurer the new Treasurer, Peter Costello has made a very strong commitmnent to achieving the aim of an underlying budget balance in two years time. 
Now, that is, in the modem jargon, a very big ask. It will involve a turn around of something like S4 billion a year over the next two years. You are familiar with what said about the budget deficit before the election and you are also very familiar with what was revealed after the election and I simply make that point and move on to the fact that we do face a particular challenge in that area. 
And it is made harder by the fact that I am determined that the commitments we made to the Australian people before the second of March are honoured. I don't think any of us can greet with any equanimity the steady decline in respec for our political and parliamentary institutions whch has occurred over the past few years. One of the
reasons why the respect for our institutions has declined is the way in which promises ame too freely made and then even more freely repudiated after governments are elected to power. 
I think part of the process of restoring trust and confidence in the process the political process is for governments to try to the best of their ability, and even beyond that if that's possible, to meet the commitments that they have made. And I have indicated to my colleagues and I have indicated publicly and I will go on indicating it publicly that nobody should imagine that I will lightly accept any repudiation of the commitments that we made to people. And even more important
than other benchmarks against which you are entitled to judge us in three years time you will be entitled to judge us according to the benchmark of wvhethcr or not we have honoured commitments made to people and to the Australian nation before the 2nd of March because unless that stream of trust" that element of confidence, can be restored then the whole res~ pect of the community for the political process and for the process of government is going to further disintegrate. 
So I am very conscious, all of my colleagues are very conscious of that fiscal challenge ahead of us and we are having the first meeting of the Expenditure Review Committee here in Sydney tomorrow. 
Can I just say something because I mentioned the word Sydney. Could I just say something about the interest in my slightly altered living arrangements residentially speaking. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have no ' t decided to move the seat of Government from Canberra to Sydney. Some people have urged me to do that I might say. But haven't, But what I have indicated is that because my family horne will continue to be in Sydney, unlike my two immediate predecessofs but not unlike some of my
predecessors further back, I will spend a little more time working out of my Sydney office ad as a result I will a little more time, relatively speakdig, in Sydney than did my immediate predecessors. 
Now, I don't make any apologies for that. I actually think there are advantages in that. I think there are consideraible advantages particularly in relation to contact with the business community in spending a little more time out of the Federal capital. And
there is little doubt that the professional bureaucrats who advise government contain a very high proportion of extremely dedicated, committed, men and women. It is also important to understand that Canberra is not a city which by its very natuire is an
automatic cross-scction of the Australian community and certainly not an automatic cross-section of the Australian business community. 
So, although the decision that I've taken is a function of personal circumstainces, and family circumstances, I think it could have the valuable by-product of retaining a closer link with sa least a section of the Australian business community. I say only a section, very deliberately, and I think that is very important. 
And that, of course, leads me to what in a sense is my final point and that is to say something about the relations between my new governent and the business community. I say to you very directly and very simply that I value very highly the associations and the friendships that I've made with many people in this room. Many of you met me when I was in Government. Most of you, I think, have met me and got to know me better since I've bcen in Opposition. And I thank a lot of people in this room far their continued interest in and support of the Coalition of the Liberal Party and their continued willingness to give advice to me and to my colleagues through some pretty lean years over the last thirteen years. I've had occasion over that thirteen year period to wonder whether the Liberal Party would ever get back into Government
and I'm sure a number of people in this room have had reason to think that. And I am grateful to many in this room for their continued interest and their continued support and I do take seriously ' lie responsibility of consulting all sections of the business comnmunity. 
I valued a lot of things the Business Council had to say, I think, in an appropriate way during the course of the election campaign about many of the important goals that Ian correctly said it shared in common with the Coaldition. I valued the fact that it tried to keep open dialogue with the farmer Labor Government. I do not believe, as some
occasionally have suggested speaking for themselves, that when a Labor Government is in power that in some way it is the role of the business community of Australia to fight a guerilla action against it. I don't. I think it is the responsibility of people who have the interests of Australia at heart to co-operate with the elected Government of the day whatever their own political vantage point, or their political attitude may be. 
I've never forgotten runniing into a very well known business figurc in Australia he's not so active now but he certainly was then shortly after the 1983 in the Golden Wing lounge at Sydney airport. And he said that he had just written two leters. lie said that he had written a letter to Malcolm Fraser commiserating with hirn and he'd written a letter to Bob Hawke congratulating him and telling him that although he
didn't vote him and he regretted the outcome he was willing to do anything he could to help bring about better government in Australia. Now, that strck me as the right attitude. it struck me as the pro-Australian attitude and it struck me as an attitude that would be a good exwmple, not only to other people in the business community but
also a pretty good example to leaders of other sections of Australian society who having participated in the democratic process ought to remember that at that the end of the day in our kind of society once you got fifty plus one you are entitled to take to decisions particularly the decisions that you told the people you were going to take if you were lucky enough to get fifty plus one.
To you, Ian, and to all of your colleagues, can I say that my door will be open. You may, if you all want to come at the same time, you may take a little longer than perhaps might otherwise be the case. But I will try very hard to keep good relations with the business community. particularly with the Business Council of Australia. I have told all of the colleagues of mine who have anything that vaguely relates to the
business comnmunity that keeping contact with you is not something that you do just in election campaigns and the lead up to it, that they will be judged by the quality of their responses to all of you ovcr the long-term and not over the short-term. 
I'm excited. I'm enthusiastic. I'm very committed, but above all else I'm very conscious of the tremendous responsibility that 1 have of the unique privilege it is for any Australian to be elected to this office for no other reason than in the most important one of all it does give to me and to my colleagues in co-operation with you, aad other people of goodwill in the Australian commnunity, that great treasured opportunity to do good things for the Australian commnity, to make sensible decisions in the interests of the entire community and to try and leave Australia a better, a stronger, a prouder and a finer nation at the end of our term of office than what we inherited at the beginning of that term. 
Thank you very much. 
Ends. 


16 April 1996 
To Jeff Kennett, to John Kennedy, to Ross Oakley, to the Lord Mayor of Melbourne, to Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Federai Opposition, to other distinguished guests,ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a great delight to share this marvellous Australian occasion and this marvellous Melbourne occasion and to participate in what is certainly the best attended ball that I have been to in all my 22 years of political life. 
It brings together over 3000 sports loving Australians on the greatest sporting arena in the Australian nation. I thought you'd like that but it's true and it also celebrates a hundred years of the authentic Australian football code. I say that with continuing respect for all of the other football codes that enrapture Australians, both as participants and also as spectators, but a hundred years of a game that has bound together the affections and the support and the adulation of millions of Australians. 
It's a game that's cut right across boundaries of class and politics and attitude and background, and it is an occasion, ladies and gentlemen, in which we can salute the contribution of the players  - and there are many of the greats of Australian football here tonight - and all of us join in saluting the contribution that they've made to the game and it's also an occasion for acknowledging the contribution of those who run the game and it's an occasion to celebrate the sheer delight and joy that the game has brought to millions of Australians through the generation. 
Ladies and gentlemen I am delighted to be here both personally and as the leader of the federal Government to pay my compliments to the Australian Football League, to compliment it on the way in which it has contributed to the great national cement of Australia, which is our affection for sporting endeavour and sporting achievement. I wish those who run the Australian Football League, I wish those who play in it, I wish those who follow it, and above all, I wish the citizens of Melbourne a very happy night and I wish you many many years of enjoyment in watching the great game of Australian football. Thank you very much for having me. 



18 April 1996
E &amp; OE .............
Thank you very much Professor Ricklefs. To Professor Terrell, the Vice Chancellor of the Australian National University, Mr Robert Gottliebsen, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. I was delighted to accept the invitation extended to me to launch this magazine. I did so for a number of reasons. One of them was that I always appreciate and respect new publishing ventures and in the spirit of competitive endeavour in the publishing and the communications world, new publications, particularly publications that aim at excellence and depth and quality rather than superficiality, are things that ought to be encouraged and applauded by governments and indeed by all participants in the political process because they add in their different ways to the accumulation of understanding and knowledge about the subjects they cover and in this particular case which of course leads me on to the other reason why I accepted the invitation this is a publication about our region. It's a publication about what you all know to be the fastest growing and in economic terms the most dynamic area of the world. It's also a region whose relations with Australia, or should I say Australia's interaction with which has been the subject of much comment over the past few months, and my presence here today is an incremental, in its own right an incremental demonstration of the importance that I attach and my new Government attaches to Australia's association and involvement with and commitment to the political economic and social affairs of the Asian Pacific region.
An audience like this doesn't need to be reminded of the network of bonds that exist and continue to grow between Australia and the different countries of the Asia Pacific region, but suffice it for me to remnind you of a couple of them. There must be something in the order of 200 000 people in the region whose tertiary education was in Australia from the establishment of the Colombo Plan back in 1950 until now. The growing trade penetration of the region, the ready embrace of the market opportunities that exist in the region by so many Australian companies and firms, particularly in the small and medium sized enterprise area, the contribution that is made by so many Australians of Asi-in descent to the life of this country, not just the business life where their mark has been very profound indeed, but also to the social, cultural and increasingly the political life of the Australian nation. 
So the bonds and the linkages grow and as the Prime Minister of the newly installed Government, let me again say as I have said on a number of occasions, and my Foreign Minister is saying almost as I speak, here in the region himself, that the new Government does have a strong commitment to the Asian Pacific region. There will inevitably be some differences of nuance. There will inevitably be a different style of doing things as befits a different Government. There will be a constant assertion of those proud and distinctive Australian values of tolerance and independence and equality of opportunity which have been a hallmark of this country, and as I said on the night of the election, that I will defend and propound the values and the principles of the Australian nation, both domestically and internationally, and the basis of any proper relationship with another country is a basis of mutual respect, of an understanding that cultures and attitudes and values can be different, but those differences can be a source of nurturing a relationship rather than a reason why that relationship won't develop. 
I was glad to have such an early opportunity to meet Dr Mahathir, the Prime Minister of Malaysia. We had a very valuable meeting in which each of us recognised that a strong relationship between two companies that have a lot in common but also come from different vantage points and different attitudes and some differences in sets of values, that the basis of a sound relationship was one of mutual respect and understanding and a recognition that you didn't necessarily improve a relationship by reading lectures to each other on particular issues but rather looking for points of understanding and points of common contact and mutual interest, and there are many between Australia and that particular country as there are between Australia and so many other countries in the Asia Pacific region. 
I want to complement the Research School which has a very long and distinguished tradition stretching back both at its current manifestation and in some of its earlier formations, stretching back over many decades in promoting the understanding of the importance of our region to the future of Australia and many people in that school over the years have made a big contribution to a better and a more mature understanding of the importance of the region to Australia's future. I also want to complement BRW, Mr Gottliebsen and his colleagues, for being associated with another venture, and together the Centre and BRW will make I hope an important further contribution to an intelligent understanding of the nature of the different countries in the region. 
The breadth of the subjects covered in the first edition is impressive and in every sense of the word I wish the magazine well. I thank those who contributed to it. I take the opportunity again of saying to all of you who are concerned about the future of Australia's relations with the region that my Government's commitment to those relations is very strong. It's firm. It will as the months unfold I think surprise a few people but we intend to do our work in relation to that association in our own way and in our own time, recognising that there is a national interest in a continuity of foreign policy stances where that continuity is natural. Where it is not natural there is little point in trying to pursue it. I think it is fair to say that in respect of Australia's association with the region there has been a proud, bi-partisan contribution. 
If one goes back to the 1950s, under Coalition Governments the great building blocks were laid. Successive governments of both political persuasions have made important contributions. I don't denigrate or decry for a moment the contribution made by the former government of this country to building our associations with the region and I think it distorts history, I think it insults the intelligence and the maturity of the Australian people for those who have different political views from mine to pretend that in some way Australia's relations with the Asia Pacific region were born after 1972, were suspended in 1975 and then resumed in 1983.
The truth of the matter is they began in the late 1950s in a big way and they continued ini a sense uninterrupted from then until now although inevitably with different governments, different Prime Ministers, different personalities, different emphases, they changed over the years but I think one of the things, and I will finish on this note, that we must understand about the region and that is that the circumstances in which the countries of the region interact with each other will change and there will be a need constantly to update relationships between countries and update attitudes and in that context, I particularly welcome the reaffirmation in Tokyo of the very strong association between the United States and Japan. I believe the announcement that was made there between the Japanese Prime Minister and the American President demonstrated the capacity of that relationship to be constantly brought up to date, to be renewed and in a practical, forward looking way, make a fuarther contribution to stability in the region but to you, Professor Ricklefs, to Robert Gottliebsen, congratulations. I wish the magazine well. I know it will make a very positive contribution to an incredibly important foreign policy focus for all Australians. 
Thank you very much. 
18 April 1996



Opening address to IISS/SDSC Conference "The New Security Agenda in the Asia-Pacific Region" Parliament House, 1 May 1996
Chairman, Professsor Bob O'Neill, Professor Paul Dibb 
Congratulate the ANU's Strategic Defence Studies centre on its 30th anniversary.
The Centre has played a significant role in promoting debate on a broad range security issues through conferences such as this and  through the links it has established with like-minded
organisations in regional and other nations.
Delighted that the international Institute for Strategic Studies is co-hosting this conference 
First time that it has done so in australia demonstrates the close ties with our friends in the United Kingdom 
Welcome speakers at this conference fom Australia 
Also warmly welcome our visiting guest speakers from overseas 
GLOBAL IMPORTANCE OF THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION
IISS involvement in this conference reflects the importance of the Asia-Pacific region to world affairs 
Economically: the Asia-Pacific region, as defined by APEC,  constitutes about 60 per cent of the worlds GDP
APECSs share of world trade increased from 34 per cent in 1970 to nearly 50 per cent in 1994  - most of the increase due to the export performance of east asian economies 
It's no accident that the Director-General of the World Trade Organisation-the wto will have visited this region at least three times by the enji of this year and that the WTO ministerial meeting is to be held in Singapore at the end of the year.
If growth can be sustained, by 2020 APEC will contain seven of the world's top ten economies based on purchasing power parity and APEC will account for nearly 75 percent of the world's production and trade 
The region will be a principal source if growth in world  demand, the main destination for global investment 
If only for these reasons, Europeans and others others have an important interest in the stability of the Asia-Pacific region 
But we also know from our own experience this century that security is indivisible
Despite the end of the cold war this mains no less true 
war in Eeurope or the Middle East can have global ramifications 
so would conflict in Asia
Strategic developments in this region therefore merit Europe's close attention 
CHANGE IN THE REGION - BENEFITS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH 
the scale of change in the region is huge we are  witnessing tectonic shifts in economic and strategic relationships 
Economic growth has been the principal engine of change: in China growth has averaged 10 per cent per annum for more than a decade, Koreas's about 8.5 per cent for a decade, in Taiwan, Hong Kong and
South East Asia the story has been similar 
The end of the cold war has quickened the pace of change 
Such growth inevitably produces enormous strategic change and pressures 
But it is unequivocally a good thing 
20 years or so ago, China had just beg to emerge from economic devastation 
Thailand's stability was threatened by communist insurgency, as was even more recently the Philippines 
Soviet competition with the United States was a source of tension, delaying economic development and political opening up
US confidence was shaken by the Vietnam war, and its will to engage was doubted in the region
India's potential was stymied by cold war confrontation 
The changes that have happened have overwhelmingly been beneficial for the lives of the people in the region, for political stability and for the world as a whole 
One of the important features of growth within the region has been the degree of regional integration it has fostered 
This is an influential factor for stability 
Intra-regional trade has grown from 55 per cent in 1980 to over 70 per cent in 1994  - higher than in Europe.
ECONOMIC CHALLENGES 
It is in the interest of the region and the rest of the world that growth continues: the region remains an important, if not the most important source of growth in world demand.
But growth at the same rate will not be easy 
Markets will have to be kept open; huge amounts of capital will be necessary to meet infrastructure challenges in energy and transport 
Fuelling growth will present issues of security of supply and the environment 
Demand for skilled labour, population movements and urbanisation present new problems. 
In helping meet these challenges APEC has an important role and my government will do what it can to strengthen it.
while APEC is an economic body, its role in sustaining growth and supporting economic integration can make an invaluable strategic contribution .
STRATEGIC CHALLENGES
We cannot simply assume that rational economic decision-making will prevail 
even if we could that does not necessarily imply stability 
New problems emerge even as interdependence grows, for example over trade access,intellectual property and human rights
Political change and greater prosperity mean new external-oriented rather than internal roles for defence forces, modernisation and more sophisticated weaponry 
Nationalism, ethnic tensions, territorial disputes did not disappear with the end of the Cold War.
Circumstances can change very quickly: the unpredictable does happen 
Korea and Taiwan remain sources of  tension and possibly major confrontation 
In such an environment, it is not surprising and sensible that the focus of strategies such as yourselves has been on the new strategic pressures  and uncertainties that economic growth creates
through changing the relativities of power among the United States, Japan, China and Korea.
These particular relationships will largely determine the future strategic shape and stability of the region 
Attention often focuses on china because of its size and the territorial issues that remain to be resolved 
My view is that it is an undeniably good thing for China and for the rest of us that China's economy has opened up and grown at the rate it has 
It is in our interest that China shoulid articipate in the world economy and have a stake in the stability of the region 
It is important therefore that we build constructive relationships with China.
It is equally important that china sees its own interests lying in removing uncertainties, building stability and strengthening regional and global institutions 
We cannot for example afford to have a major economy like china's outside the WTD.
Equally china needs to understand that it too will  benefit from membership and so needs to reach an understanding on terms of entry that is acceptable to the wider world community
ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES
Much is said about the nature of US engagement in the region 
My view is that it is central to the stability of the region 
I am confident about it, but we should not take it for granted 
Economic growth in the region invites US  engagement
And the United States understands the importance of security if that growth is to continue
The United States reiterated its commitment to maintaining a forward presence in the region in its East Asia strategy last year 
The US response to the challenges posed by the North Korean nuclear program, the reaffirmation of strategic interest in freedom of navigation in the South China Sea, and the response to tensions
over Taiwan are important signals of the United States' appreciation of the stake it has in the region 
Most recently, the joint declaraticion on security by President Clinton and the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Hashimoto, provided a welcome e affirmation of the Japanese alliance 
It is in the region's interests to support the United States' presence in the region
The Japanese-USus declaration underlined the very substantial contribution that makes to the security of the region 
My government is committed to reinvigorating Australia's alliance with the United States and supporting US regional engagement 
AUSTRALIA'S ROLE
Want to conclude with some comments on the role of Australia and the approach of my government 
Will be brief as my colleagues, the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister, will address you later 
I do not want to exaggerate the role that Australia can play 
Neither should it be underestimated
Australia's size and location, its advanced and diverse economy, the steadiness of its purpose and policy directions, and its own defence capacities are important to the prosperity and stability of
the region 
The ANZUS alliance and Australia's web of understandings with regional partners - the security agreement with Indonesia, the five power defence arrangements with Malaysia and Singapore, the joint declaration of princliples with Papua New Guinea and closer defence relations with New Zealand - are important elements in the region's security structure , 
By and large australian governments of both political persuasions have shared approaches on Foreign Policy and security issues 
There will be strong elements of continuity especially in the priority that Australia has traditionally given to the Asia-Pacific region.
But some differences of emphasis will be visible 
The first requirement if Australia is to continue to benefit from growth in the region and contribute to regional stability is its own economic health 
Structural reform, especially of areas affecting our international competitiveness, is my top priority 
The government is committed to strengthening its defence relationships and dialogue with countries in South East Asia and North Asia 
The government is also committed to participating in and strengthening multilateral pproaches to security, especially the ASEAN regional forum which is developing into an important forum for dialogue and confidence building 
An effective defence force is vital for Australia's own defence and an important contribution to regional stability 
My government has committed itself to improve the operational capability of the defence force 
Finally, in a world where domestic and external issues impact so readily on each other the need has never been more apparent for coordination of our defence, trade and foreign policies along with our
domestic policies 
To help achieve this my government has established a National Security Committee of Cabinet which will engage the responsible ministers.
CONCLUSION 
thank you for the invitation to open your conference 
I wish you fruitful and enjoyable discussions.


Launch of Paper: "Ethical Standards and Values in the Australian Public Service" Parliament House, Canberra 
9 May 1996 
Thank you very much, Dr Keating, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to thank Michael Keating for inviting me to launch this document. In some respects, I'm a little surprised to find myself launching a document of this kind, being a person who normally eschewvs the notion that you write down, in a detailed descriptive way, codes of behaviour. For example, I've always regarded myself in the ongoing debate about the need for a Bill of Rights in the Australian Constitution as something of a common law min, who thinL-q the gtrenrhs of the inqtitiution, rather than the detail of the written word, is the greater guarantee of liberty, and the greater guarantee of freedom. But having been shown a draft of this document, I thought it put in such a commonsense coherent fashion a reasonable, understandable statement of the ethical values and principles of the Australian Public Service, that I readily agreed, not only with the publication of the document, but also to come here today to launch it. 
It's not in any sense trite of me to say that the Australian public is very fortunate that over the years, it's had a federal public service that has been distinguished by two characteristics. The first of those characteristics is an extremely high degree of integrity and honesty. One of the really remarkable things about public life in Australia has been the very low incidence of any sustainable allegations of corruption or -impropriety on behalf of the federal bureaucracy. Indeed, the entire federal sphere of political endeavour in Australia, both politically and also bureaucratically, has by and large in the ninety-five odd years of Federation, been free of corruption, although the saime cannot be said wvith eqtial passion and eqiual detail abouit other levels of government. Now, that is not the word of a complacent individual, but it does record a fact, and the reputation for integrity that the federal public service has enjoyed is one of Its hillmirlks. The other characteristic of course, is a very high degree of professiona1i sm, and a willingness over the years irrespective of the political complexion of Government to give comprehensive and, on most occasions, pretty zealous technical advice. 
Now the Australian Public Service has, like the rest of Australian society, changed a lot over the ninety-five years of its existence. I've noticed a difference between the public service that I now work with, and the public service that I worked with before 1983. I'm happy to say that most of the changes that have occurred over that period of time have been beneficial changes. For example there is, I think, a more comfortable balanre between the need to preserve a capacity to give fearless independent technical advice, but equally the need to implement and to understand the reasons for the political decisions of the government of the day. think there's an easier relationship nowv between private office staff and the senior branches of the public service than used to obtain perhaps fifteen or twenty years ago. 
There's a greater understanding by the public service that political parties exist to implement policies and philosophies and attitudes, and they have a perfect right, having won a mandate from the people, to implement those, and even though those who give independent public service advice may on many occasions not share those values or principles, it's nonetheless the proper working-out of the process that those decisions should be implemented. I don't find some of the uneasiness between senior bureaucrats and senior private offie staff that I encountered on earlier occasions. I don't find the same degree of that now, and I think that has been a very beneficial change. Along with the rest of the work force, the Commonwealth public service has of course entered an era of much greater flexibility. There's probably a higher degree of turnover, and some of the mobility of the work force, which has become a characteristic of the Australian labour market, of course has affected the public service. 
I think this document will prove to be two things. I think it will represent a very clear and simple statement of the values of a professional public service. It will not purport to cover every situation, and at the end of the day, every individual is the ultimate judge of his or her owvn propriety, and no document, no Minister, no senior bureaucrat, no adviser can really, at the end of the day, define what is right and what is wrong in any given situation and it is always at the end of the day a matter of individual conscience and a matter of individual judgement as to what is the direct and proper thing to do. 
There is little doubt that the public attitudes towards the public service has changed a lot over the last couple of generations. The public now is more demanding, they're more demanding of service, they're more demanding of explanation, they are more -articulate,.. they are more persistent, they are more readily mobilised into lobby groups, they know the capacity of the media to harass and to bring about change because of exposure and harassment and they understand how the system of exerting public rps're works now, far better than they' did a generation or so ago. That requires of the public service an understanding that it is not good enough simply to deliver decisions, to deliver judgements, it is also necessary to explain the reason for it. And the willingness of senior bureaucrats, and I think particularly ( if) people who are always in the public consciousness, like for example the taxation office something that touches all of us the willingness of the Commissioner of Taxation of today in a very effective fashion to go public to explain the reasons behind many taxation office decisions, the more public friendly approach that has been taken by agencies such as that, I think they represent extremely healthy development. 
The public service is a lot more conscious now of the need to explain, the need to justify the need to defend. I think it's also important for the political arm of government to, from time to time, focus on the relationship between the bureaucracy and the political side of government and as a still very new Prime Minister, I've been very conscious of that. 
I respect the still essentially non-political tradition of the Australian Public Service. There will always be debates between political parties about the level of politicisation of the public service. There will always be different views of the notion of a nonpolitical or an apolitical public service in no way precludes the fact that like every other Australian, individual members of the federal public service can have fiercely held and are entitled to have fiercely held, partisan political views. It's a measure of their professionalism that we can have a public service where they have those views, but are able to continue irrespective of those views to give dispassionate, clear and articulate
professional advice. 
The proper relationship is for the public service to give the fearless advice; to give it professionally, to give it cogently, and to give it accurately for it to be properly considered and not summarily dismissed by the government of the day. But that decision having been taken, I think desirably if it is contrary to the advice tendered with some explanation as to why the decision has been taken, then for the decision to be carried out by the. public service without further questioning or hindrance. Now in my experience, that has by and large been the approach that has been adopted by the public service. 
I'm very happy to say, and would like to in this context, say something of Michael Keating's contribution to the Australian Public Service, because this will be, I think, one of the last, if not the last public occasion that he and I will appear together as Prime Minister and a Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. He has personified in many ways the apolitical character of the modern public service. I first encountered him when he was a senior officer in the Prime Minister's Department when the Fraser government was in office. He worked very hard for that government. He gave it a lot of good quality advice, some of it was accepted, some of it wasn't. He'll probably ponder privately to himself that perhaps the things that were accepted shouldn't have been, and those that weren't accepted should have been, but that was the nature of the public service activity. He then served with very considerable distinction, both. to Hawke and Keating Governments, serving as a Departmental Secretary and then ultimately as the Head of the Prime Minister's Department. I want to say that he bns asSisted me preitly in the transition process over the last two months or more. 1-Ic -w-A available in the proper traditions of the public service to give me some advice, some of it proved very interesting the day after the election. And I have appreciated over the last ten weeks the way in which he has gone about his job in a very professional manner. I think he has served the Commonwealth public service extremely well. He has served both sides of politics extremely well as befits a professional public servant, and I wish him well in his future activities. 
I don't believe his services are going to be entirely lost to the Commonwealth. He has a great store of knowledge and a great store of understanding of how the service works, and I want on behalf of the present government, I know that I can presume to speak for my two predecessors, Mr Keating and Mr Hawke, and also their predecessor Malcolm Fraser, to record the collective thanks of governments of the past twenty years for the contribution that Michael Keating has made to the processes of government, and to developing a Proper relationship between the political arm of government and the bureaucratic arm of government. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I know that at the present time there is a lot of debate in the community, particularly here in Canberra, about the impact of certain decisions of the new government on the size and the composition of the public service. I want to reiterate something that I said in parliament yesterday that in no way, are the decisions that we are taking now, part of any kind of punitive exercise against the public sector. I am as I think you all know, a passionate believer in the role of the private sector in our society, particularly in the small business sector, but I've long preached to my own party and I do it again today, the importance of not seeing support for the private sector as necessarily requiring some kind of prejudiced or discriminatory attitude towards the public sector. There will always be a need in our society for a strong, professional, highly intelligent and well organised public sector. ' There will always be important public sector functions, there will always be roles of government that must be performed by fill time public servants. And whilst the size of those functions, their relationship to other activities in society are going to change as governments change, and whilst there will be impacts and some of them in an individual sense perhaps painful just as decisions taken in the private sector regarding the size of workforces can be painful in the interest of achieving a longer term benefit, that in no way diminishes the respect that I have and the respect that my government will have for the professionalism of the public service, in the interests of the individuals within that service and the welfare of the families and those who they support. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I commend this document to you. I think it will be a valuable addition to the public understanding of the Australian Public Service. It succinctly sets out I think a good statement of principles and values, and I think it will aid a public respect for and a public understanding of the traditions of the Australian Public Service. 
Thank you very much. 



11 MAY 1996 
E&amp;EO.......
Mr President, Jeff Kennett, the Premier of Victoria, Peter Costello, the Treasurer of Australia to Tony Staley the federal President, all my other Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, past State and Federal Presidents of the Liberal Party, ladies and gentlemen. 
Can I first of all thank Michael Kroger for that very warm and quite moving introduction. It really is quite an emotional moment not only for me but it is an emotional moment in the history of our Party. 
Hubris is a bad thing in politics but legitimate satisfaction and pride in achievement is a necessary and appropriate thing for all of us occasionally to indulge. And if ever a group of people deserve to take a moment off and to reflect upon a long and ultimately successful journey, It is all of those people and there is so many in this room today who have battled long and hard over 13 years to bring about a change of Federal Government. And I can't tell you bow proud I am as the Federal Parliamentary Leader of the liberal Party to address this Annual Meeting of the State Council in Victoria. 
To convey from the bottom of my heart my gratitude for the great loyalty and support the Division has given me in good times and bad over the years. 
To again compliment the Division on its strength and professionalism, to thank you election after election for delivering until this last election wvhen long last some of the other States caught up with you, more than your fair share of seats in the Federal Parliament. 
And could I also take this opportunity of congratulating my colleague in Government Jeff Kennett, on his absolutely remarkable win only a short time ago. 
Of course ladies ind gentlemen much of the strength and professionalism which has been exhibited by the Victorian Division over the period of which I've spoken was due to the great leadership of State President of Michael Kroger. 
My friendship with him has been something of which I've been very proud and very publicly vocal no matter what the circumstances. I've found in him as a State President a person with whom one could work very effectively to achieve sensible reforms. In the forging of the Coalition arrangement in 1989 which brought a joint Senate ticket back to Victoria and which banned three-corned contests for sitting Members and Sharman Stone in years ahead will have great reason to thank that arrangement. It was due in no small measure to the tremendous work of Michael, 
But it is a great occasion for the Liberal Party and there's just one or two very direct things I want to say to you today. But one of the most important is that having finally got back into Federal Government, having completed that long march that I described, let us sensibly consolidate that win, let us sensibly build for the future. And one of the things we must sensibly do is to honour our history and to treasure our past. 
We haven't always been very good at that. The Labor Party has been extremely good at it, they have built failures into icons. We on the other hand have sometimes walked away from out past and we've all shared the blame in that respect but we have a very rich and honoured past. And many of the pillars of the organisation in the past are here today and I join Ted and Tony and others in paying tribute and it is a great pleasure for me to look down and see all of the people organisationally over the years so many of them that I've worked with. 
And we ought to honour the contribution of our great Prime Ministers of the past. I mean it was the Menzies era that gave to this country that unparalleled period of stability and prosperity in the years after World War II and its is still for me as the Prime Minister in the 1990s an emotional experience to be embraced by somebody who came to this country from Italy or Greece or Latvia or Estonia or Lithuania in the early 1950s and to say that I came here when Menzies was Prime Minister and he gave me and my family a fbture and I will never forget it. And it was those great years after the War under the Menzies period that contributed so much to the modern Australia. So let us never be ashamed of our past, let us always defend it with great pride and I think also of the rich history of the Victorian Division in particular. Of the great years of Bolte, Dick Hamer and of Lindsay Thompson and now of course the new ascendancy under JeffKennett. 
There is so much of which we have to be immensely proud but there is also a great deal that we must be humble about and humility is an important component in politics. 
It is a humbling experience to be the Prime Minister of this country. It is a humbling experience that you have an opportunity if you do the right thing to change the country for the better. And on the night of the election one of the things that I said was that I didn't want to lead a Government that would be a pale imitation of its predecessor. That you were there to do positive things for the good of Australia and Australians. You are not just there to enjoy and luxuriate in the pleasure of being in office, there is no point in that and it has always got to be the role and responsibilities of Liberals to do good things for the fulture of our country and of our people. 
And one of the great responsibilities of Government is to give to the people of Australia a sense of security and stability both from external attack and also internally and yesterday, in Teaching historic agreement on prohibition on weapons, we made a mighty contribution to delivering a safer and more secure Australian society. 
The Governments of Australia decided that this country is not to go down the American path. The Governments of Australia decided that we would strike a great blow for the future safety of our suburbs and of our provincial towns and cities. 
It won't be an easy decision for many tens of thousands of law-abiding Australians and I say again, as I've said in the past, I regret that very much. But I think we have
delivered a workable prohibition that fair-minded pe~ ple will understand and accept and the overwhelming majority of Australians will enthusiastically embrace as an
appropriate response. 
And it's a remarkable testament to what we can do throuah Commonwealth/State cooperation and I want to thank the State Governments, i want to thank Jeff Kennett, I want to thank all of the State Premiers for the role that they played. Collectively the leaders of Governtment in Australia matched the national need and that is what people want, that is good government. It is using the mandate and the authority of office to do good things for the future of this country. 
We have ahead ofuis a great responsibility. We have economic responsibilities, we have social responsibilities, we have political responsibilities. 
We went to the last election with a carefully crafted program. We put at the centre of our election platform strong commitments to a number of fundamental values. If I want there in the years ahead of us to be a legacy of the years inediately before us I want my Government to be seen as a Government of values and a Governent of principles more than anything else. I want there to be a [ inaudible] of the decisions that we take those great values, those commitments to individual [ inaudible] those commitments to family values, those commitments to sensible and long term economic reform. As Michael said in his introductory speech, I and many other people here have long championed the cause of industrial relations reform. Michael, himself, and Peter Costello fought and won an historic battle in the 1980' s to establish the authority of the ordinary courts of Australia over careless and damaging industrial conduct. We intend to implement the principles for wvhich they and many others fought in the 1980s. And those principles are very simple. And they are that people should have the right without lead or hindrance to make contracts at the workplace level. But they can involve a trade union if they want to. But if they don't want a trade union involved then no trade union has the right to impose itself against the will of the parties to that contract.
We'll remain as a Party utterly and totally opposed to any semblance of compulsory unionism. We will restore the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act. And very importantly' we will throwlk out Labor's job destroying unfair dismissal law. 
That is where the Liberal and National Parties stand. And the week after next the legislation to give affect to that program wvill be introduced by Peter Reith into the House of Representatives. And I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Peter on the tremendously professional way in which he has handled himself on that legislation in the short period that he's been Minister for industrial relations-
And the whole of the Australian community will be watching ater that legislation has gone through the House of Representatives. They'll be watching to see what happens to it when it gets to the Senate. They'll want to know wvhether the Australian Democrats are in favour of throwing out our stupid unfair dismissal laws or whether they want to keep them. They'll want to know whether the Australian Democrats, and the Greens and others are for or against compulsory unionism. They'll want to know whether the Australian Democrats and others are for or against liberty in the work place. No policy could have been more openly exposed, no policy could have been more repeatedly advocated or championed than the policy of industrial relations reform. And if we don't have the auffhority of the Australian people to implement those changes then no Government in the history of this country has an electoral mandate to do anything. It's as fundamental as that. 
But until we get rid of our arthritic, old fashioned, essentially pre World War I industrial relations system we are not going to see the sort of long-term economic growth on a sustained basis that this country needs to do two things and that is to cure our current account deficit problem and over time reduce our still unacceptably high level of unemployment. 
Another piece of legislation has been introduced over the past couple of weeks and that's legislation to give effect to our commitment to sell one third of Teistra. Once again something that we openly talked about. It wasn't in the pocket, or up the sleeve or in the drawer. We didn't just vaguely refer to it. We openly said to the Australian people, " a vote for Howard is a vote for the sale of one third of Teistra". And people had an opportunity and they voted in an impressive way for us. And what the minority Parties and the Labor Party in the Senate have got to decide when the roll is finally called are they for or against the greatest capital investment in the future of Australia's environment ever proposed by any Government. It's as simple as that. 
Because the economic reality is that you can't fund that one billion dollars expenditure except out of the proceeds of the sale of a capital asset. Thanks to Kimn Beazley and his $ 8 billion black hole we don't have the resources from anywhere else. So, there's only one choice if you wvant that environmental expenditure you've got to support our program. And a vote against our program on Telstra is a vote directed at the heart of the environmental regeneration of Australia. And there is no wriggling and there is no room to move on this. There is no second chance. There is no alternative proposal. If you want the Murray Darling cleaned up, if you want a long term attack on soil degradation, on ocean outfall, on river polution and all the other long term environmental concerns that Australians, especially young Australians, have then you have to vote for program that we're going to put down. And it will represent a very interesting choice for those who long have held themselves out as champions of the environment.
Wouldn't it be ironic if the Greens and the Australian Democrats having long said that their environmental credentials are better than anybody else's wouldn't it be fascinating, wouldn't it be ironic if they were the people who denied to the Australian public the best environmental capital expenditure program that anybody has proposed. Now, we stand very clearly. We told the Australian people what we were going to do. We took them into our confidence. We were honest. We were open about it. We said if you vote for us we're going to do these things. I can't wait to be kept honest on the subject. 
All the time that I've been Leader of the Party I've spoken about the importance of the family unit in our community. In the wake of the terrible events in Tasmanian of a couple of weeks ago there has been debate, not only about gun control laws, but there's been debate about some of the material on television. Debate about some of the health policies that are administered around the country, our approach to the mentally ill in our community. I've established a sub-committee of Ministers, chaired by Richard Alston, that is going to take a calm and reflective look at some of these issues. We're not going to be into any knee-jerk responses. But I think the Australian people want a whole of Government response to these kind of challenges. But none of us should ever imagine that any set of laws, or any measure of Government leadership, can replace the role of parents and can replace the role of families incalcating social values and proper social attitudes. And all of us have a responsibility to emphasise that. All of us in Government have a responsibility to pursue policies that will help sustain families. There are enormous emotional and personal values in stable and united families. Above and beyond that, of course, in a social welfare sense united strong families are the best social welfare safety net ever devised by mankind. 
But we are going to keep faith with our commitments to Australian families. Our industrial relations policy will allow parents to better blend their work and family responsibilities. We're going to reinforce the right of Australian parents to chose the type of education they want for their children and not a type of education dictated by the State. We're going to strengthen the position of families in relation to private health insurance through our commitments. We are, of course, over time going to build a fairer taxation system for Australian families. 
As I frequently said during the campaign rebuilding trust and believability between the people and their elected representatives is one of the most important challenges that we face. Another great challenge we face is to rebuild public confidence in our national institutions. I believe in the simple proposition the Parliament controls the Executive and that the law of this country controls all of us. And that simple proposition is the greatest bulwark we have against a loss of freedom and the loss of liberty. All the elaborate declarations of principle mean nothing if our institutions are not free, not respected and if they don't work. And that is why we have moved quickly to restore the dignity of the national Parliament. I congratulate Bob Halverson on his election as speaker of the House of Representatives. He has already brought degree of dignity and good humour to the place. Let me say that on Thursday we had quesqtions at Q uestion Time T've got to say, I like it. It's terrific to be there. Some of my colle agucs keep sa) rflg, John, isn't it about time to wind it up and get away. I rather like it. I mean, we sat for so long on the other side. I find it very hard to move away. 
The other thing T like is the way my colleagues deal with the questions. I mean, gee they're a great bunch. Gareth Evans at question time! The questions are much longer than the answers with Gareth. And it's a great delight to watch them trying to come to terms. But more important than that we are going to treat the Parliament seriously. I'm not going to have rostered day off at Question Time. I'm going to turn up every day and so are my Ministerial colleagues. 
And over time I think we can rebuild trust and respect in our national Parliament and that is enormously important because one of the worst legacies of the former Government and of my predecessor is the way in which he contemptuously debased the Chamber that represents the aspirations of the Australian people. He called it in his grander moments the clearing house of the nation's business and yet in his darker more frank moments he said that Question Time was a courtesy extended by the Executive to the Parliament. That was a measure of the contempt that he held. We intend to be very different. We intend to keep faith with our commitment to restore the dignity and the authority of Parliament. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have a great opportunity if we are sensible, if we listen, if we are appropriately proud at one moment but also appropriately humble about our responsibilities. We have the opportunity over the next few years at both a national and a state level to build a new Liberal era that decades into the future will be looked back upon with great pride. it was no accident that we won impressively. Just as it was no accident that Jeff Kennett won again so impressively. We won because we demonstrated a capacity to relate to the mainstream of the Australiani community. The
greatest devastation of the Labor Party on the 2nd of March was to watch seat after seat long regarded as composed of True-Believers, as they call them, fall to us. And to see the depth of the swings. To realise that if you go outside Melbourne and the other State capitals and Wollongong and Newcastle you don't find a single Labor seat anywhere in the nation. And in its geographic spread it's the greatest victory that we have won since the foundation of the Party.
Now, of course, some of it was due to weariness with the former government. But a great deal more was due to the fact that we communicated as a group of people that understood the mainstream aspirations of the Australian people. A group of people that where prepared to put behind this country some of the suffocating social censorship and political correctness which has been another very bad legacy of the former government. 
It will once again be possible to debate sensitive issues in this country without being accused of being a racist, or an extremist, or a bigot. I think it is immensely important for the quality of public debate that that be the case. 
Ladies and gentlemen we h3ve a great opportunity. We have a great oppomlinity most importantly of all to do good things for the Australian people. 
Political organiisations exist to get elected into Parliament it's cand'dates to implement the values and the principles and the policies for which that political organisation stands. That was the first lesson I learnt when I joined the Liberal Party in Sydney back in the late 1950' s. And whenever the Liberal Party has adhered to that simple proposition that it exists to articulate its values and principles and to serve the people its been successful. 
As I look around this room again arnd I think of the contributions of so many people to rich history of our Party, I am sorry in our moment of great victory that Julian Beale wasn't re-elected. Julian, I thank you warmly for the tremendous help you gave. 
I want to thank Ron Walker for providing the sinews of war. But most importantly in the collective sense can I thank all of you who over the years have kept the Liberal faith. As I said to the NSW Division a few weeks ago I would never would have become Leader of the Opposition, I would never have become Prime Minister, none of us would ever had the great privilege of being in Government if we had not enjoyed the support of the rank and file members of the Party and the way in which Tony Staley and Andrew Rob and Ron Walker and so many others and Peter Poggioli
and Ted Baillieu here in Victoria. The way in which you dedicated yourselves so single-mindedly to making our victory a reality is something that I still feel very, very
gratefurl for and I will always do. 
I will never lose touch with the grass roots of the Liberal Party, 1 will always listen. I was once part of those grass roots, I still am. I believe in the Liberal Party, I am proud of it. What I have now I owe to Liberal Party so very, very much and Janette and I can't express to you the depth of our gratitude for helping us to achieve something that over the last 13 years to so many of us seemed unachievable. And a great sense of relief that great sense that a mission has been accomplished and a new vista opens up is about the most satisfying thing that somebody can have in public life 
We now have ahead of us the great and more important task of governing well for all of the people of Australia and leaving behind at the end of that next journey a better country, a happier country, a more secure country arnd a country even more at peace with its past and its present and even more optimistic about its future.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE.......................... 
Thank you very much to my friend Ron Silberberg for that warm welcome, to Stephen Baker, the Deputy Prmier of South Australia, to Sonator Chemy) Kernot, the Leader of the Australian Democrats, my Parliamentary colleagues John Moore and Alan Cadmnan, other distinguished guests, ladies arnd gentlemen. 
This is not the first time that I've addressed a gathering of the Housing Industry Association. But it is for the reason that Ron mentioned a particular delight for me to be here today and to have the opportunity of saying at few thig about the goals and the aspirations of the new Governmeat of Australia.
Of the many constituencies that contributed to the Coalition's victory on the 2nd of March none was more important, nunc was more emphatic and none was more easily consistent with the values and goals of t Coalition than the small business community and the small business constituency of Australia. I am an unashamed believer in the role and the place of small busines in the Australian economy. I believe that the growth and the regeneration of small business carries. with it the best hope of sustained economic growth and development in the years that lie ahead of us. I don't say that in any antagonismn to large companies. And thst's not because of the logo hanging over my shoulder. Because the idea that small and big sit uneasily with each other is antiquated view of the operation of the Australian economy. Big businesses can't thrive and succeed without the support and the contributiont of tens of thousands of small businesses. They complement each other they don't compete with other. 
Your particular industry, of course, quintessentially is an expression of the small busines ethos of the Austlian community. There are many ways-in which one could describe the distinctive characteristics of thc Housing Industry Association of Australia. But your great spirit of independence, the fact that the industrial relations culture of the suburban cottage buildinig industry in Australia is dramatically different and has been over the years from the industrial relations culture of the CBD building industry of Australia is but one example of thc particular commitment that you bring to that small business ethos. 
And when we campaigned for the lost election we placed very great store on what we were going to do for small business. And I have over the years in my various roles in politics enjoyed a very frank and I think beneficial association with the HIA. We haven't alwvays agreed. I've seen myself as the subject of many of those provocative cartoons that were put together by the I{ IA under its previous Director, thirteen or fourteen years ago, when I was Treasurer. I've had a series of disagreements on some things but fundamentally we've always been able to co-operate because we have been working for the same goals. We believe in the same kind of Australia. We bclieve in an Australian society that does reward individual efrort. We believe in an Australian society that sees indelibly that it is pan of the Australian dream for somebody to start their working lift , with nothing and to build a business, and to take pride in that success and to hand that busintess on to future generations. And that's always been part of the Australian dream and to the extent that it's interfered with, or attacked, is a cause of concern, 
I know that Your industry is still experiencing some very difficult economic conditions. I know that many her today, and many others of your members, are experiencing the adversity of the downturn in the housing industry that has occurred over the past two orthree years. And I know and I'm very conscious of bow important the general economic climate is to the future of your industry. In many ways the economy which the new Government inherited on the 2nd of March was like the ( inadible) it was good in parts. There are some features of it that were strong and I don't deny that. I don't see the point in spending the next few months arguing the toss about things where we don't have differences with our political opponents, I think it is particularly counter productive to generate unnecessary conflict and unnxecessary difrernce in the Australian political scene. 1 think we should focus our efirts on the debating those issues where there are genuine differenme of approach and different opinions. 
We did inherit an Australian economy that had relatively low inflation. We also inherited an Australian economy which still has a chronic current account deficit problem and a chronic savings problem. And we'vC inherited an Australian economy which still has some very high real interest ratm and that is of particular concern and of particular importanc and meaning to all of you in the HUA and the most valuable way in which we can make a conrbution lo turning that around is to focus on attacking some of the causes Of high interest rates in the Australian community. When you hear debate and criticism Fax from of some of our projected bud gct rncasures, can I invite you to reflect upon the value of reducing the size of the budget deficit, and it will bring many benefits, but one of the help to build the conditions for lower intcrtst rates in Australia you ought to support a sharply lower budget deficit because by cutting the levels of Governmert expenditure, not mindlessly, not inscnisitively, and we certainly don't intend to do that, and we don't intend in the process of cutting the budget deficit to attack the genuinely needy and the genuiely vulnerable in our community. Nor do we intend to attack those areas of Government support that contribute towards strengthening and building the long term infrastructure of this country, but it can't be denied that one of the causes of high interest ratcs, not the only cause but one of the causes of high interes rates in Australia is of course the level of the Budget deficit. There are other causes, worries about inflation and wages, the sizc of our overseas debt and perceptions about our current account deficit They all come together to create depression but one of those major causes is the size of the budget deficit and that is why wc have to do something about it. 
Since being elected we have already begun to implement our commitments regarding the small business community. We have already introduced the legislation to reduce the provisional tax uplift factor from 8% to thus giving effct to a clear commitment made during the election campaign. We have established the small business dercgulation" task force and that was mentioned by Ron. We have already announced a reduction of in the compliance costs of small business in relation to surveys of the Austwaian Bureau of Statistics and I believe that coming out of the Small Businms Deregulation Taskforve. will be a series of pragmatic recommendations which arc designed to reduce sharply the cost of complying with Government regulation. I find as 1 go around Australia a constant complaint about the cost of complying with government regulation, not only federal government but also and most particularly at a local government and state government level so far as your industry is concerned, and attcking that and trying to understand some of the fundamental causes of it is one of the most important roles of that Small Business Dereguilation Taskforce. 
We also made commitments regarding capital gains tax relief, and those commitments ame going to be honoured in the months ahead so Av have a lot on our plates so far as the small business community is concerned. We retain a very strong commnitnicat to it and you will find as thc months go by wve will honour in a very pragmatic and a vezy Cffective way those conmmitments, and you will find that they are not mere sophistry or rhetoric bwt a genuine commitment of a government that understands the needs, the problems and the aspirations of small business and of all the arma that impact heavily on small business, none is more important of course than the area of industrial relations. I want today to say a few things about industrial relations because next week starting with the Parlinrtary sitting tomorrow, Peter Rcith will be introducing olur workplace relations bill and this will give effect to changes that I and many of my colleagues have advocated over a very long period of time, You will find as the legislation is unveiled that it gives fUll effect to the policy that we took to the last election. We wJ1l be giving full effect to those things for which the Australian people voted on the 2nd of March. We will be providing an industrial relations framework that allows for much greater flexibility in the workplace.
Imlportanltly, wt will be thro-wing out the former government's stupid, job-destroying unfair dismissal laws. 
That particular piece of legislative lunacy bas done more to destroy jobs in small business than any other single act of the former goverimeat. The present law is obsessed with form and procedure and not with merit and you will find when you see our Proposal$ unveiled that we, promised. are providing a law that is fatir to both sides. Importantly, I am very happy to announce today that one of the provisions in the legislation that will be introdued next week is the complete exemption of independent contractors from the operation of the Industrial Relationis Act That was a commitment that we made several years ago when we campaigned aoanst the changes brought in by the former government Those, provisions should never have been put there. independent contractors are men and women in small business. They do not have the relationship of employer and emnplqyee and they should never have been brought within the ambit and charter of legislation affecting employers and employees. 
This legislation will also enshrine our very strong commnitment to voluntary unionism. We have a very simple view and that is that Australans should have the right to join or not to join any association according to their choice. I have no argument with the right of met and women in this country to belong to trade unions. Last Friday I sat across the table from the President of the ACTU. and the leaders of the Maritime Unions of Australia. I think its fair to sy that the leaders of the Maritime Unions of Australia have not been amongst my most fervent political supporters over the years. But I was able to say to them as Ican say to you today, our quarrel i5not with unionism per s. Our quarrel is not with the right of people to collectively bargain if they want to. Our quarrel is with a system that prevents them from individually bargaining when they themselves Choose to do so. And we are for a system that allows people to choose. We are for a 3ystem that allows People to join or not to join and also having to join a union, to join the union Of their Choice. We are for a System that gives people the right to go outside the award system if they so choose and we am~ also for a system that prevent predatory union conduct being used to destroy the operations of businesses, and that is why in our legislation next week, we arn going to restore with their full effectiveness, the old Sections 451) and E Of tbc Trade Practices Act Those provisions were brought in by the former Coal ition Gyovemment, and T am very happy to sy T authored them as Ministe for Business and Consumer Affairs in 1977 and the reason they were repeled by the fonner ( lovernment was that theY had worked very effectively and the reason they worked very effectively is that they provided speedy, injunctive relif for a company that was at the sharp lend Of Predatory and damaging union behaviour. And once again, the union doing the right thing and looking after the interests of its members has nothing to fear fom legislatioa of that kind.  
I am sure that as we go into the next century, some trade unions in this country will survive and those that survive will be those that offer Services and effective services to their members and they will have to compete for business, like you have to compete for business. 
But we have a strange system in this country that it is only the trade union movemnt that has a guaranteed market share because they have monopoly privileges under the industrial relations legislation in relation to bargaining. Every man or woman who goes into business has to go out and fight for market share. You're not delivered market share by at act of Parliament. Political parties have to go out aud fight for members and don't I know that. Churches have to go out and fight for adherence and parishioners yet strangely enough in this country we have a situation where there is monopoly rights and monopoly privileges conferred on the trade union movement regarding the bargaining process. So wbcn you hear over the weeks ahead these cries that we are assaulting the rights of the Australian workforce, ignore them. We're doing nothing of the kind. All we are doing is restoring fundamental, individual choice. People can remain in unions. Companies, particularly large companies, can continue to have certified arrangements with unions. Nothing will change if people don't want it to change but importantly, if people want things to change they will under our legislation have the freedom for the first time to choose that things will change and that is how it ought to be in a fully free Australian society. 
The last thing that I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen is not directly related to your industry but it is related to your industry in the sense tt you art past of the broader Australian community. The responsibility that I've had since the second of March and the responsibility that my colleagues and I collectively have had sin= e the second of Match is more than a responsibility, It represents the most special, unique privilege that can overcome the way of a group of people. To be given that responsibility of governing this country at such an exciting and challenging stage of its development is of course the most challenging experience that anybody in public lift can possibly have. We have 3@ t ourselves a number of economic and industrial goals and I have canvassed a few of them in my remarks today. But we're also setting ourselves the broader goal of delivering good and candid government for the whole of the Australian community. I sense that as we move towards the end of the century, Australians are looking for better approaches and better standards from all of their politicians. They are certainly looking for vigorous debate but they are also looking for a willingness to agree where there is really no substantial disagreement They are tired of argument for its own sake. The-. y ane tired of personal vilification and abuse for its own sake. They ane looking for honest, open debate and most importantly of all, honest open communication between their leaders and the public. 
I don't pretend for a moment to you and I won't pretend to any section of the Australian people that we don't have a difficult task ahead of us, particularly in relation to the planning of the next budget. We made a number of commitments in the last election. They were honestly and genuinely made and I place and all of my colleagues place very high store on honouring commitments. Nothing saps the confidence and the faith of people in their elected representatives then the cynical repudiation of promises shortly after a change of government, and the balancing act between that commitment, and also the need to reduce the size of the budget deficit will be a difficult one. We will try and do it in an open, communicative fashion. We will try and make decisions which contribute to the long term benefit of having a lover budget deficit but also take account of the particular impact on those decisions on particular sections of the Australian community. 
I want an Australian community -where people are encouraged to take risks to invest and are free of government regulation. I also want an Australian community where the less privileged and the less fortunate are cared for but within a system that makes certain that only the less privileged and the less needy benefit from measures which arm designed to help those sections of the Australian community. In recent weeks in the wake of in many ways the-most appalling in an emotional sense, peacetime event that this country has had, you have had people of different political persuasions at a state and a federal level coming together to give this country effective gun laws. I think it's a demonstration of what the system can do, of what the body politic can, do to deliver better outcomes. All of us faced a challenge in the wake of that dreadful event and I think without exception and I am very happy to pay tribute to the contribution of Kim Beazley and Cheryl Kernot, as well as to the state leaders of my own persuasion and opposite persuasion in the case of Bob Carr, the fact is that people were able to come together to put a greater common good ahead of any partisan, political differences. 
Now in saying that, I am not announcing the end of political conflict It would be a pretty dull place if we didn't have any political conflict and I could of course go on for half an hour telling you why all of the Opposition parties should instantaneously pass all of our legislation. But what I thinkc I'm trying to say to you is that I think the Australian people want a focussed debate on the things that matter. We don't really have enough time as a nation and we don't have enough options a a nation to sort of waste our time and our energ in debating things where therm ame no real differences, waste our time and energy debating things that don't really matter. There are plenty of things that matter about the futur of this country where therm are genuinely held different views on both sides of politics and they are the things that should consume our focus and consume our debate. 
Finally ladies and gentlemen, can I say it has been a great pleasure for me to Wak to you today. I do feel personally a deep bond with the small business community of Australia. I was brought up in a small business environent. I have perhaps said this to some of YOU before at previous gathenings. I was taught to believe that the best thing that you could do in life was to Start a business of your own and to make something of it, and that they were really the best people of all. Now! I haven't really practiced that myself although I practiced law in a small business for about 12 years and I don't for a mnoment: suggest that there is any inherent superiority of one group of Australians over another. There are men and women of great worth in a sections of Australian society but the small business community of this country means a lot to me but more important than that, it means an enormous amount to the future of Australia and the HIA has been a superb example of the spirit of survival and the spirit of entrepreneurialship and the great commitment to the future of this country. I wish it well. I will continue to have the open door of which Ron. Silberberg spoke so generously and so will all of my colleagues. You arc very important to our future and I wish all of you the very best of success. 
Thank you very much 


24 May 1996
E&amp;OE.........
Well thank you very much Bishop Challen. To Robert Fitzgerald of ACOSS, ladies and gentlemen. Can I thank both the Brotherhood of St Laurence and ACOSS for the invitation to address this very important forum on the fuature of work. 
I've had associations both very briefly in Government, and previously out of Government, with the Brotherhood and of course with ACOSS, and I compliment both organisations on their initiative in organising this forum and most particularly in the compilation of the report. And it is timely that I have the chance this morning of participating in the forum, because I do so in the immediate wake of the introduction of the Government's workplace relations legislation into Federal Parliament yesterday which involves one of the most, if not the most, significant changes to the way in which the workplace laws of this country operate ever introduced into the federal Parliament. 
I want, not surprisingly, to say a few things about that legislation and about the philosophy enshrined in the legislation later in my remarks. But can I firstly take the opportunity, because this does represent in part a forum sponsored by ACOSS, and because it brings together a group of people properly concerned about the welfare of some of the less fortunate people in our community. Can I take the opportunity of revisiting a speech that I made to ACOSS in October of last year when I was Leader of the Opposition, And in that speech I made certain comnmitments on behalf of the then Coalition parties about the attitude that we would take towards benefits for the unfortunate and the more vulnerable in our community and T made on that occasion a number of explicit commitments and in the wake of the change of Government and the inevitable debate about the fiscal consolidation task that faces the new Government. 
There has been some comment and some conjecture about whether the commitments I made during that speech, in particular in Opposition, remain constant now that we are in Government, and I want to take the opportunity this morning of reaffirrng what I said, then on behalf of the Opposition I now say it on behalf of the Government the particulars of that speech that I delivered in October of 1995. 
1 don't pretend that the task of balancing the aim of achieving a balanced budget over a period of two years and maintaining commitments made in Opposition, and I don't pretend that that is an easy challenge. But I have always regarded maintaining trust with the people of this country as being a very important element of good government, no matter who is in government. 
I know that the Australian people are very pragmatic, they have a great deal of common sense, they understand that changed circumstances can sometimes make the delivery of some commitments difficult no matter how genuinely made, but equally, they are awake up to the unjustified repudiation of commitments and they are also highly suspicious of governments of either political persuasion who place the interests of the more vulnerable in our community on a lower scale of priorities than the achievement of individual statistical targets, and I therefore wanted to take the opportunity this morning of saying quite explicitly to you that the commitments that were made in relation to the more needy in our community in that speech I delivered to ACOSS in 1995 remain important commitments now in Government of the Coalition. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is not possible to talk about the future of work in Australia without of course talking about the fluture and the strengths and weaknesses of the Australian economy and I hope without any trace of misunderstanding and without in anyway sounding that I don't intend to do so and in any way patronising, I have welcomed over the past few years in particular, the way in which ACOSS and other organisations such as the Brotherhood of St Laurence have increasingly recognised the link between the unbreakable link between economic growth, economic prosperity and the establishment of effective safety nets in our community and the establishment of fair rules of conduct for the treatment of all sections of society. 
It is not possible, without a certain level of ongoing growth and prosperity, it is of course not possible to have in a pragmatic sense a fully compassionate society. The two do go hand-in-hand and it is important that when we look to social and humanitarian solutions we do so not in a vacuum but we do so against the backdrop of understanding the strengths or the weaknesses of the Australian economy. And there has been something of a convergence in the economic and social debate in Australia around a number of goals. There is less partisan divide in Australia now concerning the goals to be achieved although there still is a fair amount of furious debate about the way in which those goals are to be achieved. 
The goal ofjobs for all those who want them is still the proper ideal of any government whatever their political complexion and it certainly remains a goal of the Government that I am very proud to lead. And the goal of providing a framework for work and a framework for work opportunities within a rapidly changing society, not only changing in a technological sense, but changing in social habit and disposition, is a goal to which my Government very very strongly aspires. 
The purpose of our industrial relations legislation, our new Workplace Relations Bill, is not to play out some strong and obsessive ideological commitment. More importantly, the goal of that legislation is to provide a more modern and contemporary framework for the conduct of workplace relations. 
The legislation quite unashamedly gives expression to a number of views that I and many of my colleagues have advocated over the last ten years. It places a much greater emphasis on the direct relationship between the employer and the employee. It does not do so in a vacuum. It does not send the employee naked into the negotiating room. It does not deny to the employee the right to be represented by somebody else if that is his or her choice, and I think it is important that that be emphasised. It is true that the legislation reduces the statutory bargaining monopoly now enjoyed by the trade unions but it is not true that the legislation in any sense shape or form denies people the right of union or indeed other representation if that is their choice. 
The second very important thing that it does is that it emphasises the important Australian principle of freedom of association. It guarantees the right of people to join or not to join organisations and having decided to join an organisation, it guarantees that people will have a wider range of choices available to them in relation to trade union membership. It restores, in a more effective form, the secondary boycott provisions which were introduced by a former Coalition Government to protect particularly small businesses against irresponsible conduct and finally and very importantly, it addresses the existing unfair dismissal which even many of my political opponents have acknowledged that represent barriers to recruitment of people particularly by small firms. 
Now, they are some of the major features of the legislation, but some of the other features which are important to the evolving Australian workplace include much greater flexibility for the use of part-time work which is a very important recognition of the changed nature of the Australian workforce especially over the last 10 or years. We also propose to introduce, and this is very important to the ongoing problem of youth unemployment, far more flexibility in the training packages that will be available for young people. We do not propose to introduce a three dollar or $ 3.50 an hour youth wage. We do however propose to remove the existing rigid ceiling of of paid work within a training package which is now mandated. The effect of that change will be that people will continue to be paid at the relevant award rate for the number of hours in a week that the young person works, but the combination of training and work experience within the training package will no longer be subject to that rigid ceiling of 80%.
There are important safeguards and protections. One of those is that no young person can be forced to accept a training package including work and training which would result in that person earning over a five day period less than the unemployment benefit. One of the great advantages of this new approach is that it will open up a far more flexible range of opportunities of training opportunities and therefore in time, job opportunities for young people. I know that this proposal will be the subject of some quite deliberate misrepresentation, but we are nonetheless determined to press ahead with it because we did say during the election campaign that we regarded an assault on youth unemployment as one of our most important responsibilities and we don't intend to walk away from it. And what we are enshrining in this approach is a very very strong commitment to the principle that people should be paid proper rates according to the relevant award for the hours that are worked within a training package that there should be the maximum opportunity for people within those training packages to combine them with whatever components of work and whatever components of training that they would think fit. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I don't think I need to tell this gathering that one of the greatest changes that has occurred in the workforce in Australia over the last twenty years of course has been the very significant increase in the female participation rate in the workforce. And one of the greatest responsibilities of any government is to provide the maximum degree of choice for families in particular, but not only for families, but certainly that's a very important consideration, the maximum possible range of choices so that people can most effectively combine their work and their family responsibilities. 
In the recent election campaign I said that one of the important goals of the Coalition was to provide people who have the responsibility of raising children with a wider range of choices and that extended not only to the choices to whether in the early years of childhood one or other of the parents was at home full-time caring for children, and I've long held the belief and my belief has not altered in Government, that the denial of that choice to increasing numbers of people because of economnic pressure is a matter of profound regret and that any society ought to aspire to extend that choice, not only to people who currently can afford to exercise it, but to many people who would currently would like to exercise that choice, but through immediate economic pressure are unable to do so. 
Now, that is very largely, but not entirely, a function of the taxation system, and one of the goals of the taxation policy we presented before the last election was to make, albeit a modest start, and I can only claim it to be modest start towards providing a little more scope for people on low and medium incomes to exercise that choice. But moving inevitably through the life cycle as people do, increasingly parents want the options of moving to part-time and then in many cases back to ful-time work for both mother and father, and therefore it follows that increasingly people want the maximum amount of scope to balance their work and their family responsibilities. And that means that we have to entrench in an utterly acceptable and totally comprehensive waythe notion of permanent part-time work within our community, and one of the design features of the legislation that Peter Reith introduced yesterday was to do exactly that: to give greater currency and greater status to part-time work; to ensure that there. was the maximum amount of flexibility available for employers and employees to enter into part-time work arrangements. 
That is not designed, as some have incorrectly alleged, to produce a casualisation of the workforce. It is merely designed to recognise society's changing goals and aspirations and the changing character of society; the recognition that whereas the idea of lifetime employment with one particular employer was not uncommon to those now leaving school and universities, that is something that perhaps very few of them would contemplate to recognise the growing desire of younger parents in current generations to find creative ways of blending their work and their family responsibilities, and of course the need to do that is not limited to the operation of workplace legislation, but of course it extends into every aspect of daily life as so many of the institutions and practices that we still have in our community are a product of a time when there was a very fixed pattern of work, not only between men and women, but also between particular occupations. And so many of those patterns have disappeared, so many of those divisions have been dissolved and the new flexibilities of which I spoke, have become necessary. 
I don't pretend to this audience, Mr Chairman, that significant reductions in the currently still quite unacceptable levels of unemployment are going to immediately follow the passage of the Workplace Relations Bill. In the long term I believe the changes that we have brought forward, which incidentally meet in full the commitment I made before the election, that any person entering an Australian workplace agreement would receive in take home pay terms at least the amount that that person would have been entitled to if he or she had remained under the relevant award and it is important that I emphasise that point because in the weeks ahead that proposition will be subjected to a great deal of scrutiny and quite properly a great deal of testing. I don't pretend that overnight it is going to bring wonders and miracles, but I think over a period of time it will create a far more flexible workplace. It will importantly recognise the principle that to the maximum extent that it is possible to encourage direct negotiation, direct bargaining, and direct understandings between employers and employees, then over a longer period of time I believe you will have better workplaces and better understandings. 
The nature of a society's work opportunities are a very important sign post to the society itself. Bishop Challen spoke in his introduction of the divisions that are growing within our community. I think he is right in one sense. Economic division in Australia now is sharper and more depressing than what it probably was thirty years ago. In some other respects, Australia is a less divided society now than it was thirty or forty years ago. I have set myself the goal as Prime Minister of this country to try as best I can and while keeping faith with the particular principles and values which I hold important and my colleagues hold important, I have set myself the goal of emphasising things that bind Australians together rather than those thngs that push Australians apart. I think perhaps, we have spent a little too much time in recent years in emphasising difference and emphasising our tribal characteristics rather than focussing on those bonds that bind us together in common as Australians. Of all those things to those people in the community who don't have jobs are really empty words and empty rhetoric and the thing that binds people together in affirming that they are a part of a common culture and they are part of a nation and they are sharing in the bounty of that nation of course is the opportunity to work, and people denied that opportunity not surprisingly, are entitled to feel that they are alienated from and rejected by the society comprised of the ninety or ninety-two percent of their fellow citizens who have work. 
So whatever our political views and whatever perspectives we bring to either the workplace relations legislation or to the other policies or programmes of mine or indeed any other government, whatever they may be I think one thing does bind us all together and that is the very strong conviction that giving to all of those Australians who want to work the opportunity of doing so, of providing an economic framework that generates the jobs, and ensuring that we have a legislative framework that maximises the choices that are available to people, I think that remains a very very
important goal for all of us. 
Can I finally, Mr Chairmian, again thank the Brotherhood and ACOSS for organising this forum. I thank you warmly for the opportunity to address it this morning, particularly coming as it is in the wake of the introduction of our Workplace Relations Bill, can I renew the commitment that I gave to ACOSS and indeed to the Brotherhood before the election and subsequently that whatever differences perhaps we may have over the time ahead about our response to particular programmes, I regard the two organisations as playing a crucial role in the ongoing debate about social welfare and other matters. I will always keep an open door to them and my Government and the members of it will always be ready to engage in dialogue with the two organisations and to air the views that they have on some of the very important issues that I have discussed this morning. 
Thank you very much. 



28 May 1996 
Thank you very much Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. It is a tremendous pleasure for me to be here today. It is, as your president said, only a few months ago that I addressed this same gathering in this very room as Leader of the Opposition, and a lot has happened over the last few months and I want, first of all, to say to you very frankly and very directly, that the Coalition acknowledges very strongly the importance to it having obtained Government of the support it received in rural and nonmetropolitan Australia. 
I personally over the years of my political career have had very close links with the National Farmers' Federation and its various constituent bodies around Australia. Of all the industry groups in Australia none has been more prominent in its consistent advocacy of long term economic reform in this country than the National Farmers' Federation. It was the National Farmers' Federation that trail-blazed the cause of financial deregulation at a time when that was not a popular blood-sport in this country. It was also the National Farmers' Federation that kept the torch blazing for tariff reform at a time when you could count on the fingers of probably both your hands it would be an exaggeration to say only one hand the number of people who in Federal Parliament believed in lower tariffs, and of course very dear to my own heart, of all the industry groups none was more publicly and privately faithful to the cause of labour market reform than the National Farmers' Federation. And I can remember on earlier occasions as opposition spokesman, as Leader of the Opposition, addressing the 14F, addressing the old LGPA in New South Wales on the question of a number of issues but most particularly financial deregulation. So it does represent for me the culmination of a long association to be able to form a Government knowing that a significant indeed crucial proportion of the members of that Government represent rural and non-metropolitan seats. Many of them are marginal, I acknowledge that, that is in the nature of politics all around Australia. But more importantly within the first few weeks of that government to be able to introduce legislation giving effect to something that we together have championed and advocated over a long period of time. And I most particularly think that the legislation that was introduced by Peter Reith into the Parliament last week to give effect to our commitments on industrial relations and reform. It is no exaggeration to say that that legislation is the most important piece of economnic legislation that the Parliament has seen in many years. I still believe very passionately that reforming Australia's arthritic, outdated, overregulated, inflexible labour market will do more in the long term to secure Australia's economic competitiveness than any other single commitment and if we needed any reminding of the importance of lifting this country's competitiveness, we had it in this morning's press which uncovered the latest of an annual survey released by an international group dealing with competitiveness in Lausanne in Switzerland that records that Australia has fallen to 21st from a position of 16th in the scale of international competitiveness, that the United States and many of our trading partners in the Asia-Pacific region are right at the top of that table, and Australia is still languishing quite badly, and it's a reminder to us and it's a reminder to you, it's a remninder to all the Members of Federal Parliament that measures which are taken to boost the competitiveness of the Australian economy are still at an absolute premium and that unless something is done right across the broad front of economic reforms to arrest this country's declining international competitiveness in living standards and other terms, we are going to pay quite dearly for it. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the introduction of the industrial relations legislation to me has been the policy highlight of the first two-and-a-half months of the new Government. But early on in the life of the Government I want to say a couple of things about the relationship between my Giovernment and the National Farmers' Federation. The first is that I don't take anybody in politics for granted. You will not find from me, and I hope you will not find from any of my colleagues any assumption about automatic, knee-jerk support for our side of politics. Although the Australian bush has a long tradition of a fairly conservative political disposition which has never displeased me, nothing alters the fact that in politics you have to earn your support and politicians who take the support of particular constituencies for granted often find themselves suffering rude awakenings and I won't take the bush for granted. I won't take the support of the National Farmers' Federation for granted. I will work very hard to keep open the channels of communication. I will listen to what you have to say. 1Iw ill disagree with you sometimes. You will have occasion to criticise us on other occasions but we will always conduct our relations in a very open and direct manner, and I do have an enormous personal affection for rural Australia although I grew up in the city. I have always had very strong links with farming organisations in the time that I have been in politics and I would want it to be one of the achievements of my years as Prime Minister of this country that I made a valuable contribution to strengthening the social and economic fabric of rural Australia. That won't be easy and it can only be done by the steady implementation of sensible policies having long term benefits. 
The industrial relations reforms are very important. They will for the first time entrench the notion that people will have a right to form a direct relationship at an employer-employee level without the compulsory injection into the equation of the trade union. That doesn't mean to say you can't have a trade union representing you if you want to but what it does mean that under us you don't have to have a trade union if you don't want a trade union and that is the big difference between us and the Labor Party. We are going to reform the unfair dismissal laws. We are going to get rid of the existing laws and we are going to replace them with laws that provide a fair deal all round. We are going to bring back Section 45D and E of the Trade Practices Act. Those sections should never have been abolished by the former Government and this organisation will remember how valuable they were at the height of the Mudginberri dispute in the middle 1980s. Many of you who followed the industrial relations debate will also know that they were a valuable supplement to the powers that were used by the then Queensland Government in the South East Queensland power dispute in 1985. 
The reason Sections 45 D and E are loathed by sections of the trade union movement is they have provided a valuable protection for small businesses in particular at the sharp end of predatory union conduct, and that is why the trade union movement campaigned long and hard and finally persuaded the Labor Party and the Democrats to weaken those provisions with Mr Brereton's industrial relations bill in 1993. 
We are implementing all of the things that we said we would do during the election campaign on industrial relations. It is not a charter to cut wages. There is no mileage in seeking to cut people's wages. There's only mileage in seeking to increase people's wages based on a greater capacity to pay through higher productivity, and that is the long term goal and objective of our legislation. The legislation will also introduce a lot more flexibility in the area of training wages and youth wages. We are not contrary to what our opponents are saying, bringing a $ 3 or a $ 3.50 an hour youth wage but what we are doing is to allow greater flexibility in the mix of training and actual work in the training packages that will be available for negotiation between employers and
employees. 
Under the present system, you can't go below 80% of a work component of a work training package, and what that results in are fewer training opportunities and training places and therefore jobs being available to young people. The notion that experience on the job is totally unconnected with the number of years that you've been in the workforce is a completely impractical and erroneous notion, and one only has to state it to understand that it lacks common sense. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I regard the industrial relations changes as very important, not just to the rural comnmunity of Australia but to the future of the entire Australian economy. Another issue that we went to the election campaign loudly proclaiming was of course-our proposals to introduce a major environmental package or should I more accurately say, a series of additional environmental measures including some very valuable Landcare initiatives which have been long advocated by the National Farmers' Federation, and we propose to establish a Natural Heritage Trust into which $ 1 billion will be paid out of the proceeds of a sale of one third of Telstra. I can't think of any issue that was more extensively debated in the election campaign than our proposal to establish that Natural Heritage Trust and I want to make it clear to all of you today that nobody can have it both ways on the issue of that Natural Heritage Trust. If we don't sell a third of Telstra we cannot afford to fuind the Natural Heritage Trust. Page 3 
Fax from I hear some of the parties in the national Parliament running around saying, oh, you can fund it in another way. The answer is, you can't, We have a too big a task of fiscal consolidation. The gap between the revenue and the expenditure in the budget is too great for us to find another $ 1 billion on top of the other obligations that we have and the other commitments that we wish to keep. Now that doesn't represent a downgrading of the environment. We are not, as our opponents allege, saying that the environment is less important than other things therefore we'll only fund the
environment if we can get a third of Teistra sold. What we are talking about here is funding additional environmental programs over and above existing ones so the trade-off is not between the maintenance of existing environmental expenditure and the sale of one third of Teistra, but the trade-off is whether you think that additional $ 1 billion, going into such things as cleaning up the river Murray-Darling, going into Landcare projects, going into tackling other problems of salinity, whether you think that is more important than an ideological obsession about 100% Government ownership of Teistra, and that is all it can be because the experience all around the world is that when you disengage public ownership of telecommunications companies,
competitiveness goes up and price goes down, contrary to what is being alleged by our political opponents at the present time. 
I take the opportunity of reaffirming the guarantees of the community service obligations that are contained in our Telstra legislation-Don't believe any of the scare campaigns about the guarantees for the bush being in any way compromised by our proposal to sell one third of Telstra. They won't be. The price gaps will be maintained. The community service obligations will be guaranteed. That has worked in other countries. It is now something like nine or ten years since the privatisation process of British Telecom began and despite all of the warnings the price caps have stayed. In fact, the prices have come down as a result of the privatisation of British Telecom. If you go around the world you find that that is the experience, and this idea that the maintenance of community service obligations is incompatible with the partial privatisation of Teistra is completely erroneous. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I do take the opportunity of reaffirming the Government's strong commitment to the establishment of the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia but also reaffirmning the fink between the sale of Teistra. We simply don't have the money for that additional $ 1 billion of spending unless the one third sale of Teistra is completed and we also believe there are telecommunications policy benefits in the injection of that private entrepreneurial commitment into Telstra. AUl of the experience around the world suggest that when you disengage the Government from 100% ownership of telecommunications companies, you get dividends by way of greater competition and greater consumer benefit, and that is what we seek to do with Telstra, what we seek to do is to use 7 of the $ 8 billion to reduce debt and to use the other $ 1 billion to establish the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia. It is a fiscally responsible, orthodox, conservative approach to budget management. It's an intelligent way of policy making and I think it will be a great shame for this country, for telecommunications policy and for the environment if it doesn't succeed. 
Now there's been some debate about an alternative way of implementing the policy and I find this very curious notion, this sort of" lie won't play dead" kind of notion towards the implementation of our policy. I mean, how shocking, how outrageous it is that I should actually look for legal means to keep my word and that is basically what we've done. I mean, let me make it clear that I would far rather the proposal that we've put to the Federal Parliament go through than the alternative of formiing a company, of selling the assets off is very difficult, very complicated and it's got a lot hurdles, But can you blame me for examining alternative lawful orthodox means of implementing our policy and that is all that I have done and I will go on doing that and I don't make any apologies. I don't make any apologies for casting around for ways in which I can keep the commitments I made. I mean there was a group of us who were supposed to be kept honest by another group. I am desperately trying to be honest in relation to Teistra, in relation to industrial relations. I want to be an honest man on both subjects and I'm encountering a great deal of difficulty and all I am doing is casting around for the odd alternative way, and if there is an odd, alternative way which is orthodox and legal, why shouldn't I examine it.
Now as I am advised at the present time, the best way, the simplest way, the cleanest way is to do it by legislation and that's what we're doing and that is what I hope would turn out to be the result. There are a few other things I would like to tackle Mr President, and I don't want to avoid issues that I know are causing some concern, some criticism and certainly raising some questions in the rural communities, and I talk specifically of Native Title, of gun laws and the formulation of the Budget. 
Can I deal first of all with the issue of Native Title. We went to the last election with a number of commidtments in relation to the Native Title legislation. The first of those commitments was that we accepted the principle of Native Title legislation. We accepted the thrust of the High Court's decision in the Mabo case. We did however say that there was a need, and as a consequence of that need we have reserved the right to make amendments to the Native Title legislation to ensure its workability and not least of those concerns was the continuing ambiguity surrounding the operation of pastoral leases. As a matter of law, I have no quarrel at all and I daresay there would be nobody in this room that would have any quarrel with the preamble in the Native Title Act to the effect that a grant of a pastoral lease extinguishes Native Title. 
The final resolution was that by the High Court of Australia is yet to occur, although in relation to pastoral leases granted without reservation it was certainly I hope and many hope to be resolved when the High Court deals with the Wik case which commences in less than two weeks, and it is hoped that a decision on that case would be available before the end of the year. I also made a commitment that in the amendments that we made we would honour the principles of the R acial Discrimination Act. I don't mind saying to you as I said when I addressed a luncheon put on by the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation yesterday that this is a difficult issue. I think you have got a legitimate complaint as pastoralists about the doubts and ambiguities that surround the operation of the legislation at present. 
My quarrel is not so much with the decision of the High Court in Mabo. My quarrel is the way in which that decision was taken and extended by the former government and I might remind you that the members of my party in fact voted against that legislation. We didn't vote for it, not that we disagreed with the principle of Native Title but we disagreed with many of the features of that legislation. We drew a lot of flack at the time from a lot of organisations for doing that and I don't See any particular merit in re-traversing that debate but I wanted to make the point that the legislation in its present form is not legislation of our making. 
Now many people have argued, including a number of my fellow Premiers that, Premiers of my same political persuasion, have argued that the simple solution to the problem is for us to put in our amendments a provision that the grant of a pastoral [ ease would extinguish Native Title. Now there are a number of problems in doing that and those problems have caused us not to include that as an option in the discussion paper that has been circulated. The first of those is the undoubted pragmatic consideration that as I presently understand the mood and the attitude of the majority parties in the Senate and the Coalition is not in the majority in the Senate, that legislation would not pass through the Senate. Now I may not like that. You may not like it. A lot of people may not like it but it's a fact of life with which I must contend and it's very easy if you don't have the political responsibility to say to somebody who does, well you ought to do something knowing full well that the something you're asking him to do he's not able to accomplish.
The judgemnent that we have taken at present and of course the matter continues open for discussion and comment, the judgemnent we've taken at present is that to attempt the legislative route would be more likely than not, as well as facing inevitable defeat in the Senate, it would be more likely than not to mobilise opposition to some of the other amendments that we believe have a far better prospect, but there's no guarantee they will, of passing through the Senate. And those other options include quite a number that have been canvassed with the NFF They include for example the removal altogether of the right to negotiate in relation to the exploration stage of a project. They involve the introduction of far more stringent criteria and tests for the acceptance and registration of Native Title claims in the first place. They also involve processes that will bring about a consolidation of the interests making claims so that the number of frivolous and vexatious claims is thereby reduced. The constant complaint that I hear from people around Australia, particularly people in the pastoral industry, is the proliferation of claims that are vexatious, without merit and only result in unreasonably delaying or impeding the making of proper and reasonable investment decisions. 
There is another difficulty, frequently not acknowledged in relation to going down the route of legislative extinguishment. It is typically believed that the legislative group, even if it were possible of passage through the Senate, the legislative route would bring about a speedier resolution of the ambiguity than the judicial route. That's not necessarily the case because it is inevitable that even if legislation to extinguish Native Title where pastoral leases had been granted was passed through the Parliament in advance of the Hfigh Court decisions, then that particular piece of legislation would be subject to constitutional challenge, and that that constitutional challenge would occupy a very considerable period of time. We have chosen to go down the path that I have tried to outline this morning, not because we in any way disagree with the goals that bodies such as the NFF have, nor am I unsympathetic to the comments that have been made by the Premiers of Queensland and Western Australia and South Australia in particular about the operation of the legislation, but we've chosen to do it because we believe pragmatically that the path we have chosen is more likely than another path to bring practical, valuable important relief to those industries that are being affected by the ambiguities than other paths that have been urged upon us and I think it is also important to stress that the path that we have adopted is absolutely consonant with the commitment that we made during the election campaign. 
Mr President, I am very conscious that the action that I urged upon State Governments and was accepted at the Police Ministers' conference regarding automatic and semi-automatic weapons has not been in some quarters the most popular initiative taken by the new Government but can I say to all of you very genuinely that it was a decision, that it was my responsibility and the responsibility of the Government to take. I do apologise there is no other word more appropriate but the fact that this decision will inconvenience many tens of thousands of decent law abiding Australian citizens that have never been guilty of violence, never been guilty of uncivil conduct and have never been guilty of wanting to abuse their holding of a weapon's licence or the use of agun. And I know that numbered amongst those many tens of thousands will be many people in the rural community and in the lead-up to the meeting I had the opportunity of a number of informal discussion with leaders of the rural community about this issue and without exception the attitude taken was constructive and in the national interest. And as I have said in the Parliament I am happy to repeat today, that of all the groups in the Australian community none over the years have extinguished themselves more than the rural people of Australia in the capacity to put the national interest at all times very high in their agenda and usually ahead of their own personal interests. I'll make that preliminary comment, I repeat the assurance given that ftil and fair compensation will be paid. I also remind you that amongst the criteria laid down, by the Police Minister's Conference was the capacity for people on the land, in particular circumstances where a need was demonstrated to obtain a licence for a low powered semi-automatic weapon from the local licensing authorities. I assure you that the new rules will be administered sensibly. I assure you that the compensation will be full, will be fair, and proper compensation and I also assure you that the Government is very determiined to maintain the commitment that I made at that Police Minister's Conference. The events at Port Arthur were an awfUl experience in Australia's history. They have been talked about a lot and I don't wish to dwell on them excessively this morning, except to make the observation that in 22 years of politics, no individual incident in my experience has quite touched the national soul domestically as that particular event and it would be misreading the mood and the temper of the collective Australian community if that were not to be born in mind. 
Mr President, I now do inevitably speculation to the lead up to a Budget, there has been speculation about where cuts may fall in just about every area. And I say a few things about the preparation of the Budget, We have been left with a very difficult fiscal challenge, There is a very big fiscal consolidation challenge ahead of it. It is important that we reduce the budget deficit, it is important that we strive towards a achieving a budget balance. We have set ourselves the aim over a period over two years in closing the gap and on present indication that gap is in the order of $ 8 billion. We made during the course of the election campaign a number of commitments and I say to you that I regard the keeping of electoral commitments as extremely important. I place the honouring of election comnmitments far higher on my agenda of priorities that I think may have been placed on previous Prime Ministers and the restoration of trust between elected governments and the people who vote for them is a very, very important element of rebuilding the overall confidence in the system of government in this country. I know that a number of things are very important to the rural
community. Let me say, for example, that it would be an understatement of me to say to you today that I understand very, very well the significance to the rural community of such things as the diesel fu~ el rebate scheme and I have been around these traps long enough to know that and to know how very significant that particular measure is to you. And that I can assure you will not be lost on me or my colleagues as we make our particular decisions. But in the long run if we can achieve our aim, if we can consolidate the accounts, if we can achieve a balanced budget in two years time, that will make a mighty contribution towards a climate for lower interest rates, it will make a mighty contribution towards building the more competitive Australia which is so tremendously to all of you. Mr President, I haven't today canvassed all of the issues which are of interest and concern and no doubt some of them will come up during Question Time. Can I finish in a sense where I began and that is the relationship between the government and the rural community of Australia. I want to take this opportunity of expressing my great admiration for and confidence in all of my colleges
but two in particular, that is the Deputy Prime Minister, Tim Fischer and the Deputy Leader of the National Party and the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, John Anderson-And I say in just under three months we have worked together as colleagues in the new coalition Government. I couldn't have had two better colleagues, I couldn't have had two people more confidently more concerned about the interests of rural Australia, two people more determined to work through it with me and to work with the rest of my colleagues to achieve the sort of goals that we set ourselves during the election campaign. I believe that we have made a good start in the area of consultation and dialogue and I2d on't want us to rest on our laurels, I said at the beginning we would be an open, accessible government, we would not take you for granted, we would listen to what you have to say and I hope my attendance here today and the few words that I have had will make a contribution in reinforcing what I hope over a long period of time will be a very valuable and positive partnership between the new Liberal/ National party government and the National Farmer's Federation. Thank you. 
QUESTION ( inaudible) 
PRIME MIIISTER:
Well Mr Mackenzie can I say that I agree with you, that you have been very patient, the Native Title Act was passed in December 1993. It has proved, in my opinion to be singularly unsuccessfuhl so far in its operation in achieving its objectives and in the process its created an enormous amount of uncertainty. You invite me temptingly to hypothesise about what we might do if a certain thing happens. I don't think, and for reasons I hope you will understand, I don't think it is appropriate for me to say how the Government might react if a particular result obtains from a particular court case. I have a proper regard for the respective roles of the Parliament and the courts, I'm a traditionalist when it comes to the courts concerned I think the courts have their role, I don't thinks its the role of the court to legislate as occasionally some members of the High Court have said, I don't agree with that, I think its the role of Parliament to legislate. But I also do believe in the rule of law and the High Court has reached a certain decision about what the common law of Australia has always been and the  maddening thing about this issue is that most people I talk to don't really disagree all that strongly with the original Mabo decision, their argument is the way it has been legislatively perverted and I think that's the problem and there are things added along the way, I mean the right to negotiate for example is not something that is ordinarily part of a common law title in Australia unless you have actually demonstrated that you have the title and that is one of the things that we seek to take away. For reasons I hope you understand, I don't want to display my hand. I believe the law is strongly on the side of the High Court resolving the matter in relation to those without reservation and pastoral leases in the Wik case and what the court has to say about other pastoral leases will be a matter for the court, and can I tell you that the Federal Government's Council will be appearing in the Wik case and will be arguing very strongly the Government's belief and that is pastoral leases extinguish Native Title whether they are granted with or without reservation. And we will be arguing because that is our belief, that is my belief and it was in the pre-ainble to the legislation and we will be arguing that very strongly. I don't think for a combination of reasons it would necessarily be a positive thing for me to speculate about how we may react in the event of a particular court decision and I hope you will understand that and I say you have been very patient, I think a lot of people have been very patient, it's not something that a magic wand overnight, I have to deal with the reality, wve live in a democracy, The Australian people voted overwhelmingly for us but equally they produced a result where certain numbers obtain in the Senate and I have to take that into account and I'm also very conscious of the balance of our obligations to the whole of the Australian community. We will be arguing that point of view very strongly. I think the course of action we have chosen is more likely, more soon than another course of action to resolve the issue. It's a matter of judgment I can understand the people of good will in this room disagreeing with me on that but I think it is the right course of action. 
QUESTION: ( John Watson)
Prime Minister, there are a number of us disappointed that the GATT/ Uruguay round of trade negotiations didn't free up international trade to a greater extent than it has. We are now hanging our hats fairly solidly on the potential for APEC to at least deliver up within our region, some of the still outstanding issues, particularly very high tariffs. Australia obviously also has some obligations under that APEC agreement. I wonder i~ f you would spend a couple of moments helping us to understand where you see Australia moving to between now and the year 2010 in order to honour our side of the obligations. 
PRME MINISTER
We have a very strong coimnitment to the APEC process. We remain committed to a further reduction of tariffs in Australia. You will be aware that there was a fairly difficult debate about the Tariffs Concession Scheme. It was a policy change conmmitted to by the former Government during the election campaign which we picked up I have to acknowledge that some of the criticism on policy grounds at that decision was very understandable. Some people urge to promise as an alternative to implementing what we said in the election campaign a slow down in tariff deduction. We decided not to do that there was a six months change in the date which merely resulted in consolidation, timing consolidation but some people argued upon that what we should actually do is slow down the reduction from 8 to 6 to 5 and we rejected that because we wanted to retain the momentum towards lower tariffs and we will maintain that momentum. We do want it incidentally accompanied by some micro-economic reform measures that will create a lower cost environment for business as it moves towards a lower tariff regime. 
I think Australia has gone a long way in reducing tariffs and I suppose one shouldn't do it but I will, I want to compliment the former Government on what it did this area, I don't often compliment the former Government but I will on that. I thought their 1991 statement on tariff reduction was a very good one and it had our support. One of the nteresting differences between the former government and the present Government is that just about all the major economic changes that were made by the former government had our support when they were good. We don't seem to be having quite the same luck yet, but maybe times will change as a bit more time evaporates. But we have a very strong commitment to the APEC process. I am hard headed enough I hope to believe that it wont be easy. There are a lot of people in Australia who believe that we give away by way of industry initiatives there has to be some reciprocity and I think that is very understandable, reciprocity in a proper sense but I think its also fair to say that we see intrinsic benefits, cost wise for our efficient industries in a low tariff regime. I think I'm probably, more than any other group in Australia, I would be preaching to the converted on the subject of that, I mean the case to the effect that the high tariffs have punished our efficient exports has been made very, very eloquently over the years by many people. We support that, we believe it, and we will continue to play it our in our own policy making so I do want you to accept from me a very strong message to the APEC process, there are many pieces of it that we will put a lot of resource and a lot of effort into. We have appointed an APEC ambassador, Tim Fisher and Alexander Downer have already signalled their commnitment to the process. I will be going to the meeting in Manila and later this year we appointed 3 representative on the APEC Business Advisory Committee. So we are very, very strongly committed and involved with that is a firm commitment to the tariff reduction
process. 
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I too enjoyed your speech especially the comments you made about your government wishing to strengthen the social and economic program of the rural economic fabric of the rural sector. That's certainly music to my ears and I am sure many of the people I represent. I was also heartened by your comments that the importance of the diesel fuel rebate was not lost on you an your colleagues and along with that rebate, which is worth some $ 500 million to the rural sector, our other priority is obviously the maintenance of R D funding to the rural sector. Both of those issues were in fact election promises which you quite eloquently stated. You are endeavouring to do everything you can to maintain. Are you prepared to give this council an unqualified commnitment to maintain both those promises in the coming budget and the budgets of your Government after that? Page 
PRIME MINISTER:
I can repeat what I said to you. I do not want for reasons I hope you will understand to be in the situation that I'm announcing in an adhoc fashion elements of the budget between now and the 20th August but can I without prejudice to that Ian, can I say I repeat what I said in the speech, I have heard loudly and clearly the views. I didn't make those commitments lightly and I place an enormous, contrary to some very strange interpretations that were placed upon a speech I made to ACCOSS last Friday by some newspapers, I thought in that speech I was making the point that I placed a much higher premium on keeping commitments than perhaps people have thought and I repeat that again today but if I give direct answers in relation to one area of that kind then I'll get a lot of invitations over the next few weeks and before long the whole document will be revealed but I am very conscious of the importance you place on both of those and I'm also very conscious of what we have said. I don't want to say any more than that. 
QUESTION:
MY Chairman, I'd like to ask the Prime MKnister a question. Conditions of the environment and Landcare and Natural Heritage Trust have been for a period of time, prior to the election, certainly the sale of a third of Teistra. IF that happens to get bogged down, we at the National Farmers' Federation, we believe also that the whole community has a vested and strong interest in moving those issues forward. Would you give an undertaking to look at ways and means that we can achieve some of that progress in Landcare, in the National Heritage Trust and also in the environment without the sale of Teistra. Would you look at that for us in a practical and positive way? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it is going to Harry... I mean to use the old political refrain twhere's the money coming from" and I don't know where it is. I mean, to be absolutely as open as one can be we've got an $ 8 billion gap we would like to close. We have a number of commitments that we don't want to compromise in the process of closing that gap, we have some important commitments in the area of health insurance and family tax that are very, very important to me and I would not want to see those compromised in any way and we have worked out if we can sell one third of Teistra we get $ 8 billion from that and because the Natural Heritage Trust has got essentially a series of capital investment programs we can fund that to the tune of $ 1I billion. Now unless we have that one-third of Telstra I don't know where we can get the money from. I am always open to suggestions, the Australia Democrats have suggested that we put an extra 7% impost on Telstra well that will only result in compromising some of the capital investment progam, particularly for the bush, that have been foreshadowed by Telstra. They have suggested a carbon tax and quite a number of other wacky ideas that all involve raising additional tax. The Telstra route is clean, fiscally responsible, open and eminently affordable and it beggars belief that a group of people who for years have paraded their passion for the environment would conspire to block the best environmental package we have seen in this country for 50 years, an environmental package that has drawn the support not only of the environmental movement but of the rural movement and on its own of all the political parties in Australia. Now you cant have it both ways. The politicians in this country cant run around saying " yes we want this extra environmental program~ but gee, we want it filnded in a different way." Now, I don't know how else you can fund it and I'd have to honestly say to you that if the third sale of Teistra sinks, the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia sinks with it. There is a link, we made it clear before the election. It's not blackmail, its nothing of the kind. I mean its a one off capital injection and we just don't have it. We have a lot of pressures on us in relation to commitments, and quite legitimately people look to us to keep commitments. We are having a lively debate with the higher education community at the present time. Some of it is based on a lot of misinformation but it is lively nonetheless. I have made some very careful commitments about the maintenance of the social welfare safety net. We are obviously going to achieve a lot of savings in other areas. I have taken a strong view and the Government has taken a strong view about the fact that we've cut the guts out of defence spending in this country year after year, and I don't think it can take any more without compromising the national interest. 
So it is a very difficult balancing act and Harry I would love to be able to say to you " oh, if Telstra's preferred sale falls over there's some other way". I don't know what it is and I think the burden ought to be heavily upon those who would knock Telstra over. 
I mean, you are not dealing here with a novel proposal. The former Government, with our help, sold the Commonwealth Bank after having said Ben Chifley would turn in his grave if it were even thought about. They sold QANTAS, they sold Australian Airlines, they sold every damn thing that moved when they were in Government and now they are throwing up their arms in sort of horror and saying isn't it shocking that we are talking about selling a third of Teistra. I mean, Keating himself said there was nothing inherently important, principle-wise, in maintaining public ownership of Telstra, and I would hope as the debate unfolds and time goes by that the pressure of community opinion, particularly from the environmental movement, will see a change of heart by the minority parties in the Senate. And they'll have time to do that, they've got a Senate inquiry. They said in the election campaign that they'd have to see whether we could demonstrate community benefits from a third sale of Telstra. I think we'll have some capacity to do that and I think that the community benefits that have arisen overseas I mean Telco's been privatised are very strong, very evident. 
QUESTION-(Barry Court)
Yes Mr Prime Minister, back to the Native Title issue. In Western Australia, I'd have to say that our patience has virtually run out in a lot of cases. There's towns that have come to a halt, we can't sub-divide land, building projects have stopped, farmers are facing uncertainty with unsustainable claims, people that have got small loans from even back in war settlement times, for, 14 000 on a $ 2 million farm that now has Native Title slapped on it. It's creating, and I must warn you, an uneasy feeling in our community and the patience is running out. You've said already today that you didn't agree with the previous legislation. We ask you to as soon as possible change the legislation to extinguish the Native Title on pastoral leases and we, I've got to say it, the election voted you in with an increased percentage, certainly in our area, and we'd like some action from you. The end of the year is going to be too late. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Barry, I have to say very directly that it is just not realistic to say that we can, like that, legislate to extinguish Native Title, We wouldn't get it through the Parliament. I mean, that's just a fact of life. I mean, if you can't get Telstra through the Parliament, if you can't I mean, they've sent the Industrial Relations legislation off to a Senate committee without even looking at it. There is no way, I mean, we have had a lot of discussion we haven't done this just off the seat of our pants, we've had a lot of discussions with representatives of the minor parties and their clear ringing unambiguous message is that they will not support legislation that extinguishes Native Title. Now, you may not like it, I may not like it, but that is the fact of life. 
Now, the alternative is you can bowl that up. Now I'm just putting aside for a moment the question of what was said by us in the election campaign and I'll come back to that, but you can bowl up the legislation and you can have it knocked over and then people can say, well, that means you can then automatically have a double dissolution. Well, can I say, I'm not going to put myself and my Government in the situation where it automatically becomes hostage to a double dissolution. I mean, there may or may not be a double dissolution. Can I say, I regard myself and my Government as having been elected for three years, and I think the Australian public are fed up with the rapidity of elections in this country, and if you sort of reconcile yourself to a double dissolution on one particular issue within a few weeks of getting into power, I think you are doomed to have a lot of difficulty. Now, I know people are getting upset in Western Australia. I repeat, it wasn't our legislation, we voted against it. I don't agree with many of the provisions in it, although I support the substance of it, and we're not going to try and gut it. I think pragmatically the course we have chosen is more likely than any other course to bring earlier and better security. 
Now, that is a judgment that we have made. It is not an option to have the thing resolved before the end of the year. I'm sorry, if we were to put legislation into the Parliament tomorrow it would be sent off to a committee I mean, they've done that with the Industrial Relations legislation where we had the clearest possible, open, naked mandate imaginable and it's gone off to a committee and it won't be looked at until August. Now, they would do exactly the same thing with the Native Title legislation. Now, I know it is aggravating to a lot of people in state governments, I know it is of great concern to a lot of people in this room, and I share that concern and that aggravation. But my responsibility is not to make rhetorical speeches about the subject alone. My responsibility is to try and work out a practical way through it. Now, you talked about what was said in the election campaign. What was said in the election campaign in relation to Native Title was firstly that we would preserve the Native Title Act; secondly, that we reserve the right to amend the Act to make it more workable, and that is what we are doing, and part of that was to try and do something about the pastoral lease problem and thirdly, we made a commitment to honour the principles of the Racial Discrimination Ac. Now, I haven't stressed this very much today because it is another part of the argument but a lot of people would argue very strongly, including a lot of very conservative people, that the passage of any legislation purporting to extinguish Native Title, would be in breach of the Racial Discrimination Act. Now, I think the better legal advice is that it probably would be. Now, you can override the Racial Discrimination Act, the Parliament can, but you've got to get both Houses of Parliament to vote in favour of it, and I just have to say to you that there is now way, as I understand their attitude, there is no way that the Australian Democrats and the minority parties and the Labor Party would vote in favour of overriding the Racial Discrimination Act.
Now, I've got to say that even the most conservative of my own Members who would share all of the views that you've expressed, would have great reservation, and I would have some reservations about voting to weaken the Racial Discrimination Act. Now this is a very difficult issue and can I say to you there is an explicit irony in the fact that after I leave here I am going to have a meeting with the representatives of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, and they are going to tell me that what I've put up represents the most retrograde step in Aboriginal affis for 100 years, which I think is unreasonable if I may say so. Now, it is difficult, it is not going to be cured by people sort of making speeches at each other about what can or can't be done in a short period of time, I mean, Barry, I would love to have a solution. I sympathise with the difficulties of people in your State. I had a long talk with the Premiers of your State and with Rob Borbidge and Dean Brown about this. I think the way we are handling it is more likely than another course of action to bring practical benefits for the pastoral industry. I might be wrong, I could be, but I don't think taking everything into account I am certain of this though, that if we were to have decided first up to have gone down the legislative extinguishment route, you would have galvanised opposition to any changes and you would have compromised any hope of getting anything through the Senate, and we could have been stuck with the status quo, absent an early double dissolution and I repeat again, I am not in the business of committing my Government to an early double dissolution. I mean, I want to govern for three years, that's what I was elected for, and the idea that one can sort of summarily put oneself at the mercy of a double dissolution and all the pressures that are involved in that, is not one that I easily embrace. Could I say, with the best will in the world, I understand your point, a lot of people hold that view. I am trying as openly and directly as I can to explain the sorts of actions we've taken. I'm very conscious of the pressure in your State legitimate, on the issue and I will do everything I humanly can to accommodate it but I've got to, I mean, I've got to be accountable to the practical outcome of what I do and as I understand the situation, the practical outcome that I have, the approach that I have proposed is more likely than another approach to achieve benefits for pastoralists and miners in a shorter period of time. Now, that's the reason why we are doing it. 
QUESTION: (Ian Dondas)
Thanks Mr Howard, and I certainly appreciate your comments about the role of NFF and micro-economic reform and Industrial Relations and so on, and certainly appreciate your comments on diesel fbel rebate and I think the point needs to be made to the media here that we are talking about diesel fuel that's actually used on farms and it is not as if we get cheap fuel to drive up and down the roads. But the other point that does concern farmers in this area of course is the possible re-introduction of death duties and.... 
PRIME MMNSTER:
That's not going to happen. 
QUESTON:
That's good. The second part that is related to this is the capital gains tax that applies at the moment on transfer of farms between generations. It's a concern at the moment, as you I'm sure understand the fragile capital position of farmers at the moment. There is at the moment the capital gains tax applies of course across the board taking into account inflation factors, but there is a feeling that perhaps there should be consideration for farms to transfer farms between generations and looking more closely at this capital gains tax issue. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Ian, we have got a number of capital gains tax proposals in our election commitments and we certainy intend to keep those commitments and I'd be interested, and my office would be interested to hear a little more detail on what you've got in mind on that. There is a proposal in relation to residences. There's a limited proposal in relation to the impact of capital gains on residences generally, but I think you proposed something a little broader than that, but why can't we have a talk so I have a better understanding. I mean, I can't make any promise on the run, I won't. But I would be interested if you had a particular proposal to flesh out. If you wanted to talk to my office or me about that I'd be very pleased to. 
Ends  



29 May 1996 
E&amp; OE .......
Thank you very much Judy; to Kim Beazley, to my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a rare event in Australian politics that brings together the leaders of the two major political parties, and indeed the leaders of other political parties, in a united commitment to a piece of legislation and a political Act, clearly designed to improve the future of this country. I can't think of an event in the 22 years that I've been in politics which has so galvanised the political leadership of this country, has so brought together the major political parties of this country for a purpose which will achieve a permanent change for the better in the way in which this country conducts its affairs, and the circumstances in which the men and women of this country live out their lives.
We have been united on other occasions where the unity has been quite properly and quite appropriately around as symbols and demonstrations and commitments. But here we came together to achieve a permanent change in the attitude of this country towards the possession and use of dangerous firearms. We resolved as a community not to go down the American path. We resolved as a community to send a very strong message all around Australian society that violence as a method, particularly through the use of firearms, of settling disputes, of playing out emotions and then getting rid of
pent-up passions with something that is unacceptable to us in Australian modern society, irrespective of our political or our religious beliefs. 
I say very happily, that I have received on this issue, total support from Kim Beazley as Leader of the Australian Labor Party, and I thank him and I compliment him for that. I have received total support from Senator Kernot, the Leader of the Australian Democrats, and indeed from a wide cross-section of the Australian community. 
I congratulate all of the women' s groups that have come together in formulating this petition. I think it's fair to say that it's a very broad spectrum of women's groups coming together unitedly behind a very important cause. A cause that's important to women particularly, but not only to women, but to men and women throughout our community. Men and women both died at Port Arthur, and men and women both have been the victims of other massacres, not only here in Australia but around the world. Those who argue that it is people and not guns that kill other people might state a
truism, but they ignore a fundamental fact that there is a clear and irrefutable link between deaths and homicides through the use of guns, and the availability of guns around the world. There has to be a reason why a nation like the United States has something like a 14 in 100,000 murder rate, whereas a country such as the United Kingdom has a rate which is less than one seventh of that. There is a clear link between the availability of weapons, and those who argue otherwise are arguing in the face of all of human experience in the 20th century. 
I do feel very strongly about this issue. I regret the fact that some law abiding people who have never done anything violent or anything wrong in their lives are going to be inconvenienced by these new laws. That happens in other parts of life and in other parts of society, and I think it is a small price to pay to give to people, not only the reality of a more secure future, but also the feeling of a more secure future. And I say to this audience again that the Government remains firmly committed to the implementation, without variation, of the policy guidelines that were put down during the Police Minister's Conference here in Canberra, just over two weeks ago.
But most importantly of all I want to congratulate the women's groups. I want to congratulate those who have put today's gathering together, because it's not easy to get disparate groups together. I wish the petition well. I will certainly encourage all with whom I come into contact to sign it. And I encourage all of you in your quiet, firm but articulate way to demonstrate that there is overwhelming majority support in the Australian community for the laws that were agreed to by the Police Ministers' here in Canberra two weeks ago. Don't be, anybody in Australia, be deluded into
imtagining that there isn't overwhelming support for what the two sides of politics are doing on this issue. There is a deep feeling that this is a once in a lifetime opportunity to change things permanently for the better, and it's an opportunity that is our responsibility as leaders, and your responsibility as articulate citizens of Australia, not to squander. I congratulate you for your initiative. I wish the petition well. I assure you of the continued commitment of the Government and of the Liberal and National parties to the cause that the petition supports. 
Thank you. 


30 May 1996 
E&amp; OE.................. 
Thank you very much Warwick; to Pat McNamara, the Deputy Premier of Victoria; Shane Stone, the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory; our distinguished overseas guests, and to my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues. 
It's a great pleasure to be here tonight. It's a particular pleasure to follow my friend and colleague, Warwick Parer, the newly appointed Minister for Resources and Energy. A man who has a long background in the mining industry and therefore a pragmatic understanding of many of the challenges, circumstances and problems of your industry. 
This is the first gathering of the mining industry that I've been able to address since the change of government. I see here tonight many familiar faces. I've met many of you
in some of my earlier political manifestations, and it's very good to renew the acquaintanceship. And I'd like to say at the outset that the Government I lead is very
strongly committed to a close working relationship, a partnership, in building a better fu~ ture for our country with the mining industry. 
I place great store on governments being accessible. I place a premium on Ministers in governments understanding the problems and challenges of business. That doesn't mean on each and every occasion we will agree with you, or you with us, or that each and every occasion the decisions we take, you will support. But it does mean that you can always accept that our motive and our intention is to make the circumstances in which you do business, as encouraging and as inviting as is humanly possible. 
Your industry's contribution to Australia is quite legendary-The mfining industry is bound up with the history of this country, particularly the history of this country in the post-World War II period. Without the contribution of the mining industry and without contribution to the export income of this nation of the mining industry, all Australians would have a sharply lower living standard. And we will, all of us as Australians. depend in the future, on the contribution of the mining industry to maintain and hopefully to expand our living standards. So it is very genuinely and very warmly, at the beginning of my government's term in offie, that I say that we are friends of the mining industry. We'll be friends in the context of serving the national
interest and properly accommodating the claims of other sections of the Australian community, But we will always understand the importance of security and predictability. We will always understand the massive contribution of your industry to the wealth of our nation. 
We face, as a new government, a tnixture of opportunities and challenges. Today we've had some figures which show that growth in the March quarter was sharply higher than most of us expected. Can I say that is unequivocally good news for this country, Whatever our political views or whatever our industry, growth is the foundation of prosperity for the people. And all of us have a vested interest in the maintenance of higher levels of economic growth. Those levels of growth must be sustainable, and those levels of growth must over time be such as to reduce our still very unacceptably high level of unemployment. 
Not surprisingly the advent of these better than expected figures has provoked a bit of debate about the nature of the fiscal challenge that faces the new Goverrnent. Putting the budget of Australia back into an underlying balance is not some kind of abstract economic ideology, born of fanaticism and commitment to theory without regard to practical consequences. We need a budget balance because this country still has a chronic savings problem, and that chronic savings problem is one of the reasons that we still run a very high current account deficit. We run that high current account deficit because of our low savings, therefore we must draw on the savings of foreigners to maintain our living standard because we still lag far behind in the area of micro-economic reform. 
So when you hear me and some of my colleagues talk about the need to put the budget back into balance, we're not playing out a litany of some dated economic theory, rather we are making a practical contribution to building this nation's savings. And it's important as the debate rages over the weeks ahead about the level of growth, it's important to understand that the growth that will affect the budget challenge, is the growth for the year commencing 1996/ 1997, 1 mean, not the growth for the year that has just gone past us-And I think it is important to understand that just because you
have growth of 4.8% in the year to March 1996, it doesn't automatically follow that you're going to have growth at that order in the next financial year. Needless to say, nobody will be happier than the members of the new Government if we find that the growth outlook, when it is delivered to us for the coming financial year, is better than originally forecast by the Federal Treasury in its release on the 12th of March. 
Warwick Parer mentioned in his introductory remarks, I wanted to say a couple of things about the agenda for change and reform that the new Governent has. As I look around this room, I'm very conscious of some of the great industrial relations debates that have taken place in this country over the past ten years. There is no area of reform which is more important to the future of this country, economically speaking, than reform in the area of industrial relations. 
Over the past decade, I myself and many of my colleagues have devoted ourselves to winning an industrial relations debate. We have devoted ourselves to the very simple propositiLon that if you can build an industrial culture in this country, where people are encouraged to make their bargains at the workplace level within the framework of guaranteed decent minimum standards, without the unwanted intervention of third parties, you must over time, build not only higher wages, but a more productive culture. And that really is the cornerstone of the legislation introduced last week into the Federal Parliament by my colleague, Peter Reith. That legislation is the culmination of a ten year campaign by many people in politics and in industry to bring about a change
in the legislative framework which over time will bring about a change in the industrial culture. 
It is built upon the principle of workplace co-operation. It is not built on the principle of the domination of employees by employers. It is built on the notion that if you create a partnership at the workplace level you will get the best result possible for the company and also for the employees. It is built upon the notion of freedom of association. 
Under our legislation people are free to join or not to join the trade unions of their choice according to their desire. It is built upon the notion of the supremacy of the law over all of us. We will restore through the restoration of the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act the protection that used to exist for companies at the sharp end of predatory union behaviour. It is built upon the principle that stupid, interventionist unfair dismissal laws don't protect people against persecution by employers. What they do is to destroy job opportunities for Australians. It is built upon the proposition that not only should people have the freedom to join or not to join a union but having decided to join a union, they ought to have the freedom to join the union of their choice. 
That legislation is very important to my Government but more importantly than that, it is important to the industrial fuiture of this country. If we can get the legislation enacted, if we can create the new industrial era that I think it will bring, then that will make a massive contribution to the economic future of Australia. It is impossible of course to address the mining industry without saying something about the issue of Native Title. I think it's fair to say that I've probably had the Native Title trifecta, this week. I launched National Reconciliation Week along with Pat Dodson, the Chairman of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, and Kim Beazley and Cheryl Kernot. I addressed the National Farmers' Federation yesterday and tonight I have the opportunity of addressing representatives of the mining industry. Achieving a fair, balanced and decent solution to the problems that surround Native Title is one of the big challenges before the new Government and I've chosen over the past few days to take the debate into the open, to speak very openly and very directly about the issue because I regard it as very important that we do find that kind of solution. There is undoubtedly legitimate concern in sections of the pastoral and mining industry about the operation of the existing legislation. My party and the National Party went to the
last election with a threefold cominitment in this area. We said that we were committed to the preservation of the Native Title legislation, that we accepted the decision of the High Court of Australia in the Mabo case but we reserved the right to make changes to the legislation, to improve its workability and that in making those changes, we would honour the principles of the Racial Discrimination Act. 
Now I have held and my Party has held fast to those three principles. I think those three principles recognise the legitimate interests of those areas of the Australian community involved in this issue. There have been arguments put to me that the simple, short cut solution is to legislate immediately so that pastoral Ieaes will extinguish Native Title. The problem with that proposition, quite apart from my pragmatic political judgement, the legislation of that type would not pass through the Federal Senate as it currently is, or likely in the future to be constituted, but quite apart from that pragmatic consideration, it is fair to say that it is hard to reconcile that proposition with the commitment to honour the principles of the Racial Discrimination Act. 
After extensive consultation with the mining industry and other interested parties, we have put forward a discussion paper which draws in particular upon, but not exclusively by any means, upon some of the submissions put to us by the mining industry, particularly the proposals regarding the existing right to negotiate, which was a statutory extension of the principles laid down in the Mabo decision. I say to those people and I guess there would be some in this room who believe that the proposals the new Government has put forward don't go far enough, I ask them to understand
our obligations to the Aboriginal people of Australia in this issue. I ask you also to accept that the proposals we are putting forward are more likely in a shorter period of time to bring about a fair and proper adjustment of the difficulties in the existing legislation. 
It should not be assumed that even if legislation to extinguish Native Title where pastoral leases exists were to pass through the national Parliament that that legislation would not be subject to significant constitutional challenge and therefore further delays, and I remind you of course that in the High Court in a few weeks time there will commence the hearing of the appeal in the Wik case which when finally determined will certainly resolve I trust, the question of the relationship between pastoral leases granted without reservation and the continuation of Native Title. 
Ladies and gentlemen, that of course is not the only issue which is important in the Government's relations with the mining industry and other sections of the Australian community. But it is an issue that has to be resolved fairly and decently and with a minimum of delay and it is an issue that is properly attracting a lot of energy and attention from myself and a number of our colleagues. If we can in co-operation and not in acrimony solve the problems associated with the operation of that legislation, I believe that we will move to a new and even more positive era in relations between your industry, the governments of this country and the indigenous people of Australia. 
It is, in many ways, a very exciting time to be in Government. I've seen a lot of aspects of politics. I've been in Government once before. I learnt a lot about that. I was in Opposition for far too long and I learnt a hell of a lot about that. And I can say, to be back in Government is a vast improvement over the last 13 years. But I want to say to you that I don't make those comments in any sense of triumnphalism or smugness. 
I can give you a number of assurances apart from the ones I gave earlier, but the most important assurance of all is that the Government I lead will never take the business community or the mining industry of this country for granted. We have a lot in common with the business community and I say that unashamedly. We share your free enterprise values; we share your commitment to decent capitalism; we share your belief in reasonable profit levels; we share your goals about the sustainable development of this great nation of ours. But I don't take your support or your understanding for granted, and in the years that I hope lie ahead for my Government, we won't do that on any occasion. 
We will try very hard, just as we do in relation to Native Title to achieve a proper balance between development and the care and the nurturing of our natural environment. The time when people thought the concern for the environment was some kind of passing fad of middle class trendies has long since passed. Care for the environment is a mainstream political issue and a mainstream social and human concern which is permanently part of the Australian political landscape. That was one of the reasons why we committed ourselves in the last election to the creation of a Natural
Heritage Trust, which if only we can succeed in persuading our colleagues in the Senate to pass our legislation to privatise one-third of Telstra, we can establish with one-eighth of the capital proceeds of that sale. And that Natural Heritage Trust will finance the most imaginiative capital investment in environmental improvement that this country has seen over the last 40 or 50 years. And once again it is a demonstration of the commitment that we are making as a Government and as a community towards achieving a balance between enviroanent and development. 
And there is one other matter that I want to say something about and I've been told by my minders that I must be very careful to read this parn of the speech I'm not terribly good at reading speeches but because I've issued an extract of it to the media, I'm told I'll be breaking the rules if I don't read it. And it deals with the question of Australia's international treaty making processes and the conference on climate and related matters that is to take place shortly. 
We have moved towards reform of Australia' s treaty making processes so that industry and non-government organisations are given proper involvement in international law making. The Government will then understand potential impacts on our economy before, rather than after, taking on new obligations. 
The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change agreed in 1992 and the follow-up Berlin Conference in 1995 focused attention on this issue in a rather clamorous way. 
It is the case that climate change is a critical global challenge. Australia remains committed to fulfilling its obligations under the Framework Convention. We are contributing by limiting our emissions of greenhouse gases through a National Greenhouse Response Strategy with industry's positive participation. The Greenhouse Challenge programme provides companies with the opportunity to show they are taking practical steps to limit emissions, 
But an effective, long-term response to climate change will need to be global involving all countries. While developed countries have agreed to take the lead, developing countries are expected by the Year 2000 to be emitting more than half of the world's 002 emissions. They too will have to contribute in the longer term. The forthcoming Berlin mandate negotiations should keep the door open for this. 
The Government will campaign for an approach that ensures that all countries share equitably the burden of addressing what is a truly global problem. It will insist that Australia's economic and trade interests are safeguarded and its specific national circumstances are taken into account in implementing the Convention. 
Ladies and gentlemen, before I conclude, can thank the industry for the invitation extended to me and to so many of my colleagues to be here tonight. I hope that our collective presence is a demonstration of a determination on the part of the new Government right at the beginning to establish strong links with your industry. 
May I also, on a more personal note, congratulate Jerry Ellis, your Chairman and tonight's host, on his presumptive assumption if I can put it that way of the Chairmanship of BHP, the big Australian. A corporate honour, I am sure, of great moment in the eyes of all people in the business world. 
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, it is a continuing honour and privilege to be the Prime Minister of this country, to have the opportunity of leading a group of men and women in Government who will in their journey through Government, make their share of mistakes, have their share of failings, but will at all times have a very determined commitment to partnership with business and a long term commitment through that partnership to the future economic development and welfare of this nation and the Australian people. 
Thank you very much. 


1 JUNE 1996 
Mrs Ann Zablud, President of the Zionist Federation of Australia
Mark Liebler, President of the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund
His Excellency Mr Shmuel Moyal, Ambassador of Israel
flC Government colleagues and members of the Opposition
Rabom
Distinguished guests
Mr Malcolm Cohen ( Master of Ceremonies) 
It's a great pleasure to be here with you this evening, to enjoy your company and warm hospitality at this 37th Biennial Conference of the Zionist Federation of Australia. 
I feel especially honoured to be asked to deliver the inaugural Yitzhak Rabin Memorial Oration for the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund. 
My last address to your Conference was eight years ago, on that occasion as Leader of the Opposition. 
It's been a big eight years for both of us. 
I'm very pleased to be here tonight, both as prime minister and as a longstanding friend of Israel. 
I'm pleased to have again the opportunity to say how much I value the role and friendship of Australia's Jewish community and the strong links between
Australia and Israel. 
I count as one of the valued things of my life a deep affection and respect for the Jewish people stretching back long before my entry into public life. Can I say, not to coin a phrase, that I feel relaxed and comfortable among you. 
The world has changed enormously in those eight years, including in the Middle East Eight years ago we might all have dreamed of an end to the long and bitter conflict of finding peace for Israel and its neighbours in the region. But there was little reason then to foresee the progress which has since been made.  
That dream is now within reach, although its final shape is yet to be resolved. None of us underestimates the difficult challenges that lie ahead still.  
Many forces were at work in driving the peace process: the end of the Cold War and demise of the Soviet Union, the Gulf War and, not least, the sustained commitment and vigorous role of the United States in the Middle East 
But there is no doubt that a decisive force in turning the region from fear and despair, in bringing hope for peace, was the leader we honour tonight Yitzhak Rabin. 
Yitzhak Rabin
On the night of his death, speaking at the peace rally in Tel Aviv, Yitzhak Rabin told the crowd of more than one hundred thousand people that he had always believed that the majority of the people wanted peace, and that they were ready to take risks for peace. 
As the Zionist Federation's report says of him, Rabin was a selfless and heroic leader who was himself prepared to take great risks for peace. 
He was not prepared, of course, to take risks which would jeopardise the security of Israel. 
Rabin's support for the peace process was hard-headed and hard-nosed. He made the strategic judgment that only a negotiated peace would secure Israel's future. As the well-known Israeli author and commentator, Amos Oz, said after the assassination, Rabin was an unsentimental dove. 
Rabin understood the uncertainties, fears and hopes of many Israelis in embarking on the path of making peace with their erstwhile enemies - those same who had threatened Israel's survival from the moment of its birth in 1948. 
His coimmitment to Israel's survival as a nation, as a safe haven and refuge for the Jewish people, was the cornerstone of his life. 
But he also realised the opportunity presented by the end of the Cold War. 
He appreciated the significance of the changes taking place in Israel - in particular as a consequence of immigration and the growth in the Arab population - and in neighbouring Arab societies. 
Like Israel's founding father, David Ben-Gurion, Rabin recognised the need for Israelis and Arabs to build mutual respect, as the necessary foundation for living side by side with each other as neighbours. As he said, speaking to Palestinians, in his inaugural speech to the Knesset in July 1992 " we have been fated to live together on the same patch of land We lead our lives with you.."
Rabin's commritment to a negotiated settlement was bolstered by his convictions about the nature of the Israeli state and society. 
Like Ben-Gurion, Rabin believed in the essential Jewishness of Israel and in the importance of its democracy. For Rabin, ruling by force over the Palestinians was fundamentally incompatible with the democratic character of Israel -  it would, he said, cause many of Israel's friends to view Israel as no different from its enemies. 
Rabin and Progress Towards Peace 
Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister in 1992. 
As prime minister, he brought to the pursuit of peace as a politician the same personal courage and strategic vision he had shown as a soldier during Israel's war of independence and as the commander of Israel's forces during the 1967
war. 
He was at the heart of Israel's drive to ensure Israel's future security through peace, just as he had been at the critical moments in defending Israel's security militarily. 
On becoming prime minister, he picked up and pushed ahead the peace process which began with the 1991 Madrid Conference.
Under his leadership, Israel negotiated with the Palestinians the Oslo Declaration of Principles which was signed on 13 September 1993. We all remember that slight hesitation as he shook hands with Yasser Arafat - no doubt a small visible sign of the competing emotions tugging within his heart and the competing judgments tugging within his mind. 
He signed with King Hussein the peace treaty with Jordan in October 1994. 
Then, just over a month before his death, there was the signature on 28 September 1995 of the Interim Agreement governing the transitional period of Israeli/ Palestinian relations and setting the framework for the permanent status negotiations. 
The tremendous progress which has been achieved was not due to Rabin alone. He had partners for peace, in King Hussein and Yassar Arafat. The constructive and creative support of the United States was also necessary. 
But it was Rabin's vision, courage and above all the trust the Israeli people had in him that kept the process moving. 
Australia and the Middle East peace process 
The Government hopes - I hope - that this momentum will not be lost. 
Newly elected prime minister, Mr Benjamin Netanyahu inherits a valuable legacy towards a comprehensive settlement. He also inherits a heavy responsibility to see that legacy fulfilled and help create a future in which all peoples of the Middle East can live in peace with security. 
He brings a new era to the Israeli prime ministership. He is the first primee minister of Israel to have had no personal involvement in the tumultuous events surrounding the foundation of the Jewish state. 
Alexander Downer will talk to you more tomorrow about the Government's policies on the Middle East. Tonight I want just to mention the basic principles which underpin those policies. 
Eight years ago I promised you that a government led by me would be a true and understanding friend of Israel. My commitment to that promise has never wavered and I am pleased to repeat it tonight. 
The security of Israel within recognised and respected borders is at the core of the our policy. 
Australia and Israel will, of course, sometimes have differences, but they will be resolved in the context of Australia's staunch support and friendship for Israel and the Israeli people. 
A just outcome for the Palestinian people, in which their legitimate and political rights are respected, is clearly also necessary for the achievement of an enduring peace. 
As Rabin said not long before his death, the nature and final shape of the Palestinian entity will be defined in the permanent status negotiations. The settlement is for the Israelis and Palestinians to decide. It's encouraging that the first round of those negotiations was held on schedule in Egypt last month. The PLO's recent decision to remove from its Charter the offensive provisions rejecting Israel's right to exist was also a most welcome step. 
I would like to see a sovereign Lebanon, free of all foreign forces, with the ents Lebanese people being able to live in peace and continue to rebuild their country after the long years of civil war and strife. 
A comprehensive settlement will require Syria to join in further negotiations ides with Israel. 
The Government condemns the terrorism that seeks to wreck the peace process: the attacks on Israeli citizens by the Hamas suicide bombers and by Hezbollah. 
There can be no compromise with terrorists, in the Middle East or elsewhere. Much of the terrorism that plagues the world has its roots, and its sponsors, in
f the Middle East. Iran's support for terrorism is unacceptable. 
In the end, only the achievement of a comprehensive settlement will ensure the defeat of terrorism in the Middle East. It will also help defeat the activities of
terrorists throughout the world. 
Australia's support for the peace process is backed by practical contributions of resources and expertise. We have made longstanding commitments of Australian defence personnel to United Nations peacekeeping forces and the Multinational Force and Observers group in the Sinai.
Australia is active in the working groups on arms control and regional security and on water resources. Australian expertise and technology can be useful in helping manage the scarce water resources of Israel, Jordan and the Palestinians. 
We have contributed since 1993 to rehabilitation and development projects for Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank. 
The impact of Rabin's assassination 
Having spoken about Yitzhak Rabin's role and his legacy for the peace process, I would like to reflect for a moment on the impact of his assassination. 
In his final speech, Rabin told the crowds: " Violence erodes the basis of Israeli democracy. It must be condemned and isolated.... In a democracy, there can be
differences but the final decision will be taken in democratic elections." 
That Rabin was killed by a Jew was a transfiguring event for Israel. It prompted much questioning and discussion about the nature of Jewish society and, more widely, about the conduct of political debate and the role of free speech in a democracy. 
In a similar way, the massacre at Port Arthur six weeks ago invited Australians to take a close look at our values and to reflect on the sort of society we want to live in. 
In the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, we saw the consequences of the hatefilled language of fanaticism, language which creates a climate of violence and intolerance and hopelessness. 
Australians, like Israelis, are not backward in expressing opinions about any subject often in pithy and colourful language. The idea of plain speaking and give and take is an accepted part of political debate. 
But politicians have a responsibility to protect standards and institutions. In recent years, I have emphasised the importance of restoring respect for Parliament and its procedures. 
During the election campaign and since, I have emphasised the importance of restoring the faith of the electorate in their political representatives. In my own case, I regard it as a matter of personal honour my commitment to deliver on promises made during the campaign. 
For democracy to work it is vital that there be mutual trust between government and people. 
Following the tragedy at Port Arthur, the clear national will was that the Government act to control guns more tightly. Responding to that demand has been an important acquittal of political responsibility. 
The tragedy also raised questions about the influence of violence in films and other media on how we think and act and especially on the attitudes of our children. The role of government in responding to such community concerns requires careful consideration. 
As you would all know, I am against the unnecessary intrusion of government into people's lives, especially where such intrusion impinges on people's personal freedoms and choices.  
It is a matter for fine judgment and honest debate as to where the line should be drawn between rights and controls. We have seen that words and images have awful and sometimes unintended consequences. On the other hand, for democracies like Israel and Australia, the protection of free speech is of fundamental importance. 
I know that this community has a particular interest in these issues, and that the Coalition's position on the Racial Hatred Act was a matter of concern to the Federation. 
You should be in no doubt about our abhorrence and rejection of all forms of racism. The Federation is aware of my support for the Australian Parliament's unanimous rejection in 1986 of the UN resolution which equated Zionism with racism. We shared your pleasure when that resolution, with Australia's support, was overturned in the United Nations in 1991. 
But tolerance of the views of others, at least their right to express them, is essential if our society is to retain its democratic foundations. As I have said before, drawing on Voltaire, I may not agree with what another person says but I defend his right to say it. 
For the Coalition parties including criminal sanctions in the Racial Hatred Act would have been to go past where we judged the line should be. The Act has only recently come into force. The Government will retain it and monitor its operations. We shall be happy to maintain a dialogue with the Federation and with other interested community organisations in that process. 
Racism will be eliminated only when the ignorance and lack of understanding which are its breeding grounds are overcome. The Government's $10 million two-year education and information programme will, I hope, help reduce racist attitudes in the community and foster tolerance and fairness. 
Australia and Israel 
My first letter to a foreign leader after I was sworn in as prime minister was to Mr Peres expressing my concern about the Hamas bombings. I have today sent a message to Mr Netanyahu congratulating him and reaffirming Australia's commitment to the relationship with Israel. 
Those links between our countries and our peoples go back a long way, to the participation of Australian soldiers in the liberation of Jerusalem in the First it's World War, and Australia's early recognition of the new state of Israel in 1948. 
More can be done, however, to deepen the links, especially in the commercial field. Trade between Australia and Israel has been growing, but has not yet reached its fuill potential. 
I know that many of the guests here tonight are actively pursuing the opportunities presented by Israel as an export market. There is scope for more joint ventures, especially in areas such as information technology, telecommunications and agriculture, where Australian and Israeli companies have much to offer each other in research and technology capabilities. 
I was pleased to hear of the successful participation last month by a large Australian delegation in Agritech ' 96, Israel's international agricultural  exhibition. I heard that delegation found good prospects for cooperation in agricultural technology. 
The private sector is obviously best placed to identify and pursue the a opportunities. My government will do what it can to assist the competitiveness of Australian exporters by reforms in the labour market, telecommunications, energy and the waterfront. 
Immigration and the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund 
Australia and Israel share the challenges and opportunities of welcoming migrants to our shores. 
When I last spoke to you, Soviet controls on emigration still prevented many from exercising their right to leave. Since then nearly 700,000 Jews from the former Soviet Union have rebuilt their lives in Israel. 
As Rabin said in his Rosh Hashana message last year, this is a matter for pride but also no easy undertaking. 
In this context, I would like to pay tribute to the United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund for its work in helping young refugees from Ethiopia, the former Soviet Union, and former Yugoslavia settle in Israel. 
We admire the Fund's creativity and the success of its well-designed projects in particular, its work with Ethiopian student refutgees, many of whom are orphans and come from very deprived conditions. These students have begun new lives through the training and other support given them at special boarding schools. 
I would like to compliment Mark Liebler for the energy and commitment he has shown as president of the Fund. No-one who is aware of his ten years as former president of the Zionist Federation would be surprised by his achievements at the Fund. 
Jewish community and Zionist Federation of Australia 
The Jewish community in Australia is the most important link we have with Israel. 
The Jewish community has made an outstanding contribution to Australia's national, cultural, business and intellectual life. 
The Zionist Federation of Australia has a respected role in communicating to the government and the wider Australian public the Jewish community's views on Israel and the Middle East, and on social and other issues in Australia. It does great work, as your report shows, in fostering the Jewish religion and culture, and in supporting the Jewish community, including through its education and youth programmes. 
I would like to thank the outgoing President of the Federation, Mrs Ann Zablud, for her invitation this evening. She has made a distinguished contribution to the Jewish community. I offer my best wishes to her successor, Dr Ron Weiser. 
Conclusion 
I think it's appropriate for me to conclude by returning to what must be the principal theme of this evening in honour of Yitzhak Rabin peace in the Middle East.
The violence of his death adds poignancy to his comments on signing the peace accord on 13 September 1993: " We should not let the land flowing with milk and honey become a land flowing with blood and tears". 
It is, as Rabin said, " impossible to erase 100 years of hostility and bloodshed with the stroke of a pen and single handshake. It is an ongoing and often painful process." 
How painful Israelis and Palestinians in the Middle East know better than we here tonight. 
But we can dedicate ourselves to supporting those who continue Rabin's search for a comprehensive settlement. 
I assure you my government will be a constant friend to Israel as it continues that search. 


2 June 1996 
E&amp;OE...... 
I'm very happy to be here this morning to do two things. Firstly to launch the Smith Family's Winter Warmth appeal, but secondly, and in a sense more importantly, to take the opportunity of commending to the Australian community organisations like the Smith Family who do such a valuable job in providing for the more needy people in our community. 
I have always regarded the work of the great voluntary welfare organ~ isations as being absolutely indispensable to a compassionate social welfare safety net in our community. In saying that, I acknowledge of course, the ongoing responsibilities of the Geverntnent so far as the provision of social welfare payments are concerned, but no society can provide a genuinely sensitive and compassionate method of assisting the less needy and the less fortunate, the more needy in our community without the help of organisations such as the Smith family. 
Some years ago I spent an evening without any fanfare in the media with one of the major welfare organisations in Sydney observing first hand some of the experiences as best one could as an observer and not as someone faced with the same situation himself of people who were homeless in Sydney, and I was struck by the multiplicity of support services that are provided to those people by organisations such as the Smith Family, the Salvation Army and the society of St Vincent de Paul, and I've always had a very strong commitment in my previous political responsibilities and now as Prime Minister to assisting those organisations, to publicly commending them, and in particular in relation to the Smith Family, warmly endorsing the Winter Warmth appeal. 
And one oughtn't forget in the process of doing that the great contribution that many sponsors make and many Australian companies make towards keeping those organisations going. Sometimes some commentators are unsympathetic to the role of corporate Austalia in our community. On occasions like this it is well to remind the Australian community that there are many large Australian companies, Franklins and the .( inaudible)... company and many others that are represented here today are examples of that, but that as well as being legitimately in the business of profit making and employing people and serving customers, they are also very generous corporate citizens who are willing to make significant contributions to the alleviation of poverty and distress in our community. I don't pretend for a moment that Australia has anywhere near solved the problem of looking after the more needy in our community. It is a constant challenge no matter who is in power, no matter what your political persuasion might be. I want to make it clear this morning that no matter what the budget imperatives facing the new Government may be, we do not intend to walk away from our responsibilities to the poor and the most needy in the Australian community. 
A balance must always be struck between financial responsibility and human compassion and I don't intend one of the legacies of my years in Government to be the judgment that we were insensitive to the really needy and genuinely poor in our community. 1 recognise there are many people, I recognise that one of the most daunting and distressing things about modern life in Australia is the widening gap between the rich and poor. The answer to that is not to erect an attitude of hostility to the more fortunate in our comrmunity. The answer to that is to have policies which care for those who are less fortunate, policies that encourage the more fortunate to make a contribution to looking after the less fortunate and to try and achieve a balance of economic and social policy that always recognises that the quality of a nation's life is in part constituted by the way in which it looks after those in the community who need help. No government can do it without the help of organisations like the Smith Family. At the coal face they understand the difficulty of raising money. No organisations value a dollar more than those that have got to raise those dollars through seeking the voluntary contributions of the public. They have a marvellous mix of pragmatic understanding of where need exists and where it might not exist and also the tremendous task involved in raising funds to look after the less fortunate. 
We are still, by the standards of the world, a very lucky and a very wealthy country and that puts a special obligation on all of us, not just the Government, not just the Prime Minister, but it puts an obligation on all Australians to help those who need their help. In the past, Australians have always been very generous people and I think it is one of our great characteristics and the frugal and efficient way in which organisations like the Smith Family are run, their focus on getting the maximum possible investment in looking after people from the dollars they raise, mean that it is an organisation that is deserving of ongoing support from the Australian community. 
I thank the Smith Family on behalf of the Australian community for the work that it has done over the years, particularly at winter time and also at Christmas when that season of festivity and thanksgiving it is often the only pathway to sharing in the celebration of Christmas for many thousands of Australian families. It is a great organisation. It deserves your help, it deserves the help of the Australian public. I have pleasure in launching the appeal, I thank the organisers of the Smith Family, I thank its corporate sponsors. I encourage a Australians to contribute towards the Winter Warmth Appeal. 
Thank you. 


3 June 1996
E&amp;OE..... 
Thank you very much Tom. I hadn't realised until that warning about the embargo that what I was about to say was quite so hot! It is an enormous pleasure for me to welcome all of you here to Australia and to the beautiful city of Sydney. 
This is undoubtedly, if I can put it this way, the most prestigious banking gathering that this country has seen, and it is a compliment to my country and to the city of Sydney that you have chosen to meet here. And it does bring together the Chief Executives of so many of the world's large financial institutions, and you meet at a very interesting and Very positive and a very exciting time in Australia's economic development.
When I scanned the morning newspapers today, they presented a very very stark and interesting message you might almost say a tale of two industries and a very strong message about something that is very important to the free enterprise capitalist system and that is the issue of competition. 
I saw one lot of stories talking about changes in the level of housing interest rates. Can I say openly, as a practicing politician, housing interest rates are always very important to politicians. There was a well loved Australian Labor Prime Minister called Hen Chifley who was involved in a banking Royal Commission in the 1930Os. He was ultimately to fall foul of an over-zealous attempt to nationalise the private trading banks of Australia, but he contributed one of the richest phrases to Australia's political lexicon when he spoke of the hip pocket nerve. And the hip pocket nerve is a part of the anatomy that all politicians constantly enquire after the health of. So therefore whenever you see housing interest rates in the newspapers you are fixated but seriously there arc stories, and I'll say no more than that, there are announcements and there are further considerations, but the fact of the matter is that at a time when some of the predictions might have been less optimistic, because of the existence of strong competition in the sector in the banking sector, housing interest rates at least in relation to one bank are coming down. 
Now the significance of that is that in a companion newspaper, the Australian Financial Review I see a story about a stalled attempt to bring about some reform on the Australian waterfront, and those many of you in this room who are visitors to our country wouldn't have been here long before you must have heard some remarks about the dinosaur industrial relations characteristics of Australia's waterfront. And when you read these two stories they really are, they really present a tale of two industries. One industry which is heavily into competition and another industry that still suffers very severely from an almost total absence of competition particularly so far as the labour market is concerned. And those two comparisons and those two stories send a very strong message to people here in Australia, and where they are duplicated in other countries as I am sure they are, they should send a very strong message to the citizens of those countries that however much special interests may build arguments for shutting out competition, at the end of the day if you want a good deal for the consumer, then you must embrace competition, and there remain areas of the Australian economy and I'll touch on them in a moment, that are not subjected to the winds of competition as is the banking sector. 
But competition is crucial, it's been crucial in the changes that have occurred in the Australian financial system over the last 15 to 20 years, and this has been in Australia, as it has been in many other parts of the world, a remarkable period of time of change in the financial system. 
It was in 1979 as Treasurer in the former Coalition Government, I announced the establishment of the Campbell Committee which was the first thorough going look at the Australian financial system since the 1937 Royal Commission into banking that I mentioned earlier. As a consequence of the recommendation of the Campbell Committee, fundamental restructuring of the financial system was undertaken, and I am very happy as I have been over the past 13 years to give due credit to the contribution made by the previous Labor Government and in particular to my immediate predecessor as Prime Minister, Mr Keating. 
It was an area where there was totally bipartisan support for the cause of financial deregulation. The process was begun in response to the Campbell recommendations by the Coalition Government and the process was continued with vigour by the incoming Labor Government from 1983 onwards, and at no stage during the long process of deregulation that took place through the 1980s was there any political obstruction or objection from the Coalition opposition, and as you know, I'm sure, the current Treasurer Peter Costello has established what he has chosen to call a ' Daughter of Campbell' inquiry to be headed by well-known Australian businessman Stan Wallace, to conduct really an update of what has happened post-Campbell. It is in no way intended to be an attempt to roll back the deregulatory thrust that followed Campbell. That is with us for all time, and there is no constituency, serious constituency in Australia for a re-regulation of the financial system. But the changes that have happened over the last 16 or 17 years as such that an audit of what has occurred during that time is clearly required, and I express the hope that, when is inevitably the recommendations come from that inquiry, that positive responses to the implementations of those recommendations by the current Government will enjoy the same level of bipartisan support as the Coalition extended through the 1980s to the former Government. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now just over 3 months, in fact 3 months yesterday, since the change of Government occurred in Australia, and the incoming Government inherited an Australian economy which I would have to say was, and I say it very positively, was really better than the " curate's egg" it was a little better than just good in parts, there's no doubt that the Australian economy continues by world standards to enjoy very strong growth. We have had 19 quarters of positive economic growth. In common with most of the OECD countries we have low levels of inflation, and we continue to enjoy the benefits although they can never be taken for granted of very close geographic proximity to the fastest growing economic region in the world. And let me take the opportunity at this gathering to say very directly that the change of Government does not connote any change in the importance placed by Australia on her involvement in the Asian-Pacific region. 
There is a strong commitment across the political divide in this country towards the economic and political significance of the Asian-Pacific region, and the involvement in that region will go on unhindered and without restraint under the new Government. There will be differences of emphasis, perhaps some differences of nuance. Perhaps one of the differences of nuance will be that I thought on occasions our predecessors sometimes gave the impression that they saw this country's associations with Europe and North America as perhaps not being a plus in relation to our involvement in the Asian-Pacific region, whereas the new Government takes the view that so far from those associations being anything other than a plus, we regard them as positive advantages in our involvement in the Asian-Pacific region. 
The future of Australia and her linkages with different parts of the world will never in my view involve a choice between this country's history and this country's geography. The two should always compliment each other, but beyond that observation, it is fair to say that our associations will continue in much the same direction as those followed by the former Government and in fact followed by Governments before that. But we have inherited an economy that has some very strong characteristics, and we intend to build on the strengths that we have inherited. I also must acknowledge that there are some characteristics of the Australian economy that of course bear a more critical examination. 
It seems to me that we have three major challenges ahead of us. The first of those is to do something about Australia's chronically low savings performance. Savings is a deep problem with the Australian economy. Our household savings level has continued to fall almost continuously over the last decade and measures are required by the current Government to boost the level of both public and private savings, and that is why from the moment we were elected we embarked upon a process of fiscal consolidation. Never popular, never easy in the judgments to be made between social obligations and fiscal responsibilities and the debate will rage on on what that appropriate balance is here as it does around the world. 
But it is an urgent task to repair Australia's savings position, and we remain very strongly committed to that process of fiscal consolidation. The second of our great problems are the rigidities that exist still in our labour and in our product markets. I touched a moment ago on the rigidity of Australia's industrial relations system. Of all the policy causes to which I have been committed in my years in politics, none has been pursued more vigorously and more energetically than my commitment to the deregulation of Australia's industrial relations system. It remains the last great bastion or outpost of protective and monopolistic practises in this country. 
We have an inefficient waterfront because there is a monopoly over the supply of labour on the Australian waterfront. We have a far more efficient Australian financial system because there are not monopolies held within that system as may have been the case in earlier years, and the message. of that is very clear, and that is why my Government has put an enormous emphasis on changes to Australia's industrial relations system. And by far the most significant piece of legislation we've asked the Parliament to endorse since we were elected is the widespread plan we have to change our industrial relations system. 
It seems to me to be no accident that Australia's unemployment rate is much higher than the unemployment rates of countries that have a more flexible approach to the industrial relations system. It seems to me to be little in doubt that the relatively lower rates of unemployment in countries such as the United States and New Zealand, owes something, ladies and gentlemen, to the more flexible approach to industrial relations in those countries. 
We also have a lot of rigidities still in our product markets and the commitment to competition reform by both the Commonwealth and the State Governments of this country are designed to address that. 
And the third of the great challenges that remains of course, is the both a social and an economic one and it is a challenge that we share with many other countries around the world and that is the still unacceptably high level of unemployment. At almost 9% it does remain something of a national disgrace that so many Australians are out of work, and it is fair of me to acknowledge that one of the things that will brought into judgment at the end of my Government's first term in office, the progress that we've made in the area of unemployment, particularly youth unemployment. 
I chose to make that an important issue in the last election campaign, and it remains, so far as I am concerned, one of the great social as well as economic challenges of the Government. I remember in 1979 when as Treasurer of Australia, I first had the opportunity to meet Alan Greenspan, and I always remember the conversation because one of the first things that he said to me was " you are from Australia, you people have the biggest middle class in the world". And I thought that was a very interesting observation coming from a man who was then the chairman of the council of the President's economic advisers, I recall. And I thought it did encapsulate something about Australia which we had for a longer period of time than many other countries and that is that the gaps between the rich and the poor were not as wide in Australia and not as deep and as endemic as they were in other societies. I have to acknowledge that in the 17 years that has gone by since that conversation, I think we have deteriorated quite a lot in that department, and I don't think it would have been said so passionately, quite so accurately perhaps by him if we had our first meeting in 1996, than it would have been said in 1979. 
Now, there are a complex range of explanations as to why that deterioration should have occurred and it is way beyond either the remit to me or the time available to me to touch on them. Suffice it to say that one of the unarguable causes of the widening gap between income groups in this country is of course the stubbornly high levels of unemployment that we continue to suffer and it remains a constant obligation of Government and of those involved in shaping public policy in Australia to make a contribution towards that. 
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the better features of public life in Australia over the last to 15 years has been I think a more informed debate and a more informed discussion about economic issues. I think there is a greater understanding now and a greater convergence, to use one of those buzz words, there is a greater convergence of views amongst people holding in the past different political attitudes. There's a greater acceptance I believe in many areas of the trade union movement of the link between profitability and employment, not in all sections but certainly better so than used to be the case. There is less of gap between to two political parties on some of the significant economic issues. I mentioned earlier that it was possible to have bipartisan support for financial deregulation in the 1980s. It was also possible during the same decade to have bipartisan support for significant reductions in tariff levels which represented another major contribution to the re-ordering and the restructuring of the Australian economy. And many of the organisations and companies represented in this room have made a major contribution towards a better understanding of the operation of the Australian economy. 
When I first entered politics a monopoly on information was virtually held in the hands of the federal Treasury and the Reserve Bank, without in any way reflecting at all upon the expertise in those organisations for which I have immense personal regard. It is true that over the last 20 years, the quality of private sector economic analysis and economic advice has expanded quite dramatically, and all of it has played a significant role and a better understanding amongst the Australian people of the nature of our problems and the sort of challenges ahead of us, I suppose it is in the nature of political leaders, particularly Prime Ministers and people practising politics to strike notes of optimism and hope and I think it is part of the responsibility and it is also properly what people expect of those in positions of leadership, but I do speak of Australia's economic future with a great deal of optimism and hope. I acknowledge, and I've touched upon them briefly, some of our areas of weakness, but I do believe as I think others in this room would believe that if we can seriously attack those problems, if we can succeed in our task of fiscal consolidation, if we can make progress in freeing up the arthritic areas of our markets particularly our labour and out product markets and if we can make something of a dent on the social blight of unemployment then there are reasons, many reasons for us to feel particularly enthusiastic and particularly optimists about Australia's future. 
Can I conclude by again thanking our many visitors from all around the world for the honour that you've done our country of welcoming you again on behalf of the Governmnent to Australia and to Sydney. It's an exciting, interesting, enjoyable time to be involved in doing anything in Australia. We have ahead of us, particularly here in Sydney, the vista of the Olympic Games at the turn of the century. We have a nation which still retains a great deal of vibrance and hope and optimism and I'm particularly pleased as Prime Minister that the International Monetary Conference has decided to hold this very important gathering here in Australia. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS  - INTERNATIONAL MONETARY CONFERENCE
3 JUNE, 1996 
QUESTION
Prime Minister, we listened very carefully to your analysis, to your remarks. You might know money is a very sensitive commodity. There is a saying ' as shy as a deer' it does not necessarily apply to bankers, obviously. The capital markets appear to have welcomed your election with a 50 to 75 basis points reduction in the Australian long bond rate versus U. S bonds. We welcome that, certainly. Would you mind to rank in terms of priorities eventually, what achievements would you like to see to continue the momentum of that positive change in perceptions? This question deals with your priorities you just touched on, particularly on economic issues. 
PRIME MINSTER:
I don't want to overstate the links. There are obviously some forces in the markets that were there, irrespective of the change of government. However, I think the things that I would like to see taken into positive account in the ongoing momentum of that development, obviously the commitment of the new Government to implementing the reform agenda in the area of industrial relations, the commitment to physical consolidation. I also would like to believe that as time goes by the Government will be seen to be wanting to achieve change in those areas where there are genuine differences between the two sides of politics. But where there are no differences, let us put those issues aside. I think part of the desire of the Australian public for a more efficient and a more focused government in the 1990s is an impatience with unnecessary conflict where there is no difference of opinion. The artificial manufacturer of political difference where it doesn't exist is wasteful and inefficient, and although it's part and parcel I suppose of the paraphernalia of politics and I'm not saying that one or other side is more or less guilty than the other of this there are some issues where one can find a remarkable level of agreement, and one ought to embrace those and fix those things and then move on to the next issue. I can assure you I don't believe in the theory of politics that the age of ideology is over. I think the ideological differences now are over different issues, they are more over social issues than perhaps intensely in the 70s and 80s they were all about economic issues. I think there's been something of a greater convergence in some of those areas than used to be the case. But if at the end of another period of time at which people look back, if we can be seen to have stuck to our determination on industrial relations reforms, stuck to our determination on fiscal consolidation, stuck to our determination on privatisation and be seen as not wasting our time on the irrelevancies of government, then I'd lie to believe that that initially positive reaction has continued. 
QUESTION
Mr Prime Minister, given the positive development over the last 10 years in inflation, growth and structural changes in this country, to what do you attribute the impressive margin in your election victory? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think there are, you know, apart from skilful campaigning of course I think there are a number of explanations and that's an interesting question. I mean one of the extraordinary things about Australian politics is that the cynics might say that the former Government won despite economic circumstances in 1990 and 1993, and somebody observed the other way that they lost in 96 despite positive economic circumstances. I think that's an oversimplification. But there's no doubt that after 13 years there is an ' It's Time' factor everywhere, there's no doubt about that, unless there is a massive negative about the alternative. 
I do think though, and I don't want to embarrass him by saying it, but I read a very perspicacious comment piece by Max Walsh the other day when he talked about the sense of disequilibrium that a lot of people felt as a result of very, very rapid social and economic change. I think we're living in a period in our history where you could see governments turning over more rapidly. This may not be a politically sensible thing to say, but then I'm sometimes not politically sensible and sometimes I'm also accused of being politically incorrect which I'm very happy on occasions to plead guilty. But I don't share the view automatically that because you have a big majority in one election, that that automatically insulates you against defeat for another two or three term. I think we are living in a more volatile political climate, and I keep telling my colleagues that and I'd say it again today, I think the instability that change has brought about has produced that. I think also the people did make some judgements about style. I think there was a sense in which the former Government was seen to be focusing on division in the community rather than things that brought people together. I think the former Government was seen as pursuing interest group politics to the detriment of the mainstream. There's a real rejection of that in Australia. I think quite tightly I would like to see the next few years as being years in which we focus very strongly on things that we have in common as Australians rather than things that push us apart. Those are a complex variety of reasons. No doubt the high level of unemployment was one. There's also a nagging fear, and I touched on this in my remarks about savings because the chronic savings problem is one of the reasons we have a huge current account deficit, there was that nagging way that month after month we kept having a current account deficit outcome and that somehow or other we didn't seem to have made enormous progress in coming to terms with that over a fairly long period of time. But as always there are a complex range of explanations. 
QUESTION
Prime Minister, I am impressed with the enthusiasm which you have offered to us on the future outlook of Australia, and those of us from abroad who are involved in the market in Australia certainly do share that. In your speech you were emphasising the bipartisan approach to settle solutions here in Australia, Would you care to offer a comment on the bipartisan approach or support on the privatisation of Telstra which is of importance for Australia and obviously also for the international market? Thank you. 
PRIME MINISTER;
Well sir, hope springs eternal, but I would have to say there's no evidence at the moment of the bipartisan approach on that. What I sought to do in my speech was, I think quite fairly, to draw attention to the fact that financial deregulation was one of those areas that benefited enormously from the bipartisan approach taken. I mean the conventional wisdom was in 1983 that a Labor government would not proceed with deregulation of the financial system. Now to the surprise of many people it did and to its credit it maintained that. We continued 100% support of that and as a consequence the task of the former Government was made a lot easier. I think the same thing applies in relation to tariff reform which was another significant change that occurred in early 199 1, through the 80s and into the early 90s. Now as far as privatisation is concerned, I would hope the Labor Party would get a dose of bipartisanship. I would hope the Labor Party would be as generously bipartisan on that as we were to them on something like tariff reform where it would have been very easy for us to have been politically tricky and obstructive but we weren't and there may have been some short term political plaudits in it. 
I don' t think the Labor Party will change its view on privatisation because parties tend to be recaptured by their primeval spirits when they go into opposition, and I think what might happen is that the Labor Party will find it very hard to adjust on that particular issue. It's a pity because apart from the fact that what we're proposing is good policy, it's also a bit hypocritical of the Opposition to oppose privatisation given that with our help they were able to privatise the Commonwealth Bank and do a number of other, undertake a number of other privatisations which they previously said, that gentleman to whom I referred, Ben Chifley, would spin in his grave if he thought the Party that he once led was allowing it to happen. 
Now, I might be wrong. I hope I am. Even if I am wrong I hope that some of the other disparate elements of the Australian opposition scene can be gathered in the next time the legislation comes up to the Senate, because if we don't get that through, then we can't find the capital for our environmental program, and that would be a great pity and that would be an immense disappointment to Australians right across the political spectrum. But at the moment I'm not too optimistic about that and I wouldn't want you to think that my references to bi-partisanship in the area of financial deregulation suggested that the Australian political scene was awash with the habit, but it's not, but it just happens that in the financial area there was a lot of it and it seems both
appropriate and fair to acknowledge it. 
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, I was very much impressed by your speech, particularly to improve industrial relations in your country but I'm sorry to say, as far as I remember, 20 years ago lots of strikes were going on in this country. As one of the largest trade partners to to your country, I hope that wouldn't come again. 
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, it's very interesting. There were lots of strikes some years ago and there's no doubt that the number of, the level of industrial disputes in Australia has declined over the last ten to fifteen years. It is also true that the number of industrial disputes all around the world, particularly in industrialised countries, has declined over that same period of time. Now, as part of the domestic political debate in Australia it is often suggested that there were fewer strikes during the 1980s because of the prices and incomes accord. It is also true that there were fewer strikes in other countries such as the United Kingdom, in other countries in Europe, in Canada and so forth where the industrial relations systems and the industrial relations approaches were quite different. I mean for example, if my memory serves me correctly, in Britain in 1991 which is not all that long ago, the number of strikes recorded was lower than at any time since statistics began to be kept. It started 100 years earlier and the same sort of observations can be made in a number of other countries, so I think what you have seen is a world development away from such industrial disputation. 
Look, obviously we have a different approach to industrial relations than did our predecessors and we make no bones about it. We're unashamed. It is the area that they could never have changed or reformed. I think one of the reasons why, many reasons why we won the election was the feeling in the Australian community that there were a few areas that were completely off limits to a Labor Government and could only be tackled by a Coalition Government and labour market reform was one of those. Now, having said that I would acknowledge that there has been a change in the attitude of the leadership of many unions in this country. There is a more intelligent, pragmatic, co-operative, public spirited attitude-Now, it doesn't always still apply but it's certainly different from what used to be the case and there is a greater recognition and acceptance so I think many of the practices and attitudes to which you referred have gone completely. That's not to say that our industrial relations reforms are going to be full bloodedly embraced by the leaders of the trade union movement but I think below the surface there would be a pragmatic acceptance that some change is needed and a realisation that if the notion of political mandates means anything in the modern Australia, then the new Government does have the authority of the Australian people
to make a lot of changes in this area. 
QUESTION:
What important role would you like to see Australia play in the Asian-Pacific region? 
PREME MINISTER:
Well I want the Australian nation to be seen for what it wants to be and that is a wholehearted participant in the Asian-Pacific region, a country that will bring to that participation a different history and a different cultural bent and its own particular set of values, One of the things I said on the night of my election was that I would defend and promote abroad the values of Australia. Australia has her own set of clear, identifiable unique values and attitudes and a proper relationship between countries must have as its starting point mutual respect for the different cultural values, and one of the things we have to understand is when talking about the Asian Pacific region, is that we're not talking about a monolith. We're talking about an area that has an immense variety of cultures, very different economies, a set of political institutions that vary enormously, different attitudes in relation to the role of the media. I mean we bring to our relations with the area of the western tradition of a free, unhindered media which is part of the strength of our political system. 
We recognise that opinions will vary in different countries on that, but having said that, I wouldn't want anybody to go away from this conference without a very clear understanding of the tremendous emphasis that we place on the involvement of Australia and the extent to which we regard Australia's economic and political history as being bound up with our region, and I use the word " our" rather than " the" very advisedly and very deliberately. It is the fastest growing economic region in the world. 
I don't take our participation in it, I don't take the advantages we might derive from it for granted, and if we do we will be very sadly mistaken, but I think if we can make the structural changes to which I adverted to in my speech, if we can address the weaknesses in the Australian economy as well as consolidating the strengths then I remain very very hopeful that we can be a very effective participant, a respected player and have a participation that will deliver very great benefits to the Australian people.
ends 



To Archbishop Peter Hollingworth and Mrs Hollingworth, to the Premier of Queensland Mir Rob Borbidge and Mrs Borbidge; to many distinguished guests. including imy dear friend and former parliamentary colleague Sir James Killen, and as I look around this room, there are many people that I've known aver a long period of time. As you know, I've bee a regular visitor to the city of Brisbane during the 22 years that T have been in politics, and I have visited you in many disguises. But I can say this is the first public gathering that I have the privilege of addressing in Brisbane as Primic Minister of Austrulia. And T do so in these magnificent surroundings, and the comments of the Archbishop about the broad church, one has to be as tolerant as possible, both politically and ecclesiastically, and on occasions you've got to stretch the parwmeter of the Church a bit " urher politically than you thought you might have to, but if at the end of the day it achieves the objectivc, then it is an exercise that is well undertaken, and if by being here today I have mnade a small contribution to the appeal for the restoration of this beauifulI CathedraL then I am very happy indeed. 
I have to say to you ftat one of the challenges and one of the pleasures of the Prime Ministership of this countly is to witness so miany of the great events and anything that can make a contribution to the better observance of the centenary of the federation of Australia is an effort that is worth supporfing, In the past couple of days I have begun to undertake some interviews with the media regarding the first one hundred days of the new Government. It was Franklin Roosevelt who inaugurated this notion that has stayed with us since 1932 that you had to be checked off after the first hundred days of your governmnt to see how well you bad been going. And I've been asked by a number of people what are the emotions that I have most felt in that one hundred days and I have replied to all of them that the two emotions that I have felt most of all is firstly the emotion of exhilaration, and of equal importance the emotion of humility, because to be the Prime Minister of this country, to have the opportunity after being in opposition for 13 years, and essentially in opposition all you can really do is talk and propose, you can't do a lot in an executive Government sense, to have the opportunity finally after that period of time to do something tangible and practical of benefit to the country is an enormous exilaration. But it is also the emotion of humility and o reminder that one holds Governmrent in this country and this State anywhere in the world in the democratic tradition, youl hold Government through the gift of people and that if you lose sight of that, if you presume that you are there because of some kind of divine right, or you are there because in some kind of elevated intelleeuial sense you are better tha your political opponents then you have already begun to sow the seeds of your own defeat, and I've constantly said to my colleagues and I say it again today, that the most important thing that any Governent can do is to retain grass roots contact with the people who elected them, and governments that don't do that will pay very very dearly in terms of lost electoral support.
When we campaigned only thiee months ago, we set ourselves a number of goals. We set ourselves the goal of strengthening the sense of smcuity for Australian families, because all of my political life, I've believ4d and I believe it ever more strongly as Prime' Minister that the most stable and coherent force in Australian society is the resilience and strength of individual Australian families and that the goal of government policies should always be to strengthen them and to remember that they not only provide immense emotional support for individuals but they also provide the best social welfare system that any nation has ever devised. 
And the other very important goal that wc set ourselves was to do something about reigniting the conditions in which small busines in the Australian commnunity operated&amp; I have had a long commitment to the role of smnal business in Australia's economic firmament. I have believed all of my political life that the real key to Ausuratia's successful economlic future lies in the re-invigoration of our small business sector, and we have given ourselves a very important goal of lifing many of the restrictions that exist on small business in Australia, and in cuse any of you think that that is mere rhetoric, can I just list some of the things that we have already done to mcet the commitments that we made just under a hundred days ago to the Auwtraliafl people in relation to he small business community. 
The first and most important is that we have introduced into the Parliament our workplace relations legislation, and that bill is designed to change in a very constructive way the manner in which industrial relations is conducted in this country, and can 1 say to you very directly and without any qualification that that piece of legislation delivers on a programme of reform and a progrmme of change, that I personally arid many of my colleagues have argued for over the last ton yemr. It does not contain any suirprises. It does not contain changes that we didn't foreshadow, but what it does contain is a practical assault on the rigidity of Australia's industrial relations system. for example, -it commits the Parliament, if the legislation is passed, to dismantling the ridiculous anti-employment unhir dismissal law that was introduced by the former government in 1993. 
That bill was introduced in the name of giving fairness in the workplace. What it has done is not only tol cripple % he capacity of a person running a businiess to manage that business in the way in which a person who has invested their effort and their funds and their resources ought to have the right to do, but it has actually acted as a deterrent against the employrneti of people particularly in small business, and that is why we committed ourselves very strongly to its repeal. So when that legislation finally comes to be voted on in the Senate some timne in August or September of this yewr, one of the things that those who are minded to vote against it might contemplate is that they will be voting to retain a piece of legslation which is actually working aganst the employment of Australians in small businesses around this country. 
That legislation also contains our strong commtmrent to voluntary unionism. It restores the effectiveness of the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act. It gives to Australian employers and employees the right at the workplace level to make agreements governing their relationship without the intervention of a trade union. But it does give those people the right and the choice, if they want a trade union to be involved, to have that union involved to the full. What our legislation does, unlike the existing law, is to give people an effctive choice. We are not, and I wani to muake this point very clealy to you, we are in no way committed to ehanBing the law to take away the right of people to bargain collectively if that is their wish. We do not want to take away the right of people to have a trade union, a shop steward, or indeed anybody else to negotiate on his or her behalf; but what we do want to change is the existing law that force you to have your arrangement taken over by a trade union even in those circurnstances where you don't want a trade union involved-Now, it is a very very simple principle. It is a very simple Australian principle of giving people effective choice. 
I regard the change to the industrial relations system as in long termi, the most important economic reform that this country needs. We have inherited as a new Govenunent an Australian economy that I described the other day as a little better than the ' Curate's Egg'. There are somte great strengths in the Australian economy at present. It is growing fairly well, although that growth is uneven and T know for a combination of reasons it has rnot been as strong in Queensland in recent years as was the situation a few years ago. But overall the level of growth tbroughoat Austrlia is holding -up well compared with the rest of the world. We have a low level of inflation, we have a highly skilled workforce and of course we have a very stable political system. On the other hand we have inherited an economy that does have some weaknesses. The greatest weakness that we have is that we are still chronically in debt to the rest of the world, as a result over a long period of time: of rnning very high monthly current account imbalances and becaus as a community we don't save very much we've had to borrow from foreigners to pay over those months for the surplus of imports over e. ports and That is why we owe the rest of the world so much money. And one of the big challenges that the new government has, is to rebuild the level of savings both public and privately in Australia. As people we don't save as much as we used to in the 1950s and 1960s. The level of household savings in Australia has fallen steadily over a long period of time and we have to do something to reverse that. And one of the commitments we mrade in the last elecion was to provide a modest tax incentive to do that But we also have to rebuild our savings by reducing our budget deficit, and that is why we are working towards the aim of putting that budget into underlying balance in two years' time. and the decisions that we have to take in relation to that will not be universally popular, but could I say a couple of things about them. I believe when they come out they will be seen as fair and just and I ask you to bear in mind that if we can over the next yea or so successfully tackle our budget deficit problem and thus remove it as a constraint, then wc might be able to look forward to a very steady period of economic stability and economic growth. There are some positive signs around the world economically. I had the chance ealier this week to address the international monetary conferenice in Sydney which brought together the biggest collection of senior bankers I've seen in Australia, and in discussions I bad with them the message was very clear and that is that on the world scene, Japan is recovering from a fairly recessed period;, the United States' economy is still very strong; thie Buropeau economics are a mixture with the German one causing a little more worry Than others, but overall the world picture is quite positive and the message out of all of that is that if we can successful ly tackle the weak spot&amp; we may give ourselves the foundations for a fairy long period of growth and a long period of economic stability, and that of course will give us the best possible capacity to tackle the social dimension of economic weakness and it is always important that that be borne in mind and that is the very high level of unemployment particularly amongst young people in this country. And that was the third thing of which I spoke a great deal during the election campaign and it hasn't passed out of my mind over the last one hundred days. 
Doing something to reduce unemployment particularly amongst the young is the most important social challenge ftht we have and in the process. 1 hope that we might do something to redress the drift which has been going on in Australia for 20 or more years whereby the gap between the rich and the poor has = otinued to widen. If you were to ask me what is the thing that bas changed most in this country over the last years, I would have to Say to you that we have lost the essential middle classness that we had economically speaking of thirty Or forty year 1go. It used to be Possible to say of this country that give or take a small Dumber of people, it was a very egalitarian society. I'm sorry to say that through a combination of circumstances that has changed over the last 20 year. Unemployment has had something to do with it, also a huge contributing factor has been the fragmentation of family life and the much higher level of family disinlepraDon-There is a stark correlation between povert and single parent ñ hrnilies. And if you look at the profile of the Ie= well-off people in the Australian community there is a very heavy ean'ccntration of sole parent families in that group. So iherefore any policies which are designed to stabilise families, that are designed to create employment opportunities in small business, not only have a huge economic dimension but they also have a very considerable social dimension. 
I know as Prime Minister, and I knew it as Leader of the Opposition as well as anybody, that there is always a tension in politics between meeting commitments and also delivering outcomes that in the long termi are the responsible outcomes to deliver. 
I was very conscious of the conmilments that I made at the last election and I want to say to you today that there is nothing that I place a higher store an in Government than keeping faith with the Australian people. I place a very great store on the commitments that I mnade in relation to the family taxation system, to the private health insurance rebate, and the Capital Gains Tax changes of benefit to small  business and there will be many decisions announced in the Budget, but I want to make it very clear to you that the Budget in August will deliver on the commitments that we have made in relation to families, health insurance and small business. We regard them as being at the core of the programme that we took to the Australian people just under 100 days ago. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Archbishop in introducing mec had something to say about the events that surrounded those traec happenings in Tasmania on the afternoon of the 28th of Apr-il, and I thank the Archbishop for the kind remarks that he made. It would be no exaggeration of me to say that in the 22 years r ve been in politics, nothing that I have seen in this country has quite touched the soul of the Australian people as that Particular event. And it did produce a very strong reaction from my Government May I also say that it produced a very strong reaction and a very helpfiul reaction from the Government led by the Premier of Queensland Rob Borbidge. 
And I want to say that this is not an easy issue. There is clear and overwhelming support throughout the Australian community for the measures that have been proposed by the various Governments of Australia, There is no doubt about that, and if you are lookinz for the voice of mainstream Australia, the voice of mainstrean Australia is loud in suport of what the Governments of the country have done. But I do recognise, as I have from the very begirmingthat there are many people, particularly in rural areas of Australia, whose way of life has involved the regular but safe and responsible use of weapons, and to them theme is the naggng worry that in some way their character is impugned, that their motives wre suspected and that they are being asked to carry an unreasonable burden.
I understand that, and as I have done before, I agan today, I apologise to those tens of thousands of law abidingB Australians particularly in the country areas of Australia here in Queensland and in the other States, I apologise for the inconvenience that is involved in the new laws that are being proposed.
The introduction of those laws does not represent a negative moral judgment in any way on their behaviour, and I regret the fact that in some way, tens of thousands or deccnt law-abiding fanmers throughout this country, have in the minds of sorne of our citizens been identified with the rather irresponsible comments ot a very smal minority of people who have used extremely provocative and colourful language. I know, you know that those rather strident voices are not the voices of rural Australia. 
Can I say to those people in rural Australia that I do understand their concern. I will guarantee to them that we will have a fair and just system of compensation. I intend myself in the next few weeks to visit a number of rural areas in Australia, to directly address gatherings and to explain personally and very directly and in detail the reasons behind the Government's decision. In doing that I am not foreshadowing in any way any change to our position. I want to make it very clear that there is no case for changing the agreement that was reached at the Police Ministers' Conference. That agreement does not involve, as some people have alleged, the disarming of the Australian community, a rather extraordinary proposition. It does not involve taking away many of the weapons that people currently have. What it does involve is a comprehensive ban on automatic and semi automatic weapons throughout this country, subject to a number of limited exemptions which in the case of low powered, semi automatic weapons, involves a capacity on the part of primary producers where a demonstrable need can be demonstrated to the licensing authorities. 
I don't pretend for a moment that the changes won't result in some people having to give up weapons that they've had for a long period of time and it is very much a case of inconveniencing a small but significant number of people who have done nothing wrong in the interests of the overall national good. We have had in the wake of that awful tragedy an opportunity rarely that comes the way of any country and that is in a single act to change a culture. I do not want, and I don't think anybody in this room wants Australia to go down the American path so far as weapons are concerned. You have a situation in the United States where it is impossible now for anybody in a position of authority to do anything effective about weapon control. The National Rifle Association in the United State is so powerful and has been so used to getting its own way and successfuilly intimidating both Democrat and Republican politicians that despite overwhelming evidence of the direct link between the proliferation of firearms possession and the murder rate... . Just ponder for a moment. The murder rate in the United States is 14 per hundred thousand. It is a little over two in Australia. It is less than half that in England and Wales where the possession of guns is far less widespread than it is in Australia and of course manifestly less widespread than it is in the United
States. 
So there is a clear link and people who pretend there isn't are trivialising a very important issue. So ladies and gentlemen, I have taken a moment to explain the basis of the Government's decision. I say again how much I have appreciated the support that has been given by the Queensland Government. I recognise in a state which has more electorates comprising rural and provincial areas than any other state in Australia it has not been as easy and there have been more local political difficulties for Members of Parliament on my side of politics in Queensland, in both Nationals and Liberals than in some other states. It's easier for an urban Liberal and an urban Labor member to put up his or her hand for strict gun control legislation than it has been for some rural representatives for any of the three major parties, and for that reason I have particularly appreciated the courage displayed by Rob Borbidge and Russell Cooper in relation to this particular issue. 
The last thing that I want to say, ladies and gentlemen, and I say it very deliberately in the presence of Peter Hollingworth who for a long period of time, both before and since becoming Archbishop of Brisbane, has been at the forefront of campaigning for social justice for Australians in all walks of life. I can think of few Australian clerics who has made a more effective, a more articulate and a more reasonable contribution to debate on social welfare issues in Australia than has Peter Hollingwotth. He is so often the voice of intelligent, relevant reason from the church and I say to this gathering that we have some very important economic objectives. We are committed to a significantly lower Budget deficit but we also have important social goals and important social objectives. It has never been my personal political credo that economic efficiency should trample upon social justice. it has never been the credo of the party that I lead or the Government and the Coalition that I lead that the interests of the genuinely needy in the Australian community should be ignored. 
Before the last election I made a very detailed speech to the Australian Council of Social Services regarding the welfare priorities of the new Government if it was successfuil in the election and those commitments remain as strongly now as they were when I made that speech to the Australian Council of Social Services. That is not to say that we won't in some areas do things differently, That is not to say that we won't have some disagreements over some social issues with our predecessors and with other people in the Australian community. We have for example drawn some criticism from some of the decisions that have been taken in relation to Aboriginal affairs and I make it very clear to you today that I don't retreat from any of those decisions. I have no argument with those who espouse the cause of reconciliation between Aboriginals and other Australians. I do however have a very strong argument with those in the community who would assert that anything at all raised in the name of assisting Aborigines must be immediately supported otherwise one is guilty of prejudice or intolerance and I think there is a feeling in the community that it ought to be possible to debate issues surrounding relations between different races in Australia without the smear of racism or prejudice being raised. 
Ladies and gentlemen can I conclude by saying that it has been a privilege to be here today. I wish the appeal well-Can I on a frankly partisan note thank the people of Queensland for the magnificent commonsense they displayed on the 2nd of March. That vast sea of Queensland Liberal and National Party faces that I see when I look around from the dispatch box warms my heart. There's only two of the others left from Queensland. I know this is an ecumenical gathering but you'll forgive me a little bit at the end, but there's only two left and I think it gives an enormous new balance to the Government to have so many people from Queensland inside the Government ranks. In geographic and proportionate terms it really is a remarkable outcome and the quality of the people that have been sent from Brisbane and other Queensland seats is absolutely terrific. So I am delighted to be here today to thank Peter Hollingsworth for the invitation, to wish the appeal well, to thank the people of Queensland for the support they gave to the Government parties on the 2nd of March, but most importantly of all, to finish where I began and say that to be Prime Minister of this country is undoubtedly the greatest privilege that can come anybody's way. 
It is something that I treat with a great deal of humility and I am determined as I said on the night of my election, to do the best I humanly can to govern for all of the Australian people and to deliver outcomes that will be to the long term benefit of the country we treasure so much. 
Thank you. 


Friday 7 June 1996, 
E&amp;OE.... 
Thank you very much. To Jeff Kennett, the Premier of Victoria, and Mrs Kennett, to the Honourable Gough Whitlam, former Prime Minister of Australia, to Mr and Mrs Henderson, to Lady Sonia McMahon, to the members of the Holt family, and to all other distinguished guests and my Parliamentary colleagues and most particularly to the Reverend Fred McKay, a great Australian and a great family friend and confidant of the late Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies and Dame Pattie Menzies. Also I acknowledge the presence of Mr Ivan Devesori, the Lord Mayor of Melbourne. 
I want first of all, ladies and gentlemen, to thank the Victorian Government and particularly the Premier of Victoria for his initiative in promoting and establishing this Memorial Garden and also to acknowledge the contribution of Mr Ron Walker who conceived the idea. It is, as Jeff Kennett said, a growing disposition in the Australian community to take a greater interest in the history of this country and the contribution of people from all walks of life and from all shades of political opinion who formed this country and then contributed to its development. 
Perhaps as that distinguished historian, Geoffrey Blainey, has acknowledged, that as we grow ever closer to the day when there are no Australians left alive who participated in many of the great formative events of our early years and we are only a few years away from the time that no people will be left who served in the first War and the ages of those who experienced the traumatic years of the Great Depression are now growing older and the ranks have grown inevitably thinner it is only natural that when we look back with greater interest and greater nostalgia towards the past. And to have a Memorial Garden particularly committed to the recollection and memory of former Prime Ministers of Australia does make a very valuable contribution to building a sense of pride and interest in Australia's history. 
And it is in every way appropriate that such a garden should be dedicated here in Melbourne in the seat of the national Government for the first twenty-seven years of Federation and in the State of Victoria, the birthplace of such a large number of Australian Prime Ministers. 
This simple ceremony will play a very valuable part and a very great sense of history. And, of course, for all of us here today, it has a special significance because of the placement of the memorial to that great Australian Prime Minister, the founder of my Party, Sir Robert Menzies and his marvellous wife and someone who was loved as dearly as we loved him Dame Pattie. It is so very special to all of us that we have present his daughter, her daughter, her daughter-in-law and other members of their family because they gave so much to this country and it is a special part of the ceremony, a special part of the opening of the Garden, that we should dedicate the memorial to both of them. 
This is an important occasion in the life of the city of Melbourne. It makes an important contribution to the history of Australia. I thank the Premier, again, for his initiative. I thank the people associated with the memorial and I thank all of you for your attendance here today. 
Thank you very much, 


15 June 1996 
E&amp;OE................... 
Thank you very much Len, Peter, to honoured guests, Jeff Kennett, the Premier of Victoria  - did you write Len's speech? Pat McNamara, the Deputy Premier of Victoria, Richard Face representing the NSW Government, my colleague, Senator David Brownhill, Senator Meg Lees representing the Australian Democrats, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a particular pleasure for me to be here today, the Australian Wine Industry in a sense is an easy industry for anybody in Australia to feel affectionate about. It's not just an industry in the traditional sense, of being a group of people that produce a great product, but it also makes an enduring contribution to the social family and community fabric of the Australian nation, so it's a special industry in that sense. 
But the other reason why I'm particularly happy to be here today, is that the Australian Wine Industry is an example of one of those Australian industries that I admire most, and that is it's an industry that has succeeded and exceeded its own expectations without any real government assistance. In fact, if I knew the wine producers correctly over the last few years, so far from receiving government assistance, year in and year out they've really complained to me that they have had to surmount government obstacles and government orders. 
And it is an industry that has demonstrated great entrepreneurial flair, it is an industry which in the last decade has transformed many of the expectations Australia has about a capacity to carve out new export markets. When you look at the history of the Australian Wine Industry, if you look at the tremendous increase in the volume of exports of Australian wine out of Australia, that is a remarkable story. But even more remarkable is when you analyse that overall story you see the astonishing achievement of the Australian Wine Industry's sales into Europe, the idea that ten years ago Australian wine would be blitzing many of the traditional wine producers of the world in areas of Europe was unthought of and certainly not to be expected. So over that period of time the industry has certainly demonstrated an enormous capacity to be an aggressive innovative industry relying on its own resources, its own native talent and its own technology. 
It is the great modern Australian version of "coals to Newcastle" to have the Australian Wine Industry demonstrating along with the traditional European wine producers some of the best technology in the industry to be found anywhere in the world. It is also an industry that matches one of my other aspirations for the Australian economy it's an industry which spawns a large number of small foreign based businesses, Many of those small family based businesses have grown into much larger businesses over the years. But if the economic future of this country reay does rest upon the aggression and the entrepreneurial flair of small business, then the wine industry is a great example of that and gathered here today are many people who are really the heart and soul of the small and medium sized business future of Australia. 
Because that is where our hope really lies. And it is in having an economic environment where people can be encouraged without government assistance or government hand outs but hopefully without too much government hindrance either, to innovate to develop their own flair and to derive the benefits of it. 
By bringing together this great wine expo, the industry deserves the gratitude of the government not only the federal government but the governments of the various Australian states. This expo is a marvelous reminder of the great region of variation of the wine industry in Australia and that is one of its strengths that there are different and special characteristics of every part of the Australian Wine Industry whether it's in New South Wales, in Western Australia, South Australia, Victoria or indeed in any other part of the country. 
it's an occasion I suppose for all of us to reflect upon our own, even those who aren't in the industry, our own brushes with the industry. I have to say that in public life you have many memorable lunches. I've had a few memorable lunches in Len Evans' former Bulletin Place establishment until it ceased to be the memorable part of the Sydney social landscape that it was for so many years. But at probably one of the most memorable luncheons that I've had in my life was a very pleasant lunch with four or five people at a delightful home in the Adelaide Hills, where two of the guests were the greatest living Australian Sir Donald Bradman and the late Max Schubert and to have the opportunity to talk about their own experiences with those two great artists in disciplines and pursuits and recreations so far apart, it was a wonderful personal experience. The late Max Schubert was a great figure in the Australian Wine Industry and the contribution that he and so many other famous names in the industry have made to the development of this unique Australian product is something that all of us respect enormously. 
Ladies and gentlemen, finally could I say how happy I am to be here, particularly at the invitation of Len Evans, who has given so much to the industry, who has been so much of the very vibrant, humorous, articulate voice and face of the Australian Wine Industry and who has really brought together those, not only the industry part of the industry but also the socialising human recreational side of it. I think it is a remarkable industry, I think what you have achieved deserves our praise and credit, the fact that you have had the vision and the foresight to bring this expo together that you will be unveiling a thirty-year plan where over the past few years the industry has seen the need to dramatically increase the laying of premium grapes all of those things speak of an industry that's not only come a long way over the last ten years, but an industry that over the next twenty, thirty or forty years is going to become an even greater driving force in the expert performance of our country. 
It is a great day for any Australian to walk around this exhibition, to reflect upon the great success of a great Australian industry. I have very great pleasure in declaring it open. I thank all of the participants in the industry for the great contribution they are making in the development of the Australian economy. 
Thank you. 


16 June 1996
E &amp; EO…………………….
PRIME MINISTER:Inaudible..., by my good friend Mr Peter McGauran the local Member and it is a great regional area of not only Victoria but Australia. And it gave me an opportunity to get a representative expression of opinion from people who are unhappy with the Government's position. Though it seemed the right place to come to in Victoria to talk directly and openly to people who have concerns about the Government's decisions.
JOURNALIST:It was a very vocal body of people there today. What was the feeling up there on the stage?
PRIME MINISTER:I have been to a lot of meetings in my long political career and this is democracy at work. It wasa perfectly civil meeting. It was noisy, people felt strongly but that's their right as Australians. It's my job to come and explain myself and put my point of view and to tell people why the Government is taking a decision which will cause a lot of inconvenience and a deal of unhappiness for a lot of people who have enjoyed recreational shooting. Now I understand that, I'm sorry that that's happened but those people have a perfect right -to put their point of view, noisily if necessary that's Australia,
JOURNALIST:They say they're going to demonstrate their feelings at the ballot box at the next election. Does that concern you?
PRIME MINISTER:Well, in the end in politics you have got to take a stand on things like this and if my judgement of what is right in the interests of the Australian people is demonstrated to be wrong at the next election well so be it. That is the democratic process. They have a right to do that because in a democracy if you're unhappy with what the Government's done you have a right to organise against it. Mind you the stance the Government has taken is supported by the Labor Party as well and by most people in the National Party and in the Liberal Party. So maybe you will get another force, I don't know, that's a matter for them. But that's democracy, I don't fear that. I don't fear the verdict of the Australian people ever. Now my judgement is that they want tough gunl aws. I'm sorry that that has offended some people and I respect their different point of view but in the end you have got to stick to your guns.
JOURNALIST:You've been in talking to four groups in here today. Have you come away with any different ideas?
PRIME MINISTER:Oh No. It just reinforces my view that there are a lot of people out there who are totally decent law abiding Australians who happen to feel very strongly that we're wrong-Now I think we've agreed to disagree but I don't have a diminished view of them as responsible Australians certainly not. It was a perfectly civil meeting with four people who just were very unhappy with the Government's position. Now that happens all the time-
JOURNALIST:They've been talking to you about things like shortening magazines and things like that though. Are you taking those on board?
PRIME MINISTER:My position is that anything that weakens or is reasonably construed as weakening the Police Ministers' Resolution I can't support.
ends
&nbsp;


16 June 1996 
E&amp;EO................... 
Well thank you very much Peter McGauran, to Mr Howard, to my other Parliamentary colleagues, to my fellow Australians. 
Last night I saw on national television Mr Ted Drane, the National President of the shooters' organisations in Australia-And he said something with which I totally agree. He said that he and his fellow shooters were not criminals, they were Australians. And I want to Start my address to you today by saying at no stage in the weeks that have gone by since the decision taken by the Federal Government and the Police Ministers in that decision, at no stage have I sought to describe or categorise the attitude of people who enjoy shooting or people who are shooters as being in anyway criminal or un-Australian. I have not used language which has thought to label or smear you or other tens of thousands of law abiding citizens. 
I acknowledge and I have acknowledged in the very beginning and I do so again today, that the decisions that have been taken by all the Governments in Australia, decisions that were confirmed last Friday at the Premfiers' Conference meeting, they are decisions that will inconvenience, they will influence the activities of people who hitherto have engaged in law-abiding pursuits. And at no stage is it the basis of the decision taken by the Federal Government and at no stage is it part of my own personal attitude that in any way any of you or any people who have been involved in wvhat are, up until now, the lawfujl possession of firearms, in no way have you people been involved in cruninal behaviour at no stage. And that is not the basis of the decision. But the basis of the decision ladies and gentlemen is that we believe that it is in the national interest that there be a dramatic reduction in the number of automatic and semi-automatic weapons in the Australian community. 
In taking that decision I recognise and my colleagues recoganise that many people who previously have been carrying on a lawful pursuit are going to be inconvenienced. I know that, I regret that, I apologise for that but that is the basis of our decision. And it has been taken, ladies and gentlemen because we believe not just because of those tragic events at Port Arthur, they were the culmination of a long series of events in this country which have demonstrated as has been demonstrated in other parts of the world, that there is a clear link between the volume of powerful weapons in the community and the extent to which they are used in an indiscriminate manner. 
If you look at these statistics out of countries such as the United States, if you compare them with statistics in other parts of the world there is a clear and irrefutable link. And in taking the decisions that we have taken we are mindfil that they will impact unevenly on sections of the community, 
I am mindful that people who have never owned a weapon, have never had any desire to own a weapon are not going to be affected in the way in which people such as you are being affiected. I know that, I regret that and that is a matter of concern and apology to me but it cannot alter the responsibility of a national Government to take a decision that it believes serves the greater good of the entire Australian community. And that my fellow Australians is the basis of the decision that we have taken. We have not sought in takcing this decision to brand any of you people as being anti-social. We have not sought in takdig this decision to brand people who enjoy shooting as being engaged in any kind of criminal activity and you will find nothing that I have said and you will find nothing that I will say in the future that will in any way take that attitude. 
But there come occasions for any Government to take decisions which can only be effectively implemented in the interests of the overall national good if they involve some disproportionate inconvenience and some disproportionate deprivation for one secion of the community. I'm sorry about that but there is no other way that we can achieve the objectives. And it is always, my friends it is always the responsibility of a national Government to weigh up the gains and to set them against the losses. And the gans to the Australian community of there being fewer weapons of great destruction in the community are, in my view and in the view of all governments throughout Australia very, very significant indeed and that is why we have taken the decision.
Now I don't pretend for a moment ladies and gentlemen that the decision that we have taken is going to guarantee that in the futture there won't be other mass murders. I don't pretend that for a moment. What I do argue to you my friends is that it Will significantly reduce the likelihood of those occurring in the future. I wouldn't be so foolish as to say that it is going to completely eliminate them. And I know that in the wake of what happened at Port Arthur I know ladies and gentlemen in the wake of what happened at Port Arthur that people have argued that one of the great weaknesses in the present system and one of the causes of mass murder is that we have an approach to mental health laws that are too permissive. 
I certainly agree with that and one of things that I said after the decisions had been taken in relation to automatic and semi-automatic weapons was that we are going to investiptate whether the practice of governments throughout Australia over the last years in pushing too many people too soon out of mental health institutions unsupervised into the community, whether in fact those practices ought to change. And that is one of the things that we are going to examine. 
And I've also expressed the personal view that is shared by many people throughout Australia that one of the causes of the inculcation of violence in our community is the mind-numbing, repetitive violence that is seen on some of our television screens. And I think that along with the approach to mental health issues, they are other issues that must be seriously examined by society. 
I don't pretend that it is simply a matter of imposing a stricter regime regarding the possession of automatic or semi-automatic weapons. But that is an element of turning around tho culture in ths country and that is the reason why the Government has taken the decision that it has taken. 
And I've come here today ladies and gentlemen as I will go to other rural areas of Australia and other provincial areas of Australia to explain directly to people who I know are unhappy with the Government's decision, to go to explain directly to those people the general basis of that decision, to rem-ind you that the effec of the Government's decision is not to take all weapons out of the community. 
The effect of the Government's decision has been very, very carefully designed to ensure that, for example, the legitimate use of farmers, of weapons, the entitlement of farmers if they can demonstrate a need to the possession of the low-powered semiautomatic weapons will be retained and the whole purpose of the firearm regulations that have been devised by all the Governments of Australia is to ensure that we achieve our overallobjectives of a dramatic withdrawal of the number of potential weapons of destruction from the Australian community. 
That is our goal, that is the objective and it is a responsible objective. But in the process we have sought to make reasonable provisions in areas such as primary production. We have also, as you know, decided to introduce an effective, fair compensation scheme for weapons based upon the value of weapons as at March 1996. The goal of the compensation scheme which will be fully met by the Federal Government out of the proceeds of one-oft; special increase in the Medicare levy, which is predicted to raise something like $ 500 million and if there is any surplus, that surplus will be returned through the health insurance levy system so that there will be no money kept out of that other than the money that is used for the compensation scheme. 
But ladies and gentlemen the intention is to pay fair compensation for weapons. That is the intention and that is the commitment and there will be a 12 month amnesty during which any of the weapons that are prohibited as a consequence of the decisions taken by the Government can be handed in and proper, fair compensation will be paid. And I give you tt undertaking. I acknowledge that we are asking you to give up, we are taking away property you have previously lawfiully owned and in those circumstances you are entitled as Australians under the Constitution of this country to have proper compensation based on fair value as at the time of the decision taken by the Government in March of 1996. 
I have read during the past few weeks some reactions to the decision taken by the Government. I acknowledge that many of those reactions, although very strong and very vigorous and very determined have been absolutely measured and the sort of reaction that you would expect in a strong, robust, democratic country such as Australia. But I have also heard suggestions, for example, that the whole idea of this is to bring about the complete disarming of the Australian population. I've heard people make suggestions that this is the first step in some kind of march along a road to the deprivation of peoples' individual liberties. I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen that that is a totally unreasonable, it is a totally inaccurate and it is a totally discredited response to the decision that has been taken by the Government. The decision taken by the Government is not part and parcel of some plan to deprive Australians of their liberty. The decision taken by the Government is taken because we are committed to generating a safer Australian community and that is an aspiration. That is an aspiration that hundreds of thousands, indeed millions of Australians support the decision taken. 
So ladies and gentlemen, they support it not only in the urban areas of Australia but they support it throughout the rural and provincial areas of Australia as well. I understand why, I understand why many of you feel angry. I understand why many of you are here today to protest against the decision. I fully understand that and I can sympathise with people who have spent a life in a particular sporting pursuit and they find that life is no longer available to them and that is something that I deeply regret and I do deeply regret it but it does not alter the commitment of the Government in the aggregate national good to take decisions which we believe and all governments around Australia believe will bring about a safer Australian community, and that my friends is a proper objective of Government. It is a democratic objective of Government and in taking that decision and implementing that here what we had sought to do my friends is to frame the regulations and to frame the laws in such a way, ladies and gentlemen that people who have legitimate primary industry needs that the retention of weapons that aren't in the automatic or semii-automatic category will be allowed. We are not touching those, we are introducing a regime for registration that will be nation-wide. It's a registration regime that will bring about a significant reduction of weapons, dangerous weapons in the Australian community. And we have based it upon an approach that will give people fair compensation based upon values as at March 1996. 
So ladies and gentlemen, I've come here today to explain to you as directly and as simply as I can the basis of the decision, the reason why we have taken it, the reason why, however reluctant you may be to do so to accept that it has been taken in good fith by the Governent in the belief that it will add to the overall safety and good of the Australian community. 
And that is the greatest and ultimate responsibility of any Government of any Prime Minister of this country, whatever his political stripe, is to take decisions that if he believes or she believes will benefit the overall national good and that is the reason behind this decision. 
Ladies and gentlemen I thank you for comiing, I thank you for giving me the opportunity, however much many of you will disagree with me, to explain the basis of the Government's decision I would be very happy to answer questions that you might like to ask and I've agreed to meet after the meeting with some representatives of the shooter organisation here in Victoria. 
Ladies and gentlemen thank you for coming and I would be very happy to answer any of your questions. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
QUESTION:
Ian McLauchlan, Victorian Field and Game Association. A Freudian slip Mr Howard; we do not own weapons, we own sporting firearms. It is sporting firearns we wish to obtain. A great deal of your comments recently have been that we do not understand the legislation. We do. We understand its origin; 1988 Labor Party policy, that's its origin. We understand it and we are not misrepresenting it. In fact, had you stopped to talk to us you would have learnt that the shooting organisations support 90% because that is the part that has been lifted from the Victorian legislation that has operated very well in this country for 10 years. We understand it and we are here and we are protesting because you have simply gone too far. And we are protesting as much about what you have done as how you have done it for your failure to discuss the issues with responsible firearm groups. We are not rambos. We are protesting because you wish to take away a large sector of our sporting firearms, self-loading sporting firearms. That is why we are protesting. So I ask you my question is, are you here just to repeat your, what's becoming dogmatic position, that I am not moved, or are you in fact prepared to sit down with us and negotiate the remaining 10%.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I've come here to explain the basis of the Government's decision and the reason for it, and that is what I have sort to do today. I have not come here, as your question implies, to call you or anybody else here a rambo. I have not done that and you won't find anything in any comment that I have made in the time that I have been Prime Minister or before that has ever suggested that. I don't suggest that, I never have and I never will. So I want to make that very clear at the very beginning. You asked me whether I am prepared to talk to your organisations, I am prepared to talk to your organisations. You say to me, am I prepared to negotiate the legislation? I want to say to you Mr McLauchlan, that we have taken decisions and those decisions are not going to be changed. But we will talk to you about their implementation, we will talk to you about their meaning and I think in the process some of the concern that you perhaps have may not any longer be present. I haven't thought to adopt a patronising attitude to you or any of the members of your organisation to say that you don't understand. I think some people have sought to spread misinformation; people who say that the effect of the decision is to take all firearms out of the community, that that is our goal. 
People who spread that are deliberately trying to misrepresent my position and deliberately trying to misrepresent the position of the Government. I know that the position that you have, and I have, is in relation to some issues of very hard substance. 
I think our positions are significantly far apart. Sir, I haven't come here to negotiate the Gov'ernment's decision. I've come here to explain it. I've come here to try and justify it, and I've come here to express a willingness to talk to you about the implementation of it and to talk about the implications of it.
QUESTION: M
Mr Howard, my name is Desmond O'Riley and I represent the premier deer hunting oganisation in Australia. In the gun summit, resolutions there, in an Exceptional Circumstances category of people who will be permitted to use a semi-automatic centre-lire rifle, this list includes occupational categories of shooters who have been licensed with strategic purposes, for example, extermination of feral animals. Why is this limited to occupational needs? Why not expand it to include recreational hunters who are licensed for specific purposes such as deer and duck hunting that requires the use of semi-automatic centre-fire and shot gun? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Mr O'Riley, the decision was taken to.... no it wasn't a knee jerk decision. Somebody interjected and said it was a knee jerk decision. The decision was taken by all of the governments and by the Police Ministers who against the goal of the total prohibition of high-powered semi-automatic and automatic weapons, the view was taken that the only exception should be of course for official purposes, meaning the military and the police and for occupational purposes such as the ones that you described. Now, your question goes really to the core of the differences that exist between the view that you are taking and the view that the Government is taking. What you, by your question, are really saying is that we should allow for other than official purposes or for occupational shooters for such as the destruction of feral animals, that we should allow for a whole other category, the possession of high-powered semi-automatic weapons. 
Now, if that were to occur, that would in our view, undermine the whole basis of the change that was announced by the Police Ministers' Conference. Now, I know that that goes to the heart of the differences that exist between us, but if the Government were to agree to that kind of change it would prise open the whole basis of the decision that has been taken by the Federal Government and by the Police Ministers, and that is the reason why we cannot agree with that change. 
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister Peter Watkins, Secretary of the Sporting Shooters' Association of Australia, Victoria. In December 1995 the Victorian Police Mnister, the Hon. Pat McNamara, initiated and in fact headed a national consultative process to achieve national uniformity in firearms laws all. States were represented including Tasmania run by the Victorian Justice Department and it included all Australian shooting associations. All issues in the current debate were being resolved by consensus and every expectation of a national outcome acceptable to all but the extremists in the community was being achieved. Why was the consultative process abandoned in favour of Labor Party policy? 
PRIME MINISTER:
The question of whether it is the policy of one or other side of politics can't alter the merit of the decision, or the lack of merit in the eyes of those who don't agree with it. The fact is that with a rare degree of unanimity and spontaneity across the political divide the Police Ministers camne together after the tragedy at Port Arthur. As I said in my speech, it's not only because of what happened at Port Arthur that there was a heightened community concern about the number of automatic and semni-automatic weapons or firearms within the community. It wasn't only because of that. But it would be naive in the extreme for anybody to pretend that what happened there did not have a dramatic impact on the attitude of the Australian community and I didn't dwell on that in my speech. But I think it is unrealistic in responding to your question sir, not to acknowledge that of course it played a significant role in it and the view was taken with a great degree of unanimity and spontaneity. 
The view was taken right across the political divide, that the decision that emerged from the Police Ministers' Conference ought to in fact be the decision that is taken to the Australian people. And the fact that it has gone further than an outcome that may have arisen earlier, I acknowledge that. But that is characteristic of many decisions that are properly taken by government in what they believe to be the national interest. And while public opinion is not the only determinant of government decision, it is a fact that the governments have got to take that into account in assessing what the national good is. The fact is that across the political divide people have come to the conclusion in governent, and it is the right of people in the political process to object to that and to vote against it when the opportunity comes if that is their wish. That my friends, is the democratic process. I understand that, and I know that in the process of taking the decisions that we have taken, we are going to incur the political hostility of some people in the Australian community. I don't deny that; I don't walk away from it; I understand it and I accept it. But we took a decision across the political divide because we thought it was the right decision in the interest of the overwhelming majority of the Australian community. 
QUESTION:
Thank you Mr Prime Minister. Maybe the ballot box is the answer for all of us. 
QUESTION:
My name is Rick Foster. I'm the State President of the Victorian Field and Game Association. I've got two very short questions, but firstly can I take the Prime Minister to task on one small matter. Why is it that people continue to talk about automatic firearms in our community when in Victoria they have been banned since 1926? That's half the problem, we've got people making decisions on things they know absolutely nothing about. Mr Howard, you are certain that at no stage have you described us as criminals? How can you say that when your legislation to remove semi-automatic shot guns and .22 rimfires from the community in fact contains within it an implication that they'll be used for criminal attempt? You therefore don't believe what you say. Secondly Mr Howard, I ask you, the same firearms that farmers will be allowed to retain are the same low-powered firearms that are issued here in Victoria; semi-automatic shot guns, 22 rimfires. What makes a farmer more intrinsically trustworthy than recreational firearm owners? 
PRIME MINISTER:
We believe that if the objective is to withdraw the maximum number of semi-automatic weapons in the community, and the only exceptions to be very limited, we believe however much of it may be an unacceptable position for you people, and I acknowledge that, we believe that there is a distinction to be drawn between something which is clearly needed for somebody's occupational purposes and something which is of a recreational nature. That is the basis of the dividing line that we have chosen. What we have said is that primary producers are entitled to retain the non-prohibited category of weapons, the single and double shot rifles and shot guns, and if that if they can demonstrate to the licensing authority a clear occupational need to have one of the low-powvered semi-automatic weapons then they are entitled to have it. 
Now, we believe that in order to achieve the objectives of the legislation, and that is the withdrawal of the maximum number of these firearms from the Australian community, then the exemptions and exceptions should be very limited indeed. Sir, you made an observation about the state of the law here in Victoria. I acknowledge that the law around Australia has varied enormously, but I think you would have to acknowledge that regimes that have operated nationally, and in other parts of Australia, have allowed large numbers of automatic weapons to get into the Australian community. 
QUESTION:
You're correct there Mr Howard, but why should we be persecuted for the lack of political intent in other States? 
PRIME MINISTER:
I think sir, one of the objectives of having a national approach is to ensure that a national goal is applied as much as it possibly can in a uniform basis throughout the country. I understand that people feel they have operated in a lawful way. And I say again, the fact that we are deciding by this legislation, to declare that in fuiture certain kinds of firearms are prohibited firearms in the Australian community, that does not represent in any sense a personal judgement of criminality in relation to people who have owned and possessed those weapons up until the time that we have declared them prohibited. It does not represent any kind of personal dismarking judgement on the behaviour or the character that people have used. It represents a decision, as I said in my speech, that we believe overall is in the best interests of the greater number of the Australian community. 
QUESTION: Mr Howard, my name is John Morrissey. I'm the Victorian State President of the Australian Deer Association. Mr Howard, the Australian Deer Association supports the forceful uniform national gun laws and a general band on military assault weapons. 
The ADA strongly believes that if the current proposals are legislated without change, they will be under siege at every future state and federal election. Political parties and especially oppositions seeking election will not feel bound by the resolutions of your gun summit. Do you agree that unless there is wider community agreement than exists at present, the laws will gradually be pulled apart and patched together at successive elections? 
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't agree with that. I2 do acknowledge, as somebody who's been in politics for 22 years, I do acknowledge. I do acknowledge, ladies and gentlemen that there will be enormous pressure placed upon Opposition parties at both a federal level and a state level. L do acknowledge that there will be particular political targeting of individual members, that is already occurring. But can I say to you, that is an authentic pant of the democratic process. And the idea that having taken a decision on something like this, any government or political leader can chloroformn political discussion or political debate, of course you can't. And I don't seek to do that, and that is why I am prepared to so to different parts of Australia to talk to people who disagree very strongly with the decision that I have taken to try and explain the basis of it. I don't fear the political process in Australia. If the political process in Australia turns against me because of the decision that I have taken, I will accept that decision. 
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, my name is Jim Snow. I'm a third generation farmer of the Gippsland area. Myself and my famfly are in strong agreement that no farmer in Australia needs to have access to automatic or semi automatic firearms. Mr Howard, we believe that the decision made by the Government was the right decision. We believe quite firmly and quite fervently that the decision was a decision reached in accord with the majority of the Australian population. I don't need a rifle to help milk cows, thank goodness. Mr Prime Minister I believe that there are many people in Australia who are in complete agreeance with what's been done. What I want to ask you is what do you believe the situation would now be if you hadn't acted in accordance with our desires? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Sir, I believe the situation now would be that the great majority of the Australian people would have believed that we had failed our political responsibility if we had not acted. Now that is not a view that has majority support at this meeting. That is self evident. But as I said in answer to the previous question, I am happy to submit myself to the democratic political process in Australia. I have taken a decision. I will defend that decision anywhere in Australia. I will argue for that decision. I accept that there will be people who will campaign politically against me. That is their democratic right as Australians and I repeat that if the judgement of the Australian community at their first opportunity is that I have taken the wrong decision, then that is a judgement that I will freely and willingly accept. 1
QUESTION
Mr Howard, Sebastian Zirccone, President Sporting Shooters Association of Australia, Victoria. You called this meeting and you gave us your reasons for coming. This is an opportunity for the broad based Australian population to make their feelings on your resolutions known. Looking around, apart from the dozen up on the stand with you, and one here in front, I find it hard to believe that you have the support of the broad based community. I ask you are you running this campaign on Morgan Gallup polls? Are your advisers giving you the right advice? Are you taking advice from individuals with a vested interest? You say that the safety of Australia is going to depend on the reduction in the inventory of firearms then why haven't you banned everything if you fear them so much? You asked us to believe that we will not be persecuted yet you are asking the states to implement legislation which will make it easier for them to take what we've got left. How, how are you going to prevent that from being the ultimate achievement? Please. 
PRIME MINISTER:
You asked me what drove the decision that was taken by the Government. Can I tell you it wasn't a Morgan Gallup poll. You asked whether I'd received the wrong advice. Can I say to you very directly sir and to everybody else here today that the basis of the decision that I took was a strong view based on my own instincts as a leader of the political movement, based upon my understanding, my understanding of the feelings of the mainstream of the Australian community, that this decision would give to the Australian people a greater sense of security and a greater belief that we have a safer Australian community in the wake of not just the events in Tasmania but in the wake of a series of events over a long period of time. You once again Sir, you foretell, you suggested this legislation is the basis of further encroachments into civil liberties. It is the beginning of a walk down a long track. 
Sir, with great respect, that is not based on any reality. It is not based on fact. It is a completely irrational assertion which cannot be justified on any sort of basis of reason. This is a particular measure taken to achieve a greater sense of security, to achieve an actual and dramatic reduction in the number of firearms in the community which can be used, which can be used for dangerous and criminal purposes, and that is why we have taken the decision. It is a decision that I defend. It is a decision I believe does have the support of the Australian community. If I am wrong in that decision and you are right, if I am wrong and you are right then the democratic processes of the Australian community will vindicate you and condemn me. 
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, a simple question and I feel I can comment on this as I amn a dealer. What are you going to do for money when the $ 500 million runs out because I can assure you, bwAse upon Mr Williams' figures that were presented at the Police Ministers' Conference, on the amount of firearms that he proposes should be surrendered, your $ 500 million will go nowhere near the mark? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Sir, that is not the advice or the understanding of the Government and I do not believe it will run out. Can I give this assurance to all of you that if you are right in relation to that and we are wrong, we will not be confiscating the property of Australians without just compensation. I want to make that perfectly clear. Under no circumstances is this a Government that will violate the just compensation provision of the Aus'tralian Constitution. 
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, my name is Andrew Keane. I am a deer hunter and my wife is a deer hunter and we're proud of it. Personally I believe the Victorian guni laws are fine and should be kept and should be incorporated nationally. My question for you is under' the genuine reasons for owning a firearm, under your Commonwealth code is the ADA, another major hunting organisation, going to be an approved organisation under your proposal? 
PRIME MINISTER:
From my understanding, yes. 
QUESTION:
Mr Howard my name is Peter Kelly. I'm a former member of the National Party and a central councillor here in Victoria and I agree with the reply that you gave to Mr Reilly earlier, that your legislation is not a kneejerk reaction. Anecdotal evidence exists that you had personal objections to private ownership of firearms prior to becoming the Prime Minister and your new Attorney General Mr Williams, was appointed knowing that he had an agenda for national registration of firearms. I find it rather disgusting that you state your Government has no money for conservation but you're prepared to throw away in excess of $ 500 million on this exercise to advance your own agenda. 
The question that I want to ask is can you tell me that no government anywhere has used registration to confiscate private firearms and I'd appreciate an honest answer to that question and perhaps I could also ask why don't you put this matter of your legislation to a referendum? Thank you. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Sir you asked me about the use of gun registries in relation to certain things. I can only speak for the activities of governments of which I have been a member. Well I can't, I'm not going to answer for the activities of other governments. I can only say to you that in relation to the laws that we are supporting, the purposes of those laws are as have been explained and there are no hidden agendas. There are no ulterior motives, There are no conspiracy theories and there are no sort of strange moving forces that have not been disclosed. You asked, you remarked about anecdotal evidence concerning my own situation. Can I say quite openly to you I have held for a long time the view and I'm not frightened to repeat it today, I will repeat it all around  the country, I've held for a long time the view that I would dread the thought that this country would go down the American path so far as the possession of firearms. I would really do that. That is a view I have held before. it's a view I've expressed before and to the extent that it has played a role in my own attitude, I am no different from any other political figure or any other political leader who has strongly formed views on particular issues. 
It's not based on any particular experience and it's not based upon any particular view about people who are recreational shooters. So far as the Attorney General is concerned, I have to say to you sir in all honesty, when I appointed him as Attorney General of the Commonwealth I did not ask him his views on gun control laws. I had no particular idea of his views on gun control laws and it was not something that I weighed in the balance in deciding whether or not he should be Attorney General for the Commonwealth. 
QUESTION:
And you didn't answer the question. 
PRIME MINISTER:
You asked me, look, can I say to you if this thing were put to a national plebiscite that I think the Government's position would be supported. 
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, my name is Tony Kelly. I am a director of the Shooters' Party. Sir, my question to you amongst all this rhetoric about high powered, centre fire weapons is, will the Government consider an option, although unpalatable to a lot of us shooters that the magazine's capacity of shot guns and rimfires. be reduced? If that's the case they would be in the same position as normal side by side or under and over shotguns and I don't see any reason why a licensed shooter shouldn't be able to possess one. 
PRIME MINISTER:.
I've indicated to people who have raised all sorts of issues with me that proposals that completely accord with the spirit and the intent and the effect of the Police Ministers' resolution will be of course considered whereas such a proposal achieves that purpose varies enormously according to whom you speak. I have had people who have advocated the so called crimping option. Our view and the view the Government has taken in relation to that is that if, unless something can be irreversibly converted from a semi automatic or self loading weapon then it's not a change or an exception that we can agree to. 
QUESTION:
Thank you Sir. The only aspect is that if the weapon, as licensed is converted and then is found in the possession of a shooter, then he would be in the same position as  someone in possession of an unlicensed firearm and would run the risk of the penalty. I just ask you to consider that. Thank you. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Shall I repeat, I am perfectly happy and my colleagues are perfectly happy to talk about proposals, provided those proposals meet in full the principles laid down by the Police Ministers' decision and that process of discussion and dialogue can of course continue to go on. 
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, I wrote to you a few weeks ago and you were talking of getting rid of all of these firearms. Now I'm a woman. Any women in here are they able to walk the streets of a night time and feel free? Put up their hands if they're game enough to walk the streets of a night time, even when he's taken these guns out. We've been not able to walk the streets, even when the guns were here so it's not going to make one bit of difference taking the guns out. We still won't be able to walk the streets. What you've got to do is look at the mental health system. That's what's the problem, not the guns. Thank you. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Ma'am I would agree that one of the areas that does need examination is the way in which our mental health laws operate. We have over the last ten or fifteen years had what I can only call a preoccupation by the part of governments around this country in pushing people too soon into the community without adequate supervision and the behaviour of some of those people has been behind some of the acts of violence, some of the deaths and same of the senses of insecurity that women in the Australian community in particular experience. So as I said in my speech, I don't pretend to you for a moment that implementing the legislation that we have proposed is going to bring some kind of peaceful nirvana where there will be no violence, no discord or no unhappiness. I'm not saying that at all. What I am arguing is that it will make a significant contribution towards a safer community and I think that is a legitimate and reasoned proposition. 
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, my name is Jim Lake and I come from a little place called Stratford. A lot of the folks know me here and I'm just Joe Bloggs. I'm not a member of a shooting association as such but I've been around rifles and guns all of my life and I hope to think Mr Howard that I'm speaking for a lot of the folks that are either here and not following a particular banner and the folks that I've been speaking to that are still out there doing their bit, working away in Australia. The first thing Mr Howard I want to get clear to the media, and no offence to some of the media but get the bloody story right. 
Mr Howard, a lot of people have stood up in front of you today and they're going to be classified as some wild, red neck extreme, fight wing fascists. Mr Howard, I want to get the record straight. I'm not one of these blokes and if I am, you and me both, mate, we're in bloody trouble because I voted for you. I hate to say it Mr Howard but mankind, regardless of what his education, he's a savage and primal and blood thirsty, bloody animal and there's nothing.... 
Tape Break 
...and to the Victorian Police authorities. And the last thing I say sir, if there is any negative description of this gathering today, if there is anything done by the media to misrepresent the behaviour of people at this gathering, as a genuine concern that people of this gathering have about what the Government has proposed as distinct fr a rambo rejection of any kind of lawful authority, well that will not be the result of anything I say. And I say to the media today that I regard this as a perfectly legitimate lawful Australian gathering, and the views expressed by people at this meeting are the views that Australians are entitled to express in an over-democratic society. I don't agree with them, I can't accept them, but I will defend to the end your right to say them as loudly as possible. I don't shrink from what I have decided. I respect the depths of feeling that you have expressed. I think as good Australians together, I will have to agree to disagree with a number of the things that you have said.
 QUESTION:
  John, just one more thing. Just quickly answer that question, and that is, if the good people of Australia that own firearms, if they say we've drawn the line John, and this is enough, you'll not get another inch or another round or another gun because history has shown us that it hasn't worked when we've given them in before. And the people of Australia that own firearms say that, are we going to become criminals and are we going to have somebody kicking our doors in to come and take them? Are you prepared to make the Australian firearm owner a criminal, and maybe the only thing in the bush won't be an old man Kangaroo, it will be a gorilla? 
PRIME MINISTER.
Sir, I believe that the Australian community over the years has always been a law abiding community. I believe that when something is properly and fairly and patiently explained to Australians, and when they are persuaded that it is a decision, however much they may be personally unhappy with it which has been taken by the Government in a bona fide belief; that it serves the best interest of the Australian community. I believe as in the past in the future Australians will be a law abiding community. 


21 June 1996 
E&amp;OE............................. 
Well, thank you very much Kay. I differ from you in one respect and I didn't even think, however briefly, of sailing solo around the world. But to Kay, to Alan Jones, to Peter Collins the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales, to Bill Heffernan the State President of the Liberal Party in New South Wales, to my other Federal and State parliamentary colleagues and to all of you as supporters of the Liberal Party and as friends of the Government and bringing together as you do a remarkable crosssection of people not only here in Sydney but around Australia of people who have been committed to success and excellence in business and also to the ideal of unselfish, unrewarded in a financial sense, community service. 
For me it's quite touching that this gathering to mark the first one hundred days of the new Government should take place in the Sydney Town Hall a gathering centre of the oldest city in Australia. And it's an opportunity to remind. ourselves that government is not only about dollars and cents and about economic goals and economic objectives but government is also about values, and government is also about the way in which we think of ourselves. 
And I set myself when I became Prime Minister, a number of economic goals. But I also set myself some other goals that I think are very important. And one of those goals was a new and different relationship between the elected governors of this country and those who elect them. I do place an enormous amount of store on politicians be they Prime Ministers or Members of Parliament maintaining direct personal contact with the people they represent. I think all of us in this room who've been connected in one way or another with politics over-the years would recognise that nothing destroys the confidence of the public, in the people who've been elected to office, than a feeling that those people have grown away from the people who elected them. But somehow or other they've lost touch with what the mainstream of the Australian community is thinking. So to keep myself in touch with the Australian community, certainly with the corporate community that is important to the economic health of Australia, but also to the broader Australian community. 
And that is why I said last week that one of the things that I intended to do, without any way reducing, might I hasten to say Alan, the number of times I appear in the studio of well known public affairs commentators to be interviewed, I wanted to revive the old practice of politicians going around the country and addressing gatherings in commnunity centres and other places where people gathered in large numbers to explain and defend the policies that they were propounding. The idea that politics is the process of separating people from the people who've elected them I think is a notion that we ought to move away from. 
And another goal that I set myself of a non-economic kind is we ought as Australians try and focus on the things that united us and brought us together rather than focus too much on those things that push us apart. I have a very strong conviction that as we move towards the celebration of the Centenary of Federation, the celebration of the political birth of Australia as an independent nation in 1901, 1 have the strongest possible feeling that people want to dwell upon the successes of the one hundred years of Federation, they want to dwell upon the things that have bound us together as Australians, they want to dwell upon the things that continue to unite us as Australians and perhaps accord a lower priority to those things that tend to push us apart.
And I also believe very strongly that it's part and parcel of proper government in this country to accord, on appropriate occasions, a role and a place for the political Opposition. No person ever wins government in this country by getting 70 or 80 per cent of the vote. Although we had a magnificent victory on the second of March, it's got to be remembered that a significant proportion of the Australian population voted for an alternative. And part of the responsibility of a national political leader as well as propounding and defending the things that he believes in and stands for is to understand that there is also another point of view in the community. And consistent with the prosecution of the things that I believe in I think a due and proper place for the other point of view is part and parcel of the system. 
And finally and I think very importantly, one of the other goals I set myself; was quite simply to bring about a restoration where people felt a little more freely, if the mood struck them, to talk about controversial issues without fear of being branded as a racist or some kind of other bigot for daring to raise those subjects. I think one of the many criticisms that I had of the former Government was the way in which it used a form of social censorship to intimidate people out of debating difficult, sensitive and controversial issues. I think we had become almost too politically correct to a fault before the second of March and I hope that one of the things that I may have done in contributing to the change of Government was to bring about an atmosphere in which people felt a little more free to talk openly and directly about issues without fear of being intimidated into silence with some kind of' branding as a bigot or as a prejudiced person. 
I want to spend most of my time today not talking so much about the last one hundred days but rather ladies and gentlemen to talk about the next nine hundred days. The first one hundred days of any administration and it's a political ritual, inaugurated I understand by Franklin Roosevelt when he was elected as President of the United States in the early 1930s, it is something of a ritual but it is inevitable that there is a novelty and an interest and I suppose a tolerance and a benign view in the public towards the first one hundred days of any new government. And I'm very happy to say that we have put down the foundations of the main policies we took to the last election. We have introduced the industrial relations reform. package, by far the most important, single, legislative act that my Government will oversee in the first three years that it is in power. All of you know that of all the political causes that I have argued for over the last decade none has been more prominent than the cause of industrial relations reform. 
And in the election campaign I placed an enormous amount of emphasis on the role of small business in our community. I said that small business had in its hand the economic future of Australia and I also said that small business had in its hand the solution, over time to the problem of high unemployment, particularly high youth unemployment. 
And that remains my strongest possible economic conviction. And one of the things that small business constantly complained to me about, as I went around Australia during the election campaign, was the operation of the unfair dismissal law. Now I want to say to you that the repeal of the present, unacceptable, unfair dismissal law is a centrepiece of the industrial relations legislation that's been passed through the House of Representatives and is now awaiting passage through the Australian Senate. 
And I want to say to every man and woman in small business anywhere in Australia that if you are still suffering the constraints and the unreasonable limitations of the unfair dismissal law introduced by Mr Brereton in 1993 the only people you can blame are the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats that have held up, in the the Senate, the passage of that legislation and therefore continue to impose those unreasonable constraints and those unreasonable burdens on the operations of your business. 
And I want to say to all of you that my commitment and the commitment of the Government, to the cause of industrial relations reform and the contribution it will make to reducing unemployment, the contribution it will make to a more productive and a more competitive Australian economy that commitment remains absolutely undiminished. And I have believed that for years that fixing Australia's industrial relations system will do more than anything else to give added strength and added vitality to the Australian economy. 
I'm also happy to say that our legislation to sell one-third of Telstra and I'll have something to say about the attitude of the Australian Democrats on that in a moment and our legislation to establish the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia, have also been introduced into the Parliament-And the legislation to sell a third of Telstra has also been delayed in the Senate.  
And I noticed when I turned on my radio this morning that Senator Kernot was being introduced, was being interviewed rather, and she was being asked what she thought about Frank Blount's, I thought entirely sensible comments, in the press this morning to the effect that he thought the sale of one-third of Telstra was a terrific idea and she said in defence of her Party position, she said the most important thing was to preserve the income stream of $ 2 million coming out of Telstra into Government coffers. 
That represents a very interesting change by Senator Kernot. Up until this morning her argument was that you couldn't reduce the level of government ownership of Telstra because if you did that you would reduce the community service obligations that Telstra currently undertook. That of course is wrong, but what I find interesting is that under the weight of, I think, of changing public opinion on this issue, the Democrats are now arguing that it's not the community services that they want to keep, it's rather the income stream that they're concerned about. And when opponents of your legislation change their rationale for opposing it, it's always a very encouraging sign that your argument may in fact be registering and getting through to the Australian community.
I mention those two pieces of legislation ladies and gentlemen because they are highlights of what we campaigned on in the mun-up to the election. And the legislation to give effect of those commitments has been introduced and we await with great interest when we return after the winter recess the attitude of the Opposition and the attitude of the minor parties in the Senate. 
But it's really the next nine hundred days and the sort of opportunities that are available to us as a new Government, but more importantly available to us as an Australian community, that I want to spend a few moments on. In many ways we have a remarkable opportunity as a community at the present time to enjoy in the years between now and the turn of the Century and into the next millennium a new period, a new era of sustained, long-term economic growth and prosperity. I said a couple of weeks ago when speaking to a group of visiting bankers that in many respects the Australian economy was a little better than the ' Curate's Egg'. The Australian economy does have a lot of strength. We are enjoying, and the OECD certified it again last night, we are enjoying a very strong level of economic growth. 
We do have a highly intelligent workforce, we have great political stability, our cultural diversity is a source of not only social enrichment, but a source of economic strength and we live cheek-by-jowl with the fastest growing economic region in the world. And when you add all of those things up it bodes very well in many respects for the economic future of Australia. 
But side by side with those good features, there are a number of aspects of the Australian economy that are the cause of concern and are the reason why we are committed to particular policies.
The two great weaknesses of the Australian economy is that we do have a budget deficit problem and we do have a current account. deficit or overseas debt problem. And they remain two of the great constraints on the continuation of that very high level of economic growth. We have a low level of savings in this country. As people we don't save very much and as governments over the last few years, we have saved even less. 
And one of the biggest criticisms that can be made of the last Government and I don't criticise it on everything I've always endeavoured in those areas where I have believed my political opponents have done the right thing to agree with them and give them appropriate credit. But it is one of the great criticisms that despite the fact that we enjoyed many quarters of economic growth, on the third of March, Peter Costello and I inherited a fiscal position, a budget deficit position which was much worse than we had been led to believe by our predecessors. And that is the reason why it is necessary in the Budget that will be brought down on the twentieth of August, it is necessary for us to make a significant reduction in the size of that deficit. Now, that's not just an arid accounting exercise. There are great long term benefits for Australia if we are successful in controlling our spending. If we reduce the deficit, we add to our savings as a community. If we reduce the deficit, we take even further pressure off business and housing interest rates. If we reduce the budget deficit, we send a signal to domestic and international financial markets that there is a government in charge in this country that believes in the principles of sensible economic management and sensible economic housekeeping. So there are dividends to be won for the entire Australian community if we can make a sizeable reduction in that budget deficit.
Our other great problem of course is that we continue to have one of the highest current account deficits in the entire industrialised world. In fact, in 1995, Australia had the biggest current account deficit in the OECD region. And that is a direct result of our savings problem and it is one of the reasons why we need to reduce that deficit and it is also one of the reasons why we need to implement industrial relations and other reforms that reduce the cost of doing business in this country, because it is through that that we can over time reduce that current account deficit and lay the foundation for a longer period of higher economic growth without the sort of the circular experience of the last 10 or 15 years, of as soon as you get a bit of economic growth, you suck in too many imports then you have to put the constraints on the economic growth, so you slow down the rate at which you were sucking in imports. And that has been almost the perennial problem of the Australian economy over a long period of time * and we need to tackle the causes of that so that we can reduce the likelihood of it occurring in the future. 
And the reason that I dwell on that, ladies and gentlemen, is that I realise that in the early months of the Government that although there is the natural excitement and the natural euphoria of being in office after such a long period in opposition, some people may wonder to themselves, well, we've been in office for a hundred days and we read in the paper that the Government has to take difficult decisions and we have to cut here and cut there and restrain somewhere else and people might say to themselves particularly supporters of the Liberal Party well, we didn't quite think it was going to be like this, can I say to them that we inevitably in the lead up to a budget you go through a period of speculation. 
You go through a period when there is rumour and speculation about this or that area of Government activity. And I want to say to all of those people that don't imagine for a moment that the budget to be brought down on the twentieth of August is going to be all grim economic news. 
There will be announcements regarding Federal Government expenditures, and the budget when brought down will demonstrate the commitment of this government and the commitment particularly of the Treasurer and the finance Minister, Peter Costello and John Fahey, to achieve the aims that we set ourselves. But it will also contain some good news. It will also deliver on some of the care commitments that we took to the last election. The commitment in relation to tax deductibility of private health insurance. The commitment to make changes to the taxation system so far as it affects Australian families and some of the other commitments we made to the small business community. 
And the message of all this is that we do have to go through the deficit reduction exercise at the beginning of our term, but if we can get that right, and if we can get our industrial relations legislation through the Senate, then we can lay the foundations I believe, building on the other strengths in the Australian economy, think we can lay the foundation for a long term period of sustained economic growth and sustained prosperity for the entire Australian community. 
There is one other economic issue that I'd like to mention and it is one that Kay touched on during her very warm words of introduction and that is the issue of youth unemployment. It is undoubtedly true that the single greatest social problem that Australia continues to have is the high level of unemployment and most particularly youth unemployment. I have never pretended and I don't pretend to you today, nor did I pretend during the election campaign that I had some kind of magical solution to that problem, that overnight simply by electing a Howard Government you would abolish youth unemployment, but what I did promise was that if you could do something to revitalise, the small business sector of Australia, if you did take away some of the regulatory constraints on the small business sector; if you did get rid of such stupid imposts as the unfair dismissal law; if you did reduce the level of red tape which effects small business; if you did have a more market sensitive training system for young people and you didn't have an approach to training that priced young, people out of work instead of pricing them into jobs; that if you adopted those approaches then over time we could make a serious reduction to the level of youth unemployment. 
And that remains as a social goal, one of the most important objectives of the new Government. And at the end of the day a Government must be judged on the kind of nation it delivers not just on the tidiness of its financial accounts and that is why the character of the Government that I lead is as important to me as its economic and its financial objectives. 
There is one issue that sadly was not foreseen when I campaigned for the support of the Australian people at the election on the second of March and an issue that has certainly been very much in the headlines over the past few weeks and that is the issue of gun control. Nobody foresaw the terrible events in Tasmania which so touched the soul of this country that it produced across the political divide a spontaneous. desire by the Australian community not to go down the American path of uncontrolled availability of deadly firearms. 
And I want to say to you again today how determined my Government is to implement in full the resolutions of the Police Ministers achieved on the tenth of May. I want to take the opportunity of thanking Peter Collins and Ron Phillips and the members of the Liberal Party here in New South Wales for the tremendous support that they've given me. This has not been an easy issue, despite, I believe, the overwhelming support of the Australian community. I know that there are some people who feel keenly that what is being done is unfairly falling upon them. Can I say to you ladies and gentlemen, there are many things that governments must do, where the greater good of the greater number has to take precedence over the immediate convenience and taste and choice of a smaller section of the community. 
I have often gone to rural and provincial areas of Australia. I've often addressed gatherings of my own Party and gatherings of the National Party and drawn a very strong applause line when I've said that we want a Government that governs for the majority and for the mainstream and not a Government that governs for the noisy minority and the fringes. Well, let me say on the gun control issue, there is no doubt in the world what the mainstream of the Australian community wants, And the mainstream of the Australian community wants implementation of the policy agreement that was reached on the tenth of May. 
There's just two final things can I say that I said when 1 became Prime Minister that I regarded it above everything else as an immense privilege to hold that office and I believe while ever I see it in terms of being a privilege to serve the Australian people, then I believe that my Government will continue to be successful. And there have been many occasions over the last hundred days where the sense of privilege has been very strong. The sense of privilege that I felt in respecing and admiring the way in which people responded across the political divide on the issue of guns. 
The tremendous admiration I felt, as I know all Australians felt, for the great stoicism and courage that those members of the Australian defence force which were so directly touched by the tragic events in Townsville of a couple of weeks ago. And if I've learned anything above all else over the last one hundred days is that the faith that I had on the second of March in the great decency of the mainstream of the Australian community is even greater now than I thought a hundred days ago that it could possibly be. And that mantra that we recite whenever we return from overseas that this is the greatest country in the world, has given as far as I am concerned has been given added meaning and added moment during the last one hundred days. 
Could I finish by coming back to what this is essentially and that is a gathering of people who have given much and supported enthusiastically the Liberal Party cause over a long period of time. We went through 13 dismal political winters. There were many of our supporters who believed that we would never win an election again. There were people who wrote us off. There were people who said that we were the greatest crowd of no-hopers and we knew nothing about political organisation and there were people who talked about how the Labor Party had become the permanent government of this country. But there were many people who didn't lose the faith and a large number of them are gathered in this room today. I would not have led the Coalition to victory on the second of March if it hadn't been for your help. I wouldn't have led the Coalition to victory on the second of March if it hadn't been for the support of the organisation and I want to say to all of you thank you for that support and for that help. 
I particularly want to thank the Liberal Party organisation here in New South Wales, because this is a New South Wales gathering not, may I hasten to say do I put one part of the Liberal Party organisation anywhere in Australia ahead of the other, but can I say because this is a Sydney gathering that the support the New South Wales organisation gave was magnificent and in that context I particularly acknowledge the contribution of Bill Heffernan, Bill Heffernan has been a remarkable...(applause)... Bill has been a great servant of the Party and has put the interests of the Party ahead of his own interests on many occasions in the past-And I think that contribution that his laconic earthy style has made to the leadership of the Party organisation here in New South Wales played a major and dominant role in our success in winning so many seats here in New South Wales. For so long, the New South Wales Liberal Party was regarded by divisions in other parts of the country as the sick man of the Liberal Party around Australia, speaking federally. That was not the case on the second of March and the fruits of that success in people like Kerry Bartlett and Joe Hockey, Ross Cameron, Danna Vale and so many others are for everybody to see. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it has been an enormous experience, the last one hundred days. I want to thank my wife Janette who is here today and all of my friends. And I just look forward to the opportunity of talking to you again on many occasions in the months and the years ahead. And can I ask one thing of you? The process of keeping in touch is a two-way one. I owe you, and through you the Australian community an obligation to stay in touch, but you also owe me an obligation to tell me when I am getting out of touch. Now, Australians are normally pretty good at that and I don't think you are going to let me down. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your help, thank you for your support and I look forward to seeing a lot of you in the years ahead. 
Thank you. 


26 June 1996 
E&amp;OE..................... 
Well to Chris Miles, to Judi Moylan, to other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, and most particularly the young people who've just taken part in the presentation; can I thank you for asking me this morning to launch this material. I am very pleased indeed to be associated with a project that seeks to use the medium of the arts to engage young people in an exercise that allows them to express their views, their feelings and their emotions. 
At the present time this country is engaged in a significant debate about issues that touch upon violence in our community. And I want to say to this Fathering this morning that any project which has as its objective a reduction in violence, aggressive behaviour, and more importantly the causes of that violence in aggressive behaviour, is a project that ought to be commended by all shades of political opinion and all shades of community opinion in Australia. 
This particular project has involved the Commonwealth Government, it has involved the local community and Burnie through the Burnie City Council, and I welcome the representatives of that council to this morning's gathering. And it of course has also involved a number of young people in tile Burnie community. And to the extent that it has placed an emphasis on reducing tendencies to violence and violent expressions, to the extent that it preaches the value and the virtue of resolving differences of opinion and resolving conflict without resort to violence, it is something that we ought to encourage as strongly as we possibly can. 
I want to make it very clear to all of you here this morning that all members of the Federal Government share the desire, I believe, of the great majority of the Australian community to do what we all can to reduce the incidence of violence in our community. It finds its expression in many ways-, it occurs domestically, it occurs in other situations. In some respects, the debate that we axe having about the possession of firearms in the Australian community is a debate about the tendency of this country to have accepted, over the years, a certain culture of violence which I believe the great majority of Australians want to turn around. One has to recognise that there are many people who are born into a violent or semi-violent culture and that Is a matter of profound sadness and a matter of profound regret, and a reminder to those of us in the community who did not have that misfortune that there are some of our fellow Australians, most of them very young, who have suffered that. And we have an obligation as a community, whatever our political views and whatever our perspective on other issues, we have an obligation as a community to do all that we can to eradicate that. 
And this has been a practical project which has sort to use the great medium of the arts to re-engage people who've felt a sense of separation and alienation from the rest of the community, and it is something in that sense to be very, very warmly comnmended. 
In so many ways the arts are becoming a livelier more everyday part of life in Australia in a way that people would not have imagined a generation ago. And the use of the arts to reach people who've felt that nobody was reaching for them in the past is something that does deserve our support and our commendation. I know that on two occasions the BIG hART project has received certificates of commendation for the work it has done, and it is therefore, for that additional reason, deserving of our praise and support. I therefore have very great pleasure in launching the material, the video and the working booklets, the manuals.
I want, on behalf of the Commonwealth Government, to thank the young people from the Burnie district for their participation in thle project and also their participation here this morning. I want to congratulate Chris Miles, as the local member, for the work that he's done, and to thank very especially, the representatives of the Burnie City Council who are here this morning, and others that have been involved in the project. 
It is the kind of joint community endeavour involving federal governments, local governments and most importantly of all, people, in attacking a difficult social issue and one that has to be dealt with realistically with candour, but in a way that is sensitive and understanding towards the people who are most effected by it. 
I have, therefore, great pleasure in launching the material and I wish the project continued success. 
Thank you. 


27 June 1996 
E&amp;OE..... 
Well thank you very much Geoff Cousins; ladies and gentlemen. 
This is a very special day, not only for Optus, not only for the communications industry, bu~ t also in the several respects as a commentary of the character of Australia and the character of the Australian economy. 
One of the great features of the Australian character and the Australian way of life is that we have always, amongst many other things, been great devourers of new technology. If you go back over the years to the way in which there was a massive take-up decades ago in vacuum cleaners, the advent of television sets, the onset of the use of videos, the absolutely voracious appetite Australians, particularly young Australians, have displayed for the mobile telephone, stamp us quite distinctively around the world as being tremendous devourers and tremendous addicts of new technology. And one of the great marketing skills that I believe Optus has brought to the telecommunications industry in this country is to understand that. And today is a triumph of Australian drive, Australian business skill, and the commitment especially of young Australians, to building a new enterprise. And of all the many things that Geoff Cousins said in his speech, none cheered me more than the remarks he passed about the dedication of Optus staff and the denial that that represented to the doomsayers, who we occasionally hear, about the capacities and the commitment of the Australian workplace. 
This of course is also a great day for competition. And there's nothing that cheers the heart of a Prime Minister, particularly a new one, than demonstrations of competition in very sensitive sectors of the economy. And we've had today, and we had a few weeks ago in another area, the best possible field evidence, that if you really want to develop the Australian economy, there is no better path than the path of competition. 
We saw a few weeks ago in the banking industry, against all the predictions, all the trends, at a time when official interest rates were still hanging up, we saw a fall in housing interest rates as a result of the entry into the housing industry of new players and the competitive pressures that those new players demonstrated. And we have seen today with this quite dramatic entry, the breaking down of the last bastion you might say, of exclusive telecommunications activity; we have seen a dramatic challenge been thrown out by the Optus company to its competitive rival. And when you bear in mind that many studies indicate that after labour costs, telecommunications' costs represent the highest business input cost for Australian businesses. It does indicate very significantly just how important that decision is, and how important competition in the telecommunications industry is. 
But it also is a very important social development. There are many great Australian icons, but as we are amongst the most urbanised communities in the world, the local telephone call is the local domestic telephone call is as Australian as the Gum tree. And there's something very special about its place, the way in which it demolishes isolation, the way in which it gives comfort and support, particularly for old people living on their own; the cost of a local telephone cal is a very important thing in everyday life for Australians. 
So I want to share the enthusiasm that Geoff has demonstrated. I want to join you in congratulating Optus. I want to remark on the great strides that the telecommunications industry has taken in developing competition. I want to reaffirm the commitment of the new government to greater competition in the telecommunications area. And I can't let the opportunity pass by without again commending to the Australian community the wisdom of the Government's decision to try and inject private money into at least one third of the ownership of the Optus rival that is Telstra. I think anything that can expose the telecommunications industry to increasing levels of private sector commitment, private sector involvement, is something that ought to be encouraged. And the technology that's been outlined today goes far beyond the competitive edge that's offered in relation to local phone calls, it also of course includes the other facilities that Mr Cousins described. I understand, for example, that Net surfers will be able to unload in just nine seconds, a two minute video clip, compared with the time of several hours using the old analogue technology and that is a quite remarkable thing. And it's a demonstration of how an Australian company with Australians and Australian private commitment is at the cutting edge of technology on a world level. 
So ladies and gentlemen this is a great day for the industry. It's a tremendous tribute to the Optus company. I salute the contribution that Optus is making to the greatest force for consumer good and consumer benefit ever conceived in a free economy, and that is the force of competition. The demonstration affect of what is happening today speaks greater volumes than all the economic text books in the world about the value of competition in a free market, and it's a commitment that the Government has in so many areas. It's a salutary lesson to those in the community who still might believe that holding back the forces of competition are beneficial, and it's a reminder in a very grassroots everyday level, that if you do have competition the people who benefit most are the consumers of the product, And the people who will benefit most of all from the competitive challenge that has been thrown out today are the everyday consumers of that most basic of all Australian utilities and that is the local telephone call. 
So ladies and gentlemen, I have very great pleasure in formally commissioning the Optus local telephone service. 
Thank you. 


27 June 1996 
I have been to many, I have been to many universities over the years, and if you think that a little chorus like that is going to change my view then you are very sadly mistaken. 
Tonight, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to share with you some of my perspectives on Australia's democratic institutions. Can I say that again, can I say that again for the benefit of people who may possibly have come here with a moderately open mind, that I've come here with a moderately open mind, that I've come here tonight to say a few things about the shaping of Australia's democratic institutions and sustaining our democratic institutions, and sustaining democracy in Australia is the responsibility of all members of the Australian community and not least the political leadership of the Australian community. 
And I welcome very much the opportunity tonight of inaugurating the first of the series of shaping our institutions and could I perhaps strike a bargain with those who, could I strike a bargain with those who do not appreciate my presence here tonight. And I'll tell you what, I guarantee that at the now, it's very interesting, you're not even prepared to hear the alternative that I'm going to put.
What I am prepared to do, ladies and gentlemen, I am prepared at the end of my address, I am prepared to answer questions for 30 minutes on the subject of higher education if you will allow me to deliver the lecture. Are you prepared to have that deal or not? 
(Applause) 
Now, can we have a deal? 1 have said, now I understand that there are many. people here and there are a lot of other people who are concerned about higher education. Now, I know you don't like listening to a reasonable proposition, but you ought to listen to a reasonable proposition, and 1 am prepared, I amn prepared at the end of this lecture tonight, I am prepared to answer questions from anybody, anybody in this hall on the subject of higher education, but the condition is that you allow the people who came here tonight to hear what I have to say about the future of our institutions, to hear what I have to say. 
Now, is that a deal or is it not? It's not a deal? I see, it's not a deal. So, in other words you are not interested in the democratic process, you are only interested in the triumph of noise over reason, and I don't think that does very great credit to your argument. But ladies and gentlemen, at a time of economic and social transformation it is natural and healthy to question established institutions and attitudes. It is natural to ask that if things can be better, and if so how, there is a temptation to accept uncritically grand visions for social engineering and constitutional change. Now, I say that in politics I have never underestimated the power of ideals and the power of vision in Australian politics. 
However, grand visions ring very hollow indeed unless they are firmly grounded in community values and aspirations and most importantly if they deliver practical results which include the condition of life for all Australians. And can I say that if there is one thing that distinguishes the Coalition's approach to government it is our.. well, listen, I will keep going because I was endowed by my parents with a very strong pair of lungs. 
The Coalition's approach to government is our emphasis on practical reforms which deliver better economic and social outcomes. 1, Mr Chairman, have always taken a Burkan view towards our national institutions. I have always argued that where they have served the nation well, changed for change's sake alone is entirely inappropriate. However, where national institutions have fallen behind the needs and the aspirations of Australian society, they clearly require modernising. 
And Mr Chairman, our democratic institutions do not exist in a vacuum, they are shaped and they take shape by our national goals and our national values. And our democratic institutions ladies and gentlemen are integral to promoting freedom and diversity above compulsion and centralism. They are designed to strengthen the decentraised. networks of family, workplaces and communities, as more effecive guarantors of choice and freedom than the centralisation of political powers. They support equal opportunity for self-development and equality before the law as the most effective buffers to monopolistic powers. They broaden the opportunities for personal achievement, they reaffirm the proper role of Government in upholding its social responsibilities and they uphold the checks and balances, for example the separation of powers, the encouragement of diversity and competition in the provision of goods and services. 
I have always believed ladies and gentlemen that there are four great pillars of Australian democracy. The first of those is our great unique Australian historic tradition and inheritance of anti-authoritarianism and rugged individualism. It is one of the great traditions of the Australian character. Our second great pillars, our parliamentary system, our third is an independent judiciary and last and most importantly is a fiercely independent free media and free press. 
I for one am very proud of the achievements of Australian democracy and I believe there is a broad spectrum of opinion across the political divide in this country that uniquely Australia has made her own contribution to the practice of democratic values and democratic traditions around the world. We are one of the few nations that has maintained democratic traditions consistently throughout the economic and social changes of the twentieth century. We have a record of innovation in democratic practices and that record has been sustained by the historic traditions that I mentioned earlier of anti-auithoritarianism and individuals. All of these elements of modern Australia are among the staunchest defenders of Australian democracy and all help to set clear limits, not only to the role of government in people's lives but also to the extent to which people's lives should be left to market forces alone. 
In other words Australian democracy is protected not just by us national institutions but by the people ourselves. Our record of practising democracy and respecting civil and political life has made me particularly and I emphasise this, particularly sceptical of codifying our traditions in say, a bill of rights. I remain staunchly a supporter of the common law approach to Australian society. The common law is organic and constantly evolving-It is the accumulation of centuries of precedence built up through the practical application of the law to changing economic and social circumstances. 
Black-letter law can never be as flexible or subtle as common law, in seeking to define rights we can end up restricting them unnecessarily. Let me also add however that the judicial interpretation of the law, while sometimes necessarily creative as in the case of the Mabo decision must never become a cloak for quasi-legislative change. Judicial activism is not a substitute for parliamentary processes in which the peoples representatives canvass the pros and cons of policy proposals and changes. 
Without the consent of the governed, no policy change will ever be fully successful. Nowhere is this more true than for example in the republican debate. Forcing such a major constitutional change from the top is doomed to failure. As all of you are aware, I am not a republican. I recognise however the diversity of views on this topic within the Australian community. There are many people who voted for the Liberal Party at the last election who are staunch republicans equally I dare to say, there are many probably of fewer number who voted for the Australian Labor Party who are staunch anti-republicans. Should change occur in this area, it should only occur in circumstances where it is a unifying experience for the Australian community. 
The Australian people must be involved at the beginning, in the middle arnd at the end of the process. I do not want any future change in this area to be divisive or to leave part of the Australian community feeling bruised or hurt. The commitment to a People's Convention, and that convention will take place next year, exemplifies our commitment to injecting democracy in the debate, involving people in the future of their national institutions. 
The new Coalition government remains a strong supporter of co-operative fedexalism. One of the aspects of the recent meeting of Premiers here in Canberra that received very little coverage was the progress made in areas of overlapping Commonwealth and State jurisdiction. I remain very optimistic that this cooperative approach will continue and further develop. Australian governments at all levels have a responsibility to make the current system work more effectively. The Coalition deeply respects the role of State and local governments within our federal system. Where possible power should devolve to the level of government which is closest to the Australian people subject, very importantly, to the maintenance of certain minimum national standards. The Council of Australian Governments is currently engaged in the process of more clearly defining restrictive Commonwealth and State roles and responsibilities in the areas which impact significantly on the welfare of the Australian people. The Comnmonwealth's approach is to achieve practical improvement in service delivery in areas such as housing, health and family services. However, this cooperative approach, ladies and gentlemen, will not involve the abrogation of the Commonwealth overriding economic, financial and taxation responsibilities. And it should not mean that national leaders and law makers can never express a view in the national interest on matters which are ultimately the responsibility of the States. 
I turn now, briefly, to the impact of globalisation on Australia's economic institutions and the need to adapt those institutions to the new imperative of international competition. The latter pant of the 20th Century is undoubtedly witnessing an enormous expansion of competitive forces across the world. Barriers to the international flow of people, goods and services and financial capital are being torn down and rapid developments and communication and information technology are creating truly global markets. Against this background we cannot retreat behind the protectionist practises at institutions of the past. That is why, for example, I supported and championed and was followed in that support and champion by my immediate predecessor, Paul Keating, the cause of financial deregulation in the late 1970s. 
The establishment of the Campbell Committee was the beginning of progressively opening up our economy and increasing competition. And the most contemporary result of that competition was demonstrated in Sydney today with the opening up of new competition in the area of domestic telephone services. Right over the past month, ladies and gentlemen, two very graphic demonstrations of how the Australian consumer will benefit from competition in the area, firstly, of housing interest rates and today in the area of local telephone charges. And those within our community, wherever they may sit, within the political spectrum who set their faces against the expansion of competition must understand that the real beneficiary at the end of the day in the area of competition is the Australian consumer and in the end it is in the public interest to have the maximum amount of competition. 
The more competitive financial system since deregulation is delivering practical benefits for all Australians, for example, in the area of home mortgages. And the recently announced Wallis Inquiry provides another opportunity to consider how the financial system has developed in the last 15 years and how our regulatory institutions can be adapted to the needs of our rapidly internationalising economy. Mr Chairman, my long term commiitmnent to industrial relations reform for wich I make no apology and in relation to which I'm inordinately proud reflects a desire to update institutions
and practises to meet the contemporary needs of Australian workers and enterprises. In very many ways the current industrial relations system reflects in Australia of more than 70 years ago. 
It is imperative, ladies and gentlemen, in the current circumstances to introduce genuine democracy within Australia's labour markets. The essence of democracy is the opportunity to choose for yourself. Choice is the golden thread which runs through the Government's industrial relations policy. And that is choice for individuals as to whether or not they are members of a trade union. Choice for individuals to have say in how they work and how they are remunerated, subject to the maintenance of mninimum standards. Choice for families as to how they balance their work and family
responsibilities. By injecting choice and modernising our labour market institutions I seek to make our system far more relevant to the lives of Australian men and women in the 1990s and beyond. The new industrial relations legislation will serve the needs of Australians rather than workers having to fit into an antiquated and arthritic industrial relations system which is essentially a survival of a system that was put in place before World War I. We will, however ladies and gentlemen, fail to reap the full benefits of more relevant work place arrangements if we do not accelerate the pace of microeconomic reform to reduce the costs of doing business. And that means ensuring that barriers to competition are dismantled, particularly in those areas which directly impact on our international competitiveness. 
Ladies and gentlemen I would now like to direct a few remarks to the role of parliament in the area of reshaping our institutions. The Australian parliamentary system has particular and special national characteristics. Although it was heavily influenced in its establishment by the British Westminster tradition and some elements of the American federal structure. It is natural that the role of the Senate should be in the public spotlight given the outcome of the last election. Next Monday, ladies and gentlemen, it will be precisely 15 years since the government of the day in this country also contemporaneously had control in its own right of the Federal Senate. This has particular significance now that the Coalition is in power federally. During much of the Menzies' era, ladies and gentlemen, a de facto Coalition existed between the then Coalition government and the Democratic Labor Party with the latter supporting most of the crucial legislative proposals and policies of the Menzies' Government. A light comment can be made of the Hawke and Keating governments and the Australian Democrats. The reality was that they enjoyed what amounted to a de facto Coalition., with the Australian Democrats supporting Labor on most crucial issues over its 13 year period of offce. The Australian current legislation and the 1993 budget were notable exceptions to this proposition. The intriguing question, not only for legislators, but commentators, is whether or not the de facto Coalition between the Australian Labor Part and the Australian Democrats has in reality survived the change of government on the second of March. The early sipns, I would have to say, is that it has, but it would be uncharitable of me other than to acknowledge that it is a little too early to make a final conclusion. 
Many would think that an important test for the Democrats in. the months ahead will be whether or not they are genuinely a balance of power party or whether they will ultimately validate Malcolm Mackerras view that they truly belong on the left hand side of the political pendulum. If that does prove to be the case, then despite its large majority in the House Of Representatives, the Coalition Government will face challenges which did not present themselves to either the Menzies or Hawke Keating Governents or indeed for five and a half years of the Fraser Government when it almost uniquely, in the post 1949 experience, controlled both Houses in its own right. 
In assessing the nature of the voting patterns of a minority party one should not seek to know the number of Bills it supports or opposes, rather one should seek to know which Bill it supports or opposes. After all, in this context, some Bills are infinitely more equal than others. 
Mr Chairman, can I say that I welcome very warmly the opportunity of coming here tonight. I recognise that not everybody in this gathering is enamoured of the political philosophy that I represent, but I have never run away from an advocacy confrontation. I have always championed the cause of political leaders going on to university campuses all around Australia, of listening to the views of university students, of being willing to respond to those views, of recognising healthy areas of dissent. And I am a veteran of coming on to the university campuses, and I enjoy very much the opportunity of being here tonight and I amn looking forward to the half hour question time I promised you at the commencement of my speech.
3
Thank you very much. 6 


5 July 1996
I am delighted to be with you tonight to honour the contribution of a great Australian, Sir Thomas Playtord, to the development of our country and of this State of South Australia. 
Occasions such as this are important aad uplifting for many reasons, and not least of them is the opportunity they provide to set the historical record straight.
One of the more insidious developments in Australian political life over the past decade or so has been the attempt to re-write Australian history in the service of a partisan political cause. 
No-one should be in any doubt that this process has been a systematic and deliberate one. My predecessor as Primo Minister regarded the partisan re-interpretation of Australia's past as central to much of the agenda for the future that he sought to implement It distorted the debate over a range of policy issues including our constitutional form of government and the relevance of our traditional associations with particular countries and regions.
I say that this process of officially attempting to re-write Australian history was an insidious one because it was an abuse of the true purpose of history. It read history backwards, imposing on the past a pattern designed to serve contemporary political needs. It portrayed a partial and selective view of our past as the officially endorsed version of our history. And it sought to stifle voices of dissent from that view with abuse and vitriol rather than reasoned debate. 
This process was also an insidious one because it sought to demcan, pillory and tear down many great people of Australia's past who had no opportunity to answer back and all because they stood for principles and priorities that were percieved to be at odds with the agenda of the then national governmcnt. Sir Robert Menzies, of course, was a frequent target of such attacks, but so too were many others who shared his values and priorities. 
There is another reason as well why this recent attempted hijacking of our history was insidious. And that is because it set Australian against Australian: it implied that those who shared the officially endorsed view of our past, with all its blinkers and bitter biases, were somehow "better" Australians and more "nationalist" Australians than those who rejected it. It had the effect of re-opening soin divisions in our society that most of us rightly believed had been reconciled long ago. 
There is certainly a need for Australians to undurstand their history better. But they don't need to be force-fed by those self-appointed cultural dietitians in our midst whose agenda has more to do with divisive political strategies than respect for the facts of history. 
There is no hierarchy of "good" Australians and "lesser" Australians on the basis of what interpretation of our history, and what priorities for our future, they believe in. 
There is no purpose served by trying to tear down or demean the achievements of the great men and women of our past simply because they believed in political values, moral standards or policy priorities that are now perceived by some to be dated or unfashionable. 
Wc would benefit as a nation if there were a greater awareness of the historical forces that have shaped our development and the scale of thc contributions  which individuals, both the illustrious and the nameless, have made. 
But we need to understand the past on it own tcrms and not judge those that have gone before us on the basis of out own contemporary standards.
What we do not need is a politically filtered view of our past which holds up as icons only those who believe in a particular political philosophy and which condemns as villains and manipulators those who believed in anything else. 
The fact is that the history of our nation is the story of all our people and it is a story for all our people. It is owned by no-one. It is not the story of some general conspiracy or manipulation: it is a history which has its flaws - certainly - but which broadly constitutes a scale of heroic and unique achievement against great odds.
They are achievements to which Australians from all sides of politics and religion, and from every calling and region, have contributed. 
We need to understand those contributions and to learn from them. We need to do so, not through rose-tinted glasses, but in a spirit of generosity and openness. That generosity will recognise the special but distinctive contribution of both a Curtin and a Menzies. Although naturally according to our own predilections we will cheer rather louder for some than others. 
Above all, we need to put firmly behind us the recent, mean-spirited attempts to promote a divisive, selective and inaccurate version of our history as part of an attempt to promote a partisan political agenda. 
THE PLAYFORD LEGACY 
It is against that broader background that T am very pleased to be with you tonight to honour the memory of Sir Thomas Playford. 
Just as I have said that as a nation we need to know and understand our history belter, so too political parties need to understand and learn from their past not in a way that is demeaning of others but in a way that is constructive and respects the facts. 
That is why I welcome the wide range of activities planned during this year, the one hundredth anniversary of Sir Thomas' birth, to recognise not only the scale of what he achieved in the development of this State and our nation but also his broader political legacy in terms of the historical evolution of the liberal/ conservative political tradition in Australia. 
Those achievements have been widely documented and in particular in Stewart Cockurn's excellent biography. 
In assessing the Playford legacy we should bear in mind the rathcr special character of the Liberal Party of Australia. Almost unique amongst centre right parties in the western world it is the trustee of both the liberal and conservative traditions in our nation.
 Those who seek the true soul of our party do it mn iinmcnsc disservice if they try to define it exclusively in terms of either tradition. Over the past 18 months I have often spoken of our Party as a broad church. Few of us arc cither universally liberal or conservative on all issues. 
Speaking personally, I could barely quibble with those who might describe me as an economic liberal and one who occasionally verged on social conservatism. 
Tom Playford was elected Premier in 1938 as a stop-gap measure when the former Premier, Sir Richard Butler, unsuccessfully stood for the Federal scat of Wakefield. He must be the only slop-gap leader in history who lasted twenty seven years!! 
It would be wrong, however, if Tom Playford's place in history was more notable for the length of his tenure in office than for the range and scale of what he actually achieved. 
Of course, no-one should under-estimate the achievemont of remaniing a Premier of any State for almost twenty seven consecutive years. After just four active and demanding months in office as Prime Minister, I can only marvel at the sheer endurance qualities demanded for a 27-year stint! And 1 should state here and now that I am not intending to stay in my current office for quite that long Playford survived and prospered in a political sense for so long because he set himself some basic principles that he lived up to far better than most. 
He had both great personal courage and an enduring sense of service to his community. Those qualities epitomized themselves when as a twenty-one year old when he joined thc 27th Battalion and served at Gallipoli, France and Flanders. And that same sense of service and couragee underpinned his long decades of political service to to his community. 
Playford had absolute standards of honesty, trustworthiness and financial integrity which he alway% maintained. His governments were completely free of corruption and scandal. 
Playford was a pragmatist, not an idealogue. Having left school at thirteen, his real education canie through experience. hard work and direct dealing with people. it should come as no surprise, therefore, that throughout his political career, he was straight with the people and attuned to their interests. HeI was focussed on practical outcomes more than processes, and where an agreement was entered into with the people, he insisted that it should be carried out to its fullest intent. 
He opposed change for the sake of it. But where the practical case for gradual and incremental change was established, lie became one of its most effective advocates. 
Tom Playford loved this State and championed its interests unstintingly. Perhaps somewhat iTrevercatly, but certainly not inaccurately, his personal style could be encapsulated in the following simple rules of thumb which he applied to most propositions:
- if it employed South Australians..... he'd tick it,
- it if promoted the State's industrial development.... he'd pick it;
- if another State was interested.... he'd nick it;
- and if Canberra or anything else got in the way ....he'd kick it! 
The Premier's personal qualities and standards of government certainly explain why the Playford era listed so long. But they do not convey the scale of what was achieved during it. 
It was an era of unprecedented economic modernisation and growth for this State growth built on private enterprise facilitatad by effective government.
 Playford understood the emerging new forces of science and technology and he was determined to harness them to take his State forward. 
 He attrated industries, both large and small, to this State on an extraordinary scale from shipbuilding to steel, from defence to research from cars to textiles. And part of the reason for that success was the infrastructurc base for industry that Playford provided  - infrastructure particularly in terms of transport, energy, water and housing, 
Like the political leadcrs of every generation, Tom Playford was a product of his times - of Depression , of World Wars of profound industrial change that transformed Australia in the post-1945 era, and of a view of Australia's place in the world that is very different to what prevails today. 
Hc met the challenges that confronted the South Australia of his time in his own way that won him popular support that endured. 
Over a Premiership or twenty-seven years, it. is unreal to pretend that there were no challenges that could not have been met better, not problems that could not have been handled more effectively and fairly, nor issues for the future of South Australia that could not have been better anticipated. These are matters for historical interpretation hat should continue to be debated in good faith, as I am sure they will. 
But in looking back on the legacy of the Playford era two overriding conclusions emerge. 
The first is that the Playford years not only brought great economic reshaping to South Australia that diversified its economic base and provided opportunities for its future development. ' they also established a set of priorities for govcrnmnt that focused
clearly on providing practical benefits to all the people of this State. -and thc fact that
the number or South Australians doubled during the Playford era is tcstimony to its
many successes in that regard. 
Sir Robert Menzies was an astute judge of people and set high standards of effectiveness, and ethical conduct in making thosec judgements. It is instructive, therefore. to note Mekiis' verdict an Playford. He wrote that: 
"if a Premier is to be measured by what he did for his own community persistently, constructively, successfully, then I would offer the opinion that he was the greatest State Premier in the history of Australia." 
The second conclusion is that the achievements of the Playford era should be judged on their own terms and in  their own right. They should not be re-interpreted in the light of prevailing circumstances nor judged on the basis of current policy priorities. 
The long years of Playford Government should be asscssed in terms of how effectively it met the challenges of its own times, of how responsibly it addressed the concerns of the community which it served, and of how adequately it lived up to its own high standards of honest and effective government. On these counts, I believe that the verdict of history will rightly be kind. 
THIRTY YEARS  ON FROM THE PLAYFORD ERA 
The Playford Goverment ended in 1965. The changes that have overtaken Australian political economic and social life since that time have been fundamental. Many of them have been enriching and liberating. All of them have had an impact in changing the role of governments, in broadening our national economic horizons and in shaping the values by which we live. 
I wish tonight to outline what I see as some of those fundamncntal changes in Australian life and to describe the way in which the Coalition Federal Government believes it appropriate to respond to them. 
THE PACE AND SCOPE OF CHANGE 
Pcrhaps the most persuasive of all recent changes in Australian society has been the consequences of the processes of globalisation. 
The Cold War's "balance of terror" has been replaced by new and more peaceful forms of international competition and co-operation. 
The ongoing revolution in information technologies, transport and communications is inexorably creating genuinely global markets for goods, services and capital. Only the changes brought about by the Industrial Revolution itself over 200 years ago compare in relative significance with the changes that arc now flowing from the processes of globalisation. 
For Australia, these changes are affecting our patterns of trade, investment and employment. They are maiking the international competitiveness of our business enterprises a necessity rather than an option. They arc creating new challenges and opportunities in our relations with the world's most dynamnic economic region, the Asia-Pacific. And together with other internationalising influences, such as our direct people-to-people links with many countries around the world and our rapidly expanding tourism market, they are making for a more open, creative and diverse Australian society. 
Tihe impact of globalisation is coalescing with a rangc of other factors to change Australia in fundamental ways. 
The nature of our Federal system of government has changed significantly over recent years. And it is set to change further in the years ahead as area of overlapping Commonwealth and State jurisdiction are addressed and as practical improvements in service delivery in areas such as housing, health and family services are achieved. 
The role of the media in political life has become more pervasive and a force to be reckoned with in its own right. 
The roles of men and women, and thc patterns of work within families, have been transformed over recent decades. 
The nature of work itself and the structure of careers arc changng, with an increasing likelihood that more and more Austalians will pursue a range of different employment challenges over the course of their working lives. At thc samei time, these realities are creating their own pressures, with those who arc cxpcriencing a rising standard of living also sensing a lower quality of life through the pace and demands of work. 
Our population is ageing a~ fact which is creating its own financial pressures find its own demand for more creative opportunities for older Australians. 
At a different level, there is now among Australians what I believe to be a broad-based consciousness about, and an enduring commitment to protect, our unique and fragile natural environment. 
There is also, I believe, a strong and broadly-based national commitment to explore new ways of achieving practical and significant improvements in Aboriginal health, employment, education and housing. 
Not all recent change, however, in Australian society has been positive. 
There is an eroding sense of egalitarianism and middle classness felt by many Australians as a result of persistent high unemployment, particularly among young Australians and rising levels of family breakdown over the past decade. 
There has been a marginalization of politics in the estimation of many Australians over recent years. Tis reflects a declining regard for Parliament and Politicians. It also reflects a widely-held perception of politics as the special preserve of insiders as well as what 1 have described for some time as the dctriballsofion of traditional political constituencies in Australia. 
There is a perception, and particularly among many directly involved in it, that the role of modern government is necessarily becoming more and more complex. In my view, however, the more accurate assessment would be that modern government is being maiht more complex, and unnecessarily so. 
There seems to be a focus on form and process at the expense of toutcoines for people. 
The constant challenge is to ensure that detailed institutional and bureaucratic requirements do not prevent the achievement of practical outcomes that address the real needs of the community. A proper balance between them priorities is fundamental for effective government.
There is what I believe to be a growing and disproportionate influence of single-issue political interest groups, each pursuing their own quite legitimate purposes but often in a way that is divorced fro~ m any wider concept of the common good. 
As a result.. we have witnessed over recent year a declining sense of community as a nation and an accompanying rist of sub-groups. A political NIMBY ('not-in-my-back-yard') syndrome seem to be spreading. In current circumstances, for example, many interest groups support the Governments commitment to reduce thec budget deficit hut most go on to argue why the particular interests they represent should be quarantined from such corrective action. 
More generally, wc are also witnessing what I see as the disturbing development of a negativist political culture in Australia with its focus On demeaning institutions and pulling down personalities instead of contributing constructively to the debate on how we best meet the national challenges we face. 
A VISION FOR GOVERNMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF THESE CHANGES 
The changes I have referred to have made Australia a quite different country in some important respects, with a quite different set of national challenges, to the one in
which Tom Playford governed. 
In defining a vision for national government to respond creatively to thcse changes and to meet these contemporary challenges, it is as important to govern by a consistent set of values and priorities as it is to implement an appropriate mix of policies. 
Back on Election night, on the second of March this year, I emphasised two of the guiding principles for the new Coalition Government. 
I committed the Government to govern for all Australians. The right to govern is always an ongoing gift from the people, and there is an accompanying responsibility for any government to unite rather than to divide thc community. 
I also resolved to be true to the values, priorities and policies we had spelt out in the lead-up to, and during, the Election campaign. I made it clear on Election night that 'we have not been elected to be just a pale imitation or the Government that we have replaced". 
Those two principles have guided us as a Government since Election day, and they will continue to guide us into the future. 
We are a Government with clearly stated values and priorities which reflect those of the great mainstream of Australian society. 
We arc not a Government beholden to political correctness but one committed to broad community values and practical outcomes on both economic and social issues. 
We are not a Government of economic rationalism in the popular sense of that term. We are a Government of economic common sense. We seek greater economic efficiency, more responsible budgets and more effective markets not as ends in themselves, but as means for achieving rising living standards, expanding employment opportunities and an effective safety net. 
We are not a Government of ideology. We are a Government of ideas and ideals. And, in responding to the scale of social, economic and political change I have outlined, it will be the ideal; that motivate us and the ideals to which we aspire, rather  than miy pursuit of narrow ideology, that will take us forward. 
We are however a government with some fixed goals and strong commitments. 
In the economic area, for example, it would a great mistake for anyone to undetestimate the strength of my commitment to achieving labour market reform and a profound enhancement of the conditions in which small business operates in Australia.
+
Freeing Australia's arthritic labour markets is indispensable to securing stronger growth, greater competitiveness and over time an improvement in Australia's current account deficit. 
We seek labour market reform because it will provide greater freedom for individuals and more rewarding outcomes for both employers and employees. 
It is the absolute cornerstone of the reform plan that the Coalition has for the Australian economy. Without it our prospects will remain dented and future economic growth needlessly enfeebled. 
Likewise, on the social horizon we are steadfastin one determination to strengthen the role and place of the family unit within society. 
This goal will bc the axis around which policies in many area-. such as taxation, industrial relations and social welfare will rotate. 
THE IDEAS THAT MOTIVATE
Ideas are not political ends in themselves but the basis for developing practical policies that work for the common good. 
The ideas which lie at the centre of thc Federal Government's policymaking priorities relate directly to the concerns and aspirations of the great Australian mainstream. 
* At the core of the ideas that motivate us is our clear intention to restore trust and confidence between the Australian community and the national government. 
We made a clear-cut set of core promises to the Australian people at the last Election - promises relating to family tax and health care,  industrial relations, small business. unemployment ( particularly among out young people), the concerns of older Australians, and a range of other important policy areas. 
Let me reaffirm what has always been our position that these promises will be fulfilled and that these commitments will be honoured. 
On coming to government, of course, we inherited a serious fiscal deterioration that was dishonestly concealed by Labor in the campaign and that reflected its gross incompetence and negligence. 
We are committed to cleaning up Labor's fiscal mess. We art committed to repairing Australia's savings and to reining in the blow-out in government cxpenditure. We are acting to reduce the Budget deficit because it is the responsible and necessary thing to do. It is not easy but it is right, and we will do so fairly and justly. 
We are not pursuing this course for any reasons of ideological purity or grand economic theory. We are pursuing it because of the practical outcomes it will deliver. It is an investment in our country's future, opening up for us the possibility of generating higher rates of growth in incomes and an increasing number of jobs without putting pressure on the current account and interest rates. 
I should also reaffirm another point I have made consistently since the "Beazley black hole" was revealed after we came to office. And that is that we art not going to let Labor's fiscal irresponsibility force us into dishonouring the key Election promises we made to the Australian people. 
Those promises were made to be honoured and, regardless of the changed circumstances which Labor's negligence has created, they will be honoured. 
What we are seeking now in the Senate is partisan obstructionism for its own sake from the Democrats. They are threatening key elements of the Coalition's reform package, such as industrial relations reform, the Natural Heritage Trust and the one-third privatisation of Teistra on all of which our mandate from the Australian people is direct and specific. 
The great frc in the current situation is that the obstructionism is coming from a minority Party that parades itself as committed to keeping politicans honest. 
In presenting our legislation on these key issues to the Parliament, we arc being honest and keeping faith with the commitments we undertook at the Election. The recent actions of the Democrats would suggest that their central preoccupation is not with honesty but with blind partisanship. 
The Australian people elected our Government with an overwhelming majority to implement the changes to which we committed ourselves at the Election. In denying the people those changes, the Democrats need to know that they arc playing for very high stakes indeed. 
In addition to restoring a relationship of trust between Australians and their national government, another of the ideas which motivate us is to give practical policy effect to our belief that it is individuals who matter more than governments, bureaucracies and vested interests. 
That is why the Government is committed to making choice for individuals the golden thread running through all our policy initiatives: choice in the labour market, choice to join or not to join a trade union, choice in education, choice in telecommunications, choice in retirement income, and choice in a whole range of other policy areas.
It is why we are committed, in this period of rapid change, to strengthen the family unit which has proved itself over time as the source of the most effective emotional support for individuals and as thc best social welfare system that any society has ever devised. 
Our policy priorities are also motivated by a commitment to achieve a practical balance between thc limits of government and the limits of markets. 
We believe in getting government, not out of people's lives, but off their backs.
That is why we are committed as a Government to in maximising individual decision making, promoting private enterprise and limiting the power of the State ovcr its citizens. We will continue to pursue those goals through guaranteeing the separation of powers, through greater choice, diversity and competition in the provision of goods and services, and through sensibly and sensitively limiting the claims that are made on the State. 
Tn recognising thc proper limits, of government, we also recognise the practical limits of markets. That is why we do not belicve in complete laissez-f'aire government. It is why we do not see markets as an end in themselves. We do, however, see markets as delivering superior outcomes to state determined allocations. Governments have a proper and necessary role to guarantee a fair safety net for those who, through no fault of their own, require special assistance. Governments also have a responsibility to encourage self-sufficiency among those who are capable of it. 
The safety net guarantee, however, is critical if individuals are to have the opportunity to develop their full potential, Without such a guarantee, the liberal concepts of a free society and equality of opportunity lose their meaning. 
* We are also motivated by a commitment to meet the challenges of globalisation while continuing to assure thc Australian birthright of a fair go for all. 
That mcans achieving progress in the reform area where Labor failed so dramatically reforms such as fiscal repair, labour market freeedom, micro econonomic reform a more internationally competitive infrastructure and financial system higher productivity and less foreign debt. They = r all reforms which arc necessary if Australia is to harness the process of globalisation for its own advantage. And they are all reform-. which are necessary to ensure that Australia participates fully in the dynamic economic growth of the Asia-Pacific region. 
S
THE IDEALS TO WHICH WE ASPIRE 
In addition to the Ideas for enhancing choice and freedom that motivate our policy making priorities, we are also a Government with a clear set of ideals to which we aspire and from which we will not be diverted. 
* We will continue to meet the true tests of national leadership. 
That is why we will continue to be straight and direct with the people on major national issues (such as gun control, the Budget deficit and the imbalance in our immigration programme), and on our strategy to address them. 
It is why we will continue to set a clear course for the future based on consistent values and priorities in areas such as fiscal strategy, job growth, infrastructure reform, environmental protection and resource development.
And it is why we will continue to be committcd to building a sense of common national purpose rathcr than papering together an amalgamation of special interests. 
* We will not be swept off-course from our commitment to pursue economic reform policies aimed at freeing up the labour market, building savings and investment, creating jobs, developing export and import-competing industries, and boosting productivity and living standards. 
Wc will remain rock solid in our commitment to strengthen the decentralised networks of family, workplaces and communities as more effective guarantors of choice and freedom than the centralisation of political power. 
That is why wc will be acting to reduce the economic pressures on low and middle income families, and especially those with dependent children (through tax, health care and other reforms), 
It is why we are moving to implement our enterprise-based workplace reforms. 
And it is why we will continue to support the great voluntary associations that are so central to the strength of local communities. 
We will remain unshakeable in our resolve to reward hard work. initiative and "get up and go". 
That is why we regard our policy agenda to restore small businesses as the great generators of jobs, national wealth and individual opportunity as central to our whole purpose in government. 
And we will remain absolutely committed to interacting more extensively and cooperatively with the countries of our region at the same time as we continue to develop our important and longstanding relationships with traditional friends.
W
e will do so confident of who we are and what we stand for, and confident of the important regional contribution we can make as a democracy, as an advanced and innovative economy and as a force for security and stability. 
CONCLUSION 
The values and priorities we have set for our Government are clear. They are relevant to the forces of both change and continuity in our society. They are also relevant to the challenges we face as a nation into the next century. 
We aim to pursue those values and priorities with the same consistency, the same commitment and the same community-mindedness with which the great leaders of the Liberal tradition in Australia, such as Tom Playford, pursued the values and priorities which they judged to be right for their own time. 
Few political leaders acquire the status of a institution in their own lifetime. Tom Playford was one such leader. We have much to learn from the Playford era and from the integrity of the leader who presided over it. I am pleased to have been able to play some part in honouring his memory tonight. 


8 July 1996
E&amp;OE ..................
Thank you very much the President of the ALSF. It will be a particular pleasure to open the first conference, annual Federal Council Meeting of the Australian Liberal Students' Federation as the Prime Minister.
As your President has said I have attended many meetings of the ALSF during the wilderness years in opposition. I have been a strong supporter of the activities of Liberal students on university and college campuses all around Australia and it is therefore a special bonus to have the opportunity to speak to you as the Head of a recently elected Government, a Government that commands an almost unprecedentedly large majority in the [House of Representatives. And I take the opportunity of thanking many Liberal students around Australia who played a role in the election of the Coalition Government on the 2nd of March this year.
It is an occasion to reflect for a moment on the magnitude of that win, it's geographical spread is quite unparalleled in the post-war experience of the Liberal Party of Australia. And provided the responsibilities and the opportunities of office are used wisely, the Liberal Party has an unparalleled opportunity to politically shape the future of this country into the next millennium.
Over the years that we were in Opposition one of the thinigs that characterised Liberal students was their willingness to engage in the battle of ideas on campuses around Australia. Theirs was not simply an attitude that saw politics as a transient preoccupation sometimes to be indulged in, but rather as it is, an ongoing battle of ideas, a battle for legitimacy, a battle for the ownership of your own interpretation of the history of this country and a battle to ensure that one's political opponents did not through the authority of the office they then had write outwardly the history of this country, the contribution of the Liberal conservative psychologists.
In the first Thomas Playford Memorial Lecture that I delivered in Adelaide on Friday night, I drew attention to the quite insidious disposition of the former Government and my immediate predecessor as Prime Minister, to reinterpret Australian history according to his version of what was the correct and perceived understanding of that history. And one of the great challenges, now that the Liberal Party is in office, and now that our side of politics electorally is in the ascendancy, one of our great responsibilities is to roll back that misinterpretation of history not to replace it with a distorted version of our own but to replace it with a reflective, objective assessment of what has gone before us. And to walk away from the excessively negative view of Australia's past, a view that was sometimes encapsulated in Opposition of the history of Australia, really started in 1972 with the election of the Liberal Government and all that had gone before it was rather mindless and conservative drifted indifference. Any profound understanding of Australian history knows how completely wrong that composition is.
But it is very important that as political warriors so to speak, on campuses of Australia, it is very important that all of you understand that winning back of ideas, that winning back of history is tremendously important. And over the years different politicians have used their own interpretations of the history of their country and indeed the history of the world, those of who've establish a particular view of political legitimacy. And it's our responsibility to ensure that Australians of future generations have a comprehensive, factually based, objective vie w of the history of this country, not coloured unduly by one or other interpretation, but reflecting an emphatically positive view of what this country has achieved and particularly since the Federation in 1901.
There are many things of course that students campaigned for over the las 13 years, none of course was more persistent, more incisive and more determined than your campaign for voluntary student unions. And as somebody who has been a strong supporter of all forms of voluntary unions, let me congratulate the Australian Liberal Students' Federation for the incessant and incisive fight in this way for individual liberty of the campuses of Australia.
It is important as we reflect on what has happened in the almost, in the four months that have gone by since the election of the Coalition Government in March, it is important to recall some of the major propositions that I took to the Australian people. Of all the things that I have argued for and advocated over the last 10 years, none has been more important than my commitment to altering Australia's industrial relations system, my view of the most important economic reform this country needs is the deregulation of its labour markets, my view that until employer and employees at the workplace level are able to make agreements to suit particular circumstances of individual workplaces, then the true potential of those workplaces will not be achieved. My view that so far as possible the ordinary courts of Australia should govern the conduct between individuals, my view that any form of compulsory unionism ought to be repudiated and my view that individual men and women in the workplace should have a free choice as to whether a union is involved in the conduct of their affairs or not. I have advocated a reform program along those lines without interruption over the last decade. And that policy and that approach has been enshrined in the Governmient's Workplace Relations Bill.
That Workplace Relations Bill also gets rid of the rather mindless and job destroying unfair dismissal law that was introduced by the former Labor Government without warning, without mandate and without merit in 1993. It is very interesting if I may digress on the question of mandates. We, if ever anybody has ever got a mandate on anything, the Coalition's got a mandate to introduce industrial relations reform out of the last election. And that is apparently being delayed in the Senate yet the former Government went to the 1993 election not mentioning anything about changing the industrial relations law. Immediately after it is elected as a pay back for the support it received from the trade union movement in that campaign it introduces major changes to which it had no mandate, to which it made no reference in the 1993 election campaign and extraordinarily enough those changes go through the Federal Parliament, they go through the Senate with the support of a minor party.
It seems that if you don't mention something before the election you're more likely to get support from the minor parties in the Senate than if you do mention it. So it's a very, very interesting turning on its head of the assumed view in Australian politics, that if you actually are going to the people you seek support for something, if you win the election you then have some hope of getting that programnme through. And it is very interesting that in this very area of industrial relations the Labor Party said nothing about, I mean we weren't told in 1993 that they were going to change the unfair dismissal law to make it virtually impossible for the average small businessman to take on staff safe in the knowledge that if the person is manifestly unsuited then that person could be let go we were not told that, we were not given any warning of that. That was kept in the drawer, that was kept under wraps and yet that law was able to get through the Senate yet a law that is explained in great detail and great openness and great honesty and great candour and frankness to the Australian people -it's apparently going to suffer a different fate. Although I am told that it's all going to be OK, well I shall wait and see and live in hope that the Senate does finally pass the industrial relations legislation.
But I don't think anybody should underestimate the importance that the new Government attaches to industrial relations reform. And philosophically industrial relations reform-is all-about-the most important political-commodity of-all and-that is personal freedom or individual liberty. The industrial relations reform proposals that we have are more than a prescription for greater economic productivity, they are more than a prescription for enhancing the competitiveness of the Australian economy. They above all of those things, the industrial relations laws are really a proposal to enhance individual freedom and personal liberty in the workplace. What we are saying through that law is that subject to the observance of a proper guaranteed, minimum standard of conditions, what we are saying through that law is that subject to that, every person in the workplace has a right to feel he or she chooses to make the deal or the bargain that that person wants in the relation to their own labour and their own time and their own commitment.
We are not saying that people cannot employ the trade union to represent them. What we are saying is they should not have to employ a trade union to represent them if they do not want the trade union to represent them. It is a question of free choice of individual liberty. And over the weeks ahead if you hear people say, we are trying to stop unions operating in the workplace don't believe it because it's not true. All we are doing is trying to stop unions being forced into the workplace in cases where they are unwanted by both the employer and the employee. And we went to the election with a very, very specific programme in this area and we are carrying it out to the letter. We said that any person going into a workplace agreement could do so without fear of losing the take home value of the Award that that person would leave by going into that wor -kplace agreement. That was the rock solid guarantee that I gave and that is the guarantee that I intend to keep. It is not the guarantee that you are sometimes told I gave by the Labor Party, by the trade union movement and some commentators who deliberately distort what we represent. What I said in that campaign and what is enshrined in the legislation that Peter Reith has introduced into the Parliament is it's very similar to Opposition. That if somebody decides to leave the Award stream or so into an Australian Workplace Agreement that person has a guarantee that in take home pay terms he or she must proceed with the value of the Award and anything over and above that will become a matter of negotiation and a matter of determination between the employer and the employee and it will be one of the things that will condition whether or not the person decides to go into the Agreement.
Now I've dwelt for a moment, ladies and gentlemen, on the industrial relations law because the industrial relations issue is central to the plans that we have for economic reform in this country, but it is also central to what the philosophical divide between us and our political opponents is still about in the 1990s. People will argue that since the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union and the collapse of communism, save for one or two exceptions around the world, that we are living in the post-ideological era. That ideology is no longer important in politics. It is true that since the end of the Cold War the nature of the political divide around the world has changed. It is true that there were profound teaching consequences as a result of the end of the Cold War. It is true that one can no longer look at the world in quite the bold bi-polar terms that one did prior to the early 1990Os.
But it would be a mistake for people to believe that we are now living in a completely non-ideological era. It would be a mistake for people to believe that there are no longer any philosophical differences between us and our political opponents. And industrial -relations-reform -neatly imports one of -the--great -philosophical divides between ourselves and the Labor Party and that is on the question of individual liberty. Because when it comes to the crunch, what the Labor Party and the trade union movement argues for in industrial relations is a collectivist or corporatist approach to the management of the affairs of this country. They really argue that individuals, when it comes to the crunch, don't have a right to have the complete mastery over their own affairs-What they are really saying is that no man or woman in Australia is really bright enough, when it comes to the crunch, to make a decision ultimately about the full gambit of his or her workplace arrangements and workplace understandings, that the success of the group or the power centre in the industrial relations scene is more important than individual liberty. And when you go through our differences in this area you see again and again that the Liberal Party and those who agree -with the Liberal Party on these issues are very much in favour of the maximum amount of individual liberty and personal freedom.
But it is important when we reflect on those philosophical divides to understand that our Party, the Liberal Party of Australia, is not so much a Party of ideology but it is a Party of ideas and a Party of ideals. And the things that will shape us as a Government in the years ahead, the things that will determine the extent to which we remain in power, are the extent to which the ideas that we generate for the future development of this country and the ideals to which we adhere in Government the extent to which they are in tune with the needs and the aspirations and the hopes of the Australian people.
And any party which seeks to have a long period in government, any party that seeks to maintain its relevance to the Australian community will always be a party both of ideas and ideals. Ideas are very much the stuff of political battle, whether it's at a university, in a workplace or in the broader community. Unless parties are constantly generating ideas about the fuiture of the country, about how to tackle contemporary problems and to respond to contemporary difficulties they lose relevance. But those ideas must have some kind of frame of reference and that frame of reference must of course be the ideals by which a political party lives. A political party that is value neutral, a political party that does not give pride of place to ideals and values is a political party that will very quickly lose not only its soul but also its sense of direction. And it is important as time goes by and we spend a longer period in Federal Government it is very important that we maintain the basic ideals on which our Party was founded.
Those ideals of course are very much a strong commitment to individual liberty, they're a strong belief in the importance of the family unit within our society and our community. A very strong belief that individual, economic effort and enterprise, particularly the small business sector of the Australian economy is tremendously important not only to the employment of Australians, most especially young Australians, but also to the economic fuiture of this country. But governments exist to represent the values and aspirations of the mainstream of the Australian community. Not in a way that is insensitive or indifferent to minority groups in the community but in a way that ultimately gives expression to the aspirations and the hopes of the mainstream of the Australian community. And they are some of the ideals and some of the values that remain very important to the Liberal Party of Australia.
Can I just say one other thing. It is of a greatly partisan political character and that is that there were occasions over the last 13 yeas when not only our political opponents, but also on occasions some of those who sympathised with us must have despaired at our prospects of returning to government. It would have been people who said that our campaign techniques were out of date, that our professional skills as political campaigners were almost non-existent, that the Labor Party had become the natural party of government. And might I interpolate there by saying that some of the behaviour of the Labor Party since it lost power in March of this year indicates that it somehow or other regards what happened on the 2nd of March as an electoral aberration and something that will be automatically corrected the next time there is an election.
Can I say that that is a sadly mistaken view, there is no such thing as a natural party of government and as I watch some of the former ministers on the Front Bench of the House of Representatives, I get the impression that they haven't quite adjusted yet to the fact that they are now in Opposition. But somehow or other they believe that this is a rather rude, untimely uncharitable and wholly misguided interruption in the natural order of events. And they do give me the impression, and isn't it ironic, given the charge that was levelled against us for so many years by our critics that we had a born to rule mentality, can I say that mentality as far as I'm concerned never existed, it doesn't exist now and it won't exist in the future. The Liberal Party exists as the Government of this country at the present time because it articulated the hopes of the Australian people on the 2nd of March. We'll remain the Government of this country only for so long as we continue to articulate those hopes.
I continue to take the view that we were given an enormous privilege on the 2nd of March and any member of the Government and any supporter of the Government who lapses into any kind of belief that somehow or other the natural order of affairs has been restored, is badly misreading the mood of the Australian people and badly misunderstands the nature of Australian politics. And if our opponents imagine for a moment that what has happened to thenm is some kind of temporary interruption to the natural order of events well they face the prospect of a very, very long period in Opposition.
But ladies and gentlemen returning to the theme, there were times when many of you must have despaired about our prospects of winning and I want to say to all of you who continue to support us and to all of those people around Australia, particularly on university campuses who played such a major role in turning around attitudes, turning around moods and turning around votes of allegiance, I want to express my profound gratitude and my profound thanks. And you did demonstrate a resilience and a tenacity and an ability to come back which I'm delighted to say surprised our most strident and persistent groups.
And lastly and most importantly can I congratulate and thank the Australian Liberal Students' Federation, the individual bodies that make up this organisation, for carrying the torch, for carrying on the battle of ideas, of ideals, for carryng forth the philosophical battle, often against very great odds and often in the face of great hostility and -cynicism on -university-campuses all around Australia.-You have all played an invaluable role in keeping the strength of our type of politics going here in the 13 years that we were in Opposition and therefore played a very important -role in the great victory that we won on the 2nd of March. And I therefore have very great pleasure in declaring open this 49th Federal Council Meeting of the Australian Liberal Students' Federation.
ends.
(Question and Answer session available&nbsp; - https://pmtranscripts.dpmc.gov.au/release/transcript-10044)


14 July 1996
E&amp;OE................
Weil thank you first of all to Russ Walkingon, to my Federal Parliamentary colleague Kathy Sullvan, to Cheryl Kernot the Leader of the Australian Democrats, to all of my other State and Federal Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
I am very pleased to be here today to say a few words in support of the decision taken by the national Government some weeks ago to try and achieve for the first time in Australia effective national uniform firearms legislation. 
And I want at the outset of my remarks to express my thanks to  both Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Australia Labor Party, and also to Cheryl Kernot, the Leader of the Australian Democrats, for the support that both of them have quite generously given to t very imuportant national initiative because it is somothing tha crosses the normal party polical divide. It is an unusual issue in that sense and my remarks here today arc an appeal to a number of things. They are not an appeal to excessive emotionalism although emotion is impossible to separate from the tragic events that have been dealt with today. They are not just an appeal to that, but they are more an appeal to reason, they're an appeal to common sense, they're an appeal to the collective will of the Australian people to do something derisive to give ourselves a better future. 
They are not about turning our back on the strong, vital, tough character Which We Pride ourselves on having as Australian and I did agree i4th the remark that Cheryl Kernot made about the possession of weapons not being some kind of symbol of male virility. 
Last night I had the opportunity of witnessing a very remarkable match of Rugby at the Sydney Football Stadium, Whien the Wallabies defeated South Africa. And as I moved amongst the crowd and talked to lots of people I was overwhelmed by the number of people who came up to me, hardly a group of people who sort of have a retiring view of life, there was nothing retiring about what went on in the middle of that ground they came up and said, for heaven's sake don't weaken on your resolve to have national gun laws. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I do acknowledge that the laws that I sponsored and I hope be given final effect by the State Governments of Australia, I do acknowledge that those laws involve some reduction in the individual liberty of some Australians. I acknowledge that And I also acknowledge that the overwhelming bulk of those people arm decent, ordinary, law abiding, follow Australians. I don't regard the great generality of sporting shooters in this country as being criminals. I don't regard them as being lesser Australians than anybody else in this hall. But what I am saying to them is I'm asking them to accept that sometimes in the affairs of the nation it is necessary that a group accept some curtailment of their individual liberty in the overall greater common good. 
They are not the first people to have been asked to do that and they won't in the nature of the democracy be the last. Because the nature of a democracy is never absolute unrestrained liberly of the individual irrespective of the consequences. The nature of a democracy is always a constantly revolving compromise between the aggregate rights and interests, of the community and the unrestrained rights of individuals. And achieving that omptrnuis3 the responsibility of a democratically elected Government. I mean all my political instincts are against regulation. I might be standing on the same platform as Kim Beazley and Cheryl Kernot on this issue but on other issues we might stand on different Platforms because we have different views about the role of government in our society. But when it comes to the safety of our community, when we have the opportunity as people to freely choose a path decisively away from the American path thcn we ought to seize that opportunity. 
I don't argue that if the laws I've supported ame gem fufl effect, I don't argue that another tragedy can't happen. I can't promise you that we can abolish tragedies of that. I can't guarantee that there won't be further suicides and there won't be further murders. But I can guarantee to you that if tho~ se laws are implemented we will achieve a permanent and major reduction in the number of potentially dangerous weapons in our society. 
And that my friends is a cause worth working for, it's a cause worth fighting for. I'm not arguing and I'm not proposing, although some in this hall this afternoon might so propose, I'm not proposing that all weapons all firearms be taken out of the Australian community. One would imagine when one hears some of the criticism at what we have proposed that people will no longer be able to be sporting shooters. That people will no longer have any access to firearms. Let me remind you that we're not doing that. Let me remind you that in relation to primary producers that if  a farmer can clearly demonstrate a need for a low powered semi-automatic weapon for occupational reasons then that wll be granted by the licensing authorities. 
Let me assure retired Deputy Commissioner Atkinson that the proposal in relator to high powered semi-automatics for the culling of feral animals will be subject to the very stringent controls and the people having possession of thoe under this proposal will need to demonstrate the capacity of a professional sbooter and the gun wil only be available under my proposal for the limited. duration of the cull, it must then be handed back to the licensing authority and not retained by the primary producer. 
Can I frankly say ladies and gentlemen that most of the people that I've spoken to in the rural community although many of them will find it a degree inconvenient, they are the people in the main who have always been prepared to see a common good triumph over some personal inconvenience and the great bulk of them accept the wisdom of what is being proposed and indeed the weekend before the first police ministers' conference, among the many phone calls that I placed to people leading representative bodies around Australia were some phone calls to leaders of primary producer organisations including some bert in the state of Queensland, and the general message I got from them was well it will be a bit inconvenient but we accept the need and I have found frankly amongst farmers an overwhelmingly intelligent acceptance of the need albeit with some disappointment of the decision that we've taken. 
Now, there is as you are aware essentially only one outstanding matter. And that relates to the question. of crimping. A practise whereby a semiautomatic weapon with a capacity of five or more is reduced to a semii-auomatic weapon with a capacity of only two. The argument being that if you can havc double barrelled shot guns, why can't you have a crimped semi-automatic weapon that has a capacity of only two after the crimping promes. And what I said was that if it could be overwhelmingly demonstrated to me that the process of crimping was irreversible, then I'd be prepared to consider that Now, we did have a report from the Australian federal police which indicated that for practical purposes, a sigl continuous crimp was irreversible. I then sough some further information and I handed the matter to some people in the defence forces and I received late last week, and I have released the report, except for the highly classified section to the media this afternoon, from tho Australian Defence Forces, and that report says two thing. 
That a sirgle contuous crimp can be effectively  reversed  and five cartridges fired from the magazine within an hour. The reveral can take place within an hour, and through a more difficult procets, a niulrfple continuous crimp cani also be reversed through the use of a mandrel-And what that report says essentially is that given the tim and the application and the skills, thate is no such thing as an iff everibly crimped semi-automatic firearm N~ ow, that is the reason why I made the statement that I did last week. I was prepared to examine it, and I do not bcliev-. e that thern was any responsible course left to me to my colleagues, or indeed other thiroughout Australia who have Government responsibility in that area in the face of that sort of evidence, and that is whry I have said that the Commonwealth will be going to the Polic Ministers' Meeting OR Wedne~ sday, arguig that the crimping process should not be allowed as consistenwith the spirit of the original
Police Ministers' resolution. 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I don't as a practising politician, as the leader of a political party and as the Prime Minister of Austral* a I don't as a ma= te of ordinary course enjioy or seek argument or disagreeet with any group of people in the AustrAlin community. The instinct is always to try if onte can to find a comnwin pound a connnon basis. But that common ground and common basis must always We behind dhe common good. It must not be around the lowestommon denominator. And That is why Iset the goals that I did  before the firt Police Minister' confernc. Now, I recognise that we live in a federation. I do respect in our systam of G. 2vornicnt the toles of the States and I want to assurc all of you that I am above A a passionate Australian nationalist, and being a passionate Australian nationalist there are some things that are indivisibly and indisputably Valuable to all Australians. And one of thcse things, yes somebody interjects, ' freedom' yes the freedom to work in the relative absence of unnecssary fear. That is a very important  freedom.
And we do have an opprtuit on ths occasion, we do havo an opportunity as a nation as seven governments working together across the party Political divide, across the Commnonwealth-State constitutional divide, we do have an opportunity as a group of leaders to do somethin of lasting value and somethn that wil be seen I hope by future Australians as a moment when we put aside our normal differences and we = r united behind some common objectivis and I hope the comnitmnt of so many Australian as demonstrated here today, I hope the conutzitment by so many Australians irrespective of how they vote, I hope dmitatcommetiscmznicat and transmitted loudly and dlearty to all governments around Australia especially Over the next few days. I don't come to this debate as somebody who reacted particulary in a knee-jerk fashion to the tragic eventsain Tasmania. Infact anybody who examines the statementslImnade as long ago as 1988 when I was first leader of thr, Opposition they will find that I expressed support for many of the itiative proposed by Mr Unswoith, the Labor Premier of New South Wales. 
I am not a latter day convert but now in the position of Prime Minister of our country, I do have the opportunity, but even more important, I have the responsibility to use whatever authority that office bring to achieve the sort of goals that I believe the overwhelming majority of Australians want 
Ladies and gentlemen can I thank you for coming here today. Can I thank you for demonstrating your willingness to participate in open debate on this issue. Can I say to all of you that my own personal commitment to effective strong uniform gun laws, gun laws that given the nature of what has happened in this country, and given the nature of what is at  stake and what can be achieved are not excessively intrusive, they are reasonable, they arc balanced and they are no more than the national need demands that all governments should deliver to all Australians. 
Questions and Answers
QUESTION: 
Would you support legislation but rather why do you support legislation seeking to remove the right of law abiding citizens to defend lives and property against criminals? 
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, I don't, and 1 think it is a complete And deliberate misreading of what we have proposed to suggest that the Laws are designed to do that The reality of the matter is that these proposals impact in no way on t common or statute law governing the right of self defence and  it is a complete red herring to drag that into this whole debate. 
QUESTION
A corollary to that question however asks what about women in remote locations. Why have you removed self-defence? 
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, the reality is that under the laws that we are proposing I would be very suprised if there were any women living in rural areas of Australia where some kind of weapon were not lawfully available to them, to members of their family or to the owners of farms. What you've actually remember when you are talking about this argument about people in remote areas, if they are living on farming properties there is no prohibition on bolt action weapons, none whatsoever. 
(interjection) 
Really? And most people who are primary producers, if they can demonstrate the need to the licensing authorities will have access to low-powered semi-automatic weapons and if you can satisfy the registration requirements and most of the farmers to whom I've spoken, many, not all of them but a large number of them have said ' we contest the need of many people in rural areas, we contest the absolute essentiality of semi-automatic. weapons so the point I'm making is that from a practical point of view in many of these isolated area and thee isolated Situations of which tho questioner speaks, there wil be weapons. Now, I've got to say to you that it not only people who live in isolated areas who may  feel in fear. I know of many people, of women in urban areas who feel vulnerable and feel unsafe and there are a complex series of reasons and I think some of them are bound up with the way in which in some respects our society has degenerated into greater levels of violence and I d&amp; i&amp; all of us are moved with any expositions on the incidence of domestic violence in our community and those of us not to have been fortunate enough not to experience those things are of course as I am always very touched by and affected by reference to the particular hell through which many women live. in those situations. But if these laws we propose can make even a tiny contribution to inculcating a less violent disposition and a less violent culture in our community thin on that round, as wefl as the other grounds, those laws will be well and truly worthwhile. 
QUESTION:
If the laws are enacted and it is necessary to hand in certain types of guns, what will be done with then, will they be destroyed or stored what security precaution? 
PRIME MINISTER
Well, they'll certainly be, the; compensation will be paid and they will be destroyed. 
(tape break) 
government that will take away the lawfully acquired property of Australians without proper compensation. This is not seizure of private property without compensation and there is a, I mean, people talk about constitional rights in this debate. Can I say that there is only one relevant constitutional right in this whole debate which is actually referred to in the Australian Constitution and that is that acquisition of private property must be on just terms and that I promise you will be be the situation in relation to fire arms
QUESTION
Will the Prime Minister explain if the present proposed gun laws are not part of a plan to disarm the nation, why did the Coalition sign the United Nations convention to general and complete disarmament? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I say that this proposition about disarming the nation, I mean, let me make a few things clear about the government's policy towards the defence of Australia. I happen to believe that defence expenditure in this country has already been cut very heavily indeed too heavily and despite our difficult budget situation, the one major area of federal Government expenditure is is going to be completely immune from any overall reduction in spending in the coming budget is the area of Australia's defence. So I feel rather keenly about any sugestion that I amn a Prime Minister who is going to preside over the disarming of Australia, look, sugestions that this has, got anything to do with weakening our defence or disarrming Australia for it is the consequence of that particular convention, there is nothing and anything this cuntry has signed which in anyway Inhtibits its capacity for defence self reliance and any suggestion tha we have, I mean I have visited niany sins upon my political prcdcoessors and I will visit more on them I suppose as time goes by in the nature of poliical combat but can I say I do not accuse them of having signed something that legally prevents this country from defending itself and can I assure you that there is nothing, there w61l be nothing, and there is absolutely no substance at all in the suggestion that thesn laws in some way ihitbit our capacity for self reliance and self defence. That really is cloud cuckoo land stuff. 
QUESTION-
Prime Minister, if the Siate Police Minister fail to Agree On uniform national gun laws would you consider putting the question of gun contfol to A referendUM? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in answer to that queston look I know there is a meeting of police Ministers next Wednesday and I remain hopeful particularly in the liht of the very detailed cvidenoe to which I have referred tha is bving made available ti afternoon, I remain hopeful that the cooperativ process that I've e-mbarked upon ill deliver the remaining 10% of the agreement and givv us a hundred percent of the agement that was concluded on the tenth of May, and because I am a cooperative bloke and because I believe in reason triumphing over imtionality, and because I believe that in the mainstream comnmonsense instincts of all Australians no matter where they live in this country of ours I rernain hopoful that the voice of the great mainstream of t Awsraian community will be clearly bead by At goverments on this subject and therefore perhaps the most I'm quite sure that we'll all follow with great interest the lead-up to and t delibeations at the Police Ministers' meeting and I hope that, I really do hope very devotedly, veiy very strongly I do hope that all of the state Governments recognie that what the overwhdlzing majority of Australia people want is a one hundred percet delivery an the tenth of May agreemnent. 
QUESTION:
Given that Mr Howard, will you add support to as suggested to by former deputy police commiussioner AtKinson a mandatory jail sentence for offenders under the new law? 
PRIME MINSTER:
Well, I think we need very tough and vcty effective penalties. The exact extent of those penalties is something that I kniow wil be worked out and discussed at the Police Ministers' conference but I can assur t&amp; Atkinson and everybody else in thi hall that it is my understanding that the penalties are going to be strong and effective and will constitute an adequate deterret agains any breaches of the law. 
QUESTION:
Just a couple more. Ther is a questioner here who fouses on what might be an ongoing or contiuing problem and that is the emptying of mental institutions and unstable people roamning the steet. Ify have tohand intheir gumhey may use knives asan effective weapon. Vl you direct attention to this area of problem? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Wel, ran I say in answer to that question that it raises a very difficult issue. I would have to say that quite separately from issues of physical safety I think there was probably in the 1980s in this country too great a trend towards the deinstitutionalising process in the I treatment of some forms of mental illness and I think some of those who argue that processes set in train for example by the Richmond inquiry in New South Walew, I apologise to our Queensland audience for using a Sydney example, perhaps those processes may have gone too far, on the other hand I have seen first hand evidence of where people with particular forms of mental illness have adapted. extremely well to not living in instituitions they have, look, ti is tta4 it we hmv any sort of reason ad compassion on a difficult issue it is not somecting where you can take a hard line black and Whit view and I think it is sorictbIng wh4iro you really havc to try and comprehend it.. I mean, do tn the process probably did go too far and th= r is an agument that away from the atmosphere of certai instiutons; the regularity of which medication is taken and A tha sort of thin breaks do Arn and ther van be particularly difficult situations. Now, I choose my words carefully because I think it is something that one has to talk carefully and sensitively about because families of people who havie mental diaabiltis carzy enormous burdns and have a traval tt the rest of the community doesn't have and I've spoken to many of them and ther are arguments for and aganst the process of disinstitutionalising that's gone on in ti country for quite a long period of tim and it is one of those issues that has been gathered up in our examination along with our examination of certain proposals relaing to violence on television and I noted the response of the audience to that issue when another person spok&amp; and I want to say to you that I hope the measures that the Govemnint announced last week, which I don't suggest for a moment arc going to delivr some kind of non-, violent NivN~ a in Australia, anymore than the gun legislation is going to, but at least they wVilmake a contribution No group of political eadcnsin this country can deliver paradise but what they can do Is to discharge their responaibility while they arc in office to try and delive significant improvements where they have the capacity to do so. 
QUESTON:
Mr Prime Minister, would you reconfirm that this is not an over-reaction to the Port Arthur massacre but a response to the Australia wide ongoing problem? 
PRIME MINISTER.
Well, I think it is important, it was a terrble event, bust it was in magnitde something that gppd " h soul of the country becamse of tie sheer size of the horro. But there have bm~ many others and they're referred to vefy diretly and very cffectivly in tho display behind mec. But I said earlier as far as I am personally contc= 4ed and as far as many people on both sidea of politi; s are personall concerned, the idea of having efetie uniformi national gun laws has been on or agenda for a long period of time and I think what was agreed on the tenth of May is t rgh response and if we can dalivr onc hundred percent, if all of the Govmrments of Austraa can deliver one hundred percent of what was agreed on t tenth of May, then I believe that particular political decd will do more than anything else to stiengthen the faith and the confidence of the Australian people, whatever their political allcgi-nce in the ordinary democratir political process in this country. Thank you. 



15 July 1996 
Well thank you very much John Button, to my former parliamentary colleague and continuing friend, to the vice chancellor of Macquarie University, to Archbishop Hollingworth, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I don't want to occupy the podium today in lecture mode for very long. I do want to share very quickly with you some thoughts of mine about those areas of the future of the country and most par-ticularly your futures which I hope are both relevant to you as young men and women but also relevant to all of us as Australians and then I would do my level best to respond to the questions and the comments that you might like to deliver. 
And I thank the Commission for the Future for inviting me along today. I guess if one thinks about the future, you think about it around three areas three epicentres. The first of course is your future as people, as individuals, the level of personal security you achieve, the sort of relationships you have, the ethical standards or values that will guide your lives and the way in which you see yourself personally as making a contribution to Australian society and to the broader world. 
I guess the second area is the nakedly economic material one, and I don't say that in any derisory way, I don't dismiss materialism or economic security, because it is important and all of the surveys indicate that it bulks very large in the concern of young people and can I say that it is no surprise that it bulks very largely in the concerns of young people a generation ago, and a generation before that. One of, I guess, the interesting phenomena about examining the attitudes and the anxieties of younger people today compared with a generation ago is that some of the sense of economic insecurity has remained constant, although I guess the level of apprehension from about employment is higher now than what it was a generation ago, but other concerns that existed a generation ago, such as perhaps the fear of nuclear annihilation, or a generation further behind that the possibility of world war, and the generation behind that of course once again the possibility of world war, those things have receded into the background. 
So, in one sense, you are a remarkably lucky generation, but in another sense you have been born into a period of social and technological change and economic change and economic evolution that perhaps a person of my age I was born in 1939 and I grew up in the 1950s. I turned 21 which was then the sort of benchmark in 1960, and it was a very different world. It was better in some respects and it was worse in many other respects. I don't think Australia then was as outward looking and as sophisticated as it is now, I don't think Australia was perhaps as welcoming then as it is now to different influences and different attitudes. But on the other hand perhaps we had a sharper more defined, albeit narrower view of what Australia stood for and what it ought to stand for in the fuature. All of that is very interesting but it is not of course particularly relevant except as a historical guide to the kind of society that you contemplate both in an idealistic sense and what you accept is probably going to be your lot in a realistic sense. 
So material security is a very important component, and I guess the third area is how Australia and all of us irrespective of our age ( inaudible) how we relate to the rest of the world and how we see Australia fitting in, What sort of role, what sort of economic role, what sort of regional role, what sort of ethical role we see for our country, the sort of things that Australians ought to be recognised as standing for as supporting or opposing. 
And if I could just take those three things in the reverse order, the obvious almost cliche ridden thing for us to say about Australia's future is that our future lies within the Asian-Pacific region, because it is the region in which we are geographically located, it is the region which has the fastest economic growth in the world. It is the region which brings together a remarkable congregation of races and religions and values and different approaches to life and it is of course a region which offers enormous opportunities for Australia. And I say that it is almost cliche ridden to make that comment because it is the automatic response that people give. And certainly I want to say to you today that the government I now lead has all of the enthusiasm of previous Australian governments on both sides of politics for engagement, involvement and interaction with the region for all of the reasons that I've stated. But I think we should remember that if we are to have any kind of special influence in the region in which we are located, then we should see the other connections that we have with the rest of the world and they are obvious. 
We of course have very profound historical connections with Britain and other nations of Europe. We have a very deep cultural and democratic affinity with the United States. The fact that we speak English gives us a bond and a linkage all around the world, and so far from seeing those associations as being liabilities in our interaction with our region, I would argue that they give us advantages and they give us opportunities, and if we are to have any kind of special role it will be the synthesis role, the rote of bringing together the associations that wve bring in from Europe and North America and using them to more effectively interact with the nations of our region. 
Obviously job security, the prospect of gaining employment is something that is very significant to any group of people of your age, and it is unrealistic to have any kind of discussion like this without acknowledging that youth unemployment remains the biggest single social economic challenge that this country has. And the world has changed quite dramatically on that front in the last 20 -30 years. Technology has played a very big role in it, a very big role indeed. There are many unskilled jobs that have gone forever and there are attitudes towards other forms of employment that have changed forever. 
25 years ago the idea that recreation would be major dollar earner for Australia was something quite unthinkable, In fact people thought there was something strange about Australians being involved in the recreation industry and being involved in running the tourist industry, being involved in the hotel business. It was something almost un-Australian, peculiar, something that Australians didn't embrace. Now, that has changed quite dramatically and it is a sign that the process of change in relation to employment prospects is something that is going to go on and continue. And I can understand that it is the biggest single material immediate preoccupation of your age cohort. And I can't say to you today if I'm to be candid and honest and I've wanted to be so, I can't say to you today that there is one single set of solutions to the problem of job generation. It's obviously got an enormous amount to do with the overall economic health of our country. In my view it has also got a lot to do with the regulatory framework that effects our workplace relations. 
It's got a lot to do with the role of trade unions in our society and I don't say that in an automatically negative sense as some of you may think because of some of the views I hold on the role of unions in our community. It's also got a lot to do with the capacity of our education system, both at a primary, secondary and at tertiary level, and certainly not in the space of a short speech I don't bring you all of those answers but I say to you as the Prime Minister that I do believe offering young people hope and the maximum degree of reassurance that can be offered on the question of employment is the single most important obligation that any Government of this country has to Australians of your generation. 
And the first area that I mentioned is how we see ourselves as people, the values we have, the associations we form. I'll have to say to you that of course, as with past generations the most important things in your lives will be the personal relationships you make, the way in which you relate to your families, the way you relate to your friends, the way you relate in other associations the way you relate as members of the community. 
I think there is a sense in Australia that we have lost that feeling of community and that feeling of having a group of people around us to suppor-t us in times of adversity, I think one of the things that tugs at the heartstrings of Australians and John Button mentioned it when we think of the decline in the economic strengths and the depopulation of rural areas of Australia, we think we are losing something which has been indelibly Australian for as long as we have thought of ourselves as Australians  and that is the sense of community and mateship and looking after each other in adversity, which you find in rural Australia. 
Several years ago when Sydney was struck by the tremendously destructive bush fires, there was an outpouring of community cooperation and there was a willingness of people all around Australia to help and to put aside differences and difficulties and to come from holidays because they thought their fellow Australians were under siege and needed help, and it sort of evoked in people a warmth and a nostalgia about a characteristic of this country that many of us had thought had been lost, and that is a sense of matesip and community. And I thought that was a rather reassuring thing that so many Australians saw that as still a very very important component of our society. Now, ladies and gentlemen, they are unstructured, random thoughts, I don't think one can comne to a gathering like this particularly if one is in the business of listening as well as talking. I don't think it is realistic to attempt anything further. Can I just conclude by saying that you are in many respects a more fortunate generation than some before you. You are certainly a more fortunate generation than those who were born. in many countries at the turn of the century and who a goodly percentage of whom perished in a very destructive war between 1914 and 1918, who are more fortunate than generations that were born a little later. 
In other respects you've been born. into a period of social change, where the constants and the verities of the past are gone, many of them are gone, and life is a lot less predictable and technology is underwriting all of that unpredictability. But as always with those kind of conflicting pressures there are tremendous opportunities that are opened up for you and there is a sense of challenge and a sense of hope and a sense of excitement. And my very profound view is that the generation represented overwhelmingly in this room offers enormous encouragement and hope and inspiration to the rest of us and I don't address a gathering like this with anything other than enormous hope and optimism myself, I know all of you I did at the same age have a mixture of pessimism and optimism but I think overwhelmingly speaking as somebody at the age of 56, 1 feel an enormous sense -not only of pride but also an enormous sense of hope and optimism about the contribution that you will make as citizens of this country and collectively all of us as citizens of the world. 



19 July 1996 
Thank you very much Peter, to Ian Macdonald; to Ian Weller, Frank Tanti; Bob Tucker, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, and David Jull, my Ministerial colleagues who has just joined us. 
It is quite a pleasure to be here tonight - I almost feel I'm back in the election campaign. The last time I was in North Queensland was during the election campaign Last time I was here I visited a part of this district, the Lavarack Barracks, which of course has been touched by great sadness and tragedy in recent times and an event that touched the hearts of Australians all around the country. 
But I'm very happy to be here because this electorate, as much and in some respects more than any other electorate around Australia symbolises what we were able to achieve on the second of March and although four months have now gone by since the election and inevitably one talks about the jwi and projects into the future. I shouldn't allow tonight's gathering go by without thanking you for what you achieved here in the electorate of Herbert and particularly to thank: Peter Lindsay for the 9.9% swing that he achieved in the election. Do you know Peter that there are 36 Coalition seats more marginal than the seat of Herbert and could I also tell you that he is already one of those members that never lets you go by him in the corridor without saying something about what you ought to do, and how what you are doing could be done a lot better. And we took a decision in relation to a development at Port Hinchinbrook a couple of weeks ago, a decision that quite frankly. .( applause). And if that project reaches its full fruition that will do more to generate jobs for young North Queenslanders and will do more to help invigorate the small business community in the immediately surrounding area than any other kind of bureaucratic government intervention. Because what the development of this country is about and what the development of the non-metropolitan areas of this country is very much about, is encouraging risk taking in private sector development 
Now, I've got to say to you Peter, never let the opportunity to go by to remind me of the importance of that project and to remind Robert Hill of the importance of that project to North Queensland and particularly to his electorate. But we did achieve a great thing on the second of March, and I want to thank all of you who kept the faith through those thirteen years that we were in opposition. They were terrible. I mean, I hate being in opposition. I never intend to go back to opposition. And I think what we were able to achieve was a remarkable result and it was achieved in Coalition with our friends in the National Party and I say to you as I will say to the National Party conference tomorrow, that the most important thing about our side of politics is the continuing Coalition between our two parties. 
Whenever the Liberal and National Parties work together, we win together. And whenever we lose sight of that simple lesson we; start to run into difficulty. And I also
take the opportunity of saying to you that no Prime Minister of this country could have a more effective, a, more dedicated, a more loyal and a more decent deputy than I have in Tim Fischer.
.
Ladies and Gentlemen, there were may things that I promised the Australian people before the last election. One of the most important if not the most important thing that I promised the Australian people, and it was captured that slogan of ours For All of Us I promised them that a Coalition Government would be a Government that governed for the mainstream of the Australian community. it would be a Government that was not brow beaten and intimidated by vocal minority groups. It would be a Government that took its cue from the desire of the mainstream of the Australian community to see policies implemented that were truly in the national interest Tn saying that I don't in any way denigrate the importance of listening to minorities in our community. We are a complex society and there are sections of our community that are less fortunate that mainstream, and those people deserve a hearing and they deserve a sympathetic response. 
But at the end of the day, good government in this country is about representing the aspirations: and the hopes and the values of the mainstream of the Australian community, and if you go through many of the decisions that we have already taken, you will see us keeping faith with that commitment. The commitment that we have to build a safe Australian community through having effective national gun laws is a commitment to the security of the mainstream of the Australian community. our commitment to have strong effective industrial relations reforms, is a commitment to the mainstream of the Australian community It is not that Industrial relations legislation, it is not born out of enduring hostility to the trade union movement, but it is legislation that seeks to say to every individual worker and employer in Australia that if you want to sit down and make your own workplace arrangements and you dont want to take union involved, aud you don't want the industrial relations commission involved then you ought to have the right and the opportunity to give eftect to that desire. 
Our commitments in relation to small business and can I say that of all the sectors of the Australia economy that I talked to during the election campaign, and of all the sectors of the Australian economy with which I feel I suppose most tribally comfortable if I can put it that way it is the small business sector of the Australian community. My own background, my own family background was of a small business, kind and I've always believed that this country is essentially about encouraging people to start with nothing and to build something over a period of their working lives and to leave something more behind than they had when they started life's journey. So much of the success of this country has been built up with small business. I said during the election campaign that there were many burdens that small business was carrying that I. wanted to do about.  The most obvious burden it was carrying were those ridiculous unfair dismissal laws that Laurie Brereton gave us without warning in 1993. 
I mean, we have a very very strange morality about industrial relations law in this country. Laurie Brereton said nothing about the unfair dismissal law in the 1993 election campaign and that gets passed in the Senate. We say everything about our laws in the 1996 campaign and so far they haven't been passed by the Senate.. And I want to say to any of you in the audience tonight who are in small business, and I reckon there is quite a few of you in this audience tonight who are involved in small business in Townsville I'm sorry that the unfair dismissal law hasn't been repealed yet. The legislation to give effect to itis locked in the Senate, and as soon as the Senate expresses the will of the Australian people and passes that unfair dismissal law, it can be taken off your backs. I think it was a rotten job destroying piece of legislation and I want to see it removed from the statute books of this country as soon as humanly possible. I also said that the burden of red tape was far too excessive and by the end of the year I will have a report of a committee chaired by Charlie Bell, the man who runs the McDonald's organisation throughout Australian of ways and means of reducing by 50% in our first tern, the burden of regulation and red tape on small business in Australia. And I've already had an indication from the Australian Bureau of statistics that is a down payment on that committees work, it will reduce by 20% the number of forms, that business has got to fill out for the federal Government I mean, it is remarkable you know that without any pressure you get  20%  - try a bit harder and you might get a lot bigger percent and that is exactly what we have in mind. Now I don't pretend that you can get rid of every regulation although I guess most people in this room would think that would be a damn good idea, but I do believe that every level of government, State Government and local  government are guilty of excessive regulation as well, and I think at every level people have got to understand that the typical small business in Australia doesn't have a human resources department or a  human resources manager, they don't have a Chief accountant. I mean the person who is running the business, the man or woman who is running the business is the managing director, the sales manager the company psychologist and so forth all wrapped up in one  and the idea that you sort of have a department... and unfortunately many of the laws that are written for business in this country are written in the belief that every business has the resources of a BHIP and it simply doesn't and of course what is wrong with the industrial relations laws of Australia is that they are laws that were essentially designed for a world that is now largely gone and that was a world where industry was manufacturing industry, where most of the people who worked in business were men and there were very few women, that you had large companies where everybody worked in the one spot and was answerable to foreman and the idea that we had industrial relations laws that related to small business units is something that the framers of those laws didn't really understand. and what we need in this country is a set of industrial relations laws that sure, look after the big companies, sure, accommodate the situations of BHP and CRA and other large companies, but are also flexible enough to allow that two, three, 10 or 15 man enterprise, the flexibility and the capacity to make arrangements that are important and relevant to the operations of that particular business. 
So industrial relations reform, its relevance to small business and making changes that accommodate the small business community are , very important goals and priorities of my Government They are things that I believe in very very strongly and they are things that I believe are important to the future of this country. 
I also identified another benchmark if you like of the performance by which my Government could be measured in its first term and that is what we were willing to do for Australian families. I didn't lightly talk about Australian families during the election campaign. I have all my political career believed that if we could have a Government in this country that properly gave back power and authority to Australian families we'd have a better Australian society. We took a decision that was criticised by some of the experts but I think supported by most Australians a couple of weeks ago to do something to give authority and power back to parents in Australian communities to have a bit more say about what their children watched on television. And that was a decision once again reflecting a mainstream concern Now, I don't believe in censorship, I'm a Liberal, I'm a person who believes in a free society but I do believe that as parents we have responsibilities and I think one of the smouldering sentiments that many Australian parents have at the present time is that they are increasingly living in a society where their role and their authority in relation to what their children do is being eroded and anything that a government can do that can have an influence in changing that is a decision and measure that I believe most Australian ate willing to support. 
Now we are going to bring down a budget on the 20th of August and there's a lot of speculation about it I can't announce all of its contents to you tonight I can tell you though that there will be a few things in it that will deliver on the commitments, the important commitments that we made when we went to the people at the last election And some of those people who've been running around Australia suggesting that those important commitments we made in the last election are going to be walked Away from are going to have a lot of egg on their face We are going to ensure that the family tax package that we committed ourselves to at the election is delivered. We are going to maintain our commitment to keep Medicare, and wt are going to deliver on our commitment in relation to tax deductibility for private health insurance, a very very important commitment that has been made. 
And I can assure you that the decisions that will be taken in the Budget will represent a fair balance between the importance of keeping faith with those central commitments but equally recognising that we inherited a budget situation much worse than what we'd been told. And can I say on that subject, another law that we are going to I hope - the Senate willing pass before the next election, is a law to make certain that never again will we have this absolute charade during an election campaign where everybody wants to know the true state of the books but the Government in power won't let that true state be made available. I mean, the day after the second of March, on the third of March. I staggered up to the Commonwealth office on Phillip Street. I was feeling rather weary, I can't understand why, , and I was greeted by the then Secretary of the Prime Minister's department and two of his deputy secretaries and they handed over what they call the blue book, and it gives you all the information about the transition to government, you know,, and all this very very interesting material. And right in the middle of it was all this interesting material about the Budget deficit. I mean, it had been prepared weeks earlier and they had two blue books, they had one for Mr Keating if he had won and they had one for me. I was very happy that mine was the one that was utilised of course. And they hand this over to me and it's got right in the middle of it in bold type, underlying budget deficit for 1996/ 97 and of course it was some $ 7 billion or $ 8 billion higher than what had been the basis of the campaign by the former government 
So what we are going to do is we are going to pass a law saying that when the writs are issued for the next election. the federal Treasury will automatically be required to publish updated calculations of the Budget: situation And they will, be published they will be published and cam I say Prime Minister and I'm sure Peter Costello if he were here tonight would echo my sentiment. There's a marvellous discipline on more efforts because what it means is that the the true state of the books is going to be revealed whether you like it or not when the campaign starts and I think that is a very very important discipline.
It's the sort of discipline that a company is subjected to if it goes to the market. I mean you'd be in a lot of trouble if you issue false prospectus and so you ought to, and I think it is equally the case that governments ought to be required to issue a reasonably accurate  given the margins of error that inevitably are there given the shifting economic parameters I think that is a totally reasonable thing to do. Ladies and gentlemen, after 13 years in opposition we have the opportunity as a Coalition government to take Australia through to the end of this century to preside over the celebration of the centenary of federation and to to lay the foundation for the prosperity and the future of this county into the next millennium. I think it very important that any Government having to confer with all the Australian people as its greatest priority should be a government that focusses on those things that bind Australian people togther rather than push them apart. 
I haven't made a particular habit of talking too much about my predecessor since I became Prime Minister and I don't intend tonight to particularly depart from that practice. But I do want to sy that one of the things that worried me, Particularly over the last two or three years of the former Government, was that we seemed to spend an enormous amount of time focussing on things that divided the Australian community. We had thrust down our throats a version of Australian history that tried to divide Australians into more or less patriotic Australians according to which particular view thecy took about certain issues. We had a preoccupation with arguing a particular point of view about owr history which encouraged division rather than encouraging unity. WeIl I don't pretend for a moment that there oughtn't to be and there always will be and there should be because it is essential to democracy, theme ought to be very vigorous debate in this country about political issues and things that people feel very strongly about And I think one of the roles of the Government no matter what its complexion is, one of the roles of the Government should be to focus on things that bid us together. And I sensed as I went around the country last year in the lead up to the election, that there was a great desire on the part of the Australian people to sort of have an outbreaking of finding common ground on certain issues rather than wasting effort and energy on those things that they could never find agreement on. I coined a phrase during an election campaign that some people poked a bit of fun at but I didn't mind it at all, I was a view I had about Australia, and I said I wanted Australians to feel comfortable and relaxed about their Past. comfortable and relaxed about their present and comfortable and relaxed about their future. 
Some people thought I was joking when I said that I wasn't really, I think it is very important that we feel confident and relaxed and we feel a sense of pride and sense of satisfaction about what this country has achieved. That doesn't mean we shouldn't feel ashamed about some things in our past. Any nation that reflects on itself honestly must feel a sense of shame about certain things. It doesn't mean to say that we've been perfect but it does mean to say that over the last hundred years in particular since federation, this country has achieved an enormous amount. And I last year as Leader of the Opposition and even more so now as  Prime Minister, I sense that there are many Australians who were tired of the self-denigration that is sometimes engaged in by some in our midst, and they want a period not of triumphalism, but they want a period in which we take a quiet pride in what has been achieved, and we work together to tackle t problem that we have.. 
And we have a number of economic problems, but we-also have an enormous going for us-We have relatively strong economic growth. We have a culturally diverse workforce  which is of great benefit to us. We live cheek by jowl to the fastest growing economic region in the World, the Asian-Pacific region and it is the strong commitment of my government to maintain the involvement of this country in the Asian-Pacific region, and  any suggestion that now that you've got a Coalition Government in, power we are going to be slackening on that is completely wrong 
We are forever port of this region, that doesn't mean to say we don't have associations with other parts of the world but our economic future is very bound up in it, and areas such as North Queensland I think are even more conscious of that than some other parts of Australia. So we do have a lot going for us, and I have a very deep feeling that if we can over the next two or three years get on top of our budget problem, things such as our industrial relations system, and our chronically arthritic, waterfront, and bring about some of those other micro-economic reforms that are so necessary, then I think we can enter a period of very great stability and a period of very great prosperity. Finally ladies and gentlemen can I say to all of you that one of the great responsibilities that I have as federal Parliamentary leader, as leader of the Federal Coalition Government and as Prime Minister, one of the great responsibilities I have is to maintain a very strong contact with the grass roots of the Liberal Party. I came through the grass roots of the Liberal Party. I've spent all of my adult life working for the cause of the Liberal Party and the values in which the Liberal Party believes. And I value the opinions of the people in the grass roots of the Liberal Party and my responsibility is to continue to maintain contact with you, to maintain contact with the Australian community. The most dangerous disease of any political leader is that the Ancient Greeks coined, hubris, to lose contact with those people who elect you, to lose contact with those people who support you and to lose contact with those people who fought for you and kept faith. in you is the biggest mistake that any political leader can make. 
I finish my remarks by saying that I will do my level best to maintain the faith that you've put in me, to maintain the faith that the Australian people have put in me. I won't always get everything right I won't always do everything that you want me to do and I'm sure that between now and the next election I will annoy on occasions quite a number of you. And that's the nature of political life, but I can promise you that we will take decision in good faith. that are in our view in the best interests of all of the Australian people and that they will be decisions that will reflect the mainstream values of the overwhelming majority of the Australian community. 
Thank you very much indeed. 


Thank you very very much David Russell for that very very warm introduction. To Rob Borbidge, the Premier of Queensland, Joan Sheldon, the Deputy Premier of Queensland; to John Paterson the Federal! President of the National Partv; to Don Macdonald. the former President of the Queensland, National Party: to Rob  Tucker. the President of the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party. to John Anderson. the Deputy Leader. of the  Federal.. Parliamentary National Party and Minister for Primary Industry aad Energy; and so many of my other federal nad state Parliamentary  colleagues and particularly the Local federal member, the newly elected local federal member for Herbert, Peter Lindsay; ladies and gentlemen. 
It. is for me a particular pleasure to be here today and before talking-politically in any way could I say something that everybody without any exception, I'm sure not only in. this  room but all over Australia. will endorse my saying and that is to send our warmest good luck wishes to the  Australian Olympic team as the Atlanta Olympic Games open
.
Thces nothing quite binds the hearts of Australians, together mor than a great sporting contest. I was the witness of a great , an epic sporting victory by the Australian Rugby team last Saturday evening against the Springboks and it was  a great victory. They played brilliantly anid I think Mike Horan was there. and Tim said he was, so I think nothing quite warms the heart like an Australian sporting success and I look forward to the front pages of the newspapers and the lead first second and third items on the news bulletins over the weeks ahead being absolutely regaled with Australian victories at Atlanta.
. Ladies and gentlemen, this is the first conference of the Queensland National Party that I have addressed. It is of course the first of your State branches' conference since the two great election victories that we shared together.  The ultimate defeat of the Goss Labor Government by Rob Borbidge and Joan Sheldon and the quite remarkable win, that we had on the second of March in the Federal Election. 
That win on the second of March was in the State of Queensland in the House of Representatives the best outcome that either side of politics has achieved in two-party preferred terms in any State of Australia since federation. To have achieved as we also just did in 1975, 60.2% of the two-party preferred vote, an enormous tribute to the grass roots organisation of the two parties. 
It drove home an enduring political lesson in Australia and that is when the Liberal and National parties work together, they win together. And it was a great vindication. And I want to say to all of you how very proud I am to be in coalition with the National Party of Australia. On the night of the election, just by one seat  it would have been theoretically  possible for the Liberal Party to have governed in its own right but it was never in my contemplation no matter what the numbers that that would be the case. I had a pact in opposition with Tim Fischer and the National Party and I was determined that that pact would be followed forward : into Government, and .I am enough of a political realist to know that no matter what the outcome in individual seats may be, the most important thing about hanging onto Government in this country for our side of politics it is the absolute coalition unity of our two great political organisations.
I  have all of my political life been a devoted coalitionist I am a Liberal first, as Tim Fischer is a National Party member first,  but I am a coalitionis. I  share many of the values and aspirations of people who represent the rural areas of Australia. -I understand the pain that  is being felt in rural Australia. I know that between 30 and 40% of the State of Queensland is still drought declared. I know the despair in many of the rural towns of this country. I know the absolute anger of many people in the bush about the way in which minority groups have disadvantaged the great export income earners of this country. And when I say that f think particularly of the way in which the industrial relations system of this country has strangled the aspirations of many of the great wealth producers of Australia -  and I want to come to that in a moment. 
But can I say on a personal note, that I couldn't be working with a finer Australian, I Couldn't bc working with a man of greater trust and greater commitment the cause of his Party and the cause of our coalition then Tim Fischer. To many Australians Tim Fischer represents those great, quintessential values of directness and authenticity which we identify with the  Australian bush. He's been a fearless advocate of the cause of rural  Australia and when I heard David Russell just make a passing reference to the Diesel Fuel Rebate, it could have been Tim but I heard what the reaction of the audience was. I heard the reaction of the audience. 
I think we have in the four months that we've been in office we have accomplished a great deal. If we had control of the Senate, we'd have accomplished a lot more. We've already identified ourselves as a Government that is determined to represent the interests of the mainstream of the Australian community. One of the things that I campaigned on with that slogan ' For All of Us" was a belief that what had to be represented were the aspirations and the values of the mainstream of the Australian community. That doesn't mean you kick minorities around. It  doesn't mean. that you are insensitive to minority groups in the Australian community but what it means that at the end of the day you've got to take decisions that represent the aspirations and the desires of the great mainstream of the Australian community. And for too long this country had a  government that was pushed and pulled in every direction by the noisiest minority that happened to be in town at the particular time. 
We had an agenda to bring about certain change. But we also had an agenda to reassert some of the fundamental values and verities of the Australian way of life. I campaigned very strongly on restoring the role of the family unit as the most influential cohering unit in the Australian community-I believe that Australian families not only provide the greatest source of emotional and spiritual comfort to Australian individuals but beyond that a functioning united coherent family is the most effective social welfare system that any nation has ever seen. And the widening gap between rich and poor-much of the social disintegration of this country and much of the unemployment of this country can be traced to the disintegration of family life, 
And whilst governments can never turn back the tide of change of human behaviour and human failings they can shift the incentives, they can have an influence, they can nail their colours to the most of commitment to stabilising the Australian family, and one of the important goals will be to do that And I made certain commitment about family tax relief in the campaign and I want to tell you that that commitment is going to be honoured in full when the federal budget is brought down on the 20th of August 
It is also worth reflecting ladies and gentlemen of course on the other great victory that was secured in Queensland, and that was the change of Government and can I say to you that the relationship that I have developed with your new Premier, with Rob Borbidge, bag been a relationship of trust of confidence, of friendship, of reliance, and of shared values and shared objectives, He's a man that I like and admire a lot. He's a man tha I can work with easily. If we have a disagreement over something, that disagreement is expressed in a calm and logical fashion and I look forward to years of cooperation between a federal Coalition. Government led by me and a Queensland Coalition Government led by Rob Borbidge. 
We have a lot of policy things in common. Both of us are concerned about the need to bring about changes to the Native Title Act to make that Act more workable. I have no quarrel with the decision of the High Court in the Mabo case, but I have a lot of quarrel with the legislation that was passed by the former Labor Government against our Opposition and with the support of the Australian Democrats. That legislation has created unnecessary delay in development in this country, We have seen the stultifying effect of the uncertainty surrounding Native Title issues in relation to the Century Zinc project and it must be abundantly clear to any observers of that particular issue and any observers of resource development in this country. that failure of that project to get off the ground has in no way been the fault of either the Queensland Government or the Federal Coalition Government. We indicated a willingness to facilitate to through legislation any agreement reached between the Aboriginal communities and the company. We want that project to go ahead and I suspect that many many members of the Aboriginal community and their children also want that project to go ahead. It's the sort of project that is in the interests of everybody because it provides export: income to this country and it provides jobs for Australians whether they are of Aboriginal descent or not and it sends a signal to the rest of the world if it were to go ahead that this is a very safe, predictable, and reliable country in which to invest And it must be a matter of great frustration to manty people that that project has so far not got off the ground 
Just as it was a matter of great frustration, to many people that the seemingly acceptable Port Hinchinbrook development was for no valid reason frustrated by the former federal Labor Government And as you are aware in recent weeks Robert Hill, the Minister for the Environment has indicated the disposition of the Federal Coalition Government to allow that project to go ahead.  I mention these things my friends because one of the moods I found as I went around Australia during the election campaign was this growing feeling that you couldn't do anything in the place any more. That every time you put a  project up for approval, somebody had a reason why it couldn't go ahead-And the net effect of that was that Australians Particularly young Australians and most especially Australians in the non-metropolitan areas of Australia were denied job opportunities and denied a future-And one of the goals of my government and I know it is a goal of Rob Borbidge's government is to cut away the obstacles to many of these projects and many of these developments going ahead-. 
Two of the other areas tha we identified in the election campaign of course were the 1 importance of  industrial relations reforms to which David Russell has already referered and also the important role played by small business within our community. All of you know how strongly committed I have been an a personal level to. securing fundamental industrial relations reform in this country- There is nothing more important to the long term economic, strength of Australia then to change our arthritic out of date industrial relations system. There is no economic reform objective to which I am more strenuously committed and the members of my government Tim Fischer, John Anderson, Peter Reith all of them, and there is nothing more utterly unites the non-Labor governments of this country than a commitment to fundamental industrial relations reform. We need to absolutely get rid of any vestige of compulsory unionism in Australia. We need to restore the the effective secondary boycott laws. They were so effective that the Labor Party tried for 13 years to get rid of them and they finally succeeded in persuading the Australian Democrats after the 1993 election to destroy them And one of the important elements of our legislation is to bring back those effective secondary boycott laws. 
We are committed to giving people effective choice of work place agreements. We are committed to allowing those Australians who want to join trade unions to join the union of their choice and so the list goes on. 
In the area of small business we have already implemented our promise to reduce the provisional tax uplift factor from 8% down to 6% established a committee under the chairmanship, the Managing Director of Macdonald's -  there seems to be a lot of  them in the conversation today, to carry out an inquiry into how you reduce by 50% in our first three years of Government the red tape that operates to prevent, the free movement and the free dealing, of small business in Australia and I'll have that report by November or December of this year and of course there is no element of the industrial relations law that is more important than the provision in that legislation that will strike down Laurie Brereton's ridiculous unfair dismissal law. 
Because that unfair dismissal law, incidentally, we weren't told anything about it in the 1993 election campaign, There's a funny double standard operating here ladies and gentlemen. The Labor Party in 1993  said nothing about the industrial relations reforms they were going to implement and they got through the Senate. In 1996 we said everything about the industrial relations reforms we were going to implement and they are still stuck in the Senate. It says a very very interesting thing about some of the double standards that are operating in Australian politics at the present time, but I don't want anybody to leave this gathering today to be in any doubt that we remain absolutely committed to our goals of industrial relations reform. 
Now, Mr President, I'd now like to turn to the issue that you mentioned in your speech and that is the issue of gun control legislation and I want to say at the outset that this is a difficult issue and I know that as an urban Liberal my culture, my perspective on this as David quite correctly intoned in his introductory remarks is perhaps a little different from many in this audience. I understand that, and the last thing that I am going to do today is deliver any sermons or any lecture or any moralising scriptures about the issue. It's not something for that, it is something for sensible debate%: and discussion. It is an emotional issue and I don't think when I ac cepted the verdict of the Australian electorate on the nigh of the second of March it would have been in my contemplation or indeed in the contemplation-of anybody in this room that one of the issues that we'd have to grapple with as Coalition partner was the issue of Gun control legislation. I know that there are many people who find the laws that I support so strongly, inconvenient Some even find those laws quite unacceptable. I know that I respect their strength of feelings I don't brand sport shooters as criminals or Rambos. I've never done that You can search the record and you will find no abusive language from me. I understand that it is difficult for many of those people. I understand that on this particular occasion I'm supporting a set of laws that is asking people to give up part of a recreational pursuit and also to give up part of other activities that they have followed all their life. I also know, and I'd just like to quietly remind you that in the course of working through these proposals and reaching the situation where we are now , a number of changes have been made to recognise in particular the situation of many people in primary production.
The introduction of the first Police Ministers' Conference of the exemption in demonstrated need circumstances of Category C weapons, in other words, the less powerful semi-automatic weapons. The introduction specifically in response to representations put to us by the Queensland Government, by Russell Cooper and Rob Borbidge, put to us in relation to Category D weapons and then the acceptance last Wednesday of the proposal in relation to those involved in Olympic national and other international sporting disciplines. 
So it is not as if in the process have beep blindly insensitive to many of the concerns that have been expressed. And I do accept that some people will be inconvenienced.. I know that. I1ask that it be accepted by you that the rationale that I have adopted and the rationale that my Government has adopted ard I believe the view taken by the overwhelming majority of Australians including I know very large numbers of people in rural and non-metropolitan Australia is that on this occasion the overall common good is such that it is-an inconvenience that the majority of the population believes should be accepted. Now, that's not easy and I know that, and it is the sort of thing that happens on occasions and it is the sort of thing that doesn't give me any pleasure because I am In the business of working through things with my friends. in the National Party. And I am sensitive to the difficulties that some of my colleagues have had in relation to this issue and the Party organisation. But it is ultimately my responsibility and the responsibility of my colleagues to take a stance that delivers on the expectations of the great bulk of the Australian community, that delivers on the aspirations and the expectations of the mainstream of the Australian community, and I think throughout the country and the-city areas of Australia, there is a passionate desire to achieve something here which would have been thought unachievable a short time ago.
There is a deep feeling within the Australian community that we have an historic opportunity to ensure that this nation docs not go down the American path and we have an opportunity to deliver on that hope and that aspiration and that expectation and that is what has driven me and what has influenced mc. not a desire to score any kind of argumentative or debated point, but I believe that there are occasions when leaders of Governments, and I want to express to all the Premiers of Australia, and particularly here today to Rob Borbidge my thanks and gratification for the cooperation and the Understanding of a difficult issue. 
He has put his position very strongly and very directly to me-I want to express my thanks to all of my Liberal and National. Party colleagues for their cooperation and understanding also may I say in the proper spirit I hope of generosity on this occasion, the support and understanding that has come from other political parties that don't normally extend any support or any understanding to us on any issue at all.  And I think that is part of what is within the expectation of the Australian community and I do hope that you understand those motivations. I do hope that you understand. that I taking the attitude I have, and my government taking the attitude that it has that we believe third We are giving expression to a very deeply held view within the-Australian community. And the proposals that we have put forward are based upon the principle of proper and fair compensation. We are not proposing the complete removal of firearms from the Australian community. We are not proposing a regime that is nearly as strict as some of those who have sought to misrepresent it, would have you and to have us believe. 
We are proposing a regime that we believe over a period of time will lead to a substantial and lasting reduction in the number of firearms in the Australian community. It will deliver in our view a safer community. I don't pretend for a moment that it is going to deliver a community that will never again see a gun massacre. I won't say that I can't say that. Anybody who says that is both foolish and irresponsible. But given what has occurred and given the cvid cnt and persistent commitment I have found across the political divide in city and in country, in metropolitan and. non-metropolitan areas alike given all of that, I believe that we do have a special responsibility, at this time in our country's experience to take the action. that we have. I know it is difficult for some, I do understand that 
And I want to say in relation to that that a Coalition is always a question of some give and take. There will be occasions when the National Party suppoMT1s and members of the Coalition will think it is the one-way Liberal traffic. I understand that. But can I also say to you there will be other occasions, and I ask you to take the long view and not just look at the last two or three months or this particular issue, take the long view and understand that there. will be occasions when people do see government decisions that are particularly in the interests of the National Party side of the bargain. 
I am not unconscious of the importance in a Coalition of making sure that everybody gets a fair crack of the whip, that's very important and Tim is particularly vigilant -to ensure that that occurs. And I think if you see a number of the decisions emerge over the next few months your faith in the durability and the fairness of the Coalition will be well and truly vindicated.
 So ladies and gentlemen, I wanted to say those things directly and frankly. There is never any point in a valuable Political Partnership which is intended to last for a very very long time, there is never a  point on occasions in avoiding plain speaking or pretending that some, differences don't exist or imagining that there aren't some hurt feelings along the I way.  I understand that and I'm very respectful of it but I ask you to understand equally the reasons why I have the view that I do and the reason why I believe that the view that I have put to you and I have maintained is in the best intersts of Australia and of. secondary, but  nonetheless. great importance, it is also in the long-term best interest of the political situation of both out parties, of the unity of them and it is in the long term interests. of our capacity to deal with difficult political issues and to resolve: them in a way that rebounds very much to our credit. 
Finally, can I say to you as I have to the several State conferences of thc Liberal Party that I have addressed since the election, that I. would never have been leader of the Opposition. I would never have been a member of Parliament I would never have been a Minster and most certainly I would ncver been Prime Minister if it hadn't been for the grass, roots members of my Party and by extension, the grass roots member of the National Party of Australia.  I came out of the Liberal Party organisation in New South Wales. I've always believed in. dialogue between the organisation. and the Parliamentary Party and I think Daviid's allusion, operatic allusion, was really succinctly summed up by saying you know, don't get too carried away w ith yourself! And can I say I was  intrigued at-the way he said it. -I mean, this is new rural diplomacy. it is absolutely terrific. But ladies and gentlemen, I won t get carried away with myself, the Greeks called it hubris, Australians have some blunter ways of describing it but I'll spare those from you today and I won't get carried with myself. I am here as Prime Minister because of your work and through the gift of the Australian people and I'll always remember that and if I always remember that I've e a rough opportunity of staying here for quite awhile. If I forget it-I'll get chucked out pretty quickly and I don't want to do that. I've waited a long time and my colleagues waited a long time. They are enjoying it, they are doing a good job. I watched Bruce Scott do the Townsville RSL 1ast night - it was a tour de force' And John Anderson-s I thnk delivered a very good outcome for regional Australia in relation to a sensible resolution in the woodchip industry in particular. I think it was a very very sound decision that balanced both the desire for the environment and the desires of development. 
So ladies and gentlemen, again my heartfelt thanks for the. support that you gave us on the second of March. My heart felt thanks for the sterling support and loyalty through the wilderness-years. in Opposition. They were rotten years, I don't want to revisit. them and I  don't think any man or woman in  this room wants to revisit them  either. Remember when we work together, we win together. 
Thank you. 


Thank you very much again to John Coates and Warwick Smith, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say to the returning victorious and marvellous Australian Olympic team you are returning to a very proud and a very grateful nation. 
You have been the most successful Australian Olympic team ever and on behalf of an Australian people to whom you have given so much inspiration, so much hope and so much encouragement and so much unity over the past few weeks, I want to say that the level of pride that is felt by all Australians in your achievements cannot be gathered together in a few words.
So to all of you, those that have won medals, those that have won collectively, to John Coates, to all of the coaches, to all of those in organising the Australian Olympic effort, can I say that the memory of Australia's performance at Atlanta in 1996 will go down in the annals of the great collective sporting achievements in the history of our nation. And all of you, all of you are entitled to do two things, you are entitled to feel a deep sense of pride in what you have achieved and you are entitled to enjoy the next few weeks to celebrate in whatever way you want to and to lap up the adulation and the respect and the affection of a nation that is immensely proud of what you have achieved. 
Thank you very much. 
7 August 1996 


14 August 1996 
Mr Butler, Professor, lady and gentlemen of the Commission, may I briefly thank you very warmly for a number of things. I thank all of you very warmly for the great commitment of time and intellect and resolve that you have committed to this exercise. It was inaugurated under the previous government. Let me say that a world free of the threat of nuclear destruction is not only a common goal of both sides of politics in Australia but it's a common goal of mankind around the world and to the extent that the work of this Commission has contributed in a practical way to taking us further along the path towards that goal, then it is something that men and women of goodwill all around the world, irrespective of their politics and irrespective of their background should warm towards and feel enthusiastic about. 
I must say that meeting all of you, some for the first time, others not for the first time because we've met in different capacities, meeting all of you collectively this morning is a reminder of just what a diverse group you really are, and it is quite an achievement given the different backgrounds that you come from, it is an achievement to have presented a unanimous report. I know Foreign Minister, Mr Downer will be going into more detail at a news conference later about the report and the way in which it will be handled by the Government. Let me tell you that we are grateful for the work that you have done. The report will be treated seriously. The balance that you have struck between idealism and pragmatism is the alluring goal of statesmen all around the world and to the extent that you can strike that balance in whatever you do or whatever we do is a very considerable achievement. 
The debate about nuclear weapons in Australia last year was very intense. The feeling was right across party fines. It cut a swathe through the normal divide in our community on other issues. There was a common feeling that we had reached the stagze in the history of the world where we might look forward to a lot more stability and a lot more hope in that area, and to the extent that your work has contributed to that, you've not only done a service to Australia and a complement, paid a complement to Australia but also to the aspirations of' people around the world. So to you Sir, and to all of the members of the Commission, can I on behalf of the Australian Government thank you. I want I think to speak on behalf of both sides of politics in Australia in expressing that thanks because it was an enterprise embarked upon by the predecessor government but it's something that as far as the goal is concerned is a common goal and not the subject of political bartering or point scoring, so I thank you and I know that the work of the Commission will be looked at very carefully and the report will be studied, and I hope you enjoy the glorious Sydney weather. 
You've come at a remarkably attractive time of the year and we have a few other festivities in the city today associated with another recent enterprise and I hope you can share some of that festivity and conviviality, so thank you very much Professor. You've done us a great complement and I warmly thank all of you for the commitment of time and energy and intellect to such an important objective. 
Thank you 


14 August 1996 
E&amp;OE ........
..... to Frank Sartor, the Lord Mayor of Sydney; to Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Federal Opposition; and to John Coates our host for this evening. 
It is, as John Coates said, very easy on an occasion such as tonight to be carried away with emotion, with hyperbole, and with the superlatives that are properly uttered when we honour undoubtedly one of the great collective sporting achievements in the history of our nation. 
There are few things that bind Australians together more absolutely in a less ambiguous fashion and without regard to differences on other issues than our love of sport and our love of the achievement of Australian men and women in sporting endeavour. When we as a people examine ourselves and search for the national cement that binds Australians together, a very large component of that cement has undoubtedly got to be our sporting achievements. And the team that went to Atlanta, the team that at one stage during the recently concluded games, there was a tendency on the part of some to denigrate and to write off, it was a team that ultimately returned to its enormous credit in great triumph, and won the greatest ever victory of an Australian Olympic team since the modem Olympiad was inaugurated in 1896. 
And it wasn't only the sheer sporting achievement that impressed so many Australians. I think the 1996 Olympic team demonstrated three qualities that all of us Australians like to believe are particular characteristics of our national make-up. The team demonstrated courage; the team demonstrated excellence and high skill and the team demonstrated unassuming cheerfulness, and I think they are three great commodities that are characteristic of Australian endeavour and Australian achievement. 
I want to say to all of the members of the team that your achievements and your successes gave enormous pride, enormous hope, enormous enthusiasm and an enormous sense of unity to your fellow Australians. I can't conceive of any part of this country that wasn't touched on that Saturday morning when the great fightback commenced, I can't think of any part of Australia that hasn't been warmed by the sheer breadth of the achievement of the 1996 Olympic team. 
And I know, ladies and gentlemen that I speak for my parliamentary colleague Kim Beazley in saying to all of the members of the 1996 team, that you have done immense honour by Australia. You have brought great accolades upon this country and each and every member of the team deserves the high praise that will undoubtedly be heaped upon you over the weeks and months ahead, and on behalf of a very proud, a very grateful nation, can I say to all of you, thank you, we salute your performance, we honour your excellence, we are in awe of your capacity, and we look forward with great enthusiasm and great affection to the coming of the Olympic Games of Sydney in the Year 2000 at the commencement of the next millennium. 
And can I finally say that those Games here in the great city of Sydney will be an occasion to honour the young men and women of the world as they once again do contest. It will be an occasion to demonstrate to the rest of the world the breadth of vision and the excellence of the Australian nation. 
It will be an occasion to celebrate the sheer joy of being an Australian and it will be an occasion to demonstrate to the rest of the world the great pride that all of us have in living in the greatest country in the world. 
Thank you very much. 


17 AUGUST 1996 
E&amp;OE.....
 Well thank you very much Martin, to Dean Brown thc Premier of' South Australia, Robert Hill the Leader of the Government in the Senate, doesn't  that have a nice ring about it? My Federal and State Parliamentary, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a sheer delight to be back here to address this State Council gathering as Prime Minister. This is the first of the series of full annual State Council Meetings of the various Divisions. And it is the opportunity to do a number of things. It is an opportunity to express to the collective body of the Liberal Party in South Australia my immense personal gratitude for the magnificent result that delivered in this State for us Federally on the 2nd March.
 It is true, that in the back of the envelope calculations that we did endlessly in the lead up to the election, it is true that we thought after the superlative result in 1993. to imagine that we could even better was being a little bit greedy. But we didn't count on the great tenacity or' Sue and Trish and others who did so absolutely superbly to win additional seats and I shared many elated moments with many people in this room on the night of the 2nd March but to see the defeat of one, in particular, former Labor Minister You have no prizes who it might have been was a special pleasure. 
So to all of you of the immcense gratitude of a very grateful Prime Minister and a very grateful Parliamentary Party. And could I thank all of my Parliamentary colleagues for their loyalty and support and hard work. Can I particularly remark upon the fact that I 
don't remember an occasion on the Coalition's side of politics and I'm sure on the . Labor side of politics where there were four South Australian Cabinet Ministers holding such senior positions and exercising such a decisive influence on the direction, the policy direction of the Government of this country. And I want to thank each of those Ministers for the excellent work that they have done and I'm sure nobody will mind my particularly singling out Amanda Vanstone for the very difficult job she has done with great skill and great tenacity. It is a big portfolio, it has been in the news on one or two occasions over recent weeks and I want to thank her. I say that without denigration and without failing to be other than totally happy and warmed and enthused by the performance of all Senators and Members from South Australia. 
We have a very strong Ministerial team and we have got off to a very strong start for a group of men and women but for one or two of us who had not had previous experience in office. They have taken to the responsibilities of Government with great skill and great determination. And I acknowledge very warmly, as I do the contribution of Martin Cameron and David Piggot at the organisational helm and can I take the opportunity Martin, of congratulating you on your unanimous re-election as the President of the South Australian Division. 
May I also remark upon the very constructive and close relationship that Dean Brown and I have carried forward from my time in Opposition and his time in Government to our joint time in Government. Inevitably in relations with the Federal Government and the Stares there will be some areas of difference. But Dean and I have a good working relationship. It's a cooperative relationship. His success is my success and our success and vice versa. 
I believe in cooperative Federalism. I believe in working with State Premiers. I believe that the best results are achieved when you talk out your difficulties in advance and I particularly thank Dean and Stephen Baker and the South Australian Government for the tremendous support you gave to the Federal Government on the issue of gun control legislation. 
I know that issue was difficult for some. I acknowledge that but it is interesting, I spent a day in central Queensland yesterday in two of the most rural electorates you could find anywhere in Australia and interestingly enough the subject was raised by only one person and that was me when I said, as I do today, that I recognise that many good, law abiding. decent Australian citizens might find the laws inconvenient, even objectionable and I apologise to them for that fact. But it is one of those occasions where the aggregate national good had to take precedence over the individual personal convenience and comfort. But I wouldn't want anybody to imagine that I wasn't mindful at all times of the fact that some people were going to be particularly inconvenienced. And I want to thank Dean and Stephen for the understanding and support that they impressively displayed through the whole debate and it was very important. It was an exercise in cooperative Federalism. There was a national role of leadership for the Federal Government but it needed the understanding, the sympathy and the support of the State Governments to be brought to fruition. 
Ladies and gentlemen in the weeks, indeed the months that lcd up to the election campaign and throughout the campaign itself there were a number of theme that we in, Coalition repeated again and again. We said that our goal was to achieve reforms and to achieve policy advances in three key areas. We said that we were determined to strengthen the role of families in Australian society. We said that we were determined to re-invigorate the small business sector, both in the cities and in the rural areas of Australian. And we said that we were committed to practical solutions to the great social blight of high youth unemployment. 
Those things were a mantra, a constant mantra of our election campaign. They were issues that went to the concerns of the mainstream of the Australian community an~ Australian community that had watched policies over a number of years erode the authority and the status of the family unit, that had watched regulations upon restriction stultifying the activities of small business. And they have watched despite the expenditure of millions if not billions of dollars on certain programmes. a naggingly high level of youth unemployment. So we did offer new and different policies in those three areas. We offered them because we believed they went to the heart of the concerns of mainstream Australia. And the Australian people responded in a very positive way to our practical understanding of what concerned them and what was a worry to them and their children. 
And I am very happy to say to all of you, ladies and gentlemen. n that next Tuesday night the central message or the Budget will be that we have
The budget will be about the Australian mainstream reclaiming its right in the concerns and the decisions and the considerations of the Government or this country. The polices that we took to the people in those three areas in particular will be fully validated and fully announced and implemented in what we say next Tuesday night. We will deliver on our commitments in relation to the family tax package. We will deliver on our commitment, to give pcople an incentive to take out private health insurance. We're not prepared to see the public hospital system of this country further damaged and placed under further strain by the steady haemorrhaging of Australians out of private health insurance. We will deliver on the commitments we made in relation to the role of small business in our community. We took early action within weeks of coming into government to change Australia's industrial relations system, Changing our industrial relations system will do more than anything else to free the small business community in Australia of the stultifying level of regulation and constraint it now suffers under. 
Central in those reforms is a repudiation of Laurie Brereton's stupid, job destroying unfair dismissal law. Now we've had a bill-. I want to say to every man and woman in Australia who is in small business that we've had a bill in the Parliament to get rid of
law since about the 20th of May of this year. It was put in within two weeks of the Parliament assembling after the election and I hope and I know many men and women in small business around Australia hope that that bill will bc passed by the Parliament well before the end of the year so that the new industrial relations law can come into operation on the I it of January. We are prepared to talk, to explain and to discuss with the minor parties in the Senate the impact and the nature of our legislation. I seek intelligent co-Operation with all parties in the Parliament, We: were given the authority of the Australian people to do certain things and we are doing that but in the course of doing that it's part and parcel of the job to talk in an intelligent, constructive fashion with those who hold the balance of power in the Parliament. 
We are in the business of getting our programme through and the Australian people want us to get our program implemented and that is the kind of approach we are going to adopt and if we can get that industrial) relations legislation through, there will be no greater constituent beneficiary of that industrial relations, reform than the small business community of Australia, It is a charter for small business regeneration and that is why the industrial relations legislation is so very important to the future of this country. 
Ladies and gentlemen, next Tuesday night will be an opportunity in a sense to draw a line under the first five months. We will have tackled that terrible problem that we were handed on the third of March, Labor's huge Bankcard, Beazley's Bankcard, much bigger than we were ever told or had any reasonable grounds of suspecting and we have set about it in a systematic fashion and we will deliver a budget on Tuesday night that is strong but fair, a budget that docs the job of tackling the debt problem that we've inherited but does it in a compassionate way, that does it in a way that doesn't undermine the essential social fabric of this country, and I have been atna7cd beyond even what I thought was the battle-hardened belief of a bloke who had been in politics for 22 years at Sonic of the descriptions that had been made, at some of the things that we stand for and might be announced on Tuesday night. 
One would think that we were setting about, ripping up the social network of this country. We're not, You will find on Tuesday night that the essential guarantees that we gave before the election about the preservation of proper social welfare benefits in this country will have been met. Australia has its own particular passionate view of social welfare, We don't have the view of any other country to that we have our own view. We don't have the American view, we don't have the European view. We have an Australian view and the A Australian view is that people who really need help are entitled to have it but the Australian view is also that if' people who aren't entitled to help are trying to help themselves to it, they ought to be stopped and that incidentally applies whether you are trying to rort the social welfare system or you're trying to rort the tax system. It's all about fairness at both ends. We're not in the business of bashing around the vulnerable. We're also not in the position of unfairly advantaging the greedy and the budget is going to reflect those values and those priorities. They arc values and priorities of a fair Australia and they are the values and priorities that all Australians believe in, and they're the sort of things that we were elected to do and you can run this test of fairness over what we are proposing to do. and I will be able, as I have said on a number of occasions, I will be able to sit down alter the budget and to look every interest group and say, can you really argue that what we have proposed to do is unfair. 
Let me take the question of the changes that have been announced in higher education. I know they have been criticised in some quarters but is it really fair to have a society in which people who never go to university, whose children don't go to university, who are low income earners by any stretch of the imagination, is it right that their taxes should be used to fund the education and the ultimately high income receipts of a small section of the Australia community, and those who argue for a completely free education system at a tertiary level or one that is overwhelmingly subsidised by the taxpayer arc really saying that the taxes taken from the poor should be used to educate the future wealth and income streams of the middle class and the higher income earners of this country? I don't think that's fair. I don't think that many Australians when it's explained to them think it's fair and that's one of the reasons that we have proposed the changes that we have made and have been announced by Amanda Vanstone. 
They don't represent an attack on higher education in this country. They represent a reasonable contribution of that sector of the Australian community towards the budget problem that we have inherited and they also contain a number of reforms that are important. I notice the proposal to allow the universities to charge for full fees over and above the Government-funded places that are given to the universities, full fees to Australians, that that has drawn criticism from the Labor Party and from some others. Now I think it's a very strange attitude, it's a peculiar double standard for people to say it's perfectly all right for an American or somebody from Japan or somebody from England or Germany or Indonesia to buy a place in an Australian university but it's not all right for an Australian to do so, because that essentially is what those who critics that proposal are arguing. I think it's very important that the philosophical context of those changes be understood and I think as increasingly they are, people will see the essential justice and the essential fairness of what we have done. And of course I can't make remarks about fairness and the attacks that have been made on our fairness over the past few days without saying something about the funding decisions that have been made in relation to ATSIC.
I might remind you ladies and gentlemen that I had this to say on the question of Aboriginal affairs before the last election. I want to read, I don't often read anything when I give these speeches but let me read this, I said it is our desire to have a special place in our community for the original Australians, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. We will continue the process of reconciliation, we will continue to put great emphasis, indeed increased emphasis on the importance of lifting the health and educational standards of Aboriginal people and their job opportunities. Now I can say to you that there was nothing announced by John Herron last Tuesday that in any way invalidated that commitment, that in any way fell short of that commitment. The contribution that is being made in this area is not unfair, is not disproportionate. It is not unreasonable. We are not decimating Aboriginal funding. We are not threatening' the process of reconciliation. We are not engaged in any kind of racist pursuit. All at' those criticism are baseless and exaggerated and completely unfair. 
I mean, in the light of them it may astonish everybody in this audience indeed to know that funding for Aboriginal health for example will be $ 97 million more in the next four years under the Coalition Government than it was under the Past four years under the Labour Government. 
It may astonish you to know that funding for ATSIC's community housing and infrastructure program will be $ 26 million mort in the first four years of the Coalition Government than in the last four years under the Labor Government, that funding for ATSICs Community Development Employment Program, essentially a work for the dole scheme: for 30 000 Aboriginals will be S337 million more in the first four years of the Coalition Government than the last four years of the Labor Government. Now those Figures hardly represent a decimation of Aboriginal funding. They hardly represent an attack upon a vulnerable section of the Australian community. Of course there are cuts in other areas. There art: cuts in what can loosely be called some of the more political areas. But there are not cuts in the areas that go directly to the health and the welfare and the educational well-being of Australia's first and original citizens. So I want to reject very emphatically and with some feeling this ridiculous attack that has been made on my Government and on the integrity of the Liberal and National Parties when it comes to the treatment: of indigenous communities of this country.
 I think the reality is that those, many of those who have attacked us in this area have taken the quite mistaken view that although there has been a change of Government~ there can be no change of emphasis in certain areas. The Fact is that our compassion for vulnerable people in the Australian community is no less than the compassion of our political opponents, and in some areas it's even more. But we have different ways of doing things in different areas, and that's what you would expect when you have a change of Government. 
The first understanding is that we are all citizens together in one nation. We've never had two nation view or a three nation view towards the sort Australian society that wc want to build. And what we've set out to do in this area is to establish some principles of accountability. 
We have set out to reorder priorities. We have set out to shift the emphasis towards the essential tools of removing under-privilege and that is improving health, educational and other opportunities. So let's have no more of this ridiculous attempt to typify us as being in thc business of destroying communities, in the business of destroying the legitimate hopes and aspirations of particularly vulnerable sections or the Australian community. When you examine the facts, that kind of allegation and that kind of charge simply doesn't add up. 
Ladies and gentlemen simply beyond the Budget there are many issues of a non-economic kind that arc of' very great importance to the future of this country. Our relations with the rest of the world. It may, in some of the flurry of thc consideration of the Budget and perhaps the euphoria of the preparation for the Olympic Games, it may, have escaped the notice of many Australians that the AUSMIN talks held in Sydney,' attended on behalf Australia by your two home-town blokes, Alexander Downer and Ian McDonald, which was I'm, sorry, Ian McLachlan, apologies. All the same, he said you would never know, they're all the same. 
Those talks attended on the American side, for the first time ever, by the Defence Secretary, the Secretary of* State and the Chairman of the Joint Chiers of Staff. It represented the highest ranking American political delegation sent to this country in thirty to forty years and the arrangements that were made, the agreements that were reached at that particular meeting were quite historic, They re-established in its full these special and intimate relationship between Australia and the United States. And we are able to do that as I said in my opening address to the conference without in any way raising the spectre of this country having to make a choice between its history and its gcography. This ridiculously childish idea that if you reaffirm the importance of the relationship with the United States you are in some way playing down the importance of our association With the Asian-Pacific region has to be completely dismissed for the nonsense that it really is. It is possible to do both and in fact there is an advantage in doing both. The fact that we have close links with the United States, the fact that we have close links with the United Kingdom and with other nations of Western Europe. Those: associations add value to our association with the nations of the Asian-Pacific region because we bring to our association with our regional allies and partners an understanding and a network of contacts that would not otherwise be available we didn't have those associations. 
And one of the characteristics of the conduct of foreign policy and defence policy under Alexander Downer and lan McLachlan is that we will not be carrying forward that sort of' tepid immaturity which characterised the Libor Party's approach, this idea. that in order to make your mark with the Asia-Pacific regions somehow or rather YOU had to insult your past associations. It was immature, it was scene as immature by the sophisticated leaders of thc Asia-Pacific region and I won't have any part of that and I won't have any truck with it. But I will continue to build as Prime Minister of this country the very close relationships that have been established over decades by a succession of my predecessors, commencing with Sir Robert Menzies and on both sides-of politics. It was after all, Malcolm Fraser who forged closer relations between this country and mainland China, It was Malcolm Fraser who showed the humanitarian leadership in relation to this country's attitude toward Indo-Chinese refugees in the wake of the Vietnam war.
 It was thc Menzies Government that saw the trade agreement with Japan that laid the foundation of Japan and Australian being such close trading partners against thc fierce opposition then of the Labor Party back in the 1950s and I acknowledge thc contribution made by Gough Whitlam and Bob Hawke and Paul Keating towards thc building of close relations between Australia and the nations of the Asia-Pacific region, 
It is a bi-partisan given of Australian foreign policy that we should have close relations and we should see our economic future as being very bound up in the association between us and the Asian-Pacific region, But it not a bi-partisan given of Australian foreign policy that in order to do that you have got to insult our traditional and historical associations and I think there is a growing understanding in the region and in the world of the importance of that particular proposition. 
And could I finally say to you ladies and gentlemen that as I survey the last five months and I think of the changes that have already begun to become apparent in this country. they are not changes related just to economic issues and foreign policy issues, industrial relations issues. But I think one of the benefits of the change of Government is that that mood that was growing in the Australian community before the 2nd March that we were reverting to some kind of modern form of McCarthyism, where if you took a strong view on something and it wasn't a fashionable view you were automatically silenced by being labelled as a bigot or a racist or something else, I think that mood has largely dissipated since the 2nd March and in saying that Vit very conscious of the fact that there are people within out community who Mil always abuse freedom or speech and they are, not people with which the Liberal Party should ever have any association or any truck at all. We are a Party above everything else of tolerance and a Party of respect for personal difference of opinion. 
We are a Party that is more respectful of the diversity and more representative of the diversity of the Australian community than any other political party in this country-
One of our great strengths in the last election was the way in which we were able to attract support right across the socio-economic spectrum and right across the ethnic and cultural spectrum of Australia. And it is very important to understand that part of the post-war Liberal tradition is the immense contribution that has been made to our Party by people of a non-English speaking background. And one of the most sustaining experiences for a Liberal Party leader in this country is to go to different parts of Australia and for people who immigrated to this country not long after the World War I1 to come up to you and say that and speak to you of great emotion about how they found this country and what it's meant to them and what it meant to them to come to a country when Sir Robert Menzies was Prime Minister, and the way in which They were received into the Australian community. We ought always to remember that we arc a society made of people of different cultures and of people who have come From many countries with their particular contributions to make. 
But we ought to be able to have a society where people can speak their mind without being silenced by the dismissive smears and attempts to brand people as having prejudices which in reality don't exist. 
So finally, ladies and gentlemen. can I return to the theme I had at the beginning and that is a theme of tremendous enthusiasm and gratitude for what has been achieved particularly here in South Australia and what has been achieved throughout Australia, 
We did win a great victory on 2nd March but as I told the Party Rooms at its first meetin when we were all utterly euphoric. We're only still mildly euphoric but we were then utterly euphoric but the first danger signs appear when political leaders and members of the political party fall victim to the disease the Greeks described as hubris, When they begin to imagine that they hold their office because of some divine gift, when they begin to imagine that in some way they were elected overwhelmingly. exclusively and undeniably because of their personal genius and it had absolutely nothing at all to do with the fact that their political opponents were a bit limited, a bit shop-soiled, completely on the nose and utterly arrogant. 
You've really got to keep your feet very firmly on thc ground. Political power is a gift of the Australian people. It is not right; there is no natural party of Government in Australia. You stay in Government for so long as you remain in touch with the people who put you there and for so long as you are doing the right thing by the national interest. And all or us have an obligation to remember that. 
I have an obligation, my colleagues have an obligation and you have an obligation as members of the Party Organisation to tell us when we are not doing it. I am a creature of the Liberal Party. I have spent all of my adult life in the Liberal Party and I love it dearly and 1 owe it everything in a political sense, I would never have been a Member of Parliament without the grace and favour of the Liberal Party, I would never have been Leader of this great Party without the support of the Liberal Party and I would never have been Prime Minister of our country without the Liberal Party, so I owe it so much and I feel for it so very deeply. But there is a reciprocal obligation in all of that and that is that you should, when the time arises and in the appropriate way if you think the occasion demands it, remind me and remind my colleagues that we may in fact be succumbing to that disease that the Greeks describe so eloquently. 
Ladies-aid gentlemen thank you very very much for your support, your loyalty, your political skill and for the tremendous victory you gave us here in South Australia in March. Thank you. 


22 August 1996 
E&amp;OE.....................
Thank you very much Brian. To Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the ACT. To Madam President of the Senate. That has quite a nice ring about it, interesting place, the Senate. I thought my predecessor was very uncomplimentary about it. To fellow members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. It's a great delight for me to be with you tonight to thank the ACT Division for the tremendous work over the last twelve months and also at the end of what has been quite an interesting and a very positive week for the Coalition Government to say a few things to you about the political scene as I see it. 
Could I start by thanking each and every one of you for the support that you have given to the Liberal Party over the last twelve months. I am, as you know, a product of the Liberal Party organisation in Sydney. I've always believed in the importance of the Party organisation. I owe my political success, I owe my membership of the national Parliament, I owe the success that politics has brought to me, I owe my Prime Ministership to the Liberal Party and I'll never forget that and I'm very grateful for what the rank and file members of the Party continue to do for our joint cause. So to ag of you, a very warm thanks. 
This is, of course, the first dinner, annual gathering of the division since the sweetening victory that we enjoyed on the second of March. And can I say to all of you that one of the regrets I had about the evening of the second of March was that we didn't quite get a big enough general election swing to bring Brendan Smyth with us. Brenidan, to you belongs a distinction that can never be taken away, that the morale-shattering defeat that you and the division inflicted upon the Keating Government, as it then was, in the now famous Canberra by-election some 18 or more months ago was one of the absolute turning points in the year that led up to the Federal Election, it really was. It demonstrated that, given an opportunity, mainstream Australia was prepared to turn against the former government and you provided the focuis and you provided the capacity and I thank you very warmnly for that. I'm sorry you're not with us as a colleague, but you're still with us as part of the broader team working to help the new Coalition Government. 
Over the last five months, it seems almost-twice or three times that period of time, we have set about doing a number of things. We've set about changing the tone of Government in this country. We have set about removing some of the spiteful, personal vituperation which was part and parcel of politics in Australia before the second of March. The Australian community is tired of the eye gouging which had become part and parcel of politics in this country. They look for something better and for something a little different. We have set about implementing the major policies on which we were elected. And over the next few weeks the deliberations of the Senate on two pieces of legislation will come to a head. The Industrial Relations, or the Workplace Relations Bill, and the bill dealing with the sale of one third of Teistra, the proceeds of which will be used in part to fund the largest ever investment in Australia's environmental future. And what happens with those two pieces of legislation is not only important for the Government, but it's important for Australia's collective future. We need reform and change in Australia's workplace relations. Nothing is more likely to improve over time the climate for employment in this country than a reformed and liberated industrial relations system. 
You'll remember that during the election campaign I placed an enormous amount of store on a restoration of confidence in a burgeoning growth in activity of the small business sector of the Australian economy. I said that more than any other sector of the economy small business offered the key, the hope, for reducing signifficantly Australia's chronically high level of youth unemployment. Nothing that's happened over the last five and a half months has altered my view to getting the small business sector going in a big and better way more than anything else will make a contribution towards reducing Australia's very high level of youth unemployment. We have done a lot already to implement the promises that we made for the small business community of Australia. We've already implemented our promise to reduce the provisional tax uplift factor from eight per cent to six per cent. We have already implemented our commitment to legislate for the removal of the job destroying unfair dismissal laws. And once the Senate has passed that legislation then those laws will be a relic of the past. 
In all the discussions that I've had with men and women in small business around Australia, time and time again I've been told that that particular law introduced by Mr Brereton as Industrial Relations Minister in the former Governent has done more to cause hesitation about employing more staff than just about anything else. Time and time again I've been told the story of how small businesses are fightened to take on new people because of the inhibiting effects of that piece of legislation. And it's part of our Workplace Relations Bill and if we can get that Workplace Relations Bill through the Senate then the removal of the unfair dismissal law will
become a reality. 
In the Budget brought down on Tuesday night, and I'll come to the generality of the Budget in a few moments, in the Budget brought down on Tuesday night we delivered on our commitment to legislate for a change in the Capital Gains Tax system to allow small businesses to roll over the proceeds of the sale of the business into a like asset without having to pay Capital Gains Tax. 
Now that was the commitment that was made by me during the election campaign and it's a commitment that ' s going to be honoured in fll. We're also going to honour in full the commiutment we made that if people sell a business for the purpose of living on the proceeds for retirement, in other words, if they turn their life's work, their effort, into a superannuation then they'll be entitled after a certain level to an exemption from Capital Gains Tax. I established shortly after the election a small business deregulation taskforce under the Chairmanship of Charlie Bell, the Managing Director of McDonald's Foods and that taskforce has been charged with responsibility of telling the Government how we can reduce red tape that effects small business by 50 per cent during our first three years in Government. I'm looking forward to receiving the report of that taskforee in the very near future. 
Now these and many other measures are what we have in mind for small business. We remain very committed to the view that if we can reform Australia's workplace relations no sector of the Australian economy will benefit more than the small business community. Ladies and gentlemen it has, as I said a few moments ago, been a good week for the new Coalition Government. We have brought down our first Budget. The first Liberal National Party Government Budget since 1982. That by any measure is an important event and naturally the Budget attracted more than the usual amount of attention, not only from the commentators and the experts and the scribes and the economists, but also from the Australian population. I'm very happy to say that I think to a remarkable extent we have achieved the right guesstimation of politics and economics in the Budget when it was brought down. It's always a challenge-It's easy if you ignore the economics to get the politics right. It's easy if you ignore the politics to get the economics right. But it's a lot harder when you've got to try and get a balance between the two. As you know, no Prime Minister, no Treasurer, no Government worth it's soul is a slave just to economics and is insensitive to social considerations. And equally a government in budget formulation that ignores the realities of the economy and ignores the natural force of arithmetic any government that does that is not worth it's soul either. 
We were faced with a bigger fiscal problem than we thought we would face. It's already very well for political commentators now to say ' oh they knew all along', we didn't. Although in future we will because one of the changes announced by Peter Costello in the Budget brought dlown on Tuesday night is we're going to legislation to require the Secretary of the federal Treasurer when the next election is called to publish immediately a Ul set of accounts so everybody knows exactly where we are. And we won't go through this ridiculous charade of an outgoing government saying ' oh no I don't want to know, don't tell me please I might not like it'. I mean it was always there, it was always available. 
The Sunday after the election I wandered up to my office in Phillip Street in Sydney and was met by the then Head of the Prime Minister's Department and two of his senior officers and they banded me over a blue book and right in the middle of that blue book was all the information that had been there for some weeks. And a similar document was available to Mr Keating if he had won the election. So it was worse and we face that situation and we knew that if we didn't do anything about it, and particularly, if we didn't do anything about it in the first year we'd never be able to do anything about it. But wc were also conscious that we had entered into certain undertakings to the Australian people and I was determined that the major undertakings that we'd made to the Australian people and the major things on which we'd been elected, the major promises we'd made to win the support of the Australian public were going to be honoured. And in fact, all of them have been and one of the things of which I am immnensely proud about this budget is the extent to which, despite our difficulties, we have been able to honour the major commitments that we made to the Australian people in the lead up to the election. 
If you take you're midnd back to that election what do you remember of what we said? We said we'd have a family tax package and that's been delivered in Mul. We said we'd have a tax break for rivate health insurance and that's been delivered in i. We said that we would give Capital Gains Tax relief for small business and that's going to be delivered in fUll. We said that we'd legislate to give income tax cuts to self-. funded retirees and that's going to be delivered in full. We said that we were going to, of course, reform the industrial relations system. We said we were going to sell one third of Tclstra. and establish the environmental fund and if the Senate is willing to pass that legislation, that is also going to be delivered in fujll There are many other less, but nonetheless, quite important measures that have been delivered in full. 
The budget has been well received. We have achieved by the announcements made in the budget a major turn around in the Commonwealth's accounts and we do look forward to having a budget which is in underlying surplus at the end of the third year of the Coalition Government's first term in office, and given the extraordinarily difficult circumstances that we inherited, that is a remarkable achievement. 
Now, I don't pretend that the decisions that we have had to take over the last few months have had an easy impact on some sectors of the economy. And I am particularly conscious, as I address an audience of people who five in the ACT, that some of the decisions that we have taken, some of the adjustment that has been necessary, has had a different and heavier impact on people who live in the ACT. I2k now that, I acknowledge that, I'm sensitive about that and I'm sensitive about the consequences of the actions that have been taken by the Government. I know, and you all know, because of the nature of the city of Canberra and the atypically large number of people employed by the Commonwealth Government who reside in the ACT, that it is inevitable if you embark upon a program of restructuring the role of the national Government, if you seek to eliminate duplication between Commonwealth and State services, if you seek to put out to the private sector, those things that more properly belong to the private sector and can be more effectively done by the private sector, it is inevitable that the consequence of that will fall disproportionately heavily on people who live in this part of Australia. 
Now, I understand that and I've been very mindful of it from the beginning of the time that we were in government. But I'm also very mindfuxl of the desire of many people in the ACT and many people in this room not to look back in any sense of despair or any sense of negativism about what has happened over the past few months, but rather to see it as an opportunity and a springboard for changing some of the direction of the ACT and some of the direction of the economy of Canberra. And I know that there are many people in this room who see a very positive and optimistic future, particularly from the small businesses of this city, and see the opportunities that the changes and the restructuring of the past few months will inevitably bring about. But I wouldn't want the opportunity of this gathering tonight this is in many senses a  celebratory gathering, because it does bring together all the supporters of the Party in the ACT to reflect upon the achievement of a few months ago and to talk about the ongoing political struggle between ourselves and the Opposition. But I wouldn't want the opportunity to go by without acknowledging to all of you MY understanding and the understanding of the Government of some of the particular difficulties which are being experienced at the present time in the ACT. Much of the downsizing and the changes that are now occurring, these downsizing and changes that have occurred within State governments around Australia and in many businesses large and small around Australia. And I do understand those things and they remain very much in the Government's mind. 
Can I speak to you as a Liberal Party leader and speak to you as political colleagues for a mnomenit and say that in political terms the new government is in very good health and anybody who'd been in Question Time this week I'm sure would endorse that proposition. We look across at a very demoralised, confused and reay wondering what their role is group of people who now comprise the Federal Opposition. I've developed a new theory about Australian politics. They used to say the Liberals were the 'born to rule' Party. I think the Party that has the ' born to rule' mentality now is the Labor Party. The Labor Party was in power so long federally it was in power for 13 years that it really is finding it very difficult to adjust to the reality of opposition. There was a sense, in the first few months that they were in opposition, there was a sense in their demneanour that somehow or other they thought oh, this was all a bad dream, and that somehow or other the community would wake up, and they would wake up one bright September or October morning and they'd be back on our side of the House and we'd be back over there and all would be properly restored.. -everything was all right. You have that sort of sense in which, you know, this can't be right, this hopeless Liberal mob that we insulted and derided for 13 years, they can't possibly be in power, and in any event they're going to fall apart, they're going to brawl with each other, they're all going to be incompetent and after a while people will wake up and somehow or other it will all get adjusted and don't worry, everything's all right. 
Now, it hasn't quite worked out that way. It really hasn't. And particularly in the last week, we've watched the development and the presentation of our first budget and they have watched the support that has come forth from the rest of the community; they've watched the financial markets endorse it; they've watched mainstream Australia respond to the fact that the major commitments made to Australian families have been honoured and delivered; they've watched the vorrumitments made to small business be honoured and delivered; and they've watched a very professional presentation of that budget by a very, very good and highly intelligent Treasurer in Peter Costello. 
And they have watched, ladies and gentlemen, and they have watched a group of ministers.. and I have to say as the Prime Minister, it was a sheer delight to be in Question Time today and to have watched the Opposition fall into the absolutely cardinal blunder of asking Michael Wooldridge four highly technical questions on health policy. And each answer got better than the last one! And after he delivered the fourth answer our backbenchers were yelling out " have you got any more, please? Come on, ask us some more." And what's good about the new Government, ladies and gentlemen, is that it's got depth and it's got quality on the front bench. Now, you might expect me to say that, but I mean in and it's true, It's not a one man or a two man band, it's got a group of people who everyday are gathering more and more confidence, more and more skill and more and more capacity in the discharge of their ministerial responsibilities. It is a government of men and women for the long haul. We're not just there for 18 months or two or three years. We want to be there for a long period of time because this country, for a long period of time had a government that didn't serve it well. 
But the way in which we will be there for a long period of time is not bathing in any self congratulation, but rather retaining contact with the grassroots of the Party organisation. One of the reasons that we won the election in March of this year was that the former government had grown very arrogant. It had disassociated itself from the mainstream of the Australian community. It had wrapped itself in a cocoon of its own prejudices and surrounded itself with people of its own beliefs and it had lost touch with what mainstream Australia really wanted. And one of the, indeed, the very first injunction that I delivered to the new ministry after it had been sworn in in April of this year March of this year was to say to it, ' don't lose touch with the people who voted you in. I'm not Prime Minister, you're not Ministers because of some kind of divine genius. We are there at the gift of the Australian people, and once we start losing sight of that, once we start to forget that, then we will begin to lose touch with reality and begin to lose our political control.' 
I think we have made a very good start. I think some of the events of this week, apart from the budget, have done enormous damage to the reputation of the trade union movement. How dare Jennie George and Bill Kelty pretend that they can wipe their hands of any responsibility from what happened here on Monday. How dare they try and do that. I've never heard anything more disingenuous. You organise a rally, you make no attempt to control it and then you try and pretend you don't even know that that disgraceful riot has in fact occurred. But I've never, in all the time that I've been in politics, in all the time that I've been a member of the Australian Parliament, I have never seen anything as bad as what occurred on Monday. And the behaviour of those people brought shame upon the trade union movement, and I know the decent rank and file members of the Australian trade union movement are responsible. But leaders have a responsibility, even if it's a minority view on the occasion, leaders have a responsibility to speak out against that and I think the way in which those two characters have tried to sort of evade any r" a responsibility speaks very poorly of them and I think they will be marked down accordingly in the esteem of the Australian people. 
And finally ladies and gentlemen, can I say that I do appreciate, again, the tremendous job that is being done by the Liberal Party organisation, by Kate Carnell and the members of her team here in the ACT. I know some of the difficulties of running State and territorial governments. I know that it's not... in one sense, in a very real sense, it's the National Capital. In another sense there are the particular local needs and the local aspirations of the people who live here in the ACT and blending the two of them together is no easy task. But I'm delighted with the cooperative arrangements that exist between my government and Kate Carnell's government and I look forward to a continuation of that cooperation for many years into the future. 
Ladies and gentlemen, finally can I say that I have addressed this division in a number of capacities on a number of occasions, but this is the first opportunity that I've had to address an annual dinner gathering of the ACT Division as Prime Minister. We waited a long time. Yes we did, I know, don't remind me, we lost one or two we shouldn't have lost. Yes we did. But whatever may have happened in the past, the reality is that we have been given by the Australian people, at a really exciting and pivotal moment in Australia's history, the opportunity of being the Government of the nation. We've been given the opportunity if we are sensible, if we are responsive, if we keep our feet on the ground, if we remember the simple principles of political unity we have been given the opportunity of leading this nation into the next millennium. And I can't think of anything more challenging; I can't think of anything more opportune; I can't think of anything more exciting. And we do have the capacity and we do have the opportunity now and I feel it in a sense more than ever as a result of this week, we have the opportunity to build a government that will bring about permanently beneficial change so far as the future of Australia is concerned. But we can only do that, we can only do tat, my friends, if we continue to enjoy the confidence and the support and the frank e" change of views that come from a strong party organisation. And that is why the strength of the Division and the efforts of those of you in this room who keep it together are so very important to me. 
So again, my warm thanks. Let us look forward to many more years of purposeful and beneficial government for all Australians. Thank you. 


24 AUGUST 1996 
E&amp;OE......................
Thank you very much Bill for that warm welcome, to Tony Rundle, the Premier of Tasmania, to all of my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It is a special privilege to share the platform with the Liberal Premier of Tasmania to address this State Council Meeting. 
I start by repeating the pledge I gave before the election to look after and respond to the special needs and difficulties of the State of Tasmania. Yesterday the Bass Strait Transport Package promised in the election campaign was announced and delivered in full by the new Federal Government. That recognises the special cost disabilities of the island State. It recognises that just as there is a National Highway Programme to the benefit of other states in Australia, so there ought to be a recognition of the separation of Tasmania by the Bass Strait from the mainland of Australia. 
May I also remind the State Council of another very important economic decision taken  by the Federal Government and that was the decision on the timber industry. A decision urged upon us over weeks of negotiation and discussion by a group of backbench Mcnibers of Parliament led by Senator Eric Abetz, here from Tasmania. That decision guaranteed the jobs and the livelihood and the continuity of the timber industry in a responsible fashion in the State of Tasmania. 
I'ye had a number of greetings since I've been in Tasmania. I had the warm welcome last night at the Dinner and that sort of spilt out into the streets a little. But I will be particularly touched by another kind of welcome to Tasmania that I will have just after this meeting. When the wives of some timber workers will have a talk to me and express their thanks for the decision taken by the Federal Government in the interests of the timber industry of this State and the timber industry of Australia. Because at the end of the day the decisions that matter most are those decisions that guarantee the continuity of business, particularly small business and the continuity of the jobs of men and women who work in those businesses. 
I've chosen to open this brief address of mine to the State Council with a specific reference to the two very important pro-Tasmanian, Tasmanian, not completely Tasmanian specific, in relation to the timber industry because that has beneficial ramifications around Australia but both of those decisions are of particular long-term value to the Tasmanian economy. And I want to assure you that in the, I hope years that lie ahead of Federal Coalition Government, we will maintain that special understanding of the particular problems of Tasmania and the particular challenges. And I warm, as you must have, to the spirited address of your Premier his determination to look forward and be positive rather than to look back in negative reflection. 
I also want to say one or two very brief things about the Budget and about what we have done in the last five months. You will remember that in the election campaign we made a number of core commitments to the Australian people. We said that we would do number of core commitments to the Australian people. We said that we would do something in a practical way to strengthen the role of the family unit in Australian society and we have delivered on that commitment in spades in the Budget. We have delivered in full our $ 1 billion on a one year basis or if you use the arithmetic of our critics a $4 billion family tax package. We have delivered on that in full to the every last dollar. 
We have delivered on our commitment to provide tax incentives for private health insurance. That only over time will not only provide families with tax relief if they take out private health insurance, but importantly it will take some of the strain off the public hospital system operated by each of the State Governments. Because the steady erosion of people out of private health insurance means that more and more people are using the public hospital system. And we've also quite unashamedly added the additional component that if you can afford to take out private health insurance and you choose not to you ought to pay a bit more because we don't think it is right that people who can afford to access private health insurance should be able to use the public hospital system without paying a little bit more for the privilege of doing so. That is a principle of fundamental equity and it amazes me beyond belief that a Labor Government so concerned about the interests of lower income earners in Australia and so professedly concerned about the future strengths of the public hospital system, should have neglected over 13 years to introduce such an equity measure. 
1 predict over time if people return as we hope and believe they will, to private health insurance, significant additional resources will flow into the public hospital system and therefore into the coffers of State Governments as a result of the decisions that we have taken in the area of private health insurance. So we delivered on that. 
We've also delivered on our commitments to adopt a preventative approach to family breakdown and not just a responsive approach when the breakdown occurs. We have doubled the resources going to marriage and relationship counselling. And we have also committed ourselves to a special programme of some $ 6-8 million to deal with problems of domestic counselling and violence. The resources will be committed to the peak and quality welfare organisations of this country to provide first rate counselling. Organisations like the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul and the various capital city missions designed to provide counselling for families at risk and to get at the preventative stage at thle problems of child abuse and domestic violence. We quite properly hear a lot about the incidence of child abuse we should hear more about the efforts of government to strike at the causes of that abuse before in fact it takes place. And I'm very proud that one of the as yet unreported features of the Budget are the additional resources that are going into the area. 
One other thing of which I am proud is the significant increase an increase of $5 million a year in the base funding under the emergency relief programme that is going to the volunteer welfare organisations similar to the ones that I've just mentioned. Their base funding had declined because the formula being used by the former Government had not kept pace with the increased demand on their services so we have increased that funding permanently by $ 5 million a year. And we're going to bring in a new escalator which will ensure that the funding for those organisations are coupled with the very generous public response that properly comes the way of those organisations continues. 
Now these are some of the as yet unheralded, unreported measures in the Federal Budget and they give the lie to the idea that we're just a mob of bean counters, disinterested in some of the coal face problems of family hardship and personal distress and domestic unhappiness. Those are real problems in our society and they are part and parcel of the responsibility of the Government. 
I'm very proud of what the Budget has done for families and there'll be more done in that area. I'm very proud of our defence of freedom of choice for families in the area of education. We have maintained increased funding for both public and private education in Australia. We've also introduced an important new policy in the area of independent schools. We propose to abolish the former Government's very restrictive New Schools' Policy which prevented the spread of low fee paying independent schools. And one of the direct consequences of that decision will be to facilitate the establishment of low fee paying independent schools. Isn't remarkable that it's a Liberal Government that has championed a policy that will allow the expansion of low fee paying schools in areas like the western suburbs of Sydney? Yet it was the former Labor Government that maintained a restrictive policy that prevented that occurring. Once again you see, I suppose conventional perceptions of political ideology turned on their head. You see the Liberal Party championing the cause of choice for the battler in education as well as choice for the battler in other areas of society. 
Thee other area that we made much of in the campaign of course was our very strong commitment to small business. The greatest way in which we can help small business is to get our Industrial Relations Bill through the Federal Senate. And the moment of truth is fast arriving on that issue. The Democrats have said in principle they support the legislation, naturally the fine print of the qualifications and the detail of the negotiations will be all important. And we seek to establish a co-operative discussion with them because the passage of that Bill is very important. On the passage of that Bill hangs the fate of our proposals to get rid of Laurie Brereton's stupid job destroying unfair dismissal law. 
Our commitment to end for all time compulsory unionism in Australia. Our commitment to restore the full operation of the secondary boycott prohibitions bought in by the Fraser Government in the late 1970s and they were so successful that the Trade Union movement never rested until they persuaded the former Labor Government with the help of the Democrats to get their repeal through the Parliament a couple of years ago. And we are pledged to bring themn back. And we're also committed to get rid of the conveniently, the long restrictions in the Industrial Relations Act that prevent the emergence of workplace unions. And finally and importantly we are committed to giving Australian employees the right to choose between an Award and going into a workplace agreement. 
I want to make it very clear to you and to the Australian people that the legislation now before the Parliament honours in full my rock solid guarantee that any Australian going into a workplace agreement, cannot be worse off than he or she would have been if remaining under an Industrial Award. We are not in the business of driving down peoples wages, we are in the business of driving them up based on higher productivity and that has always been the touchstone of our approach to industrial relations. Now getting that through is very important to small business but in others we've also acted. We've delivered on our promise to legislate and we will be delivering on or promise to legislate to provide capital gains tax relief when you rollover the proceeds of the sale of a business into a like business. We're also providing capital gains tax relief for people who sell businesses at a certain age and live on the proceeds of the retirement. We think it is only reasonable that that be done. I'll have by October the Report of the Task Force into red tape that strangles small business, being chaired by the Managing Director of MacDonalds Foods, Mr Charlie Bell. And that document will advise the Government on how we reduce by 50 per cent the red tape burden on small businesses in Australia during our first three years in Government. 
We've already legislated a reduction in the provisional tax uplift factor for small business and that this year is worth $ 180 million in cash flow and benefits to the small business community of Australia. So we have not been idle, we have delivered in that area too. And as you know I have a very strong philosophical commitment to the role of small business in this country. And so far from the age of the communications explosion being an age in which small business falls further behind, it's in fact the reverse. The doctrine of the 1970s that big was beautiful in business is now looking a bit dated. In fact the communications explosion and the accessibility of those basic tools of that explosion: the personal computer, the facsimile machine and the mobile telephone have given an authority and an independence and a power to small business that wasn't previously there. By the turn of the century a greater proportion of Australians will be employed in small business than they are at present. Small business is the way of enterprise in the next millennium rather than big business. And that is why getting the right industrial relations fr-amework and the right industrial relations setting and the right taxation setting for small business is so tremendously important. 
Ladies and gentlemen can I simply say on a personal note what a special delight it is to be here. I want to say again as I did last night when addressing many of you, that I understand the importance of links between the parliamentary party and the organisation I am a child of the organisation. I camne through the Liberal Party ranks. I know how important it is for Members of Parliament to keep their feet on the ground and not get carried away with the paraphernalia of office. I've been around for a long time, I've watched other people do that and I've watched them crumble and fail as a consequence and I'm absolutely determined that it won't happen. 
It is good to be in Government. I've watched the faces of those opposite us over the last five months I mean we had 13 years of it and they've only had five months and I want to make sure that they realise as time goes by how we've felt over the last 13 years. I believe in sharing these things around. I don't say that in any sense of triumphalism because we've experienced it all. We had years in Government, we lost, we went down and we then seemed to go down even further. We fought and we spattered with each other, we brawled, our Coalition broke uip, we had several false starts and then we finally made it. And having made it we have a special responsibility to you to make sure we don't waste the opportunity. We will nurture it, we will husband it, we will care for it, we will make sure we deliver on the commitments that we've made and we will make sure that we fulfil the trust that I know all of you have invested in us. Part of that process will be to work in company and in harmony with our State colleagues. Of course there are inevitably differences of emphasis between National and State Governments. It wouldn't be a properly functioning Federation if it weren't. But at the end of the day Tony Rundle's success is my success and my success is Tony's success. At the end of the day parties that work together win together. Parties that don't work together politically fail. 
So ladies and gentlemen thank you again for your tremendous support, for the leadership role of Bill Gatenby, for the contribution of all my Federal colleagues I warmly thank them, my Ministers, my Parliamentary Secretaries, my Senate colleagues for the contribution that so many of them have made I am so immensely grateful. It is a tremendous privilege to be the Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia. It's an even greater privilege to be the Prime Minister of Australia. I am very conscious of that, I certainly won't let you down. 


27 August, 1996 
Thank you very much Jim; to Sir Roden and Lady Cutler; to Bob Radford; to John, the son of the great man, and to other members of the Bradman and Menzies family; to the British Consul; Mr Morrison, his wife, and a special welcome to the three members of the great 1948 team, 
The climate here, I guess, reminds you of the opening match against Worcester and it is tremendous to see so many people who have been a part of cricket over so many years; Jack Pollard, who's contributed so much through writing to our understanding, not only of cricket, but of so many other sports. 
I'd have to say that of all the things I've been invited to do since becoming Prime Minister none gives me greater pleasure than to be here today, in a small way to pay tribute to the greatest living Australian, to pay tribute to a person who was not only the greatest cricketer the world has ever seen but by any measure the most accomplished male sportsman this nation has produced in 200 years. But he was more than that. He became an institution which has spanned different generations of Australians. He gave hope and inspiration to a generation of people depressed by the terrible economic devastation of the early 1930$. He straddled the war years and returned to lead the greatest cricket team Australia has sent abroad, and he continues as an inspiration to young Australians. 
I only saw him bat once. At the age of ten my father took me to the Sydney Cricket Ground hill and I saw him play in the Kippax Oldfield Testimonial which was the last occasion on which he appeared on the Sydney Cricket Ground. And yet to my own children, almost fifty years later, he is still seen as the absolute icon of what it is to be a good sportsman and what it is to be a great Australian. And I think this museum is a marvelous tribute to him. But in his modest way he would want it to be far more than a tribute to him, but rather to be an encouragement and inspiration to people who love the game of cricket; to young and older people who can come and reminisce and talk about games they've seen and games they've enjoyed, to look at the memorabilia, to reflect upon their own experiences, and very importantly for the young, to provide a source of coaching and a source of scholarships which I know that the foundation does. 
And I want to pay tribute to the work of so many people who've made the foundation possible. I want to pay tribute to the work of Channel 9 and the contribution through the telethon. I want to acknowledge the contribution of Bob Hawke as former Prime Minister and leader of a former government, the contribution that was made by that government as well as the contribution that had been made by the current government. And to all of the numerous commercial donors that have made this museum a reality, and to Bob Radford who's passionate commitment to the game of cricket and great support for the trust in the foundation and for the guiding influence and prestige given to the project by Sir Roden Cutler who has been trustee of the foundation since its inauguration. 
It is a sign, ladies and gentlemen, of the way in which sport and most particularly cricket, binds together Australians irrespective of their politics, irrespective of their different views on other issues. Bob Hawke came here in 1989 at the inauguration of it and I am honoured and indeed greatly privileged to be here on behalf of the Government, and I know on behalf of all of the people of Australia. 
I want to thank the people who've made the trust possible. I want to thank Sir Donald and Lady Bradman for their continued support and encouragement; to thank Sir Donald for his typically modest but very appropriate words that were read by Jim at the beginning of the proceedings. His unfailing capacity to speak in a language we all understand about a game that we all love and its place in the national life of Australia and its place in the history of Australia is something that has always meant a great deal to me, and I know that it means a great deal to everyone that is present. It is an enormous privilege for all of us to have been touched in some way by the life and the contribution and the abilities of this great Australian who has enriched this nations experience in the twentieth century so much. And this museum, the second stage and the final stage of which I have great pleasure in declaring open, will not only keep that memory alive, but as he will want it to be. It will provide a constant source of encouragement, a Mecca, for all Australians and for people from all around the world who love our game so very dearly. 
I have great pleasure in declaring stage two of the Bradman Museum open. 
Thank you. 


28 AUGUST 1996 
 Thank you very much Ian. To my Ministerial colleagues from other countries, to Stephen Baker, the Deputy Premier of South Australia, Your Excellencies, other  distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 This happens to be the first APEC ministerial meeting hosted since the change of  Government in Australia in March of this year and it's a great opportunity for me  tonight to say a few things very directly to such a cross section of the APEC  community about the priorities of the new Liberal/ National Party Government in  Canberra. The way in which we embrace the ideals and the aspirations of APEC and  also to put down a few practical thoughts about issues which are directly relevant to a  meeting of APEC Energy Ministers. 
 I guess I don't need to remind any of you of the enormous potential of the collective  economies of APEC. Comprising a half of the world's global production, they are  forecast together to grow about a third faster than OECD economies between now and  the year 2010. And all of us in our different ways are banking on this growth for  greater prosperity for our people and greater opportunities for future generations, and  whilst I remain very confident, as I know you are, that this can be achieved, none of us  should become so obsessed and carried away with the APEC ideal as to take it for  granted. 
 The first condition for continued growth is of course responsible domestic economic  management and I can't help but briefly mentioning the action taken by my  Government here in Australia to achieve significant fiscal consolidation in our recently  delivered Budget. We propose over a period of two years to reduce the level of  outlays by about 2 percentage points of gross domestic product to the lowest level that  we've seen for about seven or eight years and along with the domestic regulatory  reforms and freer labour market that my Government will introduce, fiscal  consolidation will help make Australia more competitive. 
 Another key of course is market access for our exports. Exports have been vital to the  high rates of economic growth achieved by East Asian countries. But keeping markets  open is not something that can be taken for granted. My Government is committed to pursuing better market access for our industries and primary producers. In this  endeavour, we see APEC as playing a key role. 
 A third condition for continued growth especially in the developing and newly  developed East Asian economies is the successful tackling of infrastructure constraints. The investments required in areas such as education, transport,  communications, and energy are colossal. Over the next decade, East Asia's  infrastructure investment requirements will be quite massive and financing this  investment will put great pressure on capital markets. 
 Energy is the source of growth or constraint to growth that you are tackling at this  meeting. East Asia's demand for energy is doubling every 12 years. Some US$ 1.6  trillion in investment capital will be needed in the period immediately ahead to meet  energy infrastructure needs. Energy is a major issue for my Government. We will soon  be releasing a white paper on sustainable energy and we are committed to developing a  sustainable and internationally competitive energy sector. A key element of our energy  policy, and of our agenda for microeconomic reform generally, is reform of the  electricity and gas industries. In cooperation with state and territory governments, we  are establishing a national electricity market and free and fair trade in natural gas and  free and fair trade in natural gas across state borders. 
 The benefits to Australia from competition and freer trade domestically in these vital  industries will be substantial. Consumers will benefit from lower prices and higher  quality service. 
 One cannot manage the staggering energy demands in the region without considering  the consequences for the environment. None of us wants our region to face next  century the appalling problems Russia and East Europe face today. 
 Climate change is a serious issue. It is a global problem and the solution will also have  to be global. The costs of adjustment must also be distributed fairly evenly among  developing economies as well as the developed ones. Australia is committed to  meeting its obligations under the Climate Change Convention. We have a  comprehensive national response to limit our domestic greenhouse gas emissions.  Since 1991 the rate of growth in our emissions has fallen from 3.0 to 0.5 percent per  annum, showing that with the right policies the environment can be protected and the  economy still grow. 
 Under a cooperative programme called the Greenhouse Challenge industry has signed  voluntary agreements aimed at lifting energy efficiency and encouraging commercial  innovation such as investment in new co-generation plants. 
 Four companies BHIP, ICI, CRA and Shell and three industry associations have  already signed agreements covering 30 per cent of emissions from the Australian  industrial sector. And next week we will be signing a further 10 industry agreements in  sectors such as electricity, paper manufacture and finance.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, your meeting, the first of A. PEC energy ministers, demonstrates  APEC's singular ability to bring together economies with diverse characteristics. In  APEC, developed and developing members can work cooperatively on common  energy challenges. Energy exporters like Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia and Canada  can cooperate with major importers like Japan, Korea and Chinese Taipei. China by  2020 wvill be the world's largest energy consumer. 
 The inter-dependence of APEC economies in energy is very high, particularly in coal  and LNG. Australia exports around 80 per cent of its coal to Japan and other APEC  members. Over 90 per cent of Japan's LNG imports and over 80 per cent of its coal  imports are sourced within APEC. The vast bulk of the private sector capital required  to finance energy infrastructure development in APEC economies will come from  within the confines of APIEC itself. 
 Dealing with environmental issues is another area where APEC has a role. A good  example is the APEC project involving public sectors and industry from Japan, the  United States, Australia and China, for using otherwise wasted methane from coal  mines in China. APEC can foster more public sector-business joint ventures of this  sort, involving cooperation between developed and developing members. 
 For my own part, I am looking forward to attending in the Philippines in November  this year's meeting of APEC leaders and there we shall reaffirm our commitment to  achieving the Bogor and Osaka goals of free trade and investment in the APEC region  by 20 10/ 2020. Reinforcing the political commitment to liberalisation as a force for  overall economic growth is one of APEC's great strengths. All of the economists tell  us that trade liberalisation in any country is good for economic growth in that country  no matter what other countries do. But all governments, and the Ministers among us  tonight will know this only too well, know the political pressures against liberalisation  which can entail significant social dislocation in the short term. Even business can  sometimes speaks with two voices on the opening up of markets. APEC can help  make the benefits of liberalisation clearer by balancing the pain of domestic structural  adjustment against the gains from better access to export markets. And the greater the  number of economies that liberalise in concert, the greater the advantage to each. It is  essential, therefore, that at the end of the day, even though we do not look for precise  mathematical reciprocity, that all APEC economies make a contribution to the overall  liberalisation package. 
 I would hope therefore that by November, leaders will be able to take stock of material  progress in freer trade and investment on the part of all APEC economies. Each  economy has to submit this year an individual action plan setting out how it will fulfil  its commitment to free trade and investment. They must contain concrete and  substantial market opening measures. 
 Business, I think, needs to be more involved in evaluating APEC's progress on trade  liberalisation. I know Australia's representatives on the APEC Business Advisory  Council, two of whom are here tonight, are keen to do this. It would be a sensible role  for the APEC Business Advisory Council to provide next year an independent report  card setting out business views on the individual action plans. 
 APEC also has a role to play in keeping trade liberalisation moving at the global level.  We all stand to gain from the deals struck in the Uruguay Round, and making sure that  all Round commitments are thoroughly implemented is the first task. But none of us  would suggest that the Uruguay Round resolved all our market access problems.  Much remains to be done. 
 It is an event of symbolic importance, indicating how much the world has changed, that  the inaugural World Trade Organisation ministerial meeting should take place in our  own region, in Singapore in December. This provides an opportunity to ensure that  the multilateral trading system does not lag behind APEC. 
 APEC members have already made commitments that go well beyond the Uruguay  Round. The WTO needs to match the ambition of APEC so that a new sense of  purpose and dynamism is generated in global trade negotiations. This in turn would  help prevent the world from fragmenting into regional trading arrangements, many of  which do not measure up to APEC's standards of openness. 
 Trade and investment liberalisation also has an important role to play in meeting the  region's energy challenges. I know that at this meeting you have under consideration a  number of principles to guide energy policies in the region. A key principle is the  progressive opening up of trade and investment in the energy sector to enhance  efficient energy production, distribution and consumption. Energy fuels growth. For  this reason, reform and liberalisation of energy sectors in APEC should lead, and not  await, reform of other sectors. 
 It ought to be possible for APEC economies to achieve free trade in primary energy by,  for example, the year 2000. Moreover, in order to ensure that domestic energy  markets send the right price signals, APEC could set an early date for the elimination  of subsidies on primary energy production and consumption. I invite you to seriously  consider such a proposition. Based on regional trends, it is not unrealistic to imagine  APEC achieving free trade and investment in primary energy well before APEC's  2010/ 2020 target dates. 
 I mentioned earlier the huge sums required to fi nance energy infrastructure needs. If  the necessary private sector capital is to be mobilised, energy markets will have to be  opened up and the lower costs flowing from quickly liberalising the energy sector  would enhance growth in all APEC economies. 
 Ladies and gentlemen. may I conclude my remarks by again, on behalf of my  Government very warmly welcoming all of you here to the beautiful city of Sydney. I  want to thank my colleague, Senator Warwick Parer, the Minister responsible for  hosting this very important gathering because it is an opportunity for the new  Government, the different Government of Australia, to affirm its very strong  commitment to the economic and political involvement of Australia in the activities of  our region, and to reaffirm the very strong commitment to the Bogor declaration, our  very strong commitment to the aspirations of trade liberalisation and our very genuine  desire to work in constructive partnership with all of the economies of the APEC  region. 
 It is a remarkable concept that brings together diverse cultures, diverse economies and  a diversity of nations and a diversity of peoples. Personally, I look forward very much  over the next two or three months to establishing as the head of the new Government  of Australia personal contact with the leaders of so many of the APEC countries. 
 Quite deliberately, my first substantial visits overseas will be to the leaders of countries  in the APEC region. That symbolises the continuing commitment of the Government  of Australia to the involvement by this nation in the economic and political affairs of  the fastest growing region in the world, a region to which we hope we can add value  and a region to which I believe all the member countries of APEC add enormous value.  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for being our guests here in Sydney. I  hope you take back to your countries very happy and positive recollections of our  nation and I hope all of you return again soon. Thank you very much. 


29/ 08/ 96
E&amp;OE..............
Thank you Bob for that very modest understated Queensland welcome. Can I say to Joan Sheldon, the Deputy Premier and Treasurer of Queensland, to John Moore, John Herron, my other Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen it really is a tremendous pleasure to be back at this same podium as I was, I think, almost a year ago, addressing an equally large crowd then as opposition Leader and now as Prime Minister. Can I express on behalf of myself and all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues and all of the supporters of the Liberal Party and the National Party around Australia my great gratitude to the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party for the superb result that was delivered here. I should tell you that, Bob was too modest to mention it, that in the last Federal Election the two party preferred vote in the State of Queensland was 60.4 per cent in the House of Representatives and that has never been exceeded in any state of Australia in any election since Federation, 
No it was a magnificent result and in politics one is entitled for a few moments to reflect and luxuriate and enjoy the situation when you've had a good win and you've had a good result. But being a political realist and a political pragmatist my eye is always on the next contest and my eye is always on maintaining the momentum that we have gathered from past victories. And that really has been what the last seven months has been all about. It's been about consolidating the change of Government, of getting used to the fact that we are in Government after having been in Opposition for 13 years, of coining to grips with the more difficult challenges we face, turning around the cultural attitudes in some areas, getting rid of some of the obsession with political correctness, in our society but at the same time not embracing an excessive intolerance of legitimate descent and legitimate minority points of view. 
And you do require a cultural change after 13 years. It's half a generation. It's a long time-It's amazing, you find attitudes entrenched, you find assumptions made by your advisers and by the bureaucracy about what ought to be done simply because it's been done for the last 13 years and then it's discovered that, of course, the new Government doesn't want it done that way after all. And in certain areas if you challenge the orthodoxy of the last 13 years you are branded as bigoted or prejudiced or hypocritical or even worse and I think we're finding that in a number of areas. But we are a Government of balance, we're a Government of tolerance but we're also a Government of great determination. 
There are a number of things I talked about a lot in the election campaign and I didn't talk about them idly because they were in some way poll driven. I didn't need a public opinion pollster to tell me that the most important unit in the Australian society is the family. I don't need arty political researcher to tell me that a nation that devotes its energies to strengthening its families will strengthen itself. That is an intuitive understanding of human nature which I'm sure is shared by everybody in this room. I didn't need a public opinion pollster to tell me that the economic future of Australia rests very much with the vibrant and the strength of small business. I didn't need a public opinion pollster to tell me that what Australians want is decent, accountable, straight forward Government for the mainstream of the Australian community;, Government demonstrating not an intolerance of minority opinion but a commitment to do what is right for the overwhelming majority of the mainstream of our nation and our society. I was also very conscious of the need to confront economic reality. But in the process of confronting economic reality to achieve the right distillations between politics and economics, 
The job of a Prime Minister particularly, but of the Cabinet generally, it to get the mix between those two things right when you put together a budget. A budget driven entirely by economics will run into a lot of trouble and cause a lot of social dislocation. But equally budget driven not at all by economics will send the country bankrupt and will lose respect, not only of the business community, but of the wider Australian community. What wc sought to do and I think we have done very well and may I pay particular tribute to the tremendous job that I think Peter Costello did as Treasurer in leading the Budget. And also on that note, can I express my tremendous pride in the quality of the team that I lead. There was a lot of talk before the last election, they even had it as a theme the ALP that is, that we didn't have much of a team. That we were a bunch of no-hopers they said and, you know, that they had all the talent, all the class and all the experience. Well it's an iron law of politics that if you're in Government for 13 years your Ministers get very well known. for good or ill, because they're on the box virtually every night and they become household names. It's equally true that if you're in Opposition for 13 years the only person that seems to get known is the Leader of the Opposition well, if you have a few of them, which we did, a few get known. We just faced the natural, sort of, recognition irrelevance of  Opposition. But I never doubted that once we got into power that we would produce a frontbench, the equal if not the better, within a very short period of time of our opponents. And that is exactly what has happened. T1 hasn't been a one man band. I have never seen myself as other than a first amongst equals. it's all about running a good cooperative loyal team and I want to say to all of my colleagues, and most particularly two of my ministerial colleagues from Queensland who are here today, John Herron and John Moore, how grateful I am for the work that they have done and the credit the Government has earned over the lost seven months is a collective credit and not something that just resides in the activities of ono or two people. 
Ladies and gentlemen, getting that balance, that distillation between thc economics and the politics, right was a very important task. We did face a great problem with the size of the deficit and we ought to get that in to perspective. We didn't want to cut the deficit out of some blind adherence to economic theory, I've never believed in that. But the reaon we had to cut the deficit was because the long term economic health of this country, and most particularly reducing unemployment, depended on it occurring. Now why do we have, still, high unemployment in Australia? There are two reasons. Firstly we have an arthritic labour market that works against recruiting people, works very much against it, particularly through such stupid things as the unfair dismissal law that Laurie Brereton brought in. I mean, i'vc heard a lot about mandates in the last seven months, I don't remember Laurie i3rereton telling anybody before the election in 1993 that he'd done a private deal with Jennie George to introduce the unfair dismissal law. We were told nothing about that. Can 1 say the law, the machinery, to change that law was introduced into the Federal Parliament within two weeks of us being elected, of Parliamentary assembly. And as soon as the Senate passes the industrial relations legislation, which is the next most important task we face as a Government, that law, that stupid job-destroying law, will be a relic of Australian political history. 
But the reason you need to reduce the deficit is that we still have a chronically high rate of unemployment. One of the reasons is the arthritic labour market system, the other is that you can't run the Australian economy at a high level of growth for too long with us sucking in too many imparts and creating a balance of payments crisis. And that is because we run a low level of domestic savings and we have to borrow on the savings of foreigners to finance the surplus of imports over exports. Hence you have a savings problem and if you don't tackle that savings problem you'll have this recurring situation that when the economy really gets up a head of steam you've got to slow it down in order to slow down the imports in order to stop a balance of payments blow out. And that is why the neglect by the former Government of the savings problem and the fact that we ran these huge deficits over the past four or five years was a direct cause of the maintenance of high levels of unemployment. 
And I notice that Gareth Evans, the Shadow Treasurer, said yesterday that the most important thing is not cutting the deficit but reducing unemployment, T mean it's interesting after 13 years he's finally discovered the importance of unemployment. I mean we inherited an unemployment rate of around 8.5% and a youth unemployment rate of 27% and particularly the latter is a social disgrace. And whilst you've got to be realistic about what can be achieved in this area you won't achieve a permanent reduction in that level unless you get the savings problem of Australia cured so that we can run a higher rate of growth without running into a balance of payments crisis. So if anybody thinks cutting the deficit is irrelevant to the social task of reducing unemployment think again because it's not. It's directly relevant. And if you go back in Australian history to a time when we were running very low levels of unemployment. I mean, the McMahon Government lost office in 1972 when unemployment was less than two per cent and at that particular time we ran budget surpluses we didn't run budget deficits, so there is a link. There is social method in the economic commitment to lower deficits and people; who argue in some way that it's socially insensitive to try and pay off the bank card liability that we inherited really misunderstand completely or don't want to understand the link between running deficits and high levels of unemployment You won't reduce unemployment until you can run a higher rate of growth over a sustained period of time that has been our lot for the last ten of 15 years. You've got to take the speed limits off economic growth in this country and you can't d~ o that while you have a chronic savings problem. So thee was a long term social commitment and a long term national vision in the goal we set ourselves to reduce the size of the deficit. If all our measures arm passed we will achieve 8 shift in Government spending of something like two per cent of GDP over a two year period. We'll take $ 7.2 billion out of the budget deficit and we'll be pushing levels of expenditure closer to the levels that J think most people in this room want, but also levels that I think the great bulk of Australians see as reasonable. 
In pursuing those economic goals we have kept faith with the core commitments that we made to the Australian community. You heard a lot from me about our family tax package and about our health insurance rebate, to which I'll come in a moment. And you heard also about our commitments to providing roll over relief for small business for capital gains tax, You heard about our commitment to maintain the Medicare system. We maintained all of those commitments and % ye delivered those very, very large savings. I think it is fair to say that the Budget has been well received. It's been well received because it is a fair Budget while being a strong Budget. It's been well received because people think we have got the right mix, that we have spread the pain and the burden of adjustment around, that we haven't sought to punish particular groups, we've sought to strike a fair balance between the need to a productive endeavour but at the same time ensure that we have a decent safety net for those who genuinely need help. It's never been the Australian way to neglect people who genuinely need help, but equally it's never been the Australian way to allow people who don't need help to help themselves to either the taxation system or the social security system, 
Ladies and gentlemen they have been the goals and the aspirations of the Budget But the Budget represents, in a sense, the culmination of the first phase of us being in office and the first phase of turning around attitudes in Australia. As I'm sure all of you know nothing in all my political life have I campaigned more strongly for than industrial relations reform I remain deeply wedded to the view that the most valuable contribution that my Government can make towards the long term economic health of Australia is to bring about a change in our industrial relations system. There are five elements to that, It means first and foremost, as I've mentioned, getting rid of those stupid, unfair dismissal laws. It means permanently getting rid of compulsory unionism. It means restoring the effective secondary boycott provisions that were taken out of the Trade Practises Act by the former Government, not because they failed but because they were working because they were told by Bill Kelty and  Jennie George who apparently think you can conduct a public meeting in front of 15,000 people and know nothing about what part of the meeting is doing. We also had in mind as another element of that reform to give people a genuine choice between staying under an award system or going into workplace agreements. And finally we think those Australians who want to exercise their democrat right freely to join a trade union should have the right to join any union of their choice and not the union nominated by the ACT1J establishment. 
 Now they, if you like, are the five pillars of our industrial relations reform and they are all contained in the Bill that is now before the Parliament and that Bill faithfully reflects the commitments I made to the Australian people before the last election. Now we don't have the numbers in the Senate to get that Bill through in our own right, although there's a little more fluidity in the Senate now than there was a day or two ago, a week or two ago. But I don't take anything for granted and although we got 54.5% of the two party preferred vote and although we have a majority of over in the House of Representatives we don't have the numbers in the Senate and we've got to deal with the minor parties, and we will because it's our job. We will in sense of negotiating. It is our job, it is our job to get legislation through and the Australian public experts us to try. We're going to be patient, we're going to resolute in sticking to the things that are important but we:' re also going to be willing to negotiate and try and achieve those objectives. But now that we have the Budget behind us and, hopefully, it will pass through the Parliament essentially intact Now that we have that behind us we must turn our attention to these other areas of reform. And Governments are not just about counting the numbers, not just about bringing down budgets but Governments are also very much about the social direction of the country and the industrial direction. That is why I remain so very strongly committed tn the industrial relations reform. I remain very strongly committed to restoring the opportunities for small business. We've already delivered on our promise to reduce the provisional tax uplift factor which will benefit to the tune of $ 180 million the cash flow of small business. I've got the red tape task force reporting in a couple of months' time. That's being chaired by Charlie Bell the Managing Director of McDonald's foods. I've got the unfair dismissal laws that I've described. We've got the capital gains tax roll over relief, all of those are measures that help the place of small business in our community. 
Now I mentioned a moment ago health insurance and we've had a bit of debate in the last couple of days about decisions taken by the private health insurance funds to lift their premiums. There are a couple of things I'd like to say about that The first  is that under arrangements that prevailed while the former Government was in of fice the power to approve those increases had been delegated by the Minister to somebody in his Department. And it's interesting that latest batch of increases was, in fact. approved by an officer in the Department of Health under that delegation without the Minister for Health being informed that that approval had been given. 
Now, that's an interesting sort of consideration given the political sensitivities. It so happens that by the time it was a fait accompli the Minister was separately in an ad hoc way was informed by one of the funds that the approval had been obtained and the increase was going ahead. I've decided as a consequence of this, this afternoon, to have the Acting Health Minister revoke the delegation and that in future any increases in health insurance premiums will need to be approved by the Minister for Health personally in consultation with the Treasurer and myself Now I mention that. ladies and gentlemen, not to pretend that there can never be circumstances in which an increase in the cost of anything is unjustified. I'm not arguing that at all, but what I am saying that when the Government proposes to provide a subsidy of tax payers money to ( he tune of half a billion dollars a year, and that will be the cost of the health insurance rebates, it is entitled to be absolutely satisfied  itself that the benefit of the subsidy is not being in any way exploited and the value of that subsidy, in terms of its benefits to the consumer, is not going to be lost. As I said last night thc Government is absolutely determined to ensure, absolutely determined to ensure, that the full value of the subsidy through the tax system announced in thc Budget by the Treasurer will flow through to consumers of private health insurance in Australia. 
Mr Chairman, can I conclude my remarks by saying how very important it was to building the credibility of the Liberal and National Parties when they were inl Opposition, very important in the lead up to the last election that we retained very close contact with the business community all around Australia and not least here in Brisbane because the business community of Brisbane has always brought a. special independent robust perspective to business attitudes around Australia. J regard the maintenance of that link and the counselling of that advise and the willingness on occasions to listen to that advise as just as important now that we are in Government as it was when we were in Opposition. 
I said on the night of the election when I accepted victory on behalf of the Coalition Parties that I did not intend my Government to be a pale imitation of the Government it had replaced. J said that it was the duty of any elected Government in a democracy to govern for the people who voted for them and also the people who voted against them. But having said that you do also have an obligation to implement the platform on which you were elected and to fulfil the commitments that you've made to your supporters. I am determined that my Government will be seen as a Government of practical reform. I have a very simple view about institutions and practises in this country. I take the view that if something works well and that attitude continues to be acceptable to the majority of Australians why muck around with it, why waste your energy on it? But equally if a practice, an attitude or an institution is no longer serving the interests of the Australian community you have an obligation to set about reforming and changing, and if' necessary, abolishing that practise attitude or institution. 
That is the balanced view I believe of the practical reformer, we are not a group of zealots, but we are a group of very determined people. We don't believe in any idea of the natural party of Government. An Liberal who thinks there's a natural party of Government in this country should look across to the Opposition benches. In fact, the way I see some of them struggling manfully to adjust to Opposition I think some of them find it very hard to believe that after 13 years they hadn't become the natural party of Government As far as I'm concerned you've got to earn the respect of the Australian people every three years. We live in a more volatile political climate. We live in a climate where political attitudes can change more rapidly and we've got  to work hard as a group of people and we will to retain the confidence that was delivered to us on the -second of March and we'll always remind ourselves and I'll remind my colleagues and they will do likewise to me, that we hold office as a gift of the Australian people. If we take upon ourselves any appearance of the disease thc Greeks describe as hubris we will very rapidly lose the contact and the confidence of the Australian people. 
We are about providing decent, honest, accountable Government. A Government of practical reform. A Government that is sensitive to underprivileged but is not intimidated by the noisy advocacy of minority groups. A Government that sees the value of the small business ethic in our community. A Government that believes very strongly in the robust independence of individualism in Australia and Government that recognises and respects and seeks to enhance the cohering and stabilising roll of the family unit within Australian society. They are our principles, that is our credo and faithful adherence to those principles and that credo will, I believe, deliver excellent Government for future Australians. 
Thank you.  


29 August 1996 
E&amp;OE...... 
Now I mentioned a moment ago health insurance and we've had a bit of debate in the last couple of days about decisions taken by the private health insurance funds to lift their premiums. 1' here are a couple of things I'd like to say about that The first is that under arrangements that prevailed while the former Government was in office the power to approve those increases had been delegated by the Minister to somebody in his Department. And it's interesting that latest batch of increases was, in fact, approved by an officer in the Department of Health under that delegation without the Minister for Health being informed that that approval had been given-
Now, that's an interesting sort of consideration given the political sensitivities. It so happens that by the time it was a fait accompli the Minister was separately in an ad hoc way was informed by one of the funds, that the approval had been obtained and the increase was going ahead-. I've decided as a consequence of this, this afternoon, to have the Acting Health Minister revoke the delegation and that in future any increases in health insurance premiums will need to be approved by the Minister for Health personally in consultation with the Treasurer and myself. 
Now I mention that, ladies and gentleman, not to pretend that there can never be circumstances in which ant increase in the cost of anything is unjustified. I'm not arguing that at all. but what I am saying that when the Government proposes to provide a subsidy of tax payers money to the tune of half a billion dollars a year, and that will be the cost of the health insurance rebates. it is entitled to be absolutely satisfied itself that the benefit of that subsidy is not being in any way exploited and the value of that subsidy, in terms of its benefits to the consumer, is not going to be lost. As said last night the Government is absolutely determined to ensure, absolutely determined to ensure, that the full value of the subsidy through the tax system announced in the Budget by the Treasurer will flow through to consumers of private health insurance in Australia. 


7 September 1996
E &amp; OE ...........................
Thank you very much Bill Heffernan, and to my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I thought I was hearing things a few moments ago when I heard Michael Baume say he sat in the Senate for a whole week without saying anything. Can I at the commencement of this address, can I wish Michael and Toni whatever the future may hold, excellent good fortune and to the replacement chosen by the Party and shortly to be endorsed by the New South Wales Parliament in accordance with the Constitution, Bill Heffernan, can I offer you my personal congratulations in being chosen as the new Senator to represent the people of New South Wales and behalf of my federal parliamentary colleagues extend a very warm prospective welcome to you.
&nbsp;May I congratulate the New South Wales State Council for having this regular state council meeting right out slap bang in the middle of one of the areas of Australia which so decisively rejected the Keating Labor Government only seven months ago. Now we all know that the Labor Party doesn't like losing and the former Labor member for this seat didn't Eike losing at all they complained and whinged and he's taken his whinging and complaints to court and if the court awards a by-election we'll have a fight in the seat of Lindsay and on behalf of all of her colleagues, may I say how absolutely delighted every one of us will be to campaign for Jackie Kelly.
She had a terrific result, I mean, to turn around 16,000 votes and to win a seat like Lindsay, to have a margin of one, let alone a margin of about 1,000 votes was a remarkable performance. And there are a few things about her that qualifyi her for emphatic re-endorsement if that is the decision of the Court of Disputed Returns.
To start with she represents the fresh break from the failed past which the Australian people wanted on the 2nd of March. She's asked more questions in seven months than any member on the Government's side. They're about all aspects. She's a person who vigorously an energetically represents the battlers of the outer suburbs of the big cities of Australia. And yes, she represents the young as well. She represents very much the rallying cry of the Coalition that we took to the election and that is it was going to be a Government for all of us. And not a Government for the privileged noisy minorities but a Government for the mainstream of the Australian community.
And it's worth remembering that and it's worth remembering that we will take into any battle for a by election that we will take in to that by-election battle the knowledge that the Australian people voted for a big change on the 2nd of March. They wanted to throw out the failures of the last thirteen years; they wanted to draw a line both under and against the idea that this country's future should be dictated by a Government that was prepared to cave in to noisy pressure rather than to calculated decisions in the long term interests of the future of all Australians. And it is worth remembering, pause for a moment only seven months out from our remarkable election result to reflect upon the themes that took us to such a great win on the 2nd of March.
We campaigned for the future of Australian families, we said a lot about the importance of small business and we railed against the scandal of high unemployment, particularly high youth unemployment. And they remain very much the centre focus of the aspirations of the Government.
If you look at the Budget, it was a document designed to do what any decent responsible Government representing the mainstream of the aspirations of the Australian people ought to do. We had to address Beazley's Bankcard we had to, to pay off the debts. In both economic and political terms it was essential that it be tackled straight away.
If any man or woman in this auditorium this morning really imagines that we would have had any credibility if we'd have said " oh, it's very difficult, and it's got to be attended to, but we'll do it next year or the year after." If we hadn't done it in the first year, we'd have never done it. And you wouldn't have thanked me and you wouldn't have thanked the Treasurer, who I think did a marvellous job in the presentation of the Budget, you wouldn't have thanked either of us, either economically or politically, if we'd have left the Liberal and National Parties with the ridiculous predicament of going into the next election having either left undone what we ought to have done in the area of difficult decisions, or in fact made some of the difficult decisions on the eve of the election. We'd have been rightly seen as having betrayed the great trust that you've put in us.
And the Australian public understands that.
And one of the reasons, to the great chagrin of the Labor Party, and some of our other critics, that the Budget has been well received by the mainstream of the Australian community, is that they actually do understand very well, that just as a family can't and a business can't live beyond its means, neither can a nation. And that when you've had&nbsp; five years of economnic growth and you're still very deeply in debt, there must be something wrong in the way you're running things. And that is why we set ourselves about the task of repairing the deficit and giving us the real prospect within year three, we will be in the black and we will be able to look back on a period of three years of economic consolidation and economic progress.
That we were able, ladies and gentlemen, to put together a Budget that not only did the economically responsible things, but also delivered on the core commitments that we've taken to the Australian people. I'm very proud of the fact that every dollar of that family tax initiative is going to be delivered in full on the very day that it was promised during the election campaign.
I'm very proud of the fact that we are going to deliver on our commitment to private health insurance. And we're going to deliver on our commitment to small business and if the Senate is willing, and I hope it is, we will able to deliver in&nbsp;full on all of the commitments that we've made in the area of industrial relations, and the sale of a third of Telstra, so that we can use some of the proceeds of that sale to fund the biggest ever investment, capital investment in the environmental future of Australia. And it's also worth remembering, ladies and gentlemen, that the reason that we want industrial relations reform, the reason that we want waterfront reforms, the reason that we want to reinvigorate small business, is that by doing those things we make it possible to run a higher level of economic growth in this country without running into a balance of payments crisis every couple of years, and if we can do that, we have some hope over time of reducing Australia's high level of unemployment.
I don't regard eight and a half per cent as being a satisfactory or a proud level of unemployment in this country. I of course, ignore completely the sermonising and the lectures of the Labor Party about unemployment. I just simply say that you had thirteen years to fix the problem I think you should be ashamed to say anything about it for next five.
The two things that are vital to tackle the problem of unemployment in Australia, particularly youth unemployment, the two things that are needed are a fast rate of economic growth, in other words, we have to be able to take the speed limits off economic growth in Australia and a change in the structure of our labour markets in our industrial relations system, to make it easier and more attractive to employ people. And the first cab off the rank, of course, is to get rid of this ridiculous, stupid unfair dismissal law. The High Court has found that parts of the former Government's law were unconstitutional. A very interesting decision with quite a lot of relevance to the future of industrial relations law in Australia. But if we can get those industrial relations changes we will make it easier and more attractive and less burdensome to small business in particular to take on more staff And if combination with that we can run a fast rate of economic growth, then those two things working together over time will reduce unemployment. Now that is the only way you can reduce unemployment. You can't imagine that spending hundreds of millions of dollars to chumn people through training schemes and then land them back on the end of the unemployment queue creates jobs. That is why we are adopting a radically different approach to training and to labour market programmes.
We want to make them based upon the tried and trusted principle of providing incentives for the generation of real jobs and we want to generate an economic climate in which it is possible for our economy to grow without boiling over and creating a balance of payments crisis.
So the Budget was very deliberately designed to fulfil the aspirations of our election campaign and the commitments we made to the Australian people to meet the economic challenge that we faced with a much larger deficit than disclosed by the former Government and to put down the foundations of a faster growing freer economy, which is the only path to reducing unemployment. And it is important that we always see what we do as a Government and as a Party and as a movement in the context of our goals for the future of Australia.
We weren't elected just to enjoy the trappings of office, and anybody who thinks that they were should really reconsider their position. We were elected to do good things for the Australian people. We were elected to represent the interests and the values of the mainstream of the Australian community. Not in a way that is insensitive to the vulnerable. I'm very proud of the fact that all of the commitments I gave when I delivered my carefully thought through speech to the Australian Council of Social Services, in October of last year about the social secrity safety net in this country that all of those commitments have been kept. We haven't mucked around with the pension, we haven't played around with pushing people off unemployment benefits when they genuinely need them.
And the hypocrisy of the Labor Party to attack our nursing home changes which are a direct model of the changes they introduced in relation to hostels in 1987, with our support, and they know in their moments of honesty and policy honesty, they know that unless we have reform in this area that gets more capital into the nursing home sector, then the people who are going to suffer will be the elderly people, the poorer elderly who won't be able to find places in a diminishing stock of nursing home availability. And that's the problem you face. I mean, either the general body of taxpayers provides the capital, or people who can afford to do so make some provision. A provision that carefully protects people who don't have the resources to do so and carefully guarantees or financially disadvantaged older Australians, the opportunity to have the nursing home bed.
Now I will defend this reform as being fair and equitable and subsequently responsible. I know the Labor Party is trying to run a fear campaign on it, but it's a hypocritical, dishonest, baseless fear campaign. I mean, how can you criticise something that you yourself championed nine years ago. I suppose join the Labor Party, it's very easy.
I mean they did it with privatisation, remember what they said about the Commonwealth Bank? "Ben Chifley would spin in his grave", Bob Hawke said in 1985. if you dreamt of selling Australian Airlines. The gum tree would wither in the sun if you thought of privatising Telstra. And as for the Commonwealth Bank, well how could you ever dream of selling any of it, let alone the lot of it". And yet it's all happened. And the only difference as I said, between the honesty of us on Telstra at the last election, and the Labor Party, is that we were honest enough to say what we were going to do.
The Labor Party pretended all along that it wasn't going to do something that it knew darn well that if by any chance it fell across the line it would be able to do.
Now I defend all of the decisions that have been taken in the Budget. Some of them are not popular. There's no such thing as always taking a popular decision when you're in Government. But you've got to take decisions that are fair and in the national interest. And all of the criticised decisions that we've taken are fair and in the national interest. It never ceases to amaze me for example, that in the tertiary education area, the Labor Party should continue to defend a system which in its pure form, in other words, when there was no contribution sought at all from the tertiary education students, was really a fraud on the working people of this country, because what it basically did was to say to people who'd never been to university, and whose children had no intention of going to a university, we are quite happy to take your taxes to pay for a university education that will enrich another section of the Australian community. And that is fundamentally what the Whitlam fraud on the working men and women of Australia of free tertiary education, was all about. It was always a fraud and I don't think any of us should for a moment imagine that people who attack what we are doing in relation to HECS, that those people who are, that they are speaking out for the low income earners of Australia they are not. They are speaking against the interests of the low income earners of Australia.
And the balanced system that we have proposed which does involve for new students an increase in the HECS charges, and it does involve maybe a number of other changes that will give a great deal more autonomy. Including the allowance of universities in Australia to charge fUl fees over and above the Government funded places. And it will be very interesting to me, and I think to a lot of Australians, as we wait and see what attitude the Labor Party and others are going to take to the proposal which will put Australians on the same basis as foreign students, when at the present time if you come from another country you can buy a place in an Australian university over and above the funded places, but according to the Labor Party, if you're an Australian you're not allowed to do that. Now it's a funny kind of social equity, it's a funny kind of social equity, it's a funny kind of principle of looking after the national interest, to say that if you can afford it and you're from England or America or from China or from Indonesia, or from Malaysia, you can buy a place in an Australian university, but if you come from Sydney or Coonabarabran or Melbourne, you can't. Now I think that's stupid, I think it's unfair and I think the Australian people will see it as stupid and unfair. And I think it's one of the changes that ought to be supported.
And another piece of the Budget that has received virtually no publicity, but is important to this part of Sydney, is a little reported decision that we took in the area of providing greater choice for Australian parents regarding the schooling of their children. We proposed to abolish the Labor Party's new schools policy, which placed an artificial limit on the creation of low fee paying independent schools in the outer suburbs of the big cities of Australia. And one of the practical consequences of this will be to allow the growth in for example the western area of Sydney of low fee paying independent schools. Let anybody criticise that as being something done for elite. Let them see it for what it is a (inaudible)... . to give lower income earning Australians who want some opportunity to send their children to independent schools, from but want a greater choice than the schools that are now available and give them the opportunity to do that. And this is a change that the previous government was asked to make but because of the still latent hostility of' many people in the Labor Party towards full choice in the area of education, they failed to make that change. And the person who refused to make the change, of course, was the defeated former member for Lindsay, the; former Minister for Education, in the Keating Government. I mean they had the opportunity to make that change and it was a change for the benefit, I repeat, not for so-called elite schools, and I use the word " so-called" advisedly, because it's often a very unreasonable description. But in fact what this will do will be to enhance the capacity of people living in the western area of Sydney, for example to exercise greater choice regarding the education of their children.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm very proud of the first Coalition Budget in thirteen years. It was very well received by the financial markets, but more importantly to me it was very well received by the mainstream of the Australian community.
They saw it as responsible, they saw it as strong, they saw it as fair and they saw it as delivering on the main promises that we made during the election campaign. And you don't often get the combination of those four. And if the Labor Party imagines that it can muck around and can foot and take and can say well we'll support this but we'll oppose that, and escapes the political consequences of doing so, then I think the Labor Party continues to be very much out of touch.
One of the great direct benefits that Australian families have derived from the determination of the new Government to address deficit problem, is the very beneficial impact of that decision on the level of interest rates. We have already seen in seven months average mortgages on variable interest rate loans fall by about eighty dollars a month, around Australia. Now nothing I have said this in the past and I'll say it again nothing helps a battling mainstream Australian family more than a cut in housing interest rates. It goes directly to the monthly living costs of the most essential thing a family needs and that is a roof over its head. And if you bring down a Budget that cuts the deficit and is well received in the financial markets that must take pressure off interest rates. And it must have been in the minds of those who caused falls in interest rates to know that we now had a Government that is prepared to address the deficit problem, and that the Labor Party wants to hold the thrust of deficit reduction the Labor Party is striking a blow for higher and not lower interest rates in Australia.
So I would say to the Labor Party in its determination to frustrate the objectives of the Budget, you are playing with interest rate fire if you do that. You are playing around with the possibility of Australian families not enjoying a still lower interest rate to which they are entitled. And if you do that you will be once again demonstrating that you are completely out of touch with what the mainstream of the Australian community wants.
It's very much, ladies and gentlemen, a Budget not only of responsibility and fairness and strength, but of keeping trust with commitments. It was also a Battlers' Budget that delivered a better climate for lower interest rates and nothing is more important to families living in areas like Lindsay, than a Budget that does that.
But we should always, ladies and gentlemen, a Budget not as being some end in itself but rather as a means to an end. It should never be seen as just a dry economic document. And we should never see our mission in Government as being a dry economic mission. We should always see our mission in Government as building the quality of life of Australians and in enhancing the values and beliefs that Australians hold dear.
Governments are about taking decisions, but governments are also about reinforcing values and reinforcing attitudes. And I've spoken at length since becoming Prime Minister about the importance of governing for the mainstream of the Australian community. And I noticed that my current opponent is now starting to use the word " mainstream". At least he's focusing a little better than his deputy.
The Deputy seems to be very unhappy. Something caught my eye in the Sydney Morning Herald a column in the Sydney Morning Herald as I was coming out. Gareth Evans was being interviewed the other day by Derryn Hinch. And he was complaining about the fact that nobody listened to him any more. This is what he said; these are his words and not mine, he said " it's called Relevant Deprivation Syndrome". Relevant Deprivation Syndrome it hurts", he says, and he goes " nobody takes any notice of you, even though you're busting your tail day in and day out to get a message out, and it's just that combination of impotence arnd irrelevance that really is pretty mind-boggling, particularly" this is the good bit that reveals the true self " particularly, when you've been, as you say, at the centre of things for so long as I have."
Well, dear, dear me Gareth, you're breaking my heart. I think you might be breaking the heart of your dwindling band of Labor Party supporters too. I don't think any political rank and filer will thank a senior member of the Parliamentary Party for grizzling about his or her political fate seven months out ftom an election, when they were sent packing by the Australian people.
&nbsp;So I can say to Gareth Evans, and to all of those who are feeling miserable, get used to it. Because we had thirteen years of it. And of course it's no good being in Opposition and now that we're back in Government we intend to behave in a way that will keep us there for a time I hope for a long time. And if we continue to listen to people, if we remind ourselves, as we must always do, that we are there at the gift and the pleasure of the Australian people and not because of some inherited right. I mean they used to say how wrongly of the Liberal Party that it was the born to rule party, that we had a born to rule mentality. I always thought in relation to most of the Liberals I knew that that was a very unfair charge.
&nbsp;But can I say looking across at the Labor Party, if every a group of people in the last few months have demonstrated a born to rule mentality, there was that air about them in the first few months after the change of government, but that this was all some ghastly mistake, and that you know, the mob out there would realise that somehow or other there would be a spontaneous uprising and we would be sent and they would be restored to their rightful place. And in a way the Budget and the reception the Budget, has rung down the curtain on that first seven months of unreality and I think that now for the time it's really setting in to the consciousness of the Labor Party that there has been a change of government, that it wasn't an accident. That they were went packing because they no longer represented the working men and women of Australia they no longer represented the mainstream aspirations of' the Australian community. They were seen as a group of people who bent to the pressure in the winds of elite specialised interest groups and stop listening. And they wondered why it was that they would expend a lot of energy in preparing a policy and they'd be told and they would be told by some of the ( inaudible)... elements of the National Press Gallery that it was a great policy, and then they'd go out in the community and they'd find that nobody was the least bit interested in it they wondered what it was all about. And time and time again that happened. And I think that has to be called the " Self Delusion Syndrome" and I think there was a lot of that. And I think it is now dawning on t Labor Party that things have really changed that we have a Government in Canberra now that is committed to the mainstream a Government in Canberra that is very strongly committed to governing in a sensible and intelligent way in a modest but strong way for a long period of time.
&nbsp;Now, I've said before, and I make a habit of saying it in just about every speech I deliver. That it is very important that we all keep in touch I mean all of the Members of Parliament in touch with rank and file opinion in the Party. That we listen that when you are unhappy about something that we're prepared to listen and if what you're putting to us is sensible, we do something about it. If what you are putting to us, we reckon is wrong, well we'll say that. But we've got to have a proper free flowing exchange. I never want to be in the situation where the Liberal Party loses and election and then people come up to us and say, well if only you'd listened to what we'd said two or three years ago, you mightn't have lost.
&nbsp;Now that's happened in the past and I want to avoid it happening again. We're doing well politically at the moment, but I have been in this game long enough to know that we going to go through some difficult times. And it's not all going to be beer and skittles and there are going to be on occasions, when your support for what we do will be very very important. And I think it's tremendously important in these early months of our Government that we establish a frank and friendly channel of communication between the Government and the members of the Party organisation.
&nbsp;And can I say how much I have appreciated the loyalty and support, not only of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues, and can I say on that note how immensely proud I am of the way in which the members of the Ministry have performed over the past seven months. I think of all those ridiculous things that were said about how we wouldn't be able rustle up a decent front bench. And I think of the first seven months of the Labor Government back in ' 83 I remember it. I was sitting in Opposition, I remember it very well. Mick Young had to resign. Lionel Bowen I think said Japanese troops ought to be used in Cambodia, or some, your know, foreign policy gem such as that. Paul Keating was looking very indecisive as the new Treasurer. Gareth Evans had become famous because he'd organised some spy flights over Tasmania which earned him the title of " Biggles". Now he'd do anything for a headline. And so the list went on. And I think if that compares with out first seven months, then they really are as different as chalk and cheese. And it's as well to remember when people make comparisons, let's compare likes with likes, don't compare the first seven months of a group of people who bar one or two of us have not had previous ministerial experience with people who've been in for power for ten&nbsp;or twelve yeatrs. And when you make that proper comparison, you see the quality of the Coalition Ministry stand out. And I think that is something you all as Liberals, should be particularly proud.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's a terrific privilege it's a terrific honour to be part of the Government of Australia. It's an enormous privilege to represent this country abroad. It's an enormous privilege to feel that at long last we have the opportunity of doing good things for the Australian people. And that is what Government distils to its absolute essence is all about. It's not about the self satisfaction of John Howard, or Tim Fischer or ] Peter Costello. It is about doing good things for the people of Australia. And if we keep that as our vision and a-s our goal, if we keep reminding ourselves that that is the test that you should apply to every decision that is taken by the Government is it something that will do good things for the people of Australia, then we'll be a successful Government, and we'll long enjoy the confidence and respect of all of the Australian people.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;ends
&nbsp;



Fax from 08/ 09/ 96 17: 22 Pg:
PRIME MINISTER
R September 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD, MP
ADDRESS AT THE WESTERN AUSTRALIA STATE CONFERENCE
RADISSON OBSERVATION CITY HOTEL, WA
Thank you very miuchi Rit~ hard, David Honey the President of thcr Western Australian
Division of the Liberal Puity, my FRJeral and Statc Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and
acntlemen. I can't describe to you tho sensc of plca~ urc and satis-flactiun it is-~ w at long last address a
meeting of the Wostern Aajstmlian division ol' thc Liberal Patty as~ Primi: Minisier of
Australa. It iq an historic moment to have again, aller 13 years of dnft and 13 years in th;.
wilderness, to have on the platform here in Pejth both the Liberal Premirr and the iberal
Prime Minister. And I want at the beginning of my address to express my immcnse
graTitude to Liberal-, in We-ormn Australia, not only for the remarkablo achievemont of thc
lu51. federal clection which saw, even on top of the great result achieved in 1993, saw
lii inurc Labor sa lo.-r by thiat party. it wasa brie at achievement, and of course it
built oni cuiur great achievements. It Is true, Richard, wthIis State contributes
disproporiiawly atnd generously to tbe export income nf the entire nation. Tt is also
true that until the last rudcraI tcle. rion ihil State contributed lis-pmrottitely to the
fedcral succcss of the Libefal Pity and it took the othur States until the last election,
particularly t States ofNcw Southi Waiks znd Queensland tQ catch up with thr. % ilnke
rato or Western Australia. And I am vcry consisgous ol'thai and I am very gratcful for the
work of thc Western Au.' itralian Divi. 5ion and Ilic pi ofc-iuzial ismn and the capacity to
campaign effectively a( the grass roots that has always bcn a liallitnark of rte Liheral
Party in Western Australja 21 both a Stato and a l~ cdcral lkvcl.
It wju; a great Rchicvcment, the last election. And the dolighlt in -sccing even mos-c Labot
scats lost and to have Don Randall and Jticky John.-Ion as, additional Liberal mcmbcrs in
the House ol Reprc'scnitives, we are truly dolighted to have the both of you with us. It is
imporl~ ta as we jstifishly refIlect with prido and lzatisraction and gonuine emotion in the 
Fax from v2. 08/ 09/ 96 17: 22 Pg: 2
aftermath of that Sz'at victory oin the second of March. it, Is Imporwtat hat we undorstwid
why we won. Bec~ iow. in a proper understanding of why we won is die founidation of
winning again. if we misqunderstand why we won l45t 1, l111, WC 11ay 1101 Win Again. And
the political history of Australia Is littered with tht; butirN ( if party leaders anid Primc
Ministers who didn't really understand why it, was, they won in the first place. We won
on the second of March throutir u comnbination of eircumstanccs and factors, Of course
we won in significanicma.' urc, because of tho accumulated frustration and hostility of the
Austrulian pcople tuwards thc for-mr govermment and in particular the former Prime
Minister. Wc should be realistic and pragmatic enough to understand that. It was a
goyci ninenft that had grown out of touch with the mainstream of the Australian
onimunity. It was a government which danced to the tunc arid the siren call of noisy
nhinoriticti und not the great mainstream of Australians. It wag a governimerntiIhNi had
grown arrogant, it was lead by ai group of people who itly harl hpanme pn~~ ssed with
the idea thar the Labor Pary was bumn to rule. It tisetoA hia -uid of us. however wrongly,
that we had born-to-rule wientality, yet if you lookc acros the House of Representatives
chamber at question timew and iii Parliaimenrtary debates. thc mob who really do have the
born to rule. mentality are Ithe new opposition memnbers In the House of Reprs~ Uiatvoe,
They still can't Work nut why it is that they lost and they can't work out why it i thiat they
Were rrjPCTCA. So it is in large measure the case ladies and guntleniiit that we won thec
Ilisr election because of the unhappincss of the Australian ulcturati; with the prcviu-
( iovernment.
But It Is also the case that for tlir. first rime in 13 years we got the right distillaton of
politics arid pulicy. Being succcssful in an election campAign is a comnbination of
pullitiwl % kill and commitownt to forward-looking vnlues. If you only have the valuer~
uwad ie cconomics right and you got thu politics wrong you mr not going to win it. And
if you only have thc politics right and you've got no economic coinmitment and you've
got no valuci thcn you don't roully ejescrve to win. And for the fir% t tme, I believe in 13
years~ at a Federal level we got that combination right and the other thing that we got right
is that we diTplaycd particularly in the 12 months leading tip to 1hhe election both within
the Liberal Party and between the Liberal Party and I he National Vartywe displayed
remarkable unity and we demonstrated the Adflg. that has been demonstrated again and
again in Australian politicthaii when the iberal and National Parties work Together they
win together and we did it very successfully. And the unity within our own rdnkb aud
between the Parliamentary palrty and the organisation playi: 4 a very signmificant rule in that
viciory. And I wunt express on behalf of the Federal Paarlamntaiy par ty dih immnlse
gratitude for the unselish loyalty and devotin of Ilic rank wit) File of tie Liberal Party
organisation particularly in the leatd up fu the ; lesuiioii. So it is important when we look
back on why we won itr) t innber that of courst the detestation of our oppone~ nts was an
clement. We got dic fight. distillation of politics and values, we had great political unity.
But I think we also tutjd something else, another chord in the Austruliwi community
and that wab u deoite to once again , lee the Governent of this country composed of men
anad wsati who saw themnselves as thc modz. 4t, even on occasions, humble servants of
dihc Australian pcoplc rathcr than u group of men and women who in tome way thought
through divine ordination thoy had Q right to COrnPTre the Government of thir. country. 
Fa fom08/ 09/ 96 17: 22 Pg: 3
And that sonso that the Government was distant from the people and that sense that Ih.
Govornment no lonper ropresented or undentood or listcncd to or tholight about the
people of Australia was one of the most powerful reasons why the fnirmer ( iovernrent
was rejected. And if we remember that,, then our prospect-r of reeciion are very good.
But if on the other hand we forget it and thmiigh the paissage of fimei we bcnome arrogant
and presumptuous in office then the same fate awaits us. The Austrnlian electoratu now
is less tribalised politicAlly than it has evcr been since the enid of World War 11. 1Misy or
the old aroiatic allegiances are gone. It is no longer invariably the t a. wC that I vote
I . AMT because Dad did or I vote Liberal becauso Dad did. 1ii di ITerent grcrations ha've
differemnt titudes. Political allegiances amungst people undcr the age oi-30 amein a state
of convtant flux and mobility. Now that pioscnLts an enornmous ehallenge and it also
presents grint oppoitwiftics aind if we understand the nature of the ohanged cleotoratelwe
undesuid oil or those things then we have grcat prospects for the future.
The; theme of this Conference ladics and Sentlemen is about the fbture and that is what
out attention ihould bo dircted towards. We we elected by the Australian people of
counie to rcspcct the past and respect the rich history of the Australian nation but we
Wcrc also elected to provide to the Australian people goals and aspirations for Ithe future.
I remember Sir Charles Court once saying to me, he rmay have forgotten -about cight or
nine years ago, when I was the previous ( Opposilion Leader, he qald; Jot/ n what you've
always got to do is tell the Australian people what you're goas are about their fiure,
And that was a very sound piece of political advice. Australians are aspirational people
they c.~ in he inspired. they are Suspicious of humbugpand properly svbui they " nw bc
encouraged to fift their aspirations for the futurv. And it is onily tiatural as we move
toward the next millennium and as we mov; iowtudt-, tde celebration of the centenary of
the foundation of the Coinmonwcalili of Aubtilia that the Austra~ lian people should look
toward the next cuntuiy tuid Aiould look toward the futuro. Thicy want a Government t
undetistnuds that tho world of the year 2000 will be very different from the world of 40 or
years ago, Thoy don't want us to forgect out past. They want us to nurtarc it and
rv~ pect it but they want us to implement policies that do build ror the future, And that is
the tosk wo set Oursclvcs when we assurmd offico after the second of March. And
budget recently brought down by Poter Costello, I want to taethe opprtunityaofpayinp
a personal tribute to the remarkable job that Peter, as Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the
Liberal Party. did in preparng, bringing down, presenting and propotmding a very
succegsful. Federal ) iudget. That was the first of the building hlnrktq for the future
because what the Budget did was what the Atiqlralian people wanted in to do. They
wanted us at the irst availahie opporwnity to tackle the fiscal. legacy that we had
inherited from the former Government, They wanted us to attend to the payment of fth
hankcard liabilities that we had inhcriied from our predectssors. The: y diiju' waunt Wt~ o
leave it to year two or year three. And 1 don't think wny or uw suppoylers would havec
thanked us for saying well its a bit difivhult to do ic ruist year we'll get around to do it 
Fax fraom 08/ 09/ 96 17: 22 Pg: 4
in year two or year three because they would know instinctively that if you weren't game
to tackle it in the first year immediately in office you were never going to do it in the
second or third year. So we did set about doing that und thc Budget has been very well
received in the Australian community, The positive nature of the reception or the Budget
has of course aggravated our political opponents. ) I has been seein by and large by the
Australian comrmunity as a strong but fair Budget. The Australian people will always
accept difficult decisions on two conditions. First and foremost the decisions have got to
bc fair and in thq national interest and secondly they've got to be properly explained and
understood. And if you do that, if you look every interest group in the eye and say well
you won't l ike what I have done but when you look at what has been done in other areas
and you look at the dimension of our problem you will undcrstand why it was nccisary
to do it. And I believe that in every area we can do exactly that. We can look an interest
group in the eye and say we know you don't like it but you will understand that in all of
the circumstances that it was necessary. And the other grcat achievement of the Budget
is that we have been able to keep faith with the core commitmecnts that we took to the
Australian people at the last election.
I amt very proud indee that the family tux~ initiative will be delivered in full on thle
promised date. I am very proud that the health insurane rcbate, the tax rebate will be
dclivcred in full on the promised date, I am very proud that the tax incentives in capital
gains. tax for small business will be delivered nn the prmtsed date.
And if ttic Australlian Senate is wise. which 1 hope in the end it will
be. we'll be able to deliver In full, once we have sold ont third of TcIsula, dt liwgsL3 tee'
capital Investment In the env~ ronmiental fuLUMOful Auitndi. Aiid if you're looking about
building for the future of Australia, ir you ate lifting your sights to the nort. millonnium
and you cart about thc wiaunul ruivironiuent of this country, something Australians of an
ag~ cs;% aubb all genefations and aoross ail patty divisions now rcaully do caro about, and
will in your heart want to % ee that Si billion go into that groat National Heritage Trust of
Australia, that will tackle tho ongoing, the really important environmental challenges of
Australia, the saX.-Az$ the pollution of our river systems, the degradation of our R-oil.
They arc things that do have to be taick led if we are to build for the future and if we camw
about the environmental inheritane or our children and our grandchildren.
I'm~ very proud of the first Coalition Budget since 1982. I'm' valry prond that it did
properly distil our economic, our social and our rinlitiCal e. pnsihilities. Fm proud to
call it a strong, fair budget, I'm proud to call it a huciget for the mainstream of die
Australian communiiy. Rut that wsa-. hut the first of the building blocks as we look
inwarttq the future. There are many ollher Tbings. hti and gcrulcmnen. We campaigned
before the election on a number of central platforms. One of thern, or icuurm, wms our
very strong commitment to the centrality of the ruanhly unit ill AuuMieflWI society. Welvc
already begun to refLc our priorities in that tuetu uvug i t budgct announccmnrts. V/ c
also hold vory d= u tho r. of butull lbuviiimss within not only the Australian economy but
815u within dio broade4 " omuntilty. so many of u3 int the Libcral rarty owc our
philosophic idcntification with our Party to its &amp; rcat comynitniont to private enterprise and
smfall b7usirICss. SO f the Australian druam that you and I understand is the ide4 that you
might art your working lifc with nothing, take a lot of risks. build up a business, work
your inside out in the proem und pass on something better and something more
substantial to your childran1 that has always been very muceh part of the Australian
dream as I've understood it and iWa a dream that's favoured ii lut in recent years and it's
stomething that's got to be given more lire and more vigor. And thats Mne at* ihe vaainnP
why I have for ten years, and so many of my colleaigu'es her. Ioday and all around
Australia have campaignted so strongly for lnehir-frial relations reforrm. industrial relations
reform le-at at the heart of m better economic climate for small business in Australia. 
Fax from 6. 88/ 89/ 96 17: 22 Pg: S
Unless~, at a national level we can liberate the Industrial relations System Of this CoUffitY
we will not be able to have the free and vigorous and positive and productive climate that
small businesses need in Australia. Unless our indumsrial rlationas reformus az~ passed by
the Australian Parliament, we Will HIot be~ able to gct rid of Laui ic Biereton's stupidJob
destroyinlg, ucitair disnisal law. That iimdw ial rtlations reformn bill, the workiplacc
iclatioos bill, is without any arguments, the most imporlunt pioce of legislation to bc
pi-csrnted by the new Coalitioun Covernment. It contains within it ive es'.' cntial
commitments. the unfair dismissAl Commitment, the commitment to getting
of compulsory unionism, the commitment to get rid of the restriction. l5 on dio formation of
enterprise unions, the commitment to bring back the very effective secondary boycott
prohibitions in the Trade Practices Act that have protected Fo mnany businesses around
Australia from the predatory behaviour of trade unions, mid finaally of course the very
important comnmitment to allow Australian workers to havc a real choice between
whether they remain under an award or whetlier they go Into a workplacc aigecrnct.
And we'll know within the ncx few weeks as to whether we ait gvt that Iejgislatiop
through the Parliament, We continue to ; cgutiutc in Moud faith with the minor parties in
order to, T hope acieive their 5uppoit. It is an iportant pice of legislatien, and if it is
passed mctial unimpair it will crcac at a natignal level a now and better climate for
workplace rclation3. It is not an anti-workcr bill, it is not an nnti-union bill, it is a pro
freedom, pro-small business bill and that is why we are so very st4rongly committed to it.
But We AISOr'" ~ the election, ladies and gentlemen, on thc issue of
unemnployment. I don't mind acknowledging. ARAI Australia".~ eoncemed, about the less
fortunate in our community or to acknowledge that unemploymecnt, particularly amongst
the young, ctill remains the greatest unresolved social problem that we havis. Tiliae are
many reasons for high unemployment, some of then ore. the consc'rjwences of the
degenerative. processes, particularly in family lie, in The social structure of this country of
the progre. rl over Ihe lasqt 20) or 30J years. A lot of the explanation lies In the rigidity of
our lahour ma~ rkets; and our industrial relations system. It Is no accldcnt that countries
like New Zealand and the United States that have freer labour markets have lower levels
of unemployment. I know it's uncomfortable for our political opponents to be iimindcd
of thaw, but It happen,% to he a centrul reality. It is albo ut rut;( tlnit over the last 10 years the
Australian euotionly lass hotL () Cem ablu to Rfow at a SUfficiently fa,-' t rdile to allow jobs to
jcuerus and uiteiploymcnt to come down without that strong r5rowth spilling over to ai
current account deficit or balance of payments crisis. And year after ycar we've had the
problem that whcnevcr we gct a bit of economic growth goingwe suck in too mnuy
imnports, there's a balanco of paymonts problem, inlterest rates go up and the whole show
gets olosed down. Now what we've got to do is to remove the speed limits on growth in
thin country and you can only do that if you free up the supply side of tie economy. If
you get rid of the rigidities, you get rid of the stupidity which created the situsition a
couple of years ago where beef produccrs in Australia could sell their product off the hoof
at ,; omething like 60 per cent less than beef producer in the Onihl trate. that after it
had gone through the procer. Ring and the. distrihnfinn and The Transportation chain, it
ended np eMng 40) rents a kilIn dearer for tihe Australian peoplc than for the United States
wholesalers. And that was because of all of the rigiditics of our industrial relations
system. You don't find bloody minded unionism much worse in this country than you'd
find It. I n the meat processing Industry, and It's a very good exarnple, a luic growni
example. a painful example, of just how titust; rigiuitics add. to ici cost of ploduCtiOn ill
daib WUtiwry. So gvltig rid of ilao spccd limits on girowth in Australia is very much about
oconomic rcform. And then you hear govcmmrcnt~ i both at the state and the fedcral level
talking about economic reform and you hear them talking about industrial relations,
waterfront, transport, clectricity, gas and all qarts of other reforms. They are not talking
dull, dreary accountinS concepts, they are talking about the real life and flesh and blood
of the competitiveness of Australian industry.
So building for the future is about getting the budget back in tho black. R's about
addressing ! he problems of small business. t . e. sa lso very much about addresing the need
for accelerated micro-economic reform in this contry. It's about devetonpine, ar a 
Fax from national level, the energetic, outward looking, innovative, entreprenewring culture which
is so redolent in most of Western Australia. And I don't want to finish this pleasure of
addressing the Western Australian audience without acknowledging th eir particular
contribution pf Wcstcni, Australia ; o the economic stengths and the economic vitality of
Australia. You are rightly proud of the contribution that your State makes to the export
income of the nation. You rightly remind any federal government of the impact of
particular laws and particular attitudes on the economy of Western Australia.
I am, as Prime Minister, very conscious of the imnportance of thc rcsourcc sector as well
of course of other sectors of the Western Australian economy. We have that very much
in mind when decision-. were taken in relation to such things as the diesel fuel rebate in
the budget. We also had that very imuch in mind in our desire to effect reforms to the
Native Title Act to make that active accordance with mny pre-election commitment more
welcome because it. is undoubtedly the case vith that Act in its preqent forin doe&amp; need
change and reform in order to make it more workable, more workaible for miners, mome
workable for the indigenous people of Australia, more workablc for pastoralists, and
more workable for governments at both a State and federal level-
Unity between Federal and State governments of the same political persuasion is very
important. We have the happy circumstance at. present that we have feeral government
and governments in five of the six States of Australia and the two territories of Australia
of the same political stokc. it is a long time sine wc had that happy conjunction. I want
to say how important it. isto me as federal leader, to have the understanding and the
cooperation of my State colleagues. I have immense admniration for the job that Richard
Court has done as Premnier of Western Australia. Hc has been a grcat contributor to the
national political debate while at the same time as any State Premier must and should do,
he's been a staunch and outspoken advocate of the particular concerns and the particular
interests of the State of Western Australia. And whenever hie may choose to face thc
people of Western Australia, I am very confident * of what thc outcome will be, and he will
go into that battle and he will go into that political contest with a wholehearted support
and admiration and respect of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party and of myself
personally. I suppose it's something like this, the temptation to say something, even a
little bit, about your political opponents is almiost impossible to resist. Although, you
know, some people say John, you shouldn't say anything about them. And I wasn't
intending to say anything about my political opponents today, 1 was in an extremely
charitable mood as I flew across the Nullabor, but thcn I happened to have been reading
the paper as I came across a little item in the Sydney Morning Herald, the side column of
that, normally amusing, not always but often political insightful column of Alan Ramsey.
in which he talked about CGareth Evans' mental political state. lie recalled an interview
that Gareth made with Derryn Hinch a few wccks ago and lic was talking about what it
was like to be in opposition. I mean, he could have asked me, I would have told him.
And Garethi complained. he said they don't take much notice of you and he said it's called
relevance deprivation syndrome. He went on to say nobody takes any notice of you even
though you're busting your tail off day in, day out to get a niessage out. It's that
combination of impotence and irrelevance that really is pretty, pretty mind boggling
Fa8rx/ o 0m9 / 96 17: 22 Pg: 6 
Fax from: particularly wnen you-vo oml ms y. 1722 Pg-
Dear, dear me. Dear mue.
That ladies and geinlenieia, I) a SCIiNe, 5tiid it tall. You recilil at tht: beginning of my
1peech I % aid one of the reasons why we. won was that thle Austialiaas pwple: Ulhouht that
the previoui crowd really had got hopelessly out of touch, really were taking thm for
granted, and really aqsurnwd thait tall thcy had to do was turn up on polling day and get
reelected. Once politicians start thinkinS like that and behaving like that then they realy
deserve to be thrown out of office and I think the fact that somebody fools like, publicly
talking about just how dreadful it irG... if you've been a cabinet mninistcr for 13 year, which
he was, and you held a portfolio of Foreign Affairs and a few other senior portfolios and
you've only been in opposition for seven monthF. and you feel that you've got to burst
into public and whinge about It. you really have got a problem with your ego. And I think
it say-, a lot ahfll the~ Arrngnnce of the former government, but it's a lesson to us, it's a
lemson to remain in tnuch with the Aisrtrliafl pEople.
The last tling I want to say to you today, ladies and gentlemenl Is a very personal thing
and that is that to be the Prime Minisce of AuStralia Is without doubt the greatest
pri'vilegrc thut could evcr wne the way of any man or woman in this country. I want to
bay to you that all that I have aclikvvd in public life I uwc. to thc great party to which all
of us belong. I became a memiber of Parliament because or the Liberal Pairty. I became a
minister in the Fraser government bcerisc of the Liberal Party, T bcame leadoi or the
Liberal Party and I'm Prime Minister because I kcad the Liberal Party and tho Libtral-
National Patry Coalition. Like so many people in this room Ilvc devoted ail of my adult
lita4-! S a lot more to the service of the Liberal Party.
I've been through the good times and the bad times and the good tines again. So I've
never lost sight Of affirmative influences on my political thinking in my early years in
the Liberal Party in Sydney. But the people who were my heroes then are the people
from whom I took advice and received encouragement and, on occasions, inspiration.
The Liberal Party has never been a zealously ideological party. But it's reached its
greatest heights and its greatest moments when it's been a party of both ideas and
ideals. People say to me is the party an ideological one I say ' no, this is a party of
ideas and it's certainly a party of ideals. If you look at the last 50 years the great
ideas have come from our side of politics. The great in himigration tolerance, the
white Australian policy, the reception of so many Indo-Chinese refuigees in the 1970s,
that came from our side of politics. Many of the great social welfare reforms, the care
for the genuinely needy came from our side of politics. The great principle of quality
of opportunity and choice in the education of children, irrespective of whether it was
a government school or an independent school. That was pioneered by our side of
politics having been resisted for almost two decades by blindly ideological Labor
Party that couldn't see the essential principle of freedom that's involved in that. The
great ideas in the economic debates of the late 70s and through the 1980s they were
changed from our side of politics. It was the Coalition that proposed financial
deregulatrion. It was the Coalition that first propounded an industrial relations reform.
It was the Coalition that first propounded privatisation in the public interest.
Remember when Bob Hawke and Paul Keating said ' that if you sold the
Commonwealth bank Ben Chifley would turn in his grave'.-They said it was akin to
burning down the gum tree to do so. Getting the of time because we had led the
intellectual debate they succumbed and they came into line and they rather..
complied because they need the money and now they pretend that their opposition to
a sale one third of Telstra is based on some great principle of commitment to
public ownership in this country. After what they have done, after the hypocrisy they
have displayed on issues like the Commonwealth Bank and Australian Airlines and
Qantas, they have no right even to be in the debate of our privatisation in this country
any longer. 
Fax from We are most importantly of all, we are a party of ideals. We believe absolutely in the
importance in the individual worth and decency of every man and woman in this
country. We believe that self flulfilment and self esteem is important, that that is
always more important in the imposition of the collective corporatist wheel on
individual freedom and individual liberty. We believe very, very passionately in the
role and the importance of the family unit within our society. Of course, not all
families are happy but that doesn't in any sense destroy the fact that a stable,
functioning, united family is the greatest source of personal happiness and material
security that has yet been devised by mankind. And collectively those functioning
united families also happen to comprise the most efficient welfare delivery system that
mankind has ever devised. So ladies and gentlemen, this is an occasion to reflect with
personal and collective humility on the great responsibility that has been given to us
by the people of Australia. It is an occasion for me to thank the Liberals of Western
Australia for the tremendous loyalty, stoicism and commitment and support that so
many of you displayed over such a long period of time. It is an opportunity for me to
express my gratitude to the Liberal Party and it's an occasion for me to commait myself
and my colleagues to the service of the people of Australia. An occasion to say that
on all occasions the great goal of my Government will be to do good things for the
people of Australia. Thank you. Farxom 08/ 09/ 96 17: 22 Pg: 8 



12 September 1996
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
KEYNOTE SPEECH TO THE AUSTRALIAN FOOD COUNCIL
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
" SUPERMARKET TO ASIA"
Thank you very much Mr Murray Rogers for your invitation to speak today and for
those very warm introductory remarks. To my Ministerial and other Parliamentary
colleagues and to all of you, good morning and it's a great pleasure to have the forum
of this Council meeting to launch by far the most important initiative of the new
Coalition Government directed towards the long term benefit and the long term
strengthening of rural and regional Australia. As I look around the room, I am
reminded by the presence of a number of people of those who have made a
contribution to the formulation of the Government's thinking in relation to what I am
to launch today. I think of course of the contribution of the food industry, of
individuals in it, of people like Reg Clairs of Woolworths. I think of the massive
contribution of the National Farmers' Federation, represented here today by its
President, Don MeGauchie. I think of the contribution of quite a number of my
Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, of John Anderson, of Neil Andrew and of
many of the others, all of whom have played a very significant role in formulating the
Government's thinking.
I think all Australians believe that our food producers are undoubtedly amongst the
most efficient in the world and that we have the natural advantage of producing
products in a relatively clean environment. And that is a proposition that would draw
no dissent from anybody in this room. I think we are overwhelmingly conscious of the
huge opportunities that day by day are developing for propeily targeted exports from
this country to the Asian Pacific region. Everybody recognises the crucial sIgnificance
of that region to Australia's economic and political fu~ ture. It is for that reason of
course, and incidentally the first major visit I will undertake overseas as Prime Minister
wil be to Indonesia arid Japan next week, haviing last week visited the natioirs of the
Pacific region. So in every sens~ e there is a continuity of the commitment of this
T SJ SZ3ir 96/ 60/ ZI waOJiTj Xed 
country of economic and political involvement in the Asian Pacific region, an
association commenced many decades ago and continued without serious interruption
or change by Governments of both political persuasion in this country.
So we have together, if you like, together we have the capacity of this country as an
extremely efficient producer of food. We also have it being produced in an extremely
clean environment. We have a huge and growing potential inarket by its sheer size in
the Asian Pacific region, but added to that of course is the rapid development of an
increasingly wealthy middle class in many of the nations of the Asian Pacific region,
and inevitably that will bring forth demand for a greater variety of food, for greater
sophistication in food and therefore almost in the geometric progression, the market
opportunities are going to increase.
So against that background I think what we need to do is to assess what is the task, the
nature of the task required to achieve an additional breakthrough which will be of such
tremendous importance to rural and regional Australia. We produce the food the
region needs and instead of knocking on doors to markets, it's time we took the hinges
off the doors so that neighbouring consumers benefit, our food producers benefit and
Australia as a whole, particularly rural and regional Australia will also benefit. That is
why today I have very great pleasure in launching the Prime Minister's Supermarket
To Asia Council and I believe the outcome of the deliberations and the work of this
council will provide new opportunities and a real focus for the future for rural and
regional Australia.
The Council will bring together Government and industry and other leaders to work
together on removing barriers to greater exports of food products to the region. The
total Asian food market is estimated to be worth $ 685 billion by the turn of the century
with at least 12%, or over $ 83 billion to be met from imports, and this represents a
significant, indeed, huge opportunity for Australia. Producing quality food on our
farms and properties is of course not enough. We then have to get it to markets at a
good price, we have to add value to our raw products and we have to promote what
we produce.
As a sign to the Government's commitment to this process, four other senior ministers
will also be on the Council the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, Tim
Fischer-, the Minister for Primary Industry and Energy, John Anderson, the Minister
for Industry, Science and Tourism, John Moore; and the Minister for Transport and
Regional Development, John Sharp. There are a number of very eminent industry
leaders and representatives on the Council. They are Mr Keg Clairs of the Australian
Supermarket Institute; Mr Murr ay Rogers of the Australian Food Council; Mr Don
Mc~ auchie, the President of the National Farmers' Federation, and in addition, Mr
David Mortimer, the Managing Director of the TNT Group; Mlr Garry Ringwood of
AMCOR Ltd; Mr Malcolm Irving of the Australian Horticultural Corporation; and
Mlr George Kailis of the MG Kaiis Group. I also delighted that Mr Joe De Bruyn, the
National Secretary of the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association has
also agreed to join the Council along with Professor Adrienne Clarke, the Chairman of
the CSIRO. 2
z Ed sz: iir 96/ 60/ ZT Wo0xJJA XVJ 
I can't think of a more broadly based and a more representative group of people,
representing all of the interests that will come to bear on the very ambitious task that
we are with this announcement today setting ourselves as a Government. When a
Government invests the personal resources of time and commitment of a Prime
Minister, a Deputy Prime Minister and three other senior-Ministers and is able to enlist
the enthusiastic support of industry and trade union leaders and also other people with
expertise to bring to this exciting challenge, then I believe it sends a message to the
whole community and most particularly a message to rural and regional Australia as to
how important we regard putting down long term proposals and presenting a long ternm
focus which over a period of time can regenerate the fortunes and regenerate the future
of that part of Australia. We almost now accept it as part of the daily routine of
talking about Australia's political and economic future, ladies and gentlemen, to talk
about the association that we have with the Asian Pacific region, and the
announcement of this Council today and the coiluitment that it represents by the
Governiment and the commitment, and that will be spoken of in a few moments by
others, the commitment that it represents from industry is a very, very strong earnest
of the long term commitment we have to further interlocking the economic future of
Australia and most particularly rural and regional Australia with the burgeoning wealth
of the Asian Pacific region.
The Government has already committed $ 6 million over three years to increase efforts
to clear quarantine barriers to Australian exports, and in that connection we have
recently signed an agreement with the Philippines that will allow access of Australian
fr-uit previously banned.
Ini launching this Council today and throwing very much to the future and endorsing
the Government's commitment to the goals of gaining much greater access for fresh
and processed food into the Asian Pacific region, I think it's important to remind
ourselves that it's not just a question of promotion, it's not just a question of efficient
farm produce but it is also a question of removing so many of the barriers and so many
of the imposts which hobble an efficiently produced product with intermediate costs
which price that product out of world markets. Many of you around the room,
particularly those of you who represent our rural industries, are aware of the
disabilities, the cost disabilities, under which rural producers in this country have
operated for so long. The heart breaking frustration of knowing that you are an
efficient farner, that you are an efficient producer and that you can get your produce
out of the farm gate and a world competitive price only to have it mugged on the way
to the final point of sale and consumption by the inefficiencies of middlemen, by the
inefficiencies of processing, by an industrial relations system that is antiquated and an
industrial relations system that has added unnecessary costs.
So in launching this Council today 1, of course, underline the importance not only of
the initiative that it represents and the focus on promotion, the focus of taking
advantage of that huge market, but also the ongoing imperative to reduce the costs of
doing business in this country and the ongoing imperative of further micro economic
reform of industrial relations and transport and communications reform.
Mr Chairman, I am really delighted at this initiative which I first publicly outlined
almost a year ago when I addressed the anniual meeting of the National Farmers' 3
E fid SZ: i'T 96/ 60/ zr WOJJ Xpa 
Federation here in Canberra as Leader of the Opposition, a proposal that has been
under very close discussion between myself and senior people in the business
community and in the farming organisations, and I'm delighted to have this
opportunity of launching the Prime Minister's Supermarket to Asia Council, of
personally committing the investment of my own time and energy and that of my senior
ministers to achieving the objectives of the Council to thank those industry leaders who
have joined it, to thank Mr De IBruyn, coming as he does of a union background an
impressive national leader of the union movement, and of Professor Clarke of the
CSIRO. It is a marvellous cross section of people with all the skills and all the inputs
that are needed. It is a sign post of the long term commitment and in the long term
dedication of this Government to search for and find fresh initiatives and fresh ways of
revitatising and giving new hope and new encouragement and new inspiration to rural
and regional Australia in a way that is not a short term gimmick that takes advantage
of emerging market opportunities, builds upon the natural strengths of this country
which are efficient to production, a clean environment matching them in the most
appropriate way with the growing market, particularly of the middle class, in the Asia
Pacific region.
And if we can bring all of that together the opportunities for Australia, and particularly
for Australians who live in the rural and regional areas, are really bright indeed. Thank
you very much.
QUESTION: Perhaps I could kick it off, Ern Pope from Nestle Australia. I've got to say I must
congratulate you Prime Minister on pushing through with this initiative and perhaps I
could comment briefly on discussions we've had within the AFC Board as to what we
see as the really key issues here. I guess previously there seemed to be a focus on
communicating the clean and green image of Australia and while this is very important
it really is just a price of entry to many of these markets. Of course we've got to have
food safety issues covered, of course we've got to have all of the various programmes
like ( inaudible) covered right through the supply chain, but it really is only the basis of
entry into these markets and I think many of our customers in Asia reiterate that to us.
What they really care about, once they have a product that's adapted to their tastes,
what they really care about isn't cost competitive. Will it be delivered when we
ordered it, in the quantities that we ordered it and where we want it to be delivered?
This really gets back into the competitiveness issues and I guess, to some extent, the
market access issues. You've addressed that here, all I can say is, we would like some
reassurance that the competitiveness and market access issues will get priority as
opposed to perhaps just trying to promote the clean green image, because that really is
the basic of just getting there in the first place.
PRIME MINISTER:
I can certainly tell you very directly that they will and the emphasis that I placed in my
speech on continuing efforts at reducing the cost of doing business in this country,
continued efforts for labour market reform, and transport and communications reform.
There are probably many people in this room who in another context or other cunitextS
have heard me repeat the story of the Sizzler chain that was on the verge of buying the 4
1, d SZ: I. T 96/ 60/ ZT WWDJJ J Xpa 
American beef, despite the fact that it was 60 per cent dearer off the hoof. But
because of what happened from the farm gate to the point of final sale and
consumption, it ended up that the American product was 40 cents a kilo cheaper than
the Australian product.
Now, that's a parable, if you like, of the competitive disadvantage, through no fault of
their own, often of efficient primary producers in this country. And of all the things
that we want to do as a government, we really place as much importance, if not more,
on doing something about those sort of cost pressures as we do on anything else. And
I totally agree with you that promotion alone is not enough, the clean and green image
is not enough, efficient farm production is not enough because if you are mugged
along the way to the final point of sale by uncompetitive and costly practices, well you
lose the sale and you lose the whole momentum. The goal of a council like this
operating against the background of the Government's welt known commitment to
industrial relations reform, for example, which is a very topical subject at the moment
and one about which most of you have heard me talk repeatedly over the years, and I
know is very dear to the hearts of a lot of people in this room, but operating against
the background of that, this Council brings together people, not only in the food
industry and in the farming community, but also of course people in the transport
industry, which is so very important to the successful achievement of the goals of this
exercise. QUESTION: I should have also emphasised there that I think probably 80 per cent of the work that
needs to be done on our competitiveness resides within the companies in Australia as
well. I think the Government's role here to help free up the flexibility issues must add
to that and allow us to get on with it. The other issue though that I've got to say,
what my Asian customers talk about a lot at the moment is, ' when is the waterfront
going to be taken care of in Australia and should we order up massive amounts now if
it's going be an issue there?' This obviously has to be tackled in a sensitive way, but
tackled it must be. I'm just wondering if there's any comments you'd make on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, yes. We, as you know, and John Sharp has spoken about it quite regularly and
I'm very pleased that he's here today. We are very committed to reform of the
waterfront. It must go sequentially with generic reform of the labour market. The key
to waterfront reform is general labour market reform. It is a sensitive issue. We don't
intend to approach it in a needlessly belligerent or confrontational way, but we
recognise that there will be some fundamental changes needed. The costs of
processing exports through the Australian waterfront and imports too, is too high. It
does make much of Australian industry less competitive than it ought to be and many
of the problems lie with the monopoly practices which are the target of Australia's of
the Government's industrial relations reform package.
We hear a lot in economic debate about the undesirability of monopolies and of course,
they are undesirable in commerce, they're also unde~ sirable in other aicas as well.
Monopoly practices in the labour market are costly and anti-competitive, just as
S : BJd SZ31T 96/ 60/ ZI Wo01JJJX Xed 
monopoly practices in other fields such as education produce poorer outcomes than
will otherwise be the case. So I can assure you that our commitment to waterfront
reform is very strong, but it is something that is associated with generic reform to the
labour market and will be tackled by us in a firm fashion but in a fashion that's not
designed to be needlessly belligerent or confrontational.
QUESTION; There's no doubt that Asia is a particularly important market sector for Australian food
industries, but there is also a lot of food that's being exported to other parts of the
world at the present moment. Can we expect that the level of support will still be there
from the Government for continued ( inaudible) exports in those parts of the world?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, yes. It should always be, perhaps, understood and perhaps it should be stated
from time to time that the focus on the association with the region does not indicate
for a moment that this Government, or I hope any future government in this country,
ever has an ' Asia only' policy. It's a question always of seizing market opportunities
wherever they arise and it portrays an inadequate understanding of Australia's export
performance and the investment patterns and the investment flows, both 41 and out of
this country, over the last ten years, not to recognise the tremendous opportunities that
exist elsewhere.
I think it's fair to say that the dynamic of change is much stronger in the region. You
have not only the natural momentum of continuous economic growth, which is much
higher than other regions of the world, but you have the structural change which is
occurring with a rapid emergence of a very large middle-class whose capacity and
resources to purchase. Although, 10 per cent of a country is not a very large middleclass
in relative terms, but given the population sizes, they are enormous markets for
Australia. I mean, countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia and India al represent
fuarther purchasing power of their growing middle-class's enormous market
opportunities, and the diversification of taste and diet and so forth that will naturally
come because of those societal changes that have a sort of a multiplier effect on the
opportunities. But none of that means for a moment that we'll lessen the support for
the commitment toward improving market access in other parts of the world. We'll
never stop trying to improve market access into Europe, difficult though that is, but so
many of us have such long memories about that, we'd feel lonely if we still didn't have
that task ahead of us.
QUESTION: Graeme McDougall, Longerlife Vegetarian Products. Mr Prime Minister, we've
benefited over the years with grants from Austrade and I noticed that you've reined
that in some and I think our experience with Austrade is probably common to a lot of
companies around the table. There are some offices that are absolutely delightful to
deal with and they're go, go, and there are others that are just absolutely hopeless. I
wonder whether your government would ever give thought to a little bit of incentive?
9 Bd SZ: iT 96/ 60/ Zr WGOJJJT Xva 
We operate that way. Maybe some of the Austrade offices, if they had an incentive
that if they got the market open for you, could do a better job for us.
PRUIE MINISTER:
It's an interesting suggestion. I'd like to think about it. I don't want that to be
suggesting that there are all sorts of environments in different countries, and when you
mention the word incentive, that can have different connotations. Let me think about
that. I mean, we are adopting a quite interesting incentive-driven approach to job
placement. I mean, our program of privatising the job placement mechanism in this
country I think opens up enormously attractive opportunities there and I think we'll
produce far better outcomes than the present system. But I'd like to sink through the
implications of what you've suggested.
ends 7
z. d SZ: PT 96/ 60/ Zr WIOGJJJ xVPJ 


13 September 1996
E &amp; OE.........................
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. This is an inaugural exercise for me. It's the&nbsp;fourteenth meeting of the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council but it is of&nbsp;course the first such meeting to occur since the change of government in March and&nbsp;therefore it's the first meeting that I and my Ministerial colleagues, in particularly the&nbsp;Minister for Science and Technology Peter McGauran but also attended by a number&nbsp;of other ministers, including the Minister for Primary Industry and later on this&nbsp;afternoon, the Minister for Schools and Education. And it's also attended by a very&nbsp;large number, I think some 14 in number of Coalition Members and Senators.
I&nbsp;would also like to extend aspecial welcome to anumber of people who are attending&nbsp;their first meeting today Professor John De Laeter of the Curtin University of&nbsp;Technology, Professor Fay Gale, President of the Australian Vice Chancellors&nbsp;Committee and Dr Joe Baker, President of the Federation of Australian Scientific and&nbsp;Technological Societies. I do have an apology from John Moore, the Minister for&nbsp;Industry, Science and Tourism and one of the Council Members, Dr Ed Tweddell.
I would like to in front of an invited audience make the point that this is the first time&nbsp;that the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council has invited Members of&nbsp;Parliament, the media and interested scientists and others to observe part of the council&nbsp;meeting. We want to broaden community understanding of the work of the council,&nbsp;and through that emphasise the importance that the members of the council and also of&nbsp;course the Government, and the Prime Minister in particular, and the Ministers also in&nbsp;particular, place on the work of the Council and quite a deal of the areas of discussion&nbsp;that will be in the opening session to which members of the public and the media have&nbsp;been invited touch upon subjects that are important to contemporary scientific and&nbsp;political debate and through that I hope we can broaden in a small way community&nbsp;understanding of the work of the council and the role that science and technology does&nbsp;play in everyday life and how important it is to the solution of ongoing national&nbsp;problems. I do hope that the guests who are here today as part of that new approach&nbsp;find something of value and something of enjoyment from the proceedings.
I believe that the new Government, through both its policy statement on science and&nbsp;technology and engineering and its actions in the recent budget has shown a strong&nbsp;commitment to supporting science and technology. It has provided generously in the&nbsp;budget for assistance to our best researches through increased funding for the&nbsp;Australian Research Council and the National Health and Medical Research Council.&nbsp;Additional funds have been provided to research infrastructure. That's $ 90 million&nbsp;over three years and research training, $ 9.3 million over three years for 100 additional&nbsp;post graduate research scholarships.
Research industry interaction was subsequently boosted through extra resources for&nbsp;the Co-operative Research Centre's program. While the extent of application and the&nbsp;level of the industrial research and the development tax concessions have been&nbsp;reduced, we believe that the concession still remains generous in comparison with&nbsp;those of other OECD nations and the new R D start program introduced in the&nbsp;budget will provide attractive project based packages of very considerable help to&nbsp;Australian industry.
This morning's agenda items will deal with, firstly ways for science and technology in&nbsp;managing Australia's inland waters and presentations by two active scientists on their&nbsp;areas of research. The afternoon session will involve a presentation on a current study&nbsp;by the Australian Science, Technology and Engineering Council on primary school&nbsp;science and technology, and presentations from the major science and technology&nbsp;representative bodies on key issues confronting Australian science and technology.&nbsp;The agenda papers for today's meeting will be published including on the Internet. I&nbsp;will draw members' attention to the minutes of the last meeting held &nbsp;on the 8th of&nbsp;December last year which are the members' agenda papers.
We now move, ladies and gentlemen, to our first presentation for the morning which is&nbsp;called Managing Australia ' s Inland Waters Roles For Science and Technology. This&nbsp;is an important topic as the sustainable use of our natural resources is vital to our&nbsp;future. In Australia, in particular, proper management of our water resources is critical&nbsp;to sustaining agriculture, the environment and even human health. The Coalition's&nbsp;proposal about which much has been written and said to establish the Natural Heritage&nbsp;Trust of Australia into which will be paid, continuant on the sale of one third of&nbsp;Telstra, $ 1 billion to establish a fund in perpetuity for major environmental works is, in&nbsp;part, a recognition of the thrust of various Science Council work on sustaining the&nbsp;agricultural resource base.
Today's session on waterwork resources will add to our understanding of the natural&nbsp;resource which is important to us all. The presentations will focus on the Murray&nbsp;Darling Basin and the Great Artesian Basin. There will be three speakers to begin with&nbsp;and they will be followed by discussion. I would now, ladies and gentlemen, like to&nbsp;ask Professor John Murray, the President of the Murray Darling Basin Commission, to&nbsp;lead off the presentations and introduce the other speakers. But before asking him to&nbsp;the microphone, may I say to all of you, for me, this is a new experience. It is a&nbsp;privilege as Prime Minister to chair a body that is so directly concerned about planning&nbsp;for the long term future of the country a body which is so directly responsible for&nbsp;giving high quality advice to the Government and to the community generally about&nbsp;matters that will affect the way in which we live in this country, the extent to which we&nbsp;are mature and responsible enough to husband the resources given to us by nature and&nbsp;whether we are to strike that often elusive balance between protecting and nurturing&nbsp;our natural environment, but at the same time allowing for proper and progressive&nbsp;economic development which is also important to the future quality of the lives that we&nbsp;live.
But ladies and gentlemen, I invite Professor Laver to open discussion on the first of the&nbsp;agenda items. Thank you very much.
PMSEC MEETING ATTENDANCE FOR MORNING&nbsp;SESSION
COUNCIL MEMBERS ( At the table):Ministers: The Prime Minister, the Hon John Howard NIP ( Chair)The Minister for Science and Technology, the Hon Peter McGauran MP ( Deputy Chair)The Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, the Hon John Anderson MPThe Minister for the Environment, Senator the Hon Robert HillThe Minister for Communications and the Arts, Senator the Hon Richard AlstonThe Minister for Health and Family Services, the Hon Dr Michael Wooldridge MIPThe Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs, Senator the HonAmanda Vanstone
Ex Officio Members:Dr Joe Baker, President, Federation of Australian Scientific and Technological SocietiesProfessor Fay Gale, President, Australian Vice-Chancellors' CommitteeDr Keith Boardman, for Sir Gustav Nossal, President, Australian Academy of ScienceMr Peter Layer, for Sir Arvi Parbo, President, Australian Academy of Technological&nbsp;Sciences and EngineeringDr Don Williams, Chairman, Australian Science, Technology and Engineering Council
Personal members:Dr Claire Baxter, Director, Business Liaison Office, University of SydneyMr Ian Berckelman, Chief Executive, Vocational and Technical Training Corporation&nbsp;Australia Pty LtdDr Greg Clark, President, Technology Group, News CorporationDr Malcolm McIntosh, Chief Executive, CSLRO, for Professor Adrienne Clarke, Chair,&nbsp;CSIRO BoardDr Edwina Cornish, Managing Director, Florigene Pty LtdMr Norman Fussell, Chairman, Queensland Industry Development CorporationProfessor John de Laeter, Curtin University of TechnologyDr Ian Mair, Immediate Past President, The Institution of Engineers, AustraliaProfessor Fiona Stanley, Director, TVW Telethon Institute for Child Health ResearchDr Edward Tweddell, Group Managing Director and CEO, F H Faulding and Co LimitedMr John Vines, Executive Director, The Association of Professional Engineers,Scientists and Managers, AustraliaProfessor Michael Pitman, Chief Scientist
Dr John Bell, Acting Secretary and Chief Science Adviser, Department of Industry,&nbsp;Science and Tourism ( Acting Executive Officer)
&nbsp;


14 September 1996 
Thank you very much Mr Knight; to Bob and Mrs Carr, the Premier of New South Wales; to Councillor of Frank Sartor, the Lord Mayor of Sydney and to all other distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a great delight for me to be here tonight to say very briefly on behalf of the National Government how very committed it is to working as closely as possible with the New South Wales Government and with the authorities of the city of Sydney to ensure that the Games of the year 2000 and the 27th Olympiad are memorable in every sense of the word. They are memorable as a great sporting event, they are memorable as a celebration to the world of what a united, rich and diverse nation Australia is. They are memorable as an opportunity for Australia to welcome people from all around the world, to put on display our renowned capacity for tolerance, for friendliness, for informality and of course, never forgetting, also renowned to great Australian victories. And when we realise tonight that we are unveiling the logo for the Sydney 2000 Olympics, we do realise that we are in real time as far as preparation for those Games are concerned. And those four years, as I know everybody particularly associated with SOCOG and the organisation of the Games will know, those four years will go by very, very quickly indeed.
But I did want tonight, ladies and gentlemen, on this very special occasion in association with the Games to say that cooperation at all levels of government is essential, and on behalf of the Federal Government I want to say to the Premier of New South Wales that we'll work with you very, very closely. Our goal is to enhance the reputation of Australia because these Games, although they are being held in this beautiful city of Sydney, they are Games that belong to the entire Australian community. And I know that people all around our nation want the Games to be a success and as we get closer to the event people right across the continent will share &nbsp;the enthusiasm and the anticipation. So tonight is a significant milestone along the path to the Games. It is an opportunity to renew the commitment of all levels of government to the success of those Games. It's an occasion to recognise that a combined team effort will enhance the reputation of our nation and make the Games of the year 2000 a most memorable event and a curtain raiser to the celebration of 100 years of the federation of our nation.
Thank you.
&nbsp;


16 September 1996
&nbsp;E&amp; OE…..
&nbsp;Mr President
I wish first to thank -you for your hospitality. I am very pleased to be back in Indonesia, on this occasion for the first time as head of a new Australian Government.
I&nbsp;want to say how very much I appreciated your graciousness when I had to postpone my visit and how pleased I am that the visit could be rescheduled so soon.
There has already been substantial contact between the new Australian Government and the Indonesian Government. Five ministers from my Government have visited Indonesia since the elections, and a number of Indonesian ministers have been to Australia. In a month or so, ministers from our countries will meet at the Ministerial Forum.
I particularly welcome this first opportunity for me personally to reaffirm to you, Mr President, my commitment and the commitment of my Government as a whole to Australia's relationship with Indonesia. This relationship is of the very greatest significance to Australia and brings substantial benefits to our region as a whole.
That our relationship-has become far richer and so diverse reflects the natural complementarity of our national interests. But it also reflects the work that governments in both countries have put into nurturing it. I would like to thank you, Mr President, for the evident interest and care you have taken in it.
I also acknowledge the contribution made by our predecessors in government in Australia. The relationship with Indonesia enjoys bipartisan support from both sides of politics in Australia and this has a long history..
Indonesia had the support of Australia in its move towards independence after the war under a Labor government. It was a Liberal/ Country party government which welcomed the stability brought by the New Order government in the second half of the 1960s and in those early days helped in establishing the international financial arrangements to support Indonesia's development.
In more recent years, the Fraser, Hawke and Keating governments all played their part in strengthening the relationship.
The stability and unity of Indonesia and its economic growth under the New Order so much of which is due to your personal leadership, Mr President have been a feature of our economic and strategic landscape for 30 years and of great benefit to Australia and the region.
&nbsp;Australia and Indonesia
Our relationship now. has many dimensions.
Our bilateral economic links are flourishing. A decade ago, trade between us was worth less than S1 billion. In 1995-96 it was worth $ 4.2 billion That was 30 per cent higher than the year before. Our investment links are also expanding rapidly.
In part, this reflects the transformation of the Indonesian economy which has increased in size over five times since 1966. The dividend of wise policy choices by Indonesia is evident in the economy's growth and attractiveness to foreign investors.
&nbsp;I am pleased to say that Australia is deeply involved in this transformation. We are one of Indonesia's ten largest investors. Over 300 Australian companies have a presence here. We are your fifth largest source of imports.
&nbsp;This is a good start to making the most of the great potential of our economic relationship. But we should regard it as only a start.
&nbsp;As Indonesia closes in on its goal of becoming an industrialised nation, Australia is well placed to help supply your demand for intermediate and capital goods, services and technology. Dr Habibie's visit last year identified some of the scope for this. Greater cooperation is possible in areas like education, health, tourism, infrastructure, housing and business and financial services.
My Government comes in to office with a mandate to undertake some important reforms which I think will make Australia a more dynamic economy and an even more attractive economic partner.
&nbsp;Mr President
Just as Australia and Indonesia have come to see the mutual benefits of harnessing our economic. complimentaries, we have come to see the sense in close security cooperation. Our expanding security links and the recent Agreement on Maintaining security reinforce the confidence we have in each other.
The Agreement &nbsp;has my Government's strong support. It underlines that the security of each country is important to the other. It sends the message that at a time of strategic change Australia and Indonesia are committed to cooperating in order to promote regional stability.
These shared interests and views are being strengthened by increasing contacts between Australians and Indonesians. Our expanding -tourism, business and education links promote much better understanding of each other. More Indonesians and Australians than ever before are learning about each other's country, language and culture.
The confidence we have in each other and overall compatibility of our policy choices has made us good partners in regional affairs as well as bilaterally.
&nbsp;Australia and the region
Mr President
There is nothing new about Australia's active involvement in the Asia-Pacific region. Since the Second World War Australian Governments of al parties have recognised Asia's importance to Australia's future and have worked to strengthen links with the region.
Geography dictates nothing less. our security is closely affected by what happens in Asia. Our economic stake in the region is massive: more than 60 per cent of Australia's merchandise exports go to East Asia, accounting for nearly 12 per cent of our GDP. In turn, we are an important economic and security partner and a source of technology, skills and education for many countries in Asia.
We do not claim to be Asian. Like every other country in the Asia-Pacific, we bring our own distinct culture, attitudes and history to the region.
I do not believe that Australia faces a choice between our history and our geography between our links with European and North American societies on the one hand and those with the nations of Asia on the other.
Neither do I see it as a matter of balancing our interests in Asia against or with our interests in the rest of the world.
Neither do I see Australia as a bridge between Asia and the West as is sometimes suggested.&nbsp;Rather I believe that our geography and history are elements in an integrated relationship with our region and the wider world. Our links with Asia add something to our links with the rest of the world, and vice versa. For example, our close association and alliance relationship with the United States contribute to the prosperity and stability of the region.
My Government is committed to being an active participant in regional affairs. And in this I am confident that we can work closely with Indonesia.
Indonesia played a key role in the settlement in Cambodia, and we cooperated closely with you.
Mr President, it was under your leadership at the 1994 leaders' meeting in Bogor that APEC set the historic goal of fee trade in the region by 2010/ 2020. Australia strongly supported that goal at the time. My Government remains committed to it.
I look forward to discussing with you how Australia and Indonesia can work together at this years leaders, meeting at Subic Bay to make progress towards it.
Conclusions 
As neighbours, Australia and Indonesia have a close interest in the success of the other. We should support each other's. efforts.
We have to recognise that each country brings different strengths to the relationship. We should acknowledge each other's achievements. We should not presume to have the answers to each other's problems.
We are very different and we cannot expect always to see eye to eye. No country can be asked to deny its history, principles or culture, But when disagreements emerge, they should be seen in the context of the overriding mutual interests we share and the immense benefit of a close relationship between us.
Mr President
The key to any friendship is a shared long-term commitment to each other's well-being. I believe that commitment exists in Indonesia. I want here tonight to renew it on behalf of Australia
&nbsp;Thank you
&nbsp;



Fax from 19 September 1996
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MW
LUNCH HOSTED BY LEADING JAPANESE BUSINESS
ORGANISATIONS, TOKYO
IMO E 00
I am very pleased to be here today addressing major representatives of Japanese
business including some old friends.
The Australia-Japan rpartnershiD
A gathering like this underscores for me the special character of the Australia-
Japan association. It is a remnaflcble partnership. And I would like to
acknowledge before this audience the role of the private sector in laying the
foundations of this partnership.
Both Australia and Japan owe a great debt to the vision and commitment of the
Japanese business executives and their Australian counterparts who
pioneered the resources trade in the decades after World War 1I.
They laid the foundations of a trading relationship that fueled Japan's economic
miracle in the 1960s and 1970s. It is a relationship that-is stfil vitally important
to Japan's continued growth and to Australia's prosperity.
It is also a relationship that has had a sigificance beyond its bilateral character.
Because of its importance to Japan as the largest economy in the region, its
dimensions and its reliability, this trading relationship is one of the great sinews
of economic interdependence in the region as a whole. Faro m19/ 09/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 3 
Fax from -2-
Austr-flia trades more with Japan than we do with any other country. In 1995, a
quarter of Anstrnilia's merchandise exports and a fifth of our services exports
went to Japan.
From Japan's point of view, we are its fourth largest source of imports. We are
its largest supplier of energy apart from oil.
Our economic relationship has now become much more diverse. Australia is
exporting more services, manufactures and processed foodstuffs to Japan as the
Japanese market has opened up. As exports of manufactures and services grow,
small businesses are becoming increasingly engaged.
Japan is the third largest foreign investor in Australia with a current stock
worth around $ 50 billion. It may surprise some of you to hear that nearly
per cent of Japanese inveslunent flows to Australia in the past three -years have
been to the manufacturing sector. In 1995, Australia was the fourth largest
destination in the world for Japan's foreign direct investmnt
Our relationship of course, Ladies and Gentlemen, goes well beyond the
economic. Australia and Japan increasingly have similar strategic interests.
Both of us are inextricably tied economically and strategically to Asia. But
neither of us takes a narrow or inward-looking view of our region or one that
excludes others.
Japan and Australia both see their wider international links as bringing
something positive to the region. We both see our relationships with the United
States, in particular, as vital to the economic growth and to the stability of our
region. Hence, we both see APEC as a key framework for cooperation-
We also share an interest in the closest possible engagement of China in
regional and global affairs as a responsible partner. Hence, we would both
like to see China become a member of the World Trade Organisation on
reasonable terns.
The scale of human contact between our societies is now very large. Nearly
800,000 Japanese tourists visited in 1995. In the same year, nearly 80,000
Australians came to Japan. Six thousand Japanese students are in Australia,
while 1,000 Australians are studying in Japan.
So out of a trading relationship begun in more difficult times has grown a
strong economic and strategic partnership between our two countries and a
genuine friendship between our communities.
The purpose of my -visit is to assure you that my Government is strongly
committed to advancing Australia's partnership and friendship with Japan. I
see a dynamic partnership as serving Australia's and Japan's needs well into
the next century. I see it also as makcing a crucial contribution to the prosperity
and the stability of our region. Farxft 19/ 09/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 4 
The new Australian Government
I am conscious Mrt Chairman that a change of government after 13 years will
inevitably arouse interest. Let me say that my Giovernment does have different
views on some issues from our predecessors. And I want to say something
about that in a minute.
But first I want to reiterate that I and my Government welcome the progress
made in the relationship with Japan under Mr Keating's government and under
preceding Australian governments. Successive Australian governments from
both sides of politics have made a contribution to building Japan and
Austi-alia' s relationship.
The foundation stone of the modem economic relationship between Australia
an~ d Japan was of course put down by the late Sir John McEwen as Deputy
Prime Minister in a Liberal/ Country' Party Government and the then Japanese
Foreign Minister, Mr Kihi, in the formulation of the Australia-Japan
Commerce Agreement in 1957-
1 would like to say somethig about the differnt policy perspectives of the new
Government because they are important and I believe will benefit our
partnership with Japan especially as they will make Australia's economy more
competitive and capable of sustaining growth in the longer term,
Australia's economy:, the challene
The key policy questions facing both Australia and Japan along with many
other developed economies are similar. Those questions include how best to
generate sustainable growth; how far should government intervene in the
economy, and how to lower unemployment*
Australia and Japan also need to ask how we can best promote continued
growth in our region. In the case of Japan, it is good news for all of us that the
Japanese economy is now beginning to grow more strongly.
My government in March inherited an economny that was growing well with
relatively low inflatiou-It grew by over 4 per cent in 1995-96 and is expected
to continue to grow by about 3 V2pzer cent in the current fispal year.
During the next eighteen months Australia is expectcd to grow faster thani any
member of the 07 and to be one of the half-dozen fastest growing countries i
the OECD. Inflation is low and should. fall to round 2 per cent by the middle
of next year.
, Fax from 19/ 09/ 96 17: 46 Pg: S 
I Fax from -4-
But my Gonvemment also inherited an economy with some pressing structural
problems. The most important were the problem of national savings, the lack
of flexibility and competitiveness of Australia's labour market, and the
constraints on small business,
If these problems are not addressed growth in Australia ' will not reach its full
potential, and we won't be able to reduce unemployment.
And these are the problems therefore that my Government's reform agenda
will tackle.
The role of government
Central to my approach is our view that government works best when it
supports people and business rather than ties them down in regulations and
bureaucracy. Government still has an important role to play at a strategic level. My
Government is certainly not driven by any blind ideological imperative to slash
the role of government for its own sake.
But the best contribution government can make is to lay down macro-economic
and micro-economic policies which create the conditions for business to thrive.
he budget
With this in mind, our first priority has been to get the budget in order.
We have cut $ 3.9 billion from the underlying deficit in this financial year and
cut $ 7.2 billion by 1997-98, bringing the budget into underlying surplus in
1998-99.
Government outlays will drop nearly 2 per cent from 27.2 per cent of GDP
last year to 25.4 per cent in 1997-99, the lowest level since 1989-90.
Increased national saving will help find investment, reduce pressure on the
current account deficit and interest rates, and enable Australia to sustain higher
rates of economic and employment growth.
My Government has also committed itself to a number of measures which will
make fiscal and monetary policy more transparent, This will improve the
quality of policy formulation and the degree of accountability of the
Govcrnment's performance.
We will legislate for a Charter of Budget Honesty. Amongst other things the
Charter will require the government of the day to publish an official budget
update at the beginning of each federal election campaign. 19/ 69/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 6 
We have also announced an agreement with the Reserve Bank of Australia
which reinforces the Bank's independence and the shared commitment of the
Government and the Bank to an underlying inflation target of 2 to 3 per cent,
on average, over the economic cycle.
Industrial relations
My Government importantly is also committed to reforming Australia's
industrial relations system.
Our agenda for industtial relations reform is far-reaching and responsible. It
builds on the shift towards enterprise bargaining1 which business and unions
have supported. It will produce a more efficient and a more flexible labour
market. Under a new system of workplace agreements, employers and employees will
be able to enter into agreements on either an individual or collective basis.
Wages and conditions will be determined as far as possible in the workplace,
within a safety -net of minimum conditions and without the involvement of
uniions unless the employees want them involvedL
Inesponsible industrial action will also be minimised by guaranteeing genuine
freedom of choice for employees as to whether they belong to a union.
Penalties against unlawful industrial artion will be bolstered, including for
industrial action against companies not directly involved in a dispute.
The Australian community, understands the need for change in labour relations.
People understand the costs to the economy of uncompetitive labour practices.
Practical reform in industrial relations is absolutely necessary if we are to
increase job creation and reduce unemployment. Higher productivity will lift
economic growth and create new economic opportunities for all businesses,
large and small.
I am confident that our policies will engender more cooperation between
employers and employees and a greater sense of shared interest in the success
of particular enterprises.
Improving competitgveptess 2nd reducing re3LlatiOns
My Government is also committed to mak~ ing Australia's transport,
communications and other infrastucture more internationally competitive.
Fax from 19/ 09/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 7 
Fax from -6-
A nntional elcctricity market wvill be established in which power retailers can
compete. The remaining barriers to free and fair trade between the states of
Australia in nata4 gas will be dismantled. These steps will greatly improve
the prospects for ventures in mining and minerals processing in remote and
regional Australia.
We will sell one third of Tcistra, our national telecomnmunications carrier. We
will privatise federal airports through the sale of long-term leases. And we will
encourage greater private participation in rail services.
A task force is currently reviewing business regulations in order to fulfill my
Government's commitment to reduce red tape for small business by 50 per cent
in our first term in office.
My government recently established an independent review of Australia's
financial system to ensure that our regulatory arrangements are as modemn and
cost-effective as possible.
I believe that these reforms will reduce the costs of doing business in Australia.
They will make Australia more competitive and a more attractive partner for
Japan and for your companies and your institutions.
Last week, my Government announced a Supermarket to Asia CounciL This
Council. which I shall chair includes sectorai ministers, farmers, the transport
industry, the food-processing industry, the packaging industry, the distribution
and retail industry, oir national scientific research body, and a representative of
the union movement.
Its aim is to remove unnecessary regulations and generally improve the
effectiveness of the food export chain from production on the Australian farm
through to distribution into the Asian retail outlet
Japan has undertaken significant steps to open its markets. This has led to
increased market opportunities for countries like Australia in areas such as
housing and construction, processed food and information technology.
Australia is conscious that it will only succeed in taking advantage of new
openings if we are a ful~ ly competitive nation. But there are still areas where
we would like to see further liberalisation and deregulation in Japan, including
in the agricultural sector.
Finally and importantly. we in Australia know that living cheek-by-jowl with
the fastest growing economic region in the world is no automatic guarantee of
economic prosperity, success or market access. We must compete effectively
in order to take advantage of that geographic prornixity. Fa rom19/ 09/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 8 
Fax from -7-
AklEC I mentioned earlier the importance to both A'uvTalia and Japan of doing what
they can to support continued growth in the wider region as well as at home.
Last year at the Osaka APEC leaders' meeting, Japan demonstrated her
credentials to regional economic leadership. That meeting set out a blueprint
for implementing the goal leaders had set the year before in Bogor.-free and
open trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific by 2010/ 2020-
My Government is committed to APEC and its free-trade goal. I look forward
to discussing the forthcomi~ ng leaders meeting with Mr Hashimoto tomorrow
and to exploring how I can cooperate with him in consolidatinig APEC.
The fact is that economic srowth in East Asia beginning with Japan's own
spectacular experience in the 1960s has relied to large extent on finding open
markets for its exports. We cannot simply assume that markets wilt. become
more open or even stay as open as they are now.
There will always be pressures in Australia, Japan and elsewhere to slow the
pace of liberalisation and deregulation. I understand those pressures and the
social and political considerations behind them
APEC offers the opportunity to help balance the short-term costs of domestic
structural adjustment by improving access to export markets and by easing the
burden on consu~ mers. APEC also helps maximise the benefits of liberalisation.
The greater the number of economies that liberalise together, the greater the
beneit to each-
But for the process to work it is important that all APEC economies contribute
to liberalisation and that all sectors of the economy are involved.
As you know, each APEC couny must produce an individual action plan
setting out how it intends to achieve the free-trade goal. These plans, I believe,
must include substantial trade liberalising and facilitating measures that will
bring concrete benefits to our business communities. They should go beyond
existing Uruguay Round commitments.
I think business should play more of a role in evaluating the progress of a-ade
liberalisation in APEC. One practical way of doin this would be for the
A2PEC Business Advisory Council to provide an independent report to APEC
m Isters on the individual action plans.
With substantial progress towards the Bogor target, APEC leaders can credibly
urge the World Trade Organisation to agree on goals at its inaugural ministerial
meeting in Singapore in December that will generate a renewed sense of
purpose in global trade negotiations. Fafr~ i19/ 69/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 9 
Fax from -8-
This is important to help prevent the world from frapnenting into in protective
regional trading 3rrangements. Neither Japan nor Australia is part of a trading
bloc. We share the very strongest interest in the success of APEC and in the
strengthening of the WTO.
APEC members could also look at steps to accelerate liberalisation. At the
recent APEC energy ministers' meeting in Sydney I proposed that APEC
economies consider achieving free trade in primary energy by, for example, the
year 2000. Bringing forward the target for free trade in primary energy would
boost regional growth and make it much easier to find the enormous private
sector funding needed to build the required infrastructure,
Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen
I have appreciated very much your hospitality today. On my first visit to Japan
as Prime Minister I am indeed privileged to have had the opportunity to speak
to you.
I chose to come to Japan in the first seven months of my Prime Ministership
quite deliberately.
I did it to demonstrate the ongoing commirnent of my government and of the
people of Australia to the strong relationship, the deep and mature relationship,
the remarkable relationship that does exist between Japan and the Japanese
people and Australia and the Australian people.
I wanted to convey to you some of the messages both about continuity and
about change.
There is continuity about the commitment of Australia and the Australian
people to our relationship with your country and your people. There is also
inevitably, and naturally and properly, in the democratic process an agenda for
change now that a new government has been elected in Australia.
I want to say to you that I bring the goodwill of the government of Australia, I
bring the goodwill of the people of Australia, and I want to conclude by again
thanking those people in the business community here in Japan and back home
in Australia who from very small beginnings have built a great economic
partnership a partnership built on mutual advantage and co-operation, and a
partnership that has brought the two nations and the peoples of those two
nations very close as we move together towards the next millenium. 19/ 09/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 



Fax from F PRIME MINISTER
19 September 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
LAUNCH OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS INTERNET SITE
TOKYO JAPAN
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much for those words of introduction. Those of you who have
attended my earlier speech will know that this is the first occasion that I've visited
Japan as Prime Minister and I'm pai-Ecularly happy to be asked to inaugurate The web
site which will make yet another contribution, an importani one, to enhancing the
business and econoinic links between Australian and Japan.
I thought Australia had a well earned reputation for voraciously devouring new
technology but I do not think wve can possibly m'atch a rate of growth of 10 per cent a
month which was mentioned as the rate at which internet use is now occurring in
Japan, We clearly have; in common a rapid assimilation with the new technology and I think
the contribution that this site and the contribution that the internet generally will make
will be particularly apparent in the area of small and medium sized businesses. One of
the remarkable features of the communications revolution of recent times is the way in
which the tools of that revolution the personal computer, the facsimile machine an~ d
the mobile telephone have in a sense empowered small business and dismantled many
of the market barriers and the costs involved in world-wide information seeking and
the way in which this site in its own small but very important way will improve the
access to small and medium sized businesses to market opportunities, is in many
respects its most attractive feature.
understand that through the opening of this site Australia is taking a lead that no
other foreign agency has a site of this capacity, sophistication oi-breadth and in the
long term the site is a further means of developing Australia's commercial and national
image aniongst the Japanese people. FaIx r o~ 19/ 091/ 79: 646 Pg: 1 
19/ 89/ 96 17: 46 Pg: 2
Fax from One of the features of a facility suoh as this is that it equalises the opportunity for
people wanting access in whether they comne from regional areas or large cities and the
Australians amongst us will understand that that will have a particular resonance in
relation to recent political debate. For example Japanese retailers looking for sources
for importing food will be guided directly to options of buying Atlantic salmon from
Tasmania and live abalone from Ulladulla and so on.
This internet, this site can help deliver good business results but at the end of the day
because it is all about working hard nd keeping one's competitiveness up to the mark,
a constant theme of the economic relationship between Australia and Japan.
Ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate those responsible for this site and I have very
great pleasure in declaring it officially open. Thank you. 


20 September 1996E&amp;OE.........................................................
PRIME MINISTER:Thank you very much Mr Chairman for that introduction. I welcome this opportunity in nearing the end of my first visir to Japan as Prime Minister to say a few words aboutthat visit; the reason why I came, what has been achieved and the significance of that visit to the relationship between Japan and Australia.
I came to Japan in the first major overseas visit I have undertaken as Prime Minister quite deliberately because of the extremely close relationship between our two countries, my desire to establish a personal association with the Japanese Prime Minister, particularly before the meeting of leaders of the APEC countries and to make it abundantly clear that although the new government of Australia was going to do some things quite differently from the former government, there was an essential continuity of the relationship and the foreign policy positioning of Australia so far as the Asia-Pacific region was concerned. It is for that reason also that this visit embraced a visit to Indonesia carrying with it the opportunity for me to see President Soeharto for the first time in my capacity as Prime Minster. I can report that those goals in relation to both Indonesia and Japan have been completely achieved but my remarks this afternoon will appropriately be directed towards my visit to Japan.
I have established a very friendly working relationship with the Japanese Prime Minister. Our discussions both in the formal session and over lunch were warm and frank. I was able to tell him of the importance that the new Australian governinent placed upon the relacionship with Japan and I was able to canvass a number of specific items both in the context of our bilateral relationship and also in the context of our common membership of the APEC grouping and also our common identity as partners in the Asia-Pacific region. But I will come to those particular items in a moment.
The visit was also an opportunity to speak to leaders of the business community here in Japan. I had the opportunity of getting their views on investment flows and the reactions were entirely positive. I was struck at both a political and a business level at the knowledge of the initiatives of the new government and the widespread approval of those business and political leaders, of the initiative of the government in tackling the budget deficit and also the initiative of our government in proposing reforms to the labour market and other micro-economic reforms. Virtually every person&nbsp;I met raised these initiatives in an entirely positive and welcoming fashion.
I extended an invitation to the keidanren to send a mission to Australia next &nbsp;year and&nbsp;that invitation was warmly accepted. I have also renewed the invitation of the&nbsp;government to Mr Hashimoto to visit Australia next year and also a longy standing&nbsp;invitation to H-is Majesty the Emperor to visit Australia.
In addition to the matters that were mentioned at our joint press conference this&nbsp;morning, I also raised with the Japanese Prime Minister two specific matters of&nbsp;particular concern to certain Australian interests. One of those was a request to the&nbsp;Japanese Government that it include in its detailed plans for APEC a major initiative&nbsp;towards fuirther trade liberalisation in the area of agriculture. I also raised the specific&nbsp;timing problems involved in the auction of foreign quotas of rice imports into Japan,&nbsp;the current timing of which particularly disadvantages Australian rice producers and&nbsp;exporters.
I can say, ladies and gentlemen, that there is a remarkable coincidence of views&nbsp;between Australia and Japant regarding regional issues. Both of use share a very strong&nbsp;commnitment to the goals of APEC. Each of us realises that the details of particular&nbsp;action plans and the specific intent of the member countries of the APEC grouping&nbsp;regarding trade liberalisation will ultimately demnonstrate how successfuil the grouping&nbsp;and its goals are going to be. We also, as mentioned at our press conference, share&nbsp;fairly common views regarding the importance of engaging China and in particular of&nbsp;securing the inclusion of China in the World &nbsp;Trade Organisation.
Over lunch the Prime Minister and I had the opportunity of canvassing a very wide&nbsp;range of regional and indeed world issues and I particularly valued the more than two&nbsp;and a half hours that we spent together today. It gave me a unique opportunity so&nbsp;early in my Prime Ministership to get the views, the very candid and open views of the&nbsp;Japanese Prime Minister about world and regional political issues and what those&nbsp;exchanges demonistrated to mne yet again was that the relationship between Australia&nbsp;and Japan is anything but just an economic relationship. Over the years it has ripened&nbsp;into a very diverse and intricate relationship; certainly a very strong, indeed a critical&nbsp;economic component so far as both countries are concerned but it also has a very rich&nbsp;political cultural and increasingly personal dimension to it. I found in all of those&nbsp;respects my meeting wvith the Prime Minister today to be extremely beneficial and it&nbsp;certainly has provided an excellent stimulus for close relations between the new&nbsp;Government of Australia and the Government of Japan. Thank you.
QUESTION:In Japan the general election will be comning up very soon and one of the major agenda&nbsp;for the Japanese election would be the administrative reform. Now, in your country&nbsp;Prime Minister Howard you have been implementing administrative reform. I wonder&nbsp;if you could elaborate the goals behind your effobrts to reform the administration and&nbsp;the Government and what you intend to do with the reform and what has been the&nbsp;response on the Australians vis-i-vis your reform efforts? You have stated that your&nbsp;reform efforts been favorably received by the Japanese political and the business&nbsp;leaders but what has been the response within your own county.
PRIME MINISTER:The domestic response has beart one of near universal acclaim. We've had a very, very&nbsp;positive response fiom. the people. We brought down a strong but fair budget whichprovided for very heavy cuts in government spending and an underlying surplus by year&nbsp;three of our administration and that has certainly been accepted by the Australianpeople by and large. There are obviously some areas of criticism but by and large it&nbsp;has been very, very well accepted, in fact beyond the expectations of some so far as itsreception is concerned.
The purpose of our reforms is very simple and that is to address the fundamental&nbsp;problems of the Australian economy and those problems mean that we cannot grow ata fast enough rate to reduce unemployment. And the reason we can't grow at a fast&nbsp;enough rate to reduce unemployment is that we have a chronic savings problemn whichmeans that when we grow we suck in too many imports and wve have to depend upon&nbsp;the savings of foreigners in order to finance those additional imports. Anid the otherweakness we have is that our labour market is very rigid and we've proposed major&nbsp;reforms in that area So, we're tackling the savings problem via. reducing the budgetdeficit and we're tackling the structural rigidity problem by reforming the labour&nbsp;market and there are other subsidiary reforms but they are the core reformns which arebeing proposed by the Government. They were reforms that I believe received the&nbsp;endorsement of the Australian people at the election six months ago and I think theAustralian public wants those reforms implemented and rthe Australian public believes&nbsp;that they ought to be given an opportunity of working their way through the economnyand we want to take the spced limits off growth because it is only by doing that, that&nbsp;we can hope, over time to reduce unemployment.&nbsp;
QUESTION;You mention you had raised APEC with the Japanese Prime Minister specifically&nbsp;asking himn for Japan to present a liberalisation measure in agrictlture. What was hisresponse arnd do you have any specifies in mind that Japan might be able to present in&nbsp;November?
PRIME MINISTER:That and the issue relating to r-ice will be considered by the Japanese Government.&nbsp;You asked me&nbsp;for some examples of major initiatives that's perhaps something that&nbsp;&nbsp;we may ffurther canvass with the Japanese Governmnent between now and the meeting&nbsp;but the matter is now obviously going to be considered and the proposal that I put to&nbsp;the Prime Minister, but beyond that it wouldn't be appropriate for me to say anything.
QUESTION:I understand how in July this year your Government and the US Government has&nbsp;discussed the strengt~ hening of your ties in the security field and you have also carried&nbsp;out a joint exercise with the United States. I wonder if you could explain the backdrop&nbsp;as to, explain the backdrop of your strenigthening your security ties with the United&nbsp;States, are you expecting the United States to, are you intending to enhance your&nbsp;security position of your own country through greater presence of US forces in your&nbsp;country or are such manoeuvres more or less intend or have in sight the, have in sight&nbsp;China. In other words is China one element in your efforts to enhance your security&nbsp;ties with the Tlnitcd States? That's the first question.
Secondly, we understand that Australia is contemplating a possible expansion of&nbsp;exercises by your marine, by your marine core, your marines.. As you know there are&nbsp;some rumors within Japan that should Australia be expTanding your marine forces then&nbsp;that could possible lead to a reduction of US forces, the size of the US forces station in&nbsp;Okinawa? In other words the expansion of your marines could in a sense effect lead to&nbsp;realignment or consolidation of the US forces bases now stationed Okinawa. Are you&nbsp;in the future contemplating accepting US forces to your soil in Australia because of the &nbsp;vast land that you enjoy or is inviting US forces to your soil not part of the agenda and&nbsp;if that is the case why would you not contemplate accepting US forces on your soil?
PRIME MINISTER:Well&nbsp;Australia has had a long standing security arrangement with the United States&nbsp;and it seemed to the new Government the most natural thing in the world that that&nbsp;security arrangement should be reaffirmed and given a freshen up which is basically&nbsp;what occurred at the AUSMIN talks. Incidentally the Japanese Prime Minister&nbsp;remarked with approval today at both our private discussion and if I recall at our joint&nbsp;press conference at the desirability of the joint declaration between Australian and the&nbsp;United States in July and in fact likened it to the, although it has a different dimension&nbsp;and different history, he likened it to the joint declaration made between himself and&nbsp;President Clinton.
I think the best way I can answer the second part of the question is say there is no&nbsp;Okinawa link It is a completely separate situation and it would be to misunderstand&nbsp;the context in which we reaffirm, and if you like, freshened up the defence alliance with&nbsp;the United States to see it as having any kind of link. The Okinawa situation is a&nbsp;matter between the United States and Japan and it is not something that was in&nbsp;contemplation when the AUSMJN talks to place.
The facilities and the exercises that will be made available and will take place by and in&nbsp;Australia are really just a progression of the relationship which has been very close, its&nbsp;been veiy long standing. I happen to believe, my Governmecnt believes and I know the&nbsp;Japanese Government anid the Japanese Prime Minister believes that the presence of&nbsp;the United States is a force for stability in the region. I don't put it in the context of&nbsp;being country specific so far as other regional powers are concerned it is obviously a&nbsp;force for stability.
It is in ' the interests of all countries in the region to have a United States presence and&nbsp;we are quite open, we are quite unambiguous about that and in mny discussions with theJapanese Prime Minister today he was of the same mind and we both warn the United&nbsp;States in the region and I think one of the, if I may say so, one of the very best thingsin foreign policy the Japanese Prime Minister has done is the way in which he handled&nbsp;the relationship w~ ith the United States. The joint declaration of a few months agobrought to an end some trade difficulties betwcen the two countries and I think showed&nbsp;great vision and great leadership and he deserved all the praise that he received for it.
QUESTION:You mentioned that in your discussions with Japanese political and business elites there&nbsp;was a generally good response on the questions of both your fiscal and industrialrelations reforms. For the benefit of our Japanese hosts you do not control the Upper&nbsp;I-ouse of the Australian Parliament the Senate, and you need the Senate vote to getthose reforms through. Do you think there was a clear message from Japan, as our&nbsp;biggest trading partner, to an obstructionist Senate in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:I am sure that my hosts were too well mannered to interfere in Australian domestic&nbsp;politics. They expressed in all cases spontaneously support for the meAsures that we&nbsp;had taken, that we were proposing. They did not then go on ' to say ' I hope it is not&nbsp;obstructed in the Senate'. They obviously didn't do that. It would be inappropriate. I&nbsp;think the messages to the Senate are really messages to me IQ convey. I wouldn't seek&nbsp;to put words into the mouths of my hosts. That would be wrong. But nobody should&nbsp;be in any doubt at a that across the boayd, both~ political and businesswise, they were&nbsp;aware of what we had done with the budget, they are aware of what we are proposing&nbsp;in respect of industrial relations. Some of themn, of course, particularly some of the&nbsp;security houses, were aware of what we are proposing in relation to Telstra anid there&nbsp;is very great interest in it and -very great support for it. I would be putting words into&nbsp;their mouths if I said they mentioned the Senate, they didn't.
QUESTION:Australia is a very signficant member of the UK Commonwealth-As amember of the&nbsp;Commonwealth how do you assess, how do you view the Royal Family in Britain and&nbsp;what future outlook do you have for the Royal Family of&nbsp;Britain?
PRIME MINISTER:That is an interesting way of asking me whether I think Australia should become a&nbsp;republic, or not. My anti-republican views are well known in Australia; they were not&nbsp;disguised from the Australian people in the lead-up to the election nor was my very&nbsp;strong view that Australia's constitutional future is a matter To be decided by the&nbsp;Australiant people in accordance with the processes of the Australian Constitution. It is&nbsp;not normally&nbsp;a matter that I would myself raise outside of the country. I was critical of&nbsp;my predecessor for raising the matter, outside of Australia, I-do not intend to fall into&nbsp;the same error. In answer to your question, whether or not Australia becomes a&nbsp;republic will be determined entirely by the Australian people. It is uniquely for the&nbsp;Australian people and for nobody else to decide. I should perhaps add what I added in&nbsp;Indonesia to a similar question asked in a slightly different fashion and that is that I&nbsp;don't think it really matters what our constitutional form is; it is the quality and&nbsp;substance of our attitude to the nations of the world and the nations of this region&nbsp;which will determine whether we have good relations with themi or not. The nations of&nbsp;the Asia-Pacific region are a mixture of constitutionial forms but beyond that I really&nbsp;think the question of Australia's republican or other status is a matter for the&nbsp;Australian people to decide and I will certainly see to it during my Prime MInistership&nbsp;that there is a vote on the issue as I promnised. L
QUESTION:You have outlined aspects of your reform agenda, I am just wondering how you assess&nbsp;the risk of ainy short term transitional costs in the form of higher unernpioyment or&nbsp;higher industrial disputation?
PRIME MINISTER:I don't believe our proposals will lead to high unemployment, 1 believe they will lead to&nbsp;low unemployment. As far as industrial disputation is concerned there will be no&nbsp;warrant or justification for any industrial disputation in response to the legislation&nbsp;because there is nothing in the legislation which is unfai to the trade union movement&nbsp;and there is nothing in the legislation which was not made known to the Australian&nbsp;people before they voted us in with a majority vote of 40 in the House of&nbsp;Representatives. In both political and moral and industrial terms there would be no&nbsp;justification and I do not believe, in the broad sweep of things that there will be any&nbsp;significant industrial disputation as a consequence. ' That has been my personal view&nbsp;and remains my strong personal view and the view of the Government.
QUESTION:I would like to ask about the venue of the international Excpo for the year 2005. From&nbsp;what we understand from some reports by local newspapers in Australia it seems that&nbsp;the Gold Coast and the environs of Queensland would be expecting its candidacy to&nbsp;host the in ternational Expo, from what we have heard the State Government is also&nbsp;endorsing the Gold Coast as a bid to become the venue, As the head of the Federal&nbsp;Governmnent, Prime Minister, have you received -any formal or informal indication from&nbsp;the concerned parties in Australia about the possible candidacy? Secondly, I am sure&nbsp;that during the course of your stay in Japan you have heard about Japan's interest&nbsp;about hosting the international Expo in the year 2005. Should the local community in&nbsp;your country decide to host the international Expo what would your position be vis-a-vis&nbsp;possible support rendered to the Japanese Government? I do hope you will&nbsp;understand my interest because I&nbsp;am from the local community of the Aichi Prefecture.
PRIME MINISTER:The answer to that is that obviously if there is an Australian candidate I will be very&nbsp;strongly supporting the Australian candidate. It is a bit difficult for me to hypothesise&nbsp;as to what happens if there is not because that might sound back home as though I&nbsp;don't think there is a worthwhile Australian candidate. I would never want to give that&nbsp;impression. Obviously if there isn't, then given our close association with Japan I&nbsp;indicated to a number of people who had raised it and a number of people had raised it,&nbsp;I indicated that we would obviously give sympathetic consideration. But I can't really&nbsp;say any mnore than that at this stage. I don't even know what other countries may be&nbsp;putting forward proposals and it is still in the very formative stages. Certainly I am&nbsp;aware of the proposal from the Queensland Government and I will naturally be very&nbsp;sympathetic according to the merits of it and you have to wait arnd see what happens.
MODERATOR:I would like to thank you for coming&nbsp;and responding to issues and questions which&nbsp;covered a very wise and broad spectrum in a clear cut manner.
PRIME MINISTER:Thank you very much.


E&amp;OE......
Thank you very much Prime Minister. I would like to thank you for the very warm and generous way in which I have been received and it has already been all opportunity for me to reaffirm the great strength and depth of the bilateral relationship between Australia and Japan
I took the opportunity this morning to thank the Prime Minister for the way in which, Japan had strongly supported Australia's desire to be part of the Asia European meeting. Japan has been very articulate and strong in support of Australia and we continue to appreciate that very much.
I also told the Prime Minister that Australia continued to strongly support Japan's desire to become a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. We appreciate that this will take time but we have long regarded it as a natural and proper thing to occur and something that will be entirely consonant with Japan's position and rolt, not only economically but also politically in the world.
Both of us agreed. as the Prime Minister said, how important it was to engage China, how important it was on proper conditions that China were to become a member of the World Trade Organisation and Australia and Japan have very, similar views in relation to the need to properly and appropriately engage China, not only in the World Trade Organisation but more generally.
I also took the opportunity to say again how much I believe the joint declaration framed by the Prime Minister and President Clinton, how much final. joint declaration of a few months ago has contributed enormously to the Japan' U. S relationship, but in so doing has made a very positive contribution to the stability and and given a&nbsp;very optimistic outlook to the region as a whole.
May I say on a more personal note that I have very greatly appreciated the talks so far with the Prime Minister, The talks have been very -warm, they have been very friendly, and they are to continue over lunch. May I respond very positively to the initiative of the Prime Minister in proposing a series of events to celebrate particular anniversaries in the relationship between Australia and Japan. Many of them are occurring Chis year and next year, and as the Prime Minister knows, the relationship between our two countries gets deeper year by year. It has gone way beyond a mere economic relationship. It is very much cultural and personal relationship as well, and I took the opportunity this morning of renewing my invitation to the Prime Minister to visit Australia next year. He will be very warmly welcomed as a very good friend of Australia and as a person who represents a country that is very important to Australia.
And in the course of our discussions I was able to say to the Prime Minister that the bilateral relationship between Australia and Japan was in absolutely excellent shape and in every respect it is a relationship that gives great pleasure anid satisfaction to the Australian people, I also said that over lunch we would talk a little about some of the changed domestic policies in Australia and I suspect we may even spend a few moments talking about election campaigns!


22 September 1996
E&amp; OE......
Thank you very much Bob, to Joan Sheldon, to all of my Federal and State Parliamentary and Ministerial colleagues. But most importantly of all, to the members of the rank and file of the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party, statistically, in terms of absolute political movement, without doubt the most successful Liberal Division on the 2nd March, welcome and thank you. 
I do want at the beginning of my speech this morning to extend my great gratitude for the skill and the application and the persistence and the organisational astuteness of the Queensland Division of the Party. You know better than anyone the difficulties you have been through over recent years, difficulties of money, difficulties of organisation, difficulties of being out of power, difficulties occasionally with Parties on our side of politics. But all of that was overcome. It all came together and I thank Bob Tucker as President and all the other members of the organisation for what you delivered to the Liberal Party nationally on the 2nd March.
 I also compliment you on the working partnership that you established with the National Party. You demonstrated the truth of that old Australian political adage that when the Liberal and National Parties work together they win together. 
It was a great victory. It was an exhilarating victory and it was a victory in which all of us are entitled to feel an immense amount of pride and joy and satisfaction. Political faith is important. The political philosophy through the good years and the bad has got to be maintained. And the true beliefs of any political party sustain it during the lean years. But success at the ballot box and the capacity in government to do something to change the direction of a nation is ultimately what politics is all about. It is ultimately about winning power to do good things for Australia. And the Liberal Party as we come towards the end of the 1990s, as we come towards a new millennium and we come towards the centenary of the Federation of the establishment of Australia the Liberal Party of Australia has unparalleled opportunity to mould the future of this country into the next century. 
We have an unparalleled opportunity to leave deposits of the values and the beliefs and the ideals of this generation of Liberals, just as that generation of Liberals that won power in 1949 were able to leave the deposits of the values and the beliefs and the ideals of that generation of Liberals. 
It was no accident that we won overwhelmingly on the 2nd March. All of us in our more reflective moments must have wondered whether it was possible. I must confess I went from a majority of one to a majority of a few more to a minority of one and the possibility of losing by an even bigger margin because somehow or other the opinion polls were all wrong. I went through all of those emotions multiplied on the 2nd March. I don't mind admitting I was a fairly nervous political leader at five minutes past six. 
And I will forever be indebted to the people of Portland in New South Wales. That poor bloke from the Australian Electoral Commission who had his computer in the Inter-Continental, and I kept pestering him saying " have you result yet, have you got a result?". And finally at 25 past six he said " I've got a figure" and he said " there has been a 15 per cent swing to the Liberal Party in Portland" and I said, " How many on the roll?" he says, Grahame Morris said to me " It's a bit early to claim victory yet mate". 
But when you reflect ladies and gentlemen, it was not accident that we won. It was no accident because we had planned and worked and dedicated ourselves to a change of Government. We managed to get unity with the Parliamentary Party and I thank all of my Parliamentary colleagues most sincerely for that. We got the organisation and the Parliamentary Party working together. We got Presidents around Australia who were prepared to put their authority on the line to get the right candidates in the right seats. I And that is what you have got to do. The Party organisational leadership is not just a passive funnel through which things pass without any kind of interruption. You have got to make certain you get the right candidates. In New South Wales for example, four preselections were changed in order to get better candidates. And we got very handsome dividends as a consequence of that. 
It was also no accident because our opponents more than any group of people I've seen in the years that I've been in politics had not only lost touch with the mainstream of the Australian community, they had quite literally stopped listening to the mainstream of the Australian community. The only people they listened to were the flatterers and the fawners amongst those in the national Press Gallery who themselves had become a self deluded, political elite, no longer understanding what people out there were thinking. And the leaders of noisy minority groups. Because the vote on the 2nd March was a vote  against government in submission to noise of minority groups as much as it was a vote against anything. 
They stopped listening. They had lost contact. And I think one of the reasons was that their views about leadership. You don't remember that leadership, that leadership was the slogan. Thank you. I'm glad it was. Leadership was the slogan in the campaign. I mean, I have views about leadership. Political leadership is very important. Let me tell you what political leadership doesn't consist of It doesn't consist of believing that you are Prime Mnister of Australia because of some kind of process of divine selection. You are Prime Minister of Australia through the gift of the Australian people and never forget it. And never let anybody who represents us in the Federal or State Parliaments ever forget that they are representatives there through the gift of the Australian people. And I have never forgotten and I will never forget what I owe to the Liberal Party. I would never have been a Member of Parliament if it hadn't been for the Liberal Party. I would never have been a Cabinet Minister, its leader and now the Prime Minister of Australia were it not for the Liberal Party of Australia and I owe it everything that I have achieved in public life. And I want to take this opportunity of reporting my thanks to my Party which has been my great obsession for all of my adult life and a bit more. It's a great movement and it's hung together and it's stared down those that derided it only a few years ago and said it was finished. Remember some of the articles written by some people, even on our own side of politics who should have known better, saying that the Liberal Party faced extinction if it didn't win another election, that it had lost touch with the mainstream of the Australian community. I think we've demonstrated very clearly that we haven't and that we won't. 
The leadership to me has always consisted in really two facets. There are some issues in politics where quite literally you must stand in the middle of the road and dare people to run you over, where you must say this is my position, I don't care what you think about it, I think it is the right position and I want you to follow it and support me and to trust me and to have confidence in me. And on occasions all political leaders must do that. 
There are other issues though where the art of good political leadership consists in listening and understanding and comprehending and absorbing and persuading and cajoling and explaining. And the art of good political leaderships is to get the right mix of those two approaches and those two qualities depending on what the issues might be. 
A few months ago, it was necessary as a matter of national political leadership that a strong stand be taken on the prohibition of dangerous weapons in this country and I am very proud that the Government I lead with the support of the State Governmnents of Australia and I pay great tribute to the assistance that I received on that issues from Rob Borbidge and Joan Sheldon. It wasn't so easy in some parts of Queensland as it was in other parts of Australia but that was an issue where political leadership consisted in staring down opposition and daring people to oppose you. And that was the issue. 
There are othcr issues where a different approach is needed. But above all good political leadership represents never forgetting that you are there not to tell people what they should think or what they should believe but you are there to give expression to their hopes and to their aspirations, to respond to their concerns and their fears but always to listen to what they have to say to you. And one of the reasons why there is more cynicism about politics in this country than there ought to be is that too often too many Australians believe that their political leaders never listen to them. And unfortunately too often they are right and it is very, very important. But now that the Liberal Party has this magnificent opportunity with the present generation to leave its mark on the political and social landscape of Australia. It's important that we keep that in mind. 
One of the great changes that have come over Australia in the last six months is that people do feel able to speak a little more freely and a little more openly about what they feel. In a sense the pall of censorship on certain issues has been lifted. I think we were facing the possibility of becoming a more narrow and restrictive society and that free speech could not be taken so easily for granted as we might in our calmer moments have assumed. I think there has been that change and I think that's a very good thing. And I hope it continues but like everything a right such as free speech carries with it responsibilities and I welcome the fact that people can now talk about certain things without living in fear of being branded as a bigot or as a racist or any of the other ( inaudible) expressions that have been too carelessly flung around in this country whenever somebody has disagreed with what somebody has said. 
And it is very easy to forget that a bare three and a half years ago at the height of the debate on the Native Title Legislation which has proved in its detail rather than its aspirations to have been legislation that contains a lot of defects. At the height of that The Melbourne Age carried a cartoon depicting Peter Reith and myself mounted on horses shooting Aborigines and the caption of the cartoon was " The second dispossession". Now, you know, that's not bad is it? When you think about it that's three and a half years ago. Merely because we disagreed with the Government, the then Government's version of what ought to be done to help. And I think that was symptomatic of the mood that was then developing. The election of the new Government has done something to make that kind of neo-MacArthyist, zealous prejudice reaction against something that you don't agree with, made that a little less acceptable and I think that is a great thing for healthy democracy in Australia.
There is an important caveat to that. While we must always welcome removal restrictions on freedom of speech and we must always treasure the right to free speech as being a cardinal principle, a given of our free and open society, we must always remember that rights always carry with them the responsibilities as well. And that freedom of speech carries with it a responsibility on all of those who exercise that freedom to do so in a tolerant and moderate fashion and to not convert the new-found freedom, if I may put it that way, into a vehicle for using needlessly insensitive and intolerant language. 
Mr President, you will remember all of you that we campaigned on a number of basic issues in the lead up to the election. Our slogan " For All Of Us" brought together in a very effective fashion the mood and the gathering resentments of the Australian people towards the type of government that they had experienced over 13 years. But we did campaign very strongly on the importance of the family unit within the Australian community. We said that we wanted to reaffirm unambiguously the belief of the national government that it was with all their imperfections, that it was through families more than any other personal association within the Australian community that we best saw to providing individuals with not only emotional support and happiness and satisfaction but also material comfort. It is a true statement that in addition to all its other great value, a stable, functioning family remains the most effective social welfare system that mankind has ever devised. 
We committed ourselves to a family tax package and a private health insurance rebate scheme and every last dollar of those two central commitments of our election campaign were delivered in the first budget of the new Government, brought down on the August. We also made much of our commitment to the role and the place of the small business in Australian society. Small business has always been part of the Liberal ethos. It has always been part of the Australian ethos. It has always been part of the Australian dream that I was brought up to believe in and there are many things that have got to be done to improve the operating conditions of small business in Australia. We have made a start. We promised relief in the area of provisional tax and that has been delivered, $ 180 million worth. We promised capital gains tax rollover relief and that has been delivered in the budget and it will start on 1 st July next year. We promised that we would reduce the burden of red tape on small business and we have made a down payment by already reducing by 20% the number of statistical collections by the bureau of statistics. 
More importantly, I will have in my hand by the I St November a report from Charlie Bell, the Managing Director of McDonalds advising on ways and means of implementing the Government's promise that we will try and reduce the red tape on small business by  the end of our first three years in Government. The constant bane of existence of every man and woman I know in small business is the endless, time consuming, wasteful, unaffordable exercise of filling out forms in the Government, be it the Federal Government, the State Government or the local government. They each carry an equal share of the blame, and I mean the most ridiculous thing is that so many of the forms are filled out just for the sake of getting them out of the way with little regard because of the time involved with scientific accuracy. There's a lot to be done in that area. We have a group of men and women, all with a business background, who are committed to the task and I hope to have in my hands by the first of November as promised a report that is going to tell us how we are going to achieve that objective. 
Finally and most importantly in the area of small business, we introduced within two weeks of the Parliament sitting, our historic Workplace Relations Bill which amongst other things will sweep away Laurie Brereton's stupid, job destroying unfair dismissal law. I mean it's an extraordinary piece of legislation, that little sort of nugget of stupidity that was introduced without warning. I mean, what mandate did he have in 1993. They talk about mandates. I mean it's a pretty perverse situation. In 1993m, the Labor Party, having said nothing about the unfair dismissal law before the election, gets it through the Senate and we in 1996, having said everything about our Workplace Relations Bill have got to negotiate like mad to get it through the Senate. Now hope we can and right at the moment Peter Reith is engaged in detailed negotiations with the Australian Democrats and I'm not going to say any more about the substance of those negotiations. I will keep saying a lot about the value of the legislation to the Australian community. 
I will keep reminding you that there are five things about that legislation. We get rid of unfair dismissals, we entrench voluntary unionism, we bring back the prohibitions on secondary boycott conduct under the Trade Practices Act that were only take out by the Labor Party because they were working, not because they were failing they were working so they threw them out and those things acted as a marvellous protection for small business against the predatory conduct of trade unions. We're also going to give people an absolute right to be in a workplace agreement, or an award according to their choice. And finally we're going to give those Australian workers who want to belong to a trade union, and there are many and that is their right, and they will be protected in the exercise of that right to the absolute hilt, we will give them the right to join the union of their choice. 
Now they are the five principles that underline our industrial relations legislation. There is nothing anti worker or anti union in the legislation. It is a pro-worker, pro-free choice bill, not an anti worker, anti union bill. And because it entrenches the principle of free choice, Jennie George and Bill Kelty don't like it. Haven't heard' much of them lately. They've had a bad month, a very bad month. Bill told us about the sonata and the symphony before the election that struck a few discordant notes over the last few weeks, it really has and so they both should have hung their head in shame, and their pathetic, inadequate," not me, maybe him, not either of us, don't know, didn't hear the noise, wasn't in the same room, different meeting". I've never seen guilty language more obviously displayed in the rather attenuated meeting I had with them after that rally. 
Let me say to you ladies and gentlemen, that the right of lawful, peaceful, noisy dissent is a fundamental right of a healthy, functioning democracy and even though inevitably it will be directed against the government in power, it is something I will always defend as Prime Minister of Australia, but violence in political advocacy has no place in the Australian community. So it is as we go on ladies and gentlemen, well to remember the things that we were elected to do and it is well to remember that in a short space of six months, we have set about implementing so much of that agenda. The Federal budget has rightly been acclaimed throughout Australia as a strong but fair response to the economic difficulties that the new government inherited. It is true that the level of economic growth and the level of inflation that we inherited on the second of March were very satisfactory, and I've never denied that. I see no point in manufacturing criticism or difference. There's plenty of natural criticism one can make of our predecessors without making up things. So let's get on with those issues where there are real differences. But we also inherited an Australian economy that had a very big deficit and when you have five years of growth, there's something wrong with the mob in charge when you're still in the red, and that's basically what we inherited. It's as simple as that. There was a huge run up on the bankcard that we picked up on the second of March and to have done nothing about it, or to have pretended to the Australian people, oh well, we won't do it this year, we'll do it next year. 
That's like taking two and then three and then four unaffordable annual holidays. In the end you have a huge blow up and that is exactly the choice we faced. We knew we had to make some decisions that we would rather not have made but we set about doing them in a fair manner and I said before the budget that I would be able to look every interest group in Australia in the eye and say that the measures that we have taken have been fair and defensible and the reason why the budget has been well received around Australia is precisely that. People knew there was a problem. They expected their Government to do something about the problem and they responded positively to the fact that the pain was spread around and that we didn't leave people who are genuinely vulnerable in the community exposed. And we have reached a stage in the Australian community where there are certain things accepted on both sides of politics. There are people in need, in desperate need. There are underprivileged Australians. There are poor people in our midst and it's always been the Australian way to look after the poor. But it's also been the Australian way to make certain that people who try and help themselves to something they're not entitled to, shouldn't be allowed to do so. And that applies whether it's the social welfare system or whether it's rorting the taxation system. It applies at both ends and that's part of the Australian fair go and it's part of the Australian approach. 
The budget has been very well received and great credit is due to Peter Costello and the other ministers responsible for putting the budget together. And I would say to those in the Senate who must decide in the next few weeks whether all of it goes through, just remember that the fundamental responsibility of a government is to get the national accounts in shape. And strangely enough, when you examine some of the things that our opponents have said about the budget, I mean, Gareth Evans, and I will come to him in a moment in more detail, but Gareth Evans said in an interview only a week before the budget, he said, what we really need is to, eventually after three years, to get the budget into balance. But that is exactly, Gareth, what we are doing. We are proposing a rate of fiscal consolidation that will deliver that outcome in Year three. 
And I don't think any Liberal supporter around Australia would have thanked us if we'd have got up on the 20th August and said, oh look, we won't do it this year, we'll do it next year, and they'd have thought, yeah, fat chance of that. If you don't do it the first year, you never do it. 
That's one of the iron laws of politics and we've done that and we're now in a situation that if we can get the budget through, largely intact, then by year three, the year whereon that balance of statistical probabilities there'll be another election the constitution says that we will have budget, all things being equal, in balance and that is a very, very healthy 
25/ 09/ 96 15: 51 Pg: 9 8 thing, both economically, and may I whisper it, politically to be in and we should never lose sight of the fact that one in government has got to balance the requirements of economics as well as the requirements of politics. But Gareth Evans is an interesting study. He said the other day that he was suffering from a disease. He called it nobody apparently takes much notice of him anymore. He's suffering from, he called it " relevance depravation syndrome". He said that when in opposition you made statements and speeches, he said you were impotent and irrelevant. Gee, he's saying, can I1ju st say one thing. You're saying that after six months. I hate to think how you'll be feeling after twelve and a half years, that's all. 
Now I know something about opposition. Opposition is a great training ground for Government because it makes you hate the thought of being there again and it's a great training ground for Government. Can I just say of our opponents, nothing to me represents a prize example of the arsonist claiming respectability as the fire fighter when you hear the Labor Party giving us lectures about unemployment. I mean, for 32 consecutive months under the former Labor Government, unemployment in Australia was higher than it was at any time under the previous Coalition Government, not for one month or two months but for 32 consecutive months it was higher than it was at any level under the Fraser Government. We inherited an unemployment rate of The unemployment situation in Australia at the present time remains overwhelmingly the product of the economy of the past four or five years. Don't let anybody lose sight of that. Unemployment has always been a lagged indicator. Unemployment always rises last when you go into a recession and it is always the slowest to recover and any suggestion that a mob that presided over post-depression high levels of unemployment for thirteen years have got any moral credibility six months after a change of government to start pointing the finger at us about unemployment, that is absolute fairyland stuff. It is an insult to the intelligence of the Australian people and quite frankly I don't think it is washing with any man or woman anywhere in Australia. 
Now the Labor Party in Opposition can do something very constructive to reduce unemployment. They can let us get on with our Workplace Relations bill. Because that will do more to reduce, in a structural sense, unemployment over the medium term than other change you can make. There are two things you have got to do to reduce unemployment in Australia. You have got to run the economy at a faster rate of economic growth because high growth generates more jobs and on top of that you can take away the rigidities and the impediments in the labour market to make it easier and more attractive to employ people. I mean the worst thing about the unfair dismissal law is not its stupidity in relation to people who are already in the workforce but the intimidatory effect it has on small business about employing additional staff. I mean everywhere I go in Australia, men and women running businesses say to me I'm not going to take the risk of taking somebody on. I can't afford to pay them $ 20,000-$ 30,000 to settle an unfair dismissal claim. BLIP may be able to afford it, the Government may be able to but I can't. 
And you see it was symptomatic about how out of touch that lot were that they didn't understand that when you were talking about the unfair dismissal law you were really
talking about those tens upon tens of thousands of small businesses to whom the loss of $ 20,000 or $ 30,000 a year meant the difference between making an ordinary living and having to go cap in hand to your bank again. And if they had understood that, if they hadn't seen business in terms of the large constellations and the big employers, they would have seen it in it's micro level they might have understood how absolutely ludicrous that was. But I don't think it would have mattered, it was the payback that Jennie George and Bill Kelty extracted for their support in the 1993 election campaign. And they paid on time, they paid the protection money on time as they always did in the past and they always will in the future. 
Can I say to the Labor Party if it really cares about unemployment now pass the employment relations bill. Withdraw your objection to it, let us get on with doing what the Australian people voted us in to do and that is reform the Australian labour market. 
Ladies and gentlemen time doesn't permit me to say any more. I just want to, no, don't push me, don't do that. Very, very dangerous. If my wife were here she would bury her head in the hands and say, no, don't let him go on anymore, but ladies and gentlemen, can I say what a tremendous honour it is to be here today as not only the leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party but as Prime Minister of Australia, what a humbling experience it is to be amongst people that have stuck by the cause in the good years and the bad years and we've been through all of them, all of them in spades over the last few years around Australia and here in Queensland but we've lived through it, we've kept the great principles of our party and this is an opportunity to remember why we won, to learn the lessons of arrogance from our opponents. They had that story about Bill Clinton having a sign above his desk before the 1992 election, it said " It's the economy, stupid". 
I think I've sort of got a sign that says " It Was Arrogance, Stupid". 
The Australian people want in their leader and their leaders, they want people who know what they believe in, who are prepared not to be intimidated, who are willing to stare down their opponents and their critics but they also want people who remain essentially part of the Australian community, people to whom they can relate, people to whom they can talk, and people they know will listen, not always agree with them, not always take their advice, that is never possible and I promise you that in what I hope will be many years of Federal1 Government, I will continue to lead a government that listens to what the Australian people have got to say. I continue to lead a government that listens to what the rank and file of the Party organisation has to say. I make you that promise and I want you to make a promise in return and that is that when we stop doing that you tell us and you tell us before we lose the election, not afterwards because when we stop listening, we will lose just as surely as Paul Keating and his colleagues lost when they stopped listening. I mean, any Prime inister who would write off a 16% swing in the Canberra by-election as some kind of municipal rumble had to be so out of touch with what the Australian people were saying as to be doomed in retrospect to political failure and political destruction. 
Now that can happen to us. Don't anybody think we're any different. You get a few years into Government and you start believing your own PR. That's always very, very dangerous. You always ought to have a healthy bit of scepticism. So I've got a responsibility to you. I will try and live up to my part of the bargain and I want you to do the same. Ladies and gentlemen, this is a moment where Liberals are entitled just for a bare bit of triumphal, happy reflection on what was achieved. You Queensland Liberals did us proud on the Second of March. That sweep of seats, those cheers, I said last night when I mentioned Con Sciacca's defeat and I think of the exhilaration when, as one of my colleagues, as the glummer of the glimmer twins, Wayne Swan was knocked over. 
Anyway, I won't be able to go through all of them, I'm bound to get one of them wrong. It's funny how some sort of stand out but it's like Robert Tickner in Hughes, he stood out. Ladies and gentlemen, it was a great night, it was a great win, it was a great credit to all of you. Thank you from the bottom of my heart for having stuck by me, for having stuck by our Party, for having kept the faith and finally delivered the goods, but most importantly, given to the Liberal Party of Australia an unparalleled opportunity as we go towards the next century, a hundred years of the Australian nation gives us uniquely the opportunity to do good things for all of us. Thank you. 


E&amp; OE .....
Thank you very much Mr Ecclestone. To my parliamentary colleague, Andrew Tink, to all of the other special guests here today, ladies and gentlemen. Could I thank you, Mr Ecclestone, for your very warm words of welcome and could I also thank you Aaron for your very kind words, and can I start my remarks today in saying a couple of things about Epping Boys' High School. I say them in the context of my view and my attitude and the attitude of my Government towards the public education system of Australia. This is a good opportunity for me on behalf of the Government, although education is primarily a state government responsibility, for me to say how much I admire and respect the contribution over the years to the education of young Australians of the public school system and the public education system of Australia. 
I'm a great believer in competition in all things, including in education but I want in the context of saying that, to remark how important to the strength and quality of education all around Australia is the public education system. 1, myself, spent the twelve years of my primary and secondary education at a government school and I am very grateful for the education that I received in the government education system, and I want to take this opportunity publicly and quite unreservedly to complement the teachers and the staff and the other people who run the state education system not only of New South Wales but all around Australia. It's a challenging task and it's a task that deserves the gratitude of the community and the praise of those in government and also the respect and the regard of the pupils and students who pass through the state education system.
I know that today is one of the formal assemblies that you have during the year and as Aaron remarked, he is now coming to what he quite correctly describes as the nervous end of six years. I know something of the atmosphere of the upcoming higher school certificate. I have passed through two of them over the last four years and I've got another one the year after next, so I'm very attuned to the pressure of that exam. I'm very attuned to understanding how important that is in the life of young mnen and women as they leave school arnd map out the sort of careers that they want to miake for themselves. I just wanted in the few moments available to me today to say something about the goals that you may have in life, to say something about the kind of world that particularly the Year 12 students of Epping High School will pass into. 
It's always very important when you come to a watershed in your life, and leaving school is a watershed in your life. Life is never the same.-it changes profoundly once you leave school and as the years go by, you realise just how dramatic the change in your life really was when you left school, and the world that the young men and women of Epping Boys High School and Cheltenham Girls' High School will be entering when they leave school at the end of this year is a very different world from what it was 10, 20, 30 or 40 years ago. In many respects, it's a far more exciting, optimistic world full of opportunities that weren't there before. In other respects, it has challenges that didn't exist in the past. But the most important thing for any group of young people leaving, school to keep in mind is the importance of always having some goals in life, of always setting yourselves certain targets and seeking to achieve them. I know through my own life that I've constantly set myself goals. On many occasions, I thought that I would never achieve them. On many occasions, most other people thought that I would never achieve some of those goals but I kept them there and I kept persisting, and you will find through life that persistence and application and resilience is one of the most important, if not the most important quality that you can possibly have in life. 
You can never overestimate the advantage of a good, basic education. You will find in the years ahead that the basic training you received at this school in the fundamentals of reasoning and of intellectual thought,l that those things will prove to be quite priceless in the years ahead. You may have on occasions over the last few years thought them rather tedious, even useless. You may think that now. I can promise you as time goes by, if you hold those views now you will revise them in the years ahead because the world that you will go into, the world that you will enter as we come to the end of this millennium and move into the next one, is a world that more than ever will require qualifications, will require high quality education and more than ever, will require people who set themselves with very firm and very strong goals. So setting yourself goals and always seeking to achieve them and applying yourself and demonstrating resilience in achieving those goals is about the best piece of advice that I think anybody in position on an occasion like this could possibly give you. 
I think the other piece of advice that I think I could give you is that always understand the importance of achieving a balance between your career aspirations and your personal aspirations. Never neglect your career in total deference to your personal pursuits of pleasure and your personal relationships but equally, always find time in your working life and in your career for your relationships, your relationships with your family, your relationships with your friends. Always achieve that balance between the pursuit of a career, the achieving of particular goals and an enjoyable social life and the rich fulfilment, the close associations particularly, but not only through the family are going to bring you. 
That is the best kind of balanced advice that anybody could presume to give. A generation of young Australians who enter a world whose workplace opportunities are a lot different from what they were 20 or 30 years ago. It is true that there is a higher level of unemployment now than we had in this country 20 or 30 years ago but it is also true that the employment vista, particularly for girls, is much greater now than what it was 20 or 30 years ago, that the opportunities that are there, the potential that instead of when you get your first job, thinking that that is your job for life or for half your life, the prospect that you may change your careers, and that you will have the confidence to change your careers through your working life, is something that didn't e~ dst a generation ago. People were far more cautious and far less willing to chance their ann on altering their careers as they went through life.
 In many respects, you are entering a safer world than some generations before you. You may not think that, bombarded with so much of the negative aspects of life, you may think you are entering a less safe world, but in many respects, the threat of war, the removal of the potential of nuclear annihilation, and it's only last week the United Nations recorded by a record vote an agreement of nations for a comprehensive ban on the testing of nuclear weapons. A generation ago addressing a gathering like this, it may not have been possible to say that the threat of nuclear war has receded quite dramatically. You are also I hope entering an Australian society made a little safer as a result of the combined actions of political parties right across the political spectrum to prohibit the possession of automatic and semi automatic weapons, a quite dramatic breakthrough in providing a greater sense of personal security and personal safety because in the lives that you live and the occupations that you go about, physical as well as emotional security, as well as employment security is one of the things that people desire most. 
I think the very last and most important thing that I'd like to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, is that it is tremendously important always to retain a sense of hope and a sense of optimism about the future. It's something of a clich‚ to describe Australia as the lucky country. It still remains amongst the most fortunate nations in the world. It is still a nation with an incredibly high living standard. It is a nation of very great tolerance, it is a nation that treasures the fundamental freedoms more dearly than most. It's a nation of very egalitarian, social instinct. It is refreshingly free of the class division of older societies. I hope it also remains a little apart from the crass materialism which is always a danger in modem, sophisticated, technologically advanced societies. 
In other words, as a nation, particularly as we move towards the next millennium, we have a capacity to create something which is quite special and quite unique. Australia is not now, and it never ought to be a carbon copy of any one other society or other nation. It has some of the best qualities of the old world, it has some of the best qualities of the newer world, and it's cheek by jowl with the fastest growing economic region in the world, and we have by our own instincts and our own disposition a kind of culture and a kind of attitude that is quite special. So it is with a very great sense of optimism that I talk to you today and particularly give my good wishes to those members of this assembly that will be undertaking the higher school certificate. I have got to say I agree with those who in recent days have said that with all of its imperfections, there is no substitute for the higher school certificate. I believe in a public examination system. I believe that there needs to be some benchmarks and I think the idea that you can dispense with having that kind of public examination is a fairly unrealistic approach. 
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finally say to you that I always enjoy the opportunity of going to schools and going to universities to say something of what is important to you, I hope, and to also say something about my own personal views and values and attitudes. I would encourage all of you to take an interest in the public affairs of this country and I don't care what political side that is. We are a very competitive political society and I am quite certain that the spectrum of political views of Australia is as well represented here as it might be in any other part of the country and that's a very healthy, welcome sign, and no matter where your disposition might take you, can I say that being interested in politics and being interested in public affairs is something that can make a major contribution to the future of society and the future of the community. 
Politicians are like everybody else they are a mixture. Some are good, some are not so good and some of them you may think are even something else. Whatever that may be, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of the day in a democracy, those people who are elected to Parliament reflect the choices and they reflect the views of the cross section of the Australian community and I hope that you will take away from your years at this school very fond recollections, that you will remember the good times. The not so good times will recede into the past. You will have cause to reflect upon the quality of the education that you received but most importantly, I hope all of you take into your future life some very clear and identifiable goals. I hope you always keep striving towards them and I certainly hope that you will achieve a proper balance between your career pursuits and your personal pursuits. The one without the other is always an empty, unfulfilled existence and men and women find their greatest satisfaction if they can best combine the satisfaction and the pleasure from fulfilling associations with family and friends, with the satisfaction of a career goal achieved, a job well done and the satisfaction that through one's occupation you have made a contribution not only to your own self-fulfilment but also to the broader goals in building a better Australia and a better community. 
Thank you and good luck to you all


24 September 1996  
E&amp; OE........
To my ministerial colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I particularly acknowledge the  presence of Mrs Buckley the widow of the late Colonel John Buckley.  
As you've just heard, the idea of unveiling a plaque or of constructing a plaque to  commemorate the meetings of the Australian War Cabinet in Victoria Barracks in  Melbourne during World War II was the brain child of Colonel Buckley. And Dr Ross  Bastiaan, who is renowned for the work that he's done all around the world in  constructing plaques to commemorate the deeds of valour of Australian service  personnel in all theatres of war, is very well known to the service community, in  particular, and the Australian community in general.  
Ross Bastiaan who put together today's plaque has, through purely voluntary efforts,  constructed and commissioned scores of plaques all around the world and three years  ago I had the personal opportunity, as a member of the pilgrimage on the western front  in 1993, to be present when eleven of Dr Bastiaan's plaques in France and Belgium  were unveiled.  But today's plaque brings to mind the meetings of the Australian War Cabinet here in Melbourne during the darkest days of World War 11. It reminds us of the contribution  of political figures of that time including, in particular, the late John Curtin who was Prime Minister of Australia for most of World War 11 and before him Robert Menzies  who was Prime Minister when World War [ I broke out. It also reminds us of the contribution of so many Australians of all walks of life to that war effort. It reminds us  of the tremendous challenge that faced Australia and of the way in which the  Australian community united across the normal divides of different backgrounds and  different political attitudes to fight a common threat and a common enemy. And how, with the cooperation of our allies during those darkest times of World War II, we were  able to be successful against the Japanese.  
And it is important, ladies and gentlemen, as we grow further away in time from those  events to remember them as part of our history. There is a growing interest by current  generations of Australians in the many great events of this century that have shaped the  type and the destiny of the Australian nation. Today's plaque, today's meeting I think  Friday will mark the 57th anniversary of the first meeting of the War Cabinet in these  rooms here in Melbourne presided over by Robert Gordon Menzies as then Prime  Minister of Australia. It is an occasion to pay tribute to Australia's war leaders, but of  course also and very specially, to pay tribute to the men and women who fought on the  various battle fields of World War II and saved Australia from invasion and preserved  the way of life that we now all cherish so very much,  
I'm delighted that the Cabinet of 1996 has chosen the War Cabinet rooms here in  Melbourne as the first occasion on which the Cabinet of the new Coalition Government  has met. in Melbourne since the election. Let me say that the new Government, my  Government, will make it a habit to take Cabinet meetings around Australia. Whilst  we will have most of them in Canberra we will also have a number of them in Sydney  and at various times in Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth and later on all of the State capitals  and later on to some of the major provincial centres of Australia. It is appropriate that  in country as geographically large as Australia that the nerve centre of national political  decision making not always be in Canberra, that it be in other parts of Australia and I  think it is appropriate and I am delighted, ladies and gentlemen, that this first meeting  is taking place here in Victoria Barracks in the old War Cabinet room.  I have very great pleasure in participating in this little ceremony. 
Its a ceremony that reminds us of a critical moment in our history. It s an occasion to pay tribute to those  who led us then and of the contribution that they made to the type of Australia that we  now have. Thank you very much.  


30 September 1996 
Mr Chairman, to Dean Brown the Premier of South Australia thank you very much for those warm words of welcome. To Robert Lucas the Education Minister for South Australia, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is probably the most natural thing in the world that a conference of this type should be held here in Adelaide, and more broadly, here in Australia. One of the I think occasionally unremarked characteristics, of Australians through the years, and certainly current experience is proving the point quite dramatically, has been the fixation that Australians have always had with new technology. And one of our great characteristics has been, not only in the area of information technology, but also in so many other areas. One of our great capacities; as people and one of our trades, our characters, as people has been our disposition to very rapidly devour new technology. 
And I don't need to tell an audience such as this the rate at which all of the predictions made about the number of mobile telephones. the number of personal computers and so forth, the predictions made a few years ago about the penetration levels have of course not only been exceeded but the predictions that were subsequently made have also been exceeded and so the process has gone on-So it is a very natural thing that a conference like this should take Place in Australia and it is also, as the Premier said, a particularly appropriate circumstance that it should take place here in Adelaide because over the year and most particularly in the last few years, the Governments of this State have set out with a great deal of success to make this State something of a technological centre.  Throughout the nation the resources that have been put in to training and education are testament to that and the high profile that the current Government of South Australia, has given to technology and the link between technology and education and technology and business is also testament to that. 
As I got on the plane in Sydney this morning I flicked through the newspapers and one of them referred to me as a commuter style Prime Minister and I think he was drawing attention to the fact that unlike some of my predecessor I've made a decision that the Federal Government of this country should not, or the members of it, should not spend all of their waking hours in Canberra And I don't say that disrespectfully to the national capital, it's a very beautiful city and there are some large numbers of very dedicated Australians working in the national public service there to make this a better country. But it has been a desire of mine to travel around this country as much as possible and it's been a desire of mine at a personal level to spend perhaps a little more time in Sydney where my family home has always been and perhaps some of my predecessors. 
We're also in the business of taking Cabinet meetings around Australia. and I'm going on to Perth after having some further meetings here, after opening this conference and we'll be having a Cabinet meeting in Perth tomorrow and we'll be having Cabinet meeting here in Adelaide during the term of this Government That's rather a long winded way of getting to the point of that newspaper article, What, of course, that newspaper article failed to mention, but I suppose it was implicit, is that because of technological advances it is much easier now for Governments to move around. It is much easier for the personnel in Governments to move around and to maintain easy contact and easy channels of communication. 
I always think when asked to speak at something like this that how inadequate it is to list all of the individual pieces of technology that have come on the scene, particularly in the area of communications of how inadequate it is to try and surprise an audience like this with some comment about some remarkable new technological development and I certainly don't intend to try and do that this morning. Better than any audience, this audience will know just how extraordinary has been the explosion of technological capacity, how extraordinary has been the communications explosion and the way in which it in particular is almost on a weekly basis rewriting many of the rules and rewriting many of the text books and methodologies of learning and the methodologies of doing business. 
Now I'm pleased to say, of course, that theme are certain Australian institutions such as grand finals in any code of football that they're not remaking, although the communications developments of recent years have made it possible for millions more to enjoy those games and to participate in some of the great national festivals that those games represent. But the way in which technology has transformed teaching and learning in this country is, of course, something I suppose in which we've only begun in recent years to scratch the surface. The extraordinary difference between the classroom of the 1950s and the 1960s of which so many in this room, perhaps not too many but certainly a significant number, would have been very familiar and the classroom of today, the access that is available and it is particularly important: to people living in more remote areas of Australia the way in which the internet, the way in which communication facilities generally have demolished distance and difference not only within our own society but around the world has been quite remarkable. 
As the Premier said, it's very important when you talk about technology and the enormous opportunities that it opens up, particularly in the education of the young, it is important not to neglect the basic building blocks of a good education system And that means the maintenance of support for a diverse: education system and also, of course, as part of that the maintenance of support for a strong public education system. 
I'm very happy to say that despite the fact that there were some expenditure reductions in other areas of federal government responsibility, one of those areas effectively quarantined from any expenditure reduction were the capital and recurrent expenditures directed towards public and independent schools education in Australia. And that was a very deliberate decision because of the enormous priority that is attached by the federal government and I believe all state governments around Australia, irrespective of their political complexion, to the role of public and private education within our society. 
The Premier also mentioned the importance of training and the relationship between training and the workplace in the Budget. We announced a modern apprenticeship and training system which is designed to replace the current rather complicated apprenticeship and training system with one that is more directly attuned to the needs of the workplace and to the needs of young people entering the work force and is more likely to deliver as the end result of the training process, real jobs which are directly related to the needs of the individual employers and the aspirations of the young people that they employ. 
Whenever I talk to any kind of business gathering I take the opportunity to remind them of how the basic elements of the information revolution of recent years, the personal computer, the facsimile machine and the mobile telephone, of how those basic elements, have absolutely transformed the dynamics within our economy and within our community between large and small businesses. I often talk about the importance of small firms within our society and I don't think many or sufficient, numbers of people fully understand the real significance to small firms and businesses of that information, revolution. The way in which it has given to people the capacity to access markets world wide, the degree to use one of those very modern expressions, the extent to which has empowered small, businesses, not only herm in Australia but all around the world, to do things that were simply not possible in the absence of those technologies, or more particularly, the absence of their relative accessibility to most people in small business. 
Conversely of course, the globalisation of the economy and the spread of that technology is having dramatic consequences for large transnational, firms. it is now far easier for a firm that operates in more than one nation and that is increasingly the case with large firms if they are to survive and we are very conscious of that here in Australia. hoping as we do hope to build on our early success in getting a share of the Asia Pacific region which is the fastest growing economic region in the world. But information technology has meant that transnational. firms have a capacity to relocate activities and therefore relocate jobs in a much more dramatic way than was the case in the past, and all of us are conscious of this and those particular realities add a competitive pressure to the doing of business as well as in the case of small firms adding a competitive opportunity. 
Ladies: and gentlemen, this is an opportunity to do a number of things, a conference of this type. It is an opportunity to learn the latest technologies that are available, it is an opportunity for Adelaide to showcase its particular expertise and its particular capacities and sills and it's also an opportunity for Australia as, a nation to remind the world of the importance of our nation in the world of technology. But I think more importantly that it is an opportunity to remind ourselves of the enormous force for good the technological progress has brought about. 
Whenever I'm asked in a radio or television interview to try and reflect upon some of the ways in which society has gone both forward in some areas and backwards in others I always put at the top of my list the way in which technological advances, and particularly in the area of medical science, have given to people hope and an enjoyment of life and equality of life which was beyond the expectations of only a few decades ago. And an occasion such as this with the linkages between education and technology an occasion to remind ourselves of the great aid to education the technological advances and technological sophistication represents. Its also an opportunity to remind ourselves of the enormous force for good, the enormous force for progress and the enormous force for the greater enjoyment of human life and the greater benefit of mankind that technological advances and technological achievements represent. 
There are some in our-society who fear technological progress. It is true that to many aged cohorts, particularly in the middle and older ages, some of the technological advances are dazzling even to some a little unsettling I think it's important, if I can coin an expression, that the practitioners of technological change both understand, that in relation to middle aged and older people but also perhaps be conscious of a trend that was picked up in a survey conducted in connection with the Commission for the Futures examination of the hopes and fears and aspirations and beliefs of young Australians, that surprisingly enough to me, I must say, that survey also, indicated a certain trepidation amongst the young that the pace of technological change was proving unsettling to some of theta. I think it's a reminder to all of us that the pace of change and the way in which those changes are explained, the way in which they are incorporated into daily like the way in which they are seen as aid to progress and an aid to a more harmonious human existence always remains very important. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I was delighted to have-received this invitation today. I'm delighted to be with you to congratulate those who put this symposium and this expo, together. I particularly want to acclaim the partnership and the cooperation between the federal government, the state government and the private sector. This is yet another example of the importance of cooperation between all am of government and the private business sector. I thank those who've come to exhibit, I congratulate the contribution that they are making and I also applaud the emphasis that the Premier placed, and I know his government places, on the link between technology and schools education in particular here in South Australia. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have very great pleasure in declaring LETA open. I have very great pleasure in again welcoming all of you who've come overseas to Austria and I wish all exhibitors great success and I congratulate the organisers for the practical contribution that they are making through the holding of this symposium and expo to those important linkage between technological advance, science and our daily working lives and the process of learning and education. Thank you very much. 


1 October 1996E &amp; OE..................................
( Tape begins)
( Tape begins) Ladies and gentlemen it is a tremendous delight to&nbsp;be here with the Cabinet and can&nbsp;I say that it is part of a deliberate plan that the new Government has to make absolutely certain that it is a Government for all Australia and for all Australians. And not a government that is obsessed with the triangle of Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney, important though those parts of our nation are and I[ make that perfectly clear. But it is tremendously important in a nation as geographically large as Australia and as regionally diverse as Australia. And running an economy which is performing so differently ini different parts of the nation. It is important that we not only have a Federal&nbsp;Government that is comprised of people from all parts of Australia but also a Federal Government that is prepared to take the decision-making process around Australia. Because if there is one thing that I. would say contributed more than anything else to the defeat of the former government was that, particularly in the last few years of its term in office, it really did elevate to an art form the process of not listening to the Australian -community, of becoming arrogant and remote- And I1 know you've all heard of the famous sign that President Clinton or candidate Clinton had on his wall in the run up to the 1992 Presidential Election and the words read " It's the economy stupid".
Well, I've got something on my wall that says " it was arrogance, stupid". And it is a reminder that it was one of the reasons that the former government lost was that it really did become arrogant and out of touch, And part of the flow between the business supporters, of the Liberal Party and the business supporters of the National Party, &nbsp;part &nbsp;of that flow is to have a relationship whereby we can talk directly to you and See a lot of you and you feel completely unrestrained, as I know you will be, in giving us any advice that you think is necessary. And having that process is very important and I am delighted to acknowledge the presence here today of the two Cabinets, it's a very important day and it symbolises the close relationship that has existed between the new Government at a Federal level and the Coalition Government here in Western Australia. Both of them are from governments committed to longer term economic development Both or them are governments committed to longer term goals. Both of them are government% that are very conscious of the fully enterprised base of our side of politics.
&nbsp;And in the decisions that we have taken since we were elected on the 2nd March, we have tried very hard to keep faith with the core commitments we made to the Australian people in the lead up to the election. I have often said that I inherited an economy that was good in parts. I think most people here today would say the really good part is the Western Australian part and this is true, particularly on the export side-But we inherited more of' an economy that had relatively low inflation and reasonably good growth. But we also inherited an economy which was very heavily in debt and we inherited an economy that had a very large current account deficit, had an acute savings problem and had an old fashioned arthritic industrial relations system. And our economic goals since the change of government have been to address the weakness of' that economy. And our Budget was a determined attempt in the first year that we're in government to do something serious about Australia's budget and savings problem. Arnd we are going to take 2 percent of GDP out of Federal Government spending in the space of only two years.
And if our budget, yes I think that is worthy of applause, it really is, because if&nbsp; our budget is passed by the Senate, we will in year three of our first term in office, have got it into an underlying surplus and the bad thing is, and the bad debt we inherited, was that we're supposed to have had five year of positive economic growth in this country but we still had a very significant underlying budget deficit
Now some of the decisions that we took in the budget some people in the community didn't like. There are some people outside who have got quarrels with some of the decisions we took in the budget. There would be people In this room who wouldn't agree with everything that was in the budget. I had a well known business man in Adelaide the other day say to me look, I didn’t like this, I didn’t like that, I didn’t like everything else that was in it &nbsp;&nbsp;but he said, I have written you a letter congratulating you on it because overall I think it was good for the country. And you were fair as well as being strong in the decisions that were taken, And I am very proud of the fact that in our first year we have tackled the fundamental economic challenge and if we hadn't done it in the first year we. would have never done it. You know that, I know that, the commentators know that
The first year after a change of government is the year to take some of those difficult decisions. And having done that, I think it puts us in a much stronger political as well as stronger economic situation. So we've done the job in year one as far as the budget is concerned. But in the process of course we've kept many of those commitments that featured very prominently in the election campaign, commitments relating to the family tax package, the health insurance initiative, the capital gains tax rollover relief for small business. And so the list could go on.
&nbsp;But beyond the Budget, we have also addressed in a very determined way something that has been, I guess, a symbol of our side of politics federally for a long time, and that is the~ need for fundamental industrial relation reform in Australia. I have spoken to gatherings here in Perth over the years as Opposition Leader, as Industrial Relations spokesman, as private citizen for a -few months sort of thing, whatever the position was, in various guises, and I've talked every time about industrial relations reform. I've probably driven a few of you mad talking about industrial relations reform but I really do believe that if there's only one thing that you could be allowed to do to reform the Australian economy, fixing up the industrial relations system would have to be that one thing because I believe very, very strongly that reforming ant industrial relations system that hampers our productivity and our competitiveness and is a reminder of a past that has gone forever, a past where the industrial base of this country was essentially based on large aggregations of employees in blue collar employment working exclusively for manufacturing and an overwhelmingly male workforce an overwhelming unionised work force, overwhelmingly a workforce not involved in export industries. Now I am not for a moment denigrating those elements or&amp; th Australian workforce that still conform to that model but every year it becomes less and less of what is the aggregate of the Australian economy and we need an industrial relations system that accommodates the new Australian economy, not the old Australian economy.
We need an industrial relations system that promotes the globalised participation that is now increasingly required of Australian companies. We need an industrial relations system that accommodates the needs of small and medium size firms. We need an industrial relations system that accommodates the needs of the resource and service sectors as well as the manufacturing sector. And that is why the most important piece of legislation by far that we have introduced since coming into power is Peter Reith's Workplace Relations Dal1. And I want to compliment Peter on the job that he's done in .shepherding that bill so far through the Parliament. He hasn't had too much trouble getting it through the House of Representatives it would be a bit of problem if he had fallen there but it's, now in the Senate and Peter is in the process of negotiating with the minor parties and the Democrat-,. And all I. can say is that it has reached a very important stage avid we are serious about those negotiations and I hope they can be brought to fulfilment-
I just want to say one other thing about that industrial relations legislation, It is not anti-worker, it is not anti-union., it is pro the individual und it is pro the free choice of the individual in the workplace. And they are the principles around which the legislation is so strongly built and they are very important principles. And if we can get that legislation through then I think we will lay the ground work for a far more productive Australia. It will compliment legislation that has already Keen passed in a number of States, including here in Western Australian which has brought far more freedom to the workplace and has underwritten the growing productivity of this State. We've also moved to implement our very strong commitment to establish the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia with funding of S$ I billion out of the proceeds of the third sale of Telstra. That legislation is also the subject of discussion and negotiation in the Senate. Arid if we can get that piece of legislation through we will not only have privatised one-third of &nbsp;Telstra and introduced into that organisation the inevitable disciplines and influences to a much greater extent of the market place and the private sector but we would also have provided the largest capital investment ever in the long term environmental future of this country.
Can I say to you ladies and gentlemen, as somebody who has been in politics, in parliamentary politics now -not 22 years that concern in a long term, mature, balanced fashion, concern or the environmental future of Australia is now very much a mainstream political issue. It's no longer the passing preoccupation or fad of the chattering classes. It's something that concerns us, it's something that concerns my children., it's something that concerns my friends, not the headline-hunting, flippant kind of environmental passion but rather a concern for such things as water pollution, for soil degradation, for salinity levels, the shocking state of the Murray-Darling basin I know that is a long way from Western Australia but it's a very important element of the agricultural base of this nation. Those arc issues that are of long term concern and it always amazes me that people who are concerned about the environmental future or Australia should play around with the possibility of rejecting a package that is going to inject $ 1 billion into the establishment of the Natural Heritage Trust.
Richard quite properly mentioned the Native Title legislation-The existing legislation is not working properly. The existing legislation is unreasonably and unfairly hampering necessary development, not only in this state but also in other Pat of Australia. I said before the election and I will repeat it again today that I had no quarrel with the particularity of the decision of the High Court in the Mabo case. My quarrel was the way in which that case was translated into the Native Title Act. My criticism was of the terms and provisions of the Native Title Act as drawn up by the Keating Government, and that legislation and the behaviour of the former Government subsequent to the passage of that legislation did show an insensitivity towards the particular concerns ( if a state such as Western Australia. Although there is a common thread of national economic interest in so many things that affect all of us as Australians, inevitably on some issues there are going to be particularly strongly held % concerns and interests in different pats of the nation and it goes beyond argument that a state such as Western Australia, with such an enormous resource sector, such an enormous resource base. contributing so greatly to our export income through your resource sector, it is inevitable, and given the large amount of Crown land still left in your state, it is inevitable that you will look at native tide issues with greater intensity than people who live in parts of New South Wales and Victoria and it is the obligation of a national government to reasonably respond to those concerns-
Now we have spent a lot of time over the past few months in discussing and analysing and talking to the states about substantial amendments to the Native Title Act h amendments that will be revealed in just over a week’s time will not undermine the basic principles of the Ac. and will not be antagonistic to the principles of the High Court decision ' hut they will address the issue of workability. They will address the very legitimate concerns of many people in the mining and pastoral industries and they are designed to try and achieve a flair balance between the rights and interests, of Aboriginal people who saw in the Mabo decision a vindication of their long held views about their title and their rights as fellow Australians but also the legitimate rights and interests of those who seek to risk their capital and to risk their all to develop this country and to provide jobs for themselves and for others, and it will be legislation that looks very much to the future so far as the relationship between Australians, whether they am~ Aboriginals or not, and that is really what we ought to be doing, We perhaps spend a little too much time in the area of Aboriginal affairs in reflecting upon the past in a negative fashion rather than thinking of way. in which we can positively promote a more united and cooperative future. And that legislation will be very much designed to do that.
The final thing that 1 want to say to you, ladies; and gentlemen, is that I am very conscious that in winning the last election, after having been part of 13 pretty dismal and desolate years: I read occasionally of how the new Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Gareth Evans. thinks out aloud about the privations of Opposition. He talks about the relevance depravation syndrome which is a feeling he has that nobody listens to you in Opposition. Well, they've had six or seven months of it. I can say. Gareth, I had 13 years of it and it doesn't get any better for a long time. But it is very important that all of us in the Cabinet understand the particular responsibility that we have, and that wo take, as we. have, that responsibility very seriously. It's also important to not lose sight of the longer term national goal but also not to lose sight of the importance of the political battle and never to take anything in politics for granted.
We live in an age of greater political volatility now than used to be the case. You can't take anything or anybody for granted and I certainly don't and it's therefore, of course addressing an audience like this it's worth my while reminding you that even though we've only been in power for six or seven months, you never ought to take your eye off your political opponent. Just before I walked into this luncheon today I was handed a bit of paper which -was a transcript of what the now Mr Gareth Evans said on 3AW this morning when interviewed by Neil Mitchell and he was talking about taxation. Now that's a subject that never seems to be far from anybody's mind and he was asked about redesigning the taxation system and he had this very interesting comment to make, and he said this, that its not just a matter of rearranging the existing taxes. I think since we are so vulnerable by any relevant international standard there is; a case for having some overall revenue increases.
Now I think that's a statement that might get repeated. He won't be suffering any relevance depravation syndrome from that I think that statement is going to get a big run, Gareth, because basically, what he is saying is that. he believes in higher taxation. He really thinks higher taxation is more important than taxation reform-Now nobody lives in the dream world of pretending that if you want governments to do certain things you can't do those things without resorting to revenue. But just as we overwhelmingly sought to close the budget gap when we brought down the budget in August by an emphasis on the expenditure side of the budget, it remains our goal to keep a very tight control on Federal Government spending, and it serves us well even six or seven months into a term or office to remind ourselves, to remind our supporters and to remind the Australian public of the current thinking regarding levels or taxation of our political opponents.
The very last thing I want to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, is that many of you in this room have been great supporters of the Liberal Party over a long period of time-Many or you have supported the Liberal &nbsp;Party when you must have wondered about the wisdom of such a choice and you must have wondered as to whether we were over going to get back into office. I am very grateful for that and I am very conscious of the loyalty and support that you gave through the lean years and I want to say on behalf of my Government and the new Cabinet that we are very committed to remaining in touch with the Australian people. We don't take you -for granted. We never will, and if at some time in the future, we fall into the error of taking people for granted then we will deserve to be voted out or office because the Australian people are fair minded and understanding people. When they vote for a change of Government, they do it. in a quite deliberate fashion and having made that decision, they’re prepared to give the new government a fair go and if the new government gives them a fair go, they will go on reciprocating and that is what we intend to do. We value very much the opportunity that we obtained on the 2nd March to serve the Australian people. We will continue to regard boing in Government as a gift of the Australian people and not as the result or some kind of divine selection, and we'll do that with a proper understanding of what the Australian people want and we will most I particularly do all we can to retain our very close and important links with the business community of Australia, and we will do that in a variety of' ways, including having regular Cabinet meetings here in. Perth.
Thank you very much.
ends
1 October 1996
&nbsp;



-CT7,
PRIME MINISTER
2 October 1996 TRANSCRIYPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS THE TO THE CANNING/ SWAN
BREAKF. AST, PERTH
SE O E
Thank you very much Don, to Ricky Johnston and Senator Winston Crane and my State
colleagues, my former Federal colleagues, othcr distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. It's really good to come back to the same place that you visited when we were in a
Opposition. It gives you a sense of the occasion, it gives you a sense that you've achieve
something. There was a big crowd at the breakfast here in the lead up to the election
campaign, there's an even bigger crowd here this morning and that cheers me no end
because of the many miracle results that we had on the 2nd March. The results here in
Western Australia, the fact that we were able to reduce the Labor Party to only three seats
in Western Australia, the fact that we were able finally to win the seat of Canning and I
really do want to congratulate Ricky Johnston for her persistence. PI've got a bit of a soft
spot for people who keep plugging away and I think you did that magnificently. And to
Don who ran a very skillful campaign., I mean just remember the scat of Swan became
too hot for Kim Beazley and he moved to another seat.
And T want to congratulate both of these very fine grass roots campaigners. Yes, 1
remember the afternoon of the 2nd March very well and I'm sonrry in a sense thai the
results on the east coast may have spoilt some of the fun over here but I'm sure it didn't
spoil the fun of the campaign supporters in Canning and Swan in recording such
remarkable wins and it is important to remind ourselves on an occasion like this, to
remind ourselves as to some of the reasons why we won the last election. And there are
T : Bd 81: ZT 96/ 0T/ ZOUWJ xva 
many reasons but one of the very important reasons we won the last election is that the
people we de~ eted got sadly out of touch wi th What the Mainstream of the Australia
community was thinking and saying and wanting. They listened too much to the elite
commentators, they listened too little to ordinary Australians. And that lesson carries a
very strong message for us. It carries a firm message that having won Government we
shouldn't assumne that we're going to hang on to it automatically. We shouldn't assume
that because we are now in Government we're somehow or other a cut above thc rest of
the community, we're niot. We're representatives of the commrunity and we are there as a
girt of the Australian people and not as some kind of divine selection process.
And also one of the interesting things as you reflect upon the political scene over the last
few months is that how little somne of our opponents seemed to have leant 1 think we
had the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Gareth Evans, yesterday talking abot taxation.
1Je thinks we're undertaxed. I'm certain the battlers in the western suburbs of Sydney in
the scat of Lindsay where there's a by-election on the 19th October are going to really
appreciate being told that they ought to pay more Iax because that is basically what
Gareth Evans is saying and I do think that any senior politician who argues that there is a
strong case as he does for higher taxation is certainly out or contact with the Australian
community. Now I have never argued that governments can deliver things out of thin air, I've never
argued that everything that an electorate asks for or wants can be delivered, it certainly
can't. But we in the Coalition Government do not believe that the path to budget
balances lie in increased levels of taxation. We believe very strongly that the path to
budget balances lies, " s far as possible, in reduced government expenditure. And we
Were able in the first Budget that the Coaltion brought dowzi in 14 years, the first
Coalition Budget since 1982, we were able to announce a program that will in year three
of our term of office return the Federal Government budget to an underlying balance.
And given the very, very substantial level of debt that wve inheited fargrartanw
had been told, that is a remarkable achievement And it has involved taking some
decisions that people don't like. R's involved importantly though taking decisions that
are seen by the community as strong but W~ r. And I would be very happy to see my
Glovernment's handling of the economy as being categorised as strong but fair. That is
what Australians want. T1hey want governiments to strongly address problemrs but they
want governments to address those problems in a fair and an understandable fashion.
The Australian people will accept the necd for change and reform. The Australian
people will accept that there are some burdens to be undertaken and some things they
want to be foregone provided the reason for those changes is explained and provided
those changcs ame implemented Thirly. The main example of this, in Adelaide a couple of
days ago, 1. called in there on the way across to Perth and I met one of Adelaide's wvell
known busincssmnen and he said to me, look theme are a couple of things in that budget
that I didn't like., you did this and you did that and I didn't like that. But he said, I have
written you a letter congratulating you because what you've clone, he said is that you've
z : Bd 8P: ZT 96/ O1/ Ze Wjj Xpa 
spread the pain around fairly. And he said, I'll buy that, 1 will accept that. H-e said, that's
we've been wanting for a long time.
B~ ut the other really good thing about the budget is that, and it's representative of what we
have done over the last six or seven months and that is that we have delivered on all of
the core commitments that we made in the election campaign. And don't let any
commentator, don't let any of our political opponents divert you from the -reality that all
of the commitments that were uppermost in people's minds when they voted on the2nd
March, the things they really took account of in a positive sense in voting for us those
commitments have been delivered. Rcmember our commitment about the flamnly tax
package? Every last dollar of that has been delivered. Our commnitment about private
health insurance ta&amp;. rebates, every last dollar had been delivered. Our commitmnent to
give capital gans tax rollover relief to small business, every last dollar delivered. We've
already passed the law to reduce the provisional tax burden on small business by
inillion this financial year. We've implemented our commitment to reduce red-tape on
small business. And I will have a report in six weeks time from the chairman of our
Small tBusiness Deregulation Taskforce explaining how it is that we can reduce the
burden of red-tape on small business by 50 per cent within our first three years of
government. And very importantly for the smiall business commnunity and for Australia generally, we
have delivered on our commitment to change the industrial relations system of this
country towards one based on agreem~ ents at the enterprise level between employers and
employees. You remember what T had to say during the campaign about the unfair
dismissal laws. And that was a rule that was brought in by Laurie Brereton and the
former ILabor Government without warning, without a mandate, without any moral
authority axall. And that particular law in my view did more to intimidate men and
women in small business around Australia from taking on more stalT than just about
anything over the last two or three years. And I lost count of the number of people I met
around Australia, al I over Australia who are in small business and they said it may be all
right for BHfP or CRA or a very large company, if they have an unfair dismissal suit thcy
can accommodate, it they can settle it. B~ ut if I have an unfauir dismissal arguemnent with
one of my three employees and they threaten to take me to court I can't affiord to pay the
$ 20,000 or $ 30,000 to keep the thing out of court. What J won't do, I won't employ them
in the first place so as not to run the risk.
And that is the story that I've found all around Australia. Anid that particular law
delivered covertly without warning, I mnean it is a very, very odd circumbtance isn't it.
Before the 1993 election the Labor Party said nothing about the industrial relations
reforms it ultimately was to make and ytct those industrial relations reformns sailed
through the Senate. We on the other hand laid all of our plans out and we're still in the
process of negotiating them through the upper chamber. But I'm hopeful that those
negotiations have progresd well and we are serious about negotiating with the minor
parties in order to get those reforms and those changes through the Senate because that
industrial -relations law is absolutely fundamental to Austvalia's economic future. It's a
E :-6d 8': ZT 96/@ T/ ZO OJ P
W0JJ Xpa 
law that's based on five essential principles. The first of them is that we want to get rid
of Labor's job-destroying unfair dissal law. The second principle is that we're
absolutely committed to voluntary unionism. to a free choice, that men and women in thc
work force should be entitled to join or nor to join a union and not to be persecuted for
the choice that they make to join or not to join.
The third priniciple is that people should have a complete freedom of choice bctwecni
remaining under an industrial award or going into a workplace agreement, negotiated
directly between the employer and the employee with people representing thc employee
if that is the wish of the employee, subject to sonme guaranteed irtinimurn conditions. The
fourth provision is that we should allow the emergence of workplace unions if that is
what people want. People should not only have the right to join a union or not to join a
union, they should also have the right to join whatever type of union they choose. And
finally. we are committed to restoring the secondary boycott prohibitions introduecd by
the Fraser Government in the Trade Practiccs Act in the late 1 970s that have proved so
very effective to curb predatory union conduct, particularly against small businesses.
Now if we can implement thosc five major reforms to Australia's industrial relations
system, it will over a period of timne yield enormous productivity and competition
dividends and it's very, very important that thza reform be implemented and it remains a
core element, ladies and gentlemen, of Au~ stralia's economic future and a core element of
the reformn plans of the Coalition Governmecnt.
Only a couple of weeks ago I was able to undertake my first substantive visit overseas as
Prime Minister of Australia and quite deliberately and not surprisingly, T chose to visit
Indonesia and Japan during that visit, and that visit revealed to nie a number of
iundamentals about Australia's associations with the rest of the world. They revealed,
that visit revealed to me that Australiai is a highly regarded, respected country in the
Asian Pacific region. It revealed to me something thatI already knew and f am sure most
Australians knew, and that is that this country's democratic traditions are understood and
respected in our region. and the proposition, the insulting proposition that in some way
the leaders of those countries would only dcal With one political complexion in the
leadership of Australia was of course an insult not only to their intelligence but also an
insult to the democratic processes of this country.
It is quite plain to mie that the government-, of Indonesia and the governmlent of Japan,
indeed the Governments of all of those nations would not only deal with this Government
in Australia but will deal with it enthusiastically and in a very friendly fashion. And the
l inks that exist between Australia and the Asia Pacific region are links that have been
built over the years by both sides of politics. It's sometimes forgotten that the man who
laid the founidation stone of Australia's economic association with the Asia Pacific region
was John MeF~ wen who was Deputy Prime Minister in the Mcnzics Government in the
1 950s and ho was the driving force, the author, the inspiration behind the Japan-Australia
Trade Agreement of 1957 and negotiating a trade agreement with Japan in 1957 was a far
more challenging political undertaking than negotiating trade agreements these days. and
he faced opposition, Including at the time From the Labor Party yet he laid that important
i' 6 a BP: ZT 96/ 01/ zeo OJ 
foundation, and Australia and J apan have forged a remnarkcable economic partership in
this part of the world, a partnership that works very much to the bcnefit and to the credit
of Australia. Japan is our bcst customer. We are one of the few nations in the world
with an extremely healty trade balance with that country arnd it's a relationship that's
very important to Au-. tralia's economic future and itos a relationship that owes a lot to the
far sightedness and the political leadership of a Coalition figure.
B~ ut that is not to deny that over thc years, Labor Party leaders haven't also mnade a
contribution to that process. It is very important and it's going to be a feature of mny
Government that where there are areas of agreement betweeni the Government and the
Opposition, let us not waste time manutacturing false division and false argumecnt. On
the other haad, where there are areas of fundamental disagreement, such as for example
our attitude towards levels of taxation, let us by all means in those areas have very
vigorous argument and very vigorous debate, anid so far as the foreign relations of this
country are concerned, J want to say to you again that our commitment to the economic
and political linkage between Australia and the Asia Pacific region are as strong, that
commitment is as Wtong under the Coalition Government as it ha: s over been in thc past.
and we have moved early in our term of office, including in particular my meeting with
( he ? rmc Ministcr of Malaysia, we moved early in our term or office to reinforce the
importance of those links. But we do that without in any way downplaying or
denigrating or walking away from the associations that we have with other parts of the
world. have said frequently that Australia's foreign policy does not involve a choice between
our history anid our geography. We don't need to shun out European American
associations in order to strengthen our Asia Pacific associations. We can have the lot and
there is no rmaon at all, given the bistory, the culturc, the democratic traditions. the
values and the attitudes of Australia, there is no reason in the world why we can't. In our
early nonths in office wve upgraded the quality of the defence association with the United
and I am happy to say that President Cito wiIb iiigAsrlai
November before going on to the APEC meeting that I will also attend in Manila. Both
of those developments are a reminder of the importance of that association and of course
Lhe asociations that Australia has wi th the nations of E urope ame all around us, and the
preSenice in this very room Of so many people who were boni in the United Kingdom or
other parts of Europe, as well as people from, other parts of the world, from Asia, fromn
the Middle East, is a reminder of the great diversity and the great heritage of this country
in that diversity.
So we arc very much a nation which sees itself as a vibrant, divers part of an
increasingly globalised political entity, an increasingly globalised economy, and it's very
important therefore that we have a government that understands those balances and
understands those linkages, that docs not become obsessed with one or other emphasis in
the area of foreign and international economic relations but sees the opportunities for
trade advantage when they occur and we initend, so far as the conduct of our trade policy
S : Bj 8f': ZT 96/@ r/ Ze 
is concerned, to adopt an attitude that is driven ultimately by Australia's national interest
and by absolutely nothing else.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is an enorous privilege Lo be the Primec Minister of Australia.
It's an enormous privilege to be part of the first Coalition G3overnment in this country for
13 years. As Liberal Party supporters, you waited a long time. You must have wondered
if it was ever going to come. 16 years between election wins was a pretty extraordinary
period of time and Don mentioned the afternoon of the second of March. I think I've
said to some other Liberal Party audiences around Australia, I was in a high state of
nervous excitement myself on the Second of March as you might imagine, and P've never
quite forgotten, that poor official of the Australian Electoral Commission. We were at the
Intercontinental hotel in Sydney where we had our headquarters and the Electoral
Commission had sent a couple of gwenen along " With their computers and they were all
orn line to get the results as they came in and at a quarter past six I said to him, Have
you got anything?" and he said " No".
TIwenty past six 1 said " Have you got anything?", he said At twenty one past six, I
said " H~ ave you got anythingS?" and he said and at twenty nine past six he said,
"' ve got -something" and he sai'd, " There's been a 15% swing to the Liberal Purny in a
polling booth in Portland", I said, " Gee, 15%" and I said, " How many on the roll", and
hc said So T said to Grahame. Morris who was beside m~ e, I said " We've won,
we've won"~.
HeI said " No cairn down, calm down". As it sort of turned out, it wao~' t bad. I mean. it
wasn't quite as good as that everywhere. Portland is a little town near Lithgow in New
South Wales. But it was a great day, it was a great night and it was a great reward for all
of those supporters of the Party around Australia like yourselves who have worked
tirelessly, who'd kept the faith, who supported us when you probably thought we weren't
worth supporting. You must have wondered on occasions if we could ever get it right
YOU must have, you stop nodding your head, and you must have thought to yourself, gee,
they've run out of feet to shoot which basically is very understandable. But finally it all
came together and it did demonstrate that if you stick at things, if you listen to people.
But you also stick to certain Aundamental attitudes and if you go back over the years you
can find a consistency between what we took to the last election and what a number of
people, including myself have advocated in areas such as family policy.; industrial
relations reform and small business. And if there are three things that I've tried to make
a mark on as* rar as policy is concerned iD thc political debate in this country o-vcr the
years it has been in those three areas. And I wouldi ' ike at the end of miy three years in
Government, first three years I hope, never take it for granted. One term at a time, that's
my motto, and you work on it. And I would like at the end of that term, for people to
have a look at what we have achieved in those areas of doing something to strenghe
small businesses. The aggregate impact of our policies regarding the family and also of
course what we have done in industrial relations reform. if we can gat those things right
then we have a real prospect of seeing somec improvement in the omployinont area.
9 : Bj 8P: ZT 96/@ l/ ze WW0Jjj Xva 
They're of course not the only issues that the Government but they are three things that
arc very important to the type of Party we arc, the Liberal Party and they're very
important to the kind of society we are and they're very important values to me and to
other leader of thc government and of the Coalition.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you again for the tremendous help that you gave to both
Don and to Ricky in the campaign. Thank you for giving us two energetic, grass roots
members who will fight fotbr their electorates, who will understand and support the need
for certain decisions that have a short tnrm difficulty but a long term benefit and a long
term gain. It is a great experience to be in Government. It's an enormous privilege.
We've waited a long timc. We've worked very hard to get it and we don't intend to let
you down. Thank you.
ends
i. : Sa 8: ZT 96,81/ ze : UOJJ XjV 



October 1996
ADDRESS TO THE INAUGURAL FULBRIGHT ORATION
CELEBRATING THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE FULBRIGHT PROGRAMME
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
E&amp; OE
*** HECK AGAINST DELIVERY***
"* Embargoed Until Delivery"*
I am delighted to be with you this evening for this important occasion and to share in
the celebration of fifty years of achievement for the Fuibright Program.
There are many people here this evening who have worked over many years to help
fufi the aims of the Program and many who have benefited from its generosity.
I would like to join with others in conveying a very warm welcome to Mrs Harriet
Fuibright. Your presence with us in Australia for this fiftieth anniversary gives us a
special personal link to the founder of the Program, and I wish you a most enjoyable
and productive stay in our country.
The fiftieth anniversary of any organisation is an important milestone.
It is a time for looking back on what has been achieved and for looking forward to
what can be achieved in the years ahead.
It is a time for drawing strength from the vision and the ideals of those who have gone
before us as we confront the challenge of building for the future on the basis of their
achievements in a very different world.
In looking back tonight on fifty years of achievement for the Fulbright Program, we
reflect on what one man's practical vision has achieved in advancing the interests of so
many individuals and communities. We recall, in particular, the very important
contribution which that one man, Senator J. William Fuibright, made to the public life
of his own country, and to the cause of education and understanding between the
peoples of different countries.
1526 
The Fuibright Legacy
The long political career of Senator Fuibright has always defied easy classification.
He was a man of reflective intellectualism and scholarly diligence yet he was also a
visible and influential advocate of change in the practical world of international
politics.
He was a man deeply concerned about the policies of governments in an era of the
" nuclear balance of terror" yet he remained always positive and hopeful about the
power of people to break down barriers of misunderstanding and distrust.
He believed in the inherent value of international institutions yet he recognised the
uniquely important responsibilities of the United States in the search for world order
and international stability.
He had strongly held views about what he saw as the limits of American power yet he
was a strong internationalist and an enemy of American isolationism.
As a result of his upbringing, his education and his own inclinations, he drew on the
wisdom of the past yet he also revelled in exposing what he called " old myths and
new realities" in international relations.
He understood the realities of the international system yet he also believed in the
reality of an international society, and what he saw as the need for " civilising and
huxnanising" relations between people and nations.
He emphasised the need for new dimensions of international cultural understanding
yet he saw it as unrealistic and undesirable to aim for universal values, arguing ( in his
words) that " the rapprochement of people is only possible when differences of culture
and outlook are respected and appreciated rather than feared or condemned".
He once championed Presidential power as the source of any effective American
foreign policy yet his later career highlighted what he believed should be the
Congressional limits on that power.
He knew the creative and constructive opportunities that political power bestowed on
elected leaders yet he never ceased warning about the proper limits of government
and the potential for power to create its own arrogance.
He was at the heart of the great American debates over policymnaking during the Cold
War yet he became, in effect, one of the earliest and most articulate spokesmen for
many who belonged to the first post-Cold War generation.
He was a man without pretensions yet he is one of those very few people in history
whose name has also become a proper noun, as thousands of Fulbrighters around the
world will attest! 1527. 
The career of Senator Fuibright was certainly one of contrasts. It was also one of
achievement and endurance.
In 1939, he became the youngest University President in the United States. He was
the first American Rhodes Scholar to be elected to the US Senate. He was Chairman
of the influential Senate Foreign Relations Committee for fifteen years. And he was
returned by the electors of Arkansas as one of their representatives in the Congress for
thirty two consecutive years from the 1940' s to the 1970' s.
Throughout that period, Senator Fulbright became involved in an extraordinarily wide
range of foreign policy issues.
Those issues included the management of new international structures for enhancing
security and co-operation; the definition of " national interest" and the changing nature
of " national power" in an era of rapid international change; the appropriate balance
between America's international aspirations and its limited national resources, between
its global responsibilities and its domestic priorities; the revolutionary potential of
endemic poverty, nationalism and population growth in developing countries; and the
need to build bridges of co-operation and understanding between the American people
and the peoples of other countries through trade, scientific and cultural exchanges.
The debate over many of these issues, of course, continues today though in a very
diferent context to that of Senator Fulbright's time.
Some of Senator Fuibright's views were a focus of passionate support as well as
vigorous dispute. But the distinguishing mark of all of them was that they were
presented by him with forthrightness, personal integrity and a commitment to the
principles in which he believed. They were all underpinned by his faith in the power of
ideas and in the common aspirations that he strongly believed all people shared.
He had a clear vision of the role of creative leadership, liberal education and
international understanding in helping to build a more peaceful world.
It is that vision which has endured and which lives on in the scholarship program that
bears his name.
It is that vision, and its important future role in a rapidly changing world, which we
celebrate tonight.
The Constructive Internationalism of the Fulbright Prora
What motivated the establishment of the Fulbright Program, and what has sustained
and strengthened it during its first half century, has been its commitment to a
constructive internationalism built on direct educational and cultural links between the
people of different countries.
1528 
It was the same constructive internationalism that had inspired the passage into law in
1943 ( three years before the establishment of the Scholarship program) of the
' Fuibright Resolution', committing the United States to support a post-war
international organisation to maintain peace, and thus pre-empting any move to postwar
American isolationism.
It was that motivation and spirit which were again clear in 1946 when Senator
Fulbright secured the passage through Congress of his Bill to convert the sale of
surplus American war property abroad into a major student exchange program. It was
an initiative he had launched the year before, just two weeks after the dropping of the
atomic bomb on Hiroshima. And it was to be described by President Kennedy some
fifteen years later as " the classic modern example of beating swords into
ploughshares". Senator Fuibright saw this exchange program as an important catalyst in the search for
a new constructive internationalism that could contribute to the avoidance of war in
the atomic age. But he also understood the limits of any such programme, once
describing it as " not a panacea but an avenue of hope".
The purposes of the Scholarships have been described in countless ways over the past
fifty years. But, not surprisingly, the best description comes from Senator Fulbright
himself when he reflected on them in later life in the following terms:
" There is nothing obscure about the objective of educational exchange. Its
purpose is to acquaint Americans with the world as it is and to acquaint students and
scholars from many lands with America as it is not as we wish it were or as we might
wish foreigners to see it, but exactly as it is which by my reckoning is an ' image' of
which no America need be ashamed. The program further aims to make the benefits of
American culture and technology available to the world and to enrich American life by
exposing it to the science and art of many societies. Finally, the program aims,
through these means, to bring a little more knowledge, a little more reason, and a little
more compassion into world affairs and thereby to increase the chance that nations will
learn at last to live in peace and friendship."
In its fifty years of operation, the Fulbright Program has fulfilled these high ideals of
fostering leadership, learning and empathy between cultures.
Approximately 200,000 individuals including 70,000 Americans and 130,000 from
t other countries have participated in the Program since its establishment in 1946.
3 Over 140 countries are currently involved in the program with participants including a
wide range of graduate students, scholars and professionals from outside of academia.
Those who have benefited from the Fulbright Program have contributed to their
societies not only in the field of public leadership but also in the sciences, the arts,
education, literature, business, the media, community support and many other areas of
activity. Some have done so prominently and spectacularly. Countless others have
done so without as much public acclamation but with no less effectiveness in making
their communities better and fairer places in which to live. 1529 
The Fuibright exchange program between Australia and the United States began in
1949 and since 1963 it has continued under the auspices of the Australian-American
Educational Foundation. Over 4,000 Australians and Americans have benefited from
the opportunity which the Fuibright Program has provided for study and exchange in
each of our countries.
I am proud to be Honorary Co-Chairman of the Foundation, and I am proud of the
Australian Government's ongoing financial support for the Scholarship scheme.
The Fulbright Program's Next Fifty Years
In looking to the next fifty years of the Fulbright Program, we can be confidlent that its
aims and ideals have never been more relevant.
In a bilateral sense, the place of the Fuibright Program in the broader architecture of
Australia-United States relations will be an increasingly important one.
Australians and Americans share rare ties of history, language and culture. We are
united by common values and beliefs including our commitment to freedom,
democratic rights and equality of opportunity. The Fulbright Program reflects many of
our mutual characteristics as relatively young countries, including the value we place
on openness, vitality and innovation.
The relationship between our two countries is bound together by close and effective
interaction between our goverrnents and our private sector enterprises and this is
evident across a very broad range of political, security, commercial and cultural
activities. At a government-to-government level, the range of interaction between Australia and
the United States is diverse and mutually advantageous. My Goverrnent has made it
explicity clear that we aim to reinvigorate and strengthen our relations with United
States in the future.
I know it has become fashionable in some quarters to categorise alliance relationships,
such as Australia's with the United States, as anachronistic in the post-Cold War
world. That perception is, in my view, totally mistaken.
Alliances are as important in times of great change as they are in periods of direct
strategic threat. The Australia-America alliance contributes as much today as it has
ever done to peace, security and stability and we will be working to expand that
contribution even further in the future.
Nor does alliance co-operation, particularly between two such vigorous and open
democracies as the United States and Australia, entail any diminution of sovereignty or
independence on the part of either.
1530
U 
6
We will have differences on specific issues as we have had in the past. We will
convey those differences forcefully and unambiguously in support of our national
interests where the need arises. But we will do so in the broader context of a bilateral
relationship that is strong, enduring and clearly in the national interest of both our
countries. Just as we have fundamentally significant economic and security ties with the United
States, we also have dynamic economic opportunities, strategic interests and strong
bilateral relationships in Asia.
As I have made clear on many occasions, my Government does not see any choice to
be made in Australian foreign policy between our past associations and our future
hopes, between our history and our geography.
Nor do we see any choice to be made between strengthening our engagement with
Asia and reinvigorating our relationship with the United States.
Under my Government Australia can, and will, do both.
The bilateral government-to-goverrnent links between Australia and the United States
to which I have been referring work most effectively in the context of strong peopleto-
people associations. And it is those associations which add an important and
enduring quality to the nature of the Australian-American relationship.
For an older generation, there are the special ties of history between Australians and
Americans which were forged during and after the Second World War. For younger
Australians and Americans, there are the special associations developed as a result of
the expanding scale of two-way business and tourism between our two countries and
the accelerating pace of educational, technological and cultural exchanges to which the
Fulbright Program adds such a significant dimension.
It is also cultural links at a popular level that are increasingly opening up our two
societies to each other through films, music, creative art, the Internet, and much
more.
It is these direct links between Australians and Americans that provide such critical
sustenance and support to the official ties between our governments. And it is in those
links that the realisation of the Fulbright vision of understanding, mutual respect and
shared common purposes can be advanced.
The future relevance of the Fulbright Program, of course, extends well beyond the
bounds of the Australia-America relationship. It is a Program that is well-attuned to
what will be powerfidi forces of international change into the next century.
The realities of globalisation and economic interdependence are the product of the
revolutions in transportation, communications, technology and commerce, as well as
political will., that have transformed the nature of policymaking between, as well as
within, nations. 
And as part of these processes of change, the Fulbright vision for better understanding
between different cultures and for broader areas of co-operation will have an
increasing relevance.
Another great driving force of international change in the late twentieth century is the
economic dynamism and the developing regional architecture of the Asia-Pacific
region. This regional economic revolution has transformed the Asia-Pacific as well as its
relationships with the rest of the world. It has created changes of an order which, in
my lifetime, have been surpassed only by the implosion of communism.
For both the United States and Australia, the nature of our interactions with the Asia-
Pacific region as well as our strategies for broadening and deepening them lie at the
forefront of policymnaking in both our countries.
More than ever in the years ahead, the Fulbright vision for more extensive educational
exchanges, for better cultural understanding and for wider horizons of co-operation
will have a special significance in relations between the United States and Asia, just as
they will in terms of Australia's relations with the region.
Ma-xdmising Opportunities In. and With. Asia
Against this background, I wish to make some brief comments about the nature of the
emerging challenges and opportunities for Australian and American policy in
development of closer interaction with our region.
No region will be more important to world prosperity and stability in the twenty-first
century than the Asia-Pacific region.
It includes three of the world's most politically and economically influential countries
the United States, Japan and China. The futures of those countries, and their
interaction with each other, will be critical for the region and the wider world.
Inevitably, the relationship among these countries is changing as they themselves
change. The scale of change in China in particular is immense. Growth in China has
averaged ten per cent for more than a decade. This stands to change the relativities of
power in the region. But China's opening up and its growth are indisputably positive
developments. They provide new economic opportunities for others. They also provide
China with a stake in the stability of the region and in the effectiveness of regional and
global political and economic structures.
My Government is strongly committed to engagement with China. In particular, I think
China's entry into the World Trade Organisation is important and I hope that it can be
achieved in the near future on reasonable terms for all concerned. More broadly, the
management of the relationship among the United States, Japan and China is of the
utmost importance for the stability and prosperity of the region.
1532 
The Asia-Pacific region is already a global economic powerhouse, and it is likely to
become even more significant in the world economy over coming decades.
In terms of the separate national perspectives of both the United States and Australia
on these regional economic realities, the facts speak for themselves.
Already, one third of US exports go to East Asian markets, representing over two
million American jobs. US projections have put Asia, even excluding Japan, as the
United States' largest export market by 2010.
For Australia, there are comparable realities.
We are far more closely integrated economically with the Asia-Pacific regiQn than with
any other part of the world. Two thirds of our exports go there and more than half
go to East Asia. Nine of Australia's top ten export markets are in the Asia-Pacific
region, with seven in East Asia.
What happens in, and with, the Asia-Pacific region will clearly shape and influence
Australia's destiny.
Consistent policies over many years have enabled Australia to become an integral
member of the Asia-Pacific community and an important political and economic
partner of individual regional countries.
That outcome has been achieved by the work of many Australian Governments, both
Coalition and Labor. I acknowledge the contributions made by all of them, and my
Government is committed to building further on their achievements.
This continuity of Australian policy towards the Asia-Pacific region was one of the key
messages I conveyed during my recent visits to Japan and Indonesia and it was one
which I believe was well understood and appreciated. As a new Government, we will
inevitably do some things differently and we will have some different regional policy
emphases that is only natural and to be expected. But we intend to be, as the Prime
Minister of Japan Mr Hashimoto reaffirmed recently in Tokyo, an " indispensable
partner" for our neighbours and friends in our part of the world.
Our links with the countries of our region have implications which go beyond mutual
bilateral advantage. They contribute to a strengthening network of regional
associations. They also add value to our relationship with the United States, just as
our relationship with the United States contributes importantly to our region.
We believe that the active engagement of the United States is vital to the continued
economic growth of the Asia-Pacific region, to trade and investment as well as to
regional strategic stability. 
Recent reminders of the ongoing US commitment to a leadership role in the Asia-
Pacific region have been an important reaffirmation of America's continuing role in
support of regional stability and prosperity. They reflect the importance of the region
economically and strategically to the United States and they are very welcome to us in
Australia. I am thinking of the signature earlier this year by President Clinton and Japanese Prime
Minister Hashimoto of the Joint Declaration of Security. I am also thinking of the
reaffirmation of ANZUS at the recent Australia/ United States ministerial talks held in
Sydney, with the unprecedented attendance by the US Secretary of State, the Secretary
of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
I am also thinking of the extent of America's economic engagement with the Asia-
Pacific region.
The United States plays a vital role in the economy of the region as a source of capital
flows to fund the vast infrastructure needs of the region, as a supplier of technology
and as a market. The United States is the largest single market for ASEAN.
The American commitment to APEC is also fu~ ndamentally important in both regional
and global terms. APEC's iberalisation and co-operation agenda will be critical in
ensuring that the region reaches its fuill economic potential. The commitment of APEC
countries to liberalisation can also be a powerful force against pressures to protect
markets elsewhere in the world. APEC can be an important force in helping to
maintain momentum for ftirther trade and investment liberalisation both regionally and
globally under the World Trade Organisation.
I am very much looking forward to discussing these and other aspects of American
regional policy with another son of Arkansas, President Bill Clinton, when he visits
Australia next month-He will be assured of a very warm welcome to this country.
As for Australian regional policy, the purposes and goals of my Government are clear.
We have stated from the outset our profound commitment to the priority of
engagement with the Asia-Pacific region. This is the region with which Australia's
economic and strategic prospects are most immediately involved. This is the region in
which Australia needs to succeed and my Governmnent is determined to equip Australia
for such success.
We aim to facilitate the development of dynamic, exciting and expanding networks of
regional interaction in trade and commerce, in security
co-operation, in cultural and educational ties, and in people-to-people links.
We aim to develop strong regional relationships as well as to pursue Australia's
regional interests.
We aim to do so in a way that embodies vitality, dynamism and innovation in opening
up new areas of regional co-operation. We also aim to do so in a way that reflects
pride in our national values and institutions.
1534____ 
U It is governments which co-operatively set the tone and provide the lead in terms of
developing regional relationships.
My Government will continue to do so with our regional partners in terms of building
strong political links, maximising two-way trade and investment opportunities and
developing regional security co-operation.
We will also continue to do so in seeking to enhance the scope for direct people-topeople
links and in reaffirming in the strongest terms our commitment to Australia's
racially non-discriminatory immigration policy which has made us a stronger, richer
and more diverse nation an issue to which I will return later.
We are committed, as a Government, to accelerating the scope and pace of our
interaction with the countries of the Asia-Pacific region and to doing so in a way which
mutually respects our individual national priorities, traditions and attitudes.
We aim to expand through global, regional and bilateral channels Australia's current
level and range of trading and investment interests in Asia and the Pacific.
Australia supplies nearly half of East Asia's coal, iron ore and beef, as well as over half
its wool and alumina. We are a growing source of manufactures and services to East
Asia especially through small and medium size enterprises. And yet over recent
years, we have barely kept pace with the dynamic growth in regional markets.
Although the value of our regional exports is increasing, our share of key regional
markets over recent years has been declining.
We have opportunities across the board not just in traditional areas such as food
supplies and raw materials but also in services generally in education, in tourism, in
medicine, in finance, in processed food, in manufacturing, in construction, in science
and technology, in transport : in fact, across the full range of our resources and valueadding
industries.
Australian exports have made important inroads in most of those areas over the past
decade or more. But in terms of what we are capable, I believe we have only
scratched the surface of our full potential in many areas.
My Government has a clear vision of Australian possibilities in, and with, Asia. But
rhetoric alone will not be enough to make it happen. Nor is a hopeful faith in
geographic proximity to an economically dynamic region sufficient to ensure that our
national potential is realised.
What my Government is committed to is a practical strategy to fulffl our regional
potential.
That potential will only be unlocked when we address the inefficiencies in our own
national economic infrastructure and when we develop, in the Fuibright tradition,
patterns of interaction that will enhance personal contacts and cultural understanding. 1535 
I1I
That is why, as a nation, we need to pursue policies of fiscal responsibility. It is why
we need to tackle our foreign debt and current account problems. It is why we need to
lift our level of national savings. It is why we need to reform our arthritic labour
market system. It is why we need to pursue the essential task of microeconomic
reform in our transport and communications sectors.
Our actions since our election in March confirm the fact that these are all clear
priorities for the Australian Government.
Australia also needs to continue to work with our regional partners in taking the
APEC trade liberalisation process forward.
We must encourage other regional economies to match the significant liberalisation
already undertaken in Australia.
With tariff levels now at five per cent or below for all sectors except passenger motor
vehicles, textiles, clothing and footwear, sugar and cheese Australia has already moved
a long way towards the Bogor targets of free trade and investment.
Australia's regional trading partners have taken some significant steps. ASEAN
countries, for example, have cut applied tariffs on a trade-weighted average by about
two-thirds between 1988 and 1995. China's average tariff rate has come down from
per cent in 1988 to below 20 per cent in 1995. Japanese and Korean markets in citrus
fruit, beef and rice are more open than they were.
But Australian exporters of manufactures still face some very high tariff peaks in the
region. For example some on cars are as high as 200 per cent. Australian agricultural
and food exporters still face tariffs and other barriers, such as monopoly or state
importing arrangements. Our exports of legal and financial services are often
obstructed by regulatory barriers.
The value of APEC is that by liberalising in concert the benefits are maximised. For
this to work effectively, everyone must contribute.
We will use every avenue not only APEC but also the World Trade Organisation,
other regional associations and bilateral links to ensure that access barriers are
reduced and opportunities created for our exporters.
We need to pursue other priorities as well if Australia is to realise its full potential for
regional interaction.
We need innovative co-operation between government and industry on regional trade
strategies, such as the " Supermarket to Asia" strategy which we launched recently.
We need a reform program that will make Australia an even better place from which to
do business with Asia_
And we need expanded people-to-people links with regional countries.
1536 
All these priorities are fundamental if Australia is to compete effectively and engage
expansively in the Asia-Pacific region.
And they are all key priorities for the Australian Government.
In addition to our trade and commercial interests, we aim to enhance Australia's
security interests in, and with, the region.
Australia makes an important contribution to regional stability because of our strong
and professional defence force, our alliance with the United States, our active
diplomacy, and our close defence links with other regional countries. My Government
aims to strengthen each of these four elements of our regional security policy.
Our aims in the Asia-Pacific region go beyond, and supplement, our trade and security
objectives. Those aims also relate to enhancing the direct people-to-people links
between regional countries.
Immigration has played an important direct role in developing those links. In that
context, it is important to re-emphasise the non-discriminatory character of Australia's
immigration programme to which the Australian Government is unequivocally
committed.
There is certainly room for open and vigorous debate about the size and composition
of Australia's migrant intake provided that such debate is against the background of a
bipartisan commitment to a non-dscriminatory policy.
A wide range of independent contact between Australia and the countries of our region
has been developing. We see this especially in the growing links between Australian
chambers of comnmerce, professional associations, cities, schools, universities and
community groups, and equivalent bodies in many regional countries.
This range of contact is very much related to the Fuibright vision of enhanced cultural
understanding, and as a government we intend to encourage it as much as we can.
Tourism, of course, is an obvious example. 783,000 Japanese tourists visited Australia
in 1995. 77,000 Australians visited Japan, and nearly 300,000 visited Indonesia.
We have many Australians able to contribute with special language, cultural and trade
expertise, as well as through famiily and other personal ties, in developing Australia's
business, cultural and other relations with Asia.
And we have great potential to build on those resources in the future through Asian
language training in our schools and through greater awareness within our wider
community of the scope for regional interaction.
We also have a great opportunity to develop the extensive educational links that have
already been built up throughout the region. For example, there are now nearly 70,000
students from Asia studying in Australia, representing around eighty per cent of all
foreign students here. Nearly 200,000 people living in East Asia have been educated in
1532 w ct 
1538 13
Australian universities since the beginning of the Colombo Plan in 1950. And more
young Australians are now studying in Asia each year.
These are critically important personal ties which we aim to further encourage and
develop. They are also ties that relate directly to the high ambitions of the Fuibright
Program for broader and for more direct contact between the peoples of different
countries. Conclusion Senator William Fuibright was a proud American. He was also, in a very real sense, a
citizen of the world.
Tonight, we honour his service to public life in the United States. We celebrate the
world-wide achievements over fifty years of the educational exchange program which
he initiated. And we recognise the ongoing relevance of his vision in a world that is
very different to the one he knew and in which relations between nations, regions and
people are changing very rapidly.
But above all, we celebrate tonight the power of an idea: the idea that through direct
exchanges between the people of different countries and through direct experience of
different cultures, people around the world could learn to focus more on the things that
unite them than those that divide them and so make the world a better and safer
place. Senator Fulbright once described the pattern of international educational exchanges
which he initiated as " a modest program with an immodest aim" f.
He knew its idealism. He recognised the dificulties it faced. But he never lost faith in
its constructive power and nor should we. 



PRIME MINISTER
11 October 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE CSR FIBRE CEMENT FACTORY
WETHERILL PARK, SYDNEY
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Alan Coates, to Geoff Kells, the other directors of C SR, ladies and
gentlemen. I am delighted to be here today to be associated with this very large
investment of a great Australian company, the opening of a new plant that will directly
bring forth a product which is integral to one of the great industries of Australia, the
construction industry and the housing industry, and it's an opportunity to say a few words
about the importance of investment to the future of Australia. It's an opportunity to
congratulate CSR on its commitment of these resources, the generation of jobs for
Australians in Australia which a plant such as this symbolises. And it is in a world
environment of increasing globalisation and the increasing capacity of firms to move
activities offshore, and understandably so when the economic environment in other parts
of the world is so enticing and so competitive, it is an appropriate thing for the Prime
Minister of Australia to thank and congratulate CSR for the commitment it is making to
Australia and to providing job opportunities for Australians, and also to remark upon the
improving climate for investment in Australia.
We do have an environment which is accommodating to investment. We do have low
interest rates compared with a year ago. We have a low rate of inflation. We have, apart
from the odd glitch here or there, I think a very benign industrial relations climate and I
believe it could be made even better when the Government's Workplace Relations Bill
passes through the Federal Parliament and I congratulate CSR on the way in which it has
gone about democratising its own work force and the idea of involving all the employees
of an enterprise in the future of the enterprise, and removing the ancient divisions of
" them and us" is something for which this company is to be congratulated. 
The housing and construction industry have always been important to Australia. The level
of home ownership in Australia is the highest in the western world. It was one of the great
post war achievements of Australia that we were able to drive our level of home
ownership in the 1950s to over 70%, and although it perhaps may be a touch below that
now, over the years it has retained a very close relationship to that figure, and home
ownership has always been very much at the heart of the Australian way of life. The
prospects for the housing industry I believe are improving. The interest rate reductions of
recent months brought about in no small measure as a result of greater competition in the
banking industry I hope bode well for the fluture of the housing industry and I hope they
bode particularly well for the future of the dwelling construction industry because the
product of this new fibre cement plant will feed very, very directly into that activity.
So for all of those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to be here today. It's a
pleasure to be associated with a new venture. It's a pleasure as Alan Coates said to be
associated with the opening of a plant, the expansion of opportunities, the commitment of
resources to the future of Australia and to the future of a great Australian industry. Can I
also say, on a personal note, I like the fact that I'm associated with a new investment at
CSR. In its old manifestation, CSR of course was associated with sugar. I think I
disclosed to Geoff Kells at a meeting we were at some months ago that your company
gave my father many, many, many years ago his first job. He was an apprentice fitter and
turner at the Harwood sugar mill in the northern rivers area of New South Wales and after
he went to the First World War in 1916, he returned and completed hi s training as a fitter
and turner at Pyrmont, the Pyrmont plant owned by the CSR company. So I have a
nostalgic personal family affection for your great company and how it's changed and
grown and diversified and been a living example of the change and the diversification and
the development and the growth in the future optimism of our country over all of those
years. So, Alan and Geoff, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for asking me. I wish this plant well,
I wish happiness and prosperity to all who own it and work in it and I think it's a
contribution to a confident future for a great industry by a great Australian company.
Thank you very much.
ends 


13 October 1996&nbsp;
E&amp; OE...........................................
JOURNALIST: There seems to be a resignation in your Party. Can you tell us what's happened to Jim&nbsp;Short?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Jim Short resigned this morning. He went through all of his papers and he discovered that&nbsp;he had made a decision that specifically affected the AINZ bank, although it was a routine&nbsp;decision and he took it on the advice of the Reserve Bank and the Treasury. He felt that&nbsp;as he had not recalled that in our discussion last week, the circumstances had changed and&nbsp;he wanted to resign and he's done so and I with very great regret have accepted that&nbsp;resignation. He hasn't behaved in anyway dishonestly. He's shown very great integrity&nbsp;and he's done the right thing and demonstrated a concern for the Government and a&nbsp;concern for the Party in what he's done. I'm sorry that it's happened and I emphasise&nbsp;again it is no reflection on his integrity. In fact, he is regarded by everybody as a person of&nbsp;very great honesty and integrity.
JOURNALIST: There's been a lot of pressure on him though....
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;No, no. I knew nothing about this until yesterday afternoon. About five to one he rang me&nbsp;and he said, ' look, I've just been going through everything and I've discovered that therewas this explicit approval I gave only to the ANZ banking group for a second banking&nbsp;licence. I hadn't recalled it my discussion with you last week, therefore I feel the&nbsp;circumstances have changed and I must resign'. It certainly wasn't as a result of any&nbsp;pressure. He volunteered the information to me. I was busily thinking about something&nbsp;else when he rang me, I can assure you.
JOURNALIST: You've expressed a lot of confidence in him over the past few days. How does that make&nbsp;you feel now that he's decided to resign?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;I'm sorry for him but it is the right thing for him to have done.
JOURNALIST: Who will replace him?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well, I've announced that Senator Rod Kemp from Victoria will become the new&nbsp;Assistant Treasurer. He is a person of very great ability. He was in the Shadow Ministry&nbsp;before the last election. Because of the large number of people from Victoria before the&nbsp;last election it was necessary to cut the numbers back there to accommodate the natural&nbsp;claims of other states and he will fill the job very capably. Life will resume its normal&nbsp;pattern.
JOURNALIST: Does this put more pressure on Mr Costello?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;No. Has Mr Costello breached the guidelines? No he certainly hasn't. I'll be very&nbsp;interested to see whether the Labor Party is going to pursue the notion that women can't&nbsp;have independent interests in their own rights and they have to be dominated by their&nbsp;husbands' political and financial circumstances. Mr Costello has not breached the&nbsp;guidelines in any way. The shares that his wife bought were bought in 1994, they were&nbsp;put on the public register in 1994. Completely in accordance with the guidelines when &nbsp;there was another tranche of Commonwealth Bank shares after the election Peter asked&nbsp;his wife not to participate in that issue. She has behaved impeccably, so has he, and as I&nbsp;say, given their loud and noisy protestations about equal rights for women, I'll be&nbsp;fascinated to see whether the Labor Party continues as Gareth Evans did rather clumsily&nbsp;yesterday to pursue that aspect of the matter.
JOURNALIST: Cheryl Kernot said this morning your guidelines might be little bit too tight. Are you&nbsp;considering loosening them?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;No.
JOURNALIST: You said Senator Short had gone through his papers. Surely someone who is Assistant&nbsp;Treasurer should be more au fait with his own financial situation?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well, you can make all sorts of gratuitous comments about the man but he has resigned.
JOURNALIST: Mr Howard, the guidelines do say that the Ministers have to take their immediate families&nbsp;investments into account.
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Yes well that's exactly what Peter Costello did when he advised his wife not to participate&nbsp;in the second issue.
JOURNALIST: Does your immediate family have any investments?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;No. I haven't had any shares for 25 years.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, this morning Tony Staley was saying that he was glad Pauline Hanson&nbsp;had left the Liberal Party. Would you echo those sentiments?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well, I participated in the decision taken during the election campaign for her to have her&nbsp;endorsement withdrawn. I've got to say this latest comment of hers is really quite silly.
JOURNALIST: Is that the civil war comment?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Yes, it's ridiculous. I mean that is just a silly uninformed comment that nobody is going to&nbsp;take the least bit seriously and if I may say so for what it is worth, I suggest the ladies andgentlemen of the Australian media don't take it seriously either. I certainly don't.
JOURNALIST: Brendan Nelson has actually called for a bipartisan approach to condemn Pauline Hanson's&nbsp;view. Do you think you'll be speaking out more strongly now?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;I'll continue to do what I've done and that is assert the policies of the Government. I&nbsp;don't couch our policy position by way of responses to what other people have said.
JOURNALIST: Mr Howard, the Nobel Prize being awarded to the East Timorese. What's your response&nbsp;to that?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well it is certainly a significant event for those people. I'm not going to get drawn into&nbsp;the politics of the East Timorese dispute. We have a policy position on the legal status of&nbsp;East Timor, it is obvious that the recipients of the Nobel Prize have been strongly&nbsp;committed to their cause. I welcome the fact that President Soeharto will be meeting for&nbsp;the first time the Catholic Archbishop when he visits East Timor. I think that is a very&nbsp;positive move by the Indonesian Government.
JOURNALIST: One comment on the New Zealand election sir. Will the PPR affect relations with&nbsp;instability in the Government considered in the future in New Zealand?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well, that's matter for the parties to work out. I don't know what the final form of the&nbsp;Government will be. That's a matter for the New Zealand people. It's a very interestingsystem isn't it?
JOURNALIST: A week out from the Lindsay by-election how confident are you?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Lindsay is going to be a real fight because Lindsay is traditional Labor territory. The&nbsp;people got rid of Free last time. He is now trying to sneak back through the back door&nbsp;with this deal with the AAFI. I mean, you've got Kim Beazley running around the country&nbsp;saying he's in favour of tolerance and isn't it outrageous that people who advocate zero&nbsp;immigration haven't been more strongly attacked, and yet his own party has done a deal&nbsp;with a party that advocates that. Now, they're entitled to advocate it, it is a free country,&nbsp;but don't sort of say one thing on the one hand when you are talking to one audience and&nbsp;then something else when you are talking to another audience. I think it is going to be a&nbsp;very tough fight. Free could sneak back over the line by courtesy of this very sleazy&nbsp;preference deal. I hope every elector of Lindsay understands that. And the only way to&nbsp;stop Free from sneaking back through the back door is to vote for Jackie Kelly directly.
JOURNALIST: What about Jim Short's resignation? Do you think that's going to hamper your chances?
PRIME MINISTER:No, no, no.ends.


13 October 1996
FAMILY DAY 1IN THE ELECTORATE OF LINDSAY WITH JACKIE KELLY&nbsp;REGENT VILLE, WESTERN SYDNEY
E&amp; OE..........
Thank you very much Bob Woods, to Jackie Kelly, to my other parliamentary colleagues&nbsp;of which there are quite a number here today, to Mr and Mrs Mead who made their home&nbsp;available, very specially, to my parliamentary colleague Jackie Kelly, ladies and gentlemen.
We shouldn't be having another vote. There's something odd about it isn't it? You winsomething fair and square, you take out the prize, you win the grand final and they want are-run. It does strike most Australians as rather odd that somebody who joined the RoyalAustralian Air Force, who rose to the rank of Squadron Leader in that air force, isregarded in some technical way as owing an allegiance to a foreign power. But such arethe vagaries of the profession in which I once practised and far be it from me to cast anycritical aspersions on decisions of the courts, but simply let me say that it's a very odd sortof situation and I think it strikes Australians and it strikes the people of Lindsay as beingrather odd. I think it also smacks of that old sort of Australian no-no and that is badsportsmanship to grizzle when the verdict has been given and the referee has blown thewhistle. Anyway it's happened, and we have got, can I tell you, one hell of a fight on our hands.You all know that this area has traditionally, historically been a Labor Party stronghold.It's called Labor Party heartland, and of all those magnificently warming results that wereceived on the second of March few of them matched Jackie's victory here to get aswing of eleven and a half per cent. It was a remarkable achievement and it's a remarkabletribute to her and it's a remarkable tribute to you because so many of the people whomade that victory possible are here today. But despite having sort of conquered all thoseenormous odds, despite having imagined that she could look forward, at least, to threeyears of representing the people of Lindsay and doing good things for the people ofLindsay she now faces a by-election. She faces a by-election which has been made more
difficult for her to win by the fact that the Labor Party, despite its noisy protestationsabout its commitment to all sorts of things in terms of racial equality, a Labor Party thathas done a deal with the Australians Against Further Immigration Party, they've done adeal with other organisations. I mean there's a real danger that Free will sneak over theline by courtesy of the preference of the Australians Against Further Immigration and theShooters. Now there's no point in me as your political leader, as your Prime Minister andas Jackie's parliamentary colleague mincing words on something like that. If it's a fair andsquare fight she ought to win. But you've got a situation where they've entered into thesearrangements while at the other hand putting their hand on their heart and saying ' oh, youknow, isn't this terrible that organisations and people should say anything at all aboutimmigration'; I mean what sort of hypocrisy is that? On the one hand you're saying youshouldn't talk about it and the next hand you go behind the shed and say ' look will yougive us your preferences' I mean that is basically what is happening. And I think that isjust monumental hypocrisy and Australians can pick phoneyism, but they can only pickphoneyism when it's brought to their attention. So we have got a fight on our hands, areal fight. There's a real risk that a bloke who, after 13 years, you threw out because hehadn't done enough for the area can sneak back through the back door by courtesy of thispreference deal.
Let me say something about Jackie. She's a bundle of energy, she's new, she's fresh,she's different and she's the wave of the future as far as this area is concerned. She'sasked more questions in the Parliament than any other member on our side. They're allgetting a bit envious, but she has and she gives me a hard time if she doesn't get the rightanswers and that's what a local member ought to be about. And she's prepared to do that.I mean, I just think it is terrific that the Liberal Party was able to extend its support intoareas like Lindsay. I mean the Liberal Party of all the political parties in Australia's historyis the one party that is owned by nobody. Nobody owns us. We're not owned by theTrade Union Movement, we're not owned by big business, we're not owned by anypressure groups, we're really not. We're made up of people from all walks of life. Andone of the reasons why Jackie won on the second of March was that the Australian peoplewere fed up with having a Government in power that bended its knees to the noisiestinterest group in the community. Run by a Government that was too beholden to noiseand not concerned enough about the mainstream of the Australian community. We are agreat community. Australia is now composed of people drawn from all parts of the world,but they're united behind a common commitment to the ideals that make up this country.So many people over the years have made a contribution. Instead of, sort of, focusing onsome of the things that divide us and push us apart, one of the things the Liberal Party andI've certainly tried to do is to focus on those things that bind us together as Australians.And that was one of the promises that I made on election night and is one of the promisesthat I have carried forward. We brought down a budget, we were left with an appallingfinancial mess, we were left with a much bigger deficit than we were told, we were leftwith much higher debt than we were told and we had to make some difficult decisions.But they were done in a fair way.
I met a business man in Adelaide the other day and he said, ' look, I had a look at yourbudget, and he said you know, you did this and I didn't like that, it affected me, you didthat and I didn't like that and you did a whole lot of things that affected me but', he said,' I've written you a letter congratulating you on the budget'. I said, ' why?' He said,' Because it was fair'. And I'm very proud of that. There are a few things about being anAustralian and the Australian spirit that endure from one generation to the next. One ofthose things is our great tradition of mateship and another things, of course, is our sense ofa fair go. And we did try to have a fair go. There were some things in that that hit a fewpeople that could afford it and there's also a few things that a lot of people didn't like.But overall it did the right thing for Australia and that is why it has been well received, notonly here, but it's also been respected overseas. When I went to Japan and Indonesia afew weeks ago the business community in both of those countries were very appreciativeof the fact that we had inherited difficulty and we had done something very material aboutit. So ladies and gentlemen, can I do two final things. First of all I want to thank you for allthat you did to get this wonderful lady elected on the second of March. I want to thankyou very warmly. You have sent to Canberra a person of real vigour. She is new, she'sdifferent, she does represent the future. She replaced somebody who was part of theproblem and now he's trying to sneak back by courtesy of a sleazy preference deal withsome Independents. Ladies and gentlemen, it's going to be tough, I thank you for whatyou've done so far, but could I ask you to re-double, treble, quadruple those efforts overthe next week. Because if we can defy those forces in the community here in Lindsay thatwould, sort of, reverse the freely given verdict of the people on the second of March. Ifwe can demonstrate that that kind of political cynicism is unacceptable, and it will be avery tough fight to do so, we will have not only done a very good thing for the people ofLindsay, we will have confirmed in office an outstandingly energetic local representative inJackie Kelly, but we will also have said to the people of Australia that we want somethingnew and different and better and that is really what Jackie represents and that aboveeverything else is why she ought to be returned on Saturday. Thank you.0



18/ 8.' 9618: 46 Pg:
SI
18S Octobecr 3996 TRtANSCRWT OF THE PRIMI( MINISTFER
TI IE~ IION. J01 IN 11OWARD, UIP
AI) DR~ eSS TO TI IF NATIONA, UIBE RAI, WOM) IN'S CONFERFNCFI
DJACKJACJCS ROOM, WAREST POINT 11OTRhL CASI NO
HODART, TASMANIA
FA 0
Chr~ i McI~ wov, Margarcr COuffoyle, other distinguishcd guests, ladies, and gentlemen. it is
a grcat dcliilit to address t06% coniference as past of the Ifrst Federal Council meeting of the
new era of I~ ibcrad guvununt. I rumenbdr the day of the launch or our womnen's policy,
remcrnlvr vety well and what a surxessraI policy it was and what a great~ sucuom~ we had
in securine, thc electioun of a record number of wconen to the national Pzirliamnent.
If ever a poUlical party dcemonstrated in relation to something that acticin speaks louder than
rhvtuziu, tLhc l. ibvral Party demonstrated it with female representation. As it has been in so
mainy other arcas, aftic rcpivsentation, miany other areas vf svprcstntaliort. so it has been
in Motaion to fomrale represenaution in the national Parliamcni. We don't bdlive in the
parniing symibolism of quotas, we believe in the practical reality of treating women on
their~~~~ nnirlvnt by increasingly barte numbmr of them will elected as LIbeal
members of the national Parliament. And just before I canto here I spoke on the phone to
one of those wonicrt who was swept into office on the 2nd of March and one who is very
much in our droughts at the preset time. And if ever a memnber of tho I iral Party, if
cvsr a candidate for office is in our thnughts, and if ever a candidate descrvs ftta preat
Austraian commodity of a fair go, it's Jackie Kelly. And if tomorrow tho pcoplo of
Lindsay fix on a choice betn sromebody new, wmrebody igorous, wmfcbody acfive and
somrebody whoe rprm~ nis ( bk' futurc and discards somebody who's part of the failed pat
tlueJ they WMl indeud vote for Jackie and vore for her dircely tomorroW.
-7= 
18/ 18/ 96 18: 46 Pg: 2
LWkse and Ccnil~ mnii I'd Nkc, at the commtrncnicni or my addrcsa, to ; ongraulalo Citais
Meciven on licr re-eleotion at Chairman of the l'cdcral Womcn a CUMrrSitt1. And I want
to 1hafli all of you 1br the great Work that you lmavv donr. owi-OKc last ycAr. Tho way in
which so many of you and I Mnow m~ y fonno-uaiw wo~ eiigu, Mar~ rct GuUfoyla, has
played a major rolo in ais, the way in wbivb you havo, oloouragcd aim inorvxiui number ofT
Wom in the cwmWity tu n~ ot only join thc Liberal P" rt, but to become out candidat.
And ir Woii a SIMPIO 1meSSage that I Would BkO~ to SUnd f( raM1i hdietng, arid I'd Jilt-, 14
scad tn the womm of Auirala out of tiW JustiFederal Council ( if the new Iliberal era, that
shnply is, com. 9 and join us. Come and share the new dircctioft4 tt the I jhihcaI Fay has
for tho women of Auaa as wet) asfor all the people OV014rabstla.
It's natural, when threc't at cango of Sowrmnin. for people to aslk quesiicrns about the
Airection at The ncw govcnmt. ANi I Want tway a vuujle or " Wn~ aboit out ; tcncral
dircclions in ft areas of geat con'. ena to wosneui. We aw a new g ninlont, we area
lfl'rent sovenunent. andi we wont be daing things the iiau'w way &amp; 3ti e governmecnt we
Irepacd. l that dmcn't Aican to say that we'll be turning back thu cloc. ThU world has
vlwnWe roieves so tar aa thr, womcit, not only of AustrAi, but women all around the
world = r concernod. And when I talk about taking a difterent direction, I don't tal~ k about
turn*% Wa4 the alo; S, I don't Wak about trvliug notions that inay hnve been 1clevant to
womon Venerally of earlier genem tonc, I talk ahnat doing things diferntly in the ttkze
but doinS them in ant equAlly progrextive way, and in a Way CM arti ehs thc agplraiuis of
womn of alt ap~ aM we nlovc towards the ncxt illcnxiuin.
You have choscni w a mcm rn dh&amp; i pm tiurn wafiuteu, th:, eonmomit; indepondonge of
women. SUClnnhhg iztcidMalaY lytat WA3 in the, spodliht cartior this week when % vi had the
OTi ALdulOus P0t0on put forward by somo of our po~ ioaI opponents " ht tiwr was
somthing odd about women indapenduntly hatvig aaaets whun thrir husbands happen to
bec in POliticsIttP isOM vcsY strae, you know, that padtis thait speak tie lotidtxt and arecI
poisiest in the flietoric about independence When it comes to J! Ak~ np a cheap politica
polnt they grab the rliatoric of earlier Becrahion and it is wry typical of the Labor Party
of t1he 1990s.
But when wo talk aboot Worn~ s policy for 1hr, rutire, ws aren'it takIng about tun&amp;~ n
back' the clock. Ther are now "-alhla gist have bevandi toa for akv eay 1on lime a&amp; M
ty Wiill atWilt, of C-Ouim be replared as the gcncratina go by, by other now mq* itiQs.
Buat l; 1n9e cItiee0 invclv the m~ a~ dmwn emphasis on freedom of zndi'. iduat choice. The
new reAlitics in1vlvc us, providin to the women of Austreia, the imum, uboice it,
orgmising tlic diffront recponsibiiics and aspirations and hopes within their lives. A..
wvith mann wom90 Will always hAve a 9pccia Place in their lhvs tor thir tarnify and their
Otherf relationships. The ideva ihai ruiine a career, putsuing the achimvment of indi-, duai
Soalit and playing out to the limnit the individual talents ihar women have, the idea that AhU.-;
sir uneasily with fardly rcsponsbflts a tho in urial dtire uf peple to n1wturc f~ uanlis
And tO raise chIMdn has alwayr, struk inc as a lan woijuuz, slotina. Alld wo 9110uldno
ba in ths; Iusittis uf tnakiiig judgenicnts about tbls or that way in vWrih somebody ives 
18/ 1@/ 96 18: 46 Pg: 3
out hi~ q or her life. Our goal oupht to be to cvaitz to tho n ximutn ehtof( thal 8gvmieals
can do. a ranpc of iial jjboics, not nominal ohrnimo, not unaclu'vable Chioi= e. A choice
ducmnI exist if you can't afford to aspire to it, it's nicrely a pi= c of emrply rhetntic and we
hawe to Lirvaingly provido people Mobl choice.
I can romernbcr talking to a eicnar in Parliament hlouso In the mhldlu of last yvor
orphfisOd by Judi Mq) 1i, one of quie a number of the meibcm of riy MWnitry. And in
dat seminar I thoughi I could heal encapsulate the change tiat had wins ovcr AustralIAD
society by telling it that when I attended llio Sydney Untvmaity Law School beteri 1957
heave"'&amp; above and 1961, thert; wet;, I Iliink, 10 womn out of 180 in the Ent year.
When myl) daitp,? ier enrio Ot-, firt yeu of a cornhinod lAw/ ec~ omis icours at Sydncy
' I Unlvuriy i 1993, 51 per cont of the student in thast first year we= e women. AMl in that
apacex of what, 34, 35 yv* rs 34 yvaM it had chand to that exitt. And so it is ini to
flamly other arcas of life.
If you took al thc differcrit policies aw we havv tried to bing dmwn you lovs4, at owr
industrial relations policy, something very, vewy closo to my pulilkel Jicaut. Otic of thc
great benelils of te industrial relatons policy ibal we hav birought dowri, and I fcrvendy
hmope wrill Vim~ the Senate and the suvond eadliug dobato was approvad by t Senate Wnl,
two days ago one of the Sreal btawfils of that policy s tAtl it will allow pvUPte to mnorc
efrbezively blend their workqlace and their fxnily rusponslblity. And that is not only
frnNfl1nin for wonion, but it's also important tot mon and for hurbands and fathorm because
sharing family mcspotsibilties and sharn8~ tie mripoflibilitset of pavlhihf( d ik t~ iletthinl*
that is vety, very much a comimitmen so far 3s otir policice are coernei. The iea, Itat
the rtaponsibhifies of iriing children are inherently pealcr ont wonv tha on nicit is a
voton of an caslior 5cneratian, Theiy are t'hanm4 rtsponsibires, they = i shasrd affwt. iotw
= 4d they oughit to be khaivcd rcsansihilitic&amp;.
In other arcas we have sought to create a mome wtigqdul so~ iWt for wormn Violonoo of
any kind Againt Women and childiven i p" Wcuar, but Wo gnly, apfingt fl pwop, is
somothing dial I kntow is repugnant to ovorybody. And I am vary proud of the fact that
ottovof dics gftAle achkvvmcnl3 of the now Govramqnt i its 1frst caven mofltIV, And I
bbv is i3 an achievemet that will rebound to the credit or thte ouvenmnn throuh t
year no muaftr how long Rt remainx ; n officz, it what we were able to do in the wake of
that awful Iragody here in Tasmania to gwc national Sun lawo. And don't anybody
kn&amp; rcstznate thd pailicular Supprt we had from the Women or AusTalla for tIN= laws.
The witnmbcr of tifnes people, Women caMe Up to mi and said, ' don't lakv luoy mIutice of
% ome of the stuff in the necwspapmr and on the me~ io, wo'rv vry siojgly ht favour of
what you're doi&amp; g' And tha applied to women i ihe tw-al aramu of Australia. And I was
mninftd Of that two daps ago whbcu I nict a dftcation of women rapem otIng die rral
vounnunifirA Of Auht( Alia at a National Rural Wlommo'a Sumit in Con'berra. And amntp
t. many subznissions they put to mte was the strong = expesion of support for the uniform
sun laws that we'd boon able to bring In. 7 
18/ 18,96 18: 46 P9: 4
I'nI Very happy to say that in a bUd&amp; Ct WhiCh, in Other areas contain Some Very Signifficant
arnd stringmn spending dcisonx, wo were able to mnake more mnircy " Avable for
counsolling in relation to duniestic iolcnce. We were; able to make mare moncy . vailablc
for counselling in rolalion IA) p arenting skilti and we wcrc Abis to mAlc more money for
mnanigc and rulationship guidance. If prevcntion irs bett than curc in matters of Straigh~ t
health policy it is Also better-prcvention is beter than oure in areas whome if'o the
bmeadnwn of lii. relationship and Itsq negativu liostilo, violent attitudes that c~ ugc
unuiappinoss and caurm abuse.
I'm particularly prqud of my GovormniVs initiatives in thc area of small business.
Women in small bumincss now conprise somethingj like 30 to 35 per cent of Mhe total small
businoss swcor and it's growing at a very rapid rate. Thw successful entwy of women into
the smull business component of the servicc sector of our eeonoiny is particularly rapid.
Nowhere do you~ Soo the transformation of Mhe workforcc from that old paradigm of bluecollar
malc employod in niatifaetaring, woiijn to a foruman in one Lurgo afta where
most of the employces congregate. than in thre ara of wnall businms with woman. And
the way in which in rctail, in computing servioms i marketing, in certain areas of
manufacturinS in tourism, in trade promnotion, in just so many othe. r areas, thate has been
a spoctalr growth orft participation of women And our polioia for the all
businoss community of Australia arc very mtuch designod to crihaneu the growtih of small
busincis". And I look forward to the day when I hops it's not too distant when tt
industrial relations bill dme pass and we will have swepi away thoso ridculous wtfir
dismissal laws.
Ilic reality of courso, ladicq and gentlemen, is that as timc goes by and we move into the
ar;-M century lucr; will be fewer and fewer Australiats aniployod by big companies and
therC Will be proportionately morm and more employed by smnall companies. I don't tMink
the modemn community has Yet understood fully thu impact of the ommznrurications
revolution on fth role of tmall businesses in our society. The way in which thoso Ijiree
tools of that revolution the personal computer, the mobile telephoac and the facsinileo
machine havc absolutely rwoltifordse the doing of business by small firms. Those, three
tools alono ive to wntail firnis, including in particular and this is relevant wo many women
as it is to mon including a greater capacity to work out of your own home. Thu way in/
which those three tooLs have revolutionized the circumstances in whivch you do business, I
don't think has been fully undmtood.
It used to be tho cane in the 1970s that bUS was bcautiful that utless you becarne bigger
and biggcr then you couldn't got the economies of scale, you couldn't Sav yourself a
sufficiently Atrong conomic. base to penietrate 3 worldwide maket, and unless you cohered
with another unit to form a larger unit you were't going to mAlc. ii. But modem
conuunications have altered so much of that, and to use the currentI idiom, those changes
hmv empowered Small business and ame of necessity there for women in small bwsncss to a
remarkable degree. B~ ut of course providig women and indeed all people with puawe 
18/ 1e./ 96 18: 46 Pg:
oppomrsuhk for Ghcgix in arm lSik eidustiial meius. and arm a uch as small business
nvjuorf iv altv3 11i; foit dial tlicr Pa a patloular and opeolal ttotwork ri and
01o111nnity role which womun bring wiiq9t skilla and ditferant oopaoteas thAn mon, and
WWh~ i's Of 5Q tnUh imprln11 and Of So MUoh Volue to tho LAIbea Uaty
Since i ncoption t I . bura Party has tcviod very bcavll on the Advice ant lbe
p3rtieipation of the women of Austrahn. In MIL'ent circeimsdanco. wheo there wcrc fewer
women in the paid workforce the tire and sole And Mhe strangh of the Ltberal Party
organisalion depended vwy heavily on tho parricipalon of womn. And in a m= wcr mid
ditrereni age such as we now fte wc ghoukldnt be shy to acknowlc4e die coonnowa
omiribufion of tluse wiuier iz an cailict goncration who madc that contribiin In lhcir
otqiaid wify, and I tUti it's ' vey imiportant. I um tho propcily Inature and sophisticated
rProarch to thcso thitgs is to recogise that wc an; a Party Ih waetois career woman,
welorno wovion that blend careor vwitb thek farmly rospornibilitics. We welcomle women
who ehoota to be full time homemakcr, indeed we welcome womecn no anaffer what their
Choice$ Mre. Thlcre is room within the Liberal Party for a rxW~ or choices and for won
to exerre that range of choices. The onl Miop forw which there is no room in the I Aherl
Paruty are those who displayed an intolerane towards The cholce that ifas bme 1a~ n by
othmr. I 11aVV f0WId dIe adVICicad MiC coW-aCl Of W011101 thron. WUIa MnY pOlItC41 "= ee A3
absoLUtey IndiSPOnsble. I not onl refer to t. Advicc and coungel that I rooCiwV from ray
own itif and my daughter bat also the counsol anid advice that I reoevd from my
many wornen 1fiands that I've mado u~ m tho yomr in tho IberAl Party, and of gourse mor
rocently from thw membmr of my staff and I think I'm the first Pyinic Ministcr of Autralia
liAv Af eMAIC C'Jticf of -Staff and alto from thc Iinaeeru mber of my Cabinet and my
Minisary. it can bc uia without any luetainn that we bsve a latrge " Imnhcv or women ot'
9= 13 tlent anid Smat ability mt our r= Mk.
We havv nrad; the Labor Party Iuvk fwu" s bweause we; bavr put dcod,' bafrer words and
wevev put a&amp; lia Womw Axwlod. We, haval's potroiid wowen tiby e'Aablwaliuii quotas.
that ame 5oin to crcatc fasoinat i affic jams on the road to gcnder equalt in t ealy
YOMn Of the nvxt 0ceritwy. I m= a it is going to be fascinating waitching somc of tIhw
Prcelaotiona in * w Labor Party as lhay mrivo Ito got lowarsh that 35% by about the year
2002. 1 MCaU, if evwt a POlitica Patty hai dcrmofttrited the trulh of' the old Anastinian
1bdunction of ' Lord, make nit pure but not just yot' as faf as the quota is concrd. it is
tht Labojr PartY in Celation t hulr quota. We All remmbcr tha noise and the bells
and wists and the dancing i th is 510 jutt ovot tir, row4 hr when tikJ rMolution was
PAWoe A COUPIC Of ycars ago. W4ll, that was the nyt, ilt ath ( 110 folu~, tho reality was
on the 2nd March. But we 60g1t not bc, omplaccnt about thAt, and w* ought to %% vAvacy
bar&amp; L We need At ut MOTO WOMan in feeral Poaliamont, we need 11lo t mome Women, 
18/ 1896 1i8: 46 P:
in State ParIMImt. We oupht ncvcr to sell Oi~ elvcs short 1ho~ h In reltion to pons :
aehicvvmcnis. Wo should T ncmbcT Mhe significant nitsuos as fist w~ Ow vis) znw of
equal achlcvmnrt and equal oppurtuniky ky wsn tMat hav been put down thr
Llbcral Fatty.
WO rIVCMbrcr of OQWMO tiw pi. al contribudon that Marprot Glhiloyle mnade a a sonior
nwcriftr of the PrasRo Govorment. Romomber Eike Damec Rnid Lyons, we remecmber
matoy othoMs t Tanicy', Bulfilds anid to the lEst goos on. And Just ' as tlia I Ahcral
Paty was the fat Party in Australia to hav an Aboritric am one cat'its nmhars, We We= e
the first Party in Auistralia in hive a nn. 1ngth spcalWi1 person of owrsrcas bifllt as a
membher of fcdcral larliamnern in tho pemnn of MMUh LAJO.
3o many of thcse area whon yuu wavually ui ii Iba4 tt pagcs of history, you find that wo
wvCv thsati~ an md yot somehiow or other aovr t1 ycars our political oppoawnta bovt boon
al1; tQto a111Ce notion that We' 1VQ bccn dr*&amp; Ong tho chain and that we've boon fOllOwen
rtihr tOw leaders in so mAny of the". arez., 1 don't Obini they've been able to do that
since the 2nd Marh, bacause nothing~ can deny the force of tt, I thirl, givat glood of
female talent snd ability that came into federal parliamtmt on the 2nd March and it 1' A
sothilsng of which I am ixmmqcsly proud and I know 1Wa &amp; Holf my P~ arliamecntary
collcaguc ame fnmew'ely proud. Andi it is important Ouat women in the Libmrl Party speak
in a very Circe fashio to Issme Thai are relevant to t" but most particua~ y to thre
commrruniTy of which thvy aru fll and iwivc and Vayicipza'tin jizl~ ituo.
Ladics and gcntlcvucn, w, al0 haw our ideals oft he way socicty ough1t to be. My Ideal of
an Australi&amp; n soolety includos and very = 6c lnvolv e notion of women ha'ing the
eppurtunity to livu out tiwir vhoiw to the fuliwi extcztt us I hsope would always be the ease,
of all citizwns of our society, providing their unique capacity aind Waent to provide the
Ourtuuina role anid that qpeial ompastion and siabiy and affection that they can bfing to
relationships and thea reqpornitt~ c along with men as lmrentx. Firclng a wiciety wliere a
PrOpur babrne can bW rutId for thoso who want both carme stisfaction and also to Mwil
to the zuaXfntUn their nspOnlbiltles if they choose as parmit o be parents, but also
CWeo4ss~ nj that Mcmr will be ani whu wMl wazet Lu vwv thch-cenlbv wviiimit Lk die,
boav te omee thAt. will wa1it t1 0 their antic, " OCmrtint In the, Paid wov1morcc.
71= r is not a hicramhly or virix whoi it come o t ei chloics &amp;&amp; awIo mcu Mkcte 1he
only thnt bknan dd oryitue ttIsipout ft a iy sould hvWthe
Maxinum) freedom of cOW00 that we Cant Sva i&amp; Vm.
INow, lAdieS And SCDpnTlMe, let Me tConclt~ de by 11aanking You for your participation in this
conft-rcncC. I wSnt to tUink you for the wark tat you've clone. I walit toa thank the
I'cdcral Women's Committee, I want to thank Chris melPxve ant all of her cofticss for
the bclp that ty povc to rme. I wat to thank ivwiy Hilp in my own' ofl; tc whio'; ben
PArtUlatl valuable as An advisr of, wwluci's issucs to ie. All of you hav playod a vvy
very 4afiollatt rMl. in biu ni us to the vinry hAppy n; imane. where wec Invi ar Ste
&amp; gmti me in thirteen YOMr as Mcmbers Of fte SOMvAOn Party of Australia. 
18/ 1/ 96 18: 46 PS: 7
As we took~ boik uvr ft; Wn yma, % v th" n 91 di.; usebL a GJvtnt of th@, m&amp; Wtt oa
Zstd Mnmia. W; a1" 4v ivinmbor with perilmlar bMfowpur dcput~ d friand Dwmo Ni do
Mm~ ioswbo playd such a tuunivital volo in lhe lfo* Vfthe Libeal Party of Austr~ lia,
Wwon a groat firAd 4oiupanon and parn for I&amp; f d, the founder of the Nlbrai Party
and Who anbodi so uiay oc( hetrt qualtis 9 our Party an~ d we think or the
' Contaibwollo ist at WW= e Lberal Party 14 Tlir,% itory on 2nd March.
Ladies md genen ak O you d I dn " np that ir yoarn to come thea cnibution
of ate redemt Women'sl CAMMittee WMl Cm~ on10 M and remain as It Is today. a vry.
NVO4Ina" pm rtO the mechandgm Of prol4# 4poucy advic and oansadiona
a= Ud mud to ftu btiar m'ay,
Thank, you iod.
ZZ~ 44 



Fax from PRIME MINISTER
October 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOIHN HOWARD, MP
LAUNCH OF NATIONAL CARERS' WEEK
WOODSTOCK, HOBART, TASMANIA
E&amp; O F
Thank you very much Judi Moylan, to Peter Mc; Kay, to Paul Calvert, Mrs Avril Fink,
ladies and gentlemen. It's a very special pleasure for Janette and myself having just left
the, I suppose the inevitable political rigour of a National Conference of our own
Political Party, to come to this lunch to share a few moments in helping to launch
National Carters' Week.
When you are in politics you meet a lot of people, some of the interviews you have have
no impression at other interviews leave a mark on you for a little while and then
they're forgotten and then other discussions are ones that you never ever forget Several
years ago whien my eldest child, mrny daughter was doing her HSC, T interviewed a lady in
Sydney who described some of the difficulties she had in a situation in a very small home
when one of her children was doing the HSC and the other of her children was a male
adult who was profoundly handicapped and she was cuing for him, with all the
difficulties and challenges that that involved and at the same time trying to provide a
reasonable, congenial environment for her other child to study for the HSC. And the sort
of description that she gave to me did leave a real impression. And it kindled then, I was
not the Leader of the Opposition then, I was just a Shadow Minister, and it kindled an
21/ 18/ 96 09: 11 Pg: 1 
Fax from -2-
Often but not always in a family situation, usually but not always, in relation to a fr-ail
and elderly relative always involvin though a degree of porsonal commitment and a
degree of love and devotion to responsibility and devotion to what they see as their duty
to their family members or otherwise their loved ones. So it is very appropriate that there
be a National Carers' Week.
It's important in a society such as ours to take time out to honour the contribution that
unsung heroes make to keeping our society together. No society can work without
volunteer commitment and effort. There are many, many people in Australia every day of
the week, every week of the year who want to give of their time and their effort and their
talent and their energy and their intellect to help others to look after -others and they
draw a satisfaction from that. But it is important not to take that for granted in a broad
sense the community ought never to take its volunteer effort and devotion for grated It
ought to be wiffing on occasions to publicly honour it and to accord to people who are
willing to do that. the respect and gratitude to which they are entitled, And I am so very
pleased to associate miyself with this because my Government is about a lot of things and
it's not just about getting the economy right that's very important it's not just about
the sort of day-to-day arguments on taxation, industrial relationS; they're all iMportant
too. It is also a Government that is concerned about the kind of society we are and the
kind of people we honour and respect and the sort of value system that we have. And
looking after one another is the most important component of the value systemr of any
society and I would like to think that something like a proper role for carers; in our
community is an issue that straddles any political divide. T don't seek to pretend that this
or that side of politics has done it this or that way or any better than the other. If we can
reach an agreement on this T'd be more than happy to give credit to my political
opponents for anything that they've done in this area.
And I'm happy to say that being seen by others~ as sort of making some cuts and
restrictions elsewhere we have been able to do a number of things in our last Budget
which I just wanted to veMy very briefly mention today becat= s they are an indication of
the commitment we have-We have increased the number of days that a came may
temporarily cease caring in a calendar year without affecting the eligibility for the carer
payment. We're extending ftom 10 to 20 hours the number of hours per week that carers
may spend in employment, voluntary work, educational train&amp; wbilst being eligible to
receive the carers' payment. We've established a National Caters' Programme which wfll
integrate the existing array of respite care programmes into a single programme. And this
will greatly assist family carers who until now have had to find their way through a maze
of individual programmes, each with their own eligibility crite ria and
Fafrit21/ 10/ 96 89: 11 Pg: 2 
Fa rom21/ 10/ 96 09: 11 Pg: 3
-3-
different bureaucracies. We're going to provide an additional $ 36.7 million to the
National Respite for Carers' Programme over the next four years and this will help to
ensure that there is a wider array of readily available respite options suited to the diverse
needs of individual carers. We're also going to establish a national network of carer
resource centres and with funding of up to $ 700 000 a year nationally these resource
centres will help carers to liaise with came providers in identifying and delivering respite
care most relevant to individual needs.
Now these are just some of the commitments that we make and T do want you to accept
from me a very genuine commitment by the Government to the worth, to the notion of
what corers do, to what it demonstrates about the humanity and the decency and the
values of the people who provide the care. A decent, civilised., humane society always
requires personal sacrifice by individuals but that personal sacrifice ought never to be
taken for granted and it should never go unacknowledged. And the groatest deeds of
personal commitment are performed in the home environment where people care for sick
and frail and dying loved ones and those in their family who have particular disabilities
which the rest of us don't have. And they really do represent some of the most wonderfurl
stories that anybody can tell about the decency and the love and the care of men and
womcn in our community.
And 1 can't think of any cause that is more deserving of respect and honour than the
cause of the Government of this country and the Leader of that Government fbr the time
being, I hope for a while, saying how much we honour and respect your contribution.
And I want to say on behalf of my Government, on behalf of all of the Australian people
thank you for what you are doing; thank you for making it a better and a happier and a
more decent and a more humane society. And I hope that my Governmnent can over the
years ahead continue to provide help, that you have some very articulate advocates on
behaf of your organisation and good luck to them. Articulate advocacy is something that
always ultimately has an effect on Goverrnents and that's very, very important.
But this week is a very important week for you. It's a very important week for those who
believe that Australian soc iety is nmore than just a combination of economic numbers and
arid policies, it's also about values and love and compassion and care and it's a very
important week and I very proud as Prime Minister to have been asked to launch it to
say a few words about my own personal intercst in your responsibilities and also to wish
the Carers' Association the very best of good fortune and to thank all of you for the
magnifcent personal contribution you make and for the collective contribution you
make to a wvarm and more decent and more caring Australan community.
Thank you.
Fax from 



Fax from 1,11 20/ 18/ 96 13: 07 Pg: I
.7 1
PRIME MINISTER
October 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD, MP
ADDRESS TO LIBERAL PARTY FEDERAL COUNCIL
WREST POINT HOTEL CASINO, HOBART, TASMANIA
E O E
Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen for that very warm welcome. Before I
commence my address to this Federal Council I am sure that there's somebody here who
you would like to greet and that is the re-elected the Federal Member for Lindsay, Jackie
Kelly. Tony Staley, Tony Rundle, the Premier of Tasmania, my other Federal and State
Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It is an enormous privilege for me to
stand before you today as the first Liberal Prime , Minister in 14 years, addressing a
Federal Council Meeting of the most successful political party since Federation. When
yesterday we received Andrew Robb's report on the campaign it ended with an excerpt
from the acceptance speech that I delivered at the wentworth IHlotel in Sydney on the
second of March and in that speech I committed myself and my Government to the
service of all of the people of Australia. And as I look back over the last seven-and-a-half
months, I can say to you ladies and gentlemen thai we have stayed true to the values,
principles and the policies that we took to the Australian people in the election. And over
the past seven-and-a-half months there has not only been a change in policy, there has
also been a change in the style of the Government of this country. No longer do we have
a Government that responds to the loudest clamour f the noisiest minority, no longer do 
Fax from we have a Government that is so arrogant it can never say sorry, or never say that it was
wrong, no longer do we have a Governmnt that is remnote and out of touch with the
aspirations and the hopes and indeed the dreams of the mainstream of the Australian
community. Over the last seven-and-a-half months we have begun the task of addressing those aspects
of the Australian economy that need change and reform. We delivered what I believe was
the best Federal Budget in close to two decades. It was a Budget that was both strong and
fair. It was a Budget that delivered the core commitments of the Coalition taken to the
election. Tt was a Budget that goes greatly to the credit of the man who delivered it, the
Deputy Leader of the Party, Peter Costello, and the Federal Treasurer.
We also have in place a group of men and women who kfin to the Govcmnment of this
country great skills and great ability. I am imensely proud of what my team has
achieved-I am immensely proud of the skills that so many of them have brought to the
job of governing Australia. I amn immensely proud of the fact that despite 13 years of
Opposition, we have brought together a very professional and effective Go0vernmnent. A
Government that retains the overwhelming respect of the Australian people. A
Government that has delivered for all of us on what we took to the election. I remaind you
that in the election campaign, we spoke extensively of our commitment to the Australian
family. We spoke extensively of our commitment to industrial relations reform-We
spoke of our commitment to the environment. We spoke of our commatnent to restoring
the strengths and tho vigour and the competitiveness of the Australian economy. We
spoke of our commnitnent to the small business sector of the Australian economy. And in
all of those areas, every single one of those areas, which wcrc the heart and soul of the
substance of the election campaign the battleground, the things that people had in the
minds when they voted for us -all of those things have been addressed. And if they
haven't been completely addressed and if they haven't been finally addressed it. is not
through a lack of will on the part of the Coalition Governent, it is the circumstace that
we do not control both Houses of Parliament. And that is a reality that we must grapple
with and we are doing it realistically. Whatever the size of our majority in the House of
Representatives, it remains a reality that we do not control the Senatc. Our supporters
must understand that, you must understand that and you must understand the -steps we
must take to deal with that reality. And we don't do it in a pig-headed arrogant fashion,
we do it in a realistic fashion.
over the past weeks Peter Reith has done a superb job as the Minister for Industrial
Relations, a key portfolio in a key area. And over the past few weeks and months, Peter
has as any quality Minister would do in that area, he's been patiently negotiating wit
those who hold the balance of power in the Senate. And he and I and members of the
Government remain hopeful that the legislation that for 10 years many of us have
advocated above any other single economic reform, we remain hopeful that legislation
can be passed into law. Because if this Government were through some circumstaces
only to be able to choose one economic reform to introduce during its first term of
Government unquestionably that economic reform would be to change Australia's old-
Fa om28/ 18/ 96 13: 87 Pg: 2 
Fax from -sfashioned,
outdated, uncompetitive, arthritic, industrial relations system. To sweep away
such things as Laurie Brereton's job destroying unfair dismissal law a law which has
done more to discourage men and women in small business around Australia from
employing Australians than any other legislative measure introduced by a Federal
Government over the last 20 years.
So ladies and gentlemen we have kept true, we have remained true, we have stayed true
to the issues that formed the focus of our election campaign. We took to the Australian
people upfront a commitment to invest $ 1 billion into an historic natural heritage trust of
Australia and out of that we would fund ongoing environmental works and environmental
projects. And we would find the wherewithall for that out of a sale of one-third of Telstra.
We made no bones about that. We didn't temporise, we didn't kid about that, we were
upfront about it. We didn't write to the members of the Telstra Union as my predecessor
had done in 1993 to the members of the Commonwealth Bank Employees Association
and promise that he wouldn't privatise we made it clear that we would sell a third of
Telstra. And we remain committed to that and it will be upon the heads of those who
might defeat the Telstra legislation if this nation is denied the greatest ever capital
investment in the environmental future of Australia, promised by any Government since
the end of the Second World War.
And the environmental measures that we have in mind are not the environmental
measures of those who academically fancy improvements in the environment They are
measures in practical, ongoing areas such as soil degradation, salinity, ocean outfall, river
pollution, landcare the sort of things that are needed to restore the sustainable base of
agriculture in this country. The sort of things that will enhance the clean, green image of
Australia not only in our region but throughout the world.
We have also of course delivered on our commitments to small business. There were few
issues about which I spoke more frequently in the election campaign than the importance
of small business in Australia. More and more Australians as the years go by will be
employed by small firms. The hope of reducing significantly unemployment, particularly
youth unemployment, lies in a revitalisation of the small business community of
Australia. It is the large firms who are reducing staff. We hope that we can create a
climate where a multiplicity of new small firms employing Australians come into
existence in increasing numbers. And we have taken a number of major steps already. We
changed the provisional tax uplift arrangements which have injected $ 160 million of
cashflow into small business. We've promised capital gains tax rollover relief from the
first of July next year. Within a few weeks, I'll have a report from the Small Business
Deregulation Task Force about ways and means of reducing red tape by 50 per cent on
small business during our first three years in Government. And of course no sector of the
Australian economy will benefit more than the small business sector from the reforms
that we have in mind in the area of industrial relations. 20/ 18/ 96 13: 87 Pg: 3 
Fax from So ladies and gendlemen, as I look back over the past seven months, as I take you back to
that momentous and emnotional evening of the second of March 1996 an evening that
ended for many of us what had seemed like a long political nightmare of 13 year of loss,
13 years of frustration, 13 years of wondering whether again the Liberal Party of
Australia would summon the unity, the courage, the campaign skills and the application
and the commaitmient to become the Government of this country once again. And of
course history records that we did. History records that those, and there are many in this
room, who kept tbe faith through that ions political nightmare, who persevered with us,
like one of those magnificent people, who we gave an Award to last night who I
understand at one stage was the sole member of the Liberal Party in Toowoomba during
one of the darkest times for the Liberal Party in Queensland. It was really to people like
that that the victory on the second of March belonged because people like that had
retaied their faith and their commitment in the Liberal Party and the things to which the
Liberal Party has always stood. And what we are able to do with that victory was to
demonstrate that when it comes to effective, professional campaigning, the Liberal Party
is without peer. I don't say that Arrogantly or complacently but we need when we survey
such an historic achievement, we need to reflect upon what are our strengths. And we
need now that we are back in Government to begin treasuring toe heritage of our Party in
a way that perhaps we failed to do in the past. We need to honour the past greats of the
Liberal Party of Australia as well as to praise the present and to project forward to the
fuiture because the past seven and a half months has been a period of great activity and a
period of significant change and a period of consolidation. I've outlined the way in
which we have stayed mre to ihe commitmients that we took to the last election. But
those commitments were not restricted to the area of domestic policy, they also extended
into Lhe international arena. How pathetic, how petty, how ridiculous, the claim made
during the election campaign that our Asia Pacific neighbours and leaders would talk to
but not deal with a Coalition Governent. How ridiculous, how against the national
interest, the Australian national interest, such an absurd claimn sttinds. I have made it clear
on the two visits I've paid overseas, most particularly the visit to Japan and Indonesia, the
essential bipartisan continuity of many aspects of Australian foreign policy. When I was
in both of those Fountries I praised the contribution made by two former Labor Prime
Ministers to our relations with the nations in the region. I did that quite deliberately
because I do think in areas where there is common ground between the major political
forces of Australia we should identify that and then worry about our differences in areas
where there is not common ground. It has long been a bipartisan, given of Australian
foreign policy that our principle economic and strategic and political focus must be in the
Asian Pacific, region. In. 1957: 40 years ago next year, John McEwen as the Depulty
Prime Minister in a Coalition Government put down the findamernals of nur economic
relationship with Japan in the Australia-Japan Commerce Agreement. He did it against
the fierce opposition of the then Labor Party and the RSL. He did it at a CiLe when
forging an economic link with Japan was a far harder proposition than it is now. He did it
in 1957 and he showed courage and leadership and vision. And if you look at the
contribution of other Coalition people at the time, of Richard Casey as the then Minister
for External Affairs and die list could go on of' Percy Spender, his immediate
predecessor. They all played major roles in forging those links. And successive Prime
Faaœ n2 8/ 10/ 96 13: 87 Pg: 4 
Fax from 20/ 18/ 96 13: 87 Pg: S
Minsters of Australia Whitlamn in relation to China, Fraser in relation to China, Fraser
in relation to Indonesia, Hawkc i relation to APECJ Keating in relation to many of those
countries as well, they've all played a role. And it's in that tradition of looking to the
Australian national interest and not trying to find some cheap partisan political point
scoring difference that I have tried to bring a focus to our foreign relations. There's been
one difference that I have identified and that is that sometimes when I listen to the former
Government it sounded as though their policy was a region only policy, that somehow or
other you couldn't refurbish your relations wit nations such as the United Kingdom, the
rmat of Europe and the United States without in some way drawing back from our new
found relationships in the region. Now that of course is nonsense. It has never been
necessary for this nation and it never will be necessary for our nation to choose betwecn
her history and her geography when it comes to the making of Mrends abroad. We can
have them both, we will have tern both, and under this Covernment I'm sure that we can
build all of those relationships in a most productive and effective fashion. So it is not
only in the areas of domestic policy, but it is also in the area of our relatons with other
nations where there has been some changes and there has also been some essential
continuity. But another change that T believe that has occurred is in the way in which some aspects of
polities are conducted in this country. Some of it hasn't changed and some of it, given
the robust combative style of Australians, oughtn't to change either. Politics is about
difference as well as being about other things. And it's the job of political parties to
identify differences, to acknowledge similarities, but to identify differences and to
campaign on them.
I spoke when I addressed the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party of the way in
which in certain areas of debate the former Government had created a climate of
intimidation, a climate in which people were fightened to express views on certain
subjects. And I also reminded those in the audience on that occasion that robust debate in
free speech carried with it the obligation to speak in a tolerant and senisitive fashion.
One's obligations as a citizen are always a combination of freedoms and responsibilities.
No freedom is absolutely untrammrrelled, there must always be a balance between the
freedom to speak and say and act as one chooses, but also a respect for the rights, the
property, and the sensibilities of others.
And the last few weeks we've had a bit of a discussion about such things as immigration.
I think that's a good thing, not a bad thing. I think we should talk about difficult issues,
but we've got to talk about it in a sensitive and sensible fashion. Immigration has made
an enormous contribution to Australia. It's made an enormous contribution to the Liberal
Party. I might remlind you -we sometimes forget it thiat the first non-English speaking
member of the national parliament was a Liberal, Senator Misho Lajovic, and quite a long
time ago. It was the Liberal Party that put the first Asian born members of parliament
into the parliaments of this country. And I want to say that over the last 40 years, people
from all around the world have made a great contribution to this country. And the day
that I came back to the leadership of the Liberal Ponty, the 3 1st of January 1995, 1 
Fax from identified a number of values that would guide and instruct the development of policy
under my leadership. And one of those values was a vision of an Australian nation
composed of people drawn from the four COrner of the world but united behind a
common sct of Australian values. And that remains both the history of this nation and
also the ideal of this nation. And it follows from that, that tolerance and respect for
difference, a respect for the rights of people no matter where they may have come from
once thuy are citizens of Australia is a core and important Liberal value.
Ladies and gentlemen, we had an exhilarating night last night, we really did. And I want
to say something about the Lindsay by-election. I first of all want to extend to you,
Jackie, our thanks and our gratitude for an absolutely mnagnificent campaign. I also want
to wxend my congratulations to Tony Nutt, the Director of the New South Wales
Division, and all of the others who worked so very hard in Lindsay. This was the first
by-election since the election of the Government and it's vcry important that we neither
get carried away in any surge of complacency and smugness arising out of the result, but
also we don't allow the spin doctors on the other side to so devalue the result and to so
create the impression that it was an entirely predictble, in-die-grove, unavoidable,
inevitable, -natural, how-could-you-think-otherwise outcome. I mean, around in the ether
is this suggestion that governm= ni~ when they're elected after long periods in opposition,
always win the first by-election that's held shortly after they were elected. Well, I seem
to rememnber a by-election in a place called Parraat which was held in September of
973 that was less than a year after the Whitlarn Governiment had been elected. And
Philip Ruddock knows the percentage swing even better than 1, but I think it was about
seven and a half per cent against the Whitlarn Government that had been elected. Now I
mention that, ladies and gentlemen, because 1 think it is important in the debate about the
trnplica~ unis of yesterday, it is important to preserve a sense of perspective-By-elections
do normally go against incumbent governents. The history of the seat of Lindsay is a
Labor history and no amount of attempts to rewrite political history can alter that fact.
We achieved an 11.5 per cent swing on the second of March and yesterday Jacie got
another 4.76 per cent.
Now theme are a few messages that come out of it. The first message of course is to us
don't get carried away with it. One of the great capacities of the Australian people, and
one that I will strive never to forget, is to level those in authority if they get too carried
away with themselves. It's one of the great protective devices of our psyche and of our
nation. It's one of the things that distinguishes us and it's one of thing$ we, I hope, never
lose the capacity to bring people down to earth and to remind them that this is, at the
end of the day, about the most egalitarian nation you cau find on earth and that is one of
its enduring strengths and I hope it always will be.
I think the second message that comes out of Lindsay is simply this: that the Australign
people made a fundamental decision on the second of March, They wanted to change the
Government. They wanted a new group of people to govern this country and they did it
loudly and clearly and they did everywhere in Australia. It wasn't confined to Sydney or
Tasmania or Western Australia, it was everywhere. It was about the m'ost comprehensive
Fa om20/ 10/ 96 13: 07 Pg: 6 
Fax from swing that you could possibly find, both numnerically and geographically. I mean, who
would have thought, if you listed all the great industrial and mining towns in centrecs of
Australia since federation, who would have thought that alter the second of March only
Newcastle and Wollongong continue to have Labor Party representatives. That towns
such as Mount Isa and Ipswich and Kalgoorlie and Whyalla and Port Pirie and Broken
Hill, all of tern are now represented by people other than the Australian Labor Party.
And that was a measure of the socially and geographically comprehensive character of
the victory that we won. So they said loudly and clearly, what a change!' And I think
one of the messages coming out of yesterday, loudLy and clearly is, we didn't make a
mistake, we wanted a change, and for those who would endeavour unreasonably to
frustrate that change, get out of the way and let the new crowd have a fair go. And if
alter a two or thre or whatever years we don't like what they're doing, then we'll do the
same thing to thiem as we did to the other mob. I couldn't see it in clearer terms. I think
it is fundamentally a question of that. And of course at a local level there was a great
determination on the part of the people of Lindsay to give a magnificent, energetic,
youthful candidate of the future and member of the future, a fair go.
So ladies and gentlemen, it was a very, vcry eciting result, Arid there are just two other
things that I want to say to you. The first of those is that amongst the many things that
we were asked to do on the second of March was to continue to properly address the need
for practical reform and change where change and reform is necessary. As you know,
I've always adopted a rather Burkeian view to institutions and practices in Ausfralia. If
something works well T'm reluctant to we it changed. If on the other band somethinrg is
clearly failing the national interest, then it is our responsibility to vigorously pursue
change. And in areas such as waterfront reformn, industrial reations; reform and all the
other areas of change and reform that are needed to make Australia a more competitive
nation, we: have a special responsibility to pursue them. And we have, if you like, a
renewed reminder from the Australian people that the job of a sensible, progressive
government is always a job of practical reform and practical change where that is
necessary. And my Government will be a government of practical reform and change,
particularly in areas that go to Australia's economic competitiveness. Our first Budget
was splendidly received. It was seen as the right Budget at the right time, addressing the
fundamental issues of debt and our current account deficit weakness. I mean, if we can
have the opportunity through the Parliament and elsewhere to build on that, then we can
discharge our mandate for practical reform-
The very last thing I want to say is to renew my comitment to oir commnon cause. As I
said to you last night, like so many in this room I joined the Liberal Party when I left
school. The Liberal Party has been my life ever since. I love the Liberal Party and
everything that I have achieved in public life has been due to the courtesy of the Liberal
Party. I would ncvcr have been a member of Parliament, a Cabinet minister, let alone
Parliamentary Leader, or the greatest honour of all, Time Minister, had it not been for the
Liberal Party. I will never tae it for granted. I will always treasure what it has done for
me, but more importantly, I will always honour what it. has done for AusLraiia. We
belong to a great political movement. It is not just a collection of people, although they
Fa om20/ 18/ 96 13: 87 Pg: 7 
Fax from
t are fundamental to its success, it is a collection of values, it is a belief system about the
kind of society we want for ourselves, the kind of society we can have for Australia and
the kind of Australia in the world that we would like our nation to be in the next
millennium-Ladies and gentlemen, I thank all of you from the bottom of my heart for the support that
you gave me over the last year. I want to particularly thank my wife, Janette, and my
three children who have been such an indispensible mainstay and continuum in all the
time that I've been in politics. It has been a great Federal Council. It was crowned by a
great victory last night, but in the nature of things we must address ourselves to the
future, we must guard against complacency, and above all we must remember that we
carry with us the trust of the Australian people and if we betray that trust, they will wreak
the same vengeance as they wreaked upon our predecessors fo-r their betrayal and trust,
and let us never forget that imperative of political life in Australia.
Thank you. 28/ 18/ 96 13: 87 Pg: 8 



21 October 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO METAL TRADES INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION
ANNUAL NATIONAL DINNER CANBERRA
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Mr Thomas, the national president of the Metal Trades Industry
Association; to Bert and Pauline Evans; to Kim Beazley the leader of the Opposition;
Peter Reith, the Minister for Industrial Relations; other Parliamentary colleagues,
ladies and gentlemen.
It is true, as the national president said that I have been to many Metal Trades Industry
Association occasions over the years. I've spoken at gatherings both here in Canberra
and around Australia. I've attended annual meetings and annual dinners and heard
addresses by Prime Ministers and Treasurers and industry Ministers and I have to
confess there is a certain novelty about addressing this gathering for the first time as
Prime Minister and I look forward to opportunity later in the evening of participating
in what for me will be a very pleasant exercise in saying a few words about Bert Evans,
a person with whom I've had a very long association.
But tonight I wanted to address a few remarks to you about the priorities of the
Government so far as they effect not only your industry but the Australian economy. I
start by paying a very warm tribute to the MTIA. All of us have had to live with
change, innovation, globalisation, greater competition, the demolition of distance, and
the removal of things that previously provided comfort and protection.
I think it is fair to say that the Metal Trades Industry Association and its members has
responded very powerfully and very effectively to the changed world economic 
environment that the past 15 20 years has delivered. Bert Evans summed it up very
nicely to me once. He said :" John I can't get a quorum at National executive
meetings anymore. I've got to go to Kuala Lumpur airport to get the necessary
number." I think what he was saying very effectively and very powerfully was that for
an industry that for a long time was the leading protagonist for import replacement, the
leading protagonist of resisting changes to levels of protection, for reasons that I'm
sure people on both sides of politics understood only too well.
The industry realised the changed environment in which Australia found herself and set
about doing something in relation to that environment. And I do believe that the
members of your association have responded quite magnificently to the export
challenge that has been ahead of Australia for a long time and still remains very much
ahead of us. And you have been a very good example to the rest of industry about the
need to adapt and change. In his remarks the national president talked quite properly
of the challenges that are thrown up by globalisation, of the complete lack of
sentimentality in world markets. He properly remarked that Australia has been better
than most or faster than most in reducing levels of industry protection. I think it's fair
to say that in the 1980s tariff protection in Australia was reduced at a very fast rate.
And it was reduced as a result of I think bipartisan support.
I've often said that I found a number of the economic measures taken by the former
Government to be ones that we could support and support very warmly. We of course
live in hope for reciprocation, but I won't dwell on that tonight. It would be churlish
in the extreme for me to do that.
But the tariff reduction measures announced in the late 1980s and the early 1990s did
mean that Australia was in the forefront of tariff reduction and we can go to the
international fora with very clean hands so far as the pace of adjustment is concerned.
But I think industry is entitled to say well, we have done our part, we have borne the
brunt of reduced protection, but have we seen sufficient matching of that reduced
protection in the area of reduced business costs and in the area of reciprocation from
our trading partners. I think most people would have to acknowledge that the answer
is probably no to both of those questions. That is not to deny the inherent advantage
to an economy of shifting resources into those industries that are more likely to attract
them because of their naturally competitive edge. But I can understand the desire of
Australian industry to say to Government, I can understand the feeling of Australian
industry to say to Government :" Well, we have engaged in a lot of give-ups, we'd like
a few give-ups in return". And I want to say to all of you tonight that I do understand
that. And I also want to say to you tonight that, I suppose, the driving force behind
many of the changes that my Government has advocated since it was elected in March
and many of us advocated over a long period of time, particularly in the area of
industrial relations, are designed to address the fact that the pace of reduction in levels
of industry protection have not been entirely matched by the pace of reduction in the
level of business costs.
Our focus, since being elected, has really been economically in two areas. We have
focused very heavily on fiscal consolidation. And I'm very proud of the fact that we
were able to deliver a budget that was seen broadly by the Australian community and
I know there were criticisms, I know there were criticisms from industry and I know 
there were criticisms from sections of the community but broadly the Budget was
seen as both strong and fair. It was seen as addressing the fiscal challenge, the need to
reduce the deficit, and if we can get the Budget through the Senate then in year three
of my Government's term in office we will have a budget that is in underlying balance.
And given where it has recently been and where, I suppose, it is at the moment, that
will be no mean achievement. And the contribution that that will make to the national
savings effort, the contribution that that will make to underlying business confidence,
the contribution that that will make to the attractiveness of Australia as a place for
overseas investment, is quite incalculable.
The other area, of course, has been a focus on micro-economic reform, and what I
prefer to call reform designed to reduce the cost of doing business in Australia. And
the forefront of that, of course, has been our commitment to bring about industrial
relations reform. This has been a commitment of my Party and my side of politics for a
long period of time. It's been something that has occupied a great deal of my own
intellectual and political effort over the last ten years. I know that there are some in
the MTIA who haven't always agreed with what I and my Party have argued for, and
that could well still be the case. And I've always respected the candour and frankness
and vigour with which we have been able to exchange views. Our commitment to
industrial relations reform is not and never has been an exercise in union bashing. I
have my views about the role of and the behaviour of areas of the union movement.
I'm also prepared, as I have been in the past, to acknowledge the role of the trade
union movement as part of the fabric of Australia's history and of Australia's life. My
view is that trade unions in Australian society like so many other entities, as we go into
the next century, will perish or survive according to their capacity to efficiently deliver
services to their members and their supporters. There are no guaranteed market shares
for you as businessmen and women. There are no guaranteed market shares for us,
whatever our side of politics as political practitioners. And equally the philosophy that
has underlayed our approach to industrial relations is that there should be no
guaranteed market shares to any section of organised labour, or indeed, the organised
employer associations.
We are reaching the moment of decision so far as the industrial relations reforms of the
Coalition are concerned. The Workplace Relations Bill has passed the second reading
in the Senate. The committee stage debate will commence, I hope, in the next couple
of weeks.
I want to record publicly my warm thanks to my colleague, Peter Reith, for the patient,
careful, painstaking and thoroughly professional way in which he has gone about his
responsibilities. We take seriously the process of discussion and negotiation with the minor parties in
the Senate. I deal in political realities, I don't deal in political ' what might have beens.'
And I hope at the end of the day we can secure, through the Senate, the passage of the
Workplace Relations Bill in a form that essentially keeps faith with the principles that
have been laid down over quite a period of time. It will be a bill that will focus far
more heavily on individual agreement between employers and employees. It will
elevate the consummation of those agreements far more than does the present
legislation. It will sweep away the ridiculous unfair dismissal laws that we have at the 
present time. It will change the conveniently belong rule so that if it is desired,
enterprise unions can emerge. It will, I hope, give expression to the desire to give
people an effective choice between a workplace arrangement or continuation under the
current award system. It represents a very important element of the new
Government's reform agenda, as indeed does our commitment to revitalise the
circumstances in which small business operates in Australia.
Small businesses operate in every section of the Australian economy. And I know that
within the membership of the MTIA the small and medium sized businesses bulk very
large. And I hope to have in my hands within ten days a report from the taskforce I
established under the chairmanship of Charlie Bell, the Managing Director of
McDonalds, to advise the Government of ways and means of reducing by 50 per cent,
the paperwork burden on small business during our first three years of office. It's an
ambitious task, but a very important one. And in that context, if I can borrow from
Bert Evans' anecdotes again I've never forgotten an interview he gave on PM one
night, when somebody was complaining of about how not enough small firms had
responded to a circular about award superannuation. And Bert said, ' well, I think the
person who's complaining...' who I think had come from the Government '... ought
to understand that most small shows, particularly the one-man, one-woman shows,
operate on the basis that you get into the office, you open the mail, you grab the
cheques and you throw the rest into the wastepaper basket and get on with trying to
make a living.' And I thought it encapsulated the reality of how many small businesses
are forced to operate, and the sheer absurdity of imposing upon the very small firms of
Australia the compliance obligations that can be easily discharged by large companies
that have a personnel or human resources department. I thought it made the point very
eloquently and in a very cut-through fashion.
Ladies and gentlemen, we talk a lot about micro-economic reform. We talk a lot about
economic theory. But at the end of the day the goal of economic policy and the goal
of economic decision making is not to satisfy some kind of ideology, it is not to satisfy
some kind of theory. The objective of good policy in the economic area is to generate
greater economic growth and through that, to generate more jobs for Australians. And
that is a solemn responsibility of all governments. It's a solemn responsibility of
governments, it's a solemn responsibility of oppositions, to pursue policies which
generate greater growth, and through that, generate more jobs. And as a small earnest
of my view about that chain of cause and affect, and of my commitment to the
importance of job generation, I've announced tonight that we're establishing for the
first time an employment committee of the Federal Cabinet. I had announced at the
time of the election and the formation of the Cabinet that we would have an economic
committee that would have as its prime goal the pursuit of micro-economic reform.
I've decided not to pursue that. I've decided rather to establish an Employment
Committee of Cabinet whose prime goal will be to oversee the implementation of
policies that are designed to boost employment. The doesn't signal any departure from
previously stated policies. But what it does signal is a very direct commitment to pull
together the various activities of government and the various policies of government
and point them in the direction of job generation.
A competitive economy or a more efficient economy from a micro-economic point of
view is not an end in itself It is only a tool to provide greater growth, and through 
that, more jobs for Australians, particularly for young Australians. None of us,
whatever our politics or whatever our vantage point in industry or the trade union
movement, should ever lose sight of the human and social responsibility that goes hand
in glove with economic policy. And the creation of jobs and the provision of
opportunities and hope, particularly for young Australians, does remain very much at
the core of what government is all about. We had a lot to say about that during the
election campaign, we had a lot to say about the role and the place and the
contribution of the small business community towards it, and it remains very much in
the forefront of our thinking.
Ladies and gentlemen, the MTIA has made an enormous contribution to Australian
industry and to the Australian economy over a long period of time. Your members
have witnessed the enormous changes in the Australian economy of the last 20 years.
You have become active participants in the new globalised world economy. You are
at the cutting edge of change and competition. I have enjoyed in the past a very close
association, on occasions an association that has brought forth very vigorous debate
and from time to time disagreement, but always on the basis of a well intentioned
desire to serve the long term interests of Australia. And I want to say, at this the first
dinner I have addressed of the MTIA as Prime Minister of Australia, I want to say that
drawing upon that past association I commit my Government to close consultation, a
very close dialogue with your members and with your association. I regard the free
exchange of ideas and information and advice, and on occasions where appropriate,
criticism and rebuttal, between governments and the business community, as being very
important. I've often said that the Party I lead can proudly say it's not owned by any
one section of the Australian community, and that certainly is a very emphatic
declaration that I make. But it does not alter the fact that we are a Party that has
always sought to have a keen eye to the legitimate concerns of the business community
of this country the wealth generators, the job providers, the export providers, and the
providers of the economic future of Australia. And I'd always want it to be seen that
even if on occasions we might disagree, my Government and its various members listen
very closely and carefully with what you have to say.
Can 1, on behalf of my wife and myself and on behalf of my other colleagues who are
here tonight and who won't be contributing to the proceedings, thank you most
warmly for having us as guests. I wish the MTIA well. I look forward to the very
closest possible consultation and cooperation between the MTIA and my Government
in what I hope to be many years of a close partnership.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
22 October 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE FEDERAL CABINET LUNCHEON
HILTON INTERNATIONAL, ADELAIDE
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Dean Brown, the Premnier of South Australia, to Mrs Roslyn
Brown, to Tim Fischer, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, my other Cabinet
colleagues, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a delight to be back again in Adelaide. I've been a frequent visitor as the Leader of
the Liberal Party to this State since I resumed that job in January of last year. And today's
meeting of the Federal Cabinet here in Adelaide is part of a deliberate pattern of Cabinet
meetings which I promised would be followed in the lead up to the election whereby
instead of always meeting in Canberra, plus occasionally meeting in Sydney and
Melbourne, we would as well visit all of the other State capitals and over a period of three
years some of the major provincial centres of Australia. There is more to Australia than
the Melbourne-Sydney-Canberra triangle admirable though that part of the world may
be. And it is very important having seen our predecessors receive a rousing send off from
the less popular states in the regional areas of Australia it's very important that we don't
forget that lesson and we don't intend, and we intend to have our meetings around
Australia early and not late in our term, thereby giving the impression that we're just
trying to play a bit of catch up politics before the election.
I mnight also say that I speak to a South Australian audience conscious of the fact that I
don't believe, since the war, the Liberal Party representation in the Federal Cabinet has
been as high and at such a senior level as it is in my Government. There are no fewer than
four out of the 15 Cabinet Ministers, I stress Cabinet Ministers, who come from South
Australia. That is a tribute to their ability. When putting these things together one has to
pay some regard to geography, but you're not a slave to geography, and it's a tribute to
the quality of the representation that this State has sent. And of course, I'm warmed by 
the fact that at the last Federal election you only returned two Labor Members in the
House of Representatives and I think that's a remarkable strike rate.
Can I say on a frankly political note what an extraordinary win the Liberal Party did have
in the Lindsay by-election on Saturday. In 1993 the Labor Party primary vote in the seat
of Lindsay was 58.5%. Last Saturday it was 33.5%, which is an astonishing decline. And
it is a seat, despite all the attempts of some of the spin doctors since to say it was really a
safe Labor seat, I mean it had never been held by other than the Labor Party after the last
election, so you know, if it looks like a safe Labor seat and it quacks like a safe Labor seat
and votes like a safe Labor seat I reckon it must be a safe Labor seat. So it was a terrific
result and it's an enormous tribute to a very young, energetic candidate in Jackie Kelly,
who I can assure you will get a really warm reception when she comes back to Federal
Parliament next Monday to be sworn in as the Member for Lindsay. It's a reminder that
when the Australian public, after having had a government of one political persuasion in
power for a long time, makes up its mind to change it, doesn't really like people trying to
question that decision for a period of time. There is a view in the Australian community
that new Governments ought to be given a fair go. They shouldn't be given a blank
cheque or license but they should be given a fair go. And there is a sense in the
Australian community which says, well we threw the other crowd out, we put this new lot
in, let's give them a couple of years and we'll see what they're like and if at the end of that
period we're not too happy well we might start sending a few rebukes.
I think that is the mood of the Australian community. I don't take anything for granted in
politics, I've been in it long enough to know that you can have changes. There's a
volatility, there's a lack of tribal commitment in Australian politics now compared with
or 30 years ago.
Nobody in my team is being the least bit smug or complacent as a result of what happened
on Saturday. But we do read a very clear signal when you increase your vote in such a
dramatic way in a by-election in such a seat seven or eight months after a general election
has got to mean something. And what it means to us is a lot more positive than it means
to our political opponents. What it really means to us is that the Australian public wants
us to get on with the main game. They want us to get on with the job that we were
elected to do. They want the Parliament to pass the legislation that we promised the
Australian people before the last election. They want the Parliament to pass our Industrial
Relations legislation for example, something that I have been committed to for 10 or
years and I hope as a result of the very skilful way in which Peter Reith has handled that
legislation it can go through the Parliament in essentially the formn that we want. Now it
can't go through in exactly the form we want because we don't have the numbers. I wish
we did, but the realities of the mathematics of the Australian Parliament are that we will in
the foreseeable future no government of this country if the present voting system of the
Senate remains and I'm not proposing any change let me say, in parenthesis immediately
so that stories don't start spinning out of this luncheon that I am. I wouldn't want that to
happen. I just want to make it clear that we are stuck with that situation and no matter
how large our majority may be in the House of Representatives, no matter how emphatic 
may have been the result on Saturday, we have to deal with the reality of needing 39 votes
in the Senate to get legislation through and there are 37 Liberals and Nationals so we
need two more to get our legislation through. That's the reality we have to deal with.
The reality that those on the other side have to deal with is that the Australian people have
spoken I think very loudly. They spoke very loudly last March and those who live in the
seat of Lindsay spoke very loudly last weekend. But it is our responsibility to get on with
that legislation because passing that is about the single most important contribution we can
make to a more competitive and a more internationally robust Australian economy.
Because if you can fix industrial relations in this country so many other things will fall into
place. Industrial relations is the thing that can transform bad industrial relations can
transform an efficient rural producer who is a winner when his product goes out of the
farm gate into a loser when it reaches the end of the production and the distribution and
the sale chain. Bad industrial relations over the years has made it prohibitively expensive
for many people to export from Australia.
Bad industrial relations has meant that people have been focused on a " them and us"
demarcation rather than coming together in a common cause. We've seen around the
states examples of where sensible changes to industrial relations legislation can bring about
a better climate. But there's a limit to what can be done at a State level, we need a
national liberation of Australia's industrial relations system and that is what we're offering.
I mean, a very simple thing such as those ridiculous unfair dismissal laws that Laurie
Brereton didn't tell you about in the 1993 election campaign and yet they were passed into
law. They're still preventing many small businesses in this country taking on more staff
and passage of the industrial relations legislation will sweep Brereton's laws away and
replace them with laws that are fair to both employers and employees because the present
laws are manifestly unfair to employers. They are obsessed with procedural accuracy
rather than the merits of each individual case and as employers many of you, and as
employees, you will know how absolutely ridiculous that really is. Our job is to work on
getting that legislation through and I can assure you that we are. It would have been
passed months ago if we controlled the Senate and I hope that within the next few weeks
when the debate has resumed that we will see solid progress on it.
Getting on with the job also means, of course, achieving our commitment to sell one third
of Telstra thus enabling the establishment of the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia and
cleaning up the Murray-Darling basin which is about the most valuable environmental
project that any group of governments in this country can commit themselves to will be
one of the major beneficiaries of that Natural Heritage Trust. I just have to say again that
it will be upon the heads of those who oppose that legislation in the Senate if this country
is denied the biggest-ever capital investment in cleaning up its environment that we've
seen in modem history. Because establishing that fund will make it possible to do
practical things to improve the environment. What we have in mind is not so much the
stuff on excited environmental demonstrations, rather it is the stuff of looking to the long
term repair of this country's environment. The polluted river systems, the degraded soil,
the high levels of salinity, the ocean outfall all of those things which if they can be 
addressed over a period of time will not only repair Australia's environment, will also
strengthen the image this country has around the world, the clean green image, which is so
important to our primary producers and so important to our export success in fresh and
processed foods in the Asian Pacific Region.
Now they are the sort of things that the public want us to get on with. They also want us
to get on with reducing the paperwork burden on small business. We've already done a
number of things in that area. We promised that we'd do something about the provisional
tax uplift factor and that's been done and it will inject $ 160 million extra cash flow into
small business this year. I established a task force chaired by Charlie Bell, the Managing
Director of McDonalds, to tell us how in a period of three years we might reduce the
paperwork burden on small business by 50%. He's going to hand me a report in eight
days, I'll be fascinated to read it and I think the small business community will be
fascinated to know what's in it.
It will be a very, very important document because we really do have to reduce the
regulatory burden on small business. It is not only ridiculously expensive but it's also a
complete waste of time in many cases because many of the forms that are filled out are
filled out by people who recently complied with things that make no practical contribution
to the day to day running of their business and the accuracy of the sort of statistical
information collected under those circumstances ought to be regarded as at least
reasonably imprecise. It's hardly any wonder that it is. I think, sometimes when laws are
designed that might be capable of compliance by large companies that have big human
resource departments and have big accounting and corporate affairs departments, that the
people who devise those laws have no appreciation that the average one or two man or
woman business doesn't really have the time, the resources, the inclination or the desire to
comply to that kind of regulatory system. But we do need a new order in that area and
I'm very optimistic that out of this committee's work some practical suggestions will be
made to reduce that paperwork burden.
Another very important area, of course, and an area of overwhelming importance to any
government is the area of employment. Last night I announced the establishment of a new
Cabinet committee, an employment committee which will subsume the economic
committee of Cabinet I had originally intended to establish. The whole purpose of this
committee, which I will Chair and will include the Deputy Prime Minister and the
Treasurer and the Minister for Industrial Relations and a number of other Ministers the
whole purpose of this committee will be to pull together all of the policy work of the
Government and direct it towards job creation. Economic theory is never an end in itself
You never follow an economic theory out of some blind, ideological commitment. You
don't have micro-economic reform because it's a nice thing to have. You do all of those
things because at the end of the day the responsibility of a government is to follow policies
that increase economic growth and through that generate more jobs for Australians. And
that should always be the test will this policy increase economic growth and thereby
increase jobs for Australians? And if we can ask that question of every economic policy
decision we take, in my view, we will get the right answers. 
The question shouldn't be will this achieve a particular benchmark of economic change?
The question has simply got to be will this decision contribute to cause of greater
economic growth and through it an increase in the number of jobs that are generated to us
for Australians? And if we can run that test, that benchmark, across all of our decisions
then I believe we will have a far more sharply focused outcome and far more sharply
focused policy making decision process. Because getting our level of unemployment
down and it won't be easy and I'm not pretending to anybody it is. When we took over
the Australian economy in March there were some parts of it that were going well. Our
rate of inflation was low and in some areas economic growth was reasonable. But there
are a lot of features of the economy that were going very badly and one of them was that
we still had far too high a rate of unemployment particularly amongst the young. Now I
don't pretend that you can turn that around quickly and anybody who understands the
cause and effect in economics will know that the current rate of unemployment is the
product of policy processes that have been in train for a long period of time. It is a lagged
indicator and it's going to take a period of time but at least we are going to focus all of the
policy making mechanisms of the Government in the economic area on that great central
objective of generating jobs.
Our industrial relations system changes will help the employment situation over time.
Proposals we had for change in other areas in reducing the regulatory burden on small
business will help. Proposals we have in mind to improve and reform the waterfront will
also make a significant contribution. I am very mindful of the importance of different
industries to regional areas of the Australian economy. Can I say I think the idea that
Australia would never have a car industry is quite unthinkable I think it's very, very
important that that be said. I don't think to pre-empt the outcome of the Productivity
Commission inquiry. I believe that that inquiry will be far reaching, I think that inquiry
will be balanced and I want to say to you on behalf of the Government that it's not in our
scheme of things that this country will ever lose the car manufacturing capacity of
significance. I think it's very important that that be said.
Ladies and gentlemen the message coming to me loudly and clearly as I go around our
country is that people voted for change, they voted for a new government. They don't
necessarily agree with everything that we've done but they're certainly, at present and I
hope for a period of time well into the future, they feel well rid of the people that we
replaced and they're not really inclined to go back to them for quite a long period of time.
But that can change and we have to keep working hard to keep faith with the high hopes
that we established for the Australian people when we were elected on the second of
March. Part of the process of doing that is keeping in touch with people like those in this
room. The Liberal Party is not owned by any section of the Australian community. It's one of its
great boasts that nobody owns us. We're not owned by big business, we're not owned
by small business, we're not owned by this or that section. One of the things that I've
really campaigned on very hard was to try and end the politics of bending to the noise or
listening to the noise of the rowdiest interest groups in the Australian community and 
resuming governing for the mainstream. Although we're not owned by anybody we do, of
course, have a bias towards free enterprise, we have a bias towards investment, we have a
bias towards risk taking, we have a bias towards essentially a freer market economy. We
won't always agree with the business community, you won't always agree with us. One
businessman in this town said to me a few weeks ago he said I had a look at the Budget,
he said, I didn't like this, I didn't like that, he listed about four things he didn't like in it,
but he said, I've written you a letter congratulating you because it was the right Budget
for Australia.
I thought that was a pretty fair and a pretty responsible attitude to take. But I can tell you
that we value our links with the business community very highly and all of my colleagues,
particularly those who have links into economic portfolios, know that one of the important
ingredients of staying in touch and one of the important ingredients of continuing to have
the confidence of the Australian community is to listen to the business community. Not
just the business community of Sydney and Melbourne, but the business community of all
of the capital cities of Australia. And luncheons and gatherings such as this are a very,
very important element of that.
So I want to thank you because I know that over the years many of you have given
tremendous support to the Liberal Party here in South Australia. You've given great
support to Dean Brown who's doing a terrific job for his State and you've given
tremendous support to us federally. No State did better for the Liberal Party than South
Australia in the last Federal election. I'm very conscious of that and I'm very grateful for
it. And it's a very, very pleasing thing for me to look around our side of the Chamber in
the House of Representatives and to see so many of those faces and we want to keep it
that way, but it won't get easier. I suppose over a period of time it inevitably is going to
get harder. But we did see a huge change in Australian political opinion on the second of
March. I understood that, my colleagues understood that, I'm sure you understood that.
I think some of our opponents still some how or other believe it was an abhorrent mistake.
Changes after 13 years are not abhorrent mistakes, they are deliberate, decisive decisions
to change the direction of a country and it's our job and our responsibility and with your
help we will achieve precisely that change of direction. Thank you.
i 


25 October 1996
E &amp; O E……………..
&nbsp;To Chancellor Dame Leonie Kramer, Vice Chancellor, other members of the academic staff of Sydney University, ladies and gentlemen. Can I first say how privileged I am to have been invited to deliver this occasional address. I want to start in joining the Chancellor in congratulating all of those who have graduated. I want to join her also in acknowledging the great contribution of the parents and other family members and friends in the success that all of you who graduated today have endured.
&nbsp;I also think it appropriate to acknowledge the contribution that has been made to your education over the years by your teachers, both at your schools and at this university. Teaching is a hard job, an infinitely harder job I believe now than what it was 30 or years ago. The demands that are placed upon teachers in schools and also in universities go now beyond the level of academic and educational instruction and I think it is important on an occasion such as this to acknowledge the debt that is owed to those who in different ways over the years have made that contribution.
Can I also say to all of you as I sat and watched the degrees being conferred, I reflected upon that day more than 35 years ago when I walked up and received my degree in this very great hall. I have to say that my arrival on that occasion went a little unremarked. There were quite a number of other differences. 35 years ago the world was a different place and Australia was a different place. Sir Robert Menzies was still Prime Minister of Australia. John Fitzgerald Kennedy had only just been inaugurated as President of the United States and the Nikita Khruschev was the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and for those who are sports inclined, St George was half way through its world record breaking eleven premierships. So the world has changed an enormous amount and yet there is a delightful continuity in the ceremony that we have participated in today.
There is a delightful reminder that life is a combination of the past and an anticipation of the future and it's a reminder that although certain things change constantly, other things remain the same and the role of government, the role of a political leader is very much in that mould. It's about trying to get the right balance in our community and in our society between preserving the best that we have inherited from our tradition, our history and our past but recognising that in other areas, if we are to progress further and to build a happier, more tolerant society we have to change in the future.
The role of government in modern society is very different from the role of government or 40 years ago. We have to grapple with globalisation in a way that the governments of the 1960s didn't. We have to grapple with a communications revolution which offers incredible benefits and incredible hope and incredible prospects for current generations. We also have to grapple with the media which is properly in a free society more intrusive, more demanding, on occasions irritatingly trivial, but nonetheless a proper and real part of our society. And therefore there is an obligation on all of those in authority, be they in governments or in universities or in the education department or in business, to recognise the constant need for change and reform.
We hear these days references to the fact that the Australian community is suffering a degree of reform fatigue and it is true that our lives have changed so much over the last or 30 years. They've changed socially, the roles of men and women have changed dramatically, they've changed economically. The structure and responsibilities of families have changed significantly and people feel a greater sense, therefore, of insecurity and doubt than they may have felt 30 years ago. But in the midst of all of that we have to remember that it is the role and the responsibility of those in leadership positions to continue to advocate the need for sensible change and reform. The object of practical reform in our society is always there and it's one of the great ongoing responsibilities of governments and of other institutions in society. I take an optimistic view of Australian society. I take a more optimistic view of our past than some do. I take a more optimistic view of our present and I certainly take a more optimistic view of our future. That optimism is based on my belief that one of the great qualities that Australian people always had is a capacity to adapt to change and to new circumstances. We have a marvellous, protective scepticism about a certain thing but we also have a great fascination with change and sensible and intelligent reform. We are amongst the world's most voracious devourers of new technology in whatever form that new technology may take. We have also over the last 20 years witnessed, I think, a fairly smooth adaptation to a great deal of change and there'll be more change in our lives in the future.
Those graduates who come back in 35 years time will reflect upon the massive changes that have occurred in society between now and then. I believe in that sense of optimism about Australia's capacity to change, I think, provided governments and other institutions do two things that is firstly they communicate the national benefit in change and reforms and communicate clearly and unambiguously, and secondly; if they can persuade the public that the change and the reform impacts fairly on different sections of the community, then I believe most Australians will go along in time with that change and embrace those practical reforms.
Australians do have an innate sense of the national interest despite our preoccupation on occasions with particular concern for provincial attitudes, we do at the end of the day have an innate sense of the national good and we also have an innate sense of what is fair and proper with different sections of the Australian community. So the burden of change and practical reform will always be with governments in Australia. There is never a time in which any government can say, well the job is done, the task is complete, everything now works properly and we can just let things go along in a rudderless fashion. There will always be a challenge to political and other leaderships to guide the nation towards practical change and reform. And being the optimist that I am I believe that provided those two principles are observed, then indeed, the change would be embraced and accepted.
May I again say to all of you that you have my very best good wishes. I hope that the dreams and the hopes that you have in future...( tape break)... business in the professions, in academia or elsewhere in the service of people in different ways, I hope that the years that you have spent at Sydney University will be as valuable and as buttressing as the years that I spent in this institution have been to me. Good luck to all of you and thank you again for having me as your guest.
ends&nbsp;


26 October 1996
E &amp; OE……
I think I'Il&nbsp;come back to a university again! Alex Howen, John Cameron, and very &nbsp;specially Tim Fischer, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia and Leader of the National Party. And Tim has virtually, well actually this morning, returned home after having led the Australian Ministerial Delegation in the Regular Ministerial Consultations with Ministers in the Government of Indonesia. Who said that the great nations of Asia would not deal comprehensively with a Coalition Government?
I'm delighted for a number of reasons that Tim is present this morning. Not only because of his role as the number two person in the Coalition Government, as the Minister for Trade, but as the Leader of the National Party he symbolises by his presence here this morning one of the enduring realities of politics in Australia. When the Liberal Party and the National Party work together, they win together. I thank Tinm Fischer for the magnificent loyalty, the magnificent support and cooperation that he has extended to me, sometimes on some difficult issues for his own constituency. He's always seen the long view, the Australian view, the Coalition view, and he follows a fine tradition of other Country and National Party leaders who have been powerful and influential Deputy Prime Ministers of Australia.
It is Alex, not only a delight to be welcomed here as the Prime Minister of Australia, I too have waited a long time. But it has been worth the wait. It's been worth the wait overwhelmingly because I believe, and in my heart I know so many of you believe, that if we persisted long enough we would achieve a crucial change of government in Australia. And the magnitude and scale of our victory on the 2nd of March, not least here in the State of New South Wales, vindicated the perseverance and the loyalty and the commitment of so many of you over such a long period of time. And words, of course, really fail me in describing the sense of excitement and exhilaration we felt last Saturday night when Jackie Kelly was re-elected as the Member for Lindsay. Gee we're looking forward to her being sworn in on Monday.
&nbsp;I think it is a tremendous demonstration that that great Australian trait, that great Australian which we all believe that of a ' fair go' is still alive and well. And to not only retain the vote that we achieved on the 2nd of March, but to increase it in primary terms by over six per cent is an extraordinary achievement. It's a great tribute to Jackie as a candidate and a Member and it's a great tribute to the Party organisation here in New South Wales, for Tony Nutt and to all of you who have revitalised the organisation in this, the numerically largest State in Australia. And you have increased the Liberal Party representation from a level after the 1993 election, which was the battle of interstate jokes, to a level now where the New South Wales Division is making a massive contribution to both the strength and the stability and the quality of the Liberal Party throughout Australia.
And I speak to you this morning, ladies and gentlemen, although a home grown product of the Liberal Party here in New South Wales and as a Member myself of the New South Wales Division, I of course speak to you as the national leader of our Party as somebody who, in the seven-and-a-half months that has gone by since we were elected, has had as my great goal achieving the things that we said during the election campaign that we would do if we were elected.
I think one of the great achievements of the Coalition in its first seven-and-a-half months has been the extent to which it has honoured those core values and commitments and promises it took to the Australian people before the 2nd of March. Despite the static, despite the criticism and despite our natural inability to implement every last commitment because of the scale of the fiscal inheritance and mess that was ours after the 2nd of March, all of the things with which the Coalition was associated before the 2nd of March have been up there right at the very top of our implementation agenda since we were elected.
We committed ourselves to extensive action in a number of areas. We committed ourselves to industrial relations reform. And that remains at the heart of a more competitive, a more open and a more productive Australian economy. Over the past few months intensive negotiations have been underway between the Government, and our interests have been represented so very well by Peter Reith and the Australian Democrats. And I hope, in the course of the next couple of weeks, that the outcome of those negotiations will become known.
&nbsp;Industrial relations reform is critical to Australia's future. And the industrial relations reform that we are committed to deliver contains a number of absolute elements. It contains an absolute commitment to rid this country of the last vestiges of compulsory unionism and the closed shop. It involves an absolute commitment to get rid of Laurie Brereton's job destroying unfair dismissal law which destroyed almost that has destroyed almost its many jobs in small business as Paul Keating's record high interest rates of the late 1980s. It involves an absolute commitment to give people an effective choice between a workplace agreement and an industrial award. It contains a commitment to restore effective secondary boycott laws which were swept away by the former Government for one reason, they worked too well and they upset some of their friends in the Trade Union Movement. And it also involves an absolute commitment to allow the emergence, if trade unionists want them, of' workplace or enterprise unions. So that's a very important part of our reform programme. We talked about that before the election, I've campaigned for industrial relations reform in my various political guises, almost unceasingly over the last ten years.
We committed ourselves to the greatest ever investment in Australia's environmental future, The commitment to establish the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia will give to this country the greatest capital commitment to environmental protection and development promised by any government in the last 40 or 50 years. And that will only be possible if the Senate passes our proposal to sell one third of Telstra. A proposal that was fully explained and made public to the Australian people before the election. It's a very, very interesting thing you know ladies and gentlemen, that before the 1993 election the Labor Party said nothing about its plans to change the industrial relations system, yet their proposal sailed through. We said everything about our plans to sell one third of Telstra and that legislation is still under consideration in the Senate. I don't know the final outcome of that, discussions are still underway. But I do know this, that if the concept of mandate means anything, if the concept of the Australian people expressing a view on the right of people to implement the programme that they have made public before the election, then we have a right to expect the Parliament to pass our Telstra legislation.
I said before the election that revitalising small business would be an important element of reducing unemployment. A number of steps have already been taken to implement our commitments to small business. We've injected $ 180 million via the provisional tax system into the pockets largely of small business in the next twelve months. Our moves in the industrial relations area will be of enormous benefit to small business, particularly the removal of the unfair dismissal laws that hoisted on us after 1993. We have proposed in the Budget, but it will come into operation from July of next year, measures in the area of capital gains tax that will provide much needed relief for small business. And I'll have in my hands next week the report of the Small Business Deregulation Taskforce, chaired by the Managing Director of McDonalds, Mr Charlie Bell. And the terms of reference of that commtittee were to tell the Government how to reduce red tape effecting small business by 50 per cent in our first three years of government. And I'll have that report in my hands next Friday and I'll make it public then. Because if ever a set of laws have been made in this country in ignorance of the people they affect, they are many of the regulatory laws that affict smiall. business. They are made in the stupid, uninformed belief that the one or two person business with people doubling up as the sales manager, the managing director, the personnel manager, the tea maker, the bookkeeper, the everything, but they've got some kind of large personnel department at their disposal to whom the voluminous regulations can be passed for examination and leisurely comment. Well big companies may have that, but the tens of thousands of small businesses which contribute people that make up the heart and soul of the Liberal Party certainly don't have those resources at their disposal. So a major assault on small business red tape is very important to us.
And of course, ladies and gentlemen, we also said that we would pursue a responsible budgetary policy. And whatever inay now be said by Mr Beazley and others, and the records are there, the video recordings are there we replayed some of them at the Federal Council meeting in Hobart we were told by Mr Keating and Mr Beazley that the Budget was in surplus when they knew it was in massive deficit, and nothing can after that fact. We faced that problem and we produced a budget that was widely seen throughout the Australian community as being strong but fair. And that is what the Australian public wanted. And one of the reasons, one of the reasons you now see interest rates in certain areas tumbling to levels we haven't seen for more than years, one of the reasons for that is that we brought in a strong, fair and fiscally responsible budget. And that budget tackled, that budget tackled the economic problem but it also did in a way that was fair. The Australian public will always accept the need for change and reform. The Australian public will always accept the need for some belt tightening if two conditions are fulfilled. Firstly, we must explain in clear and lucid terms that national interest in making the change. In other words we have to explain to people why it is good for Australia that something be done. You don't tell them that you're doing it because it satisfies some nebulous economic theory. Economic theories are important but they're only theories, they're not ends in themselves. They are merely reasons why you might do something in the national interest. But when I take a decision I ask myself a fundamental question is it good for Australia? And if it passes that test then it's something that ought to be considered. And the second test that it has to pass is is it fair? In other words, does it impact unreasonably on one or other section of the Australian community. The great sense of the far go and the egalitarian instinct of the Australian always says: ' wvell, I don't mind doing my bit if the bloke next door does his bit as well'. And that is a very, very natural Australian instinct. And if we can apply those sort of principles and those considerations to the decisions that we take then we will continue to retain the understanding and support of the Australian people. They won't always like what we do. I had somebody in Adelaide say to me a couple of weeks ago:-" I went through your Budget and there were about seven or eight things that 1 didn't like". He said it was terrible. But he said:.-" I wrote congratulating you on a good budget because overall it was far and it was good for Australia". And that was really the object we set ourselves. You can't always do things that people like, but if there's a national interest in doing it and ifit's done fairly and the pain is spread evenly and you keep faith in those key areas where you said you'd take action, then I believe that the Australian public will go along with it. And the benefits of that strong but fair budget are now beginning to be seen. And there's no doubt that the better climate for lower interest rates is a direct result in part I stress, in part of the strong fiscal line that we took in the Budget. And I ask people who may say, well, the Budget may have done this that I didn't like, I ask them to take into account the benefits for the multitude of Australian families is one of the major reasons that we will end up having lower interest rates, still lower interest rates in Australia, is the contribution of that Federal Budget. And J want ladies and gentlemen, to record my gratitude to Peter Costello, the Treasurer, and John Fahey, the Minister for Finance, who carried the major burden of the day to day work in putting the Budget together.
&nbsp;Ladies and gentlemen, the next couple of months in the lead up to Christmas, and the next few weeks in Parliament will see decisions taken on a number of the crucial legislative measures that we have put forward. But I know some people are saying well we would have liked to have seen these things through earlier, so would I, but I've got to deal in the reality that we don't control the Senate. We may have retained our forty five seat majority, in the House of Representatives but we don't control the Senate, And the arithmetic of the Australian political process is such that no matter how strong a mandate a government may receive in the lower house it is next to impossible to see a government of this country in the foreseeable future having the numbers in its own right to control the Senate as well, and dealing with the Senate and having intelligent strategy to negotiate with the Senate is a very, very important element of political and government reality in Australia in the 1990' s.
It is important, ladies and gentlemen, that we never lose sight of the social responsibility we have to do everything we can to reduce the still chronically high level of unemployment in Australia, I don't have any unrealistic prescriptions, I don't have any unrealistic predictions or targets. I think setting targets, numerical targets in the area of unemployment is just so much window dressing and that incidentally was the view of my Labor opponent the Leader of the Opposition, when he was Minister for Employment in the Keating Government, But what I do regard as realistic and appropriate, and in the national interest is to focus all of the policy activities of the Government towards the objective of generating jobs and reducing unemployment. That's why I've established in lieu of the previously intended Economic Committee of Cabinet, a Cabinet Committee chaired by myself with Tim Fischer as Deputy Prime Minister and member, that will focus on the objective of job generation. Of gathering together all the policy decisions we've taken and asking the question, will this help to generate jobs for Australians? Will this promote a climate for investment that will generate jobs for Australians? What is the unemployment dimension of this or that political decision? I don't pretend that that's going to solve the problem. In establishing it I don't acknowledge that any fundamental policy shift is needed, because at the end of the day, a higher rate of economic growth sustained over a longer period of time with a freer labour market together will do more to reduce unemployment than any other policy prescription.
But it is important that we don't lose sight of our social and our human responsibilities. Governments do not exist to live out the fantasies of economic theories. Governments exist to provide good, stable, and where necessary, progressive government based on practical reform. Economic theories, ideological beliefs are important, but at the end of the day what is most important is what we do for people. And doing things for people, understanding people, being sensitive to people's feelings, is a very important element of government.
Before the last election, before the Government was properly charged with arrogance, it was charged with being remote from the concerns of the mainstream of the Australian community. It did generate in the Australian community an elitist view that somehow or other the public out there were too foolish to be involved in the decision-. making process on important issues. And in effect the public on some issues were told well just leave it to us mature sophisticated people in Canberra, on both sides if you like, together with our advisers and of course the commentators in the media we'll work out the solution and we'll tell you the result. Now there was a flavour Of that, not on every issue, but there was a flavour of that about a lot of issues. Well that is not an attitude of mine that I have. One of the reasons that I don't spend quite as much time in Canberra as some of my predecessors, is a determination to retain as much contact as I can with the generality of the Australian community.
We've already begun the process of taking Federal Cabinet around Australia. Of meeting in Perth, in Adelaide, and over our term in office, not only the mainland, the capital cities of Australia, both mainland and Tasmania, but also major provincial centres. And we're not going sort of do it right at the end of our term in response to the distant thunder of the electoral tumbrel, as indeed was the case with our predecessors. I mean they suddenly discovered Western Australia. The Prime Minister the former Prime Minister went about twelve or fourteen months on one occasion between visits to Western Australia and you can't treat, as a national leader, you can't treat the various parts of Australia in that kind of fashion. There is more to Australia than Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra, and one of the reasons that we have done so well in the less populated states is that we have demonstrated, ladies and gentlemen, a national perspective.
The last thing that I want to say in a policy sense, is going back to my welcome to Tim Fischer, is to say how important it is for Australia to present a balanced view of its own assessment of our place in tile world. It was always ridiculous and untrue, and unhelpful for the former Government to say that the nations of the Asia-Pacific Region would not deal with a Coalition Government, It denied the history of our successful involvement in our region, under Prime Ministers of both political persuasions. It sold short the maturity of the leaders of the nations of Asia, who understand our society and understand its workings much better than some Australian politicians patronisingly give them credit for. It denied of course the massive contribution that was made way back in 1957 by one of Tim Fischer's predecessors, Sir John McEwen, as Deputy Prime Minister in the then Coalition Government, who forged the Australia-Japan Commerce Agreement which laid the foundation of the modern trading relationship between our two nations. And forging that agreement in 1957 represented politically a far more difficult task than such a thing would do now. And he didn't get much &nbsp;help from the Labor Opposition he got a lot of opposition from people who then should have known better. But he nonetheless went ahead and did it because it was in Australia's interests to take the long view. But if you look back over the broad sweep of that forty year period, few acts on either side of politics have had such a seminal influence on that relationship which is now so important to us.
And of course we remain deeply committed to that region. Our political, our economic, increasingly our people to people future is tied up with that region and rightly so. But it isn't necessary in building further on those very important links, to deny the many other important associations that Australia has around thle world. Our natural and deep links with the nations of Europe, of Britain and the other nations of Europe, and our strong historical defence and foreign policy associations with North America. It's not a question of choice, it's a question of having a full and appropriate relationship with all. And if there is a change in the nuance of Australian foreign policy, it is that change more than anything else which is important. It is not a walking away, in any sense, in any sense, shape or form, of our association with the nations of the region, it would be folly in the national interest to do that. But it is an unapologetic affirmation that as well, we do have other associations they Complement each other we do not have to choose between our history and our geography. We are a nation confident enough with a sufficiently distinctive identity of our own as Australia and nothing else to be able to have all of those associations together.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, I want to say something to you as fellow Liberals, There are many people in this room that I have worked with in the Liberal Party here in New South Wales for most of my adult life. I come from the branches of the Liberal Party here in Sydney. I've held most of the elected offices that it's possible to hold in the Liberal Party organisation. I was a young Liberal a long time ago. I enjoyed the ' activities of campaigning in marginal seats over a very long period of time and I have a very deep affection for the Liberal Party. What I have achieved politically I owe entirely to the Liberal Party. Without your support, without your warmth and understanding and your help and your forbearance during the wilderness years, both personally and politically collectively for all of us, there were a lot of them without that assistance and I could never have hoped to as Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Party to lead it to victory on the 2nd of March. And of all the many things I felt, on the 2nd of March, one of the strongest feelings I had was one of gratitude that at long last your efforts had been rewarded. The efforts of the thousands upon thousands of Liberal Party branch members, who without any public recognition, without any reward, worked for a cause because they believe in it, and they dedicate their lives to it, they get up early in the morning on polling day, they go to the endless meetings, they go to the fundraisers, they go all over the country preaching the cause, and I get mightily angry when I hear anybody speak derisively of grass roots members, or pamphlet folder or any of the other insulting terms that some of the self-appointed critics of Liberal Party organisations sometimes use, because without people like you, we would have gone out of existence when the public repudiated us.
The rank and file members of a party give it sustenance and nourishment when it's going badly, and the concomitant of that is that when it's going well you are entitled not to be taken for granted. You are entitled to be listened to, you are entitled to be consulted. You may not always be agreed with but that's in the nature of life. And I want to say on behalf of all of my colleagues, that we won't take you for granted, we are deeply grateful for what you have done to keep our cause alive arnd to keep the flame of Liberalism burning very brightly even through very difficult times. And I want to say to you that I'll always keep in touch, I'll always listen and I'll always remember what the Liberal Party members here in New South Wales and throughout Australia have meant to me and how they have made the great achievement of all of us, of winning Federal Office possible.
Thank you.


&nbsp;29 October 1996&nbsp;
E &amp; O E ………………………………….
Thank you very much Mr Carbon and to the executives of the 3M company, to Mr Jim Downey, the Executive Director of the Australian Conservation Foundation, ladies and gentlemen. I was very happy to be able to accept this invitation this morning and take a few moments leave from the normal joint party meeting of the Coalition Parties which I will of course be joining shortly, but I wanted to be here to express a couple of thoughts on behalf of the Government, the first about the symbolism as well as the reality which is involved in the 3M company and the Australian Conservation Foundation coming together to produce today's gathering.
There is a symbolism about it. It brings together an organisation in Australia which is very broadly based and which has for a long time represented many of the broadly based 0 environmental concerns of the Australian community that's the Australian Conservation Foundation an organisation which has on occasions been supportive of what the present Government has done and has on other occasions been critical, as is the right of any community organisation. Those organisations exist to articulate the views of their members. They exist to express the views of the broad spectrum of people who give it financial and other support, and provided that is the basis on which they operate, I believe organisations of that kind discharge a very important, indeed a vital function in public debate on important public policy issues. And it also brings together a company which has now very deep roots in Australia which is a highly successful international company which has displayed all of the best credentials of a responsible corporate citizen, not only in the area of environmental matters but in other matters.
So the symbolism of those two groups coming together is important and the reality of it is also important because co-operation between the different interest groups, so far as the environment is concerned is not only important symbolically, it can also be very important in reality. For example, the Greenhouse Challenge programme which has relied very largely on a voluntary code of regulation has seen since 1991 growth in greenhouse gas emissions fall from 3% per annum to around half a percent per annum without the use of inflexible regulation and without a detrimental economic impact.
Environmental issues are forever mainstream political, social and economic issues in Australia and around the world. Achieving the elusive balance between the environment and the development is a responsibility shared by governments, industry and those groups in the community particularly charged with responsibility for promoting environmental concerns. The new Coalition Government went to the last election with a very strong commitment in environmental areas, particularly the establishment of the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia which the Senate willing will receive $ 1 billion from the sale of one third of Telstra use that to fund long term environmental projects, and if that can be realised, it will represent the largest capital investment of a particular kind, of a discrete kind, in Australia's environmental future ever undertaken.
Here is not the occasion to beat the drum about the desirability of the sale of one third of Telstra. My views on that are well known and I believe well understood throughout Australia, but it is to say that our commitment to that Natural Heritage Trust is a very strong one and it is a token, a very strong token, an earnest of the Government's desire to see environmental concerns and environmental issues assume mainstream significance and remain there.
Some years ago, those who studied Australian politics believed that concern about the environment was largely the preoccupation of those under 35 and of the loosely called middle classes. The passage of time has demonstrated that to be wrong. It's rather like, or perhaps it's evidenced by, the public reaction to French nuclear testing in Australia last year. The breadth and the depth and the unanimity of the rejection of that surprised many people. I came across many in the Australian community who might loosely be called on the far right of Australian politics, who railed us hard against French nuclear testing, as did people who might be regarded on the soft or even the far left of Australian politics, and I think you can find the same pattern with environmental issues and of course, many would quite directly argue that nuclear testing is the ultimate environmental issue because of the potential damage in so many ways it could do, but I mention that by way of analogy to make the point that concern about the environment is no longer a sort of a cafe society preoccupation. It's no longer something that is just picked up for a while and then put aside when things get better or get worse, and then you go back to if you want to sort of feel warm and fuzzy. I think all of that is now behind us. It may have been a phase, it is no longer a phase. People feel threatened by a deteriorating environment. They are concerned about river pollution, they are concerned about soil degradation, they are concerned about greenhouse gas effects, they are concerned about ocean outfall and all of those things which are now very mainstream concerns.
Now I don't pretend to you that every decision that this Government has taken on the environment has been applauded by everybody in this room. I know it hasn't, and I don't think life will ever be as uncomplicated as that, and I know that some of the decisions that have been taken have disappointed some of the environmental groups Others that have been taken have pleased sections of industry, falling short of what industry may have wanted. It was once said of the late Sir John McEwen that he once remarked that the only decent decision on industry assistance was one that was attacked by everybody effected by it. I sometimes believe that in relation to some environmental issues that may not be too far from the truth. You do have, as a government, to take into account economic, job, regional, community considerations. It is one thing to have a view about an issue which, if implemented in a particular fashion, will have only a marginal impact on a community. It is another when its impact is such because of its regional location will have an absolutely devastating and debilitating effect on the economic viability of a country or a regional town, and they are the sort of balances that have to be assessed.
But what is good about this conjunction interest today is a recognition by industry, personified by the 3M Company, that there is an ongoing corporate business and industry responsibility. But it's not a question of industry sitting there and being dragged reluctantly to the centre of the road by a government which is pulling people in both directions to try and get a consensus. Now, that does have to be done with some people in the corporate sector. There are still people in the business community whose attitude towards the environment is:-well, I'll only do something about it if I'm forced or ashamed into doing something about it.' But increasingly that is a minority view and your contribution to this conference today is a demonstration of that. And that really is the way to go because self regulation in these matters, an acceptance that everybody has a role to play, and the Government is not just to be cast in the situation of a bang together of heads, that everybody does have a role to play is a very, very important path of the whole equation.
So I want to complete my introductory remarks by saying to you that the new Government does have a very long term commitment to sustainable development. It recognises the deeply held view of the Australian community that what I might call the ' bread and butter' issues of environmental concern; air pollution, water pollution, soil degradation, things of that nature have perhaps not received the attention in the past that they should have received. And if we are to have a credible approach to environmental care and environmental concern in the years ahead, they must receive far greater attention. And it does require the cooperation of everybody. It requires a government that is prepared to keep environmental concerns at the top of the political agenda, not in a divisive flamboyant fashion, but in a fashion that builds credibly for the future. And it also needs the concern and the preoccupation of the business community. And I thank the 3M Company for demonstrating its willingness along with many others to do that. And it also requires the participation of an active, independent, articulate, environmental movement. A movement that will put its cause passionately, but a movement which also, I hope, will understand that at the end of the day decisions taken by governments have to reflect a rounded concern for the national interest and not a concern that nearly reflects one or other passionately held point of view. We can never adopt a winner takes all approach to environmental issues. We can never adopt the attitude that if one or other point of view prevails all is doom and disaster, destruction and the end of civilisation. What we have to do is to accept that there is a lot of good faith from a lot of sources in relation to the environment, that it's not a passing fad. People across the political, economic and social spectrum want a better, cleaner, safer environment for the future and if we start from that point I think we can realise a lot more than many of the doom stayers may have suggested.
But ladies and gentlemen, I have very great pleasure in declaring this conference open I think it had started before I arrived. I thank the 3M Company and the Australian Conservation Foundation for bringing it together and making it a reality and I hope all of you find it extraordinarily successful and productive.
ends&nbsp;


30 October 1996
E &amp; O E&nbsp;……………………….
Thank you very much Dr Graycar, Daryl Williams the Attorney General and Minister for Justice, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say how touched I am to receive this award. The proudest thing my Government has achieved over the last seven and a half months is undoubtedly that of uniform gun control laws throughout Australia. If I were asked to nominate something that we have done that has contributed more dramatically than anything else towards making Australia a better country for all of its citizens, I would unhesitatingly nominate what was achieved in relation to gun controls.
I want to acknowledge the contribution of Daryl Williams as the Attorney-General and the Chairman of the Australasian Police Ministers' Conference. I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Beazley, the Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Kernot, and the Premiers of the various States and the Chief Ministers of the two territories for the cooperation and support that they gave. It would have been a lot harder if bipartisan support had not been available. Violence offends our notions of a civilised society. Violence threatens the enjoyment of life. Violence in the home, in the workplace, in the streets, anywhere in Australia is something that is utterly alien to the sort of people we are and the sort of people we want to remain.
Something like one in four of all murders involve firearms. One in five suicides involve firearms. There is an undeniable link between the availability of firearms and the ease and the level of homicide in our community. One only has to look at the appalling murder rates of the United States to understand that reality. And what we decided together some months ago was to achieve a decisive cultural change in Australia because that is what the agreement of the Police Ministers represented. And it did send a message of hope and encouragement to the whole of the Australian community that if people in authority work together, have the will and the commitment, great things can be achieved.
So I'm honoured, Dr Graycar, to have received the award. It was an immense achievement, it was something of great personal satisfaction and I am very happy, indeed, that in a small way our actions have contributed towards making Australia a better, a happier and a safer place for all of us.
Thank you.&nbsp;


30 October 1996
E &amp; OE…………………………………………………..
Thank you very much Mary; to Mr Don Argus, the Managing Director;, the National&nbsp; Bank of Australia; other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It really is a&nbsp;delight for me to be here tonight and I thank you for asking me along. Whenever you sit down and try and think about the history of our country, particularly but not only the post World War II history of Australia, many chapters of that history comprise the heroic contributions of people who chose to live in Australia from other parts of the world.
It's not possible to think of the economic growth of Australia over the last 30 or years, without thinking of the massive contributions that have been made by the group loosely called ' ethnic Australians' to the development of our country.
First of course it was the many groups who came from eastern and central and southern and northern Europe. they made their special contributions. It's not possible to think of business development in go many areas without thinking of the Italians and the Greeks, to think of the contribution in areas such as property development and so many others by the East Europeans and so the story goes on. And there are many heroic stories of people arriving here with virtually nothing by way of resources except a determination to make a new life and to make a happy life for them and their families and to make a contribution to Australia, And in more recent years, we have experienced the extraordinary entrepreneurial injection of people from the Asia-Pacific region. The Chinese, people from Malaysia, people from all over that region, they've all made an enormous contribution to building our country.
And of course they bring a special value at the present time, the cultural diversity of so much of the business community of Australia is an indispensable element in winning new markets for us, particularly but not only in our own region. If you have the I knowledge, if you have the language, you have the cultural sensitivity, you have the understanding of a region then you have a capacity to do something that the rest of us can't do.-
So I think what I want to do tonight is I want to salute the business acumen, the entrepreneurial flair, As many of you know, I am quite a fanatic about the role of small business in-Australia and you can't think of small business in Australia without thinking of the contribution of ethnic Australians, and of course it is not only in small business but it is also in medium and large sized businesses. So can I just say a very simple thank you on behalf of all of your fellow Australians for what you have done before us and what we together have done over such a long period of time, You are a rich, indispensable, invaluable part of the fabric of our country and we are very gratefuil for your contribution. We salute your business achievements. I congratulate the National Australia Bank on its continued sponsorship of these very very important awards. They are a very appropriate and necessary honouring of the contribution of a group of people to the life and economic experience of our nation that is quite indispensable.
Thank you.&nbsp;


31 October 1996&nbsp;
E &amp; OE………………………………………….
To Robert Gottliebson, my Ministerial colleagues, Michael Wooldridge and Judi&nbsp; Moylan, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I am very honoured to&nbsp;continue an honourable tradition and that is of the Prime Minister of Australia having&nbsp;an award for companies that make such a direct contribution to assisting people with&nbsp;disabilities in the workforce.
We often have debates in this country and in the community, and people do it amongst&nbsp;themselves, as to whether things were better in the good old days or whether they're&nbsp;better now, and those sort of debates will go on forever. And when you draw up a&nbsp;balance sheet I guess you can say there are some things that maybe were better done&nbsp;earlier. But gee, there are a lot more things that are done better now. And one of&nbsp;those things that I believe that Australian society has undeniably advanced in&nbsp;enormously over the last 20 to 30 years is our whole attitude towards our fellow&nbsp;country men and women with disabilities. Generations ago it was something that was&nbsp;not as well treated. It was something that people often felt embarrassed about, they&nbsp;didn't want the world to know about. There was a totally different attitude. Now&nbsp;humanely, sensibly, from an economic standpoint doing good business means that we&nbsp;adopt a far more beckoning, a far more inclusive, a far more day-to-day sensible, commonsense attitude towards those of us who have disabilities.&nbsp;
And the way in which we have made great strides over the years, particularly, I think,&nbsp;over the last 10 years or so, to encourage firms to build their workforces to include&nbsp;people with disabilities, their recognition is the slogan of what the opening video said,&nbsp;' Doing Good Business' or ' It's Good Business' I'm not quite sure what order it&nbsp;came in. But I know that the centrality of the message is that it's good business and it&nbsp;is good business. But it's also good citizenship and it's also very good human relations and it takes peoples talents for what they are and it reminds all of us that in different&nbsp; ways everybody in the Australian community has got a contribution to make. And I&nbsp; can't think of a better way for the communities, through cooperation between&nbsp; governments and companies and unions and citizens generally, I can't think of a better&nbsp; way to express a practical citizenship, a better way of expressing that common thread of egalitarianism, that common thread of the Australian ' fair go' with which all us can identify, in our different ways and on which all of us can agree.&nbsp;
Reading a little bit about the different activities, big and small, around Australia, not only over the last year but before, the contribution they make to incorporating into their workforces people with disabilities, the contribution that those people make to the success of those companies, it's a mutual thing. It's not a charity exercise, it's an exercise in humane commonsense. And I think the companies that engage in it, I think they should be applauded and I welcome the way in which so many have participated. I want to congratulate the Federal Government departments that have played their role in setting an example and giving a lead which many in the private sector have emulated, some perhaps not as well as others. And one hopes that the emulation spreads throughout the community.&nbsp;
But this is a very nice function. It's a very warming occasion to be associated with. And in presenting the awards in a few moments, I do want to thank the sponsors that streak of privatisation about me always encourages me to thank the sponsors and to thank them very warmly because it's a very nice interaction between Government and private business. And I want to thank the companies and the employers, big and small, that have contributed towards today's awards. But most importantly I want to thank the target group of Australians if I can put it that way to which these activities are directed, to thank you for the very valuable and practical contribution that you are making to the success of the firms that employ you, the firms that you run, the contribution that both of them are making to the overall health and strength of the Australian economy.&nbsp;
Relations in the workplace is a very important policy area for my new Government. In&nbsp; all its ramifications relations in the workplace have received quite a lot of publicity in&nbsp; recent weeks. This is a different but very special aspect of good workplace relations.&nbsp; And the way in which so many firms have demonstrated, in a practical way, their &nbsp;commitment to good workplace relations is exemplified by the turn out for this&nbsp; presentation and exemplified by the practises and the attitudes of the companies&nbsp; involved. I warmly thank you all and in anticipation I collectively congratulate those&nbsp; who ate about to be announced as winners of the awards.
Thank you


Fax from 061/ 6132 g6 November 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTERTHE HON. JOHN HOWARD MPOPENING OFNATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS FORUMPARLIAMENT HOUSEE O ELadies and Gentlemen, I'm very pleased to have the opportunity of being present atthis first meeting of' this Forum and the new Government. I hope and from our pointof view, I intend that meeting this Forum will be a very important channel ofcommunication between the Government and the small business community ofAustralia and I am delighted that the Forum comprises such a wide range oforganisations, some large, some concentrated, some not so large, but all in all yourepresent a very significant cross section of the small business community of Australia.It would be no exaggeration to say that we placed an enormous amount of rhetoricalemphasis on small business in the lead up to the election. We also placed a lot ofpolicy emphasis on it and a great deal of our energy since the election has been debatedin that area. You mentioned a moment ago, Mr Chairman, that you hoped that PeterReith would be along. I guess of all of the reform measures that the Government hasattempted in the last eight months, none has been more important than our attempts tochange the industrial relations laws. I hope within a matter of a couple of weeks, if nota little sooner, I don't know the exact date, its always a bit indeterminate when you aredealing with the totality of the Parliament, I hope that the industrial relations laws andchanges will be a reality and over the longer term those reforms will have a greaterimpact on small business in Australia than just about any other change that anygovernment can undertake. They will throw out the existing unfair dismissal lawswhich I know have been the bane of the existence of many small businesses in Australiafor the last three years. They will also introduce a new era in the making of theworkplace agreements, they will end for all time the last vestiges of compulsoryunionism and the closed shop. They will provide a great deal more choice for thoseworkers who want to belong to unions and I think many of their provisions will delivera great deal of benefits for small business. 06/ 11/ 96 13: 25 Pg:
Fax from I know from my discussions with him that Peter Reith has talked extensively with manyof the organisations who are represented around this table and I want to take theopportunity publicly of congratulating him for the excellent job he has done innegotiating with the Australian Democrats an agreement to a secure passage of the bill.Inevitably when you reach agreement with a minor party there are some compromisesthat have to be reached otherwise you can't get the legislation through. We mighthave a majority of 45 in the House of Representatives but we don't have a majority inthe Senate and one of the political realities I would ask you to accept, that if onoccasions you don't think we are moving fast enough or quite as far as you believe weought to go or to the letter of what we said in the election we would like to do orsuggest we ought to go, I just ask you to understand that when you control bothHouses of Parliament you have more flexibility than when you control only one and Ioccasionally gaze with envy on those governments that control both Houses ofParliament but the Australian people did not give us control of the Senate but we haveto live and work with that reality and there is no good stamping our feet and hurlingabusive epithets at people, it's a question of working with what the people in ademocratic process gave us and see what we can achieve.I have no doubt that the bill in the form agreed between Peter Reith and the Democratswill deliver major reform to the Australian industrial relations scene. It will delivermajor benefits to small business and over time the enhanced flexibility that it willprovide will not only work for the benefit of small business but also to medium sizedand larger firms so it is a very significant reform and we are on the verge of having itachieved and over time it will deliver a lot of benefits to the people whose cause yourepresent in your daily activities but also around this table.We have delivered on our commitment to reduce provisional tax uplift factor from 8%to We in the budget announced the implementation of a capital gains tax roll-overrelief to take effect from the first of July next year as promised. We have received theSmall Business Deregulation Taskfor-e 14eport and I guess that will be the subject ofsome discussion around the table. I thought it was an excellent report and I undertookto the authors of the report and to the public that we would have a comprehensiveresponse to it by the middle of February which is about as quick given the interventionof Christmas, it is about as quick a timetable as we can possibly envisage.There are a number of other initiatives that I would just like to touch on whichalthough they are not exclusively small business they are important to small business. Iwanted to emnphasise the importance of our Supermarket to Asia Strategy. It is aspecial committee that I chair designed to bring together all those activities that cancontribute to makdng Australia an increasing source of both fresh and processed foodexports to the Asia-Pacific Region. One of the realities of life when we talk about theAsia-Pacific region is that there is a growing middle class in that area whosepurchasing power is growing everyday and the capacity of that middle class to becomea major purchaser of Australian food, processed food, will just, I think, expandexponentially over the next ten or twenty years and the opportunities that exist there, Iam talking here of transport as well as production capacity, the opportunities that existthere, are quite enormous and that's why if the instigation of the Food Council and theNational Farmers Federation I brought together a group of people including aFaoxm 06/ 11/ 96 13: 25 Pg: 6
Fax from representative of the ACTU and I am very pleased that the unions are involved in cooperatingwith this exercise. The food industry, the transport industry and three of mysenior Ministers sit on the committee as well and I think the opportunities that focus ofthis Committee's work will provide for small business will be quite significant.There has been some criticism of budget cuts that affect business. I note that, Iunderstand why some people would be critical of some changes that directly affecttheir constituents and when you bring down a Budget that achieves such an enormousshift in fiscal policy as our budget did, then inevitably there are going to be someelements of that shift that in a sectoral sense people won't like. I would say in relationto small business that in relative terms it has been I think well treated in relation tothose reductions. Let me quote as an example the slightly lesser contribution to theexport market development branch but it is in the context of having a much greaterfocus on small firms rather than the larger ones and I think that you will find thatelsewhere, and an interesting statistic that I had unearthed a couple of days ago,indicates that in relation to manufacturing support through the budget from this yearthrough to 1998-99 we will actually be spending 450 million dollars more onmanufacturing support than was expended in the last budget of the former government.So it's not in some areas quite as bad as some of the criticism has suggested but Iacknowledge there has been some criticism of that but I would ask you to have a lookat the overall economic benefit of having cut the deficit so significantly.There is even rumours around this morning of further movements in interest rates. Ihaven't heard any announcements but if there were to be an announcement thismorning the inflationary benefits of that would be quite significant.I won't talk about housing because there has already been very, very significantreduction in interest rates in that area but I would imagine that fibr most of yourmembers lower interest rates leading to more incentives for investment is about asgood tonic as any of you could hope to have. Now I would be the last person to claimthat the only reason interest rates come down is because there has been a cut in thebudget deficit. It is not quite as simple as that. There are a lot of things that feed intolower interest rates, lower inflation, lower wage growth, overseas interest raterelativities but the cut in the budget deficit was part of the mosaic and I would arguevery strongly that any sectoral difficulty caused by an individual budget decision ismore than outweighed by the overall benefit to the economy of having achieved a verybig fiscal shift. I mean, to shift 7-8 billion dollars in the space of two years which isabout 2 percentage points of GDP of government expenditure is a very big shift and ifwe get that all battened down, have it all passed through the Senate that will lay a veryfirm foundation in our first twelve months in office. You all know, you are all realists,you know that if governments don't take those sorts of decisions in the first year of agovernment's first term they are probably never going to take them and that was theattitude that we took.Mr Chairman, can I again thank you for your willingness to come here. Can Icommend you to the good offices and tender mercies of my Minister, Geoff Prosserwho as the Chairman rightly said, came out of the business stable and one of the thingsI am very, very happy to say, and I want to take the opportunity of saying this againstFa om06/ 11/ 96 13: 25 Pg: 7
Fax from the backizround of some of the nonsense that has been around in recent weeks aboutpeople having business interests and coming from a business background, I regard it asa positive badge of honour that I have got a significant number of people in my Cabinetwho have had a business background. I think that is a plus, not a minus, and it is notsomething to be shy about, it is not something to be ashamed of, it is something to beproud of. You need a mixture of people, you don't want a government composedentirely of businessmen, but you want a few of them. You don't want a governmentcomposed entirely of lawyers either, but you want a few of them you certainly don'twant a government composed entirely of former public servants or former partyapparatchiks. Although I have not objection to former public servants being in theministry or former academics, I have got some of those, and 1 don't mind formerapparatchiks of a certain variety but I draw the line at some former Party apparatchiksbut you do need mixture and this idea that there is something sort of awkward anddifficult about having somebody who has a business background is ridiculous and weneed to break that mould and I am delighted that somebody of Geoff Prosser'ssuccessfuzl experience in business is available because it does mean that you have agreater understanding of the realities and I have often said that one of the reasons whybusiness complains so much about the red tape and the regulation that is handed downon high is that it is often decided upon by people who have no practical understandingof the impact of red tape on the cost of running a business, particularly a smallbusiness, and it's a miracle to me how some men and women in small business find anytime to comply with the regula. tions that they are required to meet.So it's very nice to see you all and I hope that you all have a very profitable forum andI'm sure that no matter what the issue is that you will get a very receptive ear from MrProsser and I hope you have an opportunity of talking to Peter later in the day becausehe his a very important message to reinforce on the industrial relations frontWr Chairman, thank you very much, good luck and we value very warmly yourcounsel and advice.Thank you. Faxfros06/ 11/ 96 13: 25 Pg: 8


E &amp;O E...........
Thank you very much to Pat McNamara, the Deputy Premier of Victoria, to m&nbsp;colleague Lou Lieberman, to Mrs Gibson, the Chief Commissioner, . o Mr&nbsp;Heaney to my former Parliamentary colleague, Tom Uren, one of te many Phere to4ay, Reverend Donaldson, ladies and gentlemen.
Yesterday I had the very special privilege of calling on Ted Matthe s, who I'n&nbsp;the last survivor of the Australian contingent that went ashore on Gallipoli on the 25th&nbsp;of April 1915. He turns 100 on Monday, on Remembrance Day, an I, quite lit&nbsp;wa, in qwe in the experience of being able to reach out and touch so nebody wt&nbsp;been present at that awful moment, that awful time of both death ani destructi&nbsp;also a moment that has become haloed in the Australian history and fepresentsmany ways things that we care and love about our nation. That littl experienci&nbsp;mine, just in a small way, I hope taught me to try and understand the sense of a,&nbsp;reverence that those whose lives were directly touched saved, influe ced and inby " Weary" Dunlop feel about this most remarkable of all Australia
In our eams, I imagine, that " Weary" Dunlop represents what so Iany of us i&nbsp;like to be as Australians. He was strong, he was a champion sports an, in fact,understand he was the first Victorian ever to play rugby union for A stralia and&nbsp;recall reading those chapters on his sporting prowess in Sue Evury's magnificerbiography when he cmplained rather bitterly about the unforgiving ardness of&nbsp;Bulli soil of the Sydney cricket ground when he first represented Au tralia in a 1match there. He, of ourse, was also a champion boxer. He was a highly intellivery literate, well real man. He was in the best sense of that expresion, the trnof that expression, a man's man. He was a leader, he was compassic nate, he w;the greatest of all Australian traditions of mateship, he was egalitaria 1. old, irally, had butsoof e anairedpuld wellwe stent, sensi ins&nbsp;
When he cared and treated for people he didn't ask what school they went to, he didn't&nbsp;ask whether they were Protestant, Catholic or Callithumpian, he didn't ask them who&nbsp;they voted for, he didn't ask them what they thought about this or that thing, rather lie&nbsp;just treated them and cared for them and led them and inspired them because they were&nbsp;a fellow human being.
He represented a generation of Australians to whom all of us, particularly those whowere born too young for World War 11, but which all of us owe so much, There aremany great heroes in the Australian story, but that generation of men wvho wvent into.captivity ir4 the darkest days of World War 11 they endured hardship and tragedy, theytravelled journeys, they wore burdens, they provided leadership that no other group ofAustralians as a particular aged cohort does. And we owe them an immense depth ofgratitude. We also owe the memory of " Weary" Dunlop great reverence. Not only did he displaythose lovable Australian characteristics with which we so warmly identify', but he's alsoa far sighted man. At the end of World War 11 he was not one of those who said weshould turn our backs on the Asia Pacific areas. He was not someone who wanted tolive' out in hatred and so expiate some of the feelings of hostility he no doubt had abouthis treatment and the treatment of his fellow Australians, but he taught us and he tellsus that the future of Australian... ( inaudible)-, cooperation and friendship with thepeople of the Asian region. He became a leading light in the Asia Australia society.He played a very active role in the Colombo plan. He was in every sense a person wholooked to the future as well as someone who remembered the past and someone whoremembered the enormous suffering of those he served.
I have only read of " Weary" Dunlop's exploits. I had the great privilege of meetinghim on several occasions. I have talked to people who knew him, who wvere treated byhim, who served with him and who loved him, And he represents to me something towhich all of us as Australians can aspire. He has that uncomplicated generosity anddecency and he had enormous strength and he had that laconic characteristic which wehold so dear as being part of the Australian existence and the Australian personality.He was in every sense of the expression Australian to his boot heels, And the legacythat he has given to successive generations of Australians is a legacy that will warmand sustain and inspire us. And it really is entirely appropriate in this lovely gardensetting, in this lovely city of Benalla here this Sunday morning, a gathering attendedproperly by the men, the Dunlop men that we honour, the ex-POWs of World War 11,but also attended by many young people, by many children who've nourished out ofremembrance this morning and have played their part. And it is an opportunity to feelimmnensely grateful for lie and it's an opportunity to feel quietly proud of the greatprivilege al of us have to live in our nation Australia. And to remember that it was theunseating courage and bravery of men like " Weary" Dunlop and all the other men whoare here today and, of course, their fellow soldiers who didn't come back and all theothers who cared for them and looked after them.
Life at the end of its consideration is about personal courage, about character, about&nbsp;the capacity to do the right thing to care for one another in times of travail and times of&nbsp;difficulty. I can't think of a figure in Australian history who has more perfectly and&nbsp;completely lived out that injunction to care for others and to nurse and to look after&nbsp;those whose circumstances are sadly tragic. " Weary" Dunlop did that and he did it in away that has won him the affection, not only of those he cared for and treated and&nbsp;preserved in life and helped back to good health, but he has also won the affection andthe gratitude and the admniration of a nation that is proud to have produced a man ofthat stature and a nation that is grateful for what he did by way of exploration andleadership. Of the many things that has been my privilege to do since becoming Prime Minister ofAustralia few can match the privilege of being here this morning of saying some wordsthat tribute, however inadequate they are, to the memory of " Weary" Dunlop on yourbehalf thanking him and thanking God for him and also on your behalf thanking themen, the Dunlop men, that fought many died, many survived and to those who arehere today can I say to you there is a special place in the hearts of all Australians to thePOWs of World War 11. We know the sacrifices you made. We can only begin tounderstand the pain that you endured, but I want you to know that a grateffi nationsalutes and respects the contribution you made to the peace and the freedom and thetranquillity and the happiness in which Australians live in 1996.
Thank you.&nbsp;



Fax frrm 12 November 1996
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO THE AUSTRALIAN QUALITY AWARDS
DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY'
EE Thank you very much David. To Bob Carr, the Premier of New South Wales, Barry
Murphy, ladies-and gentlemen.
The last time that I made a speech in this convention centre was at the dinner to
welcome home Australia's victorious Atlanta Olympic Games team and that was a very
euphoric night and -it was a -night that was full of proper adulation for a group of men
and women who had done remarkable things in the name of Australia. And it's very
appropriate that the next address should also be in honour of a group of men and
women who are also doing equally remarkable things for Australia. We are never
reluctant, and properly so, and it's always part of our national character to do honour
and pay homage to our sports men and women who achieve so much on the sporting
and playing fields of the world. We're very proud of them and they give us a great
deal of inspiration and a great deal of encouragement.
We ought to be equally proud and we should pay equal homage to those men and
women who achieve excellence in business and the way in which the Australian Quality
Awards have grown in status over the years, the way in which a gathering of over
4000 people, I understand, involved right across the nation tonight in this exercise is an
indication of how much store all Australians are now placing on the need for our
nation to succeed in the international competitive race.
Quality is all about lifing performance. It's all about lifting competitiveness, and
lifting performance and lifting competitiveness is all about Australia's international
future. You've all been told before but it has to be said again and again. We live in a
fiercely competitive global economy. Nobody owes Australia a living. The fact that
we live cheek by jowl to the fastest growing and most exciting economic region, the
Asian Pacific region, means that we have a remarkable opportunity, that we can't take
our future for granted, that we have to claw our future for ourselves, we have to
13/ 11/ 96 12: 08 Pg 1 
Fax from : 13/ 11/ 96 12: 08 Pg: 2
compete, we have to be efficient, we have to be smart and wve have to produce high
quality products. What I think the Australian Quality Awards do is to focus the minds
of everybody, not just men and women in business but also men and women in
governments, focus the minds of all of us on lifting our gamne and lifting our
performance. As I flick through the citations of the various recipients tonight, one of the common
threads that came through very strongly to me was the importance of relations between
the owner and the proprietor of the business and the employees of that business, and
the great focus in so many of the awards, not only on customer satisfaction and good
customer relations but also on good human relations inside the firm. And I still believe
it may in the eyes of some be regarded as an old fashioned value but I think it's an
enduring and important value, that the most important resource that any firm has is its
employees, its people, and if the relations between those who run the business, and if
you can get the relationship right, if you can involve every last person in your firml or
your enterprise or your government agency or your business, in the future if you can
forge a common vision, if you can have a common purpose at the workplace level,
then I think you've got more than half of the battle won. And we've come a long way
in that department over the last few years and everybody has played a part, and I
acknowledge, quite frankly despite the differences I may occasionally have on policy
issues, I acknowledge the contribution that has been made in that area by many leaders
of the trade union movement in Australia because I think increasingly, we're all seeing
that we have to work and fight together for a common purpose and if you can have
that common purpose inculcated at the firm level, then I believe that more than half the
battle has been won.
And that of course is the philosophy that lies very much behind the Government's
recent changes to workplace relations. They are not about fighting long distant and
best forgotten battles. They are about imbuing a sense of common endeavour and
common enterprise at the workplace level because that really is the wave of the future.
The next millennium is going to see dramatic changes in the Australian workplace. We
are going to see proportionately more Australians employed by smaller firms. We arc
going to see the communications explosion absolutely change the face of the way in
wvhich work is conducted, We are going to see more people working from home. We
are going to see more people working in decentralised locations. We are going to see
people more and more sensitive to the shifls of economies in different parts of the
world. We are going to have people more conscious that job availability will be a
global thing rather than a national or a regional thing. And there's going to be an even
greater pressure in the future on high quality and high performance and I want on
behalf of the Government, I want to thank everybody that has been associated with tile
Australian Quality Awards. I want to thank the assessors, I want to thank the
participants but collectively, I want to thank everybody who is committed to building a
more competitive and a more enlightened business future for Australia.
I think more than at any other time in our history, we are conscious that we have to
make our way on our own. We will win and we will succeed if we are the world's
best, and if we're not the world's best in many areas then we are not going to have the
future that all of us want for ourselves. But I am filled with optimism and confidence
about the future. Just as I take a very positive view about the balance sheet of 2 
Fax from Australia's history to date, I also take a very positive view about Australia's future
prospects and sitting and listening tonight to the performance of big and small firms,
public sector as well as private sector bodies and agencies all over Australia, you can't
be other than filled with a great sense of optimism and hope.
So on behalf of the Government, I congratulate Barry Murphy and his committee. I
congratulate those who devised the Australian Quality Awards. 1 thank them for the
great contribution that they are making to Australia winning the international
competitive race.
Thank you. 13/ 11/ 96 12: 08 Pg: 3 



14 November 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE CENTRE FOR INDEPENDENT STUDIES
E O E
Frank Devine, Bob Carr, Roger Douglas, Greg Lindsay, and as I look around the
room, a very large number of people who have participated in different ways in the
intense and exciting debate and battle of ideas over a very long period of time.
Your mention of Boris Yeltsin of course reminds me of the invitation I received from
Kerri-Anne Kennerley to dance in public yesterday and I said Boris Yeltsin was the last
head of a government to do that and look what happened to him!!
Can I say what a tremendous pleasure it is to be here tonight to mark the twentieth
anniversary of a remarkable organisation that has played a very significant role in an
unfolding debate about the fuiture of our country. The way in which people should
relate to governments and the role of governments in our society. If you go back
twenty years there were not only a lot more monopolies in Australia commercially but
there were also a lot more monopolies when it came to the generation of ideas and the
generation facts. I think it went beyond the Federal Treasury and the Reserve Bank
and the economic partners of one or two of the major banks and insurance companies
that was about it as far as economics was concerned. As far as think tanks are
concerned apart from the tremendous contribution of the IPA there wasn't really much
around and the Centre of Independent Studies has played a tremendous role over that
period of time. There has been a quite extraordinary saga throughout the world that
watched of course the most amazing event this century and that is the implosion of
communism and the ultimate triumph of individual political liberty over political
territory which of course is the most remarkable even that I've experienced in my
lifetime and a vindication of the philosophical basis of those who opposed political
tyranny. And we've watched over that 20 year period a remarkable transformation in the
economic debate the most profound questioning of the role of government in our
society this century and there are a lot of people who have been great heroes but I am
going to be bold enough tonight to say that the two people in my book who stand out 
above the others, one of them is here tonight and that's Roger Douglas I think Roger
Douglas at a political level.... ( applause).
I suppose in a generic sense he started off from my point of view in the wrong Party
but in a sense ideas transcend Party disciplines in these things, and I think the other
person who deserves an accolade is Margaret Thatcher. ( Applause) I think some of
the sort of modern revisionism, sort of ignored the fact... I mean the real test is
whether when you've left the job you've changed the country in an identifiable way
and I think both Roger Douglas and Margaret Thatcher have certainly achieved that.
And I think the debate here in Australia there have been some sort of high points of it,
I guess and I might be accused by some of you of being a bit sort of self pre-occupied
or egocentric in saying it but I think of all the debates that have sort of raged around
the role of government and the role of the State as distinct from the role of the
individual, none has been more important in Australia over the last twenty years than
the deregulation of Australia's labour markets and I think that has been a tremendously
important debate intellectually and the power of ideas triumphing even in political
banishment is well demonstrated by that particular debate and it is a reminder that the
force of a good idea is something that can never really be stopped and many of the
people who have played very significant roles in all of those debates are here tonight
and I think at State Government level a lot of very complimentary things can be said
about what Nick Greiner did in blazing the trail as far as benchmarking of efficient
State services are concerned applause).
Now that we have put away mobile telephones I have to pay enormous tribute to my
good friend Jeffrey Kennett who also has played a tremendous role and I very freely
acknowledge the tremendous contribution that Bob Carr is making in areas like
education. Can I say that, having said that, I mean we obviously have some profound
differences on other issues but that brings me to saying something serious about the
future. The last 20 years may have been about economic issues such as the labour market but I
think the next twenty years really ought to be about some of the non-economic issues.
I think education is a very important part of that debate and the other of course is
about having a decent sensible family policy and I applaud the Centre of Independent
Studies for the emphasis they are placing on that. I mean we really do, all of us, who
are worried about the future of our nation and all of us have to be concerned about a
culture that has been far too dominant for far too long in our society that believes that
it doesn't really matter any more as to what kind of sense of responsibility or
irresponsibility some parents in our community display towards their children.
And until there is a greater focus on the lasting damage that that generation of
irresponsibility in many parts of our society has produced, then I think we are going to
be a poorer community. I do congratulate the Centre of Independent Studies for the
focus that it is placing on social policy, particularly on family policy.
We've had a lot of debate over the last couple of years about whether so-called
economic rationalism has gone too far and I think I'm the first speaker to dare utter 
those two words tonight. I mean, if you were looking for a generic term to describe all
of us, a lot of people out there would say that we were sort of economic rationalists
and a lot of you might think others are more sort of economic rationalists than you
individually might be. We would describe ourselves perhaps differently. I would
describe myself as an economic liberal although albeit self-confessedly a bit of a social
conservative. Others would describe themselves by some other label but whatever it is
I think we have a rough understanding that we have certain threads in common and
those threads in common consist of profound scepticism that Governments can solve
all of our problems. I think that's the first thing that we have in common. We have a
passionate belief in individual self-fulfilment and achievement. I think we all have a
passionate belief that a sense of civic responsibility and a view that we ought to care
for people and not in some kind of patronising way or suffocating way but in a sense of
civic responsibility and I think finally we also have as people I think as a sense that you
do need cohesive units and stabilisers in our society and the greatest stabiliser of all
still for all its imperfections is the family unit, and I would like to think that the bonds
that bind us together, let's not have a simplistic slogan of economic rationalist or this
or that. Some of us in different ways may find those terms offensive but perhaps those
four things bind us together in a very very powerful way.
I salute the Centre of Independent Studies. I think it has made a tremendous
contribution to the intellectual debate. It has made better policy, we have better
governments on both sides of the political equation as a result of organisations like the
Centre of Independent Studies and I think it is a magnificent thing that a body like this
can have Bob Carr and Peter Collins and John Howard and Nick Greiner and Roger
Douglas and Mary Easson and Mr Egan and everybody in the same room. I think
that's a good thing and I think society is better for that. I think Australians want their
political leaders where they genuinely agree on something to acknowledge that
agreement and then get on with the debate in areas where they don't agree with each
other. I think Australians are fed up with ritualistic eye gouging ( applause)... and I
think Greg, to you and your organisation has helped do that. It was after all a former
Labor leader and Foreign Minister, then Governor General of Australia, who I
attended with six years ago when your new headquarters were opened and I think it is
very typical of the way in which you've been able to gather people of both sides of
politics so I congratulate you, and in doing so can I acknowledge one very obvious
fact that you have been, and it's very evident tonight, it is a family occasion, it's not
only the CIS family but there's also plenty of Lindsays and Lindsay associates.
They're a prolific lot, and I know what a tremendous intellectual and personal support
and moral support your wife Jenny and your three children have been.
I suppose it is the oldest cliche in the book, but any man or woman in any kind of
position of responsibility needs a man or woman to support them. And I know that, I
know that very very well indeed and I'm very grateful for the support I've had from
my wife and children and I know that the support that you've had from your wife and
three children has been priceless, invaluable and incalculable, and an occasion like this
oughtn't to go by without that being acknowledged by me on behalf of everybody
here. So happy birthday, congratulations, and particularly to you Greg, for the
intellectual stewardship that you've given to this great organisation.
ends 



Fax from 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg:
PRIME MINJISTER
U* A~ NDER EMBARGO -6.45p PM A
18 November 1996 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
THE 1996 SIR ROBERT MENZIES LECTUJRE
THE LIBERAL TRADITION
The Beliefs and Values Which Guide the Federal Government
E&amp; OE CHECK AGAINST DELIVYERY
We honour tonight the memory of Sir Robert Menzies as a great Australian leader and
as the founder of modern Australian Liberalism-We recall the achievements of the
national governments that he led, as well as the values that were the driving force
behind them.
But our purpose tonight is also a much broader one: one that is focussed squarely on
the challenges of Australia's future, and on the central role of Liberal values and ideals
in ensuring that they are met successfUlly.
Menzies himself always had such a focus-He forged modemn Australian Liberalism not
as a fixed ideology but as a political philosophy with values that need to be related to
the great issues of the day, and of the future.
Australian Liberalism has always been evolving and developing. It always will be. We
are constantly relating Liberalism's enduring values to the circumstances of our own
time enduring values such as the commitment to enhance freedom, choice and
competition, to encourage personal achievement, and to promote fairness and a
genuine sense of community in Australian society.
In reflecting on Menzies' contribution to Australian life, therefore, we do not yearn for
some lost golden age. Our aim is not to re-create the circumstances and public policy
priorities of his time. That is clearly neither possible nor desirable.
Australia today is very different to the Australia of the Menzies era. 
Fax f o 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 2
Our society is more diverse and better for that fact. Our social structures have
changed significantly and will continue to do so. Our interaction with other countries
is more pervasive making our perspectives wider and our opportunities for growth
more abundant.
Political and economic realities are also fundamentally different to those of the Menzies
era. Many traditional political constituencies have been ' de-tribalied', with older
instinctive loyalties giving way to less predictable patterns of party support. Our
national economy is confronting the challenges of what will be the decisive forces of
economic change into the next century namely, globalisation, technological change
and the communications revolution.
So much of the Australia of the Menzies era has passed into history. But we should be
under no illusions about the importance of putting the achievements of Menzies into
their proper historical perspective.
The Menzies era has long been seen as a critically important target by the opponents of
the Liberal inheritance in Australia. In their view, if the stature of Menzies could be
demeaned and if the achievements of his long period in government diminished, then
their own partisan political cause would be advanced.
A year or two ago, we witnessed one of the high-water marks in the attempt to rewrite
important parts of Australia's political history. It came in the form of a
sustained, personalised and vindictive assault on the Menzies legacy orchestrated from
the highest levels of the then national government.
It was an assault without substance, without honour and without success.
It failed because it was seen by the vast majority of Australians for the divisive,
irrelevant and prejudiced attack that it was.
It failed because it aimed to establish a form of historical correctness as a particular
offshoot of political correctness.
it failed because it aimed to set Australian against Australian, implying that those who
did not share the then officially-endorsed view of the Menzies era were somehow
lesser Australians and less patriotic than those who did.
Above all, it failed because the facts of history simply did not sustain it.
Our political opponents tried to convince Australians that the Menzies era created an
' industrial museum' and that it was notable only for an economnic torpor and
international isolation.
They failed in that attempt because they could not re-write the facts. And the facts are
that the Menzies era not only provided Australia with the strongest, sustained period of
economnic growth in our history but also re-oriented Australian foreign policy towards
a greater involvement in the Asia-Pacific region, 
Fax from 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 3
3
Whether measured in terms of interest rates, employment, prices, national savings,
current account deficits, net foreign liabilities, marginal tax rates on average income, or
other standards of measurement, the fact is that the record of the Menzies
Governments in the late 1950s and early 1960s was far more impressive than the
record of its Labor critics when they were in office in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Yet, those of us who uphold the memory of Sir Robert Menzies for who he was, and
for what he achieved for Australia, must not be simply reactive in defending his place
in history. We must not sit back and be galvanised into action only when unjustified
denigrations are made.
In relating the values of Liberalism to the challenges of Australia's future, we need to
recognise more explicitly the importance of our history.
Our history must never become a refuge from the present. Nor should it ever become
simply a pretext for smug self-congratulation, for wallowing in nostalgia or for viewing
the past through rose-tinted glasses.
But the heritage of Australian Liberalism is an important part of the broader history of
Australia, and in my view we have been guilty in the past of not giving sufficient
weight to its relevance.
it is from the history of our political tradition that we can build on acquired wisdom. It
is from our history that we learn for the future from the lessons of past practical
experience. It is from our history that we can understand the scale of what our
predecessors achieved. And it is from our history that the elements of both continuity
and evolution in our political philosophy become apparent.
We must never allow a vacuum to develop in which the history of Australian
Liberalism is left to be interpreted by those who are opposed to the values that inspired
it. The attempted re-writing of Australian political history over recent years by our
political opponents should not be countered by an equA1y politicised re-writing to
redress the balance.
What is needed is a sense of balance, objectivity and honesty in drawing lessons from
our past.
Australian history is not some neat political fable in which the only national icons are
people who share a particular political faith and in which the believers in other faiths
are no more than peripheral players.
Reassessing the achievements and shortcomings of our history should not become part
of some broader process of ritualistic political eye-gouging.
Australians deserve and are now getting the restoration of civility in public life.
Where there are genuine differences of view, they need to be debated directly and
robustly, but not in a personally abusive way. 
Fax Fron 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 4
4
Nor does our political system benefit from instinctive political ' oppositionism'. Where
there is broad agreement I believe that nothing is lost by recognising that fact.
These principles need to be applied particularly when assessments are being made of
Australia's political history.
The facts of that history need to be interpreted on their own merits, and not with a predetermined
outcome in mind nor in some kind of divisive and judgmental way that uses
modern values and standards as the benchmarks for adequacy.
Glib and sweeping generalisations too often become easy substitutes for measured and
factual historical judgments.
We should never accept, for example, the often quoted but factually incorrect
depiction of Labor as the party of ' initiative' and ' non-Labor' as the agents of
' resistance' in Australian history. Nor should we accept the historical portrayal of
Labor as the ' enlargers' of Australian life, and the political opponents of Labor as mere
4straighteners'.
We should contest and dispute these mythologies for the simple reason that the facts of
history do not sustain them.
In doing so, of course, we should make no claim that the Liberal political tradition has
had a monopoly on wisdom and good judgement over the past half century in
Australia. With the benefit of hindsight there were, of course, some priorities which
could have been pursued more vigorously and there were injustices in society that
could have been remedied earlier.
Hindsight always has that advantage. But the temptation must always be resisted to
read history backwards that is, to impose on the past contemporary standards and
priorities. The fact is that the Menzies era provided good government Qf integrity, high
achievement: and strong leadership which Australians returned to office again and again
because it was attuned to the aspirations of the great mainstream of Australian society,
because it delivered on what it promised and, it is true, because of the internal
divisions within the ranks of its political opponents.
The achievements of the Menzies era laid the groundwork for the achievements of the
Liberal political tradition more generally. And we need to ensure that those
achievements are properly recognised as our political history is re-interpreted by a new
generation of Australians.
The Liberal political tradition has made a decisive contribution to nation-building in
Australia.
It has been the Liberal political tradition which has overseen the periods of greatest
sustained economic growth in our history and which, through policies in support of 
Fax fromt 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg:
free enterprise, laid the foundations for Australia's modem manufacturing, agricultural
and industrial development.
It is our political tradition which facilitated the establishment of a modem national
economic infrastructure,
It is our tradition which has championed not only the rights of small business but
opportunities in general for individuals to work hard and to achieve for themselves and
their famnilies.
it is our tradition which dramatically expanded educational opportunities for all
Australians and which, through the decision over 30 years ago to provide direct
government assistance to independent schools, ended many of the deep sectarian
divisions and bitterness which had afflicted Australian society for wnore than a century.
It is our tradition which opened up regional co-operation through economic initiatives
beginning with the 1957 Australia-Japan Trade Treaty, through educational initiatives
beginning with the Colombo Plan and through immigration reforms such as the ending
of the White Australia Policy.
It is our tradition which provided one of the world's most generous and compassionate
responses to the Indo-Chinese refugee crisis of the late 1 970s and 1 980s.
it is our tradition which expanded Australia's own defence capabilities and
underpinned them with the negotiation of the ANZUS alliance.
It is our tradition which oversaw the great surge of post-war migration to Australia
and laid the foundations of our modern Australian society drawn from the four corners
of the earth and united together by a common set of Australian values.
It is our tradition which has had a ' fair go' for all as one of its driving forces and which
has strengthened the social security safety net through such advancements in social
policy as the extension of child endowment, pensioner medical services, health
services, pharmaceutical benefits, housing, invalid and other pensions, mental health
care, family allowances, and many other initiatives.
It is our tradition which has led and won, the great debate of ideas over issues such as
greater choice and security for Australian families, industrial relations reform, financial
deregulation and privatisation.
it is our tradition which oversaw the extension of the full rights of citizenship to
Aboriginal Australians.
it is our tradition which has made an historic contribution in so many other policy areas
such as regional development, technology, environmental protection, child care and the
growth of new industries such as tourism.
And it is our tradition with our emphases on incentives for achievement deregulation
and competition which is best suited to the demands of our economic fu~ ture: a future 
~ ax from 19/ 11/ 96 e9: 55 Pg 6
6
in which economtic enterprise will become more decentralised, in which small
businesses will be even more important as generators of jobs and national wealth, and
in which technology will change patterns of work and diversify the options for
achieving growth.
So much for hollow generalisations about parties of initiative and resistance in
Australian history and in Australia's future.
The personality of Sir Robert Menzies, and the achievements of his governments, lay at
the centre of many of the historical achievements of the Liberal tradition to which I
have referred.
Tonight, however, is not the occasion for a detailed recitation of all of them. But I
would like to take the opportunity to reflect in a personal way on what I see as the
enduring legacy of Menzies' contribution to public life in Australia.
Menzies, above all, was a great Australian nation-builder in the true sense of the word.
He understood better than any political leader of his generation the nation-building
capacities of private enterprise and a strategic but limited role for government.
That is clearly evident in the record of his achievements in government in areas as
diverse as national development, economic growth, trade and foreign policy, science
and education, and the arts.
It was his essential Australianness that underpinned his unequalled period of
domninance in Australian political life.
One of the most perverse myths about Menzies was his alleged subservience to Britain,
and subsequently America. Like most Australians of his time, Menzies did have a
special admiration for the English inheritance of the rule of law, democratic
constitutionalism and personal liberty. But that did not make him any lesser Australian
in fact, it made him a more robust one as he applied that unique inheritance to
Australia's own national circumstances.
Menzies fiercely attacked British indifference to Australian interests whether it was in
strategic policy ( as in the Second World War), in trade policy or in any other aspect.
For example, in the 1930s Menzies was a consistent opponent of British governments
over their application of the 1932 Ottawa Agreement. He argued that the need for
Australia to develop its own manufacturing base demanded greater understanding than
Britain was prepared to extend.
Furthermore, immediately after the Australian declaration of war in 1939, Menzies
resisted British pressure to commit Australian forces immediately to Europe. He
argued that the situation in 1939 was not the same as 1914. He agreed to send
Australian forces to Europe only after he had an assessment of Japan's likely intentions
and after he had insisted on, and received, a reassurance from Britain on its
commitment to send a fleet to Singapore if Japan did move south. 19/ 11/ 96 09: S5 Pg: 6 
FaxF a~ 19/ 11/ 96 89: 55 Pg: 7
7
Menzies' intense Australianness was highlighted in the political relationship he had
with the Australian people. He articulated the hopes and concerns of the Australians
of his time more effectively, more representatively and for a longer period than any
other national leader.
Menzies' political genius lay in that basic affinity with the aspirations of the Australian
people. He understood the priority they placed on jobs, on rising living standards, on
home ownership, on high economic growth, on a sense of national unity, and on
opportunities for their children that were greater than they themselves had ex'perienced.
And he developed priorities in national policymnaking and a role for national
government that enabled those aspirations to be achieved.
Menzies had his finger on the pulse of the Australian nation in a way that few other
leaders have matched and none have surpassed. But the quality of his political
leadership did not lie in perceiving or anticipating every shift in public opinion. He
responded to public opirnion, but he also shaped it. He respected it, but he also guided
it. He knew the difference between short-term public opinion and long-term public
interest. Another aspect which I see as central in Menzies' enduring legacy is, of course, his
role as the Founding Father of modem Australian Liberalism.
Menzies' knew the importance for Australian Liberalism to draw on both the classical
liberal as well as the conservative political traditions. He knew the importance for
Liberalism of upholding people's fights and freedoms as individuals. He also knew the
imnportance of values and priorities that had both a proven record of past achievement
and a relevance to advancing Australia's national interests into the future.
He opposed change for the sake of change, just as he opposed blind adherence to
outmoded and ineffective practices that no longer served the national interest. He was
a traditionalist in that he respected the wisdom that is shaped by experience. But
where he was convinced of the need for change, he became its powerful advocate.
This was clearly evident in the changing emphases of Menzies foreign policy with his
awareness of the importance of the Asia-Pacific region in Australia's future and his
creation of the framework for greater interaction with it.
It was also evident in a range of his social and economic policies, and none more so
than the new directions he charted for secondary and tertiary education.
Menzies' practical approach to policy issues reflected the dualism in Liberalism's
political philosophy. He believed in a liberal politcal tradition that encompassed both
Edmund Burke and John Stuart Mill a tradition which I have described in
contemporary termis as the broad church of Australian Liberalism.
Pant of Menzies' legacy, therefore, is that Liberalism has developed political values
that are neither ideological, on the one hand, nor mere bellwethers of every changing
circumstance, on the other. 
Fax Fo 19/ 11/ 96 89: 55 Pg: 8
8
Menzies valued a broad-based political philosophy because he knew that it was fr~ om
such a philosophy that Liberalism derived its enduring values values such as
individual freedom, choice, diversity, opportunity, and the importance of strong
families and communities as bulwarks against the intrusive power of the State.
That is why the modern Liberal Party has never been a party of privilege or sectional
interests or narrow prejudice.
Menzies always championed individual freedom and spirit over collective action based
on a corporate state, and he did so not to promote narrow and selfish outcomes but for
the purposes of enabling every Australian to fulfil their hopes and aspirations.
Liberalism has always pursued those purposes, and it will continue to do so.
Another aspect of Menzies' legacy is that Liberalism has focussed on national interests
rather than sectional interests.
Menzies knew that a broad-based political philosophy is a necessary filter for the
narrow aspirations of individual lobby groups. He understood that the weaker a
political party's philosophical base, the more likely it is to be hijacked by single-issue
groups which have a focus that is sectional and not national.
These aspects of Liberalism lay at the heart of Menzies' political views. They have an
enduring relevance and value, and modem Liberalism remains strongly committed to
them. Any assessment of Menzies' influence on Australian public life would be incomplete
without reference to the great strengthening influence he exerted in support of
democratic constitutionalism in Australia.
Throughout his long career in State and Federal politics, Menzies demonstrated
consummate and, in my view, unrivalled skill as a political practitioner. But even more
than that, he demonstrated his great commitment to Parliamentary democracy.
He never forgot that the responsibilities of democratic government are not some preordained
right bestowed on a privileged few, but are a gift from the people.
He understood that the strength of our national political institutions directly affect the
value of the democratic rights exercised by individual Australians.
That is why Menzies placed the authority, standards and traditions of Parliament
squarely at the centre of the national governments that he led.
It is why he always insisted on adherence to the proper processes of Cabinet decisionmaking.
It is why he championed the doctrine of the separation of powers. 
19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 9
9
It is why he refused to compromnise on the need for honest and competent
administration and the accountability of government.
It is why he turned his back on the attractions of a legal career in private practice in
favour of fulfilling his deeply-felt sense of public duty.
I have spoken tonight of the need to guard against the re-writing of Australian political
history and, in particular, to ensure that the contribution of Robert Menzies and the
Liberal tradition are accorded their proper place in it,
There is, of course, a related and broader challenge involved. And that is to ensure
that our history as a nation is not written definitively by those who take the view that
Australians should apologise for most of it.
This ' black arm band' view of our past reflects a belief that most Australian history
since 1788 has been little more than a disgraceful story of imperialism, exploitation,
racism, sexism and other forms of discrimination.
I take a very different view. I believe that the balance sheet of our history is one of
heroic achievement and that we have achieved much more as a nation of which we can
be proud than of which we should be ashamed.
In saying that, I do not exclude or ignore specific aspects of our past where we are
rightly held to account. Injustices were done in Australia, and no-one should obscure
or minimise them.
We need to acknowledge as a nation the realities of what European settlement has
meant for the first Australians, the Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders, and in
particular the assault on their traditions and the physical abuse they endured.
We need to remember that there were wasteiful animosities that were generated by
sectarian intolerance for so much of our history.
We need to confront the scale of the damage we have done to our own natural
environment. But in understanding these realities our priority should not be to apportion blame and
guit for historic wrongs but to commit to a practical program of action that will
remove the enduring legacies of disadvantage.
That is why our priority should be a process of reconciliation with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Australians built on a practical program to alleviate their
disadvantage in terms of health, literacy, housing, employment and respec for their
culture and traditions, as well as to facilitate the goal of greater economic
independence. It is why we need to implement the plans we have put forward for the most
comprehensive revitalisation in our history of Australia's unique but fragile national
environment, 
Fax from191/ 6 955 P: 0
it is why we need to ensure that all Australians irrespective of their race, colour,
beliefs or country of origin are accorded respect and dignity as individuals and are
given an equal entitlement to achieve their aspirations, free from intinmidationi and
discrimination. The debate over Australian history, however, risks being distorted if its focus is
confined only to the shortcomings of previous generations. It risks being further
distorted if highly selective views of Australian history are used as the basis for endless
and agonised navel-gazing about who we are or, as seems to have happened over
recent years, as part of a ' perpetual seminar' for elite opinion about our national
identity. The current debate over Australian history would benefit from a more balanced
approach, from a wider perspective and from less pre-ordained pessimism.
In the broad balance sheet of our history, there is a story of great Australian
achievement to be told.
In that context, we are right to be proud of the economic achievements of our past
building in a vast and unforgiving continent one of the world's great suppliers of food,
minerals and agricultural commodities.
We are right to be proud of having built one of the most prosperous, most egalitarian
and fairest societies in the world,
We are right to be proud of our tradition of mateship in both peace and war-
We are right to be proud of living in one of the world's oldest continuous democracies,
having pioneered advances in women's franchise, individual freedom, the
accountability of governments and the rule of law.
We are right to be proud of having established one of the most ethnically diverse
societies in the world in which tolerance, respect for differences and opportunities for
all have been the distinguishing features.
We are right to be proud of our sense of Australian community characterised by our
strong traditions of voluntary associations and our safeguarding of an effective social
security safety net.
We are right to be proud of our well-merited national reputation for innovation,
practicality and down-to-earth common sense.
These are all achievements that many generations of Australians have worked hard to
secure. In highlighting them, we do not seek to obscure the failings of the past but to
restore a sense of balance and perspective. I 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 18 
Fax from 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 11
Australian history should never be a source of smug delusions or comfortable
superiority. But nor should it be a basis for obsessive and consuming national guilt and
shame. We need to work hard to remove the disadvantages which some Australians continue
to endure as a legacy of our history. But we need to recognise that our history is also
the story of a great Australian achievement in which we can, and should, take great
pride. Finally tonight, I wish to turn to the future of Liberalism in meeting the challenges
which Australia faces.
Menzies' political success lay in building an enduring and broadly-based constituency
that supported Liberalism's values and priorities. At the heart of that constituency
were ' the forgotten people' of that era the men and women of the great Australian
mainstream who felt excluded from the special interest elitism of the Liberal Party's
immediate predecessors and from the trade union dominance of the Labor Party. They
included small business people, farmers, employees in enterprises both large and small,
women, famnilies concerned for their security, older Australians, young people in search
of jobs and opportunity, and many others.
Australia faces fundamentally different challenges to those of the Australia of the
Menzies era. But Liberalism faces the ongoing challenge of building an enduring and
broadly-based constituency across the great mainstream of our rapidly changing
society. Over recent times, a new constituency has galvanised around new issues and in support
of Liberal priorities.
It includes many of the ' battlers' and families struggling hard to get ahead. It includes
Australians, young and old, who want Australia to break free of the legacy of debt and
deficits. It includes small business people who want to expand, invest and employ
more Australians. It includes all those who want the talents of Australians to be
liberated so that Australia can achieve its full potential. It includes all those who do
not want their national government to respond to the loudest clamour of the noisiest
minority. This new constituency does not represent a permanent realignment in Adstralian
politics. Its continued support for Liberal priorities cannot be taken for granted it
must be earned through keeping faith, through staying in touch, and through
continuing to be humbled by the privilege of governing a great country like Australia in
the interests. of all Australians.
Liberalism now has an opportunity, unparalleled for almost fifty years, to consolidate a
new coalition of support among the broad cross-section of the Australian people.
It will only prove enduring if Liberalism continues to relate its fimdamental values and
principles to the concerns and aspirations of the Australian mainstreamn, rather than the
narrower agendas of elites and special interests-
Fax from~ 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 12
12
That means building a genuinely shared sense of national purpose rather than an
amalgamation of special interests.
It means being flat stepping back from implementing the reforms that will make our
economy competitive with others into the future, that will generate jobs and investment
for Australia, and that will raise Australian living standards.
It means communicating clearly the rationale for change where change is necessary,
and ensuring that consequent reforms and burdens impact fairly on different sections of
the community.
It means not being a Government of economic dogma, but a Goverrnent of economic
common sense.
It means being concerned not only with economnic efficiency, but also with equity and
fairness as well.
It means seeking a more productive economy, a more responsible fiscal policy and
more effective markets not as ends in themselves or as articles of some rigid
ideological faith but as the practical means for achieving rising living standards,
expanding employment opportunities and an effective social safety net.
It means achieving a practical balance between the limits of government and the limits
of markets, between laissez-faire economics on the one side and a suffocating
centralism by government and bureaucracy on the other.
It means understanding accurately in which direction the forces of change are taking
the Australian economy towards smaller workplaces, towards more decentralised
work patterns, towards more independent sources of employment in a dynamic and
rapidly changing regional economy.
It means enhancing job-creating investment in the Australian economy as we are
doing through our Budget strategy of fiscal consolidation and enhanced
competitiveness which is providing the climate for lower interest rates, as well as
through our initiatives to make it easier to do business in Australia.
It means putting the interests of Australian f~ aies at the centre of national
policymnaking as we are through our family tax initiative, through our private health
insurance rebates, through our maintenance of the social security safety net, through
addressing the causes of family breakdowns, and through many other measures.
It means giving Australians more choice in the way they live and work more choice in
industrial relations, more choice to join or not to join a trade union, more choice in
education, more choice in child care, more choice in telecommnunications.
It means liberating and re-energising small businesses all around Australia as we are
through our industrial relations, taxation, paperwork and other initiatives that will give
them more incentives to expand, invest and create more jobs. 
Fax fromn 191/ 6 6: 5:: 1
13
it means strengthening the decentralised networks of famnilies, workplaces and
communities as far more effective guarantors of choice, freedom and opportunity than
centralised political and bureaucratic controls.
It means significantly expanding measures to protect Australia's unique environment
as we will through our historic one billion dollar Natural Heritage Trust of Australia
just as soon as the Senate passes the legislation on the one third privatisation of Teistra
which will provide the necessary funding.
It means achieving the flil potential of our rapidly developing partnerships with the
countries of the Asia-Pacific region at the same time as we continue to build on our
important and longstanding relationships with our traditional friends.
In meeting these challenges, Liberalism draws on a rich store of ideas and values. But
our clearest guiding principle will be to stay true to what we have always been a
political movement owned by no special interests, defending no special privileges and
accountable onily to the Australian people in meeting the responsibility to build a better
and fairer future for all of them. 19/ 11/ 96 09: 55 Pg: 13 



Fax from: MORE 28/ 11/ 96 17: 82 P97
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
( Canberra, Australia)
For Immediate Release November 20,-19-96
REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT,
PRIME MXIISTIR JOHN HOWARD
AND OPPOSITION LEADER KIM BSAZLEY
IN TOAST REMARKS
The Great Hall
The Parliament House
Canberra, Australia
1: 25 P. M. ( L PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: Mr. President; Mrs. Clinton;
Your Excellencies; the Leader of the opposition, Mr. Beasley, my
parliamentary colleagues; state premiers; ladies and gentlemen:
This Is, by any measure, a special occasion, we welcome the
President of the United States, a person recently reelected to
lead the most powerful nation in the world. we also welcome him
as the leader of a nation with which we have so much in common.
our relationship is a very deep and rich one. it's
a relationship that is forged on the basis of many common values,
many common elements of our history, our common service on the
battlefields of the world in defense of liberty and in defense of
freedom. We welcome him as a friend. He comes hero as the
leader of a nation with which we have shared so much in the past,
but with which we share so much in the future. one of the, I
think, great elements of the relationship between the United
states and Australia is that we are in the process of
transforming a relationship that was forged in early and more
difficult circumstances Into a new partnership in the Asia
Pacific region. We welcome both of you, Mr. President, as friends of
this country. We hope that you will enjoy your stay here. The
President of the United states is always welcome in Australia.
( Applause.) But as Dr. Johnson reminded us, we should always
keep our relationships in good repair and we should never take
close relationships for granted. We should always work on them,
nurture them and water them. And that is what today's visit and
today's events are all about.
We hope you have a delightful time. we hope you
have some time off, as well as some time for work. You are very,
very welcome, Mr. President and Mrs. Clinton. ( Applause.)
I would now invite the leader of the opposition, Mr.
Kim Beazley to support my remarks. ( Applause.)
MR. EEAZLEY: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime
Minister. Hr. President, Mrs. Clinton, Excellencies,
parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen: This is a
delightful occasion for all us here in this hall. I don't think
I've set it decked out better. And I think you'll find the
entertainment very much to your taste and I think you'll find
your time here in Australia about as enjoyable as you can fit
into four days, which is lunaticly short. ( Laughter.) I've got 
rax t ram 281/ 6178 g
to tell you that. But we'll do the very best for you we can
while you're here, all of us.
I am delighted, too, to see Mrs. Clinton hero, as
wall, after the enormous dedication and energy that she's shown
in assisting your administration and in the course of the last
election. ( Applause.) And I want to congratulate you on that election
victory. I always like to see a fellow win an election. It's a
it's a delight for those of us in opposition to think that
these things can occur from time to time. ( Laughter.) It was a
historic one, indeed.
Looking back, you are the only southern Democrat
since Appomattox to win a second term. Woodrow Wilson doesn't
count he won it from New Jersey. So you're the only southern
Democrat since Appomattox to win a second term as a President of
the United States. And I don't mention Appomattox in a
gratuitous fashion here at all. it was a defining moment for the
modern American nation the event which underwrote America's
role in the 20th century. That you reunited after that, that you
emerged with your morality intact meant that America could
exercise leadership of the democratic nations this century.
And America has been the bastion of democracy this
century, as you visited at the end of it. If you'd been visiting
us here in the middle, of course, you'd have been a bastion
looking around you seeing democracy in retreat everywhere. The
stand that the United States took for the entirety of this
century means that you visit here now and you look at democracy
as the norm as the system governing the nations around the
globe. And in those fights and struggles that you've had over
the years this century to preserve that, to keep decency alive in
international politics, it's been a matter of some pride for us
here in this nation that we have been there with you as well.
There's another reason why I want to mention
Appomattox and note and your status as the most successful
southern Democratic candidate for President since that period of
time. The way in which you reached out to all Americans of all
ethnic, racial, cultural and religious backgrounds, and included
them in your vision of the United States is an inspiration to all
of us. ( Applause.) In the days when I was Defense Minister, it was
fashionable to say that the United States was in decline, What
an extraordinary change over the course of the last decade. The
way in which the global economy works from this point on, the
needs and security of the nations of the economy mean, if
anything, America's role has got larger over the last decade and
the opportunity greater.
AS the new international economy emerges, based on,
essentially, information technology and telecommunications, once
again there's United States companies, United states initiatives
leading the way. And I don't think there's been any President of
the United States who comprehends that better than you.
So I'm looking forward to learning a great deal from
you during the course of this visit. I think that you've got
quite a story to tell in this country. But don't tell it for tkoo
long. Get out on the beaches. Get out on the golf courses. Get
out snorkeling and have a terrific time here. ( Applause.)
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: Thank you, Mr. 8eazley. I
now invite the President to respond. ( Applause.)
THE PRBSIPSNT: Thank you very much. Prime minister
and Mrs. Howard, Hr. speaker and Mrs. Halverson, Madame
President, nr. Reid, Mr. Beazley, Mts. Annus, Ambassador McCarthy:
Let me say that Hillary and I and all of us in our delegation
MORE 20/ 11/ 96 17: 02 Pg: a 
Fax from 281/ 9 782P
have very much looked forward to coming here. so far, our
experiences have even exceeded our bopes. WA have loved every
minute of it. I love the crowds welcoming us in last night. I
think I like Mr. Beazley reminding me that I'm the first southern
Democrat since Appomattox to be elected twice. But I'll have to
wait until I get home to see how that plays at home. ( Laughter.)
We're grateful to be here in Canberra, where there
is clearly a touch of America in the planning of Walter Burley
Griffin, who came from Hillary's home state of Illinois. we feel
very much that we are at home and among friends.
This morning I had a good meeting with the Prime
Minister. I was honored to meet your Cabinet. I was honored to
reaffirm our remarkable security relationship, to review our
common efforts to reduce the danger of weapons of mass
destruction, an effort in which Australian leadership has been so
vital. We're working to provide peace and stability in the
Asia Pacific region together. And together we're going to make a
big difference in building the prosperity of tomorrow, increasing
the ties of trade and investment not only between our two
nations, but throughout the area.
The scope and depth of our cooperation for a long
time now is truly extraordinary, but not surprising. it is the
hallmark of a relationship between two democracies that has grown
through struggles of five wars and a whole century's hard labors
of peace. Half a world of oceans separates us, but the currents
of friendship and commerce and culture flow constantly between
our shores and they are more binding than the land bridges that
connected the continents eons ago.
we have always looked to Australia with groat hope,
with great trust, with great admiration. we see those
expectations from what may be the very first official United
States act dealing with Australia. In 1179, Benjamin Franklin
issued an unusual passport for Captain Cook who was then
returning from one of his explorations here in the South Pacific.
That was, of course,-during our war of independence. And
Franklin sent special orders to the commanders of all American
ships not to attack the ships of the British captain, but to
treat him and his crew with all civility and kindness. He wrote
that Cook's explorations would facilitate communication between
distant nations to the benefit of mankind in general.
Franklin was a prophet. From our common struggle in
five wars, to the trade we have created, to our shared efforts to
reduce the nuclear threat, the bonds between our distant nations
have indeed been an immense benefit not only to ourselves, but to
mankind in general. The United States is profoundly grateful for
thin relationship, for the affection and the warmth that has
grown between our citizens.
For many reasons our ties have grown. One of the
most important is that we see in each other qualities that we
prize and hops for in ourselves. We admire in each other the
pioneering spirit that our forbears brought to the tasks of
pushing back the frontiers and building nations.
AS We Move into a new century, we face new and very
different frontiers. we are called upon not to homestead In the
wilderness, but to build for the security and the prosperity of a
new era, to deal with the challenges of this new explosion in the
global economy and information technology in the diversity within
all of our own societies. But we still need that frontier
spirit, we still need to believe that with courage and vision
and daring and a firm adherence to our shared and unshakable
values, we can make the future better than the present and leave
a world worthy of our children and our heritage.
MORE 20/ 11/ 96 17: 02 Pg: 9 
Fax from : 28/ 11/ 96 17: 82 Pg: 18
I want all of you to know how very much we Americans
like and admire and value Australia and her people. We want the
21st century to be a large partnership between ourselves for the
betterment of all of humankind. I believe that we are entering
the era of greatest possibility in human history. I believe
there will be more people able to live out their dreams than any
time in all of human existence if the values, the record, the
partnership we have established can chart the way to the future
we long to build. And I promise you that we, in the United States,
will do our best to be worthy of our friendship and that kind of
future. Thank you very much. ( Laughter.)
END 1: 39 P. M. ( L 



Fax from PRIME MINJISTER
21 November 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD, WP
ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE WITH PRESIDENT CLINTON
LADY MACQUARIE'S CHAIR SYDNEY
E&amp; OE
Mr President, Mrs Clinton, Mr Bob Carr, Mrs Helena Carr, the Lord Mayor of
Sydney, Councillor Frank Sartor, and many other distinguished guests, Andrew Hoy
the great Captain of the greatest ever Olympic team Australia has yet seen, ladies and
gentlemen. It's a tremendous delight to welcome you Mr President to the oldest, the
most fantastic, the most colourful and certainly the most diverse city in Australia.
Sydney represents so much of the success of the Australian dream. Sydney is
connected with the early beginnings of the penal settlement in New South Wales.
Sydney has grown to be the largest commercial centre in Australia. Sydney has
witnessed the great transformation of the make-up of the Australian community,
particularly since World War LI. And as you look around you Mr President, you will
see the diversity of the Australian community. You will see the old, you will see the
middle aged, you will see the young. You will be reminded of the historical links
between this part of our nation and the earliest beginnings of politics and everything
else that European settlement brought to Australia. You will be reminded of the links
between modem Australia and the indigenous people of Australia. You Will be
reminded of the great waves of migration that have changed for the better the face of
Australia. After World War 1I thousands of people carue to Sydney and settled from countries
like Italy and Greece and more recently the vibrancy of Sydney has been enriched by
the settlement in our city of tens of thousands of new citizens from Asia and those
people have given a particular vitality and a particular lustre. They provide an
extremely valuable link to the region whose future we together are so bound up with
and that is the Asia Pacific Region. The history of our two countries is a very proud
one. The Philadelphia was the first trading vessel to come to Australia in 1792. The
Premier has already spoken of the visit of the great white fleet in 1908. It was at a
little French village in LeHamel on the western front in 1918 that for the first time in
history Australian and American soldiers fought together under the command of the
great Australian Field General of World War 1, Sir John Monash. karo m21/ 11/ 96 17: 44 Pg 1 
jax rop~ 21/ 11/ 96 17: 44 Pg: 2
In more recent times the commercial investment of American entrepreneurs in Sydney
and in Australia has played a very major role in our economic development. This city
and this nation of ours now hosts the regional headquarters of many large American
companies. And together all of us are working towards that great event in September
of the Year 2000. Mr President, if you do choose to return I shall be delighted to
welcome you again as Prime Mnister of this country. And it is great to have an
American leader with us. As I said in the Parliament yesterday the President of the
United States is always welcome in Australia and always will be welcome in Australia.
He brings with him a reminder of all that we have in common and the most important
thing that we have in common is not bricks and mortar or dollar investments, but the
most important thing that we have in common is a shared sense of values, a shared
belief system, a shared commnitment to the liberty of the individual and a shared
optimism and hope about the future of mankind. Ladies and gentlemen, I give you the
President of the United States of America.
ends 



23 NOVEMBER 1996 ADDRESS BY THE PRI M MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MIP
TO THE AUSTRALIAIMEW ZEALAND
CHAMER OF COMMERCE F UNCTION
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Nr Kupa, Mr Wallis, Tim Fischer, the Deputy Prime Minister of
Australia, Alexander Downer, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm delighted to be back in the Philippines, I haven't been here for seven or eight
years. I'm particularly delighted to be here at the meeting of the leaders of the APEC
Forum, Mr Wallis spoke about the links between Australia and the nations of the Asia-Pacific
region. I've just come from a meeting with the President of Korea, I've not met him
before. Korea is Australia's second best export market after Japan. In the course of
my exchange with him I reflected upon the fact that within my own electorate of
Bennelong in Sydney there's a suburb called Eastwood that has within it a very
sizeable and vibrant and very successful Korean business community. And that
reflection in the discussion that I had with the Korean President can be mirrored in
bilateral discussions that one has all around the region and it is a remi nder, as
Mr Wallis said, of the for all time association of Australia with the Asia-Pacific region.
The genius of the APEC arrangement is that it brings together such a diverse group of
nations that have a number of things in common and what they have in conunon is of
course a fink to the Asia-Pacific region. They also have in common a commitment to
trade liberalisation. Trade liberalisation is easily stated, easily aspired to, not always
easily achieved.
lIn democracies trade liberalisation involves bringing domestic constituencies along
with the decisions taken by government. Trade liberalisation involves the process of
persuading one section of the community that change which may have a short-term
negative impact on that section of the community is needed in the longer term interests
of the nation as a whole. And the process of trade liberalisation must go on and the
goals that can be achieved if the APEC ideal of trade liberalisation in relation to the
developed countries by the year 2010 and the developing countries by the year 2020, if 
that ideal can be achieved then this generation of political leaders in the region. this
generation of men and women in business in the region will have made a very great
contribution to the living standards and the prosperity of the nations of the region.
I want especially to thank the Vice-President of the Philippines who was here early this
evening. I want to join Mr Wallis in paying tribute to President Ramos for the
democratic leadership that he has given to this country, the way in which the
institutions and the economy of the Philippines have been strengthened under his
leadership, He is a good friend to Australia, he has close family links in Australia. We
received him as a visitor to our country only last year and I do enjoy very much the
opportunity of being a recipient of his hospitality.
I want to thank the companies that are investing in the Philippines. I want to thank the
personnel associated with those companies for the job they are doing, not only for their
own companies but also the job they are doing in a sense as ambassadors of Australia
to this part of the world.
I'd also like to take the opportunity of thanking people associated with the Australian
mission in Manila, with the activities of AusAID and there are a number of
representatives of the mission, apart from the Ambassador and representatives of
AusAfl) who axe here. Because Australia's association with the Philippines with the
APEC region is a diverse one it is not just a question of facilitating the flows of trade
and investment it is also a question of building the people, the people links. Of
intelligently applying our aid, of encouraging the flows of people.
Earlier this afternoon I saw the Prime Minister of Malaysia and we reflected upon the
fact that something like a 130,000 Malaysians were educated in Australia. It's an
association that's very important in buttressing the bilateral relationships between our
two countries and that particular link is something that we regard in Australia as being
very important. One could go on all evening in talking about the diversity and the
complexity of the relationship that does exist between Australia and the region.
We have just had the opportunity in Australia of hosting a visit from the President of
the United States, IS&amp; Clinton. And both of us in our public comments talked about
the importance of the future together we share in this part of the world and it is a
fuiture to which my government is very strongly committed. It's a fulture which I
believe Australia can make a very positive contribution towards. It is a future which
has as its goal an ideal of peace, an ideal higher of living standards and idea of a free
flow between the peoples of the various nations of the region and also an ideal of
mutual respect of recognising that one of the great strengths of the APEC association
as indeed one of the great strengths of the Australian nation is the cultural diversity
that we have. The fact that there are so many people in Australian who were born in
the region is one of the things that makes it better and easier for us to relate to the
region. So ladies and gentlemen can I say again how delighted I am to be here tonight. I wish
all of you the very best of good corporate fortune. I thank the Chamber and the other
organisations for having me here tonight. 
I celebrate the fact that it is very much an Australian week here at the Hotel and the
very pleasant drop of white that I was savouring a moment ago, and to which I &amp; m.
anxious to return is a nice reminder of the distinctive capacities that Australia in the
area of food and wine brings to the region. I mean there is nothing quite like a
reminder of the quality of the food arnd wine that our nation produces.
It's an enormous privilege can I finally say to travel through this region as the Prime
Minister of Australia because I travel as the leader of a nation that has a very rich
history of involvement in the region, a nation that is whole-hearted about its
association with the people and the countries of the region and also a nation which is
very proud of its own traditions, its own distinctive character. And I think the essence
of any mutual association between nations as is the essence of any mutual association
between people is an acceptance of the things that we have in common and also a
recognition that from time to time we may be different and we may disagree on things.
But if good will exi* sts in the long term our association can be a very strong and a very
deep one.
Ladies and gentlemen thank you very much, it's a great pleasure to be here and I wish
you all well. Thank you. 



ovember 1996
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT THE OPENING OF THE R. G. CASEY BUILDING
BARTON, CANBERRA
E&amp; EO
Thank you very much Alexander; to my other Ministerial colleagues; to Gareth Evans,
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, and most particularly to three former Prime
Ministers Sir John Gorton, Mr Gough Whitlam and Mr Malcolm Fraser. And as I look
around the room I really am reminded that gathered here today are people who, either
themselves or through their direct family connections, were influential in or shaped the
Foreign Affairs and Trade policies of Australia over a very long period of time. As well
as, of course, acknowledging the presence of the late Dr Evatt's daughter and the grand
daughter of the late Lord Casey. I also, of course, acknowledge the presence of the
daughter of Australia's longest serving Prime Minister, Mrs Heather Henderson, and her
husband, Mr Peter Henderson, himself a former Secretary of the Department of Foreign
Affairs. I really am delighted to be here today to open this magnificent building, to say a few
words about the legacy of Richard Casey to the conduct of Australian foreign policy and
also a few things about the contemporary viewpoint of foreign policy.
You might ask why it is that this building should be named after Richard Gardiner Lord
Casey. One reason the obvious one already stated by the Foreign Minister was that he
was our longest-serving foreign minister, serving in that capacity for nine years under the
prime ministership of Robert Menzies from April 1951 to January 1960.
While that record length of service by itself makes Casey a very appropriate choice, there
are other compelling reasons. Casey's nine years as foreign minister were only one
highlight of a remarkably varied and distinguished public life which spanned almost half a
century. As well as other ministerial appointments in the Lyons and Menzies governments, Casey
served as Australia's first political liaison officer in London from 1924 to 193 1.
Although he was not officially described as such, he was Australia's first ambassador in
Washington in the second world war years, from 1940 to 1942. He was minister of state 
for the Middle East in the British war cabinet from 1943 to 1944, followed by two years
as Governor of Bengal. His public life culminated when he was appointed Governor-
General of Australia in 1965, and if my political memory serves me correctly, he was
defeated I don't know how narrowly by the then R G Menzies for leadership of the
United Australia Party after the death of Lyons in the late 1930Os.
Casey's public career was marked not just by its length and diversity. It was a career
distinguished by the personal qualities and values including a deep integrity, honour and
abiding respect for others with which Casey lived out his public duties, and by which he
lived through the eighty-six years of his life.
Walter Crocker captured well the essence of Casey when he wrote of him: ' He was not
an ideologist of any hue or shape. His loyalty was to the truth and to good government'.
In the past, some people questioned his Australianness. What a furphy. He gave
unstinting commitment to Australia, from the time he joined the Australian Imperial
Force in 1914, including his service on Gallipoli and later on the Western front.
Much of his life was spent living or travelling abroad. He had an enormous range of
personal contacts friends, colleagues, acquaintances in Britain, the United States,
Europe and Asia. He did feel a special affinity with Britain. But for all his overseas
experiences and connections, Casey's home was Australia. He remained an Australian at
heart wherever he was.
So it's very fitting to name this building after such an eminent and honourable Australian.
And it also happens to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of his death.
The naming of the building also reminds us that both sides of politics have made major
contributions over the years to Australia's international achievements. Apart from Casey
himself, the contributions of Dr Evatt, Sir John McEwen, Doug Anthony, who I noticed
has arrived and is sitting down at the rear of the hall, and Gareth Evans who all served
as Ministers for Trade or Foreign Affairs for over seven years are all recognised
appropriately by having areas of the building or its surroundings named after them.
We are reminded by the presence of so many former Prime Ministers here today of the
role played in shaping Australia's foreign relations by both sides of Australian politics. It
was under Malcolm Fraser's government, for example, of which I was a member, that
Australia welcomed more Indo-Chinese refugees per capita than any other nation in the
world. As Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam opened up our modern relationship with
China. A relationship to be built upon in different ways by successive Prime Ministers
from both sides of the political fence, and a relationship which remains as important, if
not more important, to Australia today than it was in the early 1970s. John Gorton was
responsible on the Australian side for the Five Power Defence Arrangements which
remain an important element in the security of Malaysia and Singapore.
It is fitting, given the occupant of the building, that Casey's preoccupations and legacy as
Foreign Minister mesh so well, today and into the future, with the pursuit of Australia's
national interests through our foreign and trade policies. 
While Casey's term as Foreign Minister was marked by many achievements, two have
particular resonance in laying the groundwork for Australia's strong engagement today in
the Asia-Pacific region.
The first was his leadership, to which Alexander has already referred, in building links
with Asian nations.
On Casey's retirement as minister for external affairs, the then Prime Minister, Sir
Robert Menzies, said in tribute that Casey had ' done more than any other man to
cultivate friendship with our Asian neighbours, and to improve the mutual understanding
which is the true foundation of peace'.
From the outset, Casey was in no doubt, as he remarked in an August 1951 entry in his
voluminous diaries that, and I quote:-' South-east Asia is of the greatest importance to
Australia'. That conviction was expressed in his energetic and productive pursuit of
closer relations with the countries he called Australia's ' friends and neighbours'.
Casey's statements during his visit to Japan in 1951 were seen then and since to have
marked the first real movement from enmity to close cooperation between Australia and
Japan after the end of World War II. He foresaw the importance of bringing China into
the international community.
Casey's was a practical approach. He established and widened his personal contacts with
regional leaders. He expanded Australia's diplomatic representation in the Asia region.
He promoted the humanitarian and strategic value of technical and other assistance
through the Colombo Plan. He played a vital role in negotiating the SEATO treaty.
He took issue very strongly with the White Australia policy. He saw the White Australia
policy, and the way in which it was implemented, as an unnecessary and offensive barrier
to Australia's relations with our neighbours. He worked against it in a quiet but
persistent way, helping to prepare the ground for its eventual abolition.
At the end of his term, Casey was able to reflect, with justified satisfaction, that
' Australia was accepted in South-east Asia as a country with a significant interest in the
region, seeking relations of good will and cooperation and prepared to make a tangible
contribution to the management of the region's problems'.
In a speech marking Casey's death, Gough Whitlam then leader of the Opposition said
that Casey was one of the first Australian statesmen to recognise the importance of Asia
to Australia. He said that Casey, and I quote:-' had a regard, almost a love, for Asians
which was free of sentimentality and rooted in a knowledge of their history and the
diverse cultures of the region'.
It is on the foundation established by him that we continue to build our engagement with
our neighbours and make our strong contribution to the Asia-Pacific region today.
His second achievement of enduring importance was the deepening of Australia's
relations with the United States. 
He was convinced that the United States with its economic, military and technological
capabilities would be crucial to our security in that he knew would be the vastly
changed strategic circumstances in post World War 11 specific affairs.
The ANZUS treaty was negotiated and concluded in 1951 by Percy Spender. Casey
cemented the alliance, and took it forward as an active reality. He was convinced not
only of its political and strategic worth to Australia, but also of its importance to the
security of the region
In developing our relations with the nations of Asia and reinforcing the alliance with the
United States, Casey did not lose sight of the continuing value to Australia of traditional
associations with the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe. His approach to
Australia's foreign relations was a comprehensive and interconnected exercise. He saw
the scope for Australia's relationships with individual countries to reinforce and benefit
each other and to achieve Australia's regional and international goals.
I respected Casey, as a person and a politician, for his role in helping lead Australia to
make its way in and adapt to a changing world. Having so recently welcomed President
Clinton to Australia and participated in the APEC leaders' meeting in Manila, I am even
more struck by the foresight of Casey and his legacy.
I am sure that Casey would have taken great pleasure in the President's visit. That visit
was an emphatic and unambiguous demonstration of the continuing vitality of the
partnership between Australia and the United States. The welcome which both President
Clinton and his wife were given by the Australian people said as much as any words
about the closeness and warmth of the ties between our two countries.
But the message of that visit and the earlier steps my government took to reinvigorate
the alliance at the time of the AUSMI N talks in July was not just about the importance
of our bilateral relationship and the strength of its historical and cultural roots. The
message both to the Australian and the American people and to the people of the region
was also of the contemporary relevance of our partnership, including the ANZUS
alliance, in pursuing the shared future of Australia and the United States in the Asia-
Pacific region.
Of course, it is only to be expected that we will have different perspectives from the
United States from time to time. Each of us has our own specific national circumstances
and interests. But Australia and the United States have both over-riding common
interests at stake economic, political and strategic in working together and with other
regional countries to ensure stability and continued economic growth in the Asia Pacific.
Our relationship with the United States is naturally complementary with the closeness of
our relationships with the other members of the Asia-Pacific community.
Along with our links with the United States, those relationships with Japan, Indonesia,
China, and Korea, to name just a few individually and collectively form the building
blocks of Australia's engagement in the region. 
During my visits in September to Indonesia and Japan, I reinforced the new
Government's commitment to strengthening Australia's cooperation with these two of
our most important partners.
China's success in fulfilling its potential is important to Australia, as it is to the rest of the
region. At my meeting with President Jiang Zemin in Manila, I told him that I was committed to
developing further the fundamentally sound relationship between Australian and China a
commitment that I'm happy to say was reciprocated by the President. I look forward to
giving further practical demonstration of that commitment when I visit China in the first
half of next year.
A China fully involved in the economic and political affairs of the Asia-Pacific region
would be a force for stability in our region, as well as a proper expression of the huge
potential of the region's most populous nation.
I met also for the first time President Kim Young Sam. I also assured him of the priority
my Government gave to our relationship with Korea which Australia's second largest
export market and a very important political partner. That relationship is expanding
dramatically and gaining a wider base as our people-to-people links strengthen through
education and tourism.
We'll continue to work at strengthening all of our regional relationships. Each country in
Asia has its own dynamics, its own characteristics, and its own importance and its own
separate national characteristics.
I am confident especially after my visits to Indonesia and Japan, the meetings in Manila
with other regional leaders and my discussions with the United States President that
Australia's contribution to the region is both recognised, wanted and valued.
Our engagement with the region is as strong as it is not only because our interests require
it, but because our regional partners also have an interest in our active participation.
Under the Coalition Australia will be an energetic and unreserved contributor to the
region, not only by strengthening our close partnerships with other nations in the region,
but also through practical support for regional prosperity and stability.
Australia has so much to offer in our people, our distinct national identity, our natural
resources, our skills, our technological innovativeness and our political and social
stability. The people from Asia who have settled in Australia have come here because of the sort
of country we are. They are welcome because of the qualities with which they enrich our
society, our economy and our culture. And they are an especially valued link with our
neighbours in the region. 
We do not need, as a nation, need to turn ourselves into something we are not in order to
be confident of our place in the region. We do not have to pass tests set by others any
more than we should be setting tests for others to pass.
But we do have to measure ourselves against the region in some important respects if we
are to achieve the prosperity we seek. We cannot, for example, expect to benefit simply
because we live cheek by jowl with the major source of the world's economic growth.
We have to be competitive enough to profit from it.
The one thing we can say with certainty about the future is that the regional and global
environment will continue to change rapidly. Looking back over his years as Foreign
Minister, Casey himself remarked on ' the speed with which human affairs can change'.
At the APEC leaders meeting I described globalisation as perhaps the most potent
economic force in the world today. An economic revolution has been wrought by free
movement of capital and the rapid pace and spread of technological change.
We talk a lot about the impact of globalisation on sovereignty because of the pressures
that a global economy puts on the policy-making of individual national governments.
While outside influences impinge more and more on domestic issues, it is likewise true
that practically no domestic policy act in any country is without some repercussion
elsewhere. And our domestic policy positions have a direct bearing on the effectiveness
with which we can pursue our interests abroad.
We cannot today afford to put our domestic and foreign policies into separate and
unconnected compartments. Australia's success in improving her competitiveness, its
market share, its influence and standing in the region and wider world will depend in
large part on the government's success in implementing its economic reform programme.
Equally, foreign and trade policies are a significant element in determining how
successful we shall be in meeting the government's domestic economic objectives.
In Manila, I was very struck by the commitment of APEC leaders to maintaining the
momentum of trade liberalisation and the need for that as a key ingredient for the future
growth and stability of the region.
My government will do all it can to keep up that momentum. We want to see the free
and open trade goal of APEC turned into reality, and even better with a knock-on
effect to freer trade globally.
As I have said before, this is not because of any conceptual ambition or blind ideological
commitment. It is because, for example, my government wants to see our agricultural
exports treated more equitably so that our farm sector is not discriminated against.
International trading rules at present allow practices that would not be allowed in respect
of manufactures to operate to the detriment of primary producing exporting nations. 
Most important, it is because my government sees the dividends the Australian people
can gain in the form of faster economic growth, greater opportunities and more jobs for
our younger people especially.
We need to ensure that markets are open so that we can increase our exports and the
employment within Australia that those increased exports generate. For example,
exports of medical and scientific equipment have more than doubled from $ 300 million in
1987 to $ 750 million today, creating many hundreds of highly skilled and well-paid jobs.
Under our recently concluded trade agreement with Taiwan, exports of Australian-built
cars will increase from zero at present to 6,000 by the time that Taiwan joins the World
Trade Organisation. This has helped create many new jobs at Mitsubishi's Tonsley Park
plant in South Australia.
Moreover, jobs in export industries are characterised by higher productivity and,
therefore, higher wages. For instance, among small firms the wage differential is as high
as 17 per cent.
In the case of Foreign Affairs and Trade, ladies and gentlemen, there is, as there should
be, a fundamental continuity between my Government's objectives and those of my
predecessors' especially in the priority we give to our region and APEC.
There are, however, differences of emphasis, some of which I have already alluded to in
this speech.
You will be well aware of the Government's strongly held view that when it comes to
foreign policy there is no requirement on Australia to choose between its history and its
geography. While we have to decide priorities in terms of allocation of resources and effort, we do
not have to regard our links with countries in Asia and elsewhere as a zero-sum. While
multilateral institutions play an important part especially in dealing with issues such as
proliferation and trade we see success in achieving our objectives in them as likely to be
founded on strong and well-matured relationships with our allies and friends. While
committed to global free trade in the overall national interest, we are looking for practical
results at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels that will yield early concrete
benefits for our own business community.
One of the election promises made by the Government was to commission the first ever
white paper on Foreign Affairs and Trade policy. That process is underway and, on the
current timetable, the paper will be issued in March of next year. I expect the white
paper to take a hard-headed approach and suggest clear strategies for pursuing
Australia's national interests and achieving the Government's agenda.
Finally may I say something rather more specific about the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade and those who work within that Department.
Much of the responsibility for protecting and advancing our national interests rests with
the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, with its officers here in the R G Casey
Building and in Australia's many overseas missions. 
Coalition governments have always had a strong sense of the benefits of a highly
professional and apolitical public service. My Government will be no exception.
Inevitably a change of government after thirteen years will prompt some uncertainties in
the public service. Public service and governments naturally get used to each other over
such a long period, if not in the policy sense then at least in human and operational terms.
I want to take the opportunity to say that my government looks to all of the public
service, including, of course, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, for fearless,
objective advice. It also looks for creative and innovative advice in implementing its
goals. As society's demands change and a new government takes office with a different agenda,
the public sector does need to adapt. The Government is working on reforms that aim to
increase the public service's capacity to serve the Government and Australian public
effectively, and the scope of the service's members to achieve greater satisfaction from
their work.
Jibes are often made about public servants. But my own experience has been one of
dedicated and well-qualified people with a strong sense of national responsibility,
integrity and commitment to their work. I have great respect for the quality of the
Australian public service. The international reputation of Australia's public service and
its foreign service is deservedly very high.
The history of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is very much part of Casey's
history. His connections with the Department and the various stages of its evolution go
back a long way.
When he went to London in the twenties, he did so as an official of the then External
Affairs Branch of the Prime Minister's Department. As a new member of Parliament in
the early thirties, Casey advocated a diplomatic service for Australia separate from
Britain's. As a member of that newly-established service, he was the first Australian
representative in Washington. As Minister he supported the development of a
professional and highly qualified department, which served him and Australia with great
distinction. If he were here with us today, Casey might well be surprised I'm sure he would by the
size of this building, and by the size of the department which it houses. The
Department's expansion since Casey's time is partly owing to the amalgamation of the
separate Departments of Foreign Affairs and Trade in 1987 a very sensible move in
recognition of the linkages between those areas and their effective implementation. The
planned co-location of AUSTRADE in this building is to welcomed for similar reasons.
The expansion reflects also the reality that, despite the tyranny of distance, Australia has
never been isolationist and inward looking. We have always understood that our survival
and prosperity depended on the world around us. As Prime Minister, Malcolm Fraser
commented on Casey's appreciation of the effect on Australia of events in other parts of
the world. And our history as a nation built by immigrants from all over the world has
reinforced that good sense. 
The Department has had to continue evolving and adapting since Casey's time. The
implosion of the Soviet Union and the collapse of communism by far the most profound
example of the triumph of values and ideas in my life time have precipitated a
transformation of cold-war structures and strategic balances which is still being worked
through. The explosive growth of the Asian economies has brought about a second great sea
change in world affairs. World economic structures are only beginning to adjust to the
changes in economic relativities. Our region must cope with the consequent strategic
changes over the coming decades.
Now more than ever Australia has to be an outward-looking nation, confident and proud
of our own distinctive identity, our place in the region and in the world, and properly
equipped to pursue our national interests at home and abroad.
It is sometimes said that advances in information technology and communication and
the ease and speed of transport are reducing the importance of the role of foreign affairs
and trade officials. There is no doubt that technology and transport have changed
enormously the way in which our foreign service operates.
But my visits overseas this year, to the South Pacific Forum, to Indonesia and Japan, to
Manila for the APEC meeting, have made me keenly aware of the crucial role of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in conveying in a way that is listened to and
acted on the right messages about Australia and the Australian Government's objectives
and policies.
In his 1958 book ' Friends and Neighbours', Casey referred to the qualities required of
diplomats then, the need to know and I quote: ' their own country, its interests and
strengths and weaknesses', to be ' well-acquainted with matters of defence and of trade'
as well as international politics, and to be practised in what Casey called the ' relatively
new art' of conference diplomacy and to deal with the media.
Today, Australia's international agenda is even broader and more intense than it was in
Casey's time. But the basic qualities identified by him are still demanded of our
diplomats today. My own experience of their professionalism and skills convinces me
that Casey would agree that Australia continues to be very well served by them.
In declaring this building, which I do so with very considerable pride, I want to thank Mr
Flood and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade for inviting me to undertake that
honour. I wish all the officers of the Department a happy and purposeftil working
environment. I want to reiterate the enormous value that my Government places on your
professionalism, the spread of your understanding of the friends of neighbours we have
all around the world. And to emphasise again as I finish that sound, competent,
professional, high quality advice in the area of Foreign Affairs and Trade remains as
essential as it has ever been for Australia and in a new and constantly changing world,
perhaps even greater than it has ever been.
Thank you very much. 



Fax from PRIME MINISTER
I December 1996* TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISER
THE HON JOHN H~ OWARD MEP
ADDRESS AT WA COALITION POLICY LAUNCH
IS MAJESTY'S THEATRE PERTH
Thank you very much klcndy Cowan, to Dr David Honey, the President of fte
Wester Aushralian division of the Liberal Party; Dexter Davies, the President of
the Westcrii Australian National Party-, my umny parlipmeatary colleagues both
Fedcral, and State; ladies and gentemen.
I am both haWp and proud to be here al the launch of the campaign to re-lect
Richard Court as Prmmer of Western Austraa He deserves, and his Governaet
demeres re-election for many reasons, not least of which has been the progressive
but reqxxisible leadership and vision that he has dwsatdsince has clection
onl a few yew ago.
t~ evyone kniows the extramordin ary ms thMt-a h= e-, i nheri-itd. I notice my coutr
in the Federal Parliawast said this moining on television that in Western Anshraia
Labor carries a few burdens. It's a bit lke saying Christopher Skase pinched a few
bob, or Shane. Wa= n plays a bit of cickct. Labo certainly does cary nmy
burdens'in Wester Ausbralia, but more important than the burdens that Labor
Faoxm0 1/ 12/ 96 15: 36 Pg: 1 
lax from 81/ 12/ 96 15: 36 Pg: 2
curies in Wegten Australia were the burdens that were left behind by the retreatn
LAbor ( kwemment when Richard and Hendy took over.
And the last few years have see prgessive, intelligent, vigorous Government
here in Wcstarn Amftrgaia. It is without doubt the strongest growing Stale in
Australia. It has a youth unemploymeat rat of 20% compared with a national
average of 27% or 29%. It has an un= mnloynwnt rate which is well below Ihe
national averge. It has an ocornoiic growth r= t which is well above the n~ ioWa
average. Theme figures are not accidenta. They wre the result of vwa has been
achieved over the lasn few years. They are the result of a group of mmn and women
1h, rz a diffiult job and finding the courage and vision and thie energy to tackle
Itatzremly difficult task.
Your budt here in Western Australia is now strongly in suplus. You have
resored standards of honesty and aountability in Government You are for the
first time blazing the trail in opening the books so that no more can we have thewe
ridiculous options tha have occurred in the past at election time, both at a State
and Federal level, and I warmaly commend the Wester Australian Coalition
Goverrnent for having done that
But you have Veryitaty through a united Coalition broiagh togedthej
forces of free eterprise and market forces and private prperty in this State. The
coalition between the Libeal Party and the National Party in West= r Australia has
been a % meat success and it proves once again the tUth of the proposition in
Australian politics that when the Liber-al and National parties work together they
win together and that baa been true nationally, it has been true in other States and it
has been, demnstrated-here in Western AUstala.
And finally mnay I say tha you have in Richard Court as your Premier somebody
who is a great fighter for the inerests of Wistern Australia. Whatevez our unity
may be' across the nation as fellow Liberals, when it comes to the intereMt of
Western, Austraia there is no peron anywhere in the country who fights harder for
the particular interests and rails against the particular disabilities that Western
Ajiustzaliaam Sometimes sufer.
Nowy it -As against. -that. background . of. cleaning up the mess, a vimionary
Govarmnt of unitod Coalition purpose and also very effective co-operation with
us at a federal level that I am absolutely delighted to be heme and most particularly
invite you to welcome Richard Court and his wife, Jo.
ends 



2 December 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT 1996 NATIONAL AWARDS FOR RETAIL EXCELLENCE
THE REGENT HOTEL, SYDNEY
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Frank Lowy and to your wife Shirley, and to everyone else.
Janette and I are really delighted to be here tonight.
I feel very privileged to share a platform with Kieren Perkins. I guess along with
millions of other Australians, I held my breath that Saturday morning in July. And his
magnificent win that morning, along with Susie O'Neill, seemed to turn the whole
thing around. And it was a magnificent demonstration of the thing that makes all of us
the proudest people imaginable and that is Australian determination and Australian
success and Australian quality and Australian excellence. That's what tonight is all
about. It is about honouring the excellence and the achievements of men and women
in the retail industry.
Can I say at the beginning of my remarks to you Frank Lowy; you are a great
Australian. You're a person who has demonstrated an extraordinary flair and capacity
in business; you're philanthropic; you're a person who gives a lot back to the
community and you are, in many respects, the personification of the story of post
world war to Australia, a nation that receives millions of people from around the
world. Yourself comning originally from Europe, from very sad and unhappy
circumstances, building a new life in this country, pouring so much into it and
becoming so much a part of Sydney and so much a part of Australia. And I'd like to
say what a pleasure it is for Janette and I to be your guests and Shirley's guests here
tonight. Tonight is about remarking on and honouring excellence and achievement. And it is
appropriate that one of the greatest sportsman Australia has produced should be the
first speaker tonight. And excellence is something that ought to run firmly through all
aspects of Australian life. Achievement on the sporting field or in the swimming pool
is something that Australians have always honoured with enormous enthusiasm, they 
always will and so they should. But excellence in the school room, excellence at
university, excellence in a profession, excellence in business, excellence on the
shopfloor, excellence at the retail level, is also something that we should unhesitatingly
honour. And particularly those people who commit themselves in the small and
medium size business sector.
Many of you know I do have something of a passion for small business. One of the
reasons, I guess, is that I grew up in a small business environment. My father had a
small garage they used to call them, or service station at Dulwich Hill, an inner
suburb of Sydney. And I was taught as a young bloke that the most important thing
you could do in life was to start with nothing and work your heart out and hopefully
pass on a bit more to your children than you yourself have. It was a pretty good ideal
and it's a very important ideal for Australia in the 1990s.
I know that retailing is about the most competitive thing anybody can be in at the
present time. I know it's tough. I know there's a lot of cut-throat competition. It's
always been an unprotected industry. You've never had any government handouts.
You've never had any protection. You've always been on your own and without much
sympathy if you fell over.
And I know that retailing patterns and consumer habits have changed. I often say to
people that the last recession in Australia left Australia's consumers permanently
hardened in favour of driving tough bargains. And I think we as a community changed
a lot in that last recession. But we've always had amongst our national characteristic a
tremendous capacity to innovate and to change and to adapt to new circumstances.
One of the stunning things about Australians is their willingness to embrace new ideas
and new technology. We are, as many of the people in one section of retailing,. will tell
you, as a society we probably veraciously devour new technology, new gadgets and so
forth, more rapidly than any other country in the world. The way in which Australians
have taken the mobile telephone to their heart, or should I say to their ears, so
enthusiastically is a very good demonstration of that.
And I want to say to all of the retailers of Australia, and particularly those of you who
operate on a small scale, I want to say that my Government will do everything it can to
create good circumstances to make retailing strong and prosperous. We want to have
and preserve the low inflation that we have at the present time. A high dollar is a pain
in the neck for some people, but for other people it's a good thing. Now, we don't
control the dollar, the world market forces control. And I want to say to you that the
days of thinking that any government could control the exchange rate, those days are
gone forever. But a high dollar can bring benefits in lower inflation. It can help,
therefore, to feed into lower interest rates and therefore provide a very, very sound
business base.
And we've acted very quickly to bring in many of the reforms we promised to help
small business. From the I1st of January the ridiculous unfair dismissal law that we
now have will be swept away and replaced by a far more intelligent one.
Our other industrial relations reforms, which have now all gone through Parliament,
will come, most of them, into operation on the 1 st of January and they will make direct 
bargaining a lot easier. We've implemented our commitments in relation to the
provisional tax uplift factor and we've legislated to introduce our capital gains tax
rollover relief And I notice that Charlie Bell, the Managing Director of McDonalds, is
here tonight. Charlie has chaired a committee which has given a whole raft of
recommendations to me about how we can reduce the paperwork burden on small
business by 50 per cent in our first three years in Government. And I promise Charlie
and I repeat the promise tonight in front of everybody so you can all hold me to it
that we'll give him a comprehensive and, I think, very positive response to those
recommendations by the middle of February in 1997.
Now we are very, very keen indeed to make conditions as good as we possibly can for
small business in Australia. But, there is of course, so much a government can do.
The rest is up, of course, to the entrepreneurial spirit and the flair and the innovation
and the hard work of men and women in business all around Australia.
I always get a tremendous personal delight out of being at an evening like this because
it's one of those occasions where you can really feel tremendously proud to be Prime
Minister of a country that has produced so many people who've tried and so many
who've succeeded. So many people who've started with nothing, have come to
Australia with nothing and have built great and successful enterprises. They've
employed people, they've generated wealth, they've made a lot of people happy and
they've made a contribution to this society. And business is not, in the eyes of many of
its critics, just a question of a hard edged approach to making profit, it's also about
building a happy and united community. And the shopping centres that Frank Lowy's
Westfield Corporation have produced are now part of the community life in this
country. They've helped change for the better the way in which people shop, our
shopping habits and our whole attitude to shopping and retailing has been transformed
over the last 10 or 20 years. And the Westfield Company and many other people here
tonight have made a massive contribution to that.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for having me as your guest. I want to
congratulate in advance all of those who will receive award tonight. I want to thank
Frank Lowy and his great company for the massive contribution that it has made to
Australia. And I want to thank all of you for the investment that you are making in the
future of our country, the risks that you are taking not only for yourselves, but the risk
that you are taking to build a better, more prosperous and more contented Australian
community. Thank you. 



Fax from~ 04/ 12/ 96 16: 64 Pg:
PRIME MINISTER
4 December 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO AREA CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE MEMBERS
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
E O E I.
Thank you very much Amanda. To Mr Holloway, to my other Parliamentary
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I am gratefual for the opportunity to just say a few
words to you of a general character about some of the Government's goals in the
employment area, with particular reference to the great importance we attach to
policies that affect regional and rural areas of Australia. I understand that Senator
Vanstone would have already announced a number of policy directions in relation to
the role of the Area Consultative Commnittees and I hope that those announcements
have been greeted in a positive fashion because we do see a very important role for
your comnmittees in implementing the new directions the Government has adopted in
relation to labour market programs.
All of us recognise the continued importance of trying to find better solutions to the
challenge of high unemployment in Australia. It still remains, and I don't mind
repeating it because it's a fact, it still remains the biggest social and economic
challenge that Australia has. The fact that we have a youth unemployment rate of 27%
throughout the nation rising to much higher levels in certain regional areas and certain
outer metropolitan areas of the big cities represents a very big challenge to the
Government and represents a very big challenge to the community. There will always
be debate about the best way of responding to that difficulty and that is the stuff' of the
whole political process. We have chosen to make a number of policy changes from the
direction adopted by the previous Government. We are trying to put a great deal more
emphasis on the role of small business in employing people. We have recently secured
the passage of our Workplace Relations Bill through the Senate. We believe over
time, and I have to stress over time, that that will produce a more flexible labour
market that will increase employment opportunities.
Now people will debate that and I respect that there is a political divide in the
commnunity on that but the Parliament has finally resolved the issue in favour of a piece
of legislation which, although it was not precisely in the original form presented by the 
Fax from 64/ 12/ 96 16: 04 Pg: 2
Government, it did incorporate a lot of amendments put for-ward by the Australian
Democrats and some amendments I might stress that were picked up after discussion
between the Minister and representatives of the trade union movement because not all
of what was put to us by the trade union movement on that pielee of legislation was
regarded as unacceptable. Quite a number of the amendments that were put forward
by the trade union movement were accepted but it has now been resolved and its the
responsibility of all of us to try and make the new system work and I believe if it is
allowed to work it will produce better outcomes at the workplace level. It will
importantly produce more flexibility. It will importantly preserve the present margin
under the system for younger employees through the preservation of the junior wage
structure which was marked down for abolition on the first of July next year and if that
abolition had proceeded in the Government's judgement, the jobs of a lot of young
people around Australia would have been put at risk. That is a very, very important
element in the Government's approach and I think over time as it does work, it will be
of very, very great value.
I have recently established an employment committee of Federal Cabinet which I will
chair and which includes all of the senior Ministers, including Senator Vanstone and
Mr Kemp who are involved with employment and labour market issues, and the whole
purpose of that commiittee was to focus the attention of the Government on a day to
day basis, if you like on the problem of employment and the challenges that remained
in the community to reduce unemployment. Once again, I don't believe for a moment
that there are some magical, wand-waved solutions but if you can have a proper policy
focus on it as the most important priority of all, it will make a significant difference.
We believe that there are great employment benefits for regional Australia if the
Natural Heritage Trust which of course is linked to our proposal to sell one third of
Telstra can be realised. There will be A capital investment of a billion dollars over a
period of time, the largest investment ever from a capital side in the environmental
future of Australia and if we can get that up and running and I guess we will know in
the next few days, I don't know as I speak whether the legislation will pass through the
Senate. I mean, it's the delicious vagaries of Australia's political system and I suppose
it is a reminder that all of us are ultimately controlled by the collective will of the
Australian people and we really don't want it otherwise although it does sort of keep
you at the edge of your seat, and if you're a Member of the House of Representatives
you keep a weather eye on what your colleagues are doing in the Senate, but it's all a
delightful part of the political process so we will know I hope in a few days but I
certainly don't know as I speak, but that billion dollar investment will have very
important employment consequences for regional Australia, in particular, more so for
regional Australia than the cities, and I do hope very much that we can get it up and
running. But the most important message that I would like to leave with you ladies and
gentlemen is that community involvement and community consultation and the process
of the Government listening to what the community says is what the Area Consultative
Committees are all about and particularly as Chairmen of the various Area
Consultative Committees around Australia is what your role is all about. I have often
said that political leadership in this country consists on some occasions of standing in
the middle of the road and daring people to run you over. On other occasions I think 
Fax from 641/ 6 1: 4P'
political leadership does consist in sitting down and listening to people before you've
made up your mind what you're going to do. The trick of course is to choose the
issues that are appropriate for the first treatment and also the issues that are
appropriate for the second treatment. Sometimes when you adopt the first approach
you're told that you don't listen and sometimes when you adopt the second approach
you are told you don't lead so the trick of course is to get the right mix. Now very
much the contribution that you can make to some of the new policy directions that the
Minister has outlined and others will outline is very much in the second category.
I don't pretend for a moment that the new labour market approach can work
effectively without the co-operation of the community and that involves the cooperation
of educators, of trainers, of union leaders, of people involved in small and
large business. We all have a common commitment, whatever our political beliefs may
be in better outcomes, particularly for young people and in lower levels of
unemployment because if governments and communities can't solve those sort of
problems then faith in the whole system is undermined and we don't pretend that we
can sort of send directions from a federal government that will solve all those problems
without your involvement. I want you to see the new initiatives and the new approach
and I know for some of you it's very different. Some of you, you may not feel initially
comfortable with the new approach but I do want you to see them as a bona fide
attempt on the part of the Government, albeit in a somewhat different fashion to tackle
problems which other governments have tried with varying degrees of success and I
am not here to bag my predecessors. I am here to promote the different approach that
the new Government is adopting and I hope you will accept from me, and I know I
speak for Senator Vanstone and for the other Ministers who are involved accept from
me that we do have a very strong commnitment to involving the community, a very
strong commitment to consultation and to listening. We think the new system will
work better. We do think the more market-oriented approach to job placement, the
new competitive approach will open up fresh opportunities for people that are not now
available and we would like you to give the system your co-operation. We would like
you to give the system your input and your support and in conjunction with some of
the other measures that I have alluded to today, I do hope that it will be seen and
supported as a very positive contribution to tackling what remains Australia's biggest
social and economic challenge.
I again thank you very warmly for coming. I hope you find today's meeting productive
and I hope you find the announcements that the Minister has made, and others will be
made later in the meeting, announcements that you can support and enthusiastically
participate in implementing. 04/ 12/ 96 16: 04 Pg: 3 



December 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT SALVATION ARMY CHRISTMAS APPEAL
SALVATION ARMY, CANBERRA
E&amp; OE
It is very hard indeed to visualise what Australia would be like, particularly at a time
such as Christmas, without the Salvation Army. And that is why I unhesitatingly
accepted the invitation of the Salvation Army to launch, throughout Australia, its
Christmas Appeal.
The Salvation Army is not only a remarkable section of the worldwide Christian
Church and of course Christmas is primarily the celebration of the birth of Jesus of
Nazareth but the Salvation Army is also, as well as being a powerful section of the
Christian Church, the Salvation Army is also one of Australia's leading, most admired
and most loved welfare organisations. There would be very few Australians in either
peace time or in times now thankfully in the distant past, in war time who wouldn't
have been either touched by the work of the Salvation Army or in some cases helped
by them and certainly impressed by them. And when I heard the Army band play one
of the most best known of the traditional Christmas carols, I was reminded of listening
to Army bands at street comners when I grew up. I grew up in the suburb of Earlwood
in Sydney and there was a Salvation Army citadel nearby and they played there every
Sunday evening. And as a very young boy I used to wander down to what was then
called the Earlwood Tram Terminus and listen to the Army band. So it has been very
much part of the Australian story.
The most dramatic contribution that the Salvation Army has made in Australia's
lifetime has been the contribution it has made to the relief of poverty, distress and
helping those in our community who are less fortunate. And I want to ask all
Australians to give generously at Christmas time. Most of us will celebrate a very
plentiful, a very happy and a very adequate Christmas. For those who have well paid
work, for those who are in good health, for those whose families are united, Christmas
is a time of great joy and happiness and great celebration. But there are a significant
number of our fellow Australians who are not that fortunate. Their family may have 
recently broken up; they may be out of work; they may have lost their job on the eve of
Christmas; through other misadventure their health may be poor; they may be suffering
a terminal illness whatever the situation is, when the rest of the community is
celebrating in plenty and you don't have much, it can be a particularly miserable and
unhappy existence. And the Salvation Army in its wonderful, open-hearted, generous
fashion, along with many other great welfare organisations such as the Society of St
Vincent de Paul and the City Missions and the Smith Family and there are many of
them they make a tremendous contribution to bringing happiness and comfort to
those Australians who are not as fortunate as the rest of them. And the very least all of
us can do is to put something aside and to give it to help. Australians, when they are
properly asked and their sense of fairness and their sense of compassion is touched,
most Australians can be very generous and I hope they are this Christmas.
I couldn't commend in stronger terms the work of the Salvation Army. Over the years
it's done so much, not only at Christmas time, but at other times of distress and
deprivation for many of our less fortunate citizens.
The Government very strongly supports the work of the Salvation Army. In this years
budget we increased by between 25 and 30 per cent the emergency relief funding
provided on an annual basis to organisations such as the Salvation Army to help with
people in particular need or distress and we are examining with the major welfare
organisations a new methodology to ensure that the level of that emergency fund keeps
pace with real need and doesn't fall behind. So we do very strongly support their
work. I personally admire what the Salvation Army stands for. The gentlemen who... . the
officer who appears in the poster, David Eldridge I think it is I think I recognise him
he is Chairman of the Youth Homelessness Taskforce that I established in fulfilment of
a commitment I made in the election campaign and he's doing a remarkable job. But
the genuine Christian compassion that is engaged in by the Salvation Army is a model
to everybody else. And therefore I have very, very great pleasure in launching this
national appeal.
On behalf of the Australian people I want to thank the Salvation Army for the massive
contribution it has made to the welfare of the Australian community, for the
compassion and decency and concern and the demonstration of the message of the first
Christmas that it has played out in all the years of its existence. And finally, again I ask
all Australians to dig deeply into their pockets and to give generously and
wholeheartedly and spontaneously to the Christmas appeal of the Salvation Army, or
indeed the Christmas appeals of those other great organisations that I've mentioned
because all of them together are doing a remarkable job. Without them we'd be a
meaner, a poorer, a more unhappy, a less generous and less decent society and we
should always, at a time like this, be very thankful. And the poster says it all:-" We
should thank God for the Salvos" 



rax irom blbZVJZSZ3 06/ 12/ 96 15: 33 Pg:
F PRIME MINISTER
6 December 1996 TRANSCRIEPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT ST PATRICK'S CATHEDRAL
MELBOURNE
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much. Mr John Ralph; to Your Grace, Archbishop George Pell;
to you deans, thank you for the very illuminating and informative guide and
tour of inspection of the almost fully restored and renovated St Patrick's
Cathedral. To Mr Ryan, the Chairman of the appeals committee and to all of
those other very generous citizens of Melbourne and supporters of the appeal,
can I say how impressed I am with the Cathedral. I don't think I've seen
anywhere in the world a more magnificent stained glass window than that,
certainly nowhere else in Austr~ alia, and I can understand the commitment and
dedication of Melbourne's Catholic community but also the broader community
to this project.
I am very happy this morig to announce that the Federal Government will
contribute $ 1 million towards the restoration appcaI. I do believe very strongly
that buildings such as St Patrick's Cathedral, they are of course primarily
spiritual centres, and St Patrick has been at the centre of spiritual life for
Catholics and for the Christian religion generally for almost a century since its
consecration in 1897. It's also been a great cultural centre for Melbourne and
very much part of this city for all the years that it has stood, but buildings such
as St Patrick's are also part of Australia's heritage and as we come to celebrate
the Centenary of Federation, it is important that we make provision in both the
material marking of the Centenary of Federation and also the other ways i
which we mark the history of Australia since Federation in 1901, we do make
provision for the place of church buildings and the place of the Christian
religion in the development of Australia. 
VVaxz F rA. A. 12322 86/ 12/ 96 15: 33 Pg: 2
I mean, for instance I have ensured that one of the Commonwealth members of
the cormmittee to celebrate the Centenary of Australia is Archbishop Peter
Hollingworth the Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane and I do think preserving
and restoring some of the richer of our cathedrals it is part of the heritage not
only the religious heritage but also part of the built and monumental heritage of
Australia, and this really is a magnificent cathedral and it speaks volumes for
the loving care and craftsmanship of the people that have been associated with
its restoration, and I was touched when I spoke to Michael, the gentleman
responsible for the restoration of that beautiful Archbishop's chair, and being
here today of course is a re minder of the various tributaries to the Catholic
tradition In Australia.
There is of course that very deep and strong Irish tributary which has played
such a major part not only in shaping and influencing the Catholic Church in
Australia but also shaping and influencing the Australian way of life. There are
few people in Australia who are not in some way touched by the very deep and
rich Irish heritage of this country. And as the years went by I am reminded of
the enormous contribution the other great Catholic tfibutary the people of
Italy who have made a great contribution, an enormous contribution,
particularly the post World War HI story of Catholicism in Australia and also of
Australia generally. And the people of Eastern Europe, from Poland of course,
the birthplace of the present Pope and head of the world wide Catholic Church,
a building like this is a reminder of the various tributaries to the Catholic
experience and the Catholic faith in Australia and the contribution that it has
made. So I am delighted to be here. I am delighted in a material way, as well
as other ways, to associate the Federal Governmnent with this magnificent
restoration. To you Your Grace, I wish you only still fairly recently enthroned your
enthronement occurred about the same time as mine I think! I think it was
separated by a couple of weeks. The process was a little different, and you will
have a tenure of the office perhaps, I think it could, in the normal course of
events be longer than mine, although I'll try hard to match it, but it is a delight
to be your guest-I wish all of the parishioners of St Patrick's the very best of
good fortune. I thank the Catholic community of Melbourne for the way in
which they have contributed so richly to the life of this city and to the life of
Australia and I hope in a small way this contribution helps the appeal and I
hope you will see it as a symbol of the honour that the Australian community
does to the Catholic Church and to the Catholic community for the contribution
that it has made to our nation.
Thank you. 



2
PRIME MINISTER1
6 December 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
OFFICIAL OPENING OF AUSTRALIAN CRICKET HALL OF FAME
MELBOURNE CRICKET GROUND
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Tony; to Dr Lill; to Dennis Lillee and Keith Miller; to the
other family members of the other, the other eight members of this unique band of
crioketing brothers; to Tom Reynolds, the Victorian Minister for Sport. And I
acknowledge the presence of three formier Victorian Premiers: Dick Harrer,
Lindsay Thompson and John Cain.
Earlier today I inspected the restorations of St Patrick's Cathedral and I said to the
Archbishop as I was leaving I was going to one of the spiritual centres of
Melbourne, to the true temporal shrine and sporting shrine, not only of Melbourne
but also of Australia.
I think without any doubt the Melbourne Cricket Ground is the greatest sporting
arena in our nation and I think probably without comparison anywhere in the
world. And it's a special privilege for me to be here today. Being Prime Minister
has its ups and downs. Could I say this is really an up. To be here, to be invited to
say a few words, to open this Hall of Fame is for me about the greatest of pleasure
and privilege that I could possibly have.
T: Bj õ , 0: 9T 96/ ZT/ 98 W04.9 xv 4 
I am a self-confessed cricket lover. Like so many people of my age, I started at
a time when following cricket, at a time when cricket books weren't quite as
prolific as they are now, and two that I read and read again and thumbed
through repeatedly was that wonderful book written by Johnnie Moyes in the
early 1950s called " A Century of Cricketers", which not only traced the story
of many famous Australian cricketers but also English and a few West Indian,
South African and Indian cricketers as well,
Arnd I was reflecting as I watched those names go up that there's only one of
them, and that's the last one, Dennis Lillee, that was not in that book, and the
other one that influenced in a Journalistic way my love and knowledge of
cricket was one that was jointly authored by Keith Miller and RS. Whidttington
called " Straight Hit" which was essentially about the 1951-52 West Indian tour
of Australia. I have seen four of them of those ten play. I saw Don Bradman
play but once at the Kippax-Oldfield testimonial at the Sydney Cricket Ground
in 194.9. It was his last appearance at the Sydney Cricket Ground, At the age
of 10 1 was taken there by my father on the Sydney Cricket Gifound hill.
I really saw a great deal as a young boy, a great deal of Keith and Ray and I
suppose if I had as a boy growing up following the game if I had two heroes
it was them because their menacing combination, and I don't think there's
anybody in the game we've seen who could turn it around so quickly as Keith
in his capacity to take that sensational catch, that brilliant piecc of fielding, that
marvellous burst of speed and Ray of course was the consummate artisan when
it came that rhythmic approach to the wicket I've never seen anything like it
and it really was for me a tremendous excitement to watch them play in the
early 1950s. Dennis' contribution to cricket in a subsequent generation has
been absolutely massive and he and his colleagues of that era brought new
generations of lovers and followers of the game.
I wouldn't have en vied the challenge of those who had to choose these ten
players. It would have been a formidable task and can I say that I don't think
anybody could argue for a moment with any of the selections that they have
made. -But cricket is a magnificent game. It's more than that. It's a way of life
to manly ofus it is another religion. I don't know a game which keeps people
together in a fraternity quite like cricket does. I watch cricketers of different
generations, and the capacity to, because of you common love of the game, the
capacity to spend time talking to each other. I never saw Bill O'Reilly play but
I did have the privilege of meeting Bill on a number of occasions when we
were watching matches at the cricket ground and the way ixx which the
difference i age and generations and backgrounds were just instantly dissolved
by a common love of the game. 2
z Ald P8: 9T 96/ ZT/ 98 1dOO. JXTI We 4 
I think Australia's sporting achievements are something of which all of us are
incredibly proud. As cricket lovers and cricket followers today, the
contribution that these ten magnificent players and their fellow players of their
respective eras have made to enriching the lives and bringing happiness and
pleasure to so many millions of Australians can never be properly described.
And can I say to all of those who are here today, in the case of Keith and
Dennis as recipients of this rare honour and in relation to the others as close
relatives of the other eight men that have been inducted, can I say on behalf of
a very grateful Australian nation, thank you for what you have done for a
magnificent game. Thank you for what you have done to promote the best
traditions of Australian sportsmanship, and thank you for the joy and pleasure
that you and yours have brought over more than a century to millions of
Australians and to millions of people around the world who love the game of
cricket. Can I say again what a tremendous privilege it is to be here today to honour
this great game and to honour these ten great men, and I have very great
pleasure in declaring the cricketing hall of fame open.
ends 3
E : 16d W: 91 96/ ZT/ 98WOJJ xV. 4 



PM Canberra Busine ity Dinner, 13.12.96 http:// www. nlIa. gov. au/ pmc/ presre/ cbc. html
MEDIA TRANSCRIPT
Prime Minister the Hon. John Howard MP, ADDRESS AT CANBERRA
BUSINESS COMMUNITY DINNER
13 December 1996
E&amp; OE T hank you very much Mr Denis Paige, the Chairman of the Canberra Business Council; to
Mrs Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the ACT; to my ministerial colleague Warwick
Smith; Andrew Whitecross, the Leader of the Opposition; Ministers in the ACT
Government, Tony Dedomenico, Gary Humphries and Bill Woods; to my parliamentary
colleague Gary Nairn, the federal member for Eden Monaro; to the mayor of the Tumut
Shire Council, Mr Geoff Pritchard and to David Evans, the recently appointed and new
Chairman of the National Capital Authority, ladies and gentlemen.
I am particularly pleased to be here tonight to acknowledge the presence of such a big
cross section of the community of the Canberra region and to take the opportunity of
saying very directly to you a few things about the attitude of the Federal Government
towards the Canberra region.
I amn releasing tonight a vision or mission statement about the attitude of the federal
Government to the Canberra region and my remarks will be built around some of the
things that are contained in that statement but will also contain some specific
announcements which are not canvassed is such detail in the statement. 1 want to say very
directly to you that the Federal Government remains absolutely committed to the special
role of Canberra and the Canberra region as the location of the national capital of our
nation, and because of that there are a number of particular things which we regard as
ongoing commitments and obligations. And I speak as a Coalition Prime Minister,
conscious, and I don't say this in any carping sense, of the contributions of Labor
Governments to Canberra but I am very conscious of the history of Coalition
Governments and their contribution to the development of Canberra. The particular role
played by Sir Robert Menzies as a Coalition Prime Minister in really laying the
foundations of modern Canberra, the establishment of the forerunner of the national
Capital Authority by the Fraser Government, the establishment also of the Australian
Institute of Sport;, the Australian Defence Academy; the High Court building and the
National Gallery, all of those projects were essentially initiated by and established under
Coalition Governments.
I don't come as a political pauper in any sort of you know descended sense, so far as the
Coalition is concerned it is an Australian gathering, I come as somebody who is in a
particular tradition. Now I recognise that the decisions that we have taken have had a
disproportionately large impact on the Canberra community. I know that, I acknowledge
that, I don't mince words on that, I'm sorry about that, and it is important that it be
understood that those decisions weren't taken in any punitive sense against the Canberra
community. They weren't taken because the Federal Government dislikes public servants
that's nonsense. Anybody who pokes fun at the public service doesn't understand the
important role the public service plays in the fabric of our country and particularly in the
life of the Canberra community.
But we did have a problem, I don't want to go over all of that, you've heard the debate,
I of 51 f 501/ 1170/: 9587: 44 
PM-Can erraBusne.. ityDninlear,. g3o. v1.. a9u6/ phmttpc:/ p// rwewsswre. l/ cbc. htmi
but I want you to understand the context in which those decisions were taken. We do
attach particular importance to the role of the private sector in the Canberra community.
It is true that 48% of employment in the Canberra area is in the public sector which is of
course the highest anywhere in Australia, but that does leave 52% in the private sector
and one of the emphasises as the Chairman said of the new Government has been on the
role of small business. And I think it will only be over the next 12 months that the entire
Australian community and particularly the small business community of Australia will
begin to understand the scale of the changes and begin to experience the benefits of the
changes that we are making in the area of small business. The changes under our
industrial relations legislation for example don't come into operation until the first of
January. As I speak now that silly unfair dismissal law which has discouraged so many
men and women in small business around Australia from taking on new staff, that is still
with us, and it won't be until the first of January that the new and better and fairer law
comes into operation. It won't be until the first of January that small business has greater
freedom and flexibility to arrange workplace bargains that suit their circumstances and the
circumstances of their employees.
And it won't be until July 1 st next year that an absolute tax revolution so far as the
application of the Capital Gains Tax to small business will come into operation and I don't
want anybody in this audience to misunderstand the scale of what we have decided to do
in that area. We've not simply said that you can roll over the proceeds of the sale of one
business into the purchase of another business of a like kind. We've said that up to a limit
of $ 5 million you can roll it over into the purchase now of any kind of business, any other
kind of business without incurring Capital Gains Tax liability, and the impact of that when
it spreads through the community and particularly through the small business community,
and the new law will come into operation on the first of July of next year, we can't afford
to run it any earlier than that because it will be quite an expensive item so far as the
revenue is concerned. I think it will be very popular and I think it will have quite a
liberating effect on small business. And there are many other things that we've done for
small business. We altered the provisional tax uplift factor. I had a report from Mr Charlie
Bell, the Managing Director of McDonalds on cutting red tape on small business, and he
has put forward a number of very in fact 62 specific recomnmendations and I've
promised him a definitive and positive response by the middle of February.
So when you add all those things up, when you add up the knock-on effect for small
business of I believe a rise in investment and investor confidence. I'm appointing to my
staff a major projects facilitator whose role will be to clear away unnecessary hurdles to
government approvals for major projects in Australia. Now, major projects are important
in themselves but they also have great effects for small business. Now, I stress the small
business changes because they are a very important part of our long term strategy and
they have very important affects for the Canberra region and they have particular
relevance to the many people who are in this audience. So, part of our vision, indeed the
fundamental part of our vision for this region is of course an invigoration and expansion
and liberation of the opportunities for small business. And the growth of the private
sector in the region is tremendously important.
Now yesterday Warwick Smith announced the appointment of David Evans as
Chairman of the National Capital Authority and he brings a wealth of experience to the
job, he brings particular knowledge of the area, his administrative and leadership role in
the RAAF ideally suits him for this kind of job and Warwick Smith has confirmed that the
Coalition will amend the ACT planning and land management act during our current term
to remove the current legislative barriers to perpetual leases. 2 f 501/ 17/ 97 10: 58: 46
PM Canberra Busine ity Dinner, 13.12.96
2 of 5 
PM -CanerraBusne.. ityDiner, 3.1.96http:// www. nla. gov. au/ pmc/ pressreI/ cbc. html
The final decision on if and when to introduce the new lease hold system is of course
something that rests with Mrs Carnell's government, and that decision will be a particular
benefit I believe to Canberra's business community as it will improve investor confidence
and therefore lead I hope to more jobs in Canberra. Now, the public service will remain a
major part of the life and the economy of Canberra and although there has been a
downsizing the federal public service, which I have to say in a sense matches the
downsizing that has occurred some years earlier in a number of the State public services
and perhaps we've done it in a rather more overt fashion than some of the actions of our
predecessors because there was a significant reduction in the number of people employed
in the federal public service under the actions of our predecessors.
We are increasing opportunities for the outsourcing of services to Government and they
will be a particular benefit to small business, It's been estimated for example that
initiatives in the administrative services portfolio alone could generate up to 2,500 jobs in
the private sector. And right at the moment we are examining ways to facilitate greater
access for small business to outsourcing opportunities. And as a result of the round table
with local business and Government officials yesterday it's been agreed that the business
community will be connected in the preparation and development of guidelines to deal
with the outsourcing of Government services.
That brings me, Mr Chairman, to the issue of the National Museum. You will remember
that during the election campaign I made a commitment to the establishment of the
National Museum of Australia and the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander studies. I made that commitment during the Canberra by-election in 1995. It was
reaffirmed by me during the Federal election campaign and tonight I say that the
Government stands solidly behind that commitment. As a first step we provided
million in the 1996-97 Budget for the National Museum Committee to investigate side
options. The committee has reported and has recommended that the Museum be located
at Acton Peninsula. And I announce tonight that the Commonwealth will accept the
Committee's recommendation. The National Museum and the Institute will be major
national cultural institutions which will service permanent repositories of Australia's rich
heritage and culture. Now, I recognise that there's been some debate in the community
about where the Museum should be located and not everybody will agree with the
recommendation of the Committee nor with the Government's decision. But I think the
essence here is to get on with it. The essence here is to make decisions and to move
forward. Now we're going to announce, as we probably should, funding details in the next budget.
But as a down payment on further work and as a earnest of where we stand and what we
think, the Commonwealth will allocate three quarters of a million dollars for a
development brief to commence in January 1997. Can I also say that we will continue
with the refurbishment of the Old Parliament House, the Australian War Memorial, as
well as the extension for the National Gallery.
Now, we recognise the great importance of infrastructure for this region. And it is for that
reason that I announced last week that the Commonwealth, the New South Wales and the
ACT Government's will shortly call for expressions of interest in the provision of the high
speed train service between Canberra and Sydney. We take a positive attitude to the
private sector development of this proposal. There will be a competitive tender process
and the Commonwealth will play its role as a member of the Project Control Study
Group. We will facilitate a commercially viable rail service. They know that this project
holds out very positive signs for many people in the region and I hope that the response 01/ 17/ 97 10: 58: 46
PM Canberra Busine ity Dinner, 13.12.96 
PM -CanerraBusne.. ityDiner, 3.1.96http:// www. nia. gov. au/ pmc/ pressrel/ cbc. htmi
of the private sector is a very fulsome and positive one.
We also recognise the potential for expanding the role of Canberra airport so that it can
better serve the needs of the region. The Federal Airports' Corporation is examining the
feasibility of upgrading Canberra airport to international status which could, for example,
facilitate direct flights between the region and major export markets into the Asia-Pacific
area. This could be of particular benefit to local primary producers who want to develop
niche markets in the Asia-Pacific region. I believe very strongly that the future of the
region will be assured once major stakeholders accept that a new model of development is
needed to guide it into the next century.
I want to commend the Canberra business community for responding in a positive, even
aggressive fashion to the challenges that have been presented over the past few months,
and exploring ways of embracing a new approach. The way in which the various members
of the Canberra business community have come together at such short notice tonight, the
evident commitment of so many of the people involved in that community to Canberra's
future; a desire not to look back over the shoulder in recrimination about what may have
gone before but rather to recognise that changed circumstances present new opportunities
as well as new challenges is a very encouraging development.
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, I am very cognisant of the impact of some of
our decisions on this region. Those decisions were necessary in the national interest, they
were not taken lightly. I regret the personal difficulty that some of them have caused to
many of my fellow Australians. I do not lead a Government which is a public service
basher. I lead a Government that believes very strongly in the private sector, particularly
in the small business sector. I have a deep personal and philosophical commitment to
small business. I believe it is the engine room offu ture economic growth in Australia. I
believe it is the sector which over time and I stress over time can provide the answer to
our employment difficulties. But there is an important role for a professional and highly
motivated and highly committed public service in Australia and it has a special role here in
Canberra. And there is also a special place for Canberra in the life of Australia as its
National Capital. It is a source of very great pride to me, the city of Canberra. It is a
source of very great pride to all Australians. There is obviously debate around Australia
about the size, the role and the shape of federal vis a vis State and municipal government.
But that is part and parcel of the normal ebb and flow of political debate.
But I do want to assure all of you that my Government remains, as former Coalition
governments have been and demonstrated, very deeply committed to the welfare of the
Canberra region, very deeply committed to the people of Canberra. Anid I've endeavored
tonight, with some of thle announcements that I have made, to indicate thle measure of
that commitment. I can't promise that I will agree with everything that is put to me by the
ACT Government or by the Canberra business community. But I can promise both the
Government and the business community a very frank and regular communication and
dialogue, a willingness to listen, a willingness to accede to reasonable requests that are
clearly in the interests of the region and consistent with Government policy. And I hope
that the announcements that I've made in relation to the speed rail project, to the possible
extension of Canberra airport and in relation to the National Museum, coupled those
things with our very strong generic commitment to small business, will represent a
demnonstration of our commitment to you and our desire to see a very bright and
prosperous future for the people of the Canberra region.
Thank you very much. 4 f 501/ 17/ 97 10: 58: 47
PM Canberra Busine ity Dinner, 13.12.96
4 of 5 



PRIME MINISTER
16 December 1996 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF THE FAMILY TAX INITIATIVE
WENTWORTHVILLE, SYDNEY
E Thank you very much Ross. To Mr Graham, the Mayor, to Peter Costello, Jocelyn Newman,
Judi Moylan, Senator Rod Kemp, ladies and gentlemen. I am particularly delighted to be here
in Ross Cameron's electorate. This is one of those areas of Sydney and one of those areas of
Australia into which the Government successfulfly pushed on the second of March and it really
is appropriate that Wentworthville here in the Parramatta electorate has been chosen to launch
in a formal sense, although it's been launched in an absolute sense some time ago, the
Government's family tax initiative.
This represents the delivery in fiull, on time, without subtraction, without qualification of
probably the centrepiece of the policies that we took to the last election and it is true that over
a long period of time I have talked a lot about the importance of policy supporting the family.
I regard them as very critical to the future society that I would like Australia to have. I want
to in the period that we are in Government, I want us to leave a permanent mark on the
Australian community, a mark that restores and strengthens the role of the family unit within
our society, a strengthening within our society that gives to parents more choice. The key to
our family tax initiative is that it recognises the additional costs of bringing up children and it
also seeks to give to the parents of Australia's children a lot more choice as to how they order
their lives. We as a Government don't seek to impose stereotypes on Australian parents. We
don't seek to tell Australian parents that when their children are young, one parent should be
permanently at home while one is in the workforce but we do want to give them increasingly
the option to do that if that is their choice but whether or not they do it is a matter for the
choice of individual parents.
Equally we do not believe that governments should tell parents where they should send their
children. We believe very strongly in a world class public education system. We also believe
that increasingly, we ought to give to parents a greater variety of choice as to whether to
educate their children in the public or the private system. If they decide to educate it in the
public system, they ought to have even greater choice than they have at the present time. I
speak as someone myself who spent all of my education years in the public education sector
and I support it very strongly. But I also very strongly support the provision of choice and
2630 
one of the other things that we have done since coming to power is that we have enabled
people to have greater choice to send their children to low, fee paying independent schools
and increasingly those schools will open up in the western suburbs of Sydney. I am very
proud of the fact that as we approach Christmas I am able to look back on the nine months
that we have been in Government and I am able to say that we have kept faith, we have
remained true to the promises we made to the Australian people. We have stayed true to our
promise to reform the industrial relations system. We have stayed true to our promise to sell
one third of Telstra. We had a few heart flutters along the way. We finally got it through and
we are very grateful for that, and most importantly of all, we have kept faith with and we have
remained true to the promises that we made in relation to giving additional taxation assistance
to families.
I can remember about eight or nine years ago making a speech in which I said that a taxation
system that doesn't recognise the cost of raising children, a taxation system that adopts an
antiseptic, economic neutrality towards the cost of raising children is a taxation system
without a social vision. And this family tax initiative which will deliver one billion dollars of
tax concessions to people with children, it is carefully targeted to help low and middle income
families. It helps sole parent families as well as helping two parent famidlies. We recognise the
enormous struggle of many sole parents in our community and we applaud them for the
contribution that they make single-handedly to raising their children and although all of us in
an ideal world would like to see children raised by a mother and a father, we must always
recognise the massive burden that is carried by sole parents when usually through no fault of
their own and against their wishes... I have never met a sole parent yet who really in an ideal
world would like to be a sole parent but it happens that way, but we're not into judgemental
things. We are into espousing the cause of traditional family values and espousing the
importance and the value if it's possible, the role model of having both a mother and a father
but also recognising that in some cases, that's not possible and having a willingness to support
those within our community who raise children on their own.
So we have commnitted ourselves in so many areas of Government policy to supporting
families. I have often said that apart from the emotional value that a family brings, apart from
its capacity to inculcate values from one generation to the next. Apart from the male and
female role models that it provides for young children, the family also happens to be the most
efficient social welfare system that any nation has ever devised and a United, fully functioning
famnily provides the most valuable social security safety net that mankind has yet devised. So
for all of those reasons I am immensely proud of what the Government has done in this area
and I am immensely proud that on time, to the very last dollar and cent, without any
subtraction and without and qualification, we are delivering on the commnitment we made. We
made that commitment, we carefully targeted it. We wanted it to be a symbol of our
commitment to the role of the family in Australian society and it is but one example of the
many ways in which you will find the Government that I lead, that I am very proud to lead,
will always place the family at the centre of policy making considerations.
We have had in mind the family in relation to some of the decisions that we have taken
concerning some of the material that is to be found on television. We want to support parents
in trying to provide good examples to their children, not making it difficult for them to do so.
We want to promote a community which is less violent. Part of our family policy is to provide
support through organisations that help parents who are struggling, often through a
combination of their own circumstances, struggling with the responsibilities of parent hood.
Child abuse is often the product, in fact, overwhelmingly is the product of inadequate
parenting skills and one of the things that we're trying to do is to provide, and we have 2
2631 
provided additional resources to some of the organisations in society that will encourage
people to be better parents, and we are providing more resources to tackle domestic violence
and we are also, through the action that we took in banning automatic and semi-automatic
weapons within our community, we are building a safer society in which our children will
grow up.
So as I look back over the year, not in any sense of smugness or complacency, but I am very
proud of the fact that the importance that we placed on the family within the Australian
community during the election campaign and in the lead-up to the election campaign, that has
been honoured. We have given families more choice. This tax initiative will give them more
choice. It recognises the need of families who have young children the additional expenses of
them and it also endorses the choice that ought to be available as to the childcare
arrangements that people make. So I am very proud indeed that this initiative is being
formally launched here in Wentworthville, here in the electorate of Parramatta, in the city of
Parramatta, the centre of Sydney, the if you like a microcosm of middle Australia. You
couldn't find an area anywhere in Australia, in suburban Australia that more closely reflects
the diversity of our community, the importance of young families in our society, the ethnic
varieties of our community. You couldn't find a better example.
So ladies and gentlemen, I am particularly proud that it's being launched here today. I thank
Ross Cameron for having us and I am delighted that all of my colleagues have been able to
come here. I have brought along the man who has got all of the details of it,. I mean, it's not
that I don't have the details but he has even more details than I do so I would now like to
invite Peter Costello, the Treasurer of Australia, another person who is very strongly
committed to family policy within our Government. I have invited him to say a few words
about some of the details of the family tax initiative and I want to take this opportunity of
thanking you all for coming. I hope all of you have a very happy and enjoyable Christmas with
your families.
Can I say one final thing on that, that most Australians will celebrate a plentiful, happy and
secure Christmas. There will be many of our fellow Australians who won't and at a time such
as Christmas, I ask all Australians who can afford to do so to dig very deeply into their
pockets and contribute to those great organisations like the Smith Family and the Salvation
Army and the St Vincent De Paul Society that care for the less fortunate in our community.
We still have more than 700 000 people out of work. There are many people who won't have
happy Christmases without the help of those organisations. It is our obligation I believe in the
spirit of Christmas, the true spirit of Christmas, for those who can afford to do so to dig very
deeply into their pockets and contribute to making a brighter and a happier Christmas for the
less fortunate within our society.
ends 3
2632 
FAMILY TAX INITIATIVE
From I January 1997, a family with eligible dependent children and family taxable income less than
the relevant threshold for Part A will be eligible for the following Part A assistance.
cr : eoencen :--mii incorre ' alue c, ' atue c: : r A
;. niidren Thresnoid , per " ear; per ; crtngnm;
1 $ 70 000 $ 200 $ 7.70
2 $ 73000 $ 400 $ 15.40
3 $ 76000 $ 600 $ 23.10
4 $ 79000 $ 800 $ 30.80
A family with a child under the age of five, with taxable income of the breadwinner less than the
Part B income threshold and ( for couples) the other partner's income is less than the income cut-off
for basic Parenting Allowance ( currently $ 4535), will be eligible for Part B assistance in addition
to Part A.
NJo. of dependent Breadwinner Value ot Parr B Value or Part B
children Income Thresnold ( per year) ( per fortnight)
1 $ 65000 $ 500 $ 19.20
2 $ 68000 $ 500 $ 19.20
3 $ 71 000 $ 500 $ 19.20
4 $ 74000 $ 500 $ 19.20
A family which meets both Part A and Part B eligibility criteria will receive the following total
assistance: No. of dependent Total Value of Total Value of
children Part A and Part B Part A and Part B
( per year) ( per fortnight)
1 $ 700 $ 26.90
2 $ 900 $ 34.60
3 $ 1100 $ 42.30
4 $ 1300 $ 50.00
Fortnightly amounts are rounded in these tables. 2633 



23 Januaiy 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
LAUNCH OF AUSTRALIA POST
AUSTRALIAN LEGENDS STAMP SERIES
SYDNEY CRICKET GROUND
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Mr John to the MC, Alan Jones, to Maurice Williams the
Chairman of Australia Post, to Sir Nicholas Shehadie the Chairman of the Sydney
Cricket and Sports Ground Trust, Denis Rogers the Chairman of the Australian
Cricket Board, Alan Davidson the Chairman of the NSW Cricket Association. And I
notice amongst the many sporting personalities here today the one person who played
with the man who is going to be named as the carrier of the title of the first Australian
legend in the postal series, that's Neil Harvey, so a particular welcome to Neil.
Ladies and gentleman, I want to say a couple of things about Australia Post, Australia
Day, but also of course a number of things about the significance of the inauguration of
this series in postage stamps titled Australian Legends. Australia Day in my experience
has been one of those celebrations which, in the quite spontaneous fashion, has grown
in stature and lustre and public support over the years. When I was a school boy in
Sydney in the late 1 940s and early 50s, Australia Day was I think still called
Anniversary Day and people didn't celebrate it with quite the enthusiasm and the
affection and the reverence that they do these days. And over the years in a quite
unselfconscious, spontaneous way Australia Day has gathered support.
We have major celebrations all around Australia and, contrary to popular comment in
some of the newspapers in recent days, the idea that the Prime Minister of this country
should actually announce the Australian of The Year in a city other than Sydney is not
a heresy. It has never been the situation that Sydney has some kind of mortgage on
that particular event and the work of local Australia Day Councils and Barry
Unsworth, a former Premier of New South Wales, who is now the Chairman of the
Australia Day Council here in New South Wales those organisations do a marvellous
job in focussing our public celebration of our national day and I am very happy to say
as Prime Minister of Australia how delighted I am at the growing public affection for, 
-2-
and public support for Australia Day it is an occasion which belongs to all of us
irrespective of our political beliefs, irrespective of our ethnic or other backgrounds and
irrespective of views we may have on other subjects Australia Day is an occasion
where those differences dissolve and are replaced by the things that bind us all together
as Australians. And Australia Post has played a major part as a big sponsor of
Australia Day and Australia Post itself is, as it's Managing Director has said, it is
something of an Australian icon and it has made a great contribution over the decades
to getting rid of what Geoffrey Blainey described as the ' tyranny of distance' which
was a reality of the formation of Australia and has been a reality of Australian life for
so very long.
So I want to thank Australia Post for inaugurating the series of Australian Legends.
And I understand that over the next five or more years each year there will be an
Australian Legends postage stamp. And it is of course in my view, and I am sure in the
view of all Australians, entirely appropriate that the first Australian legend should be
the greatest living Australian and that is Sir Donald Bradman. It is entirely appropriate
that in choosing Sir Donald as the first in the series of Australian legends, Australia
Post recognises the special contribution that he has made to the Australian character,
to the Australian identity. He wasn't only the greatest cricketer ever to play that
wonderful game. He didn't only achieve the most extraordinary test average of just
short of 100. He didn't lead what most people still regard as the greatest cricket team
ever to have left Australian shores and that is the famous 1948 Ashes Team that went
to England.
But more than that, or equal to that, he gave hope and encouragement and inspiration
to a generation of Australians particularly during the depression years when the
memories of the terrible slaughter and loss of young Australian manhood in France and
on the beaches of Gallipoli was still very much part of the Australian psyche. When the
spirit and the hopes and the sense of well-being of the Australian people were at a
particularly low ebb, he gave all of Australia then enormous hope and enormous
inspiration. And he gave them something very tangible and something very enjoyable
to believe in, to identify with and they saw him as a repository of what was valuable
and what was positive about the Australian character. He had great ability, he had
great tenacity, he was infinitely courteous and he had great humility. And they are very
fine qualities and they are qualities that Sir Donald has carried through his entire life.
The first time that I came to this ground in my life was in 1949 and that was to see Sir
Donald play his very last innings at the Sydney Cricket Ground in the Kippax Oldfield
Testimonial. And I came there as a 10 year old boy with my father and I sat on the
Sydney Hill where so many people did in those days, and it was much part of the
practice and the institution of coming to watch cricket in those days and into the 1950s
and for part of the 1960s. So I have a particular memory of that and it is an
extraordinary thing that it is now only a few years short of 50 years since he stopped
playing first class cricket and apart from what I understand, one Prime Minister' s XI
that one of my predecessors persuaded him to turn out in in 1963, it's just on 50 years
since he had played the game. And yet he remains in the hearts and the minds of
Australians as still The Don. He's straddled the generations of Australians like no
other Australian has ever been able to do. And when you talk about cricket to children
under 10 now they still talk about Bradman. I am told that if you go around the Indian 
sub-continent the name Bradman, when you are asked about Australians, is still the
name that is first delivered and the name that is most vividly remembered. So for all of
those reasons I could not think of a finer, more appropriate and entirely perfect choice
that Australia Post has made in choosing Sir Donald Bradman as a subject of the
Australian Legend series. It is the first time that Australia Post will have a living
Australian on the postage stamp and the idea over the coming years of having a
famous Australian figure on the postage stamp as part of this Legend Series is just
another way in which a great Australian organisation is making a contribution to an
understanding of Australian history and a contribution towards honouring not the
performance only of people on the sporting fields but also the contribution that those
sports men and women have made and continue to make to the Australian character.
I have to say that it is a great personal pleasure to have been asked to be here today
and to launch this series. This is a slightly easier meeting than I had yesterday and it is
a great personal pleasure to be associated with a game and of course the greatest
personality in that game for which I have an immense personal affection.
Australia Post today recognises Sir Donald's contribution in two unique ways. Firstly,
Sir Donald will appear on two stamps, the first living Australian featured on an
Australian stamp there will be a portrait on one of those stamps and his classic cover
drive on the other. Secondly, it will be struck in gold the stamps will be presented to
Sir Donald and he is sorry that he can't be with us today, but in a separate function in
Adelaide this morning they are going to be accepted on his behalf by Mr Mark Taylor,
the Captain of the Australian Cricket Team and I will add to the written text that I was
asked to deliver verbatim can I simply add that all of us wish Mark and his colleagues
the greatest of good fortune when they do battle with the West Indies commencing in
Adelaide on Saturday morning.
And it is now my very great pleasure to release the stamps publicly.
ends 



24 January 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO AUSTRALIA DAY COUNCIL'S AUSTRALIA DAY LUNCHEON
DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY
E&amp; OE
Mr and Mrs Unsworth, Your Excellency, Bob Carr the Premier of New South Wales and Mrs
Carr, the Lord Mayor of Sydney, Judith Flemming, other very distinguished guests, Ministerial
and Parliamentary colleagues, Archbishop of Sydney and Cardinal Clancy and other
representatives of the churches and other community organisations, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a great pleasure for me to be here today as Prime Minister to share some thoughts with
you in honour of the country we all love so deeply. There are many things that can be said
about politicians in all countries and one of the things that can be said about politicians
wherever they come from is that they are often remembered for particular phrases that they
have uttered. Some of those phrases have been carefully crafted and deliberately delivered,
other phrases have been rather spontaneously generated on the spur of the moment but have
lived with them forever.
I think of that very evocative phrase that one of my very distinguished and well loved
predecessors Ben Chifley when he spoke of the ' light on the hill'. We remembered George
Bush's reference to ' read my lips'. We remember Malcolm Fraser' s immortal phrase that ' life
was not meant to be easy'. I see Neville Wran is here today, I remember his remark ' are you
from the ABC?'. Other phrases, of course, have been rather more deliberately cast. I'm quite
certain a lot of thought was given to John Kennedy's inaugural address and to the very
prophetic warning that the former British Prime Minister, Harold McMillan, delivered to the
South African parliament in 1960 when it was an all white parliament and he spoke of the
winds of change that were blowing with a gale force through Africa. It has been my loss, for
good or ill, in the context of politicians and their phrases to be left with a phrase that I uttered
when I was also being interviewed by the ABC about 12 months ago. I uttered the phrase
' relaxed and comfortable'. And I have to say that I hadn't given an enormous amount of
thought over the previous couple of weeks to the use of that phrase, but I do want today to
share a few words with you in explanation of that phrase and to put it in the context of what I
feel about our country.
I didn't utter that phrase out of some kind of smug self satisfaction, but everything that you
could possibly want about a country and everything that you could possibly wish for was there
in order and everything was perfect about Australia. No society which has a proper 
understanding of its history or its presence or an apprehension and belief about its future can
deny certain blemishes and great historical wrongs and Australia, of course, is no exception.
But I used that phrase because of a deeply held belief I have about Australian nationalism and
Australian patriotism and that is that we should not find ourselves engaged in a frantic and
constant search for a new or a different identity. We should not allow ourselves to lapse into a
perceptional seminar about our identity. There is a very identifiable Australian character and
Australian identity. It's very different from what it was 40 or 50 years ago although there are
some common threads that bind the Australian identity of today with the Australian identity of
or 50 years ago.
When we examine our national identity we should always remember that the symbols that we
hold very dear as Australians and the beliefs that we have about what it is to be an Australian
are not things that can ever be imposed from above by political leaders of any persuasion.
They are not things that can be generated by self appointed, cultural elite who seek to tell us
what our identity ought to be. Rather they are feelings and attitudes that grow out of the spirit
of the people. I've long held the believe that those things that we hold dear as Australia, those
myths if you like those legends about Australia, are those that essentially have come in two
ways. They have come out of great traumatic events such as the events of the 25th of April
1915 in the Dardenelles on the beaches of Gallipoli and there are those other things that
through long usage and custom and a feeling that it suits the temperament of the Australian
people we have come to love and to hold dear and I think of our tradition of informal mateship
and egalitarianism. And I think it is very important when we thing of our identity we
remember that essentially it grows out of the spirit of the people and it is never something that
can be imposed.
When I think about the Australian identity I think of many of the snapshots of my own
experience as Prime Minister over the last nine months and the events that have moved me and
have reminded me so forcibly of the tremendous spirit and versatility of the Australian people.
All of us as a nation were moved greatly by the tragic events in Port Arthur in April of last
year. The suffering of so many, the ability of the community to come together, the outpouring
of national grief and a recognition that a great evil had been done and a determination to
rebuild the lives of those who have been so totally shattered by those events.
I remember with great warmth and experience of the Victorian township of Benalla when that
community honoured its most famous son, Weary Dunlop, the great Australian hero of World
War II. The spontaneous patriotism of the young school children who sang in praise of Weary
and in praise of Australian. I think recently of our great firefighters in Victoria, I think of
those wonderful airman and sailors we rescued those two yachtsmen in the ferals of the
Antarctic water. I think about great sports men and women at the Atlanta Olympic Games
and none, of course, is finer than Nova Peris-Kneebone who we honour today. She said so
very simply and so eloquently but when she put on the green and gold she played for all of us,
can I return the honour and the compliment to say that we felt Nova that you were playing for
all of us and we honour what you represent and we honour the tremendous achievement for
you and your people.
Those snapshots ladies and gentlemen focus of course my own mind and we all have our
different ways of expressing our love of country, but when I ask myself what do I love about
Australia, there are many things that I love about Australia. I love Australia's tolerance and
openness. I think Australia is one of the most tolerant and open societies in the world and I
think the great thing that Australia can boast has been its capacity to absorb people from the
four corners of the earth into a very harmonious society and over the days ahead thousands of 
new people will take their oath or affirmations as Australian citizens and they will be grouping
together with a common commitment to our nation but coming together from the four corners
of the earth and the great capacity of Australia to absorb those people in such harmony and
steadfast is I think is one of our great achievements.
I admire the adaptability of the Australian people. One of the most intriguing and endearing
things about the Australian people is our voracious passion and appetite for new technology,
the way in which we have taken to the communications revolution, the technological advances
of the late 20th Century is a tribute to our great adaptability.
I love the surprises that you can always find about the Australian people. We are a sports
loving nation and yesterday I had the immense privilege to launch the first in the Australian
legends series of postage stamps which honoured the greatest living Australian Sir Donald
Bradman who has straddled the generations and the hearts and minds of generations of
Australians like no other person in the history of this nation has been able to do.
Yet side by side with that the young now have a growing appetite, not just the young but
Australians generally have a growing appetite for the arts and the fact that there are more
people who visit museums and many other artistic centres at weekends than play sport is
something that a generation ago would have been a great surprise to many Australians.
I also love the scepticism and the irreverence of Australians. I spent my holidays again this
year at a little haunt called Hawksnest that my family and I have been visiting for the last 17 or
18 years. I walked along the beaches as I've done over the previous 16 or 17 years, and I
received plenty of advice, free advice as I walked along the beach. And it reminded me of a
conversation that I'd had with President Clinton when he visited Australia last and we were
talking about the things that Australians and Americans had in common and we agreed that
our social informality, our scorn for class structures and the lack of formality and rigidity of
older societies is something that we had in common, and he said to me, " what do you think we
don't have in common, what are some of our differences?", and I offered the view that I
thought Australians were a little more sceptical perhaps than Americans were and a little more
irreverent and this reminded me of my most sceptical and irreverent moment in the time that
I've been in politics, perhaps one or two may have heard this story before but I'll take that
risk. It was in 1983, it was just after March of 1983 and I was then a member of a former
government, not a member of an incumbent government, and I'd just been defeated, and I'd
been Treasurer in that Government and I didn't feel terribly popular at the time and I was
invited down to Ballarat by one of my colleagues. And the tour of an iron factory was one of
the events and I walked around and I tried to make conversation with the people and I got the
impression that most of them hadn't really wanted me to be there and that virtually none of
them had voted for my side of politics a few weeks earlier. And that message was made very
clearly. And as I was walking out the door somebody came racing over and he said to me:
" John, John, I've always wanted to meet you, I've always wanted to meet you, I think you
were a great Treasurer". And my face started to light up and my day brightened a little. And
he started to furiously shake my hand and he suddenly stopped and he looked at my hand and
he said, " I know that hand, it's been in my pocket for my last five years!". I don't think you
could have that exchange in any other country in the world, and I think it is one of the
absolutely lovable and endearing things about living in this country and about being an
Australian. 
Can I say one or two rather more reverent and more serious things. Can I say not only but
importantly because I am addressing you here in Sydney. I do want to take the opportunity of
saying to this huge gathering particularly containing many representatives of the business
community and the Sydney community generally, how very strongly committed the Federal
Government is to making the Olympic Games of the Year 2000 here in Sydney an absolutely
stunning success. I want to assure you that my Government will work as closely as possible
with the Premier of New South Wales and the Lord Mayor of Sydney to make this a
completely bipartisan Australian effort. An occasion when Australia can be showcased to the
world in a way that we haven't been in the past. Not only does the Games of the Year 2000
offer us a unique opportunity of demonstrating the treasure house of talent here in Australia,
but also offers up very great economic opportunities and if we are sensible as a community as
a city as a nation, then we can derive enormous economic as well as cultural and sporting and
other benefits from the Olympic Games of the Year 2000.
Can I also say, speaking as the Prime Minister of Australia, how important it is for the event to
be seen as an honour not only just to Sydney but also for the entire nation. I look of course
from time to time at the intercity and interstate rivalry for sporting events. I'm a great believer
in competition cities and between states for the location of sporting events but at the end of
the day what really matters to me is that the event or the occasion comes to Australia, and
where it may be located in Australia is a necessity of lesser importance.
Ladies and gentlemen can I thank the New South Wales committee for the Australia
Celebration for inviting me to be here and to share a few of my thoughts with you. I've been
to a number of these luncheons in the past and this is the first opportunity I've had as Prime
Minister to address it. I think one of the completely uncontroversial and quite unanimous
things that can be said about the celebration of Australia Day is the way in which it has
gathered momentum and gathered pace as the years have gone by. When I was a child going
to school in Sydney in the late 1940s and early 1950s it was anniversary day, it was celebrated
in a fairly desultory fashion but as the years have gone by it is a reminder of the greater
passion that all of us are gathering for our national identity and our sense of being as
Australians, the day has gathered a great deal more lustre, and I want to congratulate the
Australia Day Committee under Barry Unsworth here in New South Wales for the outstanding
job that he's done in organising this luncheon and the contribution that it is making to help all
of us celebrate the miracle of being Australians.
Thank you. 



Fax from 25/ 01/ 97 13: 41 Pg 1
PRIME MINISTER
January 1997 TRANSCRIEPT OF THLE PRIME M. LISTER
THE HLON. JOHN UOWARD MP
SIEECU AT IT'' LE OPENING OF TUlE ELECTORIATE OFFILZE OF
TRISH WORTH MEP, FEDERAL, MEMB3ER FOR ADELAIDE
IE&amp; OE
Thank you very much Trish. To Martin Cameroni, the President of the Liberal P~ lty in
South Australia.. to Amanda Vanstorte, R~ obert Hill, Tan M~ cLachlan, my other state and
Federal Parliameniaxy colleagues, ladies and gentleicn. I1h ave reflected on a niimber of
the rcsonances; with a year ago as I travelled here this morning the short distance from the
hotel. It was cxaciy a year ago that I opcncd that campaign office. It was about thc
same time that T think I opened a campaign office for Andrew Sotdcou. I remember to
the day of course as so many of us do, the Satuday of the Australia Day weekend last
year, when the election was called and can I say, Trish that ifs alys a pleasuic'to be int
Adelade about this time of the year and it was very nice of you to gi've me the
opportunity of saying a few words at the opening of your office.
We are on the eve of Australia Day, a day that has grown in the affections and the
commitmnent of Australians to celebrate over the last ten or 20 years. When I was
growing up people sort of struggled to celebrate Australia Day. It was called -Aruivemsary
Day I1th ink then-It certainly was in Sydney, and I guess it was the samne all aroun. d
Australia. And we sort of went through the motions of celebratirng Australia Day but
over the years. and particularly over the last decade, the celebration of it bas become a
focal point of people thinking about and reflecting on those things that bind us together.
One of the credos that I have always tried to live by in political life, both inside my own
party and also within the community is tbat we ought to focus more on the things! that
bind us together rather than or the things that might pish us apart
And onc of the most visible demonstrationis, the most powerfuil pieces of evidence of the
success of Australia will be that tomnorrow, around our country thousands upon thousands 
25/ 01/ 97 13: 41 Pg.
Fax from' Of People will become Austr-alian citizens. They will come from literally the four corners
of the Earth. They will pledge themselves to put the interests of Australia against the
interests of arny other coutrny, not in the sense of r-epudiating the countrics from which
thev have come but in the sense of embracine, an overarching commitment in common
wilh those who are aLready Australian citizens. to the future of our country and to the
' values that we share in common. And it's a very powerfii reminder that that great act
across the counucy, it's a very powerful reminder of what a magnet of tolerance this
country is to people from so many parts of the world. And it cuts through the clatter. it
cuts through the neg-ativism, it cuts through the tendency of somec Australians to see this
country as other than a ' very robust, democratic, open, tolerant and diverse community. I
think it is a source of tremendous pride to all Australian~ s, whether they were born in this
country or whether they have becomec Australians by choice, it is a reminder to all of us
ofjut how high in the esteem of thc rest of the world our country stands in terms of the
values that men arnd women around the world regard as important-
Over the Christmas holiday period I always try and read some books and I read a very
densely, and I don't mean dense in a pcjorative sense but dense in terms of size, history
of what was called the short 20th century, it was called The Age of Extemes and it traces9
the history of the 20th century from the-beainning of the Great War of 1914 to the
collapse of communism in the early 1990s. And it contains right in the mniddlc of it a
reminder that only eight courttries, if you coun sepaineiy Treland and the United
Kingdom only eight countries have been continuoU5ly democratic during that period and
Australia is one of those eight countries, the others bcing of course the United Stes,
New Zealand, Canaa the United Kingdom, Sweden and Switzerland. Now many
countries of c ourse lost their democracy and their freedom not through choice but
because of the invasion of others and that should always be kept in mind. But it is a
reminder to all of us ofjust how successful Australia has really been. And the greatest
measure of somebody's estem in the community is what others think of him or her and
the greatest mark of the esteem of the nation in the eyes of the rest of the world is what
the citizens of other countries think of that nation, and the desire of so may people to
become citizens of this country and the willingness of them to do so is a very powerful
reminder to all of us of what this country has achieved and what it really stauds; for.
Dfish, can T say on a more personal note that 1 have a very strong affinity with the
electorate of Adelaide. I bave experieniced some ins and outs I have got to say in recient
years, I am delighted to say a lot more is than outs. I think your achievemnt in winning
the electorate of Adclaide in the ti place was a remnarkable tribute to your cminpaigning
skils, it realy was. And the service that you have given to this very diverse electorate, it
i3 an cleetorae that of course embraces the heart of the city of Adelaide, it is an
electorate that straddles a very widc group of socio-econonucally speakig, of
AuStralians. It includes amongst its constituents people of very diverse backgrounds, It
has a very important educational base. It has one of ihe most important sporting bases off
course, both surnmer and winter sports, of any city in Australia and you represcnit it
magnificently and your achievement in increasing your majority at the last election and
the work that you&amp; do as a Member of Parliament the contribution you make to the 
Fax f om : 25/ 01/ 97 13: 41 Pg: 3
understanding of some of the cveryday problems of l ife is a very, very good examplec to
your colleagues.
Onle of my best recollections of Trish and a demonstration of the sort of person she really
is was the day ofthat quite disgraceful attack on Parliament on the I % h of August and
after the demonstrators had been, shall we say, I say it quite unashamedly, repulsed by
the police who behaved in an absolutely magnificent way, and other security people, in a
very difficult situation. I went around as soon as possible to inspect the diamage and
there was Trish resumning her profesion for the moment of nursig and caring for one of
the police officers who had been assaulted by several of the demnonstrators. And that is
typical of the caring role That she plays out, both as a Member of Parliamnt and as a
member of the community. It was a vivid reminder of the kind of person she is and the
fact that shes never forgotten that she bas a caring role in the commiunity as a citizen and
her trining as a nurse was very much in evidence on that occasion.
This office will be of course open and will be a vehicle of support for all of the citizens
of the electorate of Adelaide. Although in the nature of politics only slightly over haw, or
in some electorates, immn'ensely over half of de community votes for you. once you' re a
Member of Parliament you have an obligation a'nd a commitment to serve the people who
voted against you as well as the people who voted for you. And I know that Trish winl do
that and I imow that anybody, irrespective of their politics, who comes to this office can
be assured of a good hearing, can be assured of a persistent etTort to help them in sol-ving
whatever problem that they might have and I think that it is appropriate that there are so
many community leaders here.
So ladics and gentlemen, as T reflect on the last year I do so as leader of the Liberal Party
with very great pride at what has been acieved, not in any triumphal sense. We were
given the great privilege of being the Goverrnment of Australia. We have wiorked very
hard and I have been very ably assisted as Prime Minister in a very, very powerful
Ministerial and Parliamcniary contingent from South Australia. T think T have said before
that I1 cant recall in the history of Federation, certainly not i the post-war period, where
there have been four Cabinet Ministers in the Government of this coLmtry from South
Australia, which is the case at the present time and they amo ably surrounded by a very
powerful contingent of very hard-working Senators and Members, and I am delighted to
say at the opening of this office how much T appreciate the contribution of South
Australians to my Government and to the Parliament generally. It has been a very
exciting year since I was last here. It's almost a year since the change of Government
We have achieved a lot but we have many challenges ahead of us and the new year has
brought a number of reminders of continuing challenges. The new year has also brought
somc: new challIenges which willI engage the energics and the goodwilJI and th e
commitmnent and the application of anl of us. 
Fax from But ladies and gentlemen, I am here today to, with great pleasure, to declare Trish's new
electorate office open, to wish her well, to thank her for the care that she gives to the
people of Adelaide, to thank her for being such a magnificent member of our
Parliamentary team and to wish her many, many years of service to the cause of the
people of Adelaide and to the Australian community generally.
Thank you.
ends 25/ 01/ 97 13: 41 Pg: 4 



Fax from 25/ 01/ 97 14: 00 Pg: 1
PRIME MINISTER
January 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF TILE PRiME 1VNISTER.
T19E RON. JOHN UOWARD MP
SPEECHI AT ITH E OPENING OF TUlE ] ELECTORATE OFF&amp; E OF
TISHi WORTH Ml[, FEDERAL, MIEMBER FOR ADELAIDE
IE&amp; O
Thank you very much Trish. To Martin Cameron, the President of the Liberal Phrty in
South Australia,, to Amnanda Vanstone, Robert Hill, Tan McLachlan, my other stae and
Federal Par] lamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleincn. I1h ave reflected on itnu ~ mber of
the rcsoniances with a year ago as T travelled here this morning the short distance from the
hotel-It was cxactiy a year ago that I opencd Ehat campaign office. It was about the
samne time that I think I opened a campaign office for Andrew Soutbicou. I remember to
the day of course as so maay or us do, the Saturday of The Australia Day weekend List
year, when the election was called and can I say, Trish that it's alwayus a pleasureito be int
AdcLaide about this time of the year and it was very nice of you to give me the
opportunity of saying a few words at the opening of your office.
We are on the eve of Australia Day, a day that has grown in the affections and thi
commiftrnnt of Australians to celebrate over the last ten or 20 years. When I1w as
growing up people sort of struggled to celebrate Australia Day. It was called A4nniversary
Day I think then-It certainly was in Sydney, and I guess it was the samre all aro". d.
Australia. And we sort of went through the motions of celebrating Australia Day but
over the years, and particularly over the last decade, the celebration of it has become a
focal poinit of people thinking about anid reflecting on those things that bind us together.
One of the credos that I have always tried to live by in political life, both inside mny own
party and also within the community is that we ought to focus more on the things! that
bind us together rather than on the things that might ptush us apart
Arnd one of the most visible demonstrations, the most powerful pieces of evidence of the
success of Australia will be that tomrorrow, around our couny thousands upon thousands 
Faxfrft25/ 01/ 97 14: 00 rg.
of people will become Australian citizens, They will come from literally the four corners
of the Earth. They will pledge themselves to put the interests of Austrulia against the
interests, of any other counny, not in the sense of repudiating the countrics from which
thev have come but in the sense of embrac t an overarching commitment in common
with those who are already Australian citizenis, to the future of our country and to the
vadlues that we sharm in common. And it's a very powcrfd reminder that that great act
across the country, it's a very powerful reminder of what a magnet of tolerance this
counry Is to people fromt so many parts of the world-And it cuts through the clatter. it
cuts through the negativism, it cuts through the tendency of some Australians to see this
country as other than a v~ ery robust, democratic, open, tolerant and diverse community. I
think it is a source of tremendous pride to all Austraians, whether they were born in this
country or whether they have becorne Australians by choice, it is a reminder to all of us
ofjust how high in the esteem of thc rest of the world our country blads in termis of the
values that men and women around the world regard as important
Over the Christmas holiday period I always try and read some books and I read a very
densely, and I1d on't mean dense in a pejortive sense but dense in terms of size, history
of what was called the short 20th century, it was called The Age of Exienies and it traces
the history of the 20th century from the -beginning of the Great War of 1914 to the
collapse of cormmunism in the early 1990s. And it contains right in themriddlc of it a
reminder that jonly eight countries, if you count separately Ireland and the United
Kingdom only eight countries have becn continuouly democratic during that period and
Australia is one of those eight countries, the others being of course the United States,
New Zealand, Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden and Switzerland. Now many
countries of c ourse lost their democracy and their freedomn non through choice but
because of the invasion of others and tt should always be kept in mind-But it is a
reminder to all of us ofjust how successful Australia has really been. And the greatest
measure of somebody's estem in the community is what others think of him or her and
the greatest mark of the esteem of the nation in the eyes of the rest of the world is what
the citizens of other countries think of that nation, and the desire of so many people to
become citizens of this country and the Willingness of them to do so is a very powerful
reminder to all of us of what this country has achieved and what it really stnads for.
Trish, can T say on a more personal note that 1 have a very strong affinty with the
electorate of Adelaide. I have experienced some ins and outs I have got to say in recent
years, I am delighted to say a lot more is than outs. I think your achievement in winning
the electorate of Adclaide in the first, place was a rcimarkable tribute to your campaigning
skils, it really was. And the service that you have given wo this very diverse electorate, it
is an electorate that of course embraces the heart of the city of Adelaide, it is an
electorate that straddles a very wide group of socio-economically speaking, of
Australians. It includes amongst its constituents people of very diverse backgrounds it
has a very important educational base. It has one of the most important sportng bases of
course, both summer and winter sports, of aay city in Australia and you represenit it
magnificently and your achievement in increasing your majority at the last election anid
the work that you do as a Member of Parliamient, the contribution you make to the 
Fa fom25/ 01/ 97 14: 08 Pg:
understanding of some of the everyday problems of life is a very, very good exarrple to
your colleagues.
One of my best recollections of Trish and a demonstration of the sort of person she really
is was the day ol'that quite disgraceful attack on Parliament on The 1 9th of August, and
after the demonstrators had been, shall we say, I say it quite unashamedly, repulsed by
the police who behaved in an absolutely magnificent way, and other security people, in a
very difficult si tuation. I went around as soon as possible to inspect the damnage and
ther was Trish resumning her profession for the moment of nursing and caring for one of
the police officers who had been assaulted by several of the demonstrators. And that Is
typical of the caring role that she plays out, both as a Member of Parliamient and as a
member of the community. It was a vivid reminder of the kind of person shec is and the
fact that shes never forgote that she bas a caring role in the community as a citizen and
her training as a nurse was very much in evidence on that occasion.
This office will be of course open and will be a vehicle of supporl for all of the citizens
of the electorate of Adelaide. Although in the nature of politics only s~ iliry over halt, or
in some electorates, immrensely over hialf of the community votes for you.. once you're a
Member of Parliament you have an obligation and a commitment to serve the people who
voted against you as well as the people who voted for you. And I kmow that Trish wil do
that and I know that anybody, irrespective of their politics, who comes to this office can
be assured of a good hearing, can be assured of a persistent effort to help them in sol-ving
whatever problem that they miight have and I think that it is appropriate that There are so
many community leaders here.
So ladies and gentlemen, as T reflect on the last yea T do so as leader of the Liberal Parry
with very great pride at what has been achieved, not in any triumphal sense. We were
given the great privilege of being the Government of Australia. We have worked very
hard and I have been very ably assisted as Prime Minister in a very, very powerful
MNinisterial and Parliamcntmy contingent from South Australia. T think I have said before
tha I1c ant recall in the history of Federation, certainly not i the post-war period, where
there have been four Cabinet Mnisters in the Goverrnent of this comuy from South
Australia, which is the case at the present time and they ame ably surrounded by a very
powerful contingent of very hard-working Senators and Members, and I arn delighted to
say at -the opening of this office how much T appreciate the contribution, of South
Australians to my Government and to the Parliament generally. It has been a very
exciting year since I1w as last here. It's almost a year since the change of Government
We have achieved a lot but we have many challenges ahead of us and the now year has
brought a number of reminders of continuing challenges. The new yea has also brought
somc: new challenges which will engage the energies and the goodwill and the
commitment and the application of all of us. 
Fax from But ladies and gentleme, I am here today to, with great pleasure, to declare Trish's now
electonte office open, to wish her well, to thank her fotbr the care that she gives to the
people of Adelaide, to thank her for being such a magnificent member of our
Parliamentary team and to wish her many, many years of service to the cause of the
people of Adelaide and to the Australian community generally.
Thank you.
ends 25/ 81/ 97 14: 00 Pg: 4 



26 January 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO MARION CITY COUNCIL AUSTRALIA DAY
CITIZENSHIP CEREMONY, HALLETT COVE, SOUTH
AUSTRALIA
( tape begins)
past few days, rather as being the miracle of being an Australian. On an occasion such
as this there's no shortage of words, there's no shortage of cliches, there's no shortage of
rhetoric and often there's no shortage of, on occasions rather, meaningless comments
about national identity. I just want to say to you that the most important things that we
should think about on an occasion such as today are those things that unite us and bind us
together as Australians. It's always been a strong belief of mine that the core of continued
nation-building is to focus on the things that we have in common rather than the things
that might divide us or might push us apart.
Everybody has their own view of what constitutes the Australian identity. That is the
nature of a democracy. It is not the role of the Prime Minister, it is not the role of any
self-appointed group of national identity dietitians to tell us what our national identity is.
A national identity is something that belongs to the entire community. It is something that
comes out of the spirit of a people. It is something that is fashioned over a period of time
or fashioned or influenced by some great, traumatic or earth-shattering events in the
history of a nation and that is the case with Australia as it has been with many other
countries. I was reminded by the message read from Andrew Southcott that one of the
great achievements of Australia is that we have been one of only eight countries that have
been continuously democratic through the whole of the 20th century, and whilst it is
acknowledged that many countries lost their democracy through invasion and conquest
and through no fault of their own, it is a particularly meritorious achievement and
something that those who would tend to denigrate the Australian achievement, those who 
would see the Australian identity as being linked in part with a perpetual apology rather
than a proud assertion of what this country has achieved, I think that we have been, along
with only seven other nations the only group of nations to be continuously democratic
through the entire 20th century, it is a tribute to the skill of those that have gone before us,
it is a tribute to the special character of this country and it is a tribute to the Australian
achievement. Like any nation we have stains in our past, we have made mistakes, we have done
injustices to people. Injustices and underprivilege remain in modern Australia. To pretend
that everybody has a full measure of the Australian achievement is to ignore reality. To
pretend that there are not things that remain to be done to generate a more secure, a more
just and a more equitable Australian community is also to ignore reality. But when you
assess a nation, you assess a balance sheet of its past achievements and the current state of
its being and when you apply that to Australia, that balance sheet has been an
extraordinarily positive one. And one of the many things that has distinguished the
Australian achievement has been our remarkable openness and tolerance. No nation in the
world has more successfully absorbed people from the four corners of the Earth in a more
tolerant fashion than has the Australian nation and when it comes to tolerance and when it
comes to willingness to accept people, this nation should bend its knee to no group of
people or to no nation in asserting the tolerance and the liberties and the open heartedness
and the fair mindedness of the Australian community. Our success over recent decades in
particular in successfully absorbing people from the rest of the world in an atmosphere of
great harmony and great openness and great tolerance is one of the proudest things we
should feel on Australia Day and I for one, and I think I echo the views of millions of
Australians in saying it, that that is something of which we can be assertively proud and
not in any way apologetic or in any way lacking in a very strong affirmation of what
Australia has achieved.
Can I say to those people who are becoming Australian citizens for the first time today,
welcome, thank you for making our country yours. We welcome the contribution that you
make. By becoming Australian citizens I naturally invite you to continue as I guess is the
case with all of you, your very active participation in Australian and community life and as
Australian citizens in the fullest sense of the word to exercise and enjoy the privileges of
living in this country.
I spoke in Sydney at an Australia Day gathering of some of the characteristics that have
always distinguished the Australian society and the Australian community and one of those
characteristics of course has been our informality, our openness and our lack of
pretension. I think there's something quite evocative and touching about having a
citizenship ceremony on the edge of the water. The ocean has always played a very major
part in shaping the psyche of Australia. To millions of Australians an identification with
the sea, an identification with the water has been part and parcel of their upbringing, and a
part and parcel of how they think of themselves as Australians. I should say, Mr Mayor,
Your Worship, that having this Australian Day ceremony on the edge of the ocean, I
couldn't think of a more appropriate spot. It's a reminder that we have come, we're a 
nation that to a large extent is made up of people who have come across the ocean, either
by ship or more recently by planes to make this their home. And of course it is also a
reminder that we are as a nation an amalgamation of those who have lived here for tens
and thousands of years, the original Australians, and those who have come more recently
over the last two hundred years and it is also, as the General Manager pointed out, an
opportunity to reflect upon the importance of a better understanding between all
Australians and a determination to achieve through the remedying of disadvantage a full
and complete reconciliation between all members of the Australian community.
Ladies and gentlemen, this above all is an occasion for us to forget our differences,
whether they be of a political, commercial or other kind. It is not a day that belongs to the
Liberal Party, the Labor Party or to any other Party. It is not a day that belongs to any
particular view about how Australian society should be run within the democratic
tradition. It is a day to celebrate things in common. It is a day to celebrate the unity of
the Australian people. It is a day to celebrate the miracle of being an Australian and it is
most importantly the day to be immensely proud of the role model of tolerance and
openness that Australia represents to the world, not only now in the late 1990s but over
the 200 years that have gone by since European settlement.
Thank you very much. 



I Fax from 29 January 1997 TRANSCRI PT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
LUNCHEON ADDRESS TO THE GOLDEN CITY PADDLE
STEAMER MUSEUM SOCIETY
BALLARAT, VICTORIA
E&amp; OE
Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to thank Michael very warmly for that welcome; to
acknowledge Mr fam Bell who's Chairman-of the appeal; to Councillor Coghian, the
Mayor of the city of Ballarat; to Mr de Fegely, the State member, and his wife, and all
the other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is true that over the years that I've been in politics I've come to Ballarat on
numerous occasions. There's a variety of reasons for that. The local members have
invited me from time to time. There was a period when I wasn't invited as regularly as
I am now and I am delighted to say that the invitations have resumed. And on top of
that, of course, Ballarat has always played a very special role in the recollections of
anybody who's interested in the history of Australia. And I remarked at the unveiling
of the bust, if you can put it that way, I remarked that as we approach the Centenary of
Federation, Australians are becoming more and more interested in the history of our
country. And not only at a national level, but every local community is looking back
through its memorabilia and looking back through its history and getting together
stories. And they're all fascinating and they've all got their share of romanticism and
they al have their share of heroes.
Every community is building a history of what has gone before us. And I think one of
the characteristics of the celebration of the Centenary of Federation in Australia will be
quite literally an outpouring of local, historical recollection. Every community in
Australia that has any kind of identity separate from the next community will be doing
that. And one of the many ways in which we can celebrate the Centenary of the
Federation of Australia is of course to encourage every local community to dig into its
history because every local commaunity has marvellous history. And, of course, that is
what this, I feel, the Golden City Paddle Steamer appeal and this museum is all about,
it's recalling and recreating the history of this district. I rR3/ 81/ 1917: 47 Pg: 1 
Fax from The paddle steamer that I travelled on was built in 1885. That's 112 years ago. There
aren't many vehicles that you travel on that are 112 years old. I hope none of the
planes I travel on are 112 years old! And it is really quite a thing that you can have
preserved a mode of travel. You can recreate the atmosphere as best one can given
the passage of more than a century. And that the driver, the Captain of the vessel
however he may choose to be described is the Grandson of the person who built it.
Now that is to you that old cliche that is living history. And the point I make, lades
and gentlemen, is that there are hundreds and thousands of stories like that in cities and
in towns and in villages and hamlets all around Australia, and one of the things that I
do hope we as a nation do over the next three or four years is in every part of the
Australian community we gather together our historical recollections.
There are a lot of reasons why Ballarat, of course, is very much on the map when one
thinks of the history of Australia. The more famous episodes are very well known in
Australian history. Of course it's produced some very famous sportsmen and women,
the city of Balarat. I don't think it's produced too many rugby league players.
Although I remember going to Benalla and launching the Weary Dunlop Memorial at
Benialla and one thing I was very happy to remind that audience of was the fact that he
was the first Victorian to ever play rugby union for Australia which was a pretty
remarkable achievement and shows that, you know, there is some seepage, Michael,
across the boarder. You have to bear that in mind, Gasnier is a very famous name in
rugby league, Michael, a very, very famous name.
Of course, coming right up to date I was delighted to meet the Chairman of the local
conservation organisation which has won the contract to operate the Green Corps
which was one of the election promises that we made before the last election. And I
really am delighted to acknowledge the presence of the Chairman of that organisation
here today. This is an amazing organisation which acts as a facilitator between people
who want to give up their time for nothing in return to cure for the environment
matching those with organisations that want people to provide those services. And
again some pretty fierce competition the organisation, a Ballarat organisation, won
from the Federal Government the contract to run the Green Corps which is going to
put, initially, some two to three thousand young Australians to work on projects that
inv * olve caring for the environment. They'll receive very, very good training and also a
contribution at the end of the period of their training towards their future education
expenses. And the headquarters of that is going to be here in Ballarat. It's not going
to be in Canberra. Although it's a volunteer organisation, in a sense it's indulged itself
in, I suppose, the practises and the achievements of a small business because it's won a
contract against fierce competition.
And that, of course, brings me to a brief but nonetheless heartfelt reference to
something that's very important to me and very important to my Government and I
know is very important to the city of Ballarat, and that is the place and the role of
small business in the fife of this city and in the life of so many areas of provincial
Australia. I said over a year ago during the election campaign that I regarded getting small
business going in an even stronger fashion as being the long term solution, as best we
Fa om30/ 01/ 97 11: 47 Pg: 2 
I Fax from could find it and as best as a community we could find it, to the challenge of high
youth unemployment. And whatever our political beliefs are, this is not a party
political occasion, it's a community occasion, we have a concern about the level of
youth unemployment within our society. And it's not just an economic and a political
challenge but it's also a social challenge. And I do believe very sincerely that doing all
we can to create more opportunities, provide more incentives, provide more
encouragement and provide more support for small business will do more than any
other single thing to reduce youth unemployment, not only here in Ballarat but through
the whole of Australia. And so many of the initiatives of my Government have been
directed towards that and I want to take the opportunity of saying what enormous
importance my Government does attach to continuing to confront the challenge of high
youth unemployment and continuing against the difficulties that it represents,
continuing to do ali we can to bring it down. It's not easy. I don't pretend to have
overnight instant solutions but it does remain a very significant social as well as an
economic and political challenge.
One of the characteristics that binds Australians together is the tradition of volunteer
effort and the society and the organisations, behind the society whose appeal I formally
launched today is yet another example of how a group of volunteers in the community
develop a good idea. That idea captures the imagination and the attention of the local
community and for no material reward, those people like Mr Bell and all of the other
people in his organisation, they set their minds to raising flunds to recreate some history
to provide a focal point for community activities,
And I want to encourage all of you to support the museum to support the appeal. I
am delighted to launch it. As I look around in this restaurant today I see so many
aspects of the community of Ballarat represented. I see its federal and State political
representatives; I see the Mayor of city of Ballarat; I see local business leaders. I had a
stroll through the museum earlier and it's an attractive focal point, a reminder of the
connection between the history of the city of Ballarat and the lake. I was reminded by
the Mayor as we steamed through, of course, that this was the which I had
momentarily forgotten this was the site of all the rowing events in the 1956 olympic
games. I remember 1956 very well because I was doing my leaving certificate in the
middle of the olympic games and it's an end of year I remember very, very vividly.
But what this luncheon represents is the beginning of a very, very important appeal to
raise flunds to recapture, recreate and preserve for the Muure a very important part of
the history of a very significant part of Australia. Ballarat is not just a possession of
the State of Victoria, it is a possession of the entire nation because it's inextricably
bound up with the history of this country, the formation of some of the attitudes of this
country, some of the myths, some of the traditions and the legends of Australia and it
has a permanent and quite indelible part in place in the history of Australia and this
appeal wil make a very important contribution towards strengthening that place and
that role and that appeal. I warmly commend it and I have very much pleasure in
launching it.
Thank you. Fa om30/ 01/ 97 11: 47 Pg: 3 



Fax from PRIME MINISTER
29 January 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
UNVEILING OF BRONZE BUST BALLARAT
E&amp; OE
Councillor James Coghian and Mrs Coghian, to my colleague the Federal Member for
Ballarat, Michael Ronaldson, to my State Parliamentary colleagues, to the artist
amongst us, well there are probably many artists amongst but given the nature of the
occasion, the particular artist amongst us Peter Nicholson, other distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen.
Firstly, can I say what a great delight it is to be in the beautiflul gardens of Ballarat.
Australia is blessed by the fact that in many parts of our country, particularly in the
provincial and rural areas of Australia we have very fine gardens. I don't think you
could find a finer example anywhere in Australia than those of the Botanical Gardens
of Ballarat. And, of course, the city of Ballarat has a very deep association with the
history of Australia and as a community, as we approach the 100 years of the
centenary, the Centenary of Federation, it's only a few years off now and we will
celebrate 100 years of the Federation of Australia from the first of January 190 1.
It is natural, inevitable and I think highly desirable that Australians increasingly reflect
upon what has been achieved during that 100 year period and increasingly reflect upon
the history of Australia. And when you reflect upon the history of Australia, not only
over the last 100 years, but also in the years that went before that you can't, of course,
omit a reflection on many of the historical associations between the Ballarat area and
the development of Australian nationalism, the development of distinctively Australian
attitudes back in the 19th Century which, in fact, pre-dated the Federation of Australia
on the first of January 1901.
And, of course, this avenue of Prime Ministerial busts is itself a contribution to the
history of the country. As I wandered down observing the various likenesses of my 24
predecessors I reflected briefly on the changed circumstances in which each of them
came to the office of Prime Minister, I thought of the circumstances of Australia in
1901 when Sir Edmund Barton was sworn in as the first Prime Minister of Australia. I
thought of the trauma of World War I which was grappled with by a number of Prime
Ministers and not least, of course, Billy Hughes who became famous with the
Fafrv~ 30/ 01/ 97 11: 47 Pg: 4 
Fax from description of ' The Little Digger" and of James Henry Sculbi who had to grapple with
the depths of the depression in the early 1930s and of the various terms in office of Sir
Robert Menzies, Prime Minister at the outbreak of World War 11, ceasing not long
thereafter to be Prime Mnister only to return in 1949 to govern for a record period
until 1966.
1 think of the great leadership shown by John Curtin, the Prime Minister of Australia
during World War 11 and the toll that it took on his life and his being and led to his
early death in 1945. Many of the other Prime Ministers of this country on both sides
of the political fence, we all have our views, you have your views about me, you all
have your views about my predecessors. This is not an occasion for partisanship rather
it is an occasion to acknowledge the rich history of Australia, to acknowledge that the
things that bind us together as Australians are far more important and more enduring
and more significant than the things that push us apart.
I'm delighted that Peter Nicholson is here today. I've observed his work over the
years, it's hard not to. It's compulsive viewing and I agree that he's bipartisan, he
certainly gives me a flick from time to time and he's given the other blokes a flick too
from time to time. I mean, from rubber to bronze is a remarkable, it's a mark of his
artistry and of his craftsmanship. I understand there's a bit of a tradition here that
occasionally the Prime Ministers get dumped, you know, and one of my party room
commnentators said that it was the only circumstance in which I would become a " wet".
But, ladies and gentlemen, I think one of the things that marks Australians out from
any other group of people in the world I made this remark at an Australia Day speech
I gave a few days ago is that we have a very healthy irreverence and a very healthy
scepticism as a commity.
We are not a gullible people. We are, on occasions, blessed with a great amount of
scepticism and I think healthy scepticism in any community is a very good thing
provided it doesn't lurch into cynicism. We shouldn't be so sceptical that we become
cynical, equally we shouldn't be so gullible that we're not a wake up to somebody
who's trying to have us on. And that really is one of the great strengths that we have.
It is one of the things that marks us out from ot her people with whom we may have
similarities and the political cartoonists of Australia are in that long tradition of
political scepticism and it's part of our system. It's annoying sometimes but, can I say,
that scepticism is one of the things that has kept us a free people-It's one of the
reasons why Australia is listed amongst only eight countries, only eight nations, that
has been continuously democratic for the whole of the twentieth century and that is a
remarkable: thing.
And these days where sometimes I think people are too ready to see fault in Australia
and too ready to apologise for Australia, I think that particular achievement is one of
the reasons why instead of apologising we should as a community be immensely proud
of what we have achieved as a nation and particularly what we have achieved since the
Federation of the then colonies of Australia in 190 1.
So there are many things that are interesting and enriching in the life of a Prime
Minister. The most important is the regular contact with the people of Australia, the
reminders of the marvellous diversity of our country, the reminder of the spirit of
people wherever they may live in Australia and it is always to me a great pleasure to
Fafri~ 38/ 01/ 97 11: 47 Pg: 
Fax from visit different parts of the country to meet the citizens of different communities and
today is no exception.
So can I thank you Mr Mayor, can I thank you Councillor Coghian, to you Michael my
colleague, the Federal Member for Ballarat who gives such terrific representation to
this electorate in the national parliament, can thank you very much for inviting me
here and without any further ado I shall perform the deed. There is one thing I forgot
to mention Councillor Coghian said this was the second unveiling that he's presided
over, can I assure you Sir it will be the last!
ends Fafrr~ 30/ 01/ 97 11: 47 Pg: 6 



Fax from31/ 01/ 97 15: 51 Pg: 1
PRIME MINISTER
31 January 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE COMMITTEE FOR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIA, SYDNEY
E&amp; Thank you very much Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. It is, as was remarked the
case that I do have a long association with CEDA. Those politicians in Australia who
have memories like elephants have particular relationships with different organisations,
and it tends to vary in direct proportion to the extent to which the orgaunisation still
invites you to address them. When you are out of fashion and I have spent a
considerable part of my political career being sort of successively in and out of fashion
having gone through a significant period of time when I wasn't entirely flavour of
the month either electorally or in party political terms, CEDA was one of those
organisations that built up its credit for future changes by continuing to invite me along
and I also of course have a sentimental attachment to the Intercontinental Hotel. It
was the place that I spent election night cautiously simply booking some
accommodation for family and very close friends against the possibility of despite the
confidence I apparently displayed at the National Press Club although I should
confide with the Chairman that that address at the National Press Club was followed
immediately by what went down in the history of that campaign as being the ' Willis
Letters Affair'. I went back to the National Press Club to be confronted with these
letters that had allegedly been written by the Victorian Premier about some secret tax
plan I had. Nothing seems to change but we got over that and we won the election
and today I want to say a few things to you about where I see the Government's
political position and also some thoughts with you about the future prospects of the
Australian economy.
Politics is always a mix of getting the policy right as well as getting the politics right.
It is true that good policy is normally good politics but I would have to say to you on
the basis of more than 20 years experience that is not always the case. You can never
be a total slave to economic or industrial policy or industrial relations theory and
expect to continually succeed in politics. Equally, if you don't pay proper cognisance
of the importance of maintaining a forward momentum in policy development, you are
rightly over a period of time judged negatively and that over an equal period of time 
Fax fromu 31/ 61/ 97 15: 51 Pg: 2
has a very negative effect on the political fortunes of the Party that you may be a
member of or you may lead.
So, over the I1I months that we have been in office we have endeavoured quite
unashamedly to get a right mix of intelligent, reformist policy, not only in the economic
area and also to try and understand and accommodate the right political mix between
the policy imperative and also the political imperatives. Ultimately of course it is for
others to make a judgement about how successfu we have been in that. I like to
believe that in just under 12 months the Coalition Government that I had the privilege
of leading has got that mix about right, not of course completely right. There are
inevitably some people who say we should be going faster on the policy reform front.
There are some in the community who think we have gone too far. There are some
who believe that we haven't been politically sensitive enough. I think the mainstream
view, if I can call it that, is probably that we have got the mix about right.
I think there are subtle mood shifts in the Australian political community and the
political mood of Australians in the 1990s and what existed in the 1980s. There is
undoubtedly a sense of community unease about the way in which life in so many ways
has changed and that is a very, very difficult challenge for any government and for any
political leader. When you know that further change is needed in the national good,
which I do and I assume that most of you do and would share that view. But so much
of our lives have changed in the last 20 years. They've changed economically, they
have changed socially, they have changed between men and women, they have changed
so far as the power balance of nations is concerned. We no longer have a Cold War.
We have only one superpower in the world and that is the ' United States. We have the
fastest growing economic region sitting cheek by jowl in the area where Australia is.
We have vast changes as many of the retailers know in the consuming habits of
Australians, I think one of the great changes to have come out of the recession of the
late 1980s and early 1990s was a permanent change in the attitude of Australian
consumers. They became tougher buyers and I think have assumed the cultural attitude
of the Americans and many others around the world in determining to drive much
harder bargains and the buying habits of the young are very different now from what
the buying habits were when many of the people in this audience could describe
themselves as being in their late teens or early
I mention those things, ladies and gentlemen, because you can never get as a Prime
Minister or as a government an intelligent mix between the economics and the politics
of the decisions you take unless you have some understanding, and an on-going
understanding of the changes that are occurring in the community. It is just not real
life to imagine that you can't ignore fashion swings broadly defined in the attitude of
the young in OUr community, the broad changes in the moods of consumers. If you
continued to react according to the assumptions of even a few years, let alone a couple
of decades earlier then inevitably many of the attitudes that you strike are going to be
wrong. I speak to you today feeling very strong and very positive about the economic outlook
for Australia. I think at the moment Australia has a rare conjunction of very positive
circumstances so far as our economic future is concerned. We have very low inflation. 
Fax f rom 31/ 01/ 97 15: 51 PS: 3
We have as the Treasurer said a couple of days ago returned to an era quite decisively
of very low inflation. We really do have to go back to the pre-APEC days of the early
1970s to find the very low inflation that we have at the present time and it's not
confined to Australia, I read an article in The Spectator last night which indicated that
even a country such as Brazil that had experienced hyperinflation for most of its
modern experience had an inflation rate last year of iess than 10% and it is to be found
throughout the industrialised world and increasingly also into other parts which will
not be so described, The mid-year economic review, and I'll come back to that in a
moment, also told us that we have very strong by world standards and manageable
and it's important to link the strong economic growth that we have with the fact that
we have low inflation. So often in the past we've never been about to that double.
We have strong growth and that has spilled over into higher inflation which in turn has
produced tightening measures through monetary policy which would then in turn stifle
the growth. We do have a quite strong world economy. The United States economy
because, but not only, due to its remarkable flexibility enjoys very strong economic
growth and very strong business confidence and a very low level of unemployment, not
only by historic standards but also by world standards.
The European scene is more mixed but overall in reasonable shape with the British
economy probably performing better than others. The Asia Pacific region continues of
course not only to be tremendously important to Australia but also to be the strongest
regional performer in the world, and the significance of that in Australia is very widely
understood throughout the business and the political community. The mid-year
economic review which has set a new standard in political transparency so far as
economic policy is concerned in Australia it ran to something like a hundred pages
the mid year review of the former government ran to something like 6 or 9 pages. This
is the first illustration of the new charter of budget honesty which as a matter of law
when it goes through the Parliament will require the production independently by the
Treasury and the Department of Finance at the time of the next election, of a statement
of the economy's situation in sufficient detail to ensure that both sides of politics
respond in a way that is seen by the community as being responsible. What I think this
charter of budget honesty has done is to impose new disciplines on everyone. It's
imposed a new discipline on the Government, it's certainly imposed I'm happy to say a
new discipline on the Opposition as well. I like to be even-handed when it comes to
disciplines of this kind. And it has also, I might say, imposed a new discipline on the
bureaucracy, because the detail of the mid-year review has inevitably thrown the gaze,
enabled the gaze of so many of the professional economists in the private sector to
examine in detail what has happened against the projections of the Treasury and the
Department of Finance.
So. overall I think the new high in political transparency is an extremely good thing
and it can only make for better policy, more responsible policy, and a far better
understanding throughout the broader community of just bow the economy is
performing. Now it is true that there was a downward revision in company tax
collections and as a consequence we will need to undertake some further fiscal
tightening in the May budget. But as Peter Costello has indicated it is nowhere nearer
the dimension that was carried out at the time the last Budget was put together. And
the important news to emerge from the mid-year review is really the positive news and 
Fax from 31/ 61/ 97 15: 51 Pg: 4
that is that inflation projection is on the underlying front something like one percent
against 2% forecast in the Budget.
Business investment has been revised upwards, and the economic growth projection
that was thought by many to be a little optimistic has been confirmed. Now that does
really lay a very solid and a very positive and a very optimistic base. Now, I've been
in politics and having been Treasurer for a number of years and held other positions
long enough to know that it is never credible for a Prime Minister to say that or
indeed a Treasurer to say that everything about the economy functioning perfectly of
course it is not. But we do have and I think we would be selling ourselves short and I
think as a commuunity, particularly the business community, we would be failing to take
advantage of fortuitous circumstances if we didn't recognise that many of the
fundamentals in Australia at the present time are very very sound indeed and they do
provide a very very sound basis of optinmismn for the future. And all of you know that
psychology is an important element in economic decision making. Not everything is
made in a completely arithmetical and rational fashion. Hunches and instincts and
psychology and gut feelings all play a significant role, and I think we do have a very
fortuitous conjunction of circumstances.
And can I say, I hope with no immodesty, that another factor bodes well for the
economic future of Australia and that is that I believe that we have a government that
is willing in an intelligent persistent fashion to tackle the major areas of economic
reform. I know there are some who say the reforms should be more numerous. That
will always be the case. And that's part of the system and that's a good thing. You
should never have a situation where people are universally happy with what you are
doing. It breeds complacency, it breeds smugness and I think it is very very important
to have people breathing down your back from time to time as long as you reserve the
right to remind them from time to time when they may get some of that criticism
wrong. We were elected with commitments to a number of areas that were very important to
Australia's economic future. None of them was more important than Industrial
Relations reform. It took us a bit longer than we'd hoped to get it through the Senate
and we may have lost an amendment or two along the way but the great bulk of what
we took to the people was passed through the Senate, I'm very happy to say, and
those new changes, those laws came into operation, the first batch of them, only on the
first of January, a bare month that they have been in operation. Already we see I
understand a reduction of something like 8O*/ o in the number of unfair dismissal claims
made as a consequence of the new legislation. 1 have to say as I travel around
Australia in the year leading up to the election, no issue more frequently was the
subject of complaint to me from big companies, and small and medium ones, than the
operation of the old unfair dismissal laws, regularly paraded to me as a reason why
people weren't taking on more staff, Now, it is early days, but if the early signs are
borne out then that will prove to have been a very very important reform.
I think the industrial relations reforms over time will make a hugely significant
contribution to creating a better balance between labour and business, a better balance
which will better accommodate the right of employees to make free choices between
either being represented by unions or some other arrangement or indeed representing 
Fax from31/ e1/ 97 15: 51 Pg:
their own interest$, as many of them wish to and many of them are eminently capable
of so doing. I have great hopes for the industrial relations reforms. I believe the
awards simplification process which I am delighted to see companies are already taking
advantage of, and the new compliance measures that many companies are taking
advantage of; I think all of them will create a far more contemporary and a far more
competitive industrial relations climate.
We have of course embarked upon a very very committed programme of fiscal
consolidation. The $ 7 billion or more that was announced in the Budget of last year
has been subject to only minor marauding although significant in itself by the Senate
and I should say in that context that when Parliament resumes next week, we will be
re-presenting to the Senate and pressing ahead with some of the changes that have
been injected including the measure to impose a two year waiting period on the
payment of certain benefits to newly arrived people in Australia. We do believe very
strongly that a further tightening of fiscal policy will be needed, but as I mentioned at
the beginning of my speech, not of the dimension that was undertaken at the time of
the last budget. The end of last year saw us pass through the legislation to sell into the
private sector one-third of you sponsor and I'm very happy to see that the progress is
well underway with arrangements for what will prove to be the largest float in
Australia's history. And, of course, out of the proceeds of that will come $ 1.1 billion
which will go into the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia and that will represent the
larg~ st capital investment by any government in post war Australia in our
environmental future. And I am particularly proud of that commitment. It was a
commitment that was put together in the days leading up to the caling of the election
last year. And I think for a government, for a political party that over the years has
taken more than its fair share of flack about an alleged indifference to the environment,
I'm especially proud that we over the next two years will be able to demonstrate long
term credentials in the area of the environment that I believe have very, very strong
support through the Australian community.
I spoke earlier of mood and attitudinal changes within the community, Over the last
years Done has been more emphatic than the embracing by all generations of
Australians across the political divide, across the socio-economic divide, of a concern
for and a commitment to sensible policies which preserve and strengthen Australia's
environment. Nobody, I hope, of intelligence embraces radical environmentalism but
most Australians now want to see a sensible balance between economic development
and care for the environment. Sustainable development most Australians very, very
strongly support and our commitments in that area will be very, very strong evidence
of how we feel on that particular subject.
We also took to the last election campaign some very strong commitments to assist the
small business sector. I spoke a lot during that election campaign of the link between
job creation and small business. I still remain quite passionately of the belief, as I did a
year ago, that greater small business activity and a better climate for small business will
more than anything else provide the hope of greater job generation particularly for the
young within our community.
Unemployment, as everybody knows, remains too high. I don't pretend that the
8. 5 per cent rate will dissolve quickly, I do believe, however, that as the impact of 
Fax f rom 31/ 01/ 97 15: 51L Pg: 6
some of the policies that we've implemented already, and others to be implemented
this year, work their way through there will be a reduction in that level. You will
understand me being a little dismissive of and impatient with my political opponents
who after 13 years left us 8.5 per cent having taken it to 11I and then bang the table and
say how shocking, how terrible, you've had I11 months and you haven't got rid of it.
And I think a willingness to reject that sort of criticism is very, very understandable.
But the policies that we've implemented to help small business include, in the words of
the Business Review Weekly who I'm happy on this occasion to give quite a free plug
too include changes to the capital gains tax regime which the editor in chief of that
magazine described as the most important for the business comminunity in 30 years. The
impact of those changes will be that any small business can be sold in the proceeds up
to the tune of $ 5 million can be invested in any other business, not just into a like
business, we have abolished the like business test, but indeed into any other business
resulting in a deferral of capital gains tax liability. That change will come into
operation on the I1st of July next year and it will have a major impact in my view and in
the view of many on small business activity and the attractiveness of small business to
investors. There are other changes that we have made in that area including of course the
changes in the provision tax uplift factor. And the ben efits of the industrial relations
changes and the unfair dismissal changes are most marked indeed when it comes to the
small business sector,
There are many items on the agenda for the months ahead of us. The response in
February to the Charlie Bell committee on small business deregulation will be another
opportunity for the Government to demonstrate its credentials in the small business
arma We'll have the report of the Wallis Inquiry. I think I read somewhere that
there's a productivity commission report on the motor vehicle industry which will
attract, as reports dealing with tariff protection in Australia always do, a great deal of
interest. We will need and we will address the issue of waterfront reform in 1997. It
goes very much to the heart of the competitiveness of the Australian economy and it's
very important to the export sector.
So we have a very significant list of items ahead of us. And in drawing my remarks to
a close Mr Chairman, can I say that one of the many things that we have endeavoured
to do in the time that we have been in government is to develop and retain an
intelligent dialogue with the business community of Australia.
We were elected I think very proudly on the platform and on the vote that we were a
political party that was owned by nobody and that what we sought to do was to
represent the mainstream of the Australian commnunity. And if I may have a party
political com~ mercial, one of the characteristics of the Liberal Party, particularly its
modern manifestation, is that it is not really owned or dominated by any one section of
Australian society. I was especially proud that we were able to attract support from
many people at the time of the last election who would describe themselves as
traditional Labor Party voters, who described themselves as typical Aussie battlers,
people who were attracted by many of the more socially conservative policies that 
Fax from 31/ 01/ 97 15: 51 Pg: 7
were espoused by the Coalition and who'd grown weary of the special interest group
pleading that had been so successfu~ l under the former government.
Now, naturally, as an instinctive politician and as somebody whose prime responsibility
to his party is to preserve its electoral fortune, my responsibility is to achieve a mix of
outcomes that accommodate all of those responsibilities, I can't only govern for the
business community, I can't only govern for the consumer, I can't only govern for the
battler, I can't only govern for this or that section of the community, but what I can do
is endeavour in achieving the right mix of outcomes and the right mix of policies is to
achieve a fair distillation of those responsibilities.
A strong and growing economy, and I believe we have a rare conjunction of
circumstances that is going to produce that, is a fundamentally important element in a
contented community. When I made the mistake, I suppose, in politics of uttering a
spontaneous phrase and that was when I said I wanted Australians to feel relaxed and
comfortable I meant a few things a little more subtly than some of my critics have
suggested in response to that. But what I really did, more tban anything, have in mind
is that I wanted Australians to feel very, very confident about their past, very confident
about their current identity and also particularly buoyant and optimistic about the
future. I don't believe that every dragon has been tackled and slain over the last year but I do
believe that we have made a very and promising start, a sensible realistic start to
achieving those goals and at creating the kind of Australian community that I think.
most of us aspire to, whatever our political beliefs may be and wherever we may sit in
the Australian community. I think we have made a good start. There is much to be
done. I have greatly valued the cooperation and the candour of the business
coinunity in Australia. We are at heart a pro-business party. We won't always do
what you want. You will criticise us. You will be unhappy, as many of you were with
some of the measures contained in the last budget, but as the overall impact of our
Government is to create a low inflation, strongly pro-business investment environment
and improving international competitiveness and a more level playing field in industrial
relations then I think we are delivering very real benefits to the Australian business
community. Thank you very much. 



3 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ANNOUNCEMENT OF VENUE OF PRESIDENT'S CUP
MELBOURNE, VIC
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Mr Walker; to Jeff Kennett, the Premier of Victoria; to Tim
Finchem, the Commissioner of the PGA; to two of Australia's all time sporting greats,
Peter Thompson and Greg Norman, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm delighted as Prime Minister of Australia to formally acknowledge the decision that
the next President's Cup, the President's Cup of 1998 is coming to Australia. This is
an acknowledgment of the immense prestige in which Australia is held as a venue for
major sporting events. It's an acknowledgment of course of the immense contribution
that this country and its players of the years have made to golf
The President's Cup is a special golfing event. None of the prize money is taken by
the participants and the proceeds of it are contributed to various charities. It has been
successfully staged in the United States on two occasions, and during his recent visit to
Australia in October of last year the President and I discussed the possibility that the
event might, for the first time, go outside the United States. And I encouraged in him
the thought that it might come to Australia and that if that proved to be the case that
he would find that a convenient and indeed overwhelmingly appropriate reason to
return to our country.
There's quite a long tradition in politics and sport of particular politicians associating
attendance in particular parts of the world with particular sporting events and I
encourage the President to follow that long tradition if, in fact, the President's Cup
were to come to Australia.
So it is coming to Australia. I'm delighted about that. I want to thank very, very
warmly the PGA and the Commissioner for the PGA tour, Tim Finchem and also Mike
Bodney, and I'd also like to acknowledge the contribution of Brian Allan, the Chief
Executive of the Australasian PGA and of course the immense contribution of the two 
Australian golfing legends that I've already mentioned, that's Peter Thompson, the
Captain of the international team, and of course Greg Norman.
I, following the pattern of Presidents, Bush and Ford, will be the honorary Chairman of
the event. And of course once again this event will focus the attention of the sporting
world and the world generally on Australia and the contribution that Australia is
making to the life of this region and this part of the world and also the contribution
that Australia is making to the world of golf I've said on many occasions to both
Australian and international audiences that there is nothing that quite binds Australians
together so enthusiastically and so spontaneously as our passion for sport and our love
of the great sporting contest. And in the world of golf, in a short period of time, the
President's Cup has grown into being a very great sporting contest that has brought
together the uninhibited enthusiasm of great players but also the enthusiastic following
of spectators and audiences around the world. It is an event that will of course receive
worldwide extensive television coverage. It's an event that will showcase the sporting
prowess, not only of Australia and the United States but the sporting prowess of many
countries. So I am, as Prime Minister, absolutely delighted that once again the place of
Australia in the world of sport, the place of Australia in the world of golf, the place of
Australia in international sporting, cooperation has been acknowledged. And I'm
delighted that the 1998 President's Cup will be coming to Australia.
Thank you. 2 



3 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
SIGNING OF REGIONAL FOREST AGREEMENT ( RFA)
WITH PREMIER JEFF KENNETT MLA, MELBOURNE
E&amp; OE
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. The purpose of this news conference is for the
Premier and myself along with the Victorian Minister responsible, Mrs Tehan, to
announce that the Commonwealth Government and the Victorian Government have
reached agreement and as testified by the Premier and I signing that agreement in a
moment, the first of the Regional Forest Agreements covering the East Gippsland area
of Victoria. This is the trail blazer of forest agreements around Australia.
It is a win-win agreement. It is a win for jobs in regional Australia. It will generate
investment of $ 150 million in the industry and the creation of 400 additional jobs, at
least, in the industry. it is also a win for the preservation of environmental values
because the nationally agreed criteria under the agreement have been reached or
exceeded. And I want to thank the Victorian Government and particularly I want to
compliment the two Ministers directly responsible at a Victorian and Commonwealth
level that's Mrs Tehan, on behalf of the Victorian Government, and Senator Robert
Hill on behalf of the Federal Government.
This agreement is an example of how if you sit down in good faith and with good will
you can negotiate resource security preserving environmental values. This agreement
will endure for 20 years. There's provision for reviews every five years. The great
thing it does is that it delivers predicability and security. It will enable people to plan,
but that planning will take place in the knowledge that environmental values have been
protected. So I'm delighted that the agreement has been reached and I'm delighted
that I have the opportunity with the Premier of announcing that agreement today and
both of us signing it on behalf of our respective governments. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
QUESTION: ( Inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
( tape break) precise break up and in a sense having entered into an agreement that
protects environmental values, the important thing is that jobs in the industry generally
are being created. One of the very important things we've got to understand about
regional Australia is that regional Australia needs predictability and certainty and
there's nothing better for regional Australian than the knowledge that you can invest in
safety and that the ground rules are not going to be changed. For years and years
we've had uncertainty and unpredictability in the timber industry. There's been this
constant tension and tug-of-war. There was some nationally agreed criteria laid down
which are world class as far as the preservation of conservation values are concerned
and this agreement marries all of those things and that's why it's so good and people
can now go out and invest. Small businesses, which are really the heart of much of the
timber industry in regional Australia and regional Victoria, will hail this agreement and
so they should because it gives them protection, predictability and certainty and that's
what small business wants in Australia. And if you can give them that they'll generate
the jobs that will make a contribution to reducing our unemployment level.
QUESTION: ( Inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Backlash? Well, there shouldn't be because this meets the nationally agreed criteria. I
mean, if we had torn up the criteria, if we had sort of ignored the conservation values,
then they'd be entitled to complain. But the benchmarks that were laid down some
years ago, they have been observed.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, having promoted your Wetlands Policy yesterday ( inaudible)
KENNETT: I think that's a different issue. It has nothing to do with this at all.
PRIME MINISTER:
No it hasn't. That will be considered in a proper basis as we do all issues that affect
the environment. 
r QUESTION: ( Inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I would say to the other States this is a trail blazer, this is a model and I would
hope it will be copied all over Australia, not in every particular because... but the
cooperative elements of it. If you can have a win-win in other parts of Australia, if you
can get regional jobs created in other parts of Australia and conservation values
protected then you've got a very good deal.
Thank you. 



Fax from 8 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT NATIONAL ANGLICAN CONFERENCE
Exploring out Future: Australia in the Family of Nadtis
ANU, CANBERRA
OE
To Archbishop Rayner, the Primate of the Anglican Church in Australia; Archbishop
Harry Goodhew, the Archbishop of Sydney; to Kim Beazley, the Leader of the
Opposition; ladies and gentlemen.
It's quite a privilege for me to be here this morning and I want first of all to
congratulate the Anglican Church in organising, what I understand to be, your first
national conference. it is, if I may say so, a very sensible and forward looking move to
focus the thoughts and the activities and the energies of the members of the Church on
the Church's role in Australian society in the late 1990s and also to throw forward to
the next millennium.
The coming of a new millennium is focusing the minds of many organisations and many
groups of people within Australia. I suspect that the year 2001 will be a catalyst in
many ways as Australians together look towards the next century and the next
millennium. And I emphasise that word together because it is important as the Primate
said in his introductory remarks, that we endeavour a5 far as possible as Australians to
focus on those things that unite us and bind us together rather than those things that
may push us apart, Powerfiil, legitimate, partisan debate is a necessary and healthy
part of the activity not only of a nation in its political dimension but also within the
Churches in their spiritual and other dimensions.
I also want, as Prime Minister of Australia -and I know speaking on behalf of a vast
cross-section of the Australian community to express my gratitude and the gratitude
of the nation for the contribution that the Anglican Church and indeed the other
Christian Churches make to the life and the times of our society. And that gratitude is
expressed not only in relation to the spiritual contribution that is made to the nation
Faxom 08/ 02/ 97 11: 53 PS: 1 
Fax from~ 08/ 62/ 97 11: 53 Pg: 2
and to the lives and the families within the nation, but also to the massive social and
compassionate contribution that the Churches make to Australian society.
Too often I think in modem times that role is forgotten and overlooked. The flaws are
trivialised and emphasised. The massive ongoing compassionate contribution made by
the Churches and their various agencies is greatly overlooked.
Australia would be a Poorer, meaner, less hospitable, less compassionate society were
it not for organisations like Anglicare, the society of St Vincent de Paul, the Salvation
Army, the Wesley Mission, the Brotherhood of St Lawrence, and the list is very long
and very impressive. And the contribution that those organisations make and the
people within those organisations, many of whom I guess will be here or represented
here today, is something that ought not to go unrernarked. Because one of the
distinctive Australian traditions of which I am immensely proud, and of which all of us
should be immensely proud, is that great tradition of voluntarism. And that great
tradition of voluntarism is very powerfully expressed in the life and the work of the
various Christian Churches.
And I want to take the opportunity as the leader of the Government of Australia to
record my thanks. Too often on occasions such as this thanks are not recorded and
acknowledgment is not given and respect is not paid for the massive contribution that
is made quite selflessly to those in our community who are less fortunate.
I've been invited to share a few thoughts with you today about the role of Australia in
the family of nations. I don't want to particularly address that in a political or in an
economic dimension although those dimensions are immensely important and it is
simply not real life to address many of the challenges that face Australia without giving
pride of place to those two particular dimensions.
Hut when I think of Australia's role in the family of nations I think of what the rest of
the world sees of Australia and sees what Australia represents. And in trying to
project Australia forward as part of the family of nations I think not just of our
economic achievements, not just of our economic strengths and our political stances,
but I also think of the values for which Australia stands. I think of those values that
we have in common with many nations around the world.
I am reminded that Australia is one of only eight nations that has been continuously
democratic for the whole of the 20th century. Many nations of course lost their
democracy and their freedom in the 20th century through no fault of their own. But it
is no mean achievement that Australia is one of only eight nations that has retained
democracy throughout the entire 20th century.
Anid we share many values in common with other nations. The shared entitlement of
all people to self dignity and self fujlfilment. The relevance of a common humanity.
The common search for peace, and a liberal I don't mean that in a political sense but
in a generic sense commitment to the worth of all people as individuals.
When I think of Australia's projection to the world I think that we must see that the
strength of any nation or any community does not rest alone in the strength of its 
Fax from economy or in the wealth of its individuals. But it does rest very much in the moral
strengths and the importance of values within the community.
I think also when we project to the rest of the world we ought to place emphasis on
those characteristics of our which are distinctively Australian are home grown and
have been imported from nowhere. The emphasis we place on rnateship, on
adaptability, on down to earth practicality, vitality, concern for the underdog, straight
forwardness, the spirit of constructive defiance against the odds so magnificently
demonstrated right at the moment in Queensland in the area in and around Charleville.
I think also of the importance that we give to promoting fairness and decency and a
quality of opportunity in our national life. I think sensibly we are a fuindamnentally quite
sceptical people when it comes to the operations and the limits of government.
Scepticism may of course present particular challenges to the evangelising and
theological role of the Church, but within a nation it can be a great strength because it
can protect the people against the inducements and the blandishments of charlatans and
can provide a very powerful barrier to protect against the excessive concentration of
power. Government should also be limited, have a limited but strategic role. Its goals ought to
be to facilitate unity, security, choice and opportunity and to give help to the
disadvantaged. I think also of the importance as a nation that we attach to the central role of family life
within our community and the importance that public policy makers should place upon
the role of the family within our society.
We have also of course a very strong commitment as a society to an effective social
security safety net. Many elements of that safety net have enjoyed bi-partisan support
across the political divide within Australia for many years.
I think also of our capacity to project to the rest of the world an impression of
tolerance and acceptance of diversity of culture, diversity of ethnicity and of diversity
of view. It remains the fact that Australia, particularly in the last 20 or 30 years, has
had a profoundly honoured place amongst the nations in its willingness to accept
people from the four corners of the earth. It'ought to be a matter of immense pride
that this country in the late 1970s received on a per capita basis more refiugees from
war torn LIdo-China than any other nation in the world.
There is strong bi-pai-tisan support for a non-discriminatory immigration policy. There
remains legitimate room for vigorous debate on the level of the migrant intake. But
that that intake will occur on grounds that are completely oblivious to race ethnicity
and country of origin remains a hi-partisan constant in Australian politics.
We would also, in projecting to the world, be a nation that is willing to face both the
benefits and the burdens of our history. To recognise that we as a nation have
achieved many things together. To recognise that there have been blemishes and stains
in our past. Far8xo / m82 / 97 11: 53 PS: 3 
Fax from Our attempts to achieve genuine forward looking reconciliation between all Australians
and most particularly between Australians of a non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander descent and the original inhabitants of this country remains a major challenge
for the Australian community. But I say that optimistically, I say that positively, I say
that deliberately using the expression forward looking. In my view the true path to
reconciliation lies in removing current disadvantage and working together for a
brighter shared future.
The Primate mentioned the discussions that are now going on between my
Government and various sections of the community regarding the appropriate response
to the decision of the High Court in the Wik case, It is a profoundly difficult issue and
a effective resolution of it will require of all those involved an understanding and a
willingness to appreciate the others point of view. There is no monopoly of
righteousness, there is no monopoly of wisdom on this particular issue enjoyed by one
particular section of the Australian community.
I have made it clear that in my own handling of the matter only two things are, as it
were, untouchable. The first of those are the basic principles which underlaid the
decision of the High Court of Australia in the original Mabo case. In other words the
concept of Native Title which was a new concept to Australian law created by the
decision of the High Court in the Mabo case. And the other, of course, is the belief
that absolutely nothing need be done in the wake of the High Court's decision in the
Wik case because that decision did alter quite fiindamentally the original basis on
which the Native Title Act had been framed.
I am approaching that issue with complete openness and good will towards those
involved. I am already well into consultations. Further consultations I hope involve all
of the interested parties at a national level will take place within the next couple of
weeks. And out of that we will be able to see whether any common ground can be
achieved.
But it is important on issues such as that as the Primate said, that time be taken to
reach a just decision and a decision and an outcome that gives to all Australians a sense
of predicability, a sense of fairness and a sense of security. So when I think of the
projection of my country and our country to the rest of the world I think of the
projection of its values and its belief. I think of the projection of its capacity to solve
in a compassionate, fair and descent manner the internal challenges that it faces. I
think the willingness of people to put aside their partisan differences and unite to
achieve such things as national gun laws sent a very powerful message to the rest of
the world that here was a group of people faced with a particular challenge that were
prepared to put aside their differences and they were prepared quite determinately to
move away from going down one path that would, in my view, have led to greater
sadness and greater destruction within our community and quite determinately go
down another path wihich I believe over time will produce a more positive and a more
benign outcome.
When we project to the rest of the world we should never be reluctant to project those
particular characteristics of us as Australians which have always marked us out from
the rest of the world. In an age of globalisation and internationalisation a delicate
Faxfro'~ 08/ 116: 25/ 39 7 Pg: 4 
I Fax from balance must always be struck between universal fraternity amongst the nations but
also retaining those features and those characteristics which enable those from other
countries to instantly recognise that we come from a country called Australia. And
those traditional characteristics and values which we have nurtured and developed and
added to and moulded and changed over the years are part of the enduring and very
endearing Australian story.
Ladies and gentlemen I thank you again for the privilege of addressing you this
morning. I congratulate the Anglican Church on its sense of vision and perspective in
putting together this national conference. I have a sense of great optimism and hope
about the future of Australia. I have a sense of optimism and hope about the capacity
for those forces within our community working towards positive outcomes in the
defence and the promotion of values within our society. I have a positive and very
optimistic view about their capacity to influence the affairs of the nation.
I respect and value the views of the Churches expressed on so many issues. I don't
always agree with them. I don't always quite know who is speaking on occasions for
the Church or for some. But can I assure all of you as representatives of the Anglican
Church as I did recently in a discussion with Cardinal Clancy speaking on behalf of the
Catholic Church to me about certain matters, as I would to the leaders and the
representatives of any of the Christian Churches or other religious communities in
Australia, that my Government will always listen carefully to what you have to say.
We won't as I said, always be able to agree with it. We will expect that on occasions
you will be critical of us as you will be critical of other political movements. But the
important thing is that you have a valued role iitihe wider activities of the Australian
community, a role that I respect and a role that I will always deal with very openly and
very forthrightly.
Thank you for having me and I hope you have an immensely successful and rewarding
conference. ends Farxom 08/ 02/ 97 11: 53 Pg: 



11 February 1997
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. 3OHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO THE 1997 AUSTRALIA PRIZE PRESENTATION
DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Sir Arvi and Lady Parbo, to Mr Tim Fischer, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia,
Mr Peter McGauran the Minister for Science and Technology, Dr John Stocker, the
Chief Scientist, many other very distinguished people here tonight, ladies and
gentlemen. It really is a great privilege to be invited to say a few words tonight and to
present to the three winners of the 1997 Australia Prize the acknowledgment of the
great achievement that each of them has enjoyed and may I say on a personal note how
appropriate it is that tonight's proceedings should be presided over by Arvi Parbo.
Arvi Parbo has made an immense contribution to Australian industry and an immense
contribution to the understanding of the role of science and technology in Australia.
He really is one of those great post-war Australian treasures. He came to this country
without being able to speak a word of English. He hurled himself into the future of
post-war Australia and I can't think of anybody of that generation that has made a
greater contribution to the reality of modern Australia.
We inevitably, as we come towards the end of this century and of this millennium, we
inevitably look towards the Year 2001 and to the new millennium and I can't imagine a
discipline or a sphere of understanding or an area of experience which is more
appropriate as we look to the future than the area of telecommunications. Such
impeccable timing! I am used to interjections but not.. most of the interjections I
receive are not of the telecommunicating kind., but when you think of the future and
particularly when you think of the future in Australia, you really can't go past the
overwhelming relevance of telecommunications. One of the great things about
Australia, one of the great things about Australians is that we've always had an
incredible appetite for new technology. We are voracious devourers of new
technology and of new devices. It goes right back to things that, heavens above, we
take for granted now like pop up toasters and vacuum cleaners and all the sort of 
things that years and years ago were regarded as great sort of household agents but
now of course you regard as very much part of past history. The way in which
Australians took to video recorders, the way in which we took to mobile telephones,
the fact that there I think are about 2.6 million Internet connections in Australia at the
present time, and I am told that we are going to have about 4 million by the end of this
year which is an extraordinary, when you've got a nation of only 18 million people, it
is quite an extraordinary thing. 22 percent of Australians are registered mobile
telephone users.
I remember the American President telling me on three occasions when he was here
how absolutely transfixed he was by the sight of people with, as he put it, mobile
telephones fixed to their ears as he drove down Oxford Street coming in from the
airport in Sydney. So in so many ways Australia is, of all the advanced industrial
nations of the world, has an immense appetite for new technology and for things
technological and I am so delighted that tonight's gathering brings together such an
elite cross section of the scientific community here in Australia.
I won't endeavour to identify all of the people who are here tonight. Suffice it for me
to say that it really is a full parade of so many of the great Australian names in science
and technology over the last ten years and that is how it should be. We are never
reluctant as a community and as a nation to honour the immense contribution of our
great men and women of sport. Last Friday night I had the opportunity of awarding
the Sports Awards of the Year for the Confederation of Australian Sport in Melbourne
and that is perhaps something that over years has attracted more publicity and more
popular interests than prizes and honours of the type that we recognise tonight but as
the years have gone by I think there is a new maturity in the Australian community
about the importance of science and technology as there is a new maturity about the
role of the arts in our society. It is not a new maturity that in any way diminishes the
importance in our national psyche of sport and the extent to which a love of sport
provides a great national cement, that it is a recognition that Australia is a very diverse
community and any community that lauds excellence must have at the top of the list of
the people it honours those that have made a massive contribution to science and
technology. And so tonight we honour three outstanding Australian contributors in the area of
science and technology. We honour Professor Allan Snyder, Professor Rodney Tucker
and Dr Gottfried Ungerboeck, all of whom, as displayed by the video, have made an
enormous contribution in the area of telecommunications. They have helped make
communications absolutely indispensable and invaluable to the future not only of
Australia but of the entire world and in their different ways each have made a unique
contribution, and you do have to be a special kind of person, a special man or woman
to achieve what each of these have achieved tonight. And I am delighted that my
friend, although political adversary, Barry Jones, the person who inaugurated the
Australia Prize is here tonight because respect for r the role of scientists and respect
for the role of science and technology and the importance of it in the light of our
country is something that transcends political division. It is something that all
Australians who care about the future of this country now recognise quite instinctively
and having said that I want to thank Peter McGauran for the work that he's done as
my Minister in my Government responsible for matters relating to science and 
technology. He's brought very great energy to it and he has in his very enthusiastic
way and very committed way lifted the profile of the science community and the
importance of science and technology in the eyes of all members of the Government.
The telecommunications market all around the world is expanding at an exponential
rate and nowhere more dramatically of course than here in Australia.
Telecommunications will break down economic but also very importantly it will break
down social barriers. The way in which telecommunications will bring people
together, not only people from all around the world but people who are isolated and
alienated within the communities of our own nation should never be underestimated.
The way in which links between people living in what they still regard as their new
country and their relatives in their old countries, wherever those countries may be in
other parts of the world, the way in which modern and cheaper telecommunications
have diminished those barriers is one of the things that should never go unremarked at
an occasion like this because one of the great things about modern telecommunications
is the way in which it has really aided people in coming together, the way in which it
has diminished distance, the way it has broken down barriers and helped to forge
friendships and almost daily now we learn of these marvellous stories of romances
being forged through the Internet. I mean, it's not one sort of instinctive sense of the
romance of person meeting person but in time it's making a very, very massive
contribution. So it is absolutely not only part of our present but it is a fundamental part of our
future, telecommunications and the information and technological explosion that is
bound up in it. So I want to congratulate the three winners. I want to say on behalf of
my Government how very strongly committed we are to the central role of science and
technology in the future of Australia and the contribution that scientists and engineers
make to our nation is something that will never go unremarked and will never be
ignored so far as my Government is concerned and I think I can speak confidently in
that context on behalf of all political representation here tonight.
But on a personal note, to the three gentlemen that are receiving and sharing in the
great Australia Prize tonight, can I congratulate each of you unreservedly on the
personal commitment and dedication that you have brought to your disciplines and to
your professions. It is a unique accolade to be honoured with the nation's most
prestigious science award. It is a unique accolade that your peers should have
recognised your special contribution. It is a unique accolade that all those years of toil
and dedication and commitment and that creative genius that people who can reach
heights like this must obviously have. That also is a unique accolade and on behalf of a
very respectful and a very grateful nation that is proud to acknowledge the
contribution that you are making to the discipline of science, may I congratulate you
and wish you well and thank you for your contribution to science and through it the
contribution to the great human family to which all of us belong.
Thank you.
ends 



17 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT OFFICIAL LUNCHEON
PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS
WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND
E O E
Well, thank you very much Prime Minister; to Mrs Bolger; to Mr Winston Peters, the
Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand; to Helen Clark, the Leader of the Opposition;
your Eminence; other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very special pleasure for me to be here today. Jim Bolger and I have known
each other for a long time. He was, in fact, the first leader of an overseas country to
speak to me after the change of government in Australia. And we've met on a number
of occasions, first in Australia and subsequently at two overseas gatherings since the
change of government in my country.
And I want to echo everything that Jim had to say about the easy naturalness of the
relationship between our two countries, our two peoples and our two societies.
There are very deep and intricate bonds of history and tradition and culture and shared
experience and common values which bring our two countries together. It is not, of
course, a relationship embedded entirely in nostalgia and in the past. In fact, what
gives the relationship added moment in the 1990s is that it is a modern, contemporary
relationship built upon the shared interests of the two countries in the Asia-Pacific
region, a recognition that we have to work together in that region if we are to realise
our full potential. And also our common experiences over the past decade with
economic reform.
As the Prime Minister of New Zealand said, both of our societies and economies have
something of a history in tariff barriers and industry protection. The idea that you
could build fortress economies, secure against the competitive incursions of the rest of
the world, now those illusions have been swept away in both Australia and New
Zealand. And there are many people in Australia who admire greatly the strides 
towards opening up the New Zealand economy which have occurred over the last
or 15 years. And New Zealand richly deserves the reputation that it earned from many
around the world as being something of a role model of necessary economic reform
against the background of very great challenge and very great difficulty.
I have followed that change with great interest. Some might say that we are now, in
Australia, beginning to implement some of the reforms that were implemented in New
Zealand in the 1980s. Whilst that may not be an entirely fair observation to make, it is
fair to say that in one crucial area in which I've taken a very deep interest over a long
period of time that is industrial relations reform we passed legislation through our
Parliament at the end of last year which largely implemented the policy that we took to
the last election. And whilst it is dissimilar from your legislation in some respects, the
central thrust of giving more authority to employers and employees at the workplace
level to make their own bargains, getting rid of compulsory unionism, restoring
effective secondary boycott legislation, allowing the emergence of enterprise unions,
all of those things are very similar to what you have implemented.
And, of course, it's not only in economics that things have changed. For the first time
ever in the history of Australian and New Zealand sporting contests, the Bledislo Cup
will not be played at Ballimore or the Sydney sports stadium, it will be played at the
Melbourne Cricket Ground. And that in itself holds outs the tantalising prospect that
the world record crowd to watching a rugby union encounter between two great rugby
playing nations will in fact be established in the home and the birth place of Australian
Rules football. It is one of those I mean, bear in the mind that they have the world
record rugby league crowd, which was 87 000 in the match between Australia and
Great Britain. So, things have changed also on the sporting field.
The Prime Minister mentioned our shared interest in the Asia-Pacific region. The
world has changed very much so far as our associations are concerned. Australia sees
her economic future very much bound up with the most dynamic economic part of the
world. And the commitment of my Government is just as deep and just as genuine and
just as Intense as the commitment of the Hawke and Keating Government's and indeed
the Fraser Government before that towards deepening our relationships with the
nations of the Asia-Pacific region.
But as I've frequently said since becoming Australian Prime Minister, we do not need
to choose between our history and our geography. And there is nothing in the
necessity and the desirability of our close association with the nations of the Asia-
Pacific region that dictates for a moment that we should lessen those ties between
Australia and the nations of Europe and the nations of North America which continue
to be of such relevance, not only in a culture and historical sense but also in an
economic and a trade sense.
We do, in Australia, place a very significant emphasis on what I call the defence
investment. In our first budget, against the background of having to make cuts in
other areas, we quarantined the defence budget from any expenditure cuts. And that
same approach will apply to our forthcoming budget which will be brought down in
May. We regard that strong investment in defence as being a very important element
of the influence that we can project in the region. It is also an important concomitant 
to the association between Australia and the United States, an association which at all
levels has been very greatly strengthened and reinvigorated since the change of
government. I share the Prime Minister's remarks about the importance of the CDR relationship
between Australia and New Zealand. It is a relationship which imposes obligations on
both of us.
Ladies and gentlemen, the most important thing about our relationship is, of course,
the values and beliefs that as societies we share in common. Australia and New
Zealand are two of only eight nations which have been continuously democratic for the
whole of the 20th Century. And that in itself is a remarkable tribute to our two
societies and it is a remarkable tribute to the foresight of those who put together the
constitutional instruments that govern our two societies. And it is a reminder that as
we face the world together, not always agreeing on everything but fundamentally
sharing the same goals and the same objectives, that we do so from the vantage point
of having been reliably informed democracies for a very long period of time.
Our problems domestically are very similar. Our opportunities domestically and
internationally are also very similar. And the links that bind us together at a people-topeople
level are of course too numerous even to begin to mention at a gathering such
as this.
I want to say, Jim, I have enjoyed the opportunity of spending many hours talking to
you in an informal and relaxed fashion about the problems and the challenges of
contemporary government in our two countries. In the international exchanges
between leaders of countries there is nothing more valuable than the chance in a
relaxed and informal fashion to talk at length, as both of us did on Saturday night,
about the challenges of the Native Title legislation in Australia and the experience of
New Zealand in a comparable area. Of course the historical and legal basis of the
relationship between the indigenous people of New Zealand and the rest of the New
Zealand community is different from the relationship historically and legally between
the indigenous people of Australia and the rest of the Australian community. But that
doesn't alter the fact that in my country I'm seeking an outcome that delivers two
things; it delivers justice and it delivers predicability and certainty to all of those who
are involved. And I've found both in that area and the many other areas that we have
touched upon a great source of advice and shared experiences from the discussions
that we have held.
So in all of those ways it has been for me, Mr Prime Minister, a very valuable
experience. Of course as a amateur political scientist as well as a practicing politician,
I observe with some interest your new political system. I will continue to observe it
with immense interest because it does represent a very interesting and significant
departure, but nonetheless one that the New Zealand people have embraced and one
which I know those who participate in the system will use and exercise in the way in
which it should be. And I think all of us can gain inevitably from the experience of
others. I don't contemplate such a change in Australia. But then we have States and
we have a Federal Senate. So we have our own sort of differences already without
taking upon ourselves other differences. But whatever the method of delivering the 
democratic will of the New Zealand people is or whatever delivering the democratic
will of the Australian people may be, nothing can alter the fact that we are ongoing and
thorough going democracies in the best sense of the word.
But most importantly for this occasion I bring you the good wishes, the very warm
good wishes, of the Australian people to this gathering. It is the most natural thing in
the world for Australians and New Zealanders to be friendly. It has an easy informal
intimacy, the relationship between Australia and New Zealand. But as Dr Johnson
bade us to do, we should always keep our friendship whether they are at a personal
level or at a national level, we should always keep our friendships in good repair. We
should never take a natural alliance for granted. We should never presume to draw
upon the stored good will of past common experiences to maintain momentum
indefinitely into the future. We should always find new ways of expressing the
affection we have for each other without in any way demeaning the old and traditional
affiliations. And I think that is what we are doing in our relationship, particularly in the
shared experience of learning effectively to compete in a globalised world economy,
learning to take on the best of the rest of the world and to hold our own and learning
to share the experiences that competitive endeavour brings.
And to you, Jim and Joan, may I personally thank you very warmly for the great
hospitality that you've extended to me and to my Party. We have enjoyed it greatly.
And we shall take back to Australia some very pleasant recollections of the past couple
of days. It has been immensely enjoyable. And I hope it has made a small contribution
to further strengthening the already deep ties of association and affection between our
two countries and our two societies. Thank you. 



Fax from 230/ 7123 g
/ 1)
PRIME MINISTER
21 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO TIIE CHINESE AUSTRALIAN FORUM
CHINESE NEW YEAR DINNER
Dr Ang, to my many Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, other distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen. Can I first of all thank you Doctor for the words of
welcome and can I thank all of you for the warm welcome tonight. I decided a couple
of months ago that I would like an occasion associated with the Chinese New Yea to
address a large gathering of Australians including the goodly number of Australians of
Chinese descent. To take the opportunity on the occasion of the Chinese New Year to
do a number of things and the first and most important of those things on behalf of the
Government of Australia and on behalf, therefore, of all of the people of Australia first
and foremost to honour the enormous contribution that Australians of Chinese descent
have made to the building of the modem Australia. The association of Chinese people
with Australia is a very long association. There have been occasion in the past when it
has not been a happy association. But to the great bulk of Australians the contribution
of Chinese people has been generous, it has been immense, it has been impressive and
it is very much part of the miracle which is modem Australia. Chinese people have
brought to this country industry, integrity, a respect and commitment for the
importance of the family in Australian society, a flair for entrepreneurial expertise,
professional skills, entertainment skills, recreational skills. Indeed, in every walk of*
Australian life in the 1990s we find Australians with a Chinese descent or a Chinese
background and the particular association of Chinese Australians with the city of
Sydney is very well known indeed. Sydney is a different city from what it was when I
was born here in 1939 and grew up here through the 1940s and 50s. I didn't know
many Chinese boys at Eariwood Primary School in the late 1940s-I did know one at
Canterbury Boys H1igh School in the early 1950s. My children, by contrast, as they've
gone at Primary School to Greenwich ' Public School and later to private school on the
lower north shore they have known many and that is just a function of the changing
character, the diversifying character of the modern Australia. 23/ 02/ 97 12: 39 Pg: I 
Fax from 230/ 7123 g
The other reason that I wanted to come here tonight, I wanted to take the opportunity
of honouring the Chinese New Year, is to say something about the fundamentals that
bind all of us together as Australians. I certainly agree with Dr Asug that there is no
country in the world which has a finer appreciation of the values of freedom and
openness and tolerance than does Australia.
Aujstralia has its flaws, Australia has its blemishes, Australia has had its faures in the
past but if you compare this country with the other nations of the world there arec many
things about it which entitle us to boast of tolerance and openness and warm
heartedness and of decency. Of course there are some within our ranks who harbour
prejudice and bigotry and who do display intolerance whether it's on ethnic or racial
grounds or other grounds. I want to say that for my part and for the part of my
Government that that is no part of the true Australian spirit. Any manifestation of
racism in our ranks is repugnant to everything for which Australia has always stood. It
ought to be denounced, it ought to be identified and it ought to be guarded against.
The other side of the equation, of course, is the remarkable tolerance and the
remarkable receptivity and generosity that this country has displayed towards so many,
especially over the last 30 or 40 years. It remains the case that in the late 1970s
Australia took on a per capita basis more refu~ gees from war torn Indo-China than any
nation in the world and that was a very special demonstration of the contribution and
the generosity of the Australian community towards an area of very particular need. It
is necessary that we debate issues of sensitivity, issues such as immigration, issues such
as the character of Australia what contributes to the modem Australian personality and
the modern Australian character. We recognise in the course of that debate that the
composition of the Australian population has changed a great deal over the last 30 or
years.
We are a more diverse, we are a more vibrant, we are a more cosmopolitan, we are
moire global, we are a more internationalised society-than what we were several
generations ago. One of the many contributions that Australians of Asian, especially
Chinese, decent make to the modem Australia are the links that they provide with the
countries often of their birth and certainly of their family association. I've lost count of
the number of Australians of Chinese descent who over the last couple of years have
provided me with valuable insight into the culture and the politics and the attitude of
countries within our region.
Within a few weeks I'll be visiting mainland China, I'll be visiting the People's
Republic of China. It will be the first visit that I've paid to the country as Prime
Minister and the relationship between Australia and China is very important to my
Government. I recognise that of the Chinese Australians here tonight, not all of you of
course have come from the People's Republic. Many of you, perhaps a majority of
you, haven't. And I know there is a variety of views in this room about the People's
Republic of China as there are a variety of views about a whole lot of other issues.
But nothing can gainsay the fact that the association between this country and the
People's Republic is an important one. Our values on many political issues are
different. Australia is an open democracy, the People's Republic is not. But we have
very close and important economic and other ties, and it is the responsibility of any
Australian government, be it a Liberal Government or a Labor Government to look
23/ 02/ 97 12: 39 Pg: 2 
Fa om23/ 02/ 97 12: 39 PS: 3
always to Australia's national interest, and Australia's national interest lies in fostering
the economic, the cultural and the other links that now exist between Australia and not
only China but the Chinese diasporas in other parts of the world.
So it is with those things in mind and with a determination to further build a pragmatic
conmmonsense relationship built on mutual respect and on a recognition of the
importance of welcoming China into the family of nations in the Asia-Pacific region.
It's on that basis that I will visit Peking, Beijing and Shanghai during Easter of this
year. I spoke earlier, ladies and gentlemen, of many of the contributions that Chinese
Australians had made to our country. It is impossible of course to think of the
Australian economy, particularly the small business sector, without thinking of the
contribution of so many entrepreneurs of Chinese and of Asian descent in this country.
The lively way in which so many members of the Chinese Australian community have
contributed to the building of the modern Australian economy is very widely
recognised, it is very warmly appreciated and we wouldn't be the people we are, we
wouldn't be the success we are, we wouldn't be the increasingly respected community
that we are becoming amongst the economies of the world, had it not been for the
contribution of so many of those members of the Chinese Australian community.
I can't let an opportunity like tonight go by without expressing a few words of
optimism about Australia's economic future. I don't pretend to you that all of the
economic challenges that beset an industrialised nation such as Australia are behind us.
We still have a rate of unemployment that is too high although recent figures are more
encouraging than I thought they might be. We still have balance of payments problems
although they are not as severe as they were three or four years ago. The level of
business investment is high by any comparison over the last thirty years, and the latest
advice I have is that the level of business investment in Australia at the present time is
higher than what it was at the time of the resources boom at the end of the 1970s or at
the time just before the recession and the stock market crash in the mid 1 980s.
Company profits have shown a welcome upturn over the last few months. We have a
rate of inflation which is lower than its been since the early 1 970s and we have home
mortgage interest rates which are lower than they have been at any time since the late
1960s.
But more importantly than all of those things there is a greater sense in the Australian
community now of the importance of this nation integrating herself not only into the
economic infrastructure of the Asia Pacific region which is so important to Australia's
future but indeed into the entire world. And I do have a sense of growing optimism
and confidence about the state of the Australian economy and the medium term future
of the Australian economy, because the fundamentals now are as good as they have
been for decades. We do have low inflation, we have falling interest rates, we have
very strong business investment, we have broken down some of the cultural inhibitions
towards greater globalisation of the Australian economy, and in a few weeks time, I
think probably about the middle of March, I'll be announcing a comprehensive
response to an investigation into the impact of red tape and regulation on small
business in Australia and I believe that the announcements the Government will make
in that response will make a further very important contribution towards creating a
Fax from 
Fax from better investment climate for small business in Australia, Because all of my political
life I have believed very strongly in the role and the importance of small business in the
Australian community. If we are ever to break the back of high youth unemployment,
if we are ever to break the back of high unemployment in this country, it will be the
small business sector and no other part of the Australian economy that is going to
achieve that task.
But tonight ladies and gentlemen is not an occasion to give any kind of lecture in
macro or micro-economic policy. It is not an occasion to talk about the Gross
Domestic Product or the implicit price deflator, or any other kind of graduated index,
or even to speculate about what might happen on the Future's Exchange overnight. It
is an occasion, above and beyond that, it is an occasion to honour and to celebrate and
to respect the massive contribution that Chinese Australians have made to the modern
Australia. And on behalf of that modern Australia, I[ want to say to all members of the
Chnese community in Australia, you are an integral part of Australian society. You
are welcomed, you are honoured, you are respected; your right to dignity, to security,
to peace and to tolerance and respect is something which is part and parcel of what I
regard as a civilised and acceptable Australia in the 1990s,
It is part and parcel of Australian democracy to have vigorous exchanges and vigorous
debate. Some of it on occasions is not the most intelligent of exchanges that one could
be engaged in. But it is never part of civilised or acceptable or robust debate to think
of people in terms of the colour of their skin or except in a humorous and entirely f'un
loving way their country of origin.
Australians are I believe a tolerant people. They are a fuandamentally very decent
people, the most decent in the world, and I think the great majority of Australians hold
very dear that most cherished of all of the Australian ethos, and that is the ethos of the
fair go. And I want to say to all of you that a fair go for all is as much a part of the
Australian ethos now as it has ever been. So to all of you have a very happy year of
the ox. I hope all of you have the occasion during the year to have peace and
prosperity and personal happiness and personal success. And once again on behalf of
the wider Australian community and on behalf of my government can I say a word of
very warm thanks and deep appreciation for the contribution that you have made to
our country and how much a pleasure it is for me to celebrate with you our joint great
good fortune and that is to celebrate the miracle together of being Australians.
Thank you. Fa rom23/ 02/ 97 12: 39 Pg: 4 



February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD, MP
ADDRESS TO THE INNOVATIONS EXPO DINNER
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much. To my colleague Peter Reith, the Minister for Industrial Relations and also the
Minister that assists me in public service matters; to David Jull; Rhonda Parker from Western Australia;
Rosemary Varty; Mrs Catherine Harris, the Director of the Affirmative Action Agency; Dr Peter
Shergold; our overseas guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is the first occasion on which these awards have been presented and it does mark a very special
night for all of those people involved in and committed to the notion of the highest possible quality and
the most professional public service that we can devise in this country. And it's an opportunity for me
as the head of the Government of Australia, as the Prime Minister of Australia, to say how much all of
us in the political arm of Government respect, admire and appreciate the aggregate contribution of
those who work in the public service.
Coming as I do of a private enterprise, small business background and bringing into to politics all of my
deeply held views about the importance of the role and the size of the private sector, I've encountered
through my political life those who make the rather outdated but automatic assumption, still in the
minds of many, that there is a natural antagonism and tension between the private and public sectors in
the governance of Australia. I think that is an outdated notion, it is antiquated and it does belong to an
age and a time that is far behind us. Because the world in which we all live and we all operate and we
all try and govern to the best of our ability our nation has changed so much over the past ten or
years. Globalisation of the economy in the economic environment in which we operate has altered
forever the sort of pressures and the sort of circumstances in which both the private and public sectors
interact with each other. It is no longer an option for any part of the governance of this country to be
inefficient. It is not possible to shield oneself from competitive pressures. It is not a question of
choosing whether or not the public sector is efficient or competitive. It is a question of really choosing
the way in which you become efficient or competitive and indeed the pace at which you become
efficient and competitive.
There are some delightfu~ l notions of the interaction between the public service and the political arms of
Government. They have been, for all of us, immortalised in that magnificent English television series
' Yes Minister' which, of course, encapsulates for so many in a humorous way those marvellous
interactions. I still remember that marvellous story that was told of one of my predecessors, Malcolm
Fraser, and the we used to then call them permanent heads, we now call them departmental 
secretaries I don't know why! And it is of his departmental head or secretary, Geoffrey Yeend, may I
say one of the very finest public servants that Australia has produced in the time that I've been in
Australian politics. And it is said of Geoffrey Yeend and Malcolm Fraser that they indeed both watched
' Yes Minist' the only difference was that they laughed in different places! And in a sense that did
say it all and that's the humorous side.
The Australian Public Service has changed enormously over the last 20 years. I've been in federal
politics now, it'll be 23 years in May of this year. The public service that I first interacted with in 1976
when I was a very junior minister in a new government was a public service that was still very heavily
influenced by, I think, the traditions of the 1950s and 60s and 70s where there was a very long pattern
of very high profile public servants who stamped their own particular brand and their own particular
authority and their own particular approach. They had interacted with a government between 1972 and
1975 that had done things differently from their predecessors but there was still essentially a continuity.
The public service that I now interact with and respect and endeavour to work with and, I think,
successfuilly in a professional fashion is very different from the public service that I last remember in
1983 when the Labor Party was elected and began its very long period in office until March of last
year. When I say it's different I don't say that critically, I say that objectively because the world in
which it operates is different. I think we have changed our attitudes, I think there is a greater
willingness on the part of the public service without in any way sacrificing the essential thread of being
apolitical there's a greater desire on the part of the public service to try and implement what are the
accepted political goals and the accepted political mandate of the government of the day.
I know when I first became Prime Minister and I had a discussion with Michael Keating, who I'm
happy to say is here tonight, who'd served a previous Coalition government with great loyalty and
distinction and had also risen to the head of the Prime Minister's department under my predecessor
Paul Keating. He made the observation to me that he thought one of the great changes that had
occurred was the willingness of the public service without in any way sacrificing its essential apoliticism
to try and work effectively towards the political goals of the government of the day. It's always a
delicate balance. You do need to preserve a tradition of being apolitical. It is important to have a great
reservoir of people within the public service, no matter what their own individual political beliefs may
be, they have a professional capacity when a change of government occurs to serve the new
government, even if they may personally have not welcomed the change of government, and serve it in
a professional way. And I think it is possible to separate out those people and I think that tradition is
worth nurturing and I would hate to see that traditional disappear all together. But consistent with the
world in which we live it is natural and desirable that the political aims of a new government not be
seen as antagonistic to professionalism within the public service, but perhaps imposing upon that
professional public service an even greater obligation and discipline to provide objective advice about
both the desirability and also the pitfalls of the agenda of the new government.
I think occasions like this are very important. They're an occasion, an opportunity, to say thank you to
people, to honour the constant pursuit of excellence within our community and I'm so very happy that
people have come from the four corners of the Earth to be amongst us to contribute their ideas on
excellence in the public service. I'm delighted that there is such a representation from the State public
services of our nation and I'm also delighted at the way in which the various departments of the State
governments of Australia have participated, not only in the conference, but also in the award winning
process. My Government has embarked, under the very able stewardship of Peter Reith, my Government has
embarked upon some major changes to workplace relations in Australia. They are changes not
designed in any way to reinforce notions of division between them and us in the workplace. We have 2 
quietly discarded the expression industrial relations in favour of the more contemporary and I think
more beckoning expression, workplace relations. The world of enterprise bargaining is the world of the
future. The world of the future will be very different in the workplace from what it was years ago.
Many of the old modalities of workplace relations were built upon the notion that most of the work
force, in fact almost all of it, was male. A large section of it was in the manufacturing industry. Most
people worked for large organisations and answered to the foreman. Most of the congregated in one
spot in large numbers. All of those modalities have changed in varying degrees and some of them
completely. The workplaces of the future will be smaller units. An increasing number of people will
work from home. The old idea of congregating in large numbers in one spot and answering to a
foreman is almost a thing in the distant past. And we do need a new workplace relations culture and
we've delivered a new workplace relations act. That new culture will promote trade unions that are
successful in promoting their members. The idea that efficient, effective trade unions have no role at all
in the workplace relations scheme of the fuiture is quite wrong. But survival and success will go to
those that are best able to represent their members.
The workplaces of the future, of course as we all know, will involve a far greater number of women
than they did in the not so distant past. And that impact alone will profoundly alter the character of
work and the circumstances under which it is carried out. So we do need a modern approach, a
different approach, to workplace relations and I believe that the reforms that my Government has taken
through the parliament and which will now spread through the public service will be reforms that will
be enormously to the benefit of the future of Australia. They will respect the professionalism of men
and women in the public service as they will in the private sector. They will not revive old-fashioned
antiquated antagonisms between the two sectors. I believe in an expanding private sector, I believe in a
strong private sector. I also believe that there are a core of responsibilities within our community which
can only ever be discharged for the benefit of our community by a dedicated, competitive and
professional public service. A public service that works in harmony and cooperation and in an
atmosphere of mutual respect in respect of those in the private sector. There is no enduring
antagonism, there should only be an enduring partnership for the better governance of our nation.
So tonight, ladies and gentlemen, I'm honoured indeed to be in the presence of such a large gathering
of professional men and women in the public service our nation and in the public service of many other
nations. I congratulate all of you for the contribution you are making to the quality of government in
Australia. I particularly congratulate the winners and those that have taken out the awards. I thank
those that have organised tonight's gathering on my behalf I think it's an excellent occasion and I
hope it is the first of many such occasions in which the Prime Minister of the day and the government of
the day can honour the contribution to the better quality of government of Australia by those who work
and spend their lives in the professional public sector of Australia. Thank you. 



27 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT THE MELBOURNE PRESS CLUB'S
ANNUAL JOURNALIST OF THE YEAR AWARDS
GRAND HYATT, MELBOURNE
E O E
Thank you very much Mr Steve Harris; to all the other distinguished guests, in
particularly to Mrs Perkins; to all of my colleagues in political pursuit because
journalists and politicians have a very special relationship.
I once wrote down on a form that was circulated in the final year, when I was at
Canterbury Boys High School in Sydney in the 1950s, what were my employment
preferences. And I have to confess of the three that I wrote down not one of them at
that stage was politics because I thought you had to do something else before you
went into politics. But one of the three that I did write down was journalism. And
I've frequently been accused by some of my colleagues and occasionally by some of
my friends in the media, I've frequently been accused of being something of a
frustrated journalist. And in fact in one of my periods of political obscurity the
months or so that followed my removal as Opposition Leader in May of 1989 I, in
fact, did try my hand at writing columns for The Australian newspaper and it was
something that I enjoyed immensely.
I've always taken quite seriously the relationship between politicians and the press.
I've taken that relationship rather vigorously on occasions as well as I think all political
figures inevitably do. And I hope I don't sound in any way trite or patronising or just
going through the motions of saying the sort of thing that a Prime Minister or a
political leader is expected to say on an occasion like this in telling you how important
I regard both the role of the news media in Australia in both reporting and commenting
upon politics in Australia and how much I value a professional, direct and honest
association between political participants and the news media.
Like all politicians I've felt on occasions over my political career that particular issues
haven't been reported, on occasions, quite as they should have been. I have to say, 
and I was asked the question by Steve Harris before I got up to speak how I thought
I'd been treated over the last year and it will be of course a year this weekend since
my Government was elected, the first coalition government to govern Australia for 13
years and I made the observation in reply that I thought by and large making
allowances, and on some occasions some sizeable allowances, in some areas for some
shortcomings, I thought that by and large my Government had received reasonable and
fair treatment from the news media of Australia. I hope that I'll be able to say that in
another year's time and another year after that and another year after that again. You
will all have your ideas and your own views as to whether I've been treated gently,
harshly or treated just about right.
I'd like to say a couple of things about the, I suppose, the juxtaposition of the different
areas of the media in Australia and the way in which it reports federal politics.
In Australia, as in most other western democratic societies we tend to have a national
capital city gallery. In Australia it's a little different that we also have a very strong
reporting of federal politics at a State capital city and regional level. It is very
important that that balance continue.
There is obviously great merit in having a Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery
composed of people who have spent a fair amount of time in Canberra, who draw most
of their exchanges and intellectual nourishment, inevitably their prejudices and their
biases and own particular points of view from personal interchange with people in the
Federal capital. But it is also tremendously important that that be counterbalanced
with a proper focus on national affairs by journalists who don't live in Canberra. It
would be a great mistake for the reporting of federal politics in Australia to ever
become the exclusive preserve of the Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery. And one
can see inevitable and subtle, and not so subtle differences emerging between the
reporting of federal politics by the Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery and the
reporting of federal politics outside of the federal capital.
I think one of the possible explanations and I say this choosing my words carefully,
not out of any sensitivity but simply because I think it's one of those cases that is
probably only just proven I think one of the reasons why the Coalition's victory in
March of last year was rather greater than many people, including a lot of people in the
Coalition including myself at various stages during the election campaign ever thought
it might be, was that there was a fair gap between the perception of the Federal
Parliamentary Press Gallery of some of the things that really mattered in that campaign
and the views of people outside of Canberra, and most particularly in the context of my
remarks, the views of people who reported federal politics and spoke about them in the
major cities and the regional areas of Australia.
There is a Canberra view about politics, It's a very legitimate view. It's a proper
view. It's an informed view. And in most cases it's a quite intensely professional
view. There is also another view about national politics and the priorities are often
different. And the treatment of certain issues which were high on the agenda of the
former government by people in the Canberra Press Gallery was often disproportionate
to the importance attached to those issues by other sections of the Australia
community. Now that is not to demean the importance of those issues nor is it to 
demean the professional role of the Parliamentary Press Gallery but merely to
emphasise something that is probably very apparent to all of you and that is that the
way in which politics is reported can often vary very greatly around the country and
most sharply between the way it is reported out of the national capital and the way it is
reported in the rest of the country.
These particular awards I know have played a very major role in the life of your
profession here in Melbourne. And it is particularly important of course that one of the
awards, the Graham Perkin Award, honours the life and times and the contribution
particularly to the Melbourne Age of a man who had an immense influence on
journalism and on the media, especially here in Melbourne, but all around Australia.
Many very young journalists have won their first recognition and acclaim through the
' Young Journalist of the Year Award' which has been part of this particular event for
quite a number of years.
And I said in the beginning of my remarks how much I valued the role of the media in
Australian politics. I've often been asked in the various positions I've occupied in
politics my view on whether or not Australia should have a Bill of Rights. I must
unashamedly say to you that I'm not much of a believer in Bills of Rights. I am very
much a common law man. I tend to think that societies that try and write down in too
much detail the fuindamental rights which are meant to govern the conduct of their
citizens either end up in some way leaving something out or over-prescribing
something. And generally the track record of those countries is no better than the
track record of those countries that have adopted the common law approach.
I've frequently said in answer to that question that if you really want to guarantee
democracy in a nation you need three things. You need a vigorous and open
parliamentary system. You need an incorruptible judiciary. And you need a vigilant,
on occasions cranky and profoundly sceptical, media. I think those three things are
really the essential pillars of a vigorous democratic society.
When President Clinton was in Australia last year we spent quite a bit of time talking
about the comparisons between Australia and the United States, the similarities
between our two peoples and two societies. And we both agreed that something we
obviously had in common was an informality, and in most cases in both countries and
in both peoples a scorn for pretension and a dislike of class structures and class
barriers. The President said what areas did I believe that we were different. And I said
that one area where I thought Australians were quite different from Americans was
that I thought Australians were a more sceptical and a more suspicious people,
particularly of those who made decisions that affected their lives, and that meant him
and me and those who carried on our prospective, mutual profession in both countries.
And I think that is reflected in the media in this country.
I think the media in this country is sceptical. I think it has a right to be sceptical. I
think it's part of its role. It will on occasions be over sceptical and therefore draw very
heavy and very legitimate criticism from other sections of the media and from people
who are perhaps the object of that scepticism. But it is one of the three pillars of our
society. I have my quarrels on occasions with sections of the media. I've been known 
to pass some critical comments about one or two well-known sections of the media
and I'll no doubt do it in the future. And there'll be many occasions when I feel that
the reporting of what my Government has done is perhaps not as balanced and not as
just and not as fair as it might have been.
But in the long haul, having been in politics for now almost 23 years and having
become after that career Prime Minister of Australia, I have to say that in that 23 year
experience I think I've have experienced the lot. I've experienced very good press.
I've experienced very bad press. I've experienced in the main a press that is, I think,
representative of the Australian community.
So I come here tonight as somebody who has both a professional association with the
media of Australia, someone who has had more than a passing interest in the craft that
you have practised, somebody who enjoys very much for its own sake the art of clear
and direct expression. Elegant writing is something that's always a delight to read.
And although there is a very heavy emphasis, and properly so, on television and radio
and instant reporting of events I hope that we always have in our media in this country
a very special place for the well researched, the elegantly written and the powerfully
presented newspaper article. Because those contributions to journalism in Australia
can have an enduring impact and they are an important part perhaps to borrow the
analogy from a sport that you all know I love so much perhaps the test cricket part
and the others are the one-day part of the total game.
So to all of you, ladies and gentlemen, can I say the association that I have with the
media of Australia is an association that will always have its interest, it will have its
continuing vigour, it's continuing tension. I respect the role of the media. I'll criticise
it on occasions. I'll disagree with it as it will with me. But the Australian democracy
would be the poorer without it. It is a vigorous media, a very, very important pillar of
the vigorous democracy that we all claim Australia really is.
Thank you very much.
Ouestions Answers
QUESTION: Steve Price from 3 AW, Prime Minister. One of the criticisms of yourself and your
performance in the media is you're very Sydney-centric. You continue to give
interviews to people like Alan Jones, John Laws and AM on the ABC. Are you
actually aware that John Laws and Alan Jones and AM are listened to by very few
people in Melbourne?
PRIME MINISTER
No. They keep telling me everybody listens to them. I'll take that question very
seriously to heart. I don't set out to be Sydney-centric. I have been accused in the
columns of at least one newspaper recently of being channel-centric, a particular
channel-centric. I seem to have had a few appearances on one particular television
channel purely by accident over the last few weeks. I don't set out to do that. I shall 
take it very seriously. I shall carefully research what I have done and if there is a lack
of balance I shall mightily act to restore it. I would never want to allow the impression
to be created that I am Sydney-centric because I am not. I play no part at all in the
constant tug of war about the location of sporting events between Melbourne and
Sydney. I encourage vigorous interstate rivalry and as far as I am concerned, good
luck to the Victorian Premier if he can pinch more sporting events from other states.
QUESTION: Jill Singer, self-employed. I wonder, Prime Minister, could you tell me, do you think
there would be anything wrong with Kerry Packer owning Fairfax in Victoria and also
owning Channel Nine. The Chairman of Channel Seven has said that he considers
there would be problems with this because of Mr Packer's gambling influences and
that there could be some sort of, you know, murky little areas in this. I wonder what
you think about this?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we will be looking very soon at the existing cross media laws and it is something
we will have to take a decision on quite soon. I don't mean next week but quite soon.
I have said in the past that I was always very sceptical about the original reasons for
the cross media prohibitions and I have never been a fan of them and that's something
that I'm on the record as having said as far back as 1987 and I think I was Opposition
Leader then, and I have sort of retained the view and I ceased being Opposition Leader
and I haven't had a different view since then. I believe that the original purpose of the
cross media rules that were brought in largely at the instigation of Paul Keating in the
mid 1 980s was to dismantle or reduce the power of the then Fairfax empire which
included of course not only the newspapers that you mentioned but also the Seven
television network and a very large network of radio stations. It was in fact at its
height the biggest and most powerful media empire that this country had seen.
Now a lot has happened since then. I understand exactly what you are saying and I
think it's one of those issues where a Government has got to take a whole lot of things
into account, including the enormous changes in the technology of the media. You can
find just about every major player in the media, including Rupert Murdoch, including
my predecessor as Prime Minister, who at various stages had criticised the absurdity of
having cross media prohibitions in an age of what is called convergence between the
various arms of the media. I hope that we will make a conscientious, national interest
decision. No matter what decision you take with the media you can always be accused
of favouring one proprietor over another.
There's a sensitivity in this country about foreign ownership. I have never been
particularly paranoid about foreign ownership because if you have any understanding
of the way the Australian economy operates, fairly high, not high level but perhaps a
high degree of foreign ownership is indispensable if we want to maintain the sort of
activities and the sort of standards of living we have. But all of the things that you
mention weigh upon my mind but I do start from the proposition of not having the sort
of blind obsession about maintaining the present system simply because it's been there
for a number of years. I think there are arguments for changing it. I think there are 
also arguments, legitimate concerns about plurality and diversity but you've also got to
understand the size of the media market in Australia and you've also got to understand
that everybody but everybody in the media who talks on this issue has a self interest to
promote and that obviously includes people who talk on behalf of the Nine Network,
the Seven Network, the existing Fairfax organisation, even the ABC, everybody has
sort of a self interest to promote on this issue and it's our call to try and get the
balance of that right and we will be looking at this. I knew somebody would ask me
the question tonight. I didn't think it would come from a small business woman but I
hope the decision that we ultimately take will be seen as one that we conscientiously
believe is in the national interest.
QUESTION: Tess Lawrence, Prime Minister. Also small businesswoman and a consultant in ethical
crisis management. The question that I'd like to ask you on behalf of sort of spin
doctors is why is it that I've noticed that throughout your political career, and I recall
the documentary series that you participated in with me called Sex, Power and Politics,
why it is that you have always been extremely potent and vigorous in defeat and yet I
have noticed that in your political demeanour, since coming to the office of Prime
Ministership, you lack that potency, you lack that vigour. Your speech writing is banal
in the extreme and I say this simply on the basis of professional analysis and I wonder
why it is that you are an extraordinary warrior in defeat and I remember, you know,
your several defeat speeches and now that you are in office and now that you've been
bestowed with the golden crown, has the sword outworn the sheath?
PRIME MINISTER
Well I don't have a speech writer. One of my besetting sins as sort of a, how can I
describe it, as a meal or an appetiser or whatever for journalists is that I simply cannot
read a prepared text. It's not because of any sort of intellectual impairment. It's
simply that I'd hate reading something. I have a profound distaste of getting
something in front of me and reading it. Now that sometimes has led me into trouble
although I have to say that one of the sort of foreign policy glitches I had was when I
got my bridges mixed up in Indonesia and I've got to say, that was on one of the few
occasions since I've been Prime Minister that I actually read a speech and perhaps it
teaches me that you've always got to rely on your instincts. Look, I can't explain the
dichotomy, the paradox that you identify in me. I can't possibly explain it. I am
unable to do that. I will have to leave that to the judgement of others.
I am glad you thought I was a warrior in defeat. I think that's very encouraging and
I'm glad I was. I had a lot of fight in me then. I've still got a lot of fight in me now.
Perhaps when you're in office, you've become Prime Minister, you've reached the top
of the hill, politically speaking, you do take on a different attitude. You do see things a
bit differently. I have a view about the relationship between the Prime Minister, the
leader of the country and the people of that country. I, rather off the top of my head
used an expression in the lead up to the last election campaign which has remained
with me, and I daresay will remain with me forever, and that was the expression
" relaxed and comfortable". What I was trying to connote by this is that I do think the
relationship between the leader of a country and the people of that country is a special 
one, you have to have a capacity to identify with the hopes and aspirations of people.
You can never do it all of the time and you can never do it with all of them, and you
will always be despised by a section and being regarded rather suspiciously by others
but at the end of the day, having an understanding of what makes the people of a
nation tick and what their basic desires and wants are is a very important element of
being an effective leader.
I think Australians want a lot for themselves. I think they do want a society which is
harmonious. Australians don't like unnecessary conflict. They are fundamentally
tolerant and very decent people. They think they have achieved a lot and they have
good reason to believe that. They are rather proud in that sort of self deprecating,
down playing way which is characteristic of Australians, of what this nation has
achieved and they don't like it being dumped on and they don't like being lectured to
and told that they should be perpetually ashamed of what has occurred in this country
over the years. Now I think part of the role of a leader is to understand that, is to
articulate it, be willing on occasions to jolly it along or disagree with it but not always
be in a state of excited animation and pugnacity about the things in that nation which
he or she regards as inadequate but perhaps on occasions, and more occasions than
just a few, being willing to talk about the achievements of the country and articulate in
a determined way the pride that people feel in it.
Now that is a totally inadequate explanation for the paradox but it's an attempt to
explain perhaps the attitude that I have endeavoured in a broad sense to bring to the
way in which I have carried out my duties over the last twelve months. I have said
before and I will finish on this, that leadership does consist of two elements. One on
occasions is to stand in the middle of the road and dare people to run you over. On
other occasions it is to listen to people, to bring them forward, to walk with them,
perhaps on occasions at their pace. I think you need to mix the two to get the balance
right. If you're always in the middle of the road eventually one of the cars will get
you. If you are never in the middle of the road and you're never encouraging and
cajoling people and dragging them along, you won't ever get some of the necessary
reforms that are superficially very unpopular done. I have tried over the last year, and
I will continue to try for so long as the Australian people want me in my job. I will
continue to try to get the balance between those things about right because I think that
is the prescription and that is really what the Australian people want me to do.
Thank you. 



28 February 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD, MP
ADDRESS TO THE YOUTH SUICIDE SEMINAR
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
E&amp; OE
Thank you Peter Slipper; to my Ministerial colleagues Senator Amanda Vanstone and
Senator John Herron; Mr Speaker; to my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen. I want to congratulate the Standing Committee on its initiative in
organising today's seminar and I am particularly pleased that the seminar takes place
against a completely bipartisan background and involving, as it does, people from the
Australian community who in different ways, and some in a very sad and tragic way,
have been touched by youth suicide.
I've been a member of parliament now for almost 23 years and I've interviewed
thousands of constituents about literally hundreds, if not thousands, of different
problems. And all the interviews I've had one that has lived with me for years, and I
think always will, was an interview with a mother and a father of a young man who'd
taken his life in my electorate in Gladesville. The sense of bewilderment and sadness
and despair and questioning of the parenting skills and the way in which that young
man had been brought up and the desire on the part of those two very devoted parents
who according to all the criteria as they understood it, and I must say on their
explanation to me as I understood it, they'd done the right thing by their child but
despite all of that he'd taken his life. And it was certainly one of the most difficult and
yet the most revealing interviews that I've conducted as a member of parliament and I,
as I say, I've remembered it. And it brought home to me as directly as it could as a
local member of parliament the tremendous social problem and the tremendous failure,
I guess, that the high rate of youth suicide in Australia represents. Now I don't
pretend as leader of the Government that we have all the magical solutions and I'm not
coming here to say that what's been tried in the past was completely wrong and what
we're going to try is completely right it's not one of those issues and I'm sure that
the Committee and its treatment of it will understand that everybody, Government and
Opposition members alike, approach this with a positive sense and a sense of
commitment and goodwill. 
We have undertaken a number of commitments as Peter mentioned. We've allocated
some additional resources. We have put additional resources into a youth
homelessness pilot project which seeks to address some of the problems of youth
homelessness. We have different strategies in the area of youth unemployment. We
have, of course, committed ourselves to an 18 to $ 19 million programme over a period
of three years. And on top of that we've put some additional resources into parenting
education and we have also tried to address in different ways the problems and
challenges of domestic violence.
There are many tributaries, I suppose, to the problem family breakdown is obviously
a huge part of it. If people feel that the environment in which they live has failed, that
sense of failure can infect them. Mental health is clearly a key element in youth
suicide. Youth unemployment is clearly a key element. I think access in the past to
too easy access to firearms has made it easier for some people in a desperate state of
mind to take their lives. But there have to be a whole number of explanations as to
why we should have, to our great shame, such a high youth suicide rate, particularly
amongst young men. It really is quite extraordinary that a country which in so many
other ways can say we are doing better than many others, but in this area we are really
demonstrably doing much worse.
The kind of approach that will be required to bring about an improvement, I think we
have to be realistic in setting the goals, the goal can be to bring about an improvement
we're not going to get rid of it all together, we're never going to be that successful.
But it does involve pooling the resources of people. It involves pooling the resources
of the great private welfare sector of Australia and those organisations that are
represented here today. It means pooling the experience of members of parliament
from all parties who've dealt at a personal level. It means drawing on the experience
of the medical profession, academics who've studied the patterns and the behaviour. It
also means, of course, drawing on the very sad experiences of parents and siblings and
friends and associates who've lost loved ones through their own hands.
This is one of those social challenges that really is outside the normal constraints of
government so far as the bottom line is concerned. That doesn't mean, of course, that
in any area is there an unlimited source of money but it is one of those things which
marks the kind of society we are. If we have such a high youth suicide rate there must
be something fundamentally wrong that we have to try and put right. And if this
seminar can make a contribution towards it, and I believe it can, the people on the
Standing Committee represent all parts of Australia. They represent people who
understand in different areas of society the difficulties that are faced by these sorts of
social problems. I know that all of them bring a sense of very strong personal
commitment and a very, very strong sense of goodwill towards the Committee's task.
Youth suicide is very much about the failure of our society to offer young people
sufficient hope because it is a sense of helplessness and a sense that there is little hope
and a sense of despair and a sense that you're not useful and you feel alienated and you
feel unwanted. I don't pretend to be anything other than an amateur psychologist. I
don't pretend for a moment that I have anything other than an everyday understanding
of human nature. But it does seem to me, and I leave this thought with you, that it is
that sort of sense of hopelessness and a feeling of no self worth which perhaps more 
than anything brings about the conditions of mind that leads a person to take their life.
It is incomprehensible that in a society which has so many young people who display
such tremendous optimism and enthusiasm and hope about the future it seems, to all of
us, quite incomprehensible that side by side with those people who look forward to the
years ahead with boundless enthusiasm, a capacity almost to solve and conquer any
problem or belief that the generation that have gone before them have forgotten more,
that they have forgotten more than they've ever learnt. And that tremendous self
confidence that we encounter in so many of the young people in Australia which is so
endearing and attractive it does seem almost incomprehensible that side by side there
should also be people who feel so out of it and so ignored and so deprived of a
participation in the life of the community that they should feel the pressure to take their
own life.
Now I hope today's seminar makes a contribution towards addressing some of those
problems and I want to say on behalf of the Government that we do regard this as a
very important issue. It's an issue that we will treat in a completely non-political, a
completely bipartisan fashion. It's one of those issues that ought to sit astride party
political differences, I know it has in the past and I know that members of both the
Government and the Opposition here today are determined that that will be the case
now and into the future.
I want to join Peter Slipper in welcoming all of those people from the community who
are here to share their experiences, to pool their information with others. I hope out of
this seminar comes some very useful advice. I'm here today to demonstrate my
personal interest in this issue, the personal support I have for it, the commitment of the
Government and I'll be very interested to hear what comes out of it and I can promise
you that it will be very conscientiously and very intensively addressed. I have great
pleasure in declaring the seminar open. I'm sorry I can't stay any longer I have one or
two other things to do today, including going back to Sydney for a few things. I do
wish the seminar well and thank you very much for inviting me and I hope out of it
comes a number of important initiatives which will, in a practical way, address a
distressing mark against the good name and the compassion and the decency of the
Australian society.
Thank you. 



Fax from -mw
1 March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTERj
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO LIBERAL PARTY NSW STATE COUNCIL
ST GEORGE LEAGUES CLUB, KOGARAH
E 0E
Thank you very much. That's almost as good as Grand Final morning. To
Michael Osborne, to my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I can think of no more appropriate venue, no more appropriate meeting and no
more appropriate weekend than to celebrate what we have achieved over the
last twelve months.
It was a year ago this weekend, that together, we ended thirteen years of Labor
government in Australia. And I use the word together advisedly, because the
victory that we won a year ago this weekend was a victory that belonged more
than anything else to the rank and file members of the Liberal Party. And I
remember in my acceptance speech at the Wentworth Hotel on that great
Saturday night, saying that for thirteen years the Party organisatioq had endured
many disappointments, it had been the butt of much criticism, even ridicule
people said we no longer had the professional skills to win electioqs, there was
derision heaped upon the organisation, and all of that was flung back in the face
of our critics on that great Saturday in March of last year.
So ladies and gentlemen I commence my address to the NSW State Council this
morning by again thanking the organisation for the absolutely crucial role it
played in electing my government twelve months ago and for the continually
loyalty, fidelity and support that it has given tq me and to my colleagues over
the past twelve months. Fafxor '~ 01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 1 
Fax from 2
As I review that twelve months I cani honestly say that we have stayed true and
kept faith with the essential commitments that we made to the Australian
people in the lead up to the election campaign. They elected us into
Government to reform Australia's industrial relations system and we have done
that. They elected us into Government to give a greater emphasis in policy
making to supporting Australian families and we have done that. From the first
of January this year, delivered in full on time without qualification was the
Coalition's Family Tax Initiative.
We were elected into Government to assist the small business sector. We have
begun to do that and more will be done in a few weeks' time when I deliver the
Government's response to the Bell Committee Report on Small Business.
We have swept away the unfair dismissal stupidity of Laurie Brereton, we have
fairly dismissed his legislative incompetence. We have through reforming the
industrial relations system, given greater flexibility to small business men and
women. From the 1 st July this year we will introduce the biggest taxation
change to benefit small business in more than three decades. We will allow any
small business man or woman in Australia to sell their existing business and
invest up to $ 5m of the proceeds in not just a business of the same kind but
indeed into any business without incurring any liability for capital gains tax.
There are still many people in small business who are doing it tough, I know
that, I recognise that and I understand that. And you won't be hearing from this
Prime Minister such arrogant responses as " this is as good as it ever gets" and
" if you can't stand the heat you ought to get out of the kitchen and stop being a
self-employed person". Small business copped the ravages of Keating's
recession like no other sector of the Australian business community, and it has
inevitably taken them longer to recover and the period of recuperation has been
more difficult.
We said that we would deliver the greatest ever capital investment in
Australia's environmental future seen since the end of World War II and we are
going to do exactly that. We have secured the support of the Senate for the one
third sale of Telstra and out of that sale we will invest almost $ 1.2 billion into
the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia and that will go towards the long term
of regeneration of Australia's environment it won't be wasted on fancy tinsel
stuff, it will go towards restoring our land it will go towards attacking salinity it
will go towards cleaning up our river system, it will go towards purifying our
oceans. They're the sort of long term building blocks of improving the
environment the Australian community wants. And it will be one of my
proudest boasts as Prime Minister of this country if I can go to the next election
pointing to a programme of environment commitment and environment reform,
because that was an area in earlier years where the Liberal and National Parties
lagged. Farxf t01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 2 
Fax from 1 3
And we will also P~ e able to remind the Australian people and remind the
mainstream conservation movement of Australia that it was the Labor Party and
the Australian Democrats and the Australian Greens that tried to stop this
record investment in Australia's environmental future. it still to my mind
beggar's belief that parties that claim to be concerned about Australia's
environmental fu~ ure have been so indifferent and so hostile to such an
imaginative proglame.
I mention these tl~ ings ladies and gentlemen not because they are an exhaustive
list of what has bfen achieved over the last twelve months there are many
other achievemen~ ts. We have restored the accountability of the executive to
the Parliament. No longer does the Government of this country regard
Question Time al a courtesy extended by the Executive to the Parliament. I go
to every Questionl Time, not fifty per cent of them. The number of questions
asked in my first twelve months is a twenty year record. We average almost
twenty questions fa day and Question Time has once again been restored to an
institution where the Ministers can be made accountable and can be questioned
as properly they ; hould in a Westminster parliamentary democracy. And the
restoration of the accountability of the Executive to Parliament is a very
important elemer~ t in the restoration of community esteem for the institution.
Without in any Nyay robbing Parliament of its naturally robust debating
atmosphere I also believe that some of the personal vitriol which the Australian
community founf so distasteful has been removed from parliamentary
proceedings. Au~ tralians want tough vigorous debate and powerful dissent
where there are d~ fferences of view, they do not want ritualistic eye gouging for
its own sake.
Ladies and gentleman that is in a sense a very quick snapshot of what has been
achieved over the last twelve months. But it is by no means the whole story.
There are many things that we have done outside the immediate economic and
industrial area thipt are very important to Australia's long term future. The
tragic events of 4Lpril 28th produced a great response in the area of national gun
control laws. Ai~ d the achievement of those laws, may I say quite openly in cooperation
with all the state governments and also with the co-operation of the
Australan Labor Party and the Australian Democrats. Those laws have made
Australia a safer Icountry and those laws have delivered a greater sense of
security, particularly to women in our community, and I regard the achievement
of those laws as being one of the great social achievements of my Government
over the last twelve months. Faxfrm01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 PSg 3 
Fax from 4
We've also kept faith with our promise to allow a proper process for debate
about Australia's constitutional future. I said before the election where I stood
on the question of Australia's current constitution I've never disguised my
own view but I've always recognised that there are many in this party and
elsewhere that have another view and ours is not an authoritarian party ours is a
liberal open party.
We are going to have a constitutional convention, we are going to elect half of
the delegates and we're going to appoint the other halfjust as I promised, and
we'll see what comes out of it. My only goal is that if Australia is or were to
decide to change the constitutional structure the it ought to occur in
circumstances that unites and not divides the Australian community.
It is also necessary that we grapple in a sensitive way with one of the great and
more complicated challenges that I think any government could have and that is
to frame an appropriate response in the area of native title to the decision of the
High Court in the Wik case. That issue requires an understanding, requires a
patience and it requires a spirit of give and take and compromise by all
concerned if an agreed outcome is to be achieved. I'm trying to achieve such
an outcome. I have no illusions about how difficult it is. There is a great
difference of approach and opinion between the different parties at present and
I'm currently engaged in a process of discussion both private and public with
all of the interested parties and I hope that by Easter to either know if it's
possible to have an agreed outcome or if not to be in a position to recommend a
course of action to the Cabinet and therefore to the government parties.
I want to make it plain to all of you that all of the parties are being included in
those discussions. My goal is to deliver an outcome that delivers justice and
security to all of those concerned. The Wik decision was a surprise to me and
here let me say something briefly about the respective roles of the High Court
of Australia and the Executive and the Legislative branch of government in our
system of government. I am a strong believer as any believer in the
parliamentary democratic system ought to be, I'm a strong believer in the
separation of powers, There is a division of powvers and responsibilities
between the judiciary, the executive and the legislature. It is the role of the
judiciary in a properly independent way to interpret both the common law and
the statute law of Australia and one of the great strengths of Australian
democracy is that we have always had an independent judiciary and we have
always had a judiciary of great integrity. And that remains the case today
because although like any other Australian citizen, a point incidentally
acknowledged as recently as yesterday by the current Chief Justice of the High
Court of Australia, like any other citizen I have a right to criticise a decision of
the courts, I nonetheless recognise and respect both the independence and the
integrity of those who hold judicial office in this country. I do not support any
change to the method of appointing High Court judges in Australia. I deplore
any suggestion that this country should go down the American path of electing
Faxroi~ 01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 4 
Fax from judges. I oppose completely.. there are many things about the United States of
America that I love and admire, but I do not believe we will profit this country
by emulating the American judicial system.
So, ladies and gentlemen, it is important that in the current debate about the
role of the court that we don't confuse ourselves and we don't get confused
about respective roles. There is nothing wrong in anybody disagreeing with a
court decision or criticising that court decision. It has gone on for time
immemorial and it will go on again in the future. And the final word I would
say is that in a true separation of powers it is the ultimate role and prerogative
of the parliament of this country to alter any law as currently interpreted or
determined by the courts which it regards to be contrary to the national interest
of Australia.
One of the things that has been an essential ingredient in the successes that we
have achieved over the last year has been the determination and the capacity of
the government to stay in touch with the views and the aspirations and the
hopes of the Australian people. There's a column inch or two in the papers this
morning about the last twelve months and I notice the theme that's coming
through is that some people don't like the fact that I actually listen to what the
Australian public says. I thought one of the roles of a national leader was to
listen and to take notice, to empathise, to understand, to feel the joy and also to
feel the pain and to feel the various degrees of the emotions that the people of
the country he or she feels. And can I say to those who believe that I listen too
much that they're wrong. I listen because I think that's an important part of
My role and while ever I hold this job I will go on listening to the Australian
people. We face in the years ahead enormous challenges to consolidate some very
fortuitous economic circumstances. There are signs and I believe they are
gathering pace, that the Australian economy is beginning to grow again more
strongly than it did in 1996. Business investment is surging ahead very
strongly. We have historically low housing interest rates and I would like there
to be more competition in the banking system so that the historically low
housing interest rates can be replicated in the small business sector with equally
low rates.
Companies like Aussie Home Loans, RAMS, and all those other small new
players in the housing loans area have done great things. We want some of
those in the small business sector. And what they have done is a tremendous
demonstration to all of us of the value of competition. If you every hear
somebody say: ah all of this competition, that all of this deregulation is a lot
of nonsense", throw back to them the experience of Australian home buyers
over the last 12 months. We have the lowest interest rates, as Peter Costello
said, since man first walked on the moon, for the very simple reason that we've
now got more competition in the housing interest rate area. That's why you've
Fa1x/ f0ro3i/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 
FarxoM 01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 6
6
got low housing interest rates. You've got more competition. You haven', t got
it because of Government intervention, you' ve got it because of plain old
competition something that we should never lose our faith in. Never, ever, as
Liberals because it really lies at the heart of a vibrant capitalist, free-enterprise
society. There's a bit of a debate around at the present time about how far you should
go in deregulating, or freeing, the economy. Now, of course, the pace of
change is important and, of course, you have to take account of the impact of
things like tariff changes on particular parts of the country.
But, ladies and gentlemen, let us, as we approach our second year in office, let
us with the opportunity of really consolidating a great economic recovery not
lose any faith at all in the cause of greater competition and freer approaches to
the regulation of markets because they do ultimately lie behind the prosperity
and the economic future of Australia.
I think if we can consolidate the circumstances we now have and that will
involve a further reduction in the budget deficit in the Budget of May of this
year. It won't be of the magnitude required last year but there will still need to
be further fiscal tightening.
We need to bed down the industrial relations changes, many of which only
come into operation on 12 Mar-ch. We need to proceed with waterfront reform.
We need to respond quickly and effectively to the report of the Wallis Inquiry
into Australia's financial system when it is delivered. We need to implement,
without any interruption, the commitments we've made to provide tax
incentives for private health insurance.
May I say that I register great disappointment with the comments made by the
Vice-President of the Australian Medical Association about private health
insurance. Of course, private health insurance is not what everybody would
like. One of the reasons is that the number of people privately insured in
Australia is much less than what it was when we were last in Government.
When the Fraser Government was defeated in March of 1983 sixty one percent
of Australians, sixty one percent, had private health insurance. That figure is
now thirty four percent. And Graham Richardson at least like myself he was
a follower of St George Graham Richardson said, as Health Minister in the
Labor Government in 1993, that if you allow private health insurance to fall
below 40 percent you begin to put intolerable strains on the system. And
despite those warnings, year after year, Labor in Government neglected it. If
they had, five years ago, done what we are proposing to do in July we would
not now have the problems that we have. And even Bob Canr belatedly
recognises it when he said the problem is that people are dropping out of
private health insurance and putting a strain on the public hospital system. So,
if we do have problems in that area, it's because for 13 years they set about
Fax from 
Fax from 7
systematically dismantling the underpinning of private health insurance in this
country because of an ideological objection to it. They were driven by it and
despite the warnings of people like Richardson Keating, Beazley and
Lawrence and all the other crowd that had responsibility in those areas,
followed policies that did immense damage to Australia's health insurance
system. So, that represents a very considerable challenge. We have major challenges
on the foreign policy front. At Easter I will visit Singapore and China.
Australia's relationship with China is an important one to us. Under my
Government it will be a relationship which is built upon the expectation of
mutual respect. Australia and China are vastly different societies and countries.
Ours is an open liberal democracy. Theirs is a closed authoritarian country.
Yet, China has vast potential for the future. The most populist nation in the
world whose economy is growing at a very rapid rate. It is clear that it is in the
mutual national self interest of both of us to build a productive relationship. It
may surprise you to know that China invests more money in Australia than any
other country with the exception of the investments that mainland China makes
in Hong Kong. And it is a very important relationship and it is an important
relationship that I will certainly do my best to improve and build on when I go
there at Easter.
But, one thing that we have done and I think we have done very valuably in the
area of foreign policy over the last twelve months is that we have demonstrated
the proposition I have made time and time again that Australia does not have
to choose between our history and our geography in our foreign relations. Of
course, we want and we will deliver ever closer relations between Australia and
the nations of the Asia Pacific region. They are our friends, they are our
partners, they are our economic future and it is the fastest growing economic
region in the world. Yet, we have, as all of you know, deep and abiding links
with other parts of the world and our historic, and our cultural, and our
political, and our liberal democratic shared inheritance and shared values with
the nations of Europe, the United Kingdom and others, and with the United
States are an important part of our history.
And there is no incompatibility. You can have both. You don't have to make a
choice. And it was one of the foreign policy failures of my predecessor that he
gave the impression, intended or not, that somehow or another we had to make
a choice. Well, we don't. We can have both and the links that we have with
both can contribute to the mutual benefit of the overall relationship.
I suppose the only other thing I might briefly touch upon, of course, are our
opponents. I mean it would be uncharitable not to say anything about them.
But, I'm a btshy, so I'll content myself with saying about them what they have
said about themselves. I mean, we could try George Campbell. He's going
into the Senate next year for New South Wales and he said this: " I don't think
Far1xa/ N03 / 97 15: 39 Pg: 7 
Fax from the Party knows or has a clear perception of what it stands for, or more
importantly what it wants to achieve in terms of development of our society".
Not bad. That was 24 February 1997.
And then, of course, you have relevence depravation syndrome Gareth. When
he was asked about branch stacking, he said: " I don't particularly like this
terminology of branch stacking, I prefer to think of it in terms of exuberant
democracy at work".
I suppose, in a sense, it's natural at a gathering like this that you should say the
odd thing about your political opponents and you should endeavour to crack the
odd joke. I guess it is part of the approach and I think it is fair to say that the
Labor Party is still tying very hard to come to grips with the reality of being
out of office after having been in power for such a long period time.
But, can I say to all of you, don't underestimate, ever, our opponents. I think
one of the great mistakes the Labor Party made was to underestimate us and
that is the reason that we won with such a big majority one of the reasons.
Don't underestimate them. They loved being in office, And they would love to
be back in office. They do regard themselves as the natural party of
Government in Australia. One of the reasons that they lost touch as we worked
up to the last election was they couldn't really believe that the Australian
people would actually vote them out. They kept getting the negative responses.
They kept looking at their research. They kept looking at the polls. They kept
realising that they had been in power for a long timne. But deep down they said
to themselves, but we are the Labor Party. We are the modem Labor Party. I
notice part of them now call themselves the New Labor Party. And despite
that, they just somehow, all the indications to the contrary, they couldn't
believe that the Australian public were going to vote them out. They really had
begun to think they were natural party of Government. What an extraordinary
turn around. They used to say that about us. They used to say we had a bornto-
rule mentality. Well, I'll tell you what nothing belts a born-to-rule
mentality out of you more than 13 years in Opposition.
But, I don't think anybody should every forget that. I mean, never forget the
difficult parts of the journey in politics. And if you don't forget the difficult
parts of the journey you will always remember that ultimately you're not there
because you are some kind of group of divinely inspired geniuses, you are there
because of the gift of the Australian people. We are there because they thought
we better represented their aspiration. We are there because they thought we
could better lead them into the next millennium. We are there because they
think we understand their concerns,, and their hopes, and their fears and their
aspirations. So my message to you on our first birthday celebration as a new Government
is, of course, again my thanks from the bottom of my heart for all that you have
Fafrr~ 01/ 83/ 9? 15: 39 Pg: 8 
Fax from 0 1/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 9
I. 9
done to help me. To the section of the Party organisation to which I've
devoted so much of my own life and in which I find so many life long friends, I
thank you for that personal support. I thank you for the tremendous support
that you have given to all of my colleagues and could I say to you remember
that power in politics is a gift from the people. It is not there as a bribe.
Remember to keep in touch. Never be arrogant towards the people who voted
you into office. And always remember the great capacity of the Australian
people to level those within our community who get beyond their station in life
and imagine that they have some automatic right to hang on to an office. If we
do that we can celebrate many more birthdays into the future. 
Fax from 01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg:
Q&amp; A's
Question: The question's about defence. Prime Minister, the decision you made last year
in isolating the defence budget from cuts was one that I personally and a lot of
others associated with the defence forces was very much appreciated. The
morale of our defence forces is something vital to us and this party, I know, is
anxious to see that morale high. Can you tell us whether that same sort of
quarantine from cuts will be evident in the current budget, or indeed, will you
be able to maintain it for the term of this Government?
Prime Minister: Yes.
Question: As one of the rank and file members of the party, congratulations on your first
year of government and I'm sure I speak for everybody else on the floor by
hoping that there will be many more of them, But that's not my question. My
question relates to one of the first lines that you said in your speech where you
talked about environmental reform and I ask that the question with that
background, why was Airservices the people commissioned by the Federal
Government to do the utilisation, the greater utilisation of Mascot airport not
required to produce for the eastern area, modes 8 and 9, an environmental
impact study? And I ask that against the background that the No Aircraft Noise
are lobbying very hard in the eastern area, protest meetings have already been
held, more are expected in the future and as Vice President of Wentworth
Conference it concerns me with a five per cent majority, or just as
importantly.... . the seat of Vaucluse is effected by Bligh and Coogee, now why
was not the requirement why was special dispensation given so that no
environmental impact statement in regard to the jets going over the eastern
area? Prime Minister: The reason for that from recollection is that the advice we had
at the time, which was shortly after the change of government, was that a new
EIS was not required under the law, and as you know in all of these things,
EIS's do take a very long period of time. We were elected on a comrutment to
share the noise around. I know that I know that some areas of Sydney are now
getting noise that previously they didn't get, I know that. But I also have to say
to you that the previous arrangements imposed a quite intolerable burden on a
small section of the Sydney community, including many people who live in
strong Labor seats. And some of the greatest beneficiaries of the changes we
have made have been people who live in the inner suburbs. I mean I don't
know how people have lived in areas like Stanmore and St Peters and
Marrickville all these years, I mean I travel through them I mean you go over
and watch any sporting event in some of those areas, I mean it's an absolute 
Fax from miracle that anybody can hear. I mean I think those people have suffered a lot,
and what we've tried to do is to spread it around, I mean my electorate was
badly affected, it is still worse affected than others, it is less affected now than
it was. I don't disgpise that fact, they have rights. The people who live in my
electorate shouldn't lose their rights, because people might say it's
unreasonable that anything is every done to help people who live in the Prime
Minister's electorate, but I think what we've done is we've spread it around
more fairly. Now I think we have..-I mean that's what we've tried to do.
Nobody every welcomes a change that slightly disadvantages them, but I think
if you face a choice between on the one hand having a small number of people
copping it all, that's great for everybody else, but it's a bit unfair on that small
numnber of people, and that was the philosophy that drove what we did.
Question: Mr Prime Minister I preface my question by congratulating you on your
sensitive handling of the relationships with the judiciary over last twenty four,
thirty six hours, but this is on perhaps a similar question, and it's on the role of
the Governor General, and I'd like your opinion on this Sir. I've noted that the
previous two holders of this office have made a number of public statements
which I didn't think~ were in the tradition of the head of state being apolitical
and simply....
Prime Minister: When you say the previous two....
No, the present one and the previous one, and I refer particularly to the
present Governor General's statements as to what should be the timetable for
Aboriginal reconciliation. Now I know that's something to which you're fully
committed, but I'm concerned that statements by a Governor General might be
perceived as an expression of Government policy and if circumstances prevent
you adhering from that you will be regarded as not sticking to your previous
promises. What has been the position of the Governors General do they make
private statements, or are they expressers of government policy?. In a
Constitutional Mon~ archy, the Monarchist is very very careful not to give
private opinions.
Prime Minister: Well, Bob the situation, the convention as I've always read it
-is that the defacto Head of State, and that really is who the Governor General is
in our modem constitutional evolution, he is the defacto Head of State of
Australia, and in that position, he or she ought not to take sides politically, and
he or she should observe considerations of sensitivity in statements that are
made. It doesn't mean, and it would be unnatural for it to mean, that the person
who holds that office can never every express an opinion on anything. I think
that is to impose an unreal restriction and I have to say that the present
occupant of -the office, who was appointed by the previous government, is a
person for whom I have considerable personal respect. He's a person of
Fa om01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 11 
Fax from 0 1/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 12
integrity and he carries out his duties very conscientiously and I really don't
have anything fiurther to say.
Question: First of all Mr Prine Minister, I would like to congratulate you on behalf of my
people of Fairfield for completing your term, your first term of office as the
Prime Minister. Now thirteen years of labor rule brought massive
unemployment burden for payments or loans to the financial institutions like
( inaudible) Bank and huge number of house breakups and family breakups, and
I understand that your reform packages started on March 2nd last year is getting
tremendous support I wish you success for at least two decades. My question
is if I say that, if Labor Party want to dream about the decision making
process, they have to sit and eat humble Australian pies for at least two
decades. My question is, anyway from Canberra to address the Premier of
( inaudible).
Prime Minister: What I understand your question is, is there any way we can
ensure that the NSW Government restores dignity to the office of NSW
Governor. Well change the NSW Government.
Question: Prime Minister, can I say how pleased most people are that you have refused to
buckle under pressure from the homosexual lobby and endorse tonight's gay
mardi gras. And on the question of family values, can I ask you how your
Family Tax package is being perceived around the country?
Prime Minister: Well I think it is being received very well around the country.
We delivered everything that we promrised. We have delivered a little more
choice for parents as to their child care arrangements. It's not the role of
governments to say to parents how many of them should be in the workforce
when their children are young. That's their business, and it's arrogant of
governments to sort of lay down some kind of paradigm. But the former
system made it very difficult for people who wanted, particularly when their
kids were young, to have either the mother or father out of the workforce for a
period. Now I'm not saying that the changes we've made have sort of provided
huge financial incentives for greater choice, but at least they have recognised
and made a contribution towards greater choice. And that's very, very
important indeed, very, very important. I think it has been seen as a well
targeted initiative. It's been widely supported and it's been seen by
organisations such as ACOSS as being fair to very low income families, so I'm
very well pleased with the reaction it's received. 
Fax from Question: Prime Minister: How are you? Haven't seen you for ages.
still here
Prime Minister: Good on you.
Mr Prime Minister, first of all let me congratulate you on obtaining the high
office of Prime Minister of Australia. If there was every an Austr'alian citizen
that deserves such a high office it is the present holder of that situation. As you
know, Mr Prime Minister, I had never any doubts that you were going to
achieve this high office, and having achieved it you've added dignity, both
internally and externally for this nation. Having said so, let me put a very
simple question to you. What initiatives has the government in hand to initiate
further policies in overcoming the crippling overseas debt?
Prime Minister: Well a number of things, the first thing is that we have
reduced the budget deficit and therefore reduced the core of the government
sector on the savings of Australians to pay for government expenditure. We
have also, through reforming the labour market, we have set about making
Australia more competitive. There are two things that you need to do to reduce
Australia's monthly trading and balance of payments deficit, which of course is
the cause of our overseas debt. The money we owe to foreigners is the money
we have constantly borrowed from foreigners to buy the surplus of imports
over exports. The two things you need to do, the first is you need to increase
savings in the Australian community so we don't have to borrow so much from
foreigners, and the second thing you've got to do is to make the Australian
economy more competitive so that we can sell more overseas and our local
industries are more competitive against imports. Now we've set about
addressing the first by cutting the budget deficit and thereby building national
savings, and we've set about tackling the second by reforming the labour
market, we're going to tackle waterfront import reform this year. We've got
major telecommunications reform which will come into operation on the first
of July. We are pressing ahead with national competition policy, all of which
is bound to make Australia more competitive country. There has been some
improvement in Australia's balance of payments situation over the past several
years. It has been slow, but is not as acute as it was some years ago. There is
still a long way to go it is very much like turning round an ocean liner double
the size of the biggest one that's afloat at present it takes a very long time but
at least we have begun apply the policies that will start to turn that ocean liner
around. And they're being applied in those two areas. Fa rom01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 13 
Fax from 0 1/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 14
Question: And if! I might say Mr Prime Minister, congratulations, we are in delight if we
have one big thing to win if I might say, we've got to win Manly back, which
was one of the strongest Liberal branches in Australia, though I hope that that
will be able to be said after the next state elections. But that is not my
question. My question is about the Constitution of Australia which is, I
believe, personally one of the greatest constitutions of the world. And we are
talking about having a referendum or even discussions about a change, republic
or constitution monarchy which has served us so well over the years. My
problem is that in Australia, less than twelve per cent of the people in Australia
have never seen, let alone read the constitution of this country, of which there
is no litigation virtually about. If you go to the United States, litigation is
continuous, and what concerns me is in this talk of change that we might get
something like the United States constitution, which all I can see will keep
lawyers, and I excuse all lawyers here, but will keep them in jobs forever. How
can we have any proper vote when people do not know what is in this
marvellous constitution that was written one hundred years ago?
Prime Minister: I think that's right, we have failed lamentably over the years to
properly teach our children the basic features of our structure of government.
This, what's the correct expression, this sort of episode, or issues treatment of
Australian history, which has been, become the vogue in recent times has
destroyed any sort of chronological understanding that people under the age of
about forty have all the steps taken to build.... how many children.. how many
Australians under the age of thirty five or forty were properly instructed about
the federation debates, about people such as Parkes and Barton and Deakin and
all of those people it just doesn't happen anymore. You've had plenty of sort
of issues studies, but people, unless you have a chronological understanding of
a nation's history, you have no sort of structure to refer back to. Anyway, I
shouldn't go down that path too much. But you're right. People don't know
much about the Constitution, and there's a lot of people, of course, who are not
particularly keen to get into too much of the detail about it either. They
essentially regard it as a fairly dry subject, but one of the things that we are
going to do in the lead up to the convention is that we're going to prepare and
have published a document to which we will seek, probably seek, input and
contributions from people in the community who have different views, stating
some of the bare facts about how our system, our present system of government
works,, describing the present system of government, describing its strengths
and there will also be people who will argue in the same document about its
weaknesses, and I hope that that document which will be very widely
distributed, I've even got it mind perhaps it appearing as a supplement in all of
the major newspapers in Australia, so and in a relatively attractive form, so that
people can and now a lot of people will actually read material like that if it's
presented in a proper form. I mean, you can't force people to read the
constitution. We're a democracy, no matter how much you distribute a lot of 
Fax f romt 1/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg:
people just won't read it and you just have to accept that fact. But I do think if
we had a bit of a better understanding about how the system works we can have
a more intelligent debate. Now, I agree with you I think our constitution has
worked very well, I think the present system of government is a very good
system of government. I don't believe that a republican system of government
would be more liberal or more open or more democratic, but it's not just about
debate, it's I've said it before and I'll say it again that I don't think anyone's
unhappy with the present system of government. I think some people that some
of the symbolism associated with the present system of government is no longer
as contemporary as it might be, now that's not necessarly my view, but it is the
view of a lot of people, it's the view of a lot of people in this room, I think we
have to recognise that and we have to be willing to talk about it, but I don't
think we should change something unless we're satisfied that what we're
changing to is as good or better. And that's a pretty hard ask, but we shouldn't
be fightened to talk about it and but we should talk about it against the
background of being well informed and also talk but I think the way we
handle that will give people a lot more information.
Question: Prime Minister, could I begin by congratulating you for your opening speech
yesterday for the Youth Suicide Forum which was held in Canberra, it's quite
obvious that you have an excellent understanding of what is an horrific problem
and indeed a tragedy which faces Australia's youth. But my question is in lieu
of yesterday's discussions, what plan does the Government have to co-ordinate
a national strategy to address this problem?
Prime Minister: Well we have done a number of things, we have looked at the
problems of youth homelessness in a more systematic fashion, and there is
some link between dysfunctional family situations and suicide. There are a lot
of as I said yesterday, there are a lot of tributaries, and that's one of them. We
have got out pilot programnmes on youth homelessness and you may remember
that was an initiative I announced before the election they are now well
underway and I believe they will help in that area. We have put about S$ 19m
into a three-year programme which is a mixture of approaches. It's a very hard
problem and you were at the seminar and you have an understanding of it. It's
a product of family breakdown, of high unemployment, it is bound up with our
attitude to the treatment of mental health disorders, it's part of the wider debate
in the community about how soon people who have mental disorders arc
pushed back into the broader community and that's a very lively debate as you
know, and some of the personal examples that I as a local member have come
into touch with, and I mentioned one of them yesterday, are very much bound
up with that. It's about the availability of services which provide young people
in particular with a point of contact when they feel completely shut off from the
rest of society, I think one of the greatest social innovations in social policy so
simply devised when you think about it that I've seen in my life was the 
Fax from01/ 03/ 97 15: 39 Pg: 16
launching of the original Lifeline programme in the early 1960s by Alan
Walker's mission here in Sydney which provided the very simple device of
there being a telephone, and those kids helplie services, the number of
suicides that have been avoided because of that service has been absolutely
magnficent it's very simple it's very effective, It's not just a question of
money, but money's important, it's a question of mobilisig community
services in a completely non-political non -combative way, and you would have
seen there were Labor members present as well as Coalition members. And so
it's trying to do A the things that are going to bring about a change. And in a
sense you say we've got a co-ordinated strategy, well sometimes a co-ordinated
strategy doesn't look very co-ordinated, because you're drawing upon the
voluntary efforts of a lot of people and I still believe very strongly the
involvement of the volunteer sector in areas like this is enormously important.
I mean I am constantly in awe of those men and women who spend hours and
hours often during the long lonely parts of the night sitting at the end of the
telephone, waiting for someone who's about to take their life to ring them up in
the hope that they may be able to persuade that there's a bit more hope in life
than what they at the moment think. And I think those people do a tremendous
job. You can never pay those people, all you can do is thank them, and all you
can do is create a society which makes that kind of work respected and
ennobled because it's a very, very important part of our society, and without
that volunteer glue a lot of the glue that holds us together and keeps people
feeling wanted and cared for is going to disappear. 



. W 3 March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT THE NORMAN MAY OAM TRIBUTE DINNER
WENTWORTH HOTEL, SYDNEY
E O E
Thank you very much Gordon; to Michael Knight and Gabrielle Harrison; to John
Coates, and most importantly of all to our guest of honour and the person whose long
years of commitment to and enjoyment of and demonstration of the great capacity to
communicate Australian sport, Norman May, ladies and gentlemen.
It's often said that if there is a national cement in Australia it is our great love of sport.
And I can't think of a gathering that I've been to, certainly as Prime Minister, perhaps
at any time, that has brought together such a cross-section of men and women that
have thrilled us over the years. Every conceivable sport, just about, is represented here
tonight. Some of the greatest names in Australian sport, in the Olympic sports, in our
other great national sports such as cricket and rugby league, they're all represented
here tonight and that is for a very good reason. Because there's a special bond
between Australians and their sportsmen and that bond in most cases is via sports
commentators. When I was growing up as a young bloke in the late ' 40s and early ' 50s my connection
was fought apart from my rather feeble attempts to play various games not very
adequately. My real connection with sports was through those great sports
commentators, firstly on radio and I have to say almost entirely at that time through
the ABC. People like Bernard Koo and Brian McLenahan and Frank O'Rourke who
described the rugby league, and of course the great Alan McGilvray and Victor
Richardson and Johnny Moise and others, and the interstate sports commentators like
Clive Harburg and Arnold Mewens in Brisbane and Adelaide they were the people
who first sort of put me into touch with sport.
And tonight is a reminder to me of how absolutely incredibly important the link
between the sportsmen and women of Australia adore and admire how incredible is the
link that is provided by the sports commentator. Because without the sports
commentator the ability of men and women in the Australian community who love 
their sport to relate to the achievements of their sporting heroes simply wouldn't be
there. And if you look back over the sporting achievements of Australia, the last 30 or
years, no person has occupied the centre stage in communicating the thrill of the
experience and the excitement and the national pride and the sheer joy and the sheer
pleasure more effectively and more eloquently than Norman May. And in doing that
he's taking his place beside some absolutely tremendous sporting commentators, but
he really has been the principal. And what has been quite remarkable about him is his
capacity to communicate about so many sports and that's what I think marks him out
from the others. You have the great cricket commentators like Alan McGilvray and
we've had, in more recent times, great rugby league commentators like Ray Hadley
and you had some great race callers over the years, but Norman May is unique because
Norman is associated with so many sports. He will be forever associated, of course,
with the 1980 Olympic Games. And we were reminded of that just a few moments ago
when he bequeath some inaugural words to the long history of Australian sport and
what a great excitement to have three of those four tremendous representatives of
Australia in the 1980 Games here with us tonight.
But to be able, as one single sports commentator, to be able to hear the tributes from
those three blokes, to hear what Tracy Wickham had to say, to hear Doug Walters I
don't think I've heard a funnier speech at a sports gathering than I heard tonight, good
on you Doug you were a great Australian cricketer and even more important than
that, you're a great Australian personality. And of course the tribute from a
member of that sort of rare breed of the rare manifestation of sporting belongs to one
of those great Australian sporting family where incredibly the genes are such that you
produce two or three or, in some cases, even four Australian or world champions in a
particular sport.
So Norman you have achieved something that no other sports commentator in the
history of Australian sport has achieved. You have achieved a versatility, you have
achieved a capacity to relate across all of the sports and a capacity to communicate to
all Australians in something that they all instinctively love and they all instinctively
enjoy. And it's been a great privilege to share this night with you. And I'm very
grateful that you've been able to keep me fually informed as time has gone by the
cricket score in South Africa I haven't heard anything though since the resumption
after lunch. I hope somebody will get be informed about that after I've sat down.
Norman, on behalf of a very grateful sports loving nation and from the lips of a sports
loving Prime Minister can I say thank you for what you've done for Australian sport.
Thank you for all your selfless, prodigious, sacrificing efforts for no personal reward
other than the enjoyment of doing something good for other people for the tremendous
fundraising efforts to which you've committed yourself over such a very, very long
period of time. And having said all of that I would like you to come forward because I
want to make a very small presentation well, it's not so small a presentation to you
which I hope expresses the affection, the gratitude and the admiration for what you've
done and for the privilege of knowing you and your contribution to Australian sport. 



7 March 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
TO ROTARY CLUB OF AUSTRALIA
e o e
Thank you very much Tony, to Malcolm, and to all the other very distinguished office
bearers of the Rotary Club of North Sydney and all the other members of Rotary,
bother here in Australia and around the world and can I say how very touched I am by
this award. Those symbolic gestures in life a always in a sense more rewarding and
have a lot more meaning than more material gestures. And to be recognised in this
honouring way I am not a rotarian, although I have attended so many Rotary
functions in my life as all of my Parliamentary colleagues present here, and I
acknowledge their presence particularly Joe Hockey and Gillian Skinner who are the
two local members for this area, federally and State. I feel as though I know and
understand Rotary extremely well and I take the opportunity as Prime Minister to
acknowledge the tremendous contribution that Rotary makes towards building a better
Australia and building a happier more cooperative world.
We'd never be able to keep Australia going without the help of literally hundreds of
thousands, if not millions of Australians who volunteer their time and their energy and
their effort to doing those things that no government, whatever its attitude may be, no
government can ever do. Australia has a tremendous tradition of volunteerism. Being
a volunteer and getting out and helping people in an unsung, very very selfless fashion
has always been an important characteristic of being an Australian. We're very good
at it, and although of course as you all know the Rotary movement started in the
United States. The natural appeal of Rotary to Australians was very understandable.
And the way in which so many Australians joined Rotary and through the years have
cooperated in the local efforts of Rotary, have involved themselves in the international
exchanges, the encouragement to community involvement and community self-help,
the building of an understanding of what good citizenship is all about. The nurturing
of the notion that our society is really a lot about mutual obligations. We have mutual
obligations each to the other. We have rights but we also have responsibilities. As a
society we also have an obligation to look after those within our midst who are less
fortunate than we are and from time to time we have a right to say to people who are
assisted that it's part of the mutual obligation of being a member of the Australian
community that something is done in return for the effort that is extended to help them.
And Rotary has been very much part of this and in the process hundreds of thousands
of Australians have found a great deal of personal satisfaction in involving themselves 
in the affairs of Rotary, in raising fuinds to help needy causes, in promoting very
importantly international understanding. And I was reflecting as I drove here tonight
from Gladesville just how many people, how many young people I know, including
members of my extended family who have been the recipients of those great
international student rotary exchanges which are one of the great ways in which young
people have learned about other countries and the understanding that is so important,
particularly in a world where communications and the globalisation of the world
economy has demolished and removed the differences that used to exist.
So in many ways Rotary is owed a great debt of gratitude by the Australian
community, and I want on behalf of the Government to express my personal gratitude
to all of those rotarians in Australia who over the years have done so much to build
and nurture the spirit of Rotary and have made such a magnificent contribution to
improving understanding here in Australia and for making it between peoples and
between nations.
I am very touched by the honour that you have paid me tonight. I do feel a quiet pride
in the fact that it was possible in the wake of that awful tragedy to seize the
opportunity and the moment to do something very positive to change at least in one
area for all time the direction of our society.
It was a very interesting as well as a very challenging exercise, and may I acknowledge
thle assistance I received from both sides of politics; from the Leader of the Opposition,
Mr Beazley; the Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Kernot; from the NSW
Labor Premier Mr Carr; from Peter Collins, the Leader of the Opposition here in NSW
and all of the other state Premiers. And I particularly acknowledge the contribution
that was made by my deputy and the Leader of the National Party, Tim Fischer whose
constituency found the adjustment process more difficult for reasons I hope you all
understand. If you were an urban Liberal Member or an urban Labor Member it was a
little easier to put your hand up for gun control laws than if you were a rural member
and I think that should be acknowledged and in that context I also especially
acknowledge the leadership role taken and displayed by the Premier of Queensland, Mr
Rob Borbidge.
It was one of those occasions when a community wanted something done and a
community wanted something done very decisively and those who hold public office in
this country are often criticised for failing to match the moment or failing to seize the
occasion. I think on this occasion the elected representatives of the Australian
community whatever their politics overwhelmingly did the right thing by the Australian
community and the significance of the event cannot be underestimated. I never
accepted the inevitability that Australia should go down the American path so far as
personal violence, particularly gun violence was concerned. I am a great admirer of
many things American. That country has contributed enormously to the stability of the
world and contributed enormously to the way of life that people in, what is loosely
called the western world, enjoy. Like any other country which is a role model in some
areas, it is not in other areas and the pattern of urban violence, the number of deaths
from gunshot wounds in that country. The systemic violence that is found in so many
parts of the United States is something that I certainly wanted to do all in my power to
stop spreading to this country and I think in a small way what the governments and the 
political parties of Australia were able to achieve in the wake of the Port Arthur
disaster in a small way we have made a contribution to building a safer Australian
community and what impressed me was the reaction across the board of people to
what was done. I had people coming up to me in the streets and saying I didn't vote
for you last time and I never will vote for you but I do agree with what you did in
relation to gun control.
I remember going to a test match, it was a Rugby Union test match between Australia
and South Africa at the Sydney Sports Stadium in June of last year and I was invited
onto the field to meet the teams and I was still in the infancy of my Prime Ministership
so I didn't get boo-ed. It is a great Australian tradition after you've been in office for
a couple of years to get boo-ed when you go onto the field. And I met the team, and I
was very interested in the reaction of the crowd because the gun control issue was still
raging very strongly and I was interested in the reaction of the crowd and the number
of people who called out " hold the line on gun control laws" and afterwards at the
reception, interestingly enough two or three members of the South African football
team spoke to me about it because that is a country that is wracked by an enormous
amount of violence and has tragically enough a murder rate that is amongst one of the
worst in the world, and so it was a very interesting experience and it did remind and it
did remind I think all of those who were involved in it of the capacity of people in
public life if they act in concert and they act out a sense of commitment to the common
good that you can achieve things, you can change directions and you can give to the
community a sense of reassurance and I think it is particularly important and in a sense
symbolic that this award and this event should take place on the eve of the
international day for women which is tomorrow because amongst the strongest
expressions of support that I received for what I did and what my government did was
fromn women in Australia including a very large number of women who lived in rural
Australia and the number of women.... Security from violence is a very important
thing to all of us and it is a particularly important thing to women and to children and if
we've made a small contribution to building a safer and more congenial and beckoning
and more reassuring and dare I say it more relaxed and comfortable Australian
community as a result of that then I am very very grateful indeed.
But finally can I say that it wouldn't have been possible for us to have achieved what
was achieved without the goodwill and the cooperation of other people in public life.
It wasn't just achieved by me alone and I again acknowledge the contribution of others
including people who are normally my political opponents.
But to you gentlemen of the North Sydney Rotary Club and of the broader Rotary
movement, again my very warm thanks both for the contribution that your magnificent
organisation makes to the people of Australia and the Australian community and most
especially for the personal compliment that you have paid me and the honour that you
have done me tonight, I treasure it greatly and I regard it as a very special honour
indeed. Thank you. 



March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
LAUNCH OF OFFICIAL LOGO FOR
COMMONWEALTH GAMES
e o e
Thank you very much to my colleagues Michael Knight and Warwick Smith; to Ray
Godwin, the President of the Commonwealth Games Association and particular
welcome also to Gary Pembarth and Alan Ridge, the managing directors of the two
companies that were particularly acknowledged for their sponsorship. I just want to
say as patron of the association how delighted I am to be associated with this formal
launch of the logo and in a sense the formal part of Australia's campaign for the
Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur in 1998.
And I particularly acknowledge also the presence of the Consul General for Malaysia
that this is the first time that Malaysia has hosted the Games and the first time that an
Asian city has been the host of the Commonwealth Games is a very special thing in
itself Australia of course in 1994 surpassed itself as far as Commonwealth Games
performance was concerned but I know that the determination and the competitive
spirit of Australia's sportsmen and women will mean that we will be endeaviouring
with every sinew available for the competing athletes to do even better than that when
they go to Malaysia in 1998.
It is important that as a lead up to the Olympic Games here in Sydney in the Year
2000, it is important that in preparing for those games we don't in any way relax our
efforts to maintain the splendid performance of Australian athletes over the years at the
Commonwealth Games. Although the similarities between the two games are obvious
in so many ways, there aer some characteristics of the Commonwealth Games that
mark them apart from the Olympic Games and give them some special features and
some special characteristics. The well-known description of them is the Friendly
Games illustrates that particular character and that particular trait of the competitive
spirit in which the athletes take place. 
I am delighted to note the addition of so many new sports, new in the sense of them
being new for Commonwealth Games participation but certainly not new in the sense
that any of those sports are in any way unfamiliar to Australians. It is impossible to be
the Prime Minister of Australia without I suppose virtually every week of one's
existence to be reminded of the central place sport plays in the lives and indeed the
very ethic of all those things that binds our nation together. Sport, I think, and I look
at these things very positively does bring out some of the best features of the
Australian spirit. It brings out that commitment of body and soul to achieving an
objective. It brings out the capacity of people to play in a team, it brings out the
capacity of people to stretch their talents to the absolute limit and it also enables us to
put on display to the rest of world whether it is here in Australia or our teams
competing overseas those special characteristics that define Australians as being a very
distinctive and a very attractive group of people.
So ladies and gentlemen I want to wish all of those associated with the Commonwealth
Games effort, the very best of good fortune. I want to take the opportunity through
this luncheon on behalf of the Government to thank so many people in the
Commonwealth Games movement who give up their time without any reward, without
any recompense, but because they are dedicated to particular sports and they are
dedicated to ensuring that Australia always puts on the best possible representation.
Sometimes at gatherings like this, we can forget that sporting bodies all around
Australia have their genisis in those local communities where citizens come together
for no reward but simply because they love a particular sport and they are prepared to
devote hours and weeks and months and years of their time ensuring that people who
ultimately end up representing Australia, ultimately become household words as far as
Australian sports loving is concerned, that those people have their opportunities.
So I congratulate all of those associated with today's lunch. I thank the sponsors. I
commend the efforts of the Commonwealth Games association, I congratulate all of
those who brought past glory and past credit to Australia's sporting reputation and for
those who will ultimately be chosen to represent our country in Kuala Lumpur in 1998
I wish them well.
So ladies and gentlemen in concluding my remarks, I know my formal duty is to launch
the new logo and I am therefore very pleased to officially launch the new
Commonwealth Games logo which will be a very recognisable logo as we lead our
team into Kuala Lumpur.
Thank you very much. 



Fax from PRIME MINISTER
12 March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD, MP
ADDRESS TO THlE OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE
TORRUMBARRY WEIR ECHUCA, VICTORIA
E&amp;
Well thank you very much Professor Luvering. To Mr Pat McNamara, the Deputy
Premier of Victoria, to my Federal Ministerial colleagues Mr John Anderson, the
Minister for Primary Industry and Energy, Senator Robert Hill, the Leader of the
Government in the Senate and Minister for the Environment, to Marie Tehan, to
Sharmnan Stone the Federal Member for Murray and to all of my other Parliamentary
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It really is a tremendous pleasure to be here on this very special occasion for this part
of Australia. Can I say what an enormous delight it is to get out of Canberra and out
of Sydney an~ d out of Melbourne and out of all the big population centres of Australia
and come to rural Australia. I mean, it's not that I've got anything against those other
places it's just that on occasions we get accused of thinking that the world, sort of,
rotates around those parts of Australia and when in reality Australia is made up of
many parts of many different parts. And one of the many things that I'm
endeavouring to do and the many things that my Government is endeavouring to do is
to establish a very profound and effective contact and resonance with rural and
regional Australia. And as a token of that yesterday the Federal Cabinet had its first
meeting in regional Australia at Pakenllam. Some people might say that's just a
tentative step into regional Australia, but it's going to get better and better as time
goes on so that at the end of three years we will have chalked up a significant number
of meetings that are being held outside the major population centres. So this event
here today has a place in that but it's more important that than.
This is a very special event and its an occasion that's marked quite a milestone so far
as the locality is concerned. It marks a milestone in another example as the
engineering capacity of Australians and the ingenuity of Australians. This is, I
understand, the first major the first intervention of any kind in the flow of the river
since 1924 when the original weir was constructed. And what today's event does it,
sort of; brings together the modem engineering capacity and skill of Australians, but
Faxirrft12/ 03/ 97 18: 83 Pg: 7 
Fax from it's also tinged with some of our history. And to travel here on that lovely paddle
steamer, to be reminded by the local member that 30, what, 50, &amp; o 70 years ago you
had a magnificent ship building industry here. That paddle steam er was built here and
Echuca has the largest gathering, if you call a group of paddle steamers a gathering,
the largest gathering of paddle steamers anywhere in the world and I think that's sort
of a mixture of the old and the new and the wonderful historic touch is something that
adds to the occasion. But even beyond that, of course, this is an occasion to remark
upon the important work of the Murray/ Darling Basin Commission. 40 per cent of
Australia's agriculture is contained within the Murray/ Darling Basin. The construction
of the new weir is a cooperative effort between the Federal Government and the State
Governments of Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia and I particularly
want to acknowledge the contribution of the Victorian Government and the presence
here today of the Deputy Premier of Victoria, Pat McNamara.
But ladies and gentlemen, looking to the fuxture, fixing up the Murray Darling Basin is
about the most important environmental challenge that this State can have. That lovely
poem talks about the pollution in the River Murray, and there is pollution. There is
pollution in the river. There is the degradation of soil through salinity. There are many
other ongoing environmental challenges that this country has. And I think all
Australians now want a balance between environment and development. They want to
look after our national heritage but they also want industrial progress, and you can
balance the two. It's not a situation of saying that all development is bad. That is
crazy stupid nonsense. Equally worse we've passed the day when we could take
action that effected our environment and believing that somehow or other the problem
would cure itself The problem doesn't cure itself And we do need to invest time and
resources into caring for our environment. And that's the reason why the Federal
Government promised before the last election and I'm very happy to say that we are
now in a position to implement it we promised the establishment of the Natural
Heritage Trust of Australia. And that Natural Heritage Trust will have paid into it just
under $ 1.2 billion and that will be out of the proceeds of the sale of one third of
Telstra. And that $ 1.2 billion will be used over a period of years exclusively for
environmental projects. And out of that we will fully fund the $ 163 million that the
Commission believes is necessary to carry out important environmental work for the
Murray Darling Basin. And that $ 163 million will be one of the first ( inaudible) on that
Natural Heritage Trust. And I'm therefore able to say to people who are intimately
connected with the Murray Darling Basin recognising the long term importance of it to
the agricultural base and the agricultural future of Australia, I'm able to say to you, to
all of you, that we have a firm deliverable commitment in relation to the
recommendations of the Cormmission and the changes to the environmental care that
that Commission has recommended. And it does represent an historic commitment by
Australian governments to the environmental future of our nation and it delivers on a
very, very important commitment that I made to the Australian people at the time of
the last election. Believing as I did then and I do now that the future of this nation
rest very heavily upon getting the right balance between development, industry and
the environment, particularly in the regonal parts of Australia.
So Professor Luvering can I say that we have taken notice of the views expressed by
the Commission and we are very, very strongly committed to the implementation of an
action plan of the type the Commission has outlined. Fafrft12/ 03/ 97 18: 03 Pg: 8 
Fax from A great deal has already been said about the weir and I had the intricacies of it
explained to me as I came here today. And it has been a collaborative project and it's
been contributed to by all of the four governments that I mentioned. And it'will
improve the water quality. It will establish environmental ( inaudible) capable of
sustaining natural processes and it has developed an integrated management strategy
for the river system.
But in addition to that of course, as Pat mentioned, I'm very happy to be associated
with the armouncement today of a further local initiative to compliment the new weir
and to stimulate local development and that is the Logan Murray 2000 plus strategy
And my colleague, John Anderson, will sign the memorandum of understanding on
behalf of the Federal Government immediately after this opening ceremony.
But the purpose of this strategy is to bring together the Federal Government, the State
government, the local community, in working out strategies that can most effectively
secure and promote and maintain development in a coordinated, economically sensible
way, a community sensitive way, in the local area. And we will, in association with the
Victorian Government, be investing some $ 660 000 to support the objectives of that
memorandum of understanding.
But the last thing, ladies and gentlemen, I want to say to you today is something that is
really at the core of what this region is all about and the core of what our nation is all
about and that is that sense of cooperation, that sense, if you like, of community
obligation, of mutual obligation that we each have to the other. This weir has been
made possible through the cooperation of four governments. We each acknowledge
the contributions of the other government. It is not just a Commonwealth Government
project, it's not just a Victorian government project, or a New South Wales or South
Australian government one. It is a project of all of the four governments. And our
communities rest very heavily on that notion of cooperation and that notion of sharing
responsibilities. I have a very deep personal commitment to the future of regional Australia. I know
some of the problems that regional Australia has passed through over recent years. I
don't pretend to you that I have all of the answers, but I do have all of the energy and
all of the commnitment to try and address those problems. I know the importance of
small business to areas such as this area. I know the importance of small business to
the rural and regional towns of Australia and that is why my Government has placed
such a great importance on small business. I know the value of infrastructure to
regional Australia. I also know the value of community cooperation. And in that
connection, let me say that the Federal Government's ' work for the dole' scheme,
which I announced details of yesterday after the Cabinet meeting in Pakenham, is
designed to harness the combined energies and commitment of local communities,
local business organisations, the local service clubs and all the other groups that are
interested in tackling some of the great national issues it confronts. So unemployment
and youth unemployment remains one. And I salute the achievements that have
chalked up in that area which Pat McNamara mentioned as a tribute to those that have
taken risks and have invested. Faxro'~ 12/ 03/ 97 18: 03 Pg: 9 
Fax from But cooperation between diferent parts of the community and that sense that we do
have obliga tions to each other and we do have obligations to cooperate with each
other in tackling great national problems as well as regional problems is a very, very
important message for all of us.
So in being here today in formally opening or commissioning I think you commidssion
weirs rather than open them, it looked pretty open to me on the way over ill being
here today to take part in the commissioning of this Weir may I conclude by
complimenting Tiess, complimenting Guthridge, Hascombe and Davies,
complimenting the Commission and all of those that have been associated with this
project. It always warms my heart, it always has, to see a great tangible solid
engineering achievement. You really feel as though something's been achieved when
you can see it and you can see what the money's been spent on and there it is, the
direction of the river has changed, it looks as though it works and you are
tremendously impressed with it. And I can see by the happy faces of some of the
Wmers here that it does work.
So ladies and gentlemen it's an occasion above all to be thankful about being an
Australian, thankfu~ l for the great quality of life that you have in regional and rural
Australia. Thank the lovely school children that led us in the singing of the National
Anthem and that magnificent poem and those who organised that competition. But I
may 1, on your behalf, salute those that have made the weir possible. Their skill, their
engineering capabilities and their design skills have brought it to fruition and therefore
I have great pleasure in commissioning it and thank you very much for having me here
today. Thank you. Fafrvi12/ 83/ 97 18: 83 Pg: 



12 March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO LUNCHEON AT ECHUCA, VICTORIA
E O E
This is quite a meeting. It's a big tent and I don't often speak under big tents but
they're quite a, it's quite, I don't think I've been on the site of a land claim under a tent
on a river bank before. I've been in a lot of unusual places in my almost 23 years in
politics but it is a great delight to be here. I think I am sort of the first Prime Minister
of Australia who has paid an intentional visit to this electorate and I am delighted to be
here, delighted to be welcomed into the electorate of Murray by your new, very
effective, very energetic, highly intelligent and highly articulate Federal Member,
Sharman Stone. She really is doing well.
If she thought the second of March was a good night, I can tell you, there was another
bloke, no, there was another fellow, another Liberal who thought it was too and it was
a great night and it's a night that really, and I said it then and I will say it again, it's a
night that really belonged more than to me or to Sharman, but it really belonged to all
those hundreds of thousands of supporters of the Liberal and National parties
throughout Australia who, year in and year out, worked so damn hard to elect a
Coalition Government and for one reason or another we kept getting it wrong and
stumbling or shooting in the wrong direction and then finally it all came together and
we finally did win. We didn't win with a whimper but we won very strongly on the
second of March and we have a tremendous opportunity and I still feel the sense of
excitement that we no doubt all experienced on that occasion and all of my colleagues
still have that sense of excitement and that sense of commitment and that sense of
mission to try and bring about some significant changes. And one of the things we do
try very hard to do and my being here today and in Pakenham yesterday along with all
the members of the Cabinet is to end for all time the notion that the world revolves
around Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne. It really doesn't.
One of the things I am quite determined to do is to take the Cabinet I lead to the
people of Australia. We had a Cabinet meeting in Pakenham yesterday and we're
going to have Cabinet meetings all around the regions as well as the state capitals of 
Australia so that at the end of our three years in Government we will not only have
talked the rhetoric of listening to the regions of Australia, we will have acted out the
reality of listening to the regions of Australia. What I did yesterday and what I am
doing today is really the beginning of a very long journey over the next couple of
years, a journey of listening to the Australian people, especially in the regions, hearing
about their concerns, often agreeing with them, sometimes disagreeing with them but
hopefully, at the end of that process being able to govern well in their interests as well
as in the interests of all of the Australian people.
Now we inherited an Australian economy that had some good features but it also had
some bad features. It had relatively low inflation but it had very high interest rates and
in the 12 months that we have been in power, we have seen that inflation rate come
down a little further which is welcome and we have seen some quite substantial falls in
interest rates. We inherited an Australian economy that had a very high level of
unemployment and that high level of unemployment was the product of policy failures
over a long period of time and that high level of unemployment is still with us and I
didn't expect that it would be gone. I didn't even expect that a dent would be made in
it in 12 months.
( Tape breaks)
. the last year the level of business investment has been higher and for the next year it
is prospectively higher still than it has been at any time over the last 25 years. Now not
all of that is being felt evenly in Australia. A lot of that investment is concentrated in
the mining industry and in areas of the construction industry and the major cities and
some of it in the tourist industry, and I know that when politicians talk about big
investment figures, if you live in an area of Australia where there's not a lot of
investment, you sort of are a bit sceptical and you are entitled to be a bit sceptical
because all of those figures are nationally expressed.
So to get unemployment down you have to get the economy growing and it's got to
grow stronger than it is at the present time. It's growing at about 3.5% which is pretty
high by world standards. There aren't many better but it needs to grow at somewhere
between 4 and 4.5% to begin to make really solid inroads into the level of
unemployment. And that is why you have to take out of the economy all of those
things that stop people doing sensible investment and taking sensible business
decisions. And one of the things that we promised we would do is we would change the industrial
relations system of this country. And I am very happy to say that Laurie Brereton's
stupid, job-destroying unfair dismissal law is finally a thing of the past and that was got
rid of only at the beginning of this year, not because I didn't want to get rid of it earlier
but it took us a while to get it through the Senate.
Remember it? We don't control it. I mean, I keep reading about how we do now
because of Brian Harradine and Mal Colston. Well, I mean, they vote better than the
Democrats but I tell you what, it still takes a lot of effort to get anything through the
Senate but there's nothing we can do about that. The mathematics of Senate elections
are such that you have an even number of Senators retiring in each state every three 
years and it is absolutely impossible to get four out of six. You have to get about
when I went to school anyway, 65% of the two party preferred vote to get four out of
six. It used to be fairly easy to get three out of five because that's an odd number but
that was all changed in 1983 and we're stuck with this situation and we have to live
with that and we have to try and get around it and we've done rather well. We've
done better than I thought we would be doing three or four months into the
Government's first year. We managed ultimately to get the Industrial Relations bill
through and we ultimately got the Telstra sale through and that of course, that
particular piece of legislation, the Telstra sale is of enormous importance to regional
Australia because out of the proceeds of the sale of one third of Telstra which we
conservatively estimate will yield about $ 8 billion, that's the figure in the budget, out
of that we're putting $ 1.2 billion into the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia, and as
Sharman said, that will be the greatest ever capital investment in the environmental
rebuilding of this country any government of any political stripe has ever committed.
Now out of that $ 1.2 billion we're going to dedicate $ 163 million to clean up the
Murray-Darling basin. And that is something that has been needed to be done for
years and years and that is why we put so much store on that Natural Heritage Trust
and I can't for the life of me understand how the Australian Democrats who claim to
be the greenest of the green and how the Australian Labor Party could possibly vote
against the sale of Telstra and therefore effectively vote against the establishment of
the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia. But that fund over time will do more in a
constructive way to regenerate the Australian environment than any other set of policy
decisions that any government has ever undertaken. And of course it will have
employment implications in regional Australia. Most of the money from the Trust will
be spent In regional Australia rather than in the cities and that in turn will have
employment consequences.
To return to my employment theme, we need to get the economy moving more rapidly
in order to generate more jobs but we also need to tackle the unemployment problem
in other ways. We need and we are now delivering a modern training and
apprenticeship system for this country. Apprenticeships have declined alarmingly in
Australia over the last ten years and David Kemp has developed a modern
apprenticeship and training system that will arrest that decline. No longer will
traineeships and apprenticeships be driven by the industrial requirements of industrial
awards. Traineeships and apprenticeships will be developed to suit the interest and the
convenience of individual employers and the young men and women that they take on
to their payrolls.
And the third area where we are adopting an approach which I believe will make a
contribution, on its own it won't solve the problem and I don't represent that it does
but we plan to introduce a work-for-the-dole scheme in Australia. Now for years and
years whenever this was raise people would say, oh you can't do it. It's against the
ILO, it's against this, it's against that. The reality is that it's not against the ILO it
never has been and it's not sweated labour. What is wrong in a community that is
willing to look after people when they don't have a job, which it is the obligation of
any civil society to do, what is wrong with saying in an appropriate form that those
people so looked after should be asked to do something in return for the support that
they receive from the rest of the community. It is the principle that I have described 
the principle of mutual obligation. We have an obligation to look after people who
need help and in return they have an obligation to give something back at an
appropriate level. I think that is a sound principle of the Australian fair go.
Now the people who are involved in these schemes will be paid award rates of pay.
They won't be asked to work for a dollar or two dollars an hour, they'll be required to
work the amount of time necessary to work out, according to the relevant award, the
value of their dole. Any suggestion that that is unfair, it's anti-Australian, that it's
conscripted labour that is absolute nonsense. And I want to know precisely where the
Australian Labor Party stands on this issue. When it was first announced they said it
was stupid, then they had another think and thought to themselves well maybe it's not
and maybe we'll let it through. Yesterday we had Mr McMullan saying well we're
against, we'll try and amend it but ultimately we'll let it through. And this morning I
understand Mr Beazley has attacked it and says it's unfair. Well I just have one very
simple question for Mr Beazley there is a core element in our proposal and that is to
change the Social Secuitly Act so that people can be required to do work in return for
the dole. And I want a simple answer from Mr Beazley, will he or will he not vote in
favour of that particular amendment? I mean, that is the test of whether you're for or
against this scheme. I just want to know what the answer to that is. But I don't
pretend and I don't want anybody in this audience to pretend or to imagine that I see
the work for the dole scheme as being the answer to unemployment I don't. I see it
as being part of the answer along with a lot of other things. But the biggest way, the
biggest contribution that we can make to getting unemployment down in Australia is to
give the small business community of this country a much fairer go. That is the key,
that is the key.
Now I talked a lot about small business during the election campaign and I continue to
talk a lot about small business because I believe that small business can hold the key
and can provide, more than anything else, an answer to the medium and longer term
economic problems of Australia. You are entitled to ask, particularly the men and
women in this audience who are in small business, you are entitled to ask what have
you done over the last year to deliver on your promises to smnall business. And can I
start by saying that I understand why a lot of people in small business would still be
feeling a bit unhappy. I don't pretend that everything has magically changed in a year
it hasn't. We've started to do the job, we've started to make changes but anybody
who tells you that in 12 months you can wave a magic wand I mean, there was one
of my predecessors who claimed credit for the drought breaking and I knew a State
Premier who reckoned he made it rain but the reality is that in 12 months you can
make a start and we have made a big start.
To start with in the area of small business we changed the industrial relations system as
I mentioned and we got rid of the unfair dismissal laws. From the first of July this year
any person in small business in Australia will be able to sell his or her business for an
amount up to $ 5 million, invest that $ 5 million or a lesser amount into another
business, any other business, and not have any liability for capital gains tax as a result
of that sale. That represents a major change. I mean, we said we would introduce
roll-over relief for small business. We've not introduced roll-over relief we're
introducing mega roll-over relief with that particular proposal. I mean, it is a fair more
generous proposal than what we put forward at the time of the election and it is 
designed to suck more capital into small business. It's designed to do that. We made
some changes to the provisional tax uplift factor that has improved the cash flow of
small business by about $ 180 million over the past 12 months and in a couple of weeks
time I will respond in detail to the report of the Bell Committee that inquired into the
amount of red tape and regulation effecting small business in Australia and I will be
making a number of other announcements in that response that I believe will be of very
significant benefit to the small business community.
So we are very focused on the needs of small business. We are very committed to
improving the climate under which small business operates in this country and it's
something that we will nag away at during the whole of our first term in Government
because if we can really create a fundamentally more benign climate for small business
in Australia then we I think will go a powerful way towards effectively addressing
Australia's unemployment problems. Because big companies are into downsizing,
governments of necessity need to make efficiencies at all levels and it's at the small
business level, the micro level of the economy where businesses are coming into
existence at a rapid rate, some of them expanding very rapidly, some of them not doing
so well. It's in that whole area where I believe that we're going to get our greatest
employment growth.
Now ladies and gentlemen, Sharman mentioned in her speech the concerns of this
district and, indeed, the concerns of many other parts of Australia about some of the
problems thrown up by the native title issue. I don't think any government could have
a more complex issue than responding effectively and fairly to the decision of the High
Court in the Wik decision. I made it clear when that decision was brought down that
all of the options were on the table, including significant legislative change to existing
Acts of the Federal Parliament. The two things I said that weren't on the table was,
firstly, we were not going to try and overturn the original Mabo decision because I
accept that Native Title as such, the concept of Native Title is something that has come
to Australia and it is a concept that should be respected. But it is the extent of it, it is
the operation of it and, in particular, the operation of it as expressed through the
existing Native Title Act which presents so much of the problem. I want to produce an
outcome that delivers justice and security. I want to produce an outcome that respects
the rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in this country. But I also
want to produce an outcome that returns to the pastoralists and the farmers of
Australia the sort of security and predicability that they imagined for two hundreds that
they had and in reality has been taken away by the decision of the High Court. Now, I
thought it was a strange decision and may I say on the subject of responding to court
decisions it has never been out of, dare I say court, but it's never been out of order to
criticise a decision of the High Court. And it's always been the role of the Parliament
if it thinks fit to change the law as currently interpreted by the courts. And this idea
that you can't ever interfere with the law as interpreted by the courts is a very strange
notion and has no support or no logic in any proper understanding of the anglo-
Australian legal system under which we operate.
Now, I hope to be in a position if it is possible to produce an agreed outcome but I
think that will be very difficult to achieve although I am endeavouring to do so and I
am spending a lot of time talking to all of the relevant parties, but one way or another I
hope by about Easter we'll either have an agreed outcome or I'll be in a position to 
recommend to my colleagues in the Cabinet the sort of course of action that we need
to take.
Ladies and gentlemen there are lots of things that we could talk about at a gathering
like this. It is a gathering, not exclusively, but predominantly of people who join in
common cause in the weeks leading up to March of last year to secure first and
foremost of course a Coalition Government in Australia and can I take the opportunity
of acknowledging and saying what a great privilege and great honour it is to be in
Coalition with Tim Fischer and his colleagues in the National Party. Tim Fischer is a
great bloke to work with, he's a very fine Australian, he's a very good deputy Prime
Minister and an outstandingly energetic trade Minister and he makes a great
contribution to my Government and I'm delighted to have him as a close colleague and
friend.
But you also here in the electorate of Murray and particularly most of the people in
this audience, you worked so hard to get Sharman elected, you worked hard to get a
Government of Liberal values, a Government of the values of the National Party, and
our values on most things as two Coalition parties are very close indeed. Over the last
year we have delivered on all of the essential commitments that we made to the
Australian people. We said we'd have a family tax initiative, we delivered every last
dollar of it on the first of January. We said we'd have a Natural Heritage Trust and
now thankfully it is through the Senate. We said that there would be Capital Gains
Tax relief for small business and it is being over delivered on the first of July. We said
there would be tax subsidies for private health insurance and they will be delivered on
the first of July as promised and we said that in so many other areas we would deliver
on our commitments and we have.
But that is only the down-payment, that is only the beginning. And we I hope have a
number of years ahead of us as a Coalition Government. But I want to promise you
that one thing we won't make the mistake of doing is that we will never take your
support for granted, and we will never take the support of the Australian people for
granted. Australian people are great, as we all know, we are great levellers. We have
a very sceptical appreciation of somebody when he or she believes that in some way
they hold a position of authority through some kind of divine gift and not as a gift of
the Australian people. I've seen many governments and many political leaders before
me be cut down by the Australian people because they have got out of touch and one
of the things that I am determined to do is that I won't get out of touch and that my
Ministers won't get out of touch and that my members of Parliament won't get out of
touch and that means that we have to do what we are doing today and what we are
doing when Parliament is not sitting and that is getting out of Canberra, out of Sydney
and Melbourne and getting around the rest of Australia listening to peoples' concerns,
explaining what we are on about, articulating the values of the Government and
listening to peoples' concerns. We are an enthusiastic bunch of people. Can I say
thirteen years is an awfully long time to be in opposition. It is an eternity. I'll never go
back to it. I mean, it is just terrible. And I know that there are lots of people in this
gathering who shared every moment of those 13 years of agony of frustration and I
admire the patience and the tolerance and the understanding and the charity that you
displayed towards the political representatives of the Liberal and National parties over
that period of time because you must have felt let down and disappointed if not even 
more strongly so over that period of time. But that is behind us, we have this
marvellous opportunity to sensibly shape Australia as we go into the next millennium
and it is an Australia built on the sort of things that all of us hold in common. It is an
Australian society that does reward effort, that is built on the notion of mutual
obligation. You can't hold a society together unless we look after each other, but
looking after each other involves both rights and responsibilities and that of course is a
very very important principle to understand and as we look towards the turn of the
century we naturally think of the regeneration of our environment, that this
tremendously valuable asset we have in the Australian environment does need care, it
does need nurturing, it does need regeneration and it does need investment and long
term investment and I am very proud to say and I'll finish on this, that my government
is the first government in the history of Australia to make such a long term
commitment of capital and a long term policy commitment to the regeneration and the
re-invigoration of the Australian environment and the people and the area of the
Murray Darling Basin of Australia will be the principle beneficiaries of that visionary
policy and in the years to come, I believe the initiative of the Natural Heritage Trust
will be seen as the great post-war environmental initiative of any government in the
history of Australia.
Thank you. 



13 March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF NATIONAL
FAMILY DAY, SYDNEY
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Mr Handbury, Mrs Zaetta, Mr Moriarty, your Grace, the
Archbishop of Sydney, Dr John Yu, the Director of the Westmead Children's Hospital,
my Parliamentary colleagues, Peter Collins, Kerry Chikarovski, Marlene Goldsmith,
other guests and everybody, ladies and gentlemen. Can I start by congratulating
Murdoch Magazines and in particular the magazine, Family Circle, for the initiative of
that organisation and that magazine in sponsoring the idea of inaugurating a National
Family Day in Australia.
It is a very important initiative and could I also compliment Telstra for its very heavy
involvement. Of course we all understand the natural symbiosis between Telstra and
teenage families. It's very powerful indeed and we're all very conscious of it and not
surprisingly, you ought to keep promoting National Family Day. You ought to have
several of them and then perhaps your competitors will have several of them, but
seriously, it is another demonstration of another very important strand in our society
and that is the greater willingness of larger business organisations to undertake a
philanthropic role in our society of putting something back into a society and a
community which commercially gives so much to many of our large organisations.
And I do acknowledge particularly the role of Murdoch Magazines and Telstra in
launching and certainly garnering the idea and launching this event which will be
celebrated for the first time in October of this year.
My own views and that of my Government about the importance of the family unit
within our society are very well known. Of course a commitment to the role of the
family in our community is not a matter of political contention. It's one of those things
that all political parties hold in common and all political parties are committed to. I
think it is fair to say that the shape of families has changed dramatically over the last 
or 50 years, particularly over the last 20 or 30. But they're important to the
development of the human personality. Their value as a source, not only of emotional
but also of material support has not really altered although the way in which it is
expressed has changed over that period of time.
We naturally see our association and our bonds with our families in emotional,
personal terms but it's also fair to say that in welfare terms, and I have frequently said
this in the past and I will say it again, that a stable, functioning family represents the
best social welfare safety net that mankind has ever devised and no political philosophy
or no economic philosophy can replace the role of that family functioning effectively
and functioning in a supportive fashion. One of the very interesting influences on the
way in which the family has developed in the Australian community has been the
contribution of people of diverse ethnic backgrounds to the strengthening and the
development of family life in Australia. Many Australians of Asian, of Middle Eastern,
of Southern European descent have brought particular strengths to the texture of
Australian family life and the emphasis that so many within our community who
represent those diverse backgrounds, the emphasis they place on the importance of the
role of the family in Australian society is a source of very positive strengths and a
source of great nourishment to the overall impact of family life within our community.
The role of the Government in relation to families of course is not a prescriptive or a
determinant role. Rather it is the role of creating the circumstances of maximum
choice and maximum opportunity. We have made a number of changes to areas which
affect families which we believe are very beneficial. Our changes to the environment in
which people work have enabled in our view, will enable in our view as the changes
come into effect, will enable people to more effectively blend their work and their
family responsibilities. A survey carried out several years ago directed towards
Australian women produced four priority areas so far as women in Australia were
concerned and the one on the top of that list was how women could more effectively
combine their work and their family responsibilities and one of the values of more
flexibility in workplace relations is that you do enable people to find the combination
that best suits them. It's not for the Government to say that you shall work a
particular period of time at a set time or week. It is rather for the Government to
create an environment where you can work out with yourselves and your employer and
your family to the maximum extent possible, and I emphasise that as a realistic caution,
to the maximum extent possible, you work out the most effective combination of work
and family responsibilities.
Another issue of course that emerges very strongly from the emphasis that we place on
policies affecting the family is that we believe very strongly as a Government that the
arrangements that parents make for the care of their children and the combination of
full or part time parental care as distinct from paid childcare is a matter of individual
choice. There is no right or wrong pattern. The pattern for a family is the pattern that
best suits that family and once again, it is not the role of the Government to say which
should be the predominant pattern and it is a wholly unhealthy trend for there to be a
continuing debate within our community as to which is the right or the wrong way to
care for young children. The right way is the way that the parents of the children
decide the environment in which those children should be raised. 
My Government has also placed additional resources into areas of parenting education.
We've also doubled the resources available to marriage and relationship counselling,
recognising in this area as in so many other areas the old maxim that prevention is
better than cure is one that ought to be observed as much as possible. Our Family Tax
Initiative, which commenced on the first of January gave expression to our desire to
give additional tax help to families with young children within certain income ranges
and so to emphasise the importance within our community of affording families the
maximum amount of choice possible.
But ladies and gentlemen, at the end of the day the family unit is not a accumulation of
tax benefits, an accumulation of industrial relations options or an accumulation of
passionately held economic or political views. The family unit is a source of love and
support, the group in our community from which most of us derived our principle
source of personal satisfaction, personal happiness and personal strengths. Families
come in different combinations. Not all families are happy. It's unrealistic to pretend
that they are. Some families break down. The role of society ought to be comforting
and assisting and also putting in place policies that minimise to the maximum extent
possible the extent to which families do break down. I think it is important in our
society that we emphasise in a very significant way as this National Day will, the
importance of the family unit within our community. It is striking as Mr Handbury said
in his introductory remarks that despite all the changes that have occurred over the last
or 30 years in our society and despite all of the negative talk about how deleterious
are the influences of change on the family unit within our community, when you ask
people what is the most important thing in their lives, most of them unerringly and
quickly and without qualification say my family is the most important thing I have.
And that is a very, very signalled message. It's something that reminds us that
although things have changed a great deal, there are some things that haven't changed
at all and the emotional importance that we place on the family unit is one of those
things that have not altered.
So may I say again in conclusion, to the Murdoch Magazines, to Telstra, and to those
who have organised this little gathering and this little launch, how delighted I am to be
here. The day will have the full support of my Government. I know it will have the
goodwill of both sides of politics in the Australian Parliament and I wish it every great
success and I know that the Australian community will recognise the importance of the
occasion and give it the support that it deserves.
Thank you very much. 



Fax from : 114/ 03/ 97 16: 06 Pg: 1
J RfM 1~. 4-7 15: 33 r-001
PRIM* E MMIS1-E R
14 March 1997 TRANSCRWT OF TJN-PMI N11R
THE~ HON. JORN HO WA9D* MI
OF TWE AUSTnA4M.! Osr WRIDASAMPS SORIE
ALBERT PA= I MELBOURNk
Well thank you very much Mr Maidn, to Swan kitbaiids, to Mr Jais, tio
Dr Johnt Lii, and a the other Wry distinpoihed gized! ladia and VW= t= me.
Th= r's rcally no need to smy dwan you to im-for anything asociate W~ th cik you
talk about your labour of love over the last mix months in w6rking with Siroaid
B~ radman. who now with the dOath of Leo O'Brien, is t last survIVOr of the bod34ine
series of 1932/ 1933.
For me, the Opportunity of playing today ha given me te best Fiday PNa bad siju* I've
heft Prime Mniste ThU scme wasn't toolflash. I've rukched that staft of my i
cricketing career where Pm bioad-minded About my performance anti I think itVs* a
safe to do so.
But can I just take the opportunty Of conpitulating tb~ u aon their 20 yeas of
PODSfl the PMit thst we 011 lowe so rnUO~. Aad all of us -in tWs room, w~ hatvir our
occupations, Whateve our politics and Pi'u delighted -to be iL xhmber 6f alpazbcntay
team that has membwr of the Lib" ra Party; the L-Abor Part ajd. the NatiOWI N. 4' aa
few aSpifig Politicians who aie also somnetimes fadt bo4~ v1rs the ably tomfdtianthat
which he agreed to play was thiat th= r were r* prC*" Wtves. 6 fafll the parts o0 lM could
preserve his poiticaily neutral chaactar, a&amp; W goodanhMm. Butitis adeligbtto-be part
of a team that dissolve, thie party political bhrrirs for a -day. And evw aUl came t~ tber
becausc w're bound togethe by a highe= affectcm ta our potztcaJ'differeneeS and that
affection, of COwIe is a love of cricket azidat tha crickect has tmant to. u drngs
livsl lnthda i mensaspart of the Awrnlian psycbe amid the Austtaian way of lfe. ' p
U
Id I.. I,
p
"' A I pp.
' V 4 
Fax from~ 14/ 63/ 97 16: 06 Pg: 2
I do wanit to congratulate and thak Austr* Post % utrh e ftemcitdous WOrk it doe!,
~~~ Pauticularly in relation to cricket in the rua masAic country areas of Victoai Ik de
a tmidous job. And on oceasions like this tile rol. of sponsors sbcnd sver be
ignored And 1k now thW CUB, whos MMnAgig difecir b= a tUWred todaH Y fort
Crumaders, also has made a tremndous contributon to cncket in Austruia and the sport
gcewwiy. ~ Stoo Australia Post, to you W~ Moiden. can Ij ustsay thank you for t kid words about
I. the. launch of th Auistralian Leg= O~ Stamp. I undiritd itbs gom rather Well. Aod that
of oum has evtytiug to do, with the 6catht it superbly ptwnot4d bit it also has
4 lot to do with the fat tWa itis a tribue tothe greatest living Australa.: And tht is, of
course Something tha is said.-v et feeling aMi 1 know is said witlithe suppcirt of all
the Australian people.
So it's a very mioe", CCAaion. this. And Swani, thak% fo r yawr ener in p~ tfng it zbged= e.
And it's one of those great occasiqons. And -if you let m~ y diaiy = ecta, kiiow in Ole amx
weeks when you plan to have It next yeaw I'll' certainly make sume laoh e things
are moved Well, you've got to tqc advanag oftbi office for somtig. Yeahthts
right I'll bc accused of graft ind corruption I sup~ lose hwvitng said teL' Anyway, I think 3
I'd befttr conclude this spech. I n you. Z 



22 March 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT THE CARE AUSTRALIA
ANNIVERSARY DINNER
GRAND HYATT, MELBOURNE
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much to Malcolm Fraser, the Chairman of Care Australia; to my
Parliamentary colleagues, Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, Robert Hill, the
Leader of the Government in the Senate, Barry Jones, the National President of the
Australian Labor Party, to other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say firstly how very happy I am to share this very special occasion marking the
anniversary of the establishment of Care Australia. It is an opportunity to reflect
upon the selfless contribution of so many people who work for a magnificent and
generous organisation in the relief of the very unhappy circumstances of people all
around the world.
Care is an organisation that as Malcolm mentioned began in the United States at the
end of World War II. I didn't know until tonight when Malcolm mentioned it, and it
shows that you still keep learning things from former Prime Ministers, that Care had
been instrumental in such a major way in breaking the Berlin air lift.
To those of us in recent years Care of course is, I suppose, ineradicably associated
with the suffering of people particularly in Africa. And it's an occasion such as this for
me on behalf of the Government to thank those men and women of Australia who have
gone to these very troubled parts of the world, given of their effort, in some cases
given of their health and their lives to relieve the suffering of others.
And none of course has been a better and properly honoured example of that than
Malcolmn's own daughter, Phoebe, who's with us tonight whose contribution has been
quite remarkable. But I know that she would not want herself to be singled out, but
she's but one of many Australians who have done such magnificent work. 
Care is an organisation that has sustained by the generous help and the generous
donations of people in Australia. It's an organisation that has had amongst its
executive officers people with whom I've had a great deal of connection. And I can't
let an occasion like tonight go by without remarking on the presence of Tony Eggleton
who did such magnificent work for Care. Tony and Malcolm and I, of course, go back
a long way and I'm so delighted to be here tonight and to be in company of both of
them. And can I say very genuinely how much I respect what Malcolm Fraser has put
back into the community since he ceased his active parliamentary political days. He
has set a wonderful example of community service and it's one that I respect
enormously. And an occasion like this, of course, is an opportunity to reflect upon the importance
of non-governiment organisations in the provision of overseas aid. It's also an
opportunity to reflect upon the ongoing importance of official government assistance.
Australia provides, and I acknowledge the point that the Chairman has made about it
not quite being enough, but Australia nonetheless provides in the order of SI1.6 billion
of official overseas assistance. And I guess many of you would know that the country
that receives as a nation the largest single portion of that is Papua New Guinea. And
at a time when the affairs of that country are occupying the attention of the
Government and occupying the attention of many Australians, it's opportune and I
think appropriate for me to say to those in the Australian community who criticise the
fact that we have any overseas aid at all, let alone argue about the particular level of it,
it's an opportunity and I think it's right to say that if we are concerned about the
stability of that country and if we have concerns about its immediate fuxture in current
circumstances we can only imagine what might be the case if that country had not,
over the years, been provided with significant levels of aid by Australia. It is not only
an exercise in humanitarian assistance of relatively wealthy nations such as Australia to
give official assistance, but it is also a matter of the long term self-interest of this
country to give intelligent overseas aid. At the present time there's an inquiry being
conducted into the structure and character and nature of overseas aid chaired by the
former Chairman of Woolworths, Mr Paul Simons. And the Government will have
that report and will be responding to that in the near future. But let me say to all of
you that whilst there will be debates about the actual level of aid, and there will be
proper submissions put to my Government as they were put to the predecessor
government of Australia, I think I can say without any fear of political contradiction
that official overseas aid in significant proportions will remain a very important element
of Australian budgets for years into the fiuture.
When we think of non-government organisations, of course, we think of the generosity
around Australia of literally hundreds of thousands of individuals who give, in many
cases small amounts but for them proportionately very large amounts, to help
organisations such as Care and the other great non-government organisations. We also
think of the very generous corporate support. And I want to acknowledge the
contribution of corporate Australia and the philanthropy of corporate Australia to
organisations; such as Care.
In the context of the Government's ' work for the dole' scheme I have spoken often in
recent weeks at what I call the notion of mutual obligation within our society. And
I've expressed the belief that a society such as our own will only hold together 
cohesively and effectively if we are underpinned by a pattern of mutual obligations.
We provide assistance for those within our own community who through no fault of
their own need assistance, and on occasions it is not unreasonable that something be
asked in return from them and that is a principle that I've articulated in relation to the
work for the dole' scheme. And I don't think it is wrong for me to articulate that
same principle in relation to the obligations of those in the community, including in
corporate Australia and those in the more affluent sections of the Australian
community who can afford to do so, that a principle of mutual obligation exists in
relation to their support for and contributions towards worthy causes to organisations
like Care.
Australia provides for its corporate citizens a climate of unrivalled political economic
and legal stability. Quite legitimately, companies and their managers will complain
about this or that government policy, whoever is in power, or this or that set of
economnic circumstances. But if you look around the world there are few countries in
which it is easier to do business. There are few countries in which, in overall terms,
there is a more beckoning business environment and business climate. And I have no
reluctance, particularly on an occasion such as tonight, I have no reluctance at all in
asserting in that context the principle of mutual obligation. There is an obligation on
those within our community I don't state it in any kind of hectoring or preaching
sense, but I state it perhaps, to some degree, in a self interest sense so far as the
corporations are concerned there is an obligation to make contributions to
organisations such as Care. And of course tonight's magnificent dinner marking the
anniversary of the foundation of Care Australia is supported by so many
Australian companies and so many Australian individuals who've given very
generously of their time and their resources, of their money over the years to support
Care. I had the opportunity earlier this morning of spending a fascinating hour with the
former Chairman of the American Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Colin-Powell. And he
remarked upon the fact that the world has changed so much over the past few years
with the collapse of communism and the end of the Cold War that we no longer have
the enemy we'd had for most of our lifetime. And that that rivalry between the
communist world and the capitalist world, that rivalry between east and west, which
had really patterned and determined and conditioned our responses and our attitudes
over such a long period of time, the disappearance of that had left almost a political
void, almost a political vacuum. But we also agreed that it had given the world a
tremendous opportunfity and had given many people a great sense of hope about our
capacity to turn our attention to the relief of suffering and unhappiness and distress in
particular parts of the world. And none of us, not only on occasions such as this but
none of us generally can of course be other than impressed very heavily by the
enormous gaps between the rich and poor around the world as well as the growing
evidence unhappily of those gaps within our own society. And the contribution that
Care makes to the relief of human misery, the contribution that it makes to the
provision of resources that will generate self help and self support and providing
people with a way of lifling the pall of dependency on others and generating hope and
optimism about their own fives and their own future is of course a very, very worthy
aspiration now, as it always has been, for mankind. 
And whatever may be the difficulties within our own domestic economy, whatever
arguments we may have about whether this or that way of doing things could be
improved within Australia. We are amongst the most fortunate, the most blessed and
the most happy and stable and wealthy of societies in the world. And that does put a
moral obligation as well as an obligation of long term pragmatism upon the
Government of Australia and upon the citizens of Australia to make proper provision
for programmes and organisations that are determined over a period of time to help
those who need help most. And the challenge is immense. The marvels of modemn
communications have dramatised human suffering into the living rooms of Australia
and the living rooms of the world and the living rooms of the affluent in a way that
hasn't been the case in earlier years and all of us, as a consequence, are very conscious
of that. But of course there is that danger of disaster or ' poverty fatigue' as I think the
experts have called it, that danger that we see so much of it that we become numb,
almost indifferent to it. And that is why we need organisations such as Care to
intelligently mobilise on an ongoing basis for concern of the community and the
concern of the Australian people.
But ladies and gentlemen can I say how much I respect and admire the work of Care.
Can I remark upon what it has achieved in Australia over the last 10 years. Can I
thank on behalf of my Government, and I know on behalf I'm sure of the Opposition*
as well, can I thank Malcolm Fraser and all those who've worked for Care, who've
given their energy and their talents and their commitment. It is a noble cause to help
those who suffer and it is a noble cause to reach out and gather up the less fortunate
and in many cases the wretched and underprivileged within our world and within our
society and Care has been in the forefront of doing that in a practical, efficient,
effective manner. I salute their contribution to mankind and I wish Care Australia
continued success and continued achievement in their great mission of relieving human
misery and promoting human progress.
Thank you. 4 



PRIME MINIST R
TRANSCIPT OF ADDRESS BY H
HONOURABLE JOHN 110WARE MP
AT A LUNCHEON HOSTED BY TE SINGAPORE 4USTRAUIA BUSINESS
COUNCIL AND THE SINGAPORE FEDERATION OF CHAMERS OF
CONMRCE AND INDUST
SINGAPORE
E ZOThur-sday 27 March 19977
Thank you Ver much MW Kwak Leng loo, to Mr Craig Bell, to other distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen. Can I thank both the Council 4d the Federation for
providing me with this excellent forum on the first day of m4 visit to Singapore and
on the first day of a very importantjourney as Ptime Minist o Asrai to two very
important countries in our region. I
This fonvm is to say somnething about the relaionship betwe Australa and
Singapore and to put that relationship in the broader context If our regional
involvement and also in the broader contex of our joint conillituent to the cause of
economic progress of private enterprise and of czonornrc refofm and trade
liberalisation. I first visited Singapore long before I entered Parliament. In 1964 1 first camne to your
country. A very different country from what it is now. And I visited it long before 1,
of course, had any association with the Parliamentary political life of Australia.
I was shown around Singapore by a student who bad spent a ~ g part of her years
imtnediately out of school at Sydney University. She was a f ' nd of aL Close Cousin of
mine. And that little story is in some senses a metaphor for trrelationship that exits
at a people to people level betwveen so many Australians and sp manry Singaporeans.
It was infa ct the first foreign country that I went to. I didn't f y over it, or evcn just
through it, on the way elsewhere. And I did spend some time ~ iralthough, of
course, La going on elsewhert. r
Over that period that bAs gone by s ince then 33 years Shunapre has transformed
hersef and bas become within the world one of the outstandiug examples of what can
be achieved if you really pursu policies based on openness a trade liberalisation-
28/ 83/ 97 11: 89 Pg: 
IZ* II28/ 03/ 97 11: 09 Ps: 2
2
Australia's ties with Singapore are very deep. TheyI are very' long. They are etched in
historical experiences, economic co-operation and a geography in an economic and
political fixture that brings us together as part of the fastst growing area,
economically, of the worcl. The contribution that Australia 4as made to the security
of Singapore and this part of the world in years gone by is well known and is properly
honoured by all Australians. We are at present partners in AjPEC and I watched with
some admiation the hosting of the inaugural World Trade O~ anisation meeting here
in Singapore, by your Prime Minister, at the end of last year.
I come here today, ladies and gentlemen as the Leader of a iu new Australian
Government which is absolutely committed to the deepest pcjssible involvement of
our couty ina the affairs of the Asia-Pacific region. I say not as some kind of
ritalistic repeating of a foreign affairs trade mantra but as a # eeply held view of mine
that the politica and economic destiny of Australia is very glach tied up with us
successfuly being a full time player in the Asia-Pacific regoi Te growt oa our
trade to this region, the increasing two-way economic flows ~ f investment and trade
between countries such as Australia and Singapore are test ents to the importance of
the region to Australias futue.
The APEC groupii4 of nations is in many ways oneoftemsexrrdny
groupings of ziafior~ s that the world has seen. It brings togc some very large
economics, in &amp; 4ct the two largest and most powerful econo ' es in the worldith
United States and 1lpan. It brings the most populous nation cfthe world in China,' it
brings nations such as Australia and Now Zealand which ham a deep regional
economic and political future tied up with this part of the wor d but equally strong and
unambiguous ties with Europe and North Amerima It brings e grea t economic
success storics sucl# as Singapre and it brings tha remakabie ahievement of anation
such as Indonesia, which over the last 25-30 years has seen sme 3,000 islands hang
together in very effective political unison.
pSeoo, pitl eiss ao fq iutsit em eexmtrbaeorr dniantaioryn sg trhoeu ppirnogs paencdt tiht aist tah rgoruoguhp intrga dteh
being of those popu~ ations can be greatly enhanced. And I
opportunity of saying how committed my G-overnment is to
Achieving those APEC goals will involve adjustmient by all o
Australia is no exception to tha.
The process of domestic economic and political adjustment to
globalisation is not an easy one it does require political skills
level and a capacity to explain often to sceptical domestic popi
of trade fibemlisation. Your country in its way, Singapore, hal
example of ' having done that and Australia looks with some en
tha Singapre has chalked up in thw area. Lholds out to the
iberalisation the well
at to take ths
tAPEC goals.
vi domestically and
challenge, of
a communication
lIations the advantage
be= n a very successfal
Vto the achievements 
4 GA I ZUIII 28/ 83/ 97 11: 09 PS: 3
3
1 also speak to you today as thc Leader of. 4 GoyCcrunnt in 4ustralia which is very
heavily committed to a program of sensible economic changp and reform. Reforming
and changing anr economy is never an easy task and in the 1190' s, which are in some
ways a little more sceptical towards the cause of economic rformn than were the
19901S) it is a particularly challenging task.
We act ourselves when we were elected to Goverum a nurraber of important
economic and~ c political goals. We set ourselves the task of fl.' cal consolidation. We
inherited an underlying budget deficit of about 10 billion Ai~ stralian dollars. And we
set ourselves the task of achieving an anderlyig balan~ ce ove; a period of over some
three years.
We are making vezy solid progress down that path but it is nq an easy dorestic
political challenge.
we also sct ourselves the challenge of significant industrial rilations reform.
Awrtralia has many mtengths as an economy-It is a stable, open, profoundly
democratic society with a very predictable and absolutely in" rraptible legal
But it has also unfortunately had a rather arthritic old fashiom' out of date industrial
relations system. Arnd, although, over the last 10 or 15 years has shed some of the
undesirable features of that system, the progress and the pro" s has not been nearly
rapid enough, And one of the thiings of which I am paticul4 proud is that over the
past 12 months we have dramafically bastened the process of dustrial relations
reform. -And as a result of the Australian Government's new ! Tork Place Relations
Act we are now drivyig towards an industrial relations system which is based upon a
numbe of fundamcntal principles.
The first of those is that we should encourage to the maximum extent possible the
maliing of agreements between employers and employees at the individual work place
leveL Because, it is through that process that you cmn best enhance optimum
productivity outcomes in each individual enterprise.
We are also strongly committed to the principle of voluntary association. Under the
Work Place Relations Act Australians are guaranteed the righ to join or not to join a
trade union without any fear of sanction or discrimination according to the choice that
is taken. We have re-established the rule of law within Australia in relation to certain
forms of industrial behaviour and industrial conduct and in a very general sense we
are driving towards an industrial relations system which puts tle greatest possible
emnphasis on contractual udsadngs and undertakings between employers and
employees. I
The response to that legislation has been very strong and very positive and I tbink it
will help to build even further on the deserved internatonal repplation of Auwal~ ia as
being a stable, reliable, c-ohesive couhtry in which to invest. Wp have also embarked
on a progam of conomic change and economic reform in other areas where the
proess of change has not been rapd enough. And I have in mind in areas of
communications wher on the first of July this ycar we will have an essentially
deregulated comnctons system within Australia. 
œ AUVI 28/ 03/ 97 11: 09 Pg
4
I think also, Of changes that we have in mind in relation to the waterfront and Ihe
forts in Australia which in the past have sometime contribute to the occasional bad
international newspaper notice so far as Australia's economic performawnce is
concerned. We are embarking vpon an intelligent program of privalisatiort. We have secured
Parliamentary approval to a sale of one third of Telstra which is Australia's uational
telecommuvications company. Incidentally, out of the procceds of that one third we
will be investing over one billion dollars in the establishment of the natural heritage
trust of Australia which will fund the largest ever capital investment in Australia's
history in the environmental renewal and regeneration of Australia.
Over the pust couple of weeks we have announced a number of very signiiant
changes and reforms which will directly boost small business in Australia. We still
have in Australia an unemrployme~ nt wae at the unacceptably high level of 8.5% with a
youth unemployment level of around 27%. 1 believe, and my Government believes,
that revitalising and giving incentives to the small business community of Australia
will do much over time to reduce the level of unemployment in AustraUla
We have dramilti ally liberalised the capital gains tax regime for smnall business in
Australia. We have brought in more sensible rules for einployee dismxissal in
appropnaeu circumstances and we also ame providing sigaificant Governnt funds to
encourage the start up of the small and medium sized firms with an emphasis on high
technology. Now I mentioned some of those things. ladits and gentlemen, not so much to give a
dttailcd litany of what has been done by my Government over the past 12 months.
But rather to give an indication of some of the priorities that we have sud they arc
priorities based upon the belief that I think has driven successive governments herm in
Singapore and tOm is through a strong and vigorous private sector you have the best
hope of providing jobs, you have the best hope of providing continued economlic
growth. You need intelligent policy settings. It is the role of a responsible Govrnmnvt to
provide a table maqrucconornic environment. It's also the role of a responsible
Government to effectively educate the citizens of the nation it governs. It's also our
role to provide decent infrastructure.
Bcyond tha and having set the climate and established the rules, as your Prime
Minste said to me N~ hs morning, it isrally up to theprivate sc or to zewpond to that
very positive climate. And I know that the Chamber and the Coxncil in their own
ways are doing very important thing to provide tWa stable and predictable economic
climate for business investment and business exchaniges. Not only heme in Skqgpor
and in Austra but between ouir two societies. 
Fax from 28/ 83/ 97 11: 09 Pg
The relationship between Australian and Sinlgapore which is dependant on m~ any
things, and riot leasn the people to people links, is a dynamic relationship and one that
is constantly being renewed. Last year my predecessor, Paul Keating, signed the new
partnershiP Agreemuent with the Prime Minister of Singapore and I am very happy to
say that the goals and aspirations of that new partnership wec warmly endorsed by my
Government And one of the stable constant elements in3 the relationship between our
two countries is tha there is an essentially bipartisan approach between successive
Australian governments towards the relationship.
I don't pretend that as a result of the change of government in Australia nothing at all
has changed so far as foreign policy is concerned. Obviously at diffcrent govornment,
a new government, does things differently and has a different emphasis but the
essential thrust which has now been a bipartisan constant of Australia's foreign policy
over 25-30 years and that thrust is towards an ever increasing cornuzimct to the
Asia-Pacific regionj
It is sometimes forgotten that the foundation stone of the association between
Australia and Asia economicaly was laid by John McEwen who helped write the
Axisiralia-Japan free trade agreement in 1957. The people to people links that was
sporned by the great Colombo Plan started not long after World War HI is, of course,
something of which mn~ y people in Singapore and cisewbere in the region arm very
conscious. And over the years Prime Minsters and Trade Ministers, of both sides of Austraa
politics, have made a particular contribution, And today I am happy to say that the
Prne Minister of Singapore and I ann unce a new aviation agreement that is going
to dramatically increase the flow of traffic between Australia and Singapore and
beyond. It will resuilt in somethiing like a 37.5% increase in the number of passengers
carried by air between our two countries. It will inrae by 100% the available
freight carriage out of Australa into Singapore. And given the importance thai my
Government places on the Supermarket to Asia strtegy which involves, amongst
other things, the capacity for Australia to export effectively into the region fresh food
that new capacity will mnake a very important contribution.
That is but one of many examples that continue to occur of the deepening links
between~ our two societies. We do live in a world which has been rewiered very
different by the end of the Cold War, the collapse of commrrunism in Eastern Europe
and all the other changes that followed that development. In many ways the world in
which we live has had taken away from it some of the predictable antagonisms that
govern the foreign relations of most countries from the end of World War 1I. And
some have thought that has introduced a new volatlity jt0 the conduct of our affairs
and not least into the conduct of the affairs of the region.
But beyond that we live in a world of enormous opporwuifty and it is impossible to be
a political participant in dhe affairs of the Asia-Pacific region without feeling some
sene of excitement a&amp; W real hope about what can be achieved. When I met the
leaders of the othe meniber of the APEC community in Manilla towards the end of
last year I felt that I was in a small way, but in a very important way, par of a proces 
Fax from 28/ 03/ 97 11: 09 Pg: 6
6
which if everybody held their nerve about it lifted up the hopes and the aspiratons of
millions of people who lived within those conimunities. if we cmn achieve that ideal
of greater trade liberalisation, if we can miatch the aspirations of those goals, if we can
continue to carry our domestic political constituencies with us in the cause of trade
liberalisation then I do believe that the hopes that many people placed in that
organisation will not be disappointed. Because economic prosperity and economic
co-operation between nations has in the past been proved to be the foundation of
peaceful co-operation. And the stability of this part of the world and the stability of
the political association, for example, between Australia and Singapore owes as great
deal to the economic maturity of both of those societies.
Ladies and gentlemen, Australia is a very open and tolerant society. We are proud of
the fact that, amongst other things, in the late 1970' s we took more Indo-Chinese
refugees on a per capita basis than any other nation in the world. We ame immensely
proud of the contribution thAt Australians of Asian descnt, whether of Chinese or
Indian, or from any other part of Asia, we are immensely proud of the contribution
that those Australians are making to the future of oujr country.
The people of Singapore whether they come as visitors or as students, or ais business
men and women, or as migrants are very welcome in Australia. The bonds that keep
our two countries close together are personal bonds, they are political bonds, they are
ties of history, they are ties of common commitment against tyranny and oppression
and they ane also ties of hope about the economic future of our two societies.
I come here as the head of a Government that has great goodwill towards the people
of Singapore as the head of the Government that has a very strong commitment to the
deepest possible involvement in Australia in the affairs of the Asia-Pacific region. I
believe tha the best yeas of the association in prosperity and in political partnership
between Australia and Singapore lie before us-
Thank you. 



Fax from PRIME MINISTER
29 March 1997 ThANSCR1PT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HO0N. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH AT THE'OPENING OF THlE ANSETT AUS TRALIA
SHANGHAI OFFICE, SHANGHAI, CHINA
E &amp; OE
Thank you very much. To Mr Ken Cowley, the Chairman of Ansett International, to
Mr Liu, the Minister for Metallurgical Industry, MrJao, the Vice Mayor of Shaaghai.
to M~ r Rick Smith, the Australian Ambassador, to Mr Rigby, the Consul General, to
His Excellency, the Ambassador of China in Canberra, other distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen.
I am particularly Pleased to be hern today because the opening of this Ansett office in
Shanghai is the latest demonstration of the dramitic growth in the air-travel between
Australia and China. Since new and expanded air servicc arrangements Were signed
in march last year, the number of airlines flying between our countries has gone from
two to four, the number of weekly servikes has risen from two to. seven, and there has
been an average growth of 30% annually in the air traffic between Australia and China
over that three year period.
Can I say to our Chinese guests today two things about Ansett. Ansett has been a
grea Australian company for a long period of time and over the last 50 years four of
the best known business figures that Autlia has produced in that time have been
associated with the company begininingwith Reg Ansett and Peter Abeles and Rupert
Murdoch and our host today, Ken Cowley, so it is a company that has grea ' t Australian
credentials and it is a company that comes to Cbina with an impeccable business
background.
And can I say on a personal note that un~ til I became prime Minister just over a year
ago and acquired as it were an airline of my own, I was a f6ithful traveler on Ansett as
-the airline of my domestic chno for something like 22 years and I can tell our
Chinese guests that in all of that tr-avel and in one year I think I was die third roost
regular flyer on Ansett, they never lost mny baggage once. Faoxm2 9/ 03/ 97 19: 31 Pg: 1 
Fax from The dramatic growth in ai travel between Austialia and China is just another element
in a deepening economic and trade association but even more importantly, it
underlines the growing people to people links bewveen our two countries. Over
000 Chinese visitors went to Australia last year -and I have every confidence
particularly in the lead up to the Olympic Games in Sydney in the year 2000 which
will be an absolute magnet for people all around the world and not least from people
in Chiaa that -that number will grow and be dramatically exceeded when the Olympic
Gaines take place.
I want to congratulate Ansett on the care it has taken to -achieve a proper cultural and
linguistic blend within thc services that it is offerihg and will offer, it is, necessary
that that occur and it is a proper recognition of the importance of understanding the
market in which the airlines must compete for business.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the first day of afour day visit to China and I am
particularly pleased that it takes place in Shanghai, the great commercial centre of
China and a great city iii its own right by aay comparison. I am accompanied on this
visit by a delegation of businessmen and women representing, or comprised of some
of the most senior people in business in Australia and J have put together that
delegation to demonstrate to the Chinese Government and to the Chinese people the
importance I attach andmy Goverrnent attaches to -lose co-operiion. between the
Government and the business m'en and women of Australia in building an even better
partnership with the Cin=-se Goveffrnent and the Chinese people.
I last visited shanghai in 1.985. Needless to say, the change that has occurred over that
eleven year period has been quite astonishing and In the short time I have already
been here, the level of development and' idustrialisatioa has made a very big
impression. I want to thank the N ister and the Vice Mayor of ' Shanghai for the gxreat courtesy
that they have extended to me already and the welcome they extended to me last
night, ladies and gentlemen, again may I congratulate Ansett on thi success it has
achieved so far. its commitment to the air traffic between Australia and china and the
very important contribution that the company is making to the building of closer,
relations, both economic and otherwise between Australia and China. Having said
that, I have much pleasure in declaring Ansett's Shah" ba office officially open. I
wish the inaugural flight an the 8th of June the very best of success and may many
people happily and frequently travel on Ansett aircraft between Australia and China.
Thank you. Fa om29/ 03/ 97 19: 31 Pg: 2 



PRIME MINISTER
ThANSCRIPT BY THE PRIME MINITER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
VISIT TO BHP, SHANGHAI, CHINA
Saturday 29 March 1997
E &amp; EO Proo~ f Copy Onl~ y
J. Prime Minister, how impqrwat is it that Austfalia becom~ e involved inthis
8azing cconomnic boorn?
PM: Well this is probably the pst rapidly industrialising part of th world.
It is certaihly thd most rapidly industialising part of China. That in a
sense says it all. If Australia is to be relevant in this part of the world
then obviously it has to be part of the economic action. BR? clearly is
and many other Australian companies arc and I congratulate the men and
women of Australian business who have invested in this extmraodinary
economic phenomenon.
J: Seeing it first hand, have you been astounded?
PM: The visual impact of this intense industrialisation and construction is
quite amazing. You can read about something like that To see so wauy
buildiip, so many mates, so much activity,' to drive along a road that
didn't exist four years ago and be told that every building on either side
of t road is less'than 3 years old, It's quite extraordinary.
J: Anid do y-ou cx* pctt con c results out of the business delegation in the
= nd?
Fax from~ 29/ 03/ 97 16: 52 P9: 1 
Fax from 2
PM: I hope that in a number of areas there will be. The importance, of this
visit is to drive home the economic links as well as having a political
dimension. The economic links are very important that's why there is
such a sernior and very, very, authoritative business delegation
accompanying me.
J: Prime Minster, if the political links are improved after this visit this
Piime Ministerial visit to China, what kind of impact and flow-on will
that have for business links to Australia?
PM: ' Well, I think they are complementary in a way, although it is fair to say
that in some areas such as wool and wheat Australia has done very well
irrespective of the nature of the political association.
You have to keep a sense of perspective about that. I think the better the
political climate the more beckoning, I suppose, the econonic
atmosphere. But, it is also an interesting fact of Australia's association
with China that in areas like wool and wheat the association goes back
long yea r and it is a vezy, very, old association and on a number of
occasions in the past when things haven't been as warm as perhaps they
have been on other occasions we've nonetheless done quite well.
J: Prime Minister, can I just throw forward to the Ansett opening this
afternoon, what does it mean to have an airline link between the two
couniries?
PM; It is very relevant, for example, to the Olympic Games. And, one of the
things that is occurring in China as is occurring in so many countries in
the region is that there is a rapidly burgeoning middle class and you only
need in peftentagc terms a small middle class in a very large country
and you have an enormous new tourist market. You have an enormous
new potential market in services generally, as well as, of course, a huge'
consumer market for manufactured exports. But the people to people
29/ 83/ 97 16: 52 Pg: 2 
Fax from 29/ 03/ 97 16: 52 Pg: 3
3
links between Australia and China will grow. B3ear in mind that there
are something in the order of 300,000 Australians claiming Chinese
ancestry. Now, certiny a large percentage of those don't come from
China itself, although a growing number do. But the thing that springs
very readily to mind, of course, is the Olympic Gamnes.
Thank you. 



Fax from 30/ 03/ 97 18: 58 Pg:
PRIME MINISTER
March 19" 7 TRANSCIPT OF THE' PRIME MIlNISTdER
THE HON. JOHN HO0WARD MP
SPEECH TO AUSTRALIJAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
SHANGHAI CHINA.
E OE
Thank you very much for that welcome. To Minister Liu Qi, Vice Mayor Zhao Qizheiig
to Mr Marc Gauci, rnany other distinguished guests. ladies and gentlemen.. I want to thtank
the China Australia Chamber of Commerce for the forum that it has given rne today, the
first occasion to deliver a speech on my very important visit to China. I want to
ackniowledge the contribution of the Chamber to business and commercial relations between
Australia and China and I also want to acknowledge the contribution of the Australia China
B1usiness Council whose President, lohxi Allen. is amongst the members of the business
delegation accompanying me. Both of those organisations make an immzense contrilution to
fostering good business and inevitably therefore good personal relations -between Australia
-and China.
This lunch brings together a very strong cross secton of the Australian business presenice in
China and I am delighted to have accompanying me on this visit a very senior delegationi of
mena and women who ame leadcrs in Australian business. It is without doubt the strongest
business delegation ever to accompany an Australian Primec Minister alroad and it
underlines two things; my determination to present the Australian Government and the
Australian business community as partners working together to secure long tean economic
partnerships in China and also -an illustration of the diversity of the commercial and business
links that already exist between Australia and China.
It is of course no accident that Shanghai bas been cho ' sen -as my farst port of call as it were in
China. Shanghai is China's pre-eminent industeial and commercial city. It is famous in thte
West for so many things. the Australian business conmmunity has close historical link with
Shanghai. The Wing On and Sincere departmc~ nt stores which have been the main
departmzent. stores in Shanghai for mnost of the last So years were in fact begun in Sydney
by the Guo and Ma families. From modes: beginnings they set up branchres in Shanghai and 
Fax from 30/ 03/ 97 18: 58 Pg: 2
How -a r~ I"~; 2A1-P.
in all the major cities along the Chinese coast and today they remain among-the largest
department store chains in East Asia.
This visit is also a reminder to me and indeed many, of the great conitribution that
Austr-Aians of Chinese descent have maide to our nation and to the relationshdp between
Australia and China. There are sonme 300,000 Australians of Chinese descent. My own
electorate has one of the hidghest proportions of Chinese Austrlians in any part of Australia
They have made-a massive contributiou to every aspect of Australian life and particularly
the Shaughainese. Probably the best known of Shanghiainese Australians was the late Victor.
Chang, the eminent hearit suirgeon who was ttagically, murdered a few years ago. He was
born -in Shanghai and later as a child emigrating to Australia.
Australia's business presence in Shanghai is an impressive one. Au stratlian com~ panies have
around 250 investment projects here, 52 of which were approved in 1996 alone. Some of
Australia's largest investments in China are in Shanghai. They include CUB Fosters, which
is developing a new market for beer, an fine example of a well-known. Australian product
being adapted to a new environment. They include the ACI Glass bottling plant, which
incorporates some of the most advanced-glass forming technology in the world..
Other Australian, operations here include Vinidex Tubemeaker's plastie pipes factory,
Suspension Compoaents work in automotive party, and Air Interiational's air conditionin
operation-Boral is currently constructing a large pl aster board factory here the largest
such factory in China. And I bad the pleasuri just in hour ago of anowcing'a joint venture
between Sigtech and its Chinese pairtner, Da Zhong Taxis, to develop a state of the art taxi
communication system. That venture is a reminder of the important role that small and
rnedium-si~ rzd businesses can play in fostering the partnership and winning niche markets.
That firm employs fewer than 50 people and ihat is a fine example that you dont have to be
a large company to do well in such a rapidly growing mrket.
Thesc and other projeccts highlight the scaleof the business links between Australia and
China. In many ways they are a paradigm for our economic relationship with China
generally. The experience of the Baoshan iron and steel works which imports 40 per cent
of its iron ore needs from Australia mneans that many from Shanghai know Australia as a
reliable supplier of raw materials for the industries that are leading China's export growth.
Baoshan alsouses control computer systems which were supplied by Ck Technology in
Sydny; and the materials-handling control systems were supplied by Motherwell Systems
in Perth.
had the pleasure yesterday of course of visiting BHP's steel roll formng laT. BH,
incidentally. has been trading in China for over 100 years. The plant is an excellent
example of our economic cornplernentarities with China. Australia supplied the' primary'
products-it also supplied the high technology used to process those products. So Shanghai
knows that Australian investment can bring to China technology as advanced as that of any
nation in the world. 
Fax frraf 30/ 63/ 97 18: 58 Pg: 3
3
Australia and China, ladies, and gent lemen, are very different. It is fair to say, however, that
over the past ten years we have both been responding in our own ways to sudden and
profound shifts in the international econormic order. The same forces oif globalisation,
technological revolution and international competition are driving chanige in both countries.
Both our economics are undergoing fundamenTal reform albeit from different directions
and from different stages of development. I want during my visit to China to discust with
her leaders how our economic co-operation might be lifted to a new level.. In doing so. we
can build on the trust and mutual ktmwledgc that our respective business communities -have
built up over the years.
The growth and increased openness of the Chinese ec-onorny presents enormous
opportunities for Australia. China's economy has been growing at around 10 per cent a yewi
for the past 15 years. Australias ekports to China have been growing twice as fast as our
global exports. It is important to remember that Australia has had a long and reliable and
been an imnportat supplier of commodities to China for very miany years. We supplied
grain to China for many years well before diplomatic relations were catablished and when
others would not. We now supply sixty per cent of China's iron ore import a major input
to China's massive and growing steel-mnaking industry. We are a major supplier of wool.
Australia will remain a reliable supplier of raw materials of quality but we can both gain
more from exploiting opportunities for two-% way investment which would iricrease returns to
both of US.
Chinese companies already have equity in some resource projects. Expansion of ths wvould
be very welcome. New areas of cooperation are waiting to be opened up in the minimng
sector and in LNG, for examnple, to fee China's vast energy deinands. Members o-f my
businecss group have some ver imaginative and-attrctive propositions.
We need to remove constraints-to further growth in areas where we have~ traditionally
cooperated. I am hoping that we shiall be abl e to do this in the wool trade, for example, in
the context of our bilateral negotiations on China's accession to the World Trade
* Organisation
Economic change in both countries has hingllighted new sectors for cooperation. The
business group accompanying me reflects the growing diversity of our economic
relationiship and in Australia's particular strengths in financial, accounting and legal'
serices. Australiani insurance companies such as ColonialMutual Group and National
Mutual are keen to operate in China and come with strong pedigrees-AMP has just been
given approval to open a representative office in Beijing.
In Beijing, I will be opening a seminar being held by the Australian Stock Exchan'ge about
the opportunities that listing of Chinese companies would provide for raising capital. We
aim to show the advantages for high quality -Chinese companies of listing9 on the exchange.
Two Australian legal firms, Aliens Arthur Robinson and Mallesons Stephen Jacques, have
licenses to operate here. Other well-known firms such as Slake. Dawson Waldron, H4unt 
Fax fraom 30/ 03/ 97 18: 58 Pg: 4
I 4.
and Hunt, Minter Ellison to name a few are also keen to enter China &amp; Whday e much to
offer. Australia's services sector is among the most advanced in the developed world. Moreover,
it hats mi established record of achievement and contacts throughout the. Asia-Pacific region.
The growth of our two-way investmient links is a sign of a maturing economic relationship.
Australian contracted investment in China has grown strongly in recent years and is now
around $ 5 billion. Australia is one of the top destinations for Chinese investment abroad.
Growth in China has been the result of economic reform and the opening u p of the Chinese
economy which began in 1978 udder Denzg Xiaoping. That gxowth has been good for the
Chinese people, for economiues in the region and for tha world economy. MoreoVer, the
rapid development of trading and investment links between China and countries inthe Asia-
Pacific region has been importanit in engendering a sense of commuhity and4 shared interests
among regional countries. The recent reaffirmation of cbntinued commitment t6 reform by
China's leaders is therefore a very -welcome sign of continuity for China's Auktraliahi
business parters; and for the relationship generally. My firm conviction athat government
works best when it allows the enterprise of individuals full scope to flourish; when it
unshackles btisiness from the often unnecessary regulations and bureaucracy that tie down
the dynamism and creativity of business. In Australia*, my governmenrt has takena number
of significant measures to lift national savings, Ito improvi flexibility and competitiveness in
our labour market, and to lift the constraints on small business.
My government is strongly commtitted to an ongoing micro-economnic reform: programime
which will produ~ c a more competitive Australian economy. That in turn will help the
efforts of Australian companies as they develop their business in China.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am particularly pleased to have 6ad this opportunity to talk about
our economic relationship with China in general and Shanghai in particular. Shanghai will
continue to occupy a special place in the Australia-China relationship. Qur busines
communities have built up over many years a strong reservoir of goodwill and miutual trust.
This lunch is fine evidence of that.
Our links with Shanghai have a dimension that is important to the development of
Australia's overall relationship with China. Our early cooperation through Baoshau has
meant that Shanghai has been important to the growth of pem, onal contacts between our two
nations. Some of China's mnost important leaders, including President Axang Zernin, have
held important posts in Shanghai. In those ' posts, he his predecessors and successors have
come to know Australia well and the contribution that we can make to China.
What I have seen and heard over the past two days hits given me gret cordiderice in
Shanghai's prospects. It is an extraordinary city. It is eleven years since I last visited it and
it is almost urecognisable. The change-that has occurred over that 1I year period is quite
phenomenal1 and it is no exaggeration to say that over tb6 last two days I have witnessed a 
Fax from 30/ 03/ 97 18: 58
MW
tiny fraction of the activity that is involved in the area of the world that is iridustrialising at a
faster rate and at a more intense maniner than any other part of thc globe:.
I congratulate those who have been responsible. for this. I wvish them well in the future-I
offer on behalf of the Australian Goverument, the Australian business community, and tbe
Australian people a partnership, a partnership that recognises that there are differences. You
have your way of doing things in China, we have our way of doing things. in Australia.' But
providing there is a mature understanding~ of those differences and that the relationship is
always as a proper relationship between two dignified, sovereign counties should be based
on mutual self respect then there is every prospect that through concentrating ort the future
goals that we may share and concentratifig on the ways which we can com~ plemtent each
other, particularly in the area of economics, comm~ erce and business, there is every prospect
to believe that an already close and valuable relationship to both partners can grow even
more in the future and that subsequentt Prime inisters, of Australiaaxd % ubsrquent business
leaders of Australia can see the associati on * between Chinia and Australia and every start of
an economnic life as being one of the most of natural things in the world,
To the Chamber, maylI take this opportunity of publicly thun~ ing the Vice Mayor of
Shanghai for the very great courtegy that he has, -extended to me wA through him can I thank
the -people of Shanghai for the great hospitality and friendliness that they have demonstrated
towards mne and my party. I have io say to you, Mr Vice Mayor, that walking along the
Buid last night with that very large and enthusiastic gathertng of people, I fell as though it
were February or March of 1996, on the eve of o-or election rather than in March of 1997. It
was very welcome and it was a nice taste of the innate fi-iendliness of the: people of your
city. I wish you well. I come with the goodwill of the Australian~ people and of the
Australian Government.
Thank you-



Monday 31 March 1997
TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
PRIME MINISTER
BUSINESS LUNCHEON HOSTED BY THE AMBASSADOR
GREAT WALL SHERATON, BEIJING, CHINA
E&amp; EO
State Councillor Song, Ministers, Vice Ministers, other distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. I really do welcome this opportunity today before an audience which brings together, may I
say, a particularly large number of senior members of the Chinese Government, and in
acknowledging that can I thank Lhose people for the complement that thcy gave to the
relationship between Australia and China. Their presencc together with the presence of such
a distinguished and strong delegation of men and women in business in Australia is an ample
demonstration that on both sides the is a determination to build further the close
relationship between Australia and China.
I congratulate the China-Australia Chamber of Commerce on the first anniversary of its
registration and the successful amalgamation of the three Australian business groups in
China. Let me say at the outset of this speech that I attach very great importance to my visit to China.
My goverment is very firmly committed to a strong and mutually productive relationship
with China.
We seek a relationship which is both strong and diverse and we seek a relationship which is
based on mutual benefit and mutual respect. 
This commitment, may I say, is a politically bipartisan one in Australia. It has been an
important element of continuity a constant if I can put it that way in Australia's foreign
policy. This year we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic
relations with the modem China. A Labor government under Gough Whitlam was in office at
the time. A Coalition government under Malcolm Fraser subsequently very actively
developed the relationship between Australia and China. Malcolm Fraser's work was
continued by his Labor Party successors.
This visit to China is part of a pattern of visits I have undertaken since becoming Prime
Minister that takes me to Australia's principle partners and friends in the region. I have
already been to Indonesia and Japan and I am particularly happy within a year or so of taking
office to be here in Beijing.
My government's foreign policy including its policy towards China is based on a clearheaded
and independent assessment of Australia's interests in the Asia-Pacific region.
T am confident that after my discussions with President Jiang Zemin in Manila at the time of
the APEC Leaders Meeting that he shares my desire that our relationship should be both
positive and broadly based.
There is little doubt that China is one of the most important countries in our region.
It's hard to think of any major aspect of the Asia-Pacific region which will not be influenced
in some way by China's development during the next two or three decades. It's no
exaggeration to say that what happens in China over that period will be one of the major
influences on the Asia-Pacific region in the 21st century.
The past twenty years have seen a transformation within China. Under Deng Xiaoping's
leadership China threw open its doors to the outside world. It started the programme of
reforms which has seen China begin to fulfil its enormous potential. So Australia like all of
China's partners was pleased to hear the Chinese leadership's recent reatfirmation of its
commitment to that reform programme begun by Deng Xiaoping.
Over the past two or three days in both Shanghai and Beijing I have been able to witness at
first hand China's spectacular growth, spectacular industrial transformation. China's
economic achievements are bringing obvious benefits to China and to her people.
China's growth is beneficial also for Australia and for the region. It creates great economic
opportunitics for China, lor Australia and for our region. Its constructive handling can help
build even greater stability in our region. 
I would like to make a few remarks about what this growth means for regional and global
trade. In particular, I would like to say what it means for Australia.. and the part that I would
like to see Australia play in it.
China is the seventh-largest economy in the world and is set to become at least the sixth
largest by the year 2000. Trade has played a vital part in this achievement. Trade and
international services comprise 45 per cent of China's GDP.
In a remarkably short period China has gone from a relatively closed economy to become the
world's tenth largest trading nation. From July with Hong Kong. China wifl be the sixth
largest trading nation in the world.
China's trade combined with Hong Kong's has grown by 15 per cent a year since the late
1970s twice the world's average. China's trading relationships will soon be amongst the
world's most important. For example, soon after the year 2000, China's trade with Japan wil
overtake US-Japan trade which has been a pillar of Asia-P acific trade and the international
economy.
Both China and its trading partners therefore have the very greatest common iterest in
regional and global trading arrangements that are liberal and predictable.
Like the rest of us, China will need continuing access to other markets in ordcr to prosper.
We all need to ensure that markets continue to open up further.
For its part, China is iuaking some meaningful rcductions in its overall tariff rates in the
APEC context. That is very welcome. It will improve market access for China's trading
partners as well as increasing domestic competitiveness, with benefits for China's economic
growth and the living standards of her people. China's trading partners have a strong interest
in the maintenance of open and consistent trade policy and rules within China.
All that is why China will benefit from being aLm ember of the World Trade Organisation; and
why Ausfralia wants to see China join on commercially acceptable terms. The stakes for
China and for the global trading system warant a serious effrt to resolve China's accession
as soon as possible.
This would I believe usefulfly iremovc some of the pressures for protectionism in western
especially Western Europen economies which fear the level of penetration by Chinese
products. 
Likewise, China has every reason to take a lead in trade libcralisation within APEC. Steady
progress towards meeting APEC's trade and investment libcralisation goals is our best hope
of ensuring that growth in the Asia-Pacific and China reaches its full potential.
China will continue to need foreign investment, imports, technology and services to
overcome constraints on growth. Much of this will come from among the APEC economies,
rcflccting and in turn further strengthening the very high dcgree of integration amongst
those economies.
Reflecting the diversity of the region, APEC brings together a most extraordiniary range of
economies in terms of size, economic structure and stage of development. It brings togethcr
a most diverse group of societies and cultures. Each member not least Australia has
something unique and valuable to offer to the association and to the region, and each gains
greatly by it.
The value of APEC thereforc goes well beyond the economic. I am convinced that one of
APEC's greatest contributions is that it focuses our attention on the substantial interests Asia
Pacific cconomies have in common.
Australia's relationship with China has long been an important element of this regional
framework. Long before the establishment of diplomatic relations, China was Australia's fifth largest
trading partner and that was in the 1960s as it is today. Australia was a reliable supplier of
wheat throughout the 1960s, during sometimes difficult periods for China-
That continuity underscores the national interests that have driven both countries in
developing our bilateral relationship.
China's economy has grown at an average of 10 per cent a year for the last 15 years. With
good economic management there is no reason why China should not continue to grow at a
similar rate for the foreseeable future. The recent successful management of a soft economic
landing shows that we have good reason to be confident about that. The demand for inputs to
the Chinese economy for raw materials, capital, infrastructure, technology and energy will
therefore be immense.
It is vital for Australia to share in that growth. Australia's trade with China grew twenty five
percent between 1995 and 1996. Between 1988 and 1995, it grew twice as fast as Australia's
trade with the rest of the worid. Our investment has grown over four times in as many years.
Australia is one of the top destinations for China's foreign investment. 
I will propose to Chinese leaders during my visit that wc take the opportunity of the twentyfifth
anniversary of our relationship to look crcatively at the strategic partnership that I
believe our economics constitute. Establishing a partnership in growth will bring great
benefits to both our peoples.
As I have mentioned I have brought with me the strongest business group that has ever
accompanied an Australian prime minister abroad. These business leaders are from some of
Australia's longest standing and most reputable companies. They reprcsent a great range of
sectors in which Australia has particular strengths.
This joint approach between Australian business and the Australian Government is a
demonstration of the commitment of both to work together. We are both rcady for a serious
discussion with our Chinese counterparts about the concrete stcps which we might take to
build a new era in the economic relationship between our two countries.
Australia has a track record as a reliable supplier of commodities that are important to
China's economic growth: including iron ore, wool and wheat. Australia is also well placed
to provide China with steaming coal, and with LNG for power generation and domestic
consumption. We offer the technological know-how to make the most productive and
environmentally sound use of our commodities.
China has taken up equity in some mining and resource processing projects. Scope exists for
China to increase dramatically its investment in Austrdia in these areas. I want to emphasisc
that that Chinese investment is most welcome.
Both the Chinese and Australian economies are going through periods of rapid change
resulting from the forces of globalisation. Financial and business services have become more
important to maintaining our competitiveness and our productivity.
I have with mc here today leaders in Australian banking, insurance, accounting and legal
services. Tomorrow I will open a seminar by the Australian Stock Exchange. Australia is
looking for listings by quality Chinese companies to raise capital and encouraging them to
consider fuxther investment opportunities in Australia.
Our economic complementarity is also reflected in the joint venture sigings which we are
marking at this lunch:
the issuing of a busineas liccuea, for example, to the joint venture between Australia
China Holdings and the China International Science Centre to apply Australian 
technology and expertise to dealing with water pollution and waste water
management; and
an a~ e ement betwecn the Australian industry Development Corporation through the
China Water Company for their second venture and that is a water plant in Shnoxing.
Australia is already an important supplier of fresh and processed food to China. My
Government's Supermarket to Asia initiative offers the prospect of a large increase in
Australian food exports to China
I am confident, ladies and gentlemen, that our economic relationship will become ever more
important to both countries. This has been the pattern with other regional countries, such as
Japan and Korea, which have followed a similar fast growth path and in whose economic
development Australia has played key roles.
I have naturally spoken today largely about our economic links. The development of our
political co-opcration though is no less important. When I met President Jiang Zenm in
Manila, he made a point, a valuable point, about the value of prsonal face-to-face dialoguc.
I want to build a much closer level of communication between the leadership levels of our
two governments and our two nations. I look forward to the large number of high level visits
planned for the period ahead.
Australia and China have co-operated closely on a whole range of issues in the region,
including APEC and the ASEAN Regional Forumn. As China's influence grows, dialogue and
mutual understanding will become even more important.
Australia and China, my friends, have a long tradition of people-to-people links. Australians
in southern China earlier this century were astounded to find Australian blue gums and wattle
trees in full bloom more than 10,000 miles from home. No-one knows for sure when they
were first planted or who planted them perhaps Australian missionaries in the last century;
or perhaps Chinese miners returning from the Australian gold fields.
Today the contacts between us are growing fast in intensity and varicty.
Australia has a very large community of people of Chinese descent of which it is very proud.
The Chinese community has made a tremendous contribution to Australia and such links have
created a reservoir of goodwill in the relationship.
For example, doctors from Parkes, a regional city in c ntl westemrn New South Wales, at the
moment, are co-operating with the Beijing Hospital in work to understand the causes and help 
7
alleviate the effixts of Parkinson's disease. A group of Sydney doctors is actively engaged
with a Beijing hospital in heart surgery. This year the Fred Hollows Foundation plans to
begin helping train Chinese eye doctors in techniques to restore the sight of people suffering
cataract blindness.
So, ladies and gentlemen the links are very deep. They are very diverse. They go beyond the
cconomic. They include the political and as always they include the human.
I am here today as a representative of the Auistralian Government and the Australian people to
tell you that we want a close relationship building on the strengths of the past, recognising
inevitably that there will be differences but knowing that if we focus on the goals that we
have in common. if we recognise that we complement each other in so many ways then wc
can have a truely effective partnership in growth over the next twenty five years and beyond.
Thank you.
t o 



1 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN STOCK EXCHANGE!
CHINA SECURITIES REGULATORY COMMISSION SYMPOSIUM
BEIJING, CHINA
E O E
Thank you very much Maurice Newman, the Chairman of the Australian Stock Exchange, to
the Minister for Metallurgical Industry, Mr Liu Qi, other distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. May I say how particularly pleased I am to open this very important seminar. Can I
congratulate the Australian Stock Exchange and all of those associated in putting this seminar
together. I suppose when you think about the market system, when you think about free
economies, nothing quite expresses in a more robust and uncomplicated way a market
approach to economic management than a stock exchange.
It's impossible to conceive what has become known as the market economy or the market
economies of the world without thinking of stock exchanges. Because it is through stock
exchanges that equities are traded, capital is raised and judgments are made about the
strengths and the future prospects of companies and the stock exchanges of the world are an
indispensable, indeed a crucial element of the increasingly globalised economy in which we all
live. And when in 1978 the late Deng Xiao Ping began the great opening of the Chinese
economy, it was inevitable over time that that opening would embrace a greater concentration
on the role of stock exchanges in the economy of China and ultimately, of course, the listing of
Chinese securities and companies on the stock exchanges of the world. And that is why I'm
so delighted that this seminar brings the Australian Stock Exchange and the people who run it
and advise it and the China Securities Regulatory Commission, and I particularly welcome the
presence of its Chairman with us today. We had a very brief but lively discussion about the
role of his Commission and the interaction of such commissions with the Stock Exchanges
both of China and of Australia. 
This seminar will be an excellent opportunity for Chinese delegates and our Chinese guests to
gain an understanding not only of the listing requirements and the intricacies of the Australian
Stock Exchange but also the vast array of services that are associated with the operations of
securities markets in Australia.
The Australian Stock Exchange is a very sophisticated operation. It has a high reputation for
integrity. It also, I think today, celebrates its I10th birthday as a national exchange having
years ago brought together the individual State exchanges of Australia that operated for so
long. It has great advantages for Chinese companies, it operates in roughly the same time
zone as Beijing. It's electronic trading system is at the leading edge. It's surveillance system
and company recording requirements are outstanding and of course it has particular expertise
in areas such as mining and construction and building, industry and engineering which is of
such great and ongoing importance to Chinese companies and Chinese investors.
Associated with this seminar are representatives of many of the large and reputable legal and
accounting firms of Australia and as you move amongst the delegates from Australia, our
Chinese guests will meet representatives of what are household names in the legal and
accounting professions in Australia. And once again, in that area we bring services that have
high reputations in Australia, they are of world class professional capacity and they are part of
the very, very deep layers of professional services available to investors in Australia.
This is another occasion in which I want to emphasise the partnership between the Australian
government and the business community of Australia in interacting with the Chinese
government and the business men and women of China.
I have brought with me on this trip to China a very strong delegation of business men and
women. In fact it's the strongest and most senior business delegation ever to accompany an
Australian Prime Minister abroad and that has happened quite deliberately because of my belief
and my government's belief that in our dealings with China it is important to emphasise that
we and the business community are doing it together. That doesn't mean that our
predisposition in Australia towards allowing the business community freedom to make its own
decisions and to reduce the burden of government regulation on business has in any way
changed. But it is a recognition that in dealing with China it is important for the government
and the business community to work together.
Can I say to our Chinese guests and the participants in this seminar that the process of
economic change and reform is moving very dramatically in your country and although the
rate of change in Australia, by definition, is no where near is as great because the base from
which we have started is different, there is nonetheless an ongoing process of economic
change and reform. One of the things that my government will address in the next few weeks,
after my return to Australia is an examination of the Wallis Committee Report into the
Australian financial system.
About 17 years ago when I was Treasurer in the Australian government we received the
Campbell Report which ultimately led to the greatest changes in the financial system that
Australia has seen, the introduction of foreign banks, the floating of the Australian dollar and
general deregulation. May I say that it was a policy approach I'm pleased to remark was
embraced by both sides of politics in Australian and I have never been reluctant to give my
predecessor as Prime Minister credit for the work that he did in implementing that particular 
report. The Wallis Committee Inquiry is in some respects an update, a stocktaking of what
has happened to the Australian financial system since the implementation of the Campbell
Report and we will be taking some decisions on that Report in terms of a statement of how
we're going to handle it already made by the Treasurer. But I mention it ladies and gentlemen
to simply underline the fact that although we have a very modern and sophisticated and
thoroughly integrated financial system which is part of the globalised economy in which we all
now live, the process of change, surveillance and review must always go on.
Ladies and gentlemen I therefore have enormous pleasure in declaring this seminar open. I
congratulate again the Australian Stock Exchange and particularly it's Chairman, Mr Maurice
Newman, who has not only made a great contribution to the Australian business community as
Chairman of the Australian Stock Exchange and his other professional pursuits but he has
made an extremely thoughtful contribution over many years to the ongoing policy debate
within Australia about economic matters and he's been one of the strongest and most
persistent voices in favour of a deregulatory market approach to the management of the
Australian economy. And in a society such as Australia debates on those sorts of issues go on
endlessly and it is always important to have loud and strong voices in favour of an intelligent
approach to economic management.
So ladies and gentlemen I have enormous pleasure in declaring this seminar open. I hope that
all of our Chinese delegates here today derive great benefits from it. All of you will be very
welcome participants on the Australian Stock Exchange. I can assure you of a ready but of
course necessarily professional and critical appraisal of your offerings and if you do decide to
list you will be listing on an exchange which has impeccable world wide credentials, is
conducted with enormous integrity and whose operations are underpinned by highly qualified
brokers, financial advisers, lawyers and accountants.
I declare this seminar open. Thank you
Ends 



1 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
OPENING OF THE ANZ BANK BEIJING BRANCH OFFICE
BEIJING, CHINA
E&amp; O E
To the Governor of the People's Bank of China, to Mr Alastair Maitland, Mr Rick
Smith, the Australian Ambassador in China, other distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. I am really delighted that the ANZ Bank has been granted a license to operate in
Beijing. I want on behalf of the Australian Government to thank the monetary
authorities in China for that decision. I also want to thank the Australian Embassy for
work that it did in sponsoring and helping the application. But most particularly I want
to congratulate the ANZ Bank on the success it has achieved in gaining that license
and thereby being able to open a branch, the second of its branches, in China.
One of the features of my visit to China has been to stress the diversity of the
economic relationship between our two countries. Traditionally that relationship has
been expressed through commodity trade and emphasis on mining and industrial
matters but it is also important to underscore the range of sophisticated financial and
other services we have available and the great strength of the banking system and the
banking industry and the quality of banks in Australia.
Without in any way diminishing the continued value of Australia's mining industry and
our agricultural product and our other activities I believe in the years ahead the
support and the opportunities that the Australian service sector, particularly the
financial services, will offer to China will be quite immense.
Australia has a very strong and stable banking system. The ANZ Bank has long been
part of that very stable banking system and it is no surprise to me nor to other
observers of the Australian financial system that it should have sought and obtained
this license here in Beijing. 
2
I am sure that the ANZ Bank will make a real contribution to providing a wide range
of financial services to businesses not only here in Beijing but in years ahead in other
parts of China.
So, let me conclude my remarks by again congratulating the ANZ Bank on what it has
achieved, thanking the monetary authorities of China for granting the license and
remarking that this is yet another element of the burgeoning economic, commercial and
business association between Australia and China.
The economic links between nations are best expressed through the vigour of private
sector participation in the respective affairs of the two countries and the decision of the
ANZ Bank to seek a branch here and the decision of the Chinese authorities to grant
the license is evidence of a determination on both sides to ensure that the relationship
deepens and broadens.
I wish the ANZ Bank Beijing branch much business.
Thank you. 



6 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
FEDERAL LEADER'S ADDRESS TO THE
125TH VICTORIAN LIBERAL PARTY STATE COUNCIL
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much, Richard, for your very kind words of introduction. To Joy
Howley, Ted Baillieu, Tony Staley, my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues and
fellow Liberals.
Your words of introduction about my persistence, Richard, did remind me very much of
an exchange I had with my predecessor as Member for Bennelong, Sir John Cramer. He
was almost as old as I am now when he first entered Federal Parliament in 1949 and he
didn't retire as the Member for Bennelong until he reached the age of 78 in 1974. About
four years ago I went to the launch of his book and I, as a dutiful book launcher, had read
it. Some don't. And there was some very interesting paragraphs in it about the
foundation of the Liberal Party. And I had a bit of a joke with him before the launch of
the book and said, " John, I hadn't realised you were so pivotal, so crucial and so
intimately involved in the formation of the Party", I said, " there are some names I didn't
expect to see and there are a few names missing". And he said, " my boy, I'm 97 there's
nobody left around to contradict me".
But it is a great delight to be back here and can I just start by repeating the tribute that I
paid to Ted Baillieu last night for the tremendous job that he has done as President of the
Victorian Division, over probably five of the most successful years of its existence. And,
also to very warmly congratulate you Joy and to say that as Leader of the Federal
Parliamentary Party I look forward to years of very close co-operation. I know that the
link between the Parliamentary Party and the Organisation is very important to our
political future and our political survival. And when it breaks down and it when becomes
confused, when it comes ambiguous, then that is when difficulties emerge. 
I want to say to you before this State Council meeting that, from my part, I value and
respect very much the role of the Party Organisation in the day to day fortunes of the
Liberal Party. And that applies federally as it does at state divisional level. And I know
the massive contribution that the Victorian Division has made over the years to the
success of the Party here in Victoria and also to the success of the Party nationally.
In acknowledging the presence of my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues can I
personally wish you, Jim Short, many happy years in Europe. I hope that you and Jan
enjoy and derive very great satisfaction from that posting and I am certain that you will do
a marvellous job as the representative of Australia and as a participant in the constituency
in which Australia is involved on the Board of that particular bank.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the weeks and months ahead there are many significant policy
decisions that the Government will need to take. We have now been in office for just over
a year and if you look back and remember the things that we were elected to do, I think it
is fair to say that in all of the major areas we have remained true, we have kept faith with
what we told the Australian people we would do. And in some areas we have, in fact,
delivered more than what we promised and I have in mind the area of small business,
which is so important to the economic future of Australia and has played such a major role
in the development of the economic values and the economic philosophy of the Liberal
Party. We said that we would place an emphasis on small business and we have. We have
changed the industrial relations system. We have throughout Australia made significant
changes through the industrial relations legislation, significant changes to the unfair
dismissal laws to make them more intelligent. And in my small business statement of three
weeks ago I went a step beyond what was in the Industrial Relations Act and I said that
the unfair dismissal law, federally, would not apply to any person who was employed for
less than twelve months by any small business employing fewer than fifteen people.
And I have invited the other State Governments I say the other State Governments
because here in Victoria because of the handing over of the industrial relations
responsibility to the Federal Government the new federal law applies automatically. I've
invited the other State Governments of Australia to duplicate what we are doing at a
federal level. And it would be a very important test of the credentials of all other State
Governments so far as small business concerned as to whether they are prepared to come
on board with this particular proposal.
And I renew today my invitation to the Government's of New South Wales and
Queensland, of South Australia and of Western Australia and Tasmania to enact laws
within their state jurisdictions that will duplicate what we have done federally. And I hope
that they will do so because if we can achieve a uniformity and a comprehensive approach
throughout Australia on this issue then we will deliver another significant benefit to the
small business community. 
In the area of capital gains tax it will be the law Australia, after the first of July this year,
that if you sell a small business up to $ 5 million of the proceeds of that sale can be
invested in any business of any kind without incurring any capital gains tax liability. Now
that represents an enormous liberalisation of the capital gains tax law in this country and it
goes far beyond what we promised in the election campaign. And I think it is important
that over the weeks ahead, at a constituency level and at a State division level, we drive
home the value of these benefits. It is very easy for some policy changes and some
reforms to be made and for people to forget about them in short period time. This will
come into operation on the first of July.
And the other thing that will come into operation on the first of July are the tax incentives
for private health insurance something that should have been introduced in Australia five,
or six, or ten years ago. In the early 1990' s Grahame Richardson, and God forbid that I
should draw on Grahame Richardson as an authoritative source of political advice. But he
as the Health Minister in the Hawke Government, in the early 1990' s, when something like
thirty-nine per cent of the Australian population was covered by private health insurance,
he then said that something had to be done to stop the drift of people out of private health
insurance. He warned the Hawke Government that if that wasn't done, if steps were not
taken, then we ran the risk of losing the critical mass that was needed to sustain the
private health insurance system. And, of course, nothing was done.
The ideological hostility of the Labor Party to private provision so far as health is
concerned in this country over rode the common sense of that advice and the net result is
that we now have only thirty-four per cent of Australians who are covered by private
health insurance. And that is making a major contribution to the strain on the public
hospital system of Australia. And even the Labor Premier of New South Wales, Bob
Carr, now says, " oh, it's a terrible problem and something has got to be done about it".
It's a great pity that he had not supported his old mate Grahame Richardson in the early
1990' s.
But, I can promise you that the commitment that we made in the election campaign in the
health area will be delivered in full on the first of July this year when those tax incentives
come into operation. It is another case of having delivered in full, on time, and without
qualification on a promise that we made during the election campaign.
From the beginning of this year, once again, on time, without deduction and in full we
delivered the total measure of our family tax initiative. In many other areas, and I see
David Kemp here today. And David is doing an absolutely magnificent job, not only
looking after the training and apprenticeship area, but he's also got responsibility for work
for the dole.
We said that we would give Australian business and Australian young people a modern
training and apprenticeship system and we are well down the path to doing it. 
We have announced the introduction of a work-for-the-dole scheme. And a work for the
dole scheme is based on the very simple principle of mutual obligation. In the kind of
society we have it is our moral responsibility to provide a safety net of support for people
who need it. It's always been a core Liberal principle to look after the needy in our
society. And that means that if people genuinely can't get work they are entitled to
financial support and for living support and daily support from the rest of us. But it is also
fair and right in a society such as ours that having provided that support we are entitled to
ask those people who receive it to do something reasonably in return for that support.
Now, there's nothing outrageous about that. It's not anti Democratic. It's not even, I
understand, against any provisions of the International Labor Organisation. Although for
years and years and years we were told by the sceptics and our opponents, " you can't
have work-for-the-dole, the ILO won't like it." Well, amazingly I find that even the iLO
doesn't object to it. But I wonder whether the Labor Party objects to it. I wonder when
that vote finally comes in June of this year whether the Labor Party will put up his hand
for work-for-the-dole or the Labor Party will join the Australian Democrats and vote it
down. It will be a very, very interesting test of where the Labor Party stands.
But there are many other issues that we have before us. We are fast coming to the time
when a decision will need to be taken on one of the most difficult issues that any
Australian government in modern times has had to confront and that is the collection of
problems thrown up by the decision of the High Court of Australia in the Wik case. I have
to say that that was a very disappointing and a very surprising decision. It was a decision
that ran against the conventional wisdom. It was a decision that was against the
representations directly contained in recitals to the Native Title Act. It was a decision
which ran against the public assurances given by the former Prime Minister, Mr Keating.
It was a decision that ran against public statements made by Aboriginal leaders after the
passage of the 1993 Native Title Act. And it was a decision that has created an enormous
amount of uncertainty and unpredictability for the farmers and the miners of Australia and
has opened up a potential area of endless litigation unless appropriate action is taken.
Now I have over past weeks been in consultation will all of the relevant stakeholders and I
have to say that those consultations by and large have been conducted in an atmosphere of
great goodwill. I remain determined, if I can, to achieve an agreed outcome. I don't
pretend that that is easy. But that process of dialogue cannot go on forever, there has to
be an end point. There can only be an agreed outcome if there is an acceptance by the
indigenous people of Australia that an automatic acceptance of the Wik decision will
create intolerable uncertainty for the pastoralists of Australia. And equally there has to be
an acceptance by other interested parties of the sensitivity of the Aboriginal community to
the notion of extinguishment of title. And within those two bands, within those two areas
of understanding perhaps an agreed outcome that delivers respect for native title, but by
the same token guarantees security, predicability and certainty, and an avoidance of
endless block by block litigation over perhaps 40% to 50% of the land mass of Australia
which is one of the nightmare scenarios thrown up by the decision perhaps between
those two extremities there does lie the possibility of an agreed outcome. And if it can be
achieved, well it would be very important for fuiture relations between different sections of 
the Australian community. But if that agreement cannot be achieved then it will be my
intention to make certain recommendations to the Government as to a clear and definite
course of action because it is not a matter that can be allowed to be the subject of endless
discussion and endless negotiation.
We also have ahead of us, of course, the bringing down of the budget in May of this year.
And we are returning to the pattern of the May budget. And already the ERC, under the
direct guidance of Peter Costello and John Fahey, is hard at work.
The budget task that we inherited a year ago was in the dimension of about a 10 billion
deficit on an underlying basis. And it Is important for the maintenance of strong and stable
business conditions that we continue to drive towards getting a surplus in our budget. It is
not an arcane, academic, arid, economic exercise. If you have a budget surplus that has
beneficial effects on interest rates. It's no accident that interest rates have fallen by about
across the board in the last 12 months. And one of the reasons for that has been the
determination of the Government to reduce the deficit and the knowledge by the Reserve
Bank that we now have in power a group of people who are prepared to try and tackle the
size of our deficit, a group of people who are not reluctant to tackle whatever decisions
are needed to achieve that objective. And the task in May, although not of the same
dimension of last year and not the necessity involving the same sort of decisions that were
taken last year, is nonetheless a very difficult exercise and will require the continued
application of the efforts and the energies of senior ministers and of the whole
Parliamentary Party.
Another matter that I want to touch on very briefly is the debate that surrounds the
position of Senator Colston. Senator Colston, as you know, was a member of the
Australian Labor Party. I watched with fascination the Deputy Leader of the Opposition
this morning on the Sunday programme. And he was talking about the events of 1983.
You know, butter wouldn't melt in his mouth. He said, " we were a new government,
Senator Colston was a new member" he'd only been in Canberra for eight years. After
I'd been in Canberra for eight years I felt anything but a new member. And the reality, of
course, is that, as everyone knows, Senator Colston, for a whole combination of reasons,
defected from the Australian Labor Party a few months ago. And the every deed, the
every act, the every motivation of the Australian Labor Party over recent months has, in
the openly confessed words and approach of Senator Ray, been driven by tribal revenge,
nothing else. It's got nothing to do with concern for the taxpayers' money. It's got
nothing to do with proprieties, it's got everything to do with doing in the eye a bloke you
reckon ratted on your party. It's as simple as that. Senator Ray, to his credit, at least has
been honest enough to say so and honest enough to admit that he's not very nice in
pursuing the vendetta.
And then of course that other group that has had a lot to say about Senator Colston is, of
course, the Australian Democrats. Now their motivation, ladies and gentlemen, has been
driven not so much by revenge but by pique the feeling that they're no longer as relevant 
as what they were a few months ago and no longer as relevant as what they would like to
be. So in all that is said I think we ought to keep this in mind.
But let me make it very clear to you, as a number of us have made clear in the past, that
my Government will not tolerate any abuse of parliamentary privileges by any Senator or
member no matter what party that person belongs to.
We are following due process with Senator Colston. But as many in this audience will
know, due process is sometimes slow process but that is the nature of our system. And I
repeat the assurances that I've given in the past, that when he has responded as he is
required to do by about the middle of this month to the allegations that have been made
and when all of them are looked at together all of them if the advice we receive from
amongst other sources, the Attorney-General's Department, is that the matter could
involve a breach of the law then we will not hesitate, indeed, I will insist that the matter be
sent to the Australian Federal Police for investigation.
Now that is our position and there can be no ambiguity about that. My attitude all along
has been that we're not going to do any favours for anybody when it comes to the law of
this country. Equally though, we are not going to allow somebody for a combination of
reasons to be denied due process and to be denied the presumption of innocence. That
has never been our way and we won't allow it to happen in relation to Senator Colston.
Ladies and gentlemen there are just two other things that I want to say to you this
morning. The first of those is that, as Richard Alston said in his very kind introductory
remarks, the last year has been a very successful year for the Liberal Party. It's not only
been electorally successfully. You here in Victoria have the enormous pleasure of sharing
our great Federal victory on the 2nd of March last year but you also had the experience of
the exhilarating re-election of the Kennett Government only a few weeks later.
But throughout Australia there has been a change. We have kept faith with the major
commitments that we made to the Australian people. We have dumbfounded our critics
on many fronts. We were told by our critics that we couldn't deal with the nations of the
Asian-Pacific region. Quite the opposite. We have established a new basis of pragmatic
understanding with many of those nations based, as I said in Beijing, on the twin pillars of
mutual benefit and mutual respect. The only way to build a proper relationship between
Australia and another nation is on the basis of mutual respect. I respect the right of other
nations to decide the way in which they govern their affairs but equally I require of them
that they respect the right of the Australian people to run their affairs according to our
assessment of what is in the interests of the Australian people. And I can tell you one
thing, I did many things in Beijing and Shanghai but there's one thing I didn't do in either
of those cities and one thing I will never do when I go abroad as your representative, I
didn't think out aloud about the constitutional future of my country. Nor did I denigrate
the symbols and the emblems of my country. Nor did I yield an inch on important
democratic values such as press freedom. 
I mean, all of us in politics occasionally, so I've observed, get a little irritated at the press
coverage we receive. But let us never forget that the real guarantees of freedom in this
country are not in what is written down or ought to be written down in a constitution or a
Bill of Rights and as [ yve said on other occasions, I am no great believer in a Bill of
Rights, I'm a common law man through and through. What are the really great guarantors
of freedom in this country are a vigorous parliamentary democracy, and we certainly have
that, an incorruptible judiciary, and we certainly have that, and a vigorous, open, sceptical
and free press. And however much it may on occasions aggravate us it still remains a
bedrock of our democratic society. And it's one of the things that distinguishes Australia
from many other societies and it's one of those great western liberal inheritances that we
have in common with other societies around the world.
And I can say to you ladies and gentlemen that our relationship with the most populous
nation on earth, China, is on a sound and sensible footing. I didn't come back wrapped in
euphoria. I didn't start emotionally talking about a new special intimate relationship. I
didn't say that that country had things that could put us to shame any more than I said we
have things that could put it to shame. But I sought when I was there to do one thing and
that was to advance the national interest of Australia, to identify, the things that we had in
common, to recognise that there are enormous economic opportunities because it is the
biggest country in the world and it is experiencing an annual growth rate of the
unbelievable level of between 10% and 15% a year. And the transformation that is
occurring in the major cities of China is on a scale that few people could even comprehend
let alone have experienced. So it is very important that we be part of that. And I took
with me the most senior business delegation, the most senior combination of men and
women in Australian business that have ever travelled abroad with an Australian Prime
Minister. And all the members of that delegation are household names in the world of
business in Australia. And for the first time you saw the Australian Government and the
business community of Australia working together in a cooperative partnership in the
largest nation in the world advancing the interests of Australia and seeking to achieve
business understanding with that vast nation. And in that practical way we have made an
enormous contribution to the economic future and a sound and sensible relationship
between Australia and the Republic of China.
The last thing that I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen is that one of the ingredients
of our success over the last 12 months is that we have sought and I think to a large
measure have achieved our goal of retaining contact with the Australian people. We have
not allowed ourselves to get remote from their concerns. We have retained contact with
the Liberal Party Organisation. We have retained contact with the small business
community. We have retained contact with those tens of thousands of traditional blue
collar Labor voters who deserted the Keating government in March of last year and saw in
us a group of men and women who better represented their aspiration and their hopes and
their values as members of the Australian mainstream than any other political force in
Australia. And I count that as one of the proudest achievements and the greatest
achievements of my Government over the last 12 months that we have kept faith with the
mainstream. We haven't allowed ourselves to become a remote elitist party. I mean, one 
of the most constantly battling things to me in the lead up to the last election was the
extent to which many of the commentators and much of the media continued to talk of the
Liberal Party in that rather cliched fashion as being the party of privilege and the party of
elitism. Yet in reality for five or six years before the change of government last March the
new elitists, the new plutocrats of Australian politics, the new people who were remote
from the views of mainstream Australia had in fact become the Australian Labor Party. It
is they who, with their so called big picture, had got remote from the values and the
aspirations of the mainstream of the Australian community. It was our capacity to identify
with those people. It was our capacity to fashion policies that serve the interests and the
values of those people. It was our capacity to understand their basic concern for the
future of their families, their living standards, their basic patriotic decency, their concern
about day-to-day issues, not issues of long term debate and potential divisiveness. It was
all of those things that helped to achieve the result that we achieved on the 2nd of March.
And I think our capacity to do that over the last year has been of enormous benefit.
And in the process of doing that I want to thank all of you for the tremendous support and
loyalty that you have given to me. I want to thank all the members of my Federal
Parliamentary team for their understanding and support and their trust and their
confidence over the past year. In all of my political life I have never taken anything for
granted. I have said before and I'll say it again today that I would never have been leader
of the Parliamentary Liberal Party and certainly not Prime Minister of Australia without
the understanding and support of the Liberal Party Organisation. I am and remain a
creature of the Liberal Party Organisation. I believe in it. I believe in the contribution that
it has made to the building of this country. I believe in the volunteer effort of the men and
women of the Liberal Party who year after year have kept our party together while those
of us who are fortunate enough to have parliamentary office have occasionally enjoyed
some of the limelight of politics. But you are the people, you are the backbone and you
are the stuff of which long term political success has always been made. I remain
conscious of that. I thank you for that and I look forward to a continuation of that
partnership in the years ahead. Thank you very much. 



7 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS AT THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE GARVAN INSTITUTE OF
MEDICAL RESEARCH'S NEW BUILDING
GARVAN INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, SYDNEY
E O E
Well thank you very much Professor Shine, to the Premier of New South Wales, Mr
Bob Carr, your Eminence, to Peter Wills, the Chairman, to Sister Cunliffe, to the other
very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
That was a very warm and touching introduction. I could perhaps complete the
historical record to say that that particular branch of the Howard family to which the
Duke of Norfolk belongs stoically defied through the centuries the English reparation
presided over or inaugurated by Henry VIII. So there's a very, very strong and very,
very interesting link.
But ladies and gentlemen it's a particular delight for me to be here today. My first
contact with the Garvan Institute was when I was Federal Treasurer I can't imagine
why. But I was visited by, I think it was a trio a pretty formidable trio of
Jim de Minks, Charles Curran and the late Keith Cousins who was a very active
member of the Garvan Institute. And they sat in my then Martin Place office in the old
Commonwealth Bank building and explained the work of the Institute and spoke of the
need for ongoing government support at both a State and a Federal level. And over
the years the role of the Garvan Institute has grown enormously and it has taken its
place alongside a number of other very eminent research institutes all around Australia.
When you think of medical research, I don't think it's an Australian exaggeration to
say that given the size of our population our country has done remarkably well.
Because names like the John Curtin School, the Walter and Eliza, the Howard Florey
Institute, the Garvan Institute here in Sydney, all of them have won, over the years,
worldwide fame and worldwide respect. And on a per capita basis, this country has
done remarkably well. We do have world class medical research. We have world class
medical practitioners. And the cutting edge of medical research here in Australia is
something of which all Australians can be inordinately proud.
The Garvan is part of, what I might call, an enclave of compassion and medical
research in the city of Sydney. It's part of the St Vincent's campus which is an area of 
Sydney over the years which has brought unparalleled support and compassion and
care to hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people irrespective of their
background, irrespective of their views on life. The obligation of all of those that have
worked in that campus have been the relief of suffering and the care of fellow human
beings. And the medical research element of it, of which the Garvan Institute
represents, is of course a very crucial component. And even if you are a mere laymen
in matters relating to medical research and medical technology, which I certainly am,
you can't be other than quite excited at the research, the gene research, which is
occurring at the present time and the almost limitless opportunities that it provides for
rolling back some of the great challenges of disease which have afflicted mankind
through the century.
Can I echo the thanks that have been expressed by Mr Wills and by Professor Shine in
recognising the corporate contributions of so many people. And as I look around this
room I can see people who individually and through the corporate organisations that
they direct that have been in the forefront of philanthropic effort in Australia, not only
in medical research, but today we are thanking them for their contribution to medical
research. It's fashionable for some to criticise the apparent obsession of the corporate
sector with the bottom line and with modern theories of economic rationalism and
hard-hearted, bean-counting approaches to economic management. When I look
around this room I can certainly see one or two people who are believers in
appropriate philosophies of economic restraint and economic commonsense. But they
are simultaneously very generous Australians who've put their hands deeply in their
own pockets and have seen to it that the companies they run-have also supported great
organisations such as the Garvan.
I'm delighted to say that in the last budget, despite cutbacks in other areas, the Federal
Government increased expenditure on medical research. And I can assure you,
without pre-empting the particularities of what might be contained in the May budget,
we certainly won't be reversing that decision in the coming budget.
Medical research is something that should always receive the enthusiastic support of
governments. And I acknowledge the contribution of predecessor Labor governments
in this area. This is a bipartisan effort. The Commonwealth Government has been
very pleased to join the New South Wales Government in making a significant
contribution to the $ 46 million cost of establishing this institute in its current form.
And national health and medical research council funding in the current financial year is
something in the order of $ 160 million.
It is something that's very precious to all of us. It touches the quality of our lives. It
will touch the quality of the lives of our families. It will touch the quality of the lives
of our children of generations to come. It's an important national treasure, medical
research. It's something of which all Australians should be proud. And the Garvan
Institute is the finest example of it here in the city of Sydney. I congratulate all of
those that are associated with it. I particularly acknowledge the dedicated commitment
of the Sisters of Charity and of the enormous support that their inspirational work has
drawn from people of all faiths and, indeed, of no faiths in the city of Sydney over long
years of dedication to the relief of human suffering. And I'm delighted to join the
Premier of New South Wales at the opening of this fine new building. Thank you. 



Fax from PRIME MINISTER1
11 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME M[ INISTER.
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE NSW DIVISION OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
FIRST ANNIVERSARY DINNER SYDNEY
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Rod for those very gracious and extremely generous remarks.
To Michael Osborne, the President of the Liberal Party in NSW; to my parliamentary
colleagues Federal and State, and particularly I acknowledge the presence of the
Leader of the NSW Opposition Peter Collins, and could I also acknowledge the
presence of two other people -the recently preselected new Senator from NSW Mahse
Payne who is replacing Bill Heffernan ( sic), and also my predecessor as leader of the
Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, John Hewson.
It is a great night of celebration, you are absolutely right there were numerous
occasions Rod when I thought I'd never make it. There were numerous occasions
when a lot of people in this room thought I'd never make it, and there were many of
those occasions when they had good reason to believe that I would never make it.
And it is one of those occasions when all of us are entitled to take a deal of quiet
satisfaction in what has been achieved over the last year. To be out of office for 13
years between 1983 and 1996 and given the pace of modem life is the equivalent I
guess of having been out of office between 1949 and 1972. And as the first few years
rolled into five or six years and then ultimately doubled into a decade or more, there
must have been many people in this room who wondered whether they would ever live
to see the election of another federal Liberal Government and I do want to say first and
foremost to all of you and my heartfelt thanks for the tremendous loyalty and support
that you have demonstrated over the years in very difficult and often trying and
challenging and frustrating circumstances to the Liberal Party cause.
I think it is very important on an occasion like this that those of us who are lucky
enough to hold elected office, and I do regard it as a privilege and I do regard it as the
greatest privilege that could come the way of any Australian to be Prime Minister of
this magnificent country. It is an occasion, an occasion like tonight to acknowledge on
behalf of all of my colleagues, the tremendous support that you have given. And I also
want to thank those in the room who have worked so hard over the years to raise
resources for the Liberal Party. I've always been very sensitive to their problem. I
Fawx ~ 13/ 84/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 1 
Fax from 13/ 04/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 2
can understand how hard it must have been to raise a dollar for the Liberal Party over
the last few years and there must have been occasions where you wondered whether it
was really worth it. I've always tried to sort of synchronise my own efforts with those,
and although there are limits that one has to draw, I've had on several occasions to tell
Liberal Party f'undraisers, that I can't sell any nights in either the Fraser or Whitlam
bedrooms at the Lodge, but I can nonetheless say that a close conjunction between the
Parliamentary party and the organisation is tremendously important.
But tonight most importantly of all is an occasion to reflect on some of the things that
we have been able to do together over the last year. And I emphasise the word
together because it has been a team effort. I've operated on the principle that a Prime
Mnister is nothing more than a first amongst equals and I want to thank all of my
cabinet and Parliamentary colleagues. There's one person I will single out for special
mention and that is the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the National Party, Tim
Fischer. Tim Fischer is a remarkably loyal and decent deputy. Hie stood up for some
very diflicizlt decisions of the government and I have particularly in mind the decision
we took about uniform gun laws, often in the face of some very difficult circumstances
within his own immediate constituency and I particularly wanted tonight as he wings
his way to Goondiwindi for the National Party conference in QLD, I particularly
wanted to acknowledge the magnificent contribution that Tim has made to the stability
and strength of our government and also the magnificent job that Timi has done as the
Mnister for Trade and Deputy Prime Minister.
There were a number of key things that we talked about in the lead up to the election
campaign and what we've tried to do in the twelve or more months that we have been
in office. I think if you reflect on those weeks and months leading up to the election,
you will remember that we placed a great deal of emphasis on industrial relations
reform. I guess of all things that I've argued for over the last ten or fifteen years, none
has been more prominent than my belief that this country needs a fundamentally
different industrial relations system, and although it is true that because we didn't have
control of the Senate, we weren't able to get through in its entirety all that we would
have wanted in the area of industrial relations and I don't dissemble about that and I
don't pretend. We were able nonetheless to achieve the fundamental changes that we
wanted to make and I believe that over time those changes, particularly in the small
business area, will deliver a different and fundamentally changed industrial relations
system. We've not only got rid of those very silly unfair dismissal laws that were the
bane of the existence of so many men and women in business for so many years under
the former government, but we have finally got rid at a federal level of the last vestiges
of compulsory unionism. We have brought back the rule of law in the area of
secondary boycotts to the ordinary courts of Australia. We have entrenched into the
industrial relations law of Australia the notion that the best arrangement between an
employer and an employee is the arrangement voluntarily forged at the workplace level
based upon their common interest in the enterprise being successful. We have begun
to entrench that in the industrial relations laws of Australia. And as I look back over
the last 13 months I can feel very well satisfied, not complacent, not smug, but satisfied
that we have achieved that essential objective. I talked a lot, also during the election
campaign, about the importance of the family unit in our society, not in any moralising
or sanctimonious sense families come in different forms and different shapes. Not all
fhmilies are happy, not all families are successful, but that doesn't gainsay the fact that 
Fax from it remains the most important and the most cohesive institution within our society, and
it remains the role of' governments, not in a hectoring or moralising sense, but in a
positive sense, to implement policies that support families and most particularly
support families in the choices that they make. And I'm very proud of the fact that we
delivered on time to the very last dollar without any qualification the family tax
initiative that I promised during the election campaign.
We also talked a great deal in the election campaign about the role of small business
within our community. Small business has been politic-ally something of an obsession
of mine and as a lot of you know it is because of my own background, because my
father ran a very small business for a long time and worked very hard and as a result of
that he gave to his four children a far more comfortable start in their lives than had
been his situation many many years ago, and that is very much the story of so many
men and women in Australia and we have tried very hard, without seeing the business
arena as a confrontation between big and small businesses, but recognising that if you
can create a climate of risk taking, if you can create an entrepreneurial climate, an
atmosphere for small business, you are far more likely through invigorating them than
any other approach over time to do something about dragging down our
unemployment levels.
We have set about implementing all and indeed in one area more than what we
promised at the time of the last election for small business. We've not only given them
the provisional tax relief, the industrial relations reform, the relief from the unfair
dismissal laws, but in the area of capital gains tax from the first of July this year, it will
be possible for any man or woman operating a small business in Australia, either solely
through a partnership, through a trust, or through shares in a company to sell that
business and invest up to five million dollars of the proceeds of that business in any
other kind of business, it doesn't have to be a like kind of business, without incurring
any liability at all for capital gains tax. And there will be many of you in this room who
will know that over time that particular reform will draw into the small business
community of Australia, the investment and the commitment and the talents of
increasing numbers of people who will see that particular approach to taxation as being
very attractive.
We also, in the lead up to the election campaign, talked a great deal about the
importance of having a balance between development and the environment. As not
only a participant in Australian politics, but I hope something of an amateur political
scientist and something of an observer of the political scene as well as a participant and
you can in a sense be both, one of the big changes that I have seen over the last
years is the way in which concern for the environment has become a mainstream
political issue. 20 years ago concern for the environment was still looked upon rather
suspiciously by many people who supported the Liberal Party. It was regarded as a
trendy issue, perhaps on occasions an issue that had been taken over by the left wing of
politics and really not something that resonated with the business and free enterprise
principles and commitments of the Liberal Party. But over the years that has changed
and I think concern for the environent has become a mainstream issue for all
generations of Australians, and that is why in the lead up to the election we determined
that we would have very strong environmental credentials. We said that we would sell
one third of Telstra and we would use one billion dollars of the proceeds of that sale to
Faro m13/ 04/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 3 
Fax from establish the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia and I am very happy to say that we
were able to achieve that.
The Natural Heritage Trust of Australia will be established this year, the legislation has
gone through and I'll have the opportunity early next month to launch the Natural
Heritage Trust of Australia appropriately enough in the Blue Mountains just west of
Sydney in the electorate of Macquarie, which was one of the electorates won by the
Liberal Party from the Labor Party at the last election. And what we have been able to
do in thi s area I believe, and it is very important to the long term strength and health of
the Liberal Party is that we have been able to disabuse our critics of the notion that we
are disinterested in environmental protection, but we've been able to do it in a way that
resonates with our business and our other obligations and trying to have a balance
between the environment and business concerns is very very important to the future
development of Australia,
Now, ladies and gentlemen, they are just some of the things that I recall that we talked
loudly and strongly about in the lead up to the election campaign. I don't intend to
weary you with a long and detailed list but they are a sample of the things that we
regarded as important and examples of the things that we have remained true to in the
thirteen months that we have been in government. But a government is more than just
a series of promises kept or programmes delivered-A government is very much about
a style and an approach and an attitude and one of the most important things that I
have endeavoured to do, I don't know whether it has been entirely successfiul, I hope it
has, but I'll continue to try and do it, and that is to try and restore a greater sense of
civility in political life in Australia. I think for a long time we were going down the
path of losing all civility in public life and in politics in Australia and I do have to say
that nothing disillusions the young in our community more than a sense that public life
lacks any sense of civility and any sense of if' you like, call it in old-fashioned words,
good manners and a proper respect for the other pers on's point of view. And the
remark that I am about to make I hope nobody thinks for a moment that after being
Prime Minister for 13 months that I've gone soft or in any way lost my commitment to
the cause of the Liberal Party, but one of the things that I feel pleased about that I have
been able to do over the last 13 months is to preserve a capacity when it is ini the
national interest to do so to have a rational discussion with the Leader of the
Opposition. I think it is important.... ( applause)... and one example that I can recall
recently, we found ourselves sitting at the same table at a dinner in Melbourne to mark
the 10th anniversary of the establishment of Care Australia, and it was a the height of
the difficulties in Papua New Guinea and we were able to for a period of time to have a
serious discussion about the problems that that particular crisis presented for Australia.
Now, as I say that is not an indication that the rules of politics have changed, it is not
an indication that I regarded the advice that I received as being superior from the views
that I had formed, but I hope it is the role always of a Prime Minister in a country such
as Australia to recognise that however emphatic a victory may have been it remains the
case that something between 40 45% of the Australian community voted for the
alternative. And I2th ink Prime Ministers and leaders who lose sight of that lose touch
with the reality of life in Australian politics. They deserve the description of arrogant,
they deserve the description of being out of touch, they deserve the description of
Fa rom13/ 04/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 4 
Fax from~ 13/ 64/ 97 12: 25 Pg:
elitism which is on past occasions in relation to others and I hope not about in the
future myself; or any members of the Liberal Party, those allegations that will be made.
When I reflect on the events of the past year, I reflect as I said earlier with enormous
pride in the great degree of loyalty and the great degree of strength and support that I
have received from my colleagues from the business community and from the Party
organisation. Tonight does comprise quite understandably a very large number of men
and women from the business community here in Sydney. I value the links that I have
with the business community of Sydney. I value the links that I have with the business
community all around Auistralia. We are not, as the Liberal Party, we are not unlike
our opponents, we are not beholden to any one section of the Australian community.
We are not owned by the trade union movement, we are not owned by the business
community either large or small, we are not owned by individual pressure groups, but
we do have a broad coincidence of views with the business community. The values
and the priorities of the business community are similar to the values and the priorities
of the Liberal Party. We won't always agree. Over the past year, some of you have
had occasion to criticise us on some issues and that is how it should occur in a
democracy, and it is foolish even at a gathering like this where everybody thinks in
such positive terms and reflects with such gratitude on the past year, it is natural that
people should be like that, nonetheless I acknowledge that there are things that over
the last year we have done that you would have wished we hadn't done.
I'd be deluding myself for example if I didn't acknowledge there'd be one or two
people in this room who disagreed with our decision, for example, to impose that
superannuation Surcharge. I'm not wrong I understand that, and I think it is
important that I acknowledge that, I think it is important that I know by the reaction
that you really expected me to acknowledge it, and also for me to say that I know that
decisions like that displease people. I hope you understand that in putting together last
year's budget we felt that one of the measures which would give to it within the
broader Australian community a feeling that the pain had been shared around equally
within the community, was that particular measure. I know it is not popular, I
acknowledge that, but I ask you to accept and to understand that within the broader
context that I have just described that that particular decision was needed in order to
convey that overall sense of fairness and that overall sense of balance.
I've spoken, ladiet and gentlemen, very much of what has happened over the last year.
We have before us at the present time, several issues of a degree of complexity and an
order of difficulty that few governments in Australia have faced for a long time. I can't
think of an issue which any government in Australia in recent years has faced which is
a complicated as the difficulties thrown up by the decision of the Nigh Court of
Australia in the Wik case. If I can just say for a moment that this particular issue
confronts the government and the Australian community with a need to take a choice
that will respect two apparently conflicting objectives. One of those is to respect
profoundly the desire I think of most Australians to see justice done to the original
inhabitants of this country. I have little doubt that most Australians believe as is the
cowe that as a group the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people of Australia
remain the most underprivileged section of the Australian community as a group. I
equally have little doubt that many Australians are angry and frustrated that the very
large amounts of money which have been committed towards relieving that 
Fax from disadvantage appear to have achieved so little, and they have questioned the priorities
and approaches which have been involved in the provision of that money. And they
ask questions about whether the methodology which has been employed in the past is
really the appropriate methodology to be employed in the future. And the negative
symbolism of such issues as that disgraceful saga over the Hindrnarsh Bridge in South
Australia, where believe it or not because of a vote in the Senate only a few weeks
ago, we faced the real possibility of yet another inquiry because of the requirements of
the law passed by the former government. I can't estimate and I don't think any of the
observers of this scene can estimate the damage that has been done within the attitude
of the general Australian community to the cause of the genuine relief of the
disadvantage of Australian Aborigines as such things as the Hindiuarsh B~ ridge. It
represents a disgraceful symbol of political correctness doing its worst in the area of
indigenous affairs in Australia. But on the other hand, the Wik decision has presented
or the pastoralists and the miners of Australia an intolerable and unacceptable level of
instability and uncertainty. The notion that the occupation and ownership of land
which has often been in a family for several generations, might with the stroke a pen,
even of such as imminent body as the Hi1gh Court of Australia be rendered uncertain
and under a cloud is something that quite understandably has produced a wave of
instability, concern and even anger throughout the rural community of Australia and it
is the responsibility of my government and the responsibility of my Cabinet and the
Parliament within the very near future to produce a response to that particular decision
that respects the desire of the Australian community to do justice by the Aboriginal
people of this country, but also gives to our pastoralists, to the mining industry and to
other people affected, a proper measure of security and predictability, because I can
think of few scenarios involving a greater nightmare than the possibility that virtually
block by block over years to come, litigation will be waged over ownership of
something over 50% of the land mass of Australia and that according to some views of
the implications of the Wik decision is the kind of difficulty that we face. That
particular decision will challenge all of the sense of justce and the sense of
commitment to fair outcomes that we can as a government and as a Party muster.
Ladies and gentlemen on a personal note, of course tonight is a night of personal
celebration and personal satisfaction but it is a night that does very much belong to
people other than to me. I would never have been leader of the Liberal Party and I
certainly would never have been Prime Minister of Australia had it not been for the
Liberal Party organisation. It is common when you get elected to a position like Prime
Minister of Australia for people to say nice things about you and you appreciate them,
for them to compliment you on what you've done. It's common for people to speak of
the qualities that you may or may not have. But as somebody who has committed all
of his adult life to the Liberal Party cause through thick and thin, somebody who has
spent many years in the Liberal Party organisation, I do owe an enormous debt of
gratitude to a very large number of people who are in this room. People who in a
sense they represent who helped me on earlier occasions, And the sense of
comradeship and the sense of teamwork that I have always found in the Liberal Party,
even in its more diffcult times and even when there have been occasions when perhaps
I thought it hasn't made the right decisions in relation to both policy and personnel, has
been one of the sustaining things of my adult life. Fa om13/ 04/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 6 
Fax from It has been an enormous privilege to lead the Liberal Party and even more so over the
last thirteen months to be the Prime Minister of Australia. There are many happy
recollections I have of the last 13 months, but I think probably the one that I have
found the most enduring is the fact that when Janette and I and our family again
journeyed to Hawks Nest at the beginning of this year, determined to repeat an annual
pattern of the last fifteen or sixteen years, and I went walking along the beach early in
the morning and I seem to see the same faces and I seem to receive most of the same
greetings that I had received on earlier occasions and they were very friendly
greetings, most of them. But I am pleased to report that one or two of them were
most unfriendly and it was that sort of sense of reality and a reminder that there's
something about this country which enables that sort of interrelation between people
and Prime Minister that you simply wouldn't receive in any other society.
I said when 1 was interviewed for an ABC programme before the election when I was
asked the question " How did I want Australia to be in the Year 2000?" and I coined a
phrase which like other politicians has hung around my neck. Ben Chifley had ' the
light on the hill'; Howard McMillan had ' the winds of change', and ' you have never
had it so good'; Malcolm Fraser had ' life was not meant to be easy'; and I coined the
expression that I wanted Australians to feel ' relaxed and comfortable' about
themselves. I really did mean it, and what I meant by that was very much that I think
this is a country that ought to be relaxed and comfortable in the sense that what it has
achieved since its existence began has been immense by comparison with other nations.
The degree of social justice in this country. The degree of egalitarianism still, although
it is not as great sadly as it once used to be, and the respect in which the country is
held in other parts of the world and that was driven home to me very strongly during
my recent visit to China, when I realised what immense advantages Australia brought
in a relationship with a country of that size. We bring with us the gifts of being part of
western civilisation which we clearly are, but we don't bring as others might, some of
the disadvantages of a previous history which has not been as positive in our relations
with China as other countries and that experience of only a week or ten days ago, was
a reminder again of the tremendous potential and the tremendous opportunities that
this country has.
So when I talk about being relaxed and comfortable, I talk about a country that can
feel proud of what it has achieved although recognising that there were and remain
blemishes, A country which is confident of its current identity, and a country which is
also positive that whatever formal shape that identity may take in the future and that in
our appropriate style we can debate those issues as we will increasingly as we draw
towards the constitutional convention and we'll debate them in a tolerant harmonious
respectfuli fashion. We'll recognise that there are many amongst us who believe that
the current constitutional arrangements remain very effective and very relevant. There
will also be many amongst us who have another view and one of the great strengths of
the Liberal Party over the last year in government is that it has been able to manage
some of these issues and encompass within our ranks people who have different views
on issues of that kind without those differences becoming matters of public discord and
matters of public division.
So they were the sort of things that I had in mind when I spoke 14 months ago of
Australians feeling relaxed and comfortable. It wasn't the clarion call of a complacent
Fa om13/ 84/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 7 
Fax from person. It was rather som~ ebody who was endeavouring to describe in his own
language what he sees as some of the enduring and distinctive characteristics of being
and Australian.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I again thank all of you for tonight. Can I thank all of you
for the tremendous financial and other support that you have given to our Party over a
long period of time. Can I especially thank my wife Janette who is with me tonight and
all of the other people who have played such a very important and close personal role
in my life over the last year. It has been a year of tremendous achievement, a year of
great satisfaction but most importantly and I am grateftul for Rod having said it, most
impor-tantly we have endeavoured to conduct it in a way that we have laid a solid
foundation for I hope to be many years into the future. We waited long years in
opposition, they were very frustrating, they were very demanding, they were very
debilitating and it made the achievement of office all the greater and all the better and
all the more to be savoured and all the more to be used for the greater betterment and
for the good of all of the Australian people. I thank all of you very much for your
support, your loyalty, your understanding and you commitment to. our common future.
Thank you. Fafrrt13/ 04/ 97 12: 25 Pg: 8 



Fax from15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 1
PRIME MINISTER
April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF TrM PRIE MINISTER
THE RON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO LIBERAL PARTY DIVISION LUNCHEON
BRISBANE CONVENTION CENTRE
Well, thanks Bob-It's great to be in Queensland. You shouldn't be so shy. But Bob, to
you aad to your wifc and all the other members of the Queensland Division, can I say that
I always do enjoy coming to Brisbane. I came to Brisbane frequently in the various other
&amp; uses I've had in politics and I've enjoyed coming to Queensland and to Brisbane since
becomeing Prime Minister. And today is the-fulfilment of yet another Coalition promise
and that was to take the Cabinet of Australia away from Canberra Sydncy and
Mclboune. And to take the Cabinet of Australia around Australia, and thereby to chive
home the point that we were elected to govern for all of the Australian people and not just
for the people who dwell in Canberra or Sydney or Melbourne. I can assure you that over
the re= two years and beyond there will be regular Cabinet meetings in the mainland
capitals of Australia and also regular Cabinet meetings in major provincial ccntres.
We've already haed one or two provincial Cabinet meetings and there will be more to
come over the cours of the next two years. And these exerises are not token exerrcises
they arc a demonstration of the genuine commitment by the government to take the
deliberations and the processes of government around the couutry. There is not the
slightest doubt in my rnind that the more time we spend on the road, the more time we
spend out of the Federal capital, the more timne we spend out of the two major
metropolises of Australia, t greater will be our wuderstanding and the beter will be our
knowledge of what the mainatreamn of the community really wants.
Queensland of cour~ se was a marvelous Stae fbT us polirleally at the last election. The
two party prefettd vote the Coalition received in March of Last yeAr in the State of
Qeensland has not been beted inany State in a federul ceecion sin= e Federation. And
I wan to thank my colleaguts from Queensland. Many of them arc heme today, and your
efforts were not in " aim You have sent some very energtic, very artciodae, very
vigorous and very plain speakng people from Qfeensand. Nothing shy about them in
the party room I can assure you. They always tell you what you're not doing for
Queenad. A eharactezistie to which I have becom accustomed over the years froln 
Fax from 15/ 84/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 2
people in the parliamentary parr and also in the oxganisation. But that is how it should
be. Because Queensland is different, and Queensland bas particular characteristics.
Queensland has a partirular con~ tribution to make to the future of our nation. And whilst
and foremaost we are all united as Austrolians in the pursuit of common goals, as you
go around our country you must accept and understand some of the regional variations
and differencecs. And I understand the particular challenges, I know that the recestsion in
some rects4 affectcd Queensland at a different time than it did the reat of Australia. I
know the impact of the housing downturn on the Queensland economy of a few years
ago. An I also know the importance of resolving the uncertainty surrounding Native
Title, something to which I will come to in a moment.
But! I thank your President for the comments that he made about some of the particular
challenges facing the Government. It is true that small business in Australia has been.
doing it very hard over the last few years. I am very conscious of that. Small business
was badly mauled by the high interest rates of the recession. And small business paid
very heavily far the stupid. intrusive industrial relations policies of the former
government. And I'm delighted that we were able to get our industrial relations
Legislation through. And in case somebody mnissed it, can. I remind you that in the small
business package I announced a few weeks ago, we went even further than we had gone
in the industrial relations bill in the area of unfair dismissals. And I said that the federal
law would be amended so that any small business in Australia employing fewer than
people, and under the existing law that is as far as we can go at the moment, would be
free of any unfair dismissal restriction s of any kind in relation to any person employed for
a lesser period than 12 months. In other words, any small firm under a federal award
anywhere in Australia could take an employee on on 12 months probation, and if it
doesn't work out that person, without any let ot hindrance could be let go. Now that
particular reform, will be of enormous benefit to small business if it is extended not only
to business operating under federal awards but also to businesses under State: awards.
And I've already had a personal discussion with the Queensland Minister for Industrial
Rebmtons, Santo Santoro, who is with us today and I know he shares my desire to extend
that law to firms operating under Queensland law and I know that everybody in this room
will encourage him to do so.
I know tha there are some in the community who say that he should have gone further in
some areas, and I know that there arm some in the community who have criticised the
pace of reform. and change over the Lagt 12 months, arnd I want to say a few words about
that. I've been in politics a very long time. I'm a realist. And I understand that the
euphoria of a huge election victory has to be matched by performance. You can't live by
rhetoric alone in politics, you've got to deliver. And I want to go back over the last 12
months fbr a moment or two and remind you of what has been done in those ares where
we've promised action. We did prondse ourselves and promise the Australian
community that we would change our outdated industrial relatiorw legislation. Now we
wcere't able to go quite as far as we wianted to go because we didn't have the numbers in
the Senate. And it's an unfoitumate problem with our electoral system that because we
have as a result of changes made in 1923, because we have a padamnr a Senote tam 2 
Fax from 15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 3
retires an even number of senators every three years, it's virtually mtathemnaficaly
impoisible to get a majority in the Senac in a half Senate election. So we've had to rely
on the support of minor parties and independents to get our legislation through. And as a
result of the very skilful negotiations of Peter Reith we were able to get substantially all
of our industrial relations legislation through. But it was six or nine months later thanz we
would have liked and it is only now starting to come into operation. And it will be some
time before the benefits of that arm really enjoyed and really understood and realised.
And I ask people to accept and to understand that.
We promised action in relation to small business and in trmsis of the actual commitments
we made to small business it is fair to say that we have delivered beyond the
comxniments we muade. I'm not saying that everybody is feeling the benefit. And I'm
not saying that every small business in Australia has reason at the present time to think
it's living in good conditions, because clearly it do=* nt. But lets take an area such as
capital gains tax. We promised some rail over relief for capital gains. From the first of
July any small business operator anywhere in Australia will be able to sell a small
business and to invest the proceeds of that sale up to an amount of $ 5 Million in any
busincss, not a business of a like kinid, in other words you can go from a newsagency into
a computer software business, and you'll be able to invest up to $ 5 million without
having any liability at all or capital gains tax Now that represents, ladies and gentlemen,
that does represent us having taken that decision beyond what we promised at dhe time of
the last election. We have also implemetnted most of the Bell Committee
recommendations in relation to red tape. We have introduced remedial measures in
relation to fringe benefits tax. If you have firinge benefits of less than $ 5,000 a year, then
you are no longer required to keep records providing you keep paying the amount of
fringe benefits tax levied on those finge benefits. We have also made some particular
exemptions in relation to car parking and taxi travel. We have also simplified the
procedures for small business dcaliag with governments. We implemented our
commitruents irt relation to provisional tax relief. I mention these things ladies and
gentlemr-n to remind you of what has been done, but also its a token of our continued
determination to bring out and effect reforms that are important to small business.
And we want to improve the climate for small busines for two reasons. Firs and
foremost because it is the heart and soul of the Liberal ethic, indeed of the National Party
ethic, to help and promote smoall business in the Australian community. SmaLl business is
the engine room of economic growth. And as I travelled throughout China recently I was
riot only reminded of the great opportunities that exist for large Australian companies in
that huge nation, but I was also reminded of the opportunities for = mUl business. Azd the
oppotnnities for niche exporters in Australia into the Asia-Pacific region are immne
ond they are growing all t tizne. And the. communicatons revolution has empowered
smallbusiness not only in Australia, but toughout the world, irna way that you wooldn't
havw thought possible a few years ago. So we have a strong belie in the c= Wka
imprtaceand role of small business iu our coimmity. We also have an unshakeable
belief tha the only way in which we are going to achieve a lasting reduction in 
Fax from 15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 4
unemployment, particularly amongst the young, is to get small business going far more
actively and energetically thin it is at present.
So I x-ould say ladies and gentlemen, yes I know that small business is stiU doing it
tough. I know the burden small bu. siness carres. You will never hear pass my lips
remarks such as " what = i you going on about? You've never had it so good". As was
the siock response of my predecessor when small business men and women complained.
I lmow you've had it Yough, I understand that. We have implemented our commitments.
We continue to have our eyes fixed on fur-ther measures to help anid improve the climate
for small business.
And, Crs not only in thc economic area that we have delivered very strongly, we've also of
course delivered very strongly in areas such as the environxnent. Fortunately we were
able to scur the Senate's support for the one-third sale of Telsrra. I find it strange that
peopic still criticise the fact that we worked with the independents to get the Teistra
legislation through the Parliament. There was nothing dishonourable about that. We had
actually told the Australian people before the election what we were doing in relation to
Teistra. We had a mandate to sell one-third of Teistra. And we had a mandate to use a
billon dollars of the proceeds of that sale to establish the Natural Heritage Trust And I
find This suggestion in areas of the press and from our political opponents that in some
way it was sort of wr-ong to actually deliver through the Parliament, with the support of
tho numbers ia the Parliament what you actually promised the Australian people to do, a
very curious piece of political analysis. And 1 Eun very proud of the fact tbat come the
next clction I will be able to say on behalf of the Liberal and National Parties of
Australia, that we have established the largest capital fund for investment in the
environmental fututo of this country that any government has established since the end of
World War 11. And I won't be reluctant to tell the Australian community at the time of
the election that we established that fund for the benefit of the Australian envitrnent in
the teeth of ferocious opposition from both the Australiani Labor P~ arty and the Australian
Democrats. But it is true and it should never be forgott, that we did inherit a very large deficit, a
very large budget deficit. On an underlying basis it was revealed a few months ago that
the true deficit that we inherited was in the order of S10-l 11 billion.-Now people can say
that incoming governments always say that they inherit deficits. Whether that is the case
or noL, nothing can alter the fact that we did have that enormous fiscal challenge. And as
a result of the decisions thad were takeen in the flrnt budget that Peter Costello brought
down and delivered with such skil in Augus of last yeaw, we have broken the back of the
fiscal challenge that we inherited in March of Last year. That doesn't mean that this
yer'sudget is going tobe ey, oris going tobe slack. We stilhavea tough task
ahead of But we broke the back of the fiscal challenge last year as a resul of the
measu that we were able to take and as a direct consequence of that we created the
climate for lower interst ratms 
Fax from 15/ 64/ 97 17: 28 Pg:
There have been imnprovements on the interest rate front. I know they haven't flowed
through as well to the small business sector as they have in the housing sector and there's
a very good reason for that. There's mome competition in the housing sector. And when
the Wallis Committee report was released last week we made it very plain that we wanted
more competition in the banking industry. And the thrust of that report is towards the
thru~ st of the goverrnent policy is towards more compctition. And certainly both Peter
andi I have rnedc it clear to the trading banks of Australia that we want to sce morc
competition and a bente deal for the small businesses of Australia from the Australian
banking system.
I have said to many small business men and women, thae if you have the sort of
conditions of competition in the small business lending area that organisations like
Aussie Home Loans and RAM have provided for the banks in the housing area, you
would have a cheaper flow of funds into the small business commaunity th= at the present
trme. And I think it's very important that be said. So the fiscal challenge this year,
although significant, will not be as great as it was last yewr. But providing a reduced
budget deficit, continuing to provide fiscal consolidation, all of that buids international
confidence in Australia. All of that builds the right climakte for lower inflation and lower
interest rates. And ever one of you in business in this room know damn well that your
best friends are really lower interest rates, stable economic conditions, and economic
predictability. And the first responsibility of any government that really believes in the
business community, really believes in the private sector, is to provide those conditions.
In his remnarks thr. State President quite properly referred to the uncertainty over Native
Title. Caa I say to you that that issue is of immense concern to me and to my
Government. I have no problem with the coucept of Native Title. I had no particular
problem with the decision of the High Court of Australia in the Mabo decision-I bad a
lot of problems with the Native Title Act that was enacted by the Kceating Government
with the support of the Australian Democrats and the Australian Greens.
Arid for the sake of the record may I remind you that in 1993 the Liberal and National
parties voted against the present Nrauive Title Act, so when quite correctly you rail against
the failure of the Native Title Act to give certainty. when you throw up your hands in
despair about the disgraceful saga of Century Zinc, which has taken an inordinaiely long
time-, when many of you would have read with dismay the letter written by the former
Governor General and a former leader of the Australian Labor Party Mr Hayden, to the
Queensland Prcmier, you will wionder why it was tWa an Austwaian Parliament should
ever have enacted such a confused law, I ask you to remember that th~ e wasn't one
person in the Libera and National party who voted for the law in that form. Now, I want
to make tha clear bcause occasionally in the heat of thes orts of debates it is forgotten,
that the law in its present form, was something that we Mnherted anid it was acted in the
face of our fierce criticism and opposition not to the principle of Native Title butt to the
way in which the Keating Goverment implementd tha pmniple and the way in which
the Keating Govenrnmnt gave to Native Title holders rights of veto which are not
available to title holders of any other description under the land law of Australia. 
Fax from 15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 6
That is why in the lead up to the lat election I said that we were going to make changes
to the Notive Title Act. Now, I operated as most people in Australia did in the belief that
the grat of a valid pastoral Icase would extinguish Native Title, because That was
contained in the recitals to the Nattve Title Ac: t. It was contained in the former Prime
Mini'sters second reading speech, it was acknowledged by leaders of the Aboriginal
coinmuniry and it was acknowledged by leadens of other organisations, and I have to say
iliaE it vas quite surprising to me that the High Court in the Wik Case found otherwvise.
And on that point can I say very simply that there see= s to be a very confuised view in the
Australian commuunity at the present time in the minds of some about the respectivc role
of the judiciary and the role of the legislature and the executive. I am a staunch believer
in the separation of powers. I believe in the rule of law, and as a citizen of Australia I am
as subject to that rule of law as any other man or worman. 1 believe in judicial
indiependence. I believe in the security of tenure of judges appointed to courts within
Australia, and I accept that it is the role and the right of the judges of Australia to
interpret the law of Australia as it presently stands. But I equally assert the undoubted,
unqualified, unatrbiguous rights of the Parliaments of Australia to alter the law of
Australia if they think that is in the national interest.
I mention, that ladies and gentlemenc because of same strange interpretations that have
been placed by sections of the media on the declaration made by the judges yesterday.
There has never been anything wrong in any citizen of Australia inl disagreeing with or
criticising a judgment of a court. That has happened for time immemorial, it has always
happened under the anglo-Aiustralian legal system and it always ought to happen. But
wbAt is wrong of course if far parliament or the executive to try and influence particular
decisions or to unreasonably or improperly attack the integrity of judges or the
applicarion of those judges to the task before them arnd there's certainly been no
suggestion by my Government and there never will be that any such criticism is
warranted. I respect the separation of powers but I will always assert the role and the
right of both the executive and the legislature.
But that my friends is a bit of a diversion, but a n~ ecesary one from what I was saying
about Wik. I know it is a difficult issue and when the decision was brought down in
December of this year, I studied it like everybody else and I convened a meeting of all the
Premiers of Australia, including my friend arid colleague Rob Borbidge, the Premier of
Queensland. and I said to the Preiierg that I had two goals that I would work towards
achieving them I hoped by the common agreement of all parties anid those two goals
ware to respec the concept of Native Title but to deliver to the pastoralists of Australia
and the atining industry of Australia, a degre of predictability iod certinty to which I
believe thy are entlid And they remain my goals and I am workting very hard to
achieve them. My patience is not endless, it is nor inexhustble. I bowe spent a lot of
time already in discussions with the various patties and I am talking to my Cabinet
colleapme about the issu at tis very moment as we meet here in Queensland. I will go 
Fax fromv 15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 7
on trying to find common ground if that is possible, but if at the enid of the day it is not
possible, then we w. ill decide on a particular covaxse of action.
Buat I want to make it very clear to the farmers of Austalia as f've said in the past, I won't
let you down. I've made it very clear ini the past that I respect the contribution of the
farners a-ad the pastoraists of ths country. I know the diffcult timnes that They have been
through. I know the burden, they've had to catty, I know the contribution that they make
to the grogt export earnings of this nation of ours and I can certainly assure them that I am
not going to sell them short, I'm not going to sell them out, I'm not going to let them
down. And I know that they and you would hope that if it is possible to find a common
ground. if it is possible to find an accommodation of all parties behind a practical
response to the this challenge, this unexpected challenge thrown up by a decision which I
didn't expect anid I don't think anyone else expected then I think all of you would agree
that it is my responsibility as Prime Minister, my responsibility in relation to all of the
Australian people to go that extra yard in order to try and see if we can reach that
commhlon grounld. I don't think it is going to be very easy. I have no false illusions but it
is my responsibility to all of the Australian people to cndeavour to do that.
Can I just say one other thing ladies and gentlemen, and that is that one of the many
things tha I committed myself to when I became Prime Minister in March of last year
was to remadn in touch with the Australian people, to not imnagine that I had been elected
Prime Minister because of some sort of inspired belief on behalf of the mnajory of the
Australian people that uniquely I had all of the answers and that nobody else had a
legitimate alterative point of view. And what I've tried to do over the iast year is to
remain in touch with the Australian people is to listen to them and in particular I've tred
very hard to keep in touch with the business commnunity of Austraiai
The Liberal Party is an independent party, the National Party is an independent party-
Neither of the Coalition parties is owned by any section of the Australian community.
The Labor Party is owned by the trade union movement and the politicaly correct
chattering classes. I don't know who owns the Austaliian Democrats but I can assure you
that we are not owned by anybody. We might have close links with the business
community but from time to time we do things that some people in the business
community don't like. I know that. I mean, I think there may be one or two people in
this room who've been mildly critical of the decision we took in the budget last year
about the superannuation surcharge. N'ow, I'm sorry about that but I think it is better for
me o mention it and it is better for me to acknowledge the fact that I am aware: char you
are unhappy about it and to epan briefly why we did it then to sort of pretend that I amn
not aware that you arc aware that you arm unhappy with it, and that is why I've raised it.
Now we brought dow a budget las yea that got nine-and-a-half out of ten in the
Australian commuznity for fairnes anid balance ad one of the number of reasons why it
got nine-and-a-half out of ten in the community for fairmes and balm=~ was that they
thought we had invited all sections of the Australian commnunity to make a bit of a
conribution to eclving the problem and I'd like you to see that particula decision in that 
Fax from15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 8
context. I'd like you to see it as not a decision that we enjoyed taking but a decision we
believ-. d ought to have been taken in the interests of balance and fairness, and I've had a
lot of criticism of it and nonie of that criticism Wny~ e t indicated to me a superior way of
irnplernenting the decision without having some deleterious impact an the revenue that is
to be gathered from that particular decision.
I wanted to mention that because I know there's been some criticism and because I
waned you to 1now tha I'm a person who listens to and recives and is willing to
respond to criticism and I wanted you to understand the context of fairness in which that
particul1ar decision was taken in which I would like it to be judged. But I have
enaeavourcd, and all of my colleagues have enideavoured to keep contiact -with the
business community, rnot because of any sense of direct obligation but because our goals
are essentially your goals, despite the fact that we are a free standing independent
political movement reprumenting all Australians, we are at heat people who believe in the
private enterprise system.
We do believe in a smaller Governmtent sector, we believe in a strong Government sector,
doing the things Governments ought to do like having a more efficient defence force and
having a defence force that spends more money on training and weaponry and getting
ready in case they arc needed than on bureaucrats in Canberra. We are a Goverrnent that
believes strongly in small business, we are a Government that believes very strongly in
private effort and of course very passionately in the rights of private property ownership
for all Ausiralians irrespective of their position in life. So I have tried over the tast year
to retain thud contact with the business community of AustzmIa and particularly of course
with the business community here in Brisbane and I want to say thW the links through the
Party organisation are very important. I think we have made a good start I think in
many areas we have delivered beyond what we said. I know in some areas people might
have wanted us to have gone further and a bit faster. Can I assure you that none of us has
lost the zeal or the commitment or the enthusiasmn for further reformis. I thinok good
Governent is about providing a sense of reassurance; a sanme of purpose. a sense of
hope; from time to time providing a few surprises, surprises of the pleasant variety rather
than the unpleasant variety and all the time remindig itself that its obligation is not to
govern for the self interest of individual members of Parliament but to govern for the
greater good for the Australian comnity.
We had a slogan at the last electon called ' For all of Us' and I have endeavoured to
govern for all of us. We are a group of men and women who worry very much about tU
views of mainstrem Australia. We don't believ that Govarments' sbould ignore
minorities but we strongly believe that Governments. shouldn't be driven by minorities
and it has been very much our conc= r and our goal to govern fbi the minstreamn of te
Australian cornmunity.
I want to say thak you to 0l of you for the support that you have given to the Pmry
particularly during its difficult yewr out of office both federally and Stae. The fiends
you have when you ame out of office are the tru friencs. I want to dvink you fo~ r the 
FaxF an15/ 04/ 97 17: 28 Pg: 9
support that you've continued to give us, your support for bring here today and the role
all of you played in the magnificent Coalition win in March of last year here in
Queensland, and finally I want to say to you that I'll keep faith, I'll keep couch. I'll listen,
I'll respond to criticism, I1T occasionally disagree with you as you will with me,. but you
will always know tha fundamentally the goals and aspirations you have about your
businesses and about your families and about the filare of your STat and the future of
our nation are goals that we overwhelmingly share very much in common with you.
Thank you. 



( 7'
April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN SCOUT MOVEMENT
LAUNCH OF NEW NATIONAL LOGO
E O E
Thank you very much Chief Commissioner and all scouts and guides and rovers and
venturers and everybody. It is a great privilege for me to be associated with the launch of
what is a modern Australian version of a traditional emblem that has worldwide
recognition and world wide acclaim. What I like about it is that you know instincitively
what it is but it has an Australian flavour about it which perhaps it didn't have before.
And as the commissioner said it reminds us of the twin affections of members of the scouts
and that is the commitment to a great world wide movement and also a commitment to
Australia. The Scouts over the years have done tremendous work in nurturing and
developing and encouraging and inspiring young Australians and in fact young people all
over the world. It is one of the greatest young people's organisations that has ever been
devised and it owes a lot to its founder Baden Powell and it of course owes a lot to people
like Commissioner Wells and others who have devoted their lives to the cause of
developing a spirit of self esteem and commitment and care for the environment and care
for others amongst the members of the scouts. And I'm delighted although a little
belatedly though I'm sorry, because of other things, to be associated with this and I want
to thank you for the privelege of being here and I want to thank the scout movement and
all aspects of it for the contribution that its made to Australia and the contribution that its
made to character building amonst young people. 
I like the new logo. I think it is distinctively Australian yet it also unmistakeably tells you
that the Scouts of Australia are part of a world wide scouting movement. Congratulations
and all good wishes for the scouts of Australia in the years ahead. 



16 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO LILLEY COMMUNITY LUNCHEON
E O E
Well thank you very much Elizabeth the feeling is mutual. Can I say that on the second
of March of last year there were a lot of wonderful victories and there were a lot of
individual results that gave a special pleasure. A few of us in Sydney got a special
pleasure when Robert Tickner suffered a 12% swing in Hughes, but gee a lot of us got
enormous pleasure when Wayne Swan got dumped too.
He was meant to be that sort of top gun you beaut whiz bang campaign strategist and the
local Liberal Party organisation in Lilley have demonstrated the quality and strength of a
good grass roots campaign, and the 7% swing that Elizabeth and you together achieved on
the second of March last year was one of those terrific result, and Elizabeth has done a
fantastically energetic job. She is a true citizen of the electorate that she represents in the
national parliament. She is a very energetic pursuer of things that matter so far as the
electorate of Lilley is concerned and she is also a very very effective member of the much
enlarged Federal Parliamentary Liberal and National Party contingent that has come out of
Queensland as a result of the last election.
But that of course is very pleasant history, but nonetheless political history. We won in
March of last year, we had a great victory. Our political responsibility as Liberals is to
retain the support and the esteem that we enjoyed in March of last year and the broad
responsibility of the Government is to govern in the interests of all of the Australian
community. And governing in the interests of all of the Australian community means
attending to such things as trying to find a workable solution to the Native Title mess that
we have inherited from the Labor Government and which has been made worse by an
impractical decision of the High Court of Australia. It also involves continuing to
implement measures that provide greater incentives for small business and it also includes
as I recognise this morning a continued concern for the environment of Australia and a
continued implementation of policies that will benefit the environment throughout the 
entire nation. But at a local micro level, it also involves recognising the particular
problems of this electorate and I know that today Elizabeth has announced federal funding
of $ 435 000 that is going to pay for the improvement of three road accident black spots in
Lutwyche, Bracken and Geebung and I think I pronounced all of those absolutely
correctly. It is always one of the hazards of a travelling Prime Minister. There are two
hazards you pronounce the local names wrong, or you forget the name of the local
candidate. Now that will never happen with Elizabeth she is absolutely unforgettable,
but there are many leaders and some Prime Ministers, other Prime Ministers I should say,
in the past who have sort of fallen into that.
But we've got $ 66 000 for the street closure at Lutwyche Road, at Stoneleigh and Trunro
Streets at a cost of $ 66 000; 1 new traffic signals with turn arrows at the intersection of
Bracken Ridge Road and Bracken Street, Bracken that's $ 157 000, and new traffic
signals with turn arrows at Newman Street and Railway Parade, Geebung $ 212 000. So
don't say we ignore the local grass roots issues. And Elizabeth has made an
announcement about that today.
But ladies and gentlemen I'm here to speak to you very very briefly today as part of two
day visit to Queensland, centred originally around a Cabinet meeting that we had in
Brisbane yesterday. We are going to follow this habit of taking the Cabinet around
Australia. We are not going to Just sit ourselves down in Canberra and expect everybody
to come to us, we are going to progressively come to you and the whole purpose of a
government that tries to represent all of the Australian community ought to be seen
travelling around Australia. And we've had a number of Cabinet meetings in Sydney,
we've had a couple in Melbourne, we've had one in Perth, we've now had one in
Brisbane, we've had one or two in regional areas of Australia and over the next few years
we'll be going up to far North Queensland and we'll be going into the provincial areas of
New South Wales, into South Australia, Tasmania and so on. Because it is part of the
philosophy of my government to see Australia as being composed of more than the
triangle of Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney, important though that is to the entire nation.
The other thing that I should briefly say to you ladies and gentlemen is that this morning I
made a very important announcement about the status of Senator Colston. I made it clear
that when the Parliament resumes we would no longer accept his vote in the Senate. And
we've done that because we believe, despite any consequences that may flow in terms of
support for Government legislation, we think in all of the circumstances the appropriate
thing is until these matters are resolved and he like any other Australian citizen is entitled
to a presumption of innocence, he's entitled to his day in court, he's entitled to a fair trial,
equally we are entitled to make a value judgment about the damage the issue may be doing
to people's perception of the institution, and what I've said on behalf of the Government is
that when Parliament resumes if he votes for us on a particular measure then a Liberal or
National Party Senator will be absented from that division so that we don't benefit from
his vote. And we believe that is the right thing to do. It may not in the short term be the
most comfortable thing to do but in the long term I think it is the right thing to do for the
institution of Parliament, and I made it clear this morning that that is a unilateral decision 
on our part. I would expect the Labor Party to match it, but if it doesn't well that's for
the Labor Party to explain away, Just indeed as it is for the Labor Party to explain away
what apparently is the true reason that Senator Colston was not sent to Norfolk Island by
the former Government. Apparently there was a deal made to bring Mr Courtice do you
remember him, he was the member for Hinkler the deal was made to bring Mr Courtice
into the Senate and to send Senator Colston to Norfolk Island, but Mr Ludwig, I think his
name is, who runs the Australian Workers' Union here in Queensland didn't like Mr
Courtice and he said " no, that can't happen", and the cleverly arranged deal then fell apart.
So it has got nothing to do with high minded decisions about not sending somebody
who'd rorted his travel allowance to Norfolk Island it's got everything to do with the
fact that a union thug gave the thumbs down to a deal that both Mr Keating and Mr
Beazley had put their names to a few months earlier. Very very interesting revelation
today and it rather exposes the fact that all of this sanctimonious talk from the Labor Party
about how they vigorously pursued things in this affair is precisely that, sanctimonious
talk. But ladies and gentlemen I don't want to say any more about that issue. It has thrown up
its difficulties. I repeat that like any other Australian he is entitled to his day in court, to a
fair trial, to a presumption of innocence but until the matter is dealt with, we have taken
decisive action to as it were take him out of the Parliamentary equation. I think that is the
right thing to do and I think the Australian people will see it in those terms.
There are just two other things that I want to say and that is to say as there are a lot of
members and supporters of the Liberal Party here today, I want to thank the rank and file
of the Liberal Party for the contribution that you have made to the fact that we have now
after a very long political drought, we now hold office federally, and we also hold office in
Coalition with the National Party here in Queensland. You need the rank and file of a
political party when you go through periods of unpopularity. People in my situation are
the fortunate beneficiaries in a way as far as the political profile is concerned of electoral
success. But you are the people who keep the Party going, who make it all possible, and
I've always had a profound respect for the rank and file of the Liberal Party, I've always
displayed immense gratitude towards the Liberal Party organisation for the opportunity
that it has given me. I would never have been a Member of Parliament, I certainly
wouldn't have been leader of the Liberal Party and most certainly not Prime Minister of
Australia had it not been for the understanding and support over the years that I received
from the Liberal Party organisation. And I want to take this opportunity in the presence
of your member, who let me remind you holds one of the most marginal seats in the
country. It was a great win but it is an equally great challenge to hold onto the seat at the
next election and she's doing her bit and I know that you are doing your bit and we'll
endeavour at a Government level to do our bit to ensure that Elizabeth is returned with an
increased majority whenever the next election is held.
The other thing that I wanted to speak about very briefly is the importance in the policy
approaches of the government, the importance that we attach to small business. I came 
from a small business family and I was brought up to believe that about the most
worthwhile thing anybody could do was to start a business with nothing and to work your
insides out trying to make something and then give your own children a more financially
secure start in life than you yourself may have had. And that was the ethic under which I
was brought up and its the ethic that is very significantly influenced the lives of millions of
Australians over the years. And it's a very important ethic, and it's a very important value
system to the Liberal Party. It doesn't mean that we are hostile to people who aren't in
small business. It doesn't mean that we don't appreciate the contribution of people in the
public sector police and nurses and people in the armed forces and all the other hundreds
of thousands of people who do an excellent job in the public sector, but what it does mean
is that there is a special place in the value of the Liberal Party for small business. Because
it expresses that notion of self-help and it also of course in a practical way, a reinvigorated
small business sector still offers the best hope we have over time of reducing the still
unacceptably high level of unemployment that we have in Australia. And I have been quite
meticulous in seeing to it that all of the commitments we made to the small business
community before the last election have been honoured. I don't pretend that it's still not
difficult for small business, it is. And I know that many men and women in Australia in
small business, and let me make the point in passing that more than 30 per cent of
proprietors of small business in Australia are women, and the proportion of small
businesses run and managed by women in Australia is growing at a very very rapid rate.
So I use the description men and women in small business very advisedly and very
deliberately. And I'm conscious that it has been difficult. I'm conscious that you don't
always gets the same deal from the banks that large companies get. I'm conscious that
you had to struggle with some pretty unreasonable industrial relations laws. And I'm very
pleased that we were able to get our industrial relations laws through the Parliament. I'm
very pleased that we were able to go a bit further in our Small Business Statement a few
weeks ago and to say that any small business employing fewer than 15 people, and that's a
very large number of small businesses in Australia, are completely exempt from any unfair
dismissal laws at a Federal level in relation to people who have been employed for a period
of less than 12 months, and I hope that that particular decision will be duplicated at a
Queensland level by the Queensland government. I had a talk to my friend Santoro at the
weekend, he's the local Minister for Industrial Relations, and pointed out to him the
wisdom of Queensland having the same law as applied nationally and I hope that the
Queensland government will not waste any time Mrs Cunningham willing in bringing
Queensland industrial awards into line with those operating nationally.
In the same area I am very happy to say that we promised in the last election campaign
that we would give a capital gains tax roll-over relief for people who sold one business
and invested the proceeds in another. Now what we have done in that area and it will
come into operation on the first of July this year, what we have done in that area actually
goes beyond what I promised in the election campaign. And after the first of July it will be
possible for any person running a small business in Australia to sell that business and invest
up to $ 5 million, $ 5 million of the proceeds into another business, not necessarily of the
same kind, but indeed of any kind. In other words you can go from a book making
business into a bakery, or you can go from a garage into a computer software company, 
and you can invest up to $ 5 million without incurring any liability for capital gains tax.
Now it does represent a very very significant change to the taxation circumstances under
which small business will operate in Australia. We've also made a number of significant
changes to the fringe benefits tax laws. We've said that any company that pays less than
000 worth of fringe benefits in any one year will no longer be obliged to keep records
in relation to fringe benefits tax provided that business maintains the same or a lower level
of fringe benefits and of course continues to pay on a historic basis the amount of tax that
it paid in fringe benefits in the previous year. That will relieve probably 20 000 to 30 000
more small businesses in Australia from any obligation at all to keep fringe benefits tax
records. We said that we would provide provisional tax relief through lifting the
provisional tax uplift factor for small business to the tune of about $ 180 million a year, and
that was implemented last year. We are also well down the road to implementing our
commitment in relation to relieving small business of the regulatory burden of red tape and
of course the reductions in interest rates that have occurred have in the main flowed
through to the small business sector. But I would have to acknowledge that small
business does not have from the banking system the same competitive conditions that
apply in relation to home buyers and we have said that one of the reasons why we are not
agreeable to the further merger of the major trading banks in Australia is that we don't
believe the conditions of competition which are needed for that to occur are sufficiently in
evidence and in particular we would like to see more being done by those banks for small
business. And it's a theme that I will repeat endlessly as I go around Australia because I
am not satisfied that the competitive conditions for small business are good enough,
anywhere near good enough, and there does need to be more competitive banking
conditions and lower interest rates for small business.
Ladies and gentlemen for those of you who have been standing and have been kept by me
for far too long, can I say again how absolutely delighted I am to be with Elizabeth in the
Electorate of Lilley. I applaud her efforts as your representative. I thank you for the
tremendous effort you put in getting her elected. I congratulate all of you on that
magnificent seven per cent swing that you achieved and long may she continue to
represent the people not only of Chermside, but the people of Lilley in the national
Parliament. ends 



Fax from: PRIME MINISTER
16 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
LAUNCH OF GREEN CORPS PROJECT
TINCHI TAMBA WET LANDS BRISBANE
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Elizabeth. To Senator Ian Macdonald, to Mr Tony Abbott, Teresa
Gambaro, the member for Petrie; Gary Hardgrave the member for Moreton; the Mayor of
the Shire of Radcliffe, representatives of the Brisbane City Council, other guests, ladies
and gentlemcn. I'm really very pleased indeed to be associated with the formal launch of
the Oreen Corps.
It is appropriate that Tony Abbott is with us this morning because I have to give Tony
some of the credit a couple of years ago way back when we were still in Opposition when
we were talking about ideas and concepts that might fire the enthusiasm of people,
particularly young people about Australia's environmental future. Tony Abbott spent
some time putting ideas to me about the validity of having a Green Corps and I was very
heavily influaenced by those views and it is appropriate is with us and is associated with
the launch. This is yet another element of the Coalition's very strong commitment to
caring for and being concerned about Australia's environment. There used to be a time in
Austlia public life when the environment was regarded as an issue over on the side
when it was only something that a small seemingly preoccupied group of people were
interested in and it wasn't something that touched the everyday lives of people and that is
why so many parts of our heritage fell into disrcpair and into disuse and why we now
look back with some horror at the way in which we allowed environmental arocities to
take place and how we allowed the envionment to be spoilt 16/ 04/ 97 13: 25 Pg: 
Fax from But in the last ten years all of that has changed. The environment is properly a
mainstream political issue. All generations of Australians are concerned about restoring
our physical environment, refurbishing our built environment and seeing what we can do
to reverse over a longer period of time some the very negative and deleterious trends
which have developed over many many years and are effecting our environment.
And one of the policies of which I am particularly proud within the environmental area of
course is our commitment through the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia to invest
almost $ 1.2 billion into capital projects to restore the environment of Australia-A few
weeks ago I had the opportunity of going to Mildura and of touching the Murray-Darling
basin and cleaning up the Murray Darling basin will be of absolutely inestimable value to
Australia's environment. It is the cradle of about one quarter of the food production of
Australia and the contribution cleaning up the Murray Darling will make to the
environmental future of Australia is immense and the sort of things that we are interested
in in the environment are those practical things and what we have sought to do in relation
to the Green Corps which is currently attracting an investment of $ 42 million from the
Government. What we hope to do in the Green Corps is to many together the idealism in the interests
of young Australians in caring for Australia's environment, provide to them an
opportunity to learn skills about environmental care, provide to them the opportunity of
friendship and association in caring for the environment in a very very healthy
atmosphere, and what the Green Corps does is to marry those enthusiasms with our
concern for the environment And it will provide people with good training, it will
provide them with a useful subsidy at the end of the period of training, a useful subsidy
towards further educational pursuits and it brings together what I might call the volunteer
sector and also the government sector and I am very pleased that one of the features of
this is that when we decided to go down the path of the Green Corps we called for tenders
from the private sector from volunteer organisations. And if my understanding is correct
the headquarters of the organisation which is managing the Green Corps is in fact in
Ballarat in Victoria and I think I visited the headquarters when I was in Ballarat a few
months ago and it won the tender from competition all around Australia. And what is also
very good is that there's a local partnership and I want to thank the Brisbane City Council
for its contribution. What it has done to restore, what it has already done to restore the
Tinchi Tomba wetlands deserves very high praise and I particularly acknowledge in the
presence of representatives of the Brisbane City Council the contribution that the Council
has made to the restoration of the wetlands and also the willingness and the very
enthusiastic way in which the council has gone into partnership with the volunteers for
the environment to run this particular project and as lan Macdonald said, we are
embarked upon a series of projects all around Australia and naturally and quite properly
and there would be plenty of people in the audience who have seen to it that it has
occurred Queensland is getting its fair share of all of those projects. I've never known it
to be otherwise and I always acknowledge the enthusiastic pursuit of Queensland interests
by my Senatorial and House of Representatives colleagues. 16/ 84/ 97 13: 25 Pg: 2 
I Fax from So I do want to say to all of you particularly ithose who are involved in the Green Corps
tha it is one of those things that mixes a bit of idealism with a Practical goal atud a
forward looking~ objective. And that is in a sense the stuff of good government decision
making. You need a bit of idealism. You can't livc by bottom lines an~ d numbers and
statistics alone, you do need sorne idealism and I think manryinig a concern for the
environment with practical training in the outdoors and actually restoring something and
making something look more attractive, more beautiful, it really is marrying together a
number of objectives and I think the Green Corps will attract great interest. Certainly the
early experience is that there are more people at present who want to be in the Green
Corps who can at presenit be accommodated and that is something that will be born in
mind by the government as the weeks and months go by and decisions in the fu. ture have
to be made about the allocation of' resources because this is obviously going to be a very
attractive programme.
And I want to thank the young Australirans who have displayed an interes in it. The
programme as you know is not just available to people who are out of work although it is
obviously somnething of great interest and appeal to people who may be temporarily or
perhaps for a longer period of time have been unemployed. It is open to all young
Australians and both people who've been in the workforce and those who haven't have
flocked to it. And I thank them and I have already met some of them and I hope to have
the opportuity of meeting few more of them. But it is a very strong commitment by the
Coalition Government, a very strong commitment by the Liberal and National parties for
practical solutions to improving Australia's environment, marshalling enthusiam and
idealisra of young Australians, providing them with incentives, practical goals, practical
opportunities to learn AkiCl and the assurance at the cad of the training course of some
assistance. So I want to thank you Ian in particular for the work that you have put into organising
today-I want to thank you for the work that you in conjunctioni with Tony have done in
overseeing and supervising at an administrative and political level the operation of the
Green Corps. I thank all of those who have supported, I thank the department of
Employment and Youth Affains, I also tharA the volunteer organisation whose
representative will speak in a moment and most particularly I thank the participants and I
have very great pleasure in formally declaring launched the Green Corps young
Australians for the environment.
Thank you. Fa rom16/ 04/ 97 13: 25 Pg: 3 



18 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO THE HUNTER VALLEY WINE ASSOCIATION
THANKSGIVING DINNER, POKOLBIN
Thank you very much Mr Barnes. To our host and hostess, to Brian and Fay
McGuigan, to that great Liberal colleague of mine, Bob Baldwin, the Member for
Paterson, come on, give him a clap, and to many other distinguished guests and very
great and famous names in the wine industry of Australia and can I particularly
acknowledge the presence of Len Evans who I have known, I have known Evans for
years and like so many people who have spent most of their working life in the city of
Sydney, some people who live in Canberra at the moment complain that I still spend
too much of my working life in Sydney. They say I should spend more of it in
Canberra but I think the people of Sydney think otherwise. I have enjoyed the
hospitality of Len at the Bulletin place and it's terrific to see he and his wife, Tricia
here and to know what a tremendous life they've made for themselves here in the
Hunter over the last ten years.
Can I say, this is an enormously relaxing way to end a week where one or two things
happened. I can almost say a " Wik" in which one or two things happened but I can
assure you that sort of hasn't flickered out yet. We're still working very hard at it but
it really is a great escape to come here to celebrate the end of the harvest, to
congratulate you on the tremendous contribution that you are making to the Australian
economy, to say what marvellous economic conditions the new Government has
created for such a great industry, to extol the virtues of a stable taxation system,
predictable taxation system, and really I guess share with all of you as Australians the
national champion that the wine industry of Australia has now become.
We hear a lot about national champions. We hear the banks saying they want to be
national champions. We hear some people in the media saying they want to be national
champions but I think the great national champion of the last few years of the
Australian export industry has in fact been the wine industry of this country, it really
has. The way in which it's all changed, the way in which you've been able to penetrate 
markets that were regarded only 10 or 15 years ago was absolutely beyond the call as
far as the Australian wine industry is concerned is quite remarkable and the way in
which here in the Hunter you have combined not only a great industry that delivers
enormous pleasure and relaxation and congeniality to so many Australians but also the
way in which you've generated a tremendous tourist industry and also I hope
preserved some of the special rural and provincial character of the district has really
been quite remarkable.
I must say that I was struck through the introduction with the cricketing analogy. Of
course that was obviously tailored, it was obviously tailored to sort of touch the heart
of somebody like myself who is quite a lover of that game and I was saying to Tricia
Evans that the most memorable luncheon I have ever had in my life was a luncheon I
had in Adelaide about five years ago with the late Max Schubert when he was still very
much with us, thank God, Sir Donald Bradman, and it was an extraordinary privilege
to spend a couple of hours with those two giants of their respective ways of life and
their respective achievements and it was just a very humbling reminder of the massive
achievements and the massive talents of so many of our fellow Australians.
So I want to thank all of you for the contribution that you are making to our country.
I want to congratulate all of you for the sheer excellence and quality. One of the great
experiences you have now, you can go anywhere in the world now and people speak
admiringly of the quality of Australian wine and this is something that I must say of
Prime Minister of Australia, somebody who has the opportunity on occasions of
representing our great nation abroad. The sheer kick that I get out of people saying
how wonderful Australian wine is and the awe in which it is held, the quality, the
consistency of the quality of Australian wine, the fact that there is a uniformity and
quality about it which is quite extraordinary given the size of our country, and I think it
is something that gives tremendous pride and tremendous pleasure to me, it gives
tremendous enjoyment and pride and pleasure to me also and to the other, just about
all of the other 18 million Australians.
So you deserve to have a good time tonight. Thank you for the contribution that you
are making to Australia. Congratulations on your domestic achievement. To Brian
and Fay, thank you very much and can I say to Fay, I recently appointed her to the
Prime Minister's Supermarket to Asia Council and she's doing an absolutely fabulous
job on that Council in helping to build up our export performance and our export
potential into Asia. You are one of the great success stories of this country's wine
industry and Janette and I are absolutely delighted to be amongst you here in the
fabulous Hunter Valley.
Thank you. 



21 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
LAUNCH OF PROSTATE CANCER AWARENESS VIDEO
OLD PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
E O E
Thank you very much Major-General Fittock, to my colleague, Bruce Scott, ladies and
gentlemen. I would like to congratulate the Minister in the Department of Veterans' Affairs, Dr
Andrew Killer and all of the others who've been associated with putting together this
video about prostate health.
It is true that traditionally one of the characteristics of men and Australian men in
particular has been a reluctance to talk about intimate personal things and it's been, in
a sense, a characteristic of the Australian psyche that that has been the case. There are
signs, I believe very welcome signs, that in appropriate cases that attitude is changing.
And the way in which this video which I had the opportunity... I viewed most of it a
few days ago the way in which this video talks about a very important element of
male health is very reassuring. It will be extremely beneficial, not only to the one in
five Australian men over the age of 65 who are returned servicemen, but also to the
rest of the male population of Australia of that particular age cohort and indeed even
younger. Prostate health is something that should be talked about. And just as it has been the
case in relation to particular health issues facing women, they have been the subject of
direct, tasteful, but totally accurate, valuable public discussion without embarrassment
but with enormous benefit and assistance to women in our community, so it is in
relation to issues of particular significance to men within our community. And the
most valuable message that comes out of this video is that the incidence of prostate
disease, whilst a matter of concern, ought not to be something that is feared or not to
be something that can't be encountered, dealt with, and that even in its most severe
form, and that is prostate cancer as the video demonstrates, there is very much life and
a very full life after that. 
And I want to especially compliment those in the audience who participated in the
video. Because they've really broken through a communication resistance and barrier
and made an important contribution to an understanding of something which if fully
understood and fully dealt with and openly dealt with is going to greatly improve the
enjoyment of life of a large section of the Australian population. It is true that people
are living longer. It is true that medical science is putting a happy, full, invigorating
life within the reach of increasing numbers of people over the age of 60, 70 and 80 and
so forth. And that process will go on. There's no reason why it shouldn't go on. But
one of the things that will help it go on will be if sensitive issues of health, be it in
relation to women or men in our community, those sensitive issues are addressed in a
very open, frank, unembarrassed but tasteful way. And that is precisely what this
video does. And it is the sort of thing that should occur in relation to all other
incidence of particular health challenges and problems. And the insights, the day-today
advice that the video contains, the personal stories in the video and the reassuring
messages, and most importantly of all, the overwhelmingly reassuring message and that
is that prostate health is just another aspect of the health, is another aspect of caring
for the human body and another aspect of understanding symptoms when they occur,
being sensible enough to do something about them straight away, getting the best
medical advice, understanding as Tony Charlton said in the introduction of the video
understanding that there are a range of treatments available. I think all of that is
something that will benefit not only the returned servicemen within our community, but
of course we're particularly conscious of them in the lead up to Anzac Day, but also
the entire male population particularly, but not only, those over the age of 60 or
So when I was invited by those associated with the video, when I was invited to
participate in this launch, I very readily agreed to do so because I wanted to associate
myself, I wanted to associate my Government with a cause on open, sensible,
recognition of and discussion not only of health issues generally but also of particular
health challenges that effect men in our community. It's a measure of the intelligence
and the sophistication of our community that such issues can be talked about in a
sensible, open, yet completely tasteful and acceptable fashion.
I very genuinely congratulate those associated with the video. We invest as a
community hundreds of millions, indeed, billions of dollars in treating illness, in
treating ailments. We haven't in the past invested either enough resources or enough
personal commitment to prevented health measures and this video makes some
contribution to that. It also makes a contribution to relieving unnecessary anxiety in
our community.
And for all of those reasons I'm delighted to be associated with the launch. I formally
launch it. I congratulate those who put it together. And I especially congratulate and
compliment those men and women who participated in the video because the vivid
examples and stories always make a video like this effective. I wish all of those who
participated well and I congratulate the Department for putting it together.
Thank you. 



28 April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO STATE DINNER
IN HONOUR OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
MR RYUTARO HASHIMOTO
E O E
Mr and Mrs Hashimoto, Mr Tim Fischer, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia-, Mr
Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition-, my other parliamentary colleagues;, your
excellencies, distinguished guests ladies and gentlemen.
It Is a special pleasure to welcome to Australia the Prime Minister of Japan. I welcome
him as the leader of a nation with which Australia has developed very deep and close
and important relationships over the last 40 years. I do so in the fortieth year since the
signing of that very important milestone in the relationship between Australia and
Japan and that is the commerce agreement of 1957. And I will come to the importance
of that agreement and the part that it has played in laying the foundation of what is
Australia's most important economic relationship in a moment. On a personal note, it
is a pleasure for me to return the great and warm hospitality that the Prime Minister
extended to me last year when I visited Tokyo. I welcome Mrs Hashimoto as well,
and can I say if they revisit Australia, and I certainly hope they do, I am certain that
they will choose to visit us on another occasion and come from a different direction.
You see, they celebrated their wedding anniversary on the 27th of April and they came
from the United ( applause).. well, I don't know that Mrs Hashimoto is going to
applaud quite as warmly about what I am about to say. You see they left the United
States on the 26th of April and crossed the international date line and succeeded in
missing their wedding anniversary. I think there is some diplomatic price that will be
paid somewhere for that. It certainly ought not to be that of our very charming
Japanese ambassador Mr Sarto, who is very warmly and well regarded in the Canberra
community. 
But to both of you a very warm Australian welcomne is extended, and can I say that all
Australians will share the sense of relief that I know the Prime Minister and the rest of
the Japanese nation feel about the successful resolution of the very difficult hostage
crisis in Peru.
There is of course no nation in the world with which Australia has a deeper, a richer or
more important economic association than Australia has with Japan. It really began in
earnest when the former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, Sir John McEwen, with
great courage at the time pioneered the Japan/ Australia commerce agreement in 1957.
From then the relationship has grown and deepened and diversified, Australia and
Japan have a very close and complementary relationship. Japan is undeniably
Australia's best market. It is a market that's built not only on exports of minerals, but
also a market built upon a very diversified economic association. And of course the
relationship between Australia and Japan epitomises the modern commitment of
successive Australian governments of both political persuasions to the economic and
political association that Australia has developed and will continue to develop with the
nations of the Asia Pacific region. Australia and Japan are both full participants in the
Asia Pacific region. Each of our nations makes its own particular contribution to those
associations. I welcome Mr Hashimoto as a Prime Minister of Japan who has displayed great
political courage and particular political skills. He has embarked upon a very dynamic
and important economic and administrative reform programme. He has been a selfstarter
in economic reform within Japan. It has been his personal conviction that
outward looking economic reforms are important to Japans future rather than a
response to outside pressure. He showed particular diplomatic skill in negotiating a
successful resolution of outstanding matters between the United States and Japan over
the Okinawa bases. And the joint declaration of the Prime Minister of Japan and
President Clinton in May of 1996 gave contemporary and fresh expression and an
enduring quality to the relationship, important as it is to us and to the rest of the region
between the United States and Japan.
There are many attitudes that Australia and Japan share in common. Both of us
appreciate the importance of our respective alliances with the United States. Both of
us value the continued presence, the fulsome presence of the United States in the Asia
Pacific region. Both of us respect and support the overarching importance of the
APEC association. It is the most visible and the most important expression of our
common destiny as partners in the Asia Pacific region. And both of us appreciate the
importance of an effective engagement of China, not only in the affairs of the region
but also in the affairs of the entire world.
There is little doubt that a sensible embrace of China as a full partner in the Asia
Pacific region on proper terms and with proper understandings is an important foreign
policy goal of both our countries. There are areas of course where we share common
concerns and as I indicated earlier today, one of the matters that I will be canvassing
with the Prime Minister in our discussions tomorrow will be the particular concerns
that Australia has about the implications of the proposals for climate change. Australia
is in a particularly difficult position on this issue. Perhaps uniquely, Australia is a
developed country which is simultaneously a net exporter of energy and it is very 
important that the very legitimate concerns of Australia and Australians, and not only
of the Australian business community but particularly including them be known not
only by Japan but also by our other trading partners. I would like to take this
opportunity tonight Prime Minister to re-affirm the very strong support that my
government extends to Japan's aspiration to become a permanent member of the
Security Council of the United Nations. That has been a policy position of a number
of governments in Australia for some years and I want to make it plain in your
presence that my Government will continue to give very strong support to your
aspirations in that regard. I have spoken Mr Prime Minister of the very important
economic and political links that exist between our two countries. They are important
and your visit to Australia will help to further cement those links. They will help to
remind Australians of just how valuable a market Japan continues to be for our
country. They will help to bring home to Australians the long continuity of the
contribution that Japanese foreign investment has made to the development of the
Australian economy and it is an opportunity for me as Prime Minister of Australia to
emphasise the continued importance of foreign investment in this country and to reject
some of the simplistic criticisms that are from time to time made of the role of foreign
investment in the development of Australia. And I want to make it clear that without
the constant flow of capital over the years from nations such as Japan and the United
States and Britain and others who have invested in Australia, the standard of living that
we now enjoy in this country would not be nearly so high.
But important as those economic and political links undoubtedly are, there is of course
another dimension to the rich relationship between our two countries. And that
dimension of course is made up of the people to people links that over the years have
developed. Last year 800 000 Japanese people visited Australia. The cultural links,
the sister to sister city links, the educational links, the exchange visits, the growing
recognition of the importance of Japan, the enormous growth in the number of
Australian students who have learnt and can now speak Japanese and the astonishing
way in which the knowledge of and the teaching of and an understanding of the
Japanese language has supplanted that of any other foreign language in Australia over
the last 20 years is an illustration that it is not just a dollar-yen relationship, it is also a
relationship which is built on a growing mutual appreciation of different cultures and a
growing understanding of a shared destiny in our part of the world.
Can I say to you Mr Prime Minister that I enjoyed your company immensely when I
was in Tokyo. I found you a very warm and engaging host. I found the welcome that
you extended to me and my party very touching indeed and I have looked forward very
enthusiastically to the opportunity of welcoming you as Prime Minister to Australia. I
hope you can come again, and come again as Prime Minister. You and your wife will
always be welcome here, not only as the Prime Minister of Japan but also for your own
very delightful personalities. I very much hope that you both enjoy your brief but
important visit to Australia and I have much pleasure in inviting the Leader of the
Opposition Mr Kim Beazley to endorse my remarks.
Thank you. 



April 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF THE ALANNAH AND
MADELINE FOUNDATION, MELBOURNE
EE Thank you very much Neil, to you Walter, to Tim and Alicia O'Shane, to Jenny
Mackin who is here today as the Shadow Minister in the Federal Parliament
representing the Leader of the Opposition, Kim Beazley. Can I say that the words that
I will speak today I know have the endorsement of all three parties in Australia. This
is not a party-political occasion and might I say that whatever was possible to have
been done to make Australia a safer society after the events of the 28th April last year
would not have been possible without the support of the Australian Labor Party and
the Australian Democrats, as well as, of course, the Party that I have the privilege of
leading.
This is not only an important occasion and an inspiring occasion but it can also in a
sense be a very happy occasion because it is an opportunity for us to express again the
tremendous awe that we feel for the capacity of young children in our community to
survive terrible tragedies and to rebuild their lives with the help of the people who love
them most and we, of course, honour the establishment of a Foundation which
remembers the tragic death of Alannah and Madeline and all the other people who lost
their lives on that terrible afternoon.
But in doing so we also celebrate the miracle of the survival of children and the central
hope that they offer to the rest of us and I think Neil is right, that so often when
tragedy hits a family, where there is a loss of a parent or a sibling or whether it's a
dreadful accident or whatever the circumstances are, we sometimes, because of their
inability to express their feelings, we sometimes fail to realise the traumatic impact that
such events can have on children. And the Foundation that we honour today and the
Foundation that we launch today will make a very practical contribution towards doing
that. There are many ways in which a community, a society, can remember the victims
of a tragedy. 
I said the other day on the 28th, on Monday, and I'd like to repeat it to you this
afternoon, I said that in many respects the greatest memorial we could as a nation
create to the victims of the 28th of April last year was a renewed determination within
our society to do all we could to eradicate different forms of violence in our midst
whether it's violence in a public place or whether it's violence in a family or whether
it's violence on the playing fields, whether it's violence in a pub or violence in any
other social gathering. Too often the first instinct of too many people in our
community is to solve an argument or to solve a dispute through resort to violence
whether the use of physical violence or verbal violence. And I can't think of a more
fitting memorial than a greater recognition by all Australians that violence is not an
answer to any difference of opinion, particularly violence against the more vulnerable
people in our community, including women and children.
So I am really quite touched to be here today along with, I guess, the other 18 million
Australians I admire tremendously, Walter, the great courage and the inspiration that
you have represented to people in life circumstances. It's hard to say to put it that way
but it's difficult for us who haven't been touched by such sadness and such loss to
really take on board the enormity of it and the grace, the strength and the inspiration
that you have shown and demonstrated is a tremendous example. It's a humbling
example of the, I suppose the survival of the human spirit and I remember once talking
to one of my colleagues who had lost his wife and two children in very sad
circumstances and I said to him, how was it that you were able to survive, and he said,
I survived because I knew that if I didn't keep going that that really was the end of it
all. And I thought it was a tremendously eloquent yet simple way of expressing the
human force that is inside somebody who is overtaken and overcome by such an
enormous tragedy, and I can only say on behalf of all of your fellow Australians, we
admire immensely and we are inspired greatly by people who demonstrate courage in
such great personal adversity and it affects so many people. Many we don't know
about, many we do know about and, of course, when it touches so directly as it did in
the case of Tjandamarra O'Shane a little boy set upon in a most despicable and
beastly circumstances, it does reach out and affect all of us and the spontaneous
response of so many people to what happened to Ijandamarra and it is really
something very encouraging about Australia.
We're very fond sometimes of saying how poor we are and how mean we are and how
we can never get too many things right and we get so many things wrong. I think the
public response to what happened to Tjandamarra and just the outpouring of people
who wanted to be part of saying: gee, can we help?, we are so upset about what
happened, what can we do to make that little boy's life a little easier and a little
happier? I think that's one of the sort of shining examples of the essential decency of
Australians, the essential magnanimity of the Australian spirit that I have seen for a
very, very long time.
I am delighted Neil, to be the patron of the Alannah and Madeline Foundation. I am
very happy to complement 3AW. I think many good things come out of the
boardrooms at 3AW and I wouldn't be nearly as self-effacing as that. I want to
congratulate the station for its public spirited support for this Foundation. I want to
wish it well and most of all I want to complement the simple aspiration of the
Foundation and that is to recognise the need for love and compassion and support of 
children in particular who are the victims of crime and who are the victims of violence
in our community. It is, of course, a pipedream, whoever imagined it, whatever our
resolve and however well intentioned we are as a community that we can ever rid
ourselves of violence and beastly behaviour but it's not a pipedream to imagine that we
can from time to time in a community get together and make some contribution, not
only monetary but also in terms of our time and our thoughts and our prayers and our
understandings of the people who are the victims of that violence and today is a little
example of that.
You are the inspiration behind the former. Neil and his colleagues at 3AW have been
the driving force. Tjandamarra symbolises the very predicament but also the hope and
the inspiration, the hope and the encouragement of the young that the Foundation is
designed to help and designed to encourage and I am so delighted to play a very small
role in being patron of the Foundation, to convey the good wishes of all of my Federal
Parliamentary colleagues from both sides of Parliament to the Foundation, and wish it
well and to say on behalf of all Australians, there is nothing that quite touches our
hearts more than the struggle and the optimism and the laughter and the outpouring of
affection of a little child who suffered, but survived, and looks with hope in facing the
future. Thank you. 



8 May 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
AUSTRALIA-ASIA SOCIETY
" AUSTRALIA AND ASIA: AN ENDURING ENGAGEMENT"
E O E
Thank you very much Hugh for those very warm words of introduction, to Dick
Woolcott, to Ambassador Platt, to Gareth Evans representing the Leader of the
Opposition, your Excellencies, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is an immense privilege for me to be here tonight to open the AustralAsia Centre of
the Asia Society and it gives me the opportunity to speak to you directly about an issue
of enormous importance to our country and that is our relations with the nations of
Asia. The Asia Society is the pre-eminent non-government American body concerned
with relations between the United States and the nations of the Asia region. For
years now it has played a major role in promoting those linkages and the centre that we
launch tonight will help improve dialogue on Asia between Australia and the United
States and it will make in its own way yet another contribution to the very important
associations between the United States and Australia and serve again to underline the
common destiny of the United States and Australia within the Asia-Pacific region.
The Centre will draw also on the experience of the Asia Society to strengthen
understanding in Australia of the nations of Asia. It will complement the efforts of
other existing Australian institutions like the Asia Australia Institute, Asia Link and the
regional studies centres in our universities.
I congratulate Hugh Morgan and Nick Platt for their initiative and energy in bringing
together the AustralAsia Centre and bringing about its inauguration tonight. As he
mentioned Hugh Morgan recently accompanied me on my visit to China as part of a
very high level business delegation. It was a very successful visit and it was an
effective demonstration to our hosts of the joint determination and the joint
commitment of the business community of Australia and the Australian Government to
building even closer links with the nations of Asia. 
I believe that under the direction of Richard Woolcott, who brings an unparalleled
wealth of diplomatic experience, particularly in terms of our relations with the nations
of Asia that this centre will well and truly flourish. The Centre is formed, ladies and
gentlemen, at an Important time in the history of Australia's engagement with Asia.
We are living through a period of economic transformation that really been without
parallel since the Industrial Revolution more than two centuries ago. Economic
globalisation, technological advance and more open trading arrangements are
transforming patterns of production, employment and opportunity around the world.
It is a transformation from which no modern economy is, or can even imagine it can be
immune. Australia is therefore equipping itself as a nation to meet the challenges and to
seize the opportunities of the 2 1st century.
There can be no argument at all that a principal task of my government is the continued
pursuit of economic reform. Those in our midst and elsewhere who say that the
reform process has gone too far are not only wrong but their nostrums, if accepted,
would condemn Australia to a bleak and fearful future. The task of modern
government is to maintain the momentum for the changes which are necessary whilst
to the extent that it is possible to cushion the personal and social consequences of that
change. That is why the focus of the Coalition in government will continue to be
standing up for Australia in a world where the competition for investment, growth and
jobs is increasingly fierce.
Our focus will continue to be on improving Australia's capacity to compete
internationally through a comprehensive economic and social policy reform agenda.
Our focus will continue to be on increasing our national savings and the
competitiveness of our industries and enterprises. Our focus will continue to be on
helping families and small businesses and it will continue to be on expanding
opportunities for younger Australians and providing greater security for older ones.
That is the course that my Government has chartered and on which it will continue.
Australia's engagement in her region plays a vital part in my Government's overall
strategy. In discussing that engagement I am going to make no apology for raising
first and foremost, economic factors but I do not pretend that they are alone, the
essence of the association between Australia and the nations of Asia. If we are to
enjoy in this country better living standards and if we are to create the jobs we need,
economic growth is essential. Given the size of Australia's domestic market, exports
are vital and indispensable to our growth. In the past year, our exports grew more
than twice as fast as the economy as a whole. Moreover, surveys of small companies
and exporters show that those which export are more likely to be hiring employees and
paying higher wages. The markets of Asia are growing fast. During the past decade
more than half the world's economic growth has come from East Asia. In the next few
years, it will continue to grow at least twice as fast as the rest of the world.
Already nearly 60 per cent of our exports now go to East Asia. Seven out of our ten
top export markets are in East Asia.
It follows that one of the most decisive influences on our standard of living and the
capacity of our economy to provide worthwhile jobs for our children will be our
success in exporting our goods and services to the nations of Asia. In the first place 
that will require us to produce high-quality products that are internationally
competitive and to maintain a reputation as a reliable supplier.
Success will also crucially depend on improving our knowledge of our region, our
understanding of its markets and our capacity to operate in them and a deep and
greater understanding of the region's people. We are indeed fortunate that more and
more Australians particularly young ones are studying Asian languages and are
learning about the history, culture and economies of our neighbours. Our ties cannot
just be economic. As our economy becomes more integrated with our neighbours',
our stake in their security rises and our mutual understanding must grow.
Moreover, the pursuit of our economic interests in the region cannot be divorced from
acceptance by the countries of our region that we are worthwhile and valuable
partners. That means making a commitment a national commitment to developing
closer ties with our region. It means welcoming visitors and investment from Asian
nations. It means valuing our migrant communities and in particular it means saluting
the massive and enduring contribution made to the culture and the future of Australia
by those hundreds of thousands of Australians of Asian descent who have contributed
so much to the development of the modern Australia.
It is impossible, ladies and gentlemen, to imagine a prosperous and successful Australia
which is not deeply engaged with Asia. Those who propose putting up the shutters
could not be more wrong. Against this background, let me say a few words about
some of the propositions put recently in public debate by the Member for Oxley, Mrs
Hanson. Like any other Australian citizen, she has a right to be heard. Personal
attacks and mindless drowning out of her views are not only unAustralian but they feed
sympathy for her but she has equally to be prepared to have her views tested, their
accuracy assessed and their substance analysed.
She cannot have it both ways. She enjoys freedom to express her views. Equally, she
has to be accountable for those views. She cannot evade responsibility for the
consequences of her statements. This is all the more so because she now claims to lead
a political party. She is wrong when she suggests that Aboriginals are not
disadvantaged. She is wrong when she says that Australia is in danger of being
swamped by Asians. She is wrong to seek scapegoats for society's problems. She is
wrong when she denigrates foreign investment, because its withdrawal would cost
Australian jobs. She is wrong when she claims that Australia is headed for civil war.
She is wrong in having not repudiated the views of her supporters who have called for
the legalisation of the type of semi automatic weapon that Martin Bryant used to cut
down the lives of 35 people at Port Arthur.
The political campaign mounted by the Member for Oxley seeks to exploit fear and
instability without offering solutions or hope. As best I can discern them, her policies
do not provide a positive response to the challenge of boosting jobs and growth, of
revitalising our regions, of strengthening our families, of reducing our national debt
and of providing greater security in people's lives. 
They have nothing to do with meeting the challenge as our parents and grandparents
did before us of passing on to the next generation of Australians an even better,
stronger and more united Australian society than was handed over to us. None of
these goals, my friends, will be achieved through empty populism or cheap
sloganeering. None will be achieved through bitter and divisive recriminations. They
will only be achieved through constructive and consistent purpose and through
adjusting to new realities in ways that reflect what is best in Australia's past.
I want to make it clear to you tonight that under my Government, Australia's future
will be built on hope, openness, confidence and Australian values not a sour, bitter,
narrow-minded view of both our past and our future.
In responding to the views of the Member for Oxley, it would be a serious mistake to
attack those who are apparently attracted to her as bigoted, narrow-minded and racist.
A few, no doubt, are. Most, however, are not.
The fact is that Australia is a deeply tolerant, fair-minded and generous society.
Discrimination on the basis of a person's racial or ethnic origin is offensive to all
decent Australians. Every Australian, regardless of colour, race or creed, is entitled to
walk our streets, ride our buses and trains, play sport on our fields and pursue their
work with confidence, utterly free of discrimination, vilification or insult. Every
Australian, regardless of background, is entitled to be treated with total respect and
total dignity. All decent Australians agree with that, and find repulsive any violation of
that code of national tolerance.
The appeal the Member for Oxley has temporarily achieved lies not so much in the
belief that she articulates alternatives for Australia clearly she does not. Rather, she
echoes concerns about the pace of change and the pressures that parts of our
community are under. These concerns as distinct from her responses, deserve the most
sensitive understanding and the government is committed to giving them a serious and
effective response. She also echoes long-smouldering resentments about attitudes
which have been imposed upon the majority of the Australian community without that
majority feeling it has even had an opportunity of debating those issues.
In part, the 1996 Federal election result represented a repudiation of the stultifying
political correctness which had afflicted so many areas of the Australian polity during
the previous decade. Many Australians for example, resent the negative view of our
history and the Australian achievement which has become so standard in recent years.
Those same Australians resent the constant claim that our history has been little more
than a litany of racism, sexism and imperial triumphalism.
Those same Australians resent the plaintive way in which so many have encouraged us
in the past to approach our association with the nations of the Asia-Pacific region.
They resent the suggestion that Australia has to change its identity in order to play an
effective role in our region. The truth is that we go to that association as contributors
as well as beneficiaries. 
I know why some Australians have stopped to listen to the Member for Oxley. I say to
them, however, she has no answers to your problems. The Hanson cure would be
worse than the disease.
It is worth reminding both Australians and the people of the region of two striking
features about Australia's engagement with the region. First, it has been a two-way
street. We do not come as a supplicant to the regional association because we have
brought much to it. Australia has been a dependable friend and an important economic
and security partner to many countries in the region. One has only to mention the
Colombo Plan and APEC to recall the continuity and scale of Australia's contribution.
Australian exports of energy and raw materials helped make possible Japan's dramatic
industrial take-off Australia's record for tolerance and acceptance is regarded as an
example to the world. Under Malcolm Fraser's Government, Australia accepted more
Indochinese refugees on a per capita basis than any other nation in the world.
I would also make the point that Australia's willingness to take in people from all over
the world, including Asia, has been richly repaid by the contribution these immigrants
and refugees have subsequently made to Australia.
The second striking feature of our engagement, as these examples show, is its
longevity and continuity. The importance of our engagement with our region has been
a consistent theme of Australian governments since the Second World War, if not
before. This has been true for governments from both sides of politics and tonight I
acknowledge the contribution of my two predecessors as Labor Prime Ministers of
Australia for the contribution that they made to building better links between Australia
and the nations of the region. My Government is determined to continue that tradition.
It is committed to advancing Australia's national interests in our region. There will,
however, as inevitably is the case, be some important differences in approach if not
commitment from that of our predecessors.
We will, for example, be willing to listen a little more to what some in the region are
saying. During his recent visit to Australia, the Japanese prime minister, Mr
Hashimoto, made some important proposals to advance Australia's relationship with
Japan and to highlight Australia's role in the region. This is a healthy and welcome
development and we will have the confidence to welcome and respond to an initiative
from a friend like Japan-as well as from others. We do not think that the only good
initiatives can come from Australia.
On the issue of human rights, Australia will always stand up for her beliefs and values.
As Prime Minister I will never do less but I do not see that public hectoring or
lecturing other countries about their shortcomings or differences from us is appropriate
behaviour for a neighbour or indeed likely to promote our interests or our values.
Equally, Australia herself does not expect to be on the receiving end of lectures. We
have the same right to our values and sensitivities and the same right to demand
respect for them. Mutual respect has to be a two-way thing.
My Government has put considerable effort into pursuing Australia's interests in the
region. My own role in this has been to establish good working relationships with my
counterparts In some of the countries of most importance to Australia. We have made 
good progress in improving the frameworks within which Australia and the business
community in particular might better pursue their goals.
My first bilateral visit was to Indonesia, our largest neighbour, an important and
growing market for Australia, and a partner with which we share many economic,
strategic and other interests as is reflected in our close cooperation in APEC and our
security agreement. I made clear to President Soeharto my continued commitment to
strengthening that relationship.
I have already mentioned the good developments that are taking place in our
longstanding relationship with Japan, which I also visited last year. Both Mr
Hashimoto and I are committed to ensuring that our partnership becomes ever more
effective in the region and I had as you know the great pleasure of hosting a very
successful visit from Mr Hashimoto only two weeks ago. In Manila last year at the
APEC leaders meeting, I reaffirmed Australia's commitment to the economic goals of
APEC which is held by my Government.
In China recently, I proposed we form a partnership in growth. Australia has an
immensely important role to play in supplying China with the resources and energy to
fuel its future growth. Indeed I believe Australia can play in China a similar role to the
one we have played in the growth of Japan and Korea. Australia can also provide the
financial, legal and other services for which China has a growing need as its economy
modernises and becomes more sophisticated. The seniority of the business leaders
who came with me to China sent a very strong signal that the Australian Government
and business community want to work closely together in building our economic links
with China. The Chinese Premier, Li Peng, and I agreed to have regular summits in
order to ensure that Australia and China have good and direct communications at a
political level. I also proposed that we upgrade and broaden the scope of our
ministerial dialogue on economic issues.
Since my meeting, Australia has welcomed visits from a number of very senior Chinese
leaders. You will be pleased to hear that China's Vice Premier, Mr Zhu Rongji, will
visit Australia later this month.
My talks with the Premier Goh Chok Tong in Singapore have confirmed the vitality of
Australia's links with that country and I hope also this year to be able to visit India and
Malaysia, and next year Korea. My contacts in the region have left me optimistic
about Australia's prospects in our region and also immensely optimistic about the
prospects for growth and development in the region as a whole.
Asia's economic growth is good for the people of the region, good for Australia and
good for the world. It is true that this same growth is producing major changes in the
strategic outlook of our region and although potential sources of conflict remain over
Taiwan and on the Korean peninsula. But greater prosperity has for the most part
improved the prospects of stability within countries of the region. It has benefited our
security by raising everyone's stake in the stability of the region. The question is how
does the region ensure that this state of affairs continues. Part of the answer lies in
doing what we can to remove the constraints on economic growth. This is why
Australia's role as a supplier of resources, services, technology and finance is so 
important. That is why the work of APEC in bringing down barriers to trade and
investment and helping remove bottlenecks in infrastructure, capital flows, and human
resources is so important.
A second part of the answer lies in doing what we can to maintain the region's
stability. Stability is necessary if countries of the region are to be able to devote their
energies to meeting the common challenges of education, economic reform and raising
the living standards of their people. My Government has been very active in that
regard. We are committed to maintaining the Australian Defence Force's capabilities
and improving its effectiveness. My Government has reinvigorated our alliance with
the United States. That alliance, along with those of Japan and Korea, support the
engagement of the United States in our region and are therefore vital to regional
stability. We are committed to maintaining effective security links with our neighbours
through the Five Power arrangements with Malaysia and Singapore, the security
agreement with Indonesia and other bilateral arrangements.
Australia is also playing a prominent role in the development of sturdier regional
frameworks to promote regional dialogue and understanding on security matters, in
particular the ASEAN Regional Forum. These activities do not reflect a fear on the
Government's part of any particular threat. I especially want to emphasise that it is in
no-one's interests to treat China as a threat. We want to see China fully involved in
regional and global institutions. It is also in China's interests to see these strengthened.
China too needs to assure itself of open markets and a stable international trading
system if its economy is to keep growing. It has an interest in the countries of the
region being confident about future stability.
My Government believes its policies will contribute to our region's strategic resilience.
They will help provide us and our neighbours with greater confidence that we can
navigate safely a period of great economic, political and strategic change. They will
help ensure that the economic progress of the past 10 or 20 years is not disrupted.
Ladies and gentlemen, attempts to define Asia, Asianness and Australia's place in it are
interesting, but they do tend to produce more heat than light, often in the media.
Worse, they have left a degree of confusion or even resentment among many in our
community about issues on which there need be no confusion at all. I do not want to
get into definitions. Rather, I would like to finish my remarks by reiterating that our
links with our region will be vital in every way to Australia's political, social and
economic future. In building those links, Australia does not have to choose between
her geography and her history. Our history and our links with the West make a unique
contribution to the region. The recent advances we have made in our relationships
with Japan, China, Indonesia and the United States demonstrate this, as do visits to
Australia in the past six months by President Clinton, Mr Hashimoto, Chancellor Kohl
and shortly the Chinese Vice Premier, Zhu Rongji. 
-8-
Australia can be immensely confident about its place in our region. We bring many
strengths to bear. Australia has economically, politically and strategically an
important role to play. We are a stable democracy. We are located near a major
source of the world's great economic growth. The size of our economy, our vast
resources, and our technological capabilities make us a very attractive economic
partner. Our high levels of education and our innovativeness give us the capacity to
use our assets effectively.
We do not bring to our association with the region any of the colonial baggage of
others. We enjoy the security inherent in being an island continent and from having an
effective defence force. Our stability, alliances and defence links with our neighbours
contribute to our region's stability. Our credibility makes us an effective actor in
international forums. Our cultural and ethnic diversity gives us a great opportunity to
consolidate our personal ties with the countries of our region and the building blocks
years ago of such great innovations as the Colombo Plan have meant that the network
of personal associations between this country and the nations of the region are vast and
deep and I was reminded of this in a very personal way when I attended a gathering of
the Alumni of Australian Universities during my recent visit to Singapore and to spend
an hour amongst literally hundreds of Singaporeans who had been educated at
Australian universities brought home to me both the longevity of the Association and
its intensely personal character and it was an object lesson, an object reminder to me
that the greatest, the most enduring and the most effective bonds between any nations
are those that are built on people to people contacts and no number of trade missions,
no number of Prime Ministerial visits can ever equal the value of the experiences, the
very positive experiences of those thousands of people when being educated in
Australia, the contribution and the value of that experience to building friendships
between our two nations.
Ladies and gentlemen, as we go into the next century. my Government is committed to
using these strengths to build on a long history of honourable participation by Australia
in our region. I congratulate those who have formed the centre. I thank the Asia
Society of the United States for its interest and its activity and I very genuinely thank
the businesses of Australia who have contributed so magnificently to make the
foundation of this centre a reality. It is an important mission. There is no geographic
linkage more important to the future of Australia than our linkage with the nations of
the Asia Pacific region. We are forever part of this part of the world. It is forever the
destiny of Australia to see her future bound up with the aspirations of the hundreds of
millions of people of the region and all of the energies and all of our policies must
always be directed towards ensuring in the national interest that those links are open
and fuilsome and generous and directed towards the maximisation of the benefits that
we can all derive from that very important association.
Thank you. 



(-A
EMBARGOED 8.3OPM
8 May 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
AUSTRALIA-ASIA SOCIETY
" AUSTRALIA AND ASIA: AN ENDURING ENGAGEMENT"
E O E
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen
It is a great honour to be asked to open the AustralAsia Centre of the Asia Society. I
am grateful for the opportunity to speak tonight on a subject of great importance.
Australia's relations with the nations of Asia.
The AustralAsia Centre
The Asia Society is the pre-eminent American non-government institution promoting
contacts with Asia. For 30 years it has played a leading role in highlighting the extent
of US interests in Asia.
The AustralAsia Centre will help improve dialogue on Asia between the United States
and Australia. Through its link with the Asia Society it underlines both the long
history and the current relevance of Australia's cooperation with the United States in
the Asia-Pacific region.
Like President Clinton's visit to Australia last year it demonstrates the continuing
importance of Australia's partnership with the United States and our common destiny
in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Centre will draw also on the experience of the Asia Society to strengthen
understanding in Australia of Asia. It will complement the efforts of existing
Australian institutions like the Asia Australia Institute, Asia Link and the regional
studies centres in our universities and Asia 2000 in New Zealand. 
-2-
1 congratulate Mr Hugh Morgan and Mr Nick Platt for their initiative and energy in
bringing the AustralAsia Centre into existence.
Mr Morgan recently accompanied me with a group of business leaders on my visit to
China and has a strong interest in Asia. I am pleased that his interest has been widely
supported by the private sector, which has funded the establishment of the Centre.
Under the direction of Mr Richard Woolcott, a distinguished diplomat with many
years' experience in Asia, I have little doubt that the Centre will be a great success.
Australia's future
The AustralAsia Centre is formed at an important time in the history of Australia's
engagement with the countries of Asia.
We are living through a period of economic transformation that has not been equalled
in relative terms since the Industrial Revolution over two centuries ago.
Economic globalisation, technological advance and more open trading arrangements
are transforming patterns of production, employment and opportunity around the
world. It is a transformation from which no modern economy is, or can be, immune.
Australia is equipping itself as a nation to meet the challenges and seize the
opportunities of the 2 1st century.
There can be no argument that a principal task of my government is the continued
pursuit of economic reform. Those who say that the reform process has gone too far
are not only wrong but their nostrums, if accepted, would condemn Australia to a
bleak and fearful future.
The task of modern government is to maintain the momentum for the changes which
are necessary whilst to the extent possible cushioning the personal and social
consequences of that change.
That is why the Coalition's focus in government will continue to be on standing up for
Australia in a world where the competition for investment, growth and jobs is
increasingly fierce.
Our focus will continue to be on improving Australia's capacity to compete
internationally through a comprehensive economic and social policy reform
programme. Our focus will continue to be on increasing our national savings and the
competitiveness of our industries and enterprises.
Our focus will continue to be on helping families and small businesses.
Our focus will continue to be on expanding opportunities for younger Australians and
providing greater security for older Australians. 
That is the course my government has charted and on which it will continue to lead.
Australia and Asia
Australia's engagement in her region plays a vital part in my government's strategy.
In discussing that engagement I am going to make no apology for raising first and
foremost economic factors.
If Australians are going to enjoy better living standards and if we are going to create
the jobs we need, economic growth is essential.
Given the size of Australia's domestic market, exports are vital to our growth. In the
past year, our exports grew more than twice as fast as our economy as a whole.
Moreover, surveys of small companies and exporters show that those which export are
more likely to be hiring employees and pay higher wages.
The markets of Asia are growing fast. During the past decade more than half the
world's economic growth has come from East Asia. In the next few years, it will
continue to grow at least twice as fast as the rest of the world.
Already nearly 60 per cent of our exports now go to East Asia. Seven of our top ten
export markets are in East Asia.
It follows that one of the most decisive influences on our standard of living and the
capacity of our economy to provide worthwhile jobs for our children will be our
success in exporting our goods and services to Asian countries.
In the first place that will require us to produce high-quality products that are
internationally competitive and to maintain a reputation as a reliable supplier.
Success will also depend on improving our knowledge of our region, our
understanding of its markets and our capacity to operate in them.
We are indeed fortunate that more and more Australians particularly young
Australians are studying Asian languages and are learning about the history, culture
and economies of our neighbours.
Our ties cannot just be economic. As our economy becomes more integrated with our
neighbours', our stake in their security rises and our mutual understanding must
grow. Moreover, the pursuit of our economic interests in the region cannot be divorced from
acceptance by the countries of our region that we are worthwhile partners.
That means making a commitment a national commitment to developing closer ties
with our region. 
It means welcoming visitors and investment from Asian nations.
It means valuing our migrant communities.
It is impossible to imagine a prosperous and successful Australia which is not deeply
engaged with Asia.
Those who propose putting up the shutters could not be more wrong.
Pressures of change
Against this background, let me say a few words about some of the propositions put by
the member for Oxley.
Like any other Australian citizen, she has a right to be heard.
Personal attacks and mindless drowning out of her views only feed sympathy for her.
But she has to be prepared to have her views tested, their accuracy assessed and their
substance analysed.
She cannot have it both ways. She enjoys freedom to express her views. Equally, she
has to be accountable for her views. She cannot evade responsibility for the
consequences of her statements. This is all the more so because she now claims to lead
a political party.
She is wrong when she suggests that Aboriginals are not disadvantaged.
She is wrong when she says that Australia is in danger of being swamped by Asians.
She is wrong to seek scapegoats for society's problems.
She is wrong when she denigrates foreign investment, because its withdrawal would
cost jobs.
She is wrong when she claims that Australia is headed for civil war.
Why has she not distanced herself from supporters who have made irresponsible calls
for the legalisation of the type of weapon that Martin Bryant used to murder
Australians? The political campaign mounted by the member for Oxley seeks to exploit fear and
instability without offering solutions or hope.
As best I can discern them, her policies do not provide a positive response to the
challenge of boosting Jobs and growth, of revitalising our regions, of strengthening
families, of reducing our national debt and of providing greater security in people's
lives. 
They have nothing to do with meeting the challenge as our parents and grandparents
before us did of passing on to the next generation of Australians an even better,
stronger and more united Australian society than was handed on to us.
None of these goals will be achieved through empty populism or cheap sloganeering.
None will be achieved through bitter and divisive recriminations. They will only be
achieved through constructive and consistent purpose and through adjusting to new
realities in ways that reflect what is best in Australia's past.
I want to make clear that, under my government, Australia's future will be built on
hope, openness, confidence, and Australian values not a sour, bitter, narrow-minded
view of our past and future.
In responding to the views of the member for Oxley, it would be a serious mistake to
attack those who are apparently attracted to her as bigoted, narrow-minded and racist.
A few, no doubt, are. Most, however, are not.
The fact is that Australia is a deeply tolerant, fair-minded and generous society.
Discrimination on the basis of a person's racial or ethnic origin is offensive to all
decent Australians.
Every Australian, regardless of colour, race or creed, is entitled to walk our streets,
ride our buses and trains, play sport on our fields and pursue their work with
confidence utterly free of discrimination, vilification or insult. Every Australian,
regardless of background, is entitled to be treated with respect and dignity.
All decent Australians agree with that, and find repulsive any violation of that code of
national tolerance.
The appeal the member for Oxley has temporarily achieved lies not so much in the
belief that she articulates alternatives for Australia clearly she does not.
Rather, she echoes concerns about the pace of change and the pressures that parts of
our community are under. These concerns deserve the most sensitive understanding.
The government is committed to giving them a serious and effective response.
She also echoes long-smouldering resentments about attitudes which have been
imposed upon the majority of the Australian community without that majority feeling it
has even had an opportunity of debating those issues.
In part, the 1996 federal election result represented a repudiation of the stultifying
political correctness which had afflicted so many areas of the Australian polity during
the previous decade.
Many Australians resent the negative view of our history and the Australian
achievement which has become so standard in recent years. 
Those same Australians resent the constant claim that our history is little more than a
litany of racism, sexism and imperial triumphalism.
Those same Australians resent the plaintive way in which so many encourage us to
approach our association with the nations of the Asia-Pacific region. They resent the
suggestion that Australia has to change its identity in order to play a part in our region.
The truth is that we go to that association as contributors as well as beneficiaries.
I know why some Australians have stopped to listen to the member for Oxley. I say to
them, however, she has no answers to your problems. The Hanson cure would be
worse than the disease.
The government's approach to our region
It is worth reminding both Australians and the people of the region of two striking
features about Australia's engagement with our region.
First, it has been a two-way street. We do not come as a supplicant to the regional
association. We have brought much to it.
Australia has been a dependable friend and an important economic and security partner
to many countries in the region.
One has only to mention the Colombo Plan and APEC to recall the continuity and scale
of Australia's contribution. Australian exports of energy and raw materials helped
make possible Japan's dramatic industrial take-off.
Australia's record for tolerance and acceptance is regarded as an example to the world.
Under Malcolm Fraser's government, Australia accepted more Indochinese refugees
on a per capita basis than any other country in the world.
I would also make the point that Australia's willingness to take in people from all over
the world, including Asia, has been richly repaid by the contribution these immigrants
and refugees have subsequently made to Australia.
The second striking feature of our engagement, as these examples show, is its
longevity and continuity.
The motives for that engagement have changed with the times. Each government has
naturally operated in the context of its own domestic and regional circumstances.
But the importance of engagement with our region has been a consistent theme of
Australian governments since the Second World War, if not before. This has been true
for governments from both sides of politics.
My government is continuing this tradition. It is committed to advancing Australia's
national interests in our region. There will, however, be some important differences
from our predecessors. 
My government, for example, will be prepared to listen to what people in the region
are saying to us.
During his recent visit to Australia, the Japanese prime minister, Mr Hashimoto, made
some important proposals to advance Australia's relationship with Japan and to
highlight Australia's role in the region.
This is a healthy and welcome development. We will have the confidence to welcome
and respond to an initiative from a friend like Japan-as well as from others. We do not
think that the only good initiatives have to come from us.
On the issue of human rights, Australia will always stand up for her beliefs and values.
As prime minister I will never do less. But I do not see that public hectoring or
lecturing other countries about their shortcomings or differences from us is appropriate
behaviour for a neighbour or indeed likely to promote our interests or values.
Equally, Australia herself does not expect to be on the receiving end of lectures. We
have the same right to have our values and sensitivities respected. Mutual respect has
to be two-way.
The impression that was sometimes conveyed that, in order to get on with our region,
Australia would denigrate its associations with countries outside the region is one that
I and many Australians found objectionable.
My government has put considerable effort into pursuing Australia's interests in the
region. My own role in this has been to try to establish good working relationships
with my counterparts in some of the countries of most importance to Australia. We
have made good progress in improving the frameworks within which Australia and
the business community in particular might better pursue her goals.
My first bilateral visit was to Indonesia, our largest neighbour, an important and
growing market for Australia, and a partner with which we share many economic and
strategic interests as is reflected in our close cooperation in APEC and our security
agreement. I made clear to President Soeharto my commitment to strengthening our relationship.
His response was very positive.
I have already mentioned the good developments that are taking place in our
relationship with Japan, which I also visited last year. Both Mr Hashimoto and I are
committed to ensuring that our partnership becomes ever more effective in the region.
In Manila last year at the APEC leaders meeting, I reaffirmed Australia's commitment
to the economic goals of APEC.
In China recently, I proposed we form a partnership in growth. Australia has an
important role to play in supplying China with the resources and energy to fuiel its 
growth. Australia can play in China a similar role to the one we have played in the
growth of Japan and Korea.
Australia can also provide the financial, legal and other services for which China has a
growing need as its economy modernises and becomes more sophisticated.
The seniority of the business leaders who came with me sent a very strong signal that
the Australian government and business community want to work closely together in
building our economic links with China.
The Chinese premier, Li Peng, and I agreed to have regular summits in order to ensure
that Australia and China have good and direct communications at a political level. I
also proposed that we upgrade and broaden the scope of our ministerial dialogue on
economic issues.
Since my meeting, Australia has welcomed visits from a number of very senior Chinese
leaders. You will be pleased to hear that China's vice premier, Zhu Rongji, will visit
later this month.
My talks with Goh Chok Tong have confirmed the vitality of our links with Singapore.
I hope also this year to be able to visit India and Malaysia, and next year Korea.
My contacts in the region have left me optimistic about Australia's prospects in our
region. Regional prosperity and stability
I am also optimistic about the prospects for the region as a whole.
Asia's economic growth is good for the people of the region, good for Australia and
good for the world. It is true that this same growth is producing major changes in the
strategic outlook of our region. Potential sources of conflict remain over Taiwan and
on the Korean peninsula.
But greater prosperity has for the most part improved the prospects of stability within
countries of the region. It has benefited our security by raising everyone's stake in the
stability of the region.
The question is how does the region ensure that this state of affairs continues.
A part of the answer lies in doing what we can to remove the constraints on continued
growth. This is why Australia's role as a supplier of resources, services, technology
and finance is important. This is why the work of APEC in bringing down barriers to
trade and investment and helping remove bottlenecks in infrastructure, capital flows,
and human resources is important.
A second part of the answer lies in doing what we can to maintain the region's
stability. Stability is necessary if countries of the region are to be able to devote their 
energies to meeting the common challenges of education, economic reform and raising
the living standards of their people.
My government has been active in this regard. We are committed to maintaining the
Australian Defence Force's capabilities and improving its effectiveness.
My government has reinvigorated our alliance with the United States. Our alliance,
along with those of Japan and Korea, support the engagement of the United States in
our region and are therefore vital to regional stability.
We are committed to maintaining effective security links with our neighbours through
the Five Power arrangements with Malaysia and Singapore, the security agreement
with Indonesia and other bilateral arrangements.
Australia is also playing a prominent role in the development of sturdier regional
frameworks to promote regional dialogue and understanding on security matters, in
particular the ASEAN Regional Forum.
These activities do not reflect a fear on the government's part of any particular threat.
I especially want to emphasise that it is in no-one's interests to treat China as a threat.
We want to see China fully involved in regional and global institutions. It is also in
China's interests to see these strengthened. China too needs to assure itself of open
markets and a stable international trading system if its economy is to keep growing. It
has an interest in the countries of the region being confident about future stability.
The government believes its policies will contribute to our region's strategic resilience.
They will help provide us and our neighbours with greater confidence that we can
navigate safely a period of great economic, political and strategic change. They will
help ensure that the economic progress of the past 10 or 20 years is not disrupted.
Australia, the region and the world
Attempts to define Asia, Asianness and Australia's place in it are interesting, but they
tend to produce more heat than light in the media. Worse, they have left a degree of
confusion or even resentment among many in our community about issues on which
there need be no confusion.
I do not want to get into definitions tonight. Rather, I would like to finish by
reiterating that our links with our region will be vital to Australia's political and
economic future.
In building those links, Australia does not have to choose between her geography and
her history. Our history and our links with the West make a unique contribution to our
region. The recent advances we have made in our relationships with Japan, China, Indonesia
and the United States demonstrate this. As do visits to Australia in the past six months 
by President Clinton, Mr Hashimoto, Chancellor Kohl and shortly the Chinese vice
premier, Zhu Rongji.
Australia can be confident about its place in our region. We bring many strengths to
bear. Australia has economically, politically and strategically an important role to
play. We are a stable democracy. We are located near a major source of the world's
economic growth. The size of our economy, our vast resources, and our technological
capabilities make us a very attractive economic partner. Our high levels of education
and our innovativeness give us the capacity to use our assets effectively.
We enjoy the security inherent in being an island continent and from having an effective
defence force. Our stability, alliances and defence links with our neighbours contribute
to our region's security. Our credibility makes us an effective actor in international
forums. Our cultural and ethnic diversity gives us a great opportunity to consolidate our
personal ties with the countries of our region.
As we go into the next century, my government is committed to using these strengths
to build on a long history of honourable participation by Australia in our region. 



I11 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
OFFICIAL OPENING OF SCALABRINI VILLAGE
AUSTRAL, SYDNEY
E E O
Thank you very much George, to the Deputy Premier of NSW, Andrew Refshuage, to
my colleague, John Fahey, the Minister for Finance and also the Federal Member for
this area, to Craig Knowles, to my other parliamentary colleagues, to the Fathers
Provincial and most particularly my friend, His Excellency the Ambassador to the
Republic of Italy in Australia, to Father Nevio who is synonymous with the Scalabrini
Village, you can't talk about the Scalabrini Village without talking about Father Nevio
and to all the other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I remember very well when I came here in October of 1987. 1 came as Opposition
Leader. I did say that if I ever became Prime Minister, and I've got to say in
October 1987 1 thought it was a little distant, if I ever did become Prime Minister that I
would return and I am very happy to be back here today. And I'm also very happy to
recall some of the things that I said in October of 1987 and to say to all of you that
what those words meant then meant just as much some, almost 10 years later. And the
most important thing that I think I said in October of 1987 was that of the enormous
gifts and benefits that the Italian people have brought to Australia, none was stronger,
none was greater and none ought to be more cherished than the commitment of Italian
people to the care and nurture of their family members, especially the elderly members
of their families.
It has been one of the great symbols of the contribution that Italian people have made
to Australian life, particularly since the end of the Second World War. And their
demonstration of that care and commitment is an object lesson to other sections of the
Australian community and that was true 10 years ago and it remains true today and I'm
sure that when one of my successors comes back here in 10 or 15 or 20 years time that
he or she will be able to say exactly the same thing. He or she will be able to say that
the demonstration of care and nurture within the family by Australians of Italian
descent and Italian background is an object lesson to all of the rest of the Australian
community. Ladies and gentlemen today is an occasion for me, on behalf of the Federal
Government to honour the particular contribution of the Scalabrini Village, of the
movement that is throughout the world committed itself to the care of the aged. It is 
of course as people grow old that they are able to spend their years in retirement in
touch with their cultural roots as well as in touch with the members of their family. I
remember a conversation I had with Sir James Gobbo, now the Governor of Victoria
and certainly one of the greatest of all Australians of Italian descent saying to me in a
chat we were having about cultural issues, he said there is nothing more incongruous
he said than the notion of an elderly lady of Italian descent who spent the first 40 years
of her life in Italy being encouraged to sing the Road to Gundagai around the piano in
a nursing home. And of course he put it well, there is nothing wrong with the Road to
Gundagai, it's a terrific song and I know that a lot of Australians of Italian descent can
sing it as well as other Australians, but the truth simply is that as you get older you
reach out more and you need the support and the comfort and the familiarity of your
cultural roots and your cultural background.
That is why the Scalabrini Village is so important. It is why another organisation that I
have association with within my own electorate, The Sir Moses Montefiori Jewish
Home is so very important to Australians of Jewish belief It is important that people
feel that comfort and ease in the culture which is their first culture and their first
understanding and therefore it is a very, very strong commitment of my government to
maintain as part of its approach to aged care policy, a respect for, and a promotion of
villages and complexes which have a particular cultural identification.
As Carl Melvey mentioned, and in saying that I was to particularly salute the
impressive contribution that Carl Melvey has made to the Village. The great
contribution that he has made to the community life of the Italian people in Sydney and
also the very impressive contribution that Carl has made in his general professional and
business life and I think you are indeed lucky to have a person of that business and
commercial acumen to give you so much advice and to have had that counsel for so
long and so persistently and in such a loyal fashion.
We have ladies and gentlemen, as Carl mentioned, we have at a Federal level made
some changes about the funding of nursing homes and I want to take the opportunity
of saying to you today very directly that those new funding arrangements, once they
are up and running, will tackle head on the problem that has been developing over a
long period of time of how on a fair and equitable basis, whilst protecting the people
who can't afford to make a contribution and our scheme will protect those people it
will protect those people fully how you can get some more capital into the nursing
home area. And as a result of those changes I can confidently predict that over the
next few years a much larger amount of money, we calculate about $ 130 million over a
four year period, will be injected in a much needed way into the nursing home structure
of Australia because they have over the years those nursing homes they have become
starved of capital. And no government, whether it is Labor or Liberal, State or Federal
has unlimited resources to provide for exercises of that kind of what we have done
whilst protecting people who can't afford to make a contribution we'll introduce a
system that over the next four years you are going to see the injection of a much
needed sum of about $ 130 million into the capital needs of nursing homes and I think
when those reforms are up and running and when the finance and the equity and the
protection they involve for the under-privileged is recognised and understood they will
be seen as a very far-sighted, a very courageous and a very, very necessary structural
reform. But most importantly we'll get more money into nursing homes in Australia 
Ends 3
and that is, with an aging population, an absolutely essential policy objective of any
government. Can I finally say ladies and gentlemen that the retired people in Australian have been a
very important goal, have been a very, very important element of the policies of my
government over the last 13 months. I'm very proud that the commitments we made
in relation to the taxation treatment of self-funded retirees were introduced in the last
budget. I am very happy to say that many retired people will benefit from the tax
incentives of private health insurance that will come into operation on the first of July.
And I think in a number of ways the retired community of Australia will find Tuesday
night's Budget a very, very welcome Budget. It will be a good Budget for retired
people in Australia and most importantly of all over the last few years we have been
able to achieve in Australia and I don't know that it started immediately on the second
of March 1996 but certainly we have built on it and made it a little better and we have
been able to achieve a very low level of inflation. And there is nothing that destroys
the stability and the savings of elderly retired people in any community than high rates
of inflation. And although some of the retired people may not welcome the slightly
lower interest rates that have come with lower inflation certainly over a long period of
time price stability is enormously important to the retired people.
So ladies and gentlemen can I say to all of you in a very personal way I'm very, very
happy to be back here. I love mixing with and coming to functions involving the
Italian community in Australia. It's an opportunity for me on behalf of the rest of the
Australian community to salute the enormous and unselfish generous contribution that
Italian people have made to Australia. Italians comprise the largest group of
immigrants to this country with a non-English speaking background. They have
penetrated and reached and achieved in every area of Australian life, whether it's the
professions, it's business, it's politics but most importantly of all they have in every
area of Australian life made as individuals and as families and as part of the community
they have made an enormous contribution and an ongoing contribution to the tolerant
open, diverse and very cosmopolitan Australian society which we now have.
I say on behalf of all the Australians of non-Australian descent, thank you. Thank you
from all of us for the contribution that you have made. 



1i6tMt p~:/ l/ ww~ w. tia. gov. au/ piiic/ pressrel/ btidget. ltiii
16 May 1997
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
POST BUDGET ADDRESS
ANA HOTEL SYDNEY
E O E
Thank you very much Michael, to the Leader of the New South Wales opposition, Peter Collins, my
other Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
This of course is the second budget in nine months so the Friday post-budget Prime Ministerial
briefing to this particular gathering comes fairly rapidly after the budget that was brought down in
August of last year. And in trying to put what was delivered by the Treasurer last Tuesday night and in
trying to put it into a proper context, I want to invite you to see what governments do in relation to
budgets but also what governments do in relation to other policy decisions and policy announcements
as being a continuum of a three year approach.
It is now 14 months since my government was elected to office in March of 1996 elected with a very
large majority in the House of Representatives but not securing control of the Upper House. We've
faced a number of significant economic problems. 1 said when I become Prime Minister that the
Australian economy that I inherited was something of a curate's egg. There were some good parts
about it, we did have relatively low inflation, and there have been a number of changes which the
Coalition in opposition have very strongly supported implemented by the former government.
But there are number of areas where things were nowhere near as positive and our policy priorities
were directed towards them. The first of those was of course about major changes to Australia's
industrial relations system. Many of you will know that over the last decade, and the varying positions
that I've held in Australian politics and I sometimes think that's just about every one other the last ten
years, different positions I have regarded reform of the industrial relations system and deregulation
of the labour market as being far and away the most important cultural change that needs to be
undertaken by the Australian economy.
The Workplace Relations Bill that finally passed through the Senate was, I have said in the past, about
per cent of what we wanted. It wasn't everything of what we wanted but it went a great deal
further than many of the rather immediate critics at the time said that it did, and the extent of the
changes in that Workplace Relations Act are only now starting to become apparent. And I quite
deliberately commenced my remarks about the budget at this luncheon in drawing your attention to
the significance of the decision that was handed down by the full bench of the Industrial Relations
Commission yesterday. And that particular decision, has in the words of one veteran industrial
relations commentator, put the final nail in the coffin of the award system in Australia. And what that
particular decision has underlined is the supremacy of enterprise bargaining under the industrial
relations system ushered in by the Workplace Relations Act.
What the full bench did yesterday was to reject an agreement that had been entered into between the
major transport employers and the unions in the transport industry an agreement which if approved
would have spread with adverse affects in the Government's view all through the many small
businesses in the transport industry. But the real significance of that decision was the declaration by
the full bench of the Industrial Relations Commission comprised I might add of a group of people who
I f606/ 30/ 97 17: 32: 43
16 May ,997
I of 6 
16 ay 997http:// w~ vw. nla. gov. au/ pitc/ pressreI/ budgt. litii
have had a life long commitment to the centralised industrial relations system with the
acknowledgment by the full bench that the design features of the Workplace Relations Act meant that
the Industrial Relations Commission had to give supremacy to enterprise bargaining and had to regard
the award system in the future as being very much in the nature of a safety net. Now that is a very
significant decision and it proclaims, in my view, in a very practical way and as the implications of it
spread through thle business community, it will be seen by the business community as signalling the
fact that the Workplace IRelations Act, although not going as far as some would like, although only
going perhaps 80 per cent of the distance that we would have liked when the legislation was first put
into the Senate, it has brought about some fundamental changes to the way in which industrial
relations is conducted in this country.
And right at the moment there is of course another industrial relations issue looming at a political
level. And that concerns the decision I announced four weeks ago when I made a statement on
initiatives to assist small business that we would introduce a regulation to exempt from the operation
of any unfair dismissal laws, any unfair dismissal prohibitions of any kind, small businesses employing
fewer than 15 people. The reason we had a limit of 15 was simply based upon the limitations
contained in the legislation that we were able to get through the Senate. And that particular measure
would have said that any small business employing fewer than 15 people was not liable to any unfair
dismissal constraints in relation to employees that had been in their employee for fewer than 12
months. And we regarded it as entirely as eminently reasonable, entirely fair that an employer in that
situation be able to give somebody a period of 12 months' probation and if any time during that
12-month period the employee did not prove to be satisfactory then it would be reasonable to let the
employee go without facing the threat of any kind of unfair dismissal suit. And the threat of some suits
in relation to small business are very real. Anyway, we brought the regulation down and the Labor
Party and the Australian Democrats have announced that they will disallow the regulation in thle
Senate. And if they secure the support of Senator Harradine and Senator Colston, well, that regulation
won't become law. And I made it clear a few days ago and I repeat it again today, that if the Senate
does in fact disallow that particular regulation the Government will immediately incorporate it in the
form of a bill, pass it through the House of Representatives and present it to the Senate and we'll
persist with the presentation of that piece of legislation because we think it is a very valuable element
in the armoury of policy measures that we have to assist the small business community.
So ladies and gentlemen, we identified amongst the negative aspects of the Australian economy that
we inherited in March of 1996, we identified industrial relations reform as being very high on the list
of priorities. But the next area that we identified as being of a major challenge was, of course, the
underlying budget deficit. We inherited an underlying budget deficit of about $ 10.5 billion. Within a
few weeks of taking office the Treasurer and the Minister of Finance declared that our objective was
to achieve a structural surplus during our first term in government. We have, in fact, in the budget
documnentation that has been presented, we have in fact, if it is realised, we have in fact achieved that
was then regarded as an extraordinarily ambitious aim. Because in 1998/ 99 it is estimated, according
to the budget documentation, that we will have turned that structural deficit of $ 10.5 billion into a
structural surplus of $ 1 .6 billion.
And I would have to say to this audience as I would say to any business audience anywhere in
Australia, that over the past few years there has been no theme that has been more regularly repeated
at business gatherings and more regularly put to my party's vote in opposition and in government than
the desirability of this country no longer being a debtor nation, but this country tackling the size of its
budget deficit.
And under the budget announced by the Treasurer on Tuesday night we will, by the year 2000, have
reduced to about 10% of GDP the entire national debt of the Australian nation from a figure of 19.5%
of GDP in 1995. The cycle of debt and deficit is something that I believe had to be tackled as a first
priority by the new government. There was no way that we could do that without understating, as we
2 f 606/ 301/ 79: 73 2: 46
16 May 997
2 of 6 
1l~ 697 i iila gov. ati/ piic/ lprcssrcl/ bidget. litiinI
did in our first budget, very substantial reductions in government spending. And the budget savings of
between $ 7 billion and $ 8 billion that were announced by the Treasurer in August of last year, of
course, have carried over into this year's budget. And we deliberately embarked upon a team
programme of expenditure reduction. And like any intelligent government we quite deliberately
undertook many measures in the expenditure area involving difficulty for sections of the community in
our first year in government. Any government that has a social conscience as well as an obligation to
govern in the economic interests of the nation must strike a balance between the desire to have a
healthy bottom line and also the social and cultural obligations that are incumbent upon any
government. And it is necessary to strike a balance.
We have imposed, over the last two years, a number of very significant changes in areas such as higher
education, where the imposition of higher HECs charges, I think, restores an appropriate balance
between public subsidy of university education and private provision and private contribution. I have
never believed myself in the notion that a free tertiary education is the birth right of every Australian. I
think the option of free education at a primary and secondary level is something that is very ingrained
in the Australian community. But as far as tertiary education is concerned, I always regarded it as an
exercise in unsustainability and unaffordability to tether the notion that this country could forever
afford to provide free university places for all Australians who could win admission to this nation's
universities. And that is why in the late 1 980s when the former government introduced the H-ECs fee
thle Liberal and National Parties in opposition did not oppose it. In fact, it lured, albeit in a different
form, policy proposals that we had put forward in opposition. And the 1-ECs changes that were
brought in last year have significantly increased the contribution of students towards their education.
But we think that's fair. We think it strikes the right balance. Likewise with changes that we've
introduced in relation to the admission of people into nursing homes. I support the principle that if
people can afford to make a contribution towards their care in a nursing home in the later years of
their life then it is reasonable for that charge to be imposed and that contribution to be sought from the
person. I don't support the view that the untouched inheritance rights of the family of an older person
take priority over the interests of the general body of taxpayers in relation to people in that situation.
I learnt from those two examples, ladies and gentlemen, to underscore the point that in trying to strike
a balance between our economic obligations and our social obligations it is always necessary to seek
an element of compromise. There will always be some who will say-you should have gone much
further. There will always be people who argue that no matter how much is cut out of a budget you
could always cut a lot further. And the answer to that is quite obviously you can. But, of course, you
have to ask yourself whether the cost in terms of the impact of reductions in certain expenditure areas
on individuals is sustainable given the kind of society and the kind of nation we are.
I always believe that there is a truly Australian way of approaching issues of equity between the
economnic imperatives of a government's obligations and the social obligations of that government.
We do not have as big a welfare state, nor as complicated, nor as expensive a welfare state as many of
the nations of western Europe, and thankfully so. Equally, I don't think the Australian ethos would
allow some of the gaps in the welfare system of the United States to be tolerated in this country. And
as in so many things, Australia, I think, has struck a very clever and I think intelligent and certainly the
right balance.
I believe that the budget is sound in all of the important economic elements. It will reinforce the
pressure for lower interest rates within the Australian economy. I don't argue that there is
day-follows-night connection, if I can put it that way, between reductions in the budget deficit and the
level of interest rates. Obviously the rate of inflation, the rate of growth ill wages and other
considerations such as the current account deficit, have an impact on the level of official interest rates.
But quite clearly if a government is working its way towards a substantial surplus and this year we will
3 f 606/ 301/ 79: 73 2: 47
16 May ! 997
3 of 6 
16M pay:/ 1/ wl9w7 wv. ilagov. au/ piic/ pressrel/ budget. litil
repay $ 5.3 billion of debt, of national debt, the Government will not be a borrower for a dollar in the
money markets of Australia in the coming financial year, and that is a very significant achievement.
Obviously if we are doing that then that has a very healthy impact on the climate in which the
monetary authorities set interest rates.
I believe the budget will reinforce the low inflation that exists in Australia at the present time. And in
the long term low inflation, of course, helps to turn around the culture in Australia as far as household
savings is concerned.
In the area of savings we have quite deliberately introduced an across-the-board non-means tested
tax incentive to encourage all kinds of savings within the Australian community. We are utterly
unapologetic about the fact that it is not limited to particular savings. And in this context I want to say
very, very directly and very firmly that this measure is quite purposely designed to attract the
investment and the interest of those in the community who are in a position to save and therefore take
advantage of the measure. This argument that because one particular measure is of greater advantage
to one section of the community than another and therefore for that reason alone is flawed is the
equivalent of arguing that because not every person in the community has children that it is a flawed
economic policy to provide financial assistance to those people who do. The purpose of the savings
measure is to encourage and to reward those people who might be discouraged to save or those
people who have in fact saved. And that is why it is non-means tested. That is why it is not only
available for bank deposits but it is also available for personal superannuation contribution. It is also
available for rental returns on investments. It is also available in relation to certain returns from
business investments. In other words it is an across the board incentive and it will be of particular
benefit to self-funded retirees in our community who would have been completely shut out, utterly
shut out of the matching contributions system of the former government which the savings initiative
has replaced. It will over time make a contribution to turning around the culture against savings in this
country. It will take time, not everybody simply because they are not in a position to save will be able
to benefit, but that won't alter the overall value of the measure and I believe that one of the things that
governments must do in implementing economic decisions and economic measures is not only to have
regard to their real value to the community and this measure has real value, but also must have regard
to the symbolic value of particular measures. And in the 22 or 23 years that I've been in politics, one
of the most frequent entreaties I've had as I've gone around talking at business luncheons, being
interviewed on talkback radio, addressing scores of meetings all around Australia, I've frequently been
asked why is it that we tax savings twice. Why is it that we don't have some kind of tax break on
savings. And I'm very proud to say that the second budget of the Howard government is the Budget
that for the first time in the history of this country introduced a general taxation incentive for savings
in this country and I believe it is a very, very valuable measure.
Mr Speaker... ( I'm still in Parliament I'm sorry!)... the habit dies very hard... you know, you are sort of
on automatic pilot to the Speaker. But ladies and gentlemen, quite understandably people have raised
questions about the impact of the budget and the impact of other economic decisions taken by the
government on the level of unemployment in Australia.
Unemployment was around 8.5% when we came to office and youth unemployment was in the order
of 28-30%. It had gone to a level of 11.2% in the early 1990s and it had come down somewhat, but
slowly, from that level, and it does remain, and I freely acknowledge it as a major social and economnic
challenge for my government. No government can intelligently pretend and no opposition can
intelligently pretend that given the character of our economy, given the Australian commitment to a
decent minimumn wage which is very much part of the culture of this country, that reducing the level of
unemployment is going to be an easy task.
I have quite deliberately avoided committing myself to a particular target. And that was a view I might
say that was expressed frequently by some of my political opponents now when they were members of
06/ 30/ 97 17: 32: 48
16 May 997 
16M y1 97ttp: HAvgvowv vanui/ ap iic/ pressrel/ btdget. litiii
the former government. There are two barriers in Australia to lower unemployment. The first of those
barriers is that our economy is not growing fast enough to generate enough jobs to significantly
reduce the level of unemployment and the way in which you get an economy growing faster is to
remove some of the constraints on growth. And those constraints are interest rates that are too high,
inflation that is too high, budget deficits that are too high and levels of national debt which are too
high, and other constraints of course really account for what is in effect the second reason why
unemployment is too high and that is that there are structural rigidities in the Australian economy
which are working against the employment of people. And the bulk of those structural rigidities are to
be found in the area of industrial relations.
It is my view that, as the value of our industrial relations reforms and perhaps some other changes
which I mentioned earlier in my speech in the area of unfair dismissals, as those changes work their
way through the Australian economy then some of the rigidities that now exist in relation to reducing
unemployment will begin to disappear. I can't pretend to you anymore than I could pretend to any
other audience around this country that that is going to happen quickly, but if can run our economy at
four percent or more and that is certainly in current circumstances an aim that if we can build on the
success of this year's budget is an achievable goal, an achievable aim, then I believe that we will begin
to make some inroads into the unacceptably high levels of unemployment.
1 noted yesterday the remarks made by the governor of the Reserve Bank, Mr Ian Macfarlane to the
effect that growth alone would not reduce our unacceptably high level of unemployment. I agree with
that. You need to take action on other fronts. That is why we made changes to the Workplace
Relations Act and it is why we are proposing further changes in that area. But it is also why we have
introduced a work for the dole scheme. It is also why David Kemp has brought in a completely
different training scheme. It is also why we have under study a number of other proposals in
connection with the introduction of a common youth allowance, and one of those proposals is to
remove the disincentives that currently exist as between young people opting to undertake a course of
study and a course of training or alternatively going on the dole.
But 1 wanted to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the challenge of reducing unemployment
remains a huge one, not only for my government and also for the business community but for the
entire Australian community. It is unrealistic to pretend for a moment that it is something that can be
achieved quickly. But I want to reassure you that it remains very much in my mind, it remains a strong
personal commitment of mine, and a strong belief on my part that the Australian people require of us a
continued commitment in moving towards that goal.
Finally, can I say to you ladies and gentlemen that as I look back over the last 14 months like any
other seasoned politician, and like any other politician who has seen the highs, the lows, the middles,
the ups and downs and the ins and outs of the vicissitudes of Australian politics, I am satisfied that the
principal goals that we set ourselves in March of 1996 are well on the road to being realised. We have
before us at the present time one or two extremely complicated and atypical issues. I will, as you
know, journey into Longreach later this afternoon with my friend and my very decent and magnificent
Coalition colleague Tim Fischer, and can I say it is one of the privileges of public life to share a
platform with Tim Fischer who's one of the most decent, dedicated people in the Coalition firmament
anywhere around Australia.
And I'll be going there to explain to the pastoralists not only of Queensland, but also of Australia that
the plan that the Government after a lot of painstaking work has developed, is a very fair and balanced
response to a very difficult problem bequeathed to this government by what I should best describe as a
somewhat impractical decision handed down by the High Court of Australia. And that plan will deliver
all of the certainty and all of the security which farmers and graziers of Australia are entitled.
Notwithstanding some of the wild allegations to the contrary, the plan does not involve some kind of
mass taxpayer funded handout of freehold titles. One of the major elements of the plan is to ensure 06/ 30/ 97 17: 32: 49
16 May 997 
16 Ma1 997httpia:// , g. vowvi. va u/ pnic/ pressrel/ budget. htini
that if there is any upgrading of title after the proper processes of compulsory acquisition by the State
governments of Australia and that should occur on the basis of the payment by the recipient of the
updated title of a sum appropriate to the improved charactered of that title.
What this plan seeks to do ladies and gentlemen is to strike a balance. It respects native title but it
does recognise that as a result of the Wik decision the pendulum of native title matters has swung too
far in the direction of the Aboriginal community. And the Government's goal and the purpose of the
plan is not to push the pendulum back to where it was before the Mabo decision, but rather
to push thle pendulum back into the centre and that is where I believe the great bulk of the Australian
community want that pendulum to be. Most Australians would dread the thought that the farmers and
graziers of this country were thrown into a sense of insecurity and a sense of instability so far as the
title to their properties were concerned and their capacity to manage those properties was concerned.
Equally, in 1997 1 believe there is a strong constituency in this country for acceptance and recognition
of the concept of native title. There is a desire to have a proper basis of cooperation between all
sections of the Australian community. Those who believe that blanket extinguishment of native title
and pastoral leases is an answer to this very difficult problem ignore the dubious constitutionality of
such an approach. They underestimate the potential compensation bill that would face the Australian
nation. And I think they also disregard the negative symbolism of a sweeping act of general
extinguishment of title that would affect only one section of the Australian community. What I believe
my plan will do is to give to the farmers of Australia the security that I promised them and they are
entitled to have. It will reassure them in their capacity to manage their properties without interference
and without meaning to get the permission of native title claimants and at the same time it will do so in
a character and in a fashion that does not offend the desire of most Australians to achieve a fair and
just solution to this extraordinarily difficult problem.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I thank the New South Wales Division and my own Bennelong
Conference for organising this luncheon. Can I thank the business community of Sydney for the
support that it has continued to give to the Liberal Party and to my Government over the last 14
months. I have regarded communication with the business community as being a very important part
of providing good government. I hope that we have kept faith with that. I hope that that process of
communication will continue not only to the benefit of the Government but to the benefit of the entire
community of Australia.
Thank you.
Return to Media Interviews 6 f 606/ 30/ 1977: 32: 49
16 May 1997
6 of 6 



Fax from~ 17/ 05/ 97 13: 48 Pg:
MA~ Y 17 ' 97 13: 43 P. 7
PRIME MINISTER
17 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO PARTICIPANTS AT THE LONGREACH
COMMUNITY MEETING TO DISCUSS THE
WIK 10 POINT PLAN
LONGREACH, QLD
E&amp; OE
Well thank you very much Tim Fischer. To Larry Acton and the Mayor, Mrs
Maloney, and to my fellow Australians.
Can I say that I welcome very much the opportunity for the first time to talk directly
and frankly and openly to a large number of my fellow Australians who I knowv are
deeply concerned, deeply worried and feel that their situation has been made needlessly
vulnerable by a highly impractical court decision. Can I also say to you ladies and
gentlemen that although I was born in Sydney and I have lived-al[ of my life in the
urban parts of Australia, I have always had an immense affection for the outback and
for the bush. I say that at the outset because in all of my political life no charge I
would reject more emphatically, and no charge would offend me more, than the
suggestion that what I've done and what I've believed in has not taken proper account
of the concerns of the Australian bush. And I want to spend, in the limited time
available to me, to tell you where some of the misapprehensions are wrong, to explain
to you that the plan the Federal Government has will deliver the security, and the
guarantees to which the pastoralists of Australia are entitled, without at the same time
producing many of the disadvantages, the instability, the expense and the years of
Constitutional challenge which would result if the simplistic alternative of blanket
extinguishment were adopted.
Now I know there are people in this audience who don't agree with that. I respect that
and I want this morning to have the opportunity to explain why I believe what we have
in mind delivers the guarantees you want without the downsides. But in doing that can
I again remind you as Tim did, that the present Native Title Act was the product of the
combined votes of the Australian Labor Party, the Australian Democrats and
Independents in the Senate. Every man and woman who was a member of the Liberal 
Fax from 17/ 85/ 97 13: 48 Pg: 2
MAY 17 ' 97 13: 43 P. 8
4 Party and the National Party in 1993 voted against the Native Title Act. And all of the
claims, the bogus claimis, the ridiculous ambit claims that have now been put over y'our
properties are the result of legislation that was opposed tooth and nail by all of my
colleagues. And I want that understood because we are often accused of going back
on 1993. We didn't want 1993, we voted against it. And I think it's very important
that the outset that that be understood.
Now ladies and gentlemen could I say a number of very direct things to the pastoralists
who are here, and through this meeting to the pastoralists throughout Australia. That
under our 10 point plan, no pastoral leaseholder can lose anything at all under their
pastoral lease, nothing at all. I've had people say to me over the past few weeks that
they are frightened that as a result of native title claims that they can be thrown off
their property. I see signs here saying that people bought their land, of course they
bought their land. Can I say to you, you can't lose your land, and people who are
quoted around this country saying that native title claimants could have you thrown off
your land, could have you dispossessed, could take away from you what you have paid
for, that is absolutely 100% wrong. And the legislation that we are going to introduce
into the Federal Parliament will confirm that situation, and put beyond any legal doubt
that those sorts of fears are completely unfounded.
The second guarantee, and I use that word carefully, and I use that word deliberately.
The second guarantee I give you is that no pastoral leaseholder can have their title
affected by, or diminished, by a native title claim. None at all. Not affected by it or
not diminished by it.
The third very important guarantee I give you my friends is that no pastoral leaseholder
can have their conduct or their activities in any way connected with the carrying out of
a pastoral or a primary production activity interfered with by a native title claim.
We've had all this talk over the last few months that you'll need the permission of
native title claimants to put in a fence, to sink a dam, or to do anything that is
incidental to the carrying on of your business. Could I say no, no, no that cannot
happen. Because under the guarantees that wvill be contained in this legislation the
right to negotiate, that stupid property rightta a ie ontv il liat
alone, unlike other title holders in Australia, that native title right wfi be completely
abolished and removed for all time in relation to the activities of pastoralists carrying
on not only strictly defined pastoral activities, but also the fbl extent of primary
production activities which you can possibly imagine and which are contained in the
definition under the Taxation Act and as we all know unfortunately, definitions in the
Taxation Act are very widely couched indeed.
So ladies and gentlemen they are the first three guarantees that I want to give you and
can I just repeat them. That you can't have your title in any way diminished or
affected by a native title claim. You can't be put off your property. You can't be
stopped from carrying on your pastoral activities on your property. Your right to do
that will be fully confirmed. No pastoral titleholder can have their title in any way
affected or diminished, but most importantly of all, you can go away from this meeting
safe in the knowledge that when this legisation is passed in the national Parliament.
you will, have the fulal and unfettered capacity to run your property. You will not only
be able to carry on pastoral activity, but you wrill be able to diversify' into all aspects of 
Fax from : 17/ 05/ 97 13: 48 Pg: 3
MAY~ 17 ' 97 13: 44 P9
3
primary production. You will even be able to carry on an incidental tourist business, a
farm-stay business, if that is what you want. And while ever the dominant purpose of
the use of the land remains one relating to pastoral or primary industry activity, you
will be able to do that without getting the say-so, the permission, the beg-your-pardon
or whatever of anybody else. You will be subject like anv other Australian citizen to
the operations of the ordinary laws of the States of Australia and the ordinary laws of
the Commonwealth of Australia. but please don't believe this fear-mongering that says
native title claimants can throw you off your property. They can't. We will never ever
allow that to happen.
Now ladies and gentlemen, tile other guarantees that I want to give you are these.
That if there are any compensation payments ordered to be made in relation to the
compulsory acquisition or compulsory resumption of any established native title rights
anywhere in Australia, that compensation wi~ ll not be borne by tile pastoralists of
Australia, it will be borne by the general body of the Australian taxpayer on the ratio of
to be paid by the Commonwealth Government, and 25% to be paid by the State
governments. And if anybody here before me thinks that compensation payable for
native title is going to come out of the pockets of the individual pastoralists, in relation
to whom property claims have been made, can I promise you that that is 100%
inaccurate and 100% wrong. We are not going to ask the individuals who may be
related to these claims in anyway to pay the costs of compensation. Can I also say to
you that in relation to the issue of compensation, that no matter what route is chosen
by the government, if we were to go down the blanket extinguishment route there
would still be compensation payable in relation to any established native title rights.
Because there is a clause in the Commonwealth Constitution that effectively says, that
if any property right is extinguished or taken away, it can only be done on just terms.
And whether you like that or not, whether I like it or not, whether people in other
parts of Australia like it or not, it is the law of this country, it is in the Constitution.
and please don't anybody go away from this meeting imagining that the blanket
extinguishment over pastoral leases of any possible native title of that blanket
extinguishment is something that can be done and thereby escaping thle liability and thle
possibility of compensation. But can I emphasise with you again that wve have worked
out a compensation arrangement which I understand to be acceptable to all of the State
governments of Australia whereby if there is compensation as a result of a compulsory
acquisition procedures of the State then that compensation wvill be borne not by you,
alone, it will be borne by the general body of the Australian taxpayer. And the people
in the cities arnd the people who have got another view on this, a view different from
you, they will have to contribute, along with the rest of the Australian community and
the general body of the Australian community. Could I also promise you, as I have
already, that there will be a far more generous approach provided and afforded in
relation to legal assistance and legal aid for pastoralists who may be involved in any
kind of action.
The other thing that I want to emphasise to you my firiends is that the existing Native
Title Act as both Tim Fischer and I said at the outset, the existing Native Title Act is
nothing more than an administrative nightmare. The existing Native Title Act was
opposed by me, and it was opposed by the Liberal and National Parties in 1993
because we knew what has now happened would happen. We were divided by the
press at the time. I will never forget when the Native Title Act was passed in 1993. 
Fax from : 17/ 05/ 97 13: 48 Pg: 4
MAY 17 ' 97 13: 45 .0
4
the entire federal parliamentary press gallery ( inaudible) out of boredom and Gareth
Evans and Cheryl Kernot danced and embraced arnd hugged each other in the Senate
chamber. When John Hewson criticised it, as the then leader of the opposition, he was
howled down, he was abused and he was criticised by the politically correct press of
the federal parliamentary press gallery. We were the people who opposed it. And I
want to drive that point home again and again, because we knew what has now
happened would occur. We knew people would have bogus claims put on their
properties. We knew the right to negotiate was a licence for people to come from
nowhere and make a claim on your property and then say until you pay me out. we're
not going to allow you to do anything with your property. Well let me say I regard
that as repugnant, and I regard that as un-Australian and unacceptable and that is going
to be removed by the amendments that are already in the Federal Parliament, You
won't have to put up with that anymore. And under the procedures that wve have in
place ladies and gentlemen, bogus claims will not succeed. Under the procedures that
we have in place, all of the claims that have already been lodged will have to go
through the far more stringent procedure which we are legislating for. Under the
procedure that we have in place the capacity of people to come from nowhere and to
try and interfere with the conduct of your pastoral business wvill be taken away
completely. Can I say two other things about the detail of the plan. One of those relates to ( fhe
question of access. I can understand the fear in the community that people who have
no connection at all with your land can come from a distant part of Australia and say,
well years and years ago my relatives, or my ancestors, or my friends, or the other
members of my tribe had a connection with this property, and therefore I've got some
right to come onto your property and to exercise my traditional access rights. Well
under the amendments that we are framing that can't happen. Unless somebody has a
current physical connection with the land, I repeat that, unless somebody has a current
physical connection with the land, than access rights cannot be obtained. Now they
cannot. And that if any of those rights are to exist, those rights must be exercised at all
times with complete respect for, and in complete deference to. the rights of the
pastoralists who own and operate the property.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I say to you this is a difficult issue. It is an issue which goes
to the heart of your right to survive in a very difficult physical and economic and social
environment. Some of you may have thought that my comment about my concern for
the outback of Australia was the sort of thing that politicians say at the beginning of
speeches. Can I assure you it's not. Can I assure you that I am happy to spend as
much time as you can and I can today to listen to your questions, to answer them as
openly as! I can, and then afterwards to meet as many of you as I can to listen to what
you have to say. I believe that we need to move forward. I believe that we need to
take action as a nation to put the doubt and the confusion created by the very
impractical decision of the High Court in the Wik case, to put that behind us. We have
two choices. We can go down the path that I've endeavoured to explain to you today.
A path that will guarantee you the untrammelled right to run your properties. It will
guarantee you the right to retain your leaseholds. It will guarantee you the right not to
have your ownership and occupation of your properties in any way disturbed. It will
guarantee your Tight not only to carry on pastoral activities, but also primary
production activities in the widest possible sense of that term. It will guarantee you 
Fax from 17/ 05/ 97 13: 48 Pg:
MAY 17 ' 97 13: 46 P. 11
against any liability personally for the payment of compensation. It will guarantee you
access to any legal aid assistance if you want yourself, although you don't have to
make that choice, be involved in any claims to establish native title which will primarily
be ones conducted between the claimants and the State governments of Australia. It
will provide all of those guarantees. But it does not have the downside of the
alternative.. The alternative is attractive on the surface, I understand that. The alternative of
blanket extinguishment is attractive on the surface. But there are three weaknesses
with that approach. The first is. not necessarily the most important, the first is that the
potential compensation bill for the nation would be much greater. The second is that
there is a strong possibility of a Constitutional challenge to such legislation and if that
legislation of blanket extinguishment were found to be unconstitutional, then it would
necessitate the carniage of a referendum of the Australian people in order to overturn
that particular finding because it would be a finding of unconstitutionality under the
Federal Constitution. And thirdly, and most importantly, I believe that the prospects
of securing passage of the plan that I have put forward through the Senate. and the
prospects of ( inaudible) a sense of security and a sense of stability within a relatively
short period of time are much greater than in relation to the blanket extinguishment
option which would certainly be rejected by the Senate and would then inevitably
require, if it were to be carried, its re-presentation and then passage of an ultimate
double dissolution and joint sitting of the Federal Parliament following another
election. Now ladies and gentlemen, well can I say to you that the way t , o go is to get
what you want quickly, to get what you want without the risks involved in the
alternative way. You can take the risky way and in two years time you would be no
further ahead. In two years time there would be a similar meeting. In two years time
you'd be asking me to remember 1997. In two years time you'd be back arguing this
thing again. I mean the great virtue of what I'm arguing for ladies and gentlemen is
that it does deliver the guarantees that I outlined, it does give you security, it does give
you stability, but it doesn't have the disabilities and the downsides which are inherent
in the alternative proposal. It is a proposal that delivers on our commitment to give
security and stability to pastoral leaseholders and it is in my view an outcome that will
be seen by the entire Australian community as a fair and just solution to a very very
difficult national problem,
Thank you. 



21 May 1997 U
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO RYDE BUSINESS FORUM, SYDNEY
E O E
Thank you very much Ian for those very warm words of introduction and to Cath
King, to Jim Hull, the Mayor of the city of Ryde, other very well known and
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it's a great pleasure to be back at the Ryde
Business Forum wearing my new hat and carrying my new responsibilities. Some
things of course go on from year to year and one of those is the dedication of John
Booth to the community of Ryde and I want to congratulate John and TWT on its antiunemployment
initiative. The more small businesses that can do that, the better. The
more small businesses who commit themselves out of a sense of social obligation and
civic pride to reducing unemployment the better.
Of course it would help ladies and gentlemen if we could even further reform the unfair
dismissal laws which have acted as a barrier for a long time against small business
employing more people and if I can say at this stage one of the small business
initiatives of which I was particularly proud after we were elected was the
implementation of our commitment to reform the unfair dismissal laws that we had
inherited from the former Government, laws which actually worked as a disincentive
against small business taking on staff We reformed them a lot and then a few weeks
ago when I announced a package of measure for small business we decided to go even
further and to completely exempt all small firms employing fewer than 15 people in
relation to staff they'd had for less than 12 months, a proposal that I think every man
and woman in this room who runs a small business would see the great common sense
of and something that would make it easier for you to take a punt about employing one
or two more people in your business, and as you all know, the solution really to
Australia's unemployment problem lies more in the small businesses employing three
and four, making that five and six than in any sort of expectation that the large
corporations of Australia that are still into downsizing are going to pick up the
unemployment slack.
The only problem is that our political enemies in the Senate say they are going to
disallow the regulations to bring in that under 15 rule and I have to say that if that
regulation is disallowed then we will roll it back in the form of a bill and it's an
illustration of some of the road blocks that lie along the path to economic reform and
change in Australia.
But John, again congratulations on the TWT initiative. It's a great example of a public
spirited commitment to things that really matter about the community of Ryde and also
the broader community of Australia. I am delighted to be here today to say a few
things about the business climate, not only here but throughout Australia and also
about some of the responses to the Federal budget. Can I say, I hope without any real 
hyperbole but a natural tone of optimism that I believe general business conditions in
Australia now are good and they are strengthening. If you look at the fundamentals
we do have a much lower rate of inflation than we've had for many years. We do have
significantly lower interest rates although they are not as low for small business as they
are for housing and I know that's something that is in the minds of many people in
small business all around Australia.
What is more we have the prospect of maintaining low inflationary conditions in this
country for some time into the future. I don't think it's an exaggeration to say that we
appear as a community in common with other industrialised countries, we appear to
have turned the corner and moved away from those years when we seem to have
entrenched in our system high inflation and high inflationary expectations.
We do have by world standards a very high level of economic growth. The Economist
will argue about it. It's 3.5 Some will say it's 3 and a quarter. The best advice
we have is that by year's end in budget terms we will be looking at a rate of about 4%.
Now historically, that's very good. We're into the sixth year, I think, perhaps the fifth
of recovery out of a very deep and a very damaging recession. The omens
internationally are strong. The Asia Pacific region where we send most of our exports
is still growing at a very strong rate. The American economy is very strong indeed and
the news this morning that the Federal Reserve had decided not to increase interest
rates in the United States has given a great deal of confidence to not only the markets
in the United States but also the markets here in Australia. And the rate of growth in
the US is good. Japan is not growing as strongly but certainly better than was the
situation several years ago. The scene in Europe is more mixed, with the British
economy being by far in gross terms, in inflation terms and unemployment terms the
strongest of all the major European economies.
Now I paint that international picture to put the point across that the general climate is
quite conducive. There are of course a number of areas where there are still major
concerns. Unemployment in this country remains high, and unacceptably high and the
focus of policy must remain on unemployment and every time we think of reform,
every time we think of change, we have to ask ourselves, will it make a contribution
towards reducing Australia's level of unemployment? Generally speaking, it is a good,
positive, optimistic climate for business. Now I don't deny that in some areas of the
Australian economy, particularly in the small business sector, it's a mixed scene. I talk
to a lot of men and women in small business and I get a different feedback. I wandered
around today. Just about every second person I spoke to, I said how's business, and I
got a mixed reaction, some very positive, some doing all right but it's tough, others not
so good. Now I understand that and one of the great values of a gathering like this is
to actually hear people making those comments and to feel that you are in touch with
what they're saying and what are their concerns.
The Budget, ladies and gentlemen, was designed to reinforce the fairly positive
optimistic outlook for business. It wasn't a budget that went for gimmicks and rabbit
out of a hat tricks. We didn't need in this budget, because of the expenditure
reductions that we had made in the first budget, we didn't need to repeat that. I mean,
there has always got to be a purpose to economic change. There's no such thing as
economic reform being an end in itself You don't change the industrial relations
system to make yourself feel better. You don't change the tax system to make yourself 
feel better. You change it for a purpose and the purpose of economic policy is always
to generate jobs, to improve the competitiveness of the Australian economy and to lift
the living standards of the Australian people.
Now they're the three things that you should judge every measure against. Does it
help to generate jobs? Does it improve the competitiveness of the Australian economy
and does it build the living standards of the Australian people? Now the greatest thing
that I think the budget that Peter Costello brought down last week did, the greatest
thing it did was to lay down a pathway to this country being back in the black at the
end of the third year of the first term of my Government. I mean, we did inherit a
deficit of $ 10.5 billion and by year three of my Government's first term, we will have a
surplus of $ 1.6 billion and of all of the, and as I went around the business community,
whether it was big or small, before the last election they had a lot of advice to give me.
I always get advice and I understand that it goes with the territory and I don't object
to it. I welcome it but one of the things that I was always told before the last election
is that we can't live beyond our means. There's a limit and somebody bells the cat on
us and so it ought to be with the Government. In 1995 just under 20% of the annual
wealth generated by Australia each year, just under 20% of our gross domestic product
was represented by the accumulated national debt of this country and that is all the
money that over earlier years governments have borrowed to make up the difference
between what they have raised through taxation and what they have spent on the
various responsibilities of government and in 1995 if you said our GDP was something
like, you know, let us say, for example, I can't hold myself to the exact figure, if it was
$ 400 billion, then 20% of that would be, what, $ 80 billion this year, roughly what the
debt was.
Now the message I bring you today is that by the year 2000 that almost 20% will have
been reduced to 10% and in proportionate terms it would be exactly half of what it
was in 1995. Now that is not the sort of thing that gets people dancing in the streets.
It's not the sort of thing that gets people popping the corks out of the champagne. It's
not the sort of thing that gets people absolutely lyrically but in the long run it does
more for stability and it does more for a prosperous, stable Australian future than just
about anything else that a Government can do. I mean, your first responsibility as a
Government is to make sure that the accounts of the nation are in order because
without that you can't help people. I mean, you can't help pensioners. You can't help
the underprivileged. You can't attack the fundamental problems of say, Aboriginal
health unless you've got the wherewithal to do it and you don't have the wherewithal
to do it unless you are living within your means so I am very proud of the fact that we
did that and I would defend on that ground alone the enormous contribution this
budget has made to the future economic stability of this country and I am very happy
to say that by the turn of the century on present projections we will have the spending
levels of the present government back to what they were in proportional terms in the
early 1 970s, just after the Whitlam Government came to power and given the added
responsibilities of Government through higher levels of unemployment and greater
social and family disintegration than was the case 25 years ago I think that's a quite
remarkable achievement.
I am also very proud of the fact that the Federal Budget contains something that the
rest of the Australian community, as well as the business community have been asking
for for years and that is an incentive to save. I mean, I listen to the radio, I go around 
the community and over the last 20 years people have been saying to me year after
year, meeting after meeting, lunch after lunch, lecture after lecture, they've been saying
to me, why don't you do something to relieve the double taxation on savings? They've
been saying to me, it's ridiculous, I pay tax when I earn my money, I put it in the bank
or I do something else with it and I pay tax on the interest. That's double taxation.
Now people have been saying that to me for years and for the first time we've got a
government that's actually done something about it and it's not limited to savings.
If you make a personal contribution to superannuation you can claim the 15% on that.
If you get a rental return from a business investment you can claim the 15% on that
and so the list goes on. It's an across the board, comprehensive savings initiative and
for the first time you've had a government that's nailed its colours to the mast and said
we believe in savings, we believe in encouraging and procuring a savings culture and
that is why we've done it.
And in another area that I'm particularly proud of, that this budget has looked to the
future and that is the establishment of the Federation Fund. One of the things that I
recognise both in my present position and in past positions, one of the things I have
recognised for a long time is that some of the basic infrastructure of the Australian
community is starting to wear out. We do need some more capital investment and one
of the responsibilities of government is to make certain that we have a strong level of
basic infrastructure and that is why we have established a Federation Fund which in the
lead up to the centenary of federation will make available about $ 1 billion for major
capital projects.
It's not going to be a slush fund for a thousand provincial and municipal obelisks.
Now I am sorry, there may be some people in this room who are disappointed about
that but I have got to tell you, this is a fund about large projects. This is a fund which
is meant to support major projects that are going to change some of the basic
infrastructure services of the Australian community.
So I speak to you today therefore ladies and gentlemen as somebody well pleased with
the important job that the budget has done. It has put us in the pathway to being back
in the black. It has turned around a $ 10.5 billion deficit into a $ 1.6 billion surplus by
year three, and that's a monumental achievement by any measure. Yet at long last has
broken through in relation to giving a broadly based savings initiative. And also it will
look to the future particularly to the centenary of the federation of our nation in
recognising the need for additional infrastructure support and infrastructure spending.
I am of course somebody who has spent a lot of years of his political life campaigning
for the cause of small business. I came out of a small business environment and one of
the things I learnt as a child was the belief in the importance of small business and the
notion that there's nothing you can do more nobly in your life than to start with
absolutely nothing and build up a business through the efforts and entrepreneurial flair
that you might have.
I do want to share with you for a moment some of the important initiatives that we
have introduced for the small business community. Our industrial relations changes are
very valuable to small business. They significantly reduce the role, the compulsory role
of the trade union movement in the negotiation of workplace contracts. They have 
encouraged the development of workplace and enterprise agreements and contracts
which are far more amenable to the average small business enterprise than the more
complicated and cumbersome awards system. We have reformed the unfair dismissal
laws. We would like to go a lot further if only the Senate would allow us to do so.
From the 1 st of July we will introduce, from the I1st of July this year that's only a
little over two months, indeed only a little over one month we will introduce what is
the biggest single change to the capital gains tax system since it was introduced in
1985. And this is a provision that will give enormous rollover relief to every small
business in Australia. And under this provision if you sell your small business you can
invest the proceeds of that sale up to a maximum of $ 5 million, up to a maximum of
million in the purchase of another business, it doesn't have to be the same kind of
business. In other words you can sell a computer software company and buy a
newsagency or buy a little manufacturing business, whatever you like. And up to
milIlion of the proceeds of sale will be completely exempt from the payment of capital
gains tax.
Now that will over time, it will completely alter the attraction for investment into small
business. What it effectively means is that in some many areas of small business there
can be an indefinite deferral of capital gains tax liabilities. And on top of that we have
a more modest but nonetheless valuable measure that says when you retire up to
$ 500 000 in relation to the sale of the business will be completely exempt from any
kind of capital gains tax.
Now that fulfils, more than fulfils the commitment we made before the election about
what we were going to do in the area of capital gains tax We have through
responding to the recommendations of the Bell Report, we have bought about major
reductions in the paperwork burden, particularly in the area of fringe benefits tax
where from a date soon, any firm that has less than $ 5000 of fringe benefits will not
have any obligation to keep any records at all and we are exempting another number of
areas completely from any obligation in relation to fringe benefits tax.
We have of course in the small business area implemented a number of other changes
and reforms including our commitment in relation to the provisional tax uplift factor
back to where we reduced it from 8 per cent to 6 per cent in relation to last year and
this year.
So I go over those things ladies and gentlemen, some of you would be aware of them,
I hope many of you are, some of you would not be aware of them. But they do in a
period of 14 months tell a very strong story and represent a very solid list of
achievements in the area of small business. And when you add to that those who have
received the benefit of reductions in official interest rates of about 1.5 per cent over
that period of time. All of those things are together will be very valuable to small
business. And in the last budget we announced as from the 1 st of July next year, we
will be extending up to a period of three months the time in which small businesses
may remit the proceeds of deductions in relation to PAYE tax payments and other
payments of a similar kind. And in cashflow terms that will be of very great benefit to
small business. I think the period of time now is less than a month and it will go to
three months from the 1 st of July 1998. 
We are trying at every point, we are trying to make changes that are of benefit to the
small business community, because I remain very strongly of the belief, ladies and
gentlemen, that energising small business, giving small business more initiatives, taking
the paperwork burdens away from them, reducing where you can the taxation burdens,
all of those things will contribute to the capacity of small business to employ people.
And going back to what I said a few moments ago, it is all about measuring what you
do against the benchmarks, the three benchmarks, the first and most important of
which is job generation.
Now ladies and gentlemen in the last few days there's been a little bit of debate about
taxation reform in Australia. And I make no apology for talking about and recognising
the need for taxation reform in Australia. I'm very proud of the reforms that we have
already implemented. The capital gains tax reforms in the area of small business. The
$ 1 billion family tax package that gave a great deal more justice to low and middle
income families brought in on the 1 st of July. The personal tax incentives for private
health insurance that will come in operation on the 1 st of July this year. And oh what a
shame it is that those incentives weren't brought in 5 or 6 years ago when we had
about 40 to 41 per cent of the Australian population holding private health insurance.
It is now because of the lack of incentive for people to take out private health
insurance to climb to a figure of about 34 per cent. Now I believe that those measures
will be begin to turn that around and they'll be highly beneficial and they'll provide a
very strong incentive.
But it's an enormous pity and an indictment on my predecessors that the advice of the
former Labor health minister, Senator Richardson, in 1990 that something should be
done about giving people incentives to go into private health insurance wasn't taken up
on that particular occasion.
I don't think anybody would argue that we have a perfect taxation system in this
country. I've not met anybody in business or in the professions who believe that. We
have made some improvements and some reforms. And if we are thinking forward, if
we are to be a forward thinking nation, if we are to be truly competitive, if we are to
maximise the incentives for job generation in this country well you can't leave out of
that examination or leave out of that picture a taxation reform.
Now I made certain commitments about particular taxes before the last election and I
intend to honour those commitments in full. But I do believe that we need as a nation
to talk about and to think about and to debate the desirability of tax reform and the
form that that should take. And in doing so, we should always remember those three
benchmarks. We should ask ourselves will the reforms help to generate jobs? Will the
reform improve the competitiveness of the Australian economy and will the reforms
contribute to an increase of the living standards of the Australian people?
Tax reform in its own right is not a goal. What is a goal is reform to the taxation
system that matches those three benchmarks. We need a tax system that makes it
easier to create jobs. We need a tax system that improves the competitiveness of the
Australian economy and we need a taxation system that improves the living standards
of the Australian people. Now what we do on this issue in the years ahead will be
judged against those three benchmarks. I think it's profoundly disappointing that the
reaction of the Labor Party on this issue has been so negative and backward looking. 
People who say there is no need for any taxation reform in Australia are indicting
themselves as yesterday's men chained to yesterday's taxation system. Because
anybody who understands the competitive pressures that are weighing in on the
Australian economy, despite all the changes that we have made, and others that are in
the pipeline must recognise that if you are to compete effectively in an increasingly
global economy, you must be absolutely certain that the taxation system that we have
is adequate to that task. And that is why I have quite openly and deliberately
embraced and talked about the need for debate on the future of Australia's taxation
system. And I invite people whether they're in the business community, whether
they're in the welfare sector, as private citizens, those in academia and those in the
government service, and I invite all of them to participate in a very important debate.
We do have to be sufficiently courageous and mature as a nation to recognise that
although we have come a long way in the reform area, and although by in comparison
with the rest of the world we are very richly endowed nation, that if we are to maintain
that position we must be willing to examine and where necessary change some of the
economic structures of our country. But don't change it out of some kind of blind
commitment to ideology. I'm not interested in that. I'm not interested in an
econometric model of an Australian taxation system, I'm interested in a people's and
job generating model of an Australian taxation system. And if we can design over the
years ahead a system that matches those three great benchmarks then I think we will be
doing ourselves, the future of our nation and the future generations of Australian
people a very great service.
It is the role of the Government, it is the role of those who have been elected to
leadership positions to combine a patient understanding of the concerns of the
Australian community with a need on occasions to point a goal and point to an end
direction to which the community should strive and aspire. And I believe we do need a
debate on this issue and I invite people who are concerned about a positive future for
Australia instead of a negative, backward looking, smug, complacent, ' she's all right'
approach, of complete lack of realism. I invite people to join in that debate.
And finally ladies and gentlemen, can I say as the Member for Bennelong how pleased
I am to be here, how pleased I am to share a few thoughts about the budget and about
the future of the Australian economy with people who represent the commercial and
small heart of my electorate. I mean this is a cross section of what small and medium
size business in Australia is all about and it's a great privilege to be amongst you again.
I wish you well. I congratulate the Ryde Business Forum on what it's achieved and
what it's doing to represent the small business and commercial aspirations of the City
of Ryde.
Thank you. 



Fax fromn 4 It 23/ 05/ 97 11: 09 Pg:
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 47P6 PRIME MINISTER
22 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
SPEECH TO MACQUARIE FEC LUNCHEON,
FAULCON BRIDGE BLUE MOUNTAINS
E O E
Thank you very much Kerry. To my other Parliamentary colleagues, Jim Lloyd, the
Member for Robertson and the newly appointed Senator for New South Wales, Marise
Payne, my former Parliamentary colleague, Alasdair Webster, the Mayor of
Hawkesbury and the city of the Blue Mountains, other distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. It is always a pleasure to come back to the mountains. I first visited the Blue
Mountains in 1946 and stayed at a guest house, since demolished, in Katoornba Street
and came back on regular occasions through the 1950s and 1960s and more recently,
apar-t from political ties, a few family ties have brought me on a regular basis to the
Blue Mountains. And of course as a political cause, coming to this part of the world is
always a great delight and I certainly remember the lunch that I attended here at a time
when we were sort of gathering ourselves together for the great assault on the then
Keating Government. It seems a hell of a long time ago. A lot of water has passed
under the bridge and a lot has been achieved and a lot has changed. One thing I can
say is that you've got a terrific Member in Kerry Bartlett, he really is first class.
( inaudible) of a representative capacity. He really is a man of the mountains, if I can
put it that way, in the sense that he understands the communities that make up the
Macquarie electorate. It is an unusual electorate, I don't mean that critically, I mean
that admiringly. It is an unusual electorate because it's made up of one single
population centre but a series of population centres. It's got a lot of different character
about it and it's got a lot of special affinities with the history of Sydney and the history
of Australia and you have a really first class representative. 
Fax fram 4 11 23/ 05/ 97 11: 09 Pg: 2
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 48 P. 7
Now I have come to the Blue Mountains especially today not only to attend this lunch
but also to announce formally the launch of the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia and
the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia is the biggest ever capital investment by any
Government of any political complexion in the environmental futture of Australia and I
launched it at Wentworth Falls about an hour and a half ago and I am very proud of
the fact that this project has been formally launched here in the Blue Mountains
because Kerry reminded me when we were at Echo Point that I think after the Opera
House, it's the second most visited place in Australia for overseas tourists and you
could have believed it today. There were tourists from everywhere. It was a
wonderfu~ l sight to be there and to remind myself of what a beautiful part of the world
the Blue Mountains really is.
Now that Natural Heritage Trust wvill provide $ 1.25 billion of capital investment in the
environmental future of Australia and there will be some major projects like cleaning
up the Murray Darling basin and tackling the salinity problems of Western Australia
and Eastern Australia, but there will also be some small projects and I am very happy
to announce today that we're going to allocate $ 1 million towards the development of
a framework of integrated policies and mechanisms for the Nepean, for the
Hawkesbury/ Nepean catchment and this $ 1 million is going to be administered by the
Hawkesbury/ Nepean Trust and it will get strong community support and this
catchment, that is the Hawkesbury/ Nepean catchment provides the bulk of Sydney's
water supplies, has a veryv rich biodiversity, has over 500 plants and 2000 animal
species, many of which have enormous conservation significance.
Now this contribution of $ 1 million ou~ t of the Trust will make an important
contribution towards the development of a more integrated approach to, or the
potential of the catchment area and I am very, very happy after plenty of urging and
arm twisting from the local Members, Jim Lloyd is here today too to sort of remind me
that it's not just coming to the electorate of Macquarie but it will also be a very
significant benefit to his electorate and I am very, very happy to announce that today.
Ladies and gentlemen, there are a few other things that I'd like to talk about. I'd like
to talk about the recent budget. I would like to echo what Kerry Bartlett had to say
and that is that nobody in this room and nobody anywhere in Australia should ever
forget it. We did inherit a deficit of $ 10.5 billion. We were told by Mr Keating and
Mr Beazley that the budget was in surplus. We found, I found the Sunday morning
after the election, and I wasn't at my most energetic self, I've got to say, the day after
the election I was at my most excited self but I wasn't all that energetic, I don't know
why. Perhaps I hadn't slept a lot the night before and perhaps I celebrated a touch but
I found on Sunday morning when those three officials from the Department of Prime
Minister Cabinet walked in and presented me with a black book, or whether it was a
blue book I forget now, but they presented me with this book that had all the
information and I immediately looked up the thing to see what the underlying deficit
was and it wasn't what we were told and in fact, the underlying deficit then was $ 10.5
billion and by the end of the last year of our first term of government we will have
turned that around to a surplus of $ 1.6 billion. And I know to a lot of people that's
not very exciting. They say, oh well, that's just money. Your money. Not mine, not
Peter Costello's, but your money, and what we've done is to fulfil the first obligation
of any government and that is to make sure that the country lives within its means. 
Fax fromi 4 11 23/ 85/ 97 11: 09 Pg: 3
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 49 P. 8
You've got to do it. You run a business, you've got to do it. You run a household
you've got to do it. If you run a nation you've got to do it and for too long we tried to
do it otherwise. I mean, over the last six years this country ran up total debts of
billion and in that period we created a miserly 16 000 jobs. That's 6 years up to the
time that we came to power. By the year 2000 we will have halved, we will have cut
by 50% the accumulated national debt of Australia compared with what it was in 1995.
In the coming financial year we will repay $ 5 billion of the debts that were run up by
Mr Keating and Mr Beazley $ 5 billion will be repaid and it's not a mere book entry
because when you repay debt as you all know, you don't have to pay interest on it and
that means that you keep getting better each year and equally, if you keep borrowing
you keep getting worse each year, not only by the amount you borrow but also by the
interest you've got to pay on the amount that you borrowved.
Now I know in the process of doing this we have undoubtedly done some things that
people don't like. I am sorry about that but it has been necessary. There's just no
point of being in government unless you are prepared to do things that you know are in
the long term interests of the country and Peter Costello and John Fahey and 1, as the
three people principally responsible but the entire Government, and I acknowledge the
strong support of the backbenchi and the understanding and the forbearance of newly
elected members for some of the decisions that had to be taken. We set ourselves that
task and I am very proud to say that in year three we will have got Australia back into
the black and that is of enormous significance to the long term stability and the long
term prosperity of Australia. The extraordinary thing is that we've been able to do that
while at the same time we have delivered on all of the major promises that we made in
the campaign and this morning I delivered by formally launching the Natural Heritage
Trust of Australia, 1I delivered on the final major promise that I made at the last
election campaign. Let me remind you, we promised a $ 1 billion family tax package
delivered on time, in full on the first of January.
We promised to deliver tax incentives for private health insurance and they will come
in, in full without deduction on time on the first of July of 1997. It's a great pity that
the former government hadn't taken the advice of its then Health Minister to introduce
those subsidies five years ago. If they had have, some of the people who have recently
dropped out of private health insurance wouldn't have done so because they could
have afforded to remain in private health insurance.
We have over delivered in a number of areas. From the first of July this year
everybody in small business will be able to sell a business and invest up to $ 5 million of
the proceeds of the sale of that business in the purchase of another business, without
paying.., of any kind, not of the same kind, you can go from a restaurant to a software
company. As far apart as that and that's pretty far apart. ' You can go from a
restaurant to a software company and up to $ 5 million of the proceeds of that sale will
be completely exempt from capital gains tax. Now that is a very significant change to
the structure of capital gains tax in this country and it delivers more than what we
promised to do in that area so far as capital gains tax is concerned.
I am also very happy to say that the promises we made to self funded retirees in this
country have also been over delivered. We said that we would lift the tax threshold for 
Fax f rom 4 It 23/ 05/ 97 11: 09 Pg: 4
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 49
self funded retirees to the same lev'el as that applying to pensioners and this year will
see the delivery of that commitment, this coming financial year. the delivery of that
commitment in full. We also promised a far more modest savings initiative in the lead
up to the election. It had a means test of $ 35 000. We are beiniz criticised, there's a
new definition of broken promises in Canberra. If you deliver more than you
promised, that's a broken promise. , I mean, that's the broken promise a la. the Labor
Party and some members of the Parliamentary Press Gallery.
I mean, it's amazing. They held up this document of mine and I said it in the election
campaign it would have a means test and because we have delivered a more generous
rebate and we don't have a means test, I have broken my word, I mean, amazing,
absolutely amazing. In other words, if we had cut the deficit in one year instead of
three that would have been a broken promise. It's an amazing sort of approach that
some of these people really have. What was contained in the budget in the area of
savings is a very significant recognition of the years of grit and the years of providence
and careU living and saving for the future which has been the practice of so many self
fuinded retirees in Australia. We have an across the board, non means tested,
savings tax rebate and it represents for the first time an Australian Government actually
doing something serious about encouraging savings. For years and years and years I
have gone around this counter. I have met people, I have gone to lunches, I have gone
on radio programmes, been berated by interviewers, questions interrupted, abused,
everything, and people have said, what are you going to do about savings? We save
and we pay tax on the money before we put it in the investment and then when we earn
some interest we get taxed on it again and for the first time since Federation the
Governmnent has done something about that so that represents over delivery of another
very, very important commitment that we made before the last election campaign.
Of course ladies and gentlemen, in the area of small business which has always been
very important to me politically and it's always been very important economically to
the future of the country and I remain as convinced as I was during the election
campaign that revitalising small business, giving it more incentives, giving it more tax
breaks, getting rid of unnecessary red tape, freeing the industrial relations system to
allow small business to breathe a little easier and operate a little more efficiently and
more expansively that that really holds the key to job generation in this country.
You won't reduce unemployment in Australia by looking to the big companies. What
you've got to do is create an economic climate where the businesses that employ 3 or
4 people can afford to employ 5 or 6 people. That is the key, that's the way you
reduce unemployment in this country, you don't look for large companies, they're a
into downsizing. You don't look to governments because governments are responding
quite properly to the desire of taxpayers to be efficient and to focus on the core
responsibilities of government. What you've got to do is create a climate in which the
3 and 4 small businesses become 5 and 6 smali businesses. And when you can do that,
then you really do have the prospect, in a significant way, of reducing unemployment
in this country. There are other forces that have an impact on unemployment but tha
is a very, very major part of the equation.
Now what have we done with small business. We have of course from the I1st of July
introduced a very major tax concession in the area of capital gains tax. We have 
Fax from 4 11 23/ 85/ 97 11: 09 Pg:
MA1Y 23 ' 97 10: 50
changed the industrial relations system so that in future it will be easier and more
beneficial to negotiate workplace agreements and workplace contracts between small
business and employees. Importantly, we have changed quite significantly the unfair
dismissal laws and we've tackled the unfair dismissal laws in two stages. The first
stage was to throw out the Brereton unfair dismissal law which really acted as a
disincentive to take on people. I mean I lost count of the number of men and women
in small business around Australia who came up to me at gatherings like this and said
I'd take on some extra staff only I'm frightened I mightn't get somebody who worked
out and if I try and get rid of them, they'll have me in court and I can't afford to settle
for $ 15 or $ 20 000. 1 don't have that much money.
And that has been a reality, it's been a reality now in this country for several years.
Well we changed that, we took away the worst excesses of the Brereton unfair
dismissal law but of course not having the numbers in the Senate to go quite as far as
we would have like to have gone in the first time around. We tried again a few weeks
ago to go even further. And that is, we put up a proposal in my small business
statement which said that any small firm in Australia that employed fewer than
people, and that is a very large number of small businesses in Australia, something like
to 50 per cent of all small businesses in Australia employ fewer than 15 people.
And what we said in relation to them was that for all of those firms they would be
completely exempt, totally exempt from any kind of unfair dismissal law in relation to
somebody who had been employed for less than 12 months.
Now I think that's a pretty fair deal. You say to somebody right, I'll give you a go for
a year. If it works out normal rules apply, but if it doesn't work out in the first twelve
months well, we ought to par-t friends and that's it. Now I think anybody who runs a
small business and I'll bet there are a lot of people in this room who are involved in
small business, know that is the reality. And it's no good writing laws, writing unfair
dismissal laws on the assumption that a five person restaurant business has the human
resources department like BH-P. I mean it's a bit unrealistic. They don't and you've
got to write laws that suit the small firms. So we proposed that and I thought that was
pretty reasonable, but oh no, no that's exploitation according to the Labor Party. The
Labor Party and Democrats and Senator Harradine, they're all going to vote against it,
so we'll see. When that law comes up in the Senate there's going to be a motion of
disallowance so we're told and if it's disallowed, well let me say on behalf of the
Government we'll put it inside a Bill and we'll roll it up to the Senate again and we'll
see what happens when they do that.
We've also made a number of other changes in the small business area. We've done
quite a lot to reduce the paperwork burden and we're also brought in a law that says
that if you run any kind of business and the aggregate value of the fringe benefits you
give to your employees, the aggregate value of the fringe benefits you give to your
employees is less than $ 5 000 a year, then you have no obligation at all, no obligation
at all to keep any records for the purposes of filing a finge benefits tax return. Now
that once again is a very significant little change.
Now all of these things are incremental and they all over a period of time will change
the climate. We've seen some reductions of 1.5 per cent in across the board interest
rates. Now I know the competitive environment for small business interest rates is not 
Fax from 4 It 23/ 05/ 97 11: 09 Pg: 6
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 51 P. 11
as good as what it is for housing, I know that. And I think we need more competition
in the banking system and not less. And that is one of the things that is going to
motivate our response to the Wallis Inquiry and it's one of the things that is going to
motivate our response to the way the whole of the financial system operates. I mean
it's amazing what a bit of competition does. And we should never ever forget it when
people come up to you saying, look, really you can have too much competition. I
don't think you can have too much competition, you know, I think it's actually not a
bad idea to have a lot of competition and that applies in a lot of areas. Competition is
a good test and you need competition in areas like banks. I mean look at the housing
area. The thing that has driven the sharper than average fall in housing loans over the
last 12 months has been the entry of organisations like Aussie Home Loans and RAMS
and those specialist housing providers. Now they have had a very, very significant
impact and I think it's very, very important that we always keep that in mind, And if
we could see something like that occur in the small business area, then I believe that
would be exctraordinarily beneficial to small business community.
Now ladies and gentlemen there are one or two other things around at the present
time. And let me just mention one of them.
We made an announcement yesterday that we were going to reduce Australia's
migrant intake by about 10 per cent of what it was last year. Nowv there's been a
rather curious response to that particular announcement and let me deal with some of
the responses that have been made.
The first thing that I want to say is that what we have done is not only reduce the
overall size of the program but we have also quite unapologetically continued the shift
towards having a greater proportion of migrants who come into Australia in the skilled
category and a lower proportion in the family reunion category.
Now I think that is a more balance immigration program. Let me remind you that the
Government remains completely and utterly committed to a non-discriminatory
immigration policy, utterly and strongly committed to non-discriminatory immigration
policy. And I take the opportunity to say this because whenever you do anything
about the level of immigration, you have the noisy people out there who say oh, you
know it's racially motivated. Now let me say on behalf of the Government I couldn't
repudiate that more strongly and more deeply because it was a Liberal Government
that introduced non-discrimi nation into Australia's immigration program and we will
never support an immigration programme that is based on notions of racial
discrimination. I also notice that the rather empty populist who represents the seat of Oxley in the
Federal Parliament, MArs. Hanson, is running around saying ' Oh, I did it. You know I
persuaded them.' Well could I remind her, could remind the rest of Australia that my
belief that there is a link between certain levels of immnigration and high unemployment
goes back to 1991, which is five or six years ago, long before anybody had heard of
the current occupant of the seat of Oxley. I think in those days it was certainly
represented by somebody else. And this notion that we have in some way we have
responded, I mean we cut the migrant programme last year, we've cut it again this
year. We think it's right for Australia at the present level. 
Fax from 4 11 23/ 05/ 97 11: e9 Pg: 7
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 51 P1
You've always got to adjust the immigration program according to the economic and
social needs of the nation. Arnd you've always got to ask vourself what is in the best
interests of Australia. And some of the old paradigms about immuigration have
changed. You can't look at immigration in the 1990s in the way you looked at it in the
1950s anid ' 60s. And those who say that it is beneficial for employment levels are, in
my view, locked into the paradigms of the 1950s and 1960s and they don't understand
the globalisation forces that are at work and impacting on the Australian economy in
the 1990s. They don't understand the fact that amongst some groups within the
Australian community, unemployment levels amongst recently arrived people in this
country are as high as 45 and 50 per cent. Now that is not fair to them, it is not fair to
the rest of the Australian community. And you have to adjust your program
accordingly and you ought to be able to do it without any of these stupid allegations of
racism, you ought to be able to do it without people who have had nothing to do with
it claiming the credit, and you ought to be able without unreasonable criticism from
people who are locked into the paradigms and attitudes towards migration of 1950s
and We have made these changes because as a Government we believe, and I certainly very
strongly believe that there is a link between the current high levels of unemployment
and current levels of immigration and the current composition of the immigration
programme and that is why wve thought it was in the national interest of Australia to
make those changes and there was no other forces at work or no other pressures in
operation. Ladies and gentlemen, the very, very last thing that I want to say to you is that it is
great to be back, almost back on the stump. I mean I was down at Echo Point, we
were down at Wentworth Falls, I'm back here in Kerry's seat talking to a very, very
large gathering of supporters and people interested in the policies of the Government.
It has been a very, very important 14 months.
I mean one of the things I have tried to do is to keep in touch with people. I haven't
always succeeded and like any other person occupying the sort of position I do, there
obviously area areas where people have been critical and I accept and I understand
that, it's part and parcel of the job. But what I have tried to do is not lock myself up in
a little cocoon in Canberra. What I have tried to do is to move around this country. I
think I'm the first Prime Minister of Australia for more than 10 or 20 years who's
addressed a large, anybody come along, open air rally in rural Australia. I don't
remember Mr Keating or Mr Hawke doing that. I do remember them for having some
manicured forays into rural Australia, you know, visiting selected farms and having
visited this or that, I mean that's easy to do. But I think what politics is all about often
is going out and being prepared to stand up and if somebody wants to have a go at
you, let them have a go at you. That's politics, that's Australian politics. That's what
we believe in this country. We don't want cocooned Prime Ministers. We don't want
cocooned leaders and cocooned politicians, we want people who are prepared to go
and listen to their critics and to go back at them. And can I say that I intend to over
the next 14 months to do that sort of thing on a regular basis because it is very, very
important in mntaining contact and maintaining a link between myself and my
Government and the people of Australia. 
Fax from 4 It 23/ 05/ 97 11: 09 Pg: 8
MAY 23 ' 97 10: 52 P. 13
Ladies and gentlemen it still remains the greatest privilege that could come the way of
any Australian to be Prime Minister of this magnificent country. And it's enormously
refreshing for me to be back here today to be amongst supporters and friends and some
interested observers and 1 am sure the odd critic. Well good on you because that is
what the system is all about. Again can I say how well you are represented by Kerry
Bartlett and what a tremendous impression that he is making as a very thoughtfual and
understanding, effective backbencher, confidently getting on with the job, quietly
winning concessions, quietly and effectively persuading ministers to do the right thing
by his electorate and that's what the electorate of Macquarie needs and that's the sort
of representation that Kerry Bartlett is giving. 



22 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
LAUNCH OF NATURAL HERITAGE TRUST
WENTWORTH FALLS, BLUE MOUNTAINS
E O E
Thank you very much Senator Robert Hill, the Leader of the Government in the
Senate, and the Minister for the Environment, to my colleagues, Kerry Bartlett and Jim
Lloyd, to other distinguished guests particularly the mayor in the city of the Blue
Mountains, to many in the environment and landcare movement who are here today.
There is no prouder day in the history of Coalition and the environment than today.
The launch of the Natural Heritage Trust which represents the largest single capital
investment in the environmental future of Australia. It is a great milestone in the hard
march of the Australian community towards a greater and more broadly based
recognition of the need to preserve, nurture and repair and build for the environmental
future of this nation. It marks the fulfilment of a major election undertaking of the
Liberal and National parties. I'm personally very proud of today because it is true that
wandering around the beautiful environment of Hawksnest beach which is my regular
habitat, I was certainly engrossed in developing an idea which had its fruition in the
announcement that was made in the Dandenongs during the election campaign, and
fittingly enough, given the proximity of the Blue Mountains to my home town of
Sydney, fittingly enough it is formally launched here in this environmental hut at
Wentworth falls.
Environmental protection and building for the environment is for ever a mainstream
issue in Australian politics. The days when it belonged to a radical or elite or
marginalised or noisy fringe minorities, those days are gone for ever. It is now
something that occupies centre stage as far as the Coalition is concerned and it is
something that has drawn the support of all generations. It is not just an issue in which
the young are particularly concerned, although they are deeply concerned in and
committed to the future of Australia's environment, but it is one that draws the interest
and the concern of all sections of the Australian community and all age groups and all
socio-economic groups. And it is no longer just about forests, although they remain
very important, it covers the full gamut of issues that any responsible government has
to deal with. Governments must now deal with air pollution, forest biodiversity,
oceans, rivers, salinity and land use to name but a few and the problems are immense.
Salinity and erosion are destroying productive land on the eastern and western
seaboard at a growing rate. Algal blooms threaten water supplies to towns and
destruction of habitats, threatens fisheries resources. The Natural Heritage Trust of
Australia is a mechanism, a very substantial mechanism for attacking these problems in
a concerted and effective way. It will have five independent environmental packages.
They will cover vegetation, rivers, biodiversity, land, coasts and clean seas. The
Natural Heritage Trust of Australia is about the shared goals of all Australians. It's
about a partnership between Australians which draws together our knowledge in areas 
of government, science, the rural community, environment groups and the broader
Australian community.
It will of course make a very significant contribution to reducing unemployment.
There are thousands of jobs involved in the spending proposals under the Natural
Heritage Trust of Australia. This is not just an exercise in feel good. It is an exercise
in tackling actual problems, building for the future in a sustainable way and in the
process employing thousands of Australians, particularly in the rural and regional areas
of Australia. So it is a positive thing for the Australian community on every score.
Now, we had a bit of delay in getting it through the Senate because of the opposition
of other parties of its establishment but I am very proud to announce its inauguration
today. Of course there will be many major projects funded out of the Natural Heritage Trust
of Australia, and nothing of course will be more important than the clean up of the
Murray-Darling basin. Of all the things that we can do for the environmental future for
Australia, making a major and effective investment in repairing the problems of the
Murray-Darling basin as a centenary present to the environmental future of Australia,
nothing could be more important than that, and I know that that project is one that will
draw the support of all governments concerned, not only my own government but also
the governments of NSW, Victoria and South Australia. And I know right across the
political spectrum there will be a head nod in favour of the investment that has been
made out of the Natural Heritage Trust in the rebuilding of the Murray Darling basin
which is so important to the productive future of Australia, so important to the
agricultural future of Australia and that is the point that Robert made that we have
seen a fusion of the environmental and agricultural interests. No longer do they see
themselves as competitors, they see themselves as partners in building for Australia's
future. It also of course is a trust which is about a number of smaller, but nonetheless
important projects, and it Is a downpayment as it were on the future investment of the
Heritage Trust of Australia, I am announcing some expenditure of $ 1.5 million today
to cover such things as $ 102 000 to inaudible.., recovery plan in Western
Australia, in South Australia for the Kangaroo Island Black black cockatoo recovery
plan and in Tasmania the Swiss Parrot recovery plan, and also an $ 800 000 to
Queensland for control of rubber vine and prickly acacia as part of the national weeds
strategy and we've allocated $ 922 000 for aerial survey of salinity management,
something that is tremendously important. The whole challenge of salinity
management both in Western Australia and also on the Eastern part of our continent is
going to enable us to get a better handle on the extent of the salinity problem and allow
us to forecast where future problems will occur. And it's vital information in any
attempt to combat salinity and I will also be announcing, conscious of where I am, I
will be announcing later today special allocation for the Hawkesbury/ Nepean regional
strategy which is tremendously important for this particular area.
Ladies and gentlemen, they are some of the smaller but nonetheless important details
of the Natural Heritage Trust but the important message out of today is that the
Government has fully delivered indeed in money terms, has slightly over-delivered on
the commitment that was made in the lead up to the last election campaign.
No matter what view you have about the economic management of Australia, and
there is room for legitimate debate about that and I respect the range of views that
exists in the Australian community, there can never be any argument that no matter 
what view you have about the levels of Government spending and the size of the
budget deficit and the investment here or there, there is always a strong argument for
investing capital in rebuilding the natural assets of this country and the environment of
course by definition is our greatest natural asset. It has been wasted, it has been
degraded, it has been attacked, it has been spoilt and it has been badly neglected and
that is a fault of all of us and it's a responsibility that the entire community must carry.
What this Natural Heritage Trust does is to set aside a sum of $ 1.25 billion to be spent
prudently over a period of five years in attacking some of the problems and some of
the legacies of that neglect and that natural erosion. It is very much something that
builds for the future of Australia. It is something that endeavours to attack the
environmental challenges of our nation in a practical, on-going, sustainable fashion.
It is not about the flashy, transient side of the environmental debate. It is very much
about the patient, mature building approach to the environmental debate and if a
government could hope in the years to come to leave behind a legacy of having done
something really substantial it couldn't be doing anything prouder and more effective
than this because we have recognised some problems. Over the years the quality of the
investment that we're going to make will become more and more apparent and I think
it will leave a great legacy for future generations.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased and very proud to formally launch the Natural
Heritage Trust of Australia. I want particularly to thank my colleagues, Senator
Robert Hill, the Minister for the Environment and Leader of the Government in the
Senate and John Anderson, the Deputy Leader of the National party and the Minister
for Primary Industries and Energy. Their partnership in getting together the legislation
for the Natural Heritage Trust, their partnership in making decisions about the projects
which are to be funded and their partnership in symbolising the fusion of interests and
the fused future of the environment and the land in Australia is something that's been a
very important driving force behind this project and I warmly thank Senator Hill and I
warmly thank John Anderson for the political leadership that they have given and I
want to thank so many of you who have come today, some a very long distance for
this little ceremony because your presence here today, so many of you holding
positions of great esteem and respect in the environmental landscape here in Australia,
your presence here today is very encouraging to me and very encouraging to my
Government. I feel very genuinely and very enthusiastically that we have entered a new era in the
environmental saga of Australia. I feel as if we are now, we have now reached the
stage where we can address ourselves in a practical way to solving some of the long
term problems and the long term challenges but the area of political flashiness is
smaller and the area of practical achievement is greater and I think that is enormously
important for the future of this country, it's enormously important for the future
particularly of the younger members of our audience and I am delighted to welcome
them here today as well.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your presence and I have very great
pleasure in declaring open, declaring the launch, declaring and finally establishing and
finally arrived, the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia.
Thank you. 



Fax from 3 It 26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 13
MAPY 26 ' 97 10: 49 PRIME MINISTER
May 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
BRADFIELD FEDERAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
AUTUMN LUNCH, BRADFIELD
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Brendan, to Tony Staley the Federal President of the Liberal
Party and to my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues and particularly to Dr and
Mr Smith, the headmistress and husband of Ravenswood School and Mr James Miller,
the Chairman of the School Council.
Can I unashamedly and risking all of the inevitable partisan hostilities that I will incur
in saying it, our daughter had five years of outstanding education at this school. It is a
great place and Kerry I had momentarily forgotten. The thing I remember about the
of May 1991 it was a Saturday and Shore Under 14 beat Riverview 2 1 in the
soccer.
But it is a great delight to be here and can say that the schools on the North Shore
are bipartisan when it comes to inviting Prime Ministers. I well remember back in
1973 when Gough Whitlam was Prime Minister of Australia, he was invited to a Knox
Speech Night and he said it was the biggest gathering in the electorate of Bradfield
ever addressed by a Labor leader. So it is a very, very fine bipartisan tradition and it is
great to be here.
But even more importantly than that it is great to be amongst so many old friends.
And it is great to acknowledge the contribution through the years of the Federal
Division of Bradfield to the organisation of the party here in New South Wales, and of
course I cannot let the opportunity go by without particularly acknowledging the
presence of my old friend John Carrick and his wife, Angela. Nobody under this great
marque has done more for the Liberal cause in Australia than that man and I very, very
happily acknowledge it. 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 14
MA1Y 26 ' 97 10: 49 -1
2
1 also want to thank Brendan for his very kind words and endorse what Robert said
about the contribution that he is making and also the remarks that were made by Kerry
Chikarovski. Brendan has proved to be a very energetic and articulate representative
of the Division of Bradfield. H-e is very pugnacious and hard working and loyal but an
intelligent contributor to the deliberations of the parliamentary party and the
parliamentary party is the stronger for having Brendan Nelson. And I think it is also
important today that there are a number of members here who represent electorates
that we have not always held. We have always held Bradfield and Bennelong and
North ( no we have not always held North Sydney, we lost it for a while) but we have
certainly held Bradfield and Bennelong for a very, very long time but we did not win
Gilmore the first time up and we should have. And of course Parramatta has gone
back and forth. And it really is important that we are all reminded that the fuature of
the Liberal Party at a Federal level depends on getting people like Ross Cameron and
Joanna Gash re-elected at the next Federal Election.
We are sort of half way through our first term in Government and I spoke yesterday
about keeping faith with the promises that we made at the time of the last election.
And I spent a little time at the State Council meeting reminding people of how much of
the agenda that we spelt out before the election had in fact been delivered. And I am
very proud of the fact that in the last Budget for the first time in the history of
Australia, a Federal Governiment has actually given an across-the-board incentive for
people to save. For years I have gone around to meetings and I have been told by
people that what you have got to do is fix the taxation system to the extent that you no
longer tax people when they earn their income and tax them again when they receive
some interest on the investment of what is left over out of their income. And the
fifteen percent across-the-board tax break that was announced in the Budget is the first
recognition by any Federal Government that that kind of change to the Australian
taxation system ought to be made and it will act as a very powerfl~ l incentive and a
very important reward over the years for people who are thrifty enough to save.
Now Brendan spoke in his kind introduction about privatisation, And of course one
cannot let an opportunity like this go by without reminding oneself of the incredible
hypocrisy of our political opponents on privatisation. I mean I have been a consistent
supporter of privatisation as has Nick Greiner and many others under this marque for a
very long period of time. And I remember when I first advocated that we privatise
Qantas and TraitsAustralia Airlines as it then was and sort of half raised the possibility
of privatising the Commonwealth Bank that Bob Hawke went to Bathurst in May and
delivered the Ben Chifley Memorial Lecture and said that one of my predecesors
Ben Chifley, who I think in some respects was a more loved Labor Prime Minister than
some of his successors, he said that Ben Chifley would roll in his grave if anybody
thought of selling the Commnonwealth Bank.
And of course before the 1987 election, they swore they would not do it. Before the
1990 election they swore they would not do it. Before the 1993 election they swore
they would not do it And of course before the 1996 election they swore they would
not sell Telecom either. Or Telstra as it is now called. But we all know that having
sworn not to sell the Bank before those elections, they finally ended up doing so and
we also know that if the Australian people had been unfortunate enough to re-elect a 
Fax f rom~ 3 It 26/ 85/ 97 10: 53 Pg:
MAPY 26 ' 97 10: 50P. T 3
Labor Government in 1996 a re-elected Labor government would not have sold a third
of Telstra, they would have sold the whole lot. And I am reminded of that by this
extraordinary little exercise that is going on here in New South Wales. Now I am all in
favour of privatising the power system in New South Wales. I think it is aneminently
sensible thing to do. But why on earth can't you say that before the election and not
sort of kid, try and kid the Australian public, that you are not going to do it. I think it
is just sort of completes the circle. Finishes the loop as far as their hypocrisy is
concerned.
Now over the last 14 months we really have gone a tremendous distance between
implementing the agenda on which we were elected. There are a few things that have
come up as inevitably things do when you are elected that you did not anticipate. And
governments are required as well as implementing the things that they promised to do
they are also required to respond to some of the unexpected things. And we have had
such things to do with such as the issue of national gun control legislation last year, the
rather unexpected requirement to deal with a decision by the High Court of Australia
in the Wik case that many predicted might go in the other direction. But the main
agenda that my Government has had and the main agenda that my Government will
continue to have between now and whenever the next election is held is to keep faith
with the essential commitments that we made to the people of Australia to the
mainstream of the Australian community before the last election. And that is about
giving to families a greater sense of security, it is about giving to individuals greater
incentive, greater incentive to work, greater incentive to save, greater incentive to take
nisks. It is also about tackling the chronically high levels of unemployment, particularly
amongst the young, that we still have in Australia. And none of us, particularly in
electorates on the North Shore of Sydney, should lose sight of the fact that there are
areas of Australia that suffer tragically high levels of unemployment where the endemic
character of unemployment is such that it is being passed now from grandfather to
father to son and that it has become intergenerational.
We do require policies that will regenerate some of the regional areas of Australia.
That is why in the Budget wve announced that we were going to establish a $ 1 billion
Federation Fund which will be used not to finance the building of a thousand little
monuments in every suburb and every hamnlet of Australia but is going to be used to
finance the construction of major infrastructure works which will be of long term
benefit to the future of Australia particularly to the regions and to the rural area of
Australia. But in that context, one of the other responsibilities of a government is always to keep
its eye on necessary reform. Quality government and quality political leadership is
about on the one hand, holding onto and consolidating those things in the commnunity
that are important and ought to continue. And I have always believed that what one
ought to be in politics is either a discerning conservative or a selective radical or
should I say a selective conservative and a discerning radical. In other words, you
hang onto those things that are working well, you do not throw out something that is
working well just for the sake of change. But on the other hand, when something is
not working well you are zealously and you are energetically committed to bringing 
Fax 1f1 2r6il / 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: b
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 51 P1
4
about change and bringing about reform. And that is why in the early 1 980s I set my
sights on reforming Australia's industrial relations system because I thought it was out
of date. I though it was discredited. I thought it was holding back the potential
growth of Australia. I thought it was too heavily dominated by the trade union
movement and worst of all I thought it was skewed irrevocably against the interests of
small business in Australia.
It was an industrial relations system that had been built to accommodate large
company large work forces heavily unionised, overwhelmingly male, and
predominantly blue collar. And of course the character of Australia has changed so
much that that sort of paradigm no longer works and is no longer relevant to Australia.
So we set ourselves the task of changing industrial relations and one of the big changes
that I am very proud of, that my government has brought in is industrial relations
change. And as the weeks and months go by and the value of the changes that were
brought in by Peter Reith in his workplace relations legislation work their way through
the Australian economy the legislation has only been operating now for a little under
six months. We took a bit longer to get it through the Senate and we only got through
about eighty per cent of what we would have liked but that eighty per cent is an infinite
improvement, an enormous improvement on the system that it replaced.
And one of the great benefits of that legislation is that it has given to small business a
lot more flexibility and a lot more room to move and a lot more opportunity to make
agreements at a workplace level, But that task of reform is never of course finished.
So one of the other issues that governents and political leaders and business leaders
and leaders of other organisations in this country have got to face, and that is the need
to reform Australia's taxation system. Now I do not make any apology at all for
raising the issue of reform of Australia's taxation system. Anybody who imagined that
it was something that could lay dormant in the political comner for the next ten or
fifteen years has no understanding of the needs of this community and no
understanding of the wvay in which the taxation system we presently have is becoming
less and less relevant to the kind of modern Australian economy that we are trying to
build. But it is very important that as we continue to debate taxation reform we do not
make the mistake that I think we have made in the past and that is becoming obsessed
with the system of taxation reform-rather than the outcomes of taxation reform. We
must not become obsessed with building a perfect econometric model to the detriment
of asking ourselves what are the goals of taxation reform.
And I think there are three goals and there are three questions you have to ask
yourself. The first question you have got to ask yourself is what reform of the
Australian taxation system is needed to generate more jobs. That is the first question.
I think the next question you have to ask yourself, given the importance of trade to
Australia, is what reform to the Australian taxation system is going to generate more
exports? And I think that is a tremendously importantly thing. And finally you have to
ask yourself what change to the Australian taxation system is going to generate higher
living standards and encourage people to greater risk taking and provide people with
greater incentives?
Now they are the three tests that we have to apply. And it is not a debate that the
Liberal Party should walk away from. It is not a debate the Liberal Party should turn 
F3a1xf1rZm6 / 05/ 97 10: 53 rg:
tiPy 26 ' 97 10: 51 1
its back on, And those on the political spectrum who believe that an essentially
negative, backward-looking fear campaign is the only response to the issue of taxation
reform I think are making a very, very serious mistake. Now I know that this issue
was raised in the past and I am aware as anybody else in this gathering of the debate
that followed the result in 1 993. 1 think there were some errors, let me put it this way,
there were some errors of emphasis and some errors of presentation and there were
some other errors of timing in relation to that, which are entirely different now.
Now, let me say to you that our commitment not to introduce anything remotely
resembling a goods and services tax during our first term of government remains
absolutely rock solid. I gave that guarantee to the Australian people before the last
election and I have no intention from walking away from that anymore than I have an
intention of walking away from other commitments that I made to the Australian
people. But I have never said that we would never look at taxation reform. And I
think we would be a very odd government, we would fail the Australian people
completely if we turned our backs on the necessity of reform in this very, very
important area.
I can remember at the end of the 1 970s, as Treasurer, being invited to give a speech
about the challenges of reform, economic reform in Australia in the 1980s. And I said
that we needed to reform our financial system. Well, ultimately we did. And that
received support essentially from both sides of politics. We needed to embark upon
reform to our taxation system. Well, have bisrnaly failed as a nation to do that. And
we needed to look increasingly at our industrial relations system and see what areas of
change and reform were needed there. So we still have, if you are looking at the
reform agenda, and all governments have got to do that, you are not elected to occupy
positions of power without using that power wisely for the benefit of people. I have
been in politics a very, very long time now, but I have always thought that the profit of
winning office is to do good things for the country and not just the satisfaction of
exercising that political power. So part of our job, part of our responsibility is to keep
the torch of reform in certain areas going, but to do it in a way that is related to the
outcomes of that reform.
Politicians who get caught up with process and not outcomes lose the capacity to
communicate with the Australian people. The Australian people want to know why a
reform is good, they want to know how it will affect them, they want to know whether
it will make it better for them and make it better for their children and make it more
likely that their teenage children will get a job and that their elderly parents and other
members of their family have a sense of stability and a sense of security. It is the
outcomes. It is the product of change rather than the tactical value of that change
which isth e important thing that we as political figures, political activists should
always work towards.
The last thing that I want to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, is that it is always a
great pleasure to come back to the grass roots of the Liberal Party. I of course have
been a member of the New South Wales division of the party since about 1958 when I
joined a branch in Eariwood, the suburb in which I grew up, and I owe everything that
I have achieved in politics to the Liberal Party. I would never have been a member of
parliament without the Liberal Party. I would never have been a leader of the party 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 10: S3 Pg: 18
MA~ Y 26 ' 97 10: 52 6
without the support and understanding of the Liberal Party and of course I would
never have become Prine Mnister of Australia without the support and nourishment
and loyalty of people in the Liberal Party and as I look around this room I see people
that I have been associated with now for 25, 30 and in some cases even a little longer
than that years. And it is a very great privilege to have that opportunity.
I want to thank all of you for the support that you have given over the years in so
many different ways to the Liberal Party cause here in Sydney and all around Australia.
We waited a hell of a long time in Opposition. We lost more elections than we should
have. We knocked on in front of the try line far more frequently than any group of
people should have done and on occasions I sort of wondered as though somehow the
world had been turned on its head and there was absolutely no justice in politics as in
sport. It is like last night when I was watching the second one dayer. I mean I thought
English cricket teams were meant to feel like Englishmen not like South Africans. And
I mean there is something wrong when you cannot rely on the English to feel like
Eng), ishmen. There really is. You know. The world is not the same. It sort of
shattered my faith in the predicability of some of those constants.
But. anyway, ladies and gentlemen, can I say to you again that I do appreciate all of
your support. It is infinitely better to be in Government than in Opposition and we
need your continued support but we need your support, your quality support. We
need your resources, we need your manpower, but we also need on occasions your
advice. I mean politics is about listening to advice. It really is. And one of the
reasons that I think my predecessor lost the last election that he lost the capacity to
listen and he lost the capacity to understand what the proverbial man in the street or
man and woman in the street really wanted out of their political leaders. Now I will try
very hard to avoid that trap and my colleagues will try very hard to avoid that trap.
And it is your obligation privately and discreetly of course when you think we are
falling into that trap to remind us of it. But thank you again for your tremendous
support and loyalty. And once again congratulations to the most consistently blue
ribbon electorate in the whole of Australia for the Liberal Party cause, that is the
DivIsion of Bradfield. Thank you very much for all that you have poured into the
Party over the years and all that you will undoubtedly pour into it in the years to come.
I am both retrospectively and in the future very, very grateful for all of that support.
Thank you. 



Fax from 3 16 26/ 05/ 97 15: 66 Pg:
MAY 26 ' 97 14: 56 P. 2
PRIME MINISTER
26 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
OPENING ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN RECONCILIATION
CONVENTION MELBOURNE
E O E
Thank you very much. To Patrick Dodson, the Chairman of the Council; to Your
Excellency, the Governor of Victoria, Sir James Gobbo; the Premier of Victoria, Mr
Jeff Kennett; Mr Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition; Senator Kernot; other
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how very pleased I am to be here today to formally open this convention and
let me also thank the Kulin people for the warmth and generosity of their welcome.
This Convention is a uni1~ ing event. It is an occasion for positive commnitnment to the
future and a common avowal of the destiny we all share as Australians. It is an
occasion also for fr-ank speaking and there has been some today quite appropriately
and in the same spirit I intend to speak frankly although I hope on all occasions
respectfully. Since the inception of the Council in 1991) the Coalition Parties have committed
themselves to the reconciliation process and today, on behalf of the Liberal and
National parties, I reaffirm that commitment.
At the heart of this reconciliation process among Australians lies three fu~ ndamental
objectives: * the first is a shared commitment to raise the living standards and broadening the
opportunities available to the most disadvantaged group in Australian society and
that is indigenous Australians and that must be done as part of a broader
commitment to providing equality of opportunity to all Australians 
Fax from 3 16 26/ 05/ 97 15: 00 Pg: 2
MAY 26 ' 97 14: 56 P. 3
2
a second objective is a realistic acknowledgment of the inter-related histories of the
various elements of Australian society;
and a third is a mutual acceptance of the importance of working together to respect
and appreciate our differences and to ensure that they do not prevent us from
sharing the future.
In meeting these challenges, the reconciliation process must focus on the future in a
positive and principled way. Specific strategies need to be devised, specific priorities
need to be identified and specific practical programmes need to be agreed and
implemented. This process quite properly will generate debate and in some areas
genuine differences of opinion amongst people of goodwill about competing priorities.
I hope that all who participate in this convention can find important areas of common
ground on the best way of achieving the broad goals to which the reconciliation
process is committed.
As Patrick has reminded us the Convention has been preceded by over 100 formal
meetings attended by more than 10,000 people, Many of these meetings have focussed
on -what people in their own communities can do to advance the cause of
reconciliation. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of true reconciliation.
Governments and leaders alone cannot make reconciliation happen simply through
legislation, decrees, declarations or rhetoric. Truae reconciliation must come from the
hearts and minds of the Australian people, in the respect they have for differences, in
the attitudes they encourage in their children, and in their recognition of the common
destiny we share together as Australians.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am an optimist about the process of national reconciliation in
Australia. I axn an optimist about reconciliation because I believe in the decency, tolerance,
generosity and common sense of the Australian people.
I am an optimnist because I know that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
are commxitted to preserving their unique culture at the same time as reaching out to
non-indigenous Australians to build a shared future.
I am an optimist because I believe that the Australian people respect the right to a ' fair
go' for all irrespective of colour, background or belief-, and I am an optimist because I
believe that these attributes have made Australia one of the fairest, most egalitarian and
tolerant societies in the world.
But this optimism, my friends, about the reconciliation process cannot be blind. We
must be realistic in acknowledging some of the threats to reconciliation.
Reconciliation will not work if it puts a higher value on symbolic gestures and
overblown* promises rather than the practical needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in areas like health, housing, education and employment. 
Fax from 3 16 26/ 05/ 97 15: 00 Pg:
MA~ Y 26 ' 97 14: 57 P. 4
3
It will not work if it is premised solely on a sense of national guilt and shame Rather
we should acknowledge past injustices and focus our energies on addressing the root
causes of current and future disadvantage among our indigenous people.
Nor will the reconciliation process work effectively if one of its central purposes
becomes the establishment of different systems of accountability and lawful conduct
among Australians on the basis of their race or any other factor.
The reconciliation process will only work effectively if it involves and inspires all
Australians. Reconciliation is not helped if its critics are able to claim that resources directed
towards Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are disadvantaged have not
been well or wisely used.
However much some may wish to believe otherwise, there is evidence that some
programmes designed to address indigenous disadvantaged have, in fact, encouraged
dependency rather than individual initiative and personal responsibility.
Ladies and gentlemen there can be little doubt that the reconciliation process has been
hindered by the divisiveness and misinformation generated by certain extremist views
in our community.
It cannot seriously be argued that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are not,
as a group, profoundly disadvantaged.
To suggest otherwise is to ignore reality, substitute fiction for fact and
unrepresentative anecdotes for credible statistical proof
Equally, the cause of reconciliation is also damaged by those who are intolerant or
misleading for the opposite purpose.
Calls for disruption of the Sydney Olympic Gamnes and trade boycotts of Australia,
baseless allegations about a return to White Australia policies and charges of racism
relentlessly directed against those who disagree with a particular point of view have all
been very counter-productive.
We need to reject extremist views on all sides. Australia's future will be best served
by openness, tolerance, fairness and confidence in our Australian values. It will not be
built on heavy-handed threats, cheap sloganeering or empty populism whatever its
source. We need, my friends, to re-embrace the three great goals of the reconciliation proces
to which I have referred.
First, we need a renewed national focus on the true causes of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander disadvantage.
For my Government, this is the cornerstone of the reconciliation process. 
Fax from 3 16 26/ 05/' 97 15: 00 Pg: 4
MAY 26 ' 97 14: 58 4
It is why we have given such priority to programmes that directly target indigenous
disadvantage in health, housing, education and employment.
It is why we are focussing Government resources on these areas in a way that will
achieve the best outcome.
Our aim is for indigenous Australians to have greater control over their own lives and
their own communities.
This will be achieved through sensitivity to the cultural needs of indigenous people and
the ending of their cycle of dependency.
We have breathed new life into the COAG agreement on National Commitment to
Improved Outcomes in the Deli very of Programmes and Serv'ices for indigenous
people. Bilateral health agreements are now in place in a but two States and bilateral
indigenous housing agreements are well advanced in most States.
We have boosted funding for indigenous business development and, through the new
Indigenous Business Incentive Progrwnmes, we will be assisting economic
independence in the indigenous community.
Through a Commonwealth Government initiative, we have brought the Army, AT SIC
and the Department of Health and Family Services together in a pilot program to
address water supply and broader environmental health needs.
In a period of necessary and tight fiscal restraint, to which all areas of Government
spending hgve been subjected, we have either quarantined the areas of greatest need in
indigenous communities, or actually increased funding.
In overall terms we are committed to spend over $ 428 million more on indigenous
specific programs in our first four years than was spent during the previous four years.
What -we have-sought to do-is-to target this expenditure -at the areas of greatest need.
This practical, on-the.. ground approach will remain a primary focus of our policy
making. This is because we believe it will bring about true social justice for
indigenous Australians.
Second, all Australians indigenous and otherwise need to acknowledge realistically
the interaction of our histories.
Our purpose in doing so should not be to apportion blame and guilt for past wrongs,
but to commrit to a practical programme of action that will remove the enduring
legacies of disadvantage. 
Fax from 3 16 26/ 85/ 97 15: 00 Pg:
MAY 26 ' 97 14: 58 P. 6
At the same time, we need to acknowledge openly that the treatment accorded to
many indigenous Australians over a significant period of European settlement
represents the most blemished chapter in our history.
Clearly, there were injustices done and no-one should obscure or minimise them. We
need to acknowledge as a nation what European settlement has meant for the first
Australians, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and in particular the
assault on their traditions and the discrimination and violence they endured over many
decades. This week the report of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission
inquiry into The Separation ofA boriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from
1heir Families will be tabled in Parliament. Like all such reports, it will be subjected
to proper analysis and scrutiny.
It will neither be uncritically accepted nor summarily swept aside.
However, let me make this clear. Personally, I feel deep sorrow for those of my
fellow Australians who suffered injustices under the practices of past generations
towards indigenous people. Equally, I am sorry for the hurt and trauma many people
here today may continue to feel as a consequence of those practices.
In facing the realities of the past, however, we must not join those who would portray
Australia's history since 1788 as little more than a disgraceful record of imperialism,
exploitation and racism.
Such a portrayal is a gross distortion and deliberately neglects the overall story of great
Australian achievement that is there in our history to be told, and such an approach
will be repudiated by the overwhelming majority of Australians who are proud of what
this country has achieved although inevitably acknowledging the blemishes in its past
history. Australians of this generation should not be required to accept guIt and blame for past
actions and policies over which they had no control.
However, we must acknowledge past wrongs, -understand that they-still cause a great
deal of personal distress and resolve to improve areas of indigenous disadvantage both
now and into the fi~ ture.
The third broad objective of the reconciliation process on which attention should be refocussed
is the need to work together to ensure that our differences do not prevent us
from sharing in a common future.
All Australians, irrespective of their background or colour or belief or religion, share a
commnon destiny.
We all have rights and obligations as Australians. 
Fax from 3 16 26/ 65/ 97 15: 00 Pg:
MAY 26 ' 97 14: 59 P. 7
6
These rights include the right to individual self-fulfilment and cultural freedom without
discrimination and intimidation. They include the right of all Australians to dignity and
self-respect.
We cannot share a common destiny if these rights are available to some Australians,
but not all.
Likewise, we cannot share a common destiny together as Australians if different
groups in our society have different standards of conduct and different systems of
accountability. I know that the goals of the reconciliation process have been subjected to tension and
strain as a result of the current debate on Native Title issues.
You will all be aware that I have spent a great deal of time in trying to find a just, fair
and workable outcome to the in response to the decision of the High Court of
Australia in the Wik case. In working towards that solution, my Government's
primary goal has been to strike a fair and reasonable balance between the rights of
indigenous people and the rights of other Australians, in particular those in the pastoral
and mining industries.
I have heard what has been said here today, I can only remark that the myths that were
abroad in Longreach have been repeated although on the opposite side of the argument
in some of the observations that have been made here today. I need to remind you in
asking you to consider and to understand the approach of my Government for the Wik
decision.
The recitals that were contained in the Native Title Act 1993, the declarations that
were made about the impact of pastoral leases on Native Title by my predecessor, the
Labor Prime Mnister of Australia, and by a number of leaders in the indigenous
commnunity of Australia who are present in this auditorium.
I also need in the name of truth and in the name of a frank discussion of this issue to
repudiate the claim that my ten point plan involves a massive hand-out of freehold title
at taxpayer expense. That is an absolute myth, it is absolutely contrary to the fact and
I absolutely repudiate it.
I believe that the plan which I have put forward provides an equitable balance between
respect for the principles of Native Title, as laid down in the Mabo decision, and the
very legitimate interests of pastoralists and others in securing certainty in carrying on
and planning their activities.
I understand the heat and passions that this issue has generated on both sides of the
debate and I believe that a fair and equitable outcome and I believe that my ten point
plan provides the only basis of a proper approach.
I want to conclude my remarks today in the same tone as I began with a vigorous
reaffirmation of my Government's commnitment to a successful and ongoing process of
national reconciliation which is developed in a climate of mutual trust and confidence. 
Fax from 3 162/ 69 5e Pg 7
MAY Thank you.
26 ' 97 14: 59 P. 8
7
This is a process which draws on Australians fromn all walks of fife and all kinds of
backgrounds. What brings them together is a faith in the power of Australian values
the values of decency, tolerance, fairness and down-to-earth common sense.
What inspires the process of national reconciliation, and what gives it its enduring
strength, is the conviction that we can, and must, develop our fujture together as
Australians with mutual respect for, and appreciation of our differences and with a
unifying commitment to promoting Australia's national interests.
That is what this Convention is all about. It is about our future together as
Australians, and the kind of country we will hand on to our children.
I wish Pat Dodson, his fellow members of the Reconciliation Council and all others
involved in this Convention my very best wishes for a successfw, positive and
purposeful outcome over the next three days.
I have great pleasure in formally declaring this Convention open. 26/ 05/ 97 1S: 00 Pg: 7 



Fax fromt 3 10 26/ 05/ 97 13: 02 Pg: 2
" A1Y 26 ' 97 12: 58 P. 11 Al
26 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
OPENING ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN RECONCILIATION
CONVENTION MELBOURNE
Thank you very much. To Patrick Dodson, the Chairman of the Council; to Your
Excellency, the Governor of Victoria, Sir James Gobbo; the Premier of Victoria, Mr
Jeff Kennett; Mr Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition; Senator Kemnot; other
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how very pleased I am to be here today to formally open this convention and
let me also thank the Kulin people for the warmth and generosity of their welcome.
This Convention is a unifying event. It is an occasion for positive commitment to the
future and a common avowal of the destiny we all share as Australians. It is an
occasion also for frank speaking and there has been some today quite appropriately
and in the same spirit I intend to speak frankly although I hope on all occasions
respectfully. Since the inception of the Council in 1991, the Coalition Parties have commnitted
themselves to the reconciliation process and today, on behalf of the Liberal and
National parties, I reaffirm that commnitment.
At the heart of this reconciliation process among Australians lies three fUndamental
objectives: * the first is a shared commitment to raise the living standards and broadening the
opportunities available to the most disadvantaged group in Australian society and
that is indigenous Australians and that must be done as part of a broader
commitmient to providing equality of opportunity to all Australians 
Fax fromi 3 10 26/ 05/ 97 13: 02 Pg: 3
-MAY 26 ' 97 12: 58 P. 12
2
* a second objective is a realistic acknowledgment of the inter-related histories of the
various elements of Australian society,
* and a third is a mutual acceptance of the importance of working together to respect
and appreciate our differences and to ensure that they do not prevent us from
sharing the fliture.
In meeting these challenges, the reconciliation process must focus on the future in a
positive and principled way. Specific strategies need to be devised, specific priorities
need to be identified and specific practical programmes need to be agreed and
implemented. This process quite properly will generate debate and in some areas
genuine differences of opinion amongst people of goodwill about competing priorities.
I hope that all who participate in this convention can find important areas of common
ground on the best way of achieving the broad goals to which the reconciliation
process is commnitted.
Patrick has reminded us the Convention has been preceded by over 100 formal
meetings attended by more than 10,000 people. Many of these meetings have focussed
on what people in their own communities can do to advance the cause of
reconciliation. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of true reconciliation.
Governments and leaders alone cannot make reconciliation happen simply through
legislation, decrees, declarations or rhetoric. True reconciliation must come from the
hearts and minds of the Australian people, in the respect they have for differences, in
the attitudes they encourage in their children, and in their recognition of the common
destiny we share together as Australians.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am an optimist about the process of national reconciliation in
Australia. I am an optimist about reconciliation because I believe in the decency, tolerance,
generosity and common sense of the Australian people.
I am an optimist because I know that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
are committed to preserving their unique culture at the same time as reaching out to
non-indigenous Australians to build a shared future.
I am an optimist because I believe that the Australian people respect the right to a ' fair
go' for all irrespective of colour, background or belief;. and I am an optimist because I
believe that these attributes have made Australia one of the fairest, most egalitarian and
tolerant societies in the world.
But this optimism, my friends, about the reconciliation process cannot be blind. We
must be realistic in acknowledging some of the threats to reconciliation.
Reconciliation will not work if it puts a higher value on symbolic gestures and
overblown promises rather than the practical needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in areas like health, housing, education and employment. 
Fax from 3 10 26/ 05/ 97 13: 02 Pg: 4
-MAY 2E. ' 97 12: 59 P. 13
3
It will not work if it is premised solely on a sense of national guilt and shame. Rather
we should acknowledge past injustices and focus our energies on addressing the root
causes of current and future disadvantage among our indigenous people.
Nor will the reconciliation process work effectively if one of its central purposes
bomes the establishment of different systems of accountability and lawfU conduct
among Australians on the basis of their race or any other factor.
The reconciliation process will only work effectively if it involves and inspires all
Australians. Re~ conciliation is not helped if its critics are able to claim that resources directed
towards Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are disadvantaged have not
been well or wisely used.
However much some may wish to believe otherwise, there is evidence that some
programmes designed to address indigenous disadvantaged have, in fact, encouraged
dependency rather than individual initiative and personal responsibility.
Ladies and gentlemen there can be little doubt that the reconciliation process has been
hindered by the divisiveness and misinformation generated by certain extremist views
in our community.
It cannot seriously be argued that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are not,
as a group, profoundly disadvantaged.
To suggest otherwise is to ignore reality, substitute fiction for fact and
unrepresentative anecdotes for credible statistical proof
Equally, the cause of reconciliation is also damaged by those who are intolerant or
misleading for the opposite purpose.
Calls for disruption of the Sydney Olympic Giames and trade boycotts of Australia,
baseless allegations about a return to White Australia policies and charges of racism
relentlessly directed against those who disagree with a particular point of view have all
been very counter-productive.
V'e need to reject extremist views on all sides. Australia's future will be best served
by openness, tolerance, fairness and confidence in our Australian values. It will not be
built on heavy-handed threats, cheap sloganeering or empty populism whatever its
source.
We need, my friends, to re-embrace the three great goals of the reconciliation process
to which I have referred.
First, we need a renewed national focus on the true causes of Aboriginal and Torres
Stisit Islander disadvantage.
For my Government, this is the cornerstone of the reconciliation process. 
Fax from 3 16 26/ 05/ 97 13: 02 Pg:
* MAY 26 ' 97 12: 59 P. 14
4
It is why we have given such priority to programmes that directly target indigenous
disadvantage in health, housing, education and employment,
It is why we are focussing Government resources on these areas in a way that wil
achieve the best outcome,
Our aim is for indigenous Australians to have greater control over their own lives and
their own communities.
This will be achieved through sensitivity to the cultural needs of indigenous people and
the ending of their cycle of dependency.
We have breathed new life into the COAG agreement on National Commitment to
Improved Outcomes In the Delivery of Programmes and Services for Indigenous
people. Bilateral health agreements are now in place in all but two States and bilateral
indigenous housing agreements are well advanced in most States.
We have boosted funding for indigenous business development and, through the new
Indigenous Business Incentive Programmes, we will be assisting economidc
independence in the indigenous community.
Through a Commonwealth Government initiative, we have brought the Army, ATSIC
and the Department of Health and Family Services together in a pilot program to
address water supply and broader environmental health needs.
In a period of necessary and tight fiscal restraint, to which all areas of Government
spending have been subjected, we have either quarantined the areas of greatest need in
indigenous communities, or actually increased funding.
In overall terms we are committed to spend over $ 428 million more on indigenous
specific programs in our first four years than was spent during the previous four years.
What we have sought to do is to target this expenditure at the areas of greatest need.
This practical, on-the-ground approach will remain a primary focus of our policy
making. This is because we believe it will bring about true social justice for
indigenous Australians.
Second, Al Australians indigenous and otherwise need ' to acknowledge realistically
the interaction of our histories.
Our purpose in doing so should not be to apportion blame and guilt for past wrongs,
but to commit to a practical programme of action that will remove the enduring
legacies of disadvantage. 
Fax from 3 10 26/ 85/ 97 13: 02 Pg: 6
-MAY 26 ' 97 13: 00
At the same time, we need to acknowledge openly that the treatment accorded to
many indigenous Australians over a significant period of European settlement
represents the most blemished chapter in our history.
Clearly, there were injustices done and no-one should obscure or minimise them. We
need to acknowledge as a nation what European settlement has meant for the first
Australians, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and in particular the
assault on their traditions and the discrimination and violence they endured over many
decades. This week the report of' the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission
inquiry into The Separation of A boriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from
their Famnilies will be tabled in Parliament. Like all such reports, it will be subjected
to proper analysis and scrutiny.
It will neither be uncritically accepted nor summarily swept aside.
However, let me make this clear. Personally, I feel deep sorrow for those of my
fellow Australians who suffered injustices under the practices of past generations
towards indigenous people. Equally, I am sorry for the hurt and trauma many people
here today may continue to feel as a consequence of those practices.
In facing the realities of the past, however, we must not join those who would portray
Australia's history since 1788 as little more than a disgracefu~ l record of imperialism,
exploitation and racism.
Such a portrayal is a gross distortion and deliberately neglects the overall story of great
Australian achievement that is there in our history to be told, and such an approach
wrill be repudiated by the overwhelming majority of Australians who are proud of what
this country has achieved although inevitably acknowledging the blemishes in its past
history. Australians of this generation should not be required to accept guilt and blame for past
actions and policies over which they had no control.
However, we must acknowledge past wrongs, understand that they still cause a great
deal of personal distress and resolve to improve areas of indigenous disadvantage both
now and into the future.
The third broad objective of the reconciliation process on which attention should be refocussed
is the need to work together to ensure that our differences do not prevent us
f-rm sharing in a common future.
All Australians, irrespective of their background or colour or belief or religion, share a
common destiny.
We sa have rights and obligations as Australians. 
Fax from 3 10 26/ 05/ 97 13: 02 Pg: 7
-MAY 26 ' 97 13: 00 P. 16
6
These rights include the right to individual self-fuilfilment and cultural freedom without
discrimination and intimidation. They include the right of all Australians to dignity and
self-respect.
We cannot share a common destiny if these rights are available to some Australians,
but not all.
Likewise, we cannot share a common destiny together as Australians if different
groups in our society have different standards of conduct and different systems of
accountability. I know that the goals of the reconciliation process have been subjected to tension and
strain as a result of the current debate on Native Title issues.
You will all be aware that I have spent a great deal of time in trying to find a just, fair
and workable outcome to the in response to the decision of the High Court of
Australia in the Wik case. In working towards that solution, my Government's
primary goal has been to strike a fair and reasonable balance between the rights of
indigenous people and the rights of other Australians, in particular those in the pastoral
arid mining industries.
I have heard what has been said here today, I can only remark that the myths that were
abroad in Longreach have been repeated although on the opposite side of the argument
in some of the observations that have been made here today. I need to remind you in
asking you to consider and to understand the approach of my Government for the Wik
decision. The recitals that were contained in the Native Title Act 1993, the declarations that
were made about the impact of pastoral leases on Native Title by my predecessor, the
Labor Prime Minister of Australia, and by a number of leaders in the indigenous
community of Australia who are present in this auditorium.
I Also need in the name of truth and in the name of a frank discussion of this issue to
repudiate the claim that my ten point plan involves a massive hand-out of freehold title
at taxpayer expense. That is an absolute myth, it is absolutely contrary to the fact and
I absolutely repudiate it.
I believe that the plan which T have put forward provides an equitable balance between
respect for the priciples of Native Title, as laid down in the Mabo decision, and the
very legitimate interests of pastoralists and others in securing certainty in carrying on
and planng their activities.
I understand the heat and passions that this issue has generated on both sides of the
debate and I believe that a fair and equitable outcome and I believe that my ten point
plan provides the only basis of a proper approach.
I want to conclude my remarks today in the same tone as I began with a vigorous
reaffimation of my Government's commitment to a successful and ongoing process of
national reconciliation which is developed in a climate of mutual trust and confidence. 
Fax from 3 10 26/ 05/ 97 13: 02 Pg:
~ MAY 26 ' 97 13: 01 P. 17
7
This is a process which draws on Australians from all walks of fife and all kinds of
backgrounds. What brings them together is a faith in the power of Australian values
the values of decency, tolerance, fairness and down-to-earth common sense.
What inspires the process of national reconciliation, and what gives it its enduring
strength, is the conviction that we can, and must, develop our future together as
Australians with mutual respect for, and appreciation of our differences and with a
unifying commitment to promoting Australia's national interests.
That is what this Convention is all about. It is about our future together as
Australians, and the kind of country we will hand on to our children.
I wish Pat Dodson, his fellow members of the Reconciliation Council and all others
involved in this Convention my very best wishes for a successful, positive and
purposeful outcome over the next three days.
I have great pleasure in formnally declaring this Convention open.
Thank you. 



26 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
OPENING ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN RECONCILIATION
CONVENTION MELBOURNE
E&amp; O E
Thank you very much. To Patrick Dodson, the Chairman of the Council, to Your
Excellency, the Governor of Victoria, Sir James Gobbo; the Premier of Victoria, Mr
Jeff Kennett; Mr Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition; Senator Kernot; other
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how very pleased I am to be here today to formally open this convention and
let me also thank the Kuhin people for the warmth and generosity of their welcome.
This Convention is a unifying event. It is an occasion for positive commitment to the
ffiture and a common avowal of the destiny we all share as Australians. It is an
occasion also for frank speaking and there has been some today quite appropriately
and in the same spirit I intend to speak frankly although I hope on all occasions
respectfully. Since the inception of the Council in 1991, the Coalition Parties have committed
themselves to the reconciliation process and today, on behalf of the Liberal and
National parties, I reaffirm that commitment.
At the heart of this reconciliation process among Australians lies three fundamental
objectives: * the first is a shared commnitment to raise the living standards and broadening the
opportunities available to the most disadvantaged group in Australian society and
that is indigenous Australians and that must be done as part of a broader
commitment to providing equality of opportunity to all Australians 
a second objective is a realistic acknowledgment of the inter-related histories of the
various elements of Australian society;
and a third is a mutual acceptance of the importance of working together to respect
and appreciate our differences and to ensure that they do not prevent us from
sharing the fuiture.
In meeting these challenges, the reconciliation process must focus on the fuiture in a
positive and principled way. Specific strategies need to be devised, specific priorities
need to be identified and specific practical programmes need to be agreed and
implemented. This process quite properly will generate debate and in some areas
genuine differences of opinion amongst people of goodwill about competing priorities.
I hope that all who participate in this convention can find important areas of common
ground on the best way of achieving the broad goals to which the reconciliation
process is committed.
As Patrick has reminded us the Convention has been preceded by over 100 formal
meetings attended by more than 10,000 people. Many of these meetings have focussed
on what people in their own communities can do to advance the cause of
reconciliation. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of true reconciliation.
Governments and leaders alone cannot make reconciliation happen simply through
legislation, decrees, declarations or rhetoric. True reconciliation must come from the
hearts and minds of the Australian people, in the respect they have for differences, in
the attitudes they encourage in their children, and in their recognition of the common
destiny we share together as Australians.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am an optimist about the process of national reconciliation in
Australia. I am an optimist about reconciliation because I believe in the decency, tolerance,
generosity and common sense of the Australian people.
I am an optimist because I know that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
are committed to preserving their unique culture at the same time as reaching out to
non-indigenous Australians to build a shared future.
I am an optimist because I believe that the Australian people respect the right to a ' fair
go' for all irrespective of colour, background or belief, and I am an optimist because I
believe that these attributes have made Australia one of the fairest, most egalitarian and
tolerant societies in the world.
But this optimism, my friends, about the reconciliation process cannot be blind. We
must be realistic in acknowledging some of the threats to reconciliation.
Reconciliation will not work if it puts a higher value on symbolic gestures and
overblown promises rather than the practical needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in areas like health, housing, education and employment. 
It will not work if it is premised solely on a sense of national guilt and shame. Rather
we should acknowledge past injustices and focus our energies on addressing the root
causes of current and future disadvantage among our indigenous people.
Nor will the reconciliation process work effectively if one of its central purposes
becomes the establishment of different systems of accountability and lawful conduct
among Australians on the basis of their race or any other factor.
The reconciliation process will only work effectively if it involves and inspires all
Australians. Reconciliation is not helped if its critics are able to claim that resources directed
towards Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are disadvantaged have not
been well or wisely used.
However much some may wish to believe otherwise, there is evidence that some
programmes designed to address indigenous disadvantaged have, in fact, encouraged
dependency rather than individual initiative and personal responsibility.
Ladies and gentlemen there can be little doubt that the reconciliation process has been
hindered by the divisiveness and misinformation generated by certain extremist views
in our community.
It cannot seriously be argued that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are not,
as a group, profoundly disadvantaged.
To suggest otherwise is to ignore reality, substitute fiction for fact and
unrepresentative anecdotes for credible statistical proof.
Equally, the cause of reconciliation is also damaged by those who are intolerant or
misleading for the opposite purpose.
Calls for disruption of the Sydney Olympic Games and trade boycotts of Australia,
baseless allegations about a return to White Australia policies and charges of racism
relentlessly directed against those who disagree with a particular point of view have all
been very counter-productive.
We need to reject extremist views on all sides. Australia's future will be best served
by openness, tolerance, fairness and confidence in our Australian values. It will not be
built on heavy-handed threats, cheap sloganeering or empty populism whatever its
source. We need, my friends, to re-embrace the three great goals of the reconciliation process
to which I have referred.
First, we need a renewed national focus on the true causes of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander disadvantage.
For my Government, this is the cornerstone of the reconciliation process. 
It is why we have given such priority to programmes that directly target indigenous
disadvantage in health, housing, education and employment.
It is why we are focussing Government resources on these areas in a way that will
achieve the best outcome.
Our aim is for indigenous Australians to have greater control over their own lives and
their own communities.
This will be achieved through sensitivity to the cultural needs of indigenous people and
the ending of their cycle of dependency.
We have breathed new life into the COAG agreement on National Commitment to
Improved Outcomes in the Delivery of Programmes and Services for Indigenous
people. Bilateral health agreements are now in place in all but two States and bilateral
indigenous housing agreements are well advanced in most States.
We have boosted funding for indigenous business development and, through the new
Indigenous Business Incentive Programmes, we will be assisting economic
independence in the indigenous community.
Through a Commonwealth Government initiative, we have brought the Army, ATSIC
and the Department of Health and Family Services together in a pilot program to
address water supply and broader environmental health needs.
In a period of necessary and tight fiscal restraint, to which all areas of Government
spending have been subjected, we have either quarantined the areas of greatest need in
indigenous communities, or actually increased fuinding.
In overall terms we are committed to spend over $ 428 million more on indigenous
specific programs in our first four years than was spent during the previous four years.
What we have sought to do is to target this expenditure at the areas of greatest need.
This practical, on-the-ground approach will remain a primary focus of our policy
making. This is because we believe it will bring about true social justice for
indigenous Australians.
Second, all Australians indigenous and otherwise need to acknowledge realistically
the interaction of our histories.
Our purpose in doing so should not be to apportion blame and guilt for past wrongs,
but to commit to a practical programme of action that will remove the enduring
legacies of disadvantage. 
At the same time, we need to acknowledge openly that the treatment accorded to
many indigenous Australians over a significant period of European settlement
represents the most blemished chapter in our history.
Clearly, there were injustices done and no-one should obscure or minimise them. We
need to acknowledge as a nation what European settlement has meant for the first
Australians, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and in particular the
assault on their traditions and the discrimination and violence they endured over many
decades. This week the report of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission
inquiry into The Separation of A boriginal and Torres Sitrail Islander Children from?
their Families will be tabled in Parliament. Like all such reports, it will be subjected
to proper analysis and scrutiny.
It will neither be uncritically accepted nor summarily swept aside.
However, let me make this clear. Personally, I feel deep sorrow for those of my
fellow Australians who suffered injustices under the practices of past generations
towards indigenous people. Equally, I am sorry for the hurt and trauma many people
here today may continue to feel as a consequence of those practices.
In facing the realities of the past, however, we must not join those who would portray
Australia's history since 1788 as little more than a disgraceful record of imperialism,
exploitation and racism.
Such a portrayal is a gross distortion and deliberately neglects the overall story of great
Australian achievement that is there in our history to be told, and such an approach
will be repudiated by the overwhelming majority of Australians who are proud of what
this country has achieved although inevitably acknowledging the blemishes in its past
history. Australians of this generation should not be required to accept guilt and blame for past
actions and policies over which they had no control.
However, we must acknowledge past wrongs, understand that they still cause a great
deal of personal distress and resolve to improve areas of indigenous disadvantage both
now and into the future.
The third broad objective of the reconciliation process on which attention should be refocussed
is the need to work together to ensure that our differences do not prevent us
from sharing in a common future.
All Australians, irrespective of their background or colour or belief or religion, share a
common destiny.
We all have rights and obligations as Australians. 
These rights include the right to individual self-fulfilment and cultural freedom without
discrimination and intimidation. They include the right of all Australians to dignity and
self-respect.
We cannot share a common destiny if these rights are available to some Australians,
but rnot all.
Likewise, we cannot share a common destiny together as Australians if different
groups in our society have different standards of conduct and different systems of
accountability. I know that the goals of the reconciliation process have been subjected to tension and
strain as a result of the current debate on Native Title issues.
You will all be aware that I have spent a great deal of time in trying to find a just, fair
and workable outcome to the in response to the decision of the High Court of
Australia in the Wik case. In working towards that solution, my Government's
primary goal has been to strike a fair and reasonable balance between the rights of
indigenous people and the rights of other Australians, in particular those in the pastoral
and mining industries.
I have heard what has been said here today, I can only remark that the myths that were
abroad in Longreach have been repeated although on the opposite side of the argument
in some of the observations that have been made here today. I need to remind you in
asking you to consider and to understand the approach of my Government for the Wik
decision. The recitals that were contained in the Native Title Act 1993, the declarations that
were made about the impact of pastoral leases on Native Title by my predecessor, the
Labor Prime Minister of Australia, and by a number of leaders in the indigenous
community of Australia who are present in this auditorium.
I also need in the name of truth and in the name of a frank discussion of this issue to
repudiate the claim that my ten point plan involves a massive hand-out of freehold title
at taxpayer expense. That is an absolute myth, it is absolutely contrary to the fact and
I absolutely repudiate it.
I believe that the plan which I have put forward provides an equitable balance between
respect for the principles of Native Title, as laid down in the Mabo decision, and the
very legitimate interests of pastoralists and others in securing certainty in carrying on
and planning their activities.
I understand the heat and passions that this issue has generated on both sides of the
debate and I believe that a fair and equitable outcome and I believe that my ten point
plan provides the only basis of a proper approach.
I want to conclude my remarks today in the same tone as I began with a vigorous
reaffirmation of my Government's commitment to a successful and ongoing process of
national reconciliation which is developed in a climate of mutual trust and confidence. 
This is a process which draws on Australians from all walks of life and all kinds of
backgrounds. What brings them together is a faith in the power of Australian values
the values of decency, tolerance, fairness and down-to-earth common sense.
What inspires the process of national reconciliation, and what gives it its enduring
strength, is the conviction that we can, and must, develop our future together as
Australians with mutual respect for, and appreciation of our differences and with a
unifying commitment to promoting Australia's national interests.
That is what this Convention is all about. It is about our future together as
Australians, and the kind of country we will hand on to our children.
I wish Pat Dodson, his fellow members of the Reconciliation Council and all others
involved in this Convention my very best wishes for a successful, positive and
purposeful outcome over the next three days.
I have great pleasure in formally declaring this Convention open.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
26 May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
OPENING ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN RECONCILIATION
CONVENTION MELBOURNE
E&amp; O E
Thank you very much. To Patrick Dodson, the Chairman of the Council, to Your
Excellency, the Governor of Victoria, Sir James Gobbo; the Premier of Victoria, Mr
Jeff Kennett; Mr Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition; Senator Kernot; other
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how very pleased I am to be here today to formally open this convention and
let me also thank the Kuhin people for the warmth and generosity of their welcome.
This Convention is a unifying event. It is an occasion for positive commitment to the
future and a common avowal of the destiny we all share as Australians. It is an
occasion also for frank speaking and there has been some today quite appropriately
and in the same spirit I intend to speak frankly although I hope on all occasions
respectfully. Since the inception of the Council in 1991, the Coalition Parties have committed
themselves to the reconciliation process and today, on behalf of the Liberal and
National parties, I reaffirm that commitment.
At the heart of this reconciliation process among Australians lies three fundamental
objectives: * the first is a shared commitment to raise the living standards and broadening the
opportunities available to the most disadvantaged group in Australian society and
that is indigenous Australians and that must be done as part of a broader
commitment to providing equality of opportunity to all Australians 
a second objective is a realistic acknowledgment of the inter-related histories of the
various elements of Australian society;,
and a third is a mutual acceptance of the importance of working together to respect
and appreciate our differences and to ensure that they do not prevent us from
sharing the future.
In meeting these challenges, the reconciliation process must focus on the future in a
positive and principled way. Specific strategies need to be devised, specific priorities
need to be identified and specific practical programmes need to be agreed and
implemented. This process quite properly will generate debate and in some areas
genuine differences of opinion amongst people of goodwill about competing priorities.
I hope that all who participate in this convention can find important areas of common
ground on the best way of achieving the broad goals to which the reconciliation
process is committed.
As Patrick has reminded us the Convention has been preceded by over 100 formal
meetings attended by more than 10,000 people. Many of these meetings have focussed
on what people in their own communities can do to advance the cause of
reconciliation. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of true reconciliation.
Governments and leaders alone cannot make reconciliation happen simply through
legislation, decrees, declarations or rhetoric. True reconciliation must come from the
hearts and minds of the Australian people, in the respect they have for differences, in
the attitudes they encourage in their children, and in their recognition of the common
destiny we share together as Australians.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am an optimist about the process of national reconciliation in
Australia. I am an optimist about reconciliation because I believe in the decency, tolerance,
generosity and common sense of the Australian people.
I am an optimist because I know that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
are committed to preserving their unique culture at the same time as reaching out to
non-indigenous Australians to build a shared future.
I am an optimist because I believe that the Australian people respect the right to a ' fair
go' for all irrespective of colour, background or belief, and I am an optimist because I
believe that these attributes have made Australia one of the fairest, most egalitarian and
tolerant societies in the world.
But this optimism, my friends, about the reconciliation process cannot be blind. We
must be realistic in acknowledging some of the threats to reconciliation.
Reconciliation will not work if it puts a higher value on symbolic gestures and
overblown promises rather than the practical needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in areas like health, housing, education and employment. 
It will not work if it is premised solely on a sense of national guilt and shame Rather
we should acknowledge past injustices and focus our energies on addressing the root
causes of current and future disadvantage among our indigenous people.
Nor will the reconciliation process work effectively if one of its central purposes
becomes the establishment of different systems of accountability and lawfull conduct
among Australians on the basis of their race or any other factor.
The reconciliation process will only work effectively if it involves and inspires all
Australians. Reconciliation is not helped if its critics are able to claim that resources directed
towards Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are disadvantaged have not
been well or wisely used.
However much some may wish to believe otherwise, there is evidence that some
programmes designed to address indigenous disadvantaged have, in fact, encouraged
dependency rather than individual initiative and personal responsibility.
Ladies and gentlemen there can be little doubt that the reconciliation process has been
hindered by the divisiveness and misinformation generated by certain extremist views
in our community.
It cannot seriously be argued that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are not,
as a group, profoundly disadvantaged.
To suggest otherwise is to ignore reality, substitute fiction for fact and
unrepresentative anecdotes for credible statistical proof.
Equally, the cause of reconciliation is also damaged by those who are intolerant or
misleading for the opposite purpose.
Calls for disruption of the Sydney Olympic Games and trade boycotts of Australia,
baseless allegations about a return to White Australia policies and charges of racism
relentlessly directed against those who disagree with a particular point of view have all
been very counter-productive.
We need to reject extremist views on all sides. Australia's future will be best served
by openness, tolerance, fairness and confidence in our Australian values. It will not be
built on heavy-handed threats, cheap sloganeering or empty populism whatever its
source. We need, my friends, to re-embrace the three great goals of the reconciliation process
to which I have referred.
First, we need a renewed national focus on the true causes of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander disadvantage.
For my Government, this is the cornerstone of the reconciliation process. 
It is why we have given such priority to programmes that directly target indigenous
disadvantage in health, housing, education and employment.
It is why we are focussing Government resources on these areas in a way that will
achieve the best outcome.
Our aim is for indigenous Australians to have greater control over their own lives and
their own communities.
This will be achieved through sensitivity to the cultural needs of indigenous people and
the ending of their cycle of dependency.
We have breathed new life into the COAG agreement on National Commitment to
Improved Outcomes in the Delivery of Programmes and Services for Indigenous
people. Bilateral health agreements are now in place in all but two States and bilateral
indigenous housing agreements are well advanced in most States.
We have boosted funding for indigenous business development and, through the new
Indigenous Business Icentive Programmes, we will be assisting economic
independence in the indigenous community.
Through a Commonwealth Government initiative, we have brought the Army, ATSIC
and the Department of Health and Family Services together in a pilot program to
address water supply and broader environmental health needs.
In a period of necessary and tight fiscal restraint, to which all areas of Government
spending have been subjected, we have either quarantined the areas of greatest need in
indigenous communities, or actually increased funding.
In overall terms we are committed to spend over $ 428 million more on indigenous
specific programs in our first four years than was spent during the previous four years.
What we have sought to do is to target this expenditure at the areas of greatest need.
This practical, on-the-ground approach will remain a primary focus of our policy
making. This is because we believe it will bring about true social justice for
indigenous Australians.
Second, all Australians indigenous and otherwise need to acknowledge realistically
the interaction of our histories.
Our purpose in doing so should not be to apportion blame and guilt for past wrongs,
but to commit to a practical programme of action that will remove the enduring
legacies of disadvantage. 
At the same time, we need to acknowledge openly that the treatment accorded to
many indigenous Australians over a significant period of European settlement
represents the most blemished chapter in our history.
Clearly, there were injustices done and no-one should obscure or minimise them. We
need to acknowledge as a nation what European settlement has meant for the first
Australians, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and in particular the
assault on their traditions and the discrimination and violence they endured over many
decades. This week the report of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission
inquiry into The Separation of A boriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children fronm
their Families will be tabled in Parliament. Like all such reports, it will be subjected
to proper analysis and scrutiny.
It will neither be uncritically accepted nor summarily swept aside.
However, let me make this clear. Personally, I feel deep sorrow for those of my
fellow Australians who suffered injustices under the practices of past generations
towards indigenous people. Equally, I am sorry for the hurt and trauma many people
here today may continue to feel as a consequence of those practices.
In facing the realities of the past, however, we must not join those who would portray
Australia's history since 1788 as little more than a disgraceful record of imperialism,
exploitation and racism.
Such a portrayal is a gross distortion and deliberately neglects the overall story of great
Australian achievement that is there in our history to be told, and such an approach
will be repudiated by the overwhelming majority of Australians who are proud of what
this country has achieved although inevitably acknowledging the blemishes in its past
history. Australians of this generation should not be required to accept guilt and blame for past
actions and policies over which they had no control.
However, we must acknowledge past wrongs, understand that they still cause a great
deal of personal distress and resolve to improve areas of indigenous disadvantage both
now and into the future.
The third broad objective of the reconciliation process on which attention should be refocussed
is the need to work together to ensure that our differences do not prevent us
from sharing in a common future.
All Australians, irrespective of their background or colour or belief or religion, share a
common destiny.
We all have rights and obligations as Australians. 
These rights include the right to individual self-fulfilment and cultural freedom without
discrimination and intimidation. They include the right of all Australians to dignity and
self-respect.
We cannot share a common destiny if these rights are available to some Australians,
but not all.
Likewise, we cannot share a common destiny together as Australians if different
groups in our society have different standards of conduct and different systems of
accountability. I know that the goals of the reconciliation process have been subjected to tension and
strain as a result of the current debate on Native Title issues.
You will all be aware that I have spent a great deal of time in trying to find a just, fair
and workable outcome to the in response to the decision of the High Court of
Australia in the Wik case. In working towards that solution, my Government's
primary goal has been to strike a fair and reasonable balance between the rights of
indigenous people and the rights of other Australians, in particular those in the pastoral
and mining industries.
I have heard what has been said here today, I can only remark that the myths that were
abroad in Longreach have been repeated although on the opposite side of the argument
in some of the observations that have been made here today. I need to remind you in
asking you to consider and to understand the approach of my Government for the Wik
decision. The recitals that were contained in the Native Title Act 1993, the declarations that
were made about the impact of pastoral leases on Native Title by my predecessor, the
Labor Prime Minister of Australia, and by a number of leaders in the indigenous
community of Australia who are present in this auditorium.
I also need in the name of truth and in the name of a frank discussion of this issue to
repudiate the claim that my ten point plan involves a massive hand-out of freehold title
at taxpayer expense. That is an absolute myth, it is absolutely contrary to the fact and
I absolutely repudiate it.
I believe that the plan which I have put forward provides an equitable balance between
respect for the principles of Native Title, as laid down in the Mabo decision, and the
very legitimate interests of pastoralists and others in securing certainty in carrying on
and planning their activities.
I understand the heat and passions that this issue has generated on both sides of the
debate and I believe that a fair and equitable outcome and I believe that my ten point
plan provides the only basis of a proper approach.
I want to conclude my remarks today in the same tone as I began with a vigorous
reaffirmation of my Government's commitment to a successful and ongoing process of
national reconciliation which is developed in a climate of mutual trust and confidence. 
This is a process which draws on Australians from all walks of life and all kinds of
backgrounds. What brings them together is a faith in the power of Australian values
the values of decency, tolerance, fairness and down-to-earth common sense.
What inspires the process of national reconciliation, and what gives it its enduring
strength, is the conviction that we can, and must, develop our future together as
Australians with mutual respect for, and appreciation of our differences and with a
unifying commitment to promoting Australia's national interests.
That is what this Convention is all about. It is about our future together as
Australians, and the kind of country we will hand on to our children.
I wish Pat Dodson, his fellow members of the Reconciliation Council and all others
involved in this Convention my very best wishes for a successful, positive and
purposeful outcome over the next three days.
I have great pleasure in formally declaring this Convention open.
Thank you. 



Fax from 3 Iit 321UrL a reJ
, MAY 26 ' 97 10: 42 P. 3
PRIME MINISTER
24 May 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD NIP
ENE* RtL-* NEETING-OF'NSW STATE-COUNCILI
It is as always a great delight for me to be with you this morning to say a few words
about the Federal political scene and to share wvith you a very important theme as we
approach the half way point of our first term in Government, And that is the theme of
keeping faith. And this morning I want to develop with you the way ii which the
Coalition Government has kept faith with the people who voted for it, how we have
kept faith with the interests of the Australian community and how we have kept faith
with the long term goals that we, as the Liberal Party, have.
When we were elected in March of last year it was rightly said that there were many
people who voted for us on that occasion who had never previously done so. And that
one of our prime responsibilities was to keep faith with those people commonly
called, often called, the battlers of Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the biggest problems that we inherited when we became
the Government of Australia in March of last year was, of course, the appalling state of
the budget deficit. I said then, and this is true, that there were sonic features of the
Australian economy that wvere good, that there were some that were bad and there
were some that were very bad. And one of them that wvas very bad was the fact that
we inherited a budget deficit of $ 10.5 billion. In the last financial year that the
KeatinglBeazley government was in power the national debt of Australia that's the
total of all the debts run up by governments in the past had risen to almost twenty per
cent of the total wealth generated on an annual basis by the entire Australian
community. And I am very proud to say that at the end of our first term in
Government, we will have turned that $ 10.5 billion deficit into a surplus of $ 1.6 billion.
Ane Afl 4 0 r3 fl.. 4 
Fax from 3 It 26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 2
MAPY 26 ' 97 10: 42 P. 4
Now it's not the most exciting thing in the world to talk about, it's not the only thing
in the world to talk about, but it's pretty fuandamental because if you are going broke, if
you are not paying your way, if you are borrowing on the backs of your children's
future, which is what previous governments had done, then you don't have many
options and you don't have much of a capacity to do anything else. But in the coming
financial year. 1997/ 98, my Government will repay $ 5.3 billion of Paul Keating's debts
and I am very proud indeed to be able to say that.
I'm very proud to-be able-to say that we-won't be-going into the financial markets in
1997/ 98 to borrowv anything because there will be no borrowing requirement by the
Commonwealth. And what, of course, that means is that we are laying the foundation
for a stronger and more prosperous and a faster growing future for all of the Australian
c o mmun ity.
So the first news, and the really good news about the Budget brought down two weeks
ago, is -thatit-has kept faith-with our ffundamental responsibility to-repair the budget, to
repair the national accounts of Australia and to make certain that once again this
country is able to pay its wvay, and Ae make no apology at all for having given it such
an enormous priority. But it's not just something that makes you feel good but it's
something that delivers hard and credible and strong gains and strong rewards and
strong benefits. There can be no doubt at a in my mind and there can be no doubt at
all in the minds of any fair observer but if it hadn't been for the deficit cutting policies
of my Government, we would have not have seen a two per cent reduction in interest
rates since we came to power in March of last year.
Those who created the problem, that's Mr Beazley and Mr Evans, can crow all they
like about how it would have happened anyway, and it's all the result of something
else. The brutal reality is that because we are not borrowing and in fact in paying debt,
there's greater room for the Reserve Bank to do what it did yesterday. And once
again we are keeping faith with the battlers. Delivering interest rate cuts which on an
average housing loan have been worth $ 225 a month, that's over $ 50 a week let me
repeat over $ 50 a week added to your disposable income, after tax, to the average
wage and salary earner. I can't think of a greater delivery on the commitment we
made to the battlers of Australia in March of last year than to be able to deliver that
kind of reward for their support, for their wage restraint, and for the fiscal policies of
the Howard Government.
So ladies and gentleman there is a great message in yesterday's interest rate reduction.
And that message is that there are rewards for wage restraint. It's much better for a
wage and salary earner in Australia to show wage restraint and get an interest rate cut
on a housing loan, than it is to lack wage moderation and to have the high wages
consurned by the progressive taxation system and higher interest rates. 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 18: 53 Pg: 3
MA~ Y 26 ' 97 10: 43P.
The strongest possible message that should go to the wage and salary earners of
Australia is that if you continue to show wage restraint you'll get fuirther interest rate
relief. That's the message that ought to go to the wage and salary earners of Australia.
Good on you for showing wage restraint. Good on you for being part of a combined
effort to tackle the economic problems of Australia. And there is a reward at the end
of the road and that reward is lower interest rates. And it is worth far more than a
wage increase, far more every time. And I think that is a reality that has dawned on a
large number of people in Australia. It is perhaps the reality that terrifies our political
opponents but it gives happiness and satisfaction to the battlers of Austraia and to
middle Australia, because they deserve rewards. I mean let us -not forget that we -still
have very high real interest rates in this country. They may have come down, but when
you've got an inflation rate of two per cent they ought to come down and there ought
to be a reward. And that is what I think the wage and salary earners of Australia have
received over the last fourteen months, and that is why they know that we have kept
We weren't elected to government to ignore the mainstream of the Australian
community and we have kept faith with that mainstream. And the budget that Peter
Costello delivered the week before last did the job on deficit reduction. It also, or the
first time since Federation, delivered something that, year after year, people have asked
me: " Why can't we have in Australia and that is an across-the-board tax incentive for
savings?" I have lost count of the number of meetings I've been to, I've lost count of
the number of resolutions that have been passed by Liberal Party gatherings calling for
a savings break. Those innumerable occasions when I've sort of been pinned against
the wall by an irate branch member who said: " Why is it that we are taxed twice on
savings, why is it that we pay income tax on our income and then we put what's left
over into some investment and wve're taxed on the return for that investment. Why is
it?" Well it's a good question. I was never able to answer it. But I always said, well
you know, good idea, good point, take it on board. And all the other sort of excuses
you're left with when you don't have an answer. You've all heard it, probably every
one otf you has had the conversation with me. I feel like it after twenty two years.
But at long last we're able to do something about it. And quite unapologetically it is
non means tested. Cheryl Kernot wants to put a means test at $ 35,000 on it. And
extraordinarily enough I am getting criticised for breaking a promise because the
savings initiative we brought in in the budget is more generous than what we promised
during the election campaign. Now this is the new ALP and from some sections of
the Australian media definition of a broken promise. If you deliver more than you
promise you have broken your promise.
So in other words, ladies and gentleman, be on notice from now on, if wve do in any
area more than what we said we were going to do, you can bet your bottom dollar that
sonme of those smart alecs will be on our backs, saying-, " Oh there they go again,
dishonouring their promises." 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 16: 53 Pg: 4
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 44 P. 6
I'm proud of the fact that I over delivered on my savings tax promise. I'm proud of
the fact that I've over delivered on the capital gains tax concession for small business.
And that's another group in the community with whom we have well and truly kept
faith, and that is the small business community. I said during the election campaign
that providing incentives to small business so that they could generate more jobs was
one of the great goals of a Coalition government. And we've kept faith with all of the
promises we made. We delivered the relief in relation to provisional tax.
From tile first of July this year, every small business operator in Australia will be able
to. sell. his-or-her business and -thirty-per cent, let me say, of new small businesses
being established in Australia now are owvned and operated by women. And I say that
very advisedly because it's one of the great growth areas of the Australian economy
where the influence of the women in our community is being~ increasingly felt. And
from the first of July this year, any person who sells a small business, whether it's
operatedthrougha-compay, a-partnership-or a-tru-st or whatever, will bec able-to invest
the proceeds of the sale of that business into any other kind of business. It do esn't
have to be the same, or anything like it. You can go from being a bookmaker to a
software operator, whatever you like. Doesn't matter what the combination is. You
can invest up to $ Sniillioii out of the proceeds of the sale of that business without being
liable for a cent of capital gains tax. Now that represents an over-delivery of a promise
and it represents a massiv'e new incentive for people to put their money into small
business. We've also changed the industrial relations Jaws to help small business. We made
major changes to Laurie Brereton's unfair dismissal law. And we had those changes
contained in the industrial relations amendments. And then six weeks ago when I
announced my small business response to the Bell Report, we went a step further in
relation to unfair dismissal. We said that any firm in Australia that employed fewer
than fifteen people would be completely exempt completely and utterly exempt from
any kind of unfair dismissal law in relation to a person who had been employed for less
than one year.
Those of you in the audience who run small businesses will know that if you could feel
that you can put somnebody on for a trial for up to a year, and if it didn't work out you
could let them know without ending up in the industrial relations commission, at the
end of a fairly modest claim like $ 15,000 or $ 20,000, modest it may be for the claimant
but crippling for you if you're starting a new business then you might be inclined to
take the person on. And that was our thinking it's a pretty reasonable proposition
and we brought down a regulation to give effect to it but predictably perhaps the
Labor Party and the Australian Democrats and Senator Harradine have said they're
going to vote to disallow it. They're going to vote to stop us giving small business in
Australia a greater incentive to take on people, particularly young people. Because thle
truth is that we will only substantially reduce unemployment in this country if we can
get the small firms that employ three or four people to employing four or five or six
that's how you're going to reduce unemployment in Australia. You won't reduce
unemployment by looking to the big companies. They're all down-sizing. You'll
reduce unemployment in this country by taking the shackles off small business, and one
of the ways you take shackles off smiall business is to take away the intirniidatorv effect
of unfair dismissal laws. 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 85/ 97 16: 53 Pg:
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 44 P. 7
It is as plain as the proverbial nose on one's face, yet sure enough echoing the
instructions of the trade union movement of Australia who told the Labor Patty they
couldn't support it. Two weeks the federal Parliamentary Caucus said it was going to
vote to disallow the regulations. And the Trade Union movement of Australia, what a
sorry group. I mean, if you think of the last 14 months, what's the most vivid memory
of the Trade Union movement of Australia trying the bash down the door of
Parliament House on the evening of the Feder-al Budget after having heard an
inflammatory speech from the President of the ACTU and the Secretary of the ACTU.
And -who -was-oDn the plat-form with them butnone other then the Leader of the Federal
Opposition. The fact of the matter is that they contribute nothing to the public debate about
employment. They contribute nothing to the public debate about Australia's economic
-future.. The Trade-Union -movement-in. Australia at the present time is locked into-n
introspective, backward looking attitude towards protecting what they have rather than
trying to build and grow the strength of the Australian economy, and their attitude to
unfair dismissal laws is evidence of that, 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 6
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 45 P. 8
Ladies and gentlemen wve have kept faith. We've kept faith with our families of
Australia. We introduced on time. without deduction, in fulll the $ 1 billion family tax
initiative from the first of January with greater equity to families with young children,
particularly those living on one income.
On 1 July this year we will again keep faith with the families of Australia by delivering
in fll, on time, without deduction the $ 600 million tax incentive scheme encouraging
people to maintain or take out private health insurance.
And.. what-a shame is that-our predecessors, what a crying -shame it is that our
predecessors hadn't acted in this area years ago. If something~ like this had been
introduced in the early 1990s we wvould nowv have 40 per cent of the Australian
population with private health insurance, instead of 34 per cent and they were told in
the early 1990s by the ANIA, they were told by the then Minister, they were told by
everybody-who-hac4any. understading of what private, health. insurance wa-al. about
that unless you provided an incentive, unless you put a floor under the fall in private
health' insurance, it would gather momentum and run the risk of becoming a selffulfilling
prophecy. And now you have the deplorable situation wvhere even sections of
the current leadership of the AMA are denigrating private health insurance.
We have inherited a very parlous situation in this area. I believe that the private health
initiatives that come into operation on the first of July will staunch the deterioration in
this area. They will put a line under the fall and over time they will lead to more
people taking out private health insurance. But we are certainly late in the game
because of the inactivity, the indolence, the ideological hostility to private health
insurance of the former federal Labor Government.
But we will keep faith in that area. We will also keep faith with the retired people....
We promised that we would put them on the same footing as pensioners in relation to
the tax free rebate and by the end of our term, first term in government, that will have
occurred. . And the savings initiatives will be of enormous benefit to self funded retirees arnd let
me say to them that it wvill be of enormous benefit if it is non-means tested.
And attempts to means test it, particularly of the type proposed by Cheryl Kernot,
show a complete misunderstanding, a complete misunderstanding of the situation and
the needs of self-funded retired people in Australia and they completely ignore the facts
that although interest rate reductions are of great benefit to small business, to home
buyers, to battlers who have young families to bring up, they're not all enjoyed for selffunded
retirees.
I know that. My Government knows that. My colleagues know that. And that is wvhy
we have a non-means tested savings rebate. That is why we have a tax incentive for
private health insurance. That is why we brought in a tax rebate for self funded
retirees and that is why we will always follow policies that keep faith with self-fuinded
retirees. 
Fax from 311t 26/ 05/ 97 18: 53 Pg: 7
-MA4Y 26 ' 97 10: 45 P. 9
But just remember who doesn't know that. Just remember that Cheryl Kernot and
Kim Beazley want to means test it. Just remember that they are opposed to the health
insurance rebate, Just remember that when they were in Government for 13 years they
hit the self fUnded retirees in the eye by treating them in a very discriminating fashion.
Once again, my friends, this is an area where we have kept faith with the people who
supported us and kept faith with the Australian community.
It remains the fact, ladies and gentlemen, that unemployment in Australia is still
unacceptably high. As always. unemployment is the. last of the indicators to come -Sood
ater a deep recession. We have made major changes to the industrial relations systemn
which over time because of their greater flexibility, their greater focus on wvorkplace
agreements, their rejection of the compulsory role of trade unions, will produce freer,
more flexible workplaces and ' will add to job creation.
It is also true, ladies and gentlemen, that you cannot hope for a sustained fall in
unemployment until we have a sustained and higher level of economic growth.
The great problem that this country has had year after year is that it has never been
able to run the economy at a high level of economic growth for a long period of time
without something going wrong and the shutters had to be brought down to stop the
current account blowing out or inflation going through the roof.
And we have had these major breaks on the rate of economic growth. We've had
these road humps along the path to sustained economic growth and we are starting to
see daylight on that front.
We are now in an era of very lowv inflation. We now have interest rates that are at pre-
Whitlam levels. We haven't had housing interest rates where they are at the present
time since the late 1 960s and it is an extraordinary achievement and it has a long term
significance if we can maintain it for the strength and stability of middle Australia. It is
v'ery important to their psychology. It is very important to the outlook for average
AustralIan families.
We have begun to tackle the structural impediments to Australian labour markets and
we have gone a long way down that path although there is further distance to be
travelled. We have fundamentally tackled the problem of the structural budget deficit. We are
not just relying on asset sales for a transient improvement in the Budget deficit. We
have made long term improvements to the budget deficit,
And by the turn of the century spending levels, as a proportion of national wealth
generated each year in this country, % ill be at the sort of levels they were in the early
1970s. And to go further than that will, of course, be to threaten the fundamentals of
the social security safety net which we will not do or to threaten such fundamental
areas as a necessary level of defence expenditure. 
Fax froim 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 8
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 46
And on that point, ladies and gentlemen, and on the question of keeping faith, let me
say another thing of which I am particularly proud, is that my Government has kept
Cith with its commitment to maintain the level of defence expenditure.
I know it is fashionable in some corners to say you don't need any defence
commitment now that the Cold War is over. I know it is fashionable in some circles to
say that there is a never ending, bottomless pit called the peace dividend and you can
keep on cutting and cutting and cutting defence expenditure.
Well, -that -is. a very misguided notion. I mean, our-levels of-defence expenditure now
are at historically low levels and it would be nothing short of a repudiation of our
responsibilities as a Government to cut them even fuarther. And that is why we have
quarantined them from expenditure reductions. At the same time we are going to
achieve a major shift in the emphasis of defence expenditure away from what I might
loosely.-call offialdem towa~ s-those men -and women. in the firont-ine
So, ladies and gentlemen we have kept faith on all fronts. We have kept faith with our
responsibility to repair tile economy of Australia. We have kept faith with small
business. We have kept faith with families. We have kept faith with self fuinded
retirees and very importantly we have kept faith with the battlers of Australia who
deserted the Australian Labor Party in droves in Mlarch of last year and the latest and
most dramatic piece of evidence was the interest Tate reduction that occurred
yesterday. And let me say in relation to that that the major banks of Australia carry a very heavy
responsibility in the interest of their customers and the interest of Australian
community to pass on in full and without reduction and without the delay the fall
measure of the official interest rate reduction.
Let me make it clear, ladies and gentlemen, I am no bank-basher, I never have been, I
understand the role of banks in the Australian financial system. I inaugurated a
landmark inquiry that led to the deregulation of the Australian financial system. I
supported the introduction of foreign banks into Australia. I continue to support tile
further deregulation of the banking system but it's pretty hard to believe that we have a
highly competitive banking system at the present time, when there can be delays of the
kind that we are apparently about to witness in the passing on of reductions in official
interest rates and those who argue that there are adequate levels of competition at the
present time might have a bit of explaining to do if that apparent tardiness in passing
on those increases actually occurs.
So, let me say again that it is in the national interest that those reductions be passed on
quickly and in full. The battlers of Australian who have waited a long time for their
reward and they are entitled to have it on time without delay and without reduction.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I say something, you'd be disappointed if I didn't.
Can I say something about our political opponents .( interjection). . no, I'm a
charitable man. 
Faxf1r1o2' 6~/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 9
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 46 P. 11
Can I say something about this marveilous thing called privatisation. I had a talk to
Peter Collins about this yesterday. Very interesting thing privatisation. That was the
thing that way back in the mid 1 980s I started advocating when I was first Leader of
the Opposition and the Labor Party said: oh dreadlial.
With their hand on their heart they said we would never privatise Qantas. We would
never privatise it was then Trans Australian Airlines. But, of course, the
Commonwealth Bank. I mean, the sweetest fruit of all of the tree of Barcaldine the
Commonwealth Bank. How could you ever privatise the Commonwealth Bank? Sure
enough that!' s what they said when we. were advocating it. Then they win. an election
in 1987 and Bob Hawke says: oh well, we'd better have another look at it.
So they did. They had another look at it. And then they started to privatise Qantas and
Trans Australia Airlines and then you camne to the 1990 election and we had a policy of
-privatising. the. CommnmwealiBank, and Paul -Keating-said oh, . nov-he said, what's
this, he said I'll write to them all, So he wrote to every single member of the
Commonwealth Bank Employees Association saying that it was a solemn commitment,
a solemn commitment this one, a solemn commitment of the Australian Labor Party
that it would never sell shares in the Commonwealth Bank. They even put out a
prospectus after they decided to sell half of it, saying they didn't sell the other half
I mean, if the provisions of the Companies Act was applied Ralph Willis would have
been in the slammer as a result of that.
But no, they ended up and of course the crowning glory of it all was that Beazley had
to come running to us before the 1993 Budget to guarantee our support in the Senate
if they went ahead wvith the sale of it.
I mean, we were consistent, we were policy consistent. We have always argued that
Governments have no business running commercial undertakings. And we have been
arguing it for years, we have been arguing it without alteration. But, of course, I
thought the hypocrisy had sort of scaled Himalayan heights in relation to the sale of the
Commonwealth Bank but then of course we come to Telstra.
We comle to dear Teistra. At the last election we said we would sell one third of it and
I said then and Mr Egan and Mr Carr here in New South Wales have delivered proof
positive of what I've said wvas right. But the real difference on privatisation between
myself and the Labor Party at the last election wvas that if they won the election they
were going to sell the lot having promised not to sell any of it, but if we won the
election we would sell a third, precisely what we said before the election we were
going to sell. And what Carr and Egan are proposing to do here in New South Wales,
which is, of course, a direct steal of the policies of the Coalition here in New South
Wales. But I have always said, and I said it again to Peter Collins yesterday, in politics
as in life, imitation Is the sincerest form of flattery.
They've decided to do something that federally they did when they were in
Government yet hypocritically they promised not to do when they were in Opposition. 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg:
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 47 P. 12
Time and time again the Labor Party has gone to the Australian people, be it here in
New South Wales, be it federally, be it anywhere in Australia and have said: We will
never sell any of the jewels in Labor crown. We will never sell any of these great
Australian assets, that Ben Chifley and Eddie Ward would roll in their graves if they
thought any of these assets were being sold and yet when they get into office they
relentlessly say: We need the money, so let's sell, sell the assets.
It is a bankrupt, hopeless, hypocritical policy. They believe in nothing, they stand for
nothing. And they demonstrate by that kind of blanket searing hypocrisy why they are
no-longer-the. government of Australia-and why-they are held in such low-esteem as the
Government of this State.
Ladies and gentlemen, Michael said at the beginning that the last three months marked
the end of the honeymoon. Well, let me say I've always thought that the basis of a
long-and stable and. happy marriage is a.. very long and. happy. honeymoon.-.......
We had a very long and happy honeymoon as a Government and I can'tellyou we are
going to have a very long and stable marriage with the Australian people.
Thank you 
Fax f'raom 3 It2/ 5/ 71: 5 g1
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 47 P. 13
Q A Session:
Question: Prime Minister wvould you consider provided funds from the
Commonwealth Government for the screening of prostate cancer which is prevalent in
men, particularly over 50 years. This disease is more common in men than breast
cancer in women and if left undetected can result in death. I understand that this
screening is supported by the.. Association in New South Wales.
Prime Minister: I was briefly associated with the launch of a video on prostate
-cancer. put-tege# 4ieriby the. Department of Veterans Affairs and-I do think it is an.-illness
which should be talked about with the same degree openness and the same
acknowledgment of the threat that it poses to the health of men and breast cancer and
other forms of cancer it talks about in relation to the health of women.
1 wiR -consider what-yotu ve-put4o me-and-willtalk , to-Mike Wooldt-idge a-beut--it*
Question: Prime Minister thank you very much, it was an inspiring speech. I have a
question. Is it possible for you to take out time on television and make that sort of
speech to the Australian people who regrettably, every time I see you on television
You're being asked some ridiculous question about something of really no great
interest to people other than journos. If you could really take time out to make that
sort of speech to the Australian people ( inaudible) I don't believe they do.
Prime Minister: .( Inaudible)..
Question: I am speaking to you this morning as a six generation citizen of the city of
Newcastle, I am pleased to hear your affirmation of faith of battlers.
This week there couldn't have been a more miserable Or embattled city in the whole of
Australia from what we felt in Newcastle. BEI has confirmed that it will withdraw
from Newcastle and we are in a situation where we wvill be losing very shortly 2,500
jobs from the current skilled workforce. The question is, Prime Minister. we are
looking at a situation where the best remedy of loss of workforce would be with
( inaudible) steel... Can You give us a pledge of your assistance to the steel workers in
Newcastle today?
Prime Minister; Well, can I just say a couple of things in relation to the BHP I
have said that we will match the offer made by the New South Wales Government of
assistance. We think that the way it was proposed was kneejerk, fairly superficial.
We think that there are better ways of spending the resources. We'll also look to
BHP for a great contribution than was involved in the New South Wales proposal.
We think that B HP should match the contributions to the Governments and we will
certainly work to that end. I don't ( inaudible) deliberately, but I think it's a fact of life.
Next Thursday, at their request, I will meet a delegation of steel workers. They're not
being filtered through the ACTU, they're coming to see me direct. And, a number of
my Ministers have been to Newcastle already and I intend to also go to Newcastle
sometime within the next few weeks. I haven't picked a particular day. There's no
point in going there just for show, I want to talk to the steelworkers, I want to talk to
26/ 05/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 11 
Fax from 3 11 26/ 65/ 97 10: 53 Pg: 12
MAY 26 ' 97 10: 48 P. 14
the Civic leaders, I want to talk to the Chamber of Commerce and the elected
representatives of both political persuasions.
Of course, we have a Newcastle-based ( inaudible) Bob Hawke, this idea that
Newcastle/ Hunter is a Labor area, is quite wrong, it is not. It's a mixed political area
and we should try to tackle this in a non-political fashion.
Simon Crean, I trust, believes that ( inaudible)
It won.' t-be quite as devastating now-as it would -have been ten or fifteen. years ago,
because there has been a diversification. But Newcastle is a symbol of industrial
Australia. I understand that. And I understand the psychological impact of it. am not
unfamiliar with Newcastle. I have, through my wife, I have family connections with
the area ( inaudible)
( inaudible) can I just make one thing perfectly clear, it wouldn't have been any
different. If the Labor Party had won the last Federal election, BlIP would still be
closing down. Can I make that very clear they're now running around saying that if
we'd been in power it would have been different ( inaudible). I mean while they were
in power, BHP's payroll went from 56,000 to 24,000. ( inaudible)
But I am very sympathetic with the area. I know the psychological impact of what has
happened. We will match the New South Wales Government's offer. We will
encourage the company to match the contributions of the two governments and we will
see that what resources we put into it are all wisely spent. I've sent a number of
Ministers there already. I'll be going there again sometime in the next few weeks and
I'll be seeing ( inaudible) next Thursday unhindered by the ACTU.
Question: Is the next Budget likely to be showing more of these incentives ( inaudible)
and are tax cuts likely. ( inaudible). Also, just another question, ( inaudible)..
Prime Minister-( inaudible) well, I don't know that I want to speculate about next
year's Budget. But as I often say when I'm being interviewed, if I can get a wvord ill
with some of themn. I often say ( inaudible) always expect a few surprises. and I think
one of the things that people should understand is that we are about sensible reform
and sensible change, there's been a bit of debate about taxation over the last week, and
can I just repeat that if you're thinking about taxation reform in this country you've
got to ask yourself three questions. The first question is will it help create more jobs?
And the second question is will it make Australia more competitive, and the third
question is will it lift the living standards of the Australian people? So they're the three
benchmarks against which we will assess any changes we make in relation to the
taxation system. And the reason why we brought in the savings initiative is that I'm a
great believer in incentives. You can change ( inaudible) if you give people the right
incentive. And in giving people the incentive to save is a great gift. And what we've
done is tackled the savings problem on two fronts. By reducing the deficit we're
tackling public savings, and by giving people tax incentives we're encouraging private
savings. When the two things wvork together they complement each other and that
really is what a good sa~ rings policy is all about. 



May 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE MINERALS COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA'S
ANNUAL DINNER
GREAT HALL PARLIAMENT HOUSE
E O E
Thank you very much Jerry Ellis for those very kind and warm words of welcome; to Nick
Stump the new President, to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, to the Leader of the
Australian Democrats, my other parliamentary colleagues, in particular my friend and
colleague, Warwick Parer, the Minister for Resources, and ladies and gentlemen.
It's a pleasure once again for me to address this annual dinner of a great Australian
industry that contributes about $ 35 billion to our export income, about 7% of our gross
domestic product and very significantly, for those in the Australian community who
occasionally forget, the contribution to the social and welfare infrastructure of our nation
about $ 2.4 billion in taxes every year which goes towards the provision of necessary
facilities for the more needy and less fortunate in the Australian community.
I talk to you at an annual dinner at a time of very intense debate in Australia about a
number of very important economic, social and industry issues. And not surprisingly, I
want to touch on some of them in my remarks tonight.
But I would like to take the occasion of telling the audience, or those who don't know,
that today I'm delighted to say legislation passed through the Senate under the guidance of
Warwick Parer completing the abolition of export controls on all Australian commodities
except uranium. Well, it's good to have some lively interaction. I always enjoy that, as
you may have noticed. But that fulfils a longstanding commitment of the Coalition which
we carried into Government. And I thank my colleagues in the Senate very warmly.
Before touching on some of the industry and other issues that I wanted to mention tonight,
could I take a few moments to traverse some of the things that my Government has
achieved in the 12 months since I spoke to you last year. We have, on the budget front, I
believe achieved an enormous amount. We have turned a deficit of $ 10.5 billion into a
projected surplus of $ 1.6 billion at the completion of our first three years in government.
The latest budget documentation reveals that by the Year 2000 the total national debt of
Australia will be about 10% of gross domestic product, against a figure of 19.5% in the
financial year of 1995/ 96. And this has been achieved without any tax increases, and it has
also been achieved within a framework of implementing a number of very significant
election commitments particularly in the area of family taxation and capital gains tax relief
for the small business sector of Australia. 
I'd also like to remind the audience of the quite major changes that have been achieved in
the area of industrial relations. The Wor-kplace Relations Act represents without question
the biggest single legislative change to Australia's industrial relations system since the end
of World War 11. It has entrenched the use of enterprise bargaining. It will spread the use
of Australian workplace agreements and certainly not least in the mining industry. It has
restored the strength of the secondary boycott prohibitions, it has finally ended compulsory
unionism and in every respect I believe it has ushered in an era of industrial relations where
increasingly the emphasis will be on the making of bargains at a workplace level.
The full benefit of this legislation will take time to filter through, but I already welcome the
many signs that companies in the mining industry are taking advantage of the provisions of
that legislation. In many other areas of course the process of reform is proceeding at a
very considerable pace and I think of areas such as gas and electricity reform and I think of
the other initiatives that have come out of the COAG process.
In recent weeks there has been considerable debate about the importance of taxation
reform to Australia's economic future. Let me say ladies and gentlemen that anybody who
has any understanding and is prepared to address in a serious and honest fashion the
challenges to the Australian economy must acknowledge the fact that we have a less than
perfect taxation system.
We have a taxation system that does rely too heavily on the taxation of income. We have a
taxation system that generally speaking penalises exporters. We have a taxation system
that still doesn't give enough incentive to savings and we have a taxation system that in
several other respects works against economic growth and the creation of jobs. We also
have a taxation system that is too easily evaded in a number of areas and it is very
important therefore out of concern for the economic future of Australia that we engage in
a serious and thorough going debate about the need for taxation reform.
Many attempts have been made in the past about taxation reform to achieve it. Those
attempts have occurred on both sides of politics and they have been marked with bitter
debate and some severe internal difference of opinion, but the nation requires as we move
towards the 21lst century that this issue again be embraced, and those who would argue
that our system does not need change I think do fail the national interest. Those who
oppose serious and fair change will I think be rightly regarded as people being chained to
yesterday's taxation system.
I've said that in assessing the need for reform and engaging in the debate the government
will apply three very important considerations. We are not interested in reform for its own
sake. We are not interested in some kind of a econometric model of taxation reform. We
are interested in reform that delivers beneficial outcomes for the Australian community and
the Australian people. We are interested in taxation reform, first and foremost which
promotes job generation. We are interested in taxation reform that will boost and promote
exports and we are interested in taxation reform that will boost living standards and
encourage saving and promote incentive, and they will be the three great benchmarks
against which we will assess the debate in the weeks and months and perhaps several years
into the future. 
Now, this is a very important debate. We have come a long way when you think of the
state of the Australian economy 20 or 30 years ago when you think of structural rigidities
although in other areas it was much stronger particularly in the area of employment. And
we have broken down a lot of barriers and as a community we have embraced a number of
very valuable reforms, but the last great outpost of I suppose economic backwardness that
does require to be addressed in the Australian community, does require to be changed,
does require to be reformed, is the Australian taxation system, and future generations and
future leaders of industry and political parties in Australia will judge the current generation
rather poorly and deservedly so if we muff the next opportunity to embrace and bring
about valuable reform.
It won't be easy and I don't pretend for a moment that the political process will be either
costless or easy. But if the purpose of being in Government is the purpose of having
responsibility is to do good things for the future of one's country, then all of us charged
with political responsibility and who are concerned about the economic future of Australia
will very seriously and conscientiously address the question of taxation reform. We will
ask ourselves the fundamental question to we really believe that we can carry this country
forward into the 21st century with the fundamentals of the current taxation system still in
place and if we are completely candid in addressing that question we will have to say no
we can't and therefore we should set about constructing a more effective taxation system
for the new millennium.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to touch briefly on a number of issues which are
of particular concern to the mining industry but also of broader concern to the Australian
community. Jerry Ellis in his very kind introduction mentioned the very difficult issue of
native title. This is a complicated difficult issue, laden with a great deal of emotion which
presents the Parliament with quite a unique challenge. The present native title Act is very
seriously flawed. It was described by us in the lead up to the election as being unworkable.
Superimposed on a flawed and significantly unworkable act we have what I regard as the
highly impractical decision of the High Court of Australia in the Wik case. I say in
' impractical" very deliberately and very advisedly. Like any other Australian citizen I am
subject to the law of this country as interpreted from time to time by the courts of
Australia. It's very important to remind ourselves of course, as members of Parliament, we
have the right to change the law if we regard it as being unsatisfactory.
The decision of the High Court of Australia to find that there could be co-existence on
pastoral leases between farmers and native title claimants is fundamentally unworkable.
And what I have sought to do and what my Government has sought to do, whilst
respecting the principle of native title as laid down in the Mabo case and whilst
understanding the significant difficulties and therefore rejecting blanket extinguishment of
native title on pastoral leaseholds, what my Government has sought to do in consultation
with all of the effected stakeholders and lengthy consultations with all of the effected
stakeholdlers, what I have sought to do and what my Government has sought to do is to
establish a fair basis for going forward. What has become known as the 10 Point Plan
represents the distillation of that effort. It is a plan that does respect the principles of
native title laid down in the Mabo case.
I said at the beginning of this process that there were two things the Government would
not do. One of those things was that we wouldn't seek to overturn the principles of native 
title laid down by the High Court in the Mabo case and the second was that we wouldn't
sit on our hands and do absolutely nothing. We've produced a plan that I believe will give
certainty and security to pastoral lease holders. It will continue to respect the principles of
native title laid down in the Mabo decision. And it will provide a workable mechanism for
certainty and predictability for the mining industry.
Now, it has not been easy to develop that plan. And as you know it has met resistance
from some sections of the pastoral industry and some sections of that side of politics which
I lead arid with which I'm associated. Equally it has been heavily criticised by many
leaders of the indigenous community of Australia.
I haven't lightly decided and my Government hasn't lightly decided that the 10 Point Plan
is the right way to go. But we believe that it does achieve the right and the fair balance.
We are determined to proceed with it. We hope that we can win the support of the Senate.
I've already started discussions and provided detailed briefings to the Australian Labor
Party, to the Australian Democrats and the same facilities are available to the Independent
members of the Senate.
It is in the national interest that this matter be resolved without undue delay. Although I
acknowledge that the legislation, when it comes down, will be complicated and proper
time, reasonable time must be allowed for its consideration. But I think any possibility of
deliberate delay of the legislation with a view to some particular political advantage will
not be warmly welcomed or greeted by any section of the Australian community.
I acknowledge as Prime Minister that it Is a difficult emotional issue. I understand and
sympathise with and respect the passionate emotional commitment of the indigenous
people of Australia to land. I understand the importance of that in their culture. I respect
that and I sympathise with it. I ask them to understand the importance of my Government
delivering security and stability to the mining and pastoral industries. I ask them to accept
that what I have done over past weeks and months has been done in good faith with a
determination to achieve a fair balance.
I am concerned about some characteristics of the debate on native title. And I am, of
course, concerned about the possibility that if a fair and just solution is not accepted that
will only bolster the hand of some of those more extreme and insensitive elements in the
Australian community who would seek to take advantage of an impasse in a delicate and
sensitive area such as this.
I have to say also, ladies and gentlemen, that I am concerned about the insensitivity of a
land claim which has been lodged in the Northern Territory today. As some of you may be
aware, the Northern Land Council has lodged a large number of land claims today under
the Aboriginial Lanid Right. 5 Northerni Territoiy Act, not of course the Nal, e Title Act.
The claims had been lodged just prior to the commencement of the sunset clause which
commences on the 4th of June. I understand that the claims include all national parks, all
land set aside for potential development including the Ord River stage two, all vacant
crown land and certain bays, gulfs, sea beds, islands and reefs. Such claims, I think, can
only be described as very divisive and I think they will greatly harm the Northern Territory
and investment in the Territory. And one has to question the motives of those who have
promoted that claim.,. those claims, particularly against the background of the events of this 
week. And I think an overwhelming desire on the part of all sections of the Australian
community, despite the practical difficulties involved, to move forward in a very, very
positive way in the area of reconciliation between all sections of the Australian community.
I think a claim of this character is insensitive to that particular process and I very, very
seriously question the motives of those responsible for making a claim which must cause
enormous concern, as I know it already has, to the Northern Territory Government. I've
already had a lengthy discussion with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory about it.
And I think it is a very, very unfortunate development and does nothing to aid the climate
that I know many of us would like to see improve in this area.
The final matter that I want to touch on, ladies and gentlemen, is in relation to the
environment. The mining industry has frequently been the target of strong criticism from
environmentalists. However, while once the preserve of noisy fringes the environment is
now a mainstream issue. And the mining industry, in a quite magnificent way, has
responded to that.
Restoration of sites and rehabilitation is now a very common part of mining in Australia.
Environmental scientists are now employed alongside engineers and geologists and this
process is showing great dividends. For instance, Alcoa has won international recognition
for environmental excellence, for its work in rehabilitating mine areas in the south-east of
Western Australia. Energy resources of Australia's Ranger uranium mine in the Northern
Territory has won two environmental awards.
As with most things it is important to find a sensible balance and that, of course, includes
the environment. Nowhere in environmental policy is this more evident and more
important than in the area of greenhouse gas negotiations. Australia as you know is
working very hard to contribute to a fair and feasible outcome to the climate change
negotiation. We seek an outcome which differentiates greenhouse gas emission targets according to
each countries particular circumstances and available opportunities to limit omissions.
We're not looking for a special deal, we are just looking for a fair outcome which reflects
the unique character of the Australian economy. We are, in effect, seeking the same
outcome as the Europeans are permitting within the umbrella of the European Union for
the member States of that Union. Australia is one of only nine countries in the world left
to conform with the proposed inequitable uniform omission targets at or below 1990
levels. The European Union has already agreed to internal differentiation and supports it for
economies in transition and developing countries. The Government will continue to
promote Australia's position for differentiation at every conceivable opportunity. I raised
it with the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Hashimoto, and also with the Chancellor of
Germany, Dr Kohl, who contrary to media reports fully understood Australia's difficulty in
the negotiations.
This represents a particular challenge to the Australian national interest. The Australian
national interest on this occasion is sharply different from the respective national interests
of the member states of the European Union and the United States. In some respects the 
Australian national interests more closely resembles that of Japan than any other advanced
industrialised nation in this particular issue, a point that I made in some detail to the
Japanese Prime Minister when he was here.
Differentiation will give a much better long term solution to this global problem. It will
provide the best basis for the most economically efficient and least trade distortionary
solution to this very, very significant global problem. It will enhance the environmental
outcomes by allowing a better basis for a truly collective global effort. Were Australia to
go down the path of flat targets it would do very serious damage to the Australian
economy. And I want to take this opportunity tonight of assuring the mining industry that
the Government will continue to prosecute, with all the resources available to it,
Australia's specific unique national Interest in this very sensitive and very important area.
Ladies and gentlemen can I finish on a personal note. Can I thank Jerry Ellis for his kind
remarks. Can I also thank him for his leadership of the Council over the past three years.
Can I welcome his successor, Mr Stump. Can I also say how much my colleagues and I
have enjoyed our association with your industry since our election to government in March
of last year. It is a very important, vital industry to Australia's fuiture. It is a major wealth
producer. It has world class standard. It is a significant employer of people. It is a section
of Australian industry that is very important to the rural and regional areas of our nation
and it is section of Australian industry that comes face to face, at a practical level, with the
implications of cooperation and reconciliation between different sections of the Australian
community. Over the years the Australian economy has benefited in a quite incalculable way from the
mining industry. Our goals for the mining industry are specific in some areas and general
in others. Our goals are to provide the industry with a stable low inflationary environment
and I amn very proud of the fact that Australia continues to boast very low levels of
inflation. We've seen significant reductions in interest rates, although it is fair to remark
that real interest rates in Australia are still quite high by the standards of the industrialised
world. We have delivered significant industrial relations reform, we are embracing the
challenge of taxation reform, we are tackling head on in a painstaking and practical way
the problems posed by an unworkable Native Title Act and an impractical High Court
decision which has impacted on that legislation.
I want to wish the industry well, I want to congratulate it on it enormous contribution to
Australia, the wealth it has generated, the revenue it has provided for the less fortunate
sections of the Australian community, the Australians it employs, the export income it
delivers, and most importantly of all, the very high standards of professional integrity and
skill which is a very important characteristic of the Australian mining industry.
Thank you very very much indeed for having me as your guest. 


E&amp;OE......... 
Mr Aggarwal, Mrs Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory, Senator Margaret Reid, President of the Senate, Greg Cornwell, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, His Excellency the High Commissioner for India, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is, for me, a particular pleasure to be here and to share with this community a very special day. Today is a magnificent Australian autumn day. I think Canberra is at its absolute best at this time of the year and the absolutely stunning weather that has been turned on today is a tribute to the diverse exhortations, diverse in a religious sense, that have no doubt gone heavenwards in order to deliver such a beautiful day and it has been very successful. 
Today, of course, is a celebration not only for the Indian community and those from other countries that are gathered here today but it is also a celebration of some great Australian values. It is a celebration of the tolerance and the openness and the diversity of the Australian community. 
It is a celebration of religious freedom. 
Today marks a demonstration that in Australia one of the enduring strengths of our society is the right for people to believe what they wish to believe in a spiritual or religious sense and indeed to choose not to believe anything of a spiritual or religious kind.
Australia now, of course, accommodates many religions. It respects the traditions of all religions and it has been a cornerstone of Australian society ever since the foundation of our nation at the turn of the century, it has been a cornerstone of Australian society to respect and to celebrate religious as well as racial and cultural diversity. And today I take the opportunity as Prime Minister of reaffirming the importance of those values, the importance in Australia as we go towards the new millennium, the importance of racial and religious toleration. It is a very, very important and enduring Australian value and one I know to which the overwhelming majority of Australians strongly adhere and strongly aspire. 
The Mandir that I will open in a few moments is, of course, quite an ornament for the local community. It will provide a centre not only for the Hindu community and for the Indian, Sri Lankan and Fijian communities of Canberra, but it will also be a very valuable community resource and I congratulate the local organisation on the fact that it will be open to people of all faiths and people of all beliefs and all dispositions. 
I want to join Mrs Carnell and others in congratulating the local community on the tremendous work that has been involved, the long years that it has taken to bring today about. 
It is not easy for a relatively small community to get together the resources, to get the donations, to get the materials, and to get the support that is necessary to achieve a goal such as is being realised today. And I again remark upon the fact that in doing so, the community has demonstrated another great Australian value and that is the value of self-help and the value of voluntary effort and the value of the local community starting with meagre resources and building upon those resources and bringing about a very important goal. 
I also want in a broader sense today to thank the people of the broader Indian community for the contribution that they have made to Australian society. I want to thank them for the cultural enrichment they've brought to Australian society. I want to thank them for the industry, their commitment to spiritual values, their contribution to the small business life of the Australian community. 
And I would also like to thank His Excellency the High Commissioner for India for his very kind remarks. I agree with him that relations between India and Australia are very strong indeed and I do hope to have the opportunity very soon to visit India. 
India, of course, is the world's largest democracy. It is a remarkable thing that a country as large, a country as ethnically and religiously diverse and a country that was born in such tragic internecine warfare in 1947, that a country of that size should have survived for so long in a democratic state. And it is a tribute to the intrinsic democratic values of Indian society that that should have been the case. 
I value the relationship between our two countries very highly indeed and it has been a deliberate act of the foreign policy of the Australian Government over the last 14 months through the activities of myself, the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Fischer and the Foreign Minister, Mr Downer, to upgrade and enhance the relationship between our two countries. 
But ladies and gentlemen, today most importantly of all is an occasion for those in the local community to celebrate their own particular values and their own particular beliefs. Today in this very open democratic society of Australia, people of the Hindu faith are honouring their values and their beliefs and they are demonstrating in a quiet and dignified fashion their own spirituality and their own view of the importance of the spiritual side of life. And I respect them for that. I honour them for that and I thank them for the contribution that the spiritualism of Hindus is making to Australian society in the 1990s. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, can I, on behalf of the Australian Government, again say to the members of the Indian community and all gathered here today, you are very, very welcome, you are a very honoured part of Australian society. You have brought much to our country. You will contribute much to our country in the years ahead and it is a particular delight for me as Prime Minister of Australia to welcome all of you here today, to honour your contribution to modern Australiana society and to officially declare open the Mandir of Canberra. 
Thank you.


TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MIP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF THE
NATIONAL CAMPAIGN AGAINST VIOLENCE AND CRIME
F O F 
To first of all the South Australian Attorney General, Trevor Griffin I particularly
thank him for his attendance and his cooperation with the launch of this national
strategy. To my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Our Coalition
Law and Justice Policy for the last election stated quite emphatically that every
Australian was entitled to feel safe in their own homes and on the streets. We all know
that Australians are very concerned about violent crime and we know that although the
overall picture is not totally discouraging, there are pockets of increasing incidents of
crime. The dominant image we've had to date and when we think of addressing the
scourge of violence and crime in our community is of the blue line, is of policing and
can I take the opportunity of saying at the outset of these remarks of mine, words of
strong praise for the men and women of the police services of Australia. They have an
immensely difficult job. It in fact is a despicable, they are a placed in despicable
circumstances by the behaviour of people who break the law and they have copped
through the agencies of royal commissions and so forth in recent years a very heavy
battery and undoubtedly there are areas of corruption and malfeasance in parts of the
police services.
But overall w e should never, ever lose sight of the tremendous role that they play in a
particular community and I wouldn't want the opportunity of this launch to go by
without sticking up for the men and women of the police services of Australia. I think
they do a terrific job.
But addressing violence in crime is not just about policing. Police and policing are of
course primarily and properly so the responsibilities of the state andl territory
authorities. The Commonwealth has an important role to provide in offering a
co-operative framework to assist the states and the territories and to ensure that our
strategies and actions reflect world's best practice. Today we're taking that
responsibility in the experience of Australia to a new and unprecedented level and
before detailing the National Campaign Against Violence and Crime, let me outline
work already being done which reflects our broad approach to supporting our 
Fax from 3 8 05/ 06/ 97 13: 07 Pg: 2
JUN 05 ' 97 12: 56 P. 3
communities, addressing violence and crime and making our nation a safer place in
which to live.
Since March 1996 the Government has undertaken and supported a range of
substantial initiatives aimed directly at reducing the incidence of crime and violence in
Australia. We've had the national implementation of the firearms control resolutions
from the special Australasian Police Ministers' Council meeting of May 1996. We've
had the National Register of Convicted Paedophiles, We've had the convening of the
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody Summit set down for later this year. We've had famiily
violence intervention projects, domestic violence database and the domestic violence
summit to be convened later this year and to which my Government is very strongly
committed, We've had the National Women's Safety Survey, we've had strengthening
family strategy to help prevent child abuse, the National Youth Suicide Strategy, the
youth homelessness pilot programme, the rural and remote domestic violence initiative
and firearms safety information these programmes right across the broad spectrum of
Government activities.
But what is being launched today takes this kind of commonwealth leadership
involvement in standard setting and strong commitment to new levels. The National
Campaign Against Violence and Crime reflects the Federal Government's commitment
to building stronger communities, reducing the level and fear of crime in our
communities and protecting the vulnerable the aged, the young, minorities who may
be subject to unfair and unacceptable abuse and discrimination.
In broad terms the campaign is going to compile the best kcnown tactics for preventing
and addressing violence and crime, help put them in place in Australian communities to
test those tactics and programmes, ensure their effectiveness and then ensure that all
Australians are empowered to take the best possible means to tackle violence and
crime in our society.
The first year priorities will be very important. They will be residential burglary,
domestic violence, fear of crime and young people. This is a wide range Of Crime
prevention strategies, national research and implementation projects. This is the first
time there has been a truly national strategic approach to violence and crime, the
Commonwealth in partnership with the states and territories and tapping into the
expertise which already abounds and exists at those levels. The national campaign is all
about knowing the best approaches, testing those approaches and then implementing
them across the country. The aim is not just best practice, this is practical applications
for Australian society.
Surveys constantly show that there is a major concern about violence and crime in our
communities. According to McNair in 1994, 72% of Australians viewed violence in
crime as the number one issue of concern. 77% were concerned about violent crime
and residents in the ACT, New South Wales and South Australia perceive burglary as
the number one problem in their neighbourhoods. The campaign's national initiatives
will address the need to research, develop, evaluate and implement national crime
prevention projects. These projects will focus on crime prevention, fear of crime,
residential burglary, domestic violence perpetrator programmes, early intervention with 
Fa3x8 8r5o/ u0i6 / 97 13: 07 Pg: 3
JUN 05 ' 97 12: 57 P. 4
children, young people's use of public space and homeless youth and preventing
violence at public events.
In implementing the campaign and in addressing violence and crime generally, there is
a large contribution from state and territories. We believe it's time that all governments
worked together to crack down on crime in our community. Australians all want to
feel safer in their homes, in public places, on the streets, on the playing fields and
watching sport. The Campaign Against Crime and Violence will make Australia a
safer place in which to live and in concluding my remarks, could I also acknowledge
the presence here today of Shane Stone, the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is one of those occasions and this is one of those issues
which draws together all of the governments of Australia across party lines and putting
other divides aside. This strategy of ours cannot work unless it is done cooperatively.
We are working with the states. We don't adopt a " Commonwealth knows best"
approach to this. I recognise that the reservoirs of expertise and understanding about
crime and violence in our community are very much at a state and territorial level.
And the purpose of this campaign is to demonstrate the strong commitment of my
Government to tackling the problem, our willingness to help devise a national strategy
and our very strong desire to work in partnership with the states and territories.
There is a lot written and said about the responsibilities of Government in a modemn
society. I can't think of a more solemn responsibility than to give to the citizens of
that society a greater sense of personal and physical security and safety and to the
exctent that this campaign can contribute to that, then it will be successful.
Thank you. 


E&amp;EO...................................... 
Thank you. Well thank you very much. I know I've probably disappointed you because I didn't walk straight from my table over there to the podium. I have my limitations but I'm working on those. 
To Joan Sheldon, to Bob and Greer Tucker, to Tony Staley the Federal President of the Liberal Party, to my former parliamentary colleague Don Cameron, to all of my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues and members and supporters of the Liberal Party here in Queensland. It's great to be with you here in Cairns, this beautiful city in Far North Queensland on such a balmy evening and Lord let it not rain here let it rain in Birmingham. 
Ladies and gentleman I'm going to make a speech tomorrow to the Convention which I will say a few things about competition in politics at the present time. But can I say at the beginning of my very short remarks tonight, can I say to you, Bob Tucker, can I say on behalf of all of my Federal parliamentary colleagues how deeply grateful we are to the tremendous leadership that you gave to the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party over the last four years. 
It is the case that during your Presidency we won State Government here in Queensland and it's also the case that we won, what is in post World War II terms, a record number of Liberal seats federally. And I am very grateful to the Liberal Party organisation under your leadership for the tremendous work that you've done. 
May I also congratulate Bob Carroll on his election and say on behalf of the Party organisation that I will work, as you always do as the head of the parliamentary party, matters of office holding in the organisation is a matter for the organisation and can I simply say to you Bob that we will work very, very closely together. 
It is a very important 12 or 18 months ahead of us here in Queensland. And if I can speak almost as an honorary Queenslander to you tonight, very happily to do so,we have a very important 12 or 18 months ahead of us which will certainly encompass a State election and of course the next Federal election is due in March of 1999. So we have a lot of work to do together. We have a lot of work to do focussing on the common enemy and that of course is the Australian Labor Party and all of those who refuse to vote for the Coalition. 
But tonight is, above all, a celebration of Liberal achievement and Liberal success. It's a celebration of the fact that we are back in Government here in Queensland. It's a celebration of the fact that we have a very big majority in Federal parliament but it's also a reminder of the responsibilities that we have to govern in the best interests of the Australian people. And a responsibility we have to take decisions which are commonsense decisions and decisions that promote the interests of the Australian community and not decisions that are blinded by ideology. And can I say that a couple of days ago a decision in which the senior Queensland Federal Member, John Moore, was very much involved in and that is the decision that we took on the motor vehicle industry. That was a decision that was driven by our determination to provide a secure investment climate in Australia that protected Australian jobs and promoted investment in an industry that would provide more Australian jobs. 
And providing more jobs for Australians is the ultimate responsibility of any national government and it is something of which we should always remind ourselves. 
Ladies and gentlemen tonight is a fun night. It's a night of celebration, it's a night to enjoy the company of people who have worked together and campaigned together and succeeded together because we do have the right as Liberals, particularly here in Queensland, to look back over the last 12 months and to reflect upon the fact that we have come a very long way and we have achieved a great deal together. 
I reminded my Chief of Staff, Grahame Morris, on the way up that the last time I addressed the Queensland Convention the speech I made about free speech got quite a lot press coverage. The year before the speech I made about the Coalition's attitude towards proposals that Australia should become a Republic, that is when we were still in Opposition, that speech attracted enormous publicity also. So, Morris said to me: 'Well you know you've got work out something to trump those two speeches in what you say tomorrow'. Well, I'm working on that and I can assure you that I'll have a few things that are very relevant to the future of the Government and to the future of Australia to say to all of you tomorrow. 
But ladies and gentlemen can I just say on behalf of the Federal parliamentary party what a great debt we owe to the Queensland Division for the number of seats it delivered and the support that it's given to us over the last 12 months. And could I also take the opportunity, because I'm in Queensland, to say what a sheer delight it is for me to work with Tim Fischer as the Leader of the National Party in Coalition. 
You may, along a very long journey and a very long path have the occasional difference of opinion in a Coalition and I've gone through that in the last few weeks but the solid basis of the Federal Coalition is absolutely rock safe and Tim Fischer is a great coalitionist, he is a very fine Australian, he's tremendously committed to advancing the cause of Coalition Government and, like myself, he remembers the fact that we were in Opposition for 13 years. And he is aware of that great political adage, that when the Liberal and National Parties work together they win together and when the Liberal and National Parties forget that lesson and don't take heed of that experience then the reverse happens. 
So can I say to all of you that close unity and working relations, not only within our own party that is fundamentally important but also unity of purpose, identification of the common enemy and a determination to keep the political barbarians outside the gate which of course is what is my fundamental attitude to the Labor Party. You keep them on the other side of the gate, you never let them in because they did a lot of damage last time they got inside the gate. 
So what politics is still very much about is unity inside our own organisation, within our parliamentary party and unity between the Liberal and National Parties. We've demonstrated over the last couple of years that when we do that we win and succeed and we provide good government for the State of Queensland and good government for the whole Australian nation and it's a lesson that all of us I know will bear in mind. 
But ladies and gentlemen, friends, Liberals all, thank you for your support, your loyalty, your commitment, your dedication and energy in our great common cause and I look forward to addressing you tomorrow. 
Thanks. 
Ends 
PRIME MINISTER'S CONGRATULATORY REMARKS 
TO BOB TUCKER ON HIS AWARD OF LIFETIME 
MEMBERSHIP OF THE LIBERAL PARTY 
Well ladies and gentlemen, can I just have your attention very, very momentarily, but it's a tremendous honour, as somebody myself I joined the Liberal Party in 1958, ye Gods, it's a long time ago, and it's a tremendous honour to award Life Membership of the Liberal Party to somebody and it's a great honour for anybody to receive it. It's a very special award, it is not conferred very often amongst the various State Divisions of the Party around Australia. 
In my speech earlier I spoke of the tremendous contribution that Bob made as the driving force of the organisation here in Queensland over the last four years as its President and as the person who saw the Labor Party reduced to holding only two seats federally here in Queensland. Many people contributed in the organisation, but of course none more so and more effectively than did your President over that period of time, and it's with a real sense of privilege and pleasure that I hand the credentials of Life Membership of the Queensland Division to Bob Tucker.


E&amp;OE..........................
Well thank you Warren Entsch for that very stylish understated welcome. To Joan Sheldon the Deputy Premier and Treasurer of Queensland, to Bob Tucker the President of the Queensland Division, to Tony Staley, our Federal President to all of my federal ministerial colleagues and in particular John Moore, the Senior Minister from Queensland, my state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
Can I start by telling you the text of a message I sent to the Captain of the Australian Cricket Team this morning. I simply said: "A fantastic innings Mark, you have made all Australians proud. You and your colleagues have fought back magnificently. It is a true reward for your great Australian grit." If I slur any of my words or I look a bit bleary-eyed you will understand why. 
It is a great pleasure to back in Cairns in Far North Queensland. It's terrific to be addressing a Liberal Party Convention in Cairns as the Liberal Prime Minister of Australia with a Federal Liberal Member for the seat of Leichhardt. And I do congratulate the Queensland Division for demonstrating not only to the people of Queensland, but also to all of the people of Australia, that the Liberal Party is more than just representation of the major metropolitan areas of Australia. It is also a party that represents the regional areas of Australia. It has more members in Federal Parliament representing rural seats than any other party on the Australian political landscape. So we are, in every sense of the word, not only a broad church but a party which represents the entirety of the Australian community. 
It is now almost half-way through our first term in Government, and it is appropriate to both look back and also to look forward. And as we look back over the last fifteen months, it can truly be said that we have kept faith with the people who supported us. We kept faith with the commitment we made to get our books of account in order. To repair the horrendous budget deficit legacy left to us by Mr Keating and Mr Beazley, who blithely and dishonestly assured us that the budget was in balance, yet we inherited a deficit of $10.5billion. And in our first term of office, we will have turned that into a surplus of $1.6billion. And no-one should underestimate the scale of that achievement. 
In 1995, the amount of debt that the Government of Australia owed to the rest of the world including Australians, for whom it had borrowed, was almost twenty per cent of the amount of wealth that Australia produces each year. By the turn of the century we will have reduced that almost twenty per cent - we will have cut it in half, we will have reduced it to about ten per cent of our gross domestic product. This coming financial year we will repay over $5billion of the Keating/Beazley debt that we inherited. Now that is not the be all and the end all of economic existence; it's not the be all and end all of good government. 
But you can't do a lot if you are running every day deeper and deeper in debt. You can't be a strong country to the rest of the world, you can't provide a decent safety net for the people in our community who need help; you can't build incentives for investment; you can't look towards a better taxation system, if you are constantly going further into debt. And it remains one of the great shames of the former Labor administration, that over its last six years of office, it added about $75billion to the total national debt of Australia. And it has taken the courage and the strength of the new Coalition Government to start to turn that around. And I'm very proud of the way that we have tackled Australia's legacy of debt and deficit, and I'm very proud that we have been able to do it whilst keeping faith with many of the other commitments we made in the election campaign. 
We said that we'd have a $1billion Family Tax Package, and that was delivered on the first of January, on time, in full, without deduction. We said that we would give tax incentives for private health insurance, and they will start in a little under four weeks' time on the first of July this year. And from the first of July this year we will begin the process of stopping the haemorrhaging of people out of private health insurance. Six years ago, the then Labor health minister, Graham Richardson, warned the then Federal Labor Government, and warned all the state governments of Australia, if something were not done to stop the flow of people out of private health insurance, we would face a disaster in that area in a few years' time. At that time, almost forty per cent of Australians had private health insurance. Nothing was done because of the ideological hostility of the Labor Party towards the medical profession and towards private health insurance. That's why nothing was done. And as a result we now face a situation that thirty four per cent, only of Australians have private health insurance, and we are beginning the fightback on that front on the first of July. We are beginning a campaign on the first of July to restore the confidence of the Australian public in the private health insurance system. We are beginning a campaign on the first of July to tell the Australian public that unless there is a restoration of the strength of private health insurance, there will be an intolerable burden placed upon the public hospital system of this nation. 
Now this is something that should have been attended to years ago. When we left office in 1983, sixty one per cent of Australians had private health insurance. And after thirteen years of Labor Government, the ideological opponents of the medical profession and of private health provision in this country, had driven that level down to thirty four per cent. 
We made a commitment in the election campaign that we would retain the Medicare system and we've honoured that commitment. But we also made a commitment that we would improve that system. And improving that system means restoring the strength of private health provision. And we've done that and on the first of July the campaign will really begin in earnest. 
In another area, where we made very strong commitments, and one that, as many of you here in the seat of Leichhardt know, is very close to my own heart, and that is the small business sector of Australia. 
I've always believed that the small business sector of Australia holds the key to reducing unemployment over the longer term. It's not the big companies that are going to reduce unemployment, it's creating a climate in our society where the firms that employ three or four Australians can be encouraged to employ five or six. And if you get that happening amongst the hundreds of thousands of small businesses around Australia, then you will start to see a steady and sustained fall in the levels of unemployment within our community. 
And we made a number of commitments that were going to be beneficial for small business. We promised a new industrial relations system, and we delivered it. It was delayed by the Senate, and only came into operation on 1 January this year. But it is beginning to flow through the business community. And it's of particular benefit to small business. It encourages people at a workplace level to strike their own bargains without the compulsory interjection of unions. 
We've restored in full the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act, that protects small firms and big firms alike against the predatory behaviour of trade unions. We've ended for all time compulsory unionism throughout Australia. We have restored the authority of the courts of Australia in areas where that authority ought to run. And we have reduced in areas where it ought to be reduced, the influence of the Industrial Relations Commission. And you are already seeing in decisions of the Commission, in actions taken by individual employers and their workers, you're beginning to see the benefits of that legislation work its way through. 
We have improved the unfair dismissal laws at a Federal level. And in my Small Business Statement, of couple of months ago, I took that improvement one stage further, by saying, that at a Federal level, any firm employing fewer than fifteen people, and that captures literally hundreds of thousands of small businesses in Australia, any firm employing fewer than fifteen people would be completely exempt from unfair dismissal restraints in relation to the probationary employment of anybody, up to a period of twelve months. 
Now what that further measure did, was to strike at the insecurity that many small firms still feel in taking on more staff, fearing that if it doesn't work out, they can't let them go without fighting a costly court case which most small businesses in Australia simply can't afford to do. And unbelievably, the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats have said that if when that regulation is put down they will vote in the Senate to disallow it. Well let me repeat what both Peter Reith and I have said already. That if that regulation if disallowed in the Senate, we will wrap it up into a piece of legislation, probably add something to it, and then put it up to the Senate for decision and vote again, and if it's knocked back we'll put it up again after the appropriate time has elapsed. 
Now it's not only in the area of unfair dismissal, but the area of industrial relations, where we have taken action to boost small business. Once again, on the first of July this year, a major change to the Capital Gains Tax Law of Australia will come into operation. As from the first of July this year, any small business can be sold and the proceeds of that sale, up to $5million, can be invested into any other kind of business, or the same kind of business, without incurring any liability for Capital Gains Tax. And that represents, my friends, an over delivery on the commitment that we made at the time of the last election. 
And that, of course, has spawned a new definition amongst the Labor Party, and some of my critics in the wider community about a broken promise. Apparently it's a broken promise if you deliver more than you said you were going to at the time of the election. And that of course brings me to the savings rebate in the Federal Budget. 
For the first time since Federation, a national Australian government has introduced an across the board non-means tested savings rebate. For years and years governments exhorted Australians to save. For years and years commentators have exhorted Australians to save. They've said how wrong it is that you should pay tax on your income, and that when you put it in an investment, you pay tax again on the interest that you earned from that investment. Well as from the first of July next year, that is going to change. That is going to change in a very big way, and we're going to introduce a tax rebate of up to fifteen per cent in relation to savings up to an amount of $3000 a year. And it will be across the board, it will deliberately non-means tested. And this is an infinitely better system of encouraging private savings than the scheme that it replaced, the now discredited LAW co-contributions that were promised by the former Labor Government. 
One of the great weaknesses of the Labor Government system, was that it gave no reward whatever to self-funded retirees in the Australian community. Whereas this particular measure will be available to all Australians irrespective of age and irrespective of social circumstance. And contrary to what has been said by Labor Party, it's been demonstrated by independent analysis, that the proportionate gainers under this proposal are far greater in the low income bracket of our community than
 in the
high income bracket. For the first time, my friends, a federal government has been prepared to put its
tax incentive where its rhetoric is and actually do something to amend the taxation act to encourage
Australians to save.
And we've also kept faith with our programme in such important areas as the environment. And I
know in Far North Queensland how important it is to strike a balance, a sensible balance, between 3 f 807/ 0039/ 9: 079 : 09
8 Junc 1997
3 of 8 
8 June1997ttnpl: aH g/ wovw. aivu / pnc/ pressrel/ speecch/ I 997/ qldcon. hini
development and the environment.
Despite the opposition of the Labor Party and despite the opposition of the Australian Democrats, we
were able to secure the passage of legislation to authorise the sale of one third of Telstra. And out of
that the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia has been created. And there's $ 1 .25billion available out of
that Trust for new expenditure on major environmental projects. And this money won't be frittered
away in a thousand little projects that amount to very little on the national scene. It's going to be
invested in a major attack on the long term threats to the Australian environment.
We're going to do something about soil degradation. We're going to do something about river
pollution. We're going to do something about the disgraceful of the Murray-Darling Basin, and we're
going to do something about ocean outfall. We're going to tackle salinity problems which are
particular challenges in many parts of Australia. In other words, we're going to challenge the bread
and butter ongoing problems of the Australian environment. Because concern for the environment is a
mainstream Australian political issue. The years are now long behind us when the environment was
just a preoccupation of a noisy radical minority.
Older Australians worry about the environment their grandchildren will inherit. Middle-aged
Australians worry about he impact of the environment on their daily lives, and younger Australians
worry about the environment in which they hope to live years of their lives. So it cuts right across the
Australian community. And what I'm saying to you today, and what we'll be able to say between now
and the next election, ladies and gentlemen, is that we led the way in the area of environment. It was
the Liberal and National Parties at a federal level that invested more capital in the long term
resuscitation of the Australian environment than ever before. And it was the members of the Australian
Labor Party and the Australian Democrats who voted against that programme. And never let any of us
ever allow the Labor Party to escape the odium of having voted to destroy the greatest ever gift to the
Australian environment of any Australian government.
Oh, and of course, isn't the Labor Party a lovely picture on privatisation? I said before the last election
that the real difference between the Labor Party and the Coalition on the sale of Telstra was that we
were only going to sell one-third of it if we won the election. They were going to sell the lot despite
the fact that they had said that they weren't going to sell any. And I've got a lot of field evidence and
on these sorts of things, if you've got form it's pretty hard to convince the public that you're genuine.
In the mid-1I980s when we first started to talk about privatisation and Bob Hawke said that Ben
Chifley would spin in his grave if Qantas and Trans-Australia Airlines were sold or if the
Commonwealth Bank were touched they said it was absolutely sacrileges that we should even talk
about it. They won the 1987 election and then they started making noises about changing. Before the
1990 election Paul Keating wrote to every employee of the Commonwealth Bank and said over his
dead body would they sell any shares in the Commonwealth Bank. And right on the death knock to
the 1993 Budget Kim Beazley gets in touch with me and says I assume that you'll support our
legislation in the Senate to privatise part of the Commonwealth Bank. So being consistent we said yes
we would because it was our policy.
One of the extraordinary things of course about privatisation is that the Labor Party has said one thing
in government when they're in an election campaign and done a completely different thing and now
they're doing the reverse of all that in Opposition. And then of course you have the beautiful
demonstration of the NSW Premier a few days ago. He said he is going to sell the power generating
capacity of NSW for $ 22 billion. Well I think that's quite a good policy. I saw him the other day and I
congratulated him on his policy and that he ought to pass it on to his Federal colleague. I even offered
to address the left-wing delegates if he was having a bit of trouble. I think he is half tempted to take it
up.
4 of 8 07/ 03/ 97 09.09: 10
8 June 1997 
8J tut1pe9:/ 7/ w wA. iila. gov. au/ pitic/ pressre1/ specii/ I997/ qdcon. hbnl
We've been consistent on privatisation we're not zealots about it but we believe there are certain things
governments shouldn't do and that it is more appropriate that commercial undertakings of that kind
should be sold. And we've kept our word about Telstra and I'm sure that the programme will go
forward very effectively and the great benefit from that is that you will have this huge investment in
Australia's environment.
And we've also, in the Federal Budget, committed ourselves to the expenditure of another $ 1 billion
and this will be of particular benefit to rural and regional areas of Australia and that is through the
Federation Fund. This country does need some major infrastructure projects. Infrastructure in some
areas of Australia has become badly run down. It is a big country and it is important from time to time
that we take stock of the quality of the infrastructure of Australia. And there is nothing irresponsible,
there's no-thing economically foolish and there's nothing unwise about making sensible provision for
infrastructure development and expenditure in a country such as Australia. And the $ 1 billion that has
been provided for the Federation Fund to begin from the I1st of July 1998 will be a very important
earnest of my government's commitment to infrastructure within the Australian community.
Ladies and gentlemen there is just two or three other things that I did want to mention. A few days
ago we took a very important decision in the area of industry policy. A decision in which John Moore
as the Minister for Industry was very heavily and intimately involved. And that decision was to secure
two things and that is major investment and Australian jobs. And whenever you take an economic
decision as a government you've always got to ask yourself what is the jobs impact, what is the
employment impact. And the decision that we took on the motor vehicle industry was a practical
commonsense decision. It was not driven by ideology, nor was it driven by any old-fashioned belief
that you can erect a gigantic tariff wall around this country and shut out the rest of the world those
days are gone forever. We live in a global economy and we must respond to the forces of
globalisation. But we must do it realistically, and we must do it with an eye to the progress that other
countries are making towards lifting their own trade restrictions. It was only in 1987 that the motor
car industry in Australia had a tariff level of 57 per cent. That will fall under current legislation to
per cent by the year 2000 and under our proposal it will stay at that level until the 1 st of January 2004
and then it will fall by another 5 per cent to 10 per cent and that will put Australia in very good fettle
amongst other APEC nations.
We are not dragging the chain on trade liberalisation. We are able to hold our head very high on the
question of trade liberalisation. But we have a responsibility to Australian workers. We have a
responsibility to take decision that have beneficial effects on Australian jobs and Australian investment.
And we will always take account of Australian jobs and Australian investment when we take decisions
in the industry area.
As John predicted on television this morning, this particular decision should bring forth about $ 4
billion of new investment involving the creation of about 5,000 new jobs. We have done our part we
believe that thle employees of the companies are prepared to do their part and we hope and confidently
expect and, of course, require the companies to do their part.
And finally, in the economic area cag~ just say how important it is that over the coming months the
Liberal Party and the Coalition and/ it's' supporters, not only in the business community, but throughout
the wider Australian community ccneier and debate the challenge of taxation reform. I know some
people will say it's risky and I know some people will say remember 1993. Well, life is never static.
This is 1997, it's not 1993. We're in government now, we were in Opposition then. The world has
changed and I believe the attitude of the Australian community has changed. And we have an
obligation as a great political movement to take on the inevitable fear campaign that will be generated
by our old-fashioned backward looking, out of date opponents. I mean do they seriously believe that
we can go on forever with the taxation system that we have at the present time. Do they seriously
believe, does anybody seriously believe that the present Australian taxation system which does act as a
5 f807/ 03/ 97 09: 09: 11
8 June 1997
of 8 
SJne99 7hup://,. vww. niagov. au/ piic/ pressrellspeecii/ I997/ qdcon. hinl
dissincentive to personal effort, which does contain heavy sanctions against middle income earners
because of the higher rates of marginal tax on now middle income earners. I mean 40 years ago you
paid the top marginal rate of tax, personal tax in this country when you're income was 14 times
average weekly earnings. You now pay that when you're income is about one and a half times average
weekly earnings. Now that is a ridiculous comparison, maybe it's one and three quarters, even if it
were two the point would still be made.
Now you can't leave that unattended, it's got to be examined, it's got to be looked at. And there's not
much point in having the responsibility of government unless you are prepared to examine those sorts
of things. And of course our opponents are going to run around and say how ridiculous this is and
how it shouldn't happen and, you know, we've looked at the GST before and it's off the agenda. Well,
can I just say that that really is backward looking. And of course the other delightful thing about Mr
Beazley and Mr Evans attempting to do that is that they've got a bit of form on that subject as well.
I don't know whether any of you saw that very illuminating ABC series call Labor in Power. Well it
was the best of political documentaries because they all were interviewed on the assumption that they
thought they were going to lose. It was before the 1993 election and they were very frank and very
candid. And there's a beautiful interview with a chap called David Morgan who was then a senior
official in the Treasury and he is now with the Westpac Bank, and he was advising the then
government on the tax proposals in the mid-1980s, the Option C proposal. Mr Keating's 121/ 2 per cent
consumption that he wanted to have amnesia about 8 years later. And David Morgan said the break
through really came he said when Gareth Evans threw down his papers, that sounded right, and his
glasses and said we've been debating this damn thing for the last two days and he says " I can't find a
hole in it and it's about time we went for it". And of course there is further evidence that in the
mid-1980s the two senior Ministers who gave the strongest possible support to the Keating proposal
were, apart from the then Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, were Gareth Evans and Kim Beazley. Seems,
you know on a lot of these things in the past they're together. They were together in 1983 on some
travel allowance things too. But it's all different when you're in Opposition, say one thing in
government, do another thing in Opposition, you know the Crowned Princes of inconsistency.
But ladies and gentlemen, we do need a better taxation system in this country. But in debating the
taxation system we've got to constantly ask ourselves three questions. Will a reform help job
generation? Will a reform boost Australian exports? And will a reform produce greater incentives to
invest and to save.
Tax reform is not some kind of suspended ideology out there that once you've achieved it you've got
nirvana. Tax reform is only a means to an end. Don't anyone in this room imagine that just striving
after tax reform so that you can say we did it is necessarily going to help Australia. Tax reform is only
good if it -ks the right reform and it's only the right reform if it matches those sorts of goals and I'm not
in favour of putting a whole new tax on top of the existing structure. What I'm in favour of doing is
having a thorough going debate about the sort of fundamental changes that are going to match those
three criteria. And 1 think that as a nation we ought to be prepared to have that debate, as a
government we ought to be prepared to lead on that debate and as the Liberal Party as always we
should play a very integral role at the organisational level. Now I don't pretend it will be easy and I
predict now that the Labor party will crank up all the old fear campaigns of 1993. But they will be a
lot less credible on this occasion. They will ring hallow because deep inside themselves the Australian
community know that the next great economic reform that this country needs is taxation reform.
The last two months, of course, have probably been the most hectic and in some respects the most
difficult that we've had in the 14 months that we've been in power and that was to be expected. There
have been a number of major challenges. The challenge of getting the right balance in the area of
native title is a very important one and I believe that we have got the right balance. The 10 point plan
that the government has devised strikes a fair balance between the need to wind back the 6 f 807/ 0039/: 9079 : 11
8 Junc 1997
6 of 8 
8 . un 197tp: Hw,. v. nia. gov. ati/ pinc/ pressrel/ speecl/ 1 997/ qldcon. itnil
impracticality of the Wik decision by the High Court at the end of last year whilst respecting the
principle of native title laid down in the Mabo case.
The Native Title Act that we inherited from the former government was a shambles.
There is nothing wrong with the concept of native title, there was nothing wrong with the decision of
the 1High Court in the Mabo case. Anybody reading that decision would recognise it as being a very
fair and balanced and just decision. What went wrong was when Mr Keating and his mates got hold of
it and turned it into an unworkable piece of legislation. A piece of legislation that has had very
deleterious effects on investment in a number of industries. Legislation that has led to a fear in this
part of the world, for example that there would be native title claims of the reef Well let me make it
clear under our amendments that will never be allowed to happen.
But our proposals do not involve the blanket extinguishment of native title in the circumstances that
were demranded by some sections of the Coalition. And could I say how much I enjoyed and I say that
very deliberately, how much I enjoyed the journey that I paid to Longreach a couple of weekends ago
to talk directly to pastoralists. I don't know when the last time was that an Australian Prime Minister
addressed an open air gathering to which everyone was invited in rural Australia. I seemed to
remember that Bob Hawke and Paul Keating paid pre-arranged, fairly antiseptic visits to rural
Australia. And can I say that was a very successful meeting because I think for the first time many of
the people who were at that meeting understood exactly what the government had in mind and they
understood the security that it delivered to farmers and to graziers and the security that it gave to rural
people. But they also understood why I remained and the government remained committed to the
principle of native title as laid down in the Mabo case.
The reality is that the Native Title Act is badly flawed although the principle of native title is fine and
defensible. The High Court's decision in the Wik case in my view respectfully was quite impractical.
And you need a balanced but strong response to that situation and that is what the 10 point plan
represents. The legislation is being drafted at the present time, there have been consultations between
the officials at a Commonwealth level and at a State level regarding the drafting instructions and I
hope to see a first draft of that legislation before I go overseas early the week after next.
It is an important issue and there is still a long public debate ahead of us. But having spent a lot of
time devising our position the fundamental principles are not for negotiation because they are right,
they are flair and they are balanced and we are determined to go ahead with them.
Finally my friends can I say how much I have appreciated the tremendous support and understanding
and loyalty that I have received from all sections of the Liberal Party since the election last year. To
many of mny parliamentary colleagues and ministerial colleagues who are here, senior Ministers to
members of the parliamentary party, to the party organisation it has been an absolute delight and a real
privilege to be the most public face of the Liberal Party cause over the last 15 months. It hasn't been
easy but I never expected that it would be and you would have been disappointed if we'd have found it
easy through the whole of that time. But I have been sustained enormously during that period of time
by the grass roots loyalty and strength that I continue to receive from members of the party all over
Australia. The Queensland Division of the Party delivered magnificently at the time of the last election. And can I
take this opportunity of thanking Bob Tucker as President of the Queensland Division of the Liberal
Party over the last four years. The Liberal Party result here in Queensland at the last Federal election
was more than I dared hope for. To reduce the Labor Party to a miserable two seats and now you'ye
got the spectacle of Wayne Goss who's wanting to go to Canberra. The track record of former Labor
Premiers going to Canberra is not all that flash. He's wanting to go to Canberra but instead of taking
on one of our sitting members I understand Mr Kaiser's trying to have the boundaries redrawn to 7 f 807/ 0039/ 9: 079 : 12
8 June 1997
7 of 8 
8J tntpe: Hl9/ w7w vw. nia. gov au/ pmc/ prcssret/ speecii/ I997/ qildcon. ltnil
create a safe Labor seat for Wayne Goss.
But you really have delivered magnificently and the organisation has done a great job. Can I also
congratulate Bob Carroll on his election as the new President and we will, at a Federal parliamentary
level, we will be very keen to work very closely with Bob and the State Executive in the next year or
18 months. I wish Joan Sheldon and Rob Borbidge in their partnership here in Queensland the best of
good fortune. We may have had the odd flicker of difference for a moment over native title but in the
long scheme of things that counts nothing compared with the fundamental accord that exists between
us at a Federal and a State level. I mean none of us should ever forget, particularly at the Federal level,
that we were in Opposition for a long time and we all got very tired of it and we ought to be ashamed
of the number of elections we lost during that period of 13 years. And we learnt a lot of lessons about
unity and cooperation and teamwork and we've retained those lessons in government and it's very
important that we continue to retain those lessons because don't imagine that the Labor Party is a
beaten clapped out outfit. We may think it is very unsuitable as an alternative but never underestimate
your opponents, they made that mistake about us and they lost and we should never make that mistake
about them and we should always remember the barren years of Opposition. We should always
remember how futile and frustrating and irritating and aggravating it was. All you could ever do was
talk, you could never do anything and it is very, very sole destroying and I still remember it, many of
my colleagues in this auditorium remember it so let's keep that in mind and let's stay in government so
that we never return to that state.
Thank you again, your loyalty and support has been magnificent and I owe so much for what has been
achieved over the last 14 months.
Thank you
Return to Speeches 8 f 807/ 030/ 99: 70 9: 13
9 June 1997
8 of 8 


21 June 1997
E&amp;OE.............................................
Counsellor Tina Thompson, the Mayor of the Borough of Wandsworth, to Sir Roger Carrick, the British High Commissioner in Australia, Mr Neal Blewitt, the Australian High Commissioner in the United Kingdom, to Major General Stan Eskell, Jill Dutchess of Hamilton, ladies and gentlemen.
I would like, first of all, to take the opportunity on behalf of the Australian Government to thank Lady Hamilton for her great efforts in organising the erection of this memorial in 1995. It is one of the few memorials in the United Kingdom specifically to commemorate the deaths of Australian service personnel in all the World Wars.
I know that it was the focal point of the commemoration of ANZAC Day here in Britain only a short while ago and that service attracted a very large number of people. It will become the focal point in the United Kingdom in future years for the commemoration of ANZAC Day and I do very warmly, on behalf of the Australian Government and all the other Australians here, thank you very very much for your special efforts and express our appreciation for your gesture.
The floral tribute that I have placed against the memorial this morning is not only in commemoration of the more than 5000 members of the Royal Australian Air Force who died in the defence of the liberties of Europe, not only in World War II but also in World War I, but in a broader sense it commemorates the enormous sacrifice of Australians in defence of freedom in the European theatres of World War I and World War II. By any measure, the contribution in terms of human sacrifice and the loss of young lives made by Australia in the defence of things that we value and treasure in common, with other freedom loving people around the world, by any measure, that sacrifice was immense.
You only need to reflect for a moment on the fact that more than 46,000 Australian war dead lie buried in France. This memorial commemorates the more than 5,000 who died in the European theatres of air war and, of course, in Gallipoli the cemeteries care for the dead who died in the original ANZAC campaign.
So it is an occasion for Australians to reflect with sorrow but also in pride and humble gratitude of the sacrifice that so many of our country men and women have made defending the way of life which people in this part of the world enjoy to the full measure as we move towards the next millennium.
On behalf of the Government of Australia, and I know on behalf of all the Australian people, I do want to take this opportunity of recording our continued gratitude and thanks to all the men and women of Australia who paid the supreme sacrifice wherever they may have fallen and in whatever theatre of war they may have participated in defending what we hold dear and participating in the defence of the universal values of individual liberty and individual freedom. The contribution that they have made to the modern Australia will never be forgotten and the contribution that they have made collectively to the survival and freedom and the things that we hold dearest of all I hope will never be forgotten by those nations and those people with whom they fought so valiantly and in also in whose cause they so freely gave their lives and gave their all.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE.......................
It's quite a pleasure for me to be here in Warton and to have a look at an assembly line which very shortly under the terms of the formal contract arrangements between the Australian Department of Defence and British Aerospace will very shortly be duplicated in Newcastle.
As I think everybody present knows, the Australian government indicated last year that the British Aerospace tender for the new lead in fighter replacement had been accepted and the Australian government had decided to purchase the Hawk fighter designed and manufactured by British Aerospace and it was indicated at that time that there would of course be, as is the case with such arrangements, there would of course be very important offsets for Australian industry and I am happy to announce today that the formal contract between the Australians and British Aerospace will be signed in Canberra I understand from the Australian Defence Minister, Mr Ian McLachlan, on Tuesday of next week.
The entire contract of course is worth about $850 million over the first 7 years. It is a major acquisition by the Royal Australian Air Force of a new trainer which will be used by the Air Force for a period of over 25 years. Importantly, the contract will also generate up to $400 million on maintenance support expenditure in Australia from the year 2007 until the finish of the contract in 2025. Also very specifically, the contract and the offset arrangements which will be detailed when the contract is signed on Tuesday will provide a very important boost for Newcastle, Australia. It will bring to the Newcastle area of Australia a new high tech industry, it will inject $60 million over the next few years into the domestic economy of the Newcastle area, and it will generate 150-200 new jobs in that area.
There is also the prospect, which is very important thinking into the future that if further acquisitions of Hawk trainers are entered into by countries in our own region, then the Newcastle facility which will be a very high tech facility, will become, we hope, the service centre and the maintenance centre in relation to aircraft bought by other countries in the Asia Pacific region.
So the decision of the Australian authorities to buy from British Aerosopace and to accept the British Aerospace tender and the details of the contract flowing from that decision which will be signed on Tuesday does represent a very important decision by the Australian defence authorities.
Defence contracts involve very keen competition and I know that British Aerospace worked very hard to win the contract and I congratulate your company, and I congratulate all of those associated with it and can I say how delighted I am to have met the Australian engineers all of whom come from South Australia, who have already been here for a period of 6 months and some have been here for a period of over 12 months into 2 years. I should also mention of course that it is not only the Newcastle region of Australia which will receive benefits under the offset arrangements but during the acquisition phase there will be up to 68 personnel involved in South Australia in ground support equipment manufacture, in Victoria there will be some 66 involved in structural component manufacture including tail planes, fuel tanks and pylons at Hawker de Havilland and in Western Australia more than 40 people employed at RAAF Pearce including 30 personnel involved in deeper level maintenance, 12 integrated logistic support specialists and 4 working on ejector seat maintenance and air flights.
And Australia-wide, the employment benefits of this contract will peak at about 529 personnel and a steady state of employment level of about 313.
The decision of Australia to buy the trainer from British Aerospace does underline the continuing significance at a defence level of the Anglo-Australian relationship. Of course it's a very old and well understood relationship, the defence one, between Australia and Britain but it is important as I've stressed in the context of our relationship not to look to the relationship as being one simply of the past, but rather to see it in a modern, forward looking context which is consistent with the NewImages programme sponsored by both the British and Australian governments.
The involvement of our two countries, the involvement of our highly skilled personnel, our highly skilled aeronautical engineers and others in this project is a reminder of the high tech nature and the futuristic character of the relationship and a reminder of the increasing integration at a technical level of the world economy, the fact that the globalisation process is not confined to financial markets but extends into every conceivable aspect of the Australian economy.
I want to thank the British Aerospace company and I want to congratulate them on winning the contract. I'm certain that the RAAF has made a very good decision and I am equally certain there'll be no dissent from that proposition from anybody here today and I know that there will be very close co-operation between the RAAF and British Aerospace and I would particularly like to thank the Secretary of State for coming here today and associating himself with this activity and this ceremony because one of the things that I have found extremely beneficial in the few days that I've been in the United Kingdom is getting to know the members of the new government and he is amongst some half dozen of the.senior members of the new
British government that I will be meeting on this visit to the United Kingdom and I am particularly pleased that we will have the opportunity of talking after the ceremony about other aspects of the defence association between Australia and the United Kingdom.
This arrangement and the contract that will be signed in Australia on Tuesday does contain some details which are very good news for regional areas of Australia, very good news for the Newcastle area. It brings to that area a new industry, new hope, new enthusiasm and a new optimism about highly skilled jobs, highly specialised jobs can be available to replace other jobs and that is a very very important message for the people of that district and a very very important message for the people of Australia.
Again may I thank on behalf of the Australian contingent, British Aerospace for its hospitality and I welcome the opportunity of visiting this assembly line and I certainly look forward to the commencement of the construction of the facilities in Newcastle, the employment of the people involved as a consequence and a very fruitful and effective partnership between the Royal Australian Air Force and British Aerospace over the next 25 years.


E &amp; OE
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Can I assure you Neal that I am always delighted, called upon or otherwise, to speak on behalf of all the Premiers of the Australian States.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the building that over the years has most represented the face of Australia in the United Kingdom and particularly here in London has, of course, been Australia House. It is Australia's oldest representative building anywhere in the world and I understand it is one of the oldest, if not the oldest, separate representational buildings of any nation here in London.
John Mellors spoke of his contact as a user of this building in the 1970's. I, of course, can speak of my contact as a user of the building when I belonged to that literally vast army of Australians who in the 1950s and in my case the 1960s, lived in London for up to a year while we intermittently worked and 'did Europe' and traveled around. And I first had contact with this building in the late months of 1964 when I came into the reading room to look through the Australian newspapers and to keep in touch with events back home long, of course, before I had entered Australian politics, although I must confess I was plotting something on that horizon in 1964.
The Australian High Commission in London, of course, has been the focal point of Australian representation in the United Kingdom and for a long time in Europe. Indeed, four of the first five Prime Ministers of Australia, Cook, Fisher, Reid and Bruce served as High Commissioners in London and in recent years former government Ministers - Downer, McClelland and Garland - and our own current High Commissioner, Neal Blewett. And I acknowledge the presence of Sir Victor Garland in the audience as one of the former Australian High Commissioners to London.
Certainly the London post and the representation of Australia in the United Kingdom here in Australia House has been a very very important element of the presentation and the projection of our nation abroad and I do want to take the opportunity here today on behalf of the government to thank the High Commissioner and to thank the Agents-General of the various Australian States and to thank the staff of Austrade and the other various staff of the High Commission and of the State Missions for the tremendously professional job they all do in representing the interests of our country in a collective way, here in Britain, and in a wider sense throughout Europe and the rest of the world.
The Australia Centre which I am very pleased to be at opening of today, brings together in a consolidated way the various facets of Australian representation here in London. I think it is a tribute to co-operative federalism to, you might even say, the sort of, if it's not too much of a contradiction in terms, the national globalisation of the presentation of Australia to the rest of the world that we've got all but one of the Australian States housed under the one roof and I know in time, when the vicissitudes of the property market work its way through, we'll have all of the Australian States under the one roof. I think that is something which we'll all look forward to very warmly and I do want to make a particular point of thanking the Premier of Victoria and the Victorian government for their forbearance in relation to the joining of Victoria and Australia, which is always a source of some pleasure and always a very important event and the difficulties under which the staff of the Commission and the staff of Victoria House worked while that process was going on was something that deserves our gratitude and our respect.
I think it is terrific that we now have essentially a one stop shop for those people who want to deal with Australia, for those people who want to know about Australia and for those people who want to further their commercial and their business links with Australia through Australia House and this Australia Centre will consolidate those services in a highly efficient, a highly workable and in every sense a highly commendable fashion.
As a nation as we move towards our 100th birthday, it is appropriate that in the oldest representational building of Australian interests abroad, a building that was opened in the dying months of World War I by King George V in August of 1918, a building that has represented the face of Australia to millions of people from Britain who have made that very very wise choice to emigrate to Australia and to become Australian citizens and never again to barrack for England in a cricket test, well, not all of them - there's a few that are still to be weeded out on that score - but it is a building that is steeped in the history of Australia's links with the United Kingdom. Its history is derived from it being - in John Mellor's case his first real contact with the consolidated Australian presence - in the contact of people like myself as visitors to this country on working holidays around the world, as housing people who have represented
the interests of Australia in Britain and Europe over a very long period time and it is therefore very important in opening this centre that I acknowledge the place of Australia House in the history of relations between our two countries.
I do want to thank the governments of the various States in Australia for their co-operative approach, I do commend very very strongly and I take this opportunity of doing so, commend very very strongly the importance of us as a nation presenting to the rest of the world a united, consolidated voice, without in any way downplaying the fact that there are immense and special regional attractions of Australia, just as there is a particular character about different parts of the United Kingdom as so many of us are so very well aware. Equally, there are in Australia but at the end of the day we represent ourselves to the rest of the world as first, second and third as Australians and the opening of the Australia Centre is a reminder of the importance of that.
It is also an opportunity for me to reaffirm the importance to my government and the importance to myself personally of the links that exist between Australia and the United Kingdom.
There are no two nations in the world whose bonds of history, whose bonds of family to family associations, whose ties of history, whose shared values, whose shared commitment to the causes of freedom and liberty and indeed, whose shared commitment in very tragic times has been greater and more enduring than the links between our two countries and this building has served to represent Australia in the United Kingdom for a very long time and it takes a new dimension.
I have enormous pleasure in the presence of our current High Commissioner and the current British High Commissioner in Australia, Sir Roger Carrick, and I think I see the face of a former British High Commissioner, Donald Tebbitt in Australia - I think he was the first British High Commissioner that I had anything to do with when I entered Parliament in 1974 and I think it is nice that people who have had that long association with the bilateral links should be here today.
Mr High Commissioner, I thank you again for your hospitality and I have very great pleasure in formally declaring open the Australia Centre.


23 June 1997
 E&amp;OE
 Mr Michael Cook, Professor Bridge and Ladies and Gentlemen. On your one up man ship introduction, Mr Cook, I regret to say that Mr Blair won a longer term.
 After just 15 months in office, I currently visit the United Kingdom as the head of a still relatively new government in Australia to visit a brand new government here in Britain and I take particular pleasure in delivering the 1997 Sir Robert Menzies Memorial Lecture.
 I have had, as the Chairman foreshadowed, had a very valuable discussion with Tony Blair and I was struck immediately by the warmth of his attitude towards Australia and his desire to enforce strong continuing anglo-Australian relationships under our two new Governments. In fact, one of the ironic characteristics of anglo-Australian relations at a political level, in the last twenty years, was, of course, that for most of the time that Britain was governed by a Conservative government Australia was governed by a Labor Government. And there has in each country in recent times been a junta position of political leadership and I certainly see it as one of my principle responsibilities, indeed a principle commitment, in developing the relationship to ensure that the political divide, whilst always understood and respected, does not blur overall and greater commitment to building a still stronger relationship between our two societies.
 I told Mr Blair that I was convinced of the contemporary relevance of the relationship between our two countries and I was very strongly committed to building a modern relationship with Britain.
 That relationship is becoming less and less amenable to false caricatures than it has ever been. It is more open and more balanced. It is modern and dynamic.
 I am convinced - and I think I can say that Tony Blair shared my view - that the relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom is a considerable asset to both of us as we move into the 21st century. And I want to say more about that in a moment..
 But first, having asserted confidently that old myths about the relationship are dying, let me deal with a new one which emerged the other day when I was interviewed by none other than the august British Broadcasting Corporation. I was astonished when the interviewer told me that the Australian economy was sluggish and let me immediately draw on that latest OECD Economic |Outlook for 1997 and 1998 in order to deal with this myth straight away.
 The OECD says firstly that Australia's real economic growth and employment growth will be higher than in any of the G-7 nations and higher than the OECD average.
 Secondly, that our business investment growth will be higher than in any of the G-7 nations and higher than the OECD average.
 Thirdly, that our inflation level will be lower than the G-7 and OECD averages.
 Fourthly, that our government outlays as a percentage of GDP will be the third lowest in the OECD after the United States and Korea.
 And finally, our public debt to GDP ratio will be the third lowest in the OECD area.
 Whereas Australia would meet the criteria for membership of Europe's economic and monetary union, only one European country currently meets those criteria - Luxembourg. But if anybody thinks we want to join may I borrow a famous phrase from British history - no, no and no again.
 In other words the Australian economy is very strong and it is set for a period of strong, low-inflationary, sustainable growth. I suggest that the OECD assessment of Australia's economy ought to give Australia's economic partners and foreign investors a great deal of confidence in my country.
 The good prospects are built on major economic reforms already introduced by my government in the brief time that it has been in office.
 In the space of one term in government, we will have transformed an underlying budget deficit of over $10 billion into a surplus of $1.6 billion. On current fiscal settings, we will achieve a surplus of $10.7 billion in 2000-01, which if achieved will be the highest nominal surplus in Australia's history.
 This will be achieved primarily by restraint of outlays rather than tax increases. The Commonwealth's General Government net debt will be cut by almost half - from
 19 per cent of GDP in 1995-96 to just under 10.5 per cent in 2000-01. The Commonwealth will be transformed from a net borrower to a net lender and saver.
 The credibility of our monetary policy has been enhanced by the government's formal adoption of an inflation target and respect for the independence of the central bank - the Reserve Bank of Australia.
 Interest rates have fallen quite dramatically. We now have the lowest housing interest rates in Australia since 1973.
 The government has made major changes to the labour market. I have spent, as many of you know, much of my recent political life advocating reform of Australia's arthritic, Dickensian industrial relations system. We have legislated to protect the freedom of employees to join or not to join unions. We have provided sanctions against secondary boycotts. We are facilitating workplace bargaining which better tailors wages and conditions to enterprise circumstances and encourages improved productivity.
 We are ensuring that the golden thread of choice - that is effective competition - is provided across all areas of economic activity.
 I believe that small businesses offer the strongest hope for growth and the creation of employment in the decades ahead. We are creating the macroeconomic conditions in which small business can grow and are removing the obstacles standing in their way.
 We have cut capital gains tax on small business. From the first of July this year in Australia it will be possible for any small business to be sold and the proceeds of that sale, up to $A5 million, to be invested in the acquisition of any other business of any kind without incurring any capital gains tax liability. We are reviewing all government regulations and sweeping away unnecessary and outdated ones. We have amended heavy-handed unfair dismissal laws so that they no longer intimidate small businesses from hiring staff.
 And the outlook should further improve as the government moves ahead with other elements of our reform agenda.
 We have recently, and very importantly, moved to reopen the debate on fundamental taxation reform in Australia. And this is unarguably the most important challenge left in Australia's economic reform agenda. Fundamental taxation reform is a topic which has been taboo in Australia since the goods and services tax election of 1993.
 My government's approach to economic reform is not based on any blind ideological commitment to economic theory. Our approach is pragmatic, practical and common-sense.
 We are focused on strategic goals such as growth and productivity, responsible fiscal policies and greater competitiveness - but not as ends in themselves. They are the means to achieve rising living standards throughout the community, expanding job opportunities and extending an effective social security safety net.
 I want to speak briefly about the aims of my government's reform programme, and the values and ideals that underpin them. In doing so, I will take the opportunity to say something about the modern tradition of Australian liberalism that Sir Robert Menzies helped create.
 Menzies and the liberal tradition
 Menzies' influence on Australia was great and enduring. Part of the reason was the extraordinary length of his tenure in office as prime minister. Over two separate periods, Menzies was prime minister of Australia for almost nineteen years: the longest period by far for any Australian prime minister.
 Put in a British perspective, the achievement is even more extraordinary: of all British prime ministers since the early eighteenth century, only Sir Robert Walpole and William Pitt the Younger have held the office of prime minister longer than Menzies did and in those days the electoral system was somewhat different.
 But Menzies' impact on Australian public life extends far beyond the length of his period in office.
 His most important and enduring achievement was the role he played in developing a distinctive Australian form of the liberal political tradition.
 Menzies had a deep respect for the political freedoms and personal liberties, the parliamentary democracy, the rule of law, and a free press that were Britain's great gift to Australia.
 It is no exaggeration to say that these principles constitute the foundations on which Australia's strengths as a nation are built. The gift was a great legacy and it is appropriate that I acknowledge that gift tonight.
 The Australian liberal tradition embraces the philosophies of both Edmund Burke and John Stuart Mill. It draws on both the classical liberal and the conservative political traditions. It emphasises the importance of individual freedoms and responsibilities, and the relevance of values and obligations in securing outcomes that are in the national interest.
 My government has a presumption against intervention by the state in favour of the rights and role of the individual.
 At the same time we fully recognise the role and responsibility of the state to protect the interests of its citizens. The state must intervene when the community interest is at risk.
 Not so long ago, Australia and the United Kingdom shortly after each other faced the heartrending tragedies of Dunblane and Port Arthur.
 Both governments acted decisively. In Australia, we have attacked the gun culture through an historic nation-wide ban on automatic and semi-automatic weapons. The UK government has moved against handguns. The result should be safer societies and safer streets in both our nations.
 In the economy, we aim to liberate the full potential of private enterprise within the context of a strategic but appropriately limited role for government.
 We are committed to providing 'a fair go' for all Australians, and that includes the opportunity for gainful employment, and access to first-class education and training that will help all Australians fulfil their ambitions.
 We aim to strengthen the family as the most important structure in our society.
 Menzies, in his time as prime minister and also previously as opposition leader, spoke eloquently of the forgotten people, the great mainstream of Australians whose priorities were to earn a living and create secure futures for themselves and their families.
 I vowed when I came to office, as Australian prime minister, to continue to listen to the Australian people and to address key issues of concern to them.
 We heeded the interests of families in implementing our family tax package as promised at the beginning of this year. And from the first of July significant taxation rebates will commence to operate for private health insurance.
 We are giving priority to ensuring that our education and training systems prepare people for the changing demands of work into the next century. We have created a modern apprenticeship and training system which is more responsive to industry needs and gives students greater choice in education and training. The recently announced common youth allowance provides incentives to young people to continue in further education and training so that they are better equipped to enter the modern work force and have the opportunity to gain better paying and more interesting jobs.
 We are committed very strongly to the equal right of all Australians to dignity and self-fulfilment irrespective of their colour, their beliefs, their country of origin or their religious convictions.
 Australia is a country which puts great store on her record of achievement as one of the most democratic, tolerant and fair-minded communities in the world.
 We are committed to building and protecting on our inheritance as a society of generous, compassionate and decent people drawn from all over the world but with a unifying and overriding commitment to the values of Australia, a tolerance for differences and a respect for the worth and dignity of every member of Australian society. And it remains one of the proudest achievements in that context of my country that in the late 1970s on a per capita basis it took more refugees from war torn Indo China than any nation on earth.
 These principles and values are an integral part of the modern Australian liberalism that Menzies helped create. They remain as relevant to the task of responding to present economic and social challenges as they were in Menzies' time.
 I and my government are unequivocally committed to them.
 Australia and the region
 A second enduring influence of Menzies on Australia was the contribution he made during the 1950s and 1960s to the foundations of Australia's national development.
 He provided a stable institutional and economic framework which encouraged foreign investment in Australia and the development of Australia's great resource and agricultural industries.
 He placed immense importance on expanding and improving Australia's education system both at the secondary and higher education levels. And in that context he also made a massive contribution in the education area of ending the sectarian division which had driven the education sector in Australian society for almost one hundred years through the inauguration of direct government assistance to independent schools.
 Menzies championed the post-war immigration programme which has played such a vital role in the development of Australia's economy and society.
 It was also under his leadership that the foundations of Australia's engagement with the Asia-Pacific region were established. The Colombo Plan under which many thousands of people from countries in Asia received education and training in Australia - and which created people-to-people links which are still valued - was an initiative of his government.
 It was the Menzies government in 1957 which took the then bold and controversial step of signing the first trade agreement after the Second World War with Japan. Japan remains our most important trading partner.
 It was Menzies' government, recognising Australia's strategic needs, that signed an alliance agreement with the United States. The ANZUS treaty remains vital to Australia's security and is still a pillar of the Asia-Pacific region's stability.
 Under my government Australia will remain open to the region and to the world because that is vital for Australia to realise her full potential.
 Australia's tradition of engagement with the countries of Asia is an essential element of my government's vision of nation's future.
 Australia's prospects will depend greatly on developments in our own region and our relationships with the countries of the region. Partly, this is because of geography. Partly, it is because of the degree of Australia's economic integration with the countries of the region - which are, or course, the fastest growing in the world. Over 60 per cent of Australia's exports go to East Asia. And importantly, it is because of the close human associations which have developed between Australia and the peoples of the countries of her region.
 In both Europe and the Asia-Pacific, we are living through a watershed period in economic and strategic terms.
 The collapse of communism and the demise of the Soviet Union have ushered in a new era. Europe is adjusting its structures and seeking new forms of economic and security co-operation. The deepening of European integration, the enlargement of the European Union, the expansion of NATO and the positive engagement of Russia in the building of a new Europe offer the people of this region an unprecedented degree of security as well as immense economic opportunity.
 The United Kingdom of course is centrally engaged in these processes. Similar momentous - and positive - changes are taking place in the Asia-Pacific. And Australia is making an important contribution to her region's evolving security and economic structures.
 The phenomenal growth of the East Asian economies has transformed the region. The growth is undoubtedly beneficial for the stability of the region. The living standards of the people in the region have been vastly improved and their lives greatly enriched.
 The issues are how to ensure that such growth continues and how to ensure that the stability that underpinned such growth continues and is consolidated by it.
 These are no easy tasks. For just as the economic relativities between Asia and the rest of the world are changing, so are the relativities within the region. And this is bringing in its wake great strategic change.
 I am optimistic - but not complacent - about the region's prospects.
 China's growth is the result of decisions taken by the late Deng Xiaoping to open up and liberalise the economy. President Jiang Zemin, of China, has reiterated his commitment to the policy directions chosen by Deng. This is important not only because it increases the chances that the economy will continue to grow at close to the 10 per cent it has grown in recent years but also because it indicates that China will remain open to processes of modernisation and outside influences.
 Likewise China's present leaders have reiterated their commitment to maintain their commitment to the 'one China - two systems' policy enunciated by Deng in regard to Hong Kong. Australia regards China's commitment to maintaining the freedoms agreed in the 1984 joint declaration as vital to the future prosperity of Hong Kong and to the interests that Australia and the region have in Hong Kong.
 Of course, there are aspects of China's political and legal system that we would like to see significantly improved. But in Australia's view the best way of achieving this is not through public confrontation and hectoring but through constructive dialogue and through accepting China as a legitimate player in regional and global institutions with a right to a voice in shaping them.
 Indonesia is another Asian power which will have a great influence on the future course of the region. Its directions and policies overall have delivered great benefits to its people and to the region. President Soeharto for example championed the cause of free trade within APEC. The importance of his government's achievements in holding together a nation composed of hundreds of ethnic groups, and thousands of islands, and in building a modern and fast-growing economy cannot be exaggerated.
 The situation in East Timor, of course, remains a matter of very legitimate concern and debate, but we need to think carefully about how our concerns can most productively be pursued. In our view, our concerns are best pursued in the context of a broad-based relationship. Understanding and a sense of perspective are especially important during a period of great social change and leadership transition.
 New structures are being created by the countries of the region. They are not structures that have been imposed on them. Having shaped the structures, the countries in the region have a stake in them and have confidence in them. New habits of co-operation are forming.
 Fundamental to the outlook for continuing growth in the Asia-Pacific region is maintaining the momentum towards freer and more open trading and investment arrangements both regionally and globally. APEC has an important role in keeping trade liberalisation on track.
 Because it accounts for about half of the world's trade and economic output, APEC has a vital role in providing leadership for continuing liberalisation at a global level through the World Trade Organisation.
 The ability of the countries in the region to focus on their economic development and enriching the lives of their people depends also on the maintenance of stability. In that context, the framework of relationships between the key major powers, in particular, the United States, Japan and China - and in Southeast Asia, the role of Indonesia - will be critical. So also will be the continuing evolution of an emerging regional security architecture, including arrangements such as Australia's security agreement with Indonesia and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
 The active involvement and engagement of the United States is the single most important factor in our regions stability. Just as the United State's commitment in Europe has facilitated a favourable transition to a new era, US engagement in Asia is crucial to navigating the current period of strategic change in Australia's region. As the United Kingdom's relationship with the United States has done in Europe, Australia's alliance with the United States - along with Japan's and Korea's - plays a vital role in regional stability.
 Australia's contribution to the Asia-Pacific region is profound in other respects. The role it played as a supplier of resources to fuel the growth of both Japan and Korea is now being replicated in relation to China. Our strengths as a stable democracy, a technologically advanced economy, a source of education, training and skills, and a model of social tolerance and diversity are an important component of the region's life and prospects and indeed of the region's future.
 Australia and the United Kingdom
 Australia's destiny is tightly bound up with that of her region. Likewise, the destiny of the United Kingdom is tightly bound up with the future of Europe.
 Nevertheless Australia and the United Kingdom have important interests in each other's regions - whether we are geographically part of them or not. History shows events in Europe can affect Australian interests in profound ways, as events in Asia can affect the United Kingdom. We need the markets of both to prosper.
 These interests, and the roles we play in our respective regions, constitute compelling reasons to keep the friendship between Australia and the United Kingdom up to date and active and to use it to help shape our futures in a positive way.
 We have the tremendous asset that no two countries in our respective regions know each other better, trust each other more, and have closer relationships than Australia and Britain.
 This underlines a point the Australians here will know I often make: and that is Australia faces no choice between her history and geography.
 I believe that the interplay between our bilateral links and the role that each of us performs in our respective regions will be an increasingly important element in our future relationship.
 Each nation will be building on a profound economic, political and human investment we have already made and have in the other.
 Britain is the second largest investor in Australia. It is the largest investor in Australia's manufacturing industry, providing nearly 40 per cent of the total direct foreign investment in manufacturing. After the United States and the Netherlands, Australia rivals France and Germany as the next largest foreign investor in the United Kingdom.
 The continuing relevance of our bilateral relationship is also apparent in important defence and security ties, and in our co-operation on many global issues through the United Nations, the Commonwealth and other forums.
 It is also evident, of course, in the enduring ties that will continue to bind peoples: the shared values and aspirations, the historical and institutional associations, the ties of family and community, and the links established by cultural, educational and sporting exchanges.
 It would be easy with a history as rich as the one shared by the United Kingdom and Australia to allow that history to dominate our perspectives of the relationship. It is therefore important that we keep our understanding of each other contemporary and forward looking.
 For that reason, it is most fitting that the Australian and British government are co-operating in mounting the New Images promotion. We are sharing the challenge of communicating up-to-date perceptions of our economies, our societies, our directions and our peoples.
 For the same reason, I am delighted to have had the opportunity provided by the Sir Robert Menzies Centre to make my own contribution to that endeavour and to underline my confidence in the contribution that both Australia and the United Kingdom can bring, not only to a more secure and productive future for our respective region, but also with our interplay on each other a more secure and productive future for our two societies and our two nations.
 Thank you. 



24 June 1997 
E&amp;OE.................................................
Thank you very much Neal Blewett, the Australian High Commissioner in Britain, to Sir Roger Carrick, the British High Commissioner in Australia, to Mark Taylor the Captain of the Australian cricket team and all of the other members of the team, former players and captains of both England and Australia, cricket lovers, ladies and gentlemen.
As you know, one of the great laments of travelling politicians and travelling Prime Minister is that every so often because of a sense of duty and a sense of obligation you have to go to a function for which you have no enthusiasm. You are sort of dragged around and you look at all these things in the wall and you mutter to your wife why is it that it has come my lot to go to such a boring occasion. Of course, you will know that that is not my lot tonight.
You will know that it is my immense pleasure as a self-confessed cricket lover and self-confessed devotee if the intensity and the passion of the Anglo-Australian cricketing contest, that I am here tonight to launch this magnificent exhibition.
Of course, as a measure of how important cricket has been in the Australian national psyche it is s worth remembering that we had the first Australian cricket team formed 26 years before Federation. The first of the great Ashes Tests was in 1877 and the first Australian cricket team, an Aboriginal team, visited the United Kingdom some twelve years before that. So, however you look at the history of Australia, however you look at the history of the relations between our two countries you will find etched very deeply in that history and very deeply in that relationship you will find the game of cricket. And if anybody who has a passion for cricket wanted somewhere to indulge themselves, I mean what I think I would like to organise with the High Commissioner is that in the dead of night, perhaps at 3 o'clock tomorrow morning, when there is nobody else around, I can arrange a special viewing and you could literally spend hours going through this exhibition.
I do want to thank those who have been responsible for it. And in doing that can I say how terrific it is to have two former captains of England. I have seen at least two former captains of England tonight in Colin Cowdrey and Ted Dexter. It really is terrific to have them here. Can I say on behalf of all of the Australians present how much we are pleased to have so many representatives of English cricket with us tonight.
The sporting contest between Australia and England in cricket is probably the oldest and most frequented of all national rivalries in sport anywhere in the world. If there is another one I would like to know. None of my research suggests that it is the case.
It has been an incredibly intense rivalry. There have been 58 Ashes series of which Australia has won 30 and England has won 28. In England, there have been 135 tests played, 38 each have been won respectively by England and Australia and 59 have been drawn. I hope that those figures have been adjusted for yesterday's result.
It is of course, I guess the apex of sporting rivalry and sporting exchange between our two countries and game has in its different ways expressed the contrasting and the blending and very distinctive characteristics of our two peoples. The independence, the innovativeness and the creativity of Australians. The unbelievable, the incredulity that anything so dreadful could happen, which leads of course to that famous expression, when the first defeat of England on English soil was inflicted by an Australian team and the ashes of English cricket were to be cremated and the remains sent to Australia, it epitomised I guess the imperial disdain that a mere bagatelle of colonials could possibly achieve such a magnificent outcome.
Of course, it is not only the great contest. I will not insult your own passion and understanding o the game and the rich resources that are around this rich exhibition to tell you of them. To touch on any of them myself. It is not only the incredible performances and the achievements and we all have our own memories going back to the first time that we heard or saw a test match between England and Australia. Mine was in 1946 when Hammond brought his team to Australia immediately after the war. That was my very first contact through the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
But it is not only the players and the he contest. It is also the culture and all that has gone with the game. The tremendous contribution and the improvisation in the early days of cricket broadcast, and the contribution that great broadcasts that both England and Australia has made to that contest. And I guess most of all is the wonderful worklike fraternity that has been spawned by Anglo Australian cricket matches. And what touches my wife and I so much is that so much is that you go to the fourth test in Adelaide on the anniversary weekend and you see a group of people and you come to the second Test at Lords and they are all here. It is a marvellous intermigratory exercise. So, as you can imagine, it is one of those aspects of the national and the cultural life of our two countries that does bind us together. And occasionally, given the ferocity of the contests and the passions that are unleashed, you wonder whether it is binding countries together or pushing them apart. Of course, there have as we all know, been stages when at various times things have happened in the contest which have imposed strains on the relationship. But it has survived all of that. And the game of cricket for all that from time to time people will quite wrongly announce its present, its benediction or announce that it is over and it is a thing of the past it rebounds with might energy and might vigour.
Those of us who witnessed the 4000 to 5000 people lining the streets of Sydney to welcome Allan Border's team home in 1989 would have testified to the great passion that still burns within Australians for cricket achievement and cricket success. The coming of the one day game changing cricket forever. But it has not altered the essential principles of the game and it has given a new dimension and it has dragged a new audience and made cricket a new reality and a new joy to new generations of people, not only in England and Australia, but all around the world.
Can I say that it is one of the highlights of my visit overseas. Indeed,one of the highlights of my Prime Ministership is to be invited to open this magnificent exhibition. Can I say to Mark and the boys in the Australian cricket team, I think there was a little bit of a communication with the Almighty to which Neal referred. But if anybody here, if any Englishmen here imagines that your team is in any position of advantage just remember Gubby Allen's tour of Australia in 1936-37 when England won the first two matches, first two matches only to lose the next three and to see the Ashes remain in Australia. So let no Englishmen here, I say this with the greatest of respect and friendliness, let no Englishmen here derive any premature pleasure or any premature joy and out of what happened in Edgebaston and imagine that the Almighty can be called upon on four more occasions to snuffle a victory.
To my Australian and English friends alike, to all of you who are great lovers of the greatest game that the world has ever seen, can I say that this is an absolutely magnificent exhibition and I do want to thank Coopers and Lybrand. And I want to thank BHP, News International, British Aerospace, Rolls Royce and Holwaywide. I want to thank David Frith for the tremendous work he has done. He and I share another two things at least in common : a lover of cricket, and we were old boys of Canterbury High School in Sydney. I suspect he played cricket a little better than I did. We did have one great Australian cricketer as an old boy : Arthur Morris, who was captain of the school in 1939. I want to thank the sponsors. Without you this would not have been possible and the way in which you have got behind this terrific project is something that delights all of us.
So I have great pleasure Mr High Commissioner, in declaring this exhibition open. And may it be a, how shall I put it, a Mecca, a magnet for cricket lovers who visit London and who visit Australia House and a fitting contribution to the most enduring passionately engaging sporting contest of all time and that is cricket between Australia and England.
Thank you.


June 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER V
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
DINNER HOSTED BY THE FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION
NEW YORK
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Mr John Merow for those very kind and warm words of introduction. If you want a
job as my PR adviser in Australia after those very kind words, the offer is open.
Can I say to acknowledge the presence of the Australian Ambassador to the United States, Andrew
Peacock, another old political friend of mine, Michael Baume, the Consul-General in New York, very well
Michael, and the other distinguished guests, and
may I particularly acknowledge the presence of Mr Paul Volcker, the former Chairman of the Federal
Reserve system of the United States may I say a mean whose steady and courageous leadership of the Fed
at a time of very high inflation, both here and around the world, laid the sure foundations for the greater and
more consistent economic prosperity that the United States and the western world is now enjoying.
My friends, I am very greatly honoured and personally delighted to have the opportunity of addressing this
joint gathering of the Australian American Association and the very prestigious Foreign Policy Association
here in New York.
I do so as the Prime Minister of a nation.... ( interjection).. but ladies and gentlemen, the relationship
between Australia and the United States is a relationship which I am very proud as the Prime Minister of
Australia to recognise and to endorse as amongst the most important of all of the bilateral relationships that
Australia has around the world.
The relationship that Australia has with the United States is enduring. Its foundations are built hard and fast
on the bedrock of the values and aspirations that our two societies share.
We both celebrate the role of the individual and the spirit of private enterprise. We both share an
unequivocal commitment to democracy, to free speech, the freedom of the press and the independence and
the authority of the rule of law. We both believe in the right of every citizen, regardless of colour, race or
creed, to equality of opportunity to dignity and to individual self respect.
We share common views about the kind of society and sort of world we wish to bequeath to our children.
And all of this has been given very eloquent expression in the history of our two nations. It continues to be
given expression in the current efforts of our two nations to shape a future for our societies in which all have
the scope to achieve his or her ambitions and to shape the world in which there is space for every nation to
fujlfil its potential in peace and stability.
Our common endeavours are reflected in the shared sacrifices made by our men and women in war. I was
given a poignant reminder of this history when I visited the Arlington Cemetery last Saturday. There I
visited the joint grave of an Australian pilot, Francis Milne, and an American pilot, Joseph Paul. They died
in a fighter plane which crashed during the war in Papua New Guinea in 1942. They were found in 1987
and, as their remains could not be separated, they were buried together in Arlington. 
Our common endeavours to create a peaceful and prosperous world continued in the decades that followed
World War 11. We cooperated in establishing new global political and trade institutions, the United Nations
and the GAIT the predecessor to the World Trade Organisation so putting in place codes of acceptable
international conduct. We will work together in strengthening APEC the Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation Forum so that it fulfils its potential in sustaining the Asia Pacific's growth and stability.
Our great alliance, the AiNZUS alliance, founded in the Cold War and now approaching its fifth decade in
operation, will help preserve the stability of the Asia-Pacific region. Last year we held in Australia the
largest joint military exercise for many years, involving 25,000 men.
The business community so well represented here tonight has played an immense role in the building of the
relationship between Australia and the United States. You are the largest single foreign investor in the
Australia economy and therefore a vital underpinning to the current prosperity of the Australian people.
As John was kind enough to say in my still relatively new government has introduced a number of major
economic relforms. But let me just take a moment to say some very basic things about the character of the
Australian economy and in the process let me give you some key facts which are important to any
understanding of contemporary economic conditions in my country. According to the latest OECD outlook
in 1997 and 1998 Australia's real economic real economic growth and employment growth will be higher
than in any of the G-7 nations and higher than the OECD average.
Our business investment growth will be higher than in any of the G-7 nations and higher than the OECD
average Our inflation level will be lower than the G-7 and OECD averages.
Our government outlays as a percentage of GDP will be the third lowest in the OECD after the United
States and Korea.
Our public debt to GDP ratio will be the third lowest in the OECD area.
Might I say by way of emphasis that whereas Australia would meet the criteria for membership of Europe's
economic and monetary union, only one European country currently meets those criteria namely
Luxembourg. But I hasten to add that we have absolutely no intention of lodging an application to join the
union. The United States remains the largest source of our imports. Your largest bilateral trade surplus is with
Australia. It is in relative terms larger than your deficit with Japan. I should remind you, of course, that
we have one or two ideas for opening up the US agricultural market which would improve our trade
balance. Australia has 40 per cent as much invested in the United States as the United States does in Australia
which for our relative size is a major commitment. The output of Australian-owned companies in your
country is now larger than our exports to the United States.
Our societies and our economies face similar challenges in dealing with technological revolution and
globalisatiori. We share the aim of equipping our citizens, especially our young, to take advantage of the
new horizons that are being opened up. We learn from each other's experiences. My conversations with
President Clinton and 
Dr Greenspan again reinforced for me how important the great flexibility of your huge economy has been to
your extraordinary success in the area of job creation.
These shared values and interests, and the friendship which is based on them, are too valuable ever to take
for granted. And I say on behalf of the Australian Government, and I know it is reciprocated in the United
States, that we will never take the association for granted.
Last year for the first time ever the Defence Secretary of the United States, the Secretary of State and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs were altogether in Australia for our annual alliance talks. President
Clinton came to Australia last year. He and his wife received a spontaneous welcome from the Australian
people that demonstrated their high regard that the United States retains in our nation, and how warm is our
friendship towards all of you.
I take the opportunity on the occasion of my first visit to your country as Prime Minister to reaffirm my
government's strong commitment to the alliance and to our enduring friendship with the United States and
its people.
Our alliance and our friendship remain as relevant as ever. Australia and the United States have a shared
destiny in the Asia-Pacific region. The effectiveness of our cooperation will have an influential bearing on
the future course of that region.
Australia's approach to Asia has a strong bipartisan element. If there is any difference on the part of my
government with our predecessors in government, it lies in my objection to the impression that was
sometimes given in the past that Australia had to pursue an Asia-only policy and downgrade the weight it
gave to associations with Europe and the United States. My own view has always been that Australia does
not need to choose between her history and her geography.
Our links with the United States are a vital element of Australia's wider association with the Asia-Pacific
region. Australia's geography, the extent of her economic integration with the countries of Asia and the
human ties created by the presence in Australia of many Asian migrant communities, underline the huge
scale of Australia's national interests in the Asian area.
Sixty per cent of our exports go to East Asian countries. Seven of our top 10 export markets are in East
Asia. We have long played an important role in the region. Japan's first trade agreement after the Second World
War was signed with Australia in 1957.
Australia is the world's largest minerals trader, and has played a major role in the industrialisation of Japan
and Korea. We are now playing a similar role in fuelling China's growth. We are an important source of
the region's food. We are a major destination for Japanese investment and officially at least the largest
destination for Chinese foreign investment after Hong Kong.
We have close and active defence relationships with a wider range of countries in Asia than perhaps any
other country. In particular, we have a security agreement with South-East Asia's largest country,
Indonesia, and participate in the Five Power Defence Arrangements with Singapore and Malaysia. 
We now have substantial communities from Asian countries in our country. They have made a tremendous
contribution to Australia. They have enriched and diversified Australia's culture. Their entrepreneurial
drive has strengthened our economy and they have earnt a highly respected place in our society.
Australians, especially young Australians, are learning more about the enormous diversity of our
neighbourhood. There are more people studying Japanese in Australia than any other country outside China
and Korea, and there are many tens of thousands of Asian students in Australian institutions at any one time.
These growing people-to-people links especially among the younger generations will have an enormous
and positive influence on all areas of Australia's relations with its regions into the next century.
The role of the United States has been crucial to the unprecedented stability and growth that the Asia Pacific
region has achieved. I believe it would be an error of historic proportions for the United States to diminish
the level of its engagement in the Asia Pacific region. It would profoundly affect events in the region for the
worse. And I am also convinced that it is in the interest of the United States to remain deeply engaged in the Asia
Pacific region.
The United States military presence has provided the security which allows the countries of the region to
focus on economic development. United States capital, technology and management skills will continue to
be vital in sustaining the region's growth. The United States for example is still the largest or second largest
market for all East Asian countries except Brunei.
The traffic is two-way. Nearly 40 per cent of US trade is now with East Asia, twice that with Europe. The
countries of ASEAN as a group are now the United States' third largest export market.
We welcome the fact that on crucial issues the United States is exercising the leadership that is necessary in
the region.
It continues to play a vital role in providing nuclear deterrence. It has taken the lead in persuading North
Korea to abandon its nuclear programme.
And successive administrations have kept the key US alliance relationships in the region with Japan, Korea
and Australia. in good repair. US decisions after successive defence reviews to retain a fo rward-deployed
military capability in the region have underpinned stability.
President Clinton is working hard and successfully with the Japanese Prime Minister,
Mr Hashimoto, to keep the US-Japan relationship strong.
The administration's commitment to deeper engagement with China and its disavowal of notions of
containment and confrontation are central to the region's future stability. As President Clinton said during
his visit to Australia, the direction China takes in years to come, the way it defines its greatness in the future,
will help to decide whether the next century is one of conflict or cooperation. A stable, open and
prosperous China is in the interests of all of us.
The United States convened in 1993 the first APEC leaders' meeting, thus consolidating APE * C as the
region's most important body and the only forum where the leaders of the region's major powers can meet. 
The United States has played an important part in maintaining the momentum for ongoing trade
liberalisation in the region and it must continue to do so.
In every single one of these areas, Australia has been a good and faithful partner. In each case we have
given practical, financial or strong public backing to the United States. When it matters we have been a
friend and allie prepared to stand up and be counted.
One of the strengths I believe Australia brings to the partnership with the United States is the different
perspective fr-om which she views the region. We are located on the other side of the Pacific. Al1though it is
not too far away. It is only about five full length feature movies away from the west coast of the United
States. We are geographically closer to the Asian countries than is the United States. But we would not
claim any monopoly of wisdom but we are particularly aware of their diversity, and perhaps of those nations
and perhaps where they are coming from and what their aspirations are.
Australia and the United States have fundamental interests and objectives in common. We will both always
stand up for the values and principles on which our own societies are based.
In responding, for example, to human rights shortcomings in a number of countries in the region, our view is
that we must take full account of the remarkable progress and change that are taking place in the Asia
Pacific region. We need also to take account of the cultural diversity in Asia and the self-confidence and
justifiable pride that the nations of Asia have in their achievements in particular the dramatic shift in the
number of families which have moved from poverty to a more secure middle class.
The pace and scale of change in Asia in the past two decades have been unparalleled. From a region
preoccupied by internal and external threats and poverty, East Asia has become the engine of world
economic growth.
During the past decade, more than half the world's economic growth has come from East Asia. The region
now accounts for just under a third of global output. The region's importance to the global economy will
grow: the World Bank, for example, estimates growth at over seven per cent a year in the period to 2004.
Apart from one or two anachronistic regimes such as those in Burma and North Korea, the economic
transformation of the countries of East Asia has produced enormous improvements in the living standards of
ordinary people, stability that is unprecedented in their modern history, and in most cases more open
societies. Many factors have contributed to these developments. A principal one of course is the natural talent and
enterprise of the people of the region. A second is the stability in the region, to which as I have mentioned,
the United States has made such an important contribution. A third factor that we should acknowledge is
the leadership that many of these countries have had.
Under President Soeharto's leadership for example, Indonesia the fourth most populous country in the
world has achieved progress in building a nation that is nothing short of remarkable when you consider the
thousands of islands and hundreds of ethnicities that comprise Indonesia. Stability in South East Asia is in
no small measure due to Indonesia's success and to the economic and strategic directions it has chosen.
Under first Lee Kuan Yew, and now Goh Chok Tong, Singaporeans have come to enjoy one of the world's
highest living standards. 
6
At a time when Japan's economy needs to be deregulated, Japan is fortunate to have a forward-looking and
decisive leader in Mr Hashimoto. In China, President Jiang Zemin has reiterated his commitment to the
liberal economic policies first introduced by Deng Ziaoping.
The modernis; ation and liberalisation of East Asian economies are moving fast. While significant barriers to
our exports remain, tariffs are dropping throughout the region.
These are important trends. They create internal dynamics and forces which are more likely to produce the
results we seek than any outside pressure. They are giving the people of the region greater scope to fulfil
their aspirations.
Our approach must be to encourage these trends, to reinforce the growing integration of the countries of the
region into the world economy, and to encourage the broadening and deepening of their relationships with
countries outside the region. This is overwhelmingly in our strategic Interests, in our economic interests,
and in the interests of the peoples of the region itself
Against this background, may I say, that the most effective way of promoting respect for human rights and
freedoms in the region will be in the context of broad and active bilateral relationships and through dialogue.
We are not naive or starry-eyed, but we believe that a cooperative bilateral approach dealing with specific
human rights issues will produce more results than generalised public hectoring or lecturing and
confrontation. As our close neighbour, Indonesia is of particular importance to Australia. Indonesia is going through a
period of generational change and economic and political transition. Indonesia does have human rights
problems. A~ t the same time, in the last two decades, the number of its population living in poverty has
declined from 60 per cent to 15 per cent. It is in our interests that Indonesia see through this period while
maintaining its stability and the overall trend towards a more open economy and a more open society. That
means giving it both support and space to work through its challenges.
We do remain particularly concerned about the human rights situation in East Timor. A confrontational
approach, however, and refusal to accept its place as an integral part of Indonesia, will not bring the right
results for those we wish to assist.
Earlier today Hong Kong became part of the People's Republic of China. It would be unrealistic to imagine
that this historically significant event will not bring changes in the former British colony.
However, there is no doubt. China's best interests lie in keeping to the one country-two systems
commitment it made in relation to Hong Kong. China has good reason to fulfil its promises to retain Hong
Kong's substantial autonomy and its existing freedoms. Australia, like other countries in the region, has
important interests in Hong Kong which give us a stake in Hong Kong's success. We have made our
position clear to the Chinese government. China's management of Hong Kong will have a strong bearing on
how it is viewed by the rest of the world.
China's growth is giving it greater influence. Naturally, it would like to define, to the extent it can, its own
terms for its increasing engagement in the region's and the world's institutions.
Yet the reality is that China's growth depends more than ever on its access to the markets, capital and
technology available in the rest of the world. It has an increasing interest in joining and strengthening global
institutions such as the World Trade Organisation. 
China must be allowed a fair say in the development of these institutions. Its involvement must also be on
terms that strengthen them and do not damage the interests of others.
All of the countries in the Asia-Pacific region have an interest in cooperating to maintain the stability and
prosperity of the region and a responsibility to do so.
The unparalleled position of power and influence that the United States has occupied since the end of the
Cold War, however, gives it a particular degree of responsibility.
The United States has the capacity to exercise that responsibility. The predictions of decline made of the
United States in the 1980s and early 1990s have proved totally groundless. To the immense satisfaction and
admiration of friends such as Australia, the dynamism and inventiveness of the US economy and the United
States people and the strengths of its society have won through.
Australia for its part will seek to ensure that its partnership with the United States continues to make the
most effective contribution to the region's stability and prosperity into the next century.
And ladies and gentlemen, may I conclude in saying on a personal note that this is the twelfth occasion that I
have visited your country since I first came here as a relative new graduate into the profession of law in
Australia in 1964. On every occasion I have found welcome. On every occasion I have been impressed
with the openness and the vitality and the friendship of the people of the United States. It is a matter of
particular pride and personal satisfaction to me that I have the opportunity of addressing this gathering as
the Prime Minister of Australia, as the leader of a country whose close association with the United States
has underpinned not only our security but also our stability. But most importantly it has given us an
opportunity to share values across the Pacific, to share those fundamental beliefs of personal liberty, of
individual effort, of ajust society and a belief that it is appropriate always to aspire to the ideal of a better
world. The United States and Australia have been through much travail in the past. We have shared many bitter
experiences, we have stood shoulder to shoulder in many parts of the world in the defence of freedom and in
the promotion of liberty.
I like to believe that on all occasions we have done it with a generous attitude to other parts of the world
and in a common belief that the values that we share and the values we have sought to defend are worth
sharing and worth defending. And if we can continue that partnership into the future I believe that we in our
different parts of the world and together in the Asia Pacific region can play a very important role in building
a better and a more prosperous and a more stable world in the remarkable proficious circumstances that the
end of the Cold War and what might be the dawn of a new era of economic growth and economic stability
has given to both our societies and to all of the societies of the world. I thank you most warmly for your
gracious invitation tonight. 


1 July 1997
E&amp;OE......................................................
Thank you very much Michael, Andrew Peacock, Australian Ambassador to the United States and John Merow, President of the American-Australian Association; other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. For the benefit of the American present, Allan Border, was a long serving captain of the Australian cricket team. And there are many people in Australia who argue that that is indeed the most important post to be held in Australian society.
So it is a particular honour for anybody to be associated with an Australian cricket captain. Can I say that on this the last official engagement I have of a almost week long visit to the United States how welcome is the opportunity to address a few words to all of you, particularly about the strengths and purpose of the Australian economy, about the economic relationship between our two great nations and about the economic outlook for the entire world.
I have had the opportunity since being in the United States really to divide my visit into two. The political side of it in Washington where I had extremely good discussions with the President and the Vice President and senior members of their administration which reaffirmed the very close bonds between our two countries. And can I say that George Bush the former President, when he visited Australia early in 1992, did us all a great service in reminding us that we should never take for granted that generation of Americans and Australians who fought together in World War II perpetually passed on to their children and others, the instinctive closeness of the relationship and that it had to be worked on and it had to be nurtured and we had to remind ourselves and particularly younger generations of Australians and Americans of the importance and the enduring significance of that association. I think it is necessary to remind ourselves as Dr Johnson did that we should keep our friendships in good repair and keeping the American-Australian friendship in good repair requires effort on both sides of the Pacific. But I am very happy to say successive American administrations on both sides of politics, and successive Australian administrations on both sides of politics have placed very great emphasis on the importance of nurturing and protecting the relationship.
I have found a United States economy, on this my first visit to your country as Prime Minister, a United States economy which is performing more strongly, more consistently and more optimistically than at any time that I have been in public life in Australia.
Having talked briefly in the case of Paul Volker last night and at great length to Alan Greenspan last week in Washington, two men of immense wisdom and both of whom have made an immense contribution to the wealth and the stability of the United States economy and indeed the economic prospects of the entire industrialised world over the last 20 years, each of them was candid enough to say to me that they didn't completely understand all of the reasons as to why the American economy was performing so well. I always think it is the mark of a truly wise man when he's prepared to admit that not everything is capable of instantaneous and comprehensive explanation. But there is no doubt that the strength and resilience of the Unites States economy which is giving leadership and hope to the rest of the industrialised world is a source not only of great satisfaction to Americans but also a source of great satisfaction to those friends of America around the world.
You have achieved a level of price stability which is remarkable in recent times. You have achieved investment levels, and most importantly of all in terms of the overall satisfaction of your population you have also achieved remarkable things on the job creation front.
I say these things as the Prime Minister of a country who can also talk very enthusiastically and very optimistically about the economic prospects of Australia. Australia at the present time has got, in my view, most of the economic fundamentals in better condition than they have been for more than a decade. We inherited a Budget deficit, that is my government when it came to office in March of last year of about $10.5 billion. By the end of our first year in government, that's after our first term in government, that is after 3 years, we will have converted that deficit into a surplus of $1.6 billion. The projection is that the by the year 2000, we will have a surplus of $AUS10 billion Australian dollars. This year, we will repay debt of about $AUS5 billion. Our debt to GDP ratio in 1995 was 19.5 percent. By the year 2000, it will be 10 percent. We are projected by the OECD in 1997 and 1998 to have growth rates above the average of the G7. We will have the third lowest debt to GDP ratio of any country in the OECD and as I said to an audience last night, if we wanted to we would actually qualify along with Luxembourg to join the European monetary system. But it is not our intention to lodge an application.
I am also very happy to say that we have achieved most of this through a restraint on expenditures, on cutting back on our outlays. And, once again, on present projections, and on the basis of decisions already taken, not on decisions that are in the never-never, on the basis of decisions already taken, we expect by the turn of the century that our expenditure levels will be down to the levels that they were in the early 1970s.
This morning, I had the opportunity of going on to the trading floor of Salomon Brothers and meeting some of the people who worked on the debt syndicate desk. It's always an interesting experience to revisit what is alleged to have been the floor that was the inspiration for Tom Wolfe's famous novel about the financial community in New York, and to talk to some of the dealers and those handling the trading of Australian securities and Australian investments in Australian companies. And they were ready for me, I have to say. They had the yield spreads up on the screen. I took away bearing the signatures of all of the people on the Salomon Brothers debt syndicate desk a little graph which plotted the differential between the United States and Australian Treasury Bonds. And I have got to tall you and I feel pretty proud about this that when my government came to office in March of 1996, the spread was about 250 basis points against Australia. And this morning it was down to 60.3 basis points.
And I'm pretty chuffed about that because if there is no...I guess tougher, hard-headed, unambiguous, uncluttered, unsentimental measurement, than the spread between the yield on your bonds and the yield on United States Treasury Bonds, you don't get it any tougher than that, do you Fred? If you can narrow that margin, and that's a pretty good measure of what the financial community of the financial centre of the world and the financial centre of the United States thinks about what is happening. And I say these things because it is very important that the leaders of my country have an opportunity to talk directly and in an unfiltered environment to those who take investment decisions that not only affect the United States but also affect what happens in Australia.
We did determine ourselves on a course of fiscal consolidation when we came to power. We also determined ourselves on a course of action to significantly reform and deregulate our industrial relations system. We have made major changes to the workplace relations area and over time I believe that they are going to produce very major dividends through greater flexibility and therefore generate greater opportunities for job creation. We have also embarked upon a number of very significant changes to improve the climate for the operation for small businesses in our community. I believe, as an observer, as a friendly observer of the Unites States scene, that one of the keys to job generation in this country has always been the great flexibility of your labour market coupled with the enormous encouragement that you always give to small business.
And we have begun to implement policies taking Australia down those two paths over the last 18 months. I should tell you, for example, that indeed yesterday in Australia, today in the United States, a major change to the capital gains tax law affecting small businesses comes into operation. And under that change it will be possible in Australia as from today, for anybody owning a small business to sell that business to investment the proceeds in any kind of other business, not necessarily of the same kind, and enjoy a complete capital gains tax exemption in relation to up to $5 million of the proceeds of that sale comprising that reinvestment. Now, that may not come as any great surprise or be seen as any great deal to an American audience. I'm not immediately familiar will all the provisions of your capital gains tax law, but to the Australian small business community, it does represent a very, very significant improvement.
We've also, as was mentioned by John Merow in his introduction, we have also embarked upon a very vigorous programme of privatisation. We said before the election that we would see one-third of the national communications carrier, Telstra, and that privatisation is well on track and many in this room are particularly familiar with the details of it.
I should also mention, that at a State level, vigorous programmes of privatisation have been underway for some time. The Victorian Government, lead by Jeff Kennett, has been embarking upon a very successful privatisation of power utilities in Victoria for some years and in recent weeks the Labor Government of New South Wales, led by the Premier Mr Carr, has announced that subject to the approval processes of his own party, there will be a privatisation of the electricity generating capacity in New South Wales, and if that comes off, the total privatisation will be in order of $22 billion. And that will represent he largest privatisation in Australia's history.
So, in terms of the day to day interest of many in this room, there is a lot to attract you to Australia quite apart from the increasingly benign and increasingly investment climate.
On a broader front, can I say one or two other things about future change and future reform in Australia.
We are, as you know, very committed to workplace relations change and much of what we have wanted to do in that area has already been done and we look towards the benefits of that flowing through to the economy in the months and the years ahead.
Shortly, before I left Australia, the government re-opened a debate on what I regard as one of the great pieces of unfinished economic reform business in Australia, and that is the reform of our taxation system.
Although Australia's aggregate taxation levels compare reasonably favourably with most OECD countries, and indeed they are in aggregate terms significantly lower than the taxation levels of most European countries, although they are slightly higher than the aggregate levels in the United States, we do have a lopsided system in that we rely very heavily on personal income tax as a source of revenue collection. To illustrate can I tell you that in 1955, albeit a few years ago, you paid in Australia the top rate of marginal tax on your income when your income was 14 times average weekly earnings. That figure is now in 1997 something like one and three-quarters times your average weekly earnings.
So there is a very strong case on that ground alone for a significant reform to our taxation system which reduces the reliance on personal income tax as a source of revenue collection for the government. And we also have an indirect taxation system but at the moment because it is weighted in the wholesale area towards goods and does not apply to services, and indeed in the goods area is limited to particular goods, excluding many, it is a tax that works unfairly against our exporters, tends to penalise our manufacturers and because of its uneven spread is not the most efficient way to raise taxes through the indirect system.
So inevitably we are again looking, I say again, because we had quite a debate on this leading up to the 1993 election and after that election it disappeared from the political agenda for a while, we are again looking at the need for and the desirability of some fundamental taxation reform in our country and my government is very committed to this process. We believe it is one of the things that will make the Australian economy even more attractive, it is one of the things that will help our exporters. We have laid down three criteria for any tax reform. We've said it has got to respond to three questions: will it help generate jobs; will it help our exporters; will it encourage savings and investment and provide more incentive? And if the reform can meet those three criteria then I think it is a reform which will be enthusiastically embraced and enthusiastically advocated by the Australian government and I think supported by the Australian people.
Before I conclude Mr Chairman, could I just say one or two things about the economic partnership of Australia and the United States in the broader world community. Last night in addressing the Foreign Policy Association I spoke of my very strong desire for a continued full-blooded United States involvement in the Asia-Pacific region and just how important it was that the two of us together promote the trade liberalisation credentials and ideals of the APEC association. I had the opportunity just before coming here of making a short announcement to the travelling Australian media and others about a decision taken by Mitsubishi in South Australia to increase its workforce because of greater exports of the Diamante vehicle, which is being marketed here in New York in the United States by another branch of the Mitsubishi company.
And I spoke then of the triangular association between Australia, Japan and the United States in the Asia-Pacific region, and that is a very important expression of how we see our role and how we see the linkages between our country, Japan being the major destination of Australian exporters, Australia being one of the few countries in the world that has a healthy trade surplus with Japan and also the very important linkage with the United States being the largest foreign investor in Australia. And what that little ceremony did was to remind me yet again of our shared destiny in the Asia-Pacific part of the world and what an enormous investment our three countries and indeed all of the member countries of APEC have in the success of the APEC drive and the success of those who want to see a more open, a more liberal trading environment.
In many respects we are living in the most exciting and hopeful economic periods this century. We do appear, as a group of countries, to have achieved a breakthrough in the area of price stability, the like of which most of us thought wouldn't have been possible only a few years ago.
I was told by somebody this morning that a survey of inflationary expectations in the United States suggested that people thought inflation would remain below 3% for the next 10 years and when you think of how bad inflationary expectations were, not only here but all around the world, only a few years ago, that is a remarkably optimistic and a remarkably hopeful thing.
Some people have said to me over the past few days, well this boom can't last. I can understand why people would say that, but I hope that we would also understand that there sometimes moments and occasions in the histories of countries and the economic cycles of countries where the worst thing you can ever be is too cautious. When the worst thing that you can ever be is to assume that a good thing might come to and end, when in reality, if you continue to take intelligent decisions, if you continue to understand the inter-connectiveness of our world, if you continue to understand the common benefits that can be derived by countries pooling their economic experience and their economic understanding, then indeed whilst good times may not go on forever, they may in fact last for a great deal longer than many people have imagined.
I think we have, over the last few years, as a group of communities, begun to do things right in a more co-operative fashion. I think there has been an outbreak of economic responsibility, fiscal consolidation and fiscal rigour around the world which has contributed to much of the stability and the hopeful economic outlook of your country and also of your own.
Can I say again how enormously grateful I am for the opportunity to address this luncheon, to reaffirm my own personal commitment to the very close relationship between Australia and the United States.
It is a relationship deeply steeped in history, of shared experience of adversity, of a shared commitment to the values of individual liberty, of equality of opportunity and a desire to create a world society in which all countries can live out their own destinies according to their own choices.
I think the American-Australian relationship is in very good shape. I thank the members of your Association for the great contribution it has made and I express again on behalf of my wife and myself our great pleasure again being here in New York and sharing once again in the great hospitality of our American friends.
Thank You.
QUESTION:
In your talks with President Clinton were there any breakthroughs on improving the wheat and dairy system of subsidies through the Export Enhancement Programme which continues under GATT?
PRIME MINISTER:
The situation regarding that is it is never very far from our mind and the one thing that I can say with some pleasure is that over the past few months because, in part, I guess of prices and also perhaps for other reasons, that legislation has not been used and certainly not been used in a way that would damage Australia. When he was in Australia in October of last year, President Clinton gave an assurance - I certainly saw it as an assurance, that the legislation would not be used in a manner that damaged the interest of those countries against whom it was not directed and who were not responsible for the problem against which the legislation was directed.
As you know, or some of you will know, I have a longstanding view that the beginning of the problem on the agricultural subsidy front was Brussels rather than Washington and that that legislation was in large measure an American response to what the Europeans had done. Our concern was that we didn't want to be the grass that was trampled upon when the elephants of the United States and the European Union wrestled on the subject of agricultural subsidies because we do have third country markets that can be affected if that is used.
Fortunately, the situation over the past few months has been better and we hope that continues to be the situation but no Australian Prime Minister would ever come to the United States without saying something in favour of further improvement in the agricultural front, and this Prime Minister will also throw in for good measure a repeal of the Jones act which is working very much against the interest of a burgeoning and quite successful light shipbuilding in Australia.
QUESTION:
Will the current government consider deregulating the Australian health care sector or will the Medicare levy need to be raised?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we don't have any plans to raise the Medicare levy. As far as deregulation of the health sector is concerned, we brought about, we made some changes to the health care system and some of those came into operation also today - there's lots happening today - some tax subsidies ; we now provide tax subsidies in Australia for people to take out private health insurance. We are committed on the basis of election policy to the maintenance of the fundamentals of the Medicare system plus the principle of community rating which underpins part of the health insurance system. We did have an examination by the Productivity Commission of the way in which that works and there are some longer term recommendations of that Commission that we still examining. I think that is the most appropriate way that I can answer that question.
QUESTION:
Are there any plans by the Australian government for tax changes that would make philanthropy and charitable contributions deductible in the future or tax deductions for mortgage payments?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well as far as charitable deductions are concerned, they are already deductible - many of them over the nominal amount of $2 - there was a Productivity Commission recommendation several years ago that recommended that that tax concession be taken away. Let me say that we have no intention of picking up that recommendation. I don't think we, I don't think its likely to be on the agenda of either side of politics in Australia. It's certainly not on our agenda to make mortgage payments for housing tax deductible. You should remember that in Australia, the capital gains tax does not apply to the family home. We already have, therefore, a taxation system that is very beckoning towards people investing in their private homes and we would think it an unnecessary and unhelpful distortion of the system to introduce tax deductibility for mortgage payments. We think it better to use fiscal consolidation to reduce pressure on interest rates. And our housing interest rates are in fact, to borrow the words of my Treasurer, the lowest in Australia since man first walked on the moon.
QUESTION:
Here's a brief one. What will you do about the Wallis Inquiry?
PRIME MINISTER:
I expect quite a lot John. I suspect that many of the recommendations will be picked up. The Wallis Inquiry, I think you all know it. I was really a stocktake on Campbell and the progress that had been made in deregulating the financial system since the Campbell Inquiry reported in 1981 and whose recommendations were in a rare outburst of bipartisanship in Australia, firmly pursued by both sides of politics in Australia I think to the benefit of the system. There are a lot of those recommendations in Wallis that commend themselves. Some require quite a lot of study, including the recommendation about the future prudential supervision of financial institutions, both bank and non-bank. I would expect that we would be making decisions on the Wallis recommendations in the very near future. It's very much on the agenda, a response to that Inquiry, certainly before the end of the year. I think closer to now than to the end of the year.
QUESTION:
Do you have plans to give the Reserve Bank statutory independence? The rest of it is part of the argument, thereby enhancing international confidence in the stability of the Australian dollar?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I suppose you can never take the Treasurer out of the Prime Minister, but I think the current level of the Australian dollar is about right, and I have no comment to make further on that. I know that Prime Ministers who come to this city occasionally say things that have effects on share markets and I have no intention of trying to match that. The Reserve Bank of Australia already has a lot of independence. It's not sort of an antipodean Bundesbank. And I can't see it going any further. We've given them an clear inflationary objective. We've given them, we've given the whole system a charter of budget honesty. I mean, one of the things I didn't mention in my speech is that we've now passed a law in Australia that says when the next Federal election is called, the Federal Treasury will automatically publish a statement of account. In other words, they'll throw the books open when the campaign starts. So, we'll be spared the inventive arguments that have occurred during the course of election campaigns in the past, particularly by incumbent governments, I might add, not challenging oppositions, but incumbent governments about the state of accounts. And, I think the level of independence that the Reserve Bank has at the present time for Australian circumstances is about right. I think one of the reasons why there has been that beautiful contraction between the bond yields on United States securities and Australian securities over the last 15 months has been a belief that the Reserve Bank in setting interest rate levels and monetary policy targets, has acted with a great deal of independence. I think people rather like it the way it is. I think it's working very effectively, and I have very great confidence in the current leadership of the Reserve Bank of Australia.
QUESTION:
Why not eliminate the withholding tax on Commonwealth Government bonds, especially given that foreign investors can easily avoid it, that this irritant will only continue to encourage investors to hold Australian dollars offshore?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I've been asked that one before and I can understand why people would want that to happen. I guess there are arguments for it. There are arguments against it, I guess revenue arguments against it. I don't want to encourage people to think that we are going to change it but when you're having a process of taxation reform, it's always possible to look at all sorts of propositions that are put forward.
QUESTION:
This is from Jim Black sitting here. He wants me to mention.. I'm very happy to do it. Greetings from the 15 members of the American/Australian/New Zealand Chambers of Commerce gathered around the United States. He has a question as well. What strategies are in train to further add value to our mineral resources destined for export?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think there are three or four things that you can do. I think the first of those is to continue to get the micro-economic environment right. You can adopt a strategy which seeks to cut through bureaucratic delays which are involved in major investments, particularly in value adding potential exports industries. One of the things I did a few months ago was to appoint a respected Australian businessman, Bob Mansfield, who some of you will know as a special consultant in my office with the title of Major Projects Facilitator. His job quite literally is to go around the country, find major projects that are being held up by unnecessary bureaucratic delays, tell me about those projects, tell me whose responsible for the delays, and as a result getting some very speedy results. I think that process is beginning to bear fruit. We, of course, have not only a national government, but state governments as well. The interaction of the two can sometimes cause unnecessary delay. And one of the roles of that person is to eliminate those. I think a better taxation system would help all export industries in Australia. I think if you have a very attractive investment climate and you have great price stability, those things will be also working in the direction of encouraging value-added industries. I think we suffered a lot a few years ago, when we made, I think, quite a bad decision in relation to the creation of a pulp mill in Australia which would have made a major attraction on one of the sort of glaring deficiencies of our current account situation, in that we go through the rather foolish process of exporting chips and buying back large quantities of paper. It's always struck a large number of Australians that's the wrong thing to do. I think one of the ways in which you can change attitudes and bring about results in certain areas like that is to rather graphically point out to the Australian population how absurd it is that we should have that kind of circumstance and how much better off we would be in terms of foreign exchange and in terms of our current account deficit if we were able to avoid that sort of thing happening.
HOST:
Well, thank you very much Mr Prime Minister. We all wish you well as you continue with your government and then your trip home.


1 July 1997
E &amp; EO
Thank you very much Mr Johnson, to Mr Fujioka and Mr Recchia, Ambassador, Consul-General, ladies and gentleman.
It's a very pleasant opportunity for me to be associated with this great export achievement of Mitsubishi Australia. The announcement made by Mike Quinn, the Managing Director of the company in Australia today to the effect that the production run is going to be increased to 280 and then to over 300, which will result in the generation of 100 additional jobs for the motor manufacturing industry in Australia, the acknowledgment by Mr Quinn in his announcement that the decision taken by my government in relation to the motor vehicle industry a few weeks ago has stabilised and improved the investment climate in Australia.
And the performance of Australia's motor vehicle industry is very much about boosting exports as well as taking advantage of the domestic base and the fact that we can sell such a vehicle at the luxury end of the market, to sell it successfully, to secure the sort of contract that has been secured for the Diamante here in New York and to acknowledge the contribution that Australian industry is making to that is a matter of very great pleasure to me as Prime Minister, it's a matter of congratulations to the people of Mitsubishi Australia and may I also say it's a source of very important symbolism that we have this little event here in New York, within view of the Statue of Liberty and the Staten Island ferry, the knowledge that we've secured a very valuable order in the United States and we have the representatives of one of the great Japanese investors in Australia with us and the triangular association between Japan, Australia and the United States, which is very much an expression of the reality of the modern Asia-Pacific association, and very much an expression of the relationship that Australia holds very dear in the Asia-Pacific area.
I would like to thank you Mr Fujioka for being here, I thank your parent company for its continued investment within Australia, it's been a very valued association and one that has generated a lot of jobs and is now generating more jobs and attracted a great deal of investment to our country, so I am delighted to be associated with this event.
I thank the Austrade director, Mr Johnson, for organising it, I thank your company Mr Recchia, for its great contribution and I wish all of those involved in the process enormous success and particularly it's a matter of great pleasure to me that there has been as a result of this, two way trade, there has been the generation of additional Australian jobs and that is always a matter of great pleasure and great satisfaction.
Thank you



8 July 1997
E &amp; OE........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Peter, to Bob Carroll, the President of the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party, to my Parliamentary colleagues, particularly to Peter Lindsay and John Herron, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and to Ian MacDonald, the Senator for North Queensland.
I'm in North Queensland am I? I would never have guessed. I think it has been very good being in Townsville today and this is one of but a long series of Cabinet meetings that are going to be held in regional Australia, far away from the dogged triangle of Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra.
I take it that all the television bulletins are narrowcasting tonight and none of that will get fed into my electorate in suburban Sydney, but can I say that it is very, very important and all jokes aside, it is very important that a Cabinet relates to the entire community that it represents.
When we were elected, there were many things that we vowed we would do differently from our predecessors. And one of the things that I guess we vowed we would do differently, most frequently was that we would govern for the mainstream of the Australian community and not the noisy minorities. And governing for the mainstream of the Australian community means that first and foremost you've got to go out and listen to what the mainstream of the Australian community is saying. And one of the very early decisions that we took, which is of great importance to the people of Townsville and the people of Cardwell was our absolute determination to allow the Port Hinchinbrook development to go ahead.
Now I know not everybody agrees with it, but I think most people here do, and I mean, there are a few people occasionally turn up in my electorate office in Gladesville in Sydney, it's a long way from Hinchinbrook, but they nonetheless turn up, and they make a bit of noise about it and that is fine, that is democracy and they're invited in for a cup of tea and if they behave themselves they stay and if they don't well they ...
You've got to be a little bit sort of, how shall I say, flexible but that particular decision represented a determination on our part to take decisions that generated jobs for the Australian community. And I said on ABC radio this morning that I don't think I quite used the analogy of New Zealand, they say it's the land of the long white cloud. I think Australia, when it comes to development in the past, has become the land of the perpetual inquiry and the neverending appeal. Because you never seem to end. I mean, you take a decision and then somebody pops up and objects to it and then you go to another hearing and that's overturned and then you've got to go back and you take another decision and then you have another administrative review and $10 million later, nothing has happened.
I think one of the reasons why there was such an accumulation of hostility towards the former government before the last election, there was this sense of enormous despair that you could never get anything done in this country. You could never get a major project off the drawing board. People always thought it was a good idea but when it came to the crunch there was always some administrative hurdle in the way. It was absolutely symbolised and epitomised and over-represented and (inaudible) to whatever you want to emphasise it by that appalling saga with the Hindmarsh Bridge in South Australia, where you had this ridiculous spectacle of the most irrational conduct imaginable from the Federal Government Minister and mind you, not much more irrational than the behaviour of the former Environmental Minister, Senator Faulkner, when it came to the Port Hinchinbrook development.
Now, I mentioned that at the outset of my remarks because one of the things I am absolutely pledged to do is to try and get the fastest, most efficient methodology to approve investment and development, in the expansion of this country that is going to create jobs, generate business and expand the living standards and horizons of the Australian people. And it remains a very, very strong determination of mine and one that is really very, very much at the top of the list and it is one of the reasons why I've appointed on to my personal staff, a very respected Australian businessman, Bob Mansfield, as a Special Projects Facilitator.
But ladies and gentlemen, governing the people of Australia, being the Prime Minister of this country, being part of the wonderful excitement, the tremendous excitement of being given the privilege of leading the government of this country, of course, represents more than just taking decisions about economic issues. It also represents defending the values and the way of life of the Australian community. And I was determined when I became Prime Minister and I recall the remarks that I made in my acceptance speech in Sydney on 2nd March 1996 that what I was absolutely determined to do, particularly when I went overseas representing Australia, was to propound and to promote the interests and the values and the concerns of the Australian community. And that is what I did on my recent trip overseas. I went overseas determined to represent the concerns of the Australian people about the greenhouse gas issue. I went overseas determined to say to the rest of the world that this was the most racially tolerant, open and cohesive society that any experience at any generation has seen.
And one of the things that annoyed me most about political debate in Australia at the present time, is the way in which so many people who comment about Australia as opposed to Australians, are spreading this view that in some way we are a narrow-minded, bigoted people. If you look at the performance of Australia in relation to other countries around the world, if you look at our track record of tolerance, if you look at the fact that after the Vietnam War this country took more Indo-Chinese refugees than any other nation on a per capita basis on earth. When you look at the way in which we have received people from all around the world, we have absorbed them into a cohesive, united, tolerant, open and liberal Australian community. I think we are entitled as other people to look in the eye and stare down our critics. We are entitled to say to the rest of the world that when it comes to racial tolerance, when it comes to an understanding of what is involved in the concept that all people are born equal and all people are entitled to equality of opportunity that there is no country in the world that can hold a candle to the Australian community.
And as an Australian, I say this to all of you as fellow Australians, I think it is time we called an end to the self-flagellation, the introspection, the defensiveness and the willingness to accept unfounded criticism, unjustified criticism of the performance of the Australian nation. We can look any people in the eye and say, we have done right by our citizens, by any measure of international behaviour and I am frankly, as Prime Minister of Australia, no longer prepared to accept unreasonable, ill founded and uninformed criticism of the tolerance credentials of the Australian community.
There are a number of other things ladies and gentlemen that I'd like to say to you tonight. I'd like to talk to you about your local Member. He's very energetic. He's very persistent, he keeps sort of, I think when he was born, his parents, and I met his wonderful parents tonight, I think instead of uttering the first word, mum and dad, I think he said Townsville instead. He's always on about Townsville. He's always on about the interests of his electorate and that's not a bad start for a local Member and I think it's a great tribute to him that he's been such an energetic and such an enthusiastic local Member and I want to say to you that the people of Herbert are very lucky to have such an enthusiastic representative.
But making the totally unreal presumption that there may be one or two people here tonight who worked very hard to have Peter elected, could I say to you, ladies and gentlemen that on occasions like this that I come to a cocktail party sponsored by the Liberal Party, I do want to say to those of you in the audience, and I know there are many, who have stuck by us when we weren't very popular, who manned polling booths when people said the Liberal Party was going out of fashion, when people said that the Liberal Party had no hope of winning an election, when people wrote us off, when people said we'd lost elections we never deserved to win, many of you in this room tonight stuck by us. You stood there in the drizzling rain, or it doesn't drizzle so much here, it sort of seeps down, doesn't it. It drizzles a lot more where I was a couple of weekends ago. It seemed to drizzle the whole time actually. It interrupted play very frequently, I might say. Very, very inconsiderate, that's all I can say. But you really did keep the faith and you really stuck by us and one of the greatest kicks I got on election night in March of last year was being able to say at long last to the people who supported the Liberal Party through thick and thin, who put up with the ridicule, put up with the abuse, being told that our party had no hope of winning, it's terrific to stand up in front of them and say, thank you, you proved our critics wrong. And that is a matter of immense satisfaction to me and I know it's a matter of immense satisfaction to Peter and to Ian and to all of my other Parliamentary colleagues who are here tonight.
Queensland of course is a very different state. Ian MacDonald defines difference by saying it's the only state with only two Labor Members in it. That's an interesting definition of difference and I've got to say, one or two other things occurred to me but I've got to say also that Queensland delivered magnificently to us at the time of the last election and I am very, very warm towards Queensland. I am very understanding of the particular needs of the people of Queensland and some of the particular challenges of this far state. One of the things that has really excited me about my time in Townsville in the last few hours is the great enthusiasm and the optimistic and forward-looking attitude of the people who live in North Queensland. I made the observation this morning in being interviewed by, is it David Harrison?
He's got a coat on. And a tie. Anyway, well I was interviewed by him. One of the things that really struck me about the interview was the importance of focusing on the future rather than focusing on the past. So often in Australia when we talk about employment, we look at it in backward terms. We say, look, it's all gone wrong because we no longer have this or that industry. It's all gone wrong because we no longer invest in that particular area instead of understanding that to use that old sort of saying, that as one door closes another one opens and we really are as a community and as a world living on the cusp of an extraordinary opportunity.
I spent a bit of time last week in the United States and I listened to some of the explanations as to why the American economy is doing so well at the present time, although if you look at the measures of inflation and interest rates and business investment and growth, the American economy is doing no better than the Australian economy. In fact, we are about the only two economies in the world at the moment along with Luxembourg who would qualify for membership of the European monetary system. Not, might I say, have we any intention of applying to join it but it is important to understand that one of the reasons that the American economy is doing so well is that it is now beginning to enjoy the fruits of the enormous investment that that country has made in technology and the enormous investment that that country has made in technological expansion, in modern communications technology.
When you bear in mind that as a people, Australians have always had this great love affair with new technology - you go right back to vacuum cleaners and pop up toasters and they were once new technology in the experience of many people. Australia was one of the countries that took them up quicker, at a faster rate and earlier than many other countries. We have the second highest take up of personal computers of any country in the world. It's something like 27 per hundred and only just behind that in the United States. I drew a lot of comfort from that because I think what I was being told and I think what all of us have got to understand is we shouldn't worry about trying to preserve some things that have passed before us and can't be brought back. Rather, we should be looking far more optimistically about the future.
I've got a sense that in the time that I have been in Townsville and the time that I have been in North Queensland, there is a great sort of sense of enthusiasm and optimism and I can't of course finish my remarks tonight without returning to something that is very close to my heart and that is of course the role and the importance of small business in the Australian community. I said a lot about small business in the election campaign and I said it because I believed overwhelmingly that getting small business going again was the best way that over time we could reduce unemployment in Australia but I have always believed that the key to driving the Australian economy forward in a very resolute and united fashion is giving lots of incentives and lots of encouragement to small business, and we have done a lot. We've given capital gains tax relief, starting on the first of July, only a week ago. The reductions in telephone charges are going to reduce the overheads of small businesses all across Australia. The four reductions in interest rates. The reduction in provisional tax uplift. The changes to the unfair dismissal law, the reform of the Workplace Relations Act. You add them all up and it represents a very, very impressive agenda to create better conditions and a better climate for small business but of course that as always is only the beginning and there are many other things to do.
Can I finish ladies and gentlemen, in saying that it is a great delight to be back in Townsville. It is in fact the second visit that I have paid to Townsville as Prime Minister. I came here last year and addressed a gathering for Peter and also addressed the annual conference of the Queensland National Party and I am very happy to welcome some representatives of our Coalition colleagues, the National Party, here tonight, and it's always an enormous delight to be back in North Queensland. I am going to Thursday Island tomorrow morning and I am looking forward enormously to meeting the representatives of the Torres Strait Islander people, a very impressive, dignified, separate community amongst the indigenous people of Australia for me, and I hope also for them it will be an experience that both of us can learn from and each of us can benefit from.
Again, can I commend to you your local Member, Peter Lindsay. Can I thank you very warmly for having given him a 9.9% swing on the night of the second of March 1996, and can I encourage you to build on that swing whenever the next Federal election is held.
Thank you very much.


E &amp; OE..........................
To Peter Lindsay, the Federal Member for Herbert, to all of my Cabinet colleagues led by the Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the Parliamentary Liberal Party, Peter Costello. To Mayors and other members of councils in the Townsville district, ladies and gentlemen. We are here today in fulfilment of a very important promise that we made to the Australian people before the last election and that was that if we won Government, we would take the Cabinet around Australia and we wouldn't operate in the foolish belief that all wisdom resided in Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne. North Queenslanders are expected to cheer about that.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am reminded of many things about Townsville. One of them of course is that on a per capita basis it's the most fanatically devoted rugby league town in the whole of the nation because the attendances, I mean if you think the ratio of attendances at AFL games, given the population of Melbourne, is high you look at the attendance. You get 25 - 30 000 people watching your local team and given the size of the district, it's an extraordinary devotion. The other great distinction about Townsville is that it has an incredibly energetic and persistent local Federal Member in Peter Lindsay. The people of Herbert, when they swung by something like 9.5% away from the former sitting Labor Member towards the election of Peter as the Federal Member in this electorate in March of last year, chose very wisely. They not only chose a very good local Member but in electing Peter you also elected a Government that has been ever since March of last year more understanding of and more in touch and more concerned about the basic problems and the basic values and the basic attitudes of the people of North Queensland and particularly the people of Townsville.
There are many things that we said at the time of the last election that we would do if we were elected and I don't have the time today to go through all of them. I want to touch upon some of them because we are now roughly halfway through our first term in Government and it's an opportunity briefly to stocktake, to remind the Australian public, to remind regional Australia of what we said we would do, to remind the people of areas like Townsville of the commitments we made to small business in particular as a commitment to that sector of the Australian economy that holds the key to our economic growth and our economic future and also that sector of the Australian economy that still holds the capacity to generate more jobs than any other section of the Australian community.
We said that we would reform Australia's industrial relations system and although we were delayed by the Senate for about six or nine months, we finally got that legislation through at the end of last year and we are now starting to see the benefits of those changes to the Workplace Relations Act flow through into the workplaces, into the mines and into all the other industrial centres of Australia, and it will take time yet for the benefits of that legislation to come through for already those benefits are starting to be experienced and starting to be felt and companies are finding that they have more flexibility, that companies and their employees are finding that they have a greater capacity to arrange their working hours, to arrange the way in which their businesses are run to the mutual benefit of both the owner of the business and the employees of the business.
We said that we would get rid of Labor's job-destroying unfair dismissal laws. We did get rid of Brereton's unfair dismissal law and we replaced, it with a much more sensible and a much fairer unfair dismissal law, and a few months ago we went a step further and said that we would get rid of it altogether in relation to firms with under 15 employees for people that had been in their employ for less than 12 months, and that particular measure which would do great things for small business that would encourage many men and women running small businesses around Australia to take on more staff. That particular measure has been blocked in the Senate by the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats and the Australian Greens and in response to that we have put back a Bill into the Parliament saying that we are going to remove the unfair dismissal restrictions altogether in relation to small business because we believe that is going to give to the small business sector the flexibility that it needs, the capacity to take decisions in confidence that if an arrangement with an employee doesn't work out then the business can quite reasonably make other arrangements.
I have recently returned from a visit to the United States and although there are some aspects of American society that I would never embrace and there are some aspects of American society which when I took the stand that I did on gun control legislation last year, we determined as a community not to embrace, there are equally some aspects of American society that we can learn something from and the extraordinary flexibility of the small business sector and of the labour markets in the United States, the way in which new businesses come into existence at a fantastic rate, and the capacity of those businesses to generate wealth and to generate activity in a very short period of time encourages me to believe that giving even more encouragement, incentive and flexibility to the small business community in Australia is the way of the future on the path to higher employment and to greater prosperity within our community.
If you wanted an example of what my Government has done for the small business community of Australia, can I just draw your attention to two events alone during the last week. The first of those was a week ago today when the new capital gains tax provisions came into operation. As from the first of July this year, any man or woman owning a small business in this country can sell that business, invest the proceeds of sale into the purchase of another business and up to $5 million, $5 million of the proceeds of the sale of that business will be completely free of any capital gains tax liability. Now what that does is to not only deliver the commitment that I made on behalf of the Coalition at the last election in that area, but in fact we have gone way beyond the commitment that we made.
The other very significant piece of good news for small business are the benefits that will flow to it from the deregulation of the telecommunications market in Australia. I am told that for many small businesses, the second most expensive item, the second highest overhead after salaries is the cost of telephones and telecommunications and the deregulation of the telecommunications market, something pioneered in this country, something brought to fruition on the first of July 1997 by Richard Alston, my Minister for Communications, if the other crowd had stayed in office, the advent of deregulation would have been delayed for another two or three years, that particular change means that small businesses within Australia have within their grasp the capacity to reduce their telephone and telecommunications charges by anything from 30 to 40 to 50%, and the impact that that will make on the overheads of all of you who operate small businesses here in Townsville and when you add that to the capital gains tax changes, you throw in for good measure the four reductions in interest rates that have occurred since we came to office in March of last year, you throw in the changes that we've made in relation to the fringe benefits tax, you throw in the $180 million of the provisional tax uplift factor, you throw in the benefits of the industrial relations changes and together I can honestly face any of you in the eye and say that we have more than honoured the commitment we made to the small business community of Australia before the election in March of last year.
That remains, my friends, one of the proudest boasts that I can make in relation to the achievements of the Government. That, of course, is something addressed to the particular interests and the particular concerns of a very important sector of the Australian economy but if I can spend a moment or two looking at one of the other commitments that we made when we came to office last year and that was to repair the national accounts of this country.
We all know that we cannot live beyond our means without paying very dearly very soon for that excess and that indulgence, and when we came to power we had a budget deficit of $10.5 billion. We'd been told by Mr Beazley and Mr Keating that the budget was in surplus when they both knew it was massively in deficit. We discovered the scale of the deficit to be $10.5 billion and in just three years we had turned that into, it would be turned into a surplus, a deficit of $10.5 billion will be turned into a surplus of $1.6 billion. I can't think in the recent history of Australia of a budget turn around of that magnitude in such a short period of time and I can say to you that as Prime Minister of Australia, I was immensely proud when I had a meeting in Washington a couple of weeks ago with Dr Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the American Federal Reserve system. He's like the Governor of the Reserve Bank of the United States and because of his role in the United States, he probably has more economic authority than any other individual in that country and therefore any other individual in the western world.
And after we'd chatted for a moment about the reasons for America's remarkable economic performance, he was able to say to me quite spontaneously, he said, I've had a look at your economy, and he said, it's in absolutely superb shape. You seem to have all the fundamentals right, and of course he's right. The OECD has forecast that in 1997 and 1998 we will have a growth rate which is faster than the average of the big seven industrialised countries. We will have a lower debt to GDP ratio of virtually any country, any country in the OECD area. By the year 2000 we will have almost cut in half the ratio of our national debt to our annual wealth output and that's an extraordinary achievement. It was something like 19.5% in 1995. By the year 2000 it will be down to 10%.
Now these may seem to some of you dry abstractions but they are not, because they directly affect the interest rates you pay. When a Govt runs a deficit, when a Government lives beyond its means, when a Government borrows to finance profligate expenditure, it's really taking the money out of your pocket, because it's driving up interest rates, because in order to finance the profligate spending, it's got to go into the money markets and borrow and when it borrows it competes with all of the small business men and women in this audience who are going to their banks and going to their lenders in order to borrow.
One of the reasons why interest rates have come down in Australia, and I would like to see them still lower and I will bet every one of you in small business would like to see them even lower, but one of the reasons interest rates have come down in Australia is that we are no longer running such large deficits. In fact, this financial year, as a result of the splendid work of Peter Costello as Treasurer, supported by his other colleagues, we will repay $5.3 billion of Mr Keating's debts and there's nothing nicer than repaying Mr Keating's debts, nothing nicer because it gives you the satisfaction of knowing that you are doing the right thing for Australia and you are doing the right thing for the future of Australia.
Now I don't pretend to you my friends that every single problem that this country has has been solved by the new Government. I acknowledge that we still face a big challenge in relation to unemployment. It is still high but we are laying the foundations for a fall in the level of unemployment during the course of next year because when you get the economy right, when you get inflation down to one or two percent, when you get growth running at three and a half percent, when you get your debt levels down, when you get your interest rates falling, when you get your current account deficit improving, when you have record levels of business investment, when your reputation abroad is high, when you are able to watch the investors of the world look with increasing favour on Australia, when you hear that the credit rating agencies of the world are saying that our economic performance is improving and deserving of greater recognition, you know that you are laying the foundations for a fundamentally stronger economy.
And I think that it is very, very important that all of us who care about the future of Australia and who care about the future of the Government understand that message and relay that message around Australia because it's stronger growth particularly in the small business sector that will lay the foundations for a sustained fall in unemployment over a period of time.
There are, of course, many particular things that we have focussed on which have been of special benefit to the electorate of Herbert. I know that the electorate of Herbert is home for one of the largest military establishments in Australia, namely Lavarack Barracks. I also know that the electorate of Herbert and the city of Townsville has been very deeply touched by the tragedy that befell the men of the SAS and the parachute regiment in the Blackhawk disaster last year, and I know that the community rallied magnificently to the families and to the various military establishments when that occurred. And I am very pleased to say that one of the many important promises that we made and have been fully honoured, was our commitment to not in any way reduce the Defence budget. And our maintenance of the same level of expenditure on defence which in my view is the bare minimum that a nation in Australia's strategic circumstances can do, I regarded it as without any doubt one of the most important commitments that we made before the last election.
The notion that because the Cold War is over, that we no longer live in an unstable region of the world, the notion that Australia can forever just accept that it doesn't have to play its role and make its own contribution to the defence and the stability of the region is a very foolish and a very misguided notion.
And I want to say to this North Queensland audience that my Government's commitment to the maintenance of an adequate level of resources to the Australian Defence Forces is as strong today as it was when we were elected, and as strong today, as that day I went with my colleagues to the Lavarack Army Barracks early in March of 1996 to release the Coalition's Defence Policy in the lead up to the election.
We have recently undertaken a review of the resources that are spent on defence and the purpose of that review has been in fact to shift resources away from, what may I call it, the bureaucratic centre towards the sharp end of the defence forces and areas like Townsville represent the sharp end of the defence forces because it is in areas like Townsville that some of the great military and army establishments of Australia are located. And I mention that because of the great importance of the ADF to Australia and the great priority that my Government places on the maintenance of an adequate commitment and an adequate level of support for defence in this country.
Another decision that I am very pleased to say again that we took very early in our term in Government that greatly benefited North Queensland was the decision that we took to allow the Port Hinchinbrook development to go ahead without further interruption and without further delay. And one of the messages that I received when I arrived in Townsville this morning was one from the Mayor of Cardwell who said ignore the noise, listen to the majority, focus on the 2,000 new jobs that the Port Hinchinbrook development is going to generate.
Can I say to the Mayor, yes, yes, yes on all three counts because deep down what this country wants is a government to take decisions, to stick to those decisions and to take decisions that are important to the long term generation of jobs within the Australian community.
The last thing that I want to say to all of you, my friends is that politics is, at the end of the day, about having a Government in power that has an understanding of the concerns and the hopes and the aspirations of the community that it is elected to lead and elected to govern. One of my roles as Prime Minister of the country is to communicate with, to listen to, to understand and to remain in touch with the people of Australia. I am here today and I'll be in other regional areas of Australia over the next 18 months because we are determined to stay in touch with the Australian people. We are determined never to take them for granted. We didn't regard our election in March of last year as some kind of recognition of divine selection Rather we regarded it as a belief on the part of the Australian people that w e offered a superior way of doing things, but on the understanding that they were entitled to run a critical eye over what we'd done and if they weren't happy with what we'd done in the proper Australian way they would let us know and let us know fairly directly and fairly bluntly.
And I have to say it's been my experience as Prime Minister that the character of the Australian people has not changed over the last 18 months. I've had some pleasant experiences. I've had some direct experiences. In the main, though, I find amongst Australians in all walks of life, in all parts of this country, a tremendous hope and a tremendous enthusiasm about the future.
I think what a gathering like this encourages me to believe is the enormous privilege that all of have of living in a country such as Australia. To be able to gather in such a peaceful fashion, to be able to gather in such a benign and pleasant environment, to be able to get the views very directly of so many sections of the community here in Townsville, to take part in an exercise in a two way exchange, a two way communication between the Government of Australia and the people of Australia is a marvellous example of how fortunate we are in the vibrant democracy that we have in our country.
And as I look around this crowd, it is also a reminder of the great and rich diversity of Australian society. It's a reminder of the great tolerance and the great openness and the great decency of the Australian people and one of the great stories of Australia, particularly since World War II has been our capacity to take people from all around the world and to absorb them into a harmonious, tolerant, open and purposeful community. And I think one of the great Australian achievements of the last 20 or 30 years is the way in which we have built such a diverse and tolerant Australian community.
Can I thank all of you for coming along. Can I particularly commend to you the work again of your local member, Peter Lindsay and also Senator Ian MacDonald who, although he's not formally called the Senator for North Queensland, he in reality is the Senator for North Queensland because both of them do an absolutely fantastic job representing the interests of this very special part of Australia, representing the interests of North Queensland.
It's been a great delight to bring the Cabinet to Townsville. We have some more work to do this afternoon. I think I'll be seeing some of you over a drink later on this evening. But it's been great to amongst you.
Thanks for supporting the gathering and continue to give your undivided support, attention and loyalty to Peter Lindsay. He'll continue to do the right thing for you as your man in Canberra.
Thank you


9 July 1997
E &amp; OE .............................................
Well, Mr Chairman, to John Herron, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, to Warren Entsch, the Federal Member for Leichhardt, to Mr John Abednego, to Mr Getano Lui, to other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen and boys and girls, the people of the Torres Strait Islands, all of you together my fellow Australians.
Can I say how delighted I am and how touched I am at the warmth of the welcome and the generosity and the enthusiasm at the welcome that I have received from the people of the Torres Strait Islands on this very brief visit of mine to Thursday Island.
It is, I must confess, the first occasion that I have visited any part of the Torres Strait Islands. That is my omission. But in the time that I've been here, the few short hours that I've been here, I have been reminded of a number of things. The most important thing I've been reminded of is the distinctive, special, atypical culture of the people of the Torres Strait Islands. And the claims that you rightly have to a separate identification, the claims that you rightly have to separating out your authorities and your council from ATSIC have been reinforced in my mind by the time that I've spent here on Thursday Island.
You will be aware that since my Government came to office in March of last year we have provided separate budget appropriations for Torres Strait Island affairs. And I can confirm to you today that we will legislate in our first term to establish a separate authority in relation to governance of the affairs of the Torres Strait Islander people.
I've been reminded of a number of other important things too by my visit. Of the tremendous diversity and therefore the tremendous strength through that diversity of the Australian nation. To experience the different culture, an ancient culture, a culture in which you rightly take immense pride, a culture that you have nurtured often in difficult adverse circumstances and to know that your affection for that culture and your desire to retain it remains as strong today as it was generations ago is a very impressive reminder of the diversity and therefore the strength of the Australian community and the Australian nation.
I've also been reminded of the great importance to the people of the Torres Strait Islands of, as the Mayor, Pedro Stephen, pointed out in his speech, the great strength of family life within the communities of the Torres Strait Islands. Indeed the strength of the family life of the Torres Strait Islander people is something of an exemplar to the rest of Australia. And the rest of Australia would profit enormously in so many ways if we're able to match and emulate the strength of the family life of the people of the Torres Strait Islands.
You do occupy a very special place in the Australian nation. You played a very special role in the history of the Australian nation. We hold this gathering beside a memorial to people of the Torres Strait who gave their lives defending Australia in World War II. And the response of the people of the Torres Strait to the threats of Australia in World War II is something to which the rest of the Australian nation could be enormously grateful.
I want to, though, take the opportunity before you of thanking John Herron, my Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, for the tremendous job that he has done in representing the policies of the Government in relation to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander affairs. He brings to that position great skill, great compassion and a great understanding of many of the needs and challenges particularly, but not only, in the area of health and education of the people of the Torres Strait.
I also acknowledge the presence and thank Warren Entsch, the Federal Member for Leichhardt, for the invitation that he has extended to me.
The last thing that I want to say to you my friends is simply this, that we are as a people incredibly fortunate to be Australians. We are as a nation, I think, strengthened and enriched by the great diversity that we have. There is something particular about visiting a part of ones country and to be reminded of a centuries old culture which is distinct and different and separate in so many ways from the culture of so much of the mainland of Australia. Yet over the last two centuries we have shared so much together that in recognising the separate nature of our cultural backgrounds we are nonetheless reinforced through the shared historical experiences of being Australians together in this nation.
It's been a learning experience for me to come to Thursday Island. I'm humbled by the generosity of the welcome that I have received. I am impressed by the spirituality of the people of the Torres Strait Islands. I applaud the tenacity with which you have preserved your culture and your identity and I commit my Government to appropriately honouring the separate character and identity and the desire of the people of the Torres Strait to maintain that. I wish you all good fortune for the future and I thank you most warmly for your very generous and open and warm welcome to Thursday Island.
Thank you.


16 July 1997
E &amp; OE........................
Thank you very much Bob. Senator John Tierney, Peter Blackmoore, the Member for Maitland, the Lord Mayor of Newcastle, Councillor Heas, ladies and gentlemen. It's a great pleasure to be addressing such a large gathering of the citizens of Newcastle and the people of the Hunter Valley. I've got one or two fairly simple messages. The first of those is that I came to Newcastle today, I found hope, I found optimism, I found forward thinking and I found a complete rejection of negative attitudes to what has happened over the past two or three months.
That is not to gainsay the feeling of loss that no doubt some will experience. Nor is it to deny the difficult personal circumstances that retrenched people, either here in the Hunter Valley or anywhere around Australia will suffer but the most important message that should go out of the Hunter Valley to people all around Australia, that this region has an enormous amount of fight left in it, this region has an enormous future, this region has a capacity to live beyond the BHP phase and this region has a capacity to regenerate and be better than ever in the years ahead.
And what was so encouraging to me was that this was a common theme in the discussions that I had with the leaders of the community, the company itself, the union leaders and can I say very, very genuinely and very spontaneously that the courteous and constructive nature in which my discussions with the leaders of the steel unions were conducted today was a source of very great personal satisfaction to me. I found them a group of men and women who were interested in the future of their city, interested of the future of their community and interested in the future of their region and I think the constructive way in which they went about it deserves gratitude and I want to record very publicly my thanks for the way in which I was received. And can I also say that I appreciate very much the co-operative spirit that is now developing, and has developed between the company and the work force in relation to the transitional arrangements. It's not easy. It's a very difficult time. It's a very difficult process of adjustment. It's a very, very difficult management task and it's a very, very difficult human experience for any area, for any group of people to go through, and the way in which it is being tackled and the way in which we as a Government in co-operation with the community here are trying to focus on the future and focus on the positives, and can I thank the Lord Mayor for the welcome that he gave me and can I thank the Lord Mayor for the co-operative attitude that he also has adopted and I have said in relation to this particular issue that I want it to be dealt with in a bi-partisan fashion.
That is not to say that on some other issues, as my speech progresses, this being a Liberal Party gathering, that I mightn't say one or two mildly pejorative things about my political opponents but in relation to the future of Newcastle and the future of the Hunter Valley, it's something where people should work together and I have made it very clear that I want to co-operate with the New South Wales Labor Government, I have made it clear I want to co-operate with the unions and with the company and with all the community leaders of Newcastle and the Hunter Valley. I think what has happened today has reinforced a view that I have held for a long time because I am no stranger to this district. As many of you know, for the last 17 Australian summers, my family and I have spent it very close to the city of Newcastle. My wife has very deep family links with this city and I have visited it on many occasions, particularly over the last 25 years and I think I understand the potential of Newcastle, I think I understand the future and the potential of the Hunter Valley area and today encouraged me to believe that it does have an enormous sense of optimism and an enormous sense of hope.
Now that's not to suggest that there aren't difficult times ahead and the measures that I announced today are designed to look forward and I want to emphasise that the commitment of a $10 million contribution matching the $10 million announced by the New South Wales Government and at least $5 million announced by BHP, that that is quite separate and apart from and unaffected by the announcements that I made today, and we have a range of propositions that have been put to us in relation to that. I think there is some merit in establishing whether it might be possible to devote all of that money, all of those resources towards one or two, preferably one very, very significant project tat is going to contain a great potential for job generation and job creation and new business activity in the area. So can I say that in the first of my two day visits to the Hunter Valley area, how encouraged I am by the spirit of the people, and can I very warmly thank my two Parliamentary colleagues, Bob Baldwin, the absolutely outstanding newly elected Member for Paterson. Paterson was one of those seats that I had my eyes glued to on election night and when I saw his beaming face I felt very relieved and I want to thank you, Bob, for the tremendous job that you are doing in representing the people of Paterson in the Federal Parliament. And I also want to thank John Tierney who has been for a number of years, he's been the Hunter-based Liberal Senator for a number of years. He brings because of his educational background and his family background in this district, he brings particular skills and particular understandings to the Federal Parliament and to the deliberations of the Senate and it's great to come to the Hunter and be surrounded by Liberals.
It's great to come to Newcastle and to be absolutely mobbed by Liberals. I look around, they're everywhere. I mean, why didn't you invite a few more people to come here tonight, Bob. I feel a bit lonely. He says, I wanted an intimate gathering. Well, this is a tremendous opportunity for me to just say one or two other things. I have to apologise for anybody in the audience who mightn't habitually vote Liberal but I mean, this is sort of a Liberal gathering. There are just one or two things that I want to direct particularly towards not only our own supporters but to the broader Australian community. We have now been in office for about 16 or 17 months. We're about halfway through our first term in Government and I think if we look back over that first 16 or 17 months we can look back with enormous pride and satisfaction at having delivered on all of the major promises we made to the Australian people and there's one thing that Liberals should never be and that is they should never be shy about proclaiming the successes and achievements of our Government. We inherited a budget deficit from our predecessors of $10.5 billion. At the end of our first three years in government we will have turned that into a surplus of $1.6 billion.
Now it is all very well for our critics to say that that is some kind of arid, empty economic exercise. It's not because when you get the books of accounts of the nation in order, that has a beneficial flow through effect to the rest of the community. We would never have had reductions of two percent in official interest rates. We would never have had the lowest housing interest rates in over 30 years. We would never have seen falls in small business interest rates. We would never have seen the increased respect for the Australian economy in international financial markets if it had not been for the courage of the decision that we took, particularly in our first budget. And it's not an easy task to inherit a debt of that magnitude and turn it around in such a short period of time. And I am very proud to say that this year in 1997, 1998 for the first time in many years, the Commonwealth is no longer borrowing money to finance the deficit that is actually repaying about $5.3 billion. We're repaying the debts of Australia that have built up over a long period of time and as I think back over the election campaign and over the years when we campaigned from Opposition to get into Government, as I went around Australia, I went around the small business community, people said, how concerned they were about the fact that Australia continued to run large deficits and run up large debts, and we have begun to do something very constructive about that and I am very proud to say to you that in 1995, which is only two years ago, our debt to our total wealth generation a year was something like 20% of that total wealth and by the year 2000 we will have cut that 20% exactly in half so that it will be only 10% of our total wealth generation, and I am also very proud to say to you that compared with the rest of the world, the debt to wealth generation ratio of this country compares very favourably with the advanced countries of the OECD.
I mention those things, ladies and gentlemen, because the fundamentals for a more prosperous economy, the fundamentals for a stronger small business community, the fundamentals for stronger employment growth in 1997 and 1998, those fundamentals are to get the basic infrastructure of the Australian economy in order. Can I say that I am also very proud that we have delivered in full on the commitments that we made in the area of industrial relations. Reforming Australia's industrial relations system was one of the most important goals that I set my Government when it was elected to office in March of last year and we have delivered on that promise and one of the reasons why Rio Tinto is standing up to the mining union in the Hunter Valley at the present time is the greater strength that has been given by the reforms to the Workplace Relations Act enacted by my Government. That stand by the company would not have been possible if it hadn't been for the changes that were made in the Workplace Relations Act.
We do need a new, modern, contemporary, flexible industrial relations system. We cannot live with an industrial relations system that is deposited in the years before World War One and World War Two. We need an industrial relations system that encourages direct bargains between the owner and the employee. We need an industrial relations system that encourages productivity and deals with the workplace. We need an industrial relations system that allows managers to manage. We need an industrial relations system that allows workers to be paid much higher wages in return for higher productivity. Now they are the elements of the industrial relations system that the new Government of Australia has given to the people of Australia and there's no sector of the Australian economy that will benefit more as they flow through from the industrial relations reforms of my Government than the small business sector. No sector will benefit more than the small business sector and as all of you know, terrific, I love an interjection, I love it, I love it, but ladies and gentlemen, there is no sector of the Australian economy will benefit more from those changes than the small business sector and during the election campaign I spoke very strongly and repeatedly about the role of the small business community in the economic future in Australia.
I believe very strongly that job generation is very much in the hands of the small business community of this country. But they can't create more jobs, they can't hope to create more jobs unless they are given the climate in which to prosper and to invest and to succeed and that is why I committed myself very strongly to changing the industrial relations system. It is why we have already changed the unfair dismissal laws and we intend to go further in changing those unfair dismissal laws by removing their application altogether to a whole class of small businesses throughout Australia and that particular bill, that particular piece of legislation has been introduced into the House of Representatives and let me repeat what Peter Reith has said on behalf of the Government, that if it is rejected by the Senate, we will send it back to the Senate again in three months time and then it will be available if we so desire as the basis of a double dissolution of both Houses of the Parliament.
Ladies and gentlemen, the most important thing though that I want to say to you is that the resolve of the Government to implement the policies on which we were elected, the resolve of the Government to stick to the policies that we put down when we were elected in March of 1996 remain absolutely and completely undiminished. I was told a few moments, before I got up to speak that the former Labor Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, I mean it's amazing sometimes you get support from an unexpected quarter. Apparently Bob has had a few things to say about the attitude of the unions and the attitude of the Labor Party in relation to their opposition to some of the policies that were implemented, and if he's been correctly reported, Bob is basically saying to the Labor Party and the trade union movement that the Coalition was elected with a very large majority and whilst he may disagree with the policies for which we stand, the trade union movement of Australia and the ALP really owe it to the people of Australia to stop obstructing the implementation of the Coalition's programmes.
Thank you Bob.
So ladies and gentlemen, I think it's been a terrific day here in Newcastle. I want to thank the people of Newcastle for their warm welcome. I want very much to commend the people of Newcastle for the very positive attitude that they have taken towards the difficulties that they face. I do find a spirit of enormous hope and enthusiasm in this city and in this region. I want to complement Bob and John for the tremendous work that they are doing representing the people of the Hunter Valley. Thank you very warmly for coming along and if anybody wants to ask me a question, anybody, I would be delighted to try and answer it.
QUESTIONER:
(Inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think the reason that you have lower interest rates for home loans than you do for small business is that there is more competition in a housing section than there is in the small business section and one of the things that we intend to do in our response to the Wallis inquiry is to inject more competition in the area dealing with small business. You have got lower housing interest rates because of the intervention into the field of organisations like RAMS and Aussie Home Loans and so forth. I don't say this critically of the other contributors in the financial area but it's a fundamental reality that if you have competition for the provision of a product, that product is always provided at a cheaper, more efficient rate, and that applies whether it's a housing loan, a small business loan or something else.
QUESTIONER:
(Inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Being relaxed and comfortable is a very, very important thing and when I use that expression, my relaxed and comfortable has become a little bit like Malcolm Fraser's "life wasn't meant to be easy". You say it in a particular context and then it sort of becomes the thing that follows you around. When I spoke of this country being relaxed and comfortable, I spoke of it being confident and proud of its past, relaxed and confident in that sense, and I also speak of it being confident about its present and optimistic about its future. You ask me where I see Australia? I see Australia as a very prosperous, a very prosperous, successful nation playing a major role in the Asia Pacific region, a nation that is strong and powerful in its own beliefs and its own values but recognising that its future destiny lies very much with the Asia Pacific region.
QUESTIONER:
Unemployment. (inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the Labor Party of course, although they put tens of thousands of people into many of those schemes, did leave us with an unemployment level of 8.5% and I don't think anybody should ever forget that after 13 years that was their net contribution to the unemployment level. Look, you will get unemployment down in this country over a period of time if you do two things. Firstly, you've got to generate in a sustained fashion a higher rate of economic growth. There's no alternative to that. If we can't run the economy at a stronger rate of economic growth than we have run it in the past, we're not going to reduce unemployment. The second thing you have to do is to remove the structural impediments to the employment of people. That is why things like reforming the unfair dismissal laws are so important. It is why having a revamped industrial relations system with a simplified awards structure, a simplified Australian workplace agreements system, why that is so tremendously important, and also why it is enormously important to give greater encouragement and greater strength to the small business sector in the Australian economy and also, I think it's very important never to be afraid of embracing change, never to be afraid of investing in new industries, to understand that for example, one of the reasons why the United States economy is doing so impressively at the present time is that the United States economy is now getting the benefit of the enormous investment that that country made in technology over the last 10 or 20 years and one of the strongest messages I got from my recent visit to the US is that they made this huge investment in technology. For a long time people held their breath and they wondered whether it would work and whether in fact it would end up destroying more jobs than it's created then all of a sudden, as it were, the benefits of that huge investment in technology have broken through into the United States economy and I think we are going through a stage where people are understandably asking questions about when the impact of policies will begin to bite, but as I said in my speech, you can't hope over a period of time to sustain high levels of employment unless you get the fundamentals right. If we get the fundamentals right we can grow more strongly. If we fix the labour market we can remove the impediments to the employment of people, and if we are courageous enough to embrace new industries and new enterprises, then I think we have the opportunity as we move towards the turn of the century to really see the Australian economy take off and really see job generation recover to the levels that I know everybody in this room tonight want to see.
QUESTIONER:
(inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
The gentleman, in case you didn't hear, is asking whether we're in favour of taxation reform. I think he says that the existing system contains marginal rates of taxation which are a disincentive to effort. I agree with you on that. We have committed ourselves to a proper debate of taxation reform. I made a promise before the last election that I wouldn't introduce a GST during the first term. I am going to keep to that promise but that doesn't preclude us from generating a very strong debate in the Australian community about the weaknesses, and there are many, in the present Australian taxation system, and you have mentioned one of them, the disincentive effects of an over reliance on personal income tax and the desirability of moving towards a fundamental reform of the Australian taxation system and that is certainly going to go on in very large measures. One more question and then I had better finish. I am running out of voice.
QUESTIONER:
(Inaudible) Tariffs.
PRIME MINISTER:
Are you in favour of them going up or down or staying the same?
QUESTIONER:
(Inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we took a decision in relation to the motor car industry which I think was a very good decision. It was a very balanced decision. It kept the momentum towards trade liberalisation but by the same token, it didn't go so far as to discourage investment and the result of that decision was the announcement of $4 - $6 billion of investment by the motor car companies which are going to have a very, very beneficial effect on job generation. Now, well of course it says that you've got a good Government that takes the right decisions, that's what it says and we intend to take equally sensible and equally balanced decisions on other issues in the years ahead.
Thank you very much.
ends


17 July 1997 
E &amp; OE......................................
Thank you Bob. To Mr and Mrs Zeitsch, to Mr Barr, and thank you very much for coming all the way from the United States for this little ceremony and to everybody else, I share Bob Baldwin's enthusiasm for being here today because there is nothing like formally opening a new business, there's nothing better for Australia than new small businesses that are getting bigger and All Access is a very good example of precisely that. These new premises, these new headquarters are as a consequence of the business doing better and of the business expanding and the good news is that because of the policies that we are now putting into place, the climate for small business in Australia will continue to get better and this is an opportunity because it marks the opening of the expansion phase of a very successful business in Australia. It is an opportunity to remind you and to remind the Australian community of some of the major changes that my Government has made to improve the climate for small business.
Some of you may not know that as from the beginning of this month it is now possible because of the rollover relief under the capital gains tax legislation for anybody in business who is expanding and diversifying, to sell an existing business and to invest up to $5 million of the proceeds of the sale of that business in the acquisition of another business, not necessarily of the same kind but indeed, of any kind and what that means is that we are giving, as from the first of July this year an enormous additional incentive for people to grow and develop businesses, to realise their effort, to invest the proceeds free of capital gains tax, up to $5 million free of capital gains tax and invest the proceeds of that into another business.
We have produced the economic circumstances for a significant fall in interest rates. We have delivered a very, very stable climate of very low inflation. We have provided relief in the area of provisional tax. The major changes made to the industrial relations system are of particular benefit to small and medium sized businesses. They are also incidentally of significant benefit to some of the larger corporations in Australia and we have also made a number of important changes to the unfair dismissal laws that increase the attractiveness of putting on more staff for small business and we have in the pipeline some further changes that will increase that.
Now I take the opportunity of mentioning those things, ladies and gentlemen, because it is important that all of us understand that one of the very top priorities of my Government is to continue to create a better and an improving climate for small business in Australia. I have moved responsibility, Ministerial responsibility for small business affairs into the inner Cabinet and given it to one of the most senior members of the Government and that itself sends a very powerful message to the small business community that it is a valued element of the economic regeneration and the economic growth of Australia, and what is particularly encouraging about All Access, what is particularly encouraging about the expansion plans of this company is of course it involves a highly skilled workforce. It involves investing in an industry which is at the leading edge of the technology of this particular discipline and it also involves a company that has aspirations for regional growth and regional exports and when you take all of those things together you really are talking about the new future of the Hunter region. You are talking about new enterprises, you are talking about high quality service industries, well remunerated, high quality jobs and you are talking about boosts to exports and boosts to the capacity of the company to build and expand around Australia.
This company has a very good track record in the time of its existence in the area of employee relations and building a bond and a trust between employer and employee, creating a co-operative workplace, creating a spirit of working together towards a common goal of higher profits and higher wages is the foundation of the new workplace philosophy that my Government has brought to Australia. It is not a philosophy built on confrontation. It's a philosophy built on co-operation. It's a philosophy built on believing that if employers and employees work together with a common purpose to the benefit of the firm and to the benefit of themselves, they benefit, they benefit together and the community collectively benefits.
Australia is entering a very strong phase of economic growth. The economic basics and fundamentals of Australia are very strong indeed. We have a very low level of inflation, we have high levels of business investment. We are repaying our debts. This year Australia will repay $5 billion of debt that's been accumulated over the last ten years. We are increasingly seen around the world as an attractive place for foreign investment. We are increasingly seen as a highly competitive country in the Asia Pacific region and we have within our grasp enormously attractive economic prospects.
Fortunately, we live cheek by jowl with the fastest growing economic region in the world, the Asia Pacific region, and if we can continue to build greater competitiveness, if we can continue to improve the climate for small and medium sized businesses in Australia the opportunity for economic expansion and the opportunity for economic growth is practically limitless. I would therefore in formally opening these headquarters of All Access, I would particularly like to congratulate and complement Mr and Mrs Zeitsch for the tremendous leadership that they have given to their company. I would like to thank the management and the workforce of the company for the way in which all of you have co-operated to build a very important enterprise in a region that has delivered a very clear message to me over the past two days and a message that I am happy on your behalf to relay to the rest of Australia, that any thought that the Hunter region has lost heart, has lost spirit, couldn't be further from the truth. I have found great optimism, great hope, great enthusiasm, a determination to live beyond and to overcome some of the adversities of recent months and this is a marvellous example today. More businesses of this kind, more investment of this kind is precisely what the Hunter region wants and I know because of its attractiveness and its resilience, it is precisely what I believe the Hunter region will get and could I finally say that to cap all of that, the district of course has a magnificent Federal representative in Bob Baldwin, the Federal Member for Paterson who I can say as his Parliamentary leader, does a tremendous job in pressing the particular needs, the particular requirements and the particular aspirations of this marvellous part of Australia.
I therefore have very great pleasure in declaring the regional headquarters of All Access formally open. I wish all of you who work here great success, great prosperity and great happiness.
Thank you.
ends


14 August 1997
E&amp;OE......................................................
Thank you very much Bob Carroll, to your wife Marleen; to John and Jacqui Moore; to Warwick and Kathy Parer, my other Ministerial, State Ministerial and other State and Federal Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted as always to be here in Brisbane. Con Galtos welcomed me to my beloved Brisbane, as he called it. I always love the place but, of course, I got a special tug in the heart for Brisbane and for Queensland on the night of the 2nd of March last year when it delivered such magnificent results.
And, of course, in recent weeks and months those of us who follow rugby would acknowledge that Brisbane has delivered a slightly better strike rate for the Australian Wallabies than some other cities in Australia.
But, ladies and gentlemen, I want to say at the outset of my remarks tonight how much I appreciate the tremendous support that my Government and I personally have received from the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party since we were elected in March of last year.
We are, as you would know, fast approaching the half-way point of our first term in government. And it is appropriate, because we are reflecting on the future as well as looking back a little on the immediate past, to look at what has happened over that last 18 months and to put in perspective what we, as a new government, have endeavoured to do and what our plans are and our goals are for the future of our government and for the future of our nation.
I could really divide the first term of my Government into two phases. The first phase was, of course, the repair phase and that has really occupied the first 18 months. We had, as Bob said, an obligation to repair the budget deficit.
I know budget deficits sound dull and dreary. And people think they are only important to economists and bean counters and that they are irrelevant to the rest of the community. Well, let me tell you that we would now have the lowest housing interest rates since 1969 if we had not taken the steps we did in our first and second budgets to reduce the budget deficit.
We inherited an underlying budget deficit and I don't want any Liberal or any Liberal supporter ever to forget it. We inherited an underlying budget deficit of $10.5 billion and by year three of the first term of the Howard Government we will have converted that into a surplus of $1.6 billion.
And in case you think that is sort of an academic arcane proposition, I was immensely proud when I was overseas a few weeks ago to be able to say that if you apply the criteria for admission to the European Monetary Union to Australia you would find that only Australia and Luxemburg were currently in a fit economic state to join the European Monetary Union. Because our budget deficit achievements; the fact that in 1995 we owed something like 20 per cent of our annual wealth generation in national debt and that by the year 2000 on present projections we will have cut that in half; the fact that our projected growth rate in 1997 and 1998 is above the average of the G7 industrialised countries and the fact that we have business investment levels running at 30-year highs in Australia; all of those things contribute to the fact that we have done a very praiseworthy job in repairing the foundations of the Australian economy.
And if we as Liberals and as I as head of the Government and as the members of my Government don't tell the Australian public of those achievements, we know in politics that no one else will. And it is very important, when we're looking at the perspective of the first 18 months of the Government, to record those achievements.
And it's also very important to record the achievement of the Workplace Relations Act. That legislation has turned industrial relations in Australia profoundly for the better. We have totally abolished compulsory unionism. We have restored the effectiveness of the secondary boycott laws. We have significantly reformed the unfair dismissal laws and propose to go even further if we can get the legislation through the Senate. We have introduced a system of direct workplace bargaining which, over time, will bring about a change in the capacity of businesses to manage their business and will alter the relationship between employers and employees profoundly for the better. And collectively the Workplace Relations Act has laid the foundations of more productive businesses and a more productive Australian economy.
And if you are looking for some kind of independent, critical judgement on what has been achieved over the last 18 months - and although his speech was not directly addressed to what the Government has done, but it would never have been made if the Government had not done what it has done over the last 18 months - I'd invite your attention to the speech that was made in Perth two nights ago by Mr Ian Macfarlane, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia.
In the 23 years that I've been in politics I have never heard Reserve Bank Governors say that in the short term, at least, the speed limits on economic growth have been lifted in Australia. Reserve Bank Governors normally tell you why you can't grow rather than tell you that you are in a position to grow at a much faster rate. And he is the first Reserve Bank Governor I have heard in 23 years use language of that kind. And what essentially Ian Macfarlane was saying the other night was that the fundamentals of the Australian economy are such that we can now afford to grow at a faster rate without getting into the danger zone of reigniting inflation or the danger zone of threatening our external account.
Now, it's a long time since the Reserve Bank Governor has felt able to say that. And I think it represents a tacit endorsement of what has been achieved over the last 18 months. But more importantly, it is a sign of great confidence from a person who ought to know the fundamental strength of the Australian economy.
It's a declaration of optimism about the future of the Australian economy. It is a declaration that we ought to have the courage and we ought to have the capacity to grow at a much faster rate.
And very importantly, given the human dimension that is involved, it is very good news for the unemployed of Australia. Because the only way that we will reduce unemployment in a lasting fashion in Australia is to do two things. We have to grow the economy at a faster rate, at least four per cent or more a year and we have to remove those things that make it unattractive to employed people in this country. And if we can really get the economy growing at a faster rate and have the Reserve Bank Governor saying that the fundamental constraints that have existed in the past, at least in the short term, don't exist now, that is very good news. If we can get the economy growing at a much faster rate then I believe that that does represent extremely good news for the unemployed of Australia.
So as I look back over the last 18 months, I see it very much as involving a process of repairing the foundations of the Australian economy; of fixing the budget deficit; of bringing down interest rates; of strengthening our external account; of implementing our commitments in the election campaign to families and in the area of private health insurance and in the area of small business. And in the collective way, very much repairing the foundations and the fundamentals of the Australian economy.
And having passed through that first stage I think it is appropriate now that we turn our gaze to the second stage. That we look forward and that we are in a position as a government to do many things that collectively will help to realise the potential of this nation as we move into the 21st Century. And realising the potential of Australia, realising the capacities of Australia and delivering in full on those capacities and that potential is, of course, the central goal and the central aim of my Government, not only over the next 18 months, but in the years after that.
And there is no one single thing that will realise the potential of Australia into the 21st Century. There are many things that will make a contribution to that. There is our involvement with the Asia Pacific region. It's not our only trade involvement. It's not our only foreign policy involvement. But it's a very important strategic economic political and social involvement. It is the fastest growing region in the world.
We are a major player in the Asia Pacific region. And to those unthinking people in the Australian community who, in a rather cheap and populist way, have condemned the currency swap that Australia undertook to assist the Thai economy, can I invite them to contemplate just for a moment what a poor participant in the Asia Pacific region Australia would have looked if Japan was in, China was in, Hong Kong was in, Malaysia was in, Indonesia was in, the Philippines was in, but no, Australia wasn't in. So, in other words, we're a nation that's quite prepared to say that when there's something good we'll be part of the region, we'll share the bounty of the region, we'll get the economic growth of the region, but don't ask to do anything to help. And after all it's not a gift, it's not a loan, it's a currency swap. And those that have run around in this rather cheap and populist way of saying: oh look, you know, why don't give to help your own? - this is a currency swap, an intelligent arrangement between the central banks of the region and if Australia had not participated in that we would, for years into the future, have been seen as people who are just fairweather friends and people who are not prepared to make a contribution to the stability of economies in the region. And I wanted to say that and I wanted to say that very strongly.
But there are also many other things that will help us realise our potential and we move into the 21st century and I have something to say about one of those things yesterday and that is taxation reform. Many of you will know that taxation reform has been quite close to my heart and quite close to my political being for a very long time, stretching back to the time when I was Treasurer in the Fraser Government.
I believe that the Australian national interest requires a new, a better, a reformed and a modernised taxation system. I believe that the great majority of the Australian community shares that conviction. I don't underestimate the challenge that is involved in promoting taxation reform in Australia. As a veteran of 23 years in national politics, I know something about political scare campaigns. I know that they can be readily mounted. But I also know that deep down there is an enormous reservoir of commonsense and a great affection for the future of Australia and for the Australian national interest in the hearts of most Australians.
I also know that over the years people are increasingly disenchanted with a taxation system that, let us go back quite a long way to the 1950s. In the 1950s you paid the top marginal rate of income tax on your personal income if you were earning 14 times average weekly earnings. Now, I think most of us would agree in today's language that if you earn 14 times average weekly earnings you're not doing too badly. And there aren't too many of you. And that was in the 1950s and over the years that fell. It fell in the 1970s to something like 11 times average weekly earnings and in the 1980s it fell even further. And you now have the ludicrous situation in Australia, and it is ludicrous and it does sap incentive and it does frustrate the ordinary wage and salary earner in this country. You have the ludicrous situation where you pay the top marginal rate of tax when your income is a little over one and a half times of average weekly earnings. In other words a progressive taxation system that was once trumpeted as applying the top marginal rate of tax at a point where undeniably the person was a high income earner is now a taxation system that applies that top rate of marginal tax when undeniably people are not high income earners.
There are many other foibles and weaknesses of the system. And fundamental to the reforms that I have in mind is the utter conviction that what we need is to alter the mix of the Australian taxation system so that the individual taxpayer, particularly in the middle income bracket, is paying a significantly lower rate of personal income tax. And in order to do that you do need to have the commitment to a root-and-branch re-examination of the taxation system. And that must involve, obviously, the consideration of the introduction of a broad-based, indirect tax. It must involve an examination of that tax replacing some or all of the existing indirect taxes. Any reform must pass the basic test of fairness, we're not in the business of reforming the Australian taxation system to accommodate a narrow, privileged section of the Australian community. But equally we're not in the business of creating a new system that doesn't provide incentive for the entrepreneurs and the risk takers of the Australian community. We recognise very, very much the need that when we do change the Australian taxation system that there is proper compensation for those in the community who are deserving of special consideration. And I use those words deliberately and I couch that description quite advisedly.
And we also need to address the fragile state of Commonwealth/State financial relations. Over the years there has grown an imbalance between what the States collect in tax and what their spending responsibilities are. The recent decision of the High Court of Australia has, I suppose, exposed for the entire Australian community to see the soft underbelly, and that's being polite, of the existing financial arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States. So taking a look at those things together there is an overwhelming case to embrace fundamental taxation reform and that is why after its two day meeting earlier this week, the Cabinet authorised me to make the announcement that I did. And I did it, I must say, with a great deal of enthusiasm and a very strong personal commitment because of the many things on the economic front that Australia must do to realise its potential for the 21st Century is to give itself a chance with a new contemporary and modern taxation system.
We have tackled the challenge of industrial relations reform. We have tackled the challenge of repairing the budget. By commitment to reform and repair in those areas we have laid the foundation stones of stronger economic growth, which over time will deliver improvements on the employment front. We have embarked on the most progressive and bold privatisation programme of any national government in Australia. And very soon the average wage and salary earners of Australia, all Australians will be able to share in acquisitions of an interest in Australia's great public utility, Telstra. And I'm very proud to say that we will be making very, very particular and special arrangements for the employees of that company and delivering on the commitment to ensure that whenever a Liberal-National Party government privatises a government asset we pay particular care to the faithful employees of the public utility.
So taking all of those things together my friends, I think we do have a picture of a government that has set about in a very purposeful way in first of all, to use the vernacular, cleaning up the budget mess and cleaning up some of the other messes that have been left behind, but more importantly fixing its gaze on the future.
I am, as is Bob Carroll, an unfounded optimist about the future of our country. It's a great Australian cliche, of course, to say that whenever you go overseas you come back convinced that this remains the best country in the world. And can I say that is not an experience which is confined to retired people who go overseas, perhaps for the first time. It's not an experience which is confined to young people who go on working holidays around the world. It's not an experience which is confined to business men and women who go overseas. But it's also an experience which the Prime Minister of this country is very happy to confess that he has whenever he goes overseas.
And despite the enormous strength, and it's a strength that I admire of the United States economy, which I witnessed a few weeks ago, and the evident strength amongst European economies, of the British economy and all the other strengths of the developing and emerging nations of the Asia Pacific region, this country does have a combination of social stability, egalitarianism, economic hope and an overall attitude to life which provides a national mix without parallel anywhere in the world. And that, of course, places an enormous responsibility on all of us as Australians. It places a particular responsibility on the Government that I lead as the representatives of the Australian nation. And it also places a responsibility on you as supporters of that government.
And that responsibility is to preserve the remarkable national harmony of Australia. A national harmony that has been contributed to by people from all around the world, especially since the end of World War II. A national harmony which has grown out of the innate decency of the Australian people. And a national harmony that rightly marks us out as a very special nation. We not only have the responsibility of preserving that national harmony but we also have the responsibility of realising the great potential that Australia has as we move into the 21st Century.
We do have a special place in this part of the world. We are lucky that we live cheek by jowl with the fastest growing region in the world. And we bring to that association the advantages of being a projection of western civilisation in this part of the world.
I don't see our historical associations as an encumbrance in our relations with the region. Rather I see those associations as an enormous advantage. It gives to this country a special opportunity and a special capacity to realise its very great potential.
So can I say to all of you, virtually half way through the first term of office of the Coalition Government, can I first of all thank you for the support that you've given us over the last 18 months. The support that the Queensland Division of the Party gave us in the lead up to the last election. The lovely number of seats you gave us on the night of the election. I want to thank my colleagues for help and support and loyalty that they've demonstrated towards me.
I also want to say that over the last 18 months I'm very proud of what we have achieved. Like all Liberals we tend, on occasions, not to blow our trumpets as loudly as we might. We somehow or other often get caught up with that problem. And I think sometimes we ought to understand that and do a little more about it. But when you look at it, the score card over that 18-month period has really been quite remarkable. But more importantly is what lies ahead of us.
And I am really quite excited about the challenge of the tax debate. There's nothing in life, there's nothing in politics quite like having particular goals and particular challenges. And the idea that we can give to this nation a fairer, more incentive-based, better, more contemporary, more modern taxation system, one that will greatly improve the competitiveness of the Australian economy, one that will greatly improve its capacity to compete effectively, not only in our region but around the world, that is a challenge which I rise to with enormous enthusiasm.
I saw just before I came here tonight - I should share this concluding thought with you - I saw the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Gareth Evans, on television. Yes I did. The interviewer said: Mr Evans, do you believe in tax reform? He said: yes, I do. What form should the tax reform take? He said: oh, there should...you reform the tax system, he said, by generating much more economic growth, and the extra money you get from the growth you use to do all the things that you want to do, and that maybe you do one or two other things, little things at the margin. But, he said, that's tax reform. That's what Mr Evans' said.
Well, I've got two comments on it. The first is that they had 13 years to generate that extra economic growth and use the proceeds to repair the taxation system and abysmally failed to do it.
And the second observation I make is that Gareth Evans has got form on the GST. And over the months ahead you're going to be hearing a lot more about that form.
You may all remember after the 1993 election there was a programme on the ABC called 'Labor In Power' and it contained a lot of very frank interviews with members of the then government. And they were very frank because most of them thought they were going to lose the 1993 election and they were a little more forthcoming than might otherwise have been the case. And there was an interview with a former senior Treasury official, David Morgan, in which he said that the - when they were having this debate in 1985 about whether they'd have a consumption tax - he said that the turning point - he was in the Cabinet room - he said the turning point in the debate, he said, came about one o'clock, he said when Gareth Evans threw down his papers - that sounds about right - threw down his papers and said: well, I've heard enough, he said, I have sat here for two hours, he said, and nobody has been able to punch a whole in the idea of a consumption tax.
And it's a very, very interesting thing that I think one of the difficulties that both Mr Evans and Mr Beazley are going to have over the months ahead is that deep down they both believe that fundamental taxation reform is unavoidable and must be embraced. And both of them were, in fact, enthusiastic supporters of Option 'C' that was taken to the Tax Summit by my predecessor in 1985.
But, ladies and gentlemen, that was a political aside which you'll understand my making and I hope all of you make it in the months ahead.
But, again, thank you very, very much for your support. I feel a great sense of enthusiasm and excitement half way through our first term in government. I think we have ahead of us an enormous opportunity to be remembered as a government that led the way in realising the great potential of this country into the 21st Century and I'm very privileged to have the opportunity of leading that government.
Thank you.


15 August 1997
Address to the Queensland Chamber of Commerce and Industry Dinner (Being held in conjunction with the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry National Industry Policy Conference)
E&amp;OE.............................................
Well, Mr DeSouza, Mr Rob Gerard, the Federal President of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Joan Sheldon, the Deputy Premier and Treasurer of Queensland, my other Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues and many leaders of Australian industry, ladies and gentlemen.
It goes without saying that I am quite honoured to be invited to address this dinner tonight which comes at the end of a very important Conference about the role of industry policy and about the future of Australian industry.
I might also say that it comes at the end of quite a momentous week for the Australian economy. Not momentous in the sense that particular statistics and figures have been released. But momentous in the sense that I believe a number of very important markers have been put down about the future of the Australian economy. And that there have been some attitudinal changes and there has been some refocussing about the important things that affect future economic development in our nation.
First and foremost I am very pleased to say that this is the week in which your Government has got well and truly serious about fundamental reform of the Australian taxation system. And I know how close to the heart of your organisation that fundamental reform has been.
And I also think it worth mentioning that in all of the many submissions that we have received over recent months, indeed since we came back to office, about the future shape of industry policy in Australia, all of them have had, as a core element, fundamental reform of the Australian taxation system.
The other highly significant thing about developments this week was that important speech made by the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Ian Macfarlane, in Western Australia.
It was an important speech because, like the report delivered by David Mortimer to the Government, it focussed our attention on the central role and the central importance of economic growth in the future development of Australia. Because for the first time that I can remember in the 23 years that I have been in politics I heard a Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia saying that, in the short term at least, the constraints and the speed limits on economic growth had been removed.
He talked enthusiastically about the capacity of the Australian economy to grow at over four per cent. Now, that carried a number of important messages. Not least, of course, I would say it represented a tacid endorsement of the fundamental approach that we have adopted to repairing the Australian economy over the last 17 months.
It also carried a profoundly optimistic message for the unemployed of Australia. Because at the heart of solving the unemployment challenge in our country is to accelerate the rate of economic growth.
There are two ways you attack unemployment. You attack it by accelerating economic growth and you attack it by removing the impediments against the employment of Australians by individual employers. And to have somebody as senior and as authoritative as the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia saying quite clearly that, in the short term at least, those speed limits had been removed was very good news indeed.
And what I believe he has done, and what I believe that valuable reports like those of David Mortimer's have done, is to refocus our attention on the importance of economic growth.
And what they've also done is to reinforce the importance, for all of us, in focussing on the capacity of our nation to realise its potential as we move into the 21st Century.
The economic strategy that we have pursued since coming to office in March of last year has essentially been divided into two phases.
The first and very important phase was the repair phase. And I know this is not a Conference about looking over our shoulder to the past, but I think it is worth reminding this audience that we did face and underlying deficit of $10.5 billion, and that in our first three years of government we believe we will have converted that from a deficit of $10.5 billion to a surplus of $1.6 billion.
But in 1995 we had a debt to GDP ratio of 19.5 per cent. But by the year 2000 we will have halved that to only 10 per cent. But according to the latest OECD survey the growth rates of the Australian economy in 1997 and 1998 will be above the average of the G7 nations. That we will have massively repaid debt and we'll be laying the foundations for a debt free Australian future.
We have seen levels of inflation that we haven't experienced since the 1950s and 60s, and we have seen significant falls in interest rates.
Now, all of these things are important and all of them have made a major contribution to improving the framework for Australian industry and that they have made a major contribution towards very sound industry policy settings.
Now, I know that quite correctly, ladies and gentlemen, much of your work over the past few days has been focussed on the future of industry policy. And as Prime Minister I recognise, quite directly and quite openly, that there is a strong debate within our community about the role and the shape of industry policy.
The interesting thing about that debate, my friends, is that there is a wide area of common agreement.
In all of the submissions that I've seen recently on industry policy nobody disputes the need for fundamental industrial relations reform. And I believe that the Workplace Relations Act that was taken through the Federal Parliament by Peter Reith has dramatically changed the Australian workplace.
It has achieved the great goals that we set ourselves in Opposition. It has brought in a new era of direct negotiation between employers and employees. It has ended, for all time, compulsory unionism. It has restored teeth to the secondary boycott laws. And it has redressed the imbalance that used to exist in the industrial relations arena. And I believe, as the months go by and the full benefits of those changes are recognised and taken up by Australian industry, it will make an enormous contribution to the enhanced industrial structure that this country needs for the 21st Century.
So we have common ground about the need for industrial relations reform. We have common ground about the need for reducing the budget deficit and putting our budgets into surplus. And we have common ground about taxation reform to which I will allude in a moment. We have common ground about the need for sound infrastructure. We have common ground about the need for sound education and training policies. Indeed, there are many areas where there is wide degrees of common ground right across the industrial and business spectrum in Australia.
And I think it is fair to say, ladies and gentlemen, that the area where the debate has become quite properly focussed on is the extent to which the Government itself intervenes directly through budget assistance, either on the expenditure side or the taxation side of the budget, to provide direct incentives to companies to invest in Australia and to invest in Australia's future.
Now, we have before us at the present time David Mortimer's report. We have just received the report of Professor Ashley Goldsworthy on information technology. We have received a report of Mr Cutler on online services. We have before us the report commissioned by the Metal Trades Industry Association and prepared by the Economist Intelligence Unit. And we will have before us, next week, the results of this very important Conference presided over by the ACCI.
And I want to say to you that one of the most important policy responsibilities my Government will have is to examine all of those reports and to respond very quickly to the various recommendations that have been made in them.
But I think it's important to acknowledge to you that the real debate and the real area of decision making is the extent to which governments should intervene through direct budget help.
But beyond getting the fundamentals right it is important, as we come towards the end of the century and we move into the 21st Century, that governments ensure that industry policy help us to realise our full potential.
You have often heard me speak about the role of small business in the Australian economy. And I was glad of the acknowledgment that your Queensland President gave to that role in his introductory remarks. But I want you to understand that we see the growth of both large and small businesses to be not only compatible and independent, but vital for greater levels of investment for job growth and for national prosperity.
The aim of industry policy, in my view, is to create world competitive enterprises that generate high value added and quality jobs drawing on Australia's rich endowment of natural, human and man-made resources.
Industry policy is about creating an economic environment that is conducive to investment, jobs and growth. That requires macroeconomic stability, structural and taxation reform, targeted budget intervention to address market failure and a lower burden of business regulation.
In an era of globalisation, industry policy must be forward looking and outward-oriented. The challenge is to empower enterprises and workers to deal constructively with, and to harness, change. Our focus is on facilitating adjustment from declining to emerging activities, encouraging international best practice and gaining access to lucrative markets.
Education and training, active labour market policies and programmes, R &amp; D, sophisticated and competitive infrastructure services are the sinews of competitive advantage in the new world economy.
A productive, competitive and outward-oriented manufacturing industry is fundamental to my personal vision and the vision of my Government on the future of Australian industry.
My Government is prepared to strategically intervene in industry to offset distortions and remove impediments to expansion.
In May, for example, we announced a new Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Programme which will run for five years from 1999. The programme will provide $300 million to offset the distorting effect of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme on pharmaceutical prices and therefore on the incentive for pharmaceutical companies to invest in increased R &amp; D and production in Australia.
The Government's recent decision on tariff levels for the automotive industry was, in my view, the only responsible one which the Government could have taken. It took into account the commitment of all APEC members to opening up their economies, the need to continue to improve the industry's ability to compete internationally while providing certainty to communities, workers, and business. This decision is already paying off in increased investment in the Australian motor vehicle industry.
The traditional role of government is changing in response to global trends. Marketing the nation state is increasingly important to attract large, capital intensive and footloose investments. Multinational corporations are now able to play various countries and their incentive regimes off against each other. We must be willing to address this issue - how best do we offset what other countries may have to offer? It is asserted by some that establishing competitive conditions, removing impediments and trading on our social capital, such as our lifestyle and cultural diversity, are simply not enough.
As I've already observed, there is much common ground on the industry policy debate. And the area of debate now surrounds the extent to which governments should intervene by investment incentives, whether through increased outlays or tax breaks. And as I've indicated a moment ago, we'll be responding to a series of reports in that context.
The Government is, however, determined to pursue action agendas for emerging industries along the lines of our 'Supermarket to Asia' policy. The Mortimer Report identified telecommunications, resource processing and tourism. And I would add information technology/online services and the financial services industries. Some of these sectors will be the subject of decisions over the next few months which will accelerate their development. This is not picking winners - it is facilitating the emergence of new areas of competitive advantage.
We'll also, in the next few weeks, be responding to the report of the Wallis inquiry into the Australian financial system.
Part of achieving our future potential as a nation depends upon exploiting Australia's comparative advantage in the information sector.
We have every reason to be excited by the communications revolution and the opportunity that it provides for our future.
The growth of information technologies is forging new ways to communicate, to manage information and to make and market transactions. Business opportunities will come from the expansion of telecommunications, information technology manufacture, software and content provision and the impact on the competitive advantage of existing industries.
We are in a particularly good position to take advantage of these opportunities. We rank second only to the United States in computer ownership. Our spending on information technology as a proportion of GDP is 2.8 per cent compared to 1.9 per cent in Japan and 3.1 per cent in the United States. We have also one the most rapid take ups of the Internet of any country in the world and this is estimated to continue at a rate of 130 per cent into 1998.
Our Australia Online policy seeks to support industry development through the provision of a low cost world class telecommunications infrastructure. The opening up to full competition of telecommunications carriage and services on the first of July and the establishment of Networking the Nation, our Regional Telecommunications Infrastructure Fund, will underpin industry competitiveness. And I will be announcing a new policy framework to maximise development of information technology and online services in the near future, one of a number of plans we have for realising our potential into the 21st Century.
Ladies and gentlemen, no speech of this type, to this gathering, in this week, would be complete without my returning to some of the details of what I have had to say over the past few days about the future of the Australian taxation system.
I have now been in politics for over 20 years and I have watched, during that period of time, the attempts of both sides of politics to bring about fundamental reform to the Australian taxation system.
And if you step back a moment and think about that debate over the last 20 years one of the more fascinating aspects of it is that at various stages the leaders of both of the major political parties in Australia have advocated in essence the type of fundamental reform that we committed ourselves to earlier this week.
If you go back to the middle 1980s you will remember, may I say, the passionate and, indeed, principled commitment of the former Prime Minister and the former Treasurer, Mr Keating, to the cause of fundamental taxation reform. And I can certainly remember a conversation I had with him, when I was the then Opposition spokesman on Treasury matters in the mid 1980s, when he handed me a copy of the White Paper that the then Labor government was about to present to the Taxation Summit. And he spoke quite passionately about the importance of governments making fundamental changes for the national good. That, of course, was 12 years ago in 1985.
You'll all remember the change in attitude of the Labor Government after the objections to taxation reform by the ACTU at the Taxation Summit.
And if you fast-forward to 1992/93 you'll remember the very determined attempt by my predecessor as Leader of the Liberal Party, John Hewson, to bring about fundamental taxation reform.
I believe that we cannot be serious as a nation about equipping ourselves in a competitive fashion for the 21st Century unless we are prepared to embrace a fundamental reform to the Australian taxation system.
And you cannot embrace that fundamental reform unless you are prepared to examine all of the options. You cannot embrace that fundamental reform unless you are prepared to examine, quite openly and quite directly, the introduction of a broad-based, indirect tax.
And I was delighted today to see the Commission of Inquiry that's been established by the Evatt Foundation which, as its name suggests, is associated with the Australian Labor Party and the Commission is chaired by the former Governor of the Reserve Bank, Mr Bernie Fraser and has Mr Trevor Boucher, the former Taxation Commissioner, as one of its members.
I was delighted to see both Mr Fraser and Professor Bob Gregory, another member of the Committee, say quite openly that you couldn't be serious about examining taxation reform without looking at the possibility of introducing a goods and services tax or a broad-based, indirect tax of some other kind. And the idea that you can be serious, you can even playing the game and participating in the process of taxation reform without examining the introducing of a broad-based, indirect tax, is utterly and completely unrealistic.
I've already said, ladies and gentlemen, that the goal ought to be to develop a different mix within our taxation system. The goal ought to be to alter the balance away from our over-reliance on direct personal taxation towards a different mix. And in the process I certainly see, as part of the change and part of the reform, the introduction of significant reductions in the level of personal income tax, particularly for middle income earners.
I describe the process of taxation reform as a very important adventure. And I believe that it's an adventure in policy change and policy making which is quite crucial and pivotal to the economic future of this country in the 21st Century.
Given the competitive challenges we face and irrespective of the view that you take on the level of government budget assistance and incentives to attract industry and attract investment to Australia, it must be obvious to all of you and, I believe, to an increasing number of the broad Australian community, that if we are to be competitive, particularly in the Asia Pacific region, if we are to realise the great potential of this country into the 21st Century then we must tackle, we must embrace and we must solve the challenge of taxation reform. Because giving Australia a modern, contemporary, incentive driven, incentive based taxation system, will be to remove one of the last great road blocks to realising the full potential of the Australian economy.
I think back to the late 1970s when we had a rigid and closed financial system. And based upon the recommendations of the Campbell Report, and, may I say, because of a bipartisan approach with a Coalition Opposition beginning the process, a Labor government with Coalition Opposition support, not Coalition Opposition obstruction, the implementation of the recommendations of the Campbell Report we have now developed one of the most open and deregulated and, I believe, efficient financial systems in the world.
We have seen the progressive implementation of workplace relations change culminating in the Workplace Relations Act that my Government piloted through Parliament last year.
We have seen a more modern and progressive approach to tariff reform and to tariff policy. We have seen the embracing of national competitive policy. We have seen an increased focus on microeconomic reform. But all the while we have been chained and retarded and held back by an outdated, outmoded, taxation system. All the while we have gone to our conferences, we have delivered our papers, we have made our submissions to government, we have acknowledged the progress that has been made in particular areas and almost under our breaths we have said but, of course, we are yet to successfully tackle change and reform to the Australian taxation system.
It has often been said that there is never a right time to confront and embrace fundamental change. I think in relation to taxation that if we don't seize the opportunity that we now have then I think future generations will judge, not only the current generation of political leaders, but also the current generation of community and business leaders, as having failed the national interest and failed to make a sufficient contribution to realising the great potential of this country as we go into the 21st Century.
My Government is very strongly committed to the process of taxation reform.
I invite all sections of Australian business and Australian industry to join that process, to join it in a very full-blooded fashion, to join it because I believe all of us can derive great benefit from it.
If we can fix our taxation system, if we can re-balance the incentives, if we can get something that ceases to penalise our manufacturing exporters, which the current system does, if we can get a business tax regime that makes us more competitive, particularly in the Asia Pacific region, and I can't think of a single reform in an important area which will make a more fundamental contribution to realising that great potential of our nation as we go into the 21st Century.
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that your deliberations over the past week have been very fruitful. I thank the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Queensland body for the honour that you've both done me in inviting me to address the dinner.
Can I conclude by saying that my Government does understand the very strong feelings felt in various sections of Australian business about current industry policy settings.
I've endeavoured, in my remarks, to point to the fundamental importance of what we have done over the last 18 months in providing a sound underpinning for sensible, enduring industry policy in Australia.
Over coming weeks my Government will be very, very energetically addressing those many reports and recommendations, including the fruits of this particular Conference. And I believe that the outcomes that will come from those deliberations will be ones that will work very much for the benefit of Australian industry and very much for the future level of investment in industrial and business activity in Australia.
Thank you very much.



22 August 1997 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MUNISTER
THE HON. JOHN HOWARD MP
' ro THE TASMANIAN LIBERAL PARTY STATE COUNCIL DINNER
COUJNTRY CLUB CASINO, LAUNCESTON
E&amp; OE
Thank you very much Tony, to Bill Gatenby, the President of the Tasmanian Division of  the Liberal Party, Tony Staley, the Federal President of the Party, . Jocelyn Newman,
Warwick Smith, my other Parliamentary colleagues, both State and Federal, to Robyn
Gray and Ray Groom, two former Tasmanian Premiers, ladies and gentlemen.
It is again a great pleasure to be back addressing the Tasmanian Division. I was thinking
before I got up to speak that I have spoken at this dinner and to various gatherings like
this in many capacities over the years.
I have spoken to it as Opposition Leader, this is the second time I have addressed this
dinner as Prime Minister, on earlier occasions I spoke to it as Treasurer and I think on
occasions I have been allowed in to speak to it when I have not carried any particular
moniker at all, other than a member of Federal Parliament. And, over the years I have
developed some very close personal associations with many people in the Tasmanian
Division. And, I want to say at the outset tonight, how much I appreciate on a personal level, the
tremendous loyalty, understanding and support that the rank and file members of the
Liberal Party in Tasmania have given me, particularly over the last seventeen months.
It's sometimes not easy to be an open supporter of a political party and I think it does all
of us well on occasions like this to remember that it's you and people like you around
Tasmania and around Australia who have really kept the Liberal Party going. You have
kept the Liberal Party going during its difficult years, as well as being able to share the
relative success and share the delight that we now hold power at both a State and a
Federal level.
And, in terms of the history of Liberal Party right at the moment, enjoying as we do,
power at a national level and power at a State and Territorial level in every part of 
Fax frraft 4 11 23/ 08/ 97 16: 10 Pg:
RUG 23 ' 97 15: 41
Australia other than NSW, it represents one of the high points in the 52 year existence of
the Liberal Party of Australia.
But, can I say that a man who epitomnises that commitment, that willingness to give his all
to something that he believes in, that we all believe in, is of course your retiring State
President, Bill Gatenby. And can I say to you Bill, that you have given enormous support
and substance, and fibre, and leadership to the Liberal Party, here in Tasmania, over the
last three and a half years.
We would not have done as well as we have done here, Federally, we would not have
retained the authority in difficult circumstances that we have at a State level, without your
leadership. I admire the fact that with quite meagre resources, most of the time, in very
very difficult circumstances, politically, from opposition for a large part of the time at a
Federal level, and in challenging circumstances at a State level, you have kept the Liberal
Party flag flying here.
You have preserved a representative Liberal Party that reflects the grass roots of the
Tasmainian people and one of the great strengths I have always noticed at the Tasmanian
Division of the Liberal Party, is that, it seemed to me to be a more faithful representation
of the people of the State than perhaps some of the other divisions of the Liberal Party
around the country.
So, can I say, can I wish you and Margo every happiness in the future. I am delighted that
you'll continue as Federal Vice-President of the Liberal Party and that I'll continue to have
your advice and your counsel and your support on the National Executive of the Party.
You have been a great and faithful servant of the Liberal Party here in Tasmania and
around Australia and all of us are massively in your debt on that account.
So ladies and gentleman, could I also say how very pleased I am to have had the
opportunity before tonight's dinner to talk at length about issues of fundamental
importance to the future of Tasmania and fundamental to the relationship between the
Federal Government and State Government, with Tony Rundle, your Premier.
Tasmania does face some enormous challenges. The Nixon Report has highlighted some
of the realities facing the state of Tasmania and I want to compliment Tony Rundle on the
courageous leadership that he has displayed in the wake of that Report.
I feel a sense of great understanding and great sympathy with his position. There comes a
time in the life of a politician, the life of a State or the life of a country where it's really a
question of what is the point of continuing to occupy positions unless you are prepared to
take a chance and to take a risk and to strike out a courageous position.
And, one of the things that influenced me in the decision that I took ten days ago to
recommend that my Cabinet ( that we enthusiastically embrace the cause of taxation
reform), was the fundamental belief that the Australian nation needs a new taxation system
to take it into the 21 st Century. 
Fax from 4 11 23/ 88/ 97 16: 10 Pg: 4
-AUG 23 ' 97 15: 42 P. 11
And in similar vein, your Premier has Said that the people of Tasmania and the State of
Tasmania need new Constitutional and economnic arrangements to take it into the
21st century. And rather than recoil defensively into despair and despondency, what your
Premier has done is to show a lead, to stamnp his authority on the debate about the
direction of your State.
And, I wish him well, I congratulate him in his vigour. I hope the referendum that he
proposes is resoundingly supported and speaking on behalf the Federal government, I will
do everything that I reasonably can to assist in developing, and helping, and promoting
and nurturing the future of Tasmania and the future of the Tasmanian people.
We are, as we have been reminded about half way through our first term in office.
It's appropriate, therefore, to take stock of what has happened and also to try and project
forwar-d a little to what is going to happen over the next eighteen months. And over the
last seventeen months we have very much been in the process of repairing the foundations
of attending to those things that have been left neglected for a long period of
time. it's worth reminding the Australian people that we inherited an unemployment rate
of It's worth reminding the Australian people that for 13 years the Labor Party ran
this country, for 13 years they had the opportunity to fix the tax system, for 13 years they
had the opportunity to reduce unemployment, for 13 years they had the opportunity to
give this country a viable industry policy, for 13 years they had the opportunity to put this
country into the black, but when we came into office in March of last year, none of those
things had been attended to.
If ever there were a group of people who are utterly disqualified from commenting
critically on the level of unemployment in Australia, it is the members of the Labor Party
front bench in Canberra, at the present tine.
Over the last 17 months we have repaired the foundations, we have addressed the things
that needed to be addressed. We inherited an underlying budget deficit of $ 10.5 billion
and by the end of our first term we will have converted that to a surplus of $ 1.6 billion.
In 1995 the national debt of this country was about 20% of our annual wealth generation
By the year 2000 we will have cut that in half According to the OECD, we will
have a growth rate in 1997 and 1998 which is faster than the average of the G7, that is the
major 7 industrialised countries.
We inherited levels of interest rates which over the last 17 months have been reduced by
percentage points. We have in Peter Costello's phrase, the lowest housing interest
rates since man first walked on the moon in 1969. We have delivered all of the
fundamental promises we made in the area of industrial relations, in the area of small
business, in the area of the environment, despite the best efforts of the Labor Party and the
Australian Democrats and the Australian Greens to frustrate our environmental
programme. We are now in the process of generating, through the National Heritage
Trust of Australia, the largest ever capital expenditure on environmental re-generation in
the history of post World War 11 Australia-
Fax from 4 11 23/ 88/ 97 16: 10 pg:
AUG 23 ' 97 15: 43 P. 12
We have achieved the one third sale of Telstra. which is the largest privatisation so far in
Australia's history. We have delivered on our ommiitment to self funded retirees. From
the 1 st of July this year, we have delivered on our commitment in relation to private health
insurance rebates. In other words, if you look back over the last 17 months, and it's very
important that all of us as Liberals remember this, because sometimes we are our own
worst enemies in selling and proclaiming our own achievements.
Sometimes we are to reluctant to talk about what we have achieved. Sometimes, we too
readily succumb to the criticism of our opponents and the propaganda of our media critics
and sometimes we lose sight of what has been achieved over that last 17 months.
And there's an old adage in life tbat if you don't tell the world what you have done,
nobody else is going to do so.
It's tremendously important that all members of the Liberal Party understand the extent to
which we have kept faith with the commitments that we have made to the Australian
people. How we have delivered our industrial relations programme; how we have put the
country back in the black; how we have reduced interest rates We have retired debt
this year alone we'll repay five and a half billion dollars of Mr Keating's debts. And to
take a deficit of $ 10.5 billion and turn it into a surplus of $ 1.6 billion, in the space of
3 years, is a remarkable achievement. And as I had the great pleasure of saying to both
British and American audiences a couple of months ago when I was in those two
countries, that if you applied the criteria of the Mastricht Treaty for membership of the
European Monetary Union, Luxembourg and Australia are the only two countries at
present that would qualify' to join that august assembly. And I was very quick to point
out, of course, that Australia has absolutely no desire whatever to be associated with the
European Monetary Union.
I mean, I have spent a large part of my political life denigrating, quite rightly and with
some passion, the rotten anti-Australian policies of the European Economic Union, that
have done immense damage to the agricultural industries of Australia, and represent one of
the high watermarks of world trading hypocrisy. If ever a group of nations has preached
the theory of free trade but practiced protection to demented lengths, it's the European
Union. Ladies and gentlemen, that is the past 17 months and it has been a period of rebuilding the
foundations. It has been a period of attending to those things that have been left
unattended. It's involved some unpopular decisions, it's attracted its share of criticism.
But we are now entering phase two. Phase two is very much about realising the potential
of this nation as we move into the 2 1st century. Phase two is very much about building
structures that will take this country into the 21 st century. Phase two is very much about
conquering the most challenging art of modern government and that is, to choose between
preserving those things about your society, about your institutions and about your way of
life that ought to be preserved because they are good, they are better than the alternatives
and they enshrine the values that you believe in. Preserving them in one hand, and yet
with the other hand throwing out those structures and those institutions and those
practices that are no longer serving the best interests of your society and the best interests
of yoar nation. 
Fax from 4 11 23/ 08/ 97 16: 10 Pg:
. AUG 23 ' 97 15: 43 P. 13
Tony Rundle and Hill Gatenby were quite Correct tonight to talk about the fact that we are
challenged by change. The world is changing very rapidly. The information technology
revolution is the greatest transformation that the world has seen since the industrial
revolution. It is sweeping through the world in a way and at a pace that few in this room
would have thought possible even a few years ago. I mean this afternoon I received a
minute from the head of my department saying that they are for the first time examining
proposals for the use of the electronic information systems of the Commonwealth for the
distribution of Cabinet documents and Cabinet minutes and over the next few months that
will become common place practice. It's just a contemporary example that landed, not on
my desk but on my hotel bed as I unlocked the weekend bag, of the sort of changes that
are being bought about by the information technology revolution. So anybody who says
that we can resist change and anybody who thinks we can hop off the global economy and
somehow or other repair to a quiet patch undisturbed by what is happening now and what
has happened over the last 10 or 20 years is absolutely deluding themselves.
Of course we must change. And the great challenge is to change those things that must be
changed because of those forces that I've just mentioned. But at the same time, hanging
on to those fundamental Australian values, hanging on to that great egalitarism of the
Australian community, hanging on to our tolerance, remembering the great capacity of this
country particularly after World War 11 to absorb millions of people from around the
world and to build this great harmonious, tolerant Australian nation, is one of the great
achievements of the Australian story. The way in which we were able to absorb people
from all around the world and to build a nation of tolerance and harmony and also to
preserve the Federal system This is a big country You can't run it other than through a
decentralised Federal system of government and the idea that all wisdom resides in one
particular part of Australia of course, as your State President said, is absolute nonsense.
I am, as I often say, a passionate nationalist. I am not a centralist, but I am a nationalist.
A nationalist is somebody who believes that decisions should always be taken with a view
to the national benefit. A centralist is somebody who always believes the national benefit
is to be found in the decision being taken in the centre of the nation. I think there's a very,
very imnportant difference and I think true Federalism and a true co-operative struicture
between the Federal government and the State governments of Australia is to be found in
a system of government whereby we always take decisions which best express the national
interest. And in many cases they can only be taken in a spirit of co-operation and harmony and
partnershp between the Federal government and the State Government. At the moment,
the Premier and I, and our respective Ministers, are engaged in debate and discussion
about the regional forest arrangements, to be concluded between the Federal government
and th~ e State government.
And, the purpose of those arrangements is to build a stable, predictable agreement
between the two governments, involving the industry and other community groups, that
will give certainty, and security and jobs again, over the next 20 years. 
Fax fromt 4 11 23/ 88/ 97 16: 10 Pg: 7
-AUG 23 ' 97 15: 44 P. 14
Achieving that is not easy, but there is great goodwill on the part of both governments,
and I know the importance of the forest industry to the people of Tasmania. And I know
the history of the debate between the forest industry and others in Tasmania over the last
few years and it is my determination and the determination of the Tasmanian government
to see that an intelligent, and lasting, and far sighted agreement between the two
governments is reached. And one that above everything else, will give security and
predictability to the people who are employed in the industry and invest in the industry,
and will also recognise the special and unique national conservation values of the State of
Tasmania. But, ladies and gentlemen, I mentioned a moment ago that ten days ago we embarked at a
Federal level, upon a great debate, I called it, and some of my media critics derided the
reference, I called a great adventure and this is the adventure of fuhndamiental taxation
reform.
We have reformed and changed, and made more modern, the industrial relations system of
Australia. We've got the budget in order; we've reduced our debt, we're embarked upon
a vigorous program of privatisation; we have a strong and positive competition policy
throughout Australia. But the one great, neglected, unrepaired, ramshackle of the
Australian economy, is our taxation system.
And, there is not a man or woman in this audience who doesn't know that we need
fundamental reform to Aujstralia's taxation system. And if I were addressing a Labor
Party dinner, I would be able to make the same claim, without any fear of contradiction.
And the people who have performed the most pathetically of all in this debate about
taxation reform, have been Kim Beazley and Gareth Evans,
Kim Beazley started off by saying, well I'm interested in taxation reform but you can't talk
about having a broad-based indirect tax as part of it. Rather like saying, I want to have a
game of football as long as there is no opposing side.
Gareth Evans said you don't need to reform the Australian taxation system, he said all you
have got to do is have a bit more growth. Well can I say Gareth, where was your growth
over the last 13 years? And, fie said, al you have got to do is have a little bit of growth
and you do a little bit of fiddlig at the margin.
And now the latest contribution from Mr Beazley is, he says I'm in favour of taxation
reform, as long as it involves soaking the rich whatever that may mean, or whoever
they may comprise.
Can I say that by contrast, we have committed ourselves to a program of taxation reform
that will deliver a fairer taxation system, a modern taxation system, that will take this
country into the 21st Century, A taxation system that will reform the indirect tax base.
One that will involve reductions in personal income tax. One that does not involve an
increase in the overall taxation burden. And one that will include the difficulties of
Commonwealth/ State financial relations. 
Fax from: 4 11 23/ 08/ 97 16: 18 Pg:
-AUG 23 ' 97 15: 45
Now 1. think the most important area of unfinished economic business in this country is the
challenge of taxation reform. It is not something that stands alone, it's not an academic
exercise that is irrelevant to the general health of the economy. A better taxation system
means stronger economic growth and stronger economic growth means lower
unemployment. The idea that you can look at the challenge of unemployment without looking at such a
fuindamental artery of the Australian economy as the taxation system, is quite unrealistic.
All of us know, if we are honest with ourselves, that we have addressed this issue in the
past. Some of you may say, why are you raising it now? Some of you may say why are
you raising it now, some of you may say, you can't go to an election proposing taxation
reform. Does anybody seriously imagine that I could have gone to the next election as Prime
Mnister of this country and said no, we're not going to do anything about taxation
reform?
There comes a point in public life and politics, if you are really serious about doing
something good for the nation, and doing something good for your country, you have to
deya bit of conventional political wisdom. You have to ignore what some of the advisers
tell you. You have to say to people, the future of this country is worth taking a few
personal risks for and that is in reality what is involved.
I don't underestimate the challenges. I know that the Labor Party will run the most
negative, the most misrepresenting, the most dishonest, the most scurrilous fear campaign
in relation to taxation reform that anybody could imagine.
But you all know, that if we are to be faithful to the huge mandate that we were given at
the last election, you all know that one of our great responsibilities is to tackle areas of
fundamental economic reform. And we can't seriously be on the playing field, we can't
seriously be part of the team and we certainly can't be a world class team unless we are
willing to address the weaknesses in the Australian taxation system. There are many, and
you'll be hearing more of them from me and from Peter Costello and our colleagues, over
the next few months but just let me tell you one, or two of them.
In 1955, which admittedly is a long time ago, if you paid the top marginal rate of income
tax you had to be earning seventeen times average weekly earnings. By 1979 that had
fallen to something like seven times average weekly earnings it has now fallen to one and
a half times average weekly earnings. And it gives you an idea of the way in which the
progressive taxation system has become such a clog, not on very wealthy people, but has
become a clog on the aspirations of average, middle class Australians.
All of you will be aware, and you will certainly become more aware over the next few
months, of the extent to which the current indirect taxation system affects the purchase
price that you pay for so many basic daily goods that you purchase for your every day
needs. 
Fax from 4 11 23/ 08/ 97 16: 10 Pg: 9
A~ UG 23 ' 97 15: 45 P1
When you bear the fear campaign about an extra cent or a Y per cent broad-based indirect
tax, just remember the 22 per cent that you are paying on toothpaste, just remember what
you are paying on orange concentrate and remember that you can buy caviar without any
wholesale sales tax. And you think of some of those anomalies and some of those
contradictions, then you have an idea of why this system is so far out of date and why this
system is in need of fundamental repair.
Ladiesl and gentlemen, can I say to all of you that being in government is good. Doing
good things in government is even better. Being in opposition is absolutely awful and
never to be lightly embraced or contemplated. At the end of the day though what we exist
for as a political movement, what we exist to do is to implement the values of our party
which are an expression of the hopes and the aspirations of the Australian people.
One of the great strengths of the Liberal Party of Australia is that it isn't owned by
anybody, it isn't owned by any one section of the Australian community. And one of the
greatest feelings that I had on the evening of the 2nd March last year was to know that the
only obligation I carried into office as Prime Minister of Australa was an obligation to do
my level best to improve the lot of the great mass of the Australian people. I didn't go
into office feeling that I had to deliver a particular promise to a particular person, or to a
particular group of people. I went into office knowing that in my heart that if I did the
right thing by the great majority of the Australian people, then I would have fulfilled the
mandate that they so generously gave to me and my colleagues.
We have tried hard over the last 17 months to do that. We have another 18 odd months
before the next election. We are moving to that second stage which is to realise the
potential of this country as it moves into the 2 1st century.
We've copped our share of criticism that's politics, it's all part of the process. It was
never a particularly generous or a particularly giving activity, as many in this room know
just as well as I do. But if we are serious about building a better Australia, if we are
serious about making certain that his country prospers, survives and thrives into the 2 1st
century, we must continue to have the courage to take risks. We must continue to have
the courage to strike out for reform, we must have the foresight and the wisdom to hang
on to those things that are worth preserving while throwing out those things that are no
longer serving the national interest.
But it is a great enterprise, a great partnership and can I simply conclude by saying that
everything that I have achieved in public life I owe to the great party to which we all
belong. I would never have been a member of Parliament if I hadn't been the endorsed
Liberal candidate for Bennelong, I would never have been leader of the Liberal Party of
Australia if I hadn't been a member of Parliament of the Liberal Party of Australia and I
would never have achieved the tremendous honour of being Prime Minister of Australia
had it not been for the Liberal Party of Australia. So gathering here tonight, I feel very
much one of you. That all of us together over the years have shared a great journey and a
great experience and a great opportunity to work together for a cause to make our
country, to make our State and to make our world a better place in which to live. 
Fax from AUG 4 11
23 ' 97 15: 46
We ought to preserve that sense of idealism and commitment that Liberals over the years
have always had. It is a great Party, it's got great values, it's got great resilience, it's got
great decency and we should never lose sight of that fact and we should never be reluctant
to proclaim it to the rest of the Australian people. 23/ 88/ 97 16: 18 Pg:
P. 17 


23 August 1997
E&amp;OE..............................................
Thank you very much Bill, to Tony Rundle, the Premier of Tasmania, Tony Staley, the Federal President of the Liberal Party of Australia, to my cabinet colleagues, Jocelyn Newman and Warwick Smith, to all my other parliamentary colleagues from Tasmania and my State parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start these brief remarks of mine because I did have an opportunity last night of talking at somewhat greater length about what has happened over the last 18 months and what lies before us, by saying to the Tasmanian State Council how fortunate you have been over the last three and a half years to have such a dedicated, energetic and capable State President.
If ever anybody qualifies for that perhaps overworked description of indefatigable, it is Bill Gatenby. It is not easy to be State President of a Liberal Party organisation. It's certainly not easy when you inherit that job at a time when you are in opposition Federally, you face difficulties at a State level, and Bill has been a great companion and colleague on the Federal Executive, and I am absolutely delighted that he will continue. He's obviously a student of Edmund Burke. I will report him to the John Stewart Mills society of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party and I think some of those choice Burkian quotes -- I've often been accused of having a form of Burkian liberalism in my veins. Burke extolled the view that you didn't remove a practice or an institution unless its worth was demonstrated as no more. In other words he was what you might call a selective conservative or a discerning radical. You can take your pick.
I think that's one of the great challenges of Statecraft in Australia at the present time. We are living in a time of enormous change and anybody who thinks that we can sort of opt out of the globalised economy is deluding themself. As I said last night, the revolution in information technology is the greatest economic change the world has seen since the industrial revolution and we can't avoid globalisation, we have to live with the consequences, we've got to adjust to it.
But equally, there are within our society values and practices that simply because we've had them for a long time that doesn't mean you discard them. And one of the challenges of Statecraft is to get the right mix, to throw out those things and to change and adjust where change is necessary, but by the same time hanging on to those markers of a stable society and those great stabilisers which are important for the continuity of the kind of society and the kind of values that we all believe in.
But enough of my Burkian diversions, Mr President. Could I, in the interests of historical accuracy with the very greatest of respect, just record one tiny fact and that is in 1983 the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party voted against the increase in the size of the Parliament and it got through because of the support it received from our then Coalition colleagues who saw some value in increasing the Parliament. But I just have to say in defence of those who were members of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party. I think I am the only one in the room - unless Shirley Walters is here - I think I was probably the only one at the time because Jocelyn you joined us in '84 didn't you ('86) - well anyway, enough of that.
Ladies and gentlemen I just want to say before having the great pleasure of introducing Tony Rundle to address you and in formally opening this State Council, could I just make two observations. The first of those is a policy observation and the second of those is a personal observation about the person that I'm going to introduce.
The policy observation I make is that none of us should ever lose sight of the social and economic challenge of unemployment in this country. My government inherited an unemployment rate which had averaged 8.7% under the stewardship - if you can call it that - of our predecessors. None of us should ever forget that they were in office for 13 years. We are now regularly regalled with their solutions to Australia's ills. We are told, of course you need tax reform but don't ask us for any details. We are told that you need an industry policy. We are told that you need different solutions for unemployment, yet for 13 years those solutions and those alternatives apparently eluded the ladies and gentlemen who now regularly regale us with their alternative solutions.
But that is a legitimate political observation on my part. The more relevant observation that I make is that reducing unemployment remains a major challenge of this Government and of this community. But we should not approach it any sense of despair or defeatism. There have been some good things done in the cause of reducing unemployment over the last seventeen months.
We have got the nation's finances in order, we have laid the foundation of budget and fiscal stability, even prosperity over the next few years. To turn a deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus of $1.6 billion in three years is no mean achievement. To be able to say to the rest of the world that by the year 2000, we will have halved the national indebtedness of Australia as a proportion of our annual wealth generation in just five years, is also no mean achievement.
To pay off in this financial year $5.5 billion of Mr Keating's and Mr Beazley's debt is also no mean achievement, and that has been directly translated into lower interest rates. We would never have had five reductions in interest rates if we had not had the courage to reduce our budget deficit and those falls in interest rates have been a benefit, not only to home buyers, but they have also been of benefit to small business.
We have changed dramatically Australia's industrial relations system. We have ended forever compulsory unionism in this country. We have restored the strength of the secondary boycott laws which were recked by the union dominated Labor government, with the cooperation of the Australian Democrats a few years ago. We have made it possible for employers and employees to negotiate directly with each other without the intervention of a trade union, unless the trade union is invited to be part of the process.
We have given new strengths to the industrial relations commission to deal directly with recalcitrant behaviour in an industrial dispute. We have given heart to companies that are seeking to change outdated work practices that are costing them valuable markets overseas. And we have restored the rule of law to the conduct industrial relations in this country.
Now, they represent monumental changes and monumental achievements. The benefits of those changes are now flowing through, but they have only been in operation for a few months and the notion that if you pass something that comes into operation on the first of January or the first of March of 1997 that that should, by August of 1997, turn the economy completely on its head, demands a cause and effect in economic and industrial affairs that has never been experienced anywhere in the world.
And for those who say that those changes have not gone far enough and have not achieved enough, I throw back in their face the self evident fact that a certain amount of time is needed for them to work there ways through the Australian economy. All of that is good news for the unemployment problem because a more flexible industrial relations system over time will reduce unemployment and make a contribution to employment generation.
But by far the best piece of good news for unemployment that we've had for a long time was the speech made in Perth two weeks ago by the Governor of the Reserve Bank - not the speech itself, but what it revealed about the progress that we have made with the Australian economy. The Governor of the Bank, the first time in 23 years that I've heard a Reserve Bank Governor ever say it, said that essentially the speed limits on economic growth in Australia had at least in the short term been removed. In other words, he was saying, unlike his predecessors, that we can afford to grow at a faster rate without risking inflation and without risking a current account deficit crisis. Now that carries two very important messages. By far the most important is the message it carries for the unemployed of Australia. Because if we can grow at a faster rate we can generate jobs in comfort and we can generate jobs without the concern that they may be destroyed by a surge of inflation or a current account crisis. Because in the long term, let's face it, the only way that we'll markedly reduce unemployment in this country is to have a stronger level of economic growth over a sustained period of time. You can't reduce unemployment by growing at two and a half per cent. You can begin to reduce it if you grow at four to four and a half per cent or even higher. And the Governor of the Bank, from his position, was saying that our economy is now strong enough and healthy enough and vigorous enough and reformed in its fundamentals enough that we can in fact grow at that faster rate.
And the second implication of his remarks, of course, was that the changes undertaken by my Government with the help of my colleagues over the last 17 months had so repaired the fundamentals that we could afford to grow at this higher rate without risking some of the deleterious consequences that have occurred in the past.
So that's the observation about unemployment. Let's not be defensive. Let's record the things that have been achieved over the last 17 months. We have repaired the fundamentals, we have created the circumstances for higher growth, we have changed the labour market in a permanent way and we therefore over time have created far better circumstances for job generation. And we took sensible decisions in industry areas like the motor car industry which have guaranteed long term investment and long term job security. And all of these sorts of decisions my government will be heavily influence and this applies obviously to the decisions we are to take in relation to the forest industry here in Tasmania. We will be heavily influenced by the job implications of those decisions because jobs for Australians, jobs for Tasmanians and jobs. And it remains the great responsibility of government to always take wise decisions that promote job generation. That is my policy observation. My personal observation and I do it with very great pleasure in introducing Tony Rundle who is addressing you. Can I say that at a personal level, to deal with Tony Rundle as the Premier of Tasmania is a great delight. He's an intelligent, courteous, co-operative, but tough fighting representative of the Tasmanian people.
He's a person who took over the leadership of the Liberal Party here in Tasmania and therefore the Premiership of Tasmania after a difficult and not particularly positive election. It's never easy to govern with a minority. It's hard enough when you don't control the Senate not to control the Lower House also represents something of a special experience. Over the past few months he's displayed a great deal of courage, a great deal of direction and a great deal of leadership. It is true that we all have to change. Tasmania must change to survive and prosper. Australia must change to survive and prosper. To pretend that the world will pass us by and leave us floating untouched living in the world that we have lived in for the last 40 or 50 years is utterly and completely unrealistic.
Your Premier knows that. I believe that your Government knows that. We know it at a national level. Some of the changes are painful, they are unpopular, they are suspected but in the long run if they are properly and patiently explained and if they are linked to the national good then they will be accepted and I think your Premier has in the time that he's occupied the job, which is not that much longer, I think, than the time that I have occupied my position, he has displayed a very very great leadership.
I want to thank him and in doing that I also want to thank all of you as members of the Liberal Party here in Tasmania for the tremendous loyalty and support that you've given to me and my colleagues over the last 17 months. It has been a great privilege to be the Prime Minister of Australia during that time. It has wetted my appetite for occupying the job for a long time into the future.
But the most humbling thing of all is to have had such sustained loyalty and support from so many people and to you Tony I wish you well in the months ahead in the very very difficult decisions that you must take and I can assure you that you have in Canberra a Federal Government and Prime Minister who does understand the particular circumstances of Tasmania, who has been in the past personally and directly responsible for policies that have recognised those special disabilities. We won't always be able to yes to everything but we will always be understanding and comprehending. We will always recognise the special characteristics of Tasmania.
I can understand the desire of anybody born in this State to want to stay on living here. It is a beautiful State. It is a very special part of our nation and we want to preserve as best we can its special character. And I hope over the weeks and months ahead we can make decisions that make a practical and enduring contribution to that partnership and to that very special characteristic.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your support I hope you have a marvellous State Council meeting. When I leave here after a discussion with the Federal President I go to South Australia to address the South Australian State Council meeting and I look forward to meeting you fellow Liberals in Adelaide. But, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much, have a great conference and have a great year.


I am delighted to announce that the Commonwealth has agreed to provide $100 million to assist in the construction of the Alice Springs to Darwin rail link as part of our plan to ensure Australia realises its potential for the 21st century.
This represents the second project to be funded by the Commonwealth's Federation Fund as announced in the 1997/98 budget.
Expressions of private sector interest will now be sought to build, own and operate the line, on the basis there will be no ongoing Commonwealth government support.
The project will be of enormous significance not only to the South Australian and Northern Territory economies, but to the nation as a whole.
The new rail link will create 2,000 jobs in the construction phase and 200 jobs in the operational phase.
It will complete the rail link between South Australia and the Northern Territory that was first promised as early as 1911.
During thirteen years of Labor government the project was continually rejected. The Coalition has embraced and supported the rail link in its first term.
It will provide a competitive, alternative means for transporting Australian goods into Asia, providing a stimulus to economic development and jobs in Central and Southern Australia across a range of industries.
The project builds on the government's impressive record of rail reform. We have introduced greater competition in our national rail network and now we add to this by extending that network.
As part of this package, other rail operators must have access to the line. The Alice Springs to Darwin link therefore also provides support to the proposed Melbourne to Darwin line which is expected to follow a similar route in Northern Australia.
This new rail project provides tangible evidence of our desire to enhance the building of trade bridges between Australia and Asia. This is an important new phase in our moves to position Australia as the Supermarket to Asia, while at the same time creating jobs in regional Australia. It is something of which my government is justifiably proud.
23 August, 1997


23 August 1997
E &amp; OE...........................................
Thank you very much Martin and to John Olsen, the Premier of South Australia, his wife Julie, to Shane and Josephine Stone from the Northern Territory, to Senator Robert Hill, the leader of the government in the Senate, to David Pigott - congratulations on your marriage - it's good to see these fellas getting married - and to all of my other State and Parliamentary colleagues and delegates to this State Council meeting, I am delighted to be back in Adelaide. This is the second occasion that I've had the privilege of addressing a State Council meeting as Prime Minister.
I want to start by thanking all of you for the loyalty and support and understanding that you've extended to us, particularly over the last 17 months. I want to thank all of my Parliamentary colleagues from South Australia. I want to acclaim the quality of the Federal representation in the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party from South Australia.
As you know, I think it's fair to say that the quality is brimming over. We have a record number of Cabinet Ministers in the Federal government of this nation from the State of South Australia, all there not by dent of geography but all there by dent of ability and the contribution that they make.
I am particularly pleased at the extraordinary success that was achieved by the South Australian Division in the last Federal election, in proportionate terms of course, it was about as successful as you could ever get and I really do appreciate that tremendous support.
The last 17 months have represented the first phase of our first term in government. It has very much been a phase in which we have been preoccupied with repairing the foundations of the Australian economy. It has been a phase in which we have been preoccupied with attending to those things that were left unattended or done extremely badly by our predecessors.
It's worth recalling very briefly just what we faced on 2 March 1996 when we knew fairly early in the evening we were going to be the new government of Australia.
We did face, you ought to be reminded, an underlying budget deficit of $10.5 billion and in the space of only 3 years that will have been converted to a surplus of $1.6 billion. We've been able to do that whilst delivering on the promises we made to Australian families. We delivered in full, on time without deduction, the family tax initiative in January of this year. We have delivered in full, on time the promises made for tax concessions for private health insurance. We've been able to make provision for our commitment to self funded retirees. We have been able to set aside out of the proceeds of the sale of Telstra a $1.2 billion Natural Heritage Trust of Australia which will be the largest ever capital investment in the environmental future of Australia.
We've been able to allocate $1 billion for a Federation Fund, something to which I will return in a moment.
We have been able to do all of these things my friends whilst reducing the level of the budget deficit and reducing the indebtedness of Australia. And I was extremely proud as Prime Minister of this country to be able to address the financial community of New York a couple of months ago and to remind them that according to the OECD surveys of the world economy, in 1997 and 1998 Australia's rate of growth would be stronger than the average of the G7 nations, that in 1995 the level of national debt as a proportion of our annual wealth generation was 19.5% and by the year 2000 it will have been cut to just on 10%. I was able to tell them that in 1997-98 my government will repay $5.5 billion of Mr Keating and Mr Beazley's debt, that by any measure we were amongst the best performing nations so far as fiscal consolidation was concerned. And if you applied the criteria of the Treaty of Mastricht to membership of the European Monetary Union, Australia and Luxembourg would be the only two countries that would qualify for membership. I hasten to add that we had absolutely no desire whatever of joining.
So we have achieved a lot and it is worth remembering those things and we as Liberals are sometimes a little reluctant to blow our own trumpets and a little retiring about what has been achieved and these things have all laid the foundation of a much stronger economy. We've also delivered on our workplace relations commitments. We have restored the fabric of Australia's industrial relations system. I noticed in The Australian newspaper this morning that the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission is taking independent action against the Transport Workers' Union in Queensland in relation to their secondary boycots against a series of transport companies in that State. And that is a reminder of the extent to which we have been able to reform the industrial laws of Australia, brought the authority of the ordinary Courts back, we've abolished compulsory unionism, we've made it possible for workers and employers to negotiate directly with each other without the intervention of a Trade Union unless that is requested by the workers.
We've simplified the award system and we have given heart, and strength, and hope to those companies that wish to remove restrictive work practices that are holding back their performance and impeding their capacity to export. We have also, might I say, preserved our commitment to not to reduce the level of financial provision for defence in Australia.
It is the one area that has been absolutely quarantined and I make no aplogies for saying that from expenditure reduction. Expenditure on defence has been allowed to run down, too far, by our predecessors and there was a very strong case for holding defence expenditure at current levels but within that commitment we are reordering the priorities so that more money will be spent at the sharp end and less money will be spent at Russell Hill.
Ladies and gentlemen that is the first stage of our first term, we are now moving into the second stage and that second stage can best be described as the stage at which Australia begins to realise her potential as a nation into the 21st century.
We must increasingly look to the next century, we must increasingly judge all that we do as a national government, and indeed all that we do as State governments, in terms of realising the enormous potential, particularly in the Asia/Pacific region of Australia as it moves into the 21st century.
I have already committed the Government to thorough-going taxation reform. We have an inadequate, old fashioned taxation system, badly in need of renovation, badly in need of modernisation. All of you know that reform is needed. If I were addressing a Labor Party conference, I really could make the same claim.
It is becoming increasingly unsustainable for the Leader of the Opposition to pretend that no reform of the Australian taxation system is necessary. It is becoming increasingly ludicrous to imagine that you can look at reforming the Australian taxation system without examining the role of broad-based indirect taxes - it's like having a game of football with only one team. We have committed ourselves, within certain parameters, there'll be no increase in the overall taxation burden. We will examine the introduction of a broad based, indirect tax to replace some or all of the existing indirect taxes. We seek significant reductions in the burden of personal income tax. We want a fairer taxation system and we'll provide proper compensation for those people who are deserving of special consideration. We will also, as part of the review, address the difficulties and the weaknesses of Commonwealth/State financial relations which have been graphically illustrated by the decision of the High Court of Australia in relation to the franchise charges of the various State Governments.
So part of realising our potential as a nation into the 21st Century is to reform the Australian taxation system to make it a world class taxation system but part of that reform is also to address the infrastructure and long term development needs and long term development challenges of the Australian nation.
In the last budget the Treasurer announced the establishment of a $1 billion Federation Fund and this Fund was designed to pay for major infrastructure and development works around Australia, that would make a lasting contribution to the infrastructure of this country, would generate jobs in the construction phase and would be cognisant with the goals and ambitions of a nation moving confidently into the 21st century. And I am therefore absolutely delighted to announce, this afternoon, that the Federal Government will join the governments of South Australia and the Northern Territory in giving direct and strong financial support to the construction of the Alice Springs to Darwin railway.
(Extended applause)
Well thank you very much ladies and gentlemen, I'll come again. But it really does represent an historic commitment, an historic commitment by the three governments. It will make this project a major addition to Australia's infrastructure base. It will complete a rail link that was first promised in 1911.
It will serve as a very visible and powerful symbol of Federation. It will generate in the construction phase 2,000 jobs. It will provide a massive stimulus to steel activities in South Australia. The South Australian and Northern Territory governments anticipate that work on the project will commence in 1998 and be completed by the year 2002.
The three governments having now made their commitment of $100 million each, we will invite expressions of private sector interest. I am confident that this project will capture the imagination of the Australian community. I am confident it will capture the imagination of private sector investment and I am confident that it will make a major contribution to opening up Australia. It will make a major contribution to strengthening the infrastructure and the potential of not only South Australia but also the Northern Territory.
And I want to congratulate and thank John Olsen and Shane Stone for the tireless way in which they have campaigned. I mean it was almost, you know, see I didn't have a moments peace. It was only the remarkable combination of my security guards and the good sisters at the Mater hospital in Sydney that kept them away from me. Grahame Morris said to me, struth, he said, your going to be in trouble with them mate if you don't. But seriously, they have campaigned long and hard because on occasions, when you take decisions, you have got to have an eye for the future as well as an eye for the present. And although this is very much a project which has great current potential, it is also a project that will have even greater rewards and even greater returns as time goes by.
The action of the Northern Territory government in committing something like $80 million to the construction of a new port in Darwin. The changes that have occurred in the economies of both South Australia and the Northern Territory together, means that the potential of this project is very significant indeed.
It is projected to have an economic life of at least a hundred years and it will not only bring benefits to South Australia and the Northern Territory but it will also bring benefits to other parts of Australia, and I might mention that one of the conditions that have been agreed between the three governments is that in the event of any other in land rail line being constructed in the Tennant Creek to Darwin phase of the railway that I have just announced support for will be available.
It is the latest and certainly the most important of the decisions that my Government has taken in relation to the renewal of rail and rail infrastructure in Australia. We hope soon to complete in a way that is satisfactory, in all of the circumstances, given what we have inherited, arrangements regarding Australian national, which is of such great importance to the people of South Australia.
So, can I say to both to John and to Shane that I am delighted to be able to make this announcement. The Federal Government is very enthusiastic about it. We think it's a great project and I congratulate both of you on your indefatigable commitment to bringing this project about and I think the Australian people will see it as a building block in the process of realising the potential of this nation as we go into the 21st century.
Well, I guess that anything after that is a bit anticlimactic but I would like, before I sit down, because I am addressing a South Australian audience to remind you, if I may, of one or two other decisions that the Government has taken, that have been of particular importance to your State and prime amongst these was of course our decision on the level of protection for the Australian motor vehicle industry.
That was not an easy decision, but in the end, what governs our determination to take the decision that we did, was a belief that we would preserve and hopefully generate new jobs and it would guarantee future investment in the economies, not only of South Australia, but also of Victoria. And we had already seen evidence of that occurring and we have already seen the wisdom of that decision in economic and human terms being vindicated by announcements that have been made in recent weeks.
It's worth reminding ourselves that the decision is completely consistent with the APEC goals, in relation to trade by the year 2010. And in the long debate about levels of protection, it is also worth reminding ourselves that it was only in 1987 (that's 10 years ago) that the level of tariff protection of motor vehicles manufactured in Australia was 57.5 per cent. And under the plan that we have announced that will be reduced to a level of 10% in the year 2005, after a pause between 2000 and 2005.
So anybody who brands it as a decision involving a head in the sand attitude to the globalisation of economic circumstances is overlooking those facts. It was a balanced decision that properly took account of the employment and the investment needs of the community of South Australia but also a decision that was properly consistent with our long term economic goals. We've also taken other decisions in relation to the airport and in relation to commitments that have been made in the infrastructure area of your state.
Can I finish my speech ladies and gentlemen on a philosophical note and I think it is important, whilst we get the parameters of the economy right, whilst we properly look back on what has been achieved over the last 17 months, we tabulate the challenges that lie ahead, we think of the contribution that well placed infrastructure can make to the future of Australia. I think it is worth reflecting for a moment on the most important thing that keeps all of us together and that is our basic belief as Liberals.
One of the great successes of the Liberal Party over the last few years, has I believe been, the very strong recognition in most levels of the Party and certainly at a Parliamentary party level, that we are in the phrase that I have become rather fond of - we are broad church - that we do represent a spectrum of views and provided we have mechanisms and we have a will within our own ranks to have those different views argued out and decisions reached then we can work together very successfully as a Party.
The Liberal Party of Australia is a very special animal amongst centre/right parties around the world. It is not exclusively a Liberal Party in the European sense of the word, nor is it a Conservative Party, in the European or American sense of the word. It is a combination of both. It is the custodian of the conservative tradition in Australian politics. It is also the custodian of the progressive Liberal tradition in the Australian polity. And it's very important when we take our decisions, when we think of the quality of the Party, it's very important to remember that we are custodians of both of those traditions and although people may think there is something contradictory about that, there really isn't. Because increasingly modern government is about, facing the challenge of change, of very rapid change but also at the same time remembering that there is certain stabilisers in society that provide reassurance and support when a society is undergoing a basic change of an particulalry of an economic character.
Therefore a Party which is the custodian and the trustee of those two great traditions in Australian politics is the Party best placed to get the right balance between preserving those past and values and traditions which are enduring worth and enduring strength and support, whilst at the same time recognising that change in many areas of our life and our society is absolutely unavoidable, and more than that is overwhelmingly desirable.
Anybody who imagines that the Australian economy can somehow or other stand aside from the forces of globalisation which are now sweeping around the world is deluding themselves. The information technology revolution is the greatest single economic transformation the world has seen since the industrial revolution and we have only begun, in my view, to tap the surface of what all of that involves.
So, in a philosophical sense, as well as in a common sense, day-to-day pragmatic sense, the Liberal Party is the best equipped of all the political parties on the Australian scene to strike the balance and in embracing necessary, unavoidable, indeed desirable change, and equally preserving those constant values and practices and traditions. which continue to be of worth and value and should not fall before the doctrine of change merely for the sake of change and it gives to us as we view the prospects of Australia as we move into the 21st century, a unique opportunity to give leadership to this nation, to give leadership to the various States of Australia and together to realise our potential as we move as Australians together into the 21st century.


27 August 1997
E&amp;OE................................................
To Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory; to my Federal Parliamentary colleague and President of the Senate, Margaret Reid; to Tony Staley, the Federal President of the Liberal Party; to other members of the Assembly here in the ACT, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how very pleased I am, again, to be at the annual dinner of the ACT Division, to share a few thoughts with you about the direction of my Government in relation to the whole of the country over the next 12 months, and also to reflect a little on the special opportunities - and I choose those words very deliberately - that exist here in the ACT.
But before doing that I would like to acknowledge, in a very positive way, the contribution of both Margaret Reid and Kate Carnell in their respective political spheres.
I'm very proud to have Margaret as the President of the Senate. She brings an enormous amount of dignity and authority to that office and her support within the Party to take over that very important position has been obvious for a very long time. And one of the things we wanted to do on attaining office was to restore a certain amount of quiet dignity and strengths in the areas of the two presiding offices. And there's not the slightest doubt in the world that, in relation to the Senate, Margaret has done all of that.
I also want to acknowledge the enormous contribution of Kate as the Chief Minister of the Territory. Governing the ACT is a challenging task. It's an atypical electorate in many ways. It's a volatile electorate. It's a challenging electorate. And she's carried out the task with very great skill and she has my strong support.
We are now about 17 months into government. And I think I can fairly say that we have ended stage one, in many respects the most difficult stage, of our time in government.
We did inherit a budget deficit of $10.5 billion and by the end of our first term we will have turned that into a surplus at $1.6 billion. And I think it's very important because we can't do anything in Australia with the economy, we can't do anything with the economy in the ACT that has any sort of enduring legacy unless we get the fundamentals of the national economy right. And it was unavoidable and it did involve some unpopular decisions. And I know they've had an impact on the ACT, and I'll deal with that in more detail later in my remarks. But we did find an enormous number of challenges. And I'm very proud of the fact that we tackled them head-on from day one.
I gave a report to the National Parliament today on my recent visit to the United States and the United Kingdom. And I recall a visit that I paid to the trading floor of Salomon Brothers in New York. And this particular trading floor was the genesis of that famous book by Tom Wolfe called, The Bonfire of the Vanities, when he talked about the great money-market dealers in the United States. And I went to one of the dealers on the floor and he'd done a graph. That graph showed the gap between bond rates for American bonds and Australian bonds in March of 1996. And it had been 250 points against Australia. And when I saw him in July, early in July, it had come from 250 down to something like 60, which had been an extraordinary contraction and therefore a remarkable vote of confidence in the management of the Australian economy over that time. And since July, which is only a few weeks ago, it has contracted even further so that it now sits at only 25 basis points.
Now, that may be, in the eyes of some, a very technical point to make. But when you think that you are dealing there with the greatest and hardest heads in the financial community in the world, and what they are doing is making a positive judgement on the management of the Australian economy over the last 17 months, and what they are saying is that these people inherited a difficult situation, they have taken difficult decisions, they've got the thing back on track and we have a lot of long-term investment confidence in them, that sort of thing is tremendously important.
But we have, in a way, finished that first stage. We have repaired the foundations. We have introduced major workplace relations reforms. We have embarked upon a vigorous privatisation programme. One-third of Telstra is being listed for sale at present and Australians will be able to fully participate in that very great exercise.
We have piloted through Parliament, in the face of mindless, obstructive opposition from the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats and the Australian Greens, not only the one-third sale of Telstra, but the establishment of the $1.2 billion Natural Heritage Trust of Australia. And that will represent the greatest capital investment in Australia's environmental development since the end of the World War II. And it ends, for all time, the notion that the Liberal Party of Australia is in some way indifferent to the environment of this country. And what that particular project does is to demonstrate that, as far as my Party is concerned, our Party is concerned, we are a Party that believes that the environment and conservation issues are well and truly in the mainstream of political issues in Australia. And that they are of concern to Australians right across the political spectrum.
So we have done so much of the agenda that we put to the Australian people before March of last year. And the remarkable thing is that we have been able to get the budget in order and to get ourselves in a strong and sound fiscal position whilst implementing our election commitments.
We delivered the $1 billion Family Tax Initiative in full, on time, at the beginning of this year. We delivered the private health insurance rebate which commenced on the 1st of July. There's been a bit of publicity about this issue in the last few days with the premium increases being sought by some of the private funds. There is pressure on the private funds, but almost all of that pressure is directly attributable to the fact that for 13 years the former Labor Government deliberately discriminated against private health insurance in this country.
For 13 years they watched while the number of Australians with private health insurance fell from 61 per cent in 1983 to a little over 35 per cent in 1996. And that represented an act of deliberate neglect, a sin of omission designed to undermine private health insurance in Australia. And the warning that Graham Richardson, as Labor Health Minister, gave in 1990 that unless something were done to stabilise, through incentives, the number of people in private health insurance, was deliberately ignored by the Labor Party. And it is hypocrisy in the extreme for the Labor Party now to say: according to the figures that were compiled before the 1st of July more people have left private health insurance. That is an indication that the tax incentive has failed. How can it possibly have failed when it hasn't yet been given an opportunity to work? And it will be a long time into the future before we can determine the extent to which the private health insurance initiative have stabilised and reversed the adverse trends of the past 13 years. But I believe it will make a very positive contribution. And as Michael Wooldridge said the other day, some of the early anecdotal evidence is very positive in that regard.
So, that is the first part - stage one. But stage two is very much now about building on the repaired foundations, and it is very much about realising the potential of our nation as we move into the 21st Century. And realising the potential of our nation involves a number of things. It involves giving to this nation a modern 21st Century taxation system and that is why I have put taxation reform well and truly back on the agenda in Australia.
Everyone knows that we need a new, better, more incentive based taxation system. Even in their quiet more honest moments, our opponents in the Australian Labor Party know it. Kim Beazley and Gareth Evans supported Paul Keating's, "Option C", when he put it to the tax summit in 1985. They were, in fact, amongst its most fervent supporters.
I have always supported a change in the Australian taxation system. We must address the imbalance, the sheer imbalance of an indirect taxation system. We need to repair the income tax base so we can have significantly lower levels of marginal personal income tax rates. It really is ridiculous that you can have the top marginal rate of tax applying at a little over one and a half times average weekly earnings.
It really is ridiculous that you can pay sales tax on things like toothpaste, at
22 per cent, but Lear Jets are completely free of sales tax. I mean, this is the equitable taxation system that Kim Beazley wants to defend. It's not that I have got anything against Lear Jets, but I am very partial towards tooth paste. But you only, I mean, I could regale you all night with priceless examples of that, demonstrating the idiocy of the present indirect taxation system. We are committed to reforming it.
I know some people will say: gee you don't want to get into that. It's difficult, of course it's difficult, but there's really not much point in being in Government unless you are prepared to tackle some difficult issues. And it does represent the credo that is driving what we are doing in that area and what we are doing in many other areas.
I think the portents for the Australian economy are increasingly on the bright side, and increasingly improving, and this is relevant to the whole of Australia. It's as relevant to the economy of the ACT as it is to the economy of Sydney, or the economy of Perth.
The speech made by the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Mr Ian Macfarlane, in Perth a couple of weeks ago, when he said for the first time I've heard it from a Reserve Bank Governor in the 23 years that I have been in political life, he said, that it was now possible for the Australian economy to grow at over 4 per cent, 4.5 per cent, or even higher without risking a resurgence of inflation, or a crisis on our external accounts. And that was a very important statement. It was a ringing vote of confidence in Australia's economic future from a man who ought to know. And I may also claim with all due modesty, it was something of an endorsement of the success of our budget policies over the last 17 months.
What he was really saying was that, we could now afford to take the speed limits off economic growth in this country. And taking the speed limits off economic growth is important to you here in Canberra and it's important to the whole of the Australian economy because it means that we can risk a bit of growth without provoking some kind of economic crisis, which has been the great thing that has bedevilled Australian economic development in the past.
You get a bit of a spurt up and then the Treasury and the banks say you have got to close it down because the current account is falling apart or inflation is getting out of control. Now that is what happened through the 1980s. It is what caused the recession which pushed unemployment in Australia under Labor and under Kim Beazley, as employment Minister, to over 11 per cent in 1991. But for the first time in a generation to have a person as authority givers to the Governor of the Bank saying we are now in such a strong fundamental position that you can grow at a fast rate without risking inflation.
Now that is challenging and good news for the whole of the country and it's particularly good news for the unemployed of Australia because the only way you get unemployment down is to have fast economic growth and by that generate more jobs. You'll get it down then and if you fix the labour market, as we have, you'll also get it down at a faster rate.
So, the message I bring to you tonight is a message of great optimism, and great hope and great confidence about the economic future of Australia and most particularly the economic future of the Australian Capital Territory.
Now I know that some of the decisions that we have taken have impacted adversely in the ACT. I know that, I acknowledge it and I know the concern that many here tonight and many in the ACT have felt. Can I just make a couple of things crystal clear. We didn't set out to target the ACT and any suggestion that there is any in-built insensitivity in my Government towards the people of Canberra, or the people of the ACT, is absolutely wrong.
We are all Australians together and I am very proud of the National Capital of Australia. It's a great city and I want it to grow, and I want it to prosper, and I intend to lead a Government that will contribute to that. And your rate of unemployment, some of you may not know, is in fact 7.2 per cent lower on a trend basis, than what it was a year ago.
Many of the stories written about Canberra and much of the commentary about Canberra is unduly carping and unduly negative. It seeks to highlight the adverse and neglect the positive. It neglects the fact that some of the recent indicators about employment in this city have been very positive. For example the ANZ survey of job advertisements released earlier this month found that the average number of job ads in Canberra in July was 5.7 per cent higher than what it was in the same period last year.
Canberra's future lies very heavily in small business and already 52 per cent of total ACT employment is in the private sector. The latest Morgan and Banks quarterly survey found a favourable turn-around in employment expectations with 16.6 per cent of organisations surveyed in Canberra planning to take on more employees between now and October.
Canberra is very well placed to take full advantage of Government outsourcing. Outsourcing from the Department of Administrative Services alone was expected to generate 2,500 jobs. And in December of last year, I undertook to ensure that all outsourcing proposals are examined to maximise opportunities for small and medium sized enterprises.
The recent Department of Finance expression of interest for outsourcing its corporate management operation resulted in the short listing of seven firms. Only one of those was Canberra based and a further two though, have a significant presence here in Canberra, and in any case the jobs will remain in Canberra with sub-contracting to local firms.
Canberra has, as demonstrated by a recent decision, has great potential to seize opportunities in information technology, with the highest of educational standards, the ACT labour force is well equipped to adapt to new technology. The ACT Government was successful, with the support of my Government, in capturing Fujitsu to site its Asia-Pacific regional headquarters for desktop services in Canberra and that will create 900 new jobs in this city over the next few years.
I also think, on the employment front, that the Chief Minister is to be congratulated on her ambitious programme with the help of the Commonwealth Employment Service to place 500 Canberra young people into full-time jobs by Christmas by providing employers an extra $1000 subsidy for each young person on top of the subsidies already available from the federal government.
Now, I mention those particular things, ladies and gentleman, to remind all of you that, yes, there has been difficulties, there have been public service redundancies and because of the heavy proportionate reliance of this city on public service employment, it has had a noticeable impact. But there is a more positive story, there is an underlying economic strength and there is a great resilience and there is a great spirit in this city and there is a great an genuine pride from your federal government in the future and the character of the people of Canberra and the city of Canberra.
There is also a very strong commitment to doing some practical things in the infrastructure area to assist the people of Canberra and the ACT.
The very first commitment out of the Federation Fund was to the construction of the National Museum in Canberra, the National Museum of Australia, and that particular project, committed to by my Party and the Coalition in opposition, will be delivered in full and will be a very, very important, not only national building, but it will add very significantly to the public infrastructure of the city Canberra.
Can I say to you, that I, and my government, am very strongly committed to the
Very Fast Train project. It has been jointly sponsored by Federal Government, the government of the ACT and the government of NSW. I have to say to you tonight that I am concerned that progress with that project appears to have slowed in recent months. I am concerned about the fact that a couple of important meetings involved with it have been cancelled by the NSW government. And as a result of that I've written to the Premier of NSW and I have invited him to a meeting as soon as possible, and I've naturally also invited Kate Carnell as the Chief Minister of the ACT. I hope to arrange that meeting urgently because I am determined that the relatively slow progress in pushing forward the project, that that is put behind us. I want to see that project succeed. I want to see the whole process accelerated. Because I remain very optimistic that the Very Fast Train project can be a very important component of Canberra's future and the future of this region of Australia.
Having adequate infrastructure and realising the potential contribution that infrastructure can make to the future of this country is a very significant component of realising the potential of Australia as we move into the 21st Century.
As we approach the turn of the century and as we approach the new millennium, I believe that the people of Australia will increasingly focus on the fundamental strengths of our nation, they will draw encouragement and nourishment from the harmony of the Australian people from the values that we have in common, our shared aspirations about the future. They will also draw strength and encouragement and reassurance from the commitment of their governments to tackling those road blocks to realising the potential of our nation as we go into the next century.
No nation can be successful in the modern world unless it accepts that globalisation of the economy is here to stay. The idea that any nation, let alone any city or any State could simply opt out of the world, could surround itself with the cloister of high protection and ignore the processes of globalisation, any idea that that could happen is totally false. We have to change, we have to modernise, we have to embrace new ways of doing things, we have to embrace new industries.
One of the great challengers of modern government and modern state craft is to get the right balance between changing those things that ought to be changed, throwing out those things that are no longer working, but at the same time hanging onto those institutions and those values and those stabilisers in our society that provide us with reassurance and continuity. It is an important balance to be struck. It is never possible to say that change for change sake is a good thing, but if equally if we ignore the need to change and embrace even a radical way of handling things in certain areas then we will make a very fundamental mistake.
I think there is enormous optimism developing in Australia. I think we are seeing bit by bit and increasingly around the country evidence come forward of a strengthening economy. When you cut interest rates five times in 17 months, when you have a rate of inflation which is the lowest we've had for more than 30 years, when you have housing interest rates which are lower than they have been since the late 1960s, when you have cut your debt as much as we have, when you have strengthened our competitiveness by changing the industrial relations system, when you have embarked upon a competition policy which is designed to deliver real benefits to the consumers of Australia and when you have a national government which is willing to tackle the age old weakness of the Australian taxation system then you have very genuine grounds for hope and very genuine grounds for optimism.
I believe that we have the opportunity as we move towards the turn of the century to realise the enormous economic potential of Australia. There are difficult areas in the economy, the level of unemployment remains a great challenge, but that can only be reduced in an enduring sense if we have a sustained period of high economic growth and you can't have that if you have a high rate of inflation, you can't have that if you have a potential balance of payments crisis and you can't have that unless you are prepared to as we have been willing to do to reform our industrial relations systems.
So, ladies and gentlemen, in thanking all of you as members and supporters and friends of the Liberal Party here in the ACT acknowledging some of the local difficulties, explaining them as I have endeavoured to do tonight, putting them in the framework of the programme that we have over a period of time to repair the foundations and then build on those repaired foundations for the future, not only of the ACT, but of Australia.
I want to thank all of you for the loyalty and support and understanding that you have extended to my government over the last 17 months. I owe a great deal to the Liberal Party. I've never forgotten my own Liberal Party roots. I would not have been in Parliament had it not been for the Party to which we belong, I would certainly not have been leader of that Party or Prime Minister of Australia without the understanding, the support and the endorsement of the Liberal Party. I see the last 17 months as being but the beginning of what I hope to be a period of achievement, a period of hope, a period of change, but also a period of preservation of those things in our society that are enduring and are worth preserving and worth integrating into our future.
I speak to you therefore with enormous pride about the last 17 months and with an enormous sense of hope and optimism and faith in the great National Capital of Australia and of course in our entire Australian nation.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


29 August 1997
E&amp;OE..............................
Well thank you very much John for that very nice welcome and introduction. To Bruce Baird, to Rod McGeoch, to John Schaap, to Sir Frank Moore, the former Chairman, to my many other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great delight for me to be able to talk to this very large gathering of an extremely positive, forward-looking and successful industry. I doubt that in all the industries of Australia that you would find one that has fewer negative thoughts, fewer people who reflect in a mournful way on the past, than is the case with the tourist industry. And as Prime Minister there are many statistics that come one's way. But the statistic that came my way recently that really did catch my attention and it's very relevant to that video you saw a few moments ago, it's very relevant to the rise in optimism and hope in the tourist industry, was a statistic which said that between May of 1984 and May of 1997 - which is thirteen years - there were a total of 5,000 new jobs created in net terms in the combined areas of manufacturing, mining and agriculture. Yet in the service industries over the same time there were no fewer than 1.8 million jobs created in Australia in that thirteen year period.
Now that statistic is not presented negatively in relation to mining, farming or manufacturing. The mining industry in Australia has long been a very capital-intensive industry and because of the outrageous and discriminatory trade policies of the major trading blocs in the world, the farm sector in Australia has suffered very severely over that time. And it remains my very strong view and the view of my Government that there is no sector of the Australian economy that continues to deserve a particular understanding more than the rural and agricultural sector of Australia. Not only for the economic and trade and export worth that it represents to our nation, but also to the way in which it represents to many Australians part of the history and the fabric and the very heart and soul of what we imagine to be the very important and complicated but very enduring Australian way of life. And also the figures are not meant in any way to denigrate the continued importance, and particularly in the export sector, of the manufacturing industries of Australia.
But what the figures demonstrate is the enormous transformation which has occurred in the Australian economy over the last 20 years. And none, of course, no area, of course, has that transformation been greater than in the area of tourism. The whole area of tourism and hospitality and recreation was one of those things that within the living memory of many people in this room Australians would not have imagined would become one of our major export earners - in fact our best export earner two years ago.
Twenty-five to thirty years ago, even, the idea that Australia's hospitality and tourism industries would occupy the role they do in the Australian way of life and the Australian economy and the hopes that we have for the future of our country, would have been completely undreamt of. Indeed the idea of Australians being specialists at hospitality and recreation is something that somehow or other people twenty-five to thirty years ago didn't imagine. And therefore in the space of only one generation we have seen an enormous transformation in attitudes. We see the tremendous pride and enthusiasm of young Australians who are involved in tourism.
Tourism represents the quintessential expression of the small business ethic of Australia. And I know that in this room there are many men and women who really represent that in a very direct and very successful fashion. The small business sector of the Australian economy is, of course, the hope of the side in reducing unemployment in the years ahead. And it is only through policies that encourage successful small businesses that I believe over time we can reduce Australia's still unacceptably high level of unemployment. And nowhere, of course, is that more important and does that have more prospects than in the tourist industry. And I want to say to you that many of the policies that my Government has brought in over the last 18 months have been designed directly to benefit the small business sector of the Australian economy.
Of course, there have been the general changes in the economy during that period. There have been the five reductions in interest rates. There has been what I regard as the quite heroic turn-around of the national debt during that period of time. To inherit a $10.5 billion deficit and to be able to say after your first three years in government you have turned that into a surplus of $1.6 billion is no mean achievement and one of which I am particularly proud as the head of the Government.
But hand in glove with that we have also introduced a number of changes. And a number of policy reforms which are of particular benefit to small business and of particular benefit to the tourist industry. And chief amongst these, of course, has been the changes that we have made to industrial relations law. Many of you will know that I've spent a major part of the last ten or fifteen years in public life arguing the cause of fundamental workplace and industrial relations reform. And the Workplace Relations Act that was taken through Parliament by Peter Reith at the end of last year represents the biggest single change in the industrial relations culture of this country that we have seen since World War II.
It has ended completely compulsory unionism in Australia, it has restored the strength of the secondary boycott laws, it has restored the authority of the rule of law over industrial disputes and most importantly of all it has made it possible for employers and employees at the workplace to deal directly with each other without the compulsory injection against their will of a trade union.
Now, all of those represent very important and very fundamental reforms which are of direct benefit to your industry, but in one area we would like to go further. You will know that for a long time the unfair dismissal laws introduced without warning and without mandate by the former government a few years ago have had a completely counter-productive effect. Instead of protecting workers they have actually harmed workers because they have intimidated many small businesses out of taking on new staff through fear that they cannot let go people who are not performing adequately.
When we came to office we made a number of changes to those laws which have significantly improved the environment, but we would like to go further. We would like to exempt altogether from the operation of any unfair dismissal laws anywhere in Australia, any firm that employs fewer than fifteen people and the figure of fifteen has been chosen because of certain legal limits which apply in relation to the definition of a small business under the Workplace Relations Act. Now that particular proposal will go even further in bringing about the sort of changes that I know that many people in this industry would like to see.
In many respects, ladies and gentlemen, having reached the half way in our first term in government it is tempting to reflect for a moment on what has happened over the last 18 months. But also more importantly to project forward to what the government wants to do and the plans the government has in realising the great potential of Australia as we move into the 21st Century. The last 18 months has been very much an exercise in repairing the foundations, an exercise in reducing our national debt, an exercise implementing our particular commitments to families and in areas such as private health insurance, an exercise in changing the industrial relation system. But we are now moving into the second phase and that phase is very much about fundamental reforms that will enable Australia to move very confidently and very effectively into the 21st Century.
The first of those very fundamental reforms that lies before us is the very important area of taxation reform and can I say to you that we have in front of us at the moment, and this is a very important message for people in business as well as the people in politics, we have literally a once-in-a-generation opportunity to fundamentally reform for the better the Australian taxation system.
This has been tried in the past. I tried as Treasurer in 1981 without success. Paul Keating tried in 1985, I might say at the time with more support from me as the then Opposition Treasury spokesman than he got from the Trade Union Movement or many of his own colleagues and he did not succeed. John Hewson and the Coalition tried very valiantly in 1993 then opposed, as you all remember, by Paul Keating. You can't leave an area of reform as fundamental as this, you can't leave a taxation system which the High Court recently demonstrated as having almost ground to a halt so far as Commonwealth-State relations are concerned and really be serious about exploiting the potential of this country in the new millennium.
That is why I, and my colleagues, have very strongly committed ourselves to the cause of taxation reform. We know the risks and we know how easy it is for our opponents to run a negative campaign. We know how easy it is to try perhaps successfully in some areas to scare people. But at the end of the day the point of being in Government, the point of having executive authority in the national government of this country is to do good things for the future of Australia.
We do badly need a new taxation system. In the 1950s you had to reach seventeen times average weekly earnings before you paid the top marginal rate of tax, it is now 1.7. We have an indirect taxation system that is hopelessly lopsided in the items that it taxes and leaves untaxed. We have an income tax system which is sapping incentive. We badly need fundamental reform and fundamental overhaul. We need to give greater encouragement to our export industry. We need to reduce the incentives for avoidance and evasion by looking to the impact on work patterns and work behaviour and earning habits of high marginal rates of taxation. In other words, we do need a fundamental reform of the system. We need to recognise that the present relationship between the Commonwealth and the States in the area of taxation is badly in need of repair.
It is not something that can be left to the next century. It is not something that can be left to the next government. It is something that if it is ever to be tackled and tackled successfully it has got to be tackled now and that is why the Treasurer, and I, and the government that I lead is very strongly committed. And I want the support, I want the enthusiastic input and I want the intelligent contributions of all sectors of the business community of Australia. And I want to say to all of you that if it doesn't happen this time I don't know when it will ever happen.
It is not enough for the people in the business community to say we need reform, we want your active and vocal support, we want your contributions. We will do it in a fair and equitable fashion. We will do it in a way that encourages people to invest. We will do it in a way that encourages people to work harder because they believe they will get a better return for that extra effort and we will do it in a way that is fair and properly compensates genuinely disadvantaged groups in the Australian community. Now it is an important goal of all the things that I thought ten or fifteen years ago that were needed to fundamentally reform and make more competitive the Australian economy - taxation was on the top of the list.
We have reformed the Australian financial system and that may I say, as I always have, has been due to a bipartisan effort on both sides of politics. My Government has fundamentally changed the workplace relations system. We are now embracing competition policies all around Australia which are producing significant benefits. We are producing an enormous emphasis on the export industries of this country. We have embarked upon the most vigorous privatisation programme that any national government has undertaken and it would seem that the bug of privatisation has spread even here to NSW, and I welcome that very warmly, and if Bob Carr wants somebody to rustle up the Left in relation to the power sell-off I'd be only too happy to oblige.
But the one area, the one sort of outstanding, unreconstructed recidivist area of economic reform, of course, remains the issue of taxation reform. And we are going to commit ourselves very strongly to it because it is important to the future of this country. And of all the industries of Australia none, of course, has a more optimistic view about the future of Australia, none is prouder to sell the benefits of being an Australian and the benefits of Australia than your own industry. And the extraordinary way in which the tourist industry of Australia has helped to deepen the bond between Australia and the nations of the Asia-Pacific, the fact that at the very moment consideration is being given, as Bruce said in his introduction, by the Chinese government to Australia being a country of destination in tourist terms. And if that comes off I think we'll be the first Western nation to receive that categorisation.
And the way in which you have transformed your industry, the understanding of so many Australians, not all but the understanding of most of us, towards the nations of our region has been a very remarkable achievement. And as Rod and the video reminded us, of course, so much of this will reach its apex in the year 2000 when you will have that remarkable congruence of the beautiful city of Sydney representing, as Rod properly said, the whole of Australia, the tourist industry and the Games of the year 2000. And can I say on behalf of the national government of Australia, I applaud Rod's remarks that the Olympic Games should not been seen as a Sydney-centric exercise, they belong to all Australians and I am very happy to see the healthy competition that is occurring around Australia in relation to particular events. I applaud the growing involvement of Australians in other parts of our nation in the Olympics.
It is impossible, of course, when you talk about the Olympics being held in Sydney in the year 2000 to use too many superlatives. It is a remarkable opportunity. To marshall a depth of nationalism and patriotic sentiment and a sheer pride in putting Australia on display to the rest of the world that is quite unrivalled. And, of course, your industry has a unique role to play in this and it has been very heavily and very directly involved in the planning for the Olympic Games already. Because your industry understands the lure of Australia better than most of us. Your industry understands the particular fascination and beauty of Sydney. And your industry understands the spirit that a nation and a city gets from a great international sporting event.
Australians quite properly and quite proudly are renowned for their sporting expertise and their sporting achievements. We have had many great events in the past in the Olympic Games once already in the post World War II period. But, of course, the Games of the year 2000 here in Sydney will be the sporting gathering to end all sporting gatherings. And I wouldn't want any person to leave this room being in any doubt about the tremendous enthusiasm and support there is within the ranks of the Federal Government for this great international event. It is a once-in-a-hundred year opportunity to tell the rest of the world what a harmonious, united, positive, forward-looking nation we really are. It is an opportunity, of course, to display our great sporting prowess, but most importantly of all it is an opportunity to put on display to the rest of the world the openness and the friendliness and the character and the welcoming nature of the Australian people. Your industry will be critical to the success of that exercise.
And what cheers me greatly is that yours is an industry which is forward-looking and positive. You've taken some very heavy knocks. Areas of the industry, of course, were badly bruised by the pilots dispute of 1989. I've taken on board some of the remarks that were made by Bruce in his introduction, and I hope that some of our responses, I can't promise all, in those areas will be encouraging.
I know the jobs that you have already generated, but I also know the opportunities that lie ahead for job generation in your industry. Over the past few weeks we have made a number of announcements, not least our commitment to help the governments of South Australia and the Northern Territory to build the Darwin to Alice Springs railway, which I believe are important to a longer term development of the infrastructure, including the tourist infrastructure of Australia. I think rail transport has a great future in this country, and provided it is conducted on a proper commercial basis, I think there are many things that will occur in that area that will surprise and confound the cynics.
But ladies and gentlemen, I simply want to say to all of you that the message I bring to you today is very much a message of optimism and hope. There are many encouraging signs about the Australian economy in recent weeks. Not only do I believe that we have the most fortunate conjunction of economic fundamentals that we've had for more than a generation - low inflation, falling interest rates, a budget back in control, a government determined to tackle areas of fundamental reform, a strengthening trade account. Put all of those things together and you have some fundamentals that are really positive and are really bright. I know that there is still job insecurity, but I also know that positive industries like the tourist industry can make an enormous contribution to the removal of that insecurity.
So finally can I say thank you for what you have done to transform the Australian economy, to transform the view Australians have of themselves in the service industries, to bring to new generations of Australians the opportunity of making a living and having real jobs in a real industry which provides hope and optimism to them.
And let us all, as we move towards the turn of the century, and despite what I may technically have said about the formal commencement of the new millennium, I will be opening a bottle of champagne on the first of January in the year 2000 along with everybody else. And I simply say let us all have a sense of optimism and hope and very positive thoughts as we move together towards those remarkable events, the Olympic Games, a new millennium and one hundred years of celebration of the birth of the Australian nation. We have great years, exciting years, and really challenging years ahead of us and I know that your industry will make an enormous contribution to their fruition.
ends.



3 September 1997
E&amp;OE................................................
Well thank you very much, Richard Alston, for that very kind introduction, to Mrs Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory, to my predecessor, Sir John Gorton, Prime Minister of Australia from 1968-1971, the first Prime Minister of Australia to really give a significant charge to the arts in this country, particularly the Australian film industry.
Can I say ladies and gentlemen, how very delighted I am to be in this beautiful, historical building for which, I have an immense affection. As a child I saw it as the centre of political and national life in Australia. It was the place where great and important decisions were made. It was the place where as a young person I listened over the radio to those great debates between, Sir Robert Menzies and Dr Evatt. The great debates over Petrov, the letter to Molotov, the unfolding of the Royal Commission into Communism, espionage in the 1950's, the great schism in the Australian Labor Party which led to the formation of the Democratic Labor Party during those years.
And, of course, it was a building, as a person consumed by politics at a very early age, it was a building to me which seemed the epitome of all that you could want in terms of passionate pursuit of those things that you held very dear. So I do have and retain a great affection for this building.
I served in it in various capacities for 13 years and although the new building is more spacious and lavish, the accommodation is better, not only for the members but also for the staff who work there and for the press. There's no doubt that it lacks the intimacy and the warmth. You get swallowed up.
I have mixed recollections of this building and the new building. I did rather better in leadership ballots in the old building than I did in the new, although I recovered fairly well recently on that score. The sheer distance of the new building is a daunting prospect and there is a lack of, I suppose, warmth about it which you can't say about this building.
Having said all of that and having said that I was not an enthusiastic mover to the new Parliament House in the late 1980s. I have to say that I have no doubt in the world that in 30 to 40 years time the Prime Minister of Australia will speak with warmth and affection of the new Parliament House and will have long forgotten the contribution of this wonderful building.
I have to say that the debating chamber in the old Parliament was more intimate. You could literally almost reach over and touch one of your opponents in the course of the debate and the very intimacy of the old debating chamber, I think, led to a greater commitment to Parliamentary debate. I have to say that there is one thing that the two buildings do have in common and that is that it is always better to be on the right hand side of the Speaker.
It goes without saying, ladies and gentlemen, that one of the offices most associated with this building and indeed the new building, is the office that I now have the immense privilege of occupying and that is the office of the Prime Minister of Australia.
It is plainly an office that offers enormous opportunities. The capacity to influence events for the good, the capacity to bring about change is almost limitless but it is an office that has to be exercised and used in partnership with the other great institutions of our nation. The first and foremost of those is of course the Parliament itself and I do revere Parliament and I do revere the accountability of the Executive to the Parliament.
I did promise, before I became Prime Minister, that I would take Parliament seriously and except when I have been out of Australia or indisposed, I have attended every Question Time since I became Prime Minister. And without boring you with figures we have averaged 19 to 20 questions every Question Time, which is about half as much again as our predecessors.
I enjoy Parliament, I enjoy its immense cut and thrust, its banter, its opportunities for serious debate, and of course there is no greater respect that you can display towards an institution than to demonstrate your accountability to it.
Each of the 25 Prime Ministers of Australia has brought his own value system to the job. And I say his own value system, not out of any insensitivity, but merely to record the fact that Australia is yet to have a female Prime Minister, something I know that everybody will hope at some stage and I don't want to get specific - you always get into trouble on these things, at some stage, I hope, in the not too distant future will be remedied.
I came to the office with a very strong commitment to put the mainstream interests of the Australian community back at centre stage. That doesn't mean that I set out to ignore the rights and the interests of specific interest groups but rather to adopt a fresh approach to Government which was to put the broad national interest first.
I came to office with a very strong personal commitment to the principle of mutual obligation. Society, in my view, has a responsibility to look after those who are deserving of help. They, in turn, have a responsibility to meet reasonable, I underline reasonable, requests from society to contribute in return for the assistance that they have received.
I came to office with a strong view about the importance of families in our society, about the role of small business in our community, the virtues of restoring incentive and the need to look after older Australians.
I came to office with a very strong commitment to take Australia's workplace relations into the 21st Century. In the economic area, I also had a fundamental belief that the speed limits on our capacity to grow faster should be and could be removed because it is only through a faster growth in the Australian economy over a sustained period that we can seriously hope to significantly reduce unemployment.
I also came to office with some strong views about realistic plans to allow development to proceed in this country, alongside a massive program to improve our natural environment.
I also have a strong belief in the value, strength and resilience of rural Australia. My Governments horizons do not stop east of the Great Dividing Range and I also came to office with an unshakeable belief that the things that united us Australians were much greater, more enduring and more important than the things that divided us and that it has been my desire as Prime Minister to concentrate on the unifying rather than the dividing values of Australian society.
The Prime Minister of Australia is of course also the Prime Minister of a Federation. Moreover it is a Federation which is here to stay but it is a Federation which can and must be made to work better. In my view there is too much time wasted in empty rhetorical exchanges about centralism versus federalism.
I was asked recently whether I regarded myself as centralist. I said that I was not a centralist, however I quickly added that I was a nationalist and there is a world of difference between the two. A nationalist is somebody who believes that all decisions should be governed by the national interest. A centralist is somebody who asserts that the central government is always the personification of the national interest and that is a very important difference. I am, and always have been, and will continue to be, a very passionate nationalist.
What I have described are some of the main beliefs which have underpinned decision making by my Government over the past 18 months. Governments without general guiding values and beliefs will in my view only tinker at the edges of change and reform, rather than make long term improvements for our society as a whole.
Every Prime Minister, has also of course been, the product of a particular political philosophy and has led either a particular political party or a coalition of parties and some, of course, have had the rare honour in their careers of having lead various parties and changed sides on a number of occasions.
The Liberal Party of Australia, my Party, is a very special animal amongst centre/right political parties around the world. It is not exclusively a Liberal Party in the European sense of that word, nor is it a Conservative Party, in the European or American definition of that term. It is a combination of both. It is the custodian of the Conservative tradition in Australian politics. It is also the custodian of the progressive Liberal tradition in the Australian polity and although people may think there is something contradictory about that, when you think about it there really isn't.
Increasingly, modern government is about facing the challenge of very rapid change but also remembering that there are certain stabilisers in society that provide reassurance and support when a society is undergoing great change particularly of an economic character.
Therefore, a party which is the custodian and the trustee of those two traditions in Australian politics, is the party best placed to get the right balance between preserving those past values and traditions which have enduring worth, strength and support, whilst at the same time recognising that change in many areas of our life and our society is absolutely unavoidable, indeed overwhelmingly desirable. For example, anyone who imagines that the Australian economy can somehow or other stand aside from the forces of globalisation which are now sweeping around the world, delude themselves.
For example, the information technology revolution is the greatest single economic transformation the world has seen since the industrial revolution and we have only really begun, in my view, to tap the surface of all that which is involved.
Prior to the election, I undertook to put an end to Government pressure groups and to serve as Prime Minister in the national interest. We are, after all, a nation of special individuals, not special interests. I pledge to give voice to the Australian mainstream and to serve those who quote properly; "felt disadvantaged, disenfranchised by those who went before us."
More particularly, I sought to empower and small business. I want as a guiding philosophy for people to make their own choices. I want to promote iniative and excellence. At the same time I believe very strongly that no one should be left behind for want of opportunity, and therefore, in Government we have preserved and in areas strengthened a social security system which has provided a decent safety net for those who genuinely need assistance.
The family has a pivotal role in the fabric of the Australian nation. Families remain the basis of the teaching of the principles by which we live our daily lives. It is the influence of the family that has the most direct effect on moulding the character of individuals. It is there that love, dignity, morality and character are crafted. It is there that we are taught faith and loyalty and conscience and integrity.
There remains no substitute for the primacy of the family in Australia. The daily sacrifice a parent makes for a child demonstrates the strength of the family as the building block of our nation.
Tonight, ladies and gentlemen, marks the precise midpoint of our first term in Government, having being elected on the 2nd of March in 1996.
The last 18 months have represented the first phase of our first term. It has very much been a phase in which we have been preoccupied with repairing and reshaping the social and economic foundations of Australia. It has been a phase in which we have been focussed on attending to those things that were left unattended or done poorly by our predecessors.
We are now moving to the second phase.
Our goal in that second stage is to realise our full potential as a nation as we move into the 21st century. We must increasingly look to the next century and we must increasingly judge all that we do as a national government in terms of realising the enormous potential, particularly in the Asia/Pacific region of Australia as it faces the next millennium.
This second phase requires keeping the fundamentals in good repair while pursuing a positive agenda of change and growth, to expand opportunities in key sectors of the Australian economy, so as to provide for strong economic growth and the job creation which that entails.
I have always had a deep and abiding belief in the economic and social potential of Australia supported by our vast natural beauty, the endowment of a rich resource base, an imaginative and skilled people with a lifestyle unique in our region, indeed in the world.
A young country with a bright future is the image we all have of Australia. That image is our birthright. Its realisation ought to be our goal.
Our abundant natural resources have been the basis for the development of world competitive mining and agricultural industries that are amongst the most efficient and least protected of any country.
Our first class scientific and technological infrastructure has resulted in a much higher rate of invention per capita than other countries of our size.
We have a stable political system based on deeply held democratic principles and a powerful egalitarian ethic.
Our diverse nation has welcomed with open tolerance people from the four corners of the world to share a unique lifestyle.
Australians are a resilient people who have coped with problems of various kinds.
We have relished the opportunity to undertake programmes of nation-building such as the post World War II construction phase, the development of our manufacturing and the absorption of large migrant intakes in the 1950s and 1960s.
Above all, we are optimistic and forward looking people who take immense pride in national successes in sport, the arts and invention.
Yet we have missed opportunities and we have yet to reach our full potential. At the turn of the last century Australia had the highest living standard in the world and yet since we have slipped down the international league tables.
Australia can do better and as Prime Minister I am anxious and ambitious for Australia to succeed and for all its people to share that success. Part of that process is to strengthen families and our communities.
A prerequisite to meeting our potential as a nation is to restore fairness for those individuals and families. Fairness does not necessarily entail handing out growing amounts of government largesse which only serves to impose further taxation burdens on those who need relief.
It does mean, however, truly giving voice to individuals by ensuring that government programmes adequately reflect the social values and concerns of the broader community.
As a Testament to our first phase of Government let me mention one or two things and the first of those is the immense turnaround in our budget position. We inherited a $10.5 billion deficit and at the end of our first term we will have turned that into a surplus of $1.6 billion.
Our workplace reforms have simplified awards, abolished compulsory unionism, given the opportunity for workplace agreements without union interference, restored secondary boycott provisions, reduced unfair dismissal applications by 55 per cent and we are giving employers leeway to pursue were appropriate, damages actions against unions.
We are providing real incentives for small business such as delivering on our promised capital gains tax relief, providing fringe benefits tax relief and we have reduced the burden of provisional tax.
There are very tangible benefits for families. Reducing the financial pressures on families was a key election promise and a real priority for my Government.
We delivered in full, on time, our $1 billion Family Tax initiative.
The most tangible assistance, even beyond that that we have provided is the substantial reduction in home loan interest rates. That families on the average mortgage in Australia are around $293 a month better off than we came to power is evidence of our commitment to home ownership within the reach of average Australians. We now have the lowest interest rates in this country since the late 1960s. From July this year low and middle income Australians have receive tax benefits for taking out private health insurance.
The savings plan announced in this year's budget is the latest measure to secure the financial future of our families. Our tax cut on savings which will be phased in from July next year will be worth up to $450 a year. It is part of a practical plan to increase national savings and reduce debt. The initiative will be available by way of a
15 per cent rebate on up to $3,000 of savings interest or by claiming a rebate on personal superannuation contributions.
I am particularly proud, ladies and gentlemen, to say that Australia is a safer place, freer in one very important respect than it was eighteen months ago. After the tragedy of Port Arthur we moved quickly to deliver stronger, more effective and sensible uniform gun control laws to provide a safer Australian nation. This week marks the first anniversary of the implementation of the Government's firearms legislation and the gun buyback scheme. All automatic and semi-automatic firearms were banned except in very restricted circumstances. The nationwide gun buy-back has already seen more than 517,000 guns handed in exchange for proper compensation which has already totalled about $265 million.
We are also in the process of eliminating waste in the welfare system. Reviews by the Department of Social Security show that a crackdown on fraud and non-compliance is saving the taxpayer around $19 million a week. Overall, we expect to save $1 billion over the course of a year in the crack down. Part of removing the stigma associated with the payment of welfare benefits to the needy are stringent controls upon those who are not so deserving. In the nine months to July this year 137,790 people had their payments cancelled for non-compliance.
There are also been a number of important initiatives to help address youth unemployment. We have announced that the Government will provide more than
$550 million for at least 220,000 apprenticeships and traineeships over the next two years. This is aimed at enabling young people to earn while they learn and gain a valuable headstart in the job market.
While the Government is working to provide greater job opportunities through apprenticeships and by helping small business to get going again we cannot forget young Australians who cannot find work now. Our Work for the Dole plan ridiculed by people who I don't think really understand the psyche of Australian people (as not only the generality of the community but also those who are out of work) has been introduced to break the cycle of despondency and despair that unemployment can cause.
Work for the Dole is an example of how we apply the principle of mutual obligation. It is fair and equitable that people be asked to contribute to the community in return for the community's provision of a fair and equitable safety net. The plan will give young unemployed Australians the chance to experience a work culture and it will keep them involved with the community rather than being alienated from it.
The response to the scheme has been extraordinary. After advertisements in the national press calling for projects, the Government had 10,000 inquiries about Work for the Dole including 4,000 requests for application forms. 579 groups eventually applied for funding for the 70 community projects originally planned for the pilot work for the dole scheme. The pilot scheme was meant to get 10,000 of the 90,000 unemployed young people to work on community projects in regional areas with high youth unemployment.
Another important social policy reform has been the introduction of the common youth allowance. It is part of fulfilling our election promise of simplifying income support payments. Through that change the Government has taken away incentives for young people to be on the dole rather than improving themselves by education or training. They have been replaced by incentives aimed at improving the national skills base and reducing long-term unemployment.
As we look towards the next 18 months and beyond unemployment remains an immense social and economic challenge. It is important to remember that the Labor Party had 13 years to fix the problem. Throughout that time unemployment averaged at 8.7 per cent and at one stage went over 11 per cent.
Reduced unemployment depends on both sound economic fundamentals and also significant liberalisation of the labour market. The economy is now, as is evident, capable of growing at a much faster rate than has been the experience of the Australian economy over recent years.
One of the most significant economic speeches made in Australia in recent times, was that of the Governor of the Reserve Bank recently, in Perth, when he said because the fundamentals had altered it was now possible for the Australian economy to grow at a much faster rate without igniting inflation and by implication challenges on the trade account.
For years the Australian nation has wanted to be in a position where the speed limits on economic growth could be removed so that through faster economic growth, greater job generation could occur. I believe that those circumstances are very much within our grasp and the fundamentals have been so ordered that for that occurring is very real.
Unemployment does remain a huge challenge but it is always, in economic experience, the last of the economic fundamentals to come right. We have laid the foundations for solid improvement in the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, I think it is inconceivable that Australia can realise its economic potential into the 21st century without a reformed, modernised and fairer taxation system.
How can we live with a tax system which imposes a top marginal rate at one and a half times average weekly earnings when in 1960 the top marginal tax rate cut in at
15 times average weekly earnings.
How can we have a tax system which imposes a 22 per cent sales tax on the family car but no sales tax on a lear jet. Why should Australians put up with a tax system which imposes a 22 per cent sales tax on savoury snacks but no sales tax on caviar.
These are but some of the reasons why we have embarked on a process of lasting taxation reform. We aim for a system which ignites incentive to work, to save and invest and one which will be designed with an emphasis of promoting jobs, exports and investment.
This is probably the last real serious opportunity for a long time that a Government of Australia will have to bring about fundamental reform to the Australian taxation system and anyone who has seriously looked at the Australian economy over the last 10 years. Anybody who has occupied any serious position of responsibility in public life in this country will know that of all of the major reforms that have been needed or remain to be done in this country, none has been more important than the need for fundamental reform of the Australian taxation system.
That is why we have embarked upon it with vigour, not underestimating the difficulties that lie ahead but recognising that not only the great office of Prime Minister but also the other great offices of the Ministries of State in this country are to be used responsibly for the greater good of the Australian people, tackling fundamental reform of that kind is absolutely essential.
In a now famous passage in his work, my longest serving predecessor and the founder of my own Party, Robert Menzies, in his work: "The Forgotten People" Menzies wrote the following:
"I do not believe that the real life of this nation is to be found either in the great luxury hotels and the petty gossip of so called fashionable suburbs, or in the officialdom of organised masses. It is to be found in the homes of people who are nameless and unadvertised and who, whatever their individual religious conviction or dogma, see in their children their greatest contribution to the immortality of their race."
Those words are in substance as true today as they were then. The real life of this nation on the brink of the 21st century remains the family unit. Truly giving voice to families and demonstrating fairness in public administration for their benefit has been and perhaps been the greatest task of any Australian Prime Minister.
Menzies spoke, in those days, of 'homes material', 'homes human' and 'homes spiritual'. 'Homes material' represented the concrete example of frugality and saving. 'Homes human' represented one's family and the noble instinct to be with them and give them a chance in life. 'Homes spiritual' represented the brave acceptance of unclouded individual responsibility. The point at which a person seeks moral refuge in the crowd was seen to be the point at which he or she ceases to be an individual human being. What was common to the Menzian concept of home was a sense of security.
I believe that the concept of home is a compelling notion in our psyche. I was interested to see an article reprinted in the Melbourne Age from The Guardian some weeks ago where it was pointed out that how children at play run "home" during a game of hide and seek, how the desire to have a base or home remains strong throughout our lives but that technology and travel threatens the stability. Movement and travel is seen to broaden the mind and reskilling for new careers is quite properly seen as necessary in times of insecurity. The loss of security challenges traditional notions of home and people feel the need to react to alienation.
Part of the job of a Prime Minister in these contemporary times is, whilst enthusiastically embracing change and globalisation, he or she must also embrace what is secure - what people see as 'home' I suppose. I want to provide Australians with this security as we embraceing, as we must and will, a new and vastly different future.
Part of that security is an inheritance. Our greatest desire as parents is to see our children reach their maximum potential. The desire to leave one's children a greater inheritance than we were left by our own parents is a relentless and motivating force for parents. So should it be for nation states. An Australian Prime Minister's responsibility should include leaving his successor a greater social and economic inheritance than was left him and just as parents do, ask himself or herself how they could look their children in the eye and offer them anything less.


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Judi. To Dr Michael Wooldridge, to Ian Leslie, to my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I am very pleased to be here again to personally present these very important awards. I came last year. I thought the award was one of the very good, and I think forward-thinking awards devised under the patronage of the Prime Minister of Australia, whoever he or she may be at any given time.
I was tremendously impressed last year with the enthusiastic support of men and women in business, the enthusiastic support of Government agencies and also the strong personal commitment of my two Ministerial colleagues, Michael Wooldridge and Judi Moylan.
So I am very happy indeed to be back here again this year and to say how much I see what these awards recognise and acknowledge as being a very important expression, not only of common humanity but also a very important expression of commonsense and forward thinking on the part of the employers who do employ people with disabilities, on the part of people who do look in a forward-thinking way to the advantage of incorporating into their businesses and their agencies, not in any kind of patronising or tokenistic way, but in a fully inclusive way, people who may have one or other kind of disability.
The participation of companies and agencies in the Award has grown significantly over the years since the Award was established some eight years ago and I know that this year a new category in the area of higher education has been established. But what I think is important about this Award and what is important about the attitude of companies and agencies and employers which it recognises is that their commitment to the employment of people with disabilities is a commitment that will not only express that humanity but of equal importance, will add value to their businesses and will add value and capacity to the performance of their agencies. And the way in which the myths in relation to people with disabilities over the years have been steadily dissolved is one of the more heartening developments in the past generations.
We often as a society reflect on whether we've gone forward or gone backward over the years. In some areas perhaps we may not be doing things as well as we were a generation ago but I think in most areas we're doing them a lot better, and one of the areas where we are doing them a lot better is in relation to our fellow Australians who may have one or other kind of disability and I think we have a more open-hearted, a more commonsense, a more co-operative, a more understanding, a more forward-looking attitude and whilst we still have a long way to go, none of us should imagine that those with disabilities, particularly with profound disabilities, still do not suffer a far inferior quality of life than the rest of the community
But we have come a long way and people who have contributed to that march to a higher level of humanity are represented here today, and I want on behalf of the Government to very warmly thank all of the employers who participated, whether they are in the private sector or whether they are in the public sector.
I want to thank our sponsors. You should always thank sponsors. I always thank the voters, they sponsor me, and I always thank the people who support these gatherings and you know, it's easy sometimes to knock the big companies but the big companies will very generously put their, many of them, not all of them - and those that don't should feel progressively embarrassed because they haven't - but most of our large corporations are very good corporate citizens and I want to thank the sponsors and I also want to thank personally Ian Spicer for his particular contribution to the awards process, as well as of course again thanking my two Ministerial colleagues who have given this a very strong, personal commitment.
Can I say to all of you that you have in Michael and Judi two people who, whilst being very committed to reform and very committed to the process of having intelligent, workable economic outcomes in the decisions they take, they are, above all else in their respective portfolio responsibilities, interested in caring for people and the personal commitment that I know Judi has brought to these awards and to the cause of encouraging the employers of Australia, large and small, to employ people with disabilities, is a very visible token of it.
So can I again say how delighted I am to be here. It's a demonstration of my Government's strong commitment. It's a demonstration of my Government's gratitude to the humanity and commonsense of employers and agencies who have participated. Can I finally congratulate those Australians with disabilities in the workforce for their skill, their application, their guts, and I hope you see in today's awards a small recognition of the contribution that you, together with your employers, have made to a higher plane of decency and humanity within our community.
Thank you.
(ends)


8 September 1997
E&amp;OE................................................
To Mr Ken Tribe, Professor Tony Basten, the Deputy Premier of New South Wales, Andrew Refshauge, my other Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues. In particular I acknowledge the presence of two former health ministers in this State, Peter Collins and Ron Phillips, to all the other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to be here today for a number of reasons. I am delighted to have the honour of officially opening this very fine Institute. I play no part in interstate rivalry. But let me simply say, I enthusiastically embrace yet another milestone in the remarkable medical research story of Australia.
On a day when we celebrate, with very good reason, a great sporting triumph by an Australian, it's important to remind ourselves that we have won many world championships in medical research. And we have a remarkable example of that here today with Professor Peter Doherty. He's a very important link and he's a very important symbol of what this country has achieved in the field of medical research.
This Centenary Institute will take its place alongside the Walter and Eliza Hall, the John Curtin School, the Garvan, the Howard Florey Institute, as yet another manifestation of the commitment of both governments and private enterprise to the cause of medical research in Australia.
And I don't want to let the opportunity go by without very warmly thanking those companies that have given so very generously, particularly, CSL and News Limited. You need a partnership between the Government and the community to make a reality of institutes such as this. The Government can't do it all, although it ought to do a lot, and the community and the private sector can't do it all, although it ought to play a part. And my old friend, Ken Tribe, has reminded me - people do it quite a lot lately -about the foibles of the present taxation system. And I can assure you, Ken, that I will take that on board and it will, in the language of reform, be fed into the process. I'm sure that over the next few months I'll get a lot of advice about the weaknesses of the current Australian taxation system.
As Ken acknowledged, the Centenary Institute grew out of one of the first of
10 centres of excellence that were established by the Fraser Government in 1982. And I do remember the Cabinet discussion that took place. I recall, in particular, that it was the recommendation of the then Health Minister, Jim Carlton, that we establish a number of centres of excellence around Australia. And the whole idea of them was to ultimately produce institutes of this kind and to encourage world-class, trail-blazing research.
And this, as has been stated already, this Institute will focus on world-class research in cancer, tuberculosis, multiple sclerosis, diabetes and asthma. There's barely a person or a family in Australia who's not, at some stage - or some member of that family - who's not touched by one of those diseases or one of those afflictions. And, therefore, the investment by the Government and by the private sector in this Institute is an investment in the current and future good health of the entire population.
We do have a magnificent record in medical research. With a small population of only 18 million, we contribute two per cent of the total medical research around the world. And through that, we're able to share in the other 98 per cent.
The medical scientific output in Australia is very meritorious. About 45 per cent of the published research work is in the medical-scientific field, despite the fact that medical research receives only 15 per cent of the total research contribution from governments. And the institutes, and this is one of them, can take an enormous amount of credit for that superb exercise in leveraging that proportion into a much higher percentage of the research output.
The Federal Government has contributed $7.7 million on a dollar-for-dollar basis with the New South Wales Government towards the total funding cost of the Institute. As well as that, it's contributed $7.69 million since 1990 towards various research projects, which is a very significant contribution out of the research budget. And I should acknowledge the commitment of the former Federal Government, under both of my two predecessors, towards supporting this Institute and towards supporting medical research in Australia.
And I'm also pleased to say today that we will contribute a further $100 000 to assist in setting up the newest research laboratory in the Institute.
Our commitment to medical research in Australia is a very strong and ongoing one. In 1997 the Federal Government will contribute a total, through the NHMRC, of
$160 million towards medical research in Australia.
I've spoken a lot, ladies and gentlemen, in recent weeks about the importance of Australia realising her potential as we move as a nation into the 21st Century. And realising that potential as a nation is not only an economic goal, and not only is it something that has an economic dimension, and it's not just something that has a political or a strategic dimension, but it's also a goal that is realised when the talents of the Australian people are properly mobilised. And one of the great talents that the Australian nation has always had is a remarkable capacity for medical research. Our qualities in the area of medical treatment and medical science are, in my view, without peer around the world.
We talk a lot about exports out of this country. Our capacity and potential to export medical science, medical excellence, is, I believe, one that will take its place amongst all the other areas where we will perform well as an exporting nation. We have always had wonderful doctors. We've always had first-class hospitals. We've always had very dedicated nurses and very dedicated volunteers.
The medical infrastructure in Australia has always been a remarkable, almost unique, combination of the Government, the medical profession, the private sector and the volunteer. It has obviously changed over the years and there will obviously be intense and ongoing debate about the type of health system that this country ought to have. And today is not the occasion to add to the dimension of that debate in any kind of partisan way.
But merely, on behalf of the Federal Government and, I'm sure, on behalf of the people of Australia, it's an opportunity for me to say thank you to the medical research community of Australia. It's an opportunity for me to congratulate Professor Basten and his colleagues on the work that they have done here at the Institute over the last 15 to 20 years, to salute the extraordinary achievements of Australians over the last 100 or more years in the area of medical science. It is something of which we should be immensely proud. Peter Doherty is but the latest example in a long line of Australians who have put this country on the map and in the process made a magnificent contribution to relieving the suffering of humanity, not only here in Australia, but around the world.
We often hear balance sheets of human progress and human failure over the last couple of generations. Any balance sheet of human progress over the last couple of generations will tell us that there is no area of human endeavour where there has been more success than in the area of medical science and medical research. The unbelievable progress that has been made in that area, all around the world, is something that ought to give us, as human beings, part of the human race, an immense amount of pride. And Australia has played an enormous role in that. And at the centre of those activities have been the sort of people that have done their research work and made their discoveries and reached their achievements in the institutes. I'm therefore very proud, indeed, to have been invited to formally open the Centenary Institute.
I thank all of those again who have contributed so generously. I salute the intelligence and the commitment and the human dedication of those who work in the Institute. And I'm very proud that the Government I lead - and formerly, a government of which I was a part - has played such an important role in supporting such a magnificent contribution towards medical science here in Australia and, I'm sure, around the world.
Thank you


12 September 1997 
E&amp;OE................................................
Well, thank you very much David. To Mark and Judy and to their Mum and Dad, to Denis Rogers, the Chairman of the Australian Cricket Board and Australian cricket lovers all. This is one of those immensely enjoyable occasions for an Australian Prime Minister, it really is, and you know, you're in need of them occasionally.
Everybody has their childhood dreams and I had one fleetingly for a few months when I was about six that I might be Captain of the Australian Cricket team. It lasted for a very short period of time and then I decided to focus on politics. All my life I really have regarded being Captain of the Australian Cricket team as the absolute pinnacle of sporting achievement and really, the pinnacle almost of human achievement in Australia. And that is the sentiment that millions of Australians throughout my life have had and to you Mark, it is a tremendous personal pleasure to be here today to salute somebody who represents some great Australian characteristics.
You have ability, you have superb professionalism, you have enormous grit, you have great integrity, you have a capacity to fight back in adversity, you're a great family man and you're a real inspiration to sports men and women all around this country.
The statistics of your career are pretty well known. Suffice to say, that as a captain, only Don Bradman and Lindsay Hassett on a percentage basis have done better. You're number six in the total number of runs of all Australian batsmen of all time and you've been a great slip fielder. But above all, you've been a great leader and a great captain. You have endured criticism, some of it quite vituperous and mean and unAustralian, but you've fought back from that and your friends and supporters admire you immensely.
I remember the moment that I shared with you in the dressing room before the commencement of the rain-delayed Lords Test only a few months ago. You knew that we'd started not so well, we lost the First Test, the Englishmen had won the One Dayers and you knew you had a fight ahead of you. What I admired about your attitude then was that you were realistic. You knew that you were under a lot of personal pressure, although you'd done very well in the First Test in the second innings, getting your century that warmed the hearts of Australian cricket followers all around this nation.
But you were also realistic about the task that faced you. And of course at that particular time we were experiencing a brief moment of English cricket triumphalism. I happened to arrive in England just before the Second Test started and I got reminded of that by some of my friends in the media just about every day that I was there but the day when an Australian Prime Minister has got to apologise for barracking for the Australian cricket team wherever it is has not come, as far as I am concerned.
At that particular time, our erstwhile great enemy was feeling pretty smug and pretty triumphal and you knew that you, along with your team, had a great struggle ahead of you. But you responded absolutely magnificently and the leadership that you gave to your team, the inspiration that you gave to your team, as well as your own personal contributions, were really quite magnificent.
So as a man, as an Australian sporting leader, as an Australian sporting icon, and heaven knows, as we come towards the end of this century we need icons, we need people to respect for their human qualities, their capacity to acknowledge that they have valleys of despair and defeat and reversal as well as mountains of achievement, and you've gone through all of that and you've retained a great integrity and a great modesty.
It was terrific to meet your mother and father. I told them both that I saw their smiling faces at Edgbaston along with that your wife when you scored that great century and to have your family share those moments of success and those moments of triumph is an absolutely tremendous thing.
So can I say to you, Mark, on behalf of a proud and greatful nation, that you have occupied the greatest sporting post that this country can offer anybody with decency, with grace, with great professionalism and great skill. As one of your consistent supporters and advocates, I am proud to say to you on behalf of a very grateful nation, thank you for what you have done. Thank you for what you continue to do and thank you for what you will do in the future. I wish you and Judy and your two children every happiness and every success and on behalf of a very grateful Australian nation, thank you for what you have done for Australian cricket, a game we love with such intense passion and pride.
Thank you.
[ENDS]



PRIME MINISTER
12 September 1997 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
ADDRESS TO THE LOWE FEDERAL ELECTORATE CONFERENCE
DURWOOD, NEW SOUTH WALES
E&amp; OE
Paul Za~ tnmit, your We Rita, that most famous of all Italian exports to Australia, to
Micha~ l Osborne, the President of the NSW Division of the Liberal Party, Bruce
McCarthy, the State Member for Strathfield, many other very distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen.
Could I start by saying that I have been to many Liberal Party fundraise , rs and
gatherings over the years and I dare say I've got quite a few in front of me, but I've
got to say, this is one of the best organised, most diverse and most expressive of the
grass roots and the cross section of the community of the Lowe electorate. I think it is
one of the greatest of these sorts of gatherings that I've been to.
And it's a tremendous tribute to Paul and Rita that they have been able to get this
gathering together in such a spontaneous and enthusiastic way and how delighted I am
that amongst the guests tonight are the young men and women fronm the local schools
who will shortly be sitting for their Higher School Certificate. And, of course, I am
immnensely proud that the Captain and Vice Captain of my own school, Canterbury
Boys' H1igh School, are amongst those present.
Canterbury has always been a remarkable schoo, Af course. But what is particularly
interesting about it, I understand from Paul tha(~ y_) students number, 93% Of their
number, are of a non-English speakcing background. And it is a remarkable
demonstration of the diversity of that community. And when I mention that, can I say
that tonight's gathering, as well as being a tremendous cross-section of the Lowe
electorate, it is a very emphatic and a very heartening, and a very enthusiastic reminder
to me and to all of us here tonight of the great and successfuil diversity which is post-
World War Two Australia.
So many different ethnic groups, so many different nations, so many different cultures,
different religions are all represented here in a united and harmonious fashion. And it
Fax from 4 11
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 04 15/ 09/ 97 13: 14 Pg: 1 
Fax from 4 11 15/ 09/ 97 13: 14 Pg: 2
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 05P.
sends a very strong signal, a very strong signal indeed to Australia and to the friends of
Australia, that almost unique amongst the nations of the world, we have been able to
bring together men and women of goodwill from all around the world and to build a
very united, cohesive and tolerant nation.
And I know that I speak for all Australians when 1, irrespective of their background,
when I say that all of us are absolutely determined to preserve the cohesion, the unity,
the tolerance, the openness and the willingness to accept people of different
backgrounds. We regard it as a cornerstone of what we see as being the essence of the
modern Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is now just on 18 months since that wonderfuld night on the
2nd March 1996 when so many of you in this room saw the fruits of the hard work of
many months, you saw that marvellous swing against the former Labor Member for
Lowe, and you saw Paul Zammit installed as the Federal Liberal Member for Lowe.
And it was a very exhilarating experience. It was really marvellous after 13 years in
the wilderness for the Liberal Party once again to have the reins of national
government in Australia.
We had waited a very long time. I can tell you as somebody who waited through all of
those 13 years in Opposition that it's a very, very dispiriting experience. And I have
absolutely no intention of ever revisiting the experience.
And I know that in saying that I speak for all of my colleagues, that we were given that
mandate in March of last year to do things and over the last 18 months we have
completed the first stage of implementing the mandate and the authority that we were
given in March of last year. The first 18 months has been about repairing the damage.
It's been about turning around a Budget deficit of $ 10.5 billion into a surplus of $ 1.6
billion at the end of our first term in office.
It's bee about reducing interest rates, not only for home borrowers but also for small
business. It's been about implementing our family tax initiative in fuill on time, without
deduction. It has been about reforming Australia's industrial relations system. It's been about
pushing through the privatisation of one third of Teistra and the establishment of a $ 1
billion Natural Heritage Trust which will lead to the biggest-ever capital investment in
Australia's environmental regeneration this century.
It has been about giving people long sought after incentives to take out private health
insurance. It has been about restoring the authority of the Government to govern in
the interests of all Australians and not to govern in the interests of those who pursue
only narrow sectional interests.
So, it's been a very exciting 18 months. But the next phase of our term in Government
lies in front of us and that phase is about realising the potential of this great nation of
ours as we move into the 2 1st Century
And I want to share a few thoughts with you tonight about the future. We are very
proud of the history of Australia. We are very proud of Australia's past and 
15/ 09/ 97 13: 14 Pg: 3
Fax from 4 It1.1
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 05 P1
Particularly gathering in this building, we acknowledge a particular debt to those men
and women who in the past have risked their lives and so many of them have lost their
lives in the defence of the freedom of this nation.
But in looking to the fu~ ture it is really unavoidable that one can generate a great sense
of excitement and a great sense of enthusiasm about the enormous potential that this
nation has.
We are, to use that old cliche, extraordinarily lucky as a nation. We have the rich
endowment of being in this part of the world, an inheritor of the traditions of Western
civilisation. Our habits of Parliamentary democracy, our respect for the rule of law,
our respect for the authority of elected governments, and incorruptible judicial system,
a tolerance, a free and open press, it may annoy us on occasions but can I assure you
that it is far better to have a free press that annoys you on occasions than not to have a
free press at all.
And it is one of the great cornerstones of the liberty of the Australian nation. So we
have all of that as a great inheritance, but we're also very fortunate that we've placed
by geography, cheek by jowl with the fastest growing part of the world, the Asia
Pacific region.
And the opportunities we have as we go into the 21 st Century of building even closer
and deeper economic, political and cultural links with our region, whilst at the same
time, preserving associations with other parts of the world that are so important to
many Australians. that presents us with a unique and very favourable opportunity. And
I believe that if we can build on those great strengths, if we can tackle those things in
our community that need to be changed whilst preserving those things within our
society that are worth preserving, then we can build for ourselves a greater future than
even the great past that the Australian nation has had.
We are a remarkably adaptive country. Australia, for example, has after the United
States, the second largest appetite in the world for the Internet. We have, after the
United States and Japan, the third greatest usage of mobile telephones. All of our
history we have been great devourers of new technology. We have educational
qualities, both at a secondary school level and also at tertiary level that are the envy of
people all around the world.
We have a standard of excellence in the medical profession and in areas of medical
science which are also the envy of the world. I opened the new Centenary Institute for
Cancer Research in Sydney earlier this week and I reminded my audience that although
Australia has only 18 million people, it contributes two percent of the world's
aggregate in medical research. If you think about it over the last 100 years, given the
small size of our population, the Australian nation has contributed enormously and
disproportionately in a very positive way to medical science around the world.
We have one other great advantage as we go into the Asia Pacific region. We are seen
as bringing to that region the advantages of our association with western civilisation
without perhaps some of the disadvantages which are carried by other nations. We are 
Fax from 4 11 15/ 09/ 97 13: 14 Pg: 4
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 06 F-*. 11
seen as a new society, we are seen as an open society and we are seen as a tolerant
society. We do have continuing economic problems. No-one denies that. And no-one denies
that the challenge of a still unacceptably high level of unemployment is one of the
principles of those economic challenges.
But let me say of unemployment, let us not forget that our opponents had 13 years to
solve the problem of unemployment, And the average rate of unemployment during
that 13 year period was precisely what it is today, and that is 8.7 percent. And that is
said to remind the Australian community that those who had 13 years to fix the
problem have little credibility in lecturing us after only 18 months. But having said
that) my friends, reducing unemployment remains a challenge and it can only over time
be reduced in two ways.
We must first of all, generate a much faster rate of economic growth. And we are
succeeding in doing that. Only a few weeks ago the Governor of the Reserve Bank in
a speech that I've never heard a Reserve Bank Governor make before, said that the
time had now been reached in Australia where you could remove the speed limits on
economic growth. And he fet that the Australian economy could grow at 4 or
percent a year or even faster without running into balance of payments or inflationary
problem. And it's those amongst you in the audience, particularly the students here
tonight who've studied economics closely will know that over the last 20 or 30 years
one of the things that has bedevilled the Australian economy is that we have only been
able to afford the luxury of strong economic growth for a short period of time before
either inflation has taken off or we've had a balance of payments crisis and the Reserve
Bank has had to contract the economy, raise interest rates, or a particularly harsh
Budget in order to restrain demand has had to be introduced.
Now we have in front of us the opportunity of freeing ourselves from that constraint
and we are in the process of freeing ourselves from that constraint. And that is the
direct result of what my Government had done over the last 18 months. If we hadn't
cut spending in our first two budgets, we wouldn't have had five reductions in interest
rates. If we hadn't have cut spending in our first two budgets, we wouldn't have been
able to keep inflation down. If we hadn't have cut spending in our first two budgets
we wouldn't now have the prospect of much stronger economic growth.
And it's stronger economic growth that lays the foundation of higher levels of
employment and therefore reduced unemployment in the years ahead. I know it is
taking time,% I understand that. And I am sensitive to the frustration and concern of
those in the community who are trying to find jobs that are being unsuccessful.
But falling unemployment is always the last of the important economic indicators to
come right. And I believe and my colleagues believe very strongly that the changes
that we have made particularly in the labour market, the fiscal changes we've made,
the budget changes, the way in which we have reduced debt in Australia, all of those
things will contribute towards higher economic growth in the last half of 1997 and
significantly higher economic growth in 1998. And if that occurs as we believe it wI,
then unemployment will respond in a very positive way and we can look forward to an
improved employment outlook into 1998. 
Fax from 4 11 15/ 69/ 97 13: 14 Pg:
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 07 .1
Can I also say to you ladies and gentlemen, that as well as dealing in that general
economic way with the challenge of unemployment, we're also willing to take specific
decisions which are designed to generate a greater sense ofjob security within the
Australian community.
I make no apology at all for the decision that the Government took in relation to the
textile, clothing and footwear industry earlier this week. That decision was designed,
my friends, to send a signal about job security, not only to the people in that industry,
but also to people in other sections of Australian industry. And I want to say, to those
in the community who may have criticised that decision, that when it comes to
international comparisons, Australia is up there or ahead of the best, so far as trade
liberalisation around the world is concerned.
We have reduced tariffs, we have opened the Australian economy, we have embraced
trade liberalisation in a way that most other countries have not done. There are
benefits in trade liberalisation, enormous benefits. But it's also important that the pace
of change be such that the Austraian community can absorb it and the Australian
community can adjust to it.
And when y'ou consider that not terribly long ago, the effective rates of protection in
the textile, clothing and footwear industry were around 150-250 percent, that as
recently as 1990 the protection for clothing and apparel was 55 percent and will be
down to 25 percent by the year 2000 and 17.5 percent by the year 2005, nobody can
seriously say that we haven't set a very cracking pace so far as trade iberalisation and
reducing protection is concerned.
So friends, as I look back over the last 18 months, I look back with a very great sense
of pride. I also look back in a personal sense with a period of time in which I have the
great fortune of having the sustained loyalty and support and the enthusiastic
commitment not only of my Parliamentary colleagues, but also of literally thousands of
supporters and members of the Liberal Party all around Australia.
I've been a member of the Liberal Party now since 1958 which is quite a long time
ago. And I have devoted all of my adult life and the latter part of my adolescent years
working for the Liberal Party, I think I know the streets and the letterboxes of this
part of Sydney about as well as anybody can know the streets and letterboxes. I have
pamphleteered from Canipsie through to Enfield South to Croydon to Drummoyne to
Five Dock to Abbotsford. I've spilled over into Concord and when it got particularly
dark and the street lights went out, well I got into Burwood as well.
My experience has been very much the experience of a grassroots campaigner. And I
believe in that great injunction of the late Speaker of the American House of
Representatives, Tip O'Neil, when he said that all politics was local. And if ever
somebody demonstrates that he believes it, it is Paul Zammit.
And keeping in touch with your local community is what makes a highly successfu~ l
Member of Parliament and a highly successfuil politician. And can I say to you without
any sense of exaggeration or hyperbole that there is no Member of my Federal 
F4a x1 1fr1o5 / 09/ 97 13: 14 Pg: 6
P. 18
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 07
Parliamentary Party who is a more persistent, a More effective, a more repetitious
advocate of the interests of his electorate than Paul Zammcit.
Woebetide the Ministerial colleague of mine who ignores an issue that affects the
people of Lowe. And he has been in a short period of time, he has been a tremendous
advocate for the interests of the people of Lowe. But he is representative of a new
wave of men and women in the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party. And how proud I
amn that we have in our Parliamentary ranks in Canberra a record number of women
Member of Parliament. And we have done it without quotas, We have done it
without saying you've got to have such and such a percentage. We have done it on
merit. We've done it on ability, without resorting to the patronising, divisive, imposing
quotas.
And can I also say to you my fiends, although it has been a good 18 months and we
have achieved a great deal, that politics in Australia now is more volatile than it used
to be.
Australian politics is a lot less tribal than it once was. There are fewer Australians who
can be regarded as permanently rusted on to the Liberal side of politics or permanently
rusted on to the Labor side of politics. There are more who move around in the
middle and that makes the quality of local representation more important. it makes the
performance of a Government once it has been elected more important and it makes it
even more important that your local representatives have an understanding of the
electorates that they represent. And it's very heartening for me to look around this
room tonight and know that I am looking at a group of people who are very
representative of the Lowe electorate.
There's a great age range, there's a range in ethnic diversity, there's a range of
business and personal interests and I think that sends a very positive and a certainly
very encouraging message to me.
The final thing that I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen, is that the last 18
months has not only been about economic, industrial relations, foreign policy and other
of the issues that you more instinctively associate with things like, with politics and
with political endeavour. It has also been a period of time in which we may have made
some very significant advances in social policy.
I am particularly proud of the fact that it was a Liberal Government which was able at
long last and sadly, of course, in the wake of a great tragedy, to bring about uniform
and effective national gun control legislation. And your own local member, Paul
Zanmnit, played a very significant part in terms of the enthusiastic support that he gave
to that measure.
It's also been a period of time in which we have kept faith with our commitment to
preserve the social security safety net. One of the great promises I made before the
last election was that although we were determined to control the size of the budget
deficit, although we were determined to pursue disciplined economic policies, we
strongly supported the notion of a decent safety net for those in the community who
needed reassurance and needed assistance. 
Fax from 4 It 15/ 09/ 97 13: 14 Pg: Y
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 08
I am very proud that we've kept our commitments to the self-funded retirees within
the Australian community.
I know that when interest rates come down it's good if you're borrowing money, but
it's not so good if you're living on the interest earning. I understand that and I can say
to you that that is why it is very important that we keep inflation down. That is why it
is very important that we have honoured the commitment we made about the tax
threshold for self-funded retirees, the commitment we made about tax incentive for
private health insurance. And, of course, there'll be more good news for retired people
on the I1st July next year, when the I5 percent taxation rebate for savings which won't
be subject to a means test or an income test, comes into operation. And that will be a
benefit to all people who save within the Australian community and of particular
benefit to those who are retired and living on their earnings.
But ladies and gentlemen can I simply say to all of you thank yoiu for the tremendous
support and understanding and forbearance and enthusiasm that you have given to my
Government over the last 18 months.
It is an enormous privilege to be the Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia. It is an
even greater privilege to be the Prime Minister of Australia. I could not have achieved
that without the understanding and support of the rank and file of the Liberal Party and
the understanding and support of so many people represented by people in this room
tonight, who've been prepared to give their time and their money and their resources.
Can I thank the sponsors of this great occasion tonight. Can I thank those like Rick
Damelian and others who've been so incredibly generous in sponsorship and financial
support, not only tonight but on many other occasions in the Lowe electorate.
We've only been in power for IS months. Remember we were in Opposition for 13
years. And I want to remind our political opponents just how awfulI it is to be in
Opposition for that long period of time. And the only way that that can be done of
course, is for us to provide good and stable Government over a long period of time.
I have a very good Cabinet. 1 have an outstanding Parliamentary Party. I believe there
is great goodwill in the Australian comimunity towards what we are endeavouring to
achieve. We have achieved much over the last 18 months, but there is a lot that lies
ahead of us. And above aft, I want to see over the next 18 months and in the years
beyond that, I want to see a united, tolerant, cohesive Australian nation fully realising
its potential as we move into the 21 st Century.
And when you think of the 2 1st Century, I particularly think of the young people in
our midst and I want on behalf of everybody else here tonight to wish those young men
and women, who are our guests tonight, every success as they sit for their Higher
School Certificate in a few weeks time.
It is one of those incredibly challenging periods in one's life and I wish all of them
great success and I hope that each and every one of them not only achieves the Higher
School Certificate results that they want, but they also find the careers in the 
Fax from 4 11
SEP 15 ' 97 13: 09 15/ 69/ 97 13: 14 Pg: 8
professions or pursuits or occupations that they really want to experience in the years
ahead.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you. Thank you, Paul and Rita for organising such a
wonderful occasion. Thank you Paul and Rita for being such marvellous
representatives of the people of Lowe in the national Parliament.
Thank you.
[ ENDS] 


14 September 1997
E&amp;OE
Thank you very much Gary Nairn. To my Parliamentary colleagues, John Anderson and David Brownhill; to Greg and Mary Walsh who have kindly made their property available; to the Mayor and other guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am personally delighted to be here to assist John Anderson in the launch of a very important policy which will make a major, indeed historic, contribution to the positive restructuring of the rural industries of Australia.
This policy has been built, indeed it has been put together painstakingly, over a period of months on two absolutely essential foundations.
The first of those is the unshakeable belief on my part and on the part of Tim Fischer and all the others members of the Coalition Government that the rural sector is indispensable to the future of this country. It is indispensable to the future of this country not only in an economic sense, the rural industries still provide 28 percent of Australia's export income and we would be a poorer, more deprived nation without that massive injection of economic wealth.
But it is also indispensable in a cultural and human sense. I can't envisage the Australia that I grew up in and the Australia that I love so much and so many millions of other Australians love so much, without a strong and viable rural sector.
So the first and most important thing about this rural policy is that it is an unambiguous expression of faith and belief in the importance of the rural community to the future of Australia.
And the second foundation on which the policy has been built is our understanding of the difficulties through which many areas of rural Australia have passed and are continuing to pass.
Not only are they difficulties of drought and the ravages that drought over the last 15 years, particularly in the early 1980s and also recently and indeed, currently in some areas of Australia, have created.
But also, the difficulties that so many of you have suffered as a result of the corruption of world agricultural markets. And it still remains one of the standing deficiencies of world trade that a double standard can be applied in relation to agriculture and manufactured products, so far as the rules of the World Trading Organisation are concerned.
Although it is fair to say that as a result of the efforts of countries such as Australia, some progress has been made on that front in recent years, and progress I hope, will continue to be made. But it still remains the case that efficient farming nations such as Australia are severely discriminated against by the rules of international trade.
So, the policy is built on those two very important foundations. And the policy is launched as an act of faith as a commitment to an integrated vision for the future of agriculture in Australia.
The plan that John and I announce today complements many initiatives that my Government has already taken which have been of benefit to farmers. Particularly, I think of the five reductions in interest rates. For every one percent drop in interest rates there's a boost to average farm cash income of $2,450, and $170 million extra income for the farm sector as a whole.
In the light of the difficulties faced in the drought, in relation to drought, we doubled the drought recovery period. And we've recognised through the last Budget the particular difficulties faced by families living in isolated rural areas and for those families we are providing an extra $6.18 million over four years in education assistance. And in the last Budget we increased funds for the National Rural and Remote Health Support Programme by providing an extra $16 million over four years.
The regional telecommunications infrastructure programme being funded out of the proceeds of the sale of Telstra will provide $250 million over the next five years to improve the quality and reduce the cost of telecommunications services and infrastructure for rural and regional and remote communities in Australia.
And, of course, the Natural Heritage Trust is providing an injection of $1.25 billion into the regeneration of Australia's natural environment. And particularly the expenditure on things like the regeneration of the Murray-Darling Basin, which is so critical to the future of agriculture in Australia in a long-term sense. They will be particular beneficiaries of that programme.
And then, of course, is the emphasis that we are placing on building the export component, particularly into the Asia-Pacific region of the farm sector through our Supermarket to Asia initiatives and also the extra commitments in the area of quarantine of $75 million.
So, it is against the background of those measures that we have already implemented and others which time prevents me mentioning, that I launch this integrated restructuring plan for the future of agriculture in Australia.
The elements of the package add up to assistance of $517 million over the next four years.
The elements of the package that we announce today will improve the tools needed by farmers to manage their finances, to seek new opportunities and new markets. And it will provide the rural community with the new start, the fresh and positive start that so many are looking for.
Our package is appropriately entitled, Agriculture - Advancing Australia. It brings together in a very constructive and integrated way, which has been long wanted by the rural community of Australia, the key elements of welfare support, adjustment, risk management and enhanced training and rural capacity building.
It honours the commitment made in our election policy, Reviving the Heartland. It is another instance in which we have kept faith very directly and very fully with the commitments we made in the campaign.
There are specific elements of the package. Importantly, there will be a new, commercially based, risk-management scheme that provides the right incentives to promote self-reliance.
This scheme will be more generous that those which preceded it, and there will be a simplified, single farm management deposit scheme to replace the previous dual arrangements.
The new farm business programme, FarmBis, with funding of $50 million will give a significant boost to farm business training. It will boost the skills farmers need to manage their resources and properties as we continue to increase our trade with the world.
There will be a farm family restart programme providing one year of support and access to financial advice to those most in need as they face difficult adjustment decisions. This will involve a generous re-establishment grant for those who decide to leave farming to provide them with a basis for the move.
Very importantly, from midnight tonight, and I emphasise the commencement date, there will be a three-year window of opportunity on gifting to allow pensioner-aged farmers to divest up to $500,000 of their assets to the next generation without having to wait 5 years before getting the aged pension.
This particular measure, will go a long way towards speeding the intergenerational adjustment and recognises the particular difficulties that many families face in relation to the capacity of farms to support 2 or 3 generations.
It has been wanted for a long time. And it is a recommendation of our Rural Taskforce that we have been very, very happy to embrace.
The relief payment available for farm families facing difficulties in exceptional drought will now be extended to cover other rare and severe events. This is on top of the extra $80 million we announced through the doubling of the drought recovery period from 6 to 12 months. We will make the move to self-reliance more manageable by a very gradual phase-down of business assistance in exceptional circumstances. Starting in 1999 and phasing down interest rate subsidies from 100 percent to 50 percent over a 5 year period.
The package also includes a redeveloped rural communities programme to assist rural communities develop their own support mechanisms and to manage change.
Ladies and gentlemen, before inviting John Anderson to say a few words, I would like to pay a tribute to the work undertaken by John, by my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the National Party, Tim Fischer and also by their joint Parliamentary Secretary, David Brownhill. I can't think of three people who have worked more tirelessly for the interests of the rural community of Australia during a difficult period, not only a difficult period for them but also a period in which we have sought to take the time to put together a package that says something about the future and also provides people with the capacity to adjust.
Easily thrown together packages are a dime a dozen. A package that is integrated in the sense that it provides help for people who can no longer sustain their farming properties but equally provides hope and encouragement to the more efficient and successful, and also provides an incentive for self-reliance and builds upon the commitment we have to the future of agriculture as an irreplaceable component of Australian society in the Australian economy, takes a little longer.
And I am very proud of the package that I've outlined today. It represents the culmination of the hard work of many people, particularly the three colleagues that I've mentioned.
I'd also like to thank the National Farmers' Federation, New South Wales Farmers' Association and all the other rural organisations that we've consulted and talked to and also the many hundreds and thousands of individual people on the land in Australia who played a part in putting the package together.
It is, as I said at the beginning, based on those two foundations. First of all, our unshakeable faith in the importance of the rural community to the very essence and the very future of Australia. And also, our very sensitive understanding of the difficulties through which so many of you have passed and the difficulties that so many of you are still experiencing. And I believe that it is in a total sense, a proper response to those two very important considerations and I'd be absolutely delighted to invite
John Anderson to say a little bit more about the detail of the scheme and to flesh out the broad elements that I've outlined.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


17 September 1997
E&amp;OE............................
Mr Chairman and colleagues and other distinguished guests. You have had outlined to you by the organising committee for the 2000 Games in Sydney, the desire of that committee to have the Olympic torch carried through all of the Pacific nations that are members of the international Olympic fraternity. And I am very pleased to announce on behalf of the Australian Government, that the Australian Government will fully underwrite the cost of carrying the Olympic torch through the Pacific island nations. There are some private sector interests that I guess may be willing to become involved, and we will certainly be seeking their involvement, but whatever the outcome of that let me make it clear that it will happen - the torch will originate as tradition has it in Mount Olympus and will go to all of the Pacific island nations which are members of the international Olympic fraternity.
It will not only cement the spirit of the Olympics in the Pacific area, but it will also be a great boost to the tourist industry of this part of the world. I think the 2000 Games represent an unrivalled opportunity for all of the nations of the Pacific to boost their tourist industries. This is not just a Sydney event, it's not just an Australian event, it's also an Oceania event, it really does give our part of the world an opportunity in a very big way, once again, to emphasise its distinct character, so I'm very very happy to make that announcement and I'm delighted to be able to say that, come what may and come what private sector help there may be, that torch will go to all of the countries which are members of the Olympic fraternity in our part of the world.
While I am on my feet, could I say, as Prime Minister of Australia, that the Melbourne bid for the 2006 Commonwealth Games does have the very, very strong support of the National Government of Australia. I would have to say, if you will forgive the commercial, that the Melbourne Cricket Ground is not only the greatest sporting arena in Australia - I've been to sporting arenas all around the world and I have been to none better - not only in its capacity, but its facilities and its resources, its proximity to the city.
Ron Walker and Jeff Kennett are two very enthusiastic energetic and able advocates of the cause of Melbourne to have these games. It will be fifty years since a major event of that kind - there have been many other major events that have come to Melbourne including that one that Jim reminds me about every few days when I talk to him, that was the Bledisloe Cup, which came to Melbourne and produced in a non-rugby union city the largest rugby union crowd not only in the southern hemisphere, but I think also anywhere in the world. So I wouldn't let the opportunity go by without emphasising everything that Ron Walker and that video said to you.
I respect that there may be other bids from the region in that event, that obviously, that obviously the best will win, and I as always will feel confident to accept the outcome of the impartial judgement, but gentlemen I hope that the coming of the Olympic torch is not only a great sporting event but is a great cultural event for the nations of the Pacific region and we're delighted to underwrite its cost, and never forget Melbourne.
Thank you.



22 September 1997 
E O E............
Thank you very much Dr Andrew Podger, to my colleague Dr Michael Wooldridge, the Minister for Health and Family Services in Australia, to the Director General of the World Health Organisation, Dr Nakajima, to the Regional Director, Dr Han, to Mrs Jacobsen the Health Minister of the Republic of Niue, to other distinguished guests and particularly our overseas visitors, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a special privilege for me as Prime Minister to welcome you and to speak at the first-ever regional gathering of the World Health Organisation held in Australia. The World Health Organisation was formed almost fifty years ago and Australia was one of the original 61 countries that banded together to form an organisation during which 50 years of its existence, has delivered outcomes and pioneered improvements in the health and the lifestyles of the billions of people of the world in a way that I think has exceeded the expectations of its founders.
There is often debate about the worth of some international organisations. But in all the time that I have been interested in politics, and that goes back beyond the time when I entered Federal Parliament 23 years ago, I have never heard any serious criticism voiced about the role of the World Health Organisation. It has always been seen as a practical humanitarian body dedicated to the relief of human suffering and dedicated to finding solutions to disease and the spread of misery which disease inevitably involves.
Its founding ideal was to eradicate disease and conquer suffering by governments fostering co-operation among themselves and with others to promote the health of all people. We all know of the great work of the World Health Organisation and others in the eradication of smallpox. But perhaps not so well known have been the efforts which have saved millions of children's lives through world-wide vaccination coverage, and successful campaigns against polio and leprosy have also been immense successes. And on the score of polio, it is my understanding that the world is close to be able to say that polio has been all but eliminated, and as someone who still remembers the times of the 1950s when polio was a constant challenge to the well-being and the happiness of families, not only in Australia but around the world, that is a truly remarkable achievement.
Of course when gatherings such as this occur the focus is inevitably on the future and on the challenges which the future carries with it. And as we can reflect upon the achievements of the past we must also acknowledge that there are new challenges. The spread of HIV/AIDS for example, represents the modern pandemic challenge which faces an organisation such as the World Health Organisation. I can say as Prime Minister of Australia, this country has been especially successful in relation to the challenge of the HIV/AIDS problem here in Australia. Through programmes that were instituted early on in the mid-1980s which drew strong bipartisan co-operation, we have achieved an enormous amount, and it is a demonstration of what can be done in relation to health challenges if the right resources, the right strategies and the right policies are achieved.
On a domestic level, my government recognises that care for the health of its citizens is amongst its prime responsibilities. And in one particular area we have focused very heavily on the challenge of falling immunisation rates. It may astonish many visitors to this country to be told that we found last year that on 53 per cent of Australian children were properly immunised against the preventable diseases of measles, whooping cough and German measles. And that revelation to us caused very great alarm and as a result the Federal Government took the lead in February of this year to adopt a major new initiative designed to reach out to 97 per cent of Australian parents who are in favour of immunisation but who do not finish the full vaccination regime.
And I want to take the opportunity here today of publicly paying tribute to my colleague, Dr Wooldridge, for the persistent lead and advocacy that he took in relation to immunisation, stretching back to the time when he was spokesman on health matters during our period in opposition. He is a practical example of helping all the citizens of a nation to respond in an immediate and pragmatic way to a serious challenge. And I certainly regarded it as a national disgrace that a country such as Australia should have such an appalling immunisation level, and that is why we've directed policies and resources in that direction.
I think Australia could also claim to have been relatively very successful in reducing the consumption and the use of tobacco. Since the 1980s the rates of adult Australians who have tried smoking have declined from 82 per cent to
67 per cent, and from young people from 73 per cent to fifty per cent. I don't pretend that we still don't have a long way to go, nor do I ignore for a moment the fact that we have challenges in other areas of substance abuse that most also be addressed, and perhaps if addressed with the same vigour, the same publicity and the same allocation of resources as directed to areas that I've mentioned this morning, and where we have been remarkably successful - then perhaps we might in a few years' time be able to speak with pride of the achievements in areas such as that.
I'm also very proud of the fact that my government has made improving the health of indigenous Australians a major priority. As a starting point we have reached an agreement with the states of Australia to provide a set of national performance indicators aimed at improving indigenous health. And the targets we've set ourselves include: a 20 per cent reduction over ten years in both the overall death rate and the rate in comparison with the death rate of other Australians; to reduce stillbirths by 50 per cent with ten years; to reduce mortality from pneumonia by 50 per cent within ten years; to reduce mortality from diabetes by 20 per cent within ten years; and to reduce mortality from cervical cancer by 50 per cent within ten years; and to achieve at least an 85 per cent coverage in child immunisation rates within three years.
These are practical, necessary and achievable targets, and we will be very closely working with the state governments of Australia to ensure that this very important contribution to improving the life expectancy, to improving the well-being and improving the general health of indigenous Australians is achieved. We owe them that and much more, and it's a very important, indeed solemn, obligation of my government to see that those health goals are achieved in the area of indigenous health.
The gathering here today of course has a very particular regional focus. And I am delighted to say again on behalf of the Australian Government that the focus of so many of our policies, be it in the economic area, be it in the area of diplomatic endeavour, be it in the area of institutional co-operation, and here today in the area of health, we place an enormous priority on our association with our regional neighbours.
We have much in common. We have a future destiny together as a group of nations in this part of the world. And working together to make common cause to eradicate the scourge of disease, to provide new hope and new opportunity to the people of this region - particularly those who are grappling with health challenges which would be beyond the belief and the comprehension of almost all people who live in Australia, which must still be numbered amongst one of the most fortunate in the world so far as its general state of health is concerned - the quality of its healthcare system, the excellence of its medical practitioners and the quality of the care and professional attention that is received by Australians in both public and private hospitals in this country.
And I take the opportunity of saying at this gathering that despite inevitable debate and criticism and argument about health-care issues, which is part and parcel of a lively democratic society, in comparative terms, the quality of health-care in this country and the dedicated service and professionalism of doctors and other health professionals is something of which Australians can be immensely proud.
But expressing our pride in that achievement doesn't lighten the burden of ensuring that improvements be made where they ought to be made. Nor particularly does it in any way reduce, rather it increase, the obligation that we owe to those who are not so fortunate. And there are many in the region whose health outcomes are far inferior to ours, not through want of effort and commitment, but simply through a combination of natural and other phenomena.
And this gathering here will remind Australia and those Australians participating, of our obligations to the region. It will remind us of the contribution that we can continue to make to the alleviation of human suffering.
It will remind us of the enormous achievements of the past and it will also remind us of the challenges that lie ahead, remind us that diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis, which ten or 20 years ago we thought had been finally put behind us, are now re-emerging as significant health challenges in different parts of the world. So as always it remains a mixed story, but we record immense triumphs and immense successes. We rediscover old challenges and old threats in a new and more modern environment.
So ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Australia Government and on behalf of the Australian people, I welcome you very warmly to Australia and to the city of Sydney. I regard Australia's membership of the World Health Organisation as one of those enduring associations which have contributed to the relief of the suffering and the disability of mankind over a period of
50 years. And I know that I speak on behalf of both sides of politics and I know I speak on behalf of all the Australian people, in saying that we will continue to have a very deep and close involvement in the activities of the World Health Organisation. Australia will always be ready to play her part in helping to tackle the challenge of disease, will always be understanding of the problems of other nations, and will always be ready and willing to contribute our fair share in fighting disease and providing for a healthier, happier and more optimistic world for the future of its people.
Thank you.
(Ends)


24 September 1997
 E&amp;OE................................................
Thank you very much Senator Newman. To Senator Grant Tambling, the Parliamentary Secretary; to my other parliamentary colleagues; Ministers; to Mr Marrett, the Chairman of the Board; to Miss Vardon, the Chief Executive Officer; and most particularly to the 25 000 to 30 000 employees of Centrelink who are participating in this video hook-up.
This is certainly a very important day. It is a day to tell the Australian community that the process of reform and innovation and renewal is very much alive in the service delivery area of the Commonwealth Government and the Commonwealth agencies.
In administrative terms, this is probably the biggest single reform undertaken in the area of service delivery during the past 50 years. And it is a very special tribute to the ministerial leadership of my colleagues, Jocelyn Newman and Amanda Vanstone, and a particular tribute also to the heads of their departments.
I do want to take this opportunity in talking about the administrative significance of Centrelink and its launch. I want to take this opportunity on behalf of the Government as Prime Minister to thank all of those people who work in the area of public service.
Mine is a proudly private enterprise government. But that does not gainsay the fact that we regard a strong public sector providing necessary services for people as an integral part of modern government and as something that delivers necessary support to those in the community who need it.
There is nothing incompatible between a passion for private enterprise but ongoing support and respect for the role of the public sector. And those who work in the various agencies of the Government and those who will work for Centrelink in the modern face of a reformed and innovative service delivery system your work is highly valued. It is gratefully respected and I regard it as a very important part of the face of my Coalition Government as we move into the 21st Century.
Centrelink represents the culmination of the aspirations of people over a long period of time.
From the moment I entered Parliament in 1974 and began talking to constituents about their various problems in my electorate in Sydney, I began hearing complaints about the number of agencies you had to visit. It was one of the very earliest complaints. It pre-dated some of the complaints we now get about other activities of government. And what focused my mind at the time was that so many people felt that if only they could go to one place and have all their business done in that one spot it would be a lot more efficient, it would be a lot more human and it would make a great deal more sense. And over the years, at various stages, attempts were made to do this and suggestions were made that it would actually happen. But it has taken the past 18 months and the arrival of a new government and, if I may so, new Ministers to bring it about.
The consolidation in Centrelink of so many of the services of the Government that interact with people will provide, of course, a more human face. It will provide a more efficient service. It will lead to far less public dissatisfaction. And very importantly, it will give a new sense of career and a new sense of career opportunity to the thousands of people who work for Centrelink. Because Centrelink is carving out a new horizon and a completely different horizon. And it's a demonstration that there is an Australian way, a unique Australian way, of delivering service support to those in the community who deserve and need our help and our assistance.
It will reach millions of people. It will touch millions of families. It will help the too many unemployed within our community. And I think it will bring a modern understanding all over the country to the need for public services to relate in, not only a sympathetic way, but also a responsible way towards those in the community who are getting government assistance.
I have often spoken in the last few months of the principle of mutual obligation. And that is a principle which says that it is the obligation of a decent, civil society to provide a social security safety net and underpinning to those in the community who need help. And I never want the Australian tradition of providing that safety net impaired or withdrawn.
We have a solemn obligation to help those in our community who are deserving of help. Equally we have a right, as a responsible community, to ask of those who are receiving help, where it is reasonable to do so, that they do something in return for that assistance and something that is commensurate with the help and their own circumstances. And that is the principle of mutual obligation and it's the principle that underlines our approach to Work for the Dole. It's the principle that underlines the determination, the responsible and sensitive determination with which Senator Newman, in particular, has pursued the eradication to the maximum extent possible of fraud and abuse within the social security system. It is only a minority of people who undertake that. And we owe it to the millions of honest Australian citizens who don't try and abuse or rort the system to ensure that in all the manifestations of government, those who would seek to do so, are properly pursued in accordance with the due processes of the law.
These services of Centrelink will provide new opportunities, more efficient services and more hope, not only for individuals, but also for families and for a whole range of those people. I understand that Centrelink will provide services and payments to over 7.8 million Australians, including 1.6 million pensioners, almost two million families receiving family allowance and 800 000 unemployed people. There will be over 400 locations across the country. And I'm not surprised that your Chairman calculates that if he started to walk from one to the other it would take him a year. I would have thought it would take much longer than that.
But ladies and gentlemen, the size and dimension of this reform should not be underestimated. It represents something that previous generations of administrators at a Commonwealth level have dreamt of doing but haven't been able to do. And I particularly want to commend the leadership that has been shown by my colleagues and also by the heads of the client departments.
So again, ladies and gentlemen, can I express on behalf of my Government and on behalf of the people of Australia our warm congratulations to the launch of such an innovative project.
Reform and renewal and innovation is not only confined to the private sector of the Australian economy. If we are to realise the true potential of Australia as we move into the 21st Century we must constantly look to ways of not only improving the efficiency with which the private sector of our economy operates but also the efficiency and the compassion with which services to the less fortunate, in particular, in our community operate.
We need, as far as possible, to take away the notion of dependency from the delivery of services. We need to develop a balance between compassion and responsibility. We need to deliver services in an efficient and friendly manner but, nonetheless, with an eye to our overall obligations to the taxpayers of Australia who pay for the services and the support which is delivered to others within the community.
We need to look at such things as service delivery through Centrelink as a partnership, a partnership between all sections of the Australian community to see that we have a society which encourages people and gives them the incentive to work hard and to achieve and to get ahead and to succeed, and in the process to pay their taxes and to use those taxes wisely to help the development of the country, to invest in necessary infrastructure, but also where appropriate to be distributed to those in the community who we judge to need some additional assistance.
In the past we have done this in a disparate way. In the past we have encouraged people to go from one location to another and we have often confused them with a lot of administrative duplication. And in one very big stroke Centrelink cuts through that duplication. Centrelink consolidates in an efficient, modern fashion the major service delivery activities of the Federal Government. And I am somebody who's very dedicated to sensible reform and change where necessary in all sectors of Australian society.
I am very excited and very proud to be the head of the Government which has been responsible for such a major public sector reform. And one that will have a lasting impact on the morale of those who work in this area. And we're talking about a very large number of people whose work is very greatly valued and it will also have a very, very significant effect on the way in which services are delivered.
So, I wish Centrelink well. I thank and congratulate all who work within it for their efforts of the last 12 months. I wish them great career prospects and plenty of encouragement in the years ahead. I particularly thank the Chairman of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer.
I want to therefore declare Centrelink officially opened and to launch the national campaign to inform the Australian public about the benefits of this important and innovative reform.
Thank you.


25 September 1997
E&amp;OE.............
Thank you Senator Newman, Pru Goward - Head of the Office of Status of Women, Parliamentary colleagues and most particularly it is a pleasure to welcome Dame Enid's son, Brendan, her daughter Kathleen and daughter in law Janet. And we are delighted that the three of you are with us on a very direct link with Dame Enid and one of the most famous political families in Australian history.
Dame Enid Lyons was by any measure, a great Australian. Initially as a wife to Joe Lyons and mother to their 12 children, she actively supported her Prime Minister husband. Dame Enid said of her late husband, that to him, the problems of government were not the problems of statistics but of human values and human hearts and human feelings and they are ageless invariably, regarding the responsibilities of those in public life.
After his death her role dramatically changed, she rose above sickness and depression to begin, perhaps not a new life, but certainly a very different one of direct personal public service.
As Jocelyn has said, 1997 marks the centenary of her birth. She was elected to Federal Parliament 54 years ago. In the election of 1943 she was the only new member of a very diminished United Australia Party, which was one of the forerunners to the Liberal Party of Australia.
Dame Enid's own account of her Maiden Speech revealed much of her considerable character. This was a profound and special occasion because it was the first time that a woman had ever addressed the House of Representatives. She recalled how, even though she intended to speak not as a woman but as a representative citizen, she could not wholly divest herself from the qualities of her sex . She applied these qualities and their effect upon her home and family life to all kinds of policy measures. This was because she regarded the foundation of a nation's greatness as the home to the people. She dwelt on the need for extended social services and the need in providing social security to guard against the diminution of the qualities of self-dependence and self-respect that sustained Australians.
Five years later she was to become, as we have just seen on that marvellous Cinesound newsreel, the first woman member of a Federal Cabinet when Robert Menzies returned to power in the election of 1949. And theirs was a partnership in Government, despite the acknowledged differences of view very strongly, compassionately held differences of views between her late husband and the Prime Minister she then served.
It is, of course, part of the folklore of the Liberal side of politics that Menzies resigned from the Ministry led by Joe Lyons over, I think, national insurance. If you look at some of the original correspondence between Dame Enid and Menzies which is on display here today, you have some indication of the temper of that relationship.
This book is an account of Dame Enid's seven and a half years as a Member of Parliament. The title came from Billy Hughes and something he said to her during her first days in Parliament. According to Dame Enid Hughes called her aside and said "Let there be no talk of the equality of the sexes! There you sat, like a bird of paradise among carrion crows!"
Despite their differing views, Robert Menzies realised her capacity to make a contribution. She was no token and no man, let alone Sir Robert would have dared to say 'we had to have a woman'.
Just as it was then, it is now, and that is that merit - may I proudly say as Leader of the Liberal Party - motivates our decisions on these issues in this area. It is no accident that Dame Enid Lyons became of my Party and it is no accident that the Liberal Party is today represented by 25 women in the Federal Parliament, including 17 in the House of Representatives.
Women have always played a prominent part in the Liberal Party.
The Australian Women's National League was a powerful influence in the formation of the Liberal Party of Australia. Again it was no accident that ours was the first political party in the country to have equal numbers of men and women in senior party positions, particularly in the Victorian Division. Following the election of the Coalition to Government 18 months ago Australia has now achieved the highest percentage of women in Federal Parliament ever, over 20 per cent, and that is about twice the world average.
And I must say, a few months ago, when I was in the United States in Washington and accorded the distinct privilege of being invited onto the floor of the United States Senate. One of the overwhelming impression I had was firstly, the average age of the various Senators was significantly older than that of Australian Senators. I don't make that as a point of criticism, I just report it as an observation.
The other impression was the almost total lack of any female representation in the American Senate. And that is a very stark contrast to the number of women who represent both sides of politics in the Australian Senate. When I say both sides, I say all segments of politics, when one thinks of the Senate, because there are not just Labor members and Coalition members, there are also representatives of other parties.
The progress of women in Australian society has been marked by many achievements of Liberal Government. The Menzies Government delivered:
- child endowment;
- national divorce laws;
- the medical benefits scheme and a national health scheme;
- tax concessions for married pensioners;
In the Holt, Gorton and McMahon era the Liberal Party delivered assistance to deserted wives, lifted the Commonwealth Public Service marriage ban, introduced equal pay legislation and the first Child Care Act in 1972.
The Fraser Government introduced the new family allowance system which involves payments made directly to carers, principally then and still generally the case, directly to mothers.
It established the Office of Child Care, the National Women's Advisory Council and the Institute of Family Studies.
In 1979 pension health benefits were extended to single parents and dependents and before losing office in 1983 the Fraser Government developed the family income supplement scheme to help low income families. And I might add, it was the Fraser Government that signed the convention on the elimination of discrimination against women, which later led to the establishment of the sex discrimination office under the Hawke Government, in 1984.
In the book, Dame Enid expressed concern for many working women, expressed no less forthrightly these days. She was properly concerned for her children, the effect of her long absences from them and the need to balance their needs with her responsibilities as a working person, whose job often kept her distant from them.
Some, may I say ladies and gentlemen, have wrongly attempted to stereotype my Government as possessing, as what is described as, an old fashioned attitude towards women. Not only is that wrong but I think it is in part borne of a resentment that the Coalition has chosen to pursue new and different paths towards achieving greater respect and choice for women within the Australian community, although it is no less vigorous in its commitment to moving down that path.
The world has changed forever since Dame Enid Lyons' time. The choices available to many women in Australian society are now virtually limitless, compared with a generation ago. Australian society is more diverse and better for that fact. Its social structures have changed significantly and will continue to do so. The role of women has changed and we are a richer community as a consequence. Dame Enid contributed significantly to those evolutions and just as she met the challenges of her time, it is our response and ability to meet the challenges of our time.
The single principle which guides the Government's approach to women is the principle of respect in the broader sense. Respect for their wish for safety, for industrial relations conditions which meet their needs as parents and carers, for their ambitions to succeed and for income security in their retirement years. Above all, my Government respects a woman's need to make choices that are perhaps more complicated than the choices which face men.
Whilst many women have made it clear that they wish to be part of the paid workforce, that they value the independence and rewards that this provides, must also make it clear that they want to combine this with their family needs and family responsibilities. I respect both of those wishes and have set out to allow both of them to be fully realised.
The right to choose and have those choices properly recognised by Government was not always evident in earlier years. Laws were often passed with an intention to punish rather than prevent injustice. The approach was divisive, destructive, inevitably against business and against men so that large sections of the community, including women actually rejected their purpose.
In contrast, our approach has been to work with business, not against it to improve the circumstances of women in the workforce. We have ensured that women and men can now make work place arrangements to suit their individual family needs.
The Workplace Relations Act, for example, removes restrictions on permanent part time work which previously forced some workers into casual employment. Permanent, part time work with pro rata conditions is an enormous step forward for Australian women. For the first time work and family can be combined with security, certainty and full entitlements. This is a far cry, for example, from two years ago, when 28 per cent of women in the workforce were casuals, with little or no access to government subsidised child care. We have also further broadened employment and training opportunities for women.
And I am often irked by the criticism of our childcare policy, when the reality is, we have increased expenditure on childcare by some $44 million to $1.2 billion annually and over the next four years the Government will fund an additional 83,000 new childcare places.
Our family tax initiative has provided significant assistance to all Australian families within a reasonable income band who have children. And also whatever the debate about what health benefits may be our health insurance rebate makes families $450 a year better off.
The Department of Social Security estimates that there are 30,000 transfers annually between Parenting Allowance and the Sole Parent Pension. A Common Parenting Payment will be introduced by my Government to ease the transition for people with children moving from single to couple households and vice-versa.
The enshrining of pension entitlements at 25 per cent of male weekly earnings is an important safeguard for women retirees and the Government is treating the income security needs of older women in Australian society as a special priority.
Our goal, ladies and gentlemen, is to provide women with the maximum achievable degree of choice in Australian society. We do not believe and we will never believe, in patronising quotas although we do believe in an effective anti-discrimination laws. That is why we have retained and we will enhance the role of the Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner. The message that this sends is self-evident, that we respect the rights of women to be treated equally and fairly, whether it be in the workplace or elsewhere.
We are making it safer, fairer and freer for women. The decisive ban on semi-automatic weapons enhances the quality of safety for the entire Australian community and most particularly the safety of Australian women.
And later in the year I will host a Domestic Violence Summit, where my determination that our country take a united stand against this abhorrent crime will be accompanied by a national four year plan of action established in conjunction with the States and Territories.
I want to take the opportunity of saying my commitment to that is a very strong, personal one and is one which I intend to devote not only some additional finance from the Commonwealth but also a strong personal commitment because I think it is something that unites Australians across the political and other divides in our community. And there is much that can be done both in terms of protecting victims of domestic violence and also, hopefully, education and a greater understanding amongst the perpetrators of domestic violence in our society and what it involves.
This government does have an overwhelming commitment to the women of Australia to provide a greater range of choices than ever before. Today has been an opportunity for me to say something to you about our commitment in that area and it seemed to me appropriate to do it against a background of the re-launching of this remarkable book, written by a remarkable Australian woman.
She came from a family that contributed enormously to Australian society through three or four decades. She displayed in her own life a level of loyalty and love and support towards her family that was a great example to hundreds of thousands of Australians.
She was a reminder to all of us that the infinite capacity of committed able people, not only to provide a secure family focus, but also in her own right when she adopted and embraced her own political career, after the death of her husband.
It was a rare first in Australia's political experience, somebody whose husband had been the Prime Minister of Australia, then herself to enter Australian politics and become a Federal Cabinet Minister.
I have often thought over the years as I have watched other countries, where the wives or husbands of deceased political leaders succeeded them in politics. I often thought to myself, that Australia did it so many years earlier in the person of Dame Enid Lyons.
So to the members of the Lyons family, I particularly welcome you here today, in this building, which I guess, in an architectural sense, a sort of lineal descendent of the building, which your parents functioned at different times with great distinction.
But it does carry with it the spirit of the old building and I should say to all of you that I have been reminiscing with the family before the ceremony started here this morning, about where all of them managed to sleep at the Lodge, because there were quite a large number of them. And I often think as I wander around the Lodge. I often think of the different families that have lived in it before my time as Prime Minister and its a very vivid reminder of the great history of Australia.
And I want to thank you for what you represent to us here today, as family members of a very great Australian family. I commend this book. I congratulate the Office of the Status of Women for their initiative in having it printed. I want to thank Landsdowne, the Publisher.
We should take every opportunity we can, before we reach the Centenary of Federation, to reflect on the history of Australia. And what we have had the opportunity of doing is rediscovering a lot of its richness and looking at it in different ways and from different vantage points. I hope the reprinting of this very interesting piece of work will help us along the way.
[Ends]


26 September 1997
Thank you Michael. To my Parliamentary colleagues and to my fellow Liberals here in New South Wales. It really is an immense pleasure to be back with you tonight and have the opportunity of doing something that I enjoy a great deal, and that is talking directly to the members of the Liberal Party of Australia, the people who work so very hard to put us into Government all around Australia only 18 months ago, and tonight I want to address many of my remarks to the obligations that those of us who were fortunate enough to be Parliamentary members of the Liberal Party owe to the millions of people around Australia who want years of strong and effective Coalition Government.
We, as members of the Parliamentary party should never forget the obligation that we owe to those who worked so hard to put us into power. There is no point in my mincing words in talking to you tonight. The last week has not been a good week for the Government but let me say to you, it would have been an immensely worse week for the Government if I had walked away from taking some very difficult decisions.
Politics can be a cruel and unforgiving and very difficult business but it is the highest form of public service. It is the noblest thing that people can do for their country and that is to serve all of the members of the society of the nation in a sacrificing way and I have always regarded public life in politics as a great profession. And there are many people in Parliament on both sides who are dedicated to the service of this country and it is important that we do everything we can to fight the cynicism and the denigration of our great national institutions and upholding Parliamentary standards, requiring of people who hold immense power through great public offices that they exercise great care, proper diligence and honesty on all occasions is the first requirement of political responsibility.
That is a standard that I have sought to uphold and it has been upheld by me this week and it has been upheld by me throughout the whole time that I have been Prime Minister. Let me say to you tonight that I will continue to apply that standard. I will apply as Prime Minister of this country the standards my two Labor predecessors deliberately chose not to apply when they were in power.
My responsibility over the last week was to deal with difficult situations, to take immediate and effective action and then to return the concentration of my Government and the members of my Cabinet onto the things of great concern to mainstream Australia, to remind the Australian community of what we have achieved over the last 18 months, to remind the Australian community again and again what we inherited from our predecessors, to remind all of you tonight that we inherited a deficit of $10.5 billion and in three years we will have turned it into a surplus of $1.6 billion.
Just as we should never be reluctant to remind the Australian community that Kim Beazley and Gareth Evans conspired in 1983 to prevent a police investigation of their then-mate Senator Colston, equally we should never, ever be reluctant to remind the Australian people of what we inherited in March of 1996, not only that huge debt but also an average unemployment rate over the previous 13 years of 8.7 per cent. When I became Prime Minister of Australia and Peter Costello Treasurer of Australia, the long term bond rate in Australia was what the money marketeers call 250 basis points higher than the long term bond rate in the United States.
Two and a half weeks ago the Australian long term bond rate slipped below the United States long term bond rate for the first time since the floating of the Australian dollar in December of 1983 and that was a tremendous mark of approval. Ten out of ten from the most ruthless group of investors in the world, the money men and women of the New York markets and it may sound to many people a rather esoteric comparison but what it says is that in 18 months my Government has turned around the perceptions of the investors of the world about this country, that the investors of the world now know that Australia has a Government that is prepared to take difficult decisions, that Australia has a Government which has reformed our industrial relations system, that Australia has a Government that has embarked upon the most effective and comprehensive privatisation programme ever undertaken by any Federal Government in Australia, and can I personally congratulate John Fahey as Finance Minister on the marvellous job he has done in overseeing the privatisation process in my Government.
What the Australian people want from me and what the Australian people want from my Government is a focus on those things that are of direct concern to their daily lives. They are grateful that we have given them the lowest inflation in 30 years. They are grateful that we have given them five interest rate cuts and the lowest housing interest rates since the late 1930s. They are grateful that we have been able to reduce our immense national debt. They are grateful that we have delivered on our great promises in relation to the family tax initiative and the private health insurance rebate and the improved taxation treatment of self-funded retirees.
They are grateful that we have delivered on our small business commitments. They are grateful that we have reformed the industrial relations system. They are grateful that we have broken the monopoly power of the maritime unions of Australia so that it is now possible for an employer from the Australian waterfront to directly recruit non-union labour and what they want from us over the next 18 months is a redoubled effort to focus on those things that are of concern to them. Unemployment in this country remains too high but don't ever let the Labor Party get away with the myth that unemployment arrived on the second of March 1996.
Kim Beazley's great legacy to Australia is that when he was Employment Minister, unemployment reached a post- depression high of 11.2 per cent and had averaged 8.7 per cent in the 13 years that Labor had been in Government. Our responsibility is to continue our efforts to reduce it. All of the pre-conditions to a better employment outlook in 1998 are there. We have created the circumstances and are now beginning to enjoy stronger economic growth than in 1996. The Governor of the Reserve Bank, normally a conservative spokesman on economic matters, said only a few weeks ago that the constraints on economic growth had by and large been removed in Australia. What he was saying was that we had reached such stable fiscal and other economic conditions that it was possible for the Australian economy to grow without the twin threats of higher inflation and a spillover into a higher current account deficit.
That is something that a Reserve Bank Governor has never been able to say to the Australian people in the 23 years that I have been in Federal Parliament. So if you bring all of these conditions together, the low inflation, the low interest rates, the gathering momentum of economic growth, the enhanced respect in which Australia is held within the international financial community, our determination to reduce and we've succeeded in doing it, the huge debt that we inherited from the Labor Party, you are seeing assembled the greatest conjunction of positive economic circumstances that this country has had for decades and as all of us who have studied the economy know, employment is always the last of the major economic indicators to come right.
So we have much to be proud of over the last 18 months. There have been difficulties and there have been set backs but there have been immense achievements and achievements in which all of us take immense and justifiable pride. We've not only taken action on the economic front but I remain immensely proud of the way in which we have delivered a safer society through our effective ban on automatic and semi automatic weapons in the wake of the Port Arthur disaster last year.
We have changed perceptions in important respects concerning our relations with other nations of the world. We have in no way lessened the importance of our associations with the nations of the Asia Pacific region and indeed, the first visits that I paid as Prime Minister were to many of our major friends and partners in the Asia Pacific region, and I will be returning to Indonesia again in a few weeks time after I have gone to the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Edinburgh during October and once again, conducting discussions with President Soeharto who has led that great Indonesian nation now for over 30 years.
Recently I was in the Pacific area taking part in the South Pacific Forum and much of the media coverage of my visit to the Cook Islands centred upon the issue of greenhouse gas emissions, and ladies and gentlemen, I make no apologies for the fact that at that meeting I stood up for Australia's interests.
I take a very simple, uncomplicated view of the responsibility of the Prime Minister of Australia, and that responsibility in my opinion is to promote the interests of the Australian people. I find it absolutely amazing that whenever there is a disagreement between Australia and some other part of the world the Labor Party always wants us to roll over and apologise to the rest of the world.
About a year ago, the members states of the European Union said they wanted to sign a Framework Agreement with Australia, and that is an agreement to sort of express in formal language the many economic and other bonds that we have with other nations, and when the Foreign Minister came to talk to me about it I said I had absolutely no objection, and in fact I was enthusiastic about signing a Framework Agreement with the members of the European Union, but I objected to the nations of the European Union requiring us as a pre-condition of signing that Framework Agreement to agree to the insertion in it of a human rights clause which would of given them certain rights to terminate the agreement. I took the view that a nation with the outstanding human rights record of Australia ought not to be required by the nations of the European Union to agree to the insertion of such a clause.
And what was the reaction to the Labor Party? I think he is the local member for the University of New South Wales, isn't he? Laurie Brereton, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. He said, this is terrible, we should agree immediately, in other words we should roll over, and he said, if you don't agree you won't get the agreement signed. Well of course that turned out to be wrong, we stood our ground and the agreement is being concluded in another form. The same thing happened again last week. I was accused in standing up for Australia's interests in ignoring the interests and the aspirations of the Small Island States of the Pacific area. Once again I was told I ought to roll over, and apologise.
I wasn't ignoring their interests. I understand the concerns of those Island States about global warming, and about rising sea levels, but I also know that we will never get a comprehensive, workable solution to that problem unless we involve all of those nations in the world, both developed, and developing who contribute to greenhouse gas emissions, and the proposal being advance by the nations of the European Union, and apparently supported by the Australian Labor Party, would impose a crippling, disproportionate, unfair burden on Australian industry.
According to some estimates, those proposals if adopted, and if agreed to by Australia, which they never will be while ever I am Prime Minister of this country, would cost Australia something in the order of eighty or ninety thousand jobs. They would impose unfair, crippling burdens on many on the most efficient export industries of Australia. They would spell the death of many more jobs in the Hunter Valley than the recent BHP announcement that had such a traumatic effect on Newcastle, to which incidentally I send my warm good wishes at the Grand Final on Sunday. Controversial backing in an audience like this, but I think there would be something rather nice about Newcastle winning.
Ladies and gentlemen, I don't want anybody in this audience to be in any doubt about what is involved in this greenhouse gas issue. This is about the Australian national interest, this is about Australia saying to the rest of the world, we will play our part, we will make a contribution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, we will be part of a world-wide agreement that sets realistic, realisable, achievable targets. We will accept disciplines, we have already done so, and we will be having more to say about that in the lead up to the Kyoto conference, but under no circumstances are we going to accept a regime that will impose unfair and disproportionate burdens on the industries of Australia, and on the people of Australia. Because unlike just about every other developed country, Australia is simultaneously a developed society and a net exporter of energy, and as a consequence of that the sort of principles, and the sort of rules that might be satisfactory for most of the European nations are demonstrably unsatisfactory for Australia.
So in this, and in so many other areas the guiding principle of my attitude and the principle that instructs what I do in terms of our relations with the rest of the world is simply the Australian national interests, and that in my view of life is my supreme responsibility as Prime Minister of this country.
Can I also, as a member of the New South Wales Division of the Liberal Party, and as somebody who has been to most, just about every Convention since I joined the party in the late 1950's, and that means I have probably been to as many Conventions as most of the people who are gathered here, can I say a couple of things directly to you about the New South Wales Division. Can I first of all say how immensely grateful I am for the superlative effort that the party put in to deliver so many magnificent new members into the House of Representative, and the Senate at the last election. Can I also say how committed I am to securing the expulsion of Bob Carr from the Treasury benches of New South Wales at the next election.
I have got a lot of theories about politics, and one of the theories I have about politics is what's called the doctrine of the unintended election result, and I don't really think the people of New South Wales intended to elect Bob Carr at the last election, and I sort of think it happened a bit by accident, and he has been really struggling ever since, and I'll look forward to the New South Wales Conference, and the interesting debate about privatisation. I said to the Premier when I saw him a few weeks ago that if he wanted me to address the comrades and the delegates in the cause, I would be very happy to do so.
Now I think we have a tremendous opportunity here in New South Wales. We have an opportunity to hang onto all of those seats we won and win some more. I still have my eye on Michael Lee's seat of Dobell on the Central Coast, and if he doesn't get his act together on greenhouse gas emissions there will not be many of the miners of his electorate that will want to vote for him again.
But, I think it is having said that, it is important that we understand the imperatives of domestic co-operation, and the imperatives of political unity within our own ranks. I think I am entitled as Prime Minister, and as a reasonably well known member of the New South Wales Division to say that we are in a very real sense of the expression a broad church in the Liberal Party. We do have people who regard themselves as small "L" Liberals. We have people who have more conservative views, we have people who are economic Liberals, and social conservatives, that's an interesting mix. We have people who are economic liberals, and social liberals, we have people who are economically more conservative, and socially liberal and what we have managed to do and the great genius of our party is that over the years we've been able to have those groups coalesce together to form a party that is appealing to the broad cross section of the Australian community, a party that is prepared to embrace change and reform when that is necessary in the national interest, but also a party which is prepared to defend, protect, and treasure traditional values when that is important in the national interest.
One of the great imperatives of good state craft in the modern era is to know when it is in the national interest to embrace the new, and the different, and the progressive, and also to know when it is in the national interest to hold on to what is tried and true, and effective, and you've got to have the skill to pick the time, and the occasion, and the issue, and if we are to succeed, it is important that we manage our internal differences in a mature fashion, and there is no point in mincing words about that. There is no room for winner take all factionalism in the New South Wales Division of the Liberal Party or indeed any other division of the Liberal Party. We shouldn't kid ourselves, we all know that there is a lot of activism, we all know that, and let's not delude ourselves, let's not be too polite about it. I mean there is nothing wrong with that, I mean it is unrealistic to pretend that you don't have a range of views, but my plea to all of you, particularly those who have influences, manage those differences, co-operate, respect the other point of view.
One of the reasons we had a magnificent win federally in 1996 was that we went to that election with a Shadow Cabinet and a leadership, and a set of policies that reflected the cross section of views within the Australian community, and within our own party, and I think that it is very important that we keep that in mind. I believe that Peter Collins can become the next Premier of New South Wales, and I believe very strongly that we can hold onto the Federal seats we have, and even win more, and if we all work together effectively that can be achieved.
Lastly ladies, and gentlemen can I say that I always get a resurgence of enthusiasm, and some political adrenalin in coming along, and addressing this gathering. It is always very nice to be back amongst so many of my long standing friends here in the New South Wales Division. I am very proud of what my Government has achieved, I am very proud of the changes that we are making, the beneficial changes that we are making, but most importantly of all I am very proud that its been done in co-operation with, and with the support of the rank and file of the party organisation throughout Australia. I frequently say, and I will say it again tonight, that I would never have hoped to have held the office that I now hold, to have been leader of my party, to have been Prime Minister of Australia without the support and the understanding, and the enthusiastic support that has been of the ordinary rank and file members of the Liberal Party of Australia.
Again let me express my immense gratitude to all of you. Can I say to all of my colleagues here tonight thank you very much for your loyalty and understanding. Those of you who entered politics for the first time in March of 1996 will have seen sort of the rich variety of politics over the last 18 months. You will have seen some of the great highs, and you will have started to wonder a little bit on occasions about other aspects, but it is good education. Variety is very important, you've got to experience all the emotions in politics, and I think we've done that, and of course it has been a bit trying this week. I think I called it septem dies horriblis.
But the important thing my friends is that we upheld the standards. The important thing is that we faced, and acted immediately in the teeth of difficulty, the important thing is that unlike our political opponents we didn't have mealy- mouthed principles, but no action, and the important thing is that we can look every Australian in the eye, and say that we have acted to create a situation where tax payers' money is carefully, and honestly handled.
So, to all of you thank you again. I look forward to seeing you again in a year's time at the next convention, and that will be getting very close to the next election, not too close, but it will be getting close, and I know that will probably start a story tomorrow, it wasn't meant to, but ladies and gentlemen thank you ever so much, and to you Michael, as President of the Party, can I congratulate you on the tremendous job that you have done since you assumed the Presidency. It is not an easy job running the organisation, you don't get a lot of thanks, you don't get a very big salary, and you often get a lot of criticism, and lot of brick bats, and you deserve, and I know you have our support and our respect, to all of you thank you so much, Janette, and I are delighted once again to be amongst you.
Thank you
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................................................
&nbsp;
REMOVING THE SPEED LIMITS ON GROWTH
I congratulate the Chamber on 120 years of service to Australian industry. I welcome the chance to share this important occasion with you.
My Government values its links with Australian business. We have much in common. Most importantly we share the common goal of a strongly growing economy with expanding job opportunities and rising living standards for the Australian people.
There is only one way that common goal can be realised.
We must remove the speed limits on Australia’s economic growth.
All of our economic actions since taking office 18 months ago have been dedicated to that end.
Unless the Australian economy can burst free of the boom bust cycle of the past 20 years and enjoy sustained and higher levels of economic growth we will not reap the human dividend of lower unemployment.
That is why we have cut the budget deficit.
That is why we have reformed Australia’s industrial relations system.
That is why we have further reformed Australia’s financial system.
That is why we are in the midst of the largest program of privatisation in Australia’s history.
That is why we have made major changes to boost the small business sector which is the principal source of jobs growth in the economy.
That is why we have committed ourselves to the greatest remaining economic reform of all - overhauling and modernising Australia’s taxation system.
By the end of our first term we will have converted the $10.3 billion deficit left to us by Mr Keating and Mr Beazley into a surplus of over $1.5 billion. Outlays as a percentage of GDP will be the third lowest in the OECD and on current fiscal settings by the turn of the century we should have a surplus of over $10 billion.
In the process we will have halved general government net debt as a percentage of GDP from 19 per cent in 1995 to 10.5 per cent by the year 2000.
This massive fiscal reform seems to be taken for granted by some in the business community and elsewhere. Yet it represents a huge turn around involving numerous difficult and sectorally unpopular decisions.
Reducing the deficit has taken the pressure off interest rates. Business lending rates have fallen by about 2.5 per cent since July 1996, providing a boost to business confidence and investment.
Inflation has fallen significantly over the last 18 months and is well below the RBA’s target range of two to three per cent. Underlying inflation through the year to the June quarter was 1.7 per cent, the lowest recorded since the March quarter 1972.
Investment is currently at record levels in real terms - around 13 per cent of GDP.
And growth is projected by the OECD to be higher than in any of the G7 countries over the 1997 and 1998 period.
To these changes in the macroeconomic area can be added the Government’s extensive and ongoing microeconomic reform agenda.
Our industrial relations reforms have made the labour market more flexible and removed the disincentive of Labor’s unfair dismissals provisions. Applications for unfair dismissals, in the first 35 weeks of the new provisions, show a 54 per cent fall on the same period in 1996.
If Labor and the Democrats were genuine about helping small business to boost jobs they would support the Government’s legislation to exempt from the unfair dismissal laws all new employees (excluding apprentices) of businesses with 15 or fewer employees.
The National Australia Bank business survey found that 36 per cent of businesses expect to complete workplace agreements during the next year with expected productivity offsets averaging 2.5 per cent.
Full competition has been introduced into the telecommunications sector which has the potential to reduce communications charges in some areas by up to 50 per cent.
A number of initiatives aimed at revitalising and extending Australia’s rail system have also been launched.
. the sale of the National Rail Corporation and Australian National will lead to more efficient rail freight and passenger transport;
. negotiations are well advanced with States on arrangements for the interstate network;
. Commonwealth and Victorian track from Wodonga and Broken Hill to Kalgoorlie will be placed under single management by July 1998; and
. $100 million from the Federation Fund will be available for an Alice Springs to Darwin railway.
Reform of the public sector has opened up greater opportunities for Australian business through contracting out and competitive tendering for delivering government services.
Mr Bob Mansfield’s appointment as my Major Projects Facilitator is ensuring more speedy approvals for major investment proposals.
We have introduced a $130 million Innovation Investment Fund to assist small, technology-based firms obtain start-up capital.
Having restored the economic fundamentals the Government is now working on its programme to realise Australia’s potential as a nation into the 21st century.
That means an active government role in offsetting distortions and removing impediments to growth in key sectors.
Decisions on tariffs for passenger motor vehicles and the TCF sector will help develop sustainable, internationally competitive industries in the lead-up to more open trading environment beyond 2010. Our aim is to improve job opportunities and encourage new investment without resiling from our commitments to trade liberalisation.
The benefits of our car decision are already being felt. Toyota, for example, is taking advantage of the favourable climate by expanding production of its Camry and launching a new large car project.
We have also sought to deliver a better future for the Textile, Clothing and Footwear Industries.
. action agendas will be developed for wool, cotton, leather and fashion industries;
. a TCF Investment Programme and a $10 million TCF Technology Development Fund will be established, as will a $10 million national centre for TCF training;
. the Overseas Assembly Provisions will be expanded;
. a $2.5 million per annum Market Development Programme will be introduced; and
. anomalies in TCF by-laws and tariff concessions will be examined and removed.
The Government will continue to support investment and growth in the pharmaceutical industry. When the current scheme expires in 1999, it will be replaced with the Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Programme which will run for 5 years at a cost of $300 million.
My Government is committed to realising the potential of new technology and the online economy. The National Office for the Information Economy has been established to develop and coordinate policy for online activities and I have appointed Senator Richard Alston as the Minister responsible for the information economy. A New Ministerial Council is working to develop National Information and Online Services Strategy.
The Government is soon to respond to a series of reports aimed at better focussing the Government’s strategic approach. The Goldsworthy and IPAC reports into the information sector have added to the debate as has the Mortimer Report. I also welcome the contributions made in recent months by sections of industry.
Crucial to realising our potential as a nation into the 21st century is the overwhelming need to embark upon reform and modernisation of Australia’s taxation system. This is the single greatest remaining area of economic reform. Tax reform is essential to provide incentives to work, save and invest. As it stands, the current tax system does not do enough to promote jobs, exports and investment. The next century demands a modern, competitive and incentive-based taxation system which has the restoration of fairness as the key to reform.
Against the background of these reforms - and the fruits of them already apparent - I reject the claims of some that the pace of reform under my Government has been too slow.
In 18 months - despite the handicap of a hostile Senate - historic reforms have been achieved.
They have helped produce the most fortunate conjunction of economic circumstances seen in Australia for decades:
- very low inflation;
- falling interest rates;
- falling national debt;
- strong business investment.
Strong investment flows from Australian business makes clear that the business community is voting with its dollars in response to a more favourable business climate.
The determination of companies such as Rio Tinto to reclaim management prerogatives taken for granted in other industry sectors is powerful evidence of just how extensive have been the changes to our workplace relations laws.
Such action would have been unthinkable 18 months ago.
The speed limits on economic growth are being removed. We are not quite yet on the freeway but it is well and truly in sight.
Now I wish to say something on one particular pressure building on Australia which threatens our prospects for higher growth. There is a call that Australia’s growing economy be burdened with a new, unrealistic and unfair speed limit upon growth, a speed limit imposed by uniform mandatory emission reduction targets to address the global problem of climate change.
SOLUTIONS NOT POSTURES
My foremost responsibility as Prime Minister of Australia is to promote and protect the national interest. That is my goal for this issue as it is with every other area of public policy. My political opponents have sought to criticise me for this but I will never be apologetic for protecting Australia’s national interest.
Whenever I have been attacked for defending the national interest Labor has sided with foreign interests at our expense. It has been this combination of posturing and opportunism that has been the Labor way. The former Environment Minister, Ros Kelly, boasted about unilateral efforts in reducing emissions.
Now Labor offers no solution - it has no ideas, only postures.
My message to them is that the national interest is not served by posturing on this issue instead of advocating a realistic and fair solution.
UNACCEPTABLE PROPOSALS
While there are still many uncertainties surrounding the science of climate change, particularly relating to the timing and magnitude of climate change that we might expect, the Government accepts the science of climate change and the need for proportionate action in line with the precautionary principle.
The potential risks to the global environment are simply too serious to ignore. Along with other leaders at the recent South Pacific Forum, I recognised and endorsed the deep concerns regarding the impact of greenhouse emissions on rising sea levels and changing weather patterns on Forum members, especially low lying island nations.
The Government is committed to ensuring that Australia will play its part in tackling the problem of climate change.
That is part of our enlightened national self-interest.
Pulling our weight, however, doesn’t mean having to cop more than our fair share of the task. But that is what is being asked of Australia by the European Union.
Australia cannot sign up to proposals that would lead to the export of jobs and our energy efficient minerals and metals processing industries.
The European Union is advocating a legally binding uniform reduction target for greenhouse gas emissions of 15 per cent from 1990 levels by the year 2010.
The enormity of the task that the European Union's proposed uniform target threatens to impose on Australia, is simply out of all proportion to Australia's contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions. Let us not forget that Australia accounts for only 1.4 per cent of global emissions. This compares with the United States which accounts for 22 per cent of global emissions, and the European Union which accounts for 14 per cent of global emissions.
The European Union proposal is unachievable because it does not reflect Europe’s own recent performance. Nor can Europe demonstrate how it will achieve the target. According to the European Commission, the EU is not on track to meet the implied Rio target of stabilising emissions at 1990 levels by 2000. Without the collapse of East German industry - whose emissions fell by almost half - EU emissions would have risen 9 per cent above 1990 levels by the year 2000.
As the EU can expect no further one-off windfalls, such as the collapse in East German industry, their proposal should be regarded as unrealistic. It cannot provide the basis for long-term action. I can say that we are not alone in being sceptical of EU proposals.
Accounting arrangements increase our scepticism. Denmark has claimed its CO2 emissions in 2000 will be 11 per cent below 1990 levels. However, this result is largely due to not counting electricity exports in their emissions. The emissions embodied in these exports are not counted by the importing countries either so they are simply ‘lost’. Discounting this unilateral correction, (which is not allowed by the Convention), the EU estimates that Denmark’s emissions will be 7 per cent above 1990 levels. If we adopted this sort of approach we could all get our emissions down without making the environment better off.
There are other reasons Australia is opposing the uniform target approach. Because they distort trade and investment patterns, uniform target approaches will reduce global emissions only marginally.
There are those who argue we should all have uniform low per capita emissions. This would in effect require all OECD countries to evolve into' look-a-like' economies. It would be just plain silly to demand that all OECD countries should have the same economic structure or to base important decisions on the fantasy that they do.
Even if we all took all the sensible steps possible to conserve energy, Australia's economic structure and circumstances mean that the target proposed by the European Union would not be feasible.
Japan has just announced a proposal for emissions to be reduced by five per cent from 1990 levels by 2010. Their proposal allows for some small differentiation to a maximum of stabilisation of emissions at 1990 levels by 2010. These targets are simply not achievable without enormous economic costs for Australia.
THE COST OF AGREEING TO UNIFORM TARGETS
Our economic structure and trade profile demands that a fair and achievable outcome for Australia will need to allow for some emissions growth - even though this will be much reduced from what we would expect from business as usual.
We are not alone in seeking some responsible growth in our emissions. Under the 'EU bubble' many European countries will be allowed some growth in their emissions.
What this means is that what we are seeking is not special consideration, but fair consideration in line with what is being offered to European countries.
Australia's economic structure and trade profile is unique among OECD countries because of our resource base and other circumstances, such as our relatively strong population growth. So our greenhouse gas emission profile is also unique among OECD countries.
Economic reform has produced significant reorientation of the Australian economy towards the export sector in general and the resource and resource-processing sectors in particular. Australia's economy has become both more highly specialised and more emission-intensive over time.
No other OECD country trade profile combines a concentration of emission-intensive goods, in the composition of its exports, with strong developing country trade links.
Eighty per cent of Australia's exports - petroleum products, basic metals, agriculture and chemicals - are energy and greenhouse-intensive goods.
We would be penalised for being an efficient producer of energy and emission-intensive goods, most of which we export to other countries that need them for their own industrial growth.
The magnitude of the task that Australia would face would be grossly disproportionate to that faced by others and would severely affect all Australians.
According to a Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade survey, even stabilising emissions at the 1990 level by 2010 would put at risk around $68 billion worth of investment in the energy and mining sector over the next five years and tens of thousands of new jobs for Australians. It would particularly harm competitive export industries of Australia such as the coal and aluminium industries. The job losses and dislocation of peoples’ lives would be immense including in the Hunter Valley, and the Illawarra in New South Wales, Geelong and the Latrobe Valley in Victoria, the Bowen Basin and Gladstone in Queensland, Port Pirie in South Australia and the Kwinana and north west regions of Western Australia.
The impact on demand and prices would reduce coal output by 20 per cent by 2010 from what it would otherwise have been. Aluminium smelting would fall by 50 per cent below the level it would otherwise have reached.
If we were to agree to a stringent uniform emission target the high economic costs we would incur could not be cordoned off; these costs would impact on every sector of the Australian economy and community.
According to the ABARE an agreement with binding uniform targets to stabilise emissions at the 1990 level by 2010 could also involve an increase in petrol prices of up to 70 cents a litre and similar increases in diesel prices, an increase in natural gas prices of up to 40 cents a litre and an increase in average electricity prices of up to 100 per cent by 2010.
Without the involvement of developing countries, emission-intensive industries currently located in OECD countries, will simply relocate to developing countries with no emission abatement commitments and possibly with less efficient technology. This phenomenon, known as 'carbon leakage', would undermine the very objective of setting targets for one group of countries alone.
Australia is particularly vulnerable to 'carbon leakage'. For some industries, such as our aluminium industry, it would be devastating. And it would represent little gain for the global environment as Australia is one of the world's most efficient producers of energy and emission-intensive goods, such as aluminium.
We must ensure that regional economic integration through APEC to encourage lower trade and investment barriers and promote growth is not jeopardised by the Kyoto outcome. We cannot accept a solution that pretends economic costs don't matter.
These negotiations are too important for the Government to be unduly concerned about the unfair and often ill-informed criticism levelled at Australia’s position.
OUR PROPOSAL
As I indicated earlier, Australia is, of course, prepared to pull its weight. Climate change will have adverse consequences for Australia, with its long coastline and vast rural areas. We therefore have an interest in a global response to climate change which will be effective. To be effective the approach must be realistic and equitable.
In the long run the only way we will achieve a workable system to control greenhouse gas emissions all around the world is to ensure that everybody who contributes to the problem contributes to the solution. Any agreement has to provide the basis for involving the developing countries as they account for nearly half of the global emissions by 2010 , compared with less than a third today. To deliver that outcome requires different targets for different countries in different situations.
Australia wants each country to negotiate its own target in light of its own national circumstances. Differentiation provides the basis for developing countries, especially significant emitters, to come on board and make their own contribution because it acknowledges differences in stages of development and national circumstances. Without differentiation, the price, for developing countries, of taking mitigating action will remain too high.
The acceptance in September this year, by South Pacific Forum leaders, of the need for the Kyoto outcome to provide for the future involvement of significant developing country emitters was an important step forward and is the first time that developed and developing countries have joined forces on this issue. It is an essential step if the concerns of island countries are to result in effective global action.
Differentiation is nothing more than what the European Union has proposed for itself. If, as proposed, Eastern Europe and Russia are also allowed differentiated targets - then only 8 out of 35 countries, including Australia, will be left in the position of having to accept a take-it or leave-target. This is unacceptable.
We do accept that global action will impose costs on us as well as others. However, the Government’s approach is to ensure that those costs are not an unfair burden on ordinary Australians.
The Government is not prepared to sign on to any agreement at Kyoto unless it is fair; unless we are confident that the Australian community can achieve any commitments we undertake; and unless we have a clear idea about how we would go about achieving such commitments.
Australia faces some very real difficulties in these exceedingly tough negotiations.
We will have to work hard to gain wider acceptance of the link between Australia's economic and trade profile and our emissions profile. It is proving a challenge because our particular economic circumstances are not shared by the larger, more diversified economies like the US, the European Union or Japan. These key players will determine the outcome of the current negotiations, ensuring that their own particular circumstances are taken into account.
Differentiation, unlike uniform targets, can achieve this for all countries not just the majors. Negotiated targets will ensure that all economies are treated fairly and trade and investment patterns are not disrupted.
WHAT AUSTRALIA HAS ALREADY DONE
At various levels Australia has demonstrated its preparedness to play its part.
In response to the climate change threat Australia has already developed a strong program of domestic action covering a wide range of sectors:
. under the Greenhouse Challenge Program, many of Australia's biggest enterprises - including BHP, Rio Tinto, Shell Australia and ICI Australia - are on track to reduce the growth in their emissions by 18 per cent by 2000, this is equivalent to taking 3.2 million family cars off the road;
. the Government has recently extended the Greenhouse Challenge Program to cover small and medium-sized enterprises; and
. Australia's aluminium industry, already among the world's most efficient, has since 1990 lowered their emission levels per tonne of aluminium produced by 14 per cent and this should be further lowered to 20 per cent by 2000.
I note that the Australian Chamber of Manufactures is contributing to the domestic effort to tackle greenhouse gas emissions, having signed a Greenhouse Challenge Facilitative Agreement in September 1996. Under this agreement, the ACM is identifying and assisting industry members who can contribute to, and benefit from, reducing their emissions and encouraging them to develop company cooperative agreements with the Greenhouse Challenge Office. The Chamber also provides information and assistance services to members on environmental and energy efficiency issues with a view to assisting industry to improving their environmental and energy performance. I congratulate you on this important contribution.
The Government has also increased attention and funding for land care and land management through the $1.25 billion has been set aside under the Natural Heritage Trust.
We are providing climate change related support through our aid programme with projects worth $45 million in the South Pacific.
In addition to these measures we are currently considering a package of measures to strengthen our domestic response even more.
This will demonstrate both the seriousness with which we take our international responsibility to pull our weight on climate change, and just how tough emissions reductions are going to be for Australia.
The fact that our emissions are growing does not mean that we are not doing enough or that we are not prepared to shoulder our fair share of the global effort. Our recent performance in reducing our emissions growth has been comparable with most others.
Australia’s has been an honest effort in that we have not had to rely on any one-off or accidental factors, and we have not engaged in any fiddling of the numbers.
The Government has acted to promote greater community awareness about what is at stake in these negotiations. Last week the Government released an issues paper to provide the community with detailed information about the science of climate change, the international negotiations, Australia's options and the potential implications for Australia. The issues paper, Australia and the Climate Change Negotiations, provides the wider community with an opportunity to provide feedback to the Government about what sort of target Australia could achieve and how we could go about it.
Reflecting the high stakes involved for Australia, the Government has also strongly taken up the issue internationally - I have argued Australia's case on climate change with President Clinton, Prime Minister Hashimoto, Chancellor Kohl and Prime Minister Blair, and argued against agreement to an unfair, ineffective outcome at Kyoto.
I understand that President Clinton is soon to say more about the position to be taken by the United States and we will take these into account during the course of our negotiations.
FUTURE NEGOTIATIONS
The national interest is at stake in these negotiations.
We are not interested in token 'feel good' gestures. We are guided by our determination to ensure that Kyoto provides for a durable and environmentally effective outcome.
The outlook for Australia in these negotiations is tough. The challenge should not be underestimated.
We are asked to announce a numerical target or a bottom line. However, it makes no sense for us to announce a target at this stage in the negotiating process - when we are arguing for a substantially different, innovative and more effective structure to tackle climate change than is being proposed by the European Union, Japan and the United States.
It is also not possible for us to say what we could agree to now, because the Government is still in the process of consulting closely with the States, Territories, industry and the wider community.
Our aim is for a solution which takes into account both very important environmental considerations and the future of Australian industry, jobs and improved living standards.
To this end we are actively campaigning for a global strategy on climate change which will, unlike the others being proposed, make an effective difference to global warming. We have presented this case in concrete detail. It promotes the national interest by offering the prospect of genuine improvements to the world environment without imposing unnecessary speed limits on Australian industry and Australia’s economic growth.


E&amp;EO...............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much to Mr President, to Warwick and Catherine Smith, to John Watson, to my other State parliamentary colleagues, to my former parliamentary colleague Brian Archer who I’m absolutely delighted to see here tonight with his wife Dorothy. To Brian belongs one of those understated Tasmanian remarks. I can remember being at a barbecue in the garden of his home about four or five years ago and I said: "It’s a nice night" and he said "Buddy, this is the purest air in the world." And I then was reminded of all of the other natural attributes and the natural beauty of Tasmania. But it is tremendous to see Brian and Dorothy here tonight.
As I said at lunch today, we are here as part of a pattern of travelling around Australia to visit some of the regional areas to remind the Australian people that we are not a government that sees the centre of the universe as being Canberra, Sydney or Melbourne but rather a government that is determined by its every deed to govern for all sections of the Australian community. I am especially conscious that I’m in the politically historic city of Launceston. Bass is part of the political legend of Australia and particularly the Liberal Party. It takes its place along side those two other great by-election results of the last generation, the other being the Canberra by-election of 1995 which recorded a swing almost as great as Bass and then I think the equally famous by-election in Lindsay of 1996 when having taken a Labor seat in the Western suburbs of Sydney from a Labor minister with a swing of over 11 per cent - we added 5 per cent to that in the by-election. So, Bass has a very special place in the affections of all Liberals and we all remember that great victory that was won by the Liberal Party in 1975 which presaged Malcolm Fraser’s defeat of Gough Whitlam in December of that same year.
But let us fast forward to 1997. We’re here at a very important moment in the time of our first term in government. We are now just a little over 18 months and we have done the repair work, we have grappled with the tremendous fiscal legacy of a $10.5&nbsp;billion deficit which was the inheritance of Messrs Keating and Beazley and in our first three years in government we will have turned that into a surplus of $1.6&nbsp;billion.
We are in the middle of the most extensive privatisation programme that any government has undertaken anywhere in Australia. The sale of one-third of Telstra will enable hundreds of thousands of Australians to own shares in one of our great national enterprises. And so far from it representing the Australian people selling an asset it represents an opportunity for the Australian people to personally invest in one of our great commercial undertakings. And I’m not surprised that it’s been over-subscribed and I’m not surprised that it’s gathered such enormous support from people all around our country. And of course it doesn’t stop there. Out of the proceeds of that sale we are able to fund the largest-ever capital investment in Australia’s environmental future, the $1.25 billion Natural Heritage Trust. And no state in Australia is better served out of that Natural Heritage Trust than the state of Tasmania. And just before I came here I had discussions with Tony Rundle, your Premier about the disposition of some of the resources out of that Natural Heritage Trust and I’m delighted to say that as is the custom in my dealings with the Tasmanian Government it was a question of us working as partners, not as competitors, but as partners in achieving good outcomes for the people of Tasmania and good outcomes for the Australian nation.
I am delighted at the decision announced yesterday for the additional catamaran to travel the Bass Strait to Melbourne. And this will mean something like 35 to 40 000 tourists can come to this beautiful part of Australia. And it is a result of the initiative of the Tasmanian government. It has also been made possible, in large measure, by the rebate that was introduced by us as a result of an election commitment made before the election of March 1996. And that was a well-targeted, soundly based, entirely justified rebate. It recognises the disability imposed by the separation of the island of Tasmania from the rest of Australian. And it is only right and proper, it’s not a hand-out, it’s a recognition of a practical reality and it’s the sort of practical measure that Federal governments should be willing to embrace in order to assist the people of Tasmania and to assist the State of Tasmania.
As I look back over the last 18 months, I not only record the many achievements of the government and the way in which we have honoured the commitments we made to the Australian people, be it in the area of the family tax initiative, be it in the area of assisting small business or be it in the area of changing Australia’s workplace relations culture. But I also believe that we have been as a government willing not only to address the difficult situations that we inherited but also as a government to lay out a plan and a road map for the future economic development of this country.
And as we turn our gaze from the past 18 months but look forward, there are many things that lie in front of us and there are many challenges as a nation as we go into the 21st century. And our commitment to taxation reform which is the largest area of unfinished economic reform business on the Australian landscape at the present time. Our commitment to taxation reform is evidence of the determination of this government to tackle the big issues that are relevant to the future of all Australians.
We cannot afford to go into the 21st century with the existing taxation system. We cannot afford to go into the 21st century with a taxation system which is so inequitable and which evidences so many creaking joints and disconnected parts. And it’s encumbent on us as the national government of Australia to take the lead, as we are willing to do in giving to this nation and all parts of this nation a modern reformed taxation system. And a taxation system that will match the needs of the Australian nation as we move into the 21st century.
But of all of the areas of reform that we have undertaken, the one that I would like to say something about tonight is the area of industrial relations. Many of you will know that in the time that I spent in opposition, and I have to say it was too long and I never want to go back there again and I’ve no intention of going back there again. In the time that I spent in opposition there was probably an issue, no issue I thought more about than the issue of industrial of relations reform and the need to give to this country an industrial relations system that gave workers and their employers the choice of making direct bargains with each other. Not an industrial relations system that shut out trade unions because we have no enduring argument with the trade union movement of Australia. We only have an enduring argument that those who say that the union way is the only way. Our proposition is that Australian workers ought to have choice. Our proposition is that people should be free to join a union or not to join a union. Our proposition is that an employer should be able to make an agreement directly with his employees or make the agreement with the union. And our proposition is that there should be complete and unfettered freedom of choice in those area.
And that is what our workplace relations reforms have delivered. And if you wanted evidence of how effective our workplace relations reforms have been, you need look no further than the current dispute between the CFMEU and the Rio Tinto company in the Hunter Valley of New South Wales. That exercise, that proper attempt by the Rio Tinto company to reclaim the management prerogatives which are taken for granted in other sections of Australian industry would never have been possible had it not been for the Workplace Relations Act which passed through the Federal Parliament last year. Because what that dispute in the Hunter Valley is all about is Rio Tinto exercise its right to manage its own business, to run its mines and to operate its business in accordance with ordinary management practices.
One of the things at issue in the Rio Tinto dispute is the right of management to determine such issues as seniority. Can anybody really imagine in other sections of Australian industry that seniority would be something that would govern the promotion of people? Could anybody imagine that in other sections of Australian industry that trade unions would have the right to determine issues of promotion and issues of preferment according to seniority? Yet they are the sort of management prerogatives that were previously denied to companies in the mining industry and which because of the changes that we have made to the law of this country it is now possible for countries like Rio Tinto to exercise. So when you hear Jennie George, when you hear John Maitland, when you see them marching through the streets of Sydney chanting about their rights, they’re not really complaining about something that justifies a complaint they are objecting to the undoubted right of a company to manage its own affairs and they are wanting to retain prerogatives which in no other section of Australian industry would it be reasonable for a trade union to maintain.
And you should also remember that had it not been for the Workplace Relations Act passed by my government last year it would not have been possible for the company to exercise the normal undeniable right of managers to manage the business that their employer owns.
You should also remember that we are not talking here about low-paid, down-trodden employees. We are talking about people who quite rightly, because of the dangerous character of the work they undertake, we are talking about people who are paid very impressive wages indeed.
We are talking about people who have been offered wage increases of $150 - $170 a week because the company believes that as a result of the changes in work practices made possible by the Workplace Relations Act, by my Government, that that company can afford. Isn’t that really what good industrial relations in this country ought to be about? It ought to be about a company getting rid of stupid work practices and as a result of the higher productivity due to the bad work practices going, that company is then able to pay its employees better wages.
Now isn’t that an industrial relations outcome that every hard-working employee and every decent employer in Australia is biased to? Isn’t the most valuable asset that any employer in Australia has a satisfied, well paid, conscientious worker who sees his or her future tied up in the future profitability of the company? It’s that kind of culture that previous industrial relations laws in this country have prevented emerging. It’s that kind of culture which the changes in the workplace relations laws in Australia, brought about by my Government’s legislation, have made possible.
So when you hear Jennie George and her ilk talking about this being a struggle between the worker and a fight to preserve the role of the trade union movement, forget about her being a spokesperson for the legitimate interests of the employees of Australia. See her for what she is, somebody who is trying to defend the indefensible, somebody who is trying to preserve a set of arrangements which are holding back productivity, denying higher wages to her own members, and as somebody who is selfishly pursuing the interests of the trade union movement to the detriment of the people that that movement is meant to represent.
It is little wonder to me that despite a decade until March of last year in which the legal privileges of the trade union movement increased at the expense of the interests of the ordinary worker, it is little wonder to me that, despite that tricky situation, that the membership of the trade union movement in Australia was in steady decline over that ten year period.
So I think it’s very important as we look at the industrial relations scene in Australia, it’s important to recognise the fundamental changes and the far-reaching changes that have been made possible by the industrial relations reforms enacted in the Workplace Relations Act.
So not surprisingly, the State President spoke of Warwick Smith’s role in my Government and I want to say something about Warwick’s contribution as a Member of Parliament and something about his contribution over the last 18 months as a member of my Ministry. I can say, Warwick, that I was absolutely delighted when you regained the seat of Bass at the last election. I know that Tasmania is an hour ahead of the rest of Australia. Now on most occasions I’m very happy to see Tasmania an hour ahead. I’ve got to say that in 1993 I wasn’t happy to see Tasmania an hour ahead because we got your results in Sydney ahead of any other result and we were pretty unhappy about it.
But that was all fixed in great style in March of last year and Warwick has done a first-class job as my Minister for Sports, Territories and other related matters including Local Government over the last 18 months. And now I have given him the more, shall I say onerous, the more senior portfolio of Family Services. And here he will be particularly responsible for areas such as aged care and childcare services.
I want to say in relation to the aged care reforms that my Government has undertaken, I defend every last element of those reforms. Those reforms are designed to inject into the aged care sector much needed capital. Those reforms are modelled on reforms that were undertaken by the former Labor Government in the area of hospitals. How hypocritical can you be when as a member of a Government you implement changes requiring accommodation bonds in relation to hospital care but when you go into opposition and the new Government adopts the same approach in relation to people who go into nursing homes, you turn around and say it is cruel and it is wicked? It is the end of the world.
There is nothing unreasonable about asking people who can afford to do so to make a contribution, or for their families to make a contribution towards the care of people in either hospitals or aged homes. It is very easy to run a fear campaign on this issue and I condemn utterly those members of the Labor Party who have run a fear campaign because there is nothing unjust, there is nothing to fear from these changes.
They make proper allowance for the people who can’t afford to make a contribution to their care. They make the quite fair proposition that it is only reasonable that people who can afford to do so, or their families, make a contribution towards the care of people in either hostels or nursing homes and I simply ask you the rhetorical question, what is the fairness in the proposition whereby the generality of the taxpayer is asked to make a contribution to the care of an elderly member of the family when that person herself or himself or the family can make that contribution.
And that is the principle, the principle of fairness, the principle of equity on which our proposition is based. And if we listen to what the Labor Party is arguing in this area, you would end up in a situation in a few years’ time where the capital needs of nursing homes would be such that many of them would be in an unsatisfactory, dilapidated condition and it’s only through getting more money into the system from the people who can afford to make a reasonable contribution, and bearing in mind that the unexpended portion of any accommodation bond, when the person leaves the nursing home, is either refunded to the person, or in other circumstances, forms part of that person’s estate.
The idea that, if you were asked to make a, put up an accommodation bond of 10 or 20 or $30 000, that all of that disappears is absolutely wrong. There’s a draw down of a maximum of $2600 a year. I mention these things, ladies and gentlemen, because there has been a quite tenacious and a quite unscrupulous fear campaign conducted by our opponents. It’s so easy, isn’t it, to try and provoke fear and to cause unease amongst the more elderly people of our community but it’s also very dishonourable and quite despicable and I say again, the changes that we have enacted in this area, and Warwick will be overseeing their implementation, these changes are fair, defensible and equitable and they’re based upon the proposition that if people can afford to make a contribution to their care and to their treatment, it’s only reasonable that they be asked to do so otherwise the burden falls on the generality of taxpayers in the Australian community.
So Warwick, you are going to have a lot of work but I am absolutely certain that just as you have handled the portfolio that you have had over the last 18 months with very great distinction, I believe that you will be able to handle this portfolio with equal distinction.
The last thing I want to say to all of you is that the last 18 months have been an enormous experience for all of the members of the Government. It’s been an enormous experience for the Liberal Party and the Coalition. We won a magnificent victory in March of last year and since then, at no stage have we ever taken the Australian people for granted. I have always lived by the political credo that you are in office as a gift of the Australian people and you are not there because of some sort of divine process of political selection. You are there for so long as you are a successful government. You are there for so long as you have governed to serve the interest of all of the Australian people.
One of the things of which I was immensely proud on the night of the second of March last year and I remain immensely proud is that my party and my Government is owned by nobody and is owned by no section of the Australian people. We owe a debt, we owe an obligation to only one group and that is the totality of the Australian population.
We are not owned by the business community, we are not owned by the trade union movement, we are not owned by other sections of Australian society. On occasions, we argue with all sections of Australian society. On occasions we are in agreement with all sections in Australian society. At the end of the day we make conscientious decisions because of our assessment of the merits of a particular decision and that is the credo by which we have lived and will continue to live for so long as we are in Government. And I believe that the Australian people recognise and respect that.
They don’t want a Government that only looks after one section of the Australian population. They want a government that is willing when times are difficult to take difficult decisions and they want a Prime Minister who is willing to do the same thing. Even though it may involve some short-term pain or short-term criticism, in the long run if the right decision is taken in the seat of difficulty, that would be recognised by the Australian community.
So to all of you, my friends, can I most importantly thank you for your loyalty and support of the Liberal Party cause here in Bass over so many years. Can I thank you for the contribution that you made to Warwick Smith’s re-election in March of last year. Can I thank you for the contribution that you continue to make to Tony Rundle’s Government, represented here tonight by the Deputy Premier John Beswick. Can I say how much I value the close working relationship I have with Tony and the members of his Government, I believe as I said earlier, in partnership with the Commonwealth Government and the State Government.
That is the only way in which to go, and finally can I say how absolutely delighted I am to be back here in Launceston, should I say it, the second time in six weeks, and this is the first occasion in which a Federal Cabinet has ever met in the city of Launceston. I am very proud of our commitment to travelling around the regional areas of Australia and reminding all of the Australian people that that slogan of ours of the last election, For All Of Us, was no empty piece of rhetoric. It was a genuine commitment to govern for all Australians.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


7 October 1997
E&amp;EO .........................................................................................................................
To Warwick for that very warm welcome. To Tony Rundle to Jocelyn Newman, a true citizen in every sense of the word of Launceston. To Tim Fischer and my other parliamentary colleagues both State and Federal. And also a very special welcome to the ABC Rural Woman of the Year, Jane Bennett who comes from Deloraine and is a magnificent example of the increasingly recognised contribution of women to the rural life of Australia.
Women have always through the decades a fundamental and important role in the life of rural Australia. I think in the last few years what is really welcome is the fact that their role has become more and more widely respected and more and more widely acknowledged. And it’s a real tribute to this part of Australia that Jane should have been named as the ABC Rural Woman of the year.
Now as Warwick said this is the first time in living memory that a Federal Cabinet has met in Launceston. And it’s part of a programme that we decided upon when we were elected to take the Cabinet around Australia, to tell the Australian people by our presence and by our decision making processes in different parts of Australia that the centre of the universe didn’t sort of revolve around Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra. And it is very important because it is away of us meeting you, it’s a way of bring the government to all of the people of Australia and not just some of the people of Australia.
And I am particularly pleased to have had the opportunity a few moments ago of signing the environmental partnership agreement with your Premier, Tony Rundle. And this gives expression to the contribution out of the Natural Heritage Trust of $125&nbsp;million to the State of Tasmania.
Tasmania has done better out of the Natural Heritage Trust than any of the Australian States. And I’m delighted and proud to have signed that agreement with Tony. And as I walked in and I heard a few voices talking about the environment I allowed my imagination to sort of drift a little and what they were really saying was "We want Warwick", well you’ve got him. And can I say on that subject that you’ve got him in even larger measure now because as a result of the changes that I’ve made to the Ministerial arrangement Warwick is now the Minister for Family Services. Now we all know what a strong supporter of the institution of the family he is. And he brings to this important new responsibility an understanding of some of the challenges facing families in the Australian community.
And it’s a real tribute to Warwick and it’s real tribute to the city of Launceston that you have in Jocelyn Newman one of the most senior members of my government and the Minister Social Security and you now have in Warwick Smith the Minister for Family Services. It must be the air, it must be the food, it must be something or other but you certainly breed them, in a political sense, extremely well. And I’m very proud and you ought to be proud of having both of them as such very senior and very important representatives.
Now ladies and gentlemen we were elected a bare 18 months ago and it seems much longer because so much has been achieved. And when I think back at those 18 months and I think of some of problems that we inherited and I also think of some of the opportunities that we were given. The great legacy of Mr Keating and Mr Beazley was to leave us with a budget deficit of $10.5 billion. And I’m very proud to say that as a result of our work and most particularly the work of Peter Costello and John&nbsp;Fahey as the Treasurer and Finance Minister within three short years we would have turned that $10.5 billion deficit into a surplus of $1.6 billion. And in the process presided over the lowest inflation rate Australia has had since 1972. We’ve had five reductions in interest rates.
We’re in the middle of the most ambitious and successful privatisation programme that any Federal Government Australia has ever undertaken. And the sale of one-third of Telstra is funding the Natural Heritage Trust. And the Natural Heritage Trust will fund in turn the greatest ever capital investment in the environmental renewal of Australia. And one of the things that I will be immensely proud to say to the Australian people at the next election is that my government has done more for the environment of Australia than any post World War II government of Australia. And that is something that people may not have thought it possible for a Coalition government to have said a few years ago. And instead of making a lot of noise about the environment we’ve committed ourselves to practical measures and the Natural Heritage Trust focuses on such things as soil degradation, land care, salinity and all of the ongoing challenges and the ongoing threats to Australia’s rare and very precious natural environment. And it is a very important part of the achievements of my government during the time that we have been in office.
And something else of which I’m particularly proud and I know it’s very important to the economy and to the citizens of Launceston and of Northern Tasmania is the importance that we have attached to small business. I’ve always regarded small business as being heart and soul and really the life of the economic future of Australia. And it’s through small business that we will see employment growth. It’s through small business that we see men and women taking risks and investing and employing people. And in the time that we’ve been in government we have delivered on every promise we made to small business and we’ve gone much further. We cut their provisional tax. We introduced a $600 million package of measures a few months ago. We promised before the election capital gains tax relief for small business but what we have delivered is more generous than what we promised. You often hear of government’s short changing on their promises, we have over delivered on our small business promises and we’re very proud of it.
And as from the 1st July this year any person in small business in Australia can sell their business and they can invest $5 million of the proceeds of the sale of that business, up to $5 million in the purchase of any other kind of business without incurring any kind of capital gains tax liability. And on top of that Peter Reith announced only last week a series of measures designed to strike a fair balance between big business and small business. I have never seen big and small
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Good morning and thank you very much Paul Bourke for those words of introduction and I am particularly delighted to address this first ever conference of the Supermarket to Asia. And I want for a few moments this morning to reinforce the goals of the Supermarket to Asia Council, to put into context those goals and also to announce a number of initiatives. The establishment of the Supermarket to Asia Council to which I and many of my senior Ministers are very strongly committed on a personal basis recognises a reality and is designed to grasp the great opportunity for Australia’s future.
The Agri-food industry in Australia is the largest in Australia. It has a turnover of in excess of $60 billion measured in 1995-96 terms. It employs more than half a million people. And total food and beverage exports are worth in excess of $19 billion every year. The largest and most rapidly expanding market for food out of Australia is of course the Asia-Pacific region. And it is estimated that the total Asian food market will grow from about $750 billion a year in 1990 to more than $1,000 billion in the year 2000. And it’s apparent from those figures and from the rapidly expanding character of the market that the opportunities for Australia are enormous.
Given our vast expanse and our differing climates we are able to supply many different food types, from ostrich to wheat to seafood. At present we contribute about 6 per cent of the imported food into Asia so there is plenty of scope for growth and expansion. And the challenge together for the government and the industry is not only to maintain but to increase this share and to increase the returns on our food exports.
The Supermarket to Asia Council has set an ambitious, but I believe quite achievable, target to accelerate current food export growth to about $16 billion a year and if this can be achieved we will create an addition 10,000 jobs in Australia. We expect that the activities of the Council will encourage an extra 2,000 small and medium sized enterprises to commit to exporting. And the Council is a great example of the Government and industry working together to achieve a common goal of growth, jobs and exports.
The Council is taking action to create an export culture. To create an environment that supports business and together to expand our markets in Asia. And this is part of a broader government agenda that has already been delivered and that involves the delivery of a stable macroeconomic environment, with low inflation, falling interest rates and growing opportunities for business investors. We’ve already delivered significant industrial relations reforms and further reforms, particularly in the area of the waterfront which is so important to Australia’s exports, are on the agenda.
Significant transport reforms have also been delivered. For example, we have negotiated, and this is of direct relevance to activities of the Council, we have negotiated a further 13 bilateral air service agreements from the five already in operation. And this is equivalent to an additional 50 Boeing 747 freighters a week flying our food produce to the markets that need them. It’s imperative of course that we also have efficient domestic transport arrangements. There’s no point in our farmers being the most efficient in the world if factors beyond their control erode their naturally competitive edge.
Our rail industry reforms, which have been very extensive, will simplify interstate trade arrangements. Private sector ownership and competition is expected to lower the cost of transport to industry and better meet the needs of customers. Many marginal businesses, as a consequence, will become viable as a result of cheaper transport. The shipping reform group is considering ways of opening up coastal trade routes to international operators and other significant reforms. And it will provide greater scope for rail and shipping to compete over long distances in Australia with the beneficiaries being transport users.
In the area of telecommunications the Government has launched a $250 million regional telecommunications infrastructure fund and amongst other things it will provide access to the Internet for Australian farmers. The Internet and electronic commerce represent exciting new opportunities for all regional and rural producers in Australia. They are the new low cost way of dealing with business partners and finding new ones and the committing of $250 million for a five-year regional telecommunications infrastructure programme will guarantee that people who live in rural and regional Australia will have precisely the same access to electronic commerce and the telecommunications revolution as to fellow Australians in the urban areas of our country.
The national electricity market is also going to lower business input costs and this will lead to more processors opening up as their cost base is driven down. All of you are of course aware of the benefits that will flow to rural Australia from the Natural Heritage Trust through which we are investing $1.25 billion in the largest-ever capital investment in the environmental regeneration of our nation.
All of these things bring the activities of Government and industry together to produce a more sustainable and growing agricultural sector. The Government has already announced a number of initiatives designed to help the Agri-food sector specifically. We’ve announced a food regulation review to reduce the burdens on business, a national food safety system streamlining the management of Government and industry food safety and quality activities.
The investment of $76 million for enhancing quarantine operations to protect our clean, green image, and $45 million to reform the Australian Quarantine Inspection Service which will result in lower inspection fees for industry and will boost competitiveness.
Perhaps the most exciting initiative of all of direct relevance to the industry was the rural package announced by John Anderson and myself only two or three weeks ago. This is a $517 million package designed to improve the competitiveness of Australian farmers, provide them with the risk management tools they need to manage the fluctuations they face and to allow those farmers who want to leave the land the opportunity of doing so with dignity.
I recognise of course, as was alluded to in Paul Bourke’s introductory remarks, that taxation reform, which is a solid commitment of my Government over the next 18 months and beyond, is essential to the future viability, not only of your industries but also of Australian business generally.
In making this address I must emphasise the benefits of trade liberalisation. Indeed, they cannot be overemphasised. We are working particularly with the interests of your industries in mind to remove market access barriers and to exploit the benefits of growth in world agricultural trade. We export about five times as much food as we import and over 300 000 Australian jobs are linked to our trade with Japan alone. The full benefits of the implementation of the 1994 Uruguay Round agreement on agriculture could increase the value of Australia’s exports by as much as $1 billion a year.
However these opportunities also mean that Australia must play by the same rules we fought so hard to get on issues such as quarantine. The big losers from any weakening in resolve on trade liberalisation will be Australian producers and processors. We are making progress on lowering barriers to trade and this is bringing us jobs we didn’t have a few years ago and we’ll continue to push very hard on the international arena for access to other markets and we will continue to build on the successes we have achieved to date.
Since its establishment a year ago, Supermarket to Asia Council has had inputs from over 100 industry experts and they have represented all aspects of the Agri-food industry - producers, processors, packers and transporters. In the first instance, it was necessary to identify the problems to lay a sound base for the solutions and we have now started to deliver those solutions with a number of excellent initiatives.
Under the Delicatessen Programme, producers will be helped to establish and market new, high-value, niche food products tailored specifically to meet Asian market requirements and this will be an exciting project to cash in on the diverse range of foods Australia is capable of providing. Today I am delighted to announce one of the pilot projects which will be supported under the Delicatessen Programme. Ocean Gold Investments, an acquacultural venture based in South Australia, will be assisted to develop the market for two new value-added blue swimmer crab products. We will be working with the company on the complete supply side chain, from product development, to market penetration, to transport logistics.
Other ground-breaking projects to be supported under the programme involve the development of markets by highly motivated producers for new herbs and spices, organic food products and exotic meat industries. The remaining projects to be supported under the Delicatessen Programme will be announced later this month.
Ladies and gentlemen, over 30 regional export forums will be established around Australia by the end of this year. And these forums will identify emerging exporters, bring leading and potential exporters together and generate enthusiasm and share knowledge. To get the best results in this as in all other areas, participants must be shown the potential and the means of achieving it. It is a big step for many to go from being a domestic supplier to being an exporter. However, in true Australian spirit I’m sure that many of our producers will jump at the chance when they see what is possible in the Asia-Pacific market.
The placement of technical market access councillors in Seoul and Tokyo will accelerate the removal of technical access barriers such as quarantine and shelf-life restrictions and this will directly bring new markets and new jobs to Australia.
In addition to these initiatives the Council at its last meeting agreed upon five priority actions to be given the greatest priority by government and industry. The first of these is electronic commerce. The Council has identified a need to accelerate the uptake of electronic commerce as a vehicle for international trade. On-line trading has exciting potential: it throws open the doors to Asian buyers, it provides rural food businesses with ready access to Asian buyers, it displays the whole range of Australian food products and it streamlines the process of government clearances. The move to real time paperless trading will cut costs, accelerate turnaround times and open up Australia to countless buyers in the global trading environment. It is in every sense the way of the future and the Supermarket to Asia Council will play its part to ensure that we get the maximum benefit from it.
Today, I can announce that the government is providing funds to support the establishment of Air and Sea Export Freight Council. They are to be based on the very successful Western Australian model. The will bring producers, processors, packers and transporters together to fix logistic problems. It is in everybody’s interest that we optimise use of space, schedules and storage to service our global markets. Air freight councils will be established at most major airports at the end of this year.
I’m also pleased to announce that a Quality Food Australia logo will be released today. It is a commercial venture for small and medium enterprises to access and more effectively market their products in Asia. It is an important recognition of the opportunities that exist for the small and medium sized businesses in these areas to gain market access into the region. It identifies the food product as Australian and has a guaranteed minimum quality and safety certification. It is a collaborative mechanism for small and medium companies to achieve critical mass, greater market presence, economies of scale and easier access to distribution channels.
I’m also pleased to say that the Commonwealth Government will continue to do its bit to promote food exports to Asia in relation to the AQIS and customs activities. The Australian Quarantine Inspection Service and the Australian Customs Service are in consultation with industry developing a streamlined export clearance procedures and this will save businesses time and effort in obtaining export clearance. We must establish, in this area as in all other areas, Australia as an efficient and reliable exporter of food products. And by working together the Government and the industry can solve many of the issues currently hindering our exports. When new technology offers us new solutions to old problems we must naturally grab them.
The Council, ladies and gentlemen, has developed a model food safety emergency management plan and will be encouraging its update across the food industry. This will enable the Government and the industry to quickly identify the degree of difficulty of a food safety incident, the source of the problem and the necessary action so that any risk to consumers is kept to an absolute minimum and any potential damage to the reputation of the supplier is eliminated. That is all part of the aggregate responsibility we all have to zealously preserve and promote Australia’s deserved reputation as a clean, green producer of food.
In concluding this opening address ladies and gentlemen, I would like to say a big thank you to the members of the Council for the work that they have done over the last 12 months. It is in every sense of the word a visionary concept to bring together a coordinated way all of the activities both government and industry which bear upon the potential for Australia to increase significantly her share of food exports into the growing Asia-Pacific markets.
I want to thank the industry representatives. I want to thank the experts that have contributed. I want to thank Paul Bourke and his support staff and I also want to thank my senior Ministerial colleagues such as John Anderson who will be addressing the conference later today for their contribution of time and effort.
I have given a personal priority to the activities of the Supermarket to Asia Council because as Prime Minister I am strongly committed to the growth of our share of access into this enormously big and growing market. I believe very strongly that if we can act together in a concerted way to sweep away the regulatory and other barriers to a higher export performance then the opportunities for Australian producers and Australian processors is almost limitless. Nobody can over-estimate the potential for growth particularly as a result of the increasing middle classing of the populations of Asia the potential for growth in the area of food exporting and it is incumbent not only on my government but also on all sectors of industry to work together and that is what the Supermarket to Asia Council is all about. I think it is able to look back on 12 months of laying the ground work and look forward to the next 12 months of beginning to reap the benefits of this addition.
I thank you very much for your support and cooperation. I wish the conference well and I wish all associated with the exercise the very best of good fortune and success.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


23 OCTOBER 1997
THE POST-URUGUAY ROUND: REMOVING THE OBSTACLES TO TRADE AND INVESTMENT
One of the great strengths of the Commonwealth over the last half century has been its capacity to continue to meet the needs of its members. This first Commonwealth Business Forum, and the decision to focus this year’s CHOGM discussions on the theme of trade, investment and development - issues of crucial importance to all Commonwealth nations, developed and developing - are a demonstration of the Commonwealth’s continuing relevance.
GLOBALISATION
We are living today amidst unprecedented economic and technological change. We have already seen the profound effects in the deeper global integration of the world economy over the past two decades. Today capital is mobile - globally. Global foreign direct investment flows increased seven times between 1983 and 1996 from $US50 billion to $US350 billion.
Globalisation is encouraging all of us to do what we do best. It is driving specialisation of production which has increased the importance of trade as part of economic growth. From 1984 to 1994, worldwide trade in manufactures grew by nearly 90 per cent while output of manufactures grew by less than 25 per cent.
Open markets introduce sellers from one part of the world to buyers in another. Open markets attract and stimulate trade and investment. Open markets encourage more efficient allocation of resources and give recognition to the merits of comparative advantage. They are the best means of maximising the growth that is ultimately the most effective way of producing new jobs and improved living standards.
New forms of communications technology, emerging by the month, are ensuring that no corner of the world will be untouched by globalisation. The notion of purely domestic markets is becoming obsolete with the spread of use of the internet. There is no longer a captive domestic market for a local company. In return, once a product or service is available on the internet, it can be sold to the world at large.
According to our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade the global value of goods and services transacted on the internet will grow from its current value of less than $US5 billion per year to between $US100 billion and $US150 billion by the year 2000 that is, within three years.
Perhaps most important, open markets draw people together through trade and investment. In the vastly enhanced technological age, the communications revolution shrinks distance. Globalisation makes us all neighbours. Commonwealth members - spread throughout the world, but united by language, institutions and shared values - have new means of benefiting from their common heritage.
BENEFITING FROM GLOBALISATION
Globalisation offers huge opportunities for economies that are internationally competitive. It challenges economies which are not. It blurs the division between foreign and domestic policies. It increases competitive pressures in markets. It makes globally based trade rules even more important.
Globalisation therefore challenges political leaders to explain to our people how the inexorable process of globalisation can benefit them. Governments must be able to help prepare the community to embrace change and outward-looking policies. They must be able to create a supportive environment for the industries of the future.
We now have example after example of economies that - once they have opened their markets, pursued export-oriented policies and exercised fiscal discipline - have experienced soaring growth rates. The contrast between Latin American economies in the 1970s and ‘80s compared with the 1990s after they adopted more liberal policies is palpable. It is often forgotten that many of the East Asian economies - Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines - had lower per capita incomes in the 1970s than many other developing countries.
The evidence of the benefits of trade liberalisation in responding to globalisation is at hand in our individual economies.
The Australian dairy industry is a good example of an industry that has benefited from liberalisation. It has taken advantage of the opening up of export markets in East Asia and is now amongst the most cost efficient dairy industries in the world.
Australia’s exporting businesses are more productive per employee, pay higher wages than businesses which do not export and are more likely to be hiring new staff.
As we have cut protection we have seen a rapid expansion in exports of high value-added manufactured goods. Consumers have enjoyed lower prices. Producers and exporters have had access to lower cost inputs. Business has been invigorated through competition and exposure to new ideas and technologies.
These are the reasons why the last major multilateral round of trade negotiations, the Uruguay Round, was embraced enthusiastically by most members of the world economy.
And it is for these reasons that the world agreed this year to free trade in information technology products and to sign off on the world’s first multilateral agreement to liberalise telecommunications. It is not a coincidence that these industries - information technology and telecommunications - are the most powerful drivers of globalisation.
The attractions of export-oriented rapid growth in East Asia and the demonstrable benefits of liberalisation also brought the 18&nbsp;members of the Asia Pacific region together in APEC to set for themselves a target of free trade and investment. It is worth reminding ourselves that this was done under the chairmanship of President Soeharto, the leader of a developing nation.
We all have an interest in opening up markets for our exporters. Liberalisation must continue. For that to happen - whether in the WTO, APEC or elsewhere - it must be balanced. There must be something in it for everyone. This is vital if we are to build strong domestic constituencies for continued trade liberalisation.
One valid criticism of liberalisation efforts in the past is that they have tended to favour the interests of the developed industrial economies. It took the Uruguay Round, for instance, before agriculture was brought fully into the field of multilateral negotiations.
And even now - much to Australia’s frustration - international traders in agriculture are severely disadvantaged under present international arrangements. Agricultural export subsidies remain the most trade distorting form of support to agricultural producers and continue to disrupt world markets. Yet disciplines on agricultural subsidies have a long way to go to match the tight disciplines on industrial products in the WTO.
Our goal remains to have agricultural products on the same footing as industrial products. To this end, Australia will be looking to achieve the total elimination of agricultural export subsidies in the next WTO agricultural negotiations to commence in 1999. And in doing this, we will need to reject the minimalist approach of the European Union, and demand of the United States a stronger commitment to further reform. The Cairns group of agricultural exporting countries will be an active campaigner for this goal.
We need to be realistic and hard-headed in the way we approach trade reform.
Australia has prepared itself well for any future rounds of negotiations, and we will want the efforts we have made to date recognised. Our trade-weighted average tariff is 5.1 per cent. Australian applied tariffs are between zero and five per cent in all but two sectors, and in the remaining two we are making significant changes.
We will be cutting tariffs in the textiles, clothing and footwear sector by 25&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent between now and 2000 and by another 25&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent in 2005. Tariffs on passenger motor vehicles , which were at 57.5&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent a decade ago will fall to 15&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent by 2000 and 10&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent in 2005.
Australia also has one of the most open investment regimes, when judged by the inflow of capital. Australia’s commitment to the APEC goal of free trade and investment remains firm.
OPEN UP OR CLOSE DOWN
The difficult fact that has to be faced is that the correct response to globalisation is more liberalisation, not less. More change, not less. More willingness to embrace new ideas, not less. Yet this goes against the grain of people’s instincts. People prefer stability to change. Security to uncertainty. They want to know that the work they have will continue, that the skills they have acquired will remain relevant and valued. And that their children will have a future in which they can also be secure.
The challenge is not to unnecessarily restrict the pace of liberalisation but to do whatever government can to bring people along with it. It is important that the pace of liberalisation is not so swift as to create community resistance or community-destroying economic and social dislocation. But it must not be so slow that we are left behind to enjoy fewer of the benefits of globalisation and suffer higher adjustment costs in the longer run. This is what has guided my government’s sensible pacing of liberalisation in the car and textile sectors.
This relentless force of change need not threaten the future of individuals, families and businesses. People need not fear that technology is driving a wedge between the young and the old. Governments must ensure that everyone is carried with us in this new age. After all, the new technology is all about making life easier, not more complicated.
Governments - and business - have a major responsibility to equip our people through education and training to understand and adapt to change brought about by globalisation.
My government is harnessing all arms of economic policy to support adjustment and to develop new areas of competitive advantage. Apart from education and training, this includes active labour market policies, support for innovation and the development of action agendas to accelerate the development of emerging sectors such as information technology and telecommunications .
But above all, the Australian Government is a high growth government. Growth is the passport to higher job creation. High growth and the jobs that come with it will ease the unavoidable pain and dislocation which is inherent in the structural adjustment caused by globalisation.
The economic and social change caused by globalisation challenges all governments whatever their political stripe. Instead of drawing protectively inwards in the vain belief that this will lessen the impact, governments, businesses and employees should strive to achieve still higher economic growth to ameliorate any ill effects of change.
This higher growth can only be achieved on the sure foundation of strong economic fundamentals.
Yesterday, Australia recorded the rare phenomenon of negative annual inflation of 0.3 per cent, the lowest annual change for 35 years.
This was a direct result of disciplined macro-economic policies - of which a determined assault on the Budget deficit, which will produce an underlying Budget surplus in 1998-99, played a critical role.
This inflation outcome is a landmark achievement for Australia. We have lifted the speed limits on economic growth. There is now real hope that Australia can bust through the 4 per cent growth figure. This will be critical to reducing unemployment.
Developed members of the international trading system, and of the Commonwealth, have a responsibility to help developing members respond and adapt to globalisation.
Many developing countries are already on the move. The nations of the South Pacific, for example, including many Commonwealth members are improving their capacity to take advantage of opportunities in the new global trading arena. They have made a strong commitment to liberalising trade and investment, promoting the role of private sector development, and improving public accountability and transparency.
The Commonwealth can play an important role in assisting developing countries meet the costs of adjusting to the new global economic environment. It is already doing good work in this area. We think there would be value in it doing more.
In that connection, I will propose to the Heads of Government an initiative to establish an international trade and investment access facility under the Commonwealth umbrella. Australia will provide A$250,000 in the first year. It is intended to help developing Commonwealth members respond creatively to the challenges of globalisation.
The facility will focus on assisting countries meet the requirements and provisions of the WTO and other multilateral agreements, and identify and manage the adjustment costs of moving to freer trade and investment. We hope that other governments might also find the facility a useful channel for funding activities to achieve the common goal of trade and investment liberalisation.
TRADE AND GROWTH: THE ENVIRONMENT AND HUMAN RIGHTS
As we have often seen, economic growth holds the key to addressing many of the environmental and human rights challenges of the late twentieth century. This is not to say that economic growth by itself is the total answer. The slow and difficult task of building open and democratic societies is also important. Economies will not achieve their potential unless government is transparent, the legal system fair, and information free.
Nevertheless, as incomes rise, both the means and the will to address environmental concerns increase. This is why trade liberalisation and its accompanying economic growth promote environmental protection.
Proposals to tackle climate change which have the effect of dislocating or restricting trade, distorting international investment flows, lowering growth and reducing living standards will not work. The results will be worse again if they discriminate against particular countries. Equity of burden is vital. The lack of equity is why we object to EU proposals for the Kyoto conference.
Poor labour standards and human rights observance in some countries are a matter for deep concern. As with environmental issues, however, attempts to restrict trade and investment to force conformity with certain standards are more likely to harm economic growth in those countries and worsen labour conditions. In both developed and developing countries wages are generally higher in the traded than in the non-traded sectors.
Further liberalisation of trade and investment will be possible only if everyone participates. For Australia and others in the Asia Pacific Region, APEC is an important means for maintaining the momentum of trade and investment liberalisation.
APEC played a critical role in bringing the Uruguay Round to conclusion in late 1993. More recently it built up a critical level of support for the Information Technology Agreement and the last phase of the WTO telecoms negotiation. Through its Individual Action Plans and further sectoral liberalisation initiatives, APEC is helping lay the foundations for further global trade liberalisation.
While liberalisation through regional groupings is beneficial, a comprehensive global approach is still vital. In a multilateral negotiating round, like the Uruguay Round, there is something on the table for everyone and the benefits from liberalisation can be maximised.
A new comprehensive multilateral round of trade negotiations is needed to address the remaining market barriers, to exercise greater disciplines on subsidies, especially in agriculture, and to settle the issues relating to services, that globalisation is pushing higher on the agenda.
Australia’s view is that a new global round could and should be launched by the end of this century. It is also our view that the world’s largest developing economy, China, should be involved in that as a member of the WTO.
The growth experienced by developing countries which have opened up their economies - notwithstanding recent currency problems in Southeast Asia and Latin America - is a compelling message for those that are still hesitating over embarking on a export-oriented, outward-looking, growth strategy.
The Commonwealth can play an important role in providing technical support for those making the shift to more liberal trade and economic policies. I hope the facility I have foreshadowed today will help in that respect.
At this Commonwealth business forum, we have an opportunity to send a message to the world - from governments, the business community and from the enormous range of organisations which come within the Commonwealth family - that we are ready, willing and able to help shape and benefit from the globalised world of the coming century.
[Ends]


ADDRESS AT LAUNCH OF THEJOINT VENTURE BETWEENTHE COMMONWEALTH BANK AND)BANK INTERNATIONALE INDONESIAJAKARTA, INDONESIA
E&amp;O&nbsp;E............Mr Katz, Mr Foxlee, Mr Widjaja, John McCarthy, the Australian Ambassador to&nbsp;Indonesia, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am absolutely delighted to be here tonight to formally inaugurate this joint venturebetween one of the most successflul and best known private banks in Indonesia. Abank which of course occupies a special, almost legendary niche, not only in thefinacial history but also the cultural history of my country, Australia, And I amdoubly delighted to have the opportunity because this event takes place at a time whenthere has been much turmoil on international financial markets where the ficus havebeen on the economnies of the Asia-Pacific region.
I am doubly pleased to have the opportunity of saying a few words, not only about this&nbsp;joint venture, but also a few words about the economic and financial situation in which&nbsp;the world finds itself at present and most particularly this region of the world finds&nbsp;itself at the present.
This joint venture is a vote of confidence by these two organisation in the economic&nbsp;future of Indonesia. And today I delivered on behalf of my Governn vote of&nbsp;confidence in the economic future of Indonesia, I took the oppor tunitY to in my&nbsp;discussion with President Soeharto to remark upon the economic achievemen of this&nbsp;country, Indonesia, under his government to indicate my very strongly held bell that&nbsp;the economic fundamentals of Indonesia are in very good shape, to remark upon what&nbsp;has been achieved in lifting the living standards of the people of lIndonesia over the ast&nbsp;years, and to remin~ d the sometime critics of Indonesia of just how much as been&nbsp;achieved in the face of enormous adversity during that period of time.
I also indicated to the President that the Australian Government would stand ready toparticipate as a fiend, a regional mate, a partner, a close neighbour, would stand readyto participate in any International Monetary Fund facility or arrangement associatedwith present economic circumstances in Indonesia. And I did that as an expression,not only of confidence in the future of the Indonesian economy, but also as anexpression of the goodwill and the sense of partnership and the sense of shared futureand shared destiny that Australia feels with, not only the Government of Indonesia in ageneric sense, but also with the people of Indonesia.
We are not fair-weather friends of the Indonesian people, we are friends and partnersof the Indonesian people for the long haul. We see as we move into the 21 Century agrowing and deepening partnership between Australia and Indonesia in this part of theworld. It still remains the case that the Asia-Pacific region is the fastest growingeconomic region in the world. The events of the past few days and few weeks havenot altered that fact and nothing can alter that fact unless those who hold responsibilityin the nations of the Asia-Pacific region over the years ahead squander a greatopportunity to build in the Asia-Pacific region, not only rising living standards for theirpeople through trade liberalisation and the removal of economic barriers betweenpeople and nations, but also the tremendous political opportunities that this uniqueassociation of people in this part of the world presents to the countries, their peopleand their governments.
Australia's friendship with Indonesia stretches back a very long period of time. Wewere one of the first Western nations to identify, very openly, with the desire of theIndonesian people to achieve their independence And through the years we havemade a good friend, a good ally and a close working regional partner of Indonesia.And that partnership, and that friendship, and that alliance has been given renewedexpression today in the discussions that I have had with the President of Indonesia andI will be carrying back to Australia his emphatic endorsement of the importance of ourrelationship. Now this joint venture is really what the future between our two countries is all about.And this occasion is about the future, it is about the future of the region, it is about thefuture economic co-operation between the people of Australia and the people ofIndonesia. It is about the future attraction of investment from Australia in all parts ofIndonesia. And it is also about our future participation together in the globalisedfinancial and economic world in which all of us now and forever will live. Theglobalised world economy carries with it instantaneous judgements by financialmarkets on governments, it also carries with it great opportunities of expansion andgrowth and it also carries with it important responsibilities and reciprocal obligationsbetween all those nations that participate.
And this joint venture is a hard-headed business assessment made by both of the banks.They have made the decision to come together because they believe it will be good fortheir shareholders, they believe it will be good for their customers, they believeimportantly it will be good for their employees and I am delighted to have had theopportunity in the short time that I have been here to meet many of the employees of&nbsp;the Commonwealth Bank and in, of course, the future joint venture between the twoorganisations. So it is, I think in every sense, a great symbolism that today despite some of theadverse headlines of stockmarket fluctuations and of currency speculation here youhave a rolled-gold commitment by two great organisations in the economic future ofIndonesia. And I think the symbolism of that will resonate throughout the businesscommunity here in Jakarta. And it will also send a very important message back to thebusiness community in Australia, It will remind the members of the businesscommunity of Australia of the great potential of future investment in Indonesia. And itis worth recalling just how much that economic partnership has grown the way inwhich, over the last few years, the investment of Australian businesses in Indonesia hasexpanded as trade barriers have fallen our shared goals and our shared interests inworking together have become more and more apparent.
And can I say, speaking for the Australians present, wherever you may bank, wherever&nbsp;you may invest, wherever you may borrow, you can't really think of yourself as an&nbsp;Australian particularly if you grew up in anywhere remotely connected with the 1950s&nbsp;or 1960s and early 1970s without thinking of those Commonwealth Bank money&nbsp;boxes. And, of course, they weren't boxes they were actually tin, It was part and&nbsp;parcel of growing up in Australia. It was certainly part and parcel of going to a&nbsp;government school in Australia that you were taught from a very early age to drop&nbsp;coins into that Commonwealth Bank money box as it was called. And it has been part&nbsp;and parcel, and I don't think I am giving a commercial against the rivals but what the&nbsp;heck the Commonwealth entered the joint venture so they are entitled to a commnercial&nbsp;from the Prime Minister particularly on an occasion like this.
It is a great Australian institution and of course in coming together with the Bank&nbsp;Internationale Indonesia, which has a formidable reputation as one of the great private&nbsp;banks of Indonesia, it does represent a great marriage, a great partnership. But can I&nbsp;just say again how important it is, reality is important in economics and in life,&nbsp;symbolism is also important in reality and in life. And this has both substance and&nbsp;symbolism. It has the substance of two great organisations coming together and&nbsp;investing in the future of Indonesia, that is the substance. And it also has the&nbsp;symbolism. At a time like this it is saying to the financial community of Indonesia, it is&nbsp;saying to the financial community of Australia and most importantly it is saying to the&nbsp;financial community of the world that two great organisation have enormous&nbsp;confidence in the economy of Indonesia, they have great confidence in the future of&nbsp;Indonesia. And I am absolutely delighted to be associated with the opening of this&nbsp;joint venture. Thank you.
[ Ends]


Every parent lives in fear of the impact of drugs on their children's lives. 'Tough on Drugs' is all about providing moral leadership on drugs for their sake.
After all, the drug problem is our problem. It is not just an academic pursuit, however vitally important that might be, but a very real social problem for the whole community to address.
The Alcohol and Drugs Council of Australia brings to our attention the terrible impact of drug use on Australia:
that there were 634 heroin related deaths in Australia last year;
that the average length of life lost per drug related death is 36.7 years;
that up to two thirds of prisoners report that they were under the influence of alcohol or illicit drugs or both at the time they committed their most serious offence and over 25 per cent of prisoners have a major drug problem;
that up to 80 per cent of property crime in a state like NSW is drug related;
that illicit drugs are associated with over 40,500 hospital bed days in Australia each year;
that on any given day in Australia, specialist treatment agencies provide residential or counselling services to over 2,000 illicit drug users; and
that spending on illicit drugs amounts to over $7 billion a year.
But as we all know, the drug problem is not just about statistics but about real Australians: it's about people with broken lives and broken homes, it's about families who want so much to care and face terrible odds, it's about professionals in the field, law enforcement agencies, educators, health workers.
Now it's about Governments too.
If 1996 is to be remembered as the time when all Australian Governments united to be tough on guns let this year be the time when we all found the same determination to get tough on drugs.
I want to work in partnership with all Australian Governments, and with parents, teachers, volunteer and community organisations and health professionals to develop a plan to take us into the next century to really address the drug problem.
THE PLAN
To demonstrate my Government's commitment to this end I announce today the first instalment in what I plan will be an integrated, comprehensive and effective national effort to combat the menace of illicit drugs.
This is the initial response to the findings of the Commonwealth Task Force which I established on 25 August this year. The purpose of the Task Force was to collate and assess the range of Commonwealth activities relating to illicit drugs.
Our first instalment is to commit an additional $87.5 million over three years towards a National Illicit Drug Strategy designed to deliver a balanced and integrated approach to reducing the supply and demand of illicit drugs and minimising the harm they cause.
I intend that further measures will be developed in consultation with the States, Territories and the volunteer and community sector.
What this announcement achieves is a balance between additional money spent attacking the importers and distributers of drugs and additional money focusing on school education, treatment for drug users and research.
STEMMING THE TRADE
The first stage in the National Illicit Drug Strategy will be an immediate and concerted national effort to make Australia a much more difficult target for drug traffickers.
All heroin and cocaine comes from outside Australia. While we have had some notable successes in intercepting illicit drugs, these measures intensify our efforts to stop drugs coming into the country in the first place and intercepting them if they do enter Australia.
The Government will therefore provide additional funding of $43.8 million for measures to intercept more illicit drugs at our borders and within Australia.
This will include extra resources:
for 54 more operational investigative staff for the Australian Federal Police, to be organised into three "strike teams" which will target drug syndicates wherever they operate in Australia;
to increase the capacity of the Australian Customs Service's cargo profiling system and examination facilities in Sydney;
to improve Commonwealth law enforcement agencies' communication and IT capabilities.
to fund a National Heroin Signature Programme to identify trafficking patterns for heroin, improve research into drug-crime links and increase Australian Federal Police funding for informant handling and witness protection.
to enhance the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre's capacity to monitor suspicious financial transactions.
for the Australian Customs Service to employ additional intelligence analysts.
I also announce a package of measures relating to the Torres Strait.
In July I visited the Torres Strait and undertook to review surveillance arrangements. I am pleased to announce that following consultation with the Torres Strait Islander community and its Member for Leichhardt, Warren Entsch, the Government will establish a permanent AFP presence on Thursday Island, purchase three new high speed customs vessels and increase surveillance in the Torres Strait.
The Government is also looking at measures to improve the exchange of information between Australia and other countries on illicit drugs.
EDUCATION
While these supply reduction measures will undoubtedly make inroads in reducing the availability of illicit drugs, the Government understands that no country in the world has been able to completely stop the flow of illicit drugs.
That is why we regard it as essential to strengthen the national effort to reduce the use of illicit drugs and minimise the harm they cause.
Accordingly, the Government's supply reduction measures will be balanced by an additional $43.7 million for measures focussing on school education, community information and support, expanding community agency treatment programmes, enhancing our research effort and developing innovative treatments.
These measures are of such importance that we will ensure that they are developed in consultation with the States, Territories and volunteer and community organisations working in the field.
My Government is determined to prevent a new generation of users and addicts emerging. We will therefore consult with the States, Territories and community agencies about the development of an integrated set of targeted education and information measures.
These will focus on young people, their parents, local communities, teachers and health professionals, and will include $7.4 million for the development and implementation of a Schools Drug Strategy with a goal of zero tolerance of drugs in schools.
We will provide $4.8 million for a community grant programme for local drug prevention and education projects. Funding will depend on the capacity of projects to help equip those in the front line, such as parents, to play their part against illicit drugs.
We will also provide money for a national one stop shop to disseminate information to the general community including parents, schools, universities, health professionals and health care facilities. The centre will be outsourced to a community organisation which already provides drug-related education or services.
The Government will also consult with the States, Territories and volunteer and community agencies on the form which a more general community-wide education and information campaign might take.
TREATMENT AND SUPPORT
Regrettably, education and prevention do not necessarily help those who have already developed a drug problem. The Commonwealth will therefore discuss with the States, Territories and volunteer and community organisations a better approach for the diversion of drug users from prison to treatment programmes, with a view to breaking the cycle of drug dependency and criminal behaviour.
The Government believes that volunteer and community organisations have a particularly valuable role to play in treatment. You are at the front-line of this battle and you are the the ones who are best able to preserve the dignity and worth of each individual to whom help is offered.
Recognising your vital role the Government will provide additional direct funding of $21.5 million towards establishing and operating new community treatment facilities, to be identified in consultation with the States, Territories and groups such as yourselves. There will be a particular emphasis on filling geographic and target group gaps in the coverage of existing treatment services and priority will be given to areas of highest need
The Commonwealth will also discuss with the States and Territories the scope to expand existing cost-shared funding arrangements for community treatment services with a view to upgrading them.
RESEARCH
Australia is recognised as a world leader in reducing the harm caused to individuals and society due to drug use. It is essential that we maintain this high standard if we are to relieve the human, economic and social costs of illicit drug use.
The Commonwealth Government will therefore provide additional funding of $5.3 million to support new research and innovative harm minimisation measures.
An additional $4 million will be provided to the National Health and Medical Research Council to undertake an expanded programme of interdisciplinary research to achieve innovation in the prevention and treatment of illicit drug use, with a stronger focus on abstinence-based treatment, more effective treatments, and eventual re-integration of users into the community.
We will also provide additional funding for the non-heroin trials agreed by the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy in July 1997, to go towards their evaluation and the dissemination of best practice.
Illicit drug use is a national problem that affects us all - parents, volunteer and community agencies, health professionals, educators, law enforcement officers and governments Australia wide.
I readily acknowledge that in many areas the Commonwealth cannot move alone and nor would it be desirable for it to do so. Moral leadership on this issue demands that all Australian Governments as well as volunteer and community organisations, families and health professionals act in a unified and effective way to help end the misery inflicted by illict drugs on Australian lives.
That is why I have written today to Australian Heads of Government proposing the further development of the National Illicit Drug Strategy to bring together
the three streams of reducing supply, reducing demand and harm minimisation and proposing that this be an agenda item for the next meeting of the Council of Australian Governments to be held this Friday, November 7.
I am always realistic. Results will take time. But I am determined to discourage a whole new generation of drug users by the best means available. I strongly believe that with a concerted national and community effort we can make a significant difference to the benefit of all Australians.
[Ends]
2 November 1997


Today I announce the latest step in the Federal Government's fight against domestic violence with a programme to encourage corporate Australia to play its part.
Entitled Business Against Domestic Violence, the initiative recognises that employers have ways of reaching people that Governments, churches and charities cannot.
Business will be encouraged to contribute top level leadership, develop policies linking the workplace to services addressing domestic violence, or donate to public benevolence projects.
To provide an incentive for organisations to become involved in this initiative, the Government has decided to amend the income tax law to allow tax deductions for gifts of the value of $2 or more.
The initiative will be co-chaired by Robert Champion de Crespigny of Normandy Mining, Paula Gerber, a partner in the law firm Maddock Lonie and Chisholm, and Anne Badger of Melbourne Grammar School.
In NSW alone it is estimated that domestic violence costs the community $1.5 billion annually through medical expenses, legal costs, corrective services, lost productivity and forgone income.
While half of this is borne by victims, an estimated $400 million is paid by Governments through services such as sole parent pensions.
The remaining bill is carried by business themselves, as raised anxiety levels reduce productivity rates or offenders and victims stay away from work altogether.
Already many large Australian companies operate alcohol and drug programmes but more can be done.
The Commonwealth and State Governments spend $226 million annually on crisis services for the victims of domestic violence, including a $25 million programme announced last Friday to find new ways of preventing the cycle of violence infecting a new generation of abusers.
I am proud to be the patron of this initiative because domestic violence has the capacity to destroy families, now and in the next generation.
12 November, 1997


8 November 1997
E &amp; OE.....
Thank you very much Mr Chairman, to Tony Rundle the Premier of Tasmania, to my various Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues and particularly because I think we're in his electorate, to Warwick Smith the Member for Bass and Minister for Family Services.
This is quite an historic day, an historic moment, and an historic agreement for Tasmania and for an industry which is very much the heart and soul of the economic and social future of this State.
And it is also a very important day for the environment in Tasmania, and for the environment throughout Australia.
This is an outstandingly balanced agreement. It's an agreement that will directly and indirectly generate about 1,000 jobs. It's an agreement that gives a great sense of resource security to an industry which is the second largest employer of people in Tasmania.
When you are trying to achieve a balance and when you're trying to strike the right balance between strongly competing interests, I ask you always to think of the employment prospects of Australians. Employing Australians is the greatest single social challenge of any government, federal or state in Australia in the 1990s. And the decisions that we take in every area of political responsibility must have a very high priority in the area of employment.
And I say to those who may be critical of this decision, think of the jobs that it's generating for your fellow Tasmanians. Think of the investment in industry that has always been important to Tasmania's well-being.
And can I say in reference to our exchange of a few moments ago, that since 1970 this industry has had no less than 30 enquiries. It has suffered what can properly be described as paralysis through constant analysis. And it is now time for the industry, for those who work in the industry, and for the people of Tasmania to get on with the job. And can I say what a great delight it has been for me to work with Tony Rundle very closely in the preparation of this agreement.
He's a man very dedicated to the welfare of the people of Tasmania. At every stage he's been a man of his word and he's a person who has sought, as I have sought, to strike a reasonable compromise between the employment interests, the industry interests and also the interests of the environment.
This Regional Forests Agreement shows that sensible policy decisions can deliver good conservation outcomes while generating hundreds of jobs.
There is funding of $110 million over three years, and that contribution from my Government puts beyond any argument our commitment to sustainable forest industries, employment growth and secure protection of the forests.
Both the Premier and I insisted that the agreement that we have just signed should be legally binding. And that is a very important source of comfort and security to those who will make investment decisions based on the strength of this agreement.
The proposition that governments can encourage private sector people to make investments and then change the ground rules of the game after they've made the investment, and walk away without any liabilities is a situation that I have found unacceptable and both the Premier and I have insisted upon the need for the agreement to be legally binding.
The Plantations and Industry Package of $80 million will directly deliver 550 new jobs and indirectly deliver another 400 or 500. In total, direct and indirect jobs numbering about 1,000.
It will give increased security to encourage investment in jobs. The RFA will deliver world-class conservation outcomes. The RFA adds 396,000 hectares of public land to the conservation system which is an increase of 17%. And it brings total reserves to 2.7 million hectares, or 40% of Tasmania's land area.
And how anybody in the name of reason can regard that as a sellout of the environment, or a sellout of conservation values, or a defied indifference to the environment of this state or of the environment of Australia, is beyond ordinary human comprehension.
I'd also remind those critics that the reserve system protects more than 70% of the Tarkine Wilderness area and the RFA also provides $30 million for the protection of forest values on private land.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Premier and I have laboured very long and very hard to produce what both of us regard as a fair and balanced outcome.
It generates jobs, it provides investment security over a long period of time for an industry that is indispensable to Tasmania's future.
You can't have a Tasmanian future without a viable forest industry. It is unrealistic to argue otherwise. If you are really serious in holding yourself out, and I direct my remarks particularly to the Tasmanian Labor Party. If you are really serious in holding yourself out as being committed to the interests of the workers of this state, then you will get behind this agreement.
You will respect this agreement as a genuine attempt to strike the balance, the difficult balance, between the interests of the industry, the jobs security in Tasmania, the job hopes of young Tasmanians and also it delivers outstanding world-class conservation outcomes.
And I can only say, ladies and gentlemen that this is a Regional Forest Agreement of which my Government is very proud. It's a Regional Forest Agreement that delivers in full on the commitment I made and my colleagues made to strike a fair balance between preserving the environment, protecting treasured environmental values, but at the same time providing job opportunities for Australians, and particularly job opportunities for Tasmania.
I am, therefore, delighted to be present. I thank the Premier again for his constructive co-operation. It's been a sheer delight to deal with you Tony, as always, and I wish you and your colleagues well and I thank all of those associated with this Agreement. It's good news for Tasmania and its good news for a balanced approach to conservation and development in our country.
Thank you.


It is a privilege to be asked to deliver this lecture in honour of Sir Edward 'Weary' Dunlop.
Life is all about personal courage, about character, about the capacity to do the right thing to care for one another in times of trial and times of difficulty. No figure in Australian history more perfectly and completely personified the injunction to care for others in dire need. Weary Dunlop did that and he did it in a way that has won him the affection, not only of those he preserved in life but of an entire nation. 
In our highest aspirations, I imagine, that Weary Dunlop represents what so many of us would like to be as Australians. 
He had that uncomplicated generosity and decency. He had enormous strength as well as all those laconic characteristic which we hold so dear as being part of the Australian existence and the Australian personality. He was also a champion sportsman - Australian to his boot heels. And his legacy to successive generations of Australians will warm and sustain and inspire us. 
He was also profoundly Australian in the greatest of all Australian traditions of mateship. 
When he cared and treated for people he didn't ask what school they attended, he didn't ask what religion they professed, he didn't ask them which political party they supported. 
Instead he just treated them and cared for them and led them and inspired them because they were fellow human beings.
There are many great heroes in the Australian story, but that generation of men and women who went into captivity in the darkest days of World War II endured grave hardship and tragedy, they travelled journeys, they wore burdens that few Australians have been forced to bear. And we owe them an immense debt of gratitude on this Remembrance Day. 
Weary Dunlop was not someone who wanted to live out in hatred and so expiate some of the feelings of hostility he no doubt had about his treatment and that of his fellow Australians during World War II. At the end of the war he was not one of those who said we should turn our backs on this region. As kind and decent as he was Weary Dunlop was also a far sighted man. He taught us of the fruits of cooperation and the friendship of neighbours. 
Weary Dunlop became a leading light in the Asia Australia society. He played a very active role in the Colombo plan. Under the plan Dunlop shared his energy and his phenomenal surgical skills with the peoples of Thailand, Sri Lanka and India. He later returned to an Asian theatre of war to help the wounded in Vietnam. 
It was a special privilege for me to meet Weary Dunlop on several occasions. I have talked to people who knew him, who were treated by him, who served with him and who loved him. And he represents to me something to which all of us as Australians can aspire. 
There is no clearer demonstration of the respect and admiration with which Australians regarded Weary than the nation's spontaneous reaction to his passing - when around ten thousand people of all ages and from all walks of life turned out to pay their respects at his state funeral.
What was it about Weary which evoked this extraordinary response from the nation?
It was our gratitude for his commitment to his country and his selfless service to his men.
It was the sheer horror of his experiences and those of his men. As Weary put it, he felt that 'in the annals of human suffering, Australians had written something very special of their own, and handed on a precious legacy to the future.'
It was the appeal of his confidence in a better future, more extraordinary because of the suffering he had endured.
It was because Weary himself personified the best of Australian character and values.
So on this Remembrance Day, before this audience, what is it that we can learn form Dunlop's legacy? It is perhaps the true meaning of being a neighbour. 
Dunlop understood that being a neighbour has less to do with geography than it does with actions, that being a neighbour meant respecting the qualities and cultures of others as well as lending a hand so as to turn regions into neighbourhoods.
RECENT CURRENCY PROBLEMS
In recent months Australia has demonstrated just how strong are our credentials as a good regional neighbour through our support for the economies of Thailand and Indonesia.
I am proud that Australia has extended that helping hand. I am also proud that Australia is sufficiently strong to have been able to extend that hand. 
We have been able to weather the recent currency turbulence as well as we have, and we have been able to help our friends as we have, only because of the strong foundations of our economy.
Australia with a bigger budget deficit, without a comprehensive reform programme, and severe speed limits on its economic growth would have been compelled to think twice about giving such support.
We have more than halved the underlying budget deficit in one year. By the turn of the century, Australia will have the highest nominal budget surplus in its history. Government expenditure will be at its lowest level as a proportion of GDP for over 25 years.
Over 1997 and 1998 we are predicted to have the third lowest public debt to GDP ratio in the OECD.
We have the lowest headline inflation rate in 35 years.
These dramatic improvements have helped deliver much lower interest rates, benefiting business and consumers alike. We have the lowest home interest rates in 17 years. Real business investment is at its highest level ever recorded.
Workplace reform, greater competition in energy and transport, and privatisation are bringing productivity improvements.
Over 1997 and 1998, the OECD forecasts that Australia's economic and employment growth will be higher than in any G7 country.
The importance of the improvements brought about in our economic foundations in the past year and a half cannot be overstated. The currency problems in our region should have brought this home to all convincingly. 
The Government is not resting on these achievements. We will build on these foundations by proposing the most visionary and comprehensive tax reform in Australia's history.
AUSTRALIA'S RELATIONSHIP WITH OUR REGION 
Beyond what it has illustrated about our economy, the recent currency problems in the region have brought new and perhaps more realistic perspectives about the region and our relationship with it.
I am confident about the region's prospects, despite some of the present economic problems. Economic growth will be affected for a time, but the conditions are still good for continued growth in the medium term. 
Those prospects will be realised if regional countries tackle economic adjustment quickly and continue market liberalisation. There is no alternative to maintaining solid macroeconomic fundamentals. Greater transparency is being demanded and is unavoidable. Best informed markets will promote economic stability and growth. It will be crucial that economies do not turn closed and inwards. APEC's success is if anything more important.
Australia has a vital interest in her neighbours succeeding in transforming their economies. They must become more open and have sustainable patterns of growth. Sixty per cent of our exports go to East Asia. Through our participation in the IMF support packages for our neighbours and our practical help at a technical level - through for example the Reserve Bank - we are making a real difference to the region's prospects.
The point I want to emphasise tonight, however, is that recent events have surely shown that Australia should not regard itself as an anxious outsider in her region. Our actions build on a long and honourable tradition - which Weary Dunlop personified and successive governments of all political persuasions have followed since the War - of conscientious and reliable support and neighbourly behaviour towards our partners in the region. 
We have demonstrated beyond any doubt that we are a reliable regional mate. And I am pleased that this has been recognised in the region both in the personal comments that have been made by regional leaders to myself and other Government ministers and in the regional press.
We have acted from a sense of regional mutual obligation that is the foundation of any community. And of course we would like to think that our neighbours would be there when we need them. 
Another important point to emerge from the present economic problems in the region is the need for Australia to think of herself as a citizen of the world. Australia's economic and political destiny is naturally closely tied up with her immediate region. 
I am unequivocally committed to deepening our engagement with the countries of Asia. However, in pursuing this objective the Government will not neglect Australia's interests elsewhere. Our policy is Asia first or Asia plus, not Asia only.
Over 60 per cent of the direct investment Australia sends abroad is directed towards Europe and the United States. Over 60 per cent of the direct investment we receive from abroad comes from the United States and Europe. Moreover, these economic links contribute profoundly to the manufacturing base of our economy and our technological leadership in the region.
The present visit of the Dutch Prime Minister, Mr Kok, is a reminder of just how strong and important our links with other parts of the world are. The Netherlands is a major source of investment into Australia. It is also the ancestral home of about 300,000 Australians.
This highlights perhaps Australia's greatest strength: we occupy a unique intersection of history, geography, cultural, political and economic circumstance. There is no other country in the world which has such an asset. It is an immense strength and never a weakness.
Some are inclined to see the economic, cultural and political differences between Australia and the countries in our region as a problem - or as worrying gaps that should be narrowed by changing ourselves . Nothing could be further from the truth.
European and American linkages enhance rather than encumber or diminish the role we play in our region. Equally an understanding of the region adds value to our relationship with the United States, Britain and Europe. For example, during my recent visit to Washington President Clinton accepted my suggestion that it might be useful for Australia with its different perspectives on Indonesia, to share its views with the United States. Australia and United States officials subsequently had some discussions which I think will make some small contribution at least to understanding between two important friends of Australia.
We share interests with our neighbours in a stable and prosperous region and on an active and highly recorded participant in building the region's future. Our unique characteristics and our linkages with other parts of the world - in cultural, political and strategic terms - which make this contribution especially effective and make it especially highly regarded in the region.
This is demonstrated at a political level by the commitment to partnership with us by Japan and by the recent responses of countries such as Indonesia and Thailand to our assistance. 
It is demonstrated through the close defence relationships we have with regional countries such as Malaysia and Singapore. 
It is demonstrated by the large number of students from the region studying at Australian institutions.
It is demonstrated at the most important level by the large numbers of immigrants from our region who have made their homes in Australia and who are playing an influential and welcome part in shaping and building Australia's economy and society.
Our success in creating a successful, diverse, tolerant and united nation is an immense achievement. It is a beacon in our region and the world. Those who seek to diminish that achievement do Australia a great disservice.
Our success reflects the aspirations and values that Weary Dunlop held dear and so remarkably fulfilled in his life. 
Our success is also founded on a political heritage that has given our society a stability and security that has been unmatched anywhere in the world.
THE CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATE
There are other firm foundations which also provide us our strength. They are our unique national character, our system of government and our constitution.
It is therefore appropriate tonight for me to put the constitutional debate in proper perspective to debunk some myths about Australia's independence and our system of government.
As you all know, I am not a republican. The Australian people knew that when they elected me Prime Minister. I take an unashamedly Burkian view of Australian institutions but I am, above all, a passionate democrat with sufficient faith in the Australian people for them to set their own destiny.
I have a responsibility to guide the debate in an open, candid and constructive fashion. That involves honestly telling the people my own views but facilitating a process from which clearly defined options for choice emerge so that the Australian people can then make an informed and considered judgment. Whatever my personal views may be this uniquely is a matter for resolution by all of the Australian people. It is my fervent wish that if change is to occur that it occurs in circumstances that unite, not divide the Australian people. 
We all know that when the vote ultimately comes, one of the options is retention of our present system with the undoubted strength and stability it has brought. Yet at this stage, it is utterly unclear what the alternative to the status quo might be other than a vaguely defined Republican alternative.
Therefore there is a heavy onus on the Convention to explore whether or not a consensus can be reached on what kind of alternative model can be put to the people at a referendum.
This is not to say that the merits of the present system should not be discussed to the Convention. But there is little point in Republicans spending the time trying to convince Republicans to change their minds and vice versa.
It would be better for all of us, if we are to have a mature debate, that we focus on defining what the options might be - if that is possible.
To those on the anti-Republican side who think that even to discuss the shape of a Republican option is to give ground in the debate - I beg to disagree.
I believe there are many Australians who have a disposition to support change, but they will embrace change only if the alternative to our present Constitution embodies a safe, stable, workable and secure alternative - and, above all, the essential, seamless continuity of our current Westminster system of government, where real executive authority resides within the Cabinet drawn from and responsible to the Parliament.
National leadership demands that all our citizens, irrespective of whether they argue against constitutional change or in favour of it, have the right to present their case and have it heard in a spirit of tolerance and openness. 
The debate is not about who is the better, more patriotic Australian. There are people of good will in this debate who have genuine differences. There are decent, loyal and passionate Australians on both sides of the argument. There are Liberals who believe in an Australian republic just as there are committed Labor people who defend what we've got. 
The debate will never be well served by a scorecard of which personalities line up with one side of the debate or the other.
The issue is ultimately what system of government will best deliver a united and stable Australian nation. A temperate and sober debate on the real issues is required, not one based on sloganeering and personalities. Paramount remains my desire to conduct this debate in such a way that if change is to occur, it should occur in a unifying rather than a divisive fashion.
That is why I promised, before the last election, to establish a Constitutional Convention to examine the question of Australia's head of state. The return of the Convention Bill to the Parliament after it had been rejected was testament to the Government's sincerity and determination to provide full and open discussion on this constitutional matter. 
That we have a written constitution at all is a revelation to many Australians. The Hawke Government's Constitutional Commission reported in 1988 that almost 50 per cent of all Australians were unaware that we had a written Constitution, and that in the 18-24 year age group the level of ignorance rose to nearly 70 per cent. The Keating Government's Civics Expert Group reported in 1994 that 82 per cent of Australians knew nothing about the content of our constitution.
This is a poor indictment upon our education of civics amongst Australians. If this debate can at least raise awareness about the way each of us are governed then this is a worthwhile development.
That we are having this debate at all should be kept in perspective. It is an important issue but not the only important issue.
What I will not permit is the debate to distract the Government from what many Australians properly regard as their higher priorities. That was the fate of the previous government to their considerable detriment. Whether Australia becomes a republic is not an issue that weighs heavily upon Australians as they go about their daily lives. It cannot be a substitute for ways to relieve the pressure on families or to help small business get going again so as to help ease the unemployment problem.
After all, an Australian republic would deliver not one extra job, not one extra hospital bed, not extra policeman on the beat, nor one extra cent paid off the national debt. Fixing what's really broken will always the priority of my Government.
THE AUSTRALIA I KNOW
I am not one of those people who believes that Australia suffers from an identity crisis. I believe that the Australian identity is so distinct and our shared values so robust and so many of our past achievements such a legitimate source of pride, that we don't need endless naval gazing. 
The almost constant carping on what some people claim to be wrong about Australia requires all of us to get a proper perspective by focussing on what is right about us:
That we are a truly independent nation where Australia answers to no foreign power and where our ultimate strength is derived from the sovereignty of our people.
That we are free to think, to move, to speak, to worship, to elect governments, to be afforded the proper privileges of our legal system, to own and dispose of property, to raise a family and educate our children.
That the rights of citizenship are balanced by our obligations and responsibilities to those close to us.
That we live in a land where the individual is paramount and where the family unit is the corner stone of our lives.
That our patriotism is quiet but deep.
That we stand as a united people under one flag irrespective of whether Australia is the nation of our birth or of our choice.
That our lifestyle is defined by abundance of light and space, by our love of sport and competition and the rich diversity of cultural pursuits.
That the future is ours with an eagerness to meet the challenges of a world made small by technology and the onset of globalisation.
That modern day relationships with neighbours of the region are mature, durable, to our mutual advantage and decidedly in the national interest.
That being Australian embodies real notions of decency and pragmatism in a classless society which lives up to its creed of practical mateship, which brings along those who are disadvantaged and which extends the gift of welcome to those who come to our shores.
If so much is right with Australia how can it be that so much is fatally wrong that requires the most fundamental constitutional change since Federation?
I am ambitious for Australia to succeed and for its people to prosper but that does not mean that I have to celebrate the centenary of nationhood by tearing up its birth certificate. 
Ask me why I stand against radical change and the answer lies in the simple yet compelling truths that I have every right to defend the Australian experience and that I have every faith in Australians to meet the real challenges ahead.
That also requires an honesty to confront contemporary problems with practical and durable solutions.
The challenge for those who argue the case for a republic is simply put: can they demonstrate that change would deliver better governance? Will it deliver more political stability and freedom than we now enjoy? Will it deliver social and economic independence? 
PRECONDITIONS FOR CHANGE
The beauty of our Constitution is just that. Its ours. 
Despite what my predecessor attempted to claim, that the Commonwealth Constitution was a creation of Whitehall, it is a distinctly Australian document, having been drafted and approved by Australians at the time of Federation.
That the Constitution may be altered only with the approval of the Australian people at a referendum is a rare and precious provision in a world where most constitutions may be altered by parliaments or by governments, without the consent of their people.
Those two great Australian commentators on the making of our Constitution, Quick and Garran, wrote "The Constitution is the master of the legislature, and the community itself is the author of the Constitution. ... Sovereignty resides in [those] in whom is ultimately vested the power to amend a Constitution of Government." 
The essence of a republican form of government is that ultimate sovereignty resides in the people, and that all public office holders derive their authority from the people, either through election by the people, or by appointment by officers themselves elected by the people - precisely the form of government we enjoy in Australia. What this means is that we have always been a crowned republic.
So why embark upon the onerous task of redrafting the Constitution to achieve precisely the form of government we have experienced since Federation?
It was with considerable foresight that Quick and Garran in 1901 contemplated the proper circumstances upon which change to the Australian Constitution should occur. They stated that the double majority which our founding fathers had written into section 128 of the Constitution requiring the approval of an amendment by a majority of voters in a majority of States was an essential safeguard. It had been provided, not to prevent or resist constitutional change, but to protect the federal system and to prevent constitutional change being made in haste or by stealth. 
Its purpose, they wrote, was to encourage public discussion and to ensure change only occurred when there was strong evidence that it was "desirable, irresistible, and inevitable". 
These, I believe, are the touchstones against which any change should be tested. 
I call on every Australian, when they consider the question of a republic, to ask themselves whether the proposal for change meets each of these three requirements. 
Is it desirable? Is it irresistible? Is it inevitable?
How often have we heard the claim that a republic is inevitable? Australians with no firm allegiance one way or another may have found themselves drawn to the republican cause by the argument that because some regard it as inevitable, their minds have somehow been made up for them. But this is not sufficient. 
However inevitable some may believe a republic to be, desirable and irresistible it is not.
I wish to debunk two myths that those who argue for a republic have sought to espouse: first, that Australia can only ever be truly independent by changing to a republic and secondly, that we do not already have an Australian as our head of state.
AN INDEPENDENT NATION
Needless to say, I remain one of the great numbers of Australians who have yet to be convinced that we can be made any more free or independent or democratic or sovereign or profoundly more Australian than we are today.
We don't need a licence to be independent because we already are.
We certainly don't need some written ratification of the great worth of each Australian citizen because it is already apparent that Australian citizenship is one of the most cherished prizes in our world.
Australia is a fully independent nation. There are those who believe our independence came with Federation, others identify the shores of Gallipoli, others still identify later years such as the Hawke Government's Constitutional Commission which identified "some time between 1926 and the end of World War II". 
The ties which republicans tell us they want to sever do not exist today, have not existed at all for over 50 years, and were substantially severed at least over 70 years ago.
Associated with the republican argument is the notion that we need to assert our independence by becoming a republic to ensure our full engagement in Asia. 
Or from certain businessmen that we need to rebadge Australia.
This has always been a nonsense. The Coalition regards our engagement with Asia as our highest foreign policy priority. We are inextricably linked with Asia for the long term. Recent currency turbulence in the region reminds us that our prosperity as well as our security is linked with the region. We seek closer engagement in Asia because of the profound benefits which can flow from countries in the region as well as the realisation of our mutual interests.
But none of this depends upon changing our constitutional arrangements. On my visits to the region I have never perceived a desire for Australia to become a republic, and even if I did, what reason would this be to change our constitution? Why would an Australian Government supposedly assert independence from Britain by acceding to pressure from a different nation?
If Australia starts disavowing its history or disowning its institutions simply because some believe that countries in the region will respect us more for doing so, then we are gravely mistaken. 
This view is even reflected by regional figures. Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew said in 1994: "I don't think Asia understands what the argument is about. Australia would not generate greater esteem in Asia as a republic than it does with its present constitutional arrangements." 
AN AUSTRALIAN HEAD OF STATE
Just as I am unconvinced by the argument that Australia should change its constitutional form of government for reasons of perceived international advantage, so too am I unconvinced by the claims that it is only through a republican form of government that we can 'have an Australian as our Head of State'.
To my mind, we already have an Australian who is, to all intents and purposes our Head of State. We first had an Australian in the position of Governor-General 66 years ago and it would now be inconceivable and totally unacceptable for anyone but an Australian to hold that position in the future.
Our Constitution has evolved over the years through both legislative changes and Constitutional practice, to enhance the effective role and the inherent 'Australianness' of the position of Governor-General.
Australians are a pragmatic and practical people who disdain legalistic distinctions. In a pragmatic and practical way, the role of our Governor-General as Australia's effective Head of State has been clearly established and will continue.
THE CONVENTION
At next February's Constitutional Convention the first question to be dealt with is whether Australia should become a republic. But it will not be the only question.
The greatest task of the Convention will be to consider the relative merits of one model for an Australian republic against another. The heaviest onus will lie upon republicans to set out with clarity why they believe one particular model should be favoured. In this regard the blank cheque theory of constitutional change is simply unacceptable. Those who want change must say what sort of change. 
Some republicans want the people to elect the president, some want the Parliament to appoint the president, some want the Prime Minister to make the appointment, and others want the appointment to be made by a specially-constituted committee.
The onus will also lie upon the advocates for change to achieve a degree of unity and compromise on the favoured model. For their part anti-republicans will be asked to listen to cogent argument and play a constructive role in the debate.
It is my strong belief that an elected President in the Australian political culture would inevitably create an alternative political power centre certain to rival that occupied by the Prime Minister with the distinct possibility that an elected President could have a political allegiance quite different from that of the Government of the day. 
A potent cocktail for political instability would have been produced and warnings against this type of change were given by the former Governor of Victoria, Mr. Richard McGarvie, earlier this year. He argued that we already have one of the world's oldest and most successful democracies, and that we "would immediately corrode and ultimately destroy our democracy" if we were to use any method of election to choose the president.
An elected presidency raises all types of issues not least of which is the likely politicisation of the office of head of state. Political parties would likely run candidates and it would be undemocratic to deny them the right to do so. We may therefore be unwittingly sacrificing an independent and representative head of state for one that may represent only a bare majority of Australians and who may be the least independent of all.
The position of the States is also unclear. Given that each State has its own Constitution, it would be feasible for one State or more to wish to retain its own constitutional position including their own relationship with the Crown.
Thus, there is far more to this republican debate than meets the eye. 
The more one tries to simplify the case for change, the more it becomes complex and confusing, and the more it threatens the very freedoms that those who quite sincerely advocate change are trying to enshrine.
The more one argues for an independent nation, the more one realises that we have been independent all along.
The more one seeks an Australian head of state, the more it becomes clear that we have had one for years.
The more one seeks to empower the Australian people, the more one understands that we are already amongst the most sovereign human beings on earth.
The more one tries to prove that an Australian republic is "desirable, irresistible, and inevitable", the more one realises that it's really none of these things at all.
And the more one seeks to radically change this country the more one appreciates that it's really not worth the risk.
My foremost desire is to let the Australian people be heard on this important issue. The Australian Constitution belongs to them and it is not up to republican or monarchist alike to put words into their mouths or make up their minds for them. The role of the Convention will be to ensure that they have informed choice on the relative merits of the current system as against change and between the various models for change.
I believe this to be in the national interest and I call on all participants to ensure that national interest is well served.
CONCLUSION
On this Remembrance Day the legacy of Weary Dunlop provides us with an opportunity to appreciate what is precious about Australia: our political and economic stability; our international linkages; our skills and technology; our diversity; and above all, our values as individuals.
The region welcomes us for what we are and what we stand for.
It was for the same reason that the region opened its arms to Weary Dunlop. The foundation for his respect and understanding of others was the deep understanding of his own worth and that of his own history, culture and values.
Weary Dunlop personified the mateship which lies at the core of Australian values and our sense of nation. He revealed to us what being a neighbour is really all about.



E&amp;OE...........................................
These moments, this hour, this day, we dedicate to our dead.
Young Australians, whose passing into the silent land, we will honour by ourselves becoming silent :
- an echo of the eerie stillness which becalmed their battlefields on this day so long ago,
- an echo of the homes made silent when they did not return.
The two minutes silence we will observe today is a tradition born in a time when the vast majority of Australians could pause and dwell upon a name, or a face or some small precious memory. In years past, ceremonies such as today's overwhelmingly reflected personal loss - the shared silence added to other more private times when fathers, husbands, sons and friends were missed and mourned.
It is different now.
Now, thankfully, a great many Australians, have no personal experience of war, no way of knowing the anguish of enforced separation, or the greater grief of separations made permanent.
And for that reason amongst others, it is time to renew our pledge.
For most of us, not the pledge made by past generations to remember a loved one lost to war but a promise to remember all who have been lost to war and to give thanks for their valiant service in defence of our freedom and to demonstrate the value we place in those freedoms so selflessly forged. Our independent nationhood which gives us freedom to think, to move, to speak, to worship, to have a say in the election of governments, to be afforded the proper privileges of our legal system, to own and dispose of property, to raise a family and to educate our children.
Where we are encouraged to be responsible and where the individual is paramount and where the family unit is the corner stone of our nation.
Where our patriotism is quiet but deep and where we stand a united people irrespective of whether Australia is the nation of our birth or of our choice.
Where our lifestyle is defined by abundance of light and space and which is the envy of the world.
Where we regard the future of ours, eager to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
A proclamation about the observance of Remembrance Day signed on 30 October by the Governor General, on behalf of the Australian people, has given special new voice to the renewal of our faith.
That national declaration, which calls for the observance of one minute's silence, will encourage remembrance of the sacrifice for those who died or otherwise suffered in Australia's cause in wars and conflicts throughout the world.
I hope that in schools and in workplaces, in cities and in the bush, Australians will stop, just for a moment, to consider what was lost to us. And to recognise what was granted to us by the exercise of such moral courage.
The numbers are truely staggering in their enormity - over 100,000 Australian soldiers, sailors, airmen and servicewomen remain where they died, on every continent and in every ocean of the world.
There's an ancient saying: "Heroes have the whole world for their tomb and in lands far from their own". Of all the nations on earth, surely this is most true of our Australia.
But numbers alone can not adequately chronicle this nation's sacrifice. For each of the fallen had a family and friends whose lives were enriched by their love and diminished by their loss. Each added to the life of a city suburb or country town. Each worked before enlistment, as a teacher, a farmer, a labourer, a nurse, a doctor, a clerk or one of countless other occupations which add to the prosperity and the richness of a nation.
And yet, although denied the full span of human existence, who can doubt their achievement.
These were Australians whose lives were lived in deeds, not years, in sacrifice, not heartbeats in service, not the turned pages of a calendar.
These men and women, these strangers from another time, have given us a legacy from the past on which to build the future.
Gifts of determination, of compassion and self confidence, but most of all, of service.
A spirit born on the cliffs of Gallipoli, then matured in the mud of the Western Front, in jungles and in deserts and in desperate struggles on the seas and in the sky. A spirit which draws Australians together in time of need. A spirit which may seem to slumber but arises to draw new breath when needed, amid ash-filled skies, flooded ground or the rubble of a disaster.
They gained for us the friendship of peace loving people around the world. Proof of these bonds lies in the attendance today of the Buglers of Menin Gate.
Volunteers from the brave city of Ieper, who since 1928 have nightly paid tribute to over 6,000 of Australia's sons who died in the defence of Belgium, Australians who now lie within its soil but without known graves.
Their story, the legacy of all Australians who have died or suffered in war and armed conflict, has been passed to each one of us. It is the birthright of every child born into Australia, the gift of welcome extended to every migrant.
By today's act of remembrance, we cherish and nurture this possession, their gift. We prove an understanding both of its value and its cost. We build a bridge across time.
Exactly 70 years ago, at another ceremony at a place far from here, the countrymen of our honoured guests, the Buglers of Menin Gate, gathered to unveil their magnificent Memorial to those missing in action, believed killed.
Field Marshal Plumer, in declaring it opened, spoke words which echo through the decades: "He is not missing. He is here".
Today, by recognising both what has been lost to us and what has been gained, by renewing our pledge to remember, we declare, of all our fallen: "They are not missing. They are here".


E&amp;OE..............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much John Gough, Jeff Kennett, Dr Timothy Potts, to the other members of the Board of the Gallery, ladies and gentlemen.
I can't help thinking that if every speech I made was in such elegant, attractive and cultural surroundings as this, the whole tone and shape of Australian politics would be changed forever.
It is a tremendous delight to be present in this world-renowned gallery, because that is what it is. The collections of the National Gallery of Victoria are not only Australian renowned but they are together a world-renowned collection.
But the purpose of my being here today is to announce that the Commonwealth Government will contribute $25 million from the Federation Fund, which was announced at the time of the last budget, towards the redevelopment of the National Gallery of Victoria. And that contribution, along with the contribution of $94 million from the Victorian Government and what I know will be some generous contributions from the Victorian and broader Australian business community, will ensure that the redevelopment of the National Gallery of Victoria, along with the development of the Federation Square, will not only be a Victorian highlight of the Centenary celebrations but it will be an Australian highlight.
The Federation Fund comprises $1 billion and from it I have already announced contributions of $100 million towards the Darwin to Alice Springs railway and $133 million for the construction of the National Museum of Australia in Canberra. I want to emphasise, of course, that the $25 million that I announce as a contribution today towards the National Gallery of Victoria is not the end of contributions out of the Federation Fund towards activities in the State of Victoria.
The purpose of the Federation Fund is to support developments and projects which properly mark the Federation of Australia, which properly mark our birth almost 100 years ago as a nation. And they are designed to be contributions towards projects of lasting significance, those that identify very much with the past as well has have a resonance with our future.
And this gallery, which certainly houses the best collection in Australia without argument, this gallery is one of the cultural icons of Australia. It deserves the support that it is receiving from both the Victorian and also the Federal Government.
It is important when we celebrate the Centenary of Federation to reflect upon all successful aspects of the Australian story over what will then be a 100-year period. And the development of the cultural base of this country, the way in which the arts and cultural pursuits in Australia have burgeoned in popularity and broader public acceptance, the fact that more Australians in a 12-month period will visit museums than even have used sporting fixtures is a reminder of just how tremendously important the galleries, and particularly this National Gallery of Victoria is.
I want to congratulate the Premier, who is also Minister for the Arts, for the way in which he has patronised, supported and promoted the arts, not only here in Melbourne, but all around Australia.
Support for the arts is very much a mainstream issue in Australia. Support for the arts is part of the rounded approach of any government towards developing a community which not only values economic issues but also values human and cultural issues.
And for those reasons, I am very pleased indeed to announce this contribution from the Federal Government. I am delighted, of course, to remind you that the Italian architect, Mario Bellini, and the Melbourne-based firm, Media Three, are working with the Gallery to develop a world-class facility in which to display and store the collection which has been made possible by the great Felton Bequest.
So ladies and gentlemen, I wish the gallery well. I congratulate its Chairman, John Gough, and its Director, Tim Potts, on the splendid work that they have done. I congratulate the Victorian Government on its magnificent contribution and Jeff Kennett's personal commitment to the development of culture and the arts in this city and throughout Australia. And this will be a very important partnership between the Federal Government, the Victorian Government, the business community of Melbourne and those who care about the arts and the cultural activities and the cultural life of our nation. Thank you.
[Ends]


&amp;OE..............................................
I think it is very fitting that the opening of a Remembrance Walk that incorporates the display of a stone taken from at least 40 of the theatres of war in which Australian Service personnel served their country and the cause of freedom, during
World War II, I think it is very fitting that so many representatives of other nations should be here.
The idea for this Remembrance Walk was Colin McKinnon's. The idea was to get something from every place in which Australia's servicemen and women served to bring it all together. We thought originally of having what the Scots call a cairn, but in the end that sort of proved not quite as feasible as this. So we now have this magnificent Remembrance Walk.
And the story of those stones was quite amusing. I mean, you'd think from Colin's introductory remarks that I personally visited each of those countries and collected them and put them in my suitcase and brought them home. Well that was only about half true because what used to happen in some cases was, I'd get a knock on the door one Saturday morning at my home in Wollstonecraft and I'd open it up and there was the Ambassador or the High Commissioner from such-and-such a country saying: look I've got something for you, and here he had a stone. I've even had Ambassadors arrive at my home in Wollstonecraft in the dead of night and leave a stone wrapped up in a little plastic bag and say here, this is from such-and-such a country.
And it is true, that my office in Gladesville accumulated this vast collection of stones from different parts of the world and we became absolutely determined that we were going to bring this programme to fruition.
Now the Australia Remembers programme was iniated by the former Keating Government and the Minister responsible for it then. And I give him full credit for the work that he did in relation to it, with Con Sciacca. And the then Opposition, the Liberal Opposition, we supported that programme as a fully bipartisan expression of Australian gratitude to the men and women who had done so much.
And we have continued the position of that programme under the leadership of Bruce Scott, under the name of Their Service, Our Heritage. And you will see so many of the badges that give expression to that notion. Remembrance should not be a one off thing. Remembrance should be a continuous motion and the more we move as a nation towards the celebration of our 100 years of Federation. The more we have reason, to not only think of the future, because the future is so tremendously important to all of us, but we also have occasion, very much, to think of the past and the massive debts that we owe to the men and women who saved this country during World War II.
And to say simply to them without their service, their sacrifice, without their legacy and without their great gift of a free Australia, this would be a nation that we wouldn't rejoice in living in a nation that would be utterly different and unimaginably different from the Australian nation that we now enjoy and which is so much the envy of the world because it has something about it that no other country has.
Now this is very much a local expression. And I think it is rather symbolic that over my shoulder is the site of the 2000 Olympics. It is a beautiful location and a marvellously appropriate choice of location. I think it will become, in time, because of the character of the Remembrance Wall, it will become, very much, a place, for not only local people to come to but for people all around the city. Anything to do with the harbour foreshores of Sydney derives very great affection, not only from the resident of those foreshores but for all of the people of the city.
Ladies and Gentleman, can I warmly thank Colin McKinnon and the Bennelong Australia Remembers Committee for what they have done. Could I also thank one other person who has worked very very hard in the background ever since the Committee was established at a time when, I think I was the Shadow Minister for something or other, through the time I was Leader of the Opposition and in the time that I have been Prime Minister, and that is my Electorate Secretary, Mrs Kay Long.
This has been no mere, sort of just another passing occasion, she really has thrown her heart and soul into this in a normally very pleasant and helpful manner, which so many people in the Bennelong community have come to know and love so much. She really has been a great power behind this and I thank her very warmly.
This is a community effort. It is a community tribute. It is a community expression of gratitude and on behalf of the Australian nation, as the Australian Government, I thank the men and women of the Bennelong electorate, in particular, for what they did in the dark days of World War II, to make the life that I have had since that war, and my wife and my children, the joy that it is to live in this country. And I know in saying that, I speak on behalf of literally millions of Australians, whatever their political persuasions may be and whatever their views may be of other things.
I hope it is a pleasant morning. I thank you all for coming and I also thank the band. An occasion like this is no good without a terrific band and I want to thank you ladies and gentlemen very very warmly for being here. You can't beat a decent army band.
Ladies and gentlemen I now have the pleasure of cutting the ribbon and declaring the Remembrance Walk officially open.


I am pleased to be here today to present the 1997 Garran Oration.
Sir Robert Garran was a remarkable man. He played an active part in the constitutional conventions of the 1890s, and was secretary to the committee which drafted the proposed federal Constitution that emerged from the 1897-98 convention. Sir Robert became the first Commonwealth public servant in 1901, as head of the Attorney-General's Department, a post he held for 32 years. After his retirement he remained active in official, church and academic life. He died in 1957, one month short of his 90th birthday.
We correctly talk, at this the end of the 20th century, about the pace and extent of change here in Australia and across the world. There is no doubt that, particularly in the area of technological change and the communication of information, we are seeing developments unique in our history.
I wonder though if we sometimes underestimate the changes, excitements, disruptions and adjustments previous generations have experienced. Sir Robert Garran knew the promise and reality of federation. He was part of the establishment of a public service which, in many ways, is clearly recognisable today.
He lived through the first world war, advising on unfamiliar issues such as domestic wartime powers and the application of international law in time of war. He advised Billy Hughes during the bitter debate on conscription, and accompanied him to the Paris peace conference in 1919.
He saw the social change and economic upheaval of the 1920s, and at the time he was ending his public service career, Australia was just beginning to emerge from the great depression. Sir Robert dealt with the constant tides of change, not least in serving 11 Attorneys-General during his long career.
Change, of course, affects both individuals and institutions. And the conference of which this Garran Oration is the starting point is at least in part about the institution of the Australian Public Service. A healthy public service is a vital part of Australia's democratic system of government, and I regard it as being in the national interest that the service emerge with strength and vigour from the process of change which it, like other institutions, is experiencing.
I mentioned the recognisable characteristics of the service handed down through the last 97 years since Sir Robert Garran. Among those characteristics there are qualities and values which it is the duty of governments and public servants alike to guard and preserve. The public service cannot, however, be discrete from its environment. The way it develops in the months and years ahead must reflect the values and priorities of Australians, and meet the needs of government and the community.
There are, of course, those who believe that it is an option for the public service to return to some idealised, comfortable past in which it was quarantined from the winds of change blowing through the rest of Australian society. Those who hold out such an option for the public service deny the forces that are transforming Australia.
Let me state at the outset my firm belief that an accountable, non-partisan and professional public service which responds creatively to the changing roles and demands of government is a great national asset. Preserving its value and nurturing its innovation is a priority for this government.
One of the many challenges of change though is to ensure that certain essentials are not lost. Just as each nation must take account of its culture in determining the direction of change, so it is important to determine what basic characteristics an institution must retain if its fundamental worth is to be preserved.
There are many ways in which the public service might change - and some in which it must.
The public service must, for example, continue its progress towards being a modern, flexible institution whose administrative practices measure up to the best in the nation and the world. Already it can claim success in implementing reform at a pace, and with a substance, that compares with the public sectors of many western democracies.
This is not a particularly recent trend. Change did not start in March 1996. I have commented on several occasions that the public service I found in 1996 was, in many of its operations, markedly improved on the service I had known in the 1970s and early 80s.
The budgetary and financial systems have been streamlined, and there is a greater emphasis on results in place of the past concentration on process and inputs.
Central agencies exercise far less control over the staffing and finances of other agencies, so that the public servants managing programmes are clearly responsible for performance.
There is more competition in the delivery of programmes both within the public service and outside.
And there is vastly more interest shown in delivering high quality service to the public.
I think it is important to acknowledge that while governments, of both political persuasions, have been active in bringing about change, a good deal of the impetus has come from within the public service itself.
And that is hardly surprising. Intelligent men and women do not want to work for an institution that does not reflect the changes - the opportunities and excitement - of the society and world around them. In a competitive environment, good public servants need to know they are every bit as good as those in other occupations; that they too can meet the challenges of the late 20th century and beyond.
But for some - whether they be public servants or not - change can be difficult and unsettling. So there is an important leadership role for government and public service managers in developing and supporting the goal of a modern, relevant and valued public service, but with its fundamental values preserved. Change has to be placed in context. Consistent with all my views, change must not be for its own sake.
One can look beyond Australia to see the full picture of why change is both inevitable and desirable. What is happening here is part of a trend observable in most liberal democracies.
Since the early 1980s globalisation of the world economy has seen an opening up of markets, a breaking down of barriers in trade and communication, and the emergence of a greater competitive edge which requires Australia, along with other nations, to become more efficient and innovative in the way it does business.
Australian business is increasingly more competitive, and that process must continue if we are to meet the challenge of the increasingly global economy.
The government is committed to implementing policies that create an economic environment that is conducive to investment, jobs and growth. That requires fiscal stability, structural and taxation reform, strategic intervention and a reduced burden of business regulation.
For their part, Australian industry must be forward and outward looking. The challenge is for industry to harness Australia's rich endowment of natural, human and man-made resources in a constructive and positive way. In doing this, industry must focus on implementing best practice in production, management and customer service.
The public service is not quarantined from these international pressures, and its effectiveness must be seen in the context of its contribution to the strength of the national economy.
There are certain common, international responses to this new way of looking at the public sector. There is much less focus on process and more on outcomes. Managers work with a stronger client service orientation. And the burdens imposed on the private sectors are being reduced.
There is another common feature, and that relates to numbers, and the size of the public service.
Many governments have been critically examining their activities and deciding where they can and should allocate their scarce resources. In the United States, for example, the "reinventing government" programme, under the direction of Vice President Gore, has focussed on efficiencies and cost and size reductions across the administration. In Canada and a number of OECD countries, similar processes of re-defining activities have occurred.
In Australia too, there have of course been reductions in the size of the Australian Public Service.
The number of staff has declined over the past 10 years, with two significant periods of reduction. From 1987 to 1990 there was a decrease of nearly 16,000 or 9 per cent. Between 1994 and the present, the decrease has been 32,720, or nearly 20 per cent. - those figures however include 9,500 flowing from the transfer of ACT government staff and the staff of three repatriation hospitals from coverage of the Commonwealth Act.
There has, over the last decade or two, been a blurring of the divide between the public and private sectors as government business enterprises have become more competitive, more interactive with the dynamics of the marketplace and some have been privatised.
There is perhaps no better metaphor for the changing phenomenon than Telstra. When I commenced my working life, the Postmaster-General's Department looked after all communications - not, I think, that we called them that then. With Telstra this week we have seen the Australian public enthusiastically welcome the float of a third of a highly competitive and efficient company.
The reduction in the size of the public service has come about not only through a shedding of functions by this and previous governments. It has also come about through the changing role of government. The impact of information technology has also reduced the need for staff who previously performed tasks which lent themselves to computerisation.
There is no reason why a smaller number of government employees should mean that the nation is less well served. There is greater contestability in the delivery of publicly funded services, and it will continue to grow. Some functions are as efficiently or more efficiently carried out by the private sector. I make no apology for this being a private enterprise government - but it is one also that values a strong and effective public service.
And the public service accepts that its effectiveness involves taking on many of the standards and challenges placed on Australian business.
In many areas of its operations, the public service is identifying best practice and introducing the changes that will be necessary to achieve that best practice.
In looking at internal procedures, the service has undertaken an impressive benchmarking exercise in relation to personnel services. No attempt was made to hide from public scrutiny the rather horrifying examples of bureaucratic maze and duplication. Nor was time lost in determining ways of achieving more cost effective services. One of the purposes of the Public Service Bill currently before the Senate is to help the service free itself of the daunting load of process.
There are numerous other examples of how the public service is analysing its standards and performance in order to produce greater efficiency and greater client satisfaction. One of the biggest challenges, however, will be to back such change with a fresh culture that supports ongoing improvements and demands high performance standards, but accepts that this entails prudent risk management.
The government intends the new Public Service Bill to assist the service in developing that new culture. The Bill, which was introduced into Parliament in June this year, is more than just a rewrite of the existing legislation.
It provides a new conceptual framework that will enable the service to meet future challenges.
It provides a legal framework for employment that achieves an proper balance between improved accountability and devolved responsibility.
Importantly, it also provides a succinct message about the expectations of a public service appropriate to the twenty-first century.
The government hopes the new Bill will lead to better policy advice to the government, high quality services to the community and a more efficient and effective use of resources.
For that reason it is in the interests of all Australians that the Senate pass the Bill as soon as possible.
One of the marked changes we have seen in the public service over the last ten to fifteen years has been its acceptance of the need for a culture of quality service delivery. It is not, of course, just in the public service that the reality of good service is emerging as an essential part of overall performance. It is not so long ago that Queensland tourist resorts used to close their dining rooms before the last international tourist flight arrived for the day. Just as resort operators worked out that tourists did not want sandwiches in their rooms, so the public service worked out that members of the public did not want to be treated as nuisances when they sought services which were their right by law.
I was delighted recently to launch Centrelink, the Commonwealth services delivery agency which consolidates the major service delivery activities of the federal government. It will provide services and payments to over 7.8 million Australians and will be located at over 400 locations across the country. I described it as probably the biggest administrative reform of recent times. It combines efficiency with sympathetic and responsible service.
Another initiative has been the introduction of customer service charters. These will commit government agencies to the delivery of high quality services to the community. They will set out the expectations the public might reasonably have of agencies, and provide opportunities for public comment and suggestions on service.
At one level, I believe it right that as a government we expect the public service to measure up to the best standards of business. But before a host of my predecessors and truly admirable heads of departments turn collectively in their graves, I add that it is not good business practice alone which has created the fine tradition of the public service and it is not good business practice alone which will continue that tradition.
And, no matter how radical anyone's view is about the role of government in the twenty-first century, I believe there will always be an irreducible minimum of public service functions.
Defence, justice, a social security safety net, the monitoring of outcomes of, and alternatives to, existing policies - all these will require public service input. And there will always be a need for high quality economic, constitutional and other policy advice.
For these functions we will want a highly professional, disinterested yet effective public service. And lest there be any misunderstanding, the examples I have cited are just that: they are illustrative, not exclusive. They highlight the key discrete public service functions which are distinct from the private sector.
Before expanding on the qualities of the public service that give it a distinctive place among Australia's institutions, I want to touch briefly on what I see as a greater interdependence among the various sectors and institutions in Australia.
Just as nations are no longer able to maintain a separateness in an increasingly globalised world, I believe we are seeing a growing need within Australia for governments, business and the community to work together. And the public service has a significant role to play in that regard, both in ideas and implementation.
I am still surprised on occasions to find that public servants fail to understand the requirements and perspectives of business. But it can be said with equal force that business does not always have a good understanding of government.
In particular, business often fails to appreciate that corners it might be able to cut, simply cannot be cut in government. Accountability to Parliament and the people demand care and transparency. No chairman of the board, even at meetings with probing shareholders, comes under such constant and intense scrutiny as public servants before Senate estimates committees!
Far from being necessary inconveniences, both shareholders' meetings and estimates committees are vital elements of the accountability regimes of business and the Parliament respectively.
There are already innovative examples of co-operation between sectors.
The Supermarket to Asia Council is a great example of industry and government working together, in this case towards the common goal of increasing the Australian share of the Asian food market. The Council brings industry and government leaders together to provide the leadership and drive necessary to achieve success for Australian food products in export markets. The target the Council has set, incidentally, is for export growth to accelerate so that by the year 2001 there will be $16 billion a year in value of Australian food exports to Asia. This could create an extra 10,000 jobs in the agri-food industry.
Connected with the initiative, the Australian Quarantine Inspection Service and the Australian Customs Service are, in consultation with industry, developing a streamlined export clearance procedure to save businesses time and effort in obtaining export clearance.
In the international sphere too, the public service is working to support co-operative ventures.
Australia's relationship with China is one of our most important bilateral relationships. China's modernisation will be one of the forces which defines the shape of the twenty-first century. Australia is well placed to play a key role in assisting that development, particularly as a provider of energy and raw materials but also as a supplier of technology and skills.
When I visited China in March I offered to make available to the Chinese government Australia's very considerable public sector experience and expertise. Australia has much to offer the region in terms of developing public sector infrastructure in areas such as social security and taxation. Officials are currently exploring the scope for closer cooperation between Australia and China on these issues.
There is another area of partnership that I would like to announce today and about which I am very enthusiastic. It relates to improved links between Australian businesses and the community sector.
The community sector comprises a large number of non-profit organisations engaged in a broad range of activities including welfare service delivery, sporting and cultural pursuits. These organisations typically rely heavily on volunteer assistance, and each year around 2.5 million Australians participate in voluntary work.
Many of these organisations have special insights and capacities to resolve social problems, and can provide a vital integrating force between different sectors of society.
While governments have an on-going role in facilitating the community sector's work, including financial support, the business sector also has a role to play.
Consultations indicate a strong interest by business to become more involved. At present only a small proportion of the non-profit sector's funding is derived from corporate Australia.
As a result, the government has decided on the following approaches to promote closer partnerships:
I will convene a round table of business and community leaders early next year to develop specific strategies to improve business and community sector partnerships. The round table will also consider the need for a broader consultative process;
from 1998, I will present Prime Ministerial awards in recognition of business and individual philanthropy; and
the Minister for Family Services, Warwick Smith, will examine other ways of improving recognition of business and individual philanthropic activities, to educating Australians about philanthropy, and enhancing links between the business and community sectors.
I believe there is great scope for further development of co-operative activities across sectors, institutions and the community generally. As the Clerk of the Privy Council and Secretary to Cabinet in Canada said recently in her annual report to the Canadian Prime Minister, "Partnership arrangements recognize that government does not need to "do it all" for the public interest to be well served".
Having put the case for the public service adopting the best, appropriate features of business, I want to return to those purposes and qualities of the public service which make it distinctive from other businesses.
There are important areas of interaction between the activities of the public and private sectors. But there are also important differences. The private sector is directed wholly at delivering goals and services to customers. The public service is accountable to the democratically elected government of the day, and through ministers to the Parliament and to all Australians.
In that context, I want to address the more major concerns expressed from time to time in the Parliament and media about the future of the public service.
If one were asked to gather from the writings and comments of past leaders the qualities they most valued in public servants, I believe one would find high on the ensuing list the continuing and impartial nature of public service advice; that public servants are able to serve with equal dedication, successive governments of varying political persuasions.
This was in fact one of the most frequently mentioned attributes in the obituaries and articles which appeared on the recent death of that fine public servant, Dr H C Coombs.
Sir Paul Hasluck, speaking of Sir Robert Menzies, conveyed similar sentiments, "... Menzies knew, respected and used the public service. He held clearly the traditional view that the public service had its own distinctive place in the structure of Government and should be capable of serving successive Governments without fear or favour regardless of which party had gained power ... ".
One of my very firm views on government is that, while it is most important to seek and take full account of public service advice, ultimately decisions must be for government to make, and responsibility must lie with government.
Nevertheless I, like my predecessors, regard the capacity for continuing, impartial advice as one of the essential values of the service. And it is a tradition the great majority of public servants are continuing at this very moment.
The service I have described though - one of change and one that increasingly looks outwards - carries with it the consequences that the public service will not be a career for life for all those who join it. It is a healthy thing that talented people are able to move between the public and private sectors, academia, international experience and so forth.
But I consider it of enormous importance to any government that there be a continuing source of sound, fearless advice based on corporate knowledge.
I do not see employment mobility and short-term appointments to the public service as endangering our tradition of continuity. It is another instance of the breaking down of the barriers between institutions, and a sharing of skills and experience to the benefit of good government.
Any government must, and should, reserve the right to adapt the administrative structures of the public service to best achieve the policy priorities on which it was elected. So also, any government must, and should, reserve the right to have in the top leadership positions within the public service people who it believes can best give administrative effect to the policies which it was elected to implement. Governments of both political persuasions have recognised these realities.
But these realities are quite different and distinct from a move towards the American system where a new administration sees a change throughout the middle and upper ranks of policy advisers within the public service. I would oppose a move in that direction in Australia.
In fact, I strongly reject the proposition that we have adopted what some commentators call the "Washminster" system. I think it far more accurate to say that we have an Australian version of the Westminster system. We began in 1901 with elements of both the United Kingdom and United States models of government. Since then we have evolved in our own, unique way, sensibly selecting what suits our culture and recognises our experiences.
And one of the institutions we have chosen to retain is, as I say, an impartial, continuing public service.
There are practical reasons for this of course. Reinventing the wheel is not a profitable way for a government to spend its time. And we all know that it can also be fraught with danger.
On a more philosophical level, however, I believe the end of continuity in advice would take from Australian government the valuable asset of considered, honest advice based on knowledge of administrative practice and sensible precedent.
The greatest demonstration of the seamless character of government I have personally witnessed was on the morning of 4 March 1996 when Michael Keating, Bill Blick and Greg Wood arrived in my Leader of the Opposition, Philip Street office to provide professional and comprehensive briefing for my transition to government.
That power can be transferred in this calm, understated way, is a supreme asset.
Far from being idealistic, my own experience tells me that the best public servants can provide impartial advice untouched by self-interest in a way that is nurtured and encouraged within the Australian Public Service.
Given the importance attached to impartiality as a foundation of public service professionalism, I think it fair to assume that at any given time since Federation there have been those concerned about the weakening of the tradition of impartiality within the service. Those concerns have been seen to increase through the 1980s and 1990s - or, at least, have been given greater prominence.
Many of those concerns are based on unrealistic assumptions about what the basis of competent public service advice should be. They also neglect some of the changing realities of governance in which the public service has operated over recent decades.
Ministers are taking greater control of policy planning, detail and implementation. This is in part a response to a more demanding electorate that expects quite properly to see members of the government responding to community needs and answering for their decisions in a public and continuous way.
Although I would hope that a "Yes Minister" model of government has never existed in Australia, perhaps the very screening of that series made the public all the more aware that they did not want to be governed by anonymous public servants but by the people they elected and could remove at the next election. Australians want value from their politicians.
So that has brought ministers into a more prominent role in policy making, but it does not in any way diminish the need a government has for ideas, constructive suggestions and even warnings based on the wisdom of past public service experience.
I have read many articles and commentaries about my relationship with and opinions on the public service.
Let me make it clear now. I want a public service that is willing and able to generate ideas - new, innovative ideas.
I will never react negatively to new ideas put forward by public servants, and the presence of political office staff should in no way be seen as a signal that new ideas will not be welcome.
Public servants need to be responsive, as well as responsible, in the advice they give. Now I believe public servants have always been responsive to governments. But the requirement over recent years has become a more prominent one, indeed it is one of the values referred to in the draft Public Service Bill - as it was in the draft prepared by the previous government.
I think the voicing of the requirement flows in part from the need for public servants to give advice that is not only impartial, but also creative, innovative and relevant. Public servants are required to recognise the directions in which a government is moving and be capable of playing a major role in developing policy options and assisting in imaginative and professional implementation.
The need for responsive, relevant advice in no way removes the obligation on public servants to be comprehensive, informed and honest in framing their advice. Advice might have regard to known political implications, but all other implications must also be presented in a balanced way that enables the minister to make an informed decision.
No minister wants to be told what is politically pleasing without being advised of legal implications, precedents and what constitutes good policy.
Another changing reality for the public service in the 1990s is that it is competing with other sources of advice to government.
The advisory role is not exclusive to public servants. In an era of streamlined communications and an informed and vocal community, it is to be expected that governments will receive advice from many quarters.
I do not see that, in a democracy, this can be anything but healthy.
I made it clear before gaining government and on occasions since that I do not intend to fall into the trap of being a captive of any interest group. That does not mean, however, that the government does not wish to hear from individuals reflecting the great breadth of the Australian community.
Governments for many years have used a variety of sources in developing policy options. These have included industry, business - big and small - community and welfare groups, academia and ministers' personal offices. This in no way reflects on the advice given by the public service, but is simply a sensible use of a broad range of knowledge and abilities. There is nothing intrinsically new about it.
I think it only realistic to acknowledge though that public service advice is more obviously and more regularly contestable than in the past. This is a function of our age. People no longer receive their information from just one source. Even children these days move quickly to sources of learning other than their parents and teachers.
Public servants know that their advice must be comprehensive and rigorous - and relevant - if it is to be useful to government. That has always been the case, in fact. But these days the alternative advice is likely to be more immediate, more diverse and more open.
This is not something I sense the public service has any problem with, though the service naturally wishes to ensure that its views are among those considered.
I too believe it important that public service advice flow freely to ministers' offices, in accordance with long-standing practice. Sir John Bunting wrote of Menzies, "... his practice was to urge his new ministers to get to know their departments and the people in it, to look for their advice and, without being enmeshed in it, never to act without taking it into account".
In the charter letters I send to ministers when they are first appointed, I stress the importance of ministers establishing relationships of trust and confidence with their departments, while requiring ministers to make decisions on the basis of their own informed judgement and to accept responsibility for the policy directions and outcomes that result.
I mentioned just now ministers' personal advisers as one of the sources of advice to government. This is yet another matter about which commentators from time to time express concern.
As you all know, since the 1970s the nature of private office assistance to ministers has changed quite fundamentally. Not only are ministers' offices larger, but there is a public recognition that at least some of the personal staff are appointed because they share with the minister a common political philosophy and party commitments.
One of the pleasing observations I made on coming to government was that the tension I had observed between public servants and those newly developed offices of the late 70s and early 80s had significantly subsided.
I recall with some amusement from the time I was Treasurer, a reference by a then senior public servant to "meretricious players who flit across the private ministerial advisory stage". That was widely thought at the time to be a reference to Dr John Hewson and Professor John Rose, then respectively economic advisers to myself and the former Prime Minister.
In my opinion ministers deserve - and need - to have around them staff with whom they can properly discuss political issues and from who they can receive straight political advice.
And I believe strongly that public servants should not be used in that way. Their role is different and they are all the more valuable for remaining, not unaware of or insensitive to the day-to-day political happenings, but separate from the need to give those happenings sole or even top priority.
There is now a mature acceptance of the different roles, and, with the absence of the past tensions, I believe a more effective working relationship exists.
It is, of course, open to ministers to employ public servants in their private offices so that a full range of skills - political and public service - is available. I currently have five public service advisers within my own office, among them my chief of staff, Mr Arthur Sinodinos.
Ministers are best served when they have alert and activist personal staff, a responsive and professional range of public service advisers, and a relationship between their personal staff and their department which is based on openness, co-operation and mutual respect.
While maintaining a distance from political decision-making, public servants have lost some of the anonymity that existed until the 1970s and the advent of Senate committees. That too is a function of our age. Shadowy, manipulative figures are not fashionable, especially when paid for from the public purse. The detail of administration is in any case an appropriate area for scrutiny by the Parliament. And the public service I am sure accepts that role as part of the government's accountability to the Parliament, although it does throw them into the public gaze, and sometime a political limelight.
I am a very strong believer in the independence and supremacy of the Parliament, but the occasional "Christians 1, Lions nil" result can be pleasing. I recall Sir Geoffrey Yeend appearing once before a Senate committee examining proposed freedom of information legislation. Now, I suspect Sir Geoffrey was not the strongest advocate of the legislation, and I suspect too that the committee knew it. Sir Geoffrey, of course, would never have allowed a criticism of government policy to cross his lips, so it was a long, hard session. At the end of the committee's day, one senator was heard to remark to another, "Now I know what it must feel like to bowl all day to Geoffrey Boycott".
This government certainly does not want a politicised public service. It does require people in key jobs to be delivering what the government wants and what it was elected to do.
I like to think Sir Robert Garran would be pleased that the public service has maintained its capacity to adjust to changing needs over the decades.
Overall, today's public service is looking outwards far more than in the past.
It is looking more responsively at the needs of government.
It is beginning to work more closely with the private sector.
And it is accepting the responsibility of servicing individual members of the public in a highly efficient and accountable way.
No government "owns" the public service. It must remain a national asset that services the national interest, adding value to the directions set by the government of the day. The responsibility of any government must be to pass on to its successors a public service which is better able to meet the challenges of its time than the one it inherited. My government clearly accepts that responsibility.
I see no conflict between the notion of a modern and efficient public service with the best features of the business sector, and a public service with the traditional attributes of impartiality, honesty and professionalism.
It is a challenge, of course, to maintain such an institution. And government and public service managers must provide leadership to ensure that a flexible, outward-looking service does not lose sight of the principles which justify its special place among our institutions.
That is a challenge I am committed to meeting.


30 November 1997
E&amp;OE.............................................
Good Evening. Tonight I would like to talk to you about striking a fair and decent balance in this very difficult debate about Wik or Native Title. You all know there has been a lot of debate and a lot of differences of opinion but I think we all agree on one thing and that is the sooner we get this debate over and get the whole issue behind us the better for all of us.
I think we probably also agree on some other things, for example, the Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander people of Australia have been very badly treated in the past and we must continue our efforts to improve their health, their housing, their employment and their educational opportunities. And in doing that we should always remember that the Aboriginal people of Australia have a very special affinity with their land.
I think we would also agree on how important the rural and mining industries are to the future of our country. Between them they contribute 63 per cent of Australia's export income and that helps generate a lot of wealth which in turn enables us to help the less fortunate within our community.
Australia's farmers, of course, have always occupied a very special place in our heart. They often endure the heart-break of drought, the disappointment of bad international prices after a hard worked season and quite frankly I find it impossible to imagine the Australia, I love, without a strong and vibrant farming sector.
The nub of the problem is that in the Wik case, the High Court of Australia, significantly changed what had been the understanding of most people about the law when the original Native Title Act was passed in 1993. At that time virtually nobody believed that you could make a native title claim on a farm property. Mr Keating didn't believe it, Mr Beazley didn't believe it, I didn't believe it and it was a widely held view in the community. But in the Wik case, most of that was changed and the High Court, in that case, decided that it would be possible to successfully bring a native title claim on a segment of farm properties, known generally, as pastoral lease holdings.
Now this created a very big problem because the original act had been built on a different basis and we obviously couldn't leave it as it was. And of course it produced a vastly different reaction from the various interest groups. The farmers, not suprisingly, were furious. They said to the Government, look, we were assured by the Prime Minister of the day and by a lot of other people, that you couldn't bring a native title claim on a farming property, so what you have got to do - and quickly - is to change the law and take it back to where we always thought it was.
On the other hand the Aboriginal people said "no". We support the decision and we're happy to have some adjustments at the edges but basically we think it is a good outcome. So the Government had to try and solve the problem. And I had a lot of discussions with all of the different groups and at the end of the day we came up, with what I regard, as a very fair and decent and just outcome.
I said to the farmers that I wasn't prepared and the Government wasn't prepared to wipe out the right of Aboriginal people to bring native title claims on pastoral leasehold. But we were prepared to guarantee to farmers, absolutely, that they would be able to carry on their normal farming activities and what they would regard as part-and-parcel of the ordinary operation and development of their properties without having to have any of their activities vetted or approved by any native title claimants and without any interference.
On the other hand I said to the Aboriginal people we will continue and preserve your right to bring claims on pastoral leasehold but they have got to be done within proper parameters. You can't interfere with or vet what would be regarded by farmers as the normal day-to-day operation and development of their property and most importantly any claims you make had to be fair dinkum.
Can I stress a very important element of our plan and that is that if, in any way, native title rights are diminished then full compensation will be payable to the native title holders and that compensation, in the main, will be borne by Federal and State Governments, never by farmers.
The other thing I'd like to stress is the fulsome commitment of my Government to the process of reconciliation. It is a key goal of my Government that that be achieved as part of the celebration of 100 years of the Australian nation. We may differ and debate as to the correct form of reconciliation but there should be no doubt that it is, I believe, in the spirit of all Australians, whatever their beliefs on other issues, that we have full reconciliation with the Aboriginal people.
Perhaps I could wrap this up by answering some of the questions that have arisen during the course of this very long debate. For example:
Does the Government's plan preserve in full, principles of native title, laid down in the historic Mabo decision? Yes.
Is it still possible for native title claims to be made over pastoral leaseholds? Yes.
And I might add that the total area of the land mass of Australia, which in theory can be subject to a native title claim, is now 79 per cent.
Does the Government's plan guarantee that farmers can carry on their activities and what they would regard as normal and proper developments of their properties without interference from native title claimants? Yes.
Has the Government been advised that it's plan is both legal and constitutional? Yes.
Does the Government intend to preserve the indigenous land fund of $1.3 billion, which is designed to help Aboriginal people who can't bring native title claims? Yes.
Is the Government's plan a fair and appropriate balance between the competing interests of different groups? Yes it is.
When I was sworn in as your Prime Minister I took a very solemn oath. The first words of that oath were that I would well and truly serve the people of Australia and that meant all of the Australian people. In a very difficult situation I believe that I and my Government have done that. We have delivered a plan that produces fairness, justice and certainty. I don't believe that endless amendment and debate is going to produce more jobs, greater fairness or greater certainty.
Do you believe that the Aboriginal community, the farmers of Australia, the mining industry or indeed any other section of the Australian community is going to get a better outcome in this issue through prolonging it. I don't. I believe that the time has come for us to fix this issue and to fix it now. Thank you and good night.


E &amp; OE.........................
Thank you very much Mr Chairman. To the Right Reverend Ian George, to my Parliamentary colleague, Alex Somlyay, to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the President of the Senate, ladies and gentlemen.
I think this morning is an opportunity to remark upon a number of things about our country. The most important of those is to remark upon the great good fortune that we have to live in a country as free, a country as peaceful, a country as united and a country as richly endowed with material resources as we are here in Australia. That fortunate accident of history and circumstance puts a special obligation on all of us at Christmas which is a season of goodwill, a season of renewal and a season to celebrate the Christian traditions of this country. It puts a special obligation on all of us to remember those in our community who are less fortunate, to remember that for every group of parents in Australia that thinks and dreams of buying a larger house there are some families who can't afford to buy their first house. For every child that might dream of playing cricket or football for Australia there are other children who are fighting against life-threatening diseases. For every person in Australia who seeks to have a better paid job, there is somebody who is simply grateful to have the opportunity of any job at all.
I have always admired the work of the churches in Australia in supporting the Christmas Bowl Appeal. The Christmas Bowl Appeal, as Air Marshall Evans indicated, was inaugurated 50 years ago and it now is increasingly supported by all of the Christian denominations in Australia and it is an appeal that reaches out to many of the less fortunate around the world, and amongst the causes that will be aided by the Christmas Bowl Appeal this year; it will provide food for Burmese refugees forced to flee across the border to Thailand; it will improve the health of children in Namibia, it will supply clean water to communities in Zimbabwe and Zambia; it will give orphans and their foster families in Rwanda the opportunity of a new life; it will provide support and advocacy for refugees settling in Australia and it will support many other meritorious causes around the world.
So on this occasion, as we come towards the celebration of the birth of Christ and we come to reflect upon the spiritual meaning of Christmas and we enjoy all of the other things associated with Christmas: the family reunions, the opportunity to catch up with friends we don't see so often, the opportunity to have a rest from our work, it is very important that both domestically and also internationally, it is very important that we reflect upon the situation of those in our community who are less fortunate.
I want to take the opportunity on behalf of the Government and I know on behalf of the people of Australia to thank the Christian churches of Australia for the great service that they render to the less fortunate in our community, the mission they carry on to look after the sick and the suffering and the dying, the mission that they discharge in spreading a message of hope and a message of spirituality within our community.
I am also delighted to be associated with the inauguration of a new tradition. It's always great to be part of a new tradition, to be present at the inauguration, present at the creation so to speak of a new tradition and the inauguration of the concept of a national Christmas tree, and I think it was put very nicely by the Right Reverend Ian George when he said he hoped it would become the postcard of the nation, the Christmas card of the nation, and I think it is a very, very fine idea. I want to congratulate the National Capital Authority and the Christian churches not only here in Canberra but all around Australia for being associated with this, and can I finally say to all of you, and I hope in saying to all of you it is a message that will reach all Australians, that as we celebrate Christmas, as we have occasion to give thanks for the privilege we have of being Australians, and all that is good associated with being an Australian, it is an occasion when we should remember the less fortunate in our community. We should give generously, support the Christmas Bowl Appeal and in that way contribute to the great cause carried on by the Christian churches of Australia of assisting the less fortunate in our community.
I therefore have very great pleasure, ladies and gentlemen, in inaugurating the Christmas Bowl appeal for 1997. I hope it is very successful and I know it will enjoy your very, very strong support. Thank you very much. It's been a real delight to be here this morning.
[ENDS]
E &amp; OE..................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Chairman. To the Right Reverend Ian George,
 to my Parliamentary colleague, Alex Somlyay, to the Speaker of the
 House of Representatives and to the President of the Senate, ladies
 and gentlemen.
I think this morning is an opportunity to remark upon a number of
 things about our country. The most important of those is to remark
 upon the great good fortune that we have to live in a country as free,
 a country as peaceful, a country as united and a country as richly
 endowed with material resources as we are here in Australia. That
 fortunate accident of history and circumstance puts a special obligation
 on all of us at Christmas which is a season of goodwill, a season
 of renewal and a season to celebrate the Christian traditions of this
 country. It puts a special obligation on all of us to remember those
 in our community who are less fortunate, to remember that for every
 group of parents in Australia that thinks and dreams of buying a larger
 house there are some families who can't afford to buy their first
 house. For every child that might dream of playing cricket or football
 for Australia there are other children who are fighting against life-threatening
 diseases. For every person in Australia who seeks to have a better
 paid job, there is somebody who is simply grateful to have the opportunity
 of any job at all.
I have always admired the work of the churches in Australia in supporting
 the Christmas Bowl Appeal. The Christmas Bowl Appeal, as Air Marshall
 Evans indicated, was inaugurated 50 years ago and it now is increasingly
 supported by all of the Christian denominations in Australia and it
 is an appeal that reaches out to many of the less fortunate around
 the world, and amongst the causes that will be aided by the Christmas
 Bowl Appeal this year; it will provide food for Burmese refugees forced
 to flee across the border to Thailand; it will improve the health
 of children in Namibia, it will supply clean water to communities
 in Zimbabwe and Zambia; it will give orphans and their foster families
 in Rwanda the opportunity of a new life; it will provide support and
 advocacy for refugees settling in Australia and it will support many
 other meritorious causes around the world.
So on this occasion, as we come towards the celebration of the birth
 of Christ and we come to reflect upon the spiritual meaning of Christmas
 and we enjoy all of the other things associated with Christmas: the
 family reunions, the opportunity to catch up with friends we don't
 see so often, the opportunity to have a rest from our work, it is
 very important that both domestically and also internationally, it
 is very important that we reflect upon the situation of those in our
 community who are less fortunate.
I want to take the opportunity on behalf of the Government and I know
 on behalf of the people of Australia to thank the Christian churches
 of Australia for the great service that they render to the less fortunate
 in our community, the mission they carry on to look after the sick
 and the suffering and the dying, the mission that they discharge in
 spreading a message of hope and a message of spirituality within our
 community.
I am also delighted to be associated with the inauguration of a new
 tradition. It's always great to be part of a new tradition, to
 be present at the inauguration, present at the creation so to speak
 of a new tradition and the inauguration of the concept of a national
 Christmas tree, and I think it was put very nicely by the Right Reverend
 Ian George when he said he hoped it would become the postcard of the
 nation, the Christmas card of the nation, and I think it is a very,
 very fine idea. I want to congratulate the National Capital Authority
 and the Christian churches not only here in Canberra but all around
 Australia for being associated with this, and can I finally say to
 all of you, and I hope in saying to all of you it is a message that
 will reach all Australians, that as we celebrate Christmas, as we
 have occasion to give thanks for the privilege we have of being Australians,
 and all that is good associated with being an Australian, it is an
 occasion when we should remember the less fortunate in our community.
 We should give generously, support the Christmas Bowl Appeal and in
 that way contribute to the great cause carried on by the Christian
 churches of Australia of assisting the less fortunate in our community.
I therefore have very great pleasure, ladies and gentlemen, in inaugurating
 the Christmas Bowl appeal for 1997. I hope it is very successful and
 I know it will enjoy your very, very strong support. Thank you very
 much. It's been a real delight to be here this morning.
[ENDS]



 CANBERRA
E&amp;OE.........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much David and Pru. To the members of my family
   who are here, my wife Janette, my daughter Melanie, my eldest brother
   Wal and his wife Gwen. To my Parliamentary colleagues, to Mr Sessions
   and members of the Press Gallery, ladies and gentlemen.
It is an awkward moment in one's political career to launch
   a biography. You reflect for a moment on what you might or might
   not say, you wonder whether you will be a commentator on the book.
I have reviewed a number of books, I haven't been asked to
   review this one. I reviewed Bob Hawke's book and Graham Richardson's
   book and I have reviewed that marvellous biography of Alan Martin's
   about Sir Robert Menzies. But, of course, I have read this with
   absorption and, of course as David and Pru have pointed out, I spent
   quite a deal of time with them in advising on facts and tracing
   the sequence of events.
It is of course, more than a biography. It is also a chronicle
   of Australian politics over the last, almost quarter of a century.
   And we are constantly reminded of how things change. But when I
   reflect that in 1974 when I was elected to Parliament, I reflect
   upon the Australia of then and the world of then and the Australia
   of today and the world of today, the changes are absolutely mind
   boggling.
Not only have we seen in that quarter of a century the on set of,
   arguably since the industrial revolution, the greatest economic
   transformation brought about by information technology, but we have
   seen the collapse of the most pervasive, authoritarian ideology
   of the 21st Century, that is Soviet communism. We have seen the
   rise, and now the turbulence and the trepidation of the Asia-Pacific
   region as the fastest growing economic area in the world. We have
   also seen a massive transformation of Australian politics.
We are now living in a far less tribal political state that we
   lived in the early 1970s. We have also lived through a period of
   time when elections have been dominated by economic issues. When
   I was cutting my political teeth as a member of the Liberal Party
   organisation and stuffing letterboxes in suburbs like Earlwood and
   Campsie and Dulwich Hill and Hurlstone Park with people like Tom
   Hughes, who became Federal Attorney-General in the Gorton Government
   after the 1969 election, elections used to be fought, as Tony Eggleton
   who is in audience, and there is somebody who shares, as well as
   anybody in this audience, the ups and downs and the successes and
   the triumphs of our side of politics over that period of time, the
   issues that tended to dominate the political scene then were not
   economic issues.
But I can't think of an election since 1974, I would say 1972
   was the last election that was determined overwhelmingly on non-economic
   issues, that was determined on what you might call historical, cultural
   changes issues rather than economic ones. And from 1974 onwards
   it changed and there was, of course, a reason for that, and that
   is the enormous impact of all those economic changes that occurred
   in the 1970s with the floating of the American dollar, the collapse
   of the Bretton-Woods international financial arrangements and the
   OPEC oil increases and all the other domestic changes.
So we are a world away from the political world of Australia that
   I entered in 1974 when Gough Whitlam was Prime Minister and the
   late Bill Snedden was the Leader of the Opposition. When Jim Cope
   was the Speaker for a time to be replaced by Gordon Skulls, who
   I might say in my view, distinguished himself as a Speaker of the
   House of Representatives. I thought that Gordon Skulls was in fact
   a very good Speaker and he had, for a person appointed as a Speaker
   by the Labor Party, an extraordinary difficult moment in controlling
   Parliament on the 11th of November 1975.
To have been present at some of those great and, at times traumatic
   political events. To have lived through the circumstances of 1975.
   To have lived through, as a junior Minister, the early years of
   the Fraser Government. To have been trusted, unexpectedly with the
   responsibilities of Treasurer, as David recounts in the first pages
   of the book. To have suffered the fate of trying to keep pace with
   drinking beer with Malcolm Fraser in the Kirribilli hotel after
   I was sworn in as Prime Minister - and David correctly records that
   I didn't do terribly well out of that, although the press conference
   the next morning wasn't too bad.
To have gone through the difficulties as the years wear on of the
   governments, which inevitably develops tensions. To have gone through,
   in government, a few dark moments. And as I read the book I was
   reminded of some of the internal difficulties. I think one of the
   gut-wrenching experiences that I had was the enormous struggle within
   my own party and within some sections of the broader community regarding
   the very controversial anti-tax avoidance measures that I introduced
   as Treasurer in 1982.
And ironically enough, and David won't mind me saying this,
   David asked me in his afterlife, after he'd left Malcolm Fraser
   as press secretary, in fact as part of his duties in Canberra, was
   vigorously advocating with me, almost on a daily basis, and he did
   the job extremely well to calls of those who objected very violently
   to some of the measures that I was undertaking. I might say, not
   on grounds of the principle of tax avoidance but what he regarded
   as the very controversial and improper methods that the Government
   had adopted in order to recoup to the Australian Treasury the tax
   that had been so wickedly avoided by these people.
That was typical of the sort of exchange that David and I would
   have at that particular time. David, of course, himself has been
   present at all of these events as a commentator and as a journalist.
   And as Malcolm Fraser's press secretary he was with him on
   November 11th 1975 and he joined his staff when Malcolm became Leader
   of the Opposition. And he stayed with Malcolm until after the 1980
   election and he then became a consultant. Then after the defeat
   of the Fraser Government he returned to the Press Gallery. And he
   has witnessed all of those events. I have had a strong personal
   relationship with him but it has never clouded the professionalism
   of the job that he has done as a journalist and as a commentator.
And so to me one of the great values of this book is that it does
   represent, through the experience and circumstances of myself in
   the various roles that I have had during that 23 year period, it
   does represent, as I said, a chronicle of Australian politics and
   the Australian economy over that period of time.
There are many things about political life now which I have mentioned
   which are so different from what they were 23 years ago. I have
   talked about the detribalised character of Australian politics.
   I think also it is fair to say that politics has become even more
   volatile and even more unpredictable now than it was in the 1970s.
If I reflect on my childhood and the political experiences I imbibed
   then, I guess the stability and the predictability at that time
   is the dominant recollection that one has.
And if I look back over the last 18 months can I leave the thought
   with you that, probably the biggest single change that has occurred
   in the last 18 months, even more important than the impressive achievements
   of my Government, of which David was kind enough to draw attention,
   with which I won't too long detain you this morning.
But rather the most important thing that has happened over that
   last 18 months has been, in my view, the very significant change
   in the dynamic of the relationship between Australia and the Asia-Pacific
   region. Not in the sense that I suggest for a moment that our fortunes
   aren't forever committed and our destiny not forever tied
up with the future of that region. But the transformation brought
   about largely, but not entirely, by the economic instability in
   a number of the major economies in the Asia-Pacific region have,
   I think all of both the dynamic and the psychology and also the
   actuality of our relationship with that region.
We are no longer seen as some kind of anxious outsider clamouring
   to be a member of this spectacularly successful club, rather we
   are seen as a strong, reliable, dependable, better run, more successful,
   capable of punching above its weight participant in the Asia-Pacific
   region. And I think as the months go by the psychology of that and
   the way it will impact on Australian politics and the way it will
   reinforce the need for Australia always to be, in a political and
   economic sense, a citizen of the world as well as giving priority
   to our associations with our immediate region. And I think it is,
   without doubt, the single most important change in the dynamic of
   anything that has occurred over this period of time.
One of the satisfying things of political life can genuinely be
   that when you have had a difficult association and you have had
   struggles which have become publicly known, with some individuals,
   that over a period of time that you can become reconciled to each
   other and time and circumstances will alter attitudes. It is no
   secret that Andrew Peacock and I over the years, inside the Liberal
   Party, had the odd disagreement. It is also no secret, I think unfairly
   on occasions, we together were blamed for the assorted ills and
   sins and failures and inadequacies of the Federal Parliamentary
   Liberal Party.
And I must say that I did find an immense personal satisfaction,
   as time went by and particularly after the 1993 election in which,
   almost by accident at first but then over a period of time, both
   of us decided that it was rather stupid, this personal enmity which
   was never quite as big, although some people in this room might
   find it hard to believe given some of the circumstances that occurred,
   that that should go on forever.
And I do say that one of the most pleasing appoints I have made
   as Prime Minister was to initiate Andrew Peacock's appointment
   as Australian Ambassador to Washington. Not only because I felt
   it completed the process of reconciliation between two people who'd
   been competitors in the pursuit of the same cause, but I think it
   also has delivered to this country a magnificent Ambassador in the
   United States of America whose great diplomatic and interpersonal
   skills are very effectively deployed there.
There are many other people in this room that I could talk about.
   I, of course, record unstintingly, indeed fulsomely, my affection
   and gratitude towards my family who have been in their various manifestations,
   commencing with my very devoted and loyal and decent parents who
   gave to me a view of right and wrong as they saw it and as I believed
   in. And they gave to me a sense of country and a sense of effort
   and a sense of personal striving and a sense of humility, I hope,
   although some might doubt that, and a sense of always trying to
   do the right thing by people, for which I have remained grateful
   during my life.
My father died when I was 16 but I have never forgotten his influence
   and I have never forgotten his great decency and his quiet love
   of his country and his commitment to his community and most particularly
   to his family.
My mother was an immensely strong and influential person who fiercely
   protected and promoted the interests of her four sons, of which
   she became immensely proud. She of course didn't live to see
   me become Prime Minister. She did live to see me become Federal
   Treasurer and she died just a few weeks before I was ejected from
   that office by the vote of the Australian people. But I owe both
   of them, now long-dead, a very great debt of gratitude.
To my three older brothers, with whom I have always had a very
   close bond. Wal, my eldest brother, is here today with his wife
   Gwyn, and my next-eldest brother, Stan. Wal was the small businessman
   in the family which followed Dad's pattern and he's now
   very happily retired next to the Leura golf course which is a pleasant
   existence. He's come down here. And Stan, who became a very
   well known corporate lawyer around town and in Sydney, a company
   director. And then of course there's Bob who is quite well
   known on the other side of the political spectrum. Bob and I are
   an interesting sort of commentary on what is the essentially egalitarian,
   and I think likeable character, of Australian politics.
I won't tell that foundry joke again, Janette, but one of
   the things that's always terrific about Australian politics
   is that there is still an accessibility and a capacity to jump across
   a political barrier in Australia that doesn't exist in many
   other countries. Bob was once a member of the Liberal Party but
   he left us, I suspect largely because of the Vietnam war, but not
   entirely because of that, and he's now a very active member
   of the, what he calls the nice left of the Labor Party in New South
   Wales.
Thereby hangs a marvellous story when, was it Les McMahon who used
   to be the Labor Member for Sydney? He was being challenged for preselection
   by Peter Baldwin, and Peter Baldwin as you know was on the left
   and my brother, Bob, was a member of one of the branches in Leichhardt.
   And Les came up to me in the corridor one day and he said, "John,
   do you think you could put in a word in the pre-selection ballot
   with your brother for me"?
I said, "forget it mate, he's barracking for Peter Baldwin".
   And of course, that turned out to be the case. Bob and Baldwin won,
   Les lost but the point of all of that is Bob and I have remained
   good friends and good brothers. When I became Prime Minister I rang
   him up to invite him down to the swearing in because he'd worked
   in a polling booth on Petersham Town Hall all day on election day.
   I said, "you ought to come down to the swearing in". He
   said, "I'll do that". He said, "what's
   the order of proceedings?" I said, "well, the order of
   proceedings is that I get sworn in as Prime Minister and then we
   all go in and I sort of introduce my Ministry to the Governor General,
   and they are all sworn in one in turn". He said, "I tell
   you what, I'll strike a deal with you". He said, "I
   will be there for your swearing in". He said, "we can
   then have a photograph and a cup of tea" but he said, "I
   don't think I could hang around for the rest of your mob".
So I thought that was a very decent compromise but it's never
   fair in those circumstances of course to leave unacknowledged the
   enormous contribution that the two of my brothers who voted Liberal
   and remain very bright and clear-eyed on these matters and have
   been very, very staunch and loyal supporters in every sense of the
   word, of my political aspirations.
And of course, to my three magnificent children with whom, as the
   years went by I have grown ever more fond. I didn't think when
   I was dumped as Leader of the Opposition in 1989 it was all that
   flash but one thing it did do was that at a critical time in the
   ages of my children it meant that I spent a great deal more time
   with them.
One of the great pieces of mythology in bringing up children is
   the belief that it's when they're sort of in their late
   teens that you've got to find more time for them. The fact
   is that by the time they're in their late teens they're
   not particularly interested in you finding a lot more time for them
   and it's really much earlier than that and of course I got
   dumped at a time that neatly coincided with that. Over the years
   they have been very good political advisers, down to my son, Tim.
   When I was talking about the necessity of preparing for the second
   debate against Paul Keating in the last election he said to me,
   "Dad, you've got to do something about those shoulders".
He was referring to the fact that I tended, when I was trying to
   make a point, to do something with my shoulders and keeping that
   in mind, keeping Tim's admonition in mind, I did precisely
   that. I can see Janette is looking at me saying, John, this is going
   on just a little bit too long, and it is but you don't launch
   your own biography every day, do you.
Can I thank David, with assistance from Pru, for their friendship.
   It has been a friendship over a long period of time. David has acute
   and impeccable judgements on most things, although a few things
   where we do disagree rather violently. He has a wealth of political
   experience and understanding and both David and Pru are people who
   understand not only the mechanical side of politics but also the
   human side of politics.
And it's of enormous importance that people with that treasure
   trove of experience have the opportunity of putting it down and
   whether you agree with it or disagree, or reject it or accept it,
   it becomes part of the written history. As we approach the centenary
   of the Federation of Australia we are going to get increasingly
   interested in what's gone before us and I think over the next
   two or three years we are going to have an explosion of interest
   in this country in what we have achieved, particularly over the
   last 100 years.
Of course as we get to the Centenary of Federation, we are getting
   to that moment when there would be so few, if at all, Australians
   left who participated in some of the great events that have shaped
   this century and shaped the first 100 years of the Australian nation.
   It won't be long before there will be nobody left alive who
   served in World War One. There will be diminishing numbers of people
   who experienced the rigours of the Great Depression and as we get
   towards the centenary of our Federation, we are reminded of all
   that experience and all that history. Everything is a
contribution to that so I am very, very grateful to all of you.
   I want to conclude by saying that it's not only a chronicle
   of the 25 years in Australian politics. It's also a chronicle
   of the ins and outs and the successes and the triumphs and the failures
   and the losses of the Liberal Party of Australia.
I joined the Liberal Party of Australia 40 years ago. I owe it
   an enormous debt. I would not have been a Member of Parliament had
   it not been for the Liberal Party. I would not have been leader
   of the Party without that gift from it, and I certainly would not
   have been Prime Minister, and I have a deep love of the Party with
   all its weaknesses and I think it is a great institution. And I
   remain profoundly in its debt as I am in the debt of David and Pru
   for this excellent production.
Thank you.


The policy statement I release today, Investing for Growth, adds important new dimensions to the policy framework that the Government has established since March 1996. At the heart of this statement is a range of significant initiatives to encourage innovation, promote investment, develop Australia's export trade, maximise Australia's gains from the information age and further enhance our credentials as a world financial centre.
A strong, diversified, world-class business sector is crucial to Australia's future.
Without it we cannot generate the jobs to employ our young, provide the national wealth to support the less fortunate in our society or create the stable and enduring economic framework so essential to fulfilling our unique destiny as a nation.
Successful businesses are not only economic assets but increasingly, through partnership with others, they contribute to the building of our nation's social capital.
A confident business community is the life blood of a nation confident about its future.
My Government believes that Australia's business sector, through its skills, motivation and resourcefulness will play a fundamental role in shaping the Australia of the twenty first century.
Today's statement is being delivered against the backdrop of the strongest economic foundations in 25 years.
As we move into 1998 and beyond the domestic economic scene is full of hope and optimism.
With the political will to pursue the right policies we can, together, realise Australia's potential for the next millennium.
Our vision for Australian business and industry in the first quarter of the twenty first century is one of:
a technologically advanced, competitive manufacturing sector, strongly oriented to exports;
high quality service industries including the full realisation of Australia as the major financial centre in the region after Tokyo;
information industries which are a major source of employment growth, exports and new business opportunities in their own right and which transform other industries across the economy;
a vibrant small business sector - the birthplace of many new firms and ideas - complementing our larger companies; and
the export of our goods and services to the region and elsewhere satisfying the full range of their needs.
Australia occupies a unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic circumstances. There is no other country in the world which has such an asset. It is an immense strength and never a weakness. It can be used to our advantage in maximising the economic returns and potential of our nation.
The very certainty and stability of our legal and political systems are huge advantages that we too often take for granted.
We are endowed with natural beauty and a rich resource base which has underpinned the development of our great mining and agricultural industries which are amongst the most efficient and least protected in the world.
Our imaginative, inventive and highly skilled people have been acclaimed for innovative genius and commercial strength well beyond our weight of numbers.
Our first class scientific, technical and engineering workforce also boasts some of the most competitive labour costs in the region.
Our diverse and tolerant nation has extended the gift of welcome to new citizens who have made our workforce more able. Many of them constitute a priceless link with the Asia Pacific region.
Our resilient and optimistic people, founded on a commitment to enterprise, rose to the challenges of post war reconstruction and manufacturing development to build a secure and united Australian nation. Those same qualities equip us well as we face the limitless challenges of the information age.
At the turn of the century Australia had the highest living standard in the world. But as opportunities passed us by so too did many countries on the international league tables. We failed to realise our full potential.
This Statement is part of a comprehensive economic blueprint for taking Australian business and industry into the next century and achieving Australia's maximum potential.
It complements our extensive economic reforms to date and our plans for major tax reform.
It is a further instalment in the Government's strategy of creating a framework for sustained, high economic growth and employment.
We are - above all - a high growth government. The overriding aim of our extensive economic reform agenda is to deliver Australia an annual growth rate of over 4 per cent on average during the decade to 2010.
Strong and sustainable economic growth is the key to significantly reducing unemployment and raising living standards for all Australians.
No Australian Government could possibly embark on the initiatives I am announcing today had it not first established strong economic foundations.
Strong economic foundations are the key to any country's capacity to grow, create more jobs and build more national wealth.
But there is also a place for specific initiatives that will encourage private sector innovation, expansion and diversification.
Investing for Growth sets out some important initiatives in that regard established within a clear policy framework committed to maintaining strong economic foundations.
Restoring the Economic Foundations
The strongest economic foundations in 25 years have allowed us to avoid much of the fallout from recent economic and financial instability in East Asia, indeed to contribute to financial rescue packages for the region.
Economic growth is accelerating and this year's Christmas appears likely to be the strongest in five years. With recent indicators suggesting continuing robust activity, it is now widely expected that growth of more than four per cent will be achieved through 1997. The stage is set for continued strong growth into 1998. With inflation well-behaved and productivity continuing to grow strongly, sustainable growth is within our grasp.
The first phase of the Government's economic strategy was to restore the nation's economic foundations, without which growth and competitiveness cannot be achieved and sustained.
The Government is delivering low inflation, low interest rates and a much better budget position. We are swinging the budget into surplus, enhancing fiscal responsibility and accountability through the Charter of Budget Honesty and increasing monetary policy credibility through formal recognition of the independence of the Reserve Bank of Australia and its low inflation objective.
This process has been complemented by major structural reforms, particularly reform of Australia's outdated industrial relations system.
It has continued with a major programme of privatisation which has enhanced efficiency, competition and choice.
It has included a major package of measures for small business which has cut red tape, reduced regulation and expanded opportunity.
It has included measures to boost competitiveness in Australia's telecommunications and financial sectors as well as in our energy markets.
Our policies have successfully overturned the legacy of deficit and debt inherited from the last 13 years. As a result of this strategy of fiscal consolidation, independent monetary policy and structural reform there has been an unambiguous improvement in a range of economic indicators.
Where the underlying inflation rate averaged at 5.5 per cent under Labor between March 1983 and March 1996, it is now at 1.5 per cent, the lowest rate since 1972.
Where bank housing interest rates averaged at 12.6 per cent under Labor they are now at 6.7 per cent, the lowest since March 1970.
Where annual labour productivity growth averaged at 1.7 per cent over the Labor years in 1996-97, it was 2.2 per cent in 1996-97.
Where the current account deficit averaged at 4.8 per cent of Gross Domestic Product over 1983-84 to 1995-96 under Labor, it was 3.5 per cent in 1996-97.
Where the underlying budget deficit in 1995-96 was just over 2 per cent of GDP, budget projections show an underlying surplus in 1998-99 increasing to a surplus of 1.6 per cent of GDP in 2000-01.
Where general government net debt was just under 20 per cent of GDP in 1995-96 under Labor, it will be cut to around 10 per cent in 2000-01.
Where real business investment averaged at 10.5 per cent of GDP under Labor, over the last six months it was a record level of 14 per cent.
Where unemployment averaged at 8.7 per cent under Labor and while it remains always the last indicator to come right, the outlook for employment is improving.
The restoration of Australia's economic foundations will encourage low inflation and release domestic savings to fund higher investment and economic growth without a deterioration in Australia's current account deficit.
Moreover, we have achieved better budget outcomes while delivering in full on our promised tax cuts, providing capital gains tax relief for small business, fringe benefits tax relief on taxi travel and carparking, a reduced provisional tax uplift factor and a tax cut on savings.
However, we realise that improving economic performance is an ongoing task and that our overseas competitors are not resting on their laurels.
Realising our Potential as a Nation
The initiatives I announce today in Investing for Growth build on the coherent policy framework already in place and will help to realise our potential as a nation into the twenty first century.
Our determination for Australia to achieve its economic potential commits us to polices that will deliver high levels of productive investment, encourage an innovative and entrepreneurial spirit in business enterprises and give us the capacity to take advantage of new growth industries.
To fully utilise Australia's unique human and natural assets, add value, win exports and generate jobs, we are committed to polices that will encourage world competitive Australian enterprises.
Creation of world competitive enterprises capable of generating high value adding jobs is the aim of industry policy. The challenge is to harness change by focussing on emerging activities, encouraging international best practice and gaining access to lucrative markets, particularly in our own region.
The Government reaffirms its preparedness to strategically intervene in industry to offset distortions and remove impediments to expansion.
The package of new measures announced in this statement, which include spending of $1.26 billion over five years, will further boost innovation, investment, export trade and innovation in new, high growth industries.
Investing for Growth
In developing the suite of initiatives in Investing for Growth the Government has had the benefit of three important reports:
the report of the Review of Business Programs undertaken by Mr David Mortimer, Going for Growth: Business Programs for Investment, Innovation and Export;
the report of the Information Industries Taskforce (IITF), chaired by Prof. Ashley Goldsworthy AO, The Global Information Economy - The Way Ahead; and
the report of the Information Policy Advisory Council (IPAC), chaired by Dr Terry Cutler, A national policy framework for structural adjustment within the new Commonwealth of Information.
I take this opportunity to thank all of the contributors for their valuable input to these reports.
The Mortimer report advocated Going for Growth, and emphasised that sound macroeconomic policies were an essential part of that process as is maintaining the momentum of broad ranging microeconomic reform, including taxation reform. The Mortimer Report highlighted the importance of boosting business investment, encouraging innovation, expanding exports and ensuring the careful design and effective delivery of business programmes.
The Goldsworthy and IPAC reports focussed on establishing a framework for the development of the information economy, on widespread adoption of new technology and development of the information industries. Both emphasise that the Commonwealth should urgently address the issues raised by the rapidly changing information economy. The initiatives and policy commitments announced in Investing for Growth provide a whole-of-government response consistent with the priorities identified in those reports.
The initiatives set out in Investing For Growth are focussed on five key areas:
increasing support for business research and development and the commercialisation of that research;
making investment in Australia more attractive;
helping Australian businesses capture new export markets and introducing a more competitive customs regime;
promoting the further development of Australia as a financial centre; and
making sure Australia maximises its benefits from the global information age.
Encouraging Business Innovation
Innovation will be a key driver of the competitiveness of firms and economies into the next century.
The Government's innovation programmes recognise that in some circumstances business research and development (R&amp;D) will be subject to market failure and require additional assistance. To these ends the Government will commit $1 billion to support business innovation over the next four years.
In addition to the 125 per cent R&amp;D tax concession, we are extending the R&amp;D Start programme with the provision of an additional $556 million over the next four years bringing total expenditure on R&amp;D Start over that period to $739 million.
The expanded R&amp;D programme will comprise three elements:
A core element which will provide grants of up to 50 per cent of the project costs. Assistance under this component is equivalent to a 189 per cent tax concession.
R&amp;D Start-Plus will provide grants of up to 20 per cent of project cost for companies excluded from the general R&amp; D Start programme; that is, companies with a group turnover of more that $50 million. The assistance available under this component is equivalent to a 150 per cent R&amp;D tax concession.
R&amp;D-Start Premium will provide additional assistance of up to the equivalent of a 200 per cent R&amp;D tax concession. Assistance provided under R&amp;D Start-Premium will be repayable upon successful commercialisation through a royalty agreement, or similar arrangement.
We will also encourage venture capital funds through expansion of the Innovation Investment Fund Programme at an additional cost of $43 million and a total cost of $153 million over four years. This additional round of funding will ensure the critical mass necessary to develop a venture capital market in Australia, it is directly targeted at small high technology companies and expands a programme which enjoys strong support from industry.
Further measures to encourage diffusion of technology costing an additional $72 million and a total of $108 million over the next four years will also be undertaken.
Boosting Investment
High levels of investment are essential to strong economic growth and durable improvements in living standards. The recent financial turbulence in our region highlights the importance of secure economic foundations to foreign investors as well as the potential fragility of investor confidence. It also reaffirms the reality that highly interventionist strategies to attract or target investment do not guarantee economic advantage in their own right.
Australia's key as an investment location is the strength of its economic foundations, such as low interest rates, low inflation and fiscal responsibility. The Government is not disposed towards providing across-the-board investment incentives or establishing a dedicated fund for that purpose. We recognise, however, that in limited and special circumstances there may be a need for some specific incentives to attract major strategic projects that would not otherwise be likely to occur in Australia where a significant net benefit for the economy and jobs is expected. The criteria against which the need for such incentives will be assessed are clearly set out in Investing for Growth.
To co-ordinate this case by case approach to incentives, Mr Bob Mansfield has been appointed to the new position of Strategic Investment Coordinator to be located within the Prime Minister's portfolio. Mr Mansfield will be responsible for liaising with relevant Departments through a streamlined process and for advising Cabinet through me on projects which may justify provision of incentives or policy changes. Mr Mansfield will retain his current responsibilities for major project facilitation.
This role will be supplemented by an upgraded, high-profile programme to promote investment opportunities in Australia. A new body, Invest Australia, will be established to promote Australia's advantage as a location for investment and an amount of $11 million a year over four years will be provided.
Improving Our Trade Performance
Our economy is becoming increasingly open, providing both challenge and opportunity to Australian firms and industries. This means that we need to be outward looking and internationally competitive to achieve greater access to markets and strong economic growth.
The Government is pursuing a multi-faceted approach to trade policy, including bilateral, regional and multilateral initiatives.
We are building stronger bilateral trade relations with key trading partners.
Within APEC we are maintaining the momentum towards free trade and investment by 2010/2020. This year we successfully pushed for the early liberalisation in fifteen sectors, including food, chemicals and energy, key sectors proposed by Australia.
Within the WTO, we will continue to push for a new world trade round and early conclusion of the financial sector negotiations, an initiative that the APEC countries supported in Vancouver.
We recognise that more needs to be done to improve our trade prospects, building on our export successes to date.
The Government will introduce two complementary schemes to improve Australia's attraction as a site for regional manufacturing and warehousing by removing excessive access and compliance costs. We will introduce new Manufacture in Bond provisions exempting exporters from customs duties and sales tax on imported goods subsequently re-exported or used as inputs to exports. This scheme will let businesses use Australia as a base for operating in the Asia Pacific region without incurring customs duties on products intended for re-export.
I am sure that the people of Newcastle and the Hunter Valley as well as many others will welcome this announcement.
This reform will be supported by the consolidation of the Duty Drawback and Tariff Export Concession schemes into one integrated and simplified scheme to be known as TRADEX at a cost to revenue of $105 million over four years.
The Export Market Development Grants Scheme which has assisted Australian business to develop international markets will be provided with an additional $300 million to extend it to 2001-02.
The Government will commit $18 million over the next four years to the APEC Market Integration/Industrial Collaboration programme for activities aimed at removing impediments to standards and conformance and promoting industrial cooperation as well as customs harmonisation within the APEC region.
We will also boost opportunities for regional and small business exporters through the extension of Export Access and the new TradeStart programmes respectively. Austrade information and services on export markets will be provided to assist local businesses to develop and expand their export markets. Over $13 million dollars will be provided to support these programmes over the next four years.
Australia as a Financial Centre
Australia is already a major financial centre in our region. We have a highly developed and sophisticated financial sector. Our aim is to become a leading world financial centre and capitalise on the explosive growth in financial services worldwide.
The fundamental building block is our response to the recent Wallis inquiry, which will encourage the development of a world class, competitive financial system. We recognise, however, the intensive international competition for financial services activity. In advance of major tax reform, we have decided to introduce specific tax measures at a cost of $22 million in revenue foregone in a full year. We will enhance the concessional tax regime for Offshore Banking Units, widen the interest withholding tax exemption to encourage the domestic corporate debt market and relax Foreign Investment Fund (FIF) tax rules to exempt FIF investments located in the United States.
We will not, however, stop there. We will also establish a task force of the Financial Sector Advisory Council to report to the Treasurer on developments in international financial markets and provide further options to boost Australia's prospects as a financial centre.
The Information Age
The emerging global economy is based upon information and knowledge. This new age is touching almost every element of our lives. How we react to these changes will greatly influence opportunities for economic growth and jobs.
The Government has already demonstrated national leadership in this area. We have established a National Office of the Information Economy reporting to Senator Alston, who is now the Minister for the Information Economy, to co-ordinate the Commonwealth's information policies. This is supported by a Ministerial Council to ensure ownership of the information agenda by all the relevant stakeholders in government.
We are committed to maximizing the benefits of this new information age and ensuring their equitable distribution. The Government will play a national leadership role in this area to:
foster business and consumer confidence through a light touch regulatory framework;
establish the Commonwealth as a leading edge user;
improve our information industries base;
facilitate access to the information age particularly for regional and remote Australia, the disabled and to enhance IT related skills in the community.
We will introduce an Information Industries Action Agenda to attract new investment and encourage competitive advantage, including through superior software engineering and testbed facilities at a cost of $28 million over four years.
We will establish an electronic one-stop shop for all business regulatory needs so that all appropriate services are deliverable on the Internet by 2001.
The Government will also remove tariffs on inputs to the manufacture of information industries equipment. We will ensure that goods ordered and delivered electronically through the Internet will remain tariff/customs duty free. Also there will be no bits tax on the Internet.
Delivering the Programme
To drive industry reforms we will implement Action Agendas in specific industries to address impediments to growth and to identify opportunities for market expansion. The Supermarket to Asia is an example of a constructive and productive Action Agenda.
In developing and delivering industry policy programmes the Government will adopt the design principles recommended in the Mortimer Review. In particular, these principles require the specification of clear objectives and measurable performance indicators for all new programmes.
The Next Step
While Investing for Growth is a key element of our plan to realise our potential as a nation, the next step must be to reform and modernise our unfair and antiquated taxation system.
The Government aims for a fairer, better, more internationally competitive taxation system which ignites incentives to work save and invest.
Central to any tax reform are our commitments to no overall increase in the tax burden, major reductions in personal income tax, consideration of a broad based indirect tax to replace some or all existing indirect taxes, appropriate compensation for those deserving of special consideration and reform of financial relations between the Commonwealth, States and Territories.
We cannot afford yesterday's tax system for tomorrow's world. I do not underestimate the difficulties of selling tax reform but no government (or its political alternative) can be serious about achieving high economic growth and living standards unless it embraces the challenge of tax reform.
No one should doubt the complete resolve of my Government to pursue fundamental reforms to Australia's taxation system.
Conclusion
In summary, Investing for Growth adds to the reform agenda which the Government has established to date. It does so by outlining the important initiatives required to further enhance innovation, investment and exports and to develop our finance and information technology sectors as vital building blocks in a coherent economic strategy.
As a high growth Government committed to strong economic foundations, to an innovative industry policy and to a modernised taxation system we can look forward with optimism to an Australian economy achieving its full potential for the benefit of all Australians into the twenty first century.
8 December 1997
See original at http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/10052/20011121-0000/www.pm.gov.au/news/sp…


E&amp;OE.....................................................................................................................
I met somebody on Saturday night, both of whose parents are living National Treasures. Anyway, ladies and gentlemen, first of all can I thank Tony Abbott for his elegant, humorous and skilful introduction, and accurate introductions. He does the job superbly well. I'd like to thank the owners of Machiavelli and I would also like to welcome my Ministerial colleagues.
This is the second instalment of what I hope will become a regular pre-Christmas tradition under the Coalition Government. And it is an opportunity to cram a few friends into a small space, eat some delightful food, introduce those friends to people who are prominent members of the Australian Government and for me just to say a few words about what has happened over the last year.
But I do want to thank all of my colleagues who are here and also my colleagues who aren't here, elsewhere in Australia, for the tremendous support that I have had and the Government has had over the last year.
As Tony said, this last 12 months has been a little different from the first 12 months, but what has been very encouraging about the last 12 months is that we have made a very, very strong finish and as we go towards Christmas, it is possible to look back on some remarkable highlights of the last year. To comment on a few things that have occurred in the last few weeks and then to throw ahead to a few things that are going to be tremendously important to Australia and to the Government in 1998.
The single-most important thing that has happened over the last 12 months to Australia is that we have been able to withstand and come through relatively unscathed, the enormous financial turbulence in our part of the world. And of all the things that might be said about the last 12 months, that is the single-most important thing. And it is a great achievement of my Government and of all us, together, that because principally - of the steps that we took when we first came into office to tackle the economic situation that we inherited, the very large budget deficit, the very poor levels of national savings, the inadequate industrial relations system and other areas where micro-economic reform was needed - because we tackled those things it has meant that we were able to stare down what could have been a potentially disastrous impact from the financial turbulence in our part of the world.
And it is no mean achievement for us to be able to look back and to see over the past two months that Australia has increasingly been seen, not as an anxious outsider in the Asia-Pacific region seeking admission to a successful club, but rather an extremely reliable, strong, dependable, middle power, contributing and performing well above its weight. And that has been possible because of the measures that we took. It has been possible because the Australian economy is now seen as a safe haven. It is possible because of the fact that we eschewed, in the early months of our terms in office, we eschewed easy options and cheap alternatives.
And we took some decisions that cost us a bit of political pain this year, but as the year closes, I think increasingly, the Australian community is seeing the wisdom of those decisions. And I just ask you to contemplate what might have happened to our currency, what might have happened to the international esteem of this country, what might have happened to our reputation in our part of the world, if those measures had not been taken.
And it made me immensely proud, as Prime Minister of our country, to be able to say to the leaders of our partners in the region, that we were strong enough and reliable enough, and dependable enough, to be able to contribute to their financial rescue. And I think that is something that ought to be of immense satisfaction and immense national pride.
Now that is the most important thing that I can say about Australia's performance and Australia's economic strength over the last year, but we have had a few highlights, and one of them of course was the outstanding, beyond belief success of the privatisation of Telstra. It was the best privatisation Australia has seen, the biggest we have seen. It was much more successful than even the dreamers amongst the leaders of the Coalition thought it would be when we devised the plan before the last election.
When I reflect back on some of those thoughts I had, as I wandered along the beach at Hawkes Nest, before the 1996 election - when we thought we would marry up the sale of one third of Telstra with the development of the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia that provides the largest capital injection into the Australian environment by any government of any persuasion in Australia's history - it has been a remarkably successful policy, and for the life of me I can not understand why there is anyone left standing in Australia who is opposed to the privatisation of bodies like Telstra.
Even Bob Carr is in favour of privatising his electricity authorities in New South Wales and I renew the offer - I am always happy to address the comrades to try and persuade them to change their mind. But, Telstra was an outstanding success. I think we have also been very successful in putting together a coherent, sensible, well targeted industry policy. And I want to thank John Moore, who is present here today, as the Minister most responsible for the contribution that he has made to that.
Because having a balanced approach to industry, recognising that one of the messages that has come out of the turbulence in our region, is that highly interventionist economic policies simply don't work - that is one of the constants you have to bear in mind - but also recognising there is always a role for strategic intervention by governments, particularly where there is clear evidence of market failure. And that is what we sought to do with our industry policy statement.
And in sending a very strong message to the Australian business community that we are a high growth Government and setting out our sights towards a growth of four per cent or more in the decade to the year 2010, which is so essential to reducing unemployment, the Government, undoubtedly, has struck the right balance and the response to that Statement from the business community has been extremely encouraging.
And there are two or three other things where I believe that the national interest was served in a way that many of us didn't think might be possible. And of the blokes who are on the wall there, photographed in a suitably casual fashion without his glasses, is Robert Hill. Robert's not here today, he's probably still asleep, because he spent about 72 hours without sleep negotiating on Australia's behalf at the Climate Summit in Kyoto, and I don't think anybody can overestimate the magnificence of the job that he performed for Australia and the really important policy triumph that that outcome at Kyoto represented.
When we started on that road about a year ago, we were facing a demand from the European Union that as a developed country we should cut our greenhouse gas emissions between 1990 and year 2010 by 15 per cent. Now because like the European Union we couldn't fortuitously include, as the Europeans could do, all of those British coalmines that had been closed down by the Thatcher government in the 1980s, and we couldn't include the extractions from greenhouse gas emissions of the collapse of East German industry following the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, two quite fortuitous events which meant that their starting point was fairly easy to achieve, because we couldn't do that, if we had got anywhere near succumbing to their demands we'd have faced the loss of tens of thousands of jobs in regional areas of Australia, and we would have faced a very, very severe penalty on some of the most efficient and world competitive industries in Australia.
All along we said that we would make a major contribution to reducing the rate of growth of greenhouse gas emissions in Australia, and I'm very happy to say that if we had left things as they were, they would have grown by about 40 per cent between 1990 and year 2010, and as a result of the measures that we have announced, and others that were already in the pipeline, we are going to be able to reduce that to something in the order of eight per cent. But what we were able to achieve was an acceptance first of all of the principle that you can't have a binding world agreement in this area unless you recognise that different countries have different needs and have different situations.
And we also won widespread recognition at the conference of the treatment of some of the land clearance practices and the re-afforestation practices in Australia which is so important to the overall level of greenhouse gas emissions. So it was a remarkable negotiating achievement, we had no help at all from our political opponents, we had a cynical reaction from the Australian press and we had widespread grandstanding by other countries who were perfectly content to apply to themselves standards that they weren't prepared to apply to us. But in the face of that we were able to negotiate an outcome that served the environment well and also covered the interests of Australian industry.
And finally in the area of achieving things on the international stage, yesterday it was announced in Geneva that something that Australia has pushed for very hard, and that is a more liberal and open regime in financial services, and something that will further enhance the aspirations of Australia to become a major financial centre particularly in this part of the world, the World Trade Organisation agreement on the liberalisation of financial services is another, I think, feather in the international negotiating cap of Australia. And it is something that will open up enormous new opportunities in our region for the banks and other financial institutions of this country.
So as we come to the end of the year, I guess the most important bit of news that I've had as we come to the end of this year, were those magnificent job figures that came out last week. Because at the end of the day, generating jobs for Australians is the most important economic responsibility that any government has. And we have tried very hard to lay the proper foundations for that and we're starting to see some signs that those foundations are beginning to work. And to have job creation of 150,000 in three months doesn't mean that the problem is solved, and it doesn't mean that every month ahead of us is going to get better and better. But what it does mean is that for the first time in eighteen months we have begun to see the fruits of higher growth, we have begun to see growing confidence. And when you marry that up with all of the anecdotal evidence that this is going to be an extremely good Christmas for the retailers of Australia, it does mean that we end the year on a very, very optimistic and a very, very enthusiastic note.
Now that's reflecting back on the last year. I want to say something about the year ahead and it's going to be a year of very, very important policy changes. And the most important of those will be of course the reformation of the Australian taxation system. I don't think I'm giving away any political secrets to say that in 1998 the Government will unveil its plans to reshape the Australian taxation system. I'm not exaggerating things to say that of all of the unfinished pieces of economic business in Australia, none is more important than changing our taxation system. And we don't want to change it for some blind, ideological reason. We want to change it because the present system is no longer serving the needs of a modern community, particularly a community that hopes to do well in the 21st century.
Our rates of personal income tax are too high. When I left school in 1956 you paid the top marginal rate of tax when you earned 17 times the average weekly earnings - not something that sort of troubled me in a practical sense - but that was the rate. From seventeen times average weekly earnings, you're now down to 1.4 times average weekly earnings. Now that is ridiculous. It cripples incentive, it discourages people to work harder and it destroys all the sorts of aspirations for higher achievement that are meant to be the hallmark of our kind of society. So we do need a new system. We need a system that addresses the chronic deficiencies and the chronic anomalies of our indirect tax system. We need a system that makes Australia more internationally competitive and we need to address some of the weaknesses and some of the conflicts that are inherent in Commonwealth/State financial relations.
Now you can't put tax reform off forever. There's no way you can do that. It's been put off several times a lot more than it should have been put off and sooner or later a government is going to have to face the responsibility of tackling it. And of all the many things that challenge my Government in 1998 none is more important, and none will be more valuable to the long-term future of this country and the sort of society we build economically for our children than reforming the Australian taxation system.
Now I know it's risky, I know it's difficult and I know some people will say well somehow or other you get elected and then you do it. The fact of the matter is our system quite properly works on the basis that the public want to know what you stand for before an election, and I have the rather old-fashioned view that if you state categorically that you're not going to do something before an election it rather does destroy the credibility of yourself as a government if you totally repudiate that after an election. And that is why we'll unveil to the Australian public a tax plan before the election and it will be one of the things that we'll campaign on.
Now the Labor Party will oppose it, the Labor Party can go back to the 1950s, the Labor Party can stick its head in the sand, it will say the present taxation system is OK, they'll fiddle at the edges, they'll pretend that they can give you all that you want without any fundamental restructuring. And I hope at the end of the day the Australian public will disbelieve them. Because there isn't a man or woman in Australia who seriously looks at our taxation system that doesn't believe that it is long overdue for fundamental overhaul and fundamental change. And that is going to be something of enormous importance economically as we go into the next year.
One or two other very non-economic things, but things that are very important to the future of Australia will also be dealt with in the new year. We're going to have a Constitutional Convention about whether or not Australia should become a republic, and I think this Constitutional Convention is going to be a lot more successful and is going to provide a lot more interest and a lot more excitement for the Australian people than some of the cynics have suggested.
We've just completed the process of electing delegates and I think what that Convention most usefully can do is to devote its energies to working out what is the most suitable republican alternative to the present system of government. Now there remains in the Australian community a division of views on this issue and it has never been my role or my desire as Prime Minister to force one or other view down people's throats. Rather to provide a mechanism for the issue to be discussed and hopefully out of that mechanism, which is the Constitutional Convention, will come an agreed upon alternative to the existing system and then that alternative and the present system can be put to the Australian people for a vote well before the turn of the century, which is what I promised when I went to the Australian public at the last election.
It is right that we examine these issues as we come towards the end of this century. It is right that they be examined, they be talked about, they be debated and they be resolved before we celebrate 100 years of the existence of the Australian nation. And so far from my seeing the Constitutional Convention as being a wasted exercise, as being something that will become a mere debating forum, I think it may well surprise us in the diversity of Australians that have been elected to it, representing indigenous people, representing the young, representing local government, representing all points on the spectrum of political opinion, representing a variety of views as to what kind of republic Australia ought to be, representing a lot of people who don't want any change, I think it will turn out to be a far more productive and make a far greater contribution to an understanding of our identity and an understanding of the kind of constitutional future that we need to have.
We will also need in the course of the next few months of course, once again at a parliament level to try to resolve the very difficult issue of Native Title. It has proved to be one of the most difficult political and legal issues that any government has had to face. The easy thing is to throw up one's hands and say, well it's all too difficult, we'll leave it as it is. But no responsible government can leave the existing law relating to Native Title untouched because the whole basis of the original Native Title Act was that you'd only ever have Native Title on vacant Crown land. And the idea that Native Title could exist on other than vacant Crown land was something that was undreamt of by most Australians at the time of the Mabo decision, and at the time of the original Native Title Act. And it is important from the point of view of mining security and mining predictability, it is important to the point of view of the security of farmers and pastoralists, and most importantly it is important to the sense of justice and fair play of our indigenous community that a balanced and fair outcome be achieved.
And that is precisely what I believe the Government's legislation is. It was arrived at after a difficult period of four or five months of debate and negotiation within the community and within the coalition of Parties. It produced an outcome which was not completely satisfactory to any one of the individual stakeholders and that probably means that it represented a fair balance between the competing interests. It is a piece of legislation that respects the legitimate interests of all of the stakeholders and it's a piece of legislation to which the Coalition remains very strongly committed. And I might say it is a piece of legislation to which all of the Premiers and Chief Ministers of the States certainly in private, if not in the case of one of them at least in public, to which they all genuinely gave their support and their assent.
It has been a difficult issue and I know that the Government has been subjected to some very heavy criticism. But we've held our ground in the face of that criticism and we'll continue to do so, not out of any sense of arrogance, not out of any insensitivity, but because it never makes any sense to further compromise on something which has already been compromised.
We didn't adopt the trade union approach of putting an ambit claim in our legislation and then agreeing bit by bit to be ground back from that. What we decided to do from the very beginning is to talk to everybody and produce an outcome that we thought was fair and just. And having done that, we intend to defend that outcome, to argue it to the Australian people and to put it forward in the appropriate legislative way.
So ladies and gentlemen, there is an enormous amount that is on our plate and on the agenda for the coming year. I end the year both politically, but more importantly as an Australian with a tremendous sense of hope and optimism. We end the year in a week in which Australia tomorrow here in Sydney will honour a person whose death last week severed the remaining link between living Australians and those who took part in the most defining event in Australia's history, and that is the landing on Gallipoli on the 25th of April 1915.
And it is a reminder to all of us as we approach the centenary of the birth of Australia as a nation, as we approach that momentous celebration of 100 years of the Australian nation, it is a reminder of just how close we are to having no people left who were associated with some of the great historical events that define the Australian existence through the 20th century. And it's a reminder to all of us of the tremendous good fortune that we have to live in this country, of just what we have achieved as a nation, of how widely we are respected around the world, and I have a tremendous sense of excitement and enthusiasm about the fact that as a people we really exist in a unique intersection of history and geography and culture and economic circumstance.
There is no other country in the world that is quite like Australia. We are in many ways a projection of western civilisation, we have our European roots, we are increasingly linked both by people and citizens with nations of the Asia-Pacific region, that we have uniquely as a nation with this part of the world a very close strategic and historical and philosophical affinity with the nations of North America. And there is no country in the world that like, and it gives us an opportunity in a productive, positive way to work to the benefit of not only our own people, but to the benefit particularly of the countries of our region.
Ladies and gentlemen that's the year as I've seen it, there's some of the things that lie ahead of us. I am very grateful for the fact that so many of you have supported the Government, supported the Liberal Party through thick and thin. I look around this room and I see people who have been prepared to turn up when we weren't the flavour of the month through those long years - it seemed a hell of a long time and it was - those 13 years of Opposition, and many of you were around as friends then and I appreciate that very much and it's never forgotten by myself and my colleagues. But I do thank all of you, particularly my own local people in Bennelong, there are many of them here today. It's great to see you all again, and I look forward to this becoming well and truly an annual event of the Sydney political scene.
Merry Christmas to all of you, I hope it's everything that you want for yourselves and your families and friends, and I hope you all have a great New Year for the benefit of all Australians. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE............................................
Well thank you very much. Thank you very much to my friend and colleague, Philip, thank you. Well that is a very good start.
To my friend Philip Ruddock, to Joe Baini, Anwar, Mr Tueni, to my many other parliamentary colleagues and can I particularly acknowledge the presence of Ross Cameron, the Member for Parramatta and the Chairman of the Federal Parliamentary Australia-Lebanon Friendship Society. To Your Graces, Reverend Mothers, Sisters and all the other religious leaders here, particularly the Sheik and friends, and most importantly of all, my fellow Australians.
It is tonight an occasion to celebrate two important things about Australia and two important things about the human values that the people of Australia and the people of Lebanon have in common. The first and most important thing that we celebrate here tonight is the extraordinary success story that has been multicultural Australia, particularly over the last 30 or 40 years.
We celebrate here tonight the wonderful contribution that has been made to our magnificent country by the people who have made it their home that have come from Lebanon. And I want, on behalf of the Australian Government, and I know on behalf of all of the Australia people, to express our gratitude to our brothers and sisters of Lebanese descent who have made such a colossal contribution to the building and development of the miracle which is modern Australia.
No matter where you go in Australia - whether it be in politics, be it in the arts, be it in business, be it in culture, be it in sports, be it in the ordinary walks of community life - you find Australians of Lebanese descent. You find people of Lebanese descent, people born in Lebanon who are making a magnificent contribution to Australia and to Australia's future. And that has been a remarkable achievement and it has been a remarkable success story.
As our very distinguished guest from Lebanon said a few moments ago, what has been all the more remarkable is the united, cohesive, tolerant and harmonious way in which the different confessions, the different faiths, the different backgrounds, the different political views have been able to coexist so peacefully. Coexist with vigour, coexist debating differences, as you should do, in a vibrant democracy but coexisting in this united fashion within the Australian nation.
And that is an extraordinary achievement and it is a remarkable tribute to Lebanese Australians and it is a remarkable achievement of all of us, that we have been able to build that together. And we have been - living under our philosophy of multi-culturalism - we have been a remarkable, successful community.
As President Clinton was to remark in Sydney of October of 1996: Australia has become a beacon to the rest of the world in terms of the tolerant acceptance of people from 140 different countries and so many different nationalities. We are an extraordinary mixture of people. We occupy a unique intersection of history and geography and culture. We are a nation that has deep European roots, and yet, particularly since World War II, our culture has been enriched and added to by people from the Middle East, from Asia, from South America and from all around the world. And from that bringing together and that coming together there has emerged a proud and dignified and remarkably successful and a very united nation.
And we live by certain values and certain principles and the most important of those, is of course the acceptance that the individual worth - that every man and woman in this society of ours - is not measured according to the colour of their skin, is not measured according to their religious beliefs or the country in which they were born, but is measured according to the contribution they make to our nation and the sort of lives that they live as individual men and women. And they are values that will endure through the ages, so far as all future Australians are concerned.
And the other great thing that we celebrate tonight and it is really, in a sense, the reason why we are all here, and that is to celebrate the importance of freedom of speech. And it is a reminder to all of us who have known nothing other than free speech - those of us who were born in Australia and grew up in Australia and who have taken for granted free speech and have taken for granted the gift of a free and open press - we ought to remind ourselves that in many countries around the world that has not always been the case. And our guest reminded us of that and our guest reminded us of the great importance of the gift of free speech. Because, if you have in a society, three things - if you have free speech, you have a vigorous democratic system and you have an incorruptible judiciary, an incorruptible legal system - then you have the three great pillars of a successful society. And if you add to that the freedom of belief and the freedom of religion, you bring together all the great values that we hold in common as peoples who are lovers of freedom and lovers of democracy.
So tonight I salute the contribution of An-Nahar. I salute the contribution of journalists, particularly in the ethnic press but also in the mainstream press, because the contribution of ethnic newspapers to the vibrancy of our multicultural community has been immensely important. They are a very valuable, they are vital and indispensable communications links that bring together people, sharing a common culture and sharing a common background. And it is a very important element of the cross-cultural characteristics of so many Australians of different backgrounds that these newspapers and these communication vehicles exist.
And I salute the newspaper for the contribution that it has made to the Lebanese community. I salute the newspaper for the contribution that it has made to the vibrancy of free expression within Australia.
There are two other things that I would like to say tonight. I want to take the opportunity of expressing my complete solidarity with all of you when you long and pray for a free and fully independent Lebanon.
The people of Lebanon have suffered and have been tortured by war and devastation and death like few countries in the world, particularly since the end of World War II. You have been invaded, you have lost hundreds of thousands of your fellow countrymen and women and you have every right to long for a lasting peace settlement in the Middle East. And whatever may be the views of Australians and whatever may be the views of people around the world, about different aspects of the tragic circumstances of the Middle East, all of us must hope and pray that a final comprehensive peace settlement is achieved in the Middle East.
Only through the achievement of a comprehensive peace settlement can the people of Lebanon and indeed the people of many other countries in the Middle East look to the time that they can live in complete peace. They can have the sense of hope and optimism that the people of Australia have and that so many other people around the world have.
I know quite a deal, as do my many Parliamentary colleagues, of the suffering and the sadness that has come to the land of your birth, to the people of Lebanon. And I understand the shameful way in which the people of Lebanon have been tossed around and battered by the circumstances and the events of the Middle East and I want you, all of you, to go away from here tonight understanding that the Australian Government feels for the future of Lebanon and wants to see that just and lasting peace settlement over the whole of the Middle East.
And the final thing that I do want to say to you tonight, ladies and gentlemen, is to acknowledge very genuinely the values that the people of Lebanon have brought to our country. The values of hard work, the sense of family solidarity, the sense of enterprise, the sense of community, the sense of service and the sense of individual commitment. And I know as we approach the celebration of Christmas, I can speak for all Australians in wishing that you and your families come together at Christmas, that you reflect upon the bounty and good fortune of our country, you reflect upon the great gift of tolerance and understanding which is the birth right of all Australians.
And I say to all of you, whatever your faith may be, whatever your confessions may be, that this is a country that extends the gift of welcome, the embrace of friendship, the respect of culture and the respect of difference to all Australians. And on my behalf, and on behalf of the Australian Government, I wish you a very happy Christmas and a very prosperous new year. I thank you for the contribution that you make to our country and I join you in saluting the bonds of friendship between the people of Australia and the people of Lebanon.
Thank you.
[Ends]


17 December 1997
E&amp;OE............................................
We celebrate 25 years of diplomatic relations between Australia and China. We celebrate 25 years during which that relationship, inevitably has gone through, on occasions, some strain, but at this moment, at the end of 1997, is in exceptionally fine condition and represents to the Australian Government and I am sure to the Australian people, one of the most important relationships that Australia has with any country in the world.
It was during Mr Whitlam's Prime Ministership that diplomatic relations between Australia and China were established and as well as acknowledging his presence and that of Mr Hawke here tonight, I also acknowledge the presence of Australia's first Ambassador to China, Dr Stephen Fitzgerald. But, importantly, the relationship between our two countries and the improvement and the development and the deepening of that relationship has been pursued vigorously on a bi-partisan basis over the last 25 years. And during the Prime Ministership of Malcolm Fraser, between 1975 and 1983, very strong contributions were made to the development and the deepening of a relationship. And it remains a bi-partisan constant of Australian politics that close relations between our two nations is very, very important, so very firmly, on the two pillars of common interest and mutual respect.
Australia and China are very different societies, our histories have been very different, our political systems have been very different, but our relationship has always been at its very best. Each of us has fully understood the depth of those differences yet resolved to work together to capitalise on the areas of mutual benefit and common interest. It is always important in a relationship between two very different societies that you put aside those differences and you focus on those areas of common agreement and those common agreements and those common interests can be pursued to great mutual benefit.
Australia and China are very natural economic partners. Australia is a major and reliable supplier to China of commodities and technological know-how, which are important to China's economic growth and we import what China is good at producing. China is our largest wool market and a major supplier of clothing. China is the world's largest steel producer and we supply 60 per cent of its iron ore exports. In 1996 our two-way trade exceeded $8 billion and our trade with China has been growing twice as fast as our trade with the rest of the world.
Australia strongly supports the aspirations of China to become a member of the World Trade Organisation and I know that I speak on behalf of business men and women in Australia in saying that they have a growing interest in investment in China. I recall very vividly the very strong support I received from the Australian Business delegation that accompanied me on my visit to China in March of this year. That visit, I believe, made a very significant contribution to the growth in the character of the relationship that has occurred over the last 12 months. It has led to renewed interests in investment in China and (inaudible) the characteristics of our relationship over the past 12 months have been the large number of visits that have been paid by Australian Ministers to China and the significant number of visits paid by senior members of the Chinese Government, including of course, the Vice Premier, Mr Zhu Rongi, who paid a very successful visit to Australia a few months ago.
The common participation of Australia and China in the International Monetary Funds Financial Assistance Packages, for both Indonesia and Thailand, has underlined the character of our partnership in the Asia-Pacific region. It has demonstrated the depth of the Australian commitment and the Australian involvement in our region. It has demonstrated the desire of Australia to show, in a practical way, that we are a fully participating, reliable, strong partner in this part of the world. And in that connection I am very pleased to announce tonight that Australia will establish a four year programme, worth up to $20 million, which will involve experts working closely with their Chinese counterparts on banking, finance, social security and public policy frameworks.
This particular proposal I first canvassed with the Premier of China, Li Peng - during my visit - when I expressed to him the view that Australia's public service expertise could be of particular use to China in its attempt to reform its finance, taxation and social security institutions.
I am also very pleased to note that dialogue has progressed on a variety of bilateral issues between our two countries in areas such as human rights and that contact between our armed forces is also developing extremely well. But as always, in relations between nations, the most important and the most vibrant element of the bilateral relationship between Australia and China are, of course, the people to people links.
An estimated 140,000 Australians visited China last year and more than 50,000 Chinese visitors have come to our country over the last year. And for that reason, as well as the boost that I know it will give to the tourist industry, I welcome the Chinese announcement that Australia will be designated as an official tourist destination.
Tonight, ladies and gentlemen, is also an opportunity to celebrate and to mark with gratitude the enormous contribution the Chinese people have made to the development of modern Australia. There is a strong Chinese community in many areas of Australia. The contribution to Australian life, of those people, has been immense. They are a very welcome part of the modern Australia. They have added diversity and richness, and indeed lustre and talent, to all levels of Australian society. It is not possible to contemplate the modern Australia without remarking upon the contribution of that modern Australia of the people of Chinese descent who now comprise several hundred thousand of our citizens.
I would also like to take the opportunity of saying that Australia's policies in relation to immigration are avowedly non-discriminatory. Our's is a society that does not discriminate against people in any shape or form on the basis of their colour, their race, their ethnicity, or their natural origins. And those who argue otherwise are decidedly not part of the Australian mainstream.
Tonight, ladies and gentlemen, is an opportunity to reflect with great pride on what has been achieved over the last quarter of a century since the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and China. But more importantly, it is an opportunity to commit ourselves with renewed energy and vigour to the development of the relationship in a far deeper and broader fashion over the next 25 years.
The association between our two countries is an association that can only endure and grow stronger if there is a commitment, on both sides, to the development of that association. We share a common destiny, a common future, together, in our part of the world. If we cooperate, we can, to our great mutual benefit, enjoy a very fruitful partnership. I think it is a great achievement that two societies - in some ways so very different, yet united by common interests and mutual respect - have been able to forge such a relationship.
And If I can be poured a glass of champagne, I'd like - after the translation - to propose a toast to the health of Mr Li and of equal importance, to the friendship of the people of China and the people of Australia.
[Ends]



E&amp;OE............................................
Thank you very much Rabi Cohen, to his Excellency the Ambassador, to Mr Borskey to Peter Debnam and other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very special privilege for me to be here tonight for a number of reasons that go beyond the lighting of the first candle of the Menorah it also is an opportunity for me to honour, not only the creation of the state of Israel 50 years ago, next year, but also to honour the immense contribution of the Jewish community of Australia to our beautiful country.
And to say again on behalf of the Australian Government that not only is the survival, and the prosperity, and the security and the invincibility of the state of Israel behind secure, defensible boundaries, a corner stone of Australian foreign policy but also the warm and continuing embrace within the family of Australia of the Jewish community that is also a constant of our policy and of our approach. Tolerance and acceptance of people of different faiths and different ethnicity and of different religion and of different background is a fundamental element of the modern Australia in which we all believe.
And we may continue in abhorrence of any kind of discrimination based on race or religion or ethnic background is also a constant of political life in Australia. Australian Jews from the very beginning have made an immense contribution to this country and I remarked to my host as I arrived that my own father was one of the many thousands of Australian soldiers who fought under the command of General Sir John Monash, the Commander of the (inaudible) on the Western Front. And he takes his place, Monash, along with Jews of all walks of life who have contributed to the building of the modern Australia.
So it is a great honour to have been invited to light the first candle to have beaten Clinton and Blair and Mandela and indeed everyone else in being the very first to light the candle. And isn't there a beautiful symmetry about the fact that the very last official function I perform before Christmas, the very last official function that I perform before Christmas is to light the Mandelah.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................................................
To the Premier of Western Australia, Richard Court and Mrs Court,
   to Kevan Gosper, to Mr Lawrence, to Tan Le, to the many other distinguished
   guests, ladies and gentlemen. Could I first of all say what a great
   idea it is that the Australia Day Council now takes the announcement
   of the Australian of the Year around Australia. Previously it used
   to just about always be announced in Sydney or in Canberra. I think
   it's a marvellous innovation that it's now going all around
   Australia.
I think it's a tremendous opportunity for all of us as Australians
   on an occasion like this not only as I normally do when I come to
   such a presentation, and that is to stand in awe of the achievement
   and the contribution of men and women of Australia to so many endeavours
   and so many walks of life in our country, and when you think of
   the breadth of experience and the breadth of contribution and the
   sacrifice of individual self for the good of humanity that is represented
   by so many of the people who are nominated for this award, it does
   rather make you stand in awe of the contribution of individual men
   and women to the building and the betterment of our country.
But it's also an occasion to reflect upon values that are
   particularly important to all of us as Australians, those values
   of optimism, those values of tolerance, those values of perseverance
   and those values of mateship and when I look back over the last
   year, I am reminded of so many examples of the living out of those
   values by Australians, and although not remarking on it as the only
   example of course, we are reminded of the tremendously uplifting
   experience of all those volunteers in the various disasters, particularly
   but not only at Thredbo, but also in the bushfires, and it's
   a true demonstration of that great Australian spirit.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have enormous pleasure in announcing that
   the Australian of the Year is Cathy Freeman.


E&amp;OE................................................................................................................................
Thank you very much. To His Worship, the Mayor and Mrs Hardwick,
   to Mr Don Randall, the Federal Member for Swan, to my many other
   Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen,
   and also a special acknowledgment to the officers of that great
   regiment, the SAS, for their magnificent landing this morning and
   the magnificent contribution that they've made to this lovely
   ceremony. 
One of the many privileges of the office of Prime Minister is to
   have the opportunity to celebrate Australia Day with a different
   group of Australians each year. Last year, I had the opportunity
   of celebrating Australia Day at a similar ceremony to this on the
   seaside just outside of Adelaide, and today I am in this beautiful
   spot in South Perth, against the backdrop of the Swan River and
   of the city of Perth, and in the presence of a number of men and
   women who have paid us as Australians the ultimate complement, and
   that is that they have decided to become Australian citizens. 
For those of us who were born in Australia, it was not a matter
   of our choice, but rather an accident of birth of which we have
   grown to love and to cherish and to embrace as we have grown older
   and appreciated the enormous benefits of living in this country.
   There is a special act of embracing, a special act of acknowledgment
   on the part of people who choose to live in this country and I want,
   on behalf of all your soon-to-be fellow Australians to welcome all
   of you into the family of the Australian nation, to assure you that
   you have made the most wise, intelligent and far-sighted decision
   of your life to become Australian citizens and to assure you that
   of all the qualities of the Australian nation, the open, tolerant
   and positive embrace of people from all parts of the Earth is a
   very distinguishing and a very important characteristic of the fabric
   of the Australian nation.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is inevitable on an occasion such as this
   that we should pause for a moment and think about Australia. We
   think about the past, we take pride in those things that we have
   achieved and the Australian achievement has been a saga of great
   proportion. We have achieved an enormous amount as a nation. We
   have built in this country something special. It is unique to be
   an Australian. At the present time, Australia occupies a unique
   intersection of history, geography, culture and economic circumstance.
   There is no nation on Earth that totally embraces in that sense
   linkages with Europe, linkages with North America, and also linkages
   with the Asian Pacific region.
  There are many great tributaries to the Australian nation. We acknowledge
   on this day the enormous contribution of the indigenous people of
   our nation and we thank them for that contribution, and all Australians
   share the goal of genuine, on-going reconciliation between all of
   the people of Australia. We also recognise the tremendous contribution
   of those people who defended this country in war and laid down their
   lives for the preservation of the liberty of Australians. And of
   course, we welcome the people who have embraced Australia from the
   four corners of the Earth.
  When you think about Australia, you not only think of the symbols
   of Australia. A nation is made up of symbols and of celebrations
   of important events. That's a very important part of the fabric
   of a nation. But symbols, important though they are, are not quite
   as important as the character and the substance of a nation. And
   over the next few weeks, as the Mayor said, we as a country are
   going to talk about some of the symbols of our democracy. We are
   not going to talk about democracy in the sense of debating whether
   or not we are going to preserve democracy. I don't think there
   are many people in Australia who argue that other than we should
   fully preserve and perpetuate democracy as the best form of Government
   but we are going to debate the symbols, we are going to debate whether
   or not a system of government which has delivered immense stability
   and cohesion during the almost 100 years of the Australian Federation
   should be changed because some in the community, a significant number
   indeed, think that the symbolism rather than the substance of that
   system is in need of change.
Now there are issues that properly belong to debate and as I have
   said regularly, on behalf of the Government and I think I echo the
   views of all Australians in saying that at the end of the day, the
   question of whether or not this country is to become a republic
   is something that will be determined by the Australian people voting
   in an open democracy and by no other group of people, and that of
   course is how it should be.
But important though those symbols are and important though the
   symbols of a country are, I think even more important to me and
   to a lot of Australians, is not so much the symbols of the Australian
   nation in the 21st century but rather the character of the Australian
   nation in the 21st century because what really determines the place
   of a nation in the history, of the peoples of the world, what really
   determines the sense of worth and decency and self-respect that
   we have about our country is really the character of our nation.
   And what our nation stands for, its values and the beliefs it holds
   dear, are more important than what the symbols that mark that nation
   may be, significant though those symbols are.
As we go towards the 21st century, the character of the Australian
   nation is ultimately going to be shaped, in my opinion, by the way
   in which we work out the relationship between our government, of
   whatever political persuasion it may be from time to time, the community
   and individual men and women of Australia. It is the balance and
   the relationship between the government, the community and the individual
   that will ultimately shape the character of Australia.
Governments cannot shape national character. Governments cannot
   legislate to change the human heart. Governments cannot legislate
   to change the character of a people. But that does not mean that
   governments do not have an important role to play. That does not
   mean that governments cannot set examples; governments cannot lead
   where it is appropriate for governments to lead. They do have a
   role. But also a very important role in shaping the character of
   Australia will be role of our great community organisations.
This gathering of Australians out in the open air on the morning
   of the 26th of January is a magnificent expression of the sort of
   people we are. This occasion is open to everybody. This occasion
   welcomes people of all different backgrounds, be they different
   ethnic backgrounds, different religious backgrounds, different political
   backgrounds, different societal backgrounds. We are gathered together
   in an open, egalitarian, free fashion. It is one of the distinguishing
   characteristics of the Australian nation. 
We are a nation of communities. We are a nation of volunteers and
   as I look back over the last year, I think the efforts that moved
   me most amongst all Australians over the last year were the efforts
   of those volunteers who inspired us and comforted us in times of
   tragedy, whether it was the bushfires, the tragedies in other parts
   of Australia, and most particularly, that awful tragedy at Thredbo
   in July of this year. And that volunteer effort, that community
   spirit, is something very deep and very strong and governments need
   community organisations, they need the churches, they need the other
   volunteer organisations and, of course, the most important institution
   of all in our society and that is the institution of the Australian
   family is the most viable and the most enduring and the most stabilising
   part of our entire community.
[Aerial flyover]
That's the most innovative interjection I've ever had!
So, any government needs a strong community and lastly and most
   importantly, governments and communities also need free, achieving,
   successful, inspired individuals. There is nothing so powerful in
   any community as an individual who is determined to succeed and
   who is determined to contribute something to his or her society.
And individuals, of course, not only have rights but they also
   have responsibilities, and individuals making a contribution to
   the Australian community, achieving to the best of their talents
   and their abilities. As I've participated in ceremonies to
   mark the award of the Young Australian of the Year, a young girl
   who came to Australia from Vietnam when she was aged 4, and of course
   to the Australian of the Year here in Perth yesterday to Cathy Freeman,
   somebody who has captured the heart of every Australian because
   of her marvellous contribution to Australian life and to Australian
   achievement, one is reminded of the tremendous array of talent and
   ability which abounds in Australia
So ladies and gentlemen as we look towards the 21st century, the
   symbols that we embrace for the 21st century, whether they are the
   same as we have had in the 20th century or whether they are somewhat
   altered or partly or entirely altered, they are things for the Australian
   people after proper debate to decide, and I do not intend to introduce
   into this Australia Day observance any particular partisan debate
   on that. Another time and another place will be the opportunity
   for me to renew the expostulation of my own views on those subjects.
But let me simply say that important though the symbols of our
   country are, even more important will be the character of our country
   as we move into the 21st century, and that character will be ultimately
   shaped by the extent to which with goodwill, the government of the
   day, the community organisations and the individual can - each in
   their respective roles - play a very important part, a shared endeavour
   to build a good and strong and decent Australian society is the
   goal of those three segments of our great nation..
Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, can I thank the City of South
   Perth, can I thank Don Randall in particular for the invitation
   that came through him to attend this ceremony. Can I say how much
   Janette and I are enjoying the celebration of the Australia Day
   weekend here in Western Australia. It is the first opportunity I
   have had in any capacity to celebrate Australia Day here in Perth.
   We are enjoying it immensely, we have a full programme of activities
   ahead of us, including a very brief visit to a particular cricketing
   fixture at the WACA this afternoon and can I also say, on behalf
   of both of us, a very happy Australia Day to all of you and very
   especially to those who are becoming Australians for the first time
   today, thank you for honouring us with embracing the great Australian
   way of life. 
Thank you.
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Mr Sinclair, Mr Jones, fellow delegates and guests. I suppose, in
 a sense, we are all speeched out and we have another eight or nine
 days of debate and discussion ahead of us. But I thought as we reminisced,
 many of us who'd sat in the famous old chamber in which we met
 today, we reminisced about the events that took place there and my
 mind and my experience of that chamber goes back to the election of
 May of 1974. And of course, that experience encumbered some of the
 dramatic and traumatic, for some, for most, events of recent Australian
 political history. I must say, the very impressive parliamentary main
 of Gough Whitlam who was Prime Minister when I first came into parliament:
 the confrontations that followed between he and Malcolm Fraser; the
 removal in rather unexpected, spectacular terms of Jim Cope, the Speaker.
 And then, of course, the dramatic events of November of 1975.
As I wandered along the corridors of the old building I thought of
 the odd Liberal Party ballot that had taken place in the Opposition
 Party Room. And, of course, the real reason why, ladies and gentlemen,
 we are having this convention in the Old Parliament House is that
 for long years I coveted the Prime Minister's office in the corner
 of this building and, of course, unfortunately, we had moved to a
 new place before I finally aspired to the office. So I thought some
 kind of occupation by surrogacy through this convention was probably
 not a bad idea.
And I think of the tremendous parliamentary battles that I had with
 Bill Hayden. And, I guess, as I looked around at the gathering of
 current and former members of parliament of two on opposite sides,
 I guess of those that are here as delegates, Bill and I would have
 probably faced each other more, and more intensely and more passionately
 on different issues, he as Opposition Leader and I, as Treasurer,
 between 1977 and 1982.
But, of course, it is not only the house that has great memories.
 It is also this dining room which was the scene of many a parliamentary
 gathering. My first experience was a farewell dinner to the former
 Governor-General, the late Paul Hasluck. I had reason to reflect later
 that perhaps some might have wanted that farewell dinner to be have
 been delayed by four or five years.
But, I also think back to another of the very early dinners I attended
 here. It wasn't quite his last ride but it was a dinner attended
 in honour of the visiting Tsar of Iran in 1974. But I have to say
 that probably the last official luncheon or dinner that I attended
 here was a most extraordinary one. Believe it or not it was tendered,
 I hasten to say, by the Hawke Government of course, in honour of the
 late but not lamented President and dictator of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu.
 It does seem strange but it happened. He came. I have got to say that
 Bob in his inimitable style said: "oh well, it was arranged by
 one of my predecessors and you know, John, I had to sort of pick up
 the hospitality".
But I will never forget that lunch. I came around and I was Opposition
 Leader and Bob Hawke was Prime Minister and he said: "I don't
 know what we are doing with this bloke here". And he said: "How
 are we going to get through it". And I said: Well look,
 let's see if we can sort of do a bit of a double, let's
 see if each of us can avoid mentioning him'. And it was a most
 extraordinary performance. It has to be the first time in the history
 of Australian parliamentary hospitality that we actually, the Prime
 Minister and Opposition Leader, actually went through a lunch without
 mentioning the guest of honour, or his wife for that matter.
Jones, I am indebted for your interjection. Or his wife. And how did
 we do it? Well, Bob Hawke, to his great credit told a story about
 a great Labor figure whose anglicised name was E.G. Theodore. I thought
 that was pretty impressive and he talked about, you know, this and
 that inquiry and he talked about this and that contribution to fiscal
 policy and this or that contribution to the Queensland Labor Party
 and it was a marvellous little story. And at the end, he sat down,
 everybody clapped and I thought what-on-earth am I going to do because
 I had to support his remarks and I didn't know as much about
 E.G. Theodore as Bob Hawke. So I spotted Lang Hancock in the audience.
 And Lang, of course was well known for entering into a bit of barter
 with those in Romania. So I spoke, I think, eloquently about the economic
 virtues of barter, about how it was really a tremendous substitute
 for economic rationalism.
So the lunch ended and Bob said: "Gee, that wasn't bad".
 I thought we had made a very good unity ticket on that particular
 occasion. So it was a very memorable last luncheon and certainly the
 last one that I remember in this marvellous old dining room, which
 I must say is rather spunkier than it was now on many occasions when
 we dined in it before. But it carries very great memories for a lot
 of us, in a personal sense but it also carries great memories in a
 collective, national sense.
There is something rather special about today and tonight. It is an
 extraordinary gathering of Australians, an extraordinary gathering
 of humanity and whatever may be our views there is immense good will.
 And I am now going to invite you, and I assure you this will cause
 nobody any embarrassment. I am going to invite you to join me in an
 utterly uncontroversial toast. So I invite you all to charge your
 glasses and be upstanding and I invite you...No, it is utterly uncontroversial.
 Now, do you think for a moment that I would let any of you down? I
 invite all of you to join me in a toast to the land we love, Australia.
Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE........................................................................................................
Hello. Next month when Parliament meets again, the Parliament will
 resubmit its Native Title Amendment Bill. We have to do this because
 last year, the Senate put some amendments in it which are quite unacceptable.
 I hope that on this occasion we can get the Bill through and we can
 do what I think most Australians want and put this difficult issue
 behind us.
Amending the Native Title Act is very important to regional and rural
 Australia. What we have proposed is a fair balance respecting the
 rights of Aboriginal people, farmers, miners and the rest of the community.
 The Senate has insisted on some amendments which are quite unreasonable
 and the worst of the amendments insisted on by the Senate relates
 to the so-called rights to negotiate. You see, what the Senate is
 doing is saying that one section of the community, one group of Australians,
 namely the Aboriginal native title claimants, should have superior
 rights to other Australians, namely the pastoralists.
The right to negotiate is not a common law right. It was a special
 right given to native title claimants under Mr Keating's Native
 Title Act and all we are doing is saying that procedures should be
 established whereby native title claimants are given no greater rights
 than other Australians.
What the Senate is saying is that you could have a situation where
 in relation to a claim over a pastoral leasehold, the native title
 claimant could insist on a right to negotiate but that would not be
 available to a pastoral leaseholder who may, through his family, have
 occupied that land for 50 or 100 years.
We haven't given in fully to any side of this argument. We have
 tried to strike a fair balance and under our changes it will still
 be possible for native title claimants in theory to make claims over
 79 percent of the land mass of Australia.
You all remember that when the original Act was passed in 1993 the
 Keating Government virtually guaranteed that there couldn't be
 native title claim under pastoral leases. That was overturned in the
 Wik decision and what we have done with our changes is to make sure
 that farmers and pastoralists can carry on their normal activities
 without interference and that they can make reasonable extensions
 to those activities without running into road blocks and running into
 difficulties.
We need to put this issue behind us. We need to focus on the future.
 We need to focus on constructive gestures of reconciliation between
 Aboriginal people and other Australians. We can't afford as a
 nation for the debate to go on indefinitely and I therefore hope that
 when the Bill is presented again in March of this year the Senate
 will understand the fairness and let the Bill go through in the form
 that we propose.
Thank you for listening.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. His Grace, the Archbishop of
   Melbourne, said that God had had a pretty good Convention. Can I
   say that, without in any way wishing to belittle the Almighty's
   success, can I say that I think Australia has had an even better
   one. I think what this Convention has demonstrated is the truth
   of a proposition that I have always held very dear and that is the
   things that unite us as Australians are greater than the things
   that divide us.
I ask myself what have I learnt out of this last two weeks? I have
   learnt something that I wasn't so sure of at the beginning,
   and that is that I have no doubt that Australia can conduct a referendum
   on this issue with vigour, with passion and with meaning and yet
   in a way that doesn't undermine or fracture the essential values
   of our society.
I have learnt out of this Convention that this Australian way we
   have of doing things is special and is unique. I haven't experienced
   anything like this in all the years I have been in public life.
   The bringing together of so many people in different ways, with
   different backgrounds, with different contributions, with different
   views was something that at the beginning one might have thought
   was fraught with danger, that anything could have happened, that
   anything could have emerged.
In terms of the positions that were taken I suppose at various
   stages, that appeared possible. But in a great display of civility
   and good humour and with great integrity in many areas, it was possible
   for us to really let out what has been a moment in Australia's
   history and a moment that I am sure that everybody has treasured.
I have been a Member of this Federal Parliament now since May of
   1974 and I have been immensely privileged to come to the highest-elected
   position in this country and to be given the greatest honour that
   can ever become the lot of any Australian man or woman and that
   is to be the Prime Minister of our wonderful country.
I would have thought therefore that the sense of excitement and
   exhilaration is something that I had enjoyed it all. But there was
   something about this gathering and the look on peoples faces, and
   I share Geoffrey Blainey's response to the look on the faces
   of those like Malcolm Turnbull and Neville Wran and Janet Holmes
   a Court, not people who on this issue I identified with very closely,
   but obviously you have an enormous enthusiasm for it and felt a
   sense of exhilaration and happiness that what they had worked to
   achieve had in fact been achieved.
Could I also pay particular tribute to Lloyd Waddy and to Kerry
   Jones as the leaders of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy.
   I know the difficulties that they have endured in putting forward
   a cause which, for a long time, received very little support or
   recognition in commentaries on this issue. I know their lack of
   resources. I know what was said and suggested at the beginning about
   their propensity to strategically vote. I salute their immense integrity
   in the way in which they have handled themselves throughout this
   entire debate.
The reason that this has been a success and the reason why it has
   captured to a very significant degree the interest and the imagination
   of the Australian people, is that despite our differences we all
   smell the same Eucalypt, we all know the same dust and we all feel
   the same salt in the same ocean. And, of course, those things that
   are dear to one side of the argument are equally dear to others.
And what has struck me more than anything else about this whole
   Convention and about the whole debate is the integrity of the Australianism
   that has been expressed by all of the delegates. And I will go away
   from this Convention an even more idealistic Australian, one with
   an even greater passion to allow our democracy to flourish. We will
   have a vote next year. The Australian people will decide the outcome
   of that. And we will all accept the verdict of the Australian people
   with grace and goodwill, all of us, whatever the result may be.
Can I say that it was always my fervent wish that this issue could
   be resolved in the sense of it not being on the agenda when we celebrated
   the Centenary of our Federation. If Australia is to become a republic,
   it ought to be become a republic on the 1st of January 2001. If
   Australia is not to become a republic at that time, let it be off
   the agenda for the celebration of the Centenary of our Federation
   so that we can share together the jubilation and the gratitude and
   the affection that we feel for what this country has meant to us
   over the last 100 years.
That doesn't mean to say that the issue, if it is rejected
   next year, will not necessarily return. It is in the nature of a
   democracy that is always open to the people. But the celebration
   of 100 years of the Australian nation, with all its achievement
   and acknowledging all of its blemishes. And can I say on that point,
   that one of the things which has enriched this Convention has been
   the contribution of the representatives of the first Australians,
   the Indigenous people.
And I hope in a small way, to you Lois and Gatjil and Nova, and
   to Pat and George and to Neville, I am sorry, and to David, I hope
   that is in some way a sign and a signal from all of us that you
   do occupy a very special place in our community. 
I think we can look forward, with great hope and in a very positive
   way, to the conduct of this referendum. This Convention has spoken
   very clearly. It will be the intention of my Government, if it is
   returned at the next election, to hold the referendum before the
   end of 1999. In the meantime, in the nature of things, other issues
   will flood back to the stage of public debate and I imagine that
   there will be a period in which the debate on this issue might go
   slightly on to the backburner, particularly so far as some of the
   more active political players are concerned. But that, once again,
   is in the hands of the Australian public. 
We won't back track on the commitments that we have given
   and I have given in the name of my Government. I said before the
   last election that we would have a Convention. I promised the Australian
   people a vote before the year 2000. I said at the opening of this
   Convention that if a clear view emerged about a republican model
   the Australian people would have a referendum. I repeat my promise
   that that is what will occur. I repeat again that my Government,
   the members of the Liberal Party of Australia and therefore in practice,
   the members of my Government, will be allowed an open or a free
   vote during that election campaign.
I am proud of the fact that my Party, the Liberal Party of Australia,
   allowed a conscience vote on this issue. I don't say that to
   criticise the other Party, I simply say it as a mark of the maturity
   of my Party that we did that. This is an issue that is 
a-typical, that is different. It doesn't follow the normal
   conventions and cannons of political behaviour and I am very proud
   of the Liberal Party being mature enough and strong enough to allow
   people an open and free vote on this issue.
I want to say to you, Ian, that you have adorned the proceedings
   of this Convention in a way that has won everybody's admiration.
   There is nobody and I say nobody - and I am not normally noted for
   modesty on these things - in this room, whose parliamentary skills
   and whose management skills, in a Chamber such as this, are as consummate
   as yours, Ian, and you have demonstrated that.
And to you Barry, you brought with your particular role, as National
   President of the Australian Labor Party, but also because of who
   you are and the character that you are and what you mean to many
   people in Australia, you brought an added quality as Deputy Chairman
   of the proceedings. And I also salute, very warmly, the contribution
   that you have made.
I would like to thank Nick Minchin, in particular, who has carried
   the ministerial burden. Nick has got two specific responsibilities
   in my Government, and many others, but the two he has got have been
   fairly lively of late. One has been the Constitutional Convention
   and the other has been native title and he has worked very hard
   and he has been a great source of support and strength to me, in
   this. And I would also like to thank on my own personal staff, Catherine
   Murphy, who has been of particular help to me and to Nick, and who
   has kept me informed.
Can I join in thanking the Secretariat and in particular, Bill
   Blick from my Department who has headed up the Secretariat. And
   to Lyn Barlin, whose work as Clerk I admired immensely, and I am
   delighted that he has been able to help us out.
There is not a lot more I can say. I am really so happy that we've
   been able to hold something so different, so special and that we've
   come through it better Australians. We are all the happier for the
   experience. The memories that I will take away from this include
   the lovely Grace sung last night by George and his wife, which was
   a beautiful touch and a reminder of the special diversity of our
   country. 
The immense intelligence and dignity and bearing of the younger
   delegates to the Convention with their variety of views. But not
   to forget the age cohorts at the other end of the range were also
   very well represented and their contribution was considerable and
   we are greatly in their debt.
It has been a very special experience. I have loved every minute
   of it. I feel privileged to have been the Prime Minister who brought
   it about and I think it has brought us all together as Australians,
   whatever the outcome referendum may be, in a very, very special
   way. Thank you very, very much.
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Well ladies and gentlemen, the National Security Committee of Cabinet
 has authorised the deployment of elements of the Australian Defence
 Force to the Gulf. Those elements will depart tomorrow. This follows
 discussions between Australia and the United States. As indicated
 the elements will include a contingent of the SAS and two Boeing 707s
 for refuelling purposes.
I will travel to Perth tomorrow to see the personnel before their
 departure. I have spoken to the Leader of the Opposition and I have
 invited him to accompany me in speaking to the forces before they
 depart. I know that they will depart with the universal goodwill of
 the Australian community who will be united in their hopes for their
 safe return.
I should emphasise at this stage that the authority has merely been
 for deployment and as yet no authority has been given for the engagement
 of those forces in military activity. It remains the fervent hope
 of the Government that this matter can still be settled by diplomatic
 means. But it is essential as part of the preparations for military
 action, if that becomes regrettably necessary, it is essential that
 early deployment take place.
Can I express my appreciation of the decision announced today by the
 Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mrs Shipley, which she spoke to me
 about by telephone before making the announcement in Wellington, that
 New Zealand had offered a contingent of SAS and also some Orions.
 Every effort will be made for co-operation between the Australian
 and New Zealand forces should military action become necessary. The
 degree and the character and the extent of that co-operation is something
 that has to be worked out at an operational level.
I want to emphasise that the contribution that Australia is making
 demonstrates our desire to make it plain to Saddam Hussein and the
 Iraqi leadership that a growing number of the states of the civilised
 world will not tolerate or agree to his continued possession of and
 capacity to deliver weapons of mass destruction. That does represent
 a threat not only to the immediate region but also in the long run
 to the security of nations around the world. And it is important that
 that message be conveyed. It is also important that the authority
 of the United Nations be maintained and supported and if action were
 not to be taken, in the event of diplomatic efforts failing, then
 the authority of the United Nations would be severely damaged and
 undermined and there would be very significant security implications
 for states in the Middle Eastern region but also around the world.
Can I say again that the forces that will be going to the Gulf are
 forces in which all Australians feel an immense sense of pride. And
 we all hope, first and foremost, that their use will not be necessary
 and if that use does become necessary then that they will all safely
 complete their mission and return home to their families and loved
 ones.


E&amp;OE......................................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Palmer, Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen.
   It is my pleasure to welcome the delegates who represent some 34
   different countries to this 15th Asian Regional Conference of Interpol.
   I particularly welcome your President Mr Kanemoto and your Secretary
   General Mr Kendall.
In this the 75th anniversary year of the formation of Interpol
   I record my own personal thanks and those of the Australian people
   for the work that Interpol has done in the cause of worldwide law
   enforcement over that 75 year period.
As you are aware Australia is a long-standing member of Interpol.
   We are very pleased to have played a constructive role in its extensive
   history as an assembly of police organisations promoting police
   co-operation throughout the world. Our support for Interpol remains
   strong and we look forward to its continued development as a first
   class international organisation.
Australia is very grateful for the opportunity of hosting this
   Asian Regional Conference which was last held in my country in 1991.
   In doing so, I pay particular tribute to the Commissioner of the
   Australian Federal Police, Mr Mick Palmer. It is a personal credit
   to you Mr Palmer that this conference is being staged here in Australia.
   It is also to your great credit that you were unanimously elected
   as a delegate for Asia on Interpol's Executive Committee for
   the next three years. Your election to this post is also a credit
   to your force, the Australian Federal Police, and the important
   role that the AFP plays in the fight against crime both in Australia
   and in the region.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is an opportunity for me as Prime Minister
   of Australia to address some words of gratitude, very directly,
   to all serving police officers in Australia. I do so conscious of
   the fact that in recent times some police services in this country
   have come under some criticism. And I want, against that background,
   all of the police personnel in Australia to know that the great
   bulk of their fellow Australians deeply appreciate what they do
   to protect our lives and our property. A strong police force based
   on complete integrity is indispensable to the kind of civilised
   society we have here in Australia.
Despite the misdeeds of some who have brought undeserved opprobrium
   on the ranks of their colleagues I know that the overwhelming majority
   of men and women within police ranks in Australia are dedicated,
   hard working, honest Australians who are performing a splendid task
   in contributing to our community. And I take this opportunity on
   this platform, in opening this gathering, to express my personal
   thanks and that of my Government to them and to wish them well in
   their very important work for the goodwill and the benefit of all
   Australians.
By protecting individuals, families and businesses against crime
   police officers protect the national interest. But law enforcement
   agencies protect the national interest in other, perhaps less visible
   ways.
The desirability of a country like Australia as an economic destination
   depends not solely upon the strength of its economic foundations
   but also upon the security of those foundations. Organisations such
   as the Australian Federal Police, the Customs Service, the National
   Crime Authority and the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis
   Centre protect the integrity of data flows, banking infrastructure,
   financial and other telecommunications links. 
When this is added to transparency in political decision making,
   law enforcement agencies can contribute to strong business confidence.
I noted in a recent issue of the Far Eastern Economic Review last
   month a survey of business investors which listed Australia as the
   best place to invest in in the region this year. The contribution
   of law enforcement agencies in securing the integrity of our economic
   foundations can only add to this perception. 
I understand that at Interpol's 66th general assembly session
   last year your President identified some key areas of focus in the
   fight against transnational crime. He said that regional programmes
   were needed to complement this fight and that greater use of technology
   and telecommunications were also important.
The theme of your conference recognises the importance of regional
   arrangements to ensure the success of global activity. The failure
   to appreciate differences in culture and society often mean that
   some arrangements, while designed for global application, only succeed
   to reflect a regional disposition.
This conference will no doubt consider this issue.
Transnational crime is now a serious security issue which has been
   recognised by Interpol's new observer status at the United
   Nations. But there is only so much that governments can do either
   in isolation or collectively. Treaties may be important but all
   the agreements in the world cannot replace the indispensability
   of co-operation between law enforcement professionals. You, as individual
   police professionals, will always be the most important element
   in defeating international crime.
Perhaps the most tangible demonstration of this co-operation is
   of course your organisation, Interpol.
Crime does not recognise national let alone international boundaries.
   Worse still, criminal activity takes direct advantage of those boundaries.
   In Australia we have identified the need for formal co-operation
   of our law enforcement agencies to cope with this problem. We have
   developed several national organisations including the National
   Crime Authority and others based upon mutual assistance and an extended
   professional police relationship to help overcome difficulties.
The connection between our police agencies in Australia is a strong
   one, exemplified, if in no other way, by the composition of the
   Australian delegation here today.
Internationally the Australian Federal Police now has over 30 officers
   working full time overseas in liaison positions including one attached
   to Interpol.
My Government has a very keen eye to an Australian Federal Police
   force ready to tackle the crimes in an increasingly globalised world
   of the 21st century.
In that context and against that background my Government will
   shortly appoint an independent expert to assess the resourcing needs
   of the Australian Federal Police in the light of a strategic review
   of the challenges facing federal law enforcement.
That person will be required to report within three to four months,
   to ensure that longer term funding for the Australian Federal Police
   is given a sound foundation as soon as possible.
This will result in a new budget charter for the Australian Federal
   Police.
Australia deserves a Commonwealth law enforcement agency that is
   second to none in the world.
A reform process to enable the AFP to develop into such an agency
   is underway, but it will not succeed unless resourcing decisions
   are geared to the vision we have for the AFP.
Last year, my Government commissioned a study by the accountants
   Deloittes to look at AFP resource management practices. Their report
   makes clear that there is a need for additional funds in the short
   term, in particular for accruing superannuation liabilities which
   have been eating into operational funds and of that the Government
   will have more to say shortly. It is also apparent that, for the
   long term, a new process for better linking funding to the Government's
   law enforcement priorities is needed.
For the longer term we have to ensure that the resources we give
   to the AFP will equip it to fight the kind of crime we will face
   in the next century.
My Government will ensure that the AFP is adequately resourced
   to meet the challenges of the 21st century and looks forward to
   receiving the recommendations of the forthcoming strategic review.
I note, Mr Chairman, that the Conference will be discussing the
   scourge of drugs and the threat it presents to the citizens of the
   region and indeed the people of the world. All parents, let alone
   law enforcement officers, understand that the abuse of drugs is
   a very serious issue confronting us all, here in Australia, within
   our region and around the world.
The production and distribution of drugs is increasing across the
   globe. The illicit drug trade is now an international, multi-billion
   dollar enterprise with its undisclosed and untaxed profits rivalled
   by few industries. Estimates of the size of the illicit drug trade
   range from US $300-$500 billion of the United States per annum.
International criminal networks are becoming increasingly sophisticated
   with greater access to the latest technologies for both the concealment
   and smuggling of drugs as well as the proceeds of their crimes.
It should not be forgotten, however, that the drug problem is above
   all a very human one. In this country alone there were 634 heroin
   related deaths in 1996. Illicit drugs are associated with over 40,000
   hospital bed days each year in Australia and spending on illicit
   drugs now amounts to over $7 billion Australian dollars a year.
More than those statistics however, the drug problem is about real
   people with broken lives and broken homes. It's about families
   who want so much to care and face terrible odds in trying to do
   so. It's also about professionals in the field such as law
   enforcement agencies both here and abroad who have vital role to
   play in stemming the tide.
Last year my Government demonstrated its moral leadership on this
   issue by announcing its strategy "Tough on Drugs" - a
   plan which ensures that this very real social problem is one which
   we all have a stake in addressing.
The plan balanced efforts to intercept drug traffickers with fresh
   and additional resources for education, treatment and research.
We are committed to a rigorous school education campaign aimed
   at zero tolerance for drugs.
From young people who have been targeted by drug dealers to their
   families who have had to rebuild shattered lives - drugs have a
   devastating affect on them all.
Tough on Drugs is an integrated and comprehensive national effort.
   It combats the drug barons with $43 million additional resources
   to intercept illicit drugs at our borders and within Australia.
It provides an additional $14 million to warn our young people
   and the wider community about the extreme danger of illicit drugs.
And it responds to those with special needs - the drug users with
   almost $30 million to support front line professionals such as doctors
   and hospital staff, counsellors, researchers and new non-government
   treatment facilities.
Law enforcement against drug crimes must also respond to the challenges
   of the latest technologies. Our funding of a National Heroin Signature
   Programme to identify the trafficking patterns of heroin is therefore
   important as are funds to improve research into drug-crime links.
   We have also enhanced the Australians Transaction Reports and Analysis
   Centre's capacity to monitor suspicious financial transactions
   and add to a sophisticated armoury targeted against dug traffickers.
I know from my discussions with Mr Palmer that Interpol will play
   a vital role in the wider regional context is supporting our own
   police forces and other law enforcement agencies as we strengthen
   the fight against drug trafficking.
Just as the Government has acted upon the impact of drugs on the
   lives of Australians so too has it worked to reform gun laws in
   this country. I note that you will be discussing the subject of
   firearms regulations during the course of your deliberations.
This is a subject of which Australia is sadly now very familiar.
   Almost two years ago in an otherwise tranquil corner of Australia
   there was a tragic event where a lone gunman took the lives of 35
   innocent people at the barrel of a semi-automatic weapon. That our
   freedom from such an awful crime could be so cruelly shattered touched
   every Australian and reverberated throughout the world.
It also generated a timely, yet measured response which was supported
   by all major political parties across the Australian spectrum and
   by the overwhelming bulk of the Australian community. The agreement
   of Australian Police Ministers brought about national crime prevention
   legislation which outlawed semi-automatic weapons. 
We acted in a lasting, effective and unified way after proper negotiations
   with all sections of the Australian community. 
All Australian Parliaments successfully passed complementary legislation
   banning ownership of these weapons, except in the most limited and
   understandable of cases. Our year long national gun amnesty and
   buy back scheme saw over 640,000 firearms surrendered for their
   genuine value totalling almost $315 million. All of those firearms
   with the very few exceptions for museum and police use were then
   destroyed.
Taking such a strong stand was unpopular in some quarters but demonstrated
   the Government's determination to fight crime.
The protection and security of a nation's citizens is not
   only the first responsibility of government but also one of its
   most noble.
It is a duty which has become even more onerous as criminals benefit
   from the growth in the global economy, larger trading volumes, advances
   in technology and electronic commerce and easier international travel.
It is a duty which no doubt will motivate much of your deliberations
   this week. And I want you to know that your deliberations will take
   place against the background of an assurance from me as the Prime
   Minister of Australia, that the role of law enforcement agencies
   in this country, be it the police services or other agencies, is
   deeply admired, is gratefully acknowledged and will always have
   our warm and continuing support. With that in mind, I have great
   pleasure in declaring open this 15th Interpol Asian Regional Conference.
   Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Major Evans. To Kim Beazley and General Baker.
 Before I say a few words of my own I would like to read a message
 from the Governor-General as follows:-
"My thoughts are very much with the members of the Australian
 Defence Force who are leaving for overseas today. Can I ask that you
 tell them that they leave with my warmest good wishes and my prayers
 that they have a successful mission and a safe return".
Ladies and gentlemen I want to say a few very simple things to you.
 I want, first of all, to express my personal thanks and that of the
 Australian people for the fact that, first of all you have devoted
 your life to the Australian Defence Force. And the contribution that
 all of you have made to the training, the rigour, the discipline and
 the lifestyle of the Australian Defence Force is something that I,
 and I know that millions of your fellow countrymen and women appreciate
 very much.
I want to thank you very much for the mission that you are about to
 undertake. You are undertaking a mission for a good cause. It is in
 the interests of civilised countries that the sort of conduct of the
 Iraqi leadership is not allowed to go unchecked. And there is a very
 strong moral case for the ultimate use of military force if it becomes
 necessary. And it is not something that is remote and unconnected
 from Australia, it is something that in the long run if not dealt
 with can have serious consequences for our country.
We still hope at this stage that it won't be necessary to use
 force and we continue to support the diplomatic efforts that are now
 under way. But it is very important that we be willing, if necessary,
 to use force. The authority and the reputation of the United Nations
 is also very much involved.
I know that you will have mixed feelings. In many senses this mission
 is a fulfilment of the years of training and so forth in your regiments.
 And it will be seen by many of you as the kind of thing for which
 you have trained. I know as professional soldiers, professional men
 and women, you will be aware also of the risks that are involved.
 And that is something of which your Prime Minister and your Leader
 of the Opposition and I know the Chief of your Defence Force and your
 fellow Australians are also very much aware.
You can go overseas knowing that you have behind you the most superb
 training imaginable, and something that is so tremendously important
 to you and it will be a source of great sustenance and support. And
 I can say that you go overseas with our goodwill, our support, our
 good wishes. I know that inevitably the families you leave behind
 will feel a sense of anxiety. In the best way possible we will all
 try and share that and to help them.
You will go overseas with our good wishes. And may I say to all of
 you, that God's speed, a safe return, a very successful mission.
 You go with the good wishes and the goodwill of an immensely proud
 Australian nation.
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for what you are doing for a just
 cause, thank you for what you are doing for Australia. My thoughts
 will be with you constantly over the weeks ahead.
Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Jim Jackson, the President of the Gladesville
   RSL Club. To John Watkins, the State Member for Gladesville, to
   Councillor Peter Graham, the Mayor of Ryde, and to all the members
   of the Gladesville RSL Club.
When I first became the Member for Bennelong back in 1974 one of
   the very first community organisations in my electorate that I made
   contact with was the Gladesville RSL Club. And I've retained
   a very affectionate and close association with that club over the
   last 23 to 24 years. It is an outstanding example of the community
   spirit in this part of Sydney and this part of Australia. 
It is not only a club that honours the sacrifice and the contribution
   of the men and women of Australia in the wars in which this country
   has been involved this century and, most particularly, by dint of
   the passage of years of World War II and the battles in Korea and
   Vietnam, but it is also an organisation that has put an enormous
   amount into the local community. It is not just a recreation club.
   It is a club that provides comradeship and friendship and a family
   network, in the broader sense of the word, for the people of Gladesville
   and the surrounding areas. And over that 25-year period it has poured
   vast resources into helping young people in the area, into helping
   other organisations into providing welfare support for widows and
   children of returned servicemen and generally providing a local
   community network.
I have found, in my experience, that whenever the Gladesville RSL
   Club has been asked to help a worthwhile local activity, it has
   been only too willing and only too able and only too effective in
   the contribution that it has made. And I've often spoken, in
   recent times, of how the only way that we in Australia can achieve
   what we want to do and the only way in which we can build the kind
   of society we want for the 21st Century is to have a shared endeavour
   between the Government, the community and the individual. Governments
   can't do everything. Community organisations can't do
   everything and individuals can't do everything. We need to
   pool our resources, to share our endeavour and to combine our activities
   to build the kind of Australian society that I know that we all
   want for the 21st Century. And I can't think of an organisation,
   in a general sense, that has done more to blend the great traditions
   of the Australian past with an eye to the future and the kind of
   society we want for the 21st Century than RSL clubs, of which the
   Gladesville RSL Club is an outstanding example.
I cannot, of course, given that I'm declaring open some extension
   of an RSL club and that I'm in the presence of many men and
   women who put their lives on the line to defend Australia, I can't
   let that occasion go by without expressing the hope that, even at
   this eleventh hour, a peaceful settlement in the Gulf dispute will
   be possible.
You are aware that the day before yesterday, on behalf of all Australians
   and with the Leader of the Opposition accompanying me, I farewelled
   the Australian service personnel who are now on the verge of arriving
   in the Gulf. And I wished them well and Godspeed on behalf of all
   Australians. But in saying so, I expressed the fervent hope, which
   I repeat this morning, that a peaceful settlement will be possible
   in the Middle East.
Nobody knows and nobody feels more keenly than those people who
   sore active service in World War II, in particular, of whom there
   are so many here this morning. Those men know better than anybody
   else, better than I do, better than those younger than I and this
   audience do, the sheer horror and the sheer wastefulness of war.
   There is not a man or women amongst us this morning who sees war
   as anything other than dirty, distasteful and always to be avoided
   unless the cost of avoiding it is greater than the cost of being
   involved in it. And that remains the approach of my Government.
We are prepared to join in a military strike if that is necessary.
   But before we take that fateful decision, we want every single avenue
   of diplomacy explored. We want every single opportunity taken to
   enable Saddam Hussein to allow the inspection of those sites where,
   on good grounds, it is believed that weapons of mass destruction
   are stored. This is no idle, indifferent, irrelevant issue for Australia.
   It is something that does threaten the stability of the Middle East
   unless it is properly resolved. And if he is allowed to get away
   with what he is attempting then others will be provoked into doing
   likewise. And the lessons of history are, that if you allow that
   to happen you end up paying a far greater price than the price you
   would have paid if you had taken action in the first place. 
And that is the basis of the decision that has been taken by my
   Government. I believe it is a decision which has very strong support
   in the Australian community. And I acknowledge the support that
   has been given to it by Mr Beazley on behalf of the Australian Labor
   Party. Because when Australian troops go abroad, they should go
   abroad not against the background of political disputation, but
   against the background of having the support and understanding of
   all of the Australian people.
I hope it won't be necessary for them to go into active service.
   I know that if it does become necessary, they will perform in the
   finest traditions of the Australian Defence Forces, just as the
   men and women here this morning, many of whom are members of the
   Gladesville RSL Club, performed when their time came in the finest
   traditions of the Australian Defence Forces.
Moving from that rather more serious and sombre note, can I say
   to you Jim, once again, it's a delight to be your guest. Jim
   is an ornament, as President of the RSL Club here, to the local
   community in Gladesville. I understand you've invested about
   $3.5 million in these extensions. It will provide marvellous new
   facilities to your members and guests. It will continue to provide
   a great focus of community activity. And I look forward to visiting
   it again in the near future.
I think I'll have to tell you this morning that it's
   probable that I won't be in my electorate on Anzac Day. At
   this stage it is my intention to pay a very quick visit to Hellfire
   Pass - the opening of the great memorial in Hellfire Pass - on the
   site of the Burma-Thailand Railway on Anzac Day this year and on
   behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people, honour
   those men of Australia who died in those terrible circumstances
   in World War II as prisoners of war of the Japanese. And I hope
   that that ceremony will bring home to younger generations in Australia
   again the huge debt that they owe, that we all owe, to the men who
   laid down their lives in those tragic circumstances. And also it
   will be a fitting momument to the links that were forged after World
   War II between Australia and the nations of Asia. And it will be
   a reminder of the exultation of men like Weary Dunlop who said that
   always remembering the past tragedies, we should look to the future
   and we should build links between Australia and the nations of Asia.
   So if I'm not here on Anzac Day, Jim, you will understand that
   I'm not swinging the lead, that I will, in fact, be doing precisely
   that.
But may I say again, thank you ladies and gentlemen of the Gladesville
   RSL Club for having me here this mornming. To you, Jim, in particular,
   thank you for your courtesy and hospitality. I declare the extentions
   open and I wish good fortune, good happiness and plenty of chit
   chat and social exchanges between your members years into the future.
   Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
(Tape begins)...and a marvellous event at what is a marvellous
   golf course. I know that all who are going to play here over the
   next four days will enjoy what is a superb location and a really
   delightful course.
This represents the last tournament in the current season and it
   is certainly a sign of the way in which, increasingly, Australia
   is improving and establishing its reputation as a major location
   for the holding of major golf tournaments. Later this year, of course,
   we will have the privilege of hosting the first ever President's
   Cup outside of the United States. It is just another incidence of
   the growing standing of Australia in the world of international
   sport.
We have been able to attract to this ANZ tournament the participation
   of a very high calibre group of players. That, of course, has been
   evident in the various open men's and women's championships
   that have been held in different locations and in different golf
   courses around Australia over the past few months. The names of
   those who have won have become household names in a nation that,
   of course, is notorious for the love that the men and women of this
   country have for sport.
Golf is a sport which is played with great skill by many Australians
   and over the years we have produced some of the most famous names
   in world golf. Of course, it is also a pursuit that is indulged
   in less conspicuously, but with no less enjoyment, by hundreds of
   thousands of Australians of all ages. In many respects, the climate
   of Australia and the quality of the golf courses that are available
   to the general population in Australia are such that there is probably
   no country in the world in which the playing and enjoyment of golf
   by the general population is more achievable, more affordable and
   more embarked upon than Australia. Whenever you talk in the most
   casual way about golf to people from other countries, they marvel
   at the facilities that exist here and the fact that they are within
   the reach of the average man and woman in a way that simply isn't
   present in many other countries.
I want to congratulate Royal Canberra on hosting this event. I
   want to wish all of those who play in today's event and in
   the subsequent days' events the best of good fortune. I know
   that there are several here I met this morning who are very much
   in the running for the incentive of $500,000, which is a very considerable
   incentive, that lies at the end of this particular competition.
   I know that there will be one or two extraordinarily happy players
   when this tournament is over.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for having me along. I have very
   much pleasure in unveiling this, I am sure, magnificent looking
   trophy. Thank you very much.


E&amp;OE......................................................................................................................
Thank you very much to Kerry Stokes and Brian Kennedy, Mr Olsen of
 Esso, to Mrs Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital
 Territory, to my two predecessors, John Gorton and Gough Whitlam,
 both of whose governments made immense and important contributions
 to the enduring place of the arts in the Australian community, to
 my Ministerial colleague Richard Alston, who I agree with the Chairman
 is an outstanding Arts Minister, you say that he doesn't always
 get everything that you ask, that's not the view of the Finance
 Minister and the Treasurer, but he is a very committed person of the
 arts in Australia, and also I acknowledge the presence of the Chief
 Justice of Australia, Sir Gerard and Lady Brennan.
It is a special occasion for Canberra, it is a special occasion for
 the National Gallery, and it's a very special occasion for the
 place of the arts in the Australian community.
I remember attending, with Janette, fifteen years ago the opening
 of this building by Malcolm Fraser. And over the last fifteen years,
 through various governments, the arts in their different forms have
 flourished in quite a remarkable fashion. And these extensions and
 the place of the arts in the Australian community of course have been
 contributed to by many people. And I join Brian Kennedy and others
 in paying tribute to the work of Betty Churcher, the former Director
 of the Gallery, who did play such a significant role in getting so
 much of it into place.
I would like to also on behalf of the government, thank Esso, and
 through Esso thank all the other companies in Australia, and all the
 other individuals in the private sector who make such a contribution
 to financing and supporting the arts in its various forms all around
 our country. We have developed the habit of philanthropy to a much
 greater extent over the last ten or twenty years. But we still have
 a distance to go. But there are many similarities that are celebrated
 in the exhibition that I am about to open between the experience of
 Australia and the experience of the United States. The similarities
 in the landscape productions of the two countries are very marked
 as you have a look at the exhibition. And of course there are some
 very marked differences. One similarity that I would like to see emerge
 in greater form is the habit of corporate philanthropy in Australia.
 If we could perhaps duplicate what is done in the United States, particularly
 in the area of arts, I think it would be something of the United States
 well borrowed by the Australian community. But in saying that its
 all the more reason why I should emphasis the contribution that is
 made by companies such as Esso and AMCOR and many others that have
 helped over the years.
This evening I have got the pleasure of launching three things not
 one. The exhibition Esso Presents New Worlds from Old, the new exhibition
 wing designed by Andrew Andersons, arguably now Australia's finest
 temporary exhibition space and of course Fiona Hall's Garden
 Sculpture and Water Feature.
It will add enormously to the attraction of Canberra as a tourist
 destination. And it will add enormously to the sense of our national
 capital as the greatest repository of great national institutions.
 And Kate is right when she says it's not only an important occasion
 for Canberrans, but it's also an important occasion for all Australians.
It's an opportunity for me on behalf of the government to not
 only affirm in the strongest possible language, our ongoing support
 for the role not only of the Gallery but of the arts in the life of
 Australia and in the activities of our community, but it's also
 an opportunity for me to congratulate Kerry Stokes and Brian Kennedy
 and all the other members of the board of the Gallery for the way
 in which they have acted as good stewards of the resources that have
 been given to them by my government and by the government of the ACT.
This exhibition which Janette and I had the privilege of looking at
 briefly before coming here, this exhibition celebrates the similarities
 in the heritage of our two countries, but it also is a very sharp
 reminder of the distinctive qualities of our two societies. And it
 is a reminder to any proud Australian, and that of course embraces
 all of us here tonight, of the skill and the dexterity and the talent
 of our own artists. And it fills me with a great deal of pride to
 know that this exhibition, which will put on display so many of the
 finest Australian artists will go to many parts of the United States.
Last week I had the opportunity of visiting North East Arnhem Land
 and viewing some of the artwork of the indigenous people living in
 that part of Australia. And I am therefor particularly pleased to
 hear the news about the St Petersburg Exhibition of Australian Indigenous
 Art.
In so many ways art does express what we are. Art should not shout
 at us, it should speak of us as we are. It should allow us to express
 ourselves and it should at all times be a representation to the world
 of what Australia is and what Australia has achieved. And as every
 year goes by we draw more strength as a community from our artists,
 we draw more strength from the reservoir of talent in so many of the
 art forms that which is Australia's great good fortune.
The National Gallery has played a very important role in the life
 of our society over the past fifteen years. These extensions will
 enhance the appeal of the Gallery, they will make it more available
 to the Australian community, and all of us who care about the role
 of the arts in Australian society must take great heart from the ever
 increasing patronage of the arts by average Australians. The way in
 which in perhaps a generation and a half the arts have gone from appearing
 to be just a possession of a select few or an elite to something that
 is accessible to and loved by and favoured by all sections of the
 Australian community, is something that I know must bring enormous
 pleasure to those people who have devoted their entire lives to promoting
 and patronising the arts in Australia.
So ladies and gentlemen, I again congratulate the Gallery on what
 it has done. I salute the memory of the artists who have contributed
 both as landscape painters in the United States and also in Australia
 I thank Esso for its contribution, I particularly congratulate Kerry
 and Brian and those that put the exhibition together. And I have enormous
 pleasure in declaring open Esso Presents New Worlds from Old, the
 new exhibition wing and of course Fiona Hall's Garden Sculpture
 and Water Feature.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................................................
Thank you very much to Rob Borbidge, the Premier
   of Queensland, to Joan Sheldon, the Deputy Premier and Treasurer,
   to John Moore, my federal Ministerial colleague, other Ministers,
   the Leader of the Opposition in Queensland, members of the Brisbane
   City Council, ladies and gentlemen.
As you are aware, one of the objectives that my
   Government has had over the last couple of years is to make certain
   that the foundations of the Australian economy are strong, to make
   certain that we are seen throughout the world as being a strong,
   reliable country economically in which inflation is low and in which
   the business investment climate is extremely attractive.
Now that has, of necessity, involved us taking
   over that two year period a number of decision which have sought
   to reduce our public spending and to get our budget deficit which
   we found to be $10.5 billion back into surplus. We have done a very
   good job along that path and I hope that in the next federal budget
   it will be possible for our Treasurer to announce a budget surplus
   with will represent a major turnaround in such a short period of
   time.
But that hasn't been an end in itself. When
   you embark upon a programme of getting the books in order of fiscal
   consolidation as the boffins call it, or simply reducing the deficit
   as we call it, when you embark upon that sort of programme, it's
   not just end in itself. You also get a benefit from it. It is something
   that I call a social bonus. You get something out of sensible economic
   decision making, you give yourself the capacity further down the
   track to do things in a directed, intelligent, measured way that
   you want to do for the long-term benefit of the country.
And one of the social bonuses to come out of our
   expenditure restraint and other decisions that we took, was the
   capacity we had to announce in the last federal budget the establishment
   of a Federation Fund of $1 billion. And that was designed principally
   to fund the development of major infrastructure projects all around
   Australia, to mark the federation of Australia, the Centenary of
   Federation in the year 2001, to generate jobs in the construction
   phase of those projects, and to leave the future generations a lasting,
   practical memorial of one hundred years of the federation of the
   six Australian colonies into the nation of Australia in 1901. And
   as a result of that Fund being created, as part of the social bonus,
   what we have already announced is a commitment of funds to the Darwin
   to Alice Springs railway, a commitment to the National Gallery of
   Victoria, a commitment to building that major infrastructure project
   at Jervoise Bay in Western Australia which will support the oil
   and gas export industries of Western Australia which are so important,
   not only to our country, but also to the state of Western Australia.
And I am pleased to announce today that we will
   be committing out of that Federation Fund a sum of $65 million towards
   the Light Rail Project which was announced by the Premier of Queensland
   in November of last year. I share all of the enthusiasm of both
   the Premier and the Treasurer for the Briztram project. I share
   all of his belief that it will be a visionary transport project
   that will tap the heritage values of Brisbane. Just three quarter
   of an hour ago, I had the opportunity of talking to a number of
   the diplomatic visitors we have at our Liberal Party convention
   here in Brisbane, and I was talking about the different cities of
   Australia, and I made the observation that I have now been in politics
   since 1974 and in that almost 24 years that I have been in politics,
   of all of the great cities of Australia, none has been more dramatically
   transformed in that 24 year period than the city of Brisbane.
I can still recognise the other cities, and I recognise
   some of the old values of Brisbane as well. It still retains some
   great deposits of its earlier years, but it really has been transformed
   into a modern, attractive, dynamic diverse city. And it needs, part
   of that transformation, it needs infrastructure, it needs long term
   planning, it needs an adequate transport network and this project
   will help to give it that. And that is why it is a project that
   admirably fits the bill so far as Federation funding is concerned.
   It is precisely this sort of project that the Federation funding
   was designed to augment. And it will create the jobs, it will provide
   the linkages between communities. And in every respect it does fit
   the bill.
And can I say to you, Mr Premier, and to you, Joan,
   as the Treasurer of the state of Queensland, that I have an enormous
   respect for the commitment you have for the development, not only
   of Brisbane, but also to the development of the state of Queensland.
   You are both great Queenslanders and you are also very loyal partners
   with myself and our other heads of government in the future long
   term development of our country.
But you do understand the particular needs of Brisbane,
   and the particular needs of Queensland. You are fathers for the
   mining industry of this state, you have stood up for the interests
   of Queensland in promoting the need for a sensible outcome to the
   difficult problem of Native Title. You know the value to Queensland
   of the jobs and investment that will be involved in settling the
   difficulties involved in that legislation. You also understand the
   importance of small business in the life of Queensland and you also
   understand that in the 1990s government, in the 1990s the kind of
   society we want could only ever be created through a shared endeavour
   which involves a partnership between the government, the community
   and the individual. The Government can't do everything on its
   own. But it's got to help and it's got to provide leadership
   and it's got to provide facilitation and this project really
   does epitomise that and epitomise it very well.
So I congratulate you, Mr Premier and Deputy Premier
   and I congratulate the Government of Queensland on this visionary
   project. I'm delighted to associate my Government with it in
   a practical way. And that, of course, won't be the end of federation
   funding support for the State of Queensland.
This project was number one on the priority list
   given to me by the Premier of Queensland. There are other projects
   and of that more will be said at an appropriate time. But we are
   working very closely with the Government of Queensland. We share
   a vision about the future of this State and, of course, as part
   of that, a vision about the future of the entire country.
But can I just diverge from the project and just
   say one other thing. And I think it is important that I say it as
   the very proud patron of the great St George Rugby League Club.
   Can I say how delighted I am that the, at times vigorous and spirited
   but I think at all times rather tragic tribal war that racked the
   great game of rugby league, now appears to have come to an end.
   The armistice will be consummated at Lang Park tonight and appropriately
   enough between Manly and the Brisbane Broncos. And given my loyalties
   and given the fact that I am a leader for all of the Australian
   people, I shall not choose, I shall not gain to express a preference
   for the outcome. But the real winner of that clash tonight will
   be the followers and lovers of rugby league and the many Australians,
   whether here in Queensland or in Sydney or elsewhere, were devastated
   by the tribal war that went on for a number of years. I think it
   is a wonderful thing and it's been settled in, I hope, a lasting
   fashion. I wish the game well and I hope it is well supported. 
But, ladies and gentlemen, again, my congratulations
   to the Premier of Queensland, to his Government for their vision
   and their foresight and their commitment to the development of Brisbane
   and the development of the State of Queensland. And I'm delighted
   to lend my Government's support to the tune of $65 million
   out of the Federation Fund. We look forward to further cooperative
   endeavour in the months ahead. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Joan, for those very kind and gracious words
 of introduction. To Penny, to Judi Moylan, to Chris McDiven, to all
 of the others, members and delegates and ladies and gentlemen.
Last year I had the opportunity when I was in Washington of going
 onto the floor of the American Senate. And I was struck immediately
 by two comparisons with the Parliaments of Australia.
The first was - and I make no criticism of this, let me say - the
 first was that the average age of the American Senate was infinitely
 higher than the average age of either the Australian Senate or the
 Australian House of Representatives.
And the second observation that really hit me was the, I have to say,
 pitifully few number of women Senators in the American Senate. And
 it brought home to me far more dramatically than any kind of statistical
 comparison that you might care to make just how well Australia compares
 and, indeed, how well Australia leads the way in the representation
 of women in the parliaments of democratic nations. In fact, as a result
 of the last Federal election we are now twice the world average so
 far as parliamentary representation for women in democratic parliaments.
This is no modern day aberration because one of the least remarked
 features of Australia's democratic development is that we did
 essentially lead or help lead the rest of the world in giving the
 vote to women and giving women preferment and advancement in public
 political positions.
And it is also the case with our own party, the Liberal Party of Australia.
 Women played a very important role from the very beginning in the
 formation and the development of the Liberal Party of Australia. And
 I'm immensely proud of the fact that we have chalked up so many
 firsts.
We have an unparalleled level of female representation in the Federal
 Parliament as a result of the last election. We didn't indulge
 ourselves with streamers and kissing and hugging and dancing on the
 floor of our national conference. Rather, we simply went about the
 process of pre-selecting women of talent and ability and getting them
 elected to the Federal Parliament. And nowhere is that, of course,
 more apparent than here in the State of Queensland because the female
 representation in the House of Representatives from the State of Queensland
 is, I believe, a record for any State of Australia in Federal politics
 from either side. And that occurred in the last election.
And we have the spectacle at the present moment, apparently, of the
 male heavies of the Australian Labor Party trying to intimidate a
 woman, Anne Scott, out of securing pre-selection for the Labor Party
 for the seat of Oxley.
But, ladies and gentlemen, there are lots of things that I want to
 say something about today. But the most important message I have for
 all of you is that the Liberal Party is, firstly, immensely proud
 of what it has achieved in the area of women's representation
 and the advancement of women, not only within our party but also within
 the community.
But we are not in the business of resting on what has been achieved.
 As I said in the speech I gave on International Women's Day last
 Sunday, listing the achievements of the Menzies Government and other
 Liberal governments in introducing benefits and changes of direct
 help to women. And it is a very long list and it is a list that goes
 a lot further than we are often given credit for. And it includes,
 for example, the signature of the international convention that led
 to the creation of the very office of the Commissioner for Sex Discrimination
 to which Penny referred to in her introductory remarks.
It was a Liberal government that established the first national childcare
 office. It was a Liberal government that lifted what now seems to
 be the quite laughable ban on married women continuing in the Federal
 Public Service. It was a Liberal government that introduced child
 endowment. It was a Liberal government that first recognised the rights
 of married pensioners so far as the tax system was concerned. It was
 a Liberal government that introduced many of the provisions for private
 health insurance that is so important for women. And the list goes
 on.
It is a list which is about building practical measures and practical
 areas of achievement for Australian women. But, of course, it is not
 sufficient to rest on what has been achieved. And nor should listing
 those achievements be seen as some declaration of complacency because
 there is still a long way to go. There is still a long way to go to
 recognise the full participation of women within our community.
We are a party that treasures and values choice. We do not believe
 in the patronising use of quotas. We do not believe in advancing certain
 categories of women or, indeed, certain categories of men. We do not
 define women's preferment by whether or not the woman in question
 has a particular attitude on a specified range of subjects. Our view
 is that all women within the Australian community, whatever their
 views on politics or life, have a right to a quality of opportunity
 and have a right to free choice. And that is embedded in the policies
 that we have adopted in so many areas.
The world into which women are now born is, of course, radically different
 from what it used to be. The most astonishing and profound social
 change that has occurred in my own lifetime has, of course, been the
 change in the role in the status of women within our modern community,
 within the Australian community and within western society. And I
 specify western society because sadly enough, the role and the status
 and the position and the treatment of women in other societies is
 often quite appalling. And one of the things that we ought to remember
 at a conference such as this is that the women of many third world
 countries are denied even the basic rights of physical protection
 and sustenance that we take for granted.
The world has changed enormously. And I try to think of it in my own
 personal terms of thinking of the world into which the three women
 that have had the greatest influence on my life - my mother, my wife
 and my daughter - of the differences of the world into which the three
 of the were born.
My mother belonged to that Australian generation, a great, heroic
 generation, that lived through two world wars and a great depression.
 And she was a dedicated person who believed absolutely and committedly
 in the importance of family life and the importance of playing your
 part in a community.
My wife was born into a different era. I shall, of course, not specify
 precisely which era, but a different era, a more modern contemporary
 era in which many attitudes had changed. Not out of disrespect for
 the attitudes of earlier years but just simply because the world does
 change. And the opportunities for women of my wife's generation
 were very different and they were greater and infinitely different
 from those of my mother's generation.
And then again my daughter was born into a still later generation.
 And I've often remarked that when I commenced at the Sydney University
 Law School in 1957 there were, out of a class of about 120, there
 were fewer than 20 women. When my daughter started 35 years later
 in an economics/law degree at Sydney University the majority of that
 first year were women. And that represents a dramatic illustration
 and, might I say, a dramatic demonstration of the legacy of the Menzies
 Government. Because it was the Menzies Government, in response to
 the Report of the Murray Committee in the 1950s, that really laid
 the foundation for the great post World War II expansion of higher
 education in Australia. And when you hear our political opponents
 waxing lyrical about the contribution that they have made to higher
 education, we ought to remember that.
The world has changed. It has changed forever and it will go on changing.
 And whenever I talk to my daughter about her future, the contemplation
 of the changes that lie ahead of her, of course, are very much in
 her own mind.
There are certain things, of course, that never change. People never
 lose their desire to have a sense of personal and physical security.
 And one of the things of which I am very proud that I have been able
 to do in the time that I have been Prime Minister is to bring to the
 people of Australia, particularly to the women of Australia, a greater
 sense of physical security because of the uniform prohibition on semi-automatic
 weapons.
Violence and the threat of violence is something that is abhorrent
 to all of us, absolutely. And there's nothing in my view that
 unites women's groups in Australia right across the spectrum,
 whether they are very conservative or rather radical, than an abhorrence
 of violence and physical violence, physical violence of any kind.
 And the measures that my Government has taken to reduce the incidence
 of domestic violence and to deliver that very simplistic but, nonetheless,
 profound measure, that real men don't hit women' is
 something that I'm very proud of also. Because violence against
 women and children is absolutely unacceptable in a civilised society.
 It is something that ought to be campaigned against. It ought to be
 exposed. It ought to be treated in a sensitive fashion. It should
 remain as it is, a crime. But there should be an approach to it that
 allows men who see themselves as having a problem to seek proper counselling
 and proper assistance. But there are different ways in which we can,
 as a community, demonstrate our determination to achieve equality.
In the months ahead we'll be releasing a new taxation plan for
 all of the Australian people. And that taxation plan will be scrutinised
 just as closely by the women of Australia as it will be by the men,
 and so it should, not only for those women, of course, a majority
 now, by far, who are in the paid workforce, but also those who are
 not in the paid workforce.
And can I endorse very strongly what Joan Sheldon had to say about
 respecting the choices that women make in relation to the caring of
 their dependent children. It is not the role of a government to dictate
 a stereotype. It is not the role of a government to say that you should
 or shouldn't be in the workforce, that both parents should or
 shouldn't be in the workforce when children are young. That is
 for parents to decide.
It is not my role as Prime Minister to say what is right or wrong
 in relation to that. It is my role as Prime Minister to respect and
 to support the choices which women make and men make, and to provide
 a taxation system and a welfare system that facilitates and promotes
 those choices.
There was a time some years ago when women who had young children
 and who entered the workforce were criticised in some way, not always
 openly but, perhaps, indirectly, for neglecting the interests of their
 children by entering the workforce.
Now those days are, by and large, behind us. But we don't now
 want to replace those outdated attitudes with a new and equally unacceptable
 attitude from some other sections of the community who seek to almost
 sneer at and treat as second class citizens those women who elect
 or, indeed, those men who elect to be full-time carers for their children
 at home.
Either choice is equally honourable. Either choice should be equally
 supported. Both choices should be fully respected and that is the
 attitude that I have always brought to these matters and that is the
 attitude that has permeated the changes that we made after the last
 election through the family tax initiative that delivered an additional
$1 billion into the hands of parents through the tax system who were
 caring for young children.
And since the last election we have done a number of very important
 things for women. Importantly, we have continued to increase the resources
 that have been made available for childcare. There will be 83,000
 additional childcare places made available under my Government over
 the next four years. We are now spending more than $1 billion a year
 in childcare assistance and that has been a real increase in each
 of the two years that we have been in government.
In the area of superannuation we have dramatically expanded the opportunities
 and made fairer the treatment of women. We have not only introduced
 the retirement savings accounts - these are superannuation accounts
 that literally follow workers from one job to another or, indeed,
 in and out of the workforce. And they are ideal for the chosen life
 patterns of many women within our community whose experience is often
 full-time work, when a child arrives, a period of being out of the
 workforce entirely, then followed by part-time work, then followed
 by a return to full-time work.
Now, what we need with that kind of situation is an itinerant superannuation
 package that follows you and that you don't lose the benefits
 of it when you are temporarily out of the workforce.
We've also introduced an arrangement whereby it is possible to
 obtain for the partner to the marriage who's continuing to work
 when children are young, an opportunity to obtain what is, in effect,
 a double taxation deduction in relation to the spouse who is at home.
And then last Sunday I announced, ten years after the former Labor
 government had been told to do it, ten years after the former Labor
 government had been told to do it, I announced that my Government
 had begun the policy reform process that would lead to the inclusion
 of superannuation as an item of marital property to be adjudicated
 upon in the event of a dissolution of a marriage.
Now, that has been a long-outstanding area of grievance and concern
 to many women in Australia. We all hope that marriages, when entered
 into, will last forever but unfortunately not all of them do and we
 need to have fair, balanced, sensible rules providing for the disposition
 of property, particularly for that generation of women whose experience
 in the work forces is not as great and extensive and as full as that
 of younger women within our community. And that policy announcement
 will be very warmly welcomed by women in their middle years, many
 of whom have been denied the opportunity of building up any kind of
 separate assets and have been people who, often in the past, have
 been very unfairly treated on the dissolution of their marriages.
Now, it is never possible in these areas to satisfy everybody. And
 every time we have a debate in our Party Room or in our party about
 contentious things such as the Child Support Agency, I am reminded
 of just how infinitely difficult it is in these situations to satisfy
 everybody. But if you try and apply the principle of justice and equity
 and fairness you have to recognise the inclusion of superannuation
 is enormously important.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have derived an enormous amount of advice
 and support and understanding from the women members of the Federal
 Parliamentary party. We had a very valuable and stimulating dinner
 the other night in which I was able to get just about all of my female
 colleagues together and to get their ideas on policy. It wasn't
 a night spent just talking, may I say, it was not a night spent at
 all talking about women's issues, it was a night spent talking
 about issues that affect all of us as Australians. Issues that affect
 the Australian community, their health, their employment opportunities,
 the future job prospects of our children and the future development
 of our children.
When we held the Constitutional Convention I remarked upon the astonishing
 differences between the make-up of that Convention and the make-up
 of the conventions that had put together the Constitution in 1901.
 And the biggest single difference, of course, was that there were
 no women at all present in the conventions of 1901. And on this occasion
 something in the order of 35 to 40 per cent of the delegates both
 appointed and elected to the Convention were women. And that is yet
 another symbol and another piece of reality as well of the change
 that has come over our society.
I don't set any particular target for the number of women in
 Federal Parliament. What I do set is a target of removing remaining
 barriers against their full participation. That is the only liberal
 goal that you can set on something like this. We treat people on merit
 and on quality. We don't prefer them on the basis of their gender.
 We simply prefer them on the basis of their commitment and on the
 basis of their ability. And I have no doubt that with that approach
 the number of women will continue to grow.
I look into this audience and I think of the contribution being made
 by Judi Moylan, the first-ever woman appointed to the position exclusively
 of Minister for the Status of Women. I see Margaret Reid, the first
 ever woman to be President of the Australian Senate. And I look around
 at the tremendous contribution that so many of you have made to the
 development of policy within the Liberal Party and to the development
 of all that we stand for.
This is the first occasion of our great National Convention of 1998.
 Joan, you are the first Treasurer anywhere in Australia. You are the
 Deputy Premier of Queensland. You're a colleague for whom I have
 great respect and affection and you are a colleague who will have
 my total support in the political campaigns that lie ahead of you
 and your colleague, Rob Borbidge, over the coming months.
The Coalition holds at present unprecedented levels of power and authority
 throughout Australia, not only at a federal level but in five of the
 six States. We therefore have an unrivalled opportunity to leave our
 imprint, to mould and change Australian society for the better. And
 part of that will be the aspiration that in the future our successors
 will be able to say that the Liberals of the mid to late 1990s changed
 Australian society to give full equality of opportunity and full ranges
 of choices to Australian women.
Women have come, rightly, a long way over the last ten or twenty years.
 There is still a distance to be travelled but it is a journey that
 we will undertake together. It is a journey based upon proper respect
 and understanding of the things that we all have in common but, equally,
 the unique different contributions of men and women to a caring, understanding
 and compassionate society.
Can I thank the women of the Liberal Party for what you have done
 to deliver Federal Government to me and to my colleagues. Can I continue
 to encourage you to give us your ideas, your thoughts, your criticisms
 where necessary, your visions for the future. And above all, let us
 all work as hard as we can to continue realising our great Liberal
 goals that we all share in common.
I have great pleasure in declaring this conference open. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Bob, and may I thank your company very warmly
 for its sponsorship of this morning's breakfast. Can I acknowledge
 the presence of the Premier of Queensland; the Deputy Premier, Joan
 Sheldon; my many other State and Federal Parliamentary colleagues;
 Tony Staley, the Federal President of the Liberal Party; Bob Carroll,
 the Queensland President of the Liberal Party; many business observers
 and participants; members of the diplomatic core and other guests.
I want to pick up a point that Bob made in his words of welcome. And
 that is to stress the great importance my Government has placed, since
 the day of its election, on the importance of continued communications
 with the business community.
I made a very proud boast on the night of the election victory and
 that very proud boast was that the Liberal Party was owned by no sectional
 interest within the Australian community. The Liberal Party is a creature
 of the Australian people and owes its allegiance to all of the Australian
 people.
We are not owned by the business community. We're certainly not
 owned by the trade union movement. And we're certainly not owned
 by any elite, politically correct pressure group. What we are owned
 by is a driving ambition to serve the interests of all of the Australian
 people.
But having said that, can I emphasise that there are many points of
 convergence and there are many areas of policy where the approach
 of my Government, the philosophy of the Liberal Party and the philosophy
 of the National Party is absolutely consonant with the goals and objectives
 of all sections of the business community in Australia.
We agree not on all things but we agree on most things of overriding
 importance to the economic future of Australia. And I've encouraged
 all the members of my Ministry from day one to develop the closest
 communication with the relevant sections of the business community
 with which they interact. And I'm delighted that in so many of
 those areas - and Bob touched on it this morning in his words of welcome
 in the area of communications in which Richard Alston has done an
 absolutely outstanding job in an area that's involved a great
 deal of change and a great deal of development - that has been very
 much to the fore.
I want to sketch a few thoughts with you this morning. I want to talk
 about the goals we set ourselves just over two years ago when we came
 into government, how we've gone in achieving those goals and
 to state some of the goals for the Australian economy that I see ahead
 over the next few years.
When we came to power in March of 1996, the biggest challenge we faced
 was repairing the fiscal position of our Federal Budget. All political
 rhetoric aside, the cold reality was that we were in the red to the
 tune of $10.5 billion and that unless something were done about that
 we wouldn't be able to do much else. Because if you're steadily
 racking up debt, you're steadily going broke, your cash flow
 is hesitant, whether you're running a business, you're running
 a household or you're running a country, you really can't
 do much by way of expansion unless you attend to that.
And we set about attending to it. We were criticised. We were criticised
 by some of the economic writers, not by all of them. We were criticised
 by the Labor Party. We were criticised by the pressure groups. We
 were criticised by some of the media. And we were even criticised
 by sections of the business community who said that we'd gone
 too far and that really you needed a more moderate, a more modest
 approach. And when I look back over that period of two years - and
 I particularly set it against the impact of the Asian economic troubles
 - I say every night to myself: thank heavens we took the action to
 the degree we did, to the measure that we did, in the Budget of 1996.
 Because if we had not got that budget deficit under control nothing
 else would have been possible. If we had not got that budget deficit
 under control we would not be grappling with the reality of some of
 the Asian troubles affecting, in a very direct and profound way, Australia's
 domestic economy.
Now, I don't pretend that we can argue that there won't
 be any flow-through from what has occurred in Asia. But fundamentally
 we have protected ourselves against the impact of that downturn because
 of the action we took in 1996 in Peter Costello's first Budget.
 And I say that defiantly, unqualifiedly, unapologetically and absolutely.
 And it is the most important and enduring thing in the whole of the
 economic debate in Australia at the present time.
It will cast the longest shadow of all in terms of the economic debate
 over the next Federal election. Because our opponents will have to
 argue to the business community of Australia. They'll have to
 argue to the Australian people that somehow or other, having left
 us with a legacy of a $10.5 billion deficit, having argued against
 repairing it, having said every single measure we took virtually was
 unfair or unnecessary and despite the impact of the Asian economic
 troubles and despite having their own activities having already racked
 up hundreds of millions, if not, billions of dollars of additional
 spending promises, despite all of that and putting all of that together
 they're still competent economic managers.
Now the reality is that all of those things can't be true. And
 we have attended to what was the fundamental challenge and that was
 to get the Budget in order. And it has given us a degree of domestic
 stability and security that we haven't known for a long time.
And we do have the lowest inflation rate in the Western world. I know
 it's an era of low inflation rates but ours is lower than anybody
 else's and that's not a bad achievement. We do have the
 lowest housing interest rates since the late 1960s. And we do have
 business interest rates that are dramatically lower than what they
 were two years ago. We still have a very strong level of private sector
 business investment. Our economy is likely to grow this year at the
 top of the rate achieved by the member countries of the G7. We have
 made inroads into unemployment. We now have the lowest unemployment
 rate at the moment that Australia's had for seven years. We would
 like to go further because the human face of economic failure and
 economic distress is always, of course, unemployment and it remains
 a major social challenge for any government.
So our great and first economic goal was to get the Budget back in
 order and we have done that and we have done that magnificently. And
 it will be a very proud Treasurer who will be able to stand up on
 the 13th of May and announce that after two years and after having
 inherited a deficit of $10.5 billion, he can announce that the books
 of the Commonwealth have been returned to an underlying surplus.
We also set ourselves another great goal. It was a goal that had been
 dear to the hearts of many of us over a long period of time. It was
 certainly dear to my heart and I know it was dear to Ian McLachlan's
 heart because he'd had a few scraps along the way in the good
 cause. And it was dear to Peter Reith's heart and it was dear
 to Peter Costello's heart. That, of course, was the great historic
 cause of industrial relations reform.
And once again we had our critics. And I think one or two of them
 could even be found in the business community who said: oh, you've
 whimped it out, you haven't gone far enough, you've only
 scratched the surface, you've haven't touched the side,
 you've just sort of fine-tuned it. Now, of course there were
 a few changes made as the legislation passed through the Senate. But
 the fundamental integrity of that reform package was maintained to
 the very end. And you see the full fruits of just how far we have
 gone in reforming the industrial relations system in Australia as
 you see working out right at the moment this great historic, I believe,
 exciting and defining change which is now occurring on the Australian
 waterfront.
As everyone knows, the uncompetitive character of the Australian waterfront,
 the bloody-minded attitude of the Australia wharfies is part of the
 Australian folk law. There's that lovely story told about the
 old lady at Charleville when we she was told that a cyclone was coming
 and she better get ready for it and she said: don't worry dear,
 the wharfies won't land it.
I mean, it's deeply embedded in the Australian psyche. It's
 something that you learn virtually from the day you're born that
 we've got inefficient wharves and, of course, it's true.
 I won't bore you with too many statistics at breakfasts like
 this but for containers, the crane rate across the Australian wharves
 is 18 an hour, our Asian competitors it's 30 an hour.
I know a man in the Riverina district of New South Wales who runs
 a stock feed business and he competes. He sells into Japan and he's
 competing against an American company that exports off the West Coast
 of the United States to Yokahama. He's very competitive on everything
 except the cost of getting the product from Australia into Japan.
 And his American competitor can do it at
 55 per cent - 55 per cent of the cost of what is involved in taking
 it from Australia to Japan.
And what we did with that legislation was to change the legal monopoly
 held by the Maritime Union of Australia. We made it possible for the
 recruitment and use of non-union labour. We had no quarrel with members
 of the trade union movement. We don't seek to smash any union.
 But what we do seek to smash are union monopolies. They are wrong.
 They are anti-productivity. They are against the interests of the
 Australian community. They have destroyed jobs and they retarded and
 deterred investment. And regional and rural Australia, the country
 people of Australia, will benefit enormously from a reformed and more
 productivity waterfront. I want to applaud and congratulate the courage
 of the National Farmers' Federation of Australia for what they
 have done.
But this is a defining change, it's a defining reform. It says
 to the rest of the world that we are prepared to tackle those things
 that have denied Australia's membership of the very top league
 of the most productive and competitive nations in the world. Now,
 I'm very proud that one of the great reforms that my Government
 has introduced has been in the area of industrial relations.
And I want to record my gratitude to Rob Borbidge and to Joan Sheldon,
 as the leaders of the Queensland National Liberal Party Government,
 who have been absolutely uncompromising and absolutely and totally
 supportive of all that we have done in this area. As people who represent
 the most decentralised State in Australia, as people who lead a State
 which is built very much on provincial cities and provincial towns,
 they know the importance of that part of Australia - the importance
 of that part of Australia of reform on the waterfront.
We also set ourselves a goal of reducing the costs of doing business
 in Australia. That meant pressing ahead with micro-economic reform,
 with competition policy. We honoured in full, as Bob acknowledged,
 the promise we'd made abut the deregulation of the communications
 industry in Australia. And many business surveys, as so many of you
 here this morning know, will tell you that after rental costs, one
 of the largest overheads of any average business in Australia is,
 of course, the cost of communications. And the bonus for small business
 out of a deregulated communication system is almost incalculable and
 the way in which costs have dramatically fallen. No better illustrated,
 I suppose, than something I read in The Economist a few months
 ago that stuck in my mind. It said in 1930 it cost something like
 $300 a minute to have a telephone call from London to New York. And
 now, of course, it costs not more than a dollar or two. And it's
 a dramatic illustration of how changes have occurred in that area.
We introduced specific reforms to help small business. We introduced
 the capital gains tax rollover relief that means that now if you want
 to sell your successful small business and rollover the proceeds of
 the sale of that successful small business into the purchase of a
 new one, you can do so without incurring any capital gains tax liability
 up to the tune of $5 million. Now that represents the honouring of
 an important promise that we made before the last election and it's
 a huge benefit to small business.
We also promised that we would embark upon the largest privatisation
 in Australia's history. And that, of course, was the sale of
 one-third of Telstra. What a magnificent success on every front that
 has been. And I want to congratulate John Fahey, the Minister for
 Finance and the Minister in charge of privatisation, for the flawless
 way in which he's handled the privatisation, not only of Telstra
 but, indeed, of other assets that the Commonwealth has sold.
It has been a great success. And the thing that encapsulated more
 than anything was the fact that 92 per cent, 92 per cent of the employees
 of the company bought shares. I mean, they weren't too troubled
 by the Labor Party's opposition. They weren't troubled by
 the trade union movement's opposition. They liked the idea of
 owning shares in the company that employed them. And that's a
 magnificent idea, it's a magnificent ideal. And it's the
 kind of thing that defines us and makes us different from our political
 opponents and it's something that we'll always encourage.
 Six hundred and two thousand Australians who've never owned shares
 in their lives now own shares as a result of the Telstra float. It
 was a booming, thumping, unqualified success which all of us as Liberals
 can be proud.
On top of that, we've got $1.25 billion going towards the regeneration
 of the Australian environment. And our opponents have got the nerve
 to say: isn't it shocking that most of that money is going into
 regional Australia. They're complaining about it going into fixing
 the salination problems of the Murray Darling Basin. Well, it's
 not surprising. You don't have salination problems in Killara
 or Woollahra.
Ladies and gentlemen, of course the great environmental challenges
 are to be found in the country areas of Australia and that's
 why most of the money is going there. And if the Labor Party thinks
 that's unfair they ought to set about trying to win a few rural
 seats.
But we also set ourselves the task of further reforming the financial
 sector. And Peter Costello said in the lead-up to the election that
 we needed to do really a stocktake, an update of the Campbell Report
 and we did that. And the Wallis Report was brought down and just about
 every recommendation made by Wallis has been introduced including
 measures that are going to bring far more competition to the Australian
 financial system.
They are some of the goals that we set ourselves. And they are goals
 that have been achieved on time, in full and in some areas, ahead
 of schedule. And I'm very proud that in two short years we have
 seen the greatest reform ever Australia's industrial relations
 system. We have seen the most spectacular transformation of a budget
 deficit towards a budget surplus. We have seen major reforms for small
 business. We've seen a hugely successful programme of privatisation.
 And in the process we have created a situation where this country
 has bought itself protection and insurance against the ill-effects
 of the Asian economic downturn.
But that is what we have achieved to date and any dynamic political
 party never rests on achievements. It always looks to the future and
 sets itself some more goals. And the goals that I have for my Government
 over the next few years in the economic area will, of course, be dominated
 by the great cause of taxation reform. It is the great area of unresolved
 economic business on the Australian national agenda.
We have no hope of realising the full potential of this country in
 the Asian-Pacific region as we move into the 21st Century unless we
 have the guts to take on the challenge of taxation reform. It is difficult,
 it is challenging. There'll be no shortage of people who say
 it's too hard and there'll be no shortage of fear campaign
 from the Australian Labor Party.
We are prepared to have a go. We are prepared to have a go because
 we believe the present taxation system is fundamentally unfair. We
 believe the present taxation system is imposing unnecessary burdens
 on the Australian business community. We believe that the present
 taxation system is out of date. We believe that the present taxation
 system breeds resentment and envy because many Australians in the
 middle feel that they are carrying all the burden. And a taxation
 system that falls into public disrepute and into public contempt is
 a taxation system that cries aloud for reform.
Now, I've been up a few hills and in a few valleys so far as
 taxation reform is concerned. And as I look around the room there
 are a few other people who are in that category. But the experience
 of battle gives you knowledge for your future encounters and for future
 combat. I've learnt the bit about the failures in the past on
 both sides of politics. But there's nobody who takes the future
 of our country seriously that in their most honest, private moments
 can seriously suggest that we can go on indefinitely with the present
 taxation system. It does need reform and we are prepared to embrace
 that reform. And it will be historic and significant beyond the experience
 of any other economic reform that has been undertaken in the time
 that I've been active in politics.
We will need the support and the understanding of the business community
 of Australia. I welcome very much the cooperation that has already
 occurred. The constant contact between representatives of the business
 community and my Government over the last few months - I want that
 to go on. At the end of the day we will produce a plan that is fair,
 that will encourage competition that business will find will encourage
 investment, the Australian public will embrace as being fair and reasonable.
 And it is a very, very important cause and it is one that I encourage
 you very, very strongly to support.
We must, of course, press ahead with the process of fiscal consolidation.
 Having done the hard yards and made the gains we have no intention
 of dissipating them in profligate and unnecessary government spending.
 But that doesn't mean that there isn't a social bonus out
 of fiscal restraint. I made that observation yesterday when I announced
 the contribution of $65 million out of the Federation Fund towards
 the light rail proposal. The visionary concept of Rob Borbidge and
 Joan Sheldon that was announced in November of last year here in Brisbane.
 There is a social bonus if you get your economic house in order. And
 that social bonus will be directed in areas of greatest return and
 areas of greatest need.
But I have one or two other goals that I would like to see realised
 as we move into the next century. One of those goals is to see Australia
 become the second great financial centre of the Asia-Pacific region
 after Tokyo. I believe that more and more people will see Australia,
 the cities of Australia, the financial centres of Australia, as being
 the place to locate their regional headquarters, as being the major
 financial area after Tokyo.
We have an almost irresistible combination of attractions. We have
 a strong economy. We have a stable political system. We have a benign
 and friendly environment. We have a coherent legal system readily
 understood. We speak the English language. And we have a banking system
 which is sound and stable, prudentially regulated and regarded throughout
 the world as being of high integrity. Now, you can't get a better
 combination. You can't get a better brace of attractive conditions
 for a financial centre than that. And one of the things to which I
 commit my Government into the next century is to build Australia as
 a great financial centre for the region. And there is no reason in
 the world why by the year 2010 there can't be four great financial
 centres of the world: there can't be London and New York and
 Tokyo and Australia. And I'll leave it to the competitive spirit
 of the financial community of Australia to decide which city will
 be the financial capital of Australia.
Who am I to spoil a nice breakfast by saying anything about that.
 Good luck to all of them. And that's one of the great advantages
 of the Australian federation, you can have a bit of competition. Queensland,
 incidentally, led the way in many areas of taxation reform. If it
 hadn't been for Queensland we would never have, I think, as early
 in the piece, we would never have abolished probate and succession
 duties. So Queensland has an enviable record in setting the pace in
 some of these areas. And they never let us forget and good luck to
 them.
But, ladies and gentlemen, they are the goals, some of the goals that
 my Government has. And I speak to you this morning with a mixture
 of emotions, all very positive. I speak to you with the emotion of
 pride that in two years we have done great things for the Australian
 economy. We have given it a low inflation, low interest rate, high
 investment environment. We have protected it against the worst effects
 of the Asian economic troubles.
We have had some spectacular successes against all odds. Robert Hill's
 triumph at Kyoto at the end of last year in relation to greenhouse
 gases is one of them. We have given, through the industry policy statement
 I delivered on the 8th of December last year and to which John Moore
 made such a magnificent contribution, we have given a greater sense
 of direction and a greater sense of certainty to the business community
 of Australia. We have made some intelligently pragmatic decisions
 in the industry policy area. This country has a very low tariff regime
 by comparison with the rest of the world. And the decisions that we
 took in the motor vehicle industry and the textile, clothing and footwear
 industries are decisions that I will defend and support anywhere in
 this country. Because they are decisions that have already returned
 a lot in relation to the investment that has been made in those industries.
But that is what we have achieved in the past and I'm very proud
 of all of those things. I'm very grateful that I have such a
 strong team of economic Ministers. They are an outstanding group of
 people. All of them for what they have achieved. Peter Costello has
 done a superb job as the Treasurer of this country. I know how hard
 that job is. I had it for a long time. It's a lousy job on occasions.
 And he's done it very well and I thank him for it. And I thank
 John Fahey, the Finance Minister, who supported him so well. And I've
 spoken of the contribution that Peter Reith and Richard Alston and
 others have made to our economic goals.
So I'm grateful as well as proud. But most important of all,
 I'm excited about what lies ahead. In politics you keep renewing   


E&amp;OE.....................................................................................................................................
Thank you, thank you very much. To Peter Costello, thank you for
   that very warm welcome. To Tony Staley; to Tim Fischer, the Deputy
   Prime Minister of Australia; State Premiers; Chief Ministers; my
   Cabinet and Ministerial colleagues; other Parliamentary colleagues;
   ladies and gentlemen. It is an enormous privilege to be with you
   this morning to deliver this National Convention address, to reflect
   upon the heritage and the values of our great party, to record the
   achievements of the past two years and to outline our goals for
   the years ahead into the 21st Century.
Above all, the Liberal Party is a party that belongs to all Australians.
   When I accepted the mandate of the Australian people on that exhilarating
   night of the second of March 1996, that none in this room will ever
   forget, I said the proudest thing about being the Prime Minister-elect
   of Australia was that I led a party that was owned by no one section
   of the Australian community, that it was a party for all Australians.
   It wasn't owned by the business community. It wasn't owned
   by the noisy elites. It wasn't owned by political correctness.
   It certainly wasn't owned by the trade union movement. It was
   owned by the ordinary men and women of Australia and I remain immensely
   proud that we have demonstrated that in Government.
We are a party with a great history but an even greater future.
   We remember the great inheritance of Sir Robert Menzies, our founder,
   remember those long, uninterrupted years of social and economic
   stability after 1949 when we had an unemployment rate that was the
   envy of the rest of the world, when we welcomed in their millions
   the peoples of Europe and the Middle East, whether they came like
   Alex Somlyay's parents from 
Budapest or whether they came from Italy or from Greece or from
   the Baltic States or from Poland or Czechoslovakia. We welcomed
   them in their millions and they have all become, every last one
   of them, wonderful Australians and we thank them and we respect
   them for the contribution they have made to our great nation.
We also remember the inheritance from Menzies of great social reform.
   We remember the trail-blazing reforms of the Fraser Government.
   We remember the fact that it was the Holt Government and not the
   Whitlam Government that ended the inequity of the white Australia
   policy. We remember the family allowance changes brought in by Malcolm
   Fraser, and of course we also remember the 13 barren years under
   Hawke and Keating. 
Our Party has always been rooted very firmly in principles. We
   believe, above all, in the supremacy and the sovereignty of the
   individual. We believe that the family unit is the bedrock of our
   society. We believe in the work ethic. We believe in rewarding hard
   work and achievement. We believe in the principle of mutual obligation.
   Those in the community who are down on their luck are entitled to
   our assistance and our compassion but we as a community are entitled
   to ask in return where it is reasonable that people who receive
   Govenrment help give something back to the community. That is the
   principle of mutual obligation and that is the principle that is
   enshrined in our Work for the Dole policy which has the overwhelming
   support of the Australian community.
We are a party that believes passionately in the place and the
   role of small business in our society. I have often spoken very
   feelingly and proudly about my own background as the son of a garage
   proprietor in the inner suburbs of Sydney. I have never forgotten
   the upbringing I received. I have never forgotten what I was taught
   about the value of starting with nothing and building something
   by the dint of your own effort and your own achievement and I long
   for an Australia where every man and woman who wants to do that
   can do it without hindrance or without interruption.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are also, above all a party that believes
   in tolerance and racial equality. We have welcomed people from the
   four corners of the earth. We have welcomed people of different
   religions and of different colour and of different ethnic backgrounds.
   We admire and we respect them all and they are all equal and entitled
   members of the great Australian family.
Peter Costello in his introduction spoke of the achievements that
   we have marked up since our election in March of 1996. We have achieved
   an historic turnaround in the economic fortunes of Australia. Whatever
   they may say to the contrary, nothing can conceal the fact that
   Paul Keating and Kim Beazley left to the incoming Coalition Government
   a huge deficit of $10.5 billion and in two short years we have turned
   that around so that we have in prospect the announcement in May
   of this year when Peter Costello delivers his third budget that
   this country will once again be in the black. We will once again
   be a country that is paying its way and that is a huge historic
   achievement in just over two years.
We took many decisions in our first budget and our second budget
   that people didn't agree with. There were some complaints,
   even outcries, but let me say, I don't apologise for any of
   the decisions that we took because, without question, if we had
   not set about getting the books in order, the economic troubles
   that had swept through the Asia-Pacific region would have gone close
   to engulfing and undermining the Australian economy. If we had taken
   the Beazley advice, if we had simply been swallowed up in the Beazley
   inheritance of debt and deficit we would not have been able to fireproof
   the Australian economy against the worst ravages of the economic
   downturn in Asia. It will remain forever to the credit of my Govenrment
   that it was prepared to take the tough economic decisions that have
   brought Australia protection and insurance against the worst effects
   of what has happened in Asia and I remain immensely proud of that
   and I will defy any of my critics on that because every single thing
   we did to get our economic house in order has meant protected living
   standards for the Australian people. 
It has meant that the potential economic dislocation that has swept
   through Indonesia and Malaysia and Thailand and Korea is something
   that will never come to Australia and it was my Government with
   my Treasurer and my Deputy Prime Minister and my Cabinet colleagues
   and my Parliamentary Party that had the courage and the foresight
   to do that and we should always be immensely proud of that achievement.
We have delivered in the process a major social bonus. We have
   not only kept those great promises we took to the last election,
   the family tax initiative, the health insurance rebate, the relief
   for small business, the relief for self-funded retirees but our
   interest rate reductions, which are worth $300 a month to the average
   home buyer in Australia. Now that, my friends, is the equivalent
   of a wage rise of $100 a week to the average wage and salary earner
   in Australia. Let me say that again. The equivalent of $100 a week
   increase in the average wage of the ordinary worker in Australia.
All of that has been achieved in the face of fierce opposition
   from the Labor Party because every measure that we took to reduce
   the deficit and thereby make it possible for interest rates to fall
   was opposed by the Australian Labor Party, and what is more, if
   they get back into office, those interest rate cuts will disappear
   because they will once again lapse into deficit and debt and once
   again interest rates will go up and nothing could be more certain
   than if Labor were to win the next election, that $100 a week wage
   rise that is the benefit of our economic policies will disappear
   very quickly. 
Of course, ladies and gentlemen, one of the other great achievements
   of my Government is that we have fundamentally changed the character
   of industrial relations in this country. We are now watching the
   unfolding of one of those great defining moments in the economic
   and industrial history of a nation. What is now occurring on the
   Australian waterfront is a defining moment in Australia's industrial
   relations history. It will benchmark for all time the attitudes
   of the Liberal Party and the National Party on one hand and the
   attitude of the Labor Party and their mates in the trade union movement
   on the other hand. What we have done is not to smash a trade union.
   We have no desire to smash a trade union and we have no desire to
   smash trade unionism. What we have done 
by our legislative changes is to smash for all time the trade union
   monopoly on the Australian waterfront. 
Let me say again that I applaud the courage and the leadership
   and the guts and determination of the National Farmers' Federation.
   They are taking advantage of the legal changes that we made. It
   needed a Liberal Government to make the changes. It needed a Liberal
   Government to break the monopoly. It needed a Liberal/National Party
   Government to give the National Farmers' Federation the opportunity
   and the incentive to do what it is now doing and I notice on one
   of those programmes this morning that Mr Beazley has said that if
   he wins the next election you know what he's going to do about
   the waterfront? He's going to have a meeting. Going to have
   a meeting. That's not the half of it. He's going to have
   a meeting at which Bob Hawke is the ringmaster. I mean, he's
   going to have a meeting on native title. I mean, the last time the
   Labor Party had a meeting on native title it produced the wretched,
   unworkable Native Title Act that we are trying to fix up. So heaven
   preserve us from another meeting under Labor Party leadership on
   the native title. 
No doubt, he will have a meeting also on taxation reform. I predict
   now that the Beazley policy on taxation reform, when it is finally
   revealed will involve having a meeting. The mind really boggles
   when you think about a meeting about the waterfront. The last time
   a Labor Prime Minister had a meeting on the waterfront it cost you
   and me and the rest of the Australian taxpayers $420 million and
   there was zilch improvement in productivity. So bad was it that
   some of the people then made redundant about six or seven years
   ago are still working on the waterfront. It's a bit like some
   kind of long-running Labor soapie. Perhaps there will be some cameo
   appearances from Laurie Brereton and Paul Keating as well.
Ladies and gentlemen, our reforms have not been limited to repairing
   the budget deficit or, indeed, for getting rid of debt. But our
   reforms have also included the creation of 
100 000 new apprenticeships in the last 12 months. We've delivered
   the lowest unemployment rate for seven years. We have introduced
   a Work for the Dole scheme. We have demanded new standards of literacy
   and numeracy throughout Australia. We have reduced rorting and welfare
   cheating to the tune of $28 million a week and that 
$28 million a week is redirected to the most needy people within
   the Australian community. And we have also correctly rebalanced
   the direction of Australian foreign policy. We have recognised that
   Australia occupies a unique intersection of history, geography,
   culture and economic circumstances. 
We are the only nation in the world that is a projection of western
   civilisation in this part of the world with profound and enduring
   links, not only with Britain and Europe but also with North America,
   and we have replaced the obsessive Asia-only policies of the Keating
   Government with the more balanced and mature Asia-first approach
   of my Government. Instead of us appearing as we sometimes did as
   an anxious outsider wanting admission to the Asian club under the
   Keating Government, we are now seen as a proud participant, a respected
   regional mate, a country that is prepared to help our 
Asian friends in their hour of need and along with Japan, Australia
   is the only country that has contributed to the economy bailouts
   of Indonesia, Korea and Thailand and I am very proud of those decisions
   because they are in Australia's interests. They will guarantee
   Australian jobs. They will guarantee Australian exports. They will
   protect Australian firms' future in those particular countries.
But they are some of the things that we have achieved. But politics
   is never static. It is never something that involves looking back
   in retrospect all the time. It is something that involves being
   proud of your past and your heritage and what you believe in and
   what you stand for. But you must always throw to the future. And
   ahead of us lies the great piece of unfinished economic business
   in Australia and that is to fundamentally overhaul and reform the
   Australian taxation system. We have a taxation system in this country
   which is increasingly seen as unfair and inequitable and that is
   why we want to change it.
We want to give to the ordinary Australian wage and salary earner
   in the 21st Century a fairer and more equitable Australian taxation
   system. We want to end the evasion and the rorting at both ends
   of the spectrum. We want to reform the business taxation system.
   We want to make our firms more competitive as a result in world
   markets. We want to address some of the problems of Commonwealth/State
   financial relations and we certainly want to respect the overall
   need for fairness and equity.
Now this is not an easy task and I don't pretend that we won't
   be opposed and bitterly attacked, not only by the Labor Party but
   by other groups in the community. But I say to you my friends, what
   is the point of holding the reins of national office, what is the
   point of having a mandate from the Australian people, what is the
   point of being in Government? It is not being there just to enjoy
   what is involved in some kind of sense of prestige or importance.
   What is really important about being in Government is to do good
   things for the people of Australia and doing good things for the
   people of Australia involves tackling the problems identified by
   the people of Australia. And deep down, all Australians know that
   our present taxation system is unfair, is crumbling and is in need
   of root-and-branch reform.
The Labor Party knows that. They knew it back in the mid 1980s
   when Keating tried his Option C. They knew it in 93 but for
   sheer political opportunism, they lied their way through the election
   campaign. And then to rub insult into injury, they did, in Dawkin's
   1993 budget, in the greatest piece of political betrayal I have
   seen in my 24 years in politics, they did the very thing that they
   attacked us for allegedly wanting to do. And we all remember the
   scandal of the dishonoured L-A-W tax cuts. We all remember the huge
   increases in sales tax. 
And my message to the Australian people is, that whatever anybody
   says about taxation, always remember that whatever Labor says about
   taxation in an election campaign, it will do the direct opposite
   when it gets into government. And that ought to be remembered by
   all Australians.
 So taxation reform is one of our great goals and it's
   a goal that will need the support of everybody in this room and
   all our friends and supporters throughout the nation if it to be
   realised. And another great goal is to fix the deplorable native
   title inheritance that we received from the Keating-Beazley government.
The Native Title Act of 1993 has delivered very little justice
   to Australia's indigenous people. It has been a bitter disappointment
   for them. And it has, in addition, delivered extraordinary delays,
   extraordinary degrees of cumbersome regulation and extraordinary
   doubt so far as the mining and pastoral industries of Australia
   are concerned. 
My critics say I that I should sit down and have yet another meeting
   in relation to my 10 Point Plan and in relation to the legislation
   that is now in the Parliament again. Can I say to you, ladies and
   gentlemen, I've had no less than 15 to 20 meetings over the
   last 12 months with the major stakeholders. I began meeting on the
   native title issue with the Premiers and Chief Ministers of Australia
   at Kirribilli in January of last year. I then met the indigenous
   leaders, the leaders of the mining industry and the pastoral industry.
   We have already compromised. We have already made concessions. We
   have already protected the fundamental rights of the indigenous
   people of Australia.
The Native Title Amendment Bill now before the Australian Parliament
   is a fair and balanced compromise representing the interests and
   respecting the interests of all of the Australian people involved
   in this very, very difficult issue. And the proposition that we
   should compromise further is a call to surrender. It is not a call
   to compromise. I mean, what is being asked for amongst other things
   is to say, in relation to pastoral leases, that we will give to
   one section of the Australian community a right to negotiate that
   we will not give to another section of the Australian community.
The right to negotiate was never intended for pastoral leases.
   It was put there in an extraordinary late night meeting - once again
   these meetings under Labor governments - an extraordinary late night
   meeting that represented a compromise in the negotiations that were
   then going on. It is a right unknown to the common law of Australia.
   It is not a right enjoyed by any other section of the Australian
   community. 
I simply want to say to all of you and to the Australian Senate
   and to all the members of the Australian Senate: the Australian
   people are sick and tired of this issue. They want to put it behind
   them. They want us to get on with our future and they expect you
   to do your constitutional duty and pass that legislation without
   delay.
We have many others goals for the future. Those goals include,
   of course, continuing the assault on the still too high levels of
   youth unemployment. They include continuing to protect the budget
   surplus that I believe we can deliver in May of this year. They
   also include, as I said yesterday, the opportunity of making Australia
   the second great financial centre in the Asian-Pacific region after
   Tokyo. So that as we move into the 21st Century we'll have
   four great financial centres in the world - London, New York, Tokyo
   and Australia. We have the climate. We have the legal system. We
   have the political 
stability. We have the prudential banking system. We have the respected
   money market systems to deliver that goal. And I believe it's
   one of the many opportunities that are there to be grabbed hold
   of by the Government of this country and by the Government of the
   States of Australia.
But there is another great goal that I have for the future. And
   just as Robert Menzies made Australia the greatest home-owning democracy
   in the Western world, so it is my goal that my Government will make
   Australia the greatest share-owning democracy in the world.
Already we have sold one-third of Telstra and we're along
   the way towards that goal. Ladies and gentlemen, we can and should
   go further. And I therefore announce today that we have made a firm
   policy decision, that if re-elected we will proceed to allow the
   people of Australia, the men and women of Australia, to buy the
   remaining two-thirds of Telstra.
This is how we will do it. We will not wait until after the election
   to introduce the legislation. We will introduce the legislation
   to give effect to this goal into this session of Parliament. The
   proclamation date of the legislation will be a date not earlier
   than the return of the writs after the next Federal election. So
   that in accordance with the undertaking I gave to the Australian
   people before the last election, the Australian people will have
   an opportunity at the next election to decide whether or not they
   agree with our policy. If they throw us out, then presumably the
   legislation won't be proclaimed by the Labor Party. Did I hear
   somebody say, Commonwealth Bank.'
But they re-elect us, as I believe they will, we can then proceed,
   without lead or hindrance, to allow the men and women of Australia
   to buy into this great Australian company. And let me remind you
   that in the first float of one-third 92 per cent - 92 per cent of
   the employees of Telstra bought shares in that company. Six hundred
   and two thousand Australians bought shares for the first time in
   their lives. And I know that out there, there are men and women
   who will applaud this decision. Because they will see it as an opportunity
   to buy shares in a great Australian company. And I can't think
   of a better way of enhancing Australian ownership than to let Australians
   buy something. I mean, this notion that in some kind of indirect,
   surrogate way the Government is best placed to own something on
   your behalf - it's never worked in practice and that's
   not surprising.
This particular decision will enable us to retire about 40 per
   cent - let me say that again - about 40 per cent of the Federal
   Government debt left to us by Paul Keating and Kim Beazley. 
As was the case of the first one-third, the overwhelming bulk of
   the proceeds will, of course, be used to reduce our debt. But we
   will reserve the right, as we did in relation to the first one-third,
   to provide a specific social bonus out of the capital proceeds of
   the sale of the remaining two-thirds.
Good economic policies, sound and prudent fiscal management always
   return a good and useful social bonus. And that has been the case
   with our interest rate policies and our budget policies, so it is
   the case in relation to our privatisation policies. And John Fahey
   and Richard Alston will be, this morning, releasing a joint press
   statement detailing some of the other aspects of that particular
   announcement.
But, ladies and gentlemen, they are but some of the achievements
   and some of the goals for the future. That is what we have done.
   That is what we believe in. And that is some of what we will do
   in the future. And what is the alternative? The alternative is a
   negative party that has lurched back in the area of industrial relations
   to the 1950s and the 1960s. The alternative is a Labor Party that
   refuses to admit it was wrong.
As William Hague said on Friday, one of the first things that I
   said to him when I met him in London last year after he'd been
   elected Leader of the Conservative Party, was that he had to demonstrate
   to the British people that he changed. In other words, it was a
   different party from the party that had been thrown out. But the
   only thing that has changed about the Australian Labor Party is
   that they no longer have Paul Keating as their leader.
Their policies have not changed. In many respects, they have got
   worse. They are more interventionist, they are more profligate,
   they are more irresponsible than what they were in government. They
   would revisit the scene of every political and economic crime they
   committed in their 13 years if the Australian people were to re-elect
   them. They would drag us back to deficit and debt. They would send
   home interest rates sky-rocketing. They would bring back political
   correctness. They would kowtow to the trade union movement. They
   would repeal our industrial relations legislation. 
That's no idle piece of political rhetoric my friends. They
   have said it. They are totally opposed to our industrial relations
   reforms. They even want to go back to the 1950s and reinforce the
   full rigour of the award system. There'd be no NFF at Webb
   Dock under a Labor government. John Coombs would become the plutocrat
   of the Australian industrial relations scene if the Labor Party
   were elected. 
Ladies and gentlemen, Labor in government again would be an immense
   risk. The Australian people threw them out after 13 years because
   they were fed-up with their approach. Their Hobart Conference demonstrated
   that they had done no serious policy work in Opposition. They have
   not developed new ideas. They have opposed for the sake of opposing.
   They have been negative in the extreme and they offer no hope, no
   inspiration, no leadership and no alternatives to the


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Your Excellency, Lady Deane, other very distinguished
   guests including my Ministerial colleagues John Anderson and Robert
   Hill, ladies and gentlemen.
This is the first occasion that I have had an opportunity
   as Prime Minister to come to these Landcare Awards. And they do
   represent a quite remarkable bringing together of different communities
   in Australia who are dedicated to the care and the restoration and
   the protection of our very fragile and special environment.
It is true, as the Governor-General said, that
   the environment has now become one of those things that straddles
   the differences between politicians on both sides of the political
   divide. It is no longer an issue that only the young are interested
   in. It is no longer an issue that only people living in areas of
   the bush and the regions of Australia are interested in. It is certainly
   no longer the preserve of those people who live in what are loosely
   called the leafy suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne. It is now an issue
   that effects everybody.
And at its grass roots, and at its best, and its
   most basic and its most enduring the landcare movement represents,
   in my opinion, the best expression you can find anywhere in Australia
   of the enduring concern of Australians for the future of this precious
   and beautiful continent of ours.
[applause]
And I am very happy on behalf of the Government
   to say how strongly we support the landcare movement and how excited
   my colleagues and I are about this gathering of so many competitors.
Now we also have a very significant number of sponsors,
   and one of those sponsors of course is Telstra. I don't give
   Telstra any special plug except to say that Telstra had a little
   bit to do a couple of years ago with a little bit of money that
   ultimately ended up being invested by my Government in the future
   of the environment. And I am very proud of that Natural Heritage
   Trust, very proud indeed.
[applause]
And I am also very proud of the fact that my two
   Ministers have gone out of their way to make certain, through their
   own actions, that that money gets to the right destinations and
   I can promise you they will go on doing that. Because it is the
   responsibility of governments to see that money goes where it is
   meant by governments to go.
And landcare is going to receive in the coming
   year about, or overall rather, about $280 million out of the $1.25
   billion that has been set aside out of the sale of Telstra and set
   aside for the Natural Heritage Trust.
Landcare of course is a great community movement.
   It brings together on a voluntary and co-operative basis people
   from all sections of Australian society who have a common commitment
   towards, and a common love of the land which is held in us... trust
   for future generations of Australians. And that is something else
   about landcare which is so tremendously important.
And I think the other thing that I want to say
   tonight is that it is an opportunity to remark on the importance
   of non-metropolitan Australia to the future of our nation. I am
   very conscious as I speak to you tonight that many areas of Australia,
   despite the fact that drought has been put behind us in other parts
   of our country, that there are still many areas of Australia which
   are severely affected by drought. And I am very conscious as somebody
   who grew up in the city of Sydney and has always lived in the cities
   of Australia, I am very conscious of the different challenges that
   face my fellow country men and women in the rural areas of Australia.
And the rural areas of Australia occupy a very
   special place in my own heart, and they occupy a very special place
   I know in the hearts of all Australians. And even though we have
   a relatively small part of our population who live in the rural
   areas of Australia they bulk very large in the export earnings of
   our nation and they bulk even larger in the affections of the rest
   of our nation. We understand the tribulations that you suffer, we
   understand how important the nurturing of land is to your future,
   we understand the massive contribution that the bush makes to this
   nation of ours. And I have often said that I can't imagine
   the Australia that I grew up to love, I can't imagine that
   Australia, without a vibrant rural community. I can't imagine
   that nation without its beloved bush and of course to have its beloved
   bush we need to care for the future of the bush and that of course
   brings us very much back to landcare.
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Government
   I express again my very strong support for the landcare movement.
   It is making a magnificent practical contribution to the caring
   and the preservation of our environment. I congratulate all of those
   who have participated in competition for the awards that are going
   to be made tonight. I thank the sponsors, all of them for the great
   contributions they are making. And I wish all people who live and
   work and have their future in the bush the very best of happiness
   and success and I thank you for the wonderful contribution you make
   to our nation.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Premier and ladies and gentlemen, I would like to welcome you here.
 This is the signing of the Central Highlands Regional Forest Agreement.
 It is the second RFA signed in Victoria and the third in a series
 - the two Victorian ones and one in Tasmania.
The best news out of this is that it's going to create 300 new
 jobs. And that is a very important element of the Regional Forest
 Agreement. It's a very balanced outcome. It represents yet another
 putting aside of the phoney war between environmental concerns and
 job creation and development. Conservation is important but so is
 job creation.
And there's a funding package of $28 million for industry development.
 It will provide a 20-year period of security for investment. There
 is 116,000 hectares of additional reserves, which is an increase of
 64 per cent. And the RFA that we are signing in a moment meets all
 of the required scientific criteria. And when added to the existing
 reserves, almost half of the Central Highlands area will have been
 reserved. So when you set that against the 300 jobs that has been
 created, the 20-year security, $28 million investment, it's a
 win-win situation and it's another example of the sensible, cooperative
 approach that's being adopted to these issues which is of benefit
 to Victoria and, most importantly, it creates new jobs for Australians
 - 300 in this case - and also evinces a proper concern for the environment.
 So I'm delighted to be here with the Premier today to sign it.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..............................................................................................
Thank you very much Wil. To Michael Osborne, the
   President of the New South Wales Division of the Liberal Party,
   to my Federal Ministerial colleagues of which there are a number
   here tonight; Richard Alston, John Moore, Judi Moylan, Bronwyn Bishop,
   John Herron - I don't think I have missed any of the Ministers.
   If I have, put your hand up. To my Federal Parliamentary colleagues
   other than Ministers, to Peter Collins and other state parliamentarians,
   Ian Armstrong, the Leader of the National Party in New South Wales,
   ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start by thanking all of you for being here
   tonight and to thank so many of you for the tremendous support that
   you have given to the Liberal Party in Sydney and New South Wales
   and therefore throughout Australia over the last couple of years.
   It is a tremendous sense of satisfaction that I have in marking
   the second anniversary here in Sydney of the election of the first
   Coalition Government in Australia for 13 years and I take the opportunity
   through this gathering tonight to thank all the members and supporters
   of the Liberal Party for the tremendous help that they have given
   to me and the tremendous understanding they have displayed and the
   loyalty they have demonstrated over the last couple of years.
I came into the Prime Ministership and my Government
   came into office with a number of quite basic guiding principles.
   I have always had a strong personal philosophy about the quality
   of government in this country that essentially says that the art
   of good statecraft as we come towards the end of this century and
   we approach the third Christian millennium, the art of good statecraft
   is really to strike a balance between preserving those values of
   our past and those values of our culture and our history that continue
   to serve us well and continue to remain relevant for our future,
   and to be willing to defend those values and those cultures with
   great tenacity. But by the same token, to be ready to challenge
   and to change, fundamentally if necessary, those practices and those
   attitudes that really have no place in the future Australia that
   we want to build into the 21st Century.
And I also believe that what you have to do is
   to strike a balance between those two. I have also brought to my
   view of the Prime Ministership of this country a fundamental belief
   that Australia occupies a quite unique intersection of history,
   geography, culture and economic circumstance. We are the only nation
   in the world that is geographically cast in Asia, has deep and enduring
   links with Britain and the rest of Europe and also profound historical
   and strategic ties with North America, particularly the United States.
   So far from that intersection being a liability or an encumbrance,
   it is of immense advantage to this country. 
That has been demonstrated over the past few months
   as our neighbours in Asia have passed into great economic turmoil
   and Australia has been able to emerge from that as a nation fighting
   above, hitting above and punching above its own weight and a nation
   that is able to be a reliable friend and a good regional mate of
   those countries in their difficulties. In the years ahead, when
   those countries recover, as inevitably they will, they will remember
   that it was Australia occupying that unique intersection, with all
   of the influences that intersection can bring, that Australia was
   amongst the countries that was willing to help and to give them
   succour and comfort during their difficult times.
We do occupy that very special place in the world
   and it's a source of immense pride to me that my Government
   has been able to turn what was a, what I could only describe as
   an Asia-only focus of the former government into an Asia-first focus
   under my Government. Asia will forever be the most important area
   of our operations, both politically, economically and strategically.
   But as Wil said, we do have important and enduring economic, historical
   and cultural links with other parts of the world.
We came to office with many things that we wanted
   to do. We came to office believing that the social fundamentals
   of this country were srong, that we had a stable political system
   but there are aspects of our economic management that needed dramatic
   change, and as I look back over the last two years, I do so with
   some satisfaction but certainly no sense of complacency or smugness.
   We have turned a deficit of $10.5 billion into a prospective surplus
   in Peter Costello's third budget. We do have the lowest inflation
   rate in the OECD. We do have a very strong level of business investment.
   We have the lowest interest rate for 30 years and only this afternoon
   as a result of the competitive pressures that are now within the
   Australian financial system, some of them directly flowing from
   the implementation of the recommendations of the Wallis Committee,
   we have seen further reductions in business overdraft rates. And
   we have seen over the last week through the actions of the Westpac
   Bank, and this afternoon by the Commonwealth Bank, we have seen
   the first real interest rate breakthrough that the small business
   community of Australia has been hoping for and wanting for many
   long years. That represents extraordinarily good news for what remains
   the backbone of the Australian economy.
We have been able to reduce, even before the prospective
   privatisation of the remaining part of Telstra, we have been able
   to produce a situation that our debt to GDP ratio which was about
   20 per cent in 1995 is now prospectively only 10 per cent in the
   year 2000. By the one single decision to allow the men and women
   of Australia to buy the remaining two thirds of Telstra, we will
   be able, by that one single decision to eliminate almost 40 per
   cent of the total Federal Government debt of this country that existed
   when we came to office in March 1996.
So we have been able, in a quite fundamental way,
   to give to the Australian economy, the strongest economic foundations
   that it's had for 25 years. And I can, with some feeling, ask
   the rhetorical question, where do you imagine the Australian economy
   would have been? What do you imagine the impact of the Australian
   economy would have been from the turmoil in Asia if we had been
   running the loose fiscal policy that we inherited two years ago,
   if we were still struggling with a deficit of over $10 billion a
   year. It certainly would have left us weak, vulnerable and subject
   to very severe economic buffeting. Instead of that, we are seen
   as a stable, reliable, predictable country with which to do business
   and in which to invest.
But we've also, very importantly, undertaken
   some quite fundamental changes to Australia's industrial relations
   system and I guess of all the causes with which I have been strongly
   identified in my political time, on the economic front none has
   been more important than the need to reform Australia's outdated
   industrial relations system. Just as I believe that there are many
   things about Australia that have been part of our past, that we
   should fight with passion to defend as we go into the future, there
   are some things about our past that we should fight to get rid of
   because they are holding us back and one of those things is the
   industrial relations system which has its origins back in pre-World
   War One days, built on some rather unsound notions, coming out of
   the decision of the old Arbitration Commission in the now almost
   infamous Harvester Case. 
And over the years, that award-driven system has
   weakened Australia economically and one of the things we resolved
   to do in 1996 was to change that forever. And at first some of the
   changes we made were seen with suspicion, even by some of our friends
   and supporters as perhaps not going far enough, as perhaps being
   weaker than the would have liked.
But those critics were wrong and those suspicions
   were misplaced because we have brought about fundamental change
   in the industrial relations area and we have been able to do it
   without industrial turmoil. We were told before the last election
   that if we tried to do what we had in mind there would be industrial
   strife. The reality has been completely the opposite. It may stagger
   some of you to know that in 1997 Australia recorded the lowest number
   of days lost to industrial disputes for 85 years. In other words,
   we had to go back to World War One days to find such an impeccable
   industrial record. 
What we have done with those industrial relations
   changes is to build a framework and a basis for one of the most
   defining industrial challenges that this country has faced and that
   of course is fundamental reform of the industrial relations of Australia's
   waterfront. 
We all know that Australia has an inefficient waterfront.
   We all know that the unproductive practices of the waterfront, and
   the activities of the Maritime Union of Australia and its predecessors,
   are almost legend in the industrial relations folklore of Australia.
   We all know that it's one of the things that stands between
   Australia and the full realisation of her potential as a modern,
   competitive, highly productive and highly successful nation. It's
   one of those things that continues to deny us the full realisation
   of the potential that the rest of the world has always seen in our
   country. And at long last we have that intersection of circumstances.
   We have a government which has had the courage to change the law
   of this country, to break the monopoly of the Maritime Union on
   the supply of labour. We have, in the National Farmers' Federation,
   we have a very courageous organisation of men and women who are
   seen as an integral part, not only of the history and the backbone
   of this country but also of its export capacity and it's export
   future. And we also see in the Patricks company and led by a person
   who I think has conducted himself with great courage and great commitment,
   Mr Chris Corrigan, we see a company, and we see in the National
   Farmers' Federation together, people who are prepared to use
   the tools provided by the changes to the law that my Government
   has made. 
Now this is a defining moment. It is a defining
   dispute in the industrial relations history of Australia. We do
   not seek an argument with any union in this country. We have no
   enduring quarrels with any union. We do not wish to destroy unions,
   we do not wish to destroy unionists and we do not wish to destroy
   unionism. There is a place for both union and non-union labour on
   the waterfront of Australia just as there is a place for union and
   non -union labour on any factory floor and in any office in this
   country. 
It is a question of personal choice. Over a period
   of time, union membership has declined and I guess that process
   will go on. But that is a matter of individual choice. But what
   we are determined to see changed because it is important for the
   generation of jobs and the earning of export income for this country,
   what we are determined to see changed are of course the practices
   on the waterfront that have damaged this country's interests
   over such a long period of time. 
So it is an important dispute. It is a crucial
   issue. It is one of those defining moments in the industrial relations
   experience of any country and it will be important that those who
   want the goals that we have talked about for so long in this area
   to be achieved and realised over the months ahead. It will be important
   that you continue to give us and those involved in these events
   your wholehearted support because Australia's export income
   future is at stake. The potential jobs of thousands of Australians
   are involved and the economic reputation and the reliability of
   this country as seen by the rest of the world is very much involved.
The other area, my friends, of course which is
   extremely important to Australia's economic future is dealing
   with what I regard to be the great piece of unfinished economic
   reform business in Australia and that is the long-overdue reform
   of our taxation system. By any measure, we have a very old fashioned,
   increasingly unworkable, and in the eyes of many people, increasingly
   unfair taxation system. We have tried, and I speak collectively
   of us as a nation, we have tried to change it on a number of occasions
   over the years. I had a go when I was the Treasurer in the Fraser
   Government. Mr Keating had a go when he was the Treasurer in the
   Hawke Government. He had the rug pulled from under his feet by the
   ACTU and his Prime Minister. We courageously had a go under John
   Hewson's leadership in 1993 and through one of the most, I
   think, dishonest and destructive scare campaigns that I have ever
   seen run in Australian politics, that attempt was defeated in the
   1993 election.
We said in the 1996 election that we wouldn't
   introduce this kind of reform during our first term and we have
   remained true to our word. But I came to the conclusion in about
   August of last year that it wasn't real life for me to go to
   the next election and once again rule out taxation reform. You don't
   get more than one go at being Prime Minister of this country and
   none of us are either on this earth or in any of these positions
   of immense responsibility for indefinite periods of time. And that
   means that you've got to use the opportunities you have wisely.
   You've got to be, I guess, a faithful steward to the responsibilities
   that you have while you have them. And it seemed to me that when
   it came to the issue of taxation reform, I really had two alternatives.
   I could either sort of say look, it's all too hard, and fudge
   it and pretend that nothing needed to be done or alternatively,
   we would go to the next election full bloodedly committed to the
   fundamental reform of the taxation system. 
And that we'd lay out in some detail the plans
   that we had in mind. Now there may be some of you and there may
   be some of our supporters elsewhere who question the wisdom of it.
   But I don't think I could have credibly got away with going
   to the next election campaign, saying we're going to put tax
   reform off for yet another three years. And I certainly wasn't
   going to stand in front of cameras at the next election campaign
   and say solemnly that of course we're not going to change the
   tax system, having all the time an intention if I won that election
   to do the exact opposite. I am not interested in that kind of duplicity.
So we have decided to reform the tax system. We
   have decided to go to the next election with a detailed proposal.
   I think there has been something of a mood change in the Australian
   community about the need for tax reform. I believe that increasing
   numbers of Australians believe our present system is outmoded, out
   of date and is in need of root and branch reform. There is a growing
   acceptance in the business community that reformed taxation in Australia
   will particularly boost our export capacity. There is a realisation
   that there is rorting of the present system at both ends and if
   it is to be made more fair, fundamental changes are needed. But
   whatever the arguments may be, we are committed and Peter Costello
   and I, in particular are working very hard at present to put together
   the details of a proposal which will be presented to the Australian
   people in enough time for them to analyse and understand it and
   digest it before the next election.
Now I don't underestimate for a moment the
   difficulty of the task. I know that we will fight, we will face
   a ferocious fear campaign from our Labor opponents, our Labor opponents
   who have offered no policy alternatives, who seem to have a growing
   capacity to muck rake and to make trivial personal attacks on individuals,
   who this week were busy making personal attacks on people, from
   myself down in the Government while my Government was busily getting
   on with the job of providing good government for the people of Australia.
We will face a very strong fear campaign. I have
   no doubt of that. But I also have a belief in the great maturity
   and the commonsense of the Australian people. I think as we come
   towards the end of this century, the expectations of the public
   are of their politicians and of their leaders, that they will endeavour
   to make an honest attempt and to have a go at fixing the fundamental
   problems, not only of the economy but of the nation generally. And
   I think we will earn respect and we will win support because we
   are prepared to tackle those fundamental problems. I think Australians
   want a different taxation system. I think they see the present one
   as failing and as being unfair and I think they will give us marks
   for tackling it. But I don't pretend it will be easy. We will
   need your support, we will need your understanding and we will need
   your advocacy in the weeks and months ahead.
Could I just say one or two other personal things
   about the Liberal Party and about what it has meant to me and what
   it continues to mean to me after my many years of membership and
   the enormous privilege I now have, not only of being its Federal
   Parliamentary Leader but also of being Prime Minister of Australia.
   I have never forgotten my organisational roots in the Liberal Party.
   I have never forgotten the long association that I have had with
   so many people in this room, the long association I have had with
   the Party organisation.
At the present time I am the fortunate beneficiary
   of, I suppose a collection of loyalties and a collection of committed
   people, the like of which has not been my experience before and
   the like of which comes for few people as an experience in their
   life and I am very conscious of that. And I am very grateful for
   all of the support that you have given to me. And I am very grateful
   that together, we have been able to achieve an enormous amount over
   the last two years. And I remember that night two years ago on the
   second of March when we had that wonderful win, and one of the greatest
   senses of satisfaction that I had on that occasion was the realisation
   that there were many people at the Wentworth Hotel that night who
   had literally spent years and years with us, trying to win, and
   time after time we kept losing. And we were told by our political
   opponents that we didn't have a decent Party organisation.
   We were told by our political opponents and by some of our critics
   in the media, of which there were many, that we of course were never
   going to win, that we weren't professionals and that we were
   political no-hopers. And it was a source of tremendous pride and
   satisfaction to me that together, we proved all of them wrong. 
That is what an occasion like this reminds me of.
   This is what an occasion like this enthuses me to say to all of
   you, that we can win again and we can win well, provided we don't
   take the Australian people for granted, provided we continue to
   address those things that the Australian people want addressed.
   They want their governments to do things, to deal with problems,
   to tackle difficult issues, to have a go at reforming areas that
   need reforming. They don't want a Government that sits there
   and does nothing. They don't want a government that imagines
   it can sit on a large majority and automatically be re-elected on
   the assumption that they won't put back a government they threw
   out or a party they threw out so unceremoniously only three years
   earlier.
We do live in a more volatile political climate
   than ever before. The differences between the parties are narrower.
   We are less tribal, politically, than we used to be and the number
   of swinging voters is much greater than used to be the case and
   that puts an obligation all the time of good, innovative government
   on those who happen to be in power. It means that you can never
   rest on your laurels. You can never assume that having done a certain
   amount is enough. It means that you have to, having conquered one
   issue and dealt with one problem, that you have got to move very
   rapidly onto the next. And that is the philosophy and that is the
   approach that we have endeavoured to adopt and we will continue
   to adopt between now and the next election.
Can I thank all of you personally again for what
   you have done, for the support you have given us, and prospectively
   for the support I hope you continue to give us into the future.
   To you Michael, as President of the Patty in New South Wales and
   to our new State Director, Remo Nogarotto, I thank both of you for
   your commitment to the organisation. And there is one other person
   I would like to thank tonight and that is somebody who has helped
   and sustained me through all of my years in politics, and shared
   the ups and downs and the trials and tribulations as well as some
   of the more happy moments and that is my wife, Janette, who is with
   me tonight. If I can say to you, we celebrate our 27th wedding anniversary
   tomorrow and typically of course, not surprisingly, we are at a
   Liberal Party gathering and it has certainly been characteristic
   of our lives. Thanks a lot Janette, you have made it all possible.
Thanks a lot.


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Mrs Hewetson; to your Grace, the Archbishop of
 Sydney; to Bishop King. to Mr Brunsdon and to other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Janette and I are particularly happy to share this very special occasion
 with you because it marks a very important project which is a very
 impressive part of a long tradition of service to older Australians.
And I want, on behalf of the Government, to pay tribute to the work
 of Anglican Retirement Villages, to salute the place of what used
 to be called and commonly understood in Sydney as the Mowll Village
 but is now broadly understood as Anglican Retirement Villages, the
 tremendous contribution that you have collectively made to the quality
 of providing a secure, compassionate, supportive environment for older
 Australians.
I don't think one could find, anywhere in our country, a better
 example of enlightened, compassionate care and a congenial, supportive
 community environment for older people than you can find here at Castle
 Hill. It brings together the tradition of Christian caring with a
 recognition of the importance of maintaining links with family, friends
 and the community.
As the representative of the Government, as the Prime Minister of
 Australia, let me say to all of those involved with Anglican Retirement
 Villages and particularly those associated with the splendid new state-of-the-art
 nursing home, whose foundation of which we mark today, can I say a
 very warm word of thanks and gratitude for what you have done to set
 an example to so many others in the aged care sector with the sort
 of work and the sort of complex that you began to establish here just
 40 years ago and has now grown to, here at Castle Hill, something
 that care for, in the order of 1,500 people. And throughout Australia
 generally, Anglican Retirement Villages cares for some 3,500 Australians.
Caring for our senior citizens, older Australians, whatever description
 we may choose to use, is very much a shared endeavour. The Government
 cannot do it on its own. The churches and their welfare arms cannot
 do it on their own and individuals cannot do it on their own either.
 And what we need is a partnership, a shared endeavour, between those
 three arms of activity.
The Government has ongoing and basic responsibilities. Community organisations,
 particularly the churches, do a magnificent job bringing their special
 skills of compassion and care and understanding and those things related
 to the human spirit, which are so important in providing a rounded,
 caring environment. And then, of course, we need the contribution
 of individuals. But the three have to work together.
There are some in our community who can make a contribution to their
 caring. There are many who can't. And we must always have an
 approach to aged care that looks after those people who cannot afford
 to support themselves in any way. And that is what makes the approach
 of Anglican Retirement Villages such a fine example of aged care within
 our community. You have, I understand, here at Castle Hill some 30
 per cent of your residents who, because of their circumstances, do
 not make any personal contribution. And that is how it should be in
 any kind of decent, caring, compassionate society.
A few days ago I launched, on behalf of the Government, a $270 million
 commitment to the aged care sector which is designed to do a number
 of things and particularly designed to provide more assistance for
 those Australians who wish to remain longer in their own homes. And
 that is an example of one feature of our responsibility in the aged
 care sector. We have a responsibility - and let me say to you that
 we will always discharge it faithfully and fully - we have a responsibility,
 and we'll always meet that responsibility, to support the provision
 of high quality aged care, residential facilities for those Australians
 who want it. And the example of your village is one that we would
 like to see duplicated all over Australia.
We also have a responsibility to provide additional resources and
 additional services to those Australians who wish to remain in their
 own home environment as long as possible. And what you need is a blended,
 united approach towards aged care within our society. An approach
 which recognises the changes that have overtaken society, that recognises
 that where as 50 years ago large complexes of residential care were
 not something that we had contemplated. But over the passage of a
 couple of generations they have come to be part and parcel of our
 life. And what we must do is to make them congenial and give them
 a great communal spirit, which is so obvious here at Castle Hill.
 And it's the example of that caring, communal environment and
 the countless examples I have, as a politician, of people saying to
 me how they have found so much friendship and so much support and
 so much caring and so much love and compassion in retirement villages
 of this kind. And it is a very important off-shoot of the life of
 Australia and the caring for the elderly in Australian community of
 the last couple of generations.
We are, as a society, living longer, We're healthier. Our aspirations
 of life in our retirement years are greater and our horizons are broader
 than used to be the case. And that is something that we should all
 welcome. And can I say, as an Australian who grew up in the 1950s
 and somebody who is a little younger than many of your here but not,
 perhaps, as young as some others in the audience, can I say how much
 I believe that my generation and younger generations of Australians,
 how much we owe to the generation which is so largely represented
 in this congregation today. Because in the main, you are the generation
 that sustained and defended and protected and saved our nation during
 World War II, whether it was on the battlefield or on the home front.
 And the generations of Australians that came after you owe you a debt
 of gratitude that can never be fully repaid. And one of the small
 ways in which that debt of gratitude can be repaid is, of course,
 to ensure that the choices that you want and your generations wants
 for aged care, whether it be in your own home or be in a marvellous
 retirement village such as this, that those choices are fully available.
Can I salute, on behalf of the Government, the work of the Anglican
 Church, the work, in particular, of Anglican Retirement Villages.
 Giving good government and delivering a good and fair society, which
 is what all of us want as we move into the 21st Century, does involve
 that shared endeavour of which I spoke. No government has either the
 wit or the resources to do all of it on its own. No individual can
 survive the ups and downs and the turmoil of life without companionship
 and support from others within the community. And no organisation,
 no matter what the strength of its spiritual being and essence might
 be, can do things all on its own without the support of individuals
 and without, where necessary, the support of its government. So we
 do need that shared endeavour. And the care of the aged is an area
 where we can give expression to that shared endeavour, that partnership,
 with each of us playing its rightful role.
I thank the Anglican Church on behalf of the Government and the people
 of Australia for the magnificent contribution that it is making to
 the aged care sector. I say, on behalf of the Government, that we
 will always play our role to the full, we will always be generous,
 we'll always be compassionate and supportive and we'll always
 understand the importance of the lives of older Australians of the
 kind of environment that is so evident here.
I congratulate the Anglican Retirement Villages. I thank you for your
 contribution. I wish all of you well. And, particularly, I wish all
 of those associated with the magnificent new nursing home project
 which will provide state-of-the-art care and facilities that I know
 that all Australians would hope to see available to their parents
 and their loved ones. And I thank you very warmly for having me amongst
 you today.
Thank you
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Peter for those very warm words of welcome;
 to Joy Howley; to Tony Staley; to Peter Poggioli; to Phil Gude, the
 Deputy Leader of the State Parliamentary Liberal Party, Alan Stockdale,
 the Treasurer of Victoria, to my other Ministerial and Parliamentary
 colleagues, both State and Federal, and most importantly the men and
 women of the Liberal Party of Victoria.
It is a great pleasure for me to back addressing once again the State
 Council gathering of the strongest division of the Liberal Party of
 Australia. A Division, that over the years through good times and
 bad for the Federal Parliamentary Party, in Government and in Opposition,
 has always delivered a magnificent electoral dividend to us in Canberra.
I want in my remarks this morning to express again my gratitude to
 the Victorian Division for the tremendous understanding, and support,
 and loyalty, and vigorous advocacy which all of you have delivered
 to us over the last two years. It has been a two year period of tremendous
 achievement. And as we turn our gaze towards the inevitability of
 a Federal election some time in the next twelve months and if I were
 some of the newspaper commentators I wouldn't get too excited
 about particular dates. Can I say to all of you that the next twelve
 months is not a time to be reticent, it is not a time to be shy, it
 is not a time to be unforthcoming about what the Government that I
 have the privilege to lead has achieved.
In many respects the Coalition Government elected in March of 1996
 has been the greatest reform government Australia has had since the
 end of World War II. In all the areas you look at you have seen sweeping,
 indeed, fundamental reform. No Government and no Treasurer has achieved
 what my Government, and Peter Costello has achieved, over the last
 two years in turning around the disastrous fiscal inheritance that
 was left to us. A $10.5 billion deficit concealed - but so obvious
 and there for the asking. But the day after the election when I met
 the outgoing head of the Prime Minister's Department and his
 two colleagues in my then Opposition Leader's office in Sydney,
 still recovering as I was from the euphoria of the night before, but
 able to read, just, because I had been to Church. I was able to read
 those dreadful figures. They handed me the book. It was all there
 and, of course, it had been there for weeks but somebody hadn't
 bothered to ask. And that is the measure of the difficulty that we
 faced. We did inherit a deficit of $10.5 billion. And in just two
 years we have turned that by dint of an extraordinary effort of fiscal
 discipline to which all of my colleagues have contributed. We have
 turned that around and I am immensely proud of that reform. And it
 is a reform that is widely recognised throughout the economic world.
 It is a reform that is helped to fire-proof the Australian economy
 against the worst of the Asian ravages. It means that as we talk to
 the leaders of Indonesia, the leaders of China and Singapore we are
 able to talk from a position of strength. And along with Japan, Australia
 is the only nation that has been strong enough to participate in the
 three IMF bailouts, respectively of Korea, Thailand and Indonesia.
 And all of those bailouts have involved an investment in the future
 of Australian jobs and Australian industry and that is why we have
 done it. But you only do that from a position of strength. If Mr Beazley
 and Mr Keating had been returned at the last election Australia would
 not have been able to help Indonesia and Thailand and Korea in their
 hour of need. We would not have been able to be the good regional
 mate that we have been to those countries.
But as Peter said, we have delivered the lowest interest rates that
 this country has seen for thirty years, or more. The reductions in
 housing interest rates, worth on average about $250 to $300 a month,
 or put another way - the equivalent for the average wage and salary
 earner in Australia of an increase of $100 a week in that person's
 income. That is the measure. And none of you should ever forget in
 the months ahead that in 1990 the overdraft rate for small business
 was driven to 20.5 per cent under Mr Keating's Treasurership.
 And in the last week we have had two of the major banks in Australia
 announce dramatically lower interest rates for small and large businesses.
 And that we will have a base rate for small business in the order
 of 7.25 per cent from Westpac and about the same from the Commonwealth
 Bank. And I expect it will only be a matter of time before the other
 banks and financial institutions respond. None of that would have
 been possible if we hadn't cut the budget deficit. None of that
 would have been possible if we hadn't embarked upon a process
 of fiscal consolidation.
But it doesn't end there. We have reformed the industrial relations
 system and we have reformed it in a climate of industrial peace and
 industrial tranquility, the like of which we have not seen at any
 time since the end of World War II. Indeed, in 1997, the number of
 industrial disputes in Australia hit the lowest level it had been
 for
85 years. In other words, we had to go back to the years of World
 War I to find a period of industrial peace, the equal of what we experienced
 in 1997. So much for all the prophecies of blood in the streets and
 industrial strife - all the warnings that were made in those speeches
 by Mr Kelty and others on the eve of the 1996 election. Because what
 the Australian people have said and what the Australian workers have
 said is that they welcome the opportunities and the choice involved
 in the new industrial relations era that we have introduced.
And, of course, under Peter Costello's Treasurership, we have
 also embarked upon some very fundamental changes and reforms to the
 Australian financial system. We have, in the Australian financial
 system now, one of the most competitive in the world. And increasingly
 Australia is seen as a haven for investment in this part of the world.
 We have a stable political system. We have stable economic conditions.
 The lowest rate of inflation in the OECD area. We have a stable legal
 system. We speak the international language, the English language.
 And we are seen as having a stable banking system with an open competitive
 financial approach. In other words, you have a coming together of
 all of the influences that make Australia the most attractive place
 in the world in which to invest. And I believe that we are set fair
 to realise one of our other great goals in the next century. And that
 is to see Australia become, after Tokyo, the second great financial
 centre of the Asian Pacific region. And to join New York and London,
 along with Tokyo, as the four great financial centres of the world.
And, of course, the reform agenda doesn't end there either. We
 have, by our commitment, to allow the men and women of Australia to
 buy the remaining two-thirds of Telstra. We have given ourselves the
 capacity, in that one single decision, to reduce, by 40 per cent,
 the total Federal Government debt of this country. In other words,
 40 per cent of the almost $100 billion of Federal Government debt
 that we inherited from Mr Beazley and Mr Keating in March of 1996.
We've also seen significant strides on the employment front.
 We have seen, over the last six months, the generation of about 140,000
 new jobs. We have seen significant reforms to small business. We have
 seen the introduction of the work-for-the-dole principles. The principle
 of mutual obligation. The principle that Mr Beazley chokes on. The
 principle that no Labor government could ever embrace because the
 trade union movement would deny them the capacity to deliver it in
 government.
And so, my friends, the list of reforms has been quite fundamental.
 On the 1st of May we will introduce a fully competitive system of
 labour market tendering. The Jobs Network, it represents, for the
 first time anywhere in the world, a far more private sector approach
 to the process of job placement. Wherever you go, in all the fields
 of our responsibility and our endeavour, this has been a great reforming
 government.
And, of course, we have ahead of us that great unfinished piece of
 economic reform business in Australia, and that is to reform Australia's
 increasingly outmoded and ramshackled taxation system. We've
 said, consistently, that we will lay before the Australian people,
 before the next election, a plan to be implemented after the election
 that will restore fairness and equity to the Australian taxation system.
 A plan that will be bad news for the cheats, but good news for the
 honest workers of Australia. It'll be good news for the exporters
 of Australia. It'll be good news for the small business men and
 women of Australia. And, above all else, it will be good news for
 the future economic competitiveness of our nation.
What is the response of the Labor Party to that? The response of the
 Labor Party to that is to pretend that the present system is adequate
 - the system that they made worse and worse over a 13 year period.
 And they demonstrate, by their response to our approach, they demonstrate
 their fundamental indifference to serious reform and they demonstrate
 their fundamental and continuing unfitness for office.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is one other great issue that is with
 us at the present time. And that, of course, is to reform the Australian
 waterfront. It is part, almost of the legend of industrial relations
 and life in Australia, that our waterfront is inefficient. There's
 that wonderful story about the lady of Charleville, when she was told
 that a cyclone was coming by her grand-daughter and she said: don't
 worry, darling, the wharfies won't land it. And, of course, it's
 not a joke, only in the most peripheral of senses. It has long been
 the grim reality of many of the exporters of Australia, particularly
 our farmers who've worked hard in difficult seasons against great
 odds only to see market opportunities squandered because of the inefficiency
 of our waterfront. By any measure, we have a highly inefficient waterfront.
Bob Hawke promised and delivered many meetings when he was Prime Minister.
 And that is the response of Mr Beazley He said: oh, there's no
 problem with the waterfront, all you've got to do is have a meeting
 or, if necessary, two or three or four or five meetings and at the
 end of the day you can negotiate an arrangement with the Maritime
 Union of Australia. Well, they tried that. The Labor Party tried that.
 And there was about $450 million spent, under the former government,
 as a result of all of those meetings. And we got absolutely no lasting
 dividend in terms of improved productivity.
Our waterfront is still woefully inefficient by world standards. It
 is miles behind the wharves of our competitor nations in the Asian
 Pacific region. The reforms that were undertaken in New Zealand a
 few years ago have literally left us for dead. We have tried negotiating.
 We have always been willing to embrace sensible reform. But in the
 past, the law has stood in the way. But now you have a government
 that has had the courage to change the law.
When we changed the Industrial Relations Act, we broke the
 monopoly on the recruitment and the supply of labour on the Australian
 waterfront by the Maritime Union. And it has now been possible, through
 the courage of Patricks - and I say that deliberately and unashamedly
 - and the courage of the National Farmers' Federation. Those
 two organisations have taken advantage of the law that we are proud
 to say that we changed. And what we are now seeing is the first real
 attempt for 50 years to deliver a more competitive waterfront. And
 this is a defining moment in Australia's industrial relations
 history. It is a defining moment in a very, very long saga, a disgraceful
 saga, of low productivity and anti-competitive behaviour. And it's
 an opportunity that has to be embraced, an opportunity grasped by
 the Australian community.
And I want to say, on behalf of the Government, that we will support
 any attempts, provided they are within the laws of Australia, to make
 Australian wharves more competitive and more productive. And we will
 support any, legitimately, within the laws of Australia, who commit
 themselves to achieve those very important national interest goals.
And, of course, we're not dealing here with the battlers of the
 trade union movement. We're not dealing here with underpaid people.
 We're dealing here with people whose incomes are in the order
 of $70,000 to $80,000 a year on average. We are dealing here with
 people who've made an art form out of the rorting that goes on,
 on the Australian waterfront. And we are dealing with a union that
 believes that, above all unions, it has a right to privileged treatment,
 that has a monopoly on privileged treatment and to hell with the consequences
 to Australia and to the rest of the trade union movement. And one
 of the things that I find quite intriguing about the behaviour of
 the MUA over the past few days is the way in which the ACTU is edging
 itself away and saying: well, no, we really want this strike limited,
 we don't really want it to spread.
Well, can I just say again to all of you, ladies and gentlemen, this
 is a defining moment in our industrial relations experience. It is
 a very important issue and it is very important to the national interest
 of Australia that there be the right conclusion.
My friends, can I say something of the contribution, as I would very
 much like to do, of my Victorian colleagues to the successful working
 of my Coalition Government. I'm very proud of the fact, of course,
 that there are five Victorians in the Cabinet. And one of the most
 interesting things I find to do is to make a few comparisons. I think
 of the Minister and, if I can remember the Shadow Minister, I contrast
 the performance of the Minister versus the Shadow Minister.
Now, I start with Peter Costello. Now, he's done pretty well.
 He's done very well. And you know who his Shadow is - you must.
 You're not depriving Gareth of attention, are you? The only thing
 I'd say about that comparison is simply this, while Peter Costello's
 been cutting your interest rates, Gareth Evans has been trawling through
 the gutter of Australian politics.
Now, this is one that you really won't get, even in jest. Who
 really knows the Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations? But, of
 course, it gets even better. I don't think there's any -
 Laurie? No, no. He's the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs.
 Laurie was the Minister for Industrial Relations, now it's Bob
 McMullan, in case anybody hadn't noticed - Bob McMullan - m-c-m-u-l-l-e-n,
 I think. But if you think, you know, there's a bit of obscurity
 there, I don't think any of you could name - and Richard, you're
 not allowed to take part in this - the Shadow Minister for Communications.
 He's an obscure...
INTERJECTION:
Richard doesn't know either, Prime Minister. Richard, doesn't
 know either.
PRIME MINISTER CONTINUES:
And then, of course, we have the comparison of the Health Minister,
 Michael. And can I say, very, very seriously and very, very sincerely
 what an outstanding job, in a very, very difficult portfolio, Michael
 Wooldridge has done. He's an extremely valued member of my Ministerial
 team. His opponent is that man - the little boy lost, we call him
 - home alone from Dobell, Michael Lee.
And then, of course, we come to David Kemp's adversary. I'm
 reminded of that old biblical injunction:- would that my enemy would
 write a book. And, of course, David's adversary is Mark Latham.
 And he's read his bible and he's written a book. The only
 thing Mark Latham hasn't done, of course, is to say anything
 relevant about education. And I can remember when he was appointed
 as the Shadow Minister for Education, Mr Beazley ran around saying:
 look, watch out Liberals, you'll be sorry you ever heard of Mark
 Latham. I think Kim Beazley would be sorry that he'd ever heard
 of Mark Latham. It's a great book. It actually contains some
 thinking. And for the first time in two years you've seen somebody
 in the Labor Party say something relevant about the future. And we're
 very happy to remind the Australian people of this because Mark Latham
 supports fundamental reform of Australia's taxation system. He
 supports a broad-based, indirect tax. He supports the principle of
 mutual obligation in welfare. He supports a progressive industry policy.
 In other words, he supports all of the things that Kim Beazley, Simon
 Crean and Gareth Evans totally oppose. He's a great Shadow Minister.
Ladies and gentlemen, could I finally say something, recognising that,
 inevitably, in a federation, there will be some differences of emphasis
 from time to time on the respective responsibilities of the Federal
 and State governments. Can I something about the issue of the respective
 health care responsibilities of the State and the Federal Government.
 As governments we all have our responsibilities. And I think there
 is a united view, certainly between myself and the Premier of Victoria
 and all the other Premiers and Chief Ministers of Australia, that
 we should deliver, to the Australian people, the best aged care and
 the best health care system that we can.
We have our direct responsibilities. We have them for aged care and
 we have them for private health insurance. And we also share responsibilities
 through the Medicare agreement for the funding of public hospitals
 by the State governments. And I know there have been some public disagreements
 between the Federal and State governments. And I do want to say very
 factually and calmly, on behalf of the Federal Government, that we
 believe that the offer that we have made to the States is a fair and
 reasonable one.
I understand the concern of States. Equally, I ask you to understand
 the facts. I ask you to remember that the agreement that we propose,
 commencing on the 1st of July this year, for a five year period, will
 involve an increase of three per cent each, so that there'll
 be accumulative real increase of 15 per cent over the five-year period.
 And this is in a climate of zero inflation. I ask you to bear in mind
 that in our general tax payments going to the States, for all purposes,
 there will be an increase of almost five per cent, in real terms,
 in a climate of zero inflation. I think it is a matter, undisputed,
 on the public record that between 1993 and 1998, the Commonwealth
 spent over $3.25 billion more on hospitals than if the 1992 levels
 had continued. And the States only spent $355 million more than if
 the 1992 funding levels had gone on. And that in the first and second
 years of that five year period, State spending actually declined by
 $500 million in 93-94 and $331 million in the following
 year. And that according to my advice, Victoria, South Australia,
 Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory, on adjusted
 1992 dollar levels, is spending less now than was the case in those
 years.
Now, I don't mention these figures other than to put, plainly
 and unemotionally, on the public record what is our position. Because
 the offer that we have made does represent real growth over that five-year
 period. And it is a fair and defensible and reasonable offer. We have
 responsibilities in the health and aged care area that go beyond our
 responsibilities with the States in relation to public hospitals.
I announced last Thursday a very important expansion of the Commonwealth's
 investment in the aged care area, built around the belief that the
 greatest thing that we can do for the aged in Australia is to give
 them the choice, for as long as possible, to remain within the secure
 environment of their own homes. And the whole purpose of the policy
 I announced on Thursday was to do that. And it was also a policy that
 broke new ground at a Federal level in the area of providing assistance
 and comfort for carers within our community. And I have to say, in
 all the years that I've been in Parliament, the most moving stories
 that I have had from constituents have been stories about the difficulty,
 often of very elderly people caring for adult children with profound
 disabilities and impairments. And nobody could be less than totally
 moved and touched by those stories. They are the great unsung heroes
 and heroines of any compassionate and decent society. And what they
 have a right to expect from the Government and what they have a right
 to expect from the entire community is a recognition, is a firm recognition
 of the tremendous role that they play and also some improvement in
 the material support that they receive.
And I'm very happy that, from the 1st of July this year, there'll
 be a significant increase in the domiciliary care benefit. And also
 that we are going to expand the respite facilities. And we're
 also, over the next 12 or fifteen months, we're going to expand
 the eligibility criteria for that care benefit and we're going
 to combine it with the Disabled Childrens Benefit into a new carers
 allowance which will have expanded criteria. So that a larger number
 of people, I estimate up to 14,000 or 15,000 additional people, will
 be able to qualify. This is an area of very great need. It is an area
 of direct Federal Government responsibility. And it is an area in
 which we are injecting more resources and more support.
I always regret, as I know my State colleagues do, any disagreements
 on issues that are important to our joint endeavours. But it is the
 responsibility of both levels of government, when those disagreements
 occur it is the responsibility of both levels of government to put
 their cases with care and with prudence, not emotionally, understated
 it necessary, but nonetheless firmly, politely and factually. And
 I have to say, on behalf of my Government, in that firm, polite, factual
 fashion, that the offer that we have made does represent a generous
 increase on the last five years. It does represent three per cent,
 real, each year for five years. It does build upon an almost five
 per cent real increase in the general tax money going to the States
 in a climate of zero inflation. And it does have to be used against
 the background of the individual spending decisions on hospitals that
 have been made by all the State Governments over the past few years.
 Now, I do have available as a result of work done by my staff, I do
 have available, and with Michael Wooldridge's office, some material
 explaining these things in more detail for any of you who would be
 interested to have it.
Ladies and gentlemen, I know that in the course of Government it is
 inevitable that there will be some disagreements and I think it is
 important that the facts be examined in a very unemotional, and if
 necessary, understated fashion.
Can I finally say, ladies and gentlemen, that in a sense returning
 to what I said at the beginning of my address, and that is that we
 have achieved an enormous amount over the last two years. And we've
 achieved it because there has been tremendous co-operation between
 all of the members of the Federal Parliamentary Party. And I want
 to express to all of my Victorian colleagues, to all of you without
 exception, my personal gratitude for the support and loyalty and understanding
 that you have given over the last two years. There have been occasions


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much my Parliamentary colleague, Paul Marek, to Councillor
 McRae the Mayor of Rockhampton, to Senator Ian Macdonald, to Vince
 Lester, other councillors, other distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a tremendous delight for me to be here in Rockhampton, to be
 visiting the electorate of Capricornia which Paul Marek won for the
 Coalition and won for the National Party at the last election. And
 I want in the few moments that I intend to speak to you today to share
 a few thoughts with you about some issues that are very important,
 not only to central Queensland, but also to our entire nation.
But before I do that, let me say that I had planned to come to Rockhampton
 some time ago because I set myself a goal when I became Prime Minister
 of making certain that I communicated very directly to the people
 of rural and regional Australia that mine was not just a Government
 that governs to the people of Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney but,
 in fact, is a Government which governs people who live in the regional
 and rural areas of Australia.
And can I say to you, my fellow Australians, that I am very conscious,
 as Prime Minister, of the particular challenges, of the particular
 concerns, of the particular needs of rural and regional Australia.
 I know that many of you have lived by the produce of your land. I
 know that this area of central Queensland boasts to us the great export
 industries of Australia, the cattle industry and the coal industry.
 I know the particular difficulties that the former industry is going
 through. I know that this gathering of more than 500 Australians understand
 probably better than any other gathering of 500 Australians anywhere
 in our country just how much we are at the mercy of a fiercely competitive
 world and no matter how efficient you are, no matter how productive
 you are, if you live in a competitive world environment then you can
 win or lose a market according to the vagaries of the weather and
 according to the vagaries of international trade.
Now I don't come to you today as professing some kind of naive
 belief that everything is easy for you. I understand the problems
 of many of your industries and I am filled with admiration for the
 stoic ways which many of you have survived through very hard times
 and have continued to do so. But I am very mindful of the continuing
 impact of drought, although in the last few days the faces of smiles
 on that particular front. I am nonetheless very conscious of the impact
 the drought has had on the livelihood and the lives and hopes and
 the aspirations of many people in this hall.
Another reason why I wanted to come here was to pay tribute to your
 Federal Parliamentary representative. Paul Marek has been an outstandingly
 successful Federal representative for the seat of Capricornia over
 the last two years. Paul has brought to his representation to the
 electorate, he has brought an earthy understanding of the hopes and
 the aspirations of the men and women of this area. He doesn't
 come with what some people would call, a typical Coalition background.
 He has a trade union background, and I am very proud that my Coalition
 Government includes in its ranks people who have served as members
 of trade unions and it's pretty relevant to a debate we are having
 at a moment and I'll come to that just in jiff but, of course,
 nothing will stop me from coming from it.
But ladies and gentlemen, what it demonstrates to you is that we are
 a party for all Australians. We are a Coalition for all Australians.
 We're not just a Coalition to pose for the lawyers and farmers
 and doctors and business men and women and graziers and pastoralists.
 We are a party, a coalition, the two parties, the Liberal Party and
 the National Party who represent a broad cross-section of the Australian
 community. And one of the proudest things that I was able to say on
 the night of the 2nd of March 1996 when I knew that the people of
 Australia had elected me as Prime Minister, was that I could go into
 the Prime Minister's job beholden to no one special interest
 or pressure group in Australia. I knew that I could go into the Prime
 Ministership with a commitment to defer to the best of my ability
 all of the people of Australia.
And unlike the Labor Party, which is still, and we are seeing it played
 out very dramatically at the present time, still bound hand and foot
 to the trade union movement, unable to articulate the national interest
 when certain issues arise. I was able to go into the Lodge and become
 the Prime Minister in this wonderful country of ours owing allegiance
 to no one special group and having a special obligation to serve to
 the best of my ability and that of my colleagues, all of the people
 of Australia. And I remain very proud of the fact that we answer to
 nobody other than to the collective of the people of Australia and
 that will always be the approach that we take and it will always guide
 the individual decisions that we make.
Ladies and gentlemen, Paul mentioned in the course of his introduction,
 the financial measures that we have taken since we were elected in
 March of last year. It is true that when we came into Government there
 was an accumulated Federal Government debt of between $95 and $100
 billion, and it was also true that we inherited an annual budget deficit
 of $10.5 billion and I am very pleased to say when Peter Costello
 brings down the Budget in May of this year, in just under four weeks
 time, we will be able to tell the people of Australia that on an annual
 basis we are once again back in the black. That we have turned that
 annual deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus, that we have done
 the most important thing that any Government must do if it wants to
 lay the basis of individual prosperity and that is to lay the basis
 of national prosperity. And getting a budget deficit eliminated is
 no sort of abstract economic arid exercise. It has dramatically beneficial
 consequences for the whole community. Does any person in this hall
 imagine that we wouldn't have been more severely buffeted, that
 we wouldn't have been more heavily damaged by the downturn that
 has occurred in the Asian Pacific region if we had not taken the action
 we did two years ago to get our national accounts in order. Does anybody
 imagine that we would have been able to insulate ourselves as well
 as we have. I don't pretend that there won't be some impact
 of the Asian downturn, of course there will be. But it would have
 been immeasurably greater and the damage to Australia vaster if we
 had not taken hold of the economic situation that we inherited and
 every week that now goes by I think drives home to these people of
 Australia that if we had not taken some of the decisions that we did
 take when we came to Office two years ago, if we had simply said what's
 10.5 billion dollars a year, what's 95 to 100 billion dollars
 accumulated over a period of years? Let's not worry about it,
 let's borrow some more, let's spend up big, something will
 turn up to save Australia again. If we had taken that sort of careless
 indifferent attitude, I can say to you my friends that the economics
 staring us in the face now, given what has happened in the Asia Pacific
 region, would have been far more daunting and far more damaging than
 what has turned out to be the case.
But, of course, it hasn't stopped there, not only have we protected
 Australia and strengthened Australia against the ravages of the Asian
 economic downturn, but we have, because we have reduced our own borrowing,
 and our own debt, we have brought about the most substantial reductions
 in interest rates that this country has seen both on the housing scene
 and now, thankfully, in the business area, the most substantial reductions
 in interest rates that Australia has experienced for the last 30 or
 40 years. Housing interest rates are now at their lowest levels since
 the late 1960s. It is, in the words of Peter Costello, possible to
 say that we have the lowest housing interest rates since man first
 walked on the moon.
And if you accept that the average housing loan around Australia,
 and this is the case, is $100,000, the average mortgage on a home
 is $100,000, the saving is worth about $300 a month or the equivalent,
 if you are an employee, of getting a $100 a week rise from your employer.
Now that is the measure of the reduction in housing interest rates
 that has occurred and that is directly attributable to the fact we
 have reduced the deficit. If we had not reduced the deficit, those
 housing interest rates would not have come down. Now I am very happy
 to say that that fall in housing interest rates is now starting to
 be matched by a fall in business overdraft rates. And in the last
 couple of weeks the two largest banks in Australia, Westpac and the
 Commonwealth Bank have announced significant reductions in their business
 overdraft rates and all I can say to you is that if you are a customer
 of either of those banks, I'd go along and get the details. And
 if you are a customer of any other lending institution, I'd go
 along and say to them why aren't you doing what Westpac and the
 Commonwealth are doing? Because competition in the financial sector
 is what it's all about and I look forward to the day when the
 same reduction in housing interest rates are flowing through to the
 small business and to the farming area and once again on a $100,000
 benchmark, $100,000 loan benchmark, the interest savings under the
 proposals announced by both Westpac and the Commonwealth amount to
 interest savings of about $4,000 a year.
Now I know that getting interest rates down is not the only thing
 that people in rural and regional Australia want, and I know that
 there are many other things that are needed, but over long years of
 discussion with people on the land and people in small businesses,
 I have come to know that the cost of borrowing money is one of the
 greatest obstacles of prosperity and to expansion and that constantly
 people have said to me it's all right for housing interest rates
 to come down but unless you can get some reduction in business interest
 rates, or interest rates on our farming property, we are not being
 able to see around the next corner. Now I am very happy to say, my
 friends, that as a result of the development that I've outlined,
 we are starting to see the light at the end of the tunnel, not only
 in the housing interest rate area but also, very importantly and very
 critically for this audience, in small business and farming area.
Now ladies and gentlemen, I want to say a couple of things about two
 issues that Paul touched on. One of them, of course, is the quite
 important issue of reform of Australian waterfront. And right at the
 moment we are witnessing one of the most important and potentially
 one of the most beneficial developments in Australia's long industrial
 relations history that we could possibly experience. And there is
 only one issue at stake in relation to the waterfront and that is
 whether or not Australia is to have a world competitive, a world productive
 and a world leading waterfront. That is the issue, it's not about
 anything else and the single objective of my Government is to give
 to this country an efficient, productive and competitive watefront.
And all of you as producers and exporters will know that the unproductive
 character of the Australian waterfront, is not something that has
 arrived in the last few months, it's not something that's
 arrived in the last few years. It's even not something that's
 arrived in the last 10 or 20 years. It is something which has been
 with this country for as long as just about the oldest person in this
 room can remember. It's almost been part and parcel of an understanding
 of the economic difficulties that face Australia. It's been part
 of the folklore almost, that this country has been bedevilled by an
 unproductive waterfront.
Governments in the past have talked about it. Governments in the past
 have sat down with the Maritime Union to discuss this. Governments
 in the past have presided over the expenditure of hundreds of millions
 of dollars to try and solve the problem. My Government in fulfilment
 of a very solemn commitment that we made, and there's nothing
 strange about the fact that I and my Government are committed for
 reforming the Australian waterfront. We've been talking about
 doing that for years. We finally got the opportunity when we were
 elected in March of 1996 and the first thing we had to do was to change
 the law because unless you were willing to change the law it wouldn't
 have been possible for what has occurred over recent weeks to occur.
And we did change the law. We changed the law to make it possible
 for union monopolies to be broken. I have no quarrel with trade unionism.
 I have no quarrel with trade unionists. I believe in freedom of association.
 I believe it is the birthright of any man or women in Australia to
 join a union or not to join a union, but I don't believe it is
 the birthright of any group of Australians to hold the rest of the
 country to ransom. I don't believe it is the birthright of any
 group of Australians to impose uncompetitive and anti-productive practices
 on aspects of our economy. And to hear some of the complaints of the
 Maritime Union of Australia in recent days, one would think that they
 imagine that all of us have collective amnesia. We are invited to
 forget to the fact that year in and year out they held the economy
 to ransom. We are invited to forget the fact that they set out a few
 months ago to destroy the very livelihood of the business that employed
 them, that they have year in and year out maintained the right to
 exert a ruthless union monopoly that no other section of the trade
 union movement in the modern age has the temerity to exert or the
 temerity to claim.
Now that is the background, but what is at stake, it is only one thing
 and that is whether in the competitive world of the 21st Century,
 that world that you as producers and exporters understand only too
 well, whether we are to be equipped with a world competitive productive
 waterfront or whether we are to tie one hand and one arm of every
 producer in Australia behind his or her back and say well you can
 slave your heart out on your farm, you can have the most productive
 enterprise, you can have the most marvellously sought after export
 but unless it gets across the wharves or it comes through the wharves
 and unless it can occur in those circumstances in a productive, in
 a competitive way, you are not going to be successful and you are
 not going to survive in business.
Now that is what is at stake. It's a simple question of whether
 we are as a nation going to claim the right to have a productive and
 a competitive waterfront. Because if we can claim that right, if we
 do bring that about, then that will generate more Australian jobs,
 it will generate more export income for Australia and it will attract
 more business investment both domestically and from overseas into
 Australia. And that is the issue which is involved, nothing more,
 indeed, nothing less. Whether Australia is going to remove one of
 the last great impediments for her international economic success
 and one of those last great impediments to Australia's international
 economic success is the unproductive, the appallingly uncompetitive
 character of the Australian waterfront.
And I don't think there's a man or woman in Australia who
 examines this issue fairly, who won't conclude that we need to
 reform, we need to change, we need to modernise the way in which we
 handle our waterfront. Now this my friends is a very important issue.
 It is an issue that goes to the survivability and the strength of
 Australia's economic future. It is an issue where the national
 interest must take precedence over the selfish interests of any one
 section of the Australian community. And I have a lot of compassion
 to those people who have suffered from the uncompetitive nature of
 the Australian watefront in the past. I know the heartache of many
 farmers has seen their produce rot on the waterfront. I know the heartache
 of small business men and women who have seen their businesses destroyed
 or restricted or hindered because of the unproductive character of
 the Australian waterfront. And those in the Australian community who
 criticise the attempt of the Government and others to bring about
 reform in the name of fairness and justice, I ask those people to
 contemplate the long years of unfairness and injustice to those Australians
 in the past who have suffered at the hands of the bullying, bludgeoning
 unfair taxing of the Maritime Union of Australia.
The other matter that I wanted to touch on very briefly is, of course,
 the issue of native title. Now this is a difficult issue, it's
 an issue that does generate emotion. But it is an issue that ultimately,
 like all other political issues, must be resolved by the Australian
 people, either through their elected representatives or if it turns
 out to be the case at the time of an election in which one of the
 crucial judgements to be made is whether or not the Government's
 native title legislation will be passed. [Inaudible] this was an issue
 that provoked a certain amount of argument on my side of politics
 and I can remember going to a meeting in Longreach in May of last
 year in which quite a number of the people in the audience didn't
 think that my Government was going far enough to protect the interests
 of pastoralists and farmers and of the mining industry, and it was
 an interesting experience to have people who have spent a lifetime
 supporting you politically expressing public doubts about the stance
 that you were taking. But I took that stance and I listened to that
 criticism. I rejected that criticism, I argued back and said that
 the position that my Government, and may I say manfully and loyalty
 supported by the Deputy Prime Minister, Tim Fischer, who is the most
 marvellous person that any Prime Minister could have as his deputy.
 Supported by him we took a decision which we regard as representing
 a fair balance between the interests of different sections of the
 Australian people and we put that position into legislation. We sent
 that legislation into the Parliament at the end of last year and it
 was rejected by the Senate. We put it into the Parliament three months
 later and it's now been rejected again. And I want to say to
 you ladies and gentlemen as I've said to many others when I've
 been asked this question, we have no intention of altering or retreating
 from the principles that are contained in that legislation. And I
 don't say that out of any pigheadedness or any stubbornness and
 I don't say it out of any sense of self-righteousness, as I've
 learnt in politics, it's always a dangerous delusion to be too
 self-righteous, no matter what party you belong to or no matter what
 the issue. But I do it because I have honestly come to the conclusion
 that our legislation represents a fair balance between different sections
 of the Australian community. I have refused to accept the proposition
 urged on me by the Labor Party and by the minor parties and the Independents
 and by other people in the community, that we should give a right
 to negotiate over certain landholdings in Australia to one group of
 Australians when denying it to all other groups of Australians.
I believe in that great shining principle. I believe in that great
 shining principle that all Australians should be equal before the
 law, and that all Australians should be accountable to the same dispensation
 of justice under our board that we should all be equally accountable.
 And I cannot accept the principle and my party and the National Party
 will never accept the principle that one group of Australians should
 be given rights and privileges that are not available to others. Nobody
 denies the collective disadvantage of different sections of the Australian
 community and the true remedies of that is not to create inequality
 under the law but the true remedy to that is to address specific programmes
 in areas of health, education and employment and housing in order
 to minimise or to reduce that social disadvantage. To address social
 disadvantage through creation of inequality under the law, opens up
 new boundaries of discontent and anger within the rest of the community,
 and that is not something that any sensible Government ought to embark
 upon and it is certainly not something that my Government will embark
 upon.
And can I also say in relation to the native title issue, there seems
 to be a form of elitist arrogance around in the eyes of some in the
 media and some commentators. That in some fashion, the Australian
 people are incapable of making a judgement on this issue without lapsing
 into emotional sorts and emotionally explosive language. You won't
 find any emotionally explosive language coming from me on this issue
 and I don't intend to repeat them at this gathering but the three
 most memorably despicable comments that have been made in that particular
 category during the course of this debate have all come from people
 who have been fiercely critical of the stance taken by my Government
 and fiercely critical of the compromise that we have urged the Australian
 people to accept.
Now can I say to you my friends that solving the issue of native title
 can only be realised through acceptance of the legislation that we
 presented and when I addressed that gathering at Longreach in May
 of last year, I outlined my proposal, I said that they would be incorporated
 into legislation and that legislation would be presented to the Parliament
 and if it was rejected that it would be presented to the Parliament
 again and that I would take all the steps that were available to ensure
 that the legislation would be put through. I have delivered on that
 commitment, I've kept faith in the commitment that I made at
 that gathering at Longreach because I believe the basis of the explanation
 I gave them remains the only basis on which the native title issue,
 a very difficult issue of native title, can be resolved.
Finally, can I say to all of you that it is always a great personal
 experience to be able to get out of the large population centres of
 Australia to visit the rural and regional areas of our country and
 to have the experience of meeting with people and exchanging a few
 words about their particular business, personal or other challenges.
 By far the most rewarding part of being Prime Minister of Australia,
 is the opportunities the job gives to meet, to mingle with, to listen
 to and respond and I have on occasion to offer some comfort and encouragement
 to my fellow Australians. And I find that every day, every week that
 goes by the experience of that becomes the better and becomes the
 richer. So it is for me, personally, a very rewarding thing to be
 amongst all of you. I want to say how much I enjoyed meeting the young
 men and women involved in the work for the dole programme and this
 magnificent heritage village.
Can I marvell about the air-conditioning genius of early Australia,
 this is a wonderfully air-conditioning, I say that not in any jest,
 I say that in admiration, I think it is, given the large gathering,
 given the humidity of the day, I think it is a beautifully air-conditioned
 building. I think the reality is that as we get closer and closer
 to celebrating 100 years of Australia as a nation we will become more
 and more attached to, more attracted to and more enthralled by our
 past. We will honour our heritage and all the great of it as we approach
 our 100 years as a nation. As we wander through the village, we wander
 into that beautifully reconstructed catholic church, to come to this
 hall to talk the young men and women, all of whom to a man and a woman
 when I asked about their experiences for working for the dole, they
 say it's much better than doing nothing at home. And I think
 that is something that expresses a sentiment because no


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you, thank you very much Bob Baldwin. To the Administrator,
 Mr Ron Eagle, to Senator John Tierney, Mr Peter Blackmore, other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen. And certainly, most importantly of all,
 the people of the Hunter Valley.
I am delighted to have this first opportunity as Prime Minister to
 be at the Maitland Town Hall. I thank the Administrator and the people
 of Maitland for the civic reception that you have honoured me with
 today. I regard gatherings, such as this, as being the ultimate in
 grass roots politics. It is the ultimate way in which a Prime Minister,
 or any senior figure in political life in Australia, can meet a cross-section
 of the community, can meet men and women in business, the people who
 run the hospitals, the people who run the caring charities, the people
 who work on the land, the people who are retired citizens, the people
 who run the ambulance service, the people who run the fire service
 and the police service. All of those groups in the community come
 together on an occasion like this, and it is a great reminder to me
 as Prime Minister, of the tremendous community spirit which binds
 the Australian nation together.
I am also delighted to be in the electorate of Paterson which my friend
 and colleague, Bob Baldwin, has held in the Federal Parliament since
 March of 1996. Although this is certainly not an overt political occasion,
 it's a civic gathering, I don't think I'll be offending
 any sensitivities to say very emphatically that Bob Baldwin has been
 an outstandingly active and energetic representative for the electorate
 of Paterson.
He's a consistent advocate of Paterson's causes, he persistently
 lobbies for the interest of the people of Paterson and he has persistently
 lobbied me on a number of issues which have been of particular concern
 to people in his electorate. Because it is a very diverse area and
 as the Administrator said in his introductory remarks, we've
 had the opportunity since some of the unfortunate events which overtook
 the city of Newcastle and the Hunter Region generally. We've
 had the opportunity of seeing how different sections of the Australian
 community can work together in a time of difficulty. Nobody welcomes
 the decision that was taken by BHP. The important thing though was
 that the city and the area didn't look back. They didn't
 wallow in self pity, they looked for new alternatives and new hopes
 and new opportunities. And to a cooperative effort involving the Federal
 Government, the State Government, the Newcastle City Council, the
 business interest of the city and the region, the representatives
 of the trade union movement and also the representatives of the business
 community it was possible, amongst other things, to put together a
 Prime Minister's task force for dealing with the problems thrown
 up by the BHP announcement on Newcastle. And interestingly enough,
 that task force was jointly chaired by a former BHP official and the
 then Secretary of the Newcastle branch of the Australian Workers'
 Union. And at all stages in my contact with that group and with the
 people of the district following those events in Newcastle, there's
 been a total absence of politics and there's been a total commitment
 on the part of everybody to try and come up with sensible solutions
 for the future of the region.
And can I take the opportunity of saying here today that a few months
 ago my Government committed millions of dollars to support the establishment
 of the Redbank Power Station and that project, if it can go ahead,
 will generate 1,000 jobs in the construction phase and several hundred
 additional jobs over and above the construction phase. And it is being
 held up at the moment because Energy Australia won't connect
 the power station to the New South Wales electricity grid and I do
 hope that the owner of Energy Australia, which is the New South Wales
 Government, will exercise the rights and powers of ownership and ensure
 that Energy Australia does what is necessary to get that project going.
 My Government has committed millions of dollars to it. My Government
 wants the jobs that it will generate. We now need the electricity
 generated in order to get the project going and I hope that the common
 sense that that situation commends itself to the New South Wales Government
 over the weeks and the months ahead, and I think it's very important,
 when there is a legitimate interest in the creation of new jobs in
 this region, I think it's only important that every effort be
 made, every effort be taken, every opportunity seized to support a
 project that will generate new jobs.
The Hunter Valley has a tremendous sense of community spirit as the
 Administrator and Bob have both said, I am no stranger to this part
 of the world. My wife has very long family connections, not only with
 Newcastle, but also with Singleton. And my family have holidayed in
 this part of the world for close on 20 years, and we do it because
 it is a very pleasant place to come to. We've grown very fond
 of the area, it brings together an extraordinary cross-section of
 the Australian community, and it does represent the coastal areas
 of Australia. It does, of course, in Newcastle contain one of the
 oldest and the best known of the industrial centres of Australia.
 It does, of course, in the wine growing area manifest one of the great
 burgeoning export industries of this country and it does, of course,
 contain many very attractive rural parts of Australia.
And this morning at Tocal I had the opportunity of sampling the delights
 of that beautiful college which is the most respected agricultural
 college in Australia. And the New South Wales Department of Agriculture
 is doing a splendid job in administering that college for the Alexandra
 Trust and about 400 or 500 young Australians a year pass through that
 college. And what it does is to bring together all that is good about
 Australia's agricultural past, but at the same time impart to
 those who pass through the college modern, contemporary understanding
 of the demands of farming and agricultural life.
Agriculture is still a very important part of the fabric of the Australian
 nation. It is not only the rural way of life that's important
 but the export income that we earn from farmers is tremendously important.
 Without that export income, the people who live in the cities of Australia
 would be a lot worse off. Without that export income, which is often
 not as great as the effort of the farmers who generate the income
 deserved, without that income Australia would be a much poorer nation.
And I want to take the opportunity as I have on other occasions when
 I've visited non-metropolitan areas of Australia, to say that
 one of the greatest and continuing goals of my Government is to ensure
 that our rural producers receive a fairer go on international markets.
 Now that means, not only tough negotiating in the world trade fora,
 like people like Tim Fischer and John Anderson, but it also means
 that we have a taxation system that encourages exporters. It also
 means that we have an efficient, productive waterfront. It also means
 that we have low inflation and low interest rates. And I am very happy
 to say that although many areas of rural Australia have been gripped
 by drought in recent years, and some continue to be gripped by drought,
 and I saw them myself first hand despite the deceptive appearance
 of some green on the top, that there is still a lot of drought affliction
 in this part of the world. But despite those setbacks there have been
 some good pieces of news for rural Australia in recent times.
To start with, we are making a huge commitment to landcare and bushcare
 through the Natural Heritage Trust of Australia. The Natural Heritage
 Trust of Australia will spend $1.25 billion on capital projects designed
 to repair Australia's environment. And these projects, and I
 made some announcements yesterday in Far North Queensland, will include
 some further investments in relation to river systems in both the
 Hunter area and also the northern part of New South Wales. But the
 great advantage of the Natural Heritage Trust is that we are going
 to spend the money on practical environmental challenges. We are spending
 a lot of money on cleaning up the Murray Darling Basin which is the
 underpinning of a large part of Australia's agricultural base.
 We are spending a lot of money on tackling the horrific salinity problems
 in Western Australia. And you only have to fly over Western Australia
 to get an idea of how difficult the salinity problem is. We are spending
 money on landcare. There are now 4,000 landcare groups in Australia.
 I went to the Annual Presentation of the Prime Minister's Landcare
 awards in Canberra a few weeks ago and it was a marvellous reminder
 to me of a cooperative effort between farmers, environmentalists,
 townspeople, everybody who is interested and comes together with a
 common cause of preserving and re-enriching the soil and the land
 of Australia. So this Natural Heritage Trust is not going to be spent
 on what I might call high-profile politically correct, peripheral
 environmental issues. It is going to be spent on grass roots, down
 to earth, ongoing, far sided environmental regeneration. Cleaning
 up our rivers, preventing ocean outfalls, removing salinity, caring
 for the land, caring for bush. All of those things are the way in
 which we can make a lasting contribution to the rehabilitation and
 the regeneration of the Australian environment.
The other thing that I am happy to say has come the way of the bush
 and come the way of small business over the last few months is, of
 course, that as a result of the policies we've followed. We've
 seen a very significant fall in interest rates. And I have been travelling
 around rural Australia and regional Australia for a long time now
 in various disguises, and the last couple of years I've been
 touring around as Prime Minister and in the last few months I am happy
 to say for the first time I am able to look at rural people, I am
 able to look small business men and women in regional towns in the
 face and say: your interest rates are coming down. Because for so
 long our interest rates have been at Himalayan levels. Only a few
 years ago we had interest rates at 17, 18, 19, 20 per cent and we
 now, as a result of the announcements made by the Commonwealth and
 Westpac, and I apologise for the representative of any other bank
 present for mentioning those two, but they happen to be the ones that
 have made the announcements. As a result of that we are now looking
 forward to a situation where on an overdraft of $100,000 you can achieve
 an interest rate reduction of about $4,000 a year because those banks
 have announced packages that will have their base lending rates at
 about seven and a quarter per cent.
And when you compare that with the levels obtained only a few years
 ago it is indeed extremely good news. And that is something that is
 unalterably one of the best pieces of news that farmers and small
 business people can have because the burden, the crushing burden of
 high interest rates has been the most perennial, repeated, constant
 complaint which has been made to me over the last 10 or 15 years when
 I have been to many a civic reception, been to many a homestead, been
 to many a small business in many a main street of many a country town
 in Australia. And the constant complaint I've had more than anything
 else is the level of interest rates, and at long last we are starting
 to see the breaking of that particular drought and we hope, of course,
 that the breaking of some other natural drought will come very, very
 freely and very, very soon to those parts of Australia that need it
 very badly.
I am often asked ladies and gentlemen what is the best thing about
 being the Prime Minister of Australia, and the best thing without
 question about being the Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity
 to come to gatherings like this to meet so many different parts of
 the Australian community, to be reminded as I have today of the enormous
 part of our heritage which is owed to the rural community. To speak
 to people who's families for generations have owned land, who
 for generations have been rural people. To have the opportunity of
 meeting people who have made this country their home from Europe or
 from Asia. To meet, as I have at this civic reception, people from
 countries as far apart as Thailand and Greece and Italy. To have the
 opportunity of being reminded of the contribution to the Australian
 culture of the 1990s of our Indigenous heritage and to understand
 that respecting everybody's right to fully identify according
 to their own culture is part of the modern Australia and is part of
 what it is to be an Australian in the 1990s.
So visiting gatherings such as this, having the opportunity of getting
 out of Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra, not that I have anything against
 any of the people who live in those wonderful areas having myself
 grown up and spent all my life in Sydney, it is part of the tonic,
 the regeneration, I suppose of the political being to meet so many
 people and to understand and to listen a little more and perhaps understand
 and realise a little better some of the particular challenges that
 you have in these parts of Australia.
I want to thank all of you for the contribution that you make to your
 community. I want to salute again the great Australian volunteer spirit.
 We are one of the great volunteer nations of the world. We are a nation
 that better than most have grasped the fact that Governments can't
 do it on their own. Individuals can't do it on their own and
 community groups like the churches and the great charitable organisations
 can't do it on their own either. But we can only build the kind
 of society we all want, a good and a fair society, a good, fair and
 strong society as we move towards the 21st Century if we enlist the
 cooperation of the Government, the community groups and the individual,
 with each playing their own part. Recognising that when people need
 help, they should be helped but in accordance with the principle of
 mutual obligation, if we help people who can afford to give something
 back to the community in return for that assistance then that is not
 unreasonable to ask for. And that principle of mutual obligation underpins
 our approach to such projects as the work for the dole.
But ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very warmly for the civic reception
 that has been tended to me by the Administrator and by the people
 of the city of Maitland. I wish you all well, I thank you for the
 contribution that you are making to our country, to your community
 and it's been a great delight to have been amongst you today.
 Thank you.


Deputy Defence Minister General Watanachai and Mrs Supawattisiri
General Suntorn (Head, Armed Forces Development Command)
Mr Direck (Governor of Kanchanaburi)
Veterans, ladies and gentlemen.
Memorials throughout the world attest to Australia's achievement in battle. Most stand on the very tracts of earth where once our countrymen struggled and suffered before prevailing over their enemies.
This museum - through its stories, by its message also a Memorial - is no different.
Here also, Australians struggled and suffered and, in the end, prevailed. Here was fought a war within a war - a deeper, darker battle against the very essence of an enemy which sought to enslave the free world. Put simply, in the words of a great man who served at this place, "it was a war against monstrous things".
Our enemies then aimed at the complete submission of those they sought to conquer.
Unconditional surrender of the spirit was demanded - a world created in which the vanquished were to be made dumb and dull-eyed, where all spark of compassion for their own kind was to be extinguished and with it the means to organise, to resist.
This Memorial is dedicated to the memory of every man and woman whose heroism was marked by their survival in the face of outrageous brutality and terror and to every individual who sought to deliver them from servitude.
 We can only wonder how they managed to endure and to survive. They existed in a hell where the slightest pause, or misconstrued gesture, could result in appalling retribution - in beatings with rifle butts or bamboo canes or boots. Here alone, at Hellfire Pass, 68 young men were beaten to death for being too exhausted, or too weak, or too sick.
None of us can imagine how men can claw out solid rock with nothing more than their own hands and primitive tools. Let alone imagine how near naked and starving men could build a railway through 420 torturous kilometres of jungle, across rivers and over rugged mountain ranges. Or how survival is possible on a handful of rice each day and living each hour stalked by disease and pain. Or how madness could be kept at bay.
Yet this Memorial does not seek to magnify tragedy but to commemorate triumph.
And celebrate the brilliance of Medical Officers such as Albert Coates, Bruce Hunt, Roy Mills, Weary Dunlop and every one of their colleagues. The compassion of medical orderlies who risked their own lives in cholera wards tending the sick and the dying.
The courage of ordinary soldiers who, haunted by memories of home and happiness, faced the dawn of each new terrible day.
Invested here is every small, unrecorded act of kindness bestowed upon a mate and every act conferred upon a complete stranger. It is a place to represent the shared experience of nations by paying tribute to all those who suffered. The thousands of British, American, Indian and Dutch imprisoned with Australians, enduring the same abuses, dying the same deaths. The estimated quarter of a million romusha, forced labourers from Singapore, Malaya, Java, Vietnam, Burma and Thailand of whom 90,000 are said to have perished - numbers only the brutality of man in foul climate and harsh terrain could seek to camouflage. 
It is a place also to recognise the kindness and bravery of the Thai people who attempted to ease the suffering of our men. Who risked their own subjugation for the deliverance of others. Through simple deeds of hard-boiled eggs left anonymously on riverbanks to be found by starving prisoners. And great heart-stopping risks taken to smuggle medicines into workcamps.
At this sacred place, we affirm that Australia will never forget acts of courage made on behalf of its people.
I wish to recognise two extraordinary individuals, Boonpong and his wife Boopa Sirivejaphan, who were shadowed by the threat of torture and even death to smuggle much needed medical supplies, money and other goods to allied prisoners along this railway. The extent of their sacrifice was kept secret from grateful prisoners until 1945 yet their selfless actions sustained life and morale for many Australians throughout their servitude.
On behalf of a thankful nation I present this posthumous award, a certificate of our appreciation, to the grandson of Boonpong and Boopa, Veeravej Subhawat. Let it mark our enduring gratitude for the virtuous deeds of your grandparents and let it symbolise the warmth of our friendship which has grown ever stronger since the war.
As a token of an unrepayable debt, I also wish to announce today the contribution by the Australian Government of a further $50,000 towards the Weary Dunlop/Boonpong Exchange Trust. A trust in memory of all Australian Medical Officers and of every Thai citizen who risked torture and death to provide comfort and hope to our sick. A trust to allow talented young Thai surgeons to travel to Australia to refine their skills.
Out of war, a legacy of peace.
So too, can this museum be claimed as a legacy for the future. Let it exemplify the courage and compassion which are the highest virtues to which our young can aspire. Let it be a prophecy of Australia's commitment to Asia and all its peoples. Of our willingness to stand together during empty years of adversity as well as bountiful years of plenty. Let it warn off any nation who may mistakenly judge that freedom loving countries will every allow tyranny to prevail. And let it promise that the memory of what was done here, lost here, gained here will not be forgotten.
To all those responsible for the vision and reality of this museum, our heartfelt thanks are owed you. On behalf of the Australian people and in memory of those it honours, I declare the Hellfire Pass Memorial Museum open.
 Thank you


E&amp;OE...........................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Ambassador and I first of all particularly
   acknowledge the presence of a number of very senior Ministers in
   the Government of Thailand. 
I have had the opportunity over the past two days of spending quite
   a lot of time with your Prime Minister and with senior members of
   the Government and I appreciate very much, as I know all of the
   members of my party do, the gracious hospitality and the welcome
   that has been extended to all of us. Of course, my visit and the
   visit of many Australians here at present is particularly to honour
   the contribution of our countrymen in the past to the defence of
   liberty and the contribution of many others, and that is something
   about our past that we respect and we honour and we salute, but
   tonight I would like to say something about the present and about
   the future.
I would like to start by saying how much I respect and admire the
   very practical, the very diligent and the very courageous way in
   which the Government and the people of Thailand are tackling the
   severe economic difficulties that are facing your country at present.
   It is no easy task to undertake compliance with the conditions of
   the International Monetary Fund programme. That particular programme,
   to which Australia has been a contributor to the tune of US$1 billion,
   and in fact Australia along with Japan, are the only two countries
   in the world that have contributed to each of the three rescue packages
   organised by the International Monetary Fund in the Asian Pacific
   region for Thailand, Korea and Indonesia. I understand very much
   the social implications of some of the measures that are being undertaken.
It is easy for those distant from the Governments of the countries
   affected to lay down rules of compliance and to set benchmarks and
   to require responses. The decisions that must be made on the ground,
   the decisions that have to be made which affect the livelihood of
   the people of the countries affected carry a lot more responsibility
   and imply a great deal more pressure. I admire very much the efforts
   of your Prime Minister and the efforts of the members of your Government
   in implementing that package. 
The association between Thailand and Australia is a very deep one.
   There are more than 50 000 Australians of Thai descent and Thailand
   and Thai culture has made a very significant impact, particularly
   on the major cities of Australia. The Ambassador reminded me that
   in Sydney and Melbourne alone, there are in each of those two cities
   three to four hundred Thai restaurants. I ought to say that before
   I dined more regularly at the Lodge in Canberra, there was a restaurant
   I used to frequent quite a lot called the Ruen Thai in Kingston
   and it's a very, very nice eating establishment, indeed, but
   if there are any representatives of other Thai restaurants here
   tonight, please forgive me for not having given you a commercial.
But the links are friendly. They are deep, they are genuine and
   I am very proud of the fact that my country was able to help Thailand
   in her time of need, and I am not shy in saying that our economy
   was strong enough to be able to render that assistance and I am
   not shy in saying that had a little bit to do with the skilful policies
   that my Government has followed. 
But being part of a region, being a part of the Asia Pacific region,
   carries benefits and responsibilities. It gives us as a nation,
   which occupies, as I often say, a unique intersection of history,
   geography and economic circumstance. We are a country that has deep,
   historical links with Europe. We have had a long association with
   North America with whom we share great traditions of liberal democracy
   but we are geographically located in the Asia Pacific region, and
   our own society is a marvellously successful experiment in bringing
   people from all parts of the world and producing a tolerant, harmonious
   nation of 18 million people who respect the cultural differences,
   who understand that beneath the overriding loyalty to the values
   and the traditions and the interests of Australia, people are entitled
   to retain an affection and a love of their mother culture, and that
   is something which is respected in Australia.
  We do have this sort of unique position and I am very proud of the
   fact that we have been able to be of help to Thailand and it's
   very important as we look to the future, we remember of course in
   that old cliche, the lessons of the past, and one of the very positive
   lessons of the past is represented by the fact that so many people
   here tonight graduated from universities in Australia and the hosts
   tonight of course include the Alumni of Australian Universities.
   I have found particularly in the time that I have been Prime Minister,
   as I have travelled around the Asian Pacific region, that rich legacy
   represented by initially the Colombo Plan, and then building on
   that a long tradition of encouraging scholarly links between the
   peoples of the region and the people of Australia. I want to thank
   all of those who have been involved in that education process. I
   want to thank those who are promoting it into the future and I am
   very pleased that part of the visit that I have paid here has involved
   some announcements in that particular area.
Beyond all of that, I want to strike a note of positive thought.
   I want to speak optimistically about the future of the region. I
   know that Thailand, along with other countries, is going through
   difficulty but I also know that fundamentally, there are strengths
   in the Thai economy just as there are strengths in the Indonesian
   economy and strengths in the Korean economies that weren't
   there 20 or 30 years ago. The process of economic globalisation
   and trade liberalisation is unstoppable. It may along the way be
   tempered. There may need to be local adjustments to accommodate
   social pressures and social circumstances but we are all together
   committed to a more open trading system. 
The APEC goal is a fine goal and it's a goal that in the years
   ahead that will enrich and not rob the people of the APEC countries.
   It's a goal that if realised, will unlock investment opportunities
   and unlock employment opportunities which are not now available
   to the peoples of the region. I am a great optimist about those
   APEC goals. I do believe that the foundations which have been laid
   are very solid ones and the current economic difficulties are not
   going to crack them. I hear people talk in very doomsaying terms
   on occasions about the strength of the Japanese economy. Japan's
   economy is fundamentally one of the most powerful in the world and
   the contribution that Japan in the years ahead will make to the
   economic strength and the economic durability of the world will
   continue to grow and be quite immense.
All big economies from time to time will go through difficulties.
   The Japanese economy of course is no exception but the fundamental
   strengths of huge overseas balances of low inflation, the cultural
   discipline of high savings and a very powerful work ethic and a
   remarkable export performance, put all of those together, it is
   still fundamentally a very, very powerful player on the world economic
   scene.
My own Government has undertaken a number of major economic reforms
   which are designed to strengthen our capacity not only to grow at
   home, and I am very happy to say that our projected growth rates
   next year are the highest amongst the OECD and our inflation rates
   the lowest, and we have seen some of the lowest interest rates that
   Australians have experienced in their lifetime. Those reforms will
   also enable Australia to play a more vigorous role around the world.
   60 per cent of Australian exports now go to the Asian Pacific region.
   We are forever politically, culturally and economically part of
   this region and we are a very active and a very positive player.
   We are a good friend. We are not a fairweather friend. We are a
   friend for the long journey and for the long distance.
  Can I particularly address some remarks to my fellow countrymen
   and women who are here tonight as businessmen and women in Thailand
   and in the Asia Pacific region. You are not only making wise investment
   decisions and contributing to the well-being of your own companies
   and your own corporations but you are also demonstrating to other
   Australians that so much of our economic future lies in this part
   of the world. It's very important, simply because the nations
   of the region have gone through a few economic difficulties, it's
   very important that we reaffirm just how strongly committed we are
   as a nation and as a group of men and women to economic involvement
   in the Asian Pacific region. Just as it was always foolish to say
   that the only economic region in the world that mattered to Australia
   was the Asia Pacific region, that was never true. We have important
   links and important destinies in other parts of the world. Equally,
   it is foolish now to believe that just because a number of countries
   in the region are going through some difficulties, that in some
   way the fundamental importance of this region to Australia has in
   some way been dramatically discounted. 
It hasn't. The nations of the Asia Pacific region will grow
   again and grow strongly again and they will do so in the very near
   future. They will do so because, particularly in the case of Thailand,
   they are led by men and women who are committed to sensible economic
   reform, who are prepared to accept the responsibilities of economic
   restructuring, who are prepared to sensibly use the economic aid
   that has been given to them by countries such as Australia.
  Ladies and gentlemen, our two countries have a lot of history. They
   have a lot in common at present but most importantly of all, they
   have a great future together. I think the contribution that we have
   been able to make to strengthening the bonds between the countries
   of the region are very, very significant.
I want to thank my two hosts tonight for this reception but more
   than that, I want to congratulate both of you, the Chamber of Commerce
   and the Alumni for the contribution that both of you make to what
   is of course the most important linkage of all between two nations,
   and that is the linkage of people, the associations of common experiences,
   business, personal, social and economic and also the exchange of
   cultures, the exchange of ideas and the building over the years
   of mutual respect and mutual affection. 
I am particularly touched by the fact that I have this opportunity
   of speaking to you tonight on Anzac Day which means so much as all
   the Australians in the audience know to the calendars of Australia
   and New Zealand. I wish all of you well. I thank my Thai hosts most
   sincerely. I had the opportunity of an audience with the King this
   afternoon. I thank the Prime Minister for whom I have great personal
   regard for the job that he is doing. I thank the Ministers and I
   most particularly thank my hosts and I wish all of you great success
   and great happiness and great prosperity into the future. 
Thank you.
ENDS


As we gather here to face the dawn,
We honour those who faced the night.
Not a night of rest, nor dreams,
Not a night of shared laughter or the warmth of homefire.
But a monstrous corruption of nature,
An eclipse of humanity itself.
And yet, when we look at the night sky,
the wonder we feel is surely for the stars, not the black veil behind them.
So too, our wonder is for these men, whose sparks of courage shine bright through the distance of time.
Their story of sacrifice and suffering, of constancy and compassion, illuminates the very essence of the Anzac spirit. For, of all our heroes, they were armed with human virtue alone and their victory was over the darkest recesses of the human heart.
To a superb tradition of self discipline under fire was added selflessness and ingenuity. To a heritage of wild reckless bravery was added cold calculated valour sustained for years.
To the world, proof was given that tyranny, in the end, has no power over the courage and decency of ordinary men and women.
It is an example to which we all aspire - as relevant in peace as to war, to our future as to our past.
And on this sacred day, at this most sacred place, we honour all Australian service men and women who gave or offered their lives in war.
We pay tribute to our veterans, unique Australians who have known the blessings and hardship of both conflict and peace.
On this day, we give grateful thanks to friends and allies who shared our danger, and we add our pledge that their loyalty will neither be forgotten nor unreturned.
On this day, we enrich ourselves for, it's been said, a nation reveals itself not only by the men it produces but by the men it honours, the men it remembers.
On this day most of all, we mourn the fallen - long years of love and talent lost, of potential unrealised, of generations unborn.
We would have them know of our firm and steadfast belief that they rest not in shades of darkness but bask in the brightness of an Australian sun.
We would have them know that we will remember them.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Sally-Anne; to Mr Samaranch, the President of
 the International Olympic Committee; to Doctor Primo Debiolo; to my
 parliamentary colleague, Andrew Thomson, the Federal Minister for
 Sport; to the Chairman of the Organising Committee, Mr Michael Knight;
 to Frank Sartor, the Lord Mayor of Sydney; to John Coates, the President
 of the Australian Olympic Committee, other very distinguished guests,
 ladies and gentlemen.
May I, as Prime Minister of Australia, welcome all of our overseas
 visitors to this very important gathering. And can I say, not only
 as the Australian Prime Minister but also as someone who has had Sydney
 as his home town for all of his life, say to all of our visitors just
 how tremendously excited all Australians are about the prospect of
 hosting the Olympic Games here in Sydney in the year 2000.
Australians are, as many of you know, great sports loving people.
 Sport has defined the character of the Australian nation and the Australian
 people, perhaps like no other nation on earth. It is a source of enormous
 pride to Australians that we share, with Greece, the honour of being
 one of the only two countries that have participated in all of the
 Olympics of the modern era. But when it is borne in mind that in 1896
 Australia got formally federated as a nation and we have a population
 of probably only four million people, that is a remarkable achievement.
I know that Sydney will host the Games in 2000 with style, with flair
 and, I believe, with ease. I want to congratulate those responsible
 for organising the Games for the tremendous work they have already
 achieved. I believe the complimentary remarks made by the President,
 Mr Samaranch, are well deserved and well merited.
I want to say, on behalf of the Federal Government, that this is a
 united Australian effort. It brings great pride and credit to Sydney
 but, above all, it is a compliment to all Australians.
The Games in the year 2000 will belong to all Australians. We will
 have the opportunity to showcase our magnificent nation to the rest
 of the world. And being the great sports lovers that we are, we will
 barrack like never before for the achievements and the successes of
 the Australian team. All Australians drew great pleasure and store
 from the achievements of our team at Atlanta and we look forward,
 eagerly, to the efforts of our team in Sydney in the year 2000.
May I congratulate you, Mr President, on your very strong statement
 about drugs in sport. Can I say that my Government totally shares
 your feelings and we believe the very high standard you have set by
 those remarks is well merited.
I see the Olympic Games as a tremendous opportunity not only to showcase
 Australia to the world but once again to bring together the young
 men and women of the world in open enthusiasm and competition.
Sport can unite and enable and encourage and can inspire the best
 in men and women. And I'm very proud, as Prime Minister of Australia,
 that my country, our country, will play a central role in these great
 Games at the turn of the century.
I hope all of you enjoy your time in Sydney. I promise you continuing
 hospitality. I promise you a great and rapturous welcome in the year
 2000. And my Government will do all it can to make the Games of the
 year 2000 the most memorable yet. Thank you. I formally open the conference
 and I welcome you all.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much for those words of welcome, Dr Moyes, to
 the Reverend Bob Dunlop, to Reverend Pamela McNally, to Ms Carmen
 Duncan, ladies and gentlemen.
I've come here this morning for several reasons. I've come
 partly to salute the work over a long period of time of LifeForce
 and its predecessor and I suppose, its parent organisation, Lifeline,
 which under the leadership of that great Australian, Sir Alan Walker,
 was established so many years ago and for the first time, provided
 an easily accessible human link between people in our community who
 felt lonely, depressed, ignored, unfairly treated or who in any way
 were shut out from, or alienated from society. And the concept that
 help was as close as the telephone and the concept that our community
 was warmhearted enough and decent enough and had within its ranks
 enough good people willing to make their time available to help people
 who needed help. Over the years, that has undoubtedly saved the lives
 of countless thousands of Australians and it's given to those
 countless Australians and their families new and fresh hope.
So I therefore want, this morning, to salute the work, not only of
 LifeForce and Lifeline, but all the other organisations in Australia
 that have worked so very hard to provide a link between what seems
 to people in a desperate frame and a depressed frame of mind, a world
 that is passing them by and ignoring them and unfairly treating them
 - that's provided those people with a visible link.
I've also come to demonstrate my personal concern and the concern
 of my Government about the level of suicide within the Australian
 community. It is a matter of sadness that the rate of suicide particularly,
 but not only, amongst young people and marginally greater amongst
 young men than young women, is one of the great social failings of
 the Australian community. I don't want to talk for very long
 about the resources that we have made available. But we have significantly
 increased the resources for fighting suicide and preventing suicide.
 But more, I want to talk about the way in which there can be greater
 community consciousness and also address some remarks particularly
 to those people here this morning who have been directly touched by
 the tragedy of suicide. And I hope that this morning's gathering
 gives you some comfort. I hope that it is a token for you that the
 rest of the Australian community thinks about the sadness that you
 have suffered. I hope that you do derive a little comfort, that you
 try and perhaps find a little understanding in it. I have not personally
 been touched by suicide in the sense that many of you in this gathering
 have been, but as a local member of Parliament and as just an ordinary
 member of society I have spoken often with people who have been directly
 touched. And I know the anguished questioning, the why? How is it
 that it happened to me, to a member of my family? Where did I go wrong?
 What could I have done? All the multitude of questions and the introspections
 and the self-criticism that inevitably happens and the sense of despair
 that perhaps if something had been done, or not done, things might
 have been different. And I know that for many of you, the opportunity
 to converse with others who have been similarly touched, to have an
 understanding that your community, your government, the churches of
 Australia and the other community organisations of Australia have
 a very, very active concern and a great desire to help and to understand.
As a Member of Parliament, I've been touched on a number of occasions
 by lengthy discussions I've had with constituents of mine who've
 lost young children, or young adult children as a result of suicide
 and they've had a very profound effect on me. As a society, we
 have to collectively try and understand some of the reasons why the
 rate of suicide is so high. We can't, as a community, escape
 responsibility for it. We can't, as a community, ignore the impact
 of youth unemployment. We can't, as a community, ignore the impact
 of weaker family bonds. We can't, as a community, ignore the
 impact of a lessened sense of personal and family responsibility which
 is a characteristic of modern, western society of the 1980s and the
 1990s. Nor can we ignore the impact of the lessened role within our
 community of institutions that stand for certain immutable values
 and certain immutable principles of human conduct and human life.
The reasons why people take their own lives are mixed. There is no
 one simple explanation but one thing that binds all of these incidents
 together is of course, the enormous human tragedy that they represent
 and the scars they leave, often forever, on those people who have
 been directly affected.
Governments can help, they can fund programmes, they can recognise,
 as I do, and as Dr Moyes does, that governments acting alone can't
 solve or lessen the pain of this. Individuals acting alone can't
 either, nor can organisations. We do need a shared endeavour, we need
 the resources of the Government, we need the agencies of the Government,
 we need the enormous moral commitment of organisations like the Wesley
 Mission and we need the efforts of individuals in their own lives
 to think about the alienation of a workmate, to wonder whether somebody
 with whom we might be working feels left out of things and perhaps
 we don't spend enough time talking to them about their personal
 or family problems.
I once spoke to one of the telephone counsellors from an organisation
 run by the De La Salle Brothers in Brisbane and he said that the thing
 that had struck his organisation most about the telephone calls that
 they'd had from young people was that the overwhelming bulk of
 the telephone calls that they'd had from young people were young
 people expressing a despair about the fact that they had absolutely
 no capacity to communicate or to talk over their problems with anybody
 in the world. They couldn't do it with their family members because
 in some cases the family had disintegrated. In other cases, the family
 unit members didn't care. Many of them didn't have jobs
 and some of those that did have jobs found it quite impossible to
 communicate with their workmates.
Now I think all of us can play a small part in spending a little more
 time listening to people who seem to be making, I suppose, to put
 it in one way, making heavy weather of their lives and who need help
 and who need comfort and who need counsel.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I do want to associate my Government very
 strongly with everything that can be done within the Australian community
 to prevent suicide. It is a huge, collective social problem in this
 country. It is a national disgrace that our suicide rate should be
 as high as it is. It is the fault of no one thing, it is the fault
 of no one group. We collectively, as a community must carry responsibility
 and of course, the great tragedy is the opportunity of fulfilled lives
 lost, the years of love, the years of contribution and the years of
 playing an effective role within society that are lost.
But most importantly of all, it is an opportunity for me, on behalf
 of the Australian community to extend our love and our understanding
 and our thoughts to those here today and to those throughout our nation
 who have been touched directly by the tragedy of suicide and to say
 that we do care, we are trying to help. There are great organisations
 like LifeForce, there is a government, there are communities who are
 willing to help to try and lessen the pain and to try and help you
 in the fullness of time to be more reconciled to and to be more at
 peace with the tragedy that has overtaken your lives.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE.....................................................................................................................
Thank you Michael and to my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and
   gentlemen. I want to again thank the New South Wales Division for
   organising this post-budget gathering, to give me an opportunity
   in my home town and not very far from, if the curtains were open
   I could wave to the family, but to say a few things about the Budget
   and to say a few things about the current political context. 
It is true that it was a good Budget and I think all of the nice
   things that have been said about it were thoroughly deserved and
   any of the ungracious things that were said about it were not merited
   and not deserved because it is the first time in eight years that
   we have an underlying surplus. It is true that we have achieved
   in two years a turn around on $13 billion from a deficit of $10.5
   to a surplus of $2.7 billion. But the story on debt reduction, which
   in the long term is what the future prosperity of this country is
   very much tied up with, the story of debt reduction is even more
   spectacular. I don't want to burden you with a lot of dreary
   figures but you've got to have some figures when you talk about
   a budget otherwise people might think you are not taking it very
   seriously.
In 1995 - 96, Australia's Federal Government debt accounted
   for about 20 per cent of our annual wealth generation, about 20
   per cent of our gross domestic product. When you factor in the proceeds
   of the sale of the remaining two thirds of Telstra, by the year
   2000 - 2001 we will have reduced that 20 per cent of annual wealth
   generation to a bare 1.5 per cent of the annual wealth generated
   by the Australian nation. And if we can go into the 21st century
   essentially free of Federal Government debt, and the next Coalition
   Government in New South Wales does as I know it will do, and that
   is privatise the electricity authorities of this state and if we
   can get a few other sensible privatisations carried out at a state
   level we are going to be able to look at the next century largely
   free of government debt.
Now that is something that I don't think anybody in this room
   in their lifetime would have thought possible and if you are looking
   to the future and if you are looking at the long term prospects
   of this country, being able to give to the generations of the third
   millennium, to the generations of the 21st century, being able to
   give to them an essentially debt-free nation, is a remarkable aspiration
   and I can't think of anything that would better set up the
   society which my children and the children of many here today will
   inherit, in fact to have something that is essentially debt-free
   and I am very proud that it's been my Government through the
   three budgets that we have now brought down, we has really been
   able to get the debt monkey off the back of Australians and we have
   been overburdened with debt for a very long period of time and there
   are some in the community who have said to me, what do you do with
   the surplus? You have $2.7 billion sitting there. Well it doesn't
   of course sit there. It is used to repay the accumulated debts of
   the last few years.
I notice that my opposite number said I was lucky, that I had led
   a very lucky Government. I didn't think it was terribly lucky
   when I discovered the state of the books that day after the election,
   not far from here when I saw the then-head of the Prime Minister's
   Department and he gave me the news, but putting that aside, I think
   the debt achievements, the way in which we have been able to reduce
   that debt has been a remarkable tribute to what the Government has
   done. 
Another thing of which I am immensely proud is that for the third
   time in a row we haven't increased any taxes. There were no
   increases in income tax. There were no increases in excise and there
   were no increases in sales tax. Of course, when you were living
   in an era of virtually zero inflation, which we are at the moment,
   the nightmare of automatic indexation, which used to bedevil a lot
   of people particularly if you are in the spirits industry or if
   you are in some other, or you relied very heavily on fuel purchases
   to run your businesses and so forth, they were a real menace and
   we are living now in an era of virtually zero inflation, and it
   is something that I hope will continue for a period into the future.
   However, I repeat this. For the third time in a row, no increases
   in tax, be it income tax, company tax, excise duty or sales tax.
All of these things have occurred according to a plan. When we
   came to government we set out to get the country's books back
   into balance and into surplus and to pay off all of the debt that
   had been accumulated over the previous seven or eight years and
   we decided to do it largely by reducing Government expenditure.
   I am now very happy to say that we have in prospect Government expenditure
   levels that we haven't seen in this country since the years
   of the early 1970s. When you bear in mind that in the early 1970s
   the unemployment rate was a lot lower than what it is now and that
   the demand made on the social welfare purse by, for example, the
   Sole Parents Benefit and so forth and the things that have increased,
   I am not criticising this, I am simply making the observation that
   there are now demands on the public purse that didn't exist
   in the 1970s because of changed patterns in society and higher levels
   of unemployment. 
When you take that into account, it is quite remarkable that we
   have been able to get back to the 1970 levels of expenditure because
   when Gough Whitlam was elected Prime Minister of Australia in December
   of 1972, the level of unemployment in this country was less than
   two percent. Indeed, if unemployment in the 1950s or 60s ever got
   anywhere near 2 per cent it was regarded as a national scandal.
   Now over the last generation it has become much harder to return
   unemployment to levels like that and that of course imposes a strain
   on the budget that wasn't present back in those years and I
   mention the point to illustrate the magnitude of the achievement
   of the Government in bringing it back towards those levels. 
It is also true, as Michael said, that we have been able to insulate
   Australia against the worst of the Asian economic turmoil. It is
   impossible of course to think about Australia's future without
   looking at the juxtaposition of this country to the Asia Pacific
   region. The Asian economies are important to Australia. The great
   bulk of our exports go to the Asia Pacific region. Japan and Korea
   between them take 33 - 34 per cent of all of the exports of Australia.
   Although our outward foreign investment is more heavily directed
   towards the European Union in North America, our trade future is
   very much linked up with the countries of the Asian Pacific region
   and it is impossible to believe that we can be left completely unaffected
   by what has happened in Asia. The really good thing is that the
   impact has been dramatically less than would otherwise have been
   the case if we had followed a different economic path when we came
   to power. If we had said, forget about the deficit, if we had said,
   don't worry about getting the budget back into balance, can
   you imagine the impact that would now be having on the sections
   of the Australian economy. Can you imagine the impact that would
   be having in places like Wall Street on the attitudes, the impact
   of that on people's perception towards the way in which the
   Australian economy was being managed.
By doing what we have done, by taking the sort of decisions we
   did in the first couple of years, incurring some political criticism,
   running the gauntlet of many interest groups who have naturally
   criticised some of the decisions that have affected them, we have
   delivered in 1998 a measure of protection and a measure of inoculation
   from the impact of the Asian economic virus that would not have
   even been remotely possible if we had followed a less responsible
   course. 
And we are able, as Peter Costello said the other day, to contemplate
   the possibility that we could be the fastest growing country in
   the Asia-Pacific region. Now that would have been unthinkable a
   few years ago. Now that's not to strike any note of complacency.
   It's not to discount the fact that because of what's happened
   in Asia our growth is going to be less now than would otherwise
   have been the case. But economic management and political achievement
   is all about what is possible and what is realistic and what is
   achievable, and what we have been able to do by way of insulating
   Australia from the Asian turndown has been quite spectacular and
   I think very very praiseworthy.
And we are of course now experiencing the lowest inflation rate
   for more than 30 years, the lowest interest rates, and I'm
   delighted to say that at long last it's starting to happen
   in the small business area, where many of the interest rates are
   starting to come down in the way in which housing interest rates
   have come down. And some of that has been due, let me say, in so
   small measure to the greater amount of competition which is in the
   financial sector and I want to pay tribute to the way in which the
   financial system's growing competition has contributed. Because
   at the end of the day, those immutable rules of commonsense economics
   normally work. If you have more competition in an industry, you
   normally do get a better deal for the consumer. That of course is
   what we have in mind when we try to do something about the waterfront.
   Although I promised myself I wouldn't spend more than half
   my speech talking about the waterfront, so I won't unless you
   provoke me. It is very barely thought to salute the role of competition
   in the Australian economy and competition in the financial sector
   has meant lower housing rates and lower small business rates, and
   we are very committed to a further expansion of that competition.
   And I think we have a good story to tell. It's been a very
   successful Budget, it's been a very well received Budget. It's
   also contained a number of measures which recognise the contribution
   of people, particularly older Australians, the contribution that
   those people have made to Australia. But of course the Budget is
   only one part of the economic story, and it's only one part
   of the political responsibility of my Government. We are a reformist
   Government and I am very very proud of that fact. I do hold the
   view, as Michael said, that there is really no point in being in
   Government unless you are willing to do something with it. I have
   been in politics for, it will be 24 years on the 18th of this month,
   since on a very rainy Saturday in 1974 I was elected as the federal
   Member for Bennelong and I went in after Gough Whitlam had been
   Prime Minister for 18 month, and it is almost a quarter of a century
   ago, and it almost naturally seems like the proverbial yesterday.
   And having become Prime Minister a couple of years ago, I've
   taken the view that having been given that enormous privilege, there
   is very little point in frittering away the opportunity and the
   privilege by leaving untouched those things that ought to be changed
   and ought to be reformed. And we set ourselves three or four major
   reform goals.
The first and most important of those was to reform Australia's
   industrial relations system, and I don't think there would
   be anybody in this room, and I don't even think there'd
   be any of our political opponents now, who would argue for a moment
   that we haven't tried to reform Australia's industrial
   relations system. And we have been very successful. The Maritime
   Union of Australia the activities of the waterfront of course still
   bulks very large in people's minds. Let me say to you again
   that we are absolutely determined to finish the job that we started
   in reforming the Australian waterfront.
And we are not doing that because we dislike the Maritime Union
   of Australia, or because we want to destroy unionism or because
   we want to discriminate against unionists. We are doing it because
   it is in Australia's interests to have a more efficient waterfront,
   and it is in Australia's interests to have voluntary unionism
   on the Australian waterfront, and we remain absolutely committed
   to that objective. We set ourselves, of course, the great goal of
   fixing the Budget and economic mess that we inherited in March in
   1996 and I've dealt at some length on that subject. But the
   other issue we've set ourselves the task of tackling of course
   was the fundamental issue of taxation reform. I have watched, and
   I think there are few people in this room who have watched some
   attempts being made by former Governments to reform the Australian
   taxation system. As Treasurer in the Fraser Government I made two
   attempts to persuade that Government to fundamentally reform the
   Australian taxation system. Paul Keating when he was Treasurer in
   the Hawke Government, to his credit, tried to reform the Australian
   taxation system, and I might say on that particular occasion I supported
   it, even though not everybody in the Liberal Party at that particular
   time agreed with my doing so because I have always believed that
   we had to reform our taxation system. John Hewson, to his credit,
   tried very hard in the lead up to the 1993 election to persuade
   the Australian public of the wisdom of taxation reform and unfortunately
   through the efforts of the then Prime Minister, my predecessor at
   that attempt was unsuccessful.
We now have what I believe to be the last great opportunity in
   the foreseeable future of doing something fundamental to reform
   the tax system. If you can't change it from the vantage point
   of Government, if you can't change it where there's a
   growing body of opinion in the community that it ought to be changed,
   if you can't change it when the common sense of this country
   needing a more competitive taxation system cries aloud for action,
   I can't believe that there will ever ever be such a conjunction
   of circumstances in the foreseeable future where you are going to
   be able to change it. And if somebody comes along and says, now
   look, we think it would be a good idea to fix the tax system but
   this is not the right time. I mean we had almost zero inflation,
   so if you are going to change the tax system on that score alone,
   that is a tremendously good reason why you should try and do it.
   We have the pressure of needing to be more competitive in our own
   region. That's a reason to do it. We have the Budget in balance
   - that's another reason to do it. 
We have a greater congruence of support for tax reform between
   the business community and the welfare lobby despite some of the
   remarks that have been made in the past few days than we've
   ever had before. Now, I can't think of a better circumstance
   in the 25 years that I've been in politics which are more sufficient
   so far as taxation reform is concerned than the circumstances we
   now have . So if we blow this opportunity as a country, if all of
   those who are collectively responsible and that includes the Opposition
   as well as the Government, if we blow this opportunity, no public
   figure in Australia will in the foreseeable future have any credibility
   to say, oh well, now is not the right time but some time in the
   future might be the right time. I mean, does anybody really believe
   that we can go on indefinitely with the present ramshackle wholesale
   tax system that we have. 
Does anybody believe that we can go on indefinitely with a personal
   income tax system which in a year or two's time we'll
   have people on average weekly earnings paying 47 cents in the dollar
   on some of their income. I don't think there are many people
   when confronted with those realities that believe that we can go
   on doing it. And therefore I am amazed beyond belief that the political
   irresponsibility of the Leader of the Opposition Mr Beazley saying
   last night : well, even if the Australian people vote for tax reform,
   I Kim Beazley, I am going to try and frustrate it. Now not only
   is that negative and destructive and the politics of a spoiler and
   not a leader, it is also an attitude which is arrogant towards the
   wishes of the Australian people. 
I mean, one of the things you have got to do in politics, either
   when you are Government, or when you are Opposition, there are some
   things that cry aloud for a national interest decision and not a
   partisan political decision. When I supported the efforts of the
   former Prime Minister to change the tax system in the mid-1980s
   I did that because I thought it was the right thing to do for the
   country, and I think that the decision that Mr Beazley announced
   last night, is a negative, spoiling, backward looking decision and
   one that does no credit to him and no credit to the party he leads.
   What could be fairer or better than an incumbent Government saying,
   we will lay out a taxation plan, we will campaign on that, we will
   run all the political rifts that are involved in that, according
   to the conventional political wisdom, and if we win the election,
   having laid out our plans, then we ask the parties controlling the
   Senate, because under our present system, it is impossible for one
   side of politics to absolutely control both Houses of Parliament
   and that has been the case now for fifteen years since the size
   of the Parliament was increased by the action of the Labor Party
   back in 1983. Nothing could be fairer, nothing could be more open,
   and I want to say to the Opposition Leader and to the people of
   Australia, I think the public deserves better than that. 
I think the public is entitled to have an honest contest about
   a policy, to have votes cast in a ballot box and then for the referee's
   decision to be adhered to. And if at the next election the Australian
   public votes for tax reform presented by the Government, I think
   there's a moral and political obligation on the parties who
   opposed it to accept the verdict of the Australian people. But apparently
   those who sit opposite do not take that view, and apparently those
   who sit opposite are determined to destroy and spoil and frustrate
   no matter what the verdict of the Australian people is.
It would be a different matter if we kept our plans under wraps.
   I mean, a lot of people have said to me, why do you talk about tax
   reform before the election? I talk about tax reform before the election
   because I don't think it's honest to say to the public,
   I'm not going to change the tax system and then get into power
   and say, oh look I've read the wrong page or something, I really
   meant to say the opposite. I mean that's not very credible.
   We are going to lay it all out so people know what they will get
   and having known that I think the honest, decent thing for any self
   respecting Opposition to do is to say, we'll accept the verdict
   of the people. 
But apparently that is not the case. I mean, I don't often
   say nice things about my predecessor but I've got to say at
   least he had the guts and the strength before the 1993 election
   to say, if Hewson wins I'll let the taxation reform package
   go through.' And that is the course of action that I thought
   Mr Beazley was going to follow. It's the course of action that
   he said he was going to follow. And he made it very plain a few
   months ago, in fact in August of last year, and he said this, if
   John Howard goes to the next election with a clearly and honestly
   described GST tax proposal, and he wins the election, Labor will
   regard that as a mandate and not seek to block the introduction
   of a GST.' Well that's his sort of description of the
   tax reform and he repeated that on a number of occasions. Anyway,
   I think you've got my point. I think you understand that I
   am not very impressed with what he's done. 
And more to the point, I don't think the Australian public
   will be very impressed with what he's done. I think the Australian
   public is fed up with the politics of spoiling and destruction and
   negativism. I think they are fed up with the situation where a government
   can get a very large majority in the House of Representatives and
   find that so many of the important elements of its programme has
   been frustrated in the Senate. But we will all live to fight another
   day on that, and at the end of the day the Australian people will
   resolve these things exercising the great common sense that they
   always do in relation to such great matters.
The very, very last thing that I want to say to all of you is this,
   that we have absolutely no intention on giving up on our reform
   agenda. We set ourselves a number of goals when we were elected
   in 1996. We set ourselves the goal of IR reform, we had to stick
   to that to the bitter end. We set ourselves the goal of fixing the
   Budget. We've essentially, but not totally, done that job and
   we can't afford to be complacent. We set ourselves the goal
   of a great privatisation programme and we're well down the
   track on that. And we set ourselves the goal of taxation reform.
   And I believe that that last mentioned goal of reforming Australia's
   taxation system is the greatest piece of unfinished economic reform
   business in Australia. The financial system was fixed in the 1980's.
   We are no longer a country that dwells behind high tariff barriers.
   We are a country which now has a more modern, contemporary, flexible
   industrial relations system. We have now recognised the wisdom of
   governments not running business enterprises that they are not equipped
   to run. But the last piece of really unfinished, big economic business
   in Australia is taxation reform. We have a responsibility to do
   it, despite the obstruction, despite the spoiling tactics of our
   opponents, we intend to proceed.
And finally can I pay a particular tribute to the work that Peter
   Costello as Treasurer has done, not only in preparing a large Budget
   but also in the work that he has done in preparing the two Budgets
   that went before it. And also because the Treasurer gets most of
   the headlines and all of the publicity on Budget night that I also
   pay a tribute to John Fahey as the Finance Minister who has worked
   so very, very closely with Peter in preparing the Budget. I believe
   that I am served by a very able group of Ministers. I think the
   Government that I lead has the best reform credentials of any government
   in the economic area since World War II. I made that claim a few
   weeks ago and I was criticised, not surprisingly, by some of my
   opponents for doing so. But I mean it very sincerely and if you
   look at the checklist, if you look at the reforms that have been
   undertaken over the last couple of years, I think they are plainly
   thought out. 
But I haven't been able to do that alone. I've needed
   the assistance of a very able group of Ministers and particularly
   in this Budget week I pay tribute to Peter Costello's work
   as Treasurer. I pay tribute to the support that he's received
   from John Fahey and I want to thank all of my other Ministerial
   and Parliamentary colleagues, many of whom are here today for their
   tremendous help. And really finally can I thank all of you for the
   continued support you give to the Liberal Party, for the interest
   you display in our activity and I know the great encouragement you
   give to the party organisation which Michael Osborne and Remo Nogarotto
   as the President and the Director find so very helpful and so very
   encouraging. Thank you very much. 


E&amp;OE........................................................................................................
.... I do want to say a number of things tonight about the economic
   and the strategic agenda that my government has, and I want to touch
   upon some of the issues that no doubt you have touched upon during
   your conference, but it is also appropriate that I say one or two
   words about the very disturbing developments within Indonesia, because
   the relationship between Australia and Indonesia is one of tremendous
   significance to the future of our country.
In direct economic terms trade with Indonesia only accounts for
   about two and a half per cent of Australia's total world trade,
   but there's little doubt that the relationship between Australia
   and what is our nearest neighbour, and a very large country, the
   sixth most populous country in the world, is of enormous significance
   to our strategic future. We view what is occurring in Indonesia
   as a matter of very, very deep concern. It is of course for the
   people of Indonesia to resolve the identity of the government of
   Indonesia. It is not for the head of government in Australia, or
   representatives of the Australian government to give public advice
   about who should be in charge of foreign countries. It is our role
   to be a helpful neighbour and a good friend in a time of difficulty
   and Australia has certainly been that.
One of the things that I resolved to do when I became Prime Minister
   was to ensure that there was a proper balance in Australia's
   foreign relations between the nations of the Asia-Pacific, the nations
   of Europe and North America. I thought, without being ultra-critical
   of my predecessor, that there was perhaps too much of an obsession
   with what I described as an Asia only approach by the former government.
   And I set out in no way to reduce our links with the Asia-Pacific
   region, but to supplement them by consolidating our links with other
   parts of the world. But one of the things that we were determined
   to do within the embrace of that approach was to continue very close
   relations with Indonesia. And in her time of great economic difficulty,
   Australia has been a very good friend. Along with Japan, Australia
   is the only country in the world which has contributed to the three
   IMF rescue packages in the Asia-Pacific region. We've also
   provided other assistance to Indonesia. Because it is in our direct
   national interest to do so. And the amount of difficulty that the
   adjustment required of Indonesia by the International Monetary Fund
   is imposing upon the people of that country, particularly the poor
   of that nation, is a matter of concern.
But in looking at what is unfolding in Indonesia we shouldn't
   lose sight of the fact that that country has made remarkable strides
   over the past twenty or thirty years. The level of absolute poverty
   in Indonesia has been dramatically reduced over that period of time
   and the economic performance of the country has improved enormously.
   It is going through an enormous amount of pain and suffering at
   present, and I think it needs as a people the understanding and
   the sympathy and the practical response of the Australian nation.
   But by the same token we must recognise that the forces of individual
   liberty and the desire for political freedom are very strong forces
   within any nation and in the end as we know from our own experience,
   they are forces that can never be kept back and in the end they
   must be recognised and given effect to. And I just want to say to
   you that naturally the Australian government will follow very closely
   all of the events as they unfold. We have a priority of course in
   terms of the safety of Australian citizens in Indonesia, we want
   to remain a good and enduring friend of the Indonesian people, and
   that is something that, a view we hold irrespective of the identity
   of those who may be in charge of that country from time to time.
Your conference has been ladies and gentlemen about the challenge
   of leadership, and I thought coming up in the plane this afternoon,
   that I would share a few thoughts with you about how I see the role
   of political leadership, particularly in the economic policy area.
   And drawing upon some of the experiences that I've had in the
   now almost 24 years that I've been a member of the national
   parliament. I've seen over that period of time a number of
   major challenges for change and reform and forward looking attitudes
   in the economic management of our country.
There have been many big changes in the way in which the Australian
   economy operates over the past quarter of a century, and when one
   reflects on what the Australian economy was like in 1974 and compare
   it with what the Australian economy is now, there have been some
   very dramatic changes. Of course 1974 was the beginning of the enormous
   change that the Australian economy experienced when we moved away
   from that period of an almost unending boom that followed the early
   years of the 1950s, through to the onset of the oil shock and all
   the other world economic turbulence in the early 1970s.
And I developed after a few years in Parliament a view that there
   are a number of fundamental areas of reform that were needed to
   be undertaken and would require political leadership on both sides
   of Australian politics to achieve. And I think it is fair to say
   that we should give the system, and this includes both sides of
   politics, and it also includes the contribution of the business
   community of Australia, we should give the system some credit for
   having achieved a remarkable amount of reform over that period of
   time. When we think of how regulated and cloistered the Australian
   financial system was in the middle 1970s. When then had, when I
   was Treasurer, the establishment of the Campbell Committee of enquiry
   into the financial system. We had some of the reforms recommended
   by that Committee implemented by the former Coalition government,
   but a large number of them also implemented by the Labor government
   that replaced the Fraser government in 1983. And I might say those
   reforms were implemented by the then Treasurer Mr Keating with the
   enthusiastic bipartisan support of the then Opposition. And I'm
   very proud of the fact that in Opposition between 1983 and 1996
   I was able, and a number of my colleagues were able in the various
   roles that we occupied, we were able to argue for and articulate
   from Opposition the need for economic reform and to play a very
   constructive role with those in the former Labor government who
   were also interested in economic reform.
Mr Keating found it easier to implement financial deregulation
   because he had our assistance. The former Labor government found
   it easy to privatise the Commonwealth Bank and the old Australian
   Airlines, because he had our assistance. And it's fair to say
   that in the political process, Oppositions have responsibility as
   well as governments. Now that I think when you look back over that
   period of time I think we can all give ourselves some credit for
   the tremendous strides that were made in the area of financial deregulation.
Moving to the area of industry protection which has long been an
   area of some controversy within economic and political debate in
   Australia, it's fair to say that the Australian economy now
   is an infinitely more open and less protected economy than what
   it was in the 1970s. And although I acknowledge that there can be
   a variety of views about the level of tariff protection in particular
   industries, and I would be the first to acknowledge that there is
   no such thing literally speaking as a level playing field anywhere
   in the world, and that there is no such thing as perfect free trade
   anywhere in the world, and every nation has its own blind spots
   when it comes to particular industries and particular areas of economic
   activity. We have as a nation become a lot more open and I think
   we are the better and we are the stronger for that. And the programme
   of tariff reform that was undertaken during the 1980s has been of
   enormous benefit to the Australian economy and to the Australian
   people.
Of course an area with which I strongly identified myself a few
   years ago, indeed for many of the years that I was in Opposition,
   was the cause of industrial relations reform. And I think of all
   of the areas of institutional rigidity that was still largely left
   untouched when the Coalition government was elected in 1996, industrial
   relations was the outstanding example. And a number of us in Opposition,
   and I know many people in this audience, also played a role in it,
   fought a very long and ultimately successful campaign to change
   the mindset not only of the Australian community but also of sections
   of the business community towards the industrial relations system
   of this country.
And we now have a system which is fundamentally very different
   from that which obtained twenty years ago. We have a system which
   is built very substantially on the notion of direct relations between
   employers and employees at the workplace level. It is not a system
   which is built on a rejection of trade unions, it is not a system
   which says that people should not have the absolute right to join
   or not to join a trade union. Rather it is a system that recognises
   that the association at a workplace level between employers and
   employees is infinitely more important than membership of the institutions
   on both sides of labour and of capital and I think as the years
   go by the changes in that industrial relations area will be seen
   to have been of enormous benefit to our country.
That of course allows me to say something about the issue of waterfront
   reform. I don't think there is any area of industrial relations
   activity which has been more in need of fundamental change and reform
   than the Australian waterfront. Much has been said and written about
   the waterfront over the past few weeks, and much water is yet to
   flow under the bridge. Let me simply say to you that the government
   remains absolutely and totally committed to the cause of waterfront
   reform. And I also want to take the opportunity as Prime Minister
   of warmly congratulating and expressing my total support for the
   role that my Industrial Relations Minister, Peter Reith, has played
   in conducting the government's case and prosecuting the government's
   cause in the area of industrial relations reform.
Let me also say that our goal has been to reform the Australian
   waterfront and make it more efficient because that is in Australia's
   national interest. And we have also had as a goal the removal of
   compulsory unionism on the Australian waterfront because we also
   regard that as being in Australia's national interest. It has
   never been our goal, despite what some have said, to destroy the
   Maritime Union of Australia. It has never been our goal to remove
   unionists from the Australian waterfront. And by any measure, and
   I won't bore you with statistics tonight, the Australian waterfront's
   current state demands fundamental reform. And we intend to stick
   with it, we intend to go the distance to achieve that very important
   and that very fundamental reform.
There are of course one or two areas where reform is yet to occur.
   And I think there is little doubt that the area which is most in
   need of reform and which is an area that I have frequently described
   as comprising the greatest area of unfinished economic reform business
   in Australia is of course the cause of reforming Australia's
   taxation system.
Over the years a number of attempts have been made. I've been
   in it long enough to sort of be open enough to reflect on the attempts
   that have been made on both sides of politics over the last 18 or
   20 years to bring about change. I had a go or two when I was Treasurer
   in the former Coalition government, and didn't succeed. Mr
   Keating had a go when he was Treasurer in the Hawke government,
   and I must say that he received a great deal of support from me
   as the Opposition economic spokesman, but he was unsuccessful. And
   then John Hewson as Leader of the Opposition, quite courageously
   and with a great deal of support from many in the community also
   attempted it from Opposition before the 1993 election. And on that
   occasion Mr Keating ran a very negative and destructive, but in
   political terms albeit short-term political terms, he ran a very
   successful negative campaign and destroyed Fightback and was re-elected
   in 1993.
We now have what I regard as the last great opportunity in the
   foreseeable future to reform Australia's taxation system. If
   we fluff it on this occasion, if it is defeated on this occasion
   by essentially negative, short-sighted attitudes, then I don't
   think the opportunity is going to come our way again for a number
   of years. The circumstances at the moment for fundamental taxation
   reform are as good as they will ever be. We have a very low rate
   of inflation, we have quite solid economic growth, we have a greater
   recognition within the Australian community of the essential unfairness
   of the present system and we also have I think a more mature approach
   from the spokesmen representing the welfare lobby than we've
   had in recent years. And I want to congratulate the business community,
   I particularly want to congratulate John Ralph and Stan Wallis and
   many others here tonight who've played such a very constructive
   role in trying to represent the legitimate view of business to the
   government about the need for reform.
At the end of the day it will fall to my government and a small
   group of senior ministers within the government to decide the final
   shape of the package. But we have been greatly aided by what you've
   put to us and we've been greatly encouraged by the way in which
   you have sought to establish a constructive understanding with the
   welfare sector. Because fairness and equity is very important. You
   won't sell to the Australian people fundamental tax reform
   unless they believe it is fundamentally fair. In all the years I've
   been in politics, I've had a very strong view that you can
   sell fundamental reform, you can persuade the Australian people
   of the need to change something that they've had for a long
   time if you satisfy two conditions. The first of those conditions
   is that you've got to persuade them that it's in Australia's
   interests, because at the end of the day they are a patriotic lot
   and they do worry about the future of the country. And the second
   thing you've got to do is you've got to persuade them
   that it's fair. In other words that those who need protection
   are protected, and that those who've been getting away with
   rorting the system through whatever device are prevented by the
   change from doing so into the future. And they are the two conditions.
   And I believe that we can achieve both of those objectives.
I have no doubt that the case in the national interest for reforming
   the tax system is overwhelming. A new taxation system would of course
   greatly boost the prospect of Australian exports. A new taxation
   system would even-out the bumps that now exist in our totally outdated
   wholesale taxation system. A taxation system that reforms many of
   the mechanisms that now affect business operations would also be
   of general benefit to the business community. A reform that recognises
   that in 1956 when I left school you were only paying the top marginal
   rate of tax if you earnt something like 18 times average weekly
   earnings, and by the year 2000 if we leave the current system untouched,
   you'll be paying the top marginal rate of tax at one and a
   quarter times average weekly earnings, and that is a taxation system
   that cries aloud for fundamental reform.
But in the process of making the change and introducing the reform
   we must of course ensure that there is a proper level of protection
   for the less fortunate in our community. And I'm determined
   that the test of fairness will not only be met, but it will be passed
   with flying colours. And can I say ladies and gentlemen without
   wishing on an occasion like this to introduce too much of a discordant
   note, how tremendously disappointed I am that the Leader of the
   Opposition last night in his Budget reply chose to take such a negative
   approach. Chose to say to the Australian people, even if you re-elect
   the Coalition government on the basis of the Coalition government
   has unveiled its tax reform plan at the next election, which is
   our intention, even if you do that, we in the Opposition will not
   accept that verdict and we will do everything we can to prevent
   the introduction of tax reform.
I think that is a very negative attitude. It is if I may say so
   in stark contrast to the rather more constructive approach that
   we in Opposition took to a number of important Labor government
   measures which could never have become law without our support.
   And I'm often reminded of the fact that if the Liberal and
   National parties in Opposition had taken a blindly negative approach
   to the then Labor government's plans to privatise the Commonwealth
   Bank and to privatise Australian Airlines, neither of those events
   would have occurred, but in the process we would have traded-in
   and pawned our own credibility. And credibility in politics, as
   in life generally, is a very important commodity. So I do express
   my very deep disappointment that such a negative attitude should
   have been taken because the cause of taxation reform is something
   that goes very directly to the national economic interest. Taxation
   reform is needed to make Australia a stronger, more competitive
   and a better country in which to do business into the 21st century.
   And there are leadership obligations on both sides of politics when
   it comes to something as fundamental as taxation reform.
Can I just say one or two other things before I conclude. I can't
   of course sit down without saying something about the Budget that
   Peter Costello brought down on Tuesday night. I'm immensely
   proud of the fact that in just over two years we have brought around
   a quite remarkable fiscal turnaround. One of the most remarkable
   things about what was projected in the Budget last Tuesday night
   is that back in 1995 the debt to GDP ratio taking into account federal
   government debt was about 20 per cent. Twenty per cent of gross
   domestic product. On current projections, and on the assumption
   that we allow as I put it, the men and women of Australia to buy
   the remaining two-thirds of Telstra, on that basis by the year 2000-2001,
   we will have reduced the federal government debt of Australia from
   20 per cent in 1995 to one and a half per cent only of gross domestic
   product by the year 2000-2001.
And we will be able to say to the people of Australia, particularly
   to the younger generations of Australians, that one of the greatest
   legacies we have given you is the legacy of living in a comparatively
   debt free nation. And I don't think it would be in the experience
   of anybody in this room that such a low level of federal government
   debt would have existed. And it does represent a huge turn-around,
   and the great bulk of that turn-around has been achieved through
   the device of expenditure restraint. Because for the third budget
   in a row, the Treasurer was able to say that there was no increase
   in income tax, there was no increase in company tax, there was no
   increase in excise duty, and there was no increase in sales tax.
   So we are very proud of that particular achievement.
And all of this was done according to a plan. We knew that we had
   to take some difficult decisions in our first budget. We knew that
   we had to lay the groundwork for that fiscal turn-around in that
   first budget, and I'm very glad indeed that those decisions
   were undertaken in 1996 because, as the Secretary to the Treasury
   said to me on Budget night, this Budget has been made possible by
   the Budget that the government brought down in 1996 when some of
   the many difficult expenditure decisions were undertaken. And can
   I also in that context take the opportunity of 
congratulating in this gathering the work that Peter Costello as
   Treasurer has done over the last two and a quarter years. I think
   he's done the job with flair, I think he's delivered the
   Budget with flair, and I think in every sense of the word he's
   a person who is very much in full control of the responsibilities
   that I have given to him as Federal Treasurer.
My final word ladies and gentlemen is about government-business
   relations. When I was elected Prime Minister, or perhaps on election
   night in 1996 when I knew that I was going to be sworn in as Prime
   Minister, I said that one of the things that I valued most was the
   fact that the Party I led was owned by no section of the Australian
   community. That the Liberal Party was a Party composed of men and
   women from all walks of life and supported by Australians from all
   walks of life. And that has remained the case in the time that we've
   been in government. We have very much tried to govern for the mainstream.
   We've tried to look to and achieve the national interest, rather
   than a sectional interest.
But that doesn't mean that we don't have close links
   with the business community. We share many of the goals of the business
   community of Australia. We all believe in decent capitalism. We
   all believe in the profit motive, we all believe in investment,
   we all believe in private enterprise. We all believe that governments
   should stick to the things that are the real responsibility of the
   government, and leave commercial undertakings and commercial decision-making
   to people who are best able to undertake them. The longer I stay
   in politics the more persuaded I am that governments are very bad
   at trying to run businesses. And the more persuaded I am that there
   are skills required for business which are handy in government but
   not necessarily transferable and that there are also skills required
   in government which might be handy in business but are also not
   necessarily totally transferable. They are different disciplines,
   they intersect, they overlap, they have a lot in common. And what
   I have tried to do is to build over the past two and a quarter years
   a good and open relationship with the business community. We don't
   always agree. We accept that from time to time you'll criticise
   us. You will accept that from time to time we may express dissatisfaction
   with some of the things that business does. I think it is very important
   on big national economic issues that there be as many spokesmen
   for the business community out there arguing the cause as there
   are spokesmen for contrary points of view out there arguing the
   cause. Because capturing the hearts and minds of people on the need
   for economic change and industrial and other reforms is a 24 hour
   challenge. And in living as we do in a media driven and a media
   dominated society in so many ways, that particular part of the equation
   is tremendously important.
But I value very much the links that my government has built with
   the business community. I value enormously the contribution of the
   Institute of Company Directors. I think we do have a very direct
   and open relationship. It's a relationship that I hope all
   of us will see in the future as being one that must be moulded to
   the national interest and that on all occasions we will work as
   best we can to achieve those goals.
I congratulate you on having such a successful conference. I thank
   you very warmly for asking me to come tonight. It's a great
   pleasure to be once again in your company.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Katie. I suppose, some corners are a bit longer
 than others as far as election dates are concerned. To Ian Armstrong,
 the Leader of the New South Wales National Party, my Federal colleague,
 Judi Moylan, the Minister for the Status of Women, other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Today is an opportunity for me to put into context some of the decisions
 that my Government has taken over the two and a quarter years that
 we have been in power. And it's very important whenever you look
 back on what a Government has done to remember as well as what it
 has done, what things might have been like if some of the things it
 had done over that period of time had not been done. And that is particularly
 important against the backdrop of what is now occurring in the Asia
 Pacific region. It's not possible to say anything about Australia,
 about Australia's economic future or Australia's political
 future without a few words about the very momentous events in Indonesia
 over the past few weeks.
The resignation yesterday of President Soeharto was in every sense
 of the word a moment in the history of that country and also a moment
 in the history of our entire region. Whatever has been said about
 him - and a lot has been said critically, and what will be said in
 the future - nothing can gainsay the fact that that brought great
 stability and a lot of well measured economic progress to the people
 of Indonesia. It is no mean feat to be the governor for 32 years of
 a country of over 200 million people, the fourth largest nation on
 earth, comprised of an archipelago of more than 3000 islands with
 an enormous amount of religious and ethnic diversity. He did bring
 to that country a great deal of measured improvements for the poor.
 Certainly the democratic processes that we take for granted were not
 there but equally, it's very important in our relations with
 the countries of the world to understand that our philosophical approach,
 as much as we revere it, can be very different from the approaches
 of other countries.
We quite sensibly, in my view, gave up the cheap option of giving
 kerbside public political advice to the people of Indonesia about
 who should be their government and we won't be departing from
 that practice in the future. There must be more openness, there must
 be more personal liberty and there must be a continued growth of economic
 freedom in Indonesia if bloodshed and civil strife is to be avoided
 in the future. We regard Indonesia as a very important country to
 Australia, not so much because of trade, because our bilateral trade
 is only about 2.5 per cent, but geographic proximity, historical experiences,
 the fact that Australia was one of only three countries in the world
 that contributed to the IMF bailouts of Thailand, Indonesia and Korea
 is a demonstration that Australia is part and parcel of the Asia Pacific
 region forever, and also in relation to Indonesia that Australia is
 a reliable and durable friend in times of difficulty.
When I became Prime Minister I said that one of the things I wanted
 to do with Australia's foreign relations was to move away from
 what I saw on occasions as being a rather obsessive Asia-only approach,
 which was adopted on occasions by the former Government, to a broader
 and more sensible Asia-first approach, recognising that Australia
 also had very important economic, historical and political relationships
 with the nations of Europe and the nations of North America because
 it's long been my strong personal conviction that Australia occupies
 a rather unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic
 circumstance. We have deep cultural roots with the nations of Europe.
 We share the common commitment to personal liberty and democracy with
 the nations of North America yet geographically, we are part of the
 Asia Pacific region and we have been able, to our great benefit to
 welcome into our nation many tens of thousands of people from the
 nations of the Asia Pacific region and they have added a very rich
 and important cultural dimension to the modern Australia and I think
 it's very important in the projection of our foreign relations
 that we remember that unique intersection that we occupy and I think
 we have understood that every well in the events of the past few weeks.
We will work with the Government of Indonesia appointed by the people
 of Indonesia and that applies irrespective of the identity of the
 people who are members of that Government. So it's really against
 a background of what is happening in the Asia Pacific region, not
 only in Indonesia but throughout the entire region that you must really
 see what my Government has done over the past two and a quarter years.
 If there is one very clear message that comes out of that turbulence
 and that is that Australia needs a government that will give it economic
 security, economic stability and economic safety. We don't want
 a government, we don't want a set of policies that will play
 fast and loose with Australia's economic stability.
Now what has happened in the Asia Pacific region has really dramatically
 strengthened the case for on-going economic reform in Australia. So
 far from what is happening in those countries taking the pressure
 off us to change and reform, what has happened in those countries
 has really increased the tempo and the nature of that pressure. And
 that is why we adopted the approach that we did when we came to power
 in relation to a number of areas. And I frequently ask the rhetorical
 question, where would Australia now be if we had not taken the measures
 we did more than two years ago to reduce the budget deficit? Where
 would Australia now be if we had brought down two weeks ago a budget
 with a deficit of $5 - 10 billion? Where would Australia have been
 if we had not undertaken the measures to reduce the very, very large
 Federal Government debt that we faced in March of 1996. And all of
 the adverse developments in our region have totally vindicated the
 economic approach the Government has adopted, sometimes in the face
 of fierce criticism and always in the face of political obstruction
 from the Senate the measures that the Government has taken over the
 past two and a quarter years. Because if we had taken a looser, more
 permissive approach to economic management, if we had said: we will
 let the budget deficit correct itself in a cyclical fashion, if we
 had not undertaken some unpopular spending reductions which affected
 different sections of the community, if we had adopted that looser,
 more permissive attitude, you really have to scratch your head and
 wonder what the rest of the world would now be thinking of the Australian
 economy against the background of what has happened in the Asia Pacific
 region. Because in the global economy of the late 1990s you can suffer
 the penalties of geography, irrespective of the virtue of your own
 domestic economic policies. What has happened in our part of the world
 has made it all the more necessary that the sort of reform measures
 that we have undertaken be undertaken.
What we have done by reducing the budget deficit and what we have
 done by tackling the debt problem is to create in many respects in
 Australia, which is seen as a safe, reliable, secure economic haven
 in a very, very turbulent part of the world.
I don't want to weary you with statistics but let me just give
 you one. In 1995, the total federal Government debt of Australia represented
 about 20 per cent of our GDP, that is 20 per cent of our annual wealth
 generation. On current projections, and factoring in the acquisition
 of the remaining two thirds of Telstra by the men and women of Australia,
 that figure by the year 2001 will be reduced to a bare 1.5 per cent
 of our annual wealth generation, or 1.5 percent of our gross domestic
 product. And we often talk as we look forward to the next millennium,
 and we look forward to the 21st Century, we often talk about futures
 and visions and legacies. I would hope that one of the great legacies
 of my Government for the children, particularly of the next millennium,
 will be a debt-free millennium and I can't think of a surer economic
 foundation for the 21st Century than for the people of Australia to
 believe that they can go into that century on the basis of this nation
 being a relatively free-of-debt nation.
That's not a mere academic exercise because when you reduce debt
 and when you get rid of deficits, you create more favourable circumstances
 in a lot of areas. I had the opportunity the other night of attending
 one of those great sporting functions that comes the way of a Prime
 Minister. I am very proud of the fact that I am the patron of the
 greatest rugby league club in the world, that's the St George
 Rugby League Club, and I went out there for the testimonial dinner.
 I didn't get many arguments when I said that last Tuesday night
 saying I went out there for the testimonial dinner for Mark Coyne,
 the Captain of St George. And during the course of the evening is
 the great opportunity at gatherings like that to get some free advice,
 and you always do. And one thing you can be certain of if you go to
 a sporting event in Australia that you'll always get plenty of
 free advice. It's always free, it's not always friendly,
 but it's always free.
And in the course of the evening, quite a number of people spoke to
 me about something that really is the direct consequence of what I've
 been talking about and that is the sharply lower interest rates that
 Australian homebuyers and Australian business are now enjoying. Now
 I know that there are a lot of you in the audience today who would
 say that they're still not low enough and I know that none of
 you would want me to ever say to any banker I run into that interest
 rates in Australia are low enough. But I think it is indisputable
 that over the last couple of years we have seen the most significant
 falls in the interest rate structure of this country that I can certainly
 remember. And they're worth, when you are talking about buying
 the average home, certainly in Sydney, and on a national average they
 are worth a gain of about $300 a month for somebody paying off a home.
And what is good is that the competition in the banking industry,
 the greater competition, has now resulted in those reductions flowing
 through into the small business area and they have been particularly
 sticky and particularly resistant to reductions over recent years.
 Now that would not have happened if it hadn't been for our Budgets
 in 1996, 1997 and 1998. Because when you reduce government debt, you
 get the governments out of competition for monies in the financial
 markets and you create the circumstances, or you help create the circumstances,
 for lower interest rates all around. So again and again you have to
 see what we have done against the background of making this a more
 secure, stable and safe economy.
You must see reform to the Australian waterfront, which we are absolutely
 determined to see through to the end because we believe it is in the
 national interest. We are not on some kind of ideological binge in
 trying to reform the Australian waterfront. We have no desire to destroy
 unionism. We have no desire to destroy individual unions. It's
 a cornerstone of our approach that every Australian should have the
 right to join or not to join a trade union. It should be a matter
 of personal, individual choice. And our goal on the waterfront has
 not been to destroy the Maritime Union of Australia. Our goal on the
 waterfront has been to give to the Australian nation, to the economy
 of Australia, the sort of efficient, economic waterfront that exists
 amongst our competitor nations. And many of you have heard over recent
 weeks and months the comparisons about the performance of the Australian
 waterfront and waterfronts around the world.
And that has been our goal, and the reason why we are committed to
 it is that it's part of the exercise of making Australia a more
 stable, secure and safe economy.
And it's made all the more necessary, not less necessary, by
 what has been happening and the turbulence that's been occurring
 in the Asia Pacific region. And it's really against that background
 that we come to what I have described in the past as the greatest
 piece of unfinished economic business in Australia and that is taxation
 reform. I've now been in Federal Parliament for 24 years and
 over that period of time I have seen major reform in many areas affecting
 the Australian economy. I've seen the opening up of the Australian
 economy through a very extensive dismantling of tariff barriers. I
 have seen the dramatic transformation to greater openness of the Australian
 financial system. I have seen tremendous changes in many other areas.
 I have seen the extensive privatisation programme embraced on occasions
 by both sides of politics but pursued very persistently by the Coalition
 since the mid 1980s. I've seen, particularly under my Government,
 and I am very proud of the achievements in this area, a change in
 our approach to industrial relations, an overturning of the rather
 cloistered, inward looking industrial relations system that we inherited
 in 1996 to a more open system. And reforming the waterfront is an
 individual projection of that industrial relations reform.
But there does remain one very big piece of unfinished economic business
 and that is to reform Australia's taxation system. And this shouldn't
 be seen as some kind of economic revolution. It shouldn't be
 seen as something that involves turning conventional economic practice
 on its head. What it should be seen as is the next logical, inevitable,
 absolutely necessary step in the process of making Australia a more
 secure, stable and reliable economy.
We can no longer afford an old fashioned inefficient taxation system.
 And what is happening around us drives that point home all the more.
 I mean it's going to be a harder world in which to compete so
 therefore you should arm yourself with a modern, competitive taxation
 system. It's got nothing to do with ideology. It's got an
 enormous amount to do with competitive survival and it's also
 got a great deal to do with fairness.
I've always believed that you can sell major reform to the Australian
 people if you satisfy two criteria. First of all, you have to persuade
 them that it's in Australia's interests because Australians,
 despite their reluctance sometimes to be too overt about it, are deep
 nationalists and deeply concerned about the welfare and the future
 of their country. And if you can persuade them that it's a good
 thing for Australia that we have a new taxation system, that's
 half the battle. The other half of the battle is to persuade them
 that the change is going to be fair to all Australians.
If I could deal with the first part of those criteria and that is
 the national interest criteria and the case on national interest grounds
 for a new modern taxation system is overwhelming. There's hardly
 a credible commentator on taxation left who would argue seriously
 against the need for reform. The wholesale tax system of Australia,
 which is the principle vehicle through which indirect taxation is
 raised in Australia, the wholesale tax system is outdated, outmoded,
 and in every sense of the world, unfair and old fashioned. It is a
 system which severely penalises Australian exporters. It is a system
 which is lopsided in its treatment of different industry sectors.
 It is a system of indirect taxation that has parallels in only a handful
 of countries around the world and we wouldn't normally like to
 compare ourselves economically with those nations. It was a system
 that was introduced at a time when services bulked very small in the
 Australian economy, and it was introduced at a time when the dynamics
 of a global economy in which we now live were literally light years
 away. And on every score it has to go and it has to be replaced, and
 many other indirect taxes along with it, by new and a better, and
 a different system.
If we really want to do well as exporters in the Asia-Pacific region
 if we really want to nail down the gains that we have made over the
 last few years, if we really want to permanently waterproof ourselves
 against the turbulence of that region, we have to undertake taxation
 reform. We've got to give ourselves a system that gives a competitive
 edge with that part of the world. We can't, to use the example
 that I frequently used, have a taxation system that is so lopsided
 and indiscriminate, it taxes the family car at 22%, but taxes a Lear
 jet at zero. Or taxes orange juice concentrate at 20% and taxes caviar
 at zero.
And one could spend the whole afternoon giving examples of that sort
 of lopsided treatment and of the disparate way in which different
 industry sectors are treated. So the case for that reform on national
 interest grounds is overwhelming and there comes a time in the political
 and economic life of any country, and in the political life of individuals
 on the political stage, where you really have to ask yourself, what
 is the point of being in public life on either side of politics unless
 you are prepared to embrace some kind of national interest concern.
I mean we have debated this taxation issue for years and years in
 this country. I can remember it being debated when I was the Treasurer
 in the Fraser Government. I can remember that when Mr Keating was
 the Treasurer in the Labor Government he advocated reform and as the
 Opposition spokesman on economic matters then, I supported him. And
 I think Mr Beazley and Mr Evans also supported him very strongly.
 I can remember it came back again in 1993 when John Hewson led the
 Coalition. And it is now back on the agenda and back on the table.
In many respects, this is our last, best opportunity for half generation
 to do something sensible about our taxation system and if we lose
 that opportunity I think we're selling ourselves short. If we
 lose the opportunity I think we're doing a lot of damage to Australia's
 economic future and we aren't providing that big extra element
 that is going to deliver the stability and the security and the safety
 that we all know is necessary and we have all been reminded is necessary
 as a result of the turbulence which has occurred in our part of the
 world.
It is often said, fairly or unfairly I never quite know, that Australia
 is the lucky country. And we are lucky that we have been able to survive
 some of the worst effects of what's occurred in our region. But
 it's also said that you've got to make your own luck and
 the fact that we have been able to survive some of that impact is
 a direct result of many of the measures the Government has taken.
 But we can't rest on what we so far achieved. We've got
 to embrace the next necessary element of reform. And the next necessary
 element of economic reform is, of course, reforming Australia's
 taxation system and that is why we remain very, very strongly committed
 to it. And there are a host of reasons, of course, you are all aware
 of, other reasons why we need a new and better taxation system.
It is quite ludicrous that 30 to 40 years ago you didn't pay
 the top marginal rate of tax unless you earned something like 16 to
 17 times average weekly earnings. There aren't all that many
 people in Australia in that situation and there weren't then.
 Now you pay the top marginal rate if you hit one-and-three-quarter
 times average weekly earnings. And in the early years of the next
 century, if we don't make any change, that is going to be an
 even lower proportion.
Now that is a plainly ludicrous personal taxation system. And it does
 need change. I don't pretend that you can wave a magic wand and
 get rid of all the problems of the taxation system by reform. But
 I do believe that if you identify a national economic need to change
 something and you make a compelling case, than I believe that it will
 be embraced by the Australian community.
And it can be done in a way that is fair to low income earners. And
 I want to repeat an undertaking I gave a couple of weeks ago, and
 that is that there is no way that we are going to change the taxation
 system to hurt the poor in Australia. I do believe that Governments
 and the rest of the community have social obligations to those in
 the community who are less fortunate than the rest of us. Those social
 obligations have to be delivered in a targeted way, they have to be
 delivered in a sympathetic way and they have to be delivered in a
 efficient way, but they must, nonetheless, be delivered. And part
 of that process is to have a taxation system and a taxation reform
 that takes proper care of the less well-off in the community. And
 it can be done. The idea that there's something immutably fair
 about the present system which can't be delivered in some other
 system is absolutely illogical. Of course you can have fairness in
 any system if you build in safeguards and you build in protection
 for the less well off and we certainly intend to do that.
So ladies and gentlemen, as you may have gathered, I remain rather
 committed to the cause of taxation reform. Not once again because
 it's some kind of ideological beacon not because I want to win
 some kind of ideological argument, but because with all the sincerity
 and conviction I can muster I believe it is important for the welfare
 of my country, particularly against the background of the economic
 and political turbulence of our region, that we do everything we possibly
 can to make this a more secure, stable and safe society economically
 as well as socially. And the only way you can do that is to tackle
 obvious problems. Governments are elected to govern, they are elected
 to lead, they are elected to deal with problems. And when I became
 Prime Minister in March of 1996 I identified a number of problems
 with the Australian economy. I identified a big budget problem. I
 identified the need for changing our industrial relations system.
 I identified the need for the Government to get out of those business
 undertakings that are not properly the business of Government. And
 I also identified the need to have a more balanced approach to environment
 concerns and development. And I also identified the need in our foreign
 relations to bring about more balance in relation to the various regional
 interests that we had.
And one by one we have tackled those problems and they've been
 tackled against the backdrop of what was then unexpected turbulence
 in our part of the region - in our part of the world. And what that
 unexpected turbulence has done is to reinforce the need, the urgency,
 the necessity to undertake fundamental reform to make us a stronger,
 safer community. And that's why we did what we did in relation
 to the Budget. That's why we had to take some decisions that
 some people, including some in the business community, I guess some
 people in this gathering didn't like in the 1996 Budget. And
 we have offended, in the process, different sections of Australian
 society but those decisions were taken out of concern for the mainstream
 Australian national interest. And that's why we fixed the Budget.
 That's why we are trying to reform the waterfront. And lastly
 and most importantly, it is why we are so committed to the cause of
 changing the Australian taxation system.
Can I finally say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that I have greatly
 appreciated, and my Government has greatly appreciated, the links
 that it has developed with the business community of Australia. I
 came into office with a very strong personal commitment to the cause
 of small business. I've had that commitment all of my life. I
 guess it's something to do with the fact that I grew up ve


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Michael, to my many federal and state parliamentary
 colleagues and my fellow Liberals here in New South Wales. As always
 it's a great pleasure to be back talking to the New South Wales
 Division of the Liberal Party. And this morning I want to share some
 thoughts with you about the Australian federal political scene which
 are very important to our party and to our country over the weeks
 and the months ahead.
We will of course sometime in the next nine months have a federal
 general election. When that will be and what form that will take I
 am yet to decide and in making that decision I will naturally take
 the counsel, not only of my federal parliamentary colleagues, but
 also of the Liberal Party organisation here in New South Wales and
 throughout Australia. And it is therefore appropriate that we begin
 to assess the choice that the Australian people will need to make
 when the next federal election is held because elections, be they
 state or federal, are all about choice. They're about deciding
 whether you will go down one path and continue in a particular direction,
 or whether you will change direction and go backwards down another
 path. And I use that word backwards very advisedly in the context
 of the next federal election, because it will involve a choice about
 going forward or about turning around and going backwards. Because
 over the past few weeks the Australian public has had driven home
 to it just how negative, reactionary and backward-looking is the federal
 political alternative on offer.
My Government was elected a little over two years ago. We were elected
 following thirteen years of Labor - thirteen years which increasingly
 saw a government drift away from contact with the ordinary men and
 women of our nation. A group of people in government who became arrogant
 and lazy and out of touch, and one of the things that I've encouraged
 all of my colleagues to avoid is falling into the trap of being arrogant
 and out of touch. And I believe that we have worked very hard to avoid
 that and the success that is now becoming more evident to the Australian
 community is the reward that we are beginning to see as a consequence
 of avoiding that arrogance. Everyone knows that we are living in a
 very turbulent region and I don't think I have gone through a
 week in public life in Australia where the potential turbulence of
 our own Asian-Pacific region, particularly Indonesia, has been more
 apparent than it has over the last week. And if ever the truism that
 we are part of the Asia-Pacific region was driven home to the Australian
 public it was driven home over the last week. All of us will hope
 that as change is undertaken in Indonesia that the direction will
 be towards a more open and a more inclusive Indonesian society.
I have never taken the view that Australian Prime Ministers should
 pontificate about the leadership of other nations. Good relations
 between countries are built on mutual respect and that includes accepting
 the decisions that other nations make about their leadership and their
 constitutional forms and their way of government, but equally demanding
 of them that they accept the decisions we make about our leadership,
 our constitutional forms and our way of government. And I've
 followed that approach since I've been Prime Minister and I'm
 sure it's been the right approach. We have good relations with
 Indonesia, we are a friend of Indonesia's, we've been a
 regional mate of Indonesia's but we have not been an uncritical
 commentator. We are prepared to defend our own interests and our own
 rights and to have our own views but we stop short of telling other
 countries how to run their own affairs. Now I don't know precisely
 the ultimate form of the change process which is underway in that
 country. And who governs that country and the form of that government
 is a matter for the Indonesian people to determine. I do know that
 I want the country to have peace, I want the country to have a greater
 measure of personal liberty, and I want the country to have increased
 living standards. And whatever may have been said of the government
 of that country for the past thirty two years, nothing can gainsay
 the fact that the living standard of the average Indonesian has risen
 dramatically during that period of time. And the way forward for Indonesia
 is through economic and political openness and co-operation with the
 nations of the region. And we will continue to be a good friend, we'll
 continue to help where we can as we have in the past, but like any
 other great democratic self-respecting nation we will of course require
 in our relations with that country as with all others, a basis of
 mutual self respect.
But what has happened there and what indeed has happened in the region
 over the past few months has driven home to the Australian people
 the need for a government that delivers safety, security and stability.
 And the clearest possible message has come from the economic management
 of my government epitomised by the recent Federal Budget, and that
 is that against the backdrop of enormous regional turbulence we have
 delivered security, safety and stability to the Australian people
 and to the Australian economy. And I ask the very obvious rhetorical
 question: Where would we have been now against the background of what
 has happened in the Asia-Pacific region if we had not followed the
 economic course we embarked upon in March of 1996? Where would we
 have been if we had left Mr Beazley's black hole of $10.5 billion
 unfilled? Where would we have been if we had taken the advice of the
 Australian Democrats? I mean they sometimes make the big spenders
 of the Labor Party look like skinflints. Where would we have been
 if we had taken the lazy option and adopted the views of having one
 government you were paralysed and did nothing? The truth is that if
 we had not cut the budget deficit, if we had not got on top of the
 enormous debt that we inherited from Mr Beazley and Mr Keating, this
 country now would have been weaker, more vulnerable and at the mercy
 of the economic turbulence that is swirling through the Asia-Pacific
 region.
So what we are facing at the moment is a very clear choice. Do we
 hang on to that stability, security and safety which my government
 has delivered, or do we go down a backward risky economic path which
 is being mapped out by the Labor Party? The Labor Party says it believes
 in fiscal responsibility but opposes every measure to deliver it.
 The Labor Party says it believes in budget surpluses but has spent
 two and a quarter years trying to stop the creation of a budget surplus.
 The Labor Party created the problem - they lit fire to the building
 and they've tried to stop the fire brigade putting out the fire.
 And yet they pretend to the Australian people that they too are a
 party of economic responsibility.
The Labor Party in 1998 is a monumental economic risk. The Labor Party
 if re-elected would undermine the security the stability and the safety
 against the background of Asian economic turbulence that my government
 has delivered. And it's not only at the macro level that the
 Labor Party is a risk, it's also at a level that directly affects
 people in this audience and affects the great bulk of middle Australia.
 One of the greatest gifts of my government to the battlers of Australia
 and to middle Australia - has been the enormous reduction in interest
 rates that has occurred since 1996. To the average homebuyer it's
 worth $300 a month and that is the equivalent of $100 a week pay rise.
 If Labor is re-elected that will be put at risk because as certain
 as one can be of anything in politics, if Labor gets back into power
 interest rates will start going up again. Because Labor is a party
 of big spending. Labor doesn't believe in budget surpluses, Labor
 believes in budget deficits because that's what they did when
 they were in government, despite what they said to the opposite. And
 the biggest risk to middle Australia of a re-elected Labor government
 will be higher interest rates because the low interest rates we now
 have are a direct result of the economic policies of my government
 -without them there would have been much greater pressure on borrowing
 in the financial markets and therefore much higher interest rates.
So we do have a very clear choice emerging - we have safety, stability
 and security against the backdrop of Asian economic turbulence on
 the one hand and on the other hand the enormous risk of returning
 Labor to office federally, and that risk is symbolised more than anything
 else by the threat that a re-elected Labor government would pose to
 the level of interest rates - not only for housing but also for small
 business. Because they are now at their lowest level for more than
 thirty years. You have to go back into the late 1960s to get interest
 rates for housing as low as they are now and back into the early 1970s
 - before the Whitlam government began to take an axe to Australia's
 economic stability - to get the sort of interest rates for small business
 that are now becoming daily more apparent.
We therefore ladies and gentleman do have a very clear choice. And
 it's a very clear choice that it's the responsibility of
 all of us as members of the Liberal Party to communicate to the Australian
 people, either at a federal parliamentary level or at a branch or
 conference level. Because it goes very much to the kind of Australian
 community we are going to have as we go into the next millennium.
 We often talk about the future - we talk about our goals, we talk
 about our vision for the future, we talk about our hopes for the future.
 I believe that one of the greatest legacies that a government of Australia
 in the late 1990s, in the closing years of the twentieth century,
 one of the greatest legacies that that government could aspire to
 leave to the generations of the third Christian millennium of the
 twenty-first century would be a debt-free Australian society. When
 I think of the future that my own children will enjoy and hopefully
 their children will enjoy, one thinks of the prospect that they might
 have a society that is not only socially stable, racially tolerant,
 politically liberal, but also a society that is free of debt and a
 society therefore that provides a sense of continuity and a sense
 of economic predictability that is so very important.
All of our economic policies have been designed to deliver that stability,
 that safety and that security which is so important. We don't
 pursue economic policies because we have some ideological obsession
 with it. Change for the sake of change is of no use. Change is only
 worthwhile if it delivers a benefit to society. And every single change
 that I've embraced as Prime Minister has been a change that I've
 believed will make Australia a better nation. I believe that one of
 the greatest gifts of statecraft in modern society is to choose between
 preserving those values and those institutions we've inherited
 from the past that are worth preserving and getting rid of those attitudes
 and those practices that are worth getting rid of. And when people
 say to me do you believe in change my answer is I believe in change
 if it's for the better but if it's for the worse or if it's
 simply neutral then I'm not in favour of it. And that is the
 attitude we ought to take. Beware of those people who say that change
 just for the sake of experimentation is something you ought to embrace.
 But equally have the courage to throw out something which is clearly
 working against our interests. And it's in that context that
 we have approached economic, industrial relations and other change
 since we've been in office.
We want to reform the Australian waterfront not because we want to
 destroy the Maritime Union of Australia, or we want to prevent trade
 unionists working on the Australian waterfront. We want to reform
 the Australian waterfront because that will be good for the Australian
 economy. We want to reform the Australian waterfront because that
 will create more jobs and generate more investment and make Australia
 a more competitive exporter in an increasingly competitive world trading
 environment.
We reduced the budget deficit because that made Australia stronger
 and more secure and it has meant that against the background of the
 Asian economic turbulence that we are a much more stable society that
 we might otherwise have been. Equally when we turn our gaze to the
 next great area of economic change that will be good for Australia
 - that is taxation reform - we view it not as turning the world on
 its head, not as a revolution, we see it rather as the next necessary
 desirable change to further strengthen the Australian economy. We
 want a new tax system because the present one is not good enough.
 We want a new tax system because the present one is not fair enough.
 We want a new indirect tax system because the present one penalises
 exporters. We are one of the few great trading nations in the world
 that has a taxation system that actually penalises Australians that
 want to sell goods and services overseas. And that's the reason
 why we have to get rid of the present system because it's hurting
 Australia. When we line up against nations that have a different indirect
 tax system, an indirect tax system that does not impose any penalty
 on inputs to the manufacture of goods that we sell overseas we are
 at a disadvantage. Because the present system does impose that penalty
 and that alone is argument enough for changing the present system.
So tax reform is not about revolution. Tax reform is about the evolutionary
 building of further advantages and further protections for the Australian
 economy and for the Australian community. It's about making Australia
 a more competitive nation. It's about removing the unfairness
 of a wholesale tax system that says that if you can afford to buy
 a Lear jet you don't pay any indirect tax, but if you're
 like most of us and can only afford a family car you pay twenty-two
 per cent. It's about a taxation system that back in the 1950s
 said that you only paid the top marginal rate of tax if you earned
 in Australia in today's dollar terms about $500 or $600,000 a
 year. But now you pay that top marginal rate of tax if you earn something
 round $50,000 a year. And by the time we get to the year 2000 it will
 be down to around $39,000 a year. Now we can't go on with that
 kind of taxation system. That's why we want to change it. There's
 nothing revolutionary or radical about that, to me it is plain up
 and down common sense and that's what tax reform is about, is
 adopting a common sense sensible measured approach to change that
 will make Australia a better country. There are very few nations on
 earth left with the indirect tax system that we have at the present
 time because most of them have had the wit to realise that such an
 indirect taxation system works to Australia's disadvantage.
We're not going to introduce a tax system that is going to hurt
 the poor. One of things I'm very proud about is the way in which
 my government has maintained the social security safety net in this
 country. I think we are long past the day when there's any serious
 argument in Australia about the desirability of having a social security
 safety net. We don't believe in anybody being allowed to rort
 the welfare system anymore than we believe that people at the top
 end of town should be able to escape their taxation liability. They
 shouldn't be, because it's unfair and it imposes an unfair
 burden on the rest of us and the great bulk of wage and salary earners
 who are in no position to take advantage of fancy and dubious arrangements.
 I want to make it very clear that our tax reform will be directed
 to ensure that people who are escaping their fair share of the tax
 burden will be required under those reforms to do so, and any suggestion
 to the contrary is completely wrong. But we need tax reform because
 it will further strengthen us and because it's a necessary next
 step in the process of making Australia ever stronger, more stable
 and more secure against the background of what is occurring in our
 region.
Ladies and gentlemen over the next few months we will of course be
 unveiling the details of our taxation policy. But we'll be going
 to the next election whenever it is being held against a background
 of very significant achievement over the time that we have been in
 government. We have been willing to tackle issues of long term importance
 to the Australian community. We have strengthened the economy. We
 have improved industrial relations. We have reasserted the rights
 of the mainstream of the Australian community against the clamouring
 of noisy minorities without being insensitive to the responsibilities
 of government to look after the vulnerable and the weak and the disadvantaged
 within our community. We have adjusted Australia's foreign policy
 so that whilst we preserve the great priority of our relations with
 the Asia-Pacific region, we haven't ignored the very important
 linkages that this country has with Britain and the rest of Europe
 and with the nations of North America. I have frequently said that
 Australia occupies a unique intersection of history, geography, culture
 and economic circumstance in this part of the world. We are a projection
 of western civilisation in the Asia-Pacific region. We are a nation
 that has very strong historical links with Europe. We have deep bonds
 of shared democracy and liberal values with the nations of North America
 and we are located in the Asia-Pacific region. And our own society
 has been enriched through the immigration into this country of hundreds
 of thousands of people from the Asia-Pacific region. And when you
 put all of that together it gives us a great advantage, it gives us
 a place in history and geography and culture and economic circumstance
 that no other nation on earth can possibly occupy. And if we are sensible
 and positive and if we don't see those historical and economic
 and cultural linkages as being mutually exclusive but rather blending
 together to give us a unique position in this time of history then
 we have an enormous opportunity to build a very special society playing
 a very special role in this part of the world.
So we'll be able to go the next election whenever it is held
 proud of the record of economic stability and reform, proud of the
 fact that we have given Australia a proper role in the world and the
 affairs of the world and also having a practical vision and a solid
 set of values as we go into the next century.
But can I just finally address a few words to all of you as members
 of the Liberal Party organisation. Election campaigns are not won
 by members of parliament alone, they're not even principally
 won by members of parliament. They are won by the combined grassroots
 efforts of the men and women who make up the rank and file of political
 parties. I need your help whenever the election is. My colleagues
 need your help and all of us together need to mount a very strong
 and effective grassroots election campaign. Election campaigns are
 never easy. They are becoming harder each time in this country because
 we now live in a state where politics is a lot less tribal than it
 used to be and there are fewer people in the Australian community
 whose political allegiance is permanently rusted on to one or other
 side of politics. And there are a lot more people swinging around
 in the middle and therefore you can have significant movement one
 way or the other within a very short period of time. So I don't
 take anything for granted. From the moment I was elected two and a
 quarter years ago I said that we couldn't take the result of
 the next election for granted and that remains the case.
But I'm greatly encouraged by the unity and the strength of our
 own parliamentary party. I'm greatly encouraged by the support
 that I've received from the organisation and I'm greatly
 encouraged by the fact that in the face of very considerable difficulty
 and adversity on a number of issues the Government has gone the distance
 and stayed the course and the public is beginning to appreciate and
 to respect that and to understand that and to see that as a great
 strength. There are always times in public life, there are always
 times in the lives of political leaders, in the lives of government,
 when you're going to go through periods when everybody is criticising
 you and everybody is expressing doubt about the wisdom of the course
 that you are following. And like every other government worth its
 salt we have gone through periods like that over the last two and
 a quarter years. But because our cause has been right and our objectives
 have been in the national interest we have stuck to our course and
 that has been evident in areas like economic reform. There were plenty
 of critics eighteen months, a year ago, who said we'd gone too
 far. There aren't many of them now. They're very grateful
 that we did do what we did a couple of years ago. And they're
 very grateful that it was a couple of years ago and not this budget.
 And they're very grateful that we had the foresight and the determination
 to do it. There are people who were critical, our opponents in particular,
 of some of the things we have done in respect of industrial relations,
 but we've stuck to course and we're going to continue to
 pursue the course. We're going to continue to pursue the cause
 of waterfront reform for example, because it's in Australia's
 interest that it be achieved. That's what governments are elected
 to do. There's never any point in being in government if you
 don't do something with it. There's nothing more pathetic
 in public life than to be given high office and be elected to a position
 of power and responsibility and then squander the opportunity that
 that great gift from the people gives you. And that has been something
 that has very significantly affected the way in which we have conducted
 the affairs of government.
But ladies and gentlemen I'm very proud on behalf of the Federal
 Government to give this report, to map out the choice that lies ahead
 of the Australian people. Whether we continue down the path of stability,
 security and safety or whether we go backwards and put at risk the
 achievements of the last couple of years in particular go back to
 the era of high debt, high deficit and high interest rates and high
 unemployment that was the legacy that we inherited from Mr Beazley
 and from Mr Keating.
Ladies and gentlemen again my very warm thanks for the tremendous
 support that you've given me and given my government over the
 last couple of years and I look forward with great enthusiasm to the
 challenge of the weeks and the months ahead.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Skurnik, to the Ambassador, Consul-General,
 Mr Oystragh, Dr Goldman, to Mr Aqualina representing the NSW Government,
 to my predecessor, Bob Hawke, to the former Premier of NSW, Neville
 Wran and to other distinguished guests including my colleague, Mr
 Andrew Thomson, the Federal Member for Wentworth, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a particular honour for me to be here today to do a number of
 things on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia to
 congratulate the congregation and particularly the Jewish community
 of Sydney on this wonderful event. It's made special for me by
 the fact that the original building destroyed so tragically in 1994
 was opened in February of 1960 by the former Prime Minister of Australia,
 Sir Robert Menzies.
This is a wonderful occasion for your community and it is an opportunity
 for me on behalf of your fellow Australians to express my and their
 admiration for the contribution of your community to the life of our
 country over such a long period of time. It is important on occasions
 such as this to pause for a moment and to honour the contribution
 of a community and to recognise the integral role that the Jews of
 Australia have played in the life of our nation over such a long period
 of time. Their contribution, your contribution, has been in every
 field of endeavour. It has been in the professions, in law, in medicine,
 in engineering, in architecture. It has been in politics, it has been
 in sport. It has produced probably the greatest military leader that
 Australia has seen. Two Governors-General of Australia have been of
 the Jewish faith and wherever people look through the history of our
 country, we can find an honourable contribution by the Jewish community
 of our nation. And what you have done in rebuilding this synagogue
 in such a short period of time is a tribute to your commitments and
 to the loyalty of those things that you hold dear. And it is an opportunity
 for me on behalf of the rest of the Australian community to salute
 that contribution and to thank you for what you have collectively
 done to make our nation a better place in which to live.
It is also appropriate that this new synagogue is open in the 50th
 year of the foundation of the state of Israel in 1948. No country
 could have had its birth in more difficult, hostile, unwelcoming circumstances.
 Yet against enormous odds over that 50 year period, the state of Israel
 has not only survived but it's prospered and it has been a beacon
 of freedom in the Middle East. Successive Australian governments have
 defended the territorial integrity and have supported the right of
 Israel to peacefully exist within secure boundaries. And I take this
 opportunity, on behalf of my Government, of reaffirming the continuity
 of that support and our determination consists of that support to
 see a lasting peace achieved in the Middle East.
This is also an occasion, of course, to celebrate the spiritual life
 of our nation. To honour and respect the role of spiritual values
 whatever form they may take within our community. And when we think
 of those values, we think of the future and we think of hope and even
 in the most difficult circumstances we can find hope. Particularly
 today I believe many people around the world will find hope that after
 long decades of hatred and destruction, the people of the Irish Republic
 and of Northern Ireland have apparently taken a path towards peace.
 And that is the source of hope that even in the most difficult circumstances
 the difficulties and hatreds of the past can be overcome.
It is also, of course, very understandably a moment for the Jewish
 community here today and around Australia to reflect upon the tragedies
 that have befallen your community in other parts of the world. And
 of course to remember those who've suffered in such awful circumstances.
 And for all of us to resolve that such events can never again let
 overtake any part of humanity or any part of the world.
And finally, ladies and gentlemen, it is for me a very distinct, personal
 pleasure to be here today. My association with the Jewish community,
 particularly of Sydney, long predates my entry into public life. And
 very early in my life I enjoyed the warm embrace and the welcome and
 the sense of community, the sense of family, the sense of commitment
 to make which has been a hallmark of the Jewish community in Australia.
And I want to take this very public opportunity of thanking that community
 for the friendship that it has extended to me both inside and outside
 public life. This is a great community occasion. It's an opportunity
 to thank those who have dedicated themselves to rebuilding the synagogue.
 It is an opportunity to salute the expansion and the diversification
 of the cultural life of the Jewish community here in Sydney. A great
 investment in your schools and other community activities. And to
 recognise the fact that this building and all the surrounds to it
 will become a very important part in the life of your community. It's
 an occasion for celebration. It's an occasion for thanksgiving.
 It's an occasion for reflecting on all of those great things
 that we have in common as Australians.
And ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for honouring me and
 on behalf of your fellow Australians, on behalf of the Government
 I send you my warmest good wishes. I thank you for the contribution
 you make to the life and soul of Sydney and to the Australian nation
 and I have enormous pleasure in officially declaring this new Central
 Synagogue, I understand the largest in the southern hemisphere, I
 have great pleasure in declaring it, in a secular sense, well and
 truly open.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mr Morgan, to Mr Peter
   Sturrock, to my parliamentary colleagues, Ambassadors, High Commissioners,
   ladies and gentlemen. I'm delighted to address the Chamber
   not for the first time, but certainly for the first time as Prime
   Minister. And I do so against the backdrop of what has been a quite
   remarkable year for your industry. And I want to offer some congratulations.
   I first of all want to congratulate the industry in all its facets
   for a particularly successful year. To have reached record levels
   of sales of units in 1997 of some 723,000 is no mean achievement,
   and warm congratulations are due to all of you, not only to your
   companies but also to your employees because those kinds of results,
   including the profit results which were alluded to by Mr Morgan
   of course cannot be achieved by companies and their executives alone,
   but also involve the very considerable efforts of the men and women
   who are employed by the various companies that make up the industry.
It's not only been a remarkable year for your
   industry because of the number of motor vehicles that have been
   sold in Australia and the success of the other parts of the industry,
   it's also been a remarkable year because there has been a great
   deal of policy activity which is not only directly borne on your
   industry in relation to the decisions the Government took last year,
   but also more generally the industry policy that the government
   has laid down principally through the Investing for Growth
   statement that I delivered on behalf of the Government in December
   last year.
In this context I want to express my own personal
   thanks to John Moore, my Industry Minister, the person who interfaces
   most with your industry, and also Tim Fischer the Trade Minister,
   who also plays a very important role in relations between your industry
   and my government. We saw in 1997 exports grow in your industry
   to $2.65 billion. We saw largely, but not only as a consequence
   of the decisions taken by the government, we saw major investment
   announcements made by a number of the major companies which operate
   here in Australia. Those investment announcements, and the jobs
   that will flow from those investment announcements, are an important
   element of building confidence in Australian manufacturing industry.
   And they are also a direct dividend of the decisions that were taken
   by my Government and announced in June of last year.
I share Mr Morgan's remarks regarding the
   cooperative process that occurred before those decisions were announced.
   Making decisions about the long-term environment in which such a
   basic industry as motor manufacturing will operate, making those
   decisions are very important moments in the economic and industry
   life of any government. If the decisions are wrong, if the wrong
   settings are put down and the wrong signals given, then the consequences
   can be felt for years into the future. 
That particular industry decision generated an
   enormous amount of debate within the Australian community. There
   was no shortage at the time of simplistic solutions that were urged
   upon the Government by those who wanted one or other outcome. In
   the end we took a decision which I believe reflected both economic
   and industrial realism. I said before the decision was taken that
   I could not imagine Australia without a motor manufacturing industry
   into the foreseeable future. But the idea that we wouldn't
   take decisions that would give a sense of basic stability and security
   and confidence to the industry was unthinkable. Equally, we did
   have APEC obligations and world trade obligations more generally
   speaking. And I believe that the decision that was taken in relation
   to the tariff pause between the year 2000 and 2005 on the understanding
   that there would be a further move down in tariffs in the year 2005
   reflected precisely the right balance which it was the responsibility
   of the Government to find.
And I believe the other aspects of the decision
   which Mr Morgan referred to and the very positive response that
   it received from all sectors of the industry is evidence of the
   balance that was involved in it. And I believe that we have provided
   a stable, predictable and secure investment framework and climate
   for the industry. And we look forward in the years ahead to a repetition,
   perhaps not in the precise numbers, but certainly in the general
   direction, a repetition of the extremely successful year that your
   industry has enjoyed in 1997.
We live as all of you know in a very turbulent
   part of the world economically. Since you last met a year ago, the
   economic situation in the Asian-Pacific region has deteriorated
   significantly. A number of countries, Indonesia, Korea and Thailand
   in particular, have needed substantial rescue packages from the
   International Monetary Fund. And I'm particularly proud that
   our own country has been strong enough to be, along with Japan,
   the only two countries in the world that have participated in those
   three rescue packages.
And our capacity to do that has been a direct result
   of our underlying economic strengths and a direct result of the
   economic policies we began to put in place when we were elected
   in March of 1996. If we had not strengthened our fiscal position,
   if we had not reduced our government outlays, if we had not sought
   to move from a budget deficit to a budget surplus, if we had not
   as a result seen significant reductions in interest rates and inflation,
   we would not have been in a position to help, through the IMF, those
   three countries.
It is equally fair to say that if we had not seen
   major reductions in interest rates over the last couple of years
   I do not believe that your industry would have experienced the boom
   in sales that it did, particularly in 1997. Because lower interest
   rates mean that more people, particularly young people buying into
   the cheaper end of the market have a greater capacity to involve
   themselves in motor car purchases than would otherwise be the case.
   And lower housing repayments and obligations in that area free disposable
   income for investment in the purchase of other goods, including
   motor vehicles.
The events in the Asia-Pacific region have not
   of course left Australia untouched, but it is fair to say that the
   impact of those events has been less than many feared when the deterioration
   commenced and certainly a lot less than would have been the case
   if the corrective measures I've alluded to had not been undertaken
   by the Government beginning in March of 1996. We are being affected,
   but we are not being hurt and affected to the extent that we would
   have been if we had followed a more lax and permissive approach
   to economic management.
What we have endeavoured to do over the last two
   years, be it in the area of motor vehicle policy, be it in the area
   of repairing the budget situation we inherited, be it in the area
   of industrial relations reform, all of those moves, all of those
   reforms have been directed towards strengthening the Australian
   economy. And I'm particularly pleased that we committed ourselves
   down that path two years ago because if we had not done so then
   we would have been more severely buffeted by the events in Asia
   than has turned out to be the case.
And all of our reform measures, be they ones in
   the past or be they ones in the future, are directed to one goal
   and one goal alone, and that is to strengthen the Australian economy
   and to give to the Australian economy a capacity to not only survive
   but to prosper in a very competitive world environment. And it's
   in that context that I turn very briefly to an area of economic
   reform which is crying aloud for attention, and that is the area
   of taxation reform.
Now I know that there is great interest in taxation
   reform in your industry. If ever there was a sector of the Australian
   economy which is penalised and denied the full results of its competitive
   effort and achievement, it is in the area of export manufacturing.
   And of course your own industry knows how counter-productive, penal
   and old-fashioned is the existing indirect taxation system in this
   country. And if one were looking in abstract, and one never does,
   at the Australian economy, one would have to conclude that there
   is something fundamentally myopic about a country maintaining an
   indirect tax system which we do at present which directly penalises
   people who wish to sell manufactured goods abroad. And that of course
   is precisely the situation in relation to your industry. And one
   of the strongest possible arguments for taxation reform in the area
   of indirect taxation is to replace the existing indirect taxation
   system with a taxation system that gives greater incentive and a
   fairer go to those who export manufactured goods from this country.
Now there are many arguments in favour of taxation
   reform but of all of them in the industry area none is more compelling
   and none is more incontestable than the proposition that the existing
   wholesale tax system blatantly discriminates against manufacturers
   and particularly discriminates against manufacturers who are involved
   in export.
We see taxation reform ladies and gentlemen as
   the next logical step in the further strengthening of the Australian
   economy. We don't see it as a revolution. We don't see
   it as a process of turning the Australian economy on its head. Rather
   we see it is a sensible further step to strengthen the Australian
   economy, to arm it with a more competitive ambience in the outside
   world, to give to it the break that more competitive taxation systems
   that other countries employ give to the export industries of those
   nations. Now, people will say it is hard, people will say it is
   risky, but at the end of the day it is the responsibility of the
   Government that is interested in the medium and the longer term
   to design and structure policies which will strengthen Australia
   in the medium to the longer term. 
We are at the moment enjoying probably the strongest
   economic fundamentals that this country has had for 25 years. You
   have to go back that long or further to find interest rates that
   are as low as they are now. We have the lowest inflation rate in
   the OECD area. We have very strong levels of business investment.
   We hope by the turn of the century, even without the sale of the
   remaining two-thirds of Telstra to have halved our government debt
   to GDP ratio from the level it was in 1995, and if we are successful
   in relation to the sale of the remaining two-thirds of Telstra,
   we will reduce it to a bare 1.5% of GDP compared with a level of
   20% of GDP in 1995. 
Now, that represents a very strong economic framework,
   but it doesn't represent an economic framework that I feel
   in any way complacent about, or one that should encourage us to
   rest on our laurels. As you know as business men and women, competing
   in the world is always about winning today's race. You can
   never derive any satisfaction in saying that my time was a lot faster
   than the time of an Australian competitor 20 years ago. You've
   got to win today's race to survive, you've got to win
   today's race and look forward to winning tomorrow's in
   order to make a decent profit. 
And so it is with the management of an economy.
   Having achieved one reform goal and having been able to say that
   the economic foundations of the country are in very good shape,
   you must then go on to achieving the next goal. You must ask yourself
   what is the next logical step that will strengthen the Australian
   economy and enable it to win the next race and to win it very comfortably.
   In our view, that next step is the very important one of taxation
   reform. When I look back at the last 15 or 20 years of economic
   management in Australia and I think of the barriers to competitiveness
   that existed 20 years ago, and I think of how one by one those barriers
   in different ways have been modified or removed, I think we have
   been quite successful and quite mature as a country with our approach
   to economic management. 
But in the area of taxation reform, we've
   had a few goes in the past but haven't been very successful,
   and it is a challenge to our maturity, our capacity to look to the
   medium to longer term, our willingness to worry about the kind of
   21st Century economically that we are going to leave to our children
   and grandchildren, it's in that context that we need to look
   at those remaining areas of reform that need to be addressed. 
So it is against that background ladies and gentlemen
   that we are looking of course, and we'll be unveiling to the
   Australian public the outline of our plans to reform and re-shape
   the Australian taxation system. They are about making Australia
   a more competitive nation. They are about improving the opportunities
   for Australian manufacturers to export and export successfully,
   and they are about looking to the medium and longer term prosperity
   and strength of the Australian economy.
I want to take this opportunity again of thanking
   the industry for the contribution that it has made to the Australian
   economy over many years, and the contribution particularly that
   it as made in recent years. I want to congratulate the new members
   of the Automotive Trade Council, David Morgan, Sam Komori, Jim Wiemils,
   Mike Quinn, John MacKenzie, Bruce Griffiths, Grant Anderson and
   Graham Bulmer. The Automotive Trade Council will be charged with
   directing the market access and development strategy and the council
   will have a four year charter to deliver the markets which will
   secure the industry's future. The Council will be aided by
   Ian Grigg as my Government's special automotive envoy and he
   will spearhead representations to foreign Governments and companies
   with a view to winning market access, two way investment and strategic
   integration into global supply chains. It has been a very good year
   for the industry, it's been a momentus year, a year of very
   frank and direct exchange between the Government and the industry,
   a year in which long term stability was provided to the industry
   by the decisions of the Government. I look forward very enthusiastically
   to a continuation of that partnership and the opportunity in the
   future to again hear of the great success of the industry and of
   the contribution that it continues to make to the Australian economy.
   Thank you very much.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much to Rob Borbidge the Premier of Queensland,
   to Joan Sheldon, the Deputy Premier and Treasurer, to Russell Cooper
   the Minister for Police and State member for Crows Nest. I used
   to live next door to Crows Nest but there aren't as many sheep
   in Crows Nest Sydney as there are in Crows Nest Queensland. But
   to my Federal colleague, the Minister for Veterans Affairs, Bruce
   Scott, Bill Taylor the Member for Groom, Senator Bill O'Chee,
   Mr Healy, one of the local State members, Bob Carroll, the State
   President of the Liberal Party and Ian Macfarlane, the Liberal candidate
   for Groom at the next election and anybody else I have missed, ladies
   and gentlemen.
It's a tremendous joy for me to be here this morning. One
   of the best things about being Prime Minister is the opportunity
   to travel around our vast country and to meet different communities
   in their own local centres. And to somebody who grew up in Sydney
   it is always a particular delight to get out into the bush and therefore
   when the opportunity presented itself this morning to be associated
   with this very important project, which is going to be supported
   as you will see in a moment out of the Federation Fund, I leapt
   at that opportunity.
Eighteen months ago when we brought down the 1997 Budget we decided
   that we would make available an amount of $1 billion to fund important
   projects all around Australia which would mark the Centenary of
   Federation in a particular fashion. They wouldn't just be ordinary
   public works programmes, although some of them have a high content
   of what could be so described as public works. But they'd also
   have a little bit of historical significance where they could and
   they'd also relate to a project that part of Australia for
   a long time had wanted to see funded. And in that context, one of
   the first announcements that we made was funding towards the construction
   of the Darwin to Alice Springs railway. Something that governments
   within Australia have been talking about almost since federation
   and had really not got around to doing anything about. We also announced
   funding for the Jervois Bay infrastructure program in Western Australia
   that's designed to support the export industries of Western
   Australia which, along with the export industries of Queensland,
   make such an enormous contribution to the national export effort.
And so when we came to Queensland there were a number of very important
   features that struck me about the federation projects. The first
   was that just about every project put up by the Queensland Government
   was worthy of financial support. Unfortunately we didn't have
   a fund of $5 billion, we had a fund of only $1 billion. But I must
   compliment the Queensland Government on the quality of the projects
   that were put forward. And I am very happy to say that the first
   project that we decided to fund which Jones referred to, Bris Tram,
   a $65 million contribution. That was number one on the list from
   the Queensland Government. And the cultural heritage trail which
   we are going to support and which this woolshed is a very important
   part and really epitomises what it is all about. It was also very
   high on the list and therefore I am delighted to say that the Federal
   Government will contribute the sum of $50 million from the Federation
   Fund to the Queensland cultural heritage network.
Now as the Premier said, this network will remind the Queenslanders
   of the turn of the century of what life was like a hundred years
   ago or more. And it is a fact that wherever you live in Australia
   as we approach the centenary of the federation of our country people
   are becoming more and more nostalgic about the events that led to
   federation. They are becoming more respectful of the past. They
   are wanting to preserve links with the past and they are wanting
   to, I guess, educate their children and themselves about what life
   was like a hundred years ago. And this marvellous woolshed is really
   a tribute to that attitude, to that state of mind. And it is really
   wonderful to see all the names on the beams. I was reminded this
   morning that one of the names on the beams, R J Randall, Dick Randall
   was probably the longest serving secretary of the Treasury that
   Australia has ever had. And his signature has probably appeared
   on more bank notes over a longer period of time than any other head
   of the Treasury. And as I look around it is a marvellously and lovingly
   restored and cared for building. And I think it is very important
   that Australians of this generation do visit places like this. And
   the rest of the trail is in the same vein. There is the coastway
   trail as Rob said from Brisbane to Thursday Island. There is the
   North Queensland mining and dinosaur trail. The very important Matilda
   Trail through central Queensland and, of course, the Southern Downs
   Squatters Trail around the Toowoomba area. And it will be a marvellously
   integrated project. It won't be just a series of disjointed
   ideas. There will be a theme about it and there will be a pattern
   to it and it will present an integrated idea of what life is like
   and a reminder of the great cultural heritage of this part of Australia.
   It will generate 2150 jobs in the construction phase and many ongoing
   jobs after that. And it will be responsible for promoting a lot
   of additional local economic activity. And the way in which it is
   structured is, of course, in recognition of the special character
   of Queensland. The one State in Australia where the bulk of the
   people do not live in the capital city of the State and it gives
   to the State of Queensland that very special character.
But ladies and gentlemen, in every sense of the word, this particular
   proposition put forward by the Queensland Government suited the
   criteria of the Federation Fund. And I was very happy along with
   all of my colleagues to give it very strong support. And I congratulate
   the Queensland Government in what it's done in putting it forward.
Can I just say two other things and the first of those and, very
   importantly, I am delighted to be here with Rob Borbidge and with
   Joan Sheldon. There is a Queensland election in two weeks time 
   so I've read and heard! And may I say that I am happy to stand
   shoulder-to- shoulder in every way with both of them and to support
   the Queensland Government in all that it has done since it was elected
   three years ago. I've had a very close association with the
   Premier of Queensland during that period of time. I have dealt with
   a lot of Premiers, both as Prime Minister and as Treasurer, as Opposition
   Leader and in other positions. And there is none that I have enjoyed
   dealing with more than I have dealing with Rob Borbidge. He is a
   person who has always put the interest of Queensland first and that
   is his responsibility and that is his job and he has done it very,
   very well. And I would never respect a State Premier who didn't
   try and put the interests of his or her State first. I'd think
   something had gone wrong with Federal/State relations if that didn't
   happen. But within that, he has also at all times been a very good
   Australian and he has always seen to the national interest as well.
   And on some occasions I know, and I thank him for it. He has taken
   a bit of political pain in Queensland to support the national interest
   and I respect that and I thank him very warmly for that. 
And can I just say that when I read some of the things that are
   written and said about the Queensland election I sometimes wonder
   that some of the commentators need a bit of a reality check. There
   is only one question in that election and that is whether Rob Borbidge
   continues to be the Premier of Queensland or Peter Beattie becomes
   the Premier of Queensland. Any noise on the side is irrelevant.
   I mean that is the choice, that's what it's about and
   that's what people should be concerning themselves about. I
   mean it is very easy when you don't have the faintest possibility
   of ever having to implement the promises you make in an election
   campaign to say all sorts of things. But when you know that at the
   end of the day the acid will be on you after polling day to actually
   do what you say, you then have to adopt a rather more responsible
   attitude. 
And it's very easy for minority groups in Australian politics,
   and there are plenty of them to run around offering simplistic solutions
   to difficult problems. To offer the earth whenever there's
   a tiny cell of discontent. To say: yes, I'll stop this, I'll
   do that, and I'll fund something else, knowing full well that
   they will never be asked to do it. That's the easiest, laziest
   and I think the most dishonourable option in politics. If you've
   been in politics a long time you know that at the end of the day
   you can't escape responsibility and you can't escape reality.
   You can't escape decent policy, you can't escape being
   honest with people about what you can and can't do. And I've
   found in Rob Borbidge a man of his word, a man of great honour,
   a great fighter for Queensland. 
If he'd have been at the first State of Origin game which
   I was at, I am very happy to say at the Sydney Football Stadium
   last Friday week. And I've got to tell you Prime Ministers
   are strictly neutral in State of Origin games  strictly neutral.
   I mean when the game was going, NSW go I was sandwiched between
   Nick Shahadie and John Laws and Nick in his inevitable style he
   said gee that was a pretty good start wasn't it John?'
   and I just sort of sat there and he said what's wrong
   with you?' and I said Prime Ministers are neutral Nick But
   you'd have been, of course, greatly delighted by the fantastic
   win that Queensland was able to snatch right at the final moment
   and I imagine there won't be too many neutral people at the
   second one. One of the great contributions that Queensland has made
   to Australian sport is a bi-partisan approach to State of Origin
   games.
But I am delighted to be here this morning and to wish the Queensland
   Government well and to say that as far as the Federal Government
   is concerned, I have a very simple minded view and that is that
   the interest of Queensland and the interest of Australia will be
   best served by the re-election of Government led by Rob Borbidge
   and Joan as Deputy Premier and I'll be delighted to continue
   the very close cooperation between our two governments.
Finally, can I simply say to you again, thank you for having me.
   It is a real delight for a Sydney boy to get out of the big smoke,
   to get away from Sydney, to get away from Canberra and to spend
   some time in rural Australia. I am very fond of Toowoomba. I don't
   think there's an inland city in Australia, which is more beautiful,
   and I am looking forward to spending a bit of time there later on
   today. But particularly to those associated with the Jondaryn Woolshed.
   To those associated with the activities of the Cultural Heritage
   Network here in Oakey Creek, congratulations on the tremendous work
   that you are doing. We all feel particularly warm about the bush
   as part of our Australian heritage and this is a magnificent contribution
   to it and the Federal Government is delighted to be associated with
   the Queensland Government in support of it. Thank you very much.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well thank you very much Bill Taylor, to Ian and Karen Macfarlane,
   to Cameron Thompson, the Liberal candidate for Blair, to the Mayor,
   other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is for me,
   a great pleasure, a particular pleasure to be back in what I regard
   as the most attractive inland city in Australia. 
And if you think that's one of those campaign trail things
   which is adjusted for every inland city I go to, I can produce some
   evidence that it's not. But it really is great to be back here
   in Toowoomba and I do want to start by thanking Bill Taylor for
   the ten years of tremendous public service that he's given
   to the people of Groom. This electorate which used to be called
   the electorate of Darling Downs, has not had a harder working more
   dedicated member, and he's brought to his parliamentary representation
   very great integrity, very great commitment. He's always put
   the interests of his party and his country ahead of his own personal
   interests. And sometimes in political life you come across people
   who don't always behave like that, but in the case of Bill
   he has been a very honourable, as well as a very effective representative.
And I, on behalf of the Government, and all of my colleagues, warmly
   thank him for the contribution that he's made to our Party
   and I warmly thank him for the contribution that he's made,
   not only to the people of Toowoomba, but also to the people of the
   whole Groom electorate. 
And may I also on another local note, and particularly for some
   of the older members who are present today, tell you that I had
   the enormous privilege when I visited the Hellfire Pass area of
   Thailand, to open the Hellfire Pass museum, which commemorates the
   terrible suffering of the Australian men who died in captivity in
   WWII building the notorious Burma Thailand Railway. I invited along
   with my party, three former Federal Members of Parliament and Ministers
    two Liberal, and one Labor  as befits an occasion that
   belongs to all Australians, and not to one side of politics. And
   all of them had been prisoners of war of the Japanese, and one of
   them of course was the former Federal Member for what was then called
   the electorate of Darling Downs, Sir Reginald Schwartz. And at the
   age of 87, Reg Schwartz was still in great spirits, in great heart
   and the privilege of talking to him and sharing with him some of
   his recollections of those terrible days, and the suffering involved
   was a very moving part of my visit and one of the moving things
   that I've experienced since becoming Prime Minister.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I don't know when the next election,
   federally, is going to be held. I know there is a State election
   here in Queensland on the thirteenth of June. I said out at the
   woolshed, when we announced our contribution to the Federation Fund,
   I said that I stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Rob Borbidge and Joan
   Sheldon. I said what I believed and that is that Rob Borbidge has
   been an extremely good Premier of Queensland. I also said that there
   was really only one choice that Queenslanders had to make on the
   thirteenth of June and that was whether or not Rob Borbidge or Peter
   Beattie would be the Premier of Queensland after the thirteenth
   of June, because they are the only two results that are possible.
   There is no other result possible. It is very easy for minor parties
   to promise the earth, to run populist campaigns offering simplistic
   solutions. Government in modern society is complicated and difficult.
   There are no simplistic, easy, populist solutions, because if there
   were they would have been tried by our political predecessors years
   and years ago. 
I can tell you there is one thing that I believed when I came into
   Government and my belief has not altered and that is that there
   are never in relation to the difficult problems facing the country
   or a State, there are never easy, simple populist solutions. And
   I say beware of people who offer easy populist solutions, because
   they could never deliver them. And I suspect they offer them because
   they know they will never be called on to deliver them, and that
   observation applies in relation to minor parties of any description
   and minor parties that have no real prospect of wielding power and
   exercising authority. Because it is only the prospect of actually
   having the responsibility of implementing what you say you are going
   to achieve that really brings about a sense of reality and sense
   of responsibility in political leaders and political parties. So
   I would simply say to the people of Queensland that the choice is
   Borbidge or Beattie and nobody else, and that choice ought not to
   be complicated by listening to the insubstantial inducements of
   populist solutions which in reality offer no solutions at all. 
I mentioned that when I became Prime Minister I realised that there
   were no easy solutions. And so has been the case over the last two-and-a-quarter
   years. But I'm immensely proud of what my Government has been
   able to achieve during that period of time, and in the economic
   area, that's been achieved against the background of something
   that we didn't know would happen, and nobody knew it would
   happen, when we were elected to Government in March of 1996, and
   that is the economic downturn in the Asia-Pacific region. Nobody
   was telling us in March of 1996 that that was going to happen, or
   if they were telling us, they didn't take the care to write
   it down, so they could now prove that they were telling us. The
   reality is that the Asian economic downturn has overtaken our part
   of the world and overtaken the world without any forewarning. And
   despite that, despite the fact that that downturn was unexpected
   and despite the fact that it has imposed some strains and some pressure
   on the Australian economy, we have really performed in our part
   of the world, infinitely better than any other country. And I would
   say to the Australian people all over our country, that what we
   have been able to do, particularly through our economic management
   is to deliver three things. We've delivered security, we've
   delivered safety, and we've delivered stability against the
   background of an enormous amount of economic turbulence.
And I can just very briefly take you through some of the evidence
   in support of that statement. We do now have thankfully, the lowest
   housing interest rates that this country has had since the late
   1960s. We've now got the lowest small business interest rates
   that we've had since the early 1970s. The average homebuyer
   in Australia is now the equivalent of $330 a month better off than
   what he or she was in March of 1996. Now, that is real money. That
   is unassailable, after tax money. And it is the equivalent of a
   $100 a week payrise, for a person paying off the average loan around
   Australia. Now, it does represent a very significant increase in
   the living standard and the economic security of people who are
   borrowing to pay off their home. Now, I recognise that low interest
   rates has different effects of different sections of the population.
   I know that it is terrific news if you are a borrower. The news
   is not so flash if you are a lender, and in recognition of that,
   of course, the Government undertook a number of measures. One of
   them we promised in the last election campaign for self-funded retirees,
   in relation to their tax threshold, and I'm also very happy
   to say that in the last Budget, we announced a major extension of
   the Seniors' Health Card for self-funded retirees. And the
   impact of that is that a self-funded retired couple earning up to
   the very large sum of $67 000 a year between them, or about $40
   000 a single person that those people will qualify in future for
   the Seniors' Health Card, they will qualify with effect from
   the first of January of next year. And that is a recognition that
   they are a section of the population who have very carefully saved
   for their retirement and understandably feel on occasions that perhaps
   there has been insufficient recognition of the contribution that
   their thriftiness has made to the overall economic welfare of the
   nation. 
SO, on the interest rate front, there's some very good evidence
   of what we have achieved. On the inflation front, we have now the
   lowest inflation rate in the industrialised world. And very importantly
   on the Budget front, we inherited a deficit on an annual basis from
   Mr Beazley and Mr Keating, of $10.5 billion and in just over two
   years, we have converted that into a surplus this year in prospect
   of $2.7 billion. Now that surplus won't mould away in the bank.
   That surplus will be used to pay off the accumulated debts over
   a period of years that we inherited from the former Government.
   I mean, without burdening you with statistics, it was calculated
   that when we came into office we inherited about $95 to $100 billion
   dollars of accumulated Federal Government debt and that represented
   a few years ago about 20% of our annual wealth generation as a nation.
   And on our calculations, if all of our policies are implemented,
   including the privatisation of the remaining two-thirds of Telstra,
   we will by the turn of the century have reduced that 20% to a bare
   1.5% of our annual wealth generation. Now, that is a remarkable
   achievement because as you all know, just as a household, a farm,
   a small business, or indeed a large business, cannot go indefinitely
   living beyond its means. So it is with a nation. And the debt burden
   hanging over a country is really a representation of the pawning
   of our children's future and our children's economic livelihood
   and stability years into the future. And I would like to think that
   my Government will be seen in time as the Government that delivered
   a relatively debt free 21st Century to future generations
   of Australians. Because a debt burden is a burden of enormous proportions.
   It is a burden that eats up income that you earn. It's a burden
   that prevents you doing things and the more debt we pay off and
   the higher the surlpus we generate, the more capacity we have to
   do two things. To spend money needy areas, be they in the social
   area or the infrastructure area, and also of course to deliver reductions
   particularly in the areas of personal income tax. SO in those three
   areas, we have achieved an enormous amount. We've cut interest
   rates, we've got a record low inflation level and we've
   tackled, in a very successful and a very systematic way, the debt
   burden that we inherited.
So it is fair to claim, as I do very frequently and very proudly,
   but against a background of unanticipated economic turbulence, we
   have delivered that security, that stability, and that safety. But
   in other areas, we have also tackled fundamental reform that we've
   need to address for a very long time. And one of those areas of
   course is Industrial Relations reform. I've been campaigning
   for Industrial Relations reform in this country for a very long
   period of time. It was probably the policy issue for which I was
   best known when I became Leader of the Opposition again in January
   of 1995. And if there was one thing above all that I wanted to achieve
   when I got into office and that was to implement the promises that
   we'd made in relation to Industrial Relations.
And I am very pleased that that has occurred. We now have a much
   better Industrial Relations system. One of the areas, of course,
   where we've been very active is reform of the Australian waterfront.
   We need a more efficient waterfront. We need change in the industrial
   relations of the Australian waterfront. Not because we want to destroy
   a union, not because we object to trade unionists working on the
   waterfront. That has never been our policy. We want to change the
   Australian waterfront because it will be economically beneficial
   for Australia. And I think the industrial obscenity of the present
   arrangements on the waterfront are best epitomised by what is now
   happening in relation to that ship on the west coast of the United
   States. It goes over there with the frozen meat and because the
   American Union is mates with the MUA and the ALP, won't unload
   it. It's got to go back to New Zealand and it's got to
   be reloaded by what is regarded as acceptable labour and then go
   back to the West Coast in the United States. 
We all know what conditions that export is going to be in by the
   time it is finally taken off that ship. Now that, ladies and gentlemen,
   is an outrage. That, ladies and gentlemen, represents in a classic,
   unarguable case study, that represents what we are trying to change
   about the Australian waterfront. That is a metaphor for all of the
   things that are wrong with the Australian waterfront at the present
   time. And I know we have encountered the distance. I know we've
   incurred criticism from the media and from other sections of the
   Australian community. But I want you to know we are absolutely determined
   to continue pursuing fundamental reform to the Australian waterfront.
   And we are going to do it not because we have some ideological hang-up.
We are going to do it because it is good for Australia. That's
   why we are doing it. It will make Australia economically more efficient.
   It will help our exporters. It will stop Australia's waterfront
   being a laughing stock for the rest of the world. And I want personally
   to compliment Peter Reith my Industrial Relations Minister on the
   very steadfast and courageous role that he played in the face of
   some fierce and vicious criticism, intimidation and attack. And
   I admire very much the job that he has done. But when I talk about
   doing something in the national interests that, of course, brings
   me to the other steps that must be taken to further deliver the
   safety and security and the stability of the Australian economy.
   And that, of course, is the reform of our taxation system. And once
   again the goal to reform this system because it will be good for
   Australia. That's the reason we want to do it. I believe very
   strongly and it's based on almost 25 years of experience in
   public life, that you can persuade the Australian public of the
   need for reform and change if you satisfy two conditions. You must
   first of all persuade the Australian public that the change you
   want to make is in Australia's interest. In other words, it's
   in the national interest of our country that we bring about the
   change. And secondly, you've got to persuade them that the
   change you intend to make is fair. 
Now, I am applying that by theory to the cause of taxation reform.
   We do have an old-fashioned tax. We do have a tax system that penalises
   our exporters. We apply wholesale sales tax at various rates on
   some goods and on other goods we don't apply any rate of wholesale
   sales tax. Some of the rates are very high. We have a lot of anomalies.
   We charge 32 per cent for a television set. We charge 22 per cent
   for a family car. We charge nothing for caviar or if you are wealthy
   enough to buy a Lear jet, we don't' charge anything for
   that either, in sales tax that is. And so the list goes on and there
   is anomaly after anomaly in the system we have at the present time.
   But as a community that draws so much of its wealth to some of the
   great export industries of Australia, the economic sector most affected
   and most penalised by our present tax system is, of course, the
   export system. Because if we had a better indirect tax system we
   wouldn't tax the input to the goods that we send overseas and
   we'd be far more competitive in the trading activities of other
   countries. 
Our taxation policy will be released in plenty of time for the
   Australian people to examine it in detail before the election takes
   place. It will address the concerns people have about it being fair
   and equitable to low income earners. And all I would say in relation
   to our political opponents is that, like everything else, we know
   what they are against but we don't know what they are for.
   And I have searched in vain over the past few months to find one
   single new policy that the Labor Party has generated in the two-and-a-quarter
   years it's been in opposition. Now, I am prepared to accept
   for a year or eighteen months that a party that had been in power
   for 13 years couldn't be expected to reinvent the wheel in such
   a short period of time. I was prepared to accept that they had to
   go through some period of introspection and self examination and
   some period of policy renewal. That happens to any political movement
   after it goes into opposition from a long period of government.
   But that period of consultation and naval gazing to the Labor Party
   is now finished. They now have the obligation that they are putting
   themselves forward as an alternative government. They have an obligation
   of telling the Australian public what they believe in and what they
   stand for. We know they left us with a deficit of $10.5 billion
   and then to add insult to injury where they tried to stop us through
   the Senate from fixing up the mess that they concealed to the Australian
   public and left behind. 
We know that they tried to stop industrial relations reform. We
   know that they support the MUA's stranglehold on the Australian
   waterfront. We know that they are in favour of compulsory unionism.
   We also know that they are against taxation reform. Mr Beazley said
   last week that he wanted to keep the present wholesale tax system.
   So we know a lot of what they are opposed to but we have now real
   idea of what they are for. And part of the process to the lead up
   to an election is for the Government to say what it believes in
   and for the Opposition to say what it believes in. And then people
   have a look and they make a decision and they start the debate.
   Well only one player has come upon the stage so far and that is
   the Government. We are the only actor on the stage. We are the only
   show in town at the moment that is telling the Australian people
   what it believes in. We believe in making Australia strong and stable
   economically. We believe in fixing the industrial relations system.
   We believe in fixing the tax system. We believe in a sensible program
   of privatisation. We believe in having good relations with our neighbours
   based on the principle of mutual respect but thus far we don't
   really know what our political opponents stand for. 
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finish by thanking all of you as members
   and supporters of the Liberal Party and others of whatever basis
   you come here today for the support you've given to Bill Taylor.
   Can I take the opportunity of commending Ian Macfarlane to you as
   the Liberal Party candidate for Groom of the next Federal election.
   Ian is very well known in this part of Queensland. 
Can I take this opportunity of commending Ian Macfarlane to you
   as the Liberal Party candidate for Groom at the next Federal election.
   Ian is very well known in this part of Queensland. He, of course,
   has been as I understand it a resident of this district for a long
   period of time. There wouldn't be anybody who has a better
   understanding of agri-politics in this country than does Ian. He
   has a very strong background because of his association with and
   leadership of the Grains Council. He does understand some of the
   difficult problems that are faced by primary producers in Australia.
   Although we've brought a lot of change and a lot of improvements
   and a lot of reforms and happily in many parts of Australia weather
   conditions have turned a lot better for primary producers, it is
   still very difficult. And later on in a few moments I'll be
   talking to representatives of the pork industry to listen to the
   concerns that they have and to listen to the views that they wish
   to put to the Government.
So it's more important than ever that we put into Parliament
   men and women who understand primary industries. We do need people
   who've got a deep background in the rural industries of Australia.
   There will always be a very large place in the ranks of the Coalition
   parties for men and women who have rural backgrounds. We must always
   remember that the Liberal Party represents more rural seats in Australia
   than any other party. And the Liberal Party's understanding
   of and representation in rural Australia is immense. So in every
   respect I think the Liberal Party has made an outstanding choice
   in selecting Ian Macfarlane as the candidate to run under the Liberal
   banner at the next Federal Election. He will have my total support,
   my total confidence and after the election I will very warmly welcome
   him as the new Federal Member for Groom. Thank you very much.
ends


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much John. Thank you very much Bob. To the
   Consul General for Italy in Sydney, to Peter Collins, the Leader
   of the Opposition in NSW, to my very good colleague and friend,
   Minister for Defence Industry, Science and Personnel, Bronwyn Bishop.
   And I've only allocated myself three or four minutes because
   I don't believe in long speeches at these gatherings so I won't
   welcome all the other dignitaries but simply say friends all.
And I start by saying what an absolutely fantastic military band
   that was. And whoever organised it deserves the credit and thanks
   of us all. Ladies and gentlemen, as many of you know this is not
   the first Italian National Day celebration that I have had the privilege
   of addressing. And it is for me an immense pleasure as Prime Minister
   of our great country to express on behalf of all of your fellow
   Australians our simple and deep gratitude to the Australians of
   Italian desent for all that you have given to our country over such
   a long period of time.
More than a billion people have left different parts of Italy,
   most of them over the last half a century to come and make their
   home in Australia. And they have brought their values, they have
   brought their passion, they've brought their commitment, they've
   brought their brains, they've brought their song, they've
   brought their laughter, they've brought all of their emotions
   and they have contributed to every part of Australian life. Wherever
   you go, be it in politics, be it in business, be it in medicine,
   be it in the other professions, be it in the arts, be it in business,
   you find Australians of Italian desent. And you find, if you look
   back over the last 50 years, a very special way in which Italians
   have changed for the better the way of life in our country. And
   I thank you for that.
I think Australia has done better than any other country on earth
   in bringing together people of different ethnic and cultural and
   linguistic backgrounds and producing a unified cohesive blend yet
   allowing each individual part of that process to preserve a special
   affection and love of the country of their birth and the country
   of their cultural heritage. And one of the most moving experiences
   I have as Prime Minister, wherever I go in Australia is to come
   across men and women who have come from Italy, many of them 30 or
   40 years ago and they speak with pride and love and emotion of what
   it meant to come to Australia but they also retain a very fierce
   and understandable pride and love for the country of their birth.
   And it really does make me feel immensely proud and humble as Prime
   Minister of this country that we've been able to receive people
   who have given so much to Australia and if they feel consistent
   with that and at ease with that love of Australia, a great retentive
   love for the country of their birth. And I think that's something
   that all of us should feel particular pride in.
I know, ladies and gentlemen, that at this time there are many
   of us who feel sorrow and sadness that the mudslide tragedy in the
   Campania area of Italy and I know that the Consul General's
   spoken for all of us in making a reference to that.
Can I say two other things and that is that I want to honour the
   modern contribution of the Italian Republic to the family of the
   world. Many of us not only know that Italian desent look with great
   pride on the economic and social success and development of Italy
   particularly over the last 20 or 30 years. Italy has a great and
   beneficial influence particularly, but not only, on the family of
   Europe and in the wider council of the world Italy is greatly and
   justifiably respected.
And finally can I say to you that I am about to initiate arrangements
   that will lead to a formal invitation to his excellency the President
   of the Italian Republic, Signor Scalfaro to visit Australia
   at the end of the year.
So to all of you my friends, thank you for what you have done for
   Australia. Go on being part of this great nation of ours and thank
   you very warmly for having me with you. Thank you.


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much to Captain David Eldridge,
   the Chairman of my Taskforce on Youth Homelessness. To my colleague,
   Warwick Smith, the Minister for Family Services and Senator Helen
   Coonan, a Senator from New South Wales, other representatives, particularly
   of the Sydney City Mission, of other welfare organisations, the
   St Vincent de Paul Society and also to other officers of the Salvation
   Army.
One of the very first things that did as Prime
   Minister was to get together a group of people to launch the taskforce
   into youth homelessness. It was a commitment that I had made in
   a speech I delivered as Opposition Leader to ACOSS late in 1995
   and it arose out of my personal desire after discussion with a lot
   of parents and also with others involved in the welfare field that
   we ought to try and find out whether or not there was some better
   or more improved way of dealing with the challenge of youth homelessness
   and something that more directly focussed on the desirability of
   trying to achieve as much as we possibly could, reconciliation between
   young people who leave home and other members of their families.
We all of course have an idealised view of family
   life. All of us hope that the maximum number of young people in
   the Australian community will experience growing up in a loving,
   secure and stable home environment where the welfare of children
   is the central concern and greatest commitment through life of their
   parents. Now that is the ideal and it is an ideal that is worth
   restating even in the most cynical of times and it's an ideal
   to which all of us should be committed and it's an ideal to
   which all of us should lend our energy because it is indisputable
   that the greatest gift that any young person can have is a loving
   home environment. It provides them with assets for life which cannot
   be matched by anything else. Having stated the ideals we must of
   course recognise that sadly, not all of our young people have the
   opportunity of being given that very secure start in life. Not all
   of our young people are provided with a secure and loving home environment.
There are complex reasons why that secure environment
   is not available in every case. They are the product of changing
   societal attitudes, they are the product of economic difficulty,
   they are the product of unemployment, they are the product of all
   sorts of pressures and what society must do, whilst always reaffirming
   its belief in striving to the ideal in the maximum number of cases,
   what society ought to try and do is to provide a network of help
   and counsel and advice and an understanding to help those people
   who do not have that precious gift that is available to so many
   other young people in the community.
I have spoken in the past few months a great deal
   of the importance of there being a shared endeavour in our community
   between individuals, the Government and the great community organisations
   of modern society. Individuals alone can't always look after
   themselves. Many can but some can't. Through no fault of their
   own they do need help and a compassionate society ought to provide
   that help. The Government alone can't provide that help although
   the Government has a very important role to play. The Government
   has community resources available to it and it has an overall responsibility
   to set the scene and to provide a framework. And the third great
   arm of that shared endeavour is represented here today by magnificent
   organisations such as the Salvation Army, the Society of St Vincent
   de Paul and the various city missions throughout Australia, and
   they are the third very important arm. And one of the significant
   things that I wanted to do in my approach to youth homelessness
   was to involve those organisations to a much greater extent and
   that was because I had the very strong belief that they had more
   coalface experience and a greater practical day to day understanding
   of it than any other group of men and women in our society because
   they deal with it, they deal with it day to day, they understand
   the sense of despair and the sadness and the loneliness and the
   deprivation that is the lot of young people who are afflicted by
   homelessness.
I have also had the opportunity of witnessing the
   joy and the happiness that can come when there is a reconciliation
   between a young person and his or her family members and that is
   the rewarding part of it. I wanted to involve them. I wanted the
   Government to, by setting up the taskforce, demonstrate its commitment
   to this particular issue. I also wanted there to be a greater understanding
   of the sense of alienation that some parents in the past had felt
   towards the process of assessing the entitlement of young people
   to the youth homelessness allowance. I had had many complaints as
   a Member of Parliament in my own electorate and also in my position
   as Opposition Leader from parents who said that the process shut
   them out, that if one of their family members left home and sought
   the allowance, they often were shut out of the process, they didn't
   feel part of it. They felt that they were held responsible totally
   without having an opportunity of putting their case. 
I have heard reports from all around Australia
   from my colleagues of angry meetings of parents complaining about
   a process that had shut them out and with so many of these things,
   there was of course an element of truth in that. There was also
   in some cases an element of exaggeration so I wanted one of the
   things, one of the elements of this task force's work to be
   a focus on ways in which the parents of children who were homeless
   could feel part of the process, could feel that an adverse judgement
   was not automatically being made on them and that they were given
   an opportunity of putting their point of view, of understanding
   the process but above everything else, an emphasis on reconciliation,
   of early intervention and of involving community groups. And out
   of that taskforce came the launch of a series of pilot projects
   that the Government funded all around Australia and one of those
   pilot projects of course is represented here today and that is a
   pilot project which is a joint endeavour of the Salvation Army in
   Sydney and of the Sydney City Mission, and it's an example
   of how a different approach can produce results. This is an area
   of course where you have to work very hard to get sometimes only
   a modest return.
 There are successes but there are also a lot of failures. But the
   most important thing is that there is a shared commitment represented
   here today between a lot of individuals who have been sadly touched
   by the problem of youth homelessness. Amongst the audience are some
   young people who are part of the group that we are trying to help.
   There are also parents of those young people who are also people
   who are equally deserving of help and understanding. There's
   also here of course the representatives of the organisations who
   are so very directly involved and finally, of course, there's
   the Government, and in that old cliche the Government's always
   here to help but what we are trying to do with this is to get a
   better of understanding of a very significant human problem. 
We gather here today in the largest city in Australia.
   It's a very beautiful city and there's a lot to be proud
   of to be a citizen of Sydney as most of us who are here today, we
   are citizens of Sydney as well as firstly and most importantly being
   Australians. But it's also a fact of life that in any big city
   there's a lot of loneliness and there's a lot of individual
   sadness and there are a lot of people who are reaching out for help
   and above all, they want company and they want understanding and
   I have had many discussions over the time that I have been Prime
   Minister with people involved in trying to help young people and
   I have talked to people who have been involved in providing help
   line services.
I remember talking to a De La Salle brother who
   is involved in the running of a help line service in Brisbane and
   what he told me was that the most common area of assistance that
   people wanted when they rang up was help in how to relate more effectively
   and how to communicate more effectively with their parents and their
   brothers and sisters and their friends. And it's a very simple
   yet rather sad thing that what is so obviously lacking in the lives
   of many people is the opportunity and the capacity to talk to the
   people you want to talk to most. All of us I think are inadequate
   sometimes in expressing our feelings. All of us are inadequate in
   communicating effectively with people we should communicate effectively
   with. Of course one of the reasons, as you all know, that people
   leave home and one of the reasons why families break down and children
   no longer think that they have anything much in common with their
   parents and vice versa is a simple difficulty in communication and
   a failure to understand each other and a failure to be able to talk
   directly to each other.
I do not claim and my Government does not claim
   for a moment to have the answers, all of the answers to the problem
   of youth homelessness. We do have a commitment to try some new ways
   of tackling the problem. We recognise it, it flows in part from
   economic circumstances. We recognise in part that it flows from
   changed attitudes towards individual responsibility. We recognise
   that it flows in part from different generational attitudes towards
   the authority of parents and the relationship between children and
   parents. There are a whole lot of reasons but we're very genuine
   in our desire to find some of those answers. We are very grateful
   for Captain Eldridge's personal contribution and also the contribution
   of the other members of his taskforce. He comes as so many people
   in this room do, from a great Christian organisation, from an organisation
   that is committed to the welfare of young people within our community
   and I very warmly thank him and all of his colleagues.
I am very happy to announce, ladies and gentlemen,
   that I have informed my colleague, Warwick Smith that we are going
   to extend the funding and therefore the continuity of the pilot
   programmes by providing an additional $2.3 million and that will
   allow funding to go on for another six months. We've done that
   because we think the pilot programmes are so successful and they
   have provided so many new insights and better understandings, and
   given a better emphasis on the importance of reconciliation, not
   to pretend for a moment that the ideal always exists because plainly
   it doesn't. There are many sad examples of where it doesn't
   exist but equally, to recognise that if we can give a greater emphasis
   to reconciliation between parents and children, to the role of great
   organisations, I think all of us would be very grateful.
So could I end again by thanking all of you who
   have contributed. I want to thank the representatives of the Department
   of Family Services and their Minister, Warwick, for the contribution
   that they have made. It is a partnership and it does involve individuals,
   the Government and organisations. I do want to thank the Salvation
   Army, the Brotherhood of St Laurence, the Wesley Central Mission,
   the Society of St Vincent de Paul, Anglicare and of course the Independent
   City Missions of Australia, and indeed, all others who contributed.
   And I thank the young people and the parents who have been touched
   by this programme, I hope in a beneficial way, for their attendance.
   It's a very important, personal commitment of mine and of my
   Government and I hope it can be said that it has made a difference
   and it has contributed to a better understanding of an immensely
   challenging human and social issue in modern Australia.
Thank you.
ENDS


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
To my friend and colleague Richard Court, to Mr Peter Middleton, my
 other state and federal parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
As always it's a huge delight to be in Western Australia. And as always
 as Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, I acknowledge
 very genuinely the immense contribution, particularly at this time,
 because of the importance of export income to Australia, I acknowledge
 the tremendous contribution of the State of Western Australia to Australia's
 aggregate national wealth. And I particularly acknowledge the leadership
 over decades that has been displayed by coalition governments in relation
 to the development of the resource sector of Western Australia. And
 the announcement to which Richard referred a few moments ago is yet
 the latest in a long list of resource projects which if they had not
 been developed and there had not been the visionary leadership in
 this state on our side of politics to develop, the Australian nation
 today would be the poorer and all of its citizens would be more vulnerable
 to the uncertainties of a hostile global economy.
Ladies and gentlemen there are a number of reasons why it's always
 a delight to be in Western Australia and why it's important as Prime
 Minister of the entire country that one regularly visits every part
 of the Commonwealth. One of the reasons of course as many of you will
 remember is that my predecessor systematically insulted the State
 of Western Australia by going for a period of I think of almost twelve
 months between visits. And one of the things that I resolved to do
 when I became Prime Minister was to visit this State on a very regular
 basis to meet the business community, to hear their concerns, to take
 their advice - or at least listen to it - and sometimes to take it.
 And to meet the people of Western Australia. And also if I had any
 spare time to do the odd bit of campaigning for my federal colleagues
 who hold such a high proportion of the seats in this State.
I want today to say something about the economic fundamentals of Australia.
 For reasons you will understand I am not going to explore future levels
 of anything. But I am going to say something about the fundamentals
 of the Australian economy because it's very important we understand
 how strong our economy really is. And when I make the claim and when
 Peter Costello makes the claim that our economic foundations are stronger
 now than they have been for twenty five years that is no idle piece
 of political rhetoric.
We do have the lowest inflation rate in the western world. We do have
 a strong level of business investment. We do have a situation where,
 having inherited a budget deficit courtesy of Mr Beazley of $10.5billion,
 in just two years in three Budgets we have turned that into a surplus
 of $2.7billion. And I take the opportunity of congratulating Peter
 Costello as my Treasurer for the excellent job that he's done in the
 economic management of Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen some people at the moment are making comparisons
 between Australia now and Australia in 1986 when my predecessor as
 Prime Minister, then as Treasurer, made that chance remark from the
 kitchen somewhere in Victoria when he was talking on the telephone
 to John Laws, it was later elevated into a very carefully designed,
 politically shrewd remark - in fact it was an off the cuff observation
 - about Australia becoming a banana republic. Now I think it's worth
 me running through a few comparisons between Australia then and Australia
 now. And I think it's very relevant to the economic debate which is
 taking place at present. In mid 1986 our inflation rate was 8.8%,
 our underlying inflation rate is now 1.5% and the headline inflation
 rate is the remarkable minus at .2%. The current account deficit is
 forecast now to be 5.25% of GDP - it was well above 6.5% in the mid
 1980s. In the mid 1980s we had a budget deficit of 2% of GDP, we now
 have a surplus of 0.5% of GDP. Our debt servicing ratio - a very very
 important measure of long term economic strength internationally -
 our debt servicing ratio was 15.3% in the mid 1980s - it is now 10.8%.
 And our terms of trade in 1998 are significantly better than what
 they were in the mid 1980s.
Now I mention those figures ladies and gentlemen not to burden you
 with a lot of statistics but merely to make the observation that the
 underlying strengths of the Australian economy now are the soundest
 that they have been for a very long period of time and they are infinitely
 more sound and more durable and more beckoning to the rest of the
 world than what they were in the mid 1980s. It is obvious that if
 we had not taken the measures we took when we came to office in March
 of 1996, the Australian economy now would have been infinitely more
 at risk than it is. And I do invite you for a moment to contemplate
 what would have happened to economic management in this country if
 we had not taken the measures that we took in 1996.
Can you imagine where we would be now if we had persisted with running
 a budget deficit of $10.5billion a year, if we had not tackled the
 accumulated debt of $95-100billion a year. Can you imagine where we
 would be if we had to set out to reform our industrial relations system,
 that if we had pretended that the Beazley/Keating approach of constantly
 running up debt was the only way forward for Australia. And in view
 of everything that has happened, particularly in the Asia Pacific
 Region, I can't stress too strongly how weakened and vulnerable and
 enfeebled the Australian economy would have been under that kind of
 leadership and indeed how much stronger and better placed it is under
 the sort of leadership that it's been given over the past two and
 a quarter years.
And of course in that context one has to contemplate the prospect
 of handing over the management of the Australian economy to the treasuryship
 of Gareth Evans. Of handing over the management of the Australian
 economy to people who fought tooth and nail every measure that my
 Government took to restore the strength of the Australian economy
 after it was elected to office. Not only did our Labor predecessors
 create the problem and leave it behind for us to fix, but they set
 about systematically trying to stop us fixing the problem. Because
 if you go through the records of the current Parliament, you will
 find that virtually every single measure that we took to get the budget
 into surplus was in fact fought by the Australian Labor Party and
 if they had had their way they would have perpetuated the economic
 legacy that they bequeathed to us in March of 1996.
Now I mention these things ladies and gentlemen because in the nature
 of political combat people are going to be making judgements about
 economic performance over the next few months. Of course we have an
 election in this country sometime between now and when the election
 is constitutionally due. Now I hope all the ladies and gentlemen of
 the press got that because that's the story out of today. We will
 eventually have an election. When that is of course is something that
 is yet to be resolved. But it is important, as we draw close to that
 election whenever it is, that we do remember what the situation was
 in March of 1996, we contemplate what my Government has done to turn
 that situation around and we also properly ask the question, what
 would have happened if the former Government had stayed in office
 and what might happen if it were returned to office at the next election.
 Labor would be a huge economic risk. It's track record demonstrates
 that and nothing which is being said in the two and a quarter years
 that we have been in Government alters my view on that and I notice
 that Mr Beazley today said that he had been Prime Minister over the
 last couple of years unemployment would have been down to 6%. It's
 funny that in the time that he had a go he got a post-Depression level
 of 11.2% and at average 8.7% over the whole time that his party was
 in Government.
But ladies and gentlemen, having said something about the fundamentals
 of the Australian economy I want to narrow my focus of my speech to
 two very important issues. And one of those is the issue of taxation
 reform. We need self evidently as a nation to build our competitiveness
 to the maximum extent possible. The past few weeks, the past few days,
 the past few months, have driven home like perhaps no other set of
 circumstances have driven home the reality that we live in a globalised
 economy. Some of us might wish it otherwise. Some of us might like
 to believe you could turn the clock back and you could return to a
 nostalgic era when we weren't in a global economy. Whether we like
 it or not that is just not possible and in order for this country
 to survive and to prosper and to build the living standards of Australians
 all over our continent what we have to do above everything else is
 to be competitive. And every single measure that my Government has
 taken over the past two and a quarter years has been designed to build
 the strengths of the Australian economy and to improve its competitiveness.
 That is why we set about curing a budget deficit. That is why we have
 set about reforming the industrial relations system. But there is
 one great untouched area of economic reform which is crying aloud
 for attention. It is crying aloud for attention like no other area
 of economic reform and that is the overwhelming need to reform Australia's
 increasingly outdated and old fashioned taxation system. This is a
 cause that I have spoken about on many occasions in the past in the
 various positions I have held other than that of Prime Minister. It's
 got a lot of form, it's got a lot of track record and it's got a lot
 of history - the taxation debate in this country. It was attempted
 in the early 1980s by the then Treasurer in the Fraser Government
 and he was unsuccessful. It was attempted by the then Treasurer in
 the Hawke Labor Government and he was also unsuccessful. It was attempted
 by John Hewson as Leader of the Coalition in 1993 and it was also
 unsuccessful so far as the electorate was concerned. Now I guess with
 that sort of track record the hypothetical man from Mars would say:
 'why on earth would anybody be stupid enough to attempt it again?'.
 Now that's not a bad question - on the surface. Well let me examine
 it for a moment. Let me put to you very seriously that if you care
 about the future of this country and if you care about its future
 economic security and competitiveness, this is really the last great
 opportunity, perhaps in the political and business experience of most
 in this room to achieve taxation reform.
We have a rather rigid political system at the moment where it's every
 difficult for one side of politics to get control of both Houses of
 Parliament. In fact that hasn't been the case since the middle of
 1981 and the prospect of that changing under the current electoral
 system is just about zero. Now some people say to me "oh, John,
 forget about this taxation reform, what you ought to do is to go the
 election on your policies on your record, talk a bit about Labor say
 how bad they are and invite the public to put you back and if anybody
 says anything to you about taxation promise them a meeting."
 Now that of course is what Bob Hawke did in 1984. But ladies and gentlemen
 I can't do that and what's more I won't do that and the reason that
 I can't and won't do that is that the Australian public would treat
 it with justifiable contempt.
They would say that this man and his Treasurer have gone around the
 country over the past few months and told us that taxation reform
 was necessary and desirable and now when they get a bit close to the
 event and the heat is on they go to water. But there's another reason
 why you can't solve it by having a meeting and that is that there's
 absolutely no prospect that you'd get agreement at the meeting. At
 the end of the day governments are elected to make decisions, they
 are elected to govern, they are elected to give a lead on fundamental
 political and economic reform. And what is more if we did have a meeting
 and we came up with some mish-mash out of that meeting we'd then have
 to have an election because there is no way that the Opposition parties
 in the Senate would vote in favour of the proposal that might come
 out of that meeting.
So however you look at it, politically, economically and strategically?
 The imperative is that we present to the Australian people - as we
 will - a comprehensive taxation reform plan before the election. Now
 I know it is difficult and I know there will be a scare campaign and
 I know that Kim Beazley, despite the fact that he wholeheartedly supported
 Paul Keating's 12.5 consumption tax in 1986 and Gareth Evans threw
 down his glasses and his papers after two days of discussion and said
 that nobody had been able to punch a hole in the Keating idea in 1986.
 Despite all of that, they will campaign with all the vigour at their
 disposal in a negative, despoiling fashion to stop the cause of tax
 reform. And Peter Costello and I and our colleagues will need all
 of your help and all of your goodwill and all of your support and
 all of your commitment to win that great debate. And I don't underestimate
 the battle that lies ahead but there is really no alternative. If
 you are to have a decent taxation system in this country, if we are
 to break out of the unfairness and the uncompetitiveness of the present
 system there is really no other moment and there is no other way.
 However you look at it, putting it off is not going to solve the problem
 and therefore it is absolutely essential that we embark upon the course
 to which we are committed. And I believe that if you appeal to the
 Australian people in the right way and if you fulfil two very important
 criteria in that appeal then you will be able to win support for something
 as fundamental as taxation reform.
There are two things that we have to do above all else. We have to
 persuade the Australian people that delivering a different taxation
 system is in the national interest. It is not enough to say it's in
 the interest of the business community or it is in the interest of
 families, important though those groups are. It's not enough to say
 it is in the interest of the farmers or the city people or whatever.
 What we have to do is to demonstrate that Australia will be a better
 country economically, a fairer country economically and a more competitive
 country economically with a new and fairer and better taxation system.
 Because at the end of the day Australians are great patriots, they
 may understate their patriotism. They may not be as demonstrable as
 Americans or others but deep down all Australians wherever they live
 worry about the reputation of this country, worry about the sort of
 future which is going to be left to their children and grandchildren.
 And they worry about the strength of the Australian economy around
 the world.
So if we can pitch our campaign, which we definitely will, towards
 the cause of delivering a taxation system which is fairer and better
 in the national interest then that will win wide appeal. The other
 thing we need to do is that we have to demonstrate that the changes
 we have in mind are fair and they are fair to all sections of the
 community. That they are not a giveaway to the rich but equally they
 are changes that recognise the importance of the wealth generating
 and the wealth creating sector of the Australian community. And they
 must be reforms and changes that protect the vulnerable and the weak
 and the poor within our community because none of us, particularly
 those charged with political responsibility, should ever forget the
 fact that there are genuinely vulnerable and weak and poor people
 economically within our community. And that has always been a very
 important part of the Liberal legacy to care for those people as part
 of our broader policies of national and economic development. Taxation
 reform is very dear to my heart. I know it is very dear to the heart
 of the Treasurer and it is very dear to the heart of many people on
 our side of politics. We've had the courage to tackle the deficit
 problem. We've had the courage to tackle industrial relations. We've
 had the courage to tackle many other issues that have come our way
 over the last two and a quarter years. And I regard tackling taxation
 reform as the next logical step of strengthening and buttressing the
 Australian economy in an increasingly uncertain world. And what is
 happening in the Asia Pacific region and what is happening globally
 at the present time makes it more, not less necessary, to pursue the
 cause of taxation reform. Don't be misguided by anybody running around
 an saying: 'oh there is a bit of difficulty on the world currency
 markets, there's a bit of turmoil, there is a bit of a meltdown in
 the Asia Pacific region, therefore in these uncertain times you ought
 to put taxation reform on the shelf.' That would be completely the
 wrong thing to do. It is precisely at a time like this that a Government
 should retain its nerve and its determination to pursue the next logical
 element of economic reform and that is taxation reform.
My friends, the last specific issue that I want to address is one
 that was referred to by Richard Court and that is the issue of native
 title reform. I am very aware that the Native Title Act in its present
 form has a more adverse effect on the people of Western Australia
 than any other State in the Commonwealth. I am very aware of the clog
 that it represents on the development of the resource industry in
 this State. And I am very aware of the loss of wealth that has already
 occurred as a result of the negative operation of that legislation.
 That is why we set about after the Wik decision to create a balanced
 plan, a fair plan that provided the basis of lasting and effective
 reform to the Native Title Act. And one of the most aggravating and
 unreasonable and inaccurate claims that is made about the Government's
 Native Title Bill is that it represents in some way a sell-out of
 the interests of all people in the Australian community other than
 the farmers and the miners - it doesn't.
It does, of course, represent a proper accommodation of the interests
 of the farming and mining communities, not only in Western Australia
 but throughout the whole of the country. But it does take into account
 the proper and legitimate interests of the indigenous community. And
 it is the product of a genuine attempt on my part, helped by a number
 of my colleagues, to build a compromise which respected the basic
 principle of the Mabo decision but also gives security, both in terms
 of title and process to the farming and mining communities. And the
 proposition that the only way you can settle the issue is for us to
 further compromise completely ignores the fact that in arriving at
 the position where we are now, we have already compromised a great
 deal in the eyes of many people within the Australian community. And
 I say that very deliberately at present because there is some debate
 about whether or not now might not be the time to see whether the
 minor parties and others in the Senate would again address the native
 title issue.
Well, can I say that if I got an assurance that the Native Title Bill
 was going to be passed through the Senate if it were presented again
 in its present form, of course I would present it again. But until
 I receive any such assurance, the idea that the Government should
 further compromise is absolutely ridiculous. I went through months
 of difficult negotiation with States, with the mining and the farming
 communities and with representatives of Australia's indigenous people.
 And I arrived at a situation which was not entirely satisfactory to
 any one group but did represent a decent and honourable compromise
 and it's that legislation that is now lying twice rejected by the
 Federal Senate. And it's that legislation which constitutes the only
 proper basis on which we can satisfactorily resolve this issue. And
 this proposition that by some way brokering a compromise of the Native
 Title legislation will shut people out of potential election to the
 Federal Senate is completely misguided. Indeed, if the Liberal and
 National parties were to negotiate away their position on this issue,
 that would provide a very fertile breeding ground for more rabid propositions
 that would say to Australia's rural communities, those parties that
 have traditionally represented your interests are no longer willing
 to do so.
So I want to make it very clear to you, I make it very clear in the
 presence of your Premier, that I was very serious when I said in May
 of last year, when with Tim Fischer I met a group of pastoralists
 and debated this issue at Longreach in Queensland that having arrived
 at a commitment to my 10 point plan, we were not only determined to
 put that into legislation but we were determined to pursue that legislation
 until it was approved in accordance with the Constitutional processes
 of the Australian Parliament.
Can I finally say to all of you, ladies and gentlemen, that when I
 was elected as Prime Minister I made what I regarded then and I still
 regard as the most important commitment that any Prime Minister on
 any side of politics can make to the people who choose to elect you
 and that is, I said, that I would endeavour to the best of my ability
 to govern for all Australians. That although we campaign on our own
 political platforms when we are given office we have a responsibility
 to govern for the entire community. And that commitment I have taken
 seriously and I will continue to take seriously whilever the Australian
 people choose to have me as their Prime Minister. But I also take
 very seriously the links that my Party and the National Party have
 with the business community of Australia. We, of course, are not owned
 by the business community in the way that the Labor Party is owned
 by the trade union movement. There are occasions when the business
 community disagrees and disagrees very strongly with measures that
 we have taken. And in my dealings in the last 24 years I can recall
 occasions when the business community has been critical of decisions
 taken by the Liberal Party and I am sure that will be the case in
 the future. But we do share a broad spectrum of agreement on a large
 number of issues. We do believe that the wealth generating sector
 of the Australian economy is crucial. We do believe that the bulk
 of the jobs in this country come from the wealth generating sector.
 We believe in decent levels of profit. We believe in decent compassionate
 capitalism. We believe in attracting business investment. We believe
 in the minimum levels of Government intervention consistent with maintaining
 a proper social security safety net. And we believe very much that
 this country has to play a very pro-active role both in terms of exports
 and imports in the world economic environment. And over the last two
 and a quarter years I have been very grateful to the advice and the
 communication that I have received and had with the business community
 all over Australia and not least here in Perth.
And I want to say how important it is that the linkages established
 by such groups as the 500 Club not only be maintained but also developed.
 Being in Government in modern times is an extremely challenging task.
 No one country in the world is the complete master of its own economic
 destiny. Even a nation as powerful as that of the United States must
 live by the constraints of a global economy. And we see in relation
 to Japan, the second most powerful economy in the world, a very powerful
 living out of that proposition that we are all part of the global
 economy now and whether we like it or not we can't escape it. And
 it is, therefore, very important in the process of governing, the
 Prime Ministers and governments that hold the essential values of
 private enterprise of investment and all the things that flow from
 it maintain their close links with the business community. So I thank
 you for the support you have given. I thank you for the contribution
 that you have made to building a better Australia. I am an optimist
 about our country's future. I think we have the prospect before us
 of entering the next century


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
To my friend and colleague Richard Court, to Mr Peter Middleton,
   my other state and federal parliamentary colleagues, ladies and
   gentlemen.
As always it's a huge delight to be in Western Australia.
   And as always as Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
   I acknowledge very genuinely the immense contribution, particularly
   at this time, because of the importance of export income to Australia,
   I acknowledge the tremendous contribution of the State of Western
   Australia to Australia's aggregate national wealth. And I particularly
   acknowledge the leadership over decades that has been displayed
   by coalition governments in relation to the development of the resource
   sector of Western Australia. And the announcement to which Richard
   referred a few moments ago is yet the latest in a long list of resource
   projects which if they had not been developed and there had not
   been the visionary leadership in this state on our side of politics
   to develop, the Australian nation today would be the poorer and
   all of its citizens would be more vulnerable to the uncertainties
   of a hostile global economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen there are a number of reasons why it's
   always a delight to be in Western Australia and why it's important
   as Prime Minister of the entire country that one regularly visits
   every part of the Commonwealth. One of the reasons of course as
   many of you will remember is that my predecessor systematically
   insulted the State of Western Australia by going for a period of
   I think of almost twelve months between visits. And one of the things
   that I resolved to do when I became Prime Minister was to visit
   this State on a very regular basis to meet the business community,
   to hear their concerns, to take their advice - or at least listen
   to it - and sometimes to take it. And to meet the people of Western
   Australia. And also if I had any spare time to do the odd bit of
   campaigning for my federal colleagues who hold such a high proportion
   of the seats in this State. 
I want today to say something about the economic fundamentals of
   Australia. For reasons you will understand I am not going to explore
   future levels of anything. But I am going to say something about
   the fundamentals of the Australian economy because it's very
   important we understand how strong our economy really is. And when
   I make the claim and when Peter Costello makes the claim that our
   economic foundations are stronger now than they have been for twenty
   five years that is no idle piece of political rhetoric. 
We do have the lowest inflation rate in the western world. We do
   have a strong level of business investment. We do have a situation
   where, having inherited a budget deficit courtesy of Mr Beazley
   of $10.5billion, in just two years in three Budgets we have turned
   that into a surplus of $2.7billion. And I take the opportunity of
   congratulating Peter Costello as my Treasurer for the excellent
   job that he's done in the economic management of Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen some people at the moment are making comparisons
   between Australia now and Australia in 1986 when my predecessor
   as Prime Minister, then as Treasurer, made that chance remark from
   the kitchen somewhere in Victoria when he was talking on the telephone
   to John Laws, it was later elevated into a very carefully designed,
   politically shrewd remark - in fact it was an off the cuff observation
   - about Australia becoming a banana republic. Now I think it's
   worth me running through a few comparisons between Australia then
   and Australia now. And I think it's very relevant to the economic
   debate which is taking place at present. In mid 1986 our inflation
   rate was 8.8%, our underlying inflation rate is now 1.5% and the
   headline inflation rate is the remarkable minus at .2%. The current
   account deficit is forecast now to be 5.25% of GDP - it was well
   above 6.5% in the mid 1980s. In the mid 1980s we had a budget deficit
   of 2% of GDP, we now have a surplus of 0.5% of GDP. Our debt servicing
   ratio - a very very important measure of long term economic strength
   internationally - our debt servicing ratio was 15.3% in the mid
   1980s - it is now 10.8%. And our terms of trade in 1998 are significantly
   better than what they were in the mid 1980s. 
Now I mention those figures ladies and gentlemen not to burden
   you with a lot of statistics but merely to make the observation
   that the underlying strengths of the Australian economy now are
   the soundest that they have been for a very long period of time
   and they are infinitely more sound and more durable and more beckoning
   to the rest of the world than what they were in the mid 1980s. It
   is obvious that if we had not taken the measures we took when we
   came to office in March of 1996, the Australian economy now would
   have been infinitely more at risk than it is. And I do invite you
   for a moment to contemplate what would have happened to economic
   management in this country if we had not taken the measures that
   we took in 1996. 
Can you imagine where we would be now if we had persisted with
   running a budget deficit of $10.5billion a year, if we had not tackled
   the accumulated debt of $95-100billion a year. Can you imagine where
   we would be if we had to set out to reform our industrial relations
   system, that if we had pretended that the Beazley/Keating approach
   of constantly running up debt was the only way forward for Australia.
   And in view of everything that has happened, particularly in the
   Asia Pacific Region, I can't stress too strongly how weakened
   and vulnerable and enfeebled the Australian economy would have been
   under that kind of leadership and indeed how much stronger and better
   placed it is under the sort of leadership that it's been given
   over the past two and a quarter years. 
And of course in that context one has to contemplate the prospect
   of handing over the management of the Australian economy to the
   treasuryship of Gareth Evans. Of handing over the management of
   the Australian economy to people who fought tooth and nail every
   measure that my Government took to restore the strength of the Australian
   economy after it was elected to office. Not only did our Labor predecessors
   create the problem and leave it behind for us to fix, but they set
   about systematically trying to stop us fixing the problem. Because
   if you go through the records of the current Parliament, you will
   find that virtually every single measure that we took to get the
   budget into surplus was in fact fought by the Australian Labor Party
   and if they had had their way they would have perpetuated the economic
   legacy that they bequeathed to us in March of 1996.
Now I mention these things ladies and gentlemen because in the
   nature of political combat people are going to be making judgements
   about economic performance over the next few months. Of course we
   have an election in this country sometime between now and when the
   election is constitutionally due. Now I hope all the ladies and
   gentlemen of the press got that because that's the story out
   of today. We will eventually have an election. When that is of course
   is something that is yet to be resolved. But it is important, as
   we draw close to that election whenever it is, that we do remember
   what the situation was in March of 1996, we contemplate what my
   Government has done to turn that situation around and we also properly
   ask the question, what would have happened if the former Government
   had stayed in office and what might happen if it were returned to
   office at the next election. Labor would be a huge economic risk.
   It's track record demonstrates that and nothing which is being
   said in the two and a quarter years that we have been in Government
   alters my view on that and I notice that Mr Beazley today said that
   he had been Prime Minister over the last couple of years unemployment
   would have been down to 6%. It's funny that in the time that
   he had a go he got a post-Depression level of 11.2% and at average
   8.7% over the whole time that his party was in Government.
But ladies and gentlemen, having said something about the fundamentals
   of the Australian economy I want to narrow my focus of my speech
   to two very important issues. And one of those is the issue of taxation
   reform. We need self evidently as a nation to build our competitiveness
   to the maximum extent possible. The past few weeks, the past few
   days, the past few months, have driven home like perhaps no other
   set of circumstances have driven home the reality that we live in
   a globalised economy. Some of us might wish it otherwise. Some of
   us might like to believe you could turn the clock back and you could
   return to a nostalgic era when we weren't in a global economy.
   Whether we like it or not that is just not possible and in order
   for this country to survive and to prosper and to build the living
   standards of Australians all over our continent what we have to
   do above everything else is to be competitive. And every single
   measure that my Government has taken over the past two and a quarter
   years has been designed to build the strengths of the Australian
   economy and to improve its competitiveness. That is why we set about
   curing a budget deficit. That is why we have set about reforming
   the industrial relations system. But there is one great untouched
   area of economic reform which is crying aloud for attention. It
   is crying aloud for attention like no other area of economic reform
   and that is the overwhelming need to reform Australia's increasingly
   outdated and old fashioned taxation system. This is a cause that
   I have spoken about on many occasions in the past in the various
   positions I have held other than that of Prime Minister. It's
   got a lot of form, it's got a lot of track record and it's
   got a lot of history - the taxation debate in this country. It was
   attempted in the early 1980s by the then Treasurer in the Fraser
   Government and he was unsuccessful. It was attempted by the then
   Treasurer in the Hawke Labor Government and he was also unsuccessful.
   It was attempted by John Hewson as Leader of the Coalition in 1993
   and it was also unsuccessful so far as the electorate was concerned.
   Now I guess with that sort of track record the hypothetical man
   from Mars would say: why on earth would anybody be stupid
   enough to attempt it again?'. Now that's not a bad question
   - on the surface. Well let me examine it for a moment. Let me put
   to you very seriously that if you care about the future of this
   country and if you care about its future economic security and competitiveness,
   this is really the last great opportunity, perhaps in the political
   and business experience of most in this room to achieve taxation
   reform.
We have a rather rigid political system at the moment where it's
   every difficult for one side of politics to get control of both
   Houses of Parliament. In fact that hasn't been the case since
   the middle of 1981 and the prospect of that changing under the current
   electoral system is just about zero. Now some people say to me "oh,
   John, forget about this taxation reform, what you ought to do is
   to go the election on your policies on your record, talk a bit about
   Labor say how bad they are and invite the public to put you back
   and if anybody says anything to you about taxation promise them
   a meeting." Now that of course is what Bob Hawke did in 1984.
   But ladies and gentlemen I can't do that and what's more
   I won't do that and the reason that I can't and won't
   do that is that the Australian public would treat it with justifiable
   contempt.
They would say that this man and his Treasurer have gone around
   the country over the past few months and told us that taxation reform
   was necessary and desirable and now when they get a bit close to
   the event and the heat is on they go to water. But there's
   another reason why you can't solve it by having a meeting and
   that is that there's absolutely no prospect that you'd
   get agreement at the meeting. At the end of the day governments
   are elected to make decisions, they are elected to govern, they
   are elected to give a lead on fundamental political and economic
   reform. And what is more if we did have a meeting and we came up
   with some mish-mash out of that meeting we'd then have to have
   an election because there is no way that the Opposition parties
   in the Senate would vote in favour of the proposal that might come
   out of that meeting.
So however you look at it, politically, economically and strategically?
   The imperative is that we present to the Australian people - as
   we will - a comprehensive taxation reform plan before the election.
   Now I know it is difficult and I know there will be a scare campaign
   and I know that Kim Beazley, despite the fact that he wholeheartedly
   supported Paul Keating's 12.5 consumption tax in 1986 and Gareth
   Evans threw down his glasses and his papers after two days of discussion
   and said that nobody had been able to punch a hole in the Keating
   idea in 1986. Despite all of that, they will campaign with all the
   vigour at their disposal in a negative, despoiling fashion to stop
   the cause of tax reform. And Peter Costello and I and our colleagues
   will need all of your help and all of your goodwill and all of your
   support and all of your commitment to win that great debate. And
   I don't underestimate the battle that lies ahead but there
   is really no alternative. If you are to have a decent taxation system
   in this country, if we are to break out of the unfairness and the
   uncompetitiveness of the present system there is really no other
   moment and there is no other way. However you look at it, putting
   it off is not going to solve the problem and therefore it is absolutely
   essential that we embark upon the course to which we are committed.
   And I believe that if you appeal to the Australian people in the
   right way and if you fulfil two very important criteria in that
   appeal then you will be able to win support for something as fundamental
   as taxation reform. 
There are two things that we have to do above all else. We have
   to persuade the Australian people that delivering a different taxation
   system is in the national interest. It is not enough to say it's
   in the interest of the business community or it is in the interest
   of families, important though those groups are. It's not enough
   to say it is in the interest of the farmers or the city people or
   whatever. What we have to do is to demonstrate that Australia will
   be a better country economically, a fairer country economically
   and a more competitive country economically with a new and fairer
   and better taxation system. Because at the end of the day Australians
   are great patriots, they may understate their patriotism. They may
   not be as demonstrable as Americans or others but deep down all
   Australians wherever they live worry about the reputation of this
   country, worry about the sort of future which is going to be left
   to their children and grandchildren. And they worry about the strength
   of the Australian economy around the world.
So if we can pitch our campaign, which we definitely will, towards
   the cause of delivering a taxation system which is fairer and better
   in the national interest then that will win wide appeal. The other
   thing we need to do is that we have to demonstrate that the changes
   we have in mind are fair and they are fair to all sections of the
   community. That they are not a giveaway to the rich but equally
   they are changes that recognise the importance of the wealth generating
   and the wealth creating sector of the Australian community. And
   they must be reforms and changes that protect the vulnerable and
   the weak and the poor within our community because none of us, particularly
   those charged with political responsibility, should ever forget
   the fact that there are genuinely vulnerable and weak and poor people
   economically within our community. And that has always been a very
   important part of the Liberal legacy to care for those people as
   part of our broader policies of national and economic development.
   Taxation reform is very dear to my heart. I know it is very dear
   to the heart of the Treasurer and it is very dear to the heart of
   many people on our side of politics. We've had the courage
   to tackle the deficit problem. We've had the courage to tackle
   industrial relations. We've had the courage to tackle many
   other issues that have come our way over the last two and a quarter
   years. And I regard tackling taxation reform as the next logical
   step of strengthening and buttressing the Australian economy in
   an increasingly uncertain world. And what is happening in the Asia
   Pacific region and what is happening globally at the present time
   makes it more, not less necessary, to pursue the cause of taxation
   reform. Don't be misguided by anybody running around an saying:
   oh there is a bit of difficulty on the world currency markets,
   there's a bit of turmoil, there is a bit of a meltdown in the
   Asia Pacific region, therefore in these uncertain times you ought
   to put taxation reform on the shelf.' That would be completely
   the wrong thing to do. It is precisely at a time like this that
   a Government should retain its nerve and its determination to pursue
   the next logical element of economic reform and that is taxation
   reform.
My friends, the last specific issue that I want to address is one
   that was referred to by Richard Court and that is the issue of native
   title reform. I am very aware that the Native Title Act in its present
   form has a more adverse effect on the people of Western Australia
   than any other State in the Commonwealth. I am very aware of the
   clog that it represents on the development of the resource industry
   in this State. And I am very aware of the loss of wealth that has
   already occurred as a result of the negative operation of that legislation.
   That is why we set about after the Wik decision to create a balanced
   plan, a fair plan that provided the basis of lasting and effective
   reform to the Native Title Act. And one of the most aggravating
   and unreasonable and inaccurate claims that is made about the Government's
   Native Title Bill is that it represents in some way a sell-out of
   the interests of all people in the Australian community other than
   the farmers and the miners - it doesn't. 
It does, of course, represent a proper accommodation of the interests
   of the farming and mining communities, not only in Western Australia
   but throughout the whole of the country. But it does take into account
   the proper and legitimate interests of the indigenous community.
   And it is the product of a genuine attempt on my part, helped by
   a number of my colleagues, to build a compromise which respected
   the basic principle of the Mabo decision but also gives security,
   both in terms of title and process to the farming and mining communities.
   And the proposition that the only way you can settle the issue is
   for us to further compromise completely ignores the fact that in
   arriving at the position where we are now, we have already compromised
   a great deal in the eyes of many people within the Australian community.
   And I say that very deliberately at present because there is some
   debate about whether or not now might not be the time to see whether
   the minor parties and others in the Senate would again address the
   native title issue. 
Well, can I say that if I got an assurance that the Native Title
   Bill was going to be passed through the Senate if it were presented
   again in its present form, of course I would present it again. But
   until I receive any such assurance, the idea that the Government
   should further compromise is absolutely ridiculous. I went through
   months of difficult negotiation with States, with the mining and
   the farming communities and with representatives of Australia's
   indigenous people. And I arrived at a situation which was not entirely
   satisfactory to any one group but did represent a decent and honourable
   compromise and it's that legislation that is now lying twice
   rejected by the Federal Senate. And it's that legislation which
   constitutes the only proper basis on which we can satisfactorily
   resolve this issue. And this proposition that by some way brokering
   a compromise of the Native Title legislation will shut people out
   of potential election to the Federal Senate is completely misguided.
   Indeed, if the Liberal and National parties were to negotiate away
   their position on this issue, that would provide a very fertile
   breeding ground for more rabid propositions that would say to Australia's
   rural communities, those parties that have traditionally represented
   your interests are no longer willing to do so. 
So I want to make it very clear to you, I make it very clear in
   the presence of your Premier, that I was very serious when I said
   in May of last year, when with Tim Fischer I met a group of pastoralists
   and debated this issue at Longreach in Queensland that having arrived
   at a commitment to my 10 point plan, we were not only determined
   to put that into legislation but we were determined to pursue that
   legislation until it was approved in accordance with the Constitutional
   processes of the Australian Parliament. 
Can I finally say to all of you, ladies and gentlemen, that when
   I was elected as Prime Minister I made what I regarded then and
   I still regard as the most important commitment that any Prime Minister
   on any side of politics can make to the people who choose to elect
   you and that is, I said, that I would endeavour to the best of my
   ability to govern for all Australians. That although we campaign
   on our own political platforms when we are given office we have
   a responsibility to govern for the entire community. And that commitment
   I have taken seriously and I will continue to take seriously whilever
   the Australian people choose to have me as their Prime Minister.
   But I also take very seriously the links that my Party and the National
   Party have with the business community of Australia. We, of course,
   are not owned by the business community in the way that the Labor
   Party is owned by the trade union movement. There are occasions
   when the business community disagrees and disagrees very strongly
   with measures that we have taken. And in my dealings in the last
   24 years I can recall occasions when the business community has
   been critical of decisions taken by the Liberal Party and I am sure
   that will be the case in the future. But we do share a broad spectrum
   of agreement on a large number of issues. We do believe that the
   wealth generating sector of the Australian economy is crucial. We
   do believe that the bulk of the jobs in this country come from the
   wealth generating sector. We believe in decent levels of profit.
   We believe in decent compassionate capitalism. We believe in attracting
   business investment. We believe in the minimum levels of Government
   intervention consistent with maintaining a proper social security
   safety net. And we believe very much that this country has to play
   a very pro-active role both in terms of exports and imports in the
   world economic environment. And over the last two and a quarter
   years I have been very grateful to the advice and the communication
   that I have received and had with the business community all over
   Australia and not least here in Perth.
And I want to say how important it is that the linkages established
   by such groups as the 500 Club not only be maintained but also developed.
   Being in Government in modern times is an extremely challenging
   task. No one country in the world is the complete master of its
   own economic destiny. Even a nation as powerful as that of the United
   States must live by the constraints of a global economy. And we
   see in relation to Japan, the second most powerful economy in the
   world, a very powerful living out of that proposition that we are
   all part of the global economy now and whether we like it or not
   we can't escape it. And it is, therefore, very important in
   the process of governing, the Prime Ministers and governments that
   hold the essential values of private enterprise of investment and
   all the things that flow from it maintain their close links with
   the business communit


E&amp;OE.....................................................................................................................................
Thank you very much to my colleague and friend, Ricky Johnston,
   to Senator Chris Ellison, the Minister for Schools, Education and
   Vocational Training, Mr Mayor, other members of the Armadale City
   Council, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to be again in the electorate of Canning. I think
   it's the second or third occasion since the last election that
   I've been here and I come very willingly and very keenly because
   Ricky is an outstandingly energetic representative of the division
   of Canning in the Federal Parliament. I can tell all of you that
   she does work very hard on behalf of your interests in Canberra.
   She's constantly jawboning ministers, collaring them in the
   corridor and elsewhere and pushing the case for local business men
   and women, for local aged care establishments and generally putting
   forward in a very forthright manner the interest and the cause of
   small business. 
She mentioned a number of the changes that my Government has undertaken
   since it came into Government. We are very conscious at the moment
   of the economic difficulties of the Asian Pacific region. There
   is no doubt in the world that if we had not set about getting the
   Budget into surplus, if we had not set about getting control of
   the large amount of debt that we were left by the former Labor Government,
   if we had not set about making certain that we were living within
   our means, the Australian economy now would be in a much sicker
   shape than it is. We would have been hurt a lot more because the
   lesson that is coming out of recent economic events is that if you
   don't have your own economic house in order you are going to
   be knocked around and knocked around very badly. 
 So anybody who says that we've done the wrong thing
   over the last two and a quarter years to get the budget into surplus,
   to cut unnecessary expenditure, to undertake industrial relations
   reforms and, very importantly, in immediate prospect, to undertake
   the cause of taxation reform, is taking a very short-sighted view.
   Now I know there are some other things that have been done may have
   been unpopular with some sections of the community but if we hadn't
   of done anything, if we just sat there and allowed Mr Beazley's
   $10.5 billion deficit to continue and to grow even bigger then our
   economic vulnerability now would have been much greater. And you
   can all see that even if you run a good economy there can be difficulties
   in the international environment and it is therefore very important
   that Australia and the people of Australia hold their resolve to
   good policy. And they don't be seduced by snake oil solutions,
   they don't get attracted by people coming along offering overnight,
   simplistic solutions to problems that are very difficult and require
   carefully thought out solutions. And everything that we've
   done over the last two and a quarter years has been designed to
   strengthen the fundamentals of the Australian economy. 
And you know that we have much lower inflation now than we had
   a few years ago. Over the last two and a quarter years there have
   been significant falls in interest rates both in relation to housing
   and in relation to small business. We've undertaken major industrial
   relations reforms. We've implemented all of the specific commitments
   we made to the small business sector. We've improved the taxation
   arrangements regarding provisional tax. We've introduced a
   very generous rollover provision in relation to the sales of small
   businesses whereby if you sell a small business and invest in any
   other kind of business up to a value of $5 million, that reinvestment
   is free of Capital Gains tax. And that, in fact, took that commitment
   a long way beyond what was said during the election campaign. 
I place great importance on the small business sector. I came from
   a small business family. As a young boy I was taught the value and
   the importance in the Australian economy and in the local community
   of small business. It therefore has always occupied a very special
   place in my political heart so to speak because it is the engine
   room of greatest employment growth and the hope of the side for
   future employment growth in this country remains the small business
   sector. 
Now the next thing that we have got to do to further strengthen
   the Australian economy is to change our taxation system to make
   it fairer and better for the benefit of Australia. And I don't
   intend to walk away from taxation reform because it is good for
   Australia. It's very easy when you cop a bit of criticism on
   a proposed reform to say oh well it's too hard, I'll
   walk away'. But what's the point of having a Government
   that says that something is too hard. What's the point of having
   a Government that says that well if there's a bit of criticism
   of something we'll walk away from it. I know, I guess most
   of you know, and I know that Mr Beazley knows in his own heart and
   in his private thoughts that we can't go on forever with the
   present taxation system. I think most sensible thinking Australians,
   forgetting the politics, forgetting the point scoring and the rhetoric
   of politics, when you look at it calmly and analytically and in
   the interests of Australia, you have to conclude that the present
   taxation system is not working as it should. You have to conclude
   that it is unfair. You have to conclude that it discriminates against
   our exporters. You have to conclude that it's confusing to
   many people in small business - the various classifications between
   what's exempt from wholesale sales tax and what isn't.
   You have to conclude that it provides a rich opportunity for people
   using the black economy to evade any of their taxation obligations.
   And you really have to conclude that it needs to be fundamentally
   changed and we are committed to doing that. There is a lot of talk
   about a goods and services tax. Let me make it plain, of course,
   that if we were to introduce a broad based indirect tax or a goods
   and services tax, whatever you might call it. It would, of course,
   be introduced in replacement of existing taxes. And any attempt
   by our opponents to suggest that it's going to be put on top
   of the existing system is absolutely and totally wrong and completely
   dishonest. 
What we are in the business of doing is not increasing the tax
   burden, rather we are in the business of where possible reducing
   it but very importantly improving its fairness and improving it
   in a way that makes the Australian economy more competitive. It
   is an essential message from the rest of the world that every country
   if it is to survive and if it is to grow and to provide more jobs,
   it must be as competitive as possible. And to be competitive we
   have to have a better taxation system. We have to have one that
   takes the load that the present one imposes on the backs of Australian
   exporters off those exporters. So we are very strongly committed
   to a fair, decent change to the Australian taxation system and the
   details of that will be made known and available to the Australian
   public before the next election. And they can have a look at it,
   they can make a judgement and they can decide whether they want
   a Government that is prepared to tackle problems to make Australia
   stronger and better or whether they want a Government that will
   just stick its head in the sand and against its own internal beliefs
   and its own best instincts will say, we are not going to change
   that because it's all too hard and it's more politically
   expedient to try and score points off a Government that is trying
   to do the right thing.
It is easy in public life to be negative, it is easy in public
   life when you don't have any responsibility to say that if
   only I had the responsibility I could fix this problem overnight.
   It's only when you have the responsibility of actually delivering
   that you have to live up to your rhetoric and you have to persuade
   the public that your simplistic, one line solution can, in fact,
   be made to work. We live in a nation which has enormous opportunity,
   it has a very rich history and of all the nations on earth, it has
   the best prospects if we take the right decisions for the 21st Century.
   We are a harmonious country. We've brought millions of people
   from different parts of the world and I am very proud of the fact
   that my own party has within its ranks people who are born in many
   parts of the world and they have come to Australia to make this
   their home. 
We've welcomed people from Europe, we've welcomed people
   from the Middle East, we've welcomed people from Asia and all
   of them have become fine Australians and all of them are making
   a magnificent contribution to a cohesive and harmonious society.
   And instead of us every being apologetic about what this country
   has done we ought to be immensely proud that we have built the civil,
   harmonious society which is without parallel anywhere in the world.
   And I think sometimes we don't feel enough pride about what
   we have achieved on that score but we are inclined to be intimidated
   by those who would preach that we have a rather intolerant and insensitive
   past. Of course like any nation we have blemishes in our past, that
   can't be denied, but we have been remarkably successful in
   blending into one united nation people from the four corners of
   the earth and it has been a very important part of the psychology
   of the modern Australia.
So, ladies and gentlemen, can I thank the city of Armadale for
   according me the civic and civil welcome that it has, can I thank
   you for coming along. Can I say what a very important role local
   government plays in our community, but most importantly what a very
   important role the various organisations that are represented here
   today play in keeping our society together. I'm a great believer
   in tackling problems on the basis that we need a shared endeavour
   between individuals, governments, and community organisations.
Individuals can't do it on their own although they're
   very important and self reliance and individual initiative is a
   very significant element of our society. Governments can't
   do it on their own. Governments are good at some things but they're
   very bad at other things. They're very bad at running businesses,
   I think they ought to get out of businesses that should be left
   to the private sector to run. And I think that underlies the philosophy
   in relation to our approach to privatisation and many other things.
But community organisations are the third arm of that shared endeavour
   and many of them are represented here today. And I thank them for
   the contribution that they make to Australian society. I had the
   opportunity earlier this week in Sydney to release the interim report
   of my taskforce on youth homelessness and I released it at an outreach
   project jointly operated by the Salvation Army and the Sydney City
   Mission, and it's designed to reach out to homeless children
   in Sydney and to try and, importantly, reunite them with their parents,
   and if that fails, well to provide them with a decent future. And
   I want more emphasis placed in relation to homelessness for young
   people on efforts being made to reconcile them and reunite them
   with their parents. Too often in the past perhaps parents have been
   shut out of that equation and have been ignore, but I think more
   effort ought to be made, if it's possible, to bring about a
   reconciliation, because a united, stable family environment still
   provides above and beyond anything else, the best security and the
   best hope for children as they grow up.
So ladies and gentlemen thank you very much for coming this morning.
   I've enjoyed the opportunity of sharing some thoughts with
   you. I've appreciated the welcome with its various forms it
   has taken as I've come here and again can I commend you on
   the wisdom of the choice you made on the 2 March 1996 in sending
   Ricky to Canberra as the Federal Member for the division of Canning.
   And I hope very earnestly that you hold to that wisdom, maintain
   that skilful resolve and make certain that she's sent back
   whenever the next election is held. Thank you very much. 


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Thank you Mr Blank, Mr Spring, my friend and colleague, Phillip Baressi,
 my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a delight to be back in Ringwood. It is not, as Phillip reminded
 you the first time, but it is an opportunity for me to renew some
 associations that I've made over the years particularly with
 the small business community in this part of Melbourne. And can I
 thank those who have put this afternoon's gathering together
 because as Phillip Baressi said at the end of his introductory speech
 that Members of Parliament do need to retain very direct methods of
 communication with the people who elect them.
Government in modern times is more complex, more difficult, more challenging
 than ever before. Expectations are high. The sense of disappointment
 and the sense of frustration is also high if expectations are not
 realised. It is therefore important that this kind of personal contact
 be achieved on as many occasions as possible and I personally have
 endeavoured in the two and a quarter years that I've been Prime
 Minister to visit all parts of our country and to talk to all sections
 of the community to listen to what they have to say and to communicate
 the reasons why the Government has taken certain actions.
Over the past couple of days that we've had in Melbourne, a major
 economic conference which has been addressed by international visitors,
 by world economists, by officials of the World Banks, by leaders of
 Asian communities and Asian countries including the Chief Executive
 of the Hong Kong region of China and [inaudible] Ministers from Singapore.
 I thought some of the reporting and some of the messages that came
 out of yesterday's section of the conference were excessively
 pessimistic. There are difficulties economically in Asia and many
 of the Asian countries are going through a greater economic melt down
 than they have previously experienced. But I thought the use of the
 word depression was a little excessive and quite alarming and certainly
 doesn't represent the reading of the situation that I have that
 is available to me from our economic advisers.
Nonetheless, we are now in Australia operating against the background
 of an Asian Pacific region dramatically different than what it was
 two or three years ago. And as a result of that I am all the more
 of the view that the actions that the Government has taken to strengthen
 and protect the Australian economy over the last two and a quarter
 years were absolutely essential. Without in any way winning the sound
 of self congratulatory which is always a mistake in public life, can
 I very simply say to you that if we had not set about reducing the
 very large budget deficit we inherited, if we had not set about reducing
 debts, if we had not set about making other changes to the economic
 infrastructure of Australia, we would not now have what are in truth,
 the strongest economic foundations that Australia has had for a quarter
 of a century. And if we had not done those things we would now be
 a lot weaker and a lot more vulnerable as a result of what has occurred
 in our region of the world. Because whether we like it or not we do
 live in a global economy.
Some of us may want it other ways. We may think it would be terrific
 in the words of the old song, Stop the World, I Want to Get Off. But
 you don't have that option. The world won't allow you the
 luxury of stopping and getting off. And whether we like it or not,
 if we are not an attractive location for investment, that foreign
 investment will go somewhere else. Overseas companies and countries
 don't invest Australia out of nostalgia. They invest in Australia
 because Australia gives them a good return. And if we don't give
 them a good return, or if we don't make them welcome, they'll
 take their investment somewhere else. And instead of their investment
 employing thousands Australians, it will employ thousands of Malaysians
 or thousands of Americans, or thousands of Englishmen or thousands
 of Germans or thousands of Italians.
That is the nature of a global economy. And that is why it's
 so necessary at a time like this for governments to do things that
 strengthen us and we have been able to do that because over the last
 little while we've reduced that deficit mightily. We are now
 in surplus for the first time in over ten years. And we can look forward,
 if all our friends can just realise, to an essentially debt free start
 for the 21st century. And that's a very important achievement.
 We do have the lowest interest rates for 30 years for both housing
 and small business and that means a lot particularly to people here
 in the real estate business. It means a lot to men and women in small
 business. Because although I know you'd like the interest rates
 to be lower, they are significantly lower now than what they were
 three, four, five years ago.
That's very important to the outlook and the operations of those
 businesses. We have low inflation rates, in fact, Australia has got
 about the lowest inflation rate in the Western world. And we have
 made a lot of very important changes to industrial relations as Phillip
 mentioned. The important changes we have made to provide a better
 balance between some of the large corporations and some of the small
 business sector.
Small business is something that is very close not only to my own
 heart as a person because I grew up in a small business environment
 and I learnt at a very early age that there was nothing more worthwhile
 in life than starting your own business with absolutely nothing and
 making a go of it, and it is something that I have believed in very
 strongly all of my life. But my Government is also very committed
 to the role of small business as a generator of employment. We've
 had a lot of debate at the moment about the fact that our Native Title
 Bill is tied up in the Senate because the Opposition parties won't
 vote for it. It's not the only Bill, can I say that is tied up
 in the Senate.
There is also a Bill dealing with unfair dismissals which will make
 the law even better for small business than the changes than we made
 after we were elected and that's also being held up in the Senate
 and it's also one of the pieces of legislation that if there
 were a joint sitting with the two houses of Parliament after a double
 dissolution, if one were to occur, that would be presented for passage.
So we have done a lot to make changes and I know there is quite a
 bit of debate in the Australian community at the present time about
 the impact of economic change on our community. Some of those impacts
 are significant to sections of the Australian community. Change is
 never easy and change needs explaining, change needs justification
 and change should only ever be embraced if it's going to produce
 a better result than the one that it addresses. But there really is
 very little option for this country, in fact there is no option in
 that it must continue to make desirable changes and one of those desirable
 changes is to reform our taxation system.
Now that has been around for a very long time and deep down, most
 people in public life on both sides of politics know that sooner or
 later we have to reform our taxation system. There are some things
 you never do because they make the country worse. There are some things
 you never do because even if you do them, they don't make the
 country any better. There are other things that you know that when
 you have finally done them and you've summoned the courage to
 do them, they will produce a better country and a better economy..
 And a better taxation system is one of those things. We do have a
 very old-fashioned taxation system. There aren't many countries
 in the world that have the same wholesale taxation system that Australia
 has. There are a few countries but they aren't really at the
 top of the ladder as far as competitiveness and economic performance
 are concerned.
And it is a very funny old system, it says that if you are wealthy
 enough to buy a Lear jet, you don't pay any wholesale sales tax
 but if you are like the rest of us and you've got a family car
 you pay 22 per cent. It's a system that says that if you buy
 flavoured milk you pay sales tax and if you buy ordinary milk you
 don't. It imposes very high sales taxes on biscuits and orange
 juice concentrate but it doesn't impose any sales tax on caviar.
 It's based upon the assumption now quite erroneous that most
 of the economic activity in Australia is manufacturing. Yet in reality
 manufacturing is a smaller section of the economic activity than used
 to be the case when it was imposed.
We had a report this morning from the Institute of Chartered Accountants
 that said that incredibly enough, a family of two adults of mum and
 dad and two children with only one income earner, that was earning
 $20,000 a year was, in fact, $9 a week better off after tax than say
 a family earning $30,000 a year. Now, that has to be wrong, it's
 crazy and it's an illustration of the sort of anachronisms and
 the weaknesses and the flaws that have developed in our taxation system
 over the years. And that's why we want to address it. We are
 not wanting to address it because of revolution but changing the Australian
 taxation system is the next logical thing to do to make the Australian
 economy better and stronger, to give it more security, stability and
 safety.
Now I could put it off, I could say: Oh well look, we won't go
 to the next election with a taxation reform policy. If I get re-elected
 I'll have a meeting, I'll call everybody together and I'll
 have a meeting to talk about it. Now does anybody really imagine that
 out of that meeting you'll get a consensus to borrow the words
 of one of my predecessors? Does anybody really imagine that if you
 got the Liberal Party and the National Party and the Labor Party and
 anybody else who wanted to come along at a political level, and you
 got the business community, small and large in the middle, you've
 got the welfare sector, you've got the trade unions, you've
 got them all together, does anybody really imagine that you are going
 to get a consensus about the detail of it? You'd have a lot of
 debate, you'd have a lot of set piece speeches.(inaudible) at
 the taxation summit in 1985 but at the end of the day there would
 be no clear consensus and what people would say: oh well, the Government's
 got to decide what to do. And that's a bit proper, actually because
 the governments do have to decide what to do because that's what
 they are elected to do. Governments are elected to make decisions
 . They should have meetings and they should consult and heaven knows,
 Australia's politicians have been consulting the Australian community
 about taxation reform now for the whole time I've been in politics.
I was elected to Parliament in 1974 and that was one year after Billy
 Snedden, the late Billy Snedden, as Federal Treasurer in the McMahon
 Government had commissioned the (inaudible) committee. It was a committee
 of inquiry into Australia's taxation system chaired by a New
 South Wales judge who was a taxation expert, or had been a taxation
 expert when he practiced at the bar. And they brought down a report
 in 1975, a year after I became a Member of Parliament, recommending
 fundamental reforms of Australia's taxation system. And believe
 it or not, do you know what they recommend? They recommended the introduction
 of a broad based indirect tax. You might now call it a GST or a value
 added tax or whatever you'd like to call it. They recommended
 its introduction in place of a whole lot of existing indirect taxes
 and it actually says the wholesale sales tax was inefficient and out
 of date and anachronistic and it drew attention to the deleterious
 effects of marginal taxation rates on low income earners, like the
 example that I quoted.
Isn't it incredible. That was in 1975. It is now 1998, 23 years
 later and the system is even more in need of change. So I could, I
 could sort of do the, I think, rather weak thing and that is, give
 the idea away and say we are going to have a meeting and if I did
 that and we happened to get re-elected and we have a meeting, that
 won't achieve anything. It'll be back on my desk and I have
 to decide whether we are going to put a plan to the Australian people
 or I am going to forget about it forever.
My opponent, Mr Beazley, says the present system is terrific and doesn't
 need any change so if he gets elected you won't get any change
 there. And the other party on the horizon now, the One Nation party,
 agrees with Mr Beazley. It also says the present system is terrific,
 so you won't get any change out of that lot either. So if you
 really want to have a change to the taxation system the one great
 opportunity is to really present it now and that's what we intend
 to do before the election. And people will have an opportunity of
 looking at it. But sooner or later, with these difficult things you
 either have to say to the Australian people: it's too hard, count
 me out, I can't do it. Or you've got to bite the bullet
 and have a go, and I think the Australian people want the Government
 they elect to have a go. If they don't like it, well they'll
 vote against it and that's the democratic process.
But I think they will like it. I think they will respond to a plan
 that addresses the weaknesses of the present system. And one of the
 great virtues of the taxation reform we have in mind is that it will
 help our exports and we need to do that because in a difficult world
 environment, exporting is very important. And you can have taxation
 change that protects the poor, you certainly can. And we have consulted
 very extensively with the Australian Council of Social Services in
 putting together our plan and I hear what was said earlier about the
 need for any change not to involve a significant burden on the small
 business sector. But there are significant benefits for the simple
 system. One of the great benefits of the simpler system, an effective,
 broad based indirect tax in place of the existing taxes, can I just
 make that point, people regularly talk about introducing a GST. We
 are not going to introduce a GST. We are considering introducing something
 called that in place of existing taxes but there is no way we are
 going to put a new tax on top of the existing taxes. We are not that
 stupid. We have no intention of doing that.
But what we are considering doing and what will obviously be part
 of the plan is to bring in a broad based, indirect tax or GST in place
 of existing taxes. And also to make, of course, significant changes
 to personal income tax levels. So it's a total package, not a
 GST on its own, it's not personal income tax cuts on its own.
 It's a total reform of the system. And we are doing it because
 we think it will be good for Australia, that's the reason why
 we are doing it. And I believe that the Australian people will support
 reform if it satisfies two conditions.
One of those conditions is that it should be good for the country,
 that's the first thing. And secondly, is that it ought to be
 fair. Australians are great believers in fairness and I don't
 think the present system is fair and my suspicion is a lot of Australians
 don't think it's fair any longer, so they want that changed.
 So we are committed to reform in that area, not because of any ideological
 zeal, not because we have any zealous commitments to what is contemptuously
 called economic rationalism. We are committed to taxation reform because
 we think it will be good for our country. And that's what governments
 are elected to do.
Sometimes you've got to weather the storm of criticism and sometimes
 you've got to deal with people like One Nation who come onto
 the horizon and say, oh look, don't take any notice of that,
 there are simple solutions. I mean their National Director a couple
 of days ago was saying the solution to a cheap bank loan was to print
 money.
Print money.
He said you can have a two per cent loan from a bank. I made the observation
 that well, it's nice to be a borrower at two per cent but who
 is going to lend to the bank at one and a half per cent so it can
 afford to lend at two per cent because I thought banks operated on
 the principle, and I am obviously wrong, that you borrow from "x"
 and you lend to "y" and you pay "x" a little less
 than you charge "y" and that's called your profit.
 Well that's how I thought the system worked but I am obviously
 wrong. What you do is print money.
That's how you do it, you print money and I mean, that would
 do wonders for the savings of our retired community because if you
 start printing money you'll send inflation through the roof.
 You start printing money and you'll undermine the whole basis
 of and our economy, I think, it's very interesting now that there's
 a bit more focus on these alternative propositions, that they are
 now starting to get a bit of air play and people are starting to have
 a look at it. I mean, once you get people elected to Parliament, well,
 you are entitled to have your policies looked at like everybody else.
 Everything I say gets examined, gee does it ever. Everything I say
 gets examined. A lot of it gets misrepresented too but that's
 another matter and I won't weary you with that and I don't
 see why other people on the Australian political scene should be denied
 the privilege of having their statements examined in great detail
 and as they are examined in great detail I think people will start
 to see the folly of them.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have made a number of very, very major improvements
 over the last two and a quarter years in the operation of our economy
 and it has given us an inner strength which has enabled us to weather
 the worst of the Asian economic storm. We aren't untouched by
 that storm and we won't remain untouched by it. But if we had
 not done what we had done over the last two and a quarter years, we
 would have been absolutely ravaged by that economic storm and it would
 have inflicted a great deal more damage on the Australian economy,
 than has been the case over the last six months in particular. And
 it is very necessary therefore that it continue where change, further
 change and further reform is essential. It is very important that
 we continue on that journey.
It is very important that we communicate the need for that change
 in reform and have an understanding of its impact on all sections
 of the Australian community. And we need energetic, in touch local
 representatives and Phillip is certainly one of those. And can I say
 that he has been an extraordinarily energetic representative for the
 electorate of Deakin in the Federal Parliament. He comes of this area,
 he has experienced how small business operates in this area. His family
 involvement is in this area. And he represents a style of local politician
 that he is very effective. He is quietly persistent. He's a person
 who collars Ministers with an almost voracious appetite in the corridors
 of Parliament to put a point of view on a proposition on behalf of
 his constituents, and can I say he argued very strongly with a lot
 of his other Victorian Federal colleagues for changes in the laws,
 achieving a fairer balance between the operations of small and large
 businesses within our community. And he's argued very strongly
 for the interests of this part of Melbourne to be properly cared for,
 whatever decisions have been taken by the Federal Government.
Ladies and gentlemen, he's a first class representative and that,
 of course, is one of a number of reasons why I am absolutely delighted
 to be here today. Can I say that the strength of Australia's
 communities and their willingness to work together, the great spirit
 of voluntarism which is a defiant strength in the Australian personality
 which is readily recognisable wherever you go in Australia - it is
 one of the most uplifting things that I find as I go around our country,
 and certainly very evident here today and I do appreciate the opportunity
 of addressing such a cross section of people, and I want to acknowledge,
 although this is very much a small business gathering, I do want to
 acknowledge the presence in the audience of local clergymen, of people
 who are involved in making community activities of looking after the
 less fortunate.
I just took the opportunity before coming here and spending three
 quarters of an hour at that marvellous Salvation Army retirement village,
 Inala, a few miles away and it was a perfect demonstration of how
 well our community organisations care for people. And it's an
 enormous tribute to that great organisation, the Salvation Army.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thought some of the remarks made yesterday
 at that conference were excessively pessimistic but, nonetheless,
 our region is going through difficult times and if I could just make
 a quiet, have a quiet political commercial, I don't think now
 is really the time to put aside safety, stability and security in
 a sea of economic turbulence to go back to policies that deliver deficit
 and debt or alternatively, experiment with policies which are based
 upon such dubious propositions as sitting up 24 hours of the day,
 printing money in order to solve our economic difficulties. I think
 the time really is to hang on to a respectable, stable, secure approach.
 It has given Australia a great community of strength and stability
 in a time of considerable economic difficulty.
Thank you.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Peter, to your wife Carol, to my Federal
   Parliamentary colleagues, Senator Synon, to John Richardson and
   my other State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
There seems, at the moment in politics, to be a little bit of discussion
   about nostalgia and about going back, and I have to say that no
   one group in Australian politics, of course, has a mortgage on nostalgia
   and being warmly reminded of one's roots. And I don't
   think in a political sense there's anything quite so warmly
   nostalgic about coming to a Liberal Party function in Victoria and
   being introduced behind a pipe band given the great Scottish affections
   and ancestry of the founder of our Party and the longest serving
   Prime Minister in Australia's history, Sir Robert Menzies.
I am very happy to be back in the electorate of Aston, Peter, and
   I will, of course, never return in any of my former guises to this
   electorate having visited it on three occasions in different guises.
   And you are absolutely right and you show an appropriate degree
   of political emphasis and political skill in mentioning the fact
   that this electorate does have the largest number of mortgage-ors
   in Australia on a per capita basis. And I will complete that by
   saying, of course, that the message for them is that my Government
   has delivered the lowest housing interest rates for 30 years and
   that's a message that will be repeated during the course of
   the next few weeks, the next few months and indeed until some date
   between now and when the election is due, which constitutionally
   of course is about late May of next year, that's the latest
   date. Now, I'm not, for the benefit of the press who are travelling
   with me or indeed, and I don't mean this unkindly for anybody
   else's benefit about to muse aloud about when the election
   might be held. That is something that all Prime Ministers decide
   at the right time and in the right circumstances after talking to
   their senior colleagues. But I do want to share with you a few thoughts
   about where Australia has some from and where we are going and some
   of the political challenges on the horizon at the present time.
We've had in Melbourne over the last few days a very important
   conference dealing with Australia's trade relationships with
   the rest of the world. We've had a number of very well reported
   speeches, one or two of them from some of our visitors, I think,
   have been unduly pessimistic. I don't believe it is often particularly
   helpful for some visitors to this country to use words like depression'
   and to throw them around rather carelessly particularly given some
   of the economic difficulties of our friends in the Asia-Pacific
   region. But there is little doubt that the Asia-Pacific region is
   going through its worst economic experience in the last 30 or 40
   years. But it's also very important to keep the circumstances
   of what is happening in the Asia-Pacific region in a very clear
   perspective. 
And let me illustrate by referring to a country like Indonesia.
   Everyone knows that Indonesia's gone through a very difficult
   time and there are many difficult months ahead for that country.
   It has not only gone through difficult times economically but also
   politically and there's been a change of leadership from President
   Soeharto to the new President Dr Habibie. But even when you take
   all that into account, the living standards of Indonesian people,
   despite all of the downturn and all of the meltdown and all of the
   loss of wealth, the living standards of the Indonesian people now
   are dramatically higher than what they were at the beginning of
   the 1990s.
So therefore what we have to do is to keep in perspective what
   is occurring in our part of the world. The other thing that we should
   remember, of course, is how Australia is effected by what is happening
   in our region. Now it is quite impossible for Australia not to be
   effected by what is occurring in our region. We now sell 34 per
   cent of all of our exports to two countries alone - that's
   Japan and Korea. Those two countries are far and away our most important
   destinations for the goods that we sell abroad and inevitably because
   of those linkages and linkages with other parts of the Asian region
   we are going to be effected by a downturn in those countries. But
   the reality is that we have not been effected nearly as badly as
   we might have been and the reason for that, quite unmistakably,
   is that when our Government took office we set about getting Australia's
   economic house in order, and I am defiantly proud of what my Government
   has done over the past two-and-a-quarter years. Peter Costello as
   Treasurer supported by all of the other Ministers having responsibility
   for economic management has done an absolutely superb job in turning
   around Australia's finances.
Now, I know that there are some of the decisions that we have taken
   that some in the community haven't liked, and I am sure there
   are a number of people here tonight who personally haven't
   liked some of the decisions that we have taken. I know that, I have
   been in politics a very long time and I know that occasionally you
   take decisions that adversely affect people who are even your loyalist
   supporters. I know that, I am conscious of that. I know that some
   of the decisions we took in relation to such issues as superannuation
   a couple of years ago caused a deal of heartburning amongst some
   of our own supporters. I also know that some of the decisions we
   took in other areas affected people who were not necessarily our
   supporters.
But that is not the point of who somebody affected by a decision
   supports, it's a question of what the end product of all of
   those decisions are, and the end product of all of the decisions
   we have taken is that we have turned a Budget deficit of $10.5 billion
   a year into a surplus of $2.7 billion. We have produced the lowest
   interest rates in 30 years. We have the prospect of starting the
   21st Century with virtually no Federal Government debt and when
   you consider that in 1995 the Federal Government debt, the GDP ratio,
   was about 20 per cent, that is a remarkable turnaround. We have
   the lowest inflation rate in the OECD area and we have in prospect,
   despite the difficulties of our region, some of the highest growth
   rates amongst the industrialised countries for 1998 and 1999. 
Now the net result of all of that is that we have given to the
   Australian economy a degree of protection from what has happened
   in Asia that would simply not have been there if we had not been
   elected and would not have been there if we had listened to the
   advice we received from our opponents in the Labor Party and the
   Australian Democrats. Because one of the galling things about the
   Labor Opposition is that not only did they create the problem we
   were given the responsibility of fixing up, but at every step of
   the way they have tried to prevent us fixing the problem. It's
   one thing to create a difficulty and then hand it over to somebody
   else and say: we'll give you two or three years to fix it up.
   It's entirely another thing to create the problem, hand it
   over to somebody else and go about trying to stop the other crowd
   fixing the problem in the time that they are in Government. Because
   all of the attempts virtually we made to reduce the budget deficit
   and to get our economic house in order were obstructed by the Australian
   Labor Party and others in the Senate. We were able, through a combination
   of circumstances, to get most of those budget measures through.
   But it oughtn't to be forgotten now that Australia faces this
   great economic difficulty in Asia that not only did my Government,
   the Coalition Government, set about building the strongest economic
   foundations that Australia has had in 25 years but we did it in
   the face of the strongest possible opposition from our opponents.
The truth is that if we hadn't have done what we have done
   over the last two-and-a- quarter years Australia now would be weaker,
   more vulnerable, more exposed, our living standards more at risk
   and overseas confidence in the strength of the Australian economy
   greatly reduced. So what we have done over that period of time has
   been to build those very strong foundations and the reality is,
   my friends, that there are more things that must be done. I know
   that there are many in the community who are somewhat weary with
   economic and social change. I understand that. Peter mentioned a
   moment ago what happened in Queensland last weekend. 
Most of what happened in Queensland last weekend, not all of it,
   but most of it is due to the fact there are Australians who feel
   a sense of vulnerability because of the economic and social change
   that has occurred in our nation over the last few years. I understand
   that. I sympathise with, and I regard the great bulk of those people
   who feel that way as like the rest of us - ordinary decent Australians
   who are concerned about their future and the future of their families.
   But of course there are ways of securing your future, that will
   secure your future. There are other ways which I'll come to
   in a moment which in fact will make your future even more vulnerable
   and even more precarious. But in the globalised world in which we
   now live, and we have no option, we're all part of it. You
   can't in the words of the old song "stop the world because
   I want to get off". That's not an option. No country can
   do that. 
If we start being offensive to foreign investors they'll take
   their investments somewhere else, and for good measure the jobs
   in Australia that they would have created with that investment will
   follow to the other destination. This idea that you can be rude
   to foreign investors and say we don't want you but still keep
   the jobs that foreign investment creates, is of course completely
   mythical. I know that Australians worry when on occasions some of
   our great brand names like Arnott's Biscuits, and Bundaberg
   Sugar disappear and are bought by people overseas. I understand
   that. But I also understand that those things result from decisions
   made by Australian shareholders to sell their shares to overseas
   investors. I also know that this country would have a lower living
   standard and there would be fewer jobs for Australians if we had
   not accepted investment from foreign companies. 
I met a gentleman earlier this evening, forgive me Sir, I just
   can't immediately recall your name, but you run the McDonald's
   franchise in this area. Everybody else knows you. That man's
   company, or that man's franchise company, employs 55,000 Australians.
   Now that's a foreign company. If we hadn't been beckoning
   to foreign investment, that's 55,000 Australians that wouldn't
   have been employed. Everyone knows we would never have had a motor
   manufacturing industry in this country if we hadn't way back
   in the late 1940's accepted investment from General Motors.
   And everyone knows that there are many other industries in this
   country that simply wouldn't be here if it hadn't been
   for foreign investment and every economy in the world worth its
   salt at some period of its economic history has accepted investment
   from abroad. 
In the late 1890's most of the railroads and much of the major
   investment in the United States was British and there've been
   long periods in American history where foreign investment from Japan
   and Britain and from other parts of the world, has bulked very large
   in the economy of the most, the largest and most powerful economy
   in the world. Now, of course you need rules that ensure that if
   Australian equity is available it gets a fair crack of the whip.
   I can remember when I was Treasurer in the late 1970's. I had
   some fairly vigorous arguments with the then Queensland Government
   when I insisted that there should be Australian equity in some of
   the major coal mining developments in Queensland and I'm glad
   I did because it ensured that Australia had a stake. But the point
   ladies and gentleman is that we have a choice as a nation. We don't
   have enough domestic savings of our own to do everything that we
   want to do. Now if we want to continue growing our living standards,
   if we want to continue to have more investment that employs more
   Australians, then unless we save more as a community, and there's
   no sign that we're going to change our habits dramatically
   enough overnight for that to occur, then if we want those extra
   jobs and that higher standard of living, we've got to draw
   on the savings of foreigners and accept large amounts of foreign
   investment in this country. You don't have the option of keeping
   the living standards and not having the foreign investment. You
   want the living standards, given our savings level, you've
   got to take the foreign investment. Now I've gone on perhaps
   for a few moments about that issue because it's in the news
   at the moment. 
We not only have before us at the present time in Australia, we
   not only have on offer the failed debt and deficit policies of the
   Australian Labor Party, but we now have on offer the rather unworkable,
   impractical, utterly out of touch economic policies of the One Nation
   Party. We had their national director the other day saying you could
   have bank loans at 2%. I thought to myself that's an interesting
   proposition. Who are the Australians lining up to lend the bank
   their money at 1.5%. I wandered around, I stopped few people in
   the street and I said would you lend at 1.5%, and they said no.
   And then I heard on the radio that the national director was saying,
   you don't, that's not the point. What you do is you print
   the money. I don't think I've heard anybody for a decade
   or more, twenty years, who regards himself or herself as a serious
   player in Australia politics suggest that the answer to any economic
   problem is to print money. Everyone in this audience knows that
   such a policy would be fundamentally disastrous. That it would push
   inflation through the roof and most seriously of all, it would destroy
   the savings of retired people in our community. And it's very
   interesting that some of the appeal of this party is directed to
   older Australians. The clarion call of nostalgia of returning to
   a past that did have some desirable features, but nonetheless is
   the past, but that particular policy would do enormous damage to
   retired people. It would do enormous damage to any Australians who
   have saved. 
But what I'm saying to you ladies and gentleman, and I think
   you may have got my drift, that in these times of economic challenge
   from abroad, it is no time to turn back to a party that gave us
   deficit and debt. When Peter Costello became Treasurer, he found
   that over a period of eight or nine years alone the former Government
   had run up a Federal Government debt of about $95 billion. And it
   was running at the rate of about $10 billion a year and we have
   of course turned that around. So it's not a time to go back
   to those sort of failed policies. Nor is it a time to experiment
   with risky, faulty, out-of- touch, unreal, simplistic economic solutions.
   Nor is it a time to sound unwelcoming to foreign investment because
   if you don't welcome foreign investment in the globalised world
   economy you chase jobs out of Australia and that is undeniably the
   economic choices that face our country. But the other thing you
   must do also is to continue to make further changes that are needed
   to strengthen Australia. And that of course brings me to the issue
   of taxation reform. 
Australia, as anybody who cares about the future of our country,
   as anybody who's thought about it knows, Australia cannot go
   on forever with its present taxation system. Now I know that there
   are people who are saying you don't talk about taxation before
   an election, whenever that election may be held. You do something
   about it afterwards. You go to the election and you say, well, we'll
   have a meeting about taxation. Mr Hawke did that way back in 1984.
   He had a meeting and now 14 years later, 13 years after the meeting
   and 14 years after he promised the meeting, we still haven't
   got a reformed taxation system. It's still ramshackle and out
   of touch and yet some people say to me, John, have a meeting. Budget,
   have a meeting. I can't do that. I've spoken so often
   and Peter Costello has spoken so often of the need for tax reform
   in this country. It's simply not credible for us to now turn
   around and say, no we don't need that any more. We'll
   have a meeting and we'll see if we can muddle through. There's
   no chance on Earth that at a meeting you could get a consensus.
   You'd get everybody in. You'd get the Liberal Party in,
   the National Party in, the Labor Party, everybody else, the welfare
   groups, the business community, the trade unions, you'd have
   a talk and at the end of the day everybody would have their own
   view. And you know what the commentators would say? It's now
   up to the Government to make a decision. And that's fair enough.
   That's what Governments are elected to do. They're elected
   to make decisions into proposed policy description. Now I don't
   think ladies and gentleman, if we want taxation reform in this country,
   there is really no alternative other than to lay it out before the
   election which we intend to do and to campaign on it and to ask
   the Australian people to support it because it's good for Australia.
   Not because we have some ideological zeal about tax reform, it's
   because I believe in all my being and based on all the years I've
   been in politics that the next logical step that's needed to
   further strengthen the Australia economy is to reform the Australian
   taxation system. That's why I'm in favour of it. And what's
   more I know that Mr Beazley knows deep down that we ought to reform
   the tax system too because back in the mid 1980's when Mr Keating
   was trying to change the tax system, Mr Beazley and Mr Evans were
   his two strongest supporters. And most people who've studied
   the tax system know this. And even the people who are trying to
   say to me. well look don't do it now, they say to me in the
   next breath, we know it's got to be done but do it later, do
   it some other time. But there comes a point when you can't
   kid to the public about something like that. There comes a point
   when you have to be absolutely direct about it. Now we do need a
   new system. We're not going to bring in a goods and services
   tax on top of the existing taxes. People run around, they hold up
   these placards saying no GST. I mean they're very interesting.
   Well of course I agree with them if you're talking about putting
   a GST on top of the existing system. That would be crazy, it would
   be unfair, and it would be unthinkable. It's always been the
   case that if you look at a GST you are looking at it to replace
   existing indirect taxes and you're also looking at accompanying
   it with the introduction of personal income tax cuts. And you're
   also looking at addressing the difficulties of the Commonwealth-State
   financial relationship that cause the occasional exchange over the
   airways between Commonwealth and State Government. And your also
   looking at making certain that there is protection for the low income
   in Australia. I mean these are the principles that I laid down.
   I mean of course I'm not going to bring in a GST on its own
   or whatever you want to call it. Of course I'm not going to
   do that. It's never been in contemplation. But we do have a
   system that's breaking down. I frequently say do you want to
   go on with a system that allows the ten people in this audience
   who can afford to buy a lear jet, or is it five, or is it twenty,
   I don't know, maybe it's none, to buy it without paying
   any sales tax at all. But the rest of us who buy a family car have
   got to pay a wholesale sales tax of 22%. Do we want a tax system
   that says that you pay a sales tax on flavoured milk and many household
   utensils, but you don't pay any on caviar. You pay it on orange
   juice concentrate but you don't pay it on other things. And
   I could spend the whole night regaling you with a list of anomaly
   of the wholesale tax system that was developed at a time when the
   overwhelming bulk of economic activity in Australia was manufacturing
   and the creating of goods and there was no service industry. Of
   course we need a system, a new system and we need something that
   gives more coherence and fairness and balance. And we certainly
   need a system that helps our exporters. One of the great advantages
   of a goods and services tax, or a value added tax, or broad based
   indirect tax or whatever name you call it, is that it doesn't
   impact on exports and that will make our exports more competitive.
   And that is why most other countries, most of the countries with
   which we trade have that taxation system. Why on Earth we continue
   to burden our exporters with the old fashioned system that we have
   is beyond my understanding. And they're the sort of issues
   that our political opponents, whether in the Labor Party or One
   Nation or whatever, have got to confront. I mean are Mr Beazley
   and Mrs Hanson that the present system is perfect and they don't
   want it changed? Are they really saying that after all the years
   of study we don't need a new tax system and heaven knows the
   tax system's been understudied for all the time I've been
   in politics. I entered Parliament in 1974 and a year before I came
   in, the late Billy Sneddon commissioned the Asprey Committee to
   inquire into the Australian taxation system. And do you know what
   it recommended. It recommended the introduction of a broad based
   indirect tax to replace the wholesale sales tax. And it said that
   marginal rates of income tax were further incentive, and it said
   there need to be reform. And that report was delivered to the Whitlam
   Government in 1975 which wasn't a good year for the Whitlam
   Government, and of course there wasn't much done about it.
   And then various attempts have been made ever since to reform the
   Australian taxation system but nothing serious has happened. And
   that is why I heard this morning on the radio as I was driving from
   one electorate to the other here in Melbourne, I visited quite a
   few today, I heard a report from the Institute of Chartered Accountants
   in which they said that, that under the present taxation system,
   a family earning $20,000 a year with two children and one bread
   winner, that that particular family is relatively better off under
   the taxation system than a family earning $30,000. In other words
   the family earning $30,000 a year with the same structure, is in
   fact $9 a week worse off after taxation. Now that's just one
   example of how animalist the present taxation system is. And that
   really does have to be addressed.
There are just two other things I want to say to you. And that
   is that it is very important to different parts of Australia that
   we do get the problem of native title resolved. This has been a
   very difficult issue for Australia, and it has been a very difficult
   issue for Australia because much of the debate has been exaggerated
   and much of the debate has been the subject of emotional exchanges.
   The bill that we have put forward, despite what has been said about
   it, respects all of the basic principles of the original decision
   of the High Court of Australia in the Mabo case. The bill that we
   have put forward is already a compromise. The bill that we have
   put forward does not meet all of the aspirations of people who believe
   that when the original Native Title Act was passed in 1993, that
   the grant of a pastoral lease completely extinguish Native Title,
   and there are many people who said after 1996 when the High Court
   brought down its decision in the Wik, that all you had to do was
   to overturn that decision and go back to what the belief had been
   in 1993. And we decided in the interests of trying 


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Campbell, and my friend and colleague Bruce
 Billson, and ladies and gentlemen.
It's part of the delight of being Prime Minister of Australia
 that you get numerous opportunities to go around the country and to
 meet in a very informal, social atmosphere, different sections of
 the Australian community. And I'm especially delighted to be
 at this Veterans' Village this morning and just to say very directly
 to all of you that no country can ever do enough for the men and women
 of this country who put their lives on the line to defend it during
 wartime.
And my Government, in company with other governments, have tried over
 the years to do the right thing by the returned service men and women
 of Australia. We have recently made a number of announcements extending
 the Gold Card, extending the Seniors' Card which will be of great
 benefit to veterans and to their families. And whenever I can I take
 the opportunity, on behalf of the rest of the Australian community,
 to express the gratitude of our nation to those men and women who
 did so much in most cases so many years ago.
Recently I led a pilgrimage of returned service men and their families
 to the notorious Hellfire Pass in Thailand and I opened the Hellfire
 Pass Museum on Anzac Day to honour the sacrifice of those Australians
 who died in such terrible circumstances, and also to honour those
 who survived. Many of them were accompanied by their children and
 their grandchildren, and it was a very experience, indeed it was one
 of the most meaningful experiences of my Prime Ministership. And the
 way in which the different generations of Australians, who had bothered
 under their own steam and at their own expense, to travel to that
 remote part of Thailand to pay their respects to those brave Australians
 who did so much to give us the freedom and the way of life that we
 have.
Thank you very much for having me here. It is not an occasion for
 long speeches. It is an opportunity for me to have a cup of tea, to
 chat to you, to express my admiration for the contribution that you
 made to the country, to assure you of the continued understanding
 and support of people in Government for those people who have done
 so much, to thank the staff, to compliment the RSL, which is a great
 organisation, on the role that it plays in caring for veterans here
 in Victoria, and all around Australia. It is an ongoing responsibility
 and one that the Government respects and supports and will continue
 to support in the years ahead.
And could I just put in a plug, not excessively but in a very general
 personal sense for Bruce. He is a hard working fellow, he really does
 doggedly pursue Ministers on behalf of the people of his electorate
 and that is what a local member should do. He looks after all of them,
 whether they like him, whether they vote for him, or they don't
 vote, that his responsibility.
But, ladies and gentlemen, again my thanks and it is very nice of
 you to have me amongst you and I hope to have the opportunity over
 a cup of tea of talking to you.
Thanks a lot.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
 Thank you Bruce, to you and to my other Parliamentary colleagues,
 to the Mayors of the local municipalities, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm here to do two things. Firstly and most importantly, to express
 my support and my commendation for Bruce as your local federal member.
 He has been a very energetic and active representative of the people
 of Dunkley since he was elected in March of 1996. He's a real
 local member, he takes up the cudgels on behalf of local organisations,
 he drives Ministers to distraction until he gets satisfactory answers,
 and that is exactly what a good local member should do and I commend
 him to you in the warmest possible way.
The other thing I want to say to you very generally ladies and gentlemen,
 is something that's an important message to Australians, wherever
 they live at the present time, and that is that there is little doubt
 as you read in the newspapers, as you see on television, that in some
 parts of the world, and most particularly in the Asian-Pacific region,
 there's a fair amount of economic turmoil and a number of countries
 are going through an extremely difficult time. Now, whilst Australia
 can't hope to be completely isolated from that, we can hope if
 we do the right thing, to weather the storm of the economic turmoil
 in Asia, without it doing us any lasting damage.
And that is the objective of my Government. And that is why over the
 past two-and-a- quarter years we've set about creating a budget
 surplus, we've set about putting our economic house in order.
I know that in the process of doing that we've taken a few decisions
 that not everybody has liked, and there is probably some people in
 this room who haven't liked some of the decisions that we've
 taken. I understand that, I'm sympathetic to that, but the general
 objective has been to protect Australia and to give Australia economic
 stability, security and safety in a sea of economic turmoil. And we
 have done that, and if we had not done that, can I say to you without
 any fear of contradiction, that we would be a far more worried and
 vulnerable and weakened nation now, than what in fact we are.
Instead of us being able to stare the Asia-Pacific region in the eye
 and say "yes we'll be affected by it a little bit and we
 can't remain immune" we would have been essentially engulfed
 by it. And it's very important that we keep that in mind over
 the weeks and the months ahead, because there is really no alternative
 but to continuing policies which strengthen and protect us against
 this turmoil from abroad. If we don't do that we will import
 that turmoil very, very rapidly.
And that's why it's essential that my Government press ahead
 with such things as reforming our taxation system.
And one of the great advantages of reforming a tax system is that
 you can export more, because under a reformed taxation system exports
 are cheaper and more competitive and that means you can generate some
 more jobs in export industries.
So we do need, at this time, to remember that more than ever in the
 history of our country we are part of the world. We can't shut
 ourselves off. We can't say it in the words of that song many,
 many years ago "Stop the world, I want to get off". You
 can't do that. You can't get off the world, you're
 part of it. People run around saying we don't want foreign investment
 in this country. If we drive foreign investment away it will go somewhere
 else, and it will take hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs with
 it, because we live in a foot-loose global environment.
And if you're a foreign investor in "country A" and
 you look at Australia and Australia says "no we don't want
 your investment" you'll say "okay I won't ask
 you a second time, I'll go somewhere else, and in the process
 I'll generate a hundred thousand jobs in another country instead
 of generating them in Australia".
Now these are important issues. And it's not a time to fiddle
 around with economic experiments, and it's not time to go back
 to failed policies of big deficit and big debt, which is represented
 by the approach of our predecessors. So it is important that we bare
 those things in mind.
I know that we've had to do some things that people don't
 like over the last two-and-a-quarter years, but I'm also happy
 to say that we've done a lot of things that people wanted us
 to do. And we've made a number of decisions in the past six months
 or so that have strengthened the position of retired people in our
 community and I can assure the retired, not only of this area, but
 of all areas of Australia that when you see the details of our taxation
 policy, you won't be concerned. You will see it as a policy that
 protects your position, and a policy that builds on the protections
 that are already there and a policy that is designed to boost and
 strengthen the Australian economy.
What governments have got to do in these times is to communicate to
 people the need for changes that are necessary, but equally to hang
 on to those institutions and those values which are very important
 to our identity as Australians.
I have frequently said, and I repeat it today, that the art of good
 state-craft is to hang on to those things from the past that continue
 to serve us well. I don't believe in change for changes sake,
 I never have. I'm very conservative about a lot of issues because
 I believe in hanging on to those traditional Australian values that
 are important to our country. And I don't believe in change just
 for the sake of doing something new.
But equally, I've never been reluctant in public life to say
 to people, and to say to Australians, we have to change in order to
 better ourselves and to protect ourselves, And what I'm saying
 to the Australian community now is that it is not a time to turn inward
 and backward in relation to economic change, because if we do that
 we'll get trampled underfoot. We'll lose a lot of investment
 in this country. It will go somewhere else because other countries
 will have it and in the process we'll lose a lot of jobs and
 a lot of Australians will be a lot worse off. I think it is important
 that those things be understood.
I am very proud of what my Government has done over the last two-and-a-quarter
 years. I'm proud of the fact that we have the lowest interest
 rates for thirty years, whether it's in small business or housing.
 I'm proud of the fact that we have the lowest inflation rate
 in the western world. I'm proud of the fact that having inherited
 a budget deficit of $10.5 billion I've now got a budget surplus,
 or we have, of $2.7 billion. I'm proud of the fact that we are
 seen as an attractive place for foreign investment.
Now I want to keep it that way. I want to build on it. Because if
 we keep it that way and we build on it we can generate more investment,
 more jobs and higher living standards. But if we start fiddling around
 with that situation, if we go back to the policies of big deficit
 and debt that our Labor opponents offer us, or if we experiment with
 the policies offered by One Nation, it will scare foreign investment
 out of Australia and destroy Australian jobs. We'll all be worse
 off.
Now that is the choice that we have to make as a community. I don't
 mean a choice next week, or next month, I mean a choice in terms of
 political debate and understanding of what things are all about at
 the present time.
Governing a country is always challenging. It's very challenging
 in a global economic environment and we must always remember that
 if we're part of the world, people can pick and choose as to
 whether they come here and invest their resources, and if we scare
 them off they'll go somewhere else and we'll never get them
 back and we'll all be poorer as a consequence.
So ladies and gentlemen thank you for having me. Thank you for supporting
 Bruce. Thank you for the contribution that you're making to the
 community life in this part of Melbourne, and in this part of Victoria.
 I think these gatherings always bring out the best of Australia. I
 look around the room I see the representatives of the local community
 organisations. I see the RSL represented. I see the ethnic community's
 well represented. I see people who are service providers. I see, of
 course, that great army of people, members of the Liberal Party represented.
 I see small business people and I see members of some of the great
 sporting and recreational organisations. And, of course, looking out
 over that water makes me feel a bit at home, I see a bit of that where
 I spend some time in Sydney.
So, ladies and gentlemen thank you very much. It's very, very
 nice to be amongst you and he's a terrific bloke, give him all
 the support you can.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much. I have had the privilege today of opening
   two new facilities which are both very fine facilities for employing
   Australians in my electorate. I am especially delighted to be here
   at JTEC to acknowledge the enormous contribution that it has made
   to high tech in Australia. To particularly acknowledge the heavy
   investment of this company in research and development and also,
   if I may, ladies and gentlemen, remark upon the fact that I am opening
   today a manufacturing facility.
And in the context of a debate that will rage very vigorously over
   the weeks and months ahead, there is no section of Australian business
   which will benefit more from tax reform than the manufacturing sector.
   One of the greatest liabilities of our existing indirect tax system
   is that it discriminates against manufacturing. And it is beyond
   my belief if I can strike, if you'll forgive me, a slightly
   partisan note, it is beyond my belief that the Australian Council
   of Trade Unions and the Australian Labor Party who draw very heavily
   on the membership of manufacturing unions in Australia, should continue
   to oppose taxation reform that will benefit Australian manufacturing.
   Because if we can give Australian manufacturing more jobs, a better
   tax system then Australian manufacturing, whether it is in this
   area, this very high tech area, or it's in other areas, then
   there's the prospect of generating more jobs. 
Now, I take the opportunity of making it very plain to all of you
   this morning and through this gathering to the Australian public,
   that my Government, the Government is resolutely committed to reforming
   Australia's taxation system. We're resolutely committed
   to reforming Australia's tax system because it would be good
   for the Australian economy. Now is not the time to turn away from
   necessary change and reform. You said quite rightly Mr Chairman
   that it's a tough market out there. It is. It is hard to export.
   There's a lot of import competition. Therefore, what we should
   be doing as a Government is making it easier for you. And one of
   the ways we make it easier for exporters, for manufacturers, is
   to take the [inaudible] of the wholesales sales tax off their backs
   and replace it with something that's a bit fairer and a bit
   more even handed a bit more encouraging and a bit more beckoning
   to people who are prepared to invest in manufacturing. 
For years we have heard quite properly people in manufacturing
   industry say why don't governments do more to help Australian
   manufacturing. I can't think of anything that governments could
   do that would more assist Australian manufacturing than to give
   them a decent taxation system. And the big winners out of tax reform
   will be manufacturing, and their employees, and the people who oppose
   tax reform are opposing manufacturing and opposing manufacturing
   employees. And having said that Mr Chairman, can I also say how
   delighted I am about the contribution that your company is making
   to the amenity of the Bennelong electorate. The people you employ,
   the fact that you are at the leading edge. I was taken on a tour
   of the facilities and it was explained to me just what this company
   does, and the contribution that it makes and the influence that
   it exerts over the high-tech industry and the information technology
   industry of Australia. And it is very significant. And you can't
   really think of the Australia of the future and the reliance of
   that future on information technology and high-technology without
   factoring in the contribution of JTEC.
I understand, ladies and gentlemen, that the new products produced
   in the JTEC technology centre, have in fact produced the best order
   intake in the Australian market in any six month period in JTEC's
   11 year history. And this milestone, I am also very happy to say,
   was achieved just this morning due to an order from the Department
   of Foreign Affairs and Trade. So I am very happy Sir that that particular
   Branch of the Government is living out your request and your injunction
   for Government help in terms of being a good customer and a very
   ready buyer.
It's become, of course, a cliche and almost given for any
   speech that is made about the current state and about the future
   of the Australian economy to speak of the way in which in information
   technology has changed our lives. Without any argument, information
   technology and the changes that it has brought about is exerting
   the greatest influence on the economic structure of the world of
   any event since the industrial revolution. And the way in which
   it has transformed the working lives of people, the way in which
   it has opened up opportunities for people is of enormous significance.
   And the way in which it has created the opportunity for new jobs
   to be created providing we are innovative enough, we provide enough
   support for research and development and providing we get those
   other fundamentals of the economy that need to be changed, such
   as the tax system, right. 
So I speak here with an enormous amount of optimism as I did at
   the opening of the GEC Marconi plant in North Ryde this morning.
   Because in both cases we are talking about leading edge companies
   employing highly skilled people. We are also talking about a highly
   trained culturally diverse workforce which is making a tremendous
   contribution to our country and making a tremendous contribution
   to what our companies can offer the rest of the world. The Asian
   region is going through a great deal of economic turmoil at the
   present time. I dismiss out-of-hand talk of depression. I point
   to the strengths of the Australian economy - our low inflation,
   our low interest rates, our strong budget surplus and our strong
   levels of business investment. We have been able to weather the
   meltdown in Asia much better than would have been the case if different
   approaches had been adopted.
And I am very pleased that this country has been able to play its
   part in helping those in the Asian region that have been knocked
   around by the economic meltdown. And what the events of the past
   few months have told us is that in the modern world of globalisation
   you can never rest. You must always be seeking out those further
   changes that are needed to strengthen the country and the economy
   further against challenges from abroad. A year ago nobody was predicting
   the Asian downturn or if they did they took great care not to tell
   anybody or not to record it anywhere. The fact is that it took us
   all a little bit by surprise and that's just the point I make
   that you must always assume the unexpected and you must always take
   care to ensure that the foundations of your economy are as strong
   as possible. And we've done that and the next big steps to
   make them even stronger is to clean up and reform and change our
   taxation system. 
This is a globalised world. We are influenced by what happens in
   other countries. If we make ourselves strong domestically, if we
   encourage efficient industries and highly trained people employed
   by them then we can withstand without too much damage to ravages
   of economic downturns in other parts of the world. Asia will come
   back again, it will back with a vengeance. It still represents a
   huge export market for Australia. Of course we must diversify our
   exports. We've been doing that, this Government has been doing
   that over the last two and a quarter years and will continue to
   do it. But nobody should imagine that the Asian market, because
   of recent months, is in any way lost in the long-term to Australia
   - quite the reverse. There are new opportunities opening up all
   the time. 
But to you Mr Riedl and to all of your colleagues, and particularly
   to your workforce, we make a tremendous contribution in their skilled
   way to the success of your company. I thank you for inviting me
   and I have very great pleasure in declaring this facility open and
   I hope you make lots of money. I hope you employ many more people.
   I hope you sell many of your products overseas and you will be greatly
   aided in that process by the new taxation system that this Government
   is going to give to the Australian people. 
Thank you.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE...
Well, thank you very much Mr Smith. To you Perc, thank you very much for that very very warm welcome. To Warren Truss, to Paul Neville and Peter Slipper and Mrs Pratt the elected, the new Member for this district, any other Parliamentary colleagues who are here, ladies and gentlemen. I've come here tonight to talk to you and also to listen to you, to hear your questions, to hear your criticisms of me or my Government and also in the course of the evening, to tell you of some of the things that we have endeavoured to do as a Government over the last two-and-a-quarter years. 
I don't intend to make a long speech, because on an occasion like this, I think it is a rare opportunity for me to interact directly with you. I know that a lot of people in rural Australia are hurting at the moment. I sympathise with that, I'll try and respond to your concerns, I'll be honest with you and say where I can't help, and indeed point out where no government can help and I'll try and indicate to you as best I can that as a Government we are trying to comprehend the magnitude of the difficulty that people in many regional communities feel. 
It's one thing of course to read about it, it's one thing to get a briefing from a Department or an expert about it, it's entirely another thing to come face to face with people to talk with them, to hear their concerns and to hear the concerns of their families. Now, I know that many of you are unhappy at the way in which, and the speed with which things have changed. I also know that paradoxically, many of you are unhappy that things you wanted changed more quickly, have not been changed more quickly, and that is something of a contradiction and something of a paradox. 
  I also know that the economic changes that have taken place, not only in Australia, but around the world, have left many smaller communities feeling vulnerable and isolated and denied the sort of support that they believe they are entitled to. And many of them feel concerned about the support they believe is flowing from Government to other sections of the community. I understand all of those things. I don't pretend that everything that my Government has done has been perfect, nor will I as a self-respecting Prime Minister and self-respecting political leader, sell the achievements of my Government short either. 
  And I think tonight is a two-way process. It is an opportunity to say what you think to me, through your questions and the concerns and the advice you will both express and give, either during the meeting or over a cup of tea, and it is also an opportunity in the very frank Australian way, for me, to say a few things about what I believe we have done over the last two-and-a-quarter years. 
  Modern government is more challenging than ever. There is a greater level of disenchantment with governments around the world than at any stage of the history of the 20th Century. And part of that is due to the fact that our lives in so many ways are changing. Our lives have changed economically. Our family lives have changed, our social life has changed, and all of us deep down, want to hang on to and in some cases return to the stability that we had in the past. And I am a mixture of nostalgia and throwing forward to the future like every other person. There are many things about my past life that I think were terrific, and I think in Government, what you've got to try and do is to hang onto those things from the past that are worth preserving and at the same time have the courage and the foresight to change those things that need to be changed. 
  Now I think the greatest gift that Australia has had a nation is that for all the difficulties we have now and for all the divisions, particularly economic divisions, that may exist between different sections of society. We have been a very egalitarian community. That great Australian tradition of mateship has been one of the things that has bound us together across all of the other divides better than most other countries. And that's something of our past that I think all of us want to hang onto. But there are also some things that unavoidably do have to change and that's not easy. We do live in a world environment that inflicts change on us whether we like it or not, and there is no power on earth that can stop some of that change being inflicted on us. And with the advance of information technology that is even more compelling than it's been in the past. 
  Now all of this is creating within our communities, amongst some, a sense of insecurity and bewilderment which I understand. You may not always agree with the Government's responses to it and I understand that also. And like any other politician who participates in the democratic process I take notice of what people say not only to me directly but also through the political process. And like any other politician in Australia and any Party I am accountable to the Australian people. And I am here tonight as an exercise in that accountability. 
  I am here to listen to you, I am here to answer your questions. I am here to receive your criticisms, and if there are one or two of you around I am also here to hear anything complimentary that you might like to say. You know I am ever the optimist, ladies and gentlemen, let me say that to you. But can I, before I conclude these very brief introductory remarks, because I know there are a lot of people who want to ask me a lot of questions and I know you don't want the meeting to go on forever. Public meetings are great providing they end on time, and I don't want tonight to sort of violate that rule. 
  But before I answer your questions can I particularly thank my colleague and friend, Warren Truss, for organising this meeting. I confided to Warren when we discussed it, that despite the overwhelming sort of proprietorship of political reporting and political commentary these days by television, that I cut my teeth politically in public meetings in public halls. I am a great believer in the old-fashioned method of political contact. It's remained in a more vigorous form outside the big cities of Australia and tonight is no exception. 
  And I do think this is a marvellous opportunity to be able to talk in this way and to interact in this way and I think it is a marvellous demonstration of the open democracy of Australia. Now there are many people here tonight who disagree with many of the things I have done. Yes, I hear that. There are also people here tonight who would agree with things that I have done . I heard a couple! But ladies and gentlemen the most important thing is that we are able to do this and we are able to do it in an open and frank way. And I think that is something that all of us, whatever our political views, can take a great deal of pride in. 
  Now, that's all I want to say at this stage. I haven't come here to give you a long lecture, I have come here to answer your questions and to hear your comments and I might say one or two things at the end. But thank you very much for coming and to you Mr Mayor thank you very much for this very, very warm way in which you welcome me to your town and to your community. Thank you. 
   QUESTION: 
  Good evening, my name is Margaret Sloane. I am a pig producer and my question to Mr Howard is - I am sorry I have to read it - you quoted in the House of Representatives that between Australia and Canada there was an 8 to 1 in our favour in trade, and what you were really talking about was agricultural commodity and that the overall trade in 1997 was 1.3 million from Canada to 1.2 million from Australia. That's a hundred million in Canada's favour which is an awfully different sort of set of figures. We are told that we have got to behave ourselves and disappear because of the beef industry. Well Canada has a beefing quota and it's recently reduced it while the pork imports for us have trebled. What are you going to do about it? 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  The 8 to 1 balance is in agriculture. It is true that we had a beef quota. Our beef quota now is 7,000 tonnes a year less than what it originally was and the reason that it is 7,000 tonnes a year less now than what it was is that the Canadians in response to a decision taken on advice from Australian quarantine services refused to act in a way that was detrimental to the Tasmanian salmon industry. Because on quarantine grounds that wasn't justified and despite the fact that the quarantine prohibition on Canadian imports was maintained in a perfectly ethical, correct fashion - despite that -Canada just reciprocated, retaliated by knocking off 7,000 tonnes of our beef quota. 
Now the point I was seeking to make then, and the point I would make tonight, is that it is precisely in the area of agriculture where you have bilateral quota arrangements between countries that Australia is most vulnerable. Now the beef thing is a perfect demonstration of how we can be at the mercy of capricious retaliation by other countries. And it's one of the reasons why a number of the commodity groups around Australia have come out very strongly against the idea that the solution to some of our industry specific difficulties is to put arbitrary restrictions on imports. Now I know that's not a popular view. I understand that, but I do plead the cause of the export industries as well and I do ask you to consider that. I am not unsympathetic to the pork industry. I met a delegation from the industry earlier tonight and I met a delegation from the industry when I was in Toowoomba a few weeks ago. But I do ask you to remember that other countries can knock off our exports and put tens of thousands of Australians out of work overnight and that is the nature of things. And if you are a great commodity trading nation, if it's in your interests as a nation to build your agricultural exports, and if you have fought for years as we have to get better access to some of these markets and finally get them it can be heartbreaking also to those industries to have those quotas knocked off. 
   QUESTION: 
  Mr Howard, my name is Ken Sacresti, I am from Murgon. What I would like to put forward to you this evening is the idea of holding all Mabo claims concerning Government money spent and the fighting in court being also - the money provided being from the Government - and Australia's economy not being, it's probably the best financial time for Australia to be able to support such riff-raff in the courts which is not really achieving much except for the people who are representing the people in court. What do you think about, you know, like, if you have got a barrel of money and everybody just keeps on taking from it eventually .. 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  ...it runs out. 
   QUESTION: 
  Yeah, and everyone is going to have nothing. Like, I am sure the people, like, I am not against Aboriginal people, I have got some good Aboriginal friends. What I am looking to is Australia to be stable throughout everything without wasting money where it could probably be, you know, I am not saying no more Mabo claims, I am saying to halt the Mabo claims to put money in better places maybe for low percentage loans to farmers or something like that. 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  Well sir, I think that was a very, very strong speech in favour of our native title legislation with one or two exceptions. If you are saying to me that there is an enormous amount of confusion, if there are significant disincentives to investment in parts of Australia and there is concern about the present native title mess, you are absolutely right. I agree with you completely and we have been trying in the two-and- a-quarter years that we have been in power to remedy the native title mess. And I do remind you that the Liberal and National parties in 1993 voted against the present Native Title Act - we did. And the reason we voted against it is that we foresaw some of the difficulties that have eventuated and when the Wik decision was brought down I knew that that decision had to be responded to in a way that gave certainty and predictability to Australian farmers and miners but was also fair to the Aboriginal communities. And I tried very hard and I finally got a plan together which I presented, I suppose in its most open way, to a gathering of people at Longreach with Tim Fischer in May of last year. 
  Now that legislation has been rejected by the Senate. It is back under notice at the present time because I am carrying out very extensive discussions with Senator Harradine at the moment. Now I am absolutely determined that we fix the native title mess. I understand the frustration of people in the Australian community about it. We have a large majority in the House of Representatives but the Australian people did not give us a majority in the Senate. And I know that frustrates people but there is nothing I can do about that because I am bound by the law of Australia like any other Australian citizen. And I have to obey that law and that law says that I can't change the law. We can't change the law unless we get a Bill through both Houses of Parliament. Now there is no way around that. People get very angry and frustrated about that and a lot of the anger and frustration of people in rural Australia on this issue has been because they thought that the native title mess would have been fixed up a couple of years ago. But it hasn't been and it hasn't been because the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats and the Greens and others have knocked it back in the Senate. 
  Now sir, I am trying to fix that and I can promise you that if we get our legislation through then I believe that many of the frustrations that you feel will disappear, will bring a great deal more certainty for the farmers and will have a great deal more certainty for the mining industry but it will also be something that does respect the rights of Indigenous people. And I know by your question that you would want the Government to achieve that particular balance. 
   QUESTION: 
  Mr Prime Minister, my name is Peter Macintosh, I am a grain grower from the Burnett. I have been a farmer for 40 years and I have never seen such hardship and frustrations amongst the people of this district. It is just absolutely through the roof. I think the most unpopular, detested man in Australia is your Minister for Primary Industries, John Anderson. He alone has changed the face of politics in country areas but it's the terms of trade of farmers. Have you ever seen a graph, and I saw one only a week ago, of the terms of trade of farmers? It just goes like that. Now there's 30 per cent of the farmers have got to go I have heard today because they are not viable. In another four years there will be another 30 per cent going. The frustrations, where are we going? We are working on a world market, we are working bloody hard, we are doing the job good. We've got a world market out there that is that corrupt and subsidised and distorted and just all upside down and we've got to compete in that thing. The level playing field, someone set the nail on the head. And we are sick of running up hill. We will not, as a community, we are going to go out the back door and all this infrastructure will just disappear. We just cannot keep going. We just cannot keep going and what can you do about it? You have got to do something about rural Australia and regional Australia because it's all going down the gurgler. 
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well sir, firstly, I heard what you said about my colleague. Let me say that I know John Anderson well. He is a very fine and committed Australian. He is a very fine and committed Australian and I very, very.....I find him a person of complete integrity and decency with which to deal. I do, I mean you can disagree with a man's politics or his policies but in terms of integrity and personal decency he is a person I hold in very high regard. Now, what you said about the world trading environment is absolutely right and I agree with that. And that, may I say, is one of the reasons why when you do get an export market, you hang onto it and you clutch hold of it and you never let it go. If you are living in a corrupted world environment, as the gentleman has just said, if you can bust through that corruption and grab an export market you are a mug if you behave in a way that throws it away. And that's why it is tremendously important whenever we get an export market that we hang onto it and we try and develop it. We have no alternative but to do that because we are a small nation, we rely very heavily on our farming exports, we are highly efficient farmers. There are no farmers in the world that are more efficient than Australian ones and we are battling all the time against the subsidised practices of the Europeans and the Americans. I know that. The second job I had in politics was the Minister for Special Trade Negotiations and I had many arguments in Brussels with the European Union about it and I agree with you completely. Now you say.... 
   QUESTION: 
  [Inaudible] can't go on. 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  If your livelihood is to export, I mean, if you are a primary producer in Australia and you're in a market, in a nation of 18.5 million people, to have any prospects you have to export. So that means that every sinew of our behaviour as a trading nation must be directed towards achieving export markets. Now I know it is very difficult, the costs are too high and one way you get the costs down is to reduce things like interest rates. 
  And can I say in defence of the Government that although interest rates are still in the eyes of anybody who pays them are still too high, they have come down over the last two-and-a-quarter years by a larger degree than at any time in the last 40 or 50 years. Now I know that hasn't been enough.... 
   INTERJECTION: 
  [Inaudible]... 13%. 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  Well sir, if you are paying that much I really would like to find out who is your financier because there has been a very, very significant reduction in interest rates. Now I know it's not enough and I know there are more things that could happen but let's be fair. If there has been an improvement in the cost structure of the rural sector, let it be acknowledged and also let it be acknowledged that a number of the other policies and programmes that have been introduced by the Government, particularly through the AAA package, have given assistance to the rural sector. But sir, you put your finger on the problem when you said that we are fighting corrupted world markets. Now, the only real alternative for this nation if it must export to survive is to keep fighting to achieve access in that corrupted market environment. 
   INTERJECTION: 
  [Inaudible] 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  Well we have helped you fight. We have helped you fight by achieving over the last two-and-a-quarter years, achieving access for beef quota, getting beef quotas into some of the Asian and other countries. 
   INTERJECTION: 
  [Inaudible] 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  Yes, well, I mean you mention exceptional circumstances. Well over the last little while we have provided.... 
   INTERJECTION: 
  [Inaudible] 
   PRIME MINISTER: 
  Well sir, we have provided something in the order of $300 million in exceptional circumstances relief over the last two-and-a-quarter years. Now if you are saying to me that conditions are still very tough and very difficult, I agree with you, I understand that. If you are saying to me that there is some simple solution to achieving access to world markets that have so far not been utilised by my Government or any previous government then please tell me what that is. At the end of the day the farming sector of Australia will prosper to the degree that it can win further access on world markets. The sheer size of our market domestically dictates that that is the only solution. 
  Now you need help from the Government but you need a decent economic environment. You need low inflation, you need low interest rates and you don't need the burdens of excessive levels of protection that add to your input costs. Now they are three policies that we have followed and also may I say you need a taxation system that does not penalise exporters. You need a taxation system, I repeat, that does not penalise exporters. Now I'll raise the question of taxation reform. I dare say somebody else might raise it if I don't raise it. And one of the reasons why I support taxation reform is that I believe it will take a lot of the load off the backs of Australian exporters because under reformed taxation you don't pay any tax on the exports. And that is an enormous boost to our exporters. 
   QUESTION: 
  Mr Howard I would just like to respond to your sympathy that you have given us....oh sorry, I am Alan Woolford, I am a pork employee from Dalby. Some weeks ago at Toowoomba I asked you this question and I asked you what you are going to do for my family and the other families out there also. Your response was, I sympathise with your plight but your sympathy is not going to pay my bills and give my family the life that I want to give them. I am going to criticise you here because I truly feel that my family is going to go downhill while your family is still surviving and getting what you want your family to have. My family won't have that. Also what I would like to say, or like to ask you is, I would dearly love to get into the pork industry for myself. I am 33, I have a wife, I have two children. There is no provisions out there for myself to go to the bank and say, hey listen I want to borrow 


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Mr Mayor, for your very warm words of welcome;
 to Warren Truss, David MacGibbon, Ian Macdonald, Mr Kingston, other
 distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is my first visit, as the Mayor said, to Maryborough as Prime
 Minister. Not my first visit to Maryborough but certainly the first
 as Prime Minister. I'm in this area for a day and a half or a
 little less than a day and a half - it seems a lot longer because
 I've been to a lot of functions - and it's an exercise in
 talking, in listening, in exchanging ideas, of getting some advice,
 of receiving some criticism. In other words, it's an exercise
 in accountable democracy.
I've said at the other gatherings I've addressed that I
 personally enjoy public gatherings. I still believe they are the best
 form of political dialogue that you can have in our community.
I won't beat about the bush. I'll acknowledge that for some
 time there have been significant concerns in regional Australia. There
 are many people who feel economically vulnerable and insecure because
 of economic and social change. I also know that the level of unemployment
 in this area, in the Wide Bay electorate which Warren represents,
 is very high indeed, particularly youth unemployment.
Some of this has come about as a result of the impact of particular
 decisions. A lot of it has come about as a consequence of fundamental
 economic change. What I believe all people in political life should
 do, whether they are in the Government or they're not in the
 Government - and there's an equal obligation on all of us. There
 is no such thing as a non-participating politician. We're all
 on the same field and we're all playing according to the same
 rules. And we all have responsibilities to address issues, to analyse
 the reasons why problems have arisen and to try and put forward solutions.
 We also have an obligation to be candid enough, when people speak
 to us, not to pretend that there's an instant, immediate solution
 when clearly there isn't. And I learnt very early in my political
 life that there's no point in kidding people. There's no
 point in going to some remote part of Australia and promising the
 earth and saying that if only you were given the chance, you could
 solve the problem, and then scuttling back to Canberra and writing
 somebody a letter saying: well, I've had a look at it and unfortunately
 I can't do that. There are people I've met over the last
 few hours who I have said: look, I don't have any ready answer
 to your particular problem. But there are others where I believe that
 we can help.
Much of Australia's economic foundation, despite the difficulties
 of people in many areas of our country, is very sound. I hope I can
 say to you that, in terms of our inflation rate, our interest rate
 structure, our budget position, our level of investment and despite
 the difficulties of the Asian economic downturn, the Australian economy
 overall is in quite good health. But, in a sense, that only makes
 the difficulty of isolated, vulnerable communities even more acute
 because you find it difficult to understand how it is, that if the
 overall shape of the Australian economy is sound, why is it that you
 will have, in particular areas of the country, why you will have difficulty.
 And that, of course, is something that I'm very conscious of.
Now, what the Government has endeavoured to do over the last two and
 a quarter years is to strengthen those foundations. And I say very
 proudly, in defence of the Government's record, that we have
 been able to get our interest rates to a level that they haven't
 been at for 30 years. Not all of you will have got the benefit of
 that. Some of you will have. And I say to you that if we hadn't
 have got those interest rates down there would have been a lot more
 small businesses going to the wall and a lot more people out of work
 and a lot more difficulty and a lot more dislocation. And you can't
 separate the reduction that we've achieved in interest rates
 from some of the difficult decisions we've taken on the budget
 front. Because you can't run a huge budget deficit. You can't
 print money to finance a budget deficit. That's highly irresponsible
 and highly inflationary and undermines the confidence of people in
 their savings and the economic stability of the nation. Nobody can
 do that with any sense of responsibility. So you have to see the link
 between the decisions we've taken, some of which you haven't
 liked, over the last two and a quarter years and the benefits that
 we have derived from those decisions. And the same applies to further
 change.
One of the paradoxes of Australia's position at the moment is
 that some people are simultaneously unhappy, and I understand why,
 with the pace of change but also they're unhappy that some things
 they would like to see changed are not being changed quickly enough.
 I mean one of my frustrations as Prime Minister, over the last two
 and a quarter years, has been that the Government has not had the
 numbers in the Senate to put through legislation that it regards as
 important and the Australian people in March of 1996 regarded as important.
 We're still, for example, discussing the issue of amending the
 Native Title Act two and a quarter years after the election.
 And the reason for that is that we haven't been able to get it
 through the Labor Party and the Democrats and others in the Senate.
 It took us much longer than we would have liked to have got other
 necessary legislation through. But I have to live with that because
 that was the verdict of the Australian people under our political
 system. And no politician has a right to say to the electorate: well,
 you were wrong - so far as the outcome of an election is concerned.
 The obligation is that if you think the electorate's wrong is
 to persuade them next time they vote, to vote in a different direction.
 You have to accept the umpire's verdict.
And over the last two and a quarter years we have worked very hard
 to stabilise and strengthen the fundamentals of our economy. And there
 are other things we need to do in that area. And one of them is that
 we do need to change our taxation system. Now, I know there are a
 few people outside who disagree with that. I know the Labor Party
 disagrees with changing our tax system. I know that other political
 parties on the horizon are against changing our taxation system. Well,
 I disagree with them because I think the present system's very
 unfair. The present system does place a very heavy burden on our exporters
 because the exporters bear input taxation which would not be there
 if you had a different taxation system and it makes them less competitive
 with other countries. The present taxation system's very lop-sided.
 You don't pay any wholesale sales tax on a lot of items and you
 pay very high rates on others. The present taxation system does contain
 a lot of areas where, if you earn a bit more, you go on to a sharply
 higher taxation level. And the present taxation system contains a
 lot of disincentives for extra effort.
We think it's important for Australia's economic future
 that it be changed. We're not interested in changing it just
 for its own sake. We think it's good for Australia to change
 it and that's why we're pressing ahead with that reform.
 And I can assure you that when the details are released, which will
 be soon, you will see that we are protecting the low income earners
 in the Australian community. I do not intend, as Prime Minister, to
 preside over a tax reform plan that will hurt the poor or the vulnerable.
 But I do want to preside over a taxation plan that will deliver much
 greater incentive to ordinary wage and salary earners and also a system
 that will make it harder for people to cheat and also a system that
 ensures that everybody makes their fair contribution.
I know that there's a lot of concern in a number of rural industries.
 I've received a lot of representations from people representing
 the pork industry in recent weeks. We gave a $10 million package late
 in 1997 to help reconstruction of that industry. And after my meeting
 with representatives of the industry at Toowoomba a few weeks ago
 we agreed to a number of other plans that involved a further contribution
 of between $9 million and $11 million.
Now, I've had some views put to me today, they were put to me
 last night as well, to the effect that there needs to be a further
 addressing of that issue. Some things we can do and some things we
 can't do. Not speaking specifically of the pork industry but
 speaking generally of how we react to industries that are in difficulty
 in this country, there's one thing we mustn't do and that
 is that we must never turn our back on world markets. And there is
 no section of the Australian community that should be more conscious
 of that than people who live in regional Australia.
I've just been to Walkers. Now, that magnificent company employs
 600 Australians here in Maryborough and it is a living example of
 the critical importance of not turning our back on the world. Because
 many of those carriages are sold to Asian countries. I was told about
 the hoax they have to get a contract to sell into Hong Kong. I was
 shown the cars that are going to be sold into Malaysia in time for
 the Commonwealth Games. Now, that was a living example, a perfect
 example, of how important it is to maintain those trading links with
 the world. It was also living proof of the wisdom of our Government's
 decision to give some help to some of the ailing Asian economies last
 year. I know that was criticised. Some of our political opponents
 criticised it and said we shouldn't have done it. The reason
 we did it was because it was good for Australia. Because if you have
 a weak, collapsing Malaysian economy or a weak, collapsing economy
 in any part of the world that buys from us, they can't buy from
 us any more. And to let economies go down the drain through some sort
 of misplaced xenophobic view of the world is to cut off one's
 nose to spite the face. We send 34 per cent of our total exports as
 a country to Japan and Korea alone. Those two countries alone take
 34 per cent of Australia's exports. And if we don't nurture
 those links and we don't make certain that those links are preserved
 then we could lose them. And if we take arbitrary, foolish trade action
 in relation to imports coming into Australia, then other countries
 are going to retaliate and take action against our exports. And that
 is a view that is very, very well understood by such bodies as the
 representatives of the sugar industry and the representatives of the
 beef industry.
Now, I just mention that to make the point that the answer to our
 problems is not to turn inwards, is not to say: well, stop the world,
 I want to get off. You can't do that. The world won't allow
 you to do it and Australia last of all countries and regional Australia
 which is really the backbone of our primary production exporting potential.
 It is the last part of Australia that should adopt that kind of attitude.
 Because so much of what we send abroad comes from rural and regional
 Australia. And I know the pain and the frustration, I understand the
 pain and frustration of farmers. Australia has the most efficient
 farmers in the world and all the while those farmers are fighting
 corrupt world markets. But the way to fight corrupt world markets
 is to keep trying to prize them open. It is not to say to other countries
 that we no longer want your imports because if you say we no longer
 want your imports they will say we no longer want your exports and
 we end up being a very, very big loser, as a consequence of that.
We are going through a time of transition. And it is very important
 at a time like this that we try and get a balance between preserving
 what is good about our past, but also recognising that we have to
 make changes if we are to secure our future. And there is much about
 Australia's past of which I am, and I know everybody in this
 hall today is very proud, the fact that we have the most authentic
 participatory democracy in the world. There aren't many countries
 in the world where you can have this sort of activity. You get a few
 heckles, you get a few boos, you get a few placards. That's fair
 enough, that's part of the process. It goes with the territory
 as the saying is. But at least we can do it. And we can do it in a
 frank, equal way and that's very much part of Australia's
 egalitarian past. And I want to hang on to that. I don't want
 any of that changed. If anything, we need to reclaim a bit more of
 that because it's one of the things that we do very well and
 this method of political exchange is infinitely better than the rather
 more antiseptic methods that we find increasingly we use.
There are other things about our past that we need to hang on to and
 we should never change things just for the sake of changing. As you
 know I've been, all my political life, a very strong supporter
 of the Australian flag. Now I'm a supporter of the Australian
 flag because I think it represents our history and our being and I
 see absolutely no reason to change it and that's why the Government
 when it came into office passed the amendment to the Flag Act so it
 couldn't be changed without every Australian having a say at
 a referendum. And if they want to change it in the future through
 that process, well that's fair enough.
But those sorts of things you should preserve and value and you should
 never denigrate or be ashamed of. But equally there are other things
 that do have to change because the world in which we live is now different.
 We've tried to change our industrial relations system. We set
 out to make changes on the Australian waterfront. We were criticised.
 Not everything we wanted to achieve was achieved. But I can say an
 enormous amount was. And people who once again who live in rural Australia
 will know the benefits of a more efficient waterfront. And many of
 you will know the pain and anguish of your produce being held up on
 the wharves and after you've worked your butt off through a difficult
 season to see it held up at the wharves is just adding insult to injury
 and pain. We set out to do that and that has to change. We can't
 live with an industrial relations system that was developed before
 World War I.
And so it is that we are living in a world where, whether we like
 it or not, what we do is judged by investors in other parts of the
 world and we have to ensure that this country is always receptive
 to overseas investment. I know that some of you think that foreign
 investment, that some of it is a waste of time. Could I say to you
 that no country that has developed a standard of living that Australia
 has developed with a population of 18 million can sustain that standard
 of living without having a large amount of foreign investment. Because
 we don't generate enough savings of our own to do all the things
 we want to do. So you have essentially a choice. You either accept
 a lower standard of living because you don't have enough savings
 to produce the investment for that standard of living. Or you take
 the savings of foreigners. You borrow from overseas. You take their
 investment. And walk down the main street of any city or town in Australia
 and you will see some evidence where foreign companies have invested
 in this place, and have employed Australians. You see names like Toyota
 and Ford.
You think, as I mentioned this morning, of the birth of the motor
 manufacturing industry in Australia, where legend has it that Ben
 Chifley went around Australian companies and said: "Would you
 start a motor manufacturing industry in Australia?" And they
 said: no we won't. So he invited General Motors and Ford, Chrysler
 to come into this country.
And if you look at the history of the United States the railroads
 there were built in the 19th Century essentially with British and
 German capital. And if you look at the history of any country that
 has developed the way that Australia has. Now you need rules, you
 need requirements, once again as I mentioned this morning at Hervey
 Bay I can remember almost twenty years ago when I was Treasurer having
 some arguments with a well known former premier of Queensland about
 the level of Australian equity in some coal mines in Queensland. And
 I took the view that if you could get 50 per cent Australian equity
 you should. Our foreign investment is always operated on that basis
 that if the Australian equity is there, it ought to be injected. But
 there are many cases there's no Australian equity available so
 you've got a choice between taking the investment and the jobs
 that come with it, or once again cutting off the nose to spite the
 face.
Now, I mention these things, ladies and gentlemen, because they're
 issues that are being debated now in a way that perhaps they haven't
 been debated before. And I think it's very important that when
 propositioned to put forward that sound all right on the surface that
 they be questioned and challenged. And the value of what is now being
 done be preserved. That doesn't mean to say that everything that
 is now happening is correct. That doesn't mean to say that you
 can't make changes. It doesn't mean to say that in the process
 of my going around our country and listening to the views of people
 there aren't insights and attitudes that shouldn't be taken
 account of and I certainly do. Politics, successful state-craft is
 very much a process of keeping your own goals and moving towards them
 but understanding that you need to take people with you. And also
 accepting as you go on that journey that from time to time you'll
 get things wrong and you need to alter them. And I've never been
 reluctant in my political career to admit error. I've never been
 reluctant in my political career to acknowledge that it isn't
 possible to do something different. But I've also been very determined
 in my political career to hang on to those things that I think are
 important. Those values that I regard as important and to maintain
 the momentum towards policy reform that I regard as important.
A number of people have spoken to me this morning about the importance
 of small business in Maryborough. They've spoken to me about
 the despair in relation to the young people in this community. There
 was one single thing I wished one could do overnight but I can't.
 And nobody can. And that is to remove the blithe of youth unemployment.
 You can patiently work at it. You can produce, as we have, a new apprenticeship
 and training system that has produced 200,000 traineeships and apprenticeships
 over the last 2 years. You can make other changes to the climate
 to small business. Changes to capital gains tax. Changes to provisional
 tax. Reductions in interest rates, all of which make circumstances
 a little more congenial for small business. You can try and further
 reform the unfair dismissal laws, which I know have discouraged many
 small business men and women around Australia from employing people.
 And unfortunately our changes in that department are held up in the
 Senate by the opposition parties and it's one of the pieces of
 legislation that I have felt an immense frustration about over the
 last two and a quarter years.
We can improve the operation of our labour placement system. And we've
 introduced a new system called the job network in that department.
 But ladies and gentlemen, I don't pretend that I've come
 here today with every solution to every problem that you have. I don't
 think that will ever be possible. I acknowledge the fact that people
 feel a sense of detachment from what they see as some elements of
 mainstream politics in Australia. And when that happens I think people
 who are part of that mainstream have got to examine why and where
 they see the concerns of people justified you respond and where they
 are not you put your own case with increased vigour and increased
 determination and that is what I have been doing over the last few
 days and what I intend to do over the weeks and months ahead. I think
 people do feel a sense of, I think anger at the confrontational style
 of some of Australian politics. I don't know that they're
 always impressed every night when they turn on their television with
 point scoring arguments. I think they would rather see something different.
 I think that is a message I have got very directly and very loudly
 from the Australian community.
Now I can assure you, despite what you see on your televisions, that
 there is a lot of legislation that goes through Parliament in a very
 uneventful way. And in lightness, in harmony and sweetness. It's
 true. No. No, there are many other things where that happens. But
 that's not terribly good copy. I mean when everybody says: hey
 that's not very exciting television, but if you have a little
 bit of a verbal exchange it is. But the point I simply make is that
 sometimes the perception of that can be very negative. And perception
 is very important. It's very important to the way people form
 their views.
But, ladies and gentlemen, I just want to say just two other things
 I wouldn't want to let the opportunity go by without very, very
 warmly commending to you the tremendous job that the your local Member,
 Warren Truss, does as the Federal Member for Wide Bay. Warren is one
 of my Minister's. He's done a very, very energetic job as
 a Minister, and a very, very enthusiastic job as a representative
 of the Wide Bay electorate. And he has been somebody who's been
 very vocal in the Party Room in relation to many of the issues that
 effect rural and regional Australia. And I am very delighted also
 to have on the stage my two Liberal Party Senate colleagues from Queensland
 of Ian Macdonald and David MacGibbon.
Finally, friends can I just say again how valuable I find this kind
 of encounter. It's an opportunity for you to say what you think.
 I've enjoyed moving around talking to people in the last two
 meetings doing that and generally exchanging views.
I think every issue affecting Australia's future should be debated
 fully and should be debated intelligently and people who seek to represent
 their constituents in parliament, all of us, no matter what interest
 we represent should be fully accountable for what we say. There's
 no such thing, as I said earlier, as a non-political politician. Everybody
 is a player upon the political stage who seeks to represent the people
 of Australia in the parliaments of Australia. And all of those players
 are accountable to the same rules. They must explain, they must defend,
 they must advocate, they must justify. Where they deceive and mislead
 they should be identified and criticised and where they disappoint
 expectations they should enjoy and expect to receive the same judgement.
I always live by that rule myself. I've always tried to be accountable
 and I've always accepted the verdict of the people. And I do
 thank all of you for coming along today. I've enjoyed very much
 meeting you. I wish the city of Maryborough a great success in the
 future of its delightful community. I must say it's a stunning
 Queensland winter day and I'm told that the weather here over
 the past few days has been approaching that of the Federal Capital,
 which is quite unusual for Queensland even in the middle of winter.
 But it's been very great, it's been very nice being amongst
 you and I wish you all well. Thank you very much.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Andrea, other distinguished guests, ladies
   and gentlemen and can I invite you all to put your hands together
   for the band for the tremendous rendition of our national anthem.
May I say how delighted I am to be here at the RSL Club, to thank
   all of you for coming along this morning. I just want to say a very
   small number of things about what the Government believes in, why
   I am here. I want to commend to you the tremendously energetic job
   that Andrea West is doing as your local member and then I would
   like the opportunity to meet you over a cup of tea to hear what
   you have got to say to me and to respond to your questions.
The Government that I have the privilege of leading was elected
   about two-and-a- quarter years ago. We have taken a large number
   of decisions over that time. I am very happy to say that over the
   last week we have been able to resolve an issue that produced differences
   of opinion within the Australian community and that's the issue
   of Native Title. And the reason why it took a long time for us to
   resolve it earlier was that the Government was standing up for one
   very simple principle, and that is that all sections of the Australian
   community should be treated equally.
The reason why we couldn't get it through the Senate originally
   was that the Senate wanted to treat one section of the community
   more favourably than others. And we held out against that and in
   the end Senator Harradine and I were able to reach an agreement.
   And I think all Australians are relieved that that agreement has
   been reached and the issue has been put behind us. We want to treat
   everybody fairly but we want to treat everybody equally. I have
   never believed that there should be special privileges for one section
   of the Australian community that are denied to other sections of
   the Australian community.
And I am delighted, as Prime Minister, that that issue is now behind
   us and we can move the focus of national attention in Australia
   onto issues that I believe are of ongoing concern to Australians
   in their everyday life. Issues related to interest rates, making
   our taxation system fairer, and we will be having a great deal to
   say about that not too long from now. And can I say that when the
   taxation plan comes out it will address what I find the growing
   concern of Australians to be, and that is that our existing system
   is no longer fair : that people in the middle feel they are being
   squeezed, they feel that they are contributing more than their fair
   share, and they believe that the system ought to be changed. And
   we are going to change it to make it fairer. And I know that there
   are some people saying to us, "don't touch that it's
   too hard". Well, I wasn't elected to my present position
   to leave things alone because they were too hard. I was elected
   to my present position because the majority of the Australian people
   two-and-a-quarter years ago decided they wanted it and they put
   me there to do things for the good of Australia.
And the reason that I am standing up for a reformed taxation system
   is that I really, genuinely believe in all my being that this country
   needs a better, fairer taxation system. The easy option would be
   to say it's too hard, it's too unpopular, the opposition
   will campaign against it, the media will criticise it, some people
   might get upset by it. But that is not what you are elected to do
   in public life, you are elected to argue for and advocate those
   things that are good for Australia.
There are things about Australia at the present time that I don't
   want to change because those things are good and valuable and they
   are things that I have always held very dear as an Australian. And
   I am a great believer in public life that you have got to chose
   between the things that should be preserved and never changed and
   the things that ought to be changed because they are no longer operating
   effectively and fairly.
And one of the things that we ought to hang on to, of course, is
   this beautiful flag that is behind me. Now, I know there are some
   people that have criticised me. They have criticised me for years
   for sticking up for the flag. They have said I am old-fashioned,
   they have said I am ought of touch. Well, I stick up for the flag
   because I believe it is something that binds all of us together,
   it is a reminder of our history, but it is also a reminder of how
   special and unique we are as Australians, because of the presence
   of the Southern Cross and the Federation Star. And I will always
   stand up for things from our past that are worth preserving. But
   there are some things from our past that are no longer keeping us
   together and are no longer serving Australia well. And they're
   the sort of things that you should seek to change.
In other words, you hang onto those things that should be kept
   and preserved with all your passion and all your might, but you
   also at the same time you argue to change and improve the things
   that need to be made better. And one of the things that does need
   to be made better in Australia is we do need a fairer taxation system.
   And I can promise you that when it comes out it will be fairer than
   the present one. It will protect people on fixed incomes. It will
   protect people on the pension and it will be particularly beneficial
   for Australian families. And that will be coming out before too
   long. And I think the Australian community will give the Government
   marks for having a go and having the guts to try and reform an unfair,
   malfunctioning system. And that's the one that we have at the
   present time. And the Coalition is very committed to that.
The other thing that I wanted to say to you this morning, is that
   a gathering like this is a wonderful reminder of one of the special
   characteristics that Australians have and that is that they have
   a great sense of community and a great sense of volunteer effort.
I have just been to the leisure centre and it's one of those
   organisations that I don't think I can think of a duplicate
   anywhere in Australia. It's entirely run by volunteers and
   it has been operating for about twenty years or more. It receives
   no direct assistance from any government or semi-government organisation.
   And it's a remarkable demonstration of that great volunteer
   community spirit within the Australian community. Voluntarism rather
   than dying in Australia is getting stronger every year. And one
   of the things that inspires me more as an Australian than anything
   else, is the way in which we all come together to work for the community
   good when that is needed. And certainly when there are the challenges
   of disasters and catastrophes Australians work together like in
   no other circumstances. And it's a remarkable element of the
   Australian character.
And this morning, I know, is gathered representatives of all sections
   of the community here in the electorate of Bowman, and particularly
   in this district. And I am delighted that Andrea has been able to
   bring you together because it is an opportunity for me to hear what
   you have got to say, to receive some advice. I always receive advice,
   I try and listen to the good advice and the other advice I also
   listen to that as well. But part of interacting in politics is for
   those who are privileged enough to hold elected office to move around
   and to meet Australians. And I am often asked what is the best part
   of being Prime Minister. And my answer is unhesitantly always, that
   the best part of being Prime Minister is the opportunity it gives
   you to meet different sections of the Australian community in different
   parts of our country. And no one group is the same. No one RSL club
   in Australia is the same as another. And no one leagues club in
   Australia is the same as another. No one Senior Citizens' centre
   is the same. No one section of the Australian community is the same
   as another. And although we are a very united, cohesive people,
   we have our own regional characteristics. I am always conscious
   of that as I move around, and therefore it is always a stimulation
   and a pleasure to have the opportunity of meeting different sections
   of the Australian community, and that's what I want to do this
   morning.
The last thing that I want to say to you, ladies and gentlemen,
   is that all of us as Australians are effected by the overall strength
   of the Australian economy. I haven't come here to give a long
   economics lecture, but I have come to say one thing about the Australian
   economy, and that is that it is facing a lot of challenge at the
   moment because of what is happening in Asian-Pacific region. The
   "melt down" as they call it in Asia , is the worst economic
   set of circumstances to face those countries since the end of World
   War II. And until about a year ago everybody was talking very optimistically
   about economic growth in countries like Malaysia and Singapore and
   Korea and Hong Kong and Japan. But in the last year so much of that
   has changed and it does represent a challenge to Australia.
And I am very pleased that over the last two-and-a-quarter years
   we have been able to get the Australian budget back into balance.
   If we hadn't done that we would be effected a lot worse by
   what is happening in Asia. I am very pleased that we have been able
   to get interest rates down and get inflation down and to reduce
   a lot of the debt that the Australian Government had two to three
   years ago because in doing that we have made ourselves stronger
   and we have given ourselves better protection against the downturn
   in Asia. We now sell more than fifty percent of our goods and services
   to the Asian-Pacific region and it is inevitable, therefore, that
   if you have a downturn there that will effect us. And therefore
   it is all the more important that we should take action to protect
   ourselves against that downturn. And I know that some people wonder
   why it is that we gave some help to Indonesia and Korea and a to
   Thailand when their economies got into trouble. We lent them some
   money, we didn't give it to them. And we expect to get it back.
   But we did it because those countries are important to us. They
   buy goods and services from us. And if they don't buy goods
   and services from us well we won't be as prosperous. I think
   it is very important that that be understood. It is very important
   that we realise that if you help a country that trades with you,
   that country is stronger and better able to buy your goods and services.
We now live in a world, whether we like it or not, that is interconnected.
   No country has the option of saying, we're going to put up
   a barrier, go away, we don't want to have anything to do with
   the rest of the world. We can't operate like that. We want
   to sell goods overseas, if we want to sell goods overseas then we
   have got to be willing to buy some of the goods and services that
   other countries offer. It's difficult on occasions, and I know
   that sometimes it's easier to say, well if imports are coming
   in, let's shut them out. But in the end that won't work.
   Because if we shut somebody else's goods out, they're
   going to shut ours out. And that's going to hurt us a lot more
   than it hurts them. And that is one of the issues that Australia
   has to face . And we've taken a lot of protective action over
   the last two-and-quarter years to give the Australian economy an
   inner strength that if it didn't have, it would have more adversely
   effected by what has occurred.
And the very last thing I do want to say again, is that I am delighted
   to be on a stage with Andrea who has been your member since March
   of 1996, and Andrea I can assure you, is a very hard working member
   for the electorate of Bowman in the 
Federal Parliament. She's a very persistent pursuer of Ministers.
   She is a very constant advocate of the interests of this part of
   Brisbane in the Party Room. And she is a person that pursues very,
   very vigorously on behalf of the community of Bowman and the community
   that she represents within the Brisbane area in the Federal Parliament,
   she pursues those interests very, very vigorously. And I very, very
   warmly commend her to you and I congratulate her on the vigorous
   job that she has done in representing your interests in the Federal
   Parliament.
Ladies and gentlemen, as always it is a great pleasure to be in
   Queensland, to be in Brisbane. Thank you for coming along this morning,
   and I would be very happy to meet all of you over a cup of tea.
   Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE.....................................................................................................................................
Thank you very much, David, to Bob Carroll, the President of the Queensland
 Division of the Liberal Party, my Cabinet colleague, John Moore, I
 acknowledge the presence of another former federal colleague of mine,
 Stan Collard, who was a great friend of mine and the Coalition's
 during the difficult times of 1987, my other Parliamentary colleagues,
 ladies and gentlemen.
It is always for me a great pleased to be in Queensland, to be in
 Brisbane, and I want to thank the Queensland Division for at very
 short notice, organising tonight's gathering. It's an opportunity
 to first of all congratulate David Watson on his assumption of the
 Leadership of the Liberal Party here in Queensland at a State level.
David and I have been long time friends and colleagues. I know he
 brings to his new position an enormous amount of experience and a
 great understanding of the political challenges that lie ahead. And
 I am not a person to mince words or to beat about the bush on important
 political issues and I realise that I speak to you in the aftermath
 of an election result here at a State level, that, to say the least
 has been extremely disappointing. And it is important that we understand
 the lessons of that defeat. It's important we not be overburdened
 by it and very importantly from the federal point of view it's
 important we understand the challenge that lies ahead of us.
The last federal election we had an unparalleled success for the Liberal
 Party. It was a most extraordinary result which delivered to the Liberal
 Party a record number of seats here in the State of Queensland. There
 are a combination of reasons for that. One of the reasons often, I
 think unstated, was the quality of the candidates the Liberal Party
 offered on that particular occasion. I am naturally as Leader and
 as Prime Minister, and as the federal custodian of the fortunes of
 our Party, I am naturally concerned to ensure that the right circumstances
 exist, that we can retain all of the seats that we won here in Queensland
 at the next federal election.
And in order to achieve that goal it's important that we understand
 that ultimately the next election will be a contest between ourselves
 and the Australian Labor Party. There can only be two people who will
 end up as Prime Minister after the next election, myself or Mr Beazley.
 There is no other possible outcome of that election. And it's
 very important that we keep in mind what the alternative is.
Of course we feel disappointed and some people feel understandably
 concerned about the swings against the Liberal Party in Brisbane and
 also the gains that were made by the One Nation Party in the provincial
 and rural areas of Queensland. In responding to that it is very important
 we don't misread the signs. We should neither be intimidated
 by the outcome, nor should we be complacent about it. We should understand
 that the bulk of the people who voted for the One Nation Party came
 straight part from our own conservative base. And we must therefore
 understand why that happened, and we must therefore set in place some
 sensible strategies in order to maintain the confidence and the support
 of those people when the federal election takes place.
And there is no point in muttering about these things in hushed tones
 behind closed doors. We are an open society. And we are a society
 that thrives on debate and advocacy. And the first thing that I want
 to say to you tonight is that I have absolutely no intention of shrivelling
 away into a policy nothing' as a result of what happened
 here in Queensland. The worst thing that we could do is to lose our
 sense of policy commitment, To lose our zeal for those things that
 we believe are important for Australia. I have no end of people come
 to me since the Queensland election and say "John, you better
 forget about tax reform. Forget about it. Forget about privatising
 Telstra. Forget about doing anything the least bit bold or visionary
 for the future of Australia. What you have got to do is sort of do
 nothing. And go up into a corner, don't defend anybody. And all
 of those supporters will come flooding back". Well can I say
 to you that is a prescription to lose even more support.
And I have to say to you that I have no intention of abandoning my
 very strong support for reforming the Australian taxation system.
 And the reason that I won't abandon that is that I believe it
 is good for Australia. I have now been in politics for 24 years, and
 I have believed in taxation reform for most of that 24 year period.
 And I believe in it because I think is good for the country. Not because
 I am on some kind of ideological binge. Not because it is going to
 satisfy my ego. Not because it is going to deliver some kind of special
 taxation treatment to me. It is because that as we go into the 21st
 Century, we need to have a taxation system that helps rather than
 hinders our exporters. We need to have a taxation system that is fairer
 than the present one. We need to have taxation system that gives personal
 tax relief to low and middle income earners. We need to have a taxation
 system that sweeps away the complicated indirect taxation system that
 we have at the present time. And we need to have a taxation system
 that addresses the complications of Commonwealth / State financial
 relations which have been something that has bedevilled the politics
 of Australia for decades.
So, ladies and gentlemen, can I say that one thing I won't be
 doing and one thing that I don't believe the Liberal Party should
 do, is to take policy fright or to engage in a full scale policy retreat
 as a result of what happened here at the Queensland election.
And the same thing applies to my approach to the sale of the remaining
 two-thirds of Telstra to the men and women of Australia. You may remember
 that I made that announcement on behalf of the Government at the Liberal
 Party National Convention here in Brisbane back in March. And once
 again I am in favour of that not because of any ideological belief
 but because I think it is good for Australia. And let me tell you
 why it's good for Australia. One of the reasons why it's
 good for Australia is that it will enable us to deliver to the young
 generations of the 21st Century, an essentially debt free Australian
 nation. When we became the Government of Australia, the Federal Government
 owed about $95 to $100 million billion dollars. And that was about
 twenty percent of the total annual wealth generation of Australia.
Without the sale of Telstra, we'd be able to reduce that to about
 ten percent of the annual wealth generated by Australians by the year
 2000. But with the sale of Telstra we can reduce it to a bare one-and-a-half
 percent of our totally generated annual wealth by the year 2001. And
 that means that we can say to our children and grandchildren who will
 inherent the twenty first century that one of the legacies of those
 who were in control of Australia in the last years of the twentieth
 century, one of the legacies that we leave to those generations is
 an essentially debt free society. Now I think that is a goal worth
 striving for. I think that is a goal worth achieving. And particularly
 when you are offering to the men and women of Australia the opportunity
 to buy shares in this great Australian company. And it can be done
 in a way which protects through legislation the community service
 benefits of the existing Telstra arrangement. And indeed out of the
 proceeds of the sale of Telstra, we are able to (inaudible) for communications
 infrastructure in the rural and regional areas of Australia that we
 would not otherwise be able to do.
Now I have deliberately dealt with those two issues because I don't
 believe at a time like this amongst the Liberal Family there is any
 room for prevarication or any room for doubt as to where the Federal
 Government stands on these issues.
And if we hold our resolve and our commitment and our nerve on these
 great policy issues, we will win rather than lose support. The path
 to another defeat is to lose your policy nerve. The one way to alienate
 more supporters is to communicate to them the message that you are
 no longer committed to the things that you believe are important for
 Australia's future. There are variety of reasons why twenty-three
 percent of the Queensland electorate voted for the One Nation Party.
 Much of it is bound up with the fact that Australia, like all other
 western societies, is going through a period of great period of economic
 and social adjustment.
Globalisation of the world economy is on us whether we like it or
 not. We don't have the option of saying to the rest of the world,
 "Stop, Australia want's to get off". We are a great
 trading nation. And if we sell to the rest of the world, then we must
 buy from the rest of the world. The notion that we can live in a world
 were they buy our goods and services, but we don't buy any of
 their's is a fool's paradise and it can't be achieved.
 And in those circumstances, we have to take notice of what the rest
 of the world says. We have to be an attractive place in which to invest.
 And we have to be a country and a Government that understands that
 globalisation will impose change and difficult adjustment.
And it's very easy if you're a new kid on the block, politically
 speaking, it's very easy if you are without office, if you are
 without power, without responsibility, to come along and say "I
 have got the simple solution. You stop all imports. You keep everybody
 out. You put up a wall and you try and seal Australia off from the
 rest of the world." Sounds all right for about ten minutes. But
 after you sit and think about it you realise what folly it is. And
 I think it's very important that we understand that playing on
 the instability and the insecurity of people at a time of economic
 change is easily done the first time, it's a lot harder the second
 time. Because once you've won a bit of support you have, therefore,
 a responsibility to deliver some solutions.
And can I say to all of the parties on the political scene in Australia,
 whether they belong to the Australian Labor Party, or to One Nation
 or they're independent or they're green or they're
 anything, can I say to them, there are no simple solutions. The only
 policy prescriptions that are going to work for Australia, are ones
 that address real problems with real responses and real solutions.
 There is no such thing as a world economy in which Australia can say
 no' to the rest of the world but accept the rest of the
 world to say yes' to Australia. That kind of Nirvana, that
 kind of paradise, economically speaking, doesn't exist.
Now the first thing that we ought to understand is that one of the
 reasons why that Party did well was that it exploited the natural
 vulnerability of people at a time of great economic and social change.
The second thing that I think we ought to understand is that there
 is a discontent with some of the practices of what I might say are
 mainstream politics in Australia. People don't like opposition
 for opposition's sake. People are a little tired with confrontational
 politics. Every so often if you agree with your opponent it's
 probably not a bad idea to say so. So that when you disagree with
 your opponent you get listened to a lot more intently. Perhaps my
 opponent might have adopted that attitude when we achieved a settlement
 of the Native Title dispute. Because he is not going to change the
 legislation if he happened to win the next election. And I think there
 is a message coming from the Australian people that they don't
 like automatic confrontation. They want us to disagree when we really
 passionately disagree, but when we don't disagree they want us
 to move onto the next issue. I think that is another reason that sort
 of produced that situation.
And I think it is also right to say that there were elements in the
 campaign run by that Party that attracted bigotry and intolerance
 in the Australian community. And I want to say to all you here tonight
 that one of the proudest boasts of the Liberal Party of Australia
 is that it is the most representative, inclusive of all of the great
 political movements in our nation. The Liberal Party is the Party
 that ended the White Australia Policy. The Liberal Party is the Party
 that welcomed millions of migrants to Australian shores after World
 War II, I acknowledge of course, also the contribution of Arthur Calwell
 as Minister for Immigration in the post-war Labor Government.
And I want to say that whatever debate might now rage about the level
 of immigration in Australia, there can be no argument that immigration
 has made an invaluable an incalculable, an enormous contribution to
 the development of the modern, thriving, self respecting country that
 we have. And I honestly can't imagine Australia of 1998 without
 the contribution of people from Europe, from the Middle East, from
 Asia, from the rest of the world. And I want to say to you very, very
 unambiguously that tolerance and acceptance of people irrespective
 of their racial or ethnic background is a cornerstone of the Australian
 nation of a fair go.
And it was suggested the other day that we should in future say to
 the rest of the world we don't want anybody who comes into this
 country who can't speak English before they come here. Now, I
 can accept that you should have an immigration policy that gives a
 weighting and loading in favour of those who have a knowledge of the
 English language. But the idea that you should have a policy that
 said if you can't speak English you are not allowed is foolish,
 and it is self-denying and it is self-defeating. We would never had
 had probably that great heart surgeon who died tragically a few years
 ago, Victor Chang, or Sir Arvi Parbo who was born in Estonia and went
 on to become Chairman of the Big Australian', one of the
 great success stories of post-war migration. And I did a quick calculation
 the other day. I'd be seven shy in my own Federal Parliamentary
 Liberal Party if we had applied that doctrine, because no less than
 seven of my colleagues who sit with me in the Federal Parliamentary
 Party came to this country without the knowledge of a word of English.
 So when you apply that sort of approach retrospectively, you realise
 how idiotic it is.
Now, by all means, let us have a debate about migration but let it
 be debated with the world knowing the starting point for the Liberal
 Party. And the starting point for the Liberal Party is a commitment
 to tolerance, a commitment to absolute opposition to any kind of racism,
 a belief that we must have a non-discriminatory immigration policy
 and the recognition of the contribution of millions of people from
 different parts of the world to the unique character of Australian
 society in 1998.
Now, of course we must all remember that the bond that unites all
 of us above and beyond any other loyalty or commitment is our commitment
 to the Australian nation. And nobody has a more deeply embedded, if
 you like, old-fashioned belief in the intrinsic value of being an
 Australian than I do, and I am immensely proud on all occasions to
 speak in front of this magnificent flag, which represents in my view
 the best expression of our national unity.
And I think modern society is very very much in the art of good Government
 in modern society, is very much about hanging on to those things from
 our past that continue to serve us well, but being willing to throw
 out those things that no longer serve us well. And that's why
 I believe in keeping our present flag. It's why I believe that
 the institutions of Parliamentary democracy and the rule of law and
 the sense of the Australian fair go' ethos, and our pioneer
 spirit and our commitment to volunteerism, that all of those things
 are precious assets that we should hold onto, not only as Liberals,
 but as Australians.
But equally, we should recognise where we've got dead wood that's
 got to be thrown out. And one of the biggest pieces of dead wood we
 have at the moment, if I can return to a subject on which I am greatly
 warmed, and that is the inadequacy of our taxation system.
I mean, it is the last piece of economic dead wood that Australia
 has, and I think it is very very important that we retain the verve,
 the commitment, the zeal. Now, I know some people will say it is risky.
 Of course it is. Changing anything is risky. And if you want a quiet
 ride, if you want nothing to happen, if you want us to retreat into
 a policy vacuum, then don't talk to me. I'm not interested,
 and you won't be interested in my either. But if you want me
 to continue to say what I believe is good for Australia, what I believe
 to be the contribution that the Liberal Party at a federal level can
 make to Australia's future, then I think we have to remain very
 very strongly committed to those goals that we have identified. And
 I ask you just to think for a moment where we would be now in the
 light of the Asian economic downturn if we had not taken the measures
 that we took to get our budget in order two-and-a-half years ago.
I mean, Mr Beazley only left us with an annual deficit of $10.5 billion
 dollars. He only left us with accumulated debt of $95 to $100 billion.
 He only left us with interest rates that are 3% - 4% higher than they
 are now. In fact, we now have the lowest interest rates for thirty
 years in Australia. And in two-and-a-quarter years we have turned
 that $10.5 billion of deficit into a surplus of $2.7 billion. And
 we have done it without any help from Mr Beazley. At every turn he
 has obstructed us. Not only did he leave us with the problem but he's
 tried to sabotage us fixing the problem. I mean, that is the ultimate
 double whammy against the national interest. But despite that opposition,
 despite that hostility, we have turned that problem around. And another
 thing that he left us with was the appalling Native Title mess. The
 great sort of portrait artist, my predecessor as Prime Minister, the
 man who painted the big picture. A huge picture of confusion in relation
 to Native Title. We said before the last election that we would fix
 that problem, and it has turned out to be even more difficult than
 I imagined at the time, but finally, as a result of the negotiations
 that I conducted with Senator Harradine, we have brought about a result
 which is honourable and fair to all sections of the Australian community.
And the reason why I held out for the changes we ultimately won, was
 that what the Senate gave to us a few months ago did not respect a
 principle that I regard as very important, and that principle is that
 all sections of the Australian community should be treated equally.
 I'd support the principle of Native Title. The principle of Native
 Title laid down the Mabo case, and having read that case from cover
 to cover is a principle that I have no argument with but what I did
 not support was the Native Title Act passed by the Labor Government
 which gave to one section of the Australian community legal rights
 and procedures that were not available to other sections of the Australian
 community in a similar position. And that is what I opposed and that
 is what I fought to change and that is what I am happy to say to you
 tonight has been changed as a result of the amending legislation that
 went through the Senate two nights ago.
And now I believe that we can now get on with delivering some outcomes.
 We can now sweep away the phoney claims. We can respect the genuine
 claims. We can have an upsurge of mining investment. We can have a
 removal of the doubt over farming areas of Australia, and I predict
 now, no matter what has been said by the new Premier of Queensland,
 I predict that we'll end up with a uniform national system, because
 that's the sensible thing that we ought to have and I'm
 sure that's a goal that any sensible Premier no matter what State
 he or she leads and any sensible Prime Minister would work towards.
 And I'm very pleased that we've resolved that very difficult
 issue. It was certainly the most challenging socio-legal and constitutional
 issue that I have grappled with in the 24 years that I have been in
 Australian politics. And I acknowledge very readily the contribution
 that Senator Brian Harradine made to the resolution of that dispute.
 He's a man with whom I do not share on all occasions a coincidence
 of views on economic issues. Although there are many social issues
 on which our views are closer. But on economic issues we don't
 always agree, but he is a person of his word, he is a man of integrity
 and he is somebody who's heart is always where Australia's
 best interests lie and that's a good enough qualification. He's
 a man, in the famous words of Margaret Thatcher, with whom one can
 have a sensible discussion or do business in a political sense.
But that's long enough for me to speak to you tonight. You've
 been very patient. I know my friends that it is difficult when you've
 had a bit of a set back at the polls, but the Liberal Party is a Party
 of great resilience and we have the opportunity immediately ahead
 of us, whenever the federal election is, and don't take any hint
 from my having said immediately ahead of us' - I could
 redefine immediately ahead' to mean a couple of years or
 a few months or six months or a few weeks. I don't know when
 the next election will be, but I do know this, that it will be won,
 and it will be won convincingly by the Liberal Party and by the Coalition.
And that path to that victory is policy strength and policy boldness.
 The path to that victory is not policy timidity. We won last time
 because there was an overwhelming mood for change in the Australian
 community and there was a passionate desire to remove my predecessor
 from the office of Prime Minister. And they also... a viable stable
 alternative. To win again and to win again impressively we must give
 to the Australian people a new reason, a new incentive, a new cause,
 a new set of principles for the future. And you don't find that
 in retreating from policy commitments. You don't find that in
 going to water on the things that are important. You find that and
 you will gain the respect and the support of the Australian people
 if you are prepared to stand your ground and argue your case and say
 why it is good for Australia that certain things should be done, and
 I've found in the 24 years that I've been in politics that
 whenever you are prepared to do that, no matter how difficult it may
 seem, in the end the Australian public will support you and will respect
 you.
The Australian public will always support reform if you satisfy two
 criteria. The first criteria is that you must persuade them that it
 is for the good of Australia that you do it. And the second criterion
 is that you must satisfy them that it is fair for all Australians.
 And when our taxation policy comes out I believe it will triumphantly
 satisfy both of those criteria. It will be demonstrated to be good
 for Australia and it will be demonstrated to be fair to all Australians.
 So my friends, thank you for your loyalty, thank you for your resilience,
 thank you for your capacity to bounce back. I thank the Queensland
 organisation and all of my colleagues for being here tonight. I wish
 you well, I'll be seeing you a lot of you in the weeks and months
 ahead and I look forward to another famous victory whenever the next
 federal election is held.
Thank you.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE.....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Headmaster, to Angela, the School Captain, to
 my colleagues, Teresa Gambaro, the Member for Petrie, and Rod Henshaw,
 the candidate for Dickson, ladies and gentlemen.
It is for me a real privilege to spend a few moments with the senior
 students of St Pauls and also with some of the parent body of this
 school. I have some of the sense of what it is like to be a parent
 of a child completing his or her final examinations. My own younger
 son is sitting for the higher school certificate in New South Wales
 this year, so I am not entirely unfamiliar with the atmosphere in
 households in the lead-up to the final examination. And having had
 two before him, I am particularly familiar and my felicitations, understanding,
 sympathy and empathy go very, very directly to the parents and to
 the students. Because when you come to the end of your school career,
 it is a significant occasion in your life and it's an occasion
 that I remember when I left school in, must I confess it, but I will,
 1956, and the Australia that I lived in in 1956 was a wonderful country.
 But it was a different country from the Australia that you will leave
 school to enter in a more adult way at the end of 1998. And in sharing
 those recollections and those comparisons it's important to understand
 that there are some things about our country that don't change,
 and shouldn't change, and we should fight hard to stop changing.
 But there are other things about our country that do change, and must
 change, and we should promote the change because it is good for the
 future of our society.
There are certain enduring Australian values that I still identify
 and are still as strong and as worthy and as valuable to us as Australians
 as they were when I left Canterbury Boys High School in Sydney in
 1956. And those are the traditions of mateship, the tradition of treating
 people fairly on the basis of their contribution to society. And it's
 very important in the context of some debates that are occurring in
 Australia at the present time, to emphasise the fact that we have
 always been a society that treats people according to their worth
 and to their contribution and to their values to Australian society.
 We are a society now that has welcomed into our family as a nation
 people from one hundred and forty countries. Tolerance of people,
 acceptance of people, irrespective of their race, their religion,
 their national background or their political belief, is a cornerstone
 of a fair Australia. And it's something that needs to be emphasised
 and it needs to be practised.
Australia is in a special, indeed a unique, position in the world.
 We are the only nation in the world that is simultaneously a country
 that has inherited the great treasures of western civilisation, has
 very strong links with the nations of North America, but is located
 within the Asian Pacific Region. And that gives us a special opportunity.
 We have insights and understanding of the Asian Pacific Region that
 our friends in North America and Europe do not have. And because of
 that inheritance of ours and those associations of ours we can bring
 and make a contribution to our region that no other country can. In
 the years ahead I see Australia as being a magnet to those who want
 stability, who want tolerance, who want legal security and who want
 economic prosperity. Translating that into more practical terms, I
 see no reason why our country should not become, in the next century,
 the largest financial centre in the Asian Pacific Region after Tokyo.
 And it is already well along the way to doing that. Because we have
 enormous advantages. We simultaneously speak the English language,
 provide a banking and financial system of great integrity and great
 stability, and we also provide a legal system that offers great stability
 and great reassurance.
We have, as Australians, people of so many different racial and ethnic
 backgrounds, many of whom have links into the Asia Pacific Region
 through their families, through their businesses, through their educational
 associations. But I find as I travel around the Asia Pacific Region
 that one of the strongest resonances between our country and the countries
 of the Region are the experiences that young people from Singapore,
 from India, from China, from Indonesia, from Malaysia, the experiences
 that those people, as young people, had in attending Australian universities.
 And they remember and carry with them an affection for Australia well
 into their adult and older lives. And it's a very important link
 that we should work very hard to preserve. And it's a link that
 I know St Paul's is making a contribution towards and is nurturing
 in a very special way, as I had the opportunity with the Headmaster
 a few moments ago, to observe.
So, there are some similarities between Australia of 1956 and Australia
 of 1998. There is that continuity, that golden thread of Australian
 values that hasn't changed. But there are many things that have
 changed and many of those for the better and many of those are inevitable.
 I had a wonderful reminder of our inheritance as an Australian nation
 two weeks ago. You no doubt would have seen on television the stories
 of those four wonderful World War I veterans who returned to the old
 battlefields of northern France to celebrate the end or to remember,
 not celebrate, but to remember, the end of World War I. And my wife
 a I had those four wonderful men to morning tea at Kirribilli House.
 And the sheer joy of talking to four people, all of whom are between
 98 and 102, to hear their stories to experience the reality that the
 older you get the more vivid your recollection is of years long past,
 perhaps not always of year immediately passed, but of years long passed.
 And to hear their stories and to recognise in them a strain and a
 character and an attitude to life that was unmistakably Australian
 and something that all of us in different ways share and hang onto.
And if I've got any message to you, the young people of St Pauls,
 who will either leave this year or next year, it is that the values
 that bind us together as Australians are special. This is a special
 country. It is like no other country in the world and that gives it
 a very, very special character. And it is an immense privilege to
 live in Australia and to be part of the Australian family. And it's
 not a privilege any of us should ever take for granted. We are very
 fortunate indeed to be Australians. But we should all of us work very
 hard and observe the principles of tolerance and understanding in
 working hard to build a better Australia as we go into the 21st
 century.
We have political debate in this country. We are an open democracy.
 We should practice and we should encourage free speech. But we should
 also practice and encourage the tolerance and understanding of different
 points of view. I lead a Party and I lead a Government which is very
 committed to the notions of private enterprise and individual liberty.
 My greatest goal in life is to create an Australia where every single
 man and woman can realise his or her talents to the fullest extent,
 where people do have an equality of opportunity, where the measure
 of your success and the role that you carve out in society is something
 that is determined by your own values and your own contribution. But
 not according to the family you were born into, the race from which
 you came, the school you attended or the political party to which
 you belong. But the contribution that you can make as an individual
 member of Australian society.
And that kind of society needs a lot of things. It needs competition.
 You see in the independent school system of Australia, a great demonstration
 of competition within the education sector. I myself was wholly educated
 in the government sector of the school system in Sydney. I have sent
 my children at a secondary level to independent schools. I value that
 choice. And I want that kind of choice to be extended to all Australians.
 And that's one of the reasons why the Government changed the
 new schools policy in relation to independent schools to make it possible
 for more low fee paying independent schools to be opened in Australia.
 I want a diversity a plurality of education. I don't want a monopoly
 of education in the hands of the Government, nor do I want independent
 school education to be the preserve of people who can afford to pay
 a certain level of fees. If you do believe in freedom of choice, you
 must provide equality of opportunity so that all within the Australian
 community can exercise that freedom of choice.
Always remember the contribution that your school life has given you.
 Always remember the values that you have imbibed from your school,
 the Christian principles of St Paul's are, of course, at the
 centre of the values that you have imbibed during your education here.
 And always have goals in life. The most important thing is always
 to have another set of goals ahead of you. I have another set of goals
 ahead of me. You don't have any prizes for one of those goals
 might be. But I do have some very strong and very purposeful goals
 ahead of me. They are goals that I believe are good for Australia.
 The goals of changing and reforming, for example, our taxation system.
 I won't give you a long lecture on that. But I think it is very
 important that we have, and I direct this particularly to the economic
 students. It is very important that we have a fairer, different taxation
 system. Because it will enable us to trade a lot better in the Asian
 Pacific Region and in the rest of the world. I want to see some of
 the communications gaps between the city and the country dissolved.
 And over the course of yesterday and today and the weeks ahead, the
 Government will be making a number of announcements that will underline
 our determination to achieve that. But in your own lives, having goals
 and striving towards them is the stuff of renewal and reinvigoration
 and it is the driving force that keeps all of us going. Once we lose
 goals, we lose a sense of direction and a sense of purpose.
So the messages if I have for you are to maintain the values that
 you have imbibed at your school and to always in your lives ahead,
 always strive to achieve particular goals. And if you do that you
 can have a very fulfilling and a very, very rewarding life. And the
 Australia that you will inherit when you leave school and go to university,
 or wherever you choose to go, will be a very different Australia from
 what young Australians in the 50s and 60s inherited. And in turn the
 Australia that your children will inherit when they leave school will
 also be different. But there will be a continuity, there will be a
 golden thread of basic Australian values that will be there. Whatever
 form our Constitution may have, whatever may be the political complexion
 of the government at the time, it will still be as I recognise those
 Australian values in those four wonderful diggers of average age of
 100, in fifty years time people will still be able to recognise a
 continuity of certain values and certain beliefs.
To you, Mr Headmaster, thank you very, very much for having me here
 this morning. It is always a privilege to talk to young Australians
 and I thank you most warmly for the welcome you have given me. Thank
 you.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE..............................................................................................
Well thank you very much Kay, to your husband David, to Bob Carroll,
   the State President of the Queensland Liberal Party. To the other
   distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is always challenging to come to Kay Elson's electorate,
   to be reminded of a really energetic community-based, publicly spirited,
   really dedicated local Member of Parliament is all about. I've
   seen a lot of members of Parliament in the 24 years that I've
   been in the house but I don't think I've seen anybody
   so instinctively take to the responsibility of representing her
   constituents in a short period of time as has Kay Elson. Not only
   is she an indefatigable worker for the local community, she also
   produces in my view the best newsletters of any Federal Member of
   Parliament. She's really got them down to an art form, and
   she's put together this crowd in a short period of five days
   and I said to her that I wouldn't give her the luxury ever
   of longer notice but she really is an ornament to the concept of
   local, effective, local parliamentary representation, and she is
   somebody who is ideally suited to represent an electorate as diverse
   as the electorate of Forde, ideally suited to represent an electorate
   that has some of the more difficult areas of social challenge in
   our society as well as people who are in more comfortable circumstances.
   So Kay, in every way I am delighted to be with you and I would like
   very much to congratulate you on the job that you have done for
   the Liberal Party and the job that you have done for the electorate
   of Forde.
Ladies and Gentlemen, there are many things that I could talk to
   you about today, but I want to focus on the task that is ahead of
   us in Australia and also the task that is ahead of us as the Liberal
   Party, as the government of Australia. We have over the last two-and-a-quarter
   years set about putting Australia in a stronger economic position
   and also endeavoured to respond to some of the non-economic challenges
   that the Government faced when it came into power in March 1996.
   And I'm delighted to say that one of the non-economic challenges
   we faced was to resolve the difficult issue of Native Title. We
   didn't like the Native Title Act of 1993, and we voted
   against it, but the Government of the day insisted on putting it
   through and we were told by Mr Keating that it would be in order.
   We quickly found that that was not the case. And when we came to
   power we promised that we would make the Native Title Act
   more workable. 
And two-and-a-quarter years later, at long last, and through the
   cooperation of Senator Brian Harradine, it became possible to reach
   a solution to that problem which is fair to all sections affected
   by Native Title but was also one that was going to get through the
   Federal Parliament. And I am very pleased that that issue is behind
   us, because whatever our views were it was bound to cause continuing
   division in the community. And the reason why we held out for a
   solution that we finally got, was that the solution originally offered
   by Mr Keating and the solution originally offered by the Senate
   before Senator Harradine changed his position was a solution that
   was based on the argument that one section of the Australian community
   should be treated in a way that other sections of the Australian
   community were not. And the principle that I held out for, and the
   principle I am happy to say to you today has been met in full in
   the Native Title compromise is the principle that all Australians
   should be treated equally before the law.
And it was the desire of our opponents, the Labor Party, the Democrats,
   the Greens in the Senate. It was their desire to say that one group
   of Australians should have privileges and rights denied to other
   Australians in a similar position. It was that desire that we were
   not prepared to succumb to, and ultimately I was able to negotiate
   an understanding with Senator Harradine and I give him full credit
   for the courage that he displayed and the way in which he's
   held up against the abuse and the criticism that has unfairly come
   his way since he made his decision. And I am delighted to say to
   you that that issue is now behind us. 
And I'm absolutely certain that the new Queensland Government
   will end up very quickly becoming part of a national scheme. I don't
   think there will be much delay or much obstruction in relation to
   that. And we can put that issue behind us. We can say to the farming
   community of Australia, well you can now get on with your businesses
   without the worry of vexatious Native Title claims. We can say to
   the mining industry, particularly in Queensland and Western Australia,
   you are now free to go ahead with the investments that will be installed,
   and with the new measures in the Native Title amendment act, you'll
   be able to get rid of all the vexatious claims that have been made.
   And we'll also be able to say to the indigenous community if
   you have genuine Native Title claims, you now have a machinery to
   have them recognised and to have them dealt with because it has
   never been our desire to deny to the indigenous people of Australia
   access to a machinery which allows them to prove a genuine Native
   Title claim. So it is a win for the farmers, it is a win for the
   miners, and it is a win for the Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander
   communities of Australia. 
But more importantly than that, it is a win for a commonsense solution
   to a difficult problem. A problem that I never believed when I became
   Prime Minister would prove to be so challenging and so intractable.
   So what we've done over the last two-and-a-quarter years is
   to deal with non-economic issues such as Native Title, but we've
   also set about giving Australia stronger economic foundations. And
   I am so glad that we have. And I ask you to contemplate for a moment
   where Australia would be now, given what's happened in Asia
   if we had not reduced Mr Beazley's deficit of $10.5 billion
   a year and produced a surplus of $2.5 billion a year. I ask you
   where we would have been if we had not delivered the lowest interest
   rates in the last 30 years. I ask you where we might be if we had
   not reduced Australia's inflation rate. I ask you where we
   might be if we had not set about reforming Australia's industrial
   relations system. In other words, if we had not embraced economic
   reform, we would now be weaker, more vulnerable and more at risk
   in the light of what has happened in the Asian-Pacific region. Believe
   me, the economic melt down in the region is the worst economic circumstance
   to affect those countries since World War II and it is a triumph
   of Australian economic strength that we have not been more affected
   by what has happened in our region. We can't hope to be unaffected
   because we send more than 50% of our trade in goods and services
   into that region. But I am able to say to you that we are in better
   shape, we have better withstood the downturn, than would otherwise
   have been the case if we had not taken the measures we took from
   the time we came to power.
Now, I know that some of those measures have been criticised, and
   I know there will be people in this room who've disagreed with
   the decisions the Government has taken in this or that area. But
   if you put it all together and if you take the view that no Government
   can ever get an economy in order, can ever put a stronger protective
   layer around an economy in difficult circumstances, unless it takes
   some unpopular decisions. I hope you will see those decisions in
   that light. If we had simply sat there and done nothing and we had
   said well, we'll let the deficit stay where it is, we won't
   do anything that offends anybody, the pressure on our exchange rate,
   the pressure on our economy would have been much greater. And instead
   of us being able to say, well, we've had some impact there
   and a bit of impact over there, the entire Australian economy would
   have been exposed to greater pressure. And if anybody thinks that
   is imagination, I just ask you to look at what has happened to some
   of the economies, including some of the very strong economies in
   the Asian-Pacific region. 
And I'm very pleased that Australia has been able to play
   her part in helping countries in the region. Once again, I know
   people are critical of the fact that we extended economic assistance
   to Indonesia and Thailand and to Korea. Some people run around making
   political points out of that and say why are we giving money away
   to foreigners when we should be spending it at home. Well, to start
   with, we are not giving it away. We are lending it. And the second
   thing is that it is in our interests to do so, because these countries
   buy from us, they invest in Australia, and if you ask me what is
   better for Australia, a weak Korea, a weak Thailand, a weak Indonesia
   that buys nothing from Australia or a strong Thailand, a strong
   Indonesia, a strong Korea that buys a lot from Australia, I'll
   say a strong Korea, Thailand, and Indonesia, that buys a lot from
   Australia.
It is in our own national self-interest to make sure that there
   is an economic recovery in the Asian-Pacific region. 34% of Australia's
   exports go to two countries alone  Korea and Japan. And that
   is more combined than goes to any other two countries in the world,
   and anybody who thinks we can close our eyes and say we don't
   want anything to do with these countries, that we can put up some
   kind of barrier and say, go away leave me alone, doesn't understand
   what is good for Australia. And I think it is very important in
   these difficult times, these challenging times that we understand
   the interdependence and we don't listen to false nostrums which
   say that you can cure Australia's problems by keeping out imports.
   I know that there are a lot of people who are affected by imports.
   I also know that this country exports a lot of good and services,
   and we say to the rest of the world, we don't want your goods,
   the rest of the world will say to us they don't want our goods.
   And I can think of two great Queensland industries, the sugar industry
   and the beef industry which provide a lot of wealth for Queenslanders
   and a lot of investment and a lot of jobs in Queensland. And if
   we do something that puts those export industries at risk, we will
   be doing a great disservice, not only to the State of Queensland
   but to the Australian economy.
Now, I am very strong in my belief that we took the right economic
   decisions, unpopular though some of them may have been, disliked
   by some, though some of them may have been, if we had not taken
   them, I would now be, I believe, culpable in the eyes of the Australian
   people as Prime Minister for not having taken the measures that
   were necessary.
And of course the job is not done. There are still further areas
   of economic reform that are needed, and the next great challenge
   of economic reform is in the area of taxation. The Australian taxation
   system is unfair, it is increasingly discredited and it is becoming
   in the eyes of many unworkable. We have needed taxation reform for
   many years. I came into Parliament in 1974, and two years before
   I came into Parliament there had been commissioned by the then Liberal
   Treasurer, the late Billy Snedden, an inquiry into Australia's
   taxation system that became known as the Asprey Inquiry, and that
   inquiry recommended, believe it or not, the introduction of a broad
   based indirect tax or goods and services tax to replace existing
   indirect taxes or certain ones of them, and accompanied by reductions
   in personal income tax. 
And that report came down in 1975, 23 years ago. And reforming
   the tax system was looked at in the late 1970s, in the early 1980s,
   in the mid-1980s and then again as you all remember in early 1990s
   via John Hewson's Fightback! Package. And on each occasion,
   people have either lost the nerve or they've been defeated
   at the ballot box. And many of you might say, well, you shouldn't
   be trying again. And some people have said to me since the Queensland
   election "John, what you've got to do is nothing 
   that's the solution, do nothing. Go over there, sit down quietly,
   go around Australia, smile at everybody, say you like everybody
   and offer everybody something but please don't embrace any
   of this reform because it will be bad for you". Now, that's
   , I suggest in the eyes of some, an understandable reaction. Can
   I say to you that I think it is a reaction that would be treated
   with the contempt it would deserve from the Australian people. Because
   the solution for Australia at the present time is not to do nothing,
   because we need in Australia's interests to continue reform
   in a number of areas. 
I'm not arguing for tax reform because it is good for my health.
   I'm not arguing for tax reform because I have some kind of
   narrow, blinkered, ideological commitment to tax reform. I'm
   arguing for it because I believe it will be good for Australia.
   I'm arguing for it because I believe that it is the next step
   in order to make the Australian economy stronger and even less vulnerable
   to the rest of the world. And we are not proposing a revolutionary
   change. Sure, we are proposing a substantial change. We are proposing
   to produce a system that is fairer and better than the present one,
   and it is a system that when all the details come out very soon,
   then you will see that it is a fair and balanced approach. It is
   not revolutionary, but it is a constructive, huge improvement on
   the present system. And I think when people see the details, they
   will see it is fair. We are not going to put a Goods and Services
   tax on top of the existing indirect tax structure. We are not going
   to bring it in without having personal tax reductions. The rural
   community will find it a very user-friendly package. And Australian
   exporters who are so important to our future will also find it very
   important. And can I say to retired Australians who are here today
   in significant numbers that the package will be structured in a
   way that will not adversely affect your interests. And indeed it
   will be seen by that section of the Australian population as a very
   fair and balanced package.
Now it is very easy at the moment for our political opponents to
   make hay because the detail is not there. They can run around saying
   "Howard wants to do this and Howard wants to do that and he
   is a terrible fellow and don't listen to anything he says".
   But once it is on the table and all the details are there the scare
   campaign can be seen for what it is. A scare campaign. And I am
   committed to it. I am very strongly committed to it because it is
   good for Australia, not for any other reason. If it weren't
   good for Australia, if I didn't believe it was good for Australia,
   I wouldn't be advocating it. And it is my responsibility as
   Prime Minister to advocate things that are good for the country.
   Once I stop doing that I am of no use to the Party I have the privilege
   of leading or no use to the great office that I occupy. Because
   one is elected to Government to do good things for the people who
   elect you according to your own conscientious beliefs and that's
   what I am doing and that is why I remain very strongly committed
   to taxation reform.
And right at the moment we're having a debate about the sale
   of the remaining two -thirds of Telstra into the hands of the men
   and women of Australia. And I know there are some people who disagree
   with that. There'd be people in this room who would say "Well
   I don't know that I agree with that either. Why is he doing
   that?". Well we are doing that, once again, because we believe
   it will benefit Australia. One of the things that I inherited from
   Mr Beazley was an annual deficit of $10.5 billion and an accumulated
   Federal Government debt of between $95 and $100 billion. In other
   words in March of 1996 when I became Prime Minister, the aggregate
   debts of the Federal Government were about $95 to $100 billion.
   And that was because the previous government had run up a whole
   series of annual deficits. So it was accumulating at an annual rate
   of about $10.5 billion. And it had all added up to about $95 to
   $100 billion. Now we couldn't go on with that any more than
   any of you running a business in proportionate terms could go on
   with that. We had to do something about it. And we set about getting
   it down and we set about repaying debt. And one of the reasons why
   I am committed to the privatisation of the rest of Telstra, is that
   the proceeds of that privatisation, which some people put it around
   $40 billion, will be used to pay off the debts of the Federal Government
   run up by previous governments. And it is very important we do that.
   Because if we can do that we can essentially get what I call the
   "debt monkey" off the backs off the future generations
   of Australians. And all of think about the legacy we might leave
   to our children or grandchildren or both. And one of the legacies
   that I would like the members of the present Government to leave
   the future generations of Australians is an essentially debt free
   21st century. If I am able to say as Prime Minister to
   the young Australians who will inherent in the full the 21st
   century, that we have at least got rid of the huge burden of Federal
   Government debt, then I think that is a fine legacy.
Now that is the first reason why I support the privatisation of
   Telstra, the final privatisation of it. The second reason is if
   you are able to sell it and get that amount of money you can afford
   to take a small percentage of those proceeds and turn them into
   what I call a social bonus. And that is you can spend it on identifiable
   things that the public wants. I am happy to announce today, for
   example, that one of the things that will be spending it on, that
   social bonus up to $150 million, is to give to Australians who live
   in remote areas of the country access to untimed local calls. In
   other words just as if you live on the Gold Coast you can ring your
   neighbour on the Gold Coast on an untimed basis or if you live in
   a suburb of Sydney or a suburb of Brisbane, you shouldn't,
   because of the tyranny of distance, be denied the opportunity of
   doing that in a remote part of Australia. And neigbourliness',
   having a good neighbour policy and communications, means giving
   to people who live in the very remote parts of the country exactly
   the same opportunity for those untimed local calls. And it has been
   one of those things that has represented a symbol of the communications
   divide between the city and the country in Australia for a long
   period of time. And that will be possible that change, only if,
   of course, the full privatisation of Telstra is supported by the
   Senate.
And Mr Fischer, the Deputy Prime Minister, announced yesterday
   a decision by the company which is a real breakthrough in relation
   to the replacement of the analogue telephone services in remote
   parts of Australia in the introduction of a new digital technology
   that will, once again, improve the communications endowment of remote
   and regional areas of Australia. What is being announced today by
   Mr Fischer and Senator Alston, is untimed local calls for the outback
   areas of Australia and the abolition of what is currently called
   the pastoral rate, and the replacement of the pastoral rate with
   a new preferential rate which will enable remote areas at a preferential
   rate to have telephone access to major population centres most adjacent
   to them.
Ladies and gentlemen, all of these things should be seen in the
   context of the national interest. Not in the context of a narrow
   political ideology. Not in the context of pretending there are easy
   simple solutions to difficult problems. Can I assure you, and I
   have been in politics a few years, that if there were simple, easy
   solutions to Australia's problems I'd have implemented
   them long before now. And I think my predecessors would have implemented
   them long before now. And I do, particularly in the context of current
   political debate here in Queensland, caution anybody against the
   belief that there is a simplistic solution that nobody previously
   has thought of. Of course everybody is fallible and I don't
   claim any monopoly of wisdom and my Government, the Government like
   any other government, has made its mistakes. But I do recognise
   that a commonsense understanding of political challenges and economic
   challenges is very important.
There are just two other things that I do want to say to you. And
   one of those is that I have endeavoured in the time that we have
   been in Government to place a particular emphasis on the role of
   small business within our deliberations. The reductions we've
   achieved in interest rates, the changes we've made for industrial
   relations, the liberalisation we have already achieved in relation
   to unfair dismissal laws, and the attempts that we have also made
   to liberalise them even further. The changes we have made to the
   provisional tax structure, the changes we have made to give much
   greater capital gains, rollover relief to small businesses, the
   changes we've made in relation to retirement benefits concerning
   capital gains tax, the changes we've made to fringe benefits
   tax. All of those things have been designed to make life better
   for small business. Now, there are many other things that I know
   people would have like done and nothing is ever enough when it comes
   to change and reform by government.
But we have placed a very high premium and a very high priority
   on improving the climate and improving the outlook for small business
   within the Australian community.
And the last thing I want to say is the most important, the most
   precious role of government in modern society, is not its statistical
   achievements, important though they may be, it's not the economic
   theory, but it's rather how it relates to people and how it
   responds to the concerns of the Australian community. I understand
   as an Australian who grew up with a great belief in the cohesion
   and the stability and the fairness and the strength of this country,
   I know there are people in Australian society who feel vulnerable
   to change. Change is all around us. There is economic change, there
   is social change. There is change in the way in which family members
   relate to each other. The social habits of people have altered radically
   over a generation. And many people find that change bewildering
   and I understand that. And one of the roles of government is to
   help people through change, but by the same token not to dishonestly
   pretend that some changes can be avoided. Because they can't.
The art of good government situation is to hang on to those things
   that we can preserve and we can identify as a continuity of our
   national life, but at the same time explain the need for change
   and reform in other areas. I believe in hanging on to the good things
   from our past, but also recognising that there are some things from
   our past that do have to change. We do live in global economy. Whether
   we like it or not we are effected by economic decisions in other
   parts of the world and we can't close our eyes to that and
   if we do so we will be trampled under foot.
But I also do know there are some great Australian traditions that
   are as valuable and timeless and as enduring now as they were before
   I was born. And those traditions of mateship, those egalitarian
   traditions and those things that all of us identify instinctively
   as being true Australian traditions. And they're ones that
   I will fight hard and very strongly to preserve.
Behind me hangs the flag of which I am very proud and the flag
   that I have ensured can never be altered without a vote of all of
   the Australian people. I mention that because it is an example of
   the continuity of things that I think is important. But I am also
   conscious of the fact that we are a nation that is now uniquely
   placed to make a contribution 


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Mayor. To my colleague, Susan Jeanes, ladies
   and gentlemen. Of course, as a very young boy I learnt the word
   Onkaparinga' and as a student at the Sydney University
   law school I came across the word Noarlunga'. It was
   the name of a very well known - in those days - case on the operation
   of Section 92 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth. That of course
   is not directly relevant to my visit here, but the conjunction of
   the two words struck me as interesting.
I enjoy gatherings of this kind which in an informal way bring
   together people who are involved in the hundreds of thousands, indeed,
   millions of local communities around Australia. If you want to get
   a cross-section of Australians, if you want to get a grass roots
   view of what Australians are thinking, whether it be in the cities
   or the provincial centres or in the bush, you get together a gathering
   such as this in an informal fashion, you say a few words and then
   you mingle and talk to people and hear what they have to say. You
   receive quite a lot of advice, you try and answer some questions
   and you try and impart a little wisdom perhaps on some subjects.
   I do want to join the Mayor in complimenting Susan on the very hard
   work that she does for this electorate. 
Like so many electorates in Australia it is very diverse. It has
   its pockets of great tranquillity and prosperity and stability.
   It has other areas of difficulty where social challenges for our
   fellow Australians are quite real and I was delighted to hear what
   the Mayor had to say about your success through various things including
   the partnership of which you spoke in reducing the level of youth
   unemployment. As just about has been the case with every period
   of government in recent times in Australia, this country faces at
   present a number of challenges. In many ways our economic foundations
   are stronger now than they have been for a quarter of a century.
   We have withstood the worst impact of the Asian economic downturn
   in a way that has surprised many of our critics and has impressed
   many objective observers.
We have in fact done very well despite Asia having done very badly.
   And the Asian economic downturn shows no sign of ending quickly,
   and it is therefore very important that the steps that have been
   taken to strengthen our economy against the impact of that downturn
   be maintained. Now is not a time to throw away the things that have
   been done over the past two and a bit years to strengthen the Australian
   economy against the worst effects of the Asian economic downturn.
   And equally now is not a time to turn our backs on those further
   economic reforms that are needed in order to further strengthen
   the Australian economy against the impact of the Asian downturn.
And one change and reform that I have very much in mind, of course,
   is reforming Australia's taxation system. There has been a
   lot of talk in recent weeks and months about our plans for reform.
   Those plans will go ahead and they will go ahead because reforming
   the taxation system is the next essential step in order to further
   strengthen the Australian economy against the impact of the Asian
   downturn. If we can replace our existing indirect tax system with
   a better indirect tax system, if we can give Australians relief
   in the personal tax area, if we can build a tax system that encourages
   rather than penalises our exporters then we will do even better
   relative to the countries of the Asia-Pacific region than we have
   done over the last few years.
So my message to you today is that tax reform is the essential
   next step to further strengthen and protect the Australian economy
   against the worst effects of the Asian economic downturn. Now is
   not a time to take fright in relation to that reform, now is not
   a time to turn our back on that. Indeed the challenge of the Asian
   economic downturn adds to the urgency of reforming Australia's
   taxation system.
It won't be a system that Australians will find as revolutionary.
   It will be a logical next reform step and it will deliver to all
   Australians a fairer system, a system where it is harder to cheat
   on your fellow Australians and a system that will give particular
   relief to those with family responsibilities and will pay particular
   regard to the significance to Australia of the rural sector and
   of our export industries.
And I've just enjoyed the hospitality, only at lunchtime today,
   of one of the great export industries of Australia for which of
   course South Australia is famous. And it really is a wonderful success
   story to be told that in 1985 Australia was exporting to the United
   Kingdom 540,000 litres of wine and we're now exporting to the
   United Kingdom 85 million litres of wine. You can't get it
   any better than that and it's been a great example of Australian
   ingenuity, Australian skill, Australian salesmanship, and I was
   very pleased to hear from the people involved in the local industry
   over lunch that the economic climate, the investment climate via
   lower interest rates and low inflation and a generally benign climate
   for investment that that climate is better than those men and women
   in that industry have experienced for a very long period of time.
Good government, my friends, is not only about good economic management.
   It is also about building strong communities, it is about promoting
   and defending the fundamental values of the Australian community.
   And those fundamental values include the great importance that we
   place as a community on family life, the great importance that we
   place as a community on voluntary effort. Australians are renowned
   for their willingness to help each other, particularly in times
   of crisis and distress, and those fundamental values also include
   of course tolerance to each other, a recognition of, and respect
   for, the differences we might have as well as those things that
   we have in common and those similarities that we share as Australians.
This country in the last 40 years has welcomed millions of people
   from all around the world. And Australia has been an object lesson
   to the rest of the world in the harmony and the tolerance and the
   acceptance that we have extended to those people. And one of the
   great strengths of Australia as we move towards the 21st
   century is the way in which our nation has been further built and
   diversified by the injection and the contribution of those millions
   of people who have come from other parts of the world. And it's
   a mark of our civility, it's a mark of our decency and it's
   a mark of our tolerance as a community that we have been able to
   accept and to build out of the blending of those who've come
   and those who were here when they came, a very united, coherent,
   harmonious nation which is, because of its harmony and tranquillity,
   earns not only the envy but also the respect of the rest of the
   world.
Government in this country can only be effective if it works in
   partnership with individuals and with community organisations. We
   all want a fair society, we all want a good society, we all want
   a strong society. The Government can't do it on its on. Individuals
   can not do it on their own, and the great community and welfare
   organisations of our nation can't do it on their own either.
   It is only through a shared endeavour between the Government, the
   individual and community organisations that the sort of goals we
   want for that fair and strong and good society can be achieved.
Today's gathering brings together people involved in that
   shared endeavour here in the electorate of Kingston. It brings together
   people who are committed in the welfare sector, in the local government
   sector, in the business community, your parliamentary representative,
   your Mayor, and on this occasion I have the privilege of being here
   as Prime Minister. And it's that joint shared endeavour which
   is so tremendously important to the future of our country.
So to you, Mr Mayor, thank you very, very warmly for your welcome.
   To you Susan thank you very much for having me, congratulation again
   on the very active role that you play as the Member for this electorate.
   You are not just a faithful echo of what this electorate says, you
   are both somebody who reports on what the electorate says, interprets
   what it feels and someone who presses the cause of this electorate
   in a very fearless and energetic way. And that is how your representatives
   should be, whatever party he or she belongs to and whatever may
   be the particular problems of the electorate.
So ladies and gentleman, thank you most warmly for being here today,
   its been a great privilege to address you for a few moments. Thank
   you.


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mr Baker; to Diana Laidlaw, to my many federal
 colleagues and particularly Christine Gallus in whose electorate of
 Hindmarsh the airport is located, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to have been asked to come here this morning and to
 officially open this runway extension. It is another example of the
 commitment of the Federal Government to the building of necessary
 infrastructure to support the growth and the expansion of the Australian
 economy.
There's always a lot of legitimate debate about the role of Government
 in modern society. There are some who see that Government or who argue
 that the Government should have a greater role. There are others who
 believe that the Government should have a lesser role. There are many
 people quite understandably who believe that when governments try
 and run businesses, they normally make a pretty significant hash of
 it, and that has certainly been the experience of many South Australians
 and it was the experience of many people in Victoria and many people
 in Western Australia, and it is an ongoing legitimate argument to
 put. And I don't think there is any debate across the political
 and intellectual divide about the role of Government in Australia
 about the proposition that one of the responsibilities of Government
 is to provide a decent level of infrastructure within our community.
And that is why the Government I lead committed $100 million to the
 construction of the Darwin to Alice Springs railway which is a very
 very important infrastructure project to the people of South Australia
 and to the people of the Northern Territory. And also might I say
 to all the people of Australia, you would be surprised how many people
 in Sydney where I grew up, who are very very attracted to the concept
 of that particular infrastructure development.
And these runway extensions are very much in the same genre. They
 represent a commitment by the Federal Government to the development
 of the international capacity of the Adelaide airport, and I am therefore
 very pleased to be associated with this project.
The main runway here has been extended by 572 metres and creating
 a full-length taxiway and at a total cost to the Commonwealth of $45.7
 million. It will bring great benefits to South Australia. It will
 give additional freight capacity, particularly to Asian markets. It
 will provide greater opportunities for direct exports of perishable
 goods, and it will improve international tourism opportunities. And
 both of those things, and increased freight capacity, and an increased
 tourist capacity are important to the economy of South Australia.
I have long believed that a further significant exploitation of the
 great tourist potential of South Australia, particularly surrounding
 the great appeal of the Barossa Valley and other parts of the State
 associated with the wine growing industry, are one of the important
 elements of the future growth and the future development of the economy
 of this State.
In a very special way this new air capacity does compliment the proposed
 Darwin to Alice Springs Railway, the Adelaide to Darwin rail link.
 And it will give many South Australian businesses in the future two
 options. Either the new rail or the new air routes to markets and
 they both represent new and fresh opportunities. So, it is in every
 sense of the word a very important building block for the future growth
 and development of businesses in South Australia. It represents a
 vote of confidence by the Federal Government in the future economic
 development and growth of South Australia. And I am delighted Mr Baker
 that you are here, I know that you feel - as you are a native of Manchester
 - absolutely acclimatised this morning, absolutely acclimatised. I
 am delighted that you're here and I'm delighted to welcome
 the contribution that your company, which has had great experience
 in operating airports, the contribution that your company is making
 to the development to the economy in South Australia.
It will, of course, generate a lot of jobs. And any economic activity
 has no meaning at all unless it carries with it the generation of
 jobs and the creation of job opportunities for Australians into the
 future.
So ladies and gentlemen can I say how very pleased I am, again, to
 be here. I want to congratulate Ms Laidlaw and her department and
 the South Australian Government on the role that it's played.
 I want to thank my own Federal colleagues for their persistent advocacy
 - and I remark upon this - their persistent advocacy of the need for
 the Federal Government to give a high priority to this runway extension.
 I should tell all of you that long before I became Prime Minister
 I felt the force of South Australian Federal representation towards
 a very significant investment in this upgrade. And I was told my South
 Australian colleagues that when it came, (... aircraft flying
 overhead...) - it feels like Sydney! - when it came to putting
 together our election commitments in 1996 when we were just in Opposition.
 When it came to putting together those election commitments we have
 to leave room for the provision of funds for this airport. And I can
 well remember Senator Hill, the Leader of the Government in the Senate,
 and the Senator from South Australia reminding all of us in those
 days of the importance of this airport and the role that South Australians
 correctly saw the airport playing in the future economic development
 of the State and most particularly the business potential and the
 business capacity of the city of Adelaide.
Therefore my friends, I know I've got to cut a ribbon or a banner
 in a few moments, but let me say how delighted I am to be associated
 with this extension. It's been finished ahead of time, a little
 below budget, and congratulations to those who are associated with
 that. That's always pleasing news, and it shows a commitment.
 But of all of those people involved I congratulate them and I wish
 all of those associated with the airport great success into the future.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well to the Mayor, Tony Zappia, of the City of Salisbury, to my Federal
 Parliamentary colleague, Trish Draper, other distinguished guests,
 ladies and gentlemen.
I finally have found out, Trish, where that photograph of you and
 I with the Crows scarf has ended up. And she promised me that it would
 end up in the bar of this particular bowling club and I've found
 that this morning she is very much a person of her word.
Can I start by saying that I am very pleased indeed to be here at
 the City of Salisbury. I'm particularly happy to be in Trish's
 electorate. And I do take the opportunity of telling all of you as
 citizens of this area just what a tremendous hardworking Federal Member
 you have in Trish Draper.
Local political representation these days is less about your party
 allegiance, although that's important, and it is increasingly
 about the quality of personal representation that you bring. And a
 local member who is in touch with her constituency, a local member
 who understands that this electorate has a very significant number
 of retired people, it has a lot of people who are concerned about
 community services, it has people who are concerned about the stability
 and quality of family life - somebody who understands those things
 and communicates those concerns to her parliamentary colleagues is
 a very effective representative of the district.
In our system of government, of course, we have a division of responsibilities
 between the Local Government, the State Government and the Federal
 Government. Sometimes you get some lines blurred on the edges where
 there is concurrent responsibility and there are some things that
 are unquestionably our responsibility at a national level. And one
 of the things that we undeniably have total responsibility for is
 the overall state of the Australian economy.
I was very happy yesterday to open the runway extension to Adelaide's
 airport. And those runway extensions are going to give a very vital
 new trading link and commercial link between the city of Adelaide
 and the people of South Australia and those very important export
 markets in South East Asia. And it's another illustration of
 our commitment as a Government to building infrastructure within the
 Australian community. Australia is a very big country. And no matter
 who is in power, federally or State, and no matter what your politics
 are you must recognise we need to spend money on public infrastructure.
We committed ourselves and we were the first Federal Government in
 the history of Australia to commit ourselves to support the construction
 of the Darwin to Alice Springs Railway. Now that particular project
 is very important to South Australia. It's very important to
 the Northern Territory. But let me tell you, as a Sydney boy, it's
 something that people that all over Australia regard as a very important
 element of nation building. And nation building includes a commitment
 to valuable public infrastructure. And the Adelaide airport extension
 and the Darwin to Alice Springs Railway are examples of the commitment
 of the Government to that public infrastructure.
The Government's other commitments in the area of making the
 economy run well obviously include following the right policies to
 protect Australia from the impact of the Asian economic down-turn.
 Now you all know about that, you've all read about it and it
 is the most significant economic downturn that those countries have
 experienced in something like 30 or 40 years. The Japanese economy,
 so important to Australia because Japan is Australia's largest
 overseas market, our best customer. Japan buys more from Australia
 than any other country by far and the country that buys the next largest
 quantity of goods and services from Australia is Korea. And those
 two countries together, Japan and Korea, make up over 30% of the total
 export market of Australia. So what happens in that part of the world
 does affect us. We can't say well we don't want to know
 you, we don't want to have anything to do with you because that's
 unrealistic. And we have to understand that it does have an impact
 on us. And what we have tried to do over the last two-and-a-quarter
 years is to make sure that the Australian economy is strong enough
 and resilient enough so that the impact from Asia is less than it
 would otherwise be. We can't stop it having any impact, that's
 quite unrealistic, but what we've done over the last two-and-a-quarter
 years is to reduce, very markedly, the impact. And things would have
 been a lot worse from Asia over the last year if we hadn't taken
 some of the measures we've taken. I know some of those measures
 have been criticised but when you put them all together they have
 in fact given Australia a strength and protection that we wouldn't
 otherwise have had.
There is a lot of discussion at the moment about our plans to change
 Australia's taxation system. Many of you have spoken to me about
 it this morning. And the details of that policy are going to be out
 very soon and we are very close to completing those details. We do
 need a better system for Australia's sake. Not for the sake of
 the Liberal Party or the sake of the Government or the sake of John
 Howard or Peter Costello. We want a new and better system in this
 country because it will be good for Australia. It will be a fairer
 system and it was one of those things that will help make us even
 stronger against the impact of the Asian economic downturn.
I mean, what your Government should be doing at the moment is looking
 around and seeing what it can do to make Australia better and stronger.
 And we don't have a system at the moment that is all that fair
 and we do need a system that brings more fairness but it's a
 system that will fully protect retired people. I want to say to the
 retired people of Australia, you have nothing to fear, indeed you
 have much to gain from a fairer and different taxation system. And
 I ask all of you to wait and have a look at the detail and you won't
 have too long to wait and you will see that what I say is true. We
 must be willing to change things that are good for Australia. Part
 of the art of good Government and the mark of a good sensitive Government
 is to hang on to those things from our past which are valuable and
 enduring and important. We have a lot of traditional values as Australians
 that I don't want to see changed. We are an egalitarian society,
 we believe in the old Australian adage of mateship. We believe in
 looking after each other and sharing adversity and helping each other
 and whenever there's a great calamity or tragedy in Australia
 the best of the Australian spirit comes out. We saw it last year in
 that appalling tragedy in Thredbo in the Snowy Mountains. We see it
 in bushfires, we see it in other national calamities.
So they're qualities about Australia that I wouldn't want
 to see changed, in a hundred years I wouldn't want to see any
 change in those sorts of things.
They are other things about Australia that I don't want to see
 changed. I don't for example want to see this flag draped on
 the wall behind me changed. I support that flag very, very strongly.
 That flag is a wonderful expression of our history and that's
 why one of the first things that I did as Prime Minister was to ask
 the Parliament to pass a law saying that the Australian flag could
 never be changed without that issue being put to a vote of all of
 the Australian people. And my suspicion is that because of that law
 it will never get changed because I don't believe the majority
 of the Australian people will ever vote to change it.
So they are some of the things about Australia that I don't want
 to see changed at all. Nor do I want to see the cooperative spirit
 that exists between our local communities and their local and state
 governments change. I don't think we should change our Federal
 system of government. We divide responsibility between the national
 government, the state government and the local government.
There is much about Australia that is all right as it is and I'm
 not somebody who believes in change for change's sake. But part
 of my responsibility as Prime Minister is to argue for change in those
 things that I believe are good for Australia. You look at each issue
 and you say is the present situation continuing to be good for Australia?
 And if it is you hang on to it, you preserve it, and you argue against
 change. If on the other hand it's something that you believe
 ought to be changed for the good of Australia, you then go out and
 argue for and you advocate change.
That's why I support changing our tax system. Not because I've
 got any personal hang-up about it or some ideological commitment.
 But I just happen to believe that it would be good for Australia if
 we had a taxation system that encouraged us to export. It would be
 good for Australia if we had a taxation system that was harder for
 cheats to prosper from. It would be good if we had a taxation system
 that paid greater recognition to the cost of bring up children. It
 would be good if we had a taxation system that recognised the severe
 cost disabilities of many of our rural industries. And can I say to
 all of you that there is no state in Australia that would benefit
 more because of its heavy reliance on the manufacturing industries
 of this country. There is no State that would benefit more from the
 sort of taxation reform that we have in mind than the State of South
 Australia. Because the present taxation system, the present wholesale
 tax system is massively discriminatory against manufacturing industry.
 It penalises manufacturers and it particularly penalises manufacturing
 exporters.
And I believe my friends that when all of the details of this are
 unveiled and as I say we're getting near to completing the task
 but it is a big task, it's an important task. I believe that
 the great majority of Australians will see it as the next necessary
 step towards making this country more competitive of giving this country
 more fairness and of giving this country a greater capacity to compete
 in a difficult world environment.
It is because of what's happening in Asia that it is necessary
 for us to press ahead with essential changes and reforms. That is
 not a reason for us to go slow rather it is a reason for us to press
 ahead.
Ladies and gentlemen thank you very much for coming this morning.
 I'm often asked as I do interviews around Australia and I talk
 to journalists and commentators, I'm often asked what is the
 best part of the job. The best part of the job is the opportunity
 to meet different groups of Australians in settings like this. To
 come into a local community, to talk to people where they might regularly
 come and meet their friends, have a cup of tea or a drink or play
 bowls or whatever the activity may be, indoors or outdoors. And no
 community is the same, that's the remarkable thing about it,
 every community has it distinctive characteristics. I know a little
 of the history of this area, I know a little of the different contributions
 made by different immigrant communities after World War II to the
 character of the City of Salisbury. It's different from other
 parts of Adelaide and they're different again from parts of Melbourne
 and Sydney and Brisbane. And it's a constant fascination and
 a constant privilege to have the that opportunity of visiting so many
 local communities.
And it is a reminder to me that the only way we as Australians can
 achieve the goals that all of us share for our country and that is
 a better and fairer society and a secure society as we go into the
 next century is that we have to work together. The Government can't
 do it all on it's own. It's not very good at doing certain
 things, the Government, but it's good at doing other things.
 Local organisations can't do it all on their own but they do
 a magnificent job and individuals can't always do it on their
 own either and it's only through a shared endeavour of individuals
 and local communities and government working together that we can
 share and achieve our goals.
Thank you for having me. Trish thank you for the tremendous job that
 you're doing as the Federal Member for this electorate. I think
 it's absolutely superb, she's a great representative of
 this people of this electorate, she's a very valued colleague
 and friend and I ask you to, whenever the time may be appropriate,
 to look favourably upon her in the most practical of all ways.
Thank you very much.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE.................................................................................................
To Mr Chairman, to Mr Jack Lockett; to your excellency the Ambassador
   of France; to my colleague, Tim Fischer the Deputy Prime Minister;
   to Bruce Reid the Member of Bendigo; to the Mayor of Bendigo, ladies
   and gentlemen.
I have had many honours and privileges to come my way as Prime
   Minister but none exceeds the very special privilege of responding
   on behalf of Australia's oldest returned serviceman. This wonderful
   man, this priceless national treasure, this man who embodies so
   much of what we think good and fine and noble about our country:
   he has received from the Ambassador, France's highest decoration.
   It is a fitting acknowledgment of the incredible contribution made
   by our country to the defence of France in the Great War.
With a male population of only a little over 2.5 million, 416,000-odd
   Australians volunteered in WWI. More Australian blood has been spilt
   defending the soil of France than in any other part of the world.
   And the contribution made by Australians to the defence of France
   and to the defence of freedom was absolutely incalculable.
Today we honour a man who represents so much of what is the true
   Australian spirit. He represents courage. He represents adventure.
   He represents a willingness to share adversity, to put his life
   on the line, to risk the ultimate sacrifice. He is a wonderful and
   priceless link with a very important part of our history.
And it's a wonderful opportunity to honour those brave Australians
   of long ago who risked so much to go to the other side of the world
   to defend our way of life. And also through him to honour those
   other hundreds of thousands of Australians in WWII and in Korea
   and Malaysia and in Vietnam who did exactly the same thing. Their
   willingness to put their lives on the line, their willingness to
   sacrifice all in the defence of our way of life is something that
   always has me standing in awe.
Because we do have a way of life in this country that is precious
   and very special. It is the envy of the world, but if it hadn't
   been for the likes of Jack we wouldn't be able to enjoy it.
   And everyday we should count the blessings that people like Jack
   represent.
So to you on behalf of a very grateful, a very humble and a very
   proud and a very affectionate nation, can I say how much we hold
   you in our esteem, how deep is the emotion that so many of us feel
   for what you represent about the Australian way of life and what
   you have done to make this a country which everyone in this room
   loves, whatever may be our views on other issues. You are a priceless
   national asset and treasure. Long may you have happiness and health
   in the bosom of your family and your friends. And on behalf of a
   deeply grateful nation I say thank you and God bless you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Dr Eric Tan, to Philip Ruddock, the
   Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs in the Federal
   Government, to Colin Barnett, to Sir Charles Court, the former Premier
   of Western Australia, Senator Alan Eggleston, to my other Parliamentary
   colleagues, if I have missed any of them, ladies and gentlemen.
I am especially delighted to have the opportunity on this visit
   to Western Australia to address the Chamber of Commerce. It's
   a timely opportunity. It's a timely occasion and it is a chance
   to say a few things that are important to relations between Australia
   and Australia's neighbours in the Asia Pacific region, and
   it's also an opportunity for me to say something about the
   values that bind all of us together as Australians, irrespective
   of our racial or ethnic background.
I start by complementing the Chamber on the tremendous contribution
   that it's made to the commercial and social vigour of the city
   of Perth. There has been, for a long time, very close links between
   Western Australia and many of the nations of Asia. And I know that
   during his time as Premier, Sir Charles Court fostered very close
   links between Western Australia and the nations of Asia. And that
   tradition has been carried on by the Coalition Government in power
   in Western Australia at present.
The investment that has flowed and the contribution that has been
   made as a result of those links has played a very impressive part
   in building the economic strength of Perth and the economic strength
   of Western Australia.
It's also an occasion to thank the people of Chinese descent
   who have come to Australia from different parts of Asia for the
   contribution that they have made to the Australian nation. It's
   an occasion for me, on behalf of all Australians, to mark the enormous
   contribution of Chinese Australians to our nation. That is a contribution
   that is felt in every walk of life. It is felt in commerce. It is
   felt in the professions. It is felt in politics. It is felt in community
   life generally. And the bonds that have been developed between Australians
   of different backgrounds is one of the important and enduring values
   of the Australian community. And it is important at this time that
   those values and those bonds be very forcefully and powerfully stated.
Australia has a very long record of openness and tolerance towards
   people who have come to our shores from all around the world. In
   the years that immediately followed World War II, the doors of Australia
   were thrown open wide to hundreds of thousands, indeed millions,
   from different parts of Europe. But for a long time the doors were
   not thrown open to people from Asia. And it was under the Prime
   Ministership of Harold Holt who lead a Coalition Government in 1967
   to formally abandon what was known as the white Australia policy
   and from then on progressively Australia adopted and embraced a
   non-discriminatory immigration policy.
The level of immigration and the composition of the migrant intake
   to Australia will always be a matter of legitimate debate. And there
   are strongly held views on both sides of the argument as to whether
   Australia would benefit from, in present or immediately foreseeable
   circumstances, a significant increase in the migrant intake. And
   that is a debate that should be encouraged.
The Government that I lead has made a number of decisions since
   it came to power, which it believes have been in the national interest
   to alter the intake with a greater emphasis on skilled migration
   and a slightly lower emphasis on family reunion. And we have also,
   because of our assessment of economic circumstances, induced a reduction
   in the overall intake. Now there are those in the community who
   will disagree with that. There are those in the community who will
   argue that it ought to go further. And that is a matter of legitimate
   political debate in Australia.
But so far as I am concerned, and so far as the Government is concerned,
   we bring to that debate a number of very important principles. The
   first of those principles is that over the decades, particularly
   since World War II, migration has made an enormous contribution
   to Australia. It has helped change Australia for the better, not
   for the worse. It has helped make Australia a more outward looking,
   a more welcoming, a more interesting country. And perhaps the most
   valuable thing that I have observed over the years is the way in
   which we have been able to absorb into Australia people from something
   like 150 different countries with a remarkable degree of harmony.
   And that has been one of the great Australian achievements. I can't
   think of a country in the world that has done it more successfully.
   Nor can I think of a country in the world that has been able to
   do it and in the process preserve a core set of Australian values
   that maintain a long continuity of values connecting us now in the
   last years of the 20th Century, with the early beginnings
   of the Australian federation almost 100 years ago.
So we have bring to that debate as a Government, our view that
   immigration has been an enormous plus for Australia, and for Australia's
   development. And another principle or another value that we bring
   to the debate about immigration in Australia is that immigration
   in this country should be based firmly and absolutely on the principle
   of non-discrimination. In other words, we will not choose people
   according to their race, their ethnic or national origin. We do
   not prefer somebody because he or she is of a particular ethnic
   background against somebody else who is of another ethnic background.
   And I do want to make it very clear that the Government is firmly
   and resolutely opposed to any change in the non-discriminatory character
   of our immigration policy. It remains an important cornerstone,
   a core value of the approach that we bring to immigration. We believe
   that Australia's links to the various parts of the word have
   been enormously enhanced by the way in which we have been able to
   absorb people from different parts of the world.
We are proud of our record of tolerance. But like all things that
   we hold dear, like all values that are central to our being as a
   nation, the principle of tolerance and openness is not something
   that can be taken for granted. There are some in our community who
   would seek to foster division based on race and ethnic background.
   And it is the obligation of all of us, whatever our political beliefs,
   to hold firm against those attitudes. I believe they are minority
   attitudes. I believe they are attitudes that are held in contempt
   by the overwhelming majority of the Australian community. And they
   are certainly attitudes that are held in contempt by the members
   of the Government I have the privilege of leading.
I have often spoken, ladies and gentlemen, within the context of
   other polices of the Government, I have often spoken of the principal
   of mutual obligation. We have a policy in relation to work for the
   dole, which speaks for the principal of mutual obligation, that
   we as a civilised decent society have a belief that people who,
   through not fault of their own, are not able to get work, should
   be supported by the community, subject to certain principles and
   certain tests. But we say that in return for that support, those
   people should be willing to put something back into the community
   if it is reasonable of us to ask them to do so. And that principle
   and that policy which finds, the principles expressed through the
   policy of work for the dole, of mutual obligation, has been quite
   well received within the Australian community.
And I often see, ladies and gentlemen, the interaction between
   people who come to settle within Australia as being in another way
   the working out of that principal of mutual obligation. We who live
   in Australia have an obligation of welcome, of acceptance, of decency,
   of harmonious treatment and of tolerant understanding, of people
   who come to our country. And in return, those who come have an obligation
   to embrace along with all other Australians, whether they were born
   here or have come from another nation, have an obligation to embrace,
   along with all other Australians, the values that bind us together
   as Australians irrespective of their ethnic background.
And I've had occasion, in other circumstances, to remark that
   the things that unite us as Australians, are infinitely greater
   and more enduring than the things that divide us or put us apart.
   And those things that unite us as Australians, are things of which
   we should frequently remind ourselves. And they are things and values
   to which Chinese Australians, along with Australians of other ethnic
   descents have made an enormous contribution. They are the principles
   of tolerance and of fairness. A striding towards an essentially
   classless, egalitarian society. A belief in individual effort and
   individual liberty. A respect for the right of every Australian
   to treasure and to practice and to mark his or her own cultural
   heritage consistent with their membership of the broader Australian
   community.
Chinese Australians have made a particular contribution to our
   community. The energy that they have displayed in commerce and in
   the professions, constantly draws admiration from their fellow Australians.
   The contribution that they have made to the bonds of family life
   is equally something that draws admiration from their fellow Australians.
The Government has placed an enormous importance on the family
   unit. It's long been my belief that as well as being the environment
   in which children can best be raised to adulthood, united functioning
   families are the most effective social welfare system that any nation
   has devised. And the contribution made by the Chinese in particular,
   but not exclusively, to the strengthening of the family unit and
   the ideal of the strength of the family unit within Australian society
   is enormously important.
So, ladies and gentlemen, on this 50th anniversary,
   if I can put it that way, in meeting terms of the establishment
   of this firm, I did want to say those few things about some values
   that I regard as important, and some values that I regard as essential
   to the continuity of the kind of tolerant, harmonious society in
   which we all believe. There is no place within the modern Australia,
   for any semblance of racism or any semblance of intolerance based
   on racial difference. There is no place within our community for
   those who would argue that race or ethnic background should be a
   determining factor in the way in which people are treated or the
   way in which people are entitled to exercise their rights under
   the law.
I believe very strongly in a united Australian nation in which
   all people are equally accountable under the same set of laws and
   from which all Australians, irrespective of their background, are
   entitled to an equal dispensation of justice.
Before I conclude, I would like to say one or two things as well
   about the economic circumstances of Australia, particularly in relation
   to the Asia Pacific region. It is without any equivocation one of
   the proudest boasts of the Government that we have been able to
   give to Australia a measure of protection through the building of
   Australia's economic foundation which has meant that the worst
   effects of the Asian economic downturn have not come to Australia
   in a way that might otherwise have been the case if we had acted
   differently.
Over the last two and a quarter years, the Government has worked
   very hard to strengthen the foundations of the Australian economy.
   We now have the lowest inflation rate in the OECD area. We are projected
   to have probably the fastest economic growth rate of the G7 nations
   in 1998 and possibly also 1999. Australia now has the lowest interest
   rates that we have had for more than 30 years. And whereas three
   years ago we had a budget deficit running at $10.5 billion a year,
   I am very happy to say that Australia is now in surplus. Our levels
   of business investment are strong and Australia is widely respected
   in international financial and economic forums. But very relevantly
   to the region, that strength has enabled Australia to play a role
   in helping the countries of the region that are going through very
   difficult economic times. Along with Japan, Australia is the only
   country which has participated in each of the three international
   monetary fund bailouts of Indonesia, Thailand and Korea respectively.
   And we have done that because it is in the long term economic interests
   to do so. It is in Australia's interests that we have strong
   economies in the region. It is in Australia's interests that
   we build those economies up and help them during their hours of
   difficulty and need.
And when, as inevitably be the case, there is an economic resurgence
   in the Asian Pacific region, because there will. I have enormous
   long-term confidence in the economic strength of the Asian Pacific
   region. And when, inevitably the economic resurgence comes, the
   contribution that Australia made in the hour of need of many of
   those countries will be well and favourably remembered. We have
   not been a fair weather friend. We have put our financial support
   where our political rhetoric has been. And that contribution will
   be understood and it will be remembered.
The Government has endeavoured, in the two and a bit years that
   it has been in office to further build and diversify the links that
   already existed with so many of the nations in the region. And we've
   been particularly successful in improving Australia's relations
   with China consistent with the maintenance of very good relations
   with other parts of the region.
I am also very proud of the fact that through all the difficulties
   that Indonesia experienced a few months ago and which continues
   to experience, Australia has remained a very strong and faithful
   and reliable friend to that country and has recognised the long-term
   importance of the bilateral relationship between our two countries.
Japan, today, has chosen a new Prime Minister, the former Foreign
   Minister, Mr Obuchi. I want to take this opportunity of placing
   on public record my thanks to the man that he will succeed, Mr Hashimoto,
   for the contribution that Mr Hashimoto made to good relations between
   our two countries. He was a good friend of mine and he was a good
   friend of Australia. But I look forward to cooperating with equal
   warmth and closeness with the new Prime Minister of Japan, our best
   customer, our most important trading relationship and a nation with
   whom Australia has so much to share in the years to come.
When I became Prime Minister I said that I would continue the close
   relations between Australia and the nations of the Asian Pacific
   region. Our emphasis has, of necessity, been a little different
   from that of our predecessors. All governments do things in their
   own way and they do them a little differently and they have different
   impacts as time goes by. Without, in any way, weakening the links
   between Australia and the Asia-Pacific region, I wanted to make
   sure that our economic links with Europe and North America were
   as strong as they could possibly be. And I frequently said that
   the Government has tried to follow a policy of Asia first'
   as distinct from the policy of Asia only,' which sometimes,
   I think, was the impression given by the policies pursued by our
   predecessors. And in maintaining those links and in diversifying
   those links, we have been greatly aided by the contribution of so
   many Australians of Asian descent within our community. And they
   have played a very important role, on a people-to-people basis,
   in furthering our understanding of the communities with which we
   wish to develop and diversify those linkages.
We spend an enormous amount of time in this country navel-gazing
   about what kind of society we are. It seems that, on some occasions,
   that we engage in a form of public fretting about what it really
   means to be an Australian. It always strikes me as rather unnecessary
   and rather odd and rather unproductive. Because national identity,
   in so many ways, is an instinctive thing. It's something that
   belongs to the emotions rather than to the formal description. You
   don't write down what it means to be an Australian. You feel
   what it means to be an Australian. You don't indulge some kind
   of intellectual exercise in trying to enumerate Australian qualities
   and Australian values, you practice them. And we're practicing
   one great Australian value here tonight with such an enormously
   diverse audience, in terms of ethnic and racial background, yet
   we are bound together by something that is far greater than that
   diversity and that difference and that is a common love and a common
   commitment to our nation.
Ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate the Chamber of Commerce. I
   congratulate the forum on having made such a great contribution
   to the city of Perth, to the understanding and the harmony that
   exists between people of different backgrounds within the Australian
   community. I thank you for listening and I wish all of you much
   happiness and much success for the future.
Thank you.
QUESTIONS &amp; ANSWERS
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, I'm Wilson Wu, Chairman of the International
   Business Council of Western Australia and also, happily, Vice President
   of the WA Chinese Chamber. In my work I travelled in parts of Asia.
   There's no doubt, as an Australian myself now and very proud
   to be one for the past 11 years, I came across a lot of business
   people asking about the Hanson phenomenon. Now, I'm very proud
   to say that we, in our own - I should rightly point out - always
   tell our friends and business people abroad, Australia is, indeed,
   a very tolerant society and, indeed, that is our hallmark. But,
   regardless, we still have to confront this recent phenomenon in
   terms of, perhaps it's a perception that maybe, just maybe,
   we're beginning to be seen or perceived by some of our friends
   abroad as being beginning to go along maybe a different path by
   some politics of divisiveness. So I'm asking, perhaps, as Prime
   Minister, you could give us some advice how we, as Australians going
   abroad, can confront this in a more positive role so that we can
   assist the Government, as well as in our own ways, make this perception
   correct.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I'd be happy to try. There are a number of things you
   should say to those people about Australia. The first thing that
   you should say is what you mentioned in your question. And that
   is, Australia is a very harmonious, tolerant society. You might
   remind them, for example that on a per-capita basis Australia took
   more refugees from Indo-China in the 1970s than any nation on earth.
   You might remind them of that. You might also remind them that Australia
   has a very open, liberal democracy. We allow people to exercise
   freedom of speech in this country. We allow people to run for office.
   We are proud of our robust democracy. We have a free and open press.
   Sometimes it aggravates us, but it's infinitely better than
   the alternative, which is a cowed or muzzled press. You should remind
   them of that. You should also tell them that whilst some of the
   policies of the One Nation Party seek to exploit differences based
   on race, which they undoubtedly do, that the great bulk of the people
   who have voted for that party in Queensland have done so for other
   reasons. And I think it's very important, and I'm glad
   of the opportunity of such a gathering as this to speak very directly
   and to speak very frankly, because unless we have an understanding
   of what is happening we will get the messages wrong, not only to
   the Australian community but we'll get the messages wrong overseas.
The principle thing on which One Nation is playing is economic
   insecurity and bewilderment about change. But you have added to
   that an element of intolerance and insensitivity and desire to exploit
   differences based on race. Whenever you refer to people by a racial
   label you are running the risk of promoting hostility unless it
   is done in the most benign and understandable of circumstances,
   as I might do tonight by referring to people of Chinese background
   because this is the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and it would be
   rather strange if I didn't. It would be rather ill mannered
   of me if I didn't.
But the point I want to make to you, Wilson, is that the support
   base for the One Nation Party is drawn, principally, from people
   who respond to a simplistic answer to their difficulties. When you
   don't exercise power or hold office it's very easy to
   offer an instantaneous solution to everyone's problems. It's
   very easy to say that the way to improve Australia's rural
   economy is to keep out imports without being honest enough to acknowledge
   that if Australia locks out imports from other countries, those
   countries will lock out Australia's exports and that that would
   be very counterproductive. Now, what I would counsel you to say,
   suggest you might say to those people is, certainly, that we are
   a very tolerant country. You should say to them that we are a country
   that the great majority of whose citizens have no truck with and
   have no belief in and have no time for racism or intolerance based
   on race or ethnic difference. You should also point out that Australia,
   like all other countries that are open democracies, have experienced
   the rise from time to time, for a period of time, of political parties
   whose doctrines are based on economic populism and simplistic solutions.
   It's happened in other countries and there's no reason
   why it oughtn't happen in Australia. 
Those who ask me: how do you deal with One Nation. I reply by saying,
   you deal with One Nation by reason, by argument, by fact, by commitment,
   by demonstration, but most of all by demonstration, that the policies
   you espouse are better than any alternative policies. The best way
   that the Government can deal with One Nation or, indeed, any other
   political party  because I take the opportunity of saying
   that the economic policies of One Nation are almost indistinguishable
   from those of the Australian Labor Party. On most of the major economic
   issues of debate in Australia at the present time, One Nation and
   the Labor Party are much closer than One Nation is to the Liberal
   Party or to the National Party. There's a strange view running
   around that they're closer to us on economic policy. They are
   much closer  I mean, Hanson and Beazley are almost indistinguishable
   on major issues of economic policy. And I think that's a point
   that ought to be made fairly strongly and fairly firmly whenever
   the opportunity arises. 
So, I'm sorry to have given a lengthy answer. But I think
   it's an important answer. It's an important question and
   I'm glad you asked it. And I'm glad there's media
   here to hear both the question and the answer. Because where else
   in the  you know, there aren't many countries in the
   world where you can have this sort of exchange and I think that's
   terrific and that's one of the good things about Australia.
   And one of the things that you should tell your friends is that
   you can ask those sorts of questions in Australia. You can ask them
   in front of the media. The Prime Minister's got to answer in
   front of the media and the media can do what they like with both
   the question and the answer which, undoubtedly, they will.
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, my name is Katherine Tan. I have been in Australia
   for 22 years and I am an Australian citizen. Ever since Pauline
   Hanson's maiden speech and her One Nation scare-mongering and
   unsubstantiated accusation to the visible ethnic migrant communities
   and the minority of marginal groups that there is strong evidence
   of harassment to the individuals of this group. I, myself, have
   experienced that only two weeks ago. My 


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Richard, to David Johnston, the President of
 the Western Australian Division of the Liberal Party, to Colin Barnett,
 to my federal Cabinet and Ministerial colleagues and all of my federal
 colleagues, other Parliamentary colleagues, and fellow Liberals.
I'm delighted to be back again to address the State Conference
 of the Western Australian Division of the Liberal Party. And I start
 my address by expressing my thanks to all you for the great support
 and loyalty that you've demonstrated towards the Government since
 it was elected in March of 1996. I particularly thank the organisation
 through you, David, and your State Director, Peter Wells, for the
 professional way in which you have worked to keep the wheels of the
 Party organisation turning over and the message being sent out to
 our grassroots supporters.
And I want to commence my address to you today, which takes place
 at a very important time in the life and the history of our federal
 government, by remarking in a few words upon the challenge that lies
 ahead of us. And if there is one message that I have for you, as members
 of the Liberal Party in Western Australia, and indeed a message I
 have for Liberals all over Australia, is that it is long past time
 the members of the Liberal Party stopped being defensive. It is long
 past time that the members of the Liberal Party came out fighting
 on every conceivable front.
I want Liberals all over Australia to come out fighting about what
 our Government has achieved over the last two and a quarter years.
 I want every Liberal to remind every friend of theirs of what we inherited
 from Mr Beazley and Mr Keating. And how, in a little over two years,
 we have turned an annual deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus of
 $2.7 billion, of how we have given Australian home buyers the lowest
 interest rates in 30 years. We have slashed the monthly mortgage bill
 of the average mortgage repayer by $300 a month. And we have started
 to do the same thing for small business.
I want you to tell your fellow Australians that we now have the lowest
 inflation rate in the industrialised world, that we have a projected
 growth rate which will be superior to that of any of the G7 nations.
 I want you to tell your friends that if we hadn't taken the action
 that we took, when we came to office, the Australian economy would
 have been gravely weakened and undermined by the Asian economic downturn.
 We can't escape the impact of that downturn but we have through
 the prudent and strong policies that we have adopted we have been
 able to minimise that impact.
I want you to come out fighting and tell your friends that if we had
 listened to Mr Beazley, we would in fact be more weakened and enfeebled
 now than we were in March of 1996. Because not only did Labor leave
 us with a deficit running at an annual rate of $10.5 billion, an accumulated
 federal government debt of $95 billion, but they tried in opposition
 to move heaven and earth to stop us taking the measures that were
 required to be taken in order to repair the shattered budget position
 that we inherited over two years ago. Not only did they create the
 problem, but they spent all their waking hours trying to stop us curing
 the problem. I want you to come out fighting and to tell your friends
 that.
I also, particularly want you here in Western Australia, to tell your
 friends the story about Native Title. To remind them that it was Mr
 Keating who was Prime Minister, with an act of gross insensitivity
 to the interests of the great export industries of Western Australia
 which are so important to the national economic wealth of our entire
 nation, that it was Mr Keating that dumped the unworkable Native
 Title Act upon Australians in 1993. And for five long
 years we have tried with the help of your Premier, Richard Court,
 to remedy that appalling situation. It was the Labor Party once again
 who left us with a mess, and it was the Labor Party once again hand
 in glove with their friends in the Senate, the Australian Democrats
 and the Australian Greens who fought tooth and nail to stop us fixing
 the problem.
And it looked at one stage as though the only way the problem would
 be fixed was through a double dissolution. But fortunately I was able
 to negotiate a settlement with Senator Harradine, a settlement that
 delivered in full on all of the essential things that we wanted. And
 I want particularly to thank your Premier, Richard Court, for the
 very constructive way in which we were able to work together in the
 closing stages of those negotiations. I also pay tribute to that marvellous
 satellite phone that Richard operated in the middle of the Great Victoria
 Desert. It failed I think on one or two occasions, but for most of
 the time it worked very effectively. And the two of us were able to
 work together, as we should always, on matters of joint importance
 to Western Australia and the entire nation.
And we have been able together to deliver an outcome on Native Title
 that will give to the mining industry of Australia, to the farmers
 of Australia and to the indigenous people of Australia a fair and
 balanced outcome. It will give all of them predicability, it will
 give all of them fairness, and it will give all of them security.
 And it was a Liberal Government working with a Liberal Government
 in Western Australia that was able to achieve that outcome. And we
 achieved that outcome in the face of what I can only call the most
 despicable hostility from sections of the Australian media, from the
 Australian Labor Party and our other political opponents.
And the crowning hypocrisy of Mr Beazley was, that not only did he
 let down the interests of his native state, Western Australia, in
 the stance that he took on the issue, not only did he sell out the
 interests of Western Australians in a quite spineless way, but he
 allowed his spokesman in the Senate to describe our Bill day after
 day as racist, to describe our Bill day after day as racist. And yet
 a day after it was passed, what did Mr Beazley say about the possibility
 of a future Labor Government, however remote that might be, repealing
 the Bill? Mr Beazley said, "Oh no we have to move on". So
 after five years, after having given us the mess in the first place,
 having fought tooth and nail from opposition to stop us fixing it,
 having allowed his spokesman to describe us a racist for what we were
 going to do, when finally he was beaten, when finally reason prevailed,
 through our negotiating persistence and the cooperation of Senator
 Harradine, when finally after all of that what was Mr Beazley's
 pathetic response? His pathetic response was that we had to move on.
 I can't think of a more spineless performance from a weak leader
 in many, many years in Australian politics.
I think here in Western Australia, Liberals have got to come out fighting
 and tell the people of Western Australia what has been done on the
 score of Native Title.
And I think we also have to come out fighting to tell the people of
 Australia, all over Australia, about our plans for the future. Because
 when you compare us with the alternative, when you look at our record
 of national economic management, when you look at what we have achieved
 in the area of industrial relations reform, when you look at the way
 in which we have sensibly diversified Australia's international
 relations towards what I describe as an Asia first focus, rather than
 an Asia only focus followed by the previous government, the comparison
 works very much to our favour.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have spoken for a few moments about what has
 been achieved over the last two and a quarter years. I want now to
 say a few words abour what lies in front of us. The most important
 event on the Australian political calender over the next few weeks
 and months will, of course, be the release of the Government's
 plans to reform and make fairer and better the Australian taxation
 system. All of you know that Australia's taxation system is badly
 in need of reform and repair. I know it's difficult. And I know
 there are many in Australia, there are many in the Liberal Party who
 will say, don't attempt it, it's too difficult. There are
 many who will say, get back into office and have a meeting and do
 it somehow or other through that kind of device. But, my friends,
 you simply can't do that. If you really wanted to hand to the
 Leader of the Opposition the mother of all scare campaigns, you would
 make some vague statement about taxation reform when you got back.
 You would lay down a few principles. And he'd run all over Australia
 saying we are going to introduce a 30 per cent goods and services
 tax without any kind of income tax compensation. He would exaggerate,
 he would say we were going to cut payments to the states. He would
 invent all sort of horrendous descriptions of what we might do. And
 we would be absolutely powerless to refute that kind of campaign.
I have no intention of going to the next election and denying the
 need to reform Australia's taxation system. Because I know in
 my heart that it needs reform. And I know in my heart that it's
 my responsibility as Prime Minister to argue and explain the case
 for reform to the Australian people and to invite the Australian people
 to make a judgement. We have committed ourselves to reform, because
 we think that reform is good for Australia, for no other reason. I
 haven't done it because of some kind of ideological zeal, some
 kind of political ego trip or some kind of craving for a place in
 Australian political history. I have committed myself, and my colleagues
 have committed themselves to taxation reform because we believe that
 it is good for Australia. We don't believe that Australia can
 go on any more with a taxation system that penalise exports. We don't
 believe that Australia can go on any more with a taxation system that
 is going to push average wage and salary earners into a situation
 where they are paying a slice of their income at the top marginal
 rate. And can I particularly say here in Western Australia, I don't
 believe that we can go on any more with a taxation system where the
 relations between the Commonwealth and the States are so profoundly
 out of balance and so screamingly in need of reform and change.
I can assure you, my friends, that when the policy comes out, it will
 be comprehensive. It will be the necessary next step to further strengthen
 and buttress the Australian economy against an increasingly difficult
 and competitive world trading environment. It will be family friendly.
 I have committed much of the resources of my Government to ensure
 that families in Australia get a better deal and they will not be
 overlooked in the taxation policy when it is released.
It will address issues of Commonwealth/State financial relations.
 I do understand the need for reform in that area. And that is why
 one of the principles that I said would govern reform was to address
 Commonwealth/State financial relations.
And, my friends, it will not result in any increase in the overall
 taxation burden. That was one of the other principles that was laid
 down. But it will represent the most serious reform to the Australian
 taxation system undertaken by any government since the end of World
 War II. And it will help to catapult Australia, economically, into
 the 21st Century. The last great piece of unfinished economic
 business in Australia is repairing and reforming our taxation system.
The Coalition Government tackled the disastrous fiscal inheritance
 of Labor. The Coalition Government has addressed industrial relations
 reform. The Coalition Government has undertaken a courageous programme
 of privatisation. The Coalition Government has continued the process
 of reforming the Australian financial system through the Wallis Inquiry.
 And it is now left to the Coalition to address, in a courageous and
 far-sighted way, repairing Australia's taxation system. Unlike
 our opponents we are prepared to do it. Unlike our opponents we are
 not going back to the past, we are leading forward into Australia's
 future.
Can I say just one other thing and that is that it's very important
 at this particular time in Australia's political experience that
 parties maintain their commitment to what they believe in. And that
 parties are not spooked into abandoning their commitment to those
 reforms that they know are necessary for Australia's future.
 And I can't think of a reform in the economic area which is more
 important to Australia's future than to take the existing system
 and to change it in a profoundly positive and beneficial way.
Mr President, I would now like to address one or two remarks to the
 position of the One Nation Party in the Australian political firmament.
 I want to say that I encounter Liberals and I encounter other Australians
 asking the question - what are we going to do about One Nation? And
 there are many answers that come forth to that question. But let me
 give you, in simple terms, my answer to that question. I believe that
 what the Liberal Party does in relation to One Nation is the same
 as what it does in relation to the Labor Party or any of our other
 political opponents, and that is that the Liberal Party offers Australians
 something better.
Can I say to you, my friends, that there is no one slick, one-line
 put down of One Nation. There is no one speech that can demolish a
 political party. The only thing that will drag support back from One
 Nation is for the Liberal Party to offer the people of Australia something
 better. And part of our job, part of our responsibility, is to remind
 those in the community who may have been attracted, however unwisely,
 to support One Nation, not only what we have already done to address
 some of their concerns but also what we will do in the future.
I mean, you might remind some of those people that it was the Liberal
 Party that for five years stood for the principle, in relation to
 Native Title, that all Australians should be treated equally. I keep
 hearing from One Nation that one of their catch-cries is that all
 Australians are equal. Well, I agree with that. All Australians are
 equal. But we've been practicing that principle for the last
 five years in relation to Native Title. Why do you think we stood
 out in favour of getting rid of the right to negotiate? Why was the
 right to negotiate in Native Title the sticking point between us and
 the Labor Party? It was the sticking point because I was not prepared
 to accept the situation where one section of the Australian community
 had an advantage and had a process that was not available to other
 Australians. Now, I can't think of a better practical example
 of a political party, the Liberal Party, standing up for the principle
 that all Australians should be treated equally.
You might also remind those people who are attracted to One Nation
 that it was the Coalition Government that introduced work-for-the-dole.
 It was the Coalition Government that enunciated the principle of mutual
 obligation. That we, as a decent, compassionate society, have an obligation
 to look after those in the community who can't look after themselves
 and who can't get a job. But they have an obligation, if they're
 able to do so, to give something in return to the community through
 working for the dole. It a Coalition Government that pioneered that.
 It was a Coalition Government that promoted that.
You might also remind them it was a Coalition Government that brought
 balance and commonsense to Australia's immigration programme.
 That it was a Coalition Government that put a greater emphasis on
 skills and less emphasis on family reunion. That it was a Coalition
 Government that has ended the rorting of the immigration system. It's
 a Coalition Government that has turned back the tide of ten years
 of political correctness under the former government. And it was a
 Coalition Government that introduced the two-year waiting period for
 new migrants before they could receive welfare benefits.
Now, these are some of the concerns, some of these issues are the
 basis of concern of One Nation supporters. And we might remind them
 of what we have done. We haven't talked about those things, we've
 actually done something about them. And we've offered Australians
 something better. But we offer Australians something better in our
 willingness to see the good in people and to see the positives in
 people. We offer Australians something better by not criticising what
 is wrong but offering a better way. We don't lament the state
 of Australia's taxation system and then do nothing about it.
 We don't lament the state of Australia's industrial relations
 system and then do nothing about it. We don't go into the rural
 areas of Australia, many of which are impoverished and depressed,
 and say to people who have lost their incomes and their livelihoods
 that the answer to Australia's problems, it's rural problems,
 is to put up the barriers of protection and to lock imports out of
 Australia.
I can't think of a policy that would be more calculated to drive
 rural Australia into even deeper despair and deeper poverty than to
 go back to days of high protection. Australia is a great rural exporting
 nation. And it would be the death of rural Australia if we behaved
 in a way that invited international trade retaliation against Australia's
 farm exports. If we were so foolish as to try and not farm exports
 out of Australia, as our One Nation opponents want us to do, we would
 invite massive retaliation. You go to Queensland and argue to a sugar
 grower or a beef producer that we ought to bring in massive import
 controls on other products and he or she will shout, no, a thousand
 times, no. Because if you do that the Canadians and the Koreans and
 others will lock out our sugar and our beef exports.
We have a massive export balance in our favour in relation to farm-based
 products. And if we are so short-sighted, so stupid, so unwise as
 to imagine that salvation lies in locking out imports, then we are,
 indeed, a very naive nation. As a farming nation, as an exporting
 nation, more than most we have a long-term national interest in trade
 liberalisation. Yet, our opponents in One Nation would argue the narrow,
 destructive, anti-Australian approach of locking out imports in the
 naive belief that we could go on exporting to our heart's contents.
So we offer a better way forward, something better for Australians,
 in that department. And I think the other thing that we offer which
 is better, and it's something we offer which is better compared
 with all of our political opponents, and that is we offer a fundamentally
 optimistic and positive view about what both Australia and Australians
 have achieved and what Australia and Australians can achieve into
 the future.
We are not apologists for Australia's past. I recognise, like
 every other Australian, that there are blemishes in our history. And
 there were occasions on which the indigenous community of Australia
 were treated in an appalling manner. But the balance sheet of Australian
 history is a balance sheet of heroic achievement against tremendous
 adversity. It is a balance sheet of a very, very benign, a very, very
 positive and a very, very tolerant people.
We have welcomed to our shores millions of people from around the
 world and they have enriched and made better our nation. And I say
 to all of those people: this country is as much your home as it is
 mine. And I say to those people: this Australia is as much your land
 as it is mine and tolerance and compassion and understanding have
 always been Liberal hallmarks.
And the way forward for this country does not lie in narrow scape-goating.
 It does not lie in demarcating Australians according to their ethnic
 or racial background. It lies in focussing on those things that unite
 us as Australians and not those things that divide us. And we can
 offer to all Australians something better than all of our political
 opponents. And it's a responsibility not only of me, not only
 of Tim Fischer and of the Cabinet and of the Parliamentary party,
 but it's the responsibility for all of you, at this very important
 time in the experience and the life of the Government and in the political
 history of Australia, it's your responsibility to come out with
 me fighting to tell the Australian people what we have done, what
 we have achieved, what we plan to do in the future and how the Liberal
 Party, governing in coalition with the National Party, can beat all
 of our political opponents by offering Australians something better.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much to Mr McLelland and Mrs Henderson. To Mr and Mrs
 Durham, Mr and Mrs Herbert; to Mr Kevin Sheedy, ladies and gentlemen.
 Can I start my remarks by congratulating all of the young men and
 women here today who will receive awards and recognition as a token
 of your qualities, as a token of your professionalism and as a proper
 recognition by your peers of your particular skills and your specialities.
It is for me quite an honour to address this awards ceremony and to
 take the opportunity of saying what an enormous store the Government
 places on apprenticeships and traineeships within the Australian community.
 I endorse in the full the remarks that were made by Mr Durham about
 the responsibility of all people in Government to ensure that the
 maximum employment and apprenticeship opportunities are available
 to young people.
I am particularly proud to say in that context that in the time that
 the Government has been in office, the number of apprenticeships and
 traineeships available will have risen from about 143,000 just over
 two years ago, to in the order of 200,000 towards the end of this
 year, and a result of our new apprenticeship and training system,
 we have placed a much greater emphasis on improving the opportunities
 for people - for men and women - in apprenticeships throughout all
 areas of the Australian economy and throughout all areas of Australian
 industry.
We have endeavoured to produce within the community a new ethic, a
 new approach, a new era in relation to training and the options that
 are available particularly to young people. We have, as I've
 just mentioned, placed a greater emphasis on apprenticeships and traineeships
 and we've tried to model those apprenticeships and traineeships
 to suit the needs and the convenience of individual employers and
 their employees, rather than trying to mould the desires and the needs
 of individuals to a preconceived set notion of what ought to amount
 to the right way of going about apprenticeships.
In addition to that, we have in recent weeks introduced a new system
 of youth allowances which has profoundly altered the incentive that
 used to exist under the old system away from that old system, where
 the incentive was really to go on unemployment benefits rather than
 to remain at school or to go into some kind of training. And the way
 in which we have altered the system now means that there is a much
 stronger incentive for young people to undertake training and far
 less of an incentive for young people to go on unemployment benefits.
We have also introduced a work-for-the-dole scheme, whereby the community
 in implementing the principle of what we call mutual obligation. And
 that is if somebody can't get work in Australia, a decent society
 has an obligation to give those people a decent level of social security
 support, but it also has the right to ask of those people if it is
 reasonable that they provide something in return for that social security
 support.
We've also integrated into the apprenticeship system the notion
 of school to work transition, and a number of the young men and women
 who are receiving awards today are examples of that. And it is very
 important that we see a greater connection and continuum between what
 people learn at school and the skills that are required when they
 leave school and enter the workforce. It is a trite expression for
 any public figure to say today that we live in a world that is undergoing
 great change. It is undergoing great change and whether we like it
 or not, and there are some in our community who don't like it
 - and I understand why they may not like it - but whether we like
 it or not, every nation and every society must adjust itself to change.
There are some things in our society that quite properly we not only
 want to hang on to but we should hang on to. As an Australian community,
 we have certain received values that bind our society together. Those
 values of decency, of recognising the individual worth of people irrespective
 of their ethnic background, of encouraging tolerance and respect for
 difference, of recognising that mateship and equality of treatment
 have always been part of the Australian ethic, and hanging on to many
 of those traditional values and attitudes that are so important to
 keeping our society together. But hand-in-hand with that we must recognise
 that we do live in a globalised world economy and unless Australia
 competes, unless Australia is efficient, unless Australia's industries
 are efficient, unless our training is modern and our training methods
 are efficient and up-to-date we're not going to provide the jobs
 and opportunities that particularly our young people will need as
 the years go by.
That is why taking a few moments off for all of us, and particularly
 the parents and friends of those who are receiving awards today, to
 honour their abilities, to pay respects to the industry with which
 they are associated, and to thank them for the contribution that they
 are making to contemporary Australian society is so important.
I think part of a civilised society is to recognise and to honour
 achievement and to honour success and today I know will be a source
 of particular pride to the mothers and fathers and brothers and sisters
 and friends of those who are going to receive awards. And I want all
 of those people to savour this occasion and to enjoy the moment, because
 you have played a role as we all know, as parents, as we live through
 school and university examinations and other examinations with our
 children, we all understand what it is like and we all have that great
 sense of exhilaration when what our child or our brother or sister
 has done is publicly recognised, and that is what today's ceremony
 and awards presentation is all about. It is about recognising particular
 skill and particular achievement. It is about honouring the importance
 within our society of stable levels of employment. It is recognising
 the importance of skilled trades within our community and it is also
 recognising the restoration of the importance within modern Australia
 of apprenticeships and traineeships.
To be quite frank, we went through a period in this country where
 the importance of those things were down-graded. We became obsessed
 as a society with university education to the detriment of other methods
 of education and the other pathways to fulfilling employment. I'm
 very happy to say that in recent years there's been a re-awakening
 within the community of the importance of apprenticeships and traineeships
 and a growing recognition that a holistic approach to learning and
 education and instruction within the Australian community requires
 a renewed emphasis on the sort of contributions that are going to
 be honoured today.
Ladies and gentlemen it is a particular privilege for me as Prime
 Minister to be here today. The association that is staging today's
 presentation ceremony is of course of very very long standing, as
 Mr Durham mentioned. It predates the formation of most professional
 and trade organisations within Australia. And those who receive the
 awards today are joining a very long and distinguished list of Australians
 who've gone before them within this particular calling. So I
 congratulate again all of those young men and women who are receiving
 recognition today. I thank you for the contribution that you are making
 towards a positive image of the modern Australia. I thank your association
 for the contribution that it is making to the Australian economy and
 I wish all of you well in your future professional careers, and in
 your personal lives I wish you great success, good health and great
 happiness.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Thank you very much Richard. To Mrs Joy Howley, the president of the
 Victorian Division, to my parliamentary colleagues both State and
 Federal, and to the many supporters and members of the Liberal Party
 here in Victoria. We gather together tonight at a very important moment
 in the political life of Australia. It is now a little over two-and-a-quarter
 years since the Coalition Government was returned to office in March
 of 1996. Quite obviously the Coalition over the past month or two
 has had some difficult times, but I've never been one to mince
 words or to pretend or to play games and I speak, as Richard said,
 from the background of some understanding of the Australian political
 scene. And there are some challenges around at the moment that haven't
 been around before and there are some substances in the political
 firmament that haven't been around before. And there are some
 responses that are needed on this occasion that haven't been
 needed before. And the first and most and most important thing that
 I want to say to all of you tonight is that it is time for not only
 the parliamentary party, but also time for all members of the party
 organisation, to come out fighting and fighting very hard to explain
 to the Australian people two things - two very simple things.
The first of those is the monumental achievements of the Government
 since it was elected to office in March of 1996 and also throwing
 forward to the future the very very simple fact that the Coalition
 alone of the political entities on the Australian political horizon
 actually has a plan, actually has a design, actually has a set of
 values and a set of goals for the future of Australia.
Now, I know the opinion polls are bad at the moment. They've
 been bad before and they've come good, and we all know that great
 adage to which we will forever be indebted to my predecessor, Malcolm
 Fraser, when he said that there was only one poll that counted. Obviously
 One Nation has had impact on the political scene, but as I told the
 Liberal Party in Western Australia at the weekend there is no simple
 one line put down of One Nation. The way the Liberal Party beats One
 Nation is the way it beats the Labor Party and that is to offer the
 people of Australia something better. And what we need to do, all
 of us, is to remind the Australian people of what we have achieved,
 to remind them that when we came to office the Federal Government
 debt was $95 billion and it was accumulating at the rate of $10.5
 billion a year, and in just two-and-a-quarter years we've wound
 that back such that this year we will have a surplus of $2.7 billion.
We should remind the Australian people that interest rates now are
 lower than they have been for 30 years, that the average homeowner
 is $300 a month better off. That's the equivalent of a pay rise
 of a $100 a week for the average wage and salary earner. We should
 remind people as I did at the awards presentation ceremony of the
 Master Plumbers this afternoon here in Melbourne, that in March of
 1996 there were 143,000 young Australians in apprenticeships and traineeships,
 and by the end of the year that figure will have climbed to 200,000
 and great credit is due to David Kemp for the tremendous work that
 he's done on that front. We should remind the Australian people
 that we've created 293,000 jobs in two-and-a-quarter years. We
 should remind the Australian people that we have the lowest inflation
 rate in the OECD area, and that our growth rate this year, despite
 the challenge of the Asian-Pacific region is going to outstrip that
 of most of the countries of the industrialised world. We should remind
 the Australian people of our achievements in reforming industrial
 relations. We should tell the people again and again of what we have
 done in the are of work-for-the-dole, and we should also remind them
 that if Mr Beazley were to become Prime Minister, he would abolish
 the work-for-the-dole scheme, just as he would reverse the crackdown
 on welfare, which is saving average Australians, hard working honest
 taxpayers $46 million a week. We should remind the Australian people
 that it was the Coalition Government that ended the exploitation of
 the immigration programme which occurred under the former Government
 and introduced a two year waiting period for new migrants, that altered
 the balance of the migration programme with a greater emphasis on
 skilled migration whilst maintaining the long-standing commitment
 of the Liberal Party towards a completely colour blind and completely
 non-discriminatory immigration policy.
There is much that we should remind our fellow country men and women
 about over the weeks and months ahead but we should also, and we will
 have plenty of opportunity, when the Coalition's taxation plans
 are unveiled, we'll have plenty of opportunity to tell the Australian
 people not only what we have achieved over the last two-and-a-quarter
 years but what we will achieve over the next three years if the Australian
 public re-elects us.
And I think we also ought to remind the Australian public that it
 is very easy to identify what Mr Beazley stands for in one sense and
 in one sense alone. He stands for winning, but it is very difficult
 to find what else he stands for. He's a person who's against
 everything. He's a person who has repudiated whatever transient
 embrace of economic common sense that might in the past have been
 the want of former Labor Governments. He wants to take us back to
 the 1950s with his industrial relations policy. He says the present
 taxation system is perfect and is really in need only of tinkering
 at the edges. He will abolish the reforms that we have implemented
 in so many areas. He was the man who assured the employees of the
 Commonwealth Bank that a Labor Government would never privatise that
 bank, yet once re-elected he went ahead and did so, as indeed his
 colleagues had assured the Australian public regarding QANTAS and
 Australian Airlines.
We will have a great opportunity in the weeks immediately ahead of
 us, when our plans to reform the Australian taxation system are unveiled.
 We will have a great opportunity to demonstrate that the Coalition
 and the Coalition alone are in favour of a taxation system that will
 take this country into the 21st Century. Now I know there
 are some people and I'm sure there are some people in this audience
 who say for Heaven's sake what on earth is he talking about
 taxation reform for. Why doesn't he just keep quiet, mutter a
 few words about having a meeting, put down a few principles, get back
 into office and then introduce taxation reform?' Can I say to
 you my friends that is impossible. I can't look the Australian
 people in the eye before the next election when asked the question
 "Will you make major changes to Australia's taxation system?"
 I can't look them in the eye and say no when I know in my heart
 that is what Australia needs, and if I am to talk in generalities
 about taxation reform and say "Yes we are going to reform the
 system, and we are going to get everybody to meet together and will
 try and achieve a consensus" That would invite the mother of
 all political fear campaigns from Mr Beazley and the Labor Party.
 They would go from one end of Australia to the other saying that Howard
 is going to introduce a GST of 25% and he's not going to compensate
 the low income earners and he's not going to give any personal
 income tax cuts. He's going to look after the rich and ignore
 the poor and the low and middle income earners. And I would be powerless
 to refute that because we wouldn't have a detailed plan, and
 if anybody imagines for a moment that that is an intelligent political
 recipe for handling this, then they don't understand the dynamics
 of modern politics in Australia. We don't control the Senate.
 We'll try very hard at the next election to win more Senate seats
 but we could at least face as difficult a time after the next election
 as we now face in getting legislation through the Parliament. Therefore
 if we want to change the Australian taxation system, if we believe,
 as I do and my colleagues do that it is in Australia's interests
 and it is for the good of Australia that we have a new and different
 taxation system, then we have no political or moral alternative then
 to lay out our plans before the election and go from one end of the
 country explaining the benefits for Australia of changing our taxation
 system.
There are some who argue that you should do nothing about it because
 of what is happening in Asia. Can I say to you my friends that it
 is because of what is happening in Asia that it is all the more necessary
 to do something about it. We face, because of the Asian economic downturn,
 a far more difficult economic environment than we thought would be
 the case when were elected in 1996, and if we hadn't done what
 we have done since 1996, the Australian economy would now be more
 fragile, more vulnerable and weaker and the outlook gloomier than
 what in reality it is. We strengthened our budget position, we got
 our interest rates down, we improved the investment climate, we increasingly
 looked attractive to the rest of the world in this part of the region
 while other economies were falling over and the next logical step
 is to change our taxation system. Because if we do that, we will make
 Australia even more competitive. We will take a load off our exporters.
 We will give people more incentive to work and to save. We will make
 Australia more attractive as an international investment centre. So
 the argument that you put it off because of Asia is completely wrong.
 You bring it on because of Asia. I mean, the fact that Asia is a challenge
 to us is an additional argument why we should embrace taxation change
 and reform.
I can assure you that the tax plan, when it's brought out, will
 not involve dumping a goods and services tax on top of the existing
 taxation system. We're talking about a total taxation reform.
 I laid down five principles in August of last year when I announced
 that we would commence the reform and rehabilitation of the Australian
 taxation system. And those five principles will be honoured when the
 policy is brought down. And they included a commitment to protect
 low-income earners in the Australian community and I want to give
 those people, tonight, an assurance that they will not be left worse
 off as a result of our reforms. They will be protected. It has always
 been the mission of a Liberal government to look after the low-income
 earners in the Australian community. And the reductions that we have
 achieved in inflation and interest rates, in proportionate terms,
 have delivered more benefits to low-income earners in Australia than
 they have to any other section of the Australian community.
Ladies and gentlemen, I see the weeks ahead of us as very important
 weeks for the Coalition. We have an opportunity to do two things.
 All of us have an opportunity, in a renewed and aggressive fashion,
 to remind the Australian community of what has been achieved over
 the last two-and-a-quarter years. And when you remember that, despite
 our 44-seat majority in the House of Representatives, that we still
 don't control the Senate, that we still have, because of that
 one hand tied behind our back, what has been achieved is, indeed,
 I think, quite monumental.
We've had, in relation to all of our major pieces of legislation,
 we've had to try several times before we've got it through.
 Nobody thought we would get the Native Title Amendment Bill
 through. In the end, we did, and although it wasn't to the last
 letter everything that we wanted, it was overwhelmingly what we wanted.
 And at long last, after five years of chaos and doubt and obfuscation
 and delay, we are now going to have a native title regime in this
 country that gives stability to farmers and miners, gives a hope that
 some native title claims can be established in relation to the indigenous
 people of this country and, I think, takes off the Australian political
 agenda an issue that could, indeed, have been divisive in the eyes
 of many in the Australian community.
Richard mentioned the Telstra sale. We remain committed to the full
 privatisation of Telstra. We're going to do it in stages. And
 you might ask, 'why would you privatise it?' There's one or two
 very powerful arguments. But the most powerful of all is that at the
 30th of June this year the Federal Government owed the
 rest of the world about $82 billion courtesy of eight or nine budget
 deficits run up by Mr Beazley and Mr Keating. The sale of the remainder
 of Telstra alone will realise at least $40 billion. That's half
 of the total. And what do you do with the interest savings when you
 pay-off half of $82 billion? You spend those interest savings on roads,
 on schools, on health and on housing. And you also have a bit left
 over to spend some things in improving the telecommunications system
 of rural and regional Australia. People ask me, why would you
 want to privatise the rest of Telstra?' That's the most
 powerful reason why you would want to do it. And we're going
 to do it in stages.
We know that there is concern in country Australia, in the bush 
 and I don't mind using the politically incorrect term. I think
 most Australians still describe it very much as the bush. In the bush
 there is worry that the telecommunications aren't good and you
 do need to invest more in it. You won't get the dollars to invest
 in improving those telecommunications unless you are willing to privatise
 the rest of Telstra. But we're going to do it in stages. We're
 going to sell up to 49 per cent and then we're going to pause
 and we're going to have an inquiry, an independent inquiry, against
 the benchmarks that we will put in legislation as to whether the community
 service obligations are being met by Telstra. And when we get the
 go-ahead from that, that they are, then we're going to proceed
 to the next stage. And in the long run, that policy will relieve a
 debt burden on the Australian community and it will enable future
 governments to do good things with the money that would otherwise
 have been spent servicing a debt run up by Mr Keating and Mr Beazley.
 Now, if that's not a good proposition, if that's not a good
 deal for the Australian people then I really don't know what
 is.
So, ladies and gentlemen, we have great political opportunities in
 the weeks and months ahead of us. We have achieved a lot over the
 last two-and-a-quarter years. We have much more to achieve and we
 have much more to realise in terms of our political goals and our
 political hopes.
I want to take the opportunity tonight of thanking the members of
 the Liberal Party here in Victoria for the tremendous professionalism
 that you have all displayed, both in the years that I was in opposition
 and in the last two and a bit years in Government. The Victorian organisation
 has been very supportive of the Government and I thank the President
 and I thank the State Director and I thank all members of the organisation
 for the loyalty and support that you have displayed towards me and
 towards the Government. I want to acknowledge the professionalism
 of the Liberal Party here in Victoria. It is no mean feat to have
 achieved what this Division has achieved over the last eight or nine
 years, both at a State and a federal level.
I also pay tribute to the quality of the federal representation that
 you have sent to Canberra from here in Victoria. It numbers, of course,
 my Deputy, Peter Costello, who's done an outstanding job as Treasurer
 since the election in March of 1996 and I pay unstinted tribute to
 the work and the commitment and the tenacity of Peter in that role.
 I also acknowledge the contribution of Richard Alston who is not only
 the Deputy Leader in the Senate but also a member of the leadership
 team. I can't think of a person who could have handled the difficult
 issues thrown up by the communications portfolio and, of course, his
 grasp and understanding of the arts in Australia in terms of bringing
 it to the mainstream of the Australian community and his capacity,
 above both of those things, to handle Jabiluka protesters, has me
 in absolute awe.
To Peter Reith and to Michael Wooldridge; to all of the other 
 to Rod Kemp, to David Kemp, who I've already mentioned because
 of the work that he's done; to Judith Troeth, the Parliamentary
 Secretary, I might say the first Liberal Parliamentary Secretary -
 no offence to my National Party colleagues, of course  first
 Liberal Parliamentary Secretary for rural affairs; to all of them
 I want to say a very warm thanks. And to all of my other colleagues
 in Victoria, to Karen, to Kay and to everybody else, can I express
 my gratitude and I particularly acknowledge the presence of Julian
 here tonight as the National Party member of the Senate team for the
 next election.
We have a great challenge ahead of us. I am filled both with energy
 and optimism and, above all, commitment for that challenge. I know
 that we have been through some difficult times. I know that the appearance
 of the One Nation Party on the horizon was a surprising event to many.
 But like all other challenges that we have faced in our political
 history, we will be able to beat it off. We will beat it off by offering
 the Australian people something better. We will beat it off by being
 honest to the Australian people about our economic future. We will
 give the lie to the proposition that Australia's economic salvation
 lies in putting up the tariff walls and sealing this country off from
 the rest of the world. I can't think of anything more calculated
 to weaken and enfeeble the Australian economy than to go back to the
 days of old protection. We will also beat off any attempt by any section
 of the Australian community to embrace racial bigotry or discrimination
 as part and parcel of our society.
The Liberal Party, let me remind you, was the party, under the prime
 ministership of Harold Holt, that abolished the White Australia'
 policy. The Liberal Party has a proud record of tolerance. The Liberal
 Party's policies will always be colour blind. The Liberal Party
 always opposes discrimination and bigotry. Any type-casting of people
 on the basis of their racial or ethnic background is alien to everything
 we believe in and is something that will never be countenanced by
 any Liberal government at any time in the party's history. And
 I want to say, on behalf of all sections of the Liberal Party, how
 utterly committed we remain to the maintenance of those great principles
 of tolerance, of non-discrimination and of the treatment of people
 based on their merit and the contribution they make to the Australian
 community.
We were elected in March of 1996 for a lot of reasons. You were reminded
 of one of those reasons when you turned on your television set last
 night and you saw the ALP arts launch. But I think the most important
 reason that we were elected in March of 1996 is that the people of
 Australia wanted a government that would govern for all Australians,
 that would be first and foremost responsive to the mainstream of the
 Australian community, would not be a government that would swing on
 the hinge of every narrow interest group in the Australian community
 but rather would be a government that would attach itself to the interests
 of the mainstream of the Australian community. And that is why, of
 all the things that we have done, those of which I am most proud are
 those that have been directed towards the interests and the concerns
 of the mainstream of the Australian community. And as it has been
 with those reforms, so it will be when the taxation policy is released.
It'll be a taxation policy that will be good for Australia because
 it will lift our living standards, our investment, reduce our business
 costs, give taxpayers greater incentives to work and to save and to
 give to the economic infrastructure of this country a very, very significant
 boost and a very significant improvement. And we will be able to say
 to the Australian people, whenever we go to the next election, whenever
 that may be, we will be able to say to the Australian people that
 the Coalition and the Coalition alone has a plan, has a vision, has
 a set of values and a set of ideas for the 21st Century.
 And I can't think of anything more valuable to give to the young
 who will inherit the 21st Century than an Australian society's
 strengthened and invigorated by change and reform.
So, my friends, thank you very much for the support that you've
 given over the years. I look around this room, I see people who've
 given long years of service and loyalty and commitment to our common
 cause. I've spent most, indeed, all of my adult life virtually
 working in different ways in the Liberal Party and I always retain
 a deep sense of connection and empathy with those who work and support
 the party year in and year out. I thank you for that. I thank my colleagues
 from Victoria. I'm proud of the Senate team that you've
 chosen. I wish it well and I look forward to a resounding success
 whenever the election is held. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
To Mr Bill Skate, the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, distinguished
 guests ladies and gentlemen. There are a number of reasons why today
 luncheon is a very special occasion. It brings together two nations
 that have deep ties of history and people-to-people links. It is also
 the first occasion on which Bill Skate as Prime Minister has visited
 Canberra and we very very warmly welcome you Sir, not only in your
 own right but also as the Prime Minister of a Nation for whom Australia
 and Australians has a very deep affection. It is impossible to adequately
 catalogue the links that do exist between our two nations and chatting
 over the dinner table we reminded ourselves of just how intricate
 are those links. I discovered, for example, the Minister for Resources
 in the Government, Senator Warwick Parer, spent the first six years
 of his life in Rabaul. I was reminded by a former Prime Minister,
 Bob Hawke, that he spent some time of his life as a trade union official
 giving advice on wages and industrial relations policy in Papua New
 Guinea. And I recall the contribution to the building of that nation
 by many of my former colleagues in the Coalition.
Of course the ties that bind us together are nowhere more powerful
 than in an area of common love between Australians and the people
 of Papua New Guinea and that is in the area of sport. And of all the
 sporting links between the two nations, none is more powerful than
 in the game of rugby league. And I'm delighted to acknowledge
 the presence here today of a number of people who symbolise that link.
 I'm delighted to acknowledge, of course, the presence of an Australian
 who's probably better known in Papua New Guinea than any other
 Australian and that is Mal Meninga, one of Australia's greatest
 rugby league players and a great Kangaroo captain and now the coach
 of the Canberra Raiders.
I'm also delighted to welcome John Ribot, the Executive Director
 of the Melbourne Storm Rugby League Club. And as you will know, Mr
 Skate, John captained the Australian President's XIII to Papua
 New Guinea in 1985 and has maintained his links ever since. And, of
 course, your own Marcus Bai, who's been such an outstanding success
 as a player with Melbourne Storm, is also here and he, himself, is
 building his own hero status amongst rugby league followers. And you'll
 forgive me, ladies and gentlemen, whilst I'm on the subject of
 football, of the rugby variety, but I take the opportunity, sparing
 Graham Fortune's blushes, of acknowledging the tremendous achievement
 of the Australian Wallabies at Lancaster Park last Saturday in winning
 the Bledisloe Cup.
Of course, ladies and gentlemen, we gather here today in the shadow
 of that enormous tragedy that overtook the villages around the Sissano
 Lagoon. We record and reflect with immense sadness on the horrific
 loss of life. And can I say to you, Prime Minister, that all Australians
 felt for the families affected by that tragedy; the wives made widows,
 the children made orphans and those left disabled. And we all felt
 a special pang of sympathy and affection for you and for your country
 as you coped valiantly with such a terrible disaster. And our desire
 to reach out to you was a reflex action, an instinctive response to
 family friends.
About 140 Australian Defence Force personnel were on the ground for
 two weeks. There were medical staff and they helped deal with horrible
 cases of gangrene coupled with scores of broken limbs and the prospect
 of terrible disease. There were also communication specialists, logistics
 staff, engineers and RAAF air crews whose support was essential. And
 quite a number of them are here today as very welcome and honoured
 guests of the Australian Government and I know, in a general sense,
 of also the Government of Papua New Guinea.
Can I say, as Prime Minister, how immensely proud I was and I know
 that all Australians were for what those men and women did in those
 days immediately following that disaster. We can only begin to try
 and understand the mental strain and trauma and the painful and distressing
 circumstances under which they worked. But to see amidst that devastation
 and death and sorrow and sadness, to see those wonderful images of
 Australian defence personnel working in the name of humanity and decency
 to relieve suffering touched me and touched all Australians in a way
 that I hope those of you who are here and your colleagues who shared
 that experience will understand and accept as a very, very sincere
 and grateful expression of how we felt.
There is something particularly touching about the image of a person
 wearing that wonderful slouch hat, ministering to people who are sick
 and disabled and in a situation of distress. And all Australians are
 immensely proud of you and we are immensely grateful to you for the
 way in which you demonstrated that Australia is a true friend of those
 in need and how deeply compassionate and how willing is the Australian
 spirit when it is called upon in those circumstances.
Those images will remain with Australians for a long time. And for
 myself, that tragedy served to remind how history, geography and circumstance
 continues to bind our two nations together. It must have brought back
 to many Australians, as it did to me, images of our shared past. Not
 so vivid, perhaps, none so vivid rather, perhaps, as the tales, those
 affection tales, of the so-called fuzzy-wuzzy angels' who
 helped Australian soldiers more than 50 years ago. The feats of tens
 of thousands of those intrepid carriers are immortalised by the stories
 of the help they gave to wounded Australian diggers, mainly on stretchers,
 over the tortuous Kokoda track. Some of you may have read or heard
 the original 1942 poem by Bert Beros, and I quote just a small part
 of it:
"Many a mother in Australia when the busy day is done sends
 a prayer to the Almighty for the keeping of her son, asking that
 an angel guide him and bring him safely back.
Now we see those prayers are answered on the Owen Stanley track.
 May the mothers of Australia when they offer up a prayer mention
 those impromptu angels with their fuzzy wuzzy hair".
And however sentimental the rhyme and however in the eyes of some
 but not, I think, in the eyes of most, dated the language may seem,
 the poem helped to tell then how Australians were drawn through gratitude
 and admiration to your people and it remains a heartfelt appreciation
 enduring even unto today. And in a small way many Australians will
 see the demonstration of compassion and help given so effectively
 by the men and women of the Australian Defence Force as a small repayment
 of the immense debt of gratitude that the wartime Australian diggers
 owed to the people of your lovely country.
Mr Prime Minister, you may rest assured that the Government I lead
 and the people of Australia consider Papua New Guinea a close friend
 and we'll continue to support your efforts to rebuild after that
 horrible disaster. And in addition to what has already been provided
 we will provide whatever additional resources are needed beyond those
 already available to ensure the reconstruction of the two or three
 new schools needed, the upgrading of roads, the alterations to make
 facilities accessible to the disabled, help with agriculture and fisheries
 to rebuild the area's economy, assistance to church and non-government
 organisations for rebuilding in new areas, ongoing support for those
 suffering orthopedic injuries and amputations, support for geological
 survey work and advance to local level administration on planning.
Mr Prime Minister, let me say how pleased the Australian Government
 is with the role that you and your Government has played in relation
 to the very difficult challenge of Bougainville. We have seen the
 emergence of consultation, negotiation and the first possibilities
 of a lasting peace and political settlement. We in Australia are not
 nave about what lies ahead and ultimately, of course, success will
 depend upon the attitude of the Bouganvillians themselves. But we
 have made progress and you deserve a great deal of the credit for
 that.
And can I also take the opportunity of recording the appreciation
 that I feel and the Government feels towards the part played by the
 Australian Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer, in the progress that
 has been made in achieving some kind of lasting settlement in Bougainville.
 And after so many years of conflict we all look forward to the prospect
 of peace and I know from our discussions that you are deeply committed
 to peace on Bougainville. And I also know from our discussions this
 morning that Australia and Papua New Guinea and our other friends
 in the Pacific region will work together very closely to achieve that
 goal.
In our discussions this morning we shared our thoughts regarding the
 impact of the economic downturn in the Asia-Pacific region on our
 two countries. That impact is not going to pass quickly and there
 is quite a deal of water to flow under that particular bridge before
 we are going to see an upturn in the economies of that region. We
 both agreed about the importance of continuing to pursue, notwithstanding
 the difficulties, those necessary reforms that will make our two economies
 more effective and more competitive, not only in the Asia-Pacific
 region but also in the broader world. And we here in Australia, of
 course, will be embarking upon a very major reform of our taxation
 system. And I know from our discussions this morning, given your own
 intentions in that particular area, that you will closely examine
 the field evidence that emerges from the Australian experience.
Mr Prime Minister, it has been a personal pleasure for me to be your
 host today. We met last year on several occasions. I respect and admire
 the challenging way in which you are going about your task as Prime
 Minister of your country. Australia and Papua New Guinea share a lot
 of history, we are friends, we respect each other, we will periodically
 differ. Our relationship is now the mature relationship of two sovereign
 independent nations. The relationship was once otherwise but we have
 grown, I think, easily and effectively and comfortably into the new
 relationship.
On behalf of the people of Australia, I bid you a very warm welcome.
 On behalf of the people of Australia I send to you and your fellow
 country men and women, our good wishes, our determination to maintain
 the close ties that have characterised our relationship and the gratitude
 for the shared experiences and the mutual assistance which has gone
 in earlier years. I would now like t o invite the Deputy Leader of
 the Opposition, Mr Gareth Evans, to support my remarks. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Vaile, to Mrs Carnell, the Chief Minister of
 the ACT, to my many Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, ladies
 and gentleman.
At various stages of our history the notion and the ideal of nation
 building has always captured the attention and the affection of Australians.
 It was the notion of nation building that drove the founding fathers
 towards federation almost a hundred years ago. And it will, of course,
 be very natural, as we come towards the centenary of federation, that
 we think of the great nation-building events that have occurred in
 the past and also turn our gaze to the nation-building events of all
 kinds that will shape our future. And many of the policies of the
 Federal Government are built around the ideal, the continuing ideal,
 of nation building. And it is in the context of building the nation's
 economy, in an even stronger way, that next week I will have something
 to say about the Government's exciting plans to reform Australia's
 taxation system. But I'm not about to give you a sneak preview
 of that today. That will come next week. But it is true, as Mark Vaile
 said, that we are experiencing, literally, the rebirth and the revival
 of rail in Australia.
The rail system that the Government inherited a couple of years ago
 was in need of change and reform and there was a very large financial
 blackhole involved in that system. But we have followed a very clear
 strategy to rebuild rail in Australia and largely, as a result of
 that, the private sector is now reinvesting in rail throughout our
 nation. The Alice Springs-to-Darwin and the Melbourne-to-Darwin inland
 railway offer, potentially, enormous benefits to our nation. And by
 announcing today the Canberra-to-Sydney consortium to proceed to the
 confirmation stage, another building block is being laid in the revival
 of Australian rail.
The proponents contend it will be achieved at no net cost to government
 in keeping with the original condition. And they estimate that the
 benefits to the nation will be in the order of $5.9 billion. There
 will thousands of jobs created. There will be immense regional development,
 particularly in the communities of Goulburn, Campbelltown and the
 Southern Highlands.
And before announcing the consortium that has won the right to proceed
 to a confirmation stage, I would like to pay a tribute to the four
 consortia that put forward proposals. All four consortia provided
 quality submissions that were visionary in their scope. I also acknowledge
 publicly the members of the Joint Project Control Group, chaired by
 Ron Brown, which has made this announcement possible. In consultation
 with New South Wales and the ACT, the governments have accepted the
 recommendation of the Independent Project Evaluation Committee. It
 is with great pleasure I announce Speedrail as the successful consortium
 for the Very High Speed Train rail link from Sydney-to-Canberra.
This train is to travel at up to 320 km/h to complete the Sydney/Canberra
 journey in just 81 minutes, offering, in every sense of the word,
 a competitive alternative to air travel. The $3.5 billion project
 proposed by Speedrail will be one of the largest infrastructure projects
 in Australia's history. Moreover 80% of the resources needed to complete
 the project, by the year 2003 will come from within Australia. Thousands
 of jobs will be created during the construction phase. Speedrail will
 now enter a confirmation phase with the Federal, New South Wales and
 ACT Governments to confirm access and financing arrangements to allow
 the project to commence.
Ladies and gentleman, this is a bold and visionary initiative. And
 while the Canberra to Sydney bids were assessed solely on the basis
 of the criteria set down for this stand alone project, a Canberra-to-Sydney
 line does leave open the possibility of extension to other cities.
 Accordingly I have asked Mr Bob Mansfield to establish a committee
 to examine the possibilities for expanding the scope of the Very High
 Speed Train transport in Australia. My Government is immensely proud
 to have played a major role in creating the environment in which the
 private sector feels encouraged to invest in the future of Australia
 and Australian transport.
I would like to pay particular tribute to the energy and commitment
 of Mrs Carnell, the Chief Minister of the ACT. She has been a very
 powerful advocate of this project and I congratulate her for that.
 I did speak to Mr Carr yesterday afternoon and he regrets not being
 here but he asked me to convey to the gathering the total support
 of the New South Wales' Government towards the project. And I'd
 also like to acknowledge the presence of the former Minister for Transport
 and Regional Development, John Sharp, who played a very significant
 part on the part of the Federal Government in the inauguration of
 this project.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I said at the beginning of my speech the
 notion and the concept of nation building has always been very close
 to the hearts of Australians. It drove federation almost a hundred
 years ago, it drove the great waves of post war immigration after
 World War II, it has driven many decisions by many governments and
 it has driven many investors who care about the future of our country.
 And it is entirely appropriate as we approach the Centenary of Federation
 that not only we reflect on those events that have built the nation
 in the past and given us what we have now, but we also embrace those
 projects and those ventures and those policy changes which will further
 build the strength of the nation as we go into the 21st
 century. Speedrail is a pragmatic and visionary expression of that
 theme and that concept of nation building.
I congratulate the successful consortium, I thank the others who contributed,
 I wish all those involved great success and I assure the project of
 the unrelenting and continuing support of the Federal Government.
 Thank you.


E&amp;OE............................................................................................
Well thank you very much Air Marshal Titheridge, to Air Marshal McCormack,
 to Mrs Bronwyn Bishop the Minister for Defence Industry, Science and
 Personnel, to Warren Entsch the Federal Member for Leichhardt, other
 distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I would particularly like to express my gratitude for the very kind
 and warm remarks of Thelma Coconut. I was impressed by the depth of
 the feeling expressed and the generosity and the spirit of the welcome
 extended to me when I arrived on the tarmac and also here this morning.
 She commands our respect and our gratitude and her recollection that
 what led the owners of Peppan to agree that the base be built here
 was the story of how scared of the planes overhead the elders who
 were then growing up on the mission were reminds all of us of the
 important sacrifices of Australians of all origins that have been
 made in the years that have gone by. We are grateful for those sacrifices
 of whoever made them and in whatever form for the defence and the
 protection of our nation. And I certainly share firmly your hope that
 the base will not need to be used in war.
Can I say how delighted I am to share this occasion with you. It is
 always for me a particular pleasure to share a special occasion with
 the men and women of the Australian Defence Force. I want on behalf
 of the Government to express our unending gratitude for the tremendous
 work that you do in maintaining the defence preparedness of Australia.
 It is not always an easy life, it is not always a life that sits happily
 and comfortably with the needs and demands of family responsibilities.
 And in thanking the men and women of the defence forces I also thank
 the wives and husbands and children of the joint sacrifice they make
 as part of service life. All of us were, I am sure, moved and filled
 with tremendous pride for the work that was done by the ADF contingent
 in Papua New Guinea over the last couple of weeks following the terrible
 tidal wave disaster. And those images of those men and women at work
 relieving the suffering of humanity in a close neighbour and amongst
 friends of Australia who have rendered great assistance to Australian
 diggers in the past was a reminder to all of us of the diverse role
 and the diverse skills and the great capability of the personnel of
 the Australian Defence Force.
This base is very aptly named. Air Chief Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger
 was, of course, one of Australia's finest airmen and military
 officers. And he was one of the earliest advocates for a chain of
 airfields to protect Australians more than air and sea approaches.
 And no Australian can possibly be unmindful of the vastness of our
 nation and the need, particularly in the north of Australia, to have
 a chain of defence and of strategic installations which give some
 degree of security and some degree of reassurance. And it's a
 timely reminder for those Australians who have lived most of their
 lives in the heavily populated areas of Melbourne and Sydney and the
 south east corner of Australia. It's a very timely reminder to
 come to a place like Weipa and to be reminded of the shared inheritance
 we have with the indigenous people but also to be reminded of the
 exposure of this country and the need for us always to remain and
 retain a sense of vigilance.
When we came to Government in 1996 the Coalition said that we would
 quarantine the Australian Defence Forces from any of the budget cuts
 that we then believed necessary to put Australia back in the black
 and I am very pleased to say that that commitment has been honoured
 in full. I remain personally very committed to maintaining the provision
 of all the resources that are feasible and practicable consistent
 with our other obligations to the Australian Defence Forces. Our Defence
 Efficiency Review is restructuring defence to eliminate waste and
 duplication. We have achieved a one-off saving of $500 million and
 annual savings of $1 billion which will go to the front-end helping
 improve operational readiness.
Australian defence, of course, is not just about building barriers
 and strong defences, it is also about a contribution to regional stability
 and not just in the immediate deployment sense but also in the sense
 of the contacts that exist between the Australian Defence Forces and
 the defence personnel of our neighbouring countries. Nobody can overestimate
 the importance, for example, of the links between the Australian Defence
 Forces and the Defence Forces of Indonesia, our nearest neighbour.
 And the network of those links that have been built up over the years
 were very important to us a few months ago and they remain important.
 And the confidence that is reposed by the Defence Forces of those
 countries and the personnel that comprise the leadership of our Defence
 Forces remains extremely important.
The Defence of Australia, of course, goes beyond our coastline. As
 Ian McLachlan has said, our aim must be a secure country in a secure
 region. Australia's geography means that we must focus on operations
 to defend our maritime approaches before potential enemies reach our
 shores. We therefore need to have an effective capability for control
 and surveillance of the sea-air gap and for interdiction within it.
 And Scherger will certainly help support that capacity. The Government's
 strategic review in 1997 supported the development of an airfield
 infrastructure in Northern Australia capable of operating modern aircraft.
 And Scherger, as you all know, is one of six bases across the north
 of Australia. Three of them are the active bases at Darwin, Tindal
 and Townsville. Scherger is the third of the so-called bear bases
 including Learmonth and Curtin which are capable of being activated
 at short notice. And I had in the moments before coming here an opportunity
 of seeing in action the capacity of the defence personnel to provide
 that activation. This exercise, Northern Awakening, taking place around
 us today, underlies that preparedness. This base's capabilities
 will be further tested during a major exercise, Exercise Crocodile,
 which replaces the Kangaroo series due to take place next year.
Today marks not only the start of operational activity but also an
 end to construction and the construction route was begun in March
 of 1993. The $137 million project is now complete, on time and under
 budget. And I congratulate the 17 Construction Squadron. I congratulate
 John Holland and Hansen Yuncken. And I would also like to congratulate
 the Napranum Aboriginal Corporation who completed a major contract
 for the base also on time and within budget. The contract involved
 the manufacture of 120,000 specialised concrete blocks for the construction
 of blast walls around the aircraft dispersal area. And this is one
 of the largest contracts ever awarded to an Aboriginal community business
 enterprise and it is a source of great satisfaction to all of us that
 along with the other components of the construction of the base, it
 also was completed under budget and on time. And it's a very
 good illustration of the practical outcomes that can be achieved through
 cooperation with different sections of our community. The contractors
 can be justifiably proud of their achievements and the partnership
 with the local people that is developed. And the Department of Defence
 is a wonderful example to the rest of the community. The rights and
 the interests of the local people have been respected in the street
 names and in the cooperation. And, indeed, there has also been a very
 deep respect for the natural heritage aspects of surrounds. I was
 reminded as I drove around the base of the need for environmentally
 friendly approaches even during military exercises. And every effort
 has been made to ensure that the importance of the environment is
 at all times respected and understood.
Ladies and gentlemen, this opening today is an opportunity to reaffirm
 a number of things. It's an opportunity for the Government to
 say thank you to the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces.
 It's an opportunity for me on behalf of the Government and the
 people of Australia to record our gratitude and our respect to those
 men and women for the great service that they render to our country.
 It's an opportunity to salute the sense of cooperation and partnership
 that exists between the Royal Australian Air Force and the local indigenous
 people. To thank the Peppan people. To thank particularly Thelma Coconut
 as their representative who greeted us here today, for the spirit
 of good will and commitment to our common land Australia which has
 characterised their approach to the construction of this base.
The opening of this base completes a very, very important element
 of an urban defence structure. And I know it is, to all those Australians
 committed to and interested in the defence of Australia, a very important
 day. It's a proud day for the Royal Australian Air Force. A group
 of men and women that have served this country over long years and
 have made a tremendous contribution to preserving and defending the
 cause of liberty and the cause of democracy in many theatres of war
 around the world. I thank them. I wish all who come to and operate
 out of this base the very best of good fortune. It is the united prayer
 of all of us that this base will never need to be used in wartime.
 But as history has taught us, that united prayer can only be delivered
 if we are willing to commit ourselves to a level of defence preparedness.
 And if we are ready to, and have the capacity to, deploy military
 capability and to deploy defence capacity in order to deter those
 who might deny us the realisation of that joint prayer.
I therefore have tremendous pleasure in declaring open RAAF Base Scherger.
 It honours a great Australian, a great airman, and a great person
 who gave his life to his profession and gave his life to the defence
 of his country.
Thank you.
 [ENDS]


E&amp;OE............................................................................................
  Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the launch of the Government's
   tax plan for Australia's future. This is a very important day
   for the economic future of Australia. The plan that is being launched
   today represents the biggest single remake of the Australian taxation
   system since Federation. It involves some historic changes in relations
   between the Commonwealth and the States. It lays the groundwork
   for Australia going into the 21st century growing more
   strongly, generating more jobs and being able to compete more effectively
   on world markets. It also involves a very major remake of Australia's
   social security system, which will do two very important things.
   It will remove many of the poverty traps that now exist in the social
   security system and will provide incentives for work and thereby
   continue the policies of the Government whereby we have sought to
   rebalance the incentives within the Australian community towards
   work and away from welfare dependency.
  The Government is particularly proud of the changes that are involved
   in the relations between the Commonwealth and the States. For as
   long as any of you can remember one of the least ignobling characteristics
   of government in this country has been the annual begging-bowl pilgrimage
   to Canberra by the States. For the first time ever a Commonwealth
   Government has tackled this full-bloodedly head-on. We are giving
   the States the entire proceeds of the goods and services tax revenue.
   It will be their tax administered by us on their behalf. They will
   pay for its operation, they will get its full proceeds. It will
   not be possible for the rate to be varied without the total support
   of the governments of all of the States and Territories, the Federal
   Government and the Senate and the House of Representatives.
  In other words, I don't think it is going to happen, because
   to get an agreement at all of those levels is indeed a mammoth task
   and something that I think more than anything else guarantees a
   long period of time for the rate, and indeed, works very strongly
   against its change. What that particular change will do will be
   to give the States far greater freedom and far greater resources
   over time. On our calculations rising to about $25 billion more
   cumulatively by the year 2010 over and above what they would be
   likely to get under the operation of the present system through
   to the year 2010. It will therefore give to the States greater resources
   to do the things for which they are constitutionally responsible.
   It will probably lead to the end of the annual Premiers conference's
   and some of you may well be disappointed about that but there will
   be others who may not be so disappointed about that development.
  So that does represent a very, very important shift and a very,
   very significant and historic one as we approach the centenary of
   the Federation. Not only will we have a new State for a new century
   but we will have a new tax system and we will have a new arrangement
   between the Commonwealth and the States for a new century. And the
   historic importance of that should certainly not be underestimated.
   I said when I announced that there will be taxation reform that
   there would be five principles that would guide that reform. And
   if you go through the plan you will find that at every point those
   principles have been faithfully honoured. To start with, there will
   be lower tax collected under the plan. This plan reduces overall
   tax collection. There will be a $13 billion reduction in the area
   of personal income tax cuts and on top of that the additional family
   initiatives are worth about $2 billion.
  I am immensely proud of the fact that under this plan the top marginal
   rate paid by 81 per cent of Australian taxpayers will be 30 cents
   in the dollar or less. In other words, you can pass from $20,000
   of annual income to $50,000 of annual income without going into
   a higher tax bracket. You can almost call it the "bracket creep
   abolition provision" of the tax plan because if you look at
   the working, the income profile of so many low and middle income
   earners to pass from $20,000 through to $50,000 would be the experience
   of their working life and probably no more. And 81 per cent of people,
   we must always remind ourselves that 81 per cent will be on 30 per
   cent or less and that is a particularly important change. We have
   changed the rates at every point except the top rate. What we have
   done with the top rate is to alter the threshold but to keep it
   at 47 cents. We have increased the tax-free threshold from $5,400
   to $6,000. We have dropped the bottom rate from 20 to 17. The 30
   cent rate cuts in at $20,000 and carries you through to $50,000
   and then there is a 40 cent rate between $50,000 and $75,000. So
   the benefits for low and middle income earners are enormous under
   this package. The incentive for doing more overtime, the incentive
   for extra effort and the incentive for harder work is very self-evidently
   there.
  We have, of course, included in the plan a number of things that
   have not been widely speculated about or even thought of outside
   a very narrow range of people. I am delighted to be able to announce
   that as part of the plan provisional tax will be abolished. And
   that will be of enormous encouragement to many people in business,
   many self-employed people, and it will be a very great advantage
   to many self-funded and retired people. Very importantly for that
   group also we are introducing a system whereby we are going to fully
   refund imputation credits. And that is very, very important to people
   on modest incomes who hold shares who will get dividends franked
   to the tune of 36 cents, which is the company rate, and they might
   be on 20 and they can't get the other 16. Well under this system
   they'll get the other 16 as a refund on the franked increment
   from the Taxation Office.
  We have gone to very great care to ensure, as I outlined in the
   five principles, that low and fixed income and modest income people
   including pensioners will be fully protected. On July 1 pensions
   and other benefits will rise by 4 per cent and the proposals contain
   a guarantee that at all stages there will be a real increase of
   1.5 per cent in the pension over and above CPI increases. And that's
   a very, very important cushion, a very, very important additional
   protection. We are also increasing the retired persons' rebates.
   We are introducing special untaxed payments  one of $1,000
   for all people 60 and over who have investment income and a further
   one for self-funded retirees of and above pensionable age of $2,000.
   There will be full eligibility for that; $20,000 a year and under
   and phasing out to $30,000. And importantly also, not only for this
   section of the community but for the entire community, the plan
   involves the introduction with effect from January of next year
   of a 30 per cent tax credit or rebate on the cost of taking out
   private health insurance. This will be for 80 per cent of the Australian
   community as valuable or more valuable than full tax deductibility
   of the cost of taking out private health insurance. This benefit
   will be available to everyone. It will not be subject to an income
   test and it will represent a very significant further incentive
   for people to take out private health insurance. That is important,
   not only for the contribution that private health insurance makes
   in its own right to the aggregate health system in Australia but
   also for the load that it will take off the public hospital system.
   And, of course, it follows the decision of the Commonwealth Government
   to inject a further $915 million over five years into the public
   hospital system, representing real increases over the five year
   period of the new Medicare agreement of 17 per cent at a time of
   virtually zero inflation. So we are particularly pleased about the
   contribution that that initiative is going to make.
  This is an extremely good tax plan for the bush. Country people
   will benefit enormously through the massive reduction in fuel costs.
   The reductions in fuel costs are worth about $3.5 billion a year.
   That involves something in the order of a net reduction in relation
   to diesel of $2 billion and the additional capacity of people to
   get a rebate because it is an input cost of the cost of other forms
   of fuel. So the benefit of this for the bush and the extent to which
   the economic consequences of what has long been described as the
   tyranny of distance in this country, those economic disabilities
   will be ameliorated by this package are really quite enormous. And
   the benefits in relation to diesel fuel will not be restricted to
   farmers, they will flow through to people like ferry and marine
   operators and will be of particular benefit to many tourist operators.
   And will also be of benefit particularly to the State of Tasmania
   which in recent times has been experiencing a very significant boost
   in its tourist industry as a result of changes that have been made
   by the Federal Government in other areas.
  The package, of course, as widely predicted, includes the introduction
   of a 10 per cent Goods and Services tax. It will, of course, be
   known as a Goods and Services tax, or a GST, and that 10 per cent
   will be introduced to replace 10 other taxes. And those 10 taxes
   are, of course, the wholesale sales tax, which will be abolished
   in its entirety. And there will be Commonwealth and State taxes,
   the Financial Institutions Duty, the bank account debits tax, stamp
   duty taxes on business conveyancing, on mortgages, on shares and
   marketable securities, bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes,
   bed taxes, which will be abolished, it's part of the deal that
   they must go by the 1st of July in the year 2000. So
   it does represent a very straight-forward, simple, clearly defined,
   well put together, broad-based, consumption tax. The exemptions
   are minimal but important.
  Local government rates and water and sewerage charges are exempt
   and we are going to use the description of GST free'
   to describe something that was previously described as zero-rated.
   And health and education, childcare and a number of other things
   that are listed in the document, including regulatory charges such
   as motor vehicle registration fees, will be free of the GST. And
   there will be another category that will be input tax'
   which is the new description that we are bringing in instead of
   exempt' which is the equivalent description under an
   earlier document.
  We think the Goods and Services Tax is a modern, fair tax. One of
   the great advantages of the introduction of the Goods and Services
   Tax is the way in which we can increase the dividend for honest
   taxpayers out of the black economy. And you can't do that without
   a GST. You can't get $3 billion out of the black economy over
   three years without a GST.
  And the GST's introduction has also paved the way for the introduction
   of new and simplified methods of collection of business tax...group
   reductions and the like, which are described in detail in the document.
  The Goods and Services Tax will, of course, come into operation
   on the 1st of July in the year 2000 and, simultaneously
   with the introduction of that tax, of course, the personal income
   tax provision, which I've outlined.
  I've already had a number of preliminary discussions with the
   Premiers and Chief Ministers and it would be the intention of the
   Government, if returned at the next election, to convene an early
   meeting of Premiers and Chief Ministers at which the Treasurer and
   I will outline in more detail the proposals that we have.
  In the area of business tax we have made a number of decisions and
   we have set down a number of goals and objectives. The first thing
   that I should say about this package, so far as business is concerned,
   is that it reduces the cost burden of Australian business by an
   annual amount of $10 billion. What a lot of people still don't
   understand is that the cascading effect on business cost of the
   existing wholesale tax and indirect tax system, you can't get
   them back  once you pay the taxes, you can't get them
   back from the Tax Office, they go into your cost base. The advantage
   of a Goods and Services Tax is that you can get it back.
  Could I just give you a simple illustration I have that will resonate
   with everybody in the room and that is that the savings for business
   in relation to petrol is worth seven cents a litre. Because seven
   cents a litre is the per cent, per litre equivalent of the 10 per
   cent GST. You can't get that back now but you can with a Goods
   and Services Tax. So that is of an enormous benefit to business.
  There's a $4.5 billion cost saving for Australian exporters.
   And at a time when this country has, more than ever in its history,
   a need to do well by exporters, it is imperative that we take the
   load off the backs of exporters. And one of the tremendous advantages
   of this proposal of the Government's is the way in which it
   reduces those business costs.
  The Treasurer will be outlining to the Business Council tomorrow
   the way in which we intend to handle and review consultative mechanisms
   that are alluded to in the document with the business community.
  We have the goal of moving towards a company tax rate of 30 per
   cent. Obviously in moving towards that there needs to be a consideration
   of some of the trade-offs that might be involved between achieving
   that goal and the maintenance of some of the tax preference arrangements
   that exist under the present legislation. And, quite plainly, different
   sections of the business community have different views on how that
   might be achieved.
  We have indicated in the document our intention to move to an entity
   system of taxation, and that's very important for the future
   of trust arrangements. We have outlined in the document some proposals
   whereby trusts, in effect, from the 1st of July, 2000,
   will be taxed in the same way as companies. Now, those changes are
   subject to certain provisions which strike, I believe, a fine and
   correct balance between the need to prevent the abuses that are
   occurring through the use of trusts but, by the same token, to acknowledge
   the contribution that those arrangements have made to the viability
   of many rural and other businesses throughout Australia. And the
   document details that balance that has been struck. And, in addition,
   the Treasurer is announcing today some specific measures which are
   targeted at particular tax avoidance practices using trusts. And
   we believe that those measures alone will enhance the revenue and
   make a very significant contribution.
  We've also, in the document, outlined some of the goals that
   we have in relation to reform of the capital gains tax, that they
   once again will be brought up in the review consultation mechanism,
   about which the Treasurer will have more to say tomorrow. I might
   also mention in that context that one specific announcement that
   has been in relation to capital gains tax that will further liberalise
   the rollover provisions in relation to capital gains tax.
  Ladies and gentlemen, it is neither possible nor desirable in a
   presentation such as this, with all of you having the full amplitude
   of the documentation available to you and, no doubt, a very keen
   desire to return to it, and also with what I can assure you is an
   excellent PowerPoint presentation that you are about to receive
   from the Treasurer, I don't think it's appropriate for
   me to go on any longer.
  I am especially proud of so many features of this tax policy. It
   does, importantly, build further on the additional assistance to
   families which was contained in the Government's Family Tax
   Initiative which we announced before the last election and which
   we introduced on time, in full, without deduction from the beginning
   of 1997. It will greatly enhance the choices available to Australian
   parents about the caring arrangements for their children. There's
   a lot of debate about this issue and there are a lot of false notions.
  The philosophy of the Government and the personal philosophy of
   the Prime Minister in this area has always been that maximising
   choice is the desirable thing. It is not the role of the Prime Minister
   or the role of the Government to stereotype a particular pattern
   of family behaviour or to say what families ought to do in relation
   to the arrangements of their infant children. It is the responsibility
   of the Government, within the bounds of fiscal capacity, to give
   maximum choice. And one of the features you will find as you absorb
   the detail of the new arrangements regarding family payments is
   that not only are they more generous, not only will we be achieving
   the consolidation of 12 payments down into three, not only will
   we be simplifying their delivery to the public by the establishment
   of a special family office, but they will particularly enhance the
   choices available to parents in relation to their young children.
   And they will capture the need that many of us are very familiar
   with, of having a tax and welfare system that allows people to go
   from a situation of two parents in full-time work to one for a period
   of time and then one of those back to part-time work and then one
   of those, over another period of time, back into the full-time workforce.
  And what we've tried to do with these changes is to maximise
   the choice, not to dictate stereotype but to maximise the choices
   that are available to parents in relation to those arrangements.
   And I think they will make a very healthy and a very welcome and
   a very positive contribution to achieving that particular goal.
  Ladies and gentlemen, this is an immensely visionary taxation reform.
   We have confronted the need for root-and-branch change. We have
   not squibbed any of the difficult issues. We do not underestimate
   the extent to which our opponents will try to conduct a fear campaign.
   We take a positive, hopeful, optimistic view about Australia's
   future. We believe that properly explained, the Australian people
   will embrace a tax plan that is good for Australia and fair to them.
   They are the two criteria, the two great tests. And applying those
   criteria and applying those tests, I believe that this plan passes
   both of them with flying colours. It will give Australia a new system,
   a better system for a new century. It will boost growth, it will
   boost jobs, it will improve fairness, it will generate greater incentive,
   it will improve the business climate, it will reduce the operating
   costs of business in country Australia. It will simplify and make
   more humane and sensitive the interaction between the tax system
   and the social security system, it will give a much needed boost
   to private health insurance. Overall, it is a tax plan for all Australians,
   and a tax plan that will be of enormous benefit to the future of
   our country and before concluding I would like to personally record
   my gratitude to my colleague Peter Costello, to the fine work that
   he has done in relation to the compilation of this package. Like
   all of these things they are team efforts, and as many of you know
   here, many of the things that I've canvassed this morning are
   issues to which I have committed in terms of policy change more
   than half of my political life, and I find in the launching of this
   plan this morning the achievement in a personal sense as well as
   in a political sense, a lot of the things that I've wanted
   to do. But you can never do those things alone, and I do appreciate
   immensely the commitment and personal skill that Peter has brought
   to the effort and I'd also like to take the opportunity of
   warmly thanking the members of the Treasury taskforce chaired by
   Dr Ken Henry who's seen many a tax package from both sides,
   and he's handled himself with enormous professional flair and
   skill and also many others, Michael L'estrange and David Stevens
   from the Cabinet Policy Unit, and of course the irrepressible Arthur
   Sinodinos who is the head of my office and who has a great economic
   understanding. So to all of those people can I express my immense
   gratitude.
  It is a moment of great excitement for me. It is a moment of immense
   satisfaction that we have been able to put together a plan that
   is good in the long term for the future of our nation and that is
   what public life is about, that is what doing things in politics
   is all about, and we are than happy to go the length and breadth
   of the country which I will start doing tomorrow to explain to the
   Australian people the benefits of this plan. We believe in it, we
   believe it is good, we believe it is fair and we believe it will
   deliver a better and a stronger and a happier Australian community.
  JOURNALIST:
  Some of the States say they won't cop this....?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well I look forward to campaigning in the State of Queensland if
   Mr Beattie opposes this package. I can't see that a State with
   it's vast distances and its heavily decentralised population
   and its significant areas of strong provincial business, I can't
   think of a State that will benefit more as a result of the transport
   measures that I've announced today than Queensland. The effect
   of these measures will be to reduce transport costs by an average
   of 6.7%. The impact of the diesel changes and things associated
   with it will massively reduce the cost of transporting goods over
   long distances. And that in Queensland, given the structure of Queensland,
   is more important than any other.
  JOURNALIST:
  What if they just say they don't want it?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well, I'm sorry I didn't hear your question.
  JOURNALIST:
  What if they just say they don't want it?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well I think they will. And can I tell you what will be happening.
   We will be going to the public with this plan and if we get the
   support of the public whenever the election is held, and I make
   no comment about that, we will expect the opposition parties in
   the Senate, whoever they may comprise, to let the plan go through
   because if ever an election campaign is going to have as a really
   major issue, the next election will have this tax plan as a major
   issue. It will be no side bar mandate issue. This will be right
   there slap bang in the middle.
  JOURNALIST:


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Good Evening.
Tonight I want to talk to you about a plan that will help all Australians.
The economic troubles in Asia have brought home to all of us just
 how important it is to have a strong and competitive Australian economy.
The Government has already got rid of the budget deficit we inherited,
 delivered the lowest interest rates in 30 years and created 300,000
 new jobs.
The next step is to fix the tax system, which has been holding us
 back.
It's unfair, discourages hard work and penalises our exporters
 at the very time when Australia must sell more abroad to do well.
 We need a clean break with the past and the tax plan announced today
 will create a new fairer tax system for the 21st century.
To start with, we will cut personal income tax by over $13 billion
 a year. The tax free threshold will rise to $6,000 and all except
 the top tax rate will come down.
Over 80 per cent of taxpayers will pay a top rate of only 30 cents
 in the dollar or less and this means a person's income could
 rise from $20,000 to $50,000 a year without that person going into
 a higher tax bracket, and that's a huge incentive.
There are extra benefits for families.
Under our plan typical Australian families with either one or both
 parents in the workforce will be $40 to $50 a week better off even
 after GST.
A single income family with one child under five will have the first
 $13,000 of income completely tax free. Benefits for childcare will
 be improved and there will be no GST on childcare.
I have always believed passionately that Australians should be encouraged
 to take out private health insurance. It provides doctor of choice,
 and takes pressure off the public hospitals.
Tonight I announce that from January next year there will be a 30
 per cent tax rebate or benefit for private health insurance. For more
 than 80 per cent of taxpayers this will be at least equal to or better
 than full tax deductibility. It will be worth around $600 a year for
 a health policy costing $2,000.
This incentive will be available to everyone.
We will replace ten hidden, indirect taxes with one ten per cent goods
 and services tax.
The GST will not be an extra tax on top of existing taxes. The wholesale
 sales tax will be swept away and with it nine state and territory
 taxes such as those on bank accounts, stamp duties on mortgages, and
 bed taxes.
Health, education, childcare, hospitals, nursing homes and hostels,
 local government rates, water and sewerage rates and charitable activities
 will all be free of the GST.
The GST rate will be locked in at 10 per cent because the law will
 be changed to stop the rate being increased by anyone without the
 full agreement of all State and Territory Governments, as well as
 the Federal Government and both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
Many goods will fall in price. A family car, for example, will now
 be taxed at
 10 per cent, not the old wholesale rate of 22 per cent. But a luxury
 car tax will stay.
All up, the increase in the cost of living has been estimated at just
 under two per cent. And there will be new special powers to stop unscrupulous
 people exploiting the changes.
The new tax system will start on July the 1st of July,
 2000. And we will catch more of the cash economy  at least $3
 billion over 3 years. And remember that without the GST that would
 not be possible.
 Pensioners and low income earners will be more than fully protected.
Pensions and allowances will rise by four per cent when the new plan
 starts so that they are well ahead of any increase in the cost of
 living.
The age pension will rise by up to $15.50 a fortnight for singles
 and $25.50 a fortnight for couples.
On top of that single pensioners and self-funded retirees will receive
 an extra tax rebate of $250 a year while for couples the extra rebate
 will be $350.
Also people over 60 with investment income will receive a one off
 income tested savings bonus of up to $1,000. For self funded retirees
 of pensionable age, the savings bonus will be up to $3,000. There
 will be an extra benefit for retired people with shares. And provisional
 tax will be totally abolished.
The typical part pensioner couple with $10,000 of investment income
 will be $23 a week better off, after the GST, and better off still,
 if they have private health insurance.
The bush will get a major boost.
Fuel excise will be reduced by about $3.5 billion a year.
There will be a diesel fuel credit reducing the cost of diesel fuel
 used in heavy road and rail transport by 25 cents a litre. The excise
 on diesel fuel used off road by farmers and other business will be
 fully rebated. Hospitals and others, such as ferry and marine operators,
 will benefit.
For all businesses the cost of petrol will fall by about seven cents
 a litre. The GST will not increase the price of petrol for the ordinary
 motorist.
Small business will gain significantly.
$10 billion of taxes on business will be removed. Costs for exporters
 will fall by
 $4.5 billion a year.
The new plan will improve cashflow for most businesses and there will
 be a special fund of $500 million to reduce any start up costs.
Ours is a unique country, with immense resources, a diverse, well-educated
 people and almost limitless possibilities.
It deserves a better and fairer tax system for the next century. Our
 plan will help give the nation that future.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Well, thank you very much to John Olsen, the Premier of South Australia,
 to your wife, Julie, to Martin Cameron, the President of the South
 Australian Division, to my many Federal and State parliamentary colleagues,
 ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to be amongst you on the first day of a bit of a trip
 around Australia, talking about, explaining and answering questions
 about the plan that was unveiled yesterday. I thank you most warmly,
 John for your words of support. I am very proud of many things in
 the tax plan, and one of the things of which I am particularly proud
 is that we have after decades of rhetoric on the subject, we have
 at last done something which will be of lasting and enduring value
 in improving the balance of Commonwealth / State financial relations.
 It's been around for years. It's dogged both sides of politics.
 It has produced some of the less edifying political exchanges that
 the Australian people have had to put up with over the years, and
 at long last we've devised a plan and an approach that will give
 to all of the States of Australia a tax that gives them the capacity
 because of the growth in the economy to finance the things for which
 they constitutionally responsible.
I think there is a degree of historic symbolism in the fact that in
 the one week we have announced that there will be a seventh state
 for a new century and that we have delivered a tax plan that, in so
 many ways, will help to revitalise the Australian Federation.
I would like, ladies and gentlemen, for this tax plan not to be seen
 in isolation. I don't want it to be seen as some kind of aberration
 or abstraction, but rather I want it to be seen as the next logical,
 albeit, very significant step that has to be taken in order to strengthen
 the Australian economy. Some people say to me, things are difficult
 in Asia, the world's a bit unsettled economically, Japan is going
 through difficulty, other countries are going through difficulty,
 this isn't the time to be embracing fundamental reform. Can I
 say to those people, that they couldn't be more wrong. It is
 because of what is happening in the Asian-Pacific region, that it
 is all the more necessary that we go the next step, we travel the
 additional distance that is needed to strengthen the Australian economy.
 Over the last two-and-a-half years, we have done a number of quite
 major things to strengthen and protect the Australian economy. We
 inherited budget deficit of $10.5 billion, we put it into surplus
 one year ahead of time. We are now very much back in the black. We
 are now able to say that in the period of two years we have turned
 that into a surplus. We have delivered the lowest interest rates that
 Australia has had for thirty years. We have generated 300,000 new
 jobs in just over two years. We have the lowest inflation rate in
 the OECD area, we have a very high level of business investment. And
 there are many other economic achievements of which I could speak.
But I mention those things very briefly because they provide the context
 for what we have done in relation to taxation. Taxation is part of
 that economic continuum. It's not something that is unrelated
 to what we have done in other areas. It's all part of a steady
 measured plan to strengthen and make modern the Australian economy,
 to equip the Australian economy for the 21st century.
Now, I would be the last person in Australia to in any way under-sell
 or under-describe the scale of the taxation plan that was unveiled
 yesterday. It is, without argument, the most comprehensive reform
 proposed to the Australian taxation system since World War II. It
 is built upon a belief that we need a modern taxation system for the
 21st century. It is not just a goods and services tax,
 although that's an element. It's not just a revamping of
 the Commonwealth / State financial relations, although that is an
 element. It does not just involved major reductions in personal income
 tax, that is also an element. But when you put it all together it
 represents as a plan the investing in the Australian community of
 an enormous amount of additional incentive to not only work harder
 but to save and to invest.
Let me quote just one example of what I mean by that. You read a lot
 in the newspapers of a thing called bracket creep. Now bracket creep
 is where you earn a bit more but because of inflation you get sucked
 into a higher tax bracket. But one of the particular features of this
 tax package, is that between the income of $20,000 a year and the
 income of $50,000 a year, and let me remind this audience that 80
 per cent of wage and salary earners in Australia are at or below $50,000
 a year, so when you talk about $50,000 a year, you are talking about
 the overwhelming bulk of our fellow Australians. I think it's
 important to keep these proportionalities in mind.
Now under this plan, you will be able to pass from $20,000 a year
 to $50,000 a year and that would be the experience of the great bulk
 of Australians during their working lives, and you won't go into
 a higher tax bracket. Because what we have done is to introduce what
 is effectively a marginal rate of 30 cents in the dollar for everybody
 earning up to $50,000. Now that may not mean much to some people,
 but can I say in terms of incentive it means an enormous amount to
 the great bulk of our fellow Australians. How often do you hear the
 complaint from some of your employees that it's not worth doing
 some extra overtime because the tax man takes half of it. But what
 you can now say to him or her that the tax man will only tax 30 cents
 at most if the top income is over $50,000.
Now, I dragged that out of the myriad detail of the package to drive
 home the point that this is very much a taxation reform for middle
 Australia. We have devised tax scales for families for middle Australia
 and for the Australian battlers. And I am quite unashamed about that.
 Because they are the people who need help. They are the people who
 deserve reassurance and they are the people who can be easily frightened
 by a dishonest fear campaign about the operation of the goods and
 services tax.
I know that in an audience such as this, I probably don't need
 to extol the fundamental virtues for business of a goods and services
 tax. But let me nonetheless remind you of some of the benefits of
 it that are perhaps over looked because they're taken for granted.
 I mean every single business operator in Australia because of the
 way in which a GST operates will find that the cost of fuel will fall
 by 7 cents a litre, because the way we've structured the fuel
 taxes is that you'll reduce the excise on fuel by the necessary
 amount to allow in the 10 per cent GST so that there is no increase
 in the pump price for any person who purchases fuel. And because the
 GST is fully rebatable on your business inputs, the net effect of
 that, of course is, that you end up that your fuel, and this has got
 nothing to do with your fuel concessions which I will come to in a
 moment, but because of the way in which the system works, you end
 up with a 7 cent reduction a litre in a the cost of all the fuel that
 is used.
We have calculated that the introduction of the new system will reduce
 the operating costs of Australian business by about $10,000 million
 a year because of your capacity to recover tax payed on business inputs.
 We've also calculated that it is going to reduce the cost of
 exports by in the order of $4.5 billion a year. Now at a time when
 Australia must more than ever trade successfully abroad, I can't
 think of a more beneficial generic gift to the Australian economy
 than a $4.5 billion reduction in the costs of burdening exporters.
We calculated the overall cost reduction for Australian business will
 be in the order of 3.5 per cent. We believe that there are very significant
 cash flow benefits, particularly for small and medium sized firm.
 Any firm with a turnover of less than $20 million a year will be only
 required to remit on a three monthly basis. And that will represent
 on average that the amount of the GST collected by those firms will
 be held on an interest free basis for a period on average of 66 days.
 Now that does represent, particularly when compared with the existing
 arrangements in relation to wholesales sales tax, which have frequently
 been criticised, that represents a very significant improvement so
 far as the cash flow situation is concerned.
There will, of course, be a one off price impact of the introduction
 of the goods and services tax. Some prices will go up, some will go
 down. A South Australian audience will know that one of the important
 prices for Australians that will go down, will be the price of the
 family motor car. And that is certainly going to fall very significantly.
 And there will be transitional measures introduced so that the abrupt
 drop in the price of things like cars will not occur so that there
 will be an adverse effect, expectation wise, in the operations of
 that industry. And I think the transitional arrangements that we're
 going to propose in that area will be of very, very considerable benefit.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is one of those once in a lifetime opportunities
 that a Prime Minister or a government has to put down a plan that
 has a long-term, visionary, positive impact for the benefit of the
 country. And the greatest enthusiasm I have for this plan, the greatest
 passion I have for it, the greatest commitment I have for it, is not
 born out of a narrow political context, it is born out of a deep personal
 belief that if this plan can win the support and the approval of the
 Australian people, it will be of lasting benefit and it will deliver
 lasting improvement to our entire nation.
And that is why I ask you to give it your very strong and your very
 active support. Of course it is a mixture of economic vision, of economic
 reform and economic improvement and political judgement. There has
 never been a successful reform plan put to the Australian people or
 any other country in the democratic world that isn't a mixture
 of the two. Anybody who tries to sell pure economic theory is doomed
 to rejection. And anybody who simply operates on the basis of political
 advantage and political expediency deserves to be repudiated by the
 public. And what you need is a sensible amalgam of the two.
And what I think, and I direct these remarks particularly to a Liberal
 supporting audience, and what we now have on the Australian political
 scene, we have a government, a Coalition Government, that has been
 willing to tackle some of the fundamental areas that have needed change.
 We've encountered some barriers along the way. We've encountered
 opposition. We have been grievously hamstrung by the fact that we
 don't control the Senate. We have had the Labor Party and the
 Australian Democrats and others in the Senate throwing dirt in the
 face of the Australian people in terms of rejecting for which they
 voted at the last election. But despite that we have continued on
 our reform path. And the greatest example of that reform path, is
 of course the plan that was unveiled yesterday. And the response of
 the Opposition has even been by the standards of automatic opposition
 in Australian political history, particularly pathetic and particularly
 negative. I thought Mr Beazley's response yesterday was even
 uninspired in its negativism. To say that something was the most unfair
 thing that has ever been dumped on the Australian public, when even
 some of the Government's other strident critics have at least
 been willing to acknowledge that there is some merit in it was a,
 I think, a particularly pathetic demonstration of automatic knee-jerk
 opposition from the Opposition.
He knows, Gareth Evans knows. The former Labor Prime Minister, Mr
 Keating knew, Mr Hawke knew. Anybody who has had any acquaintance
 with the way this country operates in Government knows that we can't
 go on forever with the existing taxation system. And sooner or later
 we have got to change it. And how better than to try and change it
 than from government. How better to do it than to lay the plan out
 before the election, to involve people in it, to involve the States,
 to bring them into the process, to offer them part of the action and
 part of the reform and part of the change and to involve the entire
 Australian community in the process and government is, in the end,
 about taking the right decisions for the future. It is not just about
 staying in government, comforting and nice as that may be, and much
 in all as we'd like it to occur, in the end you are elected to
 take decisions that are good for the country's future and that's
 what we've tried to do.
 When we came into office we took some decisions in getting the
 budget back into balance which some people didn't like. But I'm
 glad, I really am glad we took all of those decisions, every last
 one of them, because given what has happened in Asia I'd rather
 be in the black a year ahead of time than lagging behind against what
 is now occurring.is what we've tried to do.
When we came into office we took some decisions in getting the budget
 back into balance which some people didn't like. But I'm
 glad, I really am glad we took all of those decisions, every last
 one of them, because given what has happened in Asia I'd rather
 be in the black a year ahead of time than lagging behind against what
 is now occurring. Yet, if we had listened to Mr Beazley, we'd
 have read some of our press critics and listened to them and listened
 to some others in the community, we would have soft pedalled on getting
 the budget back into surplus. I think if we'd have done that
 we'd have now been more vulnerable and more exposed to what has
 happened in the Asia-Pacific region.
And that is why it's so important that we push ahead with this
 taxation plan. You can't muck around if you're going to
 have reform. People argued we should have left more things out. The
 old dictum about taxation is that if you're going to change it,
 the broader the base the lower the rate. If you start leaving food
 out, then somebody will want clothing left out. If you leave that
 out, you'll want something else left out and then it really isn't
 worth doing at all. And the best way to deal with low income earners
 in the Australian community is to give them adequate compensation
 through the social security and the taxation system and that is what
 we've done because one of the many outstanding elements of this
 package is that we have embraced some quite fundamental reform of
 the social security system. We have given low income earners more
 incentive to work rather than to stay on benefits. We have altered
 the taper rates, we've increased the levels at which welfare
 benefits begin to phase out, because under the existing arrangements
 there are some family groupings who find it hardly worthwhile being
 in work because the level of social security benefits are so high
 and those sorts of incentives to stay out of the workforce are bad
 policy and they're bad for our society.
So it's a plan, ladies and gentlemen, which is not just about
 taxation. It certainly not a plan which is just about a goods and
 services tax. It fundamentally changes the way our taxation system
 operates. It is of enormous ongoing benefit to the business community,
 it will operate more efficiently and more fairly than the present
 system, it does contain major personal tax cuts and they are quite
 deliberately skewed in favour of those who have the responsibility
 of raising children and I make no apology for that, in fact, it's
 one of the proud features so far as I am concerned, of this policy.
It also brings back something that many Australians believe should
 never have gone and that is for most Australians effective full tax
 deductibility of private health insurance premiums. And that measure
 is available free of income tests and anybody, irrespective of income,
 will be able to claim either through their tax system or by way of
 a direct payment from the government 30 per cent of their health insurance
 premiums.
And the final thing that I'd particularly like to mention is,
 of course, that this plan is of special benefit, not in an unreasonable
 way, but quite importantly, given the significance of it to the national
 economy, this plan is of particular benefit to the bush or country
 Australia or rural Australia or whatever definition one might like
 to use because the changes that we propose in the area of excise on
 diesel, not only have we maintained and slightly extended the full
 rebate in relation to off-road use of diesel, but we have also introduced
 what is effectively a reduction of 25 cents a litre from 43 down to
 18 cents a litre in relation to heavy transport and rail use of diesel
 and when you combine that with the fact that every business in Australia
 will be able to buy all of their fuel effectively 7 cents a litre
 cheaper, it all adds up to something like a $3.5 billion reduction
 in fuel costs throughout Australia.
Now, not surprisingly, that's a very special benefit to rural
 Australia and deservedly so, because the cost of transportation bears
 very heavily on people who live in the non metropolitan areas of Australia
 and I said last night, and I will repeat it here today, that I can't
 wait for Monday to come when I can get to Queensland, and I can start
 pointing out to the people of Queensland  which is not only
 a large State but also the most decentralised State in Australia 
 that in relative terms it will probably gain more and the people of
 Queensland will gain more from that diesel fuel change than any other
 part of Australia.
And how on earth the new Premier of Queensland, Mr Beattie, can keep
 a straight face in opposing the government's plan is completely
 beyond me.
My friends, this has been a very important week in the life of the
 government. It's been a week in which the government has kept
 face with the commitment that I made on its behalf when it was elected
 and that is that we would govern for all Australians. Only the blinkered
 and the mean-minded and those of narrow understanding could possibly
 argue that the tax package delivered yesterday was a package for the
 rich or a package for the privileged.
It was a plan and a package for all Australians. First and foremost,
 it's given to the country the prospect and the hope of a taxation
 arrangement that will boost the economic growth of the country and
 generate more jobs. It's offered the Australian people a tax
 plan for the 21st century. It proposes to sweep away a
 ramshackle, unfair, inefficient, lopsided indirect tax system and
 replace it with a modern, comprehensive one.
It offers the biggest personal tax cuts in decades. It offers a radical
 and beneficial overhaul of Commonwealth/State relations and will at
 long last deliver to the States of the Australian federation an arrangement
 to which they have long been entitled, but equally long denied.
And most importantly of all, it offers to the Australian people the
 next necessary building block in further strengthening our economy
 against the difficult years that lie ahead, particularly in our part
 of the world.
 It is a comprehensive plan. It's an integrated plan, it's
 not one that can be subject to a process of put and take which undoubtedly
 our opponents will endeavour to do. I don't underestimate the
 challenge ahead of me and ahead of the government in explaining and
 advocating and winning support for the plan. It's had a good
 response  of course it has. It's early days and all of
 us who believe in it and all of us who want tax reform for Australia,
 let me say one thing to you. This is the best opportunity this country
 has had for fundamental tax reform at any time since I have been in
 politics, and that goes back to 1974.
I saw attempts in the last 1970's  I was part of them.
 I was part of attempts in the early 1980's, I watched the former
 Labor government try it in the mid 1980's, I was part of the
 Opposition in 1993 that tried it then. Now all of those attempts have
 failed. This attempt, I believe will succeed. It will succeed because
 I think the economic and political balance in this plan is better
 than any that have been offered in the past. It will succeed because
 it is being offered from the vantage point of government. It will
 succeed because I think there is a greater understanding in the Australian
 community now that we do need tax reform and I think it will also
 succeed because there is a sense in the Australian community if we
 don't achieve it this time, it's going to allude us in the
 lifetime of most people in this room.
But having said all of those things, it remains a very very big challenge.
 And if you want it, if the business community of Australia wants it
 and supports it, we need your help energetically to go out and advocate
 the cause of taxation reform. Because it does matter to all of you,
 you all benefit but most importantly, our country benefits and the
 great single justification for this plan above all other plans is
 that it will be good for the entire nation. I have always believed
 that if you can persuade the Australian people of two things in relation
 to a reform  the first is that it's good for Australia
 and the second thing is that it's fair to them  then they
 will embrace it and they will support it.
And I believe that this plan meets those two criteria and I believe
 it will be good for Australia, it will be fair to all Australians
 and I ask you to give it your very strong and active support. Thank
 you.
A couple of questions. Any questions? Yes?
QUESTION 1:
(inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
He wants to know how I am going to make him pass on the price cuts,
 is that right? Well, now that you've tempted me, I, well we have,
 there are a number of ways in which that will occur. The first and
 most obvious one is that when this new plan comes into operation,
 there will be a very finely-tuned and heightened sense of individual
 scrutiny on the part of every consumer in Australia. They will all
 know, they will have their lists and if I know the media of Australia,
 they will publish before and after prices. I think you will find the
 Tiser' and the Telegraph' and
 the Melbourne Sun' will have lists. One on the 30th
 of June 2000, showing the prices of all the things you buy pre-GST
 and the prices of what they ought to be afterwards and I think a lot
 of Australians will carry those lists around, that's the first
 comment I'd make. Second comment I make is that the natural forces
 of competition will work to ensure it happens and I hear a lot of
 men and women in business tell me these days that the competitive
 pressures have never been as strong. I understand that. And thirdly,
 we are going to invite the ACCC to adopt a surveillance role and to
 invest it with some authority in relation to that to ensure that the
 full measure of the changes that ought to occur, do in fact occur.
 Now, there will be some in the community who will try and behave in
 an unscrupulous fashion, they won't have any sympathy from us,
 they won't h


E&amp;OE.................................................................................................
Thank you very much Dr Aurora. To my colleagues, Philip Ruddock,
   the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, to Senator
   Rod Kemp, to Mrs Leonie Bourke, to Mr John Thwaites, other distinguished
   guests, ladies and gentleman. 
It is a real delight for me to share this very special occasion
   with representatives and members of the Indian community of Australia.
   It commemorates, of course, that great day in the sub-continent's
   history when two nations were made out of one and since then the
   association between Australia and India in particular, but also
   of course between Australia and Pakistan and Bangladesh, has taken
   many forms. You were right to remind us, Dr Aurora, of the very
   close links that Australia has with India. We have great links of
   history and it is often not appreciated by many Australians just
   how many Australians and Indians have fought together in theatres
   of battle over the years stretching back to our common participation
   in World War I. And I was reminded of this a few months ago when
   I led the pilgrimage to Hellfire Pass in Thailand and opened the
   museum there which commemorates the contribution of those Australians
   who died in captivity in World War II. And, of course, as this audience
   will know, there were many many thousands of Indians who also died
   in captivity fighting along side the Australians during that particular
   conflict. 
India, of course, is the world's largest democracy. It is
   built upon one of the world's most important and richest cultural
   heritage. Australia and India share the common membership of the
   Commonwealth. We share the common historical association which went
   before the Commonwealth. We share many other things that Australians
   of different backgrounds love, not least of those of course is our
   common affection for that wonderful game of cricket. And of course
   there are few sports that uniquely bind a limited number of countries
   together quite like the game of cricket, and it continues to have
   a romance and a fascination for the people of the sub-continent
   in a very very particular way. And, of course, it was on the visit
   of the famous Indian team, led by Lala Amarnath in 1947-48 that
   the famous Sir Donald Bradman scored his hundredth hundred in first-class
   cricket. And I said this afternoon in an interview that I recorded,
   that is frequently said that the two bets known Australian names
   on the Indian sub-continent are those of Bradman and Border. 
But of course the bonds between our two countries go beyond those
   of sport, important though those links may be. We've had official
   representation as a nation in India since 1944, three years before
   your independence. And there have been increased opportunities for
   commercial links between our two countries over the years. The past
   decade has seen businesses, ministerial, Parliamentary, and official
   level contact grow and the inauguration of the Australia South Asia
   Research Centre at the ANU in Canberra. 
When the Government I lead came to office we had a commitment to
   improve and strengthen the relations between our two countries.
   We launched a major promotion of Australia in India in 1996 called
   "Australia-India : New Horizons", and it was the
   largest trade cultural promotion ever mounted by Australia overseas
   involving a range of business science, technology, education, cultural
   and sporting events in six major Indian cities. And we followed
   up by nominating 1997 as the year of south Asia. Our total trade
   is now $2.3 billion and we expect that to double over the next five
   years. There are 100 joint ventures between Indian and Australian
   companies in areas as diverse as banking and telecommunications,
   minerals and food processing. There are over 5,500 Indian students
   studying in Australia at the present time and Australia is the most
   favoured destination for Indian students after the United States.
   And that, of course, bodes very well for future contact between
   our two countries because the links between people are the most
   important expression of the links between nations. 
You mentioned the nuclear tests and, of course, as a nation we
   oppose those tests and we expressed our disappointment at the time
   and the basis of that disappointment is well understood. Of course
   we were speaking then as the Australian Government on behalf of
   all Australians irrespective of their background. And, of course,
   our concern about those tests in no way affected the attitude of
   Australia or the Australian Government and the Australian people
   towards the Indian community within our midst. And it does not,
   in any way, diminish our commitment to build a strong relationship
   between our two countries. 
There are now some 160,000 people of Indian origin including those
   born in Australia with either one parent of both born in India.
   And it is a very long established community within the Australian
   nation. And I want, on behalf of the Government, to express my admiration
   for the contribution that Australians of Indian descent have made
   to the development of our country over a long period of time. I
   want to express, on behalf of my Government, the great respect for
   the very strong commitment to the common concerns and the common
   values of the Australian community that people of Indian descent
   have always demonstrated. 
You do have a very high level of naturalisation. You are first
   and foremost good Australians. Australians who love our country
   and love our values. But fully consistent with that you have retained
   a natural affection for your Indian origins. And a natural affection
   for the customs and the culture of India. And that is something
   the rest of us understand and respect and support. One of the great
   virtues of this country is its enduring tolerance. Australia is
   the best example of how different races can live in harmony that
   one can find anywhere in the world. 
Yesterday, Mr Ruddock, on behalf of the Government launched our
   campaign, Living in Harmony. It can be described as an anti-racism
   campaign. I think more positively speaking it can be described as
   a campaign to promote and reinforce tolerance and harmony within
   our community. Discrimination against any person on the basis of
   race, religion, national origin, or ethnicity, is absolutely abhorrent
   to my Government. It is absolutely unacceptable in a society that
   values the human decencies and places a store on the importance
   of individual liberty and individual freedom. 
And it is very important that we never lose sight of just how successful
   Australia has been in absorbing people from so many parts of the
   world. Something in the order of 150 different countries have in
   their various ways been tributaries to what is now the modern Australian
   stream. And those countries have all made a contribution, and the
   people from them have all made a contribution to building the modern
   Australia. And we should never be reluctant as a community to say
   to the world that not only have we been a tolerant country that
   we have been more successful than most in playing out and demonstrating
   that tolerance within our midst. And it is incumbent upon all of
   us, incumbent upon me as Prime Minister, incumbent upon the members
   of my Government, incumbent upon all sections of the Australian
   community to condemn and denounce intolerance whenever it occurs.
   But the best way that we can repudiate discrimination, the best
   way that we can abhor intolerance, is to demonstrate in a positive
   way our capacity to live in harmony one with the other. To salute
   the special days, the special traditions and the special values
   of different groups within our community, but equally at all times
   to demonstrate those common things that bind us together as Australians.
I have frequently said that one of the most important things we
   should remember as Australians is that the things that unite us
   are infinitely greater and more enduring than the things that divide
   us. And this country has been a remarkable demonstration to the
   world of a capacity to absorb people of so many different backgrounds
   in a harmonious and a peaceful way. 
You mentioned in your speech Dr Aurora the views of the leader
   of the One Nation Party. Can I say in relation to what you said
   that I think that those who violently demonstrate against that particular
   party and that particular person may in fact be behaving in a counter-productive
   fashion. I think violent demonstrations of any kind are unacceptable
   and offensive to the Australian community, and I think it is very
   important that all of us remember that the most effective repudiation
   of an attitude that you find unacceptable is a repudiation based
   on offering something better to the Australian community and repudiation
   based on demonstrating your superior values of tolerance and understanding
   and harmony. 
Tonight, I want on behalf of the Government to salute the contribution
   of the people of Indian descent, to our nation. I want to assure
   all of you that one of the great common threads of the Australian
   identity is respect for people individual values. This country of
   course has been built on migration. Those who were born overseas
   and have chosen Australia as their land are as much part of the
   Australian community as those of use who were born here. And that
   is irrespective of your country of origin or your racial background.
   This country is as much yours as it is mine. Its values are as much
   yours as they are mine and its future is something that all of us
   share together. And that can be a very bright and very positive
   future. It can be a future built on the common strands of Australian
   life of democracy, of respect for the rule of law, of respect for
   the rights of individuals, of the equality of men and women, a rejection
   of class distinction, a reaffirmation of the need to care for the
   more vulnerable within our community, an abhorrence of all forms
   of division or discrimination based on race and ethnicity. And a
   common commitment, irrespective or our differences on other issues,
   to the progress and the advancement of the Australian nation. 
We have much to celebrate as Australians. We have much to be proud
   of as Australians. We should say to the rest of the world as a united
   community that we are defiantly proud of what Australia has achieved
   and what Australia represents in terms of tolerance and understanding
   of difference within a united community and united nation. 
I thank you very warmly Dr Aurora for your welcome. I thank members
   of the association for asking me here tonight. Your president has
   explained that in the nature of things, I am moving onto another
   function shortly, but I am very very pleased that I have been able
   to come to both functions and on behalf of the Australian Government
   to honour again the commitment of people of Indian descent to our
   nation. To mark the independence on the 15th of August
   in 1947, in very dramatic and in many cases tragic circumstances,
   of two great nations out of the form of the Indian sub-continent
   which ultimately, in 1971, became three. Thank you again for being
   such wonderful Australians. Let us all live together in harmony
   and tolerance and understanding. Thank you.


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Mr Brooks; to my colleagues, Gary Nairn and Bill
 Heffernan; to Peter Cochran, the State Member for Monaro; to Mr Finemore
 and to Mr and Mrs Rudd who've kindly made their premises available
 for this morning's gathering.
The most important thing about the Government's tax plan is really
 what was just said by Mr Brooks. It is a plan very much about the
 future of the entire country. It is not just a plan that involves
 a reduction in personal income tax. It's not just a plan that
 involves sweeping away the rotten, inefficient, old-fashioned, indirect
 tax system. It is not just about a plan that abolishes stamp duty
 on all sorts of instruments levied by State governments. It's
 not just a plan that gets rid of wholesale tax. It is, above everything
 else, a plan about delivering to Australia a better and more exciting
 economic future. It is an honest, comprehensive attempt to reform
 the Australian taxation system in a permanent and decisive way.
We've had many attempts in the past. People have fiddled at the
 edges with the Australian taxation system, but never before has a
 government presented such a comprehensive plan which goes into every
 aspect which needs change to reform the Australian taxation system.
The Australian public knows the system we now have is unfair. Overwhelmingly
 Australians say change the present system, and they don't want
 an attempt which simply offers something but doesn't attempt
 to reform the system. And those who want to win public support, in
 our view, have got to offer a comprehensive reform plan and not just
 a tax cut here, a change there. What the Australian community now
 wants, in the face of overwhelming evidence that the present system
 is really reaching the stage of unworkability, what the Australian
 public now wants is a fair, comprehensive change to the whole system.
 And that is what our plan announced last Thursday offers.
As you know, ladies and gentlemen, one of the most evocative phrases
 that has ever been coined about Australia was that phrase of our great
 historian, Geoffrey Blainey, when he spoke of the tyranny of distance.
 And he put that in the context of the Australian continent's
 distance from the rest of the world at the time and also the vast
 distances of our nation. And this tax plan tackles head-on the tyranny
 of distance within Australia represented by the enormous transport
 costs which affect the daily lives and the daily expenses of all Australians.
People ask how is it that if you're putting a 10 per cent GST
 on, how is it that supermarket and other costs may only rise, and
 all other costs may only rise across the board by something in the
 order of 1.9 per cent. Well, one explanation is that it's been
 estimated that 20 per cent of the cost of everything that is bought
 in a supermarket is represented by transport costs. And if there's
 one thing that this package addresses, and addresses in a full-blooded
 way, is the cost of transportation within Australia.
Transport costs feed into the cost of virtually every item that Australians
 buy in their daily lives. And this package, in a very comprehensive
 and sweeping way, completely reconstructs the cost elements of goods
 and services produced and delivered in Australia. To start with there
 is a reduction from 43 to 18 cents a litre in the excise on diesel
 fuel used in heavy transport including rail. There is the maintenance
 and extension of the exemption on the payment of excise on diesel
 used off-farm. And that is not only of benefit to the farmer but it's
 also of benefit to the ferry and pleasure craft operator in the tourist
 industry. It is of benefit in relation to the operating costs of power
 generators. It is of benefit to many other aspects of the operating
 costs of businesses throughout Australia.
But on top of that a perhaps, at this stage, little recognised and
 little understood characteristic of the tax plan is that it will reduce
 the costs of every litre of fuel used in any business, anywhere in
 Australia by seven cents. And that is because the excise on petrol
 will be lowered by the amount required to allow the GST to be applied
 so that the price at the pump doesn't go up and that amount that
 has got to be lowered by is seven cents. And now you'll be able,
 as a business operator because it's a GST, to be able to obtain
 a full rebate of the GST that you pay on petrol because it's
 an input cost to the operating costs of your business.
So every single business in Australia will find that the net cost
 of fuel is reduced by seven cents a litre and that is over and above,
 over and above, the particular changes that are made in relation to
 the cost of diesel, the excise on diesel in heavy transport, rail
 and those other uses.
Now, the impact of this on country Australia, the impact of this on
 the bush, is enormous. It will flow through every part of the cost
 structure of regional Australia. It will represent the biggest single
 injection of change to bring about a reduction of the operating costs
 of businesses in rural and regional Australia that any government
 has ever offered. And it is on top, of course, of the significant
 reductions in interest rates which have been enjoyed by businesses
 and farmers throughout Australia over the last two-and-a-quarter years.
Now, of course, I hasten to add that, as in common with all other
 sections of the Australian community, people operating businesses
 and farms within rural and regional Australia will also enjoy the
 benefits and will also enjoy the credits that are involved in our
 planned changes to the personal income tax scales.
But the significance to the transport industry of these changes is
 quite historic. They will bring about a reduction of something like
 six to seven per cent in the costs of transport throughout Australia.
 And that applies whether you're in the bush or whether you're
 in the metropolitan areas of Australia. But it stands to reason that
 those parts of Australia which require the transportation over long
 distances of goods from one point to another will obviously gain,
 in proportionate terms, much more than other parts of the Australian
 community.
And I have, in the 24 years that I've been in Parliament, I've
 been in receipt of almost consistent complaints from people who live
 in country areas of our nation about the additional costs that they
 have to pay because goods have got to travel longer distances before
 they are put into production activity or they are consumed. And what
 this particular part of the tax plan does, ladies and gentlemen, is
 to deliver a very, very heavy blow in favour of reduced costs. It
 delivers more through reduced cost structure for regional and rural
 Australia than any other particular measure that any government has
 offered since World War II. And the benefits to the Australian economy
 of that are enormous. And they're not benefits that are limited
 to rural Australia. They are enormous export benefits.
One of the features of this plan is that it will reduce the annual
 cost of Australian exports by an estimated $4.5 billion. It will reduce
 the total costs of Australian business by an estimated $10 billion.
 Because I have to stress again and again that what you will now get
 under this plan if you run a business, is a capacity to get a full
 rebate of tax paid on your input costs. Whereas under the existing
 ramshackle wholesale tax system there are some rebates in relation
 to manufacturers inputs but there are many things that you have to
 buy in order to produce your goods on which you pay wholesale tax
 of up to 22 or 32 per cent and you don't get any of that back
 from the taxation department by way of a rebate. But that will all
 be swept away, and under the new plan the 10 per cent that is paid
 will be fully rebateable because it is paid on an input to your business
 activity, and that is the great virtue for business and therefore
 for the Australian economy of having a GST instead of the existing
 wholesale taxes.
And there is no way that any alternative plan can deliver those $10,000
 million of savings for business or those $4.5 billion savings for
 our export industry without the introduction of a broad-based goods
 and services tax. You can't stand up and say to the Australian
 people: we want to reduce business costs but we won't have a
 GST. You have to face the moment of truth. You either are serious
 about taxation reform or you want to fiddle at the edges. You either
 want to say to the Australian people: we will give you tax relief
 with reform or we will try and kid you that we can give you tax relief
 without reform. Well, that option is no longer available and the Australian
 people will, I believe, understand that in the weeks ahead. And I'm
 sure that the transport industry understands the enormous value to
 their business and the enormous business to Australia of us being
 able to offer this kind of sweeping change to their cost structure.
The last thing I want to say, ladies and gentlemen, is that the plan
 I announced on the Government's behalf last Thursday is not something
 that stands out there alone, it is the next necessary step in making
 our country stronger. It's the next essential step in making
 our country more competitive and it is the next necessary step in
 ensuring that we have the best possible protection against the impact
 of the Asian economic downturn.
In the two and a quarter years we've been in office we've
 turned the deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus of $2.7 billion.
 We've produced the lowest interest rates in 30 years. We've
 generated 300,000 more jobs. We've created economic conditions
 that have the lowest inflation rate in the industrialised world and
 a historically high level of business investment. Our opponents who
 left us with that huge deficit have simultaneously said that we shouldn't
 have got the budget into surplus but they are, at the same time expressing
 or shedding crocodile tears about the preservation of that surplus.
We have the runs on the board in terms of economic management and
 what we're offering to the Australian public with this tax plan
 is not a gimmick, is not just a tax handout without reform but a genuine,
 long-term, for the future of Australia, restructuring of our taxation
 system. And if I wanted the Australian people to have one view and
 one view alone of our tax plan, I would want them to see it as an
 attempt, for the sake of Australia, to give this country, for the
 long-term, for the 21st Century, a taxation system that
 recognises the nature of the Australian nation, the size of the Australian
 nation, the distances to be traveled within the Australian nation,
 and a taxation system designed for all of us to produce a stronger
 and more economically viable Australia into the 21st Century.
 It's a great plan for Australia and for the sake of Australia's
 future, it deserves your support. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Mr Spence; to Sarah and Paul; to Elizabeth
   Grace, the Federal Member for Lilley; to my State colleague, Santo
   Santoro, principals, ladies and gentlemen. And particularly can
   I address some remarks to the final year students of Clayfield and
   Nudgee. 
Our youngest son is doing the equivalent examination within the
   New South Wales system, the Higher School Certificate, and is in
   the midst of his trials so I feel for you, I also feel for your
   parents. And I have some experience of what it is like and I wish
   you well. 
And can I particularly thank those who entertained us. And can
   I join Mr Spence in congratulating those Australian families who
   have demonstrated the unwavering tolerance of the Australian community
   towards people of all races and all cultures. It is one of the distinguishing
   characteristics of modern Australia that we have been so receptive
   to people from all around the world and nothing angers me more when
   I hear people selling short the willingness of Australians to be
   tolerant and to be accepting of different races and different cultures.
   We are amongst the most tolerant, open people in the world and we've
   had a marvellous demonstration this afternoon of that in practice.
And I would also like to particularly commend Mr Young and Drug-Arm
   for its involvement in putting together this afternoon's gathering.
   Because a few months ago I had the opportunity to launch, in one
   of Brisbane's best known churches, the second installment of
   our Tough on Drugs' campaign under the auspices of Drug-Arm.
   And on that occasion the forum was marvellous and the event brilliantly
   organised and this afternoon is no exception. 
But this afternoon I'm here to say a few words in general
   about the tax plan that I launched on behalf of the Government last
   Thursday with particular reference to its impact on Australian families.
Can I first of all say that the most important thing and the most
   important reason why I hope the Australian public supports what
   the Government is putting forward is not because of the personal
   income tax cuts, not because of the goods and services tax, not
   because of this or that element of the plan, but rather that the
   plan as a whole is in the long-term benefit of Australia and of
   Australian families. And the plan is in the long-term benefit of
   Australia because it is going to make the Australian economy more
   productive and more competitive and because of that we are going
   to generate more jobs and sell more goods and services abroad and
   compete more effectively against imports from abroad. 
And the reason that that comes about is that the essential reform
   of the taxation system that is involved in the plan, and that is
   the sweeping away of the existing wholesale tax system and no less
   than nine State and Territory taxes that are very inefficient, and
   their replacement with a single rate goods and services tax will
   bring about a major reduction in the production costs which are
   involved in producing goods and services within the Australian economy.
   And if I leave but one or two thoughts with you this afternoon 
   and I hope to do better than that  can I leave with you that
   simple thought, that the fundamental reform involved in this plan
   will make the Australian economy work more efficiently because it
   will lower the cost of production of goods and services. And that
   means we will be able to sell more competitively overseas and we'll
   be able to compete more effectively against imports. And that is
   the major reason why we are pressing ahead with this plan. And it's
   the major reason why we have foresworn the soft option of just offering
   a tax cut without offering tax reform because I don't think
   that, in the long run, is going to do any good for the Australian
   economy. You can always find an excuse for a tax cut. You need to
   have a long-term plan about the future of Australia to find the
   argument and the courage for fundamental reform of the system. 
And it is only fundamental reform of the system that is going to
   make the Australian economy work more efficiently. And there has
   to be a reason, my friends, as to why for almost every year of the
   24 years that I've been in Parliament, politicians on one or
   other and on occasions on both sides of politics have thought about
   the idea of reforming the tax system. I entered Parliament in 1974
   and the year before I entered Parliament there had been commissions,
   an inquiry into the Australian taxation system and it duly reported
   in 1975, and it was known as the Asprey Report  and some of
   you in the audience may remember that name and that report 
   and do you know what it recommended in 1975, 23 years ago, it recommended
   the introduction of the equivalent of a goods and services tax and
   it recommended that the goods and services tax should replace the
   wholesale tax and some other taxes and that its introduction should
   be accompanied by some reductions in personal income tax. And it's
   very interesting that for 23 years the debate has gone on and it's
   never gone away. And the reason it's never gone away is that
   the idea is right. And there's nothing more powerful in the
   world, whether it be politics or any other activity, than the force
   of an idea whose time has not only come but which is absolutely
   right and to the long-term benefit of the Australian community and
   the Australian economy.
So we are first and foremost in favour of this reform because it
   will be to the long-term benefit of the Australian economy. And
   if you hear people saying: well, it mightn't be a bad idea
   to reform the tax system but we really shouldn't do it right
   now because there's a downturn in the Asian Pacific region,
   could I say to those people, it's because there's a downturn
   in the Asian Pacific region that we must go ahead with the reform.
   Because the challenges from the outside world make it more necessary
   that we get our own house in order, that we reform the things that
   need to be reformed.
I am a politician who has a selective view, a deliberately selective
   view about change. I am in favour of change which is beneficial
   to our country's future. I am against change which is not beneficial
   to our country's future. I, for example, am strongly opposed
   to some of the more permissive views about drug taking within the
   Australian community. I favour a zero tolerance approach to drugs.
   I was against the heroin trial, very, very strongly opposed to the
   heroin trial. And that was an example of somebody standing against
   change that he regarded as bad. But by the same token, I am prepared
   to fight vigorously for change that I believe is good and I believe
   that changing our taxation system will make the Australian economy
   more efficient.
Now, we've taken particular care in putting this package together
   to give even greater recognition to the costs involved for Australian
   families in raising children. It is fundamental to this package
   and it is fundamental to my own personal, political philosophy that
   the most valuable and the most cohesive unit within the Australian
   community is the Australian family. It is not only the place from
   which people derive warmth and love and emotional support and companionship
   and guidance and understanding of what life is all about, but it
   is also, put in another context, it is also an undeniable fact that
   stable, united families represent the most efficient welfare system
   that any nation has devised, and that the strain on society and
   the strain on the welfare system of society of disintegrating families
   is immense. And it follows then from that that whatever any government
   can do through the tax and welfare system to help families and to
   relieve some of the financial burden on them and to provide them
   with more choices, then that government ought to do. 
Now, I don't pretend that any government can legislate to
   make families cohesive, that belongs to the human nature, the human
   spirit and individual behaviour. But governments can declare their
   support for families and they can devise taxation and welfare systems
   that support families. And I'm very proud of a couple of changes
   that we have made in our tax plan that particularly helps families.
The first of those changes is that we have recognised that one
   of the weaknesses of the present system is that the way the tax
   system and the social welfare system interacts, that there are very
   powerful disincentives for low income families to get off welfare
   and to get back into the workforce. And that many low income families
   in Australia face marginal tax rates with the interaction of the
   withdrawal of family benefits and the payment of taxation, as you
   move into the workforce, withdrawal rates of something like, at
   the margin, 85 per cent. 
So what we set out to do, amongst many things in the plan, was
   to remove or, at the very least, ease what are known in the trade
   as poverty traps. And that is situations where you might earn a
   little bit more money but because of the way in which the tax system
   worked and the welfare benefits were withdrawn, you would end up
   very little out of it. And we've got examples at the present
   time where you might earn $100 a week and you end up taking extra
   and you end up taking home only 15 out of that 100. Now, that is
   a ridiculous state of affairs. You're not paying a tax rate
   of 85 per cent but by the time you pay the tax on the extra income
   and you have the special family allowance subsidy withdrawn, that
   is the effective impact. So the first thing we set out to do for
   families was to do something about those poverty traps. And we have
   significantly increased the low income families, the point at which
   special social welfare benefits start to be withdrawn so that the
   marginal tax rates and the withdrawal rates are a lot less.
The second thing we set out to do was to provide Australian families
   with more choice about the caring arrangements of their young children.
   Now obviously attitudes towards family arrangements have changed
   over the years. There will always be debate within the Australian
   community about what are the best caring arrangements for young
   children and the role of Government and my own personal philosophy
   is that that should be a matter of individual choice for parents.
   It is not for the Government to say that every young child should
   be looked after full-time by either the mother or father of that
   child while the other parent is out at work, or alternatively that
   those children should be committed to full-time childcare.
I have my own views and those views are ones that I have practiced
   in relation to my own family and we certainly have no regrets at
   all for a moment about the choices that we made in relation to that.
   But I respect that in a free society it is for individual parents
   to make decisions and I also accept that it's going to vary
   from family to family. And what we have set out to do is to enlarge
   the choices that are available to recognise now that it is more
   often than not the case that women will wish to pursue careers as
   well as raising families.
I often say that the three women who have influenced my life the
   most - my mother, my wife and my daughter were all born in different
   stages of society's attitude towards these things. And that
   I often talk to my wife and daughter about the sort of family arrangements
   that used to exist, exist now and will exist into the future. And
   although they were born those three people who have profoundly influenced
   my life into different ages with profoundly different attitudes,
   there's been a common thread and the common thread is that
   each of them has as befits responsible members of their generation
   were very strongly committed to the bonds of family and the importance
   of family. And what we have sought to do in this package is by the
   changes we have made to improve the choices. Some people are running
   around and saying Howard wants women back in the kitchen, Howard
   has an old-fashioned view. Howard doesn't want women back in
   the kitchen, Howard does not have an old-fashioned view. Howard
   has a very contemporary view and the contemporary view is that we
   should respect individual choice and that just as we should no longer
   stereotype a particular pattern of family arrangement whereby the
   mother's ceased any participation in the workforce when children
   were born, equally we should not embrace this ideal that in some
   way it's an inferior role for a mother or father to be a full-time
   homemaker whilst children are young. And unfortunately the attitude
   of some in the community represents the swing of the pendulum from
   one side of the argument profoundly to the other which is quite
   unacceptable.
And what we have done is by the new taxation scales and the doubling
   of the tax-free threshold for single income families we have built
   a lot more choice within the taxation system. Under the plan I announced
   last Thursday it will, for example, be the case that a single income
   family with at least one child under five will have an effective
   tax-free zone of $13,000. And the new tax-free zone for a single
   taxpayer will be $6,000. So effectively that single income family
   with at least one child under five will have more than double the
   tax-free threshold of two single taxpayers in a similar situation.
   Now this doesn't represent turning back the clock, it hasn't
   been done at the expense of double income families. It is simply
   a small additional contribution towards evening up the financial
   position of families who may make different choices in relation
   to the caring arrangements for their children.
Let us take the case of two families, one which decides with say
   the husband having an income of $30,000 a year, the wife having
   an income of $20,000 a year that when the first child is born the
   wife decides to drop out of the workforce for a period of a year
   or two while that child is young and that family's income drops
   very dramatically from $50,000 to $30,000. Whereas the family next
   door with the same arrangement they decide to adopt a different
   approach with after a very short period of time the wife returning
   to work, the mother returning to work and the child being put into
   full-time childcare. Now if you look at the benefits that that family
   gets in relation to its childcare expenses and the aggregate of
   its two incomes with two tax-free thresholds then to suggest that
   the modest additional support that we are going to give to the first
   family by virtue of lightening its tax burden a little bit by giving
   it two and a bit tax-free thresholds, to suggest that the second
   family is disadvantaged to the profound benefit of the first family
   is to simply ignore the figures and to ignore the facts. And the
   figures and facts that I use and are very typical of literally hundreds
   of thousands of Australian families because the great bulk of Australian
   wage and salary earners earn less than $50,000 a year.
We have calculated that something like 60 to 70 per cent of wage
   and salary earners earn between $20,000 and $50,000 a year and we
   have calculated that if you look at all taxpayers something like
   81 per cent of them are less than $50,000 a year. So what we have
   tried to do is to fashion a series of tax changes and benefits which
   are designed to the maximum extent that we can and we don't
   pretend for a moment that in these changes we have made we will
   have given total choice to every family in the Australian community.
   We haven't been able to afford to do that. But we have tried,
   since we were elected to office, to alter the tax system to give
   a little bit more justice and a little bit more choice for those
   people who might decide that for them the desirable arrangement
   in relation to their children is that for a period of time either
   the mother or father is out of the full-time workforce. And then
   as the child or children grows a little older the one that is out
   of the workforce will re-enter on a part-time basis and then perhaps
   a number of years into the future when all of them are at secondary
   school she might return, or he, to the full-time workforce.
Now we are in the business of maximising that choice. We are not
   in the business of saying: you should do this or you should do that.
   And we are also not going to be intimidated against making these
   changes by the noise of some who see but the tiniest acknowledgement
   of the rights and the interests of single income families as some
   kind of attempt to turn back a 30 year social revolution. It is
   nothing of the kind. It is merely a recognition of the justice that
   should be within our taxation system and a recognition that if governments
   believe in the importance of family and they believe in the rights
   of parents, not only to choose the education they want for their
   children but also the caring arrangements that should exist in relation
   to their children, then we should be prepared to legislate through
   the tax system to provide that choice. Because before my Government
   came to office there was no special recognition or not much special
   recognition of the position of the single income family and the
   disabilities under which they operated. And through the introduction
   of the family tax initiative, we have recognised the, in an additional
   way, the cost for all families double or single income of the cost
   of raising children and through now the introduction effectively
   of one additional tax-free threshold we have gone some distance
   further in trying to redress the imbalance within the tax system
   against single income families. Now these sorts of issues always
   generate a fair amount of heat and often not a great deal of light
   because some of the people who write about them and some of the
   people who speak about them have their own political and social
   agendas to run. 
Can I say we are not in the business as a Government, nor am I
   in the business as the Prime Minister, of engaging in social engineering.
   What I am interested in doing is, first and foremost, expanding
   choices for Australian families and for Australian parents. All
   my political life I have supported choice in the education sector.
   I am a proud product of the State Government education system in
   New South Wales and I am very proud of the quality education that
   I received in that system. And I was not reluctant to send my own
   children to government schools at a primary level but to independent
   schools at a secondary level. But I have fought all of my political
   life for effective freedom of choice in education and I thought
   one of the great things that was done by my Liberal predecessor,
   Sir Robert Menzies, in the 1960s was to sweep away 100 years of
   prejudice and bigotry and to introduce government assistance to
   independent schools. And it remains one of the great legacies of
   Menzies to politics within Australia and one of the great contributions
   that that man made to greater tolerance and equality within the
   Australian community. 
And I am also very pleased that one of the first things that my
   new Government did in the education area was to abolish the former
   Government's new schools policy. And what that has meant is
   that there can now be more low fee paying independent schools and
   that the non-Catholic sector can establish a systemic arrangement
   for their schools in the same way that the diocesan Catholic system
   has been able to have in this country for a long period of time.
   Once again, it was a question of expanding choice within the Australian
   education system. Once again, a situation of saying to parents on
   modest incomes who wanted the opportunity to send their children
   to an independent school but couldn't afford to send them to
   a higher fee paying independent school, having the opportunity of
   doing so. But I couldn't for the life of me understand why
   the previous arrangements had discriminated against that. 
But ladies and gentlemen, I have digressed a little bit away from
   taxation in saying what I have just said about education. But can
   I say in relation to the tax plan that it is not just about personal
   income tax changes although they are very extensive. I might remind
   you in case you hear those who say that we're not taxing the
   rich but we are taxing the poor, nothing could be more wrong. The
   top marginal rate of tax remains at 47 per cent, although it doesn't
   cut in until $75,000. We have introduced some anti-tax avoidance
   arrangements which will mean that the abuse as distinct from the
   legitimate use of trusts will no longer take place in the future.
   We have cut the bottom rate of tax from 20 per cent to 17 and we
   have increased the tax-free threshold from $5,400 to $6,000 and
   we have made the changes to the poverty traps that I have mentioned
   and we have introduced a number of special provisions in relation
   to pensioners and to self-funded retirees. And, very importantly,
   we have introduced a non-means tested 30 per cent tax rebate in
   relation to the cost of private health insurance. And that means,
   for example, if you have a $2,000 private health insurance policy
   you will be able to get $600 of that back from the taxman or you
   will be able to claim a direct refund from a government office on
   production of the receipt for the payment of the premium. 
Now those sorts of benefits are important to all families irrespective
   of their arrangements. But the benefits of the plan for the broader
   economy, of course, go beyond the family arrangements. The greatest
   benefit for business, as I said earlier, of this new plan is that
   their production costs will be lower. What is not understood by
   many in the community is that about half of the Wholesale Sales
   Tax that's collected at the moment comes from business. People
   who think they have wholesale tax exemptions for running their manufacturing
   businesses forget that the Wholesales Sales Tax applies to such
   things as the purchase of computers. People don't yet understand
   fully but they will over the weeks ahead that one of the huge benefits
   of the new plan is that every litre of petrol bought by a man or
   woman running a business in Australia will be seven cents cheaper
   under the GST plan, under the tax plan, than it is at present. And
   the reason for that is that we are reducing the excise on petrol
   down to the level necessary to accommodate the GST at 10 per cent
   without the price of the petrol at the pump going up. But because
   the 10 per cent is fully rebateable as a tax on a business input
   the cost of that petrol, litre of petrol purchased by the businessman
   falls by seven cents. 
Now, that is, in addition, my friends, to the huge benefit that
   will be derived largely by, but not only, by the bush, by country
   Australia as a result of the new arrangements concerning diesel.
   Everybody knows how big Australia is. Geoffrey Blainey's evocative
   phrase about the tyranny of distance may have been originally coined
   to describe the distance between Australia and Europe but it was
   quickly seen also as an apt description of the vast distances that
   Australians must travel. And nowhere more so is that relevant than
   here in the State of Queensland. Queensland is not only a big State
   but it is the most decentralised State in Australia. The majority
   of people don't live in Brisbane, whereas the majority of people
   in New South Wales live in Sydney and the majority of Victorians
   live in Melbourne. And that means that goods are transported more
   frequently over longer distances in Queensland than in any other
   State of Australia. That is why [inaudible] arrangement in relation
   to diesel fuel that cuts the excise from 43 cents a litre to 18,
   why that is such an enormous boom and why the maintenance of the
   full rebate of that 43 cents a litre excise in relation to off-road
   use for farmers and the like is of tremendous benefit. And what
   we are doing by that one single act...by those two acts rather,
   is to reduce fuel costs in Australia by $3.5 billion a year. And
   the only two other figures that I will give you is that the total
   effect of the plan will be to reduce the costs of expo


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
 Well thank you very much Mr McKenzie-Forbes. To my colleague
 Teresa Gambaro, who is the Federal Member for Petrie, to John Hodges
 over there who use to represent this electorate, and to the other
 directors, ladies and gentlemen.
It's an enormous pleasure for me to be here this morning. I'm
 often asked by people, as I travel around our wonderful country, what
 is the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia. And the
 best thing without doubt about being Prime Minister of Australia is
 that you have an opportunity virtually every day, wherever you might
 be, of meeting a different group of Australians -in their homes, in
 their local community, in their local retirement village, wherever
 it may be. And the remarkable thing is that every group is different.
 Every group has something new or different to tell you and something,
 quite often, a new or different piece of advice to give you and that
 is part of the process of the exchange that ought to go on between
 a Prime Minister and the people who he or she is elected to serve.
 And I do want to take the opportunity this morning of saying a few
 things to you about the plan we announced last week.
But before I do that I want to congratulate this retirement village
 and indeed I want to congratulate all of those associated with providing
 security, comfort, and a congenial living environment for Australia's
 senior people and senior citizens. I don't just say it because
 I'm addressing this audience but I'm very conscious that
 that age cohort of Australians who are represented here today have
 contributed so much to our country. The great bulk of you, at various
 ages, have lived through a war. Some of you through a depression.
 All of you through those years of post war reconstruction in Australia.
 And you've all contributed so much and you all held through those
 years to some constant enduring Australian values. And you've
 created the society that people of my age and younger have the great
 privilege of enjoying and I want to place on record my respect and
 appreciation for the generation of Australians that you represent
 and what you have done for our country.
And it's really doing something for our country which the tax
 plan I announced last week is all about. People have talked about
 this or that aspect of it but the most important thing about it is
 that it is designed to help Australia and to help Australian families.
 It is designed to make Australian stronger economically. It's
 designed to help Australia export more and if we export more we'll
 be more prosperous and we'll create more jobs. It's designed
 to give more choice and more help to Australian families, those particularly
 with young children. And it's got to be looked at as a whole.
 We all like getting benefits but you can't really have benefits
 without fundamental reform. The idea that there's a magic pudding
 that somebody can come along and carve up and hand out without having
 to sort of do anything to build and do anything to put it together
 is of course wrong. We build a house and we have the most comfortable
 room in it, the one we like to go to most frequently. But, of course,
 unless that house is built on sound foundations than it's not
 going to last for very long and the transitory comfort of that nice
 room is going to disappear.
Now there's been, understandably, a bit of focus on how this
 plan affects pensioners and self-funded retirees and I want to come
 to that in a moment. But before I do could I just emphasise that the
 most valuable thing about this plan is that it will, in a time of
 some difficulty around the world, the economies of Asia have turned
 down and that hasn't affected Australia too badly because we
 are now much stronger than we were. But what we therefore must do
 is to make ourselves even stronger. And some people are saying: well
 when you've got trouble overseas you shouldn't try and change
 anything. I say the reverse. I say because we have challenges overseas
 we must change certain things that will make Australia stronger and
 make Australia better. And the whole purpose of this plan is to give
 us a new and better taxation system to help the entire Australian
 nation, particularly our families. And I think everybody understands
 that the present system is really on its last legs. But the present
 system does need change. But we can't hope to go ahead, the whole
 country, unless we have a better and a reformed taxation system. And
 that's why we're doing it. We're not doing it for political
 advantage. Some people have said to me you shouldn't raise something
 like this perhaps a few months out from an election. But we are doing
 it because we believe very very genuinely and very sincerely that
 it will be good for our country. And I'm very personally committed
 to it because I believe in here that this is good for Australia and
 good for Australian families.
Now, like any other section of the community, pensioners and self-funded
 retirees will say: well if it's good for Australia that's
 good. But, not surprising, they say: well how does that affect our
 position? And there are ten ways in which...within this plan, there
 are ten particular ways in which protection is provided and benefits
 are provided for pensioners and self-funded retirees. To start with
 there is an up front, from the 1st of July 2000, increase
 in the pension and all other like benefits. And that 4% increase takes
 effect immediately on the 1st of July when the new plan
 comes into operation. And part of the guarantee in relation to that
 increase is that the pension will be permanently 1.5% above, 1.5%,
 the increase in the pension, 1.5% above any increase that will flow
 from price changes as a result of the introduction of a goods and
 services tax. And some of you will say the introduction of a goods
 and services tax will put everything up by 10%. It won't. And
 the reason why it won't put everything up by 10% is that a lot
 of things that now carry wholesale sales tax will come down in prices.
 There are a lot of things you buy like detergent and soaps, and other
 household items where there's a 22% wholesale sales tax. You
 pay 12% wholesale sales tax on some biscuits, on flavoured milk. You
 pay 32% when you buy a television or a video. You pay 22% when you
 buy a family motor car. Now all of those will disappear and therefore
 the price of many goods that you now buy will actually fall. Others
 will go up. But it's because some come down and others go up
 that it averages out, according to our calculations, at about 2%.
One thing a lot of people forget is that when they go to the supermarket
 everything they buy in the supermarket, 20% of the cost of that is
 attributable to transport. If fresh food, or canned food or anything
 is, it doesn't just materialise on the supermarket shelf, it
 has to be carried there. Now one of the big things about this plan
 is that transport costs are going to be cut very very significantly
 and they're going to be cut because the price of petrol for every
 businessman will fall by seven cents a litre, and on top of that we're
 going to give a very special big concession for the excise on diesel
 which is the fuel used by most large trucks to carry things around.
 And this is particularly important for Queenslanders because Queensland
 is a very big State and it's a very decentralised State. Queensland
 is the only State of Australia where the majority of people live outside
 the capital city. So therefore a change which helps to reduce the
 cost of carrying things around the State is particularly beneficial
 to Queensland because there is more long distance haulage involved
 in a decentralised State. That's a digression from the 4% increase
 in the pension but I think an important one to explain it. So that's
 the first thing.
The second thing is that for a long time now we've had a special
 rebate for older people so that no part of the pension will be taxed
 and we're going to increase that by $250 for a single person
 and $350 for a couple. And thirdly we're going to increase the
 pension free area, that's the amount of income you can have without
 the pension being affected, by 2.5%. Fourthly, when the pension does
 start to be withdrawn we're going to reduce the taper rate from
 50% down to 40%. In other words, instead of losing half for every
 dollar of private income, that's going to be reduced to 40%.
 There will of course, depending on your level of income, be reductions
 for all Australians over and above any special provision for older
 Australians there will be reductions in personal income tax. The tax
 free threshold is going to be lifted to $6000. The bottom rate is
 going to be cut from 20 down to 17%. And when you reach $20,000 of
 income the rate will be 30% and that will apply right through to $50,000.
 There will be no change at all in the tax rate between those two figures.
 And that means about 60 to 70% of all wage and salary earners will
 be able to, depending on their level of income, they will face a marginal
 rate of 30% or less and that is a huge improvement on the present
 situation.
The sixth thing that's of particular relevance to pensioners
 and self-funded reitirees that for every person 60 and over there
 will be savings bonus  a one-off tax fee payment of $1000 in
 relation to any investment income that you might have and that investment
 income will be very broadly defined to include things like superannuation
 and of course returns of dividends and interest savings and so forth
 from the bank. And that's available for everybody 60 years of
 age and over, pensioners and self-funded retirees. Then additionally
 for self-funded retirees who are of pensionable age or above there
 will be an additional $2000 one-off tax free bonus. And both of those
 payments will be fully available for people whose income is up to
 $20,000 and then it will phase out between $20,000 and $30,000.
Now the eighth benefit applies to those of you who may own shares
 in companies. You know there's been a system now for some years
 called imputation whereby the company is meant to pay the tax and
 then it sends the dividend to you on which there's a...sends
 you a franked dividend on which the company tax has been paid. Now
 there's a lot of retired people, there's a lot of people
 generally, where tax is deducted at, by the company at the company
 rate of 36%. But because their rate of tax maybe only 20% or some
 other figure below 36% at the margin they don't get the full
 benefit. Now what we're going to do is to change that and under
 the plan we're going to introduce what are called fully refundable
 imputation credits on shares. And it means that if the company pays
 the 36 and send you the rest and you're on a 17% rate or a 30%
 rate you'll get a refund from the tax man, a cheque from the
 tax man, that's always good, between the 17 and the 36 or the
 30 and the 36. And it will mean that people whose marginal rate of
 tax is below the company rate will get the full benefit of the imputation
 credit on the share.
Now there are two other things that I've left till the last because
 I think they are of particular importance and particular benefit to
 senior people. And they are the introduction, without an income test,
 so therefore it's available to anybody, of a 30% tax deduction
 or payment in relation to private health insurance. Now what this
 means is that if you've got a private health insurance policy,
 from the 1st of January next year, not from the 1st
 of July in the year 2000, but from the 1st of January next
 year, you'll be able to get 30% of that off either your tax or,
 if you want to get it earlier, you pay the premium you can go along
 to the Government office and they'll give you a cheque for the
 30%. Now if you've got a $2000 policy that will be worth $600.
 And the present arrangement, which is a lot more modest, will of course
 continue through to the end of this year and the new system will come
 into operation on the 1st of January next year. And that
 will be universally available. And at the present time the private
 health insurance subsidy the maximum if $450 and that's for families.
 It's a lower amount for couples and it's a lower amount
 still for singles. And this of course won't discriminate at all
 between those different people but obviously if you've got full
 family cover that's a bit more expensive and the amounts that
 you will get back will correspondingly be higher.
And the final thing of course that I wanted to mention is that part
 of the plan is to abolish in full provisional tax. And I know from
 my experience as a local member, I know from my experience as Treasurer,
 I know from my experience as Prime Minister, and I also know from
 my experience years ago as a provisional tax payer that provisional
 tax is one of those things that did irk a lot of people. And it always
 seemed that you were paying it a little bit ahead of time. You didn't
 like the tax man suggesting that there was an automatic increase in
 the amount of money you were going to earn from year to year and one
 of the things that we find we're able to do as a result of the
 changes that we've introduced is to abolish provisional tax.
Now I've taken some time ladies and gentlemen to go over some
 of the particular features of the plan that relate to pensioners and
 self-funded retirees. And I've done that because we spent a lot
 of hours and devoted a lot of time in trying to get the balance right
 because we are conscious that there is change involved in this and
 people are naturally entitled, when change occurs, to be reassured
 about the impact of that change on their own circumstances and that
 particularly applies to people who are relying on investments and
 who are relying on those investments to provide themselves with a
 secure environment.
Now one of the things any Government can best do to help provide a
 secure financial environement is to see that the level of inflation
 is kept as low as possible. I know that lower interest rates are not
 as good news for people relying on investments as they are for people
 paying off a home. I'm able to say when I go around Australia
 and I talk to home buyers, I'm able to say that under the Government's
 policies we have reduced interest rates to their lowest level for
 home buyers for 30 years. Now that's great if you're paying
 off. If you're investing and you're relying on the interest
 from that, well it's not so great. I understand that. And that
 is why we have gone to some trouble and taken some care to ensure
 that the changes that we are making, and I've listed many of
 them that have particular relevance to older Australians, those changes
 have been incorporated into the plan.
If I could just say one or two other general things and that is that
 any government, no matter what stage it may be and no matter what
 side of politics it may be, has a responsibility at various times
 of its existence to stand up in front of the public and say: we believe
 that something ought to be done for the long-term benefit of the country.
 When I entered Parliament in 1974, which is just, in May of 1974 when
 Mr Whitlam was half way through his term as Prime Minister, and a
 few months after a entered Parliament there was a report tabled which
 recommended a big change to Australia's taxation system and it
 was called the Asprey Report. Some of you may remember that name.
 It was chaired by a now deceased Supreme Court Judge of New South
 Wales. And you know what it reccommended? It recommended the introduction
 of a broad-based indirect tax. It recommended the abolition of the
 wholesale tax system. It recommended a whole lot of the changes that
 the Government has announced in the last few days. It recommended
 reductions in personal income tax, it recommended some other things.
 Not everything in the Asprey Report has been picked up by us but it's
 very interesting that 23 years ago this expert report that had been
 commissioned by the late Sir Billy Snedden who was Treasurer in the
 Liberal Government, had been delivered to Mr Whitlam as Labor Prime
 Minister and it recommended these things. And since then various people
 have tried to change the system. And the reason they've tried
 to change it is not because people enjoy changing things. I mean from
 a point of view of ease and comfort the simple thing to do is to not
 sort of change anything and just let things bubble along. The problem
 is that that's not always the best thing for the country. And
 the reason people have tried at various time to change it, I tried
 on a couple of occasions when I was Treasurer in Mr Fraser's
 Government. Mr Keating tried it when he was Treasurer in Mr Hawke's
 Government. Dr Hewson, as Leader of the Opposition, tried before the
 1993 election and we've come back and we're putting in forward,
 in a better form if I may say so, I hope with no immodesty, in a better
 form than any of those that who've gone before me. But the reason
 we've all tried is that deep down everybody knows that the present
 system has to be changed, on both sides of politics. And at various
 stages I can trawl through the records and I can find remarks made
 by Mr Beazley and Mr Evans and Mr Keating and Mr Hawke as well as
 myself and Dr Hewson and Mr Costello all saying that change is needed,
 reform is needed. And it's very tempting when you're a politician
 to say: we'll offer you the nice things without the reform. And
 I think you all know from your life's experience that it's
 never quite as simple as that.
So what we've tried to do on this occasion is put together a
 total plan that will, above everything else, be good for our country
 and good for Australian families. That's the most important thing
 about it. And if I wanted people to think one thing of it, I would
 want them to think that it was good for Australia and good for Australian
 families because that at the end of the day is the thing that unites
 all of us whether we vote Labor or Liberal or whatever our age is
 or whether we were born in this country or whether we adopted this
 as our country, and whatever our background may be, in the end we
 are bound together by a common love of our country and a common concern
 for our country's future. And that is the most important thing
 about this and that is the reason why I am personally so very committed,
 and we are putting it out for people to have a look at. We think it
 will provide plenty of protection and plenty of reassurance for retired
 people, for those on the pension. We believe it will be good for the
 economy, it will make our exports cheaper, it will make production
 costs for Australian businesses lower, it will therefore mean that
 more jobs can be generated, and it has had a very strong response
 from the business community, not because there are such enormous tax
 cuts for the business community, and in fact there are none. What
 there are for the business community are reductions in their costs,
 because now when business operates things, when you run a business
 you've got to pay taxes on many of your business inputs, simple
 things like computers, you've got to pay tax on them. Under this
 system you'd be able to get the tax, which will be at a lower
 rate back, because that's how a goods and services tax operates.
 There are a number items which are GST free. Doctors' bills,
 dentists' bills, prescription drugs  they are GST free.
 Childcare expenses, education expenses are GST free. And that means
 that you don't pay anything on them and the people who produce
 them can get a full refund of their input credits. And we calculate
 that the cost of, operating costs of doctors and childcare centres
 will in fact fall. Nursing home fees are GST and so are hostel charges,
 GST free. SO we have taken care to exclude from the GST those things.
 We have included food and clothing for the simple reason that if you
 leave out very big items like that, then other people will say why
 don't you leave something else out and you'll end up back
 with the present system which has become so unworkable. And providing
 you get the compensation right and providing you build in these other
 protections and benefits then all of that I think will work out for
 the benefit of the country.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have appreciated this opportunity and I thank
 you very very warmly for your patience and willingness to listen.
 It is my responsibility as Prime Minister to explain to you and to
 explain to millions of Australians why I think this is good for our
 country and for our country's families, and to direct my comments
 to areas that they particularly effect, because that is accountability
 in politics is all about. Now, I think this is a good plan for our
 country's future. I'm putting it out before the election
 so people so will know about it when they vote, whenever that may
 be. I don't want to be in a position of saying nothing about
 it before the election and then bringing it in afterwards, because
 that would be quite dishonest. And I want people to know exactly what
 I am going to do before the election so that they can make their judgment
 and I think if they consider the long term future of Australia and
 if they look at the way in which it effects them, then I believe,
 and I certainly hope that they will come to a very positive conclusion.
But whatever conclusion you come to, that is your perogative as an
 Australian and I will accept the judgment of the Australian people
 with the very best of grace and good will because I have an enormous
 regard for their common sense. So thank you very much, Sir, for inviting
 me along, and thank you very very much for listening and I look forward,
 over a cup of tea perhaps, of wandering around and chatting to you
 and answering any questions you have to put to me. But thank you,
 and good luck to all of you and it has been a very great privilege
 for me to have an opportunity of talking to you this morning.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE..............................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Mrs Barker. To my parliamentary colleagues
 Peter Lindsay, and Ian Macdonald, to the many other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen. Gee this is a terrific venue for a lunchtime
 meeting. It is absolutely magnificent and how marvellous it is to
 be here in Townsville and how marvellous it is to have an opportunity
 of saying a few words about the Government's taxation plan for
 the next century. There have been many descriptions given about the
 plan and there have been many attempts to put a label on it. Some
 talk about a GST, some talk about the tax cuts, some talk about this
 or other aspects of the plan that we unveiled last Thursday, but above
 and beyond individual sections of the plan, I want, and the Government
 wants this to be seen as an integrated attempt to deliver for the
 benefit of Australia and for all Australians a taxation plan, a taxation
 reform that will sweep away the existing system and replace it with
 one that is modern, is contemporary, is relevant and will be in the
 long-term economic interests of Australia.
I don't find many people in Australia defending the existing
 taxation system. Even those who have criticised the present system,
 criticised our plan, will acknowledge, when you talk to them, they
 will acknowledge that the present system is out of date. We share
 in company with countries such as Botswana and Ghana the maintenance
 of a wholesale tax system that was devised in the 1930s when the great
 bulk of the Australian economy was based on manufacturing, when the
 wholesale sales tax may conceivably have made some sense. Everybody
 acknowledges that the present system is flawed, is frail, and is badly
 in need of replacement  wholesale replacement.
I've said frequently in the past few days that I was elected
 to Parliament in 1974, half-way through the Whitlam experiment. And
 within a year of my being in Parliament there was a report tabled
 called the Asprey report and it was a report shared by a former judge
 of the New South Wales court of appeal into Australia's taxation
 system. And you know what the report recommended, and this is in 1975
  23 years ago  the report recommended that we should introduce
 a broad based indirect tax and it should apply to virtually everything
 and it should replace the existing tax system and it should be accompanied
 by reductions in personal income tax. Now, it recommended a lot of
 other things that we haven't picked up but that was the essence
 of that recommendation, and now, 23 years later, the need for that
 kind of fundamental reform that was identified in the mid-1970s is
 more pressing, more urgent and more desirable. Now , I know it is
 not easy and I have no shortage of people saying to me over the past
 couple of weeks, you shouldn't be attempting a change of that
 magnitude - it's too risky. Well, let me say in response to those
 people, it is necessary to take risks of a personal political kind
 in the long term national interests of Australia and the Australian
 people. And that is why we are putting this forward as an integrated
 plan. We don't believe the Australian people will respect a proposition
 that says oh look you don't need to reform the present system,
 but we'll offer you a tax cut. I mean, a lazy tax cut has no
 credibility at all, but a personal tax restructure that is part and
 parcel of an aggregate reform to the Australian taxation system, I
 believe, will win very wide support in the Australian community.
Now, there is no one interest group in Australia that has got everything
 it wanted out of this tax plan. We didn't set about to satisfy
 every individual interest group. What we set out to do was to design
 a structure that would deliver a more productive, more efficient Australia
 and would be beneficial to the Australian community. We took account
 of the views of interest groups, we didn't seek to produce a
 plan that aggregated all of their demands. Now you ask me what is
 good for Australia about this plan. The best thing about this plan
 for Australia is that it reduces the cost of producing goods and services
 within our community. It represents the biggest single proposition
 by any Government in Australia since World War II to reduce the cost
 of doing business.
The introduction of a goods and services tax, to replace the wholesale
 sales tax, the financial institutions duties and bank account debit
 taxes where they exist, stamp duty on business conveyancing, stamp
 duty on shares, stamp duty on promissory notes, cheques and bills
 of exchange, the massive reduction in fuel costs which I'll come
 to at the moment which is so important to the bush to regional Australia.
 All of those things together mean that when this plan is introduced,
 the costs of doing business on an annual basis in Australia will be
 reduced by approximately $10,000 million. It represents the most generous
 export market development grant that any government has offered to
 the exporters of Australia, because it will take $4.5 billion off
 the costs of exports. There will be no GST on Australian exports and
 all of the taxes paid on exporters inputs will be fully rebatable.
 It will mean that exporters from this country will be able to compete
 on an equal footing with those from other countries seeking access
 to the same markets. I often get requests from people in exports saying
 why don't you have a special incentive for exporters.
I can't think of a more special and better incentive for exporters
 than to take $4.5 billion off their export costs by the introduction
 of this plan. It will of course, by delivering a more efficient, a
 less costly method of production in this country, it will of course
 open up the opportunities for greater job generation. I did a local
 press conference this morning, and I was asked by a young lady from
 the university, what is this plan going to do for the university students
 and my answer was that it will increase your chances of getting a
 job when you leave university, because it is going to take costs off
 the back of business which haven't been proposed before. Now,
 it doesn't take all the costs off the back of business that they
 would want but it takes more costs off their back than has ever been
 offered in the past. And of course the plan does contain some very
 particular provisions which are of enormous long term importance to
 people who live in the bush, to people who live in regional Australia.
I've been coming to Townsville now for, as a politician, for
 almost 25 years, and I can't remember a visit to Townsville that
 hasn't involved somebody complaining to me about the relatively
 high cost of delivering goods to this part of Australia compared with
 some of the major population centres. So what we have done in this
 package and we have done spectacularly is to attack the tyranny of
 distance which bedevils the costs of operating businesses and keeping
 households together in regional areas of Australia. But what we are
 doing is to reduce the business, we are reducing by about $3.5 billion,
 the cost of fuel in this country. We are doing it in a number of ways.
 The first thing we are doing is we are going to reduce from 43 cents
 a litre to 18 cents a litre the excise on diesel used by heavy load
 vehicles and the same concession will apply to rail, exactly the same
 concession.
In addition we are going to extend the, maintain and slightly extend
 the existing exemption in relation to the use of diesel for off-road
 purposes, and that will continue and slightly expand the concession
 that is now available for primary producers. And a like concession
 will apply in relation to ferry and tour boat operators using equivalent
 fuels so it is not something that is simply limited to one particular
 of the community. Now the impact that this will have on reduced transport
 costs around Australia is quite enormous. Many people talk to me about
 prices in supermarkets under a GST and they say quite wrongly oh everything
 is going to go up by 10%. That's wrong. A lot of things won't
 go up by 10%, in fact the average increase will be about 1.9% and
 the reason that things won't go up by 10% is that a lot of goods
 in supermarkets, a lot of things you buy now are subject to wholesale
 sales taxes which are much higher than 10%, a whole range of detergents
 and soap powders are taxed at rates of in the order of 22%. There's
 a 12% tax now on flavoured milk and some kinds of biscuits and on
 orange juice concentrate. There's a 22% tax on the family motor
 car, and so the list goes on and on and on.
But there's another component to this argument and that is that
 for every item that is delivered on to a supermarket shelf about 20%
 of the cost of that item is accounted for by transport costs. You've
 got to deliver things from markets, you've got to deliver things
 from wholesale warehouses, and all of that involves transportation,
 and all of that is very expensive, and if you reduce dramatically
 the cost of that transportation, particularly when the goods are delivered
 to remoter areas of Australia, particularly when the goods are delivered
 to North Queensland, you will get an enormous additional benefit and
 it has been calculated at about 20% of the total cost of every item
 you take or buy off a supermarket shelf is accounted for by the cost
 of transport. So this diesel concession is of huge benefit to the
 bush, it is of huge benefit to regional Australia and I should remind
 you, although it hasn't been my intent to make an excessively
 partisan political address, I will nonetheless take the opportunity
 of reminding you that the environmental spokesman for the Australian
 Labor Party, Mr Duncan Kerr, has attacked the proposals we have in
 relation to diesel excise because he thinks they would be bad for
 the environment, and he has made it very very clear that the Labor
 Party is opposed to those particular concessions. But there's
 another little rub, and a very nice little rub in relation to the
 cost of fuel and that is that every business operator, quite apart
 from whether you are involved in diesel or on-road or off-road, will
 now be able to buy their petrol effectively at 7 cents a litre cheaper
 because under the new proposal we are going to reduce the petrol excise
 by the extent necessary to allow in the 10% GST, and because the GST
 will be fully rebatable for business purposes in the way that petrol
 excise is not, you will effectively find that your, for business purposes,
 and I stress that, you will find that your petrol for every business
 purpose is 7 cents a litre cheaper because you will be able to obtain
 a full rebate of it.
Now I mention these things ladies and gentlemen because one of the
 aspects of the plan is that there are different parts of it that have
 a different impact on different areas of the Australian economy, but
 I stress again that the great appeal, the great virtue, the great
 strength, is that this is a plan for Australia's future. It is
 not a lazy attempt to nibble at the edges. It is not an attempt to
 say to the Australian public, you can have the benefit of a personal
 tax cut without the necessary reform to strengthen the Australian
 economy. We all know that that option is no longer really available.
 We had that tried in 1993 when Mr Keating and Mr Beazley said, oh,
 you can't have Hewson's GST, we'll give you a tax cut,
 we'll make it L-A-W law, what happened after the election was
 that the tax cut disappeared and every individual sales tax went up
 by 2%, and that was very regressive. And there was no compensation
 for the pensioners in 1993, there was no compensation for them, and
 there were no special arrangements, and the impact of that increase
 in indirect tax was infinitely more regressive than would have been
 the case if the Hewson plan had been endorsed by the Australian people.
I notice this morning that the ACOSS, speaking as it claims on behalf
 of a number of welfare bodies, has attacked the plan, and I want to
 say in reply to ACOSS that we, of course, reject the calculations
 that they have made in relation to the price effect of the plan. We
 repeat the guarantee that is contained in the announcement last week
 that the pension and other benefits enumerated in the document will
 increase up-front by 4% on the 1st of July in the year
 2000 and thereafter we guarantee that there will be a 1.5% add-on
 to any CPI increase that occurs after that date. And the purpose of
 that will be to ensure that the pension is always in real terms 1.5%
 ahead of increases that occur in the consumer price index. And that
 is the essence of the guarantee we give, so if people say: well we
 don't think that 1.9 is right, my reply to that is: it is right.
 But even if it weren't right and the rise happened to be 3% you'd
 have 1.5% on top of that. And that is the nature of the guarantee
 that is contained in the Government's proposition because we
 have no desire to see the less well off in the Australian community
 effected adversely by this plan.
And I took the opportunity yesterday when I visited a retirement village
 in Brisbane to enumerate that there were ten individual elements of
 the plan that were of direct relevance to pensioners and self-funded
 retirees in the Australian community. And they include a special one-off
 untaxed payment of $1000 in relation to investment income for all
 pensioners and others in the community 60 years and over. Another
 $2000 on top of that for self-funded retirees of pensionable age.
 The introduction of refundable imputation credits - sounds complicated
 but anybody who's got some shares and whose marginal tax rate
 is lower than 36% will understand the value of refundable imputation
 credits. They are little rippers, that's all I can say in relation
 to people who are going to get the benefits of them.
And then going on from that you have the introduction of a 30% tax
 rebate for private health insurance. If you've got a $2000 policy,
 doesn't matter what your income is, from the 1st of
 January next year you'll be able to get that $600 back from the
 tax man or if you can't wait for the tax refund you can take
 the receipt for the health insurance premium along to the Government
 office and they'll write out a cheque for you on the spot for
 $600. And that is going to be available from the 1st of
 January next year. And that is going to be available without an income
 test, there won't be an income text on that.
And I'm particularly proud of the changes that we've made
 in relation to personal income tax. I make no apology for the fact,
 although it may disappoint some in the community, that we haven't
 reduced the top marginal rate. But we have increased the point at
 which that applies. We've increased that to $75,000. But what
 is very very appealing, most appealing of all about the restructured
 income tax scales is that between $20,000 and $50,000 of income there
 will be a constant uniform rate at the margin of 30%. In other words
 81% of Australian wage and salary earners, 81%, and we should always
 keep these figures in our minds so that we have a true perspective
 of how these things impact on the great bulk of our fellow Australians.
 81% of wage and salary earners in Australia will be on a top marginal
 rate of 30% or less.
And those of you who employ people and have had the experience, they
 may be earning $30,000 a year and you want them to do some overtime
 and they express some doubts and the grumble say: what's the
 point? The tax man will take half of it. Now under this plan, if you
 are anywhere between that band of $20,000 and $50,000, or indeed if
 you are $20,000 a year, you'll be able to earn as much overtime
 as you like up to an aggregate of $50,000 without passing into a higher
 taxation bracket. And that does represent a very very significant
 change to the taxation system, of enormous importance to the great
 bulk of the Australian community. And what it effectively does is
 to abolish that thing called bracket creep which the economists keep
 talking about. That is when you get flung into a higher tax bracket
 because your income goes up. It effectively abolishes bracket creep
 between $20,000 and $50,000 a year.
And I'm also very proud of the changes we have made to family
 tax arrangements. There's been the odd journalist who's
 been running around the country saying that Howard wants women to
 do this or that, he wants them all to stay home. Nothing of the kind.
 What I want is to give Australian parents a choice about how they
 organise their lives when they've got young children. What we
 have done is to give a greater recognition to the right of Australian
 parents, particularly in the middle-income area, to exercise a choice
 when their children are very young about the participation of either
 or both of them in the work force on either a full-time or a part-time
 basis. It's not my job or my desire to impose some kind of stereotype
 on Australian families. It's my desire to give the maximum amount
 of choice to Australian families within and through this taxation
 system.
Could I just say one other thing that was raised by ACOSS in its response
 this morning which I think we should all bear in mind. And that is
 that ACOSS is arguing that we should exclude food from the operation
 of the goods and service tax. Now the problem with doing that of course
 is that once you decide to exclude fresh food you then come under
 enormous pressure to exclude things that are closely aligned to fresh
 food. In Canada I think it is, they have an argument because the GST
 applies to a heated pie bought in a take-away shop but it doesn't
 apply to a frozen pie bought in a supermarket. One is regarded as
 not quite food in the sense of the GST definition and the latter one
 is regarded as in that definition. Now what would happen in this country
 is that if you left out fresh food, you'd then have people saying:
 well hang on, if you're going to leave fresh food out, you've
 got to leave out Hungry Jacks, you've got to leave out Pizzas,
 you've got to leave out McDonald's. And if you leave them
 out you'd have to leave out every restaurant in the country as
 otherwise you would be setting up absolutely unreasonably barriers
 and artificial distinctions. And once you start doing that you are
 back with the same problem that we have with the present system. And
 I can't think of anything that would be more, in relative equity
 terms, I can't think of anything that would be more beneficial
 for the rich in Australia than to take a decision in the name of helping
 the poor that ended up leaving restaurant meals completely out of
 the operation of a GST yet you're imposing it on other sections
 of the Australian community.
Now ladies and gentleman, as I said at the beginning of my speech,
 not everything in this tax plan is acceptable to everybody in Australia.
 We didn't set out to try and satisfy everybody on everything
 they want. That is absolutely impossible and governments that set
 out to try and do that are doomed to failure and doomed to disappointment.
 But what we did set out to do as we come towards the 21st
 century, as we come towards the third millennium, is to say to the
 Australian people something that they all deep down know, and that
 is that the present tax system is unsustainable. The present tax system
 is increasingly unfair. The present tax system is increasingly in
 disrepute. The present tax system holds back the productive sector
 of the Australian economy. And we haven't sought to insult the
 Australian people with just the offer of a lazy tax cut and say: oh
 we'll try and bribe your support by offering you a tax cut out
 of the surplus. We haven't done that. What we have tried to do
 is to say to the Australian people, before the election and not after
 it, before the election, we believe that in the interest of the country
 and in the interest of Australian families we need taxation reform.
Part of tax reform is lower personal income tax, but that's only
 part of it. A part of tax reform, and it's essential, is the
 introduction of a goods and services tax and the replacement of all
 those existing indirect taxes. Part of tax reform is to reduce fuel
 costs because this is a very big country. Part of tax reform is to
 end the annual unseemly wrangle between the Federal Government and
 the State Governments over the division of the total amount of revenue
 collected in Australia and we've done that. Part of tax reform
 is to get rid of the poverty traps in the existing income tax system
 and give poorer families a greater incentive to work and to get off
 welfare. Part of tax reform is to give people a greater incentive
 to take out private health insurance. Part of taxation reform is to
 have a more uniform treatment of the taxation of different business
 entities whether they be trusts or companies or other business entities.
 In other words, we have tried to take an aggregate approach for the
 aggregate interests of the Australian people. We haven't set
 out to add up all the complaints and all the logs of claims of individual
 interest groups, rather we have asked ourselves: what is the sort
 of tax system that the Australian community wants as it goes into
 the 21st Century? And that is what we have sought to deliver.
 I don't under estimate the fight ahead but I'm greatly enthused
 about it because I believe it is good, I believe it is right, I believe
 it is in the interests of all of the Australian people and that if
 we can get this plan accepted by the Australian people it will be
 of enormous long-term benefit to the economy of this country. And
 I ask the Australian people to judge it in the national interest rather
 than in the sectional interest. I ask the Australian people to see
 it for what it is. It is a bold courageous visionary plan to give
 this country a tax system fit for the 21st Century.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well thank you very much Lauren, to Mr Peter Hutchinson the Principal
   of Brooks High School, Mr Bill Lawson the Director of the Beacon
   Foundation, to my ministerial colleagues Jocelyn Newman and Warwick
   Smith, to my other Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies
   and gentlemen.
I must say that of all the occasions that comes the way of a Prime
   Minister, and there are many and varied occasions in all parts of
   Australia, and none is quite so inspiring and encouraging and warming,
   if I can put it that way, as an example of a school, a local business
   community  a broader community  and the student body
   cooperating together to provide a brighter and more optimistic future
   for the young people who are passing out of that school. And I want,
   quite unreservedly, to congratulate all of those who are associated
   with the No Dole project here at Brooks school. It is inspiring
   that people are willing to give their time on a voluntary basis
   to provide a greater sense of hope and encouragement and optimism
   to the young within our community.
The opportunity and the achievement of permanent work is, of course,
   a cherished goal of all young Australians. Many achieve it, some
   don't. The important thing is that they know along the way
   they have the understanding and the sympathy and the help, not only
   of their parents and their brothers and sisters and their friends,
   but also many in the community, starting at the local community
   through to levels of State and Federal Government. And what is so
   appealing to me about the No Dole project here is that what you
   are doing is you are wanting to eliminate the dole as an option
   for young people in the future. And I can't think of a more
   laudable goal for young people throughout Australia than the elimination
   of the dole as an option. And you are not doing it in some kind
   of abstract pie in the sky way, you are doing it in a sound practical
   way by saying we don't just want you to put the dole aside
   as an option, we don't just want you to sign a no dole charter,
   we are, in fact, willing to give you help in order to achieve that
   objective.
The Government's own approach in this area is very similar.
   We launched last year, under the umbrella of the principle of mutual
   obligation, the notion of work-for-the-dole. Our view was that if
   people can't get work after trying hard to get it, then it
   is proper that the community support them, but they might be able
   to do something in return for that. And that is the principle of
   mutual obligation. And in the changes that we have made to the Youth
   Allowance Scheme we have sought to provide people with an incentive
   to go into training or to go into work rather than to go on the
   dole. And this particular scheme here in Launceston, here at Brooks
   School, is a magnificent example and it wouldn't have been
   made possible, of course, without the active involvement of the
   local community.
Australia has a tremendous tradition of voluntary effort. One of
   the things that binds Australians together - and you always see
   it in times of national disaster and adversity - is the willingness
   of people to sink their differences in the face of a common challenge
   and to work together and cooperate. We have seen it magnificently
   in the floods that have occurred in Wollonging, just south of Sydney.
   We see it in bushfires, we see it in other natural disaster and
   the way in which the community is prepared to work together to try
   and tackle the problem of youth unemployment and to give people
   the aspiration of something other than the dole is a magnificent
   example of the local community working together.
All of us have goals for Australia as we go into the 21st
   century. What the Government has been saying about taxation reform
   in recent weeks is about the aspirations we have for strengthening
   the Australian economy as we go into the 21st century.
   But if we are to realise our goals whatever they may be, we can't
   realise them alone. Governments can't do everything on their
   own whether it be a Federal government or a State government. Individuals
   can't do everything on their own. They need the love and support
   of their families, they need the understanding of their friends
   and they need the nurturing influence of their school environment,
   they need the help and the counsel of their teachers. And the business
   community and the broader community can't do everything on
   its own either. It needs an understanding and supportive government
   and it needs a proper bond of cooperation with individuals and families
   within the broader community.
So to achieve our national goals, to achieve our local goals, to
   achieve our personal goals, we do need a measure of cooperation
   between the individual, the broader community and the different
   levels of government. And this particular project, which I understand
   last year had a 100 per cent success rate. I can't think of
   anything in Australia that has a 100 per cent success rate. And
   I think Mr Hutchinson you are something of a role model and those
   who support you and the teachers, and I do want to spend a moment
   to thank the teachers, not just teachers here but teachers all around
   Australia in both government and independent schools for the magnificent
   job that they do. I am greatly indebted for the education that I
   received within the government school system in New South Wales.
   And it stayed with me for all of my life and I remain very grateful
   for what my teachers were able to do for me then. And I think all
   of you should feel the same debt to the counsel and the advice and
   the support that you have received from your teachers.
So can I wish the No Dole project for 1998 the same measure of
   success that has been achieved in the past. It is very difficult
   to do better than 100 per cent but there are always ways of working
   out how you can do that. But if you can do that again the satisfaction
   is immense because there is nothing quite so uplifting in any kind
   of community or public life than the feeling that you have actually
   done something very positive and very enduring to provide a brighter
   future for the young of our community and to help them along the
   way to realising their goals.
Goals in life are important. Never lose goals, never lose the zest
   and the commitment to set yourself goals. While ever you set yourself
   goals your life has a purpose. When you stop setting yourself goals,
   no matter what age you are, your existence and your life, and no
   matter what you are doing loses its meaning and its purpose. And
   the great goal of this project is that the dole should not be an
   option. That the real options in life are training and secure employment
   and further education. And they are goals that the Government has,
   they are goals that the community has. And it is obvious that they
   are goals that are shared in common by this school, its students
   and the broader community.
So I am very privileged to have been able to come here today. I
   thank the school for its hospitality. I very warmly congratulate
   its Principal, its teachers and, of course, Mr Lawson the Director
   of the Beacon Foundation, who really has been in many ways the original
   inspiration for this project and the work that he has done. And
   he said to me earlier that he hoped that I might carry the message
   of his Foundation across the Bass Strait. Well, can I assure him
   that I will because I haven't quite been at a gathering exactly
   like this in all the years that I have been in public life.
We hear a lot about cooperation between the community and the Government
   and schools and this particular gathering expresses it in an inspirational
   and purposeful way, the type of which I haven't seen before.
   And I really am very humble to have been invited to come here today.
   I am grateful for the role model that all of you represent to the
   rest of the Australian community. I wish it well. I have great pleasure
   in declaring the Brooks No Dole project for 1998 well and truly
   launched and I shall have great pleasure in signing the charter
   along with all the other students in Year 10. Thank you very much.
 [Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Annette, to Mrs Joy Howley the President
   of the Victorian Division of the Liberal Party, Senator Alston,
   Senator Kemp, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Yesterday morning I took part in one of the most uplifting experiences
   that I have had since being Prime Minister. I visited a Year 10
   Government High School in Launceston - Brook High School - not in
   a particularly wealthy part of Australia and I launched what they
   call their "No Dole Programme" for 1998. And that programme
   is a partnership between the local community and the local school
   whereby the goal is that no student leaving that school should ever
   be on the dole. And so committed are they to that programme that
   at the end of the launch every Year 10 student signed a charter
   committing themselves to not being on the dole. And that charter
   was signed by the their parents and signed by leaders of the local
   business community, and I was very privileged to be invited to sign
   the charter myself. And I thought as I looked out on all of those
   young faces around the age of 15 and 16, many of them from struggling
   backgrounds, I thought to myself that the future of this country
   is really what the tax plan that I released last week is all about.
And when I have been asked by university students and school students
   over the last week what will the tax plan do for them, I have unhesitantly
   replied that because the tax plan will result in the costs of producing
   all goods and services falling quite dramatically once it is introduced
   that over time this tax plan, more than anything, will generate
   more jobs for young Australians. Because if there is one thing that
   I would like the public to see in this plan, above everything else,
   and above their own individual sectional interests - and they are
   understandable and I will deal with some of them - but what I would
   like them to see, above everything else, that this plan is a gutsy,
   fair, comprehensive attempt to fix a taxation system in the long-term
   interests of all Australians. It is not a plan for the business
   community. It's not a plan for Liberal voters. It's not
   a plan for one or other part of Australia. It is, above everything
   else, a plan for the long-term future of all Australians. And it
   is good for the long-term future of all Australians because its
   most dramatic quality is really it's most simple appeal and
   that is through the introduction of a Goods and Services Tax to
   replace 10 other taxes and thereby dramatically simplifying the
   tax system we will bring about a reduction of $10.5 thousand million
   a year in the costs of producing goods and services in Australia.
   And in that, one dramatic stroke we will do more to give an incentive
   to the business community, the wealth generators of Australia, than
   any other single deed that the Government could undertake. 
In the years that I was Treasurer, in the years that I have been
   Prime Minister, I have often been asked by men and women in business:
   why don't you give this incentive to this activity; why don't
   you provide a subsidy over here; why don't you give us some
   encouragement through the taxation system to invest more and to
   export more? Well this plan will reduce export costs by $4.5 thousand
   million a year. I call it the greatest ever export market development
   grant that any government has ever devised for the Australian business
   community.
What it will do is to reduce the operating costs of every business
   because what a lot of people in business still don't realise,
   even those in manufacturing who say to me: oh well I am a manufacturer,
   I have exemptions in relation to my manufacturing inputs. That is
   true but there are a lot of things that you use to produce your
   goods and services for which you don't have exemptions, things
   like computers for example. Another feature of the package that
   people don't appreciate is that because we are applying the
   Goods and Services Tax to petrol and reducing the excise on petrol
   by a commensurate amount so that petrol will not increase at the
   pump in relation to any purchaser and because you will be able to
   get the GST back as a tax paid on a business input, then for every
   business man and woman petrol used in business will be seven cents
   a litre cheaper after the goods and services plan comes into operation.
So it is, above everything else, an aggregate plan. It did take
   a long time to put together and we addressed the fundamental weaknesses
   of the Australian taxation system. And deep down our political opponents
   know that what we are doing is right for Australia.
It's amazing what a political defeat does to liberate the
   mind and the political spirit. I heard Gary Johns on radio last
   night. Gary was a Minister in the Keating Government, he was the
   Special Minister of State and he was the Assistant Minister for
   Industrial Relations, and he lost a seat in Brisbane at the last
   Federal election. And he was asked what he thought of the plan and
   he said it was good for Australia. And he said he gave the Howard
   Government 100 per cent support and he knew that it was a plan that
   a future Labor Government would realise was good for Australia and
   that any honest, decent government would realise was good for Australia.
The truth is, my friends, is that everybody knows our present taxation
   system is limping towards near collapse, that our present taxation
   system is outdated. It inhibits our competitiveness. It is driving
   average wage and salary earners to paying the top marginal tax rate.
   It is in need of fundamental root and branch change.
But you can't just do one part of it, you have to do the entire
   job. It's no answer to just offer a tax cut. Anybody can do
   that, particularly a Labor Opposition that thinks it can use some
   of the surplus which it opposed the creation of after having left
   a deficit of $10.5 billion that they can help themselves to some
   of that surplus and in a lazy, slick way say: we'll give you
   a personal tax cut but we won't do anything about reforming
   the indirect tax system.
That happened in 1993. Mr Keating and Mr Beazley gave us a personal
   tax cut offer in 1993. They opposed the Goods and Services Tax.
   They won the election and immediately after the election they took
   away the personal tax cut and they increased every single indirect
   tax within the purview of the Commonwealth. And there was no compensation
   provided to nursing home residents for that increase, there was
   no compensation provided to the battlers or the pensioner to that
   particular increase.
There is, in reality, no tax relief without tax reform. If you
   want enduring tax relief you need to reform the whole system. Inevitably
   in the wake of the release of the tax plan the usual suspects have
   attacked the Government. Some of them out of political motivation,
   some of them out of genuine concern, and many of them misguided.
   And an attempt has been made by some of our critics in the media
   to present the view to represent the attitude that in some way the
   entire welfare sector and the churches of Australia are against
   the Government's plan.
Within a few hours of ACOSS making its statement you had sections
   of the media saying: once again, as in 1993, the churches are attacking
   the Government. And in that context I was very pleased, indeed,
   to see some perspective put into that part of the debate by His
   Grace the Catholic Archbishop of Melbourne, George Pell, quoted
   in The Australian this morning as saying that the tax package was
   complex and a serious attempt to address the problems of an ailing
   tax system. And he urged Catholics, and one could readily substitute
   Christians, to make an informed assessment. There is no one Catholic
   position on an issue as complex as taxation, he said. Tax reform
   is needed, the system is inequitable and my personal point is somehow
   the tax base has got to be broadened if we are going to have enough
   money to provide the welfare services that are needed in a modern,
   civilised society.
Now that doesn't sound to me like a denunciation by the senior
   Catholic prelate of this city against the Government's plan.
   I don't seek the sanction or the aid of any section of the
   Christian church or any other branch of religious belief in this
   country. I respect the fact that men and women of goodwill who have
   religious beliefs will take different views on this policy of the
   Government as they do on others.
But equally, I emphatically reject the attempt being made by some
   of our critics to represent the view that the plan that we have
   released is in some way in conflict with the doctrines of the Christian
   church or is in some way unfair to the poor and the underprivileged
   within our community. And I applaud the statement made by the Catholic
   Archbishop of Melbourne as bringing real balance back into the debate.
   He is not taking sides, he is speaking commonsense and he is saying
   the obvious thing: let the individual Australian make up his or
   her mind as to whether this is good for their country. Let no person
   under the cover of some position in a church or a welfare organisation
   invoke the name of that church or that welfare organisation to promote
   their own personal criticism of the Government's taxation proposals.
This plan, as Annette said in her introduction, also contains a
   quite historic attempt, which I hope will be successful to reform
   the balance of taxation between the Commonwealth and the States.
   For decades State Premiers have gone to Canberra, demanded more
   than they believed they've got and I won't go into any
   of the history of all of that. I have seen a lot of Premiers'
   conferences, both as Treasurer and as Prime Minister. They are always
   fascinating, they are usually predictable and they don't do
   enormous amount to raise the esteem of the political process in
   Australia. 
And one of the real bonuses, can I say, as a veteran at Premiers'
   conferences in Australia since the late 1970s, one of the real bonuses
   of this tax plan is that there will be no more Premiers' conferences.
   And that will be very good for my health politically and physically.
   And the reason there won't be any need for Premiers' conferences
   is that we have recognised the need to change the present system.
   We have recognised the desirability of giving the States access
   to a growth tax and what we are going to do is to dedicate all of
   the revenue from the Goods and Services Tax to the States. We are
   going to say to them: you can get the entire proceeds of the revenue
   out of the Goods and Services Tax provided you abolish your financial
   institutions duty, your bank accounts debit tax, your bed taxes
   - those States that have them - your taxes on business conveyancing,
   your taxes on share transactions, bills of exchange, promissory
   notes, cheques and so forth.
And we will require, as part of the deal, that not only you abolish
   them, that they stay abolished and if you try and bring any of them
   back then the deal is off. And we'll go further, we will put
   a provision in the legislation providing that the level of the Goods
   and Services Tax can't be increased unless you have the unanimous
   support of the State Premiers, the Chief Ministers of the Territories,
   the Prime Minister and the two Houses of Parliament.
And can I let you into a secret - in 24 years of politics I can't
   remember a single occasion on which all of those, ladies and gentlemen,
   have agreed on an issue. And I can't think of a more fail-safe
   device and a more politically effective device than that particular
   way. And I really am very proud that part of this plan includes
   this historic turning of the tide that began in 1942 in the necessity
   of war when uniform taxation powers were assumed by the Commonwealth
   Government. And it will restore greater accountability at the State
   level and it will mean that the annual unedifying barneys'
   that go on between Commonwealth and State governments in Australia
   will substantially be a thing of the past.
I am sure I don't need to emphasise to an audience like this
   the importance of us communicating to those with whom we do business,
   to our friends and our family members, that what we are proposing
   here is not a 10 per cent tax on top of all existing levels of taxation.
   We are proposing, amongst other things, the introduction of a Goods
   and Services Tax to replace the Wholesale Sales Tax and nine or
   10 other taxes levied by State governments.
One of the most intriguing things about this debate is the degree
   of ignorance in the Australian community about the levels of hidden,
   indirect taxes on many everyday goods and services. I often take
   the opportunity in radio interviews of going through the list. The
   following items are taxed at 22 per cent: pet food, toothpaste,
   shampoo, soap and other soap powders, wheelbarrows, lawnmowers,
   ladders and garden equipment, children's toys, umbrellas, handbags
   and luggage. And at 32 per cent: clocks, watches, TV sets, video
   recorders. And at 12 per cent: Kettle chips, Cadbury family blocks,
   Peters Natural Ice-cream, Berri Orange Juice and Berri Cordial.
   And when I read that list out on the ABC this morning I was chipped
   about commercial promotions. 
Now, it does all of us well to recite that list occasionally, it
   is a reminder of the absurdity and the stupidity of the present
   system. And it is also a reminder of how wrong it is to say that
   the result of this plan will be to increase the price of everything
   by 10 per cent. Because not only is it self-evident because of the
   disappearance of taxes on items like that that the price of many
   things will fall, it is also the case that everything you take or
   buy off a supermarket shelf has, as part of its costs, a contribution
   of about 20 per cent from transport costs. And that brings me to
   one of the most spectacular parts of the tax policy and that is
   the dramatic effect it will have on the cost of transport within
   Australia. 
Geoffrey Blainey conjured a marvellous and evocative phrase when
   he spoke of the tyranny of distance and how it had shaped the attitude
   of Australians and the Australian national psyche. He had in mind
   not only the distance of Australia from Europe but he also had in
   mind the vast distances of the Australian continent. And our proposals
   will do more than any other single measure to reduce the costs of
   transporting goods over those vast distances.
We are proposing a reduction in the diesel fuel excise from 43
   cents a litre to 18 cents a litre for heavy trucks and for rail
   use. And we are extending the existing off-road exemption for the
   use of diesel fuel. And it will not only be of great benefit to
   primary producers but also of great benefit to many people in the
   tourist industry.
And that particular act alone is very, very important to the rural
   community of Australia and it is not surprising that the early indications
   are that this package has won very wide support within the Australian
   rural community. The bush likes it because it recognises one of
   the fundamental and legitimate complaints of people who live in
   country Australia and that is the high cost of the transportation
   of goods and services to them. 
So, ladies and gentlemen, it is a package, it is a plan, it's
   a vision, it's a focus of hope and inspiration to all sections
   of the Australian community. It does contain a fundamental restructuring
   of a creaking old-fashioned system. It does contain very generous
   reductions in taxation at the personal level to the tune of $13
   billion. It offers the only honest response to Australia's
   taxation malaise. And that is taxation relief accompanied by taxation
   reform.
Our political opponents next week will offer the Australian community
   taxation relief but they won't offer taxation reform. You cannot
   have taxation reform in Australia that lasts and means anything
   unless you are prepared to fundamentally reform the indirect taxation
   system. Any other claim to reform is a complete mirage because it's
   the inadequacy of the indirect taxation system. It's old-fashioned,
   out-of-date character which is the single greatest weakness in the
   Australian taxation system.
And in the course of providing personal taxation relief, we have
   done two very, very important things. We have increased the benefits
   for Australian families at the levels of low and middle incomes.
   And very importantly we have introduced a top marginal rate of taxation
   for 81 per cent of all Australian taxpayers. Eighty one per cent
   of Australian taxpayers under this plan will pay a top marginal
   rate of 30 cents in the dollar or less. Under this plan, you will
   be able to move from $20,000 a year of personal income to $50,000
   a year without going into a higher tax bracket.
You could almost call that part of the plan the bracket creep abolition
   section of the plan. You can't have bracket creep if the rate's
   the same between $20,000 and $50,000. And let us understand that
   that is where the bulk of the Australian community lies. That is
   where the bulk of wage and salary earners are. And your capacity
   as men and women in business to offer those people your employees
   the opportunity of overtime without going into a higher tax bracket
   will represent an enormous change on the present system.
So my friends, it is a very broad plan, it's a very bold plan.
   I know there were a number of people in the community, they've
   certainly expressed their views to me over the months passed and
   they probably would have to you as well when they have said: it's
   too risky, it's too dangerous. Well, in the end you have a
   responsibility to put forward something that is good for the country.
I know in here that this is very good for Australia and that is
   it's most appealing feature. And I ask the Australian people
   to judge it on its aggregate value to the Australian community.
   Of course there will be men and women in this room who will think
   I don't like that part of it, I wish they had gone a big further
   over there, I wish they wouldn't be talking about something
   over here, and I am still angry about something they did in the
   first budget. Of course, that is human nature, but in the end as
   an Australian community we have got to ask ourselves whether this
   is good for the whole country.
We all know we need a new taxation system. We all know that sooner
   or later this country has got to have a broad-based indirect tax.
   I mean that's the fundamental reform that is needed. Mr Keating
   knew it in the mid 1980s and he was strongly supported then by the
   present Opposition Leader and the present Deputy Opposition Leader.
   Mr Hawke knew it when he was Prime Minister. John Hewson tried to
   do it with great courage in 1993 and he was beaten by a most villainous
   fear campaign. 
Now, we can't allow that to happen again and we won't
   allow it to happen again. The Australian public will not be fooled
   again as they were in 1993 when they were promised tax cuts with
   no GST, they lost the tax cuts and they got the Labor version of
   a GST without any social security compensation.
Now that's the choice. You either have honest, upfront tax
   reform explained and put on the table before the election or you
   have a re-run of 1993 and that's the choice that I will be
   putting to the Australian people. I believe in this, I believe in
   it very passionately because I know it is good for our country and
   in the end I have enough faith in the Australian people to believe
   that that is the thing more than anything else that will determine
   whether or not they support it.
Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mr Peter Fogarty to my colleague, Eoin
   Cameron the Member for Stirling, ladies and gentleman.
I'm quite excited about this company because it's a wonderful
   demonstration of a number of very positive things about modern Australia.
   The first and most exciting thing about this company is its multi-racial
   workforce. As I moved around I met people from so many different
   countries particularly but not only from the countries of Asia.
   And I take this opportunity in the presence of such a multi-racial
   workforce which is doing such a tremendous job to say to those people
   who've come from other countries, particularly but not only
   from Asia, how very welcome you are here and how much I as Prime
   Minister regard you all as part and parcel of the Australian community.
   This country is as much your country as it is mine and that you
   are making a magnificent contribution to Australia. You are bringing
   skills and you are bringing a diversity and a richness to modern
   Australian life that all of your fellow Australians appreciate very
   very warmly.
So the first thing that does really strike me is the great diversity.
   And you should feel so welcome and feel that your contribution to
   this company, but more importantly, your contribution to our Australia
   is very very warmly appreciated and very widely respected. 
This company has been a tremendous modern success. It's demonstrated
   that Australian ingenuity, Australian inventive capacity and Australian
   research energy is the equal if not the better than any in the rest
   of the world. Given the size of this company, what it has achieved
   has been quite remarkable and the fact that you are able, Mr Fogarty,
   to properly boast that so many of those transactions on your material
   at any given time of the day or any given day of the year is a remarkable
   tribute to the way in which from here in Australia the quality and
   the skill of Australian achievement has spread all around the world.
Now that has happened because the company is run on modern lines.
   It's a very modern, clean welcoming work environment and that's
   very important. There is an obvious rapport between the management
   and the staff. You are all part of one team, there's not them
   and us, it's just all of us together trying to achieve a goal
   for the company and trying to achieve a goal for Australia. And
   I'm glad that some of the Government policies already in place
   have played a part in the success that has been achieved by this
   company, the export orders it has won for Australia and the penetration
   to the four corners of the earth of Australian technology and Australian
   achievement and the fruits of Australian research and development.
But I've got even better news for you ladies and gentleman
   and that is that the tax reform plan of the Government is going
   to make companies like this even more successful because the greatest
   beneficiary of our tax reform plan on the business front are companies
   that export. And one of the great things about our plan is that
   it's going to take about $4.5 billion off the cost of exporting
   goods and services around the world. And when I say that the plan
   is good for Australia I mean by that that it will make Australia
   more competitive because it will reduce the cost of doing business
   in Australia. And I'm quite certain that your accountants and
   your financial controllers are already calculating the advantages
   of being able to recover all of the taxes paid on their business
   inputs in preparing for export out of Australia the goods and services
   that this company produces. Because under our plan exports will
   not carry any goods and services tax at all. And that will give
   us a competitive advantage in winning markets around the world that
   we don't have at the present time. And people sometimes say
   to me can we have an export market development grant for this or
   that activity. This plan is a $4.5 billion export market development
   grant every year of every year for every company in Australia that
   exports. 
Now we all know that the future of Australia lies in exports. We
   are a small country, we're happy country, we're a stable
   country. It's the best place in the world to live. But we are
   still by world standards quite small and we've got to always
   be competitive. And that means that we've got to make sure
   our domestic costs are as low as possible, consistent with maintaining
   the good standard of living that Australian workers are entitled
   to. So that means we've always got to sell well abroad and
   anything you can do to reduce the costs of exports is good for Australia.
   So our proposals are a long-term plan for the future of Australia.
   We all have to worry about the medium to longer term. We can dwell
   on the past, if we want to we can derive some nostalgia and warmth
   from the past. We of course live with the present but we've
   always got to plan for the future. And this country's economic
   future lies in maximising the assets it has and this wonderfully
   diverse skilled workforce that works together so well is a great
   resource. The technology you have in this company is a great resource.
   The management cooperation between the management and the workforce
   is a great resource. The assistance you now get from government
   is a great resource. But there can be more assistance and a pro-export,
   pro-lower business cost taxation plan will also be an enormous resource.
When I go around the country saying this plan is good for Australia,
   it's good for Australia because it's going to make all
   our companies and our industries more competitive because it's
   going to reduce their business costs and make it cheaper for them
   to export and that means more jobs. More gatherings like this, larger
   gatherings such as this and a greater share of the export markets
   of the world.
And last and most important thing I want to say is that it is always
   uplifting and inspiring to visit a workplace, to see success, to
   see people of different ethnic backgrounds working harmoniously
   together as Australians - as Australians - and to see the cooperation
   and the camaraderie between the management of the company and the
   people who work in the company. It is the most exhilarating experience
   about being Prime Minister of Australia to have these opportunities.
   They are endless cameos of the success of modern Australia and they
   are a great experience and a source of great encouragement and joy
   to me and I thank the management for inviting me and I thank all
   of you for having me here. I thank you for the contribution that
   you make to our country. I wish the company and I wish all who work
   here and their families the very best of good fortune and health
   and happiness in the years ahead.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Kerry Bartlett, to Kevin Rizolli, the Mayor,
 other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a delight for me to be back in the Hawkesbury. It is a delight
 for me to be back in the electorate of Macquarie and to commend to
 all of you in the strongest possible way what a tremendous job that
 Kerry Bartlett has done as your representative in the National Parliament
 since March of 1996.
The first responsibility of a local representative is to pursue the
 interests of his or her constituents. And Kerry has certainly done
 that, be it constantly pressing the case of the maintenance of the
 RAAF base at Richmond as an operational base of the Defence Forces.
 And I can say to you this morning that there is no intention on the
 part of the Defence Department to close the Richmond base and, in
 fact, the Defence Minister has been informing those who bothered to
 enquire. And I repeat the assurance he has given that the Defence
 position is that it will be operational til at least through
 to the year 2010. And given the nature of these things that is a very,
 very significant commitment by the RAAF.
Kerry has also been extremely active in pursuing the interests of
 self-funded retirees, many of which reside in the electorate of Macquarie.
 And it's been in no small measure due to his representations
 that we were able in the last budget to announce a very significant
 extension of the seniors' card to large sections of the self-funded
 retiree population. And when I come in a moment to talk about our
 tax plan I'll also have something to say about the provision
 in that plan for self-funded retirees. He has also been very active
 in pursuing environmental causes and as a result of his representations
 there have been significant provisions of funds with more to come
 for projects in the Macquarie electorate out of the Natural Heritage
 Trust. He's also, as a person with a deep understanding of economic
 issues, he's also played a very active role in promoting what
 the Government has done to restore the health of the Australian economy.
I don't need to remind any audience in Australia that at the
 present time there is a good deal of turmoil on world financial markets,
 there is a good deal of international pressure on the Australian economy.
 And it is a remarkable thing that the Australian economy has performed
 so well and has withstood that pressure so effectively. And of all
 the things that I would like, the last two-and-a-half years that the
 Coalition Government being in office, to be regarded well it is the
 way in which we have handled the Australian economy. We did inherit
 an Australian economy that was substantially in the red and in just
 over two years we have turned a deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus.
 And we actually did it a year ahead of time.
When we came into power the Federal Government owed $95 billion. By
 the turn of the century, that will have been cut by more than half
 and, in fact, on present projections by the turn of the century, or
 the early years of the next century, we will have the lowest national
 debt to GDP ratio that this country has ever had. We have delivered
 the lowest interest rates in 30 years. The average homebuyer in Australia
 has a mortgage of $100,000 and on that average mortgage that homebuyer
 is $300 a month better off than two-and-a-half years ago. And that's
 the equivalent of a payrise from the boss of $100 a week. And that
 is a very important thing to the average Australian. That's rolled
 gold quality benefit to the average Australian because there is nothing
 more important still to the average Australian family man or woman
 than the acquisition of a family home. And the acquisition of a family
 home, and providing through the ownership of that family home a stable
 environment in which to raise children is still the aspiration of
 the overwhelming majority of Australians. And all walks of life, whatever
 their politics are, whatever their background may be, and providing
 a more secure economic base for the foundation of a stable family
 environment is a very, very important thing that any government can
 do.
And those reductions in interest rates have extended into the small
 business area as well and small business is now enjoying lower interest
 rates than it has had for decades. And we have also seen a very high
 level of business investment and we have seen significant improvements
 in the industrial relations laws of this country. Some sections of
 the union movement haven't liked them but the rank and file of
 the Australian people have liked them because they have encouraged
 workers and their employers to get together at an enterprise level
 and to reach agreement that are valuable for the individual enterprise.
 And we place very great store on the quality of our economic management
 and at a time of international turmoil you don't change the team
 in charge when that team has handled the affairs of state so very
 effectively and so very competently. And that is the very strong message
 that I would give to the Australian people. It is because of the international
 economic turmoil that you need a group of people who have got the
 runs on board in charge. It's because of that international economic
 pressure that you can't experiment with failed policies of deficit
 and debt. And it's because of those challenges that you need
 to continue to press forward with necessary change and reform.
Now, to some people change and reform can be threatening. To others
 it can be very welcome. And the art of good leadership of good statecraft
 is to change those things that need changing but to tenaciously defend
 and to hold on to those things that oughtn't to be changed. I
 believe in changing some things. I believe in hanging onto and preserving
 other things. I want to change the things that are holding Australia
 back. I want to hang onto those things that are still an expression
 of Australian unity and Australian cohesion. And one of those things
 that we should hang onto as an expression of Australian cohesion and
 Australian unity is the tolerance that Australians have always displayed
 towards people from all around the world. And one of the great things
 about Australia is that we have accepted people from everywhere in
 the world and we have amalgamated and cohered into a united Australian
 nation. And I would never like to see Australia lose its instinct
 for tolerance and decency towards people from other parts of the world.
 Racial tolerance and racial understanding and the equality of treatment
 of people, irrespective of their racial background, is one of those
 Australian values that we should all fight to defend and preserve.
 It's a great Australian value and it's a great Australian
 tradition.
Something else that I would like to preserve and defend is this flag
 that hangs behind me as an expression ...[audience applauds]....as
 an expression of the unity and the history of the Australian nation.
 Our Federal system of Government has worked well and we are going
 to give it a shot in the arm at our tax reform plan. The centrality
 of the family unit has the most cohesive social influence within our
 society. That should not only be preserved but it should be strengthened
 and encouraged and not denigrated by those forces in the Australian
 community. There's nothing old-fashioned about stable families.
 There's nothing that's more positive within a community
 than strong family and apart from the emotional support they provide
 to people they also happen to be the most efficient social welfare
 system that mankind has ever devised.
So there are a lot of things that in our society that are good and
 are worth preserving and we should unite to defend them. Our tolerance,
 the importance of family life, our great national symbols such as
 the flag, and our Federal system of Government. Now, they are the
 things we ought to keep and those people who come along and say we
 want to get rid of them, they ought to be opposed. But on the other
 hand there are things that are holding Australia back and just because
 getting rid of them involves further change we shouldn't shy
 away from that change. And one of those things, of course, and it's
 something on everybody's mind at the moment is our present taxation
 system. Our present taxation system is creaking and groaning and lurching
 towards its last days. And unless we have the honesty and the candour
 as a nation to face the need and the reality of the need for fundamental
 reform, we are going to lose the economic battle in the years ahead.
 Because if you have an inefficient taxation system, you have an inefficient
 Australian economy. And, of course, we face challenges from overseas,
 but we must press ahead with taxation reform.
Those people who say that because of the Asian turmoil we should stop
 reform, are completely wrong. It is because of the Asian challenge
 that we must press ahead with taxation reform. We have a taxation
 system now that was built on an economy that was overwhelmingly based
 on manufacturing industry in the 1930s. We have an indirect tax system
 that has no application to service industries at all, yet 65 per cent
 of the Australian economy is now services. And if we don't do
 something about repairing or modernising our indirect taxation system,
 we will not have the resources in the future to provide the welfare
 support, the hospitals, the roads, the schools, the police services
 that our community needs.
I want to take on the argument advanced by some people in the welfare
 sector  and I stress some  because there are very divided
 views in the welfare sector on this, that in some way the introduction
 of a goods and services tax is a threat to welfare services. Can I
 say that it offers a life raft to welfare services because what the
 introduction of a goods and services tax will do is to provide a more
 stable revenue base in the years into the future. The problem with
 the present taxation system is that it is leaking. It doesn't
 apply to everybody. A lot of people evade it. A lot of people dodge
 their responsibilities, and if we can replace the existing wholesale
 sales tax system with a comprehensive goods and services tax at a
 lower rate, that will provide great assurance into the future that
 the money will be there to provide the roads and the schools and the
 hospitals and the welfare services. Apart from anything else, out
 of our plan, we are going to give a greater guarantee of revenue to
 the States and they will get more as the years go by under our plan
 and they have the direct responsibility for police, for hospitals,
 in the main for roads and for a lot of other social securities, and
 of course security, and the primary responsibility for education.
We are arguing taxation reform because it is in the long term interests
 of Australia. The debate about taxation is not just about how it affects
 you and me but it is how it affects our whole nation and more than
 anything else I would like our plan to be supported because it will
 strengthen Australia and strengthen the Australian economy. It will
 give us a secure revenue base. It will stop the leakage and cheating
 and rorting that now occurs. It will reduce the cost of doing business
 in this country because under our plan every item, every input item
 to the production of a good or service, the tax on that will be fully
 rebatable. You can claim it back in full, unlike the present system,
 where because of the operation of the cascading effect of the wholesale
 tax system, there are many taxes embedded in the costs of producing
 goods and services in Australia. It has been estimated that it will
 reduce the cost of business by about $10, 000 million a year, and
 it will reduce the cost of exports by $4500 million a year. Now, in
 a hostile world trading environment, with the Asian economies in a
 very fragile situation and every country fighting like crazy to get
 its market share, what could be more important than to reduce the
 cost of Australian exports, because we've got to export to survive.
 We are a trading nation. We have only 18 million people. We can't
 seal ourselves off from the rest of the world and hope that we can
 just rest contented within our vast continent. What we have to do
 is go out and sell and succeed and compete on world markets. Our men
 and women who export can do well providing they get the best help
 the Government can provide and the best help the Government can provide
 is to take the taxes off the back of exporters. And by introducing
 a goods and services tax, exports will be GST free and the input costs
 will be completely free of taxation. So therefore we'll be giving
 a huge kick along to our exporters.
Now I know this change is, in the eyes of some people, big. It is
 big. And some people may not think it is easy. But we really have
 reached that stage in our history where we can't have the easy
 bits without the fundamental reform. You can't hope, as I said
 the other night, to play in the grand final without going to training.
 You can't hope to present yourself at the HSC without having
 studied hard and expect to succeed. And the same thing applies with
 fixing our tax system. The easy lazy option is to say: well you can
 all have a tax cut and I'll be happy and go we'll away have
 a party and that's marvellous. But you can't do that. We
 are providing an alcove for a significant personal income tax cuts.
 But we are also doing the harder bits. We're also facing the
 need to reform the system and that's the issue. Because if you
 just give tax cuts and you don't fix the system they'll
 disappear like melting snow in the hot sun. They won't last.
 It's like building a fancy house on insecure foundations. You've
 got to fix the foundations otherwise the house will get rolled over
 at the first sign of a storm. They may be old analogies but they remain
 true today in relation to taxation as they were in other circumstances.
So ladies and gentlemen, we have reached a stage in our nation's
 economic history where compared with most other countries we're
 doing very well. We have got low inflation, low interest rates. We've
 got our debt down, we've got our Budget back in the balance.
 We've generated 300,000 new jobs over the last two-and-a-half
 years. We've improved our industrial relations system. But we
 still face enormous challenges from overseas and the only way you
 can beat them off is to be competitive and strong and you can't
 be competitive and strong in the 1990s if you have a 1930s taxation
 system. And it's for the sake of Australia's economic strength
 more than for the sake of any individual section of the Australian
 economy that we put forward this taxation plan. We are not doing it
 for this group or that group. We are doing it for the future of the
 Australian economy and the future economic strength of the Australian
 nation. And I want our tax plan to be judged on what it does for the
 entire country. I want it to be judged on the gift that it bequeaths
 to future generations of Australians into the 21st century.
Now I do feel very strongly committed to it because I believe it is
 in the long term interests of our country. I believe that it will
 strengthen our economy. I believe that it will strengthen our families.
 The reduction in fuel excise will reduce the costs of transporting
 goods around this vast country of ours. Geoffrey Blainey coined that
 evocative phrase years ago of the tyranny of distance. And he talked
 then of the distance of Australia from Europe but you can equally
 talk of the distance between one part of Australia and another. And
 if you reduce the cost of carrying goods and services over those vast
 distances then I believe you are striking a blow against the tyranny
 of distance.
Now ladies and gentleman, Kerry Bartlett has played a very significant
 role in shaping the votes and the arguments and the advocacy of the
 Government particularly, but not only, in the areas affecting the
 Australian economy. I've spoke earlier of his commitment to the
 interests of self-funded retirees and one of the things that we've
 taken very great care to do in putting together our tax plan is to
 ensure that there is adequate support and adequate protection for
 the retired section of the Australian community. We've introduced
 a 30% tax deduction for the cost of private health insurance to take
 effect from January next year. We're introducing a thing called
 refundable imputation credits. Sounds complicated but it's not.
 If you're a shareholder and your tax rate is less than 36% and
 you've got a franked dividend from the company you know exactly
 what a refundable imputation credit is. It means that if you pay 20
 cents at the margin and 36 is being paid on the share you get 16 refunded
 from the taxation office and that's something that you've
 never been able to get under the present arrangement. We're going
 to abolish something called provision of taxation which has been the
 bane of existence of a lot of self-funded retirees and a lot of men
 and women in businesses and on the land. And we're also providing
 of course for special payments for people 60 years and over of $1000
 in relation to their investment income and a further $2000 for self-funded
 retirees of pensionable age. And on top of that of course, for all
 pensioners there will be an increase in the pension of 4% up front
 on the first of July in the year 2000.
And don't believe the scare campaign that that is inadequate
 because it is not. It is 1.5% or more ahead of the projected increase
 in the cost of living which across the economy we calculate to be
 1.9% as a result of the introduction of the goods and services tax.
 Some people say that that's too low. I noticed in the papers
 this morning that a respected economic intelligence union called Econotech'
 released a report through KPMG, the Italian firm, that calculated
 at the price effect of a GST was nothing more than 0.9% which is less
 than half the calculation made by the Federal Treasury. We think the
 Treasury calculation is right. It's not a political calculation,
 it's an economic calculation.
So my friends, can I finish by saying that it is a great pleasure
 to be back in the Hawkesbury electorate. As somebody who grew up in
 Sydney and who spent a good deal of time over the years because of
 family connections in areas around the Castle Hills and Pennant Hills
 and Baulkham Hills. It's an area that is not unfamiliar to me
 and I've visited on many occasions. And Kerry holds an electorate
 that straddles different parts of New South Wales and different parts
 of the Blue Mountains and of course the Hawkesbury. He represents
 it very well, he represents it very effectively and he is a person
 of this electorate for this electorate and I very, very warmly commend
 you to him and I ask you to give him every encouragement and every
 support as your federal member.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................
Mr Kim Beazley the Leader of the Opposition, my ministerial and parliamentary&nbsp;colleagues, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
Only an Irish President could still the guns of political battle in&nbsp;the middle of an Australian election campaign. And bring the leader&nbsp;of the Liberal Party and the leader of the Australian Labor Party&nbsp;together in a spontaneous expression of welcome and affection to the&nbsp;President of a country held in deep and affectionate regard by all&nbsp;Australians.
It is not true to say that Ireland and Irish men and women have influenced&nbsp;Australia. Rather, it is true to say that Ireland and Irish values&nbsp;and Irish habits and Irish people have been part of the Australian&nbsp;story and have played a formative role in shaping the modern Australia&nbsp;from the very beginning of European settlement more than 200 years&nbsp;ago.
I don't intend today to list all of those great Australians of&nbsp;Irish decent who have made a contribution to our country. In a sense&nbsp;that would be doing injustice to the role that Ireland has played&nbsp;and the parts that the Irish influence has [inaudible] in the Australian&nbsp;story. Because every part of Australian life and every part of Australian&nbsp;culture, every part of Australian politics, Australian religion and&nbsp;Australian values have been influenced and fashioned and tempered&nbsp;and led and guided and in some areas dominated by the Irish tradition&nbsp;and by Irish habits.
Irish traditions have brought a sentimentality, they've brought
a passion, they've brought a sense of conflict, they've
also brought a sense of unity and a sense of striving and a sense
of achieving to the Australian story. Indeed, in that great work the
Australian historian, Patrick O'Farrell, on the Irish in Australia
I thought spoke very eloquently of the history of the interaction
between the various groups who originally comprise European Australia.
When he wrote of the contest between Irish oriented minority and English
oriented majority, far from being divisive, became the main unifying
principle of Australian history. What held this country's people
together in a constructive and productive social and political relationship
was a continuing debate always vigorous, often bitter and sometimes
even violent about what kind of country this should be. The tension
and conflict between minority and majority was not in its essence
or effects a fundamentally destructive one but a creative exchange
which compelled Australia's inhabitants of all kinds and all
persuasions to take stock of the nature of their society.
So Madam President, you come to this country as really part of the
family. You come to this country as the President of a nation that
has contributed so much to the history of Australia and to the development
of Australia and is held in continuing affectionate regard. You also
come to this country as a very talented and successful person who
has reached the highest office in Ireland. A person whose distinguished
legal and academic career pays tribute to your innate intelligence,
your sense of justice and your patriotic commitment. You also bring
particular characteristics to the Presidency of the Republic of Ireland.
You are, I understand, the first person born in Northern Ireland to
be elected President of the Republic of Ireland. You told me earlier
during our discussions that you grew up in the Shankhill Road district
of Belfast being a member of the only Catholic family in the street
and you related some of the mixed experiences that were metered out
to your family when you were growing up  the good as well as
the bad.
I hope you find on this your first visit to Australia the most influential
representation of the Irish Diaspora anywhere in the world. One of
the pursuits, of course, of many Australians is to reflect increasingly
now because we are getting a lot more interested in our history and
our heritage. We reflect a lot more on our background now than we
used to. I think about a third of Australians claim Irish decent or
a connection with Ireland. And not, of course, to be left out of it
and I might remind you Madam President that my maternal great grandmother,
Theresa Carey, was born in county Westmeath in the Irish Republic.
And before getting too carried away with that let me remind you that
my paternal great grandfather, Christopher Jackson, was born in Portadown
county Armagh, north of the border.
It is true that the people of Irish decent in this country in earlier
days, because they were a minority, did suffer a level of discrimination
and a level of bigotry which is now, thankfully, long behind us. Sectarian
bigotry in Australia was a live thing, I think, until the 1960s when
in a remarkable way in a very short period of time it collapsed very,
very rapidly. I think it was the influence of the second Vatican Council
and of Pope John. I like to believe it was a common belief that it
was no longer Christian to be bigoted against those who also professed
your religion. And I also recognise the very significant role played
in the breaking down of that sectarian divide in Australia by the
ending in the early 1960s of the 100-year prohibition on the provision
of government assistance to independent schools. Because of all the
swords that divided Irish Catholic Australia from the rest of the
Australian population it was the sense of injustice that Catholics
properly felt, Irish Catholics in the main they were then, properly
felt about the denial of State aid. And I am particularly proud as
the Leader of the Liberal Party in 1998 that it was that self-described
humble Presbyterian Robert Gordon Menzies, of good Scottish stock
who played such a major role in providing government assistance to
independent schools in the 1960s. The influence of Irish Australians
on our politics has been immense. It has probably been historically
deeper on the Australian Labor Party and I won't presume as my
colleague, Kim Beazley, is here today to speak at length on that.
I recollected a moment ago to some friends that I joined the Liberal
Party in 1958 and the Liberal Party that I joined in 1958 was a profoundly
Protestant party, yet the Liberal Party I led into Government in 1996
represented in the most complete sense all sections of the Australian
community. And the thing that I rejoice in is that those old divides
are gone and that we learnt as Australians because of the experience
of living in this vast continent of the need to work with each other
and to find common ground with each other perhaps earlier than some
other countries have been able to do.
Madam President, you carry with you to this visit of course a reminder
of the tremendous strides that have been made towards achieving a
lasting peace in Northern Ireland. I want to take the opportunity
of congratulating the Prime Minister of the Republic of Ireland, Bertie
Ahern, and the Prime Minister of Great Britain, Tony Blair, for the
way in which they have worked together tirelessly over the last couple
of years to bring about a lasting peace in Northern Ireland.
What has occurred in that troubled province over the last 30 years
of course has been appalling. It comes on top of long years of injustice
and unfairness, and we've long passed the time when we seek to
apportion blame on one side or the other. There are evil men and women
on both sides of that argument. Those who perpetrated the terrible
deaths of those three young children, and those who perpetrated the
bomb outrage at Omagh, stand equally condemned in the eyes of the
civilised world. No amount of tribal history or division and no amount
of past injustice can justify such current abominations and atrocities
and out of those terrible deeds one is comforted, if you can be comforted,
by the hope that perhaps there is at last a realisation that the only
path forward is down the road of peace. And the evident goodwill that
is being displayed by both the British and Irish governments, the
determination of religious leaders, both Catholic and Protestant within
the whole of Ireland to emphasise the brotherhood of man, rather than
old sectarian divisions. The warm good wishes you have from your friends
all around the world, and I acknowledge the contribution of my predecessor,
Mr Keating, when he was Prime Minister in pledging some $7 million
to the fund to help build better community relations in Northern Ireland,
a pledge that I was very pleased as then Opposition Leader to support.
There are many Australians who want lasting peace in Northern Ireland.
We want it because we see it as a piece of sort of unfinished, I suppose,
family business. We also want it because it will be a source of hope
and inspiration to the rest of the world, that long tribal discord
can finally be put behind even in the most acrimonious of circumstances.
Now, I want to take this opportunity of very strongly reaffirming
on behalf of the Australian Government our commitment to the peace
process. But I also want to say that on a personal level, that I do
hope, Madam President, that you and your husband greatly enjoy your
visit to Australia. You will find warmth, you will find affection,
you will find a spontaneity of welcome that I don't think would
be extended to any other Head of State of another country.
You also of course, come in the lead up to a great Australian festival
 not the federal election on the 3rd of October 
but rather a festival that takes place a week before that, and the
last weekend in September in Australia is a great football festival,
in which we play out the Australian Rules Grand Final, and of course,
Australian Rules has much of its antecedents, not all of it, in Gaelic
football, and of course we also play out the Grand Final of Rugby
League. And both of those codes, both in terms of the derivatives,
the origins of Australian Rules, and I think in relation to Rugby
League historically the participation levels, both of those codes
have very very strong Irish connections and very very strong Irish
antecedents.
Madam, you are very welcome. We send through you our affectionate
good wishes to the people of Ireland, and it is a special relationship.
It cannot properly be categorised in terms of influence or tabulations
of Australians with Irish names. It is part of what we are. It is
part of our essence and our being and for that reason we are particularly
happy to have you amongst us, and invite Kim Beazley the Leader of
the Opposition, to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Mr Randall. My Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. As we come to the end of this election campaign, it is only natural that we should seek to put it into context and in doing that today, I want to invite you to examine the two quite different attitudes that the two major contestants in this election campaign bring to the nature and the character of Australian society.
My campaign has been based on an essentially robust and optimistic view about the future of our country, about the capacity of Australians to discriminate between those things that we ought to hang onto and preserve because they continue to work, but equally to discard and reject those things that are no longer working and are no longer beneficial to the Australian community.
I have long believed that one of the required arts of good statecraft is to be sufficiently capable of hanging on to what is worth preserving and at the same time vigorously getting rid of that which is no longer worth preserving. That has been my fundamental approach. On the other hand I believe that the Labor Party has taken an essentially pessimistic inward-looking negative view, even a frightened view, of the character of Australian society.
The Labor Party’s pitch in this campaign has been an essentially negative one, it has been an appeal to fear, it has been an appeal to a narrow focus on one aspect of the economic debate. I also think the election campaign has displayed very clearly the views of the two political parties about other characteristics of the Australian community. There are many characteristics and many values that run like mighty rivers through the Australian community. One of them is the great Australian tradition of a fair go. We do pride ourselves on being a community that worries about the underdog. We do pride ourselves on being a community that cares for the needy and believes in our great vernacular that everyone should have a fair go.
But there’s another great river that I think runs through our community which I believe the Labor Party in this campaign has all but totally ignored and that is a companion to a fair go and that is the Australian tradition of having a go. Because one of the great Australian characteristics and one that I certainly imbibed as a young person and one that has guided my behaviour though life is the belief that, yes, you look after the needy, yes, you have a social security safety net, yes, you have an open, tolerant society but you also have a society where people are encouraged to have a go. You have a society where people are given an incentive to improve themselves.
Australians are great believers in starting with little and building something and handing it onto their children. Australians are great believers in starting off life against the odds, overcoming those odds and moving on to a situation that they might never have dreamt of. And I think when you run through the Labor Party’s policies for this election campaign you find a total insensitivity to that great Australian tradition of having a go. You find no incentive for middle Australia in the Labor Party’s taxation package, you find no incentive for middle Australia in so many of their policies.
So I think if you are looking at this campaign against the background of the great traditions of the Australian nation, any emphasis on having a go from our political opponents is all but absent. In a sense, my whole campaign has been built on the principle of having a go. In a personal sense, it’s a commitment by me whatever may be the ultimate political cost of doing something that I believe is absolutely essential in the national interest and that is reforming Australia’s taxation system. I cannot believe that anybody on any side of politics who has been through the experience of the last 15 or 20 years can other but believe in their deepest, most reflective and personally candid moments that we can seriously go on indefinitely with the existing taxation system. The reality is that it is failing us and failing us badly. But more about that in a moment.
When I announced the election campaign, and it seems years ago, I said that economic competence would be the major issue and that has remained my theme throughout the election campaign and let there be no doubt about it. To those of you in this room or out there listening, wherever you are who haven’t decided how you are going to vote on Saturday there is one overriding question you have to ask yourself – do you really believe that the Australian Labor Party can never better manage the Australian economy in these difficult international times? Do you really believe that after two-and-a-half years only a Government that inherited a deficit of $10.5 billion and a year ahead of time turned that into a surplus, a Government that has delivered the lowest the lowest housing interest rates in 30 years to the tune of $320 a month more in the pocket for middle Australia paying an average mortgage? Do you really believe a Government that has peeled almost one-third off the $95 billion of Government debt that we inherited two-and-a-half years ago, do you really believe that that Government deserves only after two-and-a-half years to be expelled and to be replaced by - essentially absent one person the former Prime Minister Mr Keating - by the same people who ran this country for 13 years, left us with that high debt and left us with that high deficit? Do you really believe that they are going to be better able to run the Australian economy against that background in these increasingly difficult economic circumstances?
That is the issue of this election crystallised into a compelling question. And that is the fundamental question that you have to ask, there are other issues and no doubt they’ll be canvassed later in my remarks and more particularly during question time.
But in the end, elections are about choices. In the end if they are about choices that fundamentally is the major question that has to be asked. But, of course, it’s given added weight and given added urgency if we add to a reflection on what has happened over the last two-and-a-half years against the background of what my Government inherited. If we add to that reflection the competing attitudes of the Coalition and the Labor Party about Australia’s future.
Australia’s future is, in my view, fundamentally very positive. I have spoken often of that unique intersection that I believe Australia occupies historically, geographically and culturally in this part of the world. But we cannot be certain that the full benefits of that positive future will be realised unless we are willing to do further things to make our country stronger and safer. And that, of course, brings us inevitably and unavoidably to the issue of taxation reform. Our taxation plan, which is now well known in the Australian community, has three fundamentally powerful arguments in its favour.
The first and most important is, that it will strengthen the economic infrastructure of this country. It will reduce business costs by $10.5 billion. It will, more than any other single policy decision of any government, demolish what Geoffrey Blainey so evocatively called the tyranny of distance, its reductions in the cost of fuel at $3.5 billion a year will be an enormous boost to the bush to people living in country Australia. At a time when more than ever we must export to prosper it will take $4.5 billion a year off the cost of our exports. It is, in every sense of the word, a tax plan that first and foremost is a plan that strengthens the Australian economy. And if you reduce the costs of running Australian businesses, if you say to all men and women in business that all the taxes that you pay on the things that you buy to run your businesses will be rebated to you, and that is how you get the $10.5 billion, it is a matter of ordinary logic that those businesses are going to be more competitive, win more orders and therefore employ more people. If you are saying to the exporters of Australia, yes, in a time of trading difficulty, particularly against the background of what is occurring in the Asia-Pacific region, we’re going to reduce your export costs by $4.5 billion, you’re also providing them with a major incentive.
So that is the argument based on strengthening the national economic infrastructure. It’s a compelling argument, it’s an unavoidable argument and can I say that it’s an argument that has not even been seriously confronted let alone put down during the course of this election campaign. Indeed at no stage have our opponents tried to seriously deconstruct the fundamental economic argument in favour of our taxation plan. They have intermittently spent their time running a fear campaign and making false allegations about the price impact of the plan but there has been no serious attempt to economically deconstruct the fundamentals because deep down, I think even they accept the fact, although not for the purposes of this election campaign that fundamental taxation reform of the type we have outlined is absolutely unavoidable.
The second great argument in favour of our tax plan is that it will provide massive incentive to middle Australia. The $13 billion of reductions in personal income tax cuts, in income tax, will mean that 81 per cent, 81 per cent of all Australian wage and salary earners, that is everybody earning less than $50,000 a year, and that’s 81 per cent of Australian wage and salary earners will be on a top marginal income tax rate of only 30 cents in the dollar. Now that’s what I call encouraging middle Australia to have a go. And that is what is so completely absent from the Labor Party’s alternative tax credit system which imposes very high marginal rates of tax on household incomes which are in the range $40,000 to $60,000.
And if you are able to say to every employee in this country who might be earning $30,000 and there are hundreds of thousands, indeed millions, of our fellow Australians who are in that situation, if you’re able to say to them you can work another $10,000 or $15,000 a year worth of overtime and not go into a higher taxation bracket, the impact of that on incentive is enormous. They’ll feel like having a go if they live under that kind of taxation regime.
And the third great virtue of our taxation plan is that it will guarantee an end to one of the more ignoble features of Australian politic life. And that is the annual barney between the Commonwealth and the States over how much money the States get, who’s to blame and, and who’s responsible for any failures in government services. I have frequently renamed the goods and services tax, the government services tax. Because by dedicating all of the revenue from the goods and services tax to the States, what we are doing is guaranteeing that years into the future the states will have the wherewithal to provide the police services, the education services and the hospitals that the citizens of our States are entitled to have. And one of the great ironies of this whole campaign has been that people have attacked the GST because it’s meant to have a negative impact on the delivery of government services. In fact the GST will guarantee the delivery of government services years into the future because under our plan, the States will, after then years cumulatively, be $25 billion better off than what they are under existing arrangements.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I’ve spent a few moments recapitulating the essential elements of our taxation plan, not because it is the only economic issue in this election, but because it does represent a generational, an historic opportunity to turn away from the taxation system that we all know is no longer serving the interests of this nation. And the decision that the Australian people will make on Saturday will determine for a generation whether or not we have sensible taxation reform.
If the Labor Party wins on Saturday they will of course, in my view in time, increase existing indirect taxes. They will in time introduce selected services tax and they’ve all but admitted that at various stages in this campaign. And over time you will essentially have a rerun of what you had in 1993 after the re-election of the Keating Government. But because of their rhetoric during this election campaign, and because of the stance that has been taken, they will be constrained in office from sensible taxation reform. And you will, in fact, end up with the worst of all worlds, if the Labor Party wins on taxation. You’ll have increased indirect taxes. You’ll have changes in that area but it, it will be done in such an ad hoc and clumsy way that it will add further band-aids to an already failing and antiquated system.
So this is one of those generational elections. This is one of those moments when a nation has to decide whether it has sufficient optimism and sufficient commitment about the desirability of reform. And a sufficient commitment to a forward looking view of Australia in the world of the 21st&nbsp;century. Or whether we simply run away from that, we turn inward and pretend, McAuber-like, that something else will turn up in order to solve the problem of our failing taxation system.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, something else won’t turn up. It’s almost 25 years since I entered Federal Parliament. And a year after I entered Federal Parliament, the first of many reports on the Australian taxation system called the Asprey Report was given to the Whitlam Government, and it recommended essentially, not in every detail, what we are now proposing. And year after year, at various stages, through the mouths of politicians on both sides of politics, there was espoused the cause of taxation reform. And anybody, and many of you have been here at many of the luncheons over the years, wondered why it was, if you look back over the last 20 years that at various stages you had Paul Keating at this platform, you had Bob Hawke at this platform, you had John Hewson at this platform, you had Kim Beazley at this platform, you’ve had John Howard at this platform, all of them from different political parties. All of them over a good spread of years, but all of them saying one, the same thing at various stages and that is we have to change the present taxation system. Has it ever occurred to you why that would be so and why here I am in the closing stages of this 1998 election campaign, in front of you, some the same faces over the years, saying the same thing? It must mean something. It must mean, you know, there is just a fragment of a possibility that we might need to change our taxation system, there is just a fragment of a possibility. And there may almost be a fragment of a possibility that we will be failing the national interest if we don’t vote in favour of taxation reform on the 3rd&nbsp;of October.
I don’t ask the Australian people to vote for something that will leave them worse off. Our tax plan will leave them better off. Our tax plan will give to middle Australia a top marginal tax rate of 30 per cent. Our tax plan will give to everybody who takes out a private health insurance policy a tax rebate of 30 per cent. Our tax plan will guarantee the delivery of so many of those government services. Now I don’t for a moment ask people to support something that will leave them worse off because it won’t. But above and beyond the impact on the individual and on particular groups, I do in the words that I used my policy launch ask the people of Australia on the 3rd&nbsp;of October to call it for Australia because this above everything else is a generational change that will strengthen the Australian economy.
This plan will leave Australia a better country. It will leave Australia a stronger country. It will leave Australia with a capacity to compete more effectively in the outside world. If the downturn in Asia and the Pacific tells us anything it is that the rest of the world economies are unpredictable. If it tells us anything that the world economy of the late 1990s and the early 20th&nbsp;century is a world economy were you cannot afford to carry the baggage of a 1930s taxation system. To ask the exporters of Australia to go overseas and win orders in the increasingly difficult international environment with a 1930s taxation system is like asking a boxer to fight for the championship with one hand tied behind his back.
So, my friends, it does represent an historic generational opportunity to make a decision in favour of something that will strengthen the Australian economy. I don’t argue for a strong economy. I don’t argue for taxation reform in a vacuum. I have long believed that a strong economy and a better society are permanently linked. You can’t have a better society without a strong economy and a strong economy without a better society is simply not worth having. The two are totally and forever linked. Economic policy whether it be taxation or anything else, economic policy ultimately is meant to serve the overall good of society and we’ve had much debate over the years about the balance that we ought to have between the role of the Government and the role of the market within our society.
I do not believe in unrestrained markets. I understand the limitation of markets but I also understand the limitation of governments. I believe that the balance between those two is important to the kind of society that we want to create.
When I stood before this gathering in 1996 seeking the Prime Minister-ship of Australia I committed myself to a number of fundamental goals. I committed myself to supporting the Australian family. We have done that in many ways not least the burden that we have lifted from their shoulders through reduced interest rates. I committed myself to helping small business and we have delivered on that commitment in so many ways including our industrial relations reforms and also of course they have derived the benefits of lower interest rates. We committed ourselves to a private health insurance rebate which we are greatly adding to in terms of our taxation plan. We committed ourselves to strong economic growth. We committed ourselves to an assault on unemployment and we committed ourselves to be in government a group of men and women who govern for the mainstream of the Australian community, without paying undue regard to noisy interest groups.
I believe when you examine the ledger, when you look back over that two-and-a-half year period it is fair of me to claim that we have honoured the thrust of the commitments that we made in 1996. I don’t pretend that every last one of them has been, I know that, but of course when I stood before you in 1996 I was operating on the basis that the budget I would inherit if I became Prime Minister was in surplus, when in reality it was in deficit to the tune of $10.5 billion and I can say very defiantly to you today that that can’t happen again and it can’t happen again because one of the things we said we would also, also said we would do, in 1996 was to introduce to Charter of Budget Honesty and that is what we have done. And that means that never again will we have a situation where people operate in the dark about the true economic and fiscal position of the Government’s budget.
Ladies and gentlemen, the last two-and-a-half years, like any period of Government, and like any experience of a Prime Minister, have had their good moments, their even great moments and their more difficult moments. Like any other Prime Minister I have made my mistakes. Like any other Prime Minister I have learnt things. Like any other Prime Minister I have tried in my period of office to get closer, indeed even as close as I can to the Australian people.
I brought to my job some fundamental values. I brought to my job the values that I learnt from my parents. The values that I had imbibed through life and those values are based on some very simple propositions about human nature. They’re based on the belief that every individual is worthy, those values are based on the belief that we should create a society which treats people equally. I have often said that one of the genuinely successful and brilliant parts of Australian society has been the way in which we have been able to take the good things of our inheritance, cultural speaking, but to reject the bad things. We have imbibed much of the great Liberal tradition of our British and other European heritage, but thankfully we have rejected the class distinction that went with that in the countries that gave birth to those traditions. And I’ve often spoken of the fact that I believe that in the present moment in our history, Australia occupies a unique intersection in terms of history, geography and culture.
We are a projection of western civilisation in this part of the world. We carry with that projection some very great European traditions of which we should all be proud. We have very strong links with North America, links that have been reinforced in war and reinforced through our shared opposition to authoritarianism and our shared commitment to liberal democracy. But here we are in the Asian-Pacific region, with a vibrant component of our own population of Asian decent making a marvellous contribution to our modern society. And those three assets come together uniquely in Australia. There is no nation on earth that enjoys such a conjunction of assets. We can go into the Asia-Pacific region with the benefit of our European background and our American links without carrying the baggage that our British or American counterparts might do.
We can use our Asian understanding and bring about change as we did in relation to the International Monetary Fund’s treatment of Indonesia. And that was a very good contemporary example of how you can use that unique intersection to our great advantage.
So ladies and gentlemen, as I said at the beginning of my speech, my approach throughout the whole of this campaign has been based on a fundamentally optimistic view that I have about the innate decency of the Australian people. A fundamentally optimistic view I have about the place of Australia in the world. Our society is not without blemish. Our history is not without blemish, and in particular our treatment of the indigenous people is something that readily comes to mind when I speak of the blemishes in our history. But the balance sheet of the Australian achievement is a fundamentally positive one. It is something of which all of us as Australian’s can be immensely proud.
The fabric of Australian life can withstand robust debate. The fabric of Australian life is fundamentally tolerant, it is fundamentally decent. And the fabric of Australian life can embrace necessary change. Australians are clever enough, and astute enough, to hang on to what continues to work, but to throw out something that no longer works.
And as we stand on the cusp of the 21st&nbsp;century the sense of enthusiasm, even exhilaration, I have for the use to which we can put that very special place that unique intersection that we occupy, and the geography and the history and the culture of our world is something that challenges me. It is something that inspires me. It is something that does more than sustain me and it is something that I feel very deeply and it is something that underpins my faith in what I have done and my belief that the interests of the Australian people will be served by the return of my Government on the 3rd&nbsp;of October.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
FARR:
I’m intrigued by some remarks that you’ve said, you’ve used two or three times recently about how you’ve never been more at peace within yourself politically. I think at one stage you even said you’ve made peace within yourself politically, which sounds an awful lot like Zen Methodism or something.
PRIME MINISTER:
No no, Wesley Methodism.
FARR:
Can you explain that, the change that apparently you’ve undergone and is there a sense of political destiny in any of your thinking?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Malcolm what I mean by that is that I utterly believe in what I’m saying and doing. I mean, at various stages in your political life you have varying degrees of commitment to things that you are supporting. And this happens to all of us. You are part of a team, you support things sometimes that you didn’t originally believe in but you do it as part of a team. But if ever I have gone into an election campaign believing from the moment I got up in the morning to the moment I went to bed, and in all my being, that I what I am doing is right for Australia, it is this election campaign. Now, I know it is risky. I know it is against the conventional wisdom, but whatever the result is I will have no regrets. Whatever the result is, I will believe that I called it right for the long-term interests of this country. I mean, how else can we ever get something that we all know has got to happen. I mean, there’s not really a serious commentator in this country who disputes the need for tax reform. Everybody knows we’ve got to fix this system. We can’t go on forever with it. Are we going to struggle on forever with an indirect tax system that was built at a time when services occupied that much of the economy and it is now 65%, we’ve got to do something. Now, how else can we do it except in an election campaign? Could I have gone into this election campaign and fudged it and said oh well I’ll have a trilogy or whatever or a variation of that you can think of and I’ll have a meeting. I mean, imagine what a meeting on taxation would be like? Everybody would have their own point of view and in the end they’d turn around and say, well, John you fix it, you’re the government, you’re the Prime Minister. I mean, the job of a Prime Minister in a situation like that, I believe, is simply to lay it out, campaign for it, and try and persuade the Australian people to accept it.
Now, when I say I am at peace with myself, what I mean is I passionately believe that this is right for my country. That is what I mean. And I ask the Australian people to respond to that, and if they respond to it positively, I think it will be tremendous, and I think we’ll have a stronger country. I’m not saying it will solve every economic problem. I don’t pretend that for a moment, but it will certainly make our economy a lot stronger and I think we will have made a very intelligent decision. Now, if they say no, well, as I said on theSunday&nbsp;program, as far as I am concerned, it is good night nurse to me. But I think that the Australian people will reflect upon the value to their country of doing something that I think deep down increasing numbers of people believe is necessary. And as I said in my speech, it is funny isn’t it, all these people kept coming back here and saying at various stages that tax reform is necessary, so there must just be a possibility that that proposition is right.
MICK MILLETT:
Michael Millett, Sydney Morning Herald, Prime Minister. This flows from your last answer. Senate obstructionism, both past and future, has been a major issue in this campaign. To the extent I think during the last term there has been a number of plans discussed at senior ranks of the Liberal Party, Andrew Robb was one of them, about trying to reform the Senate. Given the likelihood of a hostile Senate resisting two of the major planks of your platform this time, will those plans have to be re-enacted? How long can we let the current dead-lock persist?
PRIME MINISTER:
Michael, I don’t have any plans to change the voting system for the Senate. I have a plan to win both houses on Saturday. That’s what I want to do. Don’t ask me to hypothesise about alternatives. If we win the House of Representatives on Saturday, but don’t win control of the Senate, I will say to every last Senator, who is not a Liberal or National Party Senator, that the Australian people have spoken, very very clearly, very emphatically, on something that has occupied the centrality of an election campaign in a way that no other issue I can recall, since 1949, has occupied the centrality of an election campaign. I mean, there will be nothing like it in terms of an identifiable mandate and I will confront all of the members of the Senate with that political reality.
LOUISE YAXLEY:
Mr Howard, Louise Yaxley, ABC Radio. Can you explain to us how it is there that such a significant amount of the benefits of your tax package go to the top 20% of income earners?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Louise, the basis of your question is not quite, with respect, accurate, in that the proportion of total tax paid by the top 20% will actually go up under our plan. And the other thing that you seem to have forgotten is that people on high incomes pay more tax. And unless you completely get rid of the progressive taxation system, if you have a tax cut, the dollar gain that they have is always higher than people on middle incomes. Because that is the way a progressive taxation system works. If you are on $100,000 a year, you are paying a lot more tax than somebody on $50,000 and somebody on $50,000 is paying more than somebody on $30,000. And if you cut the rates, then clearly in dollar terms the person on $100,000 is going to get a bit more. But bear in mind that we have not cut the top rate. The top rate, although the threshold is being pushed out to $75,000, the top rate has remained at 47%. So, I don’t think if you look at the mathematics, I don’t think it can be argued that the balance is being skewed further in favour of the well off. What’s happened quite understandably is that in dollar terms, because you are paying more tax. The dollar gain is better but many of the proportionate gains for high income earners are less and of course at a certain income level it flattens our completely. And I might also add that the health insurance rebate, because it’s a rebate, the dollar value of that remains absolutely constant and therefore in proportionate terms it’s less of a gain for people on high incomes.
FRAN KELLY:
Prime Minister, Fran Kelly, Radio National. Prime Minister, Centrelink said today that workers stood down as a result of the gas explosion in Victoria will be able to claim benefits but they will be subjected to the same eligibility as everyone else and will have to prove hardship. Isn’t it a given that any factory worker stood down as a result of this will be suffering hardship and should they be eligible for immediate assistance rather than having to use their holiday pay and their savings and the long service leave.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I haven’t seen, sorry Fran … I’ll let you finish. I haven’t seen that statement made by Centrelink but the statement that was made last week by Senator Newman was on the basis that there was a discretion under the Social Security Act to waive the waiting period and this was the sort of situation where that should be waived and people were encouraged to approach Centrelink and to take advantage of that opportunity. Now, you asked me isn’t something a given. I think all I can say in a situation like this is the existing law will be applied in a very generous, no holes barred, open-hearted fashion. But people have to continue to meet the eligibility criteria.
VIVIENNE STANTON:
Prime Minister, Vivienne Stanton, from Bloomberg News. Given that the outlook for global growth is that it’s going to slow, what are you going to do aside from tax reform to speed up growth in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, one of the things we are going to do if we’re returned is we’re not going to take the industrial relations system back to the 1950s or 60s and if you want a recipe for interfering with Australia’s economic growth, you’ll reverse the industrial relations reform that my Government has made. Australian’s economic growth performance over the last couple of years has continued to confound many of the critics and many of those who’ve made predictions and I quite deliberately anticipate a question on the IMF report that was released this morning. The Treasury and the Government shares this view, and the Treasury’s view, intention is specifically directed to this, says that the projections do not adequately take into account the strong domestic fundamentals in Australia. They imply that we’ll have average quarterly growth in this country of only 0.25 per cent. And all partial and forward-looking indicators are inconsistent with the economy in Australia slowing as dramatically as that. Our economy has held up very well in the face of the Asian economic downturn. We have performed over the last few months on the trade front better than many expected. Our growth performance in the last quarter exceeded most expectations. There’s a lot of evidence around that we have very successfully diversified our exports, and you ask me what do we do to speed up growth. I think we continue to run budget surpluses. We continue to run a low inflationary, low interest rate economy. And whilst I don’t get into the are of speculating about interest rates, I merely draw your attention to what has been achieved on that front, and you also continue to tackle those other areas of micro-economic reform including, of course, reform of the taxation system, that are so necessary.
I mean, 20 years ago if you looked at the Australian economy, you saw the need for four or five fundamental changes. You saw the need to deregulate the financial sector. You saw the need to lower tariff barriers. You saw the need to deregulate the industrial relations system and, of course, you saw the need to change the taxation system. Now, with a bipartisan approach we deregulated the financial system. Tariffs were lowered without the then Coalition Opposition running a campaign of political opportunism against the then Labor Party’s decision to lower tariffs. Industrial relations has been significantly deregulated but the Labor Party promises that if it’s returned on Saturday to turn the clock back not to Keating and Hawke. Mr Beazley on industrial relations really wants to go back to really the pre-Keating / Hawke period in industrial relations, and then that of course leaves you with taxation reform of which I’ve said something during my speech.
BARRIE CASSIDY:
Barrie Cassidy, 7.30 Report, Prime Minister. Whatever might be revealed down the track, the methodology that Treasury employed, to calculate the price impact of a GST, do you still maintain that the spending patterns of the rich and the spending patterns of the poor are basically the same.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, what I maintain, Barrie, is that the method we have used to calculate the price effect of the GST is according to the Treasury the most accurate method of what happens. The most accurate way of measuring what happens. The method we are using is the same method that the Labor Party used for 13 years to index the old age pension. I mean, if the Labor Party is saying that the CPI adjustment that we’ve used in the tax plan is not enough for people on the pension, why is it that they used that method for 13 years to adjust the pension? Are they saying that they had for 13 years gutted the pensioners of Australia by not increasing the pension by a greater amount. I mean, I saw this absolutely desperately absurd comment from Kim Beazley this morning that there’s some secret analysis that shows the cost impact is five times what we’re admitting. There is no secret analysis that says that. And that is just a desperate, sort of election-eve scare which has no substance and in any event is utterly disproved by their own behaviour in Government. I mean, if indeed some other methodology was fairer and better and more accurate why is it that successive governments have not employed it?
PETER O’CONNOR:
Peter O’Connor, Bridge News, Prime Minister. Prime Minister, when you first came into office, you moved very quickly to set an objective of getting the budget back into surplus in your first term, an objective which you achieved. Now the Treasurer also very quickly set that underlying target ban for inflation of 2 to 3 per cent. Something that was also achieved, again, overachieved even. You’ve also set a target of reducing government debt as a proportion of GDP from 20 per cent down to 10 per cent.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I think that’s, I’m sorry.
O’CONNOR:
Well I, I’m fairly, well definitely the Treasurer has set that target and the, Mr Reith also set a target of reducing workers’ awards entitlements down to a maximum of 20. Again that’s a target you have achieved. Given you willingness to set targets over a range of policy areas such as fiscal, economic and labour market areas, why are you so loathe to set a target for the socially critical area of employment? And given your success in setting those targets as well?
PRIME MINISTER:
Mr O’Connor, that, yes certainly.
O’CONNOR:
I’m not talking about Mr Beazley’s targets because, I just mean targets generally.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I know that. I’m not suggesting for a moment you are. But you just wanted to make sure that I was under no misapprehension. Well, you’ve, you’ve mis-described a couple of things. I think actually we spoke rather proudly of that debt reduction as a potential achievement rather than as a target. And I think also, when you said that we set ourselves a target of reducing award entitlements we have never set ourselves a target of reducing the monetary entitlements of people, never. In the industrial relations area, the most misquoted thing in the industrial relations debate over the last two-and-a-half years were the remarks that I made in January of 1996 when I said that no person who went into an AWA would be worse off than the entitlements they got under the award. And that was sort of quickly bundled up and converted into a guarantee that no single Australian’s wage would ever vary during the time that I was Prime Minister. What we’ve simply said is that in monetary terms you’re not going to be worse off, and in fact we’ve really stuck to that and I don’t think people have been able to put a hole in that. I don’t think the nation is served by setting targets that are plainly on your track record to date unachievable. And that is what, and I will talk about Mr Beazley’s target, that is what he has done in relation to unemployment.
I can’t and won’t set a target on unemployment because I think that essentially misses the point. People want to be told how you get there. I mean I’d love to have unemployment down to 5 per cent in a couple of years time, I’d love to have it back to what it was when I left school in 1956. But I know enough about the way the Australian economy works, I know enough about the structure of the workforce, I know enough about the world environment in which we are operating, to realise that to sort of just set those targets out there without some backing to them is just, it’s just going to increase the level of cynicism in the Australian community about the deliverability of political commitments.
My commitment to the Australian people is to make all of the policy changes that will deliver a faster growing, more competitive Australian economy which will by its natural momentum generate more jobs. I also have a commitment to maintain as free as possible an industrial relations system consistent with the Australian tribute to the fair-go in that we do have a protective safety net for workers in this country. We are different from the Americans in that respect and I think we should remain different. I believe in a social security safety net and I believe in preserving a proper balance, but equally, if you go back to a rigid awards system and you slow the rate of further deregulation in the industrial relations area I think we’d be making a very big mistake. So that’s the commitment I make and I think that is the only realistic commitment to set yourself a target of 5 per cent when you haven’t described how you’re going to get there. You haven’t even acknowledged how many jobs need to be created in order to get there is, I think, inviting cynicism.
PAUL BONGIORNO:
Paul Bonjorno Network 10, Prime Minister. Just picking up on Barrie Cassidy’s question. If there is no secret document, why won’t the government release the 12 documents identified by the&nbsp;Sydney Morning Herald&nbsp;of the Treasury using the Household Expenditure Survey of the ABS. And is it not a fact that in 1985 the draft White Paper used this HES Survey in a points compensation package, that’s the Keating Consumption Tax Package, and indeed in 1991&nbsp;Fightback!&nbsp;the Hewson consumption tax package also used the HES Survey for its compensation package?
PRIME MINISTER:
And it’s also a fact that in 1991 the Treasury advised and the then Labor Government, Prime Minister Keating and, well soon to be Deputy Prime Minister Beazley, that that was a completely flawed methodology, it was inferior to the methodology being used to adjust the pension which is the methodology that we’ve employed in this taxation package and Mr Keating and Mr Beazley enthusiastically embraced that rejection of the HES approach. So what Mr Beazley by championing in at this last moment the HES approach, he is explicitly repudiating the stance that he took in 1991 on the advice of the same person who chaired the taskforce that advised the present Government on the composition of the tax plan.
MICHAEL HARVEY:
Michael Harvey from the&nbsp;Herald Sun&nbsp;Prime Minister. Jeff Kennett reckons that Victorians are all a pack of whinging softies because they don’t like cold showers. Do you agree with that and given that this now being talked about as a national crisis, a national disaster today – the Victorian gas shutdown – are you concerned that such an unsympathetic attitude might in fact foster sentiment against governments at all levels and cause a problem for you on Saturday?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t, my reading of what he said does not square with what you’ve said. I think that is an inaccurate extrapolation of what he said. I’ve seen a lot of remarks from Mr Kennett and they’ve measured and sensibile, and sympathetic. From my point of view let me simply say to my fellow Australians in Victoria, I’ve indicated to Mr Kennett, on several occasions, that the Federal Government stands ready to help in any way asked. This is a difficult situation, it ought to be separate and apart from the election campaign, I’ve not sought to intrude the Federal election campaign into the issue. I note that so far Mr Beazley has not sought to do that either. I don’t think the Australian public wants their personal discomfort in Victoria mixed up with this election campaign and I certainly don’t intend to do it. We will help in any way we can. Australians work together well in times of adversity and difficulty and I’ve no doubt they’ll continue to do that and I hope that supplies of gas can be restored as speedily as possible.
&nbsp;
JOHN MAIR:
John Mair from Reuters, Prime Minister. Mr Beazley this morning has said that he would be prepared after Saturday to form a government with the support of an independent, apart from One Nation, if that was the case and I was wondering…
PRIME MINISTER:
Now that’s a very, very interesting change.
JOHN MAIR:
I was wondering is that something you’re prepared to do if necessary to rule with the support of an independent, not necessarily One Nation? And also are you surprised that given the size of your majority that we’re in a situation where we’re talking about perhaps the Opposition winning, or even minority governments, or hung parliaments at this stage?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well nothing ever surprises me in politics – the answer to your last question. In answer to your first question is that I’m not going to speculate about the result. I don’t know what the result is going to be. I said at the beginning of the campaign it would be tough and tight and that remains the position. I don’t take anything for granted. We may have a majority of 44 seats, but in these days of detribalised politics, fewer people rusted on to party allegiances, you can have significant movements during election campaigns. I’m not going to speculate other than to repeat what I said before, I will make no deals with One Nation – none at all – and I will govern in Coalition with only one Party and that’s the National Party of Australia.
GEOFF BREUSCH:
Prime Minister to continue on from Michael Harvey’s question, the Victorian Trades Hall has called that the situation there be described as a disaster and is asking for $50 million in Federal funding, is that something you’ll be willing to consider independently or do you still need the phone call from Jeff Kennett?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it’s not a question – it’s a question not of any phone call. It’s a question of sensibly working through with the person and the government who is responsible for handling the matter. I mean it’s, I don’t want to be critical of the brothers and sisters in the Trades’ Hall, I really don’t, but I do, I am sort of constrained to think that perhaps it’s fairly easy to say that. I mean as far as I’m concerned I want to help, if Mr Kennett asks for help, we’ll provide that help and I’m quite sure that if there is any need for that assistance to be asked for then he will ask for it and we’re ready to do so.
Look I am very genuine in saying to you I think we ought to keep politics out of this. I mean I really do. I think this is quite a serious issue and it’s quite a challenge to the maturity of the Australian political system. That includes me, it includes Kim Beazley, but also includes you. It includes everybody. I mean we have a situation here where a lot of my fellow Australians are facing personal difficulty, not through the political fault of anybody. I mean even the most fervent Labor supporter couldn’t blame Kennett for what happened. I mean they might try but it wouldn’t be fair and you’ll notice that I think I displayed a certain amount of restraint in the remarks that I passed about that water problem in New South Wales, even though it occurred under the stewardship of the administration of a Labor Government. These things can happen to any government and it is a challenge to our maturity, particularly on the eve on an election campaign that we don’t trivialise it, we do our job, we help, we don’t try and score political points out of it and I think, if I may say so, that obligation of maturity extends to the media as well.
LOUISE MAHER:
Louise Maher from Radio 2UE and affiliated stations, Mr Howard. How would you sum up the impact of Pauline Hanson and One Nation on Australian society? Do you think her star has finally waned and do you believe One Nation’s promise that it will issue double-sided how-to-vote cards on Saturday?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, look, as far as their how-to-vote material is concerned I just don’t know, I have no idea, I have had no communication. I am not aware of any communication so I have no way of knowing what One Nation is going to do with its preferences beyond what has been said by its spokesman. Can I say that I don’t know what vote One Nation is going to get on Saturday. The polls suggest it will be lower than what it was in Queensland. I don’t, once again, know whether the polls on that are accurate or not. You asked me to sum up the impact of One Nation on Australian society. Can I say that I think it’s demonstrated the fundamental strengths, the tolerant characteristics and the fundamental decency of Australian society. One Nation was something that represents a phenomenon that is not peculiar to Australia. It is very easy for anybody to play on the sense of insecurity and the sense of fear that people feel at a time of economic change and social change and economic reform. I think what has happened over the past couple of months is that people have begun to realise what I have always seen to be the case and that is that One Nation offers no solutions at all to Australia’s problems. I thought one of the most perceptive articles on One Nation was a small profile in&nbsp;The Australian&nbsp;yesterday of a young researcher for, I think, the cattleman’s union based in Rockhampton, this young woman was described as having some of the best networks in rural provisional Queensland and she made the point that she didn’t think One Nation was making a lot of headway with rural people because it didn’t really have any answers. And that whilst there may have been a transient, peripheral attraction, after a while there were no answers. So, I thought that was a very interesting article. Whether it proves to be right or wrong, I don’t know, I’ll perhaps know at about half past seven on Saturday evening. I hope she was right because I don’t think One Nation does offer any solutions.
I have said before, and I have got into trouble from saying this so that won’t intimidate me from saying it again, that the 23 per cent of Queenslanders who voted for One Nation were not all racist. They certainly weren’t. They voted for One Nation for a mixture of reasons and many of them included just a, sort of, a disorganised sense of protest and bewilderment about the change that was overcoming them. And I remember when I went to Wondai after the One Nation success in the Queensland election and addressed a very large gathering and I have never forgotten this man who I met. He said: John, I am exactly the same age as you are. And he said: I have got a rural property. He said: I can’t sell it, and he said: it was handed down to me, so I am not making any money, I owe the bank about $100,000. He said: I can’t get a job, I am 58, and he said: I have got a grown family but I have still got a couple of teenage kids, he said: what do I do? Now, that is the dilemma that is faced. And, I mean, I said to him, in all honesty - I forget what his name was - I said: I don’t have an immediate answer to that, but I said: I feel for you and I understand it. And he said: look, I am just an ordinary Australian, and he said: if somebody comes along and says I have got some simple solution, you can’t blame me for coming along to listen. Now, this is a human dilemma that a lot of people face. And I think what you saw was One Nation exploiting that. And you saw One Nation talking to people in the pig industry and saying: well, look, the answer to your problems is to block all of the imports. And for a while that looked pretty sensible and then they suddenly realised that if you blocked those imports then their mates who are trying to export sugar and beef would have their exports blocked. And I think, in fact, and I’ll probably get into trouble for saying this but I will nonetheless say it. I think, in fact, the experience of the past few months will probably strengthen the quality of some of the debate on some of these issues because, in a sense, you have had a dry run, that’s probably a bad adjective, but you have had, sort of, a dry run of, sort of, the simplistic alternative and people are starting to see that it doesn’t work. I mean, it doesn’t work to block off imports, it doesn’t work to pretend that you can, sort of, maintain the exact precise size of an existing industry and that in a globalised economy there isn’t going to be a constant change in the composition of industry.
There’s no doubt that the greatest criticism I have of One Nation is the way in which it has described people according to their race. That is wrong and that is repugnant to the values of Australian society and all Australians irrespective of their ethnic background are entitled to decent treatment and respect and I have said frequently before as a fourth generation Australian on one or two sides that as far as I am concerned anybody who has embraced this country as their own, whatever their ethnic background, has as much right as I do to call Australia home. And that really is the greatest criticism I have. You ask me whether any final analysis was has been the impact. I think you have to make your own judgement on that. I am not as pessimistic as others. I am really not and I think the reaction of Australians over a period of time has demonstrated their fundamental tolerance. And the thing that has annoyed me most about this debate is the readiness of some people to typecast the whole thing as an illustration of the inherent intolerance and racism of the Australian community. I don’t believe that and I get very, very angry when people describe Australians as racist or intolerant.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
 Thank you very much. And can I say to my fellow Australians
   that, although the final result in terms of seats will not be determined
   before some days yet, it is clear that the Coalition will have a
   working majority in the new Parliament.
I want, first and foremost, to thank the Australian people for
   returning the Government. I want to thank the Australian people
   for embracing a bold, economic reform that is in the long-term interests
   of the Australian community.
Some declarations about political precedence have been made tonight.
   Let me make a declaration about political precedence. This is probably
   the first time in the recent experience of western political parties
   that a party has successfully won an election championing such a
   major reform which so readily lent itself to a dishonest fear campaign.
And I am immensely proud of the fact that the Coalition stuck to
   its guns, we stared down that fear campaign and that the Australian
   people came with us.
I want to commit myself and the members of my Government, once
   again to the service of the Australian people. I have always seen
   myself in public life as a servant of the Australian people. And
   I regard it as a privilege beyond belief to have been twice elected
   as Prime Minister of Australia.
We now have a mandate to implement the policies that we took to
   the Australian people that we so honestly and openly and candidly
   laid before the Australian people. We have weathered the ferocious
   fear campaign and we have won the mandate of the Australian people.
I want, tonight, to acknowledge with sadness the loss of a number
   of my colleagues who
have been defeated. I want to thank them for their service to the
   Liberal Party and to their service to the National Party. And I
   know I express Tim Fischer's gratitude of extending those sentiments
   and those thoughts.
I want to salute the spectacular performance of several of my colleagues
   and I know it's always bad to single people out, but I'm
   going to do it. I want to particularly single out Trish Draper in
   the seat of Makin in South Australia. And in New South Wales and
   I want to salute the magnificent performance of Danna Vale and Jackie
   Kelly. But to all of my colleagues who have won in very difficult
   circumstances, I profess my profound gratitude.
I also want to thank the Liberal Party organisation. I want to
   thank Tony Staley the Federal President and Lynton Crosby, the Federal
   Director, and also may I extend my thanks to the various state organisations
   for the work they did in bringing about this magnificent result.
We are here tonight victorious because of superb organisation in
   the seats that really mattered and superb cooperation between the
   Parliamentary Party and the organisation.
I want to salute Tim Fischer, the Leader of the National Party.
   Tim is a great colleague and a wonderful friend. And he faced a
   very vicious challenge in his own seat and he beat that off in magnificent
   style.
I also extend my gratitude to Peter Costello, the Deputy Leader
   of the Liberal Party who has been a great Treasurer and a great
   colleague to work with. And can I also particularly thank the Premier
   of Victoria, Jeff Kennett. Jeff has been a forthright supporter
   of the cause of taxation reform and I acknowledge the contribution
   that he made during my election campaign.
And I say to all of my fellow Australians, that the government
   that you have elected tonight will lead this country into the 21st
   century. The government you have elected tonight will be a government
   for all Australians. The government you have elected tonight will
   dedicate itself to the welfare of all of the Australian people.
   I have said on other occasions that this country has unparalleled
   assets. No nation on earth so uniquely combines the heritage of
   our western civilisation, our great links with the nations of North
   America and our placement here in the Asia Pacific region. And we
   have a capacity and an opportunity to use that conjunction of circumstances
   to our benefit and to the benefit of the region and to the benefit
   of the entire world.
I want to dedicate my government to the maintenance of traditional
   Australian values. And they include those great values of mateship
   and egalitarianism. They also mean that great Australian value of
   tolerance and of treating people decently and of not discriminating
   against people according to their race or ethnic background.
We are a nation of many parts and many origins. And we should never
   forget that. And we should see that as a tremendous asset.
And I also want to commit myself very genuinely to the cause of
   true reconciliation with the Aboriginal people of Australia by the
   centenary of Federation. We may differ and debate about the best
   way of achieving reconciliation, but I think all Australians are
   united in a determination to achieve it.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, I want to express my gratitude to
   two very special groups of people in my life. I want to thank my
   magnificent personal staff in particular, my Chief of Staff, Arthur
   Sinodinos. Through all the ups and downs in the last two-and-a-half
   years, Arthur and my personal staff have sustained me and kept me
   sane when the alternative seemed very likely. And I thank him and
   I thank all those around him very, very much for what they have
   done.
And finally, can I express my love and gratitude to my magnificent
   family. Thank you. No father could be prouder than I am of my three
   children. And I just want to say to Janette and to Melanie and to
   Tim and Richard, I love you very deeply and I thank you for everything
   that you've done for me.
And finally, to all of you wonderful people, you wonderful members
   and supporters of our wonderful Party, the Liberal Party of Australia,
   tonight belongs to you as much as it does to me. I thank you from
   the bottom of my heart for the loyalty that you've given me
   over the last two-and-a-half years and let's work together
   to build another great victory in three years time.
Thank you.


&nbsp;8 October 1998
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Phillip Holt and ladies and gentleman for those very warm greetings. Believe you me it’s a great delight to be here again as Prime Minister. Like any other grand final a Federal election is always unpredictable and this last one was no exception. But I think it’s always important when you’ve been through something like that, or rather the nation has been through something like that, it’s very important, particularly bobbing around in the sea of cynicism that seems to be our lot from time to time, to reflect upon the extraordinary privilege that we have with Australian democracy. We debate each other. We don’t gaol our political opponents in this country. What we do is we argue it out and we submit ourselves to the will of the people. And whatever may be the shortcomings of Australian politics, and there are undoubtedly many shortcomings of Australian politics, we should always celebrate the joy that we are a thoroughly democratic country where ultimately the will of the Australian people really counts.
I’ve been through 11 election campaigns as a Member of Parliament and as somebody who’s followed politics for not only all of his adult life but before I was an adult, and who first voted in the closest Federal election in post-war Australian history, that was the Federal election of 1961. If Bob Menzies were alive now he would think that my majority was positively delirious after his majority of only two in 1961. I think in many ways this election was conducted with more civility and more respect for opposing points of view than has been the case for a long time and I think the whole political process is the beneficiary as a consequence of that.
I want to pay tribute tonight to the contribution that Australian business, capital ‘A’, capital ‘B’, and also Australian businesses, the contribution that you have made to the quality of political and economic debate in this country particularly over the last two-and-a-half years. I can’t recall an occasion, an issue in which there has been more direct and more deep involvement by the Australian business community, not only but most particularly your own organisation, but more generally the business of Australia than there has been over recent months on the issue of taxation reform. Now all of you have heard a great deal about taxation reform over the last seven weeks. That’s the good news because you’re going to hear a lot more about it over the months ahead because until we’ve implemented what we took to the Australian people we’re not going to let go of that bone. And I want to make it very clear to you that having emerged from an election campaign that was heavily centered on the issue of taxation reform, the Government, as soon as the constitutional processes permit it, will forge ahead to present our program to the newly elected Australian Parliament. But in saying that I do so in the knowledge that the contribution that the business community made to the propagation of our proposals for taxation reform were quite immense. Without the support and the understanding of the business community I don’t believe that we would have received such support and such understanding for our program. Now I know there is a, and was and continues to be, a conjunction of interest. But I can think of other issues in the past where there’s been a conjunction of interest between the business community and the Government of the day where there hasn’t been such a combined pursuit of certain economic and policy goals.
In all the years that I’ve been in politics, and it now numbers almost 25, there have stood out four or five major issues of economic reform that have been essential for the strength and the welfare of the Australian community. We needed to turn our backs on the old attitudes we used to have towards tariff protection in this country. We needed to turn our backs on the old regulated financial system. We needed to adopt a new and different and more modern approach to industrial relations. And both sides of politics have played a role in breaking down old attitudes in those three areas. I think of the contribution of the former Labor Government with our support to the cause of financial deregulation. I also think of the contribution of that Government to tariff reform, once again with our support. I think of the efforts of many in my own party with the support of many in the business community to bring about changes in industrial relations policy so that now I don’t believe there is any likelihood, no matter what political outcomes there may be in the years ahead, that we can ever go back to the highly regulated industrial relations system that we once had in this country. And I believe that there are many representatives of the trade union movement who will be here tonight who would share the views that I have just expressed on that particular subject. But the one great stand out, the one area which I regarded as the greatest area of unfinished economic business in the Australian experience of the last quarter of the twentieth century was the cause of reforming our taxation system.
There have been many attempts over the last quarter of a century to reform our taxation system. Several attempts were made during the lifetime of the Fraser Government. There was one attempt made by my old sparring partner, Paul Keating, when he was Treasurer in the mid 1980s and he made that attempt on that occasion with my support as Opposition Treasury spokesman. And there was another courageous attempt made, which failed, by John Hewson in 1992. And in the lead up to the last election there was no shortage of people who argued that we shouldn’t attempt to do it again. There were no shortage of people who argued that what we really had to do if we wanted to get taxation reform was to find some other way of winning the election and then after we’d won the election then announce to the Australian people that we’d suddenly discovered that taxation reform was in the long term interest of the Australian community. Now that was a course of action that we rejected because I came to the very strong belief, that I’m sure many Australians support, that the nature of political combat in this country now is that the only way that you can really win any kind of political or moral authority to bring about a major reform is to actually make that major reform a central element of your re-election campaign. If we had tried any other course of action then I don’t believe we would have had the remotest possibility of winning Parliamentary or indeed public sympathy or support for the plans that we had in mind.
There has been a lot of debate about mandates. There’s been a lot of debate about what we are now entitled to do. Can I simply say to you again and through you to the Australian people, we made taxation reform a central issue of this election campaign. We were up front, we were unashamed, we were forthright, we were open, we were honest, and we didn’t hide anything about it. And having won that election it is our intention to press ahead with all of the resources at our disposal to implement the program on which we were elected. And can I say that just before I left home to come here tonight I saw the Premier of New South Wales on television saying that he supported our right to implement the taxation program on which we were elected. And can I say that I welcome the remarks that Mr Carr made. I welcome the fact that he acknowledges that any government commanding support in the Lower House of an Australian Parliament has the right to implement the program on which that government has been elected. And I will look forward to Mr Carr’s support and I will look forward to the support of other Premiers at the specially convened meeting of Premiers with the Treasurer and myself that will take place in the first half of November because I promised in the course of putting together the taxation plan to take to the last election that before the legislation was introduced there would be a process of consultation and a central element of that consultation will be a special Premiers’ conference. Can I say to the States of Australia that you have a lot at stake in the implementation of this taxation plan because it represents the first serious endeavor by any Federal government in Australia since World War II to set right the Commonwealth-State financial relations of our nation.
Over a decade of time from the implementation of the plan it will deliver to the Australian States in aggregate $25 to $30 billion more than the States would receive through a continuation of the existing financial arrangements. It represents the wherewithal to deliver to the States of Australia the financial muscle to underwrite the cost of those essential services in areas such as police, health, housing and education which are such important responsibilities of all the States of Australia. It is a very important reform. It’s a reform that I’ve campaigned long and hard for. It’s a reform that will further strengthen the Australian economy and it’s a reform that is essential as Australia faces the international economic environment. And I want to say one or two words about the international economic environment. The attitude that the Government has towards it and the role that I believe Australia can play particularly in our own region. It is important at the present time that we recognise the difficulties that exist in the international economic outlook. But it’s also important that we not be overcome by any sense of undue pessimism or any sense of panic. The world is not lurching towards recession. The world still remains a very beckoning and a very strong place economically in many respects. The most powerful economy in the world, the United States, is still experiencing very strong growth and very low levels of unemployment. The second most powerful economy in the world, Japan, for the first time in years appears to be addressing some of the fundamental structural changes that are needed so that that country can renew its contribution to growth particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. The major economies of Europe are still strong. We have relatively, indeed historically low inflation levels in the western world and we are enjoying very low levels of interest rates. There has not been a lurch towards protectionism. There has been in the face of great economic difficulty a continued pursuit of policies of trade liberalisation.
And all of this means my friends that it’s very important that the difficulties that undoubtedly exist internationally be kept in perspective. It's very important that we don’t embrace the language of pessimism and the language of recession. It’s important that we understand the difficulties of those in our immediate region and it’s important that we draw lessons from their experience. And it’s also important, in no selfish sense, that we take advantage as Australians of the immense economic, political and social assets that this country has. Now is a time, particularly as we move towards the centenary of the federation of Australia, now is the time for us to share fully the opportunities that lie our way, particularly in our region, because of the immense assets that we have.
I’ve spoken often of the unique intersection that I believe Australia occupies in the world. We are, in this part of the world, a projection of western civilisation with all of the advantages that that has but without the disadvantages of such things that we have not thankfully inherited from Europe of class division and class structures.
We enjoy very close relations with the nations of North America, particularly the United States. But here we are in the Asian Pacific region with a very strong and vital and vigorous and forward-looking Asian component of our own Australian population. We have a strong economy. We have a liberal democracy with strong social values. We have a sound legal system. We have stable, prudential and well-regulated banks. We speak the English language. We have, in other words, a combination of assets that can make this country a hub, a centre, of economic and social activity for our own particular region.
I’ve frequently said that one of the opportunities we have, one of the great opportunities we have, as we move into the 21st Century, and it’s been made all the more obvious and likely because of the benefits of our taxation reforms, we have every opportunity to make one of the major cities of Australia the financial centre of the Asia-Pacific region as we move into the 21st Century. There is no reason why the Wall Street of the Asia-Pacific region should not go through the centre of an Australian city in the 21st Century.
The message that I would bring to you tonight, domestically, is that the Australian people have re-elected a government that is determined to get on with the business of further economic reform. It has re-elected a government that believes that continued economic reform is still necessary. It has re-elected a government that understands that if you are to be successful with economic reform you must satisfy two criteria. You must first of all persuade the people that it is in the long-term benefit and interests of the nation. And, secondly, you must satisfy the people that the reform details are fair and properly treat all sections of the Australian community.
I know there is much talk in our community and, indeed, in other like communities of the possibility that we have entered a stage of reform fatigue. I know that many on the political horizon and one party in particular that didn’t do so well last weekend, has sought to take advantage of the inevitable personal dislocation and social discontent that flows from economic and social reform and change. Change and reform is unavoidable in a modern society.
The art of good leadership and the art of good government in a modern society is to hang on to and to defend and to stand by those things from our past, and those values from our past, that continue to serve us well and continue to be relevant as we move into the future, while at the same time turning against and putting aside those practices and attitudes that no longer make a positive contribution to our future. And it falls to modern government and it certainly falls to the re-elected Australian government to hang on to those great Australian values of fairness and tolerance and equality and mateship that are still relevant as we move into the 21st Century because they are enduring Australian values that are important today and will continue to be important into the future.
And it’s also important that we recognise that as we go into the future there are some things that must change. And if we don’t change them, then we’re not going to properly fulfil our destiny as a nation and properly realise opportunities for our people. And that is why we have argued for economic and other reforms. It is why we took a risk in arguing for taxation reform. It is why we said that whatever the difficulties and the challenges that that involved, it was a journey that had to be taken because it was in the long-term interests of the Australian community.
I said on Saturday night, when I spoke at the Wentworth Hotel, that it was an immense and an almost unbelievable privilege to have been twice elected as Prime Minister of Australia. There couldn’t be a more exciting and a more challenging time to be in government in Australia than as we come towards the centenary of the federation of our nation.
We do occupy a special place in the world. We do have assets, we have talents, we have something to offer the world that no other country can offer. We combine things in our history, our geography, our culture, our economic circumstances, our way of life and our national values, that no other country has and we have opportunities. And we therefore have in front of us an opportunity to use that unique conjunction of assets and circumstances not only to the positive benefit of our own nation and our own people, but also to the positive benefit of the rest of the world, particularly of our own region. Of course we face international economic challenges. But it is important that we keep our sense of perspective, we keep our sense of balance, we reject pessimism, we decry talk of international recession and we remain positive and optimistic about the future.
Can I conclude, once again, by congratulating your organisation on the tremendous contribution that it has made to the economic life of Australia. I want to thank it for the cooperation that it has extended to the Government. I want to compliment it on the co-operative relationship that it continues to maintain with the trade union movement in Australia, and I think that level of co-operation is a mark of the goodwill of the Australian community, the great bulk of the Australian community, to reach decisions and to have attitudes which are for the long-term benefit of our nation.
Thank you very much for inviting me here tonight. It has been a marvellous occasion for me to express my gratitude to many in the business community for the help and the understanding it has extended to me and to my Government over the last two-and-a-half years and I look forward, over the next three years, to continued close friendship and close co-operation for the benefit of the whole of the Australian community.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Mr Dauth; to Mr Morgan; to Her Excellency, the
 Ambassador of the Republic of the Philippines; to my Ministerial colleagues
 who I welcome here today and most particularly, in the context of
 this occasion, the re-appointed Cabinet Minister, the Minister for
 Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and also the Cabinet Minister
 I've appointed as responsible for reconciliation, Mr Philip Ruddock;
 to my many other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to thank the organisers of this exhibition for the opportunity
 of participating in this opening and the opportunity that it gives
 me to say a few words on behalf of the Government about what the exhibition
 represents.
This exhibition will showcase to the world, and most particularly
 to our region, one of the great realities and one of the enduring
 realities and one of the enduring strengths of the Australian nation
 and that is its very rich cultural and ethnic diversity.
Many words have been spoken about the diversity of Australia and many
 things have been said about what represents the triumphs of the Australian
 nation. And also in the process of saying those words and writing
 those things we acknowledge, of course, like any other nation, our
 past and our history has had its blemishes. But the sum total, the
 balance, is a very positive and a very favourable one of which all
 of us as Australians, irrespective of our background and irrespective
 of whether we were born in this country or whether our parents were
 born in this country or we have adopted Australia as our country,
 it is something that we all share in common, that we do have a very
 rich record of achievement and a great record of tolerance and openness
 of which we should all be undeniably proud.
We have, of course, in our history a special place for the indigenous
 people of Australia. And that special place is represented in the
 exhibition and it is properly and fully acknowledged in the exhibition
 as rightly it should be.
This is an occasion to remind us that in the last 50 years we've
 had five-and-a-half million people who have immigrated to this country
 from 150 different nations around the world. There isn't an example
 anywhere in the world of the successful absorption and integration
 into the broader Australian community of such a diverse group of people.
 We have been able to do it better than any other country. We have
 been able to unite people of that diversity into a harmonious, positive,
 forward-looking Australian society. But we have been able to do it
 in a way that continues to respect the individual racial and ethnic
 and cultural background of the different groups that make up the Australian
 nation.
As I said on the night of the last election, Australia was a nation
 of many parts and many origins. The things that unite us as Australians
 will always be more powerful and more enduring than the things that
 divide us. And we have been able to achieve something quite unique
 in the world. We've been able to achieve a sense of national
 unity and preserve our sense of nationhood and our characteristic
 identity as Australians without denying to the many parts that make
 up the sum of the Australian nation a right to preserve and to nurture,
 to love and to enjoy and to cherish their individual ethnic identity
 and origin and the culture that goes with that individual ethnic origin
 and identity.
So this is an occasion, and the opening of this exhibition is an opportunity
 to talk about, in a very confident and assertive way of the Australian
 achievement, particularly over the last 50 years. But it's also
 an opportunity and an occasion to remind ourselves that that achievement
 is not something that can be taken for granted. That we must always
 reaffirm the essential principles of tolerance and decent treatment
 of all Australians irrespective of their background. That we should
 always, as a people, reject and shun intolerance and discrimination.
 We should always proclaim the self-evident importance that every man
 and woman in this country is entitled to equal treatment irrespective
 of their racial, national, religious, ethnic or other origin. And
 that any kind of racial discrimination is abhorrent to the Australian
 value and to the Australian way of life. And that any practices or
 attitudes that encourage intolerance and encourage insensitivity towards
 people on account of their racial or religious background or intolerance
 is something that should be rejected and shunned by all Australians
 and that is one of the verities of modern Australian life and it's
 a verity that we practice, it's a verity that we proclaim here
 in Australia and it is something that we communicate and we proclaim
 to the rest of the world.
One could not encompass in a short speech of this nature the contribution
 of people of so many different backgrounds have made to the Australian
 nation. We think of the massive contribution of so many people of
 diverse backgrounds to our cultural life, to our business life, to
 our political life, to our diplomatic life, to our sporting life.
 We see the entry into sports hither to be seen as somehow or other
 connected to one particular aspect of our national identity or our
 national history of people of different and diverse backgrounds. And,
 of course, the contribution that people of so many different backgrounds
 have made to the view the rest of the world has of Australia has been
 absolutely incalculable.
It is a well accepted fact that one of the many things that swung
 the International Olympic Committee in favour of Sydney those several
 years ago and one of the reasons why we will have the opportunity
 in this beautiful city of hosting the Olympic Games in the year 2000
 was the knowledge of the racial diversity and the cultural harmony
 and diversity of the Australian nation. And it was something that
 weighed very heavily in our favour and something that worked very
 much to our credit. And there is much to celebrate in the modern Australian
 nation.
We are, as I have remarked on many occasions, a nation that occupies
 a unique intersection. We are in so many ways a projection of Western
 civilisation in this part of the world. We have deep and enduring
 links with Britain and the other nations of Europe and we share much
 of the great cultural and politically liberal inheritance, and I say
 liberal not in any party political sense but in a generic sense, of
 European background. We also have very profound links with the nations
 of North America and we have shared with the United States of America
 the most powerful and the largest democracy in the world many experiences
 both in war and in peace.
But here we are in the Asian-Pacific region of the world and we have
 within the Australian nation itself a very, very vibrant community
 of people of Asian descent who are playing a magnificent role in contributing
 to the strength and the vitality of the modern Australia. In combining
 those three things we have a special opportunity and we have characteristics
 and assets that no other country in the world has. And we have an
 opportunity if we use those characteristics and those assets in an
 effective way we have an opportunity to achieve things that no other
 country can achieve.
We are seen in Asia as having the advantages without the disadvantages
 of our European and our American associations. We are seen in Europe
 and in North America as having insights into the politics and the
 culture and the life of the nations of the Asia-Pacific region. Not
 only because of our geographic proximity but also because of the people-to-people
 links, that exist between so many Australians of Asian descent and
 the countries of that region.
And when I think of that unique intersection we occupy, that unique
 conjunction of cultural and historical and geographical assets I can
 only but be very excited and enthusiastic about the opportunities
 that lie in front of this country as we move into the 21st
 Century.
It's incredibly exciting and positive time to be alive in Australia,
 to be involved in the affairs of our nation and to have the opportunity
 of sharing in all those events that are going to unfold in the next
 few years  the Olympic Games, the celebration of 100 years of
 the Australian Federation, the achievement, I hope, of a lasting reconciliation
 between the indigenous people of our country and the rest of the Australian
 community. And what this exhibition will do will be to say confidently
 to the rest of the world what modern Australia represents. It represents
 a group of people who are proud of what we have achieved, acknowledge
 the mistakes that we have made, celebrate our tolerance and our diversity
 and thank the peoples of the world for the contribution over the years
 they have made to the building of the Australian nation.
So, therefore, as Prime Minister I am particularly delighted to congratulate
 the organisers of the exhibition, to wish them well, to thank them
 for the many months of toil that they have put into establishing this
 exhibition. I know it will be a huge success because it will tell
 the truth about Australia and it will represent the modern Australia
 to the rest of the world in a most effective and illuminating fashion.
 I declare it open. Thank you.
 [Ends]


E&amp;OE............................................................................................
 I am grateful for the opportunity to be here tonight. There
 could hardly be a more appropriate time for you to meet in Australia
 - for two reasons.
The first is that in Australia we have recently implemented major
 reforms to the regulatory framework for our financial system. The
 Treasurer is justly proud of these changes and the complementary corporate
 law economic reform programme. He has already spoken to you about
 them and I will not say more than that we believe we have a system
 which is at the leading edge of the world's best practice.
Given the financial storm that has hit the world, we are very pleased
 that we strengthened our system when we did. And that is the second
 reason why your meeting is so timely.
We confront an unprecedented degree of instability in international
 financial markets. The impact on Australia's region has been
 colossal. The debate about reducing this instability is vigorous.
 It is crucial that we reach practical conclusions as soon as possible.
We know that the problems that led to the present situation stem from
 a variety of sources: inadequacies in the management of national economies,
 inadequacies in corporate behaviour, and inadequacies in the world's
 financial system.
Efforts to rebuild stability need to take account of the part that
 each has played. As banking supervisors, you have an important role
 in all of them. I will say something about the issues of national
 and international financial sector supervision but I would first like
 to put my comments in a political and an Asia-Pacific context.
Economic growth
The point that we need to remember is that the ultimate aim of our
 activities as governments and financial market supervisors is to improve
 the security and welfare of our people. The key to this is sustainable
 economic growth.
Without sustainable economic growth, improved living standards are
 not possible. Nor is better education for our children, nor are jobs
 for them, nor are health services, transport infrastructure, pensions
 for our old people and so on. Nor ultimately is our capacity to defend
 our sovereignty and maintain our security.
In the past two decades, economic growth has transformed Australia's
 region, the lives of the people in it and the relationships between
 the countries in it. Starting with Japan after the war, East Asian
 economies have grown at extraordinary rates. Millions of people were
 lifted out of poverty. Countries in the region became politically
 more stable and open. The region developed a sense of shared interests
 and a sense of community. The foundation and consolidation of APEC
 was a visible sign of this.
Many of these benefits are now threatened. At a human level, unemployment
 has increased massively. Families face great hardship. Food shortages
 and malnutrition have reappeared. Children are being withdrawn from
 school. The internal political pressures created by these developments
 are immense. Relationships between countries are tested.
The most important aim of these countries and the region as a whole
 therefore must be to get back on to the path of sustained growth as
 soon as possible. This must be the focus of the APEC leaders meeting
 which takes place in Kuala Lumpur in mid-November.
What should we do?
Keeping economies and markets open
The first thing APEC can do is make sure regional economies and markets
 stay open.
Recent financial instability and the role of hedge funds and short-term
 money flows have revived fears of globalisation. By opening their
 borders to the free flow of goods, services and capital, governments,
 it is sometimes said, have cost their people jobs and surrendered
 their countries' sovereignty. Others say open markets are all
 very well in good times, but in bad times we need to raise barriers
 to protect ourselves.
APEC must stand against that view. Open markets provide the opportunity
 for economic growth and the enormous benefits from it.
The worst possible response to the crisis would be to put up the shutters.
 That would result in competition to raise tariffs and barriers within
 the region and outside. We saw the consequences of this sort of policy
 in the Great Depression of the 1930s. Others won't keep their
 markets open, if we don't.
In 1994 in Indonesia, APEC leaders committed themselves to free trade
 and investment in the region by 2010 for developed economies and 2020
 for developing economies. That commitment helped bring the Uruguay
 Round of the GATT to a successful conclusion, and the implementation
 of binding agreements to reduce trade barriers around the globe.
In 1998 in Kuala Lumpur, APEC must recommit itself to those goals.
 I would like to see a concrete demonstration of that commitment by
 agreement to move ahead with early liberalisation in the full range
 of sectors agreed in Vancouver last year. I would like APEC to challenge
 others to enter a new broad-based round of trade negotiations in the
 World Trade Organisation.
Economic governance
The second vital step for APEC economies is to take decisive action
 to improve the transparency and accountability of government and corporate
 decision making.
In part, present problems can be ascribed to a weak capacity to manage
 international capital flows, to the vulnerability of companies and
 governments to special interests and political cronyism.
There is no point in denying this. Efforts to do so will be received
 with scepticism. Reforms are needed to regain international confidence.
APEC economies should therefore undertake to work immediately towards
 implementing the relevant codes of international best practice.
I have in mind as a start the Basle Core Principles for Effective
 Banking Supervision. Other relevant ones are the principles of the
 International Organisation of Securities Commissions for securities
 regulation, their disclosure standards for cross-border offerings,
 the IMF's special data dissemination standard and the IMF's
 code of good practice on fiscal transparency.
This will not be easy for all APEC economies. They will need time
 and help. That help can come from a great variety of institutions
 and duplication needs to be avoided.
The Australian government has engaged a consultant to survey both
 the needs of regional economies for technical assistance on economic
 governance and what is being done to meet those needs. There are substantial
 gaps.
I will be announcing in Kuala Lumpur a package of bilateral assistance
 which will help economies fill those gaps, and I will be encouraging
 other APEC members in a position to help to do likewise.
In Australia, we have been improving our own systems. I mentioned
 our new corporate and financial regulatory framework.
We will shortly be introducing into Parliament the most fundamental
 improvements to our tax system since the Second World War. The reforms
 will make for a more efficient and reliable revenue base. They will
 make industry and exporters more competitive. They will provide more
 incentive for Australians to be creative and expand their horizons.
The government has invited the private sector to make proposals to
 reform the corporate tax structure. We will build on the range of
 tax measures we announced in December 1997 to make Australia more
 attractive as a centre for financial services.
The government is committed to seeing a major Australian city become
 a major world financial centre. I have charged the Treasurer with
 producing an action agenda that will extend what we have already done
 in order to achieve this outcome. In the new government, I have appointed
 a minister for financial services and regulation specifically to work
 on this with the Treasurer.
The international financial system
The third vital step for APEC is to put its weight behind proposals
 for reform of the international financial architecture.
It is the case that many economies were ill equipped to manage capital
 flows. It is the case that transparency and accountability were lacking.
 But it is not the case that these economies got what they deserved.
 Rather, they got a whole lot more than they deserved. And I don't
 think anyone will dispute that.
Companies must take some of the blame. As the Treasurer said to you
 the other night, sensible judgments about risk were abandoned. People
 grew complacent, and got used to quick and easy profits. Then they
 panicked.
The global financial system also failed us. The sudden withdrawal
 of funds knocked companies and economies off their feet much as the
 powerful undertow of an ocean wave pulls the feet from under swimmers
 and drags them out to sea.
Economies all around the world have been affected by the contagion,
 including some that are clearly well run. In mentioning Mr Stiglitz's
 apposite analogy about even well-maintained rowing boats being swamped
 at sea I don't want to be accused of taking sides in a sensitive
 institutional rivalry.
I therefore strongly support President Clinton's call for urgent
 action to reform the international financial system. The G22 has produced
 some worthwhile discussion papers. We now need some practical outcomes.
To my mind three areas stand out as requiring action.
The first is the need for better targeted disclosure requirements
 which would focus on the gaps in current information on financial
 markets, including the major private sector participants. Measures
 need to be developed for monitoring and supervising highly leveraged
 short-term financial flows, off balance sheet commitments and derivative
 transactions.
The second is the need for measures to better manage future crises
 and to facilitate private sector involvement in crisis management.
 These might include standfast arrangements to prevent lenders from
 exiting economies in a destructive stampede, collective action clauses,
 orderly workouts involving rollovers, reschedulings and debt-equity
 swaps.
The third is the need for the IMF to be able to provide speedy and
 substantial support to appropriately qualified countries caught in
 international contagion, analogous to domestic lender-of-last resort
 facilities.
Speaking to a group who might be dubbed the grand regulators 
 rather than masters  of the universe, I should probably say
 quickly that I am not in favour of unnecessarily burdensome controls.
 We do not want to constrain the natural workings of the market beyond
 what is necessary to ensure its stable operation.
It is clear that the private sector must be included in discussions
 on how to improve the international financial system.
That is why I have established a task force to report to me on these
 issues. I will preside over the first meeting tomorrow afternoon.
 It will be composed half each from the private sector and the public
 sector, with some of the most senior banking and financial services
 figures in our country alongside the heads of the relevant government
 agencies.
I am looking for substantive and imaginative suggestions for Australia
 to champion in the appropriate international forums.
APEC economies have a big interest in early harvests from discussions
 about these issues. We need an effective regional voice in this debate.
That is why I strongly support the G22 as the most appropriate international
 forum to develop these measures.
We do not need to completely rebuild the international architecture.
 The IMF will continue to have a central role, and the other institutions
 such as the World Bank and the Bank of International Settlements play
 important roles - each in its own field.
Nevertheless, the world has changed dramatically since these institutions
 were established. In creating a consensus on improvements to the financial
 system, a broadly based grouping of countries is a valuable asset.
I can see merit in a leaders level meeting of the G22 to lock in measures
 to improve the financial system, and would willingly lend my support
 to any proposals to that end.
Growth-promoting policies
These three steps are vital elements for returning to the path of
 sustainable growth and restoring confidence in the region's economies.
 The fact is, however, that they will inevitably take time to have
 an impact. In the meantime we are faced with the short-term problems.
We must focus on what can be done now to ensure that growth resumes
 and to avoid a major credit crunch.
In this regard, the focus has to be in the first place on the largest
 and second largest economies in the world: the United States and Japan.
The recent steps taken by the United States to maintain growth have
 been reassuring. They are a practical demonstration of President Clinton's
 recent promise to keep the US economy growing and open to the products
 and services of others.
Japan has made very generous contributions to regional countries hit
 by the crisis, having already pledged support worth $42 billion. It
 has not always received due credit for that.
The steps that it has foreshadowed to recapitalise its banks and stimulate
 its economy are welcome. The rest of the world, however, is waiting
 for a sign that the measures are biting. Confidence must be rebuilt
 in Japan's economy both amongst its own people and in the rest
 of the world. With over two-thirds of East Asia's GDP, Japan
 must get back on the right track if the rest of the region is to dig
 itself out of the hole it is in.
With bipartisan support, the Australian government has made a significant
 contribution to cushioning the impact of the recession in the most
 affected countries and to restoring their financial health. Altogether,
 we have pledged $3 billion for the three regional IMF packages. In
 addition, we made large increases in aid for Thailand and Indonesia.
We have also taken a prominent role in trying to generate international
 support for these countries and to deepen the understanding of their
 individual characteristics, especially in the case of Indonesia.
As for Australia's own economy, it is still growing strongly.
 In the financial year just ended, it grew 4 per cent. We will be affected
 by the slowdown in the region and we have been buffeted by currency
 volatility. But with a strong budget surplus, low inflation and low
 interest rates, greater diversification of exports and strong domestic
 demand we are well placed to continue to grow.
Regional economies in recession must not be allowed to contract any
 further than they already have. Domestic demand must be encouraged.
 The plight of the poorest must also be taken into account  an
 issue which the World Bank and the IMF have recognised through the
 relaxation of fiscal targets.
Early this year, I personally urged the leaders of the major economies
 and the World Bank to cooperate to ensure that trade finance was available
 so that economic activity could continue.
Australia provided for an additional total of $1.4 billion in trade
 credit insurance. Japan has recently announced a further $30 billion
 worth of assistance some of which I understand will be available for
 trade finance. Singapore's prime minister, Goh Chok Tong, has
 made a proposal for a multilateral approach to trade credit. I think
 it is time for a renewed effort to develop a coordinated international
 approach in this area.
Neither pessimism nor optimism - but realism
Assessments of the region have swung all too quickly from extreme
 and overblown optimism to extreme and unwarranted pessimism. We need
 to keep a sense of perspective.
The impact of the financial crisis on the region has been huge, in
 some cases devastating. At the risk of entering another ideological
 struggle by mentioning Paul Krugman, I quote his calculation that,
 were Thailand's experience translated to the United States, it
 would be as if the $200 billion net inflow of foreign investment the
 United States receives each year were suddenly to become in the next
 year an outflow of $1 trillion.
I continue to be astonished sometimes by the lack of comprehension
 of the scale of the impact of the crisis on a country like Indonesia.
 We need to understand the huge task of political and economic restructuring
 that is being required of Indonesia. Without being Pollyannaish, we
 should recognise that despite all the difficulties it is indeed making
 some progress. It needs help and it is worth helping.
We need to understand that not all countries in East Asia or even
 Southeast Asia are the same as each other. Thailand's problems
 are different from Indonesia's or Korea's.
The fact is that growth in the region hasn't been the result
 of a miracle now gone bust or merely built on the back of speculation
 and short-term capital flows.
It has been built on the hard work, the thrift, the skills, the ingenuity,
 and the determination of people in the region to develop and to reap
 the benefits of economic growth. And it has been built on the work
 of regional governments in developing the infrastructure and systems
 necessary to support and nurture that growth.
Those qualities, skills and infrastructure remain in the region. Many
 - like Indonesia - are enormously rich in natural resources.
If APEC economies keep markets open, improve their economic governance
 and engage in efforts to strengthen the international financial system,
 they will regain international confidence and they will return to
 sustainable growth.
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Bob, and to all of my fellow Liberals here in
 Queensland I would like to thank you very warmly for that immensely
 encouraging and supportive welcome. It's very difficult, on an
 occasion like this, to really summon the right words to express the
 sense of gratitude, the sense of excitement and the sense of anticipation
 of our Liberal achievements yet to be realised. Because what has happened
 over the last month and what happened in the election on the 3rd
 of October in so many ways was more important, more crucial, more
 emphatic and more successful than our victory in March of 1996. What
 we have done by winning again and winning again in a convincing fashion
 is to give to the Coalition a heaven-sent opportunity to remake the
 political map of Australia.
I want to start my remarks this morning by congratulating Bob Carroll
 and all the other office bearers of the Queensland Division on their
 election to their respective positions. I do express my gratitude
 to the Queensland organisation, to your President, to your State Director,
 Greg Goebel, and to all the other staff and all the other branch and
 conference members who worked so very hard to deliver what is, by
 historical standards, a quite extraordinary result. For the Coalition
 to hold 19 out of the 26 federal divisions in Queensland and 14 of
 those divisions to be held by the Liberal Party is a very remarkable
 achievement.
Our sweeping win in 1996 delivered a first-class group of people into
 the Parliament. The Labor Party was left here in Queensland with a
 bare two seats and one seat, Oxley, in the hands of an Independent.
 And I do want to record my regret and my gratitude and my sense of
 political commiseration with a number of my colleagues and friends
 who were not successful on the 3rd of October.
I do want to thank Andrea West and Elizabeth Grace and Graeme McDougall,
 three members who lost their seats through no fault of their own but
 through the inevitable swing back, to some degree, of the political
 pendulum which was to be expected after the subsidence of the intense
 anti-Keating feeling of March of 1996. But all of them worked extremely
 hard as members of Parliament and I express my gratitude to them and
 my sense of thanks for the work that they did as very dedicated, committed
 and hard-working local members. To those people who fought as candidates,
 not being members of Parliament and who were unsuccessful  and
 I don't think anybody will mind me particularly singling out
 Rod Henshaw for the campaign that he waged in the seat of Dickson.
 To Cameron Thompson, the victor in Blair, and to all others who campaigned
 so very hard and who won so convincingly.
It is, as I said, by any stretch of political comparison a great result
 here in Queensland and it reflects very favourably on the work of
 the Liberal Party here in Queensland, a party that has gone through
 difficulties over the years and has faced challenges, particularly
 in the nature of Coalition politics here in Queensland which, as I
 don't need any reminding, have their own distinctive flavour
 and characteristic. But you've done it well and you've done
 it convincingly and once again the Liberal Party and the National
 Party working together, separate political organisations, separate
 and distinctive philosophies on some issues but nonetheless always
 united in a determination to politically destroy the Australian Labor
 Party.
It is very important in the wake of a victory such as we achieved
 on the 3rd of October to understand the nature of what
 was achieved and to understand the true meaning and the character
 of that victory. It is always a mistake for a political party to misread
 an election result. Paul Keating did it in 1993 and he paid very dearly
 in 1996. It was always a mistake for us to imagine that the extraordinarily
 high swings that were achieved in 1996 could be maintained forever
 because there was within that vote, as I said earlier, an intense,
 almost unprecedented degree of feeling within the Australian community
 that a change of government was needed.
In the years that I've been actively involved in politics I've
 experienced, on a number of occasions, in 1972, in 1975, in 1983 and
 again in 1996, an intense and obvious and unstoppable desire on the
 part of the Australian people for a change of government. But on other
 occasions that hasn't been present. And inevitably, therefore,
 we faced a fight to retain all of the ground that we had won in 1996.
 That we were able to win by a comfortable majority of 12 seats which
 by any historical analysis is a reasonable, ordinary, working majority
 for any incumbent government.
We face the challenge of ensuring that our victory in 1998 is followed
 by subsequent victories in the years ahead but that won't be
 achieved by assuming that what operated in 1998 is going to operate
 in the year 2001. I've said on a number of occasions since the
 election that every election is an island. There is no such thing
 as a continuum in the politics of this country. Each election throws
 up different issues, different challenges and different circumstances.
 And I can see in their reaction to the result of 1998 the seeds of
 the Labor Party's grand illusion. I don't think the Labor
 Party really does understand that the circumstances of 1998 won't
 be present in the year 2001. And just as 1998 was very different from
 1996, so the year 2001 will be very different from 1998.
We've learnt a lot of things from the last election but one of
 the things that we have learnt from the last election is that when
 it comes to marginal seat campaigning the true professionals in Australia
 are the members of the Liberal Party. We watched election after election
 being taken from us in the 1980s because the Labor Party out campaigned
 us in marginal seats. We've now been able to turn that experience
 on its head because one of the many lessons to come out of 1998 was
 the superb marginal seat campaigning of many of our members. And I
 thank them and I congratulate all of them for that.
Something that won't be present, of course, in the year 2001
 is the political challenge of introducing a bold tax reform plan.
 We all knew that that added a special dimension of difficulty to the
 campaign. We all knew that any plan of that magnitude and boldness
 was naturally exposed to an intensely dishonest fear campaign and,
 of course, the Labor Party didn't disappointed us on that score.
 They ran one of the most dishonest, ferociously simplistic, destructive,
 against the national interest, political campaigns that I have seen
 in 25 years in politics. Everybody who's had anything to do with
 the governance of this country over the last quarter of a century,
 whether they're Labor, Liberal or National, knows in their heart
 that this country needs fundamental taxation reform  everyone
 knows that.
And in their own way, in various times holding other positions, three
 successive leaders of the Australian Labor Party, Bob Hawke, Paul
 Keating and Kim Beazley, have espoused the same cause that I took
 to the Australian people on the 3rd of October. They espoused
 the cause of taxation reform. And if ever there was a time that something
 had to be called for the long-term interest of our country it was
 on the 3rd of October and that issue was taxation reform.
 And I am immensely proud of the fact that the Liberal Party of Australia
 had the courage, the determination, the resilience and the commitment
 to the national interest to stick to our guns and to go that election
 with a bold plan of taxation reform.
I and many people in this room have wanted taxation reform in this
 country for more than 20 years and at long last we have the authority
 of the Australian people to do it. And I want to say to our opponents
 in the Senate, be they members of the Labor Party or members of the
 Australian Democrats, having put our political bodies on the line
 on the 3rd of October and having won the support of the Australian
 people, we intend to use every legitimate means at our disposal to
 see that the will of the Australian people is implemented.
This extraordinary proposition that you should go through what was
 effectively a seven-week election campaign, that you should put your
 whole political future on the line both individually as a party in
 championing the cause of something that everybody in their heart knows
 is right and is in the best interests of the country, and then having
 won that battle and having survived that challenge and having got
 across the line with a comfortable working majority, that you should
 somehow or other then sit around and wait until your opponents are
 in the best tactical advantage in the Senate before you put your legislation
 forward is a piece of political intelligence that completely escapes
 me.
I thought politics was about forming a view about what was good for
 Australia, arguing your case to the Australian people and if they
 voted for you you did it. And that essentially is what I've always
 understood politics to be about but obviously, even though I've
 been in Parliament for 25 years, I have a lot to learn but we'll
 wait and see about that. The other thing that we must remember about
 the election, and now that the election is over I rather enjoy the
 role of being a commentator for a moment. I spent a lot of time in
 the campaign saying I wasn't going to be a commentator because
 commentary by Prime Ministers in election campaigns is very dangerous.
 After it's over it's a different matter.
The other thing we ought to understand about this election is that
 any dillusion by the Labor Party that in some way the result represented
 a Labor resurgence is utterly disproved by any analysis of the figures.
 What essentially happened nation wide, it varied a bit from State
 to State, what essentially happened nation wide in this election was
 that the Labor Party's primary vote barely rose. It rose perhaps
 1 to 1.5 points nation- wide. The Coalition's primary vote fell
 by 8 to 9 % nation wide and almost all of that went to One Nation.
And then via the distribution of preferences by One Nation about half
 of that 8% to 9% was passed through to the Labor Party. The Labor
 Party profited from One Nation. We lost seats because of One Nation.
 The party that did the most self sacrificing thing in placing One
 Nation last was the Liberal Party of Australia, not the Australian
 Labor Party. But it was the right decision and I want to say that
 I never had any doubt that it was the right decision to take because
 it would have distracted and beset and befuddled and provided hurdles
 throughout the entire campaign if the issue had not been taken off
 the political agenda. And I think in the long term Australian politics
 is better for the fact that there are no representatives of One Nation
 in the House of Representatives. Far, far better.
So we ought to understand why it happened. We ought to understand
 the lessons that we should learn from it. We shouldn't be reluctant
 to enjoy for a moment, to saviour for a moment, a second federal electoral
 victory. We should contemplate the responsibility that we now have
 to manage the affairs of our nation at a time of great historical
 moment, at a time of intense national excitement. Over the next three
 years Australia will experience a number of quite remarkable events.
 We will host the Olympic Games of the year 2000 and that is not just
 an event for the city of Sydney, it is an event for the entire nation.
 We will also of course, and most importantly, we will celebrate the
 centenary of the formation of the Australian nation, the centenary
 of federation in the year 2001 will represent the greatest opportunity
 that anybody in the lifetime of anybody in this room has had to reflect
 upon the Australian achievement.
And to me I see the centenary of federation, not as an occasion for
 negative, reflective, introspective, defensive, national naval gazing
 but rather as an opportunity to celebrate the intense and great achievements
 of the Australian people and of the Australian nation.
It is an occasion for celebration. It is an occasion to reflect upon
 what this nation has achieved. It is an occasion to remind the world
 again that the tolerant liberal credentials of this country are without
 parallel anywhere in the world. It is also of course an occasion,
 as any nation should do, to reflect upon the mistakes and the blemishes
 of the past and no nation is free of them. But few have achieved what
 this country has achieved and I would like to see that celebration
 as being very much a celebration of the Australian achievement, because
 it has been an incredible achievement and it has been an achievement
 that has been purchased at a very heavy cost by some of our number
 who have given their lives to defend the kind of life that we now
 enjoy and the kind of society that we now celebrate.
The next three years are of course an opportunity to provide to this
 country the economic leadership that has so far protected Australia
 against the worst impact of the Asian economic downturn. Last week's
 inflation figure was an extraordinarily good result. And it was a
 dramatic reminder to the Australian community and to the rest of the
 world of just how well this country has been managed economically
 over the last two-and-a-half years. Every day goes by we are given
 more and more proof of the wisdom of the Government's action
 when it came to office in March of 1996 to get the budget back into
 balance. There may have been decisions taken that caused pain and
 unhappiness and hostility. There may have been people in this room
 who disagreed with some of the decisions that we took. There were
 people in the community who were affected by those decisions. But
 at the end of the day if we had not got our economy in order we would
 now be suffering some of the depredation and some of the pain, to
 some of the order that is now being suffered by our friends and our
 neighbours in the Asian-Pacific region.
If we had not taken action to protect the Australian economy we would
 now have higher interest rates, higher inflation, higher unemployment,
 lower economic growth, lower economic growth, lower business investment,
 a weaker currency and a vulnerability to the world in stark contrast
 to the example of strength and resilience that we now represent to
 the world. And that is why those decisions, my friends, were so important.
But over the next three years we must not only care for the economic
 health of this country but we must do it in a way that respects the
 social fabric. We must do it in a way that continues to protect and
 nurture the values that provide a decent social security safety net,
 that recognise the importance within our community of strong functional
 Australian families, and that recognise that good government is not
 just about good economics and good bookkeeping. It is also about the
 values of our society, it is also about the things that we hold dear.
 It is also about confronting some of the non-economic challenges to
 the Australian way of life. It's about recognising as a federal
 government that we have a role in fighting the drug menace within
 our society. It is about recognising the importance of high educational
 standards within the Australian community. It is also about recognising
 the limited but strategic role that the federal government must play
 in the war against crime within the Australian community. It is about
 recognising that we are to achieve, what I think all of us want, and
 that is a strong and fair and caring Australian society as we move
 into the third Christian millennium.
We can't as a government do it alone, nor can the individual
 do it on his or her own or nor can it be left to the great community
 organisations of our nation. What we need is a partnership between
 the government, great community organisations and individuals. A partnership
 that recognises that the role of government is not to be intrusive
 but rather to be supportive. The government does have a limited role
 in our society but nonetheless an important and a strategic role.
 There are some things that governments can do that no other part of
 society can do. But there are many things that governments over the
 past have tried to do and they have been miserable failures. And the
 art of good government in the 1990s, as we come towards the close
 of this century, the art of good government will be to recognise where
 it should intervene in that limited but strategic way. To recognise
 that if you want a strong economy you'll only get that through
 an essentially unregulated thriving progressive and forward looking
 business sector and business community.
But if you really want to provide a proper social security safety
 net you not only need the provision of support from the government
 through pensions and Medicare and all the other things that make up
 the social security safety net, but you also need to supplement that
 with the work of the great community organisations such as the Salvation
 Army and the St Vincent De Paul, and all the other great organisations
 that have a coal face understanding of human misery and human hardship
 that most of us don't have. And working in cooperation with those
 great welfare organisations we can renew and renew in a very effective
 way the compassionate side of our society. But importantly we also
 need the partnership of individuals because if the Liberal Party stands
 for anything, and it does stand for many things, it stands above all
 else for the importance and the sanctity of each individual man and
 woman within the Australian community. It has always been the most
 important element of the Liberal belief that we should build a society
 where every man and woman has the absolute right to pursue to the
 maximum that his or her talents will allow their dream and their destiny
 and their hopes for their lives and for the lives of their families.
There is no better welfare system of course in any community than
 a collection of stable functioning families. United stable supporting
 families remains still the best nurturing environment for children,
 the best emotional bedrock for young adults and the greatest source
 of companionship and emotional support and love throughout life at
 whatever age.
So as we contemplate the next three years we are right to feel proud
 of what the Liberal Party has achieved. We are right to feel proud
 of the political courage the party displayed in going to the electorate
 with a bold reform plan. And we are right to anticipate the responsibilities
 of the next three years. They will be very different from the last
 two-and-a-half. We will need to blend our economic realism with our
 social responsibility and our social concern, and getting the balance
 right will be very important for the future of our party. There is
 no hostility, there is no permanent conflict, there is no enduring
 antagonism between an economically efficient society and a socially
 compassionate society. The idea that in some way you can't run
 the economy well without neglecting the social side of your responsibilities
 as a government is a very short sighted view. The two are mutually
 reinforcing. The one is not possible without the other. If you don't
 have an efficient wealthy society you cannot help the less privileged
 within our community. If you don't help the less privileged within
 our community what is the point of having a wealthy powerful society
 economically. The two are mutually reinforcing. The two matter as
 much to me as I know they matter to you. And the successful blending
 of those two and the quality that that will bring to the lives of
 the Australian community will be our goal and our responsibility over
 the next three years. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Well thank you very much, Tony. Gee, I was hoping for a slightly nicer introduction than that. Can I say to you, Tony, thank you very, very warmly for those very gracious and generous words; to Jim; to Tony and Caroline Rundle, to Jocelyn Newman and to my other Federal and State parliamentary colleagues.
It is an enormous pleasure to be back here in Tasmania. I’ll save the sort of substantive, the more substantive speech for tomorrow at the opening of the State Council but I would like, tonight, in a few moments, to say a couple of things that I really feel very strongly. And the first of the things that I want to say to all of you is how much I admire the work that Tony Rundle did as Premier of this State.
The last year in politics has been both bitter and sweet for Liberals in Tasmania. All of you are entitled to share the pleasure that all Liberals around Australia share in our Federal win. You are also, understandably, entitled to feel disappointed at the reaction of the Tasmanian electorate towards the courage and candour and honesty and foresight that Tony Rundle and the former Liberal government displayed in this State.
Tasmania has deep and fundamental economic problems. And Tony Rundle had the courage and the honesty and the tenacity and the commitment to the future of Tasmania to call those problems for what they were. And he offered, alone of the political leaders in the last Tasmanian election, he offered an honest solution to a deep and enduring problem. And until the solution that Tony Rundle offered at the last election is embraced by a Tasmanian government, those problems will remain. That may not be palatable for some Australians in Tasmania, it may not be palatable for our Labor opponents but you know it to be true. And the fact that Tony was willing at very great and ultimately significant political cost to him to put that argument won him the admiration of Liberals around Australia, won him the most precious commodity of all in public life and that is respect. Because there’s nothing more important in public life than respect. It’s not the length of time you’re in government. It’s not the length of time you’re in Parliament. It’s not the number of glib remarks you can make about your opponents. It’s whether, at the end of the day, you can look yourself in the mirror and say, I did it for the interests of Tasmania or I did it for the interests of Australia. And Tony did have the courage to do that and I admire him for it. I’m sorry the result was not more deserving so far as he was concerned but he does, I’m sure, properly rest easy in the knowledge that the programme that he took to the Tasmanian people was right for the future of Tasmania. It remains correct and until it is embraced by the current or a future Tasmanian government those deep seeded difficulties are going to remain. And no amount of obfuscation from the new Tasmanian government or from the Labor Party, federally, can alter that fact. Can I say that as a colleague to work with Tony was a courteous, intelligent, effective representative of the people of Tasmania. It was a great delight to deal with him and I’m sorry that I no longer have to deal with him as Premier of Tasmania.
Ladies and gentlemen, there are two other people that I’d like to particularly mention tonight and they are my two former colleagues from federal electorates in Tasmania, Chris Miles and Warwick Smith. Chris entered Parliament, as did Warwick, in 1984. Warwick went through the agony in 1993 of losing by 40 votes. He went through the agony of losing again in 1998, having come back in 1996, by fewer than 100 votes. He was a very effective Minister, he was a very effective member and I want to thank him for the contribution that he made to the Government as the Minister, firstly, in the area of sport and local government and territories and, subsequently, as Minister for Family Services. Both of them were difficult portfolios and both of them he carried out with very great distinction and flair.
To you, Chris, let me thank you most warmly for many of the things that you did by way of very significant contribution to the Parliamentary Liberal Party, most recently as Cabinet Secretary, a position not highly publicised but a position that involves attendance at all Cabinet meetings, on all subjects and subsequent coordination of many ministerial responses and the necessary response from my Department and my office to the decisions and the workings of Cabinet. Over the years, in many other ways, you’ve played a very significant role in the Parliamentary Liberal Party. I want to thank you for those 14 years of service to the Liberal Party and those 14 years of representation of the people of Braddon. I’m sorry that the result was not otherwise. I wish you and Ros and your family every health and every happiness for the future.
It is always the case in politics that mingled with the happiness and the enjoyment of a success are some of the losses that are suffered and some of the friends and the colleagues who are so undeservedly defeated. But Tony was right to describe the victory that we achieved throughout Australia on the 3rd of October as a very remarkable thing. In many ways it was a greater victory than 1996. Because in 1996 there was a tidal wave of resentment against the former government. In the years that I’ve been active in politics I can remember on four or five occasions, in 1972, in 1975, in 1983 and again in 1996, an absolutely passionate desire on the part of the Australian people to achieve a change of government. And that was the mood of the Australian people in 1996.
But in 1998 it was different. My predecessor had gone. The government that had been in office for 13 years had gone and the issues were different and the challenges were different. And on this occasion we did put forward a very bold, a very comprehensive and, in the eyes of many political commentators and many pollsters and many others and Tony is right, we put forward a programme that was very, very different and created a challenge the like of which the party has not had before. And I’m immensely grateful for the support that the organisation gave me. I’m immensely grateful for the stoicism and the commitment and the loyalty of all of my colleagues and I thank them very warmly and I thank the Liberal Party organisation here in Tasmania as I do all around Australia. And through Tony and Lynton Crosby, who did such a remarkable job as the Federal Director of the Liberal Party, and everybody else who worked so very hard so soon after a State election here in Tasmania to maximise the Liberal vote in this State.
We now have a remarkable opportunity in front of us. We have been given a mandate and an authority that many people never believed that we would receive. We have won an election against odds. We have won an election advocating changes that few political commentators would ever recommend that you advocate before an election. And we are now absolutely and resolutely and totally committed to implementing that programme. As I said at the Queensland conference last weekend, we will use every legitimate means at our disposal to implement that tax plan with the minimum of delay. We’ve had the argument, we’ve had the debate, we’ve had the scrutiny, we had a seven week election campaign and the highest authority in a democracy, and that is the people, have spoken. In democracies people carry more weight than anybody else because that is what democracy is all about. And the Australian people have voted us in and we intend to obey their instructions and we intend to implement the policy that we took to the election with the greatest possible dispatch.
Two other things I would like to say to you, my friends, and that is this that I do recognise that because of the results here in Tasmania at the last election and the fact that we no longer have any House of Representative seats from this State, that that does cast an additional responsibility onto the shoulders of the Senators from this State. I acknowledge their presence tonight and I particularly thank Jocelyn Newman for the tremendous work that she’s done as the senior Federal Parliamentary representative from Tasmania and one of the most senior Ministers in the Cabinet. She’s had a very, very distinguished and effective career as a Minister and as a senior member on the Liberal frontbench for many years.
Tasmania, of course, has often produced interesting results. I can remember when I first came into Federal Parliament in 1974 there were no representatives from Tasmania in the Federal Parliament on the Liberal side. They were all Labor in 1974. And in 1975 we had a famous by-election which Kevin Newman and Jocelyn and many others will remember - an absolutely famous by-election. And I think we had to go something like 20 years, from 1975 to 1995, before we were to get a by-election, federal by-election the like of it and that was the Canberra by-election which really, if my predecessor couldn’t see the writing on the wall before then, he must surely have seen it that particular night. And we went then from Kevin winning in that by-election in 1975, we won the other four seats in 1975. And then we sort of went through different, other stages and now we’re in a situation where we’re in power, federally, but we don’t hold any House of Representative seats in Tasmania. Such are the vicissitudes of politics and such are the variations that are now occurring in national politics around Australia with results in one State being significantly different from what they are in other States. But that does cast an extra burden on the Senators, it does cast an extra burden on the organisation. I want to say, as Federal Parliamentary leader, I will do all that I can and I will be encouraging my colleagues from the other States to do all they can to assist the organisation here in Tasmania in the challenge that lies ahead.
We are first and foremost an Australian party. We are a party for the entire nation. We are a party that represents the national interest but the national interest is in so many ways the sum of the interests of the individual parts of the Australian federation. And it is very important that we do all we can as a national organisation to assist the Liberal Party organisation here in Tasmania. And I take the opportunity here tonight of pledging myself and my colleagues to do exactly that.
The last thing that I want to say to you, and this in many ways is the most important thing of all, and that is that one of the things that this great victory should, I hope, instruct Liberals to do and to do very emphatically and that is to feel an enormous sense of pride in what the Liberal Party has been able to achieve since it was founded in 1944. I have many critical things to say about the Labor Party. I despise many of the attitudes they have. I am critical of the damage that they have done in their years in government at both a federal and a State level. But I will give them credit for one thing and that is that they have an intense pride in their own history and they have an intense pride in what they believe that they have achieved. And we as Liberals could well emulate that. We as Liberals could do a lot more in boosting our own political achievements over the years. We as Liberals could speak more defiantly and more passionately and more vehemently about what the Liberal Party has achieved for Australia and how the Liberal Party represents the mainstream of the Australian community far more effectively than any other political party in the Australian experience.
And we have been responsible for so many of the great beneficial changes that have come the way of this nation since the end of World War II. We provided, through the Menzies years, the longest period of uninterrupted economic growth that Australia has yet seen. We have seen, over the last two-and-a-half years, a commitment to some of the most fundamental economic reforms that this country has seen. And we have experienced, as a result of that, a capacity to live through the worst of the Asian economic downturn in a way that few would have predicted as recently as a year ago. Because the strength of the Australian economy has shown in the face of the Asian economic holocaust has been absolutely remarkable. And none of that would have been possible if it hadn’t been for the measures that the Government took two-and-a-half years ago, all of which were opposed, root and branch, by our political opponents.
So we have a lot to be proud of, not in an arrogant way, not in a triumphal way, not in a smug or complacent way, but in the sense of quiet achievement and proper satisfaction of a job well done. As Liberals we have an enormously rich history. We have provided great leadership to this country over many years in different circumstances through different people. We have a perfect right as members of that great party to feel a great sense of pride. I feel an enormous sense of privilege and humility to once again be the Prime Minister of our country.
I committed my Government, when it was elected in 1996, to the service of all of the Australian people. I did that again on the 3rd of October of this year when we returned to government. We have much to do, we have an exciting period in Australia’s history ahead of us. We’ll celebrate the Centenary of Federation, we’ll host the Olympic Games. The eyes of the world, in so many ways, will be on Australia. We’ll be able to demonstrate again what an open, egalitarian, tolerant, welcoming and beckoning society we really are. And it will be the Liberal Party that will have the political responsibility for guiding the affairs of our country through those very exciting years. That is not only a source of great excitement and exhilaration to me and my colleagues, it is also a source, I believe, of justifiable pride and satisfaction to all members of the Liberal Party. And as somebody who has devoted all of his life, since the age of 17, to the Liberal Party and to the service of the values and the ideals of the Liberal Party I want to thank you, the rank and file grassroots members of the party, for the contribution that you have made to the successes that we’ve had, the positions we’ve achieved, the elections we’ve won, the values we’ve defended and the country we’ve been privileged to lead. Thank you very, very much and I look forward to addressing you tomorrow.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Colin, to Mark and Judy, to Richie Benaud,
 to John and Veronica Fordham, ladies and gentlemen.
This is not really a chore for me, can I say that it is a great pleasure.
 There are many things that one is invited to in one's political
 life that you perhaps wonder sometimes whether you're going to
 enjoy the experience. But to be invited to be here today to share,
 for a couple of minutes, my thoughts about a remarkable Australian,
 a great Australian cricketer and a great Australian captain, is an
 enormous privilege. And I want to thank the Sydney Daily Telegraph
 for giving me the opportunity of doing so.
It is true that we had a very early start to Cabinet this morning
 and it is true that a few people remarked on the brusque way in which
 I despatched some of the business so that it would  but the
 decisions were still very good  so that I could be here. And
 when Richie Benaud got up to speak he put me in mind of another important
 commitment of mine that I sort of longed to be over so I could get
 out to watch an encounter in which he was involved. And I recall that
 my very last law exam at Sydney University, I did on the morning of
 the first day of, I think, the third Test between the West Indies
 in Australia at the Sydney Cricket Ground. A match in which, I think,
 Garfield Sobers scored a fine 168. And after the exam was over I raced
 out to the Sydney Cricket Ground to watch the match. So my connection
 with the game is spontaneous and genuine and absolutely devoted. I
 frequently said that about the greatest office anybody can aspire
 to is to be captain of the Australian Cricket Team. And there is a
 special bond between a sports-loving Australian public and the captain
 of the Australian Cricket Team. There's nothing quite like it.
 It's a function of the fact that it is our national game and
 it's a function of the fact that cricket and those who've
 led Australia into battle on the cricket field have always occupied
 a very special place in the hearts of Australians.
Mark Taylor's cricketing prowess is well known to a gathering
 like this. It is extraordinary, it's exemplary and it ranks him
 amongst the very greatest players that cricket has seen from any nation.
 But I think there are two characteristics about him that have really
 endeared him to the Australian public above and beyond his capacity
 as a player. And the first of those is that he's a great fighter.
 Everyone knows that he went through a valley of criticism and despair
 at a time when people were being very critical of him but he never
 lost his nerve. He never lost his calm. He never lost his resolve
 and, very importantly, he never lost his civility and that is a great
 tribute to him.
I can remember on the evening before the Adelaide Test at the beginning
 of last year at a time when there was a lot of criticism of him. I
 happened to be in Adelaide for a meeting and I then found that I was
 able to go to the game later on. And I rang him to wish him well and
 his response was that of a person who understood the criticism, was
 determined to prove it wrong but wasn't complaining about some
 of the unreasonable things that were being said about him. And I think
 it was that characteristic and that quality that endeared him to millions
 of Australian and world cricket lovers.
And I think the other quality which was really demonstrated on that
 morning in Pakistan only a few weeks ago when he really did play out
 the finest traditions of the game. And I had the opportunity of getting
 through to him on the telephone at his hotel to congratulate him on
 the tremendous score that he'd achieved and I asked him what
 he thought he was going to do and he said he thought he'd pull
 up the stumps. And, of course, he went on to do that. And he was putting
 his team first but he was also honouring the traditions of the game.
 And I think what Mark has done is to remind all of us and to remind
 particularly the young lovers of cricket that of course we strive
 to achieve, we strive to be the best, we strive to be the world record
 holder but we also honour the best traditions of the game. And he's
 taught us that there is nothing incompatible with personal achievement,
 personal success, decent financial remuneration as a consequence of
 that achievement and success but also honouring the great traditions
 that are associated with wearing the finest head apparel in the world
 and that is the baggy green of the Australian Cricket Team.
So, Mark, you have done us all proud. You've been a wonderful
 cricketer. I hope you continue to give inspiration and leadership
 to Australian cricket for many years into the future. As one of your
 very constant supporters and fans over a long period of time it gives
 me immense pride and satisfaction and pleasure to be here today. And
 I know to cross all of the boundaries that might otherwise divide
 Australians on other issues and say on behalf of all Australians how
 much we admire and respect what you have done. Sport does dissolve
 the barriers in Australian society, sport unites us all. Nothing quite
 binds the Australian community together like the love of sport, the
 love of a great Australian sportsman or woman and a great sporting
 achievement, whatever the sport may be. And we've had those in
 abundance. To have succeeded in Pakistan in both Test cricket and
 one day cricket and to have seen this astonishing achievement of yours,
 Mark, has really given us an absolute feast of cricket enjoyment and
 cricket pleasure. So on behalf of, not just of myself and of my political
 colleagues on both sides of the House, because there are cricket lovers
 on both sides of politics as there naturally are throughout different
 sections of the community, I say thank you for what you have done
 for Australian cricket. Thank you for being such a fine Australian
 Captain, of having honoured and kept and elevated the finest values
 of the game and thank you, most importantly, for being a wonderful
 Australian.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very Mr Morris. To Mr Turner, To Heather Thurland,
   to my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleman. Can I particularly
   acknowledge Heather's involvement in today's event. We're
   very proud of your sporting achievements. I think we're equally
   proud of the fact that you have so willingly associated yourself
   with an organisation which is synonymous with looking after the
   less fortunate in the Australian community. And I would have thought
   that you spoke for the mothers and fathers of all children in Australia
   when you said that there would be nothing worse for a parent, mother
   or father, to feel that they could not provide for their children,
   particularly at Christmas time. And that of course is what this
   great organisation is about and I'm delighted to be here today
   to formally launch the Christmas appeal of the Smith Family.
The Smith Family is one of the great volunteer organisations of
   Australia. It's an organisation that from the earliest of my
   recollections of Christmas I associated with helping people who
   needed help at Christmas time. You think of the Christmas story
   in the Bible, you think of the things associated with Christmas,
   and Santa Claus, and then in a sense you started thinking of organisations
   like the Smith Family and the Salvation Army. And it has played
   a part in my own recollection of Christmas from my very earliest
   days. 
I had an interesting experience last week at ACOSS when I made
   some remarks about the respective role in our society of the government,
   the welfare sector, the business community and individuals and I've
   been quite interested, indeed fascinated, to examine some of the
   response to those remarks that I made and I'm very glad that
   I made those remarks because they did begin to generate a debate
   within the community about the contribution that all of us must
   make to looking after the less fortunate amongst the Australian
   community. 
Those remarks were not designed to be critical of the many business
   men and women, and a number of them are here today, who over the
   years have given unstintingly of their own personal resources and
   also of their time and professional skill to help great charitable
   organisations. But they were designed to indicate that there are
   some in the business community that don't necessarily match
   the example of others. 
They were also designed to make the point that helping the needy
   and the less fortunate in Australian society must be a partnership.
   We as a government do not expect the burden to be shifted to the
   welfare sector or to the business community. We recognise that whoever
   is in government there is an ongoing role for the government on
   behalf of the community to support organisations and to help organisations
   like the Smith Family. 
That is one of the reasons why there has been a very big increase
   in the amount of emergency relief provided by the Federal Government
   to organisations like the Smith Family over the past couple of years.
   And I'm very proud of the fact that despite budget cutbacks
   in other areas we were able to dramatically increase the amount
   of emergency relief to the different welfare organisations in the
   Australian community. And for example, last year some $1 million
   was provided out of that emergency relief fund for the Smith Family
   alone.
But the point I sought to make was that it is a partnership. We
   as a government have a role, the business community has a role,
   individuals have a role and the volunteer sector of welfare in this
   community has a very important role as well. And we can only achieve
   the goals we set ourselves, and we can only help in the most practical
   way possible if we work together. It's not a question of us
   saying it's your responsibility now. That is not the point.
   It is a collective partnership. One where the Government plays a
   very important role but recognising that it can't do it all
   on its own because it doesn't have the expertise. 
There is nothing quite like an organisation which is steeped in
   the spirit of volunteerism to provide compassionate care for the
   less fortunate within our community. That extra special commitment
   that is born of a personal desire to help somebody and to help a
   cause is quite irreplaceable. You can't buy it with money,
   you can't supplement it with paid help although professional
   welfare workers are a very important part of the network. 
But there is something special like an organisation as such as
   the Smith Family and that is why I'm particularly pleased on
   behalf of the Government to be associated with it, to commend its
   efforts since 1922 when it was formed, to applaud it for its commitment
   particularly at Christmas time to ensuring that no children in Australia,
   to the extent that that is possible, go without care and go without
   assistance and go without sharing the joy of Christmas along with
   the many more fortunate children within our community who don't
   need any kind of assistance. 
So I'm very pleased to launch this appeal. I'm very pleased
   to announce a contribution of $5,000 from the Federal Government
   towards the Christmas appeal. I want to salute the work of the Smith
   Family. I want to thank it for what it has done to relieve the hardship
   of so many children and families generally throughout the Australian
   community. I want to thank the many men and women in business who've
   helped it. I want to endorse and emphasise again the importance
   I stressed last week of a partnership between the Government, the
   community, individuals, and business to ensure that we have a world
   class sensitive welfare sector in Australia, a peculiarly Australian
   model may I say of providing welfare in this country. One that we
   don't seek to copy from any other country. One that has been
   particularly fashioned to suit the needs of the Australian community.
   And a great streak of that is the volunteerism that is within so
   many of us in which gave birth to the Smith Family and has sustained
   it ever since it was formed back in 1922. 
I thank all of you. I particularly thank the leaders of the Smith
   Family for the work they do. I compliment them on behalf of the
   Government. I wish the appeal well. I hope it is widely and generously
   supported by the Australian community. Thank you.


E&amp;OE.......................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Jeff, for those very kind words of introduction
   and welcome. To Joy Howley, Peter Costello, Tony Staley, my other
   federal and state Parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals.
I start by expressing my immense gratitude to you, the members
   of the Victorian Division of the Liberal Party, for the very crucial
   part that you played in our remarkable win on the 3rd
   of October. The professionalism of the Victorian Division has been
   a long practiced habit and has for a long time been a constant in
   the political life of our country. Fortunately over the past two
   or three elections the good professional habits of the Victorian
   Division have been copied by other State Divisions around the country.
   And we have started to win in those states in a more consistent
   fashion than used to be the case in the past. But I don't forget
   the ongoing and the long standing contribution that the Victorian
   Division has made over the years to our strength at a federal level.
   And it remains the case now the tremendous strength that your federal
   Members bring to the Coalition Government in Canberra.
There are many who have contributed to our remarkable win and I
   want to say in a few moments some things about the characteristics
   of that victory. But I do want to thank Peter Costello as the Deputy
   Leader as the Treasurer over the last two and a half years for the
   leadership that he has given to the Federal Parliamentary Liberal
   Party here in Victoria. Peter has been a great Deputy, a great Treasurer,
   a great colleague and he has played a very major role in putting
   together the architecture of the policy that we so successfully
   took to the people on the 3rd of October. And he has
   also played a very major role as Treasurer in the fact that I will
   be able to go to Malaysia tomorrow as Australia's Prime Minister
   to the APEC Meeting and I will be able to speak with the authority
   as the leader of a country whose economy has held up remarkably
   well in the face of the worst economic downturn that our region
   has seen since World War II.
The real truth, and in some ways the as yet to be fully told story,
   is that the Australian economy has performed better than anybody
   really expected in the face of that economic downturn. We have historically
   low rates of inflation, historically low levels of interest rates,
   we have very high levels of business investment, we have recovering
   levels of consumer confidence and we have been able to put to the
   Australian people successfully a major historic tax reform plan.
   And this week we have seen the lowest unemployment figures for nine
   years. Peter Reith has made a great start in that new responsibility.
   Now he has got a, I mean if you get 7.7 this month Peter, next month,
   but I think we all are sensible enough to know that these things
   can bounce around. But the job market is stronger, and that Job
   Network is better than the old CES system that it replaced, much
   better. And if we can get the Australian Parliament to pass the
   Unfair Dismissal Law, we can generate even more jobs and if we can
   challenge the Labor Party, which we have, to match its rhetoric
   about youth unemployment by voting to entrench junior wage levels
   within the Australian economy, we can preserve two to three hundred
   thousand jobs for young people.
But ladies and gentlemen, I thank all of my colleagues here in
   Victoria, all of my federal colleagues for their help and their
   loyalty and their support and their commitment to our cause over
   the last two and a half years and most particularly during the election
   campaign.
I do want to express my sadness politically and personally at Russell
   Broadbent's defeat. And I do want to thank him most warmly
   for the contribution that he has made to our Parliamentary Party.
To all others who ran unsuccessfully as candidates, particularly,
   but not only to those who ran in difficult Labor held seats, I express
   my thanks. I congratulate Tsebin Tehen on his election as a Senator
   from the State of Victoria. And I thank Karen Synon for her contribution
   in the time that she has been in the Senate which will continue
   until the 30th of June.
Whenever you win an election, everybody has got an explanation
   as why you did it. And everybody has got a special pet theory which
   is sometimes vaguely related to their own contribution as to why
   you have won. Let me say there are many explanations as to why we
   won this election. And I think some of the explanations have been
   pretty close to the mark and there are some things about the election
   that ought to be understood very clearly. There is one very important
   thing about the election that should be understood and that is that
   it does not represent the beginning of a Labor resurgence. On the
   surface of it, yes, there were a number of seats won by the Labor
   Party, and there was a two party preferred swing against the Coalition.
   The reality when you look below the surface of course is that the
   Labor primary vote barely moved up, but there was a reduction of
   about eight or nine per cent nationally in the Coalition's
   primary vote and most of that went to One Nation and through their
   distribution of preferences four or five per cent of a two party
   preferred swing was delivered to the Labor Party. And it is true
   as Jeff said in his introduction that although Pauline Hanson lost
   her seat and there will only be one One Nation representative in
   the Parliament after the 30th of June next year, that
   organisation is not politically dead, and we have to continue to
   work hard to win back the disillusioned Coalition people who supported
   One Nation. Particularly in Queensland and Western Australia. One
   Nation did us a lot of damage in Western Australia. Far less damage
   here and far less damage in South Australia, but a lot of damage
   in Western Australia. We have to reach out to those people and we
   have to persuade them to come back to the Coalition.
And I think the other thing that the election demonstrated and
   demonstrated very, very dramatically is the quality of grass roots
   campaigning. And the thing that gives me tremendous pride, not only
   as Parliamentary Leader, but as somebody, like so many of you, has
   spent 30 or more years in the Liberal Party organisation. That last
   election is the best demonstration yet that when it comes to professional
   grass roots campaigning and marginal seat campaigning the Liberal
   Party now is much better than our Labor opponents.
I mean we had some astonishingly good results in marginal seats.
   I look at the audience and I see people and I, it's always
   a mistake to do this, but I make mistakes from time to time doing,
   I look, I look at people like Bob Charles and Fran Bailey and Phil
   Barresi and the tremendous job that the three of them for example
   did in very, very marginal seats, a quite astonishing job. And you
   move into the other states and the role of the three people that
   I mentioned on election night of Trish Draper and Jackie Kelly and
   Danna Vale and can I say as a Liberal coming from Sydney how tremendous
   it was to see David Hill fall over in a heap politically.
Now that's, they are some of the personal reasons why we did
   well. But I think the other reason why we won, and the other thing
   that made this victory so important, and in many ways a more emphatic
   and more important victory than 1996 because you all know that in
   1996 the Australian public was desperate to vote out a government
   that had been there for 13 years and they were desperate to get
   rid of a Prime Minister who had lost all contact with the Australian
   public and all resonance with the mainstream of the Australian community.
   But on this time we did take a very, very difficult in some respects,
   controversial taxation plan to the Australian people. But we took
   something to the Australian people that from the Prime Minister
   down was passionately believed in by the people who were putting
   it to the Australian people. And public life is ultimately about
   campaigning for those things that you believe in, trying to win
   public support for those things that you believe will be of enduring
   benefit to the Australian community. And when you win that support
   then having the courage to implement it.
And we were successful for a lot of reasons. We were also successful
   because we received magnificent support at a State Government level
   from our political colleagues. And I especially want to thank Jeff
   Kennett for the tremendous enthusiasm that he brought to the campaign,
   the tremendous support that he has given to the cause of taxation
   reform. His willingness to campaign in other parts of Australia.
   And his uncompromising support for a taxation reform programme that
   he and I and all of us know will be of enduring benefit, not only
   to the people of Victoria, but also of enduring benefit to the entire
   country.
And of course that support was continued yesterday. We had a remarkable
   day in Canberra yesterday. Everybody was happy, well just about
   everybody was happy. There was the odd piece of banter between Bob
   Carr and Peter Beattie. As Peter Costello and I remarked it was
   terrific to see it going like that instead of going like this. It
   was marvellous. But Jeff's help yesterday and the leadership
   that he has shown amongst the Coalition Premiers and State leaders
   has been enormously constructive and I am personally very, very
   grateful for it.
We now have before us, becuase we have won a second term, we have
   the opportunity to remake the political map of Australia in a way
   that would have been denied us if we had only been there for two
   and a half or three years. You really do need two, three or more
   terms at least, at least to make a really big impression and to
   change some of the entrenched attitudes that need changing. Not
   in a truculent or in a triumphal way. When I addressed the Party
   Room in 1996 after we had won power after being in the wilderness
   for 13 years, I warned my colleagues about losing touch. And I issued
   the same warning when we reassembled after the 3rd of
   October. We must never lose touch with the aspirations of mainstream
   Australia. But in keeping in touch with them, we should never be
   reluctant to take bold initiatives and to give a sense of direction
   where people are looking for it. I know there were doubters about
   our tax plan, and I know there were many people who probably closed
   their eyes and crossed their fingers and went to mass several times
   a week, but at the end of the day people do want you to tell them
   what you think is right for the country and to show a determination
   to pursue that course of action. And we were able to do that. And
   we now have an opportunity, because we have weathered this Asian
   economic storm better than most expected, we do have an opportunity
   to build on the strengths we already have economically. And we all
   know that the greatest piece of unfinished economic reform business
   is taxation reform. And after yesterday's historic Premiers
   Conference where the elected leaders of the States and Territories
   of Australia, as well as the Prime Minister and the Federal Treasurer,
   unitedly agreed on the principles of the taxation reform, can I
   again state to the so called States house of Australia, will you
   listen to the views of the Australian people rather than your own
   individualised conceit.
I don't know what more you can do. We have won an election.
   We have had a Premiers' Conference so you have the views of
   the Premiers, the Chief Ministers, the Australian people and the
   duly elected Government of Australia. I would have thought that
   was a pretty emphatic expression of opinion.
But I don't underestimate the challenge that will be involved
   and I just want you all to know that we do not intend to weaken
   or deviate or tire or give up in any way.
I can tell you as far as my federal Parliamentary colleagues are
   concerned we have only just begun this campaign. But we haven't
   gone through the political fire that we went through on the 3rd
   of October and in the weeks leading up to it, to give it away in
   the face of an opportunistic performance by the Australian Labor
   Party and the Australian Democrats. And we don't intend to
   weaken in any way.
Ladies and gentlemen, we do have, as I said, an enormous opportunity.
   It's very exciting, it's very exhilarating and it is quite
   historic to feel that you can be part of shaping events that will
   take this country into the 21st Century. Over the next
   three years we have unrivalled opportunities as Australians, to
   justifiably celebrate the Australian achievement of the last 100
   years, and to also play a very important part in our region in taking
   advantage of the fact that uniquely Australia is an intersection
   of Europe, of North America, and of the Asia-Pacific region. There's
   no country on Earth that is located in the Asian-Pacific region
   that has such profound and enduring links with Europe and with North
   America, and has within its own population now a magnificent contribution
   from people who come from the Asian-Pacific region themselves. 
We have a unique intersection of assets of history and geography
   and economic circumstance and we can make a contribution as a result
   of that in a way that no other country can. And we can be listened
   to because of those perspectives in a way that no other country
   can. And as I said earlier it will be a source of great strength
   for me to be able to go to the APEC meeting in Malaysia tomorrow
   and to speak as the leader of a successful economy. To speak as
   the leader of a democratically elected government that has had the
   courage to put a reform program to the Australian people. To speak
   as the leader of a country who understands perhaps better than any
   of the mood of all of the peoples of the Asian-Pacific region, who
   understands the western liberal tradition which we share so richly
   with the United States and Canada and New Zealand. But also understands
   the difficulties through which Indonesia is now passing and understands
   the importance of continued bilateral relations between the democratically
   elected democracies of the region and those countries whose systems
   of government are different from ours. And I go there greatly strengthened
   by the outcome on the 3rd of October. 
Finally my friends can I just say to all of you again, as a creature
   of the Liberal Party organisation, how much I am in your debt. It
   is an enormous privilege to be leader of the Parliamentary Liberal
   Party, it is of course an even greater privilege to be Prime Minister
   of Australia. Neither of those positions would have come my way
   without the years I spent in the Liberal Party organisation. Without
   that sustenance and without the understanding of the Australian
   people and of the party organisation and the hopes and aspirations
   of Liberals all around Australia that those years gave me I would
   not have aspired to or achieved those positions. I thank you. It
   is a proud moment, it is a great moment. I thank all of you for
   the part that you played in our great victory. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Quang and to Nigel Milan the Managing Director
 of SBS. I'm here today to do two things, to express the Government's
 ongoing support for SBS. SBS was created by a Government of which
 I was a member back in the 1970s and it's provided a marvellous
 link amongst people of non English speaking background within the
 Australian community.
It provides a very high quality service, it provides certain services
 for English speaking as well as non English speaking Australians which
 are denied or not available in quite the same magnitude, and I'm
 thinking of particular sports, on other free to air channels. But
 it has been a very successful Australian exercise in keeping communities
 together and providing members of individual communities with important
 cultural links and important associations with the heritage that they
 treasure so much.
This wonderful outside broadcast van which is the second and more
 proximate reason for my being here today, will enormously enhance
 the capacity of SBS Radio to take its services and to take its facilities
 to the people that it wants to reach and wants to service.
This van has a number of features unique to outside broadcast vans
 in Australia. There will be two, primarily located, I think, in Melbourne
 and Sydney but they will travel around the country and in that way
 SBS Radio will be able to improve and to upgrade the quality of the
 service which is available.
Can I say from my own personal experience that SBS does provide a
 great service. A good example of it was that I was able to do an interview
 on SBS Television before departing for the APEC Meeting and it was
 an ideal forum with its particular interest in foreign affairs for
 me to appear on and I've had many opportunities to appear on
 both television and SBS Radio over the years.
I therefore have very great pleasure in launching the van, commending
 SBS Radio and commend you Quang in particular on the leadership that
 you've brought to that organisation and I wish it well and this
 new van will add enormously to a very, very important part of the
 Australian community and a service that is particularly valuable and
 particularly appreciated by Australians who speak a language other
 than English.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................
Thank you very much, Randolph, can I commence my address by congratulating
   you for your re-election as chairman of this organisation, and I
   would like to acknowledge the presence this morning of representatives
   of many organisations, most particularly jil Djekurra and Evelyn
   Scott as leaders of ATSIC and the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation.
I am particularly pleased to be here this morning and have the
   opportunity so soon after the Government's re-election to discuss
   our approach to immigration and other policies which are very important
   to the members and supporters of the various organisations that
   are represented this morning.
The next three years does provide all of us with tremendous opportunities
   to celebrate and showcase the Australian achievement. Our achievement
   as a nation of immigrants will be central to our national celebrations
   during that time. 1999 will mark the 50th anniversary
   of Australian citizenship, and the year will provide the chance
   to reaffirm the value of Australian citizenship and its role as
   a unifying force in our culturally diverse Australian community.
   The Olympic Games in the year 2000 will be an opportunity to showcase
   our success as a harmonious and united nation with a commitment
   to shared values, excellence and respect for each individual. And
   of course most importantly, the centenary of federation in 2001
   will allow us to reflect on the Australian achievement and how far
   we have come as a nation and what our aspirations are for the new
   century.
Above all, in observing these things and celebrating these events,
   we must celebrate the values and principles that have made us such
   a cohesive nation. We are a society united in the belief that each
   of us should have the same opportunity to reach our full potential
   and share in what this great country has to offer. Our society is
   underpinned by those uniquely Australian concepts of a fair go and
   practical mateship - integral features of our community and national
   identity.
Ours is a resilient and optimistic community that has extended
   the gift of welcome to people from every corner of the world. Whether
   Australian by birth or by choice we join as one people strengthened
   by a diversity of experience and cultural background.
But above all of this we share a strong set of values:
We honour the importance of family life where the hopes of our
   children can be realised and where our elderly can be given the
   respect that they have earned and deserved.
We dedicate ourselves to the principles of free enterprise, to
   the fruits of working hard and taking risks. We revere our democratic
   national institutions and respond to calls for personal responsibility
   and the provision of practical help for the less fortunate. And
   we are ambitious for Australia to succeed into the next century
   and for all of us to share in that prosperity.
These enduring values hold important messages for all of us.
First and foremost, we are all Australians, and no Australian need
   feel foreign in their own land. No-one is better or worse than any
   other. There exists no qualification by birth or race, wealth or
   heritage, which limits a person's pride in this nation or the
   stake they hold within it.
We all belong to Australia and we all have an equal right to regard
   it as our home, with all the sanctuary that a home provides. There
   is no place within our community for those who would traffic, for
   whatever purpose, in division based on a person's religion, their
   place of birth, the colour of their skin or their ethnic makeup.
   There is no place in Australia for any semblance of racial or ethnic
   intolerance.
In October 1996 the Commonwealth Parliament passed a resolution
   that contained a simple, direct and unambiguous statement of certain
   values and principles including the commitment to maintaining a
   non discriminatory immigration policy and the denunciation of racial
   intolerance. 
What I never want to see, and I know no person in this audience
   wants to see, is an Australia where people of a particular racial
   background feel unwelcome. That would be a denial of everything
   that our country stands for. We have welcomed people from all around
   the world and all deserve to be treated equally and with an equal
   share of decency and civility. That is one of our common bonds as
   Australians.
My answer to all of those who feel threatened by our immigration
   programme is that they need not feel that way. I don't call
   them racist. I genuinely believe, however, that there are some who
   seek to prey upon community fears to encourage a sense of hostility
   towards people of particular racial backgrounds.
This is something that we should all oppose very strongly and I
   believe we should be reassured by the message sent by the Australian
   mainstream at the election that we are in essence a great hearted
   people and small minded policies will never hold sway over us.
One of the great virtues of being Australian as we come to the
   close of the century is that we occupy a unique intersection of
   history, geography, culture and economic circumstance.
Australia is a projection of western civilisation in this part
   of the world. We have deep and enduring links with Britain and the
   other nations of Europe and we share much of their great legal,
   cultural and democratic political inheritance. 
We have profound links with North America and we have shared many
   experiences with the United States in both war and peace. 
We are geographically located in the Asian-Pacific region, and
   we have within the Australian community a vibrant community of people
   of Asian descent who add to the strength and the vitality and the
   tolerance and the great cross section of modern Australia. This
   unique intersection means that we can draw strength from our diversity
   and our understanding of the region. We have an opportunity to use
   these unique characteristics in an effective way to achieve what
   no other country can.
And having just come from a meeting of APEC in Kuala Lumpur, and
   that is an organisation that brings together leaders of all of the
   pacific nations, and therefore a great cross-section of that enormous
   community, it was a reminder to me of just what a special intersection
   of those circumstances of history, geography and culture and other
   things that Australia really occupies. And we do have insights and
   understandings because of that particular background and the diversity
   of that background that gives us an opportunity to project a view
   which is superior and more enlightened and more comprehending of
   what is needed in that part of the world than that possessed by
   any other country.
And it is because of that combined background, our European associations,
   our long association with the nations of North America, our location
   in the Asian-Pacific region and our understanding of the people
   to people contact that that location gives us all of those things
   combined in a very special way to give Australia a capacity to influence
   events that no other country can possibly possess. 
Our diversity is a source of great national strength. Particularly
   since World War II, migration has made an enormous contribution
   to Australia's economy, Australia's society and Australia's
   culture.
There is not an example anywhere else in the world of the successful
   absorption of such a diverse group of new citizens. 
Multiculturalism involves the principle of mutual obligation. Within
   the framework of an overriding commitment to Australia, it respects
   the right of each individual to celebrate his or her particular
   cultural identity in an atmosphere of tolerance, understanding and
   mutual self respect.
As a Liberal Party Prime Minister I am proud to be the recipient
   of the Liberal Party heritage of compassion and commonsense in relation
   to our immigration programme. 
In the post World War II years, both sides of politics pursued
   policies which brought millions of migrants to Australia and greatly
   strengthened Australia. Liberals, in particular, are grateful that
   it was the Liberal Party of Australia that did away with the White
   Australian Policy.
It was under the Fraser Government that Australia realised its
   full humanitarian obligation by taking on a per capita basis, a
   larger number of refugees from war torn Indo-China than any other
   country in the world. 
This tradition, which has given Australia a level of tolerance
   and harmony without parallel, lives on today in our own immigration
   programme which seeks to strike a proper balance between compassion
   and the national interest. When the Coalition came to power in 1996,
   we set about making changes to the programme to restore confidence
   in it. 
Any sovereign country has the right to determine how it will dispense
   its compassion and determine the level, from time to time, of its
   migration programme. In our view, our predecessors failed to assert
   control over the programme in the national interest and overtly
   politicised aspects of immigration and multicultural policies.
That is why we have now fine tuned programme levels in accordance
   with Australia's economic situation. It is why we altered the skill
   composition and selection criteria to better reflect future development
   requirements. That is why we have not exempted this area from fiscal
   consolidation and why we have cracked down on illegal immigrants
   and overstayers.
During our second term we aim to build on our achievements to ensure
   that the immigration programme continues to be managed with integrity
   and compassion so that it enjoys the confidence of the entire Australian
   community.
We will continue to run the programme in the national interest.
   This means balancing economic and non-economic components of the
   programme and ensuring an appropriate dispersal of our migrant intake.
We will examine the recommendations of a Commonwealth/State working
   party which is due to report next year on options to increase the
   number of skilled migrants in regional areas.
It is important that the immigration programme be managed in an
   open and publicly accountable manner and that migrants are selected
   on an objective case by case assessment of applications against
   clear legal criteria.
To maintain community confidence in our programme we will curb
   the number of applicants who seek to abuse the review process by
   reintroducing legislation in the Senate to restrict access to judicial
   review in all but exceptional circumstances.
We will also reintroduce legislation, which was delayed in the
   Senate, to streamline the two-tier review process of non-refugee
   visa decisions to a single review by the Migration Review Tribunal.
We will also continue to balance the humanitarian, family and economic
   components of our immigration programme. The skilled proportion
   of the migration programme increased from 32 per cent to 52 per
   cent in the last financial year. Skills in short supply in Australia
   will continue be the principal determinant of skilled migrant entry.
Employer nomination, where migrants are guaranteed employment,
   will be accorded a higher priority for skilled entry. Minimum thresholds
   will be established to remove anomalies in the current points test
   and we will introduce factors more relevant to gaining employment
   in Australia.
During the election campaign, I committed the Coalition, if re-elected,
   to consult community groups, academics and others on settlement
   and multicultural policies and to engage all sections of the community
   in the settlement process.
The goal of our settlement programme is to allow our newest arrivals
   to fully participate in our community. 
Over the next term of office we will maintain the role of community
   organisations in providing settlement services, support for migrant
   resource centres, the community settlement services scheme and funding
   for the Adult Migrant English Programme. 
We will tender out the AMEP Research Centre and ensure that the
   eligibility criteria for programmes are sufficiently liberal and
   flexible to achieve more lasting benefits for non English speaking
   migrants.
We will maintain funding to English language and literacy training
   and education.
We will also provide better access to the translating and interpreting
   service as well as put the operation of the service on a commercial
   basis.
Australia is one of the oldest democracies in the world and democratic
   principles are deeply etched in our national character. It is that
   very democratic tradition, so much part of the Australian way, which
   has allowed the cultural diversity produced by our immigration programme
   to flourish so successfully. 
Last year the government established a new National Multicultural
   Advisory Council, chaired by Mr Neville Roach, to recommend policies
   and an implementation framework to ensure that cultural diversity
   remains a unifying influence. The Council's report is expected shortly.
As you are aware, after appropriate consultation and research we
   launched the first stage of the 'Living in Harmony' campaign to
   promote community harmony and the enormous benefits of cultural
   diversity within Australian society. 
The first stage included a $2.5 million programme of grants and
   partnership projects with the Australian Cricket Board, the New
   South Wales Rural Fire Service and Woolworths. We are committed
   to maintaining this campaign through the allocation of an extra
   $5 million which will take the overall campaign to $10 million.
We are also planning for the celebration of 50 years of Australian
   citizenship in 1999. For this reason we established the Council
   for Australian Citizenship to promote debate on citizenship issues.
We will report to the Parliament on the findings and recommendations
   of the Citizenship Council and I look forward to next year's
   celebrations.
Let me at this opportunity, Mr Chairman, pay particular tribute
   to Philip Ruddock who has been the Minister for Immigration and
   Multicultural Affairs since the Coalition Government took office
   in March of 1996. I believe that Mr Ruddock has handled the portfolio
   with great skill and compassion. He has been very professional and
   evenhanded. Philip's qualities both as a Minister and as person
   who has unique insights and understandings of the area for which
   he has responsibility have been recognised in his promotion to Cabinet
   and his new role in assisting me in relation to reconciliation issues.
   I record with great thanks and admiration Philip Ruddock's
   contribution in these areas.
Mr Chairman, let me conclude by saying a couple of general things.
   I have every confidence as we head towards a new Australian century
   that we can become even stronger and more united. I take a profoundly
   optimistic and positive view about the character of Australian society.
   I believe that the things that unite us as Australians will always
   be more powerful and more enduring than those things that divide.
   Our nation has been immensely enriched through the successive waves
   of immigration over the years that have brought new people from
   every corner of the world. We have succeeded better than any other
   nation on earth in recognising that we are a community of many parts
   and many origins. We do have a level of tolerance and understanding
   that is the envy of most nations. We are essentially a united people,
   but we respect the different cultural heritage of those within our
   community and we recognise and support their right to celebrate
   their own particular culture and their own heritage in a completely
   tolerant and open fashion. 
We are a nation like any, not without our blemishes. We have within
   our ranks those who are intolerant, and those who would seek to
   exploit differences based on race for their own particular purposes.
   As a community we face the challenge of achieving an effective and
   widely accepted reconciliation between the indigenous people of
   this country and the rest of the Australian community. And I particularly
   welcome the presence here today of Gatjil and Evelyn in that context.
But it is important that we approach these issues in a spirit of
   both optimism and hope. The Australian achievement, and I believe
   it is a glorious one, is quite special, it is unique. There is an
   Australian way, there is an Australian character and all have made
   a contribution to it. And whether you were born in this country
   or your parents and grandparents were born in this country or whether
   this is your country of choice, it is equally our own and we all
   have a right to share in its benefits and we all have a right to
   enjoy both its tolerance, its respect and its protection. 
I have great confidence that the next century hold enormous prospects
   for Australia. I have a great belief that the unique intersection
   of which I spoke gives a capacity to leave a mark, not only on this
   part of the world, but on the world generally which would be denied
   to any other community.
I thank the Federation for inviting me here today. We will continue
   to have as a government and at a political level as two coalition
   parties we'll continue to have a constructive ongoing dialogue
   with your organisation. We will agree on some things, we will disagree
   on others. You will like some of the things we do, you will dislike
   some of the other things we'll do. That is in the nature of
   public office and public life. But I come on behalf of the Government
   in goodwill, with a positive attitude to all of the organisations
   and all of the different groups that are represented here today.
I thank you for inviting me, I wish you and your deliberations
   well and I look forward to three years of constructive co-operation.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE
Brian, Margaret Reid, my other federal and state Parliamentary colleagues, and particularly Ian Macdonald, the Minister in the second Coalition Government that has responsibility for Canberra, ladies and gentleman. It really is a great pleasure to come back to this sell-out dinner of the ACT Division.
To reflect for a few moments on what the Liberal Party has achieved, and can I in her absence because it's occurred since our last dinner, can I congratulate Kate Carnell on the outstanding victory which she and her team achieved. That wasn't an easy election. There was the odd critical comment made by our Labor opponents about the federal Government, but despite all of that the people of Canberra realised that if you wanted the Canberra economy to progress and to boom then you ought to have a Liberal administration. And at this point it's worthwhile my stating, because this is the major Liberal Party gathering that I address in the Australian Capital Territory, it is worthwhile stating a few facts about Canberra and about the economy of the Australian Capital Territory. And these facts make very interesting reading against some of the things that are said. It is true that the size of the Commonwealth public sector in Canberra has contracted but the private sector workforce has increased since 1996 by more than 1000 people, and overall the number of unemployed in Canberra has actually fallen in that two-and-a-half year period by 2500. In March of 1996 when the Coalition Government came to power the unemployment rate in Canberra was 8.1%. In October of this year it was 6.7%.
The number of young people looking for work in that period has fallen by one-third. Retail turnover in Canberra is now more than 13% above what it was in March of 1996. The consumer price index for Canberra is now one-third of what it was when we took office. And the population of the ACT has actually risen by 2000 in the last two years. And the median house prices have actually increased from their 1996 levels. Now I mention these things to put into context and to try and present an overall picture of the ACT economy because fundamentally it is a very positive optimistic economy. There have been changes. I don't deny the fact there have been a number of restructurings carried out in the public service that have had an impact on public sector employment.
But it's also fair to say that the balance between public and private sector employment in Canberra has shifted markedly in favour of the private sector. Many of you will remember that when Sir Robert Menzies retired as Prime Minister in 1966 that he cited the development of Canberra as one of his major successes. He went so far as to describe Canberra as his pride and joy. And he is the founder of the Liberal Party and as our longest serving Prime Minister was responsible for many things: the creation of the National Capital Development Commission, the Mint, Lake Burley-Griffin, structuring of the ANU around the institute and the faculties, the Tidbinbilla Deep Space Tracking Station, the massive tree planting campaign, the development of satellite cities and so on.
And subsequently under the Gorton Government you had the progress of Weston Creek and the beginning of Belconnen. And the High Court, the Gallery, the Telecom Tower were all opened during Malcolm Fraser's tenure during his Prime Ministership. And the genesis of the Australian Institute of Sport, the ADFA and the new Parliament House also owe themselves to Malcolm Fraser. And with that background in mind, and in the context of that it is worth reminding ourselves that during our first term, since March of 1996, we have actively supported the very high speed train link between Canberra and Sydney which has the potential to provide 15,000 jobs during its construction phase and 2000 long term jobs on completion.
And the preferred proponent, Speed Rail, has progressed to proving upstage. We've committed $195 million to the upgrade of the Federal Highway. We have sold the airport lease of Canberra airport to the locally owned Canberra Airports Group and congratulations to Terry Snow who's here tonight and has done so much for Canberra and for the ACT Division of the Liberal Party. We've committed $472 million up to the year 2001 for Commonwealth construction projects in the ACT. We've introduced legislation which is opposed by Labor to provide long term residential leases in the ACT. We've chosen the site and design for the National Museum of Australia and we've maintained restoration works at the Old Parliament House, found a new block for the National Archives in the East Block complex and refocused the activities of the National Capital Authority.
Now I've taken a moment to read out a list and to refer to some notes, something I don't normally do. Something I don't particularly like doing. But I wanted to get a few facts and figures right because too many of our political opponents, too often, and for the meanest of reasons, have been talking down the economy of the great city of Canberra and I'm a little tired of that and I'm a little tired of the rather limp descriptions of the Government that I lead as being hostile to the interests of the people of the ACT, and hostile of the interests of people who are employed in the public sector.
Those allegations are wrong and the allegations that we have been indifferent to the economy of the ACT are demonstrably wrong as those figures I've read out have demonstrated. At the other side of the story, and that is that what the Government I lead has done for the overall economy of Australia, and what the Government that I lead has done therefore for the economy of Canberra is a story worth dwelling on for a few moments tonight. I can't remember a time that I have been in public life where the economy of this country has been on such stable and sure foundations. I entered Federal Parliament in May of 1974. I entered Federal Parliament in the middle of the three years of the Whitlam disaster. I entered federal Parliament in 1974 when wages growth in this country was running out of control, when inflation was beginning to climb, when we were coming used to something that we hadn't experienced in more than a generation and that was a high level of unemployment. I watched the international credit worthiness of this country go down. I watched unemployment rise. I watched the public service become bloated. I watched the private sector become nervous and hesitant. I watched interest rates rise, I watched inflation rates rise. And it's taken more than 20 years for that period of instability and that period of chaos to be finally worked out of the Australian economy because right at the moment we are enjoying the most stable, secure, predictable economic conditions that the Australian people have seen for more than a generation.
You really do have to go back to the 1960s to find a period when interest rates were as low as they are now. When inflation was as low as it is now. When the climate for business investment was as strong as it is now. When the reputation of Australia economically abroad was as strong as it is now. I've just recently being in the APEC gathering in Kuala Lumpur and the strongest impression that I bring back from that gathering is the respect in which Australia is held overseas. And we are held in respect overseas because we are seen to have weathered the worst effects of the Asian economic downturn.
We are seen to have stared down the economic disaster that overtook the Asia-Pacific region. And we have, in fact, come through that disaster in much better shape than even the more optimistic of us imagined possible 18 months ago. And that didn't happen by accident, it didn't happen by accident, it happened by design. And it happened because the Government you voted for in March of 1996 was prepared to undertake the necessary surgery to fix the Australian economy. I know some of the things we did in reducing the budget deficit were unpopular and I know they were very unpopular here in Canberra. But in the long run what we have done and the run is not so long because the beneficial effects are now being enjoyed by Australia. But in the long run or the short run, however you describe it, we have, in fact, given to the Australian economy a level of protection that nobody would have thought possible or likely two-and-a-half years ago.
And there is no substitute when there's a storm raging outside your country, there is no substitute for sound, domestic economic policies. I mean, when you get into trouble around the world economically you have got to make certain that you have got your fundamentals right. And we did that, and the result is that we are seen now as being the economic strong man of the Asian-Pacific region. We are seen by those countries as being strong enough and able enough to help them in their hour of difficulty, in their hour of travail. We are seen as an economy that has not only got its budget in order but as a result of the programme that the Government took to the last election we are seen as an economy led by a Government that is prepared to undertake the necessary long-term further reforms that will strengthen the Australian economy. The programme we took to the last election was courageous in the history of Australian politics.
I don't recall a government that took a more comprehensive, indeed, a more radical economic plan to an election and survived to tell the story. And the reason that we won the last election was that deep down those Australians voting where it really mattered knew that what we were putting to them was necessary in the long-term interests of our country. They knew that if we wanted to become more competitive we needed a new modern taxation system. They knew that the message coming out of the Asian turmoil was that countries when faced with that kind of turmoil don't slow down on the reform progress they, in fact, accelerate the reform progress. And that is what we were able to take the people at the last election. Now, I don't mind admitting that there were times during the campaign when I wondered whether or not we were going to win. There were times on election night and day when I worried about what the ultimate outcome would be.
But there was one thing that I never had any doubt about during that campaign and that was that what we did was the right thing in the long-term interests of Australia. And I knew that come what may I would always be able to reflect on the period and reflect on what we had done in that election campaign and say to myself that we called it right for Australia and we called it right for Australia's long-term interests. And every day that goes by now that the election is behind us I am increasingly proud of the tremendous team effort that the Liberal Party put in all over Australia. It's one thing to win an election when you know that your political opponents have been in office for 13 years and you know that the incumbent Prime Minister is deeply unpopular and you know that there is a deep desire inside Australians to have a change of government. And that was the condition that existed in 1996 and I had no false illusions about the character of our victory in 1996.
But in 1998 it was very different. We had been in office for two-and-a-half years, there was an inevitable subsidence of the strong anti-Keating feeling of 1996 and people were looking at things somewhat differently. We have taken some decisions that have hurt a few people, we have done a few things that were unpopular in the long-term interests of the country and we were promoting something that was easily capable of distortion and misrepresentation and that was a new tax system. And to win in those circumstances and to win comfortably in those circumstances gives to the re-elected Government a sense of strength and a dignity and a sense of authority which is even greater than what we enjoyed after the 1996 election.
Now, we have ahead of us a tough legislative battle. We have got to get our programme through the Senate. All I can say to those who sit opposite us in the Senate, just remember that elections are all about political parties presenting programmes, arguing for them, seeking support and when they get that support implementing those programmes. And I want to make it very clear to all of you tonight, ladies and gentlemen, and through you to the Australian people that we didn't lightly take that taxation plan to the Australian public at the last election. We didn't do it for fun, we didn't do it for our health, we did it for the long-term benefit of the Australian community.
And we intend to see it through and we are absolutely determined that every last element of that taxation plan is going to be implemented for the benefit of the Australian people. And we don't say that out of some sense of ideological zeal, we say it because we genuinely believe that the economy of Australia needs and deserves a modern contemporary 21st century taxation system. A taxation system where 81 per cent of Australian taxpayers will be on a top marginal rate of only 30 cents in the dollar, a taxation system that, incidentally, will deliver if the Parliament enacts the law, a 30 per cent tax deduction on private health insurance premiums from the 1st of January next year.
A taxation system that is going to take $10.5 billion off the costs of running businesses in Australia. A taxation system that is going to make exports $4.5 billion cheaper. A taxation system that is going to deliver an aggregate cut in personal income tax of $13 billion a year. And a taxation system that is going to make the entire infrastructure of the Australian economy more competitive and more able to win markets, not only abroad but also to retain their fair share of domestic markets against import competition. A case in favour of tax reform is overwhelming. It's a case that was acknowledged and advocated by my former opponent Paul Keating when he was Treasurer back in 1986.
And it's a case that was advocated by Bob Hawke when he was Prime Minister. It's a case that was endorsed by Kim Beazley when he was a Minister in the former Labor Government. It is the case that has been endorsed by every serious student of the taxation system of this country. I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks that I entered Parliament in 1974. 1974 was the year before the first of a whole series of comprehensive examinations of the Australian taxation system were presented to the Australian Parliament and which recommended as a fundamental part of reform the introduction of a broad-based indirect tax. Our proposal for taxation reform is years and years overdue.
We have long needed a fundamental change to our taxation system. We have finally won public approval for it. Let the members of the Australian Senate listen to the Australian public, listen to the verdict of the Australian people and give effect to the wishes that were expressed at the ballot box on the 3rd of October last. Can I finally, ladies and gentlemen, thank all of you for staying the distance and travelling the journey. I know it's been up and down, I know it's been a bit rocky, I know there's been criticism here and there of one or two things that the Federal Government has done.
But looking around at this audience tonight I see a lot of old and familiar faces and that's wonderful. I also see a lot of new faces, I also see that this is a packed gathering. And I am told that lots of people wanted to be here tonight but couldn't be accommodated because it had already been sold out. Now, what that means is that the Liberal Party is alive and healthy and vibrant and well in the Australian Capital Territory. That's what that means.
I mean, you are very lucky you have got a Federal Government that's a Liberal government and you have got a territorial government that's a Liberal government. And that's not bad. You are not only lucky but you are pretty clever. And it's a good thing because it's been a very vibrant organisation and I do want to thank the President, Brian Nye, I want to thank all of the other people that have worked so very hard to keep the Liberal Party going here in the Australian Capital Territory. You deserve the success you have achieved, it's nice to have won two federal elections in a row, it's nice to have won two ACT elections in a row and it's great to be celebrating tonight amongst friends and supporters. Thank you very much. [ends]


&nbsp;
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………
Well, thank you very much Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. It’s always a delight for me to address a gathering of the NFF personally and as leader of the Liberal Party and over the last two-and-a-half years as Prime Minister I have had a very close association with the National Farmers’ Federation. I have admired its contribution to many of the important economic debates in this country over probably 15 to 20 years. And, of course, in our first term in Government I worked very closely with the NFF in resolving what was undoubtedly the most difficult issue that came the Government’s way in that first term and that was the issue of native title. And although it has disappeared from sight virtually over the last few months, certainly from a national point of view, I know there are still some details to be resolved at a State level and that perhaps things are not proceeding at a State level in some areas as well as might have been hoped. I do want to take the opportunity of recording my appreciation to the Federation for the very constructive way in which it set about the final negotiations which led to what I saw then, and still do see, as an honourable settlement of an extremely difficult issue.
I only want to concentrate in my remarks today on a few areas but they are all important areas. The first and most important thing I want to say is to reaffirm the Government’s commitment to the sector of the Australian economy and the Australian community which you all represent. We don’t take the support of the farm sector for granted politically. Our two parties have very deep links with the farm sector and many of our representatives in Federal Parliament are or have been themselves farmers. But we realise in this era of detribalised political activity that nobody can take anybody’s support for granted. We also understand that the farm sector in Australia continues to face monumental challenges. You continue to operate in corrupted world markets, you continue to carry very heavy cost burdens and you continue to face, in common with your fellow Australians who live in isolated parts of our country, a loss of service and an erosion of the facilities to which you have been used over a period of time.
I am very happy to say that the broad economic conditions in which the country finds itself at the moment are better than at any time since I have been a Member of Federal Parliament. I entered Federal Parliament in 1974 halfway through the three year Whitlam period when the wheels were beginning to fall off the Australian economy, when our inflation rate was going through the roof. For the first time in a generation or more we were beginning to experience high unemployment, wages were running out of control, interest rates were beginning to climb, oil prices had been quadrupled and, generally speaking, the Australian economy was losing the benefits of that long uninterrupted boom that it experienced but for the interruption of the Korean war experienced from the late 1940s through until the early 1970s.
But over the last 25 years we have gone through a lot of difficult periods and the farm sector has suffered in many cases more than other sectors of the Australian community. And whilst I don’t claim for a moment that everybody in the community, let alone everybody in this room, is getting the benefit of it, the general economic climate in Australia at the moment is very strong. We do have very low inflation with no likelihood in the near future of it changing. We have much lower interest rates than we have had for a generation. We have quite high levels of business investment, we are enjoying economic growth which is even stronger than the more optimistic of us thought possible six or nine months ago, and we do appear to have weathered the Asian economic downturn far better than most people had predicted.
And one of the reasons that we have done that is that we have been able to diversify our exports better than we thought we might be able to do. And in turn that is due to the benefits of a flexible exchange rate and can I recall in that context that the National Farmers’ Federation was about the first major industry body in Australia to argue very strongly for a floating exchange rate. And when it wasn’t popular, when it wasn’t kosher to argue for a floating exchange rate in this country the National Farmers’ Federation was prepared to take up the cudgels for it. But the general economic conditions are strong. Now, that doesn’t, of course, flow through to everybody in the community.
The second issue I want to touch on very briefly, of course, is that very critical issue of taxation reform. As you all know it was the main issue of the last election campaign and despite the fear campaign that was run against it in a quite ferocious way, we won. We have a working majority in the House of Representatives. We don’t have a working majority in the Senate. And in order to get the legislation through we will need to get the support in addition to the 37 Senators we have until the 30th of June next year, we’ll need to get the support of the two Independent Senators in order to get it through in the form that we want. The Democrats have indicated that broadly speaking they support a GST but they are very strongly opposed to a GST on food. I note with approval your remarks, Mr President, once you start taking it off food you begin to erode the broad base of the tax and you begin to create pressures for it to be taken off in other areas.
Now, this is going to be a long battle. It will pass strange to many of our visitors that you can fight an election by telling the public before the election that you are going to change the tax system, you can provide all the detail under the sun, indeed, a level of detail never provided in Australian political history by an incumbent government before an election. You can win that election despite the incumbence of fighting the election on a tax platform that is subject to virulent vociferous attack but you can still have trouble getting your wishes passed into law. That’s the Australian democratic process and it’s the process that we have to live with because it’s the law and we have to work within that law. But I just want to make it clear to all of you that we intend to push very hard indeed to get the plan that the Australian people voted for the on the 3rd of October adopted.
Now, the benefits of that plan for the farm sector, for rural Australia, are quite enormous. The cost reductions total about $10.5 billion for businesses throughout the entire country. There’s about a $4.5 billion cost remit for our exporters and the great bulk of that goes to, or a very large slice of that of course goes to our primary producers. The reductions in fuel which amount to about, in cost terms, about $3.5 billion a year represent an absolute revolution in fuel costs as far as rural Australia are concerned. And they certainly represent the best proposal rural Australia has ever seen and has ever had within its grasp so far as tackling the problem of the high cost of fuel in such a very large country. And I can’t think of a more compelling reason if you wanted one reason alone why your organisation should continue to give, as I know you have in the past, the very strong support for this plan of ours.
We are very strongly committed to it. It is the greatest piece of unfinished economic business in Australia. We have de-regulated our financial system, we have floated the dollar, we have reduced tariffs, we have embarked upon micro-economic reform in other areas. But the one great standout is taxation. We are still running a 1930s taxation system and we put our bodies on the line politically at the election. As I said last night, we didn’t do it for fun, we didn’t do it for our health, we didn’t….I certainly can assure you we didn’t do it for cheap political thrills, we did it because we thought it was in the long-term interests of the society we represent in the long-term interests of the Australian community. And we are going to push very hard to get it through but it won’t be easy because those who hold the numbers in the Senate, or certainly a large proportion of them seem deaf to the verdict that was passed by the Australian people.
Another matter I want to acknowledge is the great concern in rural Australia about the disappearance of services. Some of those services, the loss of them, has been very painful and some of it is unavoidable and some is irreversible. But I nonetheless acknowledge that there are things that governments can do to prevent the loss of services in the future and to replace some of the services that have been removed in the past. And the reasoning behind the administrative changes I made affecting the bush after the election go very much to this issue of services. I have created the new portfolio of Transport and Regional Services which is now being handled by John Anderson, the Deputy Leader of the National Party. The emphasis in that portfolio is a holistic approach to use that terrible cliché towards services provided in rural and regional Australia. And John’s major, but not only, preoccupation will be to have a general responsibility in relation to them. Mark Vaile has responsibility for agriculture and related issues.
We are intending to make, and we have already announced a number of policy commitments that will bring about major improvements in a number of areas of particular concern to rural people. In the health area we are providing $50 million this financial year for rural GP retention grants. We are providing $30 million to establish another 600 Medicare easyclaim facilities and we are providing $42 million for 30 regional health service centres to be established in different parts of the country. We are going to provide $70 million for regional transaction centres which are going to be funded from the next tranche of the sale of Telstra. And these rural transaction centres will help fill the gaps in banking, postal, communications and Medicare services that have been left in a number of smaller rural communities. And there is a potential within them for additional services such as the Job Network, Centrelink and private health funds.
We have committed a further $250 million to the Natural Heritage Trust which touchs large parts of rural Australia from the sale of the next tranche of Telstra. We have committed $30 million towards the rehabilitation of the great Artesian basin, a vital resource providing essential water supplies for Australia’s farmers. And we have committed $20 million to a regional and rural floodplain management programme that will assist communities to prevent repeats of some of the recent tragedies.
I am as Prime Minister and all of my colleagues are very conscious of the concern within rural Australia about the presence of bank branches, the availability of postal services and in that context you’ll be aware of the statements that we have made about the retention of public ownership of Australia Post and the maintenance of postal service centres throughout Australia. And I am very happy to report that in the two-and-a-half years that we have been in Government we have actually turned around the process that was previously going on about the establishment of postal centres throughout the country. But it does remain a very legitimate area of concern. I can understand the feeling of rural Australia, that the very lifestyle to which people have legitimately become accustomed over generations is changing as a result of the loss of these services. And whilst I am not going to pretend that in each and every case we can stop a bank disappearing, we can reverse the withdrawal of a service. We do recognise your legitimate concern and we are setting about the implementations of policies that will respond to those concerns.
Can I just Mr Chairman touch on two other points. One of those relates to the waterfront. You will be aware that one of the most keenly fought political battles of the Government’s first term were the steps we took in March and April last year to support moves to improve and render more efficient the Australian waterfront. I want, in the context of that, to acknowledge with gratitude and to salute the contribution of the NFF, then under the leadership of Don McGauchie, for the contribution that it made to a vital crusade for the long term economic future of this country.
I think everybody in this room has known for a long time that we have an inefficient waterfront. And everybody in this room has known for a long time that you weren’t going to get a change in the waterfront culture unless the government of the day and others in the community steeled themselves and undertook a resolute course of reform. And that is what we endeavoured to do in the early part of last year. And the Patrick company and those acting in association with some of the interests I’ve mentioned earlier, the NFF and those related to the NFF, those people set about doing good work for Australia.
And whilst every element didn’t turn out as had been advised I think it is fair to say, and we’ve had some evidence in recent weeks, indeed in recent days, it’s fair to say that there have already been major productivity improvements in areas of the Australian waterfront. The Sydney waterfront still remains a problem and it underlines I think the challenge that still exists in that area and I think points the finger of responsibility, or the finger of blame at those who are responsible for the fact that Sydney is still lagging behind the pack. But the productivity improvements that have been achieved in other parts of the country are due to the action that was taken by Patricks, the action that was taken by the NFF, and the support that was given in the cause of a more efficient waterfront by the federal Government at that particular time. And I want to record my personal thanks to Peter Reith for the excellent job he did as the Minister responsible for that area at the time that action was taken.
The last issue I want to touch on very briefly is APEC. I have to say that I was disappointed that in the area of early voluntary sectoral liberalisation, because of the stand that was taken by the Japanese Government it wasn’t possible to achieve delivery on everything that had been agreed at the Vancouver meeting in 1997. We tried very hard both in bilateral discussions with the Japanese Foreign Minister when he came to Australia three weeks ago, and also during the various bilateral discussions we had, particularly via Tim Fischer and Alexander Downer in Kuala Lumpur last week. But the resolve of the Japanese Government to slow down a little on that process was such that no alternative outcome was likely.
Now I don’t want that to be seen as in any way signalling a serious set back to APEC. I don’t think it is. Given the nature of the downturn in the Asian economies over the last couple of years it was inevitable that there would be, as I said, a dropping back from top to third gear in the APEC car. And that is what happened. But other aspects of the APEC meeting were highly successful. There remains a very strong commitment amongst those countries to the Bogor goals of trade liberalisation amongst the developed countries by the year 2010, and amongst developing countries by the year 2020. I’m very pleased to say that Australia is certainly setting a good example in areas of trade liberalisation as I constantly remind countries whose agricultural sectors are more highly protected than ours are that we have, by the end of all sorts of measures, about the most efficient agricultural sector in the world. But it is cold comfort to Australian farmers who are knocked around by unfair world markets to be told that they have an inefficient sector when they’re not getting decent returns on their produce and they are encumbered by all sorts of unreasonable burdens and costs.
Mr Chairman, I don’t want to say anymore than that. I apologise for my late arrival but we had a rather extended meeting dealing with some of the finer details of the taxation legislation which I hope will be introduced by the Treasurer into Federal Parliament next week. But I do want to say again at the commencement of my second term as Prime Minister how much I value the association the Government has with the National Farmers’ Federation. How much I admire the contribution of rural men and women to our country. How important I regard the farm sector to the Australian way of life, and how much I want to work with you, how much my Ministers want to work with you in building a stronger Australia and maintaining the rural community as an integral part, not only of our economy, but an integral of the kind of country that we see Australia continuing to be into the next century. Thank you very much.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
QUESTION:
Thanks Prime Minister. Brendan Stewart, Vice President of the National Farmers’ Federation. My question is in relation to bank branches and bank closures. The Treasurer’s reopened the possibility of allowing mergers amongst the four major trading banks. Given that one merger would almost certainly lead to possibly two and a further rapid closure of bank branches in rural and regional Australia, what benefit is there, I suppose, for rural Australians in further bank mergers, and what’s your attitude to those mergers.
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well I don’t know that the Treasurer or anybody has reopened anything in relation to bank mergers. Our position on bank mergers is this: that we are not for all time against mergers of the existing banks. But we would not agree to any mergers taking place, any further mergers of the majors, in other words we’d maintain what’s called the four pillars policy, until we are satisfied that there were a greater level of competition than now exists. I have to say to you that I don’t believe that, although there have been a lot of improvements in the area of competition, I don’t believe that that greater level of competition has yet been achieved. Now I understand the feeling of people about mergers. I also understand that we live in a globalised economy and the arguments about having strong national flag carrying companies in all sorts of areas is a very strong one. But I can assure you that we are not going to likely demolish the four pillars policy but it would be a foolish government that said they could never contemplate the circumstances into the future where there might be a case for a change. But I certainly don’t see the conditions of greater competition as having yet being satisfied in order to meet the sort of criteria we had in mind when we enunciated our response to the Wallis Inquiry a couple of years ago.
QUESTION: 
Prime Minister, can I just ask you a couple of things in relation to the APEC leaders’ summit. And let me say from a personal point of view, and also on behalf of this organisation that we would congratulate you on the way that you handled what was a very difficult and delicate summit. I think the fact that you handled it the way you did is going to be of great credit to Australia as a nation, perhaps not grandstanding in a way that some others did for domestic purposes but in fact looking after the interests of the country in the way you did will stand us all in much better stead in the future. But I think it’s the consequences for APEC of actually having to refer off some of the processes of further reform to the WTO rather than deal with it with an APEC that is probably of interest to us specifically. And secondly, as New Zealand will chair APEC in the next 12 months, what can we do both as a nation, and certainly from an organisational point of view like NFF, to support New Zealand to get agriculture back on the agenda in the way that we would like it to be?
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, we can do a number of things. I think you can obviously, through your fraternal associations and I imagine that you have them with the New Zealand farm organisations, make certain that the maximum case is put to the New Zealand Government as Chairman of next year’s meeting to ensure that that happens. Can I assure you that the present New Zealand Government and the present New Zealand Prime Minister is very committed to the sort of things that I outlined in relation to APEC in my speech. The problem at the meeting Don, frankly was, I have to choose my words carefully and I don’t want to put a too fine a point on it, there were some broader political considerations that meant that the Japanese felt unable to proceed as far as they wanted to proceed, had originally committed themselves to proceed. Now I say those things carefully because Japan is an important customer of Australia’s. As a Prime Minister I understand that you’ve always got to juggle the economic dictate and political realities. And we all do that and I don’t seek to sort of be too sanctimonious about it. On the other hand we have a very very deep interest in further progress on this front and the progress we’ve made has been slow and painful but we have made progress, particularly coming out of the Uruguay round. We’re pressing very hard for a further broadly-based trade round in the year 2000. I think we have to keep in the public eye in Australia the cause of trade liberalisation although it is fair to say that across the political spectrum there is a reasonable measure of agreement about the desirability of achieving the Bogor outcomes. But I would hope that in a year’s time there would have been some improvement in the economic climate in the Asian-Pacific region so that we will meet in a more positive climate than we met in Kuala Lumpur. I can report to you that there are some signs that the Thai economy, they’re only slight at this stage, and some signs that the Korean economy, both of which have undertaken very very severe adjustment measures, very stringent adjustment measures, there are signs that those two economies are improving, ever so slightly. The outlook in Indonesia is very difficult. I don’t need to tell you with all the coverage that’s in the newspapers and on your television screens each night. It is a very difficult and volatile political situation and of course the economic situation in Indonesia, although it has stabilised somewhat, is still quite difficult, and of course there’s been a very dramatic decline in living standards and millions of people in that country have been plunged into absolute poverty. Australia does stand in very good stead in the region because we have been seen to be, and have in fact been helpful and constructive. We’ve stuck to what we believe in but we haven’t publicly hectored people. We’ve given some practical help and that’s been appreciated. And we’ve also taken the measures domestically to keep our own economy in good health. And that’s quite widely respected and quite widely appreciated in the region and the best thing for me out of the APEC meeting was that I felt I was representing a country whose esteem had risen significantly over the last year or so in particular for the reasons that I’ve outlined. Now everybody in Australia is entitled to take credit for that. It’s not just the Government but it was a very rewarding feeling and experience and it does demonstrate that there are dividends from taking the right decisions domestically but also being willing to help the region. And that wouldn’t have been possible if I hadn’t have received understanding and help as Prime Minister from organisations that eschewed short term political point scoring such as saying: well charity begins at home, why do you help out countries that don’t have the same system of government as we have? The reason, as you all know, we help out those countries is that’s in our long term national interest to do so because they are potential markets for Australia and we have no vested interest in having other than strong and very forward looking markets.
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, firstly congratulations on your re-election, and secondly congratulations on your establishment of the ministry of Transport and Regional Services. Sir, could you please advise us how you see this portfolio easing the pain being experienced in rural and regional Australia and also delivering the election promises you made to these areas.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think the greatest advantage of John Anderson’s new portfolio is that for the first time you have a senior Minister, one of the leadership group of the Government, whose major responsibility is making certain that the overall level of services in rural and regional Australia is fair and reasonable and whose total responsibility, or major responsibility is the quality of the lifestyle of that sector of the Australian community. In the past this responsibility has been rather fragmented. Now we have it put under one roof. We have it in the hands of a senior minister and it hasn’t been done at the expense of the proper focus there ought to be on the agricultural sector. And in addition to that, if I can just digress for moment, we have achieved a rationalisation of the industry responsibility within the Government that hasn’t existed for at least twenty years, perhaps ever, by grouping responsibility for manufacturing industry and also the resource industry into the one portfolio. I think that is a far more intelligent grouping than we’ve had in the past. So by giving a senior minister the responsibilities for the care of the overall quality of service for regional and rural Australia you’ll not only get a speedier implementation of Government commitments but I think you’ll get on a day-to-day basis in Cabinet discussions, or week to week basis rather, you’ll get a more lively appreciation and a better and more co-ordinated feedback of the problems and the difficulties that are being faced. Now the pain that is being experienced of which you spoke in your question is the pain that comes from years of quite high interest rates, years of disappearing markets, years of the wind down of services, and years of being buffeted by corrupt world trading practices. Now no ministerial re-arrangement, no set of government promises, no amount of government dollars can cure all of those difficulties and I can’t promise you that we can reopen, or we’ll even try to reopen every closed bank branch, or every closed services. But we are trying in a more systematic way to reverse closures and retreats where they ought to occur. To stop where possible ones occurring in the future, and particularly in the area of information technology, making a very big fist of ensuring there are not IT haves and have nots within the Australian community. That is certainly something that we would very much want to avoid.
&nbsp;[ends]
&nbsp;


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Dr Calvert, to Jackie Kelly, Senator Faulkner,
 Mr Michael Knight, the Chairman of SOCOG, Phil Coles, Brett Chivers,
 other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a particular pleasure for me to be here today to announce and
 launch the Oceania leg of the Olympic torch for the Games of the year
 2000. As you all know, next to the Olympic rings, the Olympic torch
 is the most evocative and noticeable and memorable of all of the Olympic
 symbols.
In the modern era of the Olympics the flame was first used during
 the Los Angeles Games in 1932. And in May 2000 the great tradition
 will be continued when a flame will be kindled by the rays of the
 sun at a special ceremony in Olympia in Greece and will be carried
 by as many means of transport as possible through the world and ending
 at the opening of the Games in Sydney in the year 2000. And importantly,
 for the purposes of today's gathering, on the way to Sydney the
 torch will visit the Olympic nations of Oceania. And the staging of
 the Oceania leg of the relay is a massive undertaking involving the
 co-operation of the Commonwealth, SOCOG and the national Olympic committees
 of each of the participating nations.
At the South Pacific Forum in Rarotonga on the 17th of
 September last year I announced that the Australian Government would
 fully underwrite the cost of carrying the torch through the Pacific
 island nations. And this recognised that the Olympic Games of 2000
 would not only be an Australia-wide event but would also be an event
 for the Oceania region. And just as we want the torch relay in Australia
 to touch the broadest cross-section of the Australian community and
 the Australian experience, so too do we want to showcase the lives
 of our near neighbours of the region and help reveal to the world
 a little more the rich history and culture of the Oceania region and
 its people.
Sport is central to the lives of Australians and also to the lives
 of people who live in the Oceania region. And the inclusion of the
 nations of the region in the torch relay is a particular recognition
 of this.
The torch will travel through many nations in the region with which
 Australia has a strong history of sporting links. And they include
 Papua New Guinea, Fiji, Samoa and the Solomon Islands. And Australia's
 links with many parts of the region of course extend beyond sport.
 There are links anchored in history, in war, in geography and which
 are sustained today by the many people-to-people links.
In Papua New Guinea celebrations will include an opportunity for community
 involvement by the people of Kokoda near Port Moresby. And I am particularly
 pleased that the route will take the torch to Ower's Corner on
 the Kokoda Trail itself.
The Oceania leg finishes in New Zealand with which of course we have
 long-standing and very vigorous sporting as well as trade, cultural
 and personal ties. The extension of the torch relay to the Oceania
 region gives a much greater number of people the chance to have contact
 with the Games of 2000.
Another of the great opportunities and challenges of hosting the Olympic
 Games is the attention it brings to the host nation or to the host
 region. And each nation in our region will have a special opportunity
 to provide a particular insight to the lives of their people.
The torch relay and, of course, the Olympic Games themselves provide
 a great lead into the Centenary of Federation celebrations in the
 year 2001 as the relay itself will visit some of the places where
 the foundation stones of the Australian federation were laid. Corowa,
 Bathurst and Tenterfield are just some of the places where major events
 occurred as part of the monumental march towards the federation of
 the then Australian colonies into the nation of Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Games of 2000 in Sydney will certainly be
 a great event for all Australians. As someone who completed his leaving
 certificate in 1956 at the same time as the staging of the first Olympic
 Games in Australia in Melbourne in that particular year, I have special
 memories of that year and I can remember the excitement that existed
 throughout our country when the torch arrived and as the people competing
 in the Games gathered.
Sydney will do Australia proud. I have no doubt that the Games in
 Sydney in the year 2000 will be an outstanding success. I have no
 doubt that the Games will be an opportunity for the great strengths
 and the great qualities of the Australian way of life to be showcased
 to the world. I have no doubt that all Australians in the lead up
 to the Games will come together in a united, concerted effort to ensure
 the success of the Games and to tell the world what a wonderful country
 we are, to remind the world of our remarkable achievements of tolerance
 and progress and liberty. And, importantly, they will also be an opportunity
 to tell the world of the diversity and the vibrance of the region
 in which Australia lives and of the very deep commitment that Australia
 has to the welfare of the nations of the Oceania region. It therefore
 gives me very great pleasure to launch the Oceania route of the Olympic
 torch relay.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Ladies and gentlemen, it's an enormous delight for me to be here
 tonight. And as I watched the names and I saw the people who comprise
 the Australian Hall of Fame tonight it was really a fast-forward of
 my years and years of watching sport and being excited and inspired
 and entertained by the achievements of the men and women of Australian
 sport.
I comprise the great bulk of Australian sports lovers. The performance
 of people here tonight who are part of the Hall of Fame could only
 ever be in our dreams. But we have shared their lives. We have shared
 their achievements. For me sport has always been a very important
 part of my life and a very important part of our country.
Sport binds Australians together like nothing else. Sport inspires
 Australians like nothing else. And the achievements of our men and
 women in sport are part of the Australian achievement and a part of
 the Australian legend.
My earliest recollections of sport, of course, as a boy growing up
 in Sydney, surrounded by names in cricket like Ray Lindwall and Keith
 Miller - I saw the great Sir Donald play but once in his last appearance
 at the Sydney Cricket Ground - Frank Sedgman and Ken McGregor in tennis,
 as a resident of Sydney and a follower of rugby league, Clive Churchill,
 the great little master who played for South Sydney. And so the list
 goes on. And all through my life sport has been a very important part.
But to all of us sport is something that brings out what we think
 are the best qualities about being an Australian. They are qualities
 of commitment. They are qualities of loyalty. They are qualities of
 mateship and they are qualities of achievement. There's nothing
 that excites Australians quite so much as the thrill of a sporting
 contest and the thrill of an Australian victory and an Australian
 achievement.
We could spend all night recalling the great moments that we have
 shared in sport, the exaltation that we have enjoyed about the achievement
 of individual men and women in sport representing our country. And
 the feat seems to go on and it seems to get better. We had the wonderful
 experience of Atlanta. We've had the wonderful experience of
 the Commonwealth Games at Kuala Lumpur. We're at the beginning
 of a marvellous Ashes tour. We've just had, of course, marvellous
 grand finals in Australian Rules and rugby league. We've just
 had a great Wallabies success in defeating the French. And so the
 list goes on. And, of course, here in the city of Melbourne, which
 Greg Norman tells me has the best golf courses in the world, Australia
 is going to host the President's Cup in a few weeks time.
And it is appropriate that this gathering here tonight should be in
 the city of Melbourne. I don't know a city in the world that
 does its sports men and women as proudly as does the city of Melbourne.
 And the facilities here and the great sporting arena of the Melbourne
 Cricket Ground and of Flemington Racecourse and of so many other of
 the great facilities here are a reminder of just how we honour and
 revere our sports men and women and our achievements.
But, ladies and gentlemen, tonight is an opportunity to honour the
 men and women of Australian sport. It's an opportunity to recall
 the achievements of our past greats. It's an opportunity to honour
 our current achievements. It's an opportunity to celebrate the
 tradition of Australian sport and all that it has meant to us and
 all that it continues to mean to our nation. The way in which it brings
 us together, it dissolves the barriers of politics and the barriers
 of different backgrounds and unites us all in entertainment, in achieving,
 in excelling and, above all, that great thrill we always get when
 an Australian succeeds, an Australian is a world champion or an Australian
 team wins the match or the contest.
On behalf of your fellow Australians can I say to all of those great
 sports men and women of Australia, and every sporting discipline is
 represented here tonight, thank you for the enjoyment you've
 given to us. Thank you for the inspiration you continue to be to the
 young of Australia. And thank you for living out the Australian dream
 and the Australian ideal in such a magnificent way. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
To you Robert and to Ron Spithill, to all the other very distinguished
   business guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great delight to
   share this occasion with you tonight. 
And Robert spoke of some of the things that we do well in this
   country. And I thought tonight that we were, at long last, starting
   to get things into proper balance because last night I had the great
   pleasure of attending the annual dinner of the Sports Hall of Fame
   at the Crown Casino in Melbourne. And this is a great event and
   every year they make an award or, in fact, inaugurated a new award
   last night, the Sir Donald Bradman award for the outstanding sports
   performance and it was jointly won last night by Heather Turland
   and Mark Taylor. And they also inducted into the Hall of Fame, as
   a new sporting legend, that great tennis player, Margaret Court.
   And I thought what a tremendous characteristic it was of Australians
   to properly honour the men and women who brought such sporting pride
   and pleasure to us and to our nation.
I think tonight we are quite appropriately in a different city
   but in an equally impressive way we are honouring business achievement.
   And for a long time we haven't really done that as well as
   we should have done. And I do think BRW and Alcatel deserve our
   praise and our compliment for the fact that they are leading the
   way in honouring the great achievers in Australian business because
   we do need to treat them like sporting heroes. And I say that as
   a passionate follower of Australian sporting achievement and a passionate
   supporter of particular sports in Australia but then Prime Ministers
   are meant to support all sports, and I do.
But, ladies and gentlemen, it is very important that we honour
   excellence in Australian business. And we have a gathering here
   tonight at an extraordinarily interesting time for the Australian
   economy. I've just come back from a meeting of leaders of the
   APEC nations in Kuala Lumpur and the strongest impression that I
   took away from that meeting was the new respect and the new esteem
   in which Australia is held at the present time by dint of her economic
   strength and some of the achievements and some of the qualities
   of Australia and Australians that have shone through in the recent
   Asian Pacific economic difficulties.
One of the things that I think the economic downturn in Asia has
   done is to demonstrate, in a quite emphatic way, the strengths of
   this country. What could be a more attractive conjunction of circumstances
   to have a low inflation, low interest rate, might I, I hope, not
   too immodestly say, a well-run economy, to have a stable banking
   system, a transparent banking system, to have a very stable political
   system and to have a congenial lifestyle and to have, amongst our
   population, hundreds of thousands of Australian citizens who have
   very close cultural family and personal links with the nations of
   the Asian Pacific region.
Now, when you add all of those things up, that is a remarkably
   potent mix and it's a remarkably attractive mix to people who
   are looking for some kind of oasis of stability and predictability.
   And some of those things that perhaps a few years ago some may have
   regarded as irksome, unnecessary, perhaps not adventurous enough,
   are suddenly the credentials that make this an appealing country
   - the transparency of our banking system, for example. And we have
   a world-class financial system now. And when the benefits of the
   changes in the taxation reform flow through, particularly in relation
   to the removal of financial institutions duties and bank account
   debits tax and the removal of stamp duty on share transactions,
   it will become an even more attractive place as a financial centre
   in this part of the world.
So what I think one of the...that the Asian crisis has done
   is to highlight again the tremendous strengths. And I was saying
   to Ron earlier over dinner that one of the many endearing things
   about Australians  and he, as somebody in the forefront of
   information technology, finds it particularly endearing  and
   that is that we've always been great devourers and rapid devourers
   of new technology. And it is one of the characteristics of Australians.
   And that is also something that is standing us in tremendously good
   stead in present circumstances.
I think the Australian economy has done better than just about
   anybody in this room expected. I have to confess there were occasions
   earlier this year when I thought it would slow down a little more
   than it has but, overall, it has performed very well. And all of
   the indicators coming to us are very positive and are very strong.
   And it is a fact that we are probably enjoying about as great a
   period of economic stability and strength and attractiveness that
   I can remember in the 24 years that I've been in Parliament.
I entered Parliament in 1974 when there was a period when the world
   was beginning to change very rapidly. And the manufacturers will
   nod their heads in particular. And it was at a time when all the
   constance and all the verities of that long period of economic stability
   after the end of World War II was seeming to come to an end. Now,
   we haven't gone back. We've gone to a new period of opportunity.
   And the world is very different and it's forever different
   from what it was 25 years ago but we do have now some strengths
   and we have a tremendous opportunity. And I am really tremendously
   excited that I've got the privilege of being Prime Minister
   of this country on the cusp of all these great events that we're
   going to celebrate - our centenary as a federation, the coming of
   the Olympic Games to Australia and the opportunities that this very
   strong country, economically and politically in our part of the
   world, now has. 
The fact that we are seen in the region as having the endowments
   of a western country without some of the encumbrances, perhaps of
   our North American friends and some of our European friends, in
   dealing with the countries of the region. We've sort of got
   all the advantages without any of the disadvantages of our history
   and of our culture and here we are in this part of the world and
   we can be a very special intersection of culture and of economic
   opportunity and of political history.
One of the messages that comes out of the last year is that the
   process of reform is never-ended. Those who argue that having done
   something about the industrial relations system, having essentially
   removed many of the tariff barriers that Australia used to have,
   having brought about further financial sector reforms and ultimately
   when the taxation is reformed that that will be the end of it. That,
   of course, is wrong. There's never an end to economic reform
   because new challenges come along which invite you to make further
   changes.
So, ladies and gentlemen, all of this adds up to a time and a community
   that needs business achievers. It does need risk-takers. It does
   need people who excel. It does need a nation that sees its men and
   women of business excellence as being equally important to our country
   as our great sports men and women. And tonight is a tribute to those
   people and tonight is a reminder to all of us, to those in government,
   not only of the inadequacy of the capital gains tax system but also
   it's a reminder to us of just how important it is to have business
   heroes and business achievers and just how important it is to the
   future of our country that we have people who are world-class performers
   in business. 
So I am delighted to be here tonight. I do compliment the sponsors
   of tonight's gathering. I congratulate, in advance, those who
   will be announced as winners and I thank all of you for the support
   that you're giving to an occasion that is very important to
   the future of our country as we go into the 21st Century.
   Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well thank you very much Gary Ringwood, to my ministerial colleagues
   John Anderson and Mark Vaile, to all of the representatives of Telstra
   who are here today, the other members of the Supermarket Council,
   ladies and gentlemen.
This is certainly a very important and a day of great pride and
   achievement for the Supermarket to Asia Council and I would like
   to record my personal gratitude to Gary Ringwood for all the energy
   that he has brought to bringing this project to fruition. There
   is a lot of good news around about the Australian economy at present
   and there's justifiable pride in the fact that the Australian
   economy has been able to weather the worst of the Asian economic
   downturn with less damage than many people believed as little as
   six or twelve months ago. And one of the good pieces of news that
   I heard this morning at the meeting of the Supermarket to Asia Council
   was that despite the downturn that occurred in the Asian-Pacific
   region, exports of Australian food over the last 12 months to all
   destinations have risen by something in the order of 10 per cent.
   And that is a remarkable achievement, given the difficulties in
   our part of the world.
The food industry in 1997/98 was valued at $72.6 billion and it
   employs more than 500,000 Australians across all regions. And in
   1997/98 total food exports were over $18 billion and nearly 60%
   of that was earned in Asia. And to continue to expand our markets,
   to make certain that the relative success that Australia has thus
   far had in escaping the impact of the Asian economic difficulties,
   to consolidate that success into greater achievements in the future
   we must continue to innovate and aggressively promote ourselves.
   And FoodConnect is a clear and practical manifestation of this.
   It is a demonstration of how the information economy is becoming
   increasingly relevant and crucial to our export industries such
   as agriculture. It will allow Australian producers to interact electronically
   with customers and businesses in their supply chain. Electronic
   commerce offers the potential to new and expanded markets and many
   new jobs in our agricultural industries as our efficient competitive
   producers take their products to the world. And it will make it
   much easier for small and medium sized businesses to get into export
   markets giving them larger markets and the capacity to invest and
   employ more people.
It is a very exciting development in our drive to become the supermarket
   to Asia. It would not have been possible without the assistance
   of Telstra and I do want to record the Government's gratitude
   to the company for the tremendous assistance and
   co-operation and great enthusiasm of which Gary has spoken that
   the Telstra organisation brought to this project. It is an exciting
   development. I thank all of those associated with it. It represents
   one of the great practical outcomes thus far of the Supermarket
   to Asia Council's work which I remain very enthusiastic about
   and have had the opportunity at the Council meeting this morning,
   the first since the recent federal election, to reaffirm my personal
   commitment to, and involvement in, and also the very strong commitment
   of the Government.
I'm therefore delighted to be here. I'm delighted to
   be part of the launch and to formally launch it. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Bill; to the Premier, Jeff Kennett; to the
   Lord Mayor, Jim Wiemels; my other parliamentary colleagues; ladies
   and gentlemen.
Nineteen forty eight, no, I had gone beyond the embryo stage but
   was the nine year old son of a garage proprietor whose main passion
   in life then was to survive in business long enough to see the end
   of petrol rationing and, of course, therefore, someone who grew
   up in a home in which cars were talked about a lot. And I'm
   very happy to say, given the nature of the occasion, that the longest
   owned vehicle in the Howard household  that is the John and
   Janette Howard household  was indeed a 1980 Commodore station
   wagon, purchased at time when the respective ages of our children
   were six, three and minus two months. And we owned that vehicle
   for 16 years and it did absolutely marvellous service, first as
   the family car and then as the second vehicle in which some of the
   learner drivers began to negotiate the roads of Sydney.
So from those remarks it's a suggestion of the kind of occasion
   this is. It's a mixture of pride and nostalgia but also a recognition
   in the way in which this remarkable company and its remarkable products
   have touched the lives of so many Australians. There can barely
   be a family in Australia that at one stage or another has not garaged
   a Holden vehicle. There can barely be anybody who doesn't have
   some recollection of a connection with one of the products of this
   remarkable company.
We celebrate a lot of things today. We celebrate the farsightedness
   of those involved with the company so many years ago and particularly
   the launch of the first Holden 50 years ago today. We celebrate,
   of course, a very important constant in the life of Australia both
   in 1948 and in 1998 and that is the ongoing association between
   our nation and the United States of America. We reflect with gratitude
   on the commitment of those who invested so much of their energy
   and their skill in the production of that first vehicle. We acknowledge
   the leadership displayed by the Prime Minister of the day, Ben Chifley,
   and others around him. Nineteen forty eight was a period in which
   Australia was still burdened by many wartime regulations but was
   lifting its eyes to a brighter and more optimistic future. The world
   has changed incalculably over that period of 50 years and so has
   Australia and in so many ways for the better but not in a fashion
   that we reject so many of the things that were valuable then and
   they continue to be valuable today. And an occasion such as this
   reminds us of so many of the threads in our national life that continue
   to be very strong and continue to be just as relevant now as they
   were 50 years ago.
We reflect with gratitude on those 50 years but we also, quite
   properly, look towards the future. And there can barely be, in the
   history of our country, a more exciting time to be alive and to
   be in some way in charge of events and affairs wherever we may be
   in this country of ours and right now. We are at the moment on the
   verge of celebrating some of the most momentous events in our history.
   We are to be showcased to the world again with the 2000 Olympic
   Games. We have extraordinary economic opportunities, particularly
   in our region. We are a quite remarkable intersection of culture
   and of history and geography in this part of the world. And the
   strength of our economy, as we come towards the end of this century,
   gives us a quite remarkable opportunity and a special capacity to
   play a role in the shaping of our region and a very positive role
   and a respected role. And the very strengths that are demonstrated
   by the achievement of this company are part of that story.
It is true, as Bill said, the Government, in 1997, laid out a plan
   for the Australian motor vehicle industry which was based on a very
   simple proposition and that it was inconceivable to me and inconceivable
   to the Government - and I know in stating this I would also have
   been expressing the views of the Opposition  it's inconceivable
   that Australia would not continue to have, for the foreseeable future,
   a strong and viable motor manufacturing capacity. And that plan
   and those decisions in relation to industry protection and industry
   arrangements were based on that philosophy. And we remain very steadfast
   in that goal and I believe that that commitment has created a climate
   which will beckon and provide a benign atmosphere for further investment
   in the industry. And it's a commitment to the lives of tens
   of thousands of Australians who are employed by this company. 
I therefore do take the opportunity, Mr Wiemels, in particularly
   to you as the Chief Executive of the company, to congratulate you
   on this remarkable milestone, to thank you for what you have contributed
   over the years to Australia. I want particularly to record my appreciation
   for the tens of thousands of men and women who have worked for the
   company over the years because a successful commercial organisation
   is only ever the sum of the contributions of all of those who are
   in it and who work for it. And the dedication and loyalty of Holden
   employees over the years has made the company what it is, has enabled
   its products to become part and parcel of the Australian way and
   to be indistinguishable from the Australian way of life.
It is a wonderful occasion. It's an occasion of pride. It's
   an occasion of nostalgia but more importantly than that, it's
   an occasion to reflect upon the future for this country, for this
   company and the marvellous opportunities that lie before us as we
   move into the next millennium. I congratulate the company and I
   thank you most warmly for the invitation to be with you today. Thank
   you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much, Edwina, for those warm words of introduction.
 Can I welcome everybody here tonight. As Chairman, can I say how much
 I savour the moment of at last being in charge of the Senate.
Tonight's debate is on the subject that this House believes that
 religion has no place in politics. There was once a time in Australian
 society where people were exhorted, particularly if they belonged
 to clubs, never to talk about two things and those two things were
 religion or politics. And I can remember as a young person when I
 first started to develop a great interest in politics that I thought
 to myself: heavens, if you can't talk about politics and you
 can't talk about religion life would be a pretty dull thing.
Australian political history has been dotted with periods in its time
 where the interaction between the church rather than religion and
 politics has been a controversial issue. And there was, for a significant
 period of Australia's history after World War II, a long-running
 debate about the extent to which formal pronouncements of the church
 and in relation to political issues should be countenanced. And it
 still remains, on certain moral issues, it still remains a lively
 topic of conversation. So I think for this House it is, indeed, a
 very apt subject of debate.
Now, tonight's debate, as always, is between a government and
 an opposition. The members of the Government, which comprise the Australian
 Schools Debating Team, are Imogen Saunders, from St Hilda's Anglican
 School for Girls in Perth; Richard Howard from The Shore School in
 Sydney and Simon Quinn from St Joseph's College in Brisbane.
 For the Opposition, Bishop George Browning of the Diocese of Canberra
 and Goulburn, the Hon. Gary Humphries, the ACT Deputy Chief Minister,
 and Christopher Erskine, a well known lawyer in the city of Canberra
 and the President of the Australian Debaters' Federation. Importantly
 on my left we have the three adjudicators  or are they on my
 right? Just put their hands up. No, they're in the middle. And
 those people are Belinda Holloway, Benjamin O'Donnell and Tonia
 Riszko.
I understand that the rules of a debate which involve a right of replay,
 the Government going first and the Opposition second in the right
 of reply involve a speech of eight minutes, a bell after one minute
 to allow the interruption time and then another bell at seven and
 two bells at eight. There are some capable timekeepers on my left
 who will look after all of those things for which I am very, very
 grateful. After the debate is over if anybody wants to ask any questions
 or hurl any insults at the Chair or anybody else, they're perfectly
 entitled to do so.
Can I very seriously and sincerely compliment Minter Ellison on its
 public spiritedness in sponsoring the team and being responsible for
 getting this debate together. I think debating is a marvellous past
 time. It's a great intellectual stimulant. It's a great
 trainer of the mind. And I think Minter Ellison are to be thanked
 by the debating fraternity of Australia for the contribution that
 they are making towards that cause in sponsoring this debate.
So let us to the task and the battle. This House believes that religion
 has no place in politics. The first speaker for the Government - and
 I will, just so you all know, say something of each speaker as I introduce
 them, not too long but just so you know a little bit about them -
 the first speaker for the Government is Imogen Saunders. Imogen was
 a member of the 1998 Western Australian State Debating Team. She has
 just completed year 11 at St Hilda's Anglican School for Girls
 in Perth. The first speaker for the Government, Imogen Saunders.
[ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Michelle. To both you and Kevin can I
   first of all say congratulations for having embarked upon and completed
   what remains one of life's most challenging exercises and that
   is to write a book. We may think, we politicians, that there are
   lots of books around, there are. But there are lots of people who
   think they would like to write a book. There are lots of people
   who start to write books, but many of them never finish writing
   those books. And of course there are some people who we wish would
   never have even thought of writing a book let alone completing the
   task. So congratulations to both of you for having made a very firm
   personal commitment to such a journey. 
In case you don't know, Michelle graduated in arts with honours
   from the Australian National University, and now works as a research
   officer with Senator Alan Eggleston. Kevin, I think you all know,
   as having been the Member for Menzies for a number of years. He
   was a barrister of law before entering federal Parliament, married
   with five children. And he's made a very distinctive contribution
   to political and Parliamentary life in the time that he's represented
   the division of Menzies.
One of the valuable things that I believe this book will do is
   to provide a quite special source of information and point of reference
   to people involved in public affairs because what it does, on the
   examination that I've been able to undertake, is that it brings
   together under one cover so many of these statistics and the changes
   in trends that we in public life need to know about virtually on
   a daily basis. You can often find a book that, say, deals with demographic
   trends. You can a find a book that deals completely with economic
   trends. You can find a book that deals completely with social trends.
   And you can find plenty of books that deal with political trends.
   But what Changing Australia' does is to get all of those
   under the one cover and in the process provide a very valuable source
   of reference to those involved in politics. 
 It is of course a veritable treasure trove of politically
   relevant and socially alarming statistics. For example it tells
   us that the rate of youth suicide in 1960 was 3.5 per 1000, but
   in 1990 it had risen to 11.2. Australia has many things to boast
   about. One of the things of which it should be particularly ashamed
   is the very high level of youth suicide. It has statistics that
   are relevant to contemporary political issue such as the debate
   about taxation reform. It tells us that families with children comprise
   62% of households in the poorest 30% of society, but only 32% of
   those in the top 10% of Australian households measured according
   to wealth. It tells us that over the past decade personal income
   tax, as a share of Commonwealth government revenue, rose from 35%
   to 54%, that's in the last decade, and this compares with an
   average of only 31% for all OECD nations. I can't think of
   a more compelling and relevant statistic in favour of fundamental
   reform of our taxation system, and the need for a new tax system
   for a century in case you'd missed the point that I thought
   should relevantly be made in relation to that.
It's also been recorded in the book that between 1960, and
   this really is an extraordinary statistic, between 1960 and 1990
   the effective tax rate on individuals rose by 83% where as the effective
   tax rate on families rose by 360%. Now when some of us argue that
   there should be some re-weighting of the balance of the taxation
   system in favour of family groupings perhaps a statistic like that
   will demonstrate that we are not engaged in some kind of anti-single
   person crusade. We are merely in the business of trying to re-weight
   the imbalance that has crept into our tax system over the years
   and one of the things of which I am exceptionally proud as Prime
   Minister was the family tax initiative that we took to the 1996
   election, and the way in which it has been dramatically reinforced
   in the taxation reform package which the Treasurer introduced into
   the federal Parliament.
Speaking generally, one of the other things that the book does
   is to remind us of how we are no longer the society of joiners of
   organisations which we once were. And this applies right across
   the spectrum. It applies to political parties, it applies to movements
   within religious denominations, it applies to some of the best known
   service organisations and national institutions. And if I were asked
   to, in a phrase, define the younger generation of the 1990s and
   illustrate one of their differences with younger generations of
   earlier periods, I would say that they are above all an options
   generation. They don't like to commit themselves too far in
   advance to anything and they like to keep a decision on what they
   do with their lives to the very last moment. And I think it is one
   of the characteristics of the way in which society has changed.
   I don't say that in a sense of lamenting it. I think what you
   have to do with change is to always know that it's going to
   occur. You must always do your best to accommodate it. Where it
   is for the good you should accelerate it. Where it is for the bad
   you should argue against the wisdom of ever changing just for the
   sake of change. But you should never be pessimistic about society's
   capacity to change for the good because so much of what has occurred
   over the period of years covered by this book, although it has been
   unsettling to many in our society, it has also produced many beneficial
   outcomes. And there are characteristics of modern society which
   are infinitely more tolerant, infinitely more understanding, and
   infinitely more compassionate than used to be the case. I believe
   very strongly that one of the ennobling things about modern society
   is that we have a far more compassionate, enlightened, decent understanding
   approach to people within our community with any kind of handicap
   or disability compared to what was the situation 30 or 40 years
   ago where I think they were treated in many ways quite shamefully,
   and quite indecently. 
So it is a very interesting volume and it reminds us that despite
   the decline in the membership of what you might call finite organisations
   which are involved in different kinds of good works, the number
   of people generically involved in volunteer work in Australian society
   is still as robust as ever and it records that the recent survey
   of unpaid work found that one in five Australians carry out voluntary
   work in the community. And that the nations 2.6 million volunteers
   donate the equivalent of 22 work days a year to community service
   which is the equivalent of almost a quarter of a million people
   working full-time. And it's also interesting to note that retired
   people carry out twice as much voluntary work as people in the paid
   work force.
Ladies and gentleman, I do want to congratulate both Michelle and
   Kevin on the compilation of this volume. I want to thank them for
   the contribution that this work will make to an informed understanding
   of the issues that we as members of Parliament are required to debate.
   Understanding our own nation is a prerequisite to governing our
   nation well and Changing Australia' will make a contribution
   to a better understanding of Australia and we should all be indebted
   to Michelle and Kevin for that contribution and I have much pleasure
   in launching the book. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Your Excellency, President Scalfaro; to your daughter, Marianna;
   Excellencies; my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues; ladies
   and gentlemen.
When we spoke in my office this morning I said to the President
   that the relationship between Australia and Italy was one of those
   things that brought an instant smile to the face. And that best
   described as I could the very deep links and the very enduring links
   that exist not only between our two countries on a political and
   economic level but also between the Australian people and the Italian
   people. Against that background, sir, and also because of your own
   very long and distinguished political career in Italy, you are especially
   welcome amongst us today.
This is a very large and spontaneously gathered group of Australians
   and friends of Italy who want to pay tribute to you and to your
   country and to pay tribute to the influence that the Italian way
   has had on our country and on many other nations throughout the
   world.
You have been active in Italian politics since 1946. You were a
   deputy between 1948 and 1992. You were a member of the original
   constituent assembly formed in 1946 and you've now served,
   for six years, as President of your country. You therefore come
   to Australia with a very long and distinguished background and a
   person through all of your political career has remained steadfast
   and true to those values that you regard as important in public
   life and those values that you hold dear and you have, therefore,
   had a long and very distinguished commitment to Italy and to the
   Italian people.
Italy, the modern Italy, is of course the sixth largest economy
   in the world. Particularly in recent years it has enjoyed an enormous
   economic resurgence. It is playing a very strong role in the European
   Union and the strength of its economy and the commitment of its
   people enables it to do that. And therefore this is an occasion
   to remark, as Prime Minister of Australia, on the importance of
   the economic and political association between our two nations.
But it also, importantly, an occasion for me to pay tribute to
   the enormous contribution that Italians have made, particularly
   to post-World War II Australia. Australians of Italian background
   comprise of course the largest non-English speaking tributary to
   the modern Australian nation. More than a million Australians claim
   an Italian heritage and they do it with great pride and great passion.
Italians have contributed to every facet of Australian life. The
   most important contribution they have made is the way in which they
   have reinforced so many of the important values of the Australian
   community. It is impossible to think of the Italian contribution
   to our nation without thinking of their great and passionate commitment
   to the importance of the family unit as the central pillar of a
   cohesive society. It is impossible not to think of their enormous
   enthusiasm and energy. It is impossible to conceive the story of
   post-war Australia without the Italian contribution and the Italian
   way playing a very, very important part in that story. The contribution
   that Australians of Italian descent have made of course is to be
   found in every part of the Australian life. 
One thinks of great figures such as Sir James Gobbo. And if ever
   a person celebrated the marvellous integration of the Australian
   and the Italian way, nobody has done it better than Sir James Gobbo,
   a person who served as a distinguished lawyer, a distinguished Judge
   and is now the Governor of Victoria.
One thinks of the enormous contribution in the field of business.
   One thinks of the families that are represented here today - the
   Grollo family from Victoria, very much in the news yesterday; the
   Belgiorno-Nettis family that has made also an enormous contribution
   to engineering and construction in Australia. And I don't suppose
   in a way anybody has made such an impact on the world of fashion
   in her own inimitable style than Carla Zampatti who I'm delighted
   to welcome here today.
And of course no reference to contributions to the Australian way
   would be complete without touching, however briefly, upon the contribution
   of sports men and women. And we're very proud that Christian
   Vieri, the Sydneysider, was Italy's top goal scorer before
   regrettably Italy was eliminated. And I've got to say to you,
   Mr President, that there was many an Australian heart that was with
   Italy from the very beginning of the World Cup because Australia
   was not, itself, a competitor in the final rounds. And of course
   another great sporting name, David Campese, to those of us who are
   great rugby followers. And he brought many a cheer to Australian
   rugby followers with his particular flair. 
And of course it wouldn't be appropriate for me to make these
   sorts of references seeing that it's a political gathering
   without of course acknowledging the contribution of Australians
   of Italian descent to the politics of our nation. And I'm delighted
   to say that, in terms of current Federal parliamentary representation,
   it's fairly even-handed. And I know you had the opportunity
   of meeting a number of both Government and Opposition members before
   this luncheon to exchange views and to share some ideas. And of
   course outside parliamentary politics it's very interesting
   that my own party, the State Directors of the two largest divisions
   in New South Wales and Victoria, in the person of Remo Nogarotto
   and Peter Poggioli, are both of Italian descent and I understand
   that the State Director of the Labor Party, John Della Bosca in
   New South Wales, is also of Italian descent. And can I also say
   that there is one other political figure in the history of Australia
   who, although not a member of Parliament, probably influenced the
   course of post-war Australia politics more than many other Australian
   parliamentarians and that was the late BA Santamaria whose influence
   on Australian politics was absolutely immense.
I mention these things, ladies and gentlemen, to simply remind
   people of the enormous role that Australians of Italian descent
   have played in our nation and of how they are so completely part
   of the Australian story. And the personal experiences of all of
   us and our contact with Italians goes back, in most cases, to our
   childhood. Certainly my first contact with the warmth and the enthusiasm
   and the love of life and the commitment to family and the commitment
   to the future of this country, my first contact was naturally with
   Australians who come from Italy. But I also remember, with great
   affection, my first visit to Italy in 1964, long before I entered
   politics, where I had the great good fortune to meet Father Borelli,
   the Catholic Priest, who cared for the urchin children of Naples
   and who was the subject of that very famous book written by Morris
   West and titled Children of the Sun'. And that particular
   experience, as somebody undertaking a working holiday in Europe,
   brought me into contact with the warmth and the enthusiasm of the
   Italian people in their own country.
So, sir, you've come here as the honoured, indeed, the revered
   President of a country with whom we have a very close economic and
   political association. Italy is playing a very constructive role
   within the European Union and the European family. But you also
   come here today as a reminder to all of us of the celebration and
   the miracle that is post-World War II Australia, the way in which
   we have been able to gather from the four corners of the world,
   so many men and women who made a massive contribution to building
   a very proud nation, a nation that is playing a very positive role,
   particularly in our own region. But a nation that remembers its
   roots and honours the contributions that are made to the modern
   existence and the modern identity. And the Italian contribution
   has been quite massive. It has been incalculable. It has made Australia
   a better country. It has helped to make Australia a more open society.
   It has brought us into contact with ways and attitudes that have
   made us better, made us warmer and made us more comprehending and
   more understanding.
I want to, on behalf of everybody here today, honour the Italian
   contribution. It's a very important part of the collective
   Australian heritage. And to you, sir, and to your daughter and to
   the other members of your party, I bid you a very warm welcome.
   I know that you have already been very warmly received in Victoria.
   I can assure you that you will be received with equal warmth in
   Sydney and in other parts of Australia that you will visit. I hope
   you will come again. I wish you good fortune and good health. I
   honour your country and I thank you for visiting us. I now invite
   the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Beazley, to support my remarks.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Kerry, to Tony Staley, Michael Osborne, Michael Yabsley, to my numerous
 State and federal parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
There's something about addressing a gathering from the stage
 of the Sydney Town Hall that tickles my political fancy. This particular
 stage is normally known as the stage from which conferences of the
 New South Wales Labor Party are addressed. And over the years many
 a rowdy gathering has taken place in this Town Hall but it doesn't
 belong to the Labor Party it belongs to the people of Sydney. I really
 am delighted that the division has chosen this venue for tonight's
 gathering. And can I start by thanking Kerry for her very kind words
 of introduction and can I also wish her well and commit myself and
 my federal parliamentary colleagues in New South Wales in doing everything
 in our power to secure her election as the next Premier of New South
 Wales and the defeat of the Carr Government.
It won't be easy but it is eminently achievable and the Carr
 Government is an eminently beatable Government if you can describe
 governments in that fashion. You have our goodwill, our good wishes
 and both from a personal and a political point of view I am very committed
 to doing everything I can to bring about the result we all want on
 the 27th of March next year.
Ladies and gentlemen, tonight is a marvellous moment on which to reflect
 on a remarkable year. Parliament got up last night and right at the
 end we secured the support of the two Independents thus passing into
 law the Private Health Insurance Rebate legislation which was one
 of the key elements of our taxation policy. It's the first downpayment
 on the introduction of the Coalition's taxation plan and once
 again this country has a non means tested fully available private
 health insurance rebate which, when the new tax system comes into
 operation, will mean that 81 per cent of Australians have full tax
 deductibility of their private health insurance premiums. We have
 had a remarkable year and the greatest thing to me about the election
 result on the 3rd of October is that it demonstrated that
 there is a reward in politics and there is a reward in public life
 for actually asking the community to support fundamental change and
 fundamental reform.
All of my political life I have seen politics about bringing about
 change for the better and for the improvement of the community. I
 don't believe in change for its own sake. I have often said that
 the art of statecraft in the modern age is to preserve those practices
 from the past that continue to serve the nation well whilst at the
 same time being willing to challenge and discard those practices that
 no longer serve the country well. And we had an opportunity in this
 election campaign to lay out a very important economic road map for
 Australia in the area of taxation. And the truth is that as many in
 this room will know because in different ways you have been intimately
 involved in and associated with the operation of the Australian economy
 and the interface between that economy and the Government of Australia
 for many years. You all know that our taxation system has been crying
 aloud for reform for two decades.
I came into Parliament, as Kerry reminded you, in 1974. A year later
 we had the Aspry Report named after a very prominent judge at the
 time of the New South Wales full court. And that report tabled in
 1975, 23 years ago, recommended the introduction of a broad-based
 indirect tax, in other words, a GST. And year after year the issue
 would come up and people would solemnly say: yes, we have got to get
 around to it. And the former Coalition Government looked at it on
 a couple of occasions and discarded it. To his credit my predecessor
 as Prime Minister Paul Keating advocated it in 1985 only to be torpedoed
 by the trade union movement then led, let me remind you, by Simon
 Crean who is now the Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition and Bill
 Kelty and a rather wishy-washy Prime Minister on that subject at the
 time, Bob Hawke. Then John Hewson tried to his credit and very bravely
 in 1993 to advocate it. And it was defeated then by a ferocious fear
 campaign led by my predecessor.
It may have been clever politics, it may have given them a great afterglow
 on the night of the election in 1993 but it wasn't serving the
 national interest. And I have never forgotten the conversation I had
 with Mr Keating in his office in 1985 when I was the Deputy Leader
 of the Opposition and Shadow Treasurer and I went into his office
 and I'd arranged to get a copy of the white paper on taxation
 reform and we discussed between us the need for that reform even though
 we were on opposite sides of politics. And he said that he thought
 it was something that had to be done for the long-term interests of
 Australia.
Now, I believed that then and so did he. He, of course, had a different
 view when he was Prime Minister in 1993 and more is the pity as far
 as the national interest was concerned at that time. But we have needed
 this reform for two decades. So many of the other things that we needed
 to change in this country so far as the economy and the business community
 are concerned have been attended to. We have deregulated our financial
 system, we have relaxed the tariff barriers, we have embraced sensible
 policies of privatisation, we have embraced sensible competition policies.
 All of those things have made the Australian economy stronger and
 more competitive.
And can I tell you that the best thing and the thing that has given
 me the greatest sense of pride and satisfaction over the last 12 months
 was the experience that I had in Kuala Lumpur only a few weeks ago
 at the APEC meeting. To feel and to know that Australia had won a
 new respect in our region. For two reasons, because we had a strong
 domestic economy and we were recognised as having got our own economic
 house in order. And also because of that strength we had been able
 to offer assistance. We have been able to be true regional mates to
 countries such as Indonesia and Korea and Thailand that needed our
 assistance. And one sensed that there was a recognition that Australia
 was performing well. And by any measure as I said to the Parliament
 yesterday in the last Question Time, Australians go to Christmas 1998
 with our economy in a stronger more healthy condition than it has
 been at any time since the late 1960s.
We do have a very strong level of economic growth, we have historically
 low levels of inflation, we have a budget strongly in surplus turned
 around to that condition in only two-and-a-half years, we have strong
 levels of business investment. But most importantly of all, I think,
 we have a situation where the business community and those responsible
 for the future economic growth of this country believe that we have
 a Government that is committed to taking whatever decisions are needed
 in the long-term national interests of Australia. And that is the
 message that came out of the result on the 3rd of October.
It was a risk. There were many people who told me you were crazy to
 go to an election introducing...proposing the introduction of a
 new taxation system. And in a sense, we were defying conventional
 wisdom in doing so. But when you look at it in another respect there
 was really no other way of doing it given the history of attempts
 previously to reform the Australian taxation system. I couldn't
 have gone to the election on the 3rd of October saying
 I am not going to reform the taxation system when I knew in my heart
 that reform was necessary. What was the point of being in a position
 of power and authority unless you are prepared to use it in the national
 interests? I have had all the jobs in politics. I have been Opposition
 Leader, I have been Treasurer, I have been a senior Minister, I have
 been out of favour, I have been back in favour, I have been Prime
 Minister. But really you go into public life to do positive things
 and to do - to bring about change. You don't go into public life
 to occupy office and to enjoy power for its own sake. There is nothing
 in the end to be derived from that. So, in a way, although it was
 difficult, it was also, in another sense, a fairly simple choice.
 The only way we could ever get this great reform embraced was to confront
 the Australian community with it in an election campaign. Risked all
 and having won it, know that we enjoyed the ultimate moral authority
 to implement it. And we had a Federal Executive meeting in Canberra
 today and one of the young Liberal representatives said during the
 meeting, the thing that he enjoyed most about the last election campaign
 was that he could stare any of his political opponents in the eye
 and feel that we had the moral high ground in that campaign because
 we were arguing for something that everybody, Labor and Liberal alike,
 knew deep down was necessary for the long-term economic benefit of
 Australia. So I feel pretty happy about the outcome of the election
 and I think all of the party supporters had every reason to feel very
 pleased about the outcome.
And it's not just the area of taxation reform over the last year
 that we can draw some pride from but there have been a number of other
 major events over the last year that, as time has gone by, have worked
 even more to the credit of the Government than appeared at the time.
 And one of those, of course, was the very traumatic circumstance of
 the, I believe, increasingly successful attempt in April of this year
 to reform the Australian waterfront. At the time we ran into a lot
 of criticism. A number of court decisions didn't quite go in
 the way anticipated but that is the nature of a nation that lives
 under the rule of law. And I make no further comment about those decisions.
 But that wasn't easy. And I want to pay tribute here tonight
 to the courage that was displayed on that occasion by Chris Corrigan,
 the head of Patricks. And I also want to pay tribute to the tenacity
 and strength of my Minister for Industrial Relations, Peter Reith,
 who endured all of the intimidation and all of the pressure and all
 of the personal strain and stress that goes with a senior Minister
 who is in the eye of an industrial storm of that character. And as
 the weeks and then months have gone by we are now starting to get
 a productivity dividend, not so much here in Sydney but that will
 ultimately come because once you start getting efficiency gains in
 other parts of the country inevitably it will flow through to the
 other ports in the country. The Australian waterfront will never be
 the same again. There have been fundamental changes and reforms. And
 that was something that, for decades, Australians also knew had to
 be tackled, something had to be done about it.
We were able, over the last year, to resolve that incredibly difficult
 native title issue. And I don't think there was a person of goodwill
 in this country who wanted the Wik legislation to be an issue in the
 last election campaign. I never did and I don't think Liberals
 of goodwill and decency wanted it to be either. But we weren't
 prepared to surrender what we regarded as important conditions of
 an honourable settlement and we needed to maintain the commitment
 that we made to the different sections of the Australian community
 in 1997.
We achieved a remarkably good outcome just a year ago, almost to the
 day, at the climate change convention in Kyoto. And, of course, we
 were able, in May of this year, to bring down a budget which a year
 ahead of time had turned a deficit of $10.5 billion inherited in March
 of 1996 into a very comfortable surplus. And I want to pay tribute
 to the tremendous commitment of Peter Costello as the Treasurer and
 Deputy Leader of the Party to the economic stewardship of Australia
 over the last two-and-three-quarter years.
I think on the broader scale we have been able, in the last year in
 particular, to finally but nonetheless significantly rebalance Australia's
 foreign relationships. There was nothing fundamentally wrong with
 many of the foreign policy directions of the former government. There
 were questions of emphasis and there were nuances about it which I
 didn't think were suitable for Australia's longer term interests.
 I had the sense, when I became Prime Minister, that this country was
 rather an anxious outsider to the Asian Pacific region knocking on
 the door seeking admission. I felt that we had to move away from an
 Asia only' policy to an Asia first' policy recognising
 that our prime area of commitment and interest, both economically
 and politically and strategically, had to be the Asian Pacific region
 but also knowing that we had long-term interests with other parts
 of the world.
And over the last year I've spoken a lot of the special intersection
 that I believe Australia occupies. We are quite unique. We are a projection
 of western civilisation in this part of the world. We have very deep
 and special links with the nations of North America and we share so
 much in common with them culturally and politically. But here we are
 in the Asian Pacific region with a vibrant population of Australians
 of Asian descent, increasing the relevance of Australia to the Asian
 Pacific area by the many people-to-people links that that produces.
 And you don't have many countries in the world that have such
 a conjunction of that history, geography, shared political values,
 economic circumstance and so forth. And I can't think of a time
 in Australia's recent history where we are a more attractive
 magnet as an investment haven in this part of the world.
Given everything that has happened in the Asian Pacific region over
 the last couple of years, isn't it good that Australia has the
 following characteristics? We have a stable political system. We have
 a strong economy. We have a deregulated financial system. We have
 a stable and prudentially regulated banking system. We have a strong
 and internationally respected legal system and we speak the English
 language. I can't think of a more fortunate conjunction. When
 you add all of those things together, if we can't make this country
 one of the great financial centres of the world over the next few
 years then we're not trying hard enough. And it really is, very
 specifically, and I talk generally about Australia as a financial
 centre, but I know that there are many people in this city who have
 a very strong and understandably deep commitment to achieving that
 goal.
So we have a lot to be not smug about or not complacent about but
 we are entitled as a political party and we are entitled as a government
 and a group of men and women who have worked together over a number
 of years to achieve our political goal, we are entitled to achieve
 as we come to the end of this year, we are entitled to feel that we
 have achieved a great deal. We have turned on its head some of the
 conventional wisdom about Australian politics. The last election campaign
 destroyed the mythology of the ascendancy of the Labor Party, particularly
 here in New South Wales when it came to marginal seat campaigning.
 And I want to thank Remo and his colleagues for the tremendous work
 they did in holding so many marginal seats here in New South Wales.
 It played a very, very major role in securing our re-election on the
 3rd of October.
I want to thank all of you for the tremendous loyalty and support
 that you've given me. There are many people in this room tonight
 who've been political friends of mine the whole time that I've
 been in Parliament. And many of you have counted me as a friend when
 I haven't had the job that I've got at the present time
 and when perhaps I sort of hadn't had very influential jobs at
 all in politics and I remember that and I appreciate that very, very
 deeply. I really do. But I can't tell you what a sense of satisfaction
 and pleasure that it gives me to be able to say and to be able to
 reflect and to know it is true that we have won re-election on the
 strength of what we have put to the Australian public and not off
 the back of 13 years of accumulating hostility to a former government
 and accumulating desire to bring about a change of government. And
 the mandate that we received on the 3rd of October in many
 ways was more emphatic than the mandate we received in March of 1996
 because it was achieved in more difficult circumstances. And the fact
 that by voting for us in October of this year the Australian people
 were voting for difficult but, nonetheless, necessary fundamental
 change, means that the Australian people properly led, with a proposition
 adequately explained, with the benefits for average Australians fully
 spelt out, with the essential fairness of the proposition evident
 from the beginning, that the Australian people will embrace necessary
 change. And that gives me a source of tremendous hope and tremendous
 optimism, not only about taxation reform but about other things as
 well.
We are going to have our difficulties with the Senate, we're
 going to have our arguments, but the greatest thing we have going
 for us is that the people voted for the programme that we are now
 trying to implement. Imagine the difficulty of trying to get through
 the Senate something you'd kept from the Australian people at
 the previous election. And every time I have an argument with the
 Senate about something that we put up at the previous election they
 are in a defensive position, the Labor Party and the Democrats, and
 we are in a position of occupying the political and moral high ground.
But, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for tonight. It touches
 Janette and I very deeply that you've all come along tonight.
 We do feel that it's been a great year for the Liberal Party.
 We don't forget the fact that there are many people in Australia
 who will not be sharing as bountiful a Christmas as, I guess, most
 of us will share and none of us should ever forget that. There is
 still a lot that remains to be done in terms of bridging some of the
 gaps between the well-off and the not so well-off within our community.
 And it remains as one of the challenges of the kind of society that
 we want Australia to remain and perhaps, in a sense, even more to
 become.
But let us not pass up the opportunity as Liberals and as Liberal
 supporters of reflecting on a remarkable year of achievement. The
 Australian economy is in great shape. That is significantly due to
 the decisions that the Government has taken over the last two-and-a-half
 years and it is significantly due to the sense of direction that the
 Government has given to the business community and to the Australian
 people over that period of time. I thank the business community of
 Sydney for its support for the Liberal Party. I know it has been generous.
 I thank the Liberal Party organisation here in New South Wales for
 its support. I wish all of you a merry Christmas. I hope that 1999
 is even better for the Australian people and that the dreams and the
 goals that we have for our country and for our families are fully
 realised.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Captain Eldridge, to the Reverend Dr Bill
 Lawton, to my ministerial colleagues, the leaders of many community
 and welfare organisations here today, members of the taskforce, ladies
 and gentleman.
I start by expressing my gratitude to David Eldridge and to the members
 of the taskforce for delivering the report that I launched today.
 This exercise grew out of a commitment I made in a speech I delivered
 to ACOSS late in 1995 as Opposition Leader, to try and examine against
 the background of concern being expressed by some in the community
 that the processes relating to youth homelessness were not sufficiently
 involving the families of young people who left home or were wanting
 to leave home. I didn't approach it with too many preconceived
 notions, I suppose all of us wherever we come from have preconceived
 notions and it's a bit idle to pretend otherwise.
But I thought it would make a great deal of sense if in Government
 we put together a group of men and women from both the community sector
 and the Government to have another look at this issue. And indeed
 within a couple of weeks of the Government being elected in 1996 I
 called together a group of people and the taskforce was established.
 And I'm delighted that Captain Eldridge assumed the chairmanship
 of that taskforce and I want to personally thank him for the quite
 remarkable job that he's done.
This taskforce and its recommendations give expression to part of
 the Government's philosophical approach to welfare services and
 support to the less advantaged in our community. In the address I
 gave once again to ACOSS only a few weeks ago where I tried to set
 out some of the pathways of the Government, in a philosophical sense,
 towards welfare issues in our second term of Government, I did emphasise
 that we saw the Government as having a very important and a very strategic
 role, but we also saw a partnership between the Government and community
 organisations and individuals as being very much at the core of the
 delivery of more efficient and effective welfare services in the closing
 years of this century and into the 21st century. One of
 the crucial roles for Government I said on that occasion was to foster
 a greater sense of individual moral obligation and duty amongst citizens
 and to encourage individuals through there own actions and depth of
 their conviction to give back to the community that looked after them.
Now this taskforce has completed its work and in launching the report
 today I want to pay tribute to the input of both the Government's
 dream and also the community's dream. Without in any way suggesting
 that they are the only organisations that do magnificent work in the
 community sector, I do of course acknowledge on the taskforce representatives
 of the Salvation Army, the Society of St Vincent de Paul, the Wesley
 Mission, and Anglicare. And those four organisations and many others
 of course do absolutely superb work. And the personal side of welfare
 in Australia would be quite different, would be much harsher, and
 would be far less sensitive were it not for the ceaseless voluntary
 work of magnificent organisations such as those four.
It is important, and I think it's appropriate that this report
 be released shortly before Christmas because for most of us in the
 community Christmas will be an opportunity of family renewal of family
 gatherings of celebrating the happiness of family life and all it
 means to us, and it means most to most of us. But there will be many
 of our fellow Australians who won't have that same happy circumstance
 and it's therefore appropriate on the eve of Christmas that we
 release this report and hope that it does make some contribution towards
 a better resolution of the challenges that face many in our community
 who are trying very hard to grapple in very, very difficult situations.
The report is refreshingly nonjudgmental. The report is designed to
 help people. It is realistic, it is not starry eyed, it is not ideologically
 driven. But it does represent a number of central realities. And that
 is there aren't too many people in Australian society who don't
 want their family relationships to succeed. And there aren't
 too many in our community who don't regard personal relationships
 as the most important emotional support they have in their lives.
 And if you start with those sorts of building blocks and you recognise
 that putting families in the picture, which is the title of the report,
 is a pretty sensible and logical starting point then I think you do
 get some very sensible outcomes. There's an old saying of course
 that prevention is better than cure and in a sense that old saying
 has been the driving force to this report because what it's based
 on is something that's quite new and that is early intervention.
 It's not just a question of providing adequate support services
 when families break up, or when young people find it intolerable to
 remain at home, and in some cases that is plainly the truth.
Nobody who's had any contact at all with this field deny the
 fact that in some cases there is no alternative other than for a young
 person to leave home. But equally there are many cases where that
 can be avoided. And what is, I think, very encouraging about this
 report is that as a result of the pilots it was possible to identify
 a number of very very significant things. And one the most important
 things that it was possible to identify is that of those families
 that were involved in the pilots carried out by the taskforce that
 family reconciliation was achieved in around two-thirds of all cases
 studied. And the positive outcomes include the return home of the
 younger family member, acceptance by both parents that the young person
 be afforded an appropriate degree of independence, and the creation
 of viable support systems for young people that included a member
 of their family. And of those young people who left home prior to
 contacting a pilot project close to one third returned home to live
 with one or both of their parents. And these were significant achievements
 in very difficult personal circumstances and it was found that the
 involvement of parents was important to the success of the early intervention
 strategy.
I know one is used to the bombardment of statistics and comparisons
 but some studies have suggested that in terms of costs and the cost
 of picking up the pieces in areas such as this rather than preventing
 the breakage in the first instance can be as high as 1,000 times greater
 than the successful early intervention. And it is important with something
 like this to recognise the personal and the economic. The two are
 not mutually exclusive. The idea that you can have an effective welfare
 system without a strong economy is, of course, nonsense. But the idea
 that a strong economy is an end in itself is also a nonsense. The
 purpose of economic policy and the purpose of strong economic policies
 is to make a contribution towards building a better society. And a
 compassionate caring community is the ultimate goal, surely, for all
 of us whatever our economic views may be. We can differ and argue
 about what is the best way of getting there but I don't think
 we really differ and argue too much about that being the ultimate
 goal.
So I want to say how very pleased I am as Prime Minister and how pleased
 the Government is that we have seen such a successful working through
 of the nation of a greater partnership between the Government, the
 welfare agencies and individuals within our community. And in responding
 to the work of the taskforce I want to announce forthwith that the
 principal recommendation of the taskforce, which is a continuation
 of the early intervention strategies, will be immediately supported
 by the Government. And that we'll commit $60 million over the
 next four years to July 2003 and this will provide 100 services of
 the type piloted across the country where the programme will be fully
 operational. And I am told that this will enable assistance to be
 provided to around 12,000 cases a year involving some 7,000 young
 people and 5,000 parents.
Now, the purpose of that support is to demonstrate the immediately
 positive and supportive response of the Government to what has been
 the model established by the work of this taskforce. We think it is
 breaking new ground, we think it is breaking new ground in an extremely
 positive way and I want to say to David Eldridge and what he said
 about my own personal interest in this is right. I am personally interested
 in it because I think it is something that the Government in a sensible,
 caring, positive way can contribute drawing on the expertise and the
 care and the responsibility of great community organisations. And
 we really do, all of us, have to pool our resources.
And the Government has an important role and I take the opportunity
 in case anybody would want to use what I have said today to misconstrue
 our motives. We are not in the business of shifting to the community
 sector our financial responsibility to care for the disadvantaged
 in our community. That is the responsibility of government. It is
 the responsibility of any government of any political stripe to maintain
 a decent social security safety net. That is the Australian way. We
 don't believe in allowing the unemployed to starve in the streets.
 We might ask the unemployed through the principle of mutual obligation
 to engage in work-for-the-dole programmes. We regard that as a reasonable
 request of the community that affords comfort, sanctuary and support.
 And in engaging the community sector far more as is our philosophy
 that is not a way of us withdrawing financial support rather it is
 a way of recognising the obvious and that is that the capacity of
 the sort of organisations that David Eldridge and others here today
 come from to understand and relate to the problem is the superior
 than that of any in the community. And that's been a belief that
 I have held for a long time. I hold it very strongly and it will underpin
 the approach of my Government to welfare issues.
But there is an ongoing role for the Government and that is not diminished
 rather it is expanded in cooperation with the role of the organisations
 which are examples of which are represented on the taskforce. It is
 a very good report. The other recommendations will be studied, they
 are in their character ones that require a slightly longer term response.
 But our immediate response on the day of the launch of the report
 to its principal recommendation I hope will be seen as an earnest
 of our determination to continue the excellent work to establish perhaps
 in the fullness of time a new paradigm for responding to this issue
 not only in Australia but perhaps something of an example to other
 countries around the world.
Family life does lie at the heart of the Australian way, it's
 important to all of us. A large majority of Australians are fortunate
 in their family relationships. A minority, a significant minority,
 try very hard to be happy in those relationships and don't always
 succeed and some don't try at all. To those who try and don't
 succeed they need our support and our compassion and our understanding
 and they need our help. To those who don't try at all well perhaps
 we should try doubly hard to persuade them of the merits of beginning
 to try. But whatever the situation may be the work of this taskforce
 will, I believe, make a great contribution. I support it very strongly.
 I again thank David and all of the members of the taskforce for their
 magnificent work. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Michael. To Ron and Barbara Walker, my friends,
 to the Premier of Victoria Jeff Kennett, the Lord Mayor of Melbourne,
 Your Grace, Professor Morrison, my ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues,
 and members of the Sisters of Charity, ladies and gentleman.
It is a double privilege, or pleasure, to be here this morning. It's
 an opportunity for me to open a centre that will improve the quality
 of life of hundreds, indeed thousands of people, predominantly but
 not only from Victoria, over the years ahead. It is another illustration
 of what Australia does very well and that is to combine the resources
 of the government and the public sector more broadly defined, and
 those in the community and welfare sector, and the business community,
 to achieve outcomes that will improve the quality of life in the community.
And it's also a pleasure for me to be here this morning to publicly
 honour the contribution to the community of Ron and Barbara Walker
 because for the reasons that Barbara has explained, and also for reasons
 for which many in this audience know in relation to Ron, this is a
 marvellous illustration of their great capacity to help the community
 in which they live.
But it's also an opportunity for me to honour on behalf of the
 Government the great service to the Australian community of the Sisters
 of Charity, and the health care activities of the Catholic Church
 more generally. The name St Vincent's of course is synonymous with
 healing and caring and medicine throughout Australia. And there would
 over the years literally have been millions of Australians whose lives
 have been helped and enriched in hospitals bearing that name and in
 the work of the Sisters of Charity. And I do want to say on behalf
 of the Government how much that work is appreciated and how much we
 value the involvement in the broad health care sector of Australia
 of the volunteers, the religious sector and the private sector generally.
You can't have a good health care system in Australia without
 both the public sector and the private sector. I think you may have
 heard that remark made a little bit over the last few weeks and I
 won't dwell very heavily on it. But today is a sort of....you've
 got us all here. You've got the Federal Government, you've
 got the State Government, you've got the Sisters of Charity,
 you've got the medical profession, and you've also got some
 many many conspicuous and generous members of the business community
 here in Melbourne that have contributed so much.
Today of course we've heard in a very moving way Barbara's
 own experiences and I pay tribute to her personal courage as I do
 to the philanthropic generosity of Ron Walker who has done so much
 to help so many causes. We have an opportunity to open a marvelous
 new facility that will improve the quality of life of so many Victorians.
 It's an opportunity to reflect on how eminent Australia is in
 so many areas of medical discipline. We have I think 0.3% of the world's
 population but we contribute something like 2.3% of medical research.
Australian names are well known in medical achievement and although
 we are wont on occasions to dwell on some of the imperfections in
 our health care and our medical system, I think it is important on
 an occasion like this to recognise just how good we are and how many
 eminent people we have, and how many world firsts Australia has delivered,
 and how much so many countries around the world can learn from what
 we do in this area.
The association that the pain management centre will have with the
 Bernard O'Brien Microsurgery Unit of course will be a very important
 association. And its placement as part of the broader St Vincent's
 family will mean it is, as the years go by, it will become a very
 important part of the health activities of the City of Melbourne.
 Barbara told us of her own personal experiences [tape break] as well
 as a very fine and capable and compassionate health minister spoke
 of his own professional experience of the advances that have been
 made in this field, and the contribution that this centre will make
 to the alleviation of suffering and the contribution that this centre
 will make as time goes by will further add to the reputation of St
 Vinent's. I want to thank all of those who so far have supported
 this centre. The Government itself has been pleased to make a contribution
 of a quarter of a million dollars towards the centre and I note that
 there are many in this room who have been responsible for supporting
 it in a very generous fashion and I hope that continues and I again
 commend the energetic efforts of Ron Walker in chairing the fund raising
 activities and bringing his usual energy and usual commitment to any
 project with which he is associated.
I have the opportunity, I welcomed all of those who were participating
 in the great sporting tournament, the President's Cup, of remarking
 just how well Melbourne did events of that kind. Can I again take
 the opportunity of remarking how well this city combines the commitment
 of people who hold public office, people who work in the volunteer
 sector, and people who are active and successful in the business community
 in supporting causes that are important to the civic life and of the
 quality of life generally of the people of Victoria and the people
 of Melbourne. And today is another example of that and I think the
 support that is evident here today bodes very well for future support
 for this centre.
I thank all of those associated with, the medical staff, the nurses,
 the doctors, the students, the teachers, all associated with these
 activities. I wish you well. I have great pleasure in declaring the
 Barbara Walker Centre for Pain Management open. I do again pay a personal
 tribute to Ron and Barbara who've done so much for this city
 and of course have done so much for this magnificent project. I wish
 it well and I know it will have your tremendous support. Thank you.
[ends]


25 January 1999
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Philip Ruddock, to your Excellency, the Governor of Queensland and Mrs Arnison, to the acting Premier of Queensland, to my Ministerial colleagues, Philip Ruddock and John Herron and any others who are present, to the Lord Mayor of Brisbane and other distinguished guests, and most particularly the Australian achievers of 1998, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a special two headed event to use the sporting parlance, it’s an opportunity of course to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the separate establishment in 1949 of Australian citizenship. The moment at which legally we ceased all to be in the absence of separate national citizenship, British subjects, and became as well Australian citizens. But of course it would be wrong and a total misreading of the history of our country to imagine for a moment that the Australian national identity started with the formal proclamation of the legal identity of Australian citizen. Those who trace the history of our nation will, I think, agree that the Australian identity and therefore in the spirit, the true identity of an Australian citizen and a man or woman of the Australian nation was forged long before 1949.
But it is, this celebration, an opportunity to do a number of very simple things. It’s an opportunity for all of us as Australians to reflect upon the extraordinary good fortune that has come our way to be the citizens of this country. There is no country on earth as fully endowed with the good things of life than our nation. It’s also an opportunity to acknowledge a simple reality. And that is that there is no hierarchy of descent when it comes to being an Australian citizen. Whether our ancestors were here thousands of years ago as in the case of the original Australians, the indigenous people, whether our ancestors came in the 19th century, or whether we or our ancestors are amongst the millions of Australians who have flocked to this country since the end of World War II, we are equally together, one no better than the other, all Australians.
And those who’ve come recently and embraced this nation as theirs, have as much right as I or anybody else in this audience to claim this country as their own, to respect and abide by its laws and to seek the shelter and the protection which comes with being a citizen of Australia.
And I think the third thing that this occasion allows us to do, is in our own different way to conjure up what is the greatest of all the Australian achievements. I think the Australian achievement as a collective expression is a marvellous way of describing what we have done. But we all, in a sense, assess that achievement in our own personal way. And no one individual assessment is better than the next person’s. I don’t believe in a society where there has to be a defined, handed down, for all purposes definition of what is the Australian spirit or what does Australia represent. We all have our own experiences, we all have our passions and our own definition of that.
To me I think one of the many great things about the Australian achievement is that better than most nations on earth we have been able to blend the best of our past to build such a contented, tolerant and united present. We have borrowed much and we have enjoyed much from our British and other European heritage. Respect for law, the parliamentary institutions the freedom of the press, the great inheritance of English literature which of course is the basis of our common national language. But we have been wise enough as a people to reject the pretentions and the class structures which were endemic in many of the nations of Europe. We have continued a great bond with the people of North America and we share with the peoples of North America the great traditions of liberal democracy. And to complete it here we are in the Asia Pacific region and in recent years we have been enriched by the migration to our country of tens of thousands of people from the different nations of Asia. And they have given us a living person-to-person link with that part of the world.
When you add that to the rich tradition of our indigenous heritage, we have built something on this continent of ours that no other nation has been able to achieve. We have developed traditions of mateship, of tolerance, of tenacity, of courage, of the volunteer spirit that I think makes every individual Australian immensely proud.
I am passionately proud of my Australian heritage. I respect the heritage of my parents, and I respect the respect that other Australians have for the heritage of their parents coming from different parts of the world. There is no nation that has so successfully brought together people from 140 or more different origins or source countries as well as Australia has.
So, on this, the eve of Australia Day 1999, the last Australia Day that I will see that won’t have a two in front of it, can I say to all of you that in our different ways let us celebrate what it is like to be an Australian. Let us reflect upon the immense privilege of being an Australian citizen. Let us reflect upon the bounty of the Australian nation and let us acknowledge the contribution that our forefathers have made to the building of such a united happy and successful nation.
It is an immense privilege for me as Prime Minister to be part of this observance of the 50th Anniversary of the establishment of separate Australian citizenship. I think it is a great occasion. I thank the Minister for inviting me. I wish all of you well and along with all of you I rejoice in the great achievement, the great miracle of individual Australian citizenship over the last 50 years.
Thank you.
ends


25 January 1999
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………
Your Excellency and Mrs Arnison; the acting Premier of Queensland; Mr and Mrs Rob Borbidge; to Mr Jack Penglis, the Chairman of the Queensland Australia Day Council; to my many Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues both state and federal, to Dr Gaynsler, the Young Australian of the Year, and to Mark Taylor the Australian of the Year; other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I first of all remark upon how good it is that over the last three years, those organising the national celebration of Australia Day have decided to take it on tour around the country and who have abandoned the earlier practice of always having the announcement of the Australian of the Year and the ceremony accompanying it take place in Sydney. It’s not that I have anything against Sydney, as you all know, but I think it is good that we pay tribute to the totally national character of Australia Day, and this is the third occasion on which it’s travelled around the country, and I think it’s a marvellous innovation.
Can I join everybody else in extending my congratulations to those who’ve been honoured for their achievements and I want in a moment to say a few things about Mark Taylor, the recently annointed Australian of the Year for 1999.
On occasions like this we all have our own theory, we all have our own version, we all have our own description of what makes Australia to each and every one of us the greatest country in the world. And there is nothing wrong with that, there is no received version of the best description of why Australia is the greatest country on earth. And it’s part of the nature of our society that we don’t seek some kind of uniformity or some kind of conformity of attitude as to what makes this a country that means so much to all of us. We all have our own idea of that. To me there are many things that make Australia particularly dear to me and particularly dear to my family. But one of the many things that I think is quite remarkable about this country is the way in which we have been able as a people over the years to draw the very best from the influences that are borne upon us but at the same time we have taken care to reject the negative elements of those influences. I think of our associations with Europe. We owe a lot to Europe. We owe a lot not only to our British and Irish heritage but also to those other great tributaries from Europe particularly since the end of World War II.
And what we have been able to do as people is to take from that background the very best features. We’ve taken the rule of law and the relative civility and I say relative civility of political discourse and the respect for the Parliamentary and the political process which is so much part of our British background and embracing that and making it work to our advantage, we have also been clever and astute and infinitely wise in rejecting the class consciousness and the class distinctions of Europe. And one of the enduring differences between the Australia of 1999 and the Europe that bore so much upon our formation more than two hundred years ago, is of course the relative lack of class consciousness in this country.
We have been able to combine in what I frequently describe as a unique intersection of history, geography, economic circumstance and culture, the fact that we do owe a lot to our European heritage, that we have forged a unique association with the nations of North America which play such a very important role, particularly the United States in the culture of the entire world and the political balance of the entire world. And added to that is the fact that here we are in the Asian Pacific region of the world. We are the only society on earth that is simultaneously of Europe, North America and Asia. And in recent years our own population has been enriched magnificently by the migration to this country of tens of thousands of people from the nations of Asia. And that has given us a people-to-people link with that part of the world. And it has completed what I might call that trilogy of influence on the modern Australian character. And added to that of course is our special inheritance which no-one else has of the indigenous people of this continent.
So as we reflect upon this Australia Day of 1999, the last Australia Day of this millennium, as we reflect upon it, as we give thanks to all of those who’ve made Australia a wonderful country, we honour the achievement of this country of ours, we also acknowledge the blemishes in our past and the injustices of our past. No proud nation, no self confident nation is insensitive to its periodic failings and the injustices that have occurred in the past. But we do celebrate this Australia Day in a mood of confidence, of optimism, of self-assurance, of belief in ourselves that we have built something very special and something very precious that no other society on earth has been able to build and no other society has been as astute in building as have all of us who are proud to call ourselves Australian.
Ladies and gentlemen, it gives me a very special degree of pleasure to say something of Mark Taylor, the Australian of the Year for 1999. As some of you may have discovered over the years, I have something of an interest in cricket. Like so many other Australians, I have great and abiding sporting passions. There’s nothing that can simultaneously bind Australians together quite like sport and at the same time on certain occasions it can also push us apart, of course in an entirely friendly fashion. We have many sporting loves as Australians. It remains of the great wonderments of visitors to this country that a nation of 18 million people can have such diverse footballing tastes as we have. But there is of course one game that can truly be described as Australia’s national sport and that is cricket.
Mark Taylor to me, and I know to millions of Australians, epitomises the very best of what sport is all about. He’s talented, he’s a tremendous fighter, he’s a tremendous achiever. There has been no prouder wearer of the baggy green, the Australian cricket cap, than Mark Taylor. Like any truly great sportsman, like any person who truly over a long period of time achieves what he or she sets out to achieve in life, he’s had his moments of despair and his moments of receiving fierce criticism and his moments of wondering what was going to happen next. And I know that Mark went through, as all Australians know, a difficult time in his career until that marvellous innings that he played in the second innings of the first test of the Ashes series in 1997 which really turned in the faces of all of his critics - their criticism - and left, I am very happy to say, hundreds of thousands of red faces around Australia and elsewhere in the world amongst his critics.
But when he was going through a period of adversity, he wasn’t blaming somebody else. He wasn’t blaming the umpires, he wasn’t blaming the journalists, he wasn’t blaming his team mates, he wasn’t blaming the selectors, he was accepting that he was going through a difficult period. He was facing up to it with square jawed determination and displaying the grit that we like to believe has a special Australian character about it. And that to me stamped him as a man of very great decency and very great character. And to my immense joy and I know the immense joy of millions of Australians, he worked his way out of that difficult period, he demonstrated what a champion he was because he was able to conquer adversity. He went on to play that marvellous innings last year on the Indian sub- continent. And think it was not only the sheer personal achievement of that great innings but the sensitivity and the generosity that he displayed towards a great tradition of a great game that he chose to share that 334 with the greatest cricketer that Australia has ever produced, Sir Donald Bradman.
And I remember the morning after that innings very well. I was down in Canberra on the Saturday morning putting together a new Cabinet after the election. Putting together Cabinets is not always the easiest things that comes the way of a Prime Minister, and I was very happy to take a few minutes off and to ring Mark and get him out of his breakfast at his hotel in Pakistan to say, convey my congratulations and I know the congratulations of the entire nation. And I asked him what he was going to do and he said, ‘mate I think I’ll pull up the stumps’. And he went on to do that and he, in a very special way, gave himself an immortal page in Australian cricket history.
Mark, you’ve been a wonderful ambassador for Australia. You have been a magnificent leader. You continue to display skill and courage and determination. You are at the top of your form. You are respected throughout our country and I can’t think of a more fitting person to be named as Australian of the Year 1999 than Mark Taylor. I congratulate you and I know that it is a decision that will be warmly and enthusiastically greeted throughout the entire nation.
Lades and gentlemen, Mark Taylor.

Return to Speeches


25 January 1999
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………
Your Excellency and Mrs Arnison; the acting Premier of Queensland; Mr and Mrs Rob Borbidge; to Mr Jack Penglis, the Chairman of the Queensland Australia Day Council; to my many Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues both state and federal, to Dr Gaynsler, the Young Australian of the Year, and to Mark Taylor the Australian of the Year; other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I first of all remark upon how good it is that over the last three years, those organising the national celebration of Australia Day have decided to take it on tour around the country and who have abandoned the earlier practice of always having the announcement of the Australian of the Year and the ceremony accompanying it take place in Sydney. It’s not that I have anything against Sydney, as you all know, but I think it is good that we pay tribute to the totally national character of Australia Day, and this is the third occasion on which it’s travelled around the country, and I think it’s a marvellous innovation.
Can I join everybody else in extending my congratulations to those who’ve been honoured for their achievements and I want in a moment to say a few things about Mark Taylor, the recently annointed Australian of the Year for 1999.
On occasions like this we all have our own theory, we all have our own version, we all have our own description of what makes Australia to each and every one of us the greatest country in the world. And there is nothing wrong with that, there is no received version of the best description of why Australia is the greatest country on earth. And it’s part of the nature of our society that we don’t seek some kind of uniformity or some kind of conformity of attitude as to what makes this a country that means so much to all of us. We all have our own idea of that. To me there are many things that make Australia particularly dear to me and particularly dear to my family. But one of the many things that I think is quite remarkable about this country is the way in which we have been able as a people over the years to draw the very best from the influences that are borne upon us but at the same time we have taken care to reject the negative elements of those influences. I think of our associations with Europe. We owe a lot to Europe. We owe a lot not only to our British and Irish heritage but also to those other great tributaries from Europe particularly since the end of World War II.
And what we have been able to do as people is to take from that background the very best features. We’ve taken the rule of law and the relative civility and I say relative civility of political discourse and the respect for the Parliamentary and the political process which is so much part of our British background and embracing that and making it work to our advantage, we have also been clever and astute and infinitely wise in rejecting the class consciousness and the class distinctions of Europe. And one of the enduring differences between the Australia of 1999 and the Europe that bore so much upon our formation more than two hundred years ago, is of course the relative lack of class consciousness in this country.
We have been able to combine in what I frequently describe as a unique intersection of history, geography, economic circumstance and culture, the fact that we do owe a lot to our European heritage, that we have forged a unique association with the nations of North America which play such a very important role, particularly the United States in the culture of the entire world and the political balance of the entire world. And added to that is the fact that here we are in the Asian Pacific region of the world. We are the only society on earth that is simultaneously of Europe, North America and Asia. And in recent years our own population has been enriched magnificently by the migration to this country of tens of thousands of people from the nations of Asia. And that has given us a people-to-people link with that part of the world. And it has completed what I might call that trilogy of influence on the modern Australian character. And added to that of course is our special inheritance which no-one else has of the indigenous people of this continent.
So as we reflect upon this Australia Day of 1999, the last Australia Day of this millennium, as we reflect upon it, as we give thanks to all of those who’ve made Australia a wonderful country, we honour the achievement of this country of ours, we also acknowledge the blemishes in our past and the injustices of our past. No proud nation, no self confident nation is insensitive to its periodic failings and the injustices that have occurred in the past. But we do celebrate this Australia Day in a mood of confidence, of optimism, of self-assurance, of belief in ourselves that we have built something very special and something very precious that no other society on earth has been able to build and no other society has been as astute in building as have all of us who are proud to call ourselves Australian.
Ladies and gentlemen, it gives me a very special degree of pleasure to say something of Mark Taylor, the Australian of the Year for 1999. As some of you may have discovered over the years, I have something of an interest in cricket. Like so many other Australians, I have great and abiding sporting passions. There’s nothing that can simultaneously bind Australians together quite like sport and at the same time on certain occasions it can also push us apart, of course in an entirely friendly fashion. We have many sporting loves as Australians. It remains of the great wonderments of visitors to this country that a nation of 18 million people can have such diverse footballing tastes as we have. But there is of course one game that can truly be described as Australia’s national sport and that is cricket.
Mark Taylor to me, and I know to millions of Australians, epitomises the very best of what sport is all about. He’s talented, he’s a tremendous fighter, he’s a tremendous achiever. There has been no prouder wearer of the baggy green, the Australian cricket cap, than Mark Taylor. Like any truly great sportsman, like any person who truly over a long period of time achieves what he or she sets out to achieve in life, he’s had his moments of despair and his moments of receiving fierce criticism and his moments of wondering what was going to happen next. And I know that Mark went through, as all Australians know, a difficult time in his career until that marvellous innings that he played in the second innings of the first test of the Ashes series in 1997 which really turned in the faces of all of his critics - their criticism - and left, I am very happy to say, hundreds of thousands of red faces around Australia and elsewhere in the world amongst his critics.
But when he was going through a period of adversity, he wasn’t blaming somebody else. He wasn’t blaming the umpires, he wasn’t blaming the journalists, he wasn’t blaming his team mates, he wasn’t blaming the selectors, he was accepting that he was going through a difficult period. He was facing up to it with square jawed determination and displaying the grit that we like to believe has a special Australian character about it. And that to me stamped him as a man of very great decency and very great character. And to my immense joy and I know the immense joy of millions of Australians, he worked his way out of that difficult period, he demonstrated what a champion he was because he was able to conquer adversity. He went on to play that marvellous innings last year on the Indian sub- continent. And think it was not only the sheer personal achievement of that great innings but the sensitivity and the generosity that he displayed towards a great tradition of a great game that he chose to share that 334 with the greatest cricketer that Australia has ever produced, Sir Donald Bradman.
And I remember the morning after that innings very well. I was down in Canberra on the Saturday morning putting together a new Cabinet after the election. Putting together Cabinets is not always the easiest things that comes the way of a Prime Minister, and I was very happy to take a few minutes off and to ring Mark and get him out of his breakfast at his hotel in Pakistan to say, convey my congratulations and I know the congratulations of the entire nation. And I asked him what he was going to do and he said, ‘mate I think I’ll pull up the stumps’. And he went on to do that and he, in a very special way, gave himself an immortal page in Australian cricket history.
Mark, you’ve been a wonderful ambassador for Australia. You have been a magnificent leader. You continue to display skill and courage and determination. You are at the top of your form. You are respected throughout our country and I can’t think of a more fitting person to be named as Australian of the Year 1999 than Mark Taylor. I congratulate you and I know that it is a decision that will be warmly and enthusiastically greeted throughout the entire nation.
Lades and gentlemen, Mark Taylor.


26 January 1999
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Councillor Hull; to the Mayor; Councillor Graham and Mrs Graham; to Shane Gould, former resident of the city of Ryde and one of the greatest swimmers that Australia has produced, and the Australia Day ambassador to the city of Ryde. To my many parliamentary colleagues, Kerry Chikarovski, Michael Photios, Andrew Tink, John Watkins, Jan Burnswood, and all other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is not the first time that I have addressed a citizenship ceremony here in Ryde. But it is the first time I have had the privilege of doing so as Prime Minister. And it gives me an opportunity to say one or two things briefly to you about Australia Day and about the nature of being an Australian. But the first and most important thing that I would like to do as Prime Minister, is to extend to all of those who are choosing today to become Australian citizens, a word of welcome and the hand of fellowship and the hand of welcome. I want on behalf of all of those who have been Australians by birth or adoption for a long period of time to extend our thanks to you for choosing to live amongst us and to become members of the Australian family.
There are many things that Australia can boast of. And a national day is an occasion to feel proud of what has been achieved. It is not an occasion to hide our virtue and our talents as a nation behind a bushel. It is not an occasion to sell ourselves short. It is not an occasion to be apologetic to the rest of the world about what we have achieved. It is also though an occasion to recognise that our history has contained its blemishes, and there are those amongst us, fellow Australians who are in need of our continuing compassion and our continuing help.
But the Australian story is a story of remarkable achievement. The reality is that Australia and Australians have done things better than most other countries and most other groups of people around the world. Everybody has their own theory about what is the defining characteristic of an Australian, and the good news is that that argument will never be resolved emphatically in favour of one or other version and that is how it should be in a free society. The idea that in a democratic free society there should be a received version of the Australian identity or a received version of this or that particular pattern of behaviour that makes up the Australian character is of course quite objectionable.
But there are things about us that most of us identify in common. We quite properly see ourselves as a relatively classless society, and we have good reason to do that. Because one of the elements of genius of the Australian achievement has been our capacity to take from our inheritance those good features of that inheritance, yet reject those negative features of that inheritance. We owe a great deal to the people of Britain and the rest of Europe for a great deal of our heritage. We have been clever enough to take the good features of that inheritance, the rule of law, the English language, the respect for civil discourse in political life, although it becomes rather rambunctious in the Australian transition and the Australian tradition but still essentially democratic, a free and open press, and an incorruptible judiciary. Yet in taking those good things, we have been sensible and astute enough to reject the class-consciousness and the aristocratic bearing and attitudes of much of our European inheritance. And we have allowed it to develop in its own particular characteristic on Australian soil. We have a lot in common with the people of North America, particularly the people of the United States. We share many of the democratic values of that society, yet we have in Australia, a rather more sceptical and on occasions, reserved attitude towards those in authority than perhaps is adopted by our friends and cousins in the United States.
And to complete the trilogy, so to speak, here we are in the Asian Pacific region of the world. We are the only nation in the world that is simultaneously a nation that owes so much to the nations of Europe, has so much in common with the United States, yet geographically, strategically and politically is here in the Asian Pacific part of the world. And in recent years in particular, and today is no exception as I look around this room, the membership of the Australian family has been greatly enriched by tens of thousands, indeed hundreds of thousands of new Australian citizens who have come from the nations of Asia, from the nations of our geographic and strategic region. So we have some very special characteristics, and what we have been clever enough as a society to do is to pick the good things of our heritage and to reject the negatives and the not so good.
And there are some underlying principles that I think all of us hold dear. We do hold dear the principle of mateship, but we do believe fundamentally in an egalitarian society. We do believe in equality, irrespective of race, religion, gender or national origin. And it needs to be reaffirmed as a cornerstone of the Australian existence, that every man and woman succeeds or fails in this nation according to their personal dedication or their personal worth. Irrespective of the privilege or otherwise of their birth, and irrespective of their racial origin. And I want to particularly say to those who are becoming Australians for the first time today, how important that principle of racial tolerance and how important that principle of national cohesion as a consequence is to the Australian identity and to Australian society.
We have every reason, ladies and gentlemen, as we reflect upon the past year, and we look forward to the new year, the last of the Christian millennium, we have every reason to be immensely proud of what Australia has achieved. We do have our differences and that is healthy and legitimate in a democratic society.
We do owe to the original Australians, the indigenous people of this country, a debt for the contribution that they have made to our current identity and we need to work ever closer with them to achieve greater co-operation, greater harmony and a greater common understanding.
But I cannot as Prime Minister, speak with other than an immense feeling of pride and hope and optimism about the state of Australia as we enter 1999. We should never sell ourselves short. We have done things better, and we have created in this country a style of life and attitude of mind, a capacity for civil discourse and understanding that is the envy and the rival of nations all around the world. And that has been due to the efforts over the generations of millions of ordinary men and women of this country. And this gathering which is really at the heart of what a celebration of what Australia Day ought to be, here in the city of Ryde, an area of Australia that I have been privileged to represent for almost a quarter of a century in the national parliament. We bring together so many disparate elements of our society. We bring the new citizens, we bring the wonderful representatives of that heroic generation that defended and saved this country in World War II and to who we owe all in terms of our freedom and the way of life we now have.
We are reminded of the tremendous sports men and women that this city has produced over the years, exemplified by people such as Mark Taylor and Shane Gould. We think of the wonderful volunteer organisations. We are reminded here of the civic institutions, the local council represented by the Mayor, the state parliament represented by a number of state members and the federal parliament represented by myself and Philip Ruddock, my colleague, the Minister for Immigration. We have a lot as a society and a nation to be thankful for. We owe to our forebears a debt of gratitude for the society that they have created and we all have a common responsibility to ensure that the society that we build together as we go into the next millennium is even better than the society that we as Australians have been fortunate and blessed enough to inherit.
To the new citizens again, congratulations, I hope you find your future life in Australia very happy, very enjoyable and very fulfilling. I thank you for the privilege you have given to us of becoming Australian citizens and to all of you, whether you were born here or citizens by adoption or about to be, can I wish you a very warm and happy Australia Day.
Thank you.


28 January 1999
&nbsp;INTRODUCTION
The success or failure of a nation essentially begins in the homes of its people.
And as we stand on the edge of the new millennium, Australia's fortune lies not so much with parliaments or business, or political parties or money markets but with individual Australians - young and old, men and women, Australians by birth or choice.
Each one of us responsible for building our own lives and the life of our nation. All of us accountable to ourselves, to those around us, to the future itself.
It has always been so. A century ago, Sir Henry Parkes - that great hearted champion of federation declared Australia ready for unity, for the dazzling prize of nationhood because of, in his words, the vigour, the industry, the enterprise, the foresight, and the creative skill of its people.
He knew, as I know now, that self confidence and self esteem, that determination and fair play, success itself, can be the characteristics of a nation only while its citizens possess these virtues and hold dear those values.
This does not mean that governments do not have a role in promoting the values of society. Indeed they have an important obligation to encapsulate community aspirations, define objectives and to spell out how to reach them.
So it is that in this address I will define the main domestic goals of the Government in 1999, indicate a significant strengthening of the application of the principle of mutual obligation and announce Commonwealth assistance for a major resource project here in Queensland - a tangible demonstration of our commitment to nation building as we move into the next century.
The Government has five broad goals in the year ahead.
We are resolved to pursue policies that are most likely to maintain our remarkable rate of economic growth and strength.
We are absolutely committed to the implementation in full of our visionary tax plan endorsed by the Australian people at the last election.
Thirdly, we will not tire in our efforts to further reduce unemployment which, although now at an eight year low, remains unacceptably high.
Fourthly, we will further extend our commitment to the principle of mutual obligation in Australian society.
Finally, we will work to create an even stronger social coalition to more effectively remedy areas of disadvantage and underprivilege.
These goals are not mutually exclusive nor are they the sum total of what the Government wants to do over the next twelve months. Rather, they are a mixture of specific policy commitments and broader social goals which collectively remind us of an important truth of public policy. That is that economic growth and economic efficiency are never ends in themselves, rather they are a means by which we can deliver more fulfilling lives for our fellow Australians.
In pursuing our goals for the coming year we build on the strong foundations of what has been achieved over the past three years. These have been years of remarkable consolidation, strengthening and reform of the Australian economy.
Three years of achievement which have seen Australia return to economic strength unknown for three decades.
Three short years during which we took decisive measures to strengthen our economic foundations, retire government debt by a third, turn a $10.3 billion deficit into surplus and deliver the lowest interest rates and inflation in a generation. And all achieved without new taxes or tax increases.
Years during which we stared down the worst of the Asian economic collapse – our exporters replacing their lost markets with new ones elsewhere. A time of economic growth almost a third more than other industrialised nations and jobs growth more than double the rest of the world because of our early efforts to fortify our base.
Years which have seen productivity growth, the prerequisite for sustainable wages growth, reach double the average of the Labor years. An achievement which has allowed real wages to rise by 10 per cent in less than three years, compared with 6 per cent over the previous 13 years, in tandem with higher profits - allowing lasting jobs and rising living standards to grow together, rather than one being sacrificed for the other.
All achieved peacefully with industrial disputes down to an historically low level and federal unfair dismissals down by nearly half.
Years which have seen privatisation help build a nation of shareholders with almost 4 million Australians directly investing in the share market. In less than four years more than one in ten adult Australians have become shareholders for the first time. Nearly 2 million Australians have purchased shares in Telstra. All of them have a direct stake in the growth industries of the future.
Today’s economic strength and prosperity is the nation’s reward for the economic reforms and sacrifices of earlier years.
How has this been achieved? In my view we have secured these outcomes because we govern with a clear and steady focus on those issues important to people, not on distractions or the whims of pressure groups.
We’ve responded to those issues that affect Australians in their daily lives - their mortgage repayments, their shopping bills, the security of their jobs, their plans for retirement, choices for their family’s health and schooling, the taxes they pay.
And we’ve tackled the most fundamental challenges facing Australians today by drawing on their own strengths and values – individualism, a willingness to take on responsibility, the desire for choice and opportunity.
In conception and practice, our policies have mirrored the Australian character, Australian priorities, in short – the Australian way.
Our approach has had at its core commonsense Australian values – the responsibility to secure the nation’s economic foundations, workplace reforms to allow employers and workers to get on with the job, education for our young people to equip them with skills, projects to empower voluntary organisations and work for the dole to inculcate a work ethic in the young.
We have built upon Australia’s position in the world where we occupy a unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic circumstances. We draw strength from important bonds with all parts of the world - our language, law, cultural and historical ties with Europe, strategic ties with North America and new economic and people –to- people links with our neighbours in this region.
Where would we be today, if in denial of these ties with the entire world, we had pursued some of the narrow ‘Asia only’ policies of the past?
As Mr Campbell Anderson, the President of the Business Council of Australia wrote earlier this week, "our good fortune has little to do with luck". He’s right - we’ve proved the lesson that economic fortune favours those willing to drive through strong hearted reform.
And just as economic reforms of the past have delivered strength and prosperity now, so it is the reforms of today and tomorrow that will deliver the higher economic growth, employment and living standards of the future.
Let no-one sell Australia short by understating the impressive economic achievements of recent years.
This recent economic success has given us a renewed sense of confidence and optimism not experienced for many years.
Australia’s economic fundamentals are stronger now than at any time since the 1960s. That strength is a marvellous foundation on which to build for the new millenium.
RESOLUTIONS FOR THE MILLENIUM
As 1999 begins we naturally project forward to the new millenium. As always Australians have a choice. We can resolve to maintain the momentum of recent years and move forward to improve the lives of individuals and families, the success of business. Or we can take fright and abandon the challenge of further reform.
&nbsp;Economic Discipline
The Government will further strengthen our economy.
Guaranteeing our hard won gains - high growth, low inflation and interest rates, falling government debt and unemployment and rising share ownership - is reason why I will forge ahead with overhauling a tax system which, in its current form, can't deliver new growth, or encourage new businesses, or provide new jobs.
Australians should receive the personal tax cuts they deserve with four out of five taxpayers paying no more than 30 cents in the dollar in income tax.
Workers should not be penalised by punitive tax rates on their incomes and savings, punished for working harder or longer or seeking a promotion. Parents should have greater freedom to choose the caring arrangements for their young children which best suit their needs.
Our tax reform will see pensioners keeping more of their pension for extra income earned and being assured that their hard earned pensions will remain ahead of prices. And provisional tax abolished once and for all.
Our reforms will mean that most small businesses will be able to pay all their taxes once a quarter on just one form. Our exporters can take on the world, bringing wealth back to Australia, without the burden of sales and consumption taxes. And those in the bush will face much lower transport costs through the reduction of 25 cents a litre in the diesel fuel excise for heavy transport.
And finally, our States and Territories will have a secure funding base to provide the road and bridges, the schools and hospitals all Australians need.
Failure to pass our plan will keep $10 billion of taxes on business and $4.5 billion of taxes on our exporters. Funds which would otherwise be spent on development, marketing, production, sales, jobs, people.
Failure to pass our plan will keep $13 billion of personal income tax on individuals and deny them another $2 billion in family benefits. And will maintain wholesale sales tax and nine other hidden taxes.
In short, failure to pass our plan will mean we have let pass a chance to make things right.
Further efforts to reduce unemployment
As we look ahead we resolve to continue the fight to further reduce unemployment.
Australia’s prosperity, its social stability, the quality of life enjoyed by individuals and families – all these things rely upon building a nation with jobs in abundance.
Lasting and fulfilling jobs are at the heart of personal and family security. They also reflect our values of self esteem and self-confidence and are the means by which we each demonstrate personal responsibility.
I don't claim that this government, after just under three years in office, has solved the unemployment problem. But we have made significant progress.
The unemployment rate has fallen to 7.5 per cent - the lowest jobless rate in 8 years. In our time, we have created almost 400,000 jobs, over half of them in small business. And in the year to last December, we have created an average of 14,800 new jobs each month.
We have instituted a new Job Network to bring together employers and jobseekers faster, with less cost and less bureaucracy, with a focus on results not process.
Despite the carping criticism of many the new system is superior to the one it replaced. Let me tell you why.
There are now more than four times as many sites to apply for jobs as there were through the Commonwealth Employment Service. And those best qualified to provide services to the unemployed – business, community and charitable organisations such as Drake Australia, The Salvation Army and Mission Australia - are already outperforming the old system.
In December, the Job Network placed 17,600 people into jobs, twice the number placed by the old CES a year earlier. And employers have given a vote of confidence in the new arrangements by listing 34,000 new vacancies with the Job Network in December which is in contrast to only 13,000 listed by the CES in the same month of 1997.
Lower unemployment depends upon strong economic growth, renewed efforts to remove the disincentives which exist in our welfare system and greater labour market flexibility. This greater flexibility should respect the Australian way and the Australian tradition of a social safety net.
A strong job market needs to be flexible and competitive and we have set about building a system based on common interest not on conflict. With co-operation and common purpose there is less need for regulation, red tape and legalistic rituals.
Under the new system some 180 awards have been simplified, and 40,000 Australian Workplace Agreements and 805 non-union agreements covering almost 100,000 employees have been approved.
Consistent with my pledge that no worker would be worse off on an Australian Workplace Agreement compared to their award, we’ll continue to simplify and enhance the new workplace relations system to secure and promote jobs.
And there is much more to do. We will stand by our exemption for small business from unfair dismissal laws to create extra jobs which may number as many as 50,000.
The jobs of 420,000 young Australians on junior wage rates will be protected by retaining age based youth wages.
We will maximise choice at the workplace by encouraging mediation services as an alternative to arbitration and by simplifying the approval of agreements.
And the interests of individual workers will be promoted over union bosses by introducing secret ballots for protected industrial action and preventing victimisation.
In summary, I resolve to elevate individuals, their choices, their responsibilities above the interests of institutions and pressure groups because that is what Australians want.
Comalco Project
The Australian way has also always involved great projects of national development.
The Government’s strategic investment co-ordination function, that Mr Bob Mansfield has been implementing, has continued to make good progress. The Government’s recent announcement on providing financial assistance of $40 million to the Visy Pulp and Paper Mill in Tumut was the first project as a result of these efforts.
Excellent progress has been made in discussions between Mr Mansfield and Comalco in order to encourage them to finalise a decision to build a greenfields alumina refinery in Gladstone. The project will involve an investment of $3 billion in current prices and involve three stages of construction. The first stage would occur from 1999-2001 and involve an investment of $1.4 billion and result in direct employment of 1300 people. It is an investment with undoubted significant long-term benefit to Australia. The Commonwealth Government is prepared to provide financial support exceeding $100 million to enable the project to proceed.
The issue of commercial negotiations between Comalco and potential energy suppliers to the project remains to be settled before support commitments can be finalised. The Government has done all it possibly can to ensure this investment is made in Australia and urges the various parties to finalise energy supply negotiations in order to bring this major project to reality quickly.
Creating a strong, social coalition
Few Australians would deny the proposition that Governments alone cannot solve immense social problems. They need the help and understanding of great community organisations, dedicated individuals and the corporate sector.
In reality we need a social coalition which unites all of those within the nation who seek to address in an effective way poverty and disadvantage – each being encouraged to share responsibility for providing opportunity, each being provided with incentive to offer a fair go to those in need and each being rewarded by playing a greater role in the decision making process.
I am resolved to provide a modern safety net which encourages responsibility and embraces prevention as much as cure. Traditional state-centred welfare has failed to prevent social problems and has perpetuated dependency rather than re-engagement with work and the community.
This does not mean winding back government assistance for those in need or for those who support them. We will enhance the role of community organisations not increase the burdens they carry.
Every day organisations like the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul display their capacity to enhance the welfare of those in need. Each day they address the very personal impact of social problems in ways that governments simply cannot.
I resolve to build on the initiatives of our first term which, for the first time, involved community organisations in the design and implementation of our Tough on Drugs programme and Youth Homelessness pilot projects.
I resolve to build a stronger social coalition, renewing my call to business both large and small to play their part. To give back to the community from which they profit, to follow the example of many genuine Australian philanthropists, to advise, to donate in cash or kind, to mentor.
And I resolve to leave a legacy of this International Year of Older Persons by paying due tribute to older Australians, truly valuing Australia’s wealth for their toil.
We have already extended the Seniors’ Health Card and the Veterans’ Gold Card and provided the farm families assets test concession just as we have recognised the desire of older Australians to be cared for in their own homes through our Staying at Home package.
Building on our Staying at Home package announced last year and our co-ordinated care trials I want to provide better health care for older people in their own homes. I also want to enable them to remain active participants in their local communities consistent with the Australian way of a fair go for all.
I have asked Dr Wooldridge to report to Cabinet on plans to implement these principles and announcements will be made in the months ahead to help care for older Australians particularly those afflicted with chronic and complex illnesses.
Such a goal can only be achieved by involving the health care industry and the medical profession in particular and I look forward to their co-operation.
Mutual Obligation
The dole system that we inherited sent the worst possible message to young Australians. It told them that dropping out of school, out of their communities, escaping personal responsibility, was acceptable and that the taxpayer would foot the bill.
The dole system should be about choice and responsibility - providing young people with the opportunity for training and education but at the same time making them fully responsible for their choices and for themselves.
This principle underpins our youth allowance which encourages those in receipt of government benefits to finish school and better themselves.
And it holds true for my government’s work for the dole scheme.
Under the Government’s Work for the Dole Scheme 2,000 applications have been received for projects, 410 have commenced and over 18,000 young Australians have benefited from their personal involvement in work for the dole.
Young Australians have helped make good damage caused by landslides and flooding after cyclones hit Magnetic Island last January, specialised gardens have been constructed in Parkes for dementia sufferers, specifically designed boats have been built so that people with disabilities can experience the joy of sailing, historic wooden railway carriages restored to their former beauty, walking tracks, tourism projects. Projects to help the frail and aged, the sick, the disabled, projects to help children, other unemployed Australians, the homeless.
Work for the dole has not only provided young Australians with training and skills, social contact and restored the links with their communities. For so many, it has ignited the work ethic fundamental to sustaining lasting work and broken forever the cycle of boredom and despair that was the bane of the young unemployed.
Nearly a third of scheme participants have gone on to fulfilling jobs.
During the election campaign, I announced a further 25 per cent expansion of work for the dole by requiring all year 12 school leavers on the full rate of Youth Allowance to join one of the scheme’s projects once they have been unemployed for three months.
Overall, this means up to 124,000 places will be provided over four years.
Where some would scrap work for the dole I remain passionately committed to extending the principle of asking people to give back something to the community in return for assistance in times of need. Work for the dole is an important part of our focus on boosting jobs.
Exactly a year ago – in my first Federation Address – I announced a major extension of my Government’s mutual obligation initiative. Now that we have the benefit of another year’s experience, we propose further improvements.
The first area we are going to change is the obligation to improve literacy and numeracy skills. We know that a school child without basic reading and writing skills will not be able to realise his or her full potential.
That is why I commit my Government to requiring unemployed young people who fail basic literacy and numeracy tests to undertake appropriate remedial courses if they are to continue to receive their full dole.
Previously, young people on the dole were able to satisfy their obligation by taking up one of a number of options. But I believe, and most Australians would agree, that reading and writing properly are the most fundamental prerequisites for getting a job.
So to enhance our mutual obligation policies this Government will require young people who lack basic literacy and numeracy skills to undertake training in those areas as a condition of receiving their full unemployment benefit. Refusing to learn how to read and write will deny young unemployed the full dole.
Further work is being undertaken on improving compliance and extending the coverage of mutual obligation.
CONCLUSION
Ladies and gentlemen, as this century nears its conclusion, let us reflect on a nation which has remained true to its spirit. Mistakes have been made, tragedies borne, unspeakable sacrifice endured but, at the end of the century Australians remain the enterprising, vigorous and creative people of whom Parkes spoke so lovingly.
We retain an echo within us of the yearning for a better life which drove our ancestors to build this country. That spirit was captured very well by the eminent journalist, Henry Gullett in his description written many years ago. He marveled at their courage and ability which he ascribed to the fact that all were pioneers, or the children of pioneers, the children of the most restless, adventurous and the most virile individuals.
As federation fervour ran through the country Gullett also wrote "Seldom in the world’s history, have a people entered into possession of their heritage under circumstances so auspicious and with an outlook so full of dazzling promise".
When I consider the talent, the energy, the potential amongst us, when I think of how the whole world will turn its focus upon us next year at the change of the millennium, I can’t help but conclude that Gullett’s words are even truer today - that seldom in the history of the world will a people enter into possession of the new millenium under circumstances so auspicious and with an outlook so full of dazzling promise.


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much gentlemen. To the Mayor of Ryde, to all the
 other distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman. In May of this year
 I will have represented North Ryde in the Federal Parliament for 25
 years. And North Ryde is known for a lot of things. It's known
 along with other parts of Ryde for having produced some of the most
 celebrated Australian sportsmen. It's known for another thing
 that's tremendously important today, and that is that from the
 very early years that I was representing North Ryde in the Federal
 Parliament, as you heard a moment ago, it was the location of pharmaceutical,
 technology and other leading-edge manufacturing and supplying companies
 in Australia. And over the years it has grown into an area of Sydney,
 and an area of Australia, which is really renowned for providing a
 very welcoming and appropriate environment for the establishment of
 businesses of that kind. And over the years it's become quite
 correctly known as very much a pharmaceutical, medical and high-tech
 location area, not only in Sydney but throughout Australia. And a
 lot of the credit for that is due to the very beckoning environment
 provided by the local council and provided by the community generally.
And I want to say to both Johnson &amp; Johnson Medical, and to Jannsen-Cilag,
 how delighted I am as the local member, as well as the Prime Minister
 of Australia, at the very large investment that both companies are
 making in this joint headquarters that I'll have the privilege
 in a few moments of opening.
Could I say to both companies, and to all of you, that you couldn't
 be opening a new building, establishing a new asset, and embarking
 upon either a new business venture or an expansion of an existing
 venture at a better time economically in Australia. I've got
 to say to you that the general economic conditions in Australia at
 the present time are better than at any time in the 25 years that
 I've been in Federal Parliament. There's never any point
 in public life when you have an unassailable fact to assert, there's
 never any point in public life in being reluctant to assert that unassailable
 fact. Because strange as it is I found in public life that your commentators
 and your reviewers and your critics are always marked in their reluctance
 to assert those unassailable facts. So we are living in very good
 economic times.
We are living in times of very low inflation, we are living in times
 of very low interest rates, we are living in a time when the Australian
 economy has really been able to see off the worst of the Asian economic
 downturn. That doesn't mean to say that we should be complacent,
 but it does mean to say that we should recognise the measure of the
 strength of those economic conditions. And now is a very good time
 for Australia to tell the rest of the world how attractive it is for
 companies to establish their regional headquarters in Australia. How
 attractive it is for Australia to be increasingly seen around the
 world as a financial centre in this part of the world. And one of
 the goals that I set the Government at the time of the last election
 was to see somewhere in Australia, and a Prime Minister of a Federation
 I never try and choose between competing locations, somewhere in Australia
 become the alternative financial centre to Tokyo in the Asian-Pacific
 region. And when you look at the low inflation we have, you look at
 the low interest rates, you look at the stable legal system we have,
 the stable political system we have, rambunctious though it may be
 on occasions it is nonetheless stable. When you look at the fact that
 we have a very very prudentially well supervised and well regulated
 banking system, where we have a corporate governance code which is
 second to none around the world; you have a lifestyle that is second
 to none around the world; you have a cross structure for living in
 the major cities of Australia which is now increasingly competitive
 with the cross structures of cities like Singapore and Hong Kong,
 indeed far more competitive; all of that adds up to a situation where
 Australia is a prime location, not only as a regional financial centre,
 but it is a prime location as a business financial centre generally.
 And with the passage of the Government's taxation reforms which
 will make trading and securities in this country and financial operations
 even less burdened by taxation than they are at the present time,
 we will be adding yet another element to the attractiveness of Australia
 and the attractiveness of Sydney, of Melbourne, of all the cities
 of Australia as a financial and business location.
The other thing that I want to say about both of the companies, who
 I'm very pleased to honour today and their contribution to Australia
 of course, is that both of them are very much involved in an activity
 and in an industry which goes to the heart of the quality of life,
 indeed the existence of life, and the contribution that both of those
 companies are making to medical science, the contribution that they
 are making to the relief of human suffering, and the contribution
 that those who work for them are making to the health care industry
 in Australia generally.
There's a lot of criticism of health care in this country and
 that is to be expected in a democratic society. One observation I
 would make about Australia's health care system today is simply
 this: there may be flaws in it and undoubtedly there are, but I don't
 know of any nation on Earth that has a perfect health care system.
 And I don't know of any country on Earth where a person of average
 means is better cared for if that person becomes unexpectedly ill
 than in Australia. I have to say very bluntly, I'd rather see
 a person of average means have a health problem in this country than
 in just about any other country in the world. And I think with all
 of the criticism that is sometimes made about the health care system
 in this country we ought to remember that. We ought to remember the
 quality of the doctors that we have in this country. We ought to remember
 the quality of the medical scientists we have in this country. We
 ought to remember the quality and the dedication of the nurses and
 the other health care professionals that we have in this country.
 So all of these things need to be kept in proper perspective.
But I thank Johnson &amp; Johnson medical. I thank Jannsen-Cilag for
 the contribution that they are making to the local community, for
 the contribution that they are making to Australian society and to
 the role that they are playing in providing in their own particular
 way for a first quality health care for Australian citizens.
I thank them for their investment in Australia's future. I welcome
 them in their new headquarters to the electorate of Bennelong. To
 the district of North Ryde, you remain very, very welcome and very,
 very popular corporate citizens in this part of Australia.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Senator Minchin, to my other ministerial
 and parliamentary colleagues. To Professor Stocker, to Martin Green
 and Stuart Wenham the joint winners of the Australia Prize for 1999.
 To Tim Besley who chaired the selection committee, ladies and gentlemen.
I do regard this as one of the occasions of the year and it's
 an opportunity here in the National Capital in the Federal Parliament
 to pay homage and pay our respects to and, very importantly, honour
 people who have made a particular contribution to science. The connection
 between Australian achievement and science is a very long and honourable
 one. Names such as Eccles and Oliphant and Macfarlane Burnet and many
 others come off the tongue. And the 1997 Australian of the Year, Dr
 Peter Doherty, who won the Nobel Prize for his work in immunology
 called it, I think, very appropriately the enterprise in the adventure
 of those people who dared to discover. And in a speech that he made
 recently he described the special excitement of being involved in
 discovering something in going somewhere where nobody had been before.
 And I think that encapsulates the experience and the feelings of so
 many people who have been involved in the discipline of science.
It is true that as a person trained in the law who has turned to politics,
 I come ill-prepared in the sense of intellectual discipline for science.
 But I have to say to you that one of the more stimulating and exciting
 experiences I have had as Prime Minister is to chair several times
 a year what is now called the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering
 and Innovation Council. This is a body that brings together the best
 and the brightest that Australia has in this field. And we sit around
 the Cabinet table for a few hours, normally on a Friday morning, and
 to me it's a great revelation, it's a reminder of the enormous
 resources of intellectual power that Australia possesses in this area.
 And it's also a reminder to me of how important science is for
 the future of Australia.
And can I interpolate on a personal note how much I have valued the
 work of the Chief Scientist of the Commonwealth, Dr Stocker, over
 the last two-and-a-half years. He has been the Chief Executive Officer
 of the Prime Minister's Council, he has interpreted much of what
 has gone before that Council for me and he has helped me enjoy very,
 very much the experience that has added to the stimulation that I
 derive from the exposure to the magnificent work of the people who
 make up that Council.
And I want to join Senator Minchin in paying tribute to his work as
 the Chief Scientist, thanking him and wishing him well in his future
 scientific and business career. He reminded me that this gathering
 takes place at a very significant moment when a scientist has been
 appointed only yesterday as the Chief Executive of Australia's
 largest corporation Telstra. And, of course, as Peter Doherty again
 reminded us recently Australia is probably the only nation on earth
 that was discovered in the course of a scientific expedition.
But, ladies and gentlemen, the two gentlemen that we are honouring
 tonight for their work in photovoltaeics, Martin Green and Stuart
 Wenham, have won world renowned in a field that all of us will acknowledge
 is tremendously significant to our future. There is, I am assured,
 no truth in the rumour that they were two members of that raiding
 party at Kirribilli House some time 18 months ago but was endeavouring
 to press upon me certain views about solar energy. But what they have
 succeeded in doing is to win world renowned and world respect in a
 field of endeavour where the research had lain stagnant for a period
 of some 10 or 15 years. And as you saw in that excellent video their
 contribution is world class, their achievements have earned great
 respect for them personally, they reflect very favourably on the University
 of New South Wales and the support and cooperation of that University.
 And I notice I think in the audience tonight the current and at least
 one former Vice Chancellor of that University. And the contribution
 of their research teams should also be honoured and I know when they
 speak they will have something to say about it.
But it is to me as Prime Minister of Australia a source of immense
 pride and I know for all Australians that we find within our 18 plus
 million people, people of such continuing excellence in areas of science.
 There is, of course, enormous potential for the field of research
 in which Martin and Stuart have been involved. The potential for Australia
 is immense, the potential revenue to be earned, the important commercial
 as well as scientific contribution that both of them have made is
 something that we honour here tonight. And it is important as we honour
 their contribution that we recognise the important linkages between
 the pure research and also the commercial utilisation of that research.
 And one of the things that we have been able to do with some success
 in Australia is to bring those two together.
But it is important that the Government ensure that all of the policies
 that bear on the successful protection as well as the development
 of Australia's intellectual capital that all of those policies
 that come to bear on that intellectual capital be kept constantly
 under review. And one of the valuable things that have come out of
 the meetings of the Prime Minister's Science Council is a reminder
 to me and to my ministerial colleagues of how precious is Australia's
 intellectual capital, of how the care and the nurture and the protection
 all over the world of the intellectual property of Australia is a
 special challenge. And it will be an even greater challenge as we
 move into the 21st Century. It has become clich, of course,
 to talk about knowledge-based industries, it has become a clich  to
 talk about how important is knowledge-based employment. But as we
 move into the 21st Century it will become even more important
 and it will become even more incumbent upon governments to ensure
 that the intellectual property of the Australian nation is fully protected.
In awarding jointly the Australia Prize tonight to Professor Green
 and to Professor Wenham I am inviting them to join a very significant,
 a very distinguished list of great Australians who have made a particular,
 indeed an outstanding contribution to the field of science. They have
 brought great dignity, they have brought great prestige and great
 esteem to their own chosen discipline, they have been champions in
 that discipline and most importantly of all they have made all of
 this field even prouder still to be Australians. They have been great
 and outstanding Australians. I congratulate both of them, I compliment
 their research teams and I invite both of them to come forward to
 accept their presentations. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Senator Bishop; to my other  Senator
 Bishop, good Heaven's, what a bad start. Bronwyn, I'm sorry.
 That's what happens when you spend an hour-and-a-half on the
 golf course early in the morning. It takes your mind off business.
 It makes me very active, Jackie. But to Bronwyn; to my other ministerial
 colleague, Jackie Kelly; to all the other groups who are represented
 here today and I particularly acknowledge Peter Bartells, the Chairman
 of the Australian Sports Commission, and all the other organisations
 that are involved in the sort of aims and the sort of projects that
 we have in mind for the International Year of Older Persons.
Not every international year which is designated by the United Nations
 or other international bodies draws unifying support within the Australian
 community. But it's fair to say that this year, which has been
 set aside to recognise the contribution of older people to the building
 of Australia and to the nature of Australian society that we have
 at present, is something that has the enthusiastic support of not
 only the Australian Government but the enthusiastic support of all
 Australians.
Our aim in this year is to recognise the contribution that older people
 have made to the Australian nation and to also pursue a number of
 underlying policy objectives. To recognise the desire of older Australians
 to remain in their own homes. To recognise the desire of older Australians
 to remain very active. And to implement a number of programmes which
 work towards those aims.
I'm very proud of a number of the initiatives that the Government
 has already implemented in the three years that it's been in
 power to assist older Australians. I think particularly the extension
 of the Seniors' Card to something like 225,000 largely but not
 entirely self-funded retirees. I think particularly the extension
 of the Gold Card to 50,000 World War II veterans, a very special group
 of older Australians to whom all of us owe everything in terms of
 our current lifestyle and the fact that we can live in freedom in
 this wonderful country of ours.
We have linked the pensions to 25% of male total average earnings.
 We've made changes to the thresholds in relations to taxation
 for self-funded retirees. We've provided a capital gains tax
 exemption for small businesses where the proceeds are rolled over
 into an approved retirement fund. And we've, very importantly
 for rural Australians, we've eased the assets test on retiring
 farmers so that they can transfer their farm to their family without
 affecting their eligibility for the pension. And also very recently,
 and I know something widely welcomed by the Australian community and
 particularly by older Australians, we've introduced a 30% taxation
 rebate for private health insurance, which means that something in
 order of 81% of all Australian taxpayers will effectively have a full
 tax deduction for their private health insurance.
We are particularly committed, in relation to the care of the frail
 aged, we are particularly committed to providing as much assistance
 and as many incentives as possible to assisting people to remain in
 their own homes. It is the overwhelming desire of older Australians
 to remain in their own homes all their lives or, given the circumstances,
 as long as possible. And we introduced a Staying at Home initiative
 more than a year ago which over four years increases the number of
 community aged care packages from just under 10,000 to 22,000. And
 we're also going to provide greater support for Australia's
 1.5 million carers. And I have to say that some of the most heroic
 Australians and some of the most wonderful Australians I've met
 are those older people caring for often a disabled or handicapped
 child in very, very difficult circumstances. And we have introduced
 additional measures to assist them, as indeed we've provided
 additional support for the domiciliary nursing care benefit and also
 additional assistance in relation to those who suffer dementia. And
 in relation to residential aged care, we're increasing funding
 by more than $165 million a year. And over the next 10 years $1.3
 billion will be provided to upgrade and build new premises.
You are, of course, aware of the very significant benefits for older
 people coming out of the Government's taxation reform package.
 And particularly the increases in the pension of 4%, that a further
 45,000 people will qualify for a part-pension and the pensioner concession
 card, the increase in the tax threshold, the reduction in tax rates
 and also very welcomed to many self-funded retirees, the abolition
 of provisional tax. Now, all of these things are initiatives of the
 Government which have taken place over the last three years.
The theme of 1999, the Year of Older Persons, is Australia, a society
 for all ages. And that is a theme which is designed to recognise the
 contribution of people of all ages to the building of the Australian
 community. And I hope that during this year we as a nation can recognise
 the immense contribution of older Australians to our society and to
 build partnerships between the Government and the community and the
 Government and business organisations to better meet the needs of
 older people.
And as a permanent reminder of this international year I want to pursue
 a substantial advancement in the health care delivered to older Australians.
 We want to increase the ability of older people to continue living
 in their own homes and to participate actively in their community.
 And more specifically in relation to that, we're going to provide,
 through Medicare, for general practitioners to be involved in multidisciplinary
 care planning and case management for those with chronic and complex
 needs. We want to give incentives at the practice level for general
 practitioners to achieve multidisciplinary care plans for those over
 65 and with chronic and complex needs. And for those over 75, to pay
 doctors to undertake an annual health assessment to focus on issues
 of prevention and better management of chronic illness, with these
 assessments to be done at the person's home where necessary.
 We've committed  and this was announced at the time of
 the passage of the health insurance legislation  an additional
 $25 million for further co-ordinated care trials to address the health
 care needs of older people who are chronically ill or disadvantaged.
I do want to, and I particularly welcome the emphasis here today on
 encouraging older people to remain physically active in their local
 communities. The Active Australia International Year of Older Persons
 campaign that we're going to launch today will highlight the
 benefit of physical activity for older people, indeed, for Australians
 of all ages and is one of our major initiatives for the year. And
 I particularly mark there the contribution of different agencies,
 the Australian Sports Commission, the Health Department and the Department
 of Veterans' Affairs, to deliver benefits in that particular
 programme.
Twenty years from now there will be almost twice as many people over
 the age of 65 as there are now. And this fact presents particular
 challenges and for this reason I've established a Ministerial
 Reference Group chaired by the Minister for Aged Care, Mrs Bishop,
 to develop a national strategy for an ageing Australia. And it will
 provide the vehicle for consulting the community about the type of
 policies and programmes needed in the years ahead to meet the demands
 of older people.
I've asked that group to focus on four themes. Firstly, helping
 Australians to be independent and to provide for their later years
 through employment, life-long learning and financial security. Secondly,
 delivering quality health care through new approaches to service delivery,
 co-ordinated care and independent living. Thirdly, improving attitudes
 to older people and ageing, lifestyle issues such as personal safety,
 housing, transport, recreation and community support. And fourthly,
 encouraging healthy ageing and the role of general practitioners of
 maintaining the wellbeing of older people. And I understand that that
 group will release a preliminary discussion paper in the next month
 or so with further discussion papers later in the year.
And in the area of recognising in a symbolic way the year, we're
 going to mint a commemorative coin set, we're going to print
 the commemorative stamp issue and we're going to fund a national
 touring photographic exhibition and book called Images of Our
 Elders' to promote positive images of the contribution of older
 people. And we're going to expand the Safe at Home programme
 to improve the personal and physical security of all the people living
 in their own home should the trial be successful.
And a great practical benefit will be our support for the partnership
 between the Australian Bankers Association and seniors' organisations
 to familiarise older people with automatic teller machines, electronic
 funds transfer, the Internet and telephone banking. And additional
 funding will also be provided to establish a Building Safer Communities
 programme which will target areas of community concern including burglaries,
 home invasions, assault and robbery, particularly against older people.
The Mature Age Workers Project will involve developing promotional
 material for job network members and employer associations to encourage
 them to assist older job seekers into employment.
Ladies and gentlemen, as we approach the Centenary of the Federation
 of Australia there is, I find, throughout Australia a surge of interest
 in the history of our country and a surge of interest in the contribution
 that people of different generations have made to the building of
 the modern Australia. There is a growing pride in what Australia has
 been able to achieve. There is a sense that there are now, in relation
 to some of the great historical events of our nation, of course, a
 dwindling number of Australia who had personal experience of involvement
 in them. And as we near the Centenary of Federation we have an opportunity
 to honour the contribution of all of those Australians that have made
 this country what it is today.
I want 1999 to be a year that recognises the ongoing contribution
 of mature Australians. I want it to be a year which produces, amongst
 younger Australians, a wider appreciation of the contribution of generations
 that have gone before them. I want it to be a year that recognises
 that economic and physical security are the two of most important
 things that older Australians can have. The security of a home, the
 security of a supporting family, the security of financial stability
 and adequacy and also the sense of physical safety of being able to
 walk the streets of this country in physical safety and security,
 all of those things are tremendously important.
I want to thank my ministerial colleague, Bronwyn Bishop, for the
 tremendous leadership that she's giving as the portfolio Minister
 for Aged Care. It's a new appointment and I think Bronwyn brings
 very special skills to that job and I think she will make an outstanding
 contribution through the year.
I do recognise the importance of the presence here today of my Minister
 for Sport, Jackie Kelly. The emphasis on physical activity and the
 need for Australians of all ages, and not just older Australians but
 some of the less fit younger Australians, to be more physically active
 and more physically energetic I know is something that Jackie is very
 particularly committed to.
I think 1999 will be a great opportunity to emphasise what older Australians
 have done but, more importantly than that, what older Australians
 continue to do for this country. To recognise that we are, in the
 main, a society that is lucky to enjoy longer, healthier lives, that
 the excitement that many older people derive from new careers, new
 opportunities, new experiences and new activities is something that
 is adding very greatly to the quality of life. And what they give
 back through experience and understanding and having lived through
 experiences that younger Australians have not lived through, all of
 that will go to a greater enrichment of our community.
I commend all of the organisations involved in making life better,
 more fulfilling and bringing closer links between different generations
 of Australians. I thank you very much for attending today's gathering.
 Bronwyn has a few more things to say and a few other observations
 to make about some of the activities but I know that 1999 will be
 a great year in recognising the contribution of older Australians
 to our modern Australian community.
Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Prime Minister and Mr Burton Shipley; Helen Clark, the Leader of the
 Opposition; to the members of the New Zealand Cabinet, other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I first of all, for myself and also my wife, Janette, thank you
 Jenny and Burton for your very kind hospitality. We hadn't been
 to Queenstown before. It's a lovely part of the world. I'm
 not surprised that we ran into, it seemed to be hundreds of Australian
 and English tourists. I felt on occasions as though I was engaging
 in a bit of an election campaign. I was running into all these people,
 particularly from Queensland. I really have enjoyed myself.
And can I also say that it's been an opportunity to do something
 that I regard as very important and that is to take good care of this
 very important and precious relationship. The great Dr Johnson counselled
 us all to keep our friendships in good repair. And regular meetings
 between the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand where we
 talk in a friendly but open fashion are part of that process.
Australia and New Zealand have a very rich and endearing history.
 We have shared a lot of difficult and a lot of triumphant experiences
 in the past. But it is not a relationship that should be seen in terms
 of the past only, important and precious though that is. It's
 also a relationship that has a contemporary relevance and also has
 a great future. The contemporary relevance is particularly found in
 many of our shared economic experiences. New Zealand, in many ways,
 led a lot of countries, not only Australia, in her economic reforms
 during the 1980s and the 1990s. You've had a broadly based goods
 and services tax for more than 12 years. You have a level of labour
 market deregulation which has greatly aided the economic development
 of your country. And you've also been very courageous in the
 dismantling of many of your protective barriers over the years.
Some of these things Australia has done also, others we have not done,
 others we've done in a different way. But the important thing
 is that we have a lot of shared economic experience and intelligence
 in front of us and we can all learn by each other's experience.
 I'm happy to say that the Australian economy at present is in
 a very robust state and long may it continue. But like all careful
 Prime Ministers I don't take that for granted and it needs some
 tender work, further reform and continued good government, but that
 belongs to another forum.
Can I say how much I share Mrs Shipley's commitment to broadening
 the horizons of CER. CER has been a great success but that means that
 we can look to broadening the horizons. And I also share very much
 New Zealand's commitment to a new broadly based World Trade Organisation
 round coming out of the APEC meeting.
I'm a great supporter of APEC because I believe in the end the
 living standards of the people of the APEC countries will be more
 likely enhanced if we can have freer trade within the grouping that
 comprises APEC. And it is the only grouping that brings together the
 countries of Asia, the countries of Australasia, the countries of
 North America and some countries from South America. It's a unique
 group. And its membership was enlarged at the last meeting and it
 adds to its special quality. And Australia will certainly do everything
 it can to ensure that the group receives renewed commitment out of
 the meeting in New Zealand later this year. It is a particularly important
 meeting.
Prime Minister you drew attention to the good-natured rivalries between
 our two countries. I, of course, mentioned last night at the reception
 at the High Commissioner's home the inspiration that I've
 received from the third Bledisloe Cup game at the Sydney Football
 Stadium last year when having seen that magnificent outcome I was
 so inspired that I got on a plane the next morning, journeyed to Canberra
 and advised the Governor-General to dissolve Parliament and call a
 general election. But those humourous, good-natured rivalries are
 part of a relationship that is deep. It's a relationship that
 is mature. It's a relationship that is close but it's a
 relationship that none of us should ever take for granted. And it's
 made better by the fact that although we have a lot in common we have
 our own distinctive identity and our own distinctive characteristics.
 And it's very important to respect those on both sides of the
 Tasman.
We have a number of debates about our future in Australia over the
 next few months and a variety of views are being taken. And can I
 simply say that whatever the outcome of the vote on the referendum
 in November, the essential values and fabric of the Australian community
 will remain unimpaired and untouched. The friendship between our two
 countries will remain as close as it is now.
I'm reminded by how important the future is for us, the immediate
 future, by the fact that over the next couple of years New Zealand
 will host the APEC meeting. You will host the America's Cup.
 We will have the Centenary of Federation. We'll have the Olympic
 Games. We'll have the Darvos gathering in Melbourne in the year
 2000 and we'll have the CHOGM meeting in Canberra in the year
 2001. And all of that's going to take place in the space of two
 or three years. And it's going to mean that there is a world
 focus on both our countries. And it's an opportunity for us to
 tell the world in our own particular styles what values we have in
 common and what makes our two societies so attractive. The unpretentious
 character of both New Zealand and Australian society, the relative
 physical security, the peaceful and predictable political character
 of our societies despite the heat that is properly generated in democratic
 exchange. And the fact that both of us are trying in our different
 ways to achieve, in a constructive and purposeful and well-intentioned
 fashion, a better understanding between our indigenous people and
 those who've come to our respective countries to make either
 New Zealand or Australia their home.
I thank you most warmly, Jenny, for the personal courtesy and friendship
 you've extended to me and to Janette, and to your husband Burton,
 to the great hospitality of the New Zealand Government and the New
 Zealand people. And long may that friendship which we so warmly toasted
 a few moments ago, endure.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Jim; to Mr Morgan, Brigadier Garland, other great
 contributors to the Red Cross throughout Australia, ladies and gentlemen.
The Red Cross organisation is, of course, one of the most esteemed
 and widely recognised organisations anywhere in the world. It's
 one of those remarkable groups that has survived through the years
 with its reputation for integrity, the relief of human suffering and
 service to mankind irrespective of colour, race, creed or nationality
 or political commitment. It's one of those organisations that
 has survived through the years in a quite remarkable way. And although
 historically the Red Cross was associated with the relief of suffering
 in wartime, over time it has broadened its horizons. And the way in
 which it contributes to making the lives of Australians a little easier
 and a little happier when that is needed, in a quite remarkably diverse
 manner of activities, is one of its hallmarks as we come towards the
 end of this millennium. Perhaps not many Australians would realise
 that the Red Cross played one of the major relief roles during the
 Katherine floods of last year.
The Red Cross provides a much needed early morning wake-up, hello
 call to thousands of Australians, to elderly Australians around the
 country. And as we begin this year marking the contribution of older
 Australians to our society we will discover, as we go through that
 commemoration, we will discover the contribution that the Red Cross
 has made in so many different ways.
It is an organisation that has moved with the times. It has retained
 that remarkably stark and remarkably impressive symbol of the Red
 Cross on a white background and it is one of the most easily recognisable
 symbols anywhere in the world. But it's also an organisation,
 as well as fulfilling its traditional function and its traditional
 role, has moved with the times and is providing services. And the
 fact that it will be able to gather 100,000 volunteers on the Red
 Cross Calling day which, as Jim said, first started in 1950, raised
 $5 million last year and the goal is to raise $6.3 million this year.
 And that will be raised if once again Australians respond, as they
 always have, in that great spirit of volunteerism, which is a characteristic
 of Australian societies.
One of the goals that the Government has is to build what I call a
 social coalition. Governments can't do everything on their own.
 The volunteer sector, like the Red Cross, can't do everything
 on its own. And individuals often need help in order to look after
 themselves and to look after their families and others they love.
 And the way in which you can achieve the goals that we all have is
 through a social coalition - with the Government doing its part, the
 volunteer sector doing its part, with the Government supporting the
 volunteer sector but also recognising that in a number of areas the
 volunteer sector is far better equipped to help those who need assistance
 within our community than are any agencies of the Government, and
 also to draw very heavily upon the commitment of individual Australians
 who want in their own many ways to make a contribution towards helping
 people.
Economic circumstances in Australia at the present time are good and
 many Australians are doing extremely well. Unemployment is a little
 lower than it used to be and the economic outlook for this country
 is very powerful compared with the rest of the world. But that is
 all the more reason why we should focus on those in our community
 who are not as well off. No matter how strong our national economy
 may be, no matter how well we may be doing in the eyes of the world,
 no matter how strong may be the economic outlook for Australia, we
 must remember that there are amongst us fellow Australians who are
 not doing as well. And Red Cross is directed in its own different
 ways towards relieving that suffering and that is why I commend very
 warmly to all of you and to all of the Australian people a generous-hearted
 personal response to the Red Cross Calling Appeal this year.
I want to conclude my remarks today by expressing the thanks of the
 Government to those thousands of Red Cross volunteers throughout the
 Australian community. I marvel at the willingness of so many Australians
 in an unsung, unheralded, often unremarked way to contribute to helping
 their fellow countrymen and women.
It's an organisation that is very well and efficiently run. It's
 an organisation which depends on an ongoing reputation for integrity
 and efficiency, a reputation that it's maintained through the
 decades since its formation in the 19th century. And here
 in Australia it's run by a man for whom I have a very warm personal
 regard, Jim Carlton, who runs the organisation very efficiently at
 a national secretariat level. But, very important, as he would acknowledge,
 it survives and thrives because of the volunteer efforts of thousands
 of Australians and it is those Australians to whom I express my particular
 thanks today. It is those people that have kept the Red Cross going
 and will maintain its momentum years into the future. I hope the appeal
 is successful. I hope the target of $6.3 million is not only reached
 but is exceeded. And I thank all of you for your tremendous contribution
 to such a worthy and magnificent cause. Thank you.


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Thank you very much, Trish. To you and to my Cabinet and Parliamentary
 colleagues and all the other representatives and leaders of the local
 Adelaide community. We are here today as part of a long standing practice
 of the Government and that is to ensure that when Parliament is not
 sitting our Cabinet meets around Australia and that we don't
 only meet in Canberra and occasionally in Sydney or Melbourne and
 this is not the first Cabinet meeting of this Government in Adelaide
 and it certainly won't be the last.
But today is a very special day for all of us. Today is the third
 anniversary of the election of the Government I'm very proud
 to lead on the second of March in 1996. You'll forgive me for
 saying that I thought that was a pretty intelligent decision by the
 Australian people and you'll forgive me for saying that I was
 even more impressed with their intelligence two years and eight months
 later, or seven months later, when they re-elected us on the third
 of October.
But I haven't come here to give a political speech. I want to
 say something about the strengths of Australia at the present time.
 And I want to say something about the strengths of the social coalition
 that is so important to our future and is represented here today.
 Economics is not everything, but it's very important to the capacity
 of a country to look after the less fortunate and also the capacity
 of a country to project itself to the rest of the world.
You all know that the Asian economies over the last two years have
 suffered the most fearful battering that they have experienced for
 more than a generation. And you all know that they have watched tens
 of millions of their people being thrust into absolute poverty and
 they have watched the hard won gains of twenty years disappear very
 rapidly. And through that turmoil Australia has been able to survive
 economically a lot stronger than many of our critics suggested. And
 we've even surpassed the best and most optimistic predictions
 of our own.
And I'm very proud to say as Prime Minister that over the last
 three years we have done things that have made Australia stronger.
 We have been able to get inflation and interest rates down, we've
 been able to pay our way and get rid of our debts as a nation, our
 budget deficit. But at the same time we've also been able to
 institute some very important reforms and we're in the middle
 of trying to get another very important reform through the Parliament
 which the Australian public voted for in October of last year.
Now I mention the strength of our economy not because I am not aware
 of the fact that there are still many within our community without
 a job, there are still too many in our community without a home, there
 is too many people, particularly young people who are addicted to
 drugs and there is still much unhappiness and much distress within
 our community.
But I mention our strengths because it is important we never lose
 sight of the need to think in positive terms about Australia's
 future. We have a tendency in this country to accentuate negatives
 and to denigrate achievement rather than to draw a certain amount
 of pride in what Australia has been able to do. And as we move towards
 the centenary of the foundation of the Australian nation, the Centenary
 of Federation, more and more Australians are going to draw upon the
 things that bind us together and draw upon the success and the achievements
 of our nation.
But we must in the process of doing that understand and respect that
 there are still many in our community who are vulnerable and who are
 weak and need our understanding and our help. They need it in a practical
 and a compassionate way. But they also need it in a way that gathers
 in the rest of the Australian community. And one of the goals that
 I've set the Government in its second term is to build in a more
 effective way what I choose to call a social coalition within our
 community. The Government is a coalition, it's a coalition between
 two political parties. And a coalition is something where two organisations
 join together to achieve a common objective. And the social coalition
 that I seek to build more effectively in the Australian community,
 is one that brings together the Government, it brings together the
 energy and the zeal and the commitment of individuals. And it brings
 together the private and the welfare sector of our community.
None of us can achieve it on our own. The Government is incapable
 and inadequate to the task of solving every social problem on its
 own. It has neither the expertise or all of the resources or all of
 the understanding to do that. It is equally true to say that individuals
 on their own, whilst they can solve most problems, indeed many problems,
 and the great bulk of them are very self sufficient, adequate people,
 able to live their lives and to care for themselves and their loved
 ones very effectively even they from time to time need help. They
 can't solve things on their own.
And the great welfare sector of our community, so magnificently represented
 here today by so many organisations, which does a marvellous job,
 it can't solve all of our social and human problems on its own.
 And what you need in the community is an effective social coalition.
 You need the Government doing its bit. You need individuals making
 their contribution, being self sufficient, accepting responsibility,
 accepting that it is now increasingly part and parcel of our community
 that there is a mutual obligation. Society should look after the less
 fortunate and equally those who are able to give something back in
 return for that support should be asked in an appropriate way to do
 something for that support. And we also, of course, need to enlist
 the aid of the welfare sector with their particular understanding
 of the human implications of deprivation and vulnerability in our
 community.
And in so many areas the Government is endeavouring to do it. We have
 had a lot of debate recently about the issue of drugs in our society.
 Can I say to you the Government acting alone can't solve that
 problem whether it's the Federal Government or the State government
 or all of us working together. We need the particular understanding
 of many of the organisations represented here today who deal first
 hand with the human misery that is involved in drug taking. We need
 the understanding and the cooperation of the medical profession. We
 need the goodwill and the cooperation of our police and it's
 important whenever we are thinking of community problems to acknowledge
 the very difficult role of our law enforcement agencies. They are
 too often denigrated by unthinking people who want police when they
 need help but are only too ready to blame them when they don't
 feel particularly vulnerable or to need assistance. And what we must
 do increasingly within our community is to build a more effective
 social Coalition because we live in an age and a society where none
 of us operating alone can achieve the goals that we want for our community.
There is an acceptance in Australian society that in order to build
 an effective and harmonious community we need a strong economy. We
 need strong businesses and we need an economic climate where people
 are encouraged to make money and are properly rewarded when they are
 successful. We need low inflation, we need low interest rates and
 we need a climate of risk taking and a climate of entrepreneurialship
 within our society. Because it is that climate and it is the product
 of that attitude that gives us the wherewithal to provide the programmes
 to assist the less fortunate within our community.
But all of us have an obligation to each other. The Government has
 responsibilities to those who elect us, we have responsibilities as
 individual Australians to our neighbours and as community organisations
 we have obligations to help the less fortunate within our community.
 But my message to you today is very much that this gathering represents
 the ideal of the social coalition that we seek to build for a more
 effective, a more prosperous and a more harmonious and more humane
 Australian community. It brings together men and women in business.
 It brings the leaders of the great welfare organisation, it brings
 local government, it brings your magnificent local Federal Member,
 who I will come back to in a moment, and it also brings together individuals
 who have made their mark in so many different ways within the community.
And I am delighted that all of my Cabinet colleagues are with me today
 and can I pay a particular...make a particular mention of Alexander
 Downer, one of the Cabinet Ministers from here in Adelaide who over
 the last week in particular has done an absolutely magnificent job
 as Australia's Foreign Minister in dealing with a very difficult
 and a very important issue of East Timor. An issue that is going to
 consume the attention and the resources and the time of the Government
 very significantly over the next few months.
So I want to thank all of you for coming here today, for giving me
 the opportunity of saying a few words about why we are here, what
 we want for Australia over the next three years reflecting for a moment
 on some of the Government's achievements over the past three
 years and projecting forward to some of the things that we hope to
 achieve over the next three years.
This has all been made possible because you do have an extremely hardworking
 and effective local Member in Trish Worth. I don't think it's
 a particularly controversial political statement for me to say that
 Adelaide is not the easiest seat for either side of politics to hold.
 But it is a marginal seat and Trish has done an absolutely fantastic
 job in winning it on three occasions. And she campaigned magnificently
 and gave a great source of pride and satisfaction to all of us on
 the night and, indeed, the days following the last election in October
 of last year. But she is a quintessential local Member who is in touch
 with her community who knows them all, who understands what they are
 concerned about, has an instinctive feel for human problems and somebody
 who brings a quality of representation which I think impresses both
 sides of politics.
And there are men and women in Parliament from all political shades
 who demonstrate that great capacity and she is one of them. I congratulate
 her for that, I thank her for organising today's luncheon and
 can I say on behalf of all of my Cabinet colleagues who are here in
 Adelaide today, thanks for having us and thank you all for the contribution
 that you are making to building a better Australian community.
Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Peter McGauran. To Dr Bob Edwards, Andrew
 Sayers, to Gordon and Marilyn Darling, my other Parliamentary colleagues,
 Kevin Newman, the Chairman of the Old Parliament House Council, other
 distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman. Janette and I have had
 the opportunity of a, albeit brief inspection of the exhibition and
 I can only express to you a sense of excitement about the quality
 of the exhibition and a sense of excitement about tonight. It is an
 important event in the cultural life of Australia. It's an important
 event in the history of our nation. We join only three other nations
 that have national portrait galleries. Those in Washington, London
 and Edinburgh. And this gallery expresses the history and the experience
 of the Australian people in so many ways. And it is appropriate that
 it be located here in the Old Parliament House.
To many Australians Old Parliament House provided portraits of a certain
 group of Australians. We looked upon it for so many years as the centre
 of politics and of national life from a government point of view in
 our nation. Just over a year ago when we had the Constitutional Convention
 here it displayed yet a more diverse group of Australians, each offering
 in their own way a passionate view about the future of this country.
 And I think it is entirely appropriate and I'm so pleased that
 the decision was taken that the National Portrait Gallery should be
 located here. And I do want to take the opportunity of paying particular
 tribute to the energy and the zeal and the vision of Marilyn and Gordon
 Darling because without that energy and zeal and that commitment it
 would have simply remained a set of dreams and a vision rather than
 the fulfillment which is brought to us tonight.
I certainly share the view of others that we are particularly privileged
 to have Andrew Sayers as the gallery director. The way in which people
 have spoken so warmly and positively of his contribution to the gallery
 and his understanding of what is needed to turn it into a first class
 attraction and first class manifestation of Australian culture is
 well deserved.
All of us like to collect portraits of our loved ones and through
 the years we've done it in different ways. We've done it
 through what are now faded photographs on mantlepieces, and in albums,
 and in drawers. We've done it through home movies and more recently
 through home videos. And just as we collect portraits of our own lives
 and we collect portraits of those we love, so this gallery houses
 the portraits of those who've loved Australia in a special way
 and have made a contribution to Australia in a special way. It is
 a gallery that recognises excellence. It's also a gallery that
 recognises the ordinary and the typical and that is how it should
 be as a gallery which is designed for all of the Australian community.
This gallery will take its place alongside some of the other great
 cultural institutions of our nation. We are all conscious as we approach
 the centenary of the Federation of our nation, that where ever we
 come from in Australia, and whatever view we have about the nature
 of the Australian nation and the character of the Australian people
 , we have a gathering pride of growing intensity in the history of
 our nation and of what this country has achieved. And this gallery
 will offer to its visitors a snapshot of that through the images and
 the portraits of so many Australians who in so many different ways,
 of infinitely various ways, have made a contribution.
The Government has provided very strong financial support to Old Parliament
 House and through that to the National Portrait Gallery. It is without
 doubt one of the best investments this Government has made. I really
 am very excited about what I've seen tonight. I'm not only
 excited about the concept, I'm very excited about the reality
 of it.
I do want to thank people who've made contributions, from the
 corporate sector who've made contributions to the gallery. I
 want to encourage others also to make contributions. You may have
 heard me before on the subject of partnerships and coalitions between
 governments and the corporate sector in achieving good public outcomes.
 And I do thank those who've invested and supported it. I particularly
 again very warmly thank Marilyn and Gordon for their contribution.
 And Janette and I remember very well that afternoon in Washington
 in July of 1997 when they accompanied us on a tour of the National
 Portrait Gallery in Washington, and all the while making some entirely
 appropriate, and can I say highly effective comments. Highly effective
 comments about the value of national portrait galleries and how valuable
 they are for the esteem of the Government's who's during
 whose term they are opening, and he did it very well and he did it
 very very eloquently.
So to you Marilyn and Gordon, to Dr Edwards, to Andrew Sayers, to
 all the other members of the Council of the National Gallery, thank
 you for your contribution to this great Australian institution. Thank
 you for contributing to something that will give us a particular sense
 of the luster and the achievement of our nation and of the quality
 of the people who've contributed to its history and to its success.
 It is therefore with particular pleasure that I declare open the National
 Portrait Gallery of Australia. Thank you.


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well, I'd like to thank my colleague David Kemp for that introduction.
 To my other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, and to the members
 of the Youth Roundtable.
I simply want as Prime Minister to welcome you and to thank you for
 participating in what is really a first as far as the national Government
 is concerned. We decided on a roundtable as a method of distilling
 some of the views of young Australians. I guess those members of the
 roundtable here today have discovered what we Members of Parliament
 discovered when we first came to this and the predecessor building
 and that is that our strongly held views on particular issues must
 be mixed with the equally strongly held views of our parliamentary
 colleagues.
We will find out of the roundtable the great opportunity and stimulus
 of hearing the varied views of young Australians. We are not looking,
 nor are we expecting, a single voice from you on each and every important
 issue. Rather, we recognise that you have been drawn from different
 sections of the Australian community to reflect the tremendous diversity
 of our nation. You gather, of course, at an increasingly exciting
 time in Australia's history. You are fortunate, and we as Members
 of Parliament are fortunate, that we have the opportunity to reflect
 upon the past history of our country and also contemplate future opportunities
 for our nation on an occasion where we are about to end one millennium
 and start another. And where importantly for the Australian community
 we are about to celebrate 100 years of the federation of Australia.
 And as the months ahead of us go by all Australians both young and
 old will increasingly feel a sense of history and a sense of participating
 in some very memorable moments and some very memorable occasions.
Every generation of Australians, of course, is different. Every generation
 of Australians is born into different circumstances and the current
 generation of young Australians is no different in that sense. You
 are born into a society which in so many ways is infinitely superior
 to the society in which earlier generations were born. But also you
 are born into a society which in other ways is very different and
 in some respects less stable than earlier societies.
I am very much on the side of the optimists both about current generations
 of Australians and about their future prospects. You almost uniquely
 of the generations of this century are growing up, and have grown
 up, reaching full adulthood at a time when there is a markedly less
 ideological divide both throughout the world and within the Australian
 community than used to be the case. You are, of course, the first
 generation of Australians to benefit fully from the wonders of information
 technology. And you will participate like no other Australian generation
 as the years go by in the flow through benefits of that remarkable
 epoch in the history and the experience of the world. You are also,
 of course, participating in a world that has long since put behind
 it issues related to nuclear annihilation . I perhaps even wonder
 whether the issue has even come up in any of your discussions over
 the last couple of days. Yet 15 years ago, indeed 10 years ago it
 would have been almost inconceivable that a youth round table could
 have taken place without that issue perhaps dominating all of the
 discussions like no other. That is an example of some of the different
 challenges that are faced. Today's young people of course are
 very different from young people of earlier generations. Yet as in
 all things there is a continuity.
There is a continuity of certain values. The importance we all place
 on our families, the importance we place on our personal relationships,
 the importance we place on job security, the importance we place on
 a sense of fairness and a sense of decency and a sense of justice.
 And as Australians we seek to find that in our different ways. We
 approach it in different perspectives and you will have had displayed
 before you over the last few days the different perspectives of both
 the Government parties and the opposition parties.
But despite some of our different perspectives we do share a lot in
 common. We do want a society of greater opportunity and greater hope.
 I think young people are looking for believable solutions to problems.
 I don't think any of us imagined that any government of any ideology,
 or pattern of belief or thought has all of the answers to all of the
 world's problems. I think our expectations about what governments
 can realistically achieve are in better dimension now then perhaps
 they were a generation ago. And increasingly I find young Australians
 looking for believable, understandable solutions to tangible problems
 and tangible challenges.
The young of Australia today of course are not the compulsive of joiners
 of institutions and organisations that was the wont of their forebears.
 And political parties are no different than other organisations in
 having to work harder to attract active recruits. It is a challenge
 faced by all organisations throughout Australia and I guess throughout
 the western world.
Today's young Australians are also a group of people who delightfully
 can keep their options open to the very last moment in a way that
 earlier generations of Australians found far more difficult. And as
 somebody who co-habitates with three young Australians who occupy
 the age cohort represented by the members of the round table today,
 none of the more remarkable of the experiences that I have on a daily
 basis is the capacity of people in that age group to keep their options
 on virtually anything open until the very last moment. And it is something
 that I very greatly envy and I think members of older age cohorts
 of Australians greatly envy.
Can I welcome all of you to the national capital. Can I express to
 all of you as representatives of young Australia a simple pride in
 my country and your country, a simple belief that Australia remains
 without question the greatest country in the world in which to live.
 A nation that has not been without its blemishes and a nation that
 has not been without its grievous errors and its grievous mistakes.
 But a nation that nonetheless is fairer, freer, more egalitarian,
 more open hearted, and more fundamentally dec
ent, than any nation on Earth, and a nation which I know we are all
 very proud to call our own. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE.................................................................................................
Thank you very much, to General Hartley, to Mr Owen Campbell, all
 of the other members of the mission, ladies and gentlemen.
Janette and I are particularly privileged to have the opportunity
 of being here today in this marvellous and very historic military
 surrounding, Victoria Barracks, to formally, on behalf of the Government
 and through it the Australian people, to wish the Sandakan Mission
 well, to say a few words about the importance of a nation honouring
 and remembering those who made our freedom possible and to express
 good wishes to all of those in the pilgrimage. And to say how delighted
 we are that this is an opportunity, although it commemorates a tragic,
 a terribly tragic event, how delighted we are that it's an opportunity
 for old friends and old comrades and their families to come together
 for a few days and to reflect upon the tremendous privilege it is
 to live in Australia as we come towards the end of this century.
There are many things that have been written about Sandakan and there
 are many things that can be said about it. It was, like so many events
 in a terrible war, an awful tragedy. There was an added poignancy
 about it because so many of those terrible events took place within
 a bare few weeks of the end of hostilities in World War II. And the
 suffering of the men who endured those terrible deeds is, to the present
 generation of Australians, hard to envisage and hard to understand,
 just as the suffering of those who died on the Burma-Thailand Railway
 and, indeed, of any Australians who died defending this country in
 all the wars in which we have been involved.
It is one of the more encouraging signs of our national life but as
 we come towards the end of this century there is a growing instinct
 and a growing desire on the part of all generations of Australians,
 and most particularly younger Australians, to remember those events
 that have made our present life possible - to give thanks to those
 people who laid down their lives to make Australia free. And there
 is a greater reverence and a greater respect as the years go by for
 those men and those women for what they did and for what those deeds
 represented. And whereas 50 years ago there were sometimes arguments
 about the place of ANZAC Day in our life, as every year goes by it
 becomes more hallowed and more revered and increasingly it is seen
 in the eyes of all Australians as holding a special significance beyond
 any other day in our national life.
And I want to say to all of the men and women who were so involved
 in the events that you will remember over the days ahead that a grateful
 nation will never forget your contribution. They will always remember
 that without that contribution we would not enjoy the incredible freedom
 and the great prosperity and the great privilege of living in Australia
 today.
As I wandered around today I've renewed acquaintanceships and
 friendships with a number of the returned servicemen who are going
 on the mission, some of which, in my own journey through life I've
 come into contact with in other circumstances. I think of Alan Loxton
 who tried to teach me the vagaries of criminal law at Sydney University
 in 1957, of Jim Millner who I've met on many occasions around
 the city of Sydney. And I understand that in Father Rogers we have
 the sole surviving chaplain now of the 8th Division of
 the Australian Army in World War II. And one could tell a special
 personal story about every member of this mission and most particularly
 of course, Mr Campbell, who has a very special place in the membership
 of this gathering.
This is not a mission that celebrates the triumphalism that some people
 wrongly associate with military victory. It's a mission that
 remembers, it's a mission that expresses gratitude and it's
 a mission that says on behalf of a grateful nation how indebted we
 are to the people who suffered and died. But it's also a reminder
 to us that life has gone on and it's a reminder to us that out
 of the terrible bitterness and the slaughter and the evil of World
 War II Australia, since then, has forged new relationships, new friendships
 and a new future with the people of the Asian Pacific region.
We are entitled to always, and we must always remember, the injustices
 of war. We should never shrink from the historical truth of how war
 began and we should never ever yield in our determination to remember
 the deeds and the sacrifices of the men and women who died in war.
 But the best way in which we can do that and the best way that we
 can honour them is of course to build a lasting peace and secure relationships
 with the nations of our region.
Can I say on behalf of the Government how immensely proud we are of
 the men and women of our armed services today, very much in the news
 over the last 48 hours and properly so. They are very much the equal
 of the task that continues to be upon them as they have been in the
 past.
And finally can I say, on behalf of the Government of Australia to
 all the members of the mission, I wish you well. I hope it is a time
 of positive reflection. An occasion naturally to remember with sadness
 and trauma the loss of so many mates in such terrible circumstances
 but also an opportunity to celebrate the miracle of life for all of
 us and for our families and the wonderful existence we have in Australia
 today and the wonderful future that lies ahead of our nation. To all
 of those who fought for our nation I say thank you. To those who died
 for our nation on the nation's behalf I honour them. They shall
 always be in our hearts.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much Michael Osborne; to Jeff Kennett, the Premier
 of Victoria; to Kate Carnell; to George Souris, the Leader of the
 National Party in New South Wales; Tony Staley, the Federal President
 of the Liberal Party, and my numerous State and Federal parliamentary
 colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Today we really enter the crucial and decisive period of this State
 election campaign. Today represents the countdown to the vote that
 will be taken on the 27th of March. And in the nature of
 modern politics it is what happens over the next two weeks that is
 going to determine the outcome of this election.
And let me say as a long time friend and admirer, as the Leader of
 the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, I have every confidence and
 every belief that Kerry Chikarovski can not only win this election
 but go on to be a very fine Premier of New South Wales. She has the
 style, she has the personality, she has the understanding of life
 and the experience of life that are the ingredients of a very fine
 leader of the State of New South Wales. But she's also pitted
 against a man and a government which has demonstrated in two very
 key areas the utter hypocrisy of the Labor Government that New South
 Wales now has.
For two-and-a-half years we were told by Mr Carr and Mr Egan that
 it was crucial to the future of this State that we should privatise
 the power industry of this State, yet now it is the subject of ridicule
 and derision. But can anybody imagine that if by chance Labor were
 returned they wouldn't immediately repudiate what they had said
 on this subject during the election campaign, just as Mr Keating and
 Mr Beazley broke their commitments not to privatise the Commonwealth
 Bank. But even more glaring in the hypocrisy stakes is Mr Carr's
 embracing of the goal of lower unemployment and of economic growth.
 I have now been Prime Minister of Australia for just over three years
 and I can report to you that every attempt made by the Coalition Government
 to repair the Australian economy and thereby repair the economy of
 New South Wales has been opposed by Bob Carr and opposed by Kim Beazley.
 Both of them opposed the budget cuts to get the budget back into surplus.
 Both of them have opposed taxation reform. Both of them opposed industrial
 relations reform. Both of them opposed privatisation. Both of them
 opposed the microeconomic reform that has made the Australian economy
 and through it the New South Wales economy more competitive. Yet now
 on the eve of this election Bob Carr seeks to bask in the sunlight
 of the economic strength delivered through policies that he's
 opposed for the last three years. And that is a measure of the hypocrisy
 and, therefore, one of the things that have got to be put into judgement
 and have got to be put into balance.
Now, I've known most of you in this great auditorium of a great
 club for a very long time. We've been through many election campaigns
 together. We've won a lot. We've lost a few. We share a
 common political faith and we share a common political cause. And
 over the next two weeks I want all of you to understand that in modern
 elections it is the last days, the last weeks, that really count.
 This election can be won and won very convincingly if we focus on
 the main issues. If all of us work hard over the next two weeks, if
 all of us realise that in Kerry we have a marvellous, thoughtful,
 sensitive person to lead this State into the next millennium. We have
 a strong Coalition. We have a good team. We have a great set of policies.
 We are against a government and a party that has elevated political
 hypocrisy to an art form.
I pledge, on behalf of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues, our total
 support, our total commitment to the election of Kerry as Premier
 of New South Wales and George Souris as Deputy Premier of New South
 Wales. Right here in the St George area of Sydney, which has always
 been at the knife-edge of politics both State and Federal, an important
 contest is taking place.
But, ladies and gentlemen, will you now join me in welcoming Kerry
 Chikarovski, the Leader of the Liberal Party, the person we want as
 the next Premier of New South Wales. Will you welcome, Kerry Chikarovski.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Michael. Only seems like yesterday that I
 was at this podium leading up to an event in October and it was a
 great event. It was a great outcome. Pretty sound decision by the
 Australian people. And it's a great delight for me to be here
 today to say a few words in support of somebody I've known for
 a long time, and I admire immensely, and who I believe has the intelligence
 and the character and the values to be a very fine Premier of New
 South Wales.
A few days ago I was talking to somebody and he said: John, tell me
 why we should change the government in New South Wales? You blokes
 are doing a very good job of running the economy nationally. I said
 that I agreed with that. And he said: that's flowing through
 so why would we change the government in New South Wales? And I said
 to him that the reason that we should change the government in New
 South Wales was that in a nation like Australia of federation where
 responsibilities are divided between the national government and the
 various State governments, no matter how good the Federal government
 was, unless its deeds and its leadership were matched at a State level
 by purposeful State governments then the kind of long term changes
 and improvements that we all think are necessary would not be realised.
 And reality is that there are tremendously important on going responsibilities
 at a State level that are important to the well being of a society.
 Indeed the things that touch the [inaudible] of our lives. The strength
 of the policing services, safety in the home, safety on the streets,
 safety on trains late at night, the quality of our government schools,
 the quality of our hospitals.
All of those things are overwhelmingly the responsibility of State
 governments. And it's also the responsibility of State governments
 to run their economies well. They can't leave it all to the Federal
 government. And you need the combination of the two. And you need
 State governments that are prepared to tackle head on the difficult
 issues that confront State governments.
And the reason why undoubtedly in my mind the best run State government
 in Australia at present, that is the Kennett Government in Victoria,
 the reason that is so successful is that it's had the courage
 since it was elected in 1992 to tackle issues that are important to
 that State and which can't be solved by the Federal government.
 They've tackled the problem of State debt, and they've done
 so by recognising that governments are no longer good in the modern
 age at running business enterprises. And that if governments get out
 of those business enterprises and sell interest in them to the ordinary
 public and the ordinary consumer, there are dividends and improvements
 all round and there is the wherewithal the cash to pay for much needed
 government infrastructure and much needed provision for hospitals
 and schools and all the other things that are important.
And my first and greatest criticism of the present New South Wales
 Government is that it has really not tackled any of those fundamental
 issues. We all know that Mr Carr and Mr Egan for two-and-a-half years
 told us that the only thing that really mattered was the privatisation
 of New South Wales's power industry. And you all know that in
 the end that got rolled over, big time by the unions who told them
 it simply wasn't on. And instead of standing up and continuing
 to fight for what they believed was in the long term interest of the
 State, they simply went over into a corner and wimped it and now have
 the audacity to criticise the Coalition for committing itself to something
 which they themselves know in their hearts is the right thing to do.
 And just as Mr Beazley opposed something at the last Federal election
 that he knew in his heart was needed and necessary and which he supported
 when he was a member of the Hawke and Keating Governments, so it is
 the case that Mr Carr and Mr Egan are opposing something that they
 know deep down is needed in the long term interests, not only of electricity
 generation in this State but also in the interests of getting rid
 of $18.5 billion of State debt.
And of course to make matters worse we now have the New South Wales
 Government quite literally claiming credit for the strength of the
 New South Wales economy. They're running around saying: oh the
 economy in New South Wales is getting better. It is getting better
 but it's getting better off the back of the leadership that we
 have shown at a Federal level. And it's getting better in spite
 of the course of Mr Carr, because Mr Carr along with Mr Beazley and
 other Labor leaders around Australia have opposed all of the major
 reforms that the Coalition Government has carried out federally since
 we came to power in 1996. They opposed every attempt we made to get
 rid of Mr Beazley's deficit of $10.5 billion. They opposed industrial
 relations reform. When we set about reforming the Australian waterfront,
 [inaudible] stop that reform. He wasn't putting up his hand in
 favour of reform. When we introduced taxation reform he opposed it.
 Through his public service he has sought to obstruct the spread of
 the Work For The Dole scheme through public enterprises in New South
 Wales. He has tried to obstruct microeconomic reform in this State
 prompted at a national level.
At every turn you have a Labor Government in New South Wales being
 uncooperative in trying to obstruct the flow through of national economic
 reform and national economic leadership. And yet for the purposes
 of this election campaign he sets, as I said yesterday, to bask in
 the sunlight of the strong economic conditions created by the very
 policies that he with Mr Beazley have opposed since March of 1996.
He talks about the 4% unemployment rate. A mission impossible in this
 State with the sort of policies that he espouses and the policies
 that he supports. I'm very proud of the fact that the Australian
 economy is now the strongest it has been for a quarter of a century.
 I'm very proud of the fact that we have delivered the lowest
 interest rates in 30 years, we have delivered the lowest inflation
 in decades. We are seen throughout the world as having come through
 the Asian economic downturn in remarkably strong shape. I'm proud
 of that and all Australians should be proud of it but I want to make
 it very clear that all of that has been done with virtually no help,
 no cooperation and no understanding from Labor either at a Federal
 level or at a State level.
It may be a political game to always oppose what your opponents do.
 It may make good short term politics. But in the long run you do get
 marks from the Australian people for quality policies, for quality
 attitudes and for quality government. We won the last Federal election
 because we had a plan for Australia's future. We won the last
 Federal election because people felt deep down that we were addressing
 something that needed to be addressed. And we will go on winning elections
 nationally if we continue to espouse that philosophy. And the reason
 why Federal Labor is worried at present and is looking more and more
 lacking in policy vision is that it played politics for three years.
 May have scored a few short term points, may have embarrassed us on
 various occasions. But in the end the Australian people decided to
 stay with us because they thought we were tackling the things that
 really mattered as far as Australia was concerned. And that's
 the test. And that's the test that I want the people of New South
 Wales to apply over the next two weeks.
And Rod McGeoch was absolutely right when he said that this election
 campaign has only really begun in the last 48 hours. People don't
 engage quickly in the lead up to election campaigns. They engage even
 less quickly in the lead up in to State election campaigns than they
 do to Federal ones. Now what happens over the next two weeks will
 decide whether we have a Coalition Government led by Kerry Chikarovski,
 or we continue with the Labor Government that is prepared to ride
 on our coat tails when it suits them but is not prepared to give any
 kind of political support to what we're doing that's delivered
 those conditions.
Kerry's team does have a plan. We do need to privatise the electricity
 generation system because only by doing that will be able to pay off
 $18.5 billion of public debt and give ourselves as a State the resources
 to do other things. And she does have a plan in relation to so many
 other issues.
And I want to say as a friend and supporter of hers for a long time,
 I admire her greatly. I think she has enormous style, intelligence
 and grit and determination. I think she represents a directness of
 speech, she represents a directness of attitude and a concern with
 the interests and the aspirations and the hopes of what one might
 loosely call the mainstream of this State. I think she's not
 only a very fine leader of the Coalition, I think she'll make
 an extremely fine Premier of New South Wales. Will you please welcome
 Kerry Chikarovski.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well thank you very much for those words of welcome and it is nice
 to be back. And I've come here today to announce that the Federal
 Government will provide financial support for the activities of the
 Integrated Cancer Programme which of course is a joint activity of
 the Centenary Institute and the Cancer Centre. There is no audience
 in Australia better aware of the fact that cancer leaves virtually
 no family in our nation unaffected. And although medical advances
 have contributed immeasurably to the relief of suffering from cancer
 and the longevity of life of people affected by cancer, much more
 needs to be done. And in recognition of that, successive federal governments
 of both political persuasions have given assistance to a variety of
 programmes.
The National Cancer Control Initiative was announced by the present
 Government in the last budget. We've provided new funding for
 prostate and other cancers, continuing funding of the National Breast
 Cancer Centre, and the National Screening Programme for breast and
 cervical cancer. And through the National Health and Medical Research
 Council we provide $23 million in the current year for cancer research.
But I want to announce today that the Commonwealth Government will
 provide support for a new programme to implement that approach in
 Australia. And the programme will undertake laboratory and clinical
 research and apply those results through
 multi-disciplinary cancer treatment and education. As you know the
 proposal for the Integrated Cancer Programme comes from the partnership
 between the Sydney Cancer Centre and the Centenary Institute. And
 the programme will provide an integrated research and care role for
 cancer sufferers and move cancer research in Australia into the next
 century.
The partnership between these two groups is well established and well
 known. The centre was established in January 1996 at the Royal Prince
 Alfred, King George V, and Concord Hospitals. And the centre is the
 largest cancer treating centre in Australia, admitting in excess of
 22,000 cancer patients and treating over 70,000 out-patients every
 year.
The institute was established in 1985 to commemorate 100 years of
 research and clinical excellence at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and
 the University of Sydney Medical School. And the institute was established
 to provide both New South Wales and Australia with a research centre
 of excellence at the forefront of advances in prevention, diagnosis
 and treatment of life threatening diseases including cancer.
The Integrated Cancer Programme has been established as a joint venture
 between those two groups to bring together an optimal mix of basic
 cancer research, applied laboratory research and clinical research.
 And more importantly this mix will allow the rapid introduction of
 new cancer research discoveries to be directly applied to the clinical
 care of patients fighting cancer. And the sight chosen has close links
 with the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Sydney, as well
 as to population, health, cancer screening, high technology imaging
 and the NHMRC Clinical Trials Unit.
The laboratory based cancer research will deliberately focus on existing
 areas of research showing the greatest promise for significant advances
 in the understanding and the treatment of cancer. And these will include
 genetic changes leading to cancer cell growth, a gene therapy programme
 to identify abnormal genes, and ways to circumvent cancer cell resistance
 to anti-cancer drugs.
There will be close monitoring of the results of new treatments identified
 by research. And the Cancer Clinical Trials Programme will develop
 and evaluate new cancer therapies on a large scale in partnership
 with international cancer organsiations and the pharmaceutical industry.
 And this will include world-wide acquisition of the most promising
 new anti-cancer products. The injection of federal funding will allow
 the Integrated Cancer Programme to continue to develop this approach
 and to recruit back to Australia high profile Australian cancer specialists
 and researchers currently working overseas.
I'm delighted that in the past year, six world leading Australian
 cancer specialists have been successfully recruited to work in the
 new Integrated Cancer Programme. And the Commonwealth is providing
 initial support to this very worthwhile venture to ensure that cancer
 sufferers have access to the best and latest available treatments.
 We believe that following this initial Commonwealth investment that
 the success of the venture will encourage funding from other funding
 agencies and from commercial and international pharmaceutical and
 biotechnology companies.
Cancer, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, is a disease that
 touches just about every Australian family and has a major impact
 on sufferers and those close to them. It touches us all and the Integrated
 Cancer Programme devised by the institute and the centre seeks to
 relieve some of that suffering.
The total cost of this very worthy endeavor is $6 million. The Commonwealth
 announces today federal funding of $3 million and I have every reason
 to believe that this will be matched by the New South Wales Government
 so that the total amount will be made available. Ladies and gentleman,
 this is in every sense of the well worn but very apt expression, a
 very worthy endeavor.
I have long said that Australia has scientists, medical researchers,
 doctors, and others working in the area of preventative health, in
 the area of treatment and the area of the relief of suffering which
 are not exceeded in ability by people anywhere in the world. The 21st
 century will be very much a century in which those who are at the
 forefront of research, and most importantly those who are able to
 match the results of research immediately with clinical treatment,
 will be those who will make the greatest contribution to the relief
 of human suffering.
The intellectual capital of Australia is one of its most precious
 assets. Sometimes in the past we have not done enough to preserve
 it and we have not done enough to fully exploit it and take full advantage
 of it, not only for the benefit of our citizens but also for the benefit
 of the citizens of the world. I admire the work of people who work
 in any field of research. I admire those who work in the medical profession
 in Australian and I admire the work of this institute and of this
 centre. And I hope the announcement I have made today lays the foundation
 for ongoing support both at a State Government and a private sector
 level for what is a project that I believe will bring great relief
 of suffering and will provide an inspiration to the research efforts
 of many Australians and will continue the process of people of great
 ability previously enticed overseas, returning to work in their homeland
 and to give to Australia the benefits of their great intellectual
 and research capacity. Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Mr President, to Ms Sile de Valera, your
 grace Bishop Stewart, Pat McNamara, Ivan Deveson the Lord Mayor of
 Melbourne, the other many distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I really do regard it as quite a privilege and a pleasure to have
 the opportunity of saying a few words on this St Patrick's Day
 1999. It is really understating the history of this country and it's
 misunderstanding the temper and the mood and the passions of the Australian
 people to see the Irish contribution as merely being one of yet another
 immigrant group.
Of all the many tributaries that have shaped the mighty river which
 is the modern Australia none in a sense has been more distinctive
 and more important than the contribution of the Irish to this country.
 The Irish inheritance is part of the modern Australian identity. It
 has brought many things to Australia, it has contributed in many distinctive
 ways. It is impossible, for example, to hear the sort of music that
 we have heard this morning and not realise the enormous contribution
 that is made to shaping music in this country. It is impossible to
 think of the footballing passion of this city, for example, without
 acknowledging its Irish ancestry in part. And I say that as a rather
 devoted rugby follower myself it is impossible to think of what the
 shape of Australian politics would be like without understanding the
 Irish contribution, and I'll come to that in a moment.
And one of the captivating, indeed endearing, things about being an
 Australian in 1999 is that as we approach the Centenary of the Federation
 of our nation all of us are reflecting more and more on what made
 us as we are today. And all of us are coming together in celebrating
 our history and part of that celebration, a massive part of it, must,
 of course, be to acknowledge the Irish contribution. You have heard
 it all before some 35 to 40 per cent of Australians claim an Irish
 ancestry and do it proudly. In my own case, my maternal great grandmother
 was born in County Westmeath and my paternal great grandfather was
 born in Portadown in County Armagh. A fairly familiar pattern of so
 many Australians.
And the Irish have really been part of the Australian story now for
 more than 200 years. And they have become, and their culture, their
 attitudes, their passions, their way of life has become inseparably
 part of the Australian way of life. When Mary McAleese, the Irish
 President, was in Australia early this year the only person, I said
 at her welcome luncheon, that had the capacity to interrupt an Australian
 election campaign which she did late in September of last year. She
 spoke of the natural affinity that exists between our two countries.
But, of course, when we think of Ireland and we think of Australia
 we don't only think of it nostalgically and romantically we also,
 and historically, we also think of it of course in contemporary terms.
 And today Ireland is a modern thriving successful economy. It is indeed
 an economy with probably the fastest economic growth in the European
 Union. It is an economy that has been transformed over the last 20
 years. It has defied the critics. I first visited Ireland in 1977,
 I went as an Australian Minister for special trade negotiations. I
 was trying to get a better trade deal for Australian produce in what
 was then the European common market and I got pretty lean pickings
 just about everywhere I went to every capital. And at that time the
 Irish economy was really struggling. And I remember talking to the
 then Prime Minister, I think it was Mr Lynch, about some of the challenges
 of the Irish economy. But since then things have changed and have
 changed enormously and I am delighted as I know all Australians who
 have an affection for Ireland and the Irish contribution to this country's
 history and current day being I am delighted that the incredible success
 that the Irish economy has achieved in recent times.
We honour, as Australians, the contribution of the Irish to the history
 of this country. We recognise that it has not always been an experience
 free of discrimination and intolerance. Like all societies through
 the 20th Century we went through our experiences of the
 divisions of sectarianism within our community. And for more than
 100 years the Irish in Australia who were overwhelmingly catholic
 have suffered the discrimination of being forced to pay for the education
 of their children in their faith. And I am very proud, of course,
 that that well known member of the Melbourne Scotts and self declared
 humble Presbyterian, Robert Menzies, more than anybody else brought
 to an end that discrimination.
And now Australia probably has a system of openness and tolerance
 and freedom of choice in relation to the education of its children
 second to none anywhere in the world. And we have all moved on from
 that and we all hope as the Minister said that the fragile peace process,
 and it is fragile, we were reminded again only this morning our television
 bulletins that the mad men and women on both sides of the argument
 are still to be found and those people are to be shunned and the example
 of those two great Nobel Prize winners, John Hume and David Trimble
 are to be very much admired and respected. And I know that all Australians
 who have any affinity for Ireland and their Irish associations will
 join in prayers and hopes for a successful fruition of the Good Friday
 agreement.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great privilege to be the Prime Minister
 of this country. It is a great privilege for me to acknowledge the
 immense Irish contribution to our nation, we wouldn't be what
 we are today. I can't conceive of Australian politics having
 been anything remotely resembling what it has been over the last 40
 or 50 years without the Irish contribution. For so long, of course,
 the Irish contribution to Australian politics was seen as overwhelmingly
 belonging to the Australian Labor Party for obvious historical reasons.
The Liberal Party that I joined in 1957 when I left school in Sydney
 didn't boast an enormous number of people of Irish Catholic descent.
 But I can say that over that 40 or 50 years that has changed and I
 can say to all of you that there is an adequate supply of Faheys and
 Heffernans and Herrons and McNamaras and indeed the list can go on
 of people of Irish descent bringing their passion, their particular
 view, to the lifeblood and to the existence of our political party.
 It is a wonderful occasion, I salute the Irish contribution to our
 nation it wouldn't be what it is today without it. And I hope
 all of you have a marvellously enjoyable St Patrick's Day. Thank
 you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Thank you very much Solomon, to your wife Rosie, to Mr and Mrs Lanzer,
 Mr and Mrs Baker, the School Principal Mr Ruben and his wife and the
 many other guests and friends of the Mt Scopus College.
It is an honour for me to share this very important celebration. 50
 years of achievement of any organisation is always a milestone and
 something to be grateful for. But the 50 years that your community
 has traversed has been no ordinary 50 year period. IT is difficult
 for somebody in my position to fully conceive of the hurdles and the
 obstacles that the very small Jewish community of Melbourne must have
 faced 50 years ago in embarking on this endeavour. With many of its
 members having passed through the unbelievable experience of the earlier
 years of that decade.
And yet 50 years later this school and this community can boast many
 things. It can boast the largest Jewish day school not only in Australia
 but I understand in the Southern Hemisphere. It can boast of outstanding
 scholastic achievement which is seen as one of the consistently best
 three performers of Melbourne schools in VCE examinations. But most
 importantly it can boast of having made a wonderful, cultural and
 spiritual contribution to the life of the Jewish community here in
 Melbourne and throughout Australia.
We celebrate together tonight a number of things. First and foremost,
 can I say that we celebrate a very important belief of the entire
 Australian community. It's a very important personal belief of
 my own and it's a very important belief of the party and the
 Government that I lead. And that belief is in the absolute right of
 every Australian parent to determine the character and the value system
 of the education that their children receive. And that right of parental
 choice lies at the heart of good education policy. It's a policy
 that recognises the need for choice and variety within the education
 system. We need a strong government education system. As someone myself
 who is a proud and unapologetic product of the government school system
 in New South Wales, as someone who chose both government and independent
 schools for the education of my own children, as someone who has argued
 consistently all of his political life for the maximum degree of freedom
 of choice, I think it is important on an occasion such as this to
 emphasise the centrality of that principle of freedom of choice. And,
 of course, exercising that choice is particularly important for a
 community such as your own. You are able through the tremendous support
 that you give to schools like Mt Scopus, along with government assistance,
 you are able to preserve in a special and a very effective way your
 own distinctive culture and your own beliefs. But you do it as an
 integral part of the Australian community. You are practising the
 preservation of what is dear and special to you but you are doing
 it in a way which continues to contribute to and enrich the overall
 character of Australian life.
Australia is the beneficiary of a plural system of education. Just
 as I don't believe in monopolies in commerce I don't believe
 in monopolies in education. I don't believe that the State has
 a right to monopolise the provision of education. I believe that certain
 educational standards laid down and required of all schools are reasonable.
 But beyond that the value system, the spiritual beliefs, the cultural
 heritage that is taught within those schools is ultimately available
 to those Australian parents who seek to exercise a choice in the education
 of their children. And this school has done it in a most remarkable
 way. And it is an enormous tribute to the Jewish community of Melbourne,
 it's a remarkable tribute to the strength and the resilience
 and the sense of family that has been a hallmark of the Jewish community
 in Australia. And as Solomon said, I have been an unashamed and unapologetic
 friend of Israel and of the Jewish community in Australia all of my
 public life and my affection for the Jewish people and my association
 with them long pre-dated my entry into politics.
And what has been achieved by Australian Jews in all walks of life
 is truly remarkable. They have preserved their distinctive Jewish
 characteristics and beliefs but they have done so as true and straight
 and stalwart Australians and the loyalty and the commitment of the
 Jewish community to the overall national interest of the Australian
 community has been quite remarkable. I am, therefore, particularly
 pleased to be here tonight.
I want to honour the tremendous commitment of Solomon Lew and his
 wife Rosie to this cause of this school. I want to honour all of you
 for the fact that you have been prepared to support something that
 adds enormous value to the life of a nation. Any school that teaches
 the values of the spirit, as well as sheer academic achievement, any
 school that seeks to combine the values of the spirit, education,
 sporting and other endeavours is adding enormous value to the Australian
 community.
We have many gifts in this country, but we are a nation ultimately
 that will continue to survive and continue to do well if we use and
 nurture our intellectual capital to the maximum possible extent. We
 are only 18.5 million people and we inhabit a vast continent and increasingly
 as the years go by and we move into the 21st century we will have
 rely more and more on the use and the effective application of our
 intellectual capital. And in so many fields of human endeavour that
 intellectual capital is quite remarkable. And the community of Mount
 Scopus by dint of what it stands for and by dint of the men and women
 that have graduated from the college is playing a very significant
 role in it.
Ladies and gentlemen I salute your achievement. I salute the contribution
 of the Jewish community of Melbourne to the life, not only of the
 Australian Jewish community, but the life of the broader Australian
 community. I recognise and continue to uphold the importance of the
 links that exist between Australia and the state of Israel. It is
 an old friendship, nurtured in more difficult times but preserved
 through the years in the face of changing political fashion and changing
 political attitudes. There is great affection in Australia for what
 Israel has achieved. There is great admiration for the triumphs of
 over great adversity and great difficulty and great hostility by such
 a small country. There is a recognition of the tremendous generosity
 of the people of Israel over the years to so many immigrants from
 all around the world.
I, as Prime Minister, am immensely proud of the tolerance and the
 diversity of the Australian community. We have welcomed people from
 more than 150 nations. It is a remarkable achievement. It is a tribute
 to the decency and the honourability of the average Australian and
 we have done it in a very remarkable and a very harmonious fashion.
 And it's an opportunity such as this, people coming together
 as part of a vibrant community here in the city of Melbourne to celebrate
 the joy of living in Australia in 1999 and the expectation of continuing
 to enjoy the benefits of our nation and our society as we move into
 the 21st century.
I congratulate the Mount Scopus community. I thank it for the contribution
 that it is making to the education of the young men and women of the
 Jewish community here in Melbourne and I especially honour the personal
 contributions of so many people here tonight who have made that dream,
 of which Rosie spoke earlier, come to fruition and to be made possible.
Thank you very much indeed for having me as your guest tonight.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mr Wilson. To the Right Reverend Bishop Kernot,
 the head of Anglicare in Australia and here in Victoria; to Major
 Brian Watters; to my Colleague Michael Wooldridge, the Federal Minister
 for Health; to Philip Baressi, the Federal Member for Deakin; other
 members of Parliament, representatives of the various organisations
 concerned about the drug problem, ladies and gentlemen.
I would first of all like to thank Anglicare for the opportunity of
 launching this second round of Federal Government financial support
 for treatment programs here at its Victorian headquarters. Anglicare
 is one of the major frontline welfare organisations in Australia.
 It's an organisation which is an important part of the social coalition
 that is needed in Australia to deal with difficult welfare issues
 and to tackle major social problems. I use the expression social coalition
 very deliberately to underline the point that no one section of the
 community is adequate to the task of dealing with underprivilege,
 or adequate to the task of dealing with a challenge such as drug abuse.
The Government alone cannot beat the drug problem. Individuals alone
 cannot beat the drug problem. Families need help to tackle the drug
 problem, and we need as individuals, as family members and as leaders
 of the Government, we need to enlist a frontline experience and support
 of organisations such as Anglicare. And that is why it is entirely
 appropriate that on the day in which I announce a further Commonwealth
 financial commitment, of the details of a further Commonwealth financial
 commitment to the treatment programs which are an important part of
 our tough on drugs strategy, I do so here at the headquarters of one
 of those organisations that is an important element in the fight against
 drugs, and indeed the general campaign to deliver a fairer, more decent,
 and just society.
The drug problem has been very much in the news in recent weeks. Not
 because it's something that has suddenly arrived, but through a combination
 of circumstances there has been a level of public preoccupation with
 and concentration on it that I don't think I have experienced at any
 time since I entered Parliament almost 25 years ago.
I don't pretend for a moment as Prime Minister that what my Government
 has done has provided all of the answers. And it is not essentially
 an issue that should be divided on party political lines. There are
 people who are deeply concerned about this issue and have something
 to contribute on this issue from all strands of political life in
 Australia, both State and Federal. And I would hope to the maximum
 degree possible that the effort at a government level to deal with
 the problem should be on a bipartisan basis. And that will certainly
 be the approach that I will take as Prime Minister to the Premiers'
 Conference on the 9th of April when this issue will be the main business
 of the afternoon session of that particular conference. And I've said
 before and I repeat it, that I will work as freely and willingly with
 a Labor Premier of any of the States of Australia as I will with a
 Liberal or National Party Premier.
The Government's Tough on Drugs Strategy which involves the expenditure
 of about $290 million, in dollar terms is the largest commitment by
 any Federal government to such a strategy. I don't say that to score
 a point but merely to record a fact and I appreciate the fact that
 on a number of issues I have received public support and endorsement
 from the Leader of the Labor Opposition in the Federal Parliament.
 The Tough on Drugs Strategy recognises that action is needed on three
 levels. We need to continue to commit further resources to law enforcement
 and some of the evidence of the benefit of the additional resources
 committed by the Federal Government to both Customs and Federal Police,
 the stationing of officers of the Australian Federal Police in source
 countries and countries through which drugs have passed from their
 original source, has already begun to pay dividends. Once again I
 don't overplay that but equally we shouldn't understate it.
It is true that it is a very difficult fight and it is easy for people
 to despair, it is easy for people to throw up their arms and say:
 we haven't solved the problem, we appear to be losing ground. And
 cast around in the mistaken belief that by abandoning everything that
 has been done thus far we will be suddenly more successful in dealing
 with the problem in the future. It is a battle of attrition and it
 is a battle of attrition which requires of all sections of the community
 a determined commitment both of human resources and also of financial
 resources from both the State and Federal Governments. And part of
 that is obviously law enforcement. And part of it must be continued
 co-operation between not only the federal agencies such as Customs
 and the Federal Police, but also the maximum co-operation between
 the Federal Police and the police of the various States. And the success
 that has been achieved in relation to heroin and cocaine seizures
 in recent months has very much been a consequence of enhanced and
 more effective co-operation between the law enforcement agencies of
 the Commonwealth and the law enforcement agencies of the State polices.
The second component of course is education. There can be no limit
 to the requirement that people, particularly young people, children
 be educated about the drug menace. There should be in my view, and
 I make no apology for saying this, there should be absolutely no reluctance
 at any level to pursue as vigorously as possible the Tough on Drug
 message within our schools. I can't think of a higher priority, I
 can't think of something where we should have a less complicated and
 a less uncompromising approach than the absolute determination to
 pursue the drug menace within our schools.
So therefore the second and equally important element of our campaign
 is to provide resources to educate the community against the menace
 of drugs. And we have set aside about $17.5 million for a plan to
 campaign at a Federal level against illicit drugs in schools, and
 to send the strongest possible message to school students about the
 danger and the threat posed by drugs. Not only to the young but to
 the community generally. And in a sense it's unfortunate that so much
 of the debate in recent weeks has focused on whether or not there
 should be a heroin trial and in the process I think the community
 has lost sight, or perhaps not given enough attention to the very
 real progress that has been made at both a State and a Federal level
 in improving the resources for education and also the plans, some
 of which have been announced and some of which I am to announce this
 morning for committing further resources to treatment facilities.
Part of the campaign, and the third and most important part of the
 campaign as far as my announcement this morning is concerned is of
 course the treatment of people who are addicted, not only to heroin
 but to other substances which they are abusing. I think it's fair
 to say that there is nothing more distressing in this whole campaign,
 in this whole issue, for somebody in my position than to be on a radio
 program as I have been on two occasions here in Melbourne in recent
 weeks and to speak to the despairing mother of somebody who says that
 she can't get her daughter or her son into a treatment program because
 there are no places available.
Now whatever views people may hold about heroin trials or indeed any
 other aspect of this whole debate, there ought to be no argument that
 the community has an overwhelming responsibility to provide more resources
 for those people who are trying to beat their addiction, and for those
 people who are trying to break the habit. Surely there can be an across
 the board, not only bipartisan but multipartisan view within the Australian
 community, that is unarguably one of the major priorities that we
 must address our attention to.
And so it has been that we have, in the 'Tough on Drugs' campaign,
 we made ma or announcements last year which involved the provision
 of about $50 million in our first round of grants, $50 million to
 a variety - I'm sorry, $30 million to fund 24 communities and 68 non-government
 organisations for innovative community education programmes and new
 treatment services. And examples of that first round included $1.5
 million for the Ted Noff Foundation to establish a new non-residential
 treatment service in Sydney for 12 to 18 year-olds and $1.5 million
 to the Salvation Army in Preston here in Victoria for a residential
 rehabilitation facility for women and their children. And today I
 want to announce a further round of grants totalling approximately
 $20 million for over 50 groups Australia wide to boost treatment and
 counselling services. And this funding will make a further contribution
 to the cause of providing increasingly greater treatment facilities
 for people who are trying to break their habit. And examples of the
 projects being funded in this round include $750,000 to youth off
 the streets in Ultimo in Sydney for an intensive two to four week
 residential service for young adults with a history of drug abuse;
 $375,000 to the Salvation Army in Adelaide to employ two Aboriginal
 workers for a 25bed sobering up unit for Aboriginal people; and $474,000
 to Anglicare in Lilydale here in Victoria for support training and
 treatment for illicit drug users and their families.
Ladies and gentlemen, these announcements that I've made this morning,
 the full details of which are contained in the media kit which is
 being made available, represent a further down-payment, if I can put
 it that way, on the Government's 290 million 'Tough on Drugs' strategy.
I don't represent to you, I don't pretend to you that by this announcement
 we have found some new and revolutionary response to the problem.
 It is just another contribution towards making it easier for some
 in the community who do have a drug problem to do something about
 it. It's a further contribution on the part of the Commonwealth to
 encouraging the volunteer sector in the tremendous work that they
 do in providing relief within the community.
I will be taking to the Premiers some further proposals in relation
 to the nation-wide campaign against the drug problem. I do regard
 this as a national issue. I do believe it carries national responsibilities
 and it therefore commands the attention of the national Government.
 But it can only be done effectively if we, all of us, we work together,
 that if we focus on those areas of the fight against drugs where we
 have common ground, that if we maximise our efforts in relation to
 those areas and we continue to see it very much, as Mr Wilson said
 in his introduction, being very much something that involves compassion,
 compassion for the victims of drug abuse, a total intolerance and
 a detestation of those who would profit from their misery and profit
 from the trafficking in drugs.
And those two words, zero tolerance, have been much used and, perhaps,
 over used in this debate in recent times. I want to make it clear
 that I don't think there's anybody in the Australian community who
 has anything other than maximum contempt and zero tolerance for those
 in our community who would seek to make money out of human misery
 and human suffering.
Like any other Federal member of Parliament or, indeed, State member
 of Parliament who's done his or her job in recent years, I've confronted
 the experience of discussing with parents left distraught by the loss
 of children through the scourge of drugs. I've spent much time listening
 to some of their harrowing stories and as a parent myself I can try
 to understand the sense of loss and frustration and disillusionment
 and despair and anger and all of the other human emotions that a parent
 must go through when they experience that particular happening. I
 can only say to them that the Government is trying. I don't pretend
 that we've got all of the answers. I don't think anybody has the monopoly
 of wisdom in this area. We are committing more resources. We do listen
 to the advice of people who are affected. One of the problems is that
 for as many parents affected in the ultimate way by this problem who
 may, for example, support one course of action, there is just as many
 who are violently opposed to that course of action. And the idea that
 there is one sort of universal, coal face view about something like,
 for example, a heroin trial or, indeed, anything else that is controversial
 is totally mistaken. And that is part of the dilemma that this particular
 issue throws up.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm not coming here pretending that I've provided
 or can provide all of the answers. I've come here because I'm personally
 committed to trying to make a difference in this area. I'm personally
 very concerned about the impact of drugs, not only on the lives who
 are devastated by them but also the way in which it feeds into crime
 activity, the way in which it makes our streets less safe, the way
 in which it makes our homes more vulnerable to burglaries, the way
 in which it makes our elderly people feel more threatened as they
 go about doing things that for generations have been taken for granted,
 that you can peacefully and safely do within the Australian community.
 And every time an elderly lady's handbag is snatched in a busy suburban
 street in Australia nine times out of ten that can be related to the
 drug problem.
Now, all of these things collectively impose on all of us a huge responsibility.
 I thank the welfare organisations for what they're doing. I want to
 thank Major Brian Watters, the Chairman of the National Council, very
 warmly for his compassionate interest, his great understanding of
 this problem and his advice. I also want to thank the other members
 of the Council, a number of whom who are here today. It's a very broadly
 based Council. It's an organisation that represents the many points
 of view that ought to be represented on this issue because there is
 no one single right or correct solution but there is one single resolve,
 I hope on the part of the Australian community, remembering difficult
 though the problem is, that the perspective should be kept that some
 two per cent of the Australian community have in some way been directly
 involved in hard drugs. So we must keep a sense of perspective about
 it whilst recognising, as Mr Wilson said in his introduction, it is
 a long and difficult campaign ahead of us. But I'm encouraged by the
 level of public support for doing something about it. I'm encouraged
 by the fact that on other occasions Australia has faced enormous problems
 of this magnitude and it's been able to effectively respond. And if
 we continue to have the co-operation of State and Federal governments
 of both political persuasions, indeed, of all political persuasions,
 of the various welfare organisations that many of whom are represented
 here today and also individuals within the community who've been affected
 by this issue and touched by, then I think we really can make a difference.
'Tough on Drugs' is about trying to help the people who are addicted
 to drugs, understanding in a compassionate way the emotional devastation
 that that brings to their families. It's about opposing, in the most
 unrelenting fashion, the criminal behaviour of those who seek to profit
 from it. It's about providing decent treatment for people who want
 treatment. It's about educating in a quite uncompromising, uncomplicated
 way, our young against the dangers of drug taking, and that is tremendously
 important. It's about doing all of those things. It's not about one
 to the exclusion of the other. It's not about one in priority to the
 other two. It's about a three-pronged approach - education, law enforcement,
 treatment. They are the three things that we have to balance in our
 campaign against drugs and I hope that today's announcement has made
 an important practical contribution to realising that goal.
Thank you very much.


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Hello Betty. It's a tremendous privilege for me to share this
 occasion with you and so many of your admirers and fans all around
 Australia. Everything that's been said about Betty today, the
 people who know her best and love her most in her sporting career
 and through her life have spoken very warmly of what she has meant
 to them and what she has meant to the Olympic ideal.
I suppose one of the things that one could emphatically say about
 Betty is that she is the ultimate example of what the Olympic ideal
 is really all about. Because it's not only about performance,
 it's not only about winning. It's not only about being the
 best. And she has performed well, she's won, she's been
 the best - the only Australian to win four gold medals in track and
 field events, and that is the best - but she's also displayed
 something else which is indisputably part of the Olympic ideal, and
 she's displayed immense character. And the strength of character
 that she displayed in her athletic career has been matched, indeed,
 exceeded by the strength of character of which she has displayed later
 in life. And the uncomplaining manner in which she has dealt with
 an adversity that would have crumpled the best of us is a tremendous
 example.
And I think it is entirely appropriate that we should be gathered
 here at what is undoubtedly Australia's most revered and hallowed
 sporting arena, the Melbourne Cricket Ground, in the presence of what
 must be one of the greatest gatherings of Olympic champions and contributors
 to Australia's Olympic performance. And people have come together
 very quickly because they admire, Betty, what you achieved as an athlete.
 They revere what you represent in terms of the best of the Australian
 character. And they admire, indeed, they are in awe of the tremendous
 courage that you've demonstrated.
So to you, I know that everybody here today will get behind the purpose
 of today's luncheon. And in declaring open the Betty Cuthbert
 appeal, can I say to you Betty, that the Melbourne Cricket Ground
 is still full of Australians who are cheering for you.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Your Excellency, the Premier of South Australia, John Olsen, to my
 ministerial colleagues, Senator Nick Minchin, Sir Arvi Parbo the Chairman
 of the Board, Mr Hugh Morgan the Managing Director, the leader of
 the South Australian Opposition, Mr Wran, other colleagues, ladies
 and gentlemen.
In coming here today to open the Olympic Dam extension I wanted to
 demonstrate first and foremost the very strong commitment of the Federal
 Government to the mining industry in this country. Providing about
 $41 billion of export income the mining sector is still the major
 contributor to the export earnings of Australia. The mining industry
 at present in Australia operates in quite a challenging environment.
 Although the domestic economy is strong inflation is low, interest
 rates are the lowest they have been for decades, industrial disputes
 are at record low levels and we have been operating for several years
 under an exchange rate regime which has been administered in a way
 to promote and not retard the international competitiveness of the
 Australian economy. It is nonetheless the case that world commodity
 prices are very low and as such the export environment because of
 that is very challenging. And it is therefore all the more welcome
 to me as Prime Minister and to the Federal Government generally that
 WMC continues to make such an enormous investment in mineral development
 and mineral exploration in this country.
And I want on behalf of the Government to thank that company for the
 faith that it's shown in Australia's economic strength and
 Australia's economic future. I want to thank it for the contribution
 that it's made over the years to the export earnings of our nation.
 And I also in issuing those thanks want to particularly thank the
 workforce of the company. Mining is not the easiest of vocations.
 It has its challenges, it has its depravations, it has its difficulties,
 it still, despite the enviable safety record of this company, also
 has its dangers. And there are aspects of mining that many other sections
 of the Australian community would not readily embrace. And I do want
 to record my admiration for the miners of Australia, my admiration
 for the employees and the managers of Western Mining for the remarkable
 contribution that you have made to the development of the minerals
 sector in Australia and the remarkable contribution you have made
 to the economic strength of this country.
It is important that we provide uncompromising support to the mining
 industry in this country. It is possible to strike a balance between
 caring for our environment and sensibly exploiting the mineral deposits
 of Australia. We have been given by providence a remarkable store
 of mineral deposits. There is no nation on earth that has been as
 fortunate as Australia in that respect and we would be very negligent
 not only to ourselves but also to future generations if we allowed
 obsessions with other things as distinct from the reasonable advocacy
 of other things to deny us the rational and sensible and careful exploitation
 of the mineral reserves of this nation. A strong mining sector provides
 not only tens of thousands of jobs in its own right but through downstream
 processing and the contribution it makes to the manufacturing industry
 of Australia, it provides hundreds of thousands of jobs. It provides
 wealth to its shareholders. And I'm very proud of the fact that
 Australia is now second only to the United States as the greatest
 share-owning democracy in the world. And it's a very, very proud
 thing that you have a nation that has so many shareholders and I want
 more shareholders. And if we have our way and we get a few people
 crossing the floor in our Upper House we might have a lot more shareholders
 in Australia.
But it is a tremendous day. And it's right that Arvi pays tribute
 to the customers. No business works without customers. No business
 prospers without customers. And looking after your customers and keeping
 them satisfied is a tremendously important element of any industry.
 So I want to congratulate all of those people who have been associated
 with Roxby Downs from its beginning.
I, along with Sir Arvi and John Olsen and others, went down and had
 a look at that remarkable engineering feat which is this operation
 here. And it's the first time I've had the opportunity of
 visiting this particular site, and I really did find it quite a remarkable
 engineering feat. And Arvi remarked on a number of occasions how different
 it was from when he started in the mining industry in Germany some
 50 years ago. And, indeed, mining has changed. It's become more
 sophisticated. It's become more productive. But there's
 still an ethos in the mining industry that binds the men and women
 of that industry together in a particular fashion.
So to all of you who are associated with this opening today, the company,
 the employees, the customers, the townspeople of this area, and I
 had the opportunity of meeting some of the school children and I was
 told by their headmaster that they had all been there for just on
 ten years and they've had an association, a living association,
 with the mining industry and the development of this great resource.
Before I conclude there is one other thing that I want to say, and
 because it is the last public mining occasion of this character that
 Arvi Parbo will be present at as he will retiring as Chairman of the
 Board of WMC, I want to pay a special tribute as Prime Minister to
 Arvi for the enormous contribution that he has made, not only to this
 company but he has made to Australian industry and to Australia generally.
 I can't think of a single Australian who better epitomises the
 post-world war achievement of this country. Our capacity to absorb
 in a harmonious and positive way millions of people from all around
 the world. Arvi came to Australia via Germany from his native Estonia
 almost 50 years ago. He couldn't speak a word of English when
 he came to this country. He graduated with first class honours in
 engineering from Adelaide University. He went on to become not only
 Chairman of Western Mining but also Chairman of the big Australian'.
 I have known him for more than 20 years. I have not found a businessman
 in Australia who better combines a capacity to run a company efficiently,
 to see the importance of productivity and making a profit but also
 the social and community responsibilities of corporate Australia to
 the rest of the nation. And I do thank the company and I compliment
 Arvi Parbo on the announcement that is being made today about the
 establishment of the WMC trust. It is the very example of the sort
 of corporate philanthropy which I believe we need more of in Australia.
 And Western Mining has been one of those companies that has always
 been to the fore and has always been demonstrating a lead.
But Arvi you have impressed those that you've met in business
 and in life generally greatly with your integrity, with your high
 intelligence, your love of Australia, your love of mining, your understanding
 of your fellow human beings. You are a marvellous example of what
 we have achieved in this country of how with nothing, with not even
 a knowledge of the language of our nation, you can go to the very
 top. It's a tribute to you but it's also a tribute to the
 Australian dream and the Australian ideal of the last 50 years. And
 on that note I have very great pleasure in declaring open the Olympic
 Dam extension. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Thank you very much Peter for those very warm and kind words of introduction.
 To the Premier of Victoria, Jeff Kennett, to the President of the
 Victorian Division, Joy Howley, to my many federal and state parliamentary
 colleagues, and fellow liberals from Victoria.
This is certainly a very large gathering and I thank all of you for
 coming along in such large numbers to hear my speech. Or perhaps I'm
 wrong. Richard Alston said you were all on the way to the football.
 But whatever it be, it's always great to address hundreds of
 members of the rank and file of the Liberal Party and it's appropriate
 that I do so this weekend because it is almost to the day six months
 since the government was re-elected in October of last year.
And it is therefore an opportunity to do both a stocktaking of that
 six months and also to throw forward to the next two and a half years,
 because immediately after its re-election, the government did set
 about keeping faith in a most emphatic way with the commitments that
 we made to the Australian people in the lead up to the last election.
I said when I spoke to this Council only a few weeks after the October
 election that I believed that in many ways the victory in 1998 was
 greater and more meritorious than the victory in 1996, because in
 1996 we were campaigning against a tired government that had become
 lazy, arrogant and out of touch and led by somebody who imagined that
 his judgement was always superior to that of the mainstream of the
 Australian community.
And we won very emphatically in 1996 but in 1998 we were seeking an
 explicit mandate to implement one of the most courageous blueprints
 for economic reform that any western country has seen in the last
 thirty or forty years.
It is the reality, ladies and gentlemen, that no federal government
 in Australian political history has gone to the people with such a
 comprehensive, open, transparent blueprint for economic reform than
 the government I led to the last federal election. We've had
 governments in the past that have talked generally about reform, we've
 had governments in the past that have laid out general scenarios of
 what they would do, but I defy anyone to name a government in Australian
 political history that actually took a detailed reform plan to the
 Australian economy in a fundamental area such as taxation, to the
 Australian people, laid it all out in detail and said vote for us
 or against us, on the basis of this plan.
Now I say that very deliberately because in the weeks ahead the Australian
 Senate will have to make a decision in relation to that plan. And
 I want to say to you with all of the conviction that I can muster,
 that the government has absolutely no intention of retreating from
 the responsibility to implement that plan that was given to us by
 the Australian people in October of last year.
We haven't put our political bodies on the line, survived to
 tell the story, but to walk away because of the desire of those who
 hold the balance of power but more particularly, the negative approach
 of the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats, to frustrate
 the will of the Australian people.
We embarked upon a programme of further economic reform and change
 immediately we were re-elected. We put the taxation legislation into
 the Parliament, we set about our plans to privatise the remaining
 elements of Telstra and thus make Australia not the second largest
 share owning democracy in the world, but indeed the largest share
 owning democracy in the world. And not only as Peter says, can we
 by selling the rest of Telstra, remove for ever federal government
 debt, a remarkable legacy to bequeath to our children and grandchildren,
 but also if we can sell the remaining elements of Telstra, Australia
 will boast the highest percentage of share owners of any democracy
 in the western world.
But an even more important thing has occurred over the last six months.
 And that is that I believe that over the last six months the Australian
 community and importantly the world community, has begun to realise
 the full extent to which Australia was able to stare down the worst
 of the Asian economic downturn.
There was a sense of it before the election, there was a growing confidence
 that maybe the impact of the Asian downturn would not be nearly as
 great as we had suspected, but I don't believe it was until after
 the election and through the Christmas and New Year period that the
 full realisation came to the Australian public that not only had we
 stared down the Asian economic downturn, but we had in fact demonstrated
 a capacity for economic performance that was beyond the wildest expectations
 of even some of our most enthusiastic supporters.
We have been able to deliver the lowest interest rates, the lowest
 inflation figures for 30 years, the best unemployment level for almost
 ten years, levels of business investment that make us very proud and
 very optimistic about the future and we are increasingly attracting
 the attention of the rest of the world. There was a sense, as Peter
 alluded to, when we came into office that Australia was the anxious
 outsider knocking on the door of the Asian club seeking admission.
 Now all of that has been significantly changed and we have demonstrated
 that we are an economic strongman in this particular part of the world.
And that was overwhelmingly due to the measures that we took when
 we came to office.
If we had not cut the budget deficit that we inherited, if we had
 not taken some of those decisions that caused some unease and criticism
 in the community because of their impact on particular groups, .........making
 a contribution to repairing the fiscal position, we would not now
 be in the situation that we are. And it took a great deal of skill
 and a great deal of economic and political courage to do it. And I
 do want to pay a special tribute to the work that Peter Costello did
 in that task as the Federal Treasurer, because unless you have a committed
 Federal Treasurer who has the national interest uppermost in his mind,
 you will never get long-term economic benefit and long-term economic
 results.
So my message to our supporters and our foes alike, is that we were
 not re-elected to sit on our laurels. We were re-elected to implement
 the promises we took to the Australian people and we were re-elected
 to renew our commitment to an even more vigorous reform agenda. There
 is never such a thing as there being no further need of economic and
 social reform. There is always a need for change and reform 
 not change in the name of change for its own sake  but change
 because society always requires that that what is no longer working,
 should be swept away and replaced by something that will work.
And the challenge of economic reform is still very real in this country
 and the benefits of economic reform are so apparent at both a national
 and a State level. Ask any fair minded Victorian where this State
 would be had it not been for the courageous economic and other reforms
 of the Kennett government over the last seven years.
And it is because of that courageous reform agenda that of all the
 State governments of Australia none is in a stronger economic and
 political position, none deservedly enjoy such a high level of public
 respect than does the Coalition government here in Victoria, led by
 the Premier Jeff Kennett.
We're not only going to implement the things we said we would
 do before the election, but we also intend to go further in areas
 that we began work on in our first term. We have succeeded in reducing
 unemployment. Unemployment now is lower than it has been at any time
 since the early 1990s. But it is still too high and it could go lower
 if we could make further reforms. It could go lower if we could get
 rid of the unfair burden of the unfair dismissal laws on small business.
 It could go lower if we could entrench junior wages in the Australian
 industrial relations system. We have tried to do that. I mean there
 is not a man or woman in this audience who has employed anybody who
 doesn't know the simple reality that if you force employers to
 pay higher wages for inexperienced, young employees, what they will
 do is employ less of them. And you don't need a degree in industrial
 relations, you don't need to have anything other than a bit of
 experience of life to understand that that is a reality. But while
 you have an Opposition overrulingly dominated by former trade union
 officials  I mean one of the extraordinary things about the
 modern Australian Labor Party is that as the influence of unionism
 in the community falls, the influence of trade union officials in
 the Labor Party rises. They have more influence now in their parliamentary
 party than what I think they had twenty five years ago. At least 25
 years ago they had one or two people who occasionally invested some
 money.
In all sorts of things.
But ladies and gentlemen, we are determined to do more on the industrial
 relations front. We are determined to continue the process of industrial
 relations reform begun in the early 1980s by many people who believed
 that the old centralised industrialised relations system was no longer
 serving the interests of the Australian community.
But it is not only on the economic front that this government has
 seized the agenda and has laid out an action agenda for the next two
 and a half years.
We are a party which is willing to embrace the social agenda. We are
 a party that does not believe that good government is about good economics
 alone, important though that is. We are also a government that believes
 a modern compassionate society does have to provide a proper social
 security safety net and one of the proudest boasts that the Coalition
 Government can make is that we have done exactly that.
Contrary to what our critics said three years ago we haven't
 reduced the real value of the pension but actually increased it. Contrary
 to what our critics said three years ago, we haven't reduced
 workers wages, we've increased them. The workers of Australia
 now are infinitely better off than they were under Bob Hawke or Paul
 Keating. Real wages are higher, interest rates are lower, take home
 pay is therefore greater and spending power of the average family
 is therefore greater. I mean that is why there is a sense of economic
 stability, an economic strength within the Australian community that
 we haven't seen for a while.
We are also keen to add value to the existing structures of our society
 that look after the less privileged. And last night I had the opportunity
 here in Melbourne to outline in more detail our government's
 ideas for building what I call a new social coalition in Australia,
 where you get the government, the welfare sector, the business community
 and the volunteer efforts of individual Australians working together
 in an effective coalition to look after the disadvantaged in the most
 effective manner.
I have never made any apologies since I've been Prime Minister
 in seeking the advice from those who know best about the way to best
 assist the less privileged in our community. And much and all as I
 respect the work they do you don't get that advice from a bureaucracy.
 You get it from those great coalface organisations like the city missions,
 and the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul, who
 daily deal with these difficulties and understand them in a way that
 surpasses any understanding that most others can have. And I deliberately
 involve those organisations in providing advice and in helping to
 make the decisions that we've made in that area.
And last night I announced a major series of taxation concessions
 involving a cost to the revenue of over $50 million a year. It will
 provide more incentives for generous benefactors in Australia to give
 more to help those in the Australian community who need assistance.
 And in making those announcements I acknowledged the fact that there
 are at present many Australian companies and many Australian businesses
 that have a rich tradition of giving generously and giving unstintingly
 to those causes within our community which deserve assistance.
We've also articulated quite unashamedly the principle of mutual
 obligation. And that is a principle that says that a compassionate
 society should look after those in society who need help, but in return
 those who are helped should be willing, in an appropriate way, to
 give something back to the community in return. And that is the basis
 of our work for the dole approach. And that is the basis of our approach
 in a number of other welfare areas. When it was first announced it
 was derided, it was attacked as being heartless and insensitive. But
 once the Labor Party realised that the majority of the Australian
 community understood both the fairness and the decency and the common
 sense of such an approach, it began to change its tune.
So ladies and gentlemen, I'm very pleased, indeed proud to report,
 six months into our second term that not only have we rapidly begun
 to implement the policies we took to the electorate in 1998, but we
 have also begun to set a new agenda in a number of important social
 areas.
And having reported on that what do we see on the other side of Australian
 politics? We see the Australian Labor Party still bereft of policies,
 and still bereft of any sense of real political direction. There are
 many of us in this room who've had a lot of experience in politics.
 We've had experience in both Opposition and in Government. And
 it's very instructive to have experience in Opposition, very
 instructive indeed. You learn a lot and you don't forget any
 of it if you're sensible. And one of the things you learn is
 that when you're in Opposition you will never win the respect
 of the Australian community or the Victorian community, or indeed
 any other community, unless you are prepared to undertake hard policy
 work.
Unless the public knows what you believe in and what you stand for
 you are never going to become a decent government. And the great problem
 with the Opposition in Australia at the present time is that nobody
 has the faintest idea of what it stands for other than the desire
 to replace the Government.
I have no idea what the Labor Party's long term policy is on
 taxation. I don't know whether the Labor Party is going back
 to the old pre Hawke/Keating interventionist approach to industry
 policy, or whether they're going to return to the Hawke/Keating
 approach. I don't know what their policy is on something like,
 let's take something like youth wages. Mr Beazley's party
 voted against the maintenance of youth wages, yet he said in an interview
 in the papers last week, the Melbourne Age nonetheless, he said that
 he was really in favour of keeping youth wages. He says he's
 in favour of removing the power of the Senate to obstruct legislation.
 And yet as Peter Costello says he's running the greatest bit
 of Senate interference that we've seen for decades.
The Labor Party unfortunately has lapsed into the greatest mistake
 that any Opposition can make and that is opposition for its own sake.
 And it doesn't matter whether the Labor Party is dealing with
 an issue that the public voted for, or the public voted against, or
 that the public has never heard about before, or the public likes
 or the public dislikes, they have a simple rule of thumb: if Howard
 and the Liberals are for it, we're against it. Now that may make
 for easy decision making because you don't have to give it any
 thought. You just automatically oppose it. But it doesn't in
 the long term build community respect. And I found in my years in
 Opposition, and there are a lot of them, and I shared them with quite
 a number of people in this hall, and I'm sure Jeff found the
 same thing, that if you just automatically oppose what the other crowd
 is doing irrespective of its merits, in the end you pay a very heavy
 price. And I think the Australian population is growing increasingly
 weary of it. And I think the Australian population believes that if
 a government has the courage to lay out in painfully explicit detail
 how it intends to change the Australian taxation system, take the
 political risk of putting that forward as its policy for an election
 and wins that election, I think the Australian public deep down think
 they ought to be given a fair go and they ought to be able to implement
 it.
There are just two other things I'd like to touch on my friends,
 and that is to say a few words about the very difficult circumstances
 that are unfolding in what was the old Yugoslavia. All of us I know
 regret, and feel a sense of a heavy heart, and a sense of disturbance,
 when weapons of great destruction are launched against any country.
 But as history has told us repeatedly if intransigence, if the brutal
 repression of minorities, if a denial of the human rights of minorities
 is tolerated indefinitely without reprise and without retaliation,
 a much heavier price is paid further down in time.
And the stubborn intransigence of the Milosovic regime in Belgrade,
 their unwillingness to reach a negotiated understanding with the Ethnic
 Albanians in Kosovo, the appalling human rights record of that regime,
 the atrocities that have been practiced upon the people of Kosovo
 so vividly displayed on our television screens, have really left the
 NATO countries no alternative. And whilst there is no, and it is of
 course not at all likely that there will be, involvement of any Australian
 military personnel in the NATO action, let me say that that action
 does have the understanding and the support of the Australian Government.
 We believe that the NATO members have tried hard and long to reach
 an accommodation and a fair outcome, and they have been driven to
 the use of force and the use of military weaponry through the intransigence
 of the Milosovic Government in Belgrade.
The final thing I would like to say because this is the occasion of
 your annual meeting, and that is this: that I do appreciate in a very
 real sense the support and co-operation that I have received from
 the Victorian Division over the last 12 months. I have frequently
 said, and I say it again today because it is true, that there is no
 more professional, no better organised Liberal Party Division anywhere
 in Australia than the Victorian Division. And that has been true for
 a long time. It was true when Michael Kroger was your President, It
 was true when Ted Baillieu was your president, and it remains true
 today with Joy Howley as your President. And the standards set by
 the Victorian Division could be well emulated by a number of divisions
 in other parts of the country. I don't say that critically, I
 say it in praise of the high degree of professionalism that you have
 demonstrated at both a State and a Federal level over a long period
 of time. You have been great friends, you've been great supporters,
 you have been a wonderful part of a great party. We have achieved
 an enormous amount, and the years ahead give us an opportunity to
 build for future generations a Liberal achievement and a Liberal inheritance
 which will make them immensely proud. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Your Eminence; your Grace; the Ambassador of Greece; the High Commissioner
 for Cyprus; to the Premier of New South Wales, Bob Carr; to the former
 Prime Minister of Australia, Gough Whitlam; to many other distinguished
 guests including my colleague, the Minister for Immigration, Philip
 Ruddock.
May I commence my remarks this afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, by
 extending to my colleague, the Premier of New South Wales, Bob Carr,
 my warmest congratulations on his re-election.
It ought not to be lost on this gathering, ladies and gentlemen, that
 the first public occasion which I address in Sydney after my election
 as the Prime Minister of Australia in March of 1996 was this very
 same Greek National Day in that year.
May I say that the reception today is as warm as it was then. And
 it will not be lost on those present that Bob Carr has chosen this
 particular event as the first occasion to appear publicly after his
 re-election as the Premier of New South Wales.
I want, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf, not only of the party that
 I lead but also on behalf of the Australian Government and I know
 all of the Australian people, to extend our gratitude to Australians
 of Greek descent for the enormous contribution that they have made
 to the building of the modern Australia.
The Greeks have brought many things to Australia and perhaps it is
 appropriate that this event takes place immediately after a free,
 democratic and open election because of all the many gifts that the
 Greeks made to the world, the gift of democracy is undoubtedly the
 greatest gift of all.
And we have just witnessed, as we witnessed last October, as we will
 witness again in the years ahead, a peaceful, orderly expression of
 democratic will, people putting their case to the public, people seeking
 election and then peacefully and lawfully accepting the outcome. And
 that is what Australia stands for and that is what Australia will
 always stand for.
Australia is a remarkable amalgamation of people who have come from
 many parts of the world and it would be unrealistic of me, ladies
 and gentlemen, to address this gathering at this time without acknowledging
 that there are many thousands of Australians of Serbian descent who
 have a concern about events that are taking place in their former
 homeland. I understand that and that is perfectly human and a perfectly
 natural reaction on their part.
Let me say that the great success of the modern Australia has been
 our capacity to absorb people from all parts of the world who preserve
 a love and a care and a sensitivity to their former homeland but at
 the same time, over and above that, they have embraced the traditions
 and the freedom and the values and the attitudes of their Australian
 homeland which gives them peace, protection and succour. And however
 much, however its strong feelings may run on events that are taking
 place in the former Yugoslavia, can I say to you, ladies and gentlemen,
 that the argument of the NATO countries is not with the people of
 Serbia but rather the government of Serbia.
And, ladies and gentlemen, Australia has opened its doors and made
 itself a home to people from everywhere around the world. And the
 great success of that experiment and the great genius and the great
 achievement of Australia is that our binding commitment to this nation,
 respecting our diverse and multicultural heritage, that our binding
 commitment to that nation and the values of that nation is the cement
 which has bound all of us together. And in that process the people
 of Greece have made a special contribution, not only their gift of
 democracy, the way in which they have preserved and nurtured their
 culture, their traditions, their religion, their family values, their
 business values, their business principles and their great commitment
 to communal life.
So ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the people of Australia, all
 the other Australians, I express my gratitude to the contribution
 of the Greeks to the building of the modern Australia. Long may our
 country remain a beacon to the rest of the world of freedom, of tolerance,
 of racial and religious respect, a nation that truly honours the individual
 and the role of the family in the Australian community and a nation
 that practices, better than any in the world, that great gift of democracy
 which came from the people of ancient Greece.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Mr Thomas, to your joint President, Mr Hale,
 to my ministerial colleagues including in particular Senator Nick
 Minchin the Minister who directly relates to your organisation, Peter
 Reith, Robert Hill, Philip Ruddock, to Kim Beazley the Leader of the
 Opposition, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I certainly do remember that occasion some seven and a half months
 ago when I launched the AI Group at the National Press Club. And I
 took the opportunity then of commending all of those who had played
 such an important role in bringing your organisation together. And
 I look back over that seven and a half months and I can record that
 quite a bit has happened. We launched a tax policy a few days after
 your group was launched. We then had a federal election during which
 the principal issue of debate was the taxation plan detailed by the
 Coalition. We enjoyed, those of us who were successful, the results
 of the election and perhaps even more importantly than all of that
 I think since the launch of your group and during the past seven and
 a half months the true extent to which the Australian economy has
 been able to stare down the worst economic recession the Asian-Pacific
 region has experienced in decades has become apparent to all of us.
There was a time in the middle of last year when the majority view
 amongst economic commentators was that some kind of quite significant
 slow down was just around the corner. There was a widely held view,
 I guess based on the experiences of past economic history in Australia,
 that it just wasn't going to be possible for the Australian economy
 to avoid the impact of the Asian downturn. But through the later months
 of last year and certainly in the first three months or so of this
 year that sentiment has turned around. And now it is no exaggeration,
 it is no piece of empty triumphalism for somebody in my position or
 any of my senior Ministers or people who talk about these things to
 assert the obvious and that is that the Australian economy has performed
 remarkably well, that we have enjoyed very high economic growth for
 a sustained period. We have the lowest interest rates in 30 years,
 we have a persistently lower inflation rate than we used to have.
 In three years we have turned a deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus.
 We have presided over very significant levels of business investment
 and very importantly we have been aided and you as exporters have
 been aided by the very intelligent management of the Australian exchange
 rate by the Reserve Bank of Australia. And all of these things have
 come together to give to our economy a sense of strength, a sense
 of resilience and a sense of optimism that not even the most enthusiastic
 of us may have thought possible seven and a half months ago and indeed
 12 months ago.
So it is possible as I speak to you tonight on behalf of the Government
 and congratulate you on the progress that has been made with your
 new organisation over the last seven and a half months and particularly
 to you Mr President to thank you for a thoughtful and constructive
 speech which as this organisation and its predecessors has always
 done, made a very good contribution to the ongoing economic debate
 in our country. One of the many encouraging things about the taxation
 debate which we have had in this country and we continue to have is
 the way in which it has been possible to bring forth intelligent,
 thoughtful debate about the long-term structure of our taxation system.
The core of our taxation reform is, of course, comprised in the legislation
 that is now before the Australian Parliament. But the process of business
 tax reform which we highlighted in the lead up to the election is
 a very important, indeed crucial, element of the long-term challenge
 of economic and taxation reform. And I think all of us are greatly
 in debt to John Ralph for the way in which he has been prepared to
 bring his great business and accounting skill and integrity to the
 task of presiding over the taxation reform group.
Australia is indeed fortunate to have men and women out of the business
 community like John Ralph who are willing to commit themselves to
 such an important task. And I do warmly welcome the way in which your
 group has responded tonight and has put forward its views and made
 its constructive, intelligent, thoughtful contribution to the debate.
 And knowing as I do the diversity of the companies that you represent
 forming that consolidated view would not have been easy. And it is
 an act of leadership and an act of courage on behalf of this organisation
 to do precisely that.
But, ladies and gentlemen, although we gather at this dinner at a
 time of tremendous optimism about the Australian economy, at a time
 when because of rising real incomes, low interest rates and the lowest
 unemployment level in eight or nine years the purchasing power and
 the sense of optimism of the average Australian is at a very high
 level and we are therefore entitled to feel a sense of satisfaction
 and a sense of pleasure as Australians about that.
I don't speak to you in any sense of smugness or complacency
 about that situation and mine is not a counsel of resting on our oars,
 mine is not a counsel of saying the reform task is behind us. Indeed,
 the reform task in the modern economy is never behind us. There is
 no alternative in the modern globalised economy in which we all live
 than to go on indefinitely with the process of economic reform. The
 idea that any nation that wants to preserve a decent living standard
 can opt out of reform, the idea that there is such an alternative
 to ongoing economic reform is to completely misread the changes that
 have occurred in world society over the last 20 years.
We are permanently part of a globalised economy. That will never change.
 There is no going back to the creation of national fortresses where
 barriers can be put up against the rest of the world. We may delay
 and temper the impact of change but in the end it will envelop all
 of us. And the intelligent response of national policy makers is to
 take the opportunity to reform on an ongoing basis and I can't
 think of a time in Australia's recent economic history that bodes
 better for ongoing economic reform than in the early months of this
 year. It is precisely because our economy is doing well, it is precisely
 because we do have low interest rates and low inflation and a strong
 budget position that we should embrace in a very enthusiastic manner
 ongoing economic reform. And this is exactly the right time to be
 reforming our taxation system.
I have been involved in the debate about taxation reform in this country
 now for something like 20 years. In a former government I argued the
 case for broad based indirect taxation. I remember giving my old political
 adversary, Paul Keating, very strong support in the middle 1980s when
 his Government advocated the introduction of a broad based consumption
 tax. But in all of the occasions that it has been on the table before
 I can't think of a time when it is more appropriate for taxation
 reform to occur. We have low inflation, we have an opportunity to
 grab by the scruff of the neck and consolidate even further the competitive
 advantages that our strong economic position are providing us around
 the world. And the boost to our exporters that a taxation reform package
 would give. The way in which our farmers and our miners would be made
 more competitive through the changes we have in mind in relation to
 diesel fuel and the list goes on.
And on top of that, as we were reminded by Chris Richardson of Access
 Economics only a few days ago that the planned personal income taxation
 cuts which will provide an enormous additional boost to personal spending
 power will, in fact, come in at the very time that some of the capital
 spending in this country in areas like the Olympic Games and so forth
 would be going off the boil. And Mr Richardson made the very interesting
 observation that on past occasions when governments have delivered
 personal income tax cuts they have often chosen the wrong time to
 do it. And he said that on this occasion the personal income tax cuts
 that are planned under the Government's taxation package are
 coming in at precisely the right time.
Not surprisingly I argue very strongly to you as I will to any audience
 anywhere in Australia the long-term economic benefit of the taxation
 plan that we took to the Australian people last October. It is not
 without importance in that debate that the detail of that plan was
 quite unparalleled in Australian political history. No government
 before ours had presented in such minute comprehensive detail a blueprint
 for such major and fundamental economic change. And that is a consideration
 that we believe should certainly not be lost on the Parliament as
 it deliberates on that plan and makes a decision some time during
 the next three months.
I have no doubt that the long-term cause of economic reform in this
 country, I have no doubt that the long-term cause of making this nation
 an even more competitive nation will be done a very grievous blow
 if that plan is not implemented. And I would not want any of the people
 who are here tonight to underestimate the determination of the Government
 and my own personal determination to ensure that the verdict of the
 Australian people last October on that issue is given full effect
 to by the Parliament of this country.
Could I also say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that it is not only
 in the area of taxation reform that I believe further reform and change
 should take place. I welcome the remarks that have been made about
 the Government's workplace reform agenda and I want to acknowledge
 the contribution that Peter Reith, who is here tonight, has made to
 the reform process in our Government. It hasn't always been easy
 and there was a time almost a year ago in relation to the waterfront
 reforms where there was no shortage of people who were ready to criticise
 what the Government did in that area but time has vindicated those
 decisions and the productivity improvements particularly on the Melbourne
 waterfront have demonstrated the wisdom of the actions that were taken
 by the Government.
But we have foreshadowed further reform in that area and one of the
 principal reasons why further industrial relations reform is needed
 is the contribution that it can and will make to providing further
 flexibility in the Australian labour market. We are disappointed that
 the Senate has chosen thus far to reject our attempts to entrench
 youth wages within the Australian industrial relations system. We
 are also disappointed thus far that those who had the numbers in the
 Senate have rejected our attempts in relation to the unfair dismissal
 laws. We will persevere with those measures again in the future because
 we believe they and others are important to the long-term and sustained
 attack on unemployment levels within the Australian community.
So, ladies and gentlemen, my message to you tonight is not a message
 of smug complacency and satisfaction, it is not a message of saying
 to you look what a terrific job has been done in relation to the Australian
 economy. Quite naturally, I, as Prime Minister and my Ministers take
 some pride in the Government's economic achievements. I take
 some pride in the fact that we took the difficult budget decisions
 three years ago which helped deliver us the economic security which
 is now working to the benefit of all Australians. But this is not
 an occasion for smugness and backslapping, it's not an occasion
 to say what a great job we have done, it's an occasion to acknowledge
 the real strength of the Australian economy. But above all, it is
 an occasion to recognise the undeniable reality of modern economic
 life.
There is no alternative to the reform process. Arguments about reform
 fatigue are important in so far as they remind those in government
 and indeed all of us involved in public life that the obligation to
 reform carries with it an obligation to explain the benefits of reform
 and the reasons for reform. And I have always believed that the Australian
 people can be persuaded of the wisdom of economic reform if two conditions
 are satisfied. The first of those conditions is that you must persuade
 them that it is in the national interest. And the second of those
 conditions is that you must persuade them that it is, generally speaking,
 fair to all sections of the Australian community. And if those two
 obligations are discharged then I believe the Australian people as
 they have demonstrated in relation to all of the reforms that have
 occurred over the last 20 years the Australian people will respond
 to and they will support those reforms.
But there is no national interest to be achieved in anybody seriously
 believing or anybody seriously arguing the proposition that in some
 way the Australian people and the Australian economy can opt out of
 the globalisation process, that we can turn our backs on the realities
 of modern economic life. That option is no longer available. But in
 asserting that reality I, of course, accept that the overwhelming
 obligation on myself as Prime Minister and the members of my Government
 to explain to the Australian people the ongoing benefits and the ongoing
 advantages of economic reform. If we can seize the moment which our
 remarkable economic strength gives us to press ahead with reform we
 can give to future generations of Australians an even stronger economic
 base on which they can prosper and build their lives and the lives
 of their children.
Can I say to the members of the AI group which, of course, was formed
 out of two other great industry organisations with whom I have had
 a lot to do over the years. And as I have looked around the audience
 tonight I recognise many familiar faces going back to some I met 25
 years ago when I first entered Federal Parliament. I want to thank
 your group, I want to thank its antecedents for the contribution that
 they have made to the cause of industry in this country. I think your
 President did us a service in reminding us of the ongoing fundamental
 importance of manufacturing industry to the Australian economy. And
 I admire the way in which Australian manufacturing has changed and
 modernised particularly over the last 10 or 15 years. The way in which
 it has picked up the challenge of successive governments in this country
 to shift its emphasis to exports. The way in which it is in no sense
 of shame or lack of pride in its past the way in which it has shared
 its image of being entirely concerned with what was regarded as the
 old traditional industries and the way in which it has embraced the
 new technologies and the new export opportunities that go with those
 new technologies.
I thank you very warmly for inviting me here this evening. I thank
 you again Mr President for your constructive contribution to the taxation
 debate and more particularly I thank the members of your group for
 the tremendous contribution that you continue to make to the employment
 of a million Australians or more and the building of the strength
 of the Australian economy. Thank you very much.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, the Leader
 of the Opposition, and my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues,
 and many honoured and distinguished guests. And I particularly acknowledge
 the presence of Doug Anthony, the former Deputy Prime Minister of
 Australia, and Tom Uren the former Deputy Leader of the Australian
 Labor Party, and former Chairman of the Australian Vietnamese Friendship
 Society.
Prime Minister, to you and to your wife, and to your Ministers, I
 extend a very warm welcome on behalf of the Government, and the people
 of Australia. Over the last 25 years, great strides have been made
 in building a better and a closer relationship between our two countries.
 It has not been easy but it has been done in a spirit of great good
 will on both sides. And I believe that we can quite genuinely look
 back on that period of time, assess the relationship, and recognise
 that enormous progress has been made.
And as is always the case in good relationships between nations, it
 is the people-to-people links that loom largest. And it will be not
 lost on anybody in this gathering how important those people-to-people
 links are. Nor will it be lost on any of us that Australia has within
 its confines a wonderfully vibrant and positive community of Australians
 of Vietnamese extraction, and Vietnamese birth and descent.
It numbers, according to different calculations somewhere between
 140,000 and 200,000. And it is indeed one of the largest non-English
 speaking ethnic components of the Australian population, and it has
 made a great contribution to our society. And it has produced some
 wonderful contributors to the Australian scene. One of them is here
 today of course, Tan Le, who is the young Australian of the Year last
 year. And I know that Tan Le paid a very successful visit to your
 country not long ago.
And perhaps many here will not know that only three months ago Nhan
 Vo-Van, a Vietnamese born Australian, and a senior bureaucrat in my
 department, became an Assistant Secretary in the Cabinet Secretariat
 area and sits in on all of my Cabinet meetings, and is one of the
 principal note takers of all of the deliberations of the Australian
 government.
They are but two examples of many of people of Vietnamese descent
 who have made a wonderful contribution to our nation. I'm also
 delighted to have been told this morning that Australia, with 4000
 Vietnamese students at its universities, is now the largest host country
 of overseas Vietnamese students in the world. And given the antecedents,
 and given previous associations of Vietnam with the former Soviet
 Union, with France and so forth, that is a very significant development
 and a very very significant indication of just how close our two countries
 are.
Your country Prime Minister is embarking upon an era of economic reform.
 It is not easy. We recognise that living standards remain, by those
 of the industrialised world, still very low. We contribute through
 our foreign aid program in a most constructive way. And the My Thuan
 Bridge of course is the largest infrastructure project funded through
 the aid budget ever undertaken by Australia. And I understand from
 you Prime Minister that it will be ready for opening some time in
 the middle of next year. And my Deputy Prime Minister is already,
 in his inimitable style, promoting a joint Prime Ministerial presence
 at that opening when it takes place. And I mean we might be able to
 include the odd Deputy Prime Minister as well.
Last year was the first time that our two-way trade exceeded the $1
 billion mark. And our exports to Vietnam grew by 60% to be $386 million
 in 1998, and your exports to Australia grew by 30% in the same period.
 Total Australian investment in Vietnam was worth about $1.3 billion,
 representing the activities of more than 100 Australian companies
 including Telstra, which has decided to make Hanoi its regional headquarters,
 Fosters, and Southcorp. But we are eager to work more with Vietnam
 in areas such as insurance, agribusiness, science and technology,
 mining and resources, and in education and defence.
As you know Prime Minister, foreign direct investment and trade are
 powerful contributors to sustainable growth and we must fully exploit
 and facilitate these opportunities. Predictability and transparency
 are fundamental in this area. We do want to note that we've also
 started a modest co-operation programs in the area of defence.
Prime Minister, your country and Australia are of course fellow members
 of APEC. And as I stressed to you in our talks this morning, we share
 a common interest in the realisation of the ultimate APEC goals of
 trade liberalisation, by the year 2010 in respect to developed countries,
 and the year 2020 in respect of developing countries. And it is important
 that the meeting which takes place in New Zealand this year that the
 momentum towards those goals be maintained and increased.
The region in which both our countries are located has gone through
 the worst economic adversity in four or five decades. Australia has
 essentially been able to stare down that economic downturn and we
 have been very keen, during that period, to contribute in a constructive
 way as an active regional partner in helping countries in the region
 which have been worst affected. And over and above the foreign aid
 that we give in a direct form to many countries including Vietnam
 we have been able to participate in the economic bailouts of Indonesia,
 of Korea and Thailand.
I am hopeful, and my Government is hopeful, that the worst of the
 economic downturn in Asia is behind us. But even on the most optimistic
 scenario it will be a number of years before we can see a significant
 resumption of economic growth in the countries that have been worst
 affected.
During our discussion this morning, Prime Minister, you told me of
 the economic reforms which had taken place over the last 10 years
 in Vietnam. We agreed on the importance of transparency and clear
 and open laws and rules of corporate governance. They are important
 to the investment atmosphere. They are important to the capacity of
 your country to attract large amounts of foreign investment which
 are so very important to your future economic development. Your Ambassador
 to Australia, Prime Minister, even informed me that your country has
 recently introduced a goods and services tax which commenced operation
 on the 1st of January this year.
But, Prime Minister, I want to say, in the spirit of the friendship
 that is now characteristic of the relationship between our two countries,
 how very welcome you and your party are to Australia. We have travelled
 as very different societies with a history of difference and conflict.
 We have travelled a very important but, I think, a very positive and
 a very constructive road over the last 25 years.
We respect enormously the contribution of Australians of Vietnamese
 descent to our society. We welcome the opportunity to work with your
 country in APEC. We recognise that we have some differences and it
 is always better to frankly state and recognise differences. In areas
 such as human rights I've had the opportunity to convey some
 of the concerns that are felt by Australia and by Australians. But
 I've conveyed them in a spirit of respect and a spirit of understanding
 that different societies can work together effectively, must accept
 those differences and focus on the things that they have in common
 and the things that they can achieve together.
There are 80 million people in your country. I think there are enormous
 opportunities for growth and development. I find in my discussions
 with Australian companies a continued interest in Vietnam and a desire,
 all things being equal, to invest in that country and to share in
 its economic development and its economic growth.
I am grateful, Prime Minister, that you and your wife and your colleagues
 have seen fit to come here. I hope that the rest of your visit to
 Australia is a very happy and successful and productive one. And I
 can assure you that the representative character of the gathering
 at today's lunch indicates the importance that Australians in
 walks of life place on the relationship between our two societies.
 I would now like to invite the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kim Beazley,
 to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.......................................................................................
Can I say to you, Mayor, to Barry Haase to Ron Manners to other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great delight to be in Kalgoorlie
 for the first time as Prime Minister. Kalgoorlie has a special place
 in, not only in Western Australian history, but a special place in
 Australian history. It's a very distinctive part of our country.
 It boasts a number of things. Kalgoorlie of course is the largest
 electorate in the world I think and I often entertain my European
 visitors in particular when we start comparing political notes and
 I point out that we have an electorate in Australia that is larger
 than about two-thirds of the European Union put together.
This of course is the second time that I visited the electorate of
 Kalgoorlie in the space of a month because I went to Exmouth only
 a short while ago with Barry to see for myself first hand and with
 the Premier of Western Australia, Richard Court, to announce some
 special assistance to the people of Exmouth who suffered so severely
 as a result of the cyclone.
It is not the first time that I've been to this city but it is
 certainly the first time as Prime Minister and I want to thank Barry
 very warmly for the invitation. It's an opportunity for me to
 do what I like to do when Parliament is not sitting and that is as
 frequently as possible get away from the larger urban concentrations
 of Australia which are, of course, an important part of our national
 community, to get around the country to understand first hand through
 discussion and listening to people how different life is, how important
 life is to the national good in the regional areas of Australia. And
 to say to you that I do understand as Prime Minister that there are
 special challenges and special difficulties. That I do appreciate
 the contribution that the mining industry in particular makes to the
 wealth of Australia and to the living standard of Australia.
Only a month or so ago, I opened the Olympic Dam Site in South Australia
 which is part of the great Roxby Downs Project. And that project is
 making a huge contribution potentially to Australia's export
 income. The gold mining industry is the second biggest export earner
 amongst the mining industries of Australia and Kalgoorlie is the greatest
 gold mining producing area in Australia. And it is a city which is
 rich in the history of this country, it is rich in the history of
 Western Australia and played, as you all know, a major and decisive
 role and part in the decision of Western Australia to join the Federation
 in the name of Paddy Hannon is synonymous with the development of
 the mining industry and of gold mining in Australia. It incidentally
 as I remarked to one of my staff coming here this morning, I think
 it's the only federal electorate in Australia whose Member was
 once expelled from Federal Parliament for entirely, I think in historical
 perspective, inappropriate reasons, for something that would certainly
 not happen today.
But most importantly this community is an example of how people work
 together and cooperate together in the regional areas of Australia.
 And as I moved around here this morning I met people from the local
 home nursing organisations, I met the Anglican Priest, I met the Pastors
 of other Churches, I've met people involved in Centrelink, I've
 met people involved in the Lyons clubs, people involved in all the
 different organisations that make a community work. Australians are
 very good at working together. And as we approach, in two years time,
 the Centenary of the Federation of Australia, we are becoming a lot
 more conscious as a nation of what we all have in common and how much
 we have achieved over the last one hundred years. And I am particularly
 pleased to acknowledge the presence of people from the Indigenous
 community of Kalgoorlie and the recognition that all of us as Australians
 working together have a common interest and a common investment in
 a harmonious and cooperative and caring future together as Australians
 as we go into the next century.
Australia has achieved an enormous amount. And it is a huge country,
 it varies enormously and I never tire of the opportunity of moving
 around our country and meeting people in different circumstances.
 And the richest thing about being an Australian is the immense diversity
 of this country yet the common humanity of the people of this country.
 Although we live in different circumstances, and this community is
 a long way away from the settled suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne and
 very different from the tropical areas of Far North Queensland and
 very different again from some of the mountain areas of the Snowy
 Mountains of New South Wales and yet the sense of community and the
 sense of cooperation and the national spirit is as deep and strong
 in all of those areas as it is in the next. And, although we live
 in different areas and we face different challenges, we have so many
 things in common particularly the common values we all have as Australians.
I'm very conscious, as Prime Minister of our country, of the
 role not only of Australia in a domestic sense but also the role of
 Australia in the world community. And like any other nation we have
 opportunities and responsibilities. I'm very proud of the fact
 that Australia's economic strengths at the present time has enabled
 it to stare down the worst of the Asian economic downturn. But in
 saying that I'm conscious that not everybody in Australia is
 enjoying the benefits and the bounty that come out that come out of
 that economic success. And it's the responsibility of the community
 to remember at a time of relative national prosperity, that there
 remain people within our community who continue to need our help.
 But we shouldn't lose sight of what Australia has achieved. We
 are performing better than most, we are seen in our region in particular
 as being economically very strong and one of the advantages of that
 is that we are listened to more carefully and more respectfully. We
 speak from a greater position of strength because of our economic
 achievements than would otherwise be the case.
I will, next week, meet the Indonesian President, Dr Habibie, to talk
 about the concerns I have about what is happening in East Timor. I
 will do so as the Leader of a country which has developed a friendly
 relationship with Indonesia, not an uncritical friendship. No true
 friendship is always uncritical. A true friendship in a personal level
 as well as at a national level, is a friendship that is based upon
 long and shared common experiences but is also a friendship that enables
 you to speak with candour and openness when the circumstances require.
 All Australians are concerned about what is happening in East Timor,
 all want a just and peaceful solution. We must all remember, of course,
 that it is part of Indonesia. And ultimately a proper resolution,
 a positive resolution of what is occurring there can only happen through
 the involvement, the consent and the support and the active participation
 of the Indonesian Government and the armed forces of that country.
 But our relationship with Indonesia is important to us. It's
 a nation of more than 200 million people, it's our nearest neighbour
 and it's within close flying distance, particularly of Western
 Australia. But I will go to those talks as the Leader of a country
 which has been a good friend but not an uncritical friend and a country
 whilst understanding the political and cultural differences of our
 neighbour is also a country that is concerned about human rights,
 is concerned about justice and is concerned to ensure the fair treatment
 and decent future for the people of East Timor.
But, ladies and gentlemen, it's always a special privilege for
 a Prime Minister to come to regional Australia, to talk to people,
 to listen to them, I hope in a small way to encourage them and, most
 importantly, as Barry has done on behalf of the broader community
 to express my thanks and my respect for all of those people who work
 in such a tireless, unselfish and open hearted way to help those who
 need assistance and to make our community work more effectively.
There are many things that make up the matrix of Australian values
 and one of those things is our great spirit of volunteerism. And you
 find volunteerism and a willingness to help each other, some even
 call it mateship, in rural and regional Australia to an even more
 pronounced and marked degree than you'd find in other parts of
 Australia. And the willingness of everybody to dig in and help and
 work together, particularly in adversity, is an instinctive Australian
 characteristic. And we really do do it better than any other country
 in the world, and it's one of those precious Australian assets
 that we must always hang onto and we must always work very hard to
 preserve.
Now, as you are aware, the Federal Government out of the Federation
 Fund, which is a one billion dollar fund designed to support projects
 that will in part honour one hundred years of the Australian nation
 and also contribute valuably to the infrastructure of this country,
 out of that we have contributed the sum of some five million dollars
 for the marvellous enterprise for which Mr Manners is principally
 responsible. And the Hall of Fame that will quite rightly and properly
 honour the contribution of the mining industry of Australia to this
 nation. The mining industry is an integral part of the Australian
 economy. The contribution of the mining industry to the wealth of
 this country is incalculable. And it will always be part of the policies
 of my government and the policies of Coalition Governments generally
 at a State and Federal level, to support and to help and to promote
 and to defend the mining industry of this country. And that applies
 in relation to a whole range of things, many of which have been under
 debate recently and continue to be under debate, matters relating
 to Native Title and a resolution of that issue is important to the
 people of this district because while ever there is uncertainty surrounding
 investment there will be less investment. As surely as night follows
 day if you have uncertainty about an industry you will get less investment.
 And the sooner that that is resolved the better it will be for the
 people of Western Australia, for the people of this district and for
 the people of the Australian community generally. And it's been
 the desire of my Government, and I believe that last year we worked
 out an honourable compromise which was fair to the mining industry,
 fair to the farmers, fair to the Indigenous people and fair to the
 generality of the Australian community. And the translation of that
 outcome here in Western Australia is being held up at the moment.
 And because it's being held up the mining industry is suffering
 and the community is suffering. It ought to be fixed and it ought
 to be fixed quickly. Because while it remains held up all of those
 groups, the Indigenous groups, the mining industry and the farming
 interests of this country which is so very important and the general
 community are suffering.
But, ladies and gentlemen, can I say to Barry, who's been in
 a short period of six months an extremely energetic representative
 of this vast community and this vast and vast electorate of Kalgoorlie
 and he is working very hard in Canberra for you. He's certainly
 persistent and that's what you want and that's what a community
 like this is entitled to have, you're entitled to have somebody
 who will speak up for the particular problems and challenges of a
 community such as this. I thank Barry very warmly for having me here
 today, it's a delight to be amongst you, I wish you well and
 to all of you thank you most warmly for the contribution that you
 are making to this magnificent community.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Dalton. To my colleague Wilson Tuckey, to Mr
 Ken Wilkie the Federal Member for Swan representing the Leader of
 the Federal Opposition, to Mike Board representing the Premier, to
 (inaudible) and Andrew who have given such moving speeches on the
 ongoing significance of the contribution and the sacrifice of the
 men that we honour today. I particularly thank you for your very thoughtful
 and sensitive remarks. But most importantly to 800 years of accumulated
 wisdom, experience, and commitment to Australia. These magnificent
 men. These true national treasures of Australia. To them we particularly
 honour and dedicate this occasion.
Many things have been said about the ANZAC tradition. Many things
 have been said about the sacrifice of Australians who have died to
 give us the freedom that we enjoy in this freest of all countries
 in the world. When ever I've visited a war cemetery, particularly
 the cemeteries of France, I'm struck by one overwhelming impression,
 an overwhelming reaction, and that is that they were all so young.
 As you read each headstone and see the age: 17, 18, 19, in their early
 20s. You think of the fearful slaughter and you think of the incredible
 waste of humanity that occurred on both sides of that conflict, and
 indeed of all conflicts.
We should never forget that in 1914 the male population of Australia
 was in the order of two-and-a-half to three million, and yet almost
 400,000 of those volunteered to fight in World War I. And 60,000 of
 those who volunteered never came back, and tens of thousands more
 were wounded, many very seriously. And it is an astonishing tribute
 to the resilience of that generation that these eight wonderful men
 are with us today. And I can't find the words, politicians are
 meant always to have words to talk about and describe things, I can't
 find words to adequately express the admiration that I feel for that
 heroic generation that did so much. And I want to say that as Prime
 Minister that I hope that this country forever studies and seeks to
 better and further understand World War I, to understand the influence
 that it had on the history of the world, to understand the social
 impact of World War I on the Australian nation, the sense of nationhood
 and the sense of even greater resilience and independence that the
 experience of World War I gave to our nation.
And in studying that let us honour these remarkable people. Let us
 also honour the contribution of those in the nursing corps who worked
 so very hard to care for the wounded at the front. Let us honour and
 remember the pain and the anguish and the agony of the mothers and
 the wives and the sisters who received those awful telegrams notifying
 death, or notifying severe wounding.
So today is an occasion to do that and that is because of that feeling
 that we decided on Armistice Day last year that for the first time
 under the Australian honours system we strike a commemorative medal.
 And that commemorative medal was to be given to every survivor or
 World War I alive on Armistice Day last year which was the 80th
 anniversary of the cessation of hostilities in November 1918. And
 the medal is a wonderful representation of what it honours. On one
 side it has the replica of the Digger statue that was unveiled at
 Bullecourt last year. On the other side is the Federation Star and
 the wattle of Australia. The ribbon is the colour of the Flanders
 poppy and it is joined by the crown because all the soldiers who went
 to World War I were soldiers of the King.
And I think in every way it captures the occasion, it brings together
 the various elements that were relevant at that time and continue
 to be relevant. But most importantly ladies and gentleman it's
 a symbolic expression of the respect and gratitude and honour that
 we all feel is due to that generation and most particularly to the
 survivors of that generation. And it really is one of those great
 privileges as Prime Minister of our country that I can come here today
 on the first occasion, on the eve of ANZAC Day 1999 and present the
 medals, 11 of them, to recipients and to the families. And in doing
 that could I just say one or two things particularly about some of
 the recipients.
There are many images of individuals that come out of World War I.
 None of course in a sense has become more famous than the image of
 Simpson and his donkey. But just as children of Australian schools
 learnt of Simpson and his donkey, perhaps in years ahead children
 could be told of Private Peter Casserly who is here today, who lied
 about his age to enlist in the AIF. Let them here how he wrote to
 his mother, a message in a bottle and threw it over the side of a
 ship as he departed his homeland. And may they learn how the message
 reached his mother and how Peter reached action on the Western Front.
Let children be told of Private Cecil McFee who saw a great number
 of battles on the Western Front and whose service continues even beyond
 the end of World War II when he served in Japan as a member of the
 British Commonwealth ccupation force.
May they hear about the service of Private George Podmore who was
 wounded in action at Villiers Bretonneux in April 1918. And Private
 Hubert Walton, the youngest of 11 children who enlisted at the age
 of 17 to fight in many actions on the Western Front.
Let children hear of others hear of others who survived to the 80th
 anniversary of the Armistice but did not live until today. Like Gallipoli
 veteran Lance Corporal Leonard Hall who left to fight to join the
 Light Horse when he was 16, and who had his age put up because he
 was a bugler that the regiment so dearly wanted. Let them be taught
 that he was only to survive the blast of an aerial torpedo because
 his horse was to take the brunt of the explosion.
May children learn about others recognised by this medal who were
 not to survive until today like Gallipoli veteran Private Francis
 Isaacs who fought in many battles on the Western Front such as at
 Pozieres where the AIF lost 23,000 men, who, like himself was twice
 wounded and twice returned to the front to continue his service.
Ladies and gentleman, we've had today two very fine and moving
 contributions from two young Australians. Young Australians born into
 a free country, born into a country that has almost unparalleled opportunities,
 a country which is as free as any in the world, a country that offers
 hope and security and opportunity for its young. But in their words
 they displayed a respect and an understanding and a reverence for
 the contribution of earlier generations. And there is a continuity.
 There is something very special about the Australian identity, there's
 something very special about the ANZAC tradition. And I don't
 think that the ANZAC tradition has been better described than in the
 words of that great World War I historian Charles Bean who wrote of
 the ANZAC spirit as follows: "In the end ANZAC stood and still
 stands for reckless valour in a good cause, for enterprise, resourcefulness,
 fidelity, comradeship and endurance that will never admit defeat".
I can't think, although those words were written many many years
 ago, I can't think of a more beautifully, evocative description
 of what I always thought the Australian spirit to be. Those words
 call to mind comradeship, they call to mind mateship, they call to
 mind the commitment of Australians to good causes, they call to mind
 the skepticism about too much authority which has always been an endearing
 Australian characteristic, and they call to mind the sense of adventure,
 and they call to mind the optimism of the Australian people and the
 Australian nation. And those words have been, are as valid and as
 enduring, and as evocative today as they were when they were written.
 And they beautifully encapsulate to me, and I believe to many other
 Australians, what these men went to war to defend, what they went
 to war to demonstrate, and how they demonstrated to the world what
 a remarkable, particular and special place Australia really was.
Can I say to all of you wonderful Australians collectively from the
 bottom of a grateful nation's heart, thank you for what you have
 done for us. Thank you for the land you fought to protect. Thank you
 for the way of life that you helped bequeath to all of us. And thank
 you for the quality of that life that we in the present generations
 of Australians so richly enjoy and are so deeply grateful that you
 have given to us. Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Funding for Nurses'Memorial
E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Rusty to Elisabeth Perciville to the other
 very special and distinguished and honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is appropriate as we approach ANZAC Day 1999 to take a few opportunities
 to honour those people who have made such a remarkable contribution
 to producing Australia of 1999 which is without fear as a free and
 open and democratic society. I had the special opportunity in Western
 Australia only yesterday to present to eight survivors of World War
 I the first of the eightieth anniversary commemorative medals of which
 the government has decided to strike to honour those veterans of World
 War I who survived to see armistice day 1998 the eightieth anniversary
 of the end of World War I.
Here on the other side of Australia in Sydney, today, I have the opportunity
 on behalf of the Australian Government and on behalf of the Australian
 people to pay special tribute to a special and remarkable band of
 Australian women who endured in so many theatres of war the privation,
 the suffering, the death and all of the heartache and all of the toil
 involved in caring for the wounded and the dying amongst Australian
 service personnel in all theatres of war.
Starting with their contribution for the first time in the South African
 War through the first World War through World War II and through the
 subsequent conflicts in which Australia has been involved, nurses
 have been at the forefront of the effort in defending our country
 and the greatest tributes that have been paid to them of course have
 been paid to them by the service men themselves who were cared for,
 whose lives were saved and whose lives were put together again by
 their loving care and attention.
Part of the debt that we owe to the men and women who defended this
 country is a special debt to those nurses of Australia who made such
 a magnificent contribution in all of the wars in which Australians
 have been involved. Earlier this week the marvelous ABC TV documentary
 Sisters in Arms told the work of service nurses during conflicts
 in which Australia has been involved. That particular program which
 interviewed several of the people who are here today told some wonderful
 stories of their heroism and it was a wonderful reminder to the current
 generation of Australians just how much we owe to that remarkable
 group of men and women who gave so much in the two world conflicts
 and in Korea and in Vietnam.
Just as I encouraged the audience in Western Australia yesterday to
 think that, as children in Australian schools are taught Simpson and
 his donkey, to learn some of the stories surrounding that remarkable
 group of men who comprised amongst the eight of them more than eight
 hundred years of cumulative life experiences so can we never forget
 the courage and compassion of survivors like Sister Vivienne Bullwinkle,
 the only survivor of the Banker Island Massacre in World War II and
 Sister Nell Savage, the only survivor of the sinking of the hospital
 ship Centar in World War II as well as those who were taken
 as prisoners of war.
The nurses of Australia have contributed important and never to be
 forgotten chapters to the history of this country in war. Their contribution
 was selfless their dedication was unlimited and the debt that we owe
 to them was equal to the debt that we owe to those people we owe to
 those on the fighting front. And their contribution and their spirit
 illumines in a very special way the ANZAC spirit and the ANZAC tradition.
The Government, as you know, announced with the great help of the
 various nursing associations, the dedication, hopefully later this
 year, of a special nurse's memorial in Canberra. And I am announcing
 today a further contribution, from the Federal Government, of $500,000
 towards the cost of completing, erecting and dedicating the memorial.
 We hope that that will occur in October of this year and I want to
 particularly thank all of those people who have been involved in it.
 I want to congratulate Elizabeth Percival who is here today, the Executive
 Director of the Royal College of Nursing Australia, who agreed to
 chair the memorial management committee, Ita Buttrose, who chaired
 the fundraising committee, as well as all those involved in the memorial
 project for their magnificent efforts in arriving where we are at
 present. The contributions made by various sub branches and elements
 of the RSL, by state governments and other veterans' groups have
 been very welcome. The Commonwealth Government made an initial contribution
 of $100,000 and the further contribution of $500,000 that I announced
 today will, I hope, make and important further contribution towards
 the successful billing of the appeal target and of the completion,
 the dedication and the opening of the memorial.
Memorials are an important expression of how any nation or any group
 of people feels about a section of its community. We have many memorials
 in Canberra, far and away the most moving, the most memorable and
 those that are most evocative of the history of our country are those
 that are dedicated to the contribution of the men and women who defended
 this country in war. And the nurses memorial, when it is opened, will
 take its place alongside the War Memorial, alongside the special memorials
 to our conflicts in Vietnam and elsewhere and the other special memorials
 that mark the contribution of men and women in theatres of war. Can
 I say to those representatives of the Nurses of Australia who are
 here today, that your nation is forever in your debt, your nation
 is grateful for what you did, your nation admires and respects and
 will always remember the risks you took, the contribution you made,
 the relief of suffering that you afforded. The memorial that will
 be opened in October, will I hope will be a fitting and important
 reminder to the entire nation and particularly to those that are young
 who visit Canberra of just how important the role that you all played
 at very perilous and very critical times in the history of Australia.
 Thank you very much.
  ends


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Thank you very much Tony. To the Lord Mayor of Perth and to my ministerial
 colleagues in the Government of Western Australia, ladies and gentlemen.
It is true that I am the first Prime Minister to go to Kalgoorlie
 for 18 years and I am here alive and well to report to you that the
 locals were very friendly and very pleased to see me and they had
 one or two things to say about the mining industry and those views
 were expressed in characteristically clearly understood, monosyllabic,
 you know, direct terms.
But, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for the opportunity
 of talking to such a cross-section of the business community of Perth
 and Western Australia. I, of course, have had a long association with
 Perth and this Chamber and its various antecedents over the years
 in the different positions I have held in both Government and opposition.
 And it really couldn't be a more appropriate time as we have
 begun the countdown to the final vote on the goods and service tax,
 it couldn't be a more appropriate time for me to address this
 gathering and to say a few words about the Government's attitude
 to the ongoing challenge of economic reform.
Can I reassure your acting President and all of you that the Government
 remains very committed indeed to an ongoing economic reform agenda.
 We are not committed to an ongoing economic reform agenda out of some
 ideological commitment towards change for changes sake. I don't
 believe in change for changes sake. I have often described myself
 as a discerning radical or a selective conservative. That is I believe
 in changing things that need change and I believe in preserving things
 that continue to work. And I think the idea that you have got to change
 everything just because it's been around for a while unless there's
 a valid reason for doing so is a very foolish approach. But equally
 when something doesn't work and when something is in need of
 overhaul and change you have got to have the foresight and the courage
 to pursue that change.
And that is certainly the case with Australia's taxation system.
 As some of you will know, I have been campaigning for reforming the
 Australian taxation system for probably 20 years. I have believed
 as I am sure most people in this room have believed for a very long
 time that the single biggest change that is needed to the Australia
 taxation system is to replace the ramshackle indirect tax system that
 we have at the present time which is replete with numerous inefficiencies
 and inequities with a simple, across the board, broad-based indirect
 tax, a goods and services tax.
We hear a lot about this or that model. Senator Lees of the Australian
 Democrats today said that we should adopt the Irish model. Now, I
 love the Irish, I really do. Having seen Paddy Hannan's handy
 work in Kalgoorlie today I could hardly not. But for heaven's
 sake why can't we for once have an Australian model? Why can't
 we have a model that is suitable for Australia as we come towards
 the end of this century and this millennium and we are on the verge
 of the 21st century? And the tax plan that we took to the
 last election was designed to underwrite the continued economic growth
 of our nation into the next century. Not only does it sweep away the
 ramshackle indirect tax system we have at the present time and replace
 it with an exporter friendly broad-based indirect tax which is of
 enormous benefit to all Australian exporters and to all Australian
 businesses, but it also brings in unprecedented reductions in personal
 income tax. In all the debate about whether you should have or not
 have food included many people have forgotten the fact that under
 our plan 80 per cent of Australians will be on a top marginal rate
 of no more than 30 cents in the dollar. And that will inject an enormous
 amount of incentive into the work effort of many low and middle income
 earners in our community. And of equal importance is the absolutely
 spectacular revolution in Commonwealth/State financial relations that
 our plan represents.
Now, all of you are familiar with the charade and the nonsense that
 often attends Premiers conferences in this State. One by one the Premiers
 come, they stop at the doors of Parliament House in Canberra, they
 give a doorstop saying that they have been short-changed by the Commonwealth,
 we have a meeting and they come out and they say nothing has changed,
 the Commonwealth is still short-changing us. But we had a meeting
 last Friday week, Max Evans was there, it's the best Premiers'
 Conference I have ever been to. I have only ever been to them, of
 course, as either a Federal Treasurer or as the Prime Minister but
 the ones that I have been to over the years none of them have been
 as good as the one last Friday week. And the reason the one last Friday
 week was so good was that all of us recognise that we are actually
 participating in making a bit of economic and financial history in
 this country.
We were signing a document that committed the governments of the six
 States and the two territories of Australia and the Commonwealth Government
 to a new financial deal that would secure the taxation base of the
 Australian States into the next century. Year after year Premiers
 quite properly, Charles Court did it, Richard Court has done it, Jeff
 Kennett has done it, other Premiers have done it over the years, have
 said what the States want is access to a growth tax so that they can
 support and have underwritten their responsibilities in areas such
 as government schools and police and roads and hospitals.
And under our plan, all of the revenue from the goods and services
 tax, every last dollar of that revenue will go to the Australian States.
 And can I say to those, and I know there are many here tonight who
 are quite properly and very proudly concerned about the activities
 of the welfare sector in Australia and many here tonight are directly
 involved in helping the less fortunate in our community, that the
 best way that you can help the provision of welfare in this country
 is to underwrite the taxation base of the Australian States. Because
 unless you have a situation where the Australian States have access
 to a growth tax they are not going to be able to fund all of those
 basic day to day services that are needed and are provided in our
 system of government overwhelmingly by the State governments rather
 than the Commonwealth Government.
And under our plan, by the year 2005 the Australian States collectively
 will receive $2.9 billion a year more than they would under the current
 arrangements. And that amount over time will grow. And I would say
 to every Labor and Democrat Senator from Western Australia that if
 you vote against our plan you are voting against the Federal Government
 giving the Western Australian Government more money in the years ahead
 so that that money can be spent on schools and roads and police and
 health services.
So this is not just a debate about indirect taxation reform, it's
 not just a debate about cutting personal income tax, it is also a
 debate about reforming the economic and financial structure of the
 federation. And it has needed that reform for a very long period of
 time. We took an enormous risk politically in going to the last election
 with a goods and services tax in our campaign satchel. There were
 many people who said to me, you are mad, there at some stages during
 the campaign and I thought they were probably right. But in the end
 we were able to win the election and no government in my recollection
 has gone to the people with such a detailed plan in such a fundamental
 area and been elected. I can't recall a previous government going
 with such a detailed plan.
And I would say to those in the Senate who are now debating this legislation
 and are now pontificating about what is right or what is wrong to
 the Australian people. I just remind them that we had a vote about
 that last October. If I had gone to the last election and said I am
 going to reform the taxation system and said nothing more then they
 might have an argument. If I'd have gone to the last election
 as I did to the previous election ruling out a goods and services
 tax they might have an argument. But we went to the last election
 and put all our cards on the table, we explained it in minute detail.
 We had the taxation scales, we have it all fully costed, we have it
 all verified by the Treasury, they couldn't blow any holes in
 the sums or any of the calculations. We couldn't have been more
 open and candid and forthright. And in those circumstances if the
 word mandate means anything in Australian politics we have a mandate
 with a capital M' to see that legislation pass through
 the Australian Senate.
And that is the view, might I tell you, of the Premiers even the Labor
 Premiers of Australia. At the meeting last Friday week Peter Beattie
 said to me, you have a mandate Prime Minister to introduce the goods
 and services tax. It may not be the policy of my party, he said, but
 you have a mandate to introduce it. And he was perfectly happy as
 Labor Premier of Queensland to sign up. Bob Carr was more than happy
 to sign up. I am quite sure he regards it as a very good deal. He
 goes through the motions of saying, oh, of course you understand I
 understand I don't agree with this but sighs "marvellous".
 But of course he would do that. And why wouldn't he? Because
 like every other Premier the States are going to benefit from this.
 I can't think of any other way to break the sort of a log jam
 of Commonwealth/State financial relations, and in the long run if
 you secure the revenue base of the States you are going to provide
 it.
So can I say to all of you that the Government remains very strongly
 committed to the cause of economic reform. We don't believe in
 reform for its own sake. We believe in it where it's necessary
 and in the globalised economy in which we now all live we have no
 alternative but to reform and to keep going forward. It's not
 a question of how well you're doing with how you were doing 30
 years ago or five years ago, it's a question of how well you
 were doing with your competitors in the international environment.
 And I'm very proud of the fact that over the last two or three
 years this country has been able to stare down the worst of the Asian
 economic downturn.
And one of the reasons that we are listened to with greater respect
 in the Asia-Pacific region now is that we are stronger economically
 than what we were a few years ago. It's funny like that. You
 find it in your own business experiences, you find it at a government
 level. You go to international forums with a strong economy and one
 that's performing better than most you are listened to a lot
 more than if your economy is just part of the also-rans. When I because
 Prime Minister I had the sense that Australia was the anxious outsider
 seeking admission to the rich club of the Asian-Pacific region. All
 of that has changed over the last two or three years partly because
 of the unfortunate of many of our friends in the Asia region but also
 because Australia has done better than many people expected. We have
 got our budget in order. We have a very strong fiscal position. We
 may have a current account deficit now but is a little higher than
 it was a year or two ago. But it's not of the same concern as
 it would have been at that same level if our budget was still in deficit,
 our inflation was high and our interest rates were high. We can service
 that current account deficit. We can service it very comfortably because
 the ratio of our export income to our GDP which is the determinant
 of how you can service a current account deficit is much better now
 than it's been for something like 10 or 15 years.
Now, all of these things speak of a strong economy. They speak of
 an economy that has helped Australia ride out the Asian economic downturn.
 But I don't come here proclaiming complacency or smugness. I
 recognise as I said in Kalgoorlie earlier today that there are a lot
 of challenges for the mining industry. Not only in Western Australia
 but throughout Australia. And I want to make it very plain that none
 of the policies of my Government are directed towards picking favourites
 amongst the industry sectors of Australia. I know the importance of
 service industries, and information technology industries, and high
 tech industries to Australia's futures. But I also recognise
 the ongoing contribution of the mining sector, the farm sector and
 manufacturing. And any suggestion that our Government in some way
 seeks to align itself with this or that sector of industry has been
 the industry or the sector for the future is completely wrong. We
 will always need a very strong mining industry in Australia, we'll
 always need a strong manufacturing industry, and we'll always
 need to have policies that first and foremost promote the maximum
 level of economic growth.
Part of the taxation plan of course is to reform business taxation.
 You are aware of the work of the Ralph Committee and you are aware
 of the debate that is going on in general terms at the moment within
 the business community about what is roughly called a trade off between
 the removal of some of the existing tax concessions in return for
 a 30% company tax rate. Now we have not made any decision on that
 and I know that there are a variety of views within the Australian
 business community. There's probably a variety of views in this
 room tonight. I certainly got a very strong view on that subject when
 I went to Kalgoorlie, but I equally got a very strong view from other
 sections of industry in the opposition direction as I've travelled
 around other parts of Australia. And we're going to listen to
 all of those views and we're going to assimilate it all before
 we reach a decision.
But we are committed, ladies and gentlemen, to an ongoing reformist
 approach to the management of the Australia economy. I'm very
 proud of what we've achieved. I'm very proud of the fact
 that we stuck to our guns in reforming the Australian industrial relations
 system. There is more work to do in that area. As I look around the
 room tonight I can see a few veterans of the debate about reforming
 Australia's industrial relations system through the 1980s. And
 one of the constituent elements of the Chamber from the 1980s was
 amongst the strongest proponents of industrial relations reform. And
 people like Brendan McCarthy and Lyndon Rowe, and Ross McLean, and
 others fought very hard against those within sections of industry
 in other parts of Australia who wanted to cling to the old failing
 industrial relations system that was built on the corporatist approach
 of letting everything be run by the Industrial Relations Commission.
Now, we have brought in a new era in industrial relations. We are
 seeing an historic change in community attitudes. We've achieved
 it with a minimum of industrial disputation. In fact the number of
 days lost through strikes last year was the lowest for 83 years. Despite
 the fierce opposition of many sections of the media and other sections
 of the community we did achieve lasting change in relation to the
 waterfront. It's almost a year now since the waterfront dispute.
 And although it took a number of turns that people didn't expect,
 the bottom line is that the Australian waterfront will never be the
 same again. And there are sections of the Australian waterfront that
 are now enjoying much higher productivity. And the action taken by
 the Patricks company and the support given to the reform process by
 the Federal Government has resulted in fundamental change on the Australian
 waterfront.
There is still work to be done, there are still further reforms to
 be achieved. But it's an area where through a very, very difficult
 time we have begun to see the benefits and the fruits of the Government
 having taken a very firm line in relation to industrial reform on
 the Australian waterfront. The reform process, when you are managing
 a modern economy, is never finished. We are living in a very, very
 fascinating time economically. The American economy is performing
 better than it's performed probably at any time since the end
 of World War II. The American economy has out performed the expectations
 of many of the best observers of economic performance in that country
 for many years. It may well be that the American economy and other
 economies have reached a new and higher threshold of performance and
 efficiency. I can well remember a conversation I had with the Chairman
 of the American Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan in Washington almost
 two years ago. And I said to him: how is it that the American economy's
 going so well? Do you believe it's going to continue? And he
 said: I've been in this business for a long time. And he said:
 I have to say to you that I can't believe the numbers that I'm
 seeing. And if you ask my do I know why it's all happening, he
 said, I have to say to you I'm not entirely sure, and I've
 been an economist all my life. But he said: I think it may have something
 to do with the fact that we are getting the full benefit of the enormous
 investment that our country has made in technology, and the enormous
 investment that our country has made in reform and modernisation.
 And it's probably, as a statement, had more impact on me than
 just about any other statement that's been made to me on economic
 matters in the time that I've been Prime Minister. And it drove
 home to me the fact that we may in fact be entering an era where the
 efficiencies of economies and the efficiencies of economic performance
 are delivering new possibilities and new openings.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much to the members of this Chamber
 for the support you have all given to the cause of economic reform
 and many of the economic debates over recent years. The Australian
 economy is strong. The Australian economy is doing better than most.
 The Australian economy will remain strong. The Government will remain
 absolutely committed to economic reform. We will remain absolutely
 committed to taxation reform, absolutely committed to further industrial
 relations reform. Having got the budget back into surplus we have
 no intention of squandering that surplus on a new splurge of unnecessary
 Federal government spending. You have lower interest rates now because
 the budget is in surplus. If we hadn't wiped out that $10.5 billion
 deficit interest rates in Australia would not be as low as they are
 now and the benefits of those low interest rates would not be flowing
 through, not only to small business people, but also to homebuyers.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's great to be back here in Perth. It's
 a different city, it's a city with a great entrepreneurial spirit.
 I've always enjoyed visiting it. You always get good value coming
 to Perth in terms of getting a direct and frank reading on what's
 happening, not only here in Western Australia but also around the
 country. I'm occasionally reminded when I come to Western Australia
 the contribution that your economy makes to the national economy.
 Those export figures are permanently emblazoned in my political consciousness.
 And why shouldn't you boast a bit about it because this State
 does make an enormous contribution to the export earnings in particular
 of our nation.
But it's great to be amongst you. We've got a lot of things
 to do. We've achieved a lot over the last three years but we've
 only really begun. And if we can maintain the reform process, we can
 get that GST through, get that new taxation system operating, then
 the opportunities for this country into the next century truly are
 quite amazing and potentially quite unlimited. Thank you.
 [ends]


Subjects: Economy; taxation system, tax plan, drugs,
E&amp;OE...........................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Corey, and can I say how pleased I am to
 be back in Adelaide to express my thanks to you as a group for your
 continued support of the Liberal Party cause. It is true that on a
 straight percentage basis, might I also say on a straight quality
 basis too, that the representation in South Australia in terms of
 seats is the best across Australia, and without doubt is the best
 across Australia. 9 out of 12. If we'd achieved that all around
 Australia we'd have probably had an even bigger majority than
 we secured in 1996.
But on top of that we have of course in the Cabinet a very high and
 very high quality level of representation from the State of South
 Australia. And I was certainly reminded of that earlier this week
 in Indonesia when I had at my side our Foreign Minister Alexander
 Downer who I believe has done an absolutely outstanding job in that
 portfolio over the past three years. And that of course is not to
 denigrate in anyway the contribution of the other Ministers from your
 State.
But I wanted, given the nature of the gathering, to say something
 to you today of where I see the Australian economy, and where I see
 the Government's reform programme for its second term. Reform
 is something that will always be with us in the modern globalisation
 economy. There are those who periodically write about reform fatigue.
 There are those who periodically write about the fact that the community
 will no longer accept ongoing economic reform. Whatever may be their
 motivations for saying that the reality is that we have no alternative
 but to go on reforming our economy, to go on making changes to ensure
 that we remain as competitive as we can with the rest of the world.
We don't have any option in the modern world other than to be
 part of the global economy. There's no way that we can, in the
 words of that old song Stop the World Because We Want to Get
 Off'. We can't go back to an old cloistered protective existence,
 unless of course we are to give away the high living standard, and
 the opportunities for our children that we all value so dearly So
 the challenge for modern governments in Australia and elsewhere is
 to take advantage of the opportunities that globalisation offer, to
 make certain that we are competitive enough to get our share of what
 globalisation offers, but at the same time to recognise that globalisation
 for some people can carry social and economic costs, and to ensure
 that those costs are cushioned, to ensure that those costs are explained
 and understood, and that the advantages of globalisation for the rest
 of the community far outweigh any costs for one section of the community.
And that is what we are doing. And I've always held the view
 that you can win acceptance in the Australian community for economic
 reform if you satisfy two conditions. The first of those is that you
 must explain to the Australian community that the reform that you
 are committed is in the best interests of the country. In other words,
 it passes the national interest test. And the second condition that
 you must meet is that it is fundamentally fair and seen to be fair
 by the Australian community. And if you can pass those two tests than
 I believe the Australian community will accept and embrace reform.
Now since we've been in office, which is now a little over three
 years, we have brought about some very major reforms to the Australian
 economy. The most important is of course the fiscal reform, turning
 a deficit of $10.5 billion into a surplus. We've brought about
 major reforms in the area of industrial relations, and the process
 goes on in that area. It's never ending. And we've done
 it in a way that has been fundamentally fair to the Australian community.
 And that has been demonstrated today by the living wage case which
 has delivered a fair increase to the low paid in the Australian community.
Now we were told by the unions and the Labor Party before 1996 that
 that wouldn't happen. The reality is that wage and salary earners
 in Australia now are better off than they have been for more than
 ten years. Not only have they had real wage gains, but they've
 also had another very precious gain and that is a fall in housing
 interest rates. And the fall in housing interest rates has been worth
 more than $320 a month to the average wage and salary earner. And
 if you add that to the real wage increases that many have achieved,
 and you add to that the safety net wage increases typified by today's
 decision of the Industrial Relations Commission, you have an environment
 of wage fairness, and justice.
Now that's a commitment I made in 1996 when I was Opposition
 Leader, and I'm proud to say to you today at this business gathering
 that we are a government that has delivered wage and salary justice
 to the ordinary wage and salary earner in Australia. And that's
 one of the reasons why we continue to enjoy the support of the large
 number of average wage and salary earners in Australia. It's
 one of the reasons why the Liberal Party won so many seats here in
 South Australia at the last election. And it's part of our creed
 that we continue to do that. Of course we are a party that's
 committed to the interests of the business community as the wealth
 generators of our society. We're also a party that is committed
 to a fair go for the average wage and salary earner within our community.
 And I'm very pleased to say that we have delivered on that and
 delivered on it in a very significant way.
We've undertaken of course major privatisation polices in relation
 to Telstra and other former government business organisations. But
 of course by far the biggest reform that we have embraced as a government
 was our commitment in September of last year to fundamental reform
 of the Australian taxation system. The Australian taxation system
 has needed root and branch reform for more than a quarter of a century.
 In May of this year I'll celebrate 25 years in Federal Parliament,
 and I remember only a few months after I was elected to Federal Parliament
 there was a report on the Australian taxation system that bore the
 name The Aspry Report', some of you may remember it, after
 a former judge of the New South Wales Court of Appeal, Ken Aspry.
 And surprise surprise 25 years ago it recommended the introduction
 of a broad based indirect tax. And it said that that tax should have
 essentially no exemptions. It said that the existing wholesale tax
 system was ramshackle and broken down. It said that rates of personal
 income tax were too high, that personal income tax took greater share
 of revenue, and for a number reasons you needed the introduction of
 a broad based indirect tax.
Now that was 24 to 25 years ago. And we have been debating that issue
 ever since. And at long last that debate is coming to its conclusion.
 It's coming to its pinnacle, its grand ending I hope. And by
 the 30th of June we will have an answer from the Australian
 Senate as to whether the Australian people are going to be listened
 to. Because you will remember that last October we went to the Australian
 people, not promising in general terms taxation reform. We didn't
 say if you re-elect us we'll make the tax system fairer. I often
 scratch my head and think in amazement that in 1979 when the British
 Conservative Party, under Margaret Thatcher, won office from the Labor
 Party under the former Prime Minister Jim Callaghan, and that's
 almost exactly 20 years ago today, they had a taxation policy. And
 the taxation policy essentially said: well will tax more of what you
 spend and less of what you earn. There wasn't much more detail
 to it than that. And I can remember asking a former British Chancellor
 of the Exchequer what was in his tax policy, and he said: John, essentially
 that is what we said. They didn't go into a whole lot of detail.
 They got elected, they then proceeded to do it.
We by contrast, because of the nature of the Australian political
 system, because we knew that we might face hostility in the Senate,
 we knew that people would try and deny the mandate of the Australian
 people, we went to the length of laying out in total detail what we
 were going to do. We mentioned the rates, we mentioned the cuts in
 personal income tax. We went into enormous detail. And we ran the
 extraordinarily high political risk of going through a campaign and
 somebody making some inconsequential nitpicking publicity hit against
 us on the basis of something of comparative irrelevance. And we survived
 all of that. We won the election and no government in the history
 of Australia has received a mandate on such an explicit change to
 a fundamental area of economic policy since federation.
And you cast your minds back. No government has done that. And we
 were successful in winning that election and we have the right therefore
 to say to those who hold the balance of power in the Senate, to the
 Labor Party, and the Democrats and the Australian Greens, that they
 ought to listen to the will of the Australian people. And you've
 probably heard me say that before and you'll here me say it again
 and again over the weeks ahead because we are coming to the crunch
 time. We are coming to the moment of truth as to whether the political
 system in this country really works effectively. Of whether you're
 going to provide an incentive for governments and oppositions in the
 future to actually go out and try and win support on the basis of
 what they intend to do to the Australian public, and what they will
 do, or whether in future we're just going to have election campaigns
 entirely devoid of policy content and entirely composed of one-liners
 invented by PR consultants based on focus group polling.
Now that essentially is what is the sort of political choice that
 we in a way are going to face. Now I know there are people who don't
 like aspects of the taxation plan. There are arguments about the fine
 detail of it. And I've indicated time and time again that the
 government is amenable to some kind of fine-tuning in certain areas.
 That's always been our position. But we're not going to
 alter the fundamental thrust of what we put to the Australian people.
 We're not going to start exempting large areas from the goods
 and services tax. We don't believe that the poor are helped by
 exempting food. In fact on a straight quantitative assessment you
 do more to help the rich by exempting food than you do to help the
 poor. And we believe that the best mechanisms in relation to that
 are of course the mechanisms of compensation.
There are enormous benefits for rural Australia out of this taxation
 plan. We're going to cut the national fuel bill by $3.5 billion
 a year. We're going to reduce the cost for Australian exporters
 by $4.5 billion a year. And of course we're going to make business
 costs overall cheaper by about $10.5 billion a year because no tax
 will be paid on business inputs. And there are major gains under this
 plan for the Australian States. Over time the Australian States will
 be significantly better off under the proposed GST than they would
 be if the existing arrangements continue. They will have all of the
 GST revenue. Every last dollar of the GST revenue will go to the Australian
 States. And that's why they all signed up a week and a half ago
 at the Premiers' Conference. It was the most harmonious, loving
 Premiers' Conference that I have ever been to. I mean the Labor
 Premiers loved it as much as the Liberal Premiers. Bob Carr said:
 you know Prime Minister, my party doesn't support this, where
 do I sign. Peter Beattie was no different. He was just as good. And
 without exception they all signed up, and so they should have. Because
 they were signing up to a deal that is much better for their State.
 And as that revenue grows the States will have more money to provide
 more services, for government schools, and for hospitals and for police,
 and for roads - the basic functions of State governments - and so
 they should. And we'll have a far more dignified, and we'll
 have a far more orderly way of distributing the national economic
 pie, the national revenue cake, than that sort of annual charade or
 pantomime that passed as a Premiers' Conference over the years
 where, you know, each Premier does a doorstop on the way in and one
 on the way out, and then you have a joint press conference from the
 Prime Minister and the Treasurer saying how, you know, we are sadly
 misunderstood and we're really there to help all the States.
 Now we did help them on this occasion and I think one of the greatest
 assets to come out of the taxation reform plan is the new deal for
 the States. And that is of enormous benefit and it will underpin the
 revenue base that the States need to provide all of those services.
So a lot hangs on what the Senate does over the next few weeks. We
 make no bones about it that we need obviously the support of people
 who are not members of the Coalition parties. We need the support
 of cross bench or independent Senators. But we need their support
 on the basis, and we need an understanding from the Labor Party and
 from the Australian Democrats that we took all of the political risks.
 We put our bodies on the line politically, we won support, we won
 support in the open, honest, orthodox, authentic way. And if the political
 system is to retain its credibility and its integrity then we ought
 to have the right to have the wishes of the Australian people implemented.
So we intend to press ahead with our taxation reform plan. And I'm
 telling every audience I address in Australia, I addressed one in
 Melbourne last night, I addressed a large one in Perth a week earlier,
 every audience I address I make it perfectly clear, that we have no
 intention of backing away from our commitment to taxation reform.
 It is the largest piece of unfinished economic reform business that
 this country faces. We've cleared a lot of hurdles. We've
 broken through a lot of other barriers in the area of economic reform
 and this is the big one that lies in front of us. And having gone
 to the Australian people and got their support, I for one, and I know
 I speak for all of my colleagues in saying it, we will persevere until
 we win the support of the Australian Parliament to implement those
 particular reforms.
But ladies and gentlemen, government is not just of course about economic
 matters and one of the reasons I'm here in Adelaide is to address
 probably the most challenging and gripping social issue of our time,
 and that is the drug problem.. And I don't come here, and I don't
 go anywhere in Australia pretending that I have all of the answers
 to that. And I don't seek to politicise the issue. I'm as
 happy to work with Bob Carr and Peter Beattie in tackling the drug
 problem as I am with Jeff Kennett and John Olsen, because deep down
 it is a social challenge that requires a bipartisan response. It's
 a social challenge that also has to be kept in perspective.
The great bulk of our young people do say no to drugs and I applaud
 them, but a portion of them don't and society has to tackle the
 problem in three ways. It's not just a law and order problem, although
 that's an important dimension of it. And you do need as we have provided
 increased resources through our police and customs services. It is
 also an education problem. We do need to have a clear understanding
 of the dangers of drugs and communicate those dangers to our young,
 particularly through our schools. And schools are entitled to lay
 down rules, they are entitled to stipulate codes of behaviour and
 nobody should complain if those rules are enforced and enforced rigorously.
We also have to provide, and I think this has been one of the areas
 where we have perhaps fallen behind as a community in recent years,
 we have to provide some assistance and help to those people who are
 addicted and need support in order to break their addiction. And I
 went to the Adelaide Central Mission this morning to announce the
 details of one of the programs of the Mission that we are funding
 out of our increased commitment to rehabilitation and treatment. And
 after I'd made my presentation I had the opportunity of talking to
 some of the people whose lives had been so devastated by drugs and
 who were seeking the assistance of the mission. And two or three of
 them in talking to me, their common theme was that as things stand
 at present, somebody who's been addicted to drugs wants to try and
 break the habit, it often takes too long a period of time between
 them taking of that decision and when some help is available. And
 that is not the fault of the welfare organisations. They all do in
 my view, a magnificent job and they deserve our praise and our thanks.
 I think in the past perhaps we haven't, governments generally, not
 just federal government's but state governments as well, we are all
 in this together, have perhaps not put enough resources into the treatment
 and the rehabilitation end of the problem. And that is why in our
 "Tough on Drugs" strategy, which has now committed more
 than $500 million additional over a period of four years, that that
 includes a very significant component of extra support for treatment
 and rehabilitation.
And I'll have the opportunity later this afternoon of talking in more
 detail when I close the major conference on drugs strategy which has
 been going on in Adelaide over the past few days. I mention that issue
 ladies and gentlemen because these challenges can't be put in watertight
 isolated compartments. The health of the economy is influenced by
 the health of our society. The health of our society in turn is very
 heavily influenced by the strength of our economy. The two are inextricably
 linked and bound up. And increasingly as I find in my responsibilities
 that we need more than ever before, we need an effective social coalition
 in this country.
The Government can't do everything. It doesn't have the resources
 to do everything nor does it have the wisdom to do everything. The
 welfare sector, magnificent though it is, can't do everything either.
 It certainly doesn't have the resources and it certainly in many areas,
 although it has the human understanding and the expertise, there are
 other areas of expertise that are needed.
Individuals who have difficult and broken lives need help to change
 their lifestyle and they need help to change their attitudes. The
 business community which many members contribute magnificently to
 charitable and welfare causes can't do it all on its own either. And
 therefore, I've talked a lot recently about building a better social
 coalition. The Government, the welfare sector, the individual and
 the business community, each playing it's own part, each making a
 contribution according to its capacity. And this is not the soft cell
 for the Government getting out of its financial responsibilities,
 it's quite the contrary. There are ongoing financial responsibilities
 in the social welfare sector which the Government, and only the Government,
 on behalf of the tax payer can carry. And this is not in any way a
 soft cell to say: well we're going to reduce our contribution and
 we expect the welfare sector and the community to pick up more. No,
 it's really an aim of mind to try and build a stronger and more effective
 social coalition that harnesses the resources that the Government
 has and the expertise it has with the resources that other sections
 of the community have and the expertise that they have.
And all of that of course in the end does depend very much on the
 strength of our economy. And although the economy is not the only
 thing in life, and I've never argued that, and I've indicated that
 today with my reference to other issues. But it's a very, very important
 part of our capacity, unless we have a healthy economy there are a
 lot of things we can't do. And we do have a healthy economy at the
 present time and it hasn't happened by accident. We have been able
 to stare down the worst of the Asian economic downturn. We have got
 a stronger economy now than we've had for 30 years. We've got the
 lowest inflation, the lowest interest rates for 30 years, the lowest
 unemployment for almost 10 years, an enviable level of business investment,
 a growing respect around the world, a growing interest in the economic
 strength and attractiveness and stability of Australia and the Australian
 economy.
Now those things have happened as a result of policy resolve. And
 we did some very unpopular things in our first year in office and
 we got a lot of criticism and we lost a bit of skin and a bit of paint
 and I understand that. But if we hadn't have done that, just imagine
 where the Australian economy would be now if we still had a $10 billion
 deficit. Just imagine where we would be now if we still had interest
 rates of four or five percent higher than what they are now. Just
 imagine where we would have been if our inflation rate was much higher
 now than what it is.
We would have then felt the full brunt of the Asian economic downturn.
 The reason we were able to escape that brunt was that our fundamentals
 were much stronger. And that's something that we can all feel particularly
 proud of and it's something to which every Australian has made a contribution.
 And to which as Prime Minister of our country I am extremely grateful.
So Corey, ladies and gentleman thank you very much for having me here
 today, I think I can report to you that the Federal Liberal Government
 is in good heart, in good voice. We think the policies that we've
 implemented continue to be successful but we're not complacent. And
 it's when you think you're going extremely well in politics that something
 can suddenly go wrong. I've been around a long time and I've experienced
 that phenomenon probably about 150 times and I've no doubt that I'll
 experience it again as time goes by.
But the other thing I've learnt from almost 25 years in politics is
 that if you are prepared to stand up and boldly state what you believe
 in and you go out to the Australian public and you argue it strongly
 and you defend your point of view, in the end you win the argument.
 Now we did that with the GST. We won the political argument all we've
 got to do now is get it through the Senate.
Thank you very much.
 [ends]


Subjects: Drugs
E&amp;OE.................
Thank you very much for those very kind words of welcome, and I particularly
 acknowledge the presence here today of Brian Watters and David Crosby.
  And can I especially thank the mission and the residents, and the
 other people who are supported by and use this facility, for the opportunity
 of being your guest today.
I want to say a few very brief words about the important work that
 organisations such as the Adelaide Central Mission undertake, and
 of course to announce in a formal sense, although the funding was
 announced a few weeks ago by my colleague Dr Wooldridge, a further
 contribution of over a quarter-of-a-million dollars to the mission
 which will enable the employment of an additional counsellor to provide
 further work to assist the people who continue to need the assistance
 of this, and like facilities not only in Adelaide but all around Australia.
This announcement is part of an overall strategy of the Federal government
 trying to provide extra help to the many people in the community who
 are working so hard to attack the problem of illicit drugs.
  And I want to say at the outset ladies and gentlemen, that nobody,
 not least the Prime Minister of Australia, pretends that there is
 one simple easy solution to the challenge of illicit drugs.
  It's been a challenge that has been with us for a long time.
  It's a challenge of which the community is perhaps more deeply aware
 now than it has been for a very long period of time. And it's a challenge
 for which there is no one simple single easy solution.
It needs to attacked in my view in three ways.  We need to provide
 additional resources and additional energy in educating people against
 the dangers of commencing illicit drug use.  We need to provide
 additional resources to the law enforcement authorities who seek out
 those who would profit at the expense of human misery of others.
  And indeed we need to work hard against the abuse of alcohol within
 our community, as indeed we need to work hard against the abuse of
 gambling within our community.  And I have certainly as Prime
 Minister have spoken often of the need to fight against the abuse
 of gambling within our community. And finally, as part of the three
 pronged approach if I can put it that way, we need to put additional
 resources into providing treatment facilities for people who have
 an addiction problem.  And this is a good meeting.  Reminds
 me of some of the older political meetings I used to go to and I'm
 enjoying it immensely.
You need extra resources to go into treatment facilities and that
 has been an area that I think has been neglected in the Australian
 community, and I don't seek to blame any one section of the community
 for that but rather I seek to acknowledge, and I think in common with
 others that have been involved in the area, I believe that new and
 additional resources ought to be provided.  And I'm very pleased
 to say that over the last two years my Government has committed more
 than $500 million over a period of four years to the war against drugs.
  Not only in relation to education, but also in relation to policing
 and in relation to treatment facilities.
But ladies and gentlemen, facilities such as Byron House provided
 by the Adelaide Central Mission, facilities such as Byron House provide
 a vital support capacity to those in our community who need help,
 and who need assistance: people who have a problem with alcohol addiction,
 people who have a problem with other forms of drug addiction, people
 who are suffering the impact of homelessness.  And I want to
 pay a special tribute to the work of organisations such as the Adelaide
 Central Mission.  I have long admired the contribution of our
 great welfare organisations, the city missions, the St Vincent de
 Paul, the Salvation Army, and all the other great organisations that
 provide in a very selfless way, the necessity to assist the people
 of Australia who need assistance and who are suffering particular
 problems of addiction and a particular problem of personal and family
 distress.
So I am here today to principally applaud the work of the Adelaide
 Central Mission, to remind those who work in facilities such as this
 just how valuable their work is.  We do need a social coalition
 in the Australian community to deal with this challenge.  The
 government can't do it on its own.  The welfare organisations
 can't do it on their own.  The families of people who have a
 drug problem can't do it on their own. What is needed is a coalition
 between all of those.  And rather than at a political level there
 be a preoccupation with some of the differences that might exist between
 different governments about how you approach this problem, what we
 need to do within our community is to focus on those views that we
 have in common, to focus on the common commitment of Federal and State
 governments across the political divide to trying to make a difference.
Now, nobody has, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, nobody
 has all of the answers.  I don't seek to make a political issue
 of the campaign against drugs.  I am as prepared to work with
 a Labor Premier of New South Wales and a Labor Premier of Queensland,
 as I am to work with the Liberal Premiers of Victoria and South Australia.
  This is an issue which is above and beyond party politics.  And
 I was reminded the other day that in the first speech that I made
 to the Federal Parliament as Leader of the Liberal Party, I argued
 that fighting drugs should be something that transcended the political
 divide within the Australian community.  And I'm very pleased
 that many of the initiatives I've launched, and many of the views
 that I've expressed on these issues are very directly echoed and supported
 by both Mr Carr, the Premier of New South Wales, and Mr Beattie the
 Premier of Queensland, and indeed in many respects, by the Leader
 of the Opposition Mr Beazley.
But ladies and gentlemen, I'm very pleased indeed to launch the particular
 programme which will provide additional counselling facilities, to
 help people with a drug and alcohol problem.  I congratulate
 the mission.  It's a magnificent example of the sort of organisation
 that ought to be supported by the 'Tough on Drugs' strategy, and it
 is a living proof of the need for that social coalition between the
 Federal government, the State governments, the business community,
 the welfare sector, and families who are concerned to help their members
 and indeed to help their friends who are suffering from the scourge
 of drug addiction.  I thank the mission for having me here today
 and I congratulate it most warmly and most generously on the humanitarian
 work that it is undertaking.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE...................
Well thank you very much Mr Finemore, ladies and
 gentlemen.
It is a real pleasure not only to be amongst you
 today but to realise I am the first Prime Minister of Australia to
 have addressed a national trucking convention.
  People have often spoken of the tyranny of distance that was
 a famous and evocative phrase created by that great Australian historian
 Geoffrey Blainey.  And
 if ever space and distance has defined the character of a nation then
 the space and the distance between population centres has had a huge
 impact on the character and the spirit of the Australian people.
  And there is no industry in Australia which in a way is more
 conscious of the vast distances and the vast space and the impact
 of that on our national psyche than your own industry.
I want to thank you for the major contribution
 you make to the economic strength and vitality of the Australian community.
  You are an industry comprised in the main of people who are
 fiercely committed to the free enterprise ethic.
  You are fiercely committed to the ideals of hard work in the
 hope of a decent return.  And
 in that sense and in that spirit you are part of the business free
 enterprise background of the Australian nation.
Your contribution has been significant and your
 contribution can be even greater if the Government can secure passage
 through the Australian Parliament of its fundamental reform of the
 Australian taxation system.
  I will come to that proposal in just a moment but before doing
 so I want to say one or two things briefly about the general economic
 backdrop against which this convention takes place.
 The Australian economy at the moment is performing
 very strongly, more strongly than it has for probably 30 years.
  We have very low inflation, much lower interest rates, a high
 level of business investment, a lower rate of unemployment than the
 case three years ago, a reputation around the world and particularly
 in our region of a country that was able to stare down the worst of
 the Asian economic downturn.
  That has not happened by accident, it has happened through
 a combination of the hard work of business Australia represented here
 today, the contribution of the employees of Australia and also through
 sensible on occasions stoic government policy in the face of fierce
 criticism for taking some initially unpopular measures.
You remember some of the outcry three years ago
 when we set about cutting the budget deficit of $10.5 billion that
 we inherited.  Just imagine
 where we would now be if we were still in deficit.
  Just imagine where our interest rates might now be if we still
 had a deficit of $10.5 billion or more.
  Just ask yourselves whether we would have been able to stare
 down the Asian economic downturn if we had not set about putting our
 books in order.  And so
 it has been in relation to so many policy areas.
  We have changed fundamentally Australia's industrial relations
 system. And the benefits of that are now being seen in the rising
 productivity of Australian workers where it's possible for me as Prime
 Minister to say without any fear of contradiction that Australian
 employees are better off, truly better off, than they were 10 or 15
 years ago.  Because they
 have enjoyed the double benefit of increases in real wages and also
 significant reductions in housing interest rates which have a major
 impact on the weekly disposable income of most Australian families.
  $320 a month on average has come off the mortgage of Australian
 households.  And that
 is the equivalent of a payrise of $100 a week for average wage and
 salary earners.  So they
 have been real material benefits that have flowed from economic reform.
And today my colleague, Tony Abbott the Minister
 for Employment Services, will give a report card on another reform
 success that was achieved despite the ridicule and the derision of
 our critics when the reform was introduced.
  And that is the result one year after its introduction of the
 privatised job market or job network which replaced the old Commonwealth
 Employment Service.
And I am happy to say that the Job Network has
 been 50 per cent more successful in placing unemployed Australians
 in work than the old CES.  And
 that's been achieved in the face of fierce ridicule, derision and
 criticism not only from our political opponents but from most of the
 media of Australia in the early months of the operation of that scheme.
  It was, in fact, a world first.
  We were the first country to seriously try the notion of privatising
 our labour exchange, our job market.
  And of course there was some teething troubles and difficulties
 at the beginning but we persevered and the benefits of that very important
 reform are now being seen.  And
 I congratulate and praise my Minister, Tony Abbott, on the work that
 he has done since being appointed to that job six months ago.
So there are rewards for reform.
  There are always marks given in the long run if governments
 are prepared to take a lead and commit themselves to fundamental reform.
And that, of course, brings me to the burning political
 issue of the day and that is whether the verdict of the Australian
 people in October of last year is going to be listened to and obeyed
 by the Parliament of Australia.
  Last October we went to the Australian people having released
 a detailed plan to reform the Australian taxation system.
  We didn't put out a generalised commitment for taxation reform,
 we didn't try and skate on thin ice, we didn't try and say to the
 Australian people, if you re-elect us we will do something about Australia's
 indirect tax system, we'll try and reduce personal income tax, we'll
 try and reform the business taxation system.
  What we did last October was to explain in total detail what
 we would do with the Australian taxation system if we won that election.  We told people what the rates would be, we told people what
 taxes would be abolished, we told people how income tax would be reduced,
 we told people how family benefits would be lifted, we told your industry
 of the great benefits of taxation reform.
  We laid it out in detail and we went through the fire of an
 election campaign with all the dangers during an election campaign
 of an hysterical response on occasion to what in reality can only
 be side issues.
But our plan remained intact.
  We won that election and we are now saying to the Senate of
 Australia, it is your duty to obey the wishes of the Australian people.
  Because the Australian people had an opportunity to scrutinise
 that plan.  And I want
 the focus to be in the weeks ahead as that debate goes on in the Senate
 and comes to a crescendo before the 30th of June.
  I want the focus to be on the fundamental benefits in reform
 of taxation change.  Not
 on emotional side issues that are the stuff of good headlines but
 do nothing to improve the fundamental structure of fairness or equity
 of the Australian taxation system.  I want the focus to be on the fact that tax reform will reduce
 the annual fuel bill of this vast nation of ours by $3.5 billion.
  I want the focus to be on the fact that as a result of the
 introduction of our taxation reform plan the price of fuel for business
 will fall by seven cents a litre.
  I want the focus to be on the fact that for your industry the
 effective excise rate will be reduced from 43 cents a litre to 18
 cents a litre.  That indirect
 taxation reform in Australia under our plan will reduce road transport
 costs by 6.7 per cent resulting in cost savings of around $1.5 billion.
  That the abolition of the wholesale sales tax and the introduction
 of a goods and services tax will result in an initial 8.3 per cent
 fall in vehicle prices.  During
 the transition to a GST the eligibility for tax credits will be phased
 in over two years and once businesses are eligible for the full input
 tax credits the price of vehicles will fall by 16.9 per cent on average.
 There are unarguable benefits for your industry
 in these reforms.  These
 reforms will make your industry more competitive. These reforms recognise
 the size of Australia.  These
 reforms will help regional Australia like no other reforms any government
 has proposed.  These reforms
 are sensitive to the cost pressures faced by people who live in rural
 and distant areas of our country.
  In other words, these reforms attack the fundamental difficulties
 of the cost structure of regional and rural Australia.
  At a time when we are concerned about the de-population of
 the regions of Australia I cannot for the life of me understand that
 any political party in Australia would oppose the introduction of
 reforms and changes that will do more to revitalise the regions of
 Australia than any taxation reform that has ever been proposed.
 But the benefit of these reforms do not stop
 in the areas that I have mentioned.
  Under our taxation plan there will be a fundamental change
 to the operation of the personal taxation system.
  Under our plan 80 per cent - 80 per cent - of Australian wage
 and salary earners will be on a top marginal rate of no more than
 30 cents in the dollar.  The
 impact of that on incentive for middle Australia will be enormous.
  Under our plan there will be significant increases in the tax
 benefits available for people with children.
  It is a tax reform plan that is more sensitive than any before
 it for the undeniable cost that Australian families incur in raising
 young children.  It is
 a tax reform plan that will remove many of the poverty traps in the
 existing tax welfare system in our country.
  Whereby if you get a wage increase, such as the living wage
 safety net increase awarded yesterday by the Australian Industrial
 Relations Commission, some of the benefit of that raise is gobbled
 up through people going into a higher income bracket and, thereby,
 losing some of the family allowances they were previously receiving.
  Because under our plan the income limits in relation to those
 additional family allowances are significantly increased.
  And the combination of that plus reductions in marginal tax
 rates will remove the theft of the benefits of living wage increases
 which are involved and operate under the present system.
Reforms under our plan do not stop at that.
  The benefits overall to our exporters - and as a nation we
 need incessantly to remember that we need to export to survive - and
 our plan will reduce exports costs by $4.5 billion.
  Our plan, overall, will reduce business costs throughout Australia
 by about $10.5 billion.  But
 the benefits, of course, do not stop there either.
  Under our plan the States of Australia will receive the biggest
 single beneficial reform to Commonwealth/State financial relations
 since federation.  Under
 our plan, once the transition phase has been passed through the States
 will receive significantly larger amounts than they would if the existing
 Commonwealth/State financial relations continued.
  And that is because under the plan every last dollar of the
 proceeds of the GST will go to the Australian States.
  And what that means is that they will have more resources to
 spend on government schools, on police services, on hospitals and
 on other important community services that are the ongoing responsibility
 of the Australian States within our Federal arrangement.
I find it puzzling, I find it bizarre, indeed,
 perplexing that our plan should be criticised by so many in the welfare
 sector yet under our plan we are providing a guarantee of the revenue
 base for the Australian States, the like of which they could receive
 under no other arrangement, that will enable them to increase the
 support they give to the less well off in the Australian community.
  And I say to some of our critics in the welfare sector, do
 you really believe that by knocking over the GST you are helping the
 less well off in the Australian community.
  Because every time you strike a blow against this reform you
 are putting at peril the possibility that the Australian States can,
 in fact, receive more and therefore have more to support the less
 privileged in our community.
  I'm pleased to say that the criticism from the welfare sector
 is by no means uniform and there are many who are realising the value
 of the changes that the Government is proposing.
So, ladies and gentlemen, this particular reform
 plan is the most comprehensive change to the Australian taxation system
 that has ever been proposed by any government.
  And there's not a man or woman who understands politics in
 this country or understands taxation, who understands the needs of
 the Australian economy, that wouldn't in their silent, private moments
 acknowledge that we have needed taxation reform for many years.
If we don't embrace taxation reform now the opportunity
 will not come our way in our generation again.
  This is the great opportunity this country has to embrace taxation
 reform.  I will have been
 in Parliament 25 years in May of this year and we have been debating,
 one way or another, the need for taxation reform for a quarter of
 a century.  Only a few
 months after I entered Parliament there was a document called the
 Asprey Report which was a detailed investigation of the Australian
 taxation system commissioned by former Liberal Treasurer, the late
 Billy Snedden which recommended the introduction of essentially what
 the Government proposed to the Australian people last October and
 that's a broad-based, indirect tax; recommended the introduction of
 lower rates of personal income tax and drew attention to the weaknesses
 of our existing wholesale tax system and the inequities it imposed.
  Now, that was 25 years ago.
  And we've debated it.
  It's been proposed from both sides of politics.
  I argued for it unsuccessfully as a member of the Fraser Government.  Paul Keating proposed it at the tax summit with my support.
  He was rolled by Bob Hawke and the unions.
  And then in 1993 John Hewson campaigned for it from Opposition
 and he was defeated by the most vicious and ferocious fear campaign
 waged by the one-time believer, Paul Keating, in taxation reform.
And fast forwarding to 1998 we finally got the
 verdict of the Australian people.
  We took it to them, warts and all, and we ran all the risk
 involved in it.  And if
 our political system means anything it means that when you take those
 risks, you win that support, you put your political future on the
 line in the national interest, you are entitled to have that plan
 implemented.  Not as some
 kind of reward to the Prime Minister but because it's for the good
 of Australia.  It's because
 the nation supported it.  It's
 because the nation decided that you have to embrace changes of that
 kind in order to go forward economically.
 I believe, ladies and gentlemen, that you
 can always persuade the Australian people of the need for fundamental
 reform if you satisfy two criteria.
  Firstly, you must persuade them that it is good for Australia
 because all of us, deep down, care about the collective future and
 welfare of our nation.  And
 you must also persuade them that it is fundamentally fair to different
 sections of the Australian community.
  Now, that is the responsibility that we undertook before the
 last election.  And that
 is why we laid it out in detail.
  And that is why I ignored the warnings of some so-called strategists
 and advisers who said you don't campaign on a new tax.  Well, of course, it wasn't a new tax.  It was an entirely new taxation system.  But we ignored those warnings and we campaigned and we won
 and we won because people ultimately saw that it was good for Australia
 and they accepted that it was fair.
And they do believe that you have to change.
  The art of good government is to hang on to those things that
 continue to work and continue to serve us well but at the same time
 display a willingness to get rid of those things that are no longer
 helping the country and are holding back its progress.
  And that has been the genius of this country for so many years,
 that we've been able to do that and we must now face doing it in relation
 to taxation reform.  We
 cannot go on forever putting it off and that is why I'm so committed.
  And I want to ensure that I have no intention of backing away
 from the plan that we put to the Australian people last October -
 no intention at all.  Of
 course in this or that area we can fine-tune it but the essentials
 and the comprehensive character of the change that I've outlined to
 you today of which I'm sure so many of you are very familiar, that
 they are not going to be touched because each is so dependent on the
 other.  It's not the sort of thing where you can have the one bit but
 take away another.  It
 is an integrated whole and that is its great appeal and that is its
 great benefit for the Australian people.
We have achieved a lot economically over the last
 few years.  We have come
 through the worst downturn in the Asian economic experience without
 being seriously dented.  And
 that has happened because in so many areas we have reformed and strengthened
 our economy.  But there's
 only one thing that matters in the modern, globalised world economy
 and that is not how you compare with how you were a few years ago,
 or not some hypothetical comparison between where you are now or where
 you might have been if something had occurred, what really matters
 is how you compete and compare in present day circumstances with the
 rest of the world.  And
 we have no option to stop reform in this country.
  We have to go on changing to remain competitive and relevant.
  And the great challenge for Australia is to consolidate the
 strong economic positions we now have.
  We can't afford to sit back and say, well, we don't really
 need all of this extra reform, look how well we're doing.
  Once we start doing that we'll lose the comparative advantage
 we now have.  The only
 way that we can keep ahead of the game and retain that comparative
 advantage is to continue further reform.
  And that, ladies and gentlemen, means unavoidably, inevitably
 and overwhelmingly embracing taxation reform.
  And that is why it is the single most important thing on the
 Government's economic and reform agenda at the present time.
  And it will remain on that agenda until we succeed in implementing
 it.  Because we're not
 going to walk away and I'm not going to give up or surrender on something
 that I know in all of my being is important to the long-term economic
 future and economic strength of the Australian nation.
  There's no point in holding high office in this country if
 you don't use the authority that that office gives you to bring about
 reforms that you know in your heart and your understanding are important
 to the future of the Australian community.


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
To the Premier in Western Australia, Richard Court, to my ministerial
 colleague, Wilson Tuckey, to Cheryl Edwards. And also can I say to
 all of the advisers little stunts like that of course will get a bit
 of coverage but they will not deter the Australian Government or the
 Western Australian Government from informing the Australian people
 and most particularly the people of Western Australia that the Regional
 Forest Agreement is a very balanced result between jobs and the protection
 of important forests.
It is the product of detailed scientific analysis and extensive community
 consultation. The RFA in Western Australia protects more than two-thirds
  I repeat, more than two-thirds  of the region's
 old growth forest, provides 12 new national parks and 25 additions
 to existing parks, and over 150,000 hectares of new formal reserves
 are established. Importantly, industry will benefit from 20 years
 of resource security and the removal of export impediments.
The RFA contains a combined $59 million timber, tourism and regional
 industry development package to which both the Federal Government
 and the Western Australian Government have made contributions.
So the package will focus particularly on the Nannup, Pemberton and
 Manjimup region to ensure not only the maintenance of a viable timer
 industry but also the expansion of the tourism industry. The WA timber
 industry has the potential to create around 500 extra jobs in the
 region over this period.
Can I just conclude this introductory remark by saying that I recognise
 that there has been an intense debate in Western Australia. In all
 of these cases it is the desire of the national Government to get
 a fair balance between conservation values and job security. We are
 slave to neither one or other side of the argument. We will never
 take decisions that will wilfully destroy Australian jobs in regional
 areas of our country but I think our record both here in East Gippsland,
 elsewhere in Victoria and in Tasmania demonstrates very strongly that
 we have a commitment to environmental values.
I want to personally thank my two Ministers, Robert Hill the Minister
 for the Environment, and Wilson Tuckey who is the Minister for Forests.
 Both of them have worked very hard with their State counterparts to
 get this result. And I also to you Richard want to thank you for the
 very constructive leadership role that you have discharged in Western
 Australia and I am very pleased that we are signing an agreement which
 is fair and balanced. There'll be some noise from narrow interest
 groups but I am sure the broader population in Western Australia will
 see this as a very balanced and fair outcome.
 [Premier Court speaks]
Before I depart could I just say again to you, Mr Premier and to your
 colleagues, thank you very much. This has been a very good example
 of co-operation between the Commonwealth and the State of Western
 Australia over an issue which has generated a great deal of debate,
 a great deal of emotion and an enormous amount of media coverage not
 only in Western Australia but throughout the country.
And I am delighted that we have now signed the fourth of the Regional
 Forest Agreements, we still have quite a number to go. I hesitate
 to say it but I don't think any might prove as difficult or protracted
 as this one and it's even more credit to you and to your colleagues
 and to my two Ministers that we have had such a balanced outcome.
 I agree with you, it can't be black and white. I think it's
 a fair package, it protects jobs, it protects the industry, it is
 sensitive to the environment and it's a great credit to our Ministers.
 So I will leave this link up, I thank you and I will leave it to the
 Ministers to sign the other parts of the agreement.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well thank you very much, Philip. To you and to Neville Roach, the
 Chairman, can I express very warm personal thanks. This is an ideal
 forum for me to record my immense appreciation and respect for the
 work that Philip Ruddock has done as the Minister for Immigration
 and Multicultural Affairs. Quite deservedly he enjoys a wide affection
 and respect, not only in the communities that this audience represents
 but also in the broader Australian community. He handles a portfolio,
 which is never free from day-to-day controversy and difficulty, with
 enormous sensitivity and skill. And I do want to record, quite unreservedly,
 my immense gratitude to you, Philip, for the fine work that you've
 done in the period of a little over three years. I know that everyone
 in this audience welcomed the return of the immigration portfolio
 to Cabinet after the last election. And Philip does bring a very strong
 voice in relation to those issues as well as, of course, contributing
 very constructively in the broader deliberations of the Government.
To you, Neville, can I say thank you very much. You're a very
 busy man. You have a lot of other irons in the fire as well as your
 role as Chairman of the Council and I think you've done an outstanding
 job. And I want to say to all of the other members of the committee,
 thank you from the Government for the work that you've done.
 As Philip said, all of the detailed recommendations will be examined.
 I can say to you that the essential thrust and the main elements of
 the report are, of course, endorsed by the Government. Most importantly,
 what the Government endorses are the values that are expressed in
 the report.
What holds a nation together more than anything else are its common
 values. I share Philip Ruddock's optimism. I share his positive
 note. The experiment that Australia represents, if I can call it that,
 of bringing together, in a quite unprecedented way people from the
 four corners of the earth and doing it consistently over a period
 of time and continuing to do it, both in a humanitarian way as well
 as in a nation-building way, as we again remind ourselves this week
 as we prepare to receive the first of the 4,000 refugees from Yugoslavia
 that will be received within our midst, that it really has been a
 quite remarkable experiment.
And Neville is right to use the adjective Australian before multicultural
 because what he's really putting his finger on is that we have
 developed an Australian way of doing things. And, increasingly, not
 only in relation to settlement and other policies but also in other
 areas of public life and public policy, we are developing a quite
 unique Australian way of doing things. Not that there is anything
 strange about that. We've always found a particular Australian
 way of doing things. And one of the elements, one of the genius elements
 of the Australian story is the way in which we have been able to retain
 the good bits that have been contributed to Australian society by
 the various tributaries, cultural tributaries, that make up our nation
 and reject the bad bits.
Much of our society, of course, is heavily influenced by our British
 and other European heritage, by no means of course exclusively, and
 that's an important part of the Australian history. But we've
 been very clever. We've taken the good bits and we've rejected
 the bad bits. A long time ago we decided to reject the class-consciousness
 that was part and parcel of much of our European heritage. We rejected
 that a long time ago. But we've retained the habits of civil
 discourse, of freedom of an open media and, of course, the rich cultural
 treasure that we have inherited from Europe.
When I addressed the Australian Unlimited Conference in Melbourne
 last night I spoke very optimistically about our country. I said that
 it occupied a special intersection of history, geography and culture
 and it really does. There's no nation on earth that, in this
 part of the world, in the Asian Pacific region, that has such profound
 links with the nations of Europe, shares such values in common as
 we do with the nations of North America, has taken people from 140
 source countries. And more recently, and certainly not exclusively,
 we've taken large numbers of people from the nations of the Asian
 Pacific region. And they have made an immense and beneficial and positive
 contribution to the modern Australia.
So with all of those linkages and occupying that very special intersection,
 as I call it, of history, geography and culture, we have an opportunity
 and a place in the world that no nation on this globe has or can possibly
 rival. But what we need of course to convert that fortunate conjunction
 of history and geography and other circumstances, into an enduringly
 positive advantage for the Australian community is of course to maintain
 the values of which Neville spoke, and of which this report speaks.
 And they are the values of tolerance, the values of understanding,
 of respect for cultural difference, a sensitivity to ethnic diversity,
 an understanding that when people come to a country which however
 friendly it may be is nonetheless different and strange. There is
 a process of adjustment, and there is a process of understanding that
 is needed from those of us who were either born in this country, or
 have lived for a long time in this country.
Now we Australians have done it rather better than most. It doesn't
 mean for a moment some new comers have not been subjected to bigotry,
 discrimination and intolerance. And like any country that has been
 in the general successful, we've had individual blemishes and
 dark spots and we have a collective responsibility on all occasions
 to stare down tendencies towards extremism within our community. And
 I do want to make it very plain on behalf of the Government, without
 ambiguity, that we stand totally and utterly and uncompromisingly
 opposed to any form of discrimination of any person in this country
 based on ethnic background, nationality, race, colour of skin, religious
 or political convictions. And it is a cornerstone of the Australian
 way that we resist bigotry and we resist intolerance.
I think we have come a long way in this country. I think the debt
 that we owe to the successive waves of migrants who have embraced
 the Australian way is incalculable. With exception of course to the
 indigenous people of our country which occupy a very special place
 in our history, we are all in one form or another immigrants or the
 children of immigrants. And that will continue to be the case. And
 in that way Australia is one of only a relatively small number of
 societies that can say that. And it gives us a special, I suppose
 understanding, of the difficulties, particularly for those of us and
 including many any in this audience who were not born in Australia,
 a special understanding of the difficulties of adjustment that people
 must encounter when they first settle in this nation.
And I believe that the principles espoused in this report encapsulate
 what most people think. We believe in treating people decently, we
 believe in the unity of the Australian nation above all else. But
 we respect and understand the fact that if you were born in another
 country you retain a special place in your heart for that country.
 And there is nothing that in my view that diminishes the wholeness
 of the Australian nation in that being fully recognised.
I think we have been very successful. Philip is right to refer to
 the cohesiveness that was retained at the time of the gulf war. I
 can understand the feelings of many people from the former Yugoslavia
 about events which are now occurring in that country. And I was sad
 that in some of the ANZAC Day marches the Serbian-Australian contingents
 felt unable to participate. But I was delighted that in many parts
 of Australia, including in Melbourne, they did. And that particular
 day which has such a special place of hallowed reverence in the Australian
 history and the Australian experience, above all celebrates respect
 for those who fought together and does not in any way seek to perpetuate
 hatreds in relations of those who fought in opposing armies so many
 years ago. It's a day to celebrate sacrifice and valour together
 and not indeed to focus on different and past dissent.
But I think we have been very successful and the reason we've
 been very successful is that within the individual commitment and
 affection that people have to the culture and the land of their birth
 they have developed, and all of us have together, acquired a common
 overriding commitment to the values of the Australian nation. They
 are unique and special values. They've been contributed to from
 many sources, and they have over a period of time evolved into a distinctive
 and quite outstanding, and quite tolerant and humanitarian Australian
 culture. And I think the values espoused in this report resonate very
 well with the Australian experience. I have great pleasure in launching
 it. I warmly thank you Neville, and all the members of your committee
 for your work. I think it contributes greatly to the ongoing debate
 about the Australian story and the Australian identity. Thank you.


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
 I have written to Slobodan Milosevic, the Yugoslav President
 asking him to release the two CARE workers who are not combatants,
 they are humanitarian people who have been concerned about relieving
 suffering humanity, not taking sides in a military conflict.
The letter was delivered to the President yesterday and I have asked
 the former Australian Prime Minister, Malcolm Fraser, and the Chairman
 of CARE Australia to return to Belgrade. In my letter I have asked
 Slobodan Milosevic whether he will personally receive Mr Fraser in
 relation to the representations we are making about the release of
 Mr Pratt and Mr Wallace.
I hope they can be released. They should be released. We remain concerned
 as a Government that they continue in detention and as I have said
 repeatedly we are lending and bending every effort we can to secure
 their release. And I say to their families, keep in good spirit, I
 know it is very difficult for you in this stressful situation. The
 Australian Government is doing all it can. Mr Fraser is leaving Australia
 today and will be in Europe tomorrow and I hope that it will be possible
 as the Australian Government's special envoy in relation to this
 matter for him to see the President.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Graeme; to, first of all, collectively,
 to all the members of the Howell family. This is a great occasion
 for all of you. To the Deputy Premier of Queensland; to the former
 Premier of Queensland, Mike Ahern; to my Federal Parliamentary colleague,
 Gary Hardgrave, and to David Watson, the leader of the State Parliamentary
 Liberal Party, the employees of the company, ladies and gentlemen.
I always get quite a thrill out of being involved in the opening of
 something that represents a march forward, an extension of a previously
 successful business into an even more successful expansion in prospect.
 And today is a very important, indeed, a very exciting day, not only
 for the family which is represented by not only the founders of this
 company but also by them and their almost 600 employees, but in many
 ways what we are recognising today is the sort of thing that any government
 of any political persuasion, be it State or Federal, would always
 want to see created. And that is a company starting in Australia only
 a generation ago, still retaining its essential character as a family
 business but growing over that period of time, getting a very strong
 slice of the domestic market and also laying claim to a very important
 slice of a world market.
And this company, EGR, is really a perfect metaphor for what we want
 to see more of around Australia. We want to see companies that start
 with a family base and retain that essential family character. We
 want to see companies that invest in high tech. We want to see companies
 that skilfully use research and development. We want to see companies
 that build export markets. We want to see companies that treat their
 workforce well and recognise that unless you reach out to your workforce
 and involve them in the decisions you take and share your future with
 them, quite understandably you don't get the best out of them.
 And this is a company that has done all of those things. And this
 is a company, of course, if I may say so modestly and just in passing,
 which has benefited from some of the underlying strengths of the Australian
 economy. I mean, it's very good that your interest rates are
 lower now than they used to be and it's very good that the interest
 rates that your employees pay on their houses are now about $320 a
 month lower than they used to be. We are living in very strong, buoyant,
 economic times.
About 10 days ago I attended a two day conference in Melbourne run
 by The Australian newspaper and it had the marvellous title
 of Australia Unlimited' and it spoke of the sense of hope
 and optimism that we all feel about our nation as we move into the
 next millennium. And one of the keynote speeches was delivered by
 the former chief economic advisers to one of my predecessors, Bob
 Hawke, and the speech was delivered by Professor Ross Garnaut. And
 he said that he believed that we might possibly be in the third great
 era of strong economic growth and expansion that Australia's
 experienced since it was founded. The first era ran from 1901 until
 the commencement of World War I. The second era began in the early
 1950s as a result of post-war reconstruction and the enormous benefits
 of post-war migration and then ran through until the early 1970s.
Now, whether we are in the third great economic era or not it is undeniable
 that Australia has great opportunities, has been able to stare down
 the worst of the Asian economic downturn and has an underlying economic
 strength. But what we need to capitalise on that is the contribution
 of people, the contribution of people who run and invest in businesses,
 the contribution of people who work with the owners of those businesses
 in a true partnership to build a very successful enterprise. And your
 company has done exactly that. It is a model. It's been successful
 in expansion. It's grown strongly. It's looked after its
 workforce. It's got a good product and it's won and it's
 retained markets. And it's used the various incentives that have
 been available and have been provided by successive governments.
And I do endorse what Mr Elder said, there are great areas of cooperation
 between State and Federal governments. You hear about the differences,
 you don't hear about the cooperation. And that not only applies
 in economic issues but it also applies in one of the most pressing
 and challenging social issues of our time and that is dealing with
 the scourge of illicit drugs within our community. And I've said
 as recently as an hour or so ago on 4BC that as far as I am concerned,
 as Prime Minister, I will work with any Premier of any political persuasion
 across all party divides and all party lines to find a better solution
 and a better outcome in relation to that particular problem. And I
 know that is the view of my State Premier colleagues, whether they
 come from the Labor Party or from my side of politics.
But today is very much an occasion to celebrate the success of a family
 business. I have a special place in my heart for family businesses.
 I grew up in a very small business background. My father started a
 small garage with absolutely nothing in the 1920s and built it into
 a business that was able to support his own family and provide for
 them extremely well. And I've never forgotten how important it
 was in our lives the ethic of starting with nothing and working hard
 to build something up in your lifetime and leaving some of it behind
 to your children. It's very much the story of Australia through
 the generations. This particular family has done it rather better
 than most. You've built a wonderful enterprise and you've
 done it extremely well. And it's wonderful to see the different
 generations of the family here today.
So to all of you can I say congratulations. Can I thank all of the
 management and the employees of the company for the contribution that
 they are making. You are regarded quite rightly as not only a national
 leaders but in many cases, in many respects, a world class leader
 in this particular area of plastics. And the importance of this company
 to the Australian domestic industry and the importance of the company
 to our export markets in this area cannot be overestimated. Thank
 you very much for inviting me to be here today. I am honoured to have
 been asked to open the extensions to this extrusion plant. I thank
 you all and I wish the company great good fortune and continued expansion
 and success into the future. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................
 Thank you very much Mr President. To you and to my State and
 Federal Parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals. It is always
 a delight to address the State Council of the NSW Division. It always
 a pleasure to come back to this building where I have attended many
 meetings over the years and shared with you our common commitment
 to the Liberal Party cause here in NSW and throughout Australia.
This week of course has been dominated by two significant events.
 The first of those was the unveiling of the 1999 Federal Budget. Rarely
 has a government had the opportunity to present a budget in more positive
 economic circumstances. And rarely has a government earned the right
 by dint of its own decision making to present a budget in such favourable
 circumstances. It is not an idle boast to say that the economic condition
 of this country is better than it has been since the last 1960s.
In the last year the Australian economy has out-performed any economy
 in the industrialised world. Despite predictions to the contrary,
 we stared-down the Asian economic downturn. When I became Prime Minister
 of Australia this country was an anxious outsider knocking on the
 Asian door, almost begging admission. Such was the mindset that had
 been acquired under the leadership of the former government. A little
 over three years on we are seen as a nation stronger, more secure,
 more progressive and more willing to help with our regional friends
 than ever in our history. We are seen quite properly as being fully
 engaged with, and committed, to the Asian region. But we are not obsessed
 about how we relate to the region any more. We no longer worry about
 whether we are part of Asia, involved with Asia, enmeshed with Asia.
 We are simply being ourselves in Asia.
And the ourselves we are being, if I can put it that way, is a nation
 proud of the fact that we occupy a special intersection of culture,
 geography and history. And those things a few years ago that were
 seen almost as weaknesses for Australia in Asia, such as our stable
 banking system, some people said that was a bit dull and unenterprising,
 our strong rules of corporate governance, our commitment to a system
 of open parliamentary democracy, all of those things are now seen
 as massive strengths. And when I met the President of Indonesia, the
 leader of 211 million people, our nearest neighbour, the fourth largest
 nation on earth, I am greeted as the leader of a country which is
 seen as strong, as positive, as a good but not uncritical friend and
 ally. I said when I became Prime Minister on the 2nd of
 March 1996 that I would propound and defend the values of Australia
 abroad. And I've kept faith with that commitment. And when I
 spoke to Dr Habibie I propounded and defended the values of Australia,
 but I did so in a way that did not hector or seek to tell another
 country that what worked here necessarily worked there. And this is
 something we should remember in our relations with other societies.
And just as I abhor us wanting to change ourselves to please others
 I don't expect others necessarily to change themselves to please
 us. We have to understand that in a world of differences, philosophical,
 history, cultural and ethnic, inevitably nations do not need to be
 carbon copies of each other in order to cooperate in a constructive
 fashion. And we have achieved in relation to East Timor, we have achieved
 something that our predecessors did not do. And that was we have played
 a major role in changing the policy of the Indonesian Government.
 And we've changed it in a very constructive way.
So it was with an enormous pleasure that we were able to present a
 budget which delivered a surplus, a budget that reported that Australia
 had grown more strongly than any nation in the industrialised world
 over the last 12 months. A budget that recorded that we have the lowest
 interest rates in 30 years, the lowest inflation rate in 30 years,
 a strong level of business investment. But it was also a budget that
 was able to make important social provision. It always important to
 have a balance between economic realism and social concern and social
 provision.
As I said a couple of weeks ago when addressing the Australian Unlimited
 Conference in Melbourne, our government is very much about liberalisation
 in economic affairs, and what I described as modern conservatism in
 social affairs. A concern to maintain the traditional values of Australian
 society but to apply them in a modern and contemporary fashion, having
 regard to the changes that have taken place in our community and our
 society over the last few generations. And that social provision,
 or modern conservatism, expressed itself in a number of ways. Our
 renewed commitment to further reform in the area of private health
 insurance. We are for a mixed system. We are for the public hospital
 system, but unlike the Labor Party we believe in private health insurance.
 That's why we brought in a 30 per cent rebate, something the
 Labor Party should have done years ago but refused to do because of
 their obsession with destroying private health insurance, despite
 what their now leader says. If they had done something about private
 health insurance in 1990 when their former health minister Grahame
 Richardson said they should, then we would not have inherited a private
 health insurance level in this country of about 32 per cent.
We've brought in life-time health cover. Life-time health cover
 will provide further incentive for young and healthy people to take
 out private health insurance. But there will be a 12 month grace period
 until the 1st of July 2000 for people between age 30 and
 age 65 to join and under the arrangement everybody over the age of
 65 who joins for the first time being able to do so without penalty.
 And at long last we will actually reward people who have given loyalty
 to private health insurance funds over the long years. And they are
 entitled to a reward.
Our social concern was displayed in relation to our commitment to
 education. Quite unapologetically this budget provided for the most
 generous and the most supportive provision for non-government schools
 that any Federal Government in this country's history has provided
 for. But it was not done in any way to disadvantage the government
 schools. We believe in a simple principle in education and that is
 that every Australian parent has the right to educate his or her children
 according to their choice. It is a fundamental Liberal principle first
 dramatically embraced by Sir Robert Menzies 36 years ago when he broke
 the gridlock  he broke the deadlock on State aid to independent
 schools and ended almost a century of discrimination against almost
 30 per cent of the Australian population. He did it in a dramatic
 and generous way, he did it in a way that the Labor Party was incapable
 of doing.
And what I did, and what the budget did last Tuesday night was to
 carry on that tradition into new areas to provide low income parents
 in both Catholic and non-Catholic schools greater support and as the
 Secretary of the Christian Schools Association said in his press release
 that the announcement we made delivered more justice to working class
 families and enabled them to make greater choices in education than
 the provision that any government in Australian history had ever made.
 And this argument we get from the Labor Party that we're discriminating
 against government schools totally ignores the fact that the great
 providers for the government schools are their owners and that is
 the State governments of Australia. On a per capita basis Federal
 Governments always give more money to independent schools because
 Federal Governments don't fund government schools, they're
 funded by the State Governments. And this business I mean to grab
 hold of a statistic and to say that because you're giving $X
 a head straight out of the Federal budget to Government schools, and
 X plus to independent schools that you're discriminating against
 the Government schools completely ignores the fact that we give billions
 of dollars in financial assistance grants each year to the State Government,
 and the biggest claim made on State government budgets is in fact
 education.
And under the financial agreements this year, the State of NSW for
 example will receive a five per cent real increase in their financial
 assistance grants. Well the average will be five per cent across the
 States and as you know the Commonwealth Grants Commission has awarded
 the State of NSW an increase of about $165 million under the equalisation
 arrangements that have operated under our Federal/State financial
 relations.
So I reject totally and completely the hogwash peddled by the teacher
 unions and the Labor Party that we are discriminating against government
 schools. It is our responsibility to fund independent school choice.
 We are doing it in a fair and balanced way and even in the most needy
 and least provided for parish Catholic school in Australia, the parent
 is only being subsidised to 70 per cent of the cost of educating a
 child in a government school. And to suggest in those circumstances,
 and given the responsibility of State Governments that in some way
 we are discriminating in favour of so-called elite private schools
 in this country is nonsense. The greatest expansion in the independent
 sector is not in the so-called elite schools but is in fact in the
 low fee schools that are growing up as a result of the relaxation
 of the new schools policy that I undertook to do before the 1996 election.
So ladies and gentlemen it was a great budget. It was deservedly well
 received because it combines economic achievement with social concern.
 It displayed a government that was sensitive to social need but also
 a government that has its eye very clearly on economic strength and
 economic rectitude. A government that recognised that we couldn't
 be complacent and couldn't take for granted our economic achievement.
 But above everything else, as we look back on Tuesday night, we were
 able to say that today's strength was a product of yesterday's
 reform. Just as tomorrow's strength will be a product of today's
 reform. And that of course brings me to the issue of taxation.
You've heard me say before that I regard reforming the Australian
 taxation system as the largest piece of unfinished economic business
 in this country. I said that two years ago, I said it repeatedly during
 the election campaign, I said it last week, and it's as true
 today as it was then. And nothing that happened yesterday alters the
 fact that if we want to maintain the momentum we have developed we
 need to reform our taxation system in a quite fundamental way. And
 that is why I committed the Government to taxation reform before the
 last election. And when I took the decision that we needed taxation
 reform and when our Cabinet decided we needed taxation reform, we
 knew that we wouldn't get control of the Senate at the last election.
 The reality is that under our present system, particularly as the
 result of the changes that were made in 1984 to increase the size
 of the Federal parliament, changes that the Liberal Party voted against
 but as a result of that it is impossible, virtually, for either side
 of politics to control the Senate in its own right. And until there's
 any change in that, and I don't speculate about that, that is
 going to continue to be the situation. I knew, therefore, that we
 wouldn't get control of the Senate. And I calculated that if
 we spelt it all out in detail before the election, if we did what
 people constantly say politicians don't do and that is tell the
 truth about our intentions and then set about keeping our promises,
 I knew that if we didn't do that we would have no prospect of
 getting the legislation through the Parliament.
So we spelt it out in total detail. We made full disclosure. We held
 nothing back. We exposed ourselves to the most ferocious fear campaign.
 And what we have sought to do since the election has been to keep
 that promise. And I was very proud of the fact that Peter Costello
 was able to hold up a document last Tuesday night, when he delivered
 the budget, and it was entitled Keeping Our Promises for a Stronger
 Australia.' And every single promise I made on behalf of the
 Government in October of last year has been honoured in full, without
 variation, in the Federal Budget. We didn't suddenly discover,
 as Mr Carr did after the 1995 State election that he couldn't
 rid of the toll way. We didn't suddenly discover, as Mr Keating
 did after the 1993 election that having won an election campaign fighting
 an indirect tax that, oh, sorry fella's, I didn't
 tell you about the need to increase all the wholesale sales taxes.'
 We didn't do that. We did the exact opposite. We laid it out
 in total detail. We exposed ourselves to all the risks that were inherent
 in laying it out in detail. And we did that because we thought that
 was the right thing to do and the honest thing to do. And we also
 felt that that would give us some moral authority to say to the Senate,
 well, we told the people about it before the election, they
 returned us to government, you have an obligation to pass it.'
 And it's the operation of those forces which is at stake in the
 debate that is taking place at the moment. What incentive is there
 for future governments to be honest and open with the Australian people
 if they can't implement what they were elected on? It would have
 been a different matter if I had gone to the last election and said,
 well, I believe in taxation reform, trust me,' or like
 Bob Hawke in 1984, I'd said I'm going to have a meeting
 or a summit. Or if I had just generally fudged and said I'm going
 to cut your income tax and then after the election said, oh, look,
 I sort of left the page out. And that page contains a whole lot of
 indirect tax increases. We didn't do any of that. We produced
 a document that contained the greatest amount of detail ever presented
 to the Australian people in an election campaign about a major policy
 initiative. We could not have been more open and obvious and transparent.
 We could not have made fuller disclosure. Yet we face a prospect that
 what we were elected on being voted down by the Australian Senate
 when the legislation is presented.
Now, the Australian people, in their own way, in their own time, will
 make judgements about that and they will make judgements about those
 who've made a contribution to that State of affairs. And people
 keep asking me what is my reaction to this or that person. Other members
 of the Australian Parliament are not accountable to me, they are accountable
 to the Australian people, as I am accountable to the Australian people,
 as my Federal colleagues are accountable to the Australian people.
 And all we are saying to the Australian people is, we want to do for
 you what we said we would do for you. That is what I am saying to
 the Australian people. And I would have thought in its most elementary
 way parliamentary democracy in our kind of society was about keeping
 faith with people. And there's a marvellous quote, I think it's
 from Robert Frost, that talks about having promises to keep and miles
 to walk before I sleep. We have promises to keep. As a party we want
 to keep them. There are others who are stopping us from keeping those
 promises.
Ladies and gentlemen, we remain committed, resolutely committed, to
 reforming the Australian taxation system. We don't want to reform
 the Australian taxation system because of some ideological bent. We're
 not doing it because of our health. We're not doing it because
 it's the next thing do and we've got bored. We're doing
 it because we really believe it will strengthen the Australian economy
 in years to come. I want the Treasurer of this country in 2010 to
 be able to stand up and present a budget as glowing as the one that
 Peter presented last Tuesday night and to turn around and say, this
 is the product of the reforms that the Howard Government undertook
 at the turn of the century. We do need a new tax system for a new
 millenium. We owe it to ourselves not to be complacent. In a competitive,
 globalised world economy your competitor is the other bloke in the
 race, not your predecessor as Prime Minister 25 years earlier. It's
 no good me telling the Australian people that our economy is performing
 better than it did 30 years ago unless I'm able to say it continues
 to outperform our competitors. And that is our challenge. We have
 achieved a lot because of past reforms. We won't achieve more
 in the future unless we undertake further reforms. And that is why
 we need to change the Australian taxation system. And that is why
 we will presevere in the campaign to change that taxation system.
My friends, that is all I want to say about the Federal political
 scene. But can I say, as a longstanding member of this Division and
 as a person who's attended as a delegate hundreds of State Council
 meetings since I first started coming to State Council in the early
 1960s, that I share the sense of disappointment that the party organisation
 feels about the outcome of the State election. And I think I would
 be failing in my duty as a longstanding member of the New South Wales
 Division if I didn't make a couple of observations. And I will
 presume to draw upon that long membership in the candor of the observations
 that I will make.
Can I first of all say, little is achieved by intense recrimination
 or retrospection. Little is achieved by that. Nothing is achieved
 by scape-goating. Something is achieved if lessons of past mistakes
 are learnt and those lessons are applied. And something is achieved
 if it is recognised that if there are some fundamental structural
 weaknesses to a party's approach then those structural weaknesses
 should be addressed at the beginning of a term in Opposition and not
 somewhere else during that term.
Could I make the observation that, and I made it publicly before and
 perhaps some people may not have liked the language I used but I stand
 by it, but to be credible any Opposition has to develop an alternative
 policy agenda. And it has to be developed over the period it is in
 Opposition. It cannot be cobbled together at the last minute. One
 of our most revered New South Wales Division's sons, Sir John
 Carrick, had that marvelously evocative observation that you can't
 fatten a pig on market day. Some people might think it's old-fashioned,
 I think it remains very relevant. And you can't fatten, you can't,
 you have to, over a period of time, build. We learnt that through
 our bitter cost, Federally. We went through 13 years in Opposition
 Federally. And when I look back on those years I can recognise mistakes
 that are still being made by others. You can't put it together
 at the last minute. You've got to develop a policy brand. People
 have got to know you by your political values otherwise they will
 not support you and that applies to you whether you're in government
 or whether you're in Opposition. Now, that is a piece of across
 the board advice. It is meant very genuinely. It is not directed any
 anybody or any group of people in particular. It is generally directed
 towards what I saw to be a difficulty here in New South Wales.
The other observation I would make is that one of the implied understandings
 or covenants, as I often call it, on which the Liberal Party was established
 is that you had a parliamentary wing and you had an organisational
 wing. The parliamentary wing, unlike the Labor Party, was given complete
 authority to determine policy. We won elections in the 1960s on a
 campaign about the faceless men who controlled the Parliamentary Labor
 Party. We prided ourselves on the fact that the people in Parliament
 elected by the Australian people were the people who ultimately decided
 policy. And we maintain that principle zealously. I consult the organisation.
 I talk to them. I listen to them. I have a very close association
 with my Federal President and with the State organisations and the
 Federal Director. But in the end, our Cabinet and our Parliamentary
 Party decides policy.
When we decided to embrace tax reform, before I made the announcement
 I had a telephone hook-up with all of the State Presidents to explain
 the Parliamentary Party's decision so they knew in advance. But
 we took the decision but that's the Parliamentary Party's
 prerogative. The corollary to that is that the organisation has complete
 control in relation to candidate selection, has complete control in
 relation to all of the matters relating to the running of campaigns
 and to the operation of the organisation.
Can I say, with all the best will in the world, I think those two
 responsibilities have become too blended and too merged here in New
 South Wales, especially at a State level. I think one of the things
 we have got to do is to reassert the separate responsibilities of
 the organisation and of the Parliamentary party. I think it's
 one of the important tasks that the organisation has over the weeks
 and months ahead.
The other two observations I would make is, and this is as somebody
 who first sat on the State Executive in 1963, is that I think our
 State Executive is far too big. You can't run, in my view, a
 political party with an executive that big. I think you desirably
 need an executive of about 20 people whose sole parliamentary representatives
 are those people who are elected directly to represent the federal
 and State parliamentary parties. Now, some people in this room won't
 like that and I don't imagine that much notice will be taken
 of it. But, quite frankly, as somebody who cares about being in government
 and as somebody who has had a bit of experience of being both in and
 out of government, and as somebody who loves the Liberal Party and
 who's spent all of his adult life as a member of the New South
 Wales Division, I do think that I've earned perhaps the right,
 just on this one occasion, to say a couple of things.
And there's one other thing I want to say and that is that if
 all of that advice, per chance, were taken that would be good but
 there's one other thing I just feel duty bound to say and that
 is that I think this Division has spent far too much time and energy
 in what I can only describe as self-destructive, personality-based
 factionalism. I mean, I can understand in a way, providing it doesn't
 become self-destructive, a party that has factionalism based on ideology.
 But for heaven's sake, when it's based on mutual self-promotion
 and it shows an unwillingness to see the common enemy it becomes self-destructive.
And I say that in relation to the behaviour of both sides of the argument.
 One of the great successes of the Federal Parliamentary party after
 I resumed the leadership in January 1995 was the fact that it operated
 as a broad church. That there was proper representation in the shadow
 Cabinet and in the Cabinet, of different points of view. A recognition
 that in the end if there was a majority view on a particular issue
 that majority view would prevail, but not in a triumphal, winner-takes-all
 sense. And I think any political party is a coalition. We are a coalition.
 The Liberal Party of Australia is the trustee of both the liberal,
 the classical liberal tradition of this country, as well as the conservative
 tradition. We are not exclusively either a small "l" liberal
 party or a conservative party. We are a mixture of both. And unless
 we remember that and we keep practising that we are doomed to repeat
 the mistakes, certainly that we've experienced over the last
 few years here at a State level.
Well Mr President I think I've said a fair bit this morning,
 and perhaps I've overdone it, 


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Joe. To Dick Humphrey, Maurice Newman, Alan
 Cameron, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to be here today. I was remarking to Maurice Newman
 that it has been reasonably busy day. I started off in court in a
 ceremony to mark the 175th anniversary of the Supreme Court
 of New South Wales. I have just come from a rather more somber occasion,
 a State Funeral for a former Premier of New South Wales at St James'
 and now, I guess, I am paying homage to mammon by coming to the Stock
 Exchange to launch this very important initiative.
As I am sure all of you know, amongst the many things that we have
 sought to do as a Government is to promote Australia and as Prime
 Minister of the entire country I talk generically but to promote Australia
 as a centre for...global centre for financial services. We used
 to, as Joe said, talk about it as a regional financial centre but
 it is important to see Australia's potential as a global centre
 for financial services.
And I am announcing today a number of important new initiatives and
 not least of those is the establishment of the International Financial
 Centre Taskforce that will ensure major participation in the quest
 for Australia's status as a global financial centre very important
 and valuable private sector involvement. This taskforce will be headed
 by an executive chosen from the private sector with particular knowledge
 of what is needed and the energy required to remove the barriers and
 the impediments that now stand in the way of us realising our goal
 of Australia becoming such a centre.
We are going to do a number of things apart from establishing the
 taskforce which will be based here in Sydney in the central business
 district. We are going to reopen Treasury's regional office in
 Singapore. There will be a leading role for Joe Hockey, the Minister
 for Financial Services and Regulation, as well as continuing his normal
 ministerial duties, he will have responsibility as a roving ambassador
 for me and for the Government to promote Australia as a centre for
 global financial services. We are also going to establish a new committee
 of regulators comprising the Treasury, the Reserve Bank, APRA, ASIC,
 the ACCC and the Australian Taxation Office. We are going to improve
 data collection to benchmark Australia's performance.
Now, our strategy to promote Australia as a world financial centre
 is based on the belief that this country offers attractions that few
 countries in the world can offer. First and foremost, we have a stable
 economy. We have an economy that last year grew stronger than any
 economy in the industrialised world. We have a strong, stable, well-supervised
 and prudently regulated banking system. We have a clear coherent body
 of law. We have sound traditions and principles of corporate governance.
 And one of the fascinating things about economic debate in this country
 and around the world in recent times is how some things that were
 a few short years ago seen almost as impediments to Australia aspiring
 to what we are about today are now seen as some of our greatest strengths.
 I can even recall some businessmen a few years ago saying that we
 were too stodgy, that our banking system perhaps was a little too
 conservative, that maybe we should adopt the Malaysian model for promoting
 investment, that maybe we should adopt this or that approach. Now,
 of course, those very apparent signs of stodginess are seen as some
 of the greatest strengths that this country has. Perhaps what some
 would call our very conservatism in the approach of many of our financial
 institutions, that is now seen as having been one of the virtues of
 this country over the last few years and one of the reasons why we
 have been able to stare down the Asian economic downturn.
As Joe said, over the last few years the Government has carried out
 a number of major economic reforms which have helped deliver the strongest
 Australian economy in 30 years, the lowest interest rates, the lowest
 levels of inflation, significant rises in real incomes, all of which
 have combined to give to this country in a general sense a level of
 affluence and prosperity that we haven't seen since the late
 1960s. And as I have said on many occasions the challenge of economic
 reform in a globalised economy never disappears. We are where we are
 now, the strength of today is the product of yesterday's reform
 and the strength of tomorrow will be the product of today's reform.
And that, of course, brings me to the issue of taxation reform. Any
 hope we have of making Australia a global financial centre will be
 gravely threatened, if not totally destroyed, unless we can get fundamental
 taxation reform. And one of the prices that this country will pay
 years into the future if we don't have fundamental tax reform
 is that we'll be denying the opportunity of capitalising on those
 fundamental strengths of which I spoke a few moments ago. We do have
 taxation laws at the moment which discourage the further promotion
 of Australia as a financial centre. And one of the reasons for tax
 reform is to get rid of the financial institutions duty, to get rid
 of the bank account debits tax, to get rid of the tax on share transactions,
 to reform our capital gains tax system, to replace the ramshackle,
 out of date wholesale tax system with a modern internationally competitive,
 broad based indirect tax. All of those reforms together will further
 promote and add to the other strengths that Australia has and the
 other appeal that Australia has as a world financial centre.
It's been one of my goals and it's been a goal of the Treasurer
 since we're elected to office a little over three years ago,
 to capitalise on the fundamental strengths that we have. A strong
 economy, a stable political system, English is our national language,
 strong rules, clear rules of corporate governance and a well regulated
 financial system. They are all massive generic assets. But on top
 of that you've got to look over the horizon and you've got
 to grab hold of all of those things additionally that you can do to
 make this country more attractive as a financial centre. And one of
 those, of course, is fundamental taxation reform. And that's
 why we went to the last election, spelling out in detail what we were
 going to do. It's why we told the truth to the Australian people
 at the last election about what we were going to do and it's
 why there are many Australians at the present time who are angry beyond
 belief that a government had the honesty and the candor to spell out
 in detail what it intended to do and did not intend, try to slide
 back into office on the basis of a generalised commitment to taxation
 reform, but actually spelt it out in detail. And when you have gone
 through that and you have won the election, and then you are told
 by people, who themselves, did not spell out in detail before they
 were elected what they wanted to do with the taxation system, you
 begin to ask some fundamental questions about how effectively our
 parliamentary system is operating. In all of the years I have been
 in politics one of the constant complaints I have received is that
 politicians don't tell the truth. They say that they won't
 tell you what they are going to do or when they do tell you what they
 are going to do, they change it after they have been elected. Well
 in 1998 we told the public what we were going to do on tax. We haven't
 tried to change it after we were elected. We are in fact trying to
 implement what we promised the Australian people we were going to
 do.
And I certainly as Prime Minister and all the members of my Government
 believe that what is now occurring through the refusal of the Senate
 to honour the mandate we were given not only calls into question the
 proper processes of our parliamentary system but of course it will
 do incalculable damage to the Australian economy in the future. We
 can be an even stronger more effective nation economically. We can
 become a world financial centre. We can continue to deliver higher
 living standards to the Australian people, but we can't do that
 without continued reform. We badly need taxation reform. It is the
 greatest piece of unfinished economic business on the Australian economic
 and political landscape at the present time. And it is urgent in the
 national interest that that be implemented. And our strategy to make
 Australia a global financial centre will be undermined if we cannot
 achieve financial reform.
Can I say in conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, that I appreciate enormously
 the opportunity that the exchange has given us to launch the details
 of these new initiatives today and to give me an opportunity to outline
 some of the goals that the government has in mind in this area. We
 are very strongly committed and we do believe that this country can
 become an international financial centre because it has assets that
 other centres don't have and on top of that if we have the courage
 and capacity as a community to make necessary future reforms to the
 Australian economy then that goal can be realised.
Can I very warmly commend to you the work that Joe has done as the
 Minister responsible for financial services since his appointment
 to that position in October of last year. He will have a very active
 and visible role in relation to achieving the goal of making Australia
 a financial centre. He will work very closely of course with the taskforce.
 He will be reporting directly to me as well as to the Treasurer regarding
 the activities of the taskforce. And I see him as having a very active
 part to play as a roving ambassador promoting the cause of this country
 as a world financial centre.
Can I just say once again, ladies and gentlemen, that we do have enormous
 opportunities at the present juncture in our economic and political
 history. We do have the strongest set of economic fundamentals, far
 stronger than many of us thought possible, even our more optimistic
 moments a few years ago. And we have the capacity to continue with
 that strength if we have the will and the application as a nation
 to undertake further reforms. Doing well in a globalised economy is
 a race that never finishes and it's not sufficient to look back
 and say well we're doing better than we did thirty years ago,
 we have to do better than our current day competitors if we are to
 continue to stay in front of that race. And Australia has been doing
 that over the last few years, we can continue to do that but only
 if we have a capacity and a willingness as a people to embrace the
 further necessary reforms, including taxation reform, which will maintain
 into the future the edge that we currently have over so many other
 countries and so many other competitors around the world.
Thank you very much.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Chief Justice, Chief Justice of Australia, your Excellencies, your
 Honours, Premier,
Mr Whitlam.
I have the honour and privilege today to participate in this ceremony
 on behalf of the solicitors of New South Wales and to offer my congratulations
 on behalf of the Law Society of New South Wales to this Court on obtaining
 its 175th anniversary.
It is, of course, a time when I believe despite our reluctance as
 Australians over the years to think over much about our history and,
 as Mr Whitlam said, we have tended in the past to think of history
 as belonging to other countries. I do believe that as we approach
 the Centenary of the Federation of the Australian nation and as Australians
 begin to ponder the fact that within a very short period of time there
 will be no Australians left alive who were personally associated with
 many of the seminal events which have given shape to the modern nation.
 We are as Australians becoming increasingly interested in and preoccupied
 with our history. We are finding new meaning to many of the institutions
 that have been important to our society over the years. And no collective
 view, no institution has been more important to the development of
 the modern Australian society than, of course, the rule of law.
We have many debates in our community about the desirability of writing
 a bill of rights into our Constitution. There is an ongoing debate
 acquired on most occasions as to whether the best protection of liberty
 is a robust common law or perhaps something that is more firmly rooted
 in statute. And it is not my role today to prolong or to add further
 dimension to that debate except to express the view that in all the
 time I have been in public life I have held very strongly to the conviction
 that there are three great bulwarks to a democratic society in its
 best sense. You need a vigorous and robust parliamentary system, you
 need a free press and you need an incorruptible judiciary. And the
 courts of this nation of which the Supreme Court of New South Wales
 is in many ways the exemplar, the courts of this nation through the
 years have demonstrated constant integrity, a constant discipline
 and constant incorruptibility. The willingness of courts to impose
 upon themselves and particularly this court those disciplines, to
 impose those disciplines on its members has been a constant reassurance
 to successive generations of Australians.
Of course the court has changed. Of course the profession of which
 I had the honour of practicing until I entered Federal Parliament
 has changed. I am reminded of the more obvious changes, the far larger
 number of women. When I did my first year at the Sydney University
 Law School in 1957 something in the order of 12 or 15 in my year were
 women. When my daughter commenced that same year 35 years later 52
 per cent of her first year were women. The technological changes that
 have overtaken the practice of solicitors in the last quarter of a
 century would leave a person who had been out of practice for 25 years
 which is my situation returning to that practice in many respects
 bewildered. It would have changed in so many ways yet there is a continuity
 and that continuity is that the practices of a solicitor is the practice
 of public service. A solicitor has an obligation to serve clients,
 a solicitor has an obligation to honour the traditions of the profession,
 a solicitor has an obligation to honour the principles and the service
 of the law. The law is a valuable bulwark against tyranny and a slide
 into authoritarianism. As we have seen only too sadly in one or two
 places recently the first signs of a drift to authoritarianism is
 an apparent encroachment by the executive upon the absolute independence
 and the absolute integrity of the courts of a nation.
Your Honour, it is a privilege to extend on behalf of the solicitors
 of this State the members of the Law Society of New South Wales, our
 sincere congratulations on the 175th anniversary of this
 very distinguished court, this great bulwark of freedom in Australia.
 Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Maxine. To Graham Wallace, Chris Anderson,
 Peter Charlton, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a particular honour for me to be here tonight, to say a
 few words about the importance of your industry, perhaps one or two
 other things as well and also to present awards to the winners. And
 can I at the beginning congratulate Peter Charlton and his publication
 for its sponsorship of these awards and Cable and Wireless of course
 for its sponsorship of this gathering tonight. I can remember Peter
 Charlton rather excitedly saying to me as we both boarded an aircraft
 about ten years ago that he had taken over this magazine and he hoped
 to make something really big of it. I think you have been very successful,
 Peter, and I think the prestige of these annual banking and financial
 awards is a testament to your energy and your drive.
The last year has been a very good year indeed, not only for the Australian
 economy, but also for the banking and financial industry. You don't
 need reminding that we have seen over the last year in relative terms
 probably the greatest performance of the Australian economy for about
 three decades. We have been truly successful in staring down the worst
 economic collapse that the Asia Pacific region has seen in the lifetime
 of most people in this room. And one of the reasons that we have been
 able to do that is that we have had a very stable, a very secure,
 a very well regulated and an increasingly outward looking banking
 and financial industry in this country. And it's worth exploring
 for a moment as to how that happened and also relating that series
 of developments with other challenges and other issues that Australia
 faces at the present time.
It will be twenty five years tomorrow since I entered Federal Parliament.
 And the banking and financial system of our nation in the mid to late
 1970s was vastly different from what it is now. It was inward looking,
 it was insular it operated in a different world environment, it operated
 not entirely under a fixed exchange rate mechanism but under a system
 known colloquially there as a crawling peg whereby the bands within
 which the Australian dollars rate of exchange moved were strictly
 circumscribed by government officials. And of course, no foreign banks
 were allowed to operate in Australia. In 1979 when I was Treasurer
 the Fraser Government commissioned the establishment of the Campbell
 Inquiry. That Campbell Inquiry as everyone in this room knows was
 quite historic in that it recommended major deregulation of the Australian
 financial system. Some changes to implement those recommendations
 had been made before the change of government occurred in 1983.
And although in opposition the Labor Party had been opposed to financial
 deregulation when the Hawke government came to power there was a refreshing
 change in policy. The new Prime Minister strongly supported by the
 Reserve Bank of Australia argued for and secured the floating of the
 Australian dollar and from then on his Treasurer, Mr Keating, my predecessor
 as Prime Minister, set about enthusiastically implementing with some
 change as a result of the recommendations of Vic Martin's committee
 the recommendations of Campbell. And he did that with very strong
 bipartisan support from myself as economic spokesman and generally
 from the Coalition Opposition.
And so it came to be that as a result of that set of circumstances
 and that chain of events Australia developed through the 1980s and
 into the 1990s one of the most modern, progressive and outward looking
 banking and financial systems in the world. The Australian approach
 was seen as something of a model and in a number of areas we trail
 blazed for other countries which in other areas it had been our custom
 to follow. And in coming to office in 1996, my Treasurer, Peter Costello,
 established the Wallis Inquiry which conducted something of a stocktake
 of what had happened post-Campbell and recommended a number of other
 very significant changes.
So, thus you can see that over a twenty year period we have had a
 long continuity of reform and outward-looking policies in relation
 to the banking and financial system. And it has borne fruit because
 the strength and the stability and the progressivity of our banking
 system is one of the reasons why we are seen as having such economic
 strength in our region. And one of the ironies of watching how Australia
 has performed with other nations in the region is to recall some of
 the thing that were said about our banking practices and our economic
 practices only a few years ago by some of the nations in our region
 that seemed to be out performing us economically. There were even
 suggestions that we were too stodgy, we were too conservative, we
 were too heavily regulated and some of the prudential requirements
 were too severe. Nobody says that anymore. One of the bull points
 of the Australian economy is that we have a stable, strong, secure
 and well and prudentially regulated banking system.
And it is a source of strength, it is a source of reassurance and
 what a few years ago was perhaps seen as stodgy is now seen as one
 of the reasons that makes Australia an extremely attractive place
 in which to invest.
Now, the lesson in all of that, ladies and gentlemen, is that we can
 have great reform, we can have beneficial change, we can have a world
 class structure in this country if necessary reform enjoys strong
 bipartisan support. It would not have been possible to have the strong
 banking and financial structure we now have in this country had it
 not been for the fact that both sides of politics saw the national
 benefit and the national interest in that area. If one or other side
 of politics at various stages over the last twenty years had run an
 emotional, populist campaign against financial deregulation we would
 not have the benefit of that deregulation which is there for all of
 us to see. And it would not surprise you for me to say that there
 is a lesson in that in relation to the great and burning economic
 issue of today and that is taxation reform.
It is true that reforming Australia's taxation system remains
 the largest piece of unfinished economic business in this country.
 Of all the great challenges of economic reform that were obvious twenty
 years ago to any serious player upon the Australian political scene,
 one of them was taxation reform. We have reformed our industrial relations
 system, although there is still more work to be done. We have reformed
 our financial system quite dramatically, we have demolished the old
 stultifying tariff structure that encourage inward looking introspection
 so far as our industries are concerned. The one great area of further
 reform remains our taxation system.
And that is why at the last election my government committed itself
 with all the perils involved in total disclosure of every last detail
 to the reform of that taxation system. [Tape break]...that
 if we made full and accurate and painstaking disclosure our moral
 case to ask that our proposals be passed through both Houses of Parliament
 would be compelling, if not overwhelming. Reforming Australia's
 taxation system is essential for many reasons. It's essential
 to ensure that this country remains competitive in a global world.
 It is no good saying to you that we are doing better now that we were
 five years ago unless I am able to say to you that in five years time
 we will be outperforming our competitors. In a global world it is
 how you do against the other competitors in the race, not how you
 do compared with how you were doing five years ago that really counts.
We need to reform the Australian taxation system if we are to realise
 our dream of making Australia a world centre for financial services.
 Because imbedded in the taxation reform package is the removal of
 many taxes like the bank accounts debits tax, the financial institutions
 duty, the stamp duty on share transactions, all of which contribute
 towards providing reasons why financial institutions may not establish
 their activities and do their business in this country.
We have so much going for us in the generic economic social and political
 area that we would be very negligent indeed if we didn't remove
 the other barriers that should be removed in order to realise that
 dream. We have a stable political system. We have an absolutely superb
 lifestyle. We have clear rules of corporate governance. We have an
 incorruptible legal system. We speak the English language. We are
 beautifully situated so far as the time zones are concerned and we're
 seen to have an economy which has outperformed most not only in our
 region but around the world. We therefore have a wonderful springboard
 from which to launch our drive to become a major financial centre.
But one of the things that we need to remove, one of the barriers
 we need to remove, is of course the barrier of a taxation system which
 is not as conducive to making this country a financial centre as it
 might be.
So, my friends, there is a lesson from the experience of financial
 deregulation in the long run the national interest ought to prevail,
 in the long run we should stop playing games about important reforms.
 We didn't play games about financial reform and for that I have
 always given credit to my political opponents. They should stop playing
 games with taxation reform because the national interest demands that
 we rid ourselves of a taxation system that has long outlived its usefulness.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I in advance congratulate all of those who
 will be taking awards tonight. Can I thank the participants in the
 banking and financial industry of Australia for the contribution they
 have made to our national economic wealth, for the contribution they
 have made to innovation in financial products, for the contribution
 they have made to establishing the reputation of this country as a
 wonderful country in which to do business.
I have valued for a long time my association with the financial community
 not only of Sydney but of Australia generally. It is an industry and
 a community that has changed enormously over the last twenty years.
 And it has been associated during that period with the dynamism and
 the change and the reform zeal of the Australian economy and the Australian
 nation. It is truly part of the globalised modern Australia. It plays
 an impressive role. It looks back on a year of enormous achievement
 and quite rightly tonight those who have been the stars of that achievement
 will be well and truly recognised by their peers. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Councillor Maloney, the Mayor of Longreach. The
 last time I was here a few of your were holding placards, but I'm
 delighted to be back and to have such a warm and encouraging welcome.
You've all heard me make one speech today and I won't go
 over any of that except to say that the Federal Cabinet from the moment
 we took office in March of 1996 we resolved to meet on a regular basis
 in regional and rural Australia. And when Ian Donges and Wendy Craik
 came to see me earlier this year and said they were planning to have
 this gathering of the National Farmers' Federation in Longreach
 I thought it would be a marvelous conjunction of events for the Cabinet
 and for the National Farmers' Federation to meet here at Longreach
 at the same time.
We make a practice when we go to regional centres of inviting a cross
 section of the community. It gives us an opportunity to talk to community
 leaders, an opportunity to understand the particular concerns and
 the particular interests of the bush and today has been no exception
 to that.
As I said in my speech, although the general economic conditions in
 this country are first class, better than they have been for thirty
 years, we are very conscious that not every part of Australia is sharing
 equally in that economic performance and that there are major areas
 of this country the less populated areas in the farming and rural
 areas of our community who are still doing it very tough, still are
 deserving of a special understanding and of a special consideration.
 And I'm sure that the meeting taking place here in Longreach
 will drive home to all the delegates to the National Farmers'
 Federation that their ongoing responsibilities that they have discharged
 so well over a long period of time to represent the interests of rural
 Australia.
It is a special part of being a Prime Minister of being a member of
 a Federal Cabinet, to go around this vast country of ours and to meet
 so many different people in very different circumstances and to be
 reminded of the essential character of the Australian people. To be
 reminded that we are people who draw a lot of our nourishment from
 the volunteer spirit within our communities. It's particularly
 so in the bush, people work together they help each other, they care
 for each other, they understand each other's problems. And one
 of the many characteristics of Australians are that they do help each
 other very well in adversity and they do it instinctively and they
 do it without regard to somebody's origins or background or whatever.
 Some have even presumed to call that mateship. And I think it does
 encapsulate extremely well of what this country is about. We do have
 some special characteristics as Australians. Part of being an Australian
 is either to live in the bush or to feel that the bush is part of
 what we are and to me it has always been inconceivable that you could
 think of Australia without thinking of our rural heritage. And I am
 very conscious as somebody who was born and raised in the suburbs
 of Sydney, I am very conscious of the fact that rural Australia still
 contributes 25% of our export income. The bush still, that agriculture
 produces one quarter of our annual national wealth, that it employs
 over four hundred thousand people that it has within its ranks some
 of the most efficient farmers in the world. And one of the constant
 agonies of being an Australian farmer is that you don't get enough
 reward for your efficiency because you are shut out of corrupt world
 markets by larger primary producing countries who have the economic
 and political clout to do that. But as a government we remain committed
 to improving that. As a government we are delighted to be here.
We thank the people of Longreach, we thank you, Councillor Maloney,
 once again for your warm welcome, this is the second time that you
 have welcomed me to Longreach. I hope to have the privilege of coming
 back again, it's a very special regional centre of Queensland
 and all of us here today have been in receipt of the typical warm,
 open hospitality of the Queensland people and we thank you most sincerely
 for that.
Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well thank you very much Ian. To the Mayor of Longreach, Joan Maloney,
 to Vaughan Johnson, to my many parliamentary colleagues who are here
 today and members of the National Farmers' Federation, ladies
 and gentlemen.
This is the first occasion, I think, in history that the Federal Cabinet
 has met at Longreach. It is also, as you said, the 20th
 anniversary gathering of the National Farmers' Federation and
 it is also 25 years ago today that I was elected in the middle of
 the three year term of the Whitlam Government to Federal Parliament
 as the member for Bennelong.
I want to say how pleased I am as part of a programme since we were
 elected of taking Cabinet around the country and out of the larger
 population centres, how pleased I am that we are having this meeting
 in Longreach and that it coincides with the National Farmers'
 Federation special 20th anniversary gathering. The Party
 I lead, the Coalition Government I lead has had a long association
 with the National Farmers' Federation and its predecessor organisations.
 And as I look around the room I am reminded of the many discussions
 we have had on very important issues. And your organisation has been
 an outstandingly clear and loud voice for the interests of farmers
 all around Australia.
And as I look back over the last 20 years I can recall that the National
 Farmers' Federation has been in the forefront of arguing for
 necessary change and reform. The National Farmers' Federation
 was one of the first organisations at a national level to articulate
 the need for a floating exchange rate. And to argue the cause that
 attempts to regulate the value of the Australian dollar in an increasingly
 globalised world market were doomed to failure. And, of course, I
 am very conscious of the great campaign that the National Farmers'
 Federation waged in favour of industrial relations reform. Something
 that has been very close to my heart most of the time that I have
 been in Parliament and one of the most fundamental reforms that this
 country has needed to embrace over the years if we are to become a
 more competitive nation and a more effective player on the world stage.
I am very conscious as I address this gathering of something of a
 paradox in the Australian economy. On the one hand, the general economic
 conditions in our country are better now than they have been at any
 time since the late 1960s. We grew stronger last year than any country
 in the industrialised world. We have low inflation, low interest rates,
 in fact, the lowest for more than 30 years, we have high levels of
 business investment, we have turned a budget deficit of $10.5 billion
 into a strong surplus, we are repaying debt. And if indeed we can
 implement all of our commitments out of the last election then we
 can by the year 2003 be completely free of any Commonwealth Government
 debt. And we can in effect begin the next century, the third millennium,
 as essentially a debt free nation.
That is the general situation but I am also deeply conscious that
 in many parts of rural Australia the scene is starkly different. There
 are still areas of massive economic and social difficulty. There are
 still many communities which are steadily losing services, there are
 many parts of rural Australia where the population drift either to
 larger regional centres or to the cities goes on unabated. I am also
 most conscious that Australian farmers on world markets are still
 being severely disadvantaged by the corrupt trading practices of many
 of the major players. And I know how important the upcoming discussions
 at a world trade organisation level are to the future of Australian
 agriculture and Australian farmers. So as I address you, of course
 I talk of the strong national economic conditions but I do recognise
 that those strong economic conditions nationally are not universally
 shared and are certainly not shared in areas of the Australian bush.
 And that we have sought in a sensitive and intelligent way to address
 many of those areas of particular disadvantage.
You will be aware that in our first term out of the proceeds of the
 privatisation of 30 per cent of Telstra we were able to fund a natural
 heritage trust and many of the programmes funded out of the natural
 heritage trust are of particular benefit to rural and regional Australia.
 You will be pleased to know, of course, that in the recent Federal
 Budget we committed $31.8 million over five years to rehabilitate
 elements of the great Artesian Basin. And I am delighted to say that
 a little way from here in Longreach later today my wife will be capping,
 as it is, capping the first bore as part of that programme which over
 a period of five years will provide very important support and very
 important repair to something that is of tremendous importance and
 significance to rural Australia.
Two years ago John Anderson and I announced the $515 million AAA programme
 to boost farm businesses provide a new start for many and aid planning
 for the future. Out of the most recent budget we have begun to address
 what I know and accept and recognise and will continue with my Health
 Minister to try and remedy and that is the legitimate complaint of
 people in rural Australia about the inadequate number of rural general
 practitioners. And we're investing $43.1 million this financial
 year for rural GP retention grants. We are going to establish 30 regional
 health service centres and we are also going to put over $50 million
 into creating more rural apprenticeships and we hope to create up
 to 30,000 more of those in rural and regional areas. And if we can
 secure through the Senate approval for the sale of another 16 per
 cent of Telstra to take it up to just under 50 per cent privatisation
 we hope to establish out of that second tranche of the sale of Telstra
 500 rural transaction centres which are designed to address the deficiency
 of services in many parts of rural and regional Australia.
But, ladies and gentlemen, these are particular issues which are designed
 to attack areas of special disadvantage and areas where people have
 a right to expect, indeed a right to demand, the maintenance and the
 provision of adequate basic services.
I can't, of course, address this gathering and open this conference
 today without saying something about the issue of taxation reform.
 Last year the National Farmers' Federation gave very strong and
 effective support to the Government's policy to reform the Australian
 taxation system. You will be aware that we took a detailed policy
 to the last election. We didn't fudge anything, we didn't
 obfuscate, we didn't hide anything, we didn't deceive about
 anything, we put all of it on the table. And in a manner unparalleled
 in the experience of any other government since Federation we explained
 in great detail what we intended to do with the Australian taxation
 system if we were returned to Government. We said that we would sweep
 away all the existing indirect taxes such as the wholesales sales
 tax and many of those inefficient State taxes, financial institutions
 duties, stamp duty on share transfers and other transactions. That
 we would get rid of all of those and replace that with a single rate
 broad-based indirect tax, a goods and services tax which would be
 fully rebatable in relation to business expenses. We also proposed
 major initiatives to reduce the cost of fuel. A very critical item
 in the operating costs of people on the land in this very vast country
 of ours.
Our reforms if they are implemented will reduce general business costs
 in Australia by $10.5 billion a year. They will reduce export costs
 by $4.5 billion, they will reduce fuel costs by $3.5 billion, they
 involve personal income tax cuts of $13 billion and very importantly
 they will underwrite for the first time through a growth tax the financial
 position of the Australian States.
Now, the Senate was meant in the federation compact to be a States
 house. You will all know that the federation compact represented a
 compromise between single member constituencies in the House of Representatives
 where the predominance would inevitably be held by people elected
 from the major population centres of Australia, that is the major
 cities such as Sydney and Melbourne. The compromise was that you would
 have a Senate with equal representation from the States, the idea
 being that the Senate would look to the interest of the States. Over
 the years, of course, that has become a joke. The Senate is no longer
 a States house, the Senate is even more politicised and even more
 partisan in its political poses than in fact the House of Representatives.
 Because if the Senate were now a States house the Senate would be
 rushing to pass our taxation legislation because the States will benefit
 enormously from our taxation reform.
Under our taxation reform after the transitional period, the States
 of Australia will be significantly better off and that is why, at
 the special Premiers' conference meeting a few weeks ago, all of the
 States of Australia were very happy through their Premiers to sign
 the agreement carving up the proceeds of the GST, every last dollar
 of the GST will go to the states. Every Premier, Beattie, Peter Beattie
 or Jeff Kennett, irrespective of their politics they were all very
 happy to sign on the dotted line. And so they should be. And instead
 of having another Premiers' conference the Premiers should be
 convening conferences of Senators from their various States, irrespective
 of their party allegiance and telling those people that they ought
 to be supporting the Government's taxation package. Because if
 this package goes down the best opportunity we have had since World
 War II to reform Commonwealth / State financial relations will have
 been lost.
I have been involved in probably a dozen or more Premiers' conferences
 in the twenty five years that I have been in Parliament. Few of them
 have been satisfactory. They are normally forums for grandstanding
 by Premiers, attacking Prime Ministers, irrespective of the political
 stripe of either. It happened when Malcolm Fraser was Prime Minister
 and I was Treasurer. When a Premier from this State, I think his name
 was Joh Bjelke-Peterson, used to come along and used to attack us.
 I can remember Charlie Court doing exactly the same thing, I can remember
 Neville Wran doing it. The script is almost the same, only the names
 of the players were altered. And it used to go on year after year.
Now, the last Premiers' Conference we had there was a difference.
 And the difference that was, ladies and gentlemen, that every person
 participating in that conference knew that we were making a bit of
 history. That we were changing the methodology. We were ending the
 annual farce of the Premiers' Conference. We were getting rid
 of this forum where people played games rather than made serious decisions
 about the national interest. And if that opportunity is lost, and
 it will be because if this package does not go through, we will go
 back to the old nonsense of Peter Beattie, or Bob Carr or Jeff Kennett
 doing his doorstop as they walk in and saying, you know, we want more
 money otherwise we will have to sack teachers and police and nurses
 and we on the other hand will be forced to respond to that and the
 Australian peoples estimation and the Australian peoples esteem for
 the political processes of this country will go down further.
We have come a long way in this country over the last few years. There
 have been reforms undertaken on both sides of politics over the last
 few years that have been to the benefit of this country. And over
 the last three years because of the way we got the budget back into
 order, because of our willingness to tackle industrial relations reform,
 because of our willingness to undertake all sorts of other reforms,
 we have delivered the Australian economy in general terms to a position
 of strength none of us thought possible when we came to office a little
 over three years ago. And we did it because we didn't play games
 with the country's future. But what we are witnessing at the
 moment in relation to taxation is game playing. Everybody who has
 had any serious association with politics and public policy in this
 nation over the last twenty years knows that we have got to reform
 our taxation system. My predecessor, Paul Keating, knew it in the
 middle 1980s and he campaigned passionately for it until the rug was
 pulled under his feat by his then Prime Minister. Bob Hawke knew it
 because he supported Keating's original campaign. Kim Beazley
 knows it because he was one of the strongest advocates of option C
 when the Cabinet discussed the matter in 1985. Privately, Labor people
 will agree with you that taxation reform is necessary. Everybody knows
 we can't go on forever with this system, but what are we witnessing
 at the moment? We are witnessing game playing. People are fiddling
 around with partisan politics while the national interest is being
 sacrificed. We are strong at the moment because of reforms we took
 earlier. We will be strong in the future because of reforms we take
 now. The idea that a country can sit still and automatically reap
 the benefit of past reform forever is wrong.
When I became Prime Minister of this country in 1996 I felt Australia
 was the anxious outsider in the Asian Pacific region, knocking on
 the door seeking admission. In reality over the last three years,
 that has all changed. We are seen with new respect and afforded a
 new dignity in our region because we have performed well. And we haven't
 played games. And those who are frustrating what the people voted
 for in October of last year are fiddling and playing with Australia's
 economic future and are not looking to the national interest.
Can I go to something that is of very direction interest to you and
 that is the question of the place of the commitments we made concerning
 fuel in the tax package. We are having some discussions with the Australian
 Democrats on Thursday and I want to make it perfectly clear to you
 that we are not going to trade away the commitments we have given
 to the farm sector. We remain strongly committed to ensuring that
 the farm sector is significantly advantaged out of any taxation reform.
 And as far as we are concerned the entitlements of the Australian
 farm community are not negotiable and you have a perfect right to
 expect that we will stand by the commitments we have made. And I want
 the Australian people to understand that, I want the people that you
 represent to understand that.
We are not in the business of trading away the relative advantages
 that you have got out of the taxation package. We will be talking
 to the Australian Democrats to see if there is any proper basis for
 an agreement consistent with the things that we regard as important.
 But people should not make assumptions about automatic compromises
 just because a meeting is taking place between myself, the Treasurer
 and the Leader of the Australian Democrats.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I just say one or two other things about
 the importance of international trade before I formally open this
 conference and wish you well in your deliberations. All of your know,
 I don't think there is a group of people in Australia who are
 more conscious, of the importance of winning greater access to world
 markets than are Australian farmers. And can I, at this conference,
 pay an absolutely genuine and heart felt tribute to the work of Tim
 Fischer as Deputy Prime Minister, Leader of the National Party and
 as Trade Minister for Australia over the last three years. I could
 not have a had a better Deputy. This country could not have had a
 better Trade Minister and the National Party could not have had a
 finer leader than Tim Fischer. He has fought for the interests of
 Australian farmers. He is respected overseas in a way that I find
 constantly impressive in the discussions I have with world leaders.
 Today, as I speak, he is in Beijing, talking directly to the Chinese
 Government about negotiations for the admission to China to the World
 Trade Organisation. He has spent large parts of the last three years
 vigorously and successfully promoting the interests of Australia abroad.
 And as a result of his interest we have won access to world markets
 that we didn't think possible a few years ago.
A key challenge, of course, ahead of us will be to obtain agreement
 to a further World Trade Organisation round at the World Trade Organisation
 Ministerial Meeting later this year in Seattle. This, of course, as
 past experience as taught us, will not be easy. Building momentum
 for an ambitious mandate to the WTO agriculture negotiations and a
 new World Trade Organisation round will be difficult. We want to work
 very closely with the industry to prepare for these important negotiations.
 We have appointed trade facilitators for agriculture and for processed
 foods and beverages. And we have financially supported Graham Blight's
 work as agricultural trade representative of the Australian farming
 industry.
And today, I want to announce that the Federal Government will contribute
 a further sum of a half a million dollars to ABARE to further promote
 the dissemination amongst developing countries of the advantages of
 trade liberalisation. And also to further promote the results of research
 that we have carried out into trade barriers and trade blockages which
 if removed will be of enormous advantage, not only to Australia, but
 to other countries which are members of the Cairns Group.
Ladies and gentlemen, we continue to work very hard through the Cairns
 Group and through APEC to achieve our goals. And there will be a meeting
 of the Cairns Groups of countries on the 27th and 28th
 of August in order to prepare for the Ministerial Meeting which will
 take place in Seattle.
As Prime Minister, I will go to the APEC meeting which this year is
 being held in New Zealand in September and we will maintain at that
 APEC meeting the strongest possible push towards the momentum that
 was originally behind the formation of APEC and the goal of achieving
 within the region free trade by the year 2010 for developed countries
 and the year 2020 for developing countries.
Can I conclude, Mr President, by congratulating the National Farmers'
 Federation on twenty years of representing the rural community of
 Australia. Can I, on behalf of the Coalition Government, thank you
 for the very constructive relationship that we have developed over
 the last three years. Can I take the opportunity in this forum of
 particularly thanking my three Ministers who have interacted so much
 with the farming community during that period of time, Tim Fischer,
 John Anderson and Mark Vaile. Of course, many others such as Richard
 Alston in the area of communications and of course Peter Reith in
 the area of industrial relations and as always, because of the importance
 of the health of the economy generally, Peter Costello as Treasurer.
But I want to pay a particular tribute to the three Ministers whose
 more constant responsibility is to interact with the rural sector
 and to thank them for the work they have done.
I declare this conference open, I thank the National Farmers'
 Federation for the work it does for Australia and I wish it and all
 its members and supporter organisations a very successful next twenty
 years.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Mary. To my colleague, Kim Beazley, my other
 ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how delighted I am to share in a very bipartisan way this
 very special occasion which really is the first major event of a long
 series of events planned by the Council of the Centenary of Federation.
 It is, as Kim said, a celebration of a great achievement.
No doubt all of you over past years, and certainly in recent years,
 would have had conversations about that marvellous phenomenon we find
 amongst the young of Australia of a rediscovered interest in the great
 deeds of our war heroes. The stories emerged again at the last Anzac
 Day of the growing crowds of young people at Gallipoli and the growing
 crowds of young people at Anzac Day celebrations.
Now, in part that is a demonstration of a realisation on the part
 of the young in Australia, of the debt they owe to those who fought
 to defend this country. But I think it is also resonant of a wider
 development in our community and that is a growing interest in, a
 greater curiosity about, and a growing appreciation of what this country
 has achieved and indeed how successful it has been over the last 100
 years.
It is a fact that you could count on the fingers of both hands the
 number of nations that have been continuously democratic throughout
 the entirety of the 20th Century and Australia of course
 is one of those. It is true, as Kim Beazley pointed out, that this
 nation pioneered many democratic forms and democratic practices and
 democratic traditions years ahead of when they were tried in other
 nations. It is also true that as we contemplate the next century,
 as we contemplate 100 years as the Commonwealth of Australia that
 we do as a community occupy what I frequently described as a special
 intersection or a unique place.
Here we are in the Asian-Pacific region, a nation that has very deep
 roots but certainly not exclusive roots in Western Europe and being
 in many ways, but not exclusively again, a projection of western civilisation.
 We share the great democratic traditions that we hold dear in common
 with our friends in North America. But here we are in the Asian-Pacific
 region and our society is very greatly enriched by the hundreds of
 thousands of Australians of Asian descent who are adding such vitality
 and zest to many parts of Australia. And it gives to us because of
 that particular heritage, that mixed heritage, it does give to us
 a special capacity over the next century to build a society and to
 make a contribution that is unique. It is special and it is quite
 unlike any other society on earth.
That, of course, throws on us an enormous responsibility because opportunity
 carries responsibility. And as we contemplate the celebration of the
 Centenary of Federation I think we can do so in a tremendous sense
 of optimism. There is within all Australians a great competitive streak.
 Our political system is competitive, it is adversarial and Australians
 understand that and it is part of the process both in politics and
 business to be competitive. But I think there's also another streak
 within the Australian community and that is a deep desire on occasions
 which are of national significance. A deep desire to see unity within
 the Australian community, to see both sides of politics come together,
 to put aside differences about other issues, to see all sections of
 the Australian community recognise the special privilege it is to
 be an Australian and to live in Australia.
Tonight is particularly an occasion for me, as Mr Beazley has done,
 to honour the contribution of the businessmen and women of this country.
 To honour those who laboured long and hard in the early years of Federation
 when, of course, Australia at the turn of the century by many measures
 had the highest living standard in the world. To remember those who
 kept the entrepreneurial spirit going during the years of the great
 depression and the difficult years through both world wars. To particularly
 honour those business men and women who came with the great waves
 of migration after World War II, many of whom are here tonight and
 whose exploits and deeds and contribution in the business community
 of Australia are very well and clearly understood and respected.
So I do thank the business community of Australia for coming here
 tonight. I do ask, as Peter McGauran has done and as Kim Beazley has
 done, I do ask you to get behind this great celebration, this reflection,
 this opportunity to be nourished by the Australian achievement and
 the Australian experience. To honour those that have made this country
 so strong and free and, of course, to contemplate with a great sense
 of optimism and hope the years that lay ahead of us.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for being here tonight. It is an
 honour to host this occasion. It is important that I do so in the
 presence of the leader of the Opposition because it is an occasion
 that reminds us of one enduring reality of Australian life and that
 is that things that unite us as Australians are infinitely greater
 and more enduring than those that divide us. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Thank you very much, Dr Kennedy; to Mrs Yvonne Boyd and the other
 members of the Boyd family; to Kerry Stokes, David Gonski, my colleague,
 the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Beazley, Gough Whitlam, ministerial
 colleagues, friends of the Boyd family, ladies and gentlemen.
I do feel particularly privileged to have been asked to make a small
 contribution as Prime Minister to this very special gathering that
 honours a very great Australian. Those words great Australian'
 are used perhaps a little too freely on occasions but in the case
 of Arthur Boyd it hardly does justice to the extraordinary impact
 that he had on art in this country and the extraordinary impact he
 had on the lives of so many that he touched.
Not only did he succeed in giving generations of Australians a new
 and different understanding of the Australian landscape and, therefore,
 a freer and different way of interpreting the character of our country,
 he was also associated with a very vibrant group of artists who collectively
 had an extraordinary impact on the artistic life of our nation. And
 he belonged, of course, to a very remarkable artistic family, many
 of whose members are here today and in their different capacities
 and skills have made such a contribution to our lives. But he was
 also more than an extraordinarily gifted and skilful artist, he was
 also an incredibly gentle and courteous and sensitive man. And he
 was also a lover of the Australia that he knew so well and displayed
 so well for so many of his fellow countrymen.
He was also a great philanthropist. In many ways he was a role model
 for philanthropy in this country. And the gift of the wonderful Bundanoon
 property on the Shoalhaven, he saw that as a natural thing and a natural
 obligation that he had to his nation and to the community that loved
 him so much and the community that he gave so much too. So not only
 do we as a nation today honour and thank Boyd for his remarkable talent,
 thank providence that he was given to us, that he was an Australian
 and that he made an impact on our nation, but we also warmly and sincerely
 thank and honour him for his generous spirit and the generosity that
 he has displayed through the Bundanoon Trust to the Australian community.
It is appropriate, it is dignified and it is nice in every sense of
 the word that we do have an occasion like this appropriately here
 in the National Gallery to pause and remark upon a very remarkable
 Australian, a very remarkable artistic life and a person, in every
 sense of the word, fully qualifies for that most honourable of all
 descriptions that any person can have and that is a great Australian.
[ends]


Subjects: economy, industrial relation's reforms,
 taxation reform, trade liberalisation, Supermarket to Asia
E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. I'm
 very happy to be here this morning to talk to you about a number of
 things, most particularly of course to congratulate the industry on
 the progress made over the last year, to remark upon its enormous
 contribution to the Australian economy, and also to thank it very
 warmly for the constructive forward looking attitude it's adopted
 towards reform causes in this country over the last few years, and
 not the least taxation reform, a subject to which I will return in
 a few moments.
This gathering takes place at a time when on any measure the Australian
 economy is performing exceptionally well. Without, I hope, displaying
 any complacency or hubris it is fair to say that right at the moment
 we have the best economic conditions for about 30 years. We are seen
 as a strong economy in our region. We are seen as an economy that
 has developed strong effective and transparent financial institutions
 which have stood us in good stead in the wake of the Asian economic
 downturn. We have been able to look that downturn in the face and
 stare it down. We do have our lowest inflation and interest rate levels
 since the late 1960s.
There is a sense in which the Australian economy has got it together
 like no other period that I've lived through in the period that
 I've been in public life. And that has not been through any accident.
 It has been the result of reforms undertaken in earlier years. And
 it's a very important message we keep in mind right at the moment.
 Today's economic strength is the product of yesterday's
 economic reform. Tomorrow's economic strength will be ours if
 we undertake reforms today. The idea that you can ever rest on your
 oars, the idea that you can ever say well, "she'll be right
 mate, it's good enough now, we don't need to do anymore"
 - that is a very foolish notion.
And just as three years ago when I became Prime Minister there was
 a sense in this community, in Australia, that when you looked at the
 Asian-Pacific region it was almost a rich man's club and Australia
 was almost knocking on the door seeking admission. I had businessmen
 saying to me  you know, you should model the Australian economy
 on some of the economies in Asia. You should intervene more the way
 they do. I even had some people seriously advocate the Malaysian model
 of business intervention as the way to go. And that was quite a strong
 mood in sections of the Australian business community a couple of
 years ago. I used to get a lot of lectures about it. You don't
 do enough. You ought to copy what's happening in the region.
I don't think anybody would give me that advice now. And the
 reason why they wouldn't give that advice now is that we were
 prepared to undertake some reforms and we got our position very strong.
 We got that budget back into balance; we made a lot of other changes;
 we updated our financial sector reforms; we made big changes to industrial
 relations. In fact the changes made to industrial relations were much
 greater than they were ever given credit for by many of our opponents
 in the Opposition or in the media. And those changes to industrial
 relations have laid the foundation for higher levels of productivity
 in Australia at the moment. Australian workers are better off now
 than they've been for 20 years. And they're better off for
 two reasons. Their interest rates are lower. That means their mortgage
 bills are $320 a month less than what they were three years ago. $320
 a month on average and that's a huge cut in anybody's housing
 mortgage bill. And their real wages have gone up.
That's the basis of the consumer prosperity in this country at
 the moment. That is why consumer sales are strong, because Australian
 workers have got money in their pockets because of those two developments.
 Now that hasn't happened by accident. But it won't continue
 forever if we don't make other economic reforms. If we just say
 well, we've done enough, it will continue. It won't continue
 because Asia will resurge. The competitors will return. They'll
 pull themselves up off the mat and they'll start fighting again
 and we'll have to be in there bigger and better and more effective
 than them in the future.
Economic performance is not a retrospection. Economic performance
 is about beating the fellow in the same race as you at any given time.
 And that is the lesson that Australia has to always understand. And
 that's why we committed ourselves to industrial relations reform,
 to economic reform. It is why we've committed ourselves to the
 cause of taxation reform. And I was reflecting this morning on the
 five principles that the Government set itself back in August of 1997,
 almost two years ago, when we began in earnest the journey towards
 giving Australia a 21st century taxation system.
We said a number of things. First and foremost we said that there
 would be no overall rise in the burden of taxation under our proposal.
 And there has not been. The second thing we said was that there should
 be major personal income tax cuts, particularly for Australians with
 the responsibilities of raising children. And our package delivers
 that. A core element of our package was the promise made to middle
 Australia, middle Australia bringing up children. The backbone of
 our society. The people who are part of the aspirational element of
 the Australian community that is so important to our well being. And
 these are people earning $30,000, $40,000, $50,000 a year. They're
 not wealthy. That's not wealthy. That's just a modest degree
 of success with the hope of doing better. And that's very much
 part of the Australian psyche. And they deserve recognition and they
 deserve reward and that's why one of the key elements of our
 package was that you could say that 80% of Australian taxpayers would
 be on a top marginal rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar.
 And I think that's a pretty good goal to offer to middle Australia.
 Not wealthy Australia, middle Australia, which is most of us, which
 is the backbone of our community.
We also committed ourselves to fundamental reform of the Commonwealth-State
 financial understanding which has been a farce for 50 years. The annual
 Premiers' conference in this city is one of the great farces
 of Australian politics. Right on message the Premiers arrive, Labor
 and Liberal alike. And they say the dirty rotten Federal Government
 won't give us enough money. And if they don't get what they
 want they go out the door and say we'll have to sack nurses and
 teachers and police because the Federal Government won't give
 us enough money. Well this Federal Government wants to give them more.
 But the people who are supposed to represent them in the Senate at
 the moment are sort of, we're not quite sure whether they're
 going to let us give the State more. We're working on it, but
 we're not quite sure they're going to do that.
But a key of this plan, a key of this plan is to allow a new charter
 of CommonwealthState financial relations. And for the first
 time in 50 years we have offered an end to the farce. We have offered
 a system that will allow State revenues to grow in a way they can't
 grow under the present formula. Because under our plan the States
 will get every last dollar of the GST revenue, and that over time
 will grow faster than would the funds going to the States under the
 current funding arrangement. Now that is an offer that no other group
 of States has ever been made. And that is why Labor and Liberal alike,
 they queued up, although a couple of them had a couple of them had
 a few party political disclaimers like my colleague Bob Carr who said,
 you know Prime Minister, I don't believe in any of this but where
 do I sign. And he signed up because it's a good deal for his
 State. And Peter Beattie signed up, and Jeff Kennett signed up. They
 all signed up because it's a very good deal for their State.
One of the things that really perplexes and amazes me about this whole
 debate, it has from the very beginning and still does to this day,
 is that some of the fiercest critics of our plan are people from the
 welfare sector, are people from ACOSS. And what they will stubbornly
 refuse to accept and understand is that if you guarantee a rise in
 State revenues over time, you guarantee a rise in the money available
 to pay for hospitals, and schools, and roads, and community services
 at a State level. If this plan falls over the States will have less
 money in the future to pay for welfare. Let me say that again, if
 this plan falls over in future the States will have less money to
 look after the poor.
And yet some of the strongest critics of this plan are people who
 hold themselves out as the guardians of the poor. Well, on this issue
 they are not serving the poor of Australia well. There's no other
 way that we can guarantee a rising revenue base for welfare in this
 country without fundamental taxation reform. And if the opportunity
 is lost then the poor in the long run will suffer proportionately
 more than many others in the community. And I believe that very strongly
 and it's one of the reasons why we are so very strongly committed.
 And you can't have it any other way. You can't, on the one
 hand, say you are interested long-term in the position of the poor
 and yet prevent a mechanism that will underwrite rising revenues for
 them.
Now, we all believe in a compassionate society. We believe in a society
 that offers people incentive through lower taxes if they work harder
 and earn more. That's the aspirational side of it. And we all
 believe in that. My Party believes in it. It believes in it passionately.
 You can't have an Australian society unless you reward the achievers
 and you encourage people to lift themselves from an income of $25,000
 to $50,000 without going into a higher tax bracket. Imagine the impact
 of that on the work aspirations of our young adult children. You say,
 well, you can move ahead like that without going into a higher tax
 bracket. That's the aspirational side of it. But there's
 also a compassionate side of it. And that compassionate of it says
 that there are some in the community who need help. And there are
 also services in the community that are needed. We all need police
 services. We need government schools. We need people to have choice.
 If they want to send their kids to government schools which are funded
 by the States, those States need revenue. And the problem is that
 those revenue sources are shrinking and you've got to find an
 alternative and the only alternative is taxation reform and a broad-based,
 indirect tax. It's a very stark choice and I just hope that it
 is a choice that is fully understood by the entire Australian community.
We also said, when I announced that taxation plan, that we believed
 in providing compensation and assistance under the package for those
 who needed help and, of course, we have very, very significantly provided
 for that. And, of course, the final thing we committed ourselves and
 of which I've dwelt for a few moments is that we committed ourselves
 to the introduction of a broad-based, indirect tax - a GST, to replace
 some or all of the existing indirect taxes. And that, of course, is
 precisely what our plan has sought to do.
We fought an election on that plan. We won an election on that plan.
 And we are urging the Australian Parliament to support that plan because
 we believe it is in the long-term interests of the country. And we
 believe it is important that the country have the political and institutional
 courage to embrace ongoing reform. Because we are where we are now
 and we are strong as we are now because we reformed in earlier years.
 And a similar gathering in five years time if we haven't embraced
 tax reform, we'll look back and say, wasn't that a failure
 of nerve and a betrayal of the national interest on our leaders that
 they didn't embrace taxation reform when they had the opportunity
 to do so. It won't easily come again this opportunity.
We've been at it as a community, debating tax reform, for almost
 as long as I've been in Parliament. We've been going on
 the current reform for almost two years and it's undergone the
 most exhaustive debate, the most exhaustive examination and analysis.
 And all the resources of the Federal Treasury have been poured into
 it and it's been the subject of a debate from one end of the
 country to the other. And sooner or later and I believe inevitably
 of course sooner that we have to make a decision. And if the decision
 is that we turn our back on reform the nation will be the poorer,
 the loser, and that will become apparent fairly rapidly. And many
 of those in whose name objections have been raised against this package
 will suffer more as a consequence than they are allowed or led to
 believe by many of the people who choose to speak on their behalf.
You may gather from those remarks that I'm rather committed to
 the cause of taxation reform. I am because I think it is good for
 Australia. And that is why the Government, from myself down, remains
 very committed to taxation reform. But we are dealing with a system
 that doesn't automatically let you through the checkout even
 though you've completed the purchase.
But, ladies and gentlemen, can I just say one or two other things
 unrelated to the issue of taxation reform. And that really goes very
 much to your own industry and the contribution that it makes to the
 Australian economy. The very great capacity that it has to grow over
 the years ahead. The contribution that it's made to the image,
 the clean green image, of this country. The contribution that it's
 made to the positive and favourable impressions that people have of
 the lifestyle of the Australian community.
I know that trade liberalisation is very important to many sections
 of your industry. And one of the very first things that I did as Prime
 Minister was establish the Supermarket to Asia Council, which I chair
 on a regular basis. And that Supermarket to Asia Council was designed
 to promote, in a holistic way, the favourable image of Australia as
 a great source of food of all types and of all stages of preparation
 to the nations of the Asian Pacific region recognising that despite
 the interruption by the downturn in Asia there is an enormous purchasing
 capacity in that region. And we're contributing another $14 million
 in the 1999 budget which includes a new $9.2 million food and fibre
 supply chain to help our food industry respond to new export opportunities.
 And we have contributed almost $100 million in additional funding
 since coming to government for quarantine to protect our clean green
 reputation and to boost our food exports.
But part of the responsibility we have as a government is to continue
 to press for trade liberalisation. It still remains monumentally unacceptable
 to me as Prime Minister of Australia that agricultural exports remain
 punished and discriminated against in major world markets. It is disturbing
 in the extreme, for example, that there should be talk by the United
 States' administration of imposing some kind of quota on the
 import of Australian and New Zealand lamb in the United States. It
 is a bit rich to get generic lectures from the American administration
 about free trade and the glories thereof. And yet you could have such
 a crude, old-fashioned, protective device as an import quota on Australian
 and New Zealand lamb. It rivals the crude, protectionist effects of
 the American Jones Act under which it's against American
 law for ships whose keels have not been made in the United States
 to ply the coast of the United States of America. And it's a
 reminder that it's still a tough world out there for small countries
 like Australia that have got to work together with other like-minded
 countries in the Cairns group to expand the opportunities and to expand
 the horizons for our exporters. But we continue to do that and Tim
 Fischer as the Trade Minister is indefatigable in his efforts to expand
 our trade opportunities and our trade horizons.
That's just another reminder that even though we're doing
 fairly well at the moment economically you've got to keep fighting,
 you've got to keep finding new ways of getting new markets. You
 never rest. You never go to sleep on either reform or trying to find
 a new market or trying to remove an existing inhibition or an existing
 barrier because once you go to sleep on the watch somebody else sneaks
 past you. And that has been our experience in the past. You find it
 as the experience you have in your own economic and business circumstances.
But, ladies and gentlemen, overall conditions are strong. The general
 business outlook in Australia is bright. Consumers are spending. Businessmen
 and women are investing. People are taking risks, and that's
 necessary. You have a government that is committed to reform. You
 have a government that believes in the benefits of reform, not in
 reform as an end in itself. You reform in order to deliver a stronger,
 better economy and that has always been the goal and the objective
 of our reform. But can I thank you for inviting me and can I declare
 the meetings of this Council open.
Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Well thank you very Angry. To Pat, to his mum, Kath, to his two children,
 Brooke and Dillon, all of whom will be accompanying him on this remarkable
 run around Australia, to the President of the Senate, Peter McGauran,
 Laurie Ferguson and Senator Faulkner, ladies and gentlemen.
It's an enormous privilege for me this morning to say godspeed,
 bon voyage, good luck, great running, whatever exhortations one chooses
 to use. To Pat, on behalf of the entire Australian nation, this is
 a spectacularly Australian way of really beginning the public face
 of the celebration of the centenary of the Australian nation. It brings
 together two things that are very close to the Australian identity.
 And that is personal achievement, particularly on the sporting field,
 and also the vast distance, and the size of our remarkable country.
But over the next, what, 217-odd days, Pat will join Australians in
 every Territory and every State. For openers, he said to me, he's
 going to go to Goulburn today, and then after celebrations there he'll
 go onto Mittagong. And that is just the beginning and it gives all
 of us in the comfort of our offices and whatever else we may be doing,
 some idea of the physical challenge, and the physical undertakings
 that he's embraced. But it's something that I believe will
 touch Australian hearts. It's something that will connect us
 with the vastness of our country, and also with personal endeavour
 and personal achievement. It's going to be a great celebration
 the centenary of federation, and this a special and particularly Australian
 way of commencing those celebrations. And in wishing you great success,
 in saluting this historic commitment that you are making to such a
 huge run around such a large country, I want to express on behalf
 of all Australians our thanks, our admiration and our good wishes.
 And I've asked Pat to carry a message from me to all of
 the people of Australia talking about the celebration of the centenary
 of our nation. And that message will read as follows:
   All the people of Australia are invited to celebrate the Centenary
   of the Federation of our nation in 2001.
   I hope that, whatever your heritage and backgrounds, you will
   join the governments and local communities of Australia in commemorating
   the hundredth birthday of our great nation.
   It is a time to reflect on the past, take pride in the present
   and look to the future with confidence.
   A very proud Australian, Pat Farmer, is linking symbolically
   all States and Territories as he undertakes this ultra-marathon
   run for the Centenary. It is this kind of courage and determination
   that built our great nation.
   I am delighted to have Pat Farmer as my special emissary in
   delivering this message to you.
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish on your behalf, good luck Pat on his
 great journey around Australia. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Mr Stewart for those very kind words of
 introduction. To my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, your
 Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
It is my pleasure again to address this annual dinner and I hope in
 so doing demonstrate in a small way the commitment of the Government
 to the resource sector. I must say tonight that I did have a conflict
 of interest because as often happens to Prime Ministers and to many
 of us in this room we receive competing invitations for the evening.
 And I have to say to you that I passed up the opportunity of the Australian
 premiere of Star Wars tonight to attend this dinner. But I
 am nonetheless delighted to be amongst you and to share a few thoughts
 with you not only about the Government's attitude towards your industry
 but also the vision we have for the future economic strength and the
 economic competitiveness of the Australian nation.
This dinner, of course, takes place on the evening of a day in which
 we have for the eighth quarter in a row recorded a year on year growth
 rate of more than four per cent. And for the first time in Australia's
 economic history I understand we have recorded the sixth consecutive
 quarter in which the growth rate has been more than one per cent.
 And one does have to go back to the late 1960s a period of which,
 of course, which saw some very frenetic activity in the mining industry
 to find a period when the general economic growth of the Australian
 nation was as robust as it is today.
But I think the growth of today and the growth in this era which Dr
 Ross Garnaut, an economic adviser to one of my predecessor's Bob Hawke
 whose presence I acknowledge here tonight, I think the economic growth
 of the current period which Ross Garnaut said recently at a conference
 in Melbourne perhaps represented the third great era of Australian
 economic growth since federation.
I think there are some characteristics and some features of the growth
 we are now enjoying which make it even stronger and more potentially
 durable than that of the late 1960s. It is coming off most importantly
 a period of sustained economic reform. It is also occurring in circumstances
 where we have reason to believe that we may have come much further
 in breaking down that great challenge which has bedevilled the Australian
 economy for so long and that is to remove the speed limits on growth.
 Because as you rightly said in your introduction, Mr President, the
 aim of sustained economic growth is to reduce unemployment to generate
 more jobs because of the social contribution that development will
 make. And it is true that economic policy and social policy complement
 each other.
Economic achievement is not an end in itself, it is a means to producing
 a happier, more stable and more cohesive Australian community. The
 economic strength of today importantly, as I have said on a number
 of occasions and I repeat tonight, is not accidental, it is the product
 of economic reform undertaken in preceding years. And just as today's
 strength and today's general prosperity is a product of yesterday's
 reforms so it is that tomorrow's strength and tomorrow's wealth will
 be the product of today's reform. And naturally into that context
 I say that if we are to secure a continuation of the growth that we
 enjoy today, if we are in five years at an equivalent dinner to be
 able to look at a still very strong and stridently growing Australian
 economy we will need, as the Chairman exhorted us to do, we will need
 today to embrace further fundamental reform.
And that is why the Government has persisted so long and so hard and
 so tenaciously in the area of taxation reform. We have needed to reform
 the Australian Taxation System for the last 20 or 30 years and every
 serious player on the Australian political scene, Labor, Liberal or
 indeed any other party has in his or her heart and mind recognised
 that reality. And that is why we took taxation reform to the people
 at the last election. It is why we persisted in negotiating with the
 Australian Democrats when it became apparent that the totality of
 our package would not be passed by the Australian Senate. And that
 is why I was very pleased to say that a package that delivered 85
 per cent of what we put to the Australian people was a huge reform
 and a huge improvement on the existing taxation system. Amongst other
 things the plans that will, I believe, pass the Australian Parliament
 in a few weeks will significantly reduce the cost of Australian exports.
 The package will also provide additional benefits through reduced
 cost of fuel both on rail, off road and elsewhere of enormous benefit
 to the mining industry of Australia.
But importantly the changes will also inject a great deal of additional
 incentive into the activities of 80 per cent of Australian taxpayers.
 And we should remind ourselves at a dinner of this kind that 80 per
 cent of our fellow Australians earn less than $50,000 a year and therefore
 if we are to reach out and touch them with reforms that we make we
 must bear that statistic in mind.
These reforms will produce the biggest single reduction in the input
 costs of business of any reform ever carried out to Australia's taxation
 system. The reforms will also fundamentally restructure the architecture
 of the Commonwealth/State financial covenant. Something that has needed
 reform and change and this also has been recognised on both sides
 of politics for a very long period of time. We as a Government are
 very committed to serious economic debate and serious economic reform.
 We believe that governments are elected to change things for the better.
 We believe that on occasions governments are elected to take risks
 for the long-term national interests and for the long-term benefit
 of the Australian economy. We put down a comprehensive plan, we believe
 it to be the best plan on offer for Australia's future. If there is
 an alternative plan for the reform of the Australian taxation system
 then we'd be happy to have a look at it and to debate it. But it certainly
 won't be found inside cans of soup or bags of lettuce.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is not only in the area of taxation reform
 but it's also in a number of other very important areas where I believe
 the reform agenda has worked very successfully and very effectively
 for the national interest. I am very proud of the industrial relations
 changes that the Coalition Government has carried out. And I know
 that those changes have been very widely applauded in your industry.
 Of the many policy debates that I have been involved in over the years
 none have I indulged more vigorously and more enthusiastically than
 the cause of industrial relations reform. And I believe over the years
 the community has begun to see the value of a less centralised industrial
 relations system. An industrial relations system that encourages the
 making of bargains at an enterprise level. An industrial relations
 system of that kind is particularly well suited for large sections
 of your industry.
I am also, I think, appropriately noting the importance for the economy
 generally and also for your industry of the changes to the Australian
 waterfront that were hard fought, were heavily criticised but persisted
 in to his very great credit by my Minister, Peter Reith. And those
 changes over time will render very significant economic benefits to
 the Australian community.
Can I say to you, Mr Chairman, that I do understand that despite the
 general strength of the Australian economy and despite the fact that
 in generic terms the Australian economy is stronger than it has been
 for more than 30 years, I do understand the particular challenges
 of your industry. I do understand the depressed state of world commodity
 prices. I understand the fierce competition in which your industry
 operates. I also understand the ongoing significance and importance
 of your industry to wealth generation in this country. And although
 it is properly part of the economic goals and objectives of the Government
 that I lead that we embrace the importance of new industries, that
 we understand the employment contribution that information technology
 industries, for example, can make, we will never as a Government lose
 sight of the importance to the Australian economy of your industry.
We will never lose sight of the steady contribution that the various
 sectors of the minerals industry make to annual wealth generation.
 Without your contribution to the export income of this nation we would
 not be able to sustain the high standard of living that most Australians
 enjoy. And I hope you might agree that in the time that we have been
 in Government we have pursued a policy of a very strong commitment
 indeed to exploration and generally to the development of the mining
 industry. We have thrown away such things as the very outmoded and
 foolish three mine uranium policy that we inherited in 1996. We have
 continued to propound the view that it is possible to have a vigorous
 mining industry which properly cares for and respects the environment
 of this country, that it is possible to strike a balance between your
 industry and the environment. And I do applaud the willingness of
 so many of your members to discharge the social obligations that you
 have not only to our environment but also as your Chairman mentioned
 the position of the indigenous people of our country. And it is a
 fact that some of the best examples of the willingness of Australians
 to help the indigenous people of this country are to be found in the
 mining industry. And I only wish that some of the good news stories
 that can be found in relation to the activity of your members, I only
 wish that those good news stories were more widely propounded and
 circulated throughout the Australian community.
So can I say to you, Mr Chairman, and ladies and gentlemen, that it
 is again a great pleasure to be amongst you. I understand very well
 the relative difficulties through which your industry is passing at
 the present time. I understand that over the past few years you have
 had to grapple not only with depressed commodity prices you have also
 had to battle with the uncertainty created by the native title legislation.
 That after a very long period of negotiation which directly involved
 the leadership of your industry I hope that we have achieved certainly
 at a Commonwealth level although much still remains to be done at
 a State level, I hope we have enjoyed and brought about and achieved
 an arrangement and an understanding that will provide a lasting basis
 for a sensible balancing of the rights of development of industry
 both mining and pastoral, the environment and the indigenous people.
You are quintessentially risk takers, entrepreneurs and wealth generators.
 No country can achieve durable economic strength without having a
 large number of its citizens who are prepared to embrace and indulge
 those pursuits. On behalf of the Government I thank your industry
 for the contribution that it makes to the wealth of our country, to
 the strength of our country. The contribution it makes to its exports,
 the jobs of the Australians that it provides and I can assure you
 that the Coalition will remain a firm and understanding and committed
 friend of your industry and will continue to understand and be sympathetic
 to your difficulties. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE.........................................................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mr Chairman, to my Parliamentary Colleagues,
 Jackie Kelly, my Minister for Sport and Tourism, Janice Crosio the
 Member for Prospect, Julia Irwin the Member for Fowler, other State
 Parliamentary colleagues, Father and all the members of the Croatian
 community.  Can I say
 how delighted that Janette and I are to be here this morning to share
 this very special occasion with you.
I am conscious of the importance of this event to your community.
  It's an opportunity to me, on behalf of your fellow Australians,
 to say how much we honour the contribution of Australians of Croatian
 descent to the building of the modern Australia.
The rest of us thank you for your dedication, for your loyalty to
 Australia, for your hard work, for your sense of family and your sense
 of community.  And I think
 what a wonderful thing it is here under a beautiful warm winter sunshine
 here in Australia, for me the Prime Minister of Australia to be saying
 thank you to all of you, to remember as I do your past, to honour
 the fact that the people of Croatia fought proudly and defiantly against
 communism for a very long period of time.
I think it's always important to remember the past without allowing
 the past to govern the present or to govern the future.
  Your present and your future is as part of the great Australian
 nation.  But in being
 part of the great Australian nation you're not asked to forget
 your heritage, your history, and what your people have been through
 and therefore it is marvelous, as part of the Australian democracy
 and the Australian way of life that is part of the Australian community,
 you preserve just a little bit of Croatia here, not only in this village
 but also in the broader Australian community.
I think today is also an opportunity to recognise the importance,
 as people grow older, Australians who were not born in this country
 and whose mother-tongue is not English, it is important to recognise
 the value of retirement villages and nursing homes that care for them.
  The Governor of Victoria, Sir James Gobbo, an Australian of
 Italian descent, put it to me very well one day and I've never
 forgotten his remark, when he said to me John it's a bit
 unrealistic to expect an elderly Italian lady to sit around the piano
 singing the Road to Gundagai.
  And, of course, that is true not only in relation to people
 of Italian descent, but indeed to people whose mother-tongue is other
 than English.  And as
 one of the Directors of Nursing said to me on the way in, that she
 had literally seen dementia peel away from people as they've
 been able in their older years to communicate with the nursing staff
 in their mother-tongue.
And as you rightly said in your introduction, as the years go by and
 English becomes to so many people irrespective of their descent, their
 mother-tongue the need for that will go.
  But at present it is a very important element of properly caring
 for the elderly within our community.
  And it has been, let me say, the commitment of governments
 of both political persuasion to provide continued help and support
 for nursing homes and retirement villages of this kind.
And one of the measures of the humanity of a nation is the way in
 which it does care for the old.
  In twenty years time there will be far more Australians over
 the age of 65.  We will
 live longer, we will be healthier as we live longer, and the need
 to care for people in that age bracket will grow rather than diminish
 and that has all sorts of implications for a whole range of public
 policy issues, not only nursing home policy but a whole range of public
 policy issues.
But today I'm here as the Prime Minister to say to you how much
 we admire the contribution of your community to the building of the
 Australian nation.  We
 are conscious of the circumstances in which many of you left your
 homeland.  I am very proud
 of the fact that the Australian government was one of the very first
 to recognise the independent Republic of Croatia only a few years
 ago.
But even more importantly than that, you have come to Australia, you've
 become part of the community, you've made your mark on the Australian
 community, you've made your mark in business, in politics, in
 sport.  In so many endeavours,
 the contribution of people of Croatian descent to soccer in Australia,
 for example, it is quite remarkable given the proportion of the Australian
 population that people of Croatian descent represent.
  And in so many other fields the mark of Croatians on our country
 is to be found.
But this is an occasion ladies and gentlemen not for long speeches
 but for celebration.  It's
 an occasion to thank you for your contribution.
  It's an occasion to celebrate the wonder of living in
 Australia.  The freest,
 open, most tolerant nation on earth.
And in honour of these, the man after whom this village is named,
 it's an occasion to salute the steadfastness of people of Croatian
 descent to their Catholic faith, which many of them maintained in
 their homeland in very, very difficult circumstances.
So can I say to all of you it's a great delight for Janette and
 I to be present.  It's
 a great delight to share for a few moments membership of the Australian
 Croatian family and the Australian Croatian community.
Thank you very much for what you have done for Australia.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much Kerry Stokes. To Dr and Mrs Kennedy, to
 Mr and Mrs Murphy, to Sir Arvi and Lady Parbo, to my ministerial colleagues,
 Richard Alston and Peter McGauran, Kate Carnell the Chief Minister
 of the Australian Capital Territory, other distinguished guests, ladies
 and gentlemen.
Tonight is really important for two reasons. It's the opening of a
 wonderful exhibition and the huge crowd that is gathered here tonight
 is testament to what a remarkable exhibition it is and also for the
 tremendous support and affection that the National Gallery enjoys
 in the life of Canberra and in the cultural life of our nation.
But it's also an occasion to honour a remarkable act of philanthropy
 because what the Sara Lee Corporation is doing to mark and honour
 the millennium is about as imaginative and as a self-sacrificing act
 of cultural philanthropy that any company could possibly undertake.
 In an age when there is plenty of cynicism about the behaviour of
 corporations, much of it unjustified, at a time when it's easy to
 take pot shots at manifestations of capitalism it really is very refreshing
 and encouraging to be able on an occasion like this to a very, in
 a very wholehearted and unreserved way to express our respect and
 our admiration for what the Sara Lee Corporation is doing. And the
 fact that we at the end of the process that we are going to be a very
 important part and the recipient of one of the items in this remarkable
 collection adds to our sense of connection and our sense of pleasure.
And to you Mr and Mrs Murphy, in particular, who have come here as
 the representatives of the company for tonight, can I express on behalf
 I know of all the friends and supporters of the Gallery and all of
 the art lovers of Australia, how much we respect your company for
 what it has done. And how much we thank you for the item that the
 Gallery will receive from the collection and also to honour the generosity
 and farsightedness of the Sara Lee Corporation.
This is a remarkable exhibition and over the next two months or more
 tens of thousands of Australians will have an opportunity of viewing
 it. And to appreciate in a personal way the generosity of the millennium
 gift of the company. I think this is also an occasion, of course,
 to celebrate the ongoing success, the continued and growing success
 of the Gallery under the Chairmanship of Mr Stokes and also under
 the Directorship of Dr Kennedy. I was present at the opening in 1982
 and it is for that reason Janette reminded me before I got up and
 said: you remember how long the speeches were on that occasion. And
 I do indeed. So I simply want to conclude by saying one or two important
 things about the example that I think this gift by Sara Lee is setting
 to those who would aspire to greater corporate philanthropy here in
 Australia.
The Americans can teach us a lot about corporate philanthropy. Many
 of us have understood that for a very long period of time and so much
 of the cultural and artistic treasure of the United States is a result
 of that rich tradition of corporate philanthropy. And that is one
 of the reasons why a few months ago a number of us in the Government,
 Richard Alston and myself, and aided and encouraged by people like
 David Gonski and others sat down and worked out how we might as a
 Government give more incentive and more stimulus to corporations to
 embrace the traditions of philanthropy of other countries. And as
 a consequence of that I made some announcements which I hope will
 represent very important taxation incentives both to individuals and
 also to companies to make gifts of art collections, of items of art
 and generally to move down the path towards greater philanthropy.
In our nation as we move forward we have a lot of challenges and there
 are a lot of things we want to do and in reality there's no simple
 way of saying well, all of it can be done by the Government, all of
 it can be done by the business sector, all of it can be done by individuals,
 all of it can be done by charitable agencies. What we really need
 is to get all of them together to build what I often call a social
 coalition. And the way you build a social coalition, of course, is
 for the Government to take a lead and for the Government to remain
 in the case of the arts a strong and consistent supporter of the arts.
 And I think it is fair to say in this country we have developed a
 pretty bipartisan tradition of supporting the arts in this country.
 And a lot of people have made a contribution to this Gallery. It's
 construction of it was commenced during the period of the Whitlam
 Government, it was opened in a Fraser Government and I know during
 the time of the Gorton Government the concept of a national gallery
 was very much in the minds of the members of that Government.
So it's very much a commitment from the Government level. We have
 a growing number of people who are demonstrating all around the world
 the rich artistic talent of this country. We need to encourage the
 business community more, many have been generous without tax deductions
 and without tax encouragement. And I record my appreciation on behalf
 of you all for that great generosity.
But as a result of these changes which will encourage greater corporate
 philanthropy I believe that we can enter a new era and we can begin
 to build in this country some of the pattern of corporate giving to
 the arts and corporate philanthropy, which has been taken for granted
 for decades in the United States.
Sara Lee has demonstrated to us how it can be done at its pinnacle
 and at its best. And it is a wonderful millennium gift to the art
 lovers of the world. We are honoured to have the exhibition here.
 We thank the company for what it is doing, we thank the company for
 the gift that it will make after July of next year to this Gallery
 and it will be a permanent reminder to all who come here of the greater
 generosity of the Sara Lee Corporation.
I therefore have very great pleasure, ladies and gentlemen, in declaring
 the exhibition open. I wish it well, it will be a resounding success
 and it is yet another demonstration of the great relevance and the
 great inspiration of the National Gallery of Australia to the cultural
 life of our nation. Thank you.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
 Well thank you very much Paul for those very warm words of welcome
 and might I say extremely entertaining and enthusing speech. I acknowledge
 my parliamentary colleagues, Kerry Chikarovski, Joe Hockey, Jillian
 Skinner, Brendan Nelson, Andrew Humpherson and all the other distinguished
 guests. Ladies and gentlemen I am very pleased to be here for a number
 of reasons.
Firstly, but not only, I am delighted to be associated with a project
 for which Paul Ramsey has been the basic inspiration. I have an immense
 personal regard for Paul. He is a very dedicated enthusiastic, optimistic
 Australian. The only limitation on this country's future prospects
 is that we don't have eighteen and three quarter million people
 who are simultaneously positive, talented, optimistic and hopeful
 about the future and Paul is one of those blokes who always leaves
 you a little more enthusiastic and a little more energetic and a little
 more encouraged to do something positive and to do something good
 after you have had a yarn to him. Whether it is in communications
 or the private health field or whatever, he is always out there punching
 very hard to make a positive contribution. After hearing some of his
 tales of earlier years and what they did with those Jesuits I am glad
 that I didn't go teach at Riverview.
But ladies and gentlemen the other of a number of reasons why I am
 very pleased to be here today is that is an opportunity to say something
 about a constant theme of mine in recent days and that is the concept
 within our society of a social coalition. We all, I guess, want the
 best for our country, we all want Australia to be a strong country,
 we want it to be a fair country and we want it to be a decent society.
We all want there to be proper underpinnings so that the poor in our
 community are well looked after, but we also want a society that encourages
 people who have aspirations to do better, to work hard in the belief
 that they get some return. I think we all agree on that whatever our
 backgrounds are, whatever our politics are and whatever our views
 are about public policy issues. I think we also recognise that there
 is no one section of our society that can achieve those goals operating
 on it's own.
There used to be a view in society probably 20 or 30 years ago that
 you solved every problem by handing it over to the Government, particularly
 the Federal Government, and that if you just got the Federal Government
 to establish a program and pour a lot of money into it then that would
 solve every difficulty. Then I think we went through a bit of a reaction
 to that to a belief that the Government was hopeless at everything
 and it had really no role in society at all except perhaps for providing
 the wherewithal to defend the country and provide the Police and a
 few basic services and that everything should be left to the private
 sector.
Now, I think that we have realised that that doesn't quite work
 either important though the private sector is, and dedicated though
 all of us are to it. I think though what we have come to believe,
 quite rightly in more recent years is that we all do have to work
 together in a very co-operative way and that is why I talk frequently,
 not only in areas like health and education and social security but
 I talk very frequently in a lot of areas about the need to build this
 social coalition, about the need for people to work together. The
 Government does have a role, the private sector has a role, health
 professionals, in the case of health policy have a role and of course
 the great charitable religious and welfare organisations of our society
 also have a very important role. What we really want to do is to find
 the best combination, with each of those sectors of society contributing
 those things that they can do best. In many ways our public health
 and our private health system, collectively the Australian health
 care system has the beginnings, I believe, of the very effective social
 coalition.
It is fashionable unfortunately in this country and everybody is a
 bit guilty of it, the politicians are guilty of it on occasion, the
 media is guilty of it and other people in society are guilty of it,
 of knocking the health care system of this country. I want to say
 something very strongly in defence collectively of the health care
 system. It may have its faults and it may need further reforms and
 it may need further innovations but I don't believe there is
 a better health system anywhere else in the world. Paul's joke
 about the pilot not landing in Moscow is true and the reality is that
 if you're a battler and you're earning $30 000 or $40 000
 a year or the currency equivalent of that somewhere else in the world,
 is if you're going to get ill get ill in Australia. Don't
 get ill in the United States, don't get ill certainly in the
 old Soviet Union, with great respect to the many people who have come
 from the UK health system who maybe here today it is preferable to
 get ill in Australia rather than the United Kingdom and overall I
 think we do have a very good health system. That doesn't mean
 to say it is perfect but it has a lot of things going for it. To start
 with we have undoubtedly some of the best health care professionals
 in the world, Australian doctors, Australian surgeons are world renowned,
 we all know that. And the quality of care delivered by nursing professionals
 in all Australian hospitals is of an exceptionally high standard.
We have always punched above our weight as far as medical research
 is concerned. And I reminded myself of this when I had the opportunity
 last Friday of opening the new gene therapy unit at the Peter McCallum
 Institute in Melbourne of just how remarkably has been the impact
 of the great names in medical research that have come out of this
 country. When you think of the contribution of the all the institutes,
 of the Walter and Eliza, of the Garvan and the list goes on, of the
 Peter McCallum. And in the last budget I was very proud of the fact
 that we committed ourselves to double  double - the amount of
 money being given by the Federal Government to health and medical
 research in this country. And we did that because we believe that
 Australia is very good at that and we have very good researchers and
 very good doctors and that is money well invested and well spent to
 build a better future.
We do have very good health outcomes. And we also have a very good
 partnership between the public system and the private system. And
 you can't build a successful health care system anywhere in the
 world without having the two of them. The Government has a role through
 the public hospitals. And like so many Australians I've seen
 the tremendous quality of work that is performed in public hospitals
 in this country. And without that skill and care and dedication the
 lives of many Australian families would be the poorer as a consequence.
 But we've got to supplement that with the role of the private
 hospital. And I think the role of the private hospital was heavily
 discounted for a very long time. And I am pleased that we as a government
 have done a lot more to encourage private hospitals. We've done
 a lot more to encourage people back into private health insurance.
 It's a hard battle getting people back into private health insurance
 and you won't do it unless you give them incentives. You won't
 do it unless you continue assiduously as many have done. And this
 hospital is part of that process, of tackling the problem of gaps
 in relation to private health insurance. And I make no apology for
 the fact that we are investing $1.5 billion a year or more into encouraging
 people, giving people an incentive, to remain in private health insurance.
 Because it was always part of the Australia that I grew up in that
 you had a strong public hospital system underpinned by private health
 insurance which people were encouraged to enter and remain a member
 of. And that provided a strong supplement of support for the private
 hospital system because the one complements the other and there are
 things that are done in private hospitals that can only be done within
 the ambience of the private sector. And equally there's a broader
 social responsibility which is discharged by both the public hospitals
 working together with the private hospitals.
And I was glad that Paul made the point that the North Shore Public
 Hospital and this hospital work together in a co-operative way. They
 do not see each other as rivals. They see each other as co-contributors
 to the State health system and that is enormously important. And that
 same principle applies, of course, in other areas where you have both
 private and public provisions such as education. They're not
 rivals. They're co-contributors for the same overall system,
 giving people maximum amount of choice and giving them the available
 options that they ought to have in our kind of society.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I am really very pleased indeed to be here
 today. I'm pleased to honour the philanthropic contribution of
 Paul Ramsey to Australian society, to honour the contribution of his
 hospital to new standards of excellence and care and comfort when
 people are ill. It's certainly located in an easily accessible
 part of Sydney. It's not far from Kirribilli, I don't object
 to that. And it is a hospital that I know in the short time that it's
 been open has already set new standards of comfort and excellence
 and care and that is tremendously important. But most importantly
 of all it is dedicated to the relief of human suffering, it is dedicated
 to a caring approach to human life, it is dedicated to looking after
 people when they need assistance and it is dedicated to the better
 values and the better aspirations of the Australian community. So
 in declaring this hospital formally open may I pay tribute to the
 doctors and the nurses and all the other staff who work here. I've
 always had an immense admiration for health care professionals in
 this country. Their dedication and their skill and their compassion
 is always deserving of our understanding and our respect. I thank
 them. I thank Paul for his leadership and all the other members of
 the board. And I have great pleasure in officially declaring the hospital
 open.
[Ends]


Subjects: women; business; economy; taxation reform; industrial
 relations reform;
E&amp;OE...............................................................................................
Well thank you very much Peter. To Ita Buttrose our MC, to Senator
 Helen Coonan, the Liberal Senator for New South Wales, ladies and
 gentlemen.
It is a privilege for me to be here again at this luncheon, and to
 direct a few remarks to you about the state of the Australian economy,
 how that relates to all men and women in Australia, and also a few
 observations about the contribution and the influence and the impact
 of women in the Australian economy and within Australian business.
Ita Buttrose mentioned in her introductory remarks the transformation
 that had come over the role and the place of women within Australian
 society in her lifetime. Speaking for myself as someone who was born
 in 1939 and who grew up in Australia during the 1950s, I think the
 two single most transforming events that I've observed in my
 lifetime are externally the collapse of communism and the disappearance
 through the end of the cold war of the old ideological divide across
 the world between right and left. And the other great transforming
 event of course has been the total change in the role and status and
 influence of women within our community.
Those two things are very separate, very different but domestically
 for our country of course domestically for other societies the change
 in the role and the influence of women within our society has been
 absolutely enormous. One could spend a whole afternoon regaling oneself
 with statistics which demonstrate it. I always give a homegrown example,
 that when I started Sydney University law school in 1957, out of class
 of something...or a year of something like 120 there were about
 a dozen women. When my daughter 35 years later commenced the same
 faculty at the same law school more than 50% of those in that year
 were women. And one confided in the realisation that 55% of all students
 at universities, tertiary institutions, are women, and in fact in
 small business one-third of small businesses are now owned by women
 and the rate of entry of women into small business is three times
 faster than that of men into small business.
Now this is not a speech that's going to be replete with statistics.
 But I mentioned those to dramatise and personalise the point that
 both Ita and I have made. So it is a society that is very different.
 It is a society that provides particularly to those under the age
 of 35, or even younger, provides options and opportunities that simply
 weren't available or weren't dreamt of a generation ago.
 The impact of information technology has had a transforming effect
 on the operation of business throughout the world and most particularly
 small businesses.
When I've tried to contemplate why it is that at the moment we
 seem to be enjoying a level of economic activity and a level of economic
 achievement that not even the most optimistic of us a few years ago
 would have thought possible. I search around for some of those explanations,
 and some of those reasons, I draw some instruction from a man for
 whom I have immense regard and that is Alan Greenspan who's the
 Chairman of the federal reserve system of the United States, and somebody
 who I believe has made a great contribution to the economic success
 and strength of the United States which is so important to all of
 us - always has been and always will be because it's the greatest
 economy in the world. Now his observation after a lifetime of studying
 economic activity is that he believes that the industrialised world
 and the modern industrialised economies such as the United States
 and Australia are at long last getting the proper economic dividend
 from the huge investment that has been made in technology, particularly
 information technology over recent years.
But whatever the reasons are it is quite impossible for anybody who
 has the long term interests of Australia at heart, it is quite impossible
 for therefore from somebody in my position to look at the Australian
 economy and the opportunities that it presents to both men and women
 in business of all shapes of sizes at the present time without feeling
 a great sense of enthusiasm, and excitement, and anticipation, and
 expectation about what can really be achieved. Because in many ways
 we are living at the moment in what could be regarded as the third
 golden era of Australian economic performance. If you measure that
 performance by the years of the federation of Australian since 1901.
And in putting this proposition to you I'm not being original.
 I'm plagiarising the observation from an economist who was an
 adviser to a Prime Minister, not of my political party but rather
 a Prime Minister in the person of Bob Hawke who was Prime Minister
 between 1983 and 1991. A few weeks at a seminar in Melbourne his economic
 adviser, Dr Ron Garnaut, who's often written things that have
 not always been to my liking politically. He's certainly a very
 good economist and he made the observation that we've had three
 great golden eras of economic development and performance in Australia.
 The first of them began in 1901 and ended in the trenches of World
 War I. The second began in the early years of the 1950s and ended
 in the early 1970s when the world reeled from the oil shock and all
 the economic dislocations that flowed from the floating of exchange
 rates away from the old Breton-Woods agreements which had fixed exchange
 rates. And the third era is the one that he believes that we may now
 be entering because we are enjoying at the present time levels of
 economic stability and economic predictability, the like of which
 I haven't experienced at any time over the last 30 years. You
 really do have to go back to the late 1960s to find a period of time
 when we've had such constantly strong economic indicators.
Now it's always dangerous for Prime Ministers, or Treasurers
 or anybody senior in government to make remarks about this through
 fear that you will see on the television bulleting that night an observation
 that the Prime Minister's getting carried away with hubris, the
 Prime Minister's getting carried away with his own rhetoric and
 that really doom and disaster is just around the corner, and that
 somehow or rather it's all going to fall apart, we're going
 to wake up tomorrow and we're going to find that interest rates
 have climbed and that inflation has soared, that our exports have
 fallen into a deep hole.
 Now of course I'm conscious of the fact that it's very dangerous
 to luxuriate too much in apparent economic success, and apparent economic
 success. But I also think it is very dangerous and counterproductive
 not to recognise opportunity and not to recognise strength when it
 is staring you in the face. And I'd have to say to you today
 that I can't remember a time when I've been able to address
 a gathering of people whose very active years in business are so much
 ahead of them, when I can talk with such optimism and confidence about
 the state of our economy, and the opportunities there are for Australians,
 men and women alike, to achieve and to do well in business because
 not only do we have an economic circumstance at the present time which
 is strong and stable and predictable and successful. But I think we
 also as a community understand better now, than perhaps we might have
 a few years ago, why it is so.
I think we do understand now that if you make changes and you embrace
 reforms that are necessary you do ultimately get a result, and you
 do ultimately get a dividend. The amazing thing about Australia at
 the moment is that we were able to stare down the economic collapse
 in Asia. I don't think there would have been many people in this
 room, perhaps none, and there certainly weren't many people in
 Australia who a couple of years ago were prepared to predict that
 we were going to ride out the worst of that Asian economic downturn.
I have to confess to you I didn't think we would. It's turned
 out to be better than I expected. I was rather more cautious a year
 or 18 months ago, or two years ago, about our capacity to do so. I
 hoped we would. I thought we'd taken a number of steps to protect
 Australia against the worst impact of that Asian economic downturn.
 But I had a fear because it seemed to be a very conventional thing
 to predict. But because we exported so much to the Asian-Pacific region
 it would overwhelm us. But of course it hasn't turned out to
 be like that. And the reasons why it hasn't turned out to be
 like that is that we were able as a society and a community to take
 a number of decisions over a number of years that gave the Australian
 economy a competitive edge and a competitive strength that it simply
 wouldn't otherwise have had.
I mean one of the reasons why we were able to stare down the Asian
 economic downturn is that we've run a very successful and very
 flexible exchange rate management policy in this country for a number
 of years. And that has meant that we've been able to diversify
 our exports into Europe and into the United States far more successfully
 than many people thought we might otherwise have done.
Other reasons why we've been able to do it of course are related
 to the fact that we got our budget in order and we undertook other
 reforms in the financial sector and made this country a lot more competitive
 and a lot more aggressive in winning markets around the world. In
 other words I think we have learnt from the experience of the last
 couple of years that if you are able just as you find this experience
 in running business, that you are able to undertake reforms and to
 address structural challenges then a few years down the track you
 normally get a dividend. And that has been the case I think with Australia.
One of the things that makes me so enthused about our prospects and
 about our future as a society and as a country is that having learnt
 that today's prosperity and strength is a product of yesterday's
 reforms and change. More and more Australians are likely to accept
 the proposition that tomorrow's prosperity and success and strength
 will only be purchased and guaranteed if we are able to today continue
 the reform process.
That of course brings me unavoidably and ineluctably to the issue
 of taxation reform which of course is the biggest single piece of
 economic reform on our agenda at the present time and the biggest
 single piece of economic reform that this country has indulged for
 the last 20 years. I say indulged in the broader sense of that term
 because it doesn't seem particularly indulgent at the present
 time when you're still in the political process of arguing the
 case and getting the legislation through Parliament.
But I have believed for more than 20 years that this country has needed
 fundamental taxation reform. Not because of some ideological commitment
 to taxation reform but because I've watched the present system
 slowly breakdown bit by bit under the weight of its own anachronistic
 character. We have needed for a very long time to have an indirect
 tax system that more broadly and equitably taxes economic activities
 in this country. We can no longer have one that has a lumpy discriminatory
 approach to the taxation of the consumption level and different forms
 of economic activity.
Now you are all aware I'm sure of the debate that's gone
 on over the last 18 months of our taxation reform. You are aware that
 we put a certain proposition to the public at the last election. You
 are aware that having won that election we weren't able to get
 it in its entirety through both houses of Parliament. And that we
 entered into an arrangement with the Australian Democrats whereby
 in summary we got about 85% or 90% of what we wanted. Now of course
 we have gone to the public with something a little different, and
 of course that was our first priority. And having recognised the reality
 that we couldn't get that our obligation was to see if we could
 secure agreement for the great bulk of that. And I'm very happy
 to say that we did, and I've said before and I repeat it today
 that the negotiations the government had with Senator Lees on behalf
 of the Australian Democrats were both positive and candid and constructive,
 and they produced an arrangement and an understanding which I believe
 when translated into legislation which I have every reason to believe
 will occur in a couple of weeks time, that that will deliver in 12
 months time, from the 1st of July in the year 2000, the
 taxation system will give enormous competitive economic benefits to
 Australia and to the Australian economy.
One of the great things it will do is it will make our exports cheaper.
 It will reduce the operating costs of many businesses. It will provide
 greater incentive for middle Australia. We should always remember
 that 80% of Australians earn less than $50,000 a year. 80% earn less
 than $50,000 a year. And under this proposal those people, those 80%
 will face a top marginal tax rate of not more than 30 cents in the
 dollar compared with a top marginal rate of 43 cents in relation to
 that segment of the Australian population at the present time.
Now it's possible to look at any taxation system and any taxation
 agreement and say well I would have liked more to have been done in
 that area or more to have done in another area. And of course we are
 yet to deal finally with the issue of business taxation. One of the
 many things that will be examined by the Ralph Committee whose report
 we expect to receive by the 31st of July, and will form
 the foundation of the Government's deliberations of business
 tax reform, one of the major issues to be considered by Mr Ralph is
 the impact of capital gains tax particularly on venture capital and
 particularly on small businesses, because the impact of capital gains
 tax which in an appropriate form is a necessary part of any fair taxation
 system. The impact of capital gains tax is very significant and has
 considerable ramifications not only for those people who seek venture
 capital but also to the people engaged in business, particularly small
 and medium sized business.
Now I mentioned to all of you ladies and gentlemen the importance
 of taxation reform to illustrate the point that I made at the beginning
 of my remarks on the Australian economy, and that is that today's
 strength is a product of yesterday's reform, tomorrow's
 strength is going to be the product of today's reforms. And of
 course it is not only in the area of taxation where major reforms
 have been undertaken, but an area that touches very much I think on
 the interests and the aspirations of women in business and women in
 the workforce in Australia in 1999, the area of industrial relations
 reform.
One of the things we have sought to do in changing our workplace relations
 law is to provide for much greater flexibility. To provide to both
 men and women the opportunity of more effectively and more harmoniously
 and a more complimentary way matching their work and their family
 responsibilities. One of the reasons, the many reasons, why we opposed
 the rigidity of the old award system was because it was built upon
 a mindset about the structure of the Australian workforce that was
 predominantly male, predominantly blue collar, predominantly seeing
 the Australian workforce as a large congregation usually of men working
 in one place under some kind of central supervision and some kind
 of central direction. The idea that people would work from home, the
 idea that people would have the benefit of information technology,
 the idea that you could achieve greater efficiencies with small units
 with a decentralised command structure, none of those concepts were
 in the minds of the people who developed the rigid award system of
 our old workplace relations approach. And they were amongst the reasons
 why we campaigned very strongly to bring about change in this area.
 And we believe quite passionately that the changes we've made
 in this area have opened up opportunities and greater flexibility
 especially for women in the Australian workforce than would have been
 dreamt of only a few years ago.
Different political parties have different approaches to policies
 impacting on various sections of the Australian community. It's
 fair to say that the approach that the Government that I lead has
 adopted, not only in relation to issues that are important to Australian
 women but also issues important to the entire community, is that we
 have endeavoured to the maximum extent appropriate and possible, we
 have endeavoured to adopt a mainstream approach. We have sought to
 create a society that is fair and decent and strong for all of the
 Australian community. We do not see Australian society as some kind
 of aggregation of individual groups. But we do see Australian society,
 essentially, as being a society which has a common purpose, a common
 reason and a common set of goals and a common set of aspirations.
We also recognise that within the pursuit of those common goals and
 those common aspirations different sections of society will seek to
 achieve their goals and realise their aspirations in different ways.
 And so it is that in our approach to issues that affect women we have
 not sought flashy symbolism, we have not indulged ourselves in things
 like quotas and been over-slavish about targets but rather we have
 sought to create a society which is built on merit, which is built
 on greater opportunity and is built on sweeping away attitudes that
 hold back and impede rather than to impose artificial outcomes or
 artificial quotas from on high. Now, some people criticise that approach.
 There'll be others, though, that will see in the long-term that
 that approach is both more realistic and also more respectful of the
 role and the capacities and the aspirations of women, particularly
 younger women, within the Australian community. Because in the end
 if we are about a society which encourages self-achievement, a society
 which gives people the maximum opportunity to realise their goals
 according to their own choices I don't think there could be any
 other approach. And, afterall, it's not the role of the Government
 to dictate the character of a relationship between two people. It
 is not the role of a government to say, well, during a certain period
 of your life when you have children you shall have them in paid childcare
 or rather you should care for them yourself or your husband or your
 wife should care for them. What we have as a government is the responsibility
 to say to those people, we will give you the maximum opportunity to
 choose for yourself as to what is the appropriate arrangement.
Now, I have a very strong view that, in relation to issues like this,
 the role of the Government is not a compelling or an interventionist
 role. The role of the Government is of a facilitating role and one
 that provides people with opportunities, that doesn't mandate
 that one particular approach, one particular pattern of behaviour
 is the ideal but rather that recognises that different people choose
 to do things differently and they can do them very differently with
 equal degrees of success and equal degrees of family and career satisfaction.
 But I do it against the background of recognising that the world in
 relation to the contribution and the participation of women in all
 aspects of our society has changed forever. And as one reflects on
 the different circumstances into which men and women have been born
 into Australian life over the last almost a century now of our existence
 the transformation has been quite amazing. And yet through that transformation
 and recognising that it has changed forever there are still some constants
 and there are still some enduringly common approaches and enduring
 values that haven't altered.
And the desire to find personal happiness and satisfaction within
 a family is equally as strong as it was a generation ago but it is
 manifesting itself in a different fashion, people will do it differently
 according to the different generations. The desire to be successful
 and to provide one's self and one's family with economic
 security and economic achievement and economic success is still as
 strong as it was. But that will be achieved in a very, very difficult
 fashion by people in their own particular ways.
And that the role of government is to provide a framework that facilitates
 people to make the choices they want themselves. And that is the guiding
 philosophy of ours both in relation to our approach towards issues
 that particularly affect women, recognising that all policy issues
 affect men and women in different ways and at different stages of
 their life, that the idea that you can have a hermetically sealed
 set of policies that just relate to women and not to men of course
 is unrealistic. But it is equally unrealistic not to recognise that
 there is a particular interest on the part of Australian women on
 certain activities and policies of the Government.
So our approach has not been one of flashy symbolism, rather has been
 the one of creating a supportive society and certainly a supportive
 economy that enables people to exercise a maximum degree of choice.
Ladies and gentlemen, I've enjoyed again being at this gathering.
 I want to congratulate Business Class' and the magazine
 on the contribution, along with many other magazines that are being
 made to informing and writing about and understanding and analysing
 the lifestyle and the aspirations and the hopes of women within the
 Australian community. As I said at the beginning of my remarks, it's
 quite impossible to address any gathering in my position at the present
 time without feeling an immense sense of enthusiasm and pride and
 hope about the strength of the Australian economy, the fact that we
 are seen with greater respect. We are seen to exercise greater authority
 in the world because we have achieved. And I think the opportunities
 that lie before an audience such as this, whilst not limitless, they
 are infinitely greater than they have been for a generation and it
 is a marvellous time to be involved in business, and it's a marvellous
 time for an audience such as this to be alive in Australian community
 and thank you very much for having me.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................
Well, thank you very much Senator Newman. To you the Attorney-General
 and my other Cabinet ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies
 and gentlemen.
It is with considerable pride that I have the opportunity of launching
 the Government's response to an excellent report of a parliamentary
 committee chaired by Kevin Andrews. This committee and the cause of
 strengthening and broadening a strategic approach to family policy
 has been a very strong personal interest and personal crusade of Kevin
 during the time that he has been in the Federal Parliament as the
 member for Menzies. And he's made a special contribution to policy
 developments in this area. He brings not only a deep personal commitment
 but also to his background an understanding of the importance of family
 life, the essential role of family life, within the Australian community.
 And today's launch and the policies that are behind it would not be
 possible without the very creative work of Kevin's committee and the
 personal contribution that he has made to it. And I wanted to record
 that at the commencement of my remarks.
I also want to thank my ministerial colleagues, Jocelyn and Daryl,
 in particular but also a number of others who are here today for the
 very positive role that their policy work has played in developing
 what I think is a very integrated approach to family policy by the
 Government. I think particularly of the contribution of industrial
 relations reform. To providing men and women in the workforce with
 greater choice and I'll come to that in a moment. I also want to thank
 John Herron who's brought to the broader understanding of family life
 in Australia the particular challenges and needs of family life within
 our indigenous communities. And it's a reminder to us of what a key
 role family associations and family links have always played within
 the indigenous communities of Australia.
I also thank Richard Alston for his practical recognition of the genuine
 alarm of Australian parents about some of the material that is transmitted
 in times when it is viewed by Australian children. And can I say at
 the outset that I make absolutely no apologies for the fact that the
 Government I lead has been willing to take action in relation to that
 material. It does not represent a new censorship rather it represents
 a recognition of the reality of the genuine concern that Australian
 parents have and if governments are not prepared to identify with
 that concern then governments are failing in one of the most fundamental
 of their responsibilities.
I think we all understand the role and importance of families in the
 Australian community. And I guess there's a bit of a dilemma when
 you come to examine the Government's role. On the one hand, we all
 know that happy family life comes out of personal relationships and
 if there is love and security and respect in a home then you have
 a stable family and that is the best environment in which to raise
 children. We also know that no government can legislate to make people
 nice to each other and we all know that governments can't legislate
 to make people loving and faithful to each other and no governments
 can legislate to dictate or compel a particular pattern of human behaviour.
So in between those two realities you have to strike a balance. On
 the one hand you don't want a government running a 'nanny State' telling
 you how to behave, heaven forbid. On the other hand you don't want
 a government that is utterly disinterested either in providing the
 symbols of commitment to family life or indeed the practical policy
 measures that help people achieve more satisfactory outcomes in their
 families and in their personal relationships.
But what we have tried to do over the last three years is to recognise
 that the Government has a limited but a strategic role in developing
 family policy. And we have tried to develop a strategy that pays regard
 to the fact that in the end it is human behaviour that dictates the
 stability of families. And such basic concepts of loyalty and commitment
 and personal affection but equally that the way in which Government's
 policy impacts on individuals can either increase or decrease the
 capacity of individuals to sustain a relationship. Everyone knows
 from their experience in dealing with marriage breakdown whether it
 be through counselling or giving legal advice or otherwise that financial
 pressures are one of the principal reasons why relationships come
 apart. And the inability of some people to cope with financial pressure
 and to organise simple things such as the household budget are often
 at the heart of the breakdown of a relationship between two people
 in a family. And therefore you can't ignore the importance of a strong
 economy and that's why we have argued very strongly to getting our
 economy right and taking $330 a month - you have heard that figure
 before but I'll repeat it again - off the average Australian mortgage,
 does make an enormous contribution of the capacity of the average
 family to, sort of, get over that problem and move onto the next challenge.
I think we also know that for years we have had a taxation system
 that has been progressively less accommodating towards the cost of
 raising children than it used to be. If you go back 30 or 40 years
 you'll find that, relatively speaking, a family was better treated
 under the tax system than it is now. And that's one of the reasons
 why when we came to office just over three years ago we brought in
 the family tax benefit which reversed that trend. And I am delighted
 that some of the analysis of our taxation package has indicated that
 the largest benefits have gone to many of the low to middle income
 families in proportionate terms. And I make no apology for the fact
 that we have reversed to some extent the trend over the last 15 to
 20 years against a sole income family. Not because I think the sole
 income family is the ideal it's just that I believe in choice and
 I believe that people should have the right to organise their family
 affairs and the decisions they make about the caring of their children
 when they are young according to their own personal preferences and
 not according to a model dictated either by a government or the sheer
 force of economic circumstance.
And I am very proud of the fact that when the, how should I put it,
 when the dust settles and when the clouds move away from the focus
 on the detail of what food is in or out of the GST and we start focussing
 on the longer term benefits of taxation reform you will that there
 are very significant benefits for the generality of Australian families
 with a far greater focus on recognising something which all parents
 know and that is raising children is quite expensive. And it doesn't
 get any less expensive when the children get older, it, of course,
 gets increasingly expensive as we all know too. So you can't talk
 about family strategies in the context of structures and so forth
 without first acknowledging the centrality of the general economic
 and social condition in which people live. And if there is a sense
 of hope and optimism and stability and security in the community more
 families are going to stay together because the pressures on them
 are reduced and their capacity to deal with challenges of life are
 also reduced.
It is true that bringing together all of these responsibilities within
 Jocelyn's portfolio was a major administrative step forward and a
 major recognition of the importance of having a unified approach to
 family policy. Under, once again, the taxation reform plan we are
 going to simplify the payment of family benefits, we are going to
 make them more generous and we are going to have a families' assistance
 office which is designed to, sort of, look after all of those family
 payments. And the whole system from the 1st of July next
 year is going to be not only more generous to middle income families
 but also dramatically simplified.
So there are a lot of benefits for families in a very tangible form
 that are coming out of taxation reform. But in trying to strike that
 balance between on the one hand recognising that it's the human personality
 that shapes human behaviour and relationships but also recognising
 the Government does have a strategic but limited role to provide not
 only symbols but also practical support and practical guidance. But
 I very much see the approach that we adopt towards family policy in
 the context of what I have increasingly described as the social coalition
 that this Government is trying to build within our community. And
 that is a recognition that acting on its own no one section of the
 community can solve all of the problems. And if you leave people completely
 to their own devices some are going to suffer and they are going to
 fall between the cracks and they are not going to get any assistance
 and there is going to be a lot more misery particularly to children
 who would otherwise be the case. Equally though if you allow the Government
 to be too heavy-handed and prescriptive and interventionist and give
 any government the opportunity to do so and it will and it will start
 telling people how to behave and how they ought to organise their
 family life and how they ought to organise the caring of their children
 and how many hours a week some of them should be at work and not at
 work - that's also not the solution.
We have great organisations within our community and they do great
 work and many of them are represented here today. They also acting
 alone can't pick up all of the pieces or provide all of the preventative
 education. And, therefore, I talk increasingly about drawing on all
 of those resources in a collective sense and recognising that we all
 have to work together in what I call a social coalition to tackle
 these problems. And you will find dotted through all of our policies
 that social coalition. You'll find that increasingly under this Government
 we have brought forward the policy role as well as the caring role
 of organisations like the Salvation Army and the society of St Vincent
 de Paul, to mention but two. We don't just see them as providing a
 caring role, although it is tremendously important, we also see them
 as providing a policy role because they have a better understanding
 of human frailty and of human need than most of us because they're
 dealing with it all the time.
We're not, as a government, seeking to withdraw our support. I want
 to make it clear, particularly to an audience like this, that when
 I talk about the social coalition I do not see that as an excuse for
 the Government winding back its support. I see rather it as a device
 whereby we can maximise the commitment and the resources that are
 available in the community to respond to particular human need and
 particular challenges.
One of the first things I did as Prime Minister was to convene the
 group that formed the Youth Homelessness Taskforce after I was elected
 in 1996. And it was a meeting that took place in my then Opposition
 Leader's committee room or meeting room in Chifley Square in Sydney
 and to - the other building rather in Sydney - to talk about a commitment
 I'd made when I addressed ACOSS in October of 1995 as Opposition Leader
 to have a taskforce to look at different ways of responding to youth
 homelessness, recognising that youth homelessness was an expression,
 a rather brutal expression of family breakdown and family failure
 in many cases. And I had as Chairman of that committee Captain David
 Eldridge of the Salvation Army in Victoria. And that committee, over
 a period of three years, that taskforce developed a new approach,
 a new strategy to bring about reconciliation where that was possible
 between homeless children and their parents. And I was very pleased
 after the last election to be able to announce a significant four-year
 extension of the pilot programmes that have been established and which
 is going to assist something in the order of 7,000 children and 5,000
 parents over a 12 month period.
Now, it's not curing all the problem. Some would say a lot more needs
 to be done. The answer to that is, yes it does. But what that approach
 did was to recognise the fact that it wasn't just a question of the
 Government saying, yes we'll provide support if people declare themselves
 to be homeless. It was a question of the Government marshalling the
 resources of these agencies, getting beside the young people, finding
 out if there were a possibility of reconciliation and if there were,
 bringing that about but if there wasn't, ensuring that there was proper
 opportunity for those young people to find some hope and some possibility
 of betterment in life as time went by.
The social coalition is also very evident in our approach to drugs,
 an issue that's never often off the front pages of Australia at the
 present time and something that destroys families. In common with
 every other member of Parliament in this auditorium this morning some
 of the more difficult conversations I've had and the more heartrending
 conversations I've had with constituents, some as recently as over
 the past few months, of those whose children have died of heroin overdoses
 and they ask themselves and they ask me and they ask the community
 very difficult questions. And there's no simple answer to that. And
 you won't cure the problem of drug addiction in this community unless
 you recognise the need to get the Government, to get welfare organisations,
 to get individual families and the business community all working
 together. And our approach is very much an expression of that social
 coalition.
One of the initiatives in the budget of which I was particularly proud
 was our implementation of our election undertaking to provide $48
 million over five years for a youth suicide strategy. Youth suicide,
 particularly amongst males in regional areas of Australia, is one
 of the highest in the western world. And when that is occurring inside
 a nation that, in general terms, is experiencing a good deal of economic
 prosperity and social optimism, it's a particular challenge and one
 that we should all endeavour as best we can to respond to.
And I mention those things by way of background, ladies and gentlemen,
 to make the point that a sensible family strategy from a government
 has got to recognise that in the end you can't, as I said, legislate
 human behaviour. But you can put up signposts, you can commit yourself
 to symbols and you can provide an economic framework which is conducive
 to social and personal stability. You can provide specific incentives.
 You can emphasise the importance you attach as a government to stable
 families and stable relationships. You can be bold enough to recognise
 that perhaps the course of the character of our society and the unwillingness
 over many generations, particularly of Australian men but I think
 also of men and women but particularly of men, to talk in an open
 fashion about their feelings and about their relationships, that over
 the years as a society I think because of, I suppose, our make up
 we've been a little coy and a little reluctant to recognise that from
 time to time all of us need a bit of advice in relation to our relationships
 and in relation to our families. I think it's fair to say that until
 fairly recently a lot of Australian men would have found it particularly
 difficult to even acknowledge the fact that they might need to get
 a bit of advice about their relationships and a bit of advice about
 how they might keep their families or their relationships together.
 Now, I think we're changing. I think we are becoming a lot more able
 to verbalise and talk about these things and I think that's a highly
 beneficial development.
I think the changed attitude over the last 10 or 20 years towards
 domestic violence within our community is a manifestation of that
 changed attitude, the recognition that it is a huge social problem
 for some people, a recognition that it is the ultimate expression
 not of manliness but the ultimate expression of unmanliness, domestic
 violence. And it's something as a community we should be more willing
 to discuss and to recognise the need to do something about it. And
 I think we are a community now that can perhaps talk about the need
 to provide people with marriage and relationship education. And that's
 a reason why one of the specific announcements I make today is to
 trial a voucher scheme in various areas of Australia to provide people
 who have indicated their intention of marrying a voucher to defray
 the cost of receiving marriage guidance and education. We're going
 to trial that on a basis in a number of regions throughout Australia
 and if it proves to be successful it's a programme that is going to
 be further expanded as time goes by.
We talk a lot about preventative education in relation to drugs. We
 talk a lot about preventative health measures. I think we should talk
 more about preventative relationship and marriage guidance measures.
 And to recognise that for all the resources that we pour into our
 schools and our education system there is precious little taught about
 the basic realities of parenting, the basic importance of certain
 practical things so far as relationships are concerned. In the past
 we made the invalid assumption that that was always catered for at
 home. Now, in many cases it is and the education that many children
 receive from their parents in relation to these matters is infinitely
 superior than they will ever receive from anybody else. But that is
 not always the case. And some mothers and fathers who are devoted
 and loving find it more difficult to provide that kind of support
 and advice than others do. And I think we have to be more willing
 to recognise in our education processes that that kind of assistance
 should be made available.
We are going to establish a marriage and family council which is one
 of the recommendations that was made by Kevin Andrews' report and
 the details of that are contained in the material that is being made
 available to you.
One of the emphasis' within our strategy will, of course, continue
 to be the need to provide the best possible environment for parents
 to balance their work and their family responsibilities. I've often
 spoken of the fact that over the years, although the importance of
 family life in our community has not altered but most people still
 regard having a secure family life is the most important thing they
 can achieve throughout life, the needs and the activities of modern
 Australian families are different from what they were a generation
 ago. The much higher participation of married women within the Australian
 workforce and the growing desire of both men and women to have the
 optimum choice regarding the blending of their work and their family
 responsibilities is a very important policy challenge. And I think
 it really is very much at the heart of an effective family strategy.
 Not an approach which says that the desirable model is this or the
 desirable model is that but rather an approach which says to the parents
 of young Australian children, it is for you to decide what combination
 of full-time parental care or paid childcare, at what stage in your
 working life, it is you for you to decide what is best for your children.
 It is not for the Government to say which is best. But having decided
 your desirable arrangement for your family that no one choice is a
 lesser or an inferior choice to the other and the idea perhaps a generation
 ago that the place of one or other parent is at home, just as that
 was wrong, it is equally wrong to embrace the nostrums of some who
 suggest that those who choose to have one parent at home full time
 while children are young, that in some way that is an inferior choice
 and indicative of an unwillingness to embrace the realities of modern
 life. I think we have moved to a situation where people look at these
 things now more maturely and without the prejudices of a particular
 standpoint from which we come.
I'm particularly pleased that the Attorney-General is here today because
 the responsibility that he has as the person responsible, in a legal
 sense, for the Family Law Act is integral to any comprehensive family
 strategy. We have put more resources into marriage guidance. We have,
 over the years, recognised the growing importance of that and, in
 a sense, what I'm announcing today in relation to providing support
 for relationship counselling before marriage is an extension of the
 importance that we attach to that.
Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion can I say that the whole purpose
 of launching this strategy today is really three-fold. It is to underline
 our very strong commitment to the importance of families within the
 Australian community, to recognise that whatever changes may have
 occurred in Australian society it is still overwhelmingly the case
 that most Australians draw not only their maximum emotional strength
 and support from their families but also overwhelmingly a great degree
 of their physical and material support from those families. It's also
 to recognise that family breakdown carries not only financial and
 economic costs but also severe emotional costs. And without imposing
 in any way a utilitarian definition on it I'm bound to repeat what
 I've frequently said before, that apart from its enormous emotional
 and personal advantages, a stable functioning family still represents
 the best social welfare system that any community has devised and
 certainly the least expensive. And an aggregation of stable functioning
 families represents, at a national level, the best social welfare
 system that any community has devised. But it's also the reality that
 not every family functions and it's the role and the responsibility
 of governments to help those people whose families have fallen apart.
 Firstly to try and prevent the ruptures occurring. But if those attempts
 fail to provide a compassionate, sensitive, non-judgemental understanding
 of the people who are the victims of family breakdown particularly
 children.
Now, no strategy will be total in its provision for these needs. No
 strategy will strike completely the right balance between the inevitable
 acceptable of the fact that human behaviour is beyond the writ of
 any government but by the same token governments have ongoing responsibilities.
 But what we have tried to do over the last three years is to strike
 a right balance and this strategy that I launch today in response
 to Kevin's report recognises those three principles. I think it's
 an important milestone in the Government's long policy march towards
 a better family policy. I thank Kevin. I thank Jocelyn and Daryl and
 all of my other colleagues for the contribution they have made. And
 I particularly thank all of you for coming along today to this very
 important launch. Thanks a lot.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much. To Kim Beazley the Leader of the Opposition,
 to Steve Waugh and the victorious Australian Cricket Team, to many
 others - first time I've had all of you cheering for me - but ladies
 and gentlemen it is a tremendous pleasure tonight to have everybody
 along and I want to particularly welcome the members of the Australian
 Women's Cricket Team who are amongst us as our special guests as well.
Tonight is one of those rare occasions where the guns of political
 battle are stilled, that everybody, irrespective of their differences
 of opinion on other issues, come together to pay tribute to a remarkable
 sporting achievement. To pay tribute to a group of men who have demonstrated
 their tremendous capacity on the sporting field, have brought immense
 pleasure and immense delight and immense national pride to all Australians.
 And the performance, Steve, of you and your colleagues to win seven
 in a row, the third and second last of those two being amongst the
 most exciting one-day cricket matches that I think any of us have
 ever witnessed, I think it is fair to say that these sleep deprivation
 syndrome of members of Parliament and of their staff and indeed millions
 of Australians all around the country was very intense indeed.
Australia is a great sports loving nation, Australia is a great cricket
 loving nation. And cricket in a way unites all of us like no other
 sport because it is in every sense of the word our true national sport.
 And to you, Steve, in particular tremendous credit is due. You followed
 two very fine Australian Captains, you experienced, along with your
 colleagues during the early stages of the World Cup tournament, you
 experienced a tremendous degree of criticism from some sections of
 the press. There were many people who at various stages were willing
 to say that Australia was not going to make the semi-finals let alone
 the finals let alone take out the trophy. But you persevered and you
 yourself with that marvellous 123 - one of the best if not the greatest
 one-day innings that I have ever seen. You kept your cool in remarkably
 difficult circumstances. You showed tremendous grit, tremendous leadership
 and when we think of the true Aussie spirit and the true Aussie grit
 many Australians will instinctively think of your personal performance
 in that particular match. And, of course, one doesn't have the time
 to talk about all of the individual performances but collectively
 the team has done us proud.
And to all of you can I say that nothing has quite brought such sporting
 joy to a sporting nation as much as did your victory. And the reception
 that you have received in Melbourne, in Sydney today, the reception
 that I saw a number of you receive at Stadium Australia on Saturday
 night before the rugby test between England and Australia, the gathering
 here tonight which brings together Members and Senators, Ministers,
 Shadow Ministers, Prime Minister, Opposition Leader, staff and most
 importantly of all the cricket loving youngsters of the parliamentary
 family. And because every time we do well on the sporting field, every
 time we do well on the cricket field we build something that is most
 important to all of us who are cricket lovers and that is a renewed
 enthusiasm for the greatest sport of all amongst the young people
 of Australia. And that is what your victory has done more than anything
 else, it has brought fresh enthusiasm and pride and love of this wonderful
 game to the young people of Australia. And can I say of all the gifts
 and of all the pleasure that you have given to the people of Australia
 I think the most important thing you have done is once again to enthuse
 and re-enthuse and re-ignite the passion of young Australians to the
 great and noble game of cricket.
Can I say on behalf of the Government, on behalf of the people of
 Australia and I know my sentiments will be echoed by my colleague
 Kim Beazley in a few moments, thank you very much for what you have
 done, you deserve tremendous credit. I hope you and your families
 now have the opportunity of a bit of a break before you join the fray
 again but you really have done us proud. You are a tremendous group
 of sportsmen and you have brought a great deal of joy and a great
 deal of pleasure to all Australians. Thank you very much.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
General Hickling the Chief of the Australian Army, Brigadier Pursey,
 other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a special privilege for me on this stunning Canberra morning
 to address this parade. To express on behalf of everybody who is here
 the respect and admiration that we feel for those men and women who
 are graduating today, to those men and women who have chosen a professional
 career in the armed services of Australia.
You along with the entire Australian nation inherit great traditions.
 None is more special or treasured in the Australian ethos than the
 Anzac tradition. And none more totally permeates the defence forces
 of Australia, none instils those defence forces with more justifiable
 pride than that particular tradition. Yours is an honoured profession
 and on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I thank
 you for the commitment that you are making, the commitment you are
 making to a lifetime as professional members of the Australian Defence
 Force.
It is the constant prayer of any sensible Prime Minister of this country
 that never again will we ask the young people of our nation to put
 their lives on the line the way in which it occurred far too often
 in the earlier years of this century. But in order for that prayer
 to be realised we must always have ready and able defence forces.
 And to have ready and able defence forces we need to have men and
 women superbly trained, of high intelligence with a strong sense of
 professionalism. And the core of that for the Australian forces has
 always been those who have passed through the graduating ranks of
 the Royal Military College at Duntroon. It is one of the great institutions
 of Australian life. It has produced great professional soldiers over
 the years and those soldiers have done great service in the defence
 of this country and in the defence of what we hold very dear.
Today is a special day for those graduating, it's also a very special
 day for their family members and other loved ones who have come along
 to participate in this very special occasion. And to them I also give
 my thanks for the support and encouragement that you have given to
 your sons and daughters to undertake a professional career in the
 armed forces of Australia. Because without the support and encouragement
 of your families, without the sense of pride that they transmit to
 you in what you have achieved then the task and the challenge is all
 that harder and more daunting.
It's also an occasion to compliment the commandant, the staff at the
 Royal Military College for the tremendous work they do. The quality
 of people turned out by this College is widely acclaimed around the
 world. And it's been a particular privilege for me today, the first
 occasion I have had to do this as Prime Minister of Australia to take
 this parade, to have an opportunity of meeting you and I'll meet more
 of you later over morning tea.
But can I express my thanks and my admiration. I have always had an
 immense regard for the men and women of the armed forces of this country.
 They deserve our respect. Without their efforts and their commitment
 in the past this nation would not be the free and powerful and freedom
 loving people that it really is today. And you are the current generation
 of a very long and noble tradition. I thank you for that and I wish
 all of you every happiness and every success in your professional
 career in the future. Thank you and good luck.
 [ends]


E&amp;OE....................
Good evening. As Australians we have every reason to be very optimistic
 about the future. No country in the world has better prospects as
 we enter the new century.
We are a united, resourceful and talented people. Our economic strength
 as a country is undoubted as we now enjoy the strongest economic fundamentals
 in a generation.
We have:
   * the lowest unemployment rate in almost a decade;
 * the lowest number of unemployed teenagers looking for full-time
 work in over 20 years; and
 * the lowest levels of inflation and interest rates in around
 30 years.
These strong economic results have not come about by accident. They
 are the result of sensible and practical reforms in earlier years
 including strong but fair decisions to return the budget to surplus
 and to remove the debt burden on future generations.
Just as past decisions have produced today's economic strength so
 it is that the right decisions taken today will deliver an even stronger
 economy in the future.
That is why Australia needs taxation reform because that reform will
 deliver an even stronger and better Australian economy tomorrow.
That is why I committed the Government to a plan for a new tax system
 before the last election.
A plan to put behind us once and for all an outdated, complex and
 unfair taxation system.
A plan to reward Australian workers who have endured high rates of
 personal income tax, to encourage Australian exporters to take on
 the world without an inefficient wholesale sales tax system, and to
 give Australian families even more choice about how they raise their
 children.
I can report to you tonight that our new tax system has become law.
From July next year Australia will have a modern, fairer and simpler
 taxation system - one that is good for Australia.
The new system will strengthen the Australian economy because it will
 cut the cost of exports, reduce business costs and, through lower
 personal tax, give middle Australia more incentive.
At the heart of our new tax system lies the largest personal income
 tax cut in Australia's history - $12 billion - to give Australian
 workers genuine reward for their efforts.
At present, 80 per cent of all Australians earn less than $50,000
 a year. Depending on their income their top tax rate can be up to
 43 cents in the dollar. Under our plan it can be no more than 30 cents
 in the dollar. We propose that between $20,000 and $50,000 a year
 workers will be able to earn more without paying a higher rate of
 tax.
Families with children are the greatest beneficiaries of our tax plan.
 In addition to lower income tax, families will receive $2.5 billion
 more in family benefits each year.
Parents will enjoy greater choice as to whether they stay at home
 when their children are young and will not be penalised should they
 choose to rejoin the workforce.
Families already benefit from our 30 per cent rebate for private health
 insurance which rewards those who take personal responsibility for
 their family's health care.
From July next year the 10 per cent Goods and Services Tax replaces
 the ramshackle, hidden, wholesales sales tax, with all its six rates
 with many household items taxed at 32 per cent.
When the hidden tax is abolished, many everyday household items will
 actually fall in price.
Fresh food, as well as health, education, childcare, nursing homes
 and hostels, local government rates, water and sewerage charges and
 charitable activities will all be free of the GST.
It is expected that next month the price of goods such as radios,
 televisions and video recorders will fall when the 32 per cent rate
 of wholesale sales tax is reduced to 22 per cent on the way to its
 complete abolition.
We have ensured that the rate of the GST is locked in at 10 per cent.
Overall, under our new tax system, typical families with either one
 or both parents in the workforce, will be $40 to $50 a week better
 off even after the GST.
Our new tax system also protects older Australians, pensioners and
 low income earners.
From July next year pensions will be increased by 4 per cent and we
 guarantee that they will always remain 2 per cent ahead of any rise
 in the cost of living.
We will provide additional tax rebates for pensioners and self funded
 retirees and a one off savings bonus. Older Australians as well as
 many small businesses will also benefit from the abolition of provisional
 taxation.
Our tax plan also recognises the special needs of the bush.
The cost of diesel excise for heavy transport will fall by 23 cents
 a litre and the cost of petrol used in the commercial operations of
 farmers and other businesses by about 7 cents a litre.
We are also completely removing excise from the rail sector.
More than $7 billion of taxes a year will be removed from business
 and costs for exporters will fall by several billion dollars a year.
This will help Australian business to take on the world, generate
 profits and create more jobs, especially for our young.
To help small business and others adapt to the new tax system we will
 provide $500 million for start up costs.
Our agreement with the states and territories will at last give them
 a secure revenue base to provide the essential community services
 such as roads, police, schools and hospitals that we all know are
 needed.
Never have I been more convinced that we are doing the right thing
 for Australia than I am on taxation reform. We have done much to restore
 the economic foundations of our country. Now we have created a new
 tax system which will make those foundations even stronger for the
 future.
But there is more to be done.
We can only realise our full potential as a nation if we continue
 to seize at every opportunity the chances that lie before us.
And my Government will not rest in its efforts to improve Australia's
 prospects. We will continue to govern in the national interest, hard
 at work for an even stronger Australia. Good night. 


Subjects: Regional Forest Agreements; impact of globalisation
 on regional communities; balance between caring for the environment
 and protecting jobs in regional Australia; Japan/US official visit;
 Australia as a world financial centre; business taxation reform; Goods
 and Services legislation; Asian economic downturn
E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Thorry; to Richard Court, the Premier of
 Western Australia, Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the Australian
 Capital Territory, my many Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues.
 And can I also particularly welcome the presence here of my old friend,
 Sir Robert Cotton, who was the President of the Liberal Party in the
 New South Wales Division when I joined the Party in the late 1950s.
 He's a former senior Federal Minister and, of course, Ambassador
 to the United States and a member of the Board of the Reserve Bank
 and a man who has made an enormous contribution to this country.
Thank you very much, Thorry, for your very kind words of welcome.
 I noted with great interest your endorsement of the Minister. I mean,
 I now expect when I go to a breakfast and Peter Reith is present some
 of the leadership of the trade union movement with thank me for him.
 And if somebody from the National Taxpayers is present, somebody will
 thank me for Peter Costello well. But, anyway, it's a mark, I
 think, of the attempts that Ministers have made to get close to industries
 that are important to the future of this country that you should say
 that. And can I start my remarks as well as thanking you most warmly
 for sponsoring this breakfast.
To repeat, in very unambiguous terms, our strong commitment to your
 industry that we do believe you can have a sensible balance between
 caring for the environment and protecting jobs in regional Australia.
 This idea that somebody's got to lose and somebody's got
 to win is wrong. You can get a win-win outcome. We remain very committed
 to the Regional Forest Agreement legislation. It will be reintroduced
 into the Senate  well, it's in there, it will be listed
 for debate immediately we go back and we will continue to press very
 strongly for its passage, and we believe that will occur. And other
 issues that you've raised with me this morning, Mr President,
 I'll be very, very happy to pursue.
Yesterday, when I was doing an interview with Neil Mitchell on 3AW
 in Melbourne, apropos of something that is being debated at the present
 time I made the observation that over the last couple of years there
 was probably no political/economic issue that was more heavily debated
 or more important and relevant to political debate in this country
 than the impact of globalisation on regional communities. The reality
 is that we are part of a global economy. We can't avoid that.
 We can't get off it. The die was cast several decades ago and
 the processes are irreversible. And anybody who runs around Australia
 saying that somehow or other we can turn the clock back and somehow
 or other we can avoid the implications of globalisation is deluding
 themselves and also the people they talk to. But the impact of that
 globalisation has to be managed. And your industry is a very important
 part of that because it does provide hope and relief to many people
 in regional communities. And it's not much good standing on a
 truck or a soap box in regional Australia and talking about the glories
 of globalisation unless you can translate that into jobs and you can
 translate that into hope and inspiration for the people who live in
 those communities. So, we're very conscious of the importance
 of your industry to that and for the jobs that you provide.
On Monday, ladies and gentlemen, I'll be going on an official
 visit to our two, I guess, most important economic partners still
 and that is Japan and the United States. And during those visits,
 over a period of two weeks, I'll have the opportunity of talking
 naturally to the Japanese Prime Minister, Mr Obuchi and President
 Clinton, as well as senior people in the American Administration and
 the Japanese Government. And it is, that visit, very much about moving
 on to the next step of entrenching Australia's strong economic
 position in a world which has grown in its respect for the capacity
 of this country to successfully manage its domestic economic affairs
 and to strongly project itself as a significant middle economic power,
 punching well above its weight not only in the region but also around
 the world. And one of the things that we must as a country do increasingly
 is to concentrate on our areas of strength internationally. And one
 of the areas that I want to concentrate on when I'm away is building
 the attraction of this country as a world financial centre.
One of the things that's come through very clearly over the last
 few years to me is that some of the things for which we were just
 about to be criticised by the rest of the world and even by some in
 Australia for being rather too stodgy and too conservative are now
 seen as some of the great strengths that this country has. Because
 what the Asian economic downturn demonstrated was that countries that
 had well regulated and transparent banking systems, countries that
 had sophisticated, well developed corporate laws, countries that had
 a very stable political system, countries that had a very free and
 open and tolerant society, they are increasingly the countries that
 have done well and survived. And those that haven't have been
 a lot less successful.
And when you look at Australia now one of the things that make it
 particularly attractive to the rest of the world, of course it has
 an unenviable lifestyle and it doesn't matter virtually where
 you live, you can pick any one of a number of locations in Australia
 and it really does have an unenviable lifestyle, but it has a strong,
 stable political system. It, of course, has a very strong economy
 but it has a very well developed banking system and it's prudentially
 supervised, it's well regulated and people depend on it and they
 believe in it. And we don't have what was witnessed in other
 parts of the world - we don't have the banking system being used
 as a de facto arm of government to look after, in some cases, unfortunately
 the friends of that government. We have a financial system that is
 strong and stable and at arms length. We have a strong regulatory
 and corporate code. And, of course, importantly, as far as the world
 of commerce and business is concerned, we speak the English language.
 And I don't say that in a trite fashion, but it is very important.
 So when you put all of those things together, this is a very attractive
 place in which to do business. But that's not enough. You have
 to go a bit further. You have to make certain that we have a competitive
 economy and particularly we have a competitive financial system and
 we have a competitive taxation system.
And last week we really put the last of those building blocks into
 place as far as the generality of our taxation system is concerned
 through the passage of the Goods and Services Tax legislation. And
 we now go on to the next item of business and that is the item of
 business taxation reform. And if we do that properly that will be
 another reason why Australia should be a world financial centre. It'll
 be another reason why there can't be a city in Australia that
 doesn't rival and in time surpass Tokyo as being a world financial
 centre because the time placement of Australia is ideal for it to
 grow in importance as a world financial centre. And if we make certain
 that our tax system is competitive, if we make it tax-wise a neutral
 choice between investing in the United States and investing in this
 country so that other factors come into play for example, then we
 have a real prospect of achieving that goal and achieving that dream.
 And this is the right time to be taking the decisions that will promote
 our prospects as a world financial centre because we are, to use that
 jargon, seen by many as the flavour of the month as far as economic
 performance is concerned. We've done better than anybody expected.
 I guess better than most in this room expected. It certainly surpassed
 my more optimistic expectations.
And there is a realisation that because we stared down that Asian
 economic downturn that we have a prospect of really ratcheting up
 our economic performance just that much more than we ever thought
 was possible. But we don't have unlimited time to do that and
 we won't be forgiven if we drop the ball on important further
 reforms and that is why the GST Legislation was so important. Sure
 it wasn't everything everybody wanted but it was the great bulk
 of what everybody wanted and it still represents the greatest single
 economic reform in a particular area that this country has seen since
 the end of World War II. And it will have a lasting impact. It will
 make us more competitive. And if we can make certain in our taxation
 reforms in the business area we can give ourselves a more competitive
 tax system internationally. If we can remove some of the imperfections
 in the capital gains tax area, particularly in relation to impact
 on venture capital, then we'll be striking very important further
 blows towards enhancing this country's reputation.
There's only one other thing that I want to say and that is something
 very directly related to the interface of the Liberal Party with the
 business community of Australia. There are many people here representing
 business organisations and representing individual companies. I'm
 very glad that so many of you have come to this Federal Council. This
 is the first Federal Council Meeting that has been held in Canberra
 since we were returned to government in 1996. And it's very,
 very nice to be back in the beautiful winter of Canberra for a Federal
 Council Meeting. I reflect on all those cold, wintry meetings we had
 when we were in Opposition and they seemed to stretch endlessly into
 almost political infinity at various times and we've now, of
 course, happily put those years behind us. And we value the links
 we have with the business community. We're not owned by the business
 community. We're not owned by any section of Australian society.
 And one of the proudest things I could say on the 2nd of
 March 1996 when we claimed victory is that we didn't represent
 one section of the Australian community, we sought to represent the
 entire Australian community. But having said that, we value very much
 the private enterprise business ethic. It's very important. We
 believe in business. We believe in a pro-active investment climate.
 We believe in the profit motive, it's honourable. We believe
 that business is the foundation of jobs growth and employment. And
 we believe in following policies that attract rather than discourage
 business investment.
We don't have the nave belief of many of our political opponents
 that wealth will somehow always be there. That you'll always,
 somehow or other, be able to find it to fund the various things we
 want to do in a humane society. So we do regard it as very, very important
 to have your understanding. We agree most of the time, not all of
 the time, but on every occasion, on every issue, we're very happy
 to listen to what you have to say. We enjoy very much your support
 and understanding. I thank you most particularly, Thorry, for your
 association's sponsorship of this morning's breakfast. It's
 a delight to be with you all and I hope you enjoy the rest of the
 Council. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Tony Staley, Sir John and Lady Gorton, Shane Stone, the Federal President
 elect, Richard Court and John Olsen, the Premiers of Western Australia
 and South Australia, Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister of the Australian
 Capital Territory, Peter Costello, Deputy Federal Parliamentary Leader,
 other colleagues and friends, ladies and gentlemen.
The present member for Higgins and Federal Treasurer has a very good
 line in Parliament when he rightly talks about the success that this
 Government has had in reducing interest rates. He says that interest
 rates haven't been as low in Australia since man first walked
 on the moon. Now, of course, when man first walked on the moon the
 former member for Higgins, John Grey Gorton, was Prime Minister of
 Australia.
And tonight we gather to honour the contribution of John Grey Gorton
 to the serve first and foremost of his country. And we saw in that
 marvelous little video the great sacrifice and gallantry that he demonstrated.
 And we were reminded that this place, a generation ago, was overwhelmingly
 filled with men who had gone through that experience on both sides.
 Now, of course, a generation or more on, naturally things are different.
 But on an occasion like this we reflect on a man who connects us with
 those gallant years. We reflect on a man who connects us with a time
 that was convulsed by the controversy of the Vietnam War, a time which
 in economic terms we are now reminded of because of the great strength
 of the Australian economy. I won't dwell on that tonight, that
 will come tomorrow. But also a time that connects us with the history
 and the heritage of our Party.
And John Gorton was elected to Federal Parliament almost 50 years
 ago. When he was Prime Minister of Australia - I reminded myself of
 this the other day  I think he was re-elected in 1969 and that
 was a year in which Richmond won the VFL flag, Balmain won the JJ
 Gilterton Shield that was then the symbol of rugby league supremacy
 in Sydney and, of course, Ian Chappell had just become Captain of
 the Australian Cricket Team. But it is a wonderful experience, I think,
 for a Party and particularly for the younger members of our Party
 to be reminded of the contribution of John Gorton to his country.
John Gorton was one of the first politicians, I believe, at the national
 political level in Australia to really understand the power of personal
 communication on television. It is my belief that John Gorton would
 not have won the leadership of the Liberal Party after the tragic
 death of Harold Holt in 1967 if he hadn't been able to communicate
 so directly and passionately and in such a personal fashion in the
 interviews that he conducted on television immediately after Harold
 Holt's death.
He also, of course, knew a thing or two about drama when it came to
 Party Room ballots. Now, there's a few of who know a thing or
 two about drama in Party Room ballots. I've been through a few
 of those myself. I've got to say I've never been in a tie.
 I either was resoundingly defeated or got drafted but never in a tie.
 And it must have been quite an exquisite moment and as I look around
 the room and I see some of the former colleagues who are gathered
 here. But he played a major role in a number of things that continue
 to be very important to the Liberal Party's political base today.
A little remark thing about John Gorton's ministerial career
 was that he played a very big role in cementing the changed political
 allegiances that followed the Menzies Government embrace of State
 aid to independent schools in 1963 and that continue to be an enduringly
 important thing in the dynamic of Australian politics.
He was, in every sense of the word, the genuine article as far as
 a dinkum Australian was concerned. He was direct. He was laconic.
 He had at all times a clear and passionate view of what the Australian
 national interest was. He argued like, I guess, all Prime Ministers
 do from time to time with the Premiers of the States. He had some
 celebrated arguments with Sir Henry Bolte and Sir Robert Askin during
 the time of his prime ministership.
On all occasions John Gorton was a man who had a clear eyed view of
 the Australian national interest and he was a passionate nationalist
 above everything else. And that's not a bad example for any Prime
 Minister be it in 1969, 1979 or indeed 1999 because the enduring commitment
 to the national interest is something for which I believe he will
 be remembered.
I think political parties should treasure their history. I think political
 parties should honour their past warriors and their past contributors.
 And tonight is an opportunity for us to do that and I'm immensely
 proud that I've had the chance, as the current Liberal Prime
 Minister of Australia, to honour John Gorton. To have John and Nancy
 with us and a number of their former colleagues and former colleagues
 of mine who have come here tonight, I think it's a wonderful
 opportunity for us to pay tribute to a great Australian, a great leader,
 a great Prime Minister, a Liberal to his boot straps and a man whose
 contribution to Australia is properly honoured and properly remembered.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Ladies and gentlemen, when I became Prime Minister and had the first
 opportunity to address a gathering of the Liberal Party organisation
 I acknowledged the fact that I was a creature of the Party organisation,
 that I had devoted all of my adult life to the service of the Liberal
 Party and that what I had achieved in politics was largely due to
 the courtesy and the good favour of the Liberal Party. And tonight
 in honouring Tony Staley I'm in a sense doing so because not
 only does he have great personal qualities but what I'm about
 to say about him is in a sense a metaphor for the affection that I
 feel for the entire Liberal Party of Australia.
As the video we've just seen demonstrates, Tony is a person possessed
 of three very great qualities and characteristics. First and foremost
 and indisputably he has immense personal courage. Anybody who survives
 what he went through and came back to leave a mark on national political
 life is an extraordinary individual who has extraordinary qualities.
 The second of his very great qualities is that he's possessed
  I was about to say and he's demonstrated it beautifully,
 he's possessed of a great sense of humour. And you need a sense
 of humour to be Federal President of the Liberal Party, and I'll
 return to that in a moment. And the third thing is that he's
 also possessed of considerable grace and eloquence. And his speeches
 are always entertaining. They are always beautifully delivered and
 they are always very eloquent. And it is a joy to listen to him as
 a speaker.
Ladies and gentlemen, there are sort of categories of Federal Presidents
 of the Liberal Party. There are those who reigned as Presidents during
 the great years of government - people like Phillip McBride and Jock
 Pagan and Bob Cotton, people who presided over those long, unending
 summer years between 1949 and 1972. And I think it's fair to
 say that John Atwill, as Federal President, presided over a sort of
 a return of those summer years during the period of the Fraser Government.
 But there are those others who had to do the hard yards in Opposition
  people like Jim Forbes and Ashley Goldsworthy, who's with
 us tonight. And it's pretty joyless being the head of the organisation
 when you're in Opposition. And Tony Staley is one of those who
 endured three years of Opposition as Federal President before we came
 back into office in 1996. And during that time he did a number of
 things that other Federal Presidents hadn't done. He controversially
 but very decisively intervened in a public fashion in matters relating
 to the leadership of the Parliamentary Party. People will debate the
 propriety or otherwise of that but who can argue that in the long
 run his interventions were courageous, his interventions were moulded
 by his desire to serve the Liberal Party and to achieve the best outcome
 for the Party. And sometimes you do have to break with tradition and
 break with convention. Now, as you know I favour doing that on some
 occasions and in relation to some issues and not with others. But
 Tony, Tony decided in relation to that particular matter that it was
 desirable to break with tradition. And in doing so he demonstrated
 an intelligent commitment to the future of the Party and an intelligent
 understanding of its histories and the needs of the moment.
It was a great privilege for me to have Tony with me in that suite,
 the Australia Suite, appropriately, at the Intercontinental Hotel
 on the evening of the 2nd of March 1996. And for him to
 be there at the Wentworth Hotel when Janette and I and our three children
 came in to formally claim victory after, and in so doing to end 13
 very baron and frustrating and unhappy years of being in Opposition,
 years to which none of us ever intend to return, do we.
But, ladies and gentlemen, Tony throughout his presidency has been
 a great servant of the Liberal Party. He's always put the Party
 first. I couldn't have asked for a firmer friend and ally in
 the time that I have been Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Party.
 We don't always agree on every issue. We will have arguments
 and lively debates about particular issues. But as the head of the
 organisation he's been a wonder to work with. And he's been
 the President for a number of years. He brought us back into government
 and that's a huge achievement. He's produced a well oiled
 Party machine. He's worked closely with my office. He's
 worked closely with the Parliamentary Party. He's worked closely
 in a partnership, first with Andrew Robb and more recently with Lynton
 Crosby and always through those years with Ron Walker, our indefatigable
 Federal Treasurer. And he has been a great servant of our Party. He's
 done great things for Australia. He's overcome great difficulties.
 And I really am very proud as Prime Minister and as Federal Parliamentary
 Leader of the Party to express to you, Tony, our affection, our gratitude,
 our thanks, our admiration and, above all, on behalf of the Liberal
 family throughout Australia our great debt to you for what you have
 done and the way in which you've led the organisation so skillfully
 and so effectively over the last six years. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Well, thank you very much, Tony; to John Anderson, Peter Costello,
 Shane Stone, my other fellow Liberals, ladies and gentlemen.
I want, at the beginning of my speech, to again express, as I did
 last night, my admiration and affection for Tony Staley for the work
 that he's done as Federal President and the leadership that he's
 given to the Party organisation over six very important years which
 oversaw our transition from the desolation of Opposition to a second
 term in government.
I also want, on your behalf and on my own personal behalf, to welcome
 and congratulate Shane Stone as the new Federal President of the Party.
 Shane and I have had a very long association. I respect him. I like
 him a lot. I think it's very good that the Party will have a
 national President from Darwin. I think it emphasises the breadth
 of the representation of this Party, that we are, indeed, a Party
 for all Australians and all parts of Australia and I think that sends
 a very strong signal and I know he'll be a very effective and
 a very strong President.
To you, John, I'm delighted that it's been possible for
 you to come here this morning and to say a few words as the man who
 on the 20th of July will become the Deputy Prime Minister
 of Australia. I remember that night very well. They were pretty despairing
 days. I think Ralph and I retired to the comfort of his Glenlivet
 after that discussion that we'd had. But you and I have had a
 very close association, first in Opposition and more recently in government.
 I admire your strength of character, your decency, your identification
 of the mainstream values of the Australian community and the tenacity
 of your concern for the people who live in the bush of Australia.
 And you will be a very worthy and successful successor to a man who
 I grew very fond of, Tim Fischer, in the years that we served together.
I've said before and I say it again this morning that you could
 have no better mate in a political trench than Tim Fischer. And he
 was a stoic supporter of the Coalition through good times and bad.
 And I say to a Liberal gathering such as this that when you have a
 Coalition of two parties where one has an overwhelming preponderance
 of numbers it's always a bit tough when you're the leader
 or the deputy leader of the smaller partner in that coalition. On
 the one hand you've got to achieve the common good, on the other
 hand you've got to remember that you lead a separate political
 organisation. And Tim and John were able to combine those two needs
 to the national good in a remarkably successful way. And I'm
 absolutely certain that John and Mark Vaile will be able to continue
 that good work because we all know from our experience of the last
 20 years that division between coalition parties leads to desolation
 and defeat and despair, whereas unity produces success and years in
 government. And that has been our long experience since 1949 and it
 is our experience today. And the fact that we were re-elected in 1998
 was in no small measure due to the fact that we had a strong coalition
 between the Liberal and the National parties of Australia.
My friends, we meet at this Federal Council Meeting at the end of
 a remarkable two-week period in Australian politics. It is a period
 in which we have achieved many of our policy objectives. It is a period
 in which we have done things and achieved goals and won gains for
 the people of Australia that many people doubted that we would do.
 But we meet this morning not in any sense of triumphalism or smugness
 of complacency, we meet rather with a quiet sense of pride and achievement
 that we have achieved a lot but also recognising that soberly and
 realistically we have much more to achieve because the responsibility
 of government is an ongoing one. You never reach the top of the hill
 in politics. There is always another mountain to scale. There is always
 another goal or another objective to achieve. And so it is, as we
 meet here at this Federal Council Meeting and reflect just for a moment
 on what's been achieved in the three and a bit years of government
 and particularly since the re-election in 1998, it is appropriate
 after reflecting just for a moment on that to move on to what is ahead,
 to have a look at the new peaks that we need to scale and the new
 achievements that we need to embrace.
And in doing that we should always remember the character of the Liberal
 Party of Australia. Unique almost amongst centre-right parties in
 the democratic world, the Liberal Party of Australia is the trustee
 of two great traditions within Australian politics and Australian
 public life and debate. It is the trustee of both the conservative
 tradition and the Liberal tradition. It is not exclusively a conservative
 party nor is it exclusively a liberal party in the classical sense
 of the word. It is the party of Edmund Burke as much as it is the
 party of John Stuart Mill. And our capacity to blend and respect and
 to nurture and to promote those two great traditions in the Australian
 political experiences is the fundamental ingredient of our success.
 And in recent times I have sought to define the philosophical framework
 of the Government I lead by speaking of our commitment to economic
 liberalisation and what I describe in social policy as a modern conservatism.
 It is a party that values and respects the wisdom of dispersed power
 in a large country through a federation of states. It is a party that
 continues to value and support the family unit as the enduring and
 most cohesive section and institution of our society. But it is also
 the party that has searched the fundamental liberty of the individual
 through espousal of support of such things as recently voluntary student
 unionism. A commitment that nourishes our long-held belief that men
 and women in a free society should have the right to choose or whether
 or not to join an organisation.
I've spoken recently of I guess the way in which political debate
 has evolved over the last decade or two of how we went through a period
 all around the world of believing that every problem could be solved
 by massive government intervention. The Americans tried it through
 Lyndon Johnson's "great society", Labor tried it through
 Gough Whitlam's disastrous three years as Prime Minister of Australia.
 And then we moved perhaps in reaction to a period in our history of
 where some believed that the market solved every single thing. Now
 I remain of the view that in economic matters the market solution
 is the preferred solution but sometimes other solutions are needed
 as well. And I think we have developed in this country what I can
 best described as the Australian way of addressing of many of our
 social and economic issues. It is a way that seeks to marshal the
 combined efforts of the Government, of the individual, of the business
 community and those great volunteer organisations within our society
 that know so much about human suffering and human need within our
 community. I've spoken often of the social coalition that I seek
 to build between those four great expressions of Australian decency
 and Australian society. And that social coalition is providing new
 ways and new opportunities in areas such as the fight against drug
 abuse, the fight against homelessness amongst young people within
 our community and the fight to obtain modern contemporary solutions
 to other social challenges. And I think we are finding an Australian
 way, we are finding a way that draws upon the talents and the contributions
 that those different sections of Australian society can make.
As you all know, and it does bear repeating of course, at a gathering
 such as this, the economic fundamentals of Australia now are stronger
 than they have been at any time over the last thirty years. It is
 no idle boast to say that Australia stared down, beyond the expectations
 of most, the Asian economic downturn. When I became Prime Minister
 of Australia I felt as though this country was an anxious outsider
 seeking admission to the rich man's club of Asia, but over the
 last three-and-a-quarter years that perception has changed. Australia
 is seen with new respect, held in new regard and listened to with
 greater intensity as a result of our economic performance and I particularly
 want to pay tribute to Peter Costello, the Treasurer and Deputy Leader,
 for his role in relation to our very successful economic management
 over the last three-and-a-quarter years.
Our objective at all times has not been to achieve reform for reform's
 sake. Over the last three-and-a-half years in seeking to reform the
 Australian economy we have not been engaged on some ideological binge.
 We have not sought to give us some kind of doctrinaire ideological
 ticks in particular boxes and to say that is a particular ideological
 objective that we have achieved. The sole and unambiguous purpose
 of our economic reforms has been to make the Australian economy more
 competitive and as a consequence generate more jobs for Australians
  particularly young Australians  and generate higher living
 standards for all Australians. And that remains, as we look beyond
 the goods and services tax, that remains the objective of our economic
 policies and our economic reforms. And as we look beyond the goods
 and services tax and as we examined what next must be done to secure
 that more competitive Australian economy we must remember the sort
 of world in which we live. We must understand the extent to which
 it is has been transformed by information technology. We now live
 essentially in a borderless international economy where seamless capital
 flows are fast being matched by seamless flows of job opportunities.
 And the enduring fundamental of that new world in which we live is
 that if we are not competitive we will fall behind. And it is no good
 any Australian leader or politician saying "we are doing better
 now than we were doing twenty or thirty years ago" unless we
 can confidently say that we are doing better now than our rivals are
 doing now. And it is a never-ending race, and if you fall behind you
 lose market share, you lose competitiveness and you lose jobs.
And so it is as we move on from the goods and services tax and we
 examine what our responses will be to such things as business taxation
 reform. We have to have in mind the need at all times to make this
 country international competitive. We have to ask ourselves whether
 it is as attractive to invest in Australia as it is in the United
 States or one of the other strong economies of the world. It is not
 enough to say well it's more attractive now than it was thirty
 years ago, that's irrelevant except in terms of political and
 historical comparison because the world has changed forever. We can
 never go back to the old cloistered days where you could put a wall
 around the Australian economy and keep people out and just enjoy a
 comfortable cloistered living standard within our own borders. That
 has gone forever. And one of the difficult challenges of modern government
 is to turn the undoubted advantages of globalisation to the overall
 good of the community. And it's our responsibility as sensible
 and sensitive politicians to understand that there are communities
 in Australia that get left behind by globalisation. We have to understand
 their anguish, we have to share their concern, we have to identify
 with their difficulties and we have to provide them with responses
 to the dilemma that is presented by that globalisation. And there
 is always the threat of aberrant ideologies and philosophies in a
 climate such as that. And that lay behind much of the challenge that
 was so successfully defeated in the bush by John Anderson and Tim
 Fischer at the last election.
But as we look ahead we think particularly as a country on those areas
 of economic performance that we do best. We must, in the years ahead,
 build on our natural strengths. We, of course, must continue to support
 the great performers of the past  our mining industry, our farming
 industries, our innovative manufacturers. We will continue, for decades
 into the future, to be heavily reliant on export income from the farm
 sector and from the mining sector. And nothing that the Government
 I lead will do will ever take away the competitiveness of the Australian
 mining industry or the Australian agricultural industry because both
 of them have been bedrock and necessary to our economic success and
 our economic achievement. But as we go into the next century there
 are areas of the Australian economy that we can effectively build
 on and exploit to the long-term, national good.
As a community, if we examine our history, we have always been a people
 who have been particularly inventive. We have always been a nation
 of great ideas. We have given to the world inventions and ideas and
 concepts way beyond our population. And therein, I believe, as we
 look to the next century, lies a great area of opportunity. So often
 the story of Australia has been we get a great idea but we lose it
 in the process of commercialisation.
We think of such things as Memtech and many others where an idea has
 been successfully developed in Australia yet it has been commercialised
 and, therefore, the economic benefit from it has been derived by others
 and derived overseas. And it ought to be one of the challenges of
 economic policy making in this country in the years ahead that we
 reverse that process. That we not only continue to have great ideas
 but we also convert them to commercial reality and commercial profit
 to the benefit of Australia and to the benefit of Australians.
And, therefore, as we examine not only our taxation system but we
 also examine all the other aspects of economic policy that bear on
 the competitiveness of this country we ought to seek in the decisions
 we take not only to have a clever country, not only to have a lucky
 country - because you can have a clever country but not get the full
 benefit of it, you can be a lucky country but not get the full benefit
 of that - but I hope in the years ahead we can also become a can
 do' country. A country that can convert to its national benefit
 the ideas that our citizens generate, a country that can convert its
 luck and its cleverness to a long-term, national advantage. Because
 the history of nations through the 20th Century has been
 that the greatest success has not gone necessarily to those countries
 that have had all the inventions and all the ideas but rather it has
 gone to those countries that have had the capacity to convert those
 ideas and those inventions to commercial reality and commercial success.
And it's that kind of thinking that will instruct our examination
 of something such as the capital gains tax as we get the business
 tax recommendations from John Ralph's committee. It is that consideration
 which is driving my strong commitment to making Australia a financial
 centre for the world and not just for our region. It is my belief
 that with our combination of strong economic performance, good corporate
 governance, very, very strong and prudentially regulated banks, a
 very strong legal system, a stable community both socially and politically,
 that we have an unrivalled capacity to build this nation into a world
 financial centre.
But as we go down that path we must also remember that not only do
 you win international competitiveness by such things as taxation reform
 but you also win international competitiveness by continuing the crusade
 within Australia for further reform of those institutions and those
 practises which in the past have contributed to our uncompetitiveness.
One of the remarkable elements of the Australian economic success
 story of the last three-and-a-quarter years has been the way in which
 we have lifted the productivity of the Australian workforce. Not only
 are we as Liberals able to say to the workers of Australia, we have
 cut your monthly interest bill by an average of $320, but we are also
 able to say to those same workers, we have boosted the level of your
 real wages. And we have done so against the background against two
 other great achievements and that is a record of industrial disputation
 which is the lowest for more than 75 years. So much for Bill Kelty's
 sonata, let alone the symphony. The reality is that this Government,
 this Coalition Government has given to the industrial landscape of
 Australia an unparalleled level of industrial peace. But we have also
 done it against the background of generating some $400,000 jobs in
 the three-and-a-quarter years that we have been in government. We've
 brought unemployment down to a 10-year low. It's a 20-year low
 so far as teenagers looking for full-time jobs but it is still far
 too high.
And we have achieved reforms in difficult areas such as the Australian
 waterfront that many people doubted were possible. And the courage
 that was displayed by Peter Reith and others in arguing for and prosecuting
 the case for reform of the Australian waterfront I know is widely
 respected within the Liberal Party community. But, ladies and gentlemen,
 more has to be done on that front. It's a never-ending process
 of turning around what was really an arthritic labour market system
 into one that can accommodate the demands of an Australian workforce
 in a borderless economic world. Because we built an industrial relations
 system behind a tariff wall when most workers were men, most of them
 were in blue-collar occupations and most of them worked in large aggregations
 and answered to a boss in a very hierarchical workplace structure.
 That was the background against which the industrial relations system
 essentially that we inherited three-and-a-quarter years ago was built.
 And when you think about that against the modern world you understand
 instantaneously how absolutely essential it is that we change and
 we continue to change.
My friends, there are just two other things that I want to mention.
 And that is that in all the years that I've been a member of
 the Liberal Party and all the years that I've been in Parliament
 a very important part of the sense of being of the Liberal Party has
 been our capacity as a political movement to articulate the broad
 national interest in terms of our national security. In many of my
 early years in the Liberal Party much of our debating time was spent
 talking about issues of national security. And they, of course, were
 the days of the Cold War when the divide between Soviet Russia and
 the west, led by the United States, defined not only international
 political debate but also much of domestic political debate. And that
 divide, of course, probably did more than any other single thing to
 lead to the great division within the Australian Labor Party in the
 1950s which was of such enduring importance to the years that followed
 in Australian politics. Now of course so much of that has changed
 but it doesn't mean that the demands on the Australian Government
 to have a sensible and rational approach to national security has
 changed. Indeed in many ways, particularly in our own region, we live
 in a less predictable and a more fraught security environment than
 we did 20 years ago.
When I became Prime Minister in 1996 I felt that our foreign relations
 were somewhat imbalanced. I felt that we ought to see our engagement
 with Asia as our top priority but I didn't feel as though it
 should be our only priority. And what I have sought to do over the
 last three-and-a-quarter years is to bring about a sensible rebalancing
 of our national security stance and our foreign policy, to recognise
 that our immediate area of responsibility remains, of course, and
 will always be our engagement with the nations of Asia. And we have
 done that very effectively.
We played a major role in bringing a greater understanding amongst
 the nations of Europe and North America of the dilemma faced by Indonesia
 in the wake of the Asian economic downturn. And the moderation of
 IMF policies in relation to Indonesia was in no small measure due
 to the urgings of Australia. We are playing a major and constructive
 role in trying to achieve a stable and peaceful outcome in East Timor.
 And it took a Coalition government to actually persuade the Government
 of Indonesia to change its policy on East Timor. It was a Coalition
 government and a Coalition Prime Minister that wrote to Dr Habibie
 recommending a change of policy. I don't think, of all the things
 that the former government did in foreign policy, I don't think
 an area was more characterised by an obsequious approach to the views
 of a foreign country than the approach taken by the Labor Party to
 then Government of Indonesia.
So, ladies and gentlemen, we have sought to rebalance our foreign
 policy and our national security approach because, as I've frequently
 said, I believe this country occupies a unique intersection. We are
 a nation with profound historical roots in Europe. We have had very
 close links with North America. We share many values in common with
 the nations of Europe and North America. But here we are in the Asian
 Pacific region. Our own population stimulated and nourished by the
 coming to this nation of hundreds of thousands of people from the
 nations of Asia, all making a wonderful contribution to our country.
 We can go to Asia without the baggage of being a former colonial power
 or of being a major world power. We can achieve things, as a consequence,
 that some of our friends in Europe and America cannot achieve. And
 what I've sought to do in that time is to achieve a better balance
 in relation to the capacity that that intersection gives us. And I've
 been immensely assisted and encouraged and in many areas led by the
 contribution that Alexander Downer has made as Foreign Minister of
 Australia. Alexander's contribution has been very effective.
 He's won growing respect within the world community. And I know,
 as a former leader of our Party, I know there are Liberals all around
 Australia who are extremely happy and personally very pleased at Alexander's
 success as our Foreign Minister.
I mention some of my colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, not in any
 sense to separate them or set them apart from others but really to
 make the point, and this is really the point that I've come to
 a conclusion on, and that is that our success has really been a team
 achievement. People are kind enough at gatherings such as this to
 say nice things about the Prime Minister, to say nice things about
 what the Prime Minister may have achieved. But I couldn't have
 done it without an outstanding team. And I want to tell you how tremendously
 proud I am as Prime Minister of the team that I have behind me. I've
 mentioned some of them but I could go on. Robert Hill I don't
 think is with us today because he's off doing battle over Kakadu.
 But who will forget Robert's masterly handling of the Kyoto Conference
 at the end of 1997 where against all predictions and all odds he won
 an outstanding victory for Australian industry and for a balanced
 outcome so far as industry and the environment is concerned. And I'm
 very grateful having emerged from the difficulties of the Senate over
 the last few weeks for the contribution of Robert as the Leader of
 the Government in the Senate. But I mention those of my colleagues
 who I have mentioned to simply make the point that it has been an
 outstanding team. You can't be successful in government, you
 can't be successful in politics without team achievement and
 without team effort.
We have every reason, as a political party, to be proud of what we
 have achieved. We've had the opportunity, over this weekend,
 to reflect a little bit on our history and it's important we
 do that. It's important that we reclaim our history because it's
 a great history. It's important that we remember that most of
 the great social changes and improvements were achieved under Liberal
 administ


E&amp;OE..................
 PRIME MINISTER OBUCHI:
Prime Minister Howard and I have just finished our discussion. And
 first I would like to briefly share my impressions with you. First
 of all, I am very pleased to welcome Prime Minister Howard as an official
 guest to the Government of Japan and to have had extremely meaningful
 discussion with him today.
Prime Minister Howard and I had frank exchange of views on a wide
 range of subject matters including our bilateral relations, issues
 concerning the Asia Pacific region and international affairs. Our
 fruitful discussion on the future vision for Japan/Australia cooperation
 into the 21st century is perhaps the most significant outcome
 of our meeting today. Coming out of the meeting with Prime Minister
 Howard I am left with a strong impression that Japan and Australia
 have indeed become true partners in the Asia Pacific and that we should
 continue to build wider and stronger relationship of cooperation as
 global partners.
I am happy to announce that on the occasion of the visit by Prime
 Minister Howard we agreed to issue a joint statement on electronic
 commerce. I also note with satisfaction that Prime Minister Howard
 and I have agreed to cooperate closely so that we may bring to reality
 initiatives symbolising our bilateral cooperation in the 21st
 century such as launching of Australian satellite on Japanese rocket
 and convening of Japan/Australia millennium conference.
This has been my second meeting with Prime Minister Howard and I look
 forward to building stronger ties through close dialogue between us
 such as we had today. Thank you and I now invite Prime Minister Howard
 to speak.
 PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Well, thank you very much Prime Minister. It has been a very good
 discussion. We covered a lot of ground - the bilateral relationship
 is in very good shape. We have no better customer in the world than
 Japan and we have no more broadly based association in our region
 than the association we have with Japan and with the Japanese people.
I am pleased to say that we both agreed on how important it was that
 the next round within the World Trade Organisation was successful
 and that that round should be comprehensive covering all sectors.
 We both agreed on the importance of working through APEC to ensure
 that there was maximum encouragement for that outcome and both of
 us agreed on the importance of continuing steps to include.improve
 rather, the financial architecture in the region.
We both also agreed on the importance of close association and improvement
 of relations between China and the United States and the importance
 of the admission of China into the World Trade Organisation.
Like the Prime Minister of Japan, I welcome the agreement on electronic
 commerce and also the involvement in the satellite project by Japan.
 I was also most encouraged by the Prime Minister's enthusiastic response
 to my proposal for the staging of a millennium conference regarding
 the bilateral relationship involving not only members of the two governments
 but also the business communities of our two nations and also academics
 from our two countries.
We briefly.we also discussed the situation in Indonesia and East Timor
 and both agreed on the importance of an improved security situation
 in East Timor and also the importance of there being a free and open
 vote to determine the future status of that territory.
And finally I thank the Prime Minister for the efforts that have already
 been made by Japan to bring about the release of the two Australian
 aid workers, Pratt and Wallace. I know that the Japanese Government
 will continue to be active in this area and I am most grateful and
 I know the Australian people are most grateful for activity in that
 area.
And may I conclude by saying that I have greatly enjoyed the hospitality
 so far extended to me and my party. The relationship is in very good
 condition, it is a treasured relationship to the Australian Government
 and the Australian people. And to you, Mr Obuchi, I warmly appreciate
 the personal friendship you have displayed towards me and the hospitality
 that you have extended. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................
Prime Minister and Mrs Obuchi, other ministers of the Japanese Government
 and other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say first of all on behalf of my wife and myself and all of
 the other members of the Australian party how very grateful we are
 for your great courtesy and your great hospitality. Not only in affording
 us this splendid dinner tonight but also the friendship that you have
 extended to us since we arrived from Australia last night.
The relationship between Australia and Japan does have a very special
 quality. It is a magnificent model to the rest of the world of how
 two countries with vastly different cultures and very different histories
 can come together and achieve through the pooling of their common
 objectives and their common goals a great and broadly based friendship.
Japan is Australia's best customer. We value your custom. We strive
 on all occasions to be reliable suppliers. We like to provide good
 after sales service and if there are any customer complaints we like
 to hear about them. But the relationship is more than an economic
 relationship. It is also a deepening cultural and political relationship.
 There are now literally tens of thousands of young Australians every
 year in our schools who are learning the Japanese language. And through
 that coming to know the culture of your country, the mysteries and
 the intrigue and the fascinations of Japanese life. And that linkage
 particularly through our young people is really the foundation of
 the further growth and the further development of the relationship
 between our two countries.
It is a relationship now which is very mature but there are a number
 of people in this room tonight as there were at the luncheon today
 who worked together in those years immediately after World War II
 to build the foundation of the modern bilateral relationship. And
 particularly the businessmen who worked so hard and produced such
 very good results. And those of us who enjoy the modern maturity of
 the relationship pay tribute and give due credit to so many of those
 who trailblazed more than 40 years ago.
The Prime Minister and I today have talked extensively not only about
 our bilateral relationship but we have also talked about the goals
 that we share in common in our region. The importance of achieving
 ever expanding trade horizons. The importance of helping the less
 fortunate countries in our region rebuild from the adverse effect
 of the Asian economic downturn. And I had the opportunity today, Prime
 Minister, to say to you how much I admired the work that you in particular
 have done to strengthen and revive the Japanese economy. And it is
 clear already that benefit is being enjoyed by Japanese industry and
 the Japanese people from the measures that your Government has undertaken.
The strength of the Japanese economy is not only important to the
 Japanese people but the strength of the Japanese economy is of immense
 importance to the region and the entire world. Japan is the second
 most powerful economy in the world. Japan has played a major role
 in the wealth and the prosperity not only of our region but of the
 entire world over the last 30 years. And we follow very closely and
 very encouragingly the leadership that your Government is giving in
 bringing about a strengthening of the Japanese economy.
We have, as you know, undertaken a number of reform measures in Australia
 and we are pleased with the strength of the Australian economy in
 1999. It is stronger now than it has been for more than 30 years.
 We have the lowest number of industrial disputes in Australia for
 almost 90 years. And we are an increasingly attractive country in
 which to invest.
I do remember my discussion with Mr Takeshita at Kirribilli House
 in Sydney. It was late in October, we did talk in a very lively fashion
 about the goods and services tax. It was not only a lively discussion
 but may I say from my part it was a relaxed discussion because it
 was after the election and we had been returned. But that particular
 meeting brought home to me the continuity of the relationship between
 our two countries not only at a political level but at other levels
 too because your colleague - and I know how close you have been in
 political life - your colleague had served with very great distinction
 in a large number of posts in the Japanese Government over a long
 period of time. And I know that when he conveyed to me your personal
 good wishes it was no mere diplomatic formality but it was a very
 keenly felt personal communication.
So, Prime Minister, it is a real privilege to be here. The relationship
 between our two countries continues to deepen, it continues to get
 better. But importantly you never take those relationships for granted.
 And today we have agreed on a number of things including a millennium
 conference involving not only our political leaders but also our business
 figures and our academic leaders to reflect upon what the character
 of the bilateral relationship should be as we move into the next millennium.
 And I am very grateful for your immediate and spontaneous endorsement
 of that particular proposal.
So in thanking you, Prime Minister, and thanking you Mrs Obuchi for
 your gracious hospitality to Janette and to both of us can I invite
 all of you to join me in another toast. This toast will be to his
 Majesty, the Emperor of Japan, to you Prime Minister, to your wife
 and beyond that to the enduring friendship between the people of Japan.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................
Thank you very much and to you Mr Muto thank you very warmly for your
 kind words of welcome. It is a very important part of my visit to
 Japan that as parliamentarian I have the opportunity of meeting fellow
 parliamentarians from the Japanese Diet.
I have often remarked on my visit that the relationship between Australia
 and Japan is a model of how two very different societies can come
 together and work to achieve common objectives. One of the objectives
 is surely the promotion of the parliamentary system within our two
 societies and the strengthening of the links between those who are
 elected representatives of our two peoples.
I am honoured that so many of you have turned up this morning and
 that it's such a representative range of members both political background,
 age and the different constituencies that you represent. It is a very
 strong indication to me of the great importance that the elected representatives
 of the Japanese people place on the relationship between our two countries.
Although we have a very good and strong relationship it is not one
 that should be taken for granted and it's very important particularly
 in a global economic environment that both Australia and Japan continue
 to work hard at strengthening and improving the relationship. And
 that is why I agreed with the former Japanese Prime Minister, Mr Hashimoto,
 that we would, as far as possible, meet each other as Prime Ministers
 once a year alternating between the two countries. And I think that
 is very important and a very powerful symbol of the commitment of
 the two societies to each other.
Japan buys more from Australia than any other country and Japan has
 been our best customer for many years. We are very conscious of that.
 We are keen to preserve the goodwills that exists within Japanese
 industry. And the strength of our economy makes Australia an increasingly
 attractive country with which to do business.
Our economic growth rate has been between four and five per cent.
 Our interest rates and our inflation rate are the lowest they have
 been for more than 30 years. Our unemployment rate is also coming
 down. Our business investment levels are very high and we have just
 completed a major reform of our taxation system to which Mr Muto made
 reference in his introductory remarks. All of these things indicate
 that Australia is determined to play an even stronger role in the
 regional and the world economy.
We respect both Japan's strength as the second largest economy in
 the world and also the leadership role that that gives to Japan. It
 is important not only to our region but also to the entire world that
 the recent signs of strengthening of the Japanese economy continue
 because a stronger Japan means a stronger region and a stronger world
 economy.
But our relationship is not only defined by economic and trade issues
 it is also a very strong people-to- people relationship. At present
 tens of thousands of young Australians are being taught the Japanese
 language at schools. There is a very strong commitment to the teaching
 of your language in our education system and it has rapidly replaced
 the teaching of many other foreign languages over recent years. And
 through a knowledge of your language young Australians are being given
 a knowledge of your ancient and special culture.
And finally there will be a lot happening in Australia over the next
 two years. We will host the Olympic Games in Sydney next year and
 for all of the following year we will commemorate 100 years of the
 establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia through the federation
 in 1901 of the then six colonies. And I can assure you that as many
 members of the Japanese DIET who wish to do so should come to Australia
 particularly at the time of the Olympic Games and I can assure you
 of a very warm and affectionate Australian welcome if you choose to
 do so. Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...............
As I come to the end of my visit to Tokyo on this visit to
Japan I can't think of a more delightful venue than a promotion of Australian
wine and cheese, in which to spend my final hours in Tokyo.
Japan is a huge market for Australian food and beverages
and the total of our exports are worth more than $3 billion. That is not to say we do not seek to make
that figure much larger. Of particular
significance has been the growth of wine and cheese as exports to Japan. There used to be a time when the only wine
imported into Japan came from Europe, but that is rapidly changing and nights
like tonight are a partial reminder to our competitors of just how determined
Australia is to rapidly expand her wine and cheese exports to the huge market
that is Japan.
I want to commend the Australian Wine Export Council for
opening an Australian Wine Bureau in Tokyo.
I want to commend the work of that Bureau and I understand that there
will be a series of promotions, including a major promotion in all the
restaurants and bars of this prestige hotel, the Hyatt, of Australian wine in
November. And I understand that this
very hotel has already held a number of Australian wine promotions
recently. I thank it for doing so and I
endorse its remarkably good taste.
Australian wine is one of our great exporting successes of
recent years. In 1990, a bare nine
years ago, our exports were $114 million.
We now look set to break the $1 billion mark this year if exports to
Japan are anything to go by. And the
quality of our wine is also increasingly recognised in Japan, with an
Australian red winning the trophy for the best red wine at the inaugural Japan
International Wine Challenge held late last year in Tokyo.
Likewise our dairy industry has enjoyed quite spectacular
export success in recent years.
Australia is the leading supplier of cheese to Japan with a market share
of more than 40 per cent and that represents just under half of Australia's
total cheese exports and a quarter of all Australian cheese production.
And that particular story is very relevant on a day when
the fluctuating fortunes of Australia's trade overseas is very much in the news
back home. What it reminds us is that
you can never generalise about trade.
What you do is go out and fight for market share on every conceivable
front. And to use a famous Australian
expression, you win some and you lose some, and we have certainly won some when
it has come to Australian wine and Australian dairy produce into Japan.
And finally, I'm delighted to remark that the most recent
breakthrough in Australian exports of agricultural products to Japan has been
the launch last month of Tasmanian Fuji apples, with Australian easy-peel
citrus to be launched shortly. I
understand that unfortunately if you want to buy Tasmanian Fuji apples in a
supermarket in Tokyo, you probably can't because I'm told most of them have
already been sold out.
So ladies and gentlemen it is with enormous pleasure, if I
can be suitable armed, that I propose a toast to the endeavour of our wine and
cheese exporters, and most particularly might I say to the discerning palate of
so many of our Japanese friends. It
really has been one of the great success stories of Australian export over the
last 10 years and it is always of course a double pleasure to be associated,
not only with a successful export, but also a successful export that brings
such enormous pleasure to so many Australians and indeed to so many people
around the world.
I propose a toast to the endeavour of the wine and cheese
exporters of Australia. We are indeed
very indebted to them and extremely proud of them.
Our wine and cheese exporters.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE.................
Thank you very much Richard Holbrooke for those very kind words of
 welcome. I feel very honoured that a person who's had such a very
 distinguished and effective, as far as achieving outcomes for the
 long-term benefit of humanity, contribution and role in the diplomatic
 life, not only of the United States but also of the free world, should
 be here today and I thank him very warmly for those words of introduction.
Can I, before I say what I wanted to say in relation to the common
 purpose we all have in being here, how grateful I am for so many people
 in the investment community in Australia and in the United States
 who have worked hard to put this gathering together and in particular
 to Peter Charlton and Maurice Newman and many others who have worked
 with them.
This is a great time to be showcasing the Commonwealth of Australia.
 And I am also delighted that the Premier of New South Wales, Bob Carr,
 the Labor Premier of New South Wales is with us today. And as the
 Liberal Prime Minister of Australia I welcome him in particular to
 make the point to our American friends that this is a united bipartisan
 Australian effort.
We believe that we have a great story to tell about many things that
 have been done to make our nation more competitive and economically
 stronger than it has been at any time in the 25 to 30 years that I
 have been in public life. You have heard a great deal this morning
 particularly from my ministerial colleague, Joe Hockey, who has specific
 responsibility in my Government for promoting Australia as a world
 financial centre. And also from Ted Evans, the Secretary of our Treasury.
 You have heard of the micro-detail of where the Australian economy
 sits, of how in getting taxation reform through the national Parliament
 we have put in place the fifth pillar of major economic reconstruction
 and economic change of the Australian economy over the last 15 to
 20 years.
Twenty years ago the Australian economy was far more cloistered, far
 more closed, far more insular, far more regulated, far less worldly
 than it is as we near the end of this millennium. We hadn't then deregulated
 our financial system. We didn't allow in foreign banks, we didn't
 have a floating exchange rate, we entertained the absurd delusion
 that the central bank could control the level of interest rates. All
 of that sounds fanciable, amusing and quaint and old-fashioned now
 with the experience of the last 20 years. But I mention it to indicate
 the distance that's been traveled and in doing it I have never been
 reluctant in a number of areas to acknowledge the contribution of
 prime ministers and others from the other side of politics in Australia.
 Because without the bipartisan support for financial deregulation
 and tariff reform in the 1980s and early 1990s the Australian economy
 now would not be as strong as it is.
In recent years two or three other great reforms have been achieved.
 One of those, of course, is in the space of two to three years to
 turn a very large budget deficit into a very healthy surplus. And
 I am particularly proud of the fact that Australia now has the lowest
 level of government debt, the GDP ratio, of any OECD country. And
 it is one of the great ambitions of our Government and particularly
 of my Treasurer, Peter Costello, who has made such a great contribution
 to this process for us to begin the early years of the next century
 essentially free of net Commonwealth debt. And as a legacy and as
 a contribution to future generations I can't think of a more practical
 and finer one.
The changes in the Australian labour market in the last few years
 have also been quite marked. One of the sometimes negative perceptions
 of our country a few years ago was that we didn't have particularly
 tranquil industrial relations. I am happy to emphasise the fact that
 last year the number of industrial disputes was the lowest in 86 years.
 But, of course, of all the reforms that we have undertaken none has
 been bigger and one will have greater and more far reaching consequences
 than, of course, the reforms to our taxation system that finally passed
 into law only a few weeks ago and will come into effect on the 1st
 of July next year.
Not only do those reforms sweep away a very old-fashioned and rickety,
 indirect tax system and replace it with a simpler more comprehensive
 indirect tax system that will be of great benefit to our exporters
 and will also provide significant benefits in reduced business costs
 to all of our domestic business operations. And it will also provide
 very significant reductions in personal income tax for middle income
 earners. And will also importantly provide to the States of Australia
 which, under our federal system, have the ongoing responsibility for
 police services, public hospitals, government schools, roads and all
 of those social provisions that are so very important. It will provide
 to the States of Australia a guaranteed source of revenue to fund
 those obligations and those responsibilities.
But I think one of the more important things about the achievement
 of that tax reform is that it has given to the Australian community
 and to the political process in our country a belief that if you persevere
 long enough you can achieve fundamental reform. There is sometimes
 in all of our societies a sense in which the system is so burdened
 with complexity and so burdened with checks and balances desirable
 as those checks and balances may be. But there is so many of them
 and they proliferate so much that you can't really ever achieve fundamental
 reform. And I think the faith of the Australian people in the capacity
 of our political process to achieve that fundamental reform has been
 of enormous value.
The strongest message, of course, that comes out of Australia over
 the last 12 months is the fact that we were able to stare down the
 Asian economic collapse. And if I can encapsulate what I want to say
 to you today, if I want to convey to you a metaphor for what Australia
 has been able to achieve and what Australia represents at the moment
 it is the fact that we were able to do that. And I don't mind saying
 to you that it surprised just about everybody, myself included. A
 couple of years ago if you'd have said to me: will we be able to survive
 the Asian downturn? I'd have said regretfully I think it will adversely
 affect us at some time before the end of 1998. Now, of course, it
 didn't and there are a number of reasons for it. A lot of the reasons
 are to be found in the reforms that I have mentioned because today's
 strength is always the product of yesterday's reforms. As tomorrow's
 strengths will be the product of today's reforms.
A lot of the credit for the successful management of our economy over
 the last year ought to be given to the very skillful management of
 our exchange rate policy by the Reserve Bank of Australia which I
 think has done an outstanding job and we have seen during this period
 of time the authorities in Australia working together in a very efficient
 and a very effective way. And it bodes well in my mind for the future
 conduct of public policy in so many of these areas.
But in public life and in policy making you never really get to the
 top of the hill. You scale a hill and then there's another one on
 the horizon and there are other challenges to be undertaken. And the
 purpose of this conference, and certainly the purpose of my remarks,
 is not to in any sense dwell upon or luxuriate in what may have been
 achieved over the last few years but rather to tell all of you that
 our process of reform has by no means been finished. And having completed
 the, what I might call, the retail side of our taxation reform process,
 of having got our goods and services tax established, the next big
 thing, and this is of very particular relevance to the central goal
 of this conference, is to complete the process of business taxation
 reform.
Now, there are many reasons that make Australia particularly but not
 only Sydney, of course, an attractive location as a world financial
 centre. Undoubtedly our economic strength is one of those. Undoubtedly
 our marvelous way of life, the congeniality of Australia as a place
 in which to live and to raise children. The great social and political
 stability, the fact that we speak the English language, the fact that
 we have a culturally diverse and linguistically skilled population
 who have deep and enduring family and people-to-people links with
 the nations of South East Asia. There are some 300,000 - 400,000 people
 living in Sydney, for example, who are ethnically Chinese from various
 parts of South East Asia as well as from mainland China to give you
 an example of the diversity of the Australian community, particularly
 of the Sydney community.
We, of course, have a very clear set of rules relating to corporate
 governance. We have a very well regulated and prudentially supervised
 banking system. We have also, as Australians, had one characteristic
 and Richard talked earlier about the affinity that exists between
 the peoples of the United States and the people of Australia. And
 one of the things that we have in common with our American friends
 is that we have a fascination for new technology. And all of my life
 I have been conscious of the fact that if something new comes on the
 market, some new product, Australians literally devour it. And that
 is why we have a mobile phone and internet take-up which is second
 only to that of the United States and in some aspects of communications
 reform in advance of that of the United States. And this is tremendously
 important to the sort of exercise that we are engaged in today, it
 is tremendously important to the capacity of our country to provide
 the people, to provide the infrastructure and the wherewithal to be
 an effective world financial centre.
Now, all of those things are very attractive, they are very nice and
 they'll get a tick but, of course, they are only part of the story.
 And I recognise that in the end the competitiveness of our business
 taxation system will count for a great deal more than some of those
 other things attractive though they are. And if you can get all of
 them together and if you can tick every single one of the boxes then
 you really do have a very compelling case. And that is why I want
 to tell you today in very unambiguous terms that I know that what
 we do in relation to the business tax reform process will be the ultimate
 determinant of how successful we are in the years immediately ahead
 of us in achieving the goal that so many of us have in common.
Now, a number of the changes we have already put through the national
 Parliament including the abolition of stamp duty on share transactions
 and the removal of the Financial Institutions Duty make a contribution
 towards removing some of the impediments. But the recommendations
 to come out of the Ralph review which we will have in our hands by
 the end of this month and how the Government reacts to those recommendations
 will be of crucial significance and importance in determining whether
 or not we realise those goals.
I know that in a globalised world you really have to have a tax system
 that, as far as possible, makes the choice between an investment in
 the United States and an investment in Australia neutral. And while
 that choice is not neutral and whilst it is tilted in favour of the
 United States whether by operation of our capital gains tax or by
 operation of our tax laws to deny to those funds and those other accumulations
 of capital in this country that have a tax free status a similar treatment
 in Australia then that is going to act as a disincentive. And that
 is why I recognise as Prime Minister that how we react to the recommendations
 in respect of capital gains tax in particular will determine how much
 more attractive we can make investment in Australia.
There is little doubt in my mind that our present capital gains tax
 does act as a disincentive in a number of areas and if we are really
 serious about the exercise on which we are all collectively embarked
 today then some fundamental changes will need to be made in that area.
 And they will bulk very large in the considerations that we have.
 I am particularly conscious of the many representations that have
 been made to me over the years about the absence of a more realistic
 capital gains tax approach to script exchanges. I am aware of the
 break that is seen in the existing capital gains tax regime on the
 accumulation of venture capital. And I am conscious of a number of
 the other disincentives that that tax represents in relation to decisions
 that are being made as to whether an investment should occur in Australia
 or an investment should be retained in the United States or an investment
 that is made elsewhere.
So putting all of that together, ladies and gentlemen, I know that
 if we are to realise the goal that we want and it's not an end that
 we pursue as an end in itself, there is no particular virtue in its
 own right of being able to say that Sydney has become a world financial
 centre or Australia has become a world financial centre. But if you
 have responsibility for governing a nation which has achieved a great
 deal and has demonstrated its economic strength and its economic capacity
 but is nonetheless a nation which needs to build on successful industries
 in areas such as mining and manufacturing and primary production.
 By adding value to those industries, particularly in the service sector,
 where you believe we have a capacity to perform effectively in one
 of the areas where you most naturally turn your attention is the area
 of financial services.
And if we can add to the undoubted generic strengths that I described
 earlier in my speech a modernisation of the Australian taxation system
 that removes some of the inhibitions that now exist, that recognises
 that in a global economy with seamless transfers of capital matched
 increasingly by seamless transfers of jobs that unless you are able
 to have a taxation regime that removes the impediments between this
 or that location you have no capacity at all to build upon the undoubted
 generic strengths that I and other speakers have been canvassing.
So the central message I wanted to convey to you at this luncheon,
 ladies and gentlemen, is that, yes, over the last few years Australia
 has been a country of growing economic strengths and self-confidence.
 A country, I believe, which has received an enormous national psychological
 boost out of the fact that we were able to do something most of us
 thought we couldn't do and that is avoid significant impact from the
 Asian economic downturn. And nations, in many respects, are like individuals
 and like communities. We are governed on some occasions by reason,
 we are governed on some occasions by predictability, we are governed
 on some occasions by instinct and we also enjoy tremendous fillips
 and tremendous boosts from a psychological point of view.
And I can't overestimate to you today the boost that being able to
 beat that Asian downturn has represented in the Australian psyche.
 And wherever you go in our country you find that sense of excited
 achievement that we have been able to do something that we really
 deep down didn't think we were going to be able to do. We are not
 totally sure that we have every explanation as to why we have done
 it. I mean, confident government ministers, of course, list instinctively
 and proudly the immediate contributions that their portfolios have
 made to that magnificent achievement and they are encouraged by their
 Prime Minister to do so.
But there are a lot of things to do with our national make-up that
 have produced it but it has meant that we have a sense of ourselves
 and a sense of what we have been able to achieve that I haven't found
 in our country for a very long period of time. And for that reason,
 as well as many others, now is a time for us to not, out of any sense
 of complacency or any sense of smugness to say, well gee, isn't that
 terrific let's enjoy ourselves for the next few years. There is no
 sense of that in Australia. There is a sense that we have become a
 'can do' country. There is a sense that we have challenges that we
 tackle in a practical way.
We have a great base for being a world financial centre and I have
 described that several times but we also, I think, now maturely recognise
 that if we are to go further we have to make some very specific changes
 to provide some very specific incentives particularly in a number
 of taxation areas. And this conference is about communicating Australia's
 strengths. It's about absorbing the concerns that potential investors
 may have, it is about, of course, demonstrating a common commitment
 we all have to a free enterprise system and it is about, of course,
 demonstrating just how much we all live in a global financial environment.
Can I conclude my remarks by returning to a theme that Richard Holbrooke
 touched upon in his very gracious introduction and that is the affinity
 which exists between our two societies. In any close relationship
 we will have our differences and there has been some well publicised
 differences in recent days regarding one of our fine export products.
 And it, of course, is a source of some irritation to our country that
 that should have occurred and we don't in any way resile from or apologise
 from the fierce criticism that we have tended to the American administration
 regarding that.
But Richard spoke very warmly and very appropriately of the values
 and attitudes that bind us together and those values, of course, are
 infinitely more enduring than those things that tend on occasions
 to cause disputation and to push us apart. And I am immensely proud
 as the Prime Minister of Australia to be able to speak at this luncheon
 today to talk a little of what my country has achieved and to be able
 very genuinely to say that I speak for both sides of Australian politics
 in saying that we share the sense of that national achievement. That
 we are working together overseas to achieve something more for Australia.
 I think by dint of what it has particularly achieved in the Australian
 economic firmament there is an emphasis quite properly on the city
 of Sydney but it is very much as a representative of the entire Australian
 nation.
And on that note can I conclude by saying to all of you that Richard's
 reference to the Olympic Games was very apposite. Can I say that the
 preparations for the Olympic Games are in great shape and full credit
 to SOCOG. I think Sydney will do those games on its ear. I think they
 will be one of the most remembered Olympic Games of the modern era.
 I think Sydney is superbly suited and superbly prepared. The facilities
 are very well advanced.
I invite all of our American friends to visit our country for the
 Games and it will be for a sports loving and sports crazy nation an
 absolute gourmet delight of sporting celebration and a great way for
 a proud and committed nation to welcome the world and to showcase
 its remarkable way of life and its remarkable sense of national purpose.
 Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................
Well thank you very much Nicholas Platt. To my Ministerial colleague
 Joe Hockey the Minister for Financial Services in the Australian Government
 to Andrew Peacock the Australian Ambassador to the United States,
 Michael Baume the Australian Consul General here in New York, many
 other distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman. I want to thank
 the organisations that have brought this luncheon together and the
 fact that they bring together an organisation which is concerned about
 the involvement of the rest of the world in the affairs of Asia, that
 is the Asia Society, the fact that the hosts also include organisations
 that bring together the fostering of good relations between Australia
 and the United States and organisations that are concerned about the
 economic strengths and the economic well being of our two societies
 is certainly very appropriate for the subject of my address.
I'm coming to the end of what has been a two week visit out of my
 country. A visit which has taken me, not only to the United States,
 but also taken me to Australia's best customer America is a good one,
 but we have one that's even better and that is Japan and the visit
 has in both countries has reinforced to me a number of things. First
 and foremost of course its reinforced the interaction and the interdependence
 of our relationships both politically and economic with those two
 countries. Its brought home to me how important economic strength
 is in the world. How much economic strength allows a nation of Australia's
 size of just under 19 million to punch considerably above its weight
 and I've had the opportunity over the last couple of weeks to reinforce
 to all of the people I've seen, which have been at the highest levels
 of Government in both Japan and the United States, the continued commitment
 of Australia to a very deep and abiding involvement in the affairs
 of the Asian Pacific Region.
I'm rather pleased that when introducing me Nicholas referred to that
 phrase of mine, the unique intersection that Australia occupies because
 it does to my mind encapsulate very well where Australia is placed
 in the world. We are unusual in occupying that intersection. We do
 of course have very strong and abiding links with the nations of Europe.
 We have a shared history, we have a shared language, with one of them
 we have a shared culture with so many of them. We of course have,
 as all of you in this audience particularly know and understand, we
 have a special affinity and a special affection for and a shared history
 with the people of North America, particularly the people of the United
 States.
But there we are geographically, side by side, cheek by jowl, with
 the peoples of Asia. And that does give us a special opportunity and
 it gives us a special responsibility. And in taking advantage of that
 opportunity and in discharging that special responsibility we can
 best do so from a position of economic strengths and economic example
 and economic vitality. And of a number of things that I'm particularly
 proud of, that the Government I lead has been able to achieve over
 the last three and a quarter years, one of them is the fact that in
 Asia's time of trial and economic difficulty, Australia was able to
 be a good helpful and reliable friend. It wasn't just an association
 of rhetoric and an association of expressions of goodwill. We were,
 along with Japan, the only other country that participated in the
 three international monetary fund bailouts of Indonesia, Korea and
 Thailand. And at a very critical stage of the negotiations between
 the international monetary fund and Indonesia it was the representations
 of the Australian Government to the International Monetary Fund which
 I believe played a very important role in perhaps injecting a greater
 sense of realism and a greater understanding of the need to achieve
 a balance between the economic and the social considerations in relation
 to that particular country.
We've been able to do these things and I believe without exaggeration
 to play a very constructive role over the last few years because of
 greater domestic economic strengths and it brings back to all of us
 the importance that if you seek to have some influence in the world
 you must do so in part from a position of economic strengths and economic
 dependability.
The Australian economic story of the last few years is a very good
 one. We are growing very strongly, last year we had a growth rate
 of around five per cent. We have the lowest net government debt to
 GDP ratio of any country in the OECD. We have the lowest interest
 rates as my Treasurer humorously says since man first walked on the
 moon in 1969. We have very low inflation. If we can get rid of the
 other 50 per cent of Telstra, we'll have no net Commonwealth debt
 by the year 2002. And we have course are now getting the benefit of
 a number of fundamental economic reforms that have been carried out
 in Australia over the last few years. And when three weeks ago that
 wonderful afternoon that in my political career I will never forget,
 there was returned to the House of Representative from the Senate
 a series of bills to amend the Australian taxation law and I had the
 opportunity of moving that the House of Representatives approve the
 legislation and thus finally pass into law the bills to reform Australia's
 taxation laws after years and years of debate and advocacy.
We had an interesting debate and I talked about the five pillars of
 the modernisation of the Australian economy over the last 15 or 20
 years. I mentioned the fiscal consolidation that has been undertaken
 in the last three and a quarter years where we've turned a deficit
 of $10 .5 billion into a surplus in two years. I talked about the
 financial deregulation of the Australian economy, first recommended
 by the Canberra report, which I commissioned as Treasurer in 1979,
 looked at with some trepidation by the incoming Labor Government in
 1983 but then to its great credit and with our support in Opposition
 embraced in full and that led to the floating of the Australian dollar,
 the admission of foreign banks into Australia, the abolition of exchange
 controls and a number of other measures which have underwritten the
 operation of the Australian financial system since.
I thought of tariff reform. Once again particularly of the statement
 made by the former Labor Prime Minister, Bob Hawke in 1991, with our
 strong support from Opposition, to reduce tariff levels in Australia.
 I of course also recalled that great thing that had been left unchallenged
 in Australia year after year, that is the deregulation of the labour
 market which has been undertaken very vigorously by my Government
 over the last three and a quarter years and has played a major role
 in boosting the productivity of the Australian workforce and the Australian
 labour market.
And the fifth and final of the pillars of economic reform has of course
 been the renovation of the Australian taxation system. And that taxation
 reform is undoubtedly the biggest change to our taxation system since
 World War II and arguably the biggest change to our taxation system
 since federation. It will introduce a broad based indirect tax, a
 goods and services tax we call it, it will replace a very outdated
 old fashioned wholesale sales tax, it will replace a number of taxes
 at a state level. I'm pleased to tell this audience, amongst those
 will be stamp duty on share transactions and it will also replace
 immediately the Financial Institutions Duty which is levied by State
 governments. Importantly, it will give to the Australian States a
 guaranteed revenue base to provide the Government schools, the hospitals,
 the roads, the police services which are the bread and butter of the
 provision of public services by governments in Australia.
All-in-all it represents the major renovation of our system and it
 will be accompanied, wisely in my view, at precisely the same time
 with major reductions in personal income tax. I've never believed
 that it's wise in politics to try and implement major structural reforms
 separating what might be seen as the electorally harder bits from
 the electorally more attractive bits, because surprisingly voting
 publics have a tendency not to remember for terribly long some of
 the electorally attractive bits, but to remember for much longer some
 of the electorally harder bits. So taking my cue from other countries
 that have disconnected elements of the reform, we've kept the two
 of them together. And when on the 1st of July next year
 the Goods and Services tax comes into operation, also on the 1st
 of July there will come into operation the largest reduction in personal
 income tax in Australia since the end of World War II.
Taken together it does represent a mammoth reform. It's going to make
 our exports cheaper, it's going to cut the cost of fuel, and that
 is very important in a country as large as Australia. It's going to
 reduce business costs overall and I think its going to inject a great
 deal of additional vitality into the Australian economy.
Now that in a sense is one shoe of tax reform. The other shoe which
 will start dropping on the 31st of July when we receive
 a report from a very respected Australian businessman, John Ralph
 who's written it with the assistance of a number of other very well
 known Australian businessmen including Bob Joss who's done such a
 marvellous job of running the Westpac bank in Australia over the last
 few years. That report will deal with the renovation of Australia's
 business taxes. Now I would be the first to acknowledge that we need
 reform in that area. I understand the view to be widely held in many
 areas of the investment community that the odd change here and there
 to the capital gains tax would be extremely welcome. I understand
 that people are arguing very strongly for a more competitive corporate
 tax rate. I appreciate that in an increasingly globalised economy
 where seamless transfers of capital are almost as quickly matched
 by increasingly seamless transfers of job opportunities, that it is
 important if you want to attract capital from, for example the United
 States, it is important to have the investment choice tax-wise as
 neutral as it can possibly be. And without endeavouring or trying
 in any way to pre-empt what John Ralph's committee is going to recommend,
 I can assure you that those sorts of considerations and the need to
 make Australia as attractive as possible as an investment destination
 will bulk very largely in our minds.
And as many in this audience will know, one of the specific focuses
 of my visit to New York has been to associate myself with the efforts
 of many both within the government and within the business community
 in Australia to promote Australia as a world financial centre. And
 indeed Joe Hockey's specific responsibility within the government
 includes very much that particular activity. And in doing so I believe
 that I speak, and Joe speaks, from a position of great generic economic
 strength as far as our country is concerned because I can't think
 of a time when it's possible to speak with credibility as positively
 as we can now about the strength and the optimism of the Australian
 economy. So I can assure this audience that we will have that particular
 aspiration of making Australia a world financial centre, that particular
 aspiration very much in our minds when we sit down in a few weeks
 time, as we will, to consider the recommendations of the Ralph Committee.
I just want to say two other things before allowing plenty of time
 for people to ask me questions, and I want to return to a theme that
 I developed for a moment at the gathering yesterday which I addressed.
 And that is that one of the great dividends of what has happened in
 Australia over the last year, one of the great dividends of the fact
 that we have been able to stare down the worst economic collapse Asia's
 had in the last 40 years, is that it has given to the Australian people
 and to the Australian nation a sense of self-belief about the capacity
 of this country to succeed internationally that I don't believe it's
 had before.
Australians by character and by nature are openly confident people.
 Yet there's always been within many of us, in many Australians a belief
 that whatever our assertiveness may be and whatever our confidence
 may be, when it comes to the international economic stage it's always
 been a bit difficult and a bit threatening and a bit intimidating
 out there. And what we've been able to do over the last year against
 all predictions and that is to defy a collapse that by all the conventional
 rules should have engulfed us, and indeed most people in Australia
 believed it was going to engulf us in one form or another by about
 the end of 1998, has I believe not only sent a very powerful message
 to the rest of the world, but it's also sent the very powerful message
 to all Australians and to the entire Australian nation. It's demonstrated
 to the world that we are a can-do community, that we do have a capacity
 to slug it out and survive and to stare down the worst that a fairly
 hostile world economic environment can offer.
Now, there are reasons for it, and I've described the various reforms
 that have been undertaken in Australia over the last 20 years which
 have played a part in the strengthening and in a time of crisis the
 fire-proofing of the Australian economy against the Asian economic
 downturn, and I might add that one of the things that also greatly
 aided us during that very difficult period in 1997 and 1998 was the
 skilfull management of the exchange rate in Australia by the Reserve
 Bank. Now all of those things came together when they were most needed.
 But I think the best thing of all that's come out of it beyond the
 employment growth, the low inflation, the low interest rates, the
 high levels of business investment, valuable though all of those things
 are, the psychological value of Australians finding that they've been
 able to defy and overcome this major economic challenge I think it
 is made an incalculable contribution to the national sense of self-worth,
 belief and confidence of our country. And in the end that is infinitely
 more important than any more narrowly based economic doctrine, or
 economic goal, or economic prescription. So as Prime Minister I find
 that of all of the emotions, if I can put it that way that one feels
 out of the experience of the last year, that is far and away and infinitely
 the most satisfying and the most enduring.
Can I simply conclude Nicholas by thanking you and your colleagues
 for having me here again here in New York. I think you've helped host
 a few luncheons for me in the past. I do value very much the involvement
 of the organisations that have sponsored today's lunch and it's another
 opportunity for me to say again as Prime Minister of Australia how
 deep and abiding and how important is our relationship with the United
 States. We have our differences, we've had one this week on one aspect
 of our export trade of which I won't dwell any further because it
 is already well-known to the audience. We've believed that we've been
 treated less than fairly and have made that very plain in our discussions
 with the American Administration. But the relationship is deeper and
 more long-standing and more important than an understandable and deeply
 held difference, and in some quarters of the Australian community
 a quite bitterly held difference, on a particular trade issue and
 today is an opportunity for me to say again how very important that
 overall relationship is and I'm delighted that I've had the chance
 of addressing this lunch today to share some of my thoughts with you.
Thank you.
 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 QUESTION:
My name is Dick Radez and I am not a shy American but I work with
 US pension funds and endowments and venture capital fund to fund managers
 that invest in venture capital funds in Silicon Valley in Europe.
 We have been prevented from investing in Australian venture capital
 opportunities over the years because of both the legal treatment of
 the venture capital investment vehicles in your country, the capital
 gains tax and whatever. Now, I have been after your Minister, Mr Hockey,
 about this already and he's agreed to take another look at a presentation
 in the Australian venture capital community gave to Mr Ralph. But
 given that his brief seems to be on rather a larger scale there is
 one more concern with things like trying to create another Silicon
 Valley down in Australia where we think you have got the intellectual
 talent and the experience and software information technology, the
 Internet. How do we get this revisited if the Ralph Report doesn't
 touch upon it as fully as it might?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think Ralph will have something to say about it. And I can
 assure you that it will be very thoroughly visited when we look at
 the Ralph Report in every respect.
 QUESTION:
You talk about the five pillars and that's fine. It seems one pillar
 you have missed out on is immigration. What are your comments on that?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don't think I did miss out on it at all. I was describing
 in that speech, and again today, the five things that I believe have
 contributed to the strength of the modern Australian economy. So the
 question though of immigration policy is a separate issue. We have
 achieved the economic strength we have now either because of, in spite
 of, or based upon in some way the immigration policy we have presumably
 followed over the last 20 or 30 years. So I don't think it can be
 said that in arriving at where we are now the immigration policy that
 we have followed is flawed. We have, as a Government, the view that
 at the moment the current intake is about right. The current intake
 is lower than what it was at some stages in the1970s and 1980s. It
 is an intake that has a greater proportion of people with skills and
 with a greater emphasis on business migration. It is, of course, based
 on a completely non-discriminatory principle. It is open to this or
 any future government to vary the level of immigration in the future
 if it believes that economic and social circumstances require it.
 Immigration if you look at the sweep of years since World War II immigration
 has been of enormous benefit to Australia as it has to the United
 States. But it's always been important to ensure that the aggregate
 flow of immigration and the composition of it in terms of skills versus
 family reunion is right for the economy at the particular time. So
 we don't have a doctrinaire view about the level of immigration we
 have a pragmatic view. And the pragmatic judgement at the moment is
 that the current level is right. There is a view that if you doubled
 or trebled immigration overnight, if you could do that you would have
 an enormous impact on the so called aging of the population. There
 have been some studies done on this and that particular view is somewhat
 misplaced and somewhat exaggerated that it's not quite as simple as
 that. But that does not say that a higher intake might not be sustainable
 in Australia in the years to come. I don't rule that out but I think
 there is some mythology about, around about the impact in the short
 to medium term of a dramatic increase. It just doesn't compute according
 to the advice I have it doesn't quite work out in practice like that.
 QUESTION:
My name is Tim Copland from Goldman Sachs, Mr Howard. With the falling
 gold price and the relative strength of the Australian dollar the
 Australian gold mines are hurting at the moment. Do you propose to
 provide them with some assistance whether it's by tax relief or some
 other means to help out the Aussie gold miners?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it's not immediately in contemplation, if I can put it that
 way. Look, I mean, fair try but..
 QUESTION:
Nicholas Hyde from JP Morgan. I have been out of Australia for about
 two years and one thing about being in the United States which I find
 different to Australia is the depth of the economy across all regions
 and across the smaller towns of America. And I was just wondering
 when I look at Australia I see more of a concentration in the major
 cities and hopefully with the increase of information flows, you know,
 is the Government doing anything about trying to get the wonderful
 performance of the economy into centres other than just within the
 major cities of Australia?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I am not surprised that you would find that difference. I mean,
 because of the huge size of the United States and the vastly bigger
 population of course that is a difference. I mean, I might be statistically
 wrong in saying so but I don't think I am conceptually wrong in saying
 that Australia is probably the most urbanised western society. I mean,
 it is one of the things that people still have great difficulty in
 coming to terms with about Australia of just how big our cities are.
 Of how big, for example, by world and United States standards a city
 like Sydney is. So we are a very urbanised society and it is also
 true that as the nation is doing very well economically there are
 still significant areas of social deprivation and economic deprivation
 in the regions. I mean, the major cause of the rise for a moment and
 then thankfully the disappearance of One Nation was not, in my view,
 race but it was economic deprivation and alienation in regional areas
 of Australia. And it's something that every society has to grapple
 with but we are doing a number of things in relation to that. We are
 making very strenuous efforts including out of the proceeds of the
 privatisation of Telstra. We are making very great efforts to provide
 more communication services in the bush. We don't want communications
 haves and have nots in Australia. We are working very hard at that.
 But one of the reasons why we are so very angry about the American
 decision on lamb, now that you have asked me, is the opportunity that
 is.I mean, here is a group of people of really battling Australian
 farmers without any government help, got off their backsides and carved
 out a new market in this country and whack, it's taken away or certainly
 penalties put on it. Look, I think there are a large number of particular
 policies that we are following in telecommunications, in land renewal
 through our Natural Heritage Trust proposals. We are trying to tackle
 the problem of getting medical practitioners into country areas, we
 are trying to reduce the cost of country students boarding in universities
 or colleges in the cities. There are a whole range of things that
 we are doing. But it's a very good and relevant question because side
 by side with the national economic strengths and the extraordinary
 prosperity of a number of parts of Australia, particularly in parts
 of the larger cities and some of the coastal areas, there are communities
 that feel as though they are left behind and we are working very hard
 to bring them along as best we can.
 QUESTION:
Philip Hedger from Pfizer [inaudible]. You have just been to Japan
 and we do a lot of business both in your country and Japan as you
 know. And I wonder if you could give us your, sort of, first hand
 appreciation of the economic positive indicators that have just come
 out of Japan in the first quarter and doubtless you spoke with various
 ministers there whether you feel that there's cause for prolonged
 optimism there?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think the Japanese economy has undergone a number of very
 necessary structural changes. I think there are more needed. The best
 sense I could get was tha


E&amp;OE.................
Michael and Toni and Mr and Mrs Schneider, Commissioner Halligan,
 Andrew Peacock the Australian Ambassador to the United States, ladies
 and gentlemen.
Not long after he became Consul-General I got a phone call late one
 night and Michael said, John, he says, I can save the Government an
 enormous amount of money and he then proceeded to explain to me this
 plan of his to shift the Consulate-General from the Rockefeller Centre
 to here. But he said the only problem is the Department of Finance
 reckons it's going to cost us more money. So there followed a bit
 of a debate and in the end Michael persuaded us that it would indeed
 be an extremely good deal and the Minister John Fahey was persuaded
 that it would be an extremely good deal and as a consequence the Consulate-General
 has come here.
And Michael has been telling me for some time that when I am next
 in New York I should come along to a little gathering like this and
 as I am about to do to honour a very famous American, that is to honour
 Douglas MacArthur who is to a generation of Australians probably the
 most formidable, famous and emphatic figure in American military history
 and somebody who during the course of his life played a major role
 in the military salvation of Australia during World War II. And I
 think it is appropriate that this room which brings together so many
 Australians in the United States and so many Australians in New York
 in particular it is appropriate that it should be named after a man
 who, of course, established his headquarters in Brisbane in Australia
 during the worst time of World War II, who uttered those famous words
 "we will return" after he left the Philippines and he, of
 course, led the allies during those very, very difficult times and
 I think it is therefore incredibly appropriate that we should do this.
Can I just say before I perform that little ceremony, can I say on
 behalf of the Australian Government how much it appreciates the work
 done by not only the Consul-General himself and Toni but all of the
 other members of the staff who work out of this Consulate-General's
 office.
It is a very important post. It has as character and it has a responsibility
 because it is in the centre of the greatest financial capital in the
 world, because it is here in New York it does have a special responsibility
 above and beyond the responsibility of consulate generals in other
 parts of the world.
New York, of course, has a special appeal, a special character and
 a special place not only in the United States but indeed in the entire
 world. And it is a real experience to represent ones country in this
 very dynamic and remarkable city.
So I want to say on this occasion how much the Government appreciates
 the work being done by the staff of the Consulate. And could I also
 say how delighted I am that this gathering is, in a sense, jointly
 sponsored by the Australian American Association. An organisation
 that has worked very hard to work out.work very, very hard to bring
 our two countries and our two peoples together over a very long period
 of time.
I think it was Dr Johnson said that we should keep our friendships
 in good repair and although the friendship between the United States
 and Australia is a very longstanding one, it's a very deep one and
 it's one that is constantly renewed and reinforced it's very important
 that we always work on it. And I remember when former President, George
 Bush, came to Australia in 1991 he reminded us that he would be the
 last significant figure in the - and he is a pretty significant figure
 in his administration - he was the last.he'd be the last significant
 figure in any administration in either country who was part of the
 World War II generation and therefore experienced the particularly
 close links on the battlefield against the odds between our two nations
 and our two societies. And that as successive generations have come
 it is important that we not just assume that the friendship will always
 go on, we should work on it and we should nurture it. And gatherings
 like tonight are an opportunity to honour it.
It's an opportunity for me, on behalf of the Australian Government,
 to say, despite our differences to which Michael referred to one,
 we remain very firmly committed to an alliance that has meant a great
 deal to us. To a security association that remains the very cornerstone
 of our continuing security and to a cultural relationship between
 two people who share so much and most importantly they share a common
 commitment to the values of human individuality of human freedom and
 of human dignity. And in the end it is the values that mean most in
 the unity of peoples and in the unity of nations.
Douglas MacArthur did an enormous amount to preserve that through
 his leadership during World War II with one of those Baume flourishes
 for which he is famous. Baume, of course, represented the seat of
 MacArthur in the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia between
 1975 and 1983 before the electors of MacArthur had the ill-grace,
 the ill-wisdom, the ill-manners and all of those other things to vote
 him out. And one of his former constituents, Stanham-MacArthur, Clinton
 Stanham-MacArthur, who incidentally is not related to Douglas MacArthur
 but with another, sort of, 'Baumeism' he is the great, great, great
 grandson of John McArthur who founded the wool industry in Australia.
So whenever you have a function organised by Michael Baume you can
 always expect the odd whimsy and the odd Baume flourish and we have
 another one.
So, ladies and gentlemen, this room I name the MacArthur Room. This
 room will be a reminder to all who come here of the enormous contribution
 made by Douglas MacArthur particularly will Australians remember him
 when he was the source of leadership and encouragement and hope. The
 very strong working relationship that he forged with one of my distinguished
 predecessors, John Curtin, who was Prime Minister of Australia during
 the days of World War II. In Brisbane he established his headquarters
 and there's a very special association therefore with the city of
 Brisbane. I think it is an entirely and eminently appropriate name
 to give this room and it will continue to be a reminder to all Australians
 who use it of the enormous contribution that that great man gave to
 the defence of Australia and to the saving of Australia and to the
 security of Australia during the darkest days of World War II.
I declare this formally named The MacArthur Room and I hope it will
 be a very, very effective reminder of the contribution of that great
 man, to the freedom Australians now enjoy. Thank you.
Prime Minister formally names the multi-function room the MacArthur
 Room and bestows AO on Consul-General Baume and AM on cartoonist Mr
 Paul Rigby.
This is typical of any show Baume puts on. This is a marvellously
 deregulated evening. Paul's just responded to my speech of congratulations
 but can I very briefly say how privileged I feel to have not only
 conferred the honour on my long and dear friend Michael Baume but
 also on undoubtedly one of Australia's greatest cartoonist so when
 he says, you know, don't look behind me, I might end up being drawn
 by him yet.
Politicians and cartoonists have a, how should I describe it, a particular
 association. It's different from the association you have with virtually
 anybody else and given the lot of all politicians you, how can I best
 describe it, you think you've seen the worst until you see the next
 one. But they are a special part of the, I suppose, the daily routine
 and the daily life of a politician and Australian cartoonists, Paul,
 is absolutely right. They have a larrikin spirit, they have an enterprise,
 they have a certain flair about them that I don't think the cartoonists
 of any other country can remotely touch.
Now, I know that's a pretty boastful thing to say but I think judging
 the character of the audience here I can probably get away with saying
 it and it does indeed happen to be true. And I am delighted that Paul
 has been able to be here today and that I've had the privilege of
 formally conferring his award on him.
I've said a lot about Michael in his time and in his career. I think
 everyone knows that Michael and I have a passing regard for each other.
 He really has been, without doubt, one of my very best and closest
 friends certainly but not only in the political arena.
He's been a great mate and that, of course, is about the nicest thing
 that an Australian can say about anybody. He really has through thick
 and thin but he's also contributed more than friendship to me. He's
 also added great value to everything that he's done. He was a very
 colourful and capable journalist. He had a very interesting career
 in the financial community. He won a marginal seat in the great Fraser
 flood of 1975. He lost it in the, sort of, the Hawke hurricane of
 1983. He reincarnated himself as a Senator in 1984 and I remember
 one of the great ironies of politics is that in 1983 Michael was quite
 devastated at having lost his seat and he came to work for me on my
 staff when I became Deputy Leader of the Opposition. Then he was invited
 by the then Leader of the Opposition in NSW, Nick Greiner, to run
 for what had become quite a winnable seat in the NSW Parliament. I
 think it was the seat of Camden wasn't it Michael? It was the seat
 of Camden. And he worked very, very hard for the preselection and
 the phones worked overtime as they normally do in these preselection
 battles and he was absolutely devastated and distraught when he lost
 the preselection to a fellow, I think he spells his name - F-A-H-E-Y
 - John Fahey who then went on to become Premier of NSW and is now
 the Finance Minister in my Government.
Michael was terribly upset and distraught and disappointed and the
 then government in its, I think ill-wisdom although Michael didn't
 think so at the time, decided with the support of the National Party
 to increase the size of the Parliament and that created new Senate
 opportunities. I said to Michael, why don't you run for the Senate
 and he took my advice and we made a better job of the preselection
 on that occasion and we managed to get him preselected and he was
 reincarnated as Senator Michael Baume from the State of NSW. He continued
 to represent NSW in the Senate from then on but he has been a very
 close friend but he's added great value to the Parliament and everybody
 tells me who passes through New York what a terrific job he does as
 the Consul General here and it's been very evident.
Can I finish by saying to you, Andrew, what a tremendously nice thought
 it was to sub-delegate your delegation. I think there's a delightful
 symmetry Governor General to Ambassador to Prime Minister. I think
 it's absolutely marvellous that you thought to do that and I really
 am tickled pink that I've had the opportunity, not only of extending
 this award to Michael but also to you Paul. It adds a very special
 dimension to this delightful occasion here in New York and one that
 I know you both will, and I and Janette will, remember for a very
 long time.
Congratulations to you both. The awards are eminently deserved. You
 have contributed greatly to the spirit and the life of Australia and
 you are precisely the sort of people who should be honoured in the
 Order of Australia. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................
It was my very special privilege to serve as a parliamentary colleague
 and ministerial colleague with Kevin Newman and to have the rare privilege
 of serving with husband and wife in public life of Australia. I count
 it a very great honour to say some words.
First of all, of comfort and love and assurance to you, Jocelyn, to
 Kate and Campbell, to their children, your grandchildren and the other
 members of Kevin's family.
I first met Kevin Newman on the streets of Launceston, when I campaigned
 for him as a fairly raw and new member of the House of Representatives.
Australian politics since World War II has produced many by-elections
 but few of those by-elections have presaged coming events and have
 been seen in subsequent times as watersheds in Australian political
 history. None more accurately fits that description than the famous
 by-election in Bass in 1975 that saw Kevin enter Federal Parliament
 as the member for Bass.
Within a few months he became a Minister in the Fraser Government
 and for the next seven years he and I were ministerial colleagues
 together for the entire period of that Government. And Kevin held
 no less than five ministries - Repatriation; Environment, Housing
 and Community Development; National Developments; Productivity; and
 Administrative Services. And he also in the course of discharging
 his responsibilities in those two portfolios he assisted the Prime
 Minister in Federal Affairs and he also assisted the Minister for
 Defence.
Major General Phillips recalled the words, the injunction rather,
 of Sir William Slim when he was Governor-General of Australia, that
 the officers of the Australian Defence Forces should display courage,
 faith and integrity. Throughout his parliamentary and ministerial
 career Kevin lived out that injunction of the Labor Governor-General
 of Australia.
I never found him to be other than unfailingly honest. I never found
 him to be other than a loyal and dedicated member of a ministerial
 team. He was a passionate advocate of the cause of the people of Tasmania
 for whom he felt a special affinity and a special responsibility.
He was loyal to his Department. He advocated his causes and his beliefs
 not always uncritically but always very tenaciously. He was always
 of warm and friendly disposition to his colleagues.
During the time that he was Minister for National Development he had
 to handle in 1979 and 1980 considerably difficult public debate about
 the price of fuel and the introduction of new policies which led to
 very significant dislocation for rural Australia and for many of the
 businesses of Australia. And he did that with enormous skill and enormous
 tenacity.
He played a very major role as the Minister for Administrative Services
 and therefore as the Minister responsible for the Australian Federal
 Police in the formation of the National Crime Authority where he played
 a very major role in the fight against organised crime. And he was
 one of the first ministers at a federal level to warn in very strong
 and resolute terms about the threat of organised crime in this country
 and its potential to corrupt people in high places and that was a
 warning that was valid at the time and was subsequently borne out
 by certain events.
I want to say to you, Jocelyn, on behalf of your many admiring friends
 and supporters and colleagues in the Liberal Party and in the broader
 community that you and your family are very much in our thoughts and
 our prayers today.
Your partnership with Kevin was a very special one and something that
 both of you treasured and all of us admired. Thirty-eight years of
 being together you saw the difficulties of service life in that book
 'Partners' both you and Kevin spoke of the difficulties of separation
 when both of your children were young. Kevin worried about the burden
 that you carried particularly in relation to some of the criticism
 unfairly directed at the servicemen involved in the Vietnam War.
Both of you maintained faith to each other and both of you were a
 wonderful example of the great partnership for life. And in that book
 Kevin spoke of that partnership and I use some of his words. And he
 said: 'over recent years we have each had to look a doctor in the
 eye while we were told we not immortal. That can be pretty hard to
 come to terms with but it can also be enormously positive. The heightened
 appreciation of life, love, family and friends you subsequently experience.
 We think fortune has smiled on us. When we married it was for love
 but we all know that choosing a mate for life can be pig in a poke.
 For us a long marriage that worked. We have been blessed with great
 children and grandchildren. We have both had important and influential
 careers but best of all we are still best mates.
And who amongst us wherever we might have come from and whatever we
 might have done in our lives would not want more than anything else
 to be able to say that of our life and our loves and our partnerships.
 And I think it sums up better than any words I can muster what was
 important to Kevin. It sums up the simple faith in his country, a
 love of his family, a proper sense of priorities and a belief that
 in the words of his Governor-General and Commander in Chief that if
 you live according to the principles of courage and faith and integrity
 you can endure the challenges, you can endure difficulties, you can
 make a difference.
Kevin was a well-loved colleague. He was a great servant of Australia,
 he was a great servant of Tasmania, he was a great servant of the
 cause of the Liberal Party of Australia. And I think I can speak for
 all of those identities in thanking him and thanking God for him,
 and assuring Jocelyn and Kate and Campbell and their family and their
 friends of our great love and support and affection at this time.
[ends]


Subjects: Maurie Finnegan and Maurie Rudd; Hunter
 Valley; Newcastle; Asian economic downturn; Australian economy; social
 coalition; business philanthropy; pork industry; lamb industry
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Rob. To Mike Tyler and Kevin Maher, to my
 colleague Senator John Tierney, other distinguished guests, ladies
 and gentlemen. This dinner has got off to an excellent start - you've
 got lamb on the menu. I'll refer to that in the context of Australia's
 economic challenges in a few moments.
But can I say that for me tonight is a special honour. I do appreciate
 the opportunity of addressing a gathering of people drawn from different
 sides of the argument but united in the common cause of an intelligent
 and cooperative approach to employers and employees working together
 for the benefit of their industries, the benefit of their job security,
 and the overall benefit of the country.
And I'm conscious that this annual lecture, this dinner honours two
 men, Maurie Finnegan and Maurie Rudd who made a remarkable contribution
 to the trade union movement in the Newcastle and Hunter area, and
 more generally throughout New South Wales and Australia. Both of them
 had their union careers through the old Federated Ironworkers' Association.
 It underwent a number of name changes, identity changes, but never
 lost a strong sense of passionate commitment to union principles and
 the betterment of the interests of union members and their families.
The old Federated Ironworkers' Association of course has a special
 place in trade union history in Australia because it was the location
 of one of the most famous battlegrounds in the late 1940s and early
 1950s when ideological struggles within the trade union movement and
 the broader labour movement in Australia had a different dimension
 perhaps than they do today, and have a special resonance for those
 who follow and understand the history of the trade union movement
 in this country.
I didn't have the privilege of meeting Maurie Finnegan, but I did
 have the privilege of meeting Maurie Rudd on a number of occasions.
 He was a very dedicated union man. He had a passionate commitment
 to the city of Newcastle. He fought against a debilitating illness
 that finally claimed his life, to secure a fair and decent outcome
 for the men and women affected by the industrial and economic changes
 that came upon Newcastle two or three years ago.
I shan't forget visiting him in the John Hunter Hospital not long
 before he died, and spending about an hour with him and his two very
 fine children. He knew of course that he was facing death very soon
 and he hadn't long, as I understood it, lost his wife. And the matter
 of fact, cheerful, resolute disposition that he displayed, and the
 encouragement and inspiration that he demonstrated by that display
 to his son and his daughter had quite an impact on me. He was in every
 sense of the word a genuine article, somebody who cared about his
 fellow men and women, somebody who was true to his union principles,
 true to his labour principles, but undoubtedly somebody who was prepared
 to work closely with anybody who shared his common commitment to improving
 the lot of the people of Newcastle. So I do regard it as an honour
 to have been invited to deliver this lecture in honour of those two
 men.
I do it ladies and gentlemen, at a time when if you talk about the
 generality of the Australian community, if you look at the things
 that measure economic and social performance in Australia, it is fair
 to say I think without exaggeration, it is fair to say that generally
 speaking the Australian economy at the present time is performing
 extremely well.
I've just come back from a visit to Japan and the United States, and
 I've visited the financial community of New York on a number of occasions
 in the time that I've been in politics. As Prime Minister, once in
 1997 and on a number of previous occasions as Treasurer, or as Minister
 for Business and Consumer Affairs or as Leader of the Opposition.
 And I can say without fear of contradiction that in that most, I suppose,
 that city of the most savage financial and economic judgements that
 you can find anywhere in the world, I found on this occasion a ready
 acceptance of the fact that the Australian economy is as a whole performing
 very strongly indeed.
Our growth rates, our low interest rates, our low inflation, our [inaudible]
 gains as a nation over the last few years have given to the Australian
 economy a resilience and a strength. And the fact that we were able
 to successfully stare down the dramatic downturn in the Asian economies
 in a way that frankly surprised me, I'll be honest. I thought about
 18 months ago what was going to happen was that we were going to say
 well we were going pretty well until we were mugged by the Asian economic
 downturn. And it didn't turn out that way. We have fared rather better.
 And I'm pleased for that, and I think we're all pleased for the sake
 of Australia that that has occurred.
Now I do speak against that background, but I readily acknowledge
 that although that is the general position, there are a number of
 areas of Australia including areas of the Hunter that are not sharing
 all of that general prosperity. And it would be a mistake for me,
 and it's a mistake I don't intend to make, to pretend that because
 at a national general level we're doing particularly well that that
 is evenly distributed throughout the community because in the nature
 of things it's not. And part of my job, and part of the thing that
 has brought me on a number of occasions to Newcastle and will continue
 to do so, is the sensitivity I have to the particular problems of
 different regions of Australia and the particular challenges here
 in the Hunter, and I want to say something about those in just a moment.
But can I say that one of the other general observations I wish to
 make apart from the remarks I've made about the Australian economy,
 is to say something of the way in which the political and economic
 landscape of this country has changed over the last 20 to 30 years.
 And in doing so it has mirrored a number of the changes that have
 occurred throughout the world during that same period. It's fair to
 say that the world, and Australia was no exception, went through a
 period in the 1960s and 1970s, which was evident in the United States,
 it was evident in Europe and it was evident in Australia, where there
 was a belief that if you had a problem then all that had to occur
 was that the government, particularly the federal government in a
 federation, should throw a large amount of extra money at that problem
 and that it would go away.
The Americans during the time of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations
 described it as the great society, whereby what you did was that you
 pumped large increasing amounts of federal money into particular projects
 and that the problems would go away. And I think we saw something
 of a retreat from that in the 1980s. We saw a bit of a backlash against
 it and we developed a culture in a number of parts of the world and
 it was optimised by the memorable but not particularly noble phrase
 in the Hollywood movie 'Wall Street', when Gordon Gecko said that
 greed was good. And it tended in the eyes of many people who summarised
 the attitude of that period when it was thought that rampant and rather
 insensitive capitalism was the solution to every problem.
Now I think in the 1990s we have reached something of an new equilibrium.
 We're never going back to where we were in the '60s or '70s or '80s.
 You never go back. You might have a common thread of attitudes and
 values from the past but you always have to adapt to new circumstances.
 And one of the things that I've tried to develop in the little more
 than three years that the Government has been in office is what I
 call a social coalition. The idea of a social coalition is to recognise
 one very important fact of life in Australia as we face the next millennium,
 and that is that there is no one section of society that can really
 on its own solve all of the challenges we have, or achieve all of
 the goals we seek.
The government alone cannot solve all of the nation's problems. Governments
 working together can't solve all of the government's problems. Governments
 are good at some things but they're very bad at other things. Governments
 have significant national responsibilities. They have a role in providing
 a social security safety net but they're not very good in my view
 at running businesses. In fact they're very bad at running businesses
 on just about every occasion. On the other hand other sections of
 the community are not able to carry all of the burdens and achieve
 all of the goals. And what I've sought to do through the notion of
 a social coalition is to bring together the government, the business
 community, other organisations within the community, be they welfare
 organisations, trade unions, and of course the enterprise and commitment
 of individual people to tackle problems.
One of the first things I did when I became Prime Minister was to
 get together a task force on youth homeless. But instead of the task
 force being run by somebody out of a federal government department,
 the task force was chaired by Captain David Eldridge, a Salvation
 Army officer from Melbourne. And it's produced I think quite a different,
 some might say not quite revolutionary, but certainly dramatically
 different way of tackling the problem of youth homelessness. Placing
 a premium in the first instance on seeing if there could be a reconciliation
 achieved between a young person who had left home and that person's
 family. And only when those who had cared for the child that had left
 home believed that that reconciliation did we then go about seeing
 that those people were looked after in the social security system.
What I did on that occasion was to involve at a policy making level,
 the welfare organisations of Australia. And I've continued to do that
 in relation to such things as the challenge of drug abuse within our
 community. And I make no apology for the fact that I draw very heavily
 on organisations like the Salvation Army and the society of St Vincent
 de Paul, and other organisations of that ilk, in developing policy
 for great social challenges and social issues. And I do that because
 I believe they have more coalface understanding and experience of
 the human misery caused by those social problems than any other group
 of people in the Australian community.
In the past the attitude was, well we'll allow them to provide the
 care, the Christian charity if you like, but they don't really understand
 in their soft-headed way what sought of broad ranging policies are
 needed. The reality of course is that people who run welfare organisations
 are anything but soft-headed. They know how hard it is to raise money,
 and they know the value of the hard-earned dollar, or a difficulty
 raised dollar perhaps better than any other group of people in the
 community.
But what I seek to achieve in a number of these areas, and it's found
 in expression in the call that I've made to the Australian business
 community shortly after the last election to be more generous in supporting
 noble causes and charitable endeavours. I want to develop a greater
 sense of corporate philanthropy within Australia. I'm not saying so
 much that business should give more, what I'm saying is that more
 businesses should give because there are many individual companies
 and many individual business men and women in this country who have
 a remarkable record of generosity to less well off and less fortunate
 Australians. Our Government has introduced a number of tax incentives
 to encourage a greater involvement by the business community in philanthropic
 endeavour, and this is another expression of the notion of a social
 coalition. Of tapping the capacity of the different strands of society
 where they are best able to contribute to make that contribution.
 And of course here in the Hunter the taskforce that carries my name
 is a good example of the social coalition at work because you have
 every conceivable element of that coalition represented on the taskforce.
 You have the trade union movement represented, there's a co-chairmanship
 of somebody from the trade union movement, somebody from the business
 community, you have community leaders, you have representatives of
 the churches. In other words you have the very best expression of
 a community organisation. And at a micro-Hunter level so to speak,
 it is an example of the social coalition at work.
Now I am very aware of the psychological impact on this city of some
 of the decisions that were announced several years ago. I'm also aware
 of course that the future of this city is increasingly diverse. As
 I look around this room and I had a look at the guest list before
 I came, it reminded me that old notions of Newcastle are no longer
 relevant. It reminded me of the way in which the industrial and service
 base of this city has already diversified, of the enormous change
 in the hunter region, of the growth of many service industries, not
 only in tourism but also in education. And the enormous potential
 in relation to defence industries that exist in respect of the various
 operations in the Williamtown area.
Now tonight is not an occasion for the listing of banners and the
 tabulation and the enumeration of.we've made a decision on this and
 that, and don't you remember that we decided to allocate a few million
 dollars here and there. But it is an opportunity for me to say that
 we do remain very strongly committed to the future of this city. We
 won't satisfy you on everything. We expect to continue to be criticised.
 That is part of the process and it's part of the ongoing exchange
 that occurs between a government and a community. But we have brought
 good faith and also some dollars, and I hope in the incentives that
 we have provided in a number of areas to which I will refer. We have
 also I think made a material contribution to strengthening the job
 and economic and industrial opportunities of this city for years into
 the future.
I think you're aware of the $10 million structural adjustment package
 that we announced in 1997, and we've approved a number of proposals
 out of that. And I'm pleased to announce tonight that we have agreed
 in principle to provide a $2.5 million sum of money in assistance
 on a dollar-for-dollar basis for Impulse Airlines to establish a call
 centre to service their current operations and the funding is subject
 to meeting certain Commonwealth requirements that we understand from
 discussion with the airline that they're optimistic that those conditions
 can be met. And that this project will generate some 70 direct jobs
 and of course many more indirect jobs and is a good illustration of
 the continuing diversification of the Hunter region's employment base.
I mentioned the defence industry and Rob reminded me of my visit to
 Newcastle a couple of years ago, and after being in Newcastle I went
 out to Williamtown. And of course on my last trip to Newcastle a few
 months ago I opened the British Aerospace lead-in fighter support
 facility which will inject $60 million into the area and employ 250
 people directly. I also announced that five of the new airborne early
 warning and control aircraft will be based at Williamtown and involves
 an extra 200 RAAF personnel and approximately 80 contractors. Yesterday
 my Defence Minister John Moore announced that Boeing is the preferred
 tenderer for these aircraft and the project involves new infrastructure
 valued at around $50 million.
I understand that the Redbank Power Station is now set to proceed
 which involved Commonwealth assistance through the infrastructure
 borrowing scheme which will generate investment spending of $600 million,
 1200 construction jobs over 2 years, and 250 direct jobs when the
 power station is in operation.
Some of you may remember the industry policy statement I made in December
 of 1997 and in that policy statement I announced the development of
 the manufacturing in bonds approach which was designed specifically
 to provide incentives for new investment in areas such as the Hunter,
 and specifically in Newcastle. So ladies and gentlemen I mention these
 things not to say well aren't we grand blokes and haven't we done
 all these wonderful things, but to exemplify and to demonstrate that
 our commitment is not just rhetorical. I do understand that the process
 of adjustment and change in the community that has had a particular
 cast and a particular mold for a long period of time is not easy.
 But I detect from the many contacts I have with people in the Hunter
 Valley and in Newcastle, I detect that there is a strong sense of
 optimism, there's a strong sense of accepting that change is necessary,
 that this area has very special qualities, it has a great beauty,
 it has the capacity to attract and develop new industries and it's
 in the process of doing that. And it has one other priceless asset
 and that is that it has a great community sprit, it has a great sense
 of identification with Hunter Valley's symbols. I meant he first thing
 that Kevin said to me tonight was to start talking about the match
 on the weekend between St George and Newcastle, and he informed me
 of course that he was going to...no the upcoming match between St
 George and Newcastle, and he informed that on Saturday he was going
 to be barracking for St George in its match against the Broncos. So
 that very very strong identification with symbols is very apparent
 and a community which is based on a tradition attached to a particular
 city, even though that tradition undergoes change, it leaves a very
 strong deposit of a very strong community spirit.
So my message to you tonight ladies and gentlemen as Prime Minister
 is that the nation as a whole, and generally speaking the nation is
 in very good shape economically. I don't expect everybody in the room
 to agree with every single thing that I've said. I would be perfectly
 astonished if I found any audience in Australia that I addressed that
 would do that. But I do think that over the last year as a result
 of what has happened with our economy, as a result of us being able
 to stare down that Asian economic downturn, Australians have acquired
 a sense of national pride, a sense of confidence, of self belief,
 the like of which we haven't had before or certainly for a long period
 of time.
In the past [inaudible] have a lot of economic things. We've always
 been externally and outwardly a very confident, optimistic people.
 But deep down I think there's been a feeling that when it came to
 world competition we were going to get cast aside and trampled on
 and find it very difficult. And the great value of what has happened
 in now being able to stare down the Asian downturn is that I think
 we have overcome that. And there is about Australia at the present
 time a sense of the can do and the sense that we can take on the world
 in certain areas and beat them, and that Australians are as good if
 not better in so many areas. Now that has always been true but perhaps
 as a community we needed a demonstration. And the fact to our surprise
 perhaps that it is certainly a reality that we've been able to work
 and live through the Asian economic downturn, to diversify our exports
 to North America and Europe, that all of those things have given to
 us a sense of confidence and a self belief.
But amidst that I recognise that the general can't be applied to every
 particular part of the national being. There are areas of Australia
 that continue to deserve particular understanding and special sensitivity,
 not only the Hunter Valley but a number of the regional and rural
 areas of Australia, that find the impact of economic globalisation
 very difficult to assimilate and very difficult to handle. And all
 governments have to be sensitive towards that. But so indeed do the
 affected communities.
I was relating a moment ago to those on my table the experience that
 we've had in recent months with the pork industry. You may remember
 around the time of the last election there were quite a number of
 people involved in the pork industry that were demonstrating very
 strongly, not only against us. They were demonstrating against everybody
 because they felt very understandably that they were being poorly
 treated, they were losing markets. That wasn't as a result of any
 particular decision that the government had taken, but simply as a
 result of changed market circumstances. In the face of a lot of criticism
 and opposition from the industry the Government withstood requests
 for handouts and subsidies, but rather fought to provide financial
 assistance so that the industry could get into export and incredibly
 enough that has worked. You now have a situation where sections of
 the pork industry cannot fill the orders which are coming from countries,
 particularly in the Asian-Pacific region.
Now that's not true of every pork producer, it's not true of every
 industry facing that kind of challenge. But it's an example of the
 sort of thing that can be achieved if there's and acceptance by both
 the government and by people in the community or people in the industry,
 that constructive cooperative change is unavoidable, and that if governments
 are prepared to work together with industries in a constructive way,
 recognising that you can't go back when market circumstances have
 changed.
I mentioned lamb and I'll finish on lamb. We announced today, Mark
 Vaile the new Trade Minister announced today that we'll be providing
 some financial assistance to the lamb industry and assistance to encourage
 and help the industry increase not only its domestic market but also
 its export market. The Americans have taken a very selfish and a very
 unfair decision. Australian lamb producers get no subsidies from the
 government. The American lamb industry is extremely inefficient and
 not only has the American government imposed a 30% tariff which effectively
 freezes the existing market at 78,000 pounds, but it's also imposed
 a 9% in quota tariff which is the unkindest cut of all. We're providing
 some assistance which will offset the cost of that so that with luck
 we may be able to help the Australian lamb exporters preserve their
 existing market in the United States, although their prospects of
 increasing it which would otherwise have occurred because of the superior
 quality of the product, their prospects of increasing it are virtually
 zero. But we are going to provide the industry with some advice and
 some assistance to diversify, to improve the promotion of the product
 not only here but also in other parts of the world.
But ladies and gentlemen, another example of recognising the need
 to change, that on some occasions you can't go back. But if there's
 a right revel of cooperation between the government and an industry
 and the community you can effectively move forward.
May I conclude ladies and gentlemen by saying again to the Industrial
 Relations Society that I am very honoured to be here. I do have something
 of an affection for Newcastle. My wife's family come from this district.
 As you know we've holidayed in this general area over a long period
 of time and we do have a very special affection. It's a city with
 a tremendous sprit. I don't always agree with the way it votes but
 that's life. It takes all kinds, and I respect it in the great tradition
 of the robust Australian democracy. And one of the things that has
 happened to Australian politics I think over the last few years that
 it has become less tribal. We still have our differences and that's
 good because it would be terribly dreary if we all agreed on everything,
 and vigorous debate is the stuff of which good policy is made. And
 that applies no matter who's in power and it applies no matter what
 the country is.
But I think we have become a little less tribal. We are seeing more
 of the national interest on some issues. I think there's a greater
 recognition that something I've always held very dear about public
 life in this country and that is that


Subjects: economic indicators and prospects for the Hunter
 Region; $2.5 million investment in a call centre for Impulse
 Airlines; BHP closures
E&amp;OE....................
Thank you very much Rob Chenery. To David Simmons, to Bishop Hirst,
 to the Lord Mayor, my colleague Senator John Tierney and any other
 parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a special privilege and pleasure for me to be here this morning
 to open these new offices. I think this is either the third or fourth
 visit that I paid to the Newcastle area in the little over three years
 that I have been Prime Minister. And the one very simple thing that
 I want to say to you this morning is to convey a message of optimism
 and hope and a very positive message about the future.
The fact that this building is being opened and the fact that it's
 being opened to service and provide as a headquarters for a very large
 regional business organisation is itself a demonstration of the commitment
 that many men and women in business are making to the future of Newcastle
 and the Hunter Region.
And in his introductory speech, Rob Chenery spoke of the new Newcastle
 and the new Hunter Region. And I think they are very apt and very
 relevant words and they are the words behind which a community should
 coalesce.
This part of Australia has a very rich history. This part of Australia
 is seen by the rest of Australia still in a particular stereotype.
 That is understandable and there's nothing to be ashamed of about
 that stereotype or about that past. But like so many other communities
 in Australia the world is changing and what is important for communities
 is to hold onto the good things from the past but by the same token
 change and embrace where it is necessary. And I have certainly found
 on my visits to Newcastle over the last few years that there is a
 determination on the part of the local community to do exactly that.
The economic indicators for the Hunter Region are very strong. The
 prospects for new investment and new industry are extremely positive.
 And I have found in the contact that I have had with people in business
 in this area that they are filled with optimism. They understand the
 challenges that exist, they know that there are areas of difficulty
 and hurt and loss and deprivation but above all they are looking forward
 to a more diverse future. And I think the opportunities that are here
 not only in continuing areas of manufacturing and mining but also
 in the service industries and in new areas of manufacturing endeavour
 I think those opportunities are significant.
Now, this morning is not, as Rob and David correctly said, it is not
 an occasion or a forum for a litany of announcements of this or that.
 I merely remind this audience of an announcement I made last night
 of an in-principle commitment by the Federal Government to a $2.5
 million investment in a call centre for Impulse Airlines. It will
 be subject to certain conditions but I understand from discussion
 with the company those conditions will be able to be met. And that
 will lead to the generation of some 70 to 80 jobs directly and more
 jobs indirectly.
Of itself not a huge announcement but one of a number which add to
 the diversification of the employment base and the business opportunities
 of this area. And a few days ago my colleague, John Moore the Defence
 Minister, announced that Boeing was the successful contractor for
 the early warning system. And much of the infrastructure for that
 will be centered around Williamtown. And when you add together the
 various investments that are going to be made in the aerospace industry
 in and around Williamtown they will make a very significant contribution
 to the diversification and change in the employment opportunities
 and the business base of the region.
Now, all of this is occurring against the background of a national
 economy that is performing extremely well. And it's important that
 we understand that the national economy is in good shape. We are enjoying
 the strongest growth of any industrialised nation in the world. We
 have inflation and interest rates that are at a 30 year low. Nationally,
 we have had strong employment growth with an unemployment rate nationally
 which is lower than it's been for 10 years. We have very high levels
 of business investment and lamb notwithstanding we have even increased
 our exports to the United States - but I emphasise lamb notwithstanding.
So it is, generally speaking, a very positive picture. And it's a
 picture that ought to fill Australians as a whole with a great deal
 of sense of optimism. We were able to stare down the worst Asian economic
 downturn in 30 or 40 years. And in all the visits that I have paid
 to the city of New York, which is the financial capital of the world,
 in the various positions I have occupied, the visit I paid last week
 found me receiving more than on any other occasion a universal acceptance
 that Australia was doing well. And a universal belief that the economic
 policies that were being followed at the present time were delivering
 results that were very positive.
Now, I mention all of those things not in any kind of triumphal sense
 but I think it's important to be realistic. It's important to recognise
 difficulty where it exists but it's also important not to be so overwhelmed
 with the negative side of things that you lose sight of the positive.
 And there's a very good national story to be told and there's an increasingly
 good regional story to be told in Newcastle and the Hunter. And it's
 important that people in this room tell it. It's important that I
 tell it. But it's also important that we understand that there are
 fellow Australians in this community who are suffering hurt and alienation.
 And I understand that and I have just come from a discussion with
 the Prime Minister's Taskforce on Newcastle that I established a couple
 of years ago that is jointly chaired by Rob Chenery and Kevin Maher
 of the Australian Workers' Union. And that Taskforce has kept in regular
 touch with me. We discussed this morning a number of proposals relating
 to improved access to employment support services after the redundancies
 take place at BHP in September.
So hand-in-hand with recognising and extolling and drawing attention
 to the employment opportunities and the business opportunities that
 are growing I also recognise that there are amongst the people of
 Newcastle those and their families who are seeing things more difficult
 and are having harder times and are suffering loss that other sections
 of the community aren't. And a community that brings together the
 commitment of the Federal Government, the State Government, of the
 union movement, of the business community, of the churches and of
 philanthropic individuals. A community that can get all of those together
 in what I might call a grand social coalition to tackle community
 problems is a community that will look after difficult areas but equally
 to reach out and to build new prosperity and to build new opportunities.
And I have sought in the time that I have been Prime Minister to work
 closely with the New South Wales Government, to put aside any political
 differences, to recognise that it's important for both of us to work
 together in relation to issues that affect Newcastle. We might disagree
 on other matters but when it comes to helping people through difficult
 times it's incumbent on governments at a State and federal level to
 work together as closely as possible.
But this is a very important day for the business community of Newcastle.
 And Philip Holt, the National Director of your organisation, reminded
 me that today was the culmination of something that had started in
 1917 or 1918 and he showed me the minute book. And he said, if you
 thought you'd completed a long journey with the GST you are only just
 beginning. And I think it's a reminder of how things change or in
 a sense but how they really stay the same. And it has been, I know,
 a collaborative effort between many people that have brought the business
 elements of this community together.
But it is a special part of Australia. It has a very diverse base.
 It's history is steeped in manufacturing and mining. That is still
 part of its future but the future is broader and more diverse. And
 it's important that the rest of Australia understands that that future
 is broader and more diverse. And it's important that the rest of Australia
 understand the spirit of this part of the world. It's one that I have
 been visiting on a regular basis long before I became Prime Minister
 and one with which I am very familiar.
So I was therefore very pleased indeed to be invited to come here
 again to open these new premises. To congratulate the people of Newcastle,
 to congratulate the Business Chamber on its commitment to entrepreneurial
 activity and private enterprise which is the foundation of the prosperity
 of any community and without which prosperity is impossible. I congratulate
 the businessmen and women whatever their businesses are on the contribution
 that they are making to the community and pulling the appropriate
 cord to declare these premises duly open. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................
Well, thank you very much, Lois; to Jackie Kelly; Michael Knight,
 the Chairman of SOCOG and New South Wales' Minister responsible for
 the Games; Peter Bartels, the Chairman of the Australian Sports Commission;
 Louise Sauvage and other paralympians, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm delighted to be associated with the unveiling of the Paralympian
 Torch and to say a few words of very strong support and to express
 the very strong commitment of the National Government towards the
 Paralympics to be held in October of next year. I do so with a great
 sense of pride, of course, as Prime Minister knowing that we have
 an absolutely superb team of paralympians in Australia. Their gold
 medal tally at Atlanta was second only and our team in Sydney next
 year will be the largest and strongest ever.
The Games next year will include 4000 athletes from an anticipated
 125 nations. They will be larger than the Kuala Lumpur Commonwealth
 Games, the 1998 Soccer World Cup and the 1956 Olympic Games in Melbourne.
The Government is very strongly committed to the Games and we've already
 demonstrated that commitment by contributing a guarantee of up to
 $25 million of half the expected operating deficit and providing almost
 $5.5 million for the preparation of the Paralympic athletes and meeting
 the GST liability on Paralympic ticket sales estimated at $1.6 million.
 And I'm also very proud, indeed, to have been invited to officially
 open the Games on the 18th of October next year.
I want to join Lois in congratulating the Motor Accident Authority
 for becoming the presenting partner of the Sydney 2000 Paralympic
 Torch Relay. And I encourage other companies, particularly Olympic
 and Paralympic sponsors to also support the torch relay and, for that
 matter, the whole of the Paralympic Games.
Lois said earlier that she expected the crowds to be very large and
 to cover all age groups of the Australian community. And in that connection
 I'm very pleased to announce today that the Government will be providing
 special assistance to ensure the attendance of a large number of school
 children from all over Australia, from all over Australia, to attend
 the Games. It will mean that from all parts of the country, the way
 in which the subsidy that we are providing has been organised, it
 will be possible for, I think, up to 40,000 school children from different
 parts of Australia to benefit from that support. And my colleague,
 Jackie Kelly, will be announcing immediately after this launch, will
 be announcing particular details of that scheme that I think will
 provide the wherewithal for a very, very significant involvement as
 spectators of the schools children of Australia. And, importantly,
 it will enable all parts of the Australian community to be associated
 with this event. Because it is important both in relation to the Paralympics
 and also the Olympic Games themselves that they be events that are
 owned by and felt a source of pride for all Australians. They may
 be held in Sydney but they are Games that belong to the entire Australian
 nation and it's therefore very important to all sections of the Australian
 community. And I know that people from all around the country will
 be very, very heavily involved.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I want to, on behalf of the Federal Government,
 to encourage all Australians to very strongly support our Paralympic
 team and to support these Games. They will be, as I outlined, a major
 sporting event, second only to the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
 The size and the scope of them will exceed many major world sporting
 events that we've come to accept as a touchstone of size and scope
 in recent years. And I want all these weeks in advance, these 65 weeks
 in advance, on your behalf to wish the Australian team well, to congratulate
 them and remark upon their tremendous success to date. I want to thank
 Lois and all of those associated with the organising committee and
 the sponsors and to thank Michael Knight and SOCOG for their very
 strong support and their very strong involvement. Getting behind the
 Olympic Games and the Paralympic Games is very much a united, bipartisan
 Australian effort. They are events that will showcase Australia to
 the rest of the world. They will not only showcase our athletes, the
 two events will also showcase the magnificent lifestyle of the Australian
 people.
And it's very important as we approach these two events that any differences
 or difficulties that may have arisen in the past be put behind us,
 be dissolved and put aside in the interests of demonstrating to the
 world what a friendly, open and accommodating and, of course, highly
 competitive people Australians really are. And we can do that better
 than any group of people in the world. We can make these two events
 landmarks in the showcasing of our nation to the rest of the world
 and it's in that spirit that the Federal Government approaches these
 Games. It's in that spirit that all of us are very pleased to be associated.
 And so I encourage all Australians to join me at the Games and I now
 take pleasure in officially revealing the Sydney 2000 Paralympic Torch.
[BREAK]
I forgot to say something. I don't often forget to say something,
 I sometimes say too much. But I did forget to make it very clear in
 my speech that the Government has decided to extend the Torch Relay
 to all States and Territories. And originally there was some doubt
 about that but we've made it clear that it will go to all States and
 Territories. And Louise's parents, for example, in Perth will be able
 to cheer it on. I apologise - you won't mind the interruption.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much, Andrew; to Richard Court, the Premier of Western
 Australia; to Alan Coogan, the Chairman of Anaconda Nickel; to you
 Sadie, thank you most warmly for your very gracious welcome extended
 on behalf of your people; to my Federal colleague, Barry Haase, the
 member for Kalgoorlie; to Graham Kieres and Collin Barnett, Ministers
 in the Western Australian Government, other parliamentary colleagues,
 ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say how very pleased I am to be associated with a project that
 so evidently has brought together in a spirit of cooperation and a
 sense of purpose different elements of the Australian community. When
 I listened to what Sadie had to say in her welcome and when I listened
 to what the Managing Director had to say about the cooperation between
 the company and the Aboriginal people I thought what they were saying
 represented something of a role model to the rest of Australia as
 to the attitudes that should be taken and the path of action that
 should be pursued. It is an attitude that says we must work together.
 It's also an attitude to say that everybody in this community has
 responsibilities as well as rights. And it's an attitude that says
 that the wealth of this country should be shared and that the foundation
 of individual achievement and self fulfillment is that people should
 have a sense of dignity and self worth and a sense of economic empowerment
 and a sense of economic independence. And I think they are a very
 sound set of principles and I'm delighted that they have been practiced
 in this marvelous project.
I've met a lot of managing directors and I've been to a lot of openings
 in the 25 years that I've been in Parliament. I've been to a lot of
 mines. I've been to a lot of factories. I've been to a lot of farms.
 But I don't think I've met a more self-evidently enthusiastic and
 dedicated managing director than I've met in Andrew Forrest. I have
 the vague impression that he quite likes this venture and I have the
 vague impression that he has a genuine affection for all of those
 people who are associated with it. Because what you have gathered
 here today are everybody who's played a role. And not least of course
 you have the workforce. No enterprise, be it a mining enterprise or
 a manufacturing enterprise or any other kind of enterprise is going
 to be successful unless there's a spirit of cooperation with the workforce.
 And that is clearly the case with this project as evidenced by the
 speed with which things that normally take a long period of time have
 been achieved, the cooperation and attitude of people and the spirit
 of joint endeavor and joint commitment. And that speaks volumes not
 only for the leadership of the company but it also speaks volumes
 for those who are part of that great enterprise and most particularly
 the workforce. And I want to acknowledge the contribution of the employees
 of this joint venture for bringing it to where it is today and making
 today possible and making the future that lies before all of us possible.
We're all entitled to a short commercial on an occasion like this.
 And, of course, this opening is occurring at a time of very great
 economic strength for the whole of Australia. Australia at the moment
 is enjoying record levels of economic growth. It's enjoying the lowest
 unemployment rate for more than 10 years. It's got the lowest inflation
 rate, the lowest interest rates and probably the highest level of
 international economic respect that this country has had in more than
 30 years.
A few weeks ago I visited the United States. I wasn't terribly successful
 on lamb but I was a little more successful when I went to New York
 where, I've got to say, the knowledge of and understanding of Australia
 is a lot deeper and a lot more sensitive than it sometimes is amongst
 the politicians of Washington. And I found within the financial community
 of New York a very great respect for the strength of the Australian
 economy. Indeed in all the visits I've paid to that city over the
 last 25 years I found on this occasion a stronger connection with,
 knowledge of, and faith in the economic future of Australia than on
 any occasion. Now, that's very important because there's.a bit of
 money comes out of that city from time to time, not only into Australia
 but into other parts of the world. So I think we are witnessing, in
 general terms, a very good atmosphere for the Australian economy.
I recognise, of course, that commodity prices are not as good as they
 might be. I was in Kalgoorlie recently and people had a few things
 to say about the price of gold and I can understand some of the concerns
 and I sympathise with them and I am very cognisant of them but I set
 against them the general economic health of the country. And I want
 to congratulate the Western Australian Government under Richard Court's
 leadership for the pro-investment climate it's created so far as the
 mining industry is concerned because unless you have governments that
 are promoting investment in your industry then you're not going to
 have a good atmospheric.
Now, this is a remarkable venture. When it's up and running it will
 be the largest producer of cobalt in the world and it will be the
 third largest producer of nickel. There's a billion dollars of investment
 that have gone in to getting it started. It has an almost unrivalled
 safety record. It's going to export something in the order of $500
 million of export income when it's up and running. Now, that's not
 bad for one individual company for one joint venture. And it's a remarkable
 tribute to both of the companies that form the joint venture and it's
 a remarkable tribute to all of those people that have made this possible.
 And it really fills me with a great sense of satisfaction and pride
 as Prime Minister of Australia to be associated with something that
 is all positive about the future. We're associated with a project
 that is going to generate wealth for our people. It is going to generate
 jobs for Australians. It's going to generate export income for the
 country. It's going to provide a valuable resource not only for Australia
 but for the world community. And it's going to bring together in this
 part of Western Australia a remarkable number of talents and a remarkable
 number of skills. And in the hour or so that I looked over the plant
 it does represent an aggregation of skill and commitment that is the
 source of enormous pride to me and ought to be a source of enormous
 satisfaction to all of those associated with it.
So to you, Andrew; to you Mr Coogan, Alan, the Chairman of the company,
 to everybody else who's associated with it, I want to congratulate
 you. I want to thank you for inviting me to come here today. I'm delighted
 to be associated with such a tremendously successful, Australian venture.
 I used an expression at my party's Federal Council meeting about a
 month ago when I said that I wanted Australia to become a 'can do'
 country. I wanted it to become a country that could do things better
 and differently and more successfully than other countries could do
 it. I wanted Australia to have enough belief and self confidence in
 itself to know that it could do things sometimes differently and sometimes
 against the tide and against the trends and against the predictions
 in a way that other people didn't think were possible. I know a lot
 of people thought that this project wasn't possible and a lot of people
 were skeptical and critical and cynical and now it's been brought
 to fruition. It's a marvelous demonstration of what I had in mind
 when I used that expression. This is a great illustration of a 'can
 do' community supported by a group of 'can do' Australians. I congratulate
 you. And when I sit down and I'll then be asked to stand up again
 and formally pull away the curtain but I do have great pleasure in
 declaring this mine operation open. I congratulate all those associated
 and I wish the company every success in the years to come. Thank you.


E&amp;OE....................
Thank you very much, Richard; to Shane Stone, the Federal President
 of the Liberal Party, Ian Warner, Collin Barnett, my other Ministerial
 and Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great delight to be back again in Perth. Richard reminds me
 of the visit I paid to Exmouth earlier this year. Yesterday when I
 was flying back from the mine opening I had Barry Haase, the Liberal
 member elected in the October election last year as the member representing
 Kalgoorlie, the largest electorate of the world, and he pointed out
 to me that in the nine months that he'd been the member for Kalgoorlie
 in the National Parliament he'd found that as each month went by he
 got increasingly quizzical looks from his Federal Parliamentary colleagues,
 particularly those who represented safe Liberal electorates in Sydney
 and Melbourne. And he said, 'I found out the other day the reason
 why,' and he said, 'the reason, Prime Minister is that in the nine
 months that I've been the member for Kalgoorlie you have visited my
 electorate on three occasions.' And, in fact, I have. I went to Exmouth.
 I went to the mine opening yesterday. And I'm told I was the first
 Prime Minister for 19 years to visit Kalgoorlie only a couple of months
 ago.
I mention that because one of the things I've endeavoured to do as
 Prime Minister is to disabuse the Australian population of the idea,
 however it might linger in the hearts and minds of some Australians,
 that the centre of the world is that triangle of Canberra, Sydney
 and Melbourne. And although I was born at one of the points of that
 triangle I've tried very hard in the years that I've been Prime Minister
 and the other jobs I've held to maintain very regular contact with
 all parts of the country. And today, therefore, is not in any sense
 a novel experience to address a business gathering in Perth. I've
 done so on a number of occasions in a number of capacities over the
 last 25 years. I'd have to say to you, though, that I can't remember
 a time when I've addressed a business gathering here in Perth when
 I could speak more unqualifiedly, If I can put it that way, about
 the generic overall strength of the Australian economy.
As you know, a couple of weeks ago I visited Japan and the United
 States. I didn't get very far on lamb and I was talking to John Rothwell
 a moment ago and I told him I didn't get very far on the Jones Act.
 The Jones Act is that little piece of perfidious American legislation
 that says that unless it's an American based company and the keel
 is laid in the United States you can't sell a ship into that country
 to fly American waters or the American coast. But one thing I did
 come away from America with and particularly from New York was without
 doubt the most positive view that I have encountered in the financial
 capital of the world about the general outlook for the Australian
 economy.
I've been there 20 years ago as Treasurer. I've been there two years
 ago as Prime Minister. I've been there on other occasions in other
 capacities. But on this occasion I was able to tell a story and be
 believed and hear good reports about the Australian economy in a way
 that I hadn't experienced in the past. And one of the interesting
 things about a political leader from Australia visiting the United
 States is that there is often a sharp difference in the perception
 of our country in financial centres like New York than there is in
 Washington. Because sadly it remains the case that many of the senior
 political figures in the United States have never visited Australia.
When I was in Washington I saw the Senate Majority Leader who's the
 leader of the Republican Party. I saw the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives who's also the senior ranking republican in the House
 of Representatives. And I spoke to the man who I think could possibly
 be the next President of the United States, the son of the former
 President, George Bush Jnr, and none of those three gentlemen have
 ever visited Australia. Yet when you go to New York and you talk to
 the leaders of the financial community so many of them who have banking
 and other interests in Australia, they have an intimate knowledge
 of our country and they have an understanding of its great strengths.
 And one of the many things I was able to tell them was that not only
 did Australia get an enormous economic benefit from being able to
 stare down the worst of the Asian economic downturn. But more importantly
 than that the psychological gain to our country from knowing that
 we were strong enough and good enough to work our way through the
 worst downturn our part of the world has had since World War II has
 given to the Australian community, not only to the business community
 but to the Australian community generally, a belief in its own capacity
 to do things that I don't think we've had at any time since I've been
 in public life. And it's that belief in ourselves.
In the past we've talked confidently, we've felt confident domestically,
 but in the minds of some there's always been a bit of a doubt as to
 whether when the crunch really comes this country is efficient enough
 and competitive enough and good enough to survive and beat the rest
 of the world in enough areas to do well economically. And I think
 any lingering doubts that any men and women in Australia may have
 had about that have been removed in a very significant way by what's
 happened over the last year. Because over the last year we have done
 something that a lot of people in this room, I certainly would be
 one of them, didn't think was feasible and achievable a year ago.
 And that is to emerge from the Asian economic downturn stronger and
 better than ever. I think the view of many, say in July or August
 of last year, would have been, well, gee we've done well. We've eliminated
 that budget deficit. We've got fairly strong growth. We've reformed
 our industrial relations system. We've done a number of very good
 things. We've got our interest rates down. We've got a good investment
 climate. But sooner or later and probably sooner, that is by the end
 of 1998, the Asian economic downturn will catch up with us and everything
 will slow down and the economy will go into some kind of relatively
 comatose state. Now, that didn't happen. And I think the realisation
 that it didn't happen came to most Australians around Christmas and
 in the early months of this year. And we began to see emerging a picture
 of where because of a number of reforms that have been undertaken
 in the Australian economy and because of very skilful management of
 our exchange rate by the Reserve Bank we have been able to work our
 way through the Asian economic downturn. And the secret of that, ladies
 and gentlemen, was that the Australian economy has now become a lot
 more flexible and competitive and resilient than what it was in the
 past.
Although we've had our problems with the Americans on lamb - and I
 make no apologies at all for the continued criticism we offer the
 Clinton Administration regarding that - one of the interesting statistics,
 and I try not to burden luncheons with too many statistics, about
 the last year or so is that in 1998 we increased our exports to the
 United States by 34 per cent. And that is an illustration of the way
 in which, as Asia collapsed, we were able to shift the export destinations
 of a lot of our products. And we were able to do that because we had
 a flexible exchange rate. We were able to do that because we had created
 circumstances of competition and flexibility in our community, particularly
 our business community, that we hadn't had in the past. And when you
 add together all of the reforms that have been undertaken, the fact
 that we were able to get rid of that budget deficit of $10.5 billion.
 We were able to reform our industrial relations system far more effectively
 than many people believed so or gave us credit for at the time, particularly
 in 1996. We were able to see the lowest inflation rate in 30 years,
 the lowest interest rates in 30 years. All of those things combined.
 So I am able to talk without fear of contradiction on the facts about
 a very strong and optimistic business climate and economic outlook.
 But in doing that I am very conscious that it is not uniformly a good
 story. It is nationally a good story. The generic strength of the
 Australian economy is greater and deeper now than I think it has been
 for any time in the last 30 years.
And I do know, for example, that the mining industry, which is very
 important to Western Australia, is suffering very badly from low commodity
 prices. I'm particularly conscious, not only but including as a result
 of my visit to Kalgoorlie, of the difficulties faced by the mining
 industry. And I know how much the economy of this State depends upon
 the strength and the resilience of the resource sector. I'm very aware
 of the difficulty in many of the rural and regional areas of Australia.
 I know that rural property continues to be a potential breeding ground
 for radical and irresponsible political philosophies. We saw that
 last year. We have seen a temporary abatement of the One Nation phenomenon
 but we must keep the possibility of that in mind in all of our policy-making
 decisions.
But overall, I'm able to paint an optimistic picture. I'm able to
 report on the successful passage of the essentials of the tax reform
 legislation. Now, I don't disguise my disappointment that we weren't
 able to get 100 per cent of what we put up. Of course it would have
 been better if the original package with the GST applying uniformly
 to everything had been passed. But we lost our opportunity of doing
 that when Senator Harradine said that he wouldn't support our legislation.
 And we either faced the prospect of an unproductive election exercise
 with no guarantee that even if we won the election we would have the
 numbers at a joint sitting to pass the blocked legislation or we settled
 for a compromise. The compromise like all compromises was not perfect
 but to have delivered 85 per cent of what we wanted. It delivered
 intact the taxation cuts to middle Australia that will mean 80 per
 cent of Australian taxpayers will have a marginal rate of not higher
 than 30 per cent after the 1st of July next year. With
 some changes it has delivered the long-term reforms for Commonwealth/State
 financial relations. It removes, and you saw the beginnings of it
 yesterday, it will remove the wholesale sales tax and it will introduce
 with more exemptions than we wanted, but nonetheless it is a huge
 reform, it will see the introduction of a broad based goods and services
 tax on the 1st of July next year. It will provide, I believe,
 the biggest overhaul to Australia's taxation system that we have seen
 since World War II.
So that, of course, is the first installment although by far the biggest
 installment of taxation reform. The next chapter of taxation reform
 is yet to receive in the course of the next week the final report
 of John Ralph's Committee. I know he was here in Perth recently and
 spoke to a number of you. I want to publicly record my gratitude to
 him for the tremendous job that he's done. He's brought to that review
 private sector sensitivities and an understanding of what is needed
 in business tax.
He had a long experience in the mining industry. He is a respected
 company director of a wide range of activities in his post Rio Tinto
 days. And he has an understanding of the challenges of the political
 process. And along with Bob Joss, the recently retired Chief Executive
 of Westpac, and Rick Allert of the Southport Corporation, they represent
 a very significant trio who have brought a great deal of business
 understanding.
Now, I think all of us agree that there are a couple of goals we have
 in common for business tax reform. We want change that will make Australia
 more competitive. In a globalised world economy the name of the game
 on all occasions is to make this country as competitive as possible.
 And when it comes to attracting investment it means that as far as
 possible the decision as to whether an American investor, because
 that is still a major source of capital for this country, whether
 the choice for an American investor between investing in the United
 States and investing in Australia is as neutral as possible.
You are all aware that one of the issues that will need to be addressed
 is the question of whether we opt for some lower general company tax
 rate paid for in part by the removal of existing taxation concessions
 that are of particular benefit to some companies but of less benefit
 to others.
Now, I am aware of the arguments. I've had them put to me very strongly
 and I will in the weeks ahead. And I can't at this stage predict what
 our final decision on that will be. I do make some fairly obvious
 points that people should wait until the report is in and the full
 ramifications and the full detail of any recommendations made in that
 area are in the possession of the Government and in the possession
 of the community. But I can assure you that we aren't likely going
 to embrace changes in that area that are going to cause unfair dislocation.
 Equally, I want to see us have as attractive a general company tax
 rate as possible because it goes to the increasing competitiveness
 of the Australian economy.
And in this global world in which we all now live it's not any good
 in two years time my saying that gee back in 1999 we were able to
 boast that we stared down the Asian economic downturn if in two years
 time some of the competitiveness we have now we have lost or that
 our competitors have come from behind and moved ahead of us. Surviving
 and doing well in today's economy is like a race that never finishes
 and you have to always keep in front of the bloke who's there beside
 you. And it's no good looking at it historically. It's no good saying,
 look, we are doing better now than we were doing 10 or 20 years ago,
 it's a question of how we are competing against the rest of the world
 now. And we have no option but to accept that we are part of a global
 economy and that, of course, has implications not only for the general
 level of company tax it also has implications for capital gains tax.
I think there's a general feeling in the Australian community that
 some changes to our existing capital gains tax regime are desirable.
 I have had a lot of submissions, I have got a lot of advice and there'll
 be a lot of detail in the report that Ralph delivers. But I think
 at this stage all I can usefully say is that it wouldn't be a particularly
 bold or reckless prediction to say that the capital gains tax is unlikely
 to remain in precisely the form that it is at present. I think it's
 fair to say that changes that make it more attractive for people to
 invest in higher risk ventures, changes that will underpin the capacity
 of this country to convert its inventive capacity to commercial advantage
 are the sort of changes that the Government will be looking at.
Australia has a long and meritorious reputation for inventive discoveries.
 For a nation of only just under 19 million people we have been very
 inventive indeed. We have given to the world some remarkable ideas.
 In a sense we have thought and punched above our weight in the world
 so far as inventions are concerned. Sometimes we have been very bad
 at turning those inventions to commercial advantage. And one of the
 reasons could easily be, along with others, the inadequacies of our
 existing taxation system.
Now, there are many other issues that arise out of business taxation.
 Our goal is to retain the competitive edge we now have. If we retain
 our competitive edge as a nation, if we run a low inflation, low interest
 rate, flexible economy. Part of that is to make sure that our taxation
 settings are right. Part of it is also to press ahead with further
 reforms to the industrial relations system.
That is another area where the task of reform is never finished. And
 two-and-a-half years ago we had people predicting that if a coalition
 government were elected federally it would usher in a new era of industrial
 disputation. It may not have escaped the notice of many people in
 this room but last year, 1998, we had the lowest level of industrial
 disputes for 86 years.
We have, in fact, seen in Australia over the last few years - this
 has been aided by legislation at a State level as well as at a federal
 level - we have presided over a quiet industrial revolution. We have
 seen a gradual the accelerating change in attitudes in the workplace.
 We have seen a greater concentration on workplace agreements. I am
 increasingly told of the way in which in many areas of the mining
 industry the negative implications of union membership have disappeared.
 Now, that doesn't mean that there is no place for the trade union
 movement in the Australian industrial relations scene, of course there
 is. And that has never been our objective to remove unionism from
 the industrial relations scene. But it has been our objective to elevate
 the making of agreements at workplace levels between employers and
 employees. And as Australia has increasingly done that so it is that
 the productivity of our workforce has risen. But one of the reasons
 why I can talk so confidently about the strength of the Australian
 economy is that average wage and salary earners over the last few
 years have enjoyed very significant increases in their real income.
 The rate of wage increases has run well ahead of the rate of inflation.
 But that has not created an economic problem because the productivity
 of our workforce has risen by a significantly higher rate than was
 the case five or 10 years earlier.
And when you add those real wage increases to the fact that the average
 wage and salary earner in this country paying off a mortgage on the
 family home is paying about $320 a month less - $320 a month less
 - on the family mortgage. You have a recipe for a workforce whose
 living standards now are significantly ahead of what they have been
 for a long time.
But as all of you know the responsibility of a national government
 and the responsibility of a prime minister is not just about economic
 issues important though they are particularly to the business community.
 But there are other challenges of a social character which are very
 important and one of the things that I have tried to develop as important
 to the Government that I lead is this notion of a social coalition.
 The idea that the Government acting alone can't achieve all of the
 community's goals, the idea that people left without any kind of support
 or activity by the Government can't achieve their objectives. And
 from that comes the idea that if we can marshal the collective resources
 of the Government, the business community, individuals and the more
 forward looking elements of the welfare sector in this country we
 can deal more effectively with many of the social problems that we
 face. And this is the philosophy that we try to bring to bear in things
 like tackling the problem of drugs. And over the last couple of years
 the Federal Government has committed itself to additional expenditure
 of $500 million to try and reduce the devastating impact of drugs
 on the Australian community. It's not an easy problem. I don't pretend
 to have all of the answers to it, nobody has. And I don't pretend
 that any one prescription is the right answer. And I think we can
 find in the debate the threads that bring us to agreement in a number
 of areas. We need to educate young people against the menace of drugs.
 We need to provide resources to our law enforcement agencies to capture
 and jail as many of the criminal peddlers in drugs as we can. And,
 very importantly, we need to provide rehabilitation and support to
 those who've been addicted and are trying to break the habit. And
 amongst the things that I've done here in Perth was something I did
 this morning in going to Cyrenian House just on the outskirts to re-name
 that magnificent centre the Rick Hammersley Centre in memory of somebody
 who made a great contribution to fighting the drug problem. And that's
 a magnificent example of the coalition of which I speak. It has great
 support from the State government. Rhonda Parker, the Minister responsible
 was there. It had great support from the business community. It had
 support from the Federal Government. But very importantly I spent
 20 minutes or so talking to some of the people who were there, away
 from the glare of the media and talking to them and getting their
 reaction and how they said that it was a facility that gave them,
 for the first time, a sense of security. These are people who decided
 to do something to break the habit. And they decided to go there as
 a residential facility and I said, what's good about it. And they
 said what's good about is that it gives us a sense of support and
 safety and security while we grapple with trying to beat this devastating
 habit. And those things are important and policy in those areas are
 tremendously important to any government, be it a national government
 or a State government. And that kind of facility is a great example
 of how governments and the business community and the welfare sector
 and individuals working together to achieve community goals can realise
 great things.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you very much for the support
 you show by coming along to this lunch. I can say on behalf of the
 Federal Government that although we have achieved a lot over the last
 three-and-a-quarter years that we are in no sense complacent. The
 first party meeting I had after the victory in 1996 I warned my colleagues
 about any sense of complacency. And over the last three-and-a-quarter
 years we've, like any other government, we've had our ups and downs.
 But we have kept our objective very clear and that is, at an economic
 level, to make this country a world class competitor in a globalised
 economy. And whether we like it or not we are a globalised world economy.
 We can't change that. We either become a successful part of it or
 we become an economic irrelevance. And that is the thing that has
 guided us in getting the budget back into surplus a year ahead of
 time. That guided us when we reformed the industrial relations system.
 It guides us in our plans to privatise organisations like Telstra.
 It guides us in our plans to maintain the rigor of competition policy
 and it most certainly guides us in our plans to reform the Australian
 taxation system. And I would like to be able to come back here in
 a few months time after we've negotiated changes to Australia's business
 taxation system through the Parliament, and that will be no easy task,
 I'd like to come back here in a few months time and be able to report
 to this gathering and a similar gathering here in Perth that we have
 been able to bring about a major transformation in the Australian
 business taxation system. So that once again the test and the yardstick
 of competitiveness in the globalised economy can be applied in a very,
 very positive manner.
Can I finally thank the Liberal Party organisation here in Western
 Australia which is responsible for organising today's lunch, can I
 thank you for the support that you've given me over the last year
 as Prime Minister and the support that you and your colleagues continue
 to give us in our great endeavour to maintain the competitiveness
 and the strength of the Australian economy, the like of which I don't
 think we've seen for more than three decades. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................
Thank you very much Mr Arthur Toon, to Mrs Georgina Hammersley, Mr
 John Wyndham, to Rhonda Parker, Brian Watters, the Chairman of the
 Prime Minister's Taskforce on Drugs, other distinguished guests, ladies
 and gentlemen.
I feel it a particular honour to be here this morning to really do
 two things. To rename this complex the Rick Hammersley Centre and
 also to launch the Saranna Women's Project and the Indigenous Peoples
 Programme which have been granted $528,000 in funding under the Government's
 Tough on Drugs programme and both of which are based here.
It is true, as Arthur Toon said in his words of introduction, that
 public responses at both the Government and a community level to the
 problem of illicit drugs has changed enormously over the last 20 years.
 It's one of those issues that unless you had a great deal of patience
 and application would drive the public policy maker completely mad
 because so much of the media and other focus is on the high profile
 differences of emphasis rather than on those areas where most people
 who have a conscientious commitment to trying to reduce the damage
 done by illicit drugs and to prevent young people starting to use
 those drugs in the first place that the points of agreement far outweigh
 the points of disagreement.
Over the last two years it is true that the Federal Government and
 I in particular have taken a very special interest. We have done so
 because we understand it's a huge community problem. That it does
 cause immense pain and suffering and visit tragedy on many Australian
 families. What we are trying to do is to tackle it at three levels.
 We are trying first and foremost to recognise that prevention is always
 better than cure. That if you can persuade young people of the ill-wisdom
 and the danger of starting drug taking in the first place then you
 can prevent a great deal of tragedy.
And I am frequently moved to say that it always surprises me a little
 bit when living in an age where tobacco smoking has grown from being
 something that was socially acceptable, when I was 21 or 25 and you
 all know just about what age I turned last weekend, that it's gone
 from being socially acceptable to being something that is socially
 unacceptable. And that cigarette smokers have now become, and I abandoned
 the terrible habit 20 years ago myself, have become almost social
 outcasts yet some of the people who are the most zealous advocates
 of a no smoking policy find themselves in disagreement with some of
 us who adopt very, very strong attitudes towards anything other than
 a completely intolerant approach to the use of illicit drugs.
So the first responsibility is to educate young people about the dangers
 of starting. The second area of responsibility, not necessarily less
 important, is to make certain that the law enforcement authorities
 of Australia have enough resources at their disposal to tackle people
 who peddle death and human misery and peddle drugs.
And the third area of responsibility, and this is where this wonderful
 establishment Cyrenian House comes into play, the third area of responsibility
 is to provide help and assistance for people who want to stop using
 illicit drugs and want to rehabilitate themselves and to restore their
 health and to rebuild their lives.
[Inaudible] of all of the areas the third one over the years has probably
 been more neglected than the other two because there was always, I
 guess, a strong body of opinion in the community that you shouldn't
 start using illicit drugs. And there was always a community detestation
 of the criminals who are involved in peddling drugs to people in our
 community. But over the years the facilities for rehabilitation have
 not been adequate and it is one of the areas where more resources
 have been needed for a long time. And it's been an emphasis of our
 programme. And over the last two years the Federal Government has
 committed about $500 million to its Tough on Drugs strategy. And we
 have given extra support in those three areas.
Unlike what some of our critics say, we haven't put all of the money
 into law enforcement although we have put a lot more into law enforcement.
 We have also put a lot of resources in education and I am particularly
 pleased to say that we have put a lot of resources into rehabilitation.
 Recently at a meeting I had with the Premiers and Chief Ministers
 of the States and Territories we decided on a programme of what we
 call adopting a diversion strategy whereby within effect giving to
 people who are having their first contact with the criminal justice
 system as a result of illicit drug use. We are giving them the option
 of undergoing treatment rather than being caught up in the criminal
 justice system. It's their choice as to whether they get caught up
 or not but they do have the option and the option is, I think, in
 most cases one that's going to appeal to them and appeal to the community.
 And we are getting a lot of cooperation from the State governments
 and the consultations that are taking place between the Federal Government
 which is going to provide a lot more money to fund rehabilitation
 programmes. And the State authorities which, of course, are responsible
 for the criminal justice system, the cooperation so far has been terrific.
And that's the background from which we come and that is why I have
 a special interest in being here today because today we are honouring
 the contribution of the late Rick Hammersley to this centre. And his
 contribution, of course, was related to the tragic loss of a child
 more than 20 years ago and he from that time on he devoted his time
 and his energy and his great skill and his great sense of community
 responsibility to providing an assistance mechanism, a support mechanism.
 His own experience had been that he had to go to Sydney to obtain
 treatment for his child and he recognised the paucity of resources
 and facilities here in Western Australia that he quite correctly resolved
 to try and do something about it. And his story and the story of this
 centre is a magnificent reminder of the value of what I describe as
 the social coalition in our community. And that is where you get people
 working together, each with their own expertise, providing an input
 to achieve a community goal. In building this centre he got a great
 deal of support from various organisations. He got support from Rotary,
 he got support, I understand, from the Lotteries Commission, he got
 support from different sporting organisations, from various community
 organisations, he got support from individuals who were concerned
 and, of course, he got, and this centre has received very generous
 support from the Western Australian Government I think in the order
 of at least $500,000 or $600,000 a year to keep this centre going.
So it is a great example of how somebody turned and converted an immense
 personal tragedy of his own and his family's to a noble community
 purpose. He saw a need in the community and he set about doing something
 about it. And as a result you have a centre here which I am delighted
 to have the privilege of re-naming the Rick Hammersley Centre today,
 which has provided a source of hope and encouragement to a large number
 of people who are dealing with a drug problem. Its facilities, which
 I'm going to have an opportunity of having a look at after this opening
 ceremony has completed, are very high quality facilities. And they
 do provide residential facilities for something in the order of 200
 people and that is a very large number by any measure. And this is
 exactly the sort of facility that we should be encouraging. It provides
 people with some hope for the future. It recognises that different
 personalities grapple with a personal and emotional challenge and
 a physical addiction in different ways. Some find it harder than others.
 Some find it easier than others. Some people need different measures
 of support and different levels of assistance than others. And the
 challenge for all of us, without in any way weakening our resolve
 to educate the young from the very early years against the evil of
 drug taking, we do have a particular responsibility to provide help
 for those who want to get off it.
And I've taken part in a lot of media interviews on this issue, particularly
 over the last year where it's been something very much in the public
 eye and in the news. But I don't think I've had more unsettling, distressing
 phone calls than I've had from people in different parts of Australia
 who ring in to talkback radio stations and say, I have a daughter
 who's got a drug problem and she wants to do something about it and
 I've got to wait two or three weeks before I can get some kind of
 treatment for her. The reality is, and I'm not a doctor, I'm not a
 clinical psychologist, I'm just another human being trying to understand
 the sense of despair and distress that people have. I would imagine
 that if you have a drug addiction and you've finally resolved in your
 own mind and heart that you want to do something about it, it's pretty
 important that you get help straight away and that you're not told
 that there isn't any treatment facility available for two or three
 weeks. Now, that's a gap that has to be filled. It's a need that has
 to be met. And Cyrenian House, soon to be re-named the Rick Hammersley
 Centre, is providing that kind of assistance. And it's the responsibility
 of governments at all levels on both sides of politics without the
 encumbrance and burden of political point scoring to do something
 about this immense social problem.
We do have a capacity in Australia to find an Australian solution
 to the particular dimension of a problem in our society. We are not
 like any other country, although we have similar experiences, each
 country has its own particular experience and it has its own particular
 responses and its own particular challenges.
So can I say to all of you that I'm especially privileged to be here
 today. I know that Mrs Georgina Hammersley, Rick's widow, and a number
 of members of their family are also present. I do want, on behalf
 of the Federal Government and, I believe, on behalf of the entire
 community, to pay tribute to the work that he did, to thank him for
 what he did for this community, to thank him for the humanitarian
 gesture involved in 20 years of work to tackle a dreadful scourge
 within our community. Our society is the better for what he contributed
 and it is a nobler and better place as a result of the contribution
 that he made. And for that reason, in particular, I am delighted -
 if I can be directed towards what I have to pull - I am delighted
 to re-name this facility, I re-name it the Rick Hammersley Centre.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................
Well, thank you very much, Richard. This is an historic home in the
 Australian political panthenon. It, I guess, in time will take its
 place beside that famous cottage in Bathurst which, of course, was
 the home in which Ben Chifley grew up. And in time perhaps, as we
 come to treasure our history a little more than we did in earlier
 decades, other homes will also take their place alongside this. But
 this is very much a part of John Curtin's background. It reflects
 the world in which he grew up. It was a home that, I gather from what
 his grandchildren have told me, he played a very large part in building
 including the construction even of some of the furniture.
And it is important that we honour our history. He led Australia at
 a time when our country was under its greatest security threat ever.
 And whatever people's politics are it has to be said resolutely that
 he led the country with very great courage and distinction. And it's
 only right and proper that the Federal Government of today honour
 John Curtin's contribution. I'm delighted that his grandchildren are
 with us and I thank them for giving the Western Australian Government
 and the Federal Government the opportunity for this. And to the Vice
 Chancellor of the Curtin University, who's also with us, which of
 course is very deeply involved in remembering Curtin's contribution
 to Australia, it will be a further extension of all of that. Our history
 is very important to us and as we approach the Centenary of Federation
 we're getting a lot more sensitive towards and conscious of our history.
 And today is just a small but important contribution to commemorating
 a man who gave a great deal to Australia and is well loved and remembered
 by millions of Australians.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................
Well, thank you very much, David; to Alistair Stewart; to my other
 Parliamentary colleagues, Stewart MacArthur, Patrick Secker, Judy
 Troeth, Dennis Napthine and Roger Hallam and all the other distinguished
 guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is the first Sheepvention I've ever opened in my life and I intend
 to enjoy myself today. It's the first occasion I've been to the electorate
 of Wannon, to the city of Hamilton, since being Prime Minister. But
 I'm not unfamiliar with this part of the world. I've been here on
 numerous occasions in other capacities. But I'm particularly delighted
 to be here today to not only open this, the Sheepvention, but as Prime
 Minister to honour the contribution that the wool industry has made
 to the wealth and prosperity of Australia from the foundation of the
 nation, to say, indeed, hear! hear!
To say one or two things about the sort of general state of the Australian
 economy, generally speaking, the Australian economy's in damn good
 shape. The Australian economy's as strong as it's been for the last
 25 or 30 years. We have low interest rates, low inflation. We've got
 rid of that wretched budget deficit we inherited three years ago.
 And we are seen around the world as a very strong economy. But having
 said that, I recognise that your own industry faces very big challenges.
 I know that the demand for wool around the world is nowhere near as
 great as it was. And I know that your industry faces the need, like
 so many other industries, to grapple with that situation, to maintain
 its competitiveness. And I know that the industry at the present time
 is responding, and I hope it does in a very conscientious way, to
 the recommendations of the Wool Taskforce. And I know that the industry
 has had to grapple with a lot of changes that have been imposed upon
 it by world markets and by climatic conditions and by the general
 state of the world economy. And in talking about the overall strength
 of our economy I do remain very sensitive to the particular problems
 of rural Australia and the particular challenges that face the wool
 industry of our country.
I want to take this opportunity - because it is a very significant
 gathering of rural Australia in a very special part of Australia which
 has contributed so much not only to the prosperity of the wool industry
 but to the prosperity of rural Australia - I want to take the opportunity
 of saying to this audience and through you to all the other rural
 people of Australia and to the Australian bush that just as we looked
 after the interests of the bush in relation to the GST and preserving
 the benefits of cheaper fuel that were promised when we brought the
 package down in September of 1998, I want to assure you in the decisions
 that the Government take in relation to reforming the business taxation
 system of our country we are not going to do anything that is going
 to damage the interests of the Australian bush. We're not going to
 do anything in relation to those reforms that will lessen the competitive
 position that you have and lessen the competitive position of Australian
 farmers and Australian primary producers. Because one of the distinguishing
 characteristics of Australian farmers and one of the things that has
 made so many of us so absolutely hopping mad about the American decision
 on lamb exports from Australia is that we have an industry in this
 country, we have a farm sector in this country, that does not operate
 with the protection and the support and the subsidies and the handouts
 that are given by the Americans, the Japanese and the Europeans to
 their farmers.
What Australian farmers win around the world they win by dint of their
 own competitiveness and their own expertise. And I am very, as Prime
 Minister, I'm very sensitive towards that. I'm very understanding
 of that. And, of course, it goes without saying, the Government remains
 determined to do all it can through the relief of the cost of the
 levy paid by lamb producers and other industry assistance, it remains
 determined to do all it can to ensure that the unfair, unreasonable
 anti free trade decision taken by the American administration in relation
 to lamb exports does not rob the lamb exporters of Australia of any
 of the market they have won over the last year or two and mitigates
 as much as we possibly can the impact of that decision on growth of
 further markets in the United States in the interests of Australian
 lamb producers.
I don't think any audience in Australia would have a better appreciation
 than this audience of the importance of winning markets overseas.
 Some Australians talk rather foolishly of how it is important that
 we erect protective barriers around this country as if in some way
 we could close our eyes to the rest of the world. No country can do
 that. It's in the interests of Australian primary producers as much,
 if not more, than any other section of the Australian community to
 see world markets expand and world markets opened up. And it is for
 that reason in the interests of our country that we pursue that sort
 of approach. But in order to provide our local producers with a proper
 base we need good economic conditions in this country. And that is
 why I'm very pleased to say that over the last two or three years
 we have been able to get interest rates down. I can remember for 10
 or 15 years before that when I went around the bush and I said to
 people, 'what is the thing that hurts you most?' And invariably the
 answer would come back, firstly, high interest rates and, secondly,
 high fuel prices. Now, we've been able, over the last few years, to
 bring interest rates down. They're not as low as we'd like them to
 be but they're a lot lower now than what they were 10 or 15 years
 ago. And through the taxation package we're going to reduce quite
 dramatically the cost of diesel and the cost of fuel generally throughout
 Australia. And that, along with the abolition of the wholesale sales
 taxes and many other indirect taxes, that will provide an enormous
 boost to the export industry of this country because it will reduce
 your cost structure. And if your cost structure comes down, your competitive
 position gets better.
But, ladies and gentlemen, that is a long enough speech at a Sheepvention
 or, indeed, any gathering. Can I say to you as somebody who was raised
 in a suburb of Sydney, as somebody who has spent most of his life
 living in the cities of Australia, that I've always had a tremendous
 affection for the people of the Australian bush. I do appreciate that
 you have been the backbone of our country. I do acknowledge the contribution
 of the wool industry to the wealth and the stability and the prosperity
 of Australia. I acknowledge the ongoing contributing of the export
 income that is earned for this country by Australia's primary producers.
 I know what difficult times you've been through. I know how hard it
 is for so many of you now. And I know how rotten it is when you work
 your heart out and you're locked out of a world market by the selfish
 trading policy of larger countries and larger groupings of countries
 like the United States and the European Union. I am a passionate advocate
 of our security alliance with the United States. I admire a great
 deal about that country but I despise on occasions the hypocritical
 trading policy that that country adopts which punish Australian farmers
 and punish Australian primary producers. And I want you to know the
 depth of our feeling on that and I want you to understand that we
 recognise the continuing difficulty you have. We are providing you
 with a stronger and better and more benign general economic climate
 than this country has had for many years. And I can assure you that
 in future decisions we take on the Australian taxation system we will
 not harm the interests of the Australian bush. We will not harm the
 interests of the Australian wool industry. And, of course, I have
 great pleasure in declaring this Sheepvention open for business. Thank
 you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Good evening. We all know that Australia's farmers are just about
 the most efficient and productive in the world - and don't require
 subsidies to compete overseas. That's why all Australians have every
 right to be deeply angered at the US decision to slap heavy tariffs
 on our lamb exports into America.
It has been the can-do attitude of Australian farmers that has created
 a market for Australian lamb in the United States without any government
 subsidies. When a group of us work hard enough and smart enough to
 take on the strongest country in the world only to be punished for
 our success, my Government will respond with all means at its disposal.
I expressed our anger and disappointment personally to President Clinton.
 I told him that there is no justice in his decision. Our trading partners
 can't preach about opening up other markets when they are slamming
 the door on Australian lamb producers. I told the President that this
 decision helps no one. Consumers in the US will pay higher prices.
 American lamb producers will be just as inefficient and Australian
 farmers will be slugged for producing a better product.
The Government will stand by Australian lamb producers. We will cut
 their costs by effectively cutting in half the transaction levy now
 applying to lamb sold in Australia. This arrangement will be for two
 years.
We will also establish a Lamb Industry Development Programme worth
 up to $3 million per year. This programme will provide grants for
 developing infrastructure, building demand for lamb and further boosting
 industry productivity and innovation.
On top of this we will take this issue up with the international trade
 umpire, the World Trade Organisation.
The Government will not let Australia's farmers down. We will continue
 to argue for access to international markets so that the best efforts
 and cleverness of Australian farmers can be turned to our national
 advantage. Good night.
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE....................
Well, thank you very much, Mr Deputy Mayor, Des Brown; to David and
 Penny Hawker, Joy Howley, the President of Victorian Division; to
 my numerous Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues and fellow
 Liberals.
I am delighted to have the opportunity to say a few words very directly
 to Liberal Party activists and supporters here in the electorate of
 Wannon but can I first of all express to you, David and Penny, and
 through you to the people of the area, to the people of Wannon, to
 the people of the western district of Victoria, my gratitude for the
 very warm reception I received this morning.
There are many ways in Australian politics of reaching people. And
 one very special way, of course, is to go to country shows. I thought
 what I experienced this morning was a country show writ very large,
 with a very, very special character. And I can't remember feeling
 the ambience of being in the bush, of being in rural Australia and
 addressing such a large gathering of people involved in such an important
 rural industry. I can't remember having experienced quite the ambience
 that I did this morning because the wool industry is very much part
 of the history of our country. The wool industry is very much part
 of the life and the history of this part of Australia. And I know
 that the industry has gone through enormous ups and downs in the years
 that I've followed it. And it's going through some hard times at the
 moment but like all industries there are some strong areas and some
 not so strong areas. There are some efficient areas and not so efficient
 areas and there are some opportunities for people that maybe aren't
 available to others.
One of the very good things at the present time for the wool industry,
 indeed, for all primary industry around Australia is that I can say
 without fear of much contradiction that the generic economic conditions
 we have at the moment are as good as they have been for more than
 three decades. Indeed, in many ways our economy now is stronger than
 what it was in the late 1960s. It's more open and competitive. It's
 less protected. It's not constructed on an artificial basis which
 is subject to likely change in the future. We do have the lowest interest
 rates for 30 years, the lowest inflation rate. We have, I'm very proud
 to say, the lowest Federal Government, or government debt to GDP ratio
 of any of the 24 OECD countries. And that is very important because
 farmers know more than most in the community the burden that is carried
 if you have too much debt. And one of the many complaints I used to
 receive as I went around the bush in the years that we were in Opposition
 - and those years seemed to go on forever, they were 13 years of them,
 13 years too many - people complained about not only the interest
 rate they had to pay on their own debt but they also complained about
 the readiness of governments to run up debt. And, of course, the former
 government here in Victoria was pretty good at running up debt. And
 one of the challenges of the Kennett Government when it was elected
 in 1992 was to bring about a reduction of that debt and it's done
 it quite magnificently. And, equally, our predecessors were the world's
 worst at running up debt and we inherited a Commonwealth Government
 debt of about $95 billion when we were elected.
And I'm very pleased to say that if we can get the other 50 per cent
 of Telstra sold, by the year 2002 we could be completely free of net
 Commonwealth debt. Now, that would be an astonishingly sound basis
 on which to effectively commence the next millennium because getting
 rid of debt means that people who want to do productive things don't
 have to compete with governments in the markets for borrowing money
 and that interest rates are more likely to stay down than to go up.
 And it's very important that we continue to work hard to get rid of
 our debt.
As you know we have just come through a quite historic exercise in
 reforming our taxation system. We've succeeded in bringing about the
 most beneficial change to our taxation system certainly since World
 War II and perhaps any time since Federation. And there are a lot
 of benefits in that taxation reform for people in rural Australia.
 To start with, fuel is going to be dramatically cheaper. We're not
 only going to cut the price of diesel but we're also going to effectively
 reduce the cost of other fuel by seven cents a litre when it is used
 for business purposes. And the benefits of this, the benefits of this
 for the bush are tremendous. I don't think people understand fully
 the dimension of the change that is made, has been made in this area.
 And it's important to remember that when we went to the election in
 October of last year we made certain commitments in relation to diesel
 and the cost of fuel in the bush. And it's also important to remember
 that when our legislation seemed to hit the wall in the Senate when
 a certain Senator from Tasmania said, 'I cannot', I made a promise
 to the rural community of Australia at the 20th anniversary
 gathering of the National Farmers' Federation at Longreach in Queensland
 - which coincided with the first ever meeting of Federal Cabinet in
 Longreach - I made a commitment that in the negotiations that we about
 to conduct with the Australian Democrats, in the bargaining that went
 on we would not in any way bargain away the commitments that we had
 made to people in rural Australia. And I can say without any fear
 of contradiction that undertaking has been honoured in full. And the
 benefits of the lower excise for diesel, the other changes which are
 going to be of enormous benefit to farmers and to primary producers,
 all of those have been kept and none of them have been affected by
 or in any way whittled away. And there is, in fact, an argument suggesting
 because we've extended the diesel concession, off-road diesel concession
 to rail, there's an argument that, in fact, the new package has significantly
 enhanced the benefits of the fuel reductions and the diesel concessions
 in particular for people living in rural Australia.
And I want to take the opportunity here at this lunch as I did to
 the gathering this morning when I opened the Sheepvention to repeat
 a commitment. And that is that when we receive John Ralph's Report
 - and that will be in the next few days - and when as a government
 we sit down to look at changes to the business taxation system - and
 we are going to make changes to business taxation - there will be
 changes made to the capital gains tax to make it more attractive for
 people to invest. There will be other changes made. I want to make
 it very clear that none of the changes we make will disadvantage people
 in rural Australia. We haven't decided yet on what the precise changes
 are going to be because we haven't got the final report. But we have
 decided that there will be a few principles that are going to guide
 the making of our decisions and one of those principles will be that
 we don't intend to make changes that are going to in any way erode
 the competitiveness of farmers or in any way hurt people who live
 in rural Australia.
And we're also going to try and make changes that make Australia a
 more attractive country in which to invest. I've paid a lot of visits
 over the years to the United States and I've paid a lot of visits
 over the years to New York which remains undoubtedly the financial
 capital of the world. And what is very interesting is that on this
 occasion I was paid more regard to and I was listened to with greater
 respect and there was a greater universal respect for Australia's
 economic performance in New York than I have experienced in any time
 over the last 20 years. And what is interesting about the United States
 is that many of their business leaders, particularly in the financial
 community, have a much greater understanding of our country than do
 some of their political leaders. It was disappointing to me to find
 that the two senior ranking republican leaders I spoke to, the Speaker
 of the House of Representatives and the Majority Leader in the Senate,
 that neither of them had visited Australia. And neither of them had
 any real understanding, I don't think, of Australia. Yet all of the
 leaders of the major banks and financial institutions I met in New
 York had all been to Australia on numerous occasions. They have business
 operations here, indeed, one of them is a part owner of a very well
 known restaurant in Melbourne. And that little sort of anecdote drives
 home to me something very important and that is that the way to further
 connect with the United States is rather through the business community
 and particularly the financial community than sometimes at a political
 level. And certainly we are regarded in New York and we are regarded
 in the United States as having performed very well economically. And
 there is enhanced interest in our country. There is an enhanced willingness
 to further invest in Australia and to open up new avenues of investment
 that didn't exist before. But it's very important that we understand
 that in the hard-headed world of financial decision making investment
 goes where profit is most likely to accrue and where competitiveness
 is the greater.
I would like to see Australia become a major world financial centre.
 And there's no reason why that can't occur. And there's no reason
 why, when you look at our generic strength, our low inflation, our
 political stability, our economic stability, the fact that we have
 very clear rules of corporate governance, we have an incorruptible
 legal system, we have the rather obvious enhancement of being able
 to speak the English language, although some people suggest on occasions
 we mangle it but it's an enormous advantage. And we also have within
 our ranks, particularly in the cities, we have a large number of Australians
 of Asian descent who can speak the language of that region, the languages
 rather, of that region with very great skill and very great dexterity.
 When you add all of those things together and you think of our enviable
 lifestyle, if we get our decisions right in relation to our business
 taxation system this country can become an even more attractive place
 in which to invest.
So, it's a good story but amidst that very good story of everything
 being very positive at a national level I do recognise, as I said
 at the gathering this morning, that the people in the wool industry
 have gone through a lot of difficulty. We had Ian McLachlan's report
 a few weeks ago. That's now being discussed around the industry and
 when we get reaction to that the Government will be addressing the
 sort of decisions that need to be taken. Like all industries it's
 had to adjust, everybody has to adjust. The world in this globalised,
 economic environment imposes adjustment on everybody but it's very
 important to remember that we can't reverse the process of globalisation.
 We don't have an option. In the 1960s we could get away with having
 high tariff barriers, you can't do that any more. And it's in the
 long-term interests of this country that we continue to try and open
 up the markets of other countries. We got very angry about lamb, and
 justifiably so.
The other side of the story is that in 1998 we actually increased
 our exports to the United States by 34 per cent. And indeed one of
 the reasons why Australia has been able to stare down the Asian economic
 downturn is that we were able to switch a lot of our trade which had
 been going to the countries of the Asian-Pacific region into North
 America and to Europe. And that was partly the result of us having
 a very well managed exchange rate and the conduct of our exchange
 rate policy by the Reserve Bank has been one of the major economic
 strengths that the country has had over the last few years.
And I want to assure you, and particularly your local member David,
 who does a terrific job of representing the people of Wannon and the
 people of Hamilton in the Federal Parliament, I want to assure you
 that we are conscious of the fact that there are particular concerns
 in the bush about the run down of services. And one of the things
 that we did when we decided that we would try and sell some more of
 Telstra was that we establish what we call the social bonus. And that
 is that we said that if we could get some more of Telstra sold then
 out of the proceeds of that sale we would provide some additional
 services.
And one of those proposals at the last election is of direct relevance
 to the people of this part of Victoria. And we said that a key initiative
 was a $120 million television fund to bring SBS to more regional areas
 and to eradicate transmission black spots. And that was to be funded
 from the sale of a further 16 per cent of Telstra. And I am delighted
 to say today that the communities in Western Victoria will be a priority
 area for this new five year fund when the money is finally available
 from the sale. And detailed site analysis will commence this month
 with final planning, purchase of equipment and installation and commissioning
 to follow.
And that on current indications viewers in towns such as Hamilton
 and Portland should be watching SBS television by October in the year
 2000. And this is, I know, an area that people have been expressing
 concerns about for a long time but for the benefit of the scribes
 present I am putting out a separate release so you need not take it
 down. My staff will be providing a news release. But this is fulfilment
 of a particular promise that we made at the time of the last election
 and it's an indication that we are not only trying to look after the
 concerns of rural people at the macro level, the general state of
 the economy level, but we are also trying to address particular concerns.
 Because I know that there is a lot of angst in rural Australia about
 the disappearance of what are regarded as basic services. And I know
 there's a lot of concern about banks. I know there's a lot of concern
 about doctors. And I am pleased to say that in relation to doctors
 a number of initiatives that have been taken by Michael Wooldridge
 and the Government and as a result of a tour that Michael Wooldridge
 and John Anderson conducted in many parts of rural Australia a few
 months ago and as a result of the announcements that have been made
 in the Budget there is a belief, I think, spreading in rural Australia
 that at long last a number of specific initiatives are starting to
 have an effect and we are starting to address that problem in a more
 effective way.
But, David, can I thank you very warmly, you and Penny for inviting
 me here today. I am sorry that I had to cancel the earlier visit but
 you may remember I had to cancel that visit and a visit to a couple
 of the rural electorates because of the need to negotiate with the
 Australian Democrats regarding the taxation package. And you were
 good enough to understand the need for that and I was delighted that
 I was able to renew my commitment and come here.
But it has been extremely enjoyable. I do, as Leader of the parliamentary
 Liberal Party, want to thank all of you for your tremendous support,
 your contributions to and your loyalty to the Liberal Party over a
 long period of time. The Liberal Party is sustained by its branch
 membership. We can't achieve anything unless we get candidates elected
 into Parliament. The Liberal Party organisation is a voluntary organisation
 and it's the efforts and the goodwill and the financial support and
 the hard physical work of people like yourselves.
And I certainly agree with Marilyn, your electorate Chairman, I think
 it was her who said earlier that there are awards in heaven for people
 who hand out how-to-vote cards. I have constantly said that. In the
 40-odd years that I have been a branch office bearer I have said that.
 And I have heard State Presidents say that and I have heard Federal
 Presidents say that and now you are hearing a Prime Minister say that
 because it has to be right then if all of those people say it. But
 it can be a thankless task but can I say it is not a task and it is
 not a performance and it's not something that you do that goes unacknowledged.
I owe everything that I have achieved in public life to the Liberal
 Party. Without the Liberal Party I would never have achieved the things
 that I have achieved and I have never forgotten that and I never lose
 an opportunity of expressing my gratitude to the members of the Liberal
 Party wherever I go in Australia for their tremendous loyalty and
 support. And I do that again today. I wish you well. The party is
 in good shape, in good shape here in Victoria and it's in good shape
 nationally. We have got a good story to tell, we have got good members
 to support and I look forward, without any sense of complacency I
 might add, I look forward to more opportunities to do good things
 for the people of Australia. Thank you very much.
[ends]


Subjects: Cabinet; economy; social issues; salmon; agricultural
 trade
E&amp;OE...................
Well thank you very much Paul. To Sue Napier, the Leader of the Tasmanian
 Opposition and Parliamentary Liberal Party in Tasmania, my Lord Mayor,
 my Cabinet and Parliamentary colleagues, and citizens of Hobart. Can
 I say how grateful I am Lord Mayor that you've made this magnificent
 and elegant old building available for our meeting.
I understand this is probably the first time in 20 years or more that
 Federal Cabinet has met in Hobart, and we are doing so in furtherance
 to the policy I adopted when becoming Prime Minister of making certain
 that when Parliament was not sitting Cabinet met on a regular basis
 outside the triangle of Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne. And as a consequence
 over the last three-and-a-quarter years we've held meetings not only
 in the State capitals but also in major regional centres such as Longreach
 in Queensland, all around Australia to drive home the point that we
 are in every sense of the word, a government for all sections of the
 Australian people and to try and express some understanding and sensitivity
 towards the particular challenges and the particular problem of different
 parts of Australia. And it's on that basis that my colleagues and
 I are delighted to be here today to have the opportunity of continuing
 the normal pattern of our meeting, and also to respond to and deal
 with a number of issues that I know are of particular concern to the
 people of Tasmania.
But before I come to one of those which is salmon, and I do want to
 deal with that issue, I want to say something generally about the
 health and strength of our nation. Australia's economic position generally
 speaking at present is stronger than it's been for more than 30 years.
 We have the lowest levels of inflation, the lowest levels of interest
 rates. We have in just over three years turned a deficit running annually
 at more than $10 billion into a very healthy surplus.
Of all the economic statistics that I can quote with pride, there's
 none that I'm prouder of than the one that says that of the 24 nations
 of the OECD, that is of the 24 industrialised nations, Australia has
 the lowest government debt to GDP ratio of any country in the OECD.
 In other words government debt is less of a burden to the Australian
 taxpayers than it is in any of the major industrialised countries.
 Now that is a pretty important statistic because it means something
 for the future.
It means that we are bequeathing to future generations of Australians
 a society that will be free of net Commonwealth debt. And I can say
 to you that if we were able to sell the remaining just over 50% of
 Telstra, by the year 2002 this country would be completely free of
 net debt at a Federal level. And when you bear in mind the level of
 accumulated debt that existed when we came to office we think that
 is a pretty significant achievement.
And I have found in the time that I've been Prime Minister and I've
 travelled around different parts of the world, and I was recently
 in Japan and the United States, that the attitudinal change towards
 this country over the last three years has been quite marked. The
 first visit I paid to the Asian Pacific region I felt as though Australia
 was the anxious outsider seeking admission to the rich club of the
 Asian Pacific region. And in three and a bit years that's changed.
 We are now seen as a very strong performer. We are seen as having
 achieved the remarkable feat of staring down the worst downturn the
 Asian economies have seen since World War II. Our performance surpassed
 that of many of our critics and it also surpassed, I have to say to
 you, some of the best predictions that were available to us in government.
 We in fact performed a lot better on that front than people expected,
 and I think many of us expected.
But in mentioning those things I do say them with a deal of pride
 and satisfaction but in no sense of smugness or complacency. It's
 not just a question of good luck. You make your own luck in government
 as you do in life, and we've worked very hard as a government and
 as a community to bring about those changes.
And we haven't just focused on economic issues, and I know that today
 brings together a lot of representatives of the major welfare organisations
 of the city of Hobart. And one of the many things that I've endeavoured
 to do over the last three years is to build what I describe as a social
 coalition in Australia. I've endeavoured to use the best talents of
 the government, the business community, the welfare organisations,
 and the willingness and the resources of individual Australians to
 tackle social problems in a cooperative way. I don't see great organisations
 such as the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul merely
 being the dispensers of charity and human compassion and understanding,
 priceless though they are in performing that kind of role. I also
 see them as valuable contributors to policy making within our community.
And it's no accident that I've had as head of a number of the major
 welfare activities of this Government, the development of welfare
 policy by this Government, representatives of organisations like that.
 The chairman of my advisory council on drugs is a Major in the Salvation
 Army. The chairman of the Youth Homelessness Task Force like wise
 is an officer in the Salvation Army. And I've had many representatives
 of organisations such as Anglicare and the Society of St Vincent de
 Paul involved in an advisory policy role. We need as we seek answers
 to these problems to work in a very cooperative spirit, to recognise
 that you can't as a government do it all on your own. You can't as
 a government ask welfare organisations to shoulder a greater financial
 burden, and nothing that I say about the social coalition implies
 that for a moment. You can't leave it all to individuals and you can't
 leave it all to the business community. But if you can get each of
 them involved according to their own particular capacities through
 a social coalition you can build a very effective result and a very
 very effective outcome.
And we've been able to achieve the economic goals that I outlined
 three years ago, and we've been able to see Australia stare down this
 Asian economic downturn without a abandoning the social security safety
 net. All of the things that were said when we came to government,
 about how we were going to abolish all sorts of social security benefits
 have naturally of course not materialised. We are not a government
 that ignores our social obligations. We're a government that believes
 that it's always been the Australian way to provide a decent social
 security safety net to those in our community who through no fault
 of their own need some help and assistance from their fellow Australians.
 That has always been the Australian way and it will always be the
 Australian way under this Government. The only rider I would add to
 that is that in accordance with the principle of mutual obligation
 we believe very strongly that if people are provided with assistance,
 if they are able to do so they should be asked to provide something
 back to the community in return for that assistance. And that of course
 underlines the principle of Work for the Dole.
And I'm very interested to see over the recent months the emergence
 within the community, not necessarily from within the ranks of the
 Government parties, but from other parties and from other groups in
 the community, a recognition of the importance and the value of this
 particular principle.
Ladies and gentlemen, I know that many people are here today, and
 a number of people in the State of Tasmania are concerned about the
 decision of the independent body AQIS regarding the importation of
 Salmon. Can I say that I've had some discussion with a number of you
 as I've moved around the hall today. We discussed the issue at Cabinet
 this morning and I've asked the new Minister for Agriculture, Warren
 Truss who's with us today, and the new Minister for Trade, Mark Vaile,
 who's also with us today, I've asked both of them to have a meeting
 with representatives of the industry and others who are concerned
 about this issue within the next week at a time of their convenience.
 Because I believe that there are some aspects of the decision that
 has been taken by AQIS which have been the cause of misunderstanding,
 but equally I recognise that it is an issue where legitimately, strongly
 held different points of view can exist.
I want to make a couple of, I hope, objective observations about the
 background of this decision by AQIS and the context in which it should
 be seen. The first point I should make to you is that each year Tasmania
 alone exports nearly $500 million worth of agriculture and seafood
 products. Now therefore it's a very important source of income and
 sustenance to this island State. It is very important that whenever
 we talk about the conditions under which something comes into Australia,
 be it into Tasmania or any other part of our country, we must also
 have in mind the circumstances under which our exports go into other
 countries. It is never never real life in this country to look at
 trade as a one-way traffic. There is always a reaction. For everything
 we do there can be an opposite reaction in other parts of the world.
You've had examples in Tasmania recently of the value of opening up
 new markets. I was in Japan recently and I heard with great pride
 the officers of Austrade and other representatives of Australia telling
 me about how Fuji apples from Tasmania for the first time this year
 had obtained access into the Japanese markets. And in recent years
 as a result of our trading efforts, and inviting the disciplines of
 the World Trade Organisation, we have been able to not only get apples
 into China, we've been able to get live cattle to China and Mexico,
 we've been able to get pig meat to Taiwan and Singapore. And can I
 say something more about pork? You may remember last year when Cabinet
 met in Queensland there was a very noisy demonstration, not from people
 involved in the fishing industry, but there was a very noisy demonstration
 from people involved in the pork industry. And we were told that the
 assistance and the response that we gave to that industry was woefully
 inadequate. And we were told by people in that industry that what
 we had to do was to stop imports of pork coming into Australia. But
 we were also told by people at the same meeting that if we stopped
 imports of pork coming into Australia then the Canadians would stop
 imports of sugar and beef and other things going into Canada.
So we resisted those entreaties a year ago, or less than a year ago.
 And we provided on [tape break] export capacity. And now you have
 the remarkable situation of where that industry has been turned around
 in less than a year, and that in fact some of the pork exporters from
 this country can't fill their export orders. And I ran into a couple
 of them, ironically enough at the sheepvention in Hamilton in Western
 Victoria which is a great gathering of the people in the wool industry
 of Australia, and two or three of these pork producers came up to
 me and said - look, we can't fill our orders. It's terrific the way
 the industry has turned around.
Now I tell you that little story to make the point that trade is by
 definition and in reality a two way thing. I have only one objective,
 and I said this to my colleagues this morning and I don't mind repeating
 it, I have only one objective when I apply my mind to international
 trading issues. Not [tape break] of convoluted economic theory, about
 free trade or protection or this or that. I have only one criteria
 and that is what is in the national economic benefit of Australia.
 That is the only thing that will ever govern and instruct the decisions
 that the Government I lead make on these issues.
It so happens that in my sincere view expanding world markets are
 of benefit to Australia. And the reason they are of benefit to Australia
 is that we are a small country and it's in our interests because we
 have a small domestic market and flowing from the fact that we are
 a small country we have to export to survive.
We learnt that from lamb. I mean, the American decision on lamb was
 absolutely indefensible on trading grounds. The President didn't even
 try and offer me a detailed economic justification of what the American
 administration had done. They decided for domestic political reasons
 that they could slam an import tariff on our lamb. And because they
 are big enough and strong enough to get away with it and they're big
 enough and strong enough to get away with it with every country in
 the world not just Australia they went ahead and did it.
Now, that is the brutal reality of trading with the Americans. The
 other side of it I should mention is that last year although we had
 trouble with lamb we increased our exports to the United States by
 34 per cent. And I actually had a couple of beef producers at the
 same sheepvention in Hamilton yesterday morning come up to me and
 say: hey, don't complain too much about the lamb they might knock
 off some of our beef. And I said, I don't think that is very likely
 and that wouldn't be defensible.
But I simply make the point is that what we are doing in all of these
 things, and it's relevant to the issue of salmon, and its the sort
 of thing that my colleagues are going to talk to your people in your
 industry about is that in the long run you have to ask yourself the
 question what is the best way of handling these things that promotes
 the overall benefit of Australia. And if we are seen by the rest of
 the world as blocking things coming to this country without any valid
 reason at all, if we are just doing it for a particular local industry
 advantage they are entitled to do the same thing to us. And all the
 complaints in the world are not going to stop them. They are not,
 I promise you. You can have all the fancy theories under the sun but
 if domestic political pressure is applied in markets that we sell
 to now that block out Australian products. The Canadians demonstrated
 it last year in relation to the debate over salmon. There was a retaliation
 there, they would never admit it but it seemed to have a remarkable
 coincidence in relation to our beef industry. And we have always got
 to bear that in mind.
And in the long run it is not in the interests of Australia to have
 a contracting market for agricultural products. And the reason for
 that is that we are a very efficient agricultural nation. We have
 a very efficient industry, not only agriculture but the seafood industry
 as well. And it is in the long term interests of this country that
 we open up markets. And we have had a lot more success than the critics
 would suggest. 30 per cent of the imported beef into Japan now comes
 from Australia. And I can go around the world, particularly in Asia,
 and give you example after example in order to support the proposition
 that I am putting.
And I make the point that we export four times as much agriculture
 as we import. We export 80 per cent of our agricultural produce because
 we don't have a big enough domestic market to consume it and unless
 we export it, we just won't be able to get any return on the investment
 and the sweat and the hard work of our farmers and of our producers.
So I mention those things, ladies and gentlemen, not to think for
 a moment that they directly answer some of the concerns that people
 in your industry have. But I do mention them because they are relevant
 to the way in which a national Government has to behave in relation
 to these issues.
Now, there has been a decision taken by an independent body. And that
 decision that has been taken, according to all the advice I've received
 and all the information I've read, will apply in relation to all fish
 imports greater stringency than now applies in relation to them under
 present arrangements. And I understand that the decision is being
 seen by those who've taken it, by those who try and look at these
 things independently, as having been based on proper scientific grounds.
Now, there are people who will disagree with me and the purpose of
 my Ministers' meeting you is to listen to those points of view. I'm
 not going to make any wild promises about what their responses will
 be. That would not be fair of me. It would not be honest of me. Because
 I think it's very difficult to ignore the findings of a body such
 as this, particularly against the background that I've endeavoured
 to outline because if we can put aside the finding of a so-called
 independent body that is independent then other countries can do the
 same thing. And in the long run, if we sell overseas four times more
 than we import from overseas it's a matter of common sense that in
 a tit-for-tat, blow-for-blow, retaliatory exercise we will suffer
 four times as much punishment as the benefit we have from such an
 exercise. Now that, in the end, is what world trade is all about.
 Because don't think Australia is the only country that looks at the
 impact of imports on its own domestic industry, other countries do
 the same thing. If the balance were the other way around, if we were
 a nation of 200 million people, it might be different.
Now, this is not an easy message to get across because people quite
 understandably look at a situation as it affects our own community,
 our own country and our own industry. I understand that and I'm very
 sympathetic to that. But I've got to look at the aggregate outcome
 for Australia. And the aggregate outcome for Australia is that if
 we get into a trade war on agriculture and seafood we will get murdered.
 That is the brutal reality of it. We will be punished far more severely
 than we will gain from that. And we should understand that that is,
 when you strip of it all the verbiage and all the fine talk about
 this or that argument, on a tit-for-tat basis we will suffer far more
 from a trade war and retaliatory trade action in relation to agriculture
 and seafood than we will gain from it. Now, I know that's not a message
 that some people want to hear but sometimes, in my situation, I've
 got to try and outline it as best I can and as candidly as I can and
 with all the good will in the world, and with a profound sympathy
 for the particular challenges of industries in different parts of
 Australia.
Now, there are some things that we can talk to you about and I would
 like Mark and Warren to have a discussion with the representatives
 of your industry and I know that that's going to take place at a time
 of your convenience in the next week or so. And we'll approach those
 discussions with a great feeling of good will and a great sense of
 trying to come to terms with your particular problems.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I say that one of the real delights
 of being in government and one of the - because it is much better
 than being in Opposition and those 13 barren years of being in Opposition
 were pretty ordinary and we're very happy to be back - but one of
 the real delights of being in government is the opportunity that is
 afforded to us of moving around different parts of Australia, of talking
 to people in their local communities rather than seeing government
 as just sort of an endless procession of representatives of an organisation
 or industry going to Canberra and sitting in a sterile office and
 putting their point of view to a Minister or to a Parliamentary committee.
 And it's very important that all of us practise what we preach when
 it comes to going out and meeting people and reaching people. And
 we've certainly endeavoured to do that.
And, very finally, may I join Eric in expressing to you, Jocelyn,
 the profound affection and admiration of all of your Parliamentary
 colleagues for the difficult days through which you've passed in recent
 times, the very fond memories we all have of Kevin and also and most
 particular the tremendous contribution you make as the senior Parliamentary
 representative for the Government from the State of Tasmania. You
 are a magnificent Minister and you're doing an absolutely first class
 job for the Australian community as a member of the Federal Cabinet.
 And I know all of your colleagues feel that way and would want me
 to say that on their behalf.
And also to my other Senate colleagues from Tasmania, I'm sorry it's
 only Senate colleagues at present, and I'm delighted to hear from
 Eric that you're working hard on making certain - now I know this
 is not a political gathering so I won't say any more - but you're
 working hard to see that there is a greater sense of balance in the
 representation from the House of Representatives here from the State
 of Tasmania. And I look forward to the fruits of that hard work, Eric,
 whenever it may manifest itself.
But, ladies and gentlemen, my colleagues and I are delighted to be
 amongst you. We find these gatherings of enormous benefit and once
 again to you, my Lord Mayor, our thanks for your gracious hospitality
 in this lovely old building.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Thank you very much Peter Lavis. To Louise Asher, the Minister for Small
   Business, to Carol Schwartz, your national president, Peter Clarke, other
   distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I want to thank the Property
   Council for inviting me here today to give to me an opportunity on behalf
   of the Government to share some thoughts, and I hope also aspirations I
   have about the future economic and political landscape of Australia.
  It's not a bad time to be talking to a business audience about the state
   of the Australian economy, nor indeed about the prospects that lie ahead
   of us as we come towards the end of this millennium. Of the many memorable
   things he said, Franklin Roosevelt just after he was inaugurated as President
   of the United States in the early 1930s, I think he used words to the effect
   that we have nothing to fear but fear itself. And that was an injunction
   delivered to a nation and world that was very battered down and weary by
   the ravages of the great depression. How different the circumstances are
   now, particularly here in Australia against the background of a world economy
   which is working better I believe than it has probably at any time since
   the end of World War II. And particularly against the background of the
   American economy which is displaying an incredible level of resilience and
   strength.
  And if I could perhaps borrow for today's circumstances those words of Roosevelt
   and to make the observation that just because we are performing well at
   the present time, and just because by any measure the recovery in Australia
   and the strong growth in Australia has continued longer than most people
   expected, that is no reason to fear for a moment that if we follow the right
   policies we can enjoy a continuation of that strong growth and that great
   stability of the Australian economy. I suppose that the many things that
   have been said about me in my political career, I've probably never been
   accused too often as being reckless, or indifferent about the need to take
   caution. I am appropriately cautious about certain things. I don't believe
   in changing something that works well, but I do believe very strongly in
   embracing change, even radical change, for those institutions, practices,
   and attitudes within the Australian community that ought to be changed.
   And the message that I want to leave with you today above everything else
   is that the strong state of the Australian economy in 1999 is not the product
   of inadvertence, it is not the product just of luck, it is the product of
   a number of fundamental changes and reforms that have been implemented in
   our economy over the last 10 to 15 years. And I've always been willing in
   looking back over the history of the Australian economy, where appropriate
   to give credit to changes that were introduced by our predecessors in government.
   And in one or two areas changes implemented by our predecessors have made
   a very material contribution to the strength and stability of the Australian
   economy today.
  But very particularly the strength we have at the moment, the fact that
   we are without any doubt the strongest performing economy amongst the OECD
   countries, and I never tire of saying that of all the economic statistics
   of which I'm immensely proud at the moment none gives me greater pride in
   the fact that I can say to an audience like this, and indeed to any audience,
   that of the 24 member countries of the OECD the debt to GDP ratio, the government
   debt to GDP ratio of Australia is the lowest of the 24 member nations of
   the OECD. Or put another way, the burden of debt on future generations of
   Australians is lighter than the burden of debt on future generations of
   the populations of any of the other 23 member nations of the OECD. And that
   kind of situation delivers incalculable benefits not only to the present
   but also to the future.
  We have as you know over the last three-and-a-quarter years set our faces
   toward a very strong program of economic reform. We got the country out
   of a deficit of $10.5 billion, we have returned a surplus a year ahead of
   schedule. We have delivered the lowest interest rates, the lowest inflation,
   the steadiest levels of business investment, and an economic growth rate
   that in 1998 was faster than the economic growth rate of any of the G7 nations.
   We've done that because of a commitment to a number of fundamental reforms.
   It wasn't easy in the early months of government to cut back government
   spending. It wasn't easy in the early months of government to tackle industrial
   relations reform. We faced a titanic, [inaudible], and industrial battle
   when we set out to reform the Australian waterfront. And most importantly
   of all and most contemporaneously of all, we have embraced the most fundamental
   and sweeping reform of Australia's taxation system certainly since World
   War II.
  And the value of that reform will endure for years into the future. And
   although we didn't achieve 100% of what the Australian people voted for
   in October of last year, we have achieved through the deal that we made
   with the Australian Democrats something like 85 to 90% of the promises we
   took to the Australian public. And the structural value of that reform is
   immense. It will lower the fundamental cost structure of the Australian
   economy. It will make our exports cheaper. It will reduce our domestic business
   costs. It will lower the price of fuel and that's very important to a nation
   that's physical as large as Australia. It will deliver to 80% of Australian
   taxpayers a top marginal rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar, and
   it will guarantee over time rising levels of revenue and a stronger revenue
   base for the States of Australia to provide the basic services which are
   their responsibility.
  And as all of you will know, that follow political debate in this country,
   you'll be aware that one of the great political pantomimes of Australia
   have been the annual gatherings between the Prime Minister and the Premiers
   in Canberra. It doesn't matter who the Prime Minister's been, it doesn't
   matter who the State Premiers it has been, it doesn't matter whether it's
   Labor or Liberal, it's been the same for decades. The Premiers go along
   and demand more money. The Commonwealth says they can't afford to give them
   any more money because they're already over indulged and the Premiers go
   away complaining that they've been given a very raw deal. And that pantomime
   has gone on now for decades. And one of the great benefits of the deal that
   we now got through the Parliament, and one of the great consequences of
   the agreement that I signed with all of the Premiers and the Chief Ministers
   of the Territories, is that after the transitional phase there will be a
   steady growth in the revenue from the goods and services tax for all of
   which will go to the States of Australia. Every last dollar of the GST revenue
   will be committed to the States and out of that growing revenue the States
   will have a growing opportunity of providing the increased services in health
   and housing and governments schools and police which are the ongoing responsibility
   of State governments in Australia.
  But I wouldn't like, in talking for a few minutes about what we have achieved
   over the last three-and-a-quarter years, I wouldn't want anybody in this
   audience to imagine that we regard the reform process as having been completed
   because when you live in a global economy, and forever Australia is part
   of the globalised economic environment in which the whole world now exists.
   We don't have an option to go back to the 1950s or 1960s when we may have
   had good levels of prosperity, no better than they are today. But we lived
   then in a very protected cloistered world. We now live forever in a globalised
   economy. We've seen the seamless transfer of capital across borders without
   regard for political boundaries, matched increasingly by the seamless transfer
   of job opportunities. So in this globalised world you have to keep competing
   effectively. It is like a never ending race where you have to remain ahead
   of your competitor. And it's not good enough to say to yourself - well we're
   doing better now than we were doing five or ten years ago because how you
   were doing five or ten years ago amount to absolutely nothing so far as
   beating your rival or beating your competitor.
  And in that world of global competition it's essential that the process
   of reform go on because you never really complete the process of reform.
   It's like climbing one hill only to find another one facing you on the horizon.
   And some it is that although we have done a great deal to reform the Australian
   economy. Although we're in a very strong position we have a responsibility
   of pressing ahead with the reform process, and particularly in two areas.
   We need more industrial relations reform. We need it in the form of still
   less regulation. We need some-how-or-other to persuade the Senate to pass
   those laws which will remove the restrictions on unfair dismissal which
   ought to be removed. We also need to some-how-or-other to persuade the Australian
   Senate to pass the legislation that we want that will guarantee that youth
   wages remain part of the industrial relations landscape of Australia because
   by maintaining youth wages we protect the jobs of several hundred thousand
   young Australians. So there's still much to be done on the industrial front.
  But I know of particular interest to this audience, having completed the
   process of legislating for the GST, and everything that accompanies the
   goods and services tax, and now having embarked upon the process of implementing
   the GST reform, it is imperative that we now turn our attention to the responsibilities
   of business taxation reform. And it's no secret that John Ralph handed his
   report to Peter Costello a few days ago, and I had the opportunity here
   in Melbourne this morning of a lengthy discussion with Mr Ralph in relation
   to the report that he's delivered to the government.
  And I want to take a moment to record my gratitude to John Ralph, to Bob
   Joss, and to Rick Allet and all the other members of that committee, as
   indeed I share my gratitude to people like Carol Schwartz, your national
   president, for the willingness of people in the private sector to give up
   their time and to make a contribution to the making of better policy and
   more competitive policy for the Australian economy. Because it is quite
   impossible for a government acting alone with its public service advisers,
   with all the wisdom collectively we might try and bring to the task, is
   quite impossible for us acting alone to re-write effectively the business
   taxation system of this country.
  And the report that John has delivered to the government is the product
   of an enormous amount of work contributed very generously by the private
   sector of the Australian community. And the changes that will flow from
   that report will have long term ramifications, I believe very beneficial
   ones, on the operations of business in Australia. And we've got one or two
   very simple principles in mind as we come to address that report. And those
   principles really surround one or two fundamental questions. And the first
   of those questions is will the changes we implement make it more attractive
   to invest in business operations in Australia? Will the changes make Australia
   more competitive? Will these changes be seen by investors overseas as more
   likely to attract their dollars to Australia.
  And there couldn't be a better time in the last 20 or 30 years for an Australian
   government to look at removing any barriers to greater investment in this
   country from overseas. Because the achievement of the Australian economy,
   and the strength of the Australian economy is very widely recognised around
   the world. And that was driven home to me very strongly when I was in the
   financial capital of the world, New York, only a few weeks ago. And in the
   25 years that I've been visiting that city in various government and opposition
   capacity, I've not found a greater respect for what Australia has achieved,
   and the strength of the Australian economy than I did on this particular
   occasion. Now we're going to ask ourselves that fundamental question - will
   it make Australia more competitive, will it make it more attractive to invest
   in Australia?
  And another fundamental question we have to ask ourself is whether the changes
   that we propose to make, and I can assure there will be some quite fundamental
   changes to the Australian business taxation system, will those changes lead
   to less complexity, will they lead to changes which are more likely to produce
   a simpler and more coherent taxation system? Now I can't pretend to you
   today that any business taxation system can be the essence of simplicity
   because business transactions of their very nature are often complex and
   indirect. But I think there is an overwhelming view in the Australian business
   community that not only do we need a taxation system that encourages more
   competition and more investment, and more risk taking, but we also need
   a business taxation system which is less complicated and easier to follow.
   And that will be the second of the great principles or the great questions
   that will apply to the deliberations that we are about to bring to the report
   delivered to us by Mr Ralph.
  I think all of you are aware of some of the areas of debate and some of
   the areas of discussion about business tax reform. I make one very important
   request to all of you, and that is when having a look at the impact of any
   of the recommendations and the decisions of the government that follow those
   recommendations, I do ask that you take into account the aggregate impact,
   not only of the business tax changes but also of all of the changes that
   flow from the goods and services tax on your operations. There is a tendency
   with these things for businesses to look at them in watertight compartments
   and say - well the GST has given me this advantage that's terrific, but
   if the business tax change doesn't give me also an additional advantage
   than I'm against it. I ask all of you to look in aggregate at the changes
   that will be brought about by business taxation reform, and also add to
   them the changes that have been brought about through the goods and services
   taxation reform. And I ask you to ask yourselves especially, when you add
   both of them together whether the aggregate of the benefit, the changes
   are beneficial to your businesses and your business operations. And I believe
   that if you do that you will find that in the overwhelming majority of cases
   you can answer that in a very very strong affirmative tone that I believe
   will be the reaction of the business community to the changes that we bring
   about.
  So we have ahead of us therefore ladies and gentlemen, a number of major
   further reform challenges. We have come a long way. We have made the Australian
   economy achieve something that I don't think many people thought it would
   achieve and we have seen it stare down the worst downturn in the Asia Pacific
   region since the end of World War II. And if I'd addressed this gathering
   a year ago, just on the eve of the release of the taxation reform plan,
   and before the October election of 1998, I probably would have said to you
   that we were looking forward to the challenge of selling tax reform to the
   Australian community. And I also would have reported to you that although
   the Australian economy was performing very well and is growing more strongly
   than many predicted, we thought it would be badly damaged and that growth
   would slow significantly as a result of the Asian economic downturn. And
   I would have asked you to accept the proposition that in the face of that
   impact of the downturn, that the government was better equipped than the
   alternative opposition to guide Australia through those very very difficult
   months, perhaps years.
  I'm very happy now in August of 1999 to say that a year ago I would have
   been too pessimistic in saying that, because I don't mind conceding that
   the Australian economy has performed better over the last two years than
   I thought it would. And I think it's fair to say that the Australian economy
   has performed better than most people thought it would. And I think it's
   very important that just as we have outperformed our expectations over the
   last couple of years, and that although we should never be complacent or
   smug about the future, there is no reason to believe or fear, to borrow
   Roosevelt's expression again, there is no reason to fear that we can't continue
   to enjoy the sort of economic stability and progress and that we are enjoying
   at the present time. And we can do that. It is within our grasp to build
   for ourselves the third great era of economic prosperity that Australia
   has seen this century. And we do have it within our grasp to do that if
   we continue the reform process. We won't achieve that goal, we won't build
   that third era of great economic progress if we imagine that what we have
   achieved either over the last couple of years has been a matter of luck
   and the luck is going to turn against, or if we imagine alternatively that
   we have completed the reform process. The reform process, you know it in
   your businesses, we know it with our experience in government, is never
   completed. We have done great things to get the budget back into surplus.
   We have done great things to reform the industrial relations system. We
   have pursued a vigorous competition policy which has brought about reduced
   business costs for just about all businesses in this country. We have achieved
   great things in the taxation reform front. But we still have many reform
   challenges that lie ahead of us.
  And if I could finish on one note ladies and gentlemen it is this - that
   of all of the benefits that I believe that we have derived from the economic
   achievements and the economic reforms of the last few years, and the strength,
   the current day strength of the Australian economy, the most important dividend
   out of that is I believe a dividend that goes to the national psychology.
   When I became Prime Minister of Australia in March of 1996 I had the sense
   in which Australia was something of an anxious outsider in the Asia Pacific
   region knocking on the door seeking admission to the rich club of the Asia
   Pacific region. We had the sense that some-how-or-other we were lagging
   behind as we were aspiring to be accepted as part of this unique grouping
   of nations. And now three-and-a-quarter years on so much of that has changed.
   Australia is seen with a new respect in a new light. Australia is seen as
   having achieved something that even many Australians didn't believe was
   possible. We have bred in this country a belief that we are only really
   entitled to enjoy a few short years of economic prosperity, and then the
   boom underwriting those years would be replaced by a bust, and that in some
   way we would have to put up interest rates to restrict imports and we would
   have to go back to restrictive policies.
  And I think the psychological dividend that the last year or two has delivered
   to Australia has been enormous. It has given to the country a new respect,
   a new strength around the world. We are seen as an achiever. We go to the
   councils of the Asia Pacific region, and a good friend of the region, that
   as a country that goes there on its own terms in its own right, and being
   as it always has been a totally Australian experience with those countries.
   And I think therefore that the psychological dividend, the self confidence
   dividend that has come out of the last couple of years is indeed the greatest
   dividend of all. And that should encourage us to believe that we shouldn't
   fear the possibilities that prosperity can disappear almost automatically
   in a year or twos time. And if we remain resolved to continue as the government
   is to the process of reform in the years ahead there is no reason at all
   why the prosperity the country now enjoys ought not to be consolidated or
   not to continue to the benefit of future generations of our fellow countrymen
   and women.
  [Ends]
   QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOLLOWING ADDRESS
  E&amp;OE.................
  QUESTION:
  From the perspective of this room, one of the most important components
   of the GST reform package was the removal of stamp duty from commercial
   property. When do you intend to deliver on this promise?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well under the arrangement that we have entered into with the Australian
   States it will not be removed as early as we had anticipated, not through
   any lack of desire on our part but because the compromise reached with the
   Australian Democrats meant that the growth in revenues would not be as quick
   as we had anticipated, and it will be.I can't give you an exact date, it
   will be several years into the future, precisely when I can't at this stage
   indicate but it will occur as soon as the growth in revenue from the GST
   exceeds the benefit to the states of the existing financial arrangement
   that the Commonwealth has with the States.
  It is one of the consequences of the deal that was made with the Australian
   Democrats. The stamp duty on financial instruments will be removed almost
   immediately the new arrangements come into force. The wholesale sales tax
   will be totally removed on the first of July of next year and the removal
   of other state taxes will be delayed by several years as a consequence of
   the slow down in the growth of revenues. It would have been otherwise if
   we had been able to get the entire package through the Senate. It simply
   hasn't proved possible to do that for reasons that you are all very well
   aware of. I know that that is of a disappointment to this audience but just
   as you live in a real commercial world, we live in a real political world.
   We didn't have the numbers in the Senate, we weren't going to go and have
   another election over whether or not the GST should include fresh food and
   I didn't get many encouragements from anybody to do that and we took the
   view that we should achieve a compromise that delivered 85-90% of what we
   wanted. We have done that and we feel in overall terms the benefits are
   enormous but I acknowledge your point. I can only ask you to understand
   the circumstances in which it arose.
  QUESTION:
  With the greatest respect Prime Minister, that sounds like, you say it is
   going to be delayed for several years, I am hearing it is never going to
   happen. Your speech...
  PRIME MINISTER:
  No well with the greatest respect, you are wrong. I will come back when
   it happens and remind you so.
  MC:
  Well said.
  QUESTION:
  Prime Minister, one of the consequences of economic prosperity is full employment.
   Now in Australia this might mean that it's not 3% or 5%, it maybe 7% because
   the old unemployed people don't match the new jobs. If that is the case
   and that is what I am finding, how are you likely to review your immigration
   policies to bring in people who have the skills that Australia needs and
   certainly hasn't been able to provide its work force, so that we can position
   ourselves into a global future?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  I would answer that question in a couple of ways. The first way is to say
   that we have already begun, and in fact over the last three years we have
   begun to alter our immigration policy quite dramatically to address the
   very issue you've raised. Over the last three years we have altered in a
   very major way the balance between family reunion and skilled migration.
   The current migrant intake, a far greater bulk proportion of the people
   being brought in, are skilled migrants and far fewer come in under the family
   reunion category. So we have already begun to address that.
  The broader question which I think you raised, and I guess underlying what
   you put to me is the proposition that we're hitting a point where you can't
   further reduce unemployment because the jobs that are available, they are
   not matched by the people who are out of work. Now that is true up to a
   point. It will always be true for any society irrespective of what level
   of immigration it has. There is a view that the Australian economy would
   receive an enormous boost if we had a much higher level of immigration and
   people who put that view are partly, but not totally instructed by the experience
   that this country had in the 1950s and '60s when major immigration made
   an enormous contribution to Australia's post war economic expansion.
  We don't have a fixed, in concrete view about the level of immigration.
   We take the view that the level of immigration should be adjusted according
   to economic circumstances. I don't think anybody can say, given the economic
   growth we've had over the last few years that we have got the fundamentals
   of economic policy wrong. I think that we have got them fundamentally right.
   We are ready to alter the migrant intake if we believe that the economic
   imperative require it. We are totally committed to maintaining, and where
   possible, building on the current mix between skilled and family reunion.
   We think the more skilled migrants that this country can have recruited
   on a completely non-discriminatory basis, the more the nation will be enhanced,
   and when I talk overseas about the possibility of Australia becoming a world
   financial centre one of the attributes that I put forward is the fact that
   we have, as Australian citizens now, hundreds of thousands of people who
   have come from the countries of Asia who speak the language of those countries
   and one of the enormous advantages of Australia in a global economic sense
   is that we, sure, we speak the English language which is of enormous advantage
   in world finance, particularly in world finance, but also we have as Australian
   citizens a very diverse pool of people whose skill and dexterity in speaking
   the languages of other nations, particularly in our region is of enormous
   benefit.
  So our position is that we are not permanently


Subjects: Health system; rural health
E&amp;OE..................
  Well thank you very much Dr Sharman Stone, the Member for Murray, to Mrs
   Anne McCamish, to Professor Alan Gilbert, the Vice Chancellor of the University
   of Melbourne, to Mr Paul Griggs, and may I say to you Paul thank you very
   much for your words of welcome and I reciprocate by sending my warm respects
   and regards to the Yorta Yorta people who you are representing here today
   and it is very important the involvement of the indigenous community in
   this and indeed in many other community projects and to Professor David
   Simmons who is the inaugural overlord, if I can put it at that, of this
   venture to which I am turning the first sod today.
  This as I have indicated to other audiences over the last few hours is my
   first visit to Shepparton as Prime Minister and it is a major regional centre
   by any measurement in Australia, not just in Victoria, with a population
   in the immediate city vicinity of 30 000 and much larger in the more broadly
   defined Goulburn Valley area. It makes a major contribution to the economy
   not only of Victoria but through, in particular but not only it's horticultural
   industries, a major contribution to the economy of Australia. It is properly
   described as something of a food basket for the entire Australian community
   and it has a very energetic Parliamentary representative in the person of
   Dr Sharman Stone who has been very active in the three and a quarter years
   that she has been your member in pushing the particular challenges and the
   particular causes of this area.
  I think we all know that in Australia at the moment there is a properly
   intense debate about the position and future of rural and regional communities
   within our national life. I don't think there would be an Australian who
   would dispute that part of the history, the essence and the being of the
   Australian identity is the contribution that has been made to that identity
   by what is variously described as rural Australia, regional Australia or
   more affectionately "the bush" and over the years it has made
   an enormous contribution to shaping our national identity and it has also
   made an enormous and it continues to make a great contribution to the wealth
   of our country particularly to our export income.
  Earlier this morning I visited the largest pear producer in Australia and
   this marvellous enterprise built on the back of a family business is an
   example of the expertise and the skill of this district and the importance
   of it. But rural communities and regional communities and Shepparton, although
   larger than many has not been in anyway exempt or has not escaped the process,
   has felt the pressure of the relocation of services, has experienced the
   pressure of some services disappearing and has felt the pressure particularly
   of declining availability of medical services and it was identified when
   we came into Government as being an issue that needed a great deal of attention.
   There was a chronic problem and there remains a chronic problem in attracting
   enough doctors to rural areas of Australia. There are a variety of reasons
   and there are many under this tent who will understand the reasons for that
   better than I do but the Government does understand that it is a major challenge
   and over the last few years we have set about responding to that challenge
   because we believe that the quality of life of people in any part of the
   community is based on the ready availability of some basic services, based
   on a ready availability of police services, the ready availability of educational
   services, the ready availability of medical services and the ready availability
   of some, at least recreational services. When one or other of those services
   are not available and particularly medical services then people are entitled
   to claim that they are not being treated fairly and equally as part of the
   Australian community. There are a lot of advantages of living in the bush
   or regional Australia over living in the cities but there are also disadvantages
   and the role of any Government in a fair way is to try and equalise the
   opportunities and equalise the comforts. We are keen to do that in relation
   to information technology, we don't want a society where you have technology
   haves and have nots and we have had a number of initiatives particularly
   out of the proceeds of the sale of the first instalment of Telstra to ensure
   that that has happened. In relation to the problem of the shortage of Doctors
   we have put a lot of effort into that. We have put extra resources, we have
   introduced new schemes which are designed to attract more doctors through
   a variety of devises attract more doctors to both go to the bush and to
   stay in the bush.
  Recently Dr Wooldridge, the Health Minister, himself a medical practitioner
   and John Anderson, the newly appointed Deputy Prime Minister and leader
   of the Federal Parliamentary National Party went on a tour of rural areas
   to listen to the concerns of people and to explain to those people what
   the Government was doing in response. In many ways that visit was something
   of a watershed in producing both a deeper understanding on the part of the
   Government of the feeling of people in rural communities and also on the
   part of the rural communities, a deeper understanding on their part that
   the Government had indeed over the past few years been doing a number of
   quite practical things to try and turn around the drift of doctors away
   from rural areas and to try and get more of them back to where they are
   so sorely needed and to address in some way in the process the over supply
   of doctors in many of the metropolitan areas of Australia by addressing
   the under supply of doctors in rural areas.
  Now one of the elements of that strategy has been to encourage the establishment
   around Australia of centres which focus on rural health and rural health
   problems. And the Federal government is providing on a recurrent basis funding
   of $1.5 million over five years for this project, and it's also providing
   capital support of $2.5 million.
  I want to thank the University of Melbourne who's represented here today
   by Vice Chancellor Professor Alan Gilbert, as well as the other universities
   that are involved, the other Victorian universities that are involved in
   the consortium which is associated with the school. What this school will
   do will be to address very directly the, I guess, accumulation of deficiencies
   and shortages as far as rural health is concerned. Not only the shortage
   of doctors but also some of the challenges of which Sharman Stone spoke
   in her words of introduction. It is not of course the final total answer
   to the problem but it is another element of the integrated response that
   is needed. What it does do of course is bring together the contributions
   of the Federal government, the State government, the universities of Victoria,
   the local communities in every sense of the word. Not only the local medical
   fraternity but all others involved as health professionals, the local indigenous
   community, it brings together as indicated by this audience today a cross
   section of the entire community of Shepparton. And I hope it is seen as
   not only a symbol, but also a very practical gesture by all of those who
   are concerned about addressing the problems and deficiencies of rural health.
  Having said something for a few minutes about problems and deficiencies
   in the health area, could I by way of balance and perspective say something
   about the pluses of the health system, not only of Victoria but the health
   system of Australia. It's very fashionable these days whenever anybody occupying
   a political position on either side of politics gets in front of a microphone
   to say something critical about the Australian health system. Now I would
   be the first to acknowledge as Prime Minister that the Australian health
   system does have deficiencies. It has shortages of doctors in some parts
   of Australia, it has some deficiencies in public hospitals, it has weaknesses
   in many areas. But having acknowledged all of that, I make so bold as to
   assert that with all its deficiencies the Australian health system is probably
   better than any other in the world.
  And I think it's very important that we don't allow the Australian health
   system and the esteem the Australian public has for the Australian health
   system to be cut down in the cross fire of endless political exchange because
   we have without doubt, given the size of our population, made a greater
   contribution than virtually any other western nation to medical research.
   We have world class doctors, we have world class medical researchers. And
   I'm very proud of the fact that in the last budget the government announced
   that over the next five years it would double the amount of money going
   to health and medical research in this country. And here particularly in
   Victoria, Melbourne has an absolutely marvellous reputation for its research
   capacity without peer anywhere in Australia, and certainly widely respected
   around the world.
  I frequently say that it's better if you're a battler to get sick in Broadmeadow
   than the Bronx. And the reality is that our health system with all its flaws
   and all its deficiencies is an infinitely better system than any on offer.
   We have dedicated health professionals, compassionate hard working nurses,
   and people generally who work together in a very cooperative fashion. Now
   that is not the refrain of the complacent, and it's not a Prime Minister
   saying everything in the garden is lovely, because everything in the garden
   is not lovely and there is a place for a legitimate ongoing debate about
   the status of our health system. We as a government remain committed to
   maintaining the Medicare system. That is absolute and unqualified. We believe
   that it can be built on. We believe that there is a role for private provision
   in health. We believe that the two should complement each other. There are
   imbalances and there are always changes and improvements that need to be
   made. We've put more resources into private health insurance. We think that's
   a positive move and we think over time that will make a contribution. We
   have increased resources to the Australian States in relation to their responsibilities.
   We don't ourselves see enormous merit in yet another wide ranging national
   inquiry. I think the Australian community is a little tired of endless inquiries.
   They're more interested in specific actions and specific initiatives such
   as the centre for which I'm going to turn the first sod today.
  So ladies and gentlemen, in acknowledging that there are a lot of problems,
   and I do acknowledge that. And I acknowledge particularly the legitimate
   concern, even anger of people in rural and regional Australia about the
   inadequacies of some medical services. I want on the other hand to extol
   some of the generic strengths of the Australian health system and to support
   the magnificent quality of the doctors and the other health professionals
   of Australia because they are in my view, without peer anywhere in Australia.
  But finally can I again congratulate all of those associated with this project.
   Can I thank Professor Alan Gilbert in particular for being here today and
   representing the University of Melbourne, and the contribution of the universities
   of Victoria to this project. I wish all of those associated with it well.
   I agree with Sharman Stone that we should provide inducements for those
   who work here not to slip back to Melbourne at the weekend and that is why
   it's appropriate that I turn a sod for the accommodation wing so that there'll
   be the proper wherewithal to entice them to remain in this beautiful community.
   And again can I thank the people of Shepparton for their very warm welcome.
   It's a delight to be in the Goulburn Valley, and I know that I should perhaps
   have brought some of that Sydney rain with which I am reasonably well familiar.
   But I hope that that turns to your advantage before too long and thank you
   again for having me with you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  [tape starts]
  But I would want to salute the people of Shepparton and the people of the
   Goulbourn Valley on the tremendous contribution that they are making to
   the economy of Australia. In many ways this is the food basket of Australia
   and there is around something like 80 000 Australians employed directly
   in the horticultural industry in this country. It is winning new domestic
   and international markets. Only a few weeks ago I was in Japan and I spoke
   of the way in which for the first time we have been able to get fuji apples
   into Japan. It was a pretty hard fight I can tell you, but in the end we
   were successful. The first exports are largely going to come from Tasmania
   but there is no reason why exports shouldn't spread from other parts of
   Australia but it is an illustration of the sort of things that Australia
   must increasingly do in the future. Now these enterprises are normally the
   product of tremendous skill and dedication and hard work often based on
   a family enterprise and Santo, you and your family are illustrations of
   that because you built a tremendous business through the dint of hard work
   and the dint of application to a very very difficult task and you played
   a very significant role as well in the Australian community as a result.
  But I also want to say that not only have I had the experience this morning
   of talking to and being informed by such a successful operator in the horticultural
   industry. I have also had the chance this morning to learn something about
   cutting edge youth services. To be told that this great private programme
   that takes government services to young people directly to those young people.
   I was very impressed with what Rowena and the people from Centrelink told
   me about the Project. I want to congratulate the Uniting Church, I also
   want to thank the offices of Centrelink and I want to commend to the business
   men and women of this and other communities in rural and regional Australia
   the desirability of supporting projects like that, there is no reason why
   there can't be some commercial association with pluses like that, if you
   can have the Uniting Church logo on it, if you can have the Centrelink logo
   on it, there is no reason why you can't have the logo of some kind of business
   organisation on it because what that does, what that service does it to
   take facilities and services directly to young people, particularly in areas
   where they may not be available in a building. But ladies and gentlemen
   this is not an occasion for long speeches it is an occasion to say thank
   you to people like Santo for the contribution that they are making to the
   Australian economy and the contribution that they are making to their local
   community, the example they set to other small business men and women around
   Australia and most importantly the example they set of successful family
   enterprises and I want to thank the children of the local school for the
   wonderful welcome that I received this morning. It is always the most enjoyable
   part of a visit to any part of Australia to be welcomed by the children
   of the local community and this morning has been no exception and can I
   say again how delighted I am to be here in Shepparton to be sharing the
   platform with my colleague and friend Sharman Stone, who is doing an absolutely
   remarkable job, a very energetic job, a very important job and can I say
   a very pugnacious job when the occasion arises in representing the interests
   of the Murray electorate and the people of Shepparton in the national Parliament.
  ends


E&amp;OE....................
  Thank you very much Sharman Stone, the Member for Murray. To my other Parliamentary
   colleagues, Mr John Daton, the other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
  The last time I visited the Murray electorate as Prime Minister we had a
   gathering under a rooftop such as this at Euchuca, and it was associated
   once again with an environmental project, and it was conducted more or less
   under the aegis of the Murray-Darling Basin Commission. And I'm delighted
   to be back today to be associated with the commissioning of this marvellous
   project. As the sign outside declares it's a project jointly funded by the
   Commonwealth, the State and the community. And in many ways today's event
   and this particular project fulfils two of the goals that I had about the
   nature of government policy, in not only the environmental area but many
   other areas, when I became Prime Minister.
  One of those goals was to achieve what I've chosen to describe as the building
   of a social coalition within our community, recognising that the many problems
   that confront Australia and Australians, none of them can be solved by the
   Commonwealth government, or indeed any government acting alone. None of
   them can be completely solved by individuals or communities acting alone.
   None of them can be solved by business organisations acting alone. But most
   of them can be solved if there is an effective coalition between all of
   those interests. And caring for the environment is one such area where that
   social coalition has really begun to work in a big way.
  This sort of gathering, as many would acknowledge, wouldn't have been possible
   10, or 15, or 20 years ago. 10 or 15 years ago a lot of people in this audience
   wouldn't have thought the environment was anything other than a trendy issue
   that concerned the leafy suburbs of Melbourne and Sydney. They were wrong.
   Just as many of the people who live in those trendy suburbs don't understand
   that you've got to get a balance between caring for the environment and
   the preservation of jobs, particularly in industries such as the forestry
   industry. But that belongs to another time and another place. But it's still
   a very important issue and it's a very important example of the need to
   preserve a balance in our community. And if we want to preserve the Australian
   bush all of us have got to understand that we have a contribution to make.
  And what this project does is therefore bring together that social coalition.
   But it is also a practical outcome of an idea I had more than three-and-a-half
   years ago when I was thinking in the lead up to the 1996 election about
   how it would be possible to make the sale of one-third of Telstra not only
   a boon for reducing debt in Australia but also to use some of the proceeds
   of that to provide some attractive investment in areas that were important
   to Australia's long term future. And I don't think I'm exaggerating to say
   that sort of, almost literally walking along the beaches at Hawkes Nest,
   the place on the coast of New South Wales where my family want to go for
   its annual holiday, I devised the idea of establishing a natural heritage
   trust. And then out of that sale of Telstra we would invest money in a trust
   that would be used, I hope in perpetuity, to contribute to the renewal of
   Australia's environment.
  And the Murray-Darling Basin is the principle recipient of resources coming
   out of that trust. And the problems that are encapsulated just over there,
   the challenges that are met by this project, the problems of salinity, of
   water logging, age old problems becoming more pressing as we move into the
   next Century. They are the very practical things that are being addressed
   out of this trust and of the money that is being made available.
  And we are witnessing a level of cooperation between different sections
   of the Australian community that we haven't had before. And people have
   put aside their differences and they see that they have a common benefit
   and a common gain to be had out of working together to properly look after
   our environment. And many of the assumptions we all made as children that
   certain resources in this country were unlimited, the idea that we'd never
   have to worry about nurturing them or conserving, all of those assumptions
   have been challenged over the last 20 or 30 years.
  One of the most symbolic things my wife said she's ever done since I've
   been Prime Minister was to be invited to cap the first bore just near Longreach
   in Queensland a few months ago under the program that was announced in the
   budget to begin repairing the great Artesian Basin which is so tremendously
   important to the long term resource future of this country.
  We are all a lot more conscious of the precious and the limited resources
   that this country has. And all of us are more willing and more able and
   more ready now to sink our difference on issues to work together to preserve.
   The farmers of Australia have become the greatest environmentalists in relation
   to land care of all and I congratulate them. They've always understood the
   value of land better than most and they've always understood that if you
   don't take care of your valuable resources then you'll pay a very heavy
   price in years to come. The contribution that rural people have made to
   the land care movement has been truly astonishing.
  I want to thank the scientists associated with the commission. I want to
   thank everybody who's been associated with getting this project together.
   I think as I look around this gathering I see every generation and every
   section of the community represented. I see the young from the schools,
   I see people representing the farming community, people representing local
   government, people representing Federal and State government, local businessmen
   and women, all of you have come to this gathering. And something in the
   order of $15 million already has come to this particular catchment area
   and over $1 million to this particular project from the Natural Heritage
   Trust.
  And it really does give me an enormous amount of pleasure to be involved
   in this commissioning ceremony today. I want to acknowledge the tremendous
   energy that Sharman Stone as your Federal Member has brought to concern
   for environmental issues. She's fought very hard to see that the electorate
   of Murray gets its fair share of the resources that are coming out of [inaudible].
   If it gets more than its fair share well she won't be one to point that
   out. And like any good Federal Member why should she be.
  But this electorate is really in a sense, and what happens here will be
   a metaphor for the capacity of our entire nation to handle these problems
   because the problem of salinity is a huge challenge for this country. Water
   conservation is a huge challenge for Australia. And the management of our
   resources in relation to those two challenges in particular will determine
   the ongoing wealth of the ongoing capacity of this part of our country.
  It is the food basket of Australia. I've been reminded of that quite forcefully
   and quite effectively over the last few hours since I arrived in Shepparton
   last night. I visited the largest pear producer in Australia. I've come
   to this magnificent gathering and I've had the opportunity of opening the
   new Department of Rural Health associated with the University of Melbourne,
   an exercise and a project that is designed to address over time the shortage
   of medical facilities and doctors within rural communities. But to be involved
   in the commissioning of Stage 1A of this project, and to thank all of those
   who've been associated with it, and to particularly congratulate the local
   community for coming together and working so effectively to get behind the
   project is a distinct privilege and honour for me. And I therefore have
   tremendous pleasure in declaring it, commissioned I think is the correct
   turn of phrase, commission the Muckatah Depression Catchment Project Stage
   1, I declare it duly commissioned. Thank you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  Thank you very much Chris. To his worship the Mayor, to my ministerial colleague,
   Nick Minchin, to Shane Stone the Federal President of the Liberal Party,
   other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
  Last night we were all delayed a little bit waiting for some legislation
   to go through the Senate to finally resolve the question to be put to the
   Australian public on the 6th of November in relation to the two
   issues of our Constitutional arrangements and the preamble.
  And I offered a lift on the VIP to Robert Hill and to Chris Gallus and to
   Alexander Downer. And we had a very, very pleasant discussion on the way
   over about a whole range of things. And about half an hour after we'd been
   up in the air Chris said: what are you doing for dinner tonight? And I said:
   well, eating. And she then said: well, why don't you join Alex and I in
   a restaurant in Glenelg. So we decided to do that and I had a very delightful
   evening last night in what is obviously a marvellous restaurant and soaked
   up some of the local ambience and experienced the great prosperity under
   the Howard Government here in the city of Adelaide.
  But I am particularly delighted to be here today. And when you have been
   in politics for a year or two you are always captured and enthralled by
   the ironies of politics. I mean, it really tickles my political fancy that
   a seat like Hindmarsh which for so many years was held by the Australian
   Labor Party is now in Liberal party hands. That intrigues me greatly.
  But I know this is a non-political occasion and it's an occasion to declare
   open a new electorate office. It's an occasion for me as Prime Minister
   and as Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party to congratulate
   Christine Gallus on the tremendous work that she has done in the years that
   she has been in Parliament since 1990. She won a very difficult seat. It
   was not easy, it's never been easy to retain it.
  And over the years South Australia has delivered to, may I very proudly
   say, my Government has delivered to us as very large number of seats. A
   disproportionately large number of seats but a happily disproportionately
   large number of seats. And if I may be gender selective for a moment one
   of the reasons for that is that here in the State of South Australia we
   have been very lucky to have a large number of extremely skilful female
   members of Parliament who have brought particular campaigning skills. And
   indeed of all of the States of Australia we have a larger percentage in
   our ranks of women representing the people of Australia in the Federal Parliament
   than in any other part of the country. And that is a particularly important
   thing and Christine's own campaign skills have been very, very considerable
   and much admired. Her electorate's boundaries have changed, bits have come
   in that weren't expected and other bits have gone out that were lamented.
   But overall she's managed to project the stance of somebody who is involved
   with and concerned about her local community.
  The late Speaker of the American House of Representatives, Tip O'Neil, coined
   that now fairly well known phrase that all politics was local. And it is.
   And any of us who lose sight of the fact that politics is local and any
   of us who lose sight of the fact that you need to retain contract with your
   local community will very quickly find yourself either out of office or
   out of a seat. And as I look around today I can see that Chris Gallus has
   retained contact with her local community in a very impressive and a very
   representative way. And that that is the foundation of high quality representation
   in either the State Parliament or in the national Parliament.
  It is a time where it's very easy for us as Australians to feel hopeful
   and optimistic about our future. We've had a lot of news this week. But
   in many ways the best news of all came yesterday when we learnt that the
   rate of youth unemployment in this country had fallen by 5.8 percentage
   points since March of 1996. And I think that is. Because in the end what
   the responsibility of any government is to provide hope and optimism and
   enthusiasm for the young in our community. And we still have a long way
   to go because we still have an unemployment rate which is too high, but
   it is a lot lower than what it was three years ago. And that is coming off
   the back of an economy which has given to this country, not only a rate
   of economic growth, but a sense of national pride and achievement that we
   haven't had for a long time.
  One of the best feelings I had when I went overseas a few weeks ago was
   that I was going over as the Leader of a country that had outperformed just
   about every other country in the world economically. I was going as the
   Prime Minister of a nation that was seen as the economic strongman of the
   Asian Pacific region. I was going as the Prime Minister of a country whose
   political stability and economic strength was widely respected all around
   the world.
  I had a meeting last Sunday in Sydney with, with Paul Volker, the former
   Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, the man who preceded Dr Alan Greenspan.
   And he knows a little bit about the worlds economies and he was out here
   for an economic conference with the Reserve Bank. And he spoke to me then
   of the admiration he felt for what the Australian economy had done over
   the last few years and I got a copy of the latest edition of the Fortune
   magazine which has a major spread on the performance of the Australian economy.
  Recently the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times and the Economist
   have all spoken of our economic achievement. Now this has been no accident.
   You make your own luck in government and in politics as you do in life.
   Not all of it's luck, some of it's luck, some of it's luck but most of it
   is at the end of the hard work of the government, our commitment to pursuing
   policies that were a bit unpopular and a bit risky at the beginning, but
   they are now starting to bear fruit. And we are all starting to enjoy the
   benefit of them.
  But we haven't focussed just on economics. We don't just live to borrow
   that famous biblical injunction, by bread alone. We are interested in things
   that go the quality of life in our community. We have tried to develop in
   this community over the last three years what I call a social coalition,
   where you get together the government, the welfare organisations, the business
   communities and the energy of individuals to solve challenges. And I am
   going to have the great privilege at the lunch I'm addressing in Adelaide
   later today to announce a remarkable act of corporate philanthropy on behalf
   of a very well known South Australian resource company in relation to activities
   at the university here in Adelaide. And I will have the opportunity then
   to go into some more detail about that.
  But it is an example of the spirit of cooperation between governments, communities,
   individuals which is so important. And we have involved the great welfare
   organisations of this community not only in looking after the needy which
   is their historic capacity and mission, but we have also involved them in
   policy making and in a number of areas such as drugs and other areas I have
   directly involved in an executive policy making capacity organisations such
   as the City Missions and the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent
   de Paul, because they not only bring human compassion to the solution of
   problems but they also bring a great skill and a great policy making capacity.
  But, it's a bit cool here, I don't want to delay you with a long speech.
   I want to thank you. I want to thank Christine Gallus. I want to thank her
   and her campaign team and all of the people of the electorate of Hindmarsh
   for the community that you represent. Federal Members are here to serve
   all people. They are not only here to serve the people that voted for them,
   they are here to serve the people that voted against them. And when we become
   Members of Parliament we have an obligation to look after and serve and
   represent and put forward the views and the concerns of all sections of
   the Australian community. And Chris has done that very well. She's not (inaudible)
   she's carried the Liberal banner very passionately, but she has also carried
   the Hindmarsh banner and the community banner very passionately and that
   is tremendously important. And in the long run that's what makes a high
   quality government and high quality parliamentary representatives, representation.
  So, ladies and gentlemen, congratulations to you Christine. And now, I've
   got to cut a ribbon. Thank you very much.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  SUBJECTS: Visit to Japan/USA, the Australian economy, taxation reform, youth
   unemployment, Asprey Report, Ralph Report, national gun control laws, drug
   abuse, building a social coalition, establishment of the Santos School of
   Petroleum and Engineering at the University of Adelaide, corporate philanthropy,
   Davis Cup.
  Thank you very much, John and to your wife, Julie, to my many Ministerial
   and other Parliamentary colleagues, to you, Cory, the President of the South
   Australian Division, ladies and gentlemen.
  It's a great delight, as always, to be back here in Adelaide, to have the
   opportunity of giving a little bit of a stock taking to the business community
   of Adelaide about how the Federal Government is going and where we see the
   Australian economy at the present time. And can I endorse very enthusiastically
   the sense of optimism transmitted to you by the Premier. The visit that
   I paid overseas very recently to Japan and the United States was but the
   latest in a number of visits I've paid overseas in the various capacities
   I've held or used to hold in the political structure of Australia. And I've
   been going around the place, particularly to the United States and Japan
   now for a number of years. And I have to say that the best thing about the
   most recent visit was not so much specific outcomes or specific issues discussed
   because they were, although important, they were not the principle focus
   of the visit, and not certainly the best thing about the visit, but the
   best thing of all was the great sense of confidence in which, or with which,
   Australia is now viewed around the world. And over the twenty year period
   or more that I've been visiting the city of New York, as a Treasurer, a
   Minister, a Shadow Minister, an Opposition Leader and the first occasion
   as Prime Minister in 1997, I don't think I have found a greater sense of
   positive feeling towards Australia and the achievements of the Australian
   economy than I did on this particular occasion.
  And what that really underlines, ladies and gentlemen, is that the greatest
   dividend of all out of the economic achievements and the economic strengths
   of Australia at the present time is a sense of self belief and a sense of
   national achievement and national dignity and national capacity which I
   believe the economic achievements and the economic recovery of the past
   few years has given Australia.
  I've said on a number of occasions in the past that when I became Prime
   Minister in March of 1996, I felt as if I had become the Prime Minister
   of a country, great though it was, was something of an anxious outsider
   knocking on the rich mans club of the Asian-Pacific region seeking admission.
  But over the last three and a quarter years, a lot has changed. The most
   significant thing is that we have been able to successfully stare down the
   worst recession that region has seen since World War II. And we have stared
   it down to an extent and in a way that a year ago if I had addressed a gathering
   like this, and I probably did address a gathering like this about a year
   ago, probably almost to the day because I normally address gatherings like
   this when I come to the State Conference of the Liberal Party here in South
   Australia. I probably would have said here something to you something along
   the lines of "Well, things have gone pretty well. We've got the Budget
   back into balance. We've implemented a number of industrial relations reforms.
   We've seen a little bit of a reduction in unemployment but we would like
   to see more and we're about to release the 800 pound gorilla - that is tax
   reform".
  And indeed we did. In fact, I think today is the first anniversary of the
   release of the 800 pound gorilla. The first anniversary of the release of
   taxation reform, I think Rob Gerard hosted a dinner for me in Canberra in
   his then capacity with the ACCI, he has so many capacities I think it was
   the ACCI. But a year on the landscape is very different. I would have said
   to you a year ago "Well, we have done pretty well, I think we can work
   our way through the Asian economic downturn but it's going to inflict a
   lot of damage and economic growth is going to slow down".
  A year on, of course, I can report to you that we have in fact succeeded
   beyond my wildest expectations. I have to be honest with you, I didn't predict
   a year ago that we would do so well. And we have done well for a number
   of reasons. The most important of which we are at long last getting the
   benefit of a series of economic reforms that have been embraced in this
   country over a number of years. And they include some reforms undertaken
   by the former government. And I've always been willing to give the former
   government credit in one or two areas where I believe the reforms it undertook,
   particularly in relation to changes to the financial system have been of
   great long term benefit to this country.
  But over the last few years of course under our administration we've been
   able to turn a $10.5 billion deficit into a healthy surplus, we've been
   able to bring about major changes to the industrial relations system that
   have lifted labour productivity in this country quite significantly, we've
   delivered the lowest interest rates in thirty years, the lowest level of
   inflation in more than three decades. And in a sense, most heart warming
   of all, the news we got yesterday that nationally, Australia has the lowest
   unemployment rate for more than ten years. And that in the three and a quarter
   years that we have been in office, we have been able to reduce the level
   of youth unemployment in Australia by 5.8 percentage points. It is now the
   lowest recorded since statistics began to be separately taken in relation
   to youth unemployment.
  And in the end, ladies and gentlemen, giving hope to young people to get
   jobs is about the most important mission that any government at a state
   or federal level of either political complexion can have in this country.
  So we've achieved a great deal over that period of time. And most recently,
   of course, negotiating fundamental reform of the tax system through the
   Australian Parliament has been probably the most important achievement of
   all. You are all aware that we took the tax reform plan to the last election.
   You are all aware of some of the risks that were inherent in that, but in
   the end you do have an obligation to campaign for reform when you hold a
   great public office. And that if you are not prepared to argue for things
   that improve the well being of the country, people are entitled to question
   fundamentally whether there is much point in your remaining in office. People
   are not elected Prime Minister or Premier or indeed to senior ministerial
   positions just for the satisfaction of having got there. And the whole purpose
   of being in government is to bring about reforms where they are necessary.
   And this country has needed taxation reform for a quarter of a century.
  About the first report I heard of when I came into Parliament was the Asprey
   Report. The Asprey Report was written under the chairmanship of the late
   Ken Asprey, who was a judge at the Court of Appeal in New South Wales, and
   it was commissioned by Billy Snedden when he was Treasurer and it was delivered
   to the Whitlam Government in 1975, not a good year for that particular government,
   but it was delivered to them and believe it or not, you know what it recommended?
   It recommended the introduction the introduction of a broad based indirect
   tax, and it recommended that it replace the wholesale sales tax, and it
   recommended some reductions in personal income tax as part of the package.
   And here we are at long last 25 years later, we have finally got that through.
  Now it wasn't in the exact same form that we put to the Australian people,
   and I was sorry about that. And I know there are some people in this room
   that were sorry about that. And the original model would have been better.
   But I couldn't get that through. The only way I was ever going to get that
   through the Parliament was to get the support of Senator Harradine. And
   he said "No". Or "I cannot" to be precise. And he couldn't
   and he didn't. So, I then opened negotiations with the Australian Democrats.
   And I found those negotiations straight forward and honourable. I don't
   agree with the Australian Democrats on a lot of things and they don't agree
   with me on a lot of things. But I found Senator Lees a thoroughly decent
   person with whom to deal and a person of honour and a person of her word.
   And you can deal with anybody who brings to negotiations that kind of good
   faith. And we got an outcome, less than perfect, but an outcome that was
   85 - 90 per cent of what we wanted. And of course we are going to implement
   that.
  There are going to be inevitably as you implement tax reform, there is going
   to be detail, there is going to be complexity. But I assure you that we
   are going to commit the resources to make certain that the Australian public
   fully understands what we are doing and the Australian public is fully informed
   about what we are doing, the business community is fully informed, about
   the advantages of the goods and services tax. And the advantages of this
   change for the business community, leaving aside for a moment business tax
   to which I will return, leaving that aside for a moment I can assure you
   that there are enormous benefits that will flow in terms of reduced export
   costs, reduced business costs, reduced fuel costs and other advantages from
   the fundamental reform that we are proposing. And that will, of course,
   come in substantially into effect on the first of July next year. And the
   benefits for South Australia, given the strong manufacturing industry base
   for this base are probably greater than for a number of other states. And
   you've already begun to see some of the changes which are involved with
   already the reduction in the higher rates of wholesale sales tax down to
   the more standard rate of 22 per cent as a precursor to the total abolition
   of wholesale sales tax on the first of July in the year 2000.
  As well as what was contained in the taxation reform plan taken to the Australian
   people, we invited John Ralph, supported by Rick Allett and Bob Joss, two
   other very prominent Australian businessmen, to report to us on reforms
   to the business taxation system. The Treasurer and I received that report
   from Mr Ralph a little over a week ago. And I want to record the profound
   gratitude of the government, not only to John, but also to Rick and to Bob
   and to all of the other people who worked on that report.
  I'm not in a position to make it public just yet. I'm not in a position
   yet to say exactly how we're going to handle the process of decision making
   and subsequent release of either or decisions and the content of the report.
   I want to say, however, it is about the most comprehensive and detailed
   examination of any aspect of the working of our economy that I have seen.
   It's a very well written report. It does contain some wide sweeping and
   wide ranging recommendations.
  Inevitably it has become a matter of understandable public knowledge that
   a number of issues are central to the proposals that have been examined
   by the report. Clearly there is a debate about whether we should have a
   lower rate of general taxation for companies paid for in part by the removal
   of some existing provisions, particularly accelerated depreciation. There
   are clearly going to be considerations of whether we should alter our capital
   gains tax structure. I've already said, and I repeat here today, that because
   we live in a global world economy where there are seamless flows of capital
   across boarders, increasingly followed by seamless flows of jobs, it's essential
   that Australia ask the constant question, is it as attractive to invest
   in Australia as it is to attract in other countries, particularly the United
   States.
  As a nation we have had a remarkable record for a people of only now 19
   million we have had a remarkable record of discovering things. Over the
   years we have been extraordinary in our inventive capacity but we have often
   been very bad and very negligent in our capacity to convert those inventions
   to our commercial advantage. And when I addressed the Federal Council of
   the Liberal Party a few months ago I spoke of not so much building Australia
   into a clever country or a lucky country both of which we already are. But
   rather building Australia into a 'can do' country. A country that can readily
   convert its intellectual capacity and intellectual capital to great national
   commercial advantage.
  And therefore one of the things that we have to look at when we examine
   our tax system is whether there are enough encouragements and incentives
   within the system for people to take risks and to invest in ventures. And
   that inevitably means we have got to look at the capital gains tax.
  I mention those things, ladies and gentlemen, to recognise the reality that
   part of the debate in responding to Ralph, part of the debate is fundamentally
   about those sorts of considerations. We haven't reached any final decisions
   yet. We hope to soon. We are in receipt of a lot of advice and that's fair
   enough. People have different points of view to put and it's part of the
   democratic process in a nation like Australia that people with commercial
   interests, legitimate commercial interests, and commercial concerns should
   be able to put their views and to put them very strongly.
  I can predict now that the final decisions we take won't satisfy everybody,
   they clearly won't. We are very mindful of the importance of some of the
   existing tax provisions for particular sectors of Australian business. We
   are also mindful that when you are looking at the impact of tax reform on
   particular sectors and particular companies you have got to take into account
   just not one section but rather the aggregate impact of tax reform right
   across the board. And it's fair to say that some sectors of industry have
   gained relatively more from the changes contained in the plan taken to the
   electorate last year than other sectors because the spreading of the broad,
   the base of the indirect tax in this country has brought about that result.
  But above all, I want out of the business tax reform process I want this
   country to have a modern, competitive taxation system. One that makes it
   attractive for the world to invest in Australia as well as one that makes
   it attractive for Australians to invest in Australia and also importantly
   and increasingly for Australian companies to invest abroad. Because we should
   never see foreign investment in this country as being simply a one-way process.
   So they are the sorts of considerations that I want to bring to our consideration
   of taxation reform in the business area.
  I have spoken, ladies and gentlemen, so far about essentially business and
   economic matters. But to, I guess, vary slightly a biblical injunction,
   governments don't live by bread alone either. And governments are not just
   about taxation and bottom lines and industrial relations and privatisation
   and share ownership. Governments are also about the kind of society we want,
   the kind of society in which we live. And that's why I am particularly proud
   of some of our greatest social initiatives.
  Our determination at the very beginning of our term in office to achieve
   national gun control laws in this country which have meant that I hope,
   and I think most people hope, that we may in years to come be spared the
   horrific murder rates and crime rates that are so evident in the United
   States of America. And time will tell how effective that has been, those
   changes but already the evidence is that they have started to have a positive
   impact.
  It is why the Government is so resolutely committed to a three-pronged attack
   on the drug menace of putting more money into law enforcement, more money
   into educating young people who against the dangers of drug abuse, indeed
   the dangers of taking certain drugs at all let alone abusing their consumption.
   And also putting additional resources into helping people who have got a
   drug problem kick the habit and change their lives for the better.
  And the Federal Government has committed an additional $500 million over
   the last couple of years towards that campaign. And I can't think of a social
   priority which is more important to me and is more important to the future
   well-being of this country. And it is something that touches everybody in
   one way or another. It's not just something for a Prime Minister to talk
   about at a gathering of people representing social welfare organisation.
   It's something a Prime Minister ought to talk about at a gathering like
   this as feelingly as he may talk about it at any other gathering.
  And I have tried to do that, ladies and gentlemen, within the embrace of
   an approach to social policy which I have called building a social coalition.
   That's based on a belief that in our kind of society you can't do anything
   completely on your own. We now have a far more realistic view in Australia
   about what governments can do. We went through a crazy period along with
   a lot of other nations around the world 25 or 30 years ago believing that
   all you had to do was to expand the role of government, get the government
   to spend more money and everything would be solved.
  The Whitlam Government tried that, the Johnson Administration tried that.
   I can think of a few State governments around Australia over the last 15
   years who tried that. They started running businesses, they started getting
   into this or that commercial activity where they didn't belong and it all
   fell in a heap. And no State knows that better than South Australia. And
   then there was perhaps a bit of an over-reaction and we got to the idea
   that the only thing that, in the eyes of some, the only thing that mattered
   was individual greed and individual gratification and that's not the right
   response either. And I think as we come to the end of this century and this
   millennium we have probably got a more civil balance in our community about
   the respective roles.
  The Government does have a limited role but it's a strategic role. The business
   community has a very important role. The great welfare organisations of
   Australia, like the City Missions and the Salvation Army and the St Vincent
   de Paul society, they have a very special role. Not just the role of compassion
   of looking after people but also the role of giving policy advice to governments.
   And philanthropic individuals have got a role. And it's in that context
   that the Government has advanced greater cooperation between the Government
   and the business community in the area of philanthropy. And we have given
   a number of very significant taxation concessions over the last few months
   and over the last year to encourage that.
  And it's in that context, ladies and gentlemen, that I am particularly delighted
   here in Adelaide in the presence of the Managing Director of the company
   to announce the extraordinary generosity of Santos Ltd which is to enter
   a joint venture with the University of Adelaide to establish the Santos
   School of Petroleum and Engineering. And the Santos company will be making
   a provision of no less than $25 million to the establishment of this school.
  Can I say to the company and to its Managing Director, Ross Adler, that
   this is precisely the kind of philanthropic venture that Australian companies
   should be encouraged to undertake. The sponsorship is intended to lay the
   financial foundation of the school for at least 20 years. And it is believed
   to be one of the largest financial contributions ever made to a university
   in Australia.
  The school will provide high quality research and professional training
   in an area of strategic importance to Australia's economic development.
   And it's a long-term investment in Australia's knowledge and skill base.
   And the Government itself wishes to demonstrate its support for this partnership
   and we are going to provide a $1 million grant over five years to fund a
   professorial Chair in petroleum engineering. And in recognition of that
   great gesture by the company the Commonwealth Government Chair, funded Chair,
   will be named the Ross Adler Chair in Petroleum Engineering at the University
   of Adelaide.
  This particular gesture by the company is a great source of satisfaction
   to the Government. I know it will be a great source of pride and satisfaction
   to the University of Adelaide. It's a marvellous benchmarker and role taker
   for the University of Adelaide, for Santos, for the city of Adelaide and
   for the State of South Australia. And it's a great demonstration of the
   philanthropic spirit of this city and it speaks volumes for the sense of
   civic responsibility of the company and those who have founded the company.
  This is a good example of the sort of social coalition of which I have spoken.
   But everybody has a responsibility in achieving outcomes. Each has a special
   role to play and a particular contribution to make. Our great responsibility
   as a national Government is to provide the fundamental underpinning and
   the fundamentally positive economic environment in which people can do things
   and to aspire to do even greater things. And as we come towards the end
   of this century we approach the end of the century and the next millennium
   with a great sense of hope and a great sense of optimism.
  I find as I go around Australia a sense of national resolve and a sense
   of national pride and a sense of national, perhaps contentment is not the
   right word because contentment speaks too much of complacency and oversatisfaction,
   but a sense of great achievement that we have been able to do something
   with our economy and we have been able to do it in a civil and a fair way.
   We have not just delivered lower interest rates and lower tax we have also
   delivered lower unemployment. We have preserved the social security safety
   net, we have tackled fundamental social problems and we have also had, of
   course as Australians want in recent months, we have had some remarkable
   successes on the sporting field.
  And I was reminded when John was talking with great pride about South Australian
   exports that at the end of our trip to North America Janette and I spent
   our last day in Boston and we saw a great South Australian export performing
   in Boston. We saw a tremendous performance on the first day of the Davis
   Cup by Lleyton Hewitt. It was an absolutely remarkable performance and it
   was a great source of pride for me as Prime Minister to wish him well before
   the game and to congratulate him afterwards. And I have got to tell you
   that the duo of the Prime Minister of Australia and the Honourable Andrew
   Peacock, Australia's Ambassador to Washington, cheering the Australians
   on surrounded by these very stony faced sullen and partisan Americans was
   quite a sight to behold. And all of that in 41 degree heat or 101 or 98
   or something as the Americans still translate and as I remember from my
   younger days.
  But, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for coming today. Thank you
   very much for the support that I know a lot of you give to our great political
   cause. I hope that our stewardship is seen as a proper discharge of the
   hopes that you have invested in us. We'll continue to try. I'll continue
   to work closely with your Premier who I admire and I congratulate for the
   success he has finally achieved through persisting with his plans to reduce
   the debt that he inherited here in the State of South Australia. And again
   I warmly thank Ross Adler and Santos Ltd for its great generosity and its
   great demonstration of what I mean when I speak of corporate philanthropy
   in Australia. Thanks a lot.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  SUBJECTS: taxation reform, business taxation system, Ralph Report, Asian-Pacific
   region, Australia's relationship with Israel.
  Thank you very much Chris for that very warm and generous introduction.
   To Leon Kempler, to his Excellency the Ambassador to Australia from Israel,
   Sir Zelman Cowen, the former Governor-General of Australia, my ministerial
   and parliamentary colleagues, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Ian Macfarlane,
   and many distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
  It is for me a particular honour and pleasure to be at this lunch. And there
   are a number of things I want to say about the connection I feel I have
   with the Chamber and what the Chamber represents in terms of relations between
   the people of Australia and the people of Israel.
  But I think it is appropriate for me to say at the very beginning that I
   know that I speak on behalf of all of you here, and I know millions of Australians,
   in expressing to the Government and the people of Turkey our immense sadness
   at the enormous natural disaster which has overtaken that country. I've
   asked the relevant sections of our Government to assess what assistance
   Australia can provide to the Government and to the people of Turkey and
   I know that the thoughts of many Australians and most particularly those
   within our community who have family links with Turkey will be very much
   with the people who are suffering as a result of this terrible natural disaster.
  Ladies and gentlemen my pleasure in being here today and the honour I feel
   in being invited to address this lunch is based in no small measure than
   on the association at a personal level I've had, long pre-dating my entry
   into public life, with the Jewish people of Australia and the profound admiration
   that I've had for the State of Israel and what that country has achieved
   since it's formation in 1948 in such adversarial and difficult circumstances.
   And I'm very proud of the fact that I've led a government which has, whilst
   its kept its eye very clearly on the maintenance of a fair and just peace
   in the Middle East, is a Government that has always in terms of its voting
   record in the United Nations and generally in a diplomatic sense deported
   itself in a way that is profoundly sympathetic and understanding towards
   the Government and the people of Israel. And the Australian Government has
   always understood the difficulties faced by the State of Israel and has
   pursued policies which are conducive to a further understanding of that.
  I welcome very warmly the message that was sent to this luncheon by the
   newly elected Prime Minister of Israel, Ehud Barak. He starts with a very
   large mandate and I can say from personal experience its always good to
   have your first term in government with a very large majority because you're
   bound in the course of taking decisions that are important to the future
   of your country and the long term stability of your government, you are
   bound to take some decisions that are going lose you a few friends and lose
   you a bit of support. I look forward to the Prime Ministership of Mr Barak.
   I wish him well. I know that he will pursue a just and lasting peace in
   the Middle East and I know that it is the desire of not only of my government
   but of all Australians of goodwill that there be that peace which recognises
   the legitimate rights, not only of the State of Israel and the people of
   Israel, but also the legitimate rights of other nations and other peoples
   within the Middle East.
  The relationship between Australia and Israel is a very close relationship.
   It is a relationship built on some common values. It is a relationship built
   on the common value of our commitment to individual liberty and freedom.
   Israel has been since her foundation a beacon of democracy and liberty in
   the Middle East. We share those values and those aspirations with Israel
   and our two peoples feel close as a consequence. We have of course very
   special links through the vibrant character of the Jewish community in Australia,
   but not only that but also because of the great respect so many Australians
   feel towards Israel and what Israel has achieved over the last 50 years.
  We have substantial economic links. But those economic links can be advanced
   and I'm glad that the information technology delegation that was led by
   Richard Alston to Israel was seen in such a highly successful light and
   I hope that the delegation dealing with agribusiness, which will shortly
   go to Israel, led by Phil Scanlan of Bonlac will be equally successful because
   in those two areas in particular, information technology and agribusiness,
   there is much to be shared between our two nations and our two societies.
   And it is through those sorts of links that we can build the modern 21st
   century characteristics of the relationship. The bonds of culture, the bonds
   of freedom, the people to people links, the cultural links, will always
   be there. But as Dr Johnstone exhorted us to do we should always keep our
   friendships in good repair and the friendship between Australia and Israel
   is no exception and we must seek in every way to build new ways of deepening
   and widening that friendship.
  And on that score I would like on behalf of the Government to address some
   words of thanks to you Mr Ambassador as you complete your tour of duty here
   in Australia. Over the last four years you have represented your country
   with great skill and dignity and grace. You have been a fine Ambassador
   for the people of Israel. You have understood the character of the relationship
   between our two nations and our two societies and you have interpreted in
   a new and fresh way the relevance of the links between our two societies
   as we move towards the 21st century. And I therefore thank you and your
   wife for the great work you have done in building even deeper links between
   our two societies and on behalf of everybody here I wish you well in your
   diplomatic and personal future as you leave this country with our immense
   gratitude and our immense goodwill for a job remarkably well done.
  In his introductory remarks Chris Anderson was kind enough to speak of the
   health and the strength of the Australian economy. And I want to spend just
   a few moments reinforcing the importance and the relevance of the strong
   economic climate that has been created in Australia over the last few years.
  There is little doubt that we are now experiencing the strongest economic
   fundamentals that Australia has seen since the late 1960s and in many ways
   the fundamentals are better now than they were then because then we were
   living in something of a world of economic unreality. We still then lived
   behind high tariff barriers. We lived under a centralised wage fixation
   system. We saw our markets as rather limited. The potential economically
   of the Asian Pacific region was yet to be fully realised and when we look
   back on those years, prosperous though they were, we could see that in a
   sense they were something of a calm before the economic storm which overtook
   the world in the 1970s with the end of fixed exchange rates, the quadrupling
   of oil prices and the other fundamental changes that occurred around the
   world.
  But now 30 years on our economy has been transformed. We are now an outward
   looking economy. We have low tariff barriers. We have a floating exchange
   rate. We are very much part of the global economy. We see information technology
   as being at the leading edge of economic achievement as we go into the next
   millennium. And importantly we've had governments, and I say governments
   because I am willing to give credit to my predecessors in one or two areas
   where I believe they undertook reforms that have been important to the long
   term economic strength of this country. And I think particularly of the
   decisions taken to deregulate the financial system and reduce tariff levels
   in Australia. But we have therefore had governments and most particularly
   the government that I've had the privilege of leading over the last three
   and a half years that have been willing to embrace fundamental change and
   reform and it is no accident that we have been able to stare down the worst
   economic downturn Asia has ever experienced.
  People often say to me that we have been lucky. Now we have been lucky.
   It's a great saying about Australia - the lucky country - coined by Donald
   Horne. But it's also true that you make your own luck. You make your own
   luck in life and you make your own luck as a nation. And we have made our
   own luck over the last few years. We could have squibbed it with the budget
   when we came into office. We could have said oh well if economic growth
   increases it will whirr back into surplus as somebody once famously said.
   We could have done that. We could have taken the easy way out in relation
   to industrial relations reform. We could have squibbed the fight that was
   needed to reform the Australian waterfront. We could have put taxation reform
   aside because it was too difficult. We could have gone soft on competition
   reform. We could have done all of those things. And if we had done all of
   those things, if we had sat on our economic reform hands after 1996, you
   would not now be experiencing the sort of buoyant business conditions that
   I think most Australians in business are now experiencing. And the economic
   strength we now have and the respect that is now afforded to Australia in
   international political and economic forums is no accident. It is a consequence
   of the policy changes that we have embraced over the last three and a half
   years.
  A few weeks ago I was in the United States and naturally I visited not only
   Washington, but also the financial centre of the world New York and I found
   there the greatest level of respect for the strength of the Australian economy
   that I have encountered at any time in the 25 years that I have been visiting
   that city in various political capacities. And the greatest thing to me
   out of what Australia has achieved over the last few years is the psychological
   boost it's given all of us. We've always been a confident people. We've
   always been an optimistic people. But there's also been quite a number amongst
   us who believe that when it gets to the rough and tumble of international
   economic competition sometimes we can't cut the mustard. But what I think
   out capacity to stare down this Asian economic downturn has done is that
   it's given to us a national self-confidence, a national self-belief, a national
   sense of economic achievement, the like of which this country has not had
   certainly not in my experience and perhaps in our experience since the end
   of World War II.
  So we are looking at a situation where our economic fundamentals are very
   strong. And as I frequently say this is not a council of complacency or
   smugness. You climb one economic reform hill and you find another in front
   of you. You never rest. You can never say well we've had three and a half
   very good years. Now we'll sit back and enjoy it and just let the economy
   look after itself. Once you start to do that people are entitled to ask
   the question are you any longer fit to be in government? Because the process
   of reform is an ongoing one It's an ongoing challenge. And that is why having
   successfully negotiated 85 to 90 per cent of our tax package through the
   Parliament, and I regret the fact that we didn't get the lot. We went to
   the Australian public with a package. The Australian public voted for that.
   I felt right up until Senator Harradine made that famous speech in the Senate
   I thought there was a chance of getting the lot through. And when he stood
   up and said "I can't", or "I can not", I think and he
   didn't. I knew that what we had to do was to sit down and negotiate with
   the Australian Democrats and see what we could get through.
  And as a result of that negotiation we didn't get everything but we got
   85 to 90 per cent of it. And that represents the most historic change to
   our taxation system since Federation.
  But the next shoe to fall as far as taxation reform is, of course, reforming
   our business taxation system. And I want first of all in my remarks about
   it today I want to record my immense gratitude to my friend and an eminent
   Australia businessman, John Ralph, who is here today, for his chairmanship
   and stewardship of this remarkably coherent examination of Australia's business
   taxation system. I also want to thank Rick Allet and Bob Joss who assisted
   John Ralph in preparing this review.
  It is without question the most comprehensive and detailed review of Australia's
   business taxation system ever. It is not, of course, the first review that's
   ever been carried out of Australia's taxation system. We have been regularly
   reviewing our system now for as long as I have been in Parliament. In fact,
   within a few months of my coming into Parliament in 1974 we got the report
   of the Asprey review which was commissioned by the late Billy Snedden when
   he was Treasurer in the McMahon Government. And now a quarter of a century
   on the big thing that has changed is that governments have begun to implement
   reviews of our taxation system.
  We have brought about fundamental change to the general taxation system.
   We are now about to focus on fundamental change of the business tax system.
   And we couldn't have been better served by the report that John has delivered.
   And I want to thank him very warmly on your behalf and on behalf of the
   Government for the tremendous dedication that he has brought to the task
   over the last nine or ten months.
  Now, I can't announce to you today, much as all that a few people suggested
   I should, I can't announce to you today all of the decisions that the Government
   has taken on the review that John and his colleagues have prepared. I can
   however take you as best I can into my confidence, the Government's confidence,
   regarding the process that we are going to bring to an examination of the
   review.
  We have commenced the detailed examination in Cabinet of the Ralph report.
   We haven't taken decisions, we still have a number of meetings to hold and
   quite a deal of analysis to undertake and no doubt at various stages quite
   a lot of questioning of members of the review group and people associated
   with preparation of the report.
  I am able to say to you that the Australian business taxation system will
   undergo quite fundamental change as a result of the recommendations of the
   report. And without canvassing areas of the report that I cannot canvass
   by dint of the fact that many elements of it do have a market sensitivity
   and until the Government has taken a decision as to which direction to go
   it is inappropriate to speculate.
  But I can say a number of things about the recommendations that are important
   for the Government's understanding and I hope the business community's understanding
   of it. And that is first and foremost it's very cohesive and integrated.
   It represents a total road map of the way forward so far as our taxation
   system is concerned. It's not one of those reports that, sort of, puts and
   takes and where you end up with something that lacks coherence and lacks
   integration. It's a report that quite properly is designed to make this
   country competitive in the 21st century.
  And I frequently say at gatherings like this that we are, for better or
   for worse, we are part of the global world economy. Those who think that
   in some way we can go back to the old days of shutting out the world and
   letting it pass us by are deluding themselves. We can't do that. And if
   we are to survive and if we are to do better than we are doing at the present
   time then, of course, we have to be part of the global economy. And that
   means we have to make investment decisions in this country as attractive
   as possible. It means that when we are looking at something like the capital
   gains tax, which I and the Government believe does need significant change
   and reform, we need to look at the attractiveness not only of Australians
   making investment in this country but also the attractiveness of Australia
   for people elsewhere to make investments. When we are looking at the attractiveness
   of Australia as a country in which to invest we must also look at the capacity
   of Australian companies to invest abroad and the value of the returns those
   Australians get from investing abroad.
  It is no secret that one of the issues that we need to resolve and one of
   the issues that's been a matter of very significant public debate in Australia
   over the last few months is, of course, the question of whether or not we
   might as a community opt for a lower general company tax rate, say 30 per
   cent, paid for in part by the removal of some existing provisions in the
   taxation legislation such as accelerated depreciation.
  Now, this has quite legitimately raised debate from within the business
   community about the relative impact on sectors. And that's a proper debate.
   If you are a manufacturer you will bring a particular view to tax reform.
   If you are in the service industries you will bring another view. If you
   are in the mining industry you will bring yet a third view.
  But it's important not only as we assess those competing claims, it's also
   important when the business community assesses those competing claims that
   they don't look at one section of taxation reform in isolation. It's not
   good enough for the manufacturers to say, well, I'll look at the impact
   on us, of say a lower company tax rate and less accelerated depreciation,
   without also looking at the aggregate impact of taxation reform generally.
   Because I think it is fair to say that what has already gone through the
   Parliament has in relative terms been of greater advantage to some sections
   of the business community than it has been to other sections.
  And what is important therefore when the Government reaches its decision
   as well as when business reaches its decision that all of us take into account
   the aggregate impact, the integrated impact, the whole impact of taxation
   reform and all aspects of it on the operations of business.
  I know that there is intense interest and speculation not only in the media
   but within the business community. And we are keen to take our decisions,
   to announce them and to see them implemented as soon as possible. But it
   is also desirable that we get those decisions right. You don't get one or
   two bites of business taxation reform. The opportunity that is in front
   of us at the moment is an opportunity that comes only once in a generation.
   And just as we took time to take our decisions in relation to general taxation
   reform and the result turned out to be a very positive one so it is with
   business taxation reform that we will take not an inordinate amount of time
   but we will take the right amount of time in order to reach the right decision.
  We will involve those in the community who should be involved in discussions
   to the appropriate degree. Can I point out that there has already been very
   extensive consultation between John and his committee and members of the
   business community in putting this reform proposal together.
  I find it very difficult on an occasion like this or indeed any other occasion
   when I am addressing a gathering of men and women who are involved in business
   in Australia to talk without turning a great sense of optimism and enthusiasm
   indeed excitement about the economic prospects that lie in front of this
   country.
  Chris said in his remarks that we occupy a very special place in the world.
   I have often said that Australia occupies a unique intersection. We are
   a nation that has deep links with the people and the nations of Europe.
   We are in many ways a projection of western civilisation in this part of
   the world. We share great democratic and liberal values in the broader sense
   of that word with the countries of North America.
  But here we are geographically in the Asian-Pacific region. And our cultural
   and political and other life is being enriched by the contribution of hundreds
   of thousands of Australians of Asian descent and Asian background. And when
   you put all of that together you find a country that is really quite unique.
   There is no other society in the world that has that combination of background,
   of values, that intersection of geography and history that Australia has.
   And it provides to us not only a tremendous economic opportunity but it
   provides to us a tremendous political opportunity. And the great change
   that I have felt as Prime Minister of Australia over the last few years
   as I have visited the nations particularly of our region is that the view
   of Australia has changed. Because of our economic achievement and strengths
   we are seen with a new respect. We no longer ask ourselves those rather
   silly questions of whether we are part of Asia, whether we are Asian, whether
   we are in Asia or we're enmeshed with Asia. What is happening now is we
   are just being ourselves as Australians in Asia. And we are finding, I think
   to our advantage, that we are no longer seen as the anxious outsider seeking
   admission into the rich club of Asia and the Pacific. Rather, we are seen
   as a very confident, self-assured, successful, where appropriate compassionate
   partner in the Asian-Pacific region.
  I am proud of the fact that we were strong enough economically to be, along
   with Japan, the only country in the world that contributed to the IMF bail-outs
   of Indonesia, Korea and Thailand. I am proud of the fact that we are seen
   in this part of the world as punching above our weight. Most of all, I am
   proud of the fact that we are seen as doing it with that special combination
   of unique Australian values that our history, our geography and our cultural
   inheritance has given us.
  Ladies and gentlemen, I thank the Chamber for the invitation to be here
   today. I salute those in the Israel-Australia Chamber of Commerce for the
   contribution they make to the vibrancy and the success of the business community
   in Australia. Many people in this room today have made a massive contribution
   to the economic strength and the economic vitality of our country. You have
   enriched the quality of the country's business life and many of you have
   also made a massive contribution to the quality of Australia's cultural
   life.
  As Prime Minister of Australia I am very conscious of that. I honour that
   contribution and I warmly thank you for what you are doing for Australia
   and in particular in the context of this gathering the great and enduring
   links between the people of Australia and the people of Israel. Thank you.
  [ends]
 AUSTRALIA-ISRAEL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
   QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
   CROWN TOWERS, SOUTHBANK, MELBOURNE
  E&amp;OE...................
  QUESTION:
  David Griffiths from Macquarie Bank. A question for Mr Howard. If we look
   at the implications of the tax reform and look at particular things like
   accelerated depreciation and then we lay across that the Kyoto greenhouse
   effect and what that will have on West Australian business, it goes to the
   heart of a lot of our growing businesses which has driven our sector. My
   question is, have you looked at the regional implications of tax reform
   and things like the Kyoto and is there anything the Government can do to
   address those issues?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well, the answer is that we are, of course, very conscious of regional implications
   as we look at the Ralph Committee recommendations. It is true that a number
   of mining companies have expressed a concern about the situation where you
   might have a lower rate of company tax but accelerated deprecation would
   be withdrawn. Not all mining companies have put that point of view. It's
   also true, if you look at the analysis of the impact of taxation reform
   generally quite a lot of that analysis produces a situation where the benefits
   to the mining sector have been assessed as greater than the benefits to
   other sectors. And that is relevant to the exhortation I made in my earlier
   remarks that as people react to business tax reform and business changes
   I ask them to take into account the aggregate impact of taxation reform.
  Now, I know the contribution of the mining industry of Western Australia
   to this nation's export income. I think it's about 25 per cent of our export
   income comes from the mining exports of Western Australia. And I am very
   conscious of that and we don't intend to take decisions that are going to
   impose unfair burdens or to cripple the capacity or indeed retard the capacity
   of the mining industry to go on making a contribution. And I am also very
   conscious of the revenue climate of large mining projects in Australia.
   So the answer to your question shortly is, yes, I am aware of regional implications.
   The longer answer is the one you have just heard and we'll certainly endeavour
   to put all of those things into the balance.
  QUESTION:
  Good afternoon Mr Prime Minister. My name is Wolf Blass, I am the founder
   of Wolf Blass Wines International.
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Hello Wolf.
  QUESTION:
  We are part of the Fosters Corporation and I am delighted to see my friend
   John Ralph to be there. We are the wine State and I want to speak on behalf
   of the wine industry and as you are aware we just have made an announcement
   that we have passed $1 billion revenue..
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Congratulations.
  QUESTION:
  .we have become the sixth biggest export revenue earner for Australia. However,
   my question is the tax reform. We at the moment are paying 41 per cent and


Subjects: Economy, Youth unemployment rate, further sale of Telstra,
   Tasmania's debt - Hydro policy, RFA - Labor Party Amendment.
E&amp;OE................
  Well thank you very much Shane for that very warm introduction. To you Jim,
   to Sue Napier, to Tony Rundle, Ray Green, Jocelyn Newman and my other Federal
   colleagues , my State Parliamentary colleagues and former colleagues, ladies
   and gentlemen. As always it is a great delight to be back in Tasmania. I've
   addressed in my capacities over the years as Federal Leader of the parliamentary
   Liberal Party, mark one phase and then mark two phase, I've addressed many
   State Council gatherings in Tasmania. I think I've addressed the pre-council
   dinner probably on six or seven occasions at least. I think it can fairly
   be said that speaking from a national perspective I don't think I've addressed
   a gathering like this in Tasmania at a time when our Federal and National
   standing has been stronger and better and more successful than it is at
   the present time.
  As I am able to report to you, as I will at the State Council tomorrow,
   the ship of State nationally is going extremely well. The Australian economy
   now is the best it's been for more than three decades. We now have the lowest
   level of employment nationally than for more than ten years. There has been
   5.8 percentage point reduction in the number of young people unemployed
   in the three and a quarter years that we've been in office. In fact there
   are fewer young Australians looking for full time work than at any time
   since statistics on that particular activity began to be measured in the
   1970s. We saw yesterday figures demonstrating that nationally we have the
   lowest level of long-term unemployed in this country since 1991. We have
   created almost 500,000 new jobs in Australia in the last three and a quarter
   years. We've turned a budget deficit of $10.5 billion into a strong surplus.
   We have the lowest interest rates, the lowest rate of inflation and the
   strongest sustained levels of business investment for more than 30 years.
   Our national debt to GDP ratio is healthily lower than what it was in the
   1980s and is one of the best in the OECD area.
  Coming down on the plane from Sydney I read with enormous pride a lengthy
   article in the latest edition of Fortune magazine read by all of those who
   make major economic decisions not only in the United States but around the
   world which talked about the strengths and confidence of the Australian
   economy.
  I've just come back from a visit to the United States which included a visit
   to the financial capital of the world, New York, and in the 20 or more years
   that I've been visiting that city in different capacities I have never encountered
   such a universally positive view about Australia. We are seen with a new
   respect and a new reverence for what we have been able to achieve, especially
   over the last three years. And the fact that we've been able to stare down
   the Asian economic downturn has given to this country a greater sense of
   self-belief and self-confidence and national pride at our capacity to achieve
   things than at any time that I've been in public life.
  So I am very happily able to report to you that nationally we are steering
   a very steady course and we go into the next century at the end of this
   year with the underlying strengths of the Australian economy and a sense
   of national wellbeing that like of which I have not experienced in the 25
   years that I have been in Parliament.
  Now that has not been achieved by accident. It's not been achieved by just
   good luck. You make your own luck in politics as you do in life. It has
   been achieved because when we come into office we set ourselves some goals
   and we stuck to achieving those goals. It's also been achieved because there
   were one or two intelligent reforms undertaken by the former government
   and I've never been reluctant to give the former government credit for one
   or two of the significant reforms and I think particularly of the moves
   towards a freer financial system and the changes that were made in tariff
   policy in the early 1990s which I think contributed very significantly to
   a stronger Australian economy.
  But the major reforms we have undertaken over the last three and a quarter
   years have contributed the lion's share of the strengthening of the Australian
   economy and it's been achieved by all of us working together. And I would
   take this opportunity at this dinner as I always do to express my immense
   gratitude to the rank and file members of the Liberal party for sticking
   with us. You can't win elections without party members and what I have achieved
   in politics and what my parliamentary colleagues have achieved in politics
   has been overwhelming due to your efforts. And you stuck by us when we were
   out of office federally and at a state level. Things are pretty good federally.
   I know you are going through a less happy time at a state level and I'll
   come to the state scene in a moment. But there are times when we were out
   of office just about everywhere. And people were writing the party off and
   they were saying it was finished. And they were really talking about a new
   political order that didn't really have the Liberal Party featuring very
   strongly. But there were many people in this room who stuck by us and you
   all, and we all lived, to fight another day and we all lived ultimately
   to win in March of 1996.
  So this is an occasion for me as the fortunate beneficiary at a Federal
   level of that sustained loyalty and help over so many years to extend my
   grateful thanks to the people of the Tasmanian Liberal Party who've helped
   us so much and have been the life-blood of our support through all of the
   difficult years as well as through some of the better years. But as I survey
   the national scene I recognise that it's uneven.
  I was saying to Margot Gatenby a few moments ago that very recently I attended
   a dinner for two of my Federal colleagues in Sydney. The dinner was held
   at Sylvania Waters - a famous family didn't turn up! We'd have taken their
   donation! It was a very large and enthusiastic dinner. About 600 people
   at it. And in the course of it one of the members, Bruce Baird, said that
   the unemployment rate in the Sutherland shire of Sydney, which covered the
   two seats involved was only 2.3 percent and there are many parts of Australia
   where unemployment has gone to very low levels or virtually disappeared.
   But I also know that there are many areas of Australia where that is not
   the case and I know that Tasmania still continues to have much higher levels
   of unemployment than many other parts of Australia although there has been
   a significant improvement all over the country. But there is still particular
   challenges faced by your island state which are not faced by other parts
   of the country and we at a federal level have always been conscious of that
   and that is why historically we've been associated with such job injecting
   schemes as the freight equalization program and we've presided over what
   I think I could confidently and modestly describe as a sensitive division
   of the proceeds of the sale of Telstra to ensure that Tasmania gets a fair
   share.
  I've got to say that John Olsen and Richard Court don't use the word sensitive.
   And from time to time they take me to account over that but I make absolutely
   no apology at all to anybody, anywhere in Australia for what my government
   has done in relation to the Natural Heritage Trust to help the people of
   Tasmania. No apology at all. I defend the decision to spend every last dollar.
   And I also take the opportunity as all of us must as Liberals, to remind
   the Premier of this State that when he announces programs that have been
   funded by federal money he might at least have the honesty and the decency
   to acknowledge the source of the funds.
  Now that of course brings me to say something else about the question of
   state and federal responsibilities. One of the great things that we've been
   able to do at a federal level is that we've been able to reduce our accumulated
   federal government debt.
  When we came to power the accumulated federal government debt of this country
   was in the order of $85-$90 billion. That is the money that had been racked
   up through successive deficits by the federal government and there had been
   a very big increase in that amount over the last few years that the federal
   Labor government had been in office.
  And I can report to you tonight that if we are able to sell the remaining
   50.1 per cent of the government's ownership, the government's shares in
   Telstra we will by the year 2002-2003 be able to totally eliminate net commonwealth
   government debt in this country.
  And one of the reasons why we have lower interest rates in this country
   is that we no longer have the federal government voraciously competing in
   the financial markets with private companies for the loanable funds within
   our financial system. It is no accident that we have lower interest rates.
   It's partly due to the fact that we have lower inflation and we have rising
   labour productivity which moderates wage claims, but one of the other reasons
   is that the Federal Government is not soaking up as much money as it once
   used to and that is taking pressure off interest rates. And if you go from
   the Federal level and go around the states, you see the same pattern. Victoria
   has dug itself out of a huge economic hole. It has returned prosperity to
   that state and pride to the city of Melbourne in particular under Jeff Kennett's
   leadership because they have tackled the debt problem of that State.
  I was in South Australia recently, and I spent a lot of time talking to
   the business community of Adelaide and to the business community of that
   State and I found there a sense of hope and confidence and optimism I haven't
   found for a long time. And I lost count of the number of business men and
   women who said to me that the reason why people were so much more confident
   was that they thought national economic management was strong and effective,
   and the national economic climate was good, but they also felt that because
   the South Australian Government had finally been able to get the long-term
   leasing of ETSA, the South Australian Electricity Authority, through the
   State Parliament, the State now had a prospect of eliminating its debt and
   joining the other relatively debt free States and the Commonwealth in a
   far more optimistic debt free future.
  Now, all of that, ladies and gentlemen, inevitably leads me, as you might
   expect it does, to say something about the overwhelming need for the State
   of Tasmania to do something about the chronic debt problem of this State.
   Tony Rundle was absolutely right. Tony Rundle was speaking for the future
   of Tasmania with the policy on the hydro that he took to the last election.
   I know it may be unpopular with some Tasmanians for me to say it but I'm
   going to say it nonetheless, that until this State tackles its long-term
   debt problem and does something about it through the long-term leasing or
   sale or whatever arrangements in relation to the hydro it is going to continue
   to languish and it going to continue to be seen by the rest of Australia
   as essentially responsible for its own problems. And the more that other
   States are willing to do the things that are necessary to fix the problem
   in their own States the less sympathy there will be for the plight of Tasmanians.
   Now, I say that as a friend. I say that as somebody who's come to this State
   in different capacities every year of the 25 years that I've been in Parliament.
   And I say it as somebody who frequently says in other parts of Australia
   that there are special needs and special problems in Tasmania which need
   to be understood and need to be addressed. But you cannot forever ignore
   the fact that the debt of this State as a share of gross State product is
   more than four times the average of all of the Australian States. And that
   until that is tackled, and we all know the only way in which it can be tackled,
   until that is tackled, is going to remain an albatross around the neck of
   this State. And I say it with the greatest of goodwill and the greatest
   of sincerity, it does need to be tackled.
  And, in a sense, the developments over the last year where quite a lot of
   additional funds have begun to flow under the various schemes that I mentioned
   into Tasmania, and as I say, all of those decisions are utterly justifiable
   and necessary and appropriate but, in a sense, that is being used as a bit
   of an excuse, as a bit of a smokescreen by the current Tasmanian Government
   to give the impression that the debt problem is no longer with you. It is.
   The debt problem will always be with Tasmania until something is done about
   it. It won't disappear overnight. And just as we had to do something about
   our debt problem, and it wasn't as great in relative terms, bad though it
   was, and we are now enjoying the benefit of having done something about
   it, so it is with the State of Tasmania.
  Can I say but two other things to you. One of those relates to the forest
   industry in this State. You all know as Tasmanians how important both the
   economics and the politics of forestry in this State have been over the
   years. You will be aware of the Regional Forest Agreement that Tony Rundle
   and I negotiated not so long ago. And it brought an unparalleled balance,
   I think, into proper concern for environmental values but also a lot of
   additional investment in the industry in various parts of Tasmania. And
   it's already led to the creation of several hundred new jobs. And it was
   seen by the industry as providing 20 years of long-term security. And for
   the first time every, at a Federal level, I insisted that Federal guarantees
   be given in respect of any capricious breach of contract and removal and
   withdrawal of resource security. And I did that because I thought it was
   a fair request and I also did it in the face of some institutional objections
   to the very notion that the national government should, in fact, guarantee
   that if people made an investment in an industry they could confidently
   expect that the conditions under which the investment were made would be
   honoured in the long-term by the governments of Australia. I thought that
   was a pretty reasonable request by industry. And what the forest industry,
   the timber industry of this State has had to put up with over the years
   with capricious withdrawals of consents and approvals by federal governments
   in particular, has been, I think, quite unreasonable. And that agreement
   was a very good agreement. And it was an agreement that was widely acclaimed
   by the trade union movement not only in Tasmania but around Australia, by
   the timber industry and it was also recognised by all but the most radical
   environmentalists as being also a very good deal for the environment. And
   I have to tell you that a Labor Party amendment to the Regional Forest Legislation
   in the Senate could cast, if it were carried - and I can assure you it won't
   be carried with the support of any Coalition Senators - and, of course,
   it won't be carried in the House of Representatives, but if it were carried
   it would undermine the agreement that Tony and I signed. Because what the
   amendment proposes is that you draw a distinction between Regional Forest
   Agreement signed before and after a particular date. And the design of that,
   of course, is to ensure that the Tasmanian agreement is not affected by
   the amendment. But the problem is there's another part of the amendment
   that says that all Regional Forest Agreements have got to comply with the
   objects of the Act which are to be inserted by the amendments. It's pretty
   ridiculous to put forward the proposition that a Regional Forest Agreement
   signed more than a year ago ought to comply with the objects of an Act that
   are going to be inserted in the Act in a few weeks time. You only have to
   state that to see how ridiculous it is. And on top of that, I've been advised
   by the crime law authorities in Canberra that the amendment, in any event,
   is unconstitutional because it's in breach of section 99 of the Constitution
   which says that you can't, in effect, at a Federal level, discriminate between
   the States or between different parts of the States. One of the cornerstone
   principles of the Federal compact made almost 100 years ago.
  Now, I mention the detail of that to illustrate the nonsense that is going
   on still at a Federal Labor level on the issue of resource security. And
   I think it's something that the trade union movement in this State ought
   to be outraged about and it is something that the State Labor government
   ought to be put on the rack about because it is their mates in Canberra
   who are playing fast and loose if they got their own way with the agreement
   that was signed by Tony and myself. Now, I want to assure you and assure
   all Tasmanians that there is no way that that lunatic amendment can get
   up because we're not going to support it. And even if they got the majority
   in the Senate there's no way it could go through the House of Representatives.
   But it is a matter of concern to me that the Labor Party has still not passed
   the Regional Forest Legislation. And we'll all be pushing very hard to get
   it through in the form in which it is presented.
  I mention that, my friend, because that issue is very important to Tasmania.
   And I'm very proud of the agreement that I negotiated with Tony Rundle.
   It was very balanced and it's provided a lot of long-term security. But
   the Labor Party, at a Federal level, is now run by people who are utterly
   indifferent to a balanced industry outcome. And they don't seem to care
   at all about how hard it is for blue collar workers to get jobs in regional
   areas of Australia. And if you capriciously close down a forest industry
   and you throw men and women out of work as a result it's very difficult
   indeed for those people to find jobs in alternative employment. And it's
   very interesting that the people who are taking up the cudgels more and
   more for the blue collar workers of regional areas of Australia are, in
   fact, Liberals and National Party members. And Wilson Tuckey, my Minister
   for Forests, is doing a great job taking up the cudgels for the timber workers,
   not only here but I might say also in other parts of Australia.
  The final thing I want to say to you is very much about the future of our
   party and the future of our country. We are about to end this century. We're
   about to enter a new millennium. And we enter that new millennium with a
   sense of optimism and national self confidence which is greater than I have
   ever experienced. We are in a special place, not only in the world but we're
   also in a special place and moment as far as our history is concerned. We
   are a country that has very deep roots with Europe. We are a projection
   of western civilisation in many ways in this part of the world. But we've
   had a long political association with the United States and we share many
   values in common with that country. But here we are, though, in the Asian
   Pacific region and we have hundreds of thousands of Australians of Asian
   descent now making a terrific contribution to the building of our community.
   And we occupy a very special intersection of history and geography and culture.
   We're the only country in the world that has got that combination and it
   gives us a capacity to do things and achieve things in our region and around
   the world that we haven't been able to do before.
  You can carry authority in the world if you've got a strong economy. It's
   no good lecturing people if things are a mess at home. And people will listen
   to you with a new respect and a new regard and a new ore if you lead a country
   that has been successful. And we have been successful in a way that few
   societies this century have been. We've got a strong economy. We're a tolerant
   nation. We've been continuously democratic for the entire century. And,
   therefore, as the person who has the immense privilege of being the Prime
   Minister of our country as we come towards the end of this century, I have
   to say that we have achieved an enormous amount. And our great responsibility
   is to build on that as we go into the next millennium and to give to our
   children in that next millennium the sort of foundations that I know all
   of us would want to do. It's a great time to be a Liberal in Australia.
   It's a great time to be part of a very significant and very proud chapter
   in the history of our country. Thank you.
  [Ends]


Subjects: Liberal Party traditions; Liberal achievements; Tony Rundle; Hydro
   policy, Tasmania's debt; Forest industry; Tough on Drugs policy; Gun control;
E&amp;OE....................
  Thank you very much, Shane; to Jim Bowler; to Sue Napier, your Grace; Senator
   Jocelyn Newman, the senior Federal representative from Tasmania and my valued
   Cabinet colleague, my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
  Can I say how happy I am again as Prime Minister to address this State Council,
   this annual gathering, of the Tasmanian Division of the Liberal Party. I
   wish also to extend my great gratitude to Jim for the tremendous work that
   he's done over the past years as President of the Division. I came through
   the Party organisation. I know that the pay is low and the material rewards
   are limited but I also know that the immense satisfaction of fighting for
   something that you believe in and contributing to a cause that you feel
   will better the welfare of the people of Australia is about the most satisfying
   and rewarding thing that you can do. But it hasn't been easy here in Tasmania.
   And I thank you most warmly, Jim. You'll be remembered and the work that
   you've done will be seen quite properly as an immense contribution to the
   Liberal Party cause in Tasmania.
  Can I also join Shane in remarking on the contribution of Tony Rundle. Shane
   was right, he and Tony got away with blue murder on occasions through their
   quiet, whimsical, effective way. I mean, they sort of sat and said nothing
   and they, you know, when one or other of their colleagues was sort of railing
   against the centralists in Canberra, they would say, oh, you know, they
   shouldn't talk to you like that, John, that's shocking but how about such
   and such. They did it very well. They did it very skilfully. But Tony did
   something else at the last election here in Tasmania. And I know it's not,
   in a sense, of much comfort and satisfaction in the political world to say,
   well, you were right but the people didn't understand that. But in the long
   run that does mean something. Because in the long run being in office is
   not about having a white car and having the privilege of being the Premier
   or the Prime Minister and sort of getting welcomed and people saying nice
   things about you. In the long run being in government is about trying to
   do good things for the country or trying to do good things for your State.
   And what Tony Rundle did at the last election was to say what had to be
   said. And what he said in the last election campaign was true then and it's
   even more true a year on. Because every country, every State, every municipality
   is, in the end, master of its own destiny and that implies both privileges
   as well as responsibilities. And Tony was prepared to discharge the ultimate
   responsibility of somebody holding a position of authority and that was
   to tell people what was needed to secure their future even though part of
   the message was not immediately accepted and not immensely palatable. And
   in the long run when the history of this period of Tasmanian politics is
   written people will say that Rundle was right in what he said about the
   State's debt and the he had the courage to state it. I wish you well. I
   wish both you and Carolyn every happiness in the future. I count you as
   a friend and colleague of the highest order and I think you've done a great
   thing by the Tasmanian people and by the Liberal Party here in your State.
  A gathering like this, friends, is an occasion to reflect as well as project
   forward. This is the last Tasmanian State Council of this century, this
   millennium. And it's an occasion, therefore, to reflect on the heritage
   of the Liberal Party. It will be 50 years in December since Robert Gordon
   Menzies and Arthur Fadden led the Coalition to power in 1949. And over that
   50 years there's a lot about the Liberal heritage of which we should be
   immensely proud. We should understand the character of our party. We, in
   the term that I've coined somewhat, we are a broad church. Unlike centre
   right parties in other parts of the world the Liberal Party of Australia
   is the custodian of both the classical Liberal tradition in our society
   as well as the conservative tradition. We are neither a conservative party
   exclusively nor are we a small 'l' Liberal Party exclusively. We are a mix
   of the two. There are things about Australia's history and our past that
   I believe continue to serve us well and should be preserved. There are things
   about our past and there are things about what we do now that need to be
   changed and reformed to provide us a stronger and better future. And the
   art of good statecraft is to choose from the past, from the heritage, from
   the history, those things that are of continuing and enduring value but
   also to recognise that change and reform in other areas is necessary to
   secure stability and to secure progress. And the Liberal Party has always
   been about trying to balance those things. The Liberal Party has always
   been about the liberty of the individual.
  One of the proudest things that I was able to say at the Wentworth Hotel
   on the 2nd of March 1996 when I formally accepted the immense
   privilege that had been conferred upon me and my party at the election,
   at the ballot box that day was that the Liberal Party of Australia was owned
   by no one section of the Australian community.
  We are sympathetic to business. But we are not beholden to business. We
   understand the importance of profit and capitalism but we recognise the
   potential for abuse and excesses that can occur. We recognise that the Government
   has a limited role but nonetheless a strategic role within our community.
   We are not for the government withdrawing from all areas of activity, but
   we are for the government focussing on those areas that properly belong
   to government and that does not normally include commercial activity.
  We're a Party that does not believe in privilege or class. We are a Party
   that honours and respects tradition but also prides itself in sharing the
   great egalitarian tradition of the Australian people. We are increasingly
   a party that represents people who might in another time and another era
   have regarded themselves as traditional supporters of the Labor Party. I
   was immensely satisfied and pleased that in 1996 one of the great features
   of the Coalition's victory on that occasion, was that many of the great
   industrial centers of our country, and the great mining centres of our country,
   historically associated with the Australian Labor Party were in fact returned
   federal members representing the Coalition.
  The city of Broken Hill is represented in the federal parliament by a member
   of the National Party. The city of Mt Isa is represented in the federal
   parliament by a coalition member. The cities of Whyalla and Port Pirie in
   South Australia are represented in the national parliament by a Liberal
   member. And so the list can go on. And I think it is very important that
   as we move into the next millennium, for all of us to understand that we're
   living in a different political world. It's a less ideological political
   world.
  The Australian community, particularly those under 30 are not as beholden
   to ideology as were their parents. They don't see themselves being involved
   in an angry struggle about ideology the way in which their parents may have
   in the 1960s. They are however people who look for positive outcomes. They
   are interested in a political party that delivers results. That can do things
   to make their lives more secure. And I think as we move into the next millennium
   we will see politics shaped less by rigid ideology but nonetheless shaped
   very strongly by basic values and there is a difference.
  Ideology to me has always been something rather rigid imposed from above.
   Whereas values are things that come from the community and in a sense are
   ageless. The instincts of candour and honesty and civil behavior and respect
   for the rights of the individual and the acceptance that in any decent society
   along with rights and privileges go responsibilities and obligations. They
   are values which are quite ageless in my view and embeddable. They will
   be expressed in different ways in different times and political parties
   have a responsibility to respond to those different circumstances.
  So it is important on an occasion like this that we think about what our
   party has achieved. Not only have we been in office for 34 of the last 50
   years, but many of the great breakthroughs that have occurred, the great
   breakthroughs in terms of tolerance and human values and a quality of opportunity
   have occurred under Federal Liberal governments. It was after a federal
   Liberal government that really opened up opportunities for the entire Australian
   population for a university education. And the reforms carried out in that
   area by the Menzies government in the 1950s remained one of the great contributions
   to the expansion of education to the Australian people.
  It was under a coalition government that the white Australia policy was
   ended under the Prime Ministership of Harold Holt. It was under the leadership
   of the Fraser government that was accepted into our country over 150,000
   Indochinese refugees. In fact we took more Indochinese refugees in the 1970s
   on a per capita basis than any country on earth and that was Australia being
   an open hearted, decent spirited country offering a haven to people whose
   lives have been devastated by a long and costly war. It was under a Coalition
   government that we ended one of the great sectarian divides in this country
   when we provided assistance to independent schools and recognised a cornerstone
   of education policy in this country. And that is that every Australian parent
   has the right to choose the form of education that his or her child should
   receive. And that principle was re-endorsed only two or three months ago
   when we announced long-term plans to provide even more choice to Australian
   parents in relation to the education of their children.
  A Coalition government has been responsible for many of the great [tape
   break] and coming up to date we now have a Coalition government presiding
   over and having made a great contribution towards achieving the strongest
   economic conditions that this country has had for more than 30 years. And
   there are many statistics that I could regale you with this morning about
   the strength of our economy. The one that in a persona sense is the most
   heart-warming of all is that in the three-and-a-quarter that we have been
   in government since March of 1996 we have seen a 5.8 percentage point decline
   in the number of young Australians looking for work. And that is the best
   figure of all because in the end a good economy exists to provide good living
   standards and rising job opportunities.
  Our unemployment rate is still too high. It's seven percent nationally.
   It's much higher in Tasmania. It's lower in other parts of Australia. It's
   uneven, it's lumpy. And we still have a long way to go but it's better than
   it's been for the last 10 years. And we've created almost 500,000 jobs in
   the last three and a bit years. And if we can continue our current rate
   of economic growth and, better still, if we can persuade the Senate to pass
   our laws entrenching youth wages and dealing with the unfair burden on small
   business of the unfair dismissal laws then we can hope to drive that unemployment
   rate even lower. And it will be one of the goals of the Government to keep
   doing that. Because the economic strength we have now must be translated
   increasingly in the years ahead towards providing more job opportunities
   for our young people. And those job opportunities will essentially be found
   in private business and the private sector. The strength of the business
   community and the business sector is still the foundation of job generation
   in this country. And that is why the security that the Federal Government,
   the Howard Government and the Rundle Government brought to the timber industry
   in this State was so important because it's a major employer in Tasmania.
   And that is why, as I said to you last night, I'm distributed at the import
   of the amendments that are being proposed in Canberra by our Federal opponents.
   Although, I make it plain to you, there's no way those amendments will be
   accepted by the Government. But the very fact that they're being proposed
   show an indifference towards the long-term economic security of this State.
   At long last I think there in Tasmania we've got a balance between the maintenance
   of a strong industry but also a proper concern for the environmental values
   of the State. And I want that balance preserved, I want it protected and
   I want it secured. And I can assure you on behalf of the Federal Government
   that we'll make absolutely certain that nothing is done to undermine, disturb
   or qualify the agreement that I signed with Tony Rundle covering regional
   forest arrangements in Tasmania and the investment that has been made by
   the industry will be fully honoured and fully protected and the jobs that
   have been created and secured as a consequence of that investment will also
   be fully honoured and fully protected.
  As we survey both the past and the present political scene at this State
   Council gathering we also throw forward naturally to the next millennium.
   What Australia has been able to do over the last three years has been to
   win a new respect, a new admiration around the world. We have important
   goals both nationally and internationally. We seek to build our reputation
   as a 'can do' country, as a country that can convert our inventive capacity
   to commercial benefit and commercial return. A country that has the capacity
   to become not only a regional financial centre but a world financial centre.
   Because the generic assets we have at the moment, a stable government, a
   stable economy, clear laws of corporate behaviour, an incorruptible judiciary,
   well regulated and supervised banks, Australians having a great capacity
   to speak the languages of the region with considerable skill and dexterity,
   all of those things make Australia an increasingly attractive place in which
   to invest and to establish regional service and financial activities. And
   we have great opportunities as we go into the next century to achieve those
   goals.
  And in relation to Tasmania I want to assure you again that the Government
   I lead will continue to have a particular concern for the special requirements
   and the special circumstances of Tasmania. We have, after all, a very good
   record. We gave Tasmania such fundamental programmes as the freight equalisation
   scheme. We've always understood the disabilities of an island State regarding
   transport costs. I don't think anybody can contest the fact that Tasmania
   has been fairly treated out of the Natural Heritage Trust and all the other
   programmes that have come from the sale of the various tranches of Telstra.
   And we'll continue to ensure that Tasmania gets her fair share and gets
   a fair deal. But as I said last night and I repeat this morning, that there
   remains a long-term cloud over the economic future of Tasmania and that
   is the debt of this State which is four times the State average. And until
   the bullet is bitten and something is done about that debt here in Tasmania
   your economic growth will continue to be constrained. And that is why I
   remain compassionately of the view that something must be done about the
   privatisation of the Hydro. I know that's unpopular in some circles in Tasmania.
   I know I will be condemned for saying it. But just as Tony Rundle spoke
   the truth a year ago, I speak the truth this morning when I reassert its
   necessity. Every other State in Australia and nationally is tackling the
   debt problem.
  The South Australian Government struggled to get its electricity authority's
   privatisation legislation the Parliament and succeeded. The Victorian Government
   has massively reduced the debt of that State and lifted the hopes and the
   living standards of Victorians by the action that it's taken. If we can
   secure the sale of the rest of Telstra by the year 2002 we will free Australia
   of net Commonwealth Government debt and that will lay the foundation of
   good circumstances for interest rates in the early years of the next century
   and also provide us the flexibility in time for further reductions in taxation.
   Because if you can rid yourself of the burden of debt the money you otherwise
   use to pay off the debt can be used for either the provision of new services
   or reductions in taxation. And that is why eliminating debt is so tremendously
   important. And just as we had to take action at a national level to achieve
   that outcome and just as the Victorians did it and the South Australians
   have done it and others have done it so it is necessary also for Tasmania
   to do it. I don't say that in any hectoring or insensitive or hard-hearted
   sense. It is a statement of reality. And each must make a contribution to
   solving their own difficulty and their own problem. And I think it remains
   extremely important that that be done.
  The last thing that I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen of a policy
   character is to remind you, as we should always as Liberal's remind ourselves
   that we don't exist just to get the economy right. We don't exist just to
   achieve business and material wellbeing for our community, important though
   that is, because it provides jobs which is a basis of family security. But
   we also exist to achieve great social goals and we've achieved many of those
   over the last three and a quarter years. No audience in Australia would
   know better than you do of the traumatic impact of the Port Arthur tragedy
   which occurred in April of 1996. But we were able to achieve then through
   national gun control legislation is one of the great social achievements
   of the last ten or twenty years.
  I know it was unpopular in some areas, but its long term contribution to
   the security of people is immense and we only have to see the almost daily
   demonstration of the terrifying impact of unlimited access to weapons in
   the United States to realise what an important measure that was borne out
   of the most awful and traumatic tragedy.
  So it is equally that we remain very committed to the ongoing fight against
   the drug menace. We may argue in our community about the margin, about this
   or that approach to fighting the drug problem, but most of us agree as to
   95 percent of what needs to be done. We need to educate young people against
   starting on drugs. We need to remind them of the link between so-called
   soft drugs and hard drugs. That the one leads to the other. And this absurd
   notion that marawana can be consumed without any long-term harm is not only
   clinically implausible and ridiculous, but has been constantly disproved
   by individual experience.
  We need to provide more resources for law enforcement. We need to make it
   very clear that there is no mercy, sympathy or compassion in our community
   for people who traffic out of the human misery of others, which is what
   drug dealers do.
  And finally, of course, we must be compassionate and caring and understanding
   for those people who want to break the drug habit. And I've talked to a
   lot of people who are trying to break the drug habit. I've talked to the
   parents who've lost their children through drug overdoses. And there is
   no more I guess arresting, sobering experience for a person in public life
   to do than to sit down at length to people who've gone through that tragedy
   and it's important that we do that, it's important that we understand it.
   It's very important that we also have in this country a support mechanism
   so that if somebody wants to give up the habit then they get help immediately
   and they don't have to wait a month or two before they get that assistance.
  And at a federal level we have responded. We've put an extra $500 million
   into our Tough On Drugs Strategy. And I wish to public debate focussed on
   all the positive things that the government's of Australia are trying to
   do together - labor and Liberal alike - rather than focus on the fact that
   we may disagree about whether you have a safe injecting room which I don't
   support or whether you have heroine trials which I don't support either.
   I think it would be a good idea if we focussed on the things that we are
   achieving together because there's a lot of collective determination on
   the part of all the governments of Australia to try and do something about
   this dreadful scurge in our community. And it's also important that we keep
   a sense of perspective about Is to remind you as we should always as Liberal's
   remind ourselves that we don't exist just to get the economy right. We don't
   exist just to achieve business and material wellbeing for our community,
   important though that is, because it provides jobs which is a basis of family
   security. But we also exist to achieve great social goals and we've achieved
   many of those over the last three and a quarter years. No audience in Australia
   would know better than you do of the traumatic impact of the Port Arthur
   tragedy which occurred in April of 1996. But we were able to achieve then
   through national gun control legislation is one of the great social achievements
   of the last ten or twenty years.
  I know it was unpopular in some areas, but its long term contribution to
   the security of people is immense and we only have to see the almost daily
   demonstration of the terrifying impact of unlimited access to weapons in
   the United States to realise what an important measure that was borne out
   of the most awful and traumatic tragedy.
  So it is equally that we remain very committed to the ongoing fight against
   the drug menace. We may argue in our community about the margin, about this
   or that approach to fighting the drug problem, but most of us agree as to
   95 percent of what needs to be done. We need to educate young people against
   starting on drugs. We need to remind them of the link between so-called
   soft drugs and hard drugs. That the one leads to the other. And this absurd
   notion that marawana can be consumed without any long-term harm is not only
   clinically implausible and ridiculous, but has been constantly disproved
   by individual experience.
  We need to provide more resources for law enforcement. We need to make it
   very clear that there is no mercy, sympathy or compassion in our community
   for people who traffic out of the human misery of others, which is what
   drug dealers do.
  And finally, of course, we must be compassionate and caring and understanding
   for those people who want to break the drug habit. And I've talked to a
   lot of people who are trying to break the drug habit. I've talked to the
   parents who've lost their children through drug overdoses. And there is
   no more I guess arresting, sobering experience for a person in public life
   to do than to sit down at length to people who've gone through that tragedy
   and it's important that we do that, it's important that we understand it.
   It's very important that we also have in this country a support mechanism
   so that if somebody wants to give up the habit then they get help immediately
   and they don't have to wait a month or two before they get that assistance.
  And at a federal level we have responded. We've put an extra $500 million
   into our Tough On Drugs Strategy. And I wish to public debate focussed on
   all the positive things that the government's of Australia are trying to
   do together - labor and Liberal alike - rather than focus on the fact that
   we may disagree about whether you have a safe injecting room which I don't
   support or whether you have heroine trials which I don't support either.
   I think it would be a good idea if we focussed on the things that we are
   achieving together because there's a lot of collective determination on
   the part of all the governments of Australia to try and do something about
   this dreadful scurge in our community. And it's also important that we keep
   a sense of perspective about it and understand that a percentage of the
   population we're dealing with, although it is too large, is nonetheless
   a minute section of the Australian population.
  And finally can I echo what Shane Stone had to say and that is to express
   my immense gratitude to all of you for the loyalty that you've demonstrated
   to me, to Tony Rundle and, I know, that you are demonstrating to Sue. Sue
   faces a big fight but it's a very winnable fight. I know what it's like
   to be in Opposition - I had a lot of practise, too much practise. I have
   no intention of ever going back to repeat the experience. But one thing
   that you have to do, if I may respectfully say, in Opposition, be it Federal
   or State, is that you have to start fairly early in marking out your territory
   in telling the community about those things for which you stand.
  We all know what Oppositions are against. They're against the Government,
   they're agin the Government and they want to change the Government. We all
   know that. But the big challenge for Oppositions is to tell the Australian
   public or the Tasmanian public why it is they ought to change the Government,
   to tell the public why it ought to vote for them, as well as telling them
   why they should vote against the Government. Now, I know that you and your
   colleagues, Sue, are starting to do that and we'll be very willing to provide
   any help and assistance we can.
  The Australian political scene is more volatile now than it used to be.
   I don't take anything for granted. We're travelling fairly well at the present
   time but that doesn't guarantee that we're going to win the next Federal
   election. Nobody should think that for a moment. We'll win the next Federal
   election if we work hard and we continue to deliver outcomes and people
   continue to believe in us. Then we'll win it. We won't win it because people
   think, oh well, the other crowd's hopeless. That doesn't work as much as
   it used to because we're living in a less ideological world and we have
   to work to win and achieve every vote. And so it is with the State Opposition,
   policy building, policy branding, policy differentiation is tremendously
   important so people know what you are for as well as what you are against.
  But it is a good time to be in government because we're a great sort of
   historical watershed, the turn of the century and the beginning of the third
   Christian millennium. It's a remarkable time to be in government. It's a
   great privilege. It's a great opportunity. And I have that privilege and
   that opportunity essentially because of the loyalty and support of people
   in this room and people like you all over Australia who year in and year
   out, without recognition or reward but 


E&amp;OE...........................
  Well, thank you very much, John; to Richard Alston, my other Parliamentary
   colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
  This is quite an exciting and, I think, historic night for us here in Parliament
   and also for the interaction between political Australia, if I can put it
   that way, and media Australia. I think, and this doesn't carry any connotations
   of any changes in media policy let me say immediately, but I think this
   country has been incredibly well served by free-to-air television. I think
   the quality of free-to-air television in Australia is better than in any
   other country I've seen and I think what we are witnessing tonight is another
   very interesting stage in the very praiseworthy and meritorious history
   of free-to-air television in Australia.
  I think the aim of providing to the 19 million Australians who consume free-to-air
   television the best technology in the latest available form in a way that's
   accessible to them is a very, very important obligation which is not only
   the responsibility of those who hold the free-to-air licenses but also the
   responsibility of the Government to provide it an intelligible, regulatory
   framework.
  Media policy has always been something in this country that's attracted
   intense debate. And when Richard said I should come along tonight he said
   it's just a very quiet gathering of modest, understated, retiring Australians
   who are coming to this gathering and you'll enjoy it.
  But, finally, can I say that devouring new technology whether it be high
   definition television, whether it be all of the other elements of information
   technology in Australia, devouring new technology has always been a particular
   Australian passion. We have a great desire to master, to understand, to
   enjoy new technology and I think that Australians will take to high definition
   television. Those of us who love our sport, whatever that sport may be,
   will find in high definition television and all that goes with it, an opportunity
   to enjoy the pleasures of our particular sporting passions like we've never
   enjoyed them before. And the opportunities and the new world that it opens
   up and everything else associated with it will be a very, very important
   part of the ongoing entertainment story of this country.
  I want to congratulate Richard Alston as my Minister for the really first
   class job that he's done in this area over the last three-and-a-quarter
   years. I think he's a great Minister for Communications. I know some of
   you here don't always agree with him 100 per cent of the time but I'm sure
   you agree with him most of the time. And that's what he tells me anyway
   and, you know, who am I to disbelieve such a shy, retiring colleague.
  So, ladies and gentlemen, can I again say to the proprietors of free-to-air
   television, thank you for the contribution that you've made to Australian
   society over the last 43 years since that historic moment in 1956. And I
   think that high definition television and all that is associated with it
   is going to be a really exciting chapter in the entertainment story of Australia
   and I can't wait to participate and I think most Australians will feel the
   same way. Thanks a lot.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE....................
  Well, thank you very much, Vice Chancellor; to Mrs Terrell; to Lady Wilson;
   to Professor Ross Garnaut, my Parliamentary colleagues, the academic staff
   of the university, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
  This is an important occasion not only for the university but it's also
   an important Canberra occasion and also an important reflective occasion.
   Because as someone who is now celebrating his 26th year in the
   Federal Parliament the name Sir Roland Wilson first came to my attention
   when, as a fairly enthusiastic follower of politics in Australia in the
   1950s through the well known political names such as Menzies, Fadden, Evatt,
   Casey and others, there occasionally filtered through the names of one or
   two very senior and very influential Canberra based bureaucrats and public
   servants. And the two names, of course, that I first associated with the
   Federal bureaucracy as I gathered my political enthusiasm in the 1950s were,
   of course, the names of Coombs and Wilson who were, sort of, indubitably
   linked in the minds of so many people. Of course, if my memory serves me
   correctly, I think they were probably the last two names to appear on the
   pound note when that formed part of our currency and disappearing in 1966.
   I see Ian Castles nodding so I must be right in that recollection.
  Sir Roland Wilson had an extraordinary career in the public service. He
   was, in the best sense of that word, a dedicated professional servant of
   the Commonwealth. He gave unstintingly of his service and his loyalty to
   governments of both political persuasions. It is no secret that occasionally,
   after the change of government in 1949, the odd supporter of the Liberal
   Party was heard to say, isn't it strange that Menzies retained the services
   of those two bureaucrats, Coombs and Wilson, who served the Chifley government.
   It wasn't strange because they were people of great commitment. Their paths
   followed different directions. They had different views on many issues.
  Sir Roland Wilson's career stretched for a period of over 40 years. He was
   the first Secretary of the Department of Labor and National Service founded
   under the late Harold Holt in 1941. He was, as Professor Terrell has said,
   a person who dedicated himself very much to the operations of the international
   financial mechanism.
  The person who introduced us today, Professor Garnaut, made I thought a
   very intelligent reflection on the Australian economy, historically speaking,
   a few months ago when he said that he thought there had probably been three
   great eras of economic activity and development in the federation of Australia.
   The first of those stretched from federation and ended in the trenches of
   World War I. The second began in the period of post-war reconstruction and
   then the boom and continued until the early 1970s. And he was kind enough
   to say that he thinks we might now be living in the third era but I won't
   dwell on that. But the importance of that recollection, ladies and gentlemen,
   is that for the great bulk of that second period Sir Roland Wilson was,
   of course, the dominant economic adviser to governments. And if you were
   searching for somebody who made a contribution to the economic stability
   and the economic prosperity, the extraordinary high levels of employment
   and the great levels of economic growth that occurred during that period
   of time you couldn't go past the contribution he made, particularly during
   the years that he was the Secretary to the Treasury.
  I only had an opportunity of meeting him on a few occasions because he had
   departed from the bureaucratic scene, the professional public service scene,
   by the time I arrived in Parliament. When I became Treasurer of the Commonwealth
   late in 1977 Sir Frederick Wheeler was then coming towards the end of his
   time as Secretary to the Treasury. So my acquaintance with him was brief.
   I have read a lot of him and I'm conscious, as anybody who's been part of
   the Government of this country in the post World War II period, I am very
   conscious of the immense contribution that he's made to the public life
   of our country and the way in which he has served, loyally, the Commonwealth
   in the best traditions of public service. And it is an occasion for me as
   the current Prime Minister to record on behalf of all governments that were
   served by him how much we are in his debt.
  The school and the building to be named after him, as Professor Terrell
   has said, produces or manifests some very important linkages between the
   University and the Government. The programme that brings so many young people
   in touch with the day to day workings of the Government is a living and
   very contemporary expression of the importance of keeping the university
   and academic life of the country in touch with the workings of government
   and, equally, instilling in those who work in government an understanding
   of the importance and the role of academic life within our community. It's
   also important that there is the Asian regional link as well because even
   more so than in Wilson's time the prosperity of the Asian Pacific region
   is fundamental to the prosperity and strength of the Australian economy.
   And although the Asian Pacific region has gone through difficult times in
   recent years it will forever be important to Australia's future and how
   we relate to that region, how we trade in that region, how we continue to
   be good neighbours and good players and good regional mates in that region
   is very important indeed to our economic future.
  For all of those reasons, Professor, I'm delighted to be here. I thank the
   University for asking me to come. I'm delighted to be here in the presence
   of Lady Wilson because she provides the very visible link with the University,
   this school, and her late husband. And it's an opportunity for me to say
   again how much he is admired in the history of the government of this country
   over the last 50 years and what an immense contribution he's made and just
   how important and appropriate it is that the University should name this
   building after him. Thank you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE....................
  SUBJECTS: Australian economy, communication services, banks, health services,
   education facilities, Centenary of Federation.
  Mr Chairman, Kay and Bill, ladies and gentlemen.
  This is a great occasion for me. I can't think of anything more quintessentially
   Australian than to be addressing a gathering in a World War I memorial hall
   of people who are the backbone of the Australian bush. It started to rain
   after a long period of drought and quite properly the Federal Government
   accepts all due praise for that. And the odd flaw in the roofing arrangements
   have been exposed but so what. What a delightful way to discover you've
   got a leaking roof.
  I gather the rain has been very welcome and, of course, it's a reminder
   to those Australians like myself who have grown up in the cities of just
   how difficult and how precarious and how challenging life in the bush can
   really be.
  I have followed a deliberate policy as Prime Minister of going on regular
   visits to the smaller population centres of the country. It's terribly easy
   in this place and this country if you don't live in one of the big cities
   it's terribly easy to think that the people who are elected at the time
   of Parliament only worry about the big smoke and they ignore the rest of
   the country. And I can understand why people feel that way. And on occasions
   they have had reasons to feel that way. And I have been extremely conscious
   of that and I have set out from day one not to allow that to happen. And
   I have meticulously ensured that there's always a fair amount of space in
   my calendar for visits of this kind.
  And I know that this is a particularly difficult part of the country because
   it's gone through long periods with very, very low rainfall and Bill is
   right I am constantly reminded of it. We talk regularly, very regularly
   and it is always, sort of, starts with [inaudible]. He never misses. And
   he does it so very well and I say 'well you had some in Junee' and he says
   'oh yeah, that was about three years ago'. [Inaudible] I mean, I was musing
   a few minutes ago that if the rains keeps coming and you can persuade the
   Russian army to start buying great coats again and a few of those other
   things that are needed to provide some extra boost to the wool industry
   it would be terrific.
  Now, we have tried as a Government to create better economic circumstances
   for the whole country and we have. And I am very proud of the fact that
   nationally the Australian economy is very strong and the country is in good
   shape. But the paradox of all of that is that side by side with the national
   prosperity you have a lot of areas of the country that are not fully sharing
   that through no fault of their own. And parts of the bush are very much
   in that. It's not their fault, it's not your fault. You can't control commodity
   prices, you can't control the weather, you can't control the vagaries of
   people's purchasing habits.
  But we as a Government can make sure that your interest rates are lower
   and they are a lot lower now than they used to be. I know you would like
   to see them even lower. We can bring in a taxation system which will start
   next year that will make diesel fuel cheaper and that's important for the
   bush and will take a lot off costs of exports and that's very important
   to the bush as well. We can have other measures that provide particular
   assistance. And I'd have to say that I was very impressed with Claughton
   House that I visited and I know how important that kind of facility is to
   the people who live in rural Australia. We take for granted in the city
   that you just turn up to the local school at no cost and present yourself
   and that's it and then you come home after school's out in the afternoon.
   A different world here and I understand that and I know how important facilities
   of that kind are to you people.
  So today is very much a listening and visiting exercise that I hope the
   fact that I have come, I hope the fact that I have brought with me my two
   parliamentary colleagues both of whom are doing a terrific job representing
   your interests in Canberra. And Kay is a new member and I commend her very
   warmly to you. She is a great, a very energetic member. And she is the member
   for Riverina I think. I was about to say Eden-Monaro and then I looked [inaudible].
   And she is very energetic and that is very important. And she represents
   a very diverse electorate and it's not easy representing a big diverse electorate.
   And, of course, Bill is an old mate of mine as you all know and he is doing
   an absolutely fantastic job representing the entire State and bringing a
   particular rural perspective.
  So you are in no way forgotten, you loom very large and very importantly
   in our concerns. The Australian bush is part and parcel of the Australian
   story and the Australian achievement. Without the bush Australia wouldn't
   be recognisable as the country that I grew up in and love so very much.
   So that's why it's very important not only economically and socially but
   also as far as preserving our national [inaudible]. It's so tremendously
   important to make sure that your concerns are fully understood and fully
   responded to.
  Your hospitality here at Booligal as well as the hospitality that I have
   received in Hay has been absolutely marvellous and, of course, country people
   are renowned for their kindness and their hospitality.
  It's very important, the chairman mentioned and mobile phones, it is very
   important that as the benefits of information technology flow through they
   flow to the entire community and not just the people who live in the big
   population centres. And one of the things that we are endeavouring to do
   through the progressive sale of bits of Telstra is to make certain that
   out of the proceeds of those sales we will provide additional communication
   services to people who live in country Australia. Provide them with better
   quality mobile phone services or some mobile phone services in those areas,
   and this is apparently one of them, where they don't exist. And that's an
   important priority of ours. Provide people with faster access to the Internet.
   Provide people with regional transaction centres and we are going to start
   opening those in different parts of rural Australia over the next few months.
   Which aggregate under one roof some basic services that have disappeared
   from country towns.
  I was asked earlier what I thought was the attitude of the banks towards
   closing their country networks. I have to say to you that the banks of Australia
   are a lot more sensitive and conscious now of the backlash in the bush about
   closure of banks than was the case two or three years ago. I think people
   in rural Australia have done a very good job of driving that point home
   and can I say on your behalf we've also done a job of doing exactly the
   same thing.
  I speak to the chief executives of the major banks and the chairmen of major
   banks from time to time and on no occasion do I miss an opportunity, appropriately
   not overbearingly but appropriately, of reminding them of just how important
   it is to the character of our country to preserve essential services in
   the bush.
  I also know how important doctors are in a small community and I know how
   hard it is to get them. Michael Wooldridge and John Anderson went on a rural
   tour a few months ago and listened to the concern people had about the lack
   of medical services and the lack of doctors in the bush. And I think we
   have started to lay the foundations through a number of proposals to turn
   that situation around over a period of years. It wont' be easy but I think
   we've had a bit of a breakthrough in a number of areas and we are going
   to start to see an improvement.
  I am also conscious of the difficulties of maintaining education facilities
   and you told me of the fact that the school in this district is slated for
   closure. And as you rightly mention, Mr Chairman, that is not a direct responsibility
   of the Federal Government but that doesn't mean to say we are insensitive
   to those sorts of things. We can't guarantee, no government State, federal,
   Liberal, Labor, of any political complexion, can guarantee every service
   that every person wants in every community in Australia. And I think country
   people are entitled to say that things have gone far enough in relation
   to many of their basic services and they are entitled to say we want the
   drift arrested and we want it turned around and we want [inaudible] in a
   number of areas. And we are endeavouring to do that and endeavouring to
   respond to it in different ways some of which I have touched on today.
  So I hope you can see my visit as that of a Prime Minister who cares about
   the Australian bush and the people who live in it. As somebody who hopes
   by his presence to engage you and listen to you, to respond to your concerns
   where you can and where you can't to say so quite openly. And above all
   to remind people all around this country that as we come to celebrate 100
   years of federation we have a colossal Australian achievement to be very
   proud of. And that the people of rural Australia have made a massive contribution
   to how we think of ourselves as Australians and how the rest of the world
   sees us as Australians. And that is a very, very important thing for me
   as I know it is for both of my colleagues. Thank you very much indeed for
   your hospitality, it really has been very nice to be amongst you.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  SUBJECTS: Australia's economy, rural Australia, health services in rural
   Australia, education, tourism, taxation reform, Centenary of Federation.
  Well thank you very much Kay. To my colleague, Senator Bill Heffernan, to
   his worship the Mayor, all the other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
  This, may I say in a way for a travelling Prime Minister around Australia,
   is about as good as it gets in so far as you can meet under one roof in
   one location all of the different groups that make up a vibrant local community.
   And I do want to thank you, Kay, and I want to thank the Mayor and all the
   others that are organising this gathering to give me an opportunity just
   for a couple of minutes to say a few things to you.
  I am here today for two reasons. Firstly and most importantly I was invited
   by your local member, Kay Hull, who has only been in the national Parliament
   for a little under a year but in that time has demonstrated a great energy
   and a great commitment to the diverse problems of her electorate. And I
   want to compliment her on that and I want to commend her to you for the
   first class job that she is doing as your representative in Federal Parliament.
  But I am also here because I have made it a point in the time that I have
   been Prime Minister to systematically visit the less populated areas of
   Australia, to ensure on a methodical basis that I don't spend all of my
   time in Canberra or in Sydney or in Melbourne. And not only to visit the
   less populated State capitals and the larger country towns like Bendigo
   and Ballarat and Toowoomba and Kalgoorlie and Mt Isa and Ipswich but also
   on a regular basis to come to smaller communities.
  And there's a reason for that and it's bound up in a way in the paradox
   we have in Australia at the moment. Nationally, if you look at the Australian
   nation and you look at the Australian economy it's doing very well. We are
   probably stronger economically as a nation than we have been for more than
   30 years. Our inflation is low, our interest rates are low, we have a strong
   budget surplus, we are embarking upon very important reforms. And that's
   the big picture, that's the national picture. But I know that in different
   parts of Australia that is not the universal experience. I know that in
   many parts of the bush people are doing it very tough. I know how hard it
   is in the wool industry. I know how year after year many parts of rural
   Australia have been badly crippled by drought. And to have a drought imposed
   upon years when interest rates were very high and commodity prices were
   very low is to inflict a great deal of pain and difficulty on a lot of local
   communities.
  And I therefore am taking the opportunity on visits like today to tell people
   that I do understand that although it 's going well nationally it's not
   always going well locally and it is very tough going locally. I understand
   that and the members of my Government understand that. And we are trying
   in different ways to deal with particular concerns that people have. It's
   obviously of assistance for a rural community if interest rates are lower
   than what they used to be but it's also a disappointment to a rural community
   if it can't get adequate health services. And can I say to you, Mr Mayor,
   that I am very aware of the priority of health. And that's one of the reasons
   why John Anderson, the Deputy Prime Minister, and Michael Wooldridge, the
   Health Minister, recently undertook a tour of different rural areas to talk
   directly to people about the problems with the retention of medical practitioners.
   And how a number of measures that we have introduced in that area have begun
   slowly but it will gather pace, begun slowly to turn the tide on that.
  I am very aware of the need for areas like Hay to diversify. I am glad to
   hear that some of the changes that were made in relation to the rice industry
   have been of benefit to this town and to this town's surrounding district.
   And I am also conscious that the contribution that we are making to the
   establishment of the Australian Shearers' Hall of Fame will help to develop
   the tourist potential of this district.
  I experienced first hand when I went to the Claughton Hostel this morning
   the day-to-day challenges of rural families who don't have high incomes
   to merely get their children physically to schools that are meant to be
   provided "free" under our education system. And it was a reminder
   to me as somebody who was educated within the New South Wales public school
   system in a suburb of Sydney and then went to a high school in the suburbs
   of Sydney just how difficult some of the challenges are. And I think you
   know that we provided some emergency assistance last year but I want to
   say to you that keeping that hostel going is very important for the basic
   amenity of this area. And I am very impressed with the importance of that
   occurring.
  Visits like today are an opportunity for me to meet you, to listen to you,
   to understand better or even more the challenges of rural life. But, of
   course, also to understand the particular quality that the bush brings to
   the national fabric of our country. We are going to celebrate 100 years
   of federation in two years time. And when I think of the Australian story
   and the Australian achievement of the last 100 years and indeed the years
   that went before federation it is quite impossible to conceive of what our
   country would have been like. Indeed it would have been almost unrecognisable
   without the bush and without the contribution that country people have made.
  I understand that you have the only high school in New South Wales, perhaps
   in Australia, which is a war memorial public high school. And that is a
   consequence of the fact that in World War I this town on a per capita basis
   produced more volunteers or almost more volunteers than any other town in
   Australia. And it's typical going back all those years of the, sort of,
   national and community spirit that existed. And it's an opportunity for
   me to be in touch with that.
  We are trying to make life easier for people in all parts of Australia.
   We are particularly conscious of how the corruption of world markets and
   low commodity prices have made life difficult for many country people. We
   believe that the lower diesel and fuel prices of taxation reform will be
   of benefit to rural Australia. And when taxation reform comes in in July
   of next year we think the cost reductions involved in that will provide
   benefits. We are confident that the lower interest rates that you have seen
   over the last three years and which we naturally hope will continue but
   you can never give any guarantees about because they're influence by general
   economic circumstances we believe that they have provided a tremendous amount
   of help.
  I am also very proud of the fact that the Government in its last budget
   provided a very effective choice in relation to the education of children
   in both government and independent schools within our community.
  But the most important message that I do want to leave with you today is
   not a tabulation so much of individual initiatives but rather to tell you
   that I lead a Government that first and foremost appreciates immensely the
   contribution of country people to our society, that cannot conceive of what
   our country would be like without the bush. That our understanding for those
   of us who grew up in the cities, and that is most Australians, that they
   have always seen the bush as being a very special and precious part of the
   Australian story. And what we understand to be the Australia that we love.
   We do understand that things have been difficult. We also know that the
   spirit of people in towns like Hay is tremendously strong and I have been
   reminded of that in the couple of hours that I have been here today. To
   meet the children of your schools, to meet your local representatives, to
   meet the people employed in different pursuits and tasks in the town is
   a reminder to me of that tremendous spirit.
  And I hope that by being here today in a small way I can say to you on behalf
   of not only the Government but the rest of your fellow Australians that
   you are very much an important part of our community. We understand that
   although things are going well nationally, and that's a source of great
   pride to all Australians, we also appreciate that in different parts of
   the community things are not so easy and things are very difficult. And
   I want to thank all of you for the contribution that in your different ways
   you make to the strength of the Australian community.
  We are going to focus a great deal over the next year or two on the history
   of Australia over the last 100 years in particular. And that's been a century
   of tremendous achievement. And there is no society in the world that has
   a greater right to look back in pride on 100 years of massive achievement.
   This, of course, is one of the less than 10 countries that have been continuously
   democratic for the whole of the 20th century. We pioneered many
   things in this country. We gave rights to people in Australia before they
   were given in other parts of Australia. We had to seed into our community
   people from all around the world and they have become part of our society
   and we are building, I think, a sense of hope and optimism for the future
   as a nation that is tremendously important. But in the process of doing
   that we have to understand that some in our midst are not finding it as
   easy as others.
  But, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for coming. I can't express
   to you adequately how important I regard occasions such as this. This is
   a long way from Question Time in Parliament. It's a long way from a press
   conference with the Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery. It's a long way
   from what you might say the more detached and the more rarefied air of Federal
   Government. And that's what makes it authentic and makes it important to
   me and important to my colleagues, Bill and Kay, that we have the opportunity
   of relating in this fashion to a local community.
  I know that there are some difficult stories in Hay. I know how hard some
   of the industries have been. I also know from my discussions this morning
   that there is a tremendous amount of hope and optimism about the future.
   And you have been able to transmit that to me today and most particularly
   I am delighted to have met the girls and boys from your various local schools
   and had the opportunity to talk to the older ones to inquire about what
   their hopes are when they leave school and what their prospects are. Some
   more optimistic than others but all of them basically very enthusiastic.
   I want to thank the teachers. I always thank teachers. I was taught to do
   that early in my married life because I married one. And I thank the teachers
   most warmly for the contribution that they are making in both the government
   and the independent schools to the education of so many young Australians.
  But most importantly can I thank the people of Hay for having me as your
   guest. Thank you for extending traditional Australian bush hospitality to
   a visitor. It's a great experience for me and I enjoy immensely being amongst
   you. Thank you.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE.................
  Good evening. Now that The New Tax System has become law I want to report
   to you on how our improvements are already working to the benefit of Australian
   families.
  In January the Government introduced the 30 per cent tax rebate for private
   health insurance to reward those people who take personal responsibility
   for their family's health care. Not only has this made health insurance
   much more affordable but we now have a quarter of a million more Australians
   in private health insurance than there would otherwise be.
  We are also well on the way to abolishing the old unfair system of wholesale
   sales tax with its many high and hidden rates. You are probably aware that
   the sales tax on many items has already been reduced from 32 per cent to
   22 per cent.
  Over the last month, this has brought the price of many goods down. When
   you shop around, you will find that the tax reductions have been passed
   on for goods like radios and televisions, video recorders, stereos, cameras,
   clocks and watches.
  These and many other items will fall in price again when the wholesale sales
   tax and other hidden taxes are abolished altogether after The New Tax System
   officially begins in July next year.
  The Government's consumer watchdog, the Australian Competition and Consumer
   Commission, is already working hard to make sure that consumers benefit
   from lower prices. There are tough penalties for those who do not pass on
   the savings to ordinary consumers and if you think a business has not brought
   down their prices as they should, particularly in country Australia, the
   Commission is there to help.
  The New Tax System will benefit all Australians and, in the months ahead,
   the Government will continue to explain exactly how it will allow Australians
   to share in the largest income tax cut in nation's history. Good night.


1 September 1999
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Well, thank you very much Jackie. To Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, to Terry Gathercole, Don Talbot and all the members of the Australian Pan-Pacific Swimming Team, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I simply want to say on behalf of all of the members of this magnificent team how immensely proud we are of what you have done over the last few weeks. And we decided to put on this little gathering - and I thank Jackie for organising it - just to say on behalf of the Commonwealth Parliament, to say on behalf of all of us, wherever we come from, how inspired we were by the astonishing achievements of all of you as a team.
I don’t single anybody out. I address all of you as a magnificent team for the contribution you made to further enhancing the fantastic reputation of Australia in every field of sporting endeavour. It really is quite amazing what we have been able to celebrate in sport as Australians over the past few months.
And we had a gathering here recently to celebrate the achievements of one Australian sporting team, we had another one to celebrate another achievement, we are having another one tonight. And many of us in different ways have celebrated the sporting achievements and rejoiced in them over the past few weeks in so many areas of sporting endeavour.
And in paying enormous tribute to all of you for your personal dedication none of us should forget, of course, the mums and the dads, the brothers and the sisters, the boyfriends and the girlfriends who inspire and encourage you because it is hard work. Anybody who wants to achieve anything whether it’s as a swimmer, as a footballer, as a cricketer, or any other field of endeavour you have got to work very hard, you need a lot of people behind you.
And can I simply say to you, Terry, and to Don and all the other people that have been associated with the coaching of the team, you have really done us all proud beyond our wildest expectation. We are very excited about our prospects for the Olympic Games in just over a year’s time. But most importantly of all, we are proud of young Australians who have done their best and achieved so much for themselves and for their country. And that is the most important thing.
And all of us here want you to know in a very uncomplicated simple way that we at a political level representing the Australian people here in the national Parliament honour you. We thank you, we admire what you have done and we wish you all good fortune between now and including the Olympic Games in Sydney next year. Thank you.
[ends]


3 September 1999
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………….……….
Well thank you very much Rob, to Tony Bates the Chairman of Australian Business, to Phillip Holt, to Michael Egan the Treasurer of New South Wales, to Kerry Chikarovski the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, my other State and Federal Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start by saying I totally share the sense of enthusiasm and exhilaration that Rob described of this remarkable venue. It is already apparent to the people of Sydney and indeed the people of Australia, that the entire Olympic complex here at Homebush has made, and will continue to make, a lasting contribution to the sporting and other infrastructure of Australia.
Many of you here tonight I guess, were with me just across the road last Saturday night with 107,000 people witnessing a great sporting triumph of the Australian Rugby Team. Might I also say a magnificently stirring rendition of Waltzing Matilda as well. It was a great event, a world record rugby crowd, a great result, but it drove home to all present, and to people all around Australia, what a fantastic facility this is, and it also reminded us yet again of how much our entire country will be on display to the rest of the world [Tape Break] sends of Sydney in the year to 2000 are an event that belongs to the entire Australian nation.
Speaking on behalf of the Commonwealth Government we are working very very closely and very enthusiastically with SOCOG and with the Government of New South Wales to make sure that in every way this is an outstanding event and one that does great credit to all of the Australian people.
Tonight, ladies and gentlemen is, as Rob said, almost a year since I addressed the annual gathering of Australian Business, at the Convention Centre in Darling Point, just after the re-election of the Government in October 1998. As I look back over the last year it is true, to use Robs words again, that a great deal of change has occurred. I have to say to you that looking back on my remarks a year ago, I don’t think I could have foreseen the strength that the Australian economy has exhibited over the last 12 months. I probably would have said to you a year ago that I thought the economy was doing well, that we were probably going to be incumbent somewhat and badly effected by the Asian economic downturn. I probably would have said that some of the reforms that we’d undertaken have made a contribution, faced a challenge in having the taxation reforms that we took to the Australian people fully implemented.
But now a year on I think it is fair to say that the last 12 months has probably been in many respects and according to many measures, one of the most spectacular periods of economic performance that this country has seen for more than 30 years. What has occurred over the last year, not only has an economic dimension, but it also has a dimension in our sense of national achievement. By being able to stare down the worst economic down turn the Asia Pacific region has seen since World War II. In being able to establish ourselves in the eyes, not only of our regional neighbours but of investors around the world as the stand our economy of the region. We have not only provided strong levels of economic growth, something in the order of 400,000 or 500,000 additional jobs over the last 3 ½ years, the lowest rate in unemployment in about a decade, the lowest inflation rate and the lowest interest rates for more than 30 years. But most importantly of all, I think that we have given to the Australian people a sense of national achievement and a sense of national wellbeing in economic affairs, that I don’t believe we have ever had, in the experience of most of the people present.
Because when it comes to trading and performing and competing on the world economic stage, there has always been a large number of Australians, no matter what their self confidence about their economic performance at home, have felt that when it comes to the global competition, Australia somehow or other will end up losing out.
Now that hasn’t proved to be the case. What we have done quite marvelously, particularly over the last year, has been to out compete and out perform all the vagaries of economic downturn and economic adversity has hurled at our path from all around the world.
I want to pay a particular tribute to the exporters of Australia and many of them are here tonight. Because it has been the capacity of exporters from Australia who diversify away from the disappearing market in the Asian Pacific region, to switch their products to North America and to Europe and to other parts of the world. It’s been that capacity which has enabled the Australian economy along with other things to perform even better than the most optimistic of us may have thought a year ago. The contribution of manufacturing exporters to the Australian economic performance over the last year has been particularly impressive.
The past year of course has seen the implementation of the most fundamental changes to Australia’s taxation system, or the legislation of the implementation of the most fundamental changes that the Australian taxation system has ever undergone. I want to say to all of you that it would not have been possible for the Government to have got those reforms through Parliament, it would not have been possible for the Government to have won the support of the Australian community for those reforms without the assistance of both of the organisations that are represented here tonight.
The ACCI was an absolute pioneer in winning and galvanizing business support for the reforms that are embodied in our taxation package. The contribution made by somebody like Mark Paterson for example, who argued very strongly the cause of taxation reform. The contribution that he will make in an ongoing sense as a member of the taxation advisory board, which is overseeing the implementation of taxation changes has been quite incalculable.
I remember particularly that when a certain Senator said, a certain Senator from Tasmania said "I won’t" or no I think in fact he said "I cannot" and he didn’t, I remember that one of the first business leaders in Australia to say "Look that’s a disappointment, but we have got to try and get on and see how much of the reform that we can get through the Senate through negotiation with the Australian Democrats" one of the first business leaders in Australia to say that was Phillip Holt as a result of a survey carried out amongst his members.
I want to thank him and want to thank members of Australian business for the contribution they made to the political process. You can’t implement major reforms in this country unless you have, not only the political will at the top, but you also have amongst the business organisations and the community organisations effected by those reforms, you have the will to implement the necessary changes. I take this opportunity as Prime Minister of recording my gratitude to both of the organisations represented here tonight for the great contribution that you have made to the cause of taxation reform.
What is remarkable about that contribution is that the national interest has been given priority to the individual for the sectional interest. Because not everybody here tonight finds every particular of taxation reform to their liking. Not everybody here tonight, when they do their sums, will conclude that in every sense taxation reform is a plus for them. Overwhelmingly for those represented here tonight, taxation reform is an enormous leap forward. And overwhelmingly for the Australian economy, taxation reform is going to make our exports cheaper, our business costs lower, our fuel costs lower and it is overall going to make Australia a more competitive nation. Because it is an outcome in the national interest, members of these two organisations have rallied behind us.
As all of you know ladies and gentlemen, taxation reform so far is one part of the reform process, the next major element is of course changes to the business taxation system. You are all aware that a committee chaired by John Ralph, the former chairman of CRA and a very highly respected and well regarded businessman from Melbourne, assisted by Rick Allert from South Australia and Bob Joss the former managing director of Westpac, have delivered to the Government a very comprehensive blueprint for fundamental reforms to the business taxation systems of this country.
The Cabinet at the present time is engaged in the exercise of getting its collective head around all of the details in that report. I am not giving any secrets away in saying that amongst its recommendations of course is a proposition that we might move to a lower corporate tax rate, paid for in part by removal of some of the taxation concessions that exist in the taxation legislation at present including accelerated depreciation. The report also canvasses major changes to Australia’s capital gains tax system. I have made no secret of the fact that I regard a number of features of Australia’s capital gains tax system at present as being out of kilter with our desire to attract more capital from abroad and to generate more capital within Australia.
When you live in a globalised world economy, and whether we like it or not we do, and we don’t have the option of getting off, we don’t have the option of retreating back to the old days when you could erect high tariff barriers around this country, where you could shut yourself off from the rest of the world. If we are to continue to maintain our current living standards, we have got to continue to be in front of the other competitors in the race. It is not good enough to say that we are more competitive than we were a few years ago. It is not good enough to say that we are doing better than we were ten years ago. What we have to be able to say every day of every year is that we are as good as or better than those who are competing with us in the present day race.
That is why at every turn we have to ask ourselves, is it as attractive to invest in Australia as it is in say the United States or Europe or Japan or some part of the Asian Pacific region. If it is not then we have to ask ourselves what can we do in Australia to make it more attractive. That is one of the reasons why we reformed the taxation system. It is one of the reasons why we are looking at business taxation.
I hope that we will be able to move towards the final stages of the decision making process in relation to business taxation within a few weeks. We do hope in the process of moving towards that to involve ourselves as much as we can, consistent with the market sensitivity of some of the propositions that are involved in the Ralph report, I hope that we will be able to involve ourselves in a proper consultative process with the Australian business community although it is fair to say that there has already been, in the process of the preparation of the Ralph Report, a major degree of consultation carried out by the members of that report committee with representatives of the Australian business community.
The purpose of the whole process of business taxation reform is to provide another building block towards making Australia a more competitive nation as we move into the next century.
We have come a long way in the last 25 years. We have come a very long way in the last decade, and I don’t mind saying that the strength of the Australian economy now, and the prosperity that the Australian people are now enjoying is in no small measure due to reforms that are being carried out by successive governments in this country. I have always acknowledged the contribution made by the former Government, the Hawke Government, in deregulating the Australian financial system. A change built upon a report that I commissioned as Treasurer and changes that we strongly supported as an opposition.
As I look back over the last 10 or 15 years, you can see 4 or 5 major pillars of economic reform, all of which were necessary. Those carried out over the last 3 ½ years have included of course major reforms to Australia’s industrial relations system that have produced I think a far better industrial relations climate in this country.
I am delighted to report to you tonight ladies and gentlemen, that yesterday the Australian Parliament at long last passed legislation that provides a greater measure of long term protection to junior rates of pay within the Australian Industrial Relations system. In the process in protecting youth wages, the Australian Parliament finally, in cooperation with both the Government and the Opposition, the Australian Parliament has given an enormous amount of protection to the jobs of tens of thousands of young Australians, because as employers, all of you know the fundamental reality that if you force a business operator to pay a young inexperienced person an adult wage based upon a proposition that that young person has adult skills, you run the risk of that young person becoming unemployable. That is why we have argued long and hard for the maintenance of youth wages within our system.
The last thing I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen is this, that I have spent a few minutes talking about economics, and I guess that a great amount of the ACCI conference today has properly centered on industrial issues, on business issues and on economics. No Government worth its salt, preoccupies itself entirely with economic issues.
The Government I am proud to lead has a very strong and important social agenda. Over the last 3 ½ years we have been able to change a number of attitudes within the Australian community on important social issues. I believe that we are seeing at the present time the beginning of one of the most important debates about the social welfare system in Australia that we have had for many decades. We are getting contributions from all sides of Australian politics about the need to change, and in some areas, break the old welfare mentality in this country. It is not a debate that has as its goal the Government withdrawing from the provisions of necessary support mechanisms for those in the community who are in deserving need of help and assistance, not that at all. No Government I lead will abandon the needy in the Australian community and there will always be a role for Government to look after those who can’t look after themselves.
We are beginning to see a recognition that if the Government provides assistance to people, it is not unreasonable, in accordance with the principle of mutual obligation, that if those people receiving the assistance are able to do so, they should put something back into the community by way of return.
We have seen a changed attitude within the community since the Government introduced its Work for the Dole proposals a couple of years ago. We are seeing significant leaders of the Aboriginal community like Noel Pearson and Aden Ridgeway, talking about the debilitating effect of the current welfare system on the sense of self-esteem and the sense of self worth within the indigenous communities of Australia. These are fascinating, they are encouraging, and they are important developments because they speak of a country and they indicate a country that is willing in a sensitive intelligent way, to grapple with the basis on which we provide assistance to the more needy in our community and the way in which we arrange our welfare system and I think over the months ahead we are going to see a very significant debate in this country. I hope all sides of politics, the business community, the trade union movement and the great welfare sector in this country, all of them make a contribution to that very important debate.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by again thanking all of you for the contribution that you have made to the cause of economic reform over the last year. I have always believed that you can sell fundamental reform to the Australian community if you can do two things, if you can meet two criteria. If you can persuade the Australian community that the reform is in the best interest of Australia, in other words, it is in the national interest and secondly if you can persuade the Australian community that the reforms that you are undertaking are fundamentally fair. We won the support of the Australian community in the election a year ago because we were able to persuade enough Australian people to support both of those propositions in relation to taxation reform. Australian business and ACCI have played a major part in the process of education, the process of persuasion, and for that I thank both of those organisations and I thank the members of those two organisations gathered in such large numbers in this very impressive centre here tonight, for that crucial support.
Other Speaker:
Thank you Prime Minister. Ladies and gentlemen, before the Prime Minister leaves the stage tonight, I have the privilege of inviting him to officially launch the new Australian Made Campaign. I am delighted sir that you have agreed to give your endorsement to the Australian Made Campaign. The members of the campaign, the Chairman John Holt, the board and I are very proud of Australian Made and support it very strongly. In fact many of our members large and small have made a special effort here tonight to come and be present.
In appreciation sir, I would like to present to you a unique Australian made gold pin. This one was especially forged, struck in solid gold sir. You see a big one, you can see it sir.
Australians will be our number one ticket holder for the Australia Made and something special, I would like you to wear this with a lot of pride for the sake of Australian made goods.
I thank you very much for your endorsement.
Prime Minister:
Well thank you very much Rob for that lovely gesture and can I say that the new country of origin labeling provisions under the Trade Practices Act came into operation on the 13th of August. They lay the foundations for a clearer, better and more open understanding of the notions of the country of origin so far as Australian Made and Australian products are concerned.
I want to thank those companies and indeed it is the whole campaign, Australian Made Campaign is funded by the private sector, and the contribution that so many companies have made is something that the Government appreciates enormously. It is very important that the role of the private sector in promoting support for and the acquisition by Australians of Australian made products and Australian made goods and the contribution of Australian companies and Australian enterprises be acknowledged by the Government.
We of course as a nation must trade to survive, we must trade to compete and we must trade to prosper and grow stronger. As I said in my speech the strength of the Australian economy over the last 12 months has been in no small measure due to the fact that we have been able to diversify our exports away from declining markets, or weakening markets in Asia towards new markets in North America and Europe.
In launching the Australian Made logo in endorsing the project and acknowledging and saluting the contribution of Australian companies, I want to emphasise the pride that I feel in anything that is Australian made or produced in Australia. I want to touch the natural desire of so many individual Australian consumers to buy Australian, and there are many of them in this audience tonight and there are many millions around our country, who given the right opportunity, the right encouragement, the right product and the right circumstances, will always buy an Australian product in preference to another. It is an important part of the export armoury of Australia, it is an important part of the business and economic future of this country.
I congratulate the Chamber, I congratulate all of those associated with it. I wish them well and all of us as Australians, will feel a great deal of pride in buying Australian, and great deal of pride in supporting Australian companies and Australian products. Thank you.
[ends]


5 September 1999
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………..
Thank you very much. To Joy Howley, the President of the Victorian Division; to Peter Costello, the Federal Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party; to my other Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues; and collectively to my fellow Liberals.
It is an enormous delight for Janette and I to be here today, to associate ourselves emphatically with the cause of reelecting the Kennett Government to the Treasury benches in Victoria for another four years. Politics my friends, is in the ultimate all about making a difference. There’s not much good occupying the big office and having a big car and getting all the big invitations unless you actually do something with the authority that high office gives you. And I think it can, without any doubt and even amongst his fiercest critics, it can be said ladies and gentlemen, that in the time that he has been Premier of this State, Jeff Kennett has really made a huge difference.
The transformation of Victoria, the restoration of pride in the City of Melbourne, the way in which the economy of this State has become a leader amongst the Australian States is a tremendous testament to the leadership of Jeff Kennett, and it’s a remarkable tribute to the quality of the government that the Coalition has provided since it swept to power in 1992.
When I addressed the Federal Council of the Liberal Party in July in Canberra I spoke of my ideals for seeing Australia being a ‘can do’ country in the new millennium. And of all of the States of Australia none has better exemplified the ideal of a ‘can do’ State led by a ‘can do’ Premier than has the State of Victoria because in so many fields over the last few years Victoria has led the way. And the people of Victoria should never forget the appalling economic mess that was inherited by the Kennett Government in 1992. As a frequent visitor to the State of Victoria in the various positions I held before the change of government, I sensed in this State a longing for strong leadership, for a firm economic direction, and a sense of the future. And the relief that swept through Victoria when the former Labor government was defeated in 1992 was palpable . But most importantly the man and the people who replaced the discredited Labor regime have in every sense of the word matched and fulfilled the expectations that were invested in them by the Victorian people in 1992
The debt has been cut dramatically, growth has been restored, employment has grown, the City of Melbourne has flourished like never before, and the people of Victoria have had restored to them a sense of well being and a sense of pride in their State. And that has not been through accident, it has not been through luck. It has been through high quality government and strong leadership. And Jeff Kennett and Pat McNamara and all the other members of the Coalition Government deserve our thanks and our gratitude. And as the leader of the Federal Government, as the leader of a Coalition Government that works with the government of Victoria, I’m delighted on behalf of my Federal colleagues, not only here today but all around the State of Victoria, to pledge our support and our commitment to the re-election of the Kennett Government.
We must never take, as Liberals, any election for granted. Fight to the very last hour, fight for a strong victory right up until six o’clock on polling day. Take nothing for granted, assume nothing. Assume always that you have a political enemy to keep at bay and to defeat. And if you do that the people of Victoria can have what I believe they deserve for the next four years, and that is a strongly returned Coalition Government led by Jeff Kennett so that the work that he’s done can be added to and built upon as we go into the new millennium. And the pride that Victorians feel in their State and in their capital city can continue to flourish and continue to grow. I wish Jeff and his colleagues well. They have my total support and all of my good wishes.
[Ends]


17 September 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Korea and Mrs Kim Dae-jung, other distinguished guests, and in particular the Ministers of the Korean Government who’ve accompanied their President, ladies and gentlemen.
It’s always a particular honour to welcome the political leader of a friendly nation. It is a special privilege to welcome our guest of honour today because he is no ordinary head of government. Those of us who’ve grown up in Australia and have enjoyed the benefits of democracy in this country and take for granted the effortless political and democratic process whereby political power is transferred peacefully and without resistance once the public has made its views known, must understand the different tradition of those who’ve had to fight and struggle to achieve the implementation of the democratic will of their people. And the record of our guest of honour today is precisely that. He’s a man who’s suffered much and endured much in order to achieve the great honour and distinction of leading his country.
There are few democratically elected leaders in the world today who’ve endured so much along the path to achieving the office they now occupy. I remarked to the President over lunch that both of us were once Leaders of the Opposition. And although I regarded my path to the Prime Ministership as involving the odd difficulty along the way, and the need of course to win the support of the majority of the Australian community, it was as nothing as compared with the physical and other hardships that were endured by our guest of honour. So most importantly I salute him for being a valid and courageous democrat, a person who’s endured and suffered in order to achieve the great responsibilities that he now occupies within his country.
Australia and Korea have a very important relationship. It’s a relationship of course which is touched by a shared sacrifice in war. It is impossible for any Australian Prime Minister to talk of that relationship without mentioning the contribution that our country made, and without honouring the shared sacrifice of Koreans and Australians during the Korean War in the early 1950s. And it is appropriate that later this afternoon the President and I should turn the first sod in relation to the Korean War Memorial. And very appropriately we’ll be accompanied in that ceremony by many Australian diggers who’ve fought alongside their other allies in defence of what was South Korea, and now called the Republic of Korea.
In modern times the President has played a major role in the economic recovery of his country. Like most other societies in the region Korea was badly affected by the Asian economic downturn. Unlike many others however, Korea quickly knew what had to be done to get the domestic house in order, set about doing it, and is now enjoying the benefit of the measures that were taken to produce economic reform.
It’s quite an extraordinary achievement. The country saw its unemployment rate go very rapidly to 8% but in the space of two years that rate has now been brought back to closer to 6%. The Republic of Korea is now enjoying strong economic growth, and I’m proud of the fact that Australia was one of the countries that offered to help Korea’s economic revival. We were one of the country’s earliest to offer support through the International Monetary Fund. And as events have happened because of the recovery of Korea’s economy, it was not necessary for that offer to be fully drawn down. But it was a token of our commitment to the relationship.
Korea over the years has been amongst our very best customers. Until last year it was our second best customer after Japan. And only because of the Asian downturn did it go into third place in the last 12 months. We export a great deal to Korea, and we import an increasing amount. And those of us familiar with the automotive industry will know the contribution of Korean motor vehicles to the domestic consumption of automobiles in this country.
So it is a very important relationship. It is a relationship built on ties of history. It’s a relationship built on hardheaded trade assessments, trade negotiations, and trade understanding. It’s also a relationship that’s built importantly on people to people links. There are many thousands of Korean students in Australian universities. There are many thousands of Australian citizens of Korean background and descent. And I’ve remarked to the President before that my own electorate comprises the second largest Korean-Australian population in Australia, and there is at least one Christian church in my electorate where at least one service each Sunday is conducted wholly in the Korean language.
So the cultural and people to people links are very deep, they’re very strong, and they’re very important. Our societies are different and it’s pointless pretending that we share everything in common. But we share so much in common in terms of a commitment to openness and liberal democracy, and a recognition of the importance of private enterprise and the importance of the profit motive in business activity and in the attraction of investment.
In recent times of course the President and I have shared concern about developments in East Timor. Both of us as leaders of fellow members of APEC came together in New Zealand last weekend. And that fortuitous gathering enabled many of us, including the President and myself, to discuss those events. And I am particularly pleased that the President informed me this morning that his Government subject to the approval of the Korean National Assembly would be contributing up to an infantry battalion of Korean personnel to the international peacekeeping force in East Timor.
This difficult issue challenges the skill and the understanding, the diplomacy and the sense of common purpose and resolution of many countries in our region. It’s important that the responsibility be a shared one. Australia is ready and able and proud to play a leadership role but it is not a role that should be played alone. And it’s important not only to the implementation of the task of the peacekeeping operation but also to the months and years that lie beyond it it’s important that it be a shared, regional activity involving not only Australia but also many of our other friends and neighbours in the region. So I do record very genuinely my appreciation for the President’s support, understanding and contribution.
The President and I quite understandably discussed the relations between his country and North Korea. I support the Government, the Korean Government’s, sunshine policy towards North Korea. It seeks while defending the interests of the republic of Korea, it seeks consistent with defending those interests to engage North Korea in a more constructive dialogue with the rest of the world.
And I was able to assure the President that Australia would continue its steady contribution to KEDO which has been such an important instrument in trying to draw the people of North Korea into the world community.
We cannot ignore the nuclear potential of that country. But consistent with that vigilance we must do all we can to draw them into the international community. And on that issue the attitude of the Korean Government and the attitude of the Australian Government is precisely the same.
As I look to the future, ladies and gentlemen, the relations between our two countries ought only to get better and to get stronger. They are based on mutual respect. They are based on a recognition that although we have our differences we have many more points of common interest and common values and common commitment. We have recognised the contribution of Korean people to the modern Australian community. We remember with affection and emotion our shared historical experiences and adversity. We are complementary economies. The resources of Australia have played a major role in the building of the modern Korean economy. The products of Korea have played a very important part in the modern consumption patterns of Australian citizens. And we seek on both sides of the trade balance to diversify our exports. We have much to offer in technology. We have much to offer the tourists of Korea and I know increasingly the Government of Korea seeks a greater pattern of tourism from Australia in the years ahead.
So to you, Mr President, and to your charming wife, can I say we are particularly pleased to have you. Not only because you are the leader of a country with which we have a very important relationship but you are in your own right a distinctive figure not only in our region but throughout the world. You have endured more than most of us who spend a lifetime in politics for the things that you believe in and the things that you stand for. And wherever we are in the world those people who truly do love liberty and freedom admire that in a person and that is why you are particularly welcome to be with us today.
I now invite the member for Kingsford-Smith, Mr Laurie Brereton, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and representing the Leader of the Opposition, to support my remarks. Thank you.
[ends]


19 September 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Ladies and gentlemen, I’ve come here this afternoon. My wife, and accompanied also by Mr Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, and Senator Meg Lees, the Leader of the Australian Democrats, to say very simply on behalf of the entire Australian nation how immensely proud we are of the mission that you are about to undertake, and most particularly how proud we are of the state of readiness and the professionalism of the Australian Defence Force.
We don’t pretend, and I know that your commanding officers have not pretended that this mission is without danger. Any operation of this kind does involve danger and a risk of casualties. The comfort that I believe all of us can draw is that you have been very well trained and prepared for this operation. You belong to a wonderful military tradition that Australia has had of never wanting to impose its will on other nations, but always being ready to stand up for something that is right. We think particularly of all of you in these days. We’ll think and look after as best we can and try and share the anxiety of the family and other loved ones that you leave behind.
No nation with a peaceful tradition of Australia never wants to go to war. No nation with the tradition of standing up for the right thing such as Australia has always done can turn a blind eye to something that is so fundamentally wrong. We are going into East Timor in cooperation with many other countries. We are going there because it’s the right thing to do to restore peace and stability and also because it is in the long-term interests of Australia and all Australians that we do so. And that is why the Government has not lightly, but very firmly taken the decision that we should try and assemble a multinational force and that it should go in.
So can I simply say in a very heartfelt way on my own behalf, on behalf of my Government, on behalf of all of the people of Australia, how much in your debt we are and we wish you luck. Our thoughts and prayers are with you. We will look after your families. We look forward to your very safe return home and we have every confidence that in a great Australian tradition you’ll do it well, that you’ll look after your mates when you are together in East Timor, and they in turn as mates will look after you. And that together you will bring great credit to the Australian Defence Force, and I and my colleagues will look forward very warmly to welcoming all of you home. Thank you.
[Ends]


19 September 1999
As I speak to you tonight, 2,000 young Australians are preparing to go to East Timor.
It is our nation's largest military involvement for more than 30 years.
The Government's decision to commit Australian forces to the multi-national peacekeeping operation in East Timor, sponsored by the United Nations, was not taken lightly. We decided to do it, not only because it was right but also because it was in our national interest to do so.
Continued instability, of the kind we have so recently witnessed, in a territory so close to Australia could have serious consequences for us in the longer run.
For two weeks now, we have nightly viewed scenes of violence, death and destruction in East Timor.
The total failure of the Indonesian forces to control the violence and put an end to the killings has greatly distressed the Australian people.
We have all sensed that a small, vulnerable community was about to be denied the freedom they have sought for so long, and voted so overwhelmingly to achieve.
If there had been an alternative to sending in peacekeeping forces then we would have followed it.
Many nations, not least Australia, pressed the Indonesian government to restore order but despite assurances, this did not happen.
Australia's quarrel is not with the Indonesian people. Indonesia is our nearest neighbour. We want friendly relations with the people of that country. We have always tried to help Indonesia with her problems. We gave special aid when the Asian economic collapse hit Indonesia.
It was our preference that Indonesia keep order in East Timor while the transition to independence for the East Timorese people, under the supervision of the United Nations, took place.
Unfortunately, this did not occur and it became essential that Indonesia be persuaded to accept a peacekeeping force.
Australia actively sought the support of other nations to achieve this.
Our efforts were successful.
A few days ago, the Security Council of the United Nations, with Indonesia's approval, passed a Resolution authorising the establishment of a multi-national force.
That force will go into East Timor to restore peace and stability, protect the United Nations mission and facilitate humanitarian aid.
I am proud that Australia was asked to lead the peacekeeping force.
Months ago, we made ready an additional brigade of the Australian Army in case Australian forces were needed for peacekeeping operations in East Timor. As a result, we were able to respond immediately to the United Nation's request, not only to participate but also to lead the multi-national force.
Initially Australia's contribution will be 2,000 personnel with the capacity to increase to 4,500 if the circumstances require.
They will follow in the footsteps of other Australians - the Federal Police, military liaison officers, consular officials and United Nations workers who have done so much in East Timor in past weeks to help its people.
Many other nations from all parts of the world are participating.
The Commander of the force will be Major-General Peter Cosgrove, one of Australia's most distinguished serving combat soldiers. His deputy will be an officer from the army of Thailand.
Our aim is a situation in East Timor where the United Nations can supervise the peaceful transition to independence of that territory. After all, 78.5 per cent of the people of East Timor voted for independence only two weeks ago.
We all hope that this mission can be accomplished smoothly and quickly.
We must, however, prepare for the possibility that it could be long and protracted.
Although the goal of our forces will be the restoration of peace and stability, the conditions they encounter could well be violent and disruptive.
Any operation of this kind is dangerous. There is a risk of casualties.
Our troops, however, are highly trained and totally professional. We should not only feel proud of them, but also have every confidence in their ability to do the job.
The rules under which they will operate will allow them to take all necessary steps, not only to protect themselves, but also to achieve the objects of their mission.
I know that the thoughts and prayers of all Australians will be with our troops as they embark for East Timor.
We think also of their families and other loved ones and try to share the anxiety they will feel over the days ahead.
Our soldiers go to East Timor as part of a great Australian military tradition, which has never sought to impose the will of this country on others, but only to defend what is right.
They go with our goodwill and total support.
We wish them Godspeed and a safe return home.
[Ends]


19 September 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
I simply wanted to say to all of you how immensely grateful the Australian people are for the task that you are about to undertake. You have been very well trained. The Government has every confidence in the importance of the mission that you are about to undertake and we have every confidence in the capacity of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force to carry out that mission.
It is an important mission. It, as you know, from your training and from the advice of your commanding officers it is a mission not without danger and not without challenge. But it does involve a very significant commitment to something that is important for Australia and important to the things to which the Australian nation and the Australian people have always stood.
I know that many of you have suddenly found yourselves on the way to East Timor without warning and who did not have an opportunity of saying goodbye to your families and those others who are close to you. That is unfortunate, we are very sorry for that. I think I can say on behalf of everybody that we’ll look after your families while you are away. We wish you all Godspeed and a very safe return home.
And again, on behalf of all of the people of Australia, we admire very much what you are doing, we wish you well and we know that you will do it in the best traditions of the Australian Defence Force. Thank you very much.


19 September 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
I simply wanted to say to all of you how immensely grateful the Australian people are for the task that you are about to undertake. You have been very well trained. The Government has every confidence in the importance of the mission that you are about to undertake and we have every confidence in the capacity of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force to carry out that mission.
It is an important mission. It, as you know, from your training and from the advice of your commanding officers it is a mission not without danger and not without challenge. But it does involve a very significant commitment to something that is important for Australia and important to the things to which the Australian nation and the Australian people have always stood.
I know that many of you have suddenly found yourselves on the way to East Timor without warning and who did not have an opportunity of saying goodbye to your families and those others who are close to you. That is unfortunate, we are very sorry for that. I think I can say on behalf of everybody that we’ll look after your families while you are away. We wish you all Godspeed and a very safe return home.
And again, on behalf of all of the people of Australia, we admire very much what you are doing, we wish you well and we know that you will do it in the best traditions of the Australian Defence Force. Thank you very much.


29 September 1999
Subjects: Taxation reform, business tax, economy, Asian economic downturn, foreign policy, multinational peacekeeping force, East Timor, political parties
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Well, thank you very much, Brian. I certainly remember coming to this function just under a year ago. It was just after we’d been re-elected. In fact, next Sunday is the first anniversary of the second Howard Government. And it’s an opportunity tonight for me to thank all of the members of the ACT Division and particularly to you, Brian, as President; to John Ryan, the Director, and all the other hard working members; to my Parliamentary colleagues, both State and Federal and, most particularly, Margaret Reid, as President of the Senate; to Kate Carnell, the Chief Minister, who’s had a pretty tough and challenging year at various stages but has come through very, very effectively and is still very much in control here in the Territory. But it’s an opportunity to reflect for a moment on what we have done over the last year. And it is important, as Brian says, in this game of politics never to sell yourself short but it’s also very important never to get carried away with yourself either. And I’ll deal with that issue a little later in my remarks.
But the last year has been probably the year of greatest achievement in many respects of the three-and-a-half years that the Government has been in office. We have seen, on the domestic scene, we have witnessed the passage and now the implementation of the biggest and best change to the Australian taxation system certainly since World War II. We took our political lives in our hands, I suppose, and we took an enormous risk to run at the last election with comprehensive taxation reform. But it was the right thing to do because all of us knew that sooner or later this country needed taxation reform and, in the end, the Australian public was willing to support a government that had the courage to argue the cause of taxation reform. It looked, at one stage, as though all of that was going to come to naught when Brian Harradine said, ‘I cannot’ and he didn’t. But then we sat down and negotiated with the Australian Democrats and I want to say that I found Senator Lees and honourable and decent person with whom to deal. I don’t agree with her on a lot of things and she doesn’t agree with me on a lot of things either. And I don’t suggest for a moment that the Coalition and the Democrats are going to see eye-to-eye on every issue. But I do think there’s a message from the Australian people in their reaction to the understanding we reached with the Australian Democrats. And that message is that they approved of it because they elect governments in this country to do things. They don’t elect governments to conduct long, philosophical debates in public about who is right and who is wrong. Australians are ‘can do’ people. Australians look for achievement. They look for governments that are willing to press ahead towards a goal and if there’s some compromise, not too much compromise, involved along the way, well they’re prepared to embrace that.
So we had tax reform implemented. And that, of course, has only been the half of it because in the last few weeks Peter Costello has released the Ralph Report and in the wake of the Ralph Report all of the changes to the business taxation system. And those changes have been very widely applauded, particularly by small business men and women and by farmers, by investors, by many people like yourselves who believe that life is about occasionally taking a risk, accumulating some capital and not having it taxed at a confiscatory rate. And that is one of the reasons why we were determined to make some changes to the capital gains tax system. And if we can get these changes to capital gains tax through the Parliament, and I believe we will, then we will have one of the most competitive capital gains tax regimes in the world. And this country will be a very attractive place for small investors. We now have the second highest share owning proportion of our population of any nation in the world. We’re second only to the United States as the second great share owning democracy in the world. And that is a truly remarkable achievement.
But underlying all of these changes, of course, is the self-evident fact that our economy now is as healthy, indeed, healthier than it has been at any time in the last 30 years - our rate of growth, our low level of inflation, our low level of interest rates, our significantly lower rate of unemployment. Brian mentioned how low the unemployment rate here is in the ACT. I even saw stories in the press earlier this week of how unemployment has fallen in such difficult areas for unemployment as the Western Suburbs of Sydney. We have the lowest number of young people looking for work since 1978. Our unemployment rate is at an almost 10-year low and we’ve generated more than 500,000 jobs since we were elected in March of 1996.
Now, all of those things are solid, undeniable achievements. And they are the things, they are the bread and butter things that governments are expected to deliver. And I’m very proud of the fact that Australia has been able to weather the Asian economic crisis in better shape than just about anybody predicted. And I guess when I spoke to you a year ago I would have talked about the achievement of winning the election. I would have listed some of the Government’s economic achievements. I would have talked about the budget surplus. But I probably would have said that perhaps the Asian economic downturn is going to catch up with us and things mightn’t be so easy over the following 12 months. But in reality that didn’t turn out to be the case. And we have stared down the worst downturn in the Asian economies since World War II. And we’ve done it fundamentally because we got our domestic house in order.
And one of the reasons why we are being able to act with confidence and skill and be listened to as we argued to assemble a peacekeeping force to go into East Timor, one of the reasons that we were able to do that is that we were talking from a position of economic strength. And when you go into the forums of the world and the councils of the world and you talk to other countries and you talk as the leader of the one of the strongest economies in the world you are listened to with more respect. That’s a fact of life. You’re not listened to because of your individual personality or because of your pretty face or anything like that. You’re listened to because essentially you carry with you the assets of the nation that you lead. And the assets of the Australian nation at the present time are very strong and durable assets. They are the assets of a free country, of one of the oldest democracies in the world, although we are a young country by any measure, a country that has links with Europe and North America, as well as with Asia, and a nation that upholds the principles of individual liberty and individual freedom as fiercely as any nation on this earth. But on top of that, we have the asset of a very strong economy. And we’re able to say to the rest of the world, and particularly to our friends in the region, that we were able to stare down the Asian economic downturn. And it will forever be to the credit of this country and to the policies that were implemented that gave us that strength, that we were able to work our way through that Asian downturn. It had some effect on us but nothing like the effect and the impact that people imagined. But naturally and inevitably our thoughts over the last two months have been almost totally consumed by what has happened in East Timor. It is without doubt the biggest foreign policy and national security challenge this country has had for more than three decades. At present we have just on 3,100 personnel in the ADF deployed in East Timor. It’s the largest overseas deployment Australia has made since the Vietnam War.
For the first time in our history we have the lead role in a major military involvement of a peacekeeping kind in another part of the world. If it hadn’t been for the energy and the commitment of Australia that peacekeeping force may not have come about. But it is not an easy situation for Australia because the deployment of those troops on the soil of a country or a territory which is still part of Indonesia has inevitably raised tensions between Australia and the Republic of Indonesia. And it’s idle to pretend otherwise. It was natural that as we argued for the introduction of a peacekeeping force, and although that peacekeeping force was introduced with the consent and the support of the Indonesian Government, it was inevitable that tensions were going to rise.
But it’s very important that we look to the medium and the longer term. Our commitment to an independent East Timor is unambiguous and unqualified. They have a right to be an independent country. They voted in a clean open ballot by a margin of 80% to 20%. A majority that mere mortals such as myself in a sense dream of, 80% to 20%. I mean, really, 80% to 20%. You can’t have it any stronger and more emphatic than that. And for the rest of the world to have turned its back on that would have been something that I don’t think the Australian public would have sat easily with. And that is why we were determined to see that they were going to achieve what they so richly deserved. And as a people they are a poor country. They have clearly suffered much and there’s an enormous amount of compassion and sympathy within the Australian community for them. And because it was in our national interest and because it was the right thing to do Australia made the commitment that we did. And we now have 3,100 young men and women of Australia representing this country, going into that territory in the name of Australia, in the name of all us whatever our political views are, upholding the things that we as a nation believe in.
But we should keep in mind the importance of our relationship with Indonesia. We seek friendship with Indonesia. We have done a lot to help Indonesia. We have been a friend of Indonesia’s over the years. We helped Indonesia achieve her own independence. Many have forgotten that. We were a friend of Indonesia’s as recently as a few months ago in getting valuable assistance to her as she was struck by the Asian economic downturn. We have valuable economic links with Indonesia. There are many Australians who are taught the Indonesian languages in the schools and universities of this country. And I’m sure that there are many people in Indonesia who see value in an ongoing relationship between Australia and this country. And it does represent a delicate balancing act. On the one hand we must work at all times to take the opportunities that are available to redevelop our relationship with Indonesia, but it has to be on the understanding that what we are doing in East Timor is not only right, it is not only in our national interest, but it is occurring under the supervision of the United Nations and it is also occurring with the acquiescence of the Indonesian Government.
We would never have gone there in the first place had it not been for the fact that the United Nations sanctioned it and the Indonesian Government agreed. It seems weeks ago now, but I can still remember the days leading up to the decision of the Security Council to establish a peacekeeping force, arguing with people on talkback radio about the ill wisdom of Australia taking any unilateral action. We have not acted unilaterally. We have acted under the authority of the United Nations, we have acted in concert with our friends and neighbours not only in the ASEAN region but including nations as far afield and Britain and the United States, both of which have made very valuable contributions to the United Nations peacekeeping force in East Timor. But at all times I said that there were two conditions for Australian involvement. One of them was the sanction of the United Nations, and the other was the acquiescence of the Indonesian Government. Otherwise we would have been involved in an act of war and there was no way that the Government was going to even remotely contemplate that.
So far from an operational point of view the exercise has gone extremely well. And I know that all Australians are immensely proud of what is being done in their name in cooperation with others in East Timor. And no more impressive Australian you would find than Major-General Cosgrove. But all such operations carry an enormous amount of risk, and I’ve spoken to many serving and now retired soldiers who share with me an ongoing concern and apprehension about what can happen in a situation. It is dangerous, it is fraught with a lot of difficulty and none of us who care, and I know that’s everyone, about the safety of our forces will rest easily until their mission is completed and all of them are safely returned in tact to their homeland.
So it has been a very difficult and challenging exercise. And I would not have been able to achieve what I believe Australia has to its great credit achieved, without the help of Alexander Downer and John Moore, the two Ministers principally responsible for helping me. And also the assistance of the officers of my own department and the Department of Foreign Affairs, and the Department of Defence, and most particularly of course all of those people responsible for leading our defence force. And very importantly of all of course the men and women of the defence force who I had the opportunity with my wife and the Leader of the Opposition, and the leader of the Australian Democrats of saying farewell to, when just before they departed in both Townsville and Darwin last weekend.
So it has been without doubt the most challenging foreign policy issue this country has faced for a long time. And inevitably when something like this occurs the cast and the stance of a nation’s foreign policy is never quite the same again. I think for 30 years there have been certain notions about the conduct of our foreign policy, that at the very least have been put under the spotlight and some question marks have been raised about that stance of policy by the events of the past few weeks. And it will take time for the full ramifications of that to become known and to be understood and absorbed. But I think it is clear to recognise that this country in the end has always got to act out of a sense of its own national interest.
In a way there’s no such thing as a whole string of special relationships between Australia and the nations of either the region or the rest of the world. And you build a relationship with a country on mutual self-interest. You don’t build it on the personal rapport between two leaders. That’s a rather deluded notion. You build it on those things that you have in common. And what you ought to concentrate on in your relationship with any nation are those things that you have in common rather than those things that might push or drive you apart. And I think it’s also important when you look at the stance of our foreign policy to remember that no matter how convinced the politicians and the advisers may be of the wisdom of a policy. You cannot, for a long period of time, sustain a foreign policy attitude about a nation or a region unless you have the support of the people. You can’t pursue a foreign policy at variance for a long period of time any way with what the general population of a democracy wants. And it’s important that all governments, my Government, any future government, perhaps communicate more directly and more openly with the Australian people, the aims and objectives of our foreign policy. And I think perhaps in the past, and this is not a criticism necessarily of Labor governments but it’s an observation perhaps of all governments, that there’s been a tendency to pursue some foreign policy goals without understanding the need to communicate more fully to the Australian people the reasons behind them, the desirability for them and precisely the goals and the objectives that are being sought.
I guess the other thing that I wanted to say is very much of political character because this is a political dinner and this is a political gathering and I lead a political party and we all have political objectives. And one of those political objectives is remaining in office. Not remaining in office at all costs but remaining in office because we think on balance we do a better job than our opponents. And you’ve often heard me speak in the past, I think, of how I see Australian politics now as being a lot less tribal than it used to be. You don’t have quite as many people who automatically vote Liberal because mum and dad vote Liberal or automatically vote Labor because mum and dad vote Labor.
The differences between the political parties are not quite as acute now. People don’t feel quite so compassionate about their political differences. I don’t as frequently hear people say I think the Government is doing a terrible job but I could never vote Labor. I mean, I hope I don’t hear them saying that. But I think you know what I mean. I can remember years ago that I would run into Labor voters who would say ‘gee I think the Labor Party is doing a terrible job but I could never vote for you lot, I have a philosophical objection to you’.
Now, there are still people like that on both sides but there are fewer of them now than there were 30 years ago. There are fewer of those people now than 30 years ago but what that all means, of course, is that elections are less predictable. Now, there’s no point in beating about the bush, we are all surprised at the result in Victoria, the closeness of it. And there’ll be a lot of analysis that will go on for months and it ought to go on for months to try and work out why it was that happened.
And I hope that Jeff Kennett still emerges as Premier and stays as Premier because whatever you say he has done a fantastic job and he has changed the face of that State in the seven years that he has been Premier. I mean, visiting Melbourne I have got to say to you under the Kirner, the last years of the Kirner Government was like going to a family funeral, it was very depressing. There was a sense of gloom and despondency and Jeff Kennett has turned all that around in seven years yet he hangs by a thread. Now, we have to try and understand why. Different people will have different theories and I think what it drives home to all of us is that it’s a very John Donne. Every election is an island. Each election is quite different from the one that went before it. Just because we won the last election it doesn’t mean we are going to win the next election. And you can have a huge popularity rating and you can still lose.
Wayne Goss entered the 1995 State election with an approval rating of 65 per cent and within six months of the election he was gone. Kennett entered the Victorian election with a very high approval rating. You know the outcome. Hawke entered the 1984 election with an astronomical approval rating. People talked about him having a majority of 60 seats and he copped a swing against him and was greatly humbled by it and he stayed in office for a number of years afterwards.
But the point I simply make to all of you as practising, supporting Liberals is that you can never take the electorate for granted now, it is a lot more volatile. The electorate is interested in governments and leaders who do the job in an unostentatious fashion, achieve results and go onto the next bit. People are interested in outcomes. People are interested in governments that set their goals and do their work in a consistent and predictable fashion but never, ever taking the electorate for granted.
And I well remember, as Margaret Reid will be, the first party room I addressed meeting as Prime Minister in 1996 after the March election of that year and we had a majority of 44 and the air was, sort of, full of euphoria and we thought we were terrific. And I said to them, the very first piece of advice I gave that party room was, it’s terrific now but don’t assume it’s going to last. Within the passage of a year or two we will have done a lot of things people don’t like because they will be necessary and some of the euphoria you now feel will have totally disappeared.
And if ever you give the impression to the electorate that you are taking them for granted, that you believe you are there by divine right or that you are terrific the Australian public in its typical capacity to bring people down to size will exact vengeance. I have never forgotten that. Australians are by nature a somewhat sceptical people. That’s part of the Celtic deposit of our make up. We are sceptical. We get a little bit suspicious of people who get too carried away with themselves and it’s very, very healthy, I might say, a very healthy part of our national character.
And I can well remember having a discussion with President Clinton when he was here in 1996 about the similarities about Australians and Americans and we both agreed there were many but we also agreed we had a number of dissimilarities. And I proffered the view that I thought Australians were somewhat more sceptical as a people than perhaps the Americans and some others were. And I think we as politicians and political practitioners should always keep that in mind.
Australians are deeply democratic people but they are also deeply sceptical on occasions and they do tend to run a critical yardstick over those of us who become a little too preoccupied with the inevitability of any success that might come our way, if I can put it that way. And I think it’s tremendously important that we remember that. It’s a message I convey to all of my colleagues. It’s a message that gets conveyed regularly to me at home on occasions and I think that’s a very, very healthy state in which to live.
But finally, can I say to you, thank you for a wonderful year. I have often said in the past that what I have achieved in public life has been almost totally by courtesy of the Liberal Party. I owe the Liberal Party the fact that I am in Federal Parliament. I owe the Liberal Party naturally the leadership of it and the Prime Ministership of this country. And I am very grateful for what the rank and file of the party has done for me and I am very grateful in particular for what the rank and file of the party has done here in the ACT. I thank you for it and it’s a great delight again to be with you.
[ends]


29 September 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Kylie. To my Ministerial colleague David Kemp, ladies and gentlemen. I’d like to thank David and all of those on his staff and in his department for the work they’ve put in to hosting and organising this youth roundtable. It’s a new approach to communicating with young people in Australia. It’s not designed to impose the Government’s point of view on people. It’s designed to provide a useful way of the views of the people who belong to the roundtable, hopefully representative on many issues of the views of their age cohort within the community, to tell the Government how they think and how their fellow young Australians think about certain issues.
I’ve listened to the summaries today. Predictably there are a lot of things that I’ve heard that I agree with. Quite a lot. I’m particularly impressed with the remarks, some of the remarks that have been made in relation to employment and education issues. The right of people to have educational opportunities. The concept that people should have equality of opportunity is a very important concept which has always been at the core of the value system of the Liberal Party, to which I belong. And that’s a very important principle because unless people have equality of opportunity they are being denied things that are very important to them along life’s way.
I think I was also struck by the importance placed upon some of the social challenges, not only for young people, but which particularly affect young people such as substance abuse. We need solutions to those problems which involve an input from all generations within the Australian community.
I’ve frequently said that we now live in Australia in a less tribal political environment. What that means is that you don’t have quite as many people whose political allegiance is automatic, and rusted on to one or other side. There aren’t as many people now who automatically follow the political views of their parents. There are many people now who change their political views from election to election. They look around for quality policies. They assess, come election time, which ever side is likely to respond more directly to the concerns that they have.
Young people today are probably the most option laden generation that the world has ever seen. People under the age of 25 now have more options than any similar age group in previous generations. And that of course gives them tremendous opportunities and tremendous potential. The idea of starting in a job and staying in it for the rest of your life is more the exception than the rule compared with what it was a generation or two ago.
Unemployment in Australia is still a challenge, although it’s lower than it was. And it’s important for us to understand that unemployment is very regional. There are some parts of Australia that for all practical purposes do have full employment. There are other parts of Australia where unemployment is quite chronic and is the source of considerable social and personal distress.
But the whole purpose of this roundtable has been to enable us to listen to your views. Governments from the Prime Minister down must always be willing to listen. I think we owe the young people of Australia the courtesy of our time, the civility of our attention, but also the honesty of our response. There’s nothing to be gained by Prime Minister’s and Ministers agreeing with everything that they’re told by any section of the Australian community. That is patronising in the extreme. And I try in the various groups that I deal with to observe those three rules. I try and listen to them, I try and absorb what’s being put to me, and I try and give a candid response. And so I can assure you will be our approach to the young people of Australia.
We are of course on the cusp of a most exciting time in our history. We’ll be celebrating 100 years of Australian federation in the year 2001. We’ll have the Olympic Games next year. Right at the present time we are facing foreign policy and defence challenges in a position of leadership, the like of which we haven’t faced before in our history. What is happening in East Timor at the present time represents the first occasion in the history of this nation in which we have the leadership of a multinational force involved in a significant peacekeeping operation. And that imposes very particular challenges for Australia, and it imposes very special responsibilities on the men and women who’ll be there.
We have to come to terms with the failures of our past. We have to recognise the blemishes of Australian history. And amongst those were of course our treatment of indigenous people in earlier years. We endeavoured to do that I think very effectively in the Parliament recently with a motion. And I hope the Australian people will vote in favour of the preamble which we’re putting up. As you know I don’t agree with the views of a lot of people in this room on the republic. I said that I would be candid in my response and I’m being so, but that’s another matter. You all have a vote. So do I. And it’s the great thing about a democracy in this country that we can all express with civility and courtesy and respect our differing views. But I do hope that you’ll support the preamble because I think it would be nice as we celebrate our second century as a nation, it would be nice to be able to put into our Constitution a statement of some of the fundamental truths about the Australian way. And one of those is of course to recognise the immense contribution of the indigenous people to this country, and the acknowledgement as the first Australians.
But I hope that whatever our political views are, whatever views we have on all of these things, and however we end up in resolving these issues over the next year or so, that when we come to the year 2001 we’ll be able, very genuinely, but with a proper sense of national humility, to celebrate what Australia has achieved over the last 100 years. The Australian achievement has been an immense thing. The scale of it dwarfs the achievements of so many other nations. We are a very tolerant open harmonious society and we have a lot to be proud of, and not least of that of course has been the contribution of young Australians at every point in every generation of the Australian story.
So thank you very much for coming here. I hope that you have found it valuable. I know that the Government has found it valuable. It’s an important way of communicating, I have to say respectful way of communicating with the young of Australia. We derive value and benefit from it and I hope that you do also. And thank you very much.
[Ends]


30 September 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Well, thank you very much, Bronwyn; to my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It’s a real delight to be here tonight. It’s quite a humbling experience to hear the stories of these quite remarkable Australians, to be reminded of the massive contribution that Australians of their generation have made to the building of the modern Australia.
In a couple of year’s time we’re going to spend a whole year celebrating 100 years of the Australian nation. And, in a sense, you’ve seen tonight a microcosm of that 100 years. You’ve had read out to you the stories, the achievements, the commitment and the goals of a remarkable and special group of people. And as I listen to each story, as I listen to each citation, a number of things came through - the simple virtues of love of country, of commitment to one’s family, of a desire to improve a community, a desire to care and to help, a commitment to tolerance and openness and decency, all of those values which are ageless to all Australians and to all generations of Australians.
Great national values are ageless. It is as relevant today as it was 100 years ago to be patriotic, to be civil, to respect difference, to understand the need for tolerance between different generations, to teach the young an understanding of the contribution of older people and to encourage within the entire community a desire to work together and display compassion towards each other.
The people we honour tonight have lived through the great defining moments of Australia this century. They’ve lived through depressions. They’ve lived through war. They’ve experienced the exhilaration of post-war rebuilding and construction. They’ve embraced the great waves of migration that have come to this country and changed it for the better. They have shared with their children and grandchildren the joys and the adventure of the information age. And they join us tonight to celebrate together and to put on display their own contribution to the collective Australian achievement of the last 100 years. And I am very honoured, as Prime Minister, I am very proud as Prime Minister, to know that we have within our midst a remarkable group of people whose sheer love of life and vitality is an inspiration to all of us. And I think every one of us, as we heard those citations read, would have been overwhelmed with admiration and awe at the energy and vitality and the contribution that those people are making.
Bronwyn is absolutely right in saying that it is long overdue that we honour the contribution of senior Australians. And can I, on behalf of other Australians, simply say to you, the senior achievers who’ve received awards and recognitions tonight, and through you to the entire generation of Australians that you so impressively represent, can I thank you very sincerely on behalf of your fellow country men and women for the contribution that you have made to making Australia such a wonderful country in which to live.
We owe you an immense debt. The Australia we enjoy today, the Australia that gave me so many opportunities and has given my children so many opportunities would not have been possible without the commitment and the loyalty and the dedication of you and the other members of your generation.
The award that we inaugurate tonight will become an ongoing national award administered by the National Australia Day Council. And I now have great pleasure in announcing that this year’s Senior Australian of the Year is Slim Dusty.
[APPLAUSE]
Well, ladies and gentlemen, as is apparent from that response over the years Slim Dusty has earned for himself the warmth and affection of generations of Australians. From the age of eleven when David Gordon Kilpatrick became Slim Dusty he captured the Australian character and the special place of the bush in our national life. In a career spanning more than 50 years Slim continues to do what he loves at the age of 72. His incredible resilience is demonstrated by the release of his 99th album just two months after open-heart surgery this year and his determination to add to his five million sales in this country by releasing his 100th album next year.
Slim is synonymous with country music. He spearheaded the development of the Country Music Association of Australia and has been chairman since its foundation. Among his accolades are more than 30 golden guitars as well as more gold and platinum records and ARIA awards than any other Australian. He was one of the first six inductees to the ARIA Hall of Fame, was awarded an MBE for his service to entertainment and he’s this year’s Father of the Year. Slim is also renowned for his willingness to give back to the community that has supported his music in such large numbers. The Heart Foundation is just one of the many bodies that has gained from his philanthropic gestures. Slim Dusty is a truly worthy recipient of this year’s award for the senior Australian.
[Ends]



Part of the obligation that we owe to the men and women who defended this country is a special debt to those nurses of Australia who have made a magnificent contribution in all of the conflicts in which the nation has been involved.
It is a debt incurred by a tradition of caring, compassion and healing. This tradition is again being practised by service nurses – this time as part of Australia’s contribution to the multinational force in East Timor.
As I speak, 14 Service nurses from our defence forces are on the ground in Dili to provide vital medical support to the multi-national force and, if necessary, emergency medical care to civilian East Timorese in life threatening situations.
They come from No.1 Field Hospital at Holsworthy, No.3 RAAF Hospital at Richmond, No.6 RAAF Hospital at Laverton, and No. 3 Brigade  Administrative Support Battalion Medical Company and Lavarack Barracks Medical Centre, both in Townsville.
Some of these nurses will also assist in the rapid evacuation by air of serious medical cases. God willing, we hope that this is not needed.
The Nursing Tradition
The professionalism of these young Australians reflects a continuation of a long and proud history of Australia’s Service nurses which had its beginnings so many years ago.
In 100 years of Australian defence service nursing more than 10,000 nurses have given service to their country in times of war and conflict and over 100 have given their lives, including 29 nurses in World War I and 71 nurses in World War II.
Wherever Australian troops have served nurses have been there to provide care and support so vital to the defence effort and to the wellbeing of our troops.
From the veldt in South Africa to the sands of the Western Desert and the mud of the Western Front; from the imposing terrain of Greece and the Middle East, through India, to the jungles of Southeast Asia and Papua New Guinea, nurses have always contributed to the defence of Australia’s national interest.
Our nurses have endured the same perils as the troops they served alongside – risks of injury and capture,risks of internment as prisoners of war, even the risk of death. And they have demonstrated the same proficiency and dedication, the same sacrifice and courage as the troops.
Their heroism has often gone unrecognised. Yet the conditions in which they worked were often appalling and involved considerable dangers. In many theatres of war disease was rife and the threat of invasion was always present.
They worked tirelessly to heal wounded soldiers and gave comfort to the many who did not survive. Sometimes even to enemy soldiers.
Their service and sacrifice has never been forgotten by the soldiers, sailors and airmen who owe their lives to Australian nurses.
Let us vow to never forget the remarkable feats of courage and compassion of the likes of Sister Savage, Sister Bullwinkel and Matron Best.
Sister Nell Savage
We should remember how the hospital ship, Centaur, sunk in May 1943, 22 kilometres of the Queensland coast. All but one of the service nurses on board were to lose their lives. 
It was Sister Nell Savage, the only survivor who was to receive a George Medal for her heroism for helping others in spite of her own personal injury.
Sister Vivian Bullwinkel
And let us not forget the 65 Army Nurses on board the Vyner Brooke in 1942, the twelve nurses who were drowned or killed in the water as the ship was attacked by the Japanese and the further 21 who were massacred after they struggled ashore at Banka Island, only to be made to march back into the sea to be machine gunned from behind.
In the words of Sister Bullwinkel, the only survivor, "they all knew what was going to happen to them, but no one panicked, they just marched ahead with their chins up."
Matron Best
Then there is the incident in Greece in early 1941.
In the face of a German onslaught, the Matron of one of the Australian General Hospitals, Matron Best, was informed by her Commanding Officer that they were to be evacuated with ten minutes notice and was asked to select 44 nurses and physiotherapists to be evacuated.
Matron Best spoke to her nursing sisters, making it clear that the German forces would probably capture those who chose to stay.
She asked them to write two things on a slip of paper, their names and one other word – either ‘stay’ or ‘go’.
When she collected the slips, not one was marked with the word ‘go’.
She selected 39 sisters to remain with her, and the others were evacuated.
From these chapters in our history we have gained a tremendous legacy that illuminates, in a very special way, our ANZAC tradition.
The Memorial
Memorials such as this are important expressions of the value we place in the deeds of individuals. Here on ANZAC Parade, this memorial stands next to a select group of others that mark the particular contribution of men and women in forging and defending a free and independent Australia.
Our nurses have waited long for this tribute. Perhaps too long for a grateful nation, but not so long that their service has been forgotten.
This memorial is a worthy tribute to a 100 year tradition of service and sacrifice located here amongst memorials to the service men and women of this country, they dedicated themselves to serve.
I would like to congratulate Ms Elizabeth Percival, Executive Director of the Royal College of Nursing, Australia, who graciously agreed to chair the Memorial Management Committee, Ms Ita Buttrose AO OBE, who chaired the Memorial Fundraising Committee, and all those involved for their efforts which have culminated in the dedication of this memorial. 
This memorial will serve as a prominent and appropriate focus for commemorating this special group of Australians who served, suffered and died in the service of a grateful nation.
To those nurses of Australia who are here today I say that your nation will forever be indebted to you. You have earned our admiration and respect for the contribution you made and the relief of suffering that you provided.
You are a living reminder that tyranny will never overcome the courage, tenacity and mateship of typical Australians.


E&amp;OE..................
  Thank you very much Everald, ladies and gentlemen. It's a pleasure for me
   to be back again to the National Seniors' Association Convention and to
   have been invited to address you, and to declare it open.
  I thank you Everald for the kind remarks that you have offered in relation
   to the East Timor issue. This has been the biggest foreign policy and defence
   challenge to confront Australia for more than 30 years and I know that every
   Australian will be thinking of our men and women in East Timor, will be
   immensely proud of what they are doing, of the professional way in which
   they have gone about their task, and they will be aware that they are carrying
   a very special leadership role and a very special sense of honour and distinction
   to the Australian nation because this indeed is the first time in the history
   of Australia that we have been invited to play a leadership role in an international
   peacekeeping operation. It is the largest military involvement for Australian
   forces since the Vietnam War more than 30 years ago.
  We hope that they will all be safe and they will all come home to their
   loved ones soon. But it is a dangerous mission and it's a mission that is
   being carried out in the name of all of us because we share in common with
   the rest of the world certain values about the right of men and women to
   freedom everywhere in the world.
  I will be having the opportunity later on this morning of meeting for the
   first time Xanana Gusmao who is recognised as the most significant leader
   of the East Timorese people. Now, I know that what has happened in East
   Timor in recent months has touched a lot of Australians right across the
   political spectrum and irrespective of differences of opinion they might
   have on other issues, and as I said in my address to the nation, we are
   there for two reasons. We are there because it is right to be there and
   we are there because it is in Australia's interest to be there, and we should
   remind ourselves that we are there also at the invitation of the United
   Nations and with the approval of the Government of Indonesia.
  I am, as I said, delighted to be here to open this Association's convention
   to honour the contribution that the members of this association, and that
   generation of Australians from which they are drawn, has made to the development
   of our country.
  As we survey the national economic scene and as we look at Australia's place
   in the world we see a country that in national economic terms has not been
   as strong and as prosperous as it is now for more than 30 years. In many
   ways, the Australian economy now is better and stronger than it's ever been.
   Our inflation rate is low, our interest rates are low, I know that doesn't
   necessarily come with greetings from everybody in this audience I recognise
   that, there's an upside and a downside to every state but as far as the
   contribution to the national economic activity in investment is concerned,
   it does have advantages. We have got our budget in surplus. We have very
   high levels of business investment, we have strong levels of economic growth,
   we have stared down the worst economic downturn the Asia Pacific region
   has seen since World War II and we have actually done better on that score
   than I suspected we would do about a year ago.
  So nationally, the scene is very strong and I am very happy to say that
   unemployment is looking better than I thought it would be a year ago. There
   is every prospect that unemployment can fall further, just how much I am
   not going to predict, but employment growth is very strong and over the
   last three and a half years we've created 526,000 new jobs in this country.
  So economically, Australia is in a strong position. We are recognised as
   being in a strong position around the world and that, of course, has underwritten
   our capacity to do other things. One of the reasons why we have been able
   to assume a leadership role in events in our region is that our economy
   is in a strong position. If it weren't we wouldn't be able to do that nearly
   as convincingly.
  We did have to take, when we first came into office, a number of budget
   decisions that not everybody agreed with and they still don't agree with
   that and I understand that. And you don't have the opportunity in government
   if you are moving forward and undertaking necessary reforms to do so without
   there being some criticism. But we have endeavoured to spread the burden
   fairly and evenly. We have endeavoured to protect the vulnerable in the
   community and we have also endeavoured to keep the goals of the Government
   fixed very firmly on necessary economic reform.
  Now, I know that the economic reform that is of most interest to people
   at the present time is the introduction of a new taxation system. We had
   a very lengthy debate in the lead up to the last election and I know that
   there were a lot of retired people who were concerned about aspects of the
   tax package. And I want to assure you that in the months that lie between
   now and the introduction of the tax package on the 1st of July
   next year the Government will be committing a lot of resources to fully
   explaining how the system is going to work. It is a big change. It's a very
   beneficial change. It's going to make the operations of business in Australia
   less costly. It's going to reduce the cost of our exports. It's going to
   reduce the cost of fuel which is very important for our country people and
   particularly for people who live in the larger States and the more sparsely
   populated areas of Australia.
  There are going to be very big reductions in income tax. There are going
   to be special provisions for retired people and for people on the pension.
   Under the new tax system, for example, aged pensioners will benefit from
   higher aged and service pensions and allowances, a higher pensioner rebate,
   a one off savings bonus and also if they pay tax lower taxation rates.
  From July of next year pensions will rise by four per cent and the base
   pension will continue to be protected by ensuring that the maximum single
   rate is at least 25 per cent of male total average weekly earnings. Pensions
   will be guaranteed, let me repeat, guaranteed to stay at least two per cent
   ahead of price rises. The existing pension rebates and low income aged persons
   rebate will be maintained to ensure that maximum rate pensioners and low
   income self-funded retirees continue to pay no personal income tax.
  On top of this, the maximum rebate will rise by $250 a year and $175 a year
   for each member of a couple. This means that pensioners and eligible self-funded
   retirees will be able to earn more from the 1st of July next
   year without paying personal income tax. The pension income test withdrawal
   rate has also been reduced to allow pensioners to earn more without such
   a dramatic effect on their pension. And to ensure that these assistance
   measures are maintained over time the Government will set up an independent
   compensation review in 2003.
  The Government will provide two new savings bonuses to help maintain the
   value of the savings of older Australians following the introduction of
   the GST. There will be a one off non-taxable aged persons savings bonus
   of up to $1,000 for each person aged 60 or more on the 1st of
   July next year. There will also be an additional one off non-taxable self-funded
   retirees' supplementary bonus of up to $2,000 for each person aged 55 or
   more who does not receive the Commonwealth income support payment.
  The Government is conducting a comprehensive education and communication
   campaign to inform Australians about the new tax system. For example, information
   is being provided to older Australians through the quarterly newsletter
   Aged Pension News.
  In addition to the fundamental changes to the tax system, which include
   incidentally the abolition of provisional taxation and the introduction
   of imputation credits, there have been major changes to business taxation
   arrangements which are in some respects of special significance to retired
   people.
  The proposed reduction in capital gains tax, if it secures parliamentary
   approval, will greatly benefit self-funded retirees. For them the capital
   gains tax rate will effectively be cut in half while for those still operating
   farms or others sorts of businesses the rate will effectively fall by up
   to 75 per cent.
  People over 55 who sell their farm or other small business that they have
   owned for more than 15 years for the purposes of living on the proceeds
   for retirement will be exempted from capital gains tax altogether. And that
   represents a very significant reform which will be of enormous benefit to
   many people within the age group represented by this audience.
  I know that the changes involved in tax reform are extensive. I also know
   from my years of political life that it's always possible to run a scare
   campaign. And we ran the gauntlet of a lot of scare campaigns on taxation
   reform. The scare campaign was run during the election campaign, it was
   run again while we were negotiating the legislation through Parliament,
   and it goes on. But let me assure you that not only are there enormous benefits
   for the whole country, for all of us as Australians in these reforms, there
   are also very significant benefits for individuals. And we have gone out
   of our way to protect not only the vulnerable in our community but also
   retired people who have earned the right to have a secure income and lifestyle
   in their retirement, and are entitled to be protected against any assault
   on that sense of security by major changes such as taxation reform.
  The Government of course is not only looking at taxation policy and how
   it impacts on older people, but also other policy areas. Health care is
   of great importance to all of us and responding to the practical health
   care needs of older Australians has been a major priority of my Government.
   And we have done a number of things. We've provided a 30% tax rebate for
   private health insurance premiums, and that will be of particular benefit
   to retired people. It will reward those who have taken out private health
   insurance, it is non-means tested, and I know that particular element is
   especially welcome. And it will play a major role in strengthening the place
   of private health insurance in the overall health system of this country.
   We have extended the Commonwealth Seniors' Card to a further 220,000 self-funded
   retirees by increasing the income limits for those cards. And we have extended
   the Veterans' Gold Card to a further 50,000 World War II veterans.
  As a mark of our gratitude and respect for the important role that carers
   play in our society, the Government has provided $82 million to boost respite
   care services for carers of people with dementia, and other cognitive and
   behavioural difficulties. New respite services will be developed and a number
   of these will be designed to provide flexible respite care in rural and
   remote areas.
  In my key note address to the ACOSS Conference last year and just after
   the federal election, I undertook to leave as a permanent reminder of the
   International Year of Older persons a new basis for a substantial advance
   in the quality of health care delivered to older Australians. This year's
   budget provided $171 million as a major boost to general practice, and for
   the first time the Government has decided to introduce a Medicare benefits
   scheme item for annual voluntary health assessments for all people 75 years
   of age and over. And these health assessments will be undertaken at home
   where possible, and will help older Australians to remain in their homes
   a lot longer.
  From next month and for the first time Medicare will provide funding for
   GPs in the work they undertake with other care providers in planning care
   for people, particularly older Australians, who have chronic and complex
   needs. And this is to be complemented by the practice incentives program
   for GPs to ensure that patients aged over 65 with chronic and complex needs
   have care plan if they need them. The existing coordinated care trials will
   continue to be supported and further developed. And these trials specifically
   address the needs of older people who are chronically ill or disadvantaged
   with a focus on the frail aged. The Government has also provided $41 million
   for the establishment of care link centres to give single regional contact
   points across Australia for community care services. These centres will
   improve the integration of service delivery particularly for people needing
   packages of high-level community care as an alternative to residential care.
   The budget has also allocated $6 million to train health workers in further
   research into preventing falls, particularly by older people.
  The international year of older people has seen many initiatives to recognise
   their significant contribution. Two weeks ago I had the pleasure to award
   the inaugural Commonwealth Senior Australian of the Year Award to a greatly
   loved Australian, Slim Dusty. And I'm pleased that this program will continue
   beyond the end of this international year. And I'm particularly pleased
   to learn that the National Seniors' Association is joining forces with the
   Australia Day Council for a Senior Australian of the Year Award from the
   year 2000. I think that's an excellent idea. And in parallel with the Government's
   award we have also announced the Commonwealth Recognition Award for senior
   Australians to highlight the need to widely recognise the important role
   of older people in the Australian community.
  Another worthy project that will benefit all of us is the national active
   Australia campaign. It's designed to promote the benefits of physical activity
   not only for older Australians but indeed for all Australians. And as part
   of the Government's Business and Community Partnerships initiative, we have
   created the self-service banking and older Australians project. This partnership
   involves the Australian Bankers' Association and a number of peak organisations
   representing the interests of older people to assist them to understand
   the new technology associated with electronic banking.
  It is important as all of us receive the benefits of longer life and better
   health in our more mature years, it's important to understand the strategic
   challenge that this represents for governments of whatever particular stripe.
   In 20 years time there will be almost twice as many people aged over 65
   years or more as there are now. It's important to recognise that the majority
   of these will be women. By the year 2021 it's projected that nearly one
   in five Australians will be a women 65 years or over. These trends provide
   not only a major challenge, but they also provide major opportunities for
   our community. And it's very important that we look at these developments
   not in a negative light, but indeed in an overwhelmingly positive light.
   Australia is a lot better positioned to cope financially with population
   ageing than most OECD countries because we do have a relatively younger
   age profile than many of the European societies and Japan. We have a commitment
   to build on a strong health system which for all the criticisms it receives
   is better than the health system in virtually any other country in the world.
   And we've made major improvements and reforms in recent years to income
   support and retirement incomes policy.
  To prepare for this challenge I've established a ministerial reference group,
   chaired by the Minister for Aged Care to develop a national strategy for
   an ageing Australia. The development of that strategy is the Commonwealth
   Government's key policy response to the international year of older people.
   I've asked the ministerial reference group to focus on four themes. Firstly
   helping Australians to be independent in and provide for their latter years,
   world class care, attitudes, lifestyle and community support and healthy
   ageing. In the interest, not only of older Australians but indeed of the
   entire community, we need to develop policies that maximise the capacity
   of all to contribute to the community.
  In the time that I have been Prime Minister, I have sought to foster very
   much the notion of what I describe as a social coalition and that is a recognition
   that if we are to solve our challenges or our problems and to meet our challenges,
   we need to recognise that no one part of the community has all the wisdom,
   all the resources or all the capacity to meet those challenges or solve
   those problems alone.
  The Government, acting alone, can't solve problems, individuals acting on
   their own can't solve all of their problems. The great welfare organisations
   in our community play a strategic role but they need help and support and
   the business community, on its own of course, can't solve social problems.
  But if you get the four of them working together, if you get the Government
   providing income support, not withdrawing any of its services but continuing
   to provide the basic social security safety net, if you marshal the voluntary
   efforts and the commitment of individuals, if you not only rely on the goodwill
   but also the policy wisdom and advice of the great welfare organisations
   like Salvation Army and St Vincent De Paul and many others who do a magnificent
   job and if you also harness the more philanthropic sentiments of the business
   community then together as a coalition, there are very few social challenges
   that we can't, as a community, solve.
  What we've tried to do as a government is to encourage the development of
   that coalition. I announced a number of taxation changes for example last
   year that now make it a lot more attractive for wealthier people in the
   community to donate resources and donate money to worthy causes and that
   has already sparked a greater sense of philanthropy amongst some of the
   wealthier people within our society.
  What I have said in relation to that is that I am not so much seeking to
   encourage those who already give to give more but rather to encourage more
   who can afford to do so to give something.
  And if we can develop and build this notion of a social coalition, then
   I think we have a great capacity as a community in the years ahead to meet
   head-on and solve our challenges and our problems.
  May I, ladies and gentlemen, return to the theme I touched upon at the beginning
   and that is I'm here principally as Prime Minister of Australia to honour
   the contribution of those members of the aged cohort that this audience
   represents for its continuing contribution to the Australian community;
   to say that my Government is very sensitive to and conscious of your legitimate
   needs and requests; that you have given much to the Australian community;
   you continue to give much to the Australian community and the sense of security
   and stability and stable lifestyle that I know all of us seek is a very
   legitimate ask of a society to which you have made such a great contribution.
  I also speak as the leader of a government that has seen an era of economic
   stability, the like of which we have not had for a long time. Now we're
   not complacent about that, I learnt very early in my political life never
   to get complacent or self-satisfied, I'm not. As soon as you solve one problem,
   there is another one around the corner and political life, as in personal
   and business life, is always like that.
  But we have seen a very strong period of economic growth in Australia, it's
   not the only thing but it does make a contribution to one's capacity to
   do other things for the benefit of the community.
  Now I thank you for inviting me again. I thank your Association for its
   contribution. I wish you all well and I declare your Convention open.
  [ends]


7 October 1999
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
Sir Mekere Morauta, Lady Roslyn, members of the Government of Papua New Guinea, other distinguished guests ladies and gentlemen. May I first of all say Prime Minister for myself and my wife Janette how much we appreciate the friendly hospitality that has been extended to us. This is the first occasion that I’ve been able to visit your country since becoming Prime Minister. I was meant to be here last year but other events intervened to prevent it. But I am very happy to find the time and to find the opportunity at a special juncture in our relationship to come here and to say a few things to you on behalf of Australia and on behalf of the Australian Government.
The friendship between our two countries is very well known. Like the friendship between any two people the friendship between any two nations must always be worked on and kept in very good repair. Of course the friendship between nations can sometimes be put under strain. And I have to say to you Prime Minster as the patron of the great St George Rugby League Club, that friendship was put under strain in the Grand Final. An eminent citizen of your country played a major role in the defeat of the great St George Rugby League Club. But it was a wonderful game of rugby league and he’s been an absolute ornament to your country and to the game in the contribution Marcus has made to the team for which he’s played.
But Prime Minister, I greatly admire, and my fellow countrymen and women greatly admire the steps that you and your Government are taking against a very difficult background to stabilise and over time strengthen the economy of Papua New Guinea. You face difficulties that few Australians fully comprehend. But there are a lot of Australians who do comprehend the difficulties that you face, and there is a deep well of understanding and sentiment and feeling towards your country in Australia. It’s based on long years of friendship and association. It’s based on shared experiences in peace and in war. And it’s also based upon the very extensive people to people contacts that exist between our two societies. I’ve watched in particular the strenuous efforts that you’ve made Prime Minister to engage your economy and your Government and your country with the international financial institutions. And I commend the commitment you’ve made to a continuation of that engagement because it is very important to the long term strength and stability of your country. We all are part of a globalised economy. We all depend upon the attitude of other countries towards us. None of us, not even an economy as mighty as that of the United States of America can live in isolation from the attitudes and the judgements of other countries and other economies.
Australia has announced today some significant assistance. I believe that the assistance announced today will make a very important contribution to building international confidence in your currency. But of equal importance Prime Minister is the fact that the policies to which you have committed yourself since your election will also build that international confidence, because any nation that seeks to go about tackling her own domestic economic challenges with resolution and commitment will over time attract the support and the understanding, not only of the international financial institutions, but also of the international investors. Private sector confidence in an economy is a very valuable asset. It’s important to me as Prime Minister of Australia so far as the Australian economy is concerned, and I know that it is important to you as Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea.
I was immensely pleased to hear in our discussions this afternoon, of the progress that is being made, towards the very difficult challenges that successive governments of this country have faced in relation to Bougainville. And Sir Michael Somare’s assessment of what is occurring there now gave me great encouragement. And Australia has been very pleased to play a constructive role in the peace monitoring group, and will go on providing assistance and understanding and help as best we can in the months ahead. But it does seem to us as I’m sure it does to you that gradually you are inching towards a solution to a problem that has proved enormously costly both in human life and resources, and also so far as the treasure of your own country is concerned. And all friends of Papua New Guinea will hope that that problem is brought to a proper end and proper fruition.
You mentioned Prime Minister the situation in East Timor. Of course it’s an issue that has very much consumed the efforts and the commitment of the Australian Government over the past few months. We see our role in East Timor as being the role of a nation that seeks to be none other than a good international citizen in our region. We have acted in East Timor along with others in response to a request from the United Nations and with the agreement of the Government of Indonesia. We have always sought good relations with the Government and the people of Indonesia. Indonesia is your neighbour, Indonesia is our neighbour. It’s a very large neighbour of 211 million people. And over the years in different ways successive Australian governments have endeavoured to give assistance and help and to extend understanding to the people and the Government of Indonesia. It is inevitable because of the events in East Timor that Australia’s relationship with Indonesia will go through a period of some strain. But in the medium to longer term I am confident, and most Australians are confident, that the desirability of us working together closely and sharing a future on a proper basis of mutual respect for each other’s differences as well as the points we have in common, that those feelings will assert themselves and that the relationship will lose some of the tension that inevitably it has acquired over recent months.
The Australian contribution to the peace enforcement operation in East Timor is being made in cooperation with the contributions of many nations. And I acknowledge those contributions. As Prime Minister of Australia I acknowledge those contributions most warmly. In time there will be a full United Nations peacekeeping force in what is styled as phase three. We take the view that the people of East Timor having voted in a properly supervised ballot to the tune of some 80% in favour of independence, we take the view that they are entitled to have that independence. And we and others in the region and in the broader world community will be required to provide assistance and help to the people of East Timor to make their independence reality. But already the indications are that some degree of relative normalcy is returning to that very troubled province. And the fact that we along with others have made a contribution to restoring more peaceful and tranquil conditions is a source of considerable satisfaction to not only the Government but also to the people of Australia.
Can I finally say to you Prime Minister that our two countries have had over the years a very close association. We’ve had our differences but we’ve never lost a very deep affection for each other. There is a natural desire on the part of the people of Australia to be good friends with the people of Papua New Guinea. Friends recognising that you have your proud independence as a sovereign nation with your distinctive national characteristics, playing your part in the region and in the broader world community. We share a membership of APEC, we share a membership of the Commonwealth, and we share a membership of the South Pacific Forum. But most importantly we share a history which has brought our two nations and two societies together in easier times and more difficult times. We share values. We each respect the value of democratic institutions. And in the face of considerable difficulties your country has preserved the essential institutions and instruments of a democratic way of life. And it’s something that we respect and it’s something that we share very much with you.
I hope that our brief visit which we’re enjoying very much, makes a small contribution to further strengthening an already close relationship. We are your friends. We have always been your friends, and we will always be your friends. And I hope as Prime Minister of Australia in the time that I hold that office I will be able to further build on that very great friendship between our two countries and our two peoples. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Well, thank you very much Mr Burt, to Minister, your Excellencies, the Australian High Commissioner, Mr Warner, ladies and gentlemen.
I was very pleased that it was possible to include in my itinerary for this visit to Papua New Guinea an opportunity to address this gathering because it is not only fundamental to the strength and the future of the Australian economy that its management and its goals have the support and the confidence of the business community but it is also fundamental to the future strength and direction to the economy of Papua New Guinea that what is being done in relation to that economy also has the support and the confidence of the business community.
Necessarily focussed as my visit has been on a number of the important bilateral issues between Australia and Papua New Guinea, it’s also a visit that takes place at a time when, as you rightly said in your introduction, the rest of the world is forming judgements about the capacity of Papua New Guinea to grapple with significant economic challenges and problems. And in this sense, Papua New Guinea is no different from any other country. We are all subject to international adjudication these days. Nobody is exempt from the scepticism of a global financial community. No country, however developed or whatever stage of development it may be, can imagine any more than it can seal itself off from the rest of the world, put some kind of barrier around its economic behaviour and then pretend that what the rest of the world says doesn’t matter. We’ve been painfully aware of that on various occasions in Australia. And so it applies with equal force and particular force at the present time to Papua New Guinea.
You are all aware of the long friendship and the very deep and close association between Australia and Papua New Guinea. And I don’t need to remind an audience such as this of just how intricate and detailed are the linkages and the associations and how personal and deeply felt is the sentiment between so many Australians and so many citizens of this country. And therefore it is an important part of the foreign policy and security policy projection of any Australian government and any Australian Prime Minister that we have good and friendly relations with the government and the people of Papua New Guinea.
And I’ve come here on this occasion as the Prime Minister of a very friendly country, a regional partner, a country that is anxious in an unobtrusive way to assist where it can the process of strengthening and developing the economy of this country. It was in that context that yesterday I signed, with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, I signed the new aid agreement which will maintain at a nominal level of $300 million dollars Australian a year the aid that this country, our country, Australia, continues to provide to Papua New Guinea.
We have over the years of course as a deliberate policy design and I think quite rightly shifted the emphasis away from general budget aid towards project aid. And we in fact this year finished the last year in which money is directed generally to the budget so that we are on a proper basis of providing it for project aid. The new agreement does provide for a certain degree of flexibility, sought by the government of Papua New Guinea, and that flexibility will be available for utilisation if certain criteria under the agreement are met.
But this is an important, continuing earnest of our country’s commitment. Papua New Guinea is the largest recipient of overseas aid from Australia. It has been that for a long time and it is likely to remain so for years into the future. And we see this as a very strong ongoing way of continuing to support the people of this country and to continue to express the friendship that we feel towards them.
But over and above that we have recognised that given some recent events there has been particular pressure on the Papua New Guinean economy and particular pressure in relation to the balance of payments and the exchange rate. And it is for that reason that I announced yesterday that the Reserve Bank of Australia would make available what I rather euphemistically called a financial support facility, because it’s not quite a loan and it’s not quite a currency swap which is worth something in the order of $80 million dollars, United States dollars, and that is available initially on a ninety day rollover basis and that will be a payment that is made from the Reserve Bank of Australia to the Central Bank of Papua New Guinea. In turn there will be an account, a Kina account, established in the equivalent value and the proceeds of that account will be used to retire some of the government debt in Papua New Guinea.
This will provide a significant injection of confidence. It’s meant to demonstrate to the rest of the world that Australia supports the reform programme of the new government in Papua New Guinea. We believe that that reform programme is a courageous programme. We believe it is necessary. It’s not for us to say what other countries should do in relation to the management of their economies but it is within our capacity, particularly with close friends and neighbours, to say that we support what you are doing and we as a friend are here to help you in a very practical way.
The provision of this new facility will be conditional, of course, on initialling the letter of understanding which I believe is, it will certainly happen, the letter of understanding between the International Monetary Fund and the government of Papua New Guinea. We also have in mind, in the fullness of time through next year, when there is further meeting of minds between the government of this country and the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, we have in mind the negotiation of a government to government longer term loan arrangement which will provide further support.
Now, all of these things, ladies and gentlemen, are designed to send not only a message to the people and the government of Papua New Guinea, but also a message to the international financial institutions and to the rest of the world, and that is that we in Australia will support the government and the people of Papua New Guinea in their efforts to reform and strengthen their economy.
No country can give unconditional support to another country, but it can give support on a proper basis. And it is appropriate for Australia to provide support on the basis that there is a reform programme to which there is a strong commitment by the government of this country and it is a reform programme that makes a great deal of sense. The magnitude of the challenge in this society is of course greater than in Australia. But it is still nonetheless possible to draw parallels between the challenges faced here and the challenges that have been faced in Australia.
Because we live in this globalised economy and because instantaneous judgements are made around the world on how we perform, how we manage our economies and how we behave, therefore we simply, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, we cannot isolate ourselves from what is happening. And we undertook a number of major reforms in Australia. And many of you would be aware that over the past few years the Australian economy, and particularly over the last twelve months, the Australian economy has been able to stare down the worst economic downturn the Asian Pacific area has seen since World War II. I have to say to you, quite frankly that it has done better than I expected it would do a year ago. If I had been addressing this gathering in October of last year I probably would have said to you "well the Australian economy has done pretty well so far, we’ve got the budget back into surplus, or back into balance, we’ve just won an election where taxation reform was the main issue, now we’ve got to try and get it through the Parliament, and I suppose before too long, like the rest of the region we are going to be effected by the economic downturn".
Now it’s turned out to be rather better than that and I can report to you that Australia’s economy is performing better now that it has at any time since I’ve been in public life. And I hope that’s not just seen as a sort of rose coloured assessment by an incumbent Prime Minister, they never do that, I know. But I hope that it is seen as a realistic assessment because our growth rates are still very strong. Our inflation rates and interest rates are very low. Our budget is in strong surplus. And jobs growth is still continuing. We have created something like 520,000 new jobs since March of 1996. And importantly we are being seen around the world now as a very strong economy, even in some quarters as a standout economy in this part of the world.
Now that didn’t happen by accident, it happened because of the application of sensible policies. Some of those changes were undertaken years ago by former governments, and I’ve never been reluctant to give them credit for that, particularly in the area of tariff reform and financial system reform. But the reforms undertaken by my government over the last three and a half years, the industrial relations reforms, which are really turning out to be fundamentally far more deep-seated and far-reaching than some sceptics would allow in 1996 when those reforms were implemented. And only yesterday we had a major decision by the full bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission which demonstrated just how far those reforms had gone. And of course we’ve got our budget into healthy balance, surplus, and we’ve been able to deliver very low rates of inflation.
And we have now embarked upon the biggest economic change of all and that is fundamentally restructuring our taxation system. Not only through the introduction of a goods and services tax, accompanied by significant reductions in personal income tax which will mean that 80 per cent of Australian taxpayers will be on a top rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar, but we’ve also recently announced some major changes to the business taxation system that will produce in time a corporate tax rate of 30 per cent, will bring about effectively a halving of capital gains tax, and other significant changes and incentives into the taxation system. And all of these are designed to continue the process of opening up and making more attractive for investment the Australian economy.
Now the relevance of this for Papua New Guinea is anything but incidental or peripheral. The stronger the Australian economy is the more capacity we have to help our friends and neighbours. I remember when Korea and Indonesia and Thailand all had economic difficulties as a result of the Asian downturn. Australia was able to assist the IMF bail-out packages in each of those three countries, and along with Japan, Australia was the only other country to participate in each of those bail-outs. Now that wouldn’t have been possible if our own economy had not been as strong. And the sort of role that we are now playing at the request of the United Nations in East Timor is in part a product of the economic strength as well as the political will and the military preparedness that has been involved in getting together our contribution.
So the strength and the resilience of the Australian economy does have direct relevance to not only our relationship with Papua New Guinea, the relationship through the business communities of our two societies, but also our capacity to provide direct assistance. Now I am aware of the importance being placed upon not only the government of Papua New Guinea, but also many in the business community of particular projects, and yesterday in my discussion with the Prime Minister and his ministers we talked about a number of those. As you might expect me to say in the end, judgements about the gas pipeline and so forth are judgements that have to be made at a commercial level. Our government is very keen in cooperation with the Queensland government to facilitate and to play a very supportive and proactive part. But in the end judgements must be made at a commercial level in relation to those projects. And the stronger the domestic political and economic scene in both countries, the greater the commitment to economic reform that is being undertaken in both countries will in the end I think play a significant role in the individual commercial decisions that are made.
Can I say that I have been immensely impressed and warmed by the commitment to economic reform of the new Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea. We met in Sydney three or four weeks ago. It was our first meeting, and it was an opportunity for me to hear more of the plans that he had to tackle the difficult economic problems. His Independence Day speech recently outlined his acknowledgement that although Papua New Guinea needed help and assistance and understanding from the rest of the world, it realised that the prime responsibility for reform lies within the borders of this nation. And so it is with all of us. Australia appreciates assistance and investment and support and recognition from other nations, but in the end we have to be responsible for what we do, in the end we have to accept the particular burdens of reform and change. Now I know as a member of parliament of 25 years, as a former treasurer, as a former opposition leader, and a minister holding other jobs, and now Prime Minister for over three and a half years, I know that the reform process in a developed society such as Australia is challenging and not easy.
And I can understand that the reform process in a still developing country is even more daunting and even more challenging. And what is to me encouraging and warming and one that draws our support and our sympathy and our understanding, and our practical assistance is the evident resolution and commitment of the Prime Minister and his government to that reform process. I know it won’t be easy, but the important thing is that there is an acceptance of the need for debt retirement. There is an acceptance of the need to get the macro-economic fundamentals correct. There is a recognition that the international reputation of the country, the resilience of its domestic economic institutions is very important to the international judgements that are made about it. And most importantly to this audience, there is a recognition of how important it is to have a benign and encouraging business climate. Because in the end the strength of an economy is dependent ultimately on the confidence and the willingness to invest of its business community.
There is no example in the world left standing, and it’s been the judgement economically really of the 20th century, there’s no example in the world left standing of how you can run a strong economy without having a strong, confident, optimistic business community. And if you look back over the 20th century in a way that’s the greatest single economic lesson. All of the attempts that we’ve seen over the years to run anything remotely resembling command or highly planned economies have been left in a smoking ruin. And those economies that have emerged strongest of all have been those economies that have rested upon those simple principles, that it is the private sector, it is the climate you create to encourage people to take risks and to invest that ultimately determines whether you have economic strength. We have certainly found that in Australia, and I know that the government of Papua New Guinea is very strongly committed to implementing that kind of philosophy here, and I support them in that endeavour, I commend them for the commitment they’re making to the process of reform, and in the terms that I’ve explained, I commit the Australian government to be a partner and a friend with them in achieving those goals.
It is a pleasure to be once again in this country. As I said we have a long friendship, a very deep friendship in both peacetime and in war and it’s no ordinary relationship, it’s a relationship that has particular and very close and important characteristics. It’s a relationship as I said last night at the dinner at Parliament House attended by Sir Mekere Morauta, my wife and myself, it’s a relationship that like all good relationships has got to be kept in repair, and tended and looked after and not taken for granted. And like all relationships of course as I also remarked last night, it can be put under a lot of strain, and it has been for me. I’m after all the patron of the St. George rugby league club and it was put under an enormous amount of strain when I reflect upon the contribution of a remarkable citizen of this country to the victory of Melbourne Storm in the rugby league competition this year.
So that’s just an illustration, a humorous one, but nonetheless a relevant one, of the sort of linkages that in the end really matter between societies and they are the people-to-people linkages, because it’s through them more than any other linkages that one has an understanding and a respect for, and appreciation of the society and the culture and the commitment of the people, and so it is between our two nations and I couldn’t be more delighted and honoured to be a guest of your government, of your Prime Minister and I welcomed very much this morning the opportunity of addressing so many citizens of Papua New Guinea and also so many fellow countrymen and women of my own, and long may our friendship and association endure and grow even closer.
Thank you.
[ends]


9 October 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Well, Con, thanks for that understated welcome. I might come again, when’s your next convention?
But to you, Con, to Shane Stone, the Federal President of the Liberal Party, to my federal Parliamentary and Ministerial colleagues, David Watson, the Leader of the State Parliamentary Liberal Party, but most importantly of all members of the Liberal Party here in Queensland.
Can I say how honoured I am to have the opportunity of addressing a division of the Party which has enjoyed an increase in its membership of something like twenty to thirty percent over the last twelve months because political parties in the end are about membership. They are about enlisting with the hearts and minds of the men and women of Australia. They are not about the Members of the Cabinet alone, they are not about the Prime Minister or the Premier alone. They are in the end about the commitment of the cross section of the Australian political community to a particular cause. And I want to start my address today by thanking the Queensland Division for the tremendous support that it has afforded to me and to my federal Parliamentary colleagues over the last twelve months. And to congratulate all of those, your President, your State Director and all of the members of the State Executive and the members of the various branches. And to thank those branch members for their toil and their effort and their loyalty and their commitment. Because you are the people that stuck to us during the lean years. You are the people who were still there to help us and support us when we were out of public favour. And now that we are in government let me assure that I don’t forget and I will never forget the loyalty and support that has been coming from the branches of the Liberal Party here in Queensland and throughout the length and breadth of Australia.
When I look back at the year that has passed since I last addressed this convention, I can say without undue hyperbole that it has been a year of remarkable achievement for the government, but more importantly it has been a year of remarkable success and remarkable achievement for Australia. During that twelve month period, Australia has without any ambiguity stared down in a most emphatic way the worst economic recession our region has experienced since the end of World War II.
When I addressed you a year ago I probably would have expressed some apprehension about the possibility that although we had done well, the Asian economic downturn would catch up with us. Well that has not turned out to be the case. Through a combination of skilful policy changes, a very careful and intelligent management of our exchange rate and a determination of the government to commit itself to long term economic reform, we have become the star economic performer of the Asia Pacific region.
And we have done it not only because of the work and the effort of the government and the leadership that the government has shown, but we have done it particularly because of the commitment of the men and women of the Australian community towards a new and different Australia in which we are now living. An Australia that must be more competitive. Must be more open. Must realise that you only win the race if you stay ahead of the person who is in the race with you at the particular time. You don’t win the race if you simply perform better than you did ten or twenty years ago. You win the race if you outperform your rivals in today’s contest.
And that is what Australia has been able to do over the last year. We’ve done it for the reasons I’ve mentioned and they’ve included the reforms of the government. The determination of the government when it came to office to get that deficit that Mr Beazley left us at $10.5 billion into a surplus. And we were able to do that a year ahead of schedule. And I want to record my gratitude to all members of the government for the work that was done, but particularly to Peter Costello as Treasurer for the work he did and the leadership he showed in his portfolio responsibilities, ably assisted by his Finance Minister and Acting Treasurer, John Fahey, who is on the platform with me today.
And by turning the budget around, we were able to send a very strong signal to the rest of the world that you have in charge of the government of Australia a group of men and women who were determined to take with a sense of social sensitivity but nonetheless with complete resolution the difficult economic decisions that were needed. And I know that some of those decisions in the 1996 Budget angered people in this auditorium. I know that not all the community supported every decision that we took, but in the long run it has delivered the outcome that we all wanted. It has delivered a strong and resilient Australian economy. It’s meant that we now have the lowest interest rates for more than thirty years. If we were still running a budget surplus we wouldn’t have such low interest rates. If we were still running, I’m sorry a budget deficit, we wouldn’t have such low interest rates. If we were still running a budget deficit we would be making great demands on the financial markets and competing over much with those in business for the available funds and that would be pushing interest rates up rather than in the other direction.
But over the last year we have not of course only tackled the budget problem, and that very effectively, but we have also embraced and fought during the election campaign the cause of taxation reform. Taxation reform is the biggest single economic change that has been proposed by any government in this country over the last forty or fifty years. We took that change to an election in October of last year. And we won that election despite an outrageous campaign of vilification and distortion and fear mongering lead by the Leader of the Opposition, supported by the membership of his Party and supported by many others in the Australian community. But despite that fear campaign, and despite the political risk inherent in campaigning on a taxation reform programme before an election, we won. And we were given the moral authority and the political authority of that victory to pursue our reforms through the Parliament.
Now it is a matter of well known Australian political history that we didn’t get everything that we wanted in the Parliament. But we got 85 to 90 percent of what we wanted. And although there are some features of the compromise that we would have preferred not to have had, the reality was that we had no alternative. And in the end the Australian people want their elected governments to get on with the job and to do things. They don’t want a constant seminar on Parliamentary obstruction. They want action. And they want to see a Prime Minister and a government that is prepared to negotiate sensible outcomes as necessary in order to achieve long term benefits for the Australian community.
And that long term benefit will be that come July of next year we’ll have a radically better taxation system. We will have the biggest personal income tax cut ever. We will have 80 per cent of the Australian community on a marginal tax rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar. We will have taken a seven to eight billion dollar load off the back of Australian business. We will have cut the cost of Australian exporters by three to four billion. And importantly for the state of Queensland, we will have achieved massive reductions in the price of fuel. So important and such a direct cost of moving goods across this vast state and this even vaster country.
It does represent a magnificent reform and it’s a reform of which all members of the government are immensely proud. It’s a reform that I personally sought for probably fifteen or twenty of the last years that I’ve been in Federal Parliament. It’s a reform that could only have been achieved if we had the courage, as we did, to take it to the Australian people at the last election. There was no other way of getting taxation reform in this country and we were prepared to do that. And I’m very pleased to report to you that that commitment and that courage has been rewarded.
But it’s not only been in the area of taxation that we have seen great reforms over the last year. Only two days ago, a decision of the Australian Industrial relations Commission, reminded us of how the industrial relations landscape in this country has been transformed since Peter Reith’s reforms of 1996 negotiated with the Member for Dickson when she was the Leader of the Australian Democrats. Criticised at the time by some as not going far enough. But in reality striking the right balance.
They were sensible, intelligent major reforms. And one of the reasons, ladies and gentlemen, that the Australian economy is performing so well at the present time, is that workplace relations reform has increased the productivity of the Australian workforce. The Australian workforce now has the double benefit of higher real wages because they are more productive because of industrial reform and lower interest rates. And that is why Australian consumers are spending in a record fashion. That is why domestic consumption spending is such a strong driver of Australia’s economic growth at the present time. Because the workers of Australia are better of than they have been for thirty or forty years. Because their real wages are higher and their interest rates are lower.
And we’re also of course in the middle of what they call in the markets T2, the sale of another 16 per cent of Telstra. Now I’m constrained by the operations of the Corporations Law from saying just about anything else about that at the present time or I might get in trouble, but let me say we are strongly committed to privatisation. And I think it was here in Brisbane at the first national convention of the Liberal Party in 1998 that I said one of the great goals I had in political life was that just as the Menzies government had made Australia the greatest home owning democracy of the world I wanted to make Australia the greatest share owning democracy in the western world, and we are a long way along the road to achieving that goal.
But we haven’t stopped with those achievements. Recently we announced major changes to business tax reform, to business tax. We committed ourselves to business taxation reform. And they are also quite dramatic, far reaching reforms. We will have a corporate tax rate of 30 cents in the dollar. We are effectively halving the capital gains tax for individuals which will dramatically reward investors right across the income spectrum. We are providing more incentives for people to invest in ventures. We are making it easier for people to take risks with their money in order to promote real investments that may take longer than normal to provide some return to the people who promoted them. And all of these changes are designed once again to keep us ahead of our competitors in today’s race. They are designed to maintain Australia’s position as a competitive, outward looking modern economy, not only surviving but competing very well in today’s globalised economy.
But it is not, my friends, only in the area of economics and industrial relations that this government has been active. I’ve said to you before that I don’t regard being in a strong economy as being an end in itself. I don’t regard good economic policy as being an end in itself. I regard those things as a means to achieving a more stable, harmonious, coherent, happy Australian community, in which there are employment opportunities for young Australians and in which we live happy and contented lives. And we will have the domestic economic muscle to project ourselves in an appropriate way on the international stage. And so it is that we have also concentrated very heavily on reducing unemployment. And I’m pleased to report to you that since the government was elected in March of 1996 we have generated more than 520,000 new jobs in Australia. We now have the lowest unemployment rate for close on ten years and youth unemployment now is significantly lower than what it was in March of 1996.
Those changes are of course the essence of what, in the end, we are about. We will have a more productive economy. We are able to maintain a higher rate of economic growth without overheating the economy and without having to put the brakes on to bring it back under control and we have a capacity to generate more jobs.
But in the area of health, I am pleased to report to you that major changes have also been effected over the last year. We’ve introduced a 30 per cent tax rebate without means test for all people who take out private health insurance. We’ve also committed ourselves to the introduction of lifetime health cover, which is designed to provide younger people with an incentive to take out private health insurance. And Michael Wooldridge has done a remarkable job as Health Minister in the last three and a half years. He is working assiduously to address one of the most difficult and challenging problems in the interface between the medical profession, the health insurance providers and the patient and that is the problem of the gap. And the work that he is doing and some of the fruits of that work are now becoming apparent is very important to making private health insurance more attractive to the Australian public.
I know that there are faults in Australia’s health system. There are faults that can be pointed to. And we acknowledge that. And we are working on that on those flaws and those faults with the states of Australia. But I think it is important that when you look at our health system that we preserve a sense of perspective. It for all its faults, it is an infinitely better health system than any country anywhere else in the world has. And if you are on a low income, if you are struggling, if you’re a battler, far better that you become ill here in Australia than in the United States or the United Kingdom or any part of Europe because we have an infinitely better safety net and an infinitely more protected system.
But we will pursue further changes and improvements to the health system, underpinned, always, by our commitment to the Medicare system, which is absolute and uncompromising and also our commitment to the role of private health insurance, which we have fought very hard to strengthen and to broaden and to make more attractive and which Labor for a period of thirteen years allowed to run down because of their ideological objection to private health insurance.
In other areas we’ve also implemented far reaching reforms. In the last budget we announced that this government would double the public investment in health and medical research in Australia over the next four years. By the year 2005 we will be spending in both nominal and real terms a record amount on health and medical research in this country. And we are doing that very deliberately because this country has always punched above its weight when it comes to health and medical researchers. This country has proudly produced some of the great achievers in the history of medical science. And when we commissioned the Wills examination of health and medical research provision in Australia we were determined to respond in a positive way to its recommendations. And the announcement that we were going to double the commitment to health and medical research is an indication of this government’s commitment to a can-do mentality for this country. A belief that we have the brightest and the best in Australia and too often in the past we have allowed them to go elsewhere. And we what we aim to do over the years ahead not only in relation to health and medical research is to bring them home if they have gone in earlier generations and to encourage their peers and their equivalents in current generations not to go away in the first place.
Those, ladies and gentlemen, are some of the things that we have focussed on domestically. But of course, the minds and the attention and the emotions of the Australian people in recent weeks have been very significantly focussed on events overseas. Not far overseas, but of course in East Timor. And I want to say a few words about East Timor but I know that the thing you would want me to say first and foremost is to send on your behalf and I know on behalf of all Australians, irrespective of their views of other matters, our emphatic support and message of goodwill and good wishes to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force who are serving so magnificently in East Timor at the present time.
They are a superbly well trained professional group of people who are doing this country proud, not only in a military sense but also in a humanitarian sense. And all of us have been touched by the scenes of hope they have brought to the people of that territory, and the exemplary way which they and their leaders have gone about carrying on their duties. Australia has not only done the right thing in relation to East Timor, but we have also done what is in Australia’s long term national interest.
Our involvement in East Timor was not born out of any desire for bad relations with the Republic of Indonesia. We have sought over the years to be a good friend of Indonesia. We have sought to help, as we did on a number of occasions recently, Indonesia through her difficulties occasioned by the Asian economic downturn. We were one of those countries that argued with the International Monetary Fund that the conditions it was to impose on Indonesia in relation to economic assistance should be reasonable and should pay regard to the social infrastructure of that country, and the difficulty of preserving social and other stability in such a vast archipelago, in a country with a population of 211 million people.
So we didn’t come to this issue out of any deepseated hostility to Indonesia. We came to it patiently and carefully through a belief that having regard to the whole history of what had occurred, an act of self determination by the people of East Timor, an engagement of the people of East Timor in a decision making process about their own future was desirable. And that lay behind the policy change that I urged on the President of Indonesia in December of last year. But in response to that, and to the representations of many others, the Government of Indonesia decided to go further and it would hold a ballot on independence. And of course with the greatest of all benefits, the benefit of hindsight, various people including some of our political opponents are running around saying now you should of done this or you should have done that. The reality is that once Indonesia said that there was going to be a ballot there was no way that Australia or indeed any other nation could have with any moral or political authority have argued against holding a ballot. Because after all through the years what have people been asking for, they’ve been asking that the people of East Timor be given an opportunity to determine their own futures. And so it was that they were given that opportunity, and they responded magnificently, 98.7% of them voted and the voted by almost 80% to become an independent nation. It will be a poor nation. It will need our help and it will need the help of many other nations around the world. It will be a small nation. It will have a low living standard. But the thing that matters most to the people of that nation it will be a free nation. And that in the end is what was dominant in our minds.
And that decision having been taken, conditions of great disturbance, bloodshed, and turmoil erupted, and it became very apparent to us that for a combination of circumstances that situation was not being controlled by the Indonesian military and the Indonesian Government. And I again urged upon Dr Habibie, and I encouraged others to urge upon him the acceptance of an international peacekeeping force under the authority of the United Nations. And it came to be that that is what happened. And it’s worth reminding ourselves that Australia is leading a multinational force in East Timor at the present time as a result of a unanimous resolution of the Security Council of the United Nations, and with the agreement of the Government of Indonesia. And that that is a multinational force. It is lead by Australia and at the present time the great bulk of the personnel are provided by Australia. But its increasing multinational character is becoming more apparent as each day goes by, and within the next few weeks the forces on the ground will include significant contributions from our friends and partners in the ASEAN region. And it is important through all the dust and the hubbub of some of the debate about this to remember those salient facts that we are there under the authority of the United Nations and we are there with the agreement of the Indonesian Government.
But we are also there my friends in a leadership role and proudly so, because we were ready. We took a decisions five months ago to bring an additional brigade of the Australian Army into a state of readiness because we thought this situation might possibly arise. That an Australian contribution of significant proportions might be needed. And to those who say that we didn’t plan properly, I throw back in their face that reality, that we were ready and the ADF was ready because of a decision taken by the National Security Committee of the Cabinet of your Government to make sure that that brigade was brought to a state of readiness. And as a consequence, when the United Nations Secretary-General asked me whether not only would Australia participate but would Australia lead the multinational force, I was able to immediately respond in the affirmative. And I’m proud that Australia was ready. I think all Australians should be proud of the fact that we were ready. I think it’s important to keep that in mind as we examine the context of all of the events that have occurred.
I think another thing that we ought to bear in mind is that the speed with which the peacekeeping, or peace enforcement operation was put together is by the standards of the past probably a record. I can’t recall an example in recent memory where a peace enforcement operation was put together so quickly. And for that I pay tribute to the United Nations. I also pay tribute to our friends and partners, not only here in the region but the ready response of the British and the New Zealanders, the assistance from the Americans, and the assistance of many others has been quite crucial. But we ought to not lose sight of the fact that the response to this situation was very quick, it was very effective, and it is an international issue in which Australia is playing a very major role.
This is the first occasion in this nation’s history where we have had the leadership of an international peace enforcement operation. We don’t undertake that responsibility lightly. We are there in partnership with our friends and allies around the world and in particular in our region. We are there not as an act of aggression against the Indonesian State. We are there as an act of goodwill and peace enforcement to assist the implementation of the clearly expressed will of the people of East Timor. That is what this is all about. And what I sense in the Australian community to be overwhelming support for what the Government has done is based on their belief that that is why we are there, and is based on their belief that we have not only done the right thing by the people of East Timor, and done the right thing by Australia, but we have also acted in Australia’s long term national interest.
I want to thank my colleagues for the support and help they’ve given me in relation to this issue over the last few weeks. I particularly want to thank Alexander Downer and John Moore, the two Ministers principally concerned. Alexander Downer for his very skillful, professional and deftly executed work as Foreign Minister, in bringing to a successful conclusion the detail of the negotiations involved in putting together the support that was needed for the passage of the Security Council resolution. And John Moore as Defence Minister for the recommendation he made to our Cabinet Committee five months ago to bring that brigade up to a state of readiness, and generally in relation to his responsibilities as Defence Minister. As in all of these things it’s a team effort. No successful policy of this magnitude is ever achieved by one man or one woman. You need to work with your colleagues and you need to have their understanding and their support.
Now I’ve said before and I say it again today that this is a dangerous mission. So far we have been spared the awful trauma of heavy casualties. But we can’t as a community lose sight of the possibility that things could turn nasty. We hope and pray they don’t. And we know that our men and women have the great advantage of being superbly trained, of belonging to a free and open society that values principles of human liberty and human life, and a group of men and women they are who believe that what they are doing is not only their duty, but what they are doing is in the long term interests of their country, and the long term interests of the sort of values that we don’t own exclusively as Australians, but we share with so many other nations the values of individual liberty and human dignity. And our thoughts and our prayers will remain with them constantly until their mission is completely.
Finally ladies and gentlemen can I just say a brief word about the future. We have now been in Government for more than three-and-a-half years. We have achieved an enormous amount. We have given to the Australian economy an inner strength and resilience it’s not had at any time in the 25 years that I’ve been in public life. We have I think properly rebalanced the foreign policy of this country so that although our engagement with Asia remains our priority, we no longer pursue an Asia only policy.
But we are a nation that does occupy a special intersection in the world. We are a nation that has carried with it many of the values of western civilisation, the great principles of liberalism. We are a nation that has very close links with the United States and we share many travails and conflicts with the United States. But here we are in the Asian Pacific region, uniquely having those influences but being part of the most dynamic and in the longer term the fastest growing area of the world. And we are a nation now that has within our own community and family, we have hundreds of thousands Australians of Asian descent who are making a magnificent contribution to the modern Australia.
Now these three assets, if I can put it that way, give to Australia a special capacity to understand and to work, not only with the countries of the region, but to work with countries elsewhere to do good, positive, cooperative things in the region. We seek the friendship of all of the nations of our region. We seek the friendship of Indonesia, we seek the friendship of all the other nations of the region. And we have of course the friendships of so many of them and I was reminded of the friendship we have with the people of Papua New Guinea only the day before yesterday when I paid a brief visit to that country.
But importantly in all the relations that we have, not only with the region but with the rest of the world, we relate to other countries as individuals relate to each other on a basis of mutual respect. We understand that we share many values, we understand that on other issues we are different. We don’t ask other countries to change, other countries don’t ask us to change. We are who we are, a special breed of people bringing in our own distinctive Australian way, that blend of assets, that understanding that that blend of assets brings in our relations with the countries of our region. And I believe that the nations of that region understand that. Australia is seen as having economic strength, political will, a clear and sharp national identity, and a proper sense of what we believe in, and a proper capacity to relate in a cooperative way with all the nations in the region and all the nations of the world. Thank you.
[Ends]


9 October 1999
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Mr Tommy Wong; to Bill Honeywood, representing the Premier of Victoria; to Wellington Lee, the Deputy Lord Mayor of Melbourne, all the other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted on behalf of the Australian Government and the people of Australia to welcome the guests from around the world to this Chinese Entrepreneurs’ Convention, the fourth of its kind being held here in the city of Melbourne.
This Convention and particularly tonight’s gathering is a celebration of the contribution that ethnic Chinese people have made not only to Australia but also to the life and to the economies and to the societies of many nations.
Australia is very grateful for the contribution that Chinese people have made to the development of our community. The Chinese have made a massive contribution to the modern Australian, although their part in Australian society goes back to the 19th Century. In modern Australia we can find ethnic Chinese in all walks of life – in business, in the professions, in politics, in the arts, in sport, in entertainment, in every aspect of Australian life Chinese Australians are making an enormous contribution.
This Convention particularly solutes the entrepreneurial streak that is to be found in Chinese all around the world and Australia is no exception. In every part of Australian business the beneficial impact of participation of ethnic Chinese people is to be found and as a consequence there is benefit and value and a positive outcome for the entire Australian community. And what this convention, I know, has celebrated and deliberated about over the past few days has been that common bond, that entrepreneurial spirit and strength which is a common feature wherever Chinese communities are found throughout the world.
I’m very conscious that tonight there is represented in the official gathering representatives of the various communities and nations in our region with which Australia has very close friendships. We, of course, have a very important relationship with the People’s Republic of China, the most populous nation on earth. And recently the President of that country, President Jiang Zemin, undertook the first ever State visit to Australia by a Chinese President. He was welcomed to this country as the leader of a very big nation and a nation with which Australia has been able to develop a constructive relationship. We have our differences with China but we have a lot of points of common interest and similarity. And it has been the goal of my Government to develop a relationship with the People’s Republic based on common interests and a sharing of goals, pragmatic, practical goals, that can be achieved.
There are other societies, of course, within our region. We have a strong commercial relationship with Taiwan which is totally consistent with the Government’s maintenance of a ‘one China’ policy. We have very close relations with the Republic of Singapore. And, of course, the migration to Australia of ethnic Chinese people has not only been from the People’s Republic of Taiwan but has also been from Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia and other parts of the Asian Pacific region. But whatever their original homeland the Chinese of Australia have become wonderful Australian citizens. They are a welcome and a well-respected part of the modern Australian community. And here in Melbourne it is impossible to imagine what the modern life of the city of Melbourne would be like without the contribution in so many ways of Australian-Chinese. But what is particularly noticeable and what is particularly positive is the contribution that the Chinese-Australians make to business, to the entrepreneurial spirit.
The Australian economy is experiencing very strong growth. It is fair to say that the Australian economy, over the past 12 months, has outperformed just about every economy in our region. We have been able to come through the Asian economic downturn without damage. Everyone has played a part in that. The Government has played a part. The broader Australian community has played a part. The businessmen and women of Australia have played a part and amongst them, of course, the Chinese businessmen and women of our country have played a very significant part. As Australians they have shared the achievements of the last year. As Australians they will share with the rest of their fellow countrymen and women the future that we have as we go into the 21st Century.
Australia as a nation seeks a friendly partnership with the communities and the other nations of the Asian Pacific region. We respect the values and the cultures of other societies and they in turn accept and respect the values of our distinctive Australian culture.
I, therefore, as Prime Minister of Australia, as the leader of the Australian Government, on behalf of all of our visitors from all around the world, I welcome you to the city of Melbourne. I hope that you have enjoyed Australian hospitality. I hope that you take from this convention some fond memories of the friendliness and the hospitality of the Australian people. You have been very welcome and I hope you take away from Australia from me and from the Australian Government the belief that the Chinese of Australia have made a great contribution to our community, that they are respected and loved and valued citizens of the broader Australian society, that they have brought to Australia as they have brought to every nation in the world to which they have gone, they have brought the principles of strong commitment to families, their strong small business commitment, their strong understanding of commerce and their great capacity to practise and achieve the entrepreneurial skills for which they are famous.
I hope you have an enjoyable night. I thank you again for honouring Australia and the city of Melbourne with your presence and I hope you leave our country with very fond recollections of all of us.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Well thank you very much Rear Admiral Griffiths, to Bruce Scott, the Minister
   for Veterans' Affairs, to Senator Schacht, the Shadow Minister for Veterans'
   Affairs, my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. This is
   another event which commemorates the long and rich military tradition and
   history of our country. It was in fact in the Boer War of 1899 to 1902 that
   for the first time Australians fought in the uniform of the forces of the
   Commonwealth of Australia. Because as you know they went, the first contingent
   as the contingent of the colonies as they then were, and returned in 1902
   to the federated Commonwealth of Australia. So today is a very special commemoration
   in that context.
  The Boer war was also the first military operation in which the nurses,
   the service nurses of Australia to whom an impressive memorial was dedicated
   here in Canberra only a week ago, were to serve with such distinction. And
   the nurses of Australia in the subsequent conflicts in which Australian
   forces were involved, played a magnificent part in helping and caring for,
   and nurturing, and sharing the risks of danger and death of our forces.
  16,000 young Australians served in the Boer War. It was a war that was to
   cost the lives of 600 of our countrymen, and remains on my understanding
   the third most costly military involvement in terms of loss of life of any
   operation in which Australian forces have been involved.
  This special commemoration, this colourful commemoration brings together
   the largest assembly of light horsemen in Australia since the 1940s. Certainly
   the largest gathering ever seen in Canberra. And I am, I know every Australian
   here is greatly indebted to those people who have come from the United Kingdom,
   from South Africa, from Canada, and from New Zealand to share this very
   special celebration. May I say to you Bruce that your Cabinet colleagues
   are very impressed at your own contribution. As of course fits the Federal
   Member for a great rural area such as Maranoa where a capacity to do what
   you have done is an absolute necessity, but I congratulate you nonetheless
   for it.
  But most importantly today we are here to commemorate an early sacrifice
   in the early days and early months of the Australian nation. A sacrifice
   of men and women who came and responded to a call to arms, to pursue what
   was properly seen then as being in the Australian national interest. Their
   deeds belong along side the deeds of others who fought for Australian and
   in Australia's interests in so many conflicts, and most particularly in
   World War I and World War II. And of course it is impossible for any Australian
   to attend any commemoration of this kind without thinking immediately of
   those young men and women of Australia who are in East Timor at present
   doing their duty by this country, and doing their duty by the things that
   we believe in, the values we hold and the values that we share in common
   with so many other freedom loving nations around the world.
  The bush tradition of Australia of course led to the formation of the Light
   Horse, and its contribution in the Boer War, and subsequently its contribution
   particularly in the Middle East in World War, belongs to the legend and
   the folklore and the great achievements and the great history of the Australian
   armed forces. In recent times there has been a regeneration of interest
   in the role and the contribution of the Light Horse to the Australian military
   tradition. And so it ought to be because it belongs very much to the heart
   and soul of the Australian bush which is so very much part and parcel of
   the kind of Australian nation in which all of us believe, and the kind of
   Australian nation that we have come to love.
  As we approach the centenary of the federation of Australia there is I am
   sure right across our nation a growing interest in, and an affection for
   and a desire to learn more about the great historical events that shaped
   our country which surrounded the formation of the Commonwealth of Australia.
   The readiness of Australians to go overseas in defence of an ideal, in defence
   of the Australian national interest has always been there. The willingness
   of Australians to involve themselves in a war between Great Britain and
   the Boer Republics of South Africa was an early indication of the desire
   of Australians to see themselves as playing a role not just in Australia
   but around the world and was of course part and parcel of a strong imperial
   sentiment that existed at that time all around Australia. We remember the
   contribution of those men. We honour their sense of service, their sense
   of sacrifice, and their willingness to respond to a call to arms and a call
   to duty.
  Importantly today we welcome the fact that the country in which they fought
   so long ago is now a more open democratic society, embracing the principles
   of freedom and equality and decent treatment of its citizens irrespective
   of their race or their colour or their creed. And indeed the leadership
   shown by men like Nelson Mandela in the modern South Africa is an inspiration
   to people all around the world who love and care about freedom and the dignity
   of men and women.
  Can I congratulate those who have been responsible for organising this commemorative
   event. Can I thank particularly those who've come from all around Australia,
   all ages, all parts of our country, and from around the world, to play a
   part in a very special celebration which honours the contribution of men
   and women so long ago. A century ago today commemorates the outbreak of
   the Boer War. Can I thank all of them for making a contribution because
   it reminds all of us as Australians of our rich history, our varied history
   and the willingness so long ago and in so many circumstances over the century
   that has gone by since of Australians to respond to the call to do their
   duty and to fight for what they saw and continue to see as the national
   interest of our country. Thank you.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  [Tape Starts]
  As a ten year old pupil of the Earlwood Primary School in Sydney in 1949,
   by courtesy of the ABC booming school broadcasts into our classroom, I remember
   the occasion of the inauguration of the Snowy Scheme, and that distinctive
   voice of one my predecessors, Ben Chifley, announcing in October 1949 along
   with the then Governor General Sir William McKell, and Sir William Hudson,
   the inauguration of this great Snowy Mountains Scheme. I don't think it's
   any exaggeration to say that of all the great national development projects
   that our nation has experienced, none has gone anywhere near capturing the
   imagination as has the Snowy. Not only did it capture the imagination of
   a post war Australian community anxious to throw off the drudgery of war
   time controls and restrictions, keen to embrace new citizens from different
   parts of the world, but beyond that it enabled us to demonstrate to ourselves
   and to demonstrate to the world our superb engineering skills, our technical
   capacities, and as Mr Charlton said in his speech, the great capacity, the
   can-do character, of the Australian nation.
  It remains 50 years on an astonishing engineering achievement rightly recognised
   around the world as such. It was as we have been reminded, a dangerous undertaking.
   And the deaths of 121 people are recorded during the years of the construction
   of the various elements of the Snowy Scheme.
  It is of course very much part of the history and the fabric of post war
   Australia that the Snowy River Scheme enabled us to see for the first time
   perhaps as an entire nation, the advantage of people of different backgrounds,
   of different ethnicities, of different cultures, of different nationalities
   working together. So many of them have recently been devastated and uprooted
   by war in Europe. Many former enemies, enemies only a few years earlier
   forgot old animosities and worked together within the embrace and within
   the environment of a new nation. And in the process they made an enormous
   contribution to shaping and defining the modern Australia which is a beacon
   of tolerance and understanding to the rest of the world.
  100,000 people worked on the scheme from 30 different nations. It was finished
   on or just below budget, it was finished on time, and it was an incredible
   demonstration of what this country can do and what this country can achieve.
   And tonight is an occasion to acknowledge the contribution first and foremost
   of the men and women who toiled and made this possible, of the great engineering
   skills of some of the people that have already been mentioned, the dedication
   and leadership of Sir William Hudson. And can I also as the Prime Minister
   of Australia on this 50th anniversary celebration, can I acknowledge
   the contribution and the dedication of two of my predecessors as Prime Minister,
   in particular Ben Chifley, the Prime Minister of Australia when the scheme
   was launched. And of course who was part of the Government that oversaw
   the establishment of the Snowy Mountains Authority in the 1940s. And then
   through the 1950s and '60s, the leadership of Sir Robert Menzies and the
   late Senator Sir William Spooner who for many years as Minister for National
   Development, in partnership with Sir William Hudson, played a major role
   in giving political guidance to the development of the scheme.
  We honour the men and women of the Snowy. Not only for their great engineering
   achievement, not only for the fact that it underpins now in 1999 the power
   generation of our nation, but also the provision of much needed water to
   so many of our citizens and many of our farmers who are well represented
   here tonight, and a constant reminder that in a vast dry continent such
   as Australia, the nurturing and the preservation of our precious resource
   water continues as one of our great national priorities. But we also honour
   most importantly what the Snowy Scheme represents to us 50 years on, of
   the aspirational character of the Australian people. It was inaugurated
   at a time when we had just come out of a war. It was inaugurated at a time
   when we were about to begin one of the great periods of economic growth
   and expansion that our nation has experienced. It was also inaugurated at
   the beginning of our first real comprehensive contact with building a nation
   of many backgrounds, and of many cultures and of many peoples, and many
   countries and many nationalities.
  And the important thing for us to recognise today is that in each of those
   respects the Snowy has been a resounding success. It told us that we had
   engineers the equal of any in the world. It told us that we had people of
   vision and commitment to national development the equal of any in the world.
   It told us that we could bring people of different nationalities in an environment
   of cooperation and tolerance, in putting aside older animosities which have
   become a model to the rest of the world, and it is a reminder to us in 1999
   that there is nothing that the Australian people can't do. There's nothing
   that the Australian people can't aspire to achieve if they make the commitment,
   they display the vision, and they have the determination. And that is the
   great legacy of the Snowy, and it is the thing that binds all of us together
   in saluting those who played a part in bringing it to fruition, and we honour
   their contribution on this very delightful occasion, in this most remarkable
   setting. Thank you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Well thank you very much Mr Charlton. Janette and I are delighted to share
   this tremendous celebration which commemorates the commencement of what
   must rank as one of the greatest achievements of the history of the Australian
   nation. The Snowy Mountains Scheme was a phenomenal engineering achievement,
   and it has done an enormous amount to help and build the modern Australia.
   But even more importantly than that the Snowy Mountains Scheme was an amazing
   Australian achievement in bringing people together and binding them into
   one mighty Australian workforce. And as I moved through the crowd today,
   it's a reminder to me of the incredible range of nationalities, of ethnicities,
   of people of different cultures, of different language, many of whom may
   have had the odd argument with each other before they came to Australia,
   but once they came to Australia they all found in this new welcoming tolerant
   country a new homeland. And I want to say on behalf of that country, from
   the bottom of our hearts, how immensely grateful we are to the men and women
   of the Snowy who gave us this wonderful national achievement.
  In so many different ways you taught us different cultures, different habits,
   and they've all now become part of the great Australian mainstream. So can
   I say on behalf of the Government, can I say on behalf of all of the people
   of Australia, that we are immensely proud of the engineering achievement
   which is the Snowy River Scheme. We are immensely proud of the national
   development achievement which is the Snowy River Scheme. But even more importantly
   than that we are immensely proud of the human achievement which is represented
   by the Snowy River Scheme. And today which must rank probably as the biggest
   family reunion ever staged in Australia, certainly the biggest family reunion
   that I've ever been to, I simply want to say to all of you, we are immensely
   proud of what you did, we are grateful for your commitment, we remember
   those who suffered and those who lost their lives in the construction at
   various stages of the Snowy Scheme. We remember the vision of those people
   who put the scheme together more than 50 years ago. And it is a marvelous
   opportunity under this beautiful Australian sun to celebrate 50 years of
   the commencement of the Snowy Scheme, and all of the great cultural diversity
   that the Snowy Scheme helped to bring to the modern Australia. A million
   thanks to all of you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE....................
  Well, I would like, on behalf of the Government and I know on behalf of
   everybody here, and my remarks would be supported by the Deputy Leader of
   the Opposition, I would like to congratulate you, Vicki, and all the other
   members of the team on a truly astonishing performance.
  You've achieved a strike rate, I understand, of 70 percent in world championships
   since there has been a world championship in netball. I don't know of any
   national sporting team for Australia that's done better than that. And to
   have maintained, as many of you have participated in maintaining, an absolute
   dominance in international netball over the past 10 years is a remarkable
   achievement.
  We've all read and heard and, more importantly, looked at that nail-biting
   finish that we were again reminded of so warmingly a few moments ago in
   that video. It's a clich of course but that is the stuff of which magnificently
   thrilling international sporting contests are made. The tension was evident
   and the sheer exuberance of you, Vicki, your team mates and your coaches
   and everybody else associated with the game was very evident. And it's a
   remarkable way, may I say, to conclude your own international netball career.
   And I do want to say, on behalf of the Government and everybody associated
   with the sport, what a tremendous ornament you have been, Vicki, to the
   game and the tremendous credit and repute that you have brought to netball
   Australia and to the playing of the game in our country.
  I know there is always some debate about how many people play what sport
   but it's my understanding that there is no sport in Australia that is more
   widely played than netball. And it has attracted not only enormously enthusiastic
   participation but it is attracting, importantly in this era of fierce international
   competition, it is also pleasingly attracting a growing level of sponsorship.
  But as always the strength of a sport, whether it's netball or any other
   sport that Australians indulge, the strength of a sport depends very heavily
   on that network of volunteers at a local level, those mums and dads and
   boyfriends and girlfriends and brothers and sisters and friends generally
   who year in and year out support in an entirely selfless, voluntary capacity,
   the playing of the game. And that has been the story of netball as it has
   been the story of so many other sports in the Australian community.
  We love our sporting heroes in this country. We love Australia to win. We
   love Australians to participate and we always like it when they win in very
   exciting circumstances providing, of course, they still just win. And you
   demonstrated that quite magnificently in the match against New Zealand.
  I'm delighted that we've had this little opportunity on behalf of the Parliament
   and the people of Australia to say thank you. I think national achievement
   in any endeavour where great credit is brought to Australia should be honoured.
   We should take a few moments out from our parliamentary existence and to
   simply say thank you to honour the fact that you have demonstrated that
   you are the best in the world and that you've demonstrated that in the name
   of the entire country. And we're very proud of that and we congratulate
   you. We wish you well. And, Vicki, we wish you particular health and happiness
   and good fortune in your future. And to all of those associated with the
   game, the trainers, the coaches, the administrators, the supporters, the
   spectators and the sponsors, we thank them. It's a great celebration and
   it's delightful to have you amongst us.
  Thank you.
  [Ends]


19 October 1999 
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Ron. And to your wife, to the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson and Julia Anderson, to Kate Carnell the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory, to my other Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, and they number in their ranks at least one shy retiring truckie. That’s Wilson Tuckey - who’s very shy and retiring - who informs me that he is an authentic truckie and he has what he described to me as a ‘road training’ licence. I hope that’s the right description, but Wilson is very proud of that association with your industry.
Can I say that I’m delighted again to have the opportunity of addressing the representatives of an industry that tonight celebrates a very important decade of achievement and change and reform, and also inaugurates a new era in national cooperation and national representation. Ron rather stole one of my lines when he mentioned one of the subjects that we talked about over dinner, and that is the intensely competitive character of your industry where only 20% or less of the total volume of activity is in the hands of the six largest competitors within the industry. And it speaks volumes for your industry being essentially an industry made up of small and medium sized operators. Many of them family based businesses that are daily coping with the challenges that I know businesses of that type must respond to.
And can I say in direct response to your Chairman that we are very conscious of the costs and other pressures that bear upon your industry. I want to say a few things in a moment about the general state of the Australian economy. But in talking about the general state of an economy it’s important that a Prime Minister or indeed any other minister in a government, recognise that although generically the country may be performing very strongly, there are always firstly some areas at the time which are not sharing in that general strength, and there are always particular challenges that face individual industries.
Your industry employs 135,000 people around Australia. The employment in the industry increased by almost 9% last year. 81% of all non-bulk freight is carried by road, and of course it’s almost a cliché to acknowledge how important long distance road transport and haulage is in a nation as large as Australia. Our attitude to many things has been long shaped by distance, and the long travel that people must undertake in order not only to maintain personal contact but also to do business. And your industry is particularly aware of that and particularly responsive to it. And the forces that have driven you and encouraged you to form effective national organisation, the latest manifestation of which I will officially unveil at the end of my remarks. Those forces and that understanding of the importance of providing as cheap and as affordable modes of transport and carriage in Australia by road has of course been very very difficult and very much part and parcel of your operation as people in the transport sector.
Australia’s freight task is going to double over the next 20 years. It is therefore imperative that we not only have efficient and effective modes, and accessible modes of rail and air transport, but we also have a strong competitive nationally based trucking industry. And that is what your organisation and the ladies and gentlemen representing the members of your organisation here tonight are all about. Ron and I have had many discussions, and indeed I’ve had discussions with many other members of your industry over the past couple of years, about many of the cost pressures that you are faced with.
And whilst I don’t pretend for a moment that every single element of the Government’s taxation reform package is completely unalloyed good news for your industry. I do believe that if you look at the aggregate impact of taxation reform you can argue without fear of contradiction that it will bring both medium and longer-term benefits including significance reductions in costs for your industry. One of the great characteristics of the Government’s tax reform package is that it carries with it quite fundamentally and unarguably a significant cost reduction so far as transport and the operation of your industry is concerned, because not only will the price of petrol for small businesses fall as a result of the GST component being rebated, but all trucks 20 tonnes and over trucks between 4.5 and 20 tonnes used in regional areas will see diesel excise costs effectively reduced to 20 cents a litre. And there will also be cost reductions on inputs like truck parts and tyres.
Now I know there are some concerns about some aspects of implementation. And in discussions we’ll do our best consistent with our obligations in relation to the overall package to respond to those. But I don’t think it can be disputed one of the goals which we set ourselves when be embarked upon the path of taxation reform more than two years ago, and that is to reduce the cost of fuel used for business purposes in this country. That goal has been achieved. Because we have always recognised that if we are to make a serious indentation on the cost of doing business which is conducted over long distances in this country, we have to do something about reducing the cost of fuel. And I believe we have been able to achieve that goal.
In his introductory remarks Ron talked about the challenge of change and the need for reforms in your industry. And it’s appropriate that I say something briefly about the challenge of change and the need for reform so far as the country and the government of the country is concerned. It has become a cliché to say that we live in a globalised economy, that change is unavoidable, and that those countries that propose change or refuse to embrace it will ultimately be left behind. But cliché or not it is largely true. We don’t have an option any more of putting a nice little cocoon around Australia and saying to the rest of the world we don’t like the global disciplines that you seek to impose on us. We’re going to shut them out and we’re going to be quite content within our little cocoon. Those days of course both economically and otherwise are long and distantly behind us. And we face the need and the reality as we approach the next millennium to ensure that the Australian economy is run efficiently, that it’s run competitively, and it embraces as far as possible world’s best practice.
That is the economic imperative, and no Australian government any more than can any Australian industry ignore economic imperatives. The Government is not just about economics, it is not just about the bottom line, it is not just about maintaining a budget surplus, it’s not just about lower interest rates or taxation or industrial relations reform. It is also about understanding the social impact of economic change. It is about recognising that even in the best ordered economy that even at a time when generally speaking the economy is performing well and the national economic health is very evident that there are people who are not sharing in that sense of wellbeing.
The Australian economy at the present time is now stronger than it’s been for more than 30 years. In many respects, the Australian economy now is stronger than it has been at any time since the end of World War II. Our inflation is low, our interest rates are very low, our levels of business investment are high, our budget is in surplus, our capacity to pay our debt is vastly stronger than it used to be. Yesterday we became the largest share-owning democracy in the world. Larger even on a per capita basis than the United States of America. And we are seen by the rest of the world as having achieved a near economic miracle by staring down the worst effects of the Asian economic downturn.
Now if all of those things are true, and I think most objective commentators recognise their literal accuracy. Yet I recognise as Prime Minister that there are still far too many Australians without a job, I recognise that there are many people in rural and regional Australia who are not sharing the national economic plenty. I recognise that at a time when the rest of the country is doing well that the sense of being deprived, the sense of alienation, the sense of not sharing in the national economic plenty is all the more acute.
I think we all understand from our own life’s experiences that if you are the odd person out, the one who’s not sharing in the general bounty, you feel things a lot more acutely than if all of the people in one particular group are suffering a similar situation. Now there’s no simple easy solution to that but an important start is made when governments and prime ministers recognise that within a state of general economic wellbeing there are pockets and groups of people and areas of the country that are missing out.
Since I have been Prime Minister I have argued for, and as leader of the Government, presided over probably as big a clutch of fundamental economic reforms than any government has been able to carry out in a similar period of time. We have reformed the taxation system in a way that was unimaginable a few years ago. Our changes to industrial relations have contributed to a very significant shift desirably, in my view, towards an industrial relations approach based on workplace bargaining and away from the practices of the past. And these changes have not been attended by significant increases in industrial disputation. They have not been marred by the industrial warfare that was promised by our critics when we put them forwards before the 1996 election.
In addition to that, we have presided over significant privatisation of Australian industry and we have enabled thereby literally hundreds of thousands of Australians to buy shares for the first time in their lives and to feel a more direct role in the development and the strengthening of the forces of competition and the forces of capitalism within Australia. And I use the word capitalism very deliberately and not in any way ashamedly because I think the goal of providing access to the ownership of capital to as wide a base of the Australian community as possible is an extremely desirable goal and not one in any way to be apologised for.
But the process of change and reform is not an end in itself. You change and reform in order to provide a stronger economy and through a stronger economy to provide more jobs and a higher standard of living and therefore a greater contentment in life for a greater number of Australians.
And we have seen over the last three and a half years more than half a million new jobs created. We have a lower unemployment rate now than we have had for almost 10 years. And pleasingly, although it’s still far too high, we have been able to bring about a significant reduction in the level of youth unemployment.
But there is still a very significant reform challenge ahead of us. We have just unveiled some major proposals to reform the business taxation system in this country. If we can through discussion with the Australian Democrats and the Australian Labor Party secure passage of those reforms through the Parliament they will in time deliver us a 30 per cent company tax rate and an effective halving of the rate of capital gains tax in Australia. And that will give us a taxation system for business which is as competitive and as attractive as can be found anywhere in the world.
Importantly, those changes will provide more incentive for people to invest in those activities and ventures that require the taking of greater risks than might be the case with other forms of investment. And they will provide an investment bank for many of the activities that are needed over a period of time to ensure that the inventions of the brightest and the best in Australia can be usefully converted to a commercially profitable operation.
The task of taxation reform therefore is not only bound up with the GST and reductions in personal income tax but it is also very much bound up with fundamental and important reforms to Australia’s business taxation system.
But it’s also important to understand that reform is not just in the area of economics. A few weeks ago my colleague, the Minister for Family and Community Services, Senator Newman, commissioned a reference group to examine against certain criteria the state of Australia’s social security system and to ask some fundamental questions about reform that is needed in that area. Not reform that would in any way challenge the Government’s commitment to an adequate social security safety net. Not reform that would put at risk needed protection for the vulnerable in our community because we have no intention of doing that but reform that takes account of a number of things including the Government’s commitment to the principle of mutual obligation which, simply stated, says that the Government and the rest of the community have an obligation to look after those who through no fault of their own are not able to look after themselves. But equally it is not unreasonable of the community to say of those people that if they are able to do so they should give something back to the community in return for the support they receive.
Now, that is a sound principle. It is a principle that is evident in our approach to work for the dole and it’s a principle that will underlie the need to examine our welfare system. And in case anybody imagines that it is some kind of far right agenda to have a look at our social welfare system I note with interest that in recent months Noel Pearson, a well respected leader of the indigenous community of Australia, and Wayne Swan, the social security spokesman for the Australian Labor Party, have both called in their own way and in different ways for fundamental examinations of the welfare system in Australia. And I hope out of that process we can gain a better understanding of the sort of system we need against the background of the criteria the Government has laid down as we move into the next century.
I think I would as the leader of a Coalition Government and as the leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party be remiss tonight because of the day that it is if I didn’t say something about the contribution of Jeff Kennett as Premier of Victoria. Mr Kennett’s defeat in the election (applause) – well, you are obviously listening to me – Mr Kennett’s defeat in the election is a reminder, of course, to all of us who hold office that nothing can ever be taken for granted, that we live in a volatile political climate. We live in a far less tribal political state than used to be the case and that it’s a message and a lesson that Liberal, Labor, National Party and Democrat politicians alike should absorb and understand. And anybody who imagines in politics that they are immune from those forces that are abroad within our community, democratic forces, are deluding themselves.
But if politics is about being given responsibility and using that responsibility to bring about desirable change for your community and if it is about making a difference then I believe that Mr Kennett made an enormous difference for the good for the State of Victoria. He did inherit a bankrupt State. He was courageous. He was gusty. Not everybody liked what he did, not every liked the way he did it. But he did improve Victoria and I think the judgement of history will be a very positive and a beneficial one towards him.
Can I say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that I have enjoyed the association that I have had with your industry. Ron Finemore has been a very strong and articulate advocate of the interests of your industry. He’s never been reluctant to put a point of view to the Government that has been controversial, where that point of view has been in the interest of your industry. He’s never been unwilling to criticise where that criticism has been justified. And I am sure on occasions in the past it has and I am sure that in the future there will be occasions when it will likewise be justified.
But he is a good representative, a forthright representative of your industry. Tonight is a very important occasion. I know it’s an occasion where you look back on the last 10 years in particular with a very great sense of pride and a sense of achievement. I know you have a lot of challenges ahead of you but I am sure that you will tackle them with the gusto and the commitment and the sense of vision that you have displayed over the last 10 years. Thank you for inviting me here tonight. I assure you that the Government will continue to lend a ready ear to your concerns and your legitimate advocacy. And I know in John Anderson you have a person who is particularly attuned to the concerns and needs of your industry. He is a constant advocate of the role of your sector in the Australian economy. He does represent you at the most senior level imaginable and in a most effective way around the Cabinet table.
Thank you for inviting me tonight and I have very much pleasure in declaring launched the Australian Trucking Association. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  With the successful sale of a further 16 per cent of Telstra 1.6 million
   Australians have taken a direct stake in one of our great national companies.
  This includes around 400,000 Australians who have invested in shares for
   the first time.
  Their decision supports the choice of 1.8 million Australians who bought
   shares in the first Telstra sale.
  It was that sale which contributed to the Government's repayment of over
   $24 billion of Labor's $96 billion debt and which funded the biggest environmental
   package in Australia's history.
  The $16 billion expected from the latest sale will allow the Government
   to retire even more national debt.
  It will also allow us to do much more.
  Sale proceeds will be used to help establish rural transaction centres to
   bring banking back to the bush in 500 country towns across Australia.
  SBS television will be extended to the homes of another 1 million Australians
   in places like Mackay, Shepparton, Port Lincoln, Eden and Port Hedland.
  There will also be more Australians in remote areas who will be able to
   make untimed local calls to their neighbours.
  In addition to these benefits, regional Australia will be able to obtain
   access to the internet at the price of a local call. There will also be
   continuous mobile phone coverage on major Australian highways and an extra
   $250 million to protect the environment.
  Regrettably, the Labor Party has opposed our steps to provide the means
   to deliver these benefits for the bush even though they were the ones who
   in office sold many government assets.
  By way of contrast, the Coalition has been frank and open about the benefits
   of selling Telstra. It can reduce Government debt and ensure that services
   are maintained in the bush. Goodnight.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE....................
  Well, thank you very much, Janet; to my colleague, Senator Jocelyn Newman;
   to Kerry Chikarovski, the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, Mr and
   Mrs Paul Batchelor, Sara O'Hare, other distinguished guests, ladies and
   gentlemen.
  Can I say, I'm sure on behalf of everybody, how impressive is this gathering
   and it's an opportunity for me to congratulate all of those responsible
   for organising this breakfast. Janet McDonald brings an indefatigable degree
   of energy to any of the activities in which she's involved and her commitment
   to the cause of raising support for and greater awareness of the threat
   posed to women's health by breast cancer is well known and widely appreciated.
  I just want to say two things to you this morning. Firstly, to emphasise
   to all of you how the Federal Government shares the concern of the many
   organisations represented here today in the fight against breast cancer
   within the Australian community. It is the biggest single threat to women's
   health in the area of cancer. It is the leading cause of cancer related
   deaths amongst Australian women and one in twelve Australian women will
   develop breast cancer at some stage in their lifetime. And by promoting
   awareness of it and by speaking openly of the ways in which it can be guarded
   against and detected and successfully treated all of us are engaged in a
   very commendable community service.
  There are many things that I would like the Government to be seen to be
   doing in a positive light. And one of the most important is our commitment
   to health and medical research. In the last budget the Treasurer announced
   that over the next four years we will double the amount of Federal Government
   money going into health and medical research throughout Australia. And it
   followed the recommendations of the committee chaired by Peter Wills, a
   well known Sydney businessman, and virtually all of his recommendations
   were adopted so that over the next four years it will be an exact doubling
   of the amount of Federal Government money going to all forms of health and
   medical research.
  Coming a little closer to home many will be aware that I announced some
   seven or eight months ago the Federal Government would contribute $3 million
   to the integrated cancer programme which is a joint initiative between the
   Sydney Cancer Centre and the Centenary Institute. And when it became apparent
   recently that the New South Wales Government was unable to match that $3
   million I indicated to the centre that the Federal Government would provide
   the entire amount of $6 million.
  We have honoured our election commitment to provide a $4.1 million initiative
   to specialised health care for women diagnosed with breast cancer. And this
   initiative will provide support services for women diagnosed with breast
   cancer including specialised health care. And it will be focussed particularly
   on women living in regional and rural areas.
  And, of course, Professor Redman's already referred to the Commonwealth
   and State programme of breast screening, breast cancer screening throughout
   Australia. And this is a breast cancer screening programme providing free
   screening mammograms at two year intervals targeted at women aged 50 to
   69 through a network of dedicated accredited screening and assessment services.
  The other thing I wanted to say, and it brings me very much to the point
   of an announcement, and that is that I have in the time that I've been Prime
   Minister endeavoured to foster within the Australian community the notion
   of a social coalition to tackle the challenges and the problems of our community.
   And that's built on the belief that the Government can't do everything acting
   alone. Individuals acting alone can't do everything. Business acting alone
   can't do everything and nor can the great volunteer organisations for which
   Australia is renowned acting alone can they do everything. And what we need
   is to harness the resources of those four sections of our community - the
   Government, individuals, the business community and volunteer organisations
   each contributing those resources and talents they can best contribute towards
   tackling social and other problems.
  And I have been very keen to promote a greater level of philanthropy within
   the Australian community. It's not a question so much of business giving
   more but it's really a question of more businesses giving. There are some
   wonderful examples and many of them are represented here today. The sponsorship
   of this breakfast, the wonderful examples of companies such as Estee Lauder
   and many others that are so supportive of great causes within our community.
   So I am not suggesting for a moment that many businesses don't already give
   and give very generously but we'd naturally like more of them to do so.
  And it's in that spirit that I am absolutely delighted to announce this
   morning that an important partnership in relation to breast cancer has been
   facilitated by a generous donation of $1.1 million by the AMP Society. And
   the AMP foundation has confirmed a $1.1 million partnership with the National
   Health and Medical Research National Breast Cancer Centre. So I want to
   congratulate Mr Batchelor. And this partnership reflects the very spirit
   of a social coalition of which I spoke. And the partnership will fund key
   projects of direct and lasting benefits to the community. The projects comprise
   a public information program about breast cancer symptoms, a communications
   skills training program, a breast health survey for 2000, and partial funding
   for printing costs of consumer resources.
  May I just conclude, ladies and gentlemen, by saying that at a personal
   level and at a Government level I am very committed to the cause which is
   being supported here this morning. The cause of tackling and identifying
   the fundamental health challenges for women within the Australian community
   is now widely recognised and supported within our community. It has the
   total support of the Government, it had the support might I acknowledge,
   of the former government because it is one of those things which is above
   party politics. And I think it is very important at a gathering such as
   this we acknowledge the need for an open assessment of the particular health
   risks that women face, the need for open and informed dialogue and discussion
   and information within our community. A willingness of governments at both
   the State and federal level to support a community involvement, active screening
   programmes to identify women at risk and, of course, a determined commitment
   of resources to the cause of research.
  The last 25 years have seen astonishing advances in the area of health and
   medical research as there have been astonishing advances in the area of
   information technology. As we throw towards the first part of the next millennium
   we can all hope, and I think with a degree of confidence, to predict that
   one of the distinguishing features of the first 25 years of the new millennium
   will be a further inroad into the great health challenges that beset the
   modern world. And tackling through dedicated and committed resources to
   research the scourge of cancer within our community, whether it be breast
   cancer or any other form of cancer, will be at the forefront of that effort.
  And the focus on that this morning is therefore very appropriate, very timely
   and very well targeted and I thank you all particularly the AMP who is represented
   here this morning by its new Managing Director, Mr Batchelor. I particularly
   thank the AMP and many others for their great generosity towards this very
   worthy cause.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE.................
  Thank you very much David for those very warm words of introduction. To
   Alan Gregory who has provided magnificent leadership to the Menzies Trust
   over so many years, and particularly do I welcome Denis Napthine, the newly
   elected Leader of the Opposition here in Victoria.
  The predecessor of mine as Prime Minister and Leader of the Liberal Party,
   Sir Robert Menzies, and I shared a number of common experiences separated
   by many years and one of them, of course, was a long period in opposition.
   I hope that that is not your lot in life but there will be a period in Opposition.
   It's a period which is immensely challenging. It's a period that comes the
   way of most people who spend any length of time in public life. I mean,
   you could be lucky like somebody say Graham Richardson, for example, who
   was never in opposition. You can waltz into parliament and be there for
   a short period of time and then go out having never experienced the challenges
   of opposition. But if you are to have a full political existence your predecessor
   had challenging years in opposition and came to be, in my view, one of the
   great Premiers that Australia has seen, certainly in the period after World
   War II.
  So to you, Denis, I wish you well. You will have the total cooperation and
   understanding of your federal parliamentary colleagues. We will work together
   with you to provide a strong alternative to the new Government here in Victoria.
  I want to welcome so many of you as old friends, as supporters, as fellow
   Liberals, as members of the National Party, and I am delighted to acknowledge
   the presence of my old Cabinet colleague, Peter Nixon. We shared many experiences
   together in the Fraser/Anthony Government between 1975 and 1983. And I also
   acknowledge with gratitude the presence of so many members of the Menzies
   family.
  This is quite a pleasure for me because I remember the first experience
   I had I delivering a Menzies lecture in the circumstances described by Alan
   Gregory back in 1980 when I was Treasurer in the Fraser Government. And
   again I had the privilege in 1996 not long after our victory in that year
   as Prime Minister to again deliver the lecture.
  This Trust, of course, has its genesis at Monash University when in 1976
   members of the Monash University Liberal Club under the leadership of Michael
   Kroger resolved that they would create the Menzies Trust in the image of
   the Deakin Trust of the Melbourne University Club.
  Heather Henderson recalls how her father was approached to lend his name
   to the Trust which he so readily did. And so it was established and it had
   great names in the Victorian Liberal cause - Alan Gregory, Stan Guilfoyle,
   Andrew Peacock and Sir Billy Snedden. The meeting was set up with Sir Robert
   to meet members of the club executive. It was to have been held in June
   in 1978 but unfortunately Sir Robert died several months before then and
   the meeting could not take place.
  Alan Gregory records the intense interest of Dame Pattie while she was alive
   and of Heather Henderson in the activities of the Trust and I remember being
   honoured by Heather's presence when I delivered the lecture in 1996. And
   as patron of the Australian Liberal Students Federation it's always a special
   pleasure for me to be associated with any event that brings into focus the
   contribution of Liberal students to political thought and political debate
   in Australia. And I am very pleased that the Government I lead, and David
   Kemp in particular as Education Minister, has pushed for fulfilment, so
   far frustrated by the Senate I might say, of our commitment for genuine
   Liberal freedom in relation to membership of student unions. And it was
   from the activities of the members of the Monash University Liberal club
   and many other Liberal clubs around Australia that our policy on those issues
   was devised.
  The lectures presented in this book are a kaleidoscope of Liberal and conservative
   thought over the years. I use those two words very deliberately because
   one of the special characteristics of the Liberal Party of Australia is
   that it has, unlike some other centre right parties around the world, it
   has been the trustee of both the Liberal and the conservative traditions
   in Australia. And the pluralism of the Liberal Party on many things reflects
   that joint trusteeship. We are not an exclusively conservative party nor
   are we an exclusively small "l" Liberal Party, we are a combination
   of the two. And it's an important obligation of any Liberal Party leader
   to reflect and to respect that tradition.
  There are many favourite stories, of course, recounted of Sir Robert in
   this book of lectures. There is the one attributed to Geoffrey Blainey,
   who after Menzies had won the federal election in 1949 Sir Robert was approached
   by a young journalist who said "please sir, now that you have won will
   you be answerable to the vested interest that supports you?" To which
   Sir Robert gave the classic reply "Young man, please leave my wife
   out of this debate."
  Alan Gregory quotes those wonderful words of the late Sir Paul Hasluck which
   many of us heard at that magnificent function he organised at the Southern
   Cross Hotel in 1989 to honour the 90th birthday of Dame Pattie
   Menzies. And Sir Paul said "the Menzies post-war years stand as a great
   period in Australian history. Australia had stability. Australia had a sound
   base for reorganisation. There was regularity, high standards and the utmost
   probity in all aspects of government. Australia stood with dignity and growing
   respect in a reconstructed world. Our economy was managed with care. To
   use a phrase of the period, we walked the knife-edge of inflation without
   losing balance. We kept a high level of employment. We guarded the overseas
   balances. Great care was taken over all appointments to public office and
   scrupulous control of government expenditures. In Menzies' years in Australia
   tradition was respected and progress was soundly based."
  In his 1985 lecture David Kemp recorded that when Sir Robert left office
   unemployment was under two per cent, inflation was almost non-existent and
   a person on average earnings paid about 16 per cent of his income in tax
   at a top marginal rate of 27.
  I reflected on my own impression of Menzies in my 1996 lecture when I said
   "Menzies political genius lay in that basic affinity with the aspirations
   of the Australian people. He understood the priority they placed on jobs,
   on raising living standards, on home ownership, on high economic growth,
   on a sense of national unity and on opportunities for their children that
   were greater than they themselves had experienced. And he developed priorities
   in national policy making and a role for national government that enabled
   those aspirations to be achieved."
  It is appropriate, as Alan said, that we should gather here in this beautiful
   Parliament building in Melbourne to launch this book because it was here
   in this building in this Parliament that RG Menzies began his political
   career. And it will be appropriately in this building that the Commonwealth
   Parliament will return in May of 2001 as one of the great events of the
   Centenary of Federation to sit after having re-enacted as best we can the
   inauguration of the Commonwealth Parliament in the Exhibition building to
   then sit here in ordinary session and to honour the magnificent achievement
   of 100 years of the Australian Federation in an event that I believe will
   in a very symbolic way unite all of the Australian people across the political
   divide and irrespective of their beliefs and attitudes on other issues.
  At Prahran Town Hall Menzies delivered his first political speech in 1926.
   He was accompanied by his uncle Sydney Sampson and he turned to his uncle
   after the speech and asked how he went to which the reply was "My dear
   boy, as an argument to the High Court of Australia it was admirable; as
   an address to the electors, it was hopeless. The art of political advocacy
   is the art of judicious and varied repetition." I have never heard
   that suggested before. "Until you learn to repeat yourself with skill
   you will never make a good politician." I will not make any comment
   on that.
  But the lecturers over the last twenty years have represented, as I said,
   a tremendous kaleidoscope not only of thought but of personalities that
   have richly contributed to the intellectual and the intellectual leadership
   of Australia.
  Great defenders of our institutions and our systems that have made us strong.
   They have included Sir Garfield Barwick, Sir Harry Gibbs, Dame Leonie Kramer,
   Sir Paul Hasluck, Geoffrey Blainey, Sir Zelman Cowen, Allan Martin, Don
   Argus, Hugh Morgan, Peter Costello, David Kemp, Jeff Kennett as well as
   successive Liberal Party leaders.
  The speech, of course, that stands out in the minds of many was that delivered
   by Margaret Thatcher in 1981. I might say it was delivered where it
   was always meant to be delivered at the university in circumstances of great
   difficulty. The university administration, as Ron Wilson describes, was
   less than enthusiastic about the visit and on a number of occasions urged
   the Trust and the Club to hold the lecture off the campus. The Hall committee
   refused to accommodate requests for a large lecture hall as a venue. The
   matter was only resolved when the Vice Chancellor rang the club president
   at home to advise that due to the intervention of Malcolm Fraser as Prime
   Minister the Blackwood Hall had suddenly become available. A sad footnote
   to that particular visit was that a letter of thanks delivered on behalf
   of Margaret Thatcher by her then parliamentary secretary, Ian Gow, proceeded
   by only a few days his murder by the Irish Republican Army.
  Ladies and gentlemen, today is an occasion to honour the contribution, not
   only of Sir Robert Menzies to the life of our nation but also to honour
   the importance within our community of keeping alive the spirit of ideas
   and the spirit of political debate. It has to be said that we on our side
   of politics, if I can use the broad collective, have not always been as
   successful as we might have been in defending and postulating the intellectual
   and philosophical basis of our beliefs. It is not only important to win
   elections, it is also important to win arguments and if you can win both
   elections and arguments then you have been truly successful.
  Menzies was the greatest election winner that Australia has ever seen. He
   was also of course a great winner of arguments and a great advocate in his
   cause. You were never in any doubt as to where he stood on an issue. He
   was not one for temperising, he was not one for mincing words, he was not
   one for deferring to fashionable views of what ought to occur if those views
   coincided with what he perceived to be the national interest. He was a man,
   in my view, who quite correctly believed that on some issues you should
   be willing to argue for fundamental change and on other issues you should
   be willing to stand by something that continued to work and continued to
   work in the national interest. It is an approach that guides and instructs
   me in my attitude to public issues in Australia at present. I respect the
   plural tradition of the Liberal Party. I respect the fact that the Liberal
   Party has always regarded itself as a defender of free thought and individual
   conscience.
  For that reason and because this is essentially a gathering of people who
   could loosely be described as being broadly supportive of the Liberal Party
   in the Australian political milieu I have refrained from making any explicit
   reference to matters that are the subject of political debate in Australia
   at the present time because the Liberal Party, quite correctly in my view,
   is affording to its parliamentary members the privilege of a free or open
   vote on that issue and I think that is the right and correct thing for us
   to do. Can I say two other things. And that is that in Sir Paul's great
   address to Dame Pattie's 90th anniversary.90th birthday
   party celebration 10 years ago he spoke of the stability and strength of
   Australia during the Menzies years and he spoke of the regard in which Australia
   was held at that time.
  Although the circumstances now are very different and Australia is a very
   different country now from what it was in those days and to draw slavish
   comparisons between the two would be an immense error, there is nonetheless
   a resonance in those words when you look at the condition of Australia at
   the present time. We have not had such strong economic conditions in this
   country at any time, in my belief, than we have now since World War II.
   It is also fair to say that in recent times Australia has demonstrated to
   the rest of the world with a clarity and speed, her capacity to display
   strong leadership on foreign affairs and defence issues within the Asian
   Pacific region. The regard in which Australia is held not only in the region
   but around the world because of the action we took in relation to East Timor,
   an action that respected the long term importance of a close relationship
   between Australia and Indonesia but nonetheless also respected the importance
   of standing up for what was right and what was in the Australian national
   interest.
  And that action has won for Australia enormous respect. It has demonstrated
   our capacity to act strongly and independently and with a sense of not only
   the national interest but also a sense of what is right within the Australian
   community and within the region and I believe that Australia's standing
   as a consequence of that is immeasurably greater than would have been the
   case if we had fumbled and passed over an opportunity to display such tremendous
   leadership.
  I am delighted that this launch today coincides with the second volume of
   Alan Martin's biography which I will read as well with intense interest.
   I read the first instalment of that biography some years ago as many in
   this audience would have and I was struck by the, I think, the intellectual
   rigour, the accuracy and the historical perspectives of it and I look forward
   to the second volume.
  I remember the phrase that was used by Sir Robert after his deposing by
   his own party in 1940 and he described how he was going to go away and bleed
   a while. And he did, he bled a while but he recovered from the experience
   and he returned with very great strengths and an enhanced capacity and went
   on to become Australia's longest serving and greatest Prime Minister.
  This volume and those who have contributed to it I thank them, I honour
   their contribution to political and intellectual thought in Australia I
   have great pleasure in launching it and finally Alan could I pay a very
   special tribute to you for the enormous leadership that you have shown in
   this enterprise. You have been the driving force behind the Trust, you have
   kept it alive you have gathered support, you have won the respect of all
   of us and today's gathering is a very special tribute to you as well as
   to the memory of Australia's greatest Prime Minister. Thank you.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE....................
  Thank you very much Kevin. To your wife, Margie, to Mr Tom Sweeney, my State
   parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
  When you started saying that there were similarities between myself and
   the founder of our Party, whose name has been given to this electorate,
   I allowed my mind to wander for a moment and I thought, well, is he going
   to, sort of, draw some sporting analogies. Because I was sitting next to
   a former Wallaby I thought to myself, well, to use a rugby analogy I think
   the founder would have got into the second row but I am probably 5/8th
   or halfback in terms of physical bulk.
  But, ladies and gentlemen, it's a great pleasure to be with you tonight
   and it's a pleasure to reflect very briefly before I have some other things
   to say about contemporary politics, to reflect very briefly about some of
   the things that were in that quite remarkable video. We were all struck
   by the incredible capacity of Sir Robert with his home movies and that remarkable
   footage of war torn Coventry. I remember when it was shown eight or nine
   years ago how incredibly impressive it was.
  Of course the old gentleman, he was fairly old then, the late Sir John Kramer
   who was Army Minister in the Menzies Government was my predecessor in the
   seat of Bennelong. He held it between 1949 and 1974 when he retired at the
   age of 78 and I took over the seat from him. And he lived to the age of
   97 and he towards the end of his life he wrote a memoir about his own political
   experiences and he invited me to launch it. And I well remember the occasion.
   And I read it in preparation for the launch and there was the odd chapter
   here and there that presented a slightly different version of the foundation
   of the Liberal Party than the one that I'd been brought up on. And I said
   to John when I was watching, I said "this is very interesting",
   I said "I thought it occurred in a slightly different fashion but you
   seem to have rearranged it a little bit." And he said "My boy,
   when you reach my age there's nobody left around to contradict you."
   And I was reminded of him. But what was tremendously evocative about what
   he said on that video was the emphasis that he placed on the importance
   of the individual in our Party. And one of the things that we have always
   respected is the fact that as a political movement we do allow our membership
   on some issues to be a lot more pluralistic than do our political opponents.
   And I think that's a good thing.
  And that is why I am not going to, as some of our friends from the media
   might expect, I am not going to say anything tonight about the debate which
   is going to be resolved on the 6th of November in relation to
   our Constitution. Although I will say something in support of a "yes"
   vote for the preamble because we have a Government position on that. But
   in relation to the other issue I respect the fact that we are allowing a
   free vote within the Liberal Party on that issue as we should because of
   the special character of it. And part and parcel of respecting that free
   vote is that I choose not to use Liberal Party forums to put my own personal
   point of view. And it's one of the arrangements that we have entered into
   within our parliamentary party for the conduct of the issue.
  But it is a great pleasure for me to be in Kevin's electorate. And it's
   with great ease and enthusiasm that I commend him to you as a remarkable,
   hardworking, articulate and very effective local member. And I commend him
   to you as a person of great personal integrity and conscience and dedication.
   It is important that we have people in public life who feel very strongly
   about certain issues. You may not agree with them on those issues but it's
   very important that we have people who still believe in causes and issues
   as well as making sure that the continuity of the party's broad philosophy
   is continued.
  We have a remarkable opportunity in the Liberal Party at present at a national
   level to, if we are sensible, to secure more reforms and more beneficial
   changes and to really guide this nation of ours into the 21st
   Century.
  Economically Australia now, in my view, is stronger than it has been at
   any time since World War II. In many respects the economy's strength is
   more broadly based now than what it even was in the halcyon days of the
   Menzies period, strong though the Australian economy was then. Because the
   Australian economy now is a lot less protected. There is less artificiality
   about some of its strength now than was the case 30 years ago. We have fewer
   trade barriers. We have a less regulated economy. We are exporting a greater
   variety of products and services and we have tackled over the last few years
   some of the basic economic weaknesses that we had. And as a consequence
   we have given ourselves the remarkable situation where we have been able
   to stare down the worst economic downturn that the Asian-Pacific region
   has experienced since World War II.
  And if I'd have been talking to you a little over a year ago I would have
   said that although I thought the economy was going well and we had achieved
   a lot I felt that we were going to be in some way affected by the Asian
   economic downturn. And whilst we haven't been completely unscathed by it
   we have really achieved a continuing strength that has surprised the Government
   and it has certainly surprised all of the commentators and it has won us
   a great deal of national economic respect around the world.
  I don't want to bore you with statistics but we do have a rate of growth
   at present which is above the OECD average. We have a still very low level
   of inflation, a bit of a spike today due to the increase in the price of
   petrol as a result of the increase in the world price which has now begun
   to abate. But the underlying rate is still very low indeed. And we are enjoying
   the lowest interest rates for more than 30 years. And we have turned a $10.5
   billion budget deficit into a surplus.
  We have had a few things come along that we didn't expect including, of
   course, the additional defence commitment arising out of our activity in
   East Timor and I'll come to that in a moment. But we do have a great economic
   strength that has won us a lot of respect. And it's not come by accident
   it has come as a result of a lot of hard work in the three and a bit years
   that we have been in office. And you make your own luck in politics as in
   life. And we worked very hard to give Australia that economic strength and
   I hope its paid dividends in terms of better business conditions and a more
   benign and beckoning economic climate.
  So we do have an opportunity in the years ahead to leave a very decent legacy
   for the Australian people of this generation of Australian Liberals. But
   having in that sense, I suppose, tried to draw a bit of an analogy with
   the Menzies years I think I have to say to you that the world in which we
   now live is very different from the world in which Menzies reigned as Prime
   Minister. The political climate is a lot more volatile, it's unpredictable.
   I don't need to remind a Victorian Liberal audience of that. Very unpredictable.
   And the very disappointing and regrettable defeat of the Coalition Government
   here in Victoria is a sharp reminder to all of us of how unpredictable is
   the political world.
  We live in a political world that is less tribal than it used to be. Looking
   at that old footage you were reminded of the old divide that was created
   by the Cold War between the democratic west and the communist east. And
   that defined not only international politics but it also to a large extent
   defined domestic politics. That's gone. As a result you no longer have as
   many rusted on supporters of the two sides.
  I was brought up in politics to believe that 40 per cent of the community
   always voted Labor, 40 per cent always voted Liberal and the rest moved
   around in the middle. I now feel that it's down to 30 per cent voting Labor,
   30 per cent always voting Liberal with 40 per cent moving around in the
   middle. And elections are less predictable. You have to look at each election
   in its own right as a separate entity. You can't assume anything so much
   any more. And that means that electorates have to be constantly understood,
   listened to, sympathised with, interpreted and above all respected.
  Electorates are not automatically dazzled by everything that you regard
   yourself as having achieved. Electorates can appear on occasions to be ungrateful.
   We saw a man on the movie again tonight by the name of Churchill who thought
   he'd done a bit in winning a war and lost an election immediately the war
   was over in 1945. Probably the most spectacular example of the unpredictability
   of politics in the 20th Century.
  The message therefore out of all of that is that you can't as Liberals ever,
   or we can't as Liberals ever take anything for granted. You have to work
   everyday to understand and win the respect and the sympathy and support
   of the electorate. Electorates expect governments to do good things for
   them, that's what they elect them for. You don't get the same measure of
   gratitude for the good things you have done as you do their anger and disappointment
   for the things that you neglect to do and the mistakes that you make.
  I think over the last three and a half years we have given very good Government
   to the Australian people. But we have got to keep on doing that and we have
   got to understand as Liberals that they expect us to keep on doing it.
  Kevin was kind enough to mention my role in relation to what has happened
   in East Timor. That has been a very defining moment for Australia on the
   international stage. The peacekeeping operation that was assembled in East
   Timor was assembled with a speed which surpassed any other peacekeeping
   operation in living memory assembled under the auspices of the United Nations.
   And in leading the activity that led to the establishment of that peacekeeping
   operation Australia was taking a very important stand for not only what
   was right but also for what was in Australia's national interest. And the
   skill and the professionalism of the men and women of the Australian Defence
   Force has been quite remarkable and has very understandably won the respect
   and the admiration of our allies and others around the world.
  We have unavoidably entered a difficult phase in our relationship with Indonesia.
   But I believe that that relationship can and will be rebuilt and there are
   already signs to that effect following the election of the new President
   and the new Vice-President of that country. And we should pause for a moment
   and reflect on what an extraordinary transformation has occurred in that
   nation of 211 million people. It is now the third largest democracy in the
   world. And over the last year it has gone through the process of converting
   itself into a democracy, the first democratically elected President in over
   30 years, it has accepted that East Timor is no longer part of the Republic
   of Indonesia. And all of this has occurred in this remarkable country to
   our north.
  Now, we have our differences and clearly the role we played in relation
   to East Timor represented a point of difference and a point of strain. But
   in the long run we have to accept that we are forever together in this part
   of the world and on a basis, a proper basis of mutual respect and understanding
   I am sure that we can rebuild that relationship and it will continue, I
   think, on a more practical, realistic and open and candid basis than perhaps
   has been the situation in the past.
  And it will also be important that the new nation of East Timor be part
   of that association because whatever the difficulties there may have been
   in the past and now and whatever the feelings are between the people of
   East Timor and the people of Indonesia it's very necessary that they also
   recognise that they have a common future together and a common destiny together.
   And the three of us, different sizes, different compositions, different
   cultures, different backgrounds but having in common the fact that we exist
   and will always exist together in this particular part of the world.
  But what Australia was able to do in relation to the events in East Timor
   have been very much to the credit and the reputation of our nation. Not
   something that one talks about in any boastful terms but realistically and
   soberly saying that we are a community that has been willing to take a leadership
   role, a community that has been willing sensibly and carefully to defend
   what is right and what is in our own long-term interests. But also importantly
   a country that had the national political will and the economic capacity
   to do it. Economically strong nations are listened to with greater respect
   than economically weak nations and economically strong nations have a capacity
   to do things that economically weak nations don't have a capacity to do.
   And there's a message in that for all of us coming out of what we have been
   able to achieve in strengthening the Australian economy over the last three
   and half years.
  Now, I mentioned, ladies and gentlemen, that I would have something very
   briefly to say about the second referendum question and that is the writing
   into our Constitution of a new preamble. It hasn't received a great deal
   of attention and it's Government policy to advocate a "yes" vote
   for that particular question. I would like to see that preamble supported.
   I would like to see it go into the Constitution. I think it would be a unifying
   thing for the Australian people if the community, irrespective of the different
   views it may have on the question of whether we change our other Constitutional
   arrangement. I think it would be a very unifying thing if we could put into
   our Constitution a statement of the fundamental beliefs and values of the
   Australian community. And particularly the reference in that preamble to
   the indigenous people would make a valuable contribution to the cause of
   reconciliation within the Australian community.
  We will inevitably continue to have a variety of views about how best to
   assist the indigenous people of the Australian community but it cannot be
   denied that as an identifiable group they remain the most disadvantaged
   within our society. Nor can it be denied that they have a special place
   within the Australian community as the first people of our nation. And it
   would make a marvellous unifying symbolic contribution to their place in
   the Australian community and the celebration of the Centenary of the Federation
   of the Australian Commonwealth if that preamble could be carried and that
   preamble could be inserted into the Australian Constitution.
  So I quite unapologetically at this gathering invite you to give your sympathetic
   support to the cause of an affirmative vote in relation to the preamble.
  And can I finish, ladies and gentlemen, in saying how important it is that
   gatherings like this occur that people gather around to provide significant
   financial and community support for members of Parliament. All of you in
   different ways are identified with the Liberal Party cause at a grass roots
   level here in the electorate of Menzies.
  I often say that everything that I have achieved in public life I owe to
   the Liberal Party. I would never have been a member of Parliament without
   the endorsement of the Liberal Party. I would never have been its Leader
   without its support. I would never have been Prime Minister without the
   support of the Liberal Party. And in the time that I have been Prime Minister
   I have received the most magnificent loyalty from the rank and file members
   of the Liberal Party all around Australia whether it's in New South Wales
   or Victoria or Western Australia it's the same.
  Liberals are wonderfully supportive. I want you to know that I value that
   and I understand it. And I respect immensely the contribution that the rank
   and file of the party make to our existence. I came through the party organisation
   myself. I know how important it is to have a strong party organisation.
   A party organisation that supports the parliamentary party and gives it
   public loyalty but a party organisation that also has the capacity on occasions
   to say to the parliamentary party, we think you should do this particular
   thing in a slightly different fashion and to assert its role and its right
   and its prerogative and its authority in relation to those matters that
   properly belong to the party organisation.
  Now, I know that here in Victoria because of the defeat at a State level
   there is a process of stocktaking and introspection and review and assessment
   going on. And that is right and proper. I have always found within the party
   organisation amongst Liberals around Australia that where there is a willingness
   to do that then lessons are learnt, understandings are gained. And here
   in Victoria is no different in a sense from the process of introspection
   at a State level that has been going on in New South Wales since the defeat
   at a State level in New South Wales some months ago.
  We have a big challenge ahead of us over the next two years before the next
   federal election. We can't take that election for granted. I don't. It will
   be a very big challenge. We'll be asking for a third victory in a row. That
   is very achievable but it's not something we can assume is going to happen.
   And given the sort of climate of which I spoke earlier it will be something
   that we, all of us, collectively must ensure is not taken lightly. But if
   we continue to give quality Government to the people of Australia, if we
   continue to demonstrate a capacity to listen to them, to understand that
   there is within rural Australia a very significant feeling of alienation
   and disappointment that sections of our country are falling behind the generic
   plenty and prosperity of other parts of our community then I think we will
   retain and build upon the respect we now have within the Australian community.
  But none of us, and it didn't really need the result in the Victorian election
   although it's driven it home to us, none of us can ignore the fact that
   there are many parts of the Australian community that aren't sharing in
   the national economic well-being. We are doing very well as a nation but
   there are still pockets of Australia that are not sharing in that. And I
   think we all know it's human nature that if you feel that in relative terms
   you are missing out in a big way you feel a lot more keenly than if your
   disadvantage is, relatively speaking, not quite so profound.
  So we do have tremendous challenges in front of us but it's important that
   we remember some of the things that we saw on that video tonight. The emphasis
   on the individual, the emphasis on the family, the emphasis on a sense of
   community and a reminder that the Liberal Party of Australia was built on
   commonsense Australian values. Values that do respect the individual liberty
   that do respect the right of people to work hard and be properly rewarded
   and to keep the fruits of their effort and their commitment and their skill.
  And I think you have in Kevin a marvellous representative of that philosophy
   and that's why I am delighted to be here tonight. Delighted to commend him
   most warmly to you and delighted to congratulate those who put together
   the 200 Club. I wish it well, it'll make a magnificent contribution to the
   Liberal cause here in the nobly named seat of Menzies. Thank you.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much John. It’s nice of somebody to describe me as a big politician! Can I say to you John and to Julia, and to my many other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues who are here tonight, that this summit and in particular this dinner which is the main social gathering of the summit, is the culmination of an enormous amount of effort to which my very respected and valued Deputy Prime Minister and leader of the National Party, John Anderson, has been principally responsible.
We are very genuine about this summit, and we are very genuine about the concerns and the challenges, and in some areas the threat to the very existence and the very type of life for which our fellow Australians in rural and regional Australia in the Australian bush face. We decided to have this summit not because we believe that it could provide all of the solutions to your challenges. But we saw it as a vehicle for transmitting to you our understanding of signaling to the men and women of Australia who live in the regions that we do understand that life is different. In some areas it is as good or better than it’s been in the past but in many areas it’s not. And that at a time of relative national economic plenty, and relative national economic affluence, the fact that many parts of our community in the regions in particular are doing it harder that that relative disadvantage has understandably bred a feeling of alienation, in some cases a feeling of despair.
We also decided to have the summit because we saw in it a vehicle of optimism and a vehicle of hope. In my political experience I’ve seen three types of summits. I’ve seen summits that are created when there’s really no other way out of a difficult question on talkback radio during an election campaign then to say I’ll solve that problem by holding a summit. I’ve seen summits created where the deal to be announced, the result to be produced has been sewn up well in advance. The other summit of which this is one is a genuine opportunity for the government and the ministers and the members of parliament to listen, to offer some responses, to contribute some ideas, but above all to demonstrate a willingness through personal exchange and structured discussions, to demonstrate an empathy and a sympathy and a concern, and a desire to work in partnership to try and solve some of the problems of a particular part of our community.
Now you’ve heard it said before but it is an important backdrop to this gathering. But at a national level the Australian economy has rarely been stronger, in fact probably stronger than at any time in the last 30 years. Certainly the strongest I’ve known in the 25 years that I’ve been in public life. We’ve successfully stared down the Asian economic downturn. We’ve done better over the last year than frankly I would have said a year ago we were going to do if I had addressed a similar gathering.
We have undertaken a number of major reform challenges. We have seen the successful implementation of some very fundamental changes in our industrial relations system. And the longer and more reflective history of the last few years will I believe in future record that the changes made in industrial relations have contributed a lot more to the higher productivity and the economic strength in this country than is now commonly acknowledged. And I still believe that the contribution that will be made in time by those courageous waterfront reforms that were undertaken more than a year ago now, are part of that pattern.
We’ve also successfully negotiated through the Parliament the biggest change to our taxation system, probably ever, and that contains major benefits for regional and rural Australia, particularly in the area of cheaper fuel. And the reduction in the cost of exports as a result of the abolition of the wholesale sales tax and its replacement with a goods and services tax will also be of direct benefit to rural and regional exporters.
So we’ve been busy and the backdrop of the last three-and-a-half years have been one of a generically strengthening economy, out-performing the best predictions. But nonetheless side by side with that the unfortunate reality that other parts of our nation, particular parts of our nation have not shared in that bounty and that plenty. One of the things that as an Australian who grew up to believe that this was the most egalitarian society in the world, who still remembers his first meeting as Treasurer with Alan Greenspan before Alan became the Chairman to the Federal Reserve some 20 years ago. And I met him when I was Federal Treasurer. And he said – "oh of course Mr Treasurer, you come from Australia. That country has the largest middle class in the world".
And it made a point that was important to the Australia of the 1940s, 1950s and the 1960s, that we all felt more or less a sense of general equality. There was some pretty wealthy people, there were some people who were struggling. But most of us seemed to be in the middle. And that was one of the comforting, endearing, attractive things about been an Australian. And that state has been put under stress and strain over the last 20 years. There are greater gaps in our community now through a combination of reasons, and it’s not my purpose tonight to give an economic dissertation on that. But when your country is doing well generally and doing well at a national level, those who are missing out or not doing as well feel it all the more keenly, and that is very understandable. And I want you to know that as Prime Minister I’m very sensitive to that. And I know that there are long-term structural changes that are occurring over which none of us can exercise control, such as some of the long-term declines in commodity prices and the long-term structured changes in market opportunities for primary production for many of the exporters in our rural sectors.
But I also know as I go around our country that there remains tremendous spirit and tremendous commitment and tremendous hope in the Australian bush. I can’t imagine our country without the contribution that’s been made to its very fabric and essence by rural and regional Australia. It is unimaginable to me and unimaginable to millions of Australians that what we treasure, as a very important part of our Australian heritage should ever lose its very special place within our society. So that is the mindset, that’s, if you like, the sensitivity that we bring to the problems we know that you are facing. Now we haven’t pretended at this summit that we have all of the solutions, and I don’t think any of you expect that we have. We haven’t tried to pretend that out of this we’re going to announce a grand plan that’s going to solve the problems. But out of it we will have learnt a lot more, we will have come to a better understanding of areas where we can make a difference and where we can make a contribution.
We all know the value of having a strong national economic base. All of you know the value of the lower interest rates that we’ve had over the last few years. You know the benefits of the lower inflation, you know the benefits of the fewer industrial disputes. And you also know the benefits of some of the spending that has come out of the National Heritage Trust and tomorrow I’ll be announcing the first of our regional transaction centres, made possible as a result of the sale of the second tranche of the government’s interest in Telstra.
We value very much as a government the notion of what I’ve described as the social coalition. That is something that recognises that in a country such as Australia the government can’t solve every problem. The business community can make a massive contribution but it acting alone can’t solve every problem. Nor can individuals, nor can the great welfare organisations, many of which are represented here tonight, acting alone can they solve those problems. But acting together in coalition or in partnerships we can solve many of the nation’s problems together.
But an excellent example of what I have called the social coalition in our community was the model proposed by the Sidney Myer Fund to assist regional communities in reaching their full potential. The Myer Fund first approached John Anderson with this concept and he immediately saw its worth and became a strong advocate of it within the government. With an emphasis on economic development and job creation the foundation could fulfill its role through innovative approaches to training and business skills, mentoring, seed funding and coordinating with other entities to maximise support. We were very attracted to the proposal. We discussed it a few days ago and I’m pleased to announce that the Government will support the Sidney Myer Fund with a commitment of $14.5 million in direct funding to support its good works in regional Australia. $10.7 million of this will be paid this financial year to provide the impetus needed, and it will build on the $1 million to be provided by the Sidney Myer Fund. We will also grant, give tax-deductible status for private sector contributions to the foundation. This provides a very strong incentive for the private sector to become partners in this foundation to promote new opportunities in regional Australia. And I very strongly commend this initiative to Australia’s private sector and invite them to strongly support the fund.
I did want to say one or two other things and the first of those is about competition policy. I know that competition policy has been much debated in rural and regional Australia. I want to tell you that the Government is sensitive to some of the concerns that have been expressed. We understand them. We see competition policy as serving the interests of the bush, not as some kind of ideology to be imposed on regional Australia. And we are and will remain particularly aware of this. But it is important in the name of a fair understanding of what competition policy has done in our community to remember that for an exporting country like Australia competitive costs are crucial, and the greater competition has yielded benefits such as real gas prices falling by 22%, national rail crates falling by 16% in real terms, STD phone calls falling 25% and more competitive and efficient ports and waterfronts. All of these cost reductions brought about as a result of greater competition within our economy are valuable, and all of them reinforce the economic infrastructure of rural Australia, and make a potential contribution to its prosperity.
The other area I want to touch on is the importance of infrastructure within the Australian community. I think all of us recognise that a geographically large nation such as Australia badly needs the continued appraisal, and where necessary the renewal of its infrastructure. It is a legitimate role of government to provide not only the general economic conditions that bring forth optimum private sector responses, but also to provide and support the provision of basic infrastructure within our community. And we have demonstrated that in recent times in a variety of ways.
One of those has been in the area of rail. And many of the reforms undertaken by this
Government reinforce the current rail provision within our community. And the extension of the diesel concessions, the diesel used in rail, in the negotiations undertaken between us and the Australian Democrats, have made a further contribution to the competitiveness of rail within our community.
We have been for a long time a very strong supporter of modern cost competitive rail networks within our community. And it’s in that context and against the background of our commitment to the provision of proper infrastructure within regional Australia that this afternoon as it happens I saw the Premier of South Australia Mr Olsen and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Mr Burke. And we discussed something that has been on the drawing boards of regional Australia for decades and that is the construction of the Alice Springs to Darwin railway. Seen for decades by nation builders as a very very important part of the infrastructure of the future of the Australian community. And I’m therefore very pleased to announce at this regional Australian summit, that that project is finally to become a reality next year.
It will give us a railway of course that goes from the south to the north of Australia, from the Southern Ocean to the Timor Sea. Over three years the Commonwealth will cap its contribution at $165 million. Under the agreement reached today all three governments will increase their contribution. The railway will be built with $480 million in government contributions, with $165 million coming from the Commonwealth government and the remainder coming from the governments of South Australia and the Northern Territory.
There will be $750 million contributed in private capital. The construction will take three years. It will provide jobs for 7,000 Australians in the regional parts of our nation. It will provide in particular an enormous economic boost to the city of Whyalla. And it will I believe give hope and encouragement, as well as real economic commitment, to both South Australia and the Northern Territory. But more importantly than the direct economic and employment benefits, the construction will demonstrate to all Australians the importance that the community, the government, places upon infrastructure development within regional Australia.
Through all its existence this country has always believed in large projects in the importance of infrastructure development. I had, I would have to say, one of the most moving weekends of my Prime Ministership recently when Janette and I spent most of the weekend helping those wonderful people who contributed to the project in celebrating the 50th anniversary of the commencement of the construction of the Snowy River Scheme. To walk amongst them, and to listen to their stories, but most importantly to hear the pride with which they spoke of that great nation building enterprise was a very encouraging, indeed uplifting and quite emotional experience.
That particular project of course the most remarkable engineering feat in all of Australia’s history, indeed one of the great engineering feats of the post World War II period. But it touched a nerve, it touched something within the sole of our country. It has something to do with the size of our nation, it has something to do with the belief that we must always look for ways to assimilate the size of our country with the uneven spread of its population. And that those of us who live in the concentrated urban areas must constantly understand the importance and the challenges of distance in the more remote areas. And one of the great dilemmas and contradictions of Australia has always been that it is a vast nation, and it has a rural sector that makes a massive economic contribution, yet it is amongst the most urbanised societies in the world. And perhaps that contradiction and the understanding of it goes some way towards explaining the importance that Australians have always attached to large infrastructure projects.
I have long hoped that it might be possible for the Darwin to Alice Springs railway to come to fruition because I believe it represents the sort of investment in the future of this country, the development of its less populated areas, an understanding of the importance that the contribution that a railway like that can make to the export potential of the Australian nation. And we have been reminded in recent weeks of the critical importance of Darwin being so far as its geographical proximity to our near neighbours is concerned.
So I couldn’t be more delighted ladies and gentlemen to have the opportunity at this summit tonight to make those two announcements. I want to thank Baillieu Myer in particular for the leadership and commitment he’s given to the rural partnerships. I think they are a marvelous demonstration of the philanthropic tradition of so many businesses within the Australian community. And I encourage other businesses represented here tonight to contribute to and support that fund. And I hope that our announcement and the commitment of the Commonwealth government, the commitment of the governments of South Australia and the Northern Territory to the Darwin to Alice Springs railway will be seen as a long term commitment to the future of regional Australia. It will be seen as the government of Australia saying to regional Australia you are part of our community. We understand that you are resourceful independent spirited people, but we also understand that from time to time you need a commitment and an investment from your fellow Australians.
Can I say finally to all of you, I think this has been a great concept this summit. I congratulate John for the tremendous leadership that he’s displayed in bringing it together. Speaking as Prime Minister can I say to all of you who live in regional Australia, the bush as I more commonly call it – perhaps inaccurately but very affectionately – can I say that we do understand that you have problems, that many of you have been hurt economically and socially by bewildering change. We don’t pretend to have all of the solutions but we do understand, we do care. We try to listen and in a practical way we’ll do what we can to help you. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
First of all may I acknowledge the Eora people, the traditional owners of this land. To my parliamentary colleague, Senator Aden Ridgeway, and his bride of a week, Stephanie, congratulations to them both. Lowitja O’Donoghue, Charlie Perkins, Andrew Refshauge, the Deputy Premier of New South Wales, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Janette and I are really delighted to share this wonderful celebration of a great Australian and aboriginal cultural achievement. Bangarra in 10 years has demonstrated, as Lowitja said, the passion and the beauty and the world class of indigenous culture.
We all, as Stan Grant said, have our role models. We all need role models and what the members of this theatre represent as role models not only to indigenous young people in the Australian community but to all Australians is something very special. Recently they had a wonderful tour in conjunction with The Australian Ballet to New York. And the absolutely lyrical tribute that was written by Anna Kisselgoff, probably the foremost dance critic in the world in the New York Times, brought immense pride not only to those who love and care about indigenous culture and indigenous performance and achievement and indigenous fairness in the Australian community but also to all of us who see in the arts, whether it’s in dance or any other art form, an expression of the soul and identity of the Australian nation.
So tonight I am particularly pleased to be here, to say on behalf of the Government that we admire the achievements of Bangarra. And I am also here to enjoy the company and the hospitality of a newly acquired parliamentary colleague of mine, Aden Ridgeway. Aden has displayed great leadership to the indigenous people of Australia. His years as Chairman of the New South Wales Land Council brought him into contact with many sections of government and many areas of the Australian community. And he showed in those years great skill, great patience, but above all, great commitment to the cause of improving conditions for indigenous people in the community.
In the few months that he has been in the Senate, and I say this as somebody who belongs to a different political party but I hope retains the capacity to respect and value a colleague across the political divide, he’s made a very impressive contribution to parliamentary life. And I wish him well and I look forward to working constructively with him and his colleagues, accepting that we will differ on many things but remain united in our determination to produce a better Australian society.
I do agree with Lowitja that the contribution that is being made to reconciliation by Bangarra is quite outstanding. All of us acknowledge that there is still much to be done to redress the imbalance and the deprivation within the Australian community for the indigenous people. They remain undeniably the single most disadvantaged group within Australian society. But importantly, so many Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders now look at their future and look at their lives in terms which are overwhelmingly enthusiastic, passionate and positive.
And those who have made Bangarra world famous are part of the future for the indigenous people of Australia. They bring them pride, they bring them a sense of achievement, they bring them a sense of hope. But importantly, of course, they also bring pride and achievement and sense of hope to all Australians just as Cathy Freeman revels and feels a great sense of pride in both being an Australian and in her indigenous identity and sees the two going hand in hand. So it is that the members of this dance theatre feel the same way. They are doing great things for our country. They are doing great things for their own people.
And can I conclude in joining Aden Ridgeway in thanking the many corporate supporters who are here tonight. Corporate sponsorship is a very important element of the arts and culture in the Australian community. Without it it would wither no matter what its excellence might be. I thank them. I know that Aden and the other members of his Board value your support very much. Janette and I are delighted to share this very special indigenous and Australian occasion and may good fortune attend the activities and the performances of the Bangarra Theatre for many years into the future. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Ian Macdonald. To Peter Andren, the federal member for Calare, Mr Mayor, to my parliamentary colleague, Senator Bill Heffernan, Senator for New South Wales, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a very important morning in the future of rural and regional Australia. By opening this first rural transaction centre here in Eugowra we are sending a very clear signal to rural and regional Australia of our determination to work with you to bring services back to the bush.
That is what this is about. It is a project of substance designed to recognise and respond as best we can to a heartfelt plea that is coming from rural and regional Australia about the impact on small communities of the withdrawal and the decline of the availability of services. And by committing ourselves in the last election campaign to opening something like 500 of these in partnership with local communities we committed ourselves to a programme that had substance and not just rhetoric. We don’t pretend that opening rural transaction centres in Eugowra or indeed anywhere else in our nation is going to of itself respond to all of the concerns that are legitimately felt and expressed out of rural Australia.
But we hope by this policy to deal with one of the particular problems that people experience. And it has, as you know, and I don’t need to remind communities such as this and you are gathered here in the main street in such a cross-section of the local community. And it really does remind me of the, of what the heart and soul of rural and regional Australia is all about. That sense of community, that capacity to work together for the common good. To put aside differences, to pool the resources that you have as Australians to build a better local community. And the rural transaction centre policy is an expression of something that I hold very dear as Prime Minister and that is the notion of the social coalition. The notion that none of us acting alone can solve every problem we have. We as a Federal Government can’t solve every problem, you as a local community can’t, the business community can make a contribution, individuals and welfare organisations can also play a role. But acting alone we can’t solve problems. But acting together and pooling the resources we have and bringing the best that we can bring to each and every problem we are able to achieve things together.
And that is what the rural transaction centre policy is all about. It is about the Government providing the catalyst, the Government providing financial support, seeking projects from local communities and then working in partnership with local communities, local business organisations. Providing an outlet for government services such as Centrelink and Medicare easy claim facilities and so providing a critical mass of services in a small community where companies and banks and other organisations acting alone couldn’t possibly achieve.
And that is really what the concept is all about. And it is an expression, a living expression, of the social coalition. And it is, I believe, very sincerely the way of the future. We have to find a way as a nation to arrest the decline of services in the bush. I understand that and I understand the feeling that people in regional and rural Australia have on that subject. I can’t promise you in all honesty that we can meet every concern. I can’t promise you that everybody who wants a rural transaction centre can have one. I can’t promise you that every service that has disappeared from a small rural community is going to be replaced or inadequate services augmented by rural transaction centres. But I can promise you that we will make an honest endeavour and we will over time make a significant difference. Because as a Government, and can I say, collectively as a nation, I believe Australians are seized of the importance of providing practical assistance to the regions and the rural areas of our country.
I have frequently said, and I’ll repeat it again here this morning, that I cannot conceive of what the nation, the Australia that I grew up to love as a person, as a young person in the 1950s, I can’t imagine what that nation would be like if it didn’t have as a vibrant part of it the bush, the regional and rural part of our country which is so very important to how we see ourselves and understand ourselves and identify ourselves as Australians.
And I am very conscious as your Prime Minister of the fact that although at a national level our country is experiencing very significant prosperity and affluence at a national level I am very conscious that at a regional and rural level in particular there are many areas of Australia who are not sharing in that. And the sense of loss and deprivation and alienation that is being felt by people in those areas of Australia is all the more acute because of the relative affluence of our nation at a national level. And I know the impact on a country town when services go. Not only are the services extracted, not only do they disappear but business follows them and the cash flow of the town collapses and the economic base of the town is threatened. The job availabilities for the young people dwindle and disappear. Other services are threatened and it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
And what we are in the business of trying to do through rural transaction centres and other policies is to reverse that process. We hope to make a big difference and I am delighted that I have had the opportunity to come here this morning and to open the first of 500 of these. I want to thank and congratulate the local community because without your energy and effort this would not have been possible. And without the energy and effort of 499 other local communities around Australia it will not be possible.
As Ian said there is taking place in Canberra at the present time, and I welcome them to this ceremony, a regional summit which has brought together the leaders of regional and rural Australia from all around our nation. And we as a Government are listening to the concerns of people from the regions. Last night I had the opportunity of announcing a major national infrastructure project, the final commitment to the Darwin to Alice Springs railway which brings to a positive fruition a dream that people have had in that part of Australia for almost 90 years. To build a railway that will link the southern ocean to the Timor Sea. And it’s another demonstration of our commitment and the commitment of the rest of the Australian people to providing not only in the case of rural transactions centres the services but also providing the basic infrastructure which is so necessary to support a nation as large and as vastly populated in so many areas as is Australia.
So this morning, my fellow Australians, is a wonderful celebration of the Australian spirit. It is a celebration of the determination of people to work together at a local level to reverse a decline of services. It is a celebration of the willingness of the Government to respond and listen, to acknowledge that at a time of national economic plenty it is only right and proper that all Australians feel included and it is wrong that some Australians should feel excluded and feel that they are missing out.
And I hope in a small way and in a way that will grow extensively throughout the rest of our nation we can through these rural transaction centres not only provide the substance of services so necessary to your daily lives but also provide a powerful signal to the people of the Australian bush that we care, that we are responding and that we are trying to help.
And can I finally say what a wonderful experience it always is for me as Prime Minister to get out of the big cities, to come and meet a local community. I feel very honoured that I am the first Prime Minister of Australia who have come to Eugowra and I really feel very privileged to be with you. I can’t think of a better way of spending a Friday morning after a week or two of zigzagging all over the country and making speeches in this and that part of Australia to come here to what is the heart and soul of a very important part of our national existence and our national psyche.
So, ladies and gentlemen, thank you most sincerely for what you have done to bring today’s reality about. Your faith and commitment in your community is something I admire and your fellow Australians admire greatly and I have great pleasure in declaring the Rural Transaction Centre of Eugowra 1999 officially opened.
[ends]


E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………..
Thank you very much Michael for those very warm words of introduction. To Shane Stone the Federal President, Kerry Chikarovski, the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, to my many ministerial and parliamentary colleagues and most importantly of all my fellow members of the New South Wales Division of the Liberal Party.
Not surprisingly I would like to share with you this morning some thoughts on the past year and also some ideas about the year ahead at a national political level. But I would like to start my remarks this morning by addressing an issue that is very important to the future strength and survival of the New South Wales Division.
I want to congratulate the Executive of the party here in New South Wales for the decision it took last night to establish a committee of management to run the affairs of this party in the months ahead.
I think that was a courageous decision. It was the right decision. It was a long overdue decision. I took the opportunity, as somebody who has been a member of this Division for almost 40 years, I took the opportunity after the last State election to say some very frank things about what needed to be done in New South Wales to revive our fortunes particularly at a State level. But, of course, the organisation of the party here in New South Wales is as precious and important to our federal fortunes here in New South Wales as it is to our State fortunes.
The organisation belongs to all of us. It is neither the plaything of the federal parliamentary party or the State parliamentary party. And in the 40 years that I have been a member of this Division I have always passionately advocated the importance of having a strong organisation. And the steps that have been taken address some of the difficulties the Division has faced. They represent a courageous commitment by many people sharing different views on a number of issues to unite to solve a common problem.
And I believe that the decision that was taken last night will help the Division enormously. I welcome the fact that it’s occurred. I believe it will, in the long run, enhance Kerry Chikarovski’s chances of winning the next New South Wales election. And I believe that it will also lead to a strengthening of the organisation here in New South Wales in preparation for the next federal election to be held in about two years time.
We are entitled as a great pluralistic party, a party of what I frequently call the broad church, to accommodate a range of views and it’s always been the special character of the Liberal Party of Australia to accommodate a range of views because we are the trustees of both the Liberal tradition and the conservative tradition in Australian politics.
But what we must never do is to allow our differences to overcome our common passion to our party’s future. And that is what has happened in the past year. You all know it. I don’t come to apportion blame to either side I come simply to explain the obvious. And that is that divisions have enfeebled our party here in New South Wales for too long. And at last the organisational leadership of the party has seized the moment and done something about it. It has my enthusiastic support and I know it has the enthusiastic support of the federal organisation. And I believe out of this will come a much stronger party here in New South Wales. I congratulate the Executive on the courage and the leadership that it has shown on this issue.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a year, of course, since I last addressed this Convention. And what a year it has been in national politics. It is a year that has enabled us to consolidate in a way that I would not have thought possible the economic dividend which has come out of the economic reforms and changes that the Government undertook when it was elected in March of 1996.
A year ago I might have hoped, indeed said a few prayers that we might stare down the Asian economic downturn and I wouldn’t have really dared hoped that that was possible. And yet a year on it is undeniably the case that Australia has escaped the Asian economic downturn. Our level of unemployment now is lower than it has been for almost a decade and the prospects for further job growth are very strong.
We still have very strong levels of business investment. We still have a very low inflation rate, it’s lower than it has been for 30 years. We have the lowest interest rates for more than 30 years. And importantly in terms of national prestige and national respect we are seen around the world as a strong vibrant economy. There is new respect for Australia within the region and in the councils of the world. Our Treasurer can go to international financial meetings and be asked about the performance of the Australian economy and his advice can be sought as to how it is that we have been able to escape where others have been engulfed. Now, that should be a cause of, and a source of very great national pride. And it hasn’t happened accidentally. It’s happened because we had the courage to cut spending when we came to power to get rid of Mr Beazley’s $10.5 billion deficit. And don’t anybody here forget who left us with a $10.5 billion deficit.
And we have also had the courage to embrace industrial relations reform. It’s now 18 to 20 months since those momentous days in April of 1998 when the Government sought to reform the Australian waterfront. And despite the lukewarm cooperation we received from many State governments we were successfully in bringing about fundamental change. And one of the great areas of economic inefficiency and structural rigidity in the Australian economy, the Australian waterfront, has been changed forever.
But most importantly of all, we went to the last election with a programme of taxation reform. It was dangerous, it was difficult, it was hair raising and at times we all must have wondered whether it was the right thing to do. But we did it and we won. And we not only won the election, but give or take a few things that I would rather have stayed but we had to negotiate them away in discussions with the Australian Democrats, we now have in prospect the implementation of the biggest overhaul of Australia’s taxation system since World War II. And it will make us a more competitive economy. It will cut the price of fuel in the bush. It will provide us with $12 billion of personal income tax cuts. It will make our exports cheaper and it will give to the States of Australia a revenue base in the years ahead to provide the services that the States are required to provide for their citizens.
It represents path breaking, generational economic reform. The stuff of which fundamental change is made. And it is a reform that would never have been possible without the leadership of the Federal Government and would never have been possible without the support you gave us in that election campaign in October of last year.
But on top of that, we have now set about reforming the business taxation system of Australia. Out of those reforms we will cut in half capital gains tax for individuals. Out of those reforms we will give to Australian companies a corporate tax rate of 30 cents in the dollar. It will be amongst the most competitive corporate tax rates anywhere in the world. Out of those reforms we will make Australia a more attractive place in which to invest. And out of those reforms we will encourage people who have bright ideas that require the commitment of capital that doesn’t give a return for a period of time to commit that capital. In other words, our business taxation reforms represent as fundamental a change in the business climate as do our changes to the personal income tax system and the indirect tax system.
So when I look back over that last year I see a year of enormous economic achievement. I look at what together the parliamentary party and the party organisation around Australia have achieved. I think of the strength of the Australian economy. I think of the path breaking reforms in taxation and industrial relations. We think of what has been achieved through a sale of another 16 per cent of Telstra. Yesterday at Eugowra near Parkes in central western New South Wales I opened the first of 500 rural transaction centres. A new concept that will co-locate basic services that have year by year bit by bit been withdrawn from rural and regional Australia. And those regional transaction centres represent not only a symbolic commitment but a real commitment by the Government to putting services back into the Australian bush. I am not going to, as Prime Minister, preside over the progressive withdrawal of services and the basics of life from people who live in rural and regional Australia. It is inconceivable to me as I know it is inconceivable to all of you to even imagine an Australia which doesn’t have as part of its heart and soul the rural and regional communities that have contributed so much, not only to our nation’s wealth but also to our nation’s self identity. When you think of Australia you think of the bush as well as thinking of many other things. You cannot think of Australia in the future without thinking of a vibrant, strong rural and regional part of our nation.
And that is why we must as a Government and we must as a community recognise that although we live in a time of national economic affluence there are areas of our community that are missing out. And because we are doing well nationally the sense of loss and alienation is all the greater. Because if the rest of the country is doing well and you are not doing well you feel it even more painfully and more keenly. And that is the sense of disillusionment and disappointment that people do feel in many parts of rural and regional Australia. And that is why we are putting in these rural transaction centres.
That is why we are going to generate 7,000 jobs in the construction of the Alice Springs to Darwin railway link. That particular project, which has been dreamt of by Australian governments and by Australians for 89 years, 89 years ladies and gentlemen, will finally become a reality next year when the first sod will be turned in May or June. It will represent a rail track 1400 kilometres long stretching from the Southern Ocean to the Timor Sea. It will provide at least 18 months work for the BHP steelworks in Whyalla and it will put 7,000 jobs into rural and regional Australia.
That is what is needed. That kind of commitment, that kind of partnership, coalition between the Government and the private sector. The South Australian, Northern Territory and Commonwealth Government will be contributing about $480 million and about $750 million will be contributed by the private sector.
I have called it the steel Snowy. And I called it that quite deliberately because there is a hunger within the Australian community for major projects of infrastructure development. We are a big country, we have many sparsely populated areas yet paradoxically almost we are also the most urbanised society in the world. And that is why we need major projects of this kind and that is why we must understand that our fellow Australians in the bush are sending us a clear and unmistakable message – don’t forget us, don’t leave us out, understand that we have challenges.
And that is the message that I have heard. It is a message that John Anderson as Deputy Prime Minister heard at the regional summit in Canberra a couple of days ago and it’s the message that is going to be responded to across the board by the Government in the months and years ahead.
But there has been one other event in the last year of absolutely monumental significance. And that is the way in which this country to its eternal pride and credit was able to take the leadership role in one of the more significant security challenges that have affected the Asia-Pacific region for some time. And I refer, of course, to Australia’s role in leading the Interfet forces in East Timor.
This is the first time in our nation’s history that Australia has led a multi-national peacekeeping or peace enforcement operation. And I want to say for you, and I know I say it for all of you, what immense pride we feel in the leadership of General Cosgrove and the tremendous work of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force who are now serving the cause of fairness and decency in East Timor.
We did what we did in East Timor for two reasons. We did it because it was right and we did it because it was in Australia’s national interest. We did not go into East Timor out of hostility to the people of Indonesia but out of concern for the people of East Timor. We seek in the medium to longer term good and friendly relations with the people of Indonesia. We are together forever in this part of the world. And it is in the interest of both nations that we work our way through the period of inevitable tension that has followed our involvement in East Timor and work towards a closer relationship in the years ahead.
And I have no doubt that with skill and patience and commonsense on both sides that goal can be achieved. But it will be achieved against the background of we in Australia and the rest of the world always knowing that when it came to the moment of decision this country was prepared to take the lead in standing up for what was right.
So it has been a very important and a very momentous and in many ways a quite defining year for the Coalition Government. We have seen the retirement from the Deputy Prime Ministership of a well loved figure in Australian politics in Tim Fischer. But we have also seen the smooth accession to the leadership of John Anderson who, in my view, will go on to become one of the great leaders of the National Party of Australia. And he is displaying already as a close colleague of mine as my Deputy Prime Minister, as a person of immense character and trust and decency, a sympathetic but realistic understanding of the problems that are affecting rural people and I look forward to years of close work and co-operation with John as Deputy Prime Minister.
As we survey the last year and as we properly feel a sense of satisfaction and pride in what has been achieved, we must always apply a reality check to ourselves. We must always remember that we are answerable to an electorate of Australians and Australians are properly demanding of their elected representatives.
Australians are properly sceptical of any of their elected representatives who lose sight of the fact that they are answerable to them and they are not there by some kind of divine intervention. It is very important that we understand the volatile unpredictable political climate in which we live. I don’t think there would be a man or woman amongst you who was other than surprised at the outcome of the Victorian election. A Government that had done great things for Victoria and although Jeff and I had the occasional difference of emphasis, its fair to say that he was the best Premier of any state with which I dealt in the time that I was Prime Minister and he did a magnificent job for the people of Victoria. He inherited a smoking economic ruin, he restored the pride of the city of Melbourne he made Victoria’s economy strong again, he reduced its debt yet he lost the election.
Now, we have to ponder that. And it’s no good saying the electorate got it wrong, can I say to you, the electorate never gets it wrong, never, and when politicians start running around saying the electorate got it wrong, its time for them to give politics away. Absolutely. None of us should ever be so arrogant to imagine the electorate gets it wrong. We mightn’t like the conclusion they come to. I have had causes to reflect occasionally on their sanity myself.
But I want to tell you in the end there’s an iron law of Australian politics, and that is that as far as we are concerned the customer is always right.
What all that adds up to my friends is that the next Federal election is going to be a very hard one to win. And I give you all due notice now that you won’t be hearing any talks about long uninterrupted periods of Government from me. We live in a different world. We live in a world where every single election is different from the one before it and nothing like the one that follows it. This idea of some assured path to victory has never really been true in Australian politics. Menzies went within a whisker in 1961 of losing office. One seat, the seat of Gordon, won by Jim Killen, famously on Communist Party preferences, saved the Menzies Government in 1961. I don’t know weather that telegram was ever really sent, but it has become so much part of Liberal Party mythology I don’t want to spoil a good story.
But, we went within a whisker of losing, and that was 1961 and it took another 11 years for the Labor Party to win an election. 1961, then in 1963 we won by 20 seats, 1966 under Holt we had one of the greatest electoral victories ever and then two elections later in 1972 Whitlam finally won. And nothing is predictable, nothing follows the previous election. We went close in 1990 but we went further behind in 1993. What all that instructs us is that every single election is a huge challenge and can I say that just as no election is unloseble, can I say also that no matter what the gap may be at any given moment, and I look directly at you Kerry, can I say that no election, State or Federal, is unwinnable either.
Can I say while we are having this dose of realism, popularity ratings don’t mean a great deal either if you look at electoral results. In 1995 Wayne Goss almost lost office and was ultimately tipped out in the Mundingburra by-election coming off an approval rating of 70 per cent. Kennet’s approval rating in Victoria was 65 per cent. Bob Hawke entered the 1984 election as Mr 75 per cent and went backwards. I mean I am not suggesting I would like to enter the next election with an approval rating of 29 per cent, I don’t quite want to challenge the Gods to that extent, but all of this has a very serious message and that is you can never take anything for granted in politics. Once you do and once you start to believe some of the propaganda that people might dish out to you, you’re starting to lose touch with reality.
The next election is going to be a hard slog for us and we have to work very hard over the next couple of years to win the support and the respect, to retain and win and refresh the support and respect of the Australian people. We do that by understanding them. We do that by understanding that leadership is a combination of listening and courage. Leadership is not about ramming your view down the public’s throat on every issue, but leadership is about occasionally, after having listened to what people have had to say, getting out and arguing for something that you really deeply believe to be right.
Now the last thing I wanted to say something about, is an event that is happening next weekend. Now, can I say to you that I hope that the wallabies, do to beat South Africa tonight and go on to win the world cup next weekend. I am sure everybody will say yes to that.
I have not used any Liberal Party platform over the past year, I don’t think, to express a view about the principal referendum proposal next weekend. And I do not intend to depart from that this morning. We have taken a decision to allow a free vote and that was the right decision. I have a view; I respect the views of my colleagues that are different from mine. And it’s the character of our great party to do that.
But I do want to say something about the preamble. I can talk about that and I do want to urge you all to support that because I think it is a marvellous way in which whatever our views may be on the other issue - and you know my view and I know the views of others - whatever our views may be on that issue the preamble and an affirmative vote on the preamble is an opportunity for republicans and anti-republicans alike to express their support for a properly aspirational statement about the character of modern Australia and the future of our community.
It is importantly the first opportunity we have had in 100 years to put something positive and gracious and decent and generous into our Constitution about the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. And I can’t for the life of me understand why anybody would want to pass up the opportunity of doing that. So I do, with a lot of passion and commitment, I do urge you to support the preamble. Because it will represent a noble and decent statement of some fundamental Australian values. It cannot be pleaded in aid of a particular construction of our Constitution, it represents a basic statement of Australian values.
It is neutral as to whether we are a republic or a Constitutional Monarchy. It is silent on that subject as it properly should be to enable people who have different views on that issue to express their opinion.
So as well as wanting the Wallabies to win I would also like the preamble to win. But, my friends, can I finish by saying that the last year, like the previous two years, has been a period in which I have enjoyed tremendous support and loyalty from the people of the Liberal Party all around the country and not least here in New South Wales.
I thank the State President. I thank the State Director. I thank all of my federal parliamentary colleagues who have been very loyal, very understanding, very supportive, very willing to allow me to go out in front on issues where a leader should but equally willing to give their point of view and to sound their words of caution where they think the leader might not be listening as closely or as attentively as he should.
It’s been a great partnership, a great journey, and I look forward to working with you all in the years ahead. Thank you.
[ends]
&nbsp;
QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION AT&nbsp;NSW DIVISION STATE CONVENTION&nbsp;UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES, KENSINGTON 
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………..…………………….
QUESTIONER: 
[Significance of the free vote within the Liberal Party on the Republic referendum] 
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well Jim I follow a long standing rule that I always avoid being a commentator in a political contest where I am also an advocate on one side. As you may have noted in passing, I do have a view on the issues that you have addressed. I have put my case to that. We have a free vote in the Liberal Party for a couple of reasons. We have a free vote because we think that every so often that is the intelligent, mature, Australian way of handling things and I don’t think that that damages us at all. I think we look better because we are allowing a free vote.
The Labor Party by contrast look rigid and doctrinaire. I mean the reality is that many people who vote Labor habitually will vote no next weekend and they are unrepresented in the councils of the Australian Labor Party’s parliamentary ranks. But equally there will be people who habitually vote both Liberal and Labor who will vote in different ways next weekend. Its one of those issues where the only sensible thing to do is to have a free vote.
When we decided to do that - I announced that at the convention last, the Constitutional Convention at the beginning of last year - and can I say that I believe, despite what has been occasionally said in the papers by one or two commentators who are more interested in creating mischief than promoting objectivity, I think the debate amongst my parliamentary colleagues holding different views on this subject has been conducted with enormous dignity and civility and I don’t have any criticisms of either side. I understand and respect different views on this and I think the whole process is being handled with a degree of maturity and dignity.
Now, whether it proves this or that theory Jim depending on this or that result, I think I’ll wait until I have the result. I am always happy to be a commentator the day after. But I don’t know the result, I don’t know what it will be, nobody knows, all I know is that, whatever the result is it will be the right result, because the customers are always right with referenda as well as elections.
QUESTION:
[Levels of foreign investment in Australia]
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t think this country will ever be anywhere near 100 per cent foreign owned. I think the level of foreign ownership varies in different industries. Its very high in some, its quite high in sections of the media, in other sections its quite low. I have always, for better or worse I have always taken a fairly liberal view towards foreign investment. I have always taken the view that if you want to develop this country you do need on occasion to accept a high degree of foreign investment and foreign ownership in order to get something going. I know it’s an old story, but it’s a true story, we would never have had a motor car industry in the country but for foreign investors. The Chifley Government tried to interest local investors into starting a motor car manufacturing industry in this country in the late 40s but it never materialised. We would not have had some of the mining developments in this country without foreign investment.
On the other hand I don’t believe in a completely open slather. I think the foreign investment policy we have at the present time does strike a reasonable balance. I can remember when I was Treasurer I had a number of heated arguments with the then Queensland Government about the level of foreign and Australian ownership in some of the coal developments in Queensland. I can remember holding out very strongly for 50% Australian equity in some of those coal mines in in Queensland. I’m glad I did because it means there has been a greater Australian involvement. I guess my answer is probably to you a bit unsatisfactory in that I can’t put a figurer on it. I don’t think you can. I think the balance is fairly right, however, we do live in a global economy and we have a lot of outward foreign investors. We are one of the, I think either the second or third largest foreign investors in the United Kingdom now. We have an enormous investment in that country and we have increasing investments in other parts of the world, so this is a two way process.
I would hesitate to close down the shutters I really would, but what I think we do need to do is to make it more attractive for Australians to invest in ventures. One of the advantages of the capital gains tax changes is that we’ll be encouraging people to take more risks and to invest more readily in speculative activity and I think that is a good thing.
[ends]


Subjects: Tax reform, economy, interest rates, business taxation reform,
   social politics, Snowy River Scheme.
E&amp;OE....................
  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. There's been a few changes since 1981.
   For example, when I addressed the 20th annual meeting we still
   had a mechanism called rather obscenely a "crawling peg" fixed
   exchange rate. We didn't have a floating exchange rate. We still had a very
   high tariff wall around Australia. We hadn't dreamt of privatising any of
   our major government business enterprises and I just failed in my second
   attempt to persuade the Fraser Government to introduce a broad-based indirect
   tax. Now it's called a Goods and Services Tax. But, I guess, that little
   reminder is an illustration that some things do stay the same but with the
   opportunity of government you can bring about some other very significant
   changes.
  And one of the themes that wanted to develop tonight is the current strength
   of the Australian economy, and most particularly the fact that the Australian
   economy was able to stare down such a bad economic downturn in the Asian
   Pacific region, is really due to the cumulative benefit of major economic
   reforms undertaken over the last 15 or 20 years. And those major economic
   reforms include a number undertaken by the former Labor government. And
   I've never been unwilling to give that government credit where it is due,
   particularly in relation to some of the financial sector reforms and the
   changes relating to reducing the level of tariff protection which, for a
   Labor government, was a particularly difficult political undertaking - of
   course, I might quickly add, by way of the partisan commercial, aided and
   assisted at that time by a very high-minded Opposition that didn't try and
   block things in the Senate. Think what we might have done with tariffs,
   for example, given the emotive places they occupy.
  But, seriously, the last 20 years - and I hadn't intended to start on this
   but the Chairman introducing me provoked me to do so - over the last 20
   years we really have seen the undertaking of major economic reforms deliver
   a cumulative benefit. And it's really when you add all of those things together
   you find the explanation - financial sector reform, which gave us a very
   well regulated and prudentially supervised banking system, very transparent
   banking system, very strong financial sector reforms, the changes to the
   industrial relations system carried out after the Coalition was elected
   in 1996, the very, very major turnaround in the fiscal position that was
   engineered by the Coalition over the last three-and-a-half years. You add
   those things to all the other reforms and you do begin to understand how
   it was that the Australian economy was able to so successfully work its
   way through the impact of the Asian economic downturn.
  I wanted tonight to briefly sketch the political, social and economic equation
   as I see it in Australia at the present time. And you can never talk about
   the Australian economy in isolation from the social or political climate.
   And the climate in which we operate at the moment really has three very
   important characteristics. We've gone through a period in which we have
   undertaken as a government and as a community a lot of very significant
   economic reforms and embraced a lot of economic change. And the question
   naturally arises, particularly in the wake of the very surprising result
   of the election in Victoria, as to whether we have now reached a point of
   reform fatigue as to whether the community is really saying we've had enough
   reform, we want a period of economic and social consolidation. And the textbook
   theories are all very well but there is a human dimension to all of this
   and you have to pause and call a halt for a while. I don't believe, myself,
   that the community is quite saying that but I think the community is saying
   a number of things to us, in government, about how reform is handled. So
   the first part of the climate that you've got to factor in is the fact that
   we have gone through a very lengthy period of economic reform over the last
   10 or 15 years.
  The second very, very important element that we have to inject into any
   consideration of the Australian economic and political landscape - and this
   has a very big social dimension - is the clear evidence of a growing divide
   between rural and regional Australia and the relative affluence of the rest
   of the country. This is something that I've become very conscious of over
   the last 12 months. And it is real and unless it is addressed it is going
   to significantly scar the future of this country because it represents a
   challenge to something that we have always held very dear in Australia and
   that is the contribution that the bush makes to not only our wealth but
   also to our national psyche. And what we're witnessing at the moment is
   generically a very affluent country. And large sections of our society are
   displaying an unparalleled degree of affluence and economic contentment.
   And there are sections of the Australian community that have, to borrow
   Harold McMillan's famous phrase, "never had it so good". And the
   rest of the community is very aware of it. And I think we all know that
   disadvantage, or the sense of disadvantage, is often a relative thing. And
   if you have areas of the country which are feeling left behind or left out
   at a time of economic plenty they feel the disadvantage and the deprivation
   all the more keenly and, indeed, more keenly than if the country were in
   a state of economic recession.
  But I think we do have a major challenge on our hands with the community
   to come to grips with this, to recognise that there is in the bush or rural
   and regional Australia, however you collectively describe it, a sense of
   falling behind, of having been left out. And there's no easy answer to that
   because as you all know so many of the problems of rural Australia are the
   product of almost irreversible forces such as, or uncontrollable rather
   than irreversible forces, such as a decline in commodity prices and the
   long-term disappearance of demand for particular products. In many ways
   handling this issue and ensuring that we don't lose that part of our national
   psyche represented by rural Australia and that we make the people of that
   part of rural Australia feel included and part of the Australian community
   is about as big a challenge a government has got at a state or federal level
   anywhere in Australia.
  The third element that we have to contend with, and we as politicians can
   never ignore it, and that is that every once in a while, of course, you
   try and get elected and, therefore, you have to pay some regard to what
   I call the political state as well as the social and the economic state.
   And you have to constantly balance the two sort of competing imperatives.
   On the one hand, you are elected to government to do good things and to
   bring about beneficial economic reforms but, of course, if you don't hold
   government you have no capacity to do anything at all and you always have
   to try and balance those two. I frequently say to my colleagues in the Parliamentary
   Liberal Party that it's very important that we maintain not only the reform
   faith but also the political faith. And that means being zealous but not
   too zealous. I encapsulate it by saying that there's not much point in being
   120 percent pure in Opposition. It's probably better to be about 90 percent
   pure in government. So there is a balance to be struck.
  But, of course, there's another change that's occurred in Australian politics
   over the last 10 years quite markedly and it's occurred around the world
   but it's quite profound in Australia and that is the process of what I call
   de-tribalisation of Australian politics. People are no longer rusted on
   to one or other side of politics to the extent they were a generation ago.
   When I was learning my political craft in the Liberal Party in the 1960s
   I operated on, it sounds vaguely redolent of the bygone economic management
   age, I operated on a 40-40-20 rule - and 40 percent voted Liberal, 40 percent
   Labor and 20 percent were in the middle. I think the modern manifestation
   of that is a 30-30-40 rule where you have 30 percent Labor, 30 percent Liberal
   and perhaps 40 percent moving around in the middle. People react counter-intuitively
   now to a lot of issues and I think it's one of the things that political
   parties have got to come to terms with.
  There are plenty of examples we can find in recent years of people voting
   against the traditional patterns. Now, this is not absolute. It is still
   possible to divine and discern certain straight lines as far as political
   allegiances are concerned but they are a lot more mixed now and they're
   a lot less predictable. And people don't feel as ideologically committed.
   The Cold War ended 10 years ago and I often heard people, when I grew up,
   say, well look, I think the government - at that particular time it was
   a Liberal government - is doing a terrible job but I can't possibly vote
   Labor. And, equally, I would hear Labor people saying the reverse of the
   Liberal Party in respect of an incumbent Labor government. Now, that sort
   of permanent zealous commitment is not quite as frequent anymore.
  So all of these things mean that we are operating in a different political
   climate than what we were a few years ago. We're operating in a climate
   where there's been major economic reform and the public feels that it's
   done its bit to contribute towards that. We have this particular problem
   in Australia, although I suspect it's not confined to Australia, of coping
   with rural and regional or non-metropolitan decline and the social and economic
   and political challenge of that. And, finally of course, as practising politicians
   and this is of less concern to you as it is to me, we have to cope with
   a more volatile and a less predictable political climate.
  Now, we remain very committed to a reform agenda. I like to think that the
   last three-and-a-half years have been characterised by some quite fundamental
   economic reforms. And if we flick through them I think labour market reform
   has been more far-reaching than it's been given credit for and it's one
   of the reasons why we have a far better productivity performance than we've
   had for a long time. And I think the changes in the power balance in the
   industrial relations arena, I think to a more level playing field, have
   been very beneficial. They have not been attended by the degree of industrial
   disputation that people predicted would occur. And, overall, I think we've
   got a lot to be pleased about in that area.
  We have, of course, achieved a major fiscal turnaround and that's made a
   contribution, although it's certainly not the only reason why we have, despite
   the increases of recent days, the lowest interest rate structure in about
   three decades, a very low rate of inflation, a still pretty strong business
   outlook, an employment growth factor over the last couple of years, particularly
   the last six months, which has been the best for a long time and, pleasingly,
   a significant reduction in the level of youth unemployment, although it
   still remains unacceptably high and we still have quite a distance to go
   on the unemployment front. And, of course, we have embraced, after a lot
   of argy bargy, politically and legislatively, we've embraced a major change
   to our taxation system, one that we sort of dreamt of for a long time and
   attempted by a number of people on both sides of politics and finally realised
   when we won the election last year. It didn't survive in its pristine form.
   We got about 85 percent of it. It would have been better if we'd got the
   100 percent but we're realists. Once Senator Harradine said, I can't or
   I cannot or I won't - I forget exactly what the precise expression was but
   it meant no - so we realised we had to negotiate with the Australian Democrats
   and that's another new element.
  The public, incidentally, is not really interested in long, philosophical
   dissertations from one or other side of politics as to why the other side
   should unilaterally capitulate and give in and let your legislation go through
   the Senate. I mean, we might think they're very interesting things and we
   might dine out at Liberal or Labor Party gatherings depending on who the
   politician is about how terrible and outrageous and what an absolute assault
   on democracy it is for the Senate to obstruct this fine piece of legislation.
   But, in the end, I have an uncomfortable feeling that what the public is
   saying is very simply, you're the Government, you're the Prime Minister,
   you get it fixed, you get it through, don't bore me with all the rhetorical
   debates. And I certainly found as I went around Australia during the debate
   in relation to native title and a number of other issues that that was certainly
   the case. So all government is something of a learning curve no matter how
   long you've been in and that's something that I've certainly learnt over
   the last three-and-a-half years, that the public is interested in outcomes.
   And may I say the younger generation in Australia is particularly interested
   in outcomes as far as their politicians are concerned and far less in ideology
   or prejudice or protesting or fighting long resolved rhetorical battles.
  So you have to work with political minorities, you have to work with independents,
   they're a feature of the political landscape. You might wish that you had
   absolute majorities in every parliament but that is not the case. We do
   remain very committed to a reform agenda. But I think that reform agenda
   has to be carried forward having regard to the sort of constraints and the
   sort of climate in which governments, and particularly the national Government,
   operate at the present time.
  Right at the moment we are negotiating with the Labor Party and the Democrats
   regarding the business tax reform package. And I am very hopeful that we
   will get that package through largely, perhaps not totally, but largely
   unamended. And I am cautiously optimistic that that will turn out to be
   the case. The indications from both the Democrats and the Opposition are
   that they are not interested in a very long drawn out Senate inquiry process
   of the type that applied in relation to the Goods and Services Tax.
  And if we can bed those business taxation changes down, and if we can successfully
   handle and negotiate and work our way through the implementation process
   so far as the Goods and Services Tax is concerned, and that represents a
   very, very important challenge for us, then we will certainly have a great
   deal on our plate over the next 12 months.
  But in saying that we are conscious of the sort of climate in which reform
   must take place I wouldn't want anybody to imagine that I subscribe to the
   reform fatigue theory of politics nor indeed that we have lost our commitment
   to economic reform. It is just important that we and our constituencies
   and the broader Australian community understand the considerations that
   we must take into account in advocating and implementing reform.
  I've had the view for a very long time that the Australian public will accept
   fundamental change and reform in the economic area if you can satisfy the
   public on two counts. The first is that you have to persuade them that the
   reform is good for Australia. I have to say with the benefit of hindsight
   and disclosing the thoughts of a political advocate as well as an economic
   reformer that the argument that in the end I think mattered more in the
   last federal election campaign about the Goods and Services Tax was the
   argument that overall it would probably be beneficial for the whole country.
   Individuals may have thought well, it won't be particularly good for me
   and there may well be people in this room who feel that individually those
   changes were not particularly beneficial but collectively they felt that
   those reforms would be good for Australia. Because there is a sense of altruism
   within the broad community and there is a belief that the national benefit
   in the end is something worth supporting and something worth promoting.
  And the second condition that you have got to fulfil is that you have got
   to satisfy people that the reform you are proposing is fundamentally fair
   to the average Australian. If you fail either of those tests, if a reform
   fails the national interest test or if it fails the fairness test then it's
   not going to get, in my view, out of the barrier let alone past the winning
   post. So I do think that they are the two things and if you look at all
   of the major reforms that in the end have succeed in this country you can
   probably judge them against those two criteria.
  Now, there are a number of areas of not only the Australian economy but
   a number of areas of the Australian community where further reform is necessary.
   One of the things that we are going to focus on at our national convention
   of the Liberal Party in Melbourne next year is social policy. Having focussed
   an enormous amount over the last several years on economic change and economic
   reform we believe that some of the fundamental directions of social policy
   in this country deserve a more serious examination at a national political
   level.
  Now, this examination will take place against the background of our commitment
   to the maintenance of a social security safety net, our commitment to the
   principles of mutual obligation that have underpinned our embracing of Work
   For The Dole and a number of other policies in the welfare area. But consistent
   with those commitments, I think the time has come for a more serious examination
   of social policy. The implications of an ageing population, although the
   population I hasten to add is not ageing at quite the rate it is in a number
   of other countries. And given that some of the reforms of earlier years
   have given us a capacity to deal with that ageing process rather better
   than many other countries.
  So, ladies and gentlemen, that represents, as best I can put it to you as
   Prime Minister, to come to the end of 1999 and the end of this century and
   this millennium, an overview of the circumstances in which Government is
   operating at the present time. As I said at the beginning of my remarks,
   you cannot ignore, when you are looking at economic policy, you cannot ignore
   either the social dimension or the political dimension. You cannot ignore
   the national culture.
  I often hear people who might loosely be described as having strongly, economically
   liberal or economically rationalist views argue to me that this or that
   is how it is done in the United States. Now, I always say that I note that
   with a great deal of interest and there are many things about the United
   States, or indeed other countries, that are flung in my face as adopting
   the right model or the right approach. And I try to remind them that there
   is a national culture in this country which requires that certain things
   be done differently.
  We, in my view, have often found the right balance between what you might
   loosely call the excessive involvement of government or the fussing involvement
   of governments in many European countries. And the belief in some parts
   of the United States is virtually no role at all for government. And I think
   Australia has always managed to put itself fairly sensibly in the middle.
  When I am asked the question, what do I think the role of government is
   in Australia, I think the role of government in Australia is a limited role
   but nonetheless a strategic role. And there will always be certain things
   that government has to involve itself in.
  And I had a very powerful reminder of that several weeks ago when I spent
   the whole weekend celebrating, along with the men and women who had worked
   on it, the 50th anniversary of the commencement of the Snowy
   River Scheme in this country. And as a 10 year old school boy at Earlwood
   Public School here in Sydney I can still remember in October of 1949 one
   of my Labor predecessors, Ben Chifley, announcing the commencement of the
   Snowy River Scheme. And that particular scheme for that generation of Australians
   and particularly the generation of Australians who made this country their
   home from war torn Europe had an impact on the national psyche and the way
   we thought of ourselves and the role of government in the Australian community
   that has never left us.
  Now, I think the role of government has to be limited but it nonetheless
   has to be strategic. And in a way, if you look back over the last 30 years
   and you examine political debate and you listen to political and economic
   discourse you can see as always a pattern of the pendulum swinging from
   one side to the other. We did go through a period both here and around the
   world where people imagined that every single problem could be solved by
   government intervention and if it was a federation by federal government
   intervention. It manifested itself in the United States with Lyndon Johnson's
   great society, as he called it, where you tried to solve all the social
   problems by federal government intervention. It manifested itself here with
   the, I think, the excesses of the Whitlam years where there was not only
   a massive ramping up of federal government expenditure but an unnecessary
   excursion of federal governments into areas that belonged to state and local
   government.
  And then in a way in the 1980's I think perhaps in some parts of the world
   the pendulum swung back perhaps in a number of areas and perhaps a little
   too far, although I think the changes implemented in Britain and the United
   States by the Thatcher and Reagan governments not only provided a great
   model for the rest of the world but also it left lasting benefits in those
   two societies.
  I think as we've got into the 1990s and we've shed ourselves of the influence
   of some of the ideological offshoots of the Cold War, I think we now have
   a more balanced and sensible approach to the role of the individual, the
   role of business and the role of the States. We don't want the State doing
   things that businesses can do better. We don't want, in my view, the Government
   running business enterprises that are better run by private enterprises.
   We don't want the Government dictating the entirety of the education system.
   We don't want the Government excessively intruding into our lives. But we
   do see a role for Government beyond just setting a macroeconomic climate
   we also see a role for Government in areas such as infrastructure provision
   and some of the other strategic responsibilities. And I think we have therefore
   reached a more balanced attitude towards the respective roles of Government
   and individuals and businesses within the Australian community.
  Can I finish by saying, ladies and gentlemen, that I am, of course, filled
   with an enormous amount of optimism and hope and enthusiasm about the state
   of the Australian economy. It is better now than I have experienced at any
   time in the 25 years that I have been in politics. I think the strength
   of the Australian economy now is more soundly based than what is was in
   the late 1960s because many of the artificial protectors and stabilisers
   that existed in the 1960s were as the adjectives suggest they were artificial
   and they had to be at some stage removed.
  We are living more realistically now than what we were 35 years ago. We
   are more capable of responding to a global economic climate than we were
   then. We, I think, are enjoying the benefits of the various contributions
   that have been made to our society from the combination of our western inheritance,
   our Asian geography and our North American affiliations. And the contribution
   being made by those three influences have, I think, never been more evident
   and never been more positively available to the Australian community.
  So I do conclude my remarks on an incredibly optimistic and hopeful note.
   We still have reform challenges ahead of us. We have, as I have tried to
   outline in my remarks, a number of internal, social and economic challenges
   particularly the divide between what might loosely be called those in rural
   Australia who are falling behind and the rest of the Australian community.
   And we do have a social, national, even patriotic, obligation, if I can
   be allowed to use that word, of gathering up those people because they are
   not only part of our society and part of us but they are part of how we
   think of ourselves.
  And the sort of Australia that I grew up in is one that always saw rural
   and Australia in the bush as being an integral part of the Australian identity.
   And to lose it would be to lose part of ourselves and we have a very strong
   obligation to do something about it. And it will be one of the priorities
   of Government, difficult though it is, over the months and the years ahead.
  But thank you for having me here tonight. I'll be very happy after the main
   course to try and answer your questions. Thanks a lot.
  [ends]
  E&amp;OE..................
  [tape starts]
  QUESTION:
  ..spend enough on those people in Australia who can't help themselves. I
   also believe ??? that we spend far too much on those people who could but
   won't help themselves. Your comments please.
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well I broadly agree with that and I would hope that our policy of mutual
   obligation, best expressed in work for the dole, is an attempt to capture
   the tension between those two things. It's interesting how it's been accepted
   when, and we're talking about twenty years ago a lot tonight, but it was
   interesting when as a member of the former Coalition Government back in
   the late 1970s early 80s, the idea of work for the dole was raised and the
   stock response then of our advisers was oh you can't do that. It will be
   in breach of some Geneva convention. And anyway, the unions in any event,
   the unions won't wear it and it's absolutely unacceptable to the Australian
   community. Now that's interesting how that's changed. I think people in
   Australia do accept that if people are without means of support we have
   a moral obligation to help them. But they have an obligation, a civic obligation
   if they're able to do so to give something in return for that help. I think
   we've actually established that principle quite well in this country and  


E&amp;OE...................
  Good evening. Although we live in a time of general economic plenty, there
   are some areas of our country that are missing out. And because we are doing
   well nationally the sense of loss and alienation in those areas is all the
   greater. Many people in rural and regional areas feel this particularly
   keenly when local services close and move away.
  That is why we promised at the last election to do something tangible about
   bringing services back to the bush. One of our key election promises was
   to support the establishment of up to 500 rural transaction centres around
   Australia to provide a range of services that have disappeared from many
   small regional communities.
  By opening rural transaction centres we are sending a clear message to rural
   and regional Australia that we are determined to work with you to bring
   services back to the bush. Those services could include banking, Medicare
   Easyclaim and Centrelink as well as training and business support. This
   will ensure that many more people in country areas have access to the services
   that those of us in the city take for granted. When I recently opened the
   first of these 500 centres in Eugowra, I paid tribute to the local community
   who had worked to bring this about.
  This policy is an example of what I call the social coalition in action.
   We pool the financial resources of the government and the expertise and
   local knowledge of communities and businesses in a creative partnership
   which ensures that the final outcome is better than what any one group acting
   alone could have achieved.
  An important feature of this $70 million programme is that it empowers each
   community to select the services it needs and role of the Government is
   to and respond and listen. Goodnight.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  PRIME MINISTER:
  On behalf of the Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia, I am
   pleased to bestow upon Mr Nelson Mandela an Honour in the Companionship
   of the Order of Australia.
  DAVID CONNOLLY:
  Prime Minister I present to you Mr Nelson Mandela who has been appointed
   an Honorary Companion in the General Division of the Order of Australia
   for Services to Australian-South African relations and for his outstanding
   leadership in bringing multi-racial democracy to South Africa.
  [Prime Minister bestows insignia upon Mr Mandela]
  PRIME MINISTER:
  You get two politicians in the same room and they compete for who speaks
   first!
  Mr Nelson Mandela; David Connolly, the Australian High Commissioner in South
   Africa; Mrs Connolly; Ministers of the South African Government; Mrs Helen
   Suzman, a former very distinguished member of the South African Parliament;
   ladies and gentleman.
  This is a very special and precious ceremony for many Australians and many
   South Africans. Many exaggerated words are used about men and women and
   their contribution to the world and their contribution to the relief of
   human suffering. But the words of praise that have been uttered by so many
   in relation to Nelson Mandela are, in every sense, truly justified. He is
   in every sense of the word a man of this century.
  He is a person whose moral and physical courage inspired a nation. He is
   a person whose leadership brought together people who it was never conceived
   could work together in peace and love and in harmony.
  For somebody such as myself and the Australians present who have never known
   anything other than the proposition that all people are born equal, and
   that equal opportunity is available to all, because that has been the experience
   of our homeland, it is beyond understanding for us how a person who suffered
   as much as did Mr Mandela, has nonetheless displayed such incredible grace
   and dignity and moral leadership in his responsibilities. And in the process
   has set an example to the world.
  His deeds are well known. The contribution he has made to bringing about
   a multi-racial, democratic South Africa is acclaimed around the world. His
   moral example is without peer in our generation, and importantly for us
   today, because this is an Australian South African celebration, it is appropriate
   to acknowledge the links between our two countries. And I would like on
   this occasion to pay tribute to two of my predecessors, Malcolm Fraser and
   Bob Hawke, from opposite sides of the political divide within Australia,
   that both of them played a determined role in bringing about change in South
   Africa. And both of them on this occasion would like, I know, me to speak
   on their behalf to express their respect and admiration to Nelson Mandela
   and for what he represents. He has done great things for mankind. He has
   done great things for South Africa.
  What he has achieved since his release from detention not so long ago is
   quite remarkable. And I have had the opportunity on this, my first visit
   to this beautiful country, to spend some time with his successor, Thabo
   Mbeki at the Commonwealth Conference and to marvel at the progress that
   has been made in building the new South Africa, and marvel at the way in
   which so many daunting challenges have been overcome.
  There are many things about Nelson Mandela's life that have touched different
   people in different ways. And as is so often the case in our human experience,
   it is the symbolic gestures at the right time and in the right place with
   the right sense of occasion that really leave an indelible impression upon
   us. And I think many of us will remember that remarkable symbolic gesture
   by Nelson Mandela in donning that number six jersey belonging to Francois
   Pienaar after South Africa had won the World Cup in rugby only four years
   ago. It touched the heart of many people who had been of another and different
   political view from Mr Mandela and it was truly a symbolic gesture of a
   truly uniting national leader.
  I am especially grateful that Mr Mandela has allowed his name to be leant
   to the fellowships, the awards which are given to gifted young South African
   students and academics and they will henceforth be known as the Mandela
   Awards.
  Although he is no longer President, he has continued to play a very active
   role in bringing his great moral influence to bear in world affairs. And
   I am especially grateful for what he did in his discussions with Xanana
   Gusmao, the East Timorese leader and also the strenuous efforts that he
   undertook to secure the release of Peter Wallace and Steve Pratt, the two
   Australian CARE workers who were so unjustly imprisoned in Belgrade.
  So to you Mr Mandela you are a great man of this century. You are a person
   whose moral leadership, your moral depth, your political skill, your compassion,
   your capacity for forgiveness and reconciliation have given to the world
   an example that I don't think in our lifetime we will see again. So it is
   a particular privilege for the Government and the people of Australia that
   you have been pleased to accept the honorary award as a Companion of the
   Order of Australia. It is the highest award in the Order of Australia and
   I can think of no more fitting citizen of the world to receive that award
   than Nelson Mandela. I thank you for what you have done for your country
   and for your example to all of mankind. Thank you.
  MR NELSON MANDELA:
  Prime Minister Howard, I find it very difficult to address you in that manner.
   I prefer the usual way in which I speak to you to say John, but I don't
   know whether the Australians will forgive me if I become so familiar to
   you.
  I remember that shortly after I had been released from prison, I visited
   Australia. A program was arranged for me and I was very happy indeed to
   look at it. As I was carrying out this program I received a delegation from
   the aborigines and they asked me "who gave you the right to come here?"
   I said, well, I was invited you know by the Government. And they said "well
   you know this is our country." I said well, I'm sure it is - your country
   as well. And they say "now you must come and visit us in our area." I had
   to negotiate because they were very angry and I went to see them. And I
   said to them that I am very sorry that I came there without permission but
   at the same time I would like to say to that we have been arguing about
   these questions in South Africa, but what we decided to do was to stop the
   argument and to go to our enemies at the time and say let's sit down and
   talk. And I said you make my task easy if you go to the Government and talk
   to them and arrange what should happen when you invite somebody like me
   to you country.
  Now when I was told about this award, I thought of my younger days when
   I was running around the hills of my village. At that time we thought that
   Australia was another name for Sir Don Bradman. And we didn't know Australia
   at all. Later of course we came to know about eminent citizens of Australia
   like Sir Malcolm Fraser and Bob Hawke, as John has said, and now of course,
   the man who cracks the whip is here.
  Now you have referred to the Rugby World Cup in 1995. I want to start there,
   because I want to show that we are equal. If you remember the very first
   match was between South Africa and Australia and the Australians were the
   reigning champions at the time. And I went to see our boys at Silver Mine
   in Cape Town where they were stationed. And I said to our captain, Francois
   Pienaar that the team that wins this match will go right through to the
   final. And I said that the entire South Africa is behind you and that we
   expect you to take that honour. And I was very happy indeed that we were
   able to win, although I almost collapsed because of tension. Because I have
   never seen a game against the All Blacks where there were no tries. And
   where it was all penalties. And I think that it was when I was about to
   collapse, that Stransky had a drop goal and that made the day for us.
  But when Sir Malcolm Fraser asked me to intervene in Yugoslavia and get
   your two journalists released, I was very much embarrassed because hardly
   two weeks before that President Milosevic had asked me to come and pay a
   state visit and asked me to condemn the strikes by NATO. I didn't know that
   Sir Malcolm Fraser would ask me to undertake this type of mission. I wasn't
   very polite to President Milosevic because I indicated that he was responsible
   for what was happening there and I wouldn't come. Now I had to come back
   to him and say please can you release those two? It was very difficult.
   I suspect that had not her Majesty the Queen and Pope John Paul not worked
   with me, I would not have succeeded, and perhaps the greater thanks, more
   thanks should be addressed to them and not myself. I still played a very
   small role.
  Now it is always difficult to find the right words on occasions of this
   nature, but relations between Australia and South Africa can only be described
   by words intimate, and there is a wide variety of ties between us which
   I will not go into. But during the war, the Second World War, I had decided
   that I would never join. But the only occasion when I had doubts whether
   I was doing the right thing or not was when the Australian troops passed
   though Cape Town. Their behaviour, because this is the past, because at
   the time we were so hostile to the South African army, that the very thought
   of participating in a war where South Africa was involved was revolting.
   But when we saw the Australian soldiers, the way they condemned racism and
   the way they moved amongst us and visited some of our schools, made me feel
   that I ought to be next to these men when fighting fascism. But those days
   are long passed, but I still cherish the memories of the contact with Australian
   soldiers and I am very grateful indeed, John, for this honour.
  There are many men here and women here who, when I was President, when they
   met me or passed me by they would bow. When the days were close for me to
   step down, they would hardly look at me. It is worse now, and I hope that
   by giving me this honour, they will give me some amount of respect. And
   thank you very much for the honour. It means a great deal not only to me
   and my family, but to the entire South Africa because it is not one individual
   who is responsible for the praise that you have showered on one. We are
   basically a team, collective leadership and there is hardly anything any
   one of us does that has not been discussed before, very thoroughly by the
   leadership of the organisation and an individual is merely there to articulate.
   So the men and women that you should thank are sitting down there. They
   have made even a greater contribution than myself, but I hope that they'll
   allow me to keep this medal on their behalf. Thank you very much.
   PRIME MINISTER:
  We'll now have a toast....All right, well everybody has got to have a drink.
  MR MANDELA:
  Well, you know I don't drink champagne, I don't drink wine. The only thing
   I drink is rum.
  MR CONNOLLY:
  Ladies and gentlemen will you please be upstanding and join us in drinking
   a toast.
  PRIME MINISTER:
  I would like all to join in drinking to the health of a great man, Mr Nelson
   Mandela. Nelson Mandela.
  MR MANDELA:
  May I respond, by asking you to raise your glasses to a really great man,
   John Howard, the Prime Minister of Australia.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  Well thank you very much Major Watters. To Garth Popple, to Mr Mick Palmer,
   the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, to Mr Hyde, the Commissioner
   of the police service in South Australia, other members of the council,
   ladies and gentlemen.
  As you know I have a very strong personal interest in and commitment to
   the cause of reducing drug dependence in our community. And the Tough on
   Drugs strategy is designed in different ways to respond to the many challenges
   of the terrible scourge of drug abuse in Australian society.
  I'm often asked what are the most lasting memories I have of places and
   people and events. In the time that I've been Prime Minister, and indeed
   the time that I've been in public life I can honestly say that I had one
   of those experiences just before the formal part of this meeting started
   when I had the opportunity to talk directly to the residents of this facility
   here, for them to tell me the change that being here had meant to them and
   the way in which it had given them a sense of hope about the future and
   a capacity to control their lives.
  And it did make a great impression on me. Here are ordinary men and women,
   just as easily your sons and daughters, and my sons and daughters as anybody
   else's sons and daughters. Many of them had been addicted for a long time.
   They'd all been through very difficult experiences. What was very encouraging
   to me and very uplifting was they talked about their experiences very freely
   and openly. Perhaps they recognised my face but none of them had met me
   before. And I thought, gee, if you could have facilities like this all around
   Australia it would be of enormous help. And a facility like this expresses
   in a way the best possible community response. It's saying to the people
   who've got a problem you've got to help yourself. You can't expect somebody
   else to solve your problem. On the other hand we are willing to provide
   you with a facility to try and help you and to try and put your life together
   and re-enter the community and play a very constructive role.
  I guess if there's one thing about the whole debate on drugs that annoys
   me more than anything else it is the obsessive preoccupation of sections
   of the media on those issues where there's some disagreement about how to
   tackle the problem. There's always going to be debate in a democratic society
   about whether you have this or that approach. Can I say to you that as to
   about 90 to 95% of the whole debate everybody agrees. I mean everybody agrees
   that we have to adequately resource our police in order to try and catch
   the drug pushers and make sure they go to gaol for a very long period of
   time and nobody has any argument about that. I haven't heard one person
   say you've got to go easy on drug pushers or drug barons. Everybody knows
   that. And we are putting more resources
  into that effort.
  And let me praise the efforts of the police around Australia. It's not an
   easy job. They're at the sharp end both of the criminal activity and also
   sadly of the death and personal misery that comes about as the result of
   drug abuse. Of course you've got to do that.
  And of course you've got to educate young people about the dangers of drug
   taking. You've got to encourage young people not to start taking drugs.
   You've got to encourage young people at the very beginning about how dangerous
   it is to even experiment with drugs. There's a lot of peer group pressure
   for them to do otherwise but you've got to put resources into that. And
   you also have got to have resources to help people when they want to kick
   their drug habit and that in a sense is the third arm of the approach. You've
   got law enforcement, you've got education and you've got helping people
   who've got a problem. And those three things underpin our Tough on Drugs
   approach, and we've allocated about $500 million to that program during
   the last couple of years. And it does represent a huge investment by the
   Federal Government in the campaign against drugs.
But I'm delighted to be able to announce today that we have reached agreement
   with State governments for a national approach based on the concept of diversion.
   And what the concept of diversion very simply says is that if you are caught
   on a minor possession offence, or you're a first offender, what basically
   you are told is look you've got a choice. You can go into the criminal justice
   system. Get caught up with court procedures and the possibility of a penalty,
   fine, and then perhaps ultimately gaol. Now that's one alternative and you
   can go down that path if you want to. The other alternative is that if you're
   prepared to undertake some kind of treatment or rehabilitation course then
   you will spared the rigours of the criminal justice system.
  Now I think that is a policy that has not only wide support in the Australian
   community, but it's a policy that makes an enormous amount of sense. And
   it's a policy that in a way encapsulates the principle that I often ennunciate
   on behalf of the Government, and that is the principle of mutual obligation.
   And that is that if people need some help and deserve help than we have
   a moral obligation as a decent community to offer them that help. But they've
   got to something in return if they're able to do so, and what we're saying
   to people is you've got a drug problem we'll provide you with rehabilitation
   and treatment facilities. But you've got to be willing to undertake that
   treatment and the alternative is if you don't you run the risk of being
   caught up in the criminal justice system. Now I think that is a good, fair
   Australian principle. I think it's a commonsense Australian principle and
   I think every Australian I've confronted with that and explained it in that
   way they've said yes that is a very intelligent way of handling it.
  Now what I'm really announcing today is that we have reached a framework
   agreement with all of the States and I've had great cooperation across the
   political divide. This is not a party political issue. I will sit down and
   sign an agreement and negotiate an understanding with a Labor Premier of
   New South Wales or Queensland or Victoria, as readily as I will with a Liberal
   Premier of South Australia or Western Australia. This is an issue that must
   be free of party politics and I'm happy to work with ministers and premiers
   of any political complexion. And I know that Mr Carr for example here in
   New South Wales, and Mr Beattie of Queensland share just about all of the
   views. We might have some differences of emphasis in a few areas but on
   most of the issues our views are very similar, because as human beings we're
   distressed at the human misery that's involved. We know people who have
   lost loved ones. None of us in public life can ever forget the experience
   of sitting down with a parent and going through the details of the loss
   and deprivation they suffer when they lose a child to a drug overdose or
   some other event that is influenced by drug abuse.
  So I am delighted to announce today that we have reached that framework
   agreement. We've already had a very detailed proposal put to us by New South
   Wales and I expect to conclude an agreement on the detailed operation of
   the scheme with the New South Wales Government very very shortly. Now this
   is something that pleases me no end because it is the next stage of the
   agreement that I reached when all of us met in Canberra in April. And we
   announced a further commitment of money in cooperation with the states.
   We, of course, will provide the money for the diversionary programme, they
   will provide the supporting facilities, that is the police services, and
   many of the rehabilitation facilities the states have an involvement in.
   But it is a very comprehensive approach and the important thing that I am
   announcing today is that we have been able to set aside political differences,
   we have been able to reach an overall framework agreement. And over the
   next few months we will sign individual agreements with the different states
   and the process will then begin.
  It will open up another new approach, I am not saying that this is going
   to solve the problem. The last thing anybody in a position of responsibility
   on the drug issue should ever do is ever dream of declaring victory. But
   the other thing you should ever do is ever dream of admitting defeat. It
   is tremendously important that we persevere. I have learnt in life the most
   important capacity that any nation, or any group of people can have is perseverance
   because you are always in dealing with a difficult problem, you are always
   going to go through moments of absolute exasperation and desperation. I
   would make this same appeal to the media, please by all means report things
   objectively as you see fit, but also understand that there are some wonderfully
   successful stories in the fight against drugs. And it is important that
   those stories be reported as well as the stories and the pictures of death
   and addiction and the impression being created that all is hopeless and
   nothing can be done and everybody's given up the fight.
  Wherever I go in Australia, I don't find the police have given up the fight,
   I don't find that people in the great volunteer organisations have given
   up the fight, I don't find that parents who have lost children through drugs
   have given up the fight, in fact they are wanting to give something back
   and perhaps prevent the heartache that they have experienced from being
   experienced by other Australian parents.
  So ladies and gentleman, I do feel a deep personal commitment to this issue.
   There is nothing that horrifies me more as a parent or as an Australian,
   let alone as Prime Minister, than the notion and the concept that drug addiction
   in this country can get out of control. And the experience, half an hour
   ago, of talking to some young men and women who've had a problem and are
   now seeing a way out of it, who have found a vehicle to do so and to hear
   them talk optimistically about what they are going to do with their lives,
   that is about as rewarding as it can get, as far as I am concerned, in this
   position. That is far more important to me than the latest implicit price
   deflator or whatever description that you want to give to some kind of economic
   statistic. But of course, the stronger our economy is the greater capacity
   we have to assist those areas of our community that need help.
  I often talk about the notion of a social coalition. A social coalition
   is a word I, or a description I use to outline a reality, that is that when
   we have got a problem, the Government can't do everything to solve it, although
   it can do a lot, because the government is in command of the nation's resources
   and can divert them in a special direction. Individuals acting alone can't
   solve the problem either, although they have to realise that they have got
   a problem, to begin to find a solution. The business community is often
   willing to help, it can have resources but perhaps not the expertise. And
   the great welfare organisations, and many of them are represented here today,
   the large, like the Salvation Army, the smaller, such as We Help Ourselves,
   all of them playing a magnificent role.
  But none of those groups acting alone can do it. But if they work together,
   if they pool their resources, if you bring about a social coalition, and
   this is a social coalition, you have got the Government, you've got the
   community organisations, you've got the individual commitment and you have
   also got the sympathy and the help of many in the business community. And
   increasingly I see our country in a particular and a special Australian
   way, solving our problems, tackling our challenges by a coalition of all
   of those elements in society.
  So ladies and gentlemen, I want to declare open, five months after it commenced
   it's magnificent work, but nonetheless officially, this magnificent We Help
   Ourselves Centre, which provides for a methadone to abstinence transition
   programme. If the experiences relayed to me, by the men and women to whom
   I spoke, they in such an optimistic way, and me in listening in an admiring
   way, half an hour ago, if this is a sample of what the social coalition
   can do here in Lidcombe, in Sydney, and I am sure it can be duplicated all
   around Australia. It fills me with an enormous sense of hope.
  And what also fills me with a great sense of hope is that we are making
   progress on the diversion approach. We are offering people what will be
   widely regarded as a realistic choice. We will help you break your drug
   habit, provided you're prepared to undertake the treatment and the rehabilitation.
   But if you are not, you run the risk of being caught up in the criminal
   justice system. I think that is a nice balance, it reminds people of the
   consequences but it does it in a non-threatening and I think realistic way.
  Can I again, can I thank Brian Watters, the Chairman of the Drug Council,
   who is doing a magnificent job as spokesman for the Council. He has got
   a vigorous Council and I acknowledge the presence today of other members
   of the Council. They represent a variety of views from a variety of perspectives.
   It doesn't really matter, what is important is that their collective heart
   is in the right place and they are all heading in the right direction and
   that is to try and fight and reduce and in some parts of the country eliminate
   the scourge of drugs. It is a noble cause, as we come to the end of this
   Century and we look upon the Third Millennium, it's become almost a clich
   to talk about the Millennium atmosphere and what do we hope for the next
   Millennium? I am sure greater progress in fighting the scourge of drugs
   in Australia will be something which would spring readily to mind to most
   of the people in this audience. I congratulate the State governments on
   their cooperation. I thank them for their willingness to work with the Federal
   Government. I thank the Council and most particularly, Garth, I thank you
   for your personal contribution and leadership in this area. I congratulate
   you on such a magnificent facility. I am very impressed with it and I hope
   to see many more around Australia.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Well thank you very Mr Rosenbloom. To Professor Kune, to Betty, Mark and
   Monica, and to the late John Saunders many other friends and work mates
   and associates over a long period of time. I'm very privileged to have been
   asked to launch this book. I did know John well. I met him as Professor
   Kune said, in 1977 and I retained a great regard and respect for him for
   the remainder of his life and I do regard it as a privilege to launch this
   book, particularly here in the Holocaust Museum which was a testament to
   much of John Saunders dedication to the county he embraced so warmly, Australia,
   but also to the memories of so many Australians of Jewish Descent.
  Ladies and gentlemen, what Mr Rosenbloom said about the character of this
   book is true. It's the story of a very remarkable man. Like all of us he
   was a complex person. None of has are really of easily readable.ready explanation.
   Each of us have our contradictions and our complexities. John's story is
   a phenomenal story. It's a story of somebody who endured and witnessed the
   most unspeakable deeds of mankind's history. It's the story of a man who
   was incredibly successful in business. It's the story of a man who suffered
   a great deal of personal heartache. The loss of his first wife at the early
   age of 42. The end of a marriage to his second wife.
  It's also the story of a person who retained an incredible sense of hope
   and optimism throughout the whole of his life. And that to me is one of
   the things that makes this book, as Mr Rosenbloom said, something of a metaphor
   for a remarkable group of Australians. And they are the Australians who
   came to this country from Eastern Europe in the late 1940s and through the
   1950s. Many of them, and John amongst them, were Jewish who had suffered
   the terrible losses of the Holocaust, and who came to this country and despite
   that appallingly tragic background began to give to this country in enormous
   measure.
  And I began to have some contact with that contribution myself, ironically
   about the very year that John became an Australian citizen, 1957, because
   that was my first year at the Sydney University Law School. And for the
   first time in my life as somebody I suppose who'd grown up in a fairly traditional
   white Anglo-Saxon Protestant Australian background in the suburb of Earlwood,
   I came into contact for the first time in my life with a significant number
   of people of eastern European background, not totally, but predominantly
   Jewish. And I remember my first experiences of being received into the home
   of the late Paul and Vera Strasser in Dover Heights through my friendship
   with their son Peter who remains one of my closest friends to this day.
   And through that I began to know something of this remarkable group of Australians.
   I began my articles of clerkship with Myer Rosenblum, spelt with a 'u-m',
   in 1959, and through that also I developed and further nurtured that association.
  John was in so many ways a metaphor for that remarkable group of Australians
   who've had such a profound influence beneficially on our nation, and such
   a particularly profound influence on the city of Sydney.
  He was a businessman of remarkable tenacity and success, of very great integrity.
   Professor Kune records that in their early associations in business John
   Saunders and Frank Lowy resolved on two things - there would be no corruption
   and no lawyers. That they would avoid like the plague, so to speak, they
   would avoid any extensive litigation involving lawyers and that they would
   always try and settle their disputes.
  The book is also of course a chronicle of Australia's extraordinary post-war
   economic boom starting in the early 1950s with some temporary interruptions,
   all those pretty short lived, through to the relative stalling in the early
   1970s and then on again.
  It's also a very interesting study of the political and personal philosophy
   of a man. John to my mind exhibited throughout his life the characteristics
   of what I would call the liberal European approach to politics. He was a
   person who was always alert, as one would understand from his background
   and experiences, he was always alert to any sense of prejudice or discrimination.
   He was a person who dealt with people on their merits, and he was a person
   who believed in openness. He certainly had liberal economic theories. Professor
   Kune records that he was a fan of Milton Friedman's, but he was also a person
   who believed genuinely in a social security safety net. He took great care
   of his employees. He was very rewarding of loyalty. He drove a tough business
   bargain but it was a fair bargain and it was a bargain based on integrity.
  I found him to be a person with a great sense of humour and a great sense
   of fun, exemplified by the story in the book of how he offered a long standing
   employee at Westfields in reward for great service, a plane ticket from
   under his blotter, and then when that employee went into Frank's office,
   Frank offered him from under his blotter a plane ticket for the employee's
   wife. And it was just one of those many stories and one of those many illustrations
   of a person who had a sensitivity to those around him, and a sensitivity
   to those who cared for him and demonstrated business loyalty to him.
  John's life of course is not just bound up with business. He cared for his
   family very deeply. The establishment of Hope Town to care for mildly intellectually
   retarded people on the Central Coast was a manifestation, not only of particular
   care but also of a general philanthropic spirit. He was an incredibly generous
   supporter of charities within the Australian community. He quite properly
   lent very strong support to Jewish charities, but his generosity was not
   specific to Jewish causes. He was generous to the entire Australian community.
  We meet here of course, in the site of the old Maccabi Hall, of the Holocaust
   Museum, and this was a monument by John Saunders to the suffering and the
   devastation that descended upon the Jewish people of Europe, and a reminder
   to their children and their children and so on in subsequent generations,
   and indeed to the Australian people, of what occurred those years ago, and
   a symbol of the hope out of that disaster and sadness which was represented
   by John Saunders' life and John Saunders' achievement.
  Today's gathering brings together many people whose lives were touched by
   John. Of course his children and other members of his family, those who
   worked with him in business, those such as myself who knew him through our
   connection in politics and the life of this city. He was a person who was
   I found very loyal to his friends. I met him when I was Treasurer and I
   retained contact with him at every stage of my political career. I remember
   that he was one of those people that had bothered to retain contact with
   me when I was not the most fashionable figure in my party or in Australian
   politics. And of course one always remembers those things and it was the
   mark of the person that he would do that.
  I found the book amusing, interesting and uplifting. The stories of the
   early business activities, the attaining of that crucial bank loan from
   the late Les Irwin, the manager of the Commonwealth Bank at Blacktown, the
   establishment of the first Westfield Shopping Centre, of the debate that
   went on between Frank and John about how they would fix upon the name of
   Westfield. I found it a very entertaining book and one that tells in a very
   simple and direct way a very remarkable story. It's the story of somebody
   who triumphed over appalling evil. It's the story of somebody who struggled
   against a great deal of adversity in health and other personal circumstances
   throughout his life. And as somebody like myself and others in this audience
   who've lived all their lives in Australia and have taken it for granted
   that freedom and equality and non-discriminatory treatment by governments
   is your inherited right. I can only but be filled with admiration that a
   person such as John who was not always in that situation, but nonetheless
   was able to triumph over it and display such an enormous sense of hope and
   optimism.
  And the great thing that I take out of John Saunders; life, as I take out
   of the lives of so many contributors to this country as passionate Australians
   that he represented, was their incredible sense of hope and optimism. But
   it passes understanding for many of us that somebody who could have suffered
   so much retained such an incredible sense of hope and optimism, And they
   were similar thoughts that passed through my mind when less than a week
   ago I invested Nelson Mandela with the Honourary Order in the Order of Australia,
   and I marveled at that man's incredible sense of forgiveness and compassion,
   and despite the extraordinary suffering and depravation that he suffered,
   he retained such an extraordinarily generous disposition indeed towards
   some of the very people who persecuted him.
  John Saunders' life is a remarkable one. It's a great inspiration to Australian
   Jews. It's a great reminder to the rest of the Australian population of
   the incredible contribution of the Jewish community to the life and the
   strength of Australia through its entire existence. I count as one of the
   very honoured experiences of my life to have developed over the years in
   different ways by circumstances of friendship and otherwise, a close association
   with the Jewish community not only of Sydney but around Australia.
  John Saunders never forgot that he was Jewish, he never forgot that he came
   from eastern Europe, he never forgot the experiences that he suffered along
   with so many Jewish people in Europe. But he became forever Australian and
   contributed an incredible amount to this country, and Professor Kune's work
   is a lovely memorial, a great reminder, and a very heart felt tribute to
   a great Australian and I'm delighted to launch it. Thank you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Well thank you very much Mr Pederson. To my Ministerial colleague Nick Minchin,
   to Senator Stott-Despoja, Deputy Leader of the Australian Democrats, other
   Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
  Tonight is an opportunity to do a number of things. It's an opportunity
   for me on behalf of the Government, and I'm sure on behalf of the Australian
   people to record the immense respect and admiration I have for the on going
   contribution that engineers of all kinds and of all shapes and sizes make
   to the strength, not only the economic strength but also the social and
   physical infrastructure of the Australian community.
  There are many things that Australians do extremely well, and we were reminded
   of our proficiency on a sporting field of course today. I've never been
   through a less focused Question Time than I was this afternoon, and I can
   assure you the lack of focus was totally bipartisan. But ladies and gentlemen,
   there are many things that this country does well and I've had occasions
   over the past few months to not so much coin the phrase, but repeat the
   concept of a can-do country. That is a country which focuses on achieving
   outcomes which are to the benefit of the entire community. And amongst the
   many things that Australians do extremely well is that we are very good
   builders and very good engineers. And of course the two go hand in hand
   together.
  I've had many memorable weekends as Prime Minister of this country visiting
   the many different parts of our community. But none has exceeded in interest
   and absorption and sheer Australian pride than the weekend I spent only
   recently in joining with many others, including many here tonight, to celebrate
   the 50th anniversary of the commencement of the construction
   of the Snowy Mountain Scheme. That remains to this day one of the great
   engineering feats of the world. It is certainly Australia's proudest engineering
   achievement. Not only was it a great engineering triumph, but of course
   it was a great personal triumph for the thousands of people who worked there
   and a great national triumph for the Australian nation and our openness
   and our tolerance and our capacity to blend together very quickly in the
   Australian environment people from so many different parts of the world
   who came to this country after the Second World War to make it their home.
  When I think forward, and I look forward to the 21st Century,
   I can see a role for engineering, particularly in our part of the world
   which will even surpass the contribution that it has made over the last
   50 years. I predict now that Australian engineers and Australian expertise
   will be increasingly in demand in South-East Asia and in the Asian-Pacific
   region. Our standards of excellence, our reliability and our capacity and
   our technical expertise is without parallel. And the contribution that the
   engineering schools of our various universities will make to producing the
   graduates, and in time the practical engineers, will play a very major role
   in the economic thrust of Australia into the region immediately adjacent
   to us.
  It remains of tremendous importance that all of us do what we can to encourage
   the study of science and engineering both in our schools and in our universities.
   It is true, as the Chairman said, that I have derived incredible stimulus
   and insight and knowledge from the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering,
   or Science and Innovation Council as it's now called. It's brought home
   to me as somebody not trained in the discipline of engineering or science,
   the integral role that that discipline, or those disciplines play in our
   daily life, and the interconnectedness of engineering and scientific skill
   to the economic and social wellbeing of our community. And the experience
   chairing that council has brought me into contact with the best engineering
   and science minds in Australia. And on display to me every time that council
   meets is the enormous depth of talent that this country has been able to
   draw on in that area, and the ongoing contribution that it has made and
   continues to make to our community.
  So tonight is therefore an opportunity for me as Prime Minister and collectively
   for the nation to honour and salute the contribution of Australia's engineers
   to the wellbeing of our society. It's also an opportunity for you to salute
   and honour those amongst you who have excelled in a particular way. It is
   important that every discipline, every group in our community pause for
   a moment and honour those who've been particularly good and those who have
   achieved a special level of excellence, and tonight you will have a splendid
   opportunity to do that.
  Engineering is part of the history of this country from the very beginning
   and it will be a very integral part of the future of this country. And in
   a symbolic way to capture that the institute has decided, and they've asked
   me to announce tonight, something that will in a symbolic way link the skills
   of engineers and the specialty of engineering with the history and the important
   events in the history of this country. And I'm pleased to announce that
   with funding from the National Council for the Centenary of Federation,
   and Dick Smith, who's no mean achiever in his own right as Chairman of that
   council, and Tony Eggleton, the Director of that council, both of whom who
   are here tonight. But they've taken on a project that provides a wonderful
   opportunity for communities around Australia to make their mark on history
   for the 100th anniversary of nationhood in 2001.
  Many of you will be aware, I don't know whether any of you remember from
   personal experience, that in the late 19th century arches were
   a popular form of street decoration for public celebration in the then Australian
   colonies. The celebrations associated with the inauguration of the Commonwealth
   of Australia on the 1st of January 1901, and the opening of the
   first federal Parliament in Melbourne, the arches were grander and more
   extravagant than ever before. And around Australia at that time organisations
   and communities designed and erected a wide array of arches. There was the
   floral welcome arch, the wool arch, the Aboriginal arch, and the weed arch,
   the citizen's arch, the firemen's arch, and the apple arch. There was a
   railway arch, a rustic arch and a butter arch, which melted incidentally.
   And then there was the Chinese, the French and the American arch. And all
   of those arches, particularly the butter one, were temporary, being dismantled
   within days of the federation celebrations. But in planning and erecting
   them citizens of the new nation were expressing something of who they were
   and something of their aspirations for Australia.
  So appropriately for the year 2001 the Institution of Engineers and the
   National Council for the Federation have developed a nationwide project
   to encourage people to revisit their nation's history and the idea of creating
   an arch. By decorating the arches in many and varied styles throughout the
   community, we'll be telling a significant story of who we are today as our
   nation celebrates its 100th birthday. Using specially designed
   kits provided naturally by the institute of engineers, school groups, community
   organisations, professional associations and others, will commemorate the
   centenary of federation by creating their own piece of unique centenary
   memorabilia. The Chairman of the National Council Dick Smith, as I mentioned
   is here tonight, and I know Dick is very enthusiastic about this project
   and about the opportunity it offers all Australians to celebrate the nation's
   history and achievements.
  The Federation Arches Project will also involve a competition for engineering
   students to design the Australia arch to be installed in Canberra on Federation
   between the old and new Parliament House as part of the finale event for
   the centenary year in 2001. So I therefore encourage all of you in the engineering
   profession to support both elements of the Federation Arches Project, and
   in so doing commemorate in a very tangible and relevant way not only the
   history of our nation but also the contribution made by engineers through
   the building of the modern Australia, and also as a signal into the future
   of the contribution that all of you will make to the future.
  I welcome you to Parliament House in Canberra. I honour the contribution
   of engineers to the development of the Australian nation. This is a magnificent
   gala occasion and I congratulate in advance all of those who will be given
   awards for their tremendous contribution within their chosen profession.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  Good evening. One of the key roles of government in this large sparsely
   populated nation is to satisfy the important infrastructure needs of regional
   Australia. It is a major nation building role and one which my Government
   is seeking to fulfil.
  For many years I have been a strong supporter of a competitive Australian
   rail network. And for 89 years governments and individuals have dreamt about
   the construction of an Alice Springs to Darwin railway. At last that dream
   is about to become reality. Following detailed negotiations between my Government
   and the Governments of South Australia and the Northern Territory, enough
   money will be provided to enable the project to go ahead.
  Over three years the Federal Government will contribute up to $165 million
   for this project out of a total of $480 million from the three Governments,
   and $750 million from the private sector. Again it demonstrates the social
   coalition in action. Government and the private sector working in partnership
   to provide for the infrastructure needs of the nation.
  When the first sod is turned mid next year it will represent the beginning
   of construction of rail track stretching 1400 kilometres from the Southern
   Ocean to the Timor Sea. The construction will take three years and generate
   7,000 jobs in rural and regional Australia including 18 months work for
   the BHP steelworks in Whyalla. I have called it the Steel Snowy because
   like the Snowy Mountain Scheme which began 50 years ago this year, it is
   a major project of national development.
  The railway will be good for Australian exporters, open up more opportunities
   for Australian industry and jobs. Most importantly I hope that it will send
   the strongest possible message to Australians in the bush that they deserve
   an equal share in Australia's economic prosperity. Goodnight.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………….
Well thank you very much Mr Chairman, to Mrs Clark, to Kim Beazley, my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleman. I would like first of all to express I’m sure the admiration and respect of all of us for the great courage that Fanita displayed today. Her initiative to inaugurate white wreath day not only in memory of her son Jason, but also to represent to the broader community the suffering and loss of parents and other loved ones for those who for whatever combination of reasons take their own lives.
I guess all of us as Members of Parliament, and there are a lot of us here today from all sides of politics, have difficult experiences in our constituency work. I have to say the most traumatic moments I’ve had as a local member is to sit down and talk to the parents of a child who’s taken his or her life, to listen to their story of the frustration, the sense of loss, the disappointment, the sheer agony and the tragedy that is involved, and the waste of human life particularly but not only young life that is involved in suicides. And can I say Fanita, this is not the first occasion that I’ve had parents complain to me about the perversity of confidentiality laws, the way they operate within our public health system. And this is not meant to be a knee-jerk reflection on those laws but your testimony today prompts all of us, the Government, Opposition, State and Federal to perhaps look at whether those laws designed to protect the privacy of the individual are not in fact working to deprive those closest to people at risk of necessary information. I’ve had a number of parents in my own electorate who’ve gone through the trauma that you’ve experienced express the same concern to me.
There’s nothing that any political leader can say today that can in any way adequately respond to the anguish and the sense of loss that we’ve heard represented to us today. But what we can do is to express concern, to express understanding, to congratulate all of those who’ve been associated with bringing this day together and I particularly want to compliment the ACT Trades and Labour Council for the work that they did, and the other unions associated with the ACT Council for the work they did in bringing this day together.
The Government itself in the last budget set aside $48 million in a program entitled "It’s All About Living" which was designed to cover some of the areas where governments can be of assistance. But no amount of money, no one single program can effectively respond to this growing challenge within our community. We have an appallingly high suicide rate amongst young males in rural and regional areas of our country. But as Mrs Clark pointed out, it’s not just restricted to young people. Suicide can claim the lives of people in old age and in middle age and some extremely young children. And it challenges all of us. There’s no one single explanation as to why it happens. There are many reasons. The loss of motivation, the sense of alienation, inability to get a job, a sense that there are no longer any moral constraints on any kind of behaviour in our community. All of these things together contribute, and there’s no one single explanation that fits each and every individual case.
But I would like if you take nothing else away from today’s gathering Fanita, I would like you to take away from this gathering a bipartisan expression of compassion, a statement that we are endeavouring to understand the magnitude of the grief that you feel. As a parent the loss of one of my children would be unimaginable whatever the circumstances. And I can only begin to try and understand how you feel. To say to you that we do care about people in your situation. We will try and learn more about it. We will try and help more. And it’s one of those issues that unites all of us as Australians irrespective of our political belief, and irrespective of our background and our attitudes on other issues.
I think you’ve been an incredibly courageous lady in organising today. I congratulate you. I admire your courage and fortitude. I congratulate all of those who have helped you. I know your local member Craig Emerson has worked very hard, and I know that the ACT Trades and Labour Council and others have worked extremely hard and you can see from the cross party gathering today that this is something above and beyond party politics as it ought to be, and I hope today will make a difference because this is an enormous social challenge for our nation, and it’s something that all of us have a role in responding to. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
To Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, John Eales, John O’Neill, Phil Harry, David Clarke and all the members of the victorious Australian Wallaby Rugby Union Football team. And in the true spirit of these occasions I’m also delighted to welcome to this gathering the diplomatic representatives of countries such as France and South Africa who have been great and friendly rivals of ours. Can I simply say that I don’t think Australia has gone through a greater sporting year than the year that is now coming to an end. It has been in so many areas – in rugby, in cricket, in netball, in women’s hockey, and so many sports, it has been an exhilarating year.
And I want to say to you John and the members of your team that you have been in every sense of the word magnificent ambassadors for the Australian nation overseas. You’ve not only been wonderful representatives of Australia on the sporting field, but you’ve been wonderful representatives of Australia in every other way. Rugby union has derived an enormous stimulus from your victory. Many of us of course remember the days when Australia’s victories on the rugby field were rather few and far between compared with what they are now.
I can certainly remember some desolate moments in the 1950s on the Sydney Cricket Ground hill having watched Australia play against New Zealand and South Africa when some of the international rules allowing kicking out on the full from anywhere in the field produced a very different game from the more exciting and open game that we now have.
But what you did for Australia’s sporting reputation in Wales and in the UK just a few weeks ago was absolutely fantastic and can I say that, it’s been said before and there’s nothing particularly novel about it but it remains true nonetheless, that of the many things that bind us together as Australians nothing quite binds us together like sporting success. And there was a common joy in all parts of Australia, particularly amongst rugby followers in your absolutely superb victory. And as I said at the welcome home dinner at the Sydney Convention Centre, having been knocked out of the 1995 World Cup with a drop-kick coming from…..it’s all part of the entertainment fellas. Having been knocked out of the 1995 World Cup with a drop goal from an English player, it was absolutely fitting that a crucial drop goal in the match against South Africa guaranteed that Australia would be in the finals.
So John, this is to you and all your teammates, and all those who supported them, can I particularly say your magnificent coach Rod Mcqueen who really has I know inspired the team and given it tremendous advice and tremendous support. And I also don’t want to, on an occasion like this, to leave out a special word of thanks to the wives and girlfriends of the players. I think they play a very very special part in keeping the team spirit. And finally and most importantly of all, can I say it’s delightful to have ‘Bill’ here in Parliament House. It’s a very affectionate term for a beautiful trophy, and we’re delighted to have it back in Australia. And John this is very much a bipartisan gathering. There are rugby followers of all political persuasions in Australia and that’s why this is an occasion where I’m delighted to invite the Leader of the Opposition Kim Beazley, who I think is patron of the Brumbies, to say a few words of support and in welcome to all of you. Kim Beazley.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  [Tape starts]
  General Cosgrove has proved to be an inspiration not only to the men and
   women of the Australian Defence Force, but also to the men and women of
   other countries that are serving with Australians in the INTERFET force.
   You've behaved in an absolutely impeccable and professional manner. Your
   training has been demonstrated to be very adequate for the job that you
   were given. You've not only secured your military objectives, but just as
   importantly you have secured the broader social and civilian objectives
   that these days any men and women in the armed forces of a country must
   do. You've won the confidence and the respect and the affection of the local
   people who've had a very rough time. You came here because it was the right
   thing for our country to do, and it was also in Australia's interests that
   you come. And having come here you've discharged your job with tremendous
   professional skills...[break in speech].
  But could I just say picking up where I stopped, that you came here in the
   name of the whole country, and you came to carry out a very just mission
   and also a mission that was in Australia's long term interests. And you've
   brought back to the people of East Timor some hope, some optimism, and some
   measure of faith in the future. You've also restored great peace and stability
   to this area. It's been a very important, although unexpected part of your
   military life, and I know that many of you have quite properly seen it as
   the sort of thing that you joined the Army in order to do. And I know that
   when you came here there was understandably a lot of apprehension about
   how dangerous it was because it was dangerous, and we shared as best we
   could the anxiety that you and more importantly your families would have
   felt about what might happen. But because of the tremendous training that
   you've received and the way in which you've been so effectively led, gratefully
   and thankfully casualties have been kept to an absolute minimum and that's
   something that we're always extremely grateful to know.
  Can I assure you that your mission here has the total support of the entire
   Australian population. In the 25 years that I've been in politics I've not
   known an overseas involvement of Australia, and this of course is our biggest
   involvement militarily since the Vietnam War, which has attracted such across
   the board support. Irrespective of differences back home over other issues,
   there is very widespread support that you're right to be here, that you've
   done it well, and that in the process you have added a great deal of lustre
   to a very proud Australian military tradition. And I want therefore on behalf
   of myself, my Government, and all of the people of Australia to express
   my gratitude and thanks and appreciation and respect to all of you, to the
   commander of the INTERFET operation Major-General Cosgrove, to all the other
   commanding officers of the Australian units that are serving here, because
   Australia has led this mission. It was Australia's initiative that brought
   this mission about. It was Australian leadership that got the INTERFET together,
   and it's been Australian leadership that had done so much effective work.
   But that is not in any way to play down the significance of the cooperation
   from our 16 or 17 other friends within the INTERFET forces, from different
   parts of the world. All of them have played a very very significant role.
   But your contribution has been immense. I thank you for it. I wish all of
   you well. I hope that it continues to be a smooth operation, and that in
   the fullness of time when it's fully completed, all of you will safely return
   home to your families and other loved ones. And can I just very very warmly
   thank you very much.
  I have two pieces of mail that I want to deliver. One of them is to Private
   Robin J Moore of the boys of the Intelligence Section who corresponded with
   me, and I was very pleased to respond to their correspondence. And also
   Major S E Clinging of 2RAR as well. And in the course of moving around and
   saying hello to you I'd be delighted to meet those two gentlemen and personally
   hand these items of mail to them.
  But just again, thank you very much. You've done a superb job and the entire
   Australian nation is very proud of all of you. Thanks.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE.................
  Major General Peter Cosgrove, Brigadier Evans, ladies and gentlemen, this
   is one of the real privileges that I've had as Prime Minister of Australia
   to say a few words of thanks on behalf of all of the Australian people for
   the superb way in which the men and women of the Australian Defence Force
   under General Cosgrove's magnificent leadership have carried out the mandate
   given to them by the United Nations. Your operation, and the actions of
   you men and women as Australians have brought tremendous repute, tremendous
   regard, and tremendous esteem to our country around the world.
  Australia has a very proud and great military tradition. It's not a military
   tradition that seeks to impose the will of our nation on the will of others,
   but rather a military tradition that is ready to stand up for what is right
   and what is legitimately in the Australian national interest when the occasion
   arises. And you have done that magnificently, you've done it very very efficiently,
   you've done it in a very professional way. And in the process you have won
   the affection and gratitude of the people of East Timor.
  The links between Australia and East Timor as many of you of a military
   tradition know go back a very long way. And there was a time when the people
   of East Timor extended help and succour and comfort to soldiers of the Australian
   Army during World War II when they were fighting the Japanese. And in a
   way, and for a lot of other reasons, that is a gratitude and a debt that
   is being repaid. But I can't tell you how proud I am of all of you, and
   can I say to you that in the 25 years that I've been a member of Parliament
   I have not found an issue that has more united the Australian community
   in a single resolute desire to support an effort conducted in the name of
   Australia.
  You are very much in the thoughts and the prayers of the people of Australia.
   I know that you will be thinking of your wives, sweethearts, children, parents,
   brothers, sisters and friends back in Australia. We are doing everything
   we can to look after them, to provide for them. Of course doing our level
   best, although we can never do it adequately, to share some of the anxiety
   they may feel for you.
  General Cosgrove has given me a detailed briefing this morning that shows
   that your mission has been substantially accomplished. But I will not forget,
   nor will the people of Australia forget, that when you came here you came
   into an uncertain environment, you came into a zone of great danger, you
   were sent to redress some wrongs that had been unfairly inflicted on the
   people of this territory, and you have done that in an absolutely magnificent
   way, in a way that befits the military tradition of Australia and a way
   that makes your country very proud, and in a way that will ensure that you
   will be ever felt and regarded in a grateful way by all of the Australian
   people.
  Can I as Prime Minister, and I know speaking on behalf of all Australians,
   convey to you my thanks, the thanks of the Australian people, my respect
   and admiration for your commanding officer and the commander of the INTERFET
   operation Major-General Cosgrove, for all of the other brigade and other
   commanders, and every last man and woman who's worked so well both in a
   military way and a humanitarian way. You make me very proud indeed to be
   Prime Minister of Australia, and all of your fellow Australians are both
   grateful and immensely proud at what you've achieved. Thank you.
  [Ends]


E&amp;OE....................
  Thank you very much your eminence, your grace, my many friends and all of
   you who have come along tonight particularly to demonstrate your support
   for the cause of liberalism not only here in New South Wales but throughout
   Australia.
  Some very kind things have been said about me tonight and I particularly
   thank my dear friend and former colleague as Deputy Prime Minister, Tim
   Fischer. I have said before that if I were in a political trench I would
   rather have Tim Fischer on my side than anybody else. And anybody who understands
   the support base and the origins of the National Party, once the Country
   Party of Australia, will understand how difficult it was for a leader of
   the National Party to give the total and uncompromising support for the
   gun control legislation that Tim did.
  It was easier in the cities than it was in the regions and the bush. But
   Tim has been nice, Alan's been nice, Michael Yabsley, Tony Staley, you have
   all been very kind but I wanted in the few moments I'll speak tonight I
   wanted to really turn it back on what has been said so kindly about me and
   to say that because this is a gathering of the faithful in a sense and the
   support base of the party here in Sydney and all of New South Wales and
   because I joined the Liberal Party in New South Wales and spent more than
   40 years as a member of the party starting here in Sydney that everything
   I have achieved in politics has been due to the Liberal Party.
  I would never have been a Member of Parliament without the support and the
   endorsement of the party. I would never have become Leader of the Opposition
   without the confidence of my parliamentary colleagues in the Liberal Party
   and I, of course, would never have become Prime Minister of Australia without
   the support of the Liberal Party. And I owe the Liberal Party a great debt
   and I am ever mindful of that and I have never forgotten what the Liberal
   Party did for me. I have never forgotten the political craft I learnt in
   my early years in the Liberal Party and as a symbol of that I am particularly
   happy that my dear friend, John Carrick and his wife Angela are with us
   tonight.
  Being Leader of the party is an enormous privilege. Of course to be Prime
   Minister of our country is the greatest privilege that can come the way,
   in my view, of any person in the democratic world. This country has assets
   and talents and capacities and a way of life that is properly the envy of
   the rest of the world.
  Alan referred to that phrase I often use that we occupy a unique intersection
   of both history and of geography and of culture. We are, in so many ways,
   a projection of western civilisation in our part of the world but that is
   not the full story. We have very close and enduring historic and other links
   with the people of North America but here we are in the Asian-Pacific region
   and having our own society nourished in a very positive way by the infusion
   of hundreds of thousands of Australians of Asian descent into our community.
   And that gives us a capacity to project that unique experience and that
   unique inheritance in a way that no other nation on earth is able to do
   in our part of the world. And that was one of the reasons why I believed
   that we were able to do what we did in relation to East Timor. And we have
   therefore not only a situation where we occupy that unique intersection
   but we also have, with that, an enormous responsibility.
  We now have the strongest economy in the Asian-Pacific region in terms of
   all the overall economic measurements. If I had stood before you a year
   ago I would not have been able to say with total conviction that we were
   going to stare down the worst economic downturn the Asian-Pacific region
   has seen. I would not have been able to say that. And I want to acknowledge
   the contribution that many have made to that. I acknowledge the contribution
   that Peter Costello, the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and the Treasurer,
   in the time that I have been Prime Minister the contribution that Peter
   has made to that and I acknowledge the contribution of many others.
  But the story of Australia at the moment is a story of immense achievement
   of great strength and enormous pride. I don't think this country has stood
   taller and stronger in the chances of the world than it does at the present
   time. Economic strength produces political and diplomatic strength. You
   are listened to with more attention and you are listened to more seriously
   if you speak from a base of economic strength and economic achievements.
  There are many things that we have achieved in the last almost four years
   and I and others have spoken of them. This year has been an incredibly intensive
   year. Taxation reform, industrial relations reform and above all the achievement
   of bringing to the people of East Timor the freedom that they had the opportunity
   of voting for and they voted for so overwhelmingly.
  We were able to achieve in that diplomatic effort the assembly of a United
   Nations peace enforcement operation with a speed and a decisiveness that
   had not previously been matched in any other peace enforcement operation
   carried out under the aegis of the United Nations. And that is a source
   of enormous strength to this country and a source of very great pride and
   it reflects enormous credit on the Coalition Government. The Coalition Government
   was told - and I almost feel it that I shouldn't do it but I will introduce
   a partisan note into this brief address - the Coalition Government before
   it was elected was told that it didn't understand how to deport itself in
   the Asian-Pacific region. We were told that the leaders of that region wouldn't
   listen to us. We were told that we didn't understand how to make our way
   in the region. I think we have demonstrated how totally fatuous and stupid
   that assertion was because what we have succeeded in doing overwhelmingly
   is to intelligently re-balance the relationships of this country with the
   other nations of the world.
  I have been a very lucky person in public life. I was lucky that I joined
   the Liberal Party. I was lucky to have parents who taught me the value of
   hard work, of loyalty to your community, of loyalty to your country and
   of the importance of small business in our community. And I am delighted
   to have two of my three brothers and their wives here tonight. As many of
   you know, I have another brother but he belongs to another political party
   and we get on very well but we have a standing arrangement that there's
   anything involving me that doesn't involve a dollar for the Liberal Party
   he comes, but if there's anything that involves a dollar for the Liberal
   Party he doesn't. But I was very fortunate and I've had a very, very fortunate
   life indeed in politics.
  There are many people that I should thank tonight and the list is too numerous.
   But I do particularly want to thank Janette, and Melanie, and Tim and Richard,
   my wife and my three children who are the source of the greatest pleasure
   and satisfaction and happiness in my life, and have been an absolutely indispensable
   part of anything that I might have achieved both as Prime Minister and in
   my other political responsibilities and I thank them very warmly.
  Can I say just one thing about the future and that is that it's frequently
   and rightly said that you judge the future prospects of a nation by the
   projection and the values and the standing and the capacities of its young
   people. I've had the privilege over the last week of mixing with two separate
   groups of young Australians. Last weekend as you all know I visited Dili,
   and I think I'm the first Prime Minister since John Gorton who is with us
   tonight who visited our forces in Vietnam, to have visited Australian forces
   in a theatre of military operation. And the privilege that it was of visiting
   the committed young men and women, overwhelmingly young men and women, a
   sense of professionalism, a sense of dedication and commitment and decency,
   not only in pursuing their military objectives but also in winning the hearts
   and minds of the people of East Timor. And that was an extraordinary privilege.
  The other privilege I had last week was to spend a very happy evening with
   arguably one of the greatest sporting teams that Australia has sent overseas
   in recent years, the victorious Wallabies who won the World Cup in Cardiff
   only very recently. They are absolutely without doubt in my mind as fine
   a group of ambassadors to this nation as well as great sportsmen that one
   could ever hope to have and to meet. And when I think of those two groups,
   I see a young Australia comprised of decent, committed, capable, enterprising,
   with the appropriate degree of recklessness and lack of fear that is the
   stuff of a great a nation. And as Prime Minister it not only fills me with
   immense pride but it also fills me with immense hope and immense optimism
   about the future of our nation.
  I was meant to finish my speech and I do it by very importantly thanking
   all of you for the support that you are giving to the Millennium Forum here
   in New South Wales. It is important but more than that it is critical to
   the future of the Division here in New South Wales. I deeply appreciate
   the support you have given. I congratulate Michael Yabsley and his incredible
   energy, his incredible commitment. To raise money for a political cause
   requires energy, cheek persistence, a willingness to take knock backs and
   come back again, and Michael's got all of those qualities. I respect him
   for it, I thank him, I declare the Forum launched and may it make a magnificent
   contribution to the cause in which we all believe here in New South Wales
   and all around Australia. Thank you very much for your support.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Thank you very much Ita. To Dr John Keniery, Mr Charles Jamieson, to John
   Olsen the Premier of South Australia, my Ministerial colleagues, Larry Anthony,
   Judith Troeth, my Parliamentary Secretary colleague, other very distinguished
   guests, ladies and gentlemen.
  It's a great delight, I think for the first time as Prime Minister to attend
   this very important event. And it's an occasion not only to say a couple
   of things, as Prime Ministers are want to do on occasions like this with
   captive audiences, about the superb economic performance of the Government,
   but it's also an opportunity to honour the real heroes of the Australian
   economic performance over the last couple of years and that is the exporters
   of Australia.
  If I had addressed you one year or two years ago I probably wouldn't have
   been able to report as robustly as I can tonight on the general health of
   the Australian economy. A year ago even we'd have looked forward with some
   foreboding about the potential impact of the Asian economic downturn on
   our economy. That we have been able to stare down that economic collapse
   and have come out of it in a sense stronger and better than ever is due
   to a lot of things. But one of the things it is really due to was the capacity
   of the exporters of Australia to switch their export focus away from the
   disappearing markets in the collapsing Asian economies towards new and expanding
   markets in other parts of the world.
  They were aided and abetted by a very flexibly and sensibly administered
   exchange rate policy. But without a great deal of Australian grit and determination
   and application it simply wouldn't have been possible. So on behalf of the
   Government I express my and the gratitude of my colleagues for the tremendous
   effort put in by the exporters of Australia particularly over the last couple
   of years.
  The last 12 months of course has been a very important policy year for the
   exporters of Australia because they are amongst the biggest winners from
   the Government's major overhaul of the Australian taxation system. There's
   always a danger with something like tax reform that we tend to get preoccupied
   with and bogged down by the minutiae, and the micro aspects of its implementation.
   And we think too much about the detailed application of it in this or that
   sector. And we lose sight of the enormous generic national economic benefits
   that taxation reform brings. And one of the great, and it can't be overstated,
   benefits of the introduction of a goods and services tax and the removal
   of the old indirect tax system which will occur on the 1st of
   July next year, is the tremendous boost that it will give to exports from
   this country. All exports will be free of the GST. It will make us more
   competitive in world markets. It will give us a chance to punch even more
   effectively against those competitors who've had the advantage of a more
   modern taxation system up until now. So amongst the many beneficiaries of
   taxation reform are the exporters of Australia. And it's been calculated
   that the benefit to them of the new taxation system is in the order of $7
   billion to $8 billion a year. And that is another $7 billion or $8 billion
   of competitive edge and advantage that Australian exporters will have available
   to them from the first of July next year.
  I'm very conscious ladies and gentlemen as I speak that over in Seattle
   a World Trade Organisation meeting is taking place. The publicity so far
   coming out of the meeting is about some organised demonstrations in the
   streets of Seattle. I can't imagine less well directed, less intelligent
   demonstrations than those that are taking place in Seattle because if you
   really want to cripple the future growth prospects of the poor nations of
   the world, if you really want to leave in the hands of a number of relatively
   rich and highly protective trade policy nations of the world, then you will
   condemn the current World Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle to failure.
   Because in the long run developing countries have more to gain from opening
   up world trading opportunities than many, not all, but many of the developed
   countries.
  It is only through building market access that many of the least developed
   countries in the world can have a show of lifting their standards of living.
   And if you look at those countries that were once poorly developed, that
   have grown dramatically over the last thirty years, it is those countries
   that have aggressively pursued export opportunities and have aggressively
   utilised market openings that have been made available to them. So not only
   do I want that meeting to succeed for Australia's sake and it's very important
   that it does because it can't be said too frequently that the world trading
   system is still weighted against efficient agricultural producers in particular
   such as Australia.
  But I also want that world trade round to succeed in the name and in the
   interests of the least developed countries of the world. And this is a message
   that was not lost on some of the poorest nations that were represented at
   the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Durban in South Africa which
   I attended a few weeks ago on behalf of Australia. They were intelligent
   enough and sensible enough to see that in the long run they had an enormous
   amount to gain from the prizing open of the large and growing markets of
   the more developed part of the world.
  We live forever in a globalised world. We can't stop it, we can't change
   it, we can't get off it. And those who pretend that we can are deluding
   themselves. There is no refuge in going back to protectionism and the erection
   of old barriers but there is a responsibility on governments to explain
   better the benefits of more open trade. To use the right language, to talk
   about freer trade and more open trade rather than free trade because no
   nation practices perfect free trade. Australia doesn't and nor does any
   other country. And we have an obligation to explain to our population better
   the benefits of more open trade. To translate into hard concrete examples
   the benefits of a more open trading environment. And one of the ways we
   do that is to hail and applaud those who are achievers and performers on
   the export markets of Australia.
  We are deservedly as a nation intensely proud of our sporting achievers.
   And I can't think in all the years I have been following sport in Australia,
   and that's been most of my life, I can't think of a year when Australia
   both on an individual basis and in team sport has had a greater year of
   achievement in sport than this current year. But not only should we laud
   and magnify them for what they have done but we should equally hail and
   acclaim those people who are great successes in business, great successes
   in the arts and particularly great successes in export performance. Because
   the future economic strength of Australia will ultimately come down, with
   a nation of fewer than 20 million people, to our capacity to aggressively
   and competitively trade in every area of economic activity around the world.
  And that is why tonight is very important to me, it's very important to
   the Government. We have at the moment probably, in generic terms, the strongest
   economy Australia has had for the last 30 years perhaps since the end of
   World War II. The fundamentals are better now than they were in the late
   1960s because then we had a far more closed, cloistered and protected economy.
   We now have an economy that's torn down many of those old protective barriers
   and an economy which is expanding into new areas undreamt of only a few
   years ago.
  So we have great opportunities but that puts a special obligation on all
   of us who are involved in any position of leadership be it in government
   or in business to better explain and communicate to the people of our own
   nation the benefits of opening things up and liberalising things. Because
   unless we do that we run the risk of losing the argument to populist clamour.
  And we must also remember, ladies and gentlemen, that when the entire nation
   is doing well those within our midst who are not doing well feel the difference
   even more keenly. All disadvantage within a society does tend to be relative.
   And it is true although the national strength of the Australian economy
   is greater than it's been for many decades there are regions of Australia,
   particularly outside the metropolitan areas, which are doing it tough.
  And I was reminded of this when I read the other day the disaggregated figures
   of the Australian Bureau of Statistics on unemployment levels which disclosed,
   for example, that in the Northern Beach area of Sydney the unemployment
   rate is about 1.8 per cent, the lower North Shore, 1.7 per cent, the Eastern
   Suburbs of Sydney about 2 per cent and even in the central western suburbs
   of Sydney only about 4 per cent. Yet when you get out into the regions and
   you get into the Wide Bay, Burnett district of rural Queensland, for example,
   the level is 12 to 13 per cent. And that is an illustration that where there
   are sections of the Australian community that are not sharing the boom times,
   they are not sharing the generic national prosperity that we acknowledge
   tonight. And that puts a great obligation on all of us to keep that in mind.
   It puts an obligation on us to always explain and communicate in language
   that people can clearly understand the benefit of more open trade, the benefits
   of exports, the jobs that are created by export performance and export achievement.
  And I want to congratulate all of Australia's exporters tonight. I particularly
   acknowledge the contribution of those who will be announced as award winners.
   You have done great things for our country. You have played a major role
   in the economic resurgence of Australia. You played a crucial role in piloting
   Australia through what could have been an enormous economic challenge but,
   in fact, has turned out to be a great economic triumph. And that is our
   capacity and our strength as a nation to stare down the worst economic downturn
   our region has seen and in that the exporters of Australia have played an
   absolutely indispensable role. Thank you.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE..................
  Well thank you Dick. To you Pat I express the admiration, the esteem and
   the thanks of the entire Australian nation for the superbly Australian way
   in which you have promoted the cause of the centenary of federation. I can't
   think of a more effective way than to have a sportsman much admired throughout
   Australia to undertake a marathon run around our country, over a period
   of five or six months, touching large and small communities, accompanied
   on the entire journey by his children, his mother, and his brother, giving
   innumerable speeches, promoting the notion of a united Australian community,
   promoting the idea of honest effort, promoting the notion that all of us
   are together as Australians commemorating 100 years of this nation's existence.
  Pat you're a superb ambassador for what it means to be an Australian, and
   I am very proud as Prime Minister having farewelled you back in May of this
   year, to welcome you, to marvel at your physical fitness, to marvel at your
   mental toughness, and to salute the very emphatic and symbolic way in which
   you have carried the message of the centenary of federation to so many different
   parts of our nation.
  In the course of it you've broken innumerable records. But most importantly
   of all you have symbolised in a very Australian way what it means to be
   an Australian as we celebrate 100 years of our existence. On behalf of the
   Government and the entire nation Pat, welcome back, well done, and thank
   you for a sterling effort.
  [Ends]


Subjects: Achievements and goals of the Government; East Timor, social
   coalition, foreign relations; politicians' standing in the community; refugees,
   industrial relations; privatisation, Telstra; East Timor tax.
E&amp;OE...................
  Thank you very much Mr Chairman and Ladies and Gentlemen.
  It is now almost four years since the Coalition Government was elected in
   March of 1996 and I thought it would therefore be useful if I tried in the
   few moments available to me to give a brief account of the stewardship of
   the Government over that period of time and most particularly over the last
   12 months.
  It is important when giving an overview of that kind to recall the broad
   goals that the Government set itself in March of 1996. Because it is all
   too easy in politics to focus far too heavily on the micro detail of day
   to day policy decisions and administrative actions and to lose sight of
   the fact that collectively they are but means to achieving certain overall
   goals. Every Government elected to office in this country has certain national
   broad aspirations, has a desire in the period of its office, whether it
   be long or short, to bring about beneficial change for the aggregate benefit
   of as many Australians as possible.
  And so it was with the Coalition Government taking office for the first
   time in 13 years in March of 1996. We set ourselves a number of goals, we
   set ourselves the goal, a very general but very desirable one, of strengthening
   our country. Of strengthening it economically, strengthening it socially
   and strengthening it internationally.
  I think I can report to the nation that over the four years, and particularly
   over the last 12 months, we have achieved to goal of strengthening Australia
   economically. The economic performance of this country at the moment is
   as strong as it has been at any time since the end of World War II - in
   some respects, even stronger - because we operate in a more open, competitive
   international environment, we are less protected, we have, and may I acknowledge
   our predecessors did in a number of areas, embrace essential changes and
   reforms, and that has collectively given us a fundamental generic economic
   strength that we have not had for some time.
  We sought to strengthen the country socially by recognising that it was
   important to draw upon the fundamental values and instincts of the Australian
   community. One of the things that I have endeavoured to do as Prime Minister
   is to develop what I chose to call in my Federation Address at the beginning
   of this year, an 'Australian way' or an Australian approach to handling
   particular problems, and out of that we have developed the notion of a social
   coalition.
  I don't suggest that that notion isn't found in some manifestation in other
   parts of the world but I haven't consciously sought to apply some kind of
   foreign paradigm to the notion of how we marshal the resources of all of
   the people and all of the institutions of this country.
  The social coalition seeks to recognise a reality and that is that the government
   alone cannot solve all of the social problems of a nation. The great welfare
   institutions of our society acting alone cannot hope to do so, individuals
   acting alone cannot hope to do so, although they have a role to play and
   responsibilities to assume and obligations in appropriate cases to return
   to the general community, and finally of course the business community's
   primary role is producing economic wealth, but it does have a contributory
   role to play in relation to social policy.
  And what the social coalition seeks to do is to draw upon those four elements
   and working together to tackle problems in a somewhat different and in many
   cases innovative way, and for the first time we have more heavily involved
   many of the welfare organisations at the policy making end as well as at
   the compassion end of delivering social policy.
  We have sought through a series of initiatives to encourage greater participation
   by the business community. My cry has been not that business should give
   more, but rather that more businesses should give because there are many
   outstanding examples in the Australian community of the generosity of individual
   businesses.
  We have not sought through the social coalition in any way to withdraw from
   the traditional role of government in Australian society. The traditional
   role of Government in Australian society has been that the Government should
   have a limited role, that that role should be strategic. Part of the strategic
   role of Government is to support and provide and nurture a social security
   underpinning or social security safety net.
  And it has never been the aim of the Government I lead to drive the Government
   proportion of gross domestic product down ever lower as an end in itself,
   but rather to recognise that there are roles for Government in our community,
   they are limited, but they are important and they are strategic.
  And as we come to the end of this century, I hope to believe that we may
   have found a reasonable balance in relation to the roles of Government and
   the roles of business within our community.
  And the third of the goals we set ourselves was of course the strength of
   Australia internationally. There were many elements of the foreign policy
   of the former government that we found agreement with, and its always desirable
   to have a certain continuity of foreign policy as administrations change.
   It is never in the national interest to change policy merely for the sake
   of reminding the world that a new government has taken over.
  But we have sought in the time that we've been in office to bring about
   some re-balancing. To move away from what I thought on occasions looked
   a little like an 'Asia- only' focus by the former Government to what I have
   called an 'Asia first' focus whereby we recognise that although our political,
   economic and strategic linkages with the Asian Pacific are far and away
   our most important and would continue to be so, we also have very important
   strategic and foreign policy and economic linkages with other parts of the
   world.
  And many of you have heard me before speak of what I regard as that special
   intersection of history, culture, geography and economic circumstance that
   I believe Australia occupies, with our strong links of all sorts of kinds
   with Europe and North America that our strategic and geographic placement
   here in the Asian Pacific world. And indeed that intersection and the unique
   insight that it gives to this country was very much at work in recent months
   in the role that we discharged in relation to East Timor.
  So they were, ladies and gentlemen, some of the broad goals that we set
   ourselves almost four years ago.
  Becoming more up to date, when I delivered my second Federation Address
   in Brisbane of this year, I said that the Government had five broad goals
   for 1999. I said that we were resolved first and foremost to continue to
   pursue policies that will maintain our remarkable rate of economic growth
   and economic strengths. I think I can report to you and to the Australian
   people that we have in fact achieved that goal and in some respects achieved
   it beyond the expectation that we had at the beginning of 1999.
  There is the hope that not only will we be able to report in a years time
   that we were able to stare down the Asian economic downturn, but in fact
   we might have begun to get some of the benefits of the upswing that is now
   beginning to occur in some parts of Asia.
  I said secondly that we remain absolutely committed to the implementation
   in full of our visionary tax plan endorsed by the Australian people at the
   last election. And absent the 10 to 15 per cent as I have described it that
   was taken out in negotiations with the Australian Democrats I can report
   that the Parliament has endorsed and we are in the process of implementing
   that taxation plan which is the biggest change to our taxation system, probably
   ever and certainly the biggest since the end of World War II, and will return
   to this country very major net economic benefits. It is important when the
   focus is inevitably on some of the detail and the argument and the political
   debate is about some of the detail, it is important to remember that the
   big game, the big story out of tax reform, are the major benefits to the
   Australian economy. The lower business costs, the lower export costs, the
   lower fuel costs to the bush, the major cuts in personal income tax, the
   quite dramatic and very beneficial changes to the business taxation system
   that will give us a world competitive rate of company tax that will dramatically
   cut almost in half in many cases the rate of capital gains tax, which will
   stimulate a higher level still of foreign investment in this country.
  And the story of tax reform is the story of giving to this country an even
   better economic chance, as we go into the next century, of making an already
   very competitive Australian economy, even more competitive. And giving to
   of course 80 per cent of Australian tax payers a personal rate of income
   tax at the margin that can never go higher than 30 per cent.
  Thirdly, I said that we would not tire in our efforts to further reduce
   unemployment, which although at an eight year low is still too high, and
   once again I can report to you that we have made progress. Not as much as
   I would have liked, but more than I though at one stage during the year
   it would be possible. Even some of the more conservative of the Government's
   economic advisers are now suggesting to us that with current policy settings,
   and they include of course a continuation of a strong rate of economic growth,
   we might see unemployment go even lower.
  Fourthly we are going to extend out commitment to the principle of mutual
   obligation in Australian society and certainly I can report again that we
   have been very active on that front, the extension of the work for the dole,
   the introduction in relation to the drug offensive, of the diversion programs
   in cooperation with the states. The details of that I launched in Sydney
   only a few weeks ago and yesterday the Health Minister went to Tasmania
   to announce in cooperation with the Premier of Tasmania the diversion programme
   which is built upon, once again, the principle of mutual obligation - that
   society has an obligation to do everything it can to assist people who want
   to break the drug habit. And we have a very special social responsibility
   to do that and I don't pretend that this is an easy challenge and I don't
   pretend that the solutions are simple but part of the process must be to
   confront people who do wish to break the habit with the reality that if
   they are to get assistance, if they are to avoid being caught up in the
   criminal justice system then they should avail themselves of treatment and
   rehabilitation facilities.
  And finally I said in my address earlier this year that we would work to
   create an even stronger social coalition to more effectively remedy areas
   of disadvantage and under-privilege and I have already spoken earlier of
   the importance that I place on the building of a strong social coalition
   in this country. So as we come to the end of this year and as we reflect
   upon what has occurred and it has by any definition been a remarkably active
   and a remarkably productive year but from my point of view and the Government's
   point of view it has not so much been the individual policy decisions but
   the contribution that those policy decisions have made towards achieving
   those broad goals that I recalled at the beginning of my address.
  Of course the year has also been characterised, as political years always
   are and years in the life of the nation always are, by events that could
   not reasonably have been foreseen certainly in the way they worked out at
   the beginning of the year. And clearly Australia's involvement in providing
   hope and a future for the people of East Timor very much comes into that
   category. It was without doubt the most important international event to
   effect Australia during the year. It saw for the first time Australia leading
   an international peace enforcement operation. It saw Australia assert herself
   in an appropriate and sensible way - not a provocative or over-reactive
   way in our part of the region - in a way that has brought lasting credit
   to our nation and lasting credit in particular to the men and women of the
   Australian Defence Force. It represented the act of a country that sought
   not argument or disputation with the Republic of Indonesia but rather a
   country and an Government that sought to discharge its obligations to a
   group of people who in earlier years had more than discharged their obligations
   to Australians of an earlier generation. And I believe that history will
   see the Australian action in East Timor in a positive light. History will
   see Australia as having acted in an appropriate, a restrained, but nonetheless
   very determined, very definitive way.
  Throwing forward to the year ahead it's a clich to say that it will be
   a very active year. I see the role of the Government in the year ahead being
   very much one of continuing to pursue, in the name of achieving the goals
   I outlined, the economic reform programme that has been a characteristic
   of our time in Government. There is a lot of talk in our community about
   whether the reform process has gone too far, whether we have reform fatigue.
   Once again it is a question of achieving an appropriate balance. The reform
   process never stops. In a sense, once governments give up on reform then
   the community is entitled to question the continued value of that government
   to the community. Reforms of course must take account of the impact of change
   on our community. There is an ever present obligation on governments to
   explain and interpret economic reform and the benefits of change and reform
   to their communities and their societies and if we don't do that resistance
   - much of it ill-informed - will build to the process of reform.
  It is fair to say that Australia at the present time in a national generic
   sense is enjoying great prosperity and great economic strengths. That situation
   imposes a special obligation on all of us to make sure that all sections
   of the community as best we can enjoy and share in the benefits of that
   national economic well-being and economic strength. And I think particularly
   of those of my fellow Australians who live in the rural and regional areas
   of our nation. Historically and now in present terms contributing so much
   to our export income, so much to our wealth and also importantly, so much
   to our understanding of what it is to be an Australian. And I have often
   said in the past that I cannot conceive the Australia that I grew up to
   love as being an Australia that doesn't have the bush and the rural and
   regional parts of our country as very much part and parcel of how we see
   ourselves and how we relate to ourselves as an Australian community. And
   it is a special obligation to make sure therefore as best we can, in the
   months ahead and indeed in the years ahead, that the benefits of national
   economic strengths are enjoyed by many of our Australian citizens as is
   humanly possible. Because when the country is doing well those who aren't
   doing well feel the disadvantage ever more keenly and ever more acutely
   and that puts a very special obligation on us.
  I will seek, and the Government will seek in the months ahead, to make certain
   that we continue all we can to reduce our current level of unemployment.
   Unemployment in Australia has now assumed a markedly varied character in
   the sense that there are large parts of Australia particularly in some of
   the large cities, where for practical purpose, unemployment has been reduced
   to an almost irreducible minimum. There are many of the central districts
   of Sydney where the unemployment rate is in the order of slightly below
   or slightly above 2%. And yet if we move into some of the regional areas,
   the change is quite dramatic and quite marked. And that once again underlines
   the point I make about the need for reaching out and ensuring the best available
   assistance consistent with national economic goals is made available to
   people in rural and regional Australia. And we will seek over the year ahead
   of course to complete the successful and smooth implementation of our taxation
   reforms. They are important reforms, their implementation in a smooth effective
   manner is an important priority of the government.
  We will also seek in the year ahead to build a sensible but restrained an
   non provocative way on the new sense of respect, and I believe strength,
   in which Australia is viewed internationally. We have been a very good regional
   neighbour - not only of Indonesia but also of nations such as Thailand and
   Korea. We have a capacity to play a crucial role in the economic and political
   development of the region and our capacity to do so is enhanced by our economic
   strength and our capacity to do so has also been enhanced by our diplomatic
   standing in relation to East Timor.
  And finally, ladies and gentlemen, we will seek in the year ahead, to do
   something that I said was very important to me and to the Government that
   I lead when I accepted the verdict, very pleasingly I might say, of the
   Australian people on the 2nd March 1996. And that was to try
   and focus on those things that united the Australian community rather than
   those things that divided them. Because I have long held the belief in public
   life that the things that unite us as Australians are infinitely more enduring
   and more lasting and more effective and more important than the things that
   divide us. And if there is one goal that any government worth its salt should
   set itself and that is to do everything it can to bind together and to unite
   the Australian people. And if there is one thing - and I say it finally
   - that I can say with every conviction that we have been true to over the
   last almost four years, and that is that we have not been a government that
   has been beholden to any one section of the Australian community. We have
   not been a government that has been owned by one section, we have not been
   a government that has pursued an obsessive agenda out of deference to one
   section of the Australian community. We have rather been a government that
   has sought as best we could to govern for all Australians.
  Thank you.
  JOURNALIST:
  Tony Wright from The Age, Prime Minister. Your review today has been
   pretty much about the last years of this century, and we are just about
   move into another century and millennium. And yesterday of course you knocked
   over a couple of records of the great Liberal Prime Minister Menzies with
   cricket scores and by your own lights a better economy. I wonder whether
   you attempted at any stage to go for that last record - 16 years as a Liberal
   Prime Minister? And perhaps more realistically, as you'll be going to another
   election in a couple of years, would you be prepared to commit to serving
   another full term as Prime Minister should you win that election, and God
   and passing trucks willing?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well thank you Tony. My position on this has really been quite consistent.
   I take one election at a time. And I said that after the last election.
   I'm in good health. But I'm a realist. I take one election at a time. If
   my party wants me to lead them to the next election then I will be happy
   to do so. I remind all of you that I don't hold the office I now have other
   than by the courtesy and the gift of the Liberal Party of Australia. It's
   not mine to pass on, it's not mine to do a deal with anybody about. It is
   an office that I hold out of the courtesy of the Liberal Party and my position
   is that if the party wants me to lead them to another election I'd be very
   happy to do so. What happens after that I will deal with on a term to term
   basis. I'm not getting into the exaggerated business of projecting beyond
   that. I really think that would be both presumptuous and unrealistic.
  JOURNALIST:
  Gay Davidson.[inaudible]. Anyway I wanted to ask you Prime Minister what
   your reaction was when Indonesia scrapped the East Timor [inaudible] on
   protest agreement? And have you had any..that was two days ago. Have you
   had any intelligence more about it? What diplomatic moves have you made?
   Have you given any advice to the American Government who will of course
   be clearly intrigued about this whole thing considering their interest not
   only in oil but also this sort of strength?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  You'll appreciate that I can't go into any detail about intelligence advice.
   The view of the Government is that nothing that has happened so far threatens
   the arrangements that we've made. We think that applying some of the notions
   of successor states in international law that there won't be any difficulty
   in working out an understanding in relation to that.
  JOURNALIST:
  Prime Minister, Vivienne Stanton from Reuters. After your famous school
   report card speech to Parliament earlier this year, we know that you see
   quite a bit of talent in your frontbench. I was just wondering how soon
   you're planning to rearrange the desks, and who will get to be a prefect
   and who will get sent to the back of the class?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well I don't have anything in mind on that front. When, if I were to well
   I'd announce it. Were we to make any changes I'd announce them. But I think
   the team is doing very well. But I also think that I've got a lot of talent
   on the backbench.
  JOURNALIST:
  Malcolm Farr, the Daily Telegraph. In your 25 years in Parliament,
   have you known politicians to be held in the low standing that they are
   today? And going back to the referendum but without please going to the
   issues of the referendum, do you think a consequence of the 'no' case tactic
   or strategy of saying politicians cannot be trusted would exasperate the
   current low standing of politicians. What would you do to raise the level
   of respect of politicians and consequently of the Parliament?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Well I don't know that the attitude has perhaps changed as much as people
   including journalists and some Parliamentarians often say. I think there's
   always been a bit of that sort of healthy scepticism in this country towards
   people in authority. I was asked by President Clinton when he came to Australian
   in 1996, we had a talk about some of the comparisons between Americans and
   Australians. And I said that I thought one of the differences between Americans
   and Australians was that Australians were somewhat more sceptical as a people
   than Americans. And that's no bad thing. It may be aggravating for us on
   occasions but it is no bad thing. It's I think part of our Celtic inheritance
   that we have a certain scepticism. So I'm not sure that it's got so dramatically
   worse. I mean we all say that. I don't know that it's changed quite as much.
   What would I do to change it? I don't think there's any one thing you can
   do. You can only do your best. Try and talk to people as candidly as possible.
   Try and understand what motivates the mainstream of the Australian community.
   Don't get captured by interest groups. Don't get too remote in not only
   a geographic sense but in a sense of understanding what the broad community
   feels. You asked me about the 'no' campaign. Well the 'no' campaign had
   a lot of elements and had a lot of contributors. Different people put it
   in a different way. You wouldn't have found anything I said that involved
   any denigration of politicians. I had a view. My view was that we shouldn't
   change. Now I haven't come here today to sort of rehearse the referendum,
   you shake your head and I'm glad to hear that you haven't either. But I
   don't know that out of that there was any great further damage done. But
   I'm prepared to be accountable, and bear in mind it was a free vote, and
   when you have a free vote the Prime Minister has the same privilege that's
   accorded to every other member. And I'm very happy to have anything I said
   during the campaign subject to very close scrutiny.
  JOURNALIST:
  Amanda Buckley, Bloomberg News, Prime Minister. I just wanted to ask you
   about privatisation today. We know it was very much on the Government's
   agenda when you came into office, and you've had some very big sales and
   I think 40% of Australians are now shareholders as a result. But I'm wondering
   whether you've run out of a bit of steam on this issue. We know that your
   Treasurer is very keen to get more sales and we know that he'd like to sell
   the remaining 50.1% of Telstra to eliminate Commonwealth debt. We know there's
   less enthusiasm in the National Party, perhaps reflecting what you said
   about that reform fatigue out there in the community. And I'm just wondering
   if you do have a timetable in your own mind for the rest of Telstra, if
   you can tell is where Sydney Airport is in the queue at the moment - I know
   there's a bit of a back up of big decisions coming along on that score -
   and give us some idea of what the Government's privatisation program will
   be in future?
  PRIME MINISTER:
  Amanda, the policy on Telstra hasn't changed. The policy on Telstra is that
   we still have it as a goal to sell the lot but we made a commitment to..once
   we got to where we are now we have an examination process in relation to
   the adequacy of services particularly in regional Australia. And only if
   we were satisfied from that would we then go on. But the goal hasn't changed
   and it's not as far as I'm concerned likely to change. I would like to remind
   people, particularly those in regional Australia who might be listening
   to this program, that a lot of the benefits that are now going to the bush,
   for example the rural transaction centres. And I opened the first of them
   at Eugowra about six or eight weeks ago. And they'


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
Thank you very much, Shane. To John and Nancy Gorton, Tammie and Malcolm Fraser, former prime ministers of Australia, to John Anderson the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, Peter Costello the Deputy Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, my numerous other friends, former members, fellow Liberals and distinguished Australians.
This is an important night, it’s also an emotional, sentimental and very special moment in the history of our party. It’s almost 50 years since, to the day, that the first Coalition Government was elected to office in 1949. It is, in fact, 38 years to the day when I cast my first vote in the 1961 federal election. And by way of reminder to all of us who naturally look to the next election as well as reflecting on the previous election 1961 was a reminder of the fragility, the potential fragility, of political office no matter how high you may imagine you are riding at any particular time.
As I reflect on the last 50 years of the Liberal Party’s existence I have tried to conjure in my mind and bring together what it has been that’s produced that common thread of behaviour and commitment of all leaders of the party, of all Liberal prime ministers of the party. And I think the thing that has bound us together over that 50 years is something that Shane touched on and that is that the Liberal Party has never been owned by any one section of the Australian community. We value our links with the business community. We believe in business. We believe in men and women of enterprise taking risks and getting a decent return on their investments. But we also see society in terms of a great social coalition where the Government, individuals, voluntary organisations and the business community working in partnership and coalition produce the best outcomes.
We are not a party that is dominated by sectional interests, we are a party that’s always tried to govern for the mainstream. And we have had our greatest electoral successes when we have done that devoutly and conscientiously. But there’s another important thing about the character of the Liberal Party and that is that unlike some other centre-right parties around the world we Liberals in Australia have always been the trustees and the custodians of two great traditions – the classical Liberal tradition and also the conservative tradition.
I often invoke the expression that we are a broad church. We are a party both of reform and courageous reform where the national interest requires it but we are also a party that values those inherited traditions and ways of life that are cherished and are very dear to all Australians. And the quality of good government is always to know to what to reform, what to discard and what to preserve and what to refurbish. And part of the element of Liberal success over the last 50 years has been to get a successful mix between those two traditions.
We particularly honour tonight the contribution to Australia of Robert Gordon Menzies, the founder of our party, the longest serving Prime Minister of our nation. But I also, as the current leader of the Liberal Party, honour the contributions of all of my predecessors as leader. I also remember the response of Robert Menzies in his retirement press conference in 1966 when he was asked what were the two greatest achievements of his time in office and he said: what I did for the universities of Australia and how I kept together the coalition with the then Country Party. And I acknowledge in the presence of the leader of the National Party, John Anderson, the debt the Liberal Party owes to the solid coalition that we have had in Government. And if I look back over the history of the last 50 years I remember, I particularly remember, that our years of greatest political desolation and irrelevance were the years when our relations with our coalition partner fell into disrepair and our years of greatest achievement and greatest success have been when we have worked together. The old adage that unity is strength and disunity is death remains as valid today as it was 50 years ago.
On a personal note can I say two very simple things. First and foremost, I want to say to the Liberal Party and this represents probably the greatest gathering of those who belong to, have led, have served, and have supported the Liberal Party that’s ever been assembled here in Canberra. But what I have achieved in public life I owe to the Liberal Party. I love the party. I joined just after I left school. It’s constituted a great bulk of my life. I care for it. It’s been very kind to me. And what I have achieved in public life is due to the unstinting loyalty and support of the thousands of people who’ve dedicated their lives in an unsung way to the service of our cause. And I want to acknowledge tonight not just the well-known names of the Liberal pantheon, but also those unnamed thousands upon thousands of men and women who’ve handed out pamphlets, who’ve worked polling booths, who’ve attended innumerable fundraisers, and have done all the things that have kept our party together particularly during its years of Opposition.
We gather tonight ladies and gentlemen at a time of immense strength, immense achievement, and great hope for the Australian people. The economy of Australia has not been in better shape probably at any time since the end of World War II. It’s growth is strong, its inflation is low, its unemployment is the best for ten years, the levels of business investment are high, you have a Government that has been willing to tackle some of the major economic reform challenges of the last 10 or 20 years. We have successfully stared down the worst economic downturn our region has seen in the last 40 years. And added to that through the initiative we took, in difficult and dangerous circumstances, to secure a just outcome in East Timor, the diplomatic reputation of this country has not been higher in decades.
So it is appropriate that we as Liberals from all over Australia pause for a moment to treasure and reflect upon our history. The history of any political party is immensely important not only to its own sense of self worth, but also to its place in the history of our country. Perhaps on occasions we as Liberals have not been as good as we should have been about treasuring and promoting our history. And one of the great values of a gathering such as tonight is not only to celebrate the privilege of serving the Australian people as we come to the end of this momentous century in the world’s history, but also to thank those who’ve served our party and our country in the past. And I’m particularly pleased that the two living former Liberal Prime Ministers, John Gorton and Malcolm Fraser are with us tonight. Both of them in their distinctive ways and distinctive styles made massive contributions not only to our party but also to the wellbeing of the Australian community.
And finally my friends, can I express my gratitude to my wife Janette, and to my family. You can’t hope to succeed in politics, you can’t even begin to succeed in politics without the support and love and affection of those closest to you. And I in that respect have an immensely lucky man. And that has sustained me through my 25 years in Parliament. This is a great celebration. It’s a great occasion. It’s touching to all of us that Heather Henderson and her husband Peter should be here tonight as a strong and vivid link with Robert Gordon Menzies and that great achievement back in 1949.
But most importantly of all the things that I want to say tonight can I simply conclude by saying that to have the privilege of leading the Liberal Party of Australia is the greatest privilege that can come the way of any Australian, other than the other privilege that leadership confers upon you when the Liberal Party is successful politically and that is to be Prime Minister of our country. Thank you very much for being here tonight. Long may the Liberal Party serve the men and women of Australia. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...................
  To John Moore, the Defence Minister, to Denis Burke, the Chief Minister
   of the Northern Territory, Warren Snowdon, Senator Grant Tambling, Senator
   Crossin, to Mr Fauntleroy, the Rotary Club of Darwin and everybody else,
   ladies and gentlemen.
  I have simply come here along with my wife Janette to say a very, very big
   thank you to the families of our men and women who are serving in East Timor
   and also those who are serving in Bougainville and indeed any other Defence
   personnel who are serving overseas.
  I know that at Christmas time you will miss your husbands and your fathers
   and your sons and your lovers and all of your other dear ones who are in
   Timor. I just want you to know that there's a very grateful nation that
   admires and is immensely proud of what your families, of what our men and
   women are doing in East Timor.
  And we hope that this marvellous expression of community support for which
   I thank the Rotary Clubs of Darwin and the businessmen of Darwin and the
   Northern Territory Government for putting together as well as the RMC Band
   and James Blundell and others who are going to entertain you in a moment.
   I thank you most warmly for the sacrifice that you are making for the good
   name of Australia and also for the contribution that your husbands and wives
   and relatives and loved ones are making in East Timor.
  Those men and women have done Australia proud and as Prime Minister I am
   immensely proud of the contribution they have made and I am immensely proud
   of the professionalism of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force.
   And to the children, I hope you have a lovely day, I hope you enjoy Christmas,
   I hope you hear from mum and dad between now and then and I know that you
   will look forward to the day when you'll all be reunited when they come
   home, when the job that they are now doing so magnificently is finished.
  God bless you all. I hope you have a wonderful day and a wonderful Christmas.


E&amp;OE...................
  Good evening. At the beginning of the year I recommitted the Government
   to tackling unemployment and we are making solid progress. Today I can report
   that the jobless rate has fallen to 6.7 per cent, the lowest in almost 10
   years. 568,000 new jobs have been created since March 1996.
  Unemployment has fallen by about 125,000 and earlier this year we achieved
   the lowest number of unemployed teenagers looking for full-time work than
   at any time in the last 20 years. But I know that unemployment remains too
   high in some rural and regional areas. We must do more and we are.
  A secure job starts with a strong work ethic. That is why we extended Work
   for the Dole earlier this year and achieved 90,000 more new apprenticeships
   than under Labor.
  The number of Job Network sites will increase by 700 to 2,100. Already the
   Job Network is out performing the old CES by about 50 per cent. Now, the
   number of sites outside of the cities will increase from 600 to over 1,100.
   More than half of the 150 locations which will receive a permanent Job Network
   site for the first time will be in rural and regional areas.
  Lower company tax will help keep Australian jobs at home. Lower capital
   gains tax will boost jobs particularly in small business. And exporters
   will be $3.5 billion better off under the new tax system.
  This year we won the battle to retain youth wages saving up to 230,000 jobs
   according to retailers and we'll continue to fight just as hard to exempt
   the new employees of small business from unfair dismissal laws.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE..............................................................................................
 QUESTION: [lack of GPs in country towns]
PRIME MINISTER:
I'd like you to do that and the man is Mr Brett Cox. He's back
 there holding that brief case. But I just say to you that I think the
 problem of getting more general practitioners into rural and regional
 Australia is right at the very top of the list. We have made some progress
 with a number of initiatives that Dr Wooldridge has introduced. And there
 has been some improvement but we still have a long way to go. And I would
 acknowledge that doing something about this is about the single most important
 area of challenge as far as social policy is concerned. I think people
 who live in rural Australia have the same right as people who live in
 the cities to have access to proper health care for their families, for
 themselves. I think it is one of those basic entitlements that Australians
 where ever they are should have. I can understand people feeling a bit
 left out if they can't get a doctor to treat them or to treat their
 ill child or their parents. I understand that. We are making progress,
 making some progress and in a number ways. We've got a greater emphasis
 on rural medicine in a number of the universities. We're trying to
 put incentives into the Medicare provider number system to bring about
 some changes. We're trying a number of different strategies including
 the provision of additional funds. And we have a few more ideas we're
 working on at the present time. But I can't argue with you. I think
 your proposition is correct. I don't think we will have sort of done
 the job effectively until there's a lot more progress made on this
 front.
QUESTION: [unemployment and shorter working hours]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much sir. Could I just say a couple of things? Firstly
 we already are doing what you're suggesting. We have seen in this
 country a very significant increase in the amount of part-time work and
 casual work. I've often had this proposition put to me and if you
 study the structure of the labour market in Australia the way it's
 changed over the last ten years you can actually see there are a whole
 variety of reasons the development of the very trend you mentioned. I
 was interested that you quoted Europe. I don't want to be unduly
 argumentative because it's not in my nature, but I'd have to
 say to you with every respect that Europe is not doing as well as Australia
 or the United States or indeed Japan, although Japan has not done as well
 lately, as far as unemployment is concerned. One of the reasons that Europe
 is not doing as well is that their industrial relations system is still
 too tightly regulated and is still too heavily dominated by a centralised
 approach to industrial relations. The unemployment problem in Australia
 is still with us and it's with us in a big way in many parts of the
 country. In other parts of the country it is very low indeed. And what
 I was trying to say in my opening remarks was to acknowledge the fact
 that in many parts of Sydney the unemployment rate is now only 2% or 3%.
 What we want to try and do is to find the ways of bringing about that
 same state of affairs in all parts of the country. Now it didn't
 get to 2% or 3% in those parts of the country from anything other than
 strong economic growth and also I think having a more flexible approach
 to working arrangements. I mean I agree with you that we have to have
 more flexibility but could I say that we have that now. There's a
 lot more part-time work, there's a lot more flexibility in the system
 now than there used to be. I don't think you will eliminate the rest
 of unemployment by legislating for permanently lower working hours. We've
 really got to get to a society where people agree amongst themselves as
 to what their working hours ought to be rather than trying to impose a
 rigid uniform pattern. I mean if you're trying to run a small business
 in a rural area the last thing you want is a whole lot of dogmatic rules
 that tell you how many hours you can or can't work. What you really
 want is an arrangement of course that guarantees proper minimum standards
 so people won't be exploited, but you also want the opportunity to
 really make your own arrangements that best fits the employee and also
 suits the employer. Now I understand your broad philosophical point and
 I don't disagree with it. But I point out that a lot of that is already
 happening. At the end of the day you can't get away from the fact
 that if you want to reduce unemployment you need strong economic growth.
 We've added 575,000 jobs in Australia in the last four years. We
 have reduced unemployment nationally and that has happened because we've
 had a strong pattern of economic growth. It's been uneven, I acknowledge.
 And that is the challenge we have now to try and spread some of the national
 economic benefits a little more evenly throughout the community.
QUESTION: [inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Some people like working longer, some people like working less. And some
 people would like to work indefinitely, but I agree with that. I think
 one of the most foolish things this country did a few years ago was move
 towards having fixed statutory retirement ages. I think we should move
 away, and we are moving away from that. And I don't think it makes
 a great deal of sense to say you've got to retire by a particular
 age.
 QUESTION: [health services and information technology]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well sir, in no way wishing to walk away from responding to the question,
 a number of those things at an administrative level of course are more
 in the hands of the State government than the Federal. Can I say in relation
 to the IT point I agree completely with that. And one of the benefits,
 if I may say so, of the progressive sale of Telstra, and I know some people
 in the bush criticised that, is that out of the proceeds of it we have
 the resources to upgrade a lot of the communications facilities including
 the greater provision of IT facilities. One of the things that will make
 people in the regions feel properly included in the economic progress
 of the country is not only access to general practitioners which came
 up in an earlier question, but also access to the benefits of information
 technology. And it's impossible in my view to overstate the economic
 benefit to this country of the proper utilization of the information technology
 revolution. It does have the capacity to add enormously to our productivity.
 It can demolish distance as a disabling factor in a way that virtually
 nothing else can. And just as it's important to get the cost of fuel
 and therefore the transportation of goods down because there are some
 things that you can't transport over the Internet and you have to
 carry them by truck or by rail, so it is that if we can bring IT facilities
 to people in remote areas then we'll be making a very big contribution.
 QUESTION: [GST and automotive industry]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well certainly the motor industry will be one of the major beneficiaries
 because of the very significant difference between the 22% wholesale sales
 tax and a 10% GST. The answer to that question is that we're monitoring
 the figures virtually on a daily basis. But the problem sir is that the
 overall figures are still very strong. They really are. We have figures...the
 last set of monthly figures on new motor vehicle registrations is still
 very strong. Now I understand that the industry is concerned about a buyer's
 drought and I understand that it is logical that if you face a situation
 where on the 1st of July you can buy something for several
 thousand dollars less than what you might have to pay for it now that
 you're going to hold back. Now the response has been for some of
 the traders to anticipate the reduction by heavy discounting. I think
 you're probably very conscious of that. And I know it's uneven.
 I've had that question from a number of dealers including several
 in my own electorate in Sydney who've put basically the same propositions
 to me. I can't at this stage say anything other than we'll keep
 watching it. We don't want any crisis to arise but we can't,
 I hope you'll understand, act prematurely when the overall figures
 still show very strong sales. I mean I don't think there can be any
 argument that the motor vehicle industry registrations in aggregate are
 still very strong and they're much stronger than they were two or
 three years ago. Now we'll keep watching it. Nick Minchin who's
 not only from this State but he's also the Minister responsible,
 and the Treasurer are monitoring it on a weekly basis. And we said at
 the beginning that if we needed to take any kind of emergency action we
 would and that remains our position. But the thing that is constraining
 us at the present time is that the overall figures for motor vehicle registration
 still remain very strong. Now we have to keep watching. We had I thought
 quite good news for South Australia in relation to Mitsubishi the other
 day  the announcement the other day there will be some rationalisation,
 they're still going to maintain a manufacturing capacity here in
 South Australia and that's particularly encouraging. But we will
 keep monitoring but I have to say that the overall figures are still quite
 strong.
 QUESTION: [higher education costs]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well could I take the second question first sir. There are...the scares
 that arose at the time of that leaked document, can I just tell you that
 we are not going to implement any such proposal. We have made some changes
 in relation to the higher education sector that have created a situation
 where students are making, because of the changes in the HECS arrangement,
 are making a greater contribution towards the cost of their education
 in relation to HECS. I mean bear in mind that HECS is a system where you
 have the option of deferring your contribution until after you are in
 the workforce and earning an income, or paying up front. You've got
 that choice. Now I have to say to you I think that's fair. I don't
 think we as a country can afford to go back to a system where the taxpayer
 picks up the entire cost of somebody's education at university. I
 don't think that's fair on people who don't go to university,
 I don't think it's fair on the generality of taxpayers. I think
 what you have to do is to try and have something which is balanced where
 people make a contribution. And students, it depends once again where
 you live. The opportunities for part-time work for many young students
 now are considerable in many part of the country, and they have a capacity
 through that part-time work to earn sufficient money to pay their HECS
 up front. If they don't, or they don't choose to do so then
 they don't have any liability for it until after they've graduated
 and they're in the workforce and their income has reached a certain
 level. Now I don't think anybody can question the essential equity
 of that. And I can't hold out that we can ever go back to and I'm
 against going back to the notion that education is completely free. It
 didn't work and it didn't produce a better system. Now in relation
 to the cost of people being educated who live in the country  of
 course it's more expensive. It's more expensive in relation
 to school education as well and one of the reasons why my government has
 quite unashamedly supported the independent school sector, one of the
 reasons, as well as supporting the government sector in education is that
 it's the independent sector that by and large provides opportunity
 for people who've come from the country to go to boarding school.
 I think it's very important that that be kept. There have been significant
 improvements. It sounds from your question as though you're not entitled
 to it, I'm sorry about that, but there have been very considerable
 increases in the living away from home allowances under the youth allowance
 in relation to students. In fact one of the features of that new system
 was a very significant increase in the value of the living away from home
 component of it. Now it's no good if you're not eligible for
 it because of the level of your income. I accept that. But it does provide.....
 How old is your daughter?
QUESTION:
18.
PRIME MINISTER:
She's just going to university this year. Went last year. Where
 is she, in Adelaide? Well I don't think any...I mean of course
 it's one of the reasons...not so much reason being here. I said
 earlier in answer to a question I think people have got a right in relation
 to things like health care and education to see a reasonable degree of
 equity. I can't be so unrealistic as to say to you that if you ever
 completely eliminate some of these things just as some people I talk to
 will argue well you know the cost of buying a house in some of the cities
 is a lot more than the cost of buying a house in some of the regional
 towns and that's true, and therefore your mortgage payments are much
 higher so there are some swings and round abouts between the bush and
 the bush and the cities but education and health are two of those basic
 things in life which I understand.
 QUESTION: [Medicare anomaly]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, thank you for raising that. I'll investigate it. I wasn't
 aware of that but it does sound on the face of it a bit unreasonable.
 I'll investigate that and I'll come back to that and go through
 Barry with a response.
 QUESTION: [Bank closures]
PRIME MINISTER:
Will this mean it has no banks? What's the population? Well I can't
 answer that question straight off. I would have to investigate it. The
 Rural Transaction Centres, the current round, involve about, we have about
 500 around the country. I opened the first of them a few months ago in,
 near Parkes in NSW in a little town that had about 600 people. It was
 a former Westpac premises that were required on that particular occasion
 to a co-operative arrangement with the Local Government and they are a
 great concept and the reaction to it has been very good. Can I once again
 follow that up and come back to you. We have certain criteria through
 the Department and the Minister for working out who gets them and I can't,
 not off the top of my head, not having all the detail with me say yes
 or no to that without checking out what is available in the resources
 that have been allocated to them. Can I just say one more general thing
 on bank closures that one of the, it is of no comfort to your community
 at all, but one of the things that has happened as a result of criticism
 of bank closures not only by people in the country but also by the government,
 by myself is that one or two of the banks had actually announced moratoria
 on further closures in rural areas. Now Westpac is obviously not one of
 them but certainly the ANZ did that and I know a couple of the banks have
 some ideas about trying to reverse some of the trends but we are I think
 seeing a far greater awareness throughout the country generally of the
 extraordinary sensitivity of communities and you put your finger on it
 because once the bank closes, cash flows go elsewhere and it has an impact
 on the whole sort of economic base of the town and the rural transaction
 centres are designed to, as a way of the Government intervening and trying
 to bring back services. I think you bring about a big change in the psychology
 of a small community if you're actually seen to be putting some services
 back. In the last 10 years, it has been a case of the services disappearing
 and I think that's tremendously important but your particular question
 I'll have investigated and will come back to you.
 QUESTION: [Farmers financial burdens, fertiliser bounty]
PRIME MINISTER:
I can't argue with any of the facts you put forward about and they
 really highlight the acknowledgement I made in my speech about the what's
 happened to commodity prices and the impact that has had. In relation
 to the problem of I guess keeping younger people on the land, one of the
 things we have tried to do is, by changes to the assets test rules to
 ease the intergenerational transfer of title to properties which has facilitated
 the transfer of properties and therefore has made some contribution to
 addressing that problem. Only some, I don't pretend it's made
 a huge contribution. You asked me specifically have we considered a bounty.
 The quite concise answer is no we haven't considered reintroducing
 it. We have taken the view that the best way of addressing the particular
 cost problems of farmers is to try and address them right across the board
 in relation to things like fuel and we've done that with the new
 tax system. The benefits of cheaper fuel for farmers will be very significant
 indeed. I made a commitment to the annual meeting of the National Farmers
 Federation in Longreach last year that in any discussions that we would
 keep benefits for the bush of the original tax package and they have in
 fact been, not only kept but slightly improved because the diesel concession
 now applies to rail carriage which is of particular benefit to wheat farmers
 in different parts of the country. I acknowledge what you said about interest
 rates, I mean interest rates are a lot lower now than they were and that
 is of very great benefit but we have generally taken the view, I'm
 answering your question very directly that rather than reintroduce particular
 bounties for particular products, it is better to try and reduce the cost
 of something that everybody in the bush uses such as fuel or something
 which everybody at various stages is subject to and that is the cost of
 money.
 QUESTION: [Automotive industry import protection]
PRIME MINISTER:
I've had that put to me some years ago but this is the first question
 I've had on it for several years. You believe it is doing quite serious
 damage to your motor dealers? Well I can't say to you, we had a judgement
 a couple of years ago for a combination of trade and other reasons that
 we wouldn't make any change to the existing arrangements. I can undertake
 in the spirit of what I did in relation to a number of other questions
 raised to look at the arguments again. When it came before us a couple
 of years ago the view was taken that given what we were seeking to achieve
 in relation to trading arrangements in other areas and given the general
 buoyancy of the industry, which was certainly the case a couple of years
 ago and still generally speaking is, I mean I don't think it can
 be doubted it is still a very strong industry but there wasn't a
 case for further restrictions without promising that we will change it
 I can promise to look at it again I'm sure I'll be able to get
 back to you through Barry Wakelin when I've done that.
[Ends]
Return to Address at Community Meeting


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
 Well thank you very much Barry. To you Mr Mayor, to my parliamentary
 colleagues, Senator Grant Chapman and Senator Alan Ferguson, and to Mr
 Graham Gunn, the local State member, ladies and gentlemen. First of all
 may I thank the Mayor for his warm words of welcome. This is certainly
 the first time that I've visited Quorn. If it's the first time
 that a Prime Minister has visited Quorn then I feel doubly privileged
 to be amongst you.
I want to say you very quickly and very simply that my visit here this
 morning is part of a week long visit that paying to rural and regional
 areas of Australia. Not to learn for the first time of some of the difficulties
 that you face, but perhaps to learn in a little more detail of some of
 the particular challenges that you face. I heard some of them from the
 Mayor a moment ago and I'll no doubt hear more as I move amongst
 you after I've finished my speech.
At present Australia at a national level is enjoying a fair amount of
 economic prosperity. Our general economy is very strong, out budget is
 in surplus, our inflation rates are low, our interest rates are low, our
 business investment is high. But unfortunately not every part of the country
 is sharing in the same degree that general economic strength and that
 general economic bounty. And I'm acutely aware of the fact that through
 no fault of many communities in Australia, through adverse climatic circumstances,
 perverse world markets, the unfair trading practices of the European Union,
 and in some areas of the United States, you are not getting the returns
 that you deserve. Through a long term decline in other commodity prices
 some of the traditional industries of this country, particularly wool,
 have been placed under a great deal of strain. And that has had a compounding
 affect on local communities and services have been withdrawn from some
 towns, although I was pleased to hear from the Mayor that the service
 level in this particular community remains very strong.
Now I don't come to you today saying that I've got an answer,
 that I've got a magic wand. I'm not good enough that I don't
 think any Prime Minister of this country would ever be good enough to
 turn around long term changes in world commodity prices. But any Prime
 Minister of this country worth his or her salt should first and foremost
 understand and acknowledge that there are particular challenges and difficulties
 and areas of disadvantage in some parts of the country. My obligation
 to you is to better understand your problem and to try and work out ways
 in which we can provide some assistance. I can't as I say turn around
 commodity prices, I can't change the seasons, but I can ensure that
 there is maintained at a federal government level a proper level of government
 services.
We can assist in cooperation with the State government in identifying
 new areas of economic activity that you may as a community be able to
 undertake in order to supplement or replace some of the other areas that
 are no longer as viable and as profitable. And in that context I'm
 pleased to announce this morning that the federal government will out
 of its rural program fund up to the tune of $200,000 a study of alternative
 economic activities which may be of benefit to this community. I understand
 that that program is going to be augmented with funds from the South Australian
 government and I discussed that this morning in very positive terms with
 Mr Rob Kerin the acting Premier of South Australia before I left Port
 Lincoln. Now that is designed to see if there are areas in which new economic
 activity and new economic endeavor can be embraced which may be of longer-term
 benefit to this community. I can also confirm to you that the application
 being made by some of the areas in this region for emergency assistance,
 that the assessment of that has been completed and the recommendation
 will be going to the Agriculture Minister Mr Warren Truss in the very
 near future, and he'll be giving a response and making an announcement
 in relation to that.
I can also assure you that not only here but as I go around other parts
 of the Australian bush around regional Australia, I'll be giving
 assurances about the government's commitment to the maintenance of
 existing service levels at the instance of the Commonwealth Government.
 And while it may not be of a particular concern to this community I know
 that in many rural communities of Australia the inadequacy of.....the
 inadequate numbers, not the inadequacies of the individuals, but the inadequate
 numbers of general practitioners and medical services generally is an
 issue of particular concern. And I want to say that I can understand the
 frustration of country people who have every right to have available to
 them both accessible and reasonable affordable medical services in the
 same way as your fellow Australians who live in the metropolitan areas
 of Australia.
Of course in acknowledging some of the challenges that exist in particular
 communities I don't for a moment gainsay the fact that there are
 many areas of rural Australia where there is a source of hope and optimism.
 And that a lot of the regional areas of this country are doing well and
 there are a lot of benefits that are flowing through from the economic
 reforms of the government. And I can't let the opportunity go by
 without commending to you the benefits for rural Australia of the new
 taxation system that is going to come into operation on the 1st
 of July. Amongst other things that new taxation system will dramatically
 reduce the price of fuel in rural and regional Australia. And therefore
 because many farmers rely so heavily on export income, in fact many of
 them overwhelmingly, indeed exclusively on export income, it will lead
 to a reduction in the price of those, the cost involved in those exports,
 and therefore be of long term benefit to rural Australia.
This taxation reform plan will be of great benefit to the Australia economy.
 It will not only deliver cheaper fuel and cheaper business costs, but
 also will reduce the cost of exports and will also of course be of great
 benefit in relation to the personal income tax cuts that are involved
 And also as part of the business tax reform plan the reductions in capital
 gains tax, the reductions in company tax, the increases in family benefits,
 and the increases in pensions and benefits for people who are retired
 from the working force. So I wouldn't want to let the opportunity
 go by without saying that this is a reform that the government committed
 itself to because it believed very very strongly, very very strongly indeed
 that this country needed a new modern more progressive taxation system.
The last thing that I do wish to say to you of particular policy relevance
 is that I know how important the provision of infrastructure in rural
 Australia is. To have not only adequate roads but adequate telecommunications,
 adequate information technology facilities, and to have all the other
 infrastructure which is the basic obligation of the government, some times
 in partnership with the private sector to provide, and that is something
 that all people in the Australia community are entitled to have and are
 entitled to expect. And in the speech I made on Friday in Melbourne outlining
 the government's plans for the next year I linked the sale of the
 rest of Telstra, which I know is criticised in some sections of the Australian
 community, with the acceleration of additional infrastructure provision
 in our Australian community. And to me it makes increasingly less sense
 to tie up billions of dollars of public investment in a telecommunications
 company when those billions of dollars of public investment could be released
 to facilitate a faster rate of investment in the provision of government
 infrastructure in particularly, but not only in rural and regional Australia.
 And I leave that thought with you  does it make more sense to invest
 those billions of dollars of public money in a telecommunications company
 rather than to release them to facilitate the investment at a faster rate
 of additional government resources in the provision of much needed infrastructure,
 not only but including information technology.
My final word to you is to make and repeat a commitment I've made
 many times since becoming Prime Minister to people in rural and regional
 Australia. Part of the Australian story, part of the Australian inheritance,
 part of what we think of ourselves as being as Australians, is of course
 the inheritance of the Australian bush, of rural Australia. And without
 the preservation of that not only as a viable economic part of our community
 and a massive contributor to our export income. But also as part of the
 social make up and the very essence and psyche of our community, the preservation
 of that is indispensable for the continuation of the kind of Australia
 that I grew up to love as a child and the kind of Australia that all of
 us wherever we may live in our country they love. And therefore it's
 a very important thing for me personally, as well as in a political dimension
 with my obligations as Prime Minister to do everything I can during my
 time as Prime Minister to try and ensure that people living in the bush,
 living in the regions enjoy as best and as fairly as can be the case,
 the benefits of national economic strength. We can't and I don't
 pretend that I can solve all of the problems, but I do understand that
 they exist. I will do my best not only here but also around Australia
 to better learn about them to better understand them, and to better communicate
 to my colleagues some of the challenges that you face, and this morning
 is an opportunity as your guest to meet you, to learn a little more of
 your life here and I hope in a small way to make a contribution where
 I can to improving the situation for you. Thank you very much for coming.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Thank you very much Tony, and to the Mayor, Gerry Peacocke, ladies and
 gentlemen.
As Tony said I am on a week long visit to rural and regional areas of
 Australia although I have to confess that I took a few hours off last
 night to fly back to Melbourne to participate in the inaugural Allan Border
 Medal Dinner but I am sure I will absolve myself from any sort of (inaudible)
 in conduct in relation to that by telling this audience that the recipient
 of the honour, of course, is a Narromine boy, Glenn McGrath. So that,
 sort of, completely excuses any culpable behaviour or any suggestion that
 I was resting on my oars or taking it easy.
But it is a valuable way of spending, if I can put it in this fashion,
 prime ministerial time. There is no substitute for coming out to the bush,
 to regional areas of Australia and actually talking face-to-face to understand
 both the challenges and the opportunities to be reminded of the difficulty
 that low commodity prices imposes on wool growers. To be reminded of how
 important basic government services, be they Commonwealth or State, are
 to rural communities. I have made some remarks about government services
 and I want to make the point to you today that we are not only concerned
 to ensure that there is no further reduction in Commonwealth Government
 services affecting the country areas of Australia yet we are also anxious
 where possible to rebuild the service levels and create some new service
 levels.
For example, one of the beneficial offshoots of the new employment network
 system criticised by some but, in fact, delivering 50 per cent better
 outcomes than the old Commonwealth employment service. One of the beneficiaries
 of that new system is, in fact, the regional area of Australia because
 the latest tender round produced 50 per cent more providers in regional
 Australia and indeed provided the 300 call centres throughout regional
 Australia provided where they didn't exist before.
So we are not only in the business of trying to maintain existing service
 levels but we recognise that we have an obligation to try and rebuild
 some others. Now, I don't pretend for a moment that we can control
 commodity prices, I don't pretend for a moment that we can control
 the vagaries of world trade as they affect people but we can have an influence
 on the overall economic climate. And I believe that over the last three
 or four years we can legitimately claim to have got the national economy
 performing better than it was.
That doesn't mean it's perfect, it doesn't mean that the
 benefit of that national economic strength is being evenly shared around
 the country. And one of our obligations is to try and ensure that once
 again as far as reasonable those benefits are fairly shared around Australia.
 But we have been successful in getting the economy going better, we have
 been willing to embrace change and reform that we think will be beneficial.
And, of course, that leads me inevitably and properly to the issue of
 taxation reform. Taxation reform, the new tax system starts on the 1st
 of July. It is an aggregate and fundamental change for the better to our
 taxation system. It will provide, can I say perhaps first and foremost
 to a rural audience, it will provide significantly cheaper fuel than applies
 under the present dispensation. It will provide effectively lower export
 costs and it will provide lower business operating costs all around. It
 will provide a $12 billion personal tax cut, it will include adjustments
 for pensions and benefits and other additional compensation for self-funded
 retirees. The business tax part will provide a reduction by approximately
 one half in the level of capital gains tax and will contain also reductions
 in business tax.
Now, of course, the focus is on the GST, that is inevitable and easy
 for those who seek to destroy tax reform but it is only part of a whole.
 And we'll be regaled with stories between now and the 30th
 of June and beyond on the GST on this or that item. Now, of course, if
 you want to be negative you can run that sort of campaign and we'll
 reply, we'll respond, we'll deal with people's queries,
 we'll acknowledge that our original idea was not to have any exemptions
 effectively but the only way we could get it through the Parliament was
 to accept the changes that were sought by the Australian Democrats. We
 had no alternative. That was not our original idea. But it was better
 to get 85 to 90 per cent of the reforms than to let the whole thing go.
 And that was the pragmatic, sensible judgement that we made.
But I predict now there'll be plenty of talk about individual items
 and there'll be an attempt particularity in the tabloid newspapers
 to run a scare story a day. But in the end what we are about is trying
 to produce a tax system that is beneficial to the whole country. And there's
 really not much point in being in Government, there's not much point
 being Prime Minister unless you are willing to do things that you believe
 are good for the whole country.
And having a better tax system will not only over time, but I believe
 over a relatively short period of time begin to produce a real improvement
 to the dividend. And that's why we ran to the last election with
 it. There was a lot of pain involved in that. It was difficult and we
 are going to be subject to easy criticisms from the Labor Party and from
 others but we are going to continue to persevere because we think it is
 in the long-term interest of Australia. And I know that there are many
 people around Australia who share our commitment to the cause of taxation
 reform. But I am certainly absolutely convinced that it is going to be
 of enormous benefit to rural Australia.
And we recognise there are transitional challenges and we want to work
 with people, provide information and facilitate the resolution of any
 of the questions and problems that arise as a result of that.
There are many other things that I could talk about but I think one of
 the values at a gathering like this and I want to have the opportunity
 after this gathering of going for a bit of a streetwalk and saying hello
 in an impromptu fashion to some of the shopkeepers and others. And then
 I have got an interview with Statewide and then Gerry's got
 one or two things he wants to say to me in his normal retiring unassuming
 style and give me a few ideas and then I'm off to the Tweed to continue
 the journey.
The last thing I want to say is that I have found it very encouraging
 in the past few days that every community I have visited that I have been
 able to meet a cross-section of people. I said at a local news conference
 today when I was asked why I hadn't met a particular group or a particular
 person I said I haven't sought to meet individual groups, what I
 have sought to do is to meet a cross-section of the community and not
 just get a particular point of view. And I am very pleased to have been
 able to meet aboriginal leaders, leaders of the farm communities, leaders
 of the business community as well as the elected representatives. And
 it's very important that we see our challenges particularly in regional
 Australia as being community challenges and not a question of sort of
 bargaining a slice of the action between this or that different interest
 group. Because in the end we solve problems as a nation by working together
 and in the end we solve problems of the community by working together.
 And I've certainly seen in Bourke which has had its share of difficulties
 over the last decade or so I saw a spirit of communitarianism and a spirit
 of cooperation amongst communities which was extremely encouraging.
Finally, can I say I always enjoy getting out of Canberra and Sydney
 and going around the regions. This is not the first time I have undertaken
 a prolonged visit to regional Australia, it certainly won't be the
 last time.
I know that there are difficulties. I understand the reason why people
 want a fair share. I know that people have been hurt through no fault
 of their own and I feel very deeply for people who through from generation
 to generation have produced the export wealth of this nation that have
 now found it very, very difficult.
I can't promise that we can solve all of their difficulties, I can
 promise that in so far as the Government's behaviour makes things
 worse we won't make things worse and where we can make them better
 we'll endeavour to do so. I thank you for your courtesy of having
 me here. It's great to be back in Dubbo. I commend your new federal
 member, Tony Lawler, to you, he's been very energetic and very effective
 on your behalf and I am very pleased to be his guest here today and I'd
 be very happy to respond to any of your questions. Thank you.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
QUESTION:
[Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
I've just had a very lively discussion, not a deep discussion, but
 a very lively discussion about that. The principle is that it applies
 to livestock but not something for human consumption. Now, the proposition
 was put to me about, you know, the price is determined at the time of
 the dead weight but I was making the point that the contract is formed
 when the stock is sold. And when the stock is sold it's not dead
 weight.
QUESTION:
[Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
On the basis of that the saleyard should not be concerned but I have
 arranged for the Chairman of our Tax Advisory Board, Chris Jordan, to
 be in touch with the NSW stock and station agents this afternoon I hope
 or tomorrow morning and if, you know, I'll be chased out of town
 if I am wrong.
QUESTION:
[Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
No, but that's a form of income is it? The income is not subject
 to the GST.
QUESTION:
[Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
But if you are paying somebody, if it's some type of...
QUESTION:
[Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, that kind of, if the community information centre is a not for
 profit organisation that wouldn't be subject, no.
[ends]


E&amp;OE ......................................................................................
Thank you very much Larry for that very generous introduction. To your
 wife Jenny, to Don Page, to councillor Lyn Beck, Dr Brian Pezutti MLC,
 many other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
As I think you have probably read and heard, I am in the middle of what
 is, give or take the odd interruption, such as the flight down to Melbourne
 last night to go to a certain dinner which I gather a lot of this audience
 watched on television, is a week long visit to different parts of regional
 Australia. I have variously called it a visit to regional Australia, to
 country Australia, to the regions or to the bush, because as you know
 those expressions these days tend to be a little interchangeable. And
 it has so far been for me a very fascinating, instructive and in many
 ways also quite rewarding experience.
I am doing it because I understand that in different parts of regional
 Australia there is legitimate concern that the benefits of the national
 economic strength that Australia has at the present moment is not being
 as evenly shared as it might have been. And it is very important that
 those of us who live in areas which are doing very well economically,
 it is very important that we understand that there are some of our fellow
 Australians who through no fault of their own, are missing out on the
 benefits of generic national economic strengths. It's also been rewarding
 for me because, and instructive, because it has reminded me that there
 are many parts of regional Australia that are doing very well.
I was in Port Lincoln in South Australia at the weekend and I saw for
 the first time in some detail the marvellous tuna industry which is bringing
 enormous export income to that part of Australia. But the next day I went
 to Quorne in the Flinders Ranges area, a rural community that is almost
 a metaphor for the challenges that many parts of the bush face at the
 present time. A district heavily dependent on the wool industry, facing
 the twin vice, I suppose, of a fairly severe drought in that part of South
 Australia as well as low commodity prices. And then I went to Bourke,
 a very famous town in Australian history, and Australian folklore, a town
 that has been racked by very unhappy relations between aborigines and
 other Australians over the years, but I found a community willing to work
 together in all its parts to face that problem and also a community that
 had the opportunity to embrace a very strong cotton industry over the
 last ten or fifteen years which had provided a tremendous economic stimulus.
So, it is a rewarding interesting experience because it drives home to
 me the genuine despair of some people and a legitimate and understandable
 despair, but it is also a reminder that everything is different according
 to where you are. And that of course is something that Larry understands
 very well in this electorate. Richmond of course is a very varied electorate,
 it is a combination of what you might call some elements of the old rural,
 it's got very strong service industries based on tourism, it's got very
 significant levels of unemployment, it has people who are broadly described
 as in some ways committed to an alternative lifestyle but all part of
 the community. So it does have particular challenges. And speaking as
 I know I am to a lot of people who share Larry's and my commitment to
 the Coalition's success I know that it does contain its measure of political
 challenges.
Larry is right, we are living in an environment where it is fair to say
 that Australia is a stronger, more confident country than what it was
 just on four years ago. We were able to stare down the worst of the Asian
 economic downturn with virtually no impact at all. We've seen significant
 reductions in unemployment, we have much, much lower interest rates now
 than was the case four years ago. We have very low inflation. we have
 strong levels of business investment. We've embraced some very fundamental
 economic changes and most importantly on that front of all, on the 1st
 of July we are going to see the introduction of a new taxation system.
And I don't underestimate for a moment just how major that change is,
 but nor do I for a moment, concede to anybody that it is other than a
 hugely beneficial change for the entire Australian economy. And it is
 very important that all of us see tax reform and the new tax system as
 being exactly that. We had a description for it a couple of years ago,
 we said not a new tax, a new tax system. And it is very important that
 we don't look at it in its segmented areas. It is very easy to run a scare
 campaign on the application of the goods and services tax to an individual
 item. I can in isolation mount an argument for having no goods and services
 tax on any item you name. I can in isolation indeed mount an argument
 for having no taxation at all. And sure, hooray somebody says and I understand
 that.
And in some kind of utopian concept you might want to argue for that,
 but we live in a real world. We live in a society, I think that fundamentally
 believes that there is a limited, but none the less important and strategic
 role for the government. The faith of the Liberal and National Parties
 is built on a belief that people doing their best with as little government
 intervention as possible, as lower levels of taxation as possible, that
 that is the best kind of society. We believe in people being given the
 encouragement to get out and make their own way, to build their own fortunes,
 to start with nothing and to build it up through working hard and hopefully
 leave it to the next generation.
Now that is the kind of society that we generally believe in. But we
 also as a community believe that there have got to be some basic services.
 We are not a society that wants to see people starving in the streets.
 We are a society that believes that the government has some social responsibilities.
 To provide a decent social security safety net. And I have certainly found
 since I have moved around the Australian community that the concerns that
 people have in the areas that are doing it hard, are concerns about very
 basic things. People who live in the outback want the same access to medical
 practitioners as you and I have. They want some basic services from the
 state governments, as well as from the commonwealth government. They want
 to share in the information technology revolution, they don't want an
 Australian society where you have haves in the cities and the coastal
 areas in information technology and have-nots in the more remote parts
 of the country. So we have to achieve a balance.
And one of the reasons we have decided to reform the Australian taxation
 system is that it will provide, because the GST revenue is going to the
 states, it will provide them with a greater capacity to deal with the
 fundamental responsibilities and services which under our federal system
 are the responsibilities of state governments. For years and years and
 years, people have argued that we needed to reform commonwealth/state
 financial relations. For years, people have argued, particularly state
 premiers, of all political persuasions, whether it has been Charlie Court
 or Joh Bjelke-Petersen or Henry Bolte or Neville Wran, or any of them,
 all have said the same thing. We need a reform of commonwealth/state financial
 relations. Well the GST will deliver that. It will deliver the single
 greatest reform to commonwealth/state relations since World War II.
But most importantly for people in the regions, and most particularly
 for those in the regions that live long distances from the major population
 centres, taxation reform will mean cheaper fuel and cheaper business operating
 costs. The significant reductions in the cost of diesel fuel as a result
 of the introduction of the new taxation system will be of enormous benefit
 for people who live in rural Australia. So I want all of you ladies and
 gentlemen so see the new taxation system for what it is. It is a bold,
 fundamental embrace of a new way of structuring taxation in this country.
 It will produce cheaper fuel, cheaper exports, lower business costs, a
 $12 billion cut in personal income tax with 80% of Australian taxpayers
 on a top marginal rate of no more than thirty cents in the dollar. It
 will provide compensatory benefits by way of increased pensions and allowances
 for retired people and self-funded retirees. The business tax section
 will almost halve capital gains tax and it will lower the corporate tax
 rate from thirty-six cents in the dollar to thirty cents. Now they are
 the positives. And it will also very importantly replace entirely the
 existing wholesale sales tax, with in theory seven rates of tax, with
 a single rate goods and services tax. And it will also over time as GST
 revenues build enable the states in relation to the financial institutions
 duty to abolish it almost immediately and subsequently the bank account
 debits tax and a variety of state stamp duties.
Now it is a very big reform and there are going to be a lot of scares,
 there will be a scare a day, and the tabloid press won't be reluctant
 to run some of those scares. They will run the negatives. And we will
 need to reply. And we are going to have a very vigorous and active five
 or six months. But it is a fight worth having and it is a cause worth
 fighting for, because in the end this country is going is going to have
 a more competitive taxation system. In the end you will be able to look
 back and say we are glad they went the extra miles, we're glad that Howard
 and Anthony were prepared to get out there and fight for the cause of
 taxation reform.
I have believed in fundamentally reforming Australia's taxation system
 now for more than twenty years. And there have been various attempts over
 the years to do something about it. I am not doing it because of some
 blind ideological commitment. I am not doing it as some kind of easy political
 relaxation, because it's not. It certainly isn't, it is anything but comfortable
 and relaxing on occasions if I can borrow a phrase that somebody once
 used. But what I am doing it for is because I believe deep down that we
 need these kind of reforms, and I believe that people are elected to high
 office in this country to do something positive and if you're not willing
 to do something positive you might as well get out of the way and let
 somebody else have a go. And we live in a political environment where
 the public expects their governments and their leaders to deliver outcomes
 and to deliver results.
We're no longer as tribal about our politics. There are more and
 more people who float around in the middle. There are more and more people
 who are easily attracted by peripheral people who offer magic solutions
 only to be revealed as having feet of clay in a fairly short period of
 time. What people want are governments that are prepared to embrace problems
 and to adopt policies that are going to bring about fundamental change.
And I know as somebody who, in different ways, has had something to do
 over the last 20 odd years with the intense debate about economic policy
 in this country. I've known for a long time that we needed to do
 basically about four or five things to make our economy more internationally
 competitive. We needed to open up our exchange rate, we needed to have
 a deregulated financial system. We needed to get our budget in order to
 get it back into surplus and out of deficit. We needed to do something
 about our arthritic industrial relations system. We needed, in my view,
 to get the government out of running businesses that it's no good
 at running and I'll come to Telstra in a moment as I'm sure
 you'd be disappointed if I didn't mention it.
And we also and very importantly needed to do something about our taxation
 system. Now in different ways in various stages all of those things have
 been tackled and one of the reasons Australia was able to lick the Asian
 economic downturn, in fact the overwhelming reason was that our economic
 position was strong. If we'd still been in deficit, if we hadn't
 shown the rest of the world that we were prepared to embrace economic
 reform that global economy in which we now live would have punished us
 very severely and I wouldn't have believed that 18 months ago that
 we could have done as well in the face of that Asian downturn. And I'm
 so pleased that we took the decisions we did in 1996 to get the budget
 into shape. Some of those decisions made us unpopular. Some of them made
 us unpopular in areas of regional Australia. I know that but in the long
 run we delivered a much greater benefit and that was that we were able
 to essentially protect and waterproof this country against that very severe
 economic downturn.
But you can never stop this process. We have to keep going and if we
 are to protect ourselves against the next adverse international circumstance
 when it comes along, and it will come along at some stage, we need to
 have completed the next round of reform and that means making this country
 more effective as far as its taxation system is concerned.
So I believe in taxation reform because it will make Australia stronger
 and better economically. I believe it will improve our international competitiveness.
 I believe it's a fairer system. I believe once it's been introduced
 and fully understood, people will find it a less complicated system than
 the existing arrangement and that is why I ask all of you to go with us.
 We'll go through some difficult times politically over the next few
 months on this issue. There'll be plenty of scares but keep our eye
 firmly fixed on the long term aim and that is to give this country a comprehensively
 better and comprehensively new taxation system.
One of the things that I mentioned, talking about the sort of things
 that were needed to make this country more competitive, was to get the
 Government out of running those things that private enterprise is better
 at running. And I mentioned Telstra. I know not everybody in the community
 including a number of people who support the Coalition are totally convinced
 about the desirability of the full privatisation of Telstra. Let me tell
 you why it's government policy. Let me remind you that that policy
 says that we won't proceed to the full privatisation of Telstra unless
 we're satisfied that the community service obligations of Telstra
 are being fully met. It's a condition of moving to the sale of the
 rest of Telstra that there be a satisfactory inquiry carried out into
 those community service obligations. But I believe and I hope that the
 Australian community will agree with me that as time goes by it will be
 increasingly absurd and inappropriate for this country to invest tens
 of billions of dollars in a telecommunications company when that money
 could be alternatively invested in other forms of public expenditure or
 public investment because the ownership of Telstra represents a public
 sector investment by the Australian tax payer.
It's a question of making a choice. Do we think it's better
 to have tens of billions of dollars tied up in a telecommunications company
 or would we rather see those tens of billions of dollars used to pay off
 part of our national debt. We've paid off a lot of it but if we were
 able to sell the rest of Telstra we could make the Commonwealth free of
 net debt by about the year 2003 and that's only three years away
 from now. And we'd have something left over as well, quite a large
 amount left over. And wouldn't it be better to see what was left
 over, invested for example in accelerated commitment to infrastructure.
 Wouldn't it be better to see that money invested in another way.
 Isn't there a better way of investing billions of dollars of public
 money than tying it up in a telecommunications company and in the process
 raising all sorts of difficult issues when for example you have a telecommunications
 company now which is owned just over 50% by the Government and it might
 want to invest in say a media asset and that raises questions as to whether
 it's appropriate for the Government to have an investment in another
 media asset.
As time goes by, I believe it will be increasingly inappropriate for
 the Government to own just over 50% and it will be increasingly desirable
 and in the national interest that we should invest that additional money
 in other forms of public investment including public investment in infrastructure
 in regional Australia. That is not to say that we won't continue
 to commit significant resources to infrastructure in the regions but it
 means that if we were able to sell Telstra, we would be able to accelerate
 and increase the level of commitment to infrastructure in different parts
 of the country.
Well ladies and gentleman, can I just finish by saying this. The Government
 is about more of course than economics. It is also about the kind of country
 we have. It's about the kind of society we seek to build. Larry mentioned
 East Timor, he mentioned the way in which I think we were able to demonstrate
 the historic commitment of Australia for standing up for what was right,
 not only in our own region but also around the world.
One of the things of which I am very proud that the Government has been
 able to do and I pay tribute in particular to the work that Alexander
 Downer has done as Foreign Minister has been the way in which we have
 been able to rebalance our foreign relations. When I came to the Office
 of Prime Minister, I felt as though I had inherited a situation where
 my predecessor in the Government of this country saw our relations as
 being exclusively and totally involved in the Asia Pacific Region. The
 Asian Pacific Region is the most important region to us, is now and will
 always be but there's more to our relations than our own region.
 We are in every way as a country a citizen of the world and we have important
 relations in Europe. We have important relations with the United States
 and I think we've been able to rebalance those relations. We've
 been able to play a very strong role in our own region and we've
 been able to do that because we've been economically strong and because
 we've been able to argue very very strongly for the right things
 to be done in our region.
But it is important to see the Government in dimensions beyond what it's
 achieved on the economic front and Larry was kind enough to mention many
 of those things. I think also our health reforms and I am delighted to
 know incidentally that as a result of the introduction of the tax rebate
 and the lifetime health cover proposals which you are seeing advertised
 on television at the present time with the use of those umbrellas. I've
 very happy to report that some of the major health funds in Australia
 this year have announced that they are not going to increase their insurance
 premiums. Some of the major funds to date, at least 30% or more of Australians
 who have private health insurance will not only have the benefit of the
 tax refund but largely as a result of that they won't see any increase
 in their private health insurance premiums over the next 12 months and
 that is a direct result of the determination of this Government to preserve
 the private component of the health insurance in this country. We're
 not a government that believes that health should be totally a public
 monopoly but we are a government that believes that the supplementation
 of the public sector by the private is very important.
Ladies and gentleman I am delighted to be in Larry's electorate.
 He's frank enough to know and I'm realistic enough to agree
 with him, this is a tough seat. It has been made a bit more marginal by
 the redistribution. He's been a terrific Member. He's an extremely
 able and respected Minister. He's taken to his responsibilities as
 Minister over the last 12 months in a very effective and energetic fashion
 and I really do admire him greatly for that. I admire the work he did
 first as a Parliamentary Secretary and more recently since the changes
 following Tim Fischer's retirement as Minister for Community Services.
Can I say because this is a Coalition dinner and I have been all of my
 political life a strong believer in the Coalition how much I enjoy working
 in harmony with John Anderson who took over as Deputy Prime Minister from
 Tim. Tim did a tremendous job, he lead the National Party through some
 difficult times, he kept the faith he supported loyally the decisions
 that we took as a government and John has done exactly the same thing.
 He's a man I admire and respect and trust totally. He brings great
 integrity, great intelligence and great decency to his responsibilities.
The National Party is well served in the Federal Parliament with its
 younger Deputy Prime Minister and its younger Ministers like Larry Anthony.
 It's a strong Coalition. And all of us know from past experience
 that the great years of the Liberal Party and the National Party have
 been when they've worked together. The Menzies / Fadden, the Menzies
 / McKewen, the Fraser / Anthony and now the Howard / Fischer, the Howard
 / Anderson years. They're the great years of the Coalition. Division
 is death, unity builds success, encourages and inspires loyalty and gathers
 support.
I don't take the next election for granted. Every election is hard
 going in this country. You can't predict anything any more. Look
 at Victoria. I will regard the next election whenever it occurs and it
 is due at the end of next year and I'm in no hurry to make it any
 earlier let me assure you of that. I think things are going very well
 at the present time and I am a great believer in people getting, great
 believer in people getting full value. Three years is pretty short and
 there's no reason to make it even shorter but it will be a tough
 fight. The nature of the electoral process in this country has changed.
 People expect good governments and they have a right to expect good governments
 and understandably they look for new hope, new definitions, new proposals,
 new ideas. But if we work together we can make it, we need your support,
 we thank you for the support you've given over the years. You've
 got a terrific young energetic Local Member whose got a great future in
 Federal politics as your representative. Give him all the support you
 can over the next couple of years.
Thank you.
[End]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Thank you very much Larry, ladies and gentlemen.
I am here as I think you all know as part of an almost week long visit
 to rural and regional parts of Australia to learn more of the opportunities
 as well as the problems and challenges of that part of our country.
I have certainly learnt or have confirmed for me, I understood it before
 but there's nothing quite like having it driven home in many face-to-face
 discussions. But one of the things that people in the region value most
 of all is the maintenance and expansion of basic services and whether
 those basic services are provided by the Government, provided by the private
 sector or provided through a cooperative effort of the two the outcome
 is the same. That is the community has a better service, has an enhanced
 opportunity of access to those services.
And one of the areas of great concern to people in the region is to have
 adequate access to financial services. And the opening of this Credit
 Union here in Ocean Shores today will improve the availability of financial
 services in this part of Australia. Today is not an exercise in simply
 maintaining an existing service level it's an exercise in increasing
 and improving an existing service level.
And this has been made possible by the efforts of the Summerland Credit
 Union which has made such an enormous contribution to this part of Australia.
 And it's also been made possible as a result of the improved regulatory
 environment of the credit union that came out of the Wallis inquiry. The
 Wallis inquiry which really updated the Australian financial systems was
 established by the Government just after we were elected in 1996. And
 the recommendations of that inquiry have largely been adopted. And one
 of those recommendations was to give credit unions enhanced access to
 chequeing and other facilities, to have them more closely linked to the
 payment system. In other words, to enhance the role, the viability and
 therefore the capacity of credit unions throughout Australia.
And increasingly as we go around Australia we find credit unions replacing
 the role that was performed by banks. We see because of the change in
 the flexibility in Australian financial systems we see new opportunities
 opening up for credit unions. And I applaud the credit union movement
 and I congratulate the Summerland Credit Union in particular for the initiative
 that is displayed genuinely and particularly for the initiative that is
 being displayed here in Ocean Shores.
But in addition to that, the Government itself recognised that apart
 from improving the regulatory climate and therefore making the expansion
 of the credit union movement possible the other thing the Government has
 done is to provide some $70 million out of the proceeds of the sale of
 the second part of Telstra to finance the establishment throughout Australia
 of 500 rural transaction centres.
And these are clusters of services. I opened the first one of them in
 Eugowra which is near Parkes in New South Wales, a town of probably 500
 or 600 people. I opened it up in the old Westpac banking chamber. And
 the facilities that this transaction centre contained were basic financial
 services, Medicare easy claim facilities, Internet services, copying facilities
 and also provision for the establishment of other facilities.
Now, what these rural transaction centres will do is to provide on a
 cooperative basis in small country communities around Australia a capacity
 for the local community with seed money from the Federal Government to
 bring basic services back to rural Australia.
So when you have the combination of the credit union bringing new services
 to Australia and you have these rural transaction centres bringing services
 back to rural Australia I think you can actually see the beginning of
 turning around of the changes that have occurred. So having local facilities
 is important for any local community and people want a sense of local
 identity. This is a very nice part of the world in which to live, it deserves
 basic services and the credit union movement is to be congratulated. And
 Summerland Credit in particular is to be congratulated for the initiative
 and the foresight and the commitment it is making to this community. And
 from now on there will be a new enhanced local financial facility in this
 part of the world. It's been made possible essentially by the credit
 union movement but in turn the changes we made to the financial system
 created the right environment and the right climate for the credit union
 movement to expand.
I therefore wish the Summerland Credit Union well. I congratulate it.
 I thank it for the contribution that it's making to the local community
 and I have great pleasure in declaring the Summerland Credit Union here
 in Ocean Shores officially open for business. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
  Well Ian it was really the Hughes government that I was
 first a member of but to the Mayor, to Ian Causley, your grace, my State
 parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleman.
  It is a great pleasure to be back in Lismore. I quite
 deliberately chose as part of my week long visit to what I variously describe
 as country Australia, the regions, the bush or whatever, I deliberately
 chose to spend a period of time on the North Coast because this community
 or these communities have a great cross section of some of the challenges
 and opportunity of rural and regional Australia.
  Political leaders do need to spend time in talking to
 people where they live and work and interact with each other as members
 of a community. The job of a Prime Minister is a varied one. There's
 a time for formal decision making. There's a time for representing
 Australia to the world. There's a time for putting one's partisan
 political point of view but there's also importantly a time to spend
 travelling this very large country and trying to come to grips with many
 of the challenges and opportunities that we have as we enter the new century.
  Australia is at a very interesting indeed fascinating
 stage of her history. If it had ever been possible for me to have ordained,
 and it never was, a time at which I might be Prime Minister of this country
 I can't think of a time other than now that I would have chosen because
 in many ways if we can take the right decisions as a community now we
 can win for ourselves a future and a sense of security, a sense of our
 proper place in the world, the like of which we wouldn't have been
 able to rival on any previous occasion.
  There's little doubt that at a general national
 level the Australian economy is very strong. There's little doubt
 that at a national level the spirit of our people is optimistic. There's
 a sense of hope, there's a sense of national pride, there's
 a sense of great self belief and there's a feeling that this country
 is being recognised for what it is around the world and that is a modern
 technologically sophisticated country always capable of punching above
 its weight in international affairs with an unmatched reputation for social
 harmony, for tolerance and for openness.
  Now some of you may think that is excessively benign
 and excessively positive picture. Perhaps in some ways it is but I think
 that it does describe that national mood. But you have a national mood
 and then you have what I might call a whole series of individual or regional
 moods. And I recognise, as Prime Minister, and I recognised before I embarked
 upon my journey around rural Australia beginning last weekend, I recognised
 that although we were doing well nationally there are many areas of Australia
 that aren't sharing in that national economic plenty.
  In particular, I am very conscious of the fact that rural
 Australia, most particularly those communities that are dependent on our
 traditional primary industries are doing it very hard indeed. That is
 the result of very very poor commodity prices in many cases compounded
 by the perversity of adverse seasons but overwhelmingly the challenge
 for those sorts of communities derives from the very very indifferent
 commodity prices that some of those industries have experienced for very
 prolonged periods of time.
  I've mentioned to a number of people as I went around
 the tables that last weekend I was in Quorn in rural South Australia,
 in the Flinders Rangers area, a community very heavily dependent on wool
 and a community that's doing it tough because the wool price is very
 poor and they've had on top of that a fair amount of drought and
 when you put those two together you have a fairly lethal combination for
 rural adversity.
  And I can understand how those communities feel keenly
 that when they hear the Prime Minister or indeed anybody else talking
 about the strength of the economy they can ask themselves well that's
 alright for the rest of them, it's alright for the cities, it's
 alright for him but it's not very strong out here. I want those people
 to understand it and know I respect that situation. I'm sympathetic
 towards it and I know the sense of missing out on the national economic
 success is very keenly felt But of course it's the responsibility
 of the Prime Minister to talk about the national economic condition and
 it's not realistic of me to pass up the responsibility and the obligation
 and the opportunity I have to talk to Australia's fundamental strengths.
  I've found over the last week a very legitimate
 interest and concern about service provision in regional and rural Australia.
 I think it's pretty widely understood now that no matter how robust
 may be your commitment, and mine is certainly very robust, to the free
 enterprise system a belief that the business community better than governments
 can generate economic wealth but despite that governments do have ongoing
 responsibilities to provide services.
  People living in the country have the right equal to
 the right of their fellow Australians in the city to adequate and affordable
 health services. They have the right to share fairly and equitably in
 the communications revolution that is not only sweeping Australia but
 indeed the entire world.
  We do not want in the twenty-first century information
 technology haves and information technology have nots. They also need
 of course access to adequate education and other basic facilities.
  I believe very strongly in the pre-eminent role of the
 business community and the private sector in wealth generation because
 without a strong private sector, without a strong business community you
 don't have jobs and you don't generate wealth but I do believe
 that there is a limited but very strategic role for the government in
 the provision of certain services. Some of those services of course relate
 to what is generally called infrastructure, whether it's physical
 infrastructure or intellectual infrastructure, whether it takes the form
 of roads, takes the form of provision of schools which is of course the
 responsibility overwhelmingly of State governments, or indeed all the
 other things that are normally associated with the provision of infrastructure
 by governments.
At the moment we're having something of a debate in the Australian
 community about the provision of further infrastructure around Australia
 and the government of course will continue to assume its responsibilities
 for providing financial support for that infrastructure. I think there
 are opportunities for accelerated investment in infrastructure if we didn't
 for example continue to invest tens of billions of dollars in owning a
 telecommunications company, or owning half of it. There are probably a
 number of people in this room who don't agree with me on that. I
 understand that. And I regard gatherings like this as gatherings where
 one should acknowledge some differences of opinion and try and state my
 own views as cogently as I can.
I favour the sale of the other 50% of Telstra owned by the government
 for a number of reasons. I think it's increasingly unsustainable
 for the government to have 50% of a telecommunications company and the
 private sector to own the rest. I think as time goes by it will create
 difficult issues. For example if Telstra wanted to buy into a media organisation
 for example. The government already has a media organisation, or funds
 one  it's called the ABC. We don't control it and we don't
 seek to control it. I don't think it's desirable that any government
 should seek to control a media organisation. But the idea that if sometime
 in the future Telstra might seek to have an interest in a media organisation
 and that's been talked about, I think it would face a very difficult
 conflict of interest situation for the government as a major shareholder.
I think it's a good idea for the men and women of Australia to directly
 own shares in a great national enterprise and the two floats that we've
 had to date have been extremely popular. They've even been extremely
 popular amongst some of the people who were publicly critical of the two
 floats having taken place as an examination of the share registers which
 are publicly available would indicate. And I think it would be very very
 valuable and I think very beneficial if instead of all of that money being
 tied up in Telstra we could use the proceeds of the sale of the other
 50% to pay off the rest of our Commonwealth net debt and have some billions
 of dollars left over for accelerated investment in, some of it at least,
 in some additional infrastructure in regional, but not only regional Australia,
 but throughout the whole country.
It's one of those issues where you need to face a choice. Is it
 better for Australia to have tens of billions of dollars tied up in owning
 a telecommunications company or is it better for that public investment
 to be directed elsewhere. And that really is the sort of choice that's
 involved. People say what about the standard of service provided by Telstra.
 Let me say service obligations can be legislated irrespective of who owns
 the enterprise, irrespective of who owns the enterprise. And I've
 always made it very clear ladies and gentlemen that our commitment to
 the sale of the rest of Telstra is conditional upon the government first
 being satisfied that the community service obligations laid down are fully
 met and have been fully complied with.
The other matter of course I guess I can't sit down without ever
 so briefly mentioning is the issue of taxation reform. I say the issue
 of taxation reform because what we are facing on the 1st of
 July is not the introduction of a goods and services tax. What we are
 facing on the 1st of July is a fundamental revamp for the better
 of our taxation system. In the words of the original description when
 we announced our policy almost two years ago  It's not a
 new tax, it's a new tax system. And what people should see in
 what we're introducing on the 1st of July is a very fundamental
 change. Amongst other things we're going to have a $12 billion reduction
 in personal income tax. 80% of Australian taxpayers will be on a top marginal
 rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar. We will have much cheaper
 fuel and I can't think of anything that is more directly beneficial
 to and proportionally more advantageous for rural Australia than reductions
 in fuel costs. We'll have cheaper exports and therefore more competitive
 exports because the GST won't apply to exports. We'll have a
 simplified general business tax....general tax that will reduce the
 operating costs of businesses. We'll have in the business tax area
 a reduction by approximately one-half in the level of the capital gains
 tax. We'll have a reduction in the business tax rate from 36% to
 30%. We'll see the abolition of provisional taxation. We'll
 see the introduction of increases in pensions and benefits for people
 on fixed social security payments to fully compensate them in advance
 for the price effects of the goods and services tax. And we'll see
 the removal of the rather ramshackled, inequitable wholesale tax system
 where some items are taxed at 22% and some items at nothing, and replaced
 generally speaking by a single rate goods and services tax.
Now it's very easy for people to run a campaign against one aspect
 of this change. And I could mount an argument to all of you as to why
 you shouldn't have a GST on this or that item. I suppose in isolation
 we could mount an argument that we have no taxation at all, and you know,
 you could mount it in isolation. But we have to have a tax system because
 governments are expected by communities to provide certain services and
 we need the fairest and most equitable way of raising a given amount of
 revenue to provide those services and to provide a safety net for those
 who through no fault of their own need the assistance of their fellow
 Australians. So I ask you when you read and hear of the individual requests
 for exemptions, you read and hear of the scare campaign on this or that
 item to bear in mind that we have a choice  we either embrace a
 system that will make Australia more internationally competitive, that
 once and for all will give us a better tax system, or we limp along with
 the present system. Because the people who are trying to prevent tax reform
 taking place, and that includes many of our political opponents, they
 are really arguing for the present system. You can't have it both
 ways. You can't say you want a bit of reform but without you know
 all of the things that you can easily campaign against. We went to the
 last election, we laid out our plan, we were quite up front. We ran the
 risks, we took the punches in relation to the introduction of the new
 system and the Australian people voted in favour of the government. When
 it came to getting it through the Parliament, because of the opposition
 of Senator Harradine we had to compromise a little with the Australian
 Democrats. I would have preferred originally to have gone along with the
 government's original proposition. But we compromised with the Democrats.
 We got 85% of what we wanted and that's it. There'll be no going
 back on that. We won't of course seek in the future to go back to
 our original position. We struck a deal, that was the basis of getting
 it through. And now it's important that we embrace the change and
 the reason I'm committed to it is not because I'm an ideological
 zealot. It's because I think this tax system will make Australia
 stronger and better and economically more soundly based and more competitive,
 and I think it's fairer and I think it's more efficient. And
 that is why I'm committed to it. Now of course there are going to
 be some implementation challenges and the government is keen to help the
 community, particularly the business community, the accounting and the
 legal professions in those implementation challenges. But it is one of
 those occasions when we have to be willing as a community to embrace something
 that is beneficial. Don't be diverted by the scares  they're
 easy. What is a little bit harder is building something enduring and long
 term for the future of the country.
Finally ladies and gentlemen can I say that of all the impressions I've
 gathered in the last few days travelling around Australia, the one that
 has come through most strongly to me, and the one that's come through
 most reassuringly to me, is a continued sense of community in rural Australia.
 Whether it's in the very small community or in the larger towns I
 find that great Australian willingness to put aside your differences on
 particular issues and come together as a group of people trying to solve
 a problem. Bourke is a town that has had it's share of problems involving
 people of different races. It's had difficulties between Aboriginal
 Australians and other Australians. And I found there that instead of the
 two groups being at arms length from each other and shouting slogans at
 each other, I found the groups and the leaders pleasingly and refreshingly
 working together and recognising that the problems were a community problem.
 That it wasn't productive to engage in name calling, it wasn't
 productive to negotiate with each other from arms length, rather it was
 productive to sit down as a community and try and solve these problems.
 I was asked by one or two people whether I had met some leaders of the
 Aboriginal Land Council and I said no, but I quickly said that I hadn't
 met the leaders of the National Farmers Federation either. It's not
 because I'm indifferent to either the Land Council or the National
 Farmers Federation, but I took the view that if you go to the community
 you meet the community, rather than try and get a particular view from
 particular groups in the community much and all as I may respect those
 views. And so it is in all the places that I've visited I've
 found that very strong community sentiment and I think that's very
 reassuring because it indicates that there's something very positive
 and there's something very enlightening and I think inspiring alive
 within Australian rural communities. And it's very important as we
 ponder the adversity of many rural communities that we never lose sight
 of the fact that there are many good news stories in rural Australia.
 There are huge success stories and it would be a huge mistake if the impression
 were created that everything was difficulty and despair. There is a lot
 of adversity, I understand that. I've sought in recent days and I
 will continue over the months ahead in a realistic achievable way, not
 a rhetorical unachievable way, as leader of the government to come to
 terms with those things. And I'll be aided with the advice of my
 colleagues such as Ian Causley and Larry Anthony and Gary Nehl who represent
 the three electorates of the north coast in the national Parliament. And
 I very warmly thank you for coming along tonight. I'm enjoying being
 amongst you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE........................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Mayor for those very kind words of welcome. To
 my colleagues Don Page and Larry Anthony, to all the other councilors
 and very importantly the representatives of the Ballina community.
I have a connection with Ballina. The brother and sister-in-law of my,
 I don't say oldest friend, but my longest standing friend, John and
 Sally Lowry. John's brother Peter and I were I suppose you'd
 call us best mates at Canterbury Boys High School, more than 43 years
 ago, I left school in 1956, and John and Sally settled in Ballina a lot
 of years ago and they were always kind enough to turn up whenever I come
 to these parts and it's nice to see them again today. And when I
 think of Ballina I think of that connection that goes back a very long
 way.
But it's typical I suppose of a community like this that it brings
 together different strands of Australian society and the Australian people.
 It brings together people that have lived in this community long before
 it became a lot more attractive to people in other parts of Australia.
 There are a lot of people who live in communities like Ballina who have
 a very strong and genuine commitment to environmental concerns. I've
 met in the short time I've been here the students of a significant
 cross section of both government and independent schools offering the
 parents of this district a choice in the education of their children.
 I was very pleased to hear the representative of the local Anglican school
 acknowledge the contribution that the government's new schools policy
 had made to the expansion of choice when it comes to the education of
 our young.
I've had the opportunity of talking about the social challenges
 with the representative of Lifeline. That great organisation started more
 than 40 years ago in Australia in Sydney by the then Reverend Allan Walker
 and it spread all around the world as a unique way of providing access
 to people who feel in the depths of despair and are in need of assistance
 in handling their particular personal and emotional problems. And the
 value to me of a gathering like this is I guess encapsulated by what I've
 just said over the last five minutes or so. It reminds me of this marvelous
 collection of people doing good things by their fellow men and women which
 is the hallmark of Australian society.
A lot of things are said about Australia. People often remark about our
 love of sport and that's accurate because we love it, and I'm
 no exception to the rule. People talk about our sense of mateship and
 that's accurate too. People talk about the fact that we're an
 open society. We respect people according to their worth not according
 to their class or according to their background or their ethnic origin.
 There's another characteristic of Australian society that's
 very important and that is the characteristic of the volunteer spirit.
 We are one of the great volunteer societies in the world. We are a society
 which gets things done with the assistance of volunteers in a way in which
 few other societies are able to accomplish. And some of the best of the
 Australian spirit comes out when as a community we come together to respond
 to natural challenges and to respond to community needs. And I've
 been reminded as I have moved amongst you today of just how important
 the volunteer spirit is to the Australian psyche and the Australian sense
 of being.
As you know in the past few days I've been moving around the bush,
 rural and regional Australia, learning more about some of the opportunities
 as well as some of the problems. And I had the pleasure just a few, I
 guess an hour-and-a-half ago to open a new credit union, a new Summerland
 Credit Union office not far from here and that will bring new services
 to this particular part of Australia. And I know how important community
 services provided either by governments, by the private sector, or by
 a combination of the two, how important those services are to people who
 live outside the metropolitan area. Life is different when you get out
 of the big smoke. In some respects it's better, in other respects
 it represents a challenge and it's important when we look at the
 comparisons of the city and the country, or the city and the coastal regions,
 we understand that there are plusses and minuses and I'm very mindful
 of the fact that people in the regional areas of Australia have a right
 to access basic services with the same speed and according to the same
 principles of affordability as people who live in the metropolitan areas
 of Australia, particularly in the very large cities. And of course your
 local member, Larry Anthony, who's now the Minister for Community
 Services as well as being the Member for Richmond, has a special role
 in responding to the concerns and interests of people in the community
 sector.
 I've spoken a lot over the last year, indeed over the last two
 or three years of the concept I have of a social coalition. What that
 concepts really says is that if you want to provide the best solutions
 and the best responses to some of our community problems you need to get
 the government, the local volunteer sector, the business community, and
 public spirited individuals all working together, each contributing what
 they can do best towards solving a problem. The government has of course
 a fundamental role to finance a social security safety net in our society.
 When I talk about this social coalition I don't talk about any concept
 of the government reducing its support. I see the government continuing
 its support. But I see that support being continued in harness with the
 expertise and the goodwill the resources of the community sector.
And in the time that I've been Prime Minister I have tried to involve
 many of the great social organisations, welfare organisations of Australia
 not just in providing as they can do better than anything else 
 help and advice, and moral and where necessary spiritual support to people
 who need it - but also I've tried to involve them in policy making.
 And it's been no accident that I've had a Salvation Army captain
 from Melbourne  David Eldridge  chair my Youth Homelessness
 Task Force which has given the government some new insights into stopping
 families falling apart in the first place before the young person becomes
 homeless. And when it's happened in the early stages if it's
 possible to do so, putting the young people back in contact with their
 parents. It's much better to have policies that prevent families
 falling apart in the beginning and it's also less expensive to the
 community, than it is to say well we'll sit by idly, let it happen,
 when it's happened we'll provide independent income support.
 Now in some cases it's never possible to put things back together
 again. We don't live in a utopia, we don't live in an ideal
 world. Families and relationships do break up and fall apart and there's
 a tragically high incidence of it in the Australia of today. And one of
 the reasons why our social welfare demands continue to rise is the simple
 fact that more and more families break up or more relationships break
 up and more and more is the case that we have sole parent families. And
 they do a magnificent job and the fact that we lament that there's
 a growing number of them is certainly no criticism of the way in which
 many parents, overwhelmingly but certainly not entirely women, soldier
 on and look after their children in very difficult circumstances. But
 we ought to have policies that keep families together as far as it's
 humanly possible to do so. So the digression from what I was saying was
 to make that point that the best youth homeless policies are those that
 try and stop the youth being homeless in the first instance.
I've also involved people from the welfare sector in relation to
 drugs policy. I know that's often an issue of debate in this part
 of the world. I know that some of the views that I express on that are
 criticised by those who think that there is a different way than arguing
 the cause of total rehabilitation and total rejection of drugs. I happen
 to believe very strongly that the best way to tackle the drug problem
 is to have an increased commitment in three areas. You need to increase
 your commitment as a community to law enforcement. And can I take the
 opportunity of congratulating the Australian Federal Police and the Australian
 Customs Service working in cooperation with the New South Wales Police
 for the very significant seizure of cocaine which took place yesterday.
 I make no comment for obvious legal reasons on the liability or otherwise
 of those who've been arrested. But the fact that a major seizure
 of that kind has taken place along with many other major seizures does
 indicate that whilst you can never claim any kind of victory in law enforcement
 in relation to drugs, we are doing well and the Federal Police and the
 Customs Service and the New South Wales Police deserve our thanks as they
 always do because of the important community service that they provide.
The second area where we need to act in relation to drugs is of course
 education. We need to adopt an uncompromising attitude towards the use
 of drugs in schools. And I support and applaud both government and non-government
 schools that have a no drugs in our school policy and are prepared to
 enforce that policy against people who break it. And I think State education
 departments and State education ministers and indeed others charged with
 responsibility of schools ought to give full faith and affect to those
 sort of policies.
And finally we need more services to help people who want to break the
 drug habit. One of the things that we've done recently is to put
 a lot more money from a federal level, and I'm pleased to say it's
 largely being matched although not completely as yet by the States, to
 what I call a diversion program. And this put simply says to somebody
 who's caught with a minor drug offence, you simply say to that person
 you've got a choice  you can take your chances with the criminal
 justice system and perhaps at some time if your drug offences and the
 consequences of that continue end up in gaol, or you can agree to undertake
 a program of treatment to break your drug habit. In other words we divert
 people from the criminal justice system into treatment and rehabilitation.
 And this is being trialed in different ways in some of the States. The
 New South Wales government has trialed it in relation to the drug courts,
 and other governments are showing increased interest in it. Now I don't
 pretend for a moment that the problem isn't other than a huge challenge.
 I have to say that I am unconvinced that heroin trials or safe injecting
 rooms offers a realistic alternative to the policies that are being followed.
 I acknowledge that there are some, perhaps a significant number in the
 community who don't agree with me. We'll continue to have the
 debate. I'll continue to argue why I think they are not proper alternatives,
 and no doubt those who disagree with me will continue to put the other
 point of view. But it would be a great pity if the focus by the media
 and other commentators on those parts of the drug challenge, it would
 be a great pity if they gave the impression that that is really the only
 thing that has ever been looked at in relation to drugs. As to most of
 the campaign against drugs, can I tell you there's about a 90% to
 95% agreement across Australia between the federal government, the State
 government, Labor, Liberal and National Party. It's an issue that
 ought to transcend political differences and there's an enormous
 amount of cooperation and that cooperation extends into the areas of law
 enforcement.
 So ladies and gentlemen, I've chosen to say a few things about
 those social and community issues today to you because I think they are
 important. Of course the economic wellbeing of the community is tremendously
 important as well. But a total national health audit if I can put it that
 way, includes not only economic issues but also social and human issues
 and each reinforces the other. And the responsibility of a government
 is to try and get the balance right. We pride ourselves on our achievements
 in strengthening the Australian economy and it is stronger and better
 and more robust and more competitive than it was four years ago. We have
 fewer people out of work, we have lower interest rates, we have lower
 inflation, we created something like 580,000 new jobs, we have strong
 economic growth, we stared down the Asian economic downturn.. That doesn't
 mean to say that everybody's getting a reasonable share. Some aren't.
 I understand that. And when the country's doing well over all the
 people who are missing out feel it all the more keenly. And one of the
 roles of the government as far as it can, and there's a limit to
 what the government can do, we've got to try and ensure that the
 national economic cake is at least freely available to everybody even
 though some will work harder than others to get their share of it.
But today is very much a community gathering and it's an opportunity
 for me on behalf I guess of the country to thank the people who work in
 a volunteer way in the community, to make life more bearable and more
 enjoyable and more comfortable for those less fortunate. I want to particularly
 thank the police and the fire services and the other emergency services
 for the contribution that they make. It's not easy work. It's
 often filled with trauma and a great deal of stress. And it's very
 important that the contribution of the police and other services be very
 very freely acknowledged.
But over all it's a great experience for me as Prime Minister to
 travel around our country. Over the past week I've been to Port Lincoln,
 to Quorn in rural South Australia, to Bourke, to Nyngan, to Dubbo, last
 night in the Tweed, here in Ballina, going onto Lismore tonight and so
 it goes on. And I've learnt a lot. I've had some views reinforced.
 I've had some different perspectives placed on things. I've
 learnt the value of tackling problems in a community way rather than negotiating
 an outcome between the various interests groups. But I'm delighted
 to say that at every single gathering I've gone to we've had
 a wide cross section of the community. So I'm tremendously impressed.
 For example in a place like Bourke where the problems of that city, the
 social problems, the difficulties between Aboriginal Australians and other
 Australians in that town were being tackled not in a pejorative way by
 the community, not with one group sitting in a corner and negotiating
 with the other, but rather with everybody seeing it as a community challenge
 and a community problem. And I've sought wherever possible to get
 a view of what the attitude of the community is not by meeting one individual
 group. I haven't had separate meetings with the National Farmers
 Federation, or separate meetings with the Aboriginal land councils, or
 separate meetings with this or that. Rather what I've done is to
 come to gatherings like this and to talk to people as a group. I think
 you get a group ambience, you get a better cross section of opinion, you
 get a more understanding responsive give and take attitude when you go
 to a community gathering like this, rather than trying to get all of your
 information from one specific group.
But it has been a great experience and I've learnt a lot. And of
 course in this job you go on learning and you go on getting better understanding
 and better insights. Can I conclude by saying to you what a tremendously
 capable and energetic member you have in Larry Anthony. Larry has not
 been a member for very long but he has risen fast because he's done
 well. And he's an energetic person who comes from a very long and
 honourable family of political tradition, and he's giving very effective
 representation to this community. So ladies and gentlemen thank you most
 warmly for your very kind hospitality and your traditional Australian
 friendliness. I value it very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...................................................................................................
Mr Ian Causley, Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.
It's great to be here in Lismore. It's great to be here as
 part of a week long visit to rural and regional areas of Australia. A
 visit that is designed to reinforce many of the understandings I have
 of the different challenges in regional Australia but also an opportunity
 for me to explain face-to-face without the intervention of others and
 to answer directly the concerns of people who live in the regions of Australia.
Right at the moment this country at a general national level is experiencing
 strong economic growth. We may have had from the Reserve Bank an interest
 rate increase yesterday but let me point out even after that increase
 that the average housing loan in this country will be $266 a month lower
 than what it was in March of 1996 when the Government I lead came to office.
We do have nationally much lower unemployment than we had four years
 ago. We have generated about 580,000 more jobs in Australia over the last
 four years. We have seen our budget deficit disappear. We have seen a
 very strong growth in investment even in the areas of greatest unemployment
 difficulty and I acknowledge that the north coast of New South Wales has
 some of the nation's highest areas of unemployment. I acknowledge
 that. And that, of course, as you all know has been the case for a long
 time. It's not a state of affairs, we'll come to questions in
 a minute and I'll be very happy to devote far more time to questions
 than I will to my speech, but it's important that I have an opportunity
 of putting the Government's position and then I'll be happy
 to try and answer your questions.
So I acknowledge that there are areas of unemployment which are higher
 than the rest and that has been the case for a long time. Higher unemployment
 in the north coast of New South Wales didn't arrive in March of 1996.
 In fact the absolute level of unemployment here now is lower than what
 is was then but it's much too high and we would like to see it lower.
 And over the past few days I have received a lot of messages from people
 in rural Australia. Some of those messages are of great hope and optimism
 and show a determination on the part of many communities to try and turn
 things around of their own volition.
On the other hand, some of the messages are of despair and concern particularly
 in relation to the maintenance of basic government services. And it's
 my responsibility as Prime Minister to see that the legitimate demands
 of rural communities regarding Commonwealth Government services are met.
 And for that reason I have taken on board the concerns that have been
 expressed to me here in Lismore and in other areas. And I do want to echo
 what Ian Causley said in relation to job placement services.
It is true that Employment National didn't do as well out of the
 second job tender contract as it did out of the first one. But it is not
 true as has been implied by the local newspaper here and by some of the
 Sydney newspapers that that means that there are fewer employment services
 in the bush or in Lismore than there were before. My advice is that under
 the old dispensation you had one CES. You have four job providers at present
 under the first tender and under the new system you are going to have
 seven permanent ones and two outreach ones. By any measure that is an
 increase in the services available, not a decrease. That means there are
 more opportunities and more choice for the unemployed in this part of
 Australia to get help to find a job.
Now, I don't pretend that that's going to solve the unemployment
 but I do believe that it's important if we are to have an intelligent
 debate and if we are to share our concern about such a thing as unemployment
 we should get our facts correct. I know the importance of services and
 I know that for many smaller communities the maintenance of those services
 is very important.
There's a lot of debate at the present time regarding the new taxation
 system. I want you to know that we remain absolute in our resolve to implement
 the new taxation system from the 1st of July. And we are in
 favour of the new taxation system for one reason alone and that is when
 it is introduced in full it will be good for Australia. That is why, it
 will be good for Australia. It will. It will be good for Australia. It's
 very easy, of course, as I said last night and I have said at every gathering
 as I have gone around Australia it is very easy to mount an individual
 criticism of one or other individual item in the tax system. You can mount
 an argument in relation to individual items very easily but you have to
 look at the whole policy. You have to look at the fact that it will deliver
 reductions of $12 billion in personal income tax. [Interjection] I'll
 tell you what it will do, sir, it will result in 80 per cent to the Australian
 taxpayer community, and that is the people who earn less than $50,000
 a year, being on a top marginal tax rate of no more than 30 cents in the
 dollar against 47 cents now. That's what it will do.
And I don't think anybody in their wildest imagination could suggest
 that people earning less than $50,000 a year are rich and the fact that
 80 per cent  80 per cent  of the Australian community are
 going to be on that top marginal rate of 30 cents in the dollar is an
 enormous improvement on the 43 cents odd and indeed 47 for some that exists
 now.
But it goes further than that. For the regions a particular benefit will
 be the fact that it will produce a reduction via the cut in diesel excise
 a major reduction in the price of fuel throughout Australia. It's
 going to cut about $3 to $4 billion off the cost of fuel all around Australia
 - $3 to $4 billion. And because the GST is not going to apply to exports,
 it's not going to apply to exports, that will be of enormous benefit
 to rural communities because it will make our exports cheaper.
Overall, it's going to lead to a reduction in business operating
 costs. I mean, take petrol alone. Because you will be able to get a rebate
 of GST paid on petrol bought for business purposes it's going to
 mean that petrol used in a business, wherever it might be used, will be
 on average about seven cents a litre cheaper than it is now because you
 can't get a rebate if you use petrol for business purposes on the
 excise component of your tax.
So that is an illustration. When you analyse the totality, ladies and
 gentlemen, you analyse the totality of the reform you will see that it
 will in overall terms be of enormous benefit to this country. And that
 is why the Government is persevering. That is why we took the tax reform
 package to the Australian people at the last election. That is why it
 has now become the law of the Commonwealth and that is why we are going
 to introduce it on the 1st of July. We recognise that there
 will be implementation detail. We recognise that there will be implementation
 challenges. We know that people will need advice and information and assistance
 with the new system and a large amount of Commonwealth Government resources
 is being made available to ensure that people are fully advised, fully
 informed and fully assisted regarding the implementation details of the
 new taxation system.
The last thing I want to say in my introductory remarks and then I'll
 be very happy to take your questions is this : that I recognise that although
 the country as a whole is strong and is doing well and is outperforming
 most other countries and was strong enough economically to avoid being
 badly hurt by the Asian economic downturn I recognise that despite that
 there are some parts of Australia that are missing out on that. I acknowledge
 that. And to the best of our capacity it is our desire to see that those
 sections of the Australian community who are missing out get a fairer
 deal.
I can't and I won't attempt to guarantee that every part of
 the country can equally share in national economic prosperity. That is
 from a practical point of view unachievable. And it is unachievable from
 a...it is achievable for people who have an equality of opportunity
 but in the nature of things there will be variations. But people are entitled
 to have a better share of the national economic benefit than in some communities
 they are getting.
And part of what I have been doing over the last week and part of what
 the Government continues to do is to listen to and respond to the concerns
 of rural and regional communities. But in the process of doing that it's
 also important to point out that it's not all doom and gloom in rural
 Australia. There are many parts of the regions that are doing well. There
 are many communities that have turned things around. There are many businesses
 that have taken new opportunities and won new markets. I can name many,
 I can name the cotton industry in Bourke, I can name small businesses
 in many parts of the coastal areas of Australia, I can name the tea industry,
 Madura that I visited in the Tweed. I can talk about the strength of many
 small businesses along the coast of New South Wales. It's important
 not only to acknowledge the adversity and the difficulty but also to recognise
 that there are many good news stories as well in rural areas of Australia
 and it gives a completely distorted picture to represent all of it as
 doom and gloom.
But, ladies and gentlemen, I thank Ian Causley for the invitation to
 be in Lismore. I welcome very much the opportunity of a public gathering
 like this to hear the views and to add to the questions of the people
 of Lismore and I'll be delighted to take your questions, one at a
 time if I may.
[ends]
Question and Answer
 session


E&amp;OE ..........................................................................................
Well, thank you Ian and ladies and gentlemen. It is for all of the reasons
 for which you have been made aware, a particular pleasure for me to address
 this gathering in Maclean. It is as it is described a mighty river and
 it is in every way a delightful part of the world, and I can understand
 why it is becoming increasingly attractive as a place in which to live.
I'm visiting Maclean, and indeed spending three days on the north
 coast, the Northern Rivers area however you wish to generally describe
 the district as part of a week long trip around rural and regional parts
 of Australia. I have undertaken that week long trip because I have always
 believed in the time that I've been Prime Minister, and indeed before,
 that it is very important in a country as big as Australia that the leaders,
 at a national level, ensure that they gain through regular visitation
 a comprehensive understanding of the different elements that make up our
 community.
And it is so very easy if you were born in Sydney, and grew up in Sydney
 as I was, and if you spend as I do now a large amount of my time in Canberra,
 and inevitably I am drawn because of the large population preponderance
 to a lot of meetings and so forth in Melbourne, it is very easy to spend
 so much of your time in that triangle. And that of course is a very big
 mistake. And part of the arrangements I have in my office are to ensure
 that whenever it looks as though my diary is getting a bit unbalanced,
 a bit of a bell rings metaphorically speaking and reminds me that it's
 important that I get around rural and regional parts of Australia.
That is the first reason, but the second reason is that I am very conscious
 of the reality that in modern day Australia, although we are doing very
 well at a national economic level, and we really are, we have very strong
 economic growth, we have about 580,000 more jobs than four years ago,
 we have a much lower rate of inflation and even after the adjustment yesterday
 in interest rates, we'll have housing mortgages on average $266 a
 month less than what they were four years ago, we've eliminated our
 budget deficit and we're seen as one of the strong economies of the
 world. Despite all of that there are areas of Australia that are not enjoying
 as well as other areas the benefits of that national economic strength.
 And some of those areas lie within the regions of Australia, indeed most
 of them do.
But I am also conscious of the fact that as you go around rural Australia,
 it is not all doom and gloom. Indeed there are a lot of good news stories
 in the regions of Australia. I have seen a lot of them over the last few
 days and it's very important that I get a balanced picture and it
 is very important that we have a balanced understanding and a balanced
 reporting of what occurs in the regional parts of Australia. It is true
 that some of the regions have lost services and that that has caused a
 lot of angst. People are understandably angry about the loss of government
 services. They're also angry about the loss of banking services and
 they also legitimately want the same access to medical services at an
 affordable price that their fellow Australians in the cities have.
But there are some examples of where services are being put into an area
 for the first time. For example, when it comes to the Job Network, which
 has been the subject of a lot of debate. As a result of the second tender
 in the Job Network, Maclean for the first time ever will actually have
 one or two job providers under the job network, something that they've
 never had before. Because one of the consequences of the new system is
 that about three hundred small country communities around Australia will
 have a Job Network provider helping the unemployed when they haven't
 had them, either under the old Commonwealth Employment Service arrangements
 or under the first tender of the Job Network arrangement. Now one service
 swallow, certainly doesn't make a summer, but it is an illustration
 of a determination on the part of the government, not only to recognise
 the need to prevent the withdrawal of any further government services
 from the bush, but also where possible to return or create for the first
 time, services particularly in the smaller regional and rural areas of
 our country.
I'm very conscious and I've had it reinforced to me that over
 the past few years the position of traditional primary producers who rely
 on what are regarded in this country as the traditional areas of agriculture
 and primary production, that is wool and wheat and dairy and beef, that
 all of them in different ways have been put under enormous challenge.
 I know that this is, this has historically been one of the great dairy
 areas of Australia. Of course there are far fewer dairy farmers now in
 this part of the world than there were eighty or ninety years ago. I am
 also conscious that the remaining dairy farmers in this part of New South
 Wales, are grappling with the challenge of whether or not to support dairy
 industry deregulation. This ultimately is a matter that has to be decided
 by state governments, because it is the state government, and not the
 federal government that presides over the quota system for milk and it
 is the state government that is ultimately responsible for the decision
 that will be taken. We have said at the federal level that we will support
 a move towards dairy deregulation, provided the states, and in turn I
 guess the majority of the participants in the industry, support it and
 want it. We've said that we would implement to facilitate the change,
 a dairy industry levy that would sustain the consumer price at a higher
 level than would otherwise occur as a result of deregulation and we would
 use the proceeds of that levy to finance the restructuring of the industry
 so that those people whose quotas would disappear under dairy industry
 deregulation would have compensation paid to them for the disappearance
 of those quotas. In the end it is a matter for the industry and the state
 governments to decide. We are there to help and facilitate and provide
 the national legislative mechanism for the levy because it's not
 fair to ask people to accept deregulation without financial cushioning.
 And the industry at a national level at least has developed a plan which
 they believe is the fair, the fairest and best way of achieving this outcome
 and it is ultimately in the hands of the industry to decide whether or
 not it's going to occur.
But of course, communities like Maclean and Grafton are not just built
 on primary industry. They have now become, in every sense of the word,
 communities that rely very heavily on service industries. They rely very
 heavily on tourism, they rely heavily on educational services and increasingly
 the attraction to people, particularly people in retirement of areas such
 as this mean that we need to ensure there is an adequate level of not
 only business, but also service provision that caters for a population
 with that age profile.
I can't of course let the opportunity go by without saying something
 very briefly about taxation reform. It's on everybody's lips,
 and it is very important that we see taxation reform not in miniature,
 but we see taxation reform on a very broad canvas. Taxation reform is
 a total change for the better to our taxation system. In the words of
 our original slogan, it is not a new tax, it is a new tax system. It is
 a system designed to make the Australian economy more internationally
 competitive. The reason that I've campaigned so strongly for it is
 not out of any kind of ideological zeal, or not because it is some kind
 of religion to me. It is because I believe that when it's implemented,
 we'll have a better economy, we'll be more competitive, the
 business community will have a better taxation system to deal with.
It includes a lot of things, it includes a $12 billion reduction in personal
 income tax. It means that 80% of the Australian tax paying community,
 that is those individuals who earn less than $50,000 a year, and that's
 80% of all individual taxpayers in this country, that those people will
 be on a top marginal rate of no more than thirty cents in the dollar.
 It means for people in rural Australia, that there will be cheaper fuel,
 because we are reducing the excise on diesel fuel by twenty cents a litre.
 And that will be of particular benefit to people in rural Australia. It
 means that our exports will be cheaper and more competitive. The return
 to producers will not be lower but because the GST will not apply to exports
 and because the embedded taxes now inherent in our wholesale tax system
 will be removed that our exports will be cheaper by the tune of about
 $4 billion a year. And that will make our exporters that much more competitive.
 Our business operating costs will be lower because we will replace the
 wholesale sales tax, the financial institutions duty and in time, the
 bank account debit tax and a wide range of stamp duties with the goods
 and services tax.
We will also for the first time be providing a new financial deal for
 the state governments of Australia. You would imagine from some of the
 politically inspired comments made by state premiers that in some way
 the goods and service tax was a bad thing for the states. Well, let me
 let you in to a secret. When we had the Commonwealth/state conference
 when I called a meeting of all of the premiers and chief ministers of
 the Commonwealth and the states and put to them the proposal for the goods
 and service tax arrangement. And under the arrangement the states get
 every last dollar of the revenue out of the goods and services tax, that
 is the deal. So, that in time they will be able to have more money available
 to spend on public hospitals, on roads, on government schools and police
 services and all the other things that states governments are meant to
 provide. And let me tell you that whatever they may have said publicly,
 every last premier was absolutely determined to sign that Commonwealth/state
 agreement. And I well remember Mr Carr saying, John I think this is an
 outrageous proposition, but please where do I sign. Because it was a very,
 very attractive proposition to the states. And if I were a state premier
 the last thing I would do is try and stop this new arrangement coming
 into operation.
Now, of course the focus of sections of the media, the focus of those
 who want to make an easy comment, or have an easy go at something is naturally
 on the GST. And I know with a change like this it is easy to generate
 a fear campaign. I stopped along the way to Maclean and had a chat to
 some people at a little town, and I wandered along the shopping strip
 and talked to four or five of the shopkeepers and one lady called me in
 and she . . . and I said how are you and she said business is not bad,
 but she said what about the GST she said. And I said, well let me, tell
 me about it. She said well over there I have got things that are subject
 to the GST, and over there I have some fresh fruit and a few other, some
 other food that isn't subject to the GST. And I said, well, and she
 said, well what do I do? And I said it is very easy, I said. What's
 over there? What percentage of your sales? And she said, oh about 80%.
 And I said, what is over there? And she said, the other 20%. I said, well
 under an apportionment proposal that the Tax Office is putting together,
 a small business like you would simply add up its turn over and if it
 is 80% of items subject to GST, and 20% not it means you remit 8% and
 not 10% of all your sales on a three monthly basis and you claim back
 all of the GST you pay on any of the things you buy to run your business.
 It is as simple as that. She said, oh, that's all that's to
 it. And I said, well in essence that is all that is to it.
And I think as time goes by, as people realise that it's coming
 in on the 1st of July and they begin to focus on it and apply
 their minds to it. I had another chemist in the same place, I asked him
 and he said, oh well, and he banged the computer, you know that he'd
 just bought and he said, look oh we are getting ready, he said it's
 ok, he said, I've got a bit of paper out there that I was just reading
 as you walked in and he said I'll get on top of it. He said it is
 a much better system then the present one.
But we are going to be subject to a fear campaign. The opponents of change
 can always run a fear campaign. I mean, I can remember when decimal currency
 came in. Um, gees, a lot of people remember when decimal currency came
 in. And I remember all the fear then. People said, oh how can you possibly,
 you know, this is outrageous. You know, our beloved nineteen pounds, you
 know, when shillings and sixpence and so forth and all of that, pounds,
 shillings and pence. How will we ever get used to the new system? That
 sort of concern lasted about ten days, and within a very short period
 of time people were very used to it. Now, I'd have to say that this
 is slightly more challenging than decimal currency, because there was
 an inherent situation about decimal currency. But the principle really
 is the same. It is easy to run a scare on change. And the easiest thing
 for a government to do I guess is to throw up its arms and say look, we
 won't worry about change, even though we believe it is for the betterment
 of the country.
Now, I really do believe this new system will make Australia stronger
 and better that is why I am in favour of it. And I believe that once it
 is in and people have got used to it, it will be okay. And in a few months,
 perhaps by October or November of this year, people will say what was
 all the fuss about. And this was the experience in New Zealand. But I
 do accept that over the next few months, people are going to run fear
 campaigns. You are going to have a scare a day in some of the tabloids
 and you can run a campaign, if you look at something in isolation, and
 you can say, well you know, this shirt, all men have got to wear shirts,
 so therefore we should have no GST on shirts. Now, in isolation that sounds,
 oh yeah, that sounds alright, yeah, in isolation. You can mount an argument
 about having no tax at all in isolation. But of course that's not
 realistic.
We do need to raise taxes to provide government services. Not only to
 provide the army and health services, but also the other government services
 we want. So, you've got to devise a tax system that works better
 than the present one. And the principle of the GST is that you have a
 general, single rate at a reasonably low level on virtually everything.
 We started off, we wanted to have it on food and other things, we couldn't
 get that through the Parliament, we settled for 85% of what we wanted
 and now it is set in concrete. There will be some exemptions in relation
 to food and other items, but by and large it will apply to everything,
 and the exemption in relation to food will only be in relation to fresh
 food, it certainly won't apply to things like restaurant meals.
But the important thing is that the more you exempt, the more the system
 breaks down. If you exempt one item, then there will be pressure to exempt
 another item. And everytime you, I've learnt this in politics, everytime
 you agree to the entreaty of a special interest, you create a natural
 incentive for a new special interest to fill the void created by the satisfied
 first special interest. That is how the law of increasing political demand
 on government works. And it has always been thus and it ever will be thus.
 And over the months ahead, we are going to have to deal with requests
 to leave things out, but everytime you leave things out you create that
 ripple effect and that undermines the goal that you have in mind. And
 if you go too far down that road you then reach a point where you can't
 implement all of the other reforms.
I know there are a lot of self-funded retirees in this area. There are
 special arrangements in the package to cater for your situation. Those
 who get the pension, there will be a front-end loaded increase in the
 pension of 4% on the 1st of July to accommodate in advance
 any price increases flowing from the introduction of the GST. There will
 be a savings bonus for people on the pension of a thousand dollars and
 there will be additional savings bonus for people who are self-funded
 retirees. If you are a self-funded retiree you'll benefit from the
 total abolition of provisional taxation, which I know is the bane of the
 existence of many self-funded retirees in the Australian community. And
 of course you will also benefit from the reductions if you are in the
 income tax bracket, you'll benefit from the reductions in personal
 income tax. You'll also benefit from a thing, I know it sounds complicated,
 called dividend imputation credits. You might, for example, have shares
 in a company, and you might get paid franked dividends and the tax may
 be deducted at say, 36 cents in the dollar now, it will be 30 cents in
 the dollar. But you mightn't pay 30 cents in the dollar on your tax,
 you might only pay 20 cents in the dollar and at present, you really get
 gypped the 10 cents, the difference between the 20 and the 30. And what
 we're going to do under dividend imputation credit is to pay you
 the difference. We take the view that if your tax rate is only 20 cents
 in the dollar, and it's being deducted under imputation at 30 cents,
 or 36 cents in the dollar, that is not full value for you. And you want
 to get paid the difference. And we're going to do that. And that
 is one of the particular benefits for many retired people whose taxable
 incomes may not be very high and therefore they're not paying the
 same rate as the company which issues them with the franked dividend.
Now these are many of the, might I say, no pun intended, fringe benefits
 of the taxation reform which are particularly tailored. Now, you don't
 read about dividend imputation credits, or the abolition of provisional
 tax, or bonuses for self-funded retirees. You don't read about those
 on the front pages of the newspapers and I can understand that because
 it is not, it is a good news story. And that doesn't generate a little
 bit of fear.
Now what I am putting to you my friends, is that this is a total reform.
 It is a once in a lifetime opportunity to give this country a better taxation
 system and that is why we we're doing it, we're going to stick
 with it, we're going persevere against the criticism and the growing
 choruses from particular people, but I think falling on increasingly deaf
 ears in the Australian community. There's a bit of noise as you go
 around, but there's also a lot of people who say, gee this is for
 the longterm benefit of the country. We had a debate about it at the time
 of the 1998 election, the Government got returned. They told us they were
 going to do it, they've done it, let's get on with it and get
 it behind us. That is the attitude I get. People are saying to me, look
 let's get it in, let's get it behind us and get on with something
 else. And that is very much the attitude of the government. And that is
 very much, I think, increasingly the attitude of the community.
But, ladies and gentlemen it is great to be amongst you. It's nice
 to be in Maclean. It is a beautiful part of the world. Thank you very,
 very much for your very warm welcome.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE .........................................................................................
  It is a real pleasure for me to be here in Nambucca to
 make the closing speech of a week long visit to different parts of regional
 Australia.
  And it is an opportunity to say very quickly to you that
 during that week, I have had reinforced some views that I had when I started,
 I've learnt some new things, I've got some better understandings
 and most importantly of all, I have had the opportunity of talking directly
 to literally hundreds, indeed into the thousands of people from different
 parts of regional Australia.
  Of course, this is by no means the first or the last
 time that I will make such an investment of time in the regions of Australia.
 And I've done it very deliberately because I am aware that although
 at a national economic level Australia is performing stronger and better
 than it has for twenty-five years and that's a fact : our rate of
 economic growth, our levels of business investment, our levels of inflation,
 our levels of interest rates are stronger and better than they've
 been for a long time. We are seen around the world as one of the strong
 economies, not only of our region, but of the industrialised world. And
 that condition nationally is a result of necessary economic reforms that
 have been carried out, particularly in recent years.
  But, having said that I am aware that not every part
 of the country is sharing in a reasonable way the national economic prosperity.
 I am very conscious that in some areas of regional Australia, particularly
 in some of the smaller communities that have relied very heavily on commodities
 that are traditionally part of Australian primary production, there is
 a lot of economic difficulty and economic pain.
  I am very conscious that the unemployment levels vary.
 Unemployment is virtually ceased to be a major challenge in significant
 parts of Sydney and some of the other metropolitan centres. But I know
 it remains a problem in regional Australia, although it is lower in regional
 Australia than what it was four years ago, and we should keep our perspective.
  So I've learnt a great deal about those things in
 more detail. I've learnt of the strength and the resilience of rural
 communities. I've learnt of the commitment of regional Australia
 to tackling the problems of relations between Aboriginal Australia and
 the rest of the Australian community in an open community based way. I've
 sought on all occasions not to meet with special interest groups, but
 rather to meet with the community as a whole.
  And this is a magnificent gathering of the community
 of this part of the north coast of New South Wales. I've been inspired
 by the willingness of different groups in the Australian community in
 the regions to co-operate together to tackle problems. I think it is important
 as we acknowledge the difficulties of many people in the regions of Australia
 and their special needs. I think it is also important to remember that
 there are some good news stories in the regions. It is not all gloom,
 it is not all despair, it is not all high unemployment. There are many
 areas of regional Australia that are doing well.
  Mention has been made of taxation reform. We are committed
 to taxation reform because we believe that when it's introduced it
 will strengthen the Australian economy. It will strengthen regional economies.
 To start with it will lead to cheaper fuel than you would otherwise have
 because of the significant reduction in the fuel excise on diesel. It
 will lead to cheaper fuel than you would otherwise have because we are
 going to cut the excise on diesel by a significant amount for non-metropolitan
 Australia. And that is something that is going only to non-metropolitan
 Australia. That is not going to be available in Sydney. It's not
 going to be available in Melbourne. It's going to be available only
 in non-metropolitan Australia. And that is an illustration of one of the
 benefits specifically for regional Australia of our taxation plan.
  It is very easy to look at taxation reform simply as
 the goods and services tax. It is easy to mount an argument in isolation
 against the application of the goods and services tax to one particular
 item. But what you've got to do is to look at the aggregate impact.
 You've got to remember that our tax plan involves reductions of $12
 billion in personal income tax. It will result in 80% of Australian taxpayers,
 those earning less than $50,000 a year being on a top marginal rate of
 not more than 30% on any slice of their income. It carries with it increases
 of 4% on the 1st of July in all pensions and other benefits
 to cover in advance the price effects of the GST. And the real value of
 that will be related to future increases in average earnings, so that
 the value of the compensation is not eroded over time.
  There is the abolition of provisional tax which will
 be of great benefit to retired people, particularly in the regions. There
 is special compensation for the savings of pensioners and self-funded
 retirees, also of importance to retired people in the region. We're
 totally abolishing the wholesale sales tax. We're getting rid of
 the financial institutions duty. Over time we'll get rid of the bank
 accounts debits tax and also a range of stamp duties that are levied by
 the states.
  In other words, it is an aggregate package. We're
 cutting the capital gains tax in half which will be of great benefit to
 small business men and women. We're cutting the company tax rate
 from 36 to 30% which will be of benefit to businesses. And we're
 introducing a simplified approach to the accounting of small businesses.
 We're having special provisions to quarantine any adverse impacts
 on primary producers. So there is a lot more to the tax reform package
 than just a goods and services tax, although that is an integral part
 of it.
  And the reason that I've campaigned very strongly
 for this, and the reason why we are going ahead to implement the legislation
 is that we believe that it will be beneficial for our community and for
 our country. I know that there are implementation challenges, and I know
 that people need assistance and advice and explanations in relation to
 those challenges. And that will be provided by the Government and by the
 Taxation Office over the weeks and the months ahead.
  Ladies and gentlemen I am very conscious of the importance
 of government services in regional Australia. And I have made it plain
 that I do not wish to see any further withdrawal of Commonwealth Government
 services in the regions. It's very important in our federal system
 that each level of government be accountable for its own responsibilities.
 I will answer for the services of the Commonwealth Government and you
 will be entitled to hold me accountable and my government accountable
 in relation to that. And equally I will expect you to hold Mr Carr and
 his government accountable for the services for which they have responsibility
 and also of course there are responsibilities at a local government level.
  A reference has been made to revenue sharing. I might
 point out that one of the benefits of taxation reform is that every dollar
 coming out of the GST will go to the states, every last dollar, all of
 it will go to the states. And in the years ahead, because of that as the
 revenue from the GST builds up the states will have more funds to provide
 the basic services, government schools, hospitals, police services and
 so forth. For years the premiers of Australia of all political persuasions
 have pleaded for a growth tax. They've begged the federal government
 to give them access to growth revenue. Now they have it courtesy of the
 goods and services tax. And it represents a major break through in Commonwealth/State
 financial relations.
  Ladies and gentlemen, the greatest thing about being
 Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity it gives you every day
 to meet the men and women of Australia from all sections of our community
 engaged in all occupations and all pursuits. I never tire of doing that.
 I have found the last week immensely rewarding and stimulating because
 it's enabled me to meet the men and women of Australia of all ages
 in all parts of regional Australia.
  Regional Australia is made up of a lot of elements. The
 bush as we colloquially call it usually refers to the more remote parts
 of Australia, but it helps to define our identity as Australians and,
 it is absolutely irreplaceable as part of our understanding of what it
 means to be an Australian.
  The coastal communities of Australia have a distinctive
 character of their own. They have a great lifestyle, they have a great
 sense of community, they have a great commitment to their future. And
 they have a great capacity to solve problems at a community level. They
 do have challenges that people living in the city don't have. And
 part of the journey that I've undertaken over the last week is to
 gain a better understanding of that.
  I thank you most warmly for the welcome that you've
 extended to me today and I look forward to talking to you over the next
 few minutes over morning tea. Thank you so much.
  [ends]


E&amp;OE.........................................................................................
Thank you very much Campbell to you and my Ministerial colleagues, Nick
 Minchin in particular, the co-organisers and co-hosts of this very remarkable
 gathering of very dedicated, diverse and distinguished Australians. To
 the Chief Scientist of Israel, Dr Orna Berry, to the Chief Scientist of
 Australia, Dr Rob Batterham, to my other ministerial colleagues and ladies
 and gentlemen.
As I am sure you know my professional odyssey before I became a politician,
 I am normally described as being a suburban solicitor although the reality
 is that I practiced in the central business district of Sydney all of
 my professional career. And therefore I guess the peripheral cynic would
 say that my understanding of and association with science and innovation
 was not very great when I entered Federal Parliament. And I have to say
 to you that in the almost four years now that I have been Prime Minister,
 one of the most rewarding personal experiences that I have had is to be
 exposed as Chairman of the Prime Minister's Science Council, as I
 still generically call it, during that period of time. And that exposure
 has been something of a personal journey and experience for me I frankly
 admit to coming to that position, committed to the ideals of a partnership
 between Government, the business community, the scientists, the innovators,
 the inventors and the researchers of Australia, and having a very clear
 view that that was tremendously important to the development, particularly
 because of the Australian culture of a can-do economy, and a can-do society.
 But that experience over the last four years has left a very significant
 impression on me.
I don't mind acknowledging that the genesis of my own very strong
 personal support for quite a number of the Government's significant
 decisions over that period of time which has resonated so importantly
 in the areas for which you have responsibility. The genesis of that has
 come out of the working of that council. I think particularly of the focus
 that it brought to me in relation to the importance of investment in health
 and medical research in our country, which of course has lead to the Government's
 doubling of our commitment in that area over the next four years. So tremendously
 important to not only the domestic but also the international reputation
 and research capacity in those areas of Australia her scientists and her
 doctors. And, of course, the focus that was brought to bear in the council
 on the importance of the interaction of the investment incentives that
 operate within our taxation system towards the contribution that people
 make to encouraging investment in innovation, in new ventures and the
 desirability of having a taxation regime that encourages the risk-taking
 and the patience that is required to bring those things about. And that
 of course played a very significant role, not only in shaping my own attitude,
 but the attitude of many of my colleagues towards some of the decisions
 that found their way in to the Government's business taxation reforms
 that have now been agreed to and will be presented to the Parliament for
 ratification within the next few weeks or months.
I mentioned those things in particular ladies and gentlemen to underline
 a very strong personal commitment on my part to what this gathering is
 about - an acknowledgment of the enormous importance to Australia's
 future of her scientists, her engineers, medical researchers and all of
 those that are broadly involved in the innovation process. As is often
 the case in a political life, and particularly in the life of a Prime
 Minister, there are conversations you have with people which leave you
 with a very lasting impression, and cast a very long shadow, so to speak,
 of your own understanding of how the world operates and the forces that
 are likely to bear on that operation in the years ahead.
And one such of those conversations I had in July of 1997 with the then
 and now recently reappointed Chairman of the Federal Reserve system of
 the United States, Dr Alan Greenspan. And I asked him a fairly simplistic,
 I suppose he'd been asked it a hundred times before, inquiring question
 and I said can you please explain to me how it is that the United States
 economy is performing with such spectacular strength at the present time.
 And he said that he'd reached the age of 71 and he thought he understood
 everything about economics and a lot about human nature, and he said frankly
 he didn't really know. But he then went on to say if you really pressed
 me to venture an opinion, he said I think it's got to do with the
 enormous investment that our country has made in technology and the enormous
 commitment of the business community and of the whole culture of the United
 States in technology.
Now that piece of advice stayed with me and I was reminded of it a few
 weeks ago when I read a speech he'd delivered in the United States
 and he ventured the perhaps cheeky for an American, but nonetheless given
 his position and entirely appropriate observation that one of the reasons
 why he thought the economic growth of Europe and Japan had lagged somewhat
 behind that of the United States was the fact that the investment of those
 countries in technology and the commitment to innovation had not been
 as great as had been in the United States.
And I accept as Prime Minister of Australia that there is a lesson in
 that for us. And if we are to achieve with the assets that we have, and
 we've got a lot of assets that other countries don't have. If
 we are to achieve the ideal of the can-do country in the twenty-first
 century, we do have to understand the message that was implicit in the
 Chairman's observation to me a couple of years ago.
And there are gathered in this room, people who will play a role in achieving
 the ideal of a can-do country. It is a partnership. And I do acknowledge
 the importance of the Summit having been organised as a joint effort of
 the Business Council of Australia and of the Government. The Government
 does have a role, there is a role for public investment in research and
 development, and I hope that we have demonstrated that and demonstrated
 it in a very significant way.
I understand the debate about the level of taxation incentives, and of
 course that will be one of the things that will come out of this Summit
 as a recommendation. I understand that. I also understand the importance
 of innovation and technology in responding to one of the major contemporary
 social and political challenges of Australia, today and that is the impact
 of economic change on the regions and the rural areas of Australia.
It probably hasn't escaped your attention that over the past few
 days, I spent a week travelling around rural Australia. And I visited
 a combination of what you would loosely call towns representative of what
 we call the bush and areas that are more akin to the prosperous regional,
 particularly coastal towns and cities of Australia.
And there were many things that I took away from that week. I was of
 course left with a very deep impression of the debilitating impact of
 longterm declines in commodity prices and the adversity compounding that
 of weather in many parts of Australia. And I was also left of course with
 some tremendous good news stories of the tremendous success of the cotton
 industry in western New South Wales - encouraged by very sophisticated
 irrigation technology and the extraordinarily sophisticated technology
 and innovation surrounding the tuna industry in Port Lincoln. A world
 class and world competitive industry.
And the relevance of that experience to me and for me when I think about
 this Innovation Summit was that it was a very strong reminder of how part
 of the answer to the challenge of the bush and the challenge of regional
 Australia is to make absolutely certain that we marshal technological
 skill, we marshal innovation to the advantage of our fellow Australians
 who live outside the major capital cities. And one of their great entreaties
 to me, and I am sure to all who care to listen is that they share to the
 full in the development of the information technology era, which is having
 such a profound impact on all of our lives.
One of the great advantages of a gathering such as this, because it brings
 together not only ministers and leaders of the business community, but
 also people of eminence in the academic community, practitioners in science
 and medicine and engineering and also people who are playing a trailblazing
 role so far as information technology is concerned in this country is
 that it does drive home the importance of the linkages between the Government
 and all those other sections of the community.
I've often spoken in another context of how as I look back of the
 last twenty or thirty years of politics, not only here in Australia, but
 also around the rest of the democratic world, that we've really gone
 through in a sense three phases in the interaction of government and the
 private sector and the rest of the community. I think we did go through
 a phase in the 1960's when we imagined that the solution to most
 problems in this country lay in ever-increasing investment of resources
 by government, particularly at a federal level, as being the answer to
 all of our problems. And then as time went by there was something of a
 reaction against that. And it was thought that the ideal situation was
 for government to retreat to a fairly minimalist role in our society.
 But I think as we've turned the page into the new century we've
 shunned both of those extremes and we now see many problems as problems
 that can be very effectively solved by an effective partnership or coalition,
 a word I've used in another context, between the government and different
 elements of our community. And I see this Summit today and this gathering
 here tonight as being very much an expression of that.
I bring a very simple commitment to you, that the Government is totally
 involved in harnessing the capacity of our scientists, our inventors,
 our researchers, and our innovators to the economic and social future
 of our nation. That's the broad commitment and that's the sense
 of personal enthusiasm that I bring to it. You are entitled of course
 to reserve judgement until you see the quality and nature of further Government
 decisions. I hope that some of the decisions that we've taken to
 date and I touched upon a few of them earlier in my remarks, are an earnest,
 or a downpayment of what might be achieved in the future.
There are many challenges that will require the harnessing of your understanding
 and your commitment. I thought again back to my experience of travelling
 around the regions of Australia last week and one of course can't
 escape for very long the challenge of water resources and the interaction
 of the political and scientific and environmental issues that bear upon
 that and the enormous threat posed by salinity to the economic base and
 social future of many communities in Australia. And that is a challenge
 for the Government, it will require the commitment it has already enjoyed
 the commitment of large financial resources from the Government. And it
 will require the cooperative effort of the Commonwealth Government as
 well as the governments of the various Australian states.
So, tonight is an important opportunity for me to simply state a personal
 and Government commitment to the cause that this Summit seeks to serve.
 And it is an opportunity to thank all of you who made a contribution and
 most particularly to thank my ministerial colleague, Nick Minchin, for
 the tremendous contribution that he's made.
On one other personal note, could I conclude, and that is that I'm
 sure many of you will be touched with a sense of sadness that we don't
 have with us tonight Dr Malcolm McIntosh. Malcolm McIntosh who led the
 CSIRO with such tremendous distinction was a member of the Science Council,
 was a major contributor to government, not only here, but also in the
 United Kingdom. I've had the experience of sitting around a Cabinet
 table and listening both to ministerial colleagues and other advisers
 and people from the business community and from academia and elsewhere
 over the last four years. And rarely have I heard anybody who could present
 an argument with such force and clarity, yet balanced than I did from
 Malcolm McIntosh. And I would not want this occasion to go by without
 recording my personal sadness at his death, acknowledging the contribution
 that he made to the Australian people and the Australian Government. And
 most particularly the contribution he made to CSIRO and an understanding
 of so many of the things that are so enormously important to all of us.
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your contribution of time and talent
 and energy to innovation, to the sort of things that are very significantly
 going to shape our society for years into the future. We will study very
 carefully your recommendations. You will remember my statement of commitment
 and support and quite properly you will make your judgements as the months
 and the years unfold. I think this has been a great exercise and I thank
 all of you for being an important part of it.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.............................................................................................
Thank you very much Professor Gilbert. To Professor Clarke and all the
 other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am particularly happy to be here this morning. I am, of course, very
 conscious of the extraordinary worldwide success of cochlear and bionic
 ear and just what an extraordinary contribution this great project has
 made to putting Australia on the map. And of carrying our scientific achievement
 to the rest of the world and demonstrating just what can be achieved if
 you have an effective partnership between the Government, the universities,
 our medical practitioners and scientists and the business sector.
In many ways it's a template for what ought to be achieved in other
 fields in the future. It drives home to all of us that we each have a
 role. It certainly drives home to me and I have had driven home to me
 on a number of occasions that the Government has a very important role
 in medical research in this country. I know, of course, people would quite
 properly say including many here, not just medical research, but all other
 forms of research in this country. But I am very happy to say that in
 the area of medical research we have not been unresponsive not only in
 relation to this project but also more generally with the commitment we
 made in the Budget last year to double our financial support for that
 in the years ahead.
I am also very conscious that this opening takes place here in Melbourne
 and Melbourne has a great, indeed enviable tradition of really being the
 home of family and corporate medical philanthropy in Australia. There's
 no city in the world for its size I think that has done better in terms
 of supporting medical institutes and it's a tribute to the sense
 of community of the people of Melbourne especially that they have been
 so generous.
I have a particular interest in this project. Whilst I am happy to say
 that I was never afflicted in the way that so many that have been helped
 here were, hearing impairment is something that affected me as a child
 and as a young person. And I can well remember my teenage years wearing
 one of those then not so invisible hearing aids and I wondered at the
 time of the extraordinary difficulty and challenge in life of children
 who are born profoundly deaf or for some other combination of reasons
 such as meningitis or otherwise and that was the very familiar childhood
 affliction and disease that caused the total or near total deafness. And
 I have watched with more than just a passing interest and having had the
 acquaintance over the years of some of the more eminent surgeons in this
 area who have made such a contribution to improving the enjoyment of life
 of so many Australians.
And nothing quite touches any of us as a physical affliction of a child.
 Profound deafness or blindness or disability is something that all of
 us melt in compassion and sympathy before. And to see the delight on the
 face of a child whether you meet that child or you see that child on film
 or television who's had hearing restored or hearing given or sight
 improved is something that really makes life worth living. It makes science
 worth the dedication and the application and it makes whatever support
 financially and otherwise that the private sector and governments around
 the place can give absolutely worthwhile.
We have remarkable researchers in this country and it's very appropriate,
 may I say, that this opening occurs at the time of the Innovation Summit
 here in Melbourne because what that Summit is doing is to remind all of
 us of the linkages that I mentioned earlier, to remind all of us that
 this is going to be an area where Australia can continue to punch above
 her weight in the 21st century. We are very good at this and
 we should understand how good we are. We should honour the contribution
 of so many people in the past, honour the contribution of people to this
 institute. And to Dr Clarke and to so many others I'm filled with
 admiration and I'm also filled with admiration for the young researchers
 and scientists that I met a few moments ago. And I know that I'll
 have the opportunity to meet some of the people who have been the recipients
 of this marvellous hill scaled as far as medical science in Australia
 is concerned.
I want to assure you of my on going commitment and that of the Government.
 I want to compliment Cochlear. I want to congratulate all of those who've
 been involved in supporting the institute, and all of those associated
 with the University of Melbourne  it's vice-chancellor, it's
 previous vice-chancellors, and all of those who have made such an enormous
 contribution to something that makes me as Australia's current Prime
 Minister immensely proud of just how much we have achieved in this area.
 We have a capacity because of the kind of society we are to do even better
 in this area. We have brains and professional application the equal if
 not the better of any in the world. We have a business community that
 is increasingly aware of the constructive role that it can play. We have
 leadership on a vice-chancellor level in many of our universities now
 recognising that nobody operates alone any more, that you have to have
 linkages between universities and the private sector. And we also, can
 I assure you, have a Government that places an extremely high priority
 on this kind of activity. And most importantly of all as Australians I
 think we all have an immense personal commitment and sense of excitement
 about doing something that improves the quality of lives of young Australians
 in particular, and generally pushes forward the boundaries of medical
 science.
It's frequently been said that the last 25 years of the last century
 were very much the information technology quarter of the century. I think
 it's also fair to say that the heights that are going to be scaled
 in the area of medical research and medical science in the first 25 years
 of the 21st century will leave people in the year 2050 gasping
 in amazement about what we've achieved because I think we all know,
 and I am a total layman and a real struggler in terms of trying to understand
 the complexities of medical science, but there is a sense that I think
 all of us have that we have achieved a great deal and we are reaching
 as Dr Clarke said to me a few moments ago some of the last frontiers in
 certain areas of medical science and research. It's a very exciting
 time to be involved and the thing that we should be immensely proud of
 is that Australia is right up at the front of it and medical research
 and activity here in Melbourne is right at the top of the Australian effort.
 And that gives a special sense to this occasion and gives me a very particular
 pleasure to be associated with the opening of the institute. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................
Well Prime Minister. It sounds strange when I say that now. To the Mayor,
 to Joanna Gash, to John Anderson the Deputy Prime Minister, my other Cabinet
 colleagues, and my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
We in the Federal Cabinet do this quite often. We get out of Canberra,
 we get out of Sydney, we get out of Melbourne, and we try and hold a spread
 of Cabinet meetings in the regional and rural areas of Australia whenever
 we can so that we can have an opportunity of meeting a cross-section of
 the local community, and can have an opportunity of communicating to you
 our concern about all sections of Australian society. Can I say to my
 prime ministerial counterpart today that this is a government that endeavours
 to listen to the concerns of people in rural and regional Australia. It
 is a government that recognises that Australia is made up of many parts.
 We have a lot in common as Australians, and the things that bind us together
 are a lot more important than the things that might push us apart. And
 right at the moment our country at a national level is doing very well
 economically. We've rarely done as well. But I recognise that not
 everybody is sharing that to the full whether they live in some of the
 suburbs or whether they live in some of the regional parts of Australia.
 And what we hope to do by these Cabinet meetings is to supplement the
 quality of the representation that the regional areas of Australia has
 in the federal parliament. And can I say to you very enthusiastically,
 and very genuinely that you have an outstanding federal representative
 in Joanna Gash the member for Gilmore.
Required reading for me before I came here was a long memorandum that
 Jo has delivered to the Lodge. I sat up last night and read through it.
 She gave me a list of things that she wanted the government to do, it
 was quite long. She reminded me of many of the things that we had already
 done. And she also reminded me that this was a community that was bound
 together by a common commitment to make Australia a stronger and better
 place in which to live. And Jo has certainly been an outstanding representative
 of this very diverse electorate since she won it in March of 1996. She's
 played a big role in the party room in shaping social policy. She's
 always fairly and strongly represented the interests of the electorate
 of Gilmore. It was Joanna's persistent lobbying of me and of John
 Anderseon that led me to make on behalf of the government a commitment
 in 1998 that we would declare Main Road 92 as a road of national importance.
 And that meant that the federal government committed itself to funding
 of half of the cost of constructing that road. And I know that the Shoalhaven
 Shire Council has made an enormous financial commitment and I thank you
 for that Mr Mayor. I'm disturbed that so far the New South Wales
 government has not matched the commitment of the federal government. And
 I think that's a great shame because this is a road that's very
 important to this area. And we remain absolutely committed to the financial
 provision that I promised before the last federal election. I made that
 promise on behalf of the government and I don't intend to walk away
 from it. But I've got to get the New South Wales government to do
 its bit to carry its share of the responsibility. And as a further step
 in putting pressure on the New South Wales government to do its bit and
 to pick up 50% which you always do with roads of national importance,
 I'll seek urgently in the next few weeks a meeting with the New South
 Wales Premier Mr Carr to see if we can't progress the New South Wales
 contribution to the construction of this road. And I hope that that will
 be effective, and I hope it is not necessary for us to consider alternatives
 to that kind of approach.
Ladies and gentlemen, good government for Australia is about attending
 to those things that need to be attended to at a national level, and also
 responding to the legitimate interests and concerns of people at a local
 level. We at the moment are engaged in a very big debate in Australia
 about reforming our taxation system. And I'm not going to burden
 you with a whole lot of detail about that today, you'll be relieved
 to hear. But I can tell you this  that we have done a lot of things
 to make the Australian economy run better. And the reason we committed
 ourselves to taxation reform at the last election, why we laid it all
 out before the Australian people, was because we believed that taxation
 reform would be good for the Australian people and good for the Australian
 economy. And in the end that's what it's all about. It's
 not about how it might effect this person or that person, or this group
 or that group. It is whether at the end of the day reforming the Australian
 taxation system will make Australia economically stronger and more internationally
 competitive. And whether it will by giving a secure funding base to the
 State guarantee more effectively the delivery of important local services
 such as hospitals and schools and roads and police.
And it's because we believe those things that we committed ourselves
 to taxation reform. It's not easy. There are unpopular elements in
 it, but at the end of the day we'll have taxation cuts worth $47
 a week for the average family. We'll have cheaper fuel in the regions
 of Australia. We'll have more competitive exports. We'll have
 significant reductions in business costs. We'll have in aggregate
 a $12 billion cut in personal income tax. And overall it will be of enormous
 economic benefit to Australia and it's because of the national economic
 benefit that we remain so absolutely committed to the cause of taxation
 reform.
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the great resources that this country has,
 is of course, the inventive capacity of its people. We are for a nation
 of under 20 million people capable of punching well above our weight in
 areas of technology and areas of science. We are often at the leading
 edge of many activities in this area and you don't only find this
 in Melbourne and Sydney and Canberra but you also find it in the regions
 of Australia.
And in that context I'm delighted to announce today that the Federal
 Government will provide $1 million for the Solar Sailor project which
 is based at Ulladulla and this money will support the construction and
 demonstration of a catamaran powered by solar and wind energy with compressed
 natural gas as a backup.
It will represent leading edge technology, the solar wing uses energy
 from the sun or wind separately or in combination. It represents the potential
 to travel on our waterways and oceans in a clean environmentally friendly
 manner. Australia has a proud record of exporting leading edge marine
 technology and Solar Sailor represents an exciting new direction. The
 development of this technology is a credit to the people involved and
 is the latest evidence of the innovation and potential that does exist
 in regional Australia. And, as I say in this instance, the people of Ulladulla
 and surrounding regions stand to reap the benefits of this exciting development.
It's always to me a tremendously energising experience to come to
 a gathering like this, to know that you are meeting a cross section of
 the Australian community. Not all of them are people who will agree with
 you on everything or necessarily support everything that you seek to do
 on a political level. But it's an authentic representation of the
 great volunteer spirit of the Australian people. The catering today provided
 by the volunteers of the local fire service. The lovely choir who I heard
 earlier is part of the mass choir at the Australia Day celebration in
 Sydney not so long ago. And as I look through the list of the guests,
 the CWA, the local ministers of religion, the leaders of all the other
 local organisations and one of the great traditions of this country is
 that we do work together as a people.
We bring out the best in ourselves when we work as a community to tackle
 problems. And I find these gatherings, wherever they are in Australia,
 always tremendously energising. I find them always different. I find them
 a simple way of expressing the essential unity and the essential commitment
 to the long term goals of building a better Australia which is inherent
 in all of the Australian people.
And may I say to my fellow prime minister today, that that was a very
 touching, incisive, effective introduction. I must say that it was a quieter
 question time than I'm normally used to. Perhaps we could bring you
 down to Canberra and when you stand up you would hush them all into absolute
 silence. And I thought you spoke a great deal of wisdom. I thought you
 reminded all of us of the way of life that is special about regional Australia.
But there are some aspects of living outside the capital cities of Australia
 that are not only different, but they're very special. We can't
 all live there. We don't all necessarily wish to. There are great
 aspects of living in the big cities. The great thing about Australia is
 that we have tremendous diversity. But what your speech reminded me of
 and what I think today's gathering reminds me of is that Government's
 are elected to govern for all of the Australian people and not just one
 section and we seek through meetings such as this to reach out to the
 people of the regions of Australia to recognise the need to give help
 where it's needed. To also recognise that many parts of the regions
 of Australia are doing very well and there are many businesses that are
 doing very well.
And I know that there are many parts of the Gilmore electorate where
 business is booming and where there's a great deal of prosperity.
 I also know there are sections of it where things aren't going so
 well and I can assure all of you that that situation is well and truly
 and faithfully represented in Canberra on your behalf by Joanna Gash.
May I thank her for inviting us here today. Can I congratulate her again
 on the tremendous job that she does as your local representative. And
 can I say on behalf of all of my Cabinet colleagues how absolutely delighted
 we are to be amongst you today.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..........................................................................................
Well thank you very much Mal. To Senator Alan Eggleston, to my State,
 ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, to the Mayor John Bombak, and
 to all the councillors, and all the other community leaders and guests.
 It is a delight to be in what I understand to be one week the fastest
 growing area of Australia, the next week just the second fastest growing
 area. Competing with I understand the Albert Shire in Queensland for that
 honour, and therefore being a part of Australia that has particular challenges,
 particular needs, but also a real contribution to make in the tradition
 of many of they pioneering elements of Western Australian history.
But before I say something specific about this part of Australia, and
 something specific about the electorate of Moore, can I take the opportunity
 of addressing a few remarks to the fact that right at the moment Major
 General Peter Cosgrove is returning home to Australia from his tour of
 duty as the commander of the INTERFET force in East Timor. And I know
 that I speak for every Australian in expressing my admiration for the
 tremendous job he did, and the tremendous job done by the men and women
 of the Australian Defence Force in East Timor. Of all the things that
 I have done in the time that I have been Prime Minister none has quite
 imbued me with a sense of deep and almost limitless pride in this country
 and its people than the experience I had in saying farewell to those men
 and women in Townsville and Darwin, and then visiting them in East Timor.
 And I want on behalf of every Australian to say thank you for a job well
 done, to express our gratitude that we lost no people in battle although
 unfortunately one died in hospital of non-combat reasons. But it has been
 a remarkable operation and one that has brought tremendous credit to this
 country, and particular credit to General Cosgrove. It was an occasion
 when Australia stood up for the right thing. We have a long and proud
 military tradition but it's not a belligerent or triumphal military
 tradition. It's a military tradition through which we are prepared
 to defend people who are being oppressed and we're prepared as a
 nation to do the right thing. And I think those men and women did us proud
 and they will in an appropriate way be openly and publicly welcomed home
 at a parade in Sydney and a parade in Townsville to be organised in April.
 And there'll also be a special function in Parliament House on the
 7th of March.
And can I also say that that expression of gratitude is extended with
 equal sincerity to the men and women of the Australian Federal Police.
 I had the opportunity of meeting most of the Australian Federal Police
 who'd served in East Timor at a reception in Parliament House only
 ten days ago. And many of those men and women experienced some of the
 most dangerous days of the events that unfolded in East Timor and they
 are equally deserving of our gratitude and praise, and they share with
 the men and women of our defence force the distinction of having represented
 this country so effectively and so well over past months.
Can I say that it's a great delight to be in Mal Washer's electorate
 because Mal is a very enthusiastic effective representative of the people
 of the division of Moore. He's only been a member since the 1998
 election, but in the time that he's been in federal parliament, in
 a very quiet but effective way, he's brought a common sense understanding
 of the challenges and the experiences of a rapidly growing outer metropolitan
 area of Australia. I'm often asked what is the best thing about being
 Prime Minister of Australia. And I unhesitatingly say that the best thing
 about being Prime Minister of Australia is that one has the opportunity
 on an almost daily basis of meeting a new and different group of Australians
 as you travel around the country. Yesterday morning as I reminded myself
 on the way out I went for an early morning walk in Canberra, we then had
 a Cabinet meeting in Nowra on the South Coast of New South Wales, I then
 went back to Sydney in the evening for dinner, and I came over to Western
 Australia this morning and I'm spending two-and-a-half days here.
 And that's an opportunity to meet different groups of people in a
 short space of time in different parts of Australia. And there are different
 areas that have different challenges. We talk a lot now quite properly
 about some of the challenges facing people in remote rural communities
  the bush as we lovingly call it. And the bush properly so called
 I suppose does encapsulate our idea of people who live in small communities,
 many of whom are suffering the ravages of low commodity prices, and drought
 and all the difficulty that afflicts those communities.
But the outer metropolitan areas of Australia, although the scale and
 the dimension of the challenge is different nonetheless have particular
 needs and particular challenges. The need to provide infrastructure services,
 the need to provide additional police and hospital services. I was talking
 to the, I think the correct expression is district inspector, well that's
 what I would have called it when I was at public school in Sydney all
 those years ago, and she was describing to me the challenges of some 43
 or 44 schools, primary schools in this area which has a young population.
 And I know how important the provision of education is for a growing community
 and that's one of the reasons why at a federal level we have endeavoured
 to provide the optimum level of choice for people in education. Education
 is very important to every Australian family. Providing people with the
 choice whether they send their children to government schools or non-government
 schools, and increasingly to provide people with choice within the government
 sector. As I drove past the large number of new housing estates it's
 a reminder to me of the importance I suppose of keeping interest rates
 at a tolerable level. There'd be a lot of new home buyers in the
 electorate of Moore wouldn't there Dr Washer? And I'm constantly
 reminded of Mal just how important it is to keep interest rates as low
 as possible. And I'm very very pleased to say that one of the things
 that we have been able to do, and I don't want to make this a very
 political address, but I can't you know, resist one tiny commercial,
 one tiny plug. One of the things that we have been able to do very effectively
 is to get interest rates down from stratospheric levels that they were
 at some 8 or 10 years ago. And that is tremendously important to people
 who are paying off a home.
But I think the most important thing about this gathering is that it
 reminds me very much of something that I've spoken of a lot since
 I've been Prime Minister, and that is the notion of a social coalition.
 We have a lot of debate in our society about who does what best. There
 are some people who believe that everything should be done by the government,
 and there are some people who believe that nothing should be done by the
 government. Some people think that once the government starts to do something,
 whether it's the federal government, the State government or the
 local government, then problems start. Now of course neither of those
 propositions is correct. It is ludicrous to think that the government
 can do everything because governments are not built and made, and of their
 character they're not very good at for example running businesses.
 They're not very good at doing things that you need an entrepreneurial
 or business spirit to succeed at. But on the other hand governments have
 very important functions. Unless you have government support for basic
 services such as health and education and police, and defence, then of
 course you can't have a civil and you can't have a humane, and
 you can't have a society that we want to live. And what I have tried
 to do in so many areas of my responsibilities as Prime Minister is to
 promote the idea of a social coalition. And that very simply says that
 when we have a problem in our community we should try and tackle that
 problem by bringing together the resources of the government, the resources
 of the business community, the energy and commitment of individuals, and
 also the resources and commitment of our great welfare organisations and
 volunteer groups within our society. And those groups all coalescing and
 each contributing what they do best you can hope to solve our problems.
 And it's not a question of saying well we'll leave all of that
 to the government, or all of that to the business community, or all of
 that to a local welfare group. And I've tried in a number of areas
 to enlist not only the compassion and the coal face experience of welfare
 organisations, but also their contribution to the development of policy.
 I reminded myself when I came here this afternoon that the chairman of
 two organisations that are making a major input to social policy under
 my government are Salvation Army officers. One of them Major Brian Watters
 is the chairman of my national council on drug issues, and the other is
 Captain David Eldridge of Victoria who is the chairman of the Youth Homelessness
 Task Force that I established within four weeks of becoming Prime Minister
 in 1996.
I not only seek the human contribution of those great organisations who
 do so much in our society, but I also seek their policy contribution because
 the coal face experience they have of dealing with human sadness, of human
 challenge and of human despair is not only relevant in terms of responding
 to the needs of individuals, but it's also very relevant in helping
 to develop government policy. We went through a period of time some years
 ago when everybody thought you could solve every problem by turning to
 the government. Then we had a bit of a reaction to that and people thought
 you could solve every problem by the government getting out of everything.
 But I think we've now sort of got a happy medium where people see
 that there is a limited but strategic role for governments within our
 community. And I see it represented here today. I see all the elements
 of that social coalition.
Our country at the present time is experiencing at a national level a
 great deal of prosperity. We are very strong economically, we have lower
 inflation, lower interest rates, stronger budget positions, a stronger
 international economic presence than we've had in many decades. But
 that doesn't mean to say there aren't people in our community
 that still need help. There are a lot. And there are people who aren't
 sharing in the same way as others in that national prosperity. And it's
 the obligation of a civilised decent society to see that that prosperity
 is spread around as far as possible. And it's also the obligation
 of a government at a national level and at a State level and at a local
 level to press ahead with much needed reforms, sometimes to do it in the
 face of fierce opposition and criticism. We at the moment are very strongly
 committed to taxation reform, and we're not going to go back on that.
 We're not going to weaken or tire in our commitment to that because
 we think it is good in the end for the whole Australian community. We
 may differ and argue as a community about this or that aspect. But at
 the end of the day if you believe that a reform is going to make your
 country stronger and better you'll persevere with that reform. And
 that applies whether you're the Prime Minister, you're the premier,
 or whether you're the mayor of the local municipality or city. And
 that is very much how I see my responsibilities as Prime Minister. Australia
 is a federation. We work best with a large geographical area having a
 federal government, a State government and a local government. And each
 of us has got to be accountable. We can't have a society where whenever
 one area of government gets into trouble it tries to blame the other.
 We've each got to be accountable. If we make a mess of something
 at a federal level you're entitled to blame us. If you're State
 government doesn't do something right at a State level you should
 blame them, and the same thing applies at a local level. We each have
 important responsibilities. And it's the best way of running a country
 as geographically large as Australia. You can't make all the decisions
 in Canberra. All the wisdom doesn't reside there any more than all
 the wisdom in Western Australia resides in Perth, or all the wisdom in
 New South Wales resides in Sydney. The founding fathers of this country
 weren't wrong when they devised a federal system of government and
 decided to keep the States and to keep the structure of a decentralised
 nation when we federated in 1901. And that is why part of, I believe a
 very important part, of my responsibilities as Prime Minister is to visit
 the centres of municipal and local government, and to have an opportunity
 like this to greet the leaders of the local community and through that
 to get a better understanding of some of the challenges and some of the
 problems of this community.
Can I simply conclude by saying it's great to be with Mal in his
 electorate. I wish him well. I commend him very warmly to you as a very
 very energetic and effective representative in the national parliament.
 Can I thank all of you for the contribution that you are making towards
 a better Australia. Each in your own way whether you're the mayor
 of a city, whether you run the local Lions Club, the local State Emergency
 Service, a local sporting organisation, a local church, or any other local
 group, each of you in your own way is making a contribution to a more
 civilised and more decent and happy, and more harmonious Australian community,
 And that is what in the end of the day you want in this country. We want
 a harmonious cohesive civilised society, and each of you are playing a
 very major role here in Joondalup in building that goal and achieving
 that end. Thank you. 
[Ends]


E&amp;OE .............................................................................................
Thank you very much John Moore. To the Leader of the Opposition, Kim
 Beazley; the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Alexander Downer; my other
 parliamentary and cabinet colleagues; to Admiral Chris Barrie, the Chief
 of the Defence Force; Major General Peter Cosgrove, the INTERFET Commander
 and the personnel of the Australian Defence Force and the Australian Federal
 Police, ladies and gentlemen.
Today is an opportunity in a comprehensive bipartisan way for the people
 of Australia through their elected representatives to express their immense
 gratitude to the Defence Force personnel, to the Australian Federal Police
 and to all the other groups and all the other organisations that played
 a role in achieving an outcome in East Timor which has been immensely
 to the credit and the reputation of the people of Australia. When I moved
 a resolution in the Parliament in September supporting the commitment
 and wishing our men and women well and a safe return home to their families.
I said that they did not go in the name of the Government, rather they
 went in the name of Australia. And when men and women are asked to risk
 their lives abroad in pursuit of a cause, they are entitled to know that
 they go in the name of their country who gives them undivided support
 in pursuit of their obligations and their responsibilities. And I'm
 very proud to be able to say as Prime Minster that that proved to be the
 case in relation to our deployment in East Timor.
I am delighted with today's gathering which brings together not
 only representatives of INTERFET and the Australian Federal Police, but
 also representatives of the Service Spouse Organisations, the families
 of the men and women who went to East Timor, the various non-government
 organisations that played such a critical role in the days and weeks and
 months before the United Nations mandate which provided the legal authorisation
 for the INTERFET deployment. Because the weeks and months leading up to
 the deployment were in their own way as challenging and as tense as the
 weeks and months that followed the deployment.
It is an experience that those of us involved in different levels will
 never forget. I will never forget the experience involved as Prime Minister
 and I shan't forget the sagacious advice and support of my senior
 Cabinet colleagues in which I particularly number Alexander Downer and
 John Moore. And the advice and counsel of the Department of Foreign Affairs
 and my own Department and my own personal National Security Adviser, Michael
 Thawley who's the new Australian Ambassador in the United States.
As we look back now on the an event that was deemed to be highly successful
 and an outcome for which we are immensely grateful, it is important to
 remind ourselves that the risks that were involved. And for me on behalf
 of a grateful nation to pay tribute to those men and women who assumed
 the greatest risk of all, and that is the risk to their lives. And if
 we keep in mind the tense moments and weeks and months that would have
 been the lot of their families.
We thank God that casualties were kept to such an absolute minimum. You
 never have any way of knowing that at the beginning. And I shall never
 forget the experience of visiting along with the Leader of the Opposition
 and the Leader of the Australian Democrats, many of the troops before
 they departed and the moments my wife and I spent with many of the personnel
 in Townsville and the Lavarack Barracks after having met so many of them.
 And seeing the groups of soldiers with their NCOs in the dusk of that
 very warm North Queensland evening. And trying in some way to share the
 apprehension and contemplation that they must have been feeling. It bought
 home to me the immense responsibility and risk that they were assuming
 on behalf of our nation and in the cause to which we as a group of people
 were so very strongly committed.
May I say to you Major General Cosgrove that you have won the respect,
 affection and the admiration of the entire Australian nation. Your qualities
 of firm direct leadership, your capacity to articulate in a no-nonsense
 fashion, the extent and the amplitude of your mandate and the inspiration
 that I know that you have provided to the men and women who served under
 you. It is something that makes all of us as Australians feel immensely
 proud.
I am delighted that you have a representative group of the men and women
 who served under you. I am also delighted that the Australian Federal
 Police contingent is so well represented here today.
On the table with us is Alan Mills, now retired from the Federal Police,
 but who served there before the INTERFET deployment. Served there immediately
 around the time when the ballot took place and I shan't likely forget
 the telephone conversation I had with him before the 10th of
 September, well before the deployment. When quite literally the Australian
 consulate staff in Dili was spending a great deal of time on the floor
 to avoid the bullets that were flying around at the particular time and
 in his very direct and laid back and very reassuring way when I asked
 him how it was and he said it was a bit hairy and I thought that was a
 beautiful understatement. But we should never for a moment forget the
 risk that was assumed by the members of the Australian Federal Police
 and I wanted recorded that the nation is immensely proud and grateful
 of the contribution that the men and women of the Australian Federal Police
 have afforded and I am very pleased to note the presence of so many of
 them here today.
As you know ladies and gentlemen this deployment was the largest by Australia
 since the Vietnam war. It was the first occasion on which Australian commanded
 an international force and quite rightly significant praise and credit
 from around the world has come the way of the men and women of the Australian
 Defence Force. But I do not forget the fact, nor should anyone forget
 the fact that they operated under the mandate of the security council
 of the United Nations. They were never going to go in without the authority
 and sanctions and legal commissions of the United Nations and the level
 of co-operation that existed between my government and the secretary general
 of the United Nations made the deployment possible. The speed with which
 the mandate was achieved and the breadth and simplicity of that mandate
 that made Internet's task that much easier to achieve was all the
 result of the authority given by the United Nations. Nor do I forget for
 a moment that we went there as partners with many other nations. And I
 am pleased to acknowledge the presence of the High Commissioners and Ambassadors
 of so many of the countries that sent troops and personnel to East Timor
 to serve with the Australian Defence personnel.
It was a partnership, it was a regional operation, it was also an operation
 that included contributions from countries with which Australia has participated
 in military conflicts for the whole of this century.
And finally might I say this that we gather here today not in any sense
 of triumphalism. We gather here today to express our simple gratitude
 to men and women who served their country. They served their country well,
 they put their lives on the line for a just cause. They stood up for what
 was right and proper and in the process, they made us all feel immensely
 proud. We thank god that they have come back to us. We wish all of them
 well, we remember their families and we are glad that they can share some
 of this occasion. Ladies and gentlemen, simply on behalf of the entire
 nation, may I say thank you to general Cosgrove and his men and women
 and to the men and women of the Australian Federal Police and I am delighted
 to invite the leader of the opposition, Mr Kim Beazley to second my remarks.


E&amp;OE …………………………………………………………………………………
Mrs Margaret McIntosh, and other members of the McIntosh family, my parliamentary colleagues, particularly the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Beazley, ladies and gentlemen.
Malcolm McIntosh’s life and the contribution that he made to the Australian people and the Australian community was a very eloquent demonstration of the capacity of the Australian public service to attract and to produce to use that old, but no less appropriate cliché, the brightest and the best.
He served successive Australian Governments in a range of portfolios and as is well known he occupied a very senior post in the British Ministry of Defence.
My personal contact with him was most intense in relation to his contribution as a member of the Prime Minister’s Science Council. As someone not skilled and not versed in the areas of science and technology by dint of my professional and other backgrounds, the work of that Council has been a particular learning experience and journey for me. And none contributed more to my understanding than did Malcolm.
His capacity to explain in simple, lucid and passionate terms the relevance of science and technology to the workings of modern government and to the future of our community was quite remarkable. And whenever he made an intervention or a contribution, it was an intervention or contribution of a remarkable mind, a very dedicated Australian and someone who was not only highly intelligent but was extremely patriotic and extremely committed to the service of his country.
Like all of us in this vast gathering of people whose lives have been touched by him, like all of us I admired the tenacity and courage of his struggle with cancer. His death at the very early age of fifty-four has taken a great servant of the Commonwealth of Australia. A fine mind, a lovely person, a dedicated family man.
And on behalf of the Government, on behalf of many ministers on the Government side of politics who have worked with him, I express our thanks for his life, our sympathy and love to his family and we mark and admire the courage and contribution of his life to the people of Australia.
[ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
Taoiseach Bertie Ahern, Celia Larkin, John Anderson the Deputy Prime
 Minister, Kim Beazley, Leader of the Opposition, my ministerial and parliamentary
 colleagues, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
I recall during the last federal election campaign that the guns of political
 battle were put aside and the campaign suspended for a very distinguished
 visitor to Canberra the President of Ireland, Mary McAleese. And I observed
 to her at the time that only the President of Ireland could suspend an
 Australian election campaign and live to tell the tale. But, of course,
 as something of the character and the verve of Australian politics has
 been influenced, I suspect, by that great tributary to Australian culture
 that the Irish represent that any acquaintance with the President of Ireland
 during an election campaign appears very natural indeed.
Bertie Ahern, you are so welcome here tonight. It is the easiest thing
 in the world for an Australian Prime Minister to welcome to our country
 the leader of Ireland. It is inaccurate to say that the Irish have made
 a great contribution to Australia. The truth is that the Australian identity
 is inextricably Irish to a very large extent. The influence of Ireland,
 the influence of Irish culture and the influence of Irish ways, the influence
 of the character of Irish people has been with us from the time of European
 settlement in this country.
And the story of Australia of the last 200 odd years described, I think,
 very well by Patrick O'Farrell in his landmark study of the impact
 of the Irish on Australia when he spoke of how it was in many respects
 a struggle between the English majority and the Irish minority but a struggle
 which despite its elements of great discord and its elements of discrimination
 and so forth and things that all of us have thankfully put years and years
 behind us, it was nonetheless a struggle that in its outworking was extremely
 productive. Because in many ways it represented a debate about the kind
 of nation we wanted to build and the kind of society we wanted to create.
You have come to us, Taoiseach, having visited your forces in East Timor.
 And I want to thank you and your country and your Government very warmly
 for the support you gave to the Interfet force. East Timor is a long way
 from Ireland and we like to think that in part your contribution was a
 demonstration of the affectionate bonds that exist between your country
 and ours. But importantly, it illustrated the common values that we hold
 and the common commitment we have to the cause of justice and fair dealing
 between people.
I have spoken a few moments about the historic and the sentimental character
 of the relationship between Australia and the Republic of Ireland. Perhaps
 before I conclude I might briefly return to that aspect of the relationship.
 But the relationship today is very much, of course, also the relationship
 between two modern industrialised nations. Ireland has enjoyed remarkable
 economic progress over the last 10 to 20 years. You have achieved significant
 reductions in your unemployment levels. You have embarked upon, as you
 described to me this morning, very courageous taxation reform, something
 that always draws a bit of interest and an interjection from the Treasurer.
 But what we have witnessed in Ireland over the last decade and a half
 has been very much the transformation of your economy.
You have reversed the decades-long exodus of your young people and many
 Irish leaders today rejoice in the return of so many of the young people
 of their homeland to the Republic of Ireland. You are an active member
 and I think a very productive member of the European Union. Of course
 the Australian Government from time to time has the odd difference of
 opinion with the European Union regarding matters relating to trade and
 I think both of us reminded ourselves in our discussions this morning
 of the tremendous importance of trade and the tremendous importance of
 breathing new life into the cause of greater liberalisation of world trade.
All of us have watched, Taoiseach, the steps towards achieving a lasting
 peace in Northern Ireland. I think all Australians look to the day when
 the bitterest of opponents in the Northern Ireland dispute are perpetually
 sidelined and the decent men and women of both sides of that long divide
 dominate the political processes of Northern Ireland. And I think particularly
 of men of the ilk of John Hume and David Trimble, the joint winners of
 the Nobel Peace prize. Because the tragedy of the long years of death
 and destruction in Northern Ireland I know weighs very heavily upon both
 the British and the Irish governments and I want to pay tribute to the
 efforts of successive Irish leaders as well as the efforts of successive
 prime ministers of the United Kingdom to try and bring about an honourable
 settlement. The setback recently is of course a disappointment. As I said
 at the press conference this morning our view, and I know it is very much
 the view of the Irish Government, is that adherence to the principles
 of the Good Friday agreement constitutes the proper basis of achieving
 a lasting peace in Northern Ireland.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a very happy occasion tonight. It's
 an occasion when all of us feel very much at ease with our heritage, very
 much at ease with the history of relations between Australia and the Republic
 of Ireland. I suppose Australia is in many respects the most spectacular
 component of the Irish diaspora. Something in the order of 35 per cent
 of Australians trace their heritage in some way or another to different
 parts of Ireland. And I, of course, am no exception. My maternal great
 grandmother was born in Westmeath in what is now the Republic of Ireland
 and my paternal great grandfather just to even it up was born in Portadown
 in County Armagh in the North of Ireland. And it is not, of course, in
 any way unusual to the experience of Australians to count that Irish heritage
 as a very important part of the make up of this country.
Ireland and the Irish have played an incredibly important role in the
 development of the spirit and the character of this country. To the Irish
 influence we owe much of the larrikin element of our temperament which
 we hold so dear. Our capacity to relate in an open warm hearted fashion
 with each other has also been greatly conditioned by our Irish heritage.
One of the, I think, great achievements of the building of the Australian
 nation is that we have in so many ways been able to take from the different
 parts of our heritage those things which are positive and those things
 which we wish to preserve for the future while rejecting those elements
 of our heritage that are negative and counterproductive. And so it has
 been that while we have retained much of the instinct for, I think, civil
 processes in our Government despite our robust political system, and the
 great inheritance of the rule of law from the United Kingdom we have rejected
 the class consciousness of so much of Europe. And so it has been in relation
 to our Irish heritage. We have taken so many of the wonderful, open warm-hearted
 bits of it and we have moulded them in the Australian environment and
 in the process it has made a massive contribution to the building of what
 we all know to be the modern Australian nation and what we all know to
 be the Australian character and the modern Australian man or woman.
Can I say to you, Bertie, and to Celia, I hope you have a very pleasant
 time in Australia. I know that you have met many of your fellow countrymen
 and women. I know that you have been received very warmly. And can I say
 on behalf of all of my parliamentary colleagues and all of those gathered
 here this evening that it will always be a very special occasion to have
 the leader of the Irish people amongst us. We will always be ready to
 acknowledge the bonds between our two countries, we'll always be
 ready to acknowledge the debt we owe to the Irish heritage in Australia.
 And I invite in that spirit the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Beazley,
 to second my remarks.
[ends]


E&amp;OE .............................................................................................
Good evening. The best way to see Telstra improve its services to all
 Australians, is to pass a law requiring that to happen. That's exactly
 what the Government has done. Our Customer Service Guarantee now even
 requires Telstra to pay financial compensation to customers if they do
 not meet adequate service levels.
I still believe that Telstra needs to lift its game in the country. But
 there is evidence that services are improving. Telstra maintains that
 connection times and fault repair times have improved across rural and
 remote Australia in the last two years.
They have said that 98% of Telstra's remote area customers are now
 being connected within our legislated time frames. In addition, STD charges
 have fallen by 45% in real terms over recent years. And country users
 will now benefit from the new 15 cent neighbourhood call, expected to
 cover about half their local calls.
I want to make it perfectly clear, that we will not fully privatise Telstra
 unless a public inquiry certifies that adequate service levels have been
 met. And we will work for higher levels of service. From July this year
 phone companies will be required to supply new phone connections in rural
 and remote areas where there is infrastructure in less than half the time
 that is now allowed.
Without the most recent sale of Telstra, we could not establish up to
 500 Rural Transaction Centres. We could not extend SBS Television to the
 homes of a further 1.2 million Australians. We could not allow more people
 in remote areas to make untimed calls to their neighbours, nor retire
 the massive Government debt that Labor left behind. Good night.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Your Majesty, your Royal Highness, my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues
 and in particular the Leader of the Opposition Mr Kim Beazley, Your Excellencies,
 ladies and gentlemen.
Your Majesty is no stranger to this building and to this Great Hall having
 come here in 1988 to officially declare open the new Parliament of the
 Commonwealth of Australia. Coming here today is a reminder of the great
 heritage of parliamentary democracy that this country inherited from the
 United Kingdom. Fashioned and developed according to the will and the
 design of the Australian people to create a unique national institution
 which represents the fulcrum of Australian democracy.
Parliamentary democracy in this country is lively, strong and robust.
 It is not frequently realised that Australia is one of fewer than ten
 nations in the world that has remained continuously democratic over the
 last 100 years. Ma'am, the links between the Crown and the institution
 of Parliament are well known by those who understand our history and the
 history of the world. You come here as someone who knows Australia well,
 who has a deep affection for this country. And whatever views people hold
 on the flow of political events, the respect for your own personal dedication
 to your role as a Constitutional Monarch, and your understanding of the
 workings of our system of government and the workings of the system of
 governments of all of the countries of the Commonwealth is one that is
 very widely respected.
May I on behalf of all of the people of Australia and particularly today
 on behalf of all of my fellow Parliamentarians, and those who are gathered
 here in the Great Hall, say how very pleased we are to have you and the
 Duke of Edinburgh with us again. We hope that the rest of your visit to
 Australia is as happy and as enjoyable as it has been to date. You are
 always Ma'am a welcome visitor to this country. And in that spirit
 Ma'am I invite the Leader of the Opposition Mr Beazley to support
 my remarks.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE....................................................................................................
  Well thank you very much to Mrs Kate Carnell, the Chief
 Minister of the ACT, to Senator Margaret Reid, the President of the Senate,
 Ian Macdonald my Ministerial colleague, Mr Gary Nairn, the Member for
 Eden Monaro, Gary Humphries, the Deputy Chief Minister of the ACT, other
 Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.
  Can I say how tremendously enthused I am both by the
 concept of the focus on business exercise and also by the sheer scope
 and support that has been demonstrated not only here tonight but also
 by what has happened today and what will happen tomorrow.
  I am doubly pleased because I believe Canberra and the
 surrounding areas that make up Canberra and its regional location has
 done the very thing that I believe that many people wanted it to do for
 a long time, and that is to recognise that whilst it would always have
 a very important place as the national capital and that that would largely
 shape its identity so far as the rest of the Australian community was
 concerned, its long-term future lay in breaking away from the notion that
 it was essentially a public service city. And what has happened over the
 last few years I think has vindicated the judgement of many people who
 saw that as being necessary in the medium to longer term because what
 the ACT, what Canberra and the surrounding regions has been able to do
 in recent years is to create the image of itself, in the business community
 in particular, as a good place in which to do business, as an area of
 Australia having a very well educated, savvy, technologically sophisticated,
 certainly in the area of information technology, something that I'll
 return to in a moment, and in overall terms an area of Australia that
 was increasingly going to be one in which it was attractive to do business.
  Now tonight is not really an occasion for a long recitation
 of statistics but I think it is important so as to underline what has
 been achieved largely, but not entirely, by the many men and women in
 this room, to underline the scale of the transformation of your economy
 in recent times.
  Australia's growth rate over the last few years
 has averaged 4% and that itself is quite remarkable, at a national level
 we've not had that growth rate since the 1960's. But Canberra's,
 the ACT economy grew by 7% in the year to December 1999 and that is the
 highest of any Australian state or territory.
  No state or territory has a lower level of unemployment,
 than does the ACT. At 5.3% your unemployment rate is well below the national
 figure and it is also at its lowest level since June of 1990. Over the
 last four years unemployment in the ACT has fallen from 8.1% to 5.3%.
 And importantly, although the size of the public service has contracted
 since 1996, Canberra's private sector workforce has more than grown
 to compensate for this.
  The private sector's share of total wage and salary
 earners has grown from under 47% in 1996 to around 55% last year and that
 itself represents a remarkable transformation. It is not only a function
 of the undoubted contraction of the public sector in the ACT but it is
 also a function of the immensely more attractive business climate which
 has been created in the ACT.
  Real business investment in the ACT rose by 10.7% in
 the December quarter. And another indication of the strength of the ACT
 economy is its massive 49% increase in dwelling unit commencements over
 the last year. And median house prices in Canberra are now above their
 March 1996 level.
  Now that, essentially is all I want to say in relation
 to state statistics but I believe that the scale of the improvement that's
 occurred in the ACT, in Canberra and the surrounding regions, the scale
 of that achievement is such that it is important for me in particular
 to emphasise those figures because they do represent two things. They
 represent, may I say, I hope, not immodestly, a reflection of the success
 of the government's overall economic policy.
  When you have successful national economic policies they
 do have a resonance in every part of the country. And it is true that
 unemployment in Australia for example is now sharply lower than what it
 was four years ago. And even in those areas of our country that have the
 highest level of unemployment, even in those regions such as the Hervey
 Bay region of Queensland or parts of northern Tasmania or parts of the
 outer suburban areas of Sydney, around Campbelltown, which have very high
 levels of unemployment, even their absolute levels are now much lower
 that what they were four years ago. And it is important to understand
 that the economic reform program that the government has implemented,
 at times as the Chief Minister was kind enough to acknowledge, not without
 political challenge and political peril, that has given the Australian
 economy an underlying strength which has enabled us to grow as fast, if
 not faster than any industrialised nation in the world over the last three
 or four years.
  We do have a budget that is very strongly in balance.
 We do have high levels of business investment. We do have lower levels
 of unemployment. We have much lower interest rates; we have much lower
 inflation. We are seen as a country which is paying off its debt and is
 increasingly more competitive.
  And we have ahead of us on the 1st of July
 the introduction of the biggest change in Australia's taxation system
 certainly since WWII and perhaps since Federation. And there is no absence
 of those who would seek in the months before the 1st of July
 to sow the seeds of unhappiness and discord and confusion about the new
 taxation system. None of this surprises me in the least. I knew that we
 would fight to achieve community acceptance first of all of the notion
 of reform of the taxation system and I knew that the path to the first
 of July would be strewn with stories of confusion and of chaos and of
 unfairness and of undue penalty on this or that section of the Australian
 community.
  I see on the news tonight that the latest argument is
 about the price of fuel. The price of fuel is a very sensitive issue in
 a country as big as Australia. And it may be of interest to those who
 are railing against government policy in this area to be reminded of one
 or two salient features. The first of those salient features is that the
 basic driver of fuel prices in Australia is of course the world price
 of crude oil. And that world price has been on the rise over the last
 few months. There are some signs of stability returning but we won't
 know the outcome of that for a few days or weeks yet. That is something
 over which no Australian government, Labor or Liberal, has any direct
 control of any kind.
  The other thing that I would remind those critics of
 is that one of the distinguishing features of the tax package is that
 it is going to result in sharply lower fuel prices than would otherwise
 be the case in rural and regional Australia. The original scope of that
 concession has been scaled back because of the attitude of the Australian
 Democrats. It is not as generous as we originally wanted because it's
 going to be restricted to rural and regional areas in a manner to be announced
 very shortly. But it would nonetheless represent, for those areas, a very
 significantly lower cost of fuel than would otherwise be the case. In
 fact the price of fuel annually is going to fall by about three and a
 half to four billion dollars and that will be of enormous benefit to people
 doing business in rural and regional Australia.
  Because, ladies and gentlemen, taxation reform is not
 just about the GST, it's not just about the fact that we are replacing
 a rather ramshackle wholesale tax system, that taxes some things not at
 all but taxes other things at rates as high as 32 and 45% with a single
 rate of tax at 10% potentially across the board barring basic food stuffs
 and one or two essential services such as visiting a doctor. It's
 not just about that, it's about a fundamental remaking of our taxation
 system, it's about 80% of wage and salary earners paying a marginal
 tax rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar. For people in business
 it means that we're going to have a corporate tax rate of 30 cents
 in the dollar rather than 36 cents.
And can I say very directly to an audience which is probably made up
 of proportionately more people in the service sector of the economy than
 in the manufacturing sector of the economy than perhaps any other gathering
 that I might address anywhere in Australia, that that particular change
 is of particular benefit to people in the service sector of the economy.
 We will have one of the most competitive corporate tax rates not only
 in the world, but certainly in our part of the world.
It is also of course about halving capital gains tax. For self funded
 retirees, if there are any here tonight, it's about a number of special
 benefits including the abolition of provisional tax and the introduction
 of dividend imputation credits which will ensure that people get the full
 benefit and the full value of their franked dividends.
I mention these things ladies and gentlemen because you know and I know
 that there is a game on at the moment and that game is called scare the
 voter. And that game is about planting as much fear and engaging in as
 many scare tactics as possible to try and discredit the tax system before
 it comes into operation. But can I say to you that I have no intention
 as Prime Minister and none of my Ministerial colleagues have any intention
 of allowing that campaign to succeed. I mean this is not something we
 suddenly dropped on the Australian people out of the clear blue sky, after
 the last election. We did have an election, we did tell the Australian
 people what we were going to do. We spelt it out in stark detail. We told
 people what the rates were going to be. We told people the incidence of
 the tax. We disclosed the taxation scale, we went in to more detail on
 a major policy than any government since federation has gone in to and
 we won that election. And we have charted that reform through the Australian
 Parliament and we are now in the process of introducing it. And I pursued
 the cause of taxation reform for a long time in my political career and
 we are pursuing it now for one reason and one reason alone and that is
 we believe it is good for Australia. That it will make the Australian
 economy more competitive. It will make the economy of Canberra and the
 surrounding regions more competitive.
And another great benefit, let me say of taxation reform is that it is
 going to give to the States and Territories of Australia, something that
 they have craved for decades and that is access to a growth tax. We have
 had this annual circus as it has been called  The Premier's
 Conference, where the Premiers come in to Canberra, they shake their fist
 at the front door of Parliament House and they say they are going to demand
 a better deal for their states from the Commonwealth and then they come
 out at the end of the conference and they say that once again the Commonwealth
 is being mean and miserly and they are going to have to go back home and
 increase taxes because the federal government won't give them enough
 money. And that has gone on for years and it hasn't really mattered
 who the Prime Minister has been. Whether it has been Malcom Fraser or
 Bob Hawke or Paul Keating or John Howard, it hasn't really mattered
 and it hasn't really mattered where the Premiers have come from or
 what political party they belong to. It's gone on year after year
 and Liberal Premiers have been more vigorous, Prime Ministers have been
 more vigorously insulted by Liberal Premiers and I can remember some of
 the choice things that Wayne Goss used to say about my immediate predecessors
 when he came down here. He was no slouch at having a go at a Labor Prime
 Minister. It was all part of the I suppose the charade of commonwealth
 state financial relations and at the root of all of that was the fact
 that the states said it was unfair because the commonwealth government
 had access to all of the growth in taxation revenue.
Now we are going to change that on the 1st of July. This is
 something I don't think a lot of people understand. I mean the other
 day I heard Mr Carl Scully who is the Minister for Transport in NSW, trying
 to justify fare increases by reference to the GST and he was saying that
 NSW transport users, train riders in NSW  commuters - would understand
 that after the 1st of July, that every time they bought a ticket,
 the GST component of that rail ticket was going to go straight into John
 Howard's pocket. And I say wrong Carl Scully, every last cent of
 the GST is going straight into Bob Carr's pocket and that is something
 about this tax reform that a lot of people are over looking and that is
 that all of the Goods and Services tax is going to the states and the
 territories. And it will mean as the years go by and once you get through
 the transitional phase and for a state like Queensland, and I think the
 ACT does relatively well out of this as well, after a fairly short period
 of time, you are going to be in a growth situation. And after a number
 of years, all of the states are going to be much better off than they
 would otherwise had been if the existing formula had been maintained.
 And that means that all of them will be able to pour more money into basic
 services, public hospitals, government schools, police, transport and
 road. All of the things that governments both state and territorial do
 in this country which are quite properly regard as local services.
Now my friends I perhaps digress a little in talking to you about taxation
 reform, just a little. And you will understand why because I think it's
 very important. I mean this is a gathering of men and women who are interested
 in the economic future of Canberra and its regions. It's a gathering
 of men and women who know that you can't have a good economy unless
 you have a government that is willing to undertake fundamental reforms.
 You have been willing to take risks. As I looked at the acceptance list
 tonight, I see a vast array of large Australian companies that are displaying
 a great deal of interest in this city and in the region of which it is
 heart. And that reason, that interest is a direct consequence of the leadership
 that I believe Kate Carnell's government here in the ACT has shown.
I think she has led a government that has been realistic. I know that
 some of the decisions the federal government took after May, in the May
 budget in 1996 were unpopular in the ACT, I know that and I was told that
 frequently and that is fair enough because politics is about plain speaking.
 And we took those decisions because we believed that in the longer term
 if we got our budget back in to balance, every body would be better off
 and if you look around you, you start to see the benefit of that commitment.
 But it would not have been possible for Canberra to have absorbed those
 changes unless there had been a willingness by the local business community
 to get off its tail to use the vernacular and to attract new business
 and to recognise that you have got some natural advantages such as for
 example as your region is seen as probably the most attractive region
 or one of the most attractive regions in Australia for developing e-commerce
 because of your very sophisticated highly educated work force. The way
 in which this city and this region has taken to the advantages of outsourcing.
 The way in which I think you have built upon the natural advantages that
 Canberra and the surrounding area has. The way in which you no longer
 see this region as just being the Australian Capital Territory but its
 got a broader reach than that and that is why I am delighted to see representatives
 of Councils and areas in NSW surrounding the Australian Capital Territory
 gathered here this evening.
And I have come along tonight for a couple of reasons. First and foremost
 to make it very plain that the federal government totally supports the
 goals and the aspirations of your conference. It totally supports the
 goals and the aspirations of the government of the ACT in developing the
 economic strengths of the area and tomorrow morning at breakfast, many
 of you will have the opportunity of talking to four or five of the most
 senior Ministers in the Federal Government to convey your thoughts and
 to gain their insights.
The future I believe of the ACT is one of great economic strength and
 great economic prosperity. Canberra, which is a beautiful city by any
 measure will always occupy a very special place in the national life of
 our country. There will always within the Australian community be something
 of an ambivalence towards Canberra because it is the National Capital.
 There is no federation in the world where from time to time for convenience
 sake, people who don't live in the National Capital, choose in some
 way to make unkind remarks about the National Capital. But equally the
 National Capital, increasingly is seen with great pride by the people
 of Australia. And I am reminded of some remarks that were made by Sir
 Robert Menzies when he was Prime Minister and he spoke of a different
 Canberra and he spoke of a Canberra that was viewed perhaps differently
 not only by some of its residents but by the rest of the country. And
 he said as the new capital would inevitably have small beginnings, it
 will be looked down upon by its elder state brethren and later as it grows
 as the centre of power, it will be looked at sometimes with envy but ultimately
 with pride.
I remarked today when I spoke at the National War Memorial at the reopening
 ceremony by the Queen. I spoke of the magnet that that memorial represented
 to hundreds of thousands of Australians and that is but one example of
 the attraction of this part of the world and of this city in particular
 to people from other parts of Australia. And what I think is really valuable
 about what is occurred here over the last few years and what your conference,
 your focus on business conference represents. I think it is the coming
 together of those three things which will really make Canberra and its
 regions a very dynamic area of the Australian economy. And they are the
 undoubted role of Canberra as the National Capital. Secondly, what flows
 from that is that there will always be a very large public service component
 of the life and the culture of this city. And thirdly and particularly
 as represented here tonight is the commitment of so many men and women
 in the business community to build upon the natural advantages of this
 city and its regions.
And what is encouraging about what I see here tonight and what I know
 to be the case in discussion with Mrs Carnell and with so many of my own
 Ministers is the realisation that there is no longer any conflict between
 the public service side and the business side. Those days are fast slipping
 behind us. That each is seen as complementary to the other and if you
 work together then you are going to get some very good results. So I am
 delighted to be with you tonight. I want to say again that I respect very
 much the leadership that Kate Carnell's government has shown. It's
 not easy governing anything these days. Government is challenging. We
 live in a less tribal political environment and the ebb and flow of public
 opinion is freer and fuller than used to by the case. But that is part
 and parcel of what public life is all about. It is very much about as
 we have done with things like tax reform, committing yourself to an objective,
 accepting that there is political risk, but maintaining a sense of commitment
 and purpose because you know it is in the national interest and I believe
 you have seen that here in the ACT and I congratulate Kate and her colleagues
 for that. I thank all of you for the support that you are showing for
 Canberra, for our National Capital and for the cause and I wish this conference
 every success.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE................................................................................................
Thank you very much to Dr Kemp, Mr Scott, the Chairman of the Corporation,
 to Jimmy Little and the other ambassadors for the strategy, ladies and
 gentlemen. And may I also acknowledge the Daruk people, the traditional
 owners of this land and pay respect to their very rich culture as part
 of the indigenous community of Australia.
Today is a moment to announce and to launch a strategy which is very
 much an exercise in practical reconciliation. It is a strategy that addresses
 an area of demonstrated and unarguable disadvantage for the indigenous
 within the Australian population. The right to a decent education as the
 right to a decent health system and opportunities of gainful employment
 are those fundamental birthrights that we ought to take for granted for
 all Australians. The sad fact however is that within the broader Australian
 community, there are many people who leave the school system unable to
 properly read or write or to add or subtract. And the handicap that that
 represents for them as they go through life is immense. And the burden,
 both psychological and also in practical terms, is considerable and it's
 something that is with them all the days of their life. I think it is
 very important that we see the problem of literacy and numeracy as being
 a community problem and a community challenge as well as it having a very
 special dimension and being a special difficulty so far as indigenous
 Australians are concerned.
Today is a very positive day because you have governments and communities
 coming together in a spirit of good will and working together to address
 in a very practical way a significant problem. And I want Jimmy, to acknowledge
 the warmth and the generosity and the inspirational character of the remarks
 that you addressed at the commencement of today's gathering. It was
 a simple moving statement of a person's love of his country, his
 deep respect for his indigenous culture and his desire to work with everybody
 of goodwill within the Australian community to overcome areas of disadvantage.
It is a sad fact that Aboriginal children are only half as likely as
 other children within our community to complete secondary school. And
 although indigenous retention rates have quadrupled since the 1970s, they
 are still only half those of the rest of the community.
But I think it is important whilst acknowledging that continuing disadvantage
 and important to see today's announcement in the context of addressing
 that disadvantage, it's important also to recall the fact that progress
 is being made. Too often in this broader debate, we only hear what has
 not been accomplished and the challenges that lie ahead and we hear very
 little about some of the progress. Undoubtedly not enough that has been
 made under successive governments let me say in a number of important
 areas. And let me mention some of them. The proportion of indigenous adults
 who've never attended school has fallen from a level of 14% in the
 1970s to 3% today. The proportion of indigenous children who complete
 secondary schooling has increased fourfold since the 1970s. The proportion
 of indigenous people with post secondary school qualifications has doubled
 in the last ten years and indigenous higher education enrolments have
 tripled over the same period. And specifically in the area of training,
 the number of indigenous students in higher education has risen from under
 7,000 in 1996, to over 8,000 in 1999. Ten years ago, there were an estimated
 15,000 indigenous students involved in vocational education and training.
 And by 1998, that number had risen to nearly 45,000 students. In 1994-95,
 a bare five or six years ago, there were only 817 indigenous traineeship
 commencements. By 1997-98 that number had grown to a record of 5,200.
Now I mention these things not to weave any particular story with statistics,
 but rather to make the point that there is hope that if a commitment and
 an investment of time and resources is made, progress can be achieved.
 And it is very important in the ongoing debate about reconciliation, the
 ongoing debate about addressing demonstrated areas of indigenous disadvantage
 that we recognise the scale of the challenge ahead of us as well as recognising
 that with the implementation of the right programs significant progress
 has been made and continues to be made.
And why I very enthusiastically responded to David Kemp's invitation
 to come here today and to formally launch this $27 million strategy was
 because I saw it very much in the context of what I've just described.
 I see it as a practical way of addressing disadvantage and that has been
 something the Government has sought, not always successfully but always
 with goodwill and good intentions, the Government has sought to do over
 the last four years, to put an emphasis on those areas that mean that
 the indigenous within the Australian population as a group remain the
 most significantly disadvantaged. That is an unarguable fact whatever
 the views of the rest of the community may be. And it is our responsibility
 and it is particularly my responsibility as the Prime Minister to address
 that. And today's program which goes to the heart as David has said,
 of disadvantage. He records some of the problems. The lack of attendance.
 Part of the program is to encourage a greater effort on the part of parents
 to ensure that their children attend school. It acknowledges the significantly
 high rate of deafness and hearing impairment of children, and as somebody
 who himself in his very young days had a significant hearing impairment
 that was first discovered through a routine health check at the government
 school that I attended here in Sydney, I am very conscious of the value
 of that kind of approach and that kind of program to young indigenous
 people who suffer that same disability.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy to launch this strategy. I see
 it taking its place along side the commitments that the Government and
 State governments around Australia, and let me say that in so many of
 these areas it is our desire to work closely with governments of both
 political persuasions in order to solve problems which are our common
 challenge and our common responsibility. You can't implement a literacy
 and numeracy strategy be it for the population generally, or for the indigenous
 within our population, you can't implement it effectively unless
 you have the cooperation of the State government. And I'm delighted,
 I haven't spotted him yet through the gloom that is the function
 of television lights, but he's on the list. I'm very pleased
 to acknowledge the presence of Dr Ken Boston, the Director General of
 Education here in New South Wales, as well as the representatives of many
 other educational organisations both government and independent, and also
 the leaders of parent groups from schools within the western suburbs of
 Sydney.
I would also like to particularly thank Mark Patterson, the Executive
 Director of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry because this
 is a partnership. Dare I say it it's an expression of the social
 coalition where you have the government, you have business, you have the
 volunteer sector of our community, and you have individuals working together
 trying to uplift people, providing them with the tools so that they can
 have a better life. We will never remove disadvantage within the indigenous
 of Australia unless we address the depravation they suffer in areas of
 education, and health and employment. They are to me fundamental to the
 process of reconciliation. That is not to say that reconciliation doesn't
 have a spiritual component. Of course it does. It is a multidimensional
 concept and different people see it in different ways. But a fundamental
 element of it is to address these areas of disadvantage. And I see today's
 strategy which represents a firm commitment of resources from the federal
 government, as well as a commitment to better direct existing resources
 going towards indigenous programs, I see it as a very important element
 in the reconciliation process and a very practical gesture towards addressing
 the disadvantaged.
I think all of us share to the full the values expressed in Jimmy's
 very inspirational introductory speech. He brought together I think feelings
 that we all have  a desire not to forget the past or to misunderstand
 what was involved in the past, but a recognition that if we work together
 in goodwill we can build a better and a fairer future. You can't
 build a better and a fairer future if people don't have the fundamental
 educational tools to share in that future. And attacking deficiencies
 in literacy and numeracy either within the population generally and most
 particularly within the indigenous population is a very important element.
 I thank you very warmly and particularly the corporation for having us
 here today. And I've enjoyed the opportunity of hearing something
 of your programs, and of meeting those that who being assisted. And I
 thank you very sincerely for that and I have very great pleasure in launching
 the strategy. I know it will be a success. I thank the ambassadors for
 being here today, and in advance for the role that they will play in the
 very successful implementation of what is in every sense of the word a
 gesture of practical reconciliation amongst all Australians. Thank you.
[Ends]


I have always had the strongest personal commitment to tackling the scourge of drugs in our community.
That's why I am proud that our Tough on Drugs policy is the largest single initiative ever undertaken in Australia to respond to illegal drugs. 
Our approach has been to work as part of a social coalition of families, police, governments, health, welfare and charitable organisations to contribute their own expertise to tackle the drug problem at its source.
Working in a cooperative way with State leaders from different sides of politics we have committed more than 500 million dollars to fight the drug problem through law enforcement, education and treatment.
A few days ago I announced the funding of 63 grass roots projects across Australia to involve local community groups in our Tough on Drugs strategy.
The grants cover projects in all States and Territories.  Some are like the Macarthur Drug and Alcohol Youth Project's ‘Parents Links’ programme where information sessions will encourage local parents be more involved in drug prevention.
The Government has also recently stepped up its efforts to teach children about the dangers of drugs and how important it is to take personal responsibility for a drug-free lifestyle.
Recently, a satellite broadcast of teachers, doctors and other professionals was held to better involve school communities in drug prevention.  To assist we are providing resources for educational materials so that schools can teach children and design their own community summits against drugs.
And finally I can also report that in the past nine months Federal authorities have seized 340 kilograms of heroin and over 680 kilograms of cocaine.
Good night.


Subjects: Denis Burke; mandatory sentencing; Charles Perkins; indigenous matters. 
E&amp;OE  ……………………………………………………………………………
LYNEHAM:
Prime Minister, welcome again to Nightline.
PRIME MINISTER:
Always a pleasure.
LYNEHAM:
Your meeting with Denis Burke, your allowing of the debate in Parliament today, is this all fair dinkum, or are you just politicking to try to head off a backbench revolt?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s quite transparent.  Some of my colleagues are very unhappy about the Northern Territory position and want to overturn the law.  The great bulk of the party room is against that because we think in the end that it ought to be resolved by the local parliament.  So there’s nothing phoney about this.  We have voted against debating a bill that would overturn the Northern Territory law and that remains our position.  But I have said that I’ll have serious discussions with the Northern Territory Chief Minister about some changes to their law.  I don’t like their law, I don’t like mandatory sentencing.
LYNEHAM:
Now you said today in the Parliament that you thought the principle of mandatory sentencing was flawed and you have significant concerns.
PRIME MINISTER:
That’s right.  I think the principle of heroin injecting rooms is flawed and I have significant concerns about that.  There are a lot of things that states do, but in a federation of a big country like Australia, it is normal for the national government to allow the state or territory governments to determine matters of criminal law.  It is a principle of not interfering in state and territory affairs, not endorsement of individual laws that’s at stake here.
LYNEHAM:
But why is that principle in your mind given so much more weight than the prospect of youngsters being thrown into jail for very trivial crimes and as we’ve seen in at least one case, committing suicide as a result?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Paul, that is of course in the administration of criminal law only one side of the story.  The other side of the story is the sense of insecurity that elderly people have in the face of rising crime levels in certain parts of Australia.  Now. . . 
LYNEHAM:
But if the judges have the right of discretion, they can judge the crime.  If it is a serious  . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Paul we . . . .
LYNEHAM:
We don’t put them away.
PRIME MINISTER:
Hang on Paul.  You don’t have to persuade me that as a matter of principle mandatory sentencing is wrong, but I don’t run the criminal law of the states or the territories.  
LYNEHAM:
Well, Mr Burke has already said that he has no intention of changing the laws.  He doesn’t believe they need changing.  He’s happy to talk to you, and he’ll explain to you how they work.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well . . . 
LYNEHAM:
And wouldn’t mind some more money along the way.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we’ll just wait and see.  Mr Burke should understand that we are making a serious business of having a co-operative discussion and that kind of stance is not going to get anybody anywhere.
LYNEHAM:
Well it seems to suggest that his mind is closed to whatever you say.  He is pinning himself publicly here on the very night you’ve announced the meeting.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we just wait and see and he should realise that that kind of talk if he is serious about that and if he’s been properly quoted is not going to achieve anything.
LYNEHAM:
Well at the very least, if that is his opening position, you’re going to have to be robust in the extreme.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we’ll wait and see Paul.  I’ve sort of dealt with these situations before.  
LYNEHAM:
Do you think there really is a way of coming back to a productive and a constructive relationship between your government and black Australia?  Because it’s not looking too good at the moment.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you can’t see black Australia through the mouth of, and the eyes and the reactions of somebody like Charles Perkins.  Black Australia is more than that and I certainly think that we can continue to make process along the path to reconciliation.  I think the reaction to the Government’s submission to the Senate Committee has been unreasonable, from some people quite extreme and quite destructive of the interests of indigenous people.
LYNEHAM:
Charlie Perkins in particular?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I have already commented about him and I think most people feel that what he said was just so outrageous as to be right out of the ballpark.
LYNEHAM:
But when we say that a generation of young Australians went off to World War I, that’s not historically true either, but a generation of Australians lived through it, didn’t they?  They cried, and they got those letters from the front, and it was a national experience.  
PRIME MINISTER:
That’s right.
LYNEHAM:
For the aboriginal people, wasn’t this the equivalent?  Particularly given their close kinship ties?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look Paul, there’s no argument that a lot of them suffered.  There is no argument that a lot of them were unfairly treated.
LYNEHAM:
But this resort to statistics.  It minimises it doesn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
No.  What has attempted to be done with this submission is to put the thing in perspective, not to minimise it.  You’ve got to remember that a lot of people who were involved in these practices thought they were doing the right thing.  A lot of them were kind, a lot of them weren’t.  But that was true of a lot of people in every age and every generation.  And I think it’s an attempt by the minister to put this into perspective, not to deny bad things happened, he hasn’t sought to do that.  And I think he has been, for a very humane and decent man, I think he has been very unfairly attacked.
LYNEHAM:
And despite Denis Burke’s comments you remain optimistic about your meeting with him?  Which will be when by the way?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we’re in the process of getting our diaries together.  He is currently on the way to China.  But I had a telephone conversation with him and I mean the reality is that the Northern Territory is not a state, we respect it’s right in relation to the criminal law, but I have conveyed to him the concern that we have, and he must understand that he can’t ignore that concern.  I don’t want to say anymore than that.  There is no need for me to say anymore than that.
LYNEHAM:
Thanks for your time.
PRIME MINISTER:
Pleasure.
[Ends]


Subjects: Coastwatch; Customs; drug trafficking; illegal immigrants; AFP.
E&amp;OE ..................................................................
Well thank you very much Amanda.  To you and to Lionel Woodward, Rear Admiral Shalders, Admiral Barrie, other service chiefs, Max Moore-Wilton, ladies and gentlemen.  
It is very appropriate that Amanda should be here to introduce me and to say a few words, because in the time that she's had the Justice portfolio, I don't think anybody could deny she has bought tremendous energy and dedication and commitment to her responsibilities.  And the way in which, at a political level, those responsibilities of the Government have been given a great impetus and leadership.  It is very gratifying to me and there are benefits for the broader community. 
Today marks the official opening of a centre which arose out of a weekend, a Saturday morning conversation that I had with Max Moore-Wilton in April of last year which followed hard on the heels of some landings by illegal immigrants on the east coast of Australia.  And both of us pretty quickly concluded that we needed to commit as a nation more resources to the problem, the challenge of surveillance.  And we could perhaps find a more effective way of co-ordinating those resources and the existing resources.  
So, we established a taskforce and that taskforce reported in pretty quick time.  It made some recommendations to spend, according to my notes, about $124 million over four years.  It made eighteen recommendations, we made all the money available and I think we responded to just about - if not, all - of the recommendations.  And we decided to establish a Coastwatch Section of Customs and this National Surveillance Centre is in every sense of the word, the nerve centre of that particular operation.  
The recommendations involved the acquisition of new aircraft, a new command structure, and I particularly thank Rear Admiral Shalders and the other defence personnel who have come in and are working very closely with the sixty odd customs personnel who together constitute a very effective unit.  
And the  evidence is there to be seen.  There has been an increase in the detection of illegal immigration.  In many ways Coastwatch is dealing with a reasonably old, but growing challenge and that is that of illicit drug importation and also with the comparatively new phenomenon and that is this massive problem of illegal immigration.
Now illegal immigration does present a very big challenge to our country.  Australia is an attractive place to come to by any measure because we are a liberal open society, we are seen as a place once attained, where the prospects if you can establish your case of staying, are probably better than any other society.  And that represents a magnet, on the other hand, it also represents a challenge to the Australian community that does not want illegal immigration that queue jumps the aspirations of others around the world who want to join their families and who want to come and live in Australia.  But by the same token we have to deal in a, both an efficient and humane fashion with people once they arrive in this country.  The Australian community demands that we detect illegal immigration and deal with it.  And these additional resources and the Coastwatch and the centre are a very important part of it.
The other thing that is very impressive about this operation and its characterised the operations of some of our law enforcement agencies in recent times is the high level of cooperation and I say that I'm very grateful as Prime Minister of the evident close cooperation between Customs and the Australian Federal Police and I'm delighted to welcome Mick Palmer the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police here today and the way in which the police and customs and also where appropriate the state police forces of the various Australian states.  
It is very reassuring to the public to see the law enforcement agencies of our community operating together and you have a very good example and the pooling of intelligence data from the various intelligence communities of the Commonwealth is also very welcome.
In a very day to day, practical sense this centre and Coastwatch is part of the general defence network of the country; not defence in the common understanding of that term but as far as providing an adequate response mechanism for legal immigration and certainly the menace of drug importation it's a very important component of the defence of the way of life of the Australian community.
I'm very happy to see Max Moore-Wilton here today as Chairman of the Taskforce.  It did report in record time and it made some recommendations that have given us a much greater capacity and I believe that the resources of the Coastwatch has and the centre now has given us a capacity to deal very effectively.  I'm told that the implementation of the recommendation has resulted in an improvement in our detection of illegal boats from a 74% protection rate last financial year to 94% this year.  There has been a reduction in illegal immigration by air of around 20% following the placement of additional immigration officers in overseas airports and in some of our key diplomatic posts.  Illegal immigration by air has fallen from 1,397 illegal entries to the end of February last financial year to 1,148 to the same period this financial year.
Now all of those things indicate and the evident morale and enthusiasm of people who work with Coastwatch indicate that the additional resources were not only needed but they have been well placed and well dedicated.
I do take a close personal interest in anything to do with the defence of our country and in the broader sense this is part of that network and I do want to thank the customs service; Lionel Roodwood is right and it was my first responsibility and I remember with a little bit of nostalgia opening a new customs office in Darwin and visiting the customs office in Broome and all the other little things one does in the early months of one's very first ministry in a new government back in 1976.  I thought they were a very dedicated group of men and women and twenty-four years later I have no reason to doubt that initial judgement and working with their colleagues from the ADF I think they are providing this country with first class surveillance, a first class line of defence in detection using modern intelligence techniques to detect illegal immigration and deal with it in an efficient humanitarian way and also of course to maintain both the rage and the fight against illegal drug importation into this country and the seizures of heroin and cocaine and the work of the Federal Police in particular in relation to that is well known and increasingly remarked upon in a very positive way.
So I have very great pleasure, Amanda, Senator Vanstone in declaring the surveillance open and I know that you'll provide a tremendous service to the people of Australia.  Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Mandatory sentencing; Bringing them Home report..
E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………………………
MUNRO:
Prime Minister, thanks for your time.  Your mini revolt yesterday must have been pretty serious for you to warn your colleagues that your Government’s future was at stake.
PRIME MINISTER:
Mike I don’t go into what’s discussed in the party room, but we’ve now been in office for over four years and we’re a party room of very capable and determined men and women and every so often you do have difficult issues.  And I think it is silly for a political leader to pretend that every time his or her party meets, everybody agrees on everything. 
MUNRO:
Did you get a bit of a shock?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no I didn’t.
MUNRO:
You expected it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh yes, yes.  I have known that people have different views and what you have to do in these situations is to just talk things through and to work out a handling approach that reflects the broad consensus of opinion in the party room.  But every political party goes through these kinds of processes.  It would be a political party without flesh and blood that didn’t have men and women in it who had strong views and I admire colleagues of mine who have got strong views.  And I think it’s important that we don’t run away from the fact that we do have difficult issues.  A national leader has a great balancing act every day of his life and this mandatory sentencing is a very good example.  I mean I don’t myself believe in mandatory sentencing, I think you should leave it to the discretion of the courts.  But many communities around Australia are unhappy with the results of that and they demand the right to, through their elected representatives, in effect require that certain offences be treated in a particular way.  Now, I respect that and what I’m trying to do is to resolve the concern that a lot of people have about the impact of that approach on people under eighteen.  And, but also the desire of local communities to own their criminal justice system and you must remember that the criminal law of which  mandatory sentencing is part, has always been dealt with by the states and the territories.  It is not the sort of thing like defence and foreign affairs that the national government normally gets involved in.
MUNRO:
But you did point out only last night, that, and made a point of it, that the Northern Territory is not a state.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, but it has had internal self-government for twenty-five years and it’s had control of it’s criminal law for a very long period of time.
MUNRO:
Is this insurrection, mini-insurrection put down permanently, or just until there’s an outcome with your meeting with Denis Burke?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, look, I think those words are a little colourful.  I think this thing will work its way through in a very satisfactory way.  
MUNRO:
Do you or don’t you expect any real changes out of your meeting with Denis Burke?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think what I should do is meet him and then talk to you.  And I always find it is better if you talk to people face to face and don’t conduct a long distance negotiation over even the most worthy television program.  
MUNRO:
Do you see it as a test of your leadership?
PRIME MINISTER:
A Prime Minister’s leadership is tested every day on all sorts of issues.  The idea that  every so often  you have something which tests your mettle or tests your leadership is erroneous, it happens all the time.  And it’s an incredibly responsible, but privileged position to have and I feel that responsibility every day on a whole lot of issues. 
MUNRO:
Certainly the way that Treasurer Costello was talking today indicates that there will be some changes.  Would you agree?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I haven’t seen what Peter’s said and I’m always careful not to comment on what other people tell me other people have said.
MUNRO:
Can I, can I read it to you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh yes, but I would still like to know the context Mike. I think that’s a bit pointless.  Look, look I am going to meet, I’m going to meet Mr Burke and we’re going to have a discussion and we’ll see what comes out of it.
MUNRO:
Why did it need a revolt, a mini-revolt in the party room to make you act in some way on mandatory sentencing?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well this is an issue where I, I mean my talking to them, to him is not all that inconsistent with or surprising given the views I’ve personally expressed about mandatory sentencing.  I mean for some time now I have been saying that I am unhappy with it.  Look, it is a difficult issue.  There are a lot of people in my party who don’t believe that the Federal Government should have anything at all to do with this issue.  There are some who believe it should intervene and overrule.  There are others who believe that we should just talk.  And what I’ve endeavoured to do is to reflect those views, because these are not black and white issues, they are complex issues.  I understand the feelings of people in the Territory, people are worried about crime, the safety of their homes and their families.  On the other hand, people are sensitive about people under eighteen being mandatorily jailed or sent to detention centres.  I mean we have to be very careful, we’re not talking about jail in the traditional sense.  
MUNRO:
But some would say these issues are very much black and white issues Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
Do you mean in a racial sense?
MUNRO:
I do.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, that’s wrong, because although it is true that proportionately there are more aborigines in jails all around Australia than others, that is not because the laws are directed in a discriminatory way against aboriginal people.  The laws apply equally to all of us, but because due to social and economic disadvantage, indigenous people are more likely to fall into crime.  And what we have to do is not roll back the laws so much, but try and address the causes of that economic and social disadvantage.  To try and help the aboriginal people by improving their health, and their housing and their employment prospects.  And that really is what I mean when I talk about practical reconciliation.  I think the best thing you can do if you care about the indigenous people in this country is to address those areas of disadvantage.
MUNRO:
And admit that, and really not worry about whether it is 10% or 30% of children, aboriginal children who were taken from their families?  Not get into dictionary definitions?  Just respect their feelings.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well can I say to you one of the pities about the issue of that Senate submission is that you would think over the past few days that the only thing the Government had ever done in response to that separated children report was that Senate submission. The reality is that we picked up very quickly many of the recommendations of that original report, most particularly the recommendations that were designed to help the people who continue to suffer the effects of having been separated from their families years ago.  I . . . it’s a great pity that the focus has been on that document, which was, to be fair, was just meant to be an analysis of some of the material in the original report.  And one would imagine that is the only thing that we have said or done.  But the reality is when the original report came down we picked up many, not all, I am not pretending all of them, there are a couple of ones, significant ones, we didn’t, but we have tried particularly to help with programs, link up programs, and family reunion programs for people who continue to suffer the hurt and the trauma which I acknowledge is there.  
I mean no father, no person with feeling could deny that people were hurt and traumatised and I understand that.  I have never pretended otherwise.  And neither has Senator Herron.  And I just think the whole thing has got a bit out of whack, a bit out of perspective.  Our responses have been on a number of fronts, and we do care about that.  But we have to move on, we have to address present disadvantage and build a future together.  Of course things happened in the past that shouldn’t have happened, and we know that.  But we have to deal with the present I mean that was quite a while ago now.  There was a different attitude, an attitude that aboriginal people should be assimilated into the Australian community.  There is a different view now and we have to act according to that different view, be conscious of the hurt people felt, but also move on.
MUNRO:
All right Prime Minister, thanks very much.  We have to leave it there and we do appreciate your time.
PRIME MINISTER:
Pleasure.
[Ends]


Subjects:  Taxation reform; Australian Labor Party; Governmental achievements; 
E&amp;EO…………………………………………………………………………………..
Thank you very much Kerry, to your wife; to Senator Helen Coonan and Alan Cadman.  Alan and I do belong to the quarter century club that means that we’re both only twenty-five, not that we’ve been in parliament for only twenty-five years.  But it’s great to be back to a Liberal Party function in the electorate of Macquarie.  I sneak in and out of the electorate of Macquarie in a private capacity on a number of occasions.  I have a few mates and relations in this part of the world that I’m very, very happy to visit whenever I can and it’s a delightful part of the world and it was a real privilege this morning to be able to join my twenty-four predecessors as Prime Minister of Australia in planting my tree and to remark upon the contribution that they made.  I speak not of myself, I’ll leave that to my successor to talk about my contribution to Australian politics.  But to reflect for a moment on the contribution of the twenty four people that have gone before me but most particularly in the lead up to the century of federation the incredible contribution of Sir Henry Parkes, a native of the Blue Mountains, son of the Blue Mountains, the contribution that he made not only to his state but also to the Commonwealth of Australia.  Remarkable in the fact that he had an enormous impact on our country but of course by dent of history was never to become one of its twenty-five Prime Ministers.
Kerry was kind enough to talk about all of the things that have happened in politics since I was last here and he’s right – it has been a quite momentous three-year period.  And today I want to focus for a few minutes in one of the most important things that we did during that three year period, something that of course is going to come finally to fruition on the 1st of July of this year and that is the great historic reform of Australia’s taxation system.
It is not realistic or possible for anybody in politics not to talk about taxation reform at the present time because it is the biggest reform and the most important economic reform that we’ve had since WWII.  And can I say to you as supporters and friends of the Liberal Party and to the broader Australian public that it is perfectly natural that in the lead up to the 1st of July people will have questions, people will have doubts, people will inquire, people will want information and even our best supporters will go through a period of saying : “gee I hope it all goes well, I wonder perhaps, maybe, is this and that appropriate?”  That is a perfectly natural thing.
I think one of the sort of things that I guess troubles people most in politics or about politics is sometimes there’s a tendency in the paraphernalia of it to sort of try and pretend that the obvious doesn’t exist or to ignore the obvious.  Now it is perfectly natural that when you are leading up to a big reform like this there’s going to be a degree of apprehension and degree of concern, even a degree of criticism and it’s perfectly natural.  If people weren’t interested in it, interested in it enough to be apprehensive it wouldn’t be worth doing.  It really is as simple as that.  And can I say to all of you that’s going to go on for the next few months.
But when the 1st of July dawns, that Saturday in the first day of July and the first Saturday in July and the great bulk of Australians in the days that follow discover a very simple thing - 80% of Australians tax reform will mean that the price of some things increases, the price of some things stay the same and the price of a third category of things falls and on top of that everybody will enjoy an income tax cut.  And if you’re on a pension or a benefit it will be increased up front depending upon your circumstances in the order of 4%, in some cases with rent assistance higher.  And then on top of that, particularly for self-funded retirees there’ll be other benefits as well.  Now that in essence is how 80% of the Australian community will find taxation reform.
If you are in business there’ll be a new system to get used to; people are getting used to it now.  If you are an exporter you will find that you have a bit more of a competitive edge because the GST will not be payable on your exports.  If you pay provisional tax you’ll find after a while that provisional tax has been abolished.  If you are a self-funded retiree one of the things you will enjoy is a thing called dividend imputation credits which means that you will get the full tax value off franked dividends.
But the point I really want to leave you with and no other point today is that it is a totally natural thing when you are embracing a big reform that people are going to have questions and doubts and concerns.  If you didn’t the thing wouldn’t be worth doing.  And we’ll embrace tax reform not because we’re sort of mad ideological warriors, not because it’s the next thing to do.  Not because we have an obsession with changing things just for the sake of change.  We have embraced taxation reform because we think it will make the Australian economy even stronger and better.  
Because it will reduce, over time, the operating costs of business.  If you live in the country areas of Australia, you will find that your fuel is cheaper.  And for state governments it will do something that for decades, indeed for generations, state governments have asked for and that is to have access to a growth tax.  I have been to a lot of Premiers’ Conferences.  Can I tell you that they’re a bag of laughs most of the time.  You know, they are an art form in nonsense if I could put it that way.  You know you have the Premier arrives at the front door of Federal Parliament and says “I’m going to tell them.”  And then he goes out and says “I told them that the heartless Commonwealth took no notice and I’m going to have to go back to Macquarie St and increase taxes, or reduce services or something.”
I mean there’s a lot of nonsense carried out of Premiers’ Conferences.  But there is one thing I can tell you privately, all the Premiers of Australia are united about, whether they’re Labor Premiers like Mr Carr or Mr Beattie, or Liberal Premiers like Mr Court or Mr Olsen and that is that the GST is good for them.  Because a lot of people don’t realise that every last dollar of the goods and services tax is going to go to the states.  We’re not going to get a penny of it.  Every last dollar is going to the states.  And that means that as the years go by and it builds up, the revenue returns from it, develops, and the states get the benefit.  And they have more resources to fund government schools and hospitals and police services and all the other things that are so important.  
That is why I shall never forget Mr Carr’s contribution to the GST debate.  He came down to the Conference that the Treasurer and I had with all the Premiers to get them to sign the agreement and he said “I want to tell you Prime Minister this is an outrageous attack on the living standards of average Australians, where do I sign the agreement?”.  I’ve got to say the Queensland Premier was a little more subtle, but he grabbed the pen with equal vigour.  Because they know a good thing - to vary an old slogan - and they’re going to stick to it, they’re going to stick to it because they know it is very, very good.  
So, tax reform is a huge change.  But the average person is going to find it really consists of what I described.  The other thing I’d like to say about it is that it’s not something that is being imposed on the Australian community by stealth.  It’s not being done in the dead of night.  It’s not being done in defiance of commitments.  I mean I once said we’re weren’t going to do it, but I came to the conclusion that it ought to be done.  I didn’t try and do it until I’d gone back to the people again.  I mean not like 1993 when Mr Keating opposed John Hewson’s goods and services tax, won the election on the basis of that opposition and then increased all the indirect taxes to balance his budget.  Or rather to stop it being even more in deficit.  Without it going back to the people.  And without providing any compensation to people on the pension or on fixed incomes.  
Yes, we did decide in 1997, not long after I came here that it was a good idea to put tax reform back on the agenda.  And we put it back in earnest with a detailed plan before the 1998 election.  And I went to that election and I said “yes we once had a position against it, we now believe it is good for the country.  If you don’t like it, vote us out of office, if you don’t agree with us having changed our position, vote us out of office.”  But the Australian public wanted us back.  They voted us back into office.  They voted us back knowing we that we would introduce taxation reform.  They had it warts and all and we proceeded with no assistance at all from the Labor Party, but with good assistance from the Democrats with a number of changes we would have rather not made.  But we had to make it to get it though and we got it through the Parliament.  And now it is going to be introduced.
But let me for a moment just examine where our political opponents stand on this.  I mean the Labor Party on taxation reform.  Kerry talked about rights and responsibilities.  On taxation reform the Labor Party is the classic illustration of the irresponsible citizen.  They want the right to criticise it which they have in any democracy, the opportunity to score political points off a government that’s trying to do the right thing for the country.  But they abandon any sense of responsibility about what they are going to do.  
I mean I always thought in politics that how it operated was like this. One side proposed a policy, the other side either embraced that policy or disagreed with it and if it disagreed with it, it then turned around and said what it was going to do in place of it. Now that is how it is meant to work. I mean if you are going down the main street and you want to buy a car and you go to one car sale yard and they give you a good spin as to why you ought to buy that car and the bloke next door with the other car yard then comes along and starts criticising the model the first bloke is trying to sell you, you are naturally entitled to turn around and say, well what have you got to offer? Then he turns around and says I’m not trying to sell you a car, I’m just trying to critisise that one. You start to lose a bit of interest in him, he doesn’t have a lot of credibility, but that is what Mr Beazley is doing on tax. He hates the GST so much he is going to keep it if he wins the next election. But he is going to keep it. 
I mean this is one of the, you know, one of the great secrets of Australian politics. I mean if somebody had arrived in this country six months ago and they’d have heard me and they’d have heard my opponent talking about taxation reform, they would have said, well this fellow Howard he’s in favour of tax reform, he’s in favour of the GST as part of tax reform and this fellow Beazley’s against it. So that means if Mr Beazley wins next time Australia won’t have a GST. Wrong. If Mr Beazley wins next time, Australia will have a GST. He’s not going to . . . he said he’s going to roll it back, whatever that means. And he can’t do that without increasing your income tax because he said that he’s going to roll it back but he’s not going to leave the States worse off. 
I mean he went down to a meeting with all of his Labor mates. Mr Beazley went down to Burnie, and there Mr Bracks and Mr Bacon. And Mr Beattie told Mr Beazley in Burnie that he had to give a guarantee that if any of the roll-backs that he talks about took place, he doesn’t tell us where they are. I mean what he is really doing is that every time an interest group comes along and complains to him about the GST, he says we’ll look after that with a roll-back. They go away happy. I mean, you know you’ll be in terrible trouble if they all bump into each other at the same meeting because they’ll add it all up and they’ll work out that it’s pretty difficult. So you really do have a sharp distinction between the two sides of politics on this very important issue. 
I mean, we are trying to do something we believe in and what we believe is for the good of the country. It’s not easy, it’s never easy undertaking big reforms like this and I know some people have concerns about it and they have questions about it, I understand that and we take those questions and those concerns very seriously. But we do have a goal and we have a commitment to that. And on the other side we have somebody who’s trying to luxuriate in the expediency of criticism without any idea of some alternative road map. And I think in the end that will be exposed for what it is, but ultimately that of course is for the Australian people to resolve. 
We are not only interested of course in economic issues. I was asked a few weeks ago by a journalist who interviewed me on the occasion of the fourth anniversary of Kerry Bartlett’s victory in March of 1996 and the election of the Coalition Government. I was asked to nominate the three things that I was most proud of as far as the Government’s achievements were. And I said that in no particular order our achievements, in delivering the strongest economy this country has had for 30 years and particularly the way in which we were able to stare down the Asian economic downturn better than I expected. I don’t mind admitting three years ago I was apprehensive that the Asian economic downturn might have damaged us more than it has and we performed even better than I had hoped and believed we might.
And the other two things that I am very proud of what the Government was able to do are in the non-economic areas. And that is our national gun control legislation achieved in March of 1996. And let me say I know that didn’t please everybody, didn’t please some of our supporters and friends, but it was long term in the national interest. And every time I witness on television, I witness the appalling license with which guns are available in the United States, I am grateful as an Australian that I live in this country and that must be the reaction of so many Australian parents in particular, and lonely and vulnerable people within the community. 
And the final thing that I put in the three things of which I’m most proud, of course was the role that Australia was able to discharge in relation to the people of East Timor. A role that saw our country do the right thing in our region, saw our country respond to the suffering of a group of people, saw our country undertake a very difficult operation and all credit to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, so superbly led in that operation by General Cosgrove, but demonstrating the wonderful capacity and tradition of the men and women of our Defence Force. And when I visited them in Dili and elsewhere in December, there were many things that I remember of that day, but one of the most wonderful parts of the day was the obvious warmth they displayed towards the local people and the way in which that warmth was reciprocated. Not only were they great military representatives our country, but they were great humanitarian representatives of our country. And to walk into the military hospital there and to find one of our own Liberal MLC’s, Major Brian Persudy in the medical team was just a reminder of the diversity of the skills of the modern Australian Army and the humanitarian rapport that was established. 
So Kerry, it has been a wonderful journey so far, it has been a great four years, we do have a very strong Parliamentary team. I do want to pay tribute to Kerry as your local representative. He has very strong and spontaneous support in this electorate and that doesn’t surprise me because he does represent his electorate in a very dedicated way. I said to journalists of local papers that interviewed me in Kerry’s office a short while ago. I said of him, that he lived with his constituents in the total sense of that expression. He worried on their behalf when they had problems and he celebrated with them when they had successes and had achievements. And that is the mark of a very good local representative. 
This is a very diverse electorate. It has a fascinating cross-section of the Australian community. And I think you have probably got, you got most points of view on the political spectrum represented in Macquarie! I saw a number of them on display [inaudible] and a number from elsewhere! It’s one of those places that always attracts visitors and long may in the best tradition of that expression, long may that continue to be the case. 
But Kerry, it has been an enormous privilege to have you as a colleague, to have you as somebody who is a very good conveyor of the common sense concerns of the Australian people when those concerns ought to be expressed to a Prime Minister.
A Prime Minister in the end is only as good as the advice he gets from his parliamentary colleagues. If you get bad advice and you have people who are unrepresentative of public opinion and if you have people in who are afraid to express their points of view, in the end you will lose contact. No matter how hard you try yourself to keep contact with the public, and I try very hard.
So Kerry, thank you very much for your support and your contribution. And to all of you can I say that I value the loyalty and support of the members of the Liberal Party that I have had over the last four years. We could not have travelled the journey we have, we could not have achieved what we have, we could not have reduced the unemployment the way we have, built the Australian economy, built the international respect of the Australian community, pioneered the reforms that we have without the sympathy and the understanding of the supporters of our party.
And can I just finish on this note. It is appropriate that for the second time as Prime Minister I’ve come to this same restaurant because on earlier occasion. Now that reminds me that there is something symbolic about that and that is, the first thing about it is that there is a consistency about our patterns and our attitude. And the other thing is that it is so symbolic and appropriate on the two occasions I come to this electorate we should do so in a small business establishment, because small businesses are so much the heart and soul of this electorate with its large number of small but vibrant communities, so much the heart and soul of the Liberal Party and so very important to the economic strength of the Australian economy.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Thank you very much Kerry Bartlett. To Jim Angel, the Mayor of the City of Blue Mountains; to Senator Helen Coonan, Senator for NSW; the children of the Faulconbridge Public School, in particular a very, very special thanks to them; the local residents of the area, and also those who have chosen to temporarily visit us, for the purpose of today’s gathering.
But I’m here to continue a very long tradition of Australian Prime Ministers on both sides of politics. And that is to plant an Oak tree, to join my 24 predecessors who have helped, or their descendents that I look at these trees, this Corridor of Oaks, and I find that the great bulk of them, and the fact they planted the trees in person. And I feel very humble and very honoured to join my 24 predecessors in this very simple, but very symbolic ceremony. 
And in the process we honour one of Australia’s most significant political figures, Sir Henry Parkes, who did more than any other person to bring about the federation of the then Australian colonies in 1901 and to build the Commonwealth of Australia, the Centenary of which we will celebrate together next year.
Ironically of course, Sir Henry Parkes, although he left his mark not only in this local community, because the name of the town of Faulconbridge was of course taken from his mother’s maiden name- Faulconbridge House was built in the 19th Century. He not only left his mark here in the local community, but he left his mark on the State of NSW, and he left his mark of course, on the Commonwealth of Australia. So in many ways, Ladies and Gentlemen, this ceremony which brings together the people of the local community, is both a local ceremony, reminding you of a great son of the Blue Mountains. But it is also a simple, national ceremony, which allows the community to mark in a quiet, dignified, but effective way, the contribution of the now 25 people, who have held the most privileged office that anybody could possibly aspire to, and that is the Office of Prime Minister of Australia.
I won’t of course talk about the contribution of different people of that office, other than to acknowledge that each in his own different way, whatever their political perspectives were, and as I look at the list, I see people with whom I have had profound agreement, such as Sir Robert Menzies, others with whom I’ve had some disagreement on occasions over the years. But we have all of us been united in a commitment and a dedication to the service of our country, to the service of the legal and community ideals in which we believe. One of those great community ideals of course, and one of the great corner stones of Australian democracy, is the right of individuals to express their views, on whatever subject in a lawful, and on occasions, vigorous fashion. 
Australian democracy is a vigorous thing, Australian democracy is bound up with the vigorous exchange of views. But in the end, we have always resolved our differences in a peaceful, harmonious way. And whatever political differences we may have, there are one or two things that have shone through the experience of Australian democracy. We are a most tolerant, cohesive society, we are a society that has welcomed people from different parts of the world. Despite the protestations of some, we are a society which is free of racial intolerance and hatred. We are a society which is a proud example to the rest of the world. And we have demonstrated in recent times our capacity to stand up for the principles of liberty and independence. And we have in that sense been an example to the rest of the world.
I want in being here today to thank my colleague and friend, Kerry Bartlett, the Member for Macquarie. I take the opportunity of warmly thanking him for the articulate energetic representation he brings to this very diverse electorate in the National Parliament. I can ensure all of you, who are here, all of his constituents, that he is doing a magnificent job representing you in the national Parliament.
And finally ladies and gentlemen I want to mark this occasion by an exhortation to all Australians, to understand and revere the history of this country. It is a history that has not been without blemish. It is a history of a country which has built a mighty, impressive, powerful, widely admired democracy as we have entered the 21st Century. Australia is one of fewer than 10 nations that remain continuously democratic throughout the entire 2Oth Century. It is a country whose history is rich, it is a country with a history of which we can be proud, whilst recognising that we made mistakes, and allowed injustices and unfair treatment. But if you look at the great balance sheet of Australian history, it is an achievement of which all of us can be immensely proud. And as we come to celebrate the Centenary of the Commonwealth of Australia, it is an opportunity to reflect on that history, it is an opportunity to thank people like Sir Henry Parkes who made such a contribution to the building of the modern Australia. And it’s an opportunity to resolve, to work together to build an even greater nation in the 21st Century.
Thank you very much.


Subjects: Olympic Games; foreign policy; UN committees; regional financial centre
PESCHARDT:
Prime Minister thank you for joining us on Australia Direct. Obviously the Olympics is a great opportunity for Australia. What sort of country do you hope people will see?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am sure they will see a friendly, capable, tolerant and also sophisticated country. I think people will see Australian sportsmanship and athletic talent on display, but they will also find a very sophisticated, diverse country. Sydney is a culturally diverse, exciting city. It is a cosmopolitan city in the best sense of that expression, it really is a wonderfully international city and people will find, I think they will find a sense of excitement and optimism and zest about our country which you can’t find anywhere else in the world.
PESCHARDT:
This is a more complex country I think than many people realise and appreciate it. Is that sometimes a frustration?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think it is a huge asset. I mean, we have it all. We’ve got the British, Irish and other European connection and that is very strong but it’s not the full story by any means. We’ve also got our links with North America and some of the cultural ambience, only some, of North America and we have very strong links now with Asia. We have hundreds of thousands of Australians of Asian background who are making a tremendous contribution to our society and we are really at a wonderful intersection in history and geography and culture and that is a huge asset to the country, it’s not a frustration.  It adds value to being an Australian, it adds value to Australia in a way that is quite special.
PESCHARDT:
Lets talk a bit about that if we can about the relationship with Asia which is a fundamental one in Australia.  The previous government seemed to be more committed to the relationship in Asia than your government.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, they were preoccupied with it. We are committed to it, they were preoccupied with it. They were sort of one dimensional in their approach to foreign policy. We are multi- dimensional. We adopted an Asia first, not an Asia-only approach. If we had been obsessed with Asia and been preoccupied with Asia, we would have been knocked around by the Asian economic downturn. And what helped us is that we were able to diversify. We were able to go to North America and Europe and find markets we lost in Asia and I think the strength of our approach to the rest of the world is that we see Australia as a citizen of the world, rather than just a citizen of our region.
PESCHARDT:
Is it not sometimes, obviously in terms of the East Timor conflict that saw you in direct opposition with your closet neighbour Indonesia. Now that is surely a very unsettling place to be isn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we did the right thing and what we did won us respect in the region. The relationship with Indonesia is rebuilding and I pay tribute to what President Wahid has done in the time he has been the President with the leadership he has displayed and I have no doubt that that relationship will heal and rebuild and be different in the future, but in its own way just as strong.
PESCHARDT:
Now just if we can talk a little bit about the sort of Australia that people are going to see when they come to the Olympic Games. Now there are obviously sensitivities about Aboriginal issues. It is inevitable that many people will come to this country, journalists, observers and they will focus very much on the Aboriginal issue. Is there a certain sense of discomfort about what they are going to see?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, because we don’t try and hide the truth. The living standards of Aboriginal Australians are still too low and we have to continue our efforts to raise those standards. We’ve improved them, but there is still long way to go. 
PESCHARDT:
It’s a very very slow process though.
PRIME MINISTER: 
But that is the experience of so many societies.  I don’t know of a society in the world where the debate between the indigenous community and others where it’s totally resolved.  We’re not alone in that sense, we have our own way of dealing with it. And it’s always possible to say it should be better, and that will always be right, but it’s equally true to say that there’s a commitment to lift standards of living, of health, and education, all of the practical things that must be addressed if we are to remove the disadvantage. But there is no sense of discomfort.  Australians will welcome visitors to look at our nation warts and all, that’s the nature of our society.  We’re not any different, we have blemishes, we have made mistakes, we’ve done things wrong, but the balance sheet is far more on the other side.
PESCHARDT:
In recent times, there has been criticisms of Australia by the United Nations, in particular in terms of human rights and mandatory sentencing, the way that people that have committed crimes three times immediately go to gaol. Now the response to the United Nations has been pretty extreme . 
PRIME MINISTER:  
Well not extreme, I mean that’s an extreme [inaudible] but no . . . let’s get things right. The United Nations has not criticised us, in fact the Secretary General said we were a model member. A Committee of the United Nations, of which there are many has been critical. The analysis in our view was flawed. We are unhappy with the committee process. We don’t think they take enough account of the views of elected governments. They take too much account of the views of non-government organisations and in particular in relation to mandatory sentencing the whole basis of that criticism is wrong. They were saying that the law was racially based because there were more proportionately more Aborigines in custody than others. That doesn’t make it racially based. That is the equivalent of saying that because there are more men in gaol than women that the law is gender based. I mean that is a ridiculous proposition. 
PESCHARDT:
Isn’t it though a part of being a member of a club that sometimes if you don’t like the rules of that club because you are a member of that club you just have to succumb to the views of the greater number of people?
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well, I don’t think the club, I think it’s a totally erroneous analogy, and in any event, we have been punctilious in paying our dues and meeting our obligations, if you want to use the club analogy. And that led the Secretary General to say that we are a model member.
PESCHARDT:
What about though, you are inevitably going to get criticised by American, by French, by German, by British reporters, the way that the Aboriginal issue has been treated. Is that going to worry you?
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well I worry about justified criticism. I don’t worry about so much unjustified criticism, I try and deal with it. And no society is perfect, including the societies from which those respected journalists will come. And I just ask people to look at Australia in its proper context, and to see our pluses and to see our minuses. If people do that fairly and objectively, they will go away with a very positive impression. But not the impression of a country that believes it is perfect, we’re not. But we’ve contributed a lot more that is positive, than is negative.
PESCHARDT:
 If I can just talk a little bit about the Asian Financial Crises. As you said earlier, Australia did survive that crisis very well indeed. How well is the country do you now believe placed to be a regional headquarters, a major economic and business base for the region?
PRIME MINISTER:
 Well, it already is in many respects, and I think it’s got great potential, particularly the city of Sydney, in relation to financial services. We have a stable political system, we have clear, coherent stable laws, we have an incorruptible judiciary, we have good laws of corporate governance, we have low inflation, very ,very strong well supervised banking system. All of these things are marvellous assets. We also have very livable cities and relatively low costs compared to cities like Singapore and Tokyo. I mean it is hard to imagine anybody passing us by. 
PESCHARDT:
 We do though, sometimes  . . .
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well of course they do, for a whole lot of historical reasons, I mean we are  . . . 
PESCHARDT:
Prejudice against Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: 
No we are later onto the scene. For years when people thought of financial centres in our part of the world, they automatically thought of Tokyo and Singapore, they are increasingly thinking of Sydney and Melbourne.
PESCHARDT:
Finally, if I can ask you, the Olympic Opening Ceremony, when it begins, now I know that you are not going opening the Games, neither is the Queen. It’s been a subject of controversy. Taking all that aside, how will you feel when the Games open, when the opening ceremony is on in the Olympic Stadium?
PRIME MINISTER:
 Well, I’ll feel a sense of pride and excitement. I’ll feel here, the greatest sporting event is in my country, in the city in which I grew up, a wonderful city, but most importantly it’s in Australia. And I will be looking forward to a lot of Australian gold medals as well.
PESCHARDT:
 Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us.
PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;EO…………………………………………………………………………………
Subjects: Stolen children; interest rates; mandatory sentencing; tax package; Kosovar refugees
MITCHELL:
In our Sydney studio, the Prime Minister Mr Howard.  Good morning.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL:
Would you rather coach St Kilda?
PRIME MINISTER:
(inaudible)
MITCHELL:
You’ve said you’re sorry for any hurt caused by the Government commission on the stolen generation will you now agree to a formal apology from the parliament?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no they’re quite different things.
MITCHELL:
Why?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well because the report is a report of a submission and a submission of my Government.
MITCHELL:
That was a calculated use of the word sorry yesterday though wasn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
No it was genuine.
MITCHELL:
Oh, I don’t doubt it was genuine; it was calculated.  I mean Senator Herron used the same language.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well interestingly enough we hadn’t liased…
MITCHELL:
Really?
PRIME MINISTER:
… about our responses in the Parliament, no.
MITCHELL:
So there was no agreement to use the word sorry?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well certainly not.  I certainly had no discussion with him.  When I was asked the question I just decided to give that answer.  Now you may find that strange but I don’t think it was anything odd.  If you have a report prepared in good faith which contains a factual analysis.  You put it in without any malign intent and then some people are offended by that well what’s wrong with saying sorry about that?  I mean it’s in relation to an act of the Government, today’s Government and it’s a perfectly natural thing if some people are offended to say well we didn’t mean to offend you, there was no malign intent; it was prepared in good faith, it hasn’t really been you know seriously disputed on a factual basis.  Some people were offended by it and I’m sorry about that and I say to those people, to those of my fellow Australians that may have been, that wasn’t the intention and there was no malign intent, we weren’t trying to play wedge politics.  I didn’t want the headlines in some papers of the last few days, the last week.
MITCHELL:
But clearly, you would have been conscious of use of the word ‘sorry’ in this environment?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Neil it’s the sort of thing I say… I mean anything I have done or I’ve been directly associated with that’s offended somebody, it’s a perfectly human thing to say I’m sorry.  If I interrupt you unreasonably I might say I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to do that and that’s just part of the language.  I think we’re getting too hung up.  We’re getting absolutely so focused on a word or an expression we are losing a sense of proportion.  We’re talking here about the impact on some people of a document prepared in good faith in response to a Senate Committee request.  The formal national apology relates to an entirely different thing.
MITCHELL:
OK but…
PRIME MINISTER:
It asks the current generation to accept formal responsibilities for the deeds of an early generation and that raises a whole lot of other considerations and the Government’s position on that has been repeated on numerous occasions and it hasn’t changed.
MITCHELL:
So there’s no change on that?  The head of ATSIC, Geoff Clarke and a number of other Aboriginal leaders have said what you and Senator Herron have said is not enough, you should go further with a formal apology.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t agree with that.  I think it’s perfectly proper and desirable and reasonable for us to say what we have said in relation to the unintended impact of that document…
MITCHELL:
Was the document…
PRIME MINISTER:
… which was our document.
MITCHELL:
Was the document accurate?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it was prepared in the indigenous affairs branch of my department and on the best information available to Senator Herron when he oversaw its preparation, it was.
MITCHELL:
Do you stand by it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, I stand by the document, yes.
MITCHELL:
So you apologise for its impact but not for its content?
PRIME MINISTER:
I apologise if it had any personal impact on anybody but I haven’t yet been persuaded that there’s material in it that’s inaccurate.
MITCHELL:
Was there a stolen generation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there were people… see we’re… we are now getting back to the debate that people are telling me is so divisive and in relation to any hurtful impact, I’ve said I’m sorry, yet we’re meant to go back to it.  Well I’ll go back to it if you ask me the question.  Clearly there were large numbers of people who were taken away who shouldn’t have been forcibly removed, there’s no argument about that.  There were also many children taken away in those days who would be taken in the same circumstances, away today because they weren’t being properly looked after.  As to the magnitude and the implication which I think the submission was addressing, that an entire age cohort so to speak of people were taken well that’s what the document was addressing.  Now I can’t put it any different way and I think we you know really are sort of churning over old ground in a quite unproductive fashion.  
We didn’t set out to hurt anybody but equally there were features of that report that deserve criticism, that original report.  For example there was nobody who was involved in the removal practices given an opportunity of appearing before the inquiry.  There was no evidence taken from any of the people involved.  There was reference in the context of the debate to the expression, the use of the expression ‘genocide.’  Now that is a wholly exaggerated wrong, the use of that expression.  It wasn’t genocidal.  It was clearly wrong and clearly unacceptable according to today’s standards but many of the people involved in those practices did not have any malign intent, they believed at the time that those practices were beneficial.
MITCHELL:
So the policies were well intentioned you’re saying?
PRIME MINISTER:
By many people, yes.  Yes they were.
MITCHELL:
What about the policies themselves?  Were they well intentioned?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well by today’s standards they’re not acceptable, at the time they had wide support.  
MITCHELL:
That doesn’t mean they were well intentioned.  Wasn’t it an attempt to delete the Aborigine blood?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well some people believe it was.  Look Neil you know as well as I do that years ago we had a policy of assimilation in this country.  Now that was practiced because those generations believed that that was the best thing.  Today’s generation does not believe that’s the best thing.  Today’s generation says that we should respect the separate cultural dignity of the indigenous people and I do, the Government does, most Australians today do but you have to remember that attitudes were different several generations ago or even thirty years ago so…
MITCHELL:
Have you accepted that what has happened has brought racial politics to Australia in a very strong sense?
PRIME MINISTER:
Not as far as the Government is concerned.  I mean we have for example…
MITCHELL:
There has been some awful things happening this week.  I mean Charles Perkins talking about violence.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think some people have gone overboard, I think their reaction has been bad but…
MITCHELL:
Is he one of them?  
PRIME MINISTER:
I beg your pardon?
MITCHELL:
Is he one of them?  Has he gone overboard?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think his remarks were well… look I don’t want to inflame the situation and you know that words uttered directly by Prime Minister’s are analysed.  We’re all interested, I mean we can’t have it both ways… you can’t say it’s oh a shocking thing what’s happened this week and then set about sort of as it were adding more words to the debate and potentially exacerbating.  I mean we are either serious about having a restrained, calm discussion or we want to inflame the situation by as much extravagant rhetoric as possible.
MITCHELL:
Or was it a shocking thing that happened this week?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I said people are saying it’s a shocking thing?
MITCHELL:
Do you think it was?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think… look there was nothing on the part of the Government designed to create racial politics or racial tension.  I mean the charge has been made against us that we sort of did this deliberately as some kind of diversion, I mean that’s the most absurd proposition I’ve heard in years.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well who approved the submission?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well this submission was prepared in the indigenous affairs section of my department, which is the section that Senator Herron is serviced by as minister…
MITCHELL:
He signed off on it I suppose?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Senator Herron signed off on it.  It was at one… at a stage in its preparation it was shown to an adviser in my office and I myself did not know of the document’s existence until after it had been submitted to the Senate Inquiry.
MITCHELL:
It would seem you’d obviously prefer it had not released… not been presented in this…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well let me put it this way Neil, I’d have been happy not to have had the debate in the headlines of this week, of course.
MITCHELL:
So you’d rather it wasn’t presented in this way?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Neil look I’m not going to walk away from a Minister who’s acted in good faith.
MITCHELL:
You’ve already said the document’s accurate (inaudible)…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’ve indicated a number of things about its impact.
MITCHELL:
OK financial matters.  Now there are strong arguments that the latest increase in interest rates effectively undermines the average Australian any benefit from the GST and statistically that seems a sound argument.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s not because it doesn’t take into account the interest cuts that have occurred over the last four years.  It’s a bit rich for somebody to come along and say hey look under the tax reform plan we’re going to cut your tax by $30 but under these latest increases of the interest rates that’s halved by say $15 without also taking into account the sort of $40 or $50 cut in interest rates that’s already occurred.  So if you’re going to include the interest rate rises you’ve got to include the interest rate cuts.
MITCHELL:
Well if it does there’d be a lot of people who just now would be signing up for these kind of interest rate agreements and they’re the ones who’ll be looking at their pay packet after the GST.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there’ll be some but the great bulk of people, the great bulk of people, won’t be doing that, they’ve had mortgages for a number of years and they’re $250 a month better off on average.
MITCHELL:
But do you agree that it will remove most of the benefit that comes through?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I don’t agree it will remove most of the benefit because you’ve got to take into account the interest rate falls but in any event you have never seen tax cuts and interest rate adjustments as offsets.  The Labor Party never provided any tax cuts to wipe out the impact of the 17% interest rates we had when Mr Keating was treasurer.  I mean this is a ridiculous argument.  First of all they selectively use the rises without including the falls and then they pretend there’s some law of economic management that says that every time there’s an interest rate adjustment there’s got to be a corresponding tax adjustment.  I mean that’s a ridiculous proposition.   I mean in net terms you would have to ask people if they are better or worse off as a result of government policies.  
MITCHELL:
Well, look that’s part of what I am saying.  I mean if the people are saying to me, after the GST comes in they will not be better off because of the interest rate rise.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I say to those people that unless they are in . . . unless they’ve just taken out a mortgage, and in any event it will vary according to particular circumstance.  Anybody who’s had a mortgage for say two years . . . 
MITCHELL:
But Mr Howard they’re looking at balancing their budget in the week after the GST, they’re not worried about the history.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I am sorry.  I mean you . . . 
MITCHELL:
Through that period, they’re now looking at the previous . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I understand that, but that doesn’t alter the fairness of the comparison.  
MITCHELL:
OK, related matters, the dollar below 60 cents.  I mean for the third time, one of those times was the banana republic statement, does that concern you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t talk about the dollar.  
MITCHELL:
Interest rate strategy working?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t know what you mean by the interest rate strategy.
MITCHELL:
Well, I mean part of the strategy was to prop up the dollar, wasn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, that’s asking me in another way to talk about level of the dollar, I am not going to do so.
MITCHELL:
OK.  Can we, I mean is there anyway you can talk about what the year ahead holds in terms of interest rates?  There is a degree of nervousness about further rises, do you think we’re at about the right level for the year, or not?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I can’t really do that without getting into the business of speculating or commenting on what the rate ought to be, I just can’t do that.  
MITCHELL:
But the GST surely will put pressure on inflation and therefore interest rates.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, there will be a one off,  short lived, however you describe it, inflationary, or cost of living impact from the GST – price impact.  Because  the price of some things will go up, some will stay the same and some will go down and everybody will have a tax cut.   And people then in net terms as a result of those things will be better off.  Now, just . . .  I mean we think it will be short lived, we understand that and unless it is not short lived there is no enduring impact on interest rates.  
MITCHELL:
We’ll take a call for the Prime Minister.  Marion, go ahead please.
CALLER:
Good morning Mr Howard.  
PRIME MINISTER:
Hi Marion.
CALLER:
My quality of life has been pretty good since I retired.  I am one of those people brought up a family and worked in between.  My last pay packet before I retired was $8.19 an hour, so that was not too good.  But never mind, I have been happy.  Now when my rent is taken out of my pension, I have a $138, I’m quite happy.  I go out everyday, have a coffee, take a couple of classes and buy my clothes.  But after July, I really am panicking, and please don’t tell me you’re giving me 4% rise on my pension because that would be taken up with the rent and other things.  I don’t think any of you in parliament have the slightest idea how real pensioners, those working poor plus the people on the dole, just how they live.  And quite frankly you’re not interested.  Because you’ve never done it yourself. You’re all from a background of middle class.  
MITCHELL:
Let’s put that aside for the moment.
CALLER:
Right.
MITCHELL:
And get to the question please Marion.  Yes Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I am going to mention the increase in the pension, because . . . 
CALLER:
4%?
PRIME MINISTER:
I am going to mention it because you are getting it.  And there is a rent adjustment as well which you didn’t mention. You say I don’t understand.  I haven’t lived on the pension, that’s true and nor has Mr Beazley and nor had Mr Keating . . . 
CALLER:
I did mention all of you in Parliament.
PRIME MINISTER:
Alright.  And give me a go, I listened politely and patiently to you and I just would like the same opportunity.  I haven’t, that’s true.  But I do talk to a lot of people and I do try and understand.  I do try and get a balance between running an economy that encourages more jobs being created and also looking after the poorer people in the community.  And we try and get a decent social security safety net and the compensation package that’s been introduced for the GST I think is very good and is very strong.  Now we are going to keep an eye on how it operates and we’re going to be particularly concerned about how it operates in relation to people on the pension and low incomes.  But we have gone out of our way to make sure that there is a good compensation package to protect people traditionally who are paying rent.  We also have,  I don’t know whether you have any savings, you may not.  If you do there’s also a bonus for that.  I don’t know whether you have income from sources other than the pension, I am not sure. If you do there’s further additional [inaudible] bonus in relation to any savings that you may have.  So, there are quite a number of other things, and without knowing your full income profile, and I am not suggesting that it is anything more than just the pension. I don’t know.  
MITCHELL:
Marion, if you want to . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
But there are other things that are there that you didn’t mention and I think it’s only fair on behalf of the Government that I point those out as well.
MITCHELL:
Thank you Marion, thank you for calling. Thank you to the Prime Minister.  A quick break and then more of John Howard in our Sydney studio.
[Commercial]
MITCHELL:
Your calls to the Prime Minister, keep them quick if possible.  Raymond go ahead.
CALLER:
Mr Howard, I just precede my question by saying  I am a proud Australian Jew who’s parents were fortunate enough to come to this country, seventy years ago.  I ask you sir, in very simple terms, if the President of modern Germany, and his successors over the last ten years and the German Parliament have been able to offer a total apology to those who survived the holocaust and their relatives and other generations of Jews for what were done by previous generations of Germans, why cannot your Government and the Parliament do exactly the same?
PRIME MINISTER:
Now my answer to that is that it implies an equivalence between the holocaust and the treatment of the Australian aborigines in years gone by and I don’t accept that that’s a fair comparison.  I know a great deal about what happened in the holocaust and I have a profound empathy with the suffering of the Jewish people.  I don’t think that is with great respect, an historically fair or accurate comparison.  I would point out to you and it seems to be lost in all of this that I have on numerous occasions said that I am personally very sorry for the way in which aborigines were treated in the past.  I’ve said that on numerous occasions and I repeat it here this morning.  And Parliament has passed a motion of deep and sincere regret.  And many people think that is an even more profound expression than what they are now asking for.  I think it is the appropriate way to respond.  But without in any way diminishing, in any way, diminishing the mistakes that were made in this country in the past to liken that to the holocaust is historically inaccurate, wrong and I don’t accept it.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard do you believe that you have public support on this issue?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t know, I haven’t polled it.  
MITCHELL:
But there was a poll a little while ago and it wasn’t . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I haven’t . . . was there, I mean I think polls done perhaps several years ago but I mean Neil, I don’t know.  Some people support me, some people don’t.  You know what some people have said to me – John, just say it and get it off the agenda.  Some of my critics have said that.  Now, I am not going to do that, that would be rank hypocrisy, it would be . . . 
MITCHELL:
Do your colleagues support you, because they didn’t on mandatory sentencing this week, did they?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there is a widespread view in the Government that a formal national apology of the type sought by the Labor Party and ATSIC is not appropriate. 
MITCHELL:
Did you say to the backbenchers that threatened to cross the floor that it could be the end of the Government? 
PRIME MINISTER:  
Oh, look I am not going to go into what was said in the party room.  Any public disunity is bad for a government.  
MITCHELL:
Do you oppose mandatory sentencing?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have always personally opposed mandatory sentencing.  Like I oppose personally a lot of laws that operate in the various states.  I oppose as you know heroin injecting rooms.  But in the end I accept  that is something that ought to be run by the states.  I don’t get people saying that I should override that even though I oppose it in the Territory.  
MITCHELL:
I thought I saw . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t understand, I don’t see the logic of people who on the one hand want me to override the things they object to and not override the things they approve of.  Now if they assert the right to have that view well they should acknowledge it in relation to others.  
MITCHELL:
Why were the euthanasia laws overridden and not mandatory sentencing?
PRIME MINISTER:
Because euthanasia was on an entirely scale.  We were introducing a new moral paradigm in this country if we had decided to go down that path.  We would have been saying to every Australian that you can go to the north if you wanted to, if you were able to do so, go to the Northern Territory and take advantage of that.  We would have established an entirely new national benchmark. It wasn’t just restricted to the Northern Territory and in any event that went to the very essence of the kind of society we were or would have been . . . 
MITCHELL:
Mandatory sentencing  . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
From the moral standpoint that involved a far greater issue than mandatory sentencing.
MITCHELL:
Doesn’t mandatory sentencing go to the heart of the type of society we are?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well a lot of people would argue that mandatory sentencing is a response to a grave social problem and that is the prevalence of crime, particularly certain forms of property and violence against the person crime. I mean there are two arguments on mandatory sentencing and I respect the worries of people who feel that we need tough laws against crime.  I mean I am against mandatory sentencing and Neil for the very simple reason that I think it is always better to leave the discretion in the hands of the judiciary.  For that reason I am against it.
MITCHELL:
Does mandatory sentencing work?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think the jury’s, no pun intended, the jury’s out on that.
MITCHELL:
Just a couple of other financial matters.  Interest rates . . . I think you can comment on this…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we’ll wait and see.
MITCHELL:
The banks, as I made the point earlier.  It took 66 days to pass on the drop.  Have you got any assurances from them that they won’t go beyond the quarter percent?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don’t sort of deal with the banks on a day-to-day basis, that’s more in the Treasurer’s domain, you might ask him.  But more importantly, you ought to ask the banks.
MITCHELL:
You wouldn’t expect them to would you?
PRIME MINISTER:
What? 
MITCHELL:
Pass on more than a quarter percent?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, definitely not.  And we would be extremely critical of anybody who passes on more than the official interest rate increase.  
MITCHELL:
Another member of the Ralph Review Committee has suggested that perhaps business tax changes should be delayed while the GST beds down, it’s just too much for business to cope with.  Would you consider that?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, well we have considered it and decided against it.  We think the changes ought to go ahead and we acknowledge that there are a lot of changes, but these are changes the business community’s been asking for for twenty years.  The business community have been arguing for major tax reform in this country for decades.  We have a recommendation for business tax review presided over by one of Australia’s most respected business men.  We implemented virtually all of those recommendations.  Now I say to the business community - yes there’s, it’s a big meal but it’s a meal you ordered.  And if you put it off there’ll be pressure for some other reason to put it off.  And I don’t think it’s good government to keep putting things off.  Tax reform has been put off for decades in this country and this is the first government since World War II that’s had the guts to implement decent tax reform and we’re not going to be diverted from it.  
MITCHELL:
Just finally, the Kosovo refugees who leave tomorrow I think.  Is there no chance of a stay, do they have to leave?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well these are, this is a tremendously difficult issue.  It is always naturally, you know evoking of emotions to have photographs of children, I mean I greeted the first contingent of refugees who came to this country last year.  My wife and I went out to Sydney Airport and we shook the hands and embraced hundreds of them as they came off the plane.  So I am very conscious of the emotion of all of this. But they came here on a certain basis and difficult though it is, that basis has to be adhered to.
MITCHELL:
Unequivocally.
PRIME MINISTER:
Sure.
MITCHELL:
Thank you very much for your time.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Mandatory sentencing, United Nations, stolen generation, practical reconciliation
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………………
DURANTE:
A lot has since happened since that particular Sunday night anyway. Do you still stand by the Herron submission given the latest revelation from historian Dr Peter Read from the ANU that the claim of only 10 percent is based on suspect data that this data collected in the Northern Territory in 1993 only included those Aboriginal people of full blood descent and not those of part descent.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I haven’t read that latest material as you refer to so it’s not possible for me to say whether that would alter the submission that Senator Herron put in or not. That submission was not prepared in a political environment by Senator Herron. It was actually prepared by officials in the Indigenous Affairs branch and it was meant to be simply a factual analysis of some of the material in the original report and I don’t know that it serves a great deal of purpose to say well I have this or that reaction to some comment that has been made on the Senate submission. I have indicated in Parliament that if anybody was offended by what was in that document then I am sorry about that. It was not intended to hurt or offend people. However it’s legitimate for a government when it’s asked to make a submission by a Senate inquiry to make that submission and that’s what happened. It was put together in good faith. You may disagree with it and that is fair enough. Other researchers may disagree with it and that is fair enough too. But it wasn’t the intention of the Government to hurt anybody with that document and I am very sorry that people have been offended by it but nonetheless there are certain pieces of analysis in that document that remain valid and there are reasonable points to be made and no matter how strongly people may feel -rightly - about past practices it shouldn’t prevent facts being brought to the attention of a Parliamentary inquiry. I think the important thing about the original “Bringing Them Home” report is that the Government has already responded to the recommendations about reuniting families. We have been particularly keen to provide resources for link up and other facilities.
DURANTE:
Yes, but Mr Howard that is not being spent is it? The $63 million dollars.
PRIME MINISTER:
That $63 million dollars is over a four year period and it’s not fair to say that it’s not being spent in the sense of saying that oh we are reluctant to spend it. I mean it’s been appropriated. It’s been put in the Budget. There is no reluctance on our part to spend it but if you have got something that is to be expended over a four year period and that four year period hasn’t elapsed, of course not all of it has been spent.
DURANTE:
Well, Mr Howard, you have since apologised for the, not wanting to cause any offence to people who may be offended by the items in that particular submission.  Regardless though people are still protesting about it and today even you had protesters following you around didn’t you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Karen it is the life of the Prime Minister from time to time to have protesters against him. I don’t object to that although I have to say those particular protesters drowned out the singing of 6 and 8 year old children which wasn’t very charitable but anyway that is another issue.  Look Karen, I don’t deny that the presentation of that document has generated a lot of debate and a lot of comment, a lot of criticism and I have indicated that there were no malign intentions on the part of the Government but it has to be possible to debate some of the issues surrounding this particular matter without people’s motives always being unfairly impugned. I mean suggestions that the Government is engaged in racist wedge politics and allegations of that kind are not only unhelpful to the whole process but they are also quite untrue and they are resented very deeply by me and by members of my Government. I mean there is two sides to this. There has been some very harsh things said about Senator Herron, unfair things and about other members of the government. Now we have indicated that there was no intent to hurt anybody, I am sorry if anybody was. I regret that. I mean I don’t want to hurt any Australian. I am the Prime Minister of this country. It’s not my desire to hurt anybody but I think we have to look at this in an open, fair-minded context.
DURANTE:
Can I ask you then your reaction to Bill Jonas’ report to Social Justice and the Native Title Report. I mean in the media today, Jonas has basically been saying that reconciliation is dead. If you don’t offer a national formal apology to the stolen generation and if we don’t resolve the mandatory sentencing issue either.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well as far as mandatory sentencing is concerned, I am having some discussions soon with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory. I don’t want to speculate about what might come out of those discussions because it will make them more difficult. On the issue of reconciliation, as far as the Government is concerned, the process is not dead and I will do my level best to keep the process going and there’s total good will on the part of the Government towards achieving a continuation of that process. On the issue of native title, our position, the Government’s position is that that matter was dealt with by the Parliament several years ago. I don’t think it will help if the whole issue of native title were to be reopened. Its been a very divisive issue unfortunately and what we endeavor to do was to reach a compromise that was fair and reasonable to everybody. Our advice was that what we had done with a native title legislation was quite consistent with the racial discrimination act and we are not intending to reopen the native title issue we don’t believe that anything is going to be achieved by doing that.  Now, I respect Mr Jonas’ opinion but it’s one opinion from a person I respect and who is making a very good contribution to this country but there are other views about the legal force of the native title act and there are other views about the inherent balance in that what was a compromise. I mean a lot of people on both sides of the debate were unhappy with the final compromise but it didn’t alter the fact that is was a fair compromise and one that tried to do the best by both sides of the argument.
DURANTE:
And you have stated repeatedly that you are not interested in the UN coming over and telling Australia how to do its business in its own domestic affairs. Do you still stand by that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well of course I do. I don’t think any self-respecting Prime Minister of this country can accept the situation where we have a debate in this country and that debate is resolved in a particular way and then some of the people who are unhappy with that outcome and others argue before an international body and then we are expected to alter the outcome of the results, the outcome of that issue as a result of views of the international body. I mean, I think we have to resolve these things in our own country. We don’t think that the latest committee report was fair. We think its criticism of the Government was unreasonable. We don’t think they took much account of our submissions and we have made it very plain that we are not happy. Now that doesn’t mean that we are indifferent to the United Nations. We acted under a United Nations mandate in East Timor after all. So we are not disrespectful to the United Nations but the United Nations committees are not infallible. There seems to be a view that whatever any agency of the United Nations says has to be right. Well I am afraid that that is not the case and in the end most Australians believe that we have to solve our problems and our challenges here in Australia.
DURANTE:
But wouldn’t they get a better picture of perhaps the situation if they were invited over to Australia by the Australian Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they’ve shown no willingness in the past to listen seriously to many of the submissions put by the Australian Government. I mean we sent to Geneva, Philip Ruddock whose understanding of these issues is considerable and very sensitive and he is very committed to Human Rights issues and he is a senior Minister in the Government and he’s got responsibility helping me on the reconciliation issue and he has spent a lot of time with the committee and felt very strongly after the meeting that there wasn’t really a serious willingness to listen to what was being put. Now no government can ignore that kind of treatment. I mean we didn’t treat the committee with indifference or contempt. We sent a senior Cabinet Minister. I don’t think we have done that at that level before, or certainly not for some time so that is hardly treating the process in a trivial way.  We feel that we treated the issue rather more seriously than we were treated by the UN committee and that is the reason why the Government feels strongly on the issue.
DURANTE:
You brought up Minister Philip Ruddock there. Are you happy with his performance in terms of the portfolio of reconciliation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh yes, I think Philip has done a very good job.  Karen, this is not an easy issue. I understand the importance and the sensitivity of these issues to indigenous people.
DURANTE:
You think they have got a lot of expectations though don’t you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we all have expectation and we all have to I guess mix our highest expectations with a sense of realism about what can be achieved. The important thing is to keep trying and never say well it’s finished or it’s derailed or it’s over. I think that is unhelpful because it never is if you have people of good will on both sides trying to make it work.
DURANTE:
Well what do you want to see happen? How can you see reconciliation really working, given that when you have got Senator Aden Ridgeway saying look overturn mandatory sentencing laws in the Northern Territory and maybe we will come back to participating in the reconciliation process?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t know whether he has quite said that and I had a discussion with Aden Ridgeway the other day. I had a half hour discussion with Senator Ridgeway and I am not go into what he said there. It was a private discussion and it was conducted in an atmosphere of great good will but what he said publicly I take account of. I have a lot of respect for him. I don’t think any of us should be in the business of saying, well you can’t go any further unless A B and C happens. I think what you have to do is keep the process going, keep the process of discussion going involving the reconciliation council and ATSIC and others and see what can be over time achieved.   It’s a slow process and you will have set backs from time to time. You will have difficulties and I don’t pretend that the last week hasn’t been difficult.  Of course it has. I understand that. I am particularly sensitive to it but I haven’t lost my commitment and I haven’t lost my interest and I haven’t lost my desire to get a decent outcome. 
DURANTE:
So if you are still committed to the reconciliation process, does that mean that if it means that you have to overturn mandatory sentencing, you have to look again back at the native title laws, the amendments and also apologise to the stolen generation, will you do that in order to achieve it, if that looks like what it will have to take for it to happen?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Karen I am not prepared to sort of accept benchmarks to what or may or may not be needed to achieve reconciliation. That’s not the way to achieve it. I can’t have a situation where I am going to say well I will only do this or that. I mean you look at each of these things on their merits. I don’t want to say anything further on mandatory sentencing. The Australian public knows my position on that. I personally don’t agree with it. I genuinely however take the view that issues of the criminal law are for the states and territory and that has long been the tradition in this country. However, I am having a discussion with Mr Burke about and until that discussion has occurred I have got nothing further to say. On the other issues I have tried to explain my position in relation to native title and the question of a formal apology. I heard George a moment ago, before we came on, you played me the recording of the gentleman who rang last Sunday and he spoke about his own sorrow and concern about things, but also his desire to get on and cooperate. I mean I am personally sorry for what happened. I have said that numerous times. We have had a motion in the Parliament of deep and sincere regret. We don’t think it’s appropriate to go further than that.  Now, I have made that very clear and I have said that to Aboriginal leaders on a number of occasions. I am not hiding behind this or indeed any other programme in expressing my views. But look I don’t want to be in a position of sort of ticking things off as far as reconciliation yes or no is concerned. We are committed. We will continue to talk. There’s good will on the Government’s part and I am sure there is good will on the part of people in the indigenous community.
DURANTE:
Okay, one more quick question because I think our time is running out Mr Howard. You spoke at the tree planting about your Government’s achievements, your crowning achievements, namely GST and gun control, what would you describe as your crowning achievements in indigenous issues?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think putting a greater emphasis on what I call practical reconciliation.  We have shifted the emphasis toward programs that improve Aboriginal health and education, literacy and numeracy. These are things which address the disadvantage of indigenous people. The reason why, Karen, there are a disproportionately large number of indigenous people caught up in the criminal justice system is not because the laws are designed to hurt them, it’s because of disadvantage, social and economic disadvantage, a consequence of a lot of factors. What our policies are designed to do is to try and reduce that disadvantage and I think that is a very valuable goal and I think the emphasis we’ve placed on those programs is very important.
DURANTE:
The Prime Minister John Howard, in an interview we recorded with him on Friday.
[ends]


E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Mr Scott, Major General Digger James, more importantly for this occasion to Mr Alec Campbell, his wife and the other members of the Canberra family and also to the six young men and women, of today’s Australian Defence Force who are an important part of this very symbolic, but simple commemoration.
It is an opportunity for us to honour the link between the first generation of Australians who put the name of this nation along with the nation of New Zealand on the world map that morning in April, 1915.  And I do particularly acknowledge the presence at this ceremony of Mr Simon Murdoch the High Commissioner in Australia from New Zealand.
Today is an occasion to remark upon the marvel of having a man who’s had the life experience of Alec Campbell with us.  To honour the tradition that he helped form to thank him and his fellow Anzacs for the contribution that they have made to forming the Australian way of life.  Because of all the traditions and all of the things that we hold dear as Australians, none is held more dearly than the Anzac tradition.  For all that it represents in terms of brave sacrifice of reckless indifference to danger, of valour under terrible fire, and a legacy that has been handed down to subsequent generations.
There are, as Bruce Scott said only two survivors of the campaign on Gallipoli, Alec who’s with us today and Roy Longmore and we marvel at a life of one hundred and one years.  We marvel at the richness of the experience of Alec but most of all we honour him for giving to this country a very precious legacy.  We’re proud of him, we’re proud of the generation to which he belonged while equally proud of the generation to which the six young men and women of today’s ADF belong.  
And of the many experiences I’ve had as Prime Minister of this country none filled me with greater pride, none reminded me of the simple dignity and decency of the average Australian than the experience I had of saying farewell to the men and women of the ADF who went to East Timor and greeting them in East Timor when I visited them in December of last year.
They have brought immense credit to our country; they have carried on a great tradition and it is therefore appropriate that today in this simple, symbolic ceremony, the handing over of an Australian flag that will be raised for the first time at the dawn service at Gallipoli later this month at a ceremony which I will attend along with the leader of the Opposition who I acknowledge here today and the Prime Minister of New Zealand Helen Clarke.  And that flag will be raised and then returned here at the Memorial for safe keeping and every subsequent Anzac Day taken to Gallipoli to be raised again.
Today we join the past with the present; we confirm that that Anzac tradition permeates our modern life as it has permeated earlier generations.  We thank you Alec for your sacrifice and your commitment to our nation.  Today’s generations thank you for making this a free society; we thank you for the way of life that we all enjoy and in today’s ceremony we honour in a very moving and tangible way that great link between the original Anzacs and those in the modern generation who carry on that great Australian tradition.
[ends]


E&amp;OE  ………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Malcolm.  To Peter Smedley, to Barry Jones, the National President of the Australian Labor Party, John Brumby, Dame Elizabeth Murdoch, many other leaders and contributors to the corporate and community life of the Australian nation.  
I’m especially pleased to be here tonight.  I am pleased to be here because I believe that Care has been a great humanitarian organisation that has done an enormous amount over the years to relieve the suffering of mankind.  It has become almost by dint of the terrible experience of Steve Pratt and Peter Wallace and Branko Yelan, has become almost a household name amongst the humanitarian organisations.  And I don’t say that just to single out that event as being the only thing that would bring Care to the attention of the Australian community.  And of course there are many other organisations and I don’t seek in any way to unfavorably compare their contribution to humanitarian work.  
And I’m also delighted to be here tonight because in launching the Corporate Council I am associating myself very enthusiastically with the notion of what I have called the social coalition.  And that is based on a belief that the goals we want to achieve in our community can’t be achieved by the individual sectors of our community operating in isolation.  The business community in its prosperity and its wealth is vital to the economic growth of our nation and the employment of its people.  The social welfare sector, the volunteer section of which Care is an outstanding example is absolutely indispensable to building the sort of humanitarian society we want, not only here in Australia, but around the world.  
The Government has its part to play in providing the social security safety net, and also contributing to and supporting the work of organisations such as Care and of course the millions of generous-hearted, philanthropic Australian individuals, the volunteers and Australia is a great volunteer societies of the world.  That’s a very important part of our community as well.  And what we need is to bring all of those elements together, each contributing what it can do best.  
And tonight I think is a fine example of that.  It represents a contribution by the corporate sector, not only to the work of Care, but also to explaining and communicating to the rest of the Australian business community the importance to it as well as the importance to the Australian community of partnerships with organisations such as Care.
Malcolm has outlined the disparities in our world between the rich and the poor and it remains a constant challenge of our society, not only here in Australia but around the world, to do what we can in our time, and with our current responsibilities to try and close that gap.  I am delighted to say that once again the Australian Government has reaccredited Care as one of the volunteer organisations, aid organisations that we would want to assist.  We will be contributing a sum this year of $5 million to the work of the organisation.  
And it takes its place along with a number of other remarkable humanitarian organisations that have contributed so much.  And the record of care in areas of suffering, in Africa, in Europe, in Latin America, in Asia – the record of Care is a very fine example.  It’s an organisation along with many others that has inspired not only the career commitment of many fine young Australian men and women, but it’s also an organisation that has inspired the volunteer efforts of many around the world.  
I have some experience directly in relation to Australia’s involvement in East Timor to understand in a very real way the contribution made by volunteer organisations and humanitarian organisations.  And although the military involvement of Australia was crucial and the political involvement and the political commitment was crucial to the very positive outcome achieved in that territory, the work of the humanitarian organisations in East Timor was absolutely indispensable to delivering the kind of outcomes that we want.  
There will never be a shortage of need, there will always be a demand for the humanitarian work that Care represents.  And what tonight does is to send a very strong signal through the contribution and the leadership of people such as Peter Smedley and many other prominent men and women in the Australian business community who are here tonight, it sends a signal to their fellow business men and women that it is part of not only good business, but it is part of good citizenship and is part of full participation in the humanitarian goal that business organisations, companies, participate and assist organisations such as Care.
I’ve said on a number of occasions over recent months that if I looked at the experience of the past twenty or thirty years, not only here in Australia, but also around the rest of the industrialised world you can see almost a pattern.  There was a time when people believed that every problem could be solved by massive government involvement and massive government intervention.  We saw that that didn’t work because it wasn’t all that efficient because governments are good at some things, but they’re pretty poor and pretty inefficient at others.  And then we saw something perhaps of an overreaction, too great a retreat from that and there was a rather naïve belief that if you had the unrestrained forces of pure economic rationalism you’d have some kind of miraculous trickle down effect and everything would be solved as a result of that.  I think we’ve begun to see that that doesn’t work entirely in its pure, undiluted form either.  And we’re now seeing in the early part of the twenty-first century a recognition that we need a new parternship, a new coalition if you like, recognising that governments are good at some things, very good.  You need governments for basic social security safety nets, you need governments to facilitate, you need governments to provide structures and securities.  
Business is good at so many things.  Volunteer organisations are not only wonderful for the humanitarian work they do, but also the policy understanding that they bring to particular challenges.  And of course we will always need the zeal and commitment and enthusiasm and energy of individual Australians.  
Ladies and gentlemen I am particularly pleased to be here tonight, to commend the Corporate Council, to commend in particular Peter Smedley, his work as the Chairman of the Council is something that we should respect, and support very warmly.  And can I also take the opportunity tonight, Malcolm, in paying tribute to you for the work that you have done for a number of years as Chairman of Care.  You have committed a great deal of your time and energy to humanitarian work, I respect you for that.  Your former political colleagues on both sides of the parliament respect you for that.  You are being in your post-political years a great contributor to Australian society in that work and you deserve the support and the respect of those who care about the relief of suffering around the world for that contribution.
To all of you men and women of the Australian business community whose organisations, be it Qantas or Mallesons, or News Limited, or Colonial or all of the other organisations that are here tonight, I thank you most warmly and I commend you for what you are doing.  It is a great cause and I commend you very warmly for the message that you are communicating to your fellow men and women in Australian business.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Women in Parliament; Role of Wom
E&amp;OE...............................................................................................
Thank you very much Deirdre, to you Dennis, to Senator Jocelyn Newman,
   the Minister for Families and Community Services and also the Minister
   assisting me in relation to the Status of Women, my other parliamentary
   colleagues and fellow Liberals, and ladies and gentlemen.
This is fourth opportunity I have had as Prime Minister to address
   a gathering such as this and in a sense as you might expect it is a
   little bit different each year, because as each year goes by there is
   a proper questioning of the relationship between a section of the government,
   or a section of a political party devoted exclusively to issues of concern
   to women. And also the steady progress which is being made in providing
   full equality of opportunity for women within our party and within society.
The antecedants of the Liberal Party, were not quite as far sighted
   as Dame Elizabeth Couchman and Sir Robert Menzies when they struck that
   deal of which Dennis spoke so effectively. And one of the givens about
   the Liberal Party since its formation and certainly not least of all
   here in the state of Victoria, has been the role of women within the
   party. 
And that role has inevitably changed as the role of women within our
   community has changed and one of the things that the Government has
   sought to do in the four years it has been in office has been to attack
   in a practical way areas of continuing discrimination against women
   within our community, but increasingly to recognise that the right solutions
   for the community as a whole are the solutions that women generally
   want.
I could go through a long list of statistics of percentage improvements.
   I could remind you for example that 35% of all small business operators
   in Australia in the present time are women  a significant change
   on what the position would have been twenty years ago. I could remind
   you that in 1996 we saw the biggest single flood of new women members
   into Federal Parliament that we've seen as a result of the 1996
   election. And increasingly, as Dennis has pointed out, what he now
   quite rightly doesn't call safe seats but seats that occasionally
   record higher Liberal votes than others. Just there are women increasingly
   occupying those sorts of seats in Victoria, so it is the case in the
   Federal Parliament.
And if I may say so that one of the distinguishing characteristics
   of the women members of the Coalition in both the Senate and the House
   of Representatives are their remarkable campaign skills. And any person
   who critically examined the 1998 election campaign would have to conclude
   that one of the reasons why the Coalition was returned with a comfortable
   majority were the remarkable campaign skills of many of our female members
   in many of our marginal seats. 
But today's conference, and indeed the conference over the weekend,
   the convention itself, will focus very heavily on social policy. Social
   policy of course is of equal concern to men and women. The notion
   that in same way, social policy is predominantly the concern of women
   is as wrong and as outdated as the notion that economic and business
   policy is predominantly the concern of men. Just as male politicians
   should have the same level of empathy with social challenges and social
   issues as female politicians, so it is within our community that men
   should carry an equal burden of the social responsibilities and family
   responsibilities that are carried by women.
The notion that parents have unequal levels of responsibility in relation
   to the raising of children and their responsibility for their upbringing
   is of course a now greatly discredited proposition. And the growing
   belief in modern society that children need adequate role models, both
   male and female if they are to enjoy the full benefit of their family
   upbringing [inaudible] widely share. 
Our society is a society which gives to all much greater choice than
   was the case twenty or thirty years ago. The debate about what is the
   right role for women in relation to the caring of their children and
   whether it should be caring by one or other parent at home for a period
   of time, or through care or some other child care arrangement. That
   debate has now moved and I think very refreshingly from arguments as
   to who is right or what is the right arrangement to a robust recognition,
   but what we ought to be doing is providing as many parents as possible
   with the option of making the decision that they think best suits their
   particular family circumstances. Balancing work and family responsibilities
   is very much the preoccupation of parents in the twenty first century.
Of course the aspiration of women to maintain careers, the aspiration
   of women to not only maintain careers for the satisfaction that they
   give, but also for the social interaction that they entail is widely
   understood and is part and parcel of our modern life. But equally as
   we enter the early years of the twenty first century, there is a recognition
   that the quality of the upbringing provided by parents to their children
   still remains far and away the most formative influence on the development
   of young lives. And all of our preoccupation as politicians, as members
   of a political party, all of preoccupation with strong economies, with
   balancing the budget, with reforming the taxation system, with delivering
   greater international competitiveness to the Australian economy, all
   of those pale into relative insignificance compared with the quality
   of life that we create for our young and the opportunities that they
   give to them. And the responsibility of parenthood on both men and women
   remains the most important responsibility that most of us experience
   during our lives.
We are very much a party of choice. We are a party that does not try
   and dictate stereotypes. We are a party that doesn't believe in
   quotas. We are a party that believes that people should aspire to achieve
   to the full according to their aspirations, according to their abilities
   and to their contribution and their performance. And the contribution
   that women have made to successive Coalition governments and the number
   of firsts that have been recorded by women on our side of politics is
   well understood, not only in the Liberal Party but in the broader political
   community. I want to pay tribute to the women of the Coalition Government
   elected in March of 1996, they have played major roles in shaping the
   direction of many areas of policy. And I particularly want to thank
   Jocelyn Newman for the work that she has done. She has a very important
   and much broadened policy responsibility as a result of the 1998 election.
   And the focus of this weekend's convention on social policy is
   in so small measure due to the way in which she has been able to shape
   the direction of that social policy. The way in which she has been
   able to bring an objective judgement and to set a good balance between
   encouraging the individual and community sector contributions to the
   development of social policy underpinned by the proper role of government
   within our community.
You've heard me speak very often and I'll speak again during
   this weekend, particularly when I address the Convention on Sunday morning,
   about the importance of the social coalition within our society. Of
   the fact that we appear, I think, at the beginning of this century to
   have achieved a better balance in relation to the respective roles of
   the Government and the rest of the community than we have had for thirty
   of forty years. We no longer believe that every solution can be provided
   by the government. We equally have rejected the rather naive notion
   that if you had an unrestrained market approach to everything, that
   through some kind of miracle of trickle down economics every problem
   would be solved. What you need is an appropriate recognition that the
   government has a limited but strategic role in our community. That
   we need a coalition of the government providing the social security
   safety net, that government acting as a facilitator but drawing together
   to contributions of the welfare sector, of business and of individuals.
   And much of the work that Jocelyn has done has been contributing in
   that area and giving effect to those kind of policy directions.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to have the opportunity, again,
   of opening this conference. Of thanking all of the women of the Liberal
   Party over the years for their contribution, of recording the scale
   of that contribution and to remark that perhaps the end goal of all
   of our efforts will be as each year goes by the continuing questioning
   of the issue of whether or not you need to have a separate dedicated
   segment of a convention such as this dealing with women's affairs.
   I suspect for many years to come we will, but I regard it as a wholly
   healthy thing that that question might be asked because it is an indication
   that as the years go by greater equality of opportunity is being achieved,
   more barriers are being removed and greater recognition is being afforded
   to the capacity and the willingness of women to contribute across all
   sections of society and to play an equal partnership role with men in
   the development of the Australian community.
I thank all of you for your attendance. I wish the conference well,
   and I look forward to seeing a lot of all of you over the next two to
   three days. Thank you.


I am pleased to announce that the government has proclaimed the Australian Defence Force Ensign as an official flag of Australia.  This proclamation was made under the Flags Act 1953.  The proclamation does not alter the pre-eminent status of the Australian national flag.
The Australian Defence Force Ensign was created by the Defence Force in 1969 to identify Australian military formations serving in Vietnam containing more than one of the three services.  The Ensign’s use has grown since that time with the greater cooperation of the three arms of the Defence Force in joint operations.  The Ensign has not, until now, been accorded formal status as an official flag of Australia. 
The ensigns of the Royal Australian Navy and Royal Australian Air Force with their proud histories will continue in use and represent their respective services.  The role of the Australian Army as protector of the Australian national flag continues unchanged. 


Subjects:? Telstra; Infrastructure; Economic reform
E&amp;OE? ..............................
Thank you very much Mr Switkowski, to Shane Stone, the Federal President, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I want first of all to thank Telstra for hosting this breakfast.? It is appropriate that a company that is at the leading edge of the information technology era in which we now live should host a breakfast at this National Convention and thereby provide a forum for me as Prime Minister to emphasis some of the Government's goals and objectives for the Australian economy and what kind of investment and business climate we generally want to create in this country in the early years of the twenty-first century.? It is appropriate because information technology has utterly transformed the world in which we live.? It has not only transformed the business environment, but it has also dramatically transformed and improved communication at a personal level.? It has demolished distance like no other experience that mankind has had.? And it has the potential over the next twenty-five years to play a major role in further exciting and dramatic developments in medical science.
Probably the most influential economic figure in the world today, Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve system has remarked on a number of occasions when he has endeavoured to explain the miracle of the American economy's continued strength and growth over recent years.? Dr Greenspan has remarked that if he were pressed as to an explanation as to why the United States, and because of that the world economy has done so well for such a sustained period, he would say that at long last the United States is reaping the benefit of its massive investment in technology.
And I think is probably as good and as accurate an explanation we're ever likely to get, because economics is notoriously an inexact science.? And it's probably, as it's true of the United States, it is also true of Australia.? We are now experiencing the longest continuous periods of strong economic growth that we've had since the 1960s.? In many ways it is a more broadly based period of economic expansion in the 1960s, it's certainly more soundly based because we now operate in an economic environment that is far less protected, is far more competitive, is far more export oriented, and is far more attuned to global changes in the economic environment in which we all operate.
And it is very important in this environment and particularly for the Liberal Party, as it quite properly focuses on all the goals that it has in Government.? It is important to remind ourselves of the ongoing need for economic reform.? There is a view in the current.. in some circles in Australia that the country has grown tired of economic reform, that we've reached the saturation point, that there is an element of reform fatigue within the community.? Now I can understand why people say that and I can understand people saying to me and saying to my ministers and saying to governments around Australia, that there is an increasing onus on all of us in Government to better explain and communicate and defend the value of economic reform.?
Because it's so terribly easy for people to lose sight of reality and let me illustrate by referring to something that you'd think it strange if I didn't refer to.? And that is the Government's view that we should proceed to sell the rest of the Government's interest in Telstra.? Let me say that the comments I am about to make are in no way influenced by Telstra's sponsorship of this breakfast.? But . . .? there is a lot of mythology about the privatisation of Telstra.? Myth number one is that it if a business enterprise remains in government ownership you have better customer service.? There seems to be an idea around that twenty years ago, service provision levels by the old Telecom in the bush were infinitely better than they are now.? There seems to be a view around that when Telstra was fully owned by the government, the former Government, then there was never any need for staff redundancies.? There seems to be a view around that in some way if you hobble an organisation like Telstra with the present untenable in the long term arrangement whereby the Government holds 50.1% of the shares, that it can compete on an open and equal basis in all circumstances against all comers in the competitive environment in which businesses are now obliged to operate.
That of course conveniently ignores the proposition that because of the government ownership of Telstra, the law prevents the issue of any further raising of any further equity by the company. ?Quite plainly the Government is not interested in using taxpayers money to buy shares in any future share issues by Telstra, we have far better purposes with which to use, or for which to put the resources of the Australian taxpayer.
We believe that the customer, we believe the efficient operation of the company will both benefit from the full privatisation.? I know that it is not the most popular in a top line sense of the Government's economic policies.? It is very easy for people to believe when asked the question, do you favour the full privatisation of Telstra - it is very easy to believe that in saying yes, in saying no rather, they in some way can retain a control or influence which is beneficial to the Australian community over the operations of the company.?
The customer service obligations, those requirements of law which oblige the provision of services at a particular level by telecommunications providers.? Those customer service obligations will endure irrespective of whether the Government owns 50.1% of the company or sells that interest to the men and women of Australia.? That is a separate matter of law, it does not depend in any way on the Government's ownership of 50.1% of the shares in Telstra.
Ziggy spoke quite appropriately of the importance of infrastructure to the development of Australia.? It's all part of our idea of what this country is about - infrastructure.? Anybody of my age will remember as a child the sense of excitement that surrounded the commencement of the Snow Mountain Scheme.? And we lived through that great period which was defining in terms of our capacity in a harmonious way to absorb people from all around the world and to help them and to help ourselves to get a better understanding of different communities within the Australian nation.?
And equally today the contribution that companies like Telstra are making to infrastructure is very important.? The sale of Telstra, the rest of Telstra, is not essential to the provision of a certain level of additional infrastructure.? That will continue to be financed by the Government.? But there is no doubt in my mind that if we could complete the sale of the rest of Telstra, through the additional retirement of debt, and it would help this country to become free of net commonwealth debt within three or four years time, or perhaps earlier.? There is no doubt that that sounder fiscal base would enable us to commit more resources at a faster rate to the development of further infrastructure in this country.?
But the reform process, colleagues and friends is not of course limited to the privatisation of Telstra.? That is but one high profile example of the need for the modernisation of the Australian economy.? On the first of July we will see the introduction of the biggest ever reform to the Australian taxation system.? And we're fast approaching the time and I think we've almost arrived where in a sense the political debate about the introduction of the new tax system is becoming very academic.? What really matters of course will be the actuality, the experience of it after the first of July.
All of you will know that the process of winning the argument and putting forward such a massive reform has not been easy.? Anybody who's made any impact on Australian politics from either side over the last twenty-five years has known in his or her heart that sooner or later, we would need to reform the Australian taxation system.? If you'd have sat down twenty years ago and written out the four or five great economic reforms that this country needed to guarantee that as it moved into the twenty-first century it would have a chance of surviving competitively, you would have said we needed to deregulate the financial system, and just imagine where the Australian economy would be today if we continued to operate the regulated financial system that we had in the late 1970's.? You'd have said that we needed a sound fiscal position, in other words we should stop running budget deficits and we should start running budget surpluses.? You'd have said very importantly that we needed to reform the industrial relations system.? And finally you'd have said very importantly of all we needed to reform the Australian taxation system.
And if you look back now at the beginning of the twenty-first century, twenty years on, you can tick those things off.? You can say that we have deregulated our financial system, and that was possible because both sides of politics on that issue took a constructive view.? I have never denied credit to the former Government for the work it did in that area.? We started the process with the Campbell Committee, they continued it.? But they were able to continue it because we helped them in Opposition, we didn't obstruct them in opposition.? And so it was with their attempts at privatisation.? One of the great ironies of this privatisation debate is it was possible for the current leader of the Opposition as Finance Minister to achieve the privatisation of the Commonwealth Bank because we in Opposition took a constructive view - we didn't oppose it.? And of course the other great irony of the debate is that everybody knows that if Mr Beazley were to become Prime Minister of Australia he would quickly find a reason to change his current opposition to the full privatisation of Telstra.? And I think everybody knows that.
But to return if I may, to return to the chronicle of economic reforms.? We have quite dramatically reformed Australia's industrial relations system.? One of the reasons why workers in Australia, the employees of this country are much better off now than they were four years ago is that their real incomes have risen.?? This Government has delivered the remarkable double of not only lower interest rates to the tune of $245 a month to the average home buyer, but we have also via increases in real wages, delivered additional disposable income.? And those real wage increases have been made possible by one thing more than anything else and that is that there have been significant productivity gains.?
And the ultimate of any exercise in economic management is to deliver sustainable increases in the incomes of the working people of this country.? And you want to do it in a way that is sustainable economically and we've been able to do it over the last four years because we've seen incomes go up, we've seen employment rise by over 650 000, we've seen inflation fall, we've seen interest rates being kept down.? And one of the reasons why we have been able to do that is that we have delivered a freer industrial relations system.?
But the last of those, that quartet of economic reforms that you would instinctively have written down twenty years ago, and which every single person who's made a contribution over the last twenty-five years - be it myself, be it Bob Hawke, or Paul Keating or other leaders on the political horizon over the last twenty-five years - we have all known in our hearts that if you were serious about economic reform in this country you would have to ultimately do something about the taxation system.? And so it was that we went to the last election, risky though it was, criticised though it was, heart failure though we gave to some of our political strategists and pollsters who sort of were exasperated that anything so politically perilous could be undertaken.? But we did do it, we have lived to tell the tale and we are now on the verge of seeing its introduction.? And I believe that in a year's time, the introduction of tax reform will be seen as one of the defining things that has been done by this or any other government over the last twenty-five years.?
And it's a reform of which all of us can be immensely proud, because economic reform in this country is incredibly difficult.? We don't control both houses of Parliament, we have an Opposition which is being blindly and irresponsibly obstructive on just about any genuine issue of economic reform.? In contrast in the 1980s we facilitated by refusing to adopt an opportunistic stance economic reforms in the area of financial deregulation, privatisation and tariff changes that were sponsored by the Hawke government.? And I guess particularly at a gathering which has a business flavour about it this morning, the important message out of all of that is there is really on one political grouping in this country and that's the Coalition, that continues to be in favour of serious economic reform.
And we're not interested in economic reform out of some kind of blind ideology.? We don't believe in economic reform to satisfy a theory.? I said yesterday when I opened the Women's Conference, that we have now reached a stage in political debate, we've reached an understanding that the Government continue to have a limited but strategic role in the operation of the Australian economy.? There was a time 30 years ago when people believe every problem could be solved if you had more government intervention.? The Americans called it under Lyndon Johnson the Great Society.? Gough Whitlam tried it with disastrous consequences between 1972 and 1975.? And then perhaps we swung back a little too far in the other direction in various parts of the world, we believed that every problem could be solved by the unrestrained operation of market behaviour and some naive notion that trickle down economics from that unrestrained operation would solve every problem.? Well, that's not realistic either.? And what you need is to have government displaying and demonstrating a limited but strategic role.? And so it is in many of the social policies that we are going to demonstrate, we are going to talk about for the rest of this weekend.
It is also a very strategic role for government in setting the economic climate.? But the goal of economic reform is human contentment and human achievement and human happiness.? You don't reform an economy in order to pass some kind of exam.? You don't make the Australian economy more competitive so you can go along to an international meeting and say 'look we were tenth last year, and now we are number five'.? That doesn't matter to me, it doesn't matter to the Treasurer.? What matters to me is that I can say after four years that we have higher employment, we have lower inflation, we have higher real incomes, we have lower mortgage interest rates, we will have after the first of July lower personal income tax.? I will be able to look 80 per cent of the taxpayers of Australia in the eye and say 'you will pay no more than 30 cents in the dollar'.? I will be able to say to every self-funded retiree that we are abolishing provisional tax.? I will be able to say to the companies of Australia that your company tax rate is 30 per cent whereas it is now 36.? I will be able to say that we are halving capital gains tax.? I will be able to say to the exporters of Australia that your exports will be more competitive because there won't be any GST on them.? I will be able to say to people in rural Australia that your fuel is cheaper than it would otherwise have been.? And I will be able to look every last one of you in the eye and say we have delivered in full on our commitment that the price of petrol need not rise as a result of the introduction of the GST.
So economic reform is not some kind of academic exercise in intellectual self satisfaction.? It's a flesh and blood way of delivering benefits for people.? And if economic reform doesn't deliver benefits for people then it's not worth embracing.? And that's why we have been strong economic reformers but with a social purpose.? It's why we remain committed to economic reform.? And it's why any political grouping in this country that seriously claims credibility at this stage in our history, can't do other than continue to embrace economic reform.? And our credentials on that front are very strong.? But we are not complacent about them, we don't underestimate the difficulties after you've been in office for four or five years, the difficulties of continuing to win public support for needed economic reform.
I don't underestimate the fact that there are many people in the community who will argue about, argue with me about some of our economic goals.? But I am undeterred, and the government is undeterred because we believe that when a government stops being interested in further reform, it stops having any real purpose in remaining in office.
Government is not about having the motor just idling and ticking over.? Government is very much about achieving new goals, overcoming additional challenges and providing further benefits and matching the aspirations of the Australian people.
So, we remain a genuine reformist government.? A government that believes that there have been great benefits for the ordinary people of this country as a result of the reforms to date and that above everything else is the reason why we will continue down that path.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects:  Government achievements; Youth Cadetship Programme; The Australian Labor Party.
E&amp;OE  ……………………………………………………………………………………
Well, thank you very much Peter, for that very warm introduction.  To Shane Stone, the Federal President of the Liberal Party and all of my Parliamentary and Ministerial colleagues, fellow Liberals.
This Convention meets at the beginning of the fifth year of the Coalition’s term of office.  Just over four years ago on that wonderful evening, that beautiful summer evening in March of 1996 when after 13 years in opposition we came back into government and I went to the Wentworth Hotel in Sydney to accept the decision of the Australian people with a great mixture of emotions the dominant one being a sense of great humility and awe at the responsibility that had been thrust upon me and my colleagues.  I made a number of commitments to the Australian people.  I made a commitment that we would govern for the entire Australian community.  I made a commitment that we would govern for those who voted against us as well as for those who voted for us.  I made a commitment that I would propound and defend the values of Australia, both  home and abroad.  And I am very proud to stand before you today and say that I and the Government I lead have kept faith with those promises made in March of 1996.
We have been a government that has governed for the national interest, rather than for the sectional interest.  We’ve been a government that has been concerned about the welfare of the mainstream of the Australian community, but always having an eye to those most disadvantaged in our community.  We have governed for those who voted against us as well as those who voted for us.  And one of the comparisons between this government and the former government, of which all of us are immensely proud, is that under this government the real incomes of Australian workers have gone up.  That the trade union members and the non trade union members, the workers of Australia, now are much better off than they were under either the Keating or the Hawke governments.  And nothing that Mr Beazley or anybody else can say can gainsay the fact, because a combination of the economic stability and strength that we have given Australia, the productivity gains coming off the back of our industrial relations reforms, all of those things have delivered higher real incomes.  And when you add the reduction in mortgage interest rates of $245 a month to that, you get a double, that the working men and women of Australia have never before had, and are never likely to have under an alternative government.
But we have been, also, a government that has defended and propounded the interest and the values of Australia abroad.  The humanitarian record of this government stands proud and strong.  Twenty years ago, the Fraser Government accepted into this country more Indo-Chinese refugees on a per capita basis than any other nation on earth.  And once again, when the tragedy overcame the former Yugoslavia and Kosovo, this country rose to the occasion.  And in relative terms took more refugees from war torn former Yugoslavia than virtually any other country.  Ours is a rich humanitarian record.  And on the international stage, of all the things that we have done over the last four years, there is none of which we are entitled to derive greater pride than the decisive leadership we displayed in relation to the tragic events in East Timor.  On that occasion this country provided leadership.  This country demonstrated a capacity to solve a difficult problem in cooperation with our friends in the region.  This country stood for and defended the great human values that it has always treasured.
The economic reform record of this government is one that has won it acclaim not only here, but around the world.  The lower rates of inflation, the consistently high growth, the capacity to stare down the Asian economic downturn, the commitment to economic reform, the willingness to pursue the goals of reform despite hostility and opposition from our political opponents and others.  It is a great record of reform and I particularly want to thank Peter Costello, the Treasurer and Deputy Leader for the magnificent job he has done as the principle steward of that economic reform programme.  But that reform programme, my friends, has not been pursued because we want to get an A+ in the exam for economic rationalists.  It has not been pursued because it’s an end in itself.  Economic reform is about satisfying human needs.  Economic reform is about making people feel more secure, happier, more able to care for their families.  When you generate 650,000 more jobs, you don’t get a tick from the International Monetary Fund, what you get is 650,000 happier Australians and potentially three or four hundred thousand happier Australian families.
When you cut interest rates, when you see them come down, you don’t get a tick from the financial writers, you get happier Australian families, you get more disposable income, you get more money for family holidays, you get more money for educational options, you get more opportunities for all of the Australian families.  And economic reform is all about satisfying human need.  Economic reform is about achieving social goals.  I have never understood this artificial disconnect between a strong and growing economy and the need to satisfy the social goals of a nation.  And I can look back and my colleagues can look back over the last four years and say that the social estate of this country is stronger and better and more soundly based than it was in March of 1996 because we have a stronger economy.  The industrial relations reforms, which have played such a crucial role in bringing about higher productivity have provided the basis for significant income gains by so many millions of Australian workers.
And of course, as Peter mentioned, we stand on the threshold of the introduction of the biggest single economic reform ever undertaken by any government in this country since the end of World War II.  And that reform is not there as an exercise in academic economic self gratification.  It is there to build a stronger and better Australian economy.  It is there to cut the income tax paid by average Australian families.  It is there to provide more incentive for Australian companies.  It is there to abolish provisional tax, a great benefit, particularly for retired people.  It is there to reduce the capital gains tax.  It is there to make our exports cheaper.  It is there to underwrite a growth tax for the states of Australia, so that they will be able to better discharge their responsibilities in areas such as public health and police and all the basic service provisions which decade after decade, Premiers of both political persuasions have come to Canberra, demanding.  And I have got to tell you that of all the Premiers’ Conferences I have attended either as Treasurer or as Prime Minister, none was more instructive than the one we had immediately after the 1998 election when we signed the inter governmental agreement, which guarantees that every last dollar of the goods and services tax goes to the states of Australia.  We had the lectures, we had Bob Carr, we had the other Labor Premiers coming and say that this is outrageous.  And I still remember the Premier of New South Wales, saying to me, Prime Minister, you know, this is outrageous, it’s a shocking reform.  Where do I sign?
And the real social message out of taxation reform is that for the first time in fifty years, the states of Australia have been provided with the growing wherewithal to underwrite social provision within their areas of responsibility.  So when we talk about social policy, it’s not over there in some vague disconnected compartment, isolated from economic achievement.  It is the product of economic achievement.  Economic reform is the flesh and blood of social reform.  Economic reform without a social goal, or a social vision is an economic reform that is destined to fail and ought not to be embraced.  And as I look back over the last four years, I can report that the social estate of this country is stronger and better and more soundly based.  But we intend to do more.  We intend to pursue a measured reform of our welfare system.  The reference group, chaired by Patrick McClure, who addressed the Convention on Friday, will be reporting to the government in a final form within several months.  And out of that the government will consider measured, consistent reforms to our welfare system.  But those reforms as Jocelyn Newman and I have already indicated will be based upon a number of consistent principles.  The first of those is that the social security safety net of this country will remain intact.  We are a nation which is committed to caring for those who genuinely need help.  There is an Australian way of dealing with social welfare, and that Australian way increasingly says, yes, it is our moral responsibility to care for those who really need help.  And it is not unreasonable, consistent with the principle of mutual obligation, that we should ask those who are provided with assistant if they are able to do so to give something back to the community in return.
That principle of mutual obligation was derided and denounced when it was first given form through Work for the Dole by our Labor opponents, but those criticisms are now a lot more muted.  Just as their criticisms are more muted of the Job Network.  An absolute world first in contracting out labour exchange management.  There is no other country in the world that’s done it.  And the results of it have been quite magnificent.  The Job Network is out performing the old Commonwealth Employment Service by every measure.  The Job Network has provided opportunities for participation by private organisations.  It is an absolute world first in terms of reform of the labour market.
But our approach to so many of these things, my friends, has been based on some of the great bedrock values for which this country and the Liberal Party of Australia has always stood.  And one of those, of course, is our absolute unshakable belief that the greatest institution in Australian society is the Australian family.  And that strong stable functioning families are not only the source from which most of us in different ways derive our personal fulfillment and our daily happiness and the love and support and emotional encouragement we all need through life to keep going.  It is not only that.  But it is also of course the best social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.
But the truth of course is that not everybody lives in a happy family.  Not every family in Australia is doing well.  Some are under financial stress.  Some are under emotional stress.  And the role of government is to provide help for those families in danger, in need and under stress to rid themselves of those burdens.  And that is why I am pleased to announce today that in the coming Budget we will commit an amount of $240 million over four years for a stronger families and communities strategy.
This strategy has been devised by Senator Jocelyn Newman, the Minister for Family and Community Services, and I thank her very warmly for the leadership that she has shown in this area.
There are many elements of it and they will be made available at the end of the Convention.  But let me highlight but three of them.  We do recognise, and we must all recognise, that not every person in the community who becomes a parent, has the necessary sense of responsibility or the necessary skills to raise children.  We often unwisely take for granted that people are trained and equipped to do those sorts of things, and yet in reality in many cases they are desperately in need of help and advice.  And instead of further isolating them by neglect or insensitive stereotyping, what we should be doing is reaching out to some of those people whose parenting skills are inadequate and we should be offering to support services and organisations that will reach out to those people and will provide them with more skills and will better inform them on what is required to be a successful parent.  And therefore a crucial element of our strategy will be programmes designed to help families at risk, particularly those in need of assistance and advice in relation to parenting.
In relation to the raising of children, it has always been our belief that we should provide the maximum amount of choice to parents as to the care of their children when they are young.  It is not the role of the government to say whether mum or dad should stay at home when the children are young with the other partner going out to work.  Equally it is not the role of government or the role of society to in any way denigrate and regard as inferior the choice of those women or men who choose to stay at home full time while their children are young.  And what we have sought to do my friends, is to change the taxation system in order to provide greater choice for parents regarding the childcare arrangements they want to make and leave them to make the choice and a principle element of the tax reform package that comes into operation on the first of July is exactly that greater choice.
But in the area of childcare, I believe we need to go further.  There are many in the community who can’t access childcare even though they want it.  Because all that is essentially available now is institutional childcare, of a formal variety or of the less formal kind.  And what we need to do in the childcare area is to provide men and women with more choices.  And that is why a major component of the strategy will be bold new choices in relation to childcare.  And this will be of particular benefit to families where the working members are in shift work, are in remote or regional areas, where children have prolonged periods of illness or for other reasons they are not able to access existing childcare arrangements.  And what we will do is to provide approximately $70 million over a period of four years to allow the childcarers to go to the home rather than insisting on every occasion that the children to be cared should be taken to an institution.  And just as it is appropriate in relation to the care of the aged that we should provide the option of supporting elderly people to remain in their homes longer, so it is in relation to the young that we should provide the option where it is appropriate and fair that the care go to the home, rather than in reverse.
And the final element of this strategy that I want to mention to you is that we recognise and this particularly came out of the Regional Summit, that many more isolated communities and disadvantaged communities, in both the city and the country, are in need of a greater level of community leadership.  And we’re going to provide financial support for community leaders in socially disadvantaged areas.  And this particular section of the strategy is going to include a Youth Cadetship Programme whereby 10,000 young people in over 200 communities will be funded to take part in a range of activities.
Ladies and gentlemen, this strategy is designed to address a need.  It is based on the belief that although the great bulk of Australian families, and the great bulk of Australian communities are not only coping well, but indeed happily operating within the Australian nation.  But the ideal is not available to everyone, that we must recognise that there are some families in some communities that do need additional help, and this strategy is designed to do precisely that.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have often spoken when I’ve addressed gatherings of the Liberal Party of the tradition of our party.  I’ve reminded Liberal audiences all around Australia that unlike centre right parties in other parts of the world, we are the trustees of two streams in the Australian political experience.  We are the trustees and the custodians of the classic liberal tradition in Australian politics and we’re also the trustees of the conservative tradition in Australian politics.  And that is why I speak often of the broad church of our party.  We do healthily and I think entirely appropriately, we do host within the Liberal Party of Australia a range of views on the many issues that confront a national government and confront state governments.  
And in all of the decisions we take it ought to be our goal to balance that blend of philosophical heritage.  To understand that we are a party that stands for the values and the virtues of individual liberty, free speech, the right to put one’s point of view strongly and vigorously.  We’re also a party that values the bedrock institutions of our community.  And over the last four years we have done that.  We have stood for the liberty of the individual, and we have preserved and defended the bedrock institutions of our community.  
As you know we face some time, in the normal political cycle, an election at the end of next year.  That’s no secret, I am not announcing any dates I am simply indicating to you when in the course of events normally there’ll be an election.  And as I always do at these gatherings, I seek to share frankly with you, and through you with the Australian people, my assessment of the political challenges that lie ahead.  I promised myself many things when I became prime minister.  And one of the things I promised myself was that I would never take for granted, the tremendous trust and faith that had been placed in me and the party I lead when I was elected prime minister.
We have won two elections, and we have won them magnificently.  And we won the 1998 election despite our advocacy of a sweeping and fundamental reform very much in the national interest, but very capable of misrepresentation and unfair attack.  And I don’t underestimate the challenge that lies ahead of the Coalition as we move towards the next election.  And increasingly as we move towards the next election we’ll be inviting people to compare and contrast the performance and the record of this Government with the performance and the record of the Labor Party, not only when it was in government, but importantly since it’s been in opposition.  
Because political parties should be judged not only by what they do in government, but also by how they behave in opposition.  And I sometimes imagine when I listen to Mr Beazley, and I look at the Labor Party, I get the impression that he thinks that nobody’s watching while he’s in opposition, that nobody takes any notice of anything he says while he’s in opposition.  Because he seems to say just about everything on every side of every argument.  I have never known anybody in Australian politics, more accomplished at walking both sides of the political street.  He opposes the goods and services tax, but he’s going to keep it.  He says that the native title amendments that we bought in were racially discriminatory, so you’d think he was going to repeal it, but no he’s going to have a meeting to talk about it.  He says that the private health rebate is a failure, but he’s going to keep it, and incidentally it is not a failure, it’s a tremendous success.  
And I think increasingly as we move towards the next election, the Australian people will see that the alternative government of this country is led by a person and is made up of men and women who in the four years that they have been in opposition, have not produced one solid alternative policy that might be acceptable to the Australian people.  It is the responsibility of political parties when they go into opposition to reflect upon the reasons for their defeat and over time develop an alternative programme.  And unless political parties both in government and in opposition, stand for something and are prepared to argue through the propositions supporting those values and beliefs, then they are not worthy of support.
The Coalition over the last four years has on every major issue confronting this nation in the time that we have been in government, the Coalition has stood for what it believes.  It has been willing to take risks, it has been willing to reform in the teeth of hostile opposition.  And it has been willing as it was in opposition, to be candid with the Australian people about what it stands for and what it will do if it is in government.  
And so once again it is that the Labor Party and its leader, in relation to the sale of Telstra, another example, in Government the Labor Party privatised everything they could get their hands on, after having solemnly promised all of their constituencies that they wouldn’t.  And they were able to do so because we adopted a consistent accommodating in the national interest approach and supported the privatisation of organisations like the Commonwealth Bank and Australian Airlines.  The other night Mr Beazley made a speech in which he said, it was entitled ‘Why it’s not a good idea to sell the rest of Telstra’.  And I suggested that the title should be amended to ‘Why it’s not a good idea to sell the rest of Telstra until Labor gets back into government’. Because who can doubt given their record that back in government, the Labor Party would find some reason to walk away from their commitment regarding the sale of Telstra?
Ladies and gentlemen, the journey over the last four years, undertaken by the Coalition in government has been a very rich and rewarding experience for all of those charged with the immense responsibility of forming a national government.  People have been kind enough to talk of my own role and I appreciate that, but I want to take the opportunity at this National Convention to acknowledge the contribution that has been made in the successes of the last four years by so many of you who have gathered here in Melbourne this morning.
I want to thank my parliamentary colleagues, in particular, my Cabinet colleagues.  The contribution especially of Peter Costello and Robert Hill and Richard Alston, comprising the Leadership of the Liberal Party.  The contribution of the federal organisation – there’s no better political strategist in Australia than Lynton Crosby.  I want to thank Shane Stone, I want to thank Tony Staley for the contribution that he continues to make magnificently in assisting in relation to a number of the state branches.  And Ron Walker for the sinews of war that his efforts continue to provide.  And to the rest of my ministerial colleagues, but most importantly to all of you as members of the hundreds of Liberal Party branches, all around the country.
I have never lost my contact with the party organisation.  I was a child of the party organisation.  I love the Liberal Party and everything it stands for.  I don’t always agree with everything that everybody says, and I know you don’t always agree with every single thing that I say or do.  But that is the nature of a great, broadly based, representative political movement.  
I spoke at the beginning of this address, about the promises I made to the Australian people on that beautiful summer evening in March of 1996.  And one of the other promises I made to the Australian people was that in our years in Government, we would not be beholden to sectional interests because the Liberal Party was owned by nobody, we belong alone to the Australian people.  We’re not a party that’s owned by the trade union movement, we’re not a party that’s owned by big business, we’re not a party that’s owned by vested interests.  We are a party that is answerable only to the aspirations and the hopes and the dreams and the passions of the ordinary men and women of our country.  
And that is what we have tried to do in all the decisions that we have taken over the last four years.  We have made our mistakes, we have got our priorities wrong on occasions, but the great balance sheet has been one of massive, and impressive achievement.  We are a stronger country, we are a better country, we are a safer country, we are a more respected country because over the last four years we have been willing to do things.  
When you get into government you only have a short period of time to achieve your goals and to realise your dreams.  Political office comes and goes in the natural ebb and flow of the life of a nation.  And you therefore have a very special responsibility when you reach the pinnacle of political office, not to squander or waste the opportunity, but to use your every waking hour to do good things for your country and for your fellow Australians.  
And as I looked at that video just before Peter’s speech, it reminded me of the variety of things that we have done, and the variety of challenges that we have faced.  I can report to you at this second national convention that four years on the Government is in good heart, it is in good spirit. It retains the commitment for economic reform in the national interest.  The Coalition is strong and healthy and I record my affection and gratitude to both Tim Fischer and John Anderson for the great loyalty that they have displayed to me and to the Liberal Party in government.
We have achieved much, we have conquered opposition but much remains to be done.  The challenge ahead of us is every bit as great as it was when we sought to come back into office in 1996 and to hold office in 1998.  Never underestimate your political opponent, never imagine that your political opponent is not possessed of the same determination as we have to hang on to office and to influence the national affairs of this country.
I thank all of you for the tremendous loyalty that you have displayed to me.  You have made the journey not only immensely rewarding and immensely satisfying, but you have reminded me of the great depth of decency and loyalty that resides within the Australian people.  I thank you all.  I look forward to the next great national convention of the Liberal Party in two years time after we have once again earned the respect and the support and the votes of the men and women of Australia.  Thank you.
[Ends]


I am pleased to announce that the government will commit more than $240 million to a range of practical programmes that will strengthen Australian families and communities.
The Stronger Families and Communities Strategy represents a major investment in the basic skills and services that underpin family and community life in this country, with particular benefits for families at risk.
It is built upon the traditional Australian values of mutual support and obligation and represents another practical example of the social coalition at work by involving families, government, business and the community working in partnership to ensure the whole community benefits.
Key features of the strategy are:
•Supporting families with young children and giving greater flexibility and choice in childcare;
•Helping couples establish strong and long-lasting relationships;
•Building communities by promoting leadership and supporting volunteers; and
•Helping communities to find solutions to their challenges at a local level.
Never before has an Australian government made an investment of this scale in the bonds that underpin family and community life.  Never before has an Australian government recognised so clearly the importance of the early childhood years in shaping adult capacities and experiences.
Examples of how this strategy will work include:
•A new $40 million Stronger Families Fund to help parents nurture and develop learning skills in their young children through locally developed projects.  These could include mothers’ groups, playgroups and community services.
•The provision of $65 million to provide greater flexibility and choice in the provision of childcare will help families balance work and family responsibilities when they live too far away from childcare centres.  Where both parents are running a farm, this measure will make it possible to have a childcare worker come to their home.  Families will also be able to have sick children cared for at home by a trained childcare worker.
•A new $37 million community leaders programme will help up to 400 communities, including many in rural and regional areas, develop around 2,000 leaders who will work on projects to benefit their local community.  In addition we will fund a youth cadetship programme where around 10,000 young people in over 200 communities participate in a wide range of community activities.
Around $115 million from this strategy will go to communities in rural and regional Australia and respond directly to recommendations made by the Regional Australia Summit Steering Committee that the best solutions are those tailored to local community circumstances and led by communities themselves.
16 April 2000  


E&amp;OE …………………………………………………………………………………
Your Excellency, the Governor General of Australia, Sir William Deane, and Lady Deane, to Rear Admiral Crawford, to General Sir Thomas Daly and General Sir Frank Hassett, General Park the Commander of the Forces of South Korea in the Korean War, who I am delighted to particularly welcome here today, my ministerial colleagues, the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Mr Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, the returned men and women of the Australian Forces who fought in Korea, and all of our friends and visitors from overseas.
This is a solemn and special occasion, not only in memory of the three hundred and thirty-nine Australians who gave their lives in the Korean War, but also for the rest of the 17,000 members of the Australian Defence Force who served in that conflict that commenced fifty years ago this June.  
It was a conflict fought in appalling conditions, of bitter cold and scorching heat.  It was a conflict that saw military success, military defeat on occasions, but ultimately an honourable outcome.  And once again in a line commencing with the great events of the Australian and New Zealand forces, on the shores of Gallipoli in 1915, the members of the Australian Defence Force upheld that great Australian military tradition.
It is a tradition that has never sought to impose its will or the will of this country on others, but merely to defend what is right.  And so it was that when North Korea invaded South Korea in June of 1950, the response of the United Nations was rapid and Australia was amongst the very first countries to respond to the call of the United Nations, for the first time in our history, fighting under the flag of the United Nations.  
And in that conflict at places such as Kapiong and Mariumsung, the fighting capacity and valour and steadfastness under fire, for which Australian forces have always been renowned throughout the world, once again was in evidence.  It was to be a conflict that cost the lives of millions of people of Korea.  But out of that conflict, and out of the armistice that ended it, there grew a very powerful nation which has become a firm friend of Australia’s.  And I am delighted to particularly acknowledge the presence here today of so many people from Korea and so many who’ve come from other countries to share in this very special occasion.  
But most of all it is an occasion to honour those who sacrificed their lives.  It is an occasion for me on behalf of the nation to express its gratitude and its honour and its respect to the 17,000 who fought in that conflict.  This Korean War Memorial takes its place in Anzac Parade with the memorials of other conflicts in which Australians have risked, and sometimes too many, given their lives.
So on this beautiful Autumn morning in our national capital, can I say a very heartfelt thanks to those who gave so much fifty years ago.  We remember you, we cherish what you have done, we will care for you and we will always honour what you have done in the name of Australia and in the name of the values of liberty and freedom that we all hold so dear.  
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...............................................................................................
PRIME MINISTER
Your Excellency, the Governor General, Sir William Deane and Lady Deane,
 the Lord Mayor of Sydney, Frank Sartor, Major General Peter Cosgrove and
 my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Today is an opportunity in a very public fashion for a group of Australians
 to express their thanks, their gratitude and their respect to the men
 and women of the Australian Defence Force as well as the men and women
 of the Australian Federal Police for the remarkable job that they did
 in bringing peace, stability and freedom to the people of East Timor.
In doing what they did, they followed in a great Australian military
 tradition. A tradition that does not seek to impose the will of this country
 on others, but rather to defend what is right and to uphold the opportunity
 of people to live in freedom and in peace. And I have to say ladies and
 gentlemen that of all of the great privileges that have come my way as
 prime minister of this great country of ours, none has been more moving
 and more important than the opportunity I had to say goodbye to the men
 and women who were going to East Timor, understandably feeling a sense
 of trepidation and concern about the future, but nonetheless determined
 and resolved in a quiet professional way to do their duty by their profession
 and by their country. And then the further opportunity, ladies and gentlemen
 to visit them in Dili and elsewhere in East Timor, to see the magnificent
 way in which they interacted with the people of East Timor and the quiet
 professionalism that they were displaying.
So can I say on behalf of everybody gathered, to the men and women who
 served Australia so well, who went abroad not in the name of one particular
 point of view in Australia, but went abroad in the name of Australia representing
 all of us to do a duty, to pursue a mission, to protect the people and
 to bring peace in accordance with the great traditions for which Australia
 stands.
To you Major General Cosgrove, for your splendid inspiring command, you
 have won the respect and the affection of the entire nation. To Superintendent
 Alan Blake, and Superintendent Donovan of the Australian Federal Police,
 you should also feel very content and proud of the tremendous role that
 you discharged in great danger and in accordance with the best traditions
 of the professional police force to which you belong.
This is a proud day, not only for the people of Sydney, but also for
 the people of Australia. We say thank you to the men and women of our
 forces for a magnificent job done in our name which has brought great
 credit to you and through you great credit to our nation.
[Ends]


Subjects: Trade and the WTO; interest rates; stock market volatility; ANZAC Day; war widows; Israel bridge diaster
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
JONES:
The Prime Minister’s on the line.  Prime Minister, good morning.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Alan.
JONES:
Prime Minister without getting into a debate here, I don’t want this to go too far but I just want to say to you, early this week I spoke about the extraordinary level of imports coming into this country and I mentioned that you as a government have applications before you.  If those applications are successful we’re to be getting more mangoes from Brazil and Egypt and Fiji and bananas from Equador and papaya from Brazil and persimmons from Israel and nectarines and so on.  How do Australians come to grips with the fact that they say look we can grow all this stuff ourselves not at the slave labour rates and the subsidised machinery that enables them to come into this country so cheaply.  Why are we importing this stuff?  What’s the answer to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the answer Alan is that while we are doing that we are also selling an increasing amount of product, primary produce to other countries and it’s the other face of more open trade.  We now are watching an industry like the beef industry, which over the years has had a lot of ups and downs, and is doing quite well.  I was with a group of beef producers on Monday at the Royal Easter Show and they pointed out to me that their particular industry is doing very well at the moment because they’re selling a lot abroad, they’ve got access in markets in Asia and North America that they haven’t previously had.  And I would say to your listeners, difficult though it is to accept if you look at it in isolation the admission of things that we grow in Australia from other countries it is the flip side of our being able to win access to other countries.
JONES:
Against that can I just tell you what you most probably know but agriculture support measures by the United States, Japan and the European Union governments last year totalled $362 billion.  If you John Howard instituted that in Australia someone at WTO would belt you over the head.  Why do the rules apply to us and not to them?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well because they were made by them and not by us.  
JONES:
A very good answer.  It’s true.  We don’t have a level playing field we don’t have wholly fair trade.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t argue that we do but if you think that we of twenty million people can win a subsidy war with the United States and the Europeans and the Japanese well that’s not right we can’t.
JONES:
But you’re going to Europe tomorrow and they’ve got a population of five hundred and sixty million people and they only let us import… they only let us export to them seven thousand tonnes of beef.  Now there’s one farmer at the Royal Easter Show here who grows more than that in any given year.  What chance do these people saying oh yes well we’ll stop subsidising European beef and we’ll let you John Howard have more of your farmers with an export opportunity in Europe.
PRIME MINISTER:
There is very little possibility of the Europeans doing that and that has been a gripe of governments in Australia for forty years and I will raise that again with the French President and the French Prime Minister but if they don’t change and I don’t expect they will change the alternative is not for us to try and fight a subsidy war because if you think they’re spending a lot now in order to preserve the market share of their farmers both domestically and internationally they will be willing to spend even more and that would become for Australia an unaffordable and an unwinable war.  The best prospect for Australia still remains to try and wear away at the international trading system and get more access for our exports and we have improved the situation. It is not ideal, it is far from perfect, it is unfair, it penalises a small efficient producer like Australia but it’s a little better than it was ten years ago because we have got some access for our product in countries like Taiwan and Japan and Indonesia that we didn’t have before.
JONES:
You’ve got a bit of a stake in any stock market crash.  Well correction, it was not a crash it was a correction.  
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t have a stake in it.
JONES:
Beg your pardon?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t have any personal stake.
JONES:
No, no not a personal stake but I’m just saying as Prime Minister with Telstra holding shares which lost about $4 billion.  Can you say to our listeners that this correction has, do you believe as Prime Minister it’s taken the heat out of the economy and reduced the need for another rise in interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh look I’m not going to effectively speculate about what’s going to happen on interest rates but I can separately say that you have to expect volatility in the share market.  There’s no doubt that there was a very heavy flow of money into a lot of stocks some of them speculative some of them not speculative stocks like Telstra are not speculative but some of the others were.  I think you have to expect volatility of that kind.
JONES:
There are many people listening to you who think wow they keep talking about an overheated economy, she ain’t overheated where I am, we’re struggling out here to make a quid.  I mean…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t believe, I don’t believe Alan that the Australian economy is overheated.  The Australian economy is continuing to grow very strongly.  We’re growing at around 4%…
JONES:
If it’s not overheated we don’t need an increase in interest rates do we?
PRIME MINISTER:
If we were growing at five or six percent you might say it was overheating…
JONES:
But if it’s not overheated though we don’t need an increase in interest rates.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’m not going into what’s going to happen on interest rates.
JONES:
Why don’t we ask you a couple of questions separately then?  I mean if monetary policy, that is the price of money, which is interest rates is a function which they tell us since time immemorial of inflationary pressures are you worried about the dollar value and what it does to the price of imports and the problem that that creates for inflation.  
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that’s really another area where you know Prime Ministers don’t talk about and that is the level of the Australian dollar and I know you find that frustrating and perhaps some of your listeners do but when Prime Ministers and Treasurers start thinking out aloud the markets react often erroneously and that can hurt people and therefore we don’t do it.
JONES: 
OK is one of the political problems though that you have to manage the fact that wage and salary earners in struggle street don’t create the problems of debt or the dollar value or the higher price for imports or the overblown stock market yet at the end of the day they are the ones who pay with interest rate hikes?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we’re all affected one way or the other by interest rate movements.  If you are a lender, if you’re a self-funded retiree and there are many of those listening to your program, when interest rates go down the return you get on your investment goes down.  If you’re a borrower when interest rates go down you’re happy so there are some swings and roundabouts.
JONES:
But are you worried that the benefit of the tax cuts…
PRIME MINISTER:
But look at it this way, those people you speak of, the great bulk of Australian workers wage and salary earners over the last four years the cuts in interest rates have been worth on average $245 a month to them, they’re $245 better…
JONES:
It’s the best wage increase you can get.
PRIME MINISTER:
They’ve also had wage increases which have not been eroded by inflation and one of the things that they have been able… this government has been able to deliver to people on struggle street is not only cuts in interest rates but also increases in their wages that have not been eroded by inflation.  
JONES:
But are you worried that the benefit of the big tax cut on July 1 might be eroded by interest rate increases.
PRIME MINISTER:
Alan I believe that people will find after the 1st of July that they are in many cases a good deal better off than they are now.  What will happen on the first of July for the great bulk of your listeners, is that they’ll find that the price of some things have gone up, some things have gone down and some things have remained the same.  But if they’re in the workforce and depending on their wage and their family circumstances they’ll have a noticeable cut in income tax.  Now it’s going to vary according to their wage level and so forth, but that is going to be the experience and that is what the GST, the new tax system is going to bring for the great bulk of your listeners.
JONES:
You’re off to Turkey and France tomorrow, what weight do you plan… you’re going to attend the Anzac Day service in Gallipoli…what weight do you as Prime Minister place on the symbolism and the reality of Anzac?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, enormously.  I don’t think there’s been an experience in the history of our country that has had a greater symbolic and spiritual impact than events surrounding the first Anzac Day.  I think they have defined the attitudes of Australians, they have taught us more about how we see ourselves, the sort of values that matter to us.  It was a tragic waste of young lives, many thousands of them unrealised and with the passage of time what it represents has become even more hallowed for Australians of all ages.
JONES:
With that being said and given that this only comes once a year, I’m just wondering if I could ask you again as I’ve asked your Minister for Veterans’ Affairs five million times – couldn’t we restore immediately the pensions of around four thousand war widows who remarried before 1984, half of whom have been widowed again, widows who find themselves carrying a terrible burden of loneliness and grief and deprivation, half a century ago and now are denied a war widows pension?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Alan, you have raised that with me and that’s fair enough to raise it again.  I’d just like to say that you can do that, but what we do, what we try and do with these issues is sit down on a regular basis with the RSLs and try and respond to their list of priorities.  And over the four years we’ve been in Government, we have done a lot of things, the gold card and a number of other measures that were put to us by the . . . 
JONES:
That gold card doesn’t go to Korean veterans, or Vietnam veterans. 
PRIME MINISTER:
No, that’s true, but it was awarded, I mean it principally goes to World War II veterans on the same condition that it previously went to… 
JONES:
Wouldn’t it be nice to give it… I mean I reckon Australians would be prepared to foot the bill.  Why wouldn’t we extend the gold card to all Australian veterans, including the veterans of Korea, Malaya, Vietnam?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Alan looked at in isolation– yes it would be a very good thing.  And I am not suggesting here for a moment that it wouldn’t be a good thing to do all of the things that you’ve raised the question always is with these things that governments have to assess priorities in a whole range of areas, communities, anything.  I don’t think anybody could say that successive governments in Australia and I don’t make a political comment about this, I give credit to former Labor Governments too as well as former Liberal Governments, have been fair and reasonable and generous in relation to our veterans.  It’s an area that we constantly look at.
JONES:
I tell you what I don’t want to harp on the point, but I do make the point, I don’t understand that the widow marries again because she has been consoled in her grief when her veteran husband died, she marries again and loses the pension.  But if the veteran, if the veteran lost the wife and married again and then died, the little floosy he married, that had absolutely nothing to do with the war gets a widow’s pension, it doesn’t make sense to me.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don’t want to make a comment that… I don’t want to make observations why people remarry and so forth I mean that depends on individual circumstances but Alan these things are, you know the book is never closed on these things. 
JONES:
Good, I hope you keep this one open.  One other thing, you’re going to Israel.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes.
JONES:
A woman wrote to me and says this, “my daughter Suzanne was with her husband Greg who died on the bridge when it collapsed in Israel on July 14, 1997.  The families of those who died, four, and seventy people injured have not had any assistance from our federal or state governments to put pressure on Israel for compensation.  The last two and a half years have been very traumatic, many people have visited here from Israel, made many promises, go back and do nothing.  Please could you assist us and hopefully ask Mr Howard to make mention while in Israel concerning all the problems about the bridge tragedy.”  Can you do something about that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I will be raising that matter when I’m in Israel.  I met representatives of the Australian Jewish community last week to talk about my visit and that was one of a number of things that they mentioned to me.  There have been some developments in the past few days, there’s been that decision of the court in Israel.
JONES:
Perhaps we could talk about that when you come back.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes.
JONES:  
I’ll go to the news and we’ll wish you well and we’ll talk on your return. 
PRIME MINISTER:
OK.
[Ends]


Subject:  Bilateral discussions; East Timor; Turkish earthquakes; Gallipoli
E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER ECEVIT:
We are very glad that we are hosting the distinguished Prime Minister of Australia in Ankara together with distinguished friends and it’s a very interesting occasion on which you are here Mr Prime Minister.  Namely this is the national sovereignty day, the 80th birthday of the Turkish Parliament and the Children’s Day.  You are most welcome on all these occasions and you will be visiting on Tuesday Gallipoli Peace Park in Dardenelles which is very dear to our hearts also.  As I told you in the office according to my knowledge it is the only case of adversaries, sympathising with each other and respecting each other.  Normally wars lead to enmity and hate but in the case of the Dardenelles war it led to mutual sympathy and respect between the adversaries.  It’s a unique phenomena and we are very glad that you will be visiting the cemeteries.  Very, very friendly and constructive conversation with the Prime Minister and we both admitted that true economic and business co-operation between our two countries has not been utilised thus far but we are, I’m sure, the Australian Government agrees with us that we should further cooperate in the economic field and in other fields in educatonal fields and we have had a fruitful discussion on the general political problems in the world.  I believe it will be very worthwhile if a permanent mechanism of political dialogue also is established between our two countries.  Over 100,000 Turks are Australian citizens of Turkish origin in Australia.  Many children and I suppose also of Australian origin as citizens and this provides another link of friendship and cooperation between our two countries.  Thank you again Sir for visiting our country.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Well Prime Minister can I say how warmly I, my wife and my party have been received by your Government.  There is a particular character to the relationship between Australia and Turkey.  The Prime Minister has written a lovely poem about Gallipoli which I had the opportunity to read a little while ago and he was kind enough to give me a gift of a video which illustrates that and that drives home to me the way in which the people of Turkey remember not in hostility or enmity, but in respect and out of a mutual desire not to see that kind of loss of life again as the events in the Dardenelles of 85 years ago which I will honour on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia on Tuesday, along with the Prime Minister of New Zealand.
The bilateral relationship between Australia and Turkey is in very good shape.  I think both of us agreed that we needed to put some more effort into the economic side of it.  The human side of it is very strong.  There are 100,000 and 150,000 Australian’s of Turkish background, all fully and in a very positive way part of the Australian community.  The entire Australian nation reacted with a great deal of sadness to the tragic earthquake in Turkey last year and that was not just an expression of the feelings of Turkish Australians but also of the entire Australian community.  
The Prime Minister and I have had an opportunity to talk about a wide range of international issues, of course Turkey is in a very special place in the world because of her links with not only Europe and Asia but with also many of the former republics of the old Soviet Union and of course a knowledge of Balkan politics which is second to none and we’ve also, particularly in the light of my forthcoming visit to Israel, which will include a call on the Palestinian leader, Yassar Arafat, we’ve had an opportunity of talking about the situation in the Middle East.
I did take the opportunity to thank the Prime Minister for Turkey’s contribution to the ongoing peace-keeping operation under the umbrella of the United Nations in East Timor.  That has been very gratefully received but can I say Prime Minister that Janette and I our party have really been greatly touched by the warmth of the people of Turkey and the Government of Turkey and we’re very happy to be here and I’m sure that out of the visit the bilateral relationship will be further strengthened.
PRIME MINISTER ECEVIT:
Thank you.  And I would like to thank again Mr Howard for the very friendly and warm that Australians and Australian government has extended to the victims of the earthquakes last year.  Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST:
Louise Dodson from the Australian Financial Review.  I wonder if both prime ministers could elaborate on what they have in mind for strengthening the economic relationship?
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Well a couple of things that we could do are to get move on the double taxation agreement.  We could get our officials to set a date for the next joint economic committee meeting and we could also look at whether there can be any agreements set up between our two countries that will further encourage investment.
JOURNALIST:
My question also is to both prime ministers, how did the Eurogold company come into the discussions that you had with the Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
I noted that the official approvals had been given by Turkish authorities for the activity to go ahead and I’m, we’re always pleased when Australian companies obtain approvals to do things they seek to do.
PRIME MINISTER ECEVIT:
I am hopeful that we shall reach an agreement.  It is of course up to the judiciary, the courts etc, we cannot take definite decisions by the Government alone, but we hope that a settlement will be reached.
Yes please.  That’s all?
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister Howard, I would just like to ask how you felt today when you laid the wreath at the Ataturk Memorial.  Your words in the official books were quite personal and touching on behalf of Australia.  How does it feel for you to be here in Turkey, representing Australia and marking Anzac Day and reflecting on the two countries relationship?
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Well, it’s a very moving experience.  I am conscious of the history.  I am very conscious of the incredible sacrifice and loss of Australian lives all those years ago, and I will obviously say something further about that on Anzac Day on Gallipoli.  I am also very conscious that he was an honoured opponent.  And I told the Prime Minister that I remembered as a boy attending an Anzac Day concert in the Sydney Town Hall as a member of the choir, and none of the Australian Gallery should laugh at that!  And the Anzac Day march on that occasion had involved the participation for the first time of a Turkish army officer, and that was back in 1953.  And it was done with the, at the instigation and the approval of the RSL, and it was an indication of the particular respect, despite the ferocity of the fighting and the incredible loss of life, and the  sadness that that visited upon homes in Australia, of course it visited on homes in Turkey.  Because the loss of life on the Turkish side was absolutely horrific.  You know, I guess it brought home to me a lot of things, a mix of emotions, the terrible waste and futility of war, the young lives destroyed and cut short on all sides – just a lesson to all of us about how absolutely evil and diabolic a war is.  And you . . . one experiences all of those emotions and I thought of that incident all those years ago after I laid the wreath and something came back to mind that it was something that happened, when you think of . . . when you try and transpose that to the representative of another former enemy country, I can’t imagine that it would have happened.  And I think it says something of the character of the relationship between the two countries.
JOURNALIST:
I wonder if we could hear something of the poem and the background to the writing of that poem.
PRIME MINISTER ECEVIT:
Background to the poem?
JOURNALIST:
To the writing of the poem – how you came to write it.
PRIME MINISTER ECEVIT:
Well one day I was travelling from Gallipoli to Istanbul with my wife, it was a rainy day and we thought that we should visit the cemeteries.  And I was so bitterly impressed that we returned to the cemeteries later on to take notes from the inscriptions of the tombstones and later I joined together those inscriptions of the tombstones and tried to make a poem out of it.  It’s not a war poem, it’s a post-war poem.  And it’s, it was a very touching experience for me.  I was also inspired by a message of Ataturk in the 30’s, to the relatives of the dead in Gallipoli.  It’s a very touching…I am sure you have read it Mr Prime Minister.  Every Turk has the same kind of feelings that Prime Minister Mr Howard expressed a while ago.  It has been a strange war that paid respect among the adversaries as he said and it showed as the Prime Minister has said, the futility of wars.  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
The Prime Minister’s modesty prevents him from telling you, the Australian gallery, that he has, amongst his many literary accomplishments, is a very detailed translation of T S Eliot into Turkish.
PRIME MINISTER ECEVIT:
Thank you everyone.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Thank you.
[ends]


The Prme Minister, Madam, to all of our Turkish hosts for tonight can I say how much my wife and I and all of the other members of the Australian group have appreciated the warm hospitality that you have extended to us in the time that we have been in Turkey.
We come here on a very emotional visit to inaugurate the new commemorat:ive area on Anzac, on Anzac Day. Anzac Day represents a very special moment in the annual life of Australia. It means a great deal to our countrymen and women because of what was involved and what it represented in distilling what our country was about and what our
country was to become. And it is made even more special by the fact that out of the terrible events on Anzac Cove in April 1915 there grew a relationship between our two countries, based not on bitterness and hatred but based on respect and regard for the oommitment displayed by the men who fought so gallantly on both sides. And you yourself sir, have oontributed to that with your wonderful poem which touchingly refers to the Sacrifice of all those who gave their lives in the Dardanelles campaign.
So I come as the prime minister of a country that feels warmly towards your country and its people its people. You have told us of the Australians of Turkish heritage numbering some 100,000 to 150,000 they enrich our life, they are part of our community, they enjoy all of
the privileges and carry all of the responsibilities of being  Australian. And they add to the links between our two nations.
Can I say thai your country does occupy a very special location.  And that location brings an understanding of the politics and the cballenges and the like of many of the challenging areas of the world - the Balkans; the republics of the former Soviet Union; the Middle East; your links with the European Union and you have insights and
understandings of those parts of the world that are extremely valuable to us just as I believe the insights and understandings that we can bring to countries such as Turkey of our own Asian Pacific region will be of value to you and your colleagues in government.
Last year you celebrated seventy-five years of the Turkish Republic, next year we celebrate one hundred years of the Commonwealth of Australia and I hope amongst the many people that we will welcome to Australia to share in that celebration next year will be you and your wife and you will be very warmly welcome.
We have had the opportunity today Prime Minister to talk in detail about ways in which we can improve the relationship bctween our two countries. It is a strong relationship, it is built on shared history of a particular character. It is built on the bonds that naturally
are provided by the fact that we have so many people of Turkish descent amongst our own citizens. But it is a relationship that can be built on and further improved and I hope my visit and that of my party has made a small contribution towards further strengthening that relationship.
Can I say to you Prime Minister, that the friendship that you and the President and all of your colleagues have displayed towards us will be long remembered and very deeply appreciated. And I would like in that spirit to invite everybody to join in proposing a toast to your good health and that of your wife and to the good fortune and good health of
all of the people of Turkey.


Subjects:  Turkey earthquake; Commemorative Peace Park; Bilateral Relations
E&amp;OE …………………………………………………………………………
Well your Excellency, I would like to thank you very warmly for receiving me and extending your hospitality.  
I think its true to say that relations between our countries are very close, we do have a special bond that grew out of our encounter all those years ago and the passage of time has produced a very sensitivity between the people of Turkey and the people of Australia and we value that as much as I know by your words you value that and we do have in Australia now as you say 100,000 to 150,000 people of Turkish descent, ancestry everyone making a wonderful contribution to our very diverse community and those links help to keep the two countries and two societies together.  
There was a genuine anguish in Australia not only amongst Turkish Australians but amongst all Australians at the devastation caused by the earthquake and the response from the public as well as from the government was the evidence of that anguish.  
I do want to take the opportunity of thanking Turkey for its contribution to the ongoing United Nations effort in East Timor.  You contributed some 20 civilian police and also some military observers.  The fact that we were able to get a very broadly-based force is adding to the effectiveness of what has happened in East Timor.  I know I come to your country at a very important phase of its political activities and I hope that at some time in the future in whatever capacity Sir you have the opportunity of visiting Australia and you would be very very welcome.  Any leader, any senior figure from Turkey would always be welcome to our country.
On a personal matter, I want to thank you very much for the development of the Gallipoli Peninsula as a contemplative peace park.  I know that you, yourself have played a very major role in this and that is very warmly appreciated and I will have an opportunity tomorrow and on ANZAC Day to see the changes that have taken place on the Peninsula.  I know how much you have encouraged it and how you as the Turkish Head of State, the impetus that you have given to that.  
You are right in saying that there are no bilateral difficulties between our two countries, it is a very positive relationship.  We can always make it better.  We can always improve the trade and investment and I hope that in the time that we have over lunch and also in my discussions with the Prime Minister that we will have an opportunity to canvas ways in which that can happen. 
This is my first visit to Turkey and I have been received with such friendship and warmth.  I appreciate it very very much and I do convey to you and all of your people the very good wishes of the Australian people.  We do feel a special affinity for all the reasons we both understand and it is nice though to have the opportunity to personally say to the Turkish Head of State that those feelings are very genuine and congratulations on can I say as the leader of a great sporting country to another country that loves it sport, congratulations on the football and your success.  
PRESIDENT DEMIREL:
We still have one step further…
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Yeah one step to go but I know how fond the people of your country are of soccer as we call it, football.  I can sense the enthusiasm, you’ve only got one step to go.  
PRESIDENT DEMIREL:
Almost within a week, this country will not sleep, is not sleeping and we are not going to sleep and its amazing …. And everybody forget to eat and TO sleep.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Well we have not long ago gone through the experience in rugby of winning the World Cup and we understand that many of us that follow it, not all of our country does… we stayed up late…
PRESIDENT DEMIREL:
I thank you for your mentioning it and are happy and our people are very happy because you mentioned it.  I would like to say a couple of things about the peace park.  The peace park is going to the national ….. then your country deserved it in our opinion.  Now it is going to be a beautiful example of serving the peace.  What we are attempt to ….it here is 500,000 young men …. they fought and what for and that, yes they have been dead but they have a message to the world to do the one thing.  That message is live in peace.  No more people should be killed.  I think its simple.  A very extraordinary project and that everything has been done to know the design, I think it will take ten more years to develop further.  It will be developed very carefully.  We had a very bad fire a couple of years ago and everything should be taken care of so that this isn’t repeated.  It’s a fine project and we should work together to get the thing done.  
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Just on the park, we are finding in Australia an immense upsurge of interest amongst our young in the wars and the sacrifice of young Australians in earlier generations and one of the reasons as you know that we had to shift the memorial from its original spot was that there was not enough room for all the thousands of young Australians and New Zealanders that gather, not only on ANZAC Day, but on so many other occasions and I agree very much that it should always be an encouragement of people to preserve peace and to resolve that we never again suffer such an horrific loss of life from those on both sides.  


E&amp;OE  ………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Mr Ambassador, to the Mayor of Eceabat, to the citizens of Eceabat, can I first say how delighted my wife and I are to be here and to take part in this very important, symbolic ceremony to mark the strength of the relationship and the friendship between the people of Australia and the people of Turkey.
I am here along with many other Australians on a very important mission for our country, and that is to honour the sacrifice of so many thousands of young Australians, eighty-five years ago in the Dardanelles campaign.  But in honouring the sacrifice of our young men so many years ago, we also honour the sacrifice of the brave men of Turkey who fought in that campaign and lay down their lives in defence of their homeland.  
Turkey and Australia have a close and friendly relationship.  More than 100,000 Australians are of Turkish descent and every last one of them are making a great contribution as part of a harmonious Australian community.  Australians are conscious of the challenges of many of the communities within Turkey and all Australians were deeply moved a the tragic loss of life in the Turkish earthquake of 1999.  And not only did the Government respond to the earthquake appeal, but the people of Australia responded individually to the scale of the tragedy that overtook a part of your country.
In presenting this modern medical equipment, to this health centre, which the Mayor has been graciously pleased to name the Eceabat Turkey/Australia Health Centre, I do so with great pride and great respect to your nation and to your people.  And I hope you will see it as a token of the affection of the people of Australia for the people of Turkey.
In the few days that we have been here, my wife and I have been quite overwhelmed not only by the richness of the history and culture of your country, but also by the great warmth and affection of the welcome that has been extended to us.  I wish the people of Eceabat well, I bring you the good wishes of the people of Australia.  And I hope that this health centre is a mark of the esteem and the close friendship between the people of our two nations.
I now have great pleasure in declaring open the Eceabat Turkey/Australia Health Centre.  Long may it look to the health needs of the people of Eceabat.  
Thank you.


Subjects: Tax reform; welfare reform; petrol prices; Telstra; Michael Ronaldson;
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Michael.  I will join everybody in wishing the North Ballarat Roosters the best of luck on Saturday.  I am not going anywhere near Sandringham between now and the weekend.  I wish them luck and just to sort of let you know that there is a variety of football played in this country could we also spare a thought for the Australian Wallabies who take on South Africa in the tri-nations final in Durban at the weekend.
But Michael is right.  He is always right.  But last night was quite a night and there was quite a buzz.  I got a buzz out of it and I went away feeling that there is a lot of life and heart and soul and hope and optimism in regional Australia.  And when I think as I said last night that what seven, eight years ago there was an unemployment level of 20% in the city of Ballarat and the surrounds and now it is down to 5.7% which is below the national average.   It does represent a quite remarkable turnaround and I want to congratulate everybody in the Ballarat district that has been responsible for that.  The way in which the businesses and the community have rallied together and worked together to produce better solutions to find industries that can do better, can export, to modernise some of the older industries, to bring in new ones, it is a reminder to all of us of what can be achieved if communities work together in an effective partnership.
I have been visiting Ballarat over the years in various political capacities.  It is a distinctive part of Australia.  It's very heavily identified with the history of our country and it's a reminder of the enormous contribution made by areas like Ballarat to the development of Australia, first in the nineteenth century and now more recently.  And I visit you at a time when it is fair to say that the Australian economy is performing, despite a few challenges which I will come to in a moment, is performing more strongly than it has since the late 1960s.  We have now had twelve quarters of economic growth of more than 4%.  You really do have to go back to the late 1960s and the early 1970s to find such a sustained period of economic activity, to find inflation rates which are as low as they are now.  Indeed to find interest rate levels despite some recent movements which are as low as they are now.  And when you think back to say ten  years ago when Michael first began to represent the Electorate of Ballarat it the Federal Parliament.  The inflation rates, the interest rates and the unemployment levels and the very depressed business activity, the difference is very stark.  And it is a difference which has not happened by accident.  There's a common misbelief often in the circles of those who comment on politics as distinct from those who are involved in politics that everything happens by chance or accident and that in reality the government has no say in it at all.  Now there are some things that no national government has any control over.  There are some world developments and world movements that no government, not even the government of the United States, the most powerful country the world has ever seen, can control.  But there are many other things which are matters of individual national choice.  A government can decide that it wants to be a reform government and it can decide that it wants to tackle the major challenges that face a community.  And that is very much the attitude that the Coalition took when it was elected in March of 1996.  We had been in opposition for the thirteen years which was a very long time.  There were occasions when there might have been a change of government but there wasn't.  So when the opportunity finally came our way, the first thing I promised myself was that I wasn't going to let the opportunity go by without spending every waking hour of the time that I was Prime Minister with my colleagues in endeavouring to change those things in Australia that needed to be changed. 
We have been quite deliberately, as an act of choice, we have been a reform government.  But we haven't been a mindlessly reform government.  We haven't been a government that set out the pull down everything that existed in Australia when we became the government.  The quality of government is measured by its capacity to discriminate between preserving those things that continue to work and are of enduring value and resolving to change those things that need to be altered.  We have therefore set about to identify very much those changes that were needed in the economic structure of this country.  We changed Australia's industrial relations system and we are a stronger and better country for it.  One of the reasons why Australian exporters are doing better now is that we have a more competitive industrial relations system.  
Recently I was in Perth and I opened a new factory for an exporter and the exporter which in effect services the frozen TV dinner for the Japanese market and the managing director of the company said that he had 450 employees, every single one of them was on an individual contract and he turned around to me and he said that if it hadn't been for your industrial relations reforms we wouldn't be opening this factory today and we wouldn't have a lions share of that very important export market in Japan.  And those stories can be told again all over Australia.  Because if you live in a competitive world economic environment, you need a capacity at each individual work place level to make agreements between employers and employees that will increase the productivity of that firm.  And to complete the good news story of that man I spoke to in Perth, he also pointed out to me what little turn over there was within the staff, how well they were paid and as I moved around and talked to them it was driven home to me that they saw the export performance of that company as being very much a cooperative effort.  They had the same pride of ownership in the company's achievement as did the managing director.  Now that is the best industrial relations in the world and they are the sort of workplace relations attitudes that you have to develop.  So we place a great deal of store on that change.  We place an enormous amount of store on the change in the budget position.  When we came to office our budget was running at a deficit of about ten and a half billion dollars a year which soon racked up something like $80-90 billion of government debt over the previous five years.  And in the five budgets that we have brought down when this year's is completed we will have repaid about $40-50 billion of that debt that we inherited.  And that's very important.  
Michael spoke earlier about his children.  The MC spoke earlier about grandchildren.  It's very very important to remember what you do for future generations and the best thing that we can do for the future generations of Australia is to leave them debt free.  If we can leave future generations of Australians debt free they can have a flying start.  A start that many other countries' generations won't have.  So I take particular pride in the work of the government in reducing the budget deficit, coming into surplus a year ahead of prediction.  And now being able to look the rest of the world in the eye and know that even if we do from time to time import a lot and we do from time to time borrow a lot from the rest of the world to service the economic activity in this country our national debt level is very manageable and if we can secure the approval of the parliament to allow the Australian people to own 100% of Telstra instead of only 49+% then we will by the year 2004 have completely eliminated all of the federal government debt.  Now that would be a very remarkable achievement.  We won't have eliminated the debts owed by Australian individuals and corporations to overseas lenders, that will never occur because we will always be a country that needs to import a large amount of capital to service economic activity.  But to have taken the government out of the borrowing and debt equation is an enormously important achievement.  
So that was a very important part of our reform approach.  But perhaps the most important reform change of all was the one that started on the 1st of July.  The one that our political opponents hoped would reap disaster, havoc and ruin on the government and in the process of course, on the Australian economy.  There were a lot of predictions made about how the world was going to come to an end on the 1st of July.  The sky was going to fall in, the four horsemen of the Apocalypse were going to appear, everything would stop, there would be disaster and confusion and doom and despair and pestilence.  Now of course it didn't work out that way.  What happened was that the Australian people, as they normally do when confronted with a really important change that they are satisfied is for the benefit of the country they took it in their stride.  And I am really tremendously proud of the way in which the business community, particularly small business operators have absorbed the new taxation system.
I don't pretend that there won't be some challenges and difficulties in front of us.  I don't pretend that there wasn't a lot of difficult adjustment involved.  And I don't pretend for a moment that some people aren't still grappling with some of the detail.  But overwhelmingly it has gone very well.  Overwhelmingly.  The people not only came to grips with it, they understood it, they realised it was for the benefit of the country, they also saw the fundamental fairness of it.  They believed after the 1st of July that there were significant personal income tax cuts.  They found on the 1st of July that everything didn't go up by 10%.  They found that many items did fall in price.  That the supermarket trolley wasn't 10% more expensive than it had been the week earlier.  In many cases the movement was only a few dollars.  And people then realised that this was a fair deal.  That the Government hadn't been misleading them when they said it was fair and balanced and that sure some things went up in price, some things went down, some things remained the same.  And I think as the weeks and months go by, people will increasingly look back on the 1st of July and they will recognise it was very much a case of an exaggerated prediction of gloom and despair by those who didn't want the new taxation system to be effective.  And it does represent the biggest single change to Australia's economic system since World War II.  It is a vastly different way of running a taxation system and as the individual changes work their way through the abolition of provisional tax the benefits of the almost halving of capital gains tax, the reduction over a two year period from 36 to 30 cents in the dollar in the rate of company tax.  All of those changes as they work their way through will make the Australian economy and the Australian business community a lot more competitive.  And as I said at the export dinner last night that is really what the modern world is very much about.  It is about ensuring that our economy and our country remains as competitive as possible because when you live in a globalised world economy, economic signals are transmitted at the blink of an eye.  It doesn't take long, it takes a fraction of a second for economic news to travel from one side of the world to the other.  That is the consequence of the information technology revolution in which we now live.  And you can't shut out the world anymore.  It's not an option for Australia to say to the rest of the world we have done pretty well, we have got a nice standard of living here, we don't need to make any more changes, we will say to the rest of the world leave us alone and we'll run our own race.  It's not like that.
To start with we have to, in order to prosper and survive, we have to sell a lot of products around the world.  That's what last night was all about.  We have a constant flow of people.  The flow of people across national borders now in some industries is becoming almost as intense as the flow of capital.  The way in which it is possible for people to do a service job in one part of the world for a company located on the other side of the world is becoming a part and parcel of the operation of many international organisations.  So it's tremendously important that we always keep in mind that the economic race now is not about being able to say we are doing better than thirty or forty years ago.  That's important but what really matters is how well we are doing against the person who is in the race with us at the present time.   And we have got to keep ahead of our rivals and keep ahead of our competitors.  
So ladies and gentlemen, the message I bring you today is a message of tremendous enthusiasm and optimism and hope.  It's a belief that we have achieved a lot together, that we do have a sounder, stronger, better, more durable economy than we did four and a half years ago.  That is not to say that there aren't areas of concern.  There seems to be a bit of debate around the Australian community now which I fully understand about the price of petrol.  And I would like to say something about the price of petrol because it has been getting quite a run lately and can I say first up that I understand why Australians don't like paying higher prices for petrol. It is a very sensitive consumer item.  We love our motor cars, we love using them, we love travelling, it's a big country, the price of fuel is a very important issue.  
The second thing I would like to say is despite recent increases, our fuel is still extremely cheap by world standards, it's the fourth cheapest in the world after the United States, Canada and New Zealand.  It is vastly cheaper than it is in Europe and many parts of Asia.  This country is also fortunate because it has a high level of self sufficiency in relation to the supply of crude oil.  
Overwhelmingly, ladies and gentlemen, the increase in the price of petrol which has occurred in recent months has been viewed of the increase in the world price of crude oil.  It has also been significantly influenced by the change in the exchange rate relationship between the Australian dollar and the United States dollar.  World crude oil prices are set in United States' dollars, and when the Australian dollar falls against the United States' dollar, the price each barrel of crude oil which is needed is increased thereby because of that changed exchange rate relationship.
Let me try and explain as best I can by illustration the way in which external factors have increased the price of petrol at the bowser in Australia over recent months.  
Between April and August the average capital city price of fuel, petrol in Australia at the refinery gate, that is before any taxes are added, at the refinery gate rose by 12.2 cents a litre.  The retail price, that's what was paid on average in the capital cities of Australia over that same period, has risen by only 11.9 cents a litre.  In other words there has been a very close correlation between the rise in the price at the refinery gate of 12.2 cents a litre and the rise in the bowser of 11.9.  Now that illustrates very clearly that the rise in the price of petrol has been due overwhelmingly to external factors, not to the goods and services tax.  That is the great deception of this whole debate, that the goods and services tax has been responsible for this big increase in the price of petrol.
Even if the critics of the Government were right about the inability of the oil, the alleged inability of the oil companies to pass on that one and a half cents a litre cost saving as a result of the GST.  Even if they were right about that, and I don't accept for a moment they are, even if they were right about that, that's only one to one and a half cents a litre.  That doesn't explain why the price of petrol has gone from the late 70s early 80s up to the early mid or even late 90s or even more.  That doesn't explain that at all.  
Overwhelmingly it is because the world price has gone up and because of exchange rate variations.  And they are factors over which no national Government of this country has control.  That doesn't mean to say I find the increase in the price of petrol to my liking. 
Now it is said that the Government could reduce the price of petrol by reducing the excise collected by the Federal Government.  Now that is true.  We could tomorrow have a discretionary cut in the excise per litre we collect on petrol.  I would imagine that if that were something that we would contemplate, we would say, what would the Australian public see as a significant cut in the price of petrol?  I think they would want at least a five cent a litre cut to think it was worthwhile.  
Cutting the price of petrol by cutting the federal excise by five cents a litre would cost $1.7 billion dollars.  Now I have to say to you, much in all as I am conscious of the sensitivity of the Australian public and the Australian motorist to the price of petrol, I think taking $1.7 billion off the Federal Government's surplus at the present time would be economically unwise. 
The main reason why I think it would be economically unwise is that I think that it would put upward pressure on interest rates at a time when that is probably the last thing most Australians want to see occur.  Particularly at a time when exchange rate fluctuations are putting some inflationary pressure into the system.  So I am against doing that, not because I don't want to see the price of petrol fall, I would love to see it fall, but I think taking everything into account, having a discretionary cut in the level of excise by raiding the budget surplus would not make much sense.  You could of course try and find the money from somewhere else but that immediately leads you into taking money out of other areas.  Taking money out of road funding, school funding, health funding, defence funding, none of that to my way of thinking makes any real sense. 
So I have to say, unpopular though it may be in many circles, that we don't see our way clear to cut the federal excise at the present time because we must either fund that by reducing the surplus which will put upward pressure on interest rates or we must fund it by taking money away from other programmes.  And as I move around the Australian community, I don't hear people saying to me 'we want further cuts in the provision of necessary Government services.  I hear people saying to me we want Government services maintained, and in some areas increased.  That's the message I get from the Australian people.
I think the Australian people want a balance in their economic policy.  They want a Government that gets rid of waste and extravagance and gets the budget back into balance and back into surplus, but they also want a government that is sensible enough to spend money where it is needed, a government that, for example, in the last budget was willing to put more than $500 million into attacking the problem of medical service in remote rural areas of Australia.  They want a government that is willing to put more resources into national infrastructure.  They want a government, as this government is willing to do, to put more resources into the defence of Australia.  
I have said repeatedly, and I will say it again today, that this Government in the years ahead, this country needs to spend more and not less money on defence.  And there are quite a number of areas where the Government needs to put more resources into very necessary areas.  It is a balance.  Good government is not, economically is not just about cutting expenditure in every single area.  It is about cutting expenditure in areas where that expenditure is extravagant or unnecessary but it is, on occasions, about increasing expenditure in areas where it is necessary.
And in that sort of context, and with that kind of attitude in mind could I also mention that the Government that I lead is not just about economic issues.  Economic issues are always very important because unless you have a strong economy, a growing economy, a prosperous economy there is so very little you can do to help the more vulnerable in our community, and there is so very little you can do to pursue other important national goals. 
But, we're also concerned about having a decent welfare system.  Australia I think has got many things right.  One of the things that I think we have basically got right over the years is that our social security system has avoided the excesses of both the United States and Europe.  On the one hand I think there are some aspects of the American welfare system that are too harsh and I would never count them as being introduced into Australia.
By contrast I think there are some elements of the European welfare system that are too interventionist and they have placed too great a burden on the people who are the taxpayers and as a consequence the government sector has got too big.  And what I think we have been able to do in this country is to get the balance right.  We have the Australian fair go attitude that says that we look after people who need help.  We don't allow people to go without the necessary means of basic support.  We do recognise that we have a moral obligation to help people who, through no fault of their own, need help.  And there are a lot in our midst who fall into that category, there always have been and there always will be, and the challenge of social welfare policy is to find the best way of helping them in a dignified fashion that, where possible, encourages and aids them to get back into the work force. 
And that is the aim of the recent review into social welfare, chaired by Patrick McClure of Mission Australia.  It was a group of men and women with a good understanding of our system.  They had a hard headed approach but they also had a compassionate approach.  And there has been widespread support for the principles of that report and it is based on the Governments strong support for the principle of mutual obligation which is enshrined in our Work for the Dole programme that says yes if people are out of work and they're trying to find a job, they ought to be financially supported.  But, in return for that financial support, its not unreasonable if they are physically able to do so, that they put something back into the community in return for the financial support they receive.
Now this principle of mutual obligation is now very widely supported in the Australian community and it has underpinned the recommendations of the McClure Report.  We will respond to that report over the weeks and months ahead and in so doing we will demonstrate to the Australian community the capacity of this Government to use the economic strength brought about by our economic reforms to build a stronger social structure.  Social structure that decently cares for the vulnerable in our community, because that's what a decent, humanitarian society is always about.  And also a social structure that recognises that the solution to the problems of economic and social and family vulnerability involve a partnership between the Government, the welfare sector, Australian individuals and the business community.  And we have, over the last four and a half years, in this area also been something of a trailblazer as a Government.
So, ladies and gentlemen, my message to you this morning is very much a message of hope and optimism, a degree of, how shall I put it, a degree of pride in achievement over the last four and a half years, but certainly not speaking, both as Prime Minister and leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, certainly not speaking with any sense of complacency or smugness about what has been achieved.  
It is important that Michael's campaign committee have raffle books on your table.  It is important that you always wonder the charge he's made for the gathering is high enough and whether the venue is large enough.  Because political parties do require the sinews of war.  Election campaigns are not easy.  Ballarat historically has been a marginal seat and I, in all of my political career, have learnt the value of caution, have sensed the danger of over exuberance, certainly have totally rejected any sense of complacency.  
Winning elections in Australia is very hard.  Good policy and good government does not have an automatic electoral reward.  You have to keep working away at it.  And can I say to those in the audience who want another Liberal government at the end of next year federally, you have to work very hard to achieve it.  It won't happen automatically.  Don't assume we've had a few sort of surprise election results around this country in recent years.  Nobody should assume that that can't happen at a federal level.  I don't take the next election for granted.  I have never taken the Australian people for granted, and I never will.  It's an enormous privilege to be Prime Minister of this country.  I sort of count my blessings every day to have had that privilege come my way for four and a half years.
I want the Government returned because I think it is a very good government and I think it has done a lot of good things.  I also want it returned because I think the people of Ballarat will be very well served by the re-election of Michael Ronaldson.  I think Michael is an incredibly committed, exuberant local member who is so identified with this district.  I go to a lot of gatherings.  I go to a lot of breakfasts, I go to a lot of lunches, I go to a lot of afternoon teas and morning teas and dinners and suppers and cocktail parties, the whole lot.  I mean, you know, Sunday brunches and so it goes on and I see a lot of local members.  Some are good, some are splendid, some are not there for too long, but some of them are really quite outstanding, and Michael is one of them, because Michael has a strong identification with his district.  
He's parochial to the extent needed to make the point that he is broad-minded enough to know that we're part of a nation as well as part of a state and part of a city.   And that is a very very important quality for a local member to have so there are a lot of reasons why we want to do well politically in this part of the world at the end of next year and first and foremost is to make certain that the very high quality of federal representation that you had over the last ten years is continued and that can only be achieved by re-electing Michael Ronaldson.  
Thank you very much. 


It has been said that there should no such thing as history – just biography.  For all of us, this wisdom carries with it an understanding that what we call history is simply the sum of experience of individuals lives.  It carries with it an understanding that to remember events - rather than the human tragedy or triumph lived within them is to diminish their lesson.
None of us consciously condemns the experiences of other generations to dry and dusty captivity within history books.  Their times simply seem so distant from our own, their lives so divorced from ours that it’s often hard to imagine we could share the same emotions – that our forebears felt happiness or hope as we feel, or suffered from grief or fear as we do.  But today, we affirm our understanding that the men who fought here and the many who died here, were exactly like ourselves.
History may choose to chronicle the Battle of Lone Pine as an unsuccessful military feint, a ‘demonstration’, using the words of the time, designed to draw the enemy’s reserves away from the real breakout attempted elsewhere.  But to us, it will always be about young Australians, exactly like those with us here today, like the thousands who are drawn to this place each year.
Young Australians, their bodies wearied by months of fatigue and illness, by the constant stress of combat, who nevertheless launched themselves across the killing space of no-mans land.  The startled recognition that the enemy had roofed their forward trenches with pine logs, the hurried scramble to drag enough aside to leap into the half lit gloom and terror waiting in the tunnels below.
To us, it will always be about the three days of bloody, hand to hand fighting they endured amid the narrow twisting confines of enemy trenches – fought with rifles and freshly sharpened bayonets, with home-made jam tin bombs packed with nails and scrap, and at last resort with their bare hands.  For us, it will remain the story of an aspiring nation’s courage.
While bare statistics tell of 2,277 Australian soldiers lost in the battle, to us, they’ll never simply be numbers on a page.  For each one of those men had a name we would recognise, a home we would feel welcome in, a family that loved them as much as we are loved by our own.  Each one had parents or beloved or children whose hearts were broken when they perished here.  Each possessed a unique personality- as we do - apparent in a thousand ways by our mannerisms, our humour, the principles which guide our lives, the hopes we hold for our futures.
Seven Australians who, during those three short days, at places close to where we now stand, earned their country’s highest decoration for valour in the face of the enemy, the Victoria Cross.  These soldiers would not have thought themselves exceptional.  They may even have felt their own breath-taking acts of bravery commonplace amongst that heroic company.  As one survivor of the fighting recalled “there were deeds of heroism and utter fearless bravery sufficient to warrant the issue all round of V.Cs, but nobody of high enough military rank saw them.  We, their mates, saw it all”.
The origins, lives and destinies of these seven men, give us a picture of all their kind.  And in their livelihoods, their interests, their pursuits, their values, we gain also a mirror in which we see ourselves.
One was a carpenter prior to his enlistment, two were clerks, one a salesman, a butcher, a farmer, the last barely out of school.  Professions and trades in which Australians still strive.  They lived in the cities and towns in which we still live.  Their religions were listed as Church of England, Catholic, Presbyterian, Jewish.  All faiths which many Australians still follow.
Two had immigrated to Australia.  And in their choice to make a new beginning, we see reflected the contribution that generations of other migrants have made to our nation.  One was to become a respected business leader, another a champion of the workers.  Some were married, others were single.  Some were destined to raise children, others were not.  And in the faces revealed through fading photographs, we see our friends, our workmates, our neighbours and our sons.
In short, we stand here today not to commemorate the deeds of strangers.  The passing of mere time does not render them foreign to our world or to ourselves.  We are the same people, possessed of the same courage, the same determination, the same spirit.  Within us all, is carried the seed of Anzac.
And as we return to the normal lives denied them, we will take with us a renewed sense of belonging, a renewed bond with the past and renewed hope for the future.  We will leave behind, in voices rich with Australian accents, the pledge that these men, though separated by time, can never be separated from the affection and gratitude of their people.  
Let us honour the men of Lone Pine with the evocative words of the poet, John Oxenham:
Tread softly here!
And let your soul go down upon its knees,
And with bowed head
And Heart abased, strive hard
To grasp the future gain in
This sore loss.
For not one foot of this
Dank sod but drank
Its surfeit of the blood
Of gallant men.


Deputy Prime Minister, the Right Honourable Helen Clark, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, to other Ministers, to my parliamentary colleagues, particularly the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kim Beazley, representatives of the military forces of the various nations represented at this service.
Anzac Day commemorates the great sacrifice by the soldiers of many nations.  We in Australia remember especially that 8,700 of the sons of Australia died in the Gallipoli campaign and through their deaths, and the deaths of 2,700 sons of  New Zealand, there was forged a bond between our two countries that will never be broken.  And today’s International Service reminds us that for every son of Australia and New Zealand who died at Gallipoli there is coupled one son of  France, two sons of Great Britain and no fewer than six sons of the Republic of Turkey.  And we Australians here today come to honour the sacrifice of the fighting men of all of the countries that took part in the terrible Gallipoli campaign in 1915.
Today’s services are a reminder to us of heroism and sacrifice.  They are also a reminder to all of us that the slaughter and devastation, and unmitigated horror of war, and these experiences today have struck all of us as elected leaders of nations of our responsibility to guide the policies of all of our countries along the paths of peace.  
I want to pay tribute to successive leaders of the Republic of Turkey, particularly the great Kemal Ataturk for the way in which the nations were reconcilled after the campaigns of 1915.  
I want to especially record my appreciation to President Demirel for the way in which he has championed the cause of the Gallipoli Peace Park.  That Gallipoli Peace Park will appropriately mark our respect and our honour and our regard of the men of Turkey, the sons of Turkey, who so bravely laid down their lives in defence of their homeland and it would be an appropriate place for countless thousands of young Australians and New Zealanders to come to reflect upon the sacrifices of their fathers and grandfathers and great grandfathers and to resolve collectively to never again allow such a horrible event to occur.


To this ancient land the passing of 85 years must seem but an instant in time. A mere moment in its journey towards forever. But to us it is the distance of human life. Thus we come to this place at this hour on this day to observe not only a dawn but a dusk. For dusk has all but fallen on that great hearted generation of Australians who fought here. The shadows gather on a time and a world in which our nation’s spirit was born. Soon the story of ANZAC which forever joins the people of Australia and New Zealand will pass gently from memory into history. Soon the fire struck here will be ours to tend. Soon its record once written on pages wet with tears will be ours alone to guard, ours to cherish, ours to live.
It is a remarkable legacy. Only now from the sheltered safety of our time can we comprehend what was dared and done here. Only now from the vantage point secured for us by others lives can we see the scale and the scope of their achievement. For those young Australians as wild and free as the land they loved, left us a creed to which we can all aspire in the gentle years of peace as surely as in the hard and hungry years of war.
The inheritance we claim today is not a fallen sword, nor have we come to extol a warrior’s code. The respect of gallant foes and the high regard of comrades is the praise that soldiers seek. It is not for us to give. Let them rest, far from thoughts of battle. Instead we come to claim from them, a heritage of personal courage and initiative. Of daring and determination in the face of overwhelming odds. A heritage that requires of each of us a conscious decision to do what is right regardless of the resistance we meet or the fears we hold.
We come to seek the inspiration of stories of compassion and comfort given to others in their time of need. Knowing that there are opportunities in our own lives to ease the burden of those suffering adversity and hardship. We come to draw upon their stirring example of unity and common purpose. To believe that whatever our differing circumstances, we are all companions with each of our countrymen and women, and together we travel a single path. We come to join with those that rest here in a shared love of our nation, bathed in sunlight and so blessed with bounty. We come to stand on soil rich with the lives of our kin and vow that what they began, we will finish.
For they fought to build a nation which would stand proud and respected amongst the free people of the world. A nation where ordinary men and women would live long lives of happiness and fulfilment. A country where children would grow nourished by the land’s harvest, and by the love of their parents. A country where prosperity and opportunity are derived not by birth, but by endeavour. A people made independent united and free for all time. And in the attainment of these ideals, in the keeping of a decent and responsible Australia, in every year of peace between the nations of the world, we will build for all those who have served and suffered in war, a monument upon which evening will never fall.


Subject: ANZAC Day in Gallipoli
E &amp; EO……………………………………………………………………………………
MUNRO:
Prime Minister Howard, have you felt that whilst being there?
PRIME MINISTER:
Mike, absolutely. The most moving thing to me of this morning and yesterday wandering around Gallipoli, was the enormous number of young Australians and their obvious emotional involvement in this wonderful commemoration and the way in which ANZAC Cove is now acting as a magnet for young Australians coming, not only directly from Australia but those holidaying in Europe. It is an extraordinary experience and I think there is a resurgence of national feeling, a passion for the ANZAC legend and tradition amongst young Australians. Quite remarkable, very moving and absolutely heart warming for older generations of Australians.
MUNRO:
You will be pleased to know that there were record crowds all over Australia this morning. It is your first trip to Gallipoli, what moved you most?
PRIME MINISTER:
I guess the thing that moved me most of all was to stand and contemplate as Laura said just how many men died here to, in those very simple words, keep us free and give us the way of life and the sort of things that we too often take for granted in Australia. The scale of the sacrifice is just quite extraordinary and it does have an incredible impact on one. I have read about it, I thought I knew a lot about it, I’ve talked to a lot of people about it, but nothing quite prepares you for the emotional grip that it exerts on you and I can understand why so many young Australians come and go away with a greater sense of their Australian identity.
MUNRO:
Prime Minister Howard, thanks very much for your patience and Laura Brumby we appreciate your time too.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thanks Mike.


E&amp;OE  ……………………………………………………………………
To Mayor Tiberi, the Mayor of Paris, to Mayor Galy-Dejean, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen and particularly I acknowledge the presence of the Australian Ambassador to France, Mr John Spender.
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people and to acknowledge with gratitude the gesture of the city of Paris in naming this promenade after Australia, and in so doing honouring the very close links that exist between our two nations and our two peoples.
Here on the promenade we have for example a stature of that great French navigator La Perouse, who history records arrived in Sydney, only six days after the British Captain Phillip established the first European settlement in Australia at Botany Bay in 1788.  Next year, 2001 will mark the 200th Anniversary of the departure of another great French navigator Baudin for the unknown southern oceans.
But the links that exists between our two societies have been developed over the last two hundred years, we have fought together in two world wars in defence of democracy and in defence of freedom.  And the links of course go into the modern world.
One of the many things I am doing here in Paris is bringing attention to the economic relationship that already exists between Australia and France and the great potential there is to develop that relationship in an even deeper way in the years ahead.
Those links of course take account of the great respect Australia and Australians have for the contribution of France and French culture to the civility of life not only here in Europe but all around the world.  Australians have long regarded Paris as something of a mecca for all of those who want to better understand what French culture and what the history of this great country has brought to the world.  It is undeniably a beautiful city and the opportunity of again visiting Paris is one that fills me and my wife with great pleasure.  
We share a great deal in common, our two nations and our two societies.  We work together in democracy and in harmony.  We also compete very vigorously on the sporting field, on occasions France winning and on other occasions, most recently Australia winning.  
And in the rain we learn to shorten our speeches.  
Can I say to you Mr Mayor and to all of the lovely people of Paris and the wonderful people of France that Janette and I are delighted to be here again?  We thank you very warmly for the honour that you have done our country in dedicating this wonderful walkway, the Promenade d’Australie.  It is a marvellous contribution to the deep association between our two communities and long may many French men and women and many Australians visiting Paris and visiting France enjoy the promenade and are reminded of the very close and real links that exist between our two societies.  
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...............................
PRIME MINISTER:
On behalf of the Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia and at his request I have great pleasure in conferring awards in the Order of Australia on Docteur Hubert Lelieur and Monsieur Coilliot for the magnificent service that both of them have rendered to the cause of good relations between the people of France and the people of Australia. Their service in keeping alive the bonds between our two nations, in particular caring for the memory of those Australians who died here in France so long ago is well regarded with great affection by the Australian people.
Ladies and gentlemen in conferring this honour on these two gentlemen we do service to the bonds between our two communities and we also on this very sacred piece of French soil remember the sacrifice of so many young Australians in both World War I and World War II in the defence of France and in the defence of freedom.
From a male population of just under two and a half million, between 1914 and 1918 over four hundred Australians volunteered for service in the Great War. More than three hundred thousand of those served on the Western Front and no less than forty five thousand died in France and Flanders.
In remembering the death of so many young Australians we also of course remember that more than a million and a half Frenchmen perished defending their country against the invader. And in remembering the sacrifice of so many young men of all of the nations involved in that terrible conflict we vow as leaders and as citizens of our two societies to do all that we can both now and in the future to ensure that never again will such terrible carnage claim the lives of so many of the young men and women of our communities.
And on a personal note on this occasion I honour the service on the Western Front and here at Villers Bretonneux and surrounding districts of my own Father and Grandfather both of whom served in the first AIF.
May I, on behalf of the Australians here today extend to the Minister for Veterans Affairs in the French Government and to the people of France, to the Mayor of Villers Bretonneux and all of the other French people our thanks for the immense courtesy and friendship that they have extended to us. The bonds between our two communities are very special. We thank the French people for what they have contributed to the world. We honour the memory of all of those Australians and all others who died in the two world wars and we thank God for their contribution to mankind.
[ends]


Subjects: strength of the Australian economy; Aus
E&amp;OE ....................................................................................
  Before I deliver my remarks, I would like to take this
 opportunity as I sometimes do when abroad to formally confer the award,
 of an honorary award in the Order of Australia and I would like to invite
 Gurion Meltzer to come forward to participate in this very small but very
 important ceremony.
  On behalf of the Governor General of the Commonwealth
 of Australia and at his request, it is now my privilege and pleasure to
 present with his insignia, one whom Australia has been very pleased to
 honour. Gurion Meltzer, I appoint you as an honorary officer in the general
 division of the Order of Australia for very long and meritorious service
 to Australian-Israeli relations. Congratulations.
  Dr Meltzer...
  Well can I say, ladies and gentleman, to all of you and
 to all of the very distinguished guests how delighted Janette and I are
 to be amongst you and to have the opportunity of addressing a few remarks
 about not only the strength of the Australian economy and how we see the
 world economically but also the importance of economic and commercial
 relations between our two communities.
  Israel and Australia have a multi-faceted relationship.
 It is a relationship that has a lot of history. It is a relationship that
 is based upon common values. It's a relationship that is constantly
 nourished and supported and renewed by the free flow of people between
 our two societies and I was reminded at the University this morning as
 I moved around and met the people who were there just how many Australians
 there are studying in Israel, just how many Australian business men and
 women spend considerable periods of time in your country and just how
 long and close are the bonds that bring us together.
  But I speak particularly today of the economic environment
 in which both of our communities operate. The world at present is enjoying
 one of the most sustained periods of economic growth of industrialised
 nations that we have seen in 50 or 60 years.
  The strongest economy in the world, the United States,
 is enjoying an unprecedented level of economic growth and prosperity.
 There are welcome signs that the major economies of Europe are recovering.
 There are signs that the weakness evident in the Japanese economy in recent
 years is coming to an end and while we're not going to see a resumption
 of American style growth in Japan, there are signs that the recessionary
 tendencies of the Japanese economy are now behind us.
  The other good news on the world front is that the economies
 worst hit by the Asian downtown in some cases are now beginning to enjoy
 recovery. Our own country is experiencing its strongest period of economic
 growth since the late 1960's and in many respects that economic growth
 now in Australia is more sustainable and more broadly based than what
 it was in the late 1960's because we no longer operate behind such
 high protective walls, our economy is more open, it's more competitive
 and we are beginning to enjoy the benefits of a series of economic reforms
 undertaken by governments of both political persuasions over a number
 of years.
  So the economic settings in which we operate at the present
 time around the world as far as industrialised countries are concerned
 and that of course includes both Australia and Israel are about as propitious
 and encouraging as they have been for decades.
  The common catch cry of the world, and it's true,
 is that we live in a globalised economy and that globalisation takes many
 forms. I was reminded of one of the forms of that globalisation some weeks
 ago when I went on a tour around country areas of Australia, when I visited
 a place called Bourke and, as the Australians in the audience will know
 and many Israelis in the audience will know, there's no expression
 quite as Australian as to say that you've been to the 'back
 of Bourke'. And when I went to the back of Bourke, what did I learn?
 I learnt a great deal about Israeli irrigation techniques. Because one
 of the burgeoning industries back of Bourke now is of course the cotton
 industry and we have seen what used to be a community depending very heavily
 on wool and other basic commodities or traditional commodities, we've
 seen that community now turn its hand to the development of a cotton industry
 and a very prosperous cotton industry.
  And of course it's drawn very heavily on the expertise
 of Israelis so far as irrigation is concerned. Now that's perhaps
 not the most immediate example you think of when you talk about a globalised
 economy. You tend to think of those people who look at screens all day
 and all night and watch the movement of numbers as seamlessly currencies
 change and resources flow across nations in this borderless, seamless
 economic environment in which we operate. But in so many ways now, we
 are all citizens of the one economic world and there is no turning back.
 Any idea that any of us might have that you can go back to some kind of
 comfortable, more cloistered domestic economic environment is totally
 unreal. The nature of the world in which we live now means that all countries
 can no longer do other than simply compete and compete and compete again
 in order to stay in front of or at least equal with their economic rivals.
 It's of no comfort to say to yourself we're doing better than
 we were doing 10 years ago or 20 years ago. That's irrelevant. The
 only thing that really matters now is whether you are doing better as
 against those that seek the same markets as you seek in these early years
 of the 21st Century.
  And that's the reason why the government I lead
 has set about in the four years it's been in government undertaking
 some major economic reforms. There have been some economic reforms carried
 out in Australia in the past which have helped to open up and strengthen
 our economy and I have never been unwilling either at home or abroad to
 give credit to the former government for some of the decisions it took
 particularly the freeing of the exchange rate and the deregulation of
 our financial system.
  And those reforms made possible in part by the co-operation
 that government enjoyed from the then opposition. And other changes have
 added to the momentum for strengthening and change of the Australian economy
 over recent years. And one of the other features that I find interesting
 about the global economic environment in which we now live is the far
 greater convergence between the political attitudes towards running an
 economy across the political spectrum. One goes around the world and talks
 to a Prime Minister or a President who is formerly of the centre right
 or formerly of the centre left and you talk about economic issues and
 economic challenges. The answers you get on many of the questions you
 raise are not all that different and it indicates that the realities of
 the modern world are such that the solutions that commend themselves are
 solutions that commend themselves to people who might in a formal sense
 have different political philosophies.
  But we have set about making our economy more competitive.
 Leon was kind enough to recite some of the changes for which we have been
 responsible. And can I interpolate here by acknowledging one of the achievements
 to which Leon and his colleagues in the Australian Israeli Chamber of
 Commerce in Australia have been responsible and that is that they were
 responsible for organising the largest ever sit down lunch that I have
 addressed in Australia. There were 1400 of you at the Crown Casino in
 Melbourne and then I think you had television hook-ups all around Australia
 and I was reliably informed by Leon that the total number of people viewing
 that lunch was in the order of 3500 and it really does take the prize
 for being the largest sit down lunch that I have ever addressed in my
 time as Prime Minister.
  Leon was kind enough to mention some of the reforms that
 we have undertaken and far and away the most important of those is the
 introduction of a new taxation system on the 1st of July this
 year to which I'll come to in a moment. But I wouldn't want
 you to think that I regard that as in any sense the only major economic
 change. He talked about the importance of industrial relations reform.
  We inherited an industrial relations system when we came
 to government that was too heavily dominated by formal award structures.
 We inherited an industrial relations system where too much of a monopoly
 of bargaining power was given to trade unions and too little room was
 left for direct negotiation between individual employers and employees.
  We have changed that. We have not taken away people's
 right to join or not to join a labour organisation, but we have promoted
 the idea that if people want to make direct bargains with their employers
 they should, without the intervention of a union, they should have the
 right to do so. And one of the reasons why productivity in our country
 has risen and why workers in Australia are better off in real terms than
 they were a few years ago is that the industrial relations system is far
 more conducive to higher productivity.
  We've also committed ourselves to the privatisation
 of those government business enterprises that should no longer be in government
 ownership. We are about half way there with Telstra, our major telecommunications
 provider. We face domestic political opposition but we intend to pursue
 our policy of selling the remaining 50.1 per cent in that telecommunications
 carrier. We see no virtue at all in a government owning 50.1 per cent
 and investing something in the order of $50 billion Australian dollars
 of public money in a telecommunications company, believing that those
 resources could be better invested either through debt retirement or elsewhere
 for the benefit of the Australian community.
  But it is of course in the area of tax reform that most
 publicity about our economic reform program has been generated and the
 changes are mammoth. They touch every section of Australian economic development
 and activity. We will after the 1st of July move from a corporate
 tax rate of 36 cents in the dollar in two stages to 30 cents in the dollar.
 We will virtually halve the capital gains tax. We will abolish provisional
 taxation which is of great benefit, the abolition, of great benefit, to
 retired people. We will sweep away existing indirect taxes and replace
 those indirect taxes with a single rate value added or goods and services
 tax of 10 per cent and that will be accompanied by major reductions in
 personal income tax that will mean that something in the order of 80 per
 cent of Australian tax payers will be on a top marginal rate of no more
 than 30 cents in the dollar.
  Importantly in a federation we will introduce a system
 whereby the total proceeds of the goods and services tax will go to the
 six States of Australia and the two Territories of Australia which will
 enable them to more adequately fund on an ongoing basis those essential
 bread and butter services such as public hospitals, government schools,
 police services and roads, which are the direct responsibility in our
 arrangement of state governments.
  That is important in the Australian political context
 because debate and argument between Federal and State Governments has
 been a long running political and economic source of discontent and debate
 for many years.
  So it does represent a major reform. It will transform
 the taxation environment in which the Australian economy operates. Overall
 we're watching an Australian economy at the present time that continues
 to grow at over 4 per cent a year or thereabouts. There are some signs
 in some areas of some slowing, but overall the projection is for continued
 very strong growth.
  Our budgets for the last two years have been in surplus
 and it remains a commitment of the government to retain the budget surpluses.
 We don't, of course, regard this achievement as being something to
 be complacent about. Economic progress and economic growth is something
 that governments should continue to strive to maintain and to improve.
  Earlier speakers have mentioned the linkages between
 the responsibilities of government and the responsibilities of business
 in providing for a healthy economy. It is not the role of government to
 pick winners or to play favourites in business activity. It is the role
 of the government to provide a benign, if possible, economic climate,
 to set the best set of corporate governance rules they can. To provide
 a well regulated and stable banking system. To provide as competitive
 an economic environment as they can and then leave it to individual companies
 to make their commercial decision. And that of course has been the attitude
 of my government and as I know been the credo of the Australian Israeli
 Chamber of Commerce.
  Israel and Australia have a significant trading and economic
 relationship. It is not, of course, as extensive as our economic relationship
 with countries such as Japan and Korea and the United States. The size
 and disposition of our two economies militates against it being as close
 and as extensive as that. But the opportunities for growth and improvement,
 particularly in areas of information technology, in areas of research
 and development, and in areas which bear upon the intellectual capital
 of the two countries, the opportunities for advancement in that area are
 very extensive.
  We share a lot of things in common. We are both sophisticated
 societies. We are societies that believe very firmly that companies are
 entitled to operate in a clear, open, readily understood environment of
 corporate regulation. And we are societies that believe very strongly
 in the rule of law applying not only in relation to personal conduct,
 but also in relation to business conduct. And the climate in which business
 operates is of no lesser importance now than it was 20 or 30 years ago.
 And one of the lessons that we must learn from the Asian economic downturn
 is that when the view is taken that the need for clear rules of corporate
 governance and a clear separation of the responsibilities of government
 and the responsibilities of the private sector when the view is taken
 that those requirements can be sidestepped or ignored that that is one
 of the reasons why economies fall into decline and get into economic difficulty.
 So one of the great things that our two societies have in common is a
 belief that we should operate in the same kind of general economic and
 regulatory environment.
  The other great asset that Australia and Israel have,
 of course, is the very frequent interchange between our leading business
 identities and personalities. And the series of economic missions that
 have come to Israel, some of them led by Ministers, others led by leading
 businessmen, all of them have made a contribution and in the process I
 believe that the opportunities for an expansion of economic exchanges
 and trade and investment must over a period of time grow very significantly.
  I can assure you that the reputation of this country
 for expertise in information technology, the reputation of this country
 of being a high performer and something of an example to follow in areas
 of research and development that that reputation is widely noted and respected
 within Australia. The sophistication and capacity of Israel and Israelis
 in many areas of technology is also something which is very widely and
 warmly understood.
  Can I finish ladies and gentlemen in saying how important
 I regard the contribution of the various chambers of commerce within our
 society and within Israel. In both cases what the organisations do is
 to bring together in an appropriate way the influence and the role of
 government and the influence and the role of business communities. The
 commitment of the chamber in Australia not only to developing very good
 political and person to person relations between Israel and Australia
 is well known and widely admired. And of course, the constant entreaties
 they make, the constant submissions they put to the government on behalf
 of improving economic relations between our two communities is also of
 very great importance.
  I have been very warmly received in Israel and whenever
 political or business leaders of Israel visit Australia they are also
 very warmly received. And that occurs because there is a very genuine
 warmth between our two societies. It's a warmth which I said at the
 beginning of my speech is rooted in history but it's also rooted
 in some very important values that we share in common and some of the
 contributions of that warmth I know is very much due to the activity of
 the two chambers and that is why I'm delighted to have had this opportunity
 of addressing you. But saying to all the business men and women of Israel
 that I speak as Prime Minister of an economy and a country which is very
 strong, which continues to grow, which has seen its unemployment rate
 come down, which believes in an open economic environment, that strives
 to be more competitive, is willing to undertake major economic change
 and is prepared to take political risks in the process of doing that.
  I think these attitudes and these views have some resonance
 and some receptivity here in Israel and on that basis I believe that not
 only our political and person to person relationship in the years to come
 but also our economic relationship will indeed be very strong.
  Thank you.
  QUESTIONS &amp; ANSWERS
 QUESTION:
 Prime Minister what are your plans for telecommunications
 vis-a-vis distance education in rural areas of Australia?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Well the telecommunications infrastructure in rural Australia
 is what you would in a masterstroke of understatement in Australian politics
 call a big issue. It gets a big run. Sometimes it gets a bigger run than
 it deserves because some of the issues that are talked about are a little
 exaggerated. But let me say that I think Australians living in remote
 areas of our country, and we have quite a few of those, are entitled to
 good communications and they are getting better communications. We have
 invested a lot of the proceeds of the partial sale of Telstra into providing
 better communications and I think that over the next year you're
 going to see quite a significant improvement in the provision of those
 communications.
  One of Australia's most eminent historians coined
 a phrase some years ago which is very evocative to most of us in Australia,
 when he spoke of the tyranny of distance and what has happened, I believe,
 with information technology and the modernisation of communications is
 that in a way that wasn't previously possible we have a means at
 our disposal to demolish or remove the tyranny of distance for many people
 who live in the less populated areas of our country.
  One of the remarkable things about Australia is that
 although it is a big country, and it's well known around the world
 for the bush, for rural and country areas, yet something like 85 per cent
 of the population of Australia lives in major cities which are very light
 in density and so forth than the major cities of Europe. It's one
 of the paradoxes, the contradictions, it's part of the variety of
 the country. Communications in the bush are very important. If I lived
 in the bush I would want very good communications and as Prime Minister
 for people who live in the country areas of Australia, I'm determined
 that they will get it.
 QUESTION:
 How do you see Australia's telecommunications role
 in Asia in the future?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Well I would not see Australia's future role in
 Asia in telecommunications separately from Australia's future economic
 role in Asia generally speaking. The Asian Pacific region is obviously
 the most important region in the world for Australia economically. And
 the fact that I'm in Israel and I've been in Europe and that
 I sought in the time that I've been Prime Minister to get a slightly
 better balance in our relations with the different regions of the world
 in no way alters the fact that I see Asia and the Asian Pacific region
 as being far and away the most important market destination for Australian
 goods and services but also the area where we have so much to offer given
 our particular strengths. We have a lot to offer because of a very well
 educated, sophisticated workforce. There are 800,000 Australian citizens
 who speak Asian languages and that is an enormous asset in our dealing
 with the Asian economic arena. We have seen a fall in economic activity
 in Asia over the last few years but it is rebounding. Of our three best
 customers undeniably the first is Japan. Our second best customer is either
 the United States or Korea and there are other very significant markets.
 So I make the general point that although Europe and America and the Middle
 East are very important to Australia but no Australian Prime Minister
 gainsays the particular and special importance of the Asian Pacific region.
 I think the capacity of our telecommunication companies to effectively
 compete in the Asian Pacific region would of course be enhanced if the
 one owned 50.1 per cent by the government were fully owned by the private
 sector and that's one of many reasons, including debt retirement
 and a better use of that big public investment that I believe that privatisation
 should proceed, but that is a matter for political debate and political
 resolution within Australia.
  But we have a highly sophisticated workforce. I also
 recognise that a number of Asian countries have very highly sophisticated
 and IT literate citizens, particularly countries such as India, but not
 only India but Singapore and Hong Kong and China - all of them -
 and we have an approach to business migration and a general approach to
 investment that I think enables us to take full advantage. So I see us
 having a very active economic future in the region and that very particularly
 includes investment in the area of telecommunications.
 QUESTION:
 (inaudible)?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Look we are, we are generally pragmatic about trade opportunities
 and being pragmatic about trade opportunities we have thus far taken the
 view that the best way to get a better trade deal for Australia is to
 try and make the multi-lateral trade mechanisms and trade forums work
 effectively and that's why we're pushing very, very hard for
 a new world trade round that can particularly provide roughly comparable
 treatment for the things that we export very efficiently, like agriculture,
 compared with the way in which manufactured goods are treated by the trading
 nations of the world. And we were very disappointed at the Seattle meeting,
 we thought that was a very disappointing event indeed and we're pushing
 very strongly.
  So our preference has been rather than having a series
 of free, bilateral, free trade arrangements, our preference for a very
 good reason has been to try and improve the whole multilateral environment
 and we will continue to do that.
  We never rule anything out. You never do. You are utterly
 pragmatic when it comes to these trading arrangements. Most nations are
 and Australia is no exception but to date we've had a preference
 for a multi-lateral approach.
[ends]


E&amp;OE ……………………………………………………………………………
Prime Minister and Mrs Barak and other members of the Israeli Government and delegation, my wife and I are particularly pleased to be here in Israel, it is my third visit to your country, but of course the first as Prime Minister.
Our two nations have a good strong history, we have much in common, we share common values, including a very strong commitment to the cause of peace. And I welcome your remarks Prime Minister about the peace process. We admire the leadership that you have given in that area and the steps that you have taken to bring about a more sustainable understanding between Israel and other countries in the region.
I come as the leader of a nation which has long supported Israel and has long admired the remarkable tenacity of the Israeli people sometimes in very difficult circumstances.
I look forward very much to our discussions and I thank you for the warmth of the welcome that has been extended to me, to my wife and our colleagues.


E&amp;OE …………………………………………………………………………
To Professor Moshe Kaveh, to Professor Newman, Professor Freidlander and to all the other academic company of the Bar Ilan University.  To my many Australian Jewish friends who are here today and particularly I acknowledge the presence of Isi Leibler, of Leon Kemploer, of Jo and Gerder Brender, of Colin Rubinstein, of Graham Smorgan and if there are any others I haven’t seen, I apologise.  
To the Australian Ambassador to Israel, Dr Rigby, to Mr &amp; Mrs Levy, the Ambassador and wife from the State of Israel to Australia and ladies and gentleman.
This morning’s ceremony is both, in my capacity as Prime Minister, important and moving and on a personal basis is also a source of very pride and pleasure.  This is my third visit to Israel.  It is my first as Prime Minister.  I first visited Israel in 1964, long before I entered public life and, as I reflect with amusement on occasions to many of my Jewish friends, on that occasion I stayed at the YMCA in Jerusalem.  I returned 24 years later as Leader of the Opposition and moved across to the road to the King David Hotel.  I have not come back again for the third time as Prime Minister and I do so as the Leader of a nation which has had strong and close ties with the State of Israel since its foundation in 1948.  
Australia was one of the very first countries in the world to recognise Israel and throughout all of the travail of the State of Israel in the years that have gone by since Australia has been a staunch, reliable and consistent supporter and that support and that encouragement has been based upon a number of things.  It has first and foremost been based upon the shared values that Australia and Israel have.  We are both democratic societies.  We are both societies that believe in the rule of law.  We are both societies that preach and practise racial tolerance and equality.  We are societies that believe that disputes should be settled by peaceful resolution.  
The ties between Australia and Israel of course are a broader expression of the ties between the Jewish people of Australia’s history and the rest of the Australian community.  There were Jews amongst the very first of the European settlers more than 200 years ago.  And over that period of time, Jewish people have made a massive contribution to the building of the modern Australia.
I have just come from visiting the Word War I battlefields of Gallipoli and Northern France where so many Australians served and tragically far too many died all those years ago.  It is worth reminding ourselves that amongst the seven Australians who won the Victoria Cross at Lone Pine, one of them was a Jew.  I don’t need to remind an audience such as this that the greatest Field Commander Australia produced during World War I and arguably Australia’s greatest Jewish son, Sir John Monash of course has brought great lustre to the Jewish community of Australia and great lustre to his nation.  
And as you go through the years, you find at every level in business, the professions, in government in culture, in every aspect of Australian life the Jewish community has played a magnificent and a positive role.  
And of course coming here today and accepting this honorary degree is for me something of a very special personal experience given my own links and the genesis of them with the Jewish community in Australia because it was at Sydney University in the middle to late 1950’s that I first formed some enduring friendships with Jewish people and fellow students at the University, friendships which have endured to this day.  And as a very Anglo-Celtic Protestant boy growing up in the suburbs of Sydney that experience was very special.  It exposed me to the breadths and the quality of Jewish life, their strong commitment to family values, the depth of their historical tradition, their understanding of the contribution of communities to the building of a united society and united nation.  
And at an academic level of the many people who struggled to teach me the intricacies of the law at Sydney University, none left a deeper impression on me that the late Professor Julius Stone, a very distinguished English Jew who’d come from Leeds University and who was the Professor of jurisprudence and international law at Sydney University for some 25 years.  
And from those years on, I have been very proud to call many Jewish Australians my close friends.  I served articles of clerkship with a Jewish solicitor in Sydney and had the opportunity and I think one of his other article clerks is here today and he was a pretty good teacher, he didn’t cop any sloppy work and he taught me a great deal and gave me a great deal of understanding and he himself of course was a great Australian having represented Australia at Rugby Union and in fact, his name is Myer Rosenbloom, he is in fact the oldest surviving Wallaby in Australia and his son also represented Australia at rugby union.
But through the years my association with Jewish people has been close and strong and something of which I am immensely proud.  And in my time in public life I have of course continued that association.  
So Mr President, Professor Kaveh today is personally a very rewarding and very happy occasion but it’s also beyond that and more importantly than that it is an opportunity for me to record again the strength of the relationship between Australia and Israel.  It is also an opportunity for me on behalf of the Australian Government to welcome the peace process which is underway in the Middle East and to applaud the leadership being given in that process by the Prime Minister of Israel and all of those who are so strongly committed to the process of building peace.  
It is impossible for anybody to come to the city of Jerusalem without being gripped by the sense of history and the sense of place.  To do as I did last night and visit The Great Mosque, to tread the Via Dolorosa and then to visit the wailing wall is to experience again the richness and the special character and the special place in the life of the international community of the city of Jerusalem.  So much began here, so much remains in Jerusalem and so much has been given to the world from this very special place.
In the words of a psalmist that is so well known, there is a future for the man of peace and there are many men of peace in many parts of the world today and there are many here in the Middle East who are working to build a fair and just outcome and I salute the contribution that is being made by so many in academic life here in Israel and so many within the Jewish community around the world not least in my own country Australia.
But of all the things, Mr President, that bind Australia and Israel together, the most important of all, as I said a few moments ago, are the beliefs and the values that we have in common.  Our belief that the worth of individual men and women is always important, that each individual in society has a right to strive and achieve what the talents they might have would give to them, that there is no hierarchy when it comes to the right of people to practise their religion, to observe the tradition and the culture of their race or their community.  
No community in the world in recorded human history has suffered as much from intolerance and prejudice and persecution as have the Jewish people and Israel stands as a fine example of the generous response of the Jewish people notwithstanding that dreadful history and the contribution that Israel is making through the strength and the openness of its own society.  And the tolerance it extends to different beliefs and different values is a fine demonstration to the rest of the world.
And I am very proud to say that Australia is a country that not only preaches, but also practises to the full, racial understanding and racial tolerance.  Religious tolerance in Australia is a given.  We openly promote and practise it.  We have for long observed a non-discriminatory immigration policy.  We, as a society, of course are not without our historical blemishes and our own treatment of our indigenous population years ago of course draws quite properly critical comment.  But the modern Australia is a society built of the people of 140 different countries in the world and I can think of no finer experiment, if I can use that expression, in harmony, understanding and tolerance in terms of bring different races, beliefs and religions together than you can find in the Australian nation.
So for all of these reasons Professor, may I say to you and to your University that you do me personally, you do my country and in a broader sense, the entire Australian community a great honour and a great courtesy in having conferred this degree on me.  I am delighted to note to mark this occasion you are establishing an Israeli Australia Centre within the Bagan Sedat Strategic Centre at the University and how appropriate it is that it should be within the embrace of a centre named after those two great leaders who were willing to risk and sacrifice in terms of their own domestic political situation so much to reach out to each other and to bridge some of the divides that existed in the Middle East to build a more peaceful future.
Can I say finally that the personal affection I have for the State of Israel, the personal regard I have for the Jewish people of the world will never be diminished.  It is something I hold dearly, it is something I value as part of my being and as part of what I have endeavoured to do in my life and this degree and this ceremony today means a great deal to me and I thank you very warmly.
[ends]


Subjects: Federal Government roads funding update
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER: 
Good evening.  Few issues are more important to people in rural and regional Australia than the need for decent country roads.  When the Coalition first took office we found that Labor was spending less on federal road funding than when they started thirteen years earlier.  The Black Spots Program to make our roads safer had been terminated and many communities beyond the national highways were simply left off the funding map.  
That’s why we set about changing things for the better and now of the Commonwealth’s road funding, which it controls directly, 90% is spent outside the capital cities.  We’ve provided money for the Pacific Highway improvement between Newcastle and Brisbane so that by 2005 the road will be freeway standard for much of its length.  
I can report to you tonight that work has just begun on replacing the deadliest stretch on the entire Pacific Highway with a four lane freeway between Tweed Heads and Brunswick Heads.  At a cost of almost $350 million this is the largest roads project in rural Australia and delivers on our commitment to coastal road users.  
To support other country areas we are funding roads of national importance such as the Great Western Highway, the Kidman Way, an upgraded road for the Port of Gladstone, the Geelong Road and the Pakenham Bypass.  We’ve also reinstated the Black Spots Program which could reduce road fatalities by about four hundred over a decade.  When you add this to a tangible commitment to building much needed bridges you will see that we are delivering on our promises to build the roads that Labor refused to fund.
[ends]


Subjects:  East Timor; Indonesia; Reserve Bank
E&amp;OE  ……………………………………………………………………………………
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister did you discuss President Wahid’s suggestion that there should be tripartite talks between you, Xanana Gusmao and Wahid?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, that was one of the things we talked about.  Australia’s attitude towards that suggestion is positive.  We are quite agreeable to, in principle, to there being a tripartite meeting between the Indonesian President, myself and Mr Gusmao.  However, such a meeting should follow and be separate from a bi-lateral meeting between the Indonesian President and myself.  I’ve indicated to Mr Gusmao and I’ll be indicating to the Indonesian President, I’ll be writing to him in the next [pause] I’ll be writing to the Indonesian President in the next few days indicating that I think the order of things should be first a bi-lateral meeting between the President and myself.
JOURNALIST:
Where will that be?
PRIME MINISTER:
And then, well the President’s proposed to come to Australia and I understand that is still his intention and I think it will be very good.  It will be the first time we have had a visit from an Indonesian President for twenty five years.
JOURNALIST:
When will that be?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it’s a matter for the two countries to sort out the exact date.  I think a date some time in July is one that he has suggested, but it’s a question of mutually fixing a time.  I’m not going to get tied down to a particular date now.  But that is the proposal that he made and I think it is a good proposal.  As to the meeting between the three of us, I think that is a good idea too.  But it has got to follow the other one because clearly there is a bi-lateral relationship that is separate from the relationship that each of us has to the emerging nation of East Timor.
JOURNALIST:
Can you tell us what specifically was discussed today regarding the rebuilding of East Timor?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Mr Gusmao may want to add to what I’m about to say.  We talked about progress, we talked about the meeting taking place in June of the donor countries.  I reiterated Australia’s continuing support for the reconstruction effort in East Timor.  We talked about the security situation, we talked about relations between the Territory and Indonesia.  We also talked about the building of a judicial structure, all of the things that face an emerging country.  I am filled with admiration for the efforts that are being made by Mr Gusmao and his colleagues to build a new nation out of a very difficult situation.  Few territories in the world have faced such a daunting task as he and his colleagues are facing and they deserve the world’s admiration and support.  Support is very important.  We emphasise that very strongly that countries other than Australia have responsibilities although we accept a particular role in East Timor.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Gusmao are you happy with the talks with the Prime Minister today?
MR GUSMAO:
Of course.  First of all I really want to publicly to thank the Prime Minister, his government and the whole Australian people for continuing to help us, support us.  Actually we need more people support in this very difficult situation out there.  We are very, very happy with this meeting because as the Prime Minister has said the commitment to help us and support us is there [inaudible].
JOURNALIST:
Mr Gusmao, was there any further re-negotiation, talk about the re-negotiation of the Timor Gap oil treaty today?
MR GUSMAO:
I don’t think that I am the right person to talk about this because there are teams looking at this issue and I believe that the contacts between UNTAET and the Australian Government and other parties involved in this issue are continuing.
JOURNALIST:
When is it likely to see a resolution of that issue?
MR GUSMAO:
Unfortunately I cannot tell you.
JOURNALIST:
If there was to be a tripartite meeting where would you like it to be held?
MR GUSMAO:
Of course if I can be honest Dili would be the best place [inaudible] but President Wahid suggested Darwin.
PRIME MINISTER:
I think that is something we’ll just work out between us.  The important thing is that we are all agreeable in principle.  But it ought to follow and be separate from the meeting between Dr Wahid and myself.
JOURNALIST:
If President Wahid does come how soon would you expect the tripartite meeting ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Ask me that after the other one has been set up.  It’s too early to say.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, can I ask you about the Reserve Bank’s comments on the decline of the dollar allegedly being caused by political comment, including your own.  Are you responsible for that.
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh no, it’s nonsense.
JOURNALIST:
Why is that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s just plainly nonsense.
JOURNALIST:
Are you surprised the Reserve Bank made reference to it ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think a bit too much is being read into what was in the bank’s report, but the comments I made back in January were entirely appropriate and proper.  I was criticising the comments of some economic commentators and the proposition that the Prime Minister can’t do that would be a bit ludicrous wouldn’t it?  And in any event the bank and particularly the governor has had plenty of opportunity between now and then to express a concern to me privately.  He has had plenty of opportunity and not done so.  So, I dismiss the interpretation put on it by the newspaper this morning.
JOURNALIST:
Why do you think they made those comments ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Who?
JOURNALIST:
The RBA.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you better go and ask them that.  I mean, I don’t write their reports.  I can only speak for myself and the remarks I made in January were entirely appropriate and proper and as I say the bank and the Governor have had ample opportunity to express directly to me any, and privately, any personal concern they have and they haven’t done so.  So I can only draw a reasonable conclusion from that.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] quite possible that those comments could have affected the dollar ?
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Gusmao how would you describe the situation in East Timor?
MR GUSMAO:
I think things are improving in some fields.  But there are still many, many things to do.  Mostly in the reconstruction field and other, although we are expecting [inaudible] we are optimistic that after the June meeting with donor countries we can start something concrete.
JOURNALIST:
Were you surprised that President Wahid called this tripartite meeting?
MR GUSMAO:
Not at all.  The meeting is more to do, to discuss problems in East Timor and it is not the original meeting but we were fairly happy because it could help very much the change in the relationship between East Timor and Indonesia and the change after things happened in West Timor [inaudible] for us it is of more benefit to us and that is why we immediately found that it was very interesting.
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I just add on that, that back in December when Mr Gusmao came to Canberra after the INTERFET force had gone into East Timor, we encouraged him, difficult though it was in the wake of the events that had transpired, to try and build a positive relationship with Indonesia and East Timor’s future is clearly tied up in her relations with both Indonesia and Australia.  And it is very much part of that process that the idea of a tripartite meeting being particularly concerned about East Timor and the interface between the three countries, two nations and the emerging nation, should take place.
JOURNALIST:
Relations have been strained Prime Minister do you think they are getting back on track?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I’m a realist, John, about the relationship.  You can’t go through what Australia and Indonesia went through without there being a strain.  I think people who pretend that you can do what we did in defence of the people of East Timor and then the next day expect the relationship with Indonesia to be the same, I think it is unrealistic.  I know some people, some people will imagine that you can do that.  But I’m more of a realist.  But, over time, the relationship will strengthen.  It won’t be the same as it was before, but it will still be quite strong. And that’s our view.  And I know that’s Dr Wahid’s view.  I follow very carefully what he says and also what he does and I admire very much the way he has brought more openness and democracy and transparency into Indonesian politics, into Indonesian society, and I think that is the basis for a very strong relationship between Australia and Indonesia well into the future.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Gusmao, what did you think [inaudible]
MR GUSMAO:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
We’re reaching the sort of the tail end stage of the news conference, in fact, I think that’s about it.
[ends]


Subjects: 2000-2001 Budget; assets sales; early elections; inflation rate; market commentators; Labor’s debt; bracket creep; East Timor levy; pensions; GST; Avonwood Homes
MITCHELL:
Prime Minister Mr Howard, good morning.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL:
Is this Peter Costello’s last budget?
PRIME MINISTER:
I wouldn’t expect so. I think we will still be in Government in twelve months time and he will be bringing down the next budget and I have every confidence in him as Treasurer.
MITCHELL:
I keep hearing that maybe he has had enough?
PRIME MINISTER:
Peter is a very committed energetic Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the Party and I think he has got years and years of political service in him.
MITCHELL:
Does that also mean we won’t have an election in the next twelve months?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, the normal time to have an election would be at the end of next year and unless there is a compelling reason, the Australian public doesn’t like the Government going earlier than their due time. They think there’s some suspicious, something fishy about governments that go early for no good reason and they mark them down and my experience is that if you go early without good reason, you often pay a price. Bob Hawke found that in 1984 I think Nick Greiner found it in NSW in 1991 and I think others have done the same thing.
MITCHELL:
How are you going to win it, whenever it is, how are you going to win on the basis on the back of an inflation rate of seven per cent?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it won’t be an inflation rate of …
MITCHELL:
Oh well [inaudible] come out…
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no exactly. And it’s a one off spike and it won’t be. I am not conceding its going to be seven per cent. Look you have to….
MITCHELL:
That’s the estimate isn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yeah but…
MITCHELL:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, but that’s not seven….yeah well it’s not.
MITCHELL:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well hang on…well it’s not. Look Neil, I don’t disguise the fact that there will be a one off increase in the consumer price index as a result of the introduction of the GST. That is absolutely unavoidable. It’s been factored in, it’s understood. The important thing is whether it is on going. If you just have a spike and then it falls away to a more normal, ongoing level, no problem. No problem at all. If you don’t want that, then you don’t have a GST and we made up our mind a long time ago that this is a good time to have a GST. In fact the best time to have a GST introduced is at a time when on going inflation is quite low and that is the situation at the moment.
MITCHELL:
Okay, I think from watching the Treasurer and reading last night, he is saying we are in pretty good shape isn’t he?
PRIME MINISTER:
He is and we are.
MITCHELL:
Ok, so is the GST not threatening that and why do we need the GST if we are in good shape?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, because it’s one of those long term reforms that Governments have to have the courage to introduce. Look you only, you only continue to be in good shape if you continue to do new things to strengthen you even further for the future. The worst thing that a Government can do is to have a few years of good government, get everything in order and then say, nothing more to do, rest on our laurels, won’t do any more reform, you quickly lose it. We live in a very competitive world. This is our fifth budget and in those five budgets, we will have repaid $50 billion from the $80 billion of debt run up by Mr Beazley in his last five years.
MITCHELL:
So why is the market reaction not good?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well..
MITCHELL:
The dollar went down….
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am not going to talk about the level of the dollar.
MITCHELL:
Well I won’t ask about the level. What about the reaction, the reaction has been very critical…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the reaction has been critical by some financial commentators..
MITCHELL:
And by the markets, …[inaudible]…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am not going to get in to the dollar.
MITCHELL:
You must be disappointed about it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am not going to talk about the level of the currency but I am going to talk about the criticism that has been made by some financial commentators about the treatment of the proceeds of the spectrum auction. And can I say to those people that what we are doing on this occasion with these proceeds is exactly what Treasurers have done with that kind of transaction for the last fifty or sixty years.
MITCHELL:
Well they are saying its money out of thin air…[inaudible].. it’s a clever play on words…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s not.
MITCHELL:
Well it is. I mean you were very lucky weren’t you.
PRIME MINISTER:
But it’s a question of whether it’s there or it’s not. I mean, do they really….
MITCHELL:
Of course it’s a question of how it’s accounted. I thought that you personally objected to asset sales being put in to revenue?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yes we do.
MITCHELL:
Well why do this?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well this is, this is the sale of a non-financial asset. Hang on, Neil please. There are rules laid down by the Bureau of Statistics and the IMF for the treatment of these things and what we are doing with this is the same as how we treat the rent on a building owned by the Government. And if you get rent from a building, it goes into your bottom line. If you auction a spectrum, you put the proceeds of that in to your bottom line. That is not our decision. That was the advice that we were given by the Bureau of Statistics. We are following correct accounting procedures and accounting procedures that other western governments have followed. What I objected to and still object to is when Labor was in Government, they put the proceeds of the sale of Telstra (sic) into their bottom line. We don’t do that. If we had done that, we would have been, we would be have been even in a stronger position. It would have been argued that we are in a stronger position than we are now.
MITCHELL:
But morally what’s the difference of selling off a thin air asset, and I understand that you are following these procedures, but if you are selling off a thin air asset which gives you a surplus that you otherwise wouldn’t have had.
PRIME MINISTER:
But the moral thing Neil is whether you are going to get the money or not. What’s immoral is to pretend to the public that you are going to get something that you know you won’t.
MITCHELL:
You don’t know how much you are going to get do you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we do know using very conservative estimates that we will get at least what has been put in the budget and you know that a similar auction in Britain has realised tens and tens of billions of dollars. I don’t think anybody..
MITCHELL:
I accept you might may get more, you may get less..
PRIME MINISTER:
All I can tell you is that conservative estimates of the Treasury is that we will get at least what we have put in the budget. There is nothing immoral about housing money that you will actually receive. It would be immoral of us not to count it. I mean what are you arguing? That instead of counting this, we should tax people?
MITCHELL:
I am arguing that there’s a bit of smoke and mirrors….I put to you that the market obviously agree with that assessment…you say you won’t talk about it. The markets have made a judgment and it’s….
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no I’m… I’m sorry… I am saying Neil, I am saying I am not going to talk about the level of the dollar and you know there is a difference.
MITCHELL:
Well tell me about the markets. The markets have made a very tough assessment of this Budget…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am addressing the criticism of the inclusion of the proceeds of the spectrum. That is what I am addressing. And if people saying to me … what are they saying? Are they saying we should have just ignored it? And therefore to get a surplus we have to impose tax of $2.8 billion or cut spending by $2.8 billion? Are they seriously saying that this money should not have been included? That would be an unprecedentedly unreasonable thing for any government to do. Look, I mean I tell you what, they don’t like the fact that there is nothing else to criticise in this budget, so some of the commentators have seized on this.
MITCHELL:
Okay, can’t we take the commentators out of it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you raised their views.
MITCHELL:
Well, I did true. It’s not just commentators though. There is a market judgement.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah but I am, but when I talk about commentators I include the markets because Neil we now have a situation where every time there is an economic statistic, you flash to a dealing room and you get people whose experience with economic matters is pretty limited to financial markets, giving commentary on the economic outlook and they are the people I am talking about and they influence market reaction.
MITCHELL:
Is it not a reality - now I know you don’t like to talk about the dollar - and you won’t want to talk about interest rates either, but is it not a reality that is what happened with the dollar is going to put additional pressure on interest rates and our interest rate problem is going to be even more significant toward the end of the year?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you are right in saying I am not going to talk about the level of the dollar and I am not to make predictions about where interest rates are going but I can tell you that interest rates now, despite the recent increases, are much lower than they were four years ago. And I can also tell you that if you run a budget surplus, if you pay off $50 billion of $80 billion dollars of debt that you inherited from Mr Beazley, you have a far better chance of creating the circumstances where interest rates will stay lower than they might otherwise be.
MITCHELL:
Is this the real budget? Or will we have mini budget?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, we don’t have any plans for a mini budget. We have a tax reform package coming in on the first of July which is still the biggest game in town, economically and politically. And I think it is going to be hugely beneficial reform and I think in a few months time, people are going to look back and say what was all the fuss about. Eighty per cent of Australians will be on a top marginal rate of no more than thirty cents in the dollar. $12 billion dollars of personal tax cuts. Cheaper fuel, increased family benefits. All of these things are to come in what - 55 days.
MITCHELL:
Well I have was having a look at some of the tax figures as reported today. An example, $35 000 a year, $20 a week – tax cuts. $40,000 dollars a year, $27 a week. How does that compensate for six-and-half to seven per cent inflation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Neil, hang on Neil, you’ve seen many tables that show the position net after the GST and that is, you can’t count the inflation and the GST. The GST is temporarily the inflation spike. One and the same thing. You can’t count it twice. Fair go.
MITCHELL:
Fair enough, fair enough. All right. Well how does $20 a week on $35,000 compensate for six-and-a-half to seven per cent increase in prices?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it depends upon the size of the family. All of those situations are situations where people are better off even after the GST.
MITCHELL:
Some duel income families get three dollars a week.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, but some of those duel income families’ tax position is better than the tax position of single income families. I mean we have given some additional help to single income families because their tax positions, because they don’t have two tax thresholds. I mean you get a couple that are earning together $50,000 a year, compared with a single person, single income earning $50,000 a year, the couple are better off because they have two tax-free thresholds.
MITCHELL:
Should you look, will you look at giving the pensioners more than four per cent?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we believe that is more than, more than the compensation needed for the GST. I mean look…
MITCHELL:
Four and a half per cent prediction.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well no, we’re paying…
MITCHELL:
Isn’t it a four and a half per cent prediction inflation rate over the GST alone?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no, no. The GST component of future inflation is estimated to be no more than 2.75 per cent.
MITCHELL:
I thought I read four and a half.
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
MITCHELL:
Ok, well does the four per cent compensate for the six and half to seven per cent inflation rate?
PRIME MINISTER:
But they’re getting, they’re getting the four per cent up front and then they will always be two per cent ahead of inflation thereafter. So they will always be ahead.
MITCHELL:
Ok, so they sort of pick up in the next year.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, they will always be ahead, yes.
MITCHELL:
Yeah, okay. Is the inflation dragon after this spike as you call it, is the inflation dragon still as dead as Peter Costello said it was?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well all of our indications are that it will be that in an ongoing sense inflation will be around the X, the GST component will be around two-and-a-half to two-and-three -quarter per cent. And that is very low. I believe inflation is under control. I believe that there will be a spike and I don’t disguise that and you will have a high CPI for the September quarter of this year and people should be ready for that and it’s entirely expected. It won’t be a bolt out of the blue or a shock to the system. Everybody will know it’s coming, but thereafter that it will decline and in a years time, it will be completely out of the system.
MITCHELL:
They have also got to expect to pay $300 million I think is the estimate of – early estimates were $500 - but now it’s three hundred million a year in petrol and tobacco excise. They have got to pay that too.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, there are automatic indexation arrangements and that has all been built in to the package.
MITCHELL:
What about bracket creep. I mean there is an argument that $3 billion dollars of the tax cuts have gone already in bracket creep.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well bracket creep, of course, when you have a top rate of thirty cents in the dollar for eighty per cent of tax payers, bracket creep is a lot less evident than it is under the present scales. There are fewer steps…
MITCHELL:
But do you accept there is still three billion dollars gone already before they are even introduced.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t accept is gone because you only have bracket creep if people go in to higher income brackets. So they are earning more money.
MITCHELL:
But the $12 billion tax cuts become $9 billion because people go in to higher areas and have to pay more tax.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t… Neil, well look you can, you could abolish income tax altogether and everybody would be happy for a few days.
MITCHELL:
But it would be fairer to index it…
PRIME MINISTER:
I think it’s fairer, I think its actually fairer to have fewer steps in the rate scale and to have a top marginal rate of no more than thirty cents in the dollar for the overwhelming majority of taxpayers. I mean many of the people who would be in the top rate of thirty cents in the dollar are now on a top rate of forty-three cents in the dollar and that represents and you’re not talking here about wealthy people, you’re talking about people who earn $50,000 or less, they’re not wealthy - they’re middle Australia - and those people are going to be massively advantaged by these new tax sales.
MITCHELL:
$52 a week I read as an estimate is that right?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it depends. It depends entirely on your income rate. But many of those people will be that much better off, yes.
MITCHELL:
We’ll take a call. Helen, go ahead please.
CALLER:
I’d just like to say we have just joined the health fund. I’ve been in the health fund for quite a while now and what I wanted to know is how come being in the health fund and you have to go to a private patient …. I had to have a x-ray the other week and it’s cost me $95 out of pocket.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, that’s the gap and we are negotiating with the health funds arrangements whereby aggressively those gaps are eliminated. You do have a legitimate cause for complaint. Of course it would have cost you a lot more, you would have had a different kind of service if you hadn’t been in a health fund.
MITCHELL:
Is there a bit of a Kennett factor in this Budget in two ways. One, looking after the bush because the bush punished Jeff Kennett, and second, don’t leave a surplus for whoever follows you, spend it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there’s been no consciously driven behaviour in that… against that background but I’m quite proud of the fact that this budget does address the biggest single area of disadvantage suffered by country Australians and that is the relatively poorer quality of their health services. And I made up my mind months ago that the area that we really had to address in the bush first and foremost is the inadequacy of health services because it’s so basic and everybody’s entitled to it. I mean, all the things we say about equality of opportunity in this country have got to mean that just because you live in a remote area, you shouldn’t be denied access to affordable health services and I wanted to deliver improvement in a big way and I’m very proud that this budget has done that. It’s done it in a very big way and targeting something that country people have complained about to me and to others for a long time. I heard it earlier this year when I went around, I heard it when I’ve visited rural areas of Victoria and rural areas of all parts of the country. So yes we are unashamedly addressing an area of need in the bush and I’m very proud that it’s been described in those terms by some of the papers.
MITCHELL:
Another area which affects the rural areas to a course is road funding. Now the figures as I look at them, Victoria’s paying around about 25% of road tax and getting back 15% of the funding.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, look the figures vary because the needs vary a bit across the country. The roads are a little better in some parts of Australia than others. Victoria, because of the size of the State and the investment that was made in earlier years has not quite as great a need in some areas as other parts of Australia, in other areas it does. Road funding overwhelmingly of course is the responsibility of States and local Governments and even more so under the GST because they’ll have a lot more money.
MITCHELL:
We’ll take another call. Ron go ahead please.
CALLER:
Now I can’t understand the statement you made before that when you get a tax cut it puts you into a higher tax bracket. You get a gross amount, let’s say you get fifty grand and you’re taxed ten thousand dollars, you’ve got forty to play with, if you’re taxed five grand, you’ve got forty five to play with.
MITCHELL:
No the tax cuts doesn’t put you in the higher tax bracket . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
No I didn’t say that. What I said is a higher tax, if your income goes up you run the risk of going into a higher tax bracket, that’s called bracket creep but what I said in relation to bracket creep was that we have reduced the number of steps in the rates scale and we’ve got a stock marginal rate of 30 cents in the dollar for everybody up to fifty grand a year and a lot of those people are now on 43 cents in the dollar, they will be after the first of July on 30 cents in the dollar, that was the point.
MITCHELL:
Dennis, go ahead please.
CALLER:
Mr Howard. First I’m a big fan of yours but this single income with one child, you know, what you’re saying that they’ll earn, I’m on a small wage.
PRIME MINISTER:
What’s your income?
CALLER:
Say it’s $44. But I’ve got seven children. Where does that help out. I mean I’ve got to do two jobs and recently had a stroke and I had to get over that and I’ve got to go back to work to support my family.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it will help. I think – seven children, you deserve a lot of praise for the responsibility you carry, but you will get increased family benefits as well as of course the lower level of tax. I mean I would need to sit down and get all of your financial circumstances to precisely work it out but there are, not only are there tax cuts to somebody in your position but there are also increases in family benefits. So I think when you add it all up your position will be a lot better. Whether it’s enough, look I - with seven children, that is a very heavy responsibility and I’m sorry to hear about your illness and I admire you very much for what you’re doing and I’d need to have a few more details before I could give you an exact figure.
MITCHELL:
Dennis we will have the Tax Department here tomorrow if you want to go through some of those things with them. Mr Howard I suppose it’s not sort of the sexiest budget in history is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I guess it’s in the long run to be judged on the contribution it makes to the country. When you have a bit of speculation before a budget comes out and some of that speculation turns out to be accurate, I guess there’s always a bit of a let down but what really matters is the contribution it makes to the economy. As I say in five years Mr Beazley, you add up $80 billion in debt and we will have repayed fifty of that eighty billion at the completion of this budget. Now that may not be sexy but I’ll tell you what it’s solid and it does a lot for the long term credit worthiness of Australia.
MITCHELL:
What do you think of the reaction to it?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m not fazed by the reaction of some financial commentators. I think the public will see it as an honest budget, they’ll see it as a budget that sensibly does not proceed with the East Timor levy. If we’d have kept that levy on, we wouldn’t have been attacked this morning by the Labor Party and the commentators about the spectrum sale, they’d have been saying hang on, they had all the money in the world and they still kept the Timor levy, all they’re interested in is increasing tax.
MITCHELL:
Was that a deliberate leak by the way?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. Absolutely not.
MITCHELL:
You must be very cross about that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am and I would have preferred that not to have been the subject of speculation. There would have therefore been an element of surprise and that might have added the sex appeal which you are speaking of! You know sex appeal is often tied up with surprise, so let’s understand that. But in the end whether it’s the sex appeal or whatever, what really matter is whether it makes a solid contribution to the economic strength of the country and I believe it will, as I believe tax reform will.
MITCHELL:
Presumably there were a few official leaks in there though because we got most of it before budget?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well no. A lot of people in the concluding days before a budget is delivered, a lot of people in the system have to have access to information but we did not set out to leak any of that information but it’s always difficult in some of the areas to keep all of the details under wraps. But of course I was disappointed about the East Timor levy being the subject of speculation because it did take away that element of surprise, but in the long run what matters is the decision, rather than when people though it might be delivered.
MITCHELL:
Can I just ask you quickly. I suppose it’s a related matter but it came up yesterday several times in the program and in fact the Premier, Mr Bracks is going to write to you about it. Avonwood Homes as you would probably be aware has hit the wall here in Victoria leaving a lot of people in the position with, they won’t get their houses which they should of got until after the GST is introduced. Now can they be exempted from the GST?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I don’t think they can but I mean. Can I just say, with great respect, whenever there is a problem the State Premier always writes to the Prime Minister and says you fix it . . .
MITCHELL:
But it is your GST.
PRIME MINISTER:
But that didn’t cause the company to go broke, it hasn’t been introduced yet.
MITCHELL:
But these unfortunate people . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah I know . . .
MITCHELL:
. . . that otherwise wouldn’t be paying a GST have suddenly got to pay it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Just hang on. I mean you’ve got a situation where a building company has gone into financial difficulty in Victoria and immediately the Victorian Premier is trying to shift the responsibility onto us. I mean why has the company gone broke, has it got anything to do with the laws of Victoria, has it got anything to do with the change in industrial relations climate since Mr Bracks became the Premier? I mean I don’t know, maybe it has, maybe it hasn’t. I mean Mr Bracks will write to me, State Premiers always do when they want to shift blame. When anything good happens well it’s all due to their brilliant economic and political management. Now, of course I will have a look at it and I’m very sympathetic to the people who have been left in a financial predicament. Now, but I can’t automatically grant exemptions to the GST. In any event, it’s Mr Bracks’ GST after the first of July, it’s his money, none of it comes to us. So what Mr Bracks is really saying is that the Victorian Treasury... is he saying the Victorian Treasury will . . .
MITCHELL:
People are going to have to pay the GST that they wouldn’t have had to and some of them as a result can’t afford their houses.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Neil, I will like anything that is put to me by Premiers, will look at it, but as an automatic assumption that when something goes wrong as far as State Premiers are concerned, it’s got to be dealt with by the Federal Government. Now I will have a look at it.
But can I just correct one thing. I did say earlier that when Labor was in Government, it put the proceeds of the sale of Telstra into the bottom line. What I meant was the proceeds of the sale of the Commonwealth Bank, they didn’t sell Telstra but they did sell the Commonwealth Bank.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard thank you for your time.
[ends]


E&amp;OE............................
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Unis, to Charles Chambers the Chairman of the Board of Management of Mission Australia, to Patrick MacClure, Vic Smith the Mayor of South Sydney, to Susie and Judith, ladies and gentlemen. It's an unusual but very special privilege for me to be here this morning in this very well known and special part of the wonderful, cosmopolitan city of Sydney in which I grew up and loved so very much and so many of us gathered here today know and love for all its great variety and diversity and colour.
So it's a great delight to take a few moments out from the normal ebb and flow of national political life and come here this morning and be associated with the official opening of a facility which has been produced by something that in the time I've been Prime Minister I've greatly encouraged and hoped would produce many fine role models, and that is the notion of a social coalition involving a partnership between the business community and the great welfare organisations of our nation.
And that is exactly what Lou's Place is. It's been made possible because you've had two sections of society each with their own expertise recognising that acting alone they can't produce something but acting together they can produce something quite remarkable. And it does all of us who have been fortunate, who have had relatively happy and stable and comfortable lives, periodically to be confronted with the reality that the ideal is so frequently denied to many in our community.
And the value of Lou's Place has been so eloquently demonstrated in that beautiful poem is that it does offer hope to those in the community who've been less fortunate than others. And I can't think of any organisation that does more to live out that ideal of offering people a hope and alternative than Mission Australia. It's one of our nation's great welfare organisations, it is an organisation that has carried practical Christianity and practical care and concern to people into the streets and the suburbs and the homes and the clubs and the pubs of our country for decades. And it's an organisation that has come together with some very public-spirited men and women who've been successful in corporate life that are willing to put something back into the community. And I want to congratulate Elsa O'Reilly, I want to congratulate all of her colleagues, Susie and all the others who've worked so very hard and I want to thank them on behalf of the community for what they've done.
This does provide a very practical and sustaining source of hope and encouragement for women and children in our community who deserve some understanding and assistance and deserve the kind of inspiration and encouragement that has produced the change in life and the change in attitude and the new hope and the new beginning of which that poem spoke so beautifully. And the fact that so many people in our community who've done well, they've done well in business, done well in the leading professions, done well in other aspects of commercial life have been willing to come here to engage the partnership of an organisation like Mission Australia and put together this wonderful facility is to me, Prime Minister a source of hope and a vindication of the belief that there is something very pure and decent in the soul of our country. Because while ever you have people that are willing to that then the country has a lot of hope and a lot of optimism.
And a society and a nation is made up of far more than economic statistics, far more than gross domestic products and rates of inflation and all of that, that we've talked about so much and read so much about, it's very importantly, more importantly made up of millions of human lives. Many of them are happy and fulfilled, many of them unfortunately are sad and tragic and the extent that any of us can do something in our daily lives to provide more happiness for those that are sad and tragic then we're all fulfilled and we all achieve something in the name of humanity.
And when I talk about the social coalition I talk about the Government's role in providing a social security safety net, I recognise the enormous contribution made by organisations like Mission Australia, I think of the philanthropy of thousands upon thousands of Australians, I think of the contributions of many men and women in business and my mantra is I don't ask that business give more I simply ask that more businesses give. Because there are many businesses within our community who already give generously and I hope their example is followed by many more who now don't give so generously.
I want to thank the Mayor for the very strong support that I know he has given to this facility, he's very proud of the diverse character of South Sydney and it is something of a specialty as an area, I know many parts of it very well. As a long time resident of Sydney I know south Sydney very well as one does know so many of the areas in our wonderful city. But your contribution and your help this is an occasion where everybody in the community has come together but most importantly of all is does operate a facility for women and their children, in the main disadvantaged people, women who've been either abused or in other ways unfairly treated or exploited and it offers them a supportive environment, an opportunity to find a new life and to build a new beginning which is their right. And I congratulate very generously and very warmly all of those people who've played such a major role in supporting Lou's Place, it is dedicated in memory of a wonderful people and I congratulate the partnership which has made it possible involving that organisation, Mission Australia, and I have great pleasure in declaring Lou's Place officially opened.
[ends]


Subjects: Queensland Liberal Party; tax reform; national gun laws; East Timor and Indonesia; education
E&amp;OE.................................
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much David, Con, to all my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It's always good to be back in Queensland. It's always particularly good to be in Brisbane. The best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia of course always is the opportunity to travel around the country and meet the enormous variety of people who make up our remarkable society. And over the next few days I'll have an opportunity of savouring again a bit more of Queensland. I've got tonight here in Brisbane and tomorrow I go to Townsville to open that great zinc establishment which represents the largest investment by the Republic of Korea, for a company of the Republic of Korea, in Australia at Townsville. I then will attend the East Timor parade in Townsville which promises to be one of the greatest events that Townsville has had for many years. Then I'll go on to Cairns and do a few things there and then at about midday on Thursday just for a bit of a diversion I'll fly off to Korea for the weekend because Korea is a very important customer to Australia and there's a certain symbolism in the fact that I will be opening tomorrow the largest investment by a country in this country and that particular country Korea is normally Australia's second best customer.
But tonight I want to address a few remarks a little bit around the theme that David developed and that is doing things with the responsibility that you have of high political office. I've now been in politics, in parliamentary politics since May of 1974 and that is. it'll be twenty six years on the 18th of May since I was first elected. When I was first elected Gough Whitlam was halfway through his three years of being Prime Minister. A lot of people in this room hadn't been born when I was first elected and in fact my three children hadn't been born when I was first elected although one was very close to being born when I was first elected. And over that period of time I've had an opportunity of observing some enormous changes in our community and enormous changes in the way in which politics is operated. But one of the things that hasn't changed is the fact that the purpose of public life is to actually make a difference and to bring about change for the better for your community and for your country.
And particularly addressing some remarks to some of the students who are here tonight and I welcome that fact. Some of you will in your future lives support my side of politics, some of you will support the other side, some of you will be indifferent. Those of you who take an interest in politics, the only piece of advice I would give you, and I won't try and engage in propaganda, it never works. If you appeal to people's sense of reason and fairness and intelligence you have a far better idea of winning their hearts and minds than if you inflict them with a whole lot of propaganda. The one thing I would say is that if you do have a view about changing things for the better as you see it you should try and do something about it.
And what I have tried to do in the time that I've been in parliament and particularly the time that I have been Prime Minister is to actually identify some of the problems that Australia has, some of the road blocks that Australia has to being more successful and more competitive and to remove those roadblocks, whatever the political cost and the political danger may be. And a good illustration of that is of course on the 1st of July we see the introduction of the biggest ever change to Australia's taxation system. Now that's very risky, it would have been an easier life for me to have decided to put taxation reform aside, to have left it to another Prime Minister, to have left it to another government, to have said it's all very difficult; the Labor Party doesn't like it; the Democrats only like some of it and a lot of people out there are scared of change and we could have put it aside. Now that would have been easy and comfortable, it may have reduced the stress level of my political advisers, it may have made some of my marginal seat holders feel more comfortable but at the end of the day I don't know that it would have been doing a great service by Australia's future because in the end you are judged for what you are willing to risk in order to achieve something better.
If what you want to do is risk free and has universal support then of course it's easy to do. If what you want to achieve is not risk free and encounters a great deal of opposition well it means that it probably is going to in the long run be for the benefit of the country and is going to win in the long run the respect and the admiration of those who look back on the events of your time.
The introduction of this new tax system on the 1st of July will mean that the doing of business, the way in which we conduct our affairs will never be the same again but the change will be of enormous long term benefit for Australia. To 80% of Australians, those people who aren't in business all it will mean is that some of the things you buy are a little dearer, some are a little cheaper and some will remain about the same. And in addition to that everybody will enjoy a personal income tax cut, the level of that will vary according to the number of children you have, your level of income and the other responsibilities and expenses you might incur as you earn that income. It will make our exports cheaper and more competitive, importantly for a state the size of Queensland it's going to mean that fuel in rural and regional areas will be cheaper than it would otherwise have been. We're going to reduce the company tax rate to thirty cents in the dollar giving us one of the most competitive company tax rates in the Asian-Pacific region. We're going to virtually halve capital gains tax which will particularly make it more attractive for small investors. We're going to abolish provisional tax and we're going to make a whole host of other changes including getting rid of a very old-fashioned ramshackle wholesale taxation system.
Put together it represents the biggest, single economic shakeup that the this country has seen. It's copped a lot of criticism and it will go on copping criticism until it comes in and I believe though after it comes in and people realise that it is not as complicated, it is not as fearful, it is not as awesome, it is not as difficult as it's been represented by our opponents, I believe as time goes by people will see the wisdom of the change that has been made.
But as David said, politics is not just about economic change and economic reform. I've often been asked in the time that I've been Prime Minister if I had to record the things of which I'm most proud that the Government was able to do in the time that I've been Prime Minister. Of the three things that I believe are the Government's finest achievements only one of them is economic, the other two are the fact that we were able to achieve in 1996 uniform, national gun control laws. And I don't know whether any of you saw the television footage last night and this morning of those great rallies in the United States and I've got to say I don't always agree with Hillary Clinton on political issues but what she was saying about gun control law, and very interestingly one of the people who addressed those tens of thousands, particularly of women who gathered in Washington and all around the United States was she said that if Australia was able to do something in this area why can't the United States. And this is an example [applause] and this is an example, I mean we often hear in Australia, we often make the mistake of thinking we always have to imitate and follow those in other countries. There are occasions where others in other nations should imitate and follow us. And I know there are probably a few people in this room who thought the changes we made at the time went too far, I don't. I think those changes were what the Australian public needed, they were in the national interest and I believe as the years go by they will make a very significant contribution to a reduction in the murder rate in this country and will make Australia a safer society particularly for women and children.
And another issue of course which I've alluded to of which I was particularly proud was the role that we were able to play in defending the people of East Timor. For the first time in twenty five years of our relationship with an Indonesia incorporating East Timor an Australian government had to face the inevitable difficulty of doing something that would be unpopular with the Indonesian Government but would nonetheless be the right thing. And we stood up for the people of East Timor, we did the right thing. And can I say one of the things that really struck me in the weeks leading up to the decision we achieved in the United Nations to authorize an international force to go into East Timor was the steady stream of messages and faxes I got from school students, from school communities all around Australia. They weren't concentrated in one area, some of them were government schools, some of them were Catholic schools, some of them were non-Catholic independent schools, some of them were small schools and some of them were big schools but they were all saying one thing and they wanted the Government to take some action to stick up for what they believed was right. And I think they were right in sending that advice to their Prime Minister and I have absolutely no doubt that the Government was right in the action that it took.
But I don't look back on those events now with any lingering anger towards the people of Indonesia. It's very important that when you've had a dispute of that kind that you seek to put the negative part of it behind you. You don't ever retreat from what you did, you don't ever apologise for what you did because it was right but you recognise that Australia and Indonesia share a common future and a common destiny and it's very important that every effort, consistent with Australia's self respect and Australia's sense of national dignity, that every effort is made to rebuild the relationship between Australia and Indonesia.
So of the many things that we have done ladies and gentlemen in the time that we have been in government of which we're justifiably proud, not all of them are economic and political life and national leadership and political achievement involves more than economic achievement although that is tremendously important. And as David said you can't find the resources to build a compassionate society to look after the less fortunate if you don't have a strong economy. A strong economy provides the flesh and blood of social provision and the goal of a strong economy is to have a more contented society. I don't wake up in the morning and say, you beaut we have a GDP of X%. I don't wake up in the morning and think, isn't it marvelous that we have an annual growth rate of 4%. I wake up in the morning thinking in human terms of the fact that we've generated 653,000, almost 700,000 now after last week's figures, almost 700,000 new jobs since we came into government. That we have lower levels of interest rates, we have higher real incomes, we have more people in private health insurance, that we have achieved those things. And they are the real fruits and the real product of our economic achievement.
Now I don't pretend to any of you that we have done everything that we would have liked to have done and I don't pretend that everything that we have done has been popular and I don't pretend that there's not a lot of unfinished business but we have tried as David said to govern for the totality of the Australian community. And I said on election night in 1996 that I wanted to govern for the people who voted against us as well as for the people who voted for us and we have tried to do that.
And this of course, is a Liberal Party gathering and it's a Liberal Party gathering here in Queensland which is a very important State for us. We hold a lot of seats in Queensland. We have a lot of very good members and senators in Queensland and many of them are here tonight and we would like to hold a few more seats after the next election. And I want to particularly say to you Con, that you are doing an absolutely magnificent job leading the Liberal Party organisation here in Queensland. It's never easy. It's a thankless job being the volunteer unpaid president of a political party in any State. And I want to thank also Graham Jaeschke your State Director and all the other people responsible for organising the Liberal Party's affairs here in Queensland. We are now my friends, half way through the term that we won in October of 1998. The political debate and the course of political affairs will be very heavily dictated of course by the public reaction to the introduction of a new tax system on the 1st of July. But there are many things beyond that. And there are many other things that the government has sought to do. I am reminded by the presence of people from so many, such a diverse number of schools that one of the things that the government has done that I am particularly proud of is that we have underwritten the provision of greater choice in Australia's education system. I meet the students from the various schools I speak to you myself as a product of the State government high school system in New South Wales which gave me an extremely good education for which I am very grateful indeed. But I also speak as somebody who sent his children to government schools at a primary level and exercised the choice as a father, along with my wife of course, she had a very heavy influence to, very heavy, to send my children to independent schools at a secondary level. And that is the kind of choice that I want as far as it is humanly possible for every parent in this country.
We don't play favourites with education, amongst schools, what we seek to do is to give parents a choice of where they send their children for their education. And in many ways, Australia has the most admirable array of education choices for parents of any country in the western world. As I go around the world and I explain the structure of the education system in Australia, you may, many of you be surprised to learn that it is the envy of countries around the world. We are regarded as having a far more broadly based element of choice for education in this country than any country in the western world.
So there is much ladies and gentleman, of which the Liberal Party can be genuinely proud of what it has achieved over the last eighteen months and the two and a half years before that. But we face as you always do in politics, you face a constant struggle to maintain the supremacy of the communication of your own achievements. Politics these days is a lot more volatile than it used to be. There is a lot less tribalism in politics, people are far more prone to change their political allegiance according to a whim than used to be the case a few years ago. I often used to say that when I was growing up politics was roughly operated according to a forty-forty-twenty rule. Forty percent voted Labor, forty percent voted Liberal or National and twenty percent swung around in the middle. I often think now as I move around Australia instead of it being forty-forty-twenty, it has become thirty-thirty-forty. In other words there are fewer people who are rusted on, you get bigger swings, you get outcomes that you don't sometimes expect. And all of that of course presents a greater challenge to the energy and the intelligence and the integrity of those people who are in public life. But it is an enormous privilege to be Prime Minister of Australia. It is an enormous privilege to work as the leader of a very very dedicated parliamentary team and a number of my ministers are here tonight and I want to thank them and through them all of my parliamentary colleagues for the support and loyalty they so consistently give to me.
I have had a lot of marvelous privileges in the time I have been in this job and on many occasions it has touched me very closely. A few weeks ago I went to Gallipoli on ANZAC Day and I was overwhelmed by the enormous number of young Australians who were there. Young men and women between the ages of 17 and 25, the great bulk of the 10 or fifteen thousand people who were on Gallipoli that ANZAC morning. And it was an extraordinary demonstration of the growing wonderment and interest and affection of young people in Australia for our past. I don't ask that they look on our past uncritically, Australia like every other nation has achieved an enormous amount and like every other nation it has blemishes in its past of which we ought not to be particularly proud. But of course the commitment of the young men of Australia eighty-five years ago in that terrible campaign was of course one of the things of which we could be undeniably and unalterably very proud. And it certainly warned me a great deal to find this great interest and hunger for our history and our past which is so very important in helping us to understand our present and guiding us very much to our future.
Ladies and Gentlemen I think we have come a long way. I think Australia is a better and stronger and more respected and more firmly based country economically than what it was in March of 1996. We may do things differently from our predecessors and thank heavens we do. We may have incurred the wrath of some in the community, we may be attacked furiously because some in the community believe that our priorities are wrong. I say to our critics that we set out to do a number of things. We set out to strengthen the Australian economy and we have clearly done that. We set out to govern for the mainstream of the Australian community and not for minority vested interests and we have done that. We set out to propound and defend the values of Australia abroad and we have done that. We set out to rebalance Australia's foreign and defence relations away from an exclusive preoccupation with our region to a situation where we represented ourselves as a country that had important associations not only with our region which came first, but also with other parts of the world.
And we also set out to build in the Australian community a new social coalition that recognised that not all social problems can be solved by the Government, nor can they be solved by individuals being left alone, nor can they be solved by the welfare sector. But rather if we can galvanise the efforts and the commitment and the talents of all sections of Australian society then we can do that. We have had some magnificent examples of that. Last Friday morning in the most cosmopolitan part of Sydney, perhaps Australia, in King's Cross in Victoria Street King's Cross, I opened a drop in centre for disadvantaged women largely women who were fleeing domestic violence, often with their young children, called Lou's Place and this provided something of a Mecca, something of a haven for women fleeing very unhappy circumstances. And this was made possible through a combination of the efforts of Mission Australia which is one of the great welfare organisations of Australia and a group of men and women in business who decided to put back to society which had been so generous to them through their profitable businesses, put back some resources to help those in the community who are less fortunate. And it was a splendid example to me of the social coalition in action. And for our part as a government we have kept the social security safety net but we have also made it clear that we believe very much in the principle of mutual obligation. That society should support those who through no fault of their own cannot care for themselves but in return for that support if a person is able to do so that person should give back something to society. And that is the mutual obligation principle, that is the principle on which things like Work for the Dole are based.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for coming tonight, thank you very much for the support that you have given to the Liberal Party and thank you very much Con and Graham and David and all the other members of the Queensland Division of the party for the tremendous loyalty and support and help that you have given over the years to me both as Opposition Leader and as Prime Minister. We face an important election at the end of next year. I never take anything for granted in politics. I always assume that the next election is going to be a tough fight, the next one will be, but I am very confident that with your continued support and loyalty we will not only hold on to the seats we now have in Queensland but we have excellent opportunities in one or two areas of building on the number that we already have.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Subjects: The Budget and regional and rural communities 
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER: 
Good evening.  Responsible budgets have been one of our top priorities over the last four years and this means not spending money the Government doesn’t have.  By living within our means, the Government will have repaid $50 billion of the $80 billion Government debt that Labor ran up in its last five years.  Paying back so much of Labor’s debt has reduced debt interest payments by $3 billion a year.  This money can now be spent on more important things, like meeting our responsibilities to country Australia.  I strongly believe that people living in regional areas have a perfect right to the kind of services like proper health care that those of us in the city take for granted.
It’s just not good enough that there is one GP for every thousand people in the cities, while there is only one for every fifteen hundred in the country.  To tackle this real problem, we will boost the number of GP registrars in regional areas by at least 225 and double the number of scholarships for country students to go into medical training.  We will introduce incentives and meet the travel costs of specialists to go out to deliver services in regional areas and fund local communities to pay for a range of allied health services.  There will also be 85 new regional health services, and based on successful facilities in places like Wagga, we will establish nine new clinical schools and three new university departments of rural health.
This is a practical plan to deliver more doctors and better health services in rural communities.  It sends a very important message that country people have every right to share in the nation’s prosperity. Good night.


E&amp;OE..................................
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much for that welcome, to Mr Beattie the Premier of Queensland, to Dr Choi, to Peter Lindsay, the federal member for Herbert, my other parliamentary colleagues, Ian Macdonald, the Minister for Regional Services, Mr Jim Elder the Deputy Premier of Queensland, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is not only a pleasure but there is also a degree of symbolism in my being invited to participate in this opening today and to officially declare open this marvelous plant because this represents the largest ever investment in Australia by a Korean company and this opening takes place on the eve of my first visit to the Republic of Korea as Prime Minister of Australia. And as the Ambassador who I'm very pleased to welcome and others know I'll be leaving Cairns on Thursday to pay a two and a half day visit to the Republic of Korea to repay the courtesy extended to Australia by the President of Korea who visited our country only last year.
There are many things that one could say about this particular plant and facility. It represents an investment of hundreds of millions of dollars, it symbolises a very close economic and also people to people relationship between our two nations. Korea vies with the United States to be Australia's second best export market. Korea is a country with which we have been associated in war so many years ago but we have in the years that have gone by since then built a very close partnership in peace. And the words that accompany the opening ceremony today dwell upon the partnership between our two countries that has developed over the past few decades. We have tens of thousands of Australians of Korean descent. Indeed in my own electorate in Sydney there is a very strong Korean business community so much so that there is a local Korean Chamber of Commerce.
Korea has generously purchased many Australian exports. Australia has been a reliable friend of Korea through her times of economic difficulty. Along with Japan Australia was the only other country that contributed to the three International Monetary Fund bailouts of Korea, Indonesia and Thailand. I take this opportunity of congratulating the Government and the business community of Korea for the courage they showed two years ago in confronting the reality of the Asian economic downturn and the way in which it affected their country. The Government was willing in that country to adopt the measures that were needed in order to bring the Korean economy around. And it can fairly be said that Korea has become something of a role model for other economies in the Asia-Pacific region having experienced the worst of the economic downturn but having been willing and realistic enough to adopt the measures that were needed to bring about that turn around. Australia has followed that as an anxious friend, as a willing supporter and also as a potential trade beneficiary of a stronger Korean economy.
We are now beginning to see the benefits of the turnaround in the Asian economies. It is not occurring everywhere but it is occurring in many places, not least in the Republic of Korea. And Australia having managed to escape the impact of the Asian economic downturn is now in a position to play a full role as a partner in the benefits of the economic upswing that is now gathering pace in many of the economies of the Asian Pacific region. And that of course is where this project fits in very neatly. This project will add value to the great mineral resources of Queensland. This project will add millions of dollars every year of export income to Australia. This project is an example of the partnership between the business men and women and their employees of the two countries and most particularly of the corporation Sun Metals which has been responsible for this investment. I want to take the opportunity on behalf of the federal government to thank all of those who have been involved. I thank the investors for taking the risk, I thank the various federal, state and local government authorities for facilitating the development of the project. I most particularly thank the employees of the company for the tremendous contribution that they have made. Without good workplace relations, without a partnership between management and workforce, projects of this type and this kind don't come to fruition.
Australia has an enormous number of natural economic strengths. We have great natural resources and in our understandable fascination with information technology and all that that entails we should never lose sight of the natural economic strengths that providence has given us. And in Queensland those natural economic strengths via natural resources are there in abundance and this plant builds on those and draws on those natural resources in a very sophisticated, modern and technologically based fashion. And it is another opportunity to remind ourselves that the divide between the so called new economy and the old economy is a very false divide indeed because a plant of this kind combines the resources of the old economy if you like, the natural resources, with modern sophisticated production techniques which means that the product can be delivered to the customer at a cheaper more competitive price than would otherwise be the case.
And for all of those reasons ladies and gentlemen I am very pleased to have been invited here today and I will have the opportunity when I see the President of the Republic of Korea in a few days time of conveying to him first hand my pleasure at being involved in something that symbolises in a very real way the commitment of the two countries to each other. It is a great investment by the Sun Metals Corporation. It has been made possible through a cooperative and beckoning and accommodating economic climate in Australia. Companies don't invest money of these proportions in countries that have an unwelcome attitude towards foreign investment. Foreign investment is always welcome in this country. This country owes a lot to foreign investment and those who market the proposition that in some way foreign investment is a threat to Australia do not understand the economic history of this country and do not understand what the best interests of this country represent. We have great resources, we can generate a certain amount of capital domestically to develop those resources but we will always need the investment of people from other countries, our friends and partners in friendly investing countries such as Korea to help along the process of that development.
So I congratulate all of those involved, I thank the Korean company, I thank our Korean friends for the commitment that they have made to this great project. I thank all of the Australians involved, I wish the project well and I have great pleasure in declaring it officially open.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.........................
Well, thank you very much, Major Watters, Major Small, to Cathy Rogerson, to everybody else and most particularly to the people who are being assisted by this programme.
It's very important in tackling the drug problem that we recognise two things. That first of all we recognise that it is a big problem and needs to be tackled at three levels. And also in recognising the size of the problem we also recognise the enormous things that can be achieved if we target the campaign in the right way. And before coming up to the podium I have had an opportunity of talking to many of the men who are here, of hearing over a few minutes some of their stories and to realise that if people are given the right kind of encouragement and the right kind of support it can make an enormous difference to their lives. I'm personally very committed to the Tough on Drugs strategy and I'm very committed to supporting organisations like the Salvation Army and others in the what you might loosely call the welfare sector, the coalface of helping people who are struggling with a problem. Because I think organisations like the Salvation Army, and there are many others, understand the problem, but most importantly they understand how to deal with people who have got a problem. They're not judgemental. They're strong. They have a view about what is the best way of curing an addiction, but they are not judgemental about people. And I think that is the right approach to take.
You don't achieve anything in this area by giving into the latest fad and pretending there is really no problem, but equally you don't achieve anything in this area by being too judgemental. We've all got failings, we've all got weaknesses. Some people through the circumstances of their lives have found that different stages of their lives are more difficult to cope with than others. And that really does define often, the experience and the circumstances of it all. Now, you've got to tackle this drug problem by of course being as tough as we possibly can be on the people who peddle drugs and who make a profit out of human misery. They deserve our contempt and they deserve the strongest possible retaliation from society.
We also need to educate people against commencing drug taking. I have no truck with the idea that there is anything old fashioned about encouraging young people to say no to drugs. I think that is still the best approach to adopt. This idea that you sort of educate them to handle it properly is crazy. You have to really encourage people to resist the temptation in the beginning. Now that doesn't work in many cases, then what you have got to try and do is to help the people who do become addicted and that is the third arm of our approach. And it is an area that I think has been neglected a bit in the past. Not neglected by bodies like the Salvation Army, but neglected perhaps at a government level in the past. And that's why there is a very big emphasis on helping the people who are trying to help people break their addiction. I mean, as Prime Minister, and as a local member of Parliament, I have spent a lot of time over the last few years talking to parents who've got drug addiction problems with their children. I've talked to parents whose children have really lost their lives through drug taking. And I've tried to understand the strain that is imposed on them and the way in which it can affect families. And the thing that has really struck me most of all when I listen to these tales is that there is still within the Australian community a lack of adequate facilities for people who want to try and break the addiction. And that's why centres like this are so tremendously important.
And we are going to provide a quarter of a million dollars to this particular centre to help them reach out to women in the Townsville community who have a drug addiction problem. And that additional money will enable the employment of an addictions counselor at this particular centre and that will expand the reach and the capacity of the organisation.
Brian mentioned that there was something like, that the money that we are making available for the diversionary programmes, these diversionary programmes are very important. But what they really seek to do is to say to people who, who've got a drug problem and who start to get caught up with the criminal justice system, say to them, we don't want you to go to jail, we don't want you to be put in the criminal justice system, that's ridiculous, it's inappropriate. But it's not just good enough to say that. You've got to have an incentive not to be caught up in the criminal justice system. So we are saying to those people, if you are prepared to go into a diversionary programme, to come, perhaps to a programme like this, and go through the full course and undertake all of the treatment. And if you are willing to do that we will forget about any kind of charge or any kind of processing of you through the criminal justice system. And this approach has very wide support. And it has got strong support from all of the State Governments in Australia, Liberal and Labor alike. This is not really a party political issue, it's something that's above that. And I'm very happy to work with Labor Premiers as well as Liberal Premiers in implementing these programmes. And I hope in the next couple of weeks to announce jointly with the NSW Premier the diversionary programme in New South Wales and we are working hard to do that. And that's good and I hope that I will be able to do the same thing in Queensland with the Queensland Government.
And you read a lot in the papers about the focus on heroin trials which I don't agree with, or injecting rooms which I don't agree with. There are some people who do. I think they're wrong, they think I'm wrong. But that's only a small part of the debate. The great bulk of the campaign against the drug menace in this country draws strong support from all leaders of government on both sides of politics. And what I'm trying to do as Prime Minister is to give some national focus and national leadership to it. To commit extra resources. To emphasis the areas of priority. And to particularly today to encourage and applaud the Salvation Army and like bodies for the tremendous humanity that they have displayed over the years. If ever there is a demonstration of practical Christianity within our community you get it from the Salvation Army, in so many areas. They go to people who need help, they need understanding, they don't need lectures, they need support, they also need some sort of strong guidance. And that is exactly what the Salvation Army provides. It always has. And it is a credit to the people who share its values and its faith. And I know that it has helped tens upon thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of Australians over the years to deal with different problems and this is yet another example of that and I'm always very happy to be associated with it. I applaud Brian Watters for the work that he did in leading the, what I might call loosely, the anti-drug arm and his successor is here today. Brian continues on as Chairman of my Council on Drugs and he is doing an absolutely magnificent job.
Unfortunately in the media coverage of the debate on drugs there seems to be over-preoccupation with the areas of difference and an under-preoccupation with the areas of agreement. Just about everybody agrees that you have got to put the peddlers in jail. That you have got to educate people against starting it and you have got to help people who want to be rehabilitated and today is about another small element of that and over the next year I hope to see many more programmes like this around Australia. I congratulate the Salvation Army here in Townsville. I wish the people they are reaching out to and supporting that I had the opportunity of meeting earlier, I wish them well. I hope you stay with the programme, but very importantly I hope you have happy and fulfilling lives in the years ahead. And I was tremendously encouraged by what you all said to me. And we are all, as I say, we are all susceptible to difficult behaviour. Some are more fortunate than others in the circumstances that affects their lives. And that is where people who have particular difficulties need organisations like this and I congratulate them and thank them for what they are doing for humanity.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.........................
Well, thank you very much, Major Watters, Major Small, to Cathy Rogerson, to everybody else and most particularly to the people who are being assisted by this programme.
It's very important in tackling the drug problem that we recognise two things. That first of all we recognise that it is a big problem and needs to be tackled at three levels. And also in recognising the size of the problem we also recognise the enormous things that can be achieved if we target the campaign in the right way. And before coming up to the podium I have had an opportunity of talking to many of the men who are here, of hearing over a few minutes some of their stories and to realise that if people are given the right kind of encouragement and the right kind of support it can make an enormous difference to their lives. I'm personally very committed to the Tough on Drugs strategy and I'm very committed to supporting organisations like the Salvation Army and others in the what you might loosely call the welfare sector, the coalface of helping people who are struggling with a problem. Because I think organisations like the Salvation Army, and there are many others, understand the problem, but most importantly they understand how to deal with people who have got a problem. They're not judgemental. They're strong. They have a view about what is the best way of curing an addiction, but they are not judgemental about people. And I think that is the right approach to take.
You don't achieve anything in this area by giving into the latest fad and pretending there is really no problem, but equally you don't achieve anything in this area by being too judgemental. We've all got failings, we've all got weaknesses. Some people through the circumstances of their lives have found that different stages of their lives are more difficult to cope with than others. And that really does define often, the experience and the circumstances of it all. Now, you've got to tackle this drug problem by of course being as tough as we possibly can be on the people who peddle drugs and who make a profit out of human misery. They deserve our contempt and they deserve the strongest possible retaliation from society.
We also need to educate people against commencing drug taking. I have no truck with the idea that there is anything old fashioned about encouraging young people to say no to drugs. I think that is still the best approach to adopt. This idea that you sort of educate them to handle it properly is crazy. You have to really encourage people to resist the temptation in the beginning. Now that doesn't work in many cases, then what you have got to try and do is to help the people who do become addicted and that is the third arm of our approach. And it is an area that I think has been neglected a bit in the past. Not neglected by bodies like the Salvation Army, but neglected perhaps at a government level in the past. And that's why there is a very big emphasis on helping the people who are trying to help people break their addiction. I mean, as Prime Minister, and as a local member of Parliament, I have spent a lot of time over the last few years talking to parents who've got drug addiction problems with their children. I've talked to parents whose children have really lost their lives through drug taking. And I've tried to understand the strain that is imposed on them and the way in which it can affect families. And the thing that has really struck me most of all when I listen to these tales is that there is still within the Australian community a lack of adequate facilities for people who want to try and break the addiction. And that's why centres like this are so tremendously important.
And we are going to provide a quarter of a million dollars to this particular centre to help them reach out to women in the Townsville community who have a drug addiction problem. And that additional money will enable the employment of an addictions counselor at this particular centre and that will expand the reach and the capacity of the organisation.
Brian mentioned that there was something like, that the money that we are making available for the diversionary programmes, these diversionary programmes are very important. But what they really seek to do is to say to people who, who've got a drug problem and who start to get caught up with the criminal justice system, say to them, we don't want you to go to jail, we don't want you to be put in the criminal justice system, that's ridiculous, it's inappropriate. But it's not just good enough to say that. You've got to have an incentive not to be caught up in the criminal justice system. So we are saying to those people, if you are prepared to go into a diversionary programme, to come, perhaps to a programme like this, and go through the full course and undertake all of the treatment. And if you are willing to do that we will forget about any kind of charge or any kind of processing of you through the criminal justice system. And this approach has very wide support. And it has got strong support from all of the State Governments in Australia, Liberal and Labor alike. This is not really a party political issue, it's something that's above that. And I'm very happy to work with Labor Premiers as well as Liberal Premiers in implementing these programmes. And I hope in the next couple of weeks to announce jointly with the NSW Premier the diversionary programme in New South Wales and we are working hard to do that. And that's good and I hope that I will be able to do the same thing in Queensland with the Queensland Government.
And you read a lot in the papers about the focus on heroin trials which I don't agree with, or injecting rooms which I don't agree with. There are some people who do. I think they're wrong, they think I'm wrong. But that's only a small part of the debate. The great bulk of the campaign against the drug menace in this country draws strong support from all leaders of government on both sides of politics. And what I'm trying to do as Prime Minister is to give some national focus and national leadership to it. To commit extra resources. To emphasis the areas of priority. And to particularly today to encourage and applaud the Salvation Army and like bodies for the tremendous humanity that they have displayed over the years. If ever there is a demonstration of practical Christianity within our community you get it from the Salvation Army, in so many areas. They go to people who need help, they need understanding, they don't need lectures, they need support, they also need some sort of strong guidance. And that is exactly what the Salvation Army provides. It always has. And it is a credit to the people who share its values and its faith. And I know that it has helped tens upon thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of Australians over the years to deal with different problems and this is yet another example of that and I'm always very happy to be associated with it. I applaud Brian Watters for the work that he did in leading the, what I might call loosely, the anti-drug arm and his successor is here today. Brian continues on as Chairman of my Council on Drugs and he is doing an absolutely magnificent job.
Unfortunately in the media coverage of the debate on drugs there seems to be over-preoccupation with the areas of difference and an under-preoccupation with the areas of agreement. Just about everybody agrees that you have got to put the peddlers in jail. That you have got to educate people against starting it and you have got to help people who want to be rehabilitated and today is about another small element of that and over the next year I hope to see many more programmes like this around Australia. I congratulate the Salvation Army here in Townsville. I wish the people they are reaching out to and supporting that I had the opportunity of meeting earlier, I wish them well. I hope you stay with the programme, but very importantly I hope you have happy and fulfilling lives in the years ahead. And I was tremendously encouraged by what you all said to me. And we are all, as I say, we are all susceptible to difficult behaviour. Some are more fortunate than others in the circumstances that affects their lives. And that is where people who have particular difficulties need organisations like this and I congratulate them and thank them for what they are doing for humanity.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects:  Interest rates; GST; childcare; Budget spending.
E&amp;OE  ………………………………………………………………………
HARRISON:
Prime Minister, welcome to Paradise as your local member calls it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, Peter Lindsay is always telling me that he is the member for Paradise.
HARRISON:
And you’re going to Heaven a little later on in the day.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Warren Entsch says that further north there is heaven, yes there you are.  I won’t get into that.  A bit like the State of Origin – I’m neutral.
HARRISON:
That’s a good idea, we could get you to referee the way things are going.
HARRISON:
Do you like the surrounds?  They’ve got the (inaudible) as we affectionately call it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, it is very, very attractive.
HARRISON:
We’re all dressed in blue, it could be a Liberal Party Convention to all intents and purposes.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, you are going to give me a tough time.
HARRISON:
No I am not.  Quickly if we can go onto things that we share – our audience are very concerned about interest rates and the move last night in the States.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, the future of interest rates in Australia, immediately should be decided by the Reserve Bank, it controls official interest rates.  
HARRISON:
But can’t you have a say in that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the actual control of interest rates is handled by the central bank, the Government allows the central bank independence in that.  
HARRISON:
It’s saying that aren’t we, someone suggested this morning, a colony in terms of our . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I was very interested in a speech made yesterday by the Secretary of the Treasury, Ted Evans and I agree with him that Australia has a lot of independence of movement as far as our interest rates and other things are concerned.  But that is a matter that the bank will have to take into account when it next meets.  And I don’t want to make a judgement at this stage as to what it might do.  All I can point to is that there are some differences between the American economy and the Australian.  And the rate of growth in the United States is somewhat stronger than it is in Australia although it is very strong in Australia.  Interest rates now are much lower than what they were, even allowing for the recent increases than what they were four years ago.
HARRISON:
New Zealand 6.5, the States 6.5 – obviously there is some concern out there within the financial circles and I suppose in saying that we’ve got the GST coming in, we’ve got a currency that’s great for exports, terrific, wages growth which you’ve acknowledged and an oil . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the wages growth is actually very comfortably within the Reserve Bank’s range.  I mean wages growth in Australia is not a problem, inflation is not a problem either.  There will be a one off, cost of living increase as a result of the introduction of the GST.  That will be in the September quarter, it will go up and then it will come down. You’ll have that one off effect and the Reserve Bank’s acknowledged that, the Treasury Secretary acknowledged that yesterday.  I mean all of the indicators are good.  It’s always hard for a prime minister to talk about the currency and interest rates because you have these people pouring over their screens and they analyse words and they often misinterpret them , so I am pretty wary, I’ve always been very wary and I’ve always chosen my words very carefully on these issues and anything I’ve said has always been on the very careful, conservative side.  We are part of the world economy, we can’t separate ourselves from the world economy, but that doesn’t mean to say that we have to in a knee jerk fashion, follow everything that happens overseas.  Now that judgement will ultimately have to be made by the Reserve Bank, because we do like every other industrialised country now – the United States, the United  Kingdom, Germany – we allow the central bank to set the level of interest rates in a non-political environment.  Now that’s the decision that was taken by the Government when it came to office and we have to go along with that.  We thought it was a good idea in the early years, and we still have to accept the discipline of that.  That doesn’t mean to say that you don’t have views on how the economy is performing.  I think the Australian economy is still very low inflation, wages growth is quite comfortable, our interest rates now, even allowing for the recent increases, are massively below what they were – the 17/18/20% we had with Keating I mean it’s a world of difference….. . . 
HARRISON:
So there is no J-curve and there’s no Banana Republic?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there is no J-curve and there is no Banana Republic, in fact it’s a very prosperous economy.
HARRISON:
Howard’s way
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, certainly prosperity is Howard’s way, yes.  Very much so.
HARRISON:
We’ll come back and take more in a moment.
Prime Minister John Howard joins us, let’s take some calls.  Good morning Mike.  Sylvia sorry, good morning.
CALLER:
Good morning.  I just have a little question about whether the Prime Minister will be looking into native land title within Australia and Queensland?
PRIME MINISTER:
What’s the question Sylvia?
CALLER:
About, where something will be done about native land title.
PRIME MINISTER:
In what direction?
CALLER:
In what direction?  You know, releasing more ground for mining, that type of thing.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you want fewer native title claims and fewer restrictions on mining – is that it?
CALLER:
Yes, that’s right.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I certainly favour the removal of any unnecessary restrictions on mining.  We tried to reform the Native Title Act we inherited further than we were able to do, but we were blocked by the Democrats and the Labor Party in the Senate on that.  We ended up getting a compromise ten-point plan through the Senate which Senator Harradine supported, but the Labor Party and the Democrats voted against.  And the big question now is what happens to the Queensland arrangement that Mr Beattie has put together if as I believe it will probably be, and I expect if it’s okay it will be approved by the Federal Government it’s then a question of whether the Labor Party and the Democrats vote against more mining in Queensland or in favour of more mining.  It will be quite a crucial test for the Labor Party, because see what happened was when the Northern Territory put forward its regime  that was knocked over by the Labor Party and the Democrats.  And I want to know whether they are going to do the same to the mining industry in Queensland.  It will be a very interesting test of how serious they are about jobs in North Queensland.
Our ten-point plan was a fair deal for everybody.  It took account of the aboriginal claims, but it also respected the fact that the mining industry in Queensland employs a lot of Australians, indigenous Australians and other Australians as well.  And I am in favour of development and sensible balanced mining and I want to know whether the Labor Party in Canberra is in favour of that or against it.  It will be a very interesting test of their commitment to jobs in regional Australia.
HARRISON:
Sylvia, thanks for your call, leave it there.  Mark good morning. Hello Mark?
CALLER:
Yes.
HARRISON:
Go ahead.
CALLER:
Mr Prime Minister, this is Mark William Bailey here.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes Mark?
CALLER:
You know that I am  Satan  the Devil made (inaudible), you know that I am God?  You know the evidence is the 14th of  elleventh, 1997 the case before (inaudible) in the Magistrates Court?  Ok.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes.
CALLER:
I have written to youse, I have told youse and  youse are committing treason against me mate.  So please stop committing treason invite me down there and listen to my opinion please.
HARRISON:
Ok Mark we’ll leave it there.  Or do you want to continue on with that Prime Minister?  Are you there Mark?
CALLER:
Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, well I have taken note, yes, thank you.
[advertisement]
HARRISON:
That is the number if you would like to talk to the PM.  And now the next caller is Peter.  Go ahead Pete.
CALLER:
Hello?  Is that the Prime Minister there now is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes Peter.
CALLER:
Right, just a query on ex-servicemen.  Number one, there would appear to be a discrimination in people that save their money in relation to servicemen with the same particulars and service and that type of thing.  In other words, the Government’s encouraging us to be self-funded.  Now any self-funded servicemen has to be 100% disabled in order to get the gold card.  Whereas a pensioner, even if he is receiving one dollar only has to be 50% disabled to get the gold card.  I’ve often wondered why all service personnel, serving and ex, who have done twenty years can’t be issued with the gold card automatically.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Peter, can I . . .  I am not sure that is the position, I am really not.  I am not aware of discrimination.  I mean we made the gold card available to people over a certain age who’d had a certain level of service.
CALLER:
For World War II, once they hit seventy-five or eighty.  And there’s not too many of them left.
PRIME MINISTER:
Seventy . . . well that was the gold card principle that applied in relation to people from World War I.  We followed the same rule and as people from the Korean War and so forth move into that age bracket, the same thing will happen to them. I am not aware, I’ll investigate it as a result of what you said.  
CALLER:
Well if you could.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am not aware of any discrimination against self-funded people.  But if you leave your address with the station, I’ll have that checked out and somebody will write to you.  Ok?
CALLER:
Well, Mr Prime Minister I hope it doesn’t take thirty-five years as it did to recognise areas of  South East Asia.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I wasn’t Prime Minister thirty-five years ago . . . 
CALLER:
Well Bob Hawke came over, promised us the world, but he went for a swim, didn’t he?
HARRISON:
Peter, I suggest what you do is contact  . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
I will respond to your query, but can I say that I’m, I don’t accept without investigation that your claim of discrimination is accurate.  I am not aware of that and I will check it out and I will let you know.
CALLER:
Thanks very much.
HARRISON:
Okay, let’s take our next call.  Hello Gus?  Go ahead.
CALLER:
Yes John. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes Gus.
CALLER:
Yes, look just ringing in to say look, just (inaudible) and really appreciate what you’re doing and what you’re trying to do and don’t let all the knockers get in the way.
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh well you always have knockers in this game.  But thanks very much.  I appreciate your words of support, they’re welcome.
CALLER:
Good on you, just keep doing a good job.
PRIME MINISTER:
Ok mate, thanks a lot.
HARRISON:
Let’s take more calls with the Prime Minister and Mike, go ahead mate.
CALLER:
Morning Mr Prime Minister, congratulations on a good job so far.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you.
CALLER:
Mr Prime Minister, I would like to talk about the latest news on (inaudible). I am not totally au fait with it, so excuse me if I make a couple of mistakes on it.  But the thing where we’re taking nannies for politicians to be with their parents whilst their parents are down in Canberra or wherever.  Now I think that’s a fantastic idea but really the way I look at it is if we are talking about bringing family units together, I mean why isn’t that  . . . why can’t people who are living away from home do the same thing as well and use it as a tax deduction?  Is childcare going to be a tax deduction from now on?  Or  . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well what we’ve done in and you will see the benefits of this on the 1st of July, we have increased the benefits payable to all families who have the eligible level of income for the cost of caring, or raising children.  We don’t have a straight tax deduction and this, for the cost of childcare in the ordinary sense of that.  What we do is we subsidise the cost of childcare for people up to a certain level of income and that’s quite generous and then we have a limited tax subsidy, we have had a limited tax subsidy, irrespective of income.  And all of those things, or most of them have been rolled into one simplified family benefit that is going to be payable through the family tax assistance office after the 1st of July.  
The thing about the nannies and the politicians, that wasn’t a tax proposal.  That was a limited entitlement for people to have their nanny or carer travel with them to certain destinations if they were on official duties.  It’s actually somewhat more limited, it’s a recommendation of the Remuneration Tribunal.  It was not a decision of the Government, but was a recommendation of the Remuneration Tribunal,has a rather more limited application than people have suggested.
CALLER:
Mr Prime Minister I do ask though that if I’m going away on a two week excursion or work trip – shouldn’t I be entitled to do the same thing?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that would be a matter.  That’s a matter, I mean I stress the politician is not getting a tax benefit.  What they’re being entitled to do is to get support in the cost of bringing the carer with them.  Now the question of whether that applies to other people would be a matter of individual discussion between employers and employees.
CALLER:
Right, so that  . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
I mean it is not something that could be provided by the Government.  It’s something that would have to be determined as a matter of individual negotiations with your employer.  I mean some people do this, some people don’t.  It depends.  It depends a lot on what your caring arrangements are.  
CALLER:
Right ok. So it’s a benefit that can be applied to the, their associated package then?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well no, its a matter of individual negotiation, it’s not something that the Government can say to an employer, you provide this, or you don’t provide it.  That’s a matter for the individual employer.
CALLER:
Mr Prime Minister, thank you very much and good luck with the GST.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thanks a lot.
HARRISON:
I like that guy.  “Good luck with the GST” – I think we’ll probably all need that.  Let’s take another call.
PRIME MINISTER:
You will find it is very good.  Once it has been in for . . . 
HARRISON:
Someone called it the grand scale theft. Is that a fair comment?
PRIME MINISTER:
That sounds like  . . . what – does he belong to the ALP?
HARRISON:
Look I am not going to make any more comments.  Ron good morning.
CALLER:
Good morning John, how are you going?
PRIME MINISTER:
Very well thanks.
CALLER:
You always sound on top of the world to me.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I try to, it’s a struggle.
CALLER:
It’s a bugger of a job, isn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
You could put it that way.  But I tell you what it’s interesting, you wouldn’t miss it.
CALLER:
That’s right.  Hey mate, there is one thing – I am a Townsvillian through and through, I am getting to that stage in life where I am almost retired type of thing you know.  But I have always had one dream being a port city, you know with shipping, all that sort of stuff.  And that’s the lifeblood of the city and you probably heard  at that Korean thing yesterday.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I did.
CALLER:
There’s been a lot of talk about increasing traffic through the [inaudible] into the port road, rail traffic, and all that sort of thing.  And I’ve been privileged to attend a few meetings, committees, pertaining to that around the town.  And we get something in the pipeline, you are probably well aware of it from Peter Lindsay here, regarding the . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he is sitting next to me here, I am very well aware of it.
CALLER:
Well he’d know about the Eastern Corridor Road, you know.  And we’re just working on a system – how is the Budget going for funding.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have had a number of people, including your Federal Member, Peter Lindsay, put to me this proposition and I had another submission put to me yesterday afternoon by representatives of the city and it’s something that we will take on board and think about.  I am not making any promises on the run.  Nonetheless I am aware of the importance of this to the city.  We have been very supportive of Townsville – Townsville Medical School, the extra spending in the barracks, and many other benefits that have come to this region.  We will listen very carefully to what people put to us and at the appropriate time we will consider whether it is something that can be included or not.  I mean I am aware of it, I know how importance it is as you can appreciate as I go around the country I get similar proposals put to me by every local community I visit.  
CALLER:
For sure.
PRIME MINISTER:
You can’t support them all.  You try and list them according to their national interest priority and support those that will bring the most benefit for the country and certainly the port here is very important, not only to Townsville and North Queensland, but also to Australia because of its contribution to our export income.  I am aware of all of those things and we’ll give it very conscientious consideration.
CALLER:
Really appreciate that mate because I think (inaudible) really hinges on the…..
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there is a number of things that it hinges on, it also on the hinges on the pipeline as well.
CALLER:
Oh sure.
HARRISON:
Industrial harmony I would suggest..
PRIME MINISTER:
Industrial harmony and the GST will help because exports are cheaper with the GST.
HARRISON:
(inaudible) Finally PM before you go, road funding.  The Bruce holeway as we affectionately call it. Can we fix that up?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I can’t on the run give a promise about a particular part of the National Highway. I am aware of the importance attached to road funding.In the last Budget we decided to give an absolute priority to fixing the biggest single problem in country Australia.  Not so much in a city like Townsville, but in the outlying areas, and that is the inadequacy of doctors and health services.  And rather than spray money around on a number of areas we decided to put quite a lot of money into one area and really try and fix it.  And that is what I believe we have done with the health issue.  The programme we announced is comprehensive, it does more than any other single act of a Federal Government for fifty years to tackle the problem of health services in the country areas of Australia.  
Now there is a time we can  can turn I hope to other issues.  That depends on resources, it depends on other priorities, including defence.  I have indicated in the past that we have a commitment that we will spend more money on defence.  And not- we are spending a little bit more money this year, but particularly next year and the following.  That’s very important to Townsville because this is a great garrison city of Australia if I can put it that way.  There is no city in Australia where the defence establishment is more at its heart than Townsville.  
So there are a lot of things that will compete for the funds available.  You can’t in an orderly way do other than sort of take a decision on what your priority is.  We decided this year, the big priority was fixing rural health.  And we have put a lot of money, a lot of effort and a lot of new policies into that and I think people in the country areas appreciate that.  Having done that, well we will then see what we’ve got available for other things including roads, including you know a number of infrastructure areas.  I mean we will obviously have to spend money on infrastructure in the next few years.  We will be able to spend a lot more money earlier if we could sell the rest of Telstra.  We could because  I mean we in five budgets, we will have reduced from 80 billion dollars to 30 billion dollars the debt that labor ran up in its last five budgets.  Now if we could sell Telstra by the year 2004, we would be completely free of net commonwealth debt and that would enable us to spend more money at an earlier date on infrastructure than would otherwise be the case.  I mean what is the point of having 50 billion dollars tied up in a phone company rather than having it invested in public infrastructure like roads and so forth, I mean what’s the point?
HARRISON:
And finally, obviously rural Australia, regional Australia is fairly important to you and important to all governments.  You will go the full term and will the election we won and lost in the bush?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the election is won or lost in the entire country.  You can’t just sort just say its only going to matter in the bush.  I mean that is an insult to people who live in the cities.  Everywhere matters.  As far as when the election will be, I see no reason to have the election earlier than the due date which is about the end of next year.  We only have three years and it’s a bit silly to cut that short.  Three years is a very short period of time and it’s a bit silly to cut that short when you don’t have to.  And I see absolutely no reason to go earlier than the end of next year and there is no reason to do that.  As far as country Australia is concerned, can I just make one comment about the debate in the last few days and I know Mr Beazley is playing around with this Country Labor. Country people are...
HARRISON:
Its  rebranding …
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look the country people are not interested in that kind of branding.  Country people are interested in substance, not gimmicks with names.  You’ve got to do more than rebadge yourself or rename yourself , you’ve got to change yourself and change your attitude towards regional Australia and I think in the long run, people will judge us, and I make no assumptions. I don’t take anything for granted in politics. I think you have to win every inch of the way by your performance.  I don’t assume that people have always voted for me are going to do so in the future any more than do I assume that people have always voted Labor, again are going to vote Labor in the future either. I mean I am always interested in trying to win people over from the other side, as my opponent is.  But can I just say that you need more than playing around with names.  You have to offer substance and in the budget we addressed something of substance and that is the health issue [inaudible].  Some months for it all to come through but I believe in a years time, people will look back on that budget and say well those blokes really got hold of the problem and they addressed it in a big way and that is what country people want there. They are down to earth, interested in substance people, not people who are deluded by flashy name changes which mean nothing in reality.
HARRISON: 
Prime Minister, John Howard, thanks for your time.
ends


Subjects: Tax reform; rural and regional Australia; Telstra and telecommunications; trade and Korea
E&amp;OE..........................
Well thank you very much Warren and Lynne and the Mayor of Cairns, my parliamentary colleague Ron Boswell, the Leader of the National Party in the Senate and Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Transport and Regional Services, ladies and gentlemen. Well thank you very much Lynne and Warren for those warm words of introduction. What I like about you Queenslanders is you are so subtle. It always takes me a long time to sort of work out exactly what you are saying. But I got the distinct impression that Warren has a lot of support here and can I tell you that doesn't surprise me in the slightest and it was nice of him to mention that incident a year ago and I will just say twenty seconds about it. I have never witnessed in all my life a greater example of the unreality of the Canberra press gallery than I did on that particular occasion. They had no idea of what sort of real life was about and I thought it was the most ludicrous ill-based unjustified attack on somebody's integrity I have seen for a long time and I had absolutely no difficulty in defending you mate because you were absolutely right.
Well it is great to be back in far north Queensland again and everybody I have met tonight that wasn't born here and that's all but one has said to me that they have escaped the cold weather of Sydney or the cold weather of somewhere else and you are obviously very happy to be here and it is a special part of Australia and it's a part of Australia that of course has very strong links into our region. And I will be demonstrating that tomorrow. For the first time I will be departing on an overseas visit as Prime Minister of Australia other than out of Sydney or Canberra. And I will be leaving Cairns tomorrow to go to the Republic of Korea for the first time as Prime Minister to pay an official visit to that country to repay the courtesy of a visit by President Kim Dae Jung last year.
Korea of course is a very important trading partner of Australia's. Korea buys more products from Australia than any other country in the world bar Japan and I was reminded yesterday when I was in Townsville and I opened the Sun Metals Zinc Plant just how important Korean investment is for the future of the Australian economy. So tomorrow I leave Cairns, Australia to go to Seoul in the Republic of Korea and that's entirely appropriate given the contribution of Queensland and the contribution of far north Queensland to the economy of Australia.
There are a lot of things I could talk to you about tonight. I am not going to give you another long and passionate speech about all the good things that the government has done but we have done a lot of good things and I don't want anybody to think, I don't want anybody to imagine for a moment that I am not very proud of the fact that Mr Beazley ran up $80 billion of national debt in five budgets and in our first five budgets we will have wiped $50 billion off that $80 billion of debt.
I am mighty proud of that. And while I am on the subject of my opponent I notice that he has got a new fancy moniker, Country Labor. It is a bit of an oxymoron if my experience in politics is any guide. I have only one observation on that. That in political life you win support and you win respect with substance and policy you don't win it through gimmicky descriptions. And in the end the people of non-metropolitan Australia whether you call them the regions, the country, the bush or rural and regional Australia and I sort of I use all those terms interchangeably. In the end people respond to substance they respond to long term commitment and they respond to an empathy with the challenges of their particular area of Australia. And I have been coming to Cairns for a long time. My visits to this city pre-dated Warren's election as the Federal Member for Leichardt and I know a little about it. I know how distinctive it is. I know for example how heavily it relies on small business and how important the strengths of the small business sector is. And it was one of those areas in Australia where I always got very strong support for the industrial relations agenda that I was pursuing both in opposition and in government.
You know around Australia there is only twenty per cent of people employed in the private sector now who belong to trade unions. And yet our political opponents are talking about if they were in government again, restoring the award system to the very heart of Australia's industrial relations system. We fought very hard when we first got into government against a hostile Senate to get through some very important industrial relations reforms and those changes, they weren't as far as we would have liked to have gone, we would have liked to have gone further. But we went a considerable distance. And those changes have been one of the reasons why our economy has gone much better over the last four years than it did over the preceding four years.
But that is in the past, albeit in the recent past. What is immediately in front of us on the 1st of July, in case you hadn't noticed, in case you hadn't heard is the arrival of tax reform. And tax reform can I tell you is going to be of enormous benefit to the economic strength and the economic future of Australia, and that is why I was prepared to risk my political future in October of 1998. And Warren might mutter "and my political future too in the process". But we were prepared to do it because as Warren said we knew it was good for the country. And when you have been in politics for twenty six years and there is no sort of point in messing about with political longevity. There is no point in messing around about you know who's been there longer and what it's like to be in office, been there done that. The only thing that I'm interested in at this stage of my political career is doing some things that are good for the future of the country. And in the end you get support politically if you do what is right. And I have believed for a long time that this country needs taxation reform. And we were prepared to risk our political future in October of 1998 because we believed that this reform was going to give Australia greater economic strength. Whether we like it or not, we live in a world economy. We can't isolate ourselves from what happens around the world. We might like to but we can't and this city with its links into Asia and its heavy reliance on the tourist industry knows only too well how important the attitude of the rest of the world is to Australia. But so it is that if we're going to remain competitive with the rest of the world we've got to keep changing and reforming our economy.
Warren rightly said that he thought rather than being a conservative, I was a bit of a radical. Warren, I have to say I'm both. I'm a selective conservative and I'm a discerning radical. And I don't say that in any way facetiously. Because that is what I think is, in a sense, the art of good government. There are some things about our past, and there are things about the way in which Australia has always done things that we ought to hang onto and we should never surrender. We should never give away the fact that we are a classless society that believes in treating people according to their worth and their merit and not according to where they were born or what school they went to or how they dress or what their accent is. That's never been the Australian way. We've always treated people according to their merit and what they're prepared to give to their community. And we ought to hang onto those things, they're precious, they're valuable. And we ought to hang onto the contribution that the bush, if I can use that expression, in the best description of the term, the contribution that the bush makes to the Australian character. I can't imagine what Australia would be like without its bush culture. I can't imagine what Australia would be like if we lost that. And that's one of the reasons why it's tremendously important that we give support as we did in the last Federal Budget to getting some more medical practitioners and more health services into the remote areas of the country. I mean the real outback areas that are really suffering as a result of the declining commodities prices and are doing it very hard. They are losing services, we ought to understand that, we ought to listen to that, we've got to do something about it. So we decided in the last Budget that rather than spray a bit of the money around to a number of areas affecting rural and regional Australia we would take one area and we would really make a good job of it. And that's what we did in relation to health services. And it's part of hanging on not only to the human and economic infrastructure, but also hanging onto the contribution that it makes to what it means to be an Australian and to the Australian identity and to the Australian character.
So there are a lot of things about us that we should hang onto. But there are some things about us, there are ways in which we have done things in the past that no longer work. And we have to change them. If we don't change we will get rolled over by the rest of the world. And that's why we have tried to implement in a number of areas an economic reform agenda. That's why we had to get the Budget into surplus. That's why we had to change our industrial relations system. And that's why I still believe very strongly, although there may be some people in this audience who don't agree with me, I still believe very strongly that the Government shouldn't own 50.1% of Telstra. I don't believe that you should have $50 billion of public investment tied up in a telephone company. I think it is an unwise expenditure of that public investment. Governments are lousy managers of businesses. They've demonstrated that over the years. And if governments own business operations, in the end you get a conflict of interest. There's a funny idea around you know that if somehow or other Telstra were continually owned by the government there would never be any job redundancies. In between 1991 and 1995 when the old Telecom was a hundred per cent owned by the government, there was 17,000 redundancies. Telecommunications in Australia is changing. There does need to be an improvement of the services in the bush. They have improved, there is a lot of room for further improvement and we're not going to do anything further about selling the rest of Telstra until that further improvement is guaranteed. But nobody should imagine that in the long run you get any real salvation about having a giant telecommunications company in this modern day and age half owned by the private sector and half owned by the government, you constantly start bumping into each other. It's a conflict of interest, in the long run it is an unsustainable situation. And if we could sell the rest of Telstra, we'd be able to get rid of all our debt. We've got rid of a lot of it, but we'd be able to get rid of a great deal more.
But ladies and gentlemen, tax reform is on everybody's lips, I understand that. And can I say to you that I believe after it comes in on the first of July, inevitably after enormous amount of debate, enormous amount of criticism from the Opposition, a tremendous public focus, I believe that after a relatively short period of time people will see it is as a very valuable reform.
Then under the taxation reform system, we're going to have one of the lowest company tax rates in the Asia Pacific Region. It will fall from 36 cents in the dollar to 30 cents. We are going to almost halve the capital gains tax. We're going to abolish provisional taxation. We're going to have $12 billion of personal tax cuts, 80 per cent of the Australian community, of Australian tax payers will be on a top marginal rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar. We're going to get rid of the unfair inequitable wholesale sales tax and replace it with a simple goods and services tax. We are going to get rid over time of a whole host of state taxes. Diesel fuel in non-metropolitan Australia will be 24 cents a litre cheaper than it would otherwise have been. Petrol used for business purposes will be 7 cents a litre cheaper than it would otherwise have been. All of these benefits together will represent the biggest shakeup that we've ever had in taxation in this country.
And very importantly every dollar, every last dollar of the goods and services tax is going to go to the state governments of Australia. And we're going to end this charade every year of premiers coming to Canberra and going in and saying, I'm going to demand something for Queensland and Joh Bjelke Petersen said it, Wayne Goss said it, Rob Borbidge said it, Peter Beattie says it, they all say the same thing, Labor, National, it didn't matter and then they'd come out and they'd say, the lousy federal government wouldn't give it to us and we had to go back and we had to slash services and increase taxes in Queensland they'd say. And they'd say that. they said that of Malcolm Fraser, they said that of Bob Hawke, they said that of Paul Keating and they said that of John Howard.
So what we decided to do when we put tax reform together was to say, right we're going to give the states what they've always asked for and that is access to a growth tax so that they can fund the police services, the public hospitals, the government schools and all the other things they've got to do and that is exactly what we're doing. And every dollar that goes, every dollar that's collected from the goods and services tax is going to the states. And can I assure you that I had the [inaudible] with the Premier of Queensland and the Premier of New South Wales, both of whom belong to the other party and they came along to the Premier's Conference and they said, Prime Minister this is a shocking tax reform package, it is outrageous, it is going to do the Australian people in the eye, where do I sign. And there is a very, very good reason for that. They wanted to sign because they know, and Queensland will get access to the benefits of the growth in GST revenue earlier than any other state in Australia. And Queensland will be better off quicker than any other state as a result of the introduction of the GST. So if you don't believe it, if you didn't believe it when you came into this room tonight, after I hope I've pointed that out to you you'll go away as very enthusiastic supporters of it.
But ladies and gentlemen as you gather from my demeanor I believe in this reform, I've staked a lot on it; I've campaigned for it; I've led the Government to victory in an election on it; we've got it through the parliament in the face of a hostile upper house. There were some changes made that we would have preferred hadn't been made but they've been made as the price of getting it through. And I've done all of that not for some political advantage, you can hardly argue that in the face of the danger that's involved in such basic change, but I've done that because I believe it is in the long term benefit of the people of this country and I believe that as time goes by that will be very, very widely recognised.
Ladies and gentlemen it's an enormous privilege to be Prime Minister of this country and the best part about it, more than any sort of single event, more than meeting this or that person is the opportunity it gives you endlessly to visit different parts of Australia. And I do take care to ensure that I reach the non-metropolitan areas of Australia on a regular basis. I haven't suddenly discovered the value of bush tours. I've been undertaking bush tours all of my political life. I haven't suddenly discovered regional Australia. I'm not a stranger to Townsville or to Cairns. I'm not a stranger to Kalgoorlie. I'm not a stranger to Esperance or to Whyalla or Port Pirie or to Dubbo or Parkes because Australia is more than just Sydney and Melbourne and Canberra, important though those centres are it is also non-metropolitan Australia, it's far north Queensland.
Warren does bring to the national parliament a particular style. Sounds to me it's pretty effective too. And good on him, he's a very good representative and he remarked to me tonight, he remarked to me tonight that this is a very diverse gathering of the community of his electorate and so it is, it represents people who were born in Cairns, it represents people who came to Cairns from other parts of Queensland, it represents people who've come from other states, there are representatives of our indigenous community here and the Torres Straits. There are representatives of Japan a country that has very close links with this part of Australia. There are people retired, there are people in small business, there are people involved in welfare services, government welfare services and non-government welfare services. In other words you've got the whole bit and that's terrific because that's what this community is and that's what representative politics is all about, it's about representing the entire community and of all the things I tried to say to the Australian people on the night that I was elected Prime Minister in March of 1996, the one that I wanted to get across very strongly was that I was elected to lead a government that would govern for the mainstream of the Australian community and this is the mainstream tonight. The mainstream is not made up of one particular group being the largest in the community, it is made up of different sections of the community all working together for a common purpose and that's what a community like this here tonight represents and thank you very much for having me and you've got a very good sitting member.
[ends]



Subjects: Warren Entsch, Ethanol; Esplanade project; Salvation Army Grant; Reserve Bank; Interest rises; Beer prices; GST; War Veterans pensions; Insolvent companies
MCKENZIE:
Yes, with me in the Studio, Prime Minister of Australia John Howard good morning.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning, very nice to be back again.
MCKENZIE:
Yeah you get up actually, what it is, about every eighteen months?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have been into the Leichhardt Electorate, Warren Entsch’s Electorate five times in the four and a bit years that he’s been a Member of Parliament. He’s a very good representative. He fights for the area, he gets things that the people of this district need.
MCKENZIE:
Yeah, I think he has been very well received. I remember your comments shortly after the last election. He was the only I think candidate of yours to actually extend his lead in that last election.
PRIME MINISTER:
He did very well in the last election, particularly against the background of One Nation eral in this part of Queensland.
MCKENZIE:
John Howard, you have just been down to the Sugar Convention I understand. There was the suggestion that you may be making an announcement that hasn’t come to fruition. But there is the hint that there will be the possibility of some package forthcoming in the next couple of days in the..
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we have already announced there won’t be any excise on Ethanol, which is a very important boost to the industry because it will allow them to explore the alternatives that Ethanol offers. I did say to the industry that I understood how it had been knocked around by the very low sugar price and a very corrupted world market and also the very bad season, the flooding and so forth for the last three or four years. The industry is putting together a request for the Government. It hasn’t assembled that package yet. When it does, we will look at it sympathetically and give a response. I didn’t make any promises, but I said we would look at it very carefully. I do understand the importance of the industry to this part of far north Queensland and I also pointed out to them that Governments get requests from all parts of the country in all sectors. We will look at it sympathetically. I am not going to pre-empt a response. I haven’t seen the submission yet so until I do, its silly to say whether we can or can’t support them.
MCKENZIE:
Yeah, I suppose the most prominent issue here in recent months has been the prospect of Federal assistance for the Esplanade Project. Did you see the Strand in Townsville when you were there?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, I did see that. I thought that was pretty impressive. Once again every provincial city in Australia, every area has its own set project. Some of those things are clearly the direct responsibility of the State Government or the local Government. Some sort of fall between two stools and the Federal Government gets bought in to it. We can’t fund every local project, that’s not our job. Particularly as under the GST arrangements the States will be getting a lot more money and they will have a growing access to the GST revenue.
MCKENZIE:
Yes, just a brief issue, it’s a local issue but I am hoping you are across it. It must be a challenge from time to time to be across all these local issues. But Warren Entche’s has bought up a very important subject and that is this brutality on Aboriginal Communities based on alcoholism strengthening. We have just had three murders in our Arakun over recent weeks. So he’s now suggesting we need these detox centres on the Cape so these people can get treatment and we can basically improve the situation for women and children in those communities. Are you going to be giving him a sympathetic ear?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he has raised it with me and we will have a look at that. I am not sure once again where our responsibility starts and that of the State Governments starts. I mean normally these sorts of things are provided by the State Government. Domestic violence is a problem in some Aboriginal Communities. It’s a problem in some non Aboriginal communities as well. Warren has raised it with me and anti-drug rehabilitation centres are very important. Only yesterday in Townsville, I announced a grant to the Salvation Army in Townsville that will enable it to expand its services in that area and I will have a look at Warren’s point.
MCKENZIE:
Just a point to that came up too. The time before last you were here we had a fairly energetic discussion about the child support agency.
PRIME MINISTER:
We did and it did not fall on deaf ears and this is something that Warren has campaigned for very strongly and he will have noticed and you would have noticed and many of your listeners will have noticed that in the last Federal budgets we provided some major changes in this area that meets many of the legitimate concerns that were expressed by the non custodian parents about the operation of the child support agency. Very difficult area this John because you are dealing with shattered relationships and very fragile human emotions and people with a great sense of injustice and no matter what you say to them and no matter what the process has been. When, marriages break up and children are involved but people react very emotionally and that is very understandable and nobody thinks that justice is being done by them and we have tried in the budget to recognise some of these things whilst we have put more taxpayers resources into it and it has given some relief to some of the none custodial parents and I think that’s fair.
MCKENZIE:
I think the [inaudible]. I said last week to Warren Entsch its certainly a turning point and your government has shown more courage than any other since 1988 in addressing it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we it had to be confronted. It kept coming up in our party room. People like Warren kept getting up and saying you got to do something about this because you are treating a whole group of people, non custodial parents mainly but not only men very unfairly.
MCKENZIE:
But anyway, the turning point has been reached. The major hurdles still in front of your Government, but Warren tells me works been done on that formula now.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we are working on the formula yes. But we have dealt as it were with stage one and I think that pretty, quite rightly well received.
MCKENZIE:
Now I know interest rates is fairly taboo as far interviewers in Australia are concerned but you did venture to the suggestion yesterday that the Reserve Bank need not follow that United States lead. The information’s been rife in this mornings media of course but those comments of yours yesterday could have been responsible for the overnight drop in the value of the dollar.
PRIME MINISTER:
Ridiculous. The idea that that would have been responsible is quite absurd. There seems to be a view in the minds of some people that because you have an independent Reserve Bank that the Prime Minister or the Treasurer of the day can never talk about monetary policy. That was never intended when the Reserve Bank was given independence to set interest rate levels and it would be plainly absurd if the democratically elected Prime Minister of Australia could never say anything about monetary policy and those who peddle that nonsense of course have their own political agendas to pursue.
The Reserve Bank’s set interest rates in Australia. What I said yesterday was exactly what the Secretary of the Treasury had said the day before and that is that although Australia is heavily influenced by the rest of the world, we do have a certain amount of economic independence. We don’t have to react in a knee jerk reaction to everything and its also the case incidentally that the Governor of the Reserve Bank, he himself some months ago made the same sort of observation. It was in a different context but the principal is the same and that is although we are very heavily influenced by the rest of the world, that doesn’t mean to say you don’t have some independence of movement. But those remarks weren’t necessarily tilted one way or the other in relation to what the Central Bank next does. But they were an observation and I don’t apologise for saying that. I would say it again and I say to those people who suggested the Prime Minister of this country can’t talk at all about monetary policy that, hey this is a democracy. I’m the person who in the end has the ultimate responsibility for the health of the Australian economy and of course I will continue to talk about monetary policy and of course that is entirely proper and of course that is entirely consistent with the arrangement for independence of action that was concluded between the Reserve Bank and the Government when we came to power over four years ago.
MCKENZIE:
I have got to acknowledge its not all bad news. Of course the sugar industry people love it. People in tourism in North Queensland are quite happy about that new low fifty-six six-five overnight.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am certainly not going to make predictions about the future level of the dollar. I don’t think that is the least bit helpful. Only because that’s in the realm of exciting speculation one way or the other and I think that is irresponsible but the general point I make is that talking about monetary policy is of course the sort of thing that Prime Minister’s from day to day naturally can, should, and will always do.
MCKENZIE:
We have got a few minutes left. Can we go to an open line caller too. We’ve got a gentlemen who wants to talk about small business. Now either of those headphones should be OK, just see how your volume is going. Have you got anything yet?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I have…..
MCKENZIE:
Lets go to John who wants to talk about small business. John good morning. You are talking to the Prime Minister.
CALLER:
Good morning Mr Howard, how are ya?
PRIME MINISTER:
How are you John?
CALLER:
Ah not bad mate, struggling.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah? What are you in?
CALLER:
Ah, we got a little cabin up in the tablelands mate and I am speaking on behalf I guess of a lot of people that are struggling to make ends meet at the moment. With cash flow the way it is and with the GST coming in.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you get a bit more cash flow.
CALLER:
Yeh that’s right.
PRIME MINISTER:
You’ll be able to hold it.
CALLER:
Yeh, we’ll be able to hold . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
You’ll be able to hold it for what up to three months. At least you - have you got a turn-over of more than $20 million?
CALLER:
No.
PRIME MINISTER:
I didn’t think so, well you’ll be able to hold it for three months.
CALLER:
I appreciate that. But then, what we’ve got now at the moment is people that are leaving the bar getting take-aways, now that’s the trend that’s happening and it’s going to get worse with the price of beer across the bar, can only go up.
PRIME MINISTER:
But the people will have more money in their pockets from the tax cuts.
CALLER:
I hear what you’re saying, you know I mean.
PRIME MINISTER:
You want to wait and see after the 1st of July whether the tax cut is really there. I understand that and that’s a natural, the reserve and caution that Australians have but I can assure you they are real and people will find after the 1st of July that the way in which the GST affects them in the main, this is 80% of the population is the price of some things will go up, the price of some things will stay the same and the price of some things will come down, but every taxpayer will have a tax cut.
CALLER:
Yeh, I appreciate where you’re coming from there Mr Howard but I still want to get to the point is that when you take off the excise, with the 10% on, you are going to have the excise back on again.
PRIME MINISTER:
We didn’t say otherwise.
CALLER:
No, I appreciate that but it wasn’t going to be seven per cent either.
PRIME MINISTER:
What do you mean seven per cent?
CALLER:
Seven per cent excites added on so the price of beer across the bar is going to go up.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, the price of beer across the bar will go up higher, probably seven or eight per cent, compared with a slab, a carton because there’s a service component in it in the same way that the price of restaurant meals is going to go up, there’s a service component in that. That’s the difference.
CALLER:
Bear in mind my problem again the slab’s not going to go up.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s going to go up somewhat but not as much.
CALLER:
People sitting bums on the chairs makes money rather than slabs and a little business, that’s what I’m trying to get at, I’m not trying to relate my situation to like a big hotel that’s got a big liquor outlet or liquor barn, where their turnover’s massive and their cash flow is a lot bigger than mine, bums on seats don’t represent their little business. It does for me. And it’s a family business, we don’t employ anybody else but the family. If we go down then the family. . .
PRIME MINISTER:
What’s the mix of your bar and bottle shop sales?
CALLER:
Currently?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeh, what’s the mix?
CALLER:
Right now it’s probably thirty seventy. Thirty bums on seats, seventy take-away.
PRIME MINISTER:
Seventy take-away and thirty. . .
CALLER:
People sitting at bars.
PRIME MINISTER:
I see. Well thirty per cent of your customers will pay a somewhat higher price for their beer than the other seventy per cent and you think it will twenty-eighty.
CALLER:
Yeh. See that fouls up your cash flow for a start. I mean. . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I mean, if the volume of beer bought is the same.
CALLER:
Volume of beer take-away will go up.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeh, I understand that.
CALLER:
Yeh, but your profit margin’s not in your take-away beer is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. You’ve got a grave problem, I see what you’re getting at. Well, the comfort I can offer you is that those people who are sitting at the bar drinking, they will have a significant tax cut and I’m not sure it’s going to be much of a change in the consumption pattern. I mean people tend to make decisions about whether they take beer away or they drink it at the bar, not according to the last cent of the cost of the beer but for other sort of social and non-economic reasons.
CALLER:
In the bigger areas I agree, but this is in a little community area that I’m servicing up here our turn-over not as big as a. . .
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no I realise that but then I do understand that but I don’t think it sort of alters the equation but well we haven’t long to go, I’d like to have a talk to you a couple of months after it’s operating so if next time I’m talking to John if you ring him up we’ll have a chat and you let me know whether it’s turned out as you thought or perhaps closer to what I predict.
CALLER:
Yeh, okay.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good on you. Good luck. Bye.
MCKENZIE:
It’s an interesting comment too in the light of what Peter Reith said at a dinner the other day about the GST, he said it’s going to, by the end of the year he said it’ll all most not be an issue, people will be used to it. You’ve also said yesterday that it’s going to be embraced far better than predicted.
PRIME MINISTER:
I believe that the hue and cry that has gone on over the last few months means that people are probably expecting something far worse than what’s going to happen. I don’t think people really accept at the moment that there are going to be big personal tax cuts because this will be the first time in more than a decade where there’s been a genuine cut in the personal tax rate. I think when people get their pay packets in the early weeks of July and they find in many cases thirty, forty, fifty dollars a week less tax, then they’re going to think it’s a lot different. At the moment people are sort of fixated by the fact that there’s going to be GST and they think that means a lot of things are going to go up by ten per cent, that’s not right either. So I’m quite optimistic and anyway, we don’t have long to wait. It’s now the 18 May and it’ll come into operation on the 1 July. So bring it on as quickly as possible. Unless people - the people will decide this, they’ll decide whether it’s a good thing or a bad thing. We believe it will be good and we believe it will be well embraced and then if we’re wrong well we pay the, we get the blame for that and I accept it because it’s something I’ve championed for years and something I took to the last election but I believe it is good for Australia and I believe it will work and I believe in six months time people will think it was the right thing for the Government to have done.
MCKENZIE:
Still no wind up from your minders, so we’ll talk to John about war veterans’ pensions. John go ahead, you talk to the Prime Minister.
CALLER:
Good morning Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, I’m here. I haven’t gone, I haven’t left for Korea yet.
CALLER:
I’m a Vietnam veteran and I have to say since my breakdown my dealings with the Veterans’ Affairs Department have been exceptionally good. However, it really disturbs me that the Minister, Senator Scott and his Department seem to be very, very keen on making this whole process an adversarial one. And also I’m very, very concerned at the proportion for the relativity between the pension and the living wage that people get. I’m not asking for any immediate solutions from you but I believe that in the light of . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Are you on a full rate. Are you on a full disability pension or what?
CALLER:
Not at this stage.
PRIME MINISTER:
No. Do you have a job?
CALLER:
No. I haven’t worked for eighteen months. As I say, because of my breakdown I was rather slow in getting the process going myself and as I say this is not just a plea for one it’s a plea for many that you perhaps encourage the Minister and his Department to be a little less adversarial about the process and also to look at the way that the full pension has been eroded compared with average weekly earnings.
PRIME MINISTER:
The pension has gone up in accordance with the cost of living.
CALLER:
Oh yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
And it will go up again on the first of July by four per cent along with all other pensions in advance of the impact of the GST. Look I take on board what you say. Just say I’ve found Bruce Scott a very sympathetic Minister, you’ll know in the Budget we allocated I think $32 million to deal with the implications of that recent report into the health of Vietnam Veterans and their dependents and that was an additional allocation. But I’m not of course immediately certain from what you say is, what the point of the adversarial point was without knowing some of the background details. If you like to send the details of your position to me care of this station or just write to me, Parliament House Canberra, it will get me. We’ll have a look at it and if you could mark it to the attention, no just send it to me Parliament House, Canberra.
CALLER:
Thanks very much indeed.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you.
MCKENZIE:
John Howard, the last time this bloke talked to you, in fact you were well and truly in Opposition so it’s quite a few years ago now. His name is Ron Crew, go ahead Ron.
CALLER:
Morning Mr Howard, how are you?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m very well.
CALLER:
Well it’s my usual complaint.
PRIME MINISTER:
What’s that?
CALLER:
And that’s to do with the injustices that occur in the building industry and development industry regarding the situation with trade contractors, sub-contractors and general suppliers. In the last few days in Australia we’ve seen Avonwood, a Melbourne based company affect people inter-state and around Australia and just in the last couple of days again we’ve seen Mr Boleski who is the Director of various companies including Border Island proprietary limited, which have bought Double Island just off the coast of Palm Cove just over two months ago, paid cash for it and is now insolvent. Something has got to be done with these insolvencies. What needs to happen is that in many cases the companies are trading insolvent for quite long periods of time. Then when it’s discovered that they are insolvent that it can be proved they’re trading insolvent for quite some time, the ASIC turns a blind eye. They just don’t bother about prosecutions unless it’s about twenty million bucks worth.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well if they’re very small amounts of money, it costs more in legal expenses so that it can sometimes be justified but I’m not aware of any conscious policy of the ASIC to turn a blind eye. If Directors have been guilty of carrying on when they know that a company is trading insolvently, I’m not aware of that and I’ll, that’s a matter in fact, it came up in another context a few months ago and I’m certainly not aware that that’s the policy of the ASIC.
CALLER:
Well it may not be a policy of them but it’s certainly occurring and truly we’re being robbed you know, to the tune of two hundred odd thousand, two hundred odd million in Queensland, four hundred and something million in New South Wales, three hundred and something million in Victoria. It all adds up to. . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Look I do understand that but it seems to me that what you’re really arguing for is a situation where you have a risk free involvement of sub-contractors with building companies. Now I’m sorry but the only way you can guarantee that is to establish some kind of fidelity fund which all of the solvent, honest companies are obliged to contribute to, that will drive up their costs and make it less economic and less effective for other people to be involved in this industry. You’ve got the other alternative is, which is plainly out of the question is for the Government to pick up the tab when there’s an insolventry. Well no Government [inaudible] can possibly do that.
CALLER:
I’m not asking for charity. What we’re asking for is to be paid for the work we do.
PRIME MINISTER:
I understand that.
CALLER:
We don’t want charity.
PRIME MINISTER:
I understand your point but I’m going beyond your identification of the problem, I’m trying to find a solution and the only solution that you can have. I mean if the company that you’re dealing with becomes insolvent, it goes broke, it can’t pay you and the only way you can get paid is for either the Government to come in which is not going to happen, because it is not our responsibility. No Government can underwrite every commercial deal. It would be out of business in a couple of years. The other alternative is in advance require people in the industry to put money aside in a fund that basically ensures you against the default of the company. Now that might be attractive to some people but it would be very unattractive to those companies that trade solvently and effectively and I’m not sure that the industry would support that. But they certainly for example, many industries are very strongly opposed to even a very limited variety of that in relation to employee entitlements. We found that recently. They expect the Government to provide that. You don’t get any sympathy at all from people in business who are themselves trading ethically and solvently and honestly, they don’t want to put their hard earned money into a fidelity fund. I think it’s a very difficult problem, I take on board what you’ve said about prosecutions. I’m not aware of any conscious policy on the part of the ASIC, I’ll check that again and reinforce the Government’s view that there should not be. I think if you did have a couple of; if the circumstances supported it, if people were prosecuted for trading insolvently knowing that to be the case then they ought to be hit with the full rigour of the law and maybe that will deter others in the future and perhaps that will add to the deterrent.
MCKENZIE:
Ron, I’ve got to leave you there thanks for your call. It’s news time now and Prime Minister, John Howard once again thank you for dropping in. I’ve just got a call from retired Lieutenant General Grey, and he’s threatening military response if you’re not there in ten minutes out at the university.
[ends]


Thank you very much Harry, and I acknowledge the presence of my Parliamentary colleagues, Ron Boswell, who spoke to you yesterday, the Leader of the National Party in the Senate and John Anderson's Parliamentary Secretary and Warren Entsch, the Federal Member for Leichhardt, where this meeting takes place.
I hadn't originally planned to be here this morning. When I heard on my arrival in Cairns yesterday that the Convention was taking place, both Warren and Ron asked me to come along and listen for a few moments this morning, very directly from your President and from you, about some of the problems that confront your industry. And I welcome this, albeit brief, opportunity this morning to hear what Harry has had to say and to also address some brief remarks to you.
It is true, as Harry has said, that the national economic environment is quite strong. We have had good growth in Australia. We've generated more jobs. We've got our Budget into surplus. We've reformed our industrial relations system and we're in the process of - commencing on the first of July, undertaking a major reform of our taxation system. And all of those things will work very much to Australia's further economic benefit. And if you look at the national economic scene, it's a very strong one. But in looking at the national economic scene it's my responsibility and that of my colleagues to also look at the regional economic scene and to look at the problems that confront particular industry sectors. I'm familiar, because of my past responsibilities both as Prime Minister, as Treasurer, as Opposition Leader and way back in the 1970s as Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, I'm very conscious with the torture through which the sugar industry of Australia has frequently gone and the difficulties it faces.
You are a victim of a fairly corrupt world market system. I share to the full the exasperation expressed by Harry about the Seattle Trade talks. There was a lack of American leadership at that meeting, which was a matter of intense disappointment to Australia. Because of the size of the United States' economy and the dominant role played by the United States in determining the shape of international trade negotiations when the American giant on the trade front gets idle then not a lot is going to happen. What we're endeavouring to do is to lead up of the Cairns Group. That is a group of countries as you well know, who have a vested national interest, a world wide interest in expanding trade liberalisation for agricultural producers and agricultural exporters, what we're endeavouring to do is to keep alive the flame of more access for our products. We're continuing to persist with that and it's a message that I'll be taking to Korea. I'm departing for Seoul at 12 o'clock today from Cairns and I'll be having a three-day visit and during that time I'll be reinforcing the message of trade liberalisation to the Korean Government. Of course Korea is a very good customer of Australia's. Over the last ten years Korea has bought more from us than any country in the world, other than Japan. And it remains a very important trade focus for Australia, and a very important partner.
But I do understand the world trade difficulties. I also understand the vagaries of the weather that have so badly effected this part of Australia and particularly effected your industry. Ron Boswell made an announcement yesterday regarding the excise on ethanol which is designed to open up a new avenue of hope and incentive for the industry. And it is an announcement that I know has been well received by the industry and it is an earnest of our determination to do what we can. Now I know that your industry is putting together some proposals to put to the government and I haven't come along here to make any announcements additional to what Ron said yesterday. We'll examine those proposals very carefully. Governments have numerous submissions put to it. We're not always able to accede to all of those submissions and I can't at this stage and I always deal directly and candidly with people, it's the only basis of communication between industry and governments.
I can't make any commitments in advance except to say that we will very carefully assess what the industry puts forward to us. We are very conscious of what you've gone through. We are also conscious of the importance of the sugar industry to the economic and social infrastructure of Queensland, particularly of Far North Queensland. You have a very sagacious and energetic advocate in Harry, who has led your industry with great energy and great enthusiasm over a long period of time. You will be aware of a number of the other assistance measures that the Government has afforded to the industry in recent years. But I am conscious of the particular pain and difficulty through which the industry has gone over the past 12 months and the particular impact of the very low world prices which are really are at levels that might not have been foreseen even amongst the gloomiest only a couple of years ago and their forecast has been confirmed at the quite recent ABARE rural outlook conference.
There are just two other things that I want to emphasise before concluding my remarks. And the firs to of those is that the programme of economic reform that the Government has been embarked on since it was elected just over four years ago, is not some kind of exercise in achieving an A plus in economic theory. Or winning the approval of the doyens of the economics profession, but rather the purpose of economic reform is to build a stronger Australian nation. And the purpose of economic reform is to lift the living standards of Australian people. Now, I am very conscious that when you reform an economy, not every part of the economy shares equally in the benefits of that reform. But as I look around Australia, I find some areas, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, that are very strong economically and are really brimming over with prosperity. I see other parts and your industry in certainly in that area, other parts of Australia that are not sharing.
And it is the role of government as best as it can to spread the benefits of economic prosperity as fairly and evenly as possible while always recognising that a government that believes in free enterprise and open markets is a government that does not to try to micro manage individual economic outcomes. No government can guarantee any industry or any individual a certain level of return. What a government can guarantee as best within its power is an economic environment and an economic framework which is more conducive than any other to people securing decent returns on their investment.
And that's what we've set out to do and that's why we got the Budget back into surplus and in the space of five Budgets we will have wiped out 50 of the $80 million of government debt that we inherited in March of 1996. I know that interest rates have gone up recently. I also know that they still remain vastly lower than they were in the early 1990s than they were in early 1996. We have changed the industrial relations system. I know that from time to time competition policy gets a bit of stick as you move around the regional areas of Australia. I understand that. I also understand, of course, that competition has brought a lot of benefits to all of Australia, including rural Australia. There is more competition now in the banking system than there used to be. Although there is not as much competition there as I would like to see and that is why the Government remains opposed to any relaxation of the Four Pillars banking policy until we see much stronger evidence of more competition. The great competition in telecommunications has met with all of the legitimate aspirations that people with rural Australia have for even better communications services has meant significant improvements in that area. But it remains a goal of the Government that those conditions be even further improved.
But I simply make the point, ladies and gentlemen, that pursuing economic reform is not some kind of ideological exercise. We are not ideological zealots but we are people who believe that sound, sensible economic policy in the long run is more likely to return a social dividend for the Australian community than the alternative of heavy government intervention. And I know very much that people in your industry are people who want the Government to provide you with a decent economic climate, to be sympathetic when you are overwhelmed by circumstances beyond your control, but by and large leave it to the initiative and the resourcefulness of individual investors and individual producers to achieve what they can.
I admire what the industry has done for Australia. I appreciate the contribution that it's made over the years to our export effort. I do understand the difficulties that you are going through at the present time and I thank you very much for this welcome opportunity to hear from your President speaking on your behalf and also to address a few remarks to you to put into perspective some of the Government's attitudes.
I wish you well. I know that I'll hear from you again, I hear very regularly from Harry. He's a regular correspondent, a very frequent advocate and a very persistent representative of your industry.
Thank you very much for listening.
[ends]


Subjects: Australian universities; importance of libraries; federal education funding; Prime Minister of Malaysia's remarks.
E&amp;OE..................................
Lieutenant General Gray, Vice Chancellor, Warren Entsch, the Federal Member for Leichhardt, my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say that I appreciate very much the invitation extended to me today by the University. It affords me an opportunity to pay tribute to the special contribution that the James Cook University is making, not only to the general academic life of Australia, but more broadly to the life and times and future of the community of North Queensland and Far North Queensland
I appreciate the kind words of welcome extended by the Chancellor and I also appreciate the candour with which he has addressed the ongoing debate in our community about the appropriate levels of federal government support for universities. It is not a debate that the Federal Government in any way walks away from. And it's a debate that we in a calm and sensible atmosphere are very happy to engage.
Today is an occasion, of course, to acknowledge the importance of libraries within the life of the university and within the broader teaching mission of governments, universities and schools within the Australian community. Libraries have advanced a long way from my memory of them at the Sydney University Law School, long before, of course, the arrival of the wonders of modern information technology and the ready accessibility compared with those days of resource material. But having had described to me the nature of this particular building and the facilities that it extends to its students, it is in every sense of the word, a state of the art facility which will be of enormous benefit to the students who study both here at Cairns and in the surrounding areas.
Today is an opportunity for me to remark briefly upon a number of Government initiatives of direct importance to this University. One of those has been referred to by the Chancellor and that of course is the establishment of the medical school at the university. And although the main activity is at Townsville there will nonetheless be significant benefits here at Cairns. And I want to pay tribute to the efforts of many people, including Warren Entsch and other members of Parliament, Peter Lindsay, and others, who, over the years, have campaigned very strongly for the provision of this facility. And it was argued at the time that the facility should be supported in a particular way by the Federal Government and also by State Governments and I acknowledge very readily the contribution of the Queensland Government as well to this particular project. It was put on the basis of a special need, not only in the context of this university's juxtaposition to rural and regional Australia, but also the contribution that it might make to the indigenous communities which are a very important part of the life of North and Far North Queensland.
And you will be aware of course that in the 1999 Budget, the Government provided recurrent funding to James Cook University the restored growth of 450 student places at a cost of $21 million over four years and recurrent funding for 60 places for the James Cook University Medical School in Townsville at a cost of $9.8 million and that was supported by an additional $10 million in capital funding from the Health portfolio with matched funding as I acknowledge from the Queensland Government.
And between 1996 and 2002 the Government has allocated substantial capital funding to James Cook University, $20 million for an extensive programme at the Cairns campus including $16.9 million for infrastructure projects and $10.5 million for stage three of the campus which of course incorporates this library. And $3 million will be allocated in 2002 as the Chancellor acknowledged towards the cost of the new Health Sciences and Science complex. And $1.4 million in 1998 to the development of computer network and video conferencing facilities and information technology laboratories.
Now, I acknowledge that in the ongoing debate there will always be differences of view about the adequacy of Federal Government funding for higher education, but I would hope that those details of that commitment is evidence of at least some very tangible response by the Federal Government to the particular needs and the particular position of James Cook University. It is true, as the Chancellor pointed out, that this University does not have the same resource base as some of the older universities in the established capital cities. And that in part was one of the reasons why we responded to the entreaties put to us in relation to the medical school. It is also why, of course, the integration of this University into the life of the local community is more extensive than is the case with the established sandstone universities. And it's been my experience on the many visits that I've paid to both Townsville and Cairns over the years to find a level of involvement and a level of commitment by the local community to the university community far ahead of that which occurs in Sydney or Melbourne or the other capital cities of Australia.
And I want to say to you that that is inevitably and unavoidably the way of the future for all universities in Australia. The idea that we can turn back upon that kind of partnership and go back to some kind of earlier period where universities were separated from the community and the level of involvement between universities and the private sector was kept to a minimum, those days are simply not going to return irrespective of what political attitude or what political philosophy obtains.
The debate in the Australian community and Australian society is about the level of government commitment and the level of involvement of the private sector and of personal contribution to higher education. That debate is very much about quantum, it is not about the principle of whether or not there should be a significant level of private provision and private commitment. I welcome the remarks that have been made by the Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor in that context. And it will be a ongoing dialogue between the Federal Government and the universities of Australia, both those in the regions and those within the capital cities.
It goes without saying, of course, that the future of Australia's economic and social development is very tied up with the level of its intellectual capital. It's no exaggeration to say that over the last few years Australia has enjoyed very strong economic conditions. And that is due in no small measure to the fact that we have a well educated, literate, flexible and sophisticated workforce. I will be leaving Cairns in about an hour and a half to go to Korea to pay my first visit to that country as Prime Minister. And it is a reminder to me, of course, that the very important link which is between Australia and the countries of the Asia Pacific Region. And one of the very important contributions that Australia has made to that linkage, of course, has been the contribution over the decades that has been made by the universities of Australia to educating the young men and women of the countries of our region.
And when the Prime Minister of Malaysia was reported in yesterday's press of having made some mildly energetic remarks about me and about the relationship between Australia and Malaysia, I contemplated a response and in my mind I dismissed the first two or three, and then I lighted upon what I though was the appropriate one and one that is very relevant in the context of any political leader addressing a university gathering and that is the fact that over the years Australia has educated something like 130,000 Malaysian young men and women. And the Alumni of Australian universities within the Asian community is very extensive indeed. And that contribution is something that will endure beyond the transitory exchanges that might occur between Prime Ministers of any particular period of time. And it is a reminder of a very important intellectual legacy, it's also a reminder of a very important human legacy and a very important contribution made by the universities of Australia towards the development of close relations between Australia and the people of this region.
Can I again express my gratitude to you, Chancellor and Vice Chancellor. I admire the work of this university, I wish it well. I thank you for your welcome and I have great pleasure of declaring open this beautiful library facility.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE ................................
Well thank you very much Mr Kim, to your business colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Let me first of all thank the four major business organisations of Korea, for the great courtesy that they have extended to me and the other members of my travelling party in sponsoring this lunch today. It gives me an opportunity to say something of the strength of the economic relationship between our two countries and also address a few remarks about the future.
It is symbolic that only two days ago I opened the Sun Metals Corporation Zinc Refinery in Townsville in North Queensland because that represents the largest ever investment by a Korean company in Australia. That state of the art plant which employs large numbers of Australians is a symbol of just how close our two countries have become and what a great contribution Korean investment and Korean know how is making to the economic development of Australia. That project will earn very valuable export income for Australia and the product will be exported amongst other countries to Korea and generally it represents the high water mark so far of the economic relationship between our two nations.
In introducing me Mr Kim had something to say about the historic relationship between our two countries, the experiences we shared almost fifty years ago during the Korean War and more recently the way in which Australia was able to provide a sympathetic offer of assistance when the Asian economic downturn hit Korea. Can I say in the context of that that Korea's recovery from the Asian economic downturn has been more spectacular and more impressive than that of any other country caught up with that slump. And it's a tribute not only to the government of Korea, to the business community of Korea, but also to the people of Korea that your country should have begun its recovery so soon after the worst of the economic slump hit you.
I know that all of you recognise that the path ahead will still be very difficult. But the recovery is there for all the world to see and it has won the admiration and respect of countries not only in the region, but around the world. And the reason why the recovery has occurred is that your government, your President, your business community and your people were willing to undertake the measures that were needed in order to correct the circumstances that lead to the slump in the first instance.
For our part, Australia watched anxiously as the economic downturn affected many of our friends within the Asian Pacific region. And we count it as an important element of Australia's very strong involvement with the region that we were able to offer strong support not only to Korea but also to Thailand and to Indonesia. Because Australia regards her economic links with the Asian Pacific region as being second to none so far as her economic relationships around the world are concerned. Countries such as Japan and Korea have been Australia's best customers in many commodity and other areas for decades. And it's our desire that that process go on.
We recognise that in this globalised world economy you can only hope to succeed, you can only hope to stay ahead of the other competitors in the race if you continue to reform and to keep modern and competitive your domestic economy. And that is why the Government I lead has undertaken a lot of economic change and reform since it came to office a little over four years ago. We have changed and reformed our industrial relations system. There are fewer strikes, fewer stoppages, fewer industrial disputes than ever before. We have reformed our internal competitive arrangements. We have a more open economy. We have reduced levels of tariff protection, not as far I know as some exporters would like, but even in areas such as passenger motor vehicles we will have a tariff level of no more than 10% by the year 2005. And that represents a very sharp reduction on what the situation was only a few years ago.
We have a very open and beckoning attitude towards foreign investment and those chief executives of companies that have investments in Australia who are here today will know exactly what I mean by that. We welcome foreign investment, it has made a very important contribution to our country, in the past it does now and it will in the future.
Importantly on the 1st of July we will introduce the biggest single reform to Australia's taxation system ever. We're introducing a goods and services tax, more commonly known generically as a value added tax. We're reducing company tax from 36 cents in the dollar to 30. We're almost halving capital gains tax. We're introducing significant reductions in personal income tax and otherwise implementing very significant reforms to Australia's taxation system.
We are continuing with a program of the government withdrawing from ownership of business enterprises which are better owned and managed by the public and by the private sector. I am referring in particular to the major telecommunications carrier Telstra which is now almost 50% owned by individual shareholders, most but not all of them Australians and it remains the policy of the Government, subject to satisfaction of customer delivery capacity and performance, it remains the policy of the Government to sell the remaining 50.1% of Telstra.
We are doing all of these things in the name of making Australia a more open economy. We share with many countries in the world a frustration at the fact that the World Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle last year was such a relative failure. As leader of the Cairns Group, we would have liked to have achieved a lot more at that meeting. And in my discussions with your President this morning, I reaffirmed and he agreed our joint commitment to pursuing a comprehensive new world trade organisation round. Naturally we seek to see as part of that greater liberalisation in the area of agricultural trade.
The bilateral economic and social and cultural relationship between Australia and Korea is very strong. Not only have you been a very good purchaser of Australian raw materials and many other products and services, but over the years the relationship at a political and cultural level has developed a great deal. There are some 30,000 Australians of Korean descent and they make a very strong and welcome contribution to Australian society. After being affected by the economic downturn in Asia, the tourist trade between our two counties is recovering. There were 9,500 Korean students come to Australia in 1999. I believe that as a result of the recovery of the Korean economy there will be renewed Australian investment interest in your country.
Ultimately as you better than any other audience knows, decisions about individual investment are ones to be taken by individual men and women in business. And it is not the role or the responsibility of government to dictate whether or not a particular company should invest in a particular project. But it is the role of the government, be it in Korea or in Australia to create a climate that is beckoning and encouraging towards domestic or foreign investment. And it has been the goal of my Government to be one that welcomes with open arms foreign investment into Australia.
We all talk a lot, and it's a reality, about the globalised world economy in which we live. Information technology which future historians I believe will record as having made as great, if not greater an impact on the societies of the world as the industrial revolution has meant that whether we like it or not and I think we should like it, the globalised economy is with us forever. And it is the responsibility of governments and the challenge to the business communities of the world to ensure that they take the best possible advantage of the opportunities that the globalised economy offers.
And it means that judgements made by others about domestic economic performance are more important now than they might have been a generation ago. And that is why what you have achieved in Korea is so very important to your future because it is seen with approval around the world as an example of a country hit with a severe economic downturn having the capacity and the will and the courage to bring about the changes that are necessary.
Of course there is not only an economic dimension to my visit to your country. There is also a political and foreign policy dimension. It takes place at a time when your President has in a very historic move, brought about a dialogue between your country and North Korea. Australia has recently announced the resumption of diplomatic relations with North Korea and in recent years has been a strong contributor to KEDO and has strongly involved herself in humanitarian aid to the people of North Korea. We wish the President well and we believe that the leadership that he has shown on this particular issue is very much to his personal credit and also to the people of your country.
And might I also say that I took the opportunity when I spoke to the President of expressing my gratitude to him for the speedy and effective contribution that Korea had made to the INTERFET Force led by Australia that went into East Timor.
But ladies and gentlemen, economic links are important, political links are important, trade links are important. But the true measure of the friendship of two countries is of course the links that exist between the peoples of our societies. And the more opportunities there are for travel, the more opportunities there are for people in every day life in Korea and Australia to get to know each other, the better. One of the more pleasing personal things I was able to do this morning when I met the President, was to hand him a personal message written in his own language to the President from leaders of the Korean community within Australia. And I was able to tell him that there are a significant number of people of Korean descent within my own constituency and indeed there is a Presbyterian Church in the middle of my constituency which has one of its services entirely in the Korean language. And it's a measure of the diversity of Australia, and it is also a measure of the way in which the people of Korea are welcomed in the Australian community that that should be the case.
I think our bilateral relationship is in good shape, but like all relationships it shouldn't be taken for granted and it needs to be worked on. And one of the opportunities that I have in coming here and particularly here today with leaders of so many business organisations and companies is to say that we value very much the contribution that Korea has made. We value very much the reliable relations between those in our two countries that have done business with each other. You have a reputation as a country and as businessmen and women of doing business in an open, honest and efficient manner and that is something that is very important to us, as I know it is important to you. And it is an opportunity for me to say to you and to the leaders of your government just how important the relationship is to me and to the government and that we will do all that we can to further expand it.
We agreed in our discussions today, your President and I, that we would upgrade the Ministerial contacts between our two countries. We would have formal annual meetings between our Foreign Ministers and our Trade Ministers and we also agreed that as part of the ongoing dialogue in the area of trade we would explore whether there was any scope over time for the development of a free trade association understanding between our two countries. And we have agreed to do that because, whilst both of us remain very committed to and focused upon the achievement of a new World Trade Organisation round, we need to take every opportunity we can between now and when that might occur to energise trade initiatives and trade activities not only between our two countries but generally within the Asian Pacific region.
Ladies and Gentlemen thank you very much for the courtesy that you have extended to me. I am honoured by the lunch that you have put on for me today. I value very importantly the relationship between our countries and I admire very much the contribution that your President and your business community are making to the development of that relationship.
Thank you very much.


E &amp; OE…………………………………………………………………………………..
Mr Lou Russell, the President of the Chamber, Katie Lahey, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I first of all thank the Chamber for the opportunity you’ve given me tonight on this very important anniversary, this very important milestone in the Chamber’s existence to share with you some thoughts about our country, about its general condition and more particularly about the condition of the Australian economy.  
At the present time for a whole combination of reasons it’s very appropriate that we reflect on the general condition of Australia and not just on the economic state of our country.  We are on the eve of the hosting of the greatest sporting event in the world,  the Sydney Olympics.  This weekend we’ll celebrate a very important milestone, along the path to reconciliation between the Aboriginal people of this country and the rest of the community.   
Next year we will celebrate one hundred years of the federation of the Australian nation and all of this takes place against the background of a world that has changed forever from what it was a few short years ago.  And for that reason, I congratulate Katie and the Chamber for the focus that you have given to the social responsibilities of business through the launching of the project of the common good.  
And the remarks that you have made tonight Katie echo in some respects the notion embodied in what I’ve described over the last few years as the concept of a social coalition.  And these things give me the opportunity to reflect for a few moments on not only the changes that have occurred in the economy, particularly as a result of the information technology revolution, but also the changes that have occurred in political life here in Australia and around the world in recent years.  
And just as we now all live in a globalised world economy and the things we took for granted only a few years ago and the paradigms that governed us only a few years ago have changed.  So it is with politics and I am very conscious as the leader of a political party, as a leader of the government as somebody who from time to time hopes he is abreast of contemporary political thought.  I am somebody who is very conscious of those changes.  We no longer live in such an ideologically driven political environment.  Our politics now is a lot less tribal than it was ten and certainly twenty or thirty years ago.  It is no longer possible to stereotype people quite so readily, to predict their political allegiance, to assume that they will maintain that allegiance for a lifetime.  Just as businesses become more competitive, so politics has become a lot more competitive and that is a good thing too because nobody should ever be guaranteed a market share. 
And we all have to fight a lot harder and be a lot more imaginative and we all have to be a lot more adaptive to the changes and the unpredictability and uncertainty of politics adds a very special character and a very special spice to political combat as we enter the twenty first century.  And this is quite relevant in a way to what Katie had to say about the common good and one of the reasons why I developed the notion of a social coalition.  
What I mean by a social coalition is to recognise that no one section of the community can solve the problems we confront acting on its own.  One of the reasons I developed that notion and have tried to give some expression to it over the last two years in particular is a result of observing how politics has gone through several phases over the twenty five to thirty years that I have been involved in public life.  In the 1960s and 70s there was a view, given expression to here in Australia through the very energetic federal programmes and government activities of the Whitlam Government.  Given expression to in the United States by the very interventionist policies of the Kennedy and Johnson Administration, under the title of the Great Society, there was a view that every problem could be solved if only you had more government.  That every problem would be solved if you had a Federal Government programme, particularly in countries like Australia and the United States.  And that seemed to be the solution to society’s short comings and society’s challenges.  
But that of course as we know didn’t work and we saw in the 1980s in particular, a retreat from that view.  And perhaps too great a retreat from that view and the idea developed that in some way if you simply allowed market forces to operate in a completely unrestrained way, there would be some kind of mystical, trickle down effect that would solve every conceivable social problem. And I think we’ve found in recent years that that hasn’t quite worked either.  And we’ve come I think to accept that neither of those models was entirely relevant, entirely appropriate and what we need to do is to find something and we have begun to find it, something that recognises that Governments have a limited but none the less strategic role to play in society.  
But Governments alone can’t challenge, let alone solve all of the social problems of society and I have tried to propagate the notion of the social coalition.  And what that notion simply says is that yes the Government does have a role, an ongoing role in the area of social welfare.  It’s the responsibility of Government to provide the social security safety net.  And when I talk of a social Coalition and when I talk of a greater role for business, I don’t have in mind that the Government should withdraw.  I don’t have in mind that the Government should hand over to the welfare sector or the business sector, the ongoing responsibility to provide the social security safety net.  But what I do recognise is that the Government is not very good at providing some things separate from the social security safety net.  Government agencies aren’t always the best at providing coal face social welfare counselling and personal relief and helph.  And I have tried in my time as Prime Minister in areas like drug abuse to very heavily involve volunteer organisations with Government resources.  
And the Premier of NSW and I, and I am pleased to say in an area like this, there are no real political barriers, the Premier and I today launched a government programme in the drug area.  Funded by the Federal Government but utilising the services of State Governments and involving the welfare sector facilities to provide compulsory diversionary programmes for people who have a drug problem as an alternative to being caught up in the criminal justice system.  
And what I have sought to do through the social coalition and that is why I welcome so much what Katie had to say in her introductory remarks tonight is to say well, there are some things that we do well because we levy taxation on your behalf and I know you love us doing that.  We have the resources to provide a social security safety net but we need to enlist and enrol the efforts of great volunteer organisations and not just to help people in their hours of need but also to provide policy advice and I have tried to involve those organisations in providing policy advice and right at the present time,
I’ve got a reference group shared by Patrick McClure who is the Director of Mission Australia, one of the great welfare organisations, not only of this city but of this country to give that advice.  
We need the involvement of the business community and I welcome its growing participation and I always say, I am not asking business to give more, I am asking more businesses to give.  Because there are many men and women in business who have given magnificently over the years and have very very strong senses of social responsibility.  So there is as Katie quite rightly said there is a growing role and it’s not just a question of philanthropy, it’s not just a question of writing a cheque important though, those things are, it is also a question of playing a very constructive role in promoting social improvement and social change.  Because it’s a terrible cliche to say that we live in a world that is changing very rapidly and the sort of economic and social change that the information technology revolution is bringing about will I believe be seen by future historians as probably greater than the impact of the industrial revolution on society at the time it occurred.  
So it is both a challenging and very interesting and very stimulating time to have an opportunity to lead a government, to have an opportunity to lead a business Chamber to have an opportunity to run a business in this country.  And of course the primary responsibility, the core business if I can put it in that corny fashion that the business community is to make a profit and nothing that I have said about the important social roles gainsays that fact.  We do need a society that generates wealth and we need a society that lives in as benign an economic climate as can be created and in the time that we have been in government we have sought to do that.  
We have sort over the last four and bit years to challenge some of those things that needed change.  We set about very directly and very vigorously to tackle the fiscal deficit that this country suffered from and of the many things that I am very proud to talk about none probably more so than the fact that in the five budgets that Peter Costello has brought down, we will have eliminated about 50 billion of the 80 billion dollars of debt that we inherited as a Government on your behalf in March of 1996.  And we are very proud also of the Industrial relations reforms that Katie mentioned.  
And one of the very good things about Australia’s economic performance in the last few years is that we’ve been able to give to the average wage and salary earner, not only greater job security because we’ve generated almost seven hundred thousand more jobs, but we’ve also been able to give them notwithstanding the recent increases significantly lower housing interest rates and also significant increases in real incomes because nominal wages have run ahead of the rate of inflation.  And part of that has been due to increases in productivity.  And some of that productivity gain has come from the fruits of greater investment in technology and some of it has come from significant improvements in industrial relations.  
So when we look back over that last four years I hope we can see a pattern of a government that’s been willing to tackle some issues for the longer term.  To recognise that any of us in public life only have a few years to try and make a difference and you have to take every opportunity and sometimes you can get criticised for the pace of change.  There’s sometimes a suggestion that society is suffering from reform fatigue but in the sort of world environment in which we now live you really have no alternative but to keep reforming and keep being more competitive.  And it’s not good enough to look back and say well the Australian economy is better now than it was ten years ago.  
That might be satifying if you are making a political speech but if you are trying to win a market in this month in this year, at the beginning of the twenty first century the thing that matters is whether you are as competitive as the other companies and the other countries that are trying to win that market and that was why it was so tremendously important that Australia was able to live through the economic downturn that hit the Asia Pacific region a couple of years ago.  And we now if we continue on our current path, we can have the double benefit of having lived through that downturn but now begin to get some of the fruits of the recovery which is now gathering pace in some of those Asian Pacific countries. 
I went last weekend for the first time as Prime Minister to Korea. One such country that was hit very hard and to its very great credit took the economic medicine, and very quickly, that was needed, to bring about a downturn, and the adjustment was very severe and it had a lot of very heavy social implications but now that country has turned itself around and it’s again starting to be something of a performer in our part of the region and a very important customer to Australia.  It’s been consistently amongst the three or four countries that have bought more from Australia over the last ten years than any other.  So the picture as I look at it, the state of the nation to borrow the title of tonight’s dinner is over that period of time a very positive one.  
But as I say the reform task is never over.  We can’t afford as a society to have reform fatigue.  We do need to better explain, to better understand the reactions of people to change.  But if we imagine that we can stop the world and somehow or other opt out for a couple of years from the global economic environment, I think we’re very sadly mistaken.
And that is why the biggest economic reform, in case you hadn’t heard at all, is coming on the 1st of July and that is taxation reform.  I don’t think there is a man or woman in business, I hope there isn’t, anywhere in Australia who hasn’t heard of taxation reform and who isn’t 100% ready for the introduction of the biggest change that is going to come our way so far as taxation is concerned in our lifetime.
I don’t need to tell you that the process of getting the reform originally together as a coherent policy through the late months of 1997 and into 1998, that was very hard.  And it did involve a lot of consultation with the business community and I want to record now my great thanks to many people in the business community for the very positive attitude that they took towards tax reform.  The attitude taken by this Chamber, the attitude taken at a national level by the ACCI, the attitude taken by the Australian business group, by the Business Council, by the Minerals Council, by many other business organisations put the national interest in front of immediate corporate interest.  I know that there are some companies represented in this room tonight that are not entirely happy with some aspect of tax reform, I know that.  But I found with this exercise a great willingness on the part of people in business to put the national interest in front of sectional interest.  And that gave me a great deal of encouragement.  And it meant that it was possible to reach out beyond the immediate knee-jerk reaction of people in companies and find support for something that was in Australia’s broader interests.  
We persevered with reform, even though it was unpopular and politically risky because deep down I’ve known and I think many people in this room have known that we’ve needed to reform Australia’s taxation system for more than a generation.  In fact I can still remember a year after I entered parliament, it was in 1975, there was a report tabled by the Whitlam Government which had been commissioned by the late Billy Snedden when he’d been Treasurer, called the Asprey Report, and it was chaired by the late Ken Asprey who was a judge of the Court of  Appeal in New South Wales and he was given a brief by the then government to review Australia’s taxation system and recommend some fundamental changes.  And interestingly enough he recommended the introduction of a broadbased, indirect tax; and he recommended the abolition of the wholesale sales tax; and he recommended some reductions in personal income tax; and he recommended some changes in the regime to include some kind of capital gains tax.  It all sounds very familiar.  And it’s broadly consistent with what a quarter of a century later it’s finally been possible to get through the Federal Parliament, not entirely in the form we originally intended, but nonetheless 85 to 90% of what the Australian people voted for in October of 1998.  
And the good thing about this reform is that nobody will ever be able to say that the Australian people haven’t voted for it.  And when it comes in, as it is on the 1st of July, I believe that it will be widely accepted.  I believe that within a relatively short period of time after it has been introduced the great bulk of the Australian community will look back and ask what all the fuss had been about and what all the political controversy had been about, what all the nitpicking had been about and what all the minutiae of the analysis had been about.  Because Australians in my experience will embrace and accept and facilitate reform, provided you can satisfy them on two key criteria.  You must first of all convince them that the reform is good for Australia.  And I believe that most Australians accept and I find this an interesting constant in all of the surveys that are done about tax reform, even though they might say the majority of people wonder whether it is good for them, or good for their company, or good for their family, most people think that tax reform is good for Australia.  
And the second thing is that you persuade them that it is a fundamentally fair change.  And I believe with all of the changes in social benefits, the very significant reductions in personal income tax, the reductions in capital gains tax, the abolition of provisional tax and all of the other benefits – the reductions in the price of fuel in rural areas of Australia, all of those things together I believe have produced a view in the Australian community that it’s not only good for the country, but it is also fair.
But as I said to Rob McKeogh a moment ago, before I got up to speak, it’s a little bit academic now debating all of these things, it’s going to happen on the first of July.  And we in the political world will find out fairly soon what the reaction of the Australian public is going to be.  But I am very optimistic about that reaction because I think Australians are fundamentally very positive, optimistic people.  If you take them into your confidence, if you give them the detail of something and you persuade them of the national interest imperative in change and reform then I think you have a great chance of taking them along with you.
But ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude at where I began and that is to congratulate the Chamber on its 175 years.  Can I thank you for the opportunity you have given me tonight to share some thoughts with you, not just about economics, but about the general condition of our country and the relationship which ought to exist between the business community and society.  And I was heartened by what was said tonight.  I was heartened by the emphasis that has been placed by this Chamber on the social role and the social responsibilities of corporate Australia, because with that attitude then it’s fair of me to say and I think fair of the Australian community to say to all of you that the heart of Australian business is good, that it is doing well economically, it is alive to its, not only its responsibilities to its shareholders, its first responsibility but also very alive to its responsibility to the Australian community.  And as we enter the twenty-first century, that isn’t a bad place for Australian business to be and it’s a magnificent way for it to make a contribution to the years ahead for our nation.
Thank you.
[Ends]



Subject: President Wahid; Fiji; Korean Acting Prime Minister; Kogas
E&amp;OE ……………………………………………………………………………
This will only be for a few minutes, you may want to ask me one to two quick questions, but before you do that I thought I might inform you that this morning I took a telephone call from President Wahid of Indonesia. It was in response to the letter I’d written to him, which I spoke of about ten days ago.
The President told me that he agreed that our meeting, our bi-lateral meeting should take place before the proposed tripartite meeting involving the East Timorese Leader Xanana Guasmo. He said that he was still looking forward to coming to Australia and I have suggested some dates in July and they will be a matter of discussion between the Australian Ambassador in Jakarta and President Wahid’s office.
This is the first occasion on which we have spoken. It was a very pleasant conversation, we’re both looking forward to meeting each other. I told the President that he would be the first Indonesian leader to visit Australia in twenty-six years and that he would receive a very warm and generous welcome from the Australian people, from both sides of politics.
I expect that he will be honoured with an honorary doctorate in at least one or perhaps two Australian universities. That of course is a matter for him and those institutions. But it goes without saying that he will be very warmly welcomed in Australia. The relationship between Australia and Indonesia is a very important one. I have made that repeatedly clear. I admire very much the leadership he’s given to Indonesia since taking over in very difficult circumstances. I repeated that to him during our telephone conversation and informed him that that had been the substance of some the discussion between myself and President Kim Dae-jung.
Now, any other questions?
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, have you had an update today on the events in Fiji?
PRIME MINISTER:
Very briefly Paul, the situation on our latest information, it’s still difficult but we are increasing our optimism that the matter will be satisfactorily resolved. It does not appear that the hostage takers have the support of either the police or the army. They have been denounced by the President and Army Commander Ratu Mara. There’s been widespread international condemnation of which of course Australia has been part. General Rabuka has I understand been involved in some of the discussions and negotiations. The advice we have is that there is no danger to any Australians in Fiji. It is still a very difficult, tense situation. But we have more rather than less grounds for feeling positive than last night.
JOURNALIST:
Notwithstanding the fact that threats have been made to the lives of the hostages there, there’s quite serious threats that have been made against them?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I am aware of that. Well, there’s always a threat when people are taken hostage by armed hostage takers. But I can only inform you that that is the latest. Mr Downer spoke by telephone to Ratu Mara this morning and he will be issuing a statement regarding that in Australia very soon.
JOURNALIST:
Are you concerned about the fact that the Korean media is reporting what happened yesterday as an announcement, or an agreement by you for some trade agreement with Korea? It seems to have been taken to a much further level than you announced yesterday.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you know what it’s like, if you reacted to each and everything that was said in the media you’d get rather disconcerted, wouldn’t you? I know what was agreed, it was agreed that as part of the dialogue there should be a discussion of those things.
JOURNALIST:
Can you tell us anything about the discussion you had today with Mr Han?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I had a very good discussion with Mr Han of KOGAS. I naturally extolled to him the virtues of entering into large, long term, valuable contracts for the supply of LNG from Australian suppliers and he said that he was having discussions with the joint venture project group that is in Seoul at the present time, but they haven’t of course made a decision. The situation is that they have bought their LNG from as, a number of sources in South East Asia and the Middle East and they’re looking at further diversification and that is where Australia comes in. And I spent most of my time telling him that it would be a very wise decision to involve Australia. But of course it is a commercial decision, but the company has had the goodwill and the backing, not only of the Federal Government but also of the Western Australian Government.
Yes?
JOURNALIST:
Sorry Mr Howard have you read the reports that the Fijian Prime Minister has had a gun held to his head?
PRIME MINISTER:
I haven’t heard that specific report. In my comments I’m relying on the reports I was given a couple of hours ago and also what I have been informed of the discussion between Ratu Mara and Mr Downer.
JOURNALIST:
Why do you say there’s more reason to feel positive than last night?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that was the thrust of the advice conveyed to Mr Downer.
JOURNALIST:
But why is there more optimism now? Given that it seems to be . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well no, I base that observation on what Ratu Mara told Mr Downer. It’s optimism that the matter will be satisfactorily resolved but look, I obviously can’t do more than report to you what I have been informed. I mean, we have no direct control over the situation. It’s clearly a very, a very unhappy situation. It’s been roundly condemned. It’s an outrageous act, transgression against a democratically elected Prime Minister and there’s always a danger while they remain in the hands of the hostage takers. And the reports you allude to may well be correct. I don’t know I hadn’t been informed of them. I am just informing you that I have been told that the thrust of the discussion was that there was more optimism now, that the situation could be satisfactorily resolved. Now that may prove to be wrong. In these situations all I can do is answer the questions as best I can on the latest information I’ve got.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you also spoke to the head of POSCO I think yesterday?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I did.
JOURNALIST:
What was . . . was there any outcome from that discussion?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, essentially it was a discussion that spoke of the longstanding relationship that exists. The fact that POSCO has been, you know a very substantial purchaser and I naturally exhorted the company to continue that.
JOURNALIST:
Was there a courtesy call from the Acting Prime Minister today?
PRIME MINISTER:
I saw the Acting . . . yes, I had a call from him. Well, I saw him in his Finance Minister capacity and he will be entertaining us at lunch.
JOURNALIST:
In that capacity, were there any issues addressed with him that are substantial and specific which might be of interest to us?
PRIME MINISTER:
In other words, is there anything you want me to tell you about the meeting? Well I know, it was largely a meeting that reinforced the discussions I had had with the President, particularly in relation to the trade association and the economic recovery that Korea has enjoyed.
JOURNALIST:
Discussions about currency and such issues?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. No discussion about currencies.
JOURNALIST:
Do your discussions with KOGAS leave you more optimistic that that extension, the massive development of the North West Shelf could go ahead, given that it needs an additional partner with Japan?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t think its prospects were done any harm and it’s always important to reinforce the support that the Government is giving to the private sector investors and certainly, Mr Han was left in no doubt that the Federal Government is an enthusiastic backer of that project.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE.................................
PRIME MINISTER:
The Premier of New South Wales, to John Della Bosca his ministerial colleague, to James Pitt, Professor Webster, Brian Watters, Mick Palmer, the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, ladies and gentlemen.
I can unhesitatingly say that I agree with everything that the Labor Premier of New South Wales has said. Brother Carr and I on this particular issue are as of one because this is one of those issues that, all humour aside, strikes at the kind of society we are. It strikes all families in all stations of life; it touches people unexpectedly; it challenges us to summon our sense of compassion towards people who have a problem. And I certainly agree very much with what the Premier said about the courage of people who have summoned the commitment to do something about a personal problem.
I had the opportunity along with Brian only last week of announcing a program in Townsville run by the Salvation Army and I had the chance before making the announcement to spend a half an hour with the twenty men who come from all parts of Australia and had finally sort of recognised that they had to do something about their level of either alcohol or drug abuse. And they were very open and that was terrific and it was one of the more rewarding experiences I've had in recent months of actually feeling as though you could directly engage people and I learnt a great deal about their attitude and about how you deal with these things by being very direct and asking how it started and how they felt and how we could help and where society was helping them and where society was letting them down. And what they all said was that programs that gave them an opportunity to kick the habit were tremendous and there's been an absence of those in this country and we're not interested in whose fault that may have been in the past, let's forget about that. The good news is that governments across the party political divide at a state and federal level are working together very closely. And I want to thank the New South Wales Government, I want to thank the New South Wales Premier for the very strong support that he and his government and his Ministers are giving to the federal Government strategy. We're putting resources into catching the drug barons, into law enforcement. We're putting resources into educating children against starting with drugs and we're putting resources into helping people rehabilitate themselves and break the habit.
And the essence of diversion is to confront people with the choice. Do you get sucked into the criminal justice system or do you go into a diversionary program? And it's the overwhelming view of society that we ought to give people that opportunity and that is why this agreement made with the largest state in Australia, and it's the second of these agreements, we've launched one in Tasmania with the Tasmanian Government. I expect to conclude one very soon with the Queensland Government and I have no doubt that we'll conclude with all the other governments as well.
So can I say to all of those involved in the campaign against the menace of drugs and particularly people associated with Odyssey House which since 1977 has been providing people with hope and encouragement and I thank all of those people in the city of Sydney, the community of Sydney that have supported Odyssey House over the years. It must often seem very heartbreaking and painfully slow but I do believe organisations like Odyssey House are making a real difference and I applaud them for that and I thank all of those people involved.
We must never abandon our commitment to fighting the drug problem, you never give up on it and if you can offer people a way out and diversionary programs do that and the thirty eight odd million dollars of Commonwealth money that is going into this particular agreement will make a very important contribution. I know that Odyssey House in particular is associated with a cannabis diversion program and over the years has played a major role in fighting the drug menace at the grass roots and there are people here today who have forgotten more about the drug menace than many of us will ever know in our lives because of their daily coal face experience and it is all about getting governments at both levels, getting the great voluntary organisations of Australia, getting public spirited men and women in business and the professions and I particularly thank the involvement of the medical profession in this campaign.
So this is a very positive day, it's an example of where governments at a state and federal level are responding to a real human need and I thank the Premier for his cooperation. I think the diversion approach is the right way to go; I think it will gather respect and support within the Australian community and I really am personally delighted to be associated with this announcement.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Fiji crisis;  GST; Government spending; apology; Mr Mandela
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard good morning.  
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, Fiji first.   Is George Speight a terrorist?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he has behaved like one yes.
MITCHELL:
Should he get a pardon?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I don’t think so.  I think if a country allows somebody to take hostage a democratically elected Prime Minister and hold him hostage, make demands and behave the way he’s behaved, if you give that person a pardon you are in effect suspending the rule of law.
MITCHELL:
How does that affect Australia’s relationship with Fiji ?
PRIME MINISTER:
It will have an effect.  Now as to what effect, well the Government will have a careful look at that.  We’ll give an appropriate response, there will be consequences unless the course of action on which Fiji has now embarked changes very dramatically, there will be consequences and we’ll consider that in an appropriate way.  We’re not going to make up our minds this morning, that’s foolish but there will be consequences and this is a very disturbing, profoundly regrettable event.  Fiji is an important pacific partner of Australia’s.  What is happening is the introduction of a racially based approach…. to  Government, to democracy.  We had a democratic constitution in Fiji with everybody being treated equally.  Mr Chaudhry who I met only a few weeks ago in Canberra when he came to visit me as the duly elected Prime Minister of Fiji, he was elected.  He has every right to be there and it’s an act of rebellion and a criminal act what’s occurred to him.
MITCHELL:
Could those consequences include the removal of aid to Fiji?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that’s one of the things on the agenda.  When something like this happens Neil  you put everything down and you make a response that is commensurate with the disapproval you feel towards what’s occurred, but also has regard to humanitarian consequences.  One of the things that I was able to do for Mr Chaudhry when he came to see me was to agree to a request by him to defer a little longer a transitional arrangement in relation to a trade matter between Australia and Fiji because of the possible impact of the change on the population of that country employed in a particular industry.  Now all of these things have to be measured.  We want to disapprove what’s happened but the living standards of Fiji, although it’s higher than a lot of many other countries in the Pacific is still quite low by our standards.   We have to bear that in mind, we don’t want to punish the innocent ordinary people of the country whether they’re indigenous Fijians or Fijians of Indian heritage.  They’re all citizens of Fiji and they’re all entitled to be treated equally.  That is the point that appears to have been completely put aside by the Chiefs, put aside by Mr Speight, put aside by General Rabuka and it’s just not acceptable.  I thought we had a good constitution, I thought we had got away from the idea that there was something inherently superior about the indigenous Fijians, but apparently not and I think that is deeply distressing.  And it’s something that I know a lot of friends of Fiji will feel very aggrieved by it.
MITCHELL:
It’s a little like Pacific aparthied really.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well of course.  You can’t sort of have a situation where twice in the space of fifteen years because somebody of Indian heritage has become Prime Minister, you have a coup.  And that is essentially what has happened and it leads inescapably to the conclusion that people want to run the country on racial lines.  Well Fiji has been to most countries an exercise in multi-racialism.  Nobody can do anything about the history, nobody can turn the clock back and say well this shouldn’t have happened or that should have happened.  They are there.  Fijians of Indian heritage born in that country have come there and made their lives there.  They are entitled to be treated equally just as anybody who comes to this country accepting the responsibilities of  residency or citizenship are entitled to be treated equally and not in any way denied or discriminated against according to their racial or ethnic origin.  It’s just very fundamental.
MITCHELL:
Is there a possibility or indeed a need for the world to treat Fiji in the way it treated South Africa?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think that’s sort of jumping a little ahead.  I think there are a lot of the apparatuses of, say the apparatus of tyranny and so forth that are not there.  There are some different circumstances but let’s not get tied up as to whether one thing’s as bad as another.  You look at the thing in isolation and it’s bad and it ought to be condemned and General Rabuka was right when he said there’d be world consequences as a result of the decision made by the Chiefs and there will be.
MITCHELL:
Is it possible Australia will be in a position of having to accept or being asked to accept Fijian Indians as refugees?
PRIME MINISTER:
Our preference, I mean we will treat people in relation to refugee status in accordance with our normal practices.  If people qualify well they along with others, they will be considered.  But it’s not really the right thing to immediately talk about people leaving the country.  What I would prefer to do is what I could to bring pressure on Fiji to change its attitude.  The Indians who live in Fiji, Fijians of Indian heritage they want to stay there, they want to be part of the community, they want the right to be treated equally.  Isn’t that what we should be trying to bring about?  If you immediately say we’ll allocate, or say we’ll take people, the problem with that is that really means the Fijians have won.
MITCHELL:
I found myself in the unfortunate position of interviewing George Speight this week, I didn’t realy intend to but he came on the phone and he was saying really Australia, it’s got nothing to do with Australia, it’s got nothing to do with the rest of the world.  What’s your reaction to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well every country can take that attitude and that’s true in the sense that we have no right to automatically intervene. I am not arguing that we should in any way physically intervene, but we do have a right to express a view and we have a right to react diplomatically and economically to what’s happened.  I am not saying for a moment that we should physically intervene if Fiji decides to go down that path it will be condemned and it will pay a price and to that extent it is right.  I don’t think Mr Speight and others were taking that view when they joined the rest of the world in condemning the apartheid practises in South Africa and condemning racial discrimination where it occurred in other parts of the world.  They had every right to be part of that condemnation.  So Australia is reacting in a normal, democratic fashion.  We thought there was democracy in Fiji, we are saddened that that is not the case and we are particularly concerned that it appears to be lurching back to an approach to  Government based on a race and there is no justification of any kind for that, none what so ever.
MITCHELL:
I mean broadly, sanctions are a possibility. 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there are a number of things but I don’t want to just off the top of my head say we’ll do this, that or the other.  We will have a look at it.  I would expect in an appropriate time, in the not too distant future, I or the Foreign Minister will announce a response.  But the situation is still evolving, we don’t know the final outcome although the direction we know and that’s pretty grim and pretty bleak.
MITCHELL:
OK, on to something else.  The GST.  Now do you stand by the promise no Australian will be worse off under it?
PRIME MINISTER:
I do stand by that commitment yes.
MITCHELL:
There are a lot of people who think they will be worse off.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I guess we have to analyse that when it all comes in and we don’t have much longer to wait and I think we are all rather looking forward to the first of July then we’ll be in real time so to speak and I just think that’s good and could I say to people who are concerned, wait until it comes in.  If you have a legitimate basis for saying that, well let us know and we will examine it.  But we don’t believe that people are going to be worse.  Of course you could have been cheating in the past, and it is not our intention that anybody be worse off.  If people believe after they have given the thing a fair chance to operate and got a fair idea that they are worse off, well then let us know and we will have look at it and what they have got to say.
MITCHELL:
Did I understand you correctly this week is that you agree political fund raising is not exempt, is exempt rather from the GST some forms of political fund raising?
PRIME MINISTER:
Some forms of political fund raising are exempt yes because they’re a not for profit organisation.  The Liberal Party doesn’t make any profits Neil.  I spend a large part of my life engaging in fund raising activities for various divisions of the party because we need money in order to run our campaign.
MITCHELL:
Could I just ask you then about.  This is, Rick Matthews, the Deputy Commissioner for Taxation, I asked him about it yesterday and he said this:
“[Mitchell].. tell me that fund raising by political parties will be subject to the GST?  
[Matthews] They are certainly not charities so they don’t get any of the entitlements of charities.  
[Mitchell] So will they be subject to the GST on fund raising?
[Matthews] I think they will.” 
The Tax Department thinks you will.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that is very interesting.
MITCHELL:
I am trying to make…I am not trying to embarrass either side, I am trying to make a point that if there’s confusion between the Prime Minister and the man who is implementing the GST in the Tax Department, what hope have we got?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah, I thought Rick, I mean I’m not… I heard what he said, but I thought Rick was talking there about we don’t have some of the entitlements of charities.  I mean if we for example engage in any kind of commercial activity then that would be subject to the GST but ordinary fund raisers are not.
MITCHELL:
We’ll take some calls on this.  Hello Ray, go ahead please.
CALLER:
Hi, good morning Neil.  Good morning Mr Howard.
PRIME MINISTER:
G’day.
CALLER:
Mr Howard, I’ve got a bit of a question to ask you.  My wife and I [inaudible]Australia are building a house at the moment.  We started very early this year and we seem to be caught up in a shortage of trades people, possibly as a result of the Olympics and the GST rush if you like.  Our house has been delayed like many others.  Our builder told us that we would be up for a ten per cent on progress payment.  There’s, my estimation is that if we get to lock up by the end of June, it will cost us eight and a half thousand dollars with tax but that’s not likely and we could possibly be up for twenty thousand dollars in tax.  I guess my question to you is Sir, is that is there any possibility that people like ourselves could have some sort of concessions from the taxation department on these costs because we have no idea how we are going to finance this and other people we are speaking to are in similar positions.
PRIME MINISTER:
How..Ray, is it?
CALLER:
Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
How big was the building contract?
CALLER:
Well in our particular case, the house is worth about two hundred and thirty thousand dollars.
PRIME MINISTER:
About two hundred and thirty thousand dollars.
CALLER:
Uh huh.
PRIME MINISTER:
And what are you claiming is the additional expense?
CALLER:
Well we made an estimate.  If the house got to lock up based on the progress payments, the additional ten per cent of the remaining amount would be eight and a half thousand dollars. 
PRIME MINISTER:
The additional ten per cent of the remaining amount would be eight and a half and what you are saying is because of shortage and everything that’s being delayed…
MITCHELL:
There’s been a few people in that position that have been delayed in building and they have to pay more GST than they budgeted for.
CALLER:
Even if it rains.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I mean I’d be happy if you sent me all the details on it through the station. I would have a look.  I would have to honestly say though I think it would be very, very difficult just off the top of my head to give you immediate comfort in relation to that because there are, there will be a lot of circumstances in which people will argue well if this happened earlier then I wouldn’t have been subject to as much GST and I think it would be very difficult for us to devise rules that had a very fair and even application.  I mean..
MITCHELL:
Yeah but there is somebody who is worse off.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well not necessarily, it depends on all his other economic circumstances Neil. 
MITCHELL:
They are not going to be picking up an extra twelve grand anywhere
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it depends on a whole lot of other circumstances.  I don’t know what his entitlement to the ... I don’t know the precise terms of the home owner, new home owners grant in Victoria.
MITCHELL:
Ann, go ahead please.  Go ahead.
CALLER:
Hi Neil, hi Mr Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
Hello Ann.
CALLER:
I’m just, one thing.  I belong to a sports club and we went to a seminar the other night for the GST.  Now with your fund raising, we were told, if you are registered for the GST, it is GST.  Now the only way.
PRIME MINISTER:
When you say it is GST..
CALLER:
You have to pay the GST on your fund raising, on your…
PRIME MINISTER:
Not on the money you raise, no I’m sorry, not on the money you raise.
CALLER:
Yeah, its the whole lot.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am sorry, you’ve misunderstood that.
MITCHELL:
Ok, thanks Ann.  Now Prime Minister, Mr Costello has taken after the brewers a little, accusing them of what’s he saying, money politics for their running a campaign against the GST.  
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t think Peter’s denying the right of someone to run a campaign but I think part of the campaign is an incorrect allegation that in answering a question during the 1998 election campaign I said certain things about the impact of the GST on beer across the counter which I didn’t.
MITCHELL:
Well the quote is there will be no more than a one point nine percent rise in ordinary beer.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah, but that was in answer to somebody who said he had a bottleshop and what apparently the ad doesn’t do is to acknowledge that fact and clearly gives the impression that I was talking about all beer sales, but if you look at the transcript, you will see that I clearly wasn’t.  Now I think what the Treasurer quite legitimately was venting was his anger about that and it’s an anger that the Government has, but the broader question he was making, the broader point he was making was yes there are increases in the price of beer, there are increases in the price of children’s clothing.  And I think he was quite legitimately saying that companies who sell beer apparently by nature of this campaign think they are in a special position and the Treasurer, and I agree with him, doesn’t think that’s the case.  
MITCHELL:
George, go ahead please George.
CALLER:
Yes, good morning Mr Howard.
PRIME MINISTER:
Hello George.
CALLER:
I work in the wine industry and when I voted for the GST, I voted for a 10% tax across the board, with no tax on tax.  So I guess I would like to know why we’re having a 29% WET tax on wine, which is effectively replacing the wholesale.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes well that’s right.  We didn’t, you didn’t vote – I mean what you voted for was a set of measures that would have a particular price impact and that price impact that we . . . hang on let me finish.  I mean the price impact that we spoke of in that campaign is essentially the price impact that has been delivered.  I mean it is very easy to talk about 29% taxes, it gives the impression to the listener that wine is going up by a big amount, it’s not.  You know that.  You know that cask wine is going up by quite a modest amount, premium bottled wine is going up by a little more, but when you take into account the reductions in personal income tax.  And I was with a group of people in the wine industry, can I tell you, the largest assembly you could get in a, of people in the wine industry on Wednesday night in Sydney at a dinner saying farewell to somebody who had been the chief wine judge in Sydney for about twenty-five years, Len Evans.  I mean can I tell you that that industry is booming and I have never, I have never seen so many happy people.
MITCHELL:
Ok, can I ask you, the RACV today has estimated that GST will add to the cost of the running of a car.  They say spare parts will come down, labour will be up, insurance up, petrol up.  
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I would like to see the basis of that analysis but petrol is not up as a result of the GST.  Petrol might be up . . . I am sorry Neil, but petrol might be up as a result of the increase in the price of crude oil.
MITCHELL:
And the excise which goes up as a result of the inflation rate, which goes up as a result of . . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
But that, yes but that is going . . .  I mean we’ve had . . . I think we have been down this track before.  I would like to see their analysis.  
MITCHELL:
Fair enough.  
[commercial break]
Some more quick questions to the Prime Minister in our Sydney studio.  Mr Howard is there a danger that your Government’s losing touch with people?  $30,000 curtains, $440,000 on medals for the Federation, a $1 million trip to London and every second minister running with the torch – including Michael Wooldridge sponsored by AMP?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t think anybody involving themselves in the torch relay is necessarily losing touch.  I mean it is an event that . . . 
MITCHELL:
But you decided not to, why was that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes well that was just my personal decision, but I don’t think you have to impose a rigid rule on people in relation to this.  I just decided that I wouldn’t and I would be happy for any place that might be offered to me to go to somebody who’s a volunteer in a sporting organisation.
MITCHELL:
I agree with you entirely.  But wouldn’t it be better if all ministers . . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, but look.  I don’t believe in this sort of school masterish approach to running a government that you know I am the arbiter of taste, I am the arbiter of who does what.  I mean they are a group of independently-minded men and women and I treat them like that and people make their own decisions on these things.  It’s hardly a matter of high Cabinet policy as to whether people participate, it’s a matter of individual decision.
MITCHELL:
That’s true, but you can see it would get up people’s noses.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I know, but can I just say about the trip to London.  Can I defend that?  Can I defend it on the grounds that what we are marking most of all is 100 years since the passage through the British Parliament of the Act that established the Commonwealth of Australia.
MITCHELL:
I understand that, but why are you taking twenty-four staff?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am not taking twenty-four staff.  I am . . . 
MITCHELL:
How many?
PRIME MINISTER:
Fewer that that.  Far fewer.  Twenty-four staff, I am certainly not taking twenty-four staff. 
MITCHELL:
That’s what was quoted.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes well I think that was quoted by, maybe by an Opposition figure.  Neil, look  . . . 
MITCHELL:
You’re taking a band.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yes, we are.
MITCHELL:
And spending a million dollars.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Neil look – it is an important historical event.  I mean are we saying that we never celebrate these things? Are we saying that  . . .
MITCHELL:
No I think we are saying there are more important priorities.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you can say that about everything.  You can say you don’t have any celebration of anything.  We don’t have any – I mean we could cancel the whole Centenary celebration next year and you would save $150 million or something.  Do you cancel the whole thing?
MITCHELL:
What about the curtains?  The curtains in the office?  When in opposition, your party was jumping up and down about the teak table which cost $30,000.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think what they were jumping up and down about more than anything else was the fact that we were going overseas to buy it.  
MITCHELL:
Well these are Thai curtains.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well these curtains are ordered by the parliament.  I mean you could once again not have them.  And you can sort of have a progressively dilapidating waiting room where foreign visitors come.
MITCHELL:
Well of course – no of course you don’t want that.  But . . .  But $30,000 buys a house in parts of the country.
PRIME MINISTER:
But you can say that about anything, I mean anything for, you know as well as I do Neil, anything for a public building is expensive.  But quite honestly, I wish nothing ever deteriorated or dilapidated while, you know one was there, but you can’t win on these things.  If you don’t have something that’s reasonably tasteful people say well what a rum show you know, people come and visit the Australian Prime Minister and he, compared with other countries it doesn’t match up.  I mean look I understand why people get riled about this but I tell you, I am and let me tell you that I am quite sensitive to it and . . . 
MITCHELL:
You shouldn’t – you couldn’t  - you didn’t even know about it though.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I certainly didn’t know about the price, I mean eighteen months ago I now recall there was some discussion about this.  The bill was, the quote was never shown to me, it was just gone ahead and ordered.  I had no idea until it actually came out what the price was.  Now that’s the way these things work.  But . . . 
MITCHELL:
Can I ask you quickly, about sorry day. . . there’s an interpretation in the papers today that you are changing your position on the issue of apologies – are you or not?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I am not changing my position on the apology but I think at long last, people are starting to realise that even though I don’t agree with a formal national apology, I am committed to reconciliation.  And I hope people are starting to realise that because I have always been committed to reconciliation and I have always had a difference of opinion – look can I put it like this, if you lose a relative, somebody close to you I will say to you Neil I am sorry.  I don’t say to you, Neil I apologise.  I mean you would think that odd because you would say well John you didn’t have anything to do with it.  I mean maybe some of your listeners think that is a semantic difference, I don’t think it is.
MITCHELL:
I think the important thing is that your position’s not changed.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, my position on a formal national apology has not altered, no.  But I am trying to communicate to people the fact that I am committed to reconciliation.  I do feel a sense of sorrow and regret about past injustices but we have to get on with it.  We have to worry about the now and the future and not sort of spend too much time debating the past.
MITCHELL:
I would like to get this call in if we can, very quickly Graeme, go ahead Graeme.
CALLER:
Oh Mr Prime Minister, we’ve got Mr Mandela who’s accepted our invitation to speak at an event called World Reconciliation Day on September the 8th during his visit.  It’s meant for the younger people in the world to give them a blueprint, broadbrush not delving into particular issues – is that an event and concept that you would support?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh yes, I was one of those who encouraged Mr Mandela to come.  
MITCHELL:
Oh really?
PRIME MINISTER:
I in fact asked Mr Mandela to come to Australia for a number of events, and including obviously that.  I mean  I think Mr Mandela is a fine man, a great man.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, thank you very much for your time.
PRIME MINISTER:
Ok.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE ……………………………………………………………………………
First may I acknowledge that I speak to you on the traditional lands of the Eora people.  I pay my respects to them and thank them for the warmth of their welcome.  To the many distinguished guests here today, Your Excellencies, State Premiers, Chief Ministers, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Australian Labor Party, the Leader of the Australian Democrats, to Evelyn Scott and Geoff Clarke.
I think all of us, whatever perspective we bring to this very special and moving occasion, I think all of us recognise the debt we owe to the tremendously hard work of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation over the last ten years.  And may I specially pay a personal, and I am sure a representative tribute to you Evelyn for the grace and the dignity and the leadership and the strength of character that you have brought to this very important position.
It has been a long journey and I know it has been difficult and I know there have been areas of disagreement and it is naïve of any of us to pretend that some do not remain. But let all of us try this weekend, and for my part I pledge that I will in what I say, is to focus on those things that unite us and bind us together as Australians in the cause of healing the wounds and the divisions of the past and of moving forward in a united and harmonious fashion.
It is quite impossible for anybody to attend a gathering such as this without being captured and moved by its symbolism and the speciality of the occasion.  I think it is an expression of a desire of all Australians to go forward, not to forget or ignore or fail to express sorrow or regret for the pain of the past.  It is impossible to understand the difficulty and the reality of today and to move forward effectively without understanding and acknowledging the pain that was inflicted by the injustices of the past.  And it is not possible, it is not possible for any of us, for any of us to reflect upon the desirability of moving forward without acknowledging the impact that European civilisation had on the indigenous people of this country and the cultures of the indigenous people.
This weekend is an occasion for all Australians to honour the contribution of the indigenous people of Australia to the life of this country.  It is an occasion to honour the special character of their cultures.  It is an occasion to thank them for the generosity of their spirit and it is an occasion to recognise the richness that their cultures bring to modern Australian life.  
As the Council’s declaration says, we are a nation of many origins.  We are a nation of many cultures and the 60,000 years of human habitation which has produced the cultures of the indigenous people has so much to offer to all of us.  And we can together respect the speciality of those cultures and also draw tremendous inspiration from what we have built together.  To recognise and acknowledge and express regret for the pain of the mistakes and the injustices of the past, but also hopefully my friends to draw some inspiration from what we have achieved together.
And so much of what, so much of what the Council has endeavoured to do has been to focus on those things that do keep us together, those things that we can draw inspiration in common.  So my fellow Australians, this is an occasion, it is a weekend to frankly acknowledge the tragedies and the sadness and the pain and the hurt and the cruelty of the past.  To accept the ongoing trauma of that.  But it is also my friends, it is also my friends an occasion to celebrate and rejoice in those things that we have achieved together.  
And very importantly it is an occasion for all of us to resolve to continue the process of reconciliation.  As the Council so rightly said in its document, there are many paths to reconciliation, ultimately they reach the one destination.  And each of us brings our own perspective to the process of reconciliation and the one requirement that we should bring to that is the sincerity of the view that we hold on how reconciliation might be achieved.
Reconciliation will mean different things to different people.  There is a spiritual component to reconciliation just as there is a practical component to it.  And you cannot achieve reconciliation without acknowledging as I do and the Government I lead does, the self-evident fact that the indigenous people of Australia are the most profoundly disadvantaged within our communities.  And part of the process of reconciliation is to adopt practical measures to address that disadvantage.
I want to say in response to both Geoff Clarke and to Evelyn Scott that I have appreciated on a personal basis, and I know I speak for my ministerial colleagues, the integrity and commitment that both of them bring to their responsibilities within the indigenous community.  The Government does remain firmly committed to the ongoing process of reconciliation.  We may have differences as to how that may be achieved, we may have points of departure, but the common goal of achieving reconciliation is very sincerely held by all members of the Government.  And it will be our desire and our wish to support and help and assist any ongoing reconciliation trust that emerges independent of government and is an expression of the desire of all of the Australian people to continue the process of reconciliation.
Evelyn Scott has quite correctly said that reconciliation is a people’s movement.  And in the end how people feel in their hearts about reconciliation and relations between the different groups of the Australian people will determine the success or otherwise of reconciliation.  I thank all of those associated with this remarkable event in the life of our nation, I compliment Evelyn and the members of the Reconciliation Council and I wish out of this weekend that all the participants will draw strength, will draw inspiration and will be renewed in their resolve to continue the process of reconciliation amongst all of the Australian people.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Good evening.  Living within our means will ensure that by June next year, the Government will have paid back $50 billion out of the $80 billion of Government debt that Labor ran up in its last five years in office.  As a result, we are now saving $3 billion a year in debt interest payments.  Funds that can now be spent on more important things like meeting the needs of families in regional communities.
Our recent Budget provided a package with a special focus on country families.  We are providing $65 million to help families balance their work and family responsibilities, particularly when they live too far away from child care centres.  Where both parents are running a farm for example, this will help make it possible to have a child care worker come to their home.  The same principle will also apply to allow sick children to be cared for at home.  
Incentives will also help to attract privately operated long day care centres to smaller rural communities and to establish more playgroups in regional areas.  As children grow older, the Government recognises that there is a high cost for isolated families to send their children away to school.  That is why we have increased the basic boarding allowance by over three hundred and fifty dollars to almost three thousand nine hundred dollars a year.  
We’ve also decided to help keep more young people from the country in education by increasing the family assets limits for youth allowance.  Over seven thousand young people will benefit from our decision to double the farm or business assets permitted for youth allowance from just over eight hundred thousand to just under one point seven million.  All of these measures are practical ways in which the Government is helping to support growing families in the country.
Good night.


E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Stan.  I first of all pay tribute to the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place.  To Heather, to Evelyn Scott, to the many former parliamentary colleagues of Neville Bonner and many other very distinguished guests who are gathered here and most particularly can I say to you Brendan Nelson, thank you very much for the dedication that you put in to assembling this wonderful evening.
Neville was elected to the Australian Senate in 1971 and I came in here in 1974 and I served with him as a colleague for eight years until he lost his seat in the 1983 election and I will come to the circumstances of that in a moment.
I didn’t know Neville before I came into Parliament.  I guess as I gaze over there I remember spending a few very happy hours with him late in the evening in the Parliamentary Bar along with a number of my colleagues who I’d met for the first time when I was elected to Parliament.  He was cheerful and friendly, an immensely decent man who clearly carried the twin responsibilities of knowing he was a trailblazer for his own people.  He was the first indigenous person to serve in the national parliament and that imposed on him he knew a very heavy responsibility.  But he was also a very loyal and passionate member of the Liberal Party.  The Liberal Party had done good things for him and he’d done great things for the Liberal Party and throughout his life he remained a very loyal member.
In one of the I think more ignoble pre-selection decisions, that the Liberal Party made in the state of Queensland, he lost his endorsement for the….well he didn’t lose his endorsement, he was really put in an unwinnable position.  And rather understandably he ran as an Independent and there was a period of very significant and lengthy estrangement from the Liberal Party.  He was badly treated and as time went by many people came to recognise that.  And one of the more emotional moments I’ve had as prime minister was to confer upon him life membership of the Queensland Division of the party when he rejoined it in 1996 and to embrace Neville both physically and metaphorically back into the Liberal fold at the State Convention on that occasion.  It was a special moment for us because it was something that had to be put right.  And it was put right and he showed an enormous grace and generosity of spirit in the way in which he responded.  
Neville had an incredibly good sense of humour.  He was a pretty ferocious, rambunctious participant in party room debates.  If there was a bit of a revolt against the Cabinet line, Neville would be part of it and I remember once he was telling the then prime minister, Malcolm Fraser that he had to sort of lift his game on something and he had to change a piece of obnoxious legislation and he said if you don’t do so Malcolm I will put a land claim on Narreen.  And that sort of broke the room up and sort of got rid of some of the tension of the debate.  But he had what many of us would describe as that sort of very cheeky, larrikan Australian sense of humour. Whenever we met each other we’d sort of exchange mock insults, like you know he’d say you know you’d better get your policies together a bit better Howard, they’re you know they’re not up to the mark and I would sort of reply in kind and it was all done in wonderful spirit.  
He could be very passionate, Neville.  I remember his speech at the Constitutional Convention, I thought it was a pretty good speech because he and I were in the same mob at the Constitutional Convention.  We were on the same side.  It was a very passionate… it was a wonderful speech.  I won’t talk about its substance but I’ll talk about its very, very deep feeling and mood and it showed a person who believed very, very strongly.  He was a devoted family man and the love affair of his and Heather was one that was so evident to everybody who knew them.
In one of those things that you count as a privilege I was able to see Neville at the hospice in Ipswich only about ten days or two weeks before he died.  And I spent a wonderful hour with him and his children.  He was cheerful.  He knew he was dying but he was ready for that.  He had his family around him.  He knew he had done great things for the indigenous people of Australia.  He knew that he’d served them very, very well.  He knew that he’d come back to the fold of the Party that embraced him and then treated him poorly and then came back to him and all was forgotten and forgiven.  And as someone who was very proud that it was the Liberal Party that he chose to join,  I was very proud that I was the leader of that Party when he was brought back.  And I had the opportunity of expressing to him on that occasion as Prime Minister as well as Leader of the Liberal Party the gratitude of the nation for what he’d contributed.  For the way in which he’d been trailblazer.  For the way in which he’d been able to demonstrate to other Australians the contribution and the commitment to the life of our country of the indigenous people.  
I know he suffered a lot.  He shared with other indigenous people of Australia a very difficult early life.  He suffered discrimination.  He was treated poorly and wrongly because of his race on many occasions but he grew beyond that and he showed a great spirit of community and decency and forgiveness.  He was in every sense of the word a very dedicated, loyal and committed Australian and I was very privileged to have known him and I know that in saying these things tonight I speak for all of my parliamentary colleagues and most particularly those here tonight who served with him.
He was the first indigenous person to be a member of the national parliament.  He’s been followed recently as you all know by Aden Ridgeway and I know that whatever our political allegiances may be we would all hope that others would follow them in the years ahead.  
And at Brendan’s instigation it’s been decided to establish a Neville Bonner Memorial Fund which will fund an indigenous scholarship each year for an indigenous person doing their honours year in political science.  They’ll pay the… all of the HECS fees up front as well as the $17,000 a year stipend.  The Commonwealth Government will contribute an initial amount of $400,000 to that fund and we hope in the spirit of the social coalition of which you’ve heard me speak occasionally, just occasionally some corporations will do likewise and the symbolism of it, the concept of that is that it will commemorate and remind us of a man who was the first elected politician of the indigenous people of Australia and perhaps in a small way that fund over the years will make it possible for others to play their part and to make their contribution.
Can I just say in conclusion that I think this is a wonderful evening.  It’s very rich in symbolism and it is an occasion I know that means a great deal to Heather, who lost her great mate last year and who has been a source of encouragement to her many friends.  I don’t think any of us will forget the warmth of the funeral service of Neville’s in Queensland and the wonderful tributes that were paid and the way in which it brought together so many strands of Australian society.  It bridged all the political divides and the other divides of the Australian community and that was a fitting tribute and a fitting memorial to a wonderful person who brought great credit to the indigenous people of Australia and very importantly brought great credit to his nation.  To you Heather God bless and thank you very much for sharing Neville with us for so many years. 
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects:  Networking the Nation; sale of Telstra; Minister Fahey; GST ads; depression, counselling for politicians; reconciliation, treaty.
E&amp;OE  ……………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Richard and John.  
Ladies and gentlemen I would emphasise of course that the announcement I am about to make of an additional funding of $65.5 million for over 100 projects, indeed 104 new projects and six variations in funding for previously approved projects, that all of this money is as a direct result of the Government’s partial sale of Telstra.  All of these funds are available despite the tenacious opposition of the Australian Labor Party and every Australian living in the rural and remote areas of the country who will benefit from these initiatives should remember as they enjoy the benefits of these initiatives that if the Labor Party’s will had obtained, that those benefits would not have arrived, and indeed might have been taken away. 
But there will be an additional $65.5 million available for 104 new projects.  These include, and the information would be available in the kit being provided, the funding of $20.3 million for a multi-state project called Farm Wide Regional Access Network Internet Access for all.  And that will provide untimed, internet access at the cost of a local call where that is currently not available.  Now this is a very important extension for that very large number of Australians who don’t live in the metropolitan area, but do not live in remote areas which were referred to by Senator Alston.  Many of these people have local calls available at untimed rates, but must pay ISD charges for, STD charges for internet access.  And what this fund do is to provide to them internet access at a local call rate.  And that is a very significant practical, development and improvement for them.  
We’re also going to provide the communities in Christmas Island, Cocos Island and Norfolk Island will benefit from an extended mobile phone service, as will people living in the major regional centres of Western Australia who now don’t have access to those services.  There will be a Northern Regional Development Board allocation of $690,000 to extend mobile phone coverage to the South Australian districts of Melrose, Quorn, Orroro, Wilmington, Carrieton, Leigh Creek and Wilpena Pound.  And the New South Wales Local Government and Shires’ Association has been allocated almost $600,000 to provide websites for remote regional councils who currently do not have them as well as a set of internet applications through which councils can provide an increasing range of innovative services to their residents on-line.  The East Gippsland Institution of TAFE has been allocated $257,000 to provide public interest internet access at its outreach centres at Yarram, Heyfield, Swifts  Creek, Buchan, Orbost and Mallacoota.  And these resources will help small communities lacking in services, by providing technical assistance both in and out of business hours for community members to learn about a range of internet services.
Now these are some of the examples of the 104 projects that are funded out of these latest round of decisions by the independent board, chaired by the former Deputy Prime Minister, Doug Anthony which has been charged with responsibility for allocating the $250 million provided for our regional telecommunications infrastructure fund.  Now none of this, I repeat, would have been possible without the sale of part of Telstra.  And it remains the policy of the Government, subject to the conditions that were laid down, and are well known including of course the successful conclusion of Mr Besley’s inquiry, it remains the policy of the Government to press ahead with the privatisation in full of Telstra.  It is one very important way of ensuring that there is a dramatic improvement of communications facilities in the bush and when you add to today’s announcement the earlier announcement made about the remote area access, the $150 million and the other money that’s been allocated out of the sale of the first tranche of Telstra, it represents an unprecedented level of investment in improving the communications available to people living in country Australia.  And it remains a very important objective of the Government to steadily provide additional services so that in time it will truly be possible to say that people living in the country and remote Australia have the same level of access and the same enjoyment of the benefits of information technology and of the information revolution as is available to their fellow Australians who live in the cities.  And that is their right and it is the goal of the Government steadily and in a practical, considered measured way over time to ensure that that goal is achieved.  
And I want to congratulate Senator Alston for his stewardship of this programme and it has the very strong support of the Government and I know it’s enjoyed the very active interest of the Deputy Prime Minister in all its stages and I know it will in the future because of his determination to ensure that the benefits of the sale of Telstra to date and in the future are appropriately applied for the benefit of people living in remote and rural Australia. 
Any questions?
JOURNALIST:
Is this money in addition to the $670 million allocated in the third term?
ALSTON:
No, no the $670 million is broken down into a number of components and five of those, amounting to $170 million have been added to the original $250 million from Networking the Nation.  So it comes out of that aggregate bucket.
JOURNALIST:
Senator Alston, both you and the Prime Minister have made the point that good communications are both an entitlement and indeed a right of rural and regional Australia yet the other point that you are making today is that delivering those services are inextricably linked to the full sale of Telstra, or the partial sale of Telstra.  Why should country people have to agree if you like to the full sale of Telstra to get services that you have acknowledged are there as entitlements?
ALSTON:
Well there is always a funding issue, isn’t there?  Many governments over many years have grappled with the very sizable cost of providing untimed local calls to people in remote areas, much in all as there was a standard telephone service requirement, it was always hedged with that caveat, and it’s simply very, very difficult for governments to conjure up sums of the order of $150 million for just one single initiative.  What we’ve been able to do with the combination of T1 and T2 is to provide a great suite of services to rural, regional and remote Australia that simply wouldn’t have been affordable otherwise.  So all that they’re now getting will put them at the forefront of the digital revolution and it will be funded by T1 and T2.  And of course they have the security of knowing that there can be no slippage in terms of quality of service because of our customer service guarantee which again we introduced after our commitment in the 1996 election.  So they have not only a guarantee that ordinary telephone service will improve, both in terms of connections and fault repairs, but that for the first time they will be able to get access to some of those services they always dreamed about and also some of those services that all of us look forward to in the future.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Perhaps I could put it . . . can I add a you know a postscript to that and say that those who would argue and assert that they can deliver that equity to rural and regional Australia without the resort to the proceeds of the sale of Telstra and indeed despite their opposition to the sale of Telstra in any way perhaps should be asked to identify the source of revenue that would be required.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard would you be shocked and surprised if Mr Besley didn’t come up with the sort of finding that would enable you to continue to keep promising the full sale of Telstra?
PRIME MINISTER:
Shocked and surprised?
JOURNALIST:
Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
If Mr Beazley?
JOURNALIST:
Besley.
PRIME MINISTER:
Besley, oh I am sorry, I am sorry.
JOURNALIST:
I’d know your answer to the other one.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that’s right – I’d be staggered, indeed.  Well I don’t know, he is a man of independent mood and disposition.  He’s not a person who forms his opinions to placate or suit people.  He forms his opinion on the merits.  And I’ll wait and see what he says.  I mean we are, we are confident that improvements have been made, we believe that the service delivery performance of Telstra has been rising.  I think Telstra deserves more praise for the improvements that have occurred in the bush than they’ve received.   I mean one of the great myths of this debate is the idea 
PRIME MINISTER:
I mean one of the great myths of this debate is the idea that’s conjured up by the Labor Party and some others that the days of full public ownership of the old Telecom were days of you know instantaneous repair of phones that didn’t work; of instantaneous availability of services and unlimited access to all the communication aids you needed.  I mean nothing of course could be further from the truth.  Service delivery’s improved a great deal, we’d like it to improve more but what Mr Besley does and his committee members do will I’m sure will be based upon their own independent assessment of the facts in accordance of the terms of reference.
JOURNALIST:
Is the timing of your announcement today designed to show him that the Government is going forward with those projects?
PRIME MINISTER:
The purpose of our announcement is to deliver on our promises to people who live in rural and regional Australia.  I mean we made certain promises about the proceeds of the sale of T2.  The committee has met, it’s made findings and I’m announcing them along with my colleagues.  I mean this is a good news story for the people of rural and regional Australia but it fulfils our commitment and it’s a demonstration to them more than to anybody else that we’re serious in our commitment, that there are great benefits from the sale of Telstra - not only national benefits in the liquidation of debt.  I mean remember, in case I haven’t mentioned it before that in five budgets we will have paid off $50 billion of the $80 billion of debt that Mr Beazley’s government ran up in the last five years they were in office so we’re pretty proud of the contribution that’s been made by our budgets and we’re certain that if we can secure approval for the full sale of Telstra we’ll be able to make a further sizeable contribution to eliminating debt, indeed get us into a net debt free situation by 2004 and in the process have additional resources available for other things.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Anderson do you share the Prime Minister’s confidence that improvements are being made to telecommunications in the bush and do you think that the Besley inquiry will provide a positive incentive for the further sale of Telstra?
ANDERSON:
Let me answer the first part of the question if I may.  To come to the first part of that question - I think to a very great degree what you’re seeing at the moment is a debate about relativities.  Telecommunications capacity is absolutely exploding.  It’s only fourteen years ago that I had a manual party line on my phone and you know it’s hardly remote Australia.  And the thing went out all the time and you had to wait until everybody was off the line.  You couldn’t run a business with it and in that sense the technological capacity is exploding.  So really the debate at the moment is about relative standards I think and how the bush is if you like given security in the knowledge that service standards will be maintained and that there’ll be reasonable chances of technological upgrades.  Now that is being delivered and it will continue to be delivered.  I think there are several points that need to be made.  Firstly, the exploding technological capacity is delivering extraordinary new opportunities to enhance competition and I think we’ve all been fascinated to see the interest in the tendering out process for those enhanced services in the remote areas.  There are propositions being put up that we wouldn’t have heard of five years ago and it may very well be that in some of those remote areas you see people from being at the back of the pack to the front.
The second thing I would say is this - there’s no doubt in my mind that properly constructed USO’s and the CSG which of course is Richard’s work, this Government’s work, are basic tools which can ensure that where competition doesn’t provide what you need you can do it by other means.  And I sometimes wonder why, I mean I don’t say we’ve got it 100% right yet but the mechanisms are there and I sometimes wonder why the sceptics don’t have a little bit of a look at what you can achieve by properly constructing government requirements.  The Government doesn’t own a car factory but look at the standards that a manufacturer who wants to provide motor cars to the Australian market has to meet before they can be put on the roads.  It can be done and I think Richard’s done tremendous work here and I think that properly worked, properly driven those obligations can met the objectives that we all regard as so very important in rural and regional Australia where competition fails or isn’t strong enough to deliver those benefits and therefore it is appropriate for us to have a sensible debate about how best to deploy national assets. 
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister if I may, now that Fiji has finally junked its 1997 multi-racial constitution isn’t it time for the Australian Government to bring in bans if you like that you announced the other day?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well seeing you asked me the question, we’re having a meeting of the National Security Committee of Cabinet this afternoon and Fiji will be discussed and any decision taken at that meeting will be announced after the meeting.  Suffice it to say that we remain alarmed and disturbed at the abrogation of the 1997 constitution.  It seems almost unavoidable that we’re going to see in Fiji a reversion to a racially based approach and that is something that we repudiate, we can’t possibly accept or agree to.  The question of the appropriate level of response, the parameters of that have been outlined by Mr Downer.  The timing and the ordering of it and so forth is something that we’ll need to give attention to.  We do have to bear in mind that there are still hostages in captivity although Mr Speight appears unmoved and disinterested in expressions of concern about Mr Chaudhry’s wellbeing from the rest of the world.  We remain concerned about Mr Chaudhry’s wellbeing and that of other hostages but nothing can alter the fact that what we are witnessing is a return to a racially based approach to the installation of leaders in Fiji and that is totally unacceptable to us and can’t be accepted by the rest of the world.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister to get back to Telstra.  How concerned are you at the slump in the company’s share price and given that a number of the investors who bought in on T2 will have to stump in a considerable amount of money in I think November, the second instalment and those, I think hundred of thousands of investors in Telstra are currently looking at a substantial paper loss.  How concerned are you at the market’s assessment of Telstra and do you as Prime Minister have full confidence in the management of Telstra in particular Ziggy Switowski given that many in the market believe the company doesn’t have a proper strategic focus at present.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I certainly have full confidence in the management in the board and in the management of the company.  As to giving a running commentary on share prices of Telstra or anybody else’s I’m not going to do that.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think there’s potential political damage for the Government though if those investors in November have to stump up their money and their looking at a substantial [inaudible]…?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think however I answer that it might possibly be construed as a observation on the share price and I decline the invitation.  I’m quite certain that the broad policy followed by the Government has been right and I’m quite sure that generally speaking the broadest possible share ownership we have in Australia is a good thing and I’m heartened by the fact that Australia is now the largest share owning democracy in the world.  And I don’t want to get any more specific than that about individual share values in individual companies but I do have total confidence in Mr Switkowski and Mr Mansfield and the other members of the board, I think they’re doing an excellent job.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister some people might wonder how it is that a government can readily find upwards of $400 million to promote GST and the new tax system but can’t so readily find similar amounts of money to provide decent communication services in the bush without the sale of Telstra.  How do you respond to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh very readily Karen.  The money that is being provided… I mean the amount you mention of $400 million you know as well as I do that the overwhelming bulk of that is for the provision of what is basic information which has to be provided.  And the suggestion that you know the money that’s provided for start up assistance, the money that’s provided to the Catholic Social Welfare Commission and all the various business organisations to provide them with information I mean that is the equivalent of the normal obligation of a government to do that.  I think that answer is quite readily given.  This is a huge change to our taxation system and there are still people saying they want more information and I think we’ve provided an enormous amount of information but we do have an obligation to explain a new system.  It is different.  It’s obviously going to be strange to people when it first comes in.  I think it will after a while be very readily assimilated perhaps more quickly than many think but the provision of money to explain a new system of this magnitude is absolutely appropriate and understandable.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard is Professor Fels being over zealous in his pursuit of business over possible GST breaches?  And are you concerned at the deterioration in that relationship and Mr Dick Warburton, the Chairman of the Business Coalition has written to the Treasurer basically saying that there needs to be some refinements to the law because of the concerns that business has.  Would you consider, would the Government consider some legislative amendments if you like to I guess reign Professor Fels in?
PRIME MINISTER:
I haven’t seen Mr Warburton’s letter but you have to expect in the lead up to the GST that there will be different points of view expressed about the surveillance role and the policing role of the ACCC.  The Australian public welcomes a consumer advocate in this context.
JOURNALIST:
Is he being over zealous?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I don’t believe he’s being over zealous.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well you’re asking what my view is and I’m indicating to you that I don’t believe he’s being over zealous.  I haven’t seen Mr Warburton’s letter.  I’ll obviously have a look at it.  I have a lot of respect for Mr Warburton, I appreciate the contribution he’s made to the overall cause of tax reform.  I’ve just had a meeting with the President and other members of the Business Council to talk about a whole range of matters.  There remains very strong support for tax reform within the business community.  The business community played a significant role in advocating tax reform.  But it’s inevitable you’re going to get differences of opinion when you come to the behaviour of individual companies.  And there’s no sort of one blanket business view and you do need somebody who’s in there punching for the consumer.  And I think the Australian public rather likes the idea that there’s somebody in there punching for the Australian consumer.  Now whether everything said in an individual case is right or wrong is not for me to say, I’m not in possession of all of the facts.  But you asked me do I have confidence in Professor Fels?  The answer is yes.  Do I think he’s being over zealous?  No I don’t.  I think it is important that the consumer’s interests be protected and that the consumers understand that their interests are protected.  I also think that most businesses will behave in a very ethical and honest fashion.  Australian business is constrained not only by the natural ethical instincts they have but also by competitive forces.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] what Professor Fels has said that some of these business groups are acting our of self-interest?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I haven’t read everything he’s said.  I mean it’s impossible for me to read everything everybody says in this context.  But look everybody has a point of view to put and if you’re running a business organisation and you’re facing a big change you naturally focus on how it effects your organisation and that’s why you need the balance of a consumer advocate like Professor Fels.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard one of your senior ministers who has been left looking very poor prospect in his seat for the next election, Mr Fahey.  He clearly wants out of that seat and into another.  Are you going to stay out of this contest, or are you going to back Mr Fahey’s survival against Schultz or what would be your position?
PRIME MINISTER:
Michelle that matter will be I am sure appropriately resolved in accordance with the processes of the New South Wales division which are normally applied.  I have a great respect for Mr Fahey, I am not going to get into any more particularity than that.  
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well can I finish?  I am not going, I am not going . . .  Michelle, come on, come on really.  I mean it is not.
JOURNALIST:
He is a Cabinet Minister?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes and a very good one and an excellent Finance Minister.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard do you believe that the Tax Office should take Joe Cocker’s name off the GST advertising?
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard do you think your politicians are particularly stressed and do you think there should be stress counselling available for politicians in Parliament House?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I hadn’t thought of it. I think . . . 
JOURNALIST:
Kim Beazley has.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes well okay, I am not sneering at it.  No I am serious, I am not sneering at it.  No, can I say generally I think there is a lot of stress in the Australian community.  I would prefer to relate it to the community, I don’t want any particular focus on politicians.  A lot of other people are subject to stress as well.  It is not just politicians. I think it is important that we recognise the incidence of depression and stress and I think it is particularly important for men to be more open about those things.  And not be so stitched up about the emotional impact of their careers and juggling the responsibilities of family and work.  It’s important for both men and women to recognise that.  And I certainly think we have in the past been a little reluctant to talk about these things, particularly men, but not only men and I think we ought to do so a lot more often.  But stress and so forth is something that is not confined to politicians, we’re not the only ones that have stress.  The responsibilities that are thrown on people today who are trying to raise families and to earn a sufficient family income, to pay off a house and to educate their children are very considerable.  And I admire the juggling act that so many young parents are involved in.  And that applies whether you are a politician or you are doing something else.  I mean we are all subject to stress and I think we should all be a little more open about it.  
Equally though it not get to such a situation that you become sort of compulsively sorry for yourself and we are all subject to stress at various stages in our life and that applies to politicians, and it also applies to the other 18 million or so Australians and it’s not something that is peculiar to us.
JOURNALIST:
Should there be services available to politicians though in that this is a work  . . . 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t think the services available to politicians should be such that are not available to the general community.  I don’t think there should be any special deal for politicians.  But equally people shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that we’re part of the community and we’re subject to stress like everybody else.  But we don’t want any special consideration.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, on reconciliation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, this will be the last question.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think the black leadership has made a tactical mistake by moving the debate on to treaties so quickly?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look I don’t want to talk about this debate as though it were some kind of chess game.  As though it’s, you know, they’ve made a false move or I’ve made a false move.  I mean that is, frankly devaluing the debate.  The views I hold on this issue are very sincere genuine views. I’ve expressed my reservations about a treaty.  I think a treaty would be divisive. I think everybody sees a treaty as being something that is made by one nation with another or a group of others and no matter how you sort of define it and no matter what gloss you try and put on it, that’s what it means to the average person and I know that if we got into any kind of treaty negotiations you would be talking about things like representation in parliament, special indigenous seats.  You’d be talking about land ownership issues, you would be talking about regional governance issues and they would be seen very widely by the rest of the community as being quite divisive.  I think if ever there was you know a single message that came out of the large number of people who walked over Sydney Harbour Bridge, whatever it is and it doesn’t matter, it was a large number – the real message that came out of that to me was that overwhelmingly Australians want us all to be together on these issues, they want Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to be treated as a full and equal part of the community.  They want their disadvantaged addressed, they want racial discrimination completely removed from our society and they want us to be together and I think the superimposition of a notion which is inherently and instinctively divisive such as a treaty works against that process.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you Stephenie. To Bill Con and John Ralph. My Ministerial colleague David Kemp. To Captain David Elridge of the Salvation Army. Tony Eggleton, the Executive Director of the Council for the Centenary of Federation and the Federation Event is very relevant to the announcement that I am going to make. My Parliamentary colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am delighted that Bill Con and John Ralph asked me to launch the Foundation for Young Australians, which has has been explained as a merger of the Queen's Trust established in 1977 to mark the Silver Jubilee of the Queen's accession to the throne and the Australian Youth Foundation formed after the highly successful commemoration of the Bicentenary of European settlement in Australia in 1988.
As a merged body, it will inherit a deep and rich experience in commitment to assisting young Australians including many disadvantaged young Australians to realised their dreams. And the merger takes place under the new name to mark the centenary of Federation.
In the time that they had been in existence, both the Foundation and the Queen's Trust have spent large amounts of money. Twenty-seven million dollars in the case of the Queen's Trust and thirteen point five million dollars in the case of the Australian Youth Foundation to assist young people in so many different ways. And we've just had a very interesting and quite remarkable story of how the Queen's Trust was able to assist one young Australian to acquire particular skills and to give her the opportunity of realising her potential in a way that would have simply not have been possible under other programmes and other avenues.
The aim of the new foundation is to help young Australians to reach their full potential by providing assistance to disadvantaged young people, promoting the pursuit of excellence and developing leadership potential in young Australians. Both Mr Con and Mr Ralph bring a wealth of experience in Philanthropy to the new positions that they will occupy.
On behalf of the Government and I know the Australian people and most particularly those who benefited from the work of the Australian Youth Foundation and the Queen's Trust to date. I want to thank both of them and their organisations and those who work in them for the tremendous contribution that they have already made.
We welcome the merger and we particularly welcome it as a very important project to make a practical contribution to the commemoration of the Centenary of the Federation of the Australian Nation. And for that reason I am very pleased to announce today that the Commonwealth Government will provide the new foundation with an endowment of fifteen million dollars. And that endowment will make a very substantial contribution when added to the capital resources currently available to the two organisations that are being merged. It will provide an extremely solid capital base for the activities of the new foundation.
Initially that endowment of fifteen million dollars will be used to fund the Centenary Scholarships for young Australians. This will involve one hundred scholarships for young Australians to undertake under graduate or post graduate study in both academic and vocational areas. And these scholarships will be a valuable centenary of Federation projects.
The scholarships will be of a value of up to ten thousand dollars a year for a period expected to average from three to four years. Priority will be given to disadvantaged young people, particularly from rural and remote areas who otherwise may not be able to pursue studies.
The Government's contribution will bring the total capital base of the new organisation to around fifty million dollars, which will allow to make a very significant contribution to the development and welfare of Australia's young people.
In the spirit of the Government's philosophy on philanthropy, expressed best in the notion of the Social Coalition. This Government contribution will provide I hope an incentive and leverage for support of a very active fund raising activity within corporate Australia. Its an earnest of our practical commitment as well as our rhetorical support for the new foundation. Rederick is one thing in these areas as the people gathered here today know only so well practical assistance and practical contributions seem always to out last the Rederick and both of them of course are very important and the one compliments the other.
Of course the foundation will spend its resources on things other than the Centenary Scholarships. And I might mention one or two examples of the sort of projects that have been funded to date by the Australian Youth Foundation. One of them is called the ÔHand Brake Turn Project' which is a motor vehicle crime prevention project targeted at older teenagers to break the unemployment cycle and to prevent them entering the juvenile justice system. Four hundred young people have already been involved with sixty-nine per cent of them in employment after completing the two year course, compared with only eighteen per cent of them that were employed prior to entering in to the project.
There is another called the ÔDeveloping Tomorrow's Leaders Programme, which is a programme taking one hundred young emerging leaders in their field to spend a week being informed by a range of speakers on issued facing the nation. The sixteen of those programmes will be held in Sydney next month. And there is also the Achiever Awards programme which provides grants to young people to pursue a wide range of study in areas such as the professions, trade and the Arts.
So ladies and gentlemen, the work of the new Foundation, that is the Foundation for Young Australians will appropriately mark and honour the centenary of the Federation of the Australian nation. It will bring together in emerged body the collective commitment of those who've been associated with the Queen's Trust and The Australian Youth Foundation. Both outstanding bodies and it is appropriate that they merge to mark the centenary.
We wish it well, we provide our practical help of fifteen million dollars. We encourage corporate Australia to match indeed exceed the contribution and the practical commitment of the Government to this very worthy and idealistically based new foundation. Providing opportunities for young Australians, particularly those who are in different ways disadvantaged by the way in which other programmes operate is always [inaudible] goal and I am certain that the foundation for young Australians with the additional help that I have announced today will make a very significant contribution.
I wish Mr Con and Ralph well. I thank them for their public spirited contribution to such fine causes in the past and I urge corporate Australia to give its very strong support to this very worthwhile foundation.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much John Olsen, the Premier of South Australia. To the Deputy Secretary General, Mr Kakakhel. To my Ministerial colleague, Senator Robert Hill who is not only the Minister for Environment in the Federal Government but also the Leader of the Government in the Senate, my other Parliamentary colleagues, the Lord Mayor of Adelaide and particularly our guests from overseas, ladies and gentlemen. And could I particularly pay my respects to the Kaurna people, I thank them for the warmth of their welcome and I acknowledge that this meeting takes place on lands of which they are the traditional owners.
This is the first occasion that Australia has had the privilege of hosting World Environment Day. And it is an opportunity not only to showcase our country, to showcase the city of Adelaide, the State of South Australia and the many environmental attributes that it offers to the people of Australia and to the people of the world. But it's also an opportunity for us at a national level, to associate ourselves very strongly as a nation with what World Environment Day represents and what it means in terms of an on going commitment of the people and the Government of Australia towards the preservation of our environment in all its forms.
We have as a community here, and I'm sure it is true of countries around the world, we have long since passed from that time when the environment was regarded as some kind of peripheral or optional extra, so far as the issues of the day that commanded the attention of people and nations. For a host of very good reasons, concern for the environment has become a very important mainstream issue in our lives. Not only in the lives of people who make political decisions, but also within the lives of our community. We understand as the custodians of one of the most ancient lands in the world, we understand the environmental challenges which Australia faces.
John Olsen spoke a moment ago of the importance of water to this country of ours. The challenge to establish a proper basis for sharing the water resources of Australia and to work out the competing claims of different Governments in relation to those resources, and a fair distribution of what is an incredibly precious asset, is one of the great challenges that face us environmentally in Australia. The challenge of the growing salinity of large parts of Australia goes in a sense hand in hand with the challenges we face in relation to water distribution and water conservation. And I can't think of any more important environmental challenges that this country faces. We're also as a country in a special position, with its special burdens and special challenges in that we are one of the few, if not the only, industrialised nations in the world which is a net exporter of energy. And that particular situation creates special challenges and difficulties so far as our position is concerned in relation to the worldwide debate on greenhouse gases.
Today is an occasion to honour most importantly, the men and women of Australia who have at the grassroots community level, played an important role in building a concern for the environment and making their contribution towards a better environmental future for our children.
You'll be aware of the contribution made by the Government's Natural Heritage Trust. Already that Trust and the payments from it have contributed to about six thousand individual projects around Australia. And although a very important part of it is support for the Murray Darling Basin, another very important element of the programmes administered under the Natural Heritage Trust is the way in which local partnerships between citizens, community groups, businesses with financial support from the Government has developed a concern and a care and an interest in our environment. And what we have sought to do through the Natural Heritage Trust is very much to build community acceptance and community involvement at an individual neighbourhood level in concern for our environment. To encourage people almost instinctively to see a concern for the environment as being the most natural thing in the world that one would want to have in relation to decision-making, affecting their community or their neighbourhood.
We all of us, whether we live in Australia or we live in other parts of the world have a long way to go before we can say that we have any where near achieved the sort of goals that a gathering like this will set itself. But the fact that there is a relatively higher level of understanding and agreement about what is important in relation to environmental issues is encouraging. The fact that we are starting to see a coming together of countries previously with different points of view is also itself extremely encouraging.
I want on a personal level to thank Senator Robert Hill who has done an absolutely outstanding job as Minister for the Environment since the Coalition came to office in March of 1996. As a Government that is both committed to caring for and protecting the environment, as well as a Government that has sought successfully to build a strong economic environment in Australia and to generate another seven hundred thousand jobs over the last four years, it's sometimes not easy to strike the right balance, to get the correct distillation in the making of Government policy between a proper concern for the environment, the demands of economic growth and economic development with all the benefits that that growth and development delivers in terms of jobs. We have tried to do that, we have our critics, we'll have our critics in the future. We don't pretend that everything we've done has been perfect or ideal, but we have sought to build the right balance and to create the correct distillation or achieve the correct distillation. And I want to thank you Robert for the tremendous leadership at a Ministerial level that you have given.
To our overseas guests, please enjoy the pleasures and the civility and the hospitality and the friendliness of the city of Adelaide. Everything that the Premier told you about the excellence of the South Australian wine industry is of course correct. If anything he understated it. It is an outstanding example of the capacity of this country to produce something which wins renown and creates pleasure around the world. Welcome to Australia, welcome to Adelaide. I congratulate in advance those who will receive the Prime Minister's Environmental Awards. But most importantly, I hope that this conference is outstandingly successful. I hope that all of you who participate in it go away with an even deeper resolve to achieve your goals and I hope you go as you should, in the knowledge that the Government and the people of Australia very enthusiastically share those goals with all of you.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Good evening.  
It’s a fact of life for those who live in rural and regional areas that petrol prices are generally higher for them than they are for those who live in the city.
One of the important decisions we announced in the budget was a new grant scheme to help keep the price of petrol down in the country.  
From next month, the Government will pay country service station owners a special grant for their fuel sales with a higher grant for sales in remote areas.  We’ll also ensure that the benefit of this scheme worth five hundred million dollars will be passed on to customers.  
The introduction of this scheme delivers upon an undertaking we make to country Australia.  But under the new system the pump price of petrol and diesel need not rise as a result of the GST.  
One of the great benefits of the new tax system is lower transport costs to regional areas.  The cost of diesel excise for heavy country transport will fall by twenty-four cents a litre and this will help reduce the cost of transporting goods to and from the country.  In addition the cost of petrol and diesel used in farming and other businesses will be cut by about seven cents a litre and excise will be removed altogether from the rail sector.  You can expect that these transport savings will be passed on in lower prices for every day goods and will enable our exports to be more competitive.  It’s in Australia’s interest that we have reduced fuel prices for regional areas, another reason why the new tax system is good for the nation.
Good night.


E&amp;OE..............................
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Peter Sjoquist, to John Anderson the Deputy Prime Minister and Member for Gywdir, to my many other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Can I acknowledge the welcome of the Kamilaroi people - the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place.
This is a remarkable occasion because it brings together school children and young Australians from many parts of north western New South Wales. It also brings together members of the community of Moree which is providing such a splendid lead and a splendid demonstration of how people of different cultures and different backgrounds can work together in a harmonious way.
I also want to particularly congratulate Peter Sjoquist and all of those associated with him for the tremendous personal dedication of time and effort and energy that they have put into organising this year's Croc Eisteddfod and also the Eisteddfods around Australia on two previous occasions.
The anti-alcohol, tobacco and drug message of this festival and of this Eisteddfod is one that I very warmly commend and endorse to all of you present and the message of the Eisteddfod and the message of the dangers of substance abuse is a message that I know is very warmly embraced by people within the Moree community.
But I think all of us who are going to listen to the entertainment tonight would particularly want to put our hands together to thank the children of the schools of the districts that are going to contribute to our entertainment tonight. So let's have a round of applause in advance for all of the children that are going to give us the entertainment.
It is an opportunity as Peter said for so many young Australians in this part of our country to demonstrate their particular talent to show to the people of Australia and not just to the people of Moree of how people of different backgrounds and different cultures can work together, can work together, have fun together and contribute to a great sense of community and a great sense of oneness as all Australians together. I therefore have great pleasure in declaring this Croc Eisteddfod of the Year 2000 open. I hope you all enjoy it and our warm thanks to Peter and all of those who've worked so hard to bring it about, thank you to all of them.
[ends]


E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………………………
Tony, thank you very much for those warm words of welcome.  Madam Mayor Patricia Harvey, Gillian Skinner, the other councillors of the Mosman Council, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
As somebody who bar a year or so in the 1960s when he was on a traditional working holiday, then traditional overseas and barring of course the enormous amounts of time I now spend living in Canberra or travelling around Australia, I’m someone who’s lived all of his life in the city of Sydney.  I was educated here both at Canterbury Boys’ High School and at Sydney University and I’m not of course visiting Mosman for the first time.  But this is certainly the first occasion as Prime Minister that I’ve been received in this very gracious way by the first citizen of your municipality and I want to thank you Councillor Harvey for those very kind words of welcome, to thank you Tony for what you have said of me and have said in welcoming me.
It’s a great place Australia and it’s rich with variety and diversity.  I spent last night in the town of Moree with some seventeen thousand people, north west of New South Wales.  And to come this afternoon here to Mosman having been last night to a not dissimilar gathering and this morning also, is the remainder of the incredible diversity of this country.  And of course the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity to savour that diversity and the opportunity to meet as you go around Australia, different groups of people each in their own way endeavouring to make a contribution to building a better Australian community and a more harmonious Australian society.
Mosman of course bulks large in the history of the party that I’m very proud to represent and lead.  It also bulks very large in the civic life of Australia and of the city of Sydney.  Over the years, Mosman has not been afraid to assert an independent voice – a radical point of view on occasions, as well as maintaining a forward momentum of preserving what could loosely be described as mainstream Australian values.  It’s a community that has fostered the arts and this gallery here beautifully taking its place inside what used to be a place of worship is a reminder of that.  It’s also a municipality that has of course boasted, as does Tony’s electorate in its entirety and but for the fact that I represent a number of people from the beautiful headland suburbs of Hunters Hill and Woolwich, I might be disposed to agree with some of your remarks about the beauty of this electorate, Tony.  But it also of course boasts a variety of schools.  Mosman is a great example and the electorate of Warringah is a great example of the choice that is available in education within Australian society, something to which not only your local member but I and the members of my Government are very, very strongly committed.
And I know that in a few moments I will be awarding some prizes to young people who’ve made a particular contribution and in connection with the millennium and of course we are as a community very focussed, not only on the fact that this is the year 2000 but also that next year we will celebrate for an entire twelve months, one hundred years of the Federation of Australia.  And it’s an event that I think all Australians will share because of all of the, I guess the annual events of all of the historical milestones that we have, none in a way more naturally unites us in a non-combative, harmonious fashion than the commemoration of the bringing together of the then colonies to form the Commonwealth of Australia at that time.  It was not a constitution imposed or foisted upon us, but one embraced by the people.
But in a few moments in presenting these awards, I will be able to honour the talent of the younger men and women of this municipality.  And if I would have one message for them and I suppose speakers, particularly prime ministers always have messages or should have messages on occasions like this and that is that there is nothing that a local community can not achieve if all of the forces and influences for good within that community are prepared to co-operate and work together.
Some of you hear me talk a little bit about what I describe as the Social Coalition.  It’s not a political description, it’s a description of combined community effort and it’s based on the view that the government can’t do it all on its own, it has neither the resources or the wit to solve every problem but it can do something.  Individuals left to their own devices in many cases can achieve great things, but some need help and compassion and understanding more than others.  Great community organisations like the Salvation Army and the St Vincent de Paul Society and the Red Cross and the RSL, they all make a tremendous contribution to our community as well.  And there are many open-hearted, generous, philanthropic business men and women in our society who can also make a difference and if through the operation of our Social Coalition we can get all of those elements in our society working together, each contributing what it does best, then we can achieve solutions and outcomes that we might otherwise not be able to achieve.  One of the most distinguishing things about Australian society is that we’ve always had a lot of volunteers.  We are on eof the great volunteer societies of the world, you see it everywhere.  
I never cease to be amazed at the way in which, in a self-sacrificing fashion so many people devote their lives to a cause – to a local sporting association, to a local community organisation, their local church, whatever their bent may be.  They do it for no reward, they do it because they derive not only a sense of personal satisfaction but the feeling that they are doing something good for their community and that is the great resource within Australian society and it is given less grudgingly and more open heartedly and more generously in Australian society than I think in any other part of the world.  And one of the reasons we do it so well is that we are essentially a classless community, people are prepared to pitch in and work together to try and achieve an outcome.  There aren’t the inhibitions in Australian society that you might find in more structured societies in other parts of the world and that is one of the great distinguishing characteristics and a very precious asset it is and it is something I commend very warmly to the younger people who are gathered here today.
And I guess the other thing I’d say to them is that we of course, not only here in Mosman in Sydney, but also in Australia generally live in one of the most fortunate communities in the world.  It is a remarkably peaceful and cohesive society, it is a society that respects difference but it prefers to settle its disputes by ferocious arguments rather than brute force.  However much I know on occasions you may wonder about the point of some of the political disputation that occurs in Federal or State Parliament, remember that the alternative of settling disputes with physical force is infinitely less attractive.  And we have been able to take the democracy we inherited from other parts of the world and most particularly Britain and Ireland and build it into something very special and particularly Australian.  
And gatherings like this are a celebration to me of the great success of what Australia is.  We come together in a very simple, straightforward gathering.  I’m able to say a few words about my feelings of Australia.  You’re able to make up your mind whether you agree with me or not. I think on your behalf honour some young people within the Australian community who’ve shown a particular talent and we do it within a gallery that provides for this community an opportunity to express its love of art and the artistic side of our being, which is a very important side of our being.
So can I say to you Madam Mayor, again thank you very much for having me here in Mosman. I’ve been to a few rowdy political meetings in Mosman during my time, not so recently but there have been occasions when I’ve been to some very rowdy political meetings in the Mosman Town Hall and maybe before my political career ends, I’ll come to some in the Mosman Town Hall of equal noise in the future.  Although I hope that I won’t hold the Honourable Member for Warringah responsible for that.
The last thing I can say and I mean this very sincerely and very genuinely, I think you have got a very fine Federal Member in Tony Abbott.  He’s not only a great Federal Member for Warringah, but he’s also a very good Minister and he’s a person who can relate to all Australians and that’s a very important quality for anybody in public life.  So Tony it’s a delight to be in your electorate.  Madam it’s a pleasure to be your guest and to be in your municipality and I wish you and your council and all the people of the Mosman municipality great good fortune, and good health in the years ahead.
Thank you.
[Ends] 


Subjects:   Solomon Islands; business survey, reconciliation and Moree, farm subsidies
E&amp;OE  ……………………………………………………………………………………
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, the Solomons are again asking for Australian peacekeepers to come in to help with their situation there.  Have you given any more thought to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look our position is we want to see the dispute in the Solomon Islands resolved by the people of the Solomon Islands.  It’s the overwhelming view of the countries of the Pacific region that this issue should be resolved without the intervention of foreign forces.  We want a democratic solution.  The Parliament is meeting tomorrow and we hope that that democratic solution emerges from that meeting.
JOURNALIST:
In terms of the survey which suggests that business confidence is fairly low at the moment in the introduction of the GST are you looking at anyway to try to boost that in the interim or are you just going to wait and see what happens after July 1st?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think the Australian economy is still very strong and I believe that the GST will be introduced.  The New Tax System will come in and there won’t be any medium or long term interruption to business activity or business confidence.  The sooner the new system comes the better and I believe people will find on the first of July and the days that follow that much of the doomsaying that has been around has been misplaced, that the negative destructive backward looking campaign of the Labor Party has been designed to score political points and not advance the national interest.
JOURNALIST:
So that report doesn’t concern you at all? 
PRIME MINISTER:
No, not in the longer term and it obviously doesn’t concern the business community either because the head of the ACCI has dismissed it.  You have to expect with such an enormous change that there is going to be some nervousness but I’d say to the people of Australia that this Government has had the courage to bring in a change that is for the good of Australia and it’s inevitable you go through some nervousness but in the medium to longer term Australia will be a better and a stronger country economically because of the change.  Governments have got to have the courage to embrace change for the national good and those who try and tear that down like the Labor Party are not helping the national interest. 
JOURNALIST:
Just looking locally at Moree, with what you have seen locally over the last 24 hours could Moree be used as a blueprint for reconciliation for the whole country?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it is a wonderful example of practical reconciliation. I mean the people of Moree have had to come to terms with difficulties between different races and they have overcome those difficulties in a very practical way and this is what I mean when I talk about practical reconciliation.  It is easy to make speeches and utter fine words but the real test is your willingness as a community to bring people together, to give people hope and opportunity and that’s what has happened here in Moree and I give full credit to all of the people of Moree, the cotton industry, the Aboriginal people and all the other citizens of this town for the example they have set and for the good they have done.
JOURNALIST:
Will you return again?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Australia is a big country and I try to get everywhere.  I can’t guarantee a quick return but I think I am the first Prime Minister to pay a serious visit to this place for quite a long period of years.
JOURNALIST:
The world is not a level playing field at the moment Prime Minister, will farm subsidies be increased for primary agricultural industries in Australia? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have never argued that the world is a level playing field, but I can promise the farmers of Australia is that we’ll follow policies like lower interest rates.  When our opponents were in office interest rates were 23% - they’re now less than half that.  They’re the sort of things that in the long run will do more to help the farmers of Australia than anything else.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, do you want to comment on fuel excise in Queensland has been dropped.  Have you read that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I am sorry I haven’t caught up with that.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Announcement of NHMRC Industry Research Fellowship Scheme
E&amp;OE
Thank you Professor Cunningham, Professor Castaldi, Mr Bob Carr the Premier of New South Wales, my Ministerial colleagues ? Jackie Kelly, Craig Knowles the New South Wales Health Minister, my colleague Ross Cameron ? the Federal Member for Parramatta, Senator Marise Payne, other Parliamentary colleagues, Chancellor and Vice Chancellor, other many distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. And of course I acknowledge the presence of one of my predecessors as Prime Minister Gough Whitlam, during his Government the commencement of Westmead Hospital was announced.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I join the Premier in saluting on this occasion the excellence and the dedication of medical researchers and medical scientists in Australia. Of the many heroes of Australian life, none are entitled to greater praise and greater reverence than the doctors and other medical practitioners and researchers and scientists who over the years this country has produced. To use that colloquialism, Australia has always punched well above her weight when it comes to medical research and medical science. Given our population, we have out performed many countries and we have every reason to look back over the history of Australia and to salute the contribution of just so many people and I know that the most recent of those, Dr Peter Doherty, who's agreed to become patron of the institute but unfortunately can't be here today, is an example of that.
The Premier was right when he reminded us of our own experience in our life time at the way in which medical science has altered the hopes and the aspirations, and abolished the fear of disease and early death and crippling paralysis that was the lot of so many people in the 1940s and 1950s and indeed the 1960s. But of course the conquering of those diseases and those challenges have been accompanied by the arrival of new challenges and the more modern medical challenges are no less daunting and difficult than those of earlier years. But the store of human happiness is a lot greater because of the achievements of medical science and it is something that deserves the ongoing support of governments of all political persuasions. Out of the many things that I have tried to do in my time as Prime Minister, none I'm much more proud of than the fact that in the Budget before last we committed ourselves to doubling over a period of four years of the Federal Government's contribution to health and medical research in this country. It is an incredibly important investment in the future of this country and it's a great investment in the future happiness of the Australian people.
This institute does represent an expression of what Peter Wills called in his review the virtuous cycle. The partnership - dare I invoke a phrase I often do ? the Social Coalition, whereby you have the Government, the business community, dedicated professionals and others working together to achieve desirable social goals. It's already been indicated that the Federal Government, our NHMRC funding contributed a million dollars to stage one and, as indicated by Professor Cunningham, will be contributing two million dollars towards the construction of stage two.
I'm also very pleased to announce that the NHMRC will establish ten research fellowships in industry each worth $80,000 a year for some of our brighter researchers to undertake periods of time in industry to further their understanding and their contribution towards medical research. But my warmest words of praise today are of course reserved for the health professionals, for the researchers, for the one hundred and fifty or more very dedicated people, all remarkably talented Australians who are making a contribution to the relief of human suffering and the understanding of the complexities and challenges of diseases.
Of all the things that I think we would our country to be known for, I can't think of anything that is more important that it be known as a centre of excellence and achievement and compassion in medical research. We have the endowments, we have the people, we have the lifestyle, we have the supporting infrastructure and I think we have a commitment from governments and from the private sector right across the board. As I look around this gathering today, I see governments at different levels represented, I see a bi-partisan commitment to the cause of medical research, I see people joining together to try and achieve milestones in relieving human suffering. And all of us in different ways have been the beneficiary of medical science and the skill of our surgeons and the skill of our scientists in the medical area has brought great happiness and great hope to all of us at different stages of our life and I want to take the opportunity on behalf of the Government and through it the people of Australia to thank and salute the medical practitioners and other health professional of this country and our researchers, for the contribution that they make to our ongoing happiness.
To you, Professor Cunningham and to all of your colleagues I wish you well, I hope that this institute fulfills all the hopes you have of it. I know that if the dedication of you and your team is the real measure of its success, well it will be a great Australian achievement and I have great pleasure in declaring it officially open.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE
PRIME MINISTER:
Mrs Jill Green, the launch lady, to the Premier of Victoria, Steve Bracks. How are you? Great to see you. It's always good to be made welcome. My Ministerial colleagues, Rod Kemp and Peter Reith as well as the Defence Minister John Moore Vide Admiral Shackleton, to Admiral Chris Barrie, the Chief of Defence Force and most particularly the five survivors with us today from one of the earlier HMAS Parramattas and we're absolutely delighted to see those former Naval persons with us.
This is a very important moment for the defence industry. It's a very important moment for the Williamtown dock yard. But it's also a very important moment for the Royal Australian Navy and it gives me an opportunity on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia to express my respect and gratitude to serving men and women of the Royal Australian Navy through the years who have done so much to deliver the security and the peace that we in Australia enjoy in the beginning of the twenty-first century.
It's also an occasion to express my thanks to Tenix and to the men and women who have worked so hard on the ANZAC frigate project. It's an example of Australian workmanship. It's an example of Australian engineering skill and it's a demonstration to the rest of the world how modern and state of the art can be the ship building capacity of Australia and Australians.
And it is also very importantly an occasion to remark upon the growing significance of debate in Australia about the future defence arrangements of this country. At the end of this month the Defence Minister and I will release a discussion paper through which we hope to engage the people of Australia in an intensive debate about the future shape of Australia's Defence arrangements and that will be followed later in the year by the release of a white paper to lay out the future defence needs and their scale and their detail for the years ahead.
It's an occasion to say to the people of Australia that in the years ahead, we will need as Australians to spend more rather than less on our defence capability. I think all of you are conscious that the region in which we now live is less rather than more stable than it used to be,and an important element of National priorities for this country in the time ahead will be the focus on the capacity and the needs of our Defence Forces.
And this frigate of course that is being launched today is an important element of it. I know it's an emotional occasion to people associated with the Royal Australian Navy. The Navy has a great tradition which has done great things for our country and today in particular for the people of the Royal Australian Navy to savour, to enjoy. and to reflect upon.
I wish all of those associated with the project well. On behalf of the Government I thank them and I wish the men and women of HMAS Parramatta, a great good fortune and happy sailing in the years ahead.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects:  GST; Defence Force spending; Internet; Kyoto Accord; datacasting.
E&amp;OE  ………………………………………………………………………………
GOTTLIEBSEN:
John, as a person who has devoted a lifetime to Australian Service, is achieving a GST for Australia more important to John Howard than winning the next election? 
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I hope I can do both.  But, I am prepared to take the risk of political adversity that’s involved in tax reform in order to achieve it.  There is no point in being in public life unless you are prepared to put your future on the line, to bring about something that is good for the country, or make it more competitive and get the states more money for public services, and all the other benefits of tax reform.  So, you see that as yes well, I can’t argue with the interpretation, but I think we can do both.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
With pharmacies and other parts of small business concerned about the administration of GST, are you worried about the effect on the National Party of the ALP’s Country Labor campaign?
PRIME MINISTER:
Right at the moment we are at our maximum point of political vulnerability because it’s easy to run a fear campaign, it’s hard to put it down.  Many of the consumer surveys show that people are expecting higher price rises and lower or lesser tax cuts than they’re actually going to get.  It won’t be until it comes in and it’s been operating for a few months that people will really know what’s involved.  It’s my strong belief that they will give it the thumbs up.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
Are you disappointed that after a huge advertising campaign, only about 35% of Australians are in favour of the GST, and only about 46% think it will benefit the economy?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I am not too unhappy with those figures, but they don’t mean a lot, they are all taken during this period of maximum political static and turbulence.  Wait until it comes in, and see how people react.  It really depends very much question you ask them.  You’d never have a huge majority for a GST on its own.  I am not in favour of the GST on its own, I am in favour of the GST as part of tax reform, but certainly not on its own.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
John, are you aware of the coming drain on small business cash as a result of the accelerated tax over the next fourteen months?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t, I think the phasing arrangements that have been introduced will help the very small businesses, and I think many of those fears are not well founded.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
Do you admit that not enough money has being allocated to maintain the current levels of the Australian Defence Forces?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think what I’m saying is for a combination of reasons we need to spend more, and there’s been a very small increase in the current Budget that will take effect next year, but after that I see an increase as being necessary.  Just how much and it what areas will be resolved in the context of the White Paper which will be coming out later this year.  But circumstances are such that we do need to spend more.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
Is it likely to be substantial?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, until I’ve got an idea of what it is, I never like putting those kind of labels on it because everybody puts a different figure on substantial, or significant, or modest, or noticeable.  We need to spend more on defence, and just how much more and where it will be spent is really a job for the White Paper in particular.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
John do you use the Internet?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I do.  Not a lot because I have a staff that does much for me, but I have a reasonable but not very extensive capacity to use it but I do use it from time to time. Largely for you know picking up and news and things of that kind. 
GOTTLIEBSEN:
John you’re not as passionate about the new economy as say Tony Blair or Bill Clinton.  Do you think you might have underestimated its importance?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I don’t think I’ve misread its importance, but I am averse to this idea that there is a new economy and an old economy and there is some dichotomy between them, I think they’re quite complimentary.  And if you look at the approaches that we’ve taken in a lot of policy areas you’ll see that.  I reject the idea that you can draw a line through the old economy companies and the new economy companies.  Many of the successful old economy companies so called, are those that have embraced very readily the instruments of the new economy.
GOTTLIEBSEN:
Where does the Government stand on greenhouse gases and the Kyoto Accord?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we thought the outcome in Kyoto was a very fair and reasonable one.  We remain disappointed that developing countries aren’t part of it.  We are very conscious as a net exporter of energy product and being an industrialised society that is such an exporter, we are in a unique position.  And there are still many aspects of the international understanding such as it is that exists at the moment that’s not very satisfactory to Australia, and we still have a long way to go to get an outcome that is fair and satisfactory.  
GOTTLIEBSEN:
Is Australia going to honour its obligations?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think it’s too early for us to start making declarations about that.  Let’s see what progress is made towards ratification. 
GOTTLIEBSEN:
Do you think the US will ratify the treaty?
PRIME MINISTER:
It’s a hard ask, a very hard ask.  
GOTTLIEBSEN:
John, are you concerned that Fairfax, News Corporation and Telstra have all abandoned data casting?  Is there any room for the Government to move on this policy, or is it all locked up?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there’s a lot of discussion going on right at the moment, I think you’re aware of that.  I would like to think none of them have abandoned it, and I hope that the discussions that are going on at the present time which have to respect the legislation, or the outcome that was supported by all sides of politics a couple years ago.  Any outcome’s got to respect that.  But I hope that those companies will continue to be players.  They should be and I hope we can find a way whereby they will.
[Ends]


Subjects: Role of Arts in Australian Society, Nugent Report
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much Margaret Seares, to Jennifer Bott to Richard Alston and Peter McGauran, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say immediately that confronted as I am over the next eleven days and beyond with the task of familiarising and warming the hearts of the Australian community towards tax reform, I drew incredible inspiration from the quality of the performance of the Flying Fruit Fly Circus. The quality of their balance, the intricate way in which they dealt with the detail of their routine was a source of extraordinary inspiration.
Can I say when Richard asked me to launch this report which is being prepared by Sacchi and Sacchi on behalf of the Australia Council I agreed very readily because it would give me an opportunity to not only encourage the arts community and the broader Australian community to embrace a wider view of the role of the arts in Australian society but it was also an opportunity for me to say very directly to this representative gathering the very high priority that the Government places on supporting the arts within Australian society.
For good reason which I won't dwell on today at this gathering, much of what is said about the Government I lead relates to our programs of economic change and reform but there is of course to government as there is to life another dimension other than sustenance and efficiency and productivity and economic performance. There are also the other aspects of life and the role of the arts in Australian society seen perhaps stereotyped as being a society overwhelmingly preoccupied with materialism, with sporting pleasures and others of a non-artistic kind you all know that it's a very important element of our existence and our being and essence as Australians to embrace and to practice our love of the arts.
The Government has persistently demonstrated its support for that and I was very happy to lend my very strong support to Richard Alston when he brought the recommendations surrounding the Nugent Report to budget Cabinet. The reality is that if you are serious as a government and a community about the arts there will always need to be a measure of tax payer and public subsidy and public support.
I am as strong as anybody in promoting the view that the private sector should pay its part and make a contribution. And we certainly in all of our policies in relation to the arts have endeavoured to do that. But side by side with that must sit and ongoing commitment from public sector to provide support. And I hope that the arts community and the broader Australian community will see in our response to the Nugent Report in the budget a manifestation of that belief and of that commitment.
It was in 1997 that the Australia Council recognised that although there had been a large body of behavioural research within the arts community very little work had actually been done to measure how Australians beyond existing audiences and the arts community actually felt about the arts. And in a sense this document, ÔAustralians and the Arts' is all about that journey of discovery and finding out what the rest of the Australian community thought and through that process, to encourage them to be part of the enjoyment of the Arts to mould the presentation of the Arts, the content of what is produced, the way in which it is communicated to the broader community.
The purpose of the research as I understand it was to provide an insight in to the emotional and other responses to the Arts which was the heart of community attitude. Saatchi and Saactchi found that the key challenges facing the Arts community was to better communicate with the general population. That is so often the finding of research in relation to just about any community activity. They made three fundamental point in their report, that all Australians should feel welcome to be creative. That all Australians should feel welcome to enjoy the creative output of others without obstacles and that all Australians should be proud of the Arts in Australia as a realistic expression of who we are and what we value.
The central message that the Australia Council will be sending to the Arts community through the release of this report is that everyone has their role to play in promoting the value of the Arts to all Australians.
As you read through the report you will find some evidence of negative or indifference community responses. For example if found that thirty-five per cent of Australians agree that the Arts are OK, but their just irrelevant to me. That of course represents a challenge to those within the Arts community and to those within Government.
Encouragingly of course, the report found the great majority of Australians saw the Arts as an opportunity to express in ways that we couldn't find elsewhere what we think it is to be Australian, what the essence of Australianism is and the values that we hold as Australians. And that very strong identification between the Arts and our national identity is always something that I believe has resonated very strongly in the Australian community.
And I as a person who grew up in this country in the 1950's and now in my sixty-first year have observed the way in which the Arts over the years have come to be seen by an increasing number of Australians as a way in which we tell the world who we are, what we believe in and what we stand for.
And can I say I welcome very warmly the association with today's launch of leading identities in the Australian sporting community. I marvelled I think it was Nick [Sharadie's] comments in the Daily Telegraph this morning when he speculated that a State of Origin game might be proceeded by a Bell Shakespeare performance at one of our sporting venues. One of his I think more laconic colleagues simply remarked it as long as they had the right lines in place in the goal place there when the whistle went he didn't really mind that what went on before. Both attitudes are welcome and I think it is important to see that kind of exchange as something of a metaphor for seeing the Arts as not being something separate, special or elite but something that is very much part and parcel of our daily existence.
Now all of you in one way or another are associated with the Arts in Australia and it made an enormous contribution to the role that they play and the way in which they bulk large in community life. But I think all of us have a responsibility both in the community and within the Government to understand the barriers that many of our fellow Australians sees towards the enjoyment of the Arts. To find different ways of communicating their value to them and rather than welling inwardly our views as a community or as people in Government who are interested in the Arts as to what they mean to us and how they have developed and how they express the Australian essence and what we have to try and do is to reach out and to look in the minds and attitudes of our fellow Australians.
And this report will go a long way towards helping us to do that. And I want to thank Saatchi and Saatchi. I want to congratulate the Australia Council and to Margaret and Jennifer in particular for the leadership that they have given. And can I also take the opportunity of thanking Richard Alston who'se been my principal [inaudible] not only but principal Ministerial Adviser and Peter has joined him more recently in the time that I have been Prime Minister. The role of the Prime Minister is to try and keep abreast of all of the responsibilities of Government and all of the things that matter to the community. But you can only ever hope to do that effectively if you have in various roles a Minister who has the capacity to interpret the various challenges. From the day he was appointed, I found in Richard a very vigorous champion of the Arts, not an uncritical accepter of everything that was put to him by the community but a very vigorous interested and concerned and committed person in relation to the Arts in Australian society and that has been of enormous assistance to me and it's been a companionship over the last four and a half years in relation to the Arts that I found stimulating and I have enjoyed immensely.
So this is an important day for the Australia Council. It's an important day for the Arts. I say again it's something that does bulk very large in our priorities. I hope that in the time that we've had opportunity to do so and most recently in the budget we have demonstrated that commitment. There is a central role for government in relation to the Arts. There of course is an immensely important partnership role for the private sector and the rest of the Australian community and I hope in our way we may have got the balance right. And just as the Flying Fruit Flyer Circus taught us the value of balance in their repertoire and I'm trying to find continuous balance in explaining the various intricacies of taxation reform to the Australian community, I hope perhaps that all of us together can find the right balance between the roles of the Government, the broader community, the Arts practitioners and their commercial and private enterprise benefactors and that we can be something of a model to the rest of the world as to how you get that balance right.
I have great pleasure in launching this report. I hope it is widely read and responded to and I think it will make a great contribution to the on going cause of a wider understanding of the value of Arts and most importantly the enjoyment of the Arts by a broader cross section of the Australian community.
Thank you.


Subject: Tax reform; Petrol prices; oil companies.
E&amp;OE...........................
Well I haven't the faintest idea what that all meant! But to Michael Tilley, to Malcolm Teague, who over the years has made a wonderful contribution to the culture of great business luncheon gatherings in Melbourne; ladies and gentlemen.
I was invited to nominate a title for my address and I nominated the title ?What's ahead for Australia'. I guess you would have to say if you have been following the news and listening to the radio and watching television over the last few weeks you would have perhaps thought at one stage that 75% of the Australian population were caravan dwellers, you may have thought that there was nothing ahead of Australia other than, in the eyes of some of the commentators, the alleged disaster of taxation reform and of course that there was only one person responsible for it and you are listening to him. I thought at one stage I was even going to get blamed for that grass out there! But nonetheless, I do want to share some quite serious thoughts with you and I want to share with you the proper context of tax reform which of course has its great opening and beginning just tomorrow week.
I want to put into context the reason why we have set out to reform the tax system. I want to put aside if I can for a moment the inevitable political squabble over the detail of taxation reform and try and put into context why we are doing this and why it is so very good to the future of Australia. I agree with Mr Tilley that the economic climate in this country at present is very strong. We have now had twelve quarters of economic growth which represents in terms of the annual rate about four per cent. And you have to go back to the period 1968-1971 to find a comparable period of sustained economic growth. And that was at a time when although our economy was very strong and very bullish, in many respects the Australian economy was a lot more protected and a lot more, I think, cautious and inward looking than what it is now.
The fact that we have had those twelve quarters of economic growth and the fact that we have seen 712,000 more jobs created in the last four and a bit years, we have strong levels of business investment and Australia was able to stare down the Asian economic downturn. The fact that that happened and those things happened of course is no accident. It was overwhelmingly due to the fact that a significant number of economic reforms have been carried out. And I have never been unwilling to acknowledge that one or two of those reforms were initiated by the former government. And what of course in that context on that point disappoints me most about the political debate that is raging at the present time over taxation reform is that whereas the Coalition in opposition was willing to support tariff reform, financial deregulation and other reforms when they were proposed by the Hawke/Keating government, we have had nothing but the most inane juvenile attempts to obstruct and derail taxation reform from our political opponents.
When there does come a time in the affairs of a country, particularly when the people have spoken that all of us in public life have to get behind a reform and try and make it work. But our opponents have chosen not to do that. Now economic growth has been overwhelmingly the result of reforms and particularly the reforms of the last four years - getting the budget back into surplus, reforming our industrial relations system, pursuing a vigorous competition policy. All of those things have made a significant contribution. One of the reasons why living standards in this country now are higher than they were a few years ago is that we are now enjoying much higher levels of productivity. And one of the reasons in turn for that is the fact that we have reformed our industrial relation system. Whenever I meet wage and salary earners in Australia in whatever context it is, I am always happy if I get an opportunity to point out to them that over the last few years their real wages have gone up and on top of that they are now enjoying much higher interest rates than was the case in 1996.
So all of these things have made a contribution and we are now on the verge of the biggest single economic reform that any government in this country has undertaken, certainly since the end of the World War II, and perhaps for a longer period of time. Now, I don't pretend that the path of taxation reform has been easy and I don't pretend for a moment to you, or indeed any audience in Australia, that it has been free of political risk. As I said to my partyroom colleagues this week, the Government was really in a situation that now was the hour, the moment of our greatest political vulnerability. This is the easy hit stage of taxation reform for those who would seek to tear it down and to instill fear within the community and to try and generate a momentum of hostility and concern about the impact of it on the lives of ordinary Australians. And I said to my colleagues, well, if in a few months time, the judgment as I believe it will be of the Australian people was that it was a desirable reform and most of the scare stories were exaggerated, then that will be good for the Government and the public will view with some contempt those who adopted a completely negative attitude towards tax reform. I said on the other hand if I am completely wrong and they think it is a total disaster, I said that I would face a very interesting political challenge, and I think that's right.
And they are the sort of risks every so often you've got to take in politics, and a lot of people may think that it is finely balanced because there is always a bit of a concern in the community about change. And we have undergone a lot of economic change and some people claim that there is reform fatigue in the Australian community and perhaps there is. But as you all know, or most of you know I think, we don't have any alternative in the sort of world in which we are now living. You can't freeze yourself in time when it comes to globalisation and economic change. You either keep going forward or you start to go back. You don't have an option of stopping and getting off for a while and then rejoining it. And that is what we came to believe when we were getting ready for taxation reform.
And that is why we laid out the detail of our reform plan at the last election. No political party has done that before and lived to tell the story politically. And we did that because we believed that the only way you would ever, how can I put it, claim the moral authority and mandate to introduce taxation reform, was to have laid it out before an election. Now, it is not entirely what we put to the people. We would have preferred that the Senate didn't alter what we put to the people, and I guess there are lot of people in this room would have preferred that what we put to people had not been altered by the Senate. But we had a choice ? you either abandon the lot or you settle for 85% or 90% of it and we decided to do of course the latter. And having done that we don't intend to revisit the things that the Senate has taken out.
But it is an enormous cultural and economic change. But on the other hand to many people the impact on their daily lives will be quite limited. To the average consumer, to the person not involved in business, what it will simply mean is that price of some things will rise, the price of many things will stay the same and the price of quite a number of things will fall and on top of that they will find that they will be receiving a significant cut in their income tax.
I've read many surveys about the GST. I'm surveyed out as far as the GST is concerned. They keep arriving on my desk. Some of them are worth reading, some of them I don't like reading at all and others are very illuminating and very encouraging and I saw one the other day from the Melbourne Institute ? I don't always agree with what the Melbourne Institute says about the Government's policies, but it was a bit of research ? and it said that the great bulk of people had, according to their research, had no real conception of the extent of income tax reductions that they were going to receive after 1 July. I took some comfort from that report and chose to believe that it might be accurate.
So it is, ladies and gentlemen, by any measure an enormous change and you say why are you doing it? We're not doing it for our political health but we are overwhelmingly doing it because we believe it is the right thing for the country and in the end if you have the responsibility that I have, if you go into public life, if you get elected as Prime Minister, you have the opportunity of bringing about a change ? you really do have a responsibility to have a go ? and if you fall over and the public reject it then so be it. That is the nature of the democratic process. But this reform I believe is good for Australia and it's good for Australia for a number of reasons.
It's going to make us more competitive, it's going to make our exports cheaper, it's going to give our businesses a more competitive company tax rate and a more attractive capital gains tax rate, it's going to replace a very old fashioned, unfair, discriminatory wholesale sales tax with a far fairer, more balanced, even handed goods and services tax.
It's going to deliver the largest personal income tax in Australia's history and very importantly, it is going to provide a revenue base to the States which will over time give them access to greater amounts of revenue and make it easier for them to provide the basic services such as police, public hospitals, government schools, roads and other services which are the bread and butter of the political responsibilities of State governments in Australia.
And that will end one of the I think least edifying features ? perhaps I shouldn't say end ? but it will help to reduce one of the least edifying characteristics of politics in this country and that is the constant buck passing that occurs between State and Federal Governments.
There's always a temptation to blame another tier of government if you have an embarrassing political difficulty and whilst I don't for a moment presume to be as naive to think that you're going to get rid of that altogether, I think if you are giving to the States of Australia a guaranteed increase in their revenue over time and a much higher revenue base than they have under current arrangements, it is in my view far more likely that some of the unedifying characteristics of Commonwealth/State financial exchanges are going to disappear.
So when you bring all of that together, it does represent a major economic change and a major, I think, shift not only in the way in which we raise taxation in Australia, but I also think it will be very important for the national self confidence of this country.
The media treatment of taxation reform over the last few months has been, in my view, with a few noble exceptions, incredibly negative. And I think it's very important that this country be able to look back in a few months time and say to itself well, we have embraced taxation reform, we were told it was going to bring all sorts of disaster and in reality it hasn't, and I think it will demonstrate to the Australian community the capacity of this country to change and reform in very necessary areas.
I've always had the view, ladies and gentlemen, that the Australian community will embrace change, even major change, if you can satisfy two criteria.
The first of those criteria is that you have to persuade the public that the change is good for the country. Because, at heart, all Australians are intensely patriotic and intensely concerned at the national good.
They may not shout it from the roof tops in a hand on the heart fashion as others do, but deep down they care very much about this country's future. They care very much its reputation around the world and they care very much about the need to undertake necessary change.
And the other component that we have sort to do, to satisfy, the other criteria rather is the reform as well as being for the good of Australia must also be fair because Australians have a great sense of the importance of things being fair and just. And that's one of the reasons we have gone to extraordinary lengths to respond where it's been appropriate to those more vulnerable people in our community. And I mentioned whimsically a moment ago, the caravan park issue. Now we have put a lot of time and effort in to that when we were devising the structure of the tax and we came to the conclusion that providing the option of either a half GST or allowing the proprietors of the caravan parks to the input taxed that would certainly provide a more manageable outcome and would not irrespectively of the option chosen, leave people any worse off. And that remains our view. In fact many of the calculations that we have made indicate that if you take the option of being input taxed, you many in fact find that the residents are a little worse off, so we can't quite see the point of our opponents advocating the removal of the half GST options. But we agreed to in discussion with the Australian Democrats we agreed to a further increase in rental assistance.
And one of the things I will defend very tenaciously is the fundamental fairness of this package. I know that there is some unease, indeed some criticism in sections of the business community about the role of the ACCC. Now there's a difficult balancing act. As the leader of a free enterprise government, I don't want unnecessarily prescriptive approaches being taken to business. I don't want regulatory authorities being unrealistic about how businesses operate. And businesses exist to make profits, I understand that and I would be the last person in the world to try and interfere with that.
But I am also very conscious that when you have a major change, there is always the possibility of some exploitation. There is always the willingness of some that drag their feet. There is always the willingness of some to try and blame the government and blame the change for something that they were looking for a cover to do anyway and I hope that those of you who may harbour reservations about the role of the ACCC will understand the importance of providing assurance and confidence to the consumers of Australia that the introduction of the tax is not going to be in any way interfered with, is not in any subject to distortion or exploitation.
I don't need to tell you of course that given the extraordinary scope of taxation reform that it is possible if you set your mind to it to create concern about every single element of it.
And we've had an example of that in the last 24 hours in relation to fuel excise. Now what we said in 1998 was that when the GST was introduced there would be an adjustment to the level of excise so that the price of petrol at the pump need not rise as a result of the GST. We didn't promise in 1998 that we could control the other factors that influence the price of petrol We didn't promise in 1998 that the price of petrol was going to fall as a result of the GST. We simply said that it need not rise. And in the last 24 hours, the acting Treasurer has released the details of the excise reduction which is going to be in straight production terms, 6.7 cents a litre. He's also indicated that there would be cost savings to oil companies of 1.4 cents a litre and all of that will be calculated on the basis of a retail price of 90 cents a litre on the pump, hardly an unreasonable figure. Indeed an earlier calculation we had done and the average of the price over the preceding six months had produced a figure of 85 cents. I can't predict what is going to happen to the world oil market. At the moment people are suggesting that there is no likelihood of a significant fall and there's a possibility of a further rise but of course the actual landed price of crude oil is going to be influenced by a lot of factors including exchange rates considerations.
But I am therefore in that context rather concerned to hear suggestions on behalf of some of the oil companies this morning that there are no cost savings at all out of the introduction of taxation reform. I mean, I would like to put it to them - their fuel is carried to service stations in very large tankers and those tankers use diesel and that diesel from the 1st of July will be 24 cents a litre cheaper. That's an immediate cost saving and I think the consumers of Australia would expect that cost saving to be passed on immediately and therefore any suggestion that there will be no cost savings even immediately is a little hard to take.
I mention that in passing, ladies and gentlemen, to underscore of course the complexity and also to underscore the magnitude of the advocacy and explanation task which faces any government which in embarked upon a reform of this character.
I am now in my 27th year of political and parliamentary life and quite some time ago, I came to the conclusion that this country needed a number of quite fundamental economic changes if it were to realise its full potential. It needed to reform its financial system which it has. It needed to reform its industrial relations system which it has partially, but until we get a more intelligent Senate, we will not be able to fully complete.
We needed to get our budget in order and I ought to remind you that in the last five budgets of the former government, we added $50 billion dollars to our commonwealth debt and we've been able to remove something like $30 billion of that in our first five budgets. And there's every prospect, certainly if we could get rid of the remainder of Telstra and it makes no sense to me for the Commonwealth Government to have $50 billion dollars of public investment tied up in a telecommunications company. I think it could be more effectively used elsewhere. All of those things have made a very significant contribution.
But I knew 20 years ago that we needed to reform our taxation system and I have often said that a year after I came in to parliament, there was a report tabled in federal parliament, bearing the name ?The Asprey Report' and it had been written by a former now deceased judge of the New South Wales court of appeal, Ken Asprey, and he'd recommended sweeping taxation reform. Many of you in the room will know that he recommended the introduction of a broad based indirect tax. He recommended changes to income tax. He recommended changes to a whole lot of other things which bare great similarity to what the Government has finally done.
And what that tells you of course is that for a long time, a lot of people have known what ought to have been done about our taxation system. We've always known that eventually we would have to be dragged screaming taxation wise in to the sort of post World War II period, let alone the 21st century through the introduction of a broad based indirect tax. And as Peter Costello said the other day, the only country left in the world virtually now with a wholesale sales tax is Botswana because I understand that Swaziland is contemplating abolishing it.
Now ladies and gentlemen, we have needed these changes for a long time and the Government has embarked upon them and ultimately of course, as is the case in a democracy, the Australian public is going to make a judgement. We've reached a stage now where I don't think the general public is listening too much to the claim and counter claims. They know there is only eight days to go and in good Australian style, they will make up their own mind uninfluenced by what other people are telling them as to whether this reform is good for them or bad for them.
Now I believe it will be very good for them. I believe that in a few months time, people will look back on the debate and wonder essentially what much of the fuss was about. I hope they view with contempt those people who tried to stop it, particularly after it was voted for by the Australian people in October in 1998. I hope they will remember all the detail of that was explained to them before the last election. I hope they will remember that the role and responsibility of governments is to do things that are not perpetually popular but are always in the long term national interests of the country. I'm optimistic. I believe the reform will be well receive, but if they are not I will have no regrets because I will be able to say to those who make an adverse judgement, well we gave it our best shot, we did what we thought was the right thing, we took the risks and if the Australian people ultimately make a negative judgement then that is something that we will accept, that we will not in any way be regretful for having made attempt.
So that basically is where things sit when you say to me what's ahead for Australia. Of course there is a lot more than tax reform that is ahead of Australia. And once tax reform is in my view successfully behind us, there are of course, a large number of other things to which the government will be turning its attention. It's pointless to try and spell out that agenda today. Until tax reform is behind us, we won't get clear air to get the public focusing on other subjects. There is so much preoccupation with the debate of the detail of tax reform. But I remain incredibly optimistic and hopeful and enthusiastic about this country's future. Not only its future economically, but also its future reputation and standing in the world.
I had the opportunity a few days ago of going briefly to Tokyo to attend the memorial service for the former Japanese Prime Minister and in a brief space of 24 hours, met a large number of the regional leaders and it is very clear from those discussions with leaders such as the Prime Minister, the current Prime Minister of Japan, the Prime Minister of Thailand and others that this country's reputation the respect we have gathered in the region for being able to not only to provide political leadership in relation to East Timor but also the economic strength and regional friendship that we displayed toward countries facing great difficulty in the region at the time of the Asia economic downturn has rebounded very much to the credit of Australia and to the credit of Australians. And the respect and prestige that we enjoy in the region as a result of that is very significant.
Can I finally ladies and gentlemen thank the group that organises these magnificent gatherings and it is quite a big meeting and it's at a very interesting and I think wonderful venue. Can I also thank Merrill Lynch for its sponsorship of the lunch and can I say to all of you and I hope that the great bulk of you think taxation reform is a good idea. It's too late of course now to do anything about it if you don't. Can I say to you in the end, what you get judged on in running a business, what you get judged on in running a government indeed what you get judged on in running anything is your willingness at the right time to have a go, to bring a quantum leap or achieve a quantum leap and bring about a significant change. I think tax reform is one of those things, it's one of those turning points in the policy development of a nation and we've embraced it because we really think it's the right thing for the country and I have no doubt in my own mind that in the months ahead that is the judgement the Australian people will make.
Thank you.
[ends]


SUBJECTS: Business community partnerships; corporate philanthropy
E&amp;OE..................................
That's a hard act to follow. Matthew thank you very much for your warm introduction. To Dr David Morgan, the managing director of Westpac. To Greg, to Elaine Henry. To my parliamentary colleagues, Michael Ronaldson and David Hawker and other supporters and friends of The Smith Family.
I am very privileged to be part of this occasion because what I am seeing today and what you are witnessing is a real live example of something that I have held very dear in the time that I have been Prime Minister and that is the notion of a social coalition. The belief that the problems that we have in our society today can't be solved by one part of the community acting alone. They can only be solved by the different elements of society, the Government, the business community, the great welfare organisations like the Smith Family and well motivated philanthropic individuals working together, pooling their resources, doing what each of them does best and producing the best results.
And as we go through the wonderful story that Matthew told us, we get an idea of how that works. And I want to congratulate Westpac on its generosity and its thoughtful contribution in giving people an opportunity in education is a very thoughtful as well as a very sensitive and compassionate way of helping somebody.
As the oldest company and the oldest bank and also my bank, can I say to Westpac, I am well satisfied with the way in which you have decided to give this support. But of course you can have the resources but you need the vehicle and the Smith Family has been looking after, not only the underprivileged in our society but people who whilst it would not be right to describe them as underprivileged, people who through a combination of circumstances have been denied the opportunity of realising what others have been able to realise.
I treasure the value of a university education that fortunately I was able to have when I left school in the late 1950s. And I know how important it was to me and how important it was to my mother that I go to University after I left school. Now she was able to afford to pay my fees the first year I lived in Sydney and I was able to pick up a Commonwealth Scholarship in the subsequent years, so I can therefore feel for somebody who wanted to do the same thing. I also became a lawyer, I then went on to do one or two other things and your eloquence suggests that one day you may end up at the dispatch box and I hope you don't get put in the sin bin, but I think you displayed a ready facility with the language and the communications part of your law degree is obviously something that you very, very keenly relish.
But having an opportunity for education is tremendously important. The other thing that impresses me greatly about the ?Learning for Life' program is the mentoring aspect of it. That's something else that I think is very important in social provision to give somebody the opportunity of one to one advice. It's extremely valuable and I think that particular element of the program is almost as valuable as the financial support.
Now the ?Learning for Life' program I know something of. Indeed I discovered that one of the members of my staff that he and his wife had been contributing to it over a period of time and he even showed me a report that anonymous expect for the christian name of the person concerned, the report of the young man that my staff member and his wife had been helping and the simple expressions of gratitude and I was particularly attracted by the bit down the bottom that said what would you do if you were Prime Minister for a day. The young man had written - I'd choose the Australian cricket team. Now I thought that he had extremely good values and it had a certain resonance with me.
But David Morgan referred to the Government's promotion of the notion of community partnerships. I have talked a lot in the time I have been Prime Minister about the notion of a social coalition and I have also talked a lot about the notion of mutual obligation. The sense that in a caring community we owe as a Government, as the representatives of the Australian people, as the trustees for the taxes they pay, we owe an obligation to help those who need assistance, who genuinely need help to provide them with a safety net. But it's not unreasonable having done that to ask that something be given in return.
The same applies of course with the business community. If business prospers from a stable society and a well run economy, dare I say it, then there's some obligation to put something back and increasingly businesses are doing that. And my mantra is not that businesses should give more but rather that more businesses should give because there have been some wonderful examples over the years of the generosity of individual business men and women and corporations. And we are seeing a great example of it here today with Westpac.
The Government itself of course is putting its money where its mouth is in encouraging a greater sense of philanthropy in the community and we've put through some tax changes recently that provide incentives worth $50 million - $60 million a year to make it easier and more attractive and more affordable tax wise for companies to make contributions. And only a few weeks ago I announced the Government contribution of $15 million as supplementary funding for the Centenary Foundation for Young Australians which is an amalgamation of the Old Queen's Trust in other body which will provide scholarships for young Australians in all walks of life.
So there is a spirit abroad in the Australian community of people working in greater harmony now to tackle our social problems. I have often thought that we've passed through two phases. We went through a phase I think 30 years ago when we thought that every single problem could be solved by the government intervening and throwing money at it and really ignoring everybody else and creating a large bureaucracy. Then we had a bit of retreat from that in the 1980s when people rather foolishly thought that you could solve every problem by the unrestrained operation of market economics and it would all trickle down and every poor person would be relieved of poverty and every unemployed person would be given a job. I think that we have learnt that neither of those approaches is quite right and what you need perhaps is a slightly new paradigm and we are starting to find that in a greater level of co-operation, a recognition that a government has got a limited but a very strategic role to play. We've got to provide a social security safety net but there is a greater role for organisations like the Smith Family not only in providing help for people who need help but also given advise to the Government on how to mould its social policy and I am very happy to say that the person who is chairing the enquiry for the future of social welfare policy in Australia is somebody from the welfare sector, Patrick McClure of Mission Australia.
And I have sought the advice of bodies like the Smith Family and the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul and all of those organisations because they have more to offer than just the compassion of looking after people who need help, they also have an experience of working at the coal face. They know what policies work and they know what policies don't work and governments should listen to them a lot more and not just see them as the vehicles for looking after the really tough cases in our community but also people who have the capacity to give some decent policy advice as well.
So all of those things are part of the picture that we are hoping to paint in this very important area. But the partnership between business organisations and welfare organisations is a key component and I've been quite inspired and enthused by Matthew's story. It's a wonderful story, articulate and it's a great credit to the wisdom of the scheme that it should produce somebody who's been able to do that so very well.
I wish you well and you never know, I think you might one day pop up somewhere or other in the political vortex and I think you will do it very, very well.
But to you Dr Morgan, thank you for the generosity that you have displayed to the Smith Family. My warm appreciation again of the tremendous contribution you make towards building a happier and more caring, more compassionate and fairer Australian community. It's a wonderful goal and I am delighted indeed to endorse today's events and to congratulate Westpac and the Smith Family for their magnificent partnership.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Mr Chairman.  To Bishop Peter Ingham, to Father Brian Byron, to Mrs Shakeshaft, to Brother Canavan, to Kerry Chikarovski, the Leader of the Opposition, ladies and gentlemen.
This is not the first time that I’ve been to the opening of a school extension or a refurbishment at Our Lady Queen of Peace in Gladesville.  In fact way back in August of 1974, when I think the last time something like this occurred, I had the privilege of being there as a very little known, green, newly elected Federal Member of Parliament.  But I think the building was opened and blessed by the late Cardinal Freedman.  But I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to be here today to do a number of things.  
I want first of all to pay a personal tribute to the tremendous pastoral and spiritual work that Father Byron has done in the Gladesville parish over the last twenty-five years.  He’s exemplified practical Christianity to the people, not only of the Catholic parish, but also to the broader community.
I also want to congratulate the parents and supporters of the parish for their tremendous commitment and often stoicism and support over the years to the cause of Catholic education in this part of Sydney.
Father Canavan was kind enough to acknowledge the very strong support of the Federal Government for assistance to independent schools.  And I want to take this opportunity here in the presence of a gathering of parents in a Catholic parish in my own electorate of Bennelong to reaffirm the very strong philosophical commitment that the Government I lead has to the principle of freedom of parental choice in education.
Many of the older parents, older folk here today will remember that that wasn’t always the case in this country.  And for many years Catholic parents were discriminated against in Australia, they were denied any real measure of government support, notwithstanding their constant contribution as taxpayers to the Treasury of our nation.  I am very proud that that discrimination began to end during the prime ministership of my very distinguished predecessor Sir Robert Menzies.  From then on it has become an article of faith so to speak in political life in this country that governments support independent schools.  And we were able when we came to office to relax the New Schools Policy which has enabled a greater freedom of choice, particularly in the growing areas of Sydney, for people of the Catholic faith and of other Christian denominations and indeed of other faiths to open new schools.  And we’ve also been able to significantly boost the funding through Category 11 which includes the great bulk of the Catholic systemic schools of the Archdiocese of Sydney.  And it is right, as Father Canavan says that this country probably has the best system of funding independent schools in the world.  And I remember that point being made by Peter Tennick who is the Chairman of the National Catholic Education Commission, at a meeting I had with him and Cardinal Clancy and Brother Canavan and other leaders of the Catholic Education system in Australia.
But it is a very important day also to salute the Christian Mission of the people of this parish, to congratulate the parents, to pay proper respect to the teachers.  It’s not an easy job.  I always pay proper respect to teachers – I married one almost thirty years ago.  And I always pay very great respect to them.  It’s not easy, we live in a different world than we lived in a generation ago.  Not necessarily a worse world, in many respects a far better world, because the opportunities for young children are much greater and part of the role and the local responsibility of a school is to open its doors and to open its arms to children of all backgrounds and to try and give people equality of opportunity and education.  It’s the greatest gift  in many ways that a community can give to its young to give them an opportunity.  And I am very pleased to be associated with this very practical demonstration of the strength of the Catholic Education system here in Gladesville, here in Bennelong and here in Sydney.  Because the way in which it has carried on through the decades is a remarkable tribute to the Church and a remarkable tribute to Catholic parents and teachers within the Catholic system.
As I’ve wandered around and talked to the children into the new buildings as they were blessed by Bishop Ingham, it was a reminder to all of us that the greatest responsibility we carry within our lives is the education and the nurturing of the young within our community.  And to give young children of this country the opportunity to grow up in peace and harmony and in tolerance and in respect for the faiths and the cultures of different people.  To give all of them the opportunity to aspire to what they want most in their lives, is indeed the most important thing we can do.
To you Mrs Shakeshaft and to all of the other members of the staff of the school, I wish you well. I thank you for the warmth and generosity of the welcome that has been extended by your children to me.  There is never anything quite so disarming and levelling and engaging than the contact that an itinerant politician has with young children.  They are so direct, they are so unaffected and they are therefore so absolutely engaging and enchanting in the process.
So ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for having me today. I have enormous pleasure – I think I’m meant to say a few formal words, or is that you Bishop?  No, it is me is it?  I would never want to encroach upon the role of the Church . . . I think … perhaps we’ll do it together.  But thank you for having me.  I am delighted to be associated with it.  And I wish all who come within this school, not only the strength of the faith that sustains you, but also very, very good fortune for the years ahead.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Subject: The new tax system
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER:
Good evening. 
When Australia’s new tax system begins next Saturday we’ll put behind us once and for all the old tax system that has held Australia back.  Yet instead of helping us to make the new tax system work, the Labor Party has consistently knocked and criticised and stood in the way.  Now Mr Beazley says that he will roll back the GST without specifying how and where and without telling us who will pay. 
Rolling back the GST can only make the system more complex and confusing at the very time that small business needs to be allowed to get on with the job.  Rolling back the GST will encourage every interest group worthy or otherwise to make demands.  
The truth is that bowing to every pressure group would have denied us the ability to abolish the old wholesale sales tax. It would have stopped us from delivering the largest income tax cuts in Australia’s history so that four in every five taxpayers will be on a top rate of no more than thirty cents in the dollar or less.  It would have stopped us from increasing pensions and family allowances and reducing the cost of transport in the country.  It would have encouraged the tax cheats but prevented us from giving the states the necessary revenue to fund the schools and hospitals, roads and police we all need into the future. 
We genuinely believe that improving the tax system has been the right thing for Australia.  When the new tax system begins next Saturday it will move Australia forward.  Labor’s promises can only roll Australia back.
Good night. 
[ends]


Subjects: Business philanthropy; workplace giving; $5 million to Westmead Hospital; Independent review of charities; AS
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Ian.  To my Ministerial colleagues, Jocelyn Newman and Larry Anthony.  Other colleagues, leaders of the welfare and business sector, ladies and gentlemen.  
As some of you know, I have a real passion for and interest in some of the notions and concepts and values that are encompassed in the Community Business Partnership.  Some of you may even think I've been carrying on a lot over the last few years about the social coalition.  This idea that if only we can get the Government doing what it does best - some of you might rudely say that's nothing - but the business community making its contribution, the welfare sector and of course individuals all contributing in a way that each of them can best do.  
And one of the reasons why I've been so committed to this notion is that I've tried to look at what's happened to public affairs and what has happened to community attitudes to the role of Government over the last thirty or forty years, which briefly so to speak covers the period of time that in one way or another I've been active in public affairs, in early years not of course as a Member of Parliament, but for the last 26 years as a Member of Parliament.  
And I think we've passed through three phases.  There was a time when everybody thought that all you had to do was to invite the Government in to solve the problem and if the Government turned on the taxpayer's tap, particularly if it was a Federal Government and poured an enormous amount of money into the problem, you'd solve it.  Now we found that really didn't work.  Then I think there was a bit of an over-reaction and we went through a period of time during the 1980s in which people thought that if only you had the market forces of our society, and I'm a great believer of market forces, operating in a completely unrestrained, undiluted, unconditional fashion through some kind of magical trickle-down effect of unrestrained economic rationalism, you'd solve every problem.  Now of course we found that didn't happen either, and I think we've come to realise now as we're in the early years of the 21st century that governments have a limited, but none the less, very strategic role in our society.  Governments can't answer every problem but they are needed.  And there are some things that only a government can do.  Only a government can provide the infrastructure for a pension system that looks after the needy in our community. Only a government can provide the financial underpinning for labour market policies, even though they may be carried out in a competitive spirit as they are within our new job network which we believe is working extremely well, and involves many of the organisations that are represented here tonight.  But you need the resources of the Australian taxpayer in order to achieve that.  
So I think we've reached a stage where people are ready for something that has rejected some of the sharper ideologies of the past, but recognises that there is a role for everybody.  And if we can have greater cooperation, then we can achieve greater results.
Now one of the things that has interested me as Prime Minister over the last four and a quarter years is that the welfare debate, if I can put it like that and it's probably an inadequate description.  But if I can put it like that, the welfare debate is now not so much about whether you have a safety net or not - everybody takes that for granted.  There's debate now essentially at the margins, importantly at the margins and I don't want to play that down about where the safety nets should reach and precisely what should be the dimension of the individual benefits.  But I think we have a better quality debate and I've found, and I name no names and I think of nobody in particular.  But I think we now have a debate where people are a lot more relaxed about the involvement of different philosophies and different attitudes.   
I am very happy as the leader of a coalition government and as somebody who's occasionally seen on the slightly conservative side of social policy, and I can't possibly imagine why people should think that, that I'm quite happy to acknowledge that there is a tremendously important role for the Government to play - not an overbearing or overweening role, but a very important one.  But I have sought very energetically to involve the great welfare organisations of Australia, not only in providing the human help and the human life rafts that so many of their members do so magnificently in times of sadness and distress.  And I had but another example of that last night when I went to Childers in Queensland to attend that very moving and evocative memorial service, and to meet the young people and the wonderful clergymen and councillors and others of those great organisations that do such a fantastic job.  Now that's a very important, crucial, invaluable role in our society, but those organisations also have a policy contribution to make.  They are not just compassion providers, they are also people who have a repository of understanding of what works and what fails - better than most in the community.
So dragging all of that together, what I've tried to create is this notion of a social coalition.  It's a notion that recognises that governments have ongoing responsibilities, that also others in the community - the business community has responsibilities.  If business does well it has an obligation to put something back.  And I'm very happy to acknowledge that many business men, individually and through their corporations have always recognised that.  Business men and women all around Australia for years have been at the forefront of generosity.  And I'll say it again - my mantra is not that business should give more, but rather that more businesses should give.  And the examples of many great corporate citizens in Australia over the years is something that many should follow.  And what the Community Business Partnerships seek to do is to give a practical expression of that notion of cooperation between the Government and the business community, the Government and the welfare sector and the Government and community organisations.  
And I think we have begun to see a very big change in Australian society.  And when we formed our roundtable, when we formed the partnerships last year, and the committee has met on several occasions and I thank Jocelyn Newman for the contribution that she's made as Deputy Chairman.  
Last year, the Government provided around $1.5 million to promote best practice partnerships between community organisations and the business sector.  In a recent report by the Centre for Corporate Public Affairs and the Business Council, confirmed that many large Australian companies recognise the value of corporate-community partnerships to improve corporate reputation and their relationship with the local community, as well as the beneficial impact it has on employee morale, team work and retention.
More than a year ago, the Taxation working group with the Roundtable on Business and Community Partnerships, chaired by David Gonski, made recommendations on how to encourage philanthropic giving.  In response to this I announced, I think a year or more ago, a package of measures worth $51 million for new taxation concessions. 
I am delighted to say, that after a few blocks and setbacks and parries and thrusts in the Senate - which is often the way of this building, finally received the Royal Assent on 31 May.  And the new arrangements provide a range of income and capital gains tax incentives to make donations of property, including gifts under the Cultural Gifts Programme and donations to environmental and heritage organisations.  
I've always said that I'm open to further representations and I've no doubt I will receive them in large volume, about how the tax laws interact with incentives for philanthropy.  And as an illustration of our interest in environmental measures, I recently requested the taxation working group to review and assess the recommendations outlined in the CSIRO report "Philanthropy: Sustaining the Land".
Another new direction which is an illustration of the burgeoning interest of the business community and the burgeoning commitment of the business community is the area of workplace giving.  Workplace giving occurs when employees elect to give a portion of their wage to selected charities through payroll deductions.  Their employees and even the Government may make matching contributions.  It's a simple yet effective means of raising money to many charities.  Payroll deduction schemes have been operating very successfully for many years in North America and the United Kingdom.  
The schemes can be suitable for small and large businesses, and a number of organisations in Australia are already involved in these programmes, including Westpac, Challenge Bank, Cable and Wireless Optus and Bankers Trust.  Challenge Bank has worked with the intermediary "United Way" for over 10 years as a founding corporate partner, providing assistance through Corporate Sponsorship, Payroll Deductions and Private Donations.  
To illustrate over the eighteen months to March of last year, Challenge Bank staff raised $10,000 for the Ngala Resource Centre, and the bank matched the $10,000 to $20,000.  This amount provides toys, teaching aids, an electronic whiteboard and a projector for the centre.  This year, Challenge Bank's United Way Community 2000 Project aims to raise $10,000 for the Cerebral Palsy Association of Western Australia. 
Charities, churches and not-for-profit organisations are of course pivotal members of the social coalition.  They are playing a major and running role under the Government's business and community partnerships policy.  And we always need to ensure that the legislative and administrative framework in which they operate are appropriate to the economic and social environment of modern times.  Yet as many of you involved in those organisations will know, the common law definition of a charity is based on a legal concept which originated in 1601.  As a result, there are currently a number of definitions of a charity and this often gives rise to legal disputes.  And therefore the Government has announced an independent inquiry into definitional issues relating to charities, churches and not-for-profit organisations to be completed by the end of the year. The terms of reference of the inquiry, let me assure you - it has no goal other than a simpler, clearer legal definition are being developed in consultation with the Australian Democrats and the Community Business Partnership.  
As I indicated in relation to the tax incentives and in so many other areas, the Government sees its role of an active partner in this great partnership, not only in terms of the ongoing provision of a social security safety net, but also in specific areas of joining in partnership with the private sector or private individuals to support worthwhile goals and objectives.  And our efforts to promote philanthropic giving have of course encouraged a great number of individuals to give back to their community.  And one example I wish to mention by way of a matching contribution is that of a very prominent Sydney business figure, who's recently offered to give $10 million to support research of the New Children's Hospital in Sydney, on condition that the gift be matched with contributions of $5 million from the Government of NSW and $5 million from the Commonwealth Government.
The New Children's Hospital has a strong record of research going back 70 years.  It includes childhood cancer and leukaemia, childhood diabetes and asthma.  That hospital commands a great deal of community support and receives 40,000 individual gifts each year from people and organisations such as Lions and Rotary.
I am pleased to announce tonight that the Commonwealth Government will contribute its matching sum of $5 million, and I assume that this will be swiftly followed by a $5 million contribution from New South Wales.  If that swift response is forthcoming, then it will be possible for $20 million development in the Westmead health research precinct, focusing on the illnesses that afflict our children to be a reality.  And there will be tremendous demonstration, I think, of the social coalition in action.  
And this contribution is part of a strategic initiative to develop centres of national research capacity, based on the bringing together of a 'critical mass' of excellent researchers with strong links to industry and commercial partners.  And as another illustration of that, the Government will also commit $10 million to the Bio 21 project - a joint venture between Monash and Melbourne universities and several other research and industry partners.  Some $7.5 million will be provided to the Melbourne University precinct and $2.5 million to the Monash precinct.
I am delighted also ladies and gentlemen, that the Australian Stock Exchange announced today an initiative motivated by our tax concession for gifts of property regardless of when it was acquired.  The initiative relates to ASX escrow requirements.  Normally at the time of a new ASX listing, shares held by related parties and vendors are put in escrow for a period of up to 2 years.  This means that during this time these shares are effectively locked up.  These requirements are designed to provide an incentive for people integral to a company's operations to deliver value to new shareholders over time.  They are also designed to prevent insiders from using the public market to offload shares in a strong market that can often occur immediately after listing.
In order to encourage and facilitate private giving, the ASX has decided to allow the transfer of such shares for charitable purposes.  Any such transfer will be subject to limits in order to maintain the principles underlying the doctrine of escrow.  The mechanism for such transfers will be via Umbrella Charitable Trusts that are managed by banks, insurance companies and trustee companies.  The Umbrella Charitable Trust can only make gifts to charitable entities as recognised by the Tax Office as having gift deductible status.  The ASX believes that this initiative provides a community benefit, while maintaining the key principles of escrow requirements.  To illustrate the potential of this initiative, it is estimated that since July 1999 around $2.5 billion of shares at current market values have been placed in escrow, relating to new companies listed on the ASX.
Ladies and gentlemen, I've canvassed a number of things in these remarks to illustrate the breadth and the depth of the Government's commitment to the social coalition and to the community business partnerships.  I think we have found a new and better way of doing things through these concepts.  I don't pretend that the arrangements are flawless, I don't pretend that they can't be improved, but I sense as I go around the community, a number of things -  I sense that there is recognition on the path of the great welfare organisations of this country.  That their role goes beyond providing that coal face compassion and help that which they are unsurpassable.  But it is also to provide policy advice and to be part of the policy making process.  I find within the business community recognition, not only of their social responsibilities but of the value of being seen as a positive participator in the community - the value of that in corporate terms.  
I find a refreshing absence of ideological conflict, compared to what might have been the case five or ten years ago.  There is an ease in the partnership between the Government and the welfare organisations and the business community and individuals that was perhaps lacking in the past.  I think we have found a new and better way of doing it and I'm quite excited about it.  I think out of it, we can provide new and better ways of helping those within our community who need assistance.  We all know that generically viewed, the Australian economy is very strong at the moment - it hasn't been as strong for thirty years.  We also know that there are some who continue to miss out and to miss out badly.  Sometimes through their own fault, often through no fault of their own, always in circumstances that should continue to be stressing to us as a compassionate society.
I think the social coalition is starting to make a difference, I think the Community Business Partnerships and I'll be delighted to be involved in the award presentation process a little later on - I think they're all part of it.  I want to thank you, I want to thank the men and women of Australian business, I want to thank the men and women who work so hard in our great organisations.  And I also want to thank my Ministers, Jocelyn Newman and Larry Anthony and Michael Wooldridge who's not here tonight, and many others who play a particular role in this.  And also can I thank the Government advisers in the various departments, because the partnership that we have developed and which is really crystallised in this gathering tonight has been made possible because everybody has been willing to adopt a different approach.  And I think it's great that's occurred, and I think Australia and Australians can only be the big winners.
Thank you.


E&amp;EO...................
Subjects: Discussion paper; defence issues
Thank you very much Defence Minister, Foreign Minister, Senator Abetz, my other Parliamentary colleagues, Admiral Barrie, the Chief of the Defence Force, Doctor Hawke and other departmental heads, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a very important beginning to an even more important process and that is a process of involving the Australian community in consultation and discussion about the level and character of Australia's defence commitment over the years ahead.
As the Minister has pointed out, this discussion paper is not a white paper, it is as it is entitled, a discussion paper. It is designed to lay out a number of options in front of the Australian community, to draw interested people within the Australian community and I will come to that in a moment, in a very very important process of discussion. And I too welcome the presence of the Shadow Minister because to the extent it is possible to achieve areas of bipartisanship in Defence policy that should always be sought. Because as I said at the time of the East Timor deployment, whenever the Defence Forces of Australia are deployed abroad, they are not deployed in the name of the government of the day, they are deployed in the name of Australia.
This discussion paper breaks some new ground in the sense that we are seeking to involve in a way that perhaps was not done before, the general public. And I want to thank Andrew Peacock, Stephen Loosley, David McGibbon and General Clunies Ross for their willingness to be involved in the process of facilitating that public discussion.
The release of the paper comes at a time when I believe there is a greater interest in Defence policy and matters relating to defence than we have probably had for the last 20 or 25 years. Now that's come about for a combination of reasons. One of those reasons is the heightened public interest in the wake of the East Timor deployment and the natural pride that Australians felt in the professionalism and success of that operation. But I think it is also self evident to all Australians that the strategic environment in which Australia now finds herself has changed significantly.
The end of the cold war has tended to bring more rather than less uncertainty in our region and changing attitudes of many of the major regional countries. The instability within many of them, the breakdown in a number of areas of our region of democratic government, all of them have contributed towards a more turbulent mix and as a result, I believe there is a very legitimate and increased government and public focus. And that is one of the reasons why I believe it is important to have a public discussion process and I want to thank the Minister in particular for his commitment to that.
I also want to say a couple of things about the financial provision for defence. Inevitably much of the discussion will focus on the simple question of whether we should spend more money on defence. I have stated on a number of occasions and I will state it again today that I believe that in the years ahead, Australia will need to spend more and I say that in terms proportionate to our GDP on Defence than we are currently spending and on occasions we have spent in the past. I don't seek at this time to put any figure on that. I don't seek at this time to indicate where those resources should be deployed but I do seek to make the point that in terms of national priorities, I believe that in the years in front of us, Defence will need to bulk larger than it has over the past few years.
The purpose of the discussion paper itself is not to bring out those areas where Government believes more money should be spent, but rather to elicit a community focus on it. And the value of the paper and the way in which it is structured, is to lay out options and indeed to invite those members of the public who are interested in one or other aspect of Defence policy, but not necessarily in all aspects of defence policy to be part of the discussion process.
The discussion paper of course makes it very clear that defence policy walks hand-in-hand or arm-in-arm or side-by-side with the foreign policy of the country. And I believe that one of the political successes of the Government in the past few years, and one that is not spoken of perhaps as much as it should, is the way in which, through the operation of the National Security Committee of Federal Cabinet, we have been able to achieve a very integrated approach in relation to the foreign and defence policy objectives of Australia. And that is one of those things that is a constant on all occasions.
The discussion paper and the video properly emphasises the importance of defence personnel to this country. I want to take the opportunity, as I have on a number of other occasions to express my tremendous respect and regard for the professional ability, integrity and competence of the uniformed men and women of the Australian Defence Force. They are rightly held in very high regard within the Australian community, and the objects of the Government in this discussion paper process will be to enable the Australian public to offer views on the structure and deployment of those forces.
Finally, can I say that for this process to work, it will be very important that the process of public involvement and public discussion is taken seriously by all involved. I think there are in all aspects of policy, a role for experts and a role for those who have a particular passion or particular commitment to a certain area of policy. But it is also absolutely essential to take the public with us in any decisions that we make. We live in an age of unbelievably high levels of accountability, and the idea that policy in areas like defence or foreign policy, or indeed in any other areas of policy can be handed down like tablets from the mountain п those days are long since gone. There is, as the video pointed out, always fierce competition for the public dollar. There are always competing claims being made as to what Government should spend money on, and priorities can change from individual to individual within the Government and they can change from Government to Government. It is therefore important if defence, if I can use the collective, is to win its argument and to put its case to the maximum possible benefit, it is important that a process of public discussion be involved.
So ladies and gentlemen, I have enormous pleasure in launching this discussion paper. I thank the Minister in particular, and his Department and those within that Department who've been very heavily involved in its compilation. I think it will involve the Australian people to an unprecedented level in discussion about, and understanding of our Defence policy. That can only be to the good, and I believe that out of that process, which of course will be the publication of the white paper, all of us who care about the security of this country, whether we're in politics, in the Defence forces or within the broader community will be able to feel that the development of a good defence policy has been given its best shot, and that the product ought in all of those circumstances to be one that works very much to the benefit of all the Australian people.
Thank you.
[ends]


My fellow Australians,
May I have a few moments of your time to say why the new tax system which starts on Saturday is good for Australia.
This is something the country has needed for more than twenty years and we're doing it because it is the right thing for the nation.
It will give us a fairer taxation system.
It will cut our income tax.
It will strengthen us in the world.
It will guarantee the revenue we need to support the health, education, police and other services so important for a fair society.
I speak to you tonight with great optimism.
This is because of what we have already achieved together and because I believe we can achieve so much more if we take the right decisions in Australia's interest.
The Australian economy now is stronger than it has been for thirty years.
In the last four years we've created 712,000 jobs, interest rates for families and small business have fallen dramatically, the budget deficit has been eliminated and we have wiped $40 billion off the debt burden that would otherwise have been inherited by our children.
As inflation is much lower, the take-home pay of workers buys more than it used to.
None of this has happened by accident.
It's been a direct result of strong but fair decisions made by the Government.
If those decisions had not been taken our economy now would be a lot weaker, we would have been engulfed by the Asian economic collapse, and I would not be addressing you tonight in such positive terms about Australia's future.
But we cannot be complacent if we want to maintain our living standards, create even more jobs and provide more help for the disadvantaged.
The new tax system is the next crucial step along the road to building an even stronger and fairer Australia.
We cannot mark time.
As a nation we have a choice.
We can either move Australia forward through decisions made in the national interest or, through inaction, go backwards.
Surely no-one wants that to happen to Australia.
You've heard a lot about the GST but it's only one part of the new system.
The new tax system is designed to reward Australians and their families with lower income tax and increased family benefits.
Australians will receive the largest income tax cut in our history - $12 billion.
From the first of July, every taxpayer will get a tax cut.
Under the new lower tax scales you will be able to earn up to $50,000 a year and pay a top rate of only 30% instead of up to 43% at present.
Four in every five taxpayers will be on a top rate of 30 cents in the dollar or less.
Two million families will gain when family benefits and child care assistance are increased by $2.4 billion a year.
The combination of income tax cuts and increased family benefits means an extra $40 to $50 a week for many families.
When the GST begins, the wholesale sales tax with all its complexities and different rates will be totally abolished, along with some other indirect taxes.
This means that some things will go up in price, others will come down and some will stay about the same.
The great bulk of people in business are honest. But to make sure that all the benefits of the new system are passed on to consumers we have given the consumer watchdog, the ACCC special powers.
Certain things will be free of the GST including basic food, most health and education services, nursing homes, eligible child care and local government rates.
All Australians will be treated fairly because pensions and allowances will rise by 4% from the first day of July and will be guaranteed to remain 2% above the cost of living.
Older Australians will also benefit from special savings bonuses, refundable franking credits and the abolition of provisional tax.
Of special benefit to country people, the cost of diesel for heavy road transport will be cut by 24 cents a litre.
The new system will help create more jobs because it will reduce the operating costs of business by about $7 billion a year.
Exporters costs will fall by $3.5 billion a year. This will help them do better in world markets for the sake of more jobs at home for Australians.
To encourage investment, the capital gains tax has been virtually halved, with special provisions for those in small business who've worked hard all of their lives and want to retire on the proceeds of their effort and hard work.
Every last cent of the GST revenue will go to the States.
Every State in Australia, over time, will have more money to fund the roads, police, schools and hospitals so important to our daily lives.
This is the best possible guarantee any national government can give that essential community services will not only be maintained, but strengthened in the years ahead.
Whatever teething troubles there may be with the new tax system these will be easily out-weighed by the benefits for all Australians and their families.
I thank the business community, particularly small operators for the work they have put in to get ready for the changeover.
Let me assure them that neither the Government nor the Taxation Office wants to pounce on people who make innocent mistakes in handling the new system.
Compliance is important but that does not mean penalties for genuine errors.
Introducing a new tax system was the central part of the Government's plan at the last election.
Since then, it has been easy for our opponents to nit pick, obstruct and confuse but there comes a time when we should all move on from political point-scoring.
The new system will be with us in two days time.
What I ask is that it be given the fair go it deserves.
Because this is the tax system that will help ensure that everyone pays their fair share of tax - but no more.
That will give our exporters a fair go to take on the world and give the states and territories a fair go to provide the services we will need in the future.
Now is the time for all Australians to get behind the new tax system to ensure its success.
Together we can move Australia forward.
Good night.


E &amp; OE…………………………………………………………………………………..
Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, to my Ministerial colleagues, Peter Reith and John Herron.  To Mr Joesph Elu and Mr Peter Steigrad, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I too acknowledge and pay respects to the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place.  I’m very happy indeed to take a few moments out from other contentious and well reported matters to associate myself very strongly with the launch of the voluntary service to Indigenous communities Foundation.  
Because it’s very much an expression of two elements of the Government’s approach to social policy in this country.  One of those that Peter Shergold has been kind enough to refer to is of course our passion and I think I could call it that for the notion of a social coalition.  The idea that in the early years of the 21st Century, you don’t solve the social problems of this country by the various constellations of influence and capacity in the community working independently of each other, but rather by bringing them together.
There used to be a time when we thought the solution to every problem was for the Government to take it over and spray money around.  We then went through a stage of thinking that somehow or other if the government retreated entirely, you could solve the problem. I think we’ve now reached a happy amalgam of recognising that there is a limited but strategic role for the government.  There’s a very important role for voluntary organisations. There is a very important role for the business community and also there’s a very important role for public spirited individuals.  
And one of the great Australian traditions of which all of us are very proud is the fact that we are a volunteer society and there are literally tens of thousands of Australians who are perfectly happy to give up their time for no reward to try and help right what they regard as a social inequity or a social wrong.  
And this Foundation recognises that and this Foundation over time will draw on that reservoir of decency and good will within the Australian community.  But this Foundation also gives expression to the views of the government about practical reconciliation.  
It was about three months ago that I had the opportunity in the Western Suburbs of Sydney to launch on behalf of David Kemp the literacy and numeracy programme for Indigenous Australians recognising that an inability to have the requisite level, or the denial of the requisite level of skills in areas such as numeracy and literacy, that kind of disadvantage was just as debilitating for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians as it was for other people within the Australian community.
Three weeks ago I had the opportunity along with some of my colleagues to visit Moree where I saw a remarkable experiment, a very successful one in community co-operation.  Where the cotton industry and other local citizens had decided to do something to reverse the very troubled race relations of that community and they’d had great success and the good will evident at the Croc Eisteddfod and the good will  evident in the contacts at other community gatherings was a very good demonstration to me of practical reconciliation at work.
And today’s announcement is all of a piece with both of those strands of government policy.  The social coalition and practical reconciliation.  We are involving people who have a public spirited desire to help the Indigenous people of the Australian community.  We are recruiting the leadership and commitment of the business community.  The Government itself is contributing $1.5 million dollars of money,  seed money, to help the establishment of the Foundation.  And we’ll be drawing on a very rich tradition of Australian volunteerism.  
I think many members of parliament have had the privilege in the last year or so of presenting certificates of appreciation to members of the Australian community who’ve served with volunteers abroad, have done things on behalf of various non government organisations in places like Papua New Guinea and in the Pacific Islands.  And what this is, this Foundation is about in a very systematic and professional way is recruiting people who want to volunteer for periods of weeks or months to assist Indigenous communities.
And one of the greatest problems faced by Indigenous communities in Australia is the challenge that many of them are dysfunctional, as indeed are other communities within the Australian nation.  And what we seek to do with this Foundation is to provide a network and mechanism whereby people who want to provide their time and their effort and their commitment, they can be matched to people and groups within the Indigenous communities of Australia that want that help and want that assistance.
And the Foundation will link volunteers who have professional and technical skills with communities that have requested help.  It will provide mentoring and support for Indigenous businesses.  The concept of mentoring is I believe something that is going to bulk much larger in the provision of community and welfare help in the years ahead.  
The idea that somebody with experience of running a business, being willing to make their time available to help somebody else get their business going is something that can be used with great practical benefit and great practical effect within the Indigenous communities.
Typically communities require a range of practical business management, professional and trade skills such as accountancy, construction, engineering and health work and the Foundation will match the community’s needs with the most suitable volunteer.  
The aim is to have the volunteers live in the community for two to three months, giving individuals in the community an opportunity to learn new skills from the volunteers.  And this is all about establishing working partnerships between Indigenous community volunteers and the business sector. 
The Foundation will cover travel and subsistence costs for the volunteers, while the communities will provide accommodation.  The Government as I indicated will contribute $1.5 million dollars over three years to support the work of the Foundation and fund raising will be an early priority for it to establish an additional funding base.
The Foundation will begin work with a six month pilot phase involving about ten to twelve projects around Australia.  The Board of the Foundation has representatives from the indigenous community and from the business, voluntary and service sectors.  Mr Joseph Elu and Mr Peter Steigrad have agreed to act as Co-Chairman of the Board.  I want to thank both of them for their contribution of time and the other people who are going to serve on the Board.
This volunteering program is an adjunct to the indigenous employment program launched about a year ago by Peter Reith on behalf of the Government.  It too sits very much in the centre of our approach to providing not only practical reconciliation but also to enlisting the involvement and the interest of the business community in coalition with community groups and the Government.
The support of the business community for the indigenous employment program has already been impressive.  I frequently say that I don’t ask that business give more rather that more businesses give.  And the notion of a social coalition is catching on.  It is spreading.  It is being seen as a contemporary, practical, realistic approach to solving problems of social deprivation and social disadvantage within the Australian community.  
This is the third opportunity I’ve had in less than a week.  Last Friday in Melbourne in launching a partnership between the Smith Family and Westpac.  Last Monday night here in Parliament House in giving the Prime Minister’s awards for business and community partnerships.  And today to launch, commend and endorse very strongly the Voluntary Service to Indigenous Communities Foundation.  It is an illustration of reconciliation at work.  It is an illustration of the social coalition at work.  
I thank Peter Reith and compliment him warmly on his initiative in bringing it to the Government.  I launch it and I wish it well.  I know it will enjoy great community support and great goodwill.
[Ends]


Subjects: GST; tax cuts; fair go for tax reform
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
JOURNALIST:
The tour Mr Howard, personally for you, I mean easy but what about tomorrow for the rest of us?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think it will go much better than the doomsayers have predicted.  Australians are fair, they’re intelligent.  They will give this a fair go I believe because they will make their own judgement.  They’ll put aside the rhetoric and the charge and counter charge of the last few weeks, the last six months and they’ll just go in there and make their own mind up.  And they will find after they give it a fair trial that not everything has gone up and certainly not gone up by 10%.  A lot of items will remain the same; many will go up; a lot will come down and importantly every taxpayer will have a tax cut.  And if you’ve got children that will be increased by the increases in family benefits.  
So overall I believe very confidently that after a while people will see this for the genuine reform for the future of Australia that the Government’s always seen it as.  But it’s a big undertaking.  I’ve never underestimated the risk.  It’s the biggest change to our tax system in our history.  It’s certainly the biggest change that I’ve ever been involved in, in twenty-six years of public life but in the end you’ve got to have a go for the sake of Australia. 
JOURNALIST:
Are you going to mix it with the masses tomorrow or lay low?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I’ll be around, I certainly will be, very much so.  I wouldn’t miss it for quids.
JOURNALIST:
What about the service stations?  All eyes on the price at the bowser?  That’s been the big worry.
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, the price of petrol bounces around a lot.  I heard a radio program this morning telling us that it’s $2.14 a litre in England and $1.40 in France.  
JOURNALIST:
You made a promise though.  
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you wait and have a look at the prices.
JOURNALIST: 
You’re confident they’ll be…?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look I am confident that when the whole of this thing has been given a chance of operating people will see it is a fair change.  And Australians will always support big changes if they think they’re good for Australia and they have a fair impact on their fellow Australians.  And if this thing’s given a fair go and people give it time and don’t react to the first bill and take an overall look and have a look at what’s in the pay packet.  
I mean those pay packets are going to be fatter over the weeks ahead because there’s going to be less tax taken out.  Now that will take a few days, perhaps a week in some cases to filter through but when it does filter through the extra bulk in the pay packet has got to be put against the extra dollars you might pay.  And I think most people will be very pleasantly surprised because in the nature of things you don’t tend to take on face value assurances about tax cuts, it’s only when you’ve got them in your hand that you really believe they’ve arrived.  And I understand that.  
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Your Grace, to Mr Justice Mason, and the Reverend Howard Dillion, the Director of Anglicare in New South Wales, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I was saying a moment ago, having in mind what’s going to happen tomorrow that today felt like a mixture between the eve of an election and Christmas Eve.  But instead of course this luncheon gives me an opportunity to turn my mind importantly and to address a few remarks to the broader responsibilities of government and the broader responsibilities of the corporate community.  
And can I say how pleased I am to be here.  How very pleased I am to endorse not only the broad work of Anglicare but also specifically to endorse Anglicare’s winter appeal.  I do so with some knowledge of the particular work of Anglicare, it’s not only in New South Wales but throughout Australia.  I also do so because Anglicare is the flesh and blood of one very important part of something that I have tried to build in the time that I’ve been Prime Minister.  
And although I guess if you with a microphone went for a wander down George Street today and said, what’s John Howard most associated with?  They’d probably utter three letters and I hope they’d say GST and not something less complimentary.  But I would also hope that at an other time they might reflect on the way in which this Government has sought to build what I’ve chosen to describe as a ‘social coalition’.  And that idea, that dream of a social coalition is in part based upon my comprehension and my belief about the way in which society has evolved over the last thirty to forty years.  
Paradoxes abound in our lives and of course one of the great paradoxes of Australia in the Year 2000 is that although generically we are enjoying great national prosperity, that is undeniable.  We have more jobs, we’ve eliminated our budget deficit, we have lower interest rates, we have lots of visible signs of national prosperity.  We are seen around the world as an extremely strong economy with a willingness to make changes that will make it even stronger.  Yet in the midst of all of that it is the case, as the Archbishop said that there are a lot of people in Australia who are doing it tough.  I know that and I would never pretend otherwise.  And I know that the Government, whoever comprises the Government from time to time has a social responsibility to address those areas of need.  
And over the years the attitude of governments towards their responsibilities have changed.  There was a time I think thirty years ago where there was a view that every problem in society could be solved by the Government and all it had to do was to involve itself in a very interventionist fashion, provide the financial resources and then the problem would be solved.  Then I think in reaction to that we perhaps placed too much faith in the unrestrained operation of market forces.  And I of course am an unashamed supporter of free enterprise and market forces and the benevolent face of capitalism because I believe in it very strongly.  But even that was not enough on its own to solve all of our social problems.  
And I think in this year we have come, in this period we’ve come to a more, I think balanced approach and balanced understanding of how we best address social problems.  And that is to recognise that every element of society has a role to play.  The Government has a role to play.  It will always be the role of government to provide the social security safety net.  It will always be the role of the Government to provide those basic welfare payments, support payments, pensions and benefits and the like without which people would be left completely destitute.  And nothing in my philosophy of free enterprise and belief in individual initiative gainsays or contradicts the fundamental role of the Government to look after the needy in our community.  One of the great things about Australia with all of the difficulties that we still have in tackling areas of poverty and deprivation is that I think we have a sensitive social security safety net that does recognise that we have an obligation to help those in need.  
But the Government alone can’t do it all.  It needs the financial support of individuals and of the business community.  And it also needs the support of great organisations like Anglicare.  And I’ve tried not only to see organisations like Anglicare and the Salvation Army and the society of St Vincent de Paul, I’ve not only tried to see them in terms of the compassion they deliver to individuals, the way in which they care for people.  And I was reminded yet again of the magnificent work of voluntary organisations particularly those but not only those with a Christian mission last Sunday night when I went to the Queensland town of Childers to attend that incredibly moving memorial service for those sixteen young people who’d lost their lives in such awful circumstances the previous Friday.  And there they were again, the counselors of our great voluntary organisations, many of them the Clergymen, the Salvation Army officers looking after and caring for people.  They were at the sharp end, the coal face of that misery and unhappiness and tragedy.  
But I don’t only see organisations like Anglicare as having a role in caring for people in an emotional sense I also think they have role to play in contributing to the development of policy.  It is no accident therefore that the Chairman of the Social Security Reference Group established by my Government a few months ago is Patrick McClure of Mission Australia, somebody no doubt well know to many of you.  Somebody who understands not only the human and emotional side of caring for the more needy in our community but also somebody who understands the policy imperatives.
I don’t see social welfare policy as being the exclusive reserve of those who advise governments in departments.  They have an important role to play and there are many dedicated people amongst them but we need the policy input as well as the personal care which organisations such as Anglicare provide.  
The Archbishop was kind enough to talk about the emphasis that I have placed on philanthropy within the business community.  And I think we are seeing a change developing.  This is I think the fourth occasion in the last ten days that I have been involved in something which is an expression of that partnership between the government, the business community, the corporate sector and committed individuals designed to address social need in Australia. 
And last Monday evening I had the opportunity of presenting the Prime Minister’s Award for community business partnerships which recognise those efforts of people in local communities getting together with those who need a bit of help.  And the award went to a marvelous partnership between the New England TAFE and the Toomelah Cooperative, the later being a cooperative of Aboriginal people and they were producing paper products and it’s done very successfully in a commercial way.
And there are so many different ways now in which people interact with each other and many of the old barriers have fallen down.  There’s less suspicion; there’s a greater willingness on the part of governments to recognise that they can get advice from organisations like Anglicare and it’s very professional advice and it’s based on a proper understanding of circumstances.  
There’s no longer a debate, a serious debate about the ongoing need for a social security safety net.  You might argue about the adequacy in areas, that will always be the case.  There’s a recognition on the part, a growing recognition on the part of the business community that the concept of mutual obligation is not only addressed to those people who might be unemployed and are given unemployment benefits and are asked to give something back to the community in return by way of doing some work for those benefits if they’re able to do so.  An entirely defensible and justifiable approach.  But mutual obligation also says to the business community that if you’ve done well out of society and your profits are high you, as part of the concept of mutual obligation have some responsibility to contribute back.  And growing numbers of businesses are doing that and are doing it very impressively.  Last Friday I had the opportunity in Melbourne of launching a ‘Learning for Life’ partnership between the Westpac Banking Corporation and the Smith Family- another great welfare organisation that has done so much good to relieve individual and family destitution in our society.
So for all of those reasons ladies and gentlemen I am personally delighted to support this winter appeal and to endorse in the strongest possible way to those present the cause that we come here to honour and we come here to support. 
Of course the emergency relief funding of the federal Government helps many organisations including Anglicare.  And I think the New South Wales Anglicare this year receives something over $800,000 of the emergency relief of some millions of dollars from the federal Government to many organisations throughout Australia.
I hope this winter appeal is very successful.  The Government itself will contribute $100,000 towards the Anglicare winter appeal and I hope that all of you who are here today will give very generously and support very strongly the efforts of this wonderful organisation. 
As you all know most of my waking hours, and there’ve been many of them in the last few weeks and months and particularly in these past days its being devoted very much towards the tax reform program which comes into operation tomorrow.  It represents an attempt by the Government in the face of a lot criticism and a lot of opposition to make some long term changes for the better.  There’s a lot of talk about the GST, there’s a lot of debate about how prices might or might not go up.  There’s a lot of debate about personal tax cuts.  There’s a lot of debate about business tax changes.  There’s a lot of debate about all aspects of it and that’s a proper part of the democratic exchange in our community.  But one of the elements that perhaps is less remarked it should be is that when the new system operates it will provide to the states of Australia which provide many of the ongoing community services that we take for granted, greater security and a greater guarantee of their revenue base and their revenue support.  
In the end the capacity of a society to look after its less fortunate is conditioned very heavily not only on human decency and a sense of mission that individuals have to care for the less fortunate but it is also based upon the productive wealth of that community.  And there is never a disconnect between the strength of an economy and the needs of the deprived within our community.  You need the human spirit to be in a good condition both individually and collectively to transfer that wealth and that capacity to help people but you need the resources in the first place to do it.  So you need both.  You need a strong, efficient, functioning economy which produces wealth.  You also need a human heart and a human condition and a human spirit that is willing to look after those in the community who are less fortunate.  
Anglicare is a wonderful expression of that.  The Government endorses Anglicare most warmly.  I hope you give this appeal your personal and corporate support.  It will be a wonderful expression of Australian mateship, the willingness that we so often display to help those in our community who need some help.  I hope you give it your very strong support.
Thank you.


I would like to thank Axiss Australia for hosting this dinner and thank our High Commissioner, Phillip Flood for his kind introduction.
I am also grateful that so many people in the investment community in Australia, as well as here in the UK and in Europe, have been able to come together for this gathering tonight. 
In particular, I am delighted that so many of Australia's Premiers and Chief Ministers are present here, as are the Chief Executive Officers and directors of several of Australia's major financial sector institutions. 
This broad and bipartisan representation underscores the breadth of the Australian support for this initiative.
Axiss Australia's objective is to position Australia as a global financial centre, with particular emphasis on its importance in the Asia Pacific time zone.
Since its establishment a year ago, Axiss Australia has sought to promote and improve international understanding of the Australian financial markets.
I speak to you tonight from the vantage point of the unprecedented strength of the Australian economy.
This is an economy which stared down the worst which the Asian economic collapse entailed.
This is an economy which has been nourished, renewed and reinforced by a succession of reforms of which the most recent - taxation - is by far the most historic and far-reaching.
Right now, Australia is embracing the greatest single change ever to its taxation system.
Australians are taking this momentous change in their stride - with typical Australian pragmatism and common sense.
For years Australians have known that their taxation system was decaying.  It had become hopelessly inadequate to the needs of a modern, expanding economy.
My Government supplied the missing ingredient - the political will and determination to bring about the necessary changes, to give the Australian people the taxation system they needed.
There were many obstacles.  There was plenty of political sabotage.  We didn't get all we had wanted, but we got most of it.
In the process, we have not only remade our taxation system with sharply lower personal income tax, but have also given to the states of Australia something they have long pursued; namely a guaranteed and rising revenue base to fund to provision of those basic community services indispensable for a modern, decent and caring society.
Tonight is an opportunity not only to promote the claims of Australia as a world financial centre, to talk to you of Australia's recent economic achievements, but also to put into context the economic and political relationships Australia has with Asia, Europe and North America.
Australia's best two customers are Japan and Korea, yet between them Britain and the United States receive 70 per cent of the outward foreign investment from Australia.
Fifty three per cent of total Australian exports go to the East Asia region.  Yet the capacity of Australia to shift a large amount of her trade to both Europe and North America during the Asian economic collapse was decisive in maintaining the strong growth of the Australian economy during that difficult period for our region.
This analysis is a reminder that although Asia bulks very large in Australia's economic well-being, we should never lose sight of the economic significance to us of both Europe and North America.  This is, of course, in addition to the immense political, cultural and historic links we have with those parts of the world.
The United Kingdom is a major partner for Australia, underpinned by deep historical and cultural ties.
British capital has played a major role over the years in Australia's industrial development.
Powerful commercial links between our two countries today continue to fortify this relationship. 
The United Kingdom is Australia's sixth largest merchandise trading partner but our top-ranked trading partner within the European Union, in terms of goods and services.  Britain is the largest overseas market for Australia's wine exports.
The United Kingdom is also the second largest foreign investor in Australia, just behind the United States.  Amongst those British businesses with a significant foreign presence in Australia are BAe Systems, P&amp;O, Glaxo-Wellcome, Cadbury Schweppes, Rothschilds, HSBC, British Airways, Virgin and Travelex.  This investment sustains many thousands of jobs at home for Australians.
At the same time, the United Kingdom is the second largest destination for Australian investment abroad.  Over one thousand Australian companies are active in the United Kingdom, with a large number using Britain as a beach-head for their operations into continental Europe.
Over recent years, the Government has taken strong but fair decisions to secure Australia's economic foundations.
These decisions have delivered economic outcomes unsurpassed at any time in the past 25 to 30 years. 
Broad-ranging economic reform has underpinned Australia's transformation to a new economy - both through opening up the economy to international competition and through removing the rigidities that were preventing Australian businesses from adapting to the new environment. 
The Australian economy is now a thoroughly modern one. 
It is dynamic, globally oriented and at the forefront of technological advance.
Just last week, the OECD identified Australia as one of the six fast-growth new economies of the 1990s.
Australia has grown faster than either the United Kingdom or the European Union as a whole in each year since 1992, averaging growth of 4 per cent per annum over the past eight years compared with average annual growth of 2« per cent for the United Kingdom and just under 2 per cent for the European Union.
Our recent economic success has not come about by accident.  It is readily explained by five key pillars of reform:
-tariff reform;
-deregulation of the financial system;
-reform of our once arthritic labour market;
-the restoration and consolidation of our fiscal position; and
-fundamental tax reform.
A sustained programme of tariff reduction - started under the former Labor Government - has opened up Australian markets.
Not only has this exposed local firms to the increased competitive pressures of the global environment, but such international exposure has provided greater access to innovation and encouraged Australian firms to grasp opportunities and seek out new markets. 
There is growing anger in Australia at the unfairness of existing world trade rules.  There is a double standard.  What applies to manufacturing exports does not apply to agricultural exports.  Even within the agricultural sector, Australia is heavily penalised.  Subsidies are allowed to American and European farmers which are not permitted for Australian agricultural producers.
To be fully effective, all sectors need to be adequately covered by the WTO rules.  At the moment, agriculture has been put in the too hard basket.  To be quite blunt, I'm not encouraged to believe that there is any change of heart within either the United States or the European Union on this issue.
Australia will continue to campaign very strongly for further reform of world trading rules, and especially for further liberalisation of this sector.
In this regard, I am encouraged by the British Government's Action Plan for Farming and its professed commitment toward a more market oriented Common Agricultural Policy.
There has been substantial reform of Australia's financial services regulation. Australia now has a streamlined and simple regulatory framework designed to encourage efficiency, competition and innovation. 
At the same time, the framework has maintained the highest standards of prudence, transparency and integrity for which the system has become known.
The government's Corporate Law Economic Reform Programme is building a more flexible and responsive regulatory framework. 
These reforms will allow the financial sector to adapt to the changes presented by technological developments, globalisation and increased competition. 
The reforms allow consistent and comparable disclosure of financial products, a harmonised regime for licensing of financial service providers as well as the opportunity for greater competition between markets and clearing and settlement facilities by introducing more flexible regulatory arrangements.
Over the past 17 years, Australia has also realised the benefits that flow from a flexible exchange rate, including in helping the economy adjust to external shocks. 
This was convincingly demonstrated during the Asian financial crisis. 
In the face of a serious economic slowdown in our region, a depreciating Australian dollar ensured that Australia's exporters were given a better chance to divert their products to other markets, including in North America, Europe and the United Kingdom. 
They did this with considerable success.
In the twelve months to November 1998, when Australian exports to the ASEAN countries fell by 21 per cent, and to Korea by 13  per cent, our exports to the United States increased by 34 per cent and to the United Kingdom by a massive 87 per cent over the same period - from $2.5 billion to $4.6 billion.
We have also freed up Australia's labour market. 
Enterprise bargaining and individual workplace agreements have encouraged employers and employees to negotiate and agree to arrangements better suited to their own requirements. 
The productivity improvements associated with this development have allowed wages to increase without igniting inflationary pressures.
In the past four years, the real wages of Australia's workers have increased at an annual average rate of 2.6 per cent while average labour productivity has increased at 3 per cent per year.
In this labour market environment which has encouraged agreement rather than conflict, industrial disputation has been low.  Indeed, the number of working days lost per worker in 1998 was the lowest outcome since records were first collected in 1913.
On coming to office in 1996, my Government implemented a landmark programme of fiscal consolidation. 
We set a medium-term objective of delivering a balanced budget, on average, over the course of the economic cycle.
We are now meeting this objective.  The Government has delivered underlying Budget surpluses for the past three years and significant surpluses are in prospect for the next four years and beyond.
The significance of this achievement for the wider economy should not be understated. 
It has allowed the Government to retire $40 billion of Government debt, and also allowed the Government to greatly reduce its call on the local debt market. 
This in itself has been a major factor in taking pressure off interest rates in Australia.
The lowest interest rates in a generation have helped families with mortgages, and reduced business costs.  This has delivered higher profits, encouraged more business investment and contributed to the creation of more than 700,000 new jobs over the past four years.
Retiring debt has reduced the Government's annual interest bill by around $3 billion and has allowed the Government to meet its other social responsibilities.
Australia's whole of government net debt is currently less than one quarter of that in the United States and the OECD average.  With the full sale of Telstra, Commonwealth net debt could be eliminated by 2003-04, for the sake of a debt free legacy for our children's generation.
An independent monetary policy is the other arm of the sound macroeconomic framework that is now in place. 
A 1996 charter formalised the Reserve Bank of Australia's role of keeping inflation within a target range of 2 to 3 per cent, on average, over the course of the economic cycle.
Despite sustained strong growth, inflation has been below 3 per cent for 15 consecutive quarters - the best sustained inflation outcome in recorded history.
Our fiscal and monetary policies are therefore conducted within a sound, well-defined framework.  This provides both transparency and certainty to the exercise of macroeconomic policy in Australia. 
The macroeconomic framework has delivered tangible benefits for Australians and has contributed to Australia's success in weathering the Asian economic and financial crisis. 
When many countries were raising interest rates in the face of large currency depreciations, Australian interest rates were being cut, accommodating the fall in the Australian dollar and thus enabling the Australian economy to sustain its strong growth rate.
I have already spoken enthusiastically of Australia's new taxation system.
The Government's tax reform plan puts behind us once and for all an old tax system which has held Australia back.
As of last week, an outdated wholesale sales tax system - levied at varying and hidden rates on some goods but not on services - has been replaced with a 10 per cent broadly based goods and services tax.
Personal income tax rates have been reduced - providing the largest income tax cuts in Australia's history.  Four in every five Australian taxpayers now face a marginal tax rate of 30 per cent or less.
We are also in the process of implementing a new business taxation system.
The company tax rate has been reduced to 34 per cent and will fall further to 30 per cent on 1 July 2001- putting it amongst the lowest company tax rates in the region. 
The Government has also introduced an internationally competitive capital gains tax regime.  For individuals, a 50 per cent exclusion will apply on capital gains for assets held for over 12 months.
Capital gains tax rollover relief will also be available for scrip-for-scrip takeovers between companies and trusts - a major benefit for high technology start ups.
Investments in venture capital projects in Australia by non-resident tax-exempt pension funds, such as UK and US pension funds, have also been made exempt from capital gains tax.
In addition, from 1 July 2001, temporary residents will be exempt from tax on their foreign sourced income relating to assets acquired before taking up residence in Australia.
A significant element of the new tax system involves a wholesale change to current Commonwealth-State financial relations. 
Every last cent of GST revenue will go directly to the states and territories.  This gives them access to a more secure revenue base from which to fund the essential public services that all Australians need.
This arrangement also means that the annual Premiers' Conferences will become a thing of the past.
It is fitting that such a profound change in the history of Commonwealth-State financial relations should occur so close to the commemoration of the passage of the Australian Constitution through the British Parliament one hundred years ago.
The economic reforms I have outlined have transformed Australia into a more open and competitive economy. 
They have, without doubt, improved the living standards of a countless number of Australians. 
They have created a favourable environment to encourage risk taking and innovation and, importantly, the diffusion of new technology.
It is undeniable that the world has been transformed by information technology.
That said, there has, in my view, been a lot of loose talk about some sort of artificial dichotomy between the new and old economy.
Some have attempted to portray Australia as an old economy.  Such views are wide of the mark.
Australia is a modern, sophisticated economy drawing heavily on information technology and benefiting from the explosion of service industries.
Equally, however, we have immense strengths and wealth in our great resource-based industries - agriculture, mining and most specifically in the contemporary world context, clean energy.
Australia is an eager, reliable and competitive supplier to the world.  We intend to win our fair share of world markets in commodities such as liquid natural gas, which will improve the lives and environment of many in both the developed and the developing world. 
To achieve these goals, Australian industry needs liberal amounts of capital both from home and abroad. 
The structure of our economy is not altogether dissimilar to that of the United States - with the services sector close to 80 per cent of the economy.
Australia has more computers per person than any other country in the world except one.  The number of households connected to the internet is growing rapidly - and by early next year it is estimated that almost 40 per cent of Australian households will be on line.
We also have a higher number of Internet Service Providers per person than any country in Asia - including Japan - and a higher number than Europe.
In this context, it is important to stress that what really matters is the application of the new technologies to mainstream economic and business activity.
Australia's rapid adoption of new technology continues to improve productivity throughout our industries.
I was, therefore, interested to read of the comments made earlier this year by Dr Greenspan.
In his typically understated way, he made the point that a number of countries have participated in the recent wave of invention and innovation but have been arguably slower to apply them and, therefore, slower to reap the associated benefits.  
Dr Greenspan's contention in explaining why this might be so is that these countries have typically had less flexible and, therefore, more costly labour markets.
This carries with it an important message for Australia - and many others - on the need to persevere with further labour market reform. 
Australia has the highest per capita share ownership in the western world.  Our financial markets are seeking to integrate themselves fully with major capital markets which will further strengthen our linkages to the global economy.
In the context of a rapidly changing technological environment, Australia has also embraced, enthusiastically, innovative and contemporary financial products.
Amongst debt capital markets, the Australian securitisation market is the third largest in the world. 
Our equity capital market remains strong, with over A$27 billion in new funds raised in the 1998-99 year.  Australia boasts the ninth largest foreign exchange market in the world and the Australian currency is the seventh most actively traded currency.
Australia's financial exchanges are leaders in the Asian region. The Sydney Futures Exchange is the largest in the region and has continued to grow, with a turnover of around A$10 trillion in 1999.
The Australian Stock Exchange maintains a capitalisation of over A$800 million, ranks amongst the most prominent exchanges in the world and recognises the importance of international alliances.
The ASX recently agreed with the Singapore stock exchange to develop and establish an electronic link between the two exchanges' trading and settlement systems. 
It has also entered into a strategic alliance with the NASDAQ Stock Market to provide co-listing services and is participating in multilateral discussions on the feasibility of a global equity market.
Australia also has leading edge supporting infrastructure for the financial services sector. 
The Asia Pacific Telecommunications index published in 2000 ranked Australia as one of the most competitive telecommunications economies in the region.
Australia also offers other advantages as a centre for global financial services.
Our workforce is highly educated, skilled and multilingual.  Around 40 per cent of the working age population have university, diploma or trade qualifications and Australia was ranked second in the latest World Competitiveness Yearbook for the availability of its skilled labour. 
Australians possess a wide variety of language skills, with around 2« million Australians speaking a language other than English at home and around 800,000 speaking an Asian language.
Our salaries are very competitive, and compare more than favourably with those for similarly qualified personnel in other parts of the Asia Pacific region.
The cost of prime office space in Australia's main central business districts is between a third to a half that of similar property in Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore and Beijing.  Australia, of course, offers a great lifestyle.
Australia's position within the Asia Pacific region allows Asian markets to be serviced quickly and cost-effectively.
Our trading day spans the close of business in the US and the opening of business in Europe.
What an eminently suitable location from which to conduct global financial business operations.
Our economy is strong and stable.  It has been driven along by substantial economic reform.
Our financial markets are sophisticated and deep and are underpinned by a transparent and streamlined regulatory system.
Australia has rapidly adopted new technologies and continues to provide a high level of infrastructure to support the sector.
We will continue to work with the international financial community to share the expansion of Australia as a major centre for global financial services.
I look forward to seeing you in Sydney for the Olympics.


E&amp;OE................................. 
My Lord Mayor, your Royal Highness, Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of Australia, your graces the Archbishops of Canterbury and Brisbane, to the Ministers of the British Government, and the Leader of the Opposition, to the Premiers of the States of Australia, and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and especially do I acknowledge the presence of two former Prime Ministers of Great Britain, Baroness Margaret Thatcher and Sir Edward Heath, and I acknowledge of course the presence of my predecessors John Gorton, Gough Whitlam, Malcolm Fraser and Bob Hawke.
Mr Lord Mayor you do our country and those who have come to London this week in a very bipartisan fashion to represent Australia, to commemorate that great event 100 years ago, you do us great honour in this banquet that you have given tonight. Because today is the day 100 years ago that the Act of the British Parliament establishing the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia passed through the House of Lords. And it followed the efforts of five then colonial, soon to become Australian, statesmen of that era. Barton and Deakin and Fysh and Dickson and Kingston. Two of whom were to become Prime Ministers of Australia.
They didn't come in anger, they did it in terms of the essential quest to obtain the approval of the British Parliament for a constitution which had already been approved by the people of the colonies at successive referenda. They did not come in anger and they did not leave disappointed. And it's a matter of interesting historical record that the principle point of dispute between them and the then Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain was about the circumstances in which an appeal might lie on certain matters from a decision of the High Court of Australia to the Privy Council.
And that of course in a sense summed up the character and the relationship between the people of the emerging Commonwealth of Australia and successive governments of the United Kingdom. At every stage of our constitutional development it had been the wish of successive British governments to give us what the people of the forming Australia wanted.
And as I speak to you tonight I try and think of those things that crystalise, not only the Australian achievement because it has been an immense achievement of the last 100 years, but also to think of the character of the relationship between our two great societies.
We have so much in common and it is impossible in a gathering such as this, in a place such as this, at a time such as this, not to think of the great inheritance that the people of Australia have with from the people of Britain. The rule of law, the sense of civic duty, the robust political discourse, even exchange, the great gift of Parliamentary democracy, the wonderful inheritance of the English language and all the culture that surrounds it. We owe a great deal to the people of Britain and we owe a great deal to the British inheritance.
But of course, it has been a two-way partnership. The people of Britain as the Lord Mayor was kind enough to acknowledge owe a great deal to the people of Australia. We Australians never forget the contribution that Australian servicemen made in defence of liberty alongside the service men of the United Kingdom. In 1914, a nation of just on 2.5 million males contributed a volunteer army of almost 400,000. It is an extraordinary demonstration of the commitment of the people of our nation at that time. And that was to be repeated in World War II. And if I can think of perhaps the greatest moment of shared achievement of the people of Great Britain and the people of Australia it was the way in which they stood alone but for a few other societies of common values at the time in defiance of Nazi Germany in the darkest days of World War II. And it will always be one of the greatest..[applause]
But of course, as the Lord Mayor has acknowledged, it is not only a relationship that is steeped in history and some tradition and a reverence for a shared culture and a shared inheritance, it is also a vibrant, contemporary relationship. Like any good relationship you need a combination of shared values and history and also a touch of mutual self interest. And both of our societies recognise that. The commercial links between our two societies are great indeed. And Australia is now surpassed by France only, in terms of wine exports to your country. And although it is properly understood that Australia's great export customers are to be found in the Asian region, it is nonetheless a fact of life that 70% of the outward foreign investment from Australia goes to a combination of the United Kingdom and the United States.
But of course with all relationships it is the people to people links that are the most important. And they have developed changed over the years in a quite fascinating fashion. It was commonplace for Australians of my age to come on a working holiday, often for a year or two base yourself in London and in the process, do Europe on as cheap a budget as possible. It was my experience when I had a working holiday in London in the early 1960's, it was my experience that the travel horizons of young Englishmen at that time did not extend much beyond the continent and occasionally to the United States. Yet as I was so sadly and grimly reminded when I went to that beautiful Queensland town of Childers just a couple of weeks ago, to go that very moving memorial service for those fifteen backpackers who died in that terrible fire, I was reminded just how much a rite of passage the young of this country is it becoming to go on a backpacking visit to our country. It is estimated that some 30,000 young British men and women at any given time are in our country. And the way in which that, those people to people links have turned around in that generation represents a maturing and a burgeoning and a changing of the relationship.
It is of course a fact of life and a fact of history that the thing that in the end that will bind two countries together more than anything else are the values that we share in common. We can have our differences as we do on trade. You can have as you do a great emphasis on your links with the nations of Europe. We can have as we properly do, a great emphasis on our links with the nations of Asia. In many ways, Australia occupies something of a special cultural and economic intersection in the world. We are in so many respects a projection of western civilisation in our part of the world - we share an inheritance together. We have great and enduring links with the people of Britain and the rest of Europe. We have very close associations with the people of North America. But there we are in the Asian Pacific region. Some 800,000 Australians speak an Asian language, and we have a very rich history over the last one hundred years of absorbing people from 140 nations in the world. And one of the great boasts of the Australian achievement over the last one hundred years has been our capacity to take people from every corner of the earth and to blend them into a united harmonious community. A community that respects the different cultural characteristics and inheritances of the people who comprise the modern Australia, but nonetheless a society that binds them together with a set of common values.
But it is ladies and gentlemen, the values that bind us more than anything else. And what I would like tonight to be seen as, not only a celebration and a very gracious honouring by the people of this magnificent city in this magnificent setting of the contribution that Australia has made to the world over the last 100 years and the scale of the Australian achievement during that time. An achievement which of course must be put against our share of errors - the way in which we have on so many occasions mishandled the treatment of the indigenous people of our country. We are like any other nation not without our errors and our blemishes. But it has been a hundred years of great achievement.
It has also been a one hundred year journey between Australia and the people of the United Kingdom. A journey which has taken many characteristics, shared and often vigorous encounters on the sporting field, vigorous political and trade disputes, but the common thread I think that has kept us together during all of those years, has been the values that we share in common. There aren't too many societies, ladies and gentlemen, that can look the world in the eye and say we were continuously democratic through the whole of the20th century. You can count those societies on the fingers of your two hands. And we the people of Australia, and you the people of the United Kingdom comprise two of those societies.
So can I say to our British friends tonight that we thank you for the honour that you have paid to our country. And we in Australia honour the contribution that the British inheritance has given to our society. We think of the values that we have in common.. We reflect upon the way in which we have together defended those values in moments of great challenge and great crisis. And we rededicate ourselves to a pursuit of those common values of political liberty, of individual freedom, of the rule of law, of freedom of the press, a respect for the strength of the Parliamentary system, and an importance in our lives of civic duty and civic commitment. They are great values, they are ageless values. They are values that are as relevant to this part of the world as they are to any other part of the world. And they are values that I believe the people of Britain and the people of Australia will always have in common. And they will always act as a binding and a cement between the people of our two societies.
Ladies and gentlemen, may I in conclusion invite you to join me in honouring a toast. And that toast is to the Lord Mayor and the corporation of London.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...............................
Prime Minister, Madam Speaker, Lord Chancellor, Mr Speaker, Madam President and particularly do I also acknowledge the presence here today of two former Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, Baroness Margaret Thatcher and John Major and the presence of four of my predecessors, John Gorton, Gough Whitlam, Malcolm Fraser and Bob Hawke. And also the Premiers of five of the Australian States and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory.
Can I say to you Lord Chancellor that you and Madam Speaker have done us a special honour in relation to this reception. It is an opportunity for me to express my gratitude to you Prime Minister for the generous welcome that the British Government and all associated with it have given to us in connection with Australia week here in London. It does observe one of the three great symbolic milestones of Australian Federation. The first of them was the passage of the British Act which gave legal force to a constitution that had not been forced upon an unwilling group of colonies by the Westminster Parliament, but a constitution which had been voted on and embraced by the people of Australia in a series of referenda. And as a consequence this particular event is a very important, symbolic milestone in the march of the Australian people a hundred years ago towards Federation and towards nationhood.
But we also celebrate here this week the scale of the Australian achievement over that one hundred year period. It's an achievement that has seen Australian cleverly, in my view, preserve the best of her inheritance and the best of her history - preserve those things inherited from the past that have been worth preserving. But perhaps move on from others not so worthy of preservation and to embrace new and different attitudes and new and different traditions.
Australia is a remarkable amalgam of history and modernity. It is a remarkable achievement that we can preserve the best of the history enshrined in this building yet mould it to the particular needs of a contemporary and diverse Australian society. And can I say one of the special pleasures and privileges of being Prime Minister of Australia is that we can feel a sense of ownership of the values that are here today, but we can also feel a sense of ownership of different ways in different parts of the world. And so we have come, a group of us, to London this week, to mark that very important event. To honour the Australian statesman of one hundred years ago who negotiated with Joseph Chamberlain, the then Colonial Secretary, I might say who was not an unwilling partner in the birth of the Australian Federation. Indeed the history of all of the relationships between the former Colonial Governments and the British Government and then the Federal Government of Australia after 1901 was not of a reluctant United Kingdom trying to hang onto constitutional power. Indeed the Statute of Westminster was enacted by the British Parliament in 1931 but it was not until 1943 that it was formally ratified by the Australian Parliament during World War II. The relationship constitutionally has always been a true partnership.
We celebrate history today, we also celebrate a shared present. And that shared present gives expression in the very close commercial links to which the Prime Minister has referred. The great equality of the cultural exchanges between our two societies. No Londoner can but be impressed by the impact of Australians on the cultural and artistic life of this city. Be it the opera, be it the ballet, be it painting, be it literature. Australian names and Australian achievement and Australian excellence is to be found everywhere.
But most importantly of all, what we honour and celebrate today in terms of our shared history and our great partnership are the values that we hold in common. The great worth of societies are always measured by the values that those societies have and the values that those societies are prepared to defend and what they are prepared to do in order to defend those values.
I said last night at the Guildhall the great contribution of Britain and Australia to the world has been our joint willingness when needed to sacrifice much to defend those principles of individual liberty, of the rule of law, of a civil society, of respect for difference and a tolerance of difference. They have been the special contributions of our two societies to the world. We owe much to Britain and we thank Britain for what she has given to Australia. Britain in turn owes much to Australia. It has been a very strong and robust partnership.
We honour it today, I thank you Prime Minister. I thank you Lord Chancellor and Madam Speaker. Australians are very much honoured by this occasion and we thank you very warmly.
Thank you.
ends


E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Well, thank you very much, Mr Chairman, to the State Premier’s, to my several predecessors as Prime Minister of Australia who are here today, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
To get my priorities right, I should tell you that Pat Rafter won the first set seven – five.  And it’s three all in the second.  And you know, I may be able to tell you something more by the time I finish.
But ladies and gentlemen, we are coming to the end of what has been a very special week for Australia here in London.  A week filled not only with historic observances and contribution but also a week which has enabled me along with my colleagues as Premiers of the Australian states and with the assistance of four former Prime Ministers, two Coalition in John Gorton and Malcolm Fraser and two from the Australian Labor Party in Gough Whitlam and Bob Hawke.  And I mean that expression its best sense because when we Australians go abroad in a political capacity we should always go abroad not in the name of our political parties but in the name of our country.
And the Federation story has been a story to which all stands of public opinion in Australia at a political level have contributed.  I’ve had many remarkable experiences as Prime Minister and no doubt my predecessors would reflect in the same way if they were in my position today.  But probably one of the most supremely moving occasions I’ve been involved in as Prime Minister was on last Anzac Day when along with the Prime Minister of New Zealand we went and opened the new memorial on Anzac Cove.  And the truly astonishing thing about that occasion was the vast sea of young Australian and New Zealand faces.  Something in the order of twelve to fifteen thousand young Australians had made the pilgrimage to be part of that.  And what we have witnessed over the last few years, is what I can only describe as an exploding interest in our country’s heritage.  A thirst for understanding and knowledge of our past, a desire to try and interpret it for the future.  And I think it’s a truly fascinating journey.  What accounts for it is hard to fathom.  It obviously owes much to the fact that we are on the eve of celebrating one hundred years of the Australian Federation.  I think also owes much to the realisation of current Australian generations of the scale of the Australian achievement over the last one hundred years.  The impact of Australian culture, the impact of Australian artists, the extraordinary capacity of reborn Australian film industry to communicate the essence of Australianism to the rest of the world.  I think it also has something to do with that realisation that eventually comes to all of us in relation to past events, and that is that very soon there will be nobody left alive who actually participated in those events.  There are only two people left alive in the world, both of them Australian, who were amongst the allied forces who served on Gallipoli.  And I understood in discussion with my Turkish counterparts that there are no Turkish survivors of that campaign.
So, we are at a moment where, I think, the interest of Australians in their history, where they came from, where they want to go and what it means to be an Australian is at a peak and a level of commitment and interest that I have not experienced.  There is not amongst the under thirty generation in Australia the cynicism about the past that was sometimes more the norm than the exception in the 1960s and the 1970s.  And the reason for those differences itself would repay some kind of special study.
So it’s therefore entirely appropriate, compellingly so, that we should have this Australia week here in London to mark the one hundred years passage of the Acts of the British Parliament that gave birth to the Federation.  Much has no doubt been said historically about those events.  The truly astonishing thing when one looks back was the relative ease with which the argument was won.  As is well known, the real area of debate with Joseph Chamberlain surrounded one narrow issue and that is the circumstances in which appeals might lie in the soon to be formed High Court of Australia to the Privy Council.  And of course that situation has been all of a piece with other constitutional negotiations between the then colonial office and the then Australian colonies stretching back to self government for New South Wales and then further on the enactment of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, some twelve to thirteen years were to go by until that was ratified by the Cutin, at the instance of the Curtin Government in 1943.
And I think if we look back on those days, it can at least be said that Anglo-Australian relations on the basis of us being an independent nation got off to a good start.  Of course although we had our constitutional independence in 1901, I certainly have the view, and it may or may not be shared by all of the historians here that the events of World War I really began to very separately carve out and define the Australian character.  Not only in relation to the sacrifices at Gallipoli in the scale and immensity of Australian loss of life in that war, but also the inevitable emergence of a distinctive Australian way of doing things and the inevitable unwillingness as time went by to accept uncritically decisions made which were imposed upon Australia and in which Australia paid a very heavy price.
The Anglo-Australian relationship has had elements of passion, elements of fierce disagreement.  There has on occasions people have properly said something of a love hate character about it.  And certainly that has been the case in a sporting context.  But it has been a relationship which has endured over a one hundred year period, and in many senses is more equal and relaxed and reciprocal now than perhaps at any time during that one hundred year period.  There is no longer in the relationship the dominance that cone existed when it was common for people to refer to the mother country and it was common to Australians to refer to a visit to Britain as going home, that of course has all changed.  And some of the inevitable differences, even antagonisms that arose in relation to the conduct of aspects of World War II and in particular the disposition of Australian army units when there was a direct threat on the mainland of Australia.  All of those things have now passed into history, they are not forgotten.  They play a part in the fabric of the relationship.  But I think we can find in the contemporary relationship, be it commercial or be it an analysis of our history we can find in the contemporary relationship a sense of continuity and equilibrium that we have not had before.
We share, as I said the other night at the Guildhall, the most precious of all things, and that is a commitment to certain common values.  We are amongst that very limited, unique number of countries that have been continuously democratic for the whole of the 20th century.  We are amongst that very small group of countries that ultimately stood between the barbarians of World War II and the abyss.  We are countries that have a true commitment, painful though it is on occasion for participating politicians to the belief that one of the pillars of a democratic society is a free and open press.  We are a society that believes, we are societies that believe very deeply in the rule of law.  And we are societies that are very heavily committed to robust Parliamentary institutions.  I belong to the school of thought that says that robust institutions are greater guarantors of fundamental human rights that stylishly written bills of rights.  If you have a nation that’s got a strong, open, transparent political system, if you have an incorruptible judiciary and if you have a free press you have in those three things greater guarantees of individual liberty than perhaps any stylishly written bill of rights can provide.  Now, of course there will be many in that room, there will be many in the room who will disagree with me and that can be subject of some further discourse on another occasion.
If I look back on the last one hundred years, and I acknowledge how much we have in common with the United Kingdom, I acknowledge the debt that we owe to the British, those positive elements of the British inheritance that we chose to keep, it’s a very impressive list.  But it is, of course, a reciprocal relationship.  And much has already been said about what the British owe to Australia over that period of time.  But it is interesting if you reflect on that one hundred years, to see very clearly emerging some distinctive Australian contributions to the generic practice, or the generic working out of the values and principles that we hold in common.  There is little doubt that the egalitarian spirit is one of those things that was an early definer of the distinctive Australian character.  And it’s not possible to seriously analyse the history of Australia over the last one hundred years without acknowledging how passionately felt by most Australians is a belief in the egalitarian concept.  It defines the practice of our military forces in World War I and continue to do so and it’s defined practice in the attitudes of our society.  Not always perfectly and distressingly the whole combination of reasons, some of the gaps in Australian society now are wider than we would have wanted them to be or we would want them to be in the future.  That is a trend that’s been apparent in our community for some time.  There are complex reasons for it, not all of them are economic, some of them are geared to the breaking down of the extended family and the greater incidence of family and relationship breakdown than was the case a generation ago, once again the subject for another conference by this group and the Menzies Centre.
But ladies and gentlemen, that egalitarian attitude has very heavily influence policy in this country, in Australia.  And one of the things that I’ve often reflected on as I’ve thought about the moulding of public policy is the way in which in many areas, Australia has been able to have a happy amalgam of what is good in other societies and been careful to discard what is less acceptable in those societies.  I think one of the very successful, even clever things, that Australia was able to do in relation to social welfare provision and I speak of the contribution of both sides of Australian politics to this since World War II was to avoid what I still regard as the harshness of some aspects of the American treatment of the social security safety net.  But likewise not to embrace the rather too heavy state intervention which has been a feature of many of the European social security systems.
And you can see coming out of that egalitarian spirit, you can see very, very clearly the development of what I could call an Australian way.  The  way that says that it is the obligation of society never to allow people to be without proper sustenance, but equally it is the obligation of society to ensure that sustenance having been provided at a proper level, if it is reasonable to do so something might be given back.  I think we have been rather successful for all the criticism that has been levelled at us over the years from both sides of politics, I think we have been rather successful in relation to those matters.  
But I am very conscious Mr Chairman that this is not only a gathering of historians, and although I am not an historian, I have a love of history, something I share very much in common with my premier colleague, Bob Carr who is present today and many others.  But I am also very conscious that this is a gathering of business men and women who are interested in the Australian economy, are interested in the character and the dimensions of the economic relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom.  
I speak with natural enthusiasm even verve about the current strength of the Australian economy.  I bring to those of you who may not be familiar with it a story of an economy that’s been growing at 4% for each of the last five years.  An Australian economy that’s seen 712,000 more jobs generated in that period.  An economy that was able to stare down the worst of the Asian economic downturn.  An economy which has seen the fruits of intelligent reform.  And let me say quite openly and genuinely that those reforms have been contributed to by both sides of politics.  The deregulation of the Australian financial system, the floating of the dollar which occurred when Mr Hawke was prime minister, strongly supported by the then Opposition.  It was a seminal event in opening up the Australian economy.  And I’ve always given credit to the former Labor government for that event, and equally the tariff reductions initiated, often in the face of some considerable criticism from the trade union movement in Australia during the period of the former government also played a part in creating a much better economic climate.  
In recent years of course the work that my government has undertaken to put the Budget not only in balance, but also in substantial surplus, to change the industrial relations syste – I think on that point Bob and I might begin to part a little bit of company – but nonetheless ladies and gentlemen they have made a very, very strong contribution, all of those things.  And most recently of course we have embraced a fundamental change to the Australian taxation system.  A change that everybody who’s had any influence on Australian politics in the last twenty-five years has really known at some stage that his or her political existence was a reform that had to be undertaken.  And the change that came into operation on the 1st of July is bigger in scope than any other institutional economic change that Australia has seen in the last fifty years or more.  Not only embraces the introduction of a broad-based indirect tax, but also significant reductions in personal tax, a virtual halving of the capital gains tax, the company tax rate – all designed to make a contribution to the greater international competitiveness of the Australian economy.  
I endeavoured to explain in my address to the nation on the new taxation system, tax reform was but the next crucial step along the path to making the Australian economy not only stronger and more soundly based, but also more capable of surviving international competition.  But it is important for all of us, whether we are in business or in politics, all of us who are concerned about the future of our society and the cohesion of our society, whether it be in Australia or here in Britain, to remember that economic policy however you define it and however you pursue it, is never some end in itself.  That the purpose of economic policy is to produce a social dividend to achieve social goals.  Personal contentment and human fulfilment and the stability and cohesion of society are the ultimate goals of sound economic policy.  We can differ and argue about what are the right policies, we surely don’t differ and argue that the goals at the end of the day are goals of social cohesion and of human contentment, and human fulfilment and all economic policy must be measured against that.  
Australia is an attractive investment destination for the business men and women of any nation.  We have a strong economy.  We have importantly an outward looking people, a well educated workforce.  We have great cultural diversity, 800,000 Australians speak Asian languages, a very high proportion of Australians speak a language other than English at home.  We have clear rules of corporate governance.  We have a very transparent legal system.  We have great political stability.  And we are socially a very harmonious community.  We’re not without our faults or our past blemishes.  But we do represent to the rest of the world a great success story.  
This has been as I said at the beginning of my remarks, this has been a great week for Australia.  It has been an opportunity at a political level and at a business level to present to the people of London our view of the modern Australia.  Many of them are very well informed about it in any event.  But it has been an opportunity, whatever our views may be on other subjects it has been an opportunity for we Australians to reflect on what we have in common with our friends in Britain.  It is always possible to honour your history, to understand its contribution to where you are today without in any way diminishing your own sense of identity, your sense of independence and your sense of relating to other parts of the world, or other parts of your existence. 
There will always be in the Australian experience and the Australian existence a very significant element that owes its heritance to what the British gave us.  They have us much – the rule of law, the parliamentary system and all the other things of which I’ve spoken. It has been a very close relationship.  It’s been a relationship that’s had its ups and downs, but because as I say it is so firmly rooted on values that both of us hold in common, universal values, enduring values.  It is a relationship that will endure strongly and firmly and soundly into the next century and beyond.  Thank you.
Q:
Prime Minister, [inaudible] in this year’s [inaudible] Australia turning, appearing to turn its back on Europe in favour of its relationship with Asia.  And your Asian neighbours have become, recently quite more unruly than perhaps you thought they may have been.  Can we hope that in the future Australia will be more even  handed in its relationship with both Asia and Europe and recognise the sovereign duties which Australian companies are making here and which European companies make to Australia as well?
PM:
Well, I am interested to hear that question because sections of the Australian press back home have criticised me for allegedly showing less enthusiasm for our country’s association with Asia.  What I have sought to do is somewhat rebalance our relationship.  I have never accepted the view that is often implicit in the kind of question you’ve just asked that we face in Australia some choice between our history and our geography, that’s ridiculous.  Our relationship with Asia adds value to our relationship with Europe and North America.  And our relationship with Europe and North America ought to add value to our relationship with Asia.  I indicated this morning by way of you know, explanation the point I seek to make - Japan’s our best customer everyone knows that, Korea has been amongst our very best customers over the past few years – yet 70% of our outward investment goes either to the United Kingdom or to the United States.  53% of our trade goes to East Asia, but when the Asian economic crisis hit our capacity for a combination of reasons to divert exports to Europe and North America was something that helped saved the bacon as far as we were concerned.  So my answer is, I have sought to ensure that we have a completely even-handed outlook in relation to, I mean we need, we need Asia.  We’re geographically part of the Asian Pacific region, our destiny is forever linked with what happens there.  Particularly our relations with many of the major countries of that region.  But we will also need associations and linkages, trade and otherwise, with the people of Europe and the people of North America.  Apart from anything else we have many values in common with them.  And I guess the final point I would make, it’s always very important to make it when you talk about relations between Australia and Asia, and that is that there are different parts of Asia.  Our relationships really have to almost be looked at in relation to that region in terms of a whole series of bi-lateral relationships.  They vary, some of them are not easy at the moment.  Others are in as good a shape as they’ve been for decades.
Well, seven – five in the first set, but I am afraid four – six the wrong way in the second set, and Rafter is leading two – one in the third.  So, you know.  
Q:
Prime Minister, I as one of the historians present would like to ask you to develop a theme that you raised – during this week we’ve heard a great deal about Britain’s legacy in Australia, but as you quite properly observed, Britain also owes much to Australia.  And I wonder if I might invite you to explore a bit further the ways in which in your experience Britain is learning from Australia.  
PM:
Well, I won’t get onto sport.  Well, I think the, I think it’s fair to say that although as an Australian I would never think any other country could match our instinct for egalitarianism, I hope to believe that we may have played a part in some of the questioning of some of the structures of society, both here and other parts of Europe that has been underway for some time.  I think that when I speak to what Britain owes to Australia I certainly have in mind the scale of Australia’s commitment to military conflict over the last one hundred years.  On any objective measure as was observed in a speech I think at the Gallery, at the Royal Gallery yesterday, that contribution was beyond what might have been reasonably expected.
I think as our societies, particularly in the age of information technology, as our societies become closer together rather than further apart, I think we unconsciously through the common culture, particularly of the young, we unconsciously contribute to each other and we influence, influence each other without really knowing.  I think the impact of the Australian film industry and Australian entertainers on Britain and on London, the contributions that Australians are making to great institutions like the Royal Ballet, the imprints that Australians have made on opera and the imprint that Australians have made on popular entertainment.  I think all of those things have made a disproportionately large impact on British society, that’s part of Australian achievement over this period of time that with a population of only 20 million people we have been able to achieve that.
J:
My name is Mellissa Hardy I’m a partner at [inaudible] one of the city firms.  My question for Mr Howard is in relation to your passports.  Many of us live and work in Europe, to be politically correct, which entitles us in fact to take out a European passport, but to do so would mean that we would have to surrender our Australian passports and having listened to Mr Howard today you can understand why we are not prepared to do so, we are Australian.  This has a couple of consequences.  The first is that we miss out on the mobility that we would otherwise have in terms of freedom in Europe in doing Australian business in Europe.  It also means that we are treated inconsistency with, for instance, Europeans who move to Australia, take up Australian passports and are still allowed to retain their own European passports.  And my question is, can we ask the government to in fact remove this policy and to allow Australians abroad to in fact take up your passports?
PM:
Well, I think you’re really raising a question of dual citizenship.  And, I mean, it goes beyond just a question of dual passports.  We have a committee on citizenship that was chaired by Sir Ninian Stephen, the former Governor General, very distinguished Governor General of Australia, and he has made some recommendations including one that bears very much on this point, and that is something the government is looking at at the present time.  I have to say to you in all candour that the argument is not all on the side you put.  There are some people who feel quite strongly that if you are born with Australian nationality and you want to acquire another nationality it’s not unreasonable to say you should have to choose.  It’s difficult.  I simply want to say to you I understand the convenience argument, and I think it’s  a very powerful argument.  It’s a very compelling argument, I well remember years ago I had an uncle who was in the air force during the war and like many Australian pilots were trained in Canada and he married a Canadian girl and went back to live in Canada and retained [inaudible] of Australia and he retained his Australian passport for about thirty years and in the end because he travelled frequently to the United States where a Canadian [inaudible] differently [inaudible] as far as in and out is concerned than others.  He felt he compelled to make a change which he didn’t like doing.  I understand the problem.  We are looking at it, but I have got to say as it were say that there are a lot of people who feel very strongly that you in some way diminish Australian nationality by allowing people to opt to acquire another one and [inaudible] Australian nationality.  But if others chose, I know it looks as though it operates unfairly in the other direction, I understand that.  That also is something that is going to be put into the melting pot in looking at it.  But we are considering it, but we haven’t reached a decision and I’ll certainly bear in mind the feelings that are being expressed to me.  But this may not be an utterly representative audience and utterly representative sample of Australian opinion on the subject.
J:
Prime Minister, Michael Dodd, Australian journalist living in London, one time resident of Canberra.
PM:
[inaudible]
J:
I’m independent these days.  But I was interested to find out if you had a view that the Australian mindset is perhaps a touch adolescent when it comes to the costs of overseas trips by Australian leaders and former leaders as well.  Do you have a view on that?
PM:
Well, I don’t think it’s the Australian mindset.  It’s the mindset of some people who either write in or influence the media.  I think it’s always easy game, I mean I understand that, you understand that.  But I, and I know that this will be warmly supported in this room in this place at this time.  That’s to be expected.  I think that has the reaction of some in the media, and I stress some, there have been some very notable exceptions has been very adolescent indeed.
J:
Prime Minister, as one of the other historians present, I would like to ask you a question.  Earlier this year on the departure of Queen Elizabeth from Australia, the Sydney Morning Herald ran an editorial where it was written that one thing which we can all be agreed on Australia is no longer a British country.  One thing which we are unable to agree on is when that happened.  So I wonder if you would like to reflect on that question, Mr Howard, when in your view did Britain become a foreign country?
PM:
Well, I won’t try and answer than in a constitutional sense.  The High Court has properly concluded that Britain is in legal terms a foreign country, whether in the minds of some people that’s emotionally the case is another matter.  I think it was much earlier than many people think.  I mean really believe very much that the distinctive  Australian identity began to emerge in World War I.  I have always believed as an amateur historian that was the real beginning of it.  And if you, how you look at the stories of the argument, allegedly, between, was it King George the IV and the Scullin Government was it, about the appointment of the first Australian born Governor General and Isaacs and that was in the early 1930s.  That was a sign of a country that saw itself, although being close to Britain as having a distinctive identity.  Where you find, I guess, the difficult point, where do you cross from being a situation where you think of yourself, as many Australians did for a long time as being simultaneously Australian and British and just thinking of yourself as being Australia, I don’t know when exactly that point occurred.  Some would argue that was after World War II, others might argue that was before.  I can’t be any more precise than that.  I don’t think any Australians now think of themselves as British.  Lots of Australians have affection for Britain and British ways or the British inheritance.  There are a lot of Australians I know who have an enormous respect for what Britain has given to our country, who would be horrified, of course, to be called British.  No in any nasty sense, but just in terms of it being something quite antagonistic to their sense of identity.  But when 
Tape turnover
Things that it’s got to decide is whether it is going to have some kind of capacity to act in between meetings of heads of government and what it’s going to act about and what sort of directions or goals around which commonwealth action is going to coalesce.  I think it is possible to give it a greater sense of purpose in between meetings of heads of government, it would require on the part of governments a willingness to give some freedom of movement to a smaller group, whether the commonwealth is willing to do that, I don’t know.  I think support for principles of proper governance and the rule of law are things around which I think the commonwealth should readily be able to coalesce.  I along with the British Prime Minister and a number of other commonwealth Prime Ministers a members of a group which is being charged with including President Ambique from South Africa being charged as the chairman of the immediate past commonwealth meeting was in effect drawing up some proposals for giving a greater sense of purpose and direction.  I mean, it remains undeniably a marvellous forum and it has been able to deal with issues very successfully.  South Africa was one commonwealth action that played a major role in bringing about change.  There is no doubt about that.  It has been successful in other areas as well, but I think all of us would feel that if we can give some sharper sense of purpose then that ought to be attempted.
J:
Mr Prime Minister, as one of the under thirty, I can’t see behind the banner, as one of the under thirty Australians you talked about, I am perhaps many rumoured to be thousands of Australians living in London and progressing my career further in London and outside of Australia.  Do you believe Australia suffers from any form of brain drain from its youth, its perhaps well educated youth, and if so do you think the government or the society in general, the Australian society is trying to bring us back to Australia?
PM:
I don’t quite know how I’m meant to answer that.  Look, I think the answer to that is that any society, any of our societies, that is societies that are essentially open and liberal and outward looking in opinion and view are going to from time to time go through periods of introspection and concern about losing our best and brightest.  I know that in particular areas, some of the scientific areas, there are some very well articulated arguments that suggest that Australia mightn’t be doing as well as we should be.  Some people say that marginal rates of taxation have an influence on people.  Others argue that we don’t reward those in the sciences and so forth as well as we should.  I think there is some force in that particular argument, although the evidence is not entirely conclusive.  I would have to say to you that I’m fairly alive to the possibility that we might be suffering.  I know that when we doubled the government support, doubled the government support for health and medical research in the, in last years’ budget quite a number of the medical institutes were able to tell me of people who as a result of that were coming back to Australia to share in the new opportunities that that given, so I think governments can have an influence on that.  I can’t sort of say yes or no to your question, but I can certainly say that’s something I follow very closely and where I think it’s happening to an unacceptable degree, I’d like to think I could do something about it.
Q:
I can’t really let you get away with what you said about the dual passport question.  May I just add a word?  It seems to me there are two really important questions here.  There is of course the business implications and globalisation does require you to get around the world and do things, but there is also a principle involved, it’s called equal treatment under the law.  We have 5 million people in Australia who are entitled and have dual passports and 13 million like myself also who aren’t.  Now I come from one of those families who dug the mines, rattled the chains on the convict boats, and was sent abroad by your predecessor governments in a variety of jobs so that I have children around the world and I have skilled I’ve gained which I can use around the world, but I cannot move freely around without surrendering my Australian passport.  And I think frankly to be told in the letter that, which I have received by this Commission that you have set up to study the question, that somehow someone who’d arrived two years ago would appreciate his Australian citizenship and his loyalty to Australia would be greater than mine so he can be trusted to have two passports, but I whose uncle was at Gallipoli and my grandfather died in the Australasian mine disaster in Victoria, and my great-great-grandfather who was on the convict ship, they don’t we don’t have a love for Australia?  I really resent that enormously and the strength of feeling from the sophisticated and more mature people of the country I think ought to be weighed more heavily and those people who say, oh well if you want to be an Aussie you can’t go around the world and do things.  I don’t believe it.  Thank you.
PM:
Well sir, I am one of the 13 million, I am in your situation.  I don’t think it’s got anything to do with the depth of passion for Australia, I don’t.  I think it’s a question of whether you open up something like that or whether you believe that allowing people as a voluntary act or particular convenience which I understand will acquire the nationality of another country as well as retaining the nationality of Australia I think does raise a difficult issue and there are strongly held views on both sides and you have articulated yours and it will obviously weigh upon us when we consider it but I have got to say that there are some strongly views in the opposite direction.
Q from Agent-General from WA:
Prime Minister I spend my days these days in a group of people who are trying to decide whether they want to belong to European Community as far as their money is concerned.  There are a group of people here who want to go in for the Euro, there is a group that don’t want to go in for it and there is a group in the middle that suggests that one of these days maybe they will.  Business people from Western Australia are saying to me you know that the devil is happening over there and I am dealing with that.  However, I was intrigued quite recently to read an article, albeit three or four weeks, when the news gets over here, that a proposition was submitted …
PM:  
I’ll tell Richard to buy you a fax.
Agent-General:
As you know Prime Minister I was a former Liberal member of (inaudible) one of my early lessons was about the necessity to stick to facts but that aside I was intrigued by the suggestion, I believe by the Prime Minister of  New Zealand, that perhaps consideration ought to be given to a common currency between our country and their’s.  My question is (a) do you agree with that and (b) when do you think it will occur?
PM:
Well, I think the current arrangements work just fine.
Q from Rob O’Connor from Perth, WA:
To finish on a positive note, as an expert, how do you rate Steve Waugh as a cricket captain compared with Mark Taylor?
PM:
Well, I think both of them have been incredibly successful.  They really have.  You have go to remember that the quality of cricket captains is sometimes judged unfairly, given the strength of the competition they have to lead the team against.  I think that Waugh’s captaincy in the World Cup was fantastic.  I think he  really showed steel and skill and determination which was terrific.  I think Taylor’s character has been marvellous.  I think the way he handled adversity, kept his cool, frankly acknowledged that his head could be on the block both as captain and as a member of the team, and the quality of his leadership in the West Indies was terrific.  So I think they are both fantastic blokes.  They have both been extremely successful captains and I wouldn’t seek for a moment to choose between them.
Can I just say one other thing.  There are no more questions but could I just take this opportunity because so many of them are here today to thank very warmly the Council for the Centenary for Federation, in particular Archbishop Peter Hollingworth, not only for the quality of the sermon you preached this morning but also for the leadership of his Council, so many of whom are here, have given to the celebration of the Centenary of Federation.  I think next year is going to be a fantastic commemoration by Australia.  I think the way they have set about organising it means that all Australians are going to feel involved and it is going to be a very unifying event.  I want to thank Peter and the Minister, Peter McGauran, and Tony Eggleton and Rodney Cavalier, who has brought great skill to the deputy chairmanship and Geoffrey Blainey and others who are here today who have done an absolutely job and I wouldn’t want this opportunity to go by without warmly thanking them.  
I am going to call on Mark Grainer, Chairman of the NAB, to propose the vote of thanks, but before Mark comes up, I want to just do one other small duty.  As an Australian in London we have come to know Phillip and Carol Flood very well over the last couple of years …..


E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Professor Lucas, many distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I’m very happy to participate in this little gathering and more happy that it forms part of Australia week in London because it adds another element to a remarkable week in which we who have come from Australia and you who, how should I put it, push the Australian cause on a daily basis in London, have been able to represent our country in a very positive and broadly based fashion.
I’m also delighted, of course, that the centre that has been incorporated into the college and was the recipient of the government’s support a short while ago and as a result of that and other support that it receives, will be able to broaden an understanding and a communication of Australia, Australian history, Australian literature, Australian ways and Australian customs, not only to the British but also to the rest of Europe, carries the
name of the very illustrious founder of the political party that it is my privilege to lead.  And in the totally bi-partisan spirit of this mission to the United Kingdom, I know that I won’t be transgressing on that in any way, in spending a moment to remark upon the very proper connection between the late Sir Robert Menzies and education and learning within Australia.
Menzies career, of course, was quite remarkable.  He was Prime Minister at the time of the outbreak of World War II.  It was he who intoned those never to be forgotten words by that generation when he said that it was his melancholy duty to inform the people of Australia that a state of war existed between Australia and Germany.  He was to last only two years in that job.  He spent four months of that period as a member of the Imperial
War Cabinet here in London.  And that was a remarkable period of time.  And out of that experience grew a number of myths including the quite extraordinary proposition that he wished to pursue a career in British politics.  One of the more absurd propositions that was brewed and brought about him.
But as an example of the special place that Menzies held then as Prime Minister of Australia and of the special role that Australia had at that time way back in the early years of World War II, it is often not know that one of the things that Menzies endeavoured to do was to in some way improve relations between the then neutral republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom.  And he journeyed one weekend to Dublin to see if President de Valera and then returned and it is recorded in his diary, called Dark and Hurrying days, how fruitless the mission proved to be given, as he recorded it, the intransigent attitudes held on both sides, and he underlined both sides of the argument.  But that little insight what, all those years ago, was an illustration of the properly independent role that the then Prime Minister of Australia, despite being a member of the Imperial War Cabinet was pursuing in properly trying to broker a better understanding between the two countries that have contributed so much to the modern Australia.
The Menzies connection with education of course is well remembered.  I think there were two great things that Sir Robert Menzies did for education.  The one that would be best known in this gathering of course would be the extraordinary increase arising out of the Murray Committee Report in the late 1950s in the level of commonwealth provision for tertiary education.  And it was through that support that university education came within the reach of hundreds of thousands of Australians who would otherwise have been denied through economic circumstances the opportunity of a university education.
The other great contribution that Menzies made to education was the way in which he ended one hundred years of discrimination against particularly Australian Catholics whose school system they had maintained without government support since Sir Henry Parks inaugurated the free compulsory and secular education system in New South Wales and it was replicated around Australia in the 19th century.  And that particular act which contributed so much to the breaking down of what were then still quite significant barriers and it led to the development of what is probably a wider variety of choice within primary and secondary education than is perhaps available in any other comparable country around the world.
So the name of Menzies is easily linked in the Australian political memory with education.  I’m delighted to be here today, because I believe very much in the cause of this centre.  And can I pay tribute to all of those who have been associated with the centre over the years, can I particularly acknowledge in this gathering the patient advocacy of the cause that I receive from time to time from both, from the two Michael’s.  From Michael Cook who you know, and another who some of you may not know, but you will
soon get to know extremely well and that’s Michael L’Estrange who is the High Commissioner Designate from Australia to the United Kingdom.  They were quietly persistent, always eloquent, always understanding and, along with a lot of other people, ultimately successful.  So, I do want to thank all of you.  I hope the centre fulfils its mission, I know it will.  It will interpret modern Australia to Londoners, to the British and to others, and in that way add very much to our capacity to present ourselves to the world.
Professor Lucas, thank you very much for having me here.  I appreciate very much, I have great pleasure in, as it were, formally marking the incorporation of the Centre into Kings College and I wish all who study here, all who teach here and all who are touched by this institution great good fortune.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Well, Mark, I thank you and all of your colleagues at the Macquarie Bank for organising this event, and I particularly acknowledge the presence of Bob Carr, the Premier of New South Wales and Philip Flood, the High Commissioner, and Michael L’Estrange, the High Commissioner Designate.
As you know, I am here along with others to mark the centenary of the passage through the British Parliament of the Act to which was annexed as a schedule the Constitution of the then to be formed Commonwealth of Australia.  But this morning, I wish to address my remarks most particularly to the economic state in Australia, the relevance of that to investors in the United Kingdom.  But I also in the process want to pay tribute to the contribution that the Macquarie Bank has made to the financial life of Australia and indeed the financial life of nations beyond Australia.  As you know, I’m sure all of you know, the Bank is named after the man who is often called the father of Australia, Governor Lachlan Macquarie, who had a profound influence on the early years of the colony of New South Wales and hence in a long term sense the development of the Commonwealth of Australia.  And the Macquarie Bank has done a lot to promote the memory of Governor Macquarie, and I’m pleased in particular to recognise today, the assistance that the Macquarie Bank has given to preserve the memory of Governor Macquarie it has generously donated $70,000 to the Australian Heritage Commission for urgent conservation work on Governor Macquarie’s Mausoleum on the Isle of Mull in Scotland.  And I know that Peter King, the Chairman of the Heritage Commission who’s here today, along with the government, is very grateful for that very generous philanthropic gesture by Macquarie Bank.
I can honestly say that I was present at the dinner that launched the Macquarie Bank, way back, I think, in 1984.  It was presided over by my then predecessor as Treasurer, Mr Keating, and also of course my predecessor as Prime Minister.  As political lore in Australia has it our careers have followed each other fairly closely.  But I don’t dwell on that, but I do remember the sense of optimism that surrounded that launch and the sense of hope and involvement in the opening up of the Australian financial system.  And Macquarie Bank has played a very conspicuous part in involving itself and contributing to the burgeoning and opening up of the Australian financial system.
Mark was kind enough to talk about the strength of the Australian economy.  And of course one of the great values of a visit such as this by me and my colleagues, and I have with me today the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, John Anderson, who is not only the Leader of the National Party in the Coalition government, but also the Minister for Transport and Regional Services.  And it’s an opportunity for both of us to reinforce to the British Financial community and I know that the Premier joins with me in doing this the importance of steady, consistent, orthodox economic policies which deliver strong growth, transparent corporate governance and also the prospect of ongoing economic reform.
And many of the things that we have tried to do over the last four years have really had in mind the belief that if you provide a predictable, stable, transparent climate for investment, there is really nothing you can do that beats that.  It’s not to say you shouldn’t in particular areas make particular changes.  But I find as I move around the world that more and more investors are looking for that kind of environment, they’re looking for a transparent corporate system, they’re looking for predictability in relations between the government and the corporate sector.
We set out very soon after we came into government to really update the financial deregulation that had been undertaken in the 1980s.  Much of it by the former government with our very strong support from Opposition.  And the Wallis inquiry recommended a number of changes, and those changes almost with one significant exception relating to further consolidation of the banking sector were implemented.  And they have been very effective in further opening up the financial sector in Australia.
But we also set about fixing the fundamentals.  We did inherit a very chaotic budget position.  And we are very proud of the fact that over the last five years we have repayed $40 billion of federal government debt.  And if we are successful in selling the remainder of Telstra by the year 2003 or 4 we can be free of net Commonwealth debt.  And our net debt position is in fact far in excess of the best that the OECD can offer in relation to other countries.  Retiring debt has been something of a preoccupation of the government because we do hold fairly strongly to the view that if you can provide a very stable fiscal base you do buttress yourself against budget and economic adversity if it may come along in the future.
We’ve also been very strongly committed to fundamental changes to our industrial relations system.  It’s been my personal belief and the belief of the government for a long time that one of the things that was needed in Australia was fundamental change to our industrial relations system.  Australia essentially inherited the craft union system from the United Kingdom.  I spoke with some feeling on Wednesday night of things that we inherited from Britain that were of value.  There were some things that Britain gave us that we would have not been so happy to receive, and the craft union system is one of them.  And we’ve worked fairly hard to sort of smooth the edges of it.  And in the process, great change has occurred.  We have no quarrel with unionism in Australia.  Membership of trade unions in Australia is something of personal choice and personal option.  But we have sought to have a freer industrial relations environment.  And we have achieved a great deal.  We would have liked to achieve more, but we have been unable to get those further changes through the Senate.  But we will keep trying, because they remain very important objectives of the government.
In the process of freeing our industrial relations system, we have in fact contributed to something that is very important for any community and that is real income gains.  And if people say to me what is the thing that you are most particularly proud of so far as it effects the average man and women in the street in Australia and I would say the fact that we have actually increased their take home pay, their real income position through a combination of through higher productivity, nominal wage gains have run ahead of inflation, but they have not had a deleterious impact because we have had productivity improvements.  And real wages have therefore gone up in a non-inflationary environment.  And in addition to that, of course, we have seen significant reductions in personal home mortgage interest rates, something always very sensitive and important in Australia, which for most of the last thirty or forty years has boasted the largest level of private home ownership in the western world, a legacy of the immediate post war year period under the Menzies Government.
So I paint, you will think, an optimistic picture of the Australian economy.  And I do so because there are many reasons to be optimistic and positive, economically about Australia.  There are differences, there are political divides on issues like tax reform, I don’t dwell on the politics of that divide at a gathering such as this this morning. But I do want to say that tax reform represents of course the single biggest economic reform that this or indeed any other government has carried out in Australia probably since World War II.  Most people have known in their hearts, sometimes not wanting to say it publicly, but nonetheless knowing it, that we have needed to reform Australia’s taxation system for at least the last twenty five years.  And those in the audience who are Australians and others who are familiar with Australia, and that probably gathers up most of you, will know that that’s true.  And there have been various attempts made in the past to bring it about, but none of them successful.  And it finally came into being last Saturday.  Now, I don’t take anything for granted in politics, I’m a cautious bloke by nature, but I do think it’s implementation has gone rather more smoothly than some predicted, and indeed I might almost say in a stage whisper some might have hoped.
Nonetheless, ladies and gentlemen, it is a huge reform.  It is not just restricted to getting rid of an old out of date indirect tax and replacing it with a more contemporary one, but it also involves very significant reductions in personal income tax.  It involves a restructuring of the capital gains tax system, effectively halving it.  It reduces the corporate company, the corporate tax rate from 36 cents in the dollar to 34 this year, going to 30 cents in the dollar next year.  It also contains a number of other changes such as effecting pension, tax exempt pension funds which will make investment in Australia hugely more attractive.
Now this reform, can I say to you, is important in its own right.  But can I say it is also important in another sense; I think if a nation, a government and a nation, can embrace a reform of this kind, and if as I hope and believe that it will be, embrace it successfully, it must give to that government and that nation greater confidence in their capacity to embrace other reforms in other areas that are necessary.  We hear a lot of debate in the world about reform fatigue.  You have no doubt heard it here in Britain, I hear it in Europe, I hear it in the United States.  And I can understand why people say that.  And I know as a serving political leader that communities don’t like too much change.  We are all by nature comfortable with what we have now, particularly if it’s reasonably good.  And the natural instinct is when you are undertaking certain change to say, well, that’s enough for a while, we’ll just let everything settle down for a while and then we’ll have a look at some more change in a couple of years time.  And it sounds seductive and it sounds logical, but of course it never works that way.  You can’t do that when you’re running a corporation and you can’t do that when you’re running a government.  And if you live in a globalised world you really don’t have the option of marking time.  It’s a point I tried to make when I gave an address to the Australian people on the eve of the introduction of the tax system.  That in the world in which Australia now lives we really have a choice.  And the choice is not between marking time and just enjoying everything we have now, the choice is really between undertaking further reforms or sliding backwards.  It’s that kind of world, and it’s the sort of thing that you have to face and it’s the sort of thing that governments have to face.
But in the process, of course, we have a responsibility as a government to communicate to the people the social and personal benefits of economic reform.  Economic reform is not some kind of you know, spiritual end in itself, it’s anything but.  It is simply a mechanism to deliver higher living standards and greater social contentment.  We hear a lot from time to time about the peace dividend.  People say now that there is no longer a cold war we shouldn’t have to spend as much money on defence. The reality, of course, is that in some parts of the world the end of the cold war has produced a somewhat less stable situation than a more stable situation, but that’s another matter.  But I would like to see governments talking more about, not only here in Australia but I guess around the world, particularly those governments that follow the same broad approach to managing the economy as we in Australia do, we should talk about the social dividends of strong economic growth.  The four per cent that we have had for the last five years is an impressive figure and it has a particular resonance in an audience such as this.  But the more important social statistic is that we have 710,000 more people in work in Australia now than we had four years ago.  That we have larger take home pay cheques.  That we have a lower level of youth unemployment, a much lower level of youth unemployment.  That we now have a method of matching the jobless with the available jobs largely run by the private sector which is working infinitely better than the old government run and government monopolised system that it replaced.  Now, they are some of the social dividends that you get from very strong economic growth.
Now, can I say to all of you, ladies and gentlemen, that as you turn your gaze towards Australia, particularly, but not only, as a potential world financial centre it offers attractions, I think, without parallel around the world.  It is clearly a stable democracy.  One of only fewer than ten that have remained continually democratic through the 20th century.  It has a highly skilled workforce.  It has a very multilingual workforce.  There are 800,000  Australians who speak an Asian language.  Teaching of Japanese is particularly widespread in Australian schools.  And the way in which Australians of an Asian Heritage have contributed in a very positive way and have nourished the social life and the business life of Australia, and most particularly the city of Sydney, been one of those things that have made a profoundly positive impact on our community.  So we do have in that personal sense a lot of assets that perhaps some of you may not be as well aware of.  We of course have a very stable legal system.  We have well supervised banking institutions, the level of prudential regulation is appropriate and reliable.  We have clear rules of corporate governance.  And of course we have a government and a business community and I believe many other opinion formers in Australia very strongly committed to the process of further economic reform to deliver further social dividends to our people.
The cost of living in the major cities in Australia compares more than favourably with the cost of living in many of the major cities of Asia against which we must compete.  And of course you wouldn’t expect me to end a sales pitch about the appeal and the beauty and the attractiveness, not only as I look at Mr Carr, the city of Sydney, which of course happens to by my own home city as well, but also of course all the other capital cities of Australia, the enviable, absolutely the enviable lifestyle that Australia has.
Now, if that is a sales pitch from a prejudiced Prime Minister, then of course I plead guilty on every count.  But it is also not an exaggeration, because when you add it all up, there aren’t many countries in the world of which those things could be said without serious fear of contradiction.
So as I come to the end of this quite remarkable week here in London in which we have had as a group an opportunity of not only the wonderful hospitality of our British hosts but also in so many other ways to present, perhaps for the first time for some, represent to other who know us well and perhaps change the views of still others who thought they knew us well but didn’t really, been able to present Australia in a very positive and forward looking light.  It is a country which values its history.  It is a country which is proud of those things of value that is has inherited, particularly from Britain and Ireland but also from other nations in Europe.  But it is equally a country which is very much of the world of the 21st century and a country in a quite remarkable way brings together those European connections with an Asian Pacific environment.  And those things together make it a remarkably attractive country with which to do business and it is lead by a government that is very much in the business of seeking business investment in Australia.  British capital has always been welcome in Australia, it always will be.  It has contributed marvellously to our development in the past.  And we hope that will long prove to be the case in the future.
Thank you.
MASTER OF CEREMONIES:
I think the Prime Minister, in a sprit of openness and transparency is happy to take a few questions from you before he has to leave.  Is there anybody who would like to follow anything up in particular?
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Charles Nelson, Macquarie Equities.  I think a lot of people were very surprised a couple of years ago in the Asian crisis when Australia proved itself to be so fleet of foot in the flexibility of its economy.  The question I’ve got is how did that, what did that do to your standing within the Asian region, in terms of how do they see you now?  Do they see you as part of their region, or as a kind of swing economy, which is more aligned maybe to the European or North American area?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I would hope that they and I believe they see us as really being a bit of each.  One of the things I tried to do when I became Prime Minister was not in any way to shift our focus away from Asia, but to make the point that this country has always had important economic and other linkages with the rest of the world.  Perhaps I can explain it by illustration.  Japan is Australia’s best customer.  Over the last few years, Korea has been of our very best customers.  And those two countries together take a powerful amount of export product from Australia.  Yet, our outward investment, 70 per cent of Australia’s outward investment goes to Britain and the United States.  Fifty three per cent of our trade goes to East Asia, yet when the Asian economic collapse you are speaking of hit us, it was our capacities, particularly through a flexible exchange rate to shift a lot of our exports to North America and the United States, North America and Europe that helped carry us through that Asian downturn.  I think that experience illustrated better than perhaps any speech could, the point I try to make is that it is a mistake to pigeon hole Australia.  This idea that you choose between your history and your geography in making your linkages with the rest of the world is quite misplaced.  A European association does not diminish the value of our association with Asia, I think it adds value to it.  The reality is that we can talk and deal with the countries of Asia in a way that perhaps the British and other Europeans and the Americans can’t because we are not, although we are seen as having close connections we are Australian and therefore we are seen as different.  I’m not saying better I’m just saying different.  And I think that multiplicity of connection adds value to what we bring to Asia, rather than diminishing it.  And I think the way that we have been able to slightly re-balance, somewhat re-balance our relationships with the world I think are important.  But it is very, very wrong from an Australian interest perspective to always see these things in terms of choice.  I mean you can be involved in the Asian Pacific region and still preserve links with other parts of the world, that’s the point I seek to make.  And those linkages will add value to that Asian involvement.  Just as our Asian involvement will add value to those linkages.  They are mutually reinforcing they are not competing.
QUESTION:
Euan Harkness, Barclay’s Bank.  I mean this is following on from your last statement.  Is what we saw where Australia was able to grow at the time of a crisis, which, traditionally in the [inaudible], is it a product of the net, you know that we have had sustained growth in the States, and that Australia benefit from the net, as you say from a weaker currency so, in the States and in the UK that they were able to identify suppliers, reliable suppliers at a cheaper price.  Is this what we are seeing and is this if we ever got into a horrendous situation of inflation again the world that the net would act as an extremely efficient conductor of information.  And consequently, where you have been to cut down your debt exposure that that would pay dividends in that environment.  Hopefully we won’t be there.  But don’t you think that we have seen the first effect of the net where Australia really benefited?
PRIME MINISTER:
That’s, I think that played a part.  I mean the message out of that experience with the Asian downturn was that our interaction, or the way in which we interacted with the rest of the world was a lot more flexible and effective than many of us would have expected.  I have to say that I was very agreeably surprised with the extent to which we were able to sidestep it.  I mean I believe quiet legitimately that a lot of the changes we have made gave the rest of the world confidence in the stability of Australia, side by side with other countries that weren’t so economically stable. I think all of those things did help.  But the speed with which we were able, and I think the net played a major role.  I think that is a very fair observation.
QUESTION:
Scott McCloch from Jade Absolute.  You mentioned economic reform repeatedly.  Following the very major tax changes, what items are next on the agenda in terms of economic reform?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we do need, in my view, to persevere with further reform of the industrial relations system and we will do that.  We will continue, we’re in receipt very shortly of a major report led by a number of people outside the government in the field of Australia’s social welfare system.  We have a well established and bi-partisan view that Australia must have a social security safety net.  There is no serious debate in Australia any more about that, and that’s a very good thing.  But there are always better ways of delivering the social security safety net, not involving any withdrawal of the government from the basic obligation of providing help for those who are deserving and merit assistance.  They are two areas.  We of course intend to persevere with our plans to fully privatise Telstra.  It remains, in my view, inappropriate that a government should own 50.1% of a major telecommunications asset.  I think it is a misapplication of public sector investment worth more than $50 billion.  I think that is how we have to explain it and translate it to the Australian public, especially I can’t imagine I need to debate very strongly in an audience such as this the merit of the further privatisation of Telstra.  I mean it really is a choice as to whether you put $50 plus billion of public money in a telephone company, perhaps that’s a little facetious, but only a little, into a telecommunications, a great telecommunications asset.  Are you going to put it in that or are you going to put it into something else.  And I think it’s infinitely preferable to put it into something else. And I’m sure that those who have invested in that great company would feel the same way.  I mean, I think it’s a very good company.  It’s extremely well run at both Chief Executive and Director level.  And I think the logical next step is for its full privatisation.  
Now I mentioned a few things.  There are some other things that I’ve got in mind but I don’t think now is quite the time to announce them.  But I will in due course, because once you, returning to the theme of my speech, you keep moving on to the next.  You don’t, you can’t mark time.  You either go forward or you go backwards.  And the fact that we have been able to get tax reform up gives the government and I believe the community the confidence to continue the reform process.
[Ends]


Good evening.
Now that the new tax system has begun, you will have noticed that some things have risen in price, some have gone down and others have remained about the same.  This is because of several things.  You would be aware that many items are GST free, such as basic foods, most health and education services, eligible childcare and local government rates.  In addition to this, the old sales tax with all its hidden and complex rates, some as high as 12%, 22% or more have been abolished with the introduction of the GST.  
To help keep costs down in the country, diesel for heavy transport has been cut by 24 cents a litre.  These improvements have benefited consumers, just as business will enjoy cost savings when they have the GST they pay refunded on things like fuel, postage and telephone calls. 
It is reassuring to know that there is someone to watch over the introduction of the GST to ensure that shoppers are treated fairly and that savings to business are being passed on.  
The government’s consumer watch dog, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has been given strong powers to ensure that consumers are protected.  The commission can take court action against companies who exploit consumers with penalties of up to 10 million dollars.  Those who break the law may also be required to give refunds to consumers and to publish corrections.  Already the ACCC is monitoring more than 3 million prices across the country and across a wide range of goods and services.  The new tax system is good for Australia.  The ACCC is working to ensure that it is good for consumers as well. 
Good night.


E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much, Mr Ram and General Sethna, High Commissioners, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I do value a great deal the opportunity of addressing this lunch, sharing some thoughts of mine about the relationship between our two societies and also directing some remarks to future political and economic opportunities.
Our relationship has, on occasions, been one which I believe both of us have taken a little too much for granted.  And the time has certainly arrived to inject some new vigour and some new energy into the relationship between our two nations and our two communities.  We are very different but we also have many things in common.  We share much history.  We share some common passions to which Mr Ram has referred.  We share in our capacity to interact in the English language a very special bond.  We have a shared love of democracy and we have engaged in shared sacrifices in defence of freedom.
As one who was still at school when India received her independence in 1947, I have for all of the time that I have been actively interested in and followed and later involved in politics, admired the commitment of the Indian people to democracy and the rule of law.  For a nation of such size, such complexity and such daily challenges to remain faithful to the democratic tradition and the rule of law over those years is a remarkable tribute to the strength of its society and a remarkable tribute to its people.
It is true, as Mr Ram said, that the people to people links between societies are always important.  Some of you may not know that recently Australia passed the United Kingdom to be second only to the United States as a country in which Indian students of all kinds chose to undertake their instruction.  There are between 100,000 and 150,000 Australians of Indian heritage.  Several thousand of them live in my own constituency of Bennelong in Sydney.  And over the years, the personalities of Indian and Australian sport, particularly, but not only, cricket, have become well known in all, in both of our societies.  And Mr Ram, let me assure you that as the Australian Prime Minister, I am ever mindful of the reality that wheels turn when it comes to sporting competition and the technological capacity of Indian participants in cricket and other sports is well respected in Australia.
I come to your country at a time when both of our economies are doing well.  They are different in size, they are different in emphasis.  And the social challenges vary greatly.  The Australian economy now for the last five years has enjoyed economic growth of four per cent or more.  We have in fact enjoyed our longest uninterrupted period of economic growth since the late 1960s.  And in many ways the Australian economy now is stronger and more soundly based than it was in the 1960s.  Because it is less protected and it showed during the time of the Asian economic collapse, which was particularly damaging to countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia and Korea, it showed then a great capacity and a great flexibility and it was able to divert exports from disappearing markets in those parts of the world to both North America and Europe.
We have undertaken a very significant number of reforms.  The most recent and the biggest of those was taxation reform.  Commencing the weekend before last, we have revamped the entirety of the Australian taxation system through the introduction of a broad based goods and services tax applying at a uniform rate, accompanied by  significant reductions in personal income tax, major cuts in company tax and a virtual halving of the capital gains tax.  All of these reforms and the other elements of taxation change are designed to make the Australian economy more competitive.  Designed to recognise, as I know India does, that we are now all part of a globalised world economy.  And the steps that have been taken by Indian governments during the last decade to open up the Indian economy, to attract more foreign investment, to participate, particularly, but not only through the burgeoning information technology industry in the growth of the world economy is an earnest of your government and your business community’s understanding of the need that in the modern world none of us have the option of marking time or standing still.  We must either - through ongoing reforms and ongoing liberalisation - take advantage of what the globalised economy offers or alternatively we slide backwards.  That is a decision, that is something we have recognised in Australia and I know that it is something that you also have recognised in India.
It is true, as Mr Ram said, that given the size of our economies the trade between our two communities at present is modest.  And that is one of the reasons why I attach such great importance to giving new vigour and energy to the relationship.  Of course decisions are made to invest by entrepreneurs and by those who control private capital.  And it is not the philosophy of my government to direct those areas where investments might be made by Australian companies.  But it is certainly the philosophy of my government to facilitate as much as it possibly can and most particularly through pursuing policies that encourage investment both from Australia and into Australia to do all we can to promote the right climate for expanding trade and other opportunities.
As a nation we have progressively reduced our tariff levels.  Sometimes, as happens in all societies, there is domestic political criticism of that.  But in the long run we recognise that if we are to get the greatest benefits of globalisation we must all work together whether we are in India or in Australia to reduce to the maximum extent possible the trade barriers between different countries.  India and Australia have a number of things in common on the world trade front; we both have an interest in breaking down some of the protective barriers that still exist through the European Union and the protective barriers which are supported by some of the trading activities of the United States.  We can make common cause in relation to a number of those issues.  We both have an interest in there being a new world trade organisation round.  Once again it is a question of not being able to stand still and mark time, we either make further progress on these fronts or we find that we are going to go backwards.
In the talks that I have had with your Prime Minister, with your Foreign Minister, and I know these issues will be further canvassed when I see your Finance Minister and your Commerce Minister this afternoon, I have had the opportunity of conveying the interest that I have as Leader of the Australian Government in adding as many dimensions as I can to the relationship between our two communities.  We should never make the mistake of just seeing a relationship in terms of shared history and shared experiences in pursuit of common objectives.  But they are very important.  We should never make the mistake of simply seeing a relationship in terms of the economic of trade.  That can be a mistake even if the trade relationship is very strong.  And nor of course should we lose sight of the fact that we all have an interest in the, strategically, in the stability of the regions in which we live and interact.  I know the concern which is felt by the Indian Government concerning events in Fiji where unfortunately Fijians of Indian heritage are in danger of being denied their democratic right to participate along with Fijians of other heritage in the governing of that country.  And the Prime Minister and I have discussed that matter at some length and have agreed to have further discussions in the weeks ahead.
We of course, that is India and Australia, are members of the Commonwealth.  And your Prime Minister and I are members of a high level Commonwealth group charged at the Durban meeting of Heads of the Government with a responsibility of seeing if more purpose and direction can be given to the activities of the Commonwealth in between meetings of Heads of Government.  And that is an issue that he and I and other members of that group to be chaired by the South African President will have an opportunity of discussing when we meet in New York at the Millennium Summit being organised by the Secretary General in the early weeks of September.
India and Australia have not always looked at foreign policy issues from the same perspective.  We have had our differences in the past and it is pointless to pretend otherwise.  However, even at a time of difficulty and stress in the relationship, there has been a common thread of respect and understanding.  And that is born out of the fact that we have similar institutions and we have a similar respect for the vigorous political exchange which is part and parcel of your domestic political life and also for the democratic way and for the strength and integrity of our judicial systems.
I know that in recent times, India has attracted the attention of some very significant Australian businessmen and investors.  It is a measure of the growing respect for the economic achievements of your country.  It is also of course a recognition of the global character of the economic environment in which all of us live.  And I would expect that those activities and those responses will be built upon and duplicated as time goes by.
But as an Australian Prime Minister leading a country which is endowed with a very high living standard as well as a very strong growth rate, I am conscious that your country continues to grapple with major social challenges.  And we do endeavour to do as best we can to participate in international efforts to help you address them.  And in that regard I’ve been very pleased to note in my discussions with your government that we are coming close to finalising an aid programme in relation to HIV Aids which will provide Australian assistance of some $18.5 million over a five year period.  And I have also indicated to your Foreign Minister further Australian assistance in relation to the natural calamities that have hit India in relation to drought and typhoon.  And my wife this morning had the opportunity at one of the medical centres here in New Delhi of observing the marvellous work that is being done to assist people who are desperately in need of basic medical attention.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a visit which I have looked forward to.  It is a visit that does come after an absence as the General said, of eleven years since Bob Hawke came here as Prime Minister in 1989.  It is a visit that I know will be reciprocated when your Prime Minister visits Australia for the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting to be held in Brisbane at the end of next year.  I hope it will be seen by our Indian friends here today as a measure of the determination of the government to put new vigour into the relationship.  I was asked at a news briefing last night by one of those present of what evidence did I now have after being here a day and a half of the new vigour that had been put into the relationship.  I felt like facetiously  replying that I thought I was making progress as a Prime Minister, but I didn’t think I could achieve all of that in a day and a half.  But the point I sought to make to him and I would make to you is that in the end it is up to the businessmen and women, it is up to the investors, it is up to the companies, it is up to the people of two societies as to whether or not ultimately the relationship acquires new vigour and new momentum.  But governments do have a responsibility.  They do have a responsibility to lead, they have a responsibility to symbolise a determination to change and improve a relationship.  And I hope my visit is seen in that light.  We are very much a government and a country which is conscious of our interaction, not only with the Asia Pacific region, but of course with North Asia and the Indian Ocean area.  I am frequently asked at news conferences in Australia, in Europe, in America and in Asia, I am frequently asked about the balance of Australia’s relationships with different parts of the world as if it were not possible to have a close and intimate relationship with a series of nations in the Asia Pacific region and at the same time preserve close and intimate relations with the nations of North America and many of the nations of Europe.
International relations is not something that is constantly involving competition between levels of involvement.  It is possible to add value to a relationship with one part of the world because you have a relationship with another part of the world.  Who in this audience could deny that the relationship between India and Australia is immensely strengthened by our capacity to freely discourse in a common language.  And who would deny that our location in the Asia Pacific region does not add value to our association with the countries of North America, and who could seriously deny that our relationships with the nations of the immediate north to us don’t add some value to our relationship with countries in Europe whose understanding of those societies is less than ours.  Foreign affairs is very much a process of adding, constantly adding value to your relationship on the basis of other experiences as well as on the basis of a shared history.  And it is very much in that spirit that I have come here to India, a country I have long respected and admired.  A country whose democratic traditions are both profound and admirable and also a country whose burgeoning economic strength is to be respected, is to be understood and I know will be the source of continued social and economic nourishment to the people of India in the years ahead.
I thank you very warmly for your welcome.
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, after our nuclear tests in 1998, there was an expression of very strong disappointment of India in Australia.  In fact the sentiment was strong enough to have impacted on business also.  With this visit of yours [inaudible].
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, sir, there was a strong reaction.  You ask are we over it; we have moved on.  We had a view, we don’t withdraw that view, but we move on from it and we recognise that our relationship means more than just dwelling on one particular issue.  But equally we do not lightly express views about nuclear testing.  And we did not express them carelessly or without deliberation.  But we have moved on and I am assuredly here as a mark of the government’s desire to strengthen the relationship and although the issue of the comprehensive test ban treaty has certainly been mentioned in all of the discussions I have had with all of your leaders, including the Leader of the Opposition, it is not something that has dominated the discussions but it has been properly dealt with.  So we have certainly moved on from there.
QUESTION:
Thank you.  Mr Prime Minister, Australia has been at the forefront of the talks for the liberalisation in agricultural trade.  There are many in India who also believe that it is in our long term interest to be with Australia in this effort at liberalising agricultural trade.  But there is also sensitivity and apprehension on the food security front.  That there is this feeling that for a large country such as India we need a certain degree of self sufficiency of controls to feel secure in our food needs.  Is there any way that [inaudible] there can be [inaudible] such that we can actually get onto the board realising our untapped potential in agriculture while attending to some of these concerns?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don’t think there is a permanent tension, and I don’t even know there is necessarily a short term tension between food security and a greater liberalisation of world trade in agriculture.  The common complaint of countries like India and Australia is that the world trade system is loaded against us.  You can be penalised if you do certain things in manufacturing if you are European or an American but if the same thing happens in agriculture, you can get away with what we describe in Australia as blue murder.  And we don’t think that is very fair and we are working very hard to change it, as head of the Cairns group.  I had some discussions with your Ministers about food issues, and it is true, the point you make is true, it is also true, according to those discussions, that distribution and transport and storage remain very significant elements separately from the question of sufficiency.  I don’t myself see any incompatibility between our goals and the concerns you have about security.  I mean, we do understand self evidently because of the size of your population and the challenges that you have.  But I don’t think there is any ultimate tension between the two goals.
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, you have spoken briefly about economic reforms that Australia has been doing perhaps in the last fifteen years or so.  You didn’t mention among those reforms the issue of privatisation.  I am aware that you have had good experience in privatisation in Australia.  In fact you are probably one of the few countries which has privatised all your main airports apart from Sydney.  Would you tell us something about what kind of political problems you faced in privatisation programmes and how you solved them with particular comments on airports.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, sir, I have to say to you we have had, we have done very well on privatisation up to a point.  We have certainly privatised all of our major airports except Sydney and Sydney will be privatised once we resolve some matters relating to a further airport, whether it be in the West of Sydney in a place called Badgery’s Creek or whatever, but once that issue is resolved, I can assure you that we will be seeking to secure the privatisation of Sydney airport.  The major telecommunications company in Australia, Telstra, is owned 50.1% by the government and the rest by the private sector, by many hundreds of thousands of individual Australians.  Australia now has the largest individual share ownership of any country in the world.  It has gone past the United State proportionately.  And this is very largely due to the part privatisation of Telstra.  Now we have run into a road block at the moment because of the obstinacy, I have to be careful seeing as I’m outside of Australia, the language that I use, because of the resistance of the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats in the Senate.  And in other words, they are being stupid and they won’t let it go through.  And we think if they did then many more Australians could own shares in Telstra.  We see no value at all in a telecommunications company being half owned by the government.  It’s about a $50 billion Australian asset being invested, public sector investment being tied up in a telecommunications company.  And we can retire a lot more debt, although our debt levels are at very manageable proportions now.  The former government, with our assistance in Opposition I might hastily add, did privatise the former government owned Commonwealth Bank and the level of privatisation, at a state government level, of electricity supply has been quite extensive in some states, not so extensive in others.
We are not fanatical privatisers.  We are sensible privatisers.  We don’t, for example, intend to privatise the post office.  We think there is a role there.  We think the government should have a limited but strategic role in the provision and operation of basic services.  We think we have the balance right and it will be in complete and marvellous equilibrium when we sell the remaining part of Telstra.
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, it is a privilege to be able to address you.  I have visited Australia on quite a few occasions as a tourist and hope to be going there in the latter half of September and be over there.  But in each of these visits the first word that I was taught was g’day.  So, g’day to you.  And I really hope that many more Indians will learn more about Australia and see what a fantastic country it is to visit.  Mr Prime Minister, I have a sixteen year old daughter and so she asked me [inaudible] so that I can ask you a riddle, she says, what’s the difference between an American bison and Australian bison.  So I was told that yes, one is a large animal with horns and the other is something that you wash your hands in.  So I hope we can all share that form of language and there is much to do to communicate and understand each other better so that some day we should maybe be thinking of now going to university and certainly choose Australia. 
So [inaudible] my question is, as you mentioned earlier, that students from India are choosing Australia to study for all the really good institutions they have there.  Would you see how to encourage educational institutions in Australia, see how they could set up programmes here in India and in that way with Indian institutions as well, and we would then see a much greater communication that [inaudible] this could lead to very good relationships as well.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much.  Our universities of course have a very large degree of autonomy and we don’t seek to tell them what they should do with the resources they receive from the government and the resources they are increasingly receiving from the private sector.  And like all countries we are seeking to maximise the opportunities for the private sector to contribute.  I do believe that the, in the last year the focus that there has been in Australia on opportunities in India has inevitably meant two things.  It has not only meant an increase in private sector focus on it, can I underline how important clarity and consistency and corporate governance and the predictability and the independence of the legal system and the speed of bureaucratic responses, how important they are in decisions made by entrepreneurs on whether they are going to invest in this country or that.  I mean one of the things that we found in the Asian economic collapse was that approaches that were seen as getting very quick results, but perhaps lacked a bit of transparency ended up comparing very unfavourably with the consistent rules of governance and clarity that we think exists in Australia and I think it is very important that that always be maintained.
Now, in relation to the universities, I think there will be a natural inclination.  And when you are coming off the base of shared language and many shared traditions I think the renewed interest in and appreciation of the opportunities that exist in India are going to lead to a natural momentum for change and improvement and extension of interest by Australian education interests in your country.  I mean it is no accident, of course, that there are so many Indian students.  I think it is something like 9,000 studying in Australia now.  That ought to grow exponentially and it’s grown as a result of the activity largely supported and encouraged by the government but largely is the initiative.
And as I say it is not just universities but it is tourism training courses, TAFE course, a whole raft of activities where our capacity to take more students is unlimited almost and they are very welcome.  They are made to feel welcome and they are welcome.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Sir Roden Cutler, Ted Kenna, Keith Payne, John and Valerie Howse, Your Worship the Mayor of Orange, my parliamentary colleague, Peter Andren, the Federal Member for Calare, Mr Russell Turner, the State Member for Orange, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I think it is a wonderful way to mark this very commemorative, very important, commemorative stamp issue by Australia Post.  To assemble the local community in which the first recipient as an Australian of the Victoria Cross lived the greater part of his life.  We’ve seen a marvelous representation a few moments ago of the circumstances in which Neville Howse won his Victoria Cross in South Africa.  And we’ve also been reminded, by reason of this ceremony taking place here in the beautiful city of Orange, of how there were three phases in his life. 
There was the phase that won him the Victoria Cross.  There was the phase of his life that involved service in the medical profession here in the city of Orange, as well as in the Australian military forces, and there was also the phase of his life that involved public service as Mayor and later as the Federal Member and as a Minister in a number of portfolios in the Bruce Page government. 
It was a very rich and courageous life but the same of course can be said ladies and gentlemen of all of those 96 Australians who won the Victoria Cross, 91 of them serving in Australian units and five of them serving in British units and each of them is a remarkable tale of valour.  And this great gathering today is I think indicative of the growing pride and the growing affection that Australians all over our great country have for the past achievements of our heroes. 
We do fling the words “famous” and “heroic” around rather freely, sometimes a little too freely.  But today it is no hyperbole, it is no exaggeration, it is no flight of rhetoric to say that we are in the presence of three famous and heroic men.
Those who sacrificed their lives defending Australian freedom.  Those who put their lives on the line with reckless indifference to the outcomes, which you have to do in order to win a Victoria Cross, deserve our very special honour and reverence.
A grateful nation, a free nation, cannot heap enough praise and respect on those who have distinguished themselves with such incredible valour on the battlefields.  You examine the story of each of them, three here today, one Neville Howse represented by his son, you examine the stories, one we’ve been told in South Africa.  One during the Syrian campaign in the case of Sir Roden Cutler.  Then Ted Kenna’s courageous exploits in New Guinea and the last Victoria Cross winner, Keith Payne, who’s magnificent and courageous exploits in the jungles and the fierce battles and exchanges of Vietnam.
Each of them is separate but each of them a very special story.  Each of them returns from their military service to give in different ways to their communities.  In sporting, in community, in ambassadorial, in community and in vice regal service. 
It matters not in defence to enumerate every single post military deed of these men.  But rather to acknowledge having done their duty beyond the reasonable call of any for their country on the battlefield, they came back, they rebuilt their lives, they raised families, they gave of their best to their communities, in one case very specially to a sport, beloved of many Australians, and together they represent the very best in the Australian tradition.  They were loyal.  They were brave.  They were indifferent to their own interests.  They helped save a very grateful nation.  They deserve the honour that is commemorated today.  Each of them, along with the other 92, deserve a special place in the history and the national psyche and affection of this country.
There is something very special about a Victoria Cross.  To me and I think to every Australian it stands above every other single award that might be given.  It is greater than an office that people might hold for a period of time.  It is greater than a title.  It is a greater than an order of corporate Australia or sporting Australia can give.  It really is the greatest honour of all, because what is respects is the willingness of an Australian to sacrifice, if necessary everything, in the service of his fellow country men and women.
And that is what we have done today.  We have honoured those 96 Australian men.  We hope and we pray that the circumstances will never arise again in which awards of this kind are given.  And as we honour these men today we reflect on what their deeds have done for us.  We reflect on the sacrifices of those who died in the defence of this country.  We have a very rich and special military tradition.  A tradition not seeking to impose our will on others but merely to defend what we believe is right and just and that has always been the Australian military tradition and everyone of those 96 were doing just that. 
A grateful nation again says thank you.  We are so grateful that we have 3 of them amongst us today.  We feel a special contact with the history of this country.  A particular presence of that history to have the three of them amongst us and we honour them in a very special way, in a very Australian way.  We thank you, all of you, for the great commitment you’ve made, the great mateship you’ve displayed under fire to your fellow Australians. 
And I want particularly also to thank Graeme John and those in Australia Post.  I want to thank the Headmaster of School Councillors of the Kinross Wolaroi School.  I want to thank the cadet units for the magnificent job they did.  I want to thank the Mayor for the magnificent weather that he provided.  He tells me that it’s his own personal gift and I want to thank you my fellow Australians for turning up in your hundreds, indeed thousands, to be a very special part of this important ceremony and to share for a moment on this beautiful Sunday morning an opportunity to honour, through the presence of three of them, 96 of the very greatest Australians of all.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………..
Well thank you very much Mr President for that very very warm welcome.  To David Johnston, the President of the Western Australian Division, and my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I say that I really am very pleased to be at this gathering of Liberal Party supporters and friends in the Stirling Division because I see the next federal election, and it’s not for another 18 months, and I know you’re going to have an intervening state election that’s very important for the future of Western Australia.  But I see the next federal election very much in terms of the Liberal Party on the front foot fighting to take back some seats from the Labor Party that it won at the 1998 election.   It won’t just be a question of defending the seats that the Liberal and National Parties hold throughout Australia, but it will also present us with an opportunity of taking the fight to the Labor Party in seats such as Stirling, a seat that we do need to win at the next federal election, a seat that we can win at the next federal election, and with your assistance see it again represented in the Federal Parliament by a Liberal.
This weekend will precede the Labor Party’s national conference.  And whenever political parties have national conferences it’s an opportunity for the nation to do a little bit of political stocktaking to make a few comparisons.  And we are now just over half way through our second term in government.  And it is possible to reflect for a few moments as we should on what the government has done, on what people said we couldn’t do and what we have achieved against what seemed on occasions to be impossible odds.  And when I think back over the last six months, and when my federal colleagues who are present here tonight think back over the last six months, there were occasions when it looked as though everything was against us.  The last six months in particular was as I said the time of our greatest political peril and difficulty in relation to the introduction of the new tax system.  It was easy to run a scare a day, it was easy for Kim Beazley and Simon Crean to get on the television and say the pensioners are going to be worse off, the wage and salary earners are going to be worse off, everything’s going up by 10%, the whole nation’s going to be ruined.  And that is basically what the Labor Party has done for the last two years.  The Labor Party has played the politics of fear and negativism.  The Labor Party hoped and prayed the GST would fall over on the 1st of July.  They wanted it to hurt Australia.  They wanted it to be a disappointment.  They wanted it to be a disaster.  They didn’t care about the Australian national interest.  They only cared about their own political interest.  
Now of course you all know that that didn’t turn out to be the case.  And we have seen so far, and I’m by nature still a fairly cautious bloke, that we have seen so far the relatively smooth and steady and professional introduction of what is the biggest ever change to Australia’s taxation system.  There hasn’t been an institutional change to the Australian economy since World War II that matches the introduction of the new taxation system.  We’ve not only taken away an old fashioned indirect tax system and replaced it with a modern one, we’ve not only introduced the largest reductions in personal income tax ever, we’ve not only introduced for the first time since the introduction of uniform taxation as a war time measure in 1942, a method of revenue sharing which will give to the states of Australia access to a growth tax and which will enable them to have access to growing amounts of revenue in the years ahead in order to better fund their responsibilities in areas such as public hospitals, government schools, roads and police, which are the bread and butter responsibilities of state governments. 
We’ve not only done all of those things but we have also introduced changes to the tax system that will ensure that more people are required to pay their fair share of the taxation burden.  And we’ve also introduced a taxation system that is going to make our exporters more competitive.  It’s going to provide cheaper fuel than otherwise would have been the case in the rural areas of Australia.  And I could go on.  I could talk about the halving of capital gains tax, I could talk about the fact that in two years time we’ll have one of the lowest corporate tax rates in the world falling from 36 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar.  I could remind the self funded retirees and others here tonight who pay provisional tax that we’re abolishing provisional tax.  I could talk about the many other changes that are going to make Australia a more attractive country in which to invest. 
But if you aggregate it all together it does represent an enormous change.  And the good news both economically and politically that I have for you tonight is that it’s now a reality.  And we’re no longer dealing in allegation and supposition.  We’re no longer having the Labor Party saying it’s a disaster and we replying saying it’s not a disaster and people not knowing the reality.  They know now that Labor’s being lying for the last two years.  They know now the Australian people that the Labor Party set out to destroy, to instill fear, to encourage despair, and to embark upon a very negative campaign.  The Labor Party has been caught red handed trying to talk down Australia’s future, and the Labor Party deserves all the embarrassment that it is now experiencing as a result of that.  And there shouldn’t be anybody in Australia who has the national interest at heart that should feel the least bit of sympathy or concern because of their current predicament.  They have been caught bereft of any reasonable logical position.  
We did take this tax reform to the people in 1998.  We didn’t keep it in the drawer, we didn’t conceal it, we didn’t go to the last election saying we weren’t going to do it.  We went to the previous one saying we weren’t going to do it and we didn’t during the first term.  But having decided that we were going to do it we thought the only decent honest thing to do was to lay it bare with all its detail before the Australian people in 1998 and in the process taking a huge risk.  I’m always amused when I read in the paper that the government is poll driven.  I remember when I told the Liberal Party’s pollster that we were going to have a GST he nearly had a heart attack.  He said you’ve got to be joking, you can’t do that.  Now of course we did.  We took the risk because in the end you are elected to government to do things for the future of the country.  
You’re not elected to government to warm the leather seats of ministerial office, you’re not elected to government to drive around in white cars, you’re not elected to government just to enjoy the ceremony of it all.  You are actually elected to government to do positive things. And I made a promise to myself and to my colleagues in March of 1996 that the government I led and the government of which they were a part was going to be an active reformist government. But it was also going to be a government that was prepared to defend those things of our past and our current institutions that were worth defending.  In other words the quality of government is measured by your capacity to change those things that need change and to hang onto those things that continue to work and continue to serve the country well.  And that’s been very much a hallmark of this government over the last four-and-a-quarter years.  And we set out to reform the Australian taxation system in 1997.  We laid the plans in front of the Australian people in 1998.  We won the election telling the Australian people in detail what we were going to do.  We had to negotiate some changes because we couldn’t get it through the Senate because of the opposition of the Labor Party and others.  We didn’t get everything we wanted but what we got was a vast improvement on what it replaced.  And we now have a modern more workable, fairer, more incentive driven and I believe overall a much finer taxation system.  And it’s a tribute to the determination of the government, it’s a tribute to the determination of the government’s supporters not to weaken and waiver, and be diverted by the negative campaign that was run.  And I know that at various stages over the last six months some of you must have thought gee, I wonder if this is really worth while.  You must have wondered that the negative campaign might turn out to be right.  And I want to thank all of you for the support and the loyalty that you demonstrated to the government particularly over the last six months.
I always believed that once the Australian people saw and experienced the taxation system operating they would realise that it was a change for the better.  One of the memories that I will have of that weekend for the rest of my political life was the experience I had of going to small shop keepers in my own electorate in top Ryde in Sydney, and of talking to them and hearing them, all shapes and sizes of business and how they got ready for the GST, they’d got ready for the new taxation system.  And how they assured me that they thought it would go okay.  And that experience I had that morning, not talking to big operators, talking here to people who were running essentially family businesses, and telling me that it was going to be successful.   And having a marvelous experience of an Armenian migrant insisting on paying.  I wanted to buy a cappuccino and have it with him.  And he said according to the custom of his culture he wasn’t going to allow me to buy the cappuccino and I was denied the opportunity of purchasing the first thing that I could where the GST was applied.  But it was a very very interesting experience that.  And I remember turning on the television set that night and they had footage of me going through the shopping centre and Peter Costello going through a shopping centre in his electorate in Melbourne.  And then they threw the camera to my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition.  And where was he?  He was in the Labor Party caucus room in Canberra surrounded by photographs of former Labor Party leaders.  And I thought to myself there’s got to be some symbolism in this – here we are out talking to the people and here’s the man who’s run an absolutely discredited, negative campaign for a period of 2 years surrounded by the ghosts of the Labor Party past.  And I think there was a great deal of symbolism in that and the tax change has been well received and the Australian people in my view will always support reform if you can meet two criteria – you’ve got to persuade them that it’s good for the country – they always want to know whether it’s going to be good for Australia and if it’s good for Australia you’ve got them 50% of the way and if you can persuade them that it’s fair, you’ve got them 100% of the way.
And I always believed that if we produced a fair package, we campaigned on it over a long period of time, we put our energy and our resources into explaining the benefits of it, that they would come on board and support it and so it appears to have been the case.
Now as I say I am naturally a cautious person.  But it has gone well. I’m not saying there won’t be some glitches and problems in individual areas as time goes by but fundamentally it’s been well received and the Australian people now know that all of the dire consequences that were predicted by our political opponents were falsely and unsoundly based and they now know that they have got a government that’s got the courage to pursue reforms that are for the good of the country and they have a Cabinet that’s willing to embrace necessary reform and it’s very important having had the success so far we’ve had with tax reform, that we don’t now complacently rest on our laurels and say, well, we’ve done enough, we’ll just sort of muddle along until the next election – that’s a recipe for defeat, you don’t do that.
It’s like running a business.  You don’t mark time.  You either go backwards or you keep going forward.  And the message I have tonight and the message I have for Liberals all over Australia is that the reform process has to go on.  You have no alternative in the modern world.  The kind of world economic environment in which we now live requires that we keep reforming and changing.  Doing it in a sensible way, doing it in a way that looks to the Australian national interest but nonetheless  recognising that you don’t have the option of stopping the world spinning for a while and having a rest.  It never works like that.  
And there are other areas that need reform.
We can consistent with our very strong commitment to a social security safety net, and looking after people who need assistance, there are areas of welfare reform that need to be addressed.  We need if possible to achieve further industrial relations reform;  we need to persevere with our arguments in favour of the full privatisation of Telstra.  It is pointless in my view investing $50 billion to $60 billion of public investment in a communications company – far better that that be invested in further debt retirement and other much needed national infrastructure.
So my message ladies and gentlemen tonight is that yes, we have done extremely well politically and economically in relation to taxation reform and the Labor Party is deservedly, thoroughly deservedly, on the back foot.  I mean it continues to be a source of utter amazement to me that the man in the Labor Party who told the truth about taxation reform, John Della Bosca, has lost his job but all of those who continue with this fantasy, this humbug of rollback, continue to enjoy positions of authority within the Australian Labor Party.
I mean I ask you to go around to your small businesses, to go around to your friends and you ask them, having gone through what’s been involved, necessary though it was in introducing tax reform and introducing the new tax system, do those people seriously want in the course of the next couple of years to start winding it back, to start changing it again?  We’ve just had the biggest change since World War II and Mr Beazley is saying, oh no, I want to change it again.   And he can’t have it both ways.  He can’t run around saying he’s trying to make it fairer, having previously said you can’t make it fairer, you can’t run around saying I’m going to make it fairer and then pretend, oh no, I’m only going to tinker at the edges.  I mean he is stuck big time with rollback.  You can’t have it both ways.  You can’t pretend you’re going to roll it back and then at the end of the day do absolutely nothing.  So when he talks about rollback, he’s talking about major change.  He’s talking about tinkering in a big way with a system that’s only just been introduced and has been very well received.
It’s the equivalent, as somebody said to me the other day, you move into a new house, there’s just a bit of painting and a few light switches to be fixed and the week after you’ve moved in a truck load of fellows arrives and says, we’re here to demolish that room, to rebuild that wall, to redesign the garage and for good measure we’ve got the union fellows with us to help.
That’s basically, ladies and gentlemen, what the Labor Party is offering to do and I think it will be seen for the unwanted irrelevance that it really is, because what it illustrates is one very fundamental fact of political life and that is that the Labor Party is against a lot of things but at a federal level the Labor Party stands for absolutely nothing today except the reintroduction of union domination and union control into national politics if it should again be the federal government.
I mean one of the amazing things about Labor is that at a time when private sector trade unionism in this country is at an historically low level of 20%, you now have more trade union officials in the federal parliament than ever before.  The union domination of the front bench of the Labor Party is greater and more extensive.
I read an article in The Australian today written by a man called Malcolm MacGregor – he used to be a political adviser for Bob Carr in New South Wales and he absolutely berated the composition of the national conference and he said 90% of it was made up of trade union officials, Labor Party staffers and Labor Party politicians.  There was virtually no representation from the great cross section of the Australian community.  Where were the small business men and women.  Where were the people who had some of life’s experiences outside partisan politics.  And it’s very very important that we bear that in mind when we look at the Australian Labor Party.
Mr Beazley has now been the Leader of the Opposition for as long as I have been Prime Minister and he’s been Leader of the Opposition longer than Paul Keating was Prime Minister of Australia but I still don’t know what he stands for.  I know what he stands against and that’s us, I know that he criticises everything we do, you announce something you know is – you can sort of plan your day on the basis that he’ll attack it – you know he’s faithfully like clockwork.  If I say something he’ll say the opposite.  I mean that is the sort of stupid negativity that the Australian people get tired of.   No political opponent can be so wrong that he’s wrong all the time.   Life is not like that.  There were occasions when I was Opposition Leader that I would agree with the Labor Party.  In the middle 1980’s I supported the Labor Party’s moves to deregulate the financial system.  I supported their moves when, before they abandoned them, for taxation reform and if you look back at that period you’ll see that many of the reforms that the former government introduced were only introduced, only made possible, because we supported them from Opposition.
And it would have been far better for Australia if Mr Beazley had done that after the last election.  If  after the last election he’d have got up and fronted the Australian people and he’d said ok I was against it, but they laid it out and the Australian people voted for it, I’ll let it go through and we’ll get onto something else, he would have been in a far different situation than he is now.
But ladies and gentlemen, I haven’t come here to give political advice to my opponent.  I’ve come here to report to you that your federal government is not resting on its laurels.  It’s not going to indulge itself in self congratulation, it’s not going to imagine that having implemented all the reforms that we have over the last four and a half years that the job is anywhere near finished.  The job is never finished.  We have a lot more ahead of us and we intend to embark enthusiastically on that task in the months ahead and in the lead up to the next election.
That, of course, brings me back to where I started and that is winning seats at the next election.  As somebody who’s  been in the Liberal Party for a great number of years and has been involved in grassroots campaigning in state and federal elections since the late 1950’s and early 1960’s, I know how important grassroots campaigning is and I know how important all of the people in this room are to our prospects of winning back Stirling.  The Liberal Party needs people like you very very much and as Parliamentary Leader and Prime Minister I value very much the contribution that you make.  Without the grassroots commitment and enthusiasm of people in the Liberal Party we can’t win back seats and I still believe very strongly in the value of local campaigning and of personal contact at a constituency level.  All of those things remain important.  They’re even more important now than many of the political experts imagine because there is within the Australian community a greater willingness on the part of a greater number of people than ever before to change their political allegiance.  People aren’t as rusted on as they used to be.  They shop around, they change.  There aren’t as many people I know now who sort of say look I could never vote Labor or I could never vote Liberal – there are more people who are prepared to change their views between elections and that throws an even greater responsibility and an even greater obligation on all of us.
But the Government is in good heart, the Government continues to have enthusiasm for necessary change and reform and the Government will remain committed to pursuing changes and reforms that are valuable and important for Australia’s future.
We’ve come a long way, we have an economy now stronger than it’s been since the late 1960’s, an economy that was able to stare down the Asian economic downturn.  We’ve introduced some historic reforms but the job is far from finished and we look forward with great enthusiasm for the opportunity to continue that task for many years into the future.
Thank you very much.
[Ends]


Subjects: Australian manufacturing, industry and trade; tax reform; growth and development
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………..
Thank you Ross.  To the Premier of Western Australia Richard Court, Mr Theo Kailis, Mr David Clapin, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  For a whole number of reasons I am delighted to be here today and to have the opportunity of officially opening this magnificent facility.  This facility and the wonderful story of this company and what it’s achieved domestically and what it’s continuing to achieve on the export front really conjures up a number of areas of tremendous success and achievement.  As I was taken through the facility and saw the production stage of the product that is to go into the Japanese market I was reminded of the capacity of Australians to be thoroughly modern manufacturers.  I was also reminded of course that this facility gives the lie to the false dichotomy that so many people endeavour to create today between the old and the new economy because this facility and this business is a combination of the best of the old and the best of the new. 
From the old it has the tradition of family based companies with the loyalties and personal commitment, and the strong links with a dedicated workforce that make those companies successful.  It also builds on the product of the earth and the sea of Australia, and it also builds on old traditional methods of manufacturing.  But equally it is very modern.  It has a high tech production line, it relies very heavily on information technology to make certain that the product is ideally attuned to the export market.  And it also builds very particularly on the very important trading relationship that Australia has with Japan. 
And I’m very pleased to join Mr Kailis in welcoming so many of our Japanese friends here today.  There is no trading alliance between two countries which is more important to Australia than the trading alliance with Japan.  That is not to say others are unimportant, but it is simply to underline the point that in so many fields Australia and Japan have a great deal in common.  And Japan has consistently been Australia’s best export destinations for several decades.
This company was established 25 years ago and David Clapin has given you a marvelous sketch of what has been achieved, of how the company has adapted to changes in circumstances.  And the success of this company and particularly its export success is a reminder to all of us of the opportunities of globalisation.  We hear too much of the downside of globalisation.  We hear the negative stories of how globalisation has a deleterious impact on some parts of the Australian community and the Australian economy.  Too infrequently do we hear stories such as we’ve heard today of the opportunities that globalisation presents. 
And I note with great approval Theo Kailis’s remarks about the need for flexible industrial relations.  There has been much said recently about the Government’s achievements in relation to taxation reform.  And I’m always happy to hear people say good things about the Government’s achievements in the area of taxation reform.  But I wouldn’t want anybody to lose sight of the fact that there side by side with taxation reform is the achievement of the Government and indeed the achievement of the Western Australian Government in creating a far more flexible industrial relations environment.  And the reality is that if Australia turns backwards towards a more regulated industrial relations system, if we go back to the era of the dominance of union written collective agreements, we will lose the market opportunities that the new flexible industrial relations era has given us.  And this company and this company’s achievement is testimony to the need in the modern world for an industrial relations era and climate and ambience whereby you encourage the making of agreements between employers and employees at the individual workplace level each recognising the dignity and the role of the other.  And the success of this company has been very much built on the way it’s treated its workforce.  It’s treated its workforce with care and respect and dignity, it’s paid them well, it gives them a clean, decent safe working environment.  And they are the obligations of every employer in Australia and if you can create around Australia the kind of atmosphere that exists in a business such as this and the incentives it provides to individual workers to perform and to be part of the corporate and group success, then the economic future of this country is assured. 
The processed food and beverage industry is one of Australia’s largest manufacturing industries.  It comprises around 4,000 firms, it employs over 170,000 people, and it has an annual turnover in excess of $46 billion.  And we recognised not long after our election the importance that growth,the potential for growth of food exports in the Asia-Pacific region.  And in 1997 Australia supplied 5 billion of Japan’s total 70 billion food import requirement. And the two previous speakers were kind enough to mention the Government’s Supermarket to Asia Council which I chair and regularly attend the meetings of.  And all of that is designed to optimise the very opportunities which Kailis and France have grabbed hold of and have optimised.  You are a shining exemplar of what that Supermarket to Asia concept is all about.  You have grabbed hold of the market, you’ve met the demands of the market, you’ve listened to your customers, and you’ve made the product according to your customers taste, not according to your preconceived notions and not surprising you have been remarkably successful.
Ladies and gentlemen, for all of those reasons I’m delighted to be here today.  But I have one other comment to make and that is that businesses thrive for a number of reasons.  They thrive if they have good managers, if they have a clear headed vision, if they have a well cared for and remunerated workforce.  They also thrive if they have a benign and encouraging economic environment.  And we have endeavoured in government to create that.  We’ve endeavoured to give to Australia lower inflation, lower interest rates, a better taxation system.  One that reduces some of the burdens on Australian exporters, one that reduces our company tax rate, our capital gains tax rate, and one that sweeps away a discredited indirect tax system and replaces it with a far more modern one, and one incidentally that provides the largest reduction in personal income tax in a single stroke that any government has delivered.
I applaud the success of Kailis and France.  I say to them and to all of you and to the management and employees alike of the company, the Government will continue to do all it can to maintain and build on the very encouraging economic environment that Australia now enjoys.  But it’s never something that we can take for granted.  The process of reform of an economy never ends.  There is never a point in the management of an economy when you say we have done enough and we don’t need to do anymore.  And all of you in business who are here today know that that is not only true of our experience but it’s also true of yours.  The company that goes forward is the company that never believes it can mark time.  And just as companies can’t mark time, so governments in the modern world economic environment cannot mark time either. 
This is a wonderful day for the founders of the company, it’s a wonderful day for those who work in it.  This is a great Western Australian company, but even more than that it’s a great Australian company which is making an enormous contribution to our export potential, providing satisfaction to customers and building in a thoroughly modern fashion the world reputation of Australians as great manufacturers.
So ladies and gentlemen, I have great pleasure in declaring open this new factory, this wonderful new facility of the Kailis and France company.  Long may the company be successful, long may it continue to satisfy its customers and to win more export dollars for Australia.  Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects:  Liberal Party;  role of Australia in East Timor; Australian economy; interest rates; inflation rate; opening of the new Kailis and France Food Pty Ltd factory; industrial relations; Labor Party; government achievements; tax reform; tax cuts; responsibilities of opposition; ALP national conference; Labor policy &amp; ideas?;
E&amp;OE  ..............................
Well thank you very much Richard.  To David Johnston, the State President, my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, Sir Charles Court, other distinguished Liberals, ladies and gentlemen.
It is once again a great pleasure for me to be back as prime minister, to address this State Conference of the Western Australian Division.  I do so against the background of remarkable things that we have achieved together since I spoke to you just on a year ago.  And if I can take you back to the State Conference last year, you will remember a number of things. 
You will remember that we'd just negotiated through the Parliament, after discussions with the Australian Democrats, the implementation of the great bulk of the tax reform programme that we have taken to the Australian people.  And we were looking forward, not without a certain degree of trepidation and an understanding of the difficult road ahead, we were looking forward to the implementation stage of our tax reform programme.
And the Labor Party was literally rubbing its hands together with glee.  We've withstood twelve months of negative sabotage, of arguing in a carping fashion against the Australian national interest, that vista lay ahead of the Labor Party and they literally salivated.  And it's worth reminding ourselves and it's worth reminding them, because we remember what they said, that they set out to devote themselves to a year long campaign to instil within the Australian community a sense of fear and loathing and despair about the introduction of a tax reform plan.  And it is a tremendous tribute to the sense of purpose, and the sense of commitment of the Government I lead and of all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues that we have been able to come through that period, not only successfully with our unity preserved, but we have also presided over the introduction, in a relatively smooth fashion, of the biggest, the biggest single systemic change of the structure of the Australian economy since the end of World War II. 
Nobody can doubt the scale of what has been achieved.  And none of us, particularly at gatherings such as this, which is a concourse of the broad membership of a political movement, none of us should lose the opportunity to reflect for a moment on what has been achieved.  Because politics is about getting elected to office to do things.  It's not about enjoying the fruits of office.  It's not about congratulating yourself on being a Member of Parliament, or a Minister or a Prime minister.  It's about doing good things for the people of your state or the people of your nation. 
And this Government from the very beginning, from March of 1996, set about being a reform government.  About being a government that was determined to make a difference.  About being a government that would try and change those things in Australia that needed to be changed, but equally to be a government that defended the traditional values of this country that has served us through good times and bad in the years gone by.
And that has been very much the keystone of the administration that I have led over the last four and a half years.  And although tax reform is not the only great achievement of the Government, it stands as an exemplar of the determination of the current Coalition Government to make a difference for where a difference is [inaudible].  To bring about necessary reform.  To change for the better those things that need to be changed. 
As I look back over the last year, it is also right to reflect upon some of the Government's non-economic achievements.  Nobody knew in July of last year that Australia might as turned out to be the case, be called upon to display a leadership role in defending the liberty of the people of East Timor.  Nobody knew what danger might have lay ahead in that very perilous international undertaking.  We knew that there was to be a United Nations' supervised ballot in East Timor.  We knew the fragility of the domestic political situation in Indonesia.  We knew the historic sympathy of so many people of all the generations in Australia towards the people of East Timor, remembering their sacrifices to help defend the safety and security of Australian soldiers during World War II.  And as events unfolded,  Australia was called upon to display that leadership role.  And I am pleased to say to you that in terms of assembling an international diplomatic consensus behind a United Nations' mandate to defend a peace enforcement force into East Timor, that goal was achieved in near record time.  And it is now a matter of a proudly recorded history that Australia did play, under the leadership of Major General Cosgrove on the ground in East Timor, did display a magnificent leadership role.  And it will forever be to the credit of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force that they did it in a professional, effective and where necessary compassionate fashion and it has brought great credit to this country as a defender of human rights.    And there is nothing more basic when you come to human rights than a willingness to defend the political liberty of people in another country who have voted to assert their national independence.
So as I look back over that last year, I can report to you my friends that it has been a year of great achievement.  It is a year that has seen the Australian economy continue to grow.  I can report to you that since we were elected to government, we've created almost 750,000 new jobs.  I can report to you that we have the strongest growth levels since the late 1960's.  We have the lowest housing interest rates for probably twenty-five or thirty years.  We have a much lower rate of inflation than we had through the 1970s, the 1980s and the early 1990s.  We have seen Australia winning despite the vagaries and the perversity of the international trading climate.  We see Australian exporters winning new markets around the world. 
And only yesterday morning here in Perth I opened that marvellous new factory facility of Kailis and France which is a leading example of what we mean when we talk about a supermarket to Asia.  Here's a company combining the best of an old family-based work culture and ethic with modern technology to win an export market on the basis of custom made delivery of a manufactured product to the vast markets of Japan.  It's a wonderful reminder of what can be achieved if you have Australian commitment, Australian ingenuity and Australian skill. 
And it's also a reminder of why you need a deregulated industrial relations system.  It's a reminder of why if Labor were ever to win power again in Western Australia or nationally, one of the very first things it would do would be to turn back the clock on the flexible labour market introduced by my government and by the government led by Richard Court.  Richard reminded us yesterday at the opening of that facility that there are 250,000 individual workplace agreements here in Western Australia.  And one of the first things on the hit list of the union-dominated Labor Government in Perth or in Canberra, would be to restore the union stranglehold on industrial relations in this country.  And that is one of the many reasons why Labor represents an unacceptable risk to the modern outward looking economy that we are building in Australia and the modern outward looking economy which is providing rising living standards for the men and women of Australia. 
And of the many things that I feel a sense of pride about in the economic achievements of this government, none is more important than my capacity and that of all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues to look the average wage and salary earner in the eye and say you are better off under this Government than you were under thirteen years of Labor.  Because the truth ladies and gentlemen is that the Coalition has been a better friend of the Australian worker than any Labor Government since World War II.  It is the Coalition that has delivered via higher real wages underpinned by higher productivity, increases in take home pay.  It is the Coalition that has cut the average mortgage bill of Australian homebuyers by hundreds of dollars a month.  It is the Coalition that has delivered the largest personal income tax cuts in Australia's history.  It is the Coalition that has delivered a tax system whereby 80% of Australian workers are on a top marginal rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar. 
And I have to say to you that of the literally hundreds of anecdotes I have heard about the reaction of Australians to the new taxation system, none has been more common or more repetitive than the simple statement, "I didn't realise how large the tax cuts were going to be".  And I have heard that all over Australia.  I have heard it from public servants. I have heard it from police officers.  I have heard it from school teachers.  I have heard it from wage and salary earners in private enterprise.  I have heard it all around the country.  You see Australian workers are used to being promised tax cuts by another government, only to have them, even they were LAW law, taken back after that government has been re-elected.  And they've found in respect of us, that things are somewhat different. 
So of all the things I am especially proud of, is our capacity to stare in the face of what used to be the taken for granted constituency of the Australian Labor Party, indeed many members of trade unions around this country and explain to them how they are so much better off under a Coalition Government.
But like all students of politics, particularly Australian politics, and every last person in this room is in one way or another a student of Australian politics, we must try and understand why we are able to look back with so much confidence and strength and pride about what has been achieved over the last year.  And there is a very simple explanation for it and it has enduring significance for the future of our party.   And that is that in modern politics particularly, governments and political parties and indeed oppositions, are judged as they should be, not only on what they say and how they say it, important though that may be, but they are judged overwhelmingly on what they stand for and what they do. 
And the key to the Government's success after four and a half years is that we have been an active government.  We have been a government that has not only talked about problems, but we've also been willing to attack those problems.  And that gives us a guide into the future.  If anyone imagines that the reform process is over, they are wrong.  If anyone imagines that the Australian economy can mark time in these early years of the twenty-first century, they are wrong.  If anyone imagines that all the hard work has been done and there's no more challenges ahead of us and that there are more difficult decisions to be taken, then they are also wrong.  In the modern world you don't mark time.  You either keep going forward or you fall back again.  And I've made it very clear to all of my colleagues at a Cabinet meeting a few days ago that the reform task is not over.  We must now turn our attention to other areas in need of change and reform.  We must look at the need to further reform and strengthen the welfare safety net of this country based on the principle that the Australian way, and that is that we provide a decent social security safety net to those in genuine need.  And also embracing a very important principle - of mutual obligation and when you provide assistance for people who need assistance that if they are able to do so it is only fair and reasonable that they are asked to provide something back in return.
And there are many areas of change and reform that lie ahead of us, and if we are to maintain the political momentum we have now, the last thing we should do is think complacently we can rest on our laurels and reflect too long over past successes and lose sight of the constant challenge to achieve new successes.  But of course ladies and gentlemen that challenge of standing for something, of doing something and achieving something is not only the responsibility of a government but it is also something that is the responsibility of an opposition.
And of course starting on Monday at Wrestpoint Casino in Hobart is the national conference of the ALP.  In their smug, indecent complacency, self-described by many leaders of the Labor Party as the principal agent of political change in Australia.  Well if it is the principal agent of political change in Australia let's see a few ideas come out of the ALP conference.
Let, after four and a half years as Labor leader, Mr Beazley, tell us at long last what he stands for and what he believes in.  I mean he has long enough.  He has been leader of the Labor Party as long as I have been Prime Minister and he has been leader of the Labor Party longer than was Paul Keating Prime Minister of this country.  And yet nobody has a clear idea of what he stands for.  And the other night on the 7.30 Report he even tried to tell the Australian people that after all he said about the GST, after everything he said about the GST, about everything he said about our attempts to bring in tax reform, he didn't really regard the GST as the most important element of the Labor Party's attack on the government.  You could have fooled me. 
I mean let me give you a just few, a few of the many quotes  -
"as they face it on the first of July it will be an absolute nightmare, as an example of economic management you could not imagine a more disastrous policy, both in its strategy and execution" 
And he went on :
"in the horror picture it's a complete mess, this is hell, this is hell in a small place and I think there will be an awful lot of people experiencing terrible truths with that as the year unfolds". 
And, of course, to cap it all off was the interview with Howard Sattler, who you all know well on the 30th May of this year and he had this to say :
"Look, I mean, this has been something out of the Soviet Union, circa about 1955.  You have got Joe Stalin's successors up there telling everybody in the Soviet Union how good it is, you know.  You've never been better off, you've never had more freedom in the workplace, you've never had more money and everybody is being marched off to the gulag and the same thing is happening here". 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, he did actually say that.  He did actually liken Australia in the year 2001 to the gulag.  I mean that is a measure of the desperation of the language.  The reality is they banked their all on the GST being a failure.  Their fondest prayer and hope was that come the first of July that dark cloud of which they spoke would burst and the deluge would come and it would sweep all of us away.  And to use his words to the Labor Party caucus in December of last year he would then "surf to victory" on the back of the public's discontent with the goods and services tax. 
Now, that was the grand design, that was the measure of the positive contribution that the member for Brand is making to Australian politics.  And ladies and gentlemen I think he owes it to the Australian people at the national conference over the next few days to finally admit that not only did the Australian people vote for tax reform in October of 1998, they have now accepted tax reform.  And that tax reform has become ...[applause]..
He should listen to the leader of the truth squad in the ALP, John Della Bosca.  He should listen to John Button.  I mean, John Button had that nagging habit when he was a Minister in the Hawke and Keating governments of always telling the truth about how government policy wasn't working and he was frequently talking and he said it again at an ALP gathering in Melbourne a few days ago and he said he didn't understand what rollback meant and that he really thought that the Labor Party should have done something about tax reform a long time ago. 
And I think the best thing that Mr Beazley can do for Australia is to admit that the Australian people have not only voted for tax reform but that they have accept tax reform, and abandon this ridiculously confusing commitment to a rollback which can only undermine the quality of the reform that we have introduced.  And instead of persisting with that, try and develop some kind of alternative strategy and some kind of alternative agenda because in the end it is what you stand for what you do both in government and in opposition that can judge the quality of the contribution that you can make to Australian public life.  And this idea that oppositions are only there to oppose is wrong.  When we were in opposition, and we were in opposition for quite a long time, I remember.  I have no desire or intention of going back to it.  And, no, neither have any of my federal parliamentary colleagues.  But when we were in opposition we played a major constructive role in bringing about a change in public attitudes on a lot of major issues.  We drove industrial relations reform from opposition and when the former government proposed a policy that we thought was good for Australia, such as the privatisation of the Commonwealth Bank, the privatisation of Qantas, we supported them. 
By contrast, every single measure virtually of any significance that this government has introduced has been opposed by the Australian Labor Party.  They not only left us with a ten and a half billion dollar deficit but they fought tooth and nail, root and branch, every attempt by the coalition government to get rid of that deficit and to replace it with a surplus but of course without shame they will only be too happy if they were to win government to help themselves to the expenditure of that surplus. 
But ladies and gentlemen I doubt very much that the national conference of the ALP will do what I am advising it to do.  It doesn't seem to work that way.  I don't know why, but it doesn't.  But perhaps another reason why they won't do what I am suggesting is they might do is that when you look at the national conference of the ALP you see one thing coming through very clearly and that it is a very narrowly based group of men and women.  90% of them are trade union officials, Labor members of parliament or Labor Party or political staffers. 
And when I look around this great gathering I see farmers, I see lawyers, I see doctors, I see school teachers, I see public servants, I see small businessmen and women, I see people with a mining background, I see people with a lifelong political background.  In other words, I see a cross-section of modern Australia.  I see people whose principal commitment has been most of their adult life to what remains the most important responsibility in our society and that is the raising of children.  I see all of those people gathered in this conference centre this morning. 
But when I look at that ALP national conference I see a narrowly-based group of men and women and if you don't represent the broad cross-section of the Australian community you can't hope to govern in the best interests of the broad cross-section of the Australian community.  And it remains one of the great perversities of modern political life that at a time when fewer and fewer Australians are embracing trade unionism more and more of the Labor Party is dominated by trade union officials. 
Isn't there something supremely ironic about a political leader embracing the notion of knowledge nation replacing as national president of his party the man who invented the term with somebody who is straight out of the central casting of the trade union movement of Australia.  It seems to me a very strange and bizarre approach and it symbolises in a very effective way the contradiction which is modern Labor. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as we reflect on the last year, we not only reflect upon our capacity as a political movement to achieve great things together in the public policy area, but we also reflect upon our capacity to manage within the forums of our own party challenges that might, if handled differently, have created problems and division.  And I think of our decision to allow a free vote in relation to the referendum of constitutional change in November last year, an issue which people said was going to divide the Liberal Party.  It didn't divide the Liberal Party, because in a mature fashion we acknowledged that this was an issue where good Liberals of good will to one another and to the future of their party and their country could legitimately have different points of view and so far from that issue dividing us the way in which we handled it in fact, I believe, provided a greater sense of cohesion to our party.  It's a mark of maturity to be able to say to the Australian people that independently minded men and women with strong wills and strong minds can legitimately disagree on certain issues without in any way sacrificing the broad philosophy that they hold in common.  And that has always been one of our defining characteristics.  We have always been able to do that better than our political opponents.  And it's a lesson we should never lose sight of.  We are, as I have frequently said, a broad church.   We are trustees of both the classical liberal and the conservative traditions of Australian politics.  We should never lose sight of that.  One point of view should never try to chase the other point of view out of the councils of the party.  We should always remember that we prosper best politically when we represent that broad church to the Australian community. 
Modern politics is very different from politics of thirty or four years ago.  It is less tribal.  There are fewer people in the community who will look you in the face and say I don't care how bad the Liberal government is I could never bring myself to vote Labor or vice versa.  People do judge governments more on their day-to-day capacity to solve their problems rather than on ideological prejudice sanctioned by generations of affiliation with one or other side of politics.  And that presents a very dynamic and different challenge for all of us who are members of the Liberal Party in the 21st century. 
Our party has been the most successful party on the Australian political horizon, certainly since World War II.  It's a party with a very great tradition.  It has a great tradition of tolerance and it also has an unerring instinct for what it is in the best interest of the great mainstream of the Australian community. 
I remember that very exciting night in March of 1996 when we were able to claim a 44 seat victory over the former Labor government and of the many commitments I made to the Australian people on that night none was more important than my commitment to govern for the mainstream of the Australian community.  Certainly to listen to the range of views that is produced in a pluralistic society but never to lose sight of the fact that the mission of a government is to govern for the broad interests of the community, for the great mainstream and that is what the Liberal Party has been able to do and that is what the Liberal Party continues to do.
I want to say to all of you that I am very much in your debt.  I want to thank my federal parliamentary colleagues from Western Australia.  I want to thank my federal parliamentary colleagues from all around Australia.  I want to thank Peter Costello particularly, as deputy leader of the party, for the burdens he carried in relation to the detailed implementation of the taxation reform program.  I want to thank all of my other Ministers for the work that they have done.  It is a team effort.  People are kind enough to publicly invest me with their gratitude for what the government has achieved but I could not have achieved it without the support of the rank and file of the Liberal Party all around our country and without the support of my parliamentary colleagues. 
And can I finally say that I am aware that this is a very important year for the Liberal Party in Western Australia.  Sometime between now and when we next meet at the State Conference there will be a state election.  I want to say to you, Richard, that the people of Western Australia have been well served by you.  You have been a Premier who has defended, as you should, the interests of your state and we will do what we can to help you in your election campaign whenever it may take place over the next 12 months. 
It is an incredible privilege to be leader of the federal parliamentary Liberal Party and it is an even greater privilege to be Prime Minister of this country.  And I have never forgotten what I owe to the Liberal Party.  I have never forgotten the things that it has done for me and I remain, as I have in the past, deeply grateful for all the loyalty and support that I have received from all of you.  We have had a good year.  We have reason to feel a quiet sense of pride about great things done.  But we never lose sight of the fact that in the months ahead there are new and different challenges.  Politics never remains the same.  It is a constantly moving experience and together I know that we can deal with those challenges, achieve further reforms and reflect again, not in hubris, but in quiet satisfaction in a year's time, about what has been achieved over the previous twelve months. 
Thank you indeed.


Subjects:  Chaudhry visit; ALP conference, John Della Bosca; Cathy Freeman
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, the first thing I’d like to say this morning is that the elected, but unfortunately deposed, Prime Minister of Fiji, Mr Mahendra Chaudhry, is arriving in Australia around lunchtime today.  He is coming as a guest of the Australian Government.  While he is here he will have a series of medical check-ups and I will meet him in Sydney tomorrow morning.   It will give me an opportunity to be brought up to date on what is happening in Fiji.  It will give me an opportunity to convey to him again our concern and distress about what has happened in Fiji and our determination to do what we reasonably can to encourage the people of Fiji, and those in authority in Fiji, to bring about the restoration of full parliamentary democracy and to turn away from any suggestion of a new constitution which discriminates against Fijians of Indian heritage.  I know Mr Chaudhry.  I have met him on two previous occasions.  I feel for what has happened and I know that he has gone through a very difficult time and I look forward to the opportunity of talking to him tomorrow morning, to be briefed directly on what is now happening in Fiji.
JOURNALIST:
Has this been made possible by recent events, specifically locking up the rebels?  Has it made it more possible for his to come here?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t think that has had any particular impact on him coming.  While he was still in detention I gave instructions to our High Commission in Suva that there should be an offer made that if he needed any medical help that would be available.  And he is coming, as I say, at our invitation and as our guest.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister what is the state of our relationship with the de facto authorities.  I know we recognise states not governments but how are we actually dealing with what’s happened here?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Peter, there has only just been a new de facto government installed.  We will take a pragmatic approach.  You can’t ignore the day to day realities of having exchanges with those who wield authority and we will try side by side with that to continue to demonstrate our distaste for what has occurred.  We have announced a number of measures.  We have also said that some other measures will come into effect if there is not a restoration of democracy and that does remain our position.  We welcome the fact that George Speight has been acted against.  We see what has occurred in relation to Speight as being something of a return to the assertion of constitutional authority and the rule of law.  It’s a re-embrace, if you like, of the rule of law and that’s a very welcome development.
JOURNALIST:
Would you encourage Mr Chaudhry or support any moves to set up a government in exile?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I’ll wait and hear what he has got to say.  We have to deal in a careful way.  We have an interest in a number of things in Fiji.  We want democracy restored.  We don’t, of course, want to do anything that will encourage further division in that community.  We want the community to come together.  We want it to come together on a non-racial basis.  We certainly don’t want to encourage a fragmentation.  It is already a very small country.  It already has division and we don’t want to encourage further division.  But we do want to send a message that we utterly condemn and repudiate the abrogation of democracy and the possible embrace of a racially-based approach to the choosing of political leadership in that country.  That is wholly to be regretted.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, on a purely domestic matters, Labor’s national conference is about to kick off.  Mr Beazley was on the Sunday program this morning outlining ..(inaudible) …depending on your point of view, their policies.  What thoughts to you have….?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I watched the interview.  I didn’t see any glimmer of hope that the Labor Party stands for anything.  Not a glimmer of hope.  I see that Mr Della Bosca is going on to the national executive.  Well, I would encourage Mr Della Bosca to continue to tell the truth about taxation.  What Mr Della Bosca should do on the national executive is to argue against roll back, to argue that the Labor Party should accept the verdict of the Australian people.  The Australian people voted for tax reform and they are now experiencing tax reform.  If the Labor Party is to be relevant it should be move on, accept defeat on this issue and start articulating some decent policy. 
JOURNALIST:
Should you debate at the next election a panel of potential prime ministers after you retire as Kim Beazley proposed?
PRIME MINISTER:
I thought he sounded as though he wanted me to stay for ever. 
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Cathy Freeman made it pretty plain she’s considering at some stage in the future a career in politics.  Would you like her on board?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don’t know what her politics are and that’s a matter for her.  I wouldn’t particularly at this time seek to know.  All Australians want Cathy Freeman to represent them magnificently at the Olympic Games and along with other Australians I will be cheering her on, whatever her views are on anything I don’t really care.  That’s a matter for her.  She has got a right, as any Australian, to have her views and to hold them passionately and I respect her for that very much.  But I think party politics should be put aside at a time like this.  I just want Australians to win a lot of medals at the Olympic Games, Cathy Freeman included.
JOURNALIST:
Still, putting the politics aside though, do you think she could make a contribution to national political life, no matter where?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, that is a matter for her.  I think she is a very talented person.
[ends]


Subject:  Meeting with Mr Mahendra Chaudhry; situation in Fiji; Fijian sanctions; Labor Party National Conference; GST rollback.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER:
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Chaudhry and I have had a very lengthy meeting this morning.  It’s been an opportunity for us to explore in detail not only what has happened in Fiji but also what is likely to unfold in the weeks and months ahead.  I stated to him again our total empathy with his position; our strong and continuing condemnation of the abrogation of democracy, the suspension by the decree of the 1997 constitution; the illegal detaining of Mr Chaudhry and the other members of his democratically elected government; the apparent embrace of a racially based approach to future constitutional arrangements.  We have explored in some detail the domestic situation in Fiji at present.  I share Mr Chaudhry’s concern about the level of breakdown, or the extent of the breakdown in law and order and restoring law and order is the most important, most urgently important challenge ahead of the authorities in Fiji.  Mr Chaudhry has expressed to me his strong support for the measures already announced by the Australian government.  I indicated to him that those measures would remain in place.  There will be a Cabinet meeting tomorrow in Canberra and I will be reporting to my Cabinet colleagues on the discussions that I’ve had with Mr Chaudhry and we’ll be considering the matter further.  On a personal level can I say that although I was very pleased to see Mr Chaudhry again having seen him before the coup in Canberra.  And although I’m very pleased that he is in relatively good health considering the terrible experience that he and his colleagues have been through, can I say that one of the number of reasons why I’ve valued the opportunity of talking to him this morning is to say to him directly and say with him before this media gathering how appalled I am at the brutal way in which he was removed from the discharge of the duties given to him by the people of Fiji.  It remains a black mark against the international reputation of Fiji that that coup occurred.  It remains the view of the government that somebody having been democratically elected that person had a right to serve out his term and not be interrupted by the brutal means employed by George Speight and his gang of usurpers. 
And that is very much the feeling and the attitude I know of the Australian people and certainly of the Australian government.  We are realists.  We have to deal with situations as well as aspire to outcomes and aspire to achieve goals and we’re seeking to achieve a balance between those things. 
This morning’s talk has been very valuable to me.  I hope it’s been valuable for Mr Chaudhry, and he remains in Australia for a number of days as a very welcome guest of the Australian government.  Mr Chaudhry.
CHAUDHRY:
Thank you very much Prime Minister.  Let me begin by personally thanking Prime Minister John Howard, his Government, and the people of Australia generally for the very strong support that they have shown in the weeks of this crisis for democracy and human rights in Fiji.  We of course were in captivity for eight long weeks and as Prime Minister Howard has put it it is indeed a very sad development in our region.  For me personally this was the third coup that I’ve experienced because I was in government in 1987 when Mr Rabuka carried out the first coup and then again in September of that year the second coup, and this was the third coup.  And as a person born in Fiji, Fiji’s welfare is deeply embedded in my heart.  I am very concerned about the future of our country.  It has a great future.  I think there can be a place for everybody there and we can operate successfully as a multi-racial country if allowed to do so.  But unfortunately for the third time in the last 13 years democracy has been usurped and constitutionally elected government has been removed from office by use of armed force.  I’ve had fruitful discussions with Prime Minister John Howard.  I am thankful for the measures that the Australian government has taken against the regime in Fiji, and that these measures will remain in place as Prime Minister has said.  I understand that there is going to be a review of the Fiji situation by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group in September, and as he himself has said we will look at how things unfold in Fiji in the next days and weeks. 
But the law and order situation is very grave.  There is a great down of law and order in different parts of the country.  It is only in the recent days that the military has asserted itself in restoring law and order but it has not been able to cope with the situation on a nationwide basis.  And my first and foremost concern at this stage is the restoration of law and order because innocent people are suffering as a result of the lawlessness of some criminal elements in our society. 
I am thankful to the Australian government for inviting me here, for discussions I’ve had with Prime Minister John Howard, and for my medical examination which I shall be undergoing in the next day or so. And at this stage I expect to remain in Sydney until the end of this week.  Thank you very much.
PRIME MINISTER:
Are there any questions?
JOURNALIST: 
Mr Chaudhry, do you feel safe given the state of the country at the moment returning to Fiji?
CHAUDHRY:
Well it’s not only about my own safety, a lot of people don’t feel safe there at all because of the current law and order situation.  Certainly there is a security threat as far I am concerned and members of my government.
JOURNALIST:
So do realistically think that you will never be returned to power, regardless of Australia’s position is, given what has taken place now?
CHAUDHRY:
Well as I said, we went through this experience in 1987.  It is a re-run of that and after all the events of ‘87, we were able to adopt a democratic and …[inaudible]… constitution in 1997, which has been endorsed by all communities in Fiji, all political parties in Fiji and which have the blessings of the Great Council of Chiefs as well and under that constitution, we had elections in 1999 and we formed a government. Our government consisted of four different political parties.  It was a representative government in that government we had 12 ethnic Fijijans, [inaudible] only 6 Indian Ministers and I think we governed well for the 12 months that we were in office.  We hope to return to that day once more, but looking at the way things are there at the moment, I am not too sure whether we can do that in the near future.
JOURNALIST: 
Do you think the international community is doing enough to return to democracy?
CHAUDHRY:
Well personally I think they have to put in place an integrated plan of action which of course may [inaudible] too depending on the situation in Fiji and for the time being I would say yes I am happy with the action taken by Australia, by New Zealand and the international community.
JOURNALIST:
If the military can’t cope with law and order do you think the UN should give assistance [inaudible]….
CHAUDHRY:
I think so because we also appeal to the military ourselves to restore law and order and I think that if the regime there are unable to do so then itself should seek assistance.
JOURNALIST:
From Australia?
CHAUDHRY:
I can’t say at the moment, maybe the United Nations will be the right body to approach in this regard and they can work the details out.
JOURNALIST:
Is it something you have talked about with the Prime Minister?  Something you discussed with our Prime Minister?
CHAUDHRY:
Well I have expressed my concern about the law and order situation in Fiji.
JOURNALIST:
Do you make a request though for help from [inaudible]?
CHAUDHRY:
No, not as yet.
JOURNALIST: 
Do you still regard yourself the Prime Minister of Fiji…
CHAUDHRY:
That is a question I have been asked many times.  Yes I still regard myself as a constitutionally the elected prime minister of Fiji.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think George Speight should be charged with treason?
CHAUDHRY:
Yes.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] Will you go ahead with plans to set up a government in exile possibly in Australia?
CHAUDHRY:
Well that is an option which we looked at.  It depends on the situation in Fiji if we find it almost impossible to operate from there, then we may consider that option.
JOURNALIST:
Have you talked about that with Prime Minister Howard?
CHAUDHRY:
Not as yet.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] what about in the western island of Fiji…. as a power base?
CHAUDHRY:
Yes, there is a lot of calm there and for how long that will be we do not know but ever since the events of May 19, the western part of the main island has been quite calm.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes?
JOURNALIST: 
Will the Australian government welcome the Fiji government in exile on Australian soil?
PRIME MINISTER:
That is not something that we have discussed and is not something that we would encourage.  I think the solution to the break down of democracy in Fiji lies with the people of that country.  A solution has to be found there with appropriate levels of encouragement and pressure and the sending of messages from outside.  In the end, the attitude of the Australian government is that we don’t inject ourselves directly and physically into the domestic affairs of another country unless invited to do so or under the sanction of some kind of united nations or multinational mandate and I think that point needs to be made clear.  There is a balance to be struck here.  We are a concerned friend of Fiji’s.  We are angry that democracy has been abrogated.  We are angry that a man properly elected by his people to serve his country as prime minister has been brutally taken prisoner in an act, an illegal act of treachery and we will do every thing we reasonably can to bring about a change inside Fiji.  By the same token, it is a relatively poor country, the imposition of savage economic sanctions would wreak a great deal of destruction and the poorer people of that country and we have to balance in what we do, a concern about that with our desire to register a disapproval.
It’s a very difficult balancing act, it’s not easy, but we will work through other groups particularly the commonwealth.  There is a meeting with the commonwealth ministerial action group scheduled in a few weeks time and we will certainly be very heavily involved in that.  Mr Downer will be going to a meeting of Pacific forum foreign ministers and the matter will be discussed there.  I remain of course in very regular contact with Mr Chaudhry and his colleagues.  I have discussed the matter since my return to Australia directly with the Prime Minister of India who for very understandable reasons has a particular interest in what has unfolded in Fiji.  We are of very similar mind on this.  It’s a case of using the influence and the good offices that we have but remembering the fragility of the Fijian economy and the fact that the economy has already been devastated by what’s occurred and also remembering that in the end unwanted intrusions by Australia beyond a certain point of acceptability can be quite counter productive.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, does Australia recognise the administration of what [inaudible]?
PRIME MINISTER:
We don’t recognise administrations anymore, we recognise states.  You deal with administrations when necessary.  You deal with other people as I deal as an act of personal friendship and also a great diplomatic courtesy with Mr Chaudhry and his colleagues today.  We have to recognise realities but we can, consistent with recognising realities, we can continue to demonstrate our preferences which we’ll continue to do.  Our preference is for a restoration of democracy and one of the first internal tests that the authorities will face in Fiji is the bona fides of the review mechanism that the new government says it will establish for constitutional arrangements in that country. 
If that review mechanism is not seen as being totally independent and totally transparent and in every way something that will give fearless advice about future constitutional arrangements then it will fail the first test and that will be seen by the rest of the world as a real negative for the restoration of democracy in Fiji.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister their understanding of the situation there, will you be going to Cabinet tomorrow, perhaps asking for Australia to be stepping up the situation of sanctions?
PRIME MINISTER:
The sanctions we have or the measures we have in place at the moment are right.  They won’t be wound back, they won’t be rolled back or wound back but they will be kept very much in place and we think they’re right.  But I certainly have, inevitably because of the detailed briefing that Mr Chaudhry has given me, I have a much sharper, more detailed understanding of what’s gone on.
JOURNALIST:
In the break down of the law and order and the increase in Fijian/Indians wanting to come to Australia, will you be looking at making, giving Fijian/Indians refugee status?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we don’t have any proposal in front of us to do that.  We deal with these sorts of things in accordance with a well-established immigration policies and that well-established immigration policy is that people establish refugee status on a case by case basis.  You normally undermine an immigration or refugee policy if you depart in an ad hoc way from that rule.  We saw that happen some years ago in Australia under another government and we don’t want to see that happen again. 
I should point out to you that a large number of Fijians of Indian heritage have come to Australia in recent years but I should also point out to you that it is not helpful for Fiji to have other countries encouraging the immigration of their people and I mean if we are interested in Fiji and not the short term expedience of this or that attitude then we should encourage people of talent and good will to remain in Fiji. 
Bear in mind I said to Mr Chaudhry during our discussion, I asked him when his ancestors had gone to Fiji and he said in the 1860’s.  And I said, well that was roughly about the time that most of my ancestors came to Australia.  So I mean we’re not dealing here with people other than those who for generations have been citizens of Fiji and I think it’s very important that that be kept in mind.  And I don’t want to encourage people to leave Fiji.  That doesn’t help Fiji.  We will apply our immigration policy in a compassionate way as we always do.  But you don’t in an ad hoc way just announce that you’re going to allow this or that group of people to come because that undermines the integrity of the general policy.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard could you clarify if Australia is asked to physically restore law and order in Fiji, [inaudible] would you agree to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh look I don’t deal with hypothetical questions like that.  I never deal with a hypothetical question involving the use of Australian Armed Force whether it be the police or the military.  No request has been made.  I don’t expect one.  I’ve stated the history of that and I’m just not going to answer a hypothetical question of that kind and nobody should draw any inferences from anything that’s been said at this news conference to any other effect.
JOURNALIST:
On the ALP Conference Prime Minister if you don’t mind taking any questions on another issue.  Why did your government decide to take out full page ads in Tasmanian newspapers pointing out the union membership of the ALP?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well because it’s true and it’s relevant.
JOURNALIST:
But who footed the bill for that?  Who paid for that?  The tax payer?
PRIME MINISTER:
Those ads - I haven’t seen them.
JOURNALIST:
Were you aware that they were going in?
PRIME MINISTER:
I heard about them this morning so I haven’t authorised them.  I imagine they’ve been put in by the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Chaudhry [inaudible] and what health problems do you still have?
CHAUDHRY:
On the second night of our detention I was hauled out of the room where we were by six youths and I was assaulted for about ten minutes- I was kicked on the sides and punched.  And so I had pain on my left side and after my release I had an X-ray done and I have cracked ribs on the left hand side.  Of course the natural healing process had begun because we were there for about eight weeks but there was a lot of pain in the first few weeks of my detention there.  So that is one and I had been on a fast in the third or fourth day of my detention which continued right to the end and I was down to one meal a day and I lost some weight - quite a bit of weight and so I’m feeling terribly weak.  I’ve since regained some strength but I’ve been advised by my doctors in Fiji to undergo a very thorough medical examination so that’s what I intend to do and then we’ll see what the doctors have to say.
JOURNALIST:
Does it give you any satisfaction knowing that George Speight is not only in custody but is sleeping on a mattress that apparently you were on for eight weeks?
CHAUDHRY:
Well I never was a vindictive person.  I feel sorry for him and I feel sorry for people who were misled by him because the extent of pain and suffering which has been inflicted on our people, innocent people was quite unnecessary.  There was dissatisfaction that always in a constitutional means by which you can address dissatisfaction.  And really the economy has been devastated to such an extent I don’t see it coming right for a long, long time.  And this particular coup and its aftermath was much worse than what happened in 1987 because this time around there was taken was a private property and the extent of looting and burning and all that was quite substantial compared to the violence that we experienced in 1987.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Chaudhry would you seek or would you support a United Nations referendum for the Fijian people to determine what Government they want or what form of Government and constitution they want?
CHAUDHRY:
I suggested that in the press statement I gave two days after my release that perhaps the best way of finding out what the people of Fiji want is to have the United Nations supervised referendum.  But that has been rejected by the regime there.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister Howard just on another domestic issue.  Are you surprised that Kim Beazley has omitted the topic of rollback in his speech to the ALP Conference?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well from what I’ve seen of this speech it’s the same old opposition leader trying to be all things to all men.  He released a platform statement on the 7th of July which stated quite concisely as point number three- “roll back the GST to make it fairer and simpler.  It’s impact on education, health, charity, small business and those most disadvantaged”.  And that was quite explicit.  That was on the 7th of July and yet the word rollback did not appear in his speech this morning.  Now what’s happened between the 7th of July and the 31st?  He’s been Della Bombed of course!  And the speech that he gave this morning owes more to an attempt to give an impression of changing his position as a result of the burst of candour from Mr Della Bosca. 
But he can’t have it both ways.  I mean he is either for it or he’s changed his position.  You can’t have it both ways.  I mean if he were to get up and say to the Australian people, I now accept that the new tax system is in place and we have to work with it.  Now that would represent a massive reversal but at least it would be an honest confronting of the issue.  But instead of that he tries to have it both ways.  He pretends that he’s still going to make changes and yet he is so clearly trying to avoid the language of rollback. 
Well you can’t for three years play every card in the game, do everything in your power to stop tax reform, say it’s going to destroy the very fabric of the nation and then because you’ve been confronted with some home truths by your own chosen president of the ALP then pretend to the Australian people that all of that should now be forgotten.  It won’t be forgotten.  It oughtn’t to be forgotten.  If he wants to change his position on tax reform he should say so openly and honestly and not in this deceitful way try and slide through the middle talking about fairness and simplicity but so clearly trying to jettison the language of rollback.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]
CHAUDHRY:
Well I think the international community has already put in place a range of actions, and this is to be reviewed by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group in September.  Both the Commonwealth and the United Nations have indicated that they would look to Australia and New Zealand for leadership and guidance in this regard.  And I am quite happy to leave it at that for the time being.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] 
CHAUDHRY:
Well, we certainly will have to engage in the struggle as we did after 1987.  It took us time, but we kept at it because democracy is the best thing for Fiji and for any other country for that matter.  So we’ll continue with our struggle and I think we are very encouraged by the support of the international community and we hope that it will not be too long before constitutional authority is returned to the people.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard just one question on the conference in Hobart.  Mr Beazley also unveiled what he called a new Medicare alliance.  What is your reaction to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it sounds, it sounds like a new Medicare bureaucracy.  He’s proposed a health finance commission.  He’s proposed a Medicare alliance and a national summit on health.  We don’t need these things.  Mr Beazley seems to have overlooked the fact that under the GST in the years ahead, the states will all get more money.  So why on earth would he be committing a federal government to give the states more money when they are getting more money as a result of the GST.  Unless of course he’s going to roll the GST back in a big way.  Because if you roll the GST back, you’re taking money away from the states.  Now if you’re saying as a federal government, and he talks about a ten year period, a Medicare allowance of state and federal governments which will sign up to a real increase in health funding over the next ten years.  If the GST is to be allowed to work in the way it’s been established, there is no need over a ten year period for the federal government to increase its health funding.  No need at all because under the GST the states will automatically get more funding.  And the fact that he’s committing a federal government to an alliance for real increases in health funding indicates either he doesn’t understand how the GST works, which is probably the case, but perhaps more importantly he really still has in mind a major rollback of the GST because if you roll it back you’re taking it away from the states.  Now, once again it illustrates my earlier point - he’s got to come clean on where he stands in relation to the GST.  He’s either, he’s either accepted the reality of tax reform, or he’s going to continue to campaign for a major rollback.  And this commitment shows the confusion in his own thinking. 
I mean we are saying to the states in relation to public funding for health – we’ve given you a big real increase over a five year period, under the Goods and Services Tax your funding will increase over and above what would have been the case if we hadn’t have brought in the GST.  And you will therefore have access to a lot more money for public hospitals.  You don’t need a further federal funding commitment over and above that.  You would only need it if we reneged on the GST and tried to take it back from you, which would happen under rollback.  And maybe that is what Mr Beazley has in mind.  I don’t know and I don’t think the Australian public knows.  And this is what happens when you try and be all things to all people.
Well I think we’ve had, I think we’ll just have one more question and then we’ll give it . . .
JOURNALIST:
Mr Chaudry, one of the major contributors to the Fijian economy is tourism, apart from agriculture.  Should tourists from Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the United States continue to stay away from Fiji?
CHAUDHRY:
Well right now I think the security situation is such that no-one would want to go there until such time as authorities in Fiji are able to convince travellers that Fiji is a safe place.  I think people will stay away from Fiji. Tourism of course was a very dominant, played a very dominant role in Fiji’s economy and it’s almost gone now, so it has had quite a devastating effect on Fiji’s economy.
JOURNALIST:
And Hobart, will you be attending?
CHAUDHRY:
Well, I am going in for medical tests on Wednesday and it will depend on what the doctors have to say.  But at this stage it doesn’t look so. 
[Ends]


From the day we took office four years ago the Government has worked hard to tackle unemployment.
Thanks to the creation of 650,000 new jobs, the unemployment rate has fallen from 8.5 per cent in March 1996 to its lowest level in almost a decade at 6.7 per cent.  Now there are around 125,000 fewer Australians out of work than four years ago.
It is vital that these efforts be maintained because I strongly believe that unemployment remains too high, especially in some regional areas of Australia.
One way we can tackle this problem is through Work for the Dole which has implemented our principle of mutual obligation.  
In return for the community’s help for those in need, young unemployed Australians are accepting the personal responsibility to give back to the country that supports them.
So far 57,000 young people have been part of 1,500 community based projects designed to give them greater self esteem and a new work ethic
The results are for all to see.
Recently I presented the annual Work for the Dole achievement awards where every major winner came from a location in regional Australia such as Wyong, Albany and Gympie.
Gosford’s Troy Bryant received the best participant’s award for his work with the local council where he mastered practical skills such as fencing, concreting and landscaping.   
But it was Troy’s motivation of his peers and his encouragement of their work ethic that brought him praise and a full time job with the Gosford Council.
That is exactly the type of outcome Work for Dole is striving to achieve.
Troy joins the 70 per cent of participants who now feel greater self-esteem as a result of Work for the Dole, our practical programme to encourage hope, experience and responsibility amongst young Australians. 


Subjects: Sex Discrimination Laws; interest rates
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
LIEBMANN:
The Prime Minister is with us in the studio this morning. Good morning to you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Steve.
LIEBMANN:
Why now? What’s the urgency? And why no public consultation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well because there was a court decision on Friday, that’s why now. We didn’t determine the timing of the court decision. And the Government considered the matter yesterday at Cabinet. And this is one of those things where it’s the Government’s responsibility as the elected representatives of the people to take a decision. And we took the matter around Cabinet and I have to say that there was overwhelming support to what I announced yesterday, overwhelming.
And what we’re doing is to give the states the right to have legislation of the type that operates in Victoria. It’s up to them to decide whether they’re going to do it or not. We don’t have the constitutional power to directly legislate for these matters but the states do. And we propose to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to allow them to do so if they wish.
And we are motivated by a belief that in our society children do have the right to expect, other things being equal, and I stress that, other things being equal, to have the care and affection of both a mother and a father. Now that is a view about the rights of children. It’s the rights of children that are the dominant rights in an issue like this. And I believe that society would share that view generally, not everybody but you don’t win everybody on any one issue.
But the timing of it is utterly unexceptional. I mean the court decision was last Friday. I had the matter considered yesterday. We had legal advice in front of us. We were ready to take the decision. Why wouldn’t we take the decision? That’s what governments are elected to do. We’re not elected to engage in endless consultation we’re actually elected to make decisions.
LIEBMANN:
No public consultation though. You didn’t talk to your Sexual Discrimination Commissioner, Steve Bracks?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look we are the Government and Mr Bracks is complaining we didn’t talk to him. As I understand it the Labor Party in Opposition in Victoria supported the Victorian Act, which our decision will in effect revalidate. But he doesn’t consult us every time he takes a decision any more than any other premier does. I mean it’s a federal sex discrimination act. This funny idea that the last thing governments should ever do is take a decision is not one that I share.
LIEBMANN:
But you did listen to Brian Harradine?
PRIME MINISTER:
I spoke to Brian Harradine on Friday. Yes, he got in touch with me. He communicated to me. But look this is not driven by Brian Harradine. Brian Harradine and I disagree on a whole raft of things including industrial relations policy and he didn’t support our tax package in the end. So don’t anyone run the line that this is a Brian Harradine act. I mean Brian Harradine often attacks the Government. Sometimes he supports it, sometimes he doesn’t. But this is a view that we as a Government, the people in the Cabinet, we are the Government and we took the view that states should have the right to legislate to this effect because of the view we take about the rights of children. Now let’s debate the issues not the process, we’re too process driven in this country.
LIEBMANN:
Okay I’ll get to the debate about the issue in just a moment. What did the women in the Ministry think about the decision?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t disclose what individuals say in a Cabinet meeting, that is not fair to them. But let me tell you that there was overwhelming support. I’ll go no further than that because it’s not fair but there was overwhelming support.
LIEBMANN:
What’s the point of it all though? Labor and the Democrats have indicated they’re going to block the legislation in the Senate and the woman who prompted all of this, Lisa Meldrum says she’ll fight you in the High Court.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well when you say what’s the point of it, I mean to say just because somebody opposes something is not a reason to not do it. I mean the Labor Party opposed our tax plan didn’t they, they once did and now they’ve back flipped on their rollback or something or rather, I’m not quite sure.
But in the end we have to do what we think is right not do what we think might muster the numbers in the Senate. I mean that’s what we’re elected to do. And if the Senate decides to vote against our legislation well let the members of the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats explain that to the Australian people. But we have taken in our view the overwhelmingly right decision. And the thing that motivated us most are the fundamental right of children, other things being equal, to have the care and attention of both a mother and a father.
LIEBMANN:
The reality is though that even if the legislation gets up Victorians and Western Australians will still be able to travel interstate to NSW to receive IVF or artificial insemination. It’s not going to stop women seeking children - single women and lesbians.
PRIME MINISTER:
Look, you can’t change the individual desires and views of individuals in our community but you can as a government express a community view as you see it. And what we have done is to say that we believe that those states who want to legislate in the way Victoria and Western Australia have, should have the right to do so and they shouldn’t be prevented from legislating in favour of the rights of children by federal legislation. Now what individual states do are matters for them but we are saying to them that we will remove the federal impediment for you legislating for the rights of children.
LIEBMANN:
Lisa Meldrum has a question. She says there are a lot of people who responsibly raise children on their own and she wants you to tell her why she wouldn’t be a good mother or a better mother than a lot of young girls who run around producing children, living off welfare. So why wouldn’t she be a good mother?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look I don’t know the person and I’m not going to make an individual judgement on somebody but what governments do is to express community attitudes and community standards. Now this has got nothing to do with…
LIEBMANN:
How do you…
PRIME MINISTER:
Hang on. Hang on. Well look all you can do Steve is your best. All you can do is… I’m an ordinary person like you and everybody else in the community. I get elected to a position of responsibility. In good faith I legislate in a way that I think is good for the community. Now the public will judge me on that, nobody else. I’m answerable to the public. I’m not answerable to appointed officials. I’m answerable to the Australian people. And we have made an honest decision in our belief that the signal we should be sending is that other things being equal kids should have the reasonable expectation of the care of a mother and a father.
It’s not an attack on single motherhood. There are a lot of single mums out there who started out in loving relationships, they’d like to still be in them and I admire the job they do. That’s not the issue. That is a complete red herring. This is about whether in our society people should have the reasonable expectation of the care and love of both parents.
And in the situations we’re talking about you know and everybody else knows that by deliberate choice, that opportunity and that expectation has been denied and that’s why we think it’s different and that each state should have the right to legislate if they want to. And I hope the legislation gets through but that’s a matter for the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats. But we’ve taken our stand. We have a view and I think there’ll be a lot of people out there in the general community who will agree with the stand the Government’s taking.
LIEBMANN:
I’ve got to, I know what your answer is going to be now. But last question - interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t comment about the movements in interest rates.
LIEBMANN:
I know you don’t. The Reserve Bank meets today?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it often meets.
LIEBMANN:
Yes and you have an expectation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t comment about the movements in interest rates either way.
LIEBMANN:
All right. Prime Minister thanks for coming in.
[ends]


Subjects: The Arts and its relationship with business and government 
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much James, to my two ministerial colleagues Richard Alston and Peter McGauran.  
Firstly can I say how greatly encouraged I am and I know that Richard and Peter will be and others by such a top level attendance of so many significant men and women in the business community of Australia and in the artistic and cultural life of our country.  
I don’t want to keep you for long but I do want to share a few thoughts with you about the importance of the alliance between the business community, the Government and the broader artistic community, the importance of that alliance to the cultural life of our country. 
A Prime Minister is often called upon in different environments to reflect upon the profound changes that have come over the nation in the time that he’s been actively engaged in politics.  And in the time that I’ve been actively engaged in parliamentary politics which stretches from May of 1974 to the present time one of the quite remarkable changes has been in that period of time, of course it had begun before hand, but in that period of time it has really burgeoned in a very significant way is the tremendous influence on Australian life and the marking out very clearly to the rest of the world of the distinctive characteristics, abilities and talents of the artists and others who contribute to the cultural life of our country.  The extraordinary success enjoyed over the years by our film industry, the world class performance of our major performing companies such as the Opera and the Ballet, the greater recognition of Australian writers, the greater recognition of Australian painters, the list goes on quite endlessly.  And it is undoubtedly true as David Malouf inferred in the remarks that James Strong referred to that the cultural identity of this country is a very important element in the shaping of our distinctive national identity seen so very clearly around the world.
Inevitably in a speech like this there are one or two statistics that you feel you should mention in order to make a point.  And one of those I found in the Bureau of Statistics for the Year 1996-1997 it found that some 22,700 businesses sponsored sport in Australia to the value of $280 million.  But only 2900 companies sponsored Arts and culture to the value of $29 million.  Now those figures may or may not be accurate to a few million dollars but they broadly present a picture.  
And let me say immediately as somebody who awarded the Dally M rugby league award last night and who was at the Stadium on Saturday night to see Australia beat South Africa and who is going to deliver the inaugural Bradman Oration in Melbourne on the 17th of August I would be the last person in Australia let me tell you to encourage any companies not to continue magnificently contributing to sport.  But I think the point is that there is a broader role and a broader obligation.  And that of course is an obligation that the Government is not asking the business community to shoulder alone.  
There’s been a lot of reference to Helen Nugent’s excellent report and examination into the state of the Arts in Australia.  And I’m very proud that in the last budget the Government gave what was broadly seen in the Arts community as a very strong and adequate, indeed in the eyes of some a surprisingly generous measure of support to the Arts.  
We share the view expressed by James Strong that it’s not realistic for any government to say that the Arts can be fully funded from private sources.  If a government and a community through its government wants the Arts to flourish and to be a source of national pride there is a need for a public sector contribution.  We recognise that.  That has never been a point of argument so far as we are concerned.  
And we’re very proud that we were able to commission that investigation and we’re very pleased at the level of support that we were able to get.  I have to compliment Senator Alston in particular.  He’s sort of seen as having something of a silver tongue when it comes to encouraging the expenditure review committee to agree with what some of his ministerial colleagues regard as particularly generous support for the Arts.  I think it is every last dollar totally justified.  Governments have a multitude of responsibilities and one of those responsibilities is to see that there is within the Australian community a proper measure of support for the arts.  
Now I want to acknowledge the contribution that Richard Pratt made in relation to his work as Chairman of the Foundation for Culture and the Humanities, and I want to particularly acknowledge the contribution that others have made in various capacities over the years.  I’m very confident that the Australian Business Arts Foundation will become the premier vehicle within Australia to encourage corporate sponsorship and to bring business and culture together in a mutually beneficial way.  It aims to increase private sector support for arts and culture and to forge stronger links between business and the arts.  The new name – Australian Business Arts Foundation – conveys this impression.  And the new advisory council inaugurated today will place the foundation in a very strong position to achieve those aims.  And it will as I say build very much on the achievements of the Australian Foundation for Culture and Humanities.
The inaugural council meeting today is an important step forward, a step taken on the advice of some of you here today.  It provides an opportunity to thank those business leaders who’ve lent their time, their reputation, and their resources to help strengthen private support for Australia’s cultural life through the foundation.  I pay tribute to the work of Richard Pratt and also I want to pay tribute to the work of Ron Walker and his deputy James Strong.  I want to thank those who’ve agreed to serve on the advisory council of the Business Arts Foundation, committing your time and expertise and providing advice to the board of the foundation publicly demonstrates a belief in the need for the business sector to play a part in a robust arts and cultural sector. 
It was clear to me when many of us met in Canberra 14 months ago that Australia needed business leaders to encourage others to recognise the value of investing in strategic partnerships with cultural organisations.  And in response to this you set up working groups, or business circles.  One developed and produced a business case for cultural investment guide.  Another examined the role of corporate social responsibility and that work was instrumental in the development of the new Australia Business Arts Foundation.  A third working group has been advising on communications, helping the foundation to promote greater corporate support for art and culture.  Many of you at the forum in here today provided advice that enabled the executive director   Winsome McCaughey   and her team to pilot tools and services that have been tested over the past year.  And we’ll be looking for leaders and their companies to work with the foundation as associates to help guide the development of business arts chapters in all capital cities.
All premiers of the States, chief ministers and arts ministers have been briefed on the establishment of the Business Arts Chapters, and already there’ve been very strong indication of support from the State and Territory governments.  As a first step councillors have made financial or in kind commitments totalling around $400,000 to support the development of chapters and national projects that will lead to increased corporate support to the arts.  
Ladies and gentlemen, in the time that I’ve been Prime Minister I’ve stressed on many occasions the importance of building a social coalition whereby you pool the resources of the government, the private sector, the community sector and individuals to find solutions to challenging social problems.  In a sense this organisation, this foundation, is an extension of that notion.  It recognises that the government has a role to play and we’ll always have a role to play and we won’t shirk our responsibility financially or otherwise in relation to the arts.  It recognises that the individual talent and excellence of artists is crucial to building an even stronger arts community in Australia.  It also sees important community organisations as playing a role, and it also sees the business community as playing a role not only in terms of providing financial support and building partnerships, but also in terms of the corporate and management expertise that so many people in business can bring.
Can I conclude where I began in thanking all of you for coming and saying how greatly encouraged I am and I know that my two Ministers – Richard Alston and Peter McGauran – are that so many of you having such other diverse and busy responsibilities have been able to find time to come along.  It is an impressive launch of what I believe will be an impressive instrument of further strengthening the importance of arts within the life of our nation.  
Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Cricket; Defence force; International relations
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
JOURNALIST:
Can I ask you a question Prime Minister about cricket?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes you can ask me a question about cricket, is that all right?
JOURNALIST:
Is that Okay?  I think everyone is interested here.  What do you think about tomorrow’s selection.  Should Shane Warne be vice captain?
PRIME MINISTER:
I will leave that to the Australian Cricket Board.  My understanding is that the selectors choose the team and the board appoints the captain and vice captain.  I am not going to buy in to that.  That’s entirely a matter for the Board.  One of the things I’ve got to do as a passionate cricket follower, but also as Prime Minister is to resist the temptation of giving a running commentary on cricket all the time, I don’t think that’s fair to those who have got to run cricket.  I’ll react to outcomes but I can say how delighted I am about the finding in relation to Brett Lee.  Obviously I think he’s a great bowler and I am absolutely delighted for him and for Australian cricket but as to things like vice captaincies I will leave that to the authorities.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think there should be a sort of, the whole role model thing, should that be imposed on people like Shane Warne?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh look, leave me out of that.  
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] education.
PRIME MINISTER:
Hard work, respect for other people, tolerance, being punctual and telling the truth.  I wouldn’t have thought things were very different now are they?  I  think they’re fairly constant sorts of values and I was certainly encouraged at that this school to do those things and I still remember them and they’ve had quite an influence on me.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, has the government been briefed on the shooting of two Indonesian malitia men in…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yes we have.  I think it drives home to all of the Australian community that it is still a dangerous place for the men and women of the ADF who are there.  We’ve had the tendency because of what’s happened in the early stages of the operation to assume there is no danger there.  There remains a lot of danger.  Our men and women are well trained and very well lead and they are well prepared for all developments, but whenever there’s death, it’s a reminder that it’s a dangerous operation and we must keep that in mind.  We have got 1500 young men and women up there for probably another 18 months or two years who are doing a very important job for Australia and we shouldn’t lose sight of that.
JOURNALIST:
Does it worry you sir that the militia groups seem to be growing in strength now?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have remained concerned about the militias and we continue to encourage the Indonesians to do what they can to curb them.  I know there’s a determination on the part of a lot of people in Indonesia to do that and we’d encourage them to keep doing it.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Prime Minister’s education; Education Week 
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………...
Well thank you very much Alexia.  Can everybody hear me?  Good.  To Mr Kevin Weekes the Principal of Earlwood Public School, to Kevin Moss the State Member for Canterbury, to Dale Sullivan, Mark Watts, to Mrs Gloria Kasiou who is the President of the School Council and Sue Lowe the Acting District Superintendent for St George.  And very importantly the students and the parents of Earlwood Public School. 
I’ve rather looked forward to this day for the last couple of weeks when I was able to confirm that I could come to the school.  I think all of us like the opportunity to remember some of the things from our past and certainly this school had a very great influence on me.  And I am very grateful for the education that I received at this school.  I attended this school between 1945 through to the end of 1951 when I went on to Canterbury Boys High School along with a number of other students from this school.  
I think most of you know the Kentucky Fried Chicken in William Street?  I’m sure you do.  I used to own that.  Well not quite.  Our family home used to be there and that was until about 1960… late 1960.  My mother sold it.  And when I attended this school I used to walk across William Street, through the grounds of the then Methodist, now Uniting Church, out into Homer Street and across here.  Because I lived so close I was often very late arriving to school.  
But I do remember my days here very well.  I remember a lot of my teachers.  One that I remember extremely well was a teacher called Jack Doherty.  None of you will of course know him or remember him, it was a long time ago.  But he taught me in sixth class and I can honestly say that he played quite a role in encouraging and shaping my interest in current affairs because we used to have discussions.  We used to have school broadcasts then and I’m sure you still have them in different forms now.  And we used to talk about world affairs.  And he stimulated me to express my interest in all of those things and I found them tremendously enjoyable.  
The first speech I ever made was at an Earlwood Public School function.  It was at our speech day which was held in the old Mayfair Theatre which I think has now sort of disappeared into a galaxy of shops up there in Homer Street.  But of course in the early 1950’s Earlwood boasted two picture shows as they were called then, the Chelsea and the Mayfair.  And both of them have disappeared now.  And we had our speech day there and I made my first speech.  I’ve got to say Alexia that your speech was better, more detailed and more eloquent than the first speech that I made and I think you’ve got a long future in the profession that I followed.  So good luck and I hope you do.  
One thing that I did want to say to all of the students here and that is that even though you may not think it all the time that you are at school it is a special part of your life and the people who teach you are very special people.  Teachers are in my view a group of people in the community who don’t get enough credit and enough praise for the tremendous work they do.  It’s not an easy job being a teacher.  It’s even more difficult these days than I think it was thirty or forty years ago because you’ve got to do a lot of talking, a lot more talking to the children about personal issues and what we sort of older people call pastoral care.  And all of those things are very important.  And I want to say a word for all of your teachers and say what a tremendous job that I think school teachers do.  
I’m personally very grateful for the education that I got in the New South Wales government school system both here and at Canterbury Boys High School.  I don’t think I could have got a better education anywhere else and I always remember with enormous affection the school days that I had here.  I made some very good friends here, one or two of them I still see occasionally.  I went on to make some close fiends that I’ve kept in contact with at High School.  
I have happy recollections of being at this school.  And one of the other things that I remember very well is that whenever I went to speech days if the guest speaker that was asked to come along spoke for too long I used to get a little tired of it too.  And one of things that I was reminded of by my wife, and I married a school teacher, was that when you address school gatherings you don’t go on for too long. 
And so to all of you girls and boys, you’re in a very nice school.  I have very fond recollections of it.  It’s great to see so many of your Mums and Dads and people from the local community.  Earlwood was always a community that stuck together very well and I look at the faces, I’ve read some of the names, I recognise what a wonderful cross section of modern Australia this school represents.  There’s so many different cultural backgrounds which represent very much the modern Australia and it’s a tremendous tribute to the capacity of this country to welcome people in a very warm and affectionate and open way.  
I hope all of you go on to realise what you want out of life.  Always try very hard.  The most important thing about having a career and the most important thing about anything you do is that no matter what you choose to do you do it well because career satisfaction is not so much the job you get, how important it may be, how influential it may be, how well paid it may be.  I know a lot of well paid people who are very dissatisfied and very unhappy because they don’t have career satisfaction.  I know people who aren’t as well paid or remunerated as others yet because they get tremendous career satisfaction out of what they do and they enjoy doing something very well they enjoy life a lot more than people who are a lot better off.  
So it’s not just a question of notoriety and money, it is also a question of job satisfaction.  And I hope all of you realise what you want to do and I hope as you do that you’ll always remember the contribution that your school has made particularly your very happy days here at Earlwood.  And I say as part of the Education Week how delighted I am in a personal way to contribute to it.  
I thank the school very warmly.  I thank you Alexia for your letter and I’m so delighted that I was able to fit it into my schedule and come and I’ll look forward to meeting some of you in a few moments and your parents and meeting some of the staff.  But you’re at a great school.  Always respect the job that your teachers do and I wish all of you in life very good fortune for the years ahead. 
Thank you. 
[ends]


Subjects: Pharmaceutical industry; New Tax System; 'can do'; community;
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Mr Lilley.  To Dr McKillop, the Mayor of Ryde, Councillor Edna Wilde, ladies and gentlemen.
To those who don';t live in the electorate of Bennelong, welcome not only to my electorate, but also welcome to the pharmaceutical manufacturing and information technology capital of Australia.  Because without any doubt this area and most particularly North Ryde is increasingly the home for many major pharmaceutical manufacturing companies and many companies that are at the leading edge of technological, particularly information technology development in Australia.
Almost exactly to the hour and the minute a week ago, on the other side of Australia in Perth, I opened a new factory for a company called Kaelis and France originally associated with seafood, but now very much into the business of exporting what are colloquially called in the trade, frozen TV dinners for the Japanese market.  Now you might think that is a tenuous link between what I am opening today and what I am honouring by way of investment today, but it';s not all that tenuous.  Because having gone around that factory in Perth a week ago, and having gone around this marvellous facility and met so many of the employees, and had the opportunity of being told of the product, the modern technology involved, the value to the manufacturing process of information technology it was another reminder to me of how false is the dichotomy between the so-called old and new economies.  There is really only one economy and that is the economy of successful companies that combine a basic human need and manufacturing for it with the latest and the most sophisticated information technology aids.
And just as I saw in that factory I opened in Perth a week ago, I saw again this morning as I went around your marvellous facility, I saw the application of very sophisticated technology.  The manufacturing of product that meets a human need - pain relief, life preservation, things that have been with us and challenges that have been with us and have been part of the human needs of societies and nations from a very, very long period of time.  So I want to congratulate AstraZeneca';s great achievements. I';ve got to thank Dr McKillop for the confirmation of another $30 million investment in manufacturing in our country.  
Your company employs nine hundred people throughout Australia.  That';s a very large workforce and many of you are here today and it';s very important to remark on the quality of the workplace relations of this company.  Good workplace relations, good working conditions, proper remuneration, good communications between management and employees are absolutely indispensable elements of any successful company in Australia at the present time.  There';s no successful company in Australia that has really bad workplace relations.  Those who have bad workplace relations simply don';t achieve success.  
Exports from your company have grown from less than $10 million in 1992, to more than $90 million last year.  And in the past three years, as your chairman mentioned, $42 million has been invested by your company in research and development in the terms of collaborative, exploratory, clinical and pharmaceutical research.  
We';ve heard a lot in the last week about 'knowledge nation';.  Knowledge of itself is a very important commodity.  It is indispensable.  It is part of the very essence of our being as humans.  But knowledge itself is not enough.  Unless a nation has a capacity to convert knowledge into income and jobs, it cannot fully fulfil the human needs of our modern society.  And the goals of government must there be to create to the maximum extent possible what I';ve often described in the past as a 'can-do'; community.
If you examine the history of Australia, you find that we have often been given the size of our population, at the forefront in invention.  We';ve been in the forefront at turning ideas into a practical application in terms of an invention. But we have often lost the quality and the value that could have been captured to our society of those ideas because we have lacked the capacity to innovate and convert the invention, the knowledge into a product of commercial value in satisfying human needs.  And of the many challenges that face our community in the years ahead, will be the challenge to be as innovative and as capable of converting out undoubted knowledge, the undoubted skills of our workforce, the inventive capacity of our workforce into products which generate incomes and provide jobs and satisfy human needs.  
And your company here in Australia has been a very good example of that kind of thing.  It';s prospered because it';s had a knowledgeable, contented workforce and it';s had the capacity to convert those, the ideas of that in a practical way into products that are of commercial value and are sold around the world.  It recognises the value in the modern Australia of an export capacity.  It recognises that the size of the domestic population is insufficient in so many areas to sustain the demand that is needed for a manufacturing capacity and therefore it seeks exports.  
It is true as Dr McKillop said that the marketing environment in which AstraZeneca operates is very competitive.  We';re very aware of that in the Government and that is why we have sought in our time in office to make this country as competitive as possible.  There are obvious natural attractions in establishing your headquarters in Australia if you are an overseas company.  The lifestyle of this country, its social cohesion, its openness, its lack of class pretension, all of those things make it a remarkably attractive country in which to live.  But that is not enough, it';s necessary for it to be competitive.  It';s necessary for it to have a competitive economy, a low inflation, low taxation economy.  And that is part of the thinking that lay behind the Government';s recent taxation reforms that will give us one of the lowest corporate taxation rates in the world.  It will virtually halve our capital gains tax, it will remove some of the disincentives for investment from abroad in the more entrepreneurial and venture capital risk taking exercises that any country needs in order to succeed and to prosper. 
But are very conscious of the need for a benign, encouraging, welcoming, economic environment.  And we are very pleased at the impressive number of companies in so many areas that are seeing the virtue of making Australia a place for investment, a place to establish regional headquarters for the Asia Pacific region and of course in a very special local sense, we are delighted that so many of them are choosing to establish their headquarters here in North Ryde.
So, for all of those reasons I am particularly pleased to be with you today.  I want to emphasise how very important and high is the Government';s priority on pharmaceutical manufacturing.  I am aware of the particular relationship that exists because of the nature of the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme in this country between companies such as yours and the Federal Government.  And I understand very well, the legitimate claims and entreaties of the industry in terms of that particular relationship.  I am aware and I salute the investment that your company has made in research and development, it is indispensable to the success of companies living in the modern environment.  Yours is a great success story.  You';ve not only been successful here, but of course you';ve been very successful in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in the world.  And I thank you very warmly in opening this new phase of your company';s operations.  I thank you very warmly for the face that you';ve shown to Australia.  I thank you very warmly for the contribution that you are making in a highly competitive market.  And I also salute the success commercially that you have achieved and the example that you represent to the modern Australia of how the future lies in combining in the most modern, sophisticated and technologically underpinned way possible, all of those manufacturing activities that continue to service an ongoing human need. And providing drugs, relieving human suffering, prolonging life, improving the quality of life has been an ageless human need, it will always be there and there will also be a very special place in society for companies such as yours.  And in that spirit I congratulate the management and the workforce and I have very great pleasure in declaring the new stage of your company';s operations well and truly up and running.  Good luck to all of you.  I hope you go from strength to strength.  Thank you.
[ends]


Her Majesty The Queen has agreed to extend the term of office of the Governor-General, His Excellency the Hon Sir William Deane, AC, KBE, until 30 June 2001.
Sir William has performed his duties as Governor-General with dignity and distinction.
The extension will mean that Sir William and Lady Deane will participate in their official capacities in a number of the significant events planned to commemorate the Centenary of the Federation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 2001.
8 August 2000


Subjects: Education; political life
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you Ted.  Ladies and gentlemen and students.
It is quite a pleasure to be here to spend an hour hearing something of the special projects of your school.  Particularly the projects providing a more effective transition from school to work.  And one of the ways in which education has changed over the last ten or twenty years is a greater recognition of the need to provide a closer link between what you do at school and how doing things at school prepares you for the workforce and helps you to find employment after you leave school.
Over the last couple of weeks, I've had quite an experience of visiting classrooms.  Last week, it was Education Week in New South Wales and I was invited to go back to my old primary school in the suburbs of Sydney where I attended some fifty years ago in Earlwood.  The school had changed a great  deal, but it was quite an experience to go back and to visit some of the old classrooms and to talk to some of the students in that school now.  And it was a reminder to me of the value of the public education that I received in Sydney and the importance of my early school years. 
One of the things I learnt when I was at school was that if you had some visiting dignitary you didn't want them to make too long a speech, but you enjoyed the opportunity of putting a few ideas to him and asking him or her a few questions and I know that some of you are fairly keen that that happen.
The message that I want to bring to you today is that in the modern world it is very important that we focus as much as we possibly can on getting the best outcomes for our students.  Employment opportunities are always there if we can get the right outcomes, we can train people in the right way and as the economy continues to run well we can get the two of those moving together.
Now I know that the School to Work Transition programmes that have been functioning here have been very successful. I listened to what the Principal had to say about funding, taken that on board.  And I heard some of the stories from the students who'd had success as a result of the programmes here in finding apprenticeships and finding practical opportunities in all, in a whole variety of trades. And in the moments that I have been here I have had the chance of hearing, I guess a cross-section of aspirations of young Australians and this is for me a very informative experience because all of you either right now or in the very near future are looking at finding apprenticeship training at TAFE or university opportunities that are going to lead you into employment.  And we're very keen at a Federal Government level to work with State Governments and also importantly with local school councils.  
One of the things that's very different now in the way schools are run around Australia to what they were when I was at school is that you have school councils that involve parents and they involve the local community and they involve also some representatives of the student body.  And I think that is a very sensible way of running a school because the successful schools, like successful businesses, like successful sporting teams are schools that have a joint team effort, where everybody recognises they have a role to play, everybody has some rights and also everybody has some responsibilities to try and make a contribution and to try and make a difference.
So I want to thank the Principal and I want to thank the School Council and most particularly I want to thank the students for having me here.  I was, it was suggested to me by my very good colleague and friend, Bob Charles, who's been your federal member since 1990 that I should come along and meet the student body of this school because it has demonstrated a capacity to work very effectively with quite a number of programmes.  
Now that's all I wanted to say, but I wanted you to take the opportunity of having me here, captive to this microphone and captive to this audience, if you wanted to ask me some questions, or to put some suggestions to me about how to run the school, how to run the country, how to run my government, or indeed how to run anything you like, I'll have a go at trying to respond to them.  But thank you very, very much for having me as your guest, I've enjoyed the opportunity of talking to you and I'll be very happy to respond to your questions.  Thank you very much.
QUESTION:
What are the features of your job as a prime minister that you enjoy most?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, that is actually, that is a commonly asked question, what do I enjoy most.  But it's really a very easy question to answer.  The thing I enjoy most is quite literally what I'm doing now.  It is the opportunity of going all around the country and talking to different groups of Australians and they are all different no matter how regularly you do it.
You might think it would get uniform and boring, it doesn't.  It's quite the reverse, you have a completely different insight into the way the country works, what it is like, what its people are like.  And although I've been in politics now for twenty-six years, I've of course only been prime minister for four and a half years of that twenty-six years and the opportunity of meeting different groups of Australians, not only here, but in other parts of the world.
Anzac Day this year I spent on the Gallipoli Peninsula and there were 12,000 to 15,000 young Australians there on the morning of the Anzac Day Service and it was quite an extraordinary experience to meet all of these young, enthusiastic Australians away from their country, but being drawn to the country and affection for what it had achieved.  So, that's the best part of the job, by far.
QUESTION:
Can I ask a little about your educational background to get where you are today?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, my educational background is that I went to Earlwood Public School.  Earlwood is a suburb in Sydney, it's in the inner south-west of Sydney.  I went there until I was twelve and then I went to Canterbury Boys' High School, which is I suppose if you had a rough equivalent in Melbourne, it would be, University High or Melbourne High.  It was one of those, it was a government school.  And then I did what was then called the Leaving Certificate, which was the forerunner of now what's called in New South Wales, the Higher School Certificate, which is the equivalent of your VCE.  And then after that I went to Sydney University and I did a law degree and I became a Bachelor of Laws, I graduated from Sydney University in 1961 and then I practiced law in the city for about thirteen years and then I entered parliament at the age of thirty-four.  And I entered, so that's . . . I mean I am not suggesting that my education stopped at that point, education as the old clich goes is a lifelong experience, but my formal education was entirely within the government system in New South Wales.  It was a good education and I am very grateful for the quality of the education that I received.
QUESTION:
What's your best memory of your school days?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, the best memories of my school days were, well I think, I used to enjoy debating.  I was a very keen debater and I represented my school at debating.  I'd have to say I also enjoyed very much playing rugby union - I know that's not very widely played here in Melbourne - played rugby union and cricket, cricket is my great sporting passion.  I managed to get into the second eleven at school and the second fifteen.  I played either fullback or five-eighth, you're probably not all that familiar, those of you who don't follow rugby with those field positions.  But I enjoyed debating and I enjoyed the sporting contacts.  And I found, I found school, I was also in the school cadets, I found all of those activities, I think it's very valuable if you have the opportunity to take part in a range of school activities.  I guess I was like everybody else, there were moments when I didn't like school, and there were other moments when I found it valuable.  When I look back on the teachers I had, I am very grateful for a teacher I had in my sixth class at primary school who inspired in me a great, helped to inspire in me a great interest in public affairs and discussing international issues.  
It was the first time I had been introduced to school broadcasts where you had somebody talking about what was happening in other parts of the world and what was happening in Australia.  I can remember, I know it's dating me very badly, but when the then Prime Minister of Australia, Ben Chifley opened the Snowy Mountains Scheme, you've no doubt read and heard about the Snowy Mountains Scheme, it was in 1949, it was just when I was, I was still at primary school and we all stopped to hear this broadcast.  And of course the Snowy Mountains Scheme is the biggest national development project that Australia's had in all of her history.  And they're the sort of things that you remember from school. I am never terribly good at remembering particular incidents, but they're the sort of activities and recollections that I carry very vividly.
QUESTION:
What has been your most embarrassing moment as prime minister?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, the most embarrassing moments I've had as prime minister is when I've sort of got somebody's name badly wrong.  And I mean that can happen to anybody.  You can get the name of a country wrong, or you can get somebody's name wrong and you can quite unconsciously.
I wasn't prime minister when this happened, but once when I was Leader of the  Opposition I was campaigning in an election in South Australia, the Leader of the Opposition was John and the Premier was John and I got their surnames mixed and I said vote for John and I got the wrong surname.  And the media obligingly picked it up and I had a fairly rough time.  But you know, I've always been fairly careful of names ever since.  It can, it really can happen to anybody, it really can and, but it doesn't sort of alter the embarrassment one bit, I can assure you.
QUESTION:
When you retire from politics, what do you hope to do?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I haven't really thought, I hope to do something useful.  I'd like to at some stage, put some time back for a very good charitable cause.  I think people that have been in public life and if public life's been good to them, they have something of an obligation to put something back to the community.  And I would like to do that.
I guess I will indulge even further some of my sporting interests, but I haven't given a great deal of thought to the detail of what I might do.  I think it's very important when you have a change of working experience that you find something that keeps you mentally active.  I mean the opportunity of perhaps imparting to people who are interested in politics or government some of the experiences that I've had, I think that would be a valuable way.  
I think it is very important, no matter what field you're in, whether it's politics or a trade or a profession, or a service industry, after you've been in it for a number of years and you've achieved, you have some achievements in it, you do have some responsibility in a completely voluntary way to impart some of your knowledge and some of your experience to people who might aspire in different ways to do what you've done.  Or do something similar to what you've done.  They're the sorts of things that would cross my mind, but I can't say I've given a great deal of attention to it.
QUESTION:
What's your vision of Australia in twenty years time?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, in twenty years time, what's my vision of Australia?  I want to see, I want to see a country that is able to offer jobs and hope to its young people.  I want to see a country that relates very well to its neighbours. I want to see a country where people, irrespective of their background continue to be treated in a tolerant, decent way.  Where, whether your name is Jones, or Smith, or Panapolous, or Stravinski, or whatever it may be, whatever your background may be, whether it's aboriginal, or it's Christian or Jewish or Muslim, that everybody is treated in a completely tolerant, harmonious way.  I think that's very important.  I think Australia is very good at that now.  
I think we sometimes sell short how successful we have been in integrating people with entirely different backgrounds.  When I went back to my old school in Earlwood, I was told that 40% of the students there are of Greek heritage, about 30% are of Chinese and Vietnamese and Indian and the rest of other mixed backgrounds.  When I was there, there were very few people other than of English and Scottish and Irish backgrounds, there were a few boys of Greek background, now all of that has changed a great deal and I think we've been very successful in Australia.   We sometimes talk as though we haven't been successful. I think we have.  We have, we're a very harmonious country and we've been very successful in amalgamating people and I think that's fantastic.  And I would like to see that kept and built.  
And the other thing is that I want the fact that Australia is seen as a distinctive, special culture around the world, I would like that to be very, very strong as well because there is something very distinctive about being an Australian and I don't want that sort of lost in, in the sort of greyness of too much uniformity around the world.  I would like to see that distinctive Australian character and edge preserved and enhanced if possible.
QUESTION:
How do you manage a family life being away from home so much?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it's easier now because my children are grown up.  I have three children, I have a daughter who is twenty-six, a son who is twenty-two and a son who is almost twenty.  So, they sort of are able to look after themselves reasonably well.  We still see, they're still with us at home and we still see a lot of them.  But it's not quite as difficult to manage as it used to be.  How did I manage it before?  Well, the important thing is that if you have a job, and there are a lot of jobs that take mothers and fathers away from their children at various times, it's really a question of organising your life so that you are always there when there are some important events and I always saw to it that I was present at important events for my children when they were at school, or other activities.  But when you were at home you gave them your attention and you didn't spend all the time on the phone talking to your colleagues.  And the other thing is that when you are away it's very important to keep in touch by telephone, keep in touch regularly with your family while you're moving around the country, they don't feel as disconnected.  And then when occasionally they see you on television and the phone rings, well they sort of think that they've got some contact with you.  And it's amazing if you do organise it carefully like that it's amazing how you can establish a routine and that your family can grow up not feeling as though they've missed out on time that you've spent away.  And I think I've been fairly fortunate in organising my life in that way and so far, touch wood, so good.
QUESTION:
What do you like to do in your spare time?
PRIME MINISTER:
What do I like doing in my spare, I don't have a lot of spare time.  I have very little spare time.  I guess the three things I would do in my spare time, I quite enjoy watching television.  I enjoy television, I think it's a wonderful medium and I watch all sorts of things, I watch films, I watch a lot of sport.  And I play golf.  I've taken to golf with a bit of a passion over the last three or four years.  I try and play that on a regular basis, the improvement is very gradual, very, very gradual indeed.  I look with envy on the great achievements of champion golfers like all people who essentially hack around a bit do.  But they're the sort, they're really the things I do most in my spare time, but there's not an enormous amount of it.  I find that somehow or other I am sort of very heavily preoccupied.
[Ends]


Subjects: Peter Nugent's 1989/1990 campaign for the Victorian seat of Aston; the Howard Government's achievement since coming to office in 19
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Peter for that very warm and generous welcome.  To my other federal parliamentary colleague, Phillip Barresi, to all the other many other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
It's always a delight to come back to the electorate of Aston.  The first time I ever campaigned for Peter Nugent was in fact in Wantirna.  I accepted an invitation to, when I was leader of the opposition back in 1989, to attend a ball or something at the Wantirna High School to help as part of Peter's campaign to beat a fellow called Ferguson I think who was then the federal member.  I think he was a union official like most of them.  And we went along and it was the most. in between the invitation I sort of lost the leadership of the opposition but I still went along.  And I remember it was a great night and that sort of began my association with Peter Nugent.  He won of course in 1990 when the Liberal Party did extraordinarily well in the state of Victoria.  It had something to so with the growing unpopularity of the then state Labor government.  It had quite a bit to do with 17.5% mortgage interest rates and of course it had more to do with the quality of the candidates because it had an enormous amount to do with all of those factors.  
But Aston is an electorate that I've visited on a regular basis.  And it brings together something of a cross section of suburban Australia.  I visited this magnificent Bayswater South Primary School this morning which is a role model as a government school providing bilingual educational opportunities not only for schools in Australia but also around the world.  And it was a really sort of morale building experience to spend an hour with such dedicated teachers, enthusiastic students and a supportive community.  And it was all coming together in a very special and quite spectacular way.
We're having this marvellous gathering in the electorate of Aston about half way through the Government's second term in office.  And it's an opportunity to reflect a little bit on what has been achieved but also to remind ourselves of the challenges that lie in front of us.  Because running a government and running a political party is never something that you can take for granted or you can be static or passive about.  It's always a huge mistake in politics to ever imagine that you've finished the job.  That having done a lot of things you can take it easy for a while - that's when something out of the clear blue sky comes along to cause difficulty.  Now we have done a lot.  And as Liberal Party members and as Liberal Party supporters we have every reason to be proud of what we have achieved over the last four and a half years.  
The Australian economy now is stronger than it has been at any time since the late 1960's.  We have lower rates of unemployment now than at any time in the last ten years.  And as Peter said the unemployment figures that came out this morning show that our unemployment rate is now down to 6.3%.  We have now created in the four and a half years that we have been in government no fewer than 809,000 new jobs.  
And that is really the ultimate goal, the end product, the human dividend of strong economic growth and strong economic policies.  You don't run economic policies, you don't commit yourself to economic reforms for the purpose of passing some examination in economic management.  You do it to produce a human and a social dividend.  And being able to stand in front of you and say that as a result of the economic policies we've followed we now have a much lower rate of unemployment than we had.  We have a youth unemployment rate which is dramatically lower than what it was in March of 1996.  And I can remember in one of the two debates that I had with the then prime minister Paul Keating, compered by Ray Martin, I was asked what I would like to be able to say after my first term in government that I achieved.  And one of the things I said I'd like to be able to speak of was of some significant reduction in youth unemployment. 
Now we still have a distance to go.  And for those people who are trying hard to get work and who still can't get it we have an ongoing responsibility.  But it does give me great heart and I know it must give you and it must give people who are working elsewhere around the country in the Government's political interests to be able to look back and say well we have made an identifiable difference.  
The measurement of somebody's success in public life is what he or she achieves not necessarily the length of time that he or she holds a particular position.  I know of people that have held positions for a long time and done nothing with the power and the influence that they have.  And I've known people that have held positions for relatively short periods of time that have made a difference.  
We have transformed the Australian economy.  It is stronger now.  Business conditions are better than they were.  They're not perfect, they are better than what they were.  We have undertaken some quite dramatic reforms.  Our industrial relations changes are quite ground breaking.  And all of those industrial relations changes will be threatened if there is a change of government.  
I spoke rather facetiously a moment ago of the union affiliation of the former Labor member for this electorate.  I said that quite deliberately not because there's anything wrong with belonging to a union or being a union official but there's something wrong with a political party where something like 70-80% of its members and 80% or so of the front bench of the party are former union officials when only 20% of the Australian community belongs to a trade union.  In other words you have a party that is skewed in its representation of the Australian community.  And if you have a skewed party you're going to get skewed policies and you're going to get skewed outcomes in government.  I think it's very important for all of us to think for a moment about the alternative.  
We're feeling confident.  We've introduced tax reform with a minimum of the difficulties that people forecast, and I'll come back to that in a moment.  But in political life, and I speak to you as the leader of the parliamentary Liberal Party as much as Prime Minister.  In political life you can never take anything for granted.  We found that in Victoria.  There probably weren't many people in this room who thought we were going to lose the Victorian election.  I didn't think we would but we did and that is a lesson to all of us.  You don't take the public for granted.  Once you've achieved one thing you get on to the next and don't assume that there's some sort of lasting recollection of every single thing you've done.  And I don't say that critically because people's lives are busy.  We all have our personal challenges and our personal responsibilities, we worry about the future of our families, we get on with our lives and that applies to the great bulk of our fellow country men and women. 
So it's a big challenge to win the next election.  I believe we can do it and I believe though that we will best be able to do it if we remember the importance of keeping contact with the rank and file of the Australian community. And never imagining that there's ever been a government in the history of this country that has been there other than by the gift of the consent of the Australian public.  
But we set out almost three years to reform the Australian taxation system and any body who has had anything at all to do with politics in this country knew that that was one of the great reforms that had to be undertaken.  We've needed to do it for 25 or 30 years.  Bob Hawke set out to do it and then was scared out of it by the trade union movement.  Mr Keating set out to do it and he lost the support of his then prime minister and gave away in disgust and then as prime minister launched an absolutely negative fear campaign against the Fight Back programme of John Hewson in 1993.  Remember the 1993 election?  The Labor Party campaign against us and our GST.  And as soon as they got in to office, they increased every last indirect tax they could lay their hands on without any compensation for the pensioners or the fixed income earners.  
Now I knew that it was difficult.  I knew it was dangerous.  I was told by people.  I mean I was amused to read in the papers that the government's meant to be poll driven.  When I told the Liberal Party's pollster that we were going to introduce a GST, I think he looked around for another contract.  He didn't think it was a particularly sensible thing to do.  It was a politically risky but in the end I had always believed that if you told the Australian people what you thought was necessary in the national interest, you laid out your plan in detail, you made sure it was fair and then you set out with all your energy to sell it to them, that they would come to understand and support that what you are doing was in the country's interest.  And I think the reason why we won the election in 1998 and the reason why we ultimately got the legislation through Parliament with some changes was that deep down the Australian people realised that this was a reform that had to be undertaken.  
And the thing that gives me the greatest pleasure of all in relation to tax reform is that the negative campaign waged by our opponents and others has failed.  They wanted the first of July to be a disaster.  They wanted the world to come to an end on the first of July.  They wanted the sky to fall in on me.  They wanted every small business man and woman in the country to be up in arms.  They wanted people to be complaining about the GST and when that didn't happen, they were left rather bereft and rather barren and rather naked in a policy sense.  Because if you invest of all of your hopes and aspirations on negative things, rather than positive things, you are bound to be disappointed.  
And the great thing about what we've tried to do over the last four-and-a-half years is that we've set out to do something positive.  We've always taken the view that you are elected to do things and to change things for the better. And that's going to be our watchword over the next 18 months. If anybody imagines that the reform process is finished please let me assure you it's not.  It never finishes.  We're not going to do foolish things, we're not going to do unnecessary things, but there are a lot of other areas that need further change and reform.  We need to make certain that our social welfare system is thoroughly contemporary for Australia in the 21st century.  That doesn't mean for a moment let me tell you that we're going to take away benefits that people are entitled to.  We're not in the business of cutting pensions or benefits.  That's never been our philosophy.  We are in the business of making sure that people who are not entitled to them don't get them, and we also very strongly support the principle of mutual obligation that says that if people get a benefit and they can put something back to the community in return for that benefit then it's only reasonable that they be asked to do so. But this is an area where some further change and reform to strengthen the system and to make it more efficient and more relevant to the 21st century is clearly needed and there'll be more said about that in the weeks and the months ahead.
So the process of reform and the process of further strengthening the Australian economy must go on.  But as Peter said political life is not just about economics. It's important, it's important to see economic policy as a means to an end and not an end in itself.  As I said a moment ago we don't make the economy efficient so that we can get 85 or 90 out of 100 from an economics professor. We make the economy work better so that we can generate flesh and blood personal opportunities for people.  All of you in small business think now how much better it is to be operating under a lower interest rate regime.  Think how much better it is to have the opportunity of running your businesses in more buoyant economic times.  Think of how much better it is to know that the community has the confidence to embrace something as big as tax reform. And one of the things that's great about the tax reform we brought in is that it demonstrates to all of us that we can master change, we can handle difficult transitions, and we can emerge from the process a stronger and better country.  And that is enormously important to our sense of national self being and our sense of national confidence.  
And as Peter was kind enough to say, we've also been busy in other areas.  The willingness of this country to stand up for the people of East Timor; the way in which we have rebalanced the foreign relations of Australia to make certain that although our prime area of concern is the Asian-Pacific region, we also have very important links with other parts of the world.  When I led the delegation to London a few weeks ago to commemorate a hundred years of the passage of the Australian Constitution through the then Westminster Parliament, some of the media criticised it and quite apart from the historic or cultural significance of the visit, and the important milestone it represented in commemorating an event that was quite material and crucial to the federation of Australia a hundred years ago.  
Most critics seem to forget that the United Kingdom is the second largest foreign investor after the United States in Australia, that the United Kingdom is one of the most important destinations for Australian foreign investment abroad, and that Australia is now second only to France as an exporter of wine to the United Kingdom.  It's a reminder that the relationship between the two societies is a very contemporary one.  And when I hear people talking about us not having any further relevance to Europe, I'm also reminded that there are what, a million Australians of an Italian heritage in this country, 700,000 or 800,000 of Greek heritage and so the list goes on.  Australia has very long and enduring historical links not only with Britain and Ireland but also with many other countries of Europe.  And one of the special things about Australia is that we have a bit of everything.  Here we are in the Asian-Pacific region, we're of European heritage, a lot of associations with the United States, and of course we have hundreds of thousands of Australians of Asian heritage - from India, from China, from everywhere - who are making a magnificent contribution to this country.  And the idea that we should not see ourselves very much as a political citizen of the world and not just a citizen of our own region is a very unreal view of where Australia's place in the 21st century should be.
So I speak to you as a Prime Minister who's certainly not complacent; who believes that we have justified the trust people put in us in 1996 and 1998; who believes that this country is stronger and better than it was when we came to office; believes that this country has a very strong sense of its place in the world, a place that enables it to punch above its weight of 19 million people; and also a country that is about to showcase itself to the rest of the world through the Olympic Games, but also a country that has in front of it like all other societies in the modern world, our share of challenges and our share of difficulty.
And the last thing I want to say to you is that I have received tremendous support from the rank and file of the Liberal Party in the time I've been Prime Minister and that's been delivered to me from the people of Aston by your local member.  I congratulate him on the terrific contribution he's made to the people of Aston, and the very very vigilant and the effective way that he's represented them in the national parliament.  He's great credit to the electorate and he represents you extremely well and I'm absolutely delighted to be a colleague and a friend of his and to come here and give him all the support that I can.  Thank you very much.
[ends] 


Subjects: Intelligent Island; Neville Roach; Information Technology
E&amp;OE..................
Thankyou very much Neville, the Premier, my Parliamentary colleagues, Brian Gibson, John Watson and Brian Harradine, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to be back in Launceston.  I had the opportunity on an early morning walk to remind myself of what a beautiful provincial city Launceston is and therefore it is appropriate for a whole number of reasons that this launch take place here.  It's a reminder of the importance of achieving balanced development in the state of Tasmania and it's also a reminder to me and to the members of my government and to others generally of the importance of those who live and carry on their businesses in the very large cities of Australia, the important contribution made to the community and the life and the development of Australia by the more significant provincial cities, such as Launceston.
This project, 'Intelligent Island' is being funded to the tune of 40 million dollars by the Federal government.  It's been made entirely possible and only possible because of the further partial sale of Telstra and it is appropriate that I acknowledge the presence of Brian Harradine here today because without the support of Brian Harradine and the other independent in the Senate, this money would not be available because it was opposed as you know by all of the opposition parties in the Senate, the Australian Democrats and the Australian Greens.  
And I am delighted that we are able to say in relation to this project that already, a very strong board and I thank Neville Roach, who is a very highly respected business figure in Australia and in his other activities gives great leadership in relation to building the community life of this country, his involvement in matters relating to the ethnic diversity of Australia is well know, he chaired a committee of inquiries set up by the Government in that area and I am very grateful for the contribution that he is willing to make on the -coming on the back of his business activities to so many community challenges.
There's a lot written, indeed there are acres of print and millions of words spoken about the importance of information technology.  Not only to Australia but to the world.  There's a very strong and credible view that the principal reason that the American economy is now performing so well is that that country is now beginning to reap the dividends of the massive investment in information technology and technology generally and it's therefore tremendously important that this country remain at the cutting edge of what's happening in that area. And we shouldn't sell ourselves short.  Australians are great embracers of new technology.  It's not just information technology, if you go back decades, you'll find that if Australians were quicker in taking things up than many others.  In the post war years, Australians took to the new modern consumer appliances more rapidly than many other societies and on per capita basis, we quickly raced ahead of many of the counter part communities in Europe and we are second only to the United States now in the usage of the internet.  We're second to the United States only in relation to mobile phones and we've arguably got a superior network.  Anybody who's tried on occasion to negotiate the mobile phone network of the United States will know that that's absolutely the truth. 
So there's a lot going for this country when it comes to information technology but we need to increasingly add value to that and that is what this initiative is all about.  I mean the $40 million fund, it means that of the $920 million that has come out of the sale of T2 as it's called, the second sale of part of Telstra, out of $920 million, $168 million of that is being invested in various activities in Tasmania alone.  And that is a very significant provision, a very appropriate provision and one that I'm very happy and can easily defend and support in any discussions I have with premiers in other parts of Australia who sometimes say to me how is it that Tasmania has $168 million?  And my reply is you look at the quality of each of those projects and you'll find that every last dollar is fully justified.  
Just to give you an idea of what the board has already done.  They've developed a strategic plan consisting of seven elements.  And these seven initiatives will assist the development of an internationally competitive Tasmanian IT industry.  There's $8 million for an IT&amp;T incubator to assist in a range of business and management development services as well as providing start up funding for firms.  There's $10 million for an investment fund to give an accessible funding mechanism with debt and equity components for Tasmanian IT&amp;T firms.  There's $10 million for a centre of excellence to create a focal point for innovation and to promote IT skills development.  There's $5 million for a skills development fund for projects to support the growth of an IT skills base in this state.  There's $6 million for investment attraction to maximise the access to Tasmanian IT&amp;T firms have to strategic partnerships.  A $500,000 to market the capability of Tasmania's IT&amp;T sector and a $500,000 for a study to better align telecommunications infrastructure with industry development goals. 
Neville Roach has already told you of the calibre of the board.  I thank the Tasmanian Government through the Premier for its participation in the administration of this fund and the partnership signed between the Tasmanian Government and the Minister, Senator Richard Alston back in March.  Through cooperation the two governments will ensure that this federally funded project makes a major contribution to the development of the IT industry in Tasmania.
I want to conclude off the back of yesterday's employment figures.  We are experiencing in Australia at the present time the best employment outlook this country has had for a decade.  Unemployment is still too high in this country.  It's still too high in parts of Tasmania.  It's lower now than it was a number of years ago.  I believe that it can be driven down even further.  But in order to drive it down further we'll need to do a number of things.  We'll need to maintain a strong and steady rate of economic growth.  If we can maintain 4% or better over the next few years we can not only keep unemployment where it is now but perhaps get it down a bit more.  
But we've got to do a little more than that, we've also got to take advantage of opportunities that present themselves.  We've got to make certain that we get every last job that might be available out of the information technology revolution.  We can't afford to assume it will happen.  We have to drive initiatives.  We have to be pro-active as we are being in relation to Intelligent Island.  And we have to make absolutely certain that we have an economy that is flexible enough to accommodate change and to accommodate innovation.  And if we can achieve those three things, in five years time there's no reason why we can't have an even lower rate of unemployment and be talking about getting it down a bit more than we have at the present time.  We have come a long way but you never mark time.  You either keep going forward or you go backwards.  And Intelligent Island is making certain that Tasmania will be there.  Tasmania will be part of the new jobs harvest from information technology and I'm delighted therefore to launch it.  I thank my colleagues for being here today.  I thank the Tasmanian Government for its willingness to cooperate with the federal Government in implementing this programme.  I think it's important for all of us as Australians that governments work together once policy has been established to make sure that the policy is implemented in the most effective way imaginable and I most warmly thank Neville Roach for the leadership that he has given to the board of management of Intelligent Island. 
Thank you.  
ends 


E&amp;OE..................
Well, thank you very much, Mayor, to the Premier of Tasmania, Jim Bacon, Senator Jocelyn Newman, my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I always enjoy coming to sporting grounds as you know along with, I'm sure, everybody in this room, in this dressing room.  I see sport as one of those things that unifies Australians and cuts across all of the other divides that may be in our community.  And that's even becoming increasingly true of the various football codes we play in this country.  When I was a young bloke growing up in Sydney, not only did people in Sydney sort of usually look with indifference on the football codes played in Victoria and Western Australia and the other non-rugby league or union playing states, but even between rugby union and rugby league there was an enormous divide.  But as the years have gone by one the great things I think has happened in relation to football in this country is that it has become increasingly Australianised.  And there are now increasing numbers of people in traditional rugby areas of Australia that are following with great interest the AFL.  And it's amazing in a city like Sydney how many people now follow, not only as spectators when the Swans and other teams are playing, but also on television, follow with a tremendous interest and affection the fortunes of Australian Rules.
And I hope that in a small way this $5 million grant from the Federal Government will play a part in strengthening the support for and the participation of Tasmanians in the football code I know that predominately claims their affection and that is the AFL.  And I know that there is growing interest of some of the best known AFL clubs from the mainland in this part of Australia and I know there are representatives of even of some of those clubs here today.  And I welcome and encourage that growing interest across state boundaries and that growing movement to well and truly complete the Australianisation of football in our country.
This ground, to use the jargon of the Mayor, is AFL compliant.  It looks a magnificent surface and even to the relatively untrained Australian Rules eye of the current Prime Minister, it looks and feels extremely smooth.  I didn't give it the Tony Greg key test.  I didn't think that was necessary, I couldn't find enough bull eye soil in the middle in order to do that.  But I did find walking across it a very smooth surface.  The Mayor spoke excitedly to me of the 15,000 people that had gathered here for the Olympic Torch.  And what a fantastic unifying experience that Torch Relay has proved to be.  And isn't it wonderful how quickly some of the cynicism and reserve and indifference in relation to the lead up to the Olympic Games disappears once we are into the real thing.  And the real thing started when the Torch arrived in Australia, and that real thing is going to continue right through until the holding of the Games.
I know how very important, from what I've been told, I know how very important the development of York Park is to the strength of Australian Rules football here in Tasmania.  I know of the measures that were taken several years ago to address some of the concerns people felt about the strength of the game.  I know how strongly supported it is at a junior level, and I also know from other experiences that I have had where the Federal Government, for a combination of reasons, has decided to directly assist in either the creation or the upgrading of a sporting field.  I remember the pleasure I had in opening Graham Park, which is primarily but not totally a rugby league field in Gosford on the Central Coast of New South Wales which we jointly funded along with the New South Wales Government and I opened it in March of this year.  And the exhilaration that that facility brought to the community and I know also of the tremendous encouragement that the supporters of that beautiful cricket field in Bellrieve have derived from the support that the Federal Government is giving to that ground.
Now this is a joint effort, $5 million from the Federal Government, $1.4 million from Launceston City Council.  And in my discussion with him this morning, I know the Premier is personally very committed to the promotion and marketing of the ground and the promotion and marketing of the opportunities and the importance of getting major AFL fixtures to this ground.  I understand the economic and other dynamics of the code mean that if things like that can be achieved that will represent another marvellous step forward.  But you need the basic facilities, you need a good playing surface, you need good facilities for the players, you need comfortable, congenial facilities for spectators.  Australian sporting spectators will no longer put up with inferior facilities.  They like decent facilities and the more that they can be provided and the more locations they can be provided, the better it is.
And the other great advantage, can I say, and it's always a dilemma with, particularly with football fields, the other great advantage of this is that it is compact, and you are close to the game.  I was saying to the Mayor that it may exciting to be one of 110,000 people at Stadium Australia watching a rugby test, or at the grand final in Melbourne in the Great Southern Stand, but you are a long way from the action.  And although it can be enhanced and brought to you by the replay screens, there is nothing quite like the intimacy of a smaller ground like this or Bellrieve.  And I know on the occasions that I have watched an Australian Rules game at the Sydney Cricket Ground from the Old Members Stand, you are really quite close to the action there compared with say, right up even in the where they have the sort of the guests, the Great Southern Stand at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.  So it's got that great facility.
So, as you can see, ladies and gentlemen, I'm pretty enthusiastic about this particular expenditure by the Federal Government.  I think every last dollar of it has been very well spent indeed.  I mean everything we spend money on is very well spent, let me tell you.  I wouldn't want you to think we regard ourselves as in any way profligate.  But this is really, you know, this is a very, very good one this.  And we are pretty enthusiastic about it.  And we hope all who play here, all who change here, and all who view here and cheer here enjoy a great Australian pastime; that's watching football and in the process of it, if it can make a contribution towards the, how shall I put it, the greater prominence of a Tasmanian based club in the AFL, it's somewhere along the road that that materialises then nobody will be more delighted than I and I know everybody else in this room will share that enthusiasm.
Thank you very much. 


Subjects: petrol prices 
E&amp;OE................................ 
JOURNALIST:
What comfort can you offer motorists and voters about the future of petrol prices?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we can't control the world price, nor can we control the exchange rate movements. What I can say is that the world price more than anything else has driven what has happened. We do have the fourth cheapest petrol in the world. I'm unhappy that the price has gone up but it's gone up through factors over which I don't have any control. We could cut the excise and that would reduce the price of petrol, but you'd have to find the money from something else. We cannot run the surplus down at the present time because that would put upward pressure on interest rates and everybody knows now sensitive that is. So if you're going to cut the excise to get a cut in the price of petrol at the bowser you've got to take the money out of something else and I'm not going to take it out of roads or schools or hospitals or defence. I don't think that's sensible.
JOURNALIST:
Which is the bigger worry for you - the political damage or the damage to the surplus?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the thing that I worry about most is the overall health of the Australian economy. That's more important to me than any other consideration and I don't want to see any upward pressure on interest rates and I don't want to cut spending on necessary government services. And all of those State premiers that are calling on the federal government to do something let them nominate the spending areas that they want us to pull money out of. Let Mr Bracks tell me whether he wants me to cut money going to schools in Victoria or roads or hospitals. I mean when you're the Premier, when you hold a high position you've got the responsibility of delivering the hard bits as well as the easy bits. The easy hit for a State premier now is to say Howard's got to fix it. The hard bit is to give me advice as to what spending areas they think I should hack into in order to cut the petrol excise and when they think about that they'll come to the same conclusion as I do.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard the RACV today said that the federal government is in denial about the role that it plays in terms of petrol prices. What's your response?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not in denial at all. I understand it. I mean the RACV has no responsibility for anything other than to sort of make easy calls on governments. I mean they are in the easy hit part of the game. They're like State premiers. But what I would say to the RACV is yes we can cut excise but if we cut excise we either run down the surplus or we reduce spending on roads and schools and hospitals and defence. Now they are the stark choices that I face. And I take the decision as Prime Minister, I accept responsibility for it, that it is more important at the moment to maintain spending in those areas and to keep the budget in healthy surplus than to cut petrol excise and I will be judged on that by the Australian public and I accept that judgement. But unlike the RACV and the State premiers I'm prepared to accept the responsibility of nominating the consequences of a cut in excise. That's the difference.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, fuel plays an important role in firing inflation. How long can you let this go on before it becomes a [inaudible]?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I can't control the world price. President Clinton can't control the world price. Maybe the RACV and the Victorian Premier can and if they've got the secret they might give it to us. But nobody can, no federal government or no Prime Minister can control the world price and I can't control the movements in the exchange rate of the Australian dollar against the United States dollar. It's a difficult situation but in the end I have to make a decision as to what is more important - maintaining the surplus, maintaining current levels of government spending in necessary welfare areas, or cutting the price of fuel by cutting the federal excise. Now at the moment I make the choice that it's more important to maintain the first two things. Now people will make up their own minds on that. I wish I could do all three but I can't and the difference between me and some of the others in this debate is that I'm prepared to face the reality, they just want to score political points.
JOURNALIST:
Is it a tough choice?
PRIME MINISTER:
All of these things are tough but I want to say to the people of Australia that at the moment it would be wrong and irresponsible and damaging to run down the budget surplus because that would exert upward pressure on interest rates. It would also be unfair on the needy in our community to cut spending on hospitals and roads and schools, and it would be reckless to cut spending on defence because when you're talking about the petrol excise you're talking about big dollars. You're not nipping at the margin. To make a difference you'd have to take five cents off. That's $1.7 billion and I only have to state that figure for people to understand the dimension of the difficulty. Now people who represent just one side of the argument can call on me to cut excise. I mean the motoring organisations do that every day but they don't then say well we think the $1.7 billion ought to come out of the surplus, we think it should come out of schools or hospitals or something. They're silent on that. They say that's my problem. Well I accept it's my problem and what I'm saying to them and I'm saying to the Australian public is that I have made the judgement at present that it is fairer and a better balanced response to keep the current levels of spending in those areas and to maintain the budget surplus. Now I will accept the political consequences of that as I do of all of my decisions. I'm elected to make that call and that's the call I make at the moment. I'm very sorry, I'm very sensitive to the price of petrol. I know the Aussie loves his motor car and likes to use it a lot. I understand that but I don't have the luxury of being able to call for somebody else to cut an excise. I've got the responsibility of deciding what the consequences of that are and I've tried to explain them. Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Subjects: tax reform; private health insurance; economy; employment; launch of Intelligent Island; inquiry into the case of Alwyn Johnson; welfa
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Richard.  To Sue Napier, the Leader of the Parliamentary Liberal Party, Lynton Crosby the Federal Director of the party, my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, and fellow Tasmanian Liberals.  First can I take this opportunity at your annual gathering to express my gratitude for the support, the loyalty, the encouragement and the consistency that Liberals throughout Tasmania have displayed over the last 12 months.  I know it has been a difficult period at a State level.  At a Federal level it's been a period of enormous achievement and enormous change.  But in the 18 months that lies between now and the next Federal election we have both challenges and opportunities here in Tasmania.  
We don't hold any Federal seats in the House of Representatives in Tasmania and that presents us with a great opportunity.  It's important that we work very hard to win back some of the seats that we have lost in Tasmania.  I think our prospects of doing so in several of them are quite outstanding and I would encourage the organisation to find and get behind the right candidate in each of the seats that we need to contest and we need to win back.   The next election will be a tough battle.  The third time around is always difficult.  But it can be won and if we campaign strongly and realistically, if we remain very much in touch with the mainstream of the Australian community, if we put aside arrogant notions of any right to be re-elected, but focus on a very simple proposition and that is that you must earn your re-election - you have no right to it - then I believe that we can be successful. 
As I look back on the last year I think all of us can feel a sense of quiet pride at what has been achieved.  Contrary to the most passionate desires of the Leader of the Opposition the world did not come to an end on the 1st of July.  In fact Australia embraced on the 1st of July in a way that does great credit to the commonsense of the Australian people, Australia embraced the biggest ever change to our taxation system.  And it was not only a big change to our taxation system but it was in many ways the biggest structural change the Australian economy has embraced since the end of World War II.  And the benefits of taxation reform will be felt in the years ahead.  We not only have dramatically lower personal income tax with 80% of Australian wage and salary earners and taxpayers on a top marginal rate of no more than 30 cents in the dollar, but we have given to our exporters a greater competitive edge.  We have guaranteed to the States of Australia over the years ahead a sound revenue base to fund the provision of public hospitals, government schools, police and road services which are the bread and butter responsibilities of State governments in this country.  
And whenever I hear the Leader of the Opposition talking about health and education and saying how much he's interested in health and education, I ask him the question - Mr Beazley if you're so interested in health and education why did you vote against a reform that will guarantee funds for those things in the future the like of which we haven't seen in the past.  And that illustrates the fundamental weakness of the Labor Party's position on tax reform. Tax reform was not only about changing for the better our indirect tax system, it was not only about providing reductions in personal income tax.  It was also about underwriting the future provision of revenue for the essential services in health and education that is so important to our community because unless you give to the States a secure revenue base as time goes by they will not have the wherewithal to provide particularly for government schools and for public hospitals.  So I would simply say of those in the Labor Party who profess their concern for government schools, for public hospitals, why did you vote against the best thing that government schools and public hospitals have been offered by any Federal government in Australia since the end of World War II.  And until, until they can explain that they have no credibility as the defenders of government schools and the defenders of public hospitals.  
Our commitment in those areas of course is to the great Liberal commitment of choice.  We believe in a strong government education system, but we also believe in the right of parents to choose to send their children to the school that they think is most suitable for them.  We also believe in the great Liberal principle of choice in health care and health services and one of the many achievements as I look back over the last 12 months of the Coalition Government is the remarkable renaissance of private health insurance in Australia.  I can now report to you that we are heading back to levels of 38%, 39%, even 40% of coverage of private health insurance.  And this is a remarkable turnaround my friends from what we inherited.  We inherited a private health insurance system that was literally bleeding to death and it wasn't bleeding to death by accident, it was bleeding to death because of a deliberate wound inflicted on it by the former Labor Government.  Labor does not believe in private health insurance.  At best the Labor Party grudgingly accepts the possibility that people might like it. In their hearts they would like private health insurance to disappear.  That is why Kim Beazley says it's a bad system but I suppose I'll have to keep it if I happen to be elected.  That is why Jenny Macklin refuses to rule out means testing of the private health insurance rebate.  And to borrow a hallowed phrase in Liberal Party terminology, as surely as night follows day if the Labor Party does win the next election there will at the very least be a severe means test on private health insurance.  And we're not talking about a means test, I'm not talking about a means test for people earning $100,000 a year or more.  I'm talking about a means test on an individual income of perhaps $40,000 or $50,000 a year because the economics of means tests are that unless you impose it at that kind of level you don't really save any money.
Now ladies and gentlemen one of the great reforms of the last year, one that can join taxation reform on the list of the Government's achievements over the last year has been the way in which we have been able to bring people back into private health insurance through a combination of the tax rebate, lifetime health cover, the gradual elimination of the irritation of the gap - one of the constant complaints of people who took out private health insurance.  
So therefore as we look back over the last year it is a year of very significant achievement.  It's a year in which we have seen the human dividend of good economic policies.  I've frequently spoken of the reality that good economic policies are not ends in themselves.  We don't get inflation down or interest rates down or get the budget back into surplus to pass some kind of economics examination, to get a tick from the International Monetary Fund, to get the approval of the financial markets or the financial writers.  That's not why we do that, that's not why we pursue good economic policies.  We pursue good economic policies because good economic policies produce contented, better educated, better employed, better paid people.  The human goal of good economic policies is human satisfaction and human happiness.  And if you want an illustration, an emblem if I can call it that of what we have achieved through our economic policies let me take you back only a couple of days ago to the unemployment figures that were released on Thursday.  And those figures showed that in the four-and-a-half years the Government has been in office we've created almost 810,000 new jobs, that we now have the lowest unemployment rate in this country for more than ten years.  We have the lowest youth unemployment rate for probably 20 years, we have a dramatically lower female unemployment rate and we are seeing in all parts of Australia, not just in Sydney where there's a lot of economic activity coming off the back of the Olympic Games, we are seeing broadly based job growth throughout the whole country.  And this my friends is a dramatic illustration of the human dividend - the personal bonus that thousands of Australians are enjoying out of good economic policies.  
And coming more locally here to Tasmania yesterday I was able to participate in something else that could be called a bonus, indeed we have called it a bonus.  We've called it a social bonus and it's the extra funds that we've been able to make available for very necessary projects around Australia arising out of the sale of part of Telstra.  Yesterday, accompanied I might say by the Premier, I'll come to that in a moment, I was able to formally launch Intelligent Island.  Intelligent Island is a $40 million investment in making sure that Tasmania is up there at the very front of the information technology revolution that is sweeping the world.  And this money was made available out of the proceeds of the sale of the second tranche of Telstra.  And I ought to remind you and I should remind the Tasmanian people that that money, the availability of that money was trenchantly opposed by every Labor Member from Tasmania.  Not one Labor Member or one Labor Senator voted to give Tasmania that $40 million.  They fought it tooth and nail, and yet of course their Premier as he's required to do was there beside me because the Tasmanian government is happy to cooperate in the expenditure of that money, and so they should.  I mean we do the hard work, we get it through, and they're there to help cut the ribbon.  Now that's the nature of government and I suppose it's the nature of politics.  
But don't let anybody ever forget that every Federal Labor Member and Senator from this State voted against $168 million of social bonus coming to the people of Tasmania and that's something that should always be remembered.  And every time....if it hadn't been for the Coalition, if it hadn't been for the Liberal Senators and Senator Harradine, the people of Tasmania would have been denied the opportunity to participate in information technology advances which offer the hope of modernisation, of more jobs, and the participation of the people of this part of Australia in the information technology future of the world.  And it will ever be to the discredit of the Australian Labor Party no matter how much catch up politics they now may indulge in, and it's proper that the government of the day should cooperate with us to make sure the money is properly dispersed and I don't criticise them for that, but I do criticise them and I will always criticise them for trying to deny this money to Tasmania and the people of Tasmania, the people of Bass, the people of Franklin, and the people of all the other electorates should remember that hard against every Labor Member and every Labor Senator at the next Federal election.  It's an issue that should reverberate through this island State between now and the next Federal election.
Ladies and gentlemen when at the beginning of this council meeting the President of the Young Liberals of Tasmania read out the fundamental beliefs of the Liberal Party and of Liberals all around Australia, one of those fundamental, or many of those fundamental beliefs were built upon that great principle of respect and regard for the individual. And I've got to say and I'm particularly conscious as I address a gathering of Tasmanian Liberals, that back in 1991 when I was the Opposition Spokesman on industrial relations, that responsibility brought me into contact with a Tasmanian individual called Mr Alwyn Johnson, commonly known in this State as the man, the whistleblower in relation to one of the banks.  I studied his case back in 1991 and I formed a view that he'd been the victim of a great injustice and it's a view that is shared by a number of my Tasmanian colleagues.  Jocelyn Newman and many others have discussed this matter with me, and I believe that what's been done over the years, particularly by the current government, has been inadequate to deal with the injustice that that man suffered.  We recently put to the Tasmanian government the proposition that there should be a joint Commonwealth-Tasmanian government inquiry into the circumstances of Mr Johnson's case.  The Tasmanian government rejected that proposal and I'm announcing this morning that the Commonwealth will go it alone with it's own inquiry.  I will announce in the next few weeks the name of the person who will conduct the inquiry, the terms of reference of the inquiry.  We will of course seek the cooperation of the Tasmanian government and the Trust Bank in the conduct of the inquiry.  But if the Tasmanian government won't assume its share of responsibility to see that justice is done for this man we will do it alone.  
Now some may say this is a great deal of interest by a Federal government, a national government with its many responsibilities in the circumstances of one individual. But that is what good government is all about - it is ensuring that justice is done to an individual where the system has denied that person justice and the opportunity of properly being heard.  And I am today as I was nine years ago when I first studied his case concerned that he has not been given proper justice, he's not been given fair treatment.
Ladies and gentlemen there are just two other things that I want to say to you this morning. The first of those is that we've now been in office for four-and-a-half years.  We've achieved a lot, we've changed a lot, but where necessary we've kept a lot because government is about a combination of change and reform where that is beneficial but preservation and defence of traditional values and traditional approaches where that is essential. And the art of good government is to find the right balance and that is something that we have endeavoured to do over the last four-and-a-half years.  And I believe that there is an understanding within the Australian community of the need to preserve that balance.  I've always thought that Australians would respond to reform if you could persuade them of two things.  You have to persuade them that the reform is good for Australia and you also have to persuade them that the reform is fair to all of the people of Australia.  And in the end we won the argument about tax reform, in the end we triumphed over the cynicism and the sabotage of the Labor Party.  We triumphed over the understandable concern of people about radical change because we were at every point able to persuade the people that what we were doing was good for Australia.  And we were also able to persuade them that what we were doing was fair to the people of Australia. And that is why tax reform has been so widely accepted within the Australian community.  That is why much to his disappointed the world did not fall in on the government or on the people of Australia on the 1st of July as Mr Beazley had hoped.  And that is the principle that we are going to apply to other areas of reform and challenge.  
Jocelyn Newman and I and others in the government have been working on the challenge of welfare reform.  Welfare reform will not involve cutting people's benefits to which they are entitled.  We are not a government that slashes pensions and takes away benefits from people who need them.  We are a government that will always preserve the social security safety net just as we will maintain and defend the Medicare system because it's part and parcel of the social infrastructure of this country.  But consistent with those commitments there is opportunity and scope for us in the years ahead to reform and strengthen Australia's welfare system.  Based on a strong social security safety net, based on the fundamental Australian way of looking after people who really need help and looking after them decently and compassionately, but also recognising that if the State provides assistance for people it's not unreasonable to ask that something be given by those people in return if they are able to do so.  And that is the principle of mutual obligation, it's the principle that's underpinned work for the dole and many associated projects.
So the final thing I say to you is that the reform process when you are in government is never ending.  You don't mark time - you either go forwards or you go backwards.  If you endeavour politically or in government to stand still and to be in idle you inevitably go backwards, you lose support, and you lose respect.  We live in a world of incredible economic change and incredible economic opportunity.  I have found in Tasmania not only in the last couple of days but also on the other visits I've paid in recent times, I have found a sense of hope and optimism.  It's a sense of hope and optimism I find all around Australia.  It's not confined to Tasmania.  It is a product of the improved sense of national wellbeing and national confidence that this country has developed over the past few years.  And that is in turn a product of our sense of pride in having achieved so much economically, in having stared down the Asian economic downturn, of having effectively made our mark in the leadership we displayed in relation to East Timor, and all of the other things that this Government has been able to achieve over the last four-and-a-half years.  
We have achieved my friends a great deal together and I'm delighted to be back at this State Council.  I was delighted to share some time yesterday with Sue and the members of the State Parliamentary Liberal Party to exchange experiences in relation to Opposition. I know what Opposition's like. I spent a lot of time there, won't go back again.  Promise you that, won't go back again.  Even better, been there done that.  And all you've got to do in Opposition is work as hard as possible to get out of it and I know the experience and I know how difficult it can be and I've also experienced the exhilaration of being in government.  And at a Federal level we can share some of those experiences with our State colleagues.  And together all of us over the next 18 months can of course lay the foundation for a return to government here in Tasmania, but also from my vantage point to lay the basis of winning back seats from the Labor Party in the House of Representatives, winning back from those Members who voted against giving Tasmania an information technology future.  Every last Labor Member in Tasmania voted to deny the children of Tasmania the information technology future that children all around this beautiful country of ours are entitled to.  If we go into the next 18 months with that sense of determination and that sense of corporate Liberal spirit I think we can achieve both of our goals.  Thank you.   [Ends] 


Subjects: The National Portrait Galley and relationship with business and government
E&amp;OE..................
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much, Peter McGauran, to Mr and Mrs Gordon Darling, I think to be fairly described as the great moving spirit and promoters in many general ways cultural patrons and financial patrons of this gallery, Duncan Kerr, the Shadow Minister, Richard Alston, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s a special pleasure for Janette and I to be here today.  The Portrait Gallery has been a great success and the famous acquisition that will be unveiled in a few moments brings together the efforts and the financial support, not only of the commonwealth government, but also of two people whose presence I wish to especially acknowledge and that is Robert Oatley, the founder of Rosemount Estate and John Schaeffer, one of Australia';s leading collectors.  Their generosity represents the largest cash gift ever given to an Australian national cultural institution for the purchase of a single work of art and I think it is important that I acknowledge up front their great generosity.  And in doing so, remark on the partnership, dare I say it, even the social coalition that is represented by the commonwealth government and those two Australians who';ve given so much to bring home to Australia a very important work of art.
John Webber';s portrait of Captain Cook will add a very special significance to this National Portrait Gallery.  Since the gallery was opened in March of last year, it has been an astonishing success.  It';s worked to embellish our understanding of Australia across the breadth of the Australian experience.  And without the help, of Gordon and Marilyn Darling and of Andrew and so many others, it wouldn';t have been the great success and the great draw card it';s undoubtedly been.  In the short period it';s been open, the gallery has developed a reputation for excellence and has attracted many tens of thousands of visitors.  
The Webber Portrait of James Cook, painted in 1782, is of course the most significant and impressive addition yet to the gallery';s collection.  The portrait was the only remaining 18th century portrait of Cook in private hands until it was acquired by the gallery. Of the other 18th century portraits of Cook, one hangs in Britain';s National Portrait Gallery, one in the New Zealand National Gallery and two in Britain';s National Maritime Museum.  That an Australian gallery is now home to this portrait is not before time.  
The place of Cook and his epic voyages in Australian history is not only well known, but very impressively documented.  Webber accompanied Cook on his third and final voyage to the Pacific, during which the Captain was killed.  It was three years later in 1782 that Webber painted his portrait.  
In many ways the journey of this portrait will become just as renowned as those of the 18th century navigator it characterises.  And the partnership that has made it possible for the portrait to come here and to be unveiled today is a mark of the growing determination of  Australians at a government level and also at a private level, to not only reclaim, but also to proclaim in a very proud and defiant way, the culture and the history of this country.  
I have said before that there is a place for both the government and the private sector in the patronage and the support of the arts in this country.  The government cannot do it alone but the government has an ongoing role.  It is not possible to have a credible support for the arts in this country without having a strong and continuing stream of government support and I want to record my thanks to both Richard Alston and Peter McGauran for the persistent advocacy within the government of the importance of the arts in the national life of Australia.
It is now I believe a bi-partisan given that an important part of Australia';s identity and existence as a nation is continuing source and pride in the achievements of all aspects of the arts in this country.  But just as there is an ongoing role for the government, there is also  a very significant and important role for the private sector.  We need enthusiasts, we need experts, we need people with a sensitive understanding of the history of the arts and the contribution it can make to our way of life and we also need people who are willing to make a financial contribution.  And we have seen in many different ways over the past several years the greater willingness on the part of people to work with us and to make the realisation of so many of the dreams that we have in relation to the arts possible.  And that is why I';m just so delighted that both Robert and John are with us today, that I can acknowledge on behalf of the government the debt we owe to them and also we collectively can acknowledge the importance of the coalition between the government and the private sector which has made this possible.
So ladies and gentlemen, this is a tremendously exciting moment, it really is and I would like when I';m invited, which I think I will be in a moment, to unveil the portrait, I would like Robert and John to join me on the stage when that takes place as a very, very significant mark of our gratitude to them and as a symbol of the partnership between the government and generous benefactors in the Australian community who';ve made this wonderful acquisition to the National Portrait Gallery possible.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Subjects: Indigenous Art in Australia
E&amp;OE..................
PRIME MINISTER:
May I first of all acknowledge the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place.  To Peter King, the Chairman of the Australian Heritage Commission, my ministerial colleagues, Robert Hill, Richard Alston, John Herron and John Moore and Evelyn Scott, the Chairman for the Council for Reconciliation, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I was delighted when Robert asked me to come along tonight to say a few words and to participate in the awards ceremony.  And I have had the opportunity a few moments ago to look at many of the entries to observe the quality, to hear from the artists of the spirit and the motivations that encourage them in their artwork, their painting and the contributions they have made to these awards.
This a very special occasion and it';s an opportunity to showcase to Australia, not just here in Canberra, but in the months ahead as the exhibition goes around to showcase to the entire country, the contributions of so many Indigenous artists.  The exhibition very clearly demonstrates how much Indigenous people of all ages value their cultural and their natural heritage.  And the aim of the award has been to increase public appreciation of Indigenous heritage places and it';s the only Indigenous Australian art award in which entrants are required to portray a heritage place in their artwork.
I think it';s fair to say that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artist has flourished a great deal over recent years, with many commercial galleries supported by demand for this art and indeed many Indigenous communities have prospered by communicating through their art, the important stories about their lives and their land.  And I know for example that we have here tonight some representatives from the Yarrabah community, near Cairns in Queensland and all of the art work created by this particular community tells the story of their land and their life by the sea.  And this connection with place and the beauty of the work is quickly gaining a public profile.
A year ago, the government made funding available through the Australia Council for a position of Art Development Officer and since that time the arts movement at Yarrabah has moved towards self sufficiency.  The community currently supplies eight retail outlets in Cairns and one retail outlet in Sydney with artwork and demand for the work has resulted in an extra six people being employed at the community.  It';s one of the many small but very important good news stories associated with this exhibition and with the Indigenous artists featured here.  
Artworks previously exhibited in the Art of Place exhibitions now grace the walls of the National Gallery of Australia, the Queensland Galley, the National Maritime Museum, Flinders University in South Australia and I';m told, some locations even in places as far afield as Switzerland.  And these stories will spread even further this year and I am pleased that the Federal Government was able to help with funding to enable a selection of works from this exhibition to tour around the country.  And in 2001, our centenary year, it will go to Sydney, Wagga Wagga, Alice Springs, Adelaide and Perth.
I do want to tonight to particularly thank and acknowledge the sponsors who';ve helped make this event possible.  Sponsorship this year has reached the record level of more than $280 thousand dollars and I would like to make special mention of the contribution of the Koori Mail, M N Rothschild and Sons and Multiplex, who';ve all provide substantial cash sponsorship to support the award and I also want to recognise the many other sponsors who provided in kind sponsorship.  But very particularly, I want to pay tribute to the artists who contributed to the exhibition.  
It';s a very positive, enthusiastic gathering tonight.  It';s an opportunity for Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians alike to honour the place and the role and the contribution of Indigenous artists, not only to building respect and understanding for Indigenous culture and life and the place of the Indigenous people in our community, but also I think an opportunity for us to celebrate the excellence of Australian artists, Indigenous and non Indigenous. 
I congratulate the Heritage Commission, I warmly thank the sponsors and collectively I congratulate in advance the winners of the various categories and thank you very much for inviting me to share this very important occasion with you.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
It is a special honour to have been invited by the Australian Cricket Board to deliver the inaugural Sir Donald Bradman Oration. 
I have no doubt that the Oration will become an important occasion - an opportunity to honour Sir Donald's continuing example to us all, to reflect upon his remarkable achievements and to extol the qualities of a game so indelibly a part of Australian life.
I saw Sir Donald Bradman play but once.
As a ten year old boy I sat on the now banished Hill of the Sydney Cricket Ground to see him score 53 runs in just 65 minutes in a testimonial match for two former state captains, Alan Kippax and Bert Oldfield, in front of a crowd of over 41,000 people.  It was his last match on that famous ground.
As other 'cricket tragics' in the audience will know, some matches remain with you forever.  That was certainly one - another was an opportunity in 1997 to take time out from official duties and watch Australia battle England at Lords in the Second Test.  The first day was ruined by rain.  The second day was ruined for England by Glenn McGrath as he headed towards 8 for 38 in one of the finest displays of fast bowling I have ever seen.
Rumour has it that I am not the first Prime Minister to take an interest in cricket.  
Sixty years before me, Sir Robert Menzies - not yet then Prime Minister - was determined to see Don Bradman's Australians in action against England.  In organising a ministerial visit to Britain he sent word ahead in the hope that those arranging the meetings would have a full list of cricketing fixtures at hand and that Menzies may offer himself, in spite of physical improbabilities, as the team's mascot.
I can report that Menzies saw much more of the English summer of cricket than I did.  In fact, he contrived to see something of most of the matches in which Australia played.
Faced with some criticism of my own visit to Lords, perhaps I could have repeated a statement of Menzies before he departed for England sixty years earlier, "We are all disposed to look kindly at each other in regard to cricket.  Many might be indifferent at it. None were indifferent to it."
Prime Ministerial passion for cricket is utterly bipartisan.  Bob Hawke also loves the game.  To his great credit, after becoming Prime Minister in 1983, he revived the practice of a Prime Minister's XI match against the touring side which had fallen into disuse when Sir Robert Menzies departed the scene in 1966.  That event continues to this day and is stronger and better than ever.
Likewise, Ben Chifley on arriving in the United Kingdom for an official visit during Australia's famous tour in 1948 is said to have immediately quizzed his English greeter with "who won the toss"?
So I have not been the first Australian Prime Minister to have recognised Sir Donald Bradman as a unique Australian - a man representing many of the values, much of the character of his countrymen.  Even now, in another century, in a world scarcely recognisable to that in which he played, the name Bradman resonates with meaning - talent, determination, commitment, fair play, honour.
What then does this say about Bradman and what does it say about Australians that Bradman was so elevated to the honoured status that he now occupies in the national psyche? 
It could be said that that his place was assured by his unparalleled record at the crease and certainly no exponent of the game has neared his achievement.
After all, here was a man who had scored his first test century at the age of 20, who had scored a triple test century at the age of 21 (including 309 runs in one day alone), whose record of scoring three double centuries in one test series remains unequalled to this day and who easily maintains the record of 12 test double centuries.
Indeed, Bradman's ability to accumulate runs was relentless and, in his famous test average of 99.94, there is the sobering comparison that the next highest average of a long serving Australian is that of Greg Chappell with a still outstanding 53.86 runs.  
Bradman's domination of the record books can be seen in the simple, yet irrefutable fact that no other batsmen of any longevity has averaged above 65 in the history of international test matches and that the Bradman average is at least 50 per cent above all of them.
I was reminded recently of the often told story of the journalist who asked Sir Donald what he thought he would average if he was playing today with the professionalism of modern players and their approach to fitness and so on.
"Oh, about 50 I suppose," Sir Donald was supposed to have said.
"Do you really think cricketers have improved that much?" said the journalist.
To which Bradman replied "you have to remember, I'm over 90".
Some might claim that Sir Donald Bradman's enduring legend found form at a time when Australia was in desperate need of a hero.
It is true that some of Bradman's best cricket was played during the depths of Australia's worst depression and it helped lift the spirits of the nation.  It held us together when the squalid sentence of mass unemployment risked splitting apart the social fabric of the nation.
The sheer volume of the unemployed who quite simply had nothing else to do with their time swelled the cricketing crowds who witnessed the young Bradman play during his early career. 
And his message of hope carried throughout the country by the powerful new medium - radio - which could not only reach, but inspire vast numbers of the population.
He reminded Australians that they were capable of great things in their own right, that at a time when confidence ebbed away from their collective soul, they were competitive, resourceful and talented people.  They were well and truly separate from England, comprised a sovereign nation, and displayed an egalitarian individualism that was uniquely Australian.  
Bradman and his team-mates during those difficult years, helped nurture and reinforce the national spirit borne out of a generation's sacrifice during the First World War.
Sir Donald's capacity to sustain his countrymen during their dark, desperate days is undoubted. But it is not a past generation of Australians alone who have found cause to be inspired by his profound example.  In every decade since the 1930's Australians have come to celebrate the Bradman record.
And so, in my view, it is not his record alone, not just the times in which he played, but also the quality of the man himself, which has elevated Sir Donald Bradman in the eyes of many to the status as the greatest living Australian.
In his book, The Art of Cricket, first published in 1958, Sir Donald Bradman cast his own pen over what he saw as the many qualities fostered by cricket.  But in doing so, he revealed his own virtues.
Foremost amongst others, he said, was the development of character.
He wrote "I have no doubt that it moulds in an individual the right type of character better than any other sport.  If that can be substantiated no other recommendation is required because character must surely be one of the greatest assets any nation, through its citizens, can possess."
Nor was he in any doubt that the imprint of cricket on the life of an individual would be indelible.  "Common clay must go through the heat and fire of the furnace to become porcelain," he said.   "But once through the furnace it can never be clay again.  In the same way a man's character must remain permanently enriched by his experiences at cricket."
Bradman understood how important it was to acknowledge defeat, the umpire's adverse decision and a hundred other things with a smile.
I can only concur.  There is no more easy task in the world than humbly coping with victory, but it is our response to defeat that reveals a person's moral fibre, together with their ability to learn and move on with honour.   
Sir Donald also spoke about the more physical ways in which cricket helped to sharpen the mind and how the game helped to develop the ability to think, to reason out a problem, and to act quickly.
"Then there is the moral as well as physical courage," as Bradman put it, "of facing up to hard training, to bowl fast for hours under a hot sun on a flint hard pitch, to feel the agony of seeing dropped catches nullify your best work.
He noted that "the margin between defeat and victory can be so small it may even depend upon the sportsmanship of an individual.  .  Such acts of sportsmanship are the very essence of this great game."
Sir Donald also reflected upon the qualities of leadership that were necessary in the game.
"A good captain must be a fighter; confident but not arrogant, firm but not obstinate, able to take criticism without letting it unduly disturb him, for he is sure to get it - and unfairly too."
"I don't know any game which entails such a severe and prolonged strain on the skipper, but, like the master of a ship, he must exercise control and accept the responsibility."
These are lessons for all who aspire to the mantle of leadership, whether the captaincy of a cricket team or elsewhere.
These are Bradman's lessons - it is his living legacy.
So how shall we use them?  What future lies ahead for the game of cricket?
Firstly, we must make certain that Australia's one truly national sport remains at the very centre of our lives.
Our lifestyle, unique and the envy of the world, has always been defined by an abundance of light and space and our climate and our geography would seem to guarantee the summer will always belong to cricket.
Certainly, there can be no doubt of cricket's continuing popularity.  It is a remarkable tribute to the game that it can still hold the passion of so many people during a test match played over a period of five days in the fast moving 'just in time' world in which we all now live.
Proof of this was the attendance at last summer's test matches against India - support for the third test when the series had already been decided was extraordinary.
But it would be foolhardy to become complacent about the sport we love so much.  It has survived so well throughout the decades because of its willingness to retain what is good about the past and relevant for the future, whilst embracing new ideas, techniques and approaches.
 Cricket has been able to deliver what we often seek in other aspects of our lives.  We feel instinctive ties to certain traditions and the enthusiasms of past generations but we also want to enjoy them in a way that's relevant, contemporary and successful in our own times.
Steve Waugh typifies this spirit.  His skill and mental toughness has played a huge part in the current strength of Australian cricket at an international level.  Yet he has a well known affection for the traditions of the game, typified by his idea that the first Test team to play in the year 2000 use the style of caps worn exactly a century before.
Crucial to the strength and development of cricket in Australia has been its link through the decades with two great media outlets - the ABC and Channel Nine.
It is impossible to fairly chronicle cricket's history over the past 100 years without paying tribute to the role of the ABC.  My first recollection of test cricket was the ABC broadcasts of the 1946/47 MCC tour of Australia under Walter Hammond.  The ABC cricket book, first published in 1934 and now Australia's longest running cricket journal, is the earliest sporting publication I can recall.
To this day, the ABC's radio broadcasts remain a source of contact with cricket for hundreds of thousands of Australian fans.
Channel Nine's television coverage of cricket has set standards unmatched anywhere else in the sporting world.  It pioneered new techniques and enhancements which have added to the enjoyment of the game for millions in Australia and overseas.
The Nine Network has played a major role in making television coverage of sport in Australia the best in the world.
I think it is too early to make any judgement about the impact of the internet upon the game but the fact that 2.4 million unique visitors read 110 million pages on the 'Baggy Green' site over a single season augurs well for its future as yet another way to reach out to cricketing enthusiasts.
Whatever the medium, Australia has also been fortunate to have been entertained and educated by the world's best commentators.  In different eras and in vastly different ways, men like the late Johnny Moyes and Alan MacGilvray, in radio, and Ritchie Benaud and Ian Chappell, in television, stamped their personalities and expertise on the broadcasting of the game.
It has not just been the reporting of the sport that has adapted to meet the needs of its followers.  At times, despite considerable controversy and dire predictions of its demise, cricket has evolved in more fundamental ways.
The most momentous development in cricket in my lifetime was, of course, World Series Cricket.  It generated controversy, provoked intense and passionate debate and defied some of the game's most honoured conventions.
In the process, it changed the game forever yet helped preserve it.
It is true that World Series Cricket was different.  Players were paid more.  The Super Tests, the one day game and night cricket all challenged the orthodoxy.  Yet World Series Cricket introduced new enthusiasts, including many Australians in regional areas, able to see some of the world's greatest cricketers in action.
The compromise which ended the controversy - control of the game to the Australian Cricket Board, television rights to Channel Nine and better remuneration for the players themselves - saw cricket emerge stronger and more diversified.  One day cricket provided the resources to sustain the game at other levels and Test cricket was strengthened when the skills of the one day game built upon those that had gone before.
In short, the game was able to accommodate both purists as well as those seeking new excitement and entertainment and typically of Australian sporting skill, the best players quickly adapted to both styles of play.
It gave cricket a special character amongst the world's sports - two games, they are different yet they are the same.
One form of cricket has never displaced the other.  The layers simply deepened, the loyalties grew.
This capacity for renewal and reinvention has been a long standing quality of the game.  Before World Series Cricket, others were realising the potential of international one day games.
During the 1970/1971 Ashes Series in Australia rain washed out the 1971 New Year Test in Melbourne.  Concerned about the loss of revenue Sir Donald Bradman, as Chairman of the Board of Control, organised a one day game between England and Australia. 46,000 people watched Australia win an exciting match and the official international one day game was born.
And of course, yesterday we saw the first match played 'indoors' - another change, another variation, another Australian innovation, broadening the appeal of the game. 
Particular tours have, when needed, breathed new life into the game.  To cricket lovers of my generation, no tour did more, and none is more memorable, than the West Indies' tour of Australia in 1960/61.  December this year will, in fact mark, the 40th anniversary of the famous 'tied Test' in Brisbane - an unforgettable game played by unforgettable characters on both sides.
It helped rekindle passions somewhat cooled after the Ashes tour two years earlier.  Although successful for Australia, it had been pretty dreary, most notable for Trevor Bailey living up to the wonderfully evocative nickname of 'Barnacle' by notching up 68 runs in a record 458 minutes at the crease!
It is true to say that one of the greatest threats to the integrity of world class cricket ever encountered has been played out before us in recent times.
The recent allegations of match fixing represent a challenge to the very fine qualities encouraged by the game of cricket - to the very values personified by Sir Donald and so many of our other sporting champions.
We have all been saddened by allegations of match-fixing.  Hanse Conje's admissions represent a great personal tragedy to our friends in South African cricket and claims from the sub-continent are still unresolved.
We all have a responsibility - administrators, players and supporters the world over - to act firmly and resolutely whenever there is evidence of corruption in the game.
We remember that Bradman himself was a model cricket administrator. 
With the exception of only two years, Sir Donald held a position on the controlling board of cricket between the 1945/46 season and 1980.  He was also an Australian selector continuously from 1936 to 1971 with the exception of only one tour. As the first former test player to be elected chairman of the Board of Control, he did not accept that sports scandal was integral to the phenomenon of sport and nor should the administrators of today.
I am pleased, therefore, that the ACB has such strong processes to deal with any allegations of corruption which may arise in the future.
At the Press Club recently, Malcolm Speed outlined how the Board intends to educate players, beginning with the Commonwealth Bank Cricket Academy, through the State teams, those selected to play for Australia A as well as the Australian team itself, about the standards of behaviour that are expected of players in relation to corruption in the game.
The ACB nominated Mr Richie Benaud to sit on the ICC's Code of Conduct Commission and soon the ICC's new anti-corruption unit will swing into action.
Mr Speed also said player contracts and codes of conduct now impose heavy penalties for such behaviour and that an investigator has been appointed to investigate allegations.
The latest initiative began this week where players will now sign a pledge to the public before every series to assure cricket lovers that they are playing every part of every match on its merits.
I can understand the views of many people who would ask what has become of the game to require such action but I also commend the Board on being seen to discharge its duties as defined in its mission statement and to set for itself the objective to "respect the spirit, traditions and values of cricket".
It should be lost on no-one, however, that no amount of education or regulation or contractual requirement can ever guarantee the highest level of fair play.  In the end, it is for every player honoured with selection to the national team to return the trust of the cricket loving public.  What is required is the good will and good conduct of the players.  I am sure that the baggy green acts as a constant reminder of their responsibilities.
Ladies and Gentlemen, in conclusion, history has shown us we have every reason to be confident about the future of cricket, not just in this country, but throughout the great fraternity of cricketing nations around the globe.
Future generations of young Australians, learning to love this game in their local schools and clubs, as we did, will ensure its survival and success.
With well founded optimism about the game's future I share in Bradman's hope that cricket expand even further.  For, as Sir Donald once said, "there are no tariff barriers, licences, restrictions, or any other obstacle in the way of exporting this game which can bring such benefit and pleasure to a whole nation.  May cricket continue to flourish and spread its wings.  The world can only be the richer for it."
With the example of Sir Donald as our inspiration - not just in cricket but in life - we can make this dream, or any dream, come true. 


Subjects: Reform; Taxation reform; welfare reform, social coalition; economy, workplace relations; unemploymen
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Premier, to my parliament colleagues, Peter Costello, Robert Hill, Richard Alston, my State Parliamentary Colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I notice the Premier mentioned revenue flows under the GST, I've been conducting a bit of a focus group on my table and Rob Gerard tells me that you know, he is going to be contributing an enormous amount and if Rob is an example then some of the predictions made by the Premier may come true but I think we all have to wait and see.  But it's a very convenient starting point for my address because the last time I was in this room speaking to an audience like this was some months ago and it was at a time I guess that a number of you and a lot of people around the Australian community wondered about how tax reform was going to go. Most of you supported it and John Olsen is right when he says there is no state in Australia which will benefit more from the abolition of wholesale sales tax than the state of South Australia because of your heavy reliance on manufacturing industry.  You were very supportive of it, you were hopeful about it, and you generally saw the benefits for the country and the benefits for your state of tax reform.  But like so many you wondered about perhaps the political wisdom of it and you wondered about how it was all going to go and we faced it that time, what can only be described as the most negative backward looking carping campaign of political sabotage from our opponents.
There are occasions when I am willing to give credit to the Australian Labor Party.  I was never unwilling to give credit to the former government, particularly the Hawke government for one or two of the reforms that were brought in and we gave that government strong support.  Financial deregulation wouldn't have been achieved without bipartisan support in this country and reform in other areas wouldn't have been achieved without bipartisan support and occasionally in political life, no matter where you are, whether you're the government or the opposition, you should be willing to put aside your partisan attitudes and you should be willing to put your hand up and say, well I think the government's right on that.  Now that is what the Labor Party should have done on tax reform and I bet they now, seven weeks after its successful introduction lament very much that they didn't put the national interest ahead of selfish political interest.  
Because the reality, ladies and gentlemen is that tax reform has been needed in this country for a quarter of a century at least.  You in business know that.  I remember a year after I was elected to Federal parliament, the then government, the Whitlam government tabled the Asprey report, that was a committee of inquiry into the Australian taxation system that recommended the introduction of a broad based indirect tax and it recommended reductions in personal income tax and that's been really the agenda for reform that has been needed in this country for the last quarter of a century.  
Now we took a hell of a risk going to the last election on tax reform, but I don't regret for a day, for a day I don't regret for a moment the risk that was taken.  I always believe in the end that if you campaigned fearlessly and strongly on something that you believed was right and you were willing to put it in terms of the national interest and it was seen to be fair for most of the community, that the Australian people would embrace it. And I think it has done not only great things for the Australian economy, taxation reform, but I think it's also done a lot for our sense of national self belief because part of a country's belief system is its belief in its capacity to bring about fundamental change and reform that involves transitional difficulty but is going to deliver a stronger outcome and taxation reform was very of a piece with that kind of change and that kind of reform.
It was easy to run a fear a day, it was easy to try and instill concern in some of the more vulnerable people in our community.  It was easy to predict that it was going to be a burden, an unmanageable burden on the business community, it was easy to suggest the personal tax cuts were going to evaporate.  But all of that fear campaign was stared down and the greatest thing of all, as far as I and my colleagues are concerned, is that the Australian people have now been given an opportunity of experiencing it and they are increasingly delivering a positive verdict because tax reform has passed what I regard as the two fold test of reform in this country.  In my view you can also persuade Australians to support reform if you can meet two criteria.  The first of those criteria is that it must be good for Australia.  If it's not good for Australia, it doesn't really matter in a sense whether it's good for you.  If it's not good for the whole country, the Australian people won't embrace it.  And the second criteria is that it's good to be fundamentally fair, particularly to the more vulnerable people in our community and I believe that the Australian community has embraced our change and our reform because they have seen it to be exactly fitting those two criteria.  And I think they also see it as being part of a steady pattern of change and reform that this government has undertaken over the last four and a half years.  It is no accident that we were able to stare down the Asian economic downturn.  We were able to do it because we had a strong economy, because we had put the budget back in to surplus, because we were seen as an attractive place for business investment, because we had a flexible exchange rate, we were seen as having strong, recently reformed rules of corporate governance and regulation and we were seen as a stable country, both economically as well as socially and politically.
There were many people who believed when the Asian economic downturn hit this part of the world, that Australia would be sucked in to the vortex.  Well that didn't happen and it didn't happen because we were seen as stronger and we were seen as different and that is a direct result of many of the things that we did in the first two years that we were in government.  If we put off fixing the budget deficit for a couple of years, the Asian downturn would have sucked us in.  If we hadn't set about reforming our industrial relations system, the Asian downturn could well have sucked us in.  And I had some evidence of this only a few weeks ago when in Perth, I opened a new export facility for a company called Kallis France, which is exporting TV dinners for the Japanese market and the executive chairman of the company was able to say to me, without any fear of contradiction, he was able to say, if it hadn't been for the workplace relations reform of the Coalition government, today wouldn't have been occurring.
There are many reforms that this government has carried out and the news that I have for you today is that the reform process has not finished.  In the modern, globalised world economy, you never sit still.  You all know in business that the option of just running on the spot or marking time is not really a viable option.  You either keep trying to expand, or you start to go backwards.
I've had a few people say to me since tax reform came about and they've said look, slow down, take it easy, you've done enough, don't take any more risks.  Well my reply to them is sorry, I'm not made that way.  I don't intend to slow down, I don't intend to mark time and I don't intend to avoid taking political risks in the long term interest of Australia.  I am prepared to take personal political risks, I'm not of course prepared to take risks with the future of this country and I think it's important, having achieved major areas of reform in so many areas that so far from resting on any kind of policy laurels, that what we should be doing is pressing ahead with other areas of reform.  
We had an example of that only in the past few days with the delivery of the McClure report on welfare reform in this country and I've spoken here before of the collective social obligations of the government the business community of Australia.  I've spoken often at the notion of a social coalition.  I've spoken of mutual obligation.  Mutual obligation in the welfare sector is when you say to people, we will look after you if you need help, we will not allow to go without the means of sustenance and support, but if you are able to do so, you should put something back in return for that support.  Now that is a principle that has very ready acceptance throughout the Australian community and I've also encourage the business community of Australia to join us in a social coalition to deliver an improved way of helping the more vulnerable in our community.
None of us can do it on our own.  You can't leave it to organisations like the Salvation army and the St. Vincent de Paul to do all of the welfare work of the country.  You can't leave all of it to the government, we don't expect the business community to take our place, but if working together, all of us can build a social coalition to tackle many of societies challenges, that is a way of business returning to the community the benefits it has derived from a strong and more prosperous Australian economy.
So I see reforming Australia's welfare system and I see that blueprint from the McClure report widely supported in the Australian community.  Not just by the Coalition but also by many leaders of the welfare sector.  I see it as a very important blue print for intelligent, compassionate reform of the social security system over the years ahead.
Of course one of the great ironies, ladies and gentlemen, of the tax debate that we've had with the Labor Party - and you'll forgive me at a Liberal Party luncheon for mentioning the Labor Party - one of the great ironies of the debate that we've had on taxation over the last 12 months is that the greatest single guarantee of the resources that are needed for government services in the years ahead, will in fact be delivered by the Goods and Services Tax because all of the revenue from the Goods and Services Tax goes to the States of Australia.  And with that one change we deal with two age old financial problems in this country.  
The first of those age old financial problems hasn't really changed much since Tom Playford and Bob Menzies talked about the Murray-Darling back in 1957 and that is the States tend to blame the Commonwealth for not giving them enough money and there tends to be a bit of duck-shoving between the Commonwealth and the States regarding their responsibilities.  And every Premier I've known in the time that I have been Prime Minister, and the time previously when I was Treasurer, has been part of that debate with the Commonwealth.  And at long last we've found a way through tax reform of putting an end to that sort of nonsense and under the GST, after the transitional years, the States will have access to growing sources of revenue and they'll have more money for Government schools and public hospitals, and police and roads, all of those bread and butter things that are the responsibility of States to deliver in Australia.
So therefore we've not only dealt with the problem of this endless wrangle between the Commonwealth and the States over money, but we have also I believe have provided a very important financial underpinning for the delivery of services that are so important to the vulnerable people in our community.
John spoke of the visit to London a few weeks ago, to commemorate the Centenary of Federation.  And that was an important event, not only historically, but it was also a very important event economically.  I don't think there would have been a time before, and there won't be for many years to come, when you would have had both the Prime Minister and the Premiers of most of the States of Australia gathered at meetings attended by the leaders of all of the major financial institutions, not only in the United Kingdom, but from also other European countries.  And also at other gatherings attended by the Chairman of so many British companies that have large investments in our country.  And it was an opportunity to showcase in a bi-partisan way the modern strengths of the Australian economy and John is right when he says that this country is held in high repute and regard around the world.
It's not an empty idle, rhetorical boast that I make, but it's been earned over the last four and a half years because of that steady program of reform and change which has been undertaken.  It's been based on a commitment to economic fundamentals.  The greatest thing you can do for a person who's on welfare is to give them a job and the unemployment success of this Government over the last four and a half years, has been quite astonishing.
I had the opportunity in Federal Parliament yesterday to go through some of the unemployment statistics in some of those areas of Australia traditionally identified with high unemployment, was able to point out that some areas of Western Sydney traditionally seen as having very high levels of unemployment, have seen them fall from 20 per cent in areas to like 4, 5 and 6 per cent.  We've generated almost 810,000 new jobs in the last four and a half years.  
We have the lowest level of youth unemployment since 1978.  We have one of the lowest levels of female unemployment over the last twenty years.  It's wrong to see those good unemployment figures as merely as a product of the Olympics boom in Sydney because as John pointed out, and every Premier is entitled to point out, there has been strong jobs growth right across the nation.  
So I can report to you today, ladies and gentlemen, that the Australian economy is in strong and very robust health.  But it's not been achieved easily.  It's not been achieved without taking a number of decisions that in their time have been unpopular and it won't be retained if we relax, it won't be retained if we indulge ourselves in the foolish notion that we can spend the next 18 months between now and the election worrying just about our political credentials and neglecting the important fact that if you deliver a strong economy, it also delivers a strong political dividend.
And I want to make it very clear to all of you today that having come thus far with a strong reform program we intend to continue to pursue it.  We remain strongly committed to the full privatisation of Telstra.  We remain strongly committed, if we can get the legislation through the Senate, with further industrial relations reform.  We remain strongly committed to the sensible implementation in cooperation with the business community of business tax reform.  
Peter made an announcement recently about the timing of the introduction of what's known as Option 2 and that was a recognition that the business community is digesting quite a lot of change at the present time and the sensible thing to do is to recognize the need to manage that change over a slightly longer period of time.  Because it's not only the changes to indirect changes and the changes to the personal tax system but it's also the major change to company tax - the reduction over a two period from 36 to 30 cents in the dollar.  The virtual halving of capital gains tax which amongst other things have made this country infinitely more attractive to venture capital investors from all around the world.  We're very conscious of the need for those changes to be managed and absorbed by the Australian business community.  
So we remain very much a Government that is strongly committed to further change and reform and strengthening of the Australian economy.  We need to retain strong budget surpluses.  They make an important contribution to the underlying strength of the Australian economy.  They impose proper restraints on governments in relation to their expenditure plans.  But they're also very important to perceptions of financial markets about the management of the Australian economy.
It is in so many ways an immensely, a privileged time to be Prime Minister of this country.   Next year we will have a year long commemoration of the Centenary of the Federation of Australia.  It will be an opportunity in different parts of Australia to celebrate all that we have achieved together.  It's an opportunity to reflect upon the scale of the Australian achievement and that achievement of course has not only been measured in economic growth and economic strength, but it's also been measured in what this country has represented to the rest of the world.   I have frequently been asked over the last few months what do I regard as some of the greatest achievements of the government in four and a half years.  I've spoken in some detail of those economic achievements, but of course it is not only economic achievements of which I and my colleagues are very proud.  We are very proud of the social reforms that we have presided over.  We are very proud of the role that we played in bringing about a safer community in relation to gun controls and we are very proud of the way in which we have rebalanced Australia's foreign relations and how we were able to stand up for the human rights of the people of East Timor and demonstrate not only to our region but demonstrate to the rest of the world that when a challenge comes in areas related to human rights, Australia is second to none in its willingness to stand up for the rights of vulnerable communities particularly in our part of the world.
So my friends, I can, as I see myself properly doing at a gathering such as this, reporting to you on the state of the government and on the state of the nation.  I don't report to you as anybody who is in anyway smug or complacent about the challenges ahead of us.  I report to you a sense of achievement in relation to our reforms, particularly taxation reform.  I do so in gratitude for the support that we have received from the business community.  I thank John Olsen for the support that he gave to the cause of taxation reform.  And I thank many people in this room who over the years have encouraged me and encouraged my colleagues to go on with the tax of taxation reform.  But I also recognise that there are many challenges that lay ahead of us. 
I think the Australian nation is in very good economic shape.  There are some problems, there are some challenges, but the fundamentals are stronger and better than they have been for more than thirty years, and that is not an accident, it is a product of good policy and it is also a product of an effective partnership between the government and the people of Australia and you in the business community of Adelaide have played a very important role in that and I acknowledge it and I thank you for the contribution that you have made to bringing us thus far.
   Thank you. 


Subjects: welfare reform; tax reform; employment; achievements of the Howard Government; South Australian Coalition Members
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you John for those very warm words of welcome.  Can I join everybody else in wishing happy birthday to Mrs Olsen senior.  It';s a wonderful milestone in one';s life and we';re all delighted to share this special occasion with you.
I';d also like to congratulate Rosemary Craddock on her election as the new President of the South Australian Division.   The organisational leadership of the party around the country is very important to us in the Federal Parliamentary Party and I know that I and my Federal colleagues will work very closely with her and the South Australian Executive.  
And can I also take the opportunity of recording my gratitude to you Cory for the leadership that you've given to the organisation here.  I';ve particularly enjoyed the time that we have worked together.  You have put a lot of effort into building the organisation here in South Australia and I know that you finish your term as President of the Party here with the very good wishes of all of the members of the rank and file of the Parliamentary Party.
I haven't brought along a PowerPoint presentation.  I haven't.  And I intended instead to say something about tax reform and particularly something about the predictions that have been made about tax reform by Mr Beazley and the Labor Party.  And I was thinking to myself that if I had brought along a PowerPoint presentation.  If I had brought along some slides and graphs and I was talking about Mr Beazley';s predictions what would I have had?  Well I would have started with a huge dark cloud.  Then I would have moved on to a representation of Dante';s Inferno because he said it was going to be hell.  It was going to be hell from the 1st of July.  Then of course I';d have probably had a representation of Jurassic Park because that was one of the other predictions that he made and I would have ended it up with a representation of the Four Horseman of the Apocalypse.   
Because he predicted that there would be pestilence and famine and disaster and poverty and disease and all the other things that were going to sweep across Australia with the introduction of the new taxation system.  And when I look back on the time that has gone by since I last addressed this State Council and I think of the things that have happened on the national political stage none has more lasting significance than the damage done by the Labor Party leader to himself, and his own credibility.  Not by something that we have done but by something he himself did you his own hand.
To predict something that was so outrageous and exaggerated and so preposterous as he did in relation to tax reform and worst still to hope and pray that it was going to happen because he thought it would be to his political advantage and to see that not realised and to see the Australian community embrace tax reform - take to it; warm to it; realise its benefits and to see all the prognostications of doom and disaster fall in a heap has done enormous damaged to the credibility of the leader of the Opposition and to the Australian Labor Party.
And I don';t believe the Australian people will forget that and I don';t believe that we should allow the Australian people to forget the irresponsible predictions made by Labor about tax reform.  The extent to which they talk down the capacity of the Australian people to embrace an important reform.  It is one of the worst examples of political negativism that I have seen in the 26 years that I have been in public life.  And they deserve the criticism and the censure of the people of Australia.
As I look back over the last year we have achieved an enormous amount.  On the international stage and I particularly acknowledge the contribution that Alexander Downer has made as Foreign Minister over the last four and a half years.  On the international stage it was Australian leadership that liberated the people of East Timor.  Australian leadership and Australian initiative.
And it is very much to the international credit of this country that we took the stand that we did and it';s a stand that has been vindicated by the events that have followed and will continue to be seen as very much the high water mark of this country';s determination to stand up for fundamental human rights when they are under threat.
We have seen a continued fall in the level of unemployment.  Of all of the promises I made in 1996 none was more important than the promise I made to try and reduce unemployment and particularly youth unemployment.  And I can report four and a half years on that that promise has been fulfilled.  We now have 810,000 more jobs in Australia than in March of 1996.  We have the lowest level of overall unemployment in ten years.  We have the lowest level of female unemployment in almost 20 years.  We have areas of Australia that for decades had double digit unemployment, now have levels of unemployment below the national average.
Blacktown in the western suburbs of Sydney now has an unemployment rate of 4.3 per cent, which is below the national average.  And as you go around the country you can find areas where historically unemployment was very high and it';s now down to levels that we have seen since the late 1960s or early 1970s.  
Now that doesn';t mean there';s still not challenges ahead and there is still areas of South Australia and there are areas of Australia where the level of unemployment is still too high but we have delivered the commitments.  We';ve kept the faith; we';ve done what we said we would do in relation to unemployment.  
We';ve continued to protect the integrity of the budget surplus.   We have continued to see strong business growth.  We';ve continued to see strong levels of productivity.  And importantly we have seen in the last two weeks the highest level of membership of private health insurance seen in this country since the middle 1980s.  We have reversed a 15 year old hemorrhaging of the private health insurance system of this country.  We have done what Labor would never have done and that is that we have saved private health insurance.  Labor would never have done that because Labor hates private health insurance.   Labor doesn';t believe in private health insurance and if Labor is given the opportunity Labor will destroy the incentives now available for Australians to join private health insurance.  And it is one of the reasons why turning to Labor is an unacceptable risk for the Australian people at the end of next year.
And over the last twelve months of course the most significant development has been the successful introduction of the new taxation system.  For 25 years this country has needed a new taxation system.  For 25 years governments have for a variety of reasons avoided the ultimate responsibility of putting their political life on the line in order to bring in taxation reform.
And at long last after the election of 1998 we have the opportunity to do what every significant politician on either side of parliament has known for a quarter of a century had to be done and that is to bring in a new taxation system.  
We got no help from Labor.  At every turn Labor tried to destroy and sabotage through guerilla tactics, scare tactics and downright misrepresentations.  The Labor Party sought to intimidate the Australian people out of the act of faith and courage needed to embrace reform.  But to their great credit the Australian people became increasingly tired of Labor';s scare campaign.  
And so it was that when the new system started on the 1st of July there was already more than a little apprehension in the hearts of the Labor Party members that maybe they had over-played their hand.  But maybe they shouldn';t have been so negative and we all in Parliament in the last week before the introduction, we sensed it.  They became more nervous and apprehensive and they wondered whether they had done the right thing.  And well may they have wondered whether they had done the right thing because they hadn';t.  
And in the weeks that have gone by the Australian community has embraced taxation reform.  They have recognised it for what it is.  It';s the biggest single change to the economic system of this country in 40 or 50 years.
It delivers the biggest personal tax cuts we';ve seen ever.  It sweeps away an old fashioned wholesale tax system.  It provides tax breaks for our exporters.   It reforms the business tax system by cutting the company rate to 30 cents in the dollar in two years time.  It halves the capital gains tax.  It delivers benefits importantly over time to the States.  It provides the greatest underpinning any national government has ever provided to the provision of welfare services in Australia because it will in time guarantee increasing revenues to the States so they can deliver more assets to government schools, public hospitals, police and road services.  Something that States have wanted in this country for generations. 
And it represents the biggest single of a large number of economic reforms that the government has undertaken over the last four and a half years.  
When you add them up, getting the budget back into surplus a year ahead of prediction.  Re-writing our industrial relations laws that have helped to deliver higher productivity.  Further modernising the structure of our financial system.   Making Australia the largest share-owning democracy in the world.  Four years ago I said that just as Menzies had made Australia the largest home-owning country in the world, it was my hope that the Government that I led could make Australia the largest share-owning democracy in the world and I';m delighted to report to you that is that promise also has been delivered in full.
But taxation reform is more about the political achievement of the government that brings it in.  Taxation reform is also about the national self belief that Australians have in their capacity to embrace necessary reform.  When a country embraces and manages to bring in a reform of that kind it gives people great faith that they can embrace other reforms and provided you convince the people that the reform is good for the country, and that it';s fair for all of its citizens, I believe that there is no change or reform which the Australian people will not embrace.
So I speak to you just over half way through the Government';s second time in office knowing that we';ll have another Federal election by the end of next year and knowing as I do that that will be a very hard fight.  The third one always is.  And politics in Australia today are never predictable and nobody should take that election for granted.  Nobody should assume that the policy success that we have had has its automatic reward.  It helps; it gives you credibility; it makes you more believable than your opponent.  It is remembered by some but it doesn';t carry an automatic political dividend.  
It';s also necessary for us to remind the Australian people of the risk in electing a Labor government.  We don';t want them to get the idea that there isn';t much of risk involved in electing a Labor government.  But let me remind you of some of the risks, particularly to middle Australia, of electing a Labor government.
The first and most important risk of electing a Labor government is the risk it would represent to the income tax cuts delivered only a few weeks ago.  We have Mr Crean saying he';s going to have a bigger surplus that we have.  To use that famous AFL slogan "I';d like to see that".   We have Mr Beazley promising to spend additional dollars, hundreds of millions of additional dollars on health and education. We have him promising to roll back the GST, but quickly promising the states that they won';t have to bear any of cost of the roll back.  
I saw him yesterday';s promising to spend a lot more money on defence as well.  Well there is certainly nothing with him agreeing with us that more should be spent on defence.  But the point of what I';m saying is that he';s busily adding up huge financial commitments and if you are going to spend more on education, if you are going to roll back the GST, but not leave the states worse off and you are going to have an even bigger surplus than we have, the money';s got to come from somewhere and that money, if those commitments are to be delivered, that money can only come from taking away the income tax cuts or some of them that were delivered only a few weeks ago.  
And the second danger to middle Australia and it';s a very clear and obvious danger of electing a Labor government is that they will dismantle the incentives we';ve put in place to encourage a record number of people back in to private health insurance.  
The Labor Party';s always had an ideological hostility towards private health insurance.  Jenny Macklin as the Shadow Health Minister can barely utter the words private health insurance.  She despises it.  As an advisor to Brian Howe she wrote of its imperfections.  She but grudgingly acknowledges that may be in some form it will be retained and her refusal to rule out a means testing of private health insurance if Labor were elected is a reminder of the sorts of things that would be in the gunshot of a newly elected Labor government. 
And we shouldn';t imagine that that';s not a possibility.  It';s always possible when you have an election that a change of government is going to occur and I think it';s always realistic and sensible when we are talking to each other as members of the Liberal Party, not only to talk about what we have achieved, but also to talk about the threat that is represented by the election of our opponents.  And of course the third great danger to middle Australia is that the industrial relations reforms, led by Peter Reith, which have led in very large measures to the higher productivity of Australian businesses over the last four years that those industrial relations reforms would be rolled back and that we would once again give back to the union bosses of Australia, domination of Australia';s industrial relations system.  It matters not to Labor that only 20% of the private sector workforce is now a member of a trade union.  But when you have 80% or more of your federal parliamentary membership with a union background, it is little wonder that is should still see the industrial relations future of this country in terms of trade union ownership.  
And if we turn back the clock on industrial relations in this country, we will strike a blow at the heart of productivity gains of recent years, which have delivered real wage increases to the working men and women of this country, the like of which they never saw in the 13 years that Labor was in power between 1983 and 1996. 
So my message to you today, fellow Liberals, is not only does this government and all of us working together have much to be proud of, over the last four and a half years.  We have achieved, we have delivered, we';ve kept faith.  We';ve done the things and more than we said we would do and we will go on with the programme of reform.  You don';t stop, you don';t rest on your laurels, you don';t say that';s enough, let';s consolidate.  That is a recipe for stagnation and going backwards.  But it is also very necessary that we bear in mind and we communicate to the Australian people the danger of going back to Labor.  We don';t want them to get away with the impression that it';s just a slight adjustment to change government.  They are different.  They have different values, they have different attitudes, they despise many of the reforms that we have introduced and given half an opportunity they will turn back the clock and I have indicated some of the areas in which that will occur. 
The last thing that I want to say is a rather more personal thing and that is to pay tribute to all of my colleagues from South Australia in the Federal parliament.  In different ways, each of them makes a very special contribution.  South Australia has the strongest and largest representation in the Federal government of Australia now than I think it';s ever had since federation.  The number in the Ministry, the sensitive important portfolios they hold, the leadership of the government in the Senate and Robert Hill is the longest serving leader of a major political party in the Senate since federation. He is still one of the youngest looking members of the ministry isn';t he?!!  The contribution that Alexander makes, I have mentioned.  Nick Minchin covering that enormous industry portfolio, the first time ever that  a Prime Minister is combined industry science and resources in to the one portfolio.  The tremendous job and congratulations to you and to those who work with you Amanda on the tremendous work that';s been done in relation to the drug campaign.
Fantastic job that Trish Worth does as a Parliamentary Secretary and I know that I am not meant to at a political gathering to say anything about the Speaker, so I';ll just leave to you to work out who he is, but he also does an absolutely fantastic job. And to all of the other colleagues which in different ways do such an outstanding job.  South Australia is strong and effective as an integral of the federal government to Australia and it';s there, not only in terms of the quality of the representation, but it';s also there in terms of the outcomes that have been achieved on the merits for the benefit the people of South Australia and of course in terms of seats, you hold a record number and we have to fight hard to hold to every last one of them at the next election.  We had some great wins here in 96, we had some great retentions here in 98';, we want to hang on to all of them come the end of next year.  But ladies and gentlemen, finally to all of you, thank you for the tremendous support you';ve given me.  It';s a great pleasure to work with John Olsen as Premier, he takes a national perspective, he fights hard for South Australia, but in the end he';s an Australian beside me in promoting the best interest of this country and I will do everything I can to continue that cooperation which is very important to the Liberal cause here in South Australia.
Thank you.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS AT THE LIBERAL CONVENTION SOUTH AUSTRALIA, 19 AUGUST 2000
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, I would like to congratulate you on your economic reform.  You probably get a lot of that when you come to gatherings such as this but I think that the taxation reform has been very brave, particularly announcing before an election in going to it and implementing it as you have done, so I would like to congratulate you on that.  But in light of taxation reform, there';s an issue that seems to be slowly creeping up, which is interest rates.  It';s just a question in regards to interest rates and it';s an issue that effects a great number of people, particularly self employed, small business and people like myself who are home owners in addition to the state government with our on going debts.  I would just like you to outline your perspective on where you see that travelling and whether interest rates might drop a bit after the GST implementation.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Michelle, is it?  I can';t speculate about the future movement of interest rates, it';s always not wise for Prime Ministers and Treasurers and people in our sorts of positions to do that.  I can point out to you yes, they have gone up a little bit in the last year.  They are still for the average home borrower, $220 dollars a month less than what they were in March 1996.  The Reserve Bank controls the movement of interest rates, the important thing about interest rates is the contribution movements in them make to the long term stability of the economy. Too often in the past, we';ve had sharp variations in - particularly upwards - which have helped in bringing on recessionary conditions and one of the aims sensible conduct of monetary policy at the present time by the bank is to make certain that we maintain strong growth.  The thing that';s most important is to maintain strong growth and we';ve been able to do that over the last four years.  I don';t think any body likes to see them going up if you';re a borrower, although I know some self-funded retirees who thought they went down too far and it tends to vary a bit according to what situation you are in but even if you take the worst scenario, which is you know, you just look at the last year they are still significantly below what they were in March of 1996.  I am sorry I can';t speculate any further than that, I just don';t think it';s possible for me to do so.
QUESTION:
I';d like to say a word that no body would like to hear and every body seems to be avoiding and it';s called uranium deposits, I';d just like to know what you';d like to tell us about this?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Nick, you want to have a go at that?
SENATOR MINCHIN:
You are not wimping out are you Prime Minister?  Well I presume you don';t mean uranium deposits but the disposal of radioactive waste.  Uranium mining is one of the great industries of this country and contributes jobs and exports and hundreds of millions of dollars to the economic welfare of this country, but that';s uranium mining which we strongly support and anyone who has a mine that they propose to create, can create it as long as they meet all our stringent Robert Hill applied environmental safeguards.  
As to the disposal of radioactive waste, I congratulate the Olsen government on its support for the Keating/Labor government policy which was to establish a national repository for Australia';s low level waste and we are also committed to the establishment of a national store for our intermediate level waste.  And the fact is ladies and gentlemen, we have been creating this waste for some 40 years through the beneficial use of nuclear medicine and nuclear science which saves lives every single day in this country.   
400,000 Australians benefit every year from nuclear medicine in this country and I get calls every day from families who tell me of the examples in their own cases where their families have suffered cancer and they benefit from nuclear medicine that is available as a result of us having the Lucus Research reactor and its application through 180 nuclear medicine centres in this country and the fine medicine that we practice.  But all those beneficial uses create waste and have created waste for 40 years and it is an absolute scandal that in this country it';s been left lying around in university basements and hospital basements and in 50 sites around the country. That is a scandal and we are determined to fix it, to build these national repositories to safely store our radioactive waste and I thank you for your support.
PRIME MINISTER:
Now you know why I asked him to answer the question.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, congratulations on your excellent address today and the achievements of the government, but in addition this month, your commissioned report on welfare reform has been brought to the parliament, to the public and of course the government';s response is still some way away, but I wonder if you would outline where you see the government proceeding with this important and I think potentially publicly popular set of welfare reforms?
PRIME MINISTER:  
The report that was written by a committee chaired by Patrick McClure who is the head of Mission Australia, one of the largest welfare groups in the country is a good and balanced report, we have endorsed its broad thrust, it makes a number of major recommendations, one of which is over time to consolidate all welfare payments in to one, to try and provide a greater degree of as it were, personally customised response to individual needs.  It endorses the principle of mutual obligation, which has been a cornerstone of our approach.  We are looking at the report in detail and we';ll give a government response I hope by the end of the year.  There are a lot of things in it that will take years to implement, the important thing is that is brings a very balanced perspective and it';s drawn a lot of general support, even the Labor Party and the Democrats have indicated general support.  I take the opportunity of making it very clear that we don';t ever concede the moral high ground of the Labor Party on welfare reform.  This idea that welfare and concern for the underprivileged is a Labor issue and that some how or other, the Liberal Party is behind the eight ball on that and that is one of the great modern myths of Australian politics.  We have defended the social security safety net in four and a half years.  The Labor Party said we were going to destroy it, it tried to run a fear campaign, none of them have worked because their not true and we don';t intend to take benefits away from people who deserve them, we never have and we never will, that';s not part of our way of handling things.  We do think if people are able to give something back in return for welfare, then it';s only reasonable that they be asked to do so and the recommendations that McClure has made in relation for example to single parents, to deserted mothers are not draconian, they are not the severe things that were predicted by the Labor Party.  They';re measured and sensible and they are really designed to help people re-enter the workforce, they are not designed to penalise people or stigmatise people, we are not going to do that and we never have and we won';t in the future and I think as time goes by one of the great achievements of this government will have been seen to be the reforms that we make in the welfare area and they';ll match, not only our economic goals, but very importantly I think they will match our social goals.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister congratulations again on the reforms the government has led, be they be recent reforms in taxation, industrial relations, health and welfare which we now hear about.  Recently the Treasurer announced a formation of a new board of taxation which comprises a number of prominent Australian business people and will drive forward I understand the ongoing process of tax reform in Australia, particularly the so called option two - business tax reform.  Prime Minister, I wonder if you';d share with delegates some of the future tax reforms that you see the government embarking upon as we head toward the next election and beyond, baring in mind of course, the success with which we';ve already enjoyed.
PRIME MINSTER:
Well I don';t know that I have a whole lot of new tax reforms to announce this morning.  I would like to get current reforms fully bedded down and you mentioned option two, which is very important change to the business tax system.  The board, the taxation, it';s not the taxation board of review, it';s the taxation advisory board and that';s a significant difference in nomenclature. It';s not designed to have the primary responsibility for building taxation policy, it';s designed to give the government advice on the operation of the present law and also to give some policy advice.  I think what we have to do in tax is to make sure that the changes bought in on the 1st July are well and truly bedded down.  We have to give the business community a bit more time to absorb and implement option two and the reason we';ve put off its introduction a little is not that we';re walking away from it, we';re still committed to it very strongly, but we do need to make certain that all the other changes are fully absorbed.  You never end the process of tax reform, but so as to avoid falling a victim of the communications clutter, I don';t think I';ll foreshadow any further changes to the tax system this morning and I';ll try to hold my fire on that for at least a few months.
[ends]


Subjects: The Tough on Drugs strategy in Victoria and Australia wide
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
PRIME MINISTER: 
Well Major Watters, the Premier of Victoria Steve Bracks, the Health Minister, Police and Emergency Services Minister and the Attorney General of Victoria, Mick Palmer the Commissioner of the Federal Police, Commissioner O’Louglin, Professor Hamilton, Professor Penington, ladies and gentlemen.  
I am very pleased indeed to share the platform with the Victorian Premier today following a similar announcement and a brief function in Sydney not so long ago when I shared a platform with the New South Wales Premier and also a similar launch by my Health Minister and the Premier of Tasmania.  And I hope to be followed very shortly by similar initiatives with the Premiers of the other three states of Australia.  
It is important, as the Premier said, that governments, state and federal work together to do what we all collectively can do to reduce the disastrous impact of drug abuse on the young in particular but more generally the community of Australia. 
Nobody has all of the answers.  There are debates on the periphery I believe about aspects of tackling the drug problem.  The good news story is that as to the centrality of the assault on the drug problem there’s a very high degree of agreement and a very high degree of cooperation within the Australian community.
We all agree that we need effective law enforcement and I again congratulate the state police forces of Australia, to the Federal Police.  In particular I have in mind some of the seizures in recent days which involved magnificent cooperation between the Federal Police, the Customs, the National Crime Authority and the state police resources.  That kind of cooperation is absolutely imperative.  We all agree on that. 
We also agree on how important it is to educate the young against the damage done by drug abuse.  And I can’t stress that too strongly.  Deterrents and educating people in their formative years against the danger of drug taking, and very importantly helping parents and welfare organisations to involve themselves effectively in those programmes is also tremendously important.  
The other element of course is to provide very effective rehabilitation services.  And this diversion agreement is of a piece with I think a far more effective approach to rehabilitation and assistance.  I agree with Major Watters, sending people to gaol for addiction alone is barbaric and we do have to find a practical alternative to it.  And I think these diversion agreements, and they were to a very large extent pioneered here in Victoria, are a very effective way of doing it.  
And when we discussed at the COAG meeting probably fifteen months ago the Commonwealth’s desire to sign partnership agreements with the states to implement these diversionary programmes there was very ready agreement across the political divide from all of the states and the territories of Australia.  
The Premier said, and there’ll be just on $23 million coming from the federal Government for the diversion agreement in Victoria.  And I warmly welcome and thank the Premier for the announcement that he’s made on behalf of Victoria.  It is a partnership, we’ll provide additional resources that will fund the treatment of people diverted from the criminal justice system.  And that is where organisations such as Moreland Hall play such a tremendous role. 
It’s an occasion, as well as saluting the cooperation between governments and the role of the law enforcement agencies, it’s also an opportunity for me to salute on behalf of all of the Australian people the tremendous work done by organisations such as Moreland Hall.  It’s an outreach of the Uniting Church.  It’s been operating I understand for more than twenty years.  And it’s dealt with all forms of substance abuse- alcoholism, starting, still doing that, but has now moved more into the illicit drug area.  And I think the work that is done at the coal face by such organisations, and Major Watters of course as a member of the Salvation Army brings a specialty to that understanding as well.
It is a difficult fight.  There’s a lot written and said about the fight against drugs and there’s no simple answer.  And there have been legitimate areas of difference on some ways of tackling the problem.  But there can be no area of difference I believe in relation to the undesirability of sending people to gaol who are merely suffering from an addiction and who’ve not really seriously moved from addiction into crime.  And it is to prevent the tragedy of that occurring that these agreements are being entered into.  And if we can keep seven and a half thousand people here in Melbourne and in Victoria out of the criminal justice system then I think every last dollar of the money that both governments have committed will have been well spent.  
Now we can’t do that without cooperation.  And I’m absolutely delighted as I look around the audience this morning to see not only representatives of the state government, the federal government but the welfare organisations, the Victoria Police, the Federal Police and Professor Penington and others involved in the fight against drugs here in Victoria because this is an expression of the community’s concern an expression of the desire on the part of people, putting aside their differences on other issues, to work together as much as we can.  
I have a very strong personal commitment to the Tough on Drugs strategy.  We have put a lot more money into it.  We don’t pretend everything we’re doing is perfect and we don’t pretend that there aren’t some areas of legitimate debate in the community.  But there’s a sincere commitment by the federal Government to work with state governments irrespective of their political persuasion to see if we can make some difference over a period of time.  
I think we are making a difference.  It’s slow, it’s tough, it’s disappointing on occasions but it’s tremendously encouraging when you can actually get people together like this.  I mean in this room there’s a fair amount of expertise and capacity to do something about the problem.  I think that’s got to mean something.  And it sends a very strong signal to the rest of the Australian community.  
It is a real partnership and I thank the Premier warmly.  I thank him for his presence and the presence of three of his Ministers who are so directly involved in the campaign against this tremendous social scourge which does touch just about everybody, some tragically, some not so tragically, some less directly.  But there’s none of us who haven’t in some way known of or been associated with or in the case tragically of many deeply grieved by drug abuse.  And if we can play a part in some way in reducing the problem, and I think this diversion agreement will do it and I think it does enlist all of the relevant bodies in our community.  So I thank the Premier.  
I have great pleasure in formally announcing the federal Government commitment of $23 million.  I acknowledge the earlier contribution of the previous Victorian Government to pioneering work in this area.  And I think this does represent a very strong, positive signal to the people of Victoria of the determination of the two governments that have the responsibility to work together to try and reduce the scourge of drugs within our community.  And I warmly thank all of you for the help that you have given by your attendance here today and the commitment of yourselves personally and of the organisations that you represent. 
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much to my parliamentary colleague and the Member for Ballarat Michael Ronaldson, the Mayor of the City of Ballarat Mr Barnes, to Mr John Fairfax the Managing Director of Rural Press, to Rob Hunt of Bendigo Bank, to John Finch the driving force behind this marvelous occasion, ladies and gentlemen.
This is one of those occasions, and I say this very sincerely, that helps make public life and particularly the role of being Prime Minister of Australia really satisfying and really enjoyable because what tonight is very much about is demonstrating to Australia and indeed to the world that the fighting Australian spirit in regional Australia is very much alive and is very effective.  
And I do want to congratulate all of those associated with the past few days and associated with tonight for the tremendous role model that you represent to some of the great regional areas of Australia in what you have been able to do.
So often we read and hear of the bad news stories about regional Australia and tonight therefore is a double pleasure for me because it is in every sense of the word a good news story.  The way in which Ballarat and the regions surrounding Ballarat has coped with some of the challenges confronting all of regional Australia over the last few years have been quite remarkable.
It was only seven years ago in 1993 that Ballarat and its environs had an unemployment rate of 20%.It is now down to 5.7% which is below the Australia wide average.  Now that's happened, I mean let me say in the true spirit of collegiate loyalty, Michael Ronaldson's had a lot to do with that of course.  But can I also say that he hasn't been alone, that all of you have worked very hard and the business men and women of Ballarat have diversified.  I mean the wonderful stories that I have heard over the dinner table and Michael's told me many others of the refusal of local businesses to accept that it can't happen in a regional city, the determination of many people to start new businesses, the way in which regional Australia and Ballarat in particular has taken very eagerly to the benefits and the unlimited opportunities of information technology, I mean that's been a very important element of the revival of many businesses and the commencement and the success of others.  And of course you've heard the wonderful story from Brown Brothers.  
I mean tonight is about the export excellence of Australian industry and it's a reminder of course that if you have exports, and we want plenty of those, you've also got to have imports.  And I don't want to give you a simplistic economics lecture but occasionally there are some people who think you can have exports and not have any imports.  The only problem with that theory is that if you think it other countries will think it too and then you don't end up having any exports.  And the whole idea of an open economy succeeding well in the world is that it has to be willing to extend to others what we want for ourselves.  
And in the long run the economic future of this country depends very heavily indeed on our capacity to export.  And that is why a night like tonight which is a celebration of the capacity of regional Australia to export that is why a night like tonight is so tremendously important.  Amongst other things it gives me an opportunity for a few moments to praise the export effort of the people in Ballarat, to tell you that you are equal to the best in the world, to tell you that your export performance has played a major part in the evident economic strength of Australia as we have moved into the twenty first century.  Because the contribution of something like 20% of our gross domestic product that comes from exports has been really quite remarkable. 
Mr Brown told us the story of the success of the wine industry, it's a truly remarkable exemplar of what Australia has been able to do.  But of course it's duplicated in so many other industries.  And those people who say that our future lies in going back to a protective past, to shutting out those who would wish to export into Australian markets misunderstand the character of the globalised world economy in which we live.  
In the economy of the twenty first century you really only have two options- you either keep going forward or you go backwards.  We don't have the option as a country of marking time, of saying well we've got a nice little niche, we've got a nice little share, it's pretty warm and comfortable and we'll just sit where we are now and everything will be marvelous.  It doesn't work that way.  What all of you in business know is that you really have to keep thrusting forward and keep trying to win new markets.  And the same thing applies to a country.  And that's the reason why the Government has been so committed to a programme of economic reform over the last four and a half years. 
I didn't embark upon tax reform for my health, I certainly didn't.  I didn't embark upon it to win some popularity contest, and I didn't.  But I embarked upon it as we had embarked upon industrial relations reform, embarked upon budget reform, embarked upon so many other areas of reform because it is the only way that Australia can keep going forward in the globalised world economy.  And the countries that are doing very well around the world now are the countries that are willing, by and large, to have very open economies and are willing by and large to embrace necessary economic reform.  
And what is so very encouraging to me and I know it will be to many other people around Australia who care about this country's economic future is that the Australian people in relation to tax reform in particular, but in relation to economic reform in general, have demonstrated a capacity and a willingness to embrace change for the long term future of the country.  
And I believe that Australians will always accept a strong argument put in favour of change and reform if you can satisfy two pre-conditions.  One of those conditions is that you must persuade them that it is good for Australia because in the end there is a deep streak of altruism and national decency within all Australians.  They care very much about the international reputation of this country, they care very much about its collective future and prosperity and even though they may quite properly be preoccupied with their own interests and their own lives and those of their families and their businesses and their communities they always have a special place in their personal concern about the long term future of this country.  And I think Australians accepted that we needed to change that very arthritic old-fashioned taxation system.
And the other thing that you have to do is to persuade them that the change and reform as well as being good for the country is fundamentally fair for all of its citizens because the other great strength that Australians have is an instinct for fairness.  That old Australian expression 'a fair go' is not just a clich, it's not just a catch cry, it is something that Australians feel very strongly.  And if you can persuade people that what you want to do is good for the country, and it represents a fair go for the citizens of the country then they will go along with it.  
And that is why I think in the end we appear to have won the support of the Australian community for taxation reform, difficult and hazardous though it was and I acknowledge there have been difficulties for some and some may lay ahead of us.  But basically, all of the predictions of doom and disaster and the end of the world on the 1st of July did not materialise.  Armageddon was not experienced at the beginning of this financial year.  And I think Australians see the value of embracing a change in reform that while it involves some transitional difficulties has been, I believe a very important change for the better and something that will be for the long term benefit, not just to the Australian economy generally, but of course it will be of enormous benefit to Australian exporters.  One of the great advantages of a value added taxation system, which is what we have now embraced, is that it is not applied to exports and it puts us in a far stronger competitive position with so many other countries around the world.  And that of course is what reform is all about.  Its about putting us in a very competitive economic position.
So ladies and gentlemen I am really delighted to have had the opportunity tonight of responding to Michael Ronaldson's invitation.  I know that various parts of regional Australia have traveled through difficult times over the last few years, and many of our fellow country men and women in smaller country towns around Australia, in many of the rural areas of Australia are still going through significant difficulty. 
You can't generalise about non-metropolitan Australia.  It's really quite a mistake to do so, it really, in a sense is divided into two or three areas.  The very small rural communities that have relied on the traditional rural exports are doing it very tough.  Because, through no fault of their own, their prices are low and they've experienced a long term decline in their real returns.  And, it is tough.  
Some of the largest cities in regional areas of Australia continue to do extremely well.  Others have had to go through a process of adjustment and Ballarat is one of those.  You have changed the base of your industry in a quite effective fashion and it's been one of the reasons why Ballarat has done so very well.  Some of the industries recognised tonight as the award winners, if you'd have said fifteen years ago that they were going to be industries that were doing well in export from Ballarat, people would have thought you had no understanding of the district.  I think that's a great tribute to the resilience of the community.
There are other non metropolitan areas of Australia, particularly some of the coastal regions which are doing extremely well based on the tourist industry and recreation and all of those things that surround those two industries.
So it's unwise to generalise too much about non-metropolitan Australia.  But it's very wise to understand that although generically, the country is doing very well economically, not all of our citizens are enjoying that prosperity to the same extent.  And it's beholden on the government, and all of my colleagues and I are very conscious of this, and it's also beholden on the rest of the community to understand that.  Because one of the things about the Australian fair go, is to make certain that the benefits of economic strength and economic prosperity are to be shared fairly and equally as far as that is possible within the Australian community.
But my friends tonight is a night for people to legitimately feel good about themselves and to feel good about their community.  Tonight is an occasion to celebrate excellence and success.  It's a night to recognise the capacity of a local community to pull together.  And the thing that strikes me about tonight above everything else is the tremendous sense of community pride that people have.  That you've been able to show yourselves and to show your community and to show Australia and in many cases other parts of the world just how successful this regional part of Australia can be.
And can I pay tribute to the sponsors, both the principal sponsors and the others, the bank and Rural Press, two great organisations, both of which are making a very significant contribution in their different ways to regional Australia.  One providing a new way of marshalling the savings and the capital effort of people in rural Australia, another providing an absolutely indispensable, high quality communications network for the people of non metropolitan Australia.
So ladies and gentlemen I thank you very much for being kind enough to invite me here tonight.  I congratulate in advance those who will win all the principle categories, but, very importantly, I collectively congratulate and thank you for the contribution that the exporters of Ballarat are making to the prosperity of the Australian nation.  The way in which they are showcasing the excellence and the skill of individual Australians around the world.  It certainly is a source of immense pride to me as Prime Minister and I know it is extremely valuable to all of your fellow Australians.
[ends]


Subjects: Tax reform; welfare reform; petrol prices; Telstra; Michael Ronaldson;
E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………………………………...
Well thank you very much Michael.  I will join everybody in wishing the North Ballarat Roosters the best of luck on Saturday.  I am not going anywhere near Sandringham between now and the weekend.  I wish them luck and just to sort of let you know that there is a variety of football played in this country could we also spare a thought for the Australian Wallabies who take on South Africa in the tri-nations final in Durban at the weekend.
But Michael is right.  He is always right.  But last night was quite a night and there was quite a buzz.  I got a buzz out of it and I went away feeling that there is a lot of life and heart and soul and hope and optimism in regional Australia.  And when I think as I said last night that what seven, eight years ago there was an unemployment level of 20% in the city of Ballarat and the surrounds and now it is down to 5.7% which is below the national average.   It does represent a quite remarkable turnaround and I want to congratulate everybody in the Ballarat district that has been responsible for that.  The way in which the businesses and the community have rallied together and worked together to produce better solutions to find industries that can do better, can export, to modernise some of the older industries, to bring in new ones, it is a reminder to all of us of what can be achieved if communities work together in an effective partnership.
I have been visiting Ballarat over the years in various political capacities.  It is a distinctive part of Australia.  It’s very heavily identified with the history of our country and it’s a reminder of the enormous contribution made by areas like Ballarat to the development of Australia, first in the nineteenth century and now more recently.  And I visit you at a time when it is fair to say that the Australian economy is performing, despite a few challenges which I will come to in a moment, is performing more strongly than it has since the late 1960s.  We have now had twelve quarters of economic growth of more than 4%.  You really do have to go back to the late 1960s and the early 1970s to find such a sustained period of economic activity, to find inflation rates which are as low as they are now.  Indeed to find interest rate levels despite some recent movements which are as low as they are now.  And when you think back to say ten  years ago when Michael first began to represent the Electorate of Ballarat it the Federal Parliament.  The inflation rates, the interest rates and the unemployment levels and the very depressed business activity, the difference is very stark.  And it is a difference which has not happened by accident.  There’s a common misbelief often in the circles of those who comment on politics as distinct from those who are involved in politics that everything happens by chance or accident and that in reality the government has no say in it at all.  Now there are some things that no national government has any control over.  There are some world developments and world movements that no government, not even the government of the United States, the most powerful country the world has ever seen, can control.  But there are many other things which are matters of individual national choice.  A government can decide that it wants to be a reform government and it can decide that it wants to tackle the major challenges that face a community.  And that is very much the attitude that the Coalition took when it was elected in March of 1996.  We had been in opposition for the thirteen years which was a very long time.  There were occasions when there might have been a change of government but there wasn’t.  So when the opportunity finally came our way, the first thing I promised myself was that I wasn’t going to let the opportunity go by without spending every waking hour of the time that I was Prime Minister with my colleagues in endeavouring to change those things in Australia that needed to be changed. 
We have been quite deliberately, as an act of choice, we have been a reform government.  But we haven’t been a mindlessly reform government.  We haven’t been a government that set out the pull down everything that existed in Australia when we became the government.  The quality of government is measured by its capacity to discriminate between preserving those things that continue to work and are of enduring value and resolving to change those things that need to be altered.  We have therefore set about to identify very much those changes that were needed in the economic structure of this country.  We changed Australia’s industrial relations system and we are a stronger and better country for it.  One of the reasons why Australian exporters are doing better now is that we have a more competitive industrial relations system.  
Recently I was in Perth and I opened a new factory for an exporter and the exporter which in effect services the frozen TV dinner for the Japanese market and the managing director of the company said that he had 450 employees, every single one of them was on an individual contract and he turned around to me and he said that if it hadn’t been for your industrial relations reforms we wouldn’t be opening this factory today and we wouldn’t have a lions share of that very important export market in Japan.  And those stories can be told again all over Australia.  Because if you live in a competitive world economic environment, you need a capacity at each individual work place level to make agreements between employers and employees that will increase the productivity of that firm.  And to complete the good news story of that man I spoke to in Perth, he also pointed out to me what little turn over there was within the staff, how well they were paid and as I moved around and talked to them it was driven home to me that they saw the export performance of that company as being very much a cooperative effort.  They had the same pride of ownership in the company’s achievement as did the managing director.  Now that is the best industrial relations in the world and they are the sort of workplace relations attitudes that you have to develop.  So we place a great deal of store on that change.  We place an enormous amount of store on the change in the budget position.  When we came to office our budget was running at a deficit of about ten and a half billion dollars a year which soon racked up something like $80-90 billion of government debt over the previous five years.  And in the five budgets that we have brought down when this year’s is completed we will have repaid about $40-50 billion of that debt that we inherited.  And that’s very important.  
Michael spoke earlier about his children.  The MC spoke earlier about grandchildren.  It’s very very important to remember what you do for future generations and the best thing that we can do for the future generations of Australia is to leave them debt free.  If we can leave future generations of Australians debt free they can have a flying start.  A start that many other countries’ generations won’t have.  So I take particular pride in the work of the government in reducing the budget deficit, coming into surplus a year ahead of prediction.  And now being able to look the rest of the world in the eye and know that even if we do from time to time import a lot and we do from time to time borrow a lot from the rest of the world to service the economic activity in this country our national debt level is very manageable and if we can secure the approval of the parliament to allow the Australian people to own 100% of Telstra instead of only 49+% then we will by the year 2004 have completely eliminated all of the federal government debt.  Now that would be a very remarkable achievement.  We won’t have eliminated the debts owed by Australian individuals and corporations to overseas lenders, that will never occur because we will always be a country that needs to import a large amount of capital to service economic activity.  But to have taken the government out of the borrowing and debt equation is an enormously important achievement.  
So that was a very important part of our reform approach.  But perhaps the most important reform change of all was the one that started on the 1st of July.  The one that our political opponents hoped would reap disaster, havoc and ruin on the government and in the process of course, on the Australian economy.  There were a lot of predictions made about how the world was going to come to an end on the 1st of July.  The sky was going to fall in, the four horsemen of the Apocalypse were going to appear, everything would stop, there would be disaster and confusion and doom and despair and pestilence.  Now of course it didn’t work out that way.  What happened was that the Australian people, as they normally do when confronted with a really important change that they are satisfied is for the benefit of the country they took it in their stride.  And I am really tremendously proud of the way in which the business community, particularly small business operators have absorbed the new taxation system.
I don’t pretend that there won’t be some challenges and difficulties in front of us.  I don’t pretend that there wasn’t a lot of difficult adjustment involved.  And I don’t pretend for a moment that some people aren’t still grappling with some of the detail.  But overwhelmingly it has gone very well.  Overwhelmingly.  The people not only came to grips with it, they understood it, they realised it was for the benefit of the country, they also saw the fundamental fairness of it.  They believed after the 1st of July that there were significant personal income tax cuts.  They found on the 1st of July that everything didn’t go up by 10%.  They found that many items did fall in price.  That the supermarket trolley wasn’t 10% more expensive than it had been the week earlier.  In many cases the movement was only a few dollars.  And people then realised that this was a fair deal.  That the Government hadn’t been misleading them when they said it was fair and balanced and that sure some things went up in price, some things went down, some things remained the same.  And I think as the weeks and months go by, people will increasingly look back on the 1st of July and they will recognise it was very much a case of an exaggerated prediction of gloom and despair by those who didn’t want the new taxation system to be effective.  And it does represent the biggest single change to Australia’s economic system since World War II.  It is a vastly different way of running a taxation system and as the individual changes work their way through the abolition of provisional tax the benefits of the almost halving of capital gains tax, the reduction over a two year period from 36 to 30 cents in the dollar in the rate of company tax.  All of those changes as they work their way through will make the Australian economy and the Australian business community a lot more competitive.  And as I said at the export dinner last night that is really what the modern world is very much about.  It is about ensuring that our economy and our country remains as competitive as possible because when you live in a globalised world economy, economic signals are transmitted at the blink of an eye.  It doesn’t take long, it takes a fraction of a second for economic news to travel from one side of the world to the other.  That is the consequence of the information technology revolution in which we now live.  And you can’t shut out the world anymore.  It’s not an option for Australia to say to the rest of the world we have done pretty well, we have got a nice standard of living here, we don’t need to make any more changes, we will say to the rest of the world leave us alone and we’ll run our own race.  It’s not like that.
To start with we have to, in order to prosper and survive, we have to sell a lot of products around the world.  That’s what last night was all about.  We have a constant flow of people.  The flow of people across national borders now in some industries is becoming almost as intense as the flow of capital.  The way in which it is possible for people to do a service job in one part of the world for a company located on the other side of the world is becoming a part and parcel of the operation of many international organisations.  So it’s tremendously important that we always keep in mind that the economic race now is not about being able to say we are doing better than thirty or forty years ago.  That’s important but what really matters is how well we are doing against the person who is in the race with us at the present time.   And we have got to keep ahead of our rivals and keep ahead of our competitors.  
So ladies and gentlemen, the message I bring you today is a message of tremendous enthusiasm and optimism and hope.  It’s a belief that we have achieved a lot together, that we do have a sounder, stronger, better, more durable economy than we did four and a half years ago.  That is not to say that there aren’t areas of concern.  There seems to be a bit of debate around the Australian community now which I fully understand about the price of petrol.  And I would like to say something about the price of petrol because it has been getting quite a run lately and can I say first up that I understand why Australians don’t like paying higher prices for petrol. It is a very sensitive consumer item.  We love our motor cars, we love using them, we love travelling, it’s a big country, the price of fuel is a very important issue.  
The second thing I would like to say is despite recent increases, our fuel is still extremely cheap by world standards, it’s the fourth cheapest in the world after the United States, Canada and New Zealand.  It is vastly cheaper than it is in Europe and many parts of Asia.  This country is also fortunate because it has a high level of self sufficiency in relation to the supply of crude oil.  
Overwhelmingly, ladies and gentlemen, the increase in the price of petrol which has occurred in recent months has been viewed of the increase in the world price of crude oil.  It has also been significantly influenced by the change in the exchange rate relationship between the Australian dollar and the United States dollar.  World crude oil prices are set in United States’ dollars, and when the Australian dollar falls against the United States’ dollar, the price each barrel of crude oil which is needed is increased thereby because of that changed exchange rate relationship.
Let me try and explain as best I can by illustration the way in which external factors have increased the price of petrol at the bowser in Australia over recent months.  
Between April and August the average capital city price of fuel, petrol in Australia at the refinery gate, that is before any taxes are added, at the refinery gate rose by 12.2 cents a litre.  The retail price, that’s what was paid on average in the capital cities of Australia over that same period, has risen by only 11.9 cents a litre.  In other words there has been a very close correlation between the rise in the price at the refinery gate of 12.2 cents a litre and the rise in the bowser of 11.9.  Now that illustrates very clearly that the rise in the price of petrol has been due overwhelmingly to external factors, not to the goods and services tax.  That is the great deception of this whole debate, that the goods and services tax has been responsible for this big increase in the price of petrol.
Even if the critics of the Government were right about the inability of the oil, the alleged inability of the oil companies to pass on that one and a half cents a litre cost saving as a result of the GST.  Even if they were right about that, and I don’t accept for a moment they are, even if they were right about that, that’s only one to one and a half cents a litre.  That doesn’t explain why the price of petrol has gone from the late 70s early 80s up to the early mid or even late 90s or even more.  That doesn’t explain that at all.  
Overwhelmingly it is because the world price has gone up and because of exchange rate variations.  And they are factors over which no national Government of this country has control.  That doesn’t mean to say I find the increase in the price of petrol to my liking. 
Now it is said that the Government could reduce the price of petrol by reducing the excise collected by the Federal Government.  Now that is true.  We could tomorrow have a discretionary cut in the excise per litre we collect on petrol.  I would imagine that if that were something that we would contemplate, we would say, what would the Australian public see as a significant cut in the price of petrol?  I think they would want at least a five cent a litre cut to think it was worthwhile.  
Cutting the price of petrol by cutting the federal excise by five cents a litre would cost $1.7 billion dollars.  Now I have to say to you, much in all as I am conscious of the sensitivity of the Australian public and the Australian motorist to the price of petrol, I think taking $1.7 billion off the Federal Government’s surplus at the present time would be economically unwise. 
The main reason why I think it would be economically unwise is that I think that it would put upward pressure on interest rates at a time when that is probably the last thing most Australians want to see occur.  Particularly at a time when exchange rate fluctuations are putting some inflationary pressure into the system.  So I am against doing that, not because I don’t want to see the price of petrol fall, I would love to see it fall, but I think taking everything into account, having a discretionary cut in the level of excise by raiding the budget surplus would not make much sense.  You could of course try and find the money from somewhere else but that immediately leads you into taking money out of other areas.  Taking money out of road funding, school funding, health funding, defence funding, none of that to my way of thinking makes any real sense. 
So I have to say, unpopular though it may be in many circles, that we don’t see our way clear to cut the federal excise at the present time because we must either fund that by reducing the surplus which will put upward pressure on interest rates or we must fund it by taking money away from other programmes.  And as I move around the Australian community, I don’t hear people saying to me ‘we want further cuts in the provision of necessary Government services.  I hear people saying to me we want Government services maintained, and in some areas increased.  That’s the message I get from the Australian people.
I think the Australian people want a balance in their economic policy.  They want a Government that gets rid of waste and extravagance and gets the budget back into balance and back into surplus, but they also want a government that is sensible enough to spend money where it is needed, a government that, for example, in the last budget was willing to put more than $500 million into attacking the problem of medical service in remote rural areas of Australia.  They want a government that is willing to put more resources into national infrastructure.  They want a government, as this government is willing to do, to put more resources into the defence of Australia.  
I have said repeatedly, and I will say it again today, that this Government in the years ahead, this country needs to spend more and not less money on defence.  And there are quite a number of areas where the Government needs to put more resources into very necessary areas.  It is a balance.  Good government is not, economically is not just about cutting expenditure in every single area.  It is about cutting expenditure in areas where that expenditure is extravagant or unnecessary but it is, on occasions, about increasing expenditure in areas where it is necessary.
And in that sort of context, and with that kind of attitude in mind could I also mention that the Government that I lead is not just about economic issues.  Economic issues are always very important because unless you have a strong economy, a growing economy, a prosperous economy there is so very little you can do to help the more vulnerable in our community, and there is so very little you can do to pursue other important national goals. 
But, we’re also concerned about having a decent welfare system.  Australia I think has got many things right.  One of the things that I think we have basically got right over the years is that our social security system has avoided the excesses of both the United States and Europe.  On the one hand I think there are some aspects of the American welfare system that are too harsh and I would never count them as being introduced into Australia.
By contrast I think there are some elements of the European welfare system that are too interventionist and they have placed too great a burden on the people who are the taxpayers and as a consequence the government sector has got too big.  And what I think we have been able to do in this country is to get the balance right.  We have the Australian fair go attitude that says that we look after people who need help.  We don’t allow people to go without the necessary means of basic support.  We do recognise that we have a moral obligation to help people who, through no fault of their own, need help.  And there are a lot in our midst who fall into that category, there always have been and there always will be, and the challenge of social welfare policy is to find the best way of helping them in a dignified fashion that, where possible, encourages and aids them to get back into the work force. 
And that is the aim of the recent review into social welfare, chaired by Patrick McClure of Mission Australia.  It was a group of men and women with a good understanding of our system.  They had a hard headed approach but they also had a compassionate approach.  And there has been widespread support for the principles of that report and it is based on the Governments strong support for the principle of mutual obligation which is enshrined in our Work for the Dole programme that says yes if people are out of work and they’re trying to find a job, they ought to be financially supported.  But, in return for that financial support, its not unreasonable if they are physically able to do so, that they put something back into the community in return for the financial support they receive.
Now this principle of mutual obligation is now very widely supported in the Australian community and it has underpinned the recommendations of the McClure Report.  We will respond to that report over the weeks and months ahead and in so doing we will demonstrate to the Australian community the capacity of this Government to use the economic strength brought about by our economic reforms to build a stronger social structure.  Social structure that decently cares for the vulnerable in our community, because that’s what a decent, humanitarian society is always about.  And also a social structure that recognises that the solution to the problems of economic and social and family vulnerability involve a partnership between the Government, the welfare sector, Australian individuals and the business community.  And we have, over the last four and a half years, in this area also been something of a trailblazer as a Government.
So, ladies and gentlemen, my message to you this morning is very much a message of hope and optimism, a degree of, how shall I put it, a degree of pride in achievement over the last four and a half years, but certainly not speaking, both as Prime Minister and leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, certainly not speaking with any sense of complacency or smugness about what has been achieved.  
It is important that Michael’s campaign committee have raffle books on your table.  It is important that you always wonder the charge he’s made for the gathering is high enough and whether the venue is large enough.  Because political parties do require the sinews of war.  Election campaigns are not easy.  Ballarat historically has been a marginal seat and I, in all of my political career, have learnt the value of caution, have sensed the danger of over exuberance, certainly have totally rejected any sense of complacency.  
Winning elections in Australia is very hard.  Good policy and good government does not have an automatic electoral reward.  You have to keep working away at it.  And can I say to those in the audience who want another Liberal government at the end of next year federally, you have to work very hard to achieve it.  It won’t happen automatically.  Don’t assume we’ve had a few sort of surprise election results around this country in recent years.  Nobody should assume that that can’t happen at a federal level.  I don’t take the next election for granted.  I have never taken the Australian people for granted, and I never will.  It’s an enormous privilege to be Prime Minister of this country.  I sort of count my blessings every day to have had that privilege come my way for four and a half years.
I want the Government returned because I think it is a very good government and I think it has done a lot of good things.  I also want it returned because I think the people of Ballarat will be very well served by the re-election of Michael Ronaldson.  It think Michael is an incredibly committed, exuberant local member who is so identified with this district.  I go to a lot of gatherings.  I go to a lot of breakfasts, I go to a lot of lunches, I go to a lot of afternoon teas and morning teas and dinners and suppers and cocktail parties, the whole lot.  I mean, you know, Sunday brunches and so it goes on and I see a lot of local members.  Some are good, some are splendid, some are not there for too long, but some of them are really quite outstanding, and Michael is one of them, because Michael has a strong identification with his district.  
He’s parochial to the extent needed to make the point that he is broad-minded enough to know that we’re part of a nation as well as part of a state and part of a city.   And that is a very very important quality for a local member to have so there are a lot of reasons why we want to do well politically in this part of the world at the end of next year and first and foremost is to make certain that the very high quality of federal representation that you had over the last ten years is continued and that can only be achieved by re-electing Michael Ronaldson.  
Thank you very much.


Subjects: Education in the Australian context
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Mr Paul Sheehan the Headmaster of Melbourne Grammar, to James Newton the Captain of Wadhurst, Your Grace the Archbishop, Chairman of the School Council, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  
This is for me a real pleasure.  I enjoy immensely the opportunity of visiting the great variety of schools throughout Australia on a regular basis.  And I'm happy to say that in the course of the last month I've successively participated in the New South Wales Education Week commemoration or observance by returning to Earlwood Public School where I was educated between 1945 and 1951 before going to Canterbury Boys' High School.  And in one of life's coincidences, His Grace and I not only grew up in the same suburb but we were in fact educated two years apart at the same high school.
But I've also had the opportunity in the last few weeks of visiting a number of schools here in Melbourne- different schools both government and independent.  And it's an opportunity therefore to remark upon one of the sterling characteristics of the education system of this country and that is that we offer to our young men and women a remarkable range of choice.  
In many respects I believe that Australia has the best mix of any western country when it comes to the right balance between government provision and independent contribution to education.  We've had over the years many debates in our society about the respective roles.  I have come to a very firm conclusion, and I arrived at that conclusion long before I became Prime Minister, and that is that we need both streams and each in their unique ways makes a very special contribution.  
The history of this school is a very special one.  It's contributed over the years in a quite remarkable way students into all aspects of Australian life.  Three Prime Ministers of Australia went through Melbourne Grammar.  Many people in the professions, law, medicine.  One of the distinguishing characteristics is that Flack was the first person to win a gold medal at an Olympic Games is an old boy of this school and that is of special consequence at a time such as this. 
But most important I think the school has demonstrated a capacity to change with the times yet preserve its basic traditions and values.  And that in many ways is one of the hardest things to do in life.  I think we all want to hang on to those things about our past that are valuable and important but at the same time we want to remain contemporary, we want to remain in touch.  And don't we all find that in dealing with our own children as they grow up and become young adults.  We seek to have a common bond with them based in values and the sort of things that we hold dear as a family and as a community.  But by the same token we recognise that a young person leaving school from Melbourne Grammar or Canterbury Boys High School or indeed anywhere in the Year 2000 it's a very different experience from leaving school as I did at the time of the Melbourne Olympic Games in 1956.  
And the responsibility of schools and the responsibilities of parents is to do what they can to maintain that synthesis between the inherited traditions and values of the past yet try to constantly express them in contemporary terms, in a contemporary setting and in a contemporary language.  It's not always easy and those institutions in our society that do it best are the more successful.  And from what I've learnt of this wonderful school, it's doing it better than many and doing it in a very impressive fashion.
There are a lot of myths about the cost of education in this country.  There are a lot of careless remarks made about elitism and about wealth and about privilege.  Of course societies have always had some people who are better off than others but society has always had, and particularlyr the Australian society, has always had a desire to provide people with equality of opportunity.  
I think it's important for me to salute the fact that every last dollar of this wonderful facility that I'm about to declare open was contributed by the parent body and was contributed by the supporters of the school- the whole -what- four or five million dollars of it.  And that is a very impressive achievement and it speaks volumes for the commitment and the dedication of the parents and the old boys and the supporters of this magnificent school.  
Educating our young is an enormously important responsibility of governments at both a state and a federal level.  And in many ways it's no exaggeration to say that the quality of the education that we provide to our young people at primary school, at secondary school and at university will more than probably anything else shape the capacity of this country to survive and prosper, to maintain a civil and cohesive community internally and to properly present itself to the rest of the world.  
And in order to achieve the best education outcomes we not only need standards of academic rigour, we not only need the right balance between personal responsibility and freedom of expression and freedom of thought but we also need a vigorous amount of competition and choice.  
I don't like monopolies.  I don't like monopolies in commerce.  I certainly don't like monopolies in politics- but you never get them, there's always change from one side to the other.  And I certainly don't like monopolies in education.  The idea that all education should conform to a particular stereotype is wrong.  It is important the education meet particular standards and communities have a right to lay down certain benchmarks in relation to those standards and the achievement of them.  But the reason why I am such a passionate supporter of a diverse and pluralistic education system in this country is that it does provide parents with choice and it's a fundamental right of every Australian parent to have as much control and choice in the education of their children as society can possibly give them.  
And that's one of the reasons why in May of this year the Government altered the funding formula for independent schools within our country.  And the change in that funding formula is designed to provide more resources in a more accurate way to those communities in the independent sector that are more deserving of assistance.  And contrary to some of the things that have been written about those changes in the funding formula it was not designed to produce an opposite result.  
And one of the things that has pleased me greatly under the funding policies of the Government over the last four and a half years has been the development particularly by the Anglican Church but not just by the Anglican Church but by others of low and modest fee paying skills in some of the less affluent parts of the country.  And I think that is a wholly welcome development and it means that we are adding to the rich variety of the education system within our community.  
Ladies and Gentlemen the boys who attend this school do receive a wonderful experience in life.  They receive a good education, they receive valuable pastoral care.  They are also the recipients of one of the most important elements of school education in Australia and that is the partnership between the staff, the headmaster, the actual. the boys who attend the school and the broader school community constituted by the parents, old boys and general supporters.  And schools such as this have a great history of that and much of their strength and much of their success has been due to the tremendous support that you receive in a broader school community.  And the roll up this morning is an eloquent statement of the community support for this school.
It is very important in our lives to mark excellence and achievement.  It's important to recall the great history of institutions and this school does have a great history and you have every right to be very proud of it.  You should of course take care to ensure that the traditions are constantly renewed and updated, maintaining what is really good from the past and treasuring it but also recognising that traditions are only valuable in so far as they provide us with a guide for today's behaviour and for future experiences.  And to the extent that a school can achieve that balance and that synthesis then I think it makes a remarkable contribution. 
My last words are of course to the students.  I know all of us in our lives wonder on occasions just precisely what contribution, in the more difficult moments that schooling is really making to our lives.  But as we grow older and we leave school we reflect with great pride and gratitude on what you have achieved.  
Can I say to you boys that your teachers care for you a great deal.  Teaching is a very noble profession.  I think the teachers of Australia today carry more burdens and more responsibilities than they did several generations ago.  There's a broader responsibility thrust on the shoulders of teachers now than used to be the case.  And I think they do a remarkable job whether they teach here or they teach in any of the thousands of schools both government and independent throughout our community.  
You will when you leave the school look back I know in the main with great affection and gratitude for the education you've received.  It is a priceless endowment.  It is a priceless endowment to have been born in this country.  It's a priceless endowment to have the opportunity of a good education in Australia.  You are certainly receiving it here.  You are receiving it here by courtesy of a great school, the support of your parents, their sacrifices on your behalf and they are immense in so many cases and the dedication and loyalty and scholarship of your teachers.  It will give you a magnificent start in life and it's important that you bear that in mind.  I wish all of you well.  And as a great lover of sport which is so close to the hearts of so many millions of Australians, of course it is just not scholarship for which Melbourne Grammar is famous, it makes a wonderful contribution to developing the whole person through sporting activity.  And that is a very important part of your lives and I know that it's a very important part of the school activity. 
Mr Headmaster thank you very much for inviting me here.  I am honoured to have had the opportunity of addressing a few words and conveying a few of my thoughts about education and the structure of schools within the Australian community.  I wish the school well and I have great pleasure in declaring the new invigorated Wadhurst School well and truly open. 
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Discovery Centre; role of CSIRO; information technology; government funding.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Mr Charles Allen. To Mr Chris Anderson the Chief Executive of Cable and Wireless Optus, Mrs Kate Carnell the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory, Dr Adam the Acting Chief Executive of CSIRO, Mr Jim Peacock and particularly also to the members of the McIntosh family that are here today because the opening of Discovery fulfils one of the many visions and aspirations that Malcolm McIntosh had for this magnificent organisations.
CSIRO is one of those great Australian institutions which one first heard of, if you were of my generation, as a young child and then at various stages through life. CSIRO has made enormous contributions, not only to the science and technological life of Australia, but through it to the economic strengths of the nation and also to the betterment of the human condition and the social conditions in which our community lives.
Around the end of last year when every newspaper and magazine was filled with what you could loosely describe as millennium studies, analysing what the new millennium would bring and what the past millennium had delivered, one of those articles that stayed with me for a long time and I still remember very vividly was in The Economist which analysed the various economic cycles and phases of mankind over the last few hundred years starting with the Industrial Revolution and moving up to the information technology age in which we are now living.  And it made the very simple point that each era was shorter than the previous one and we can measure eras now in much shorter periods of time.  And of course the constant through all of those periods, starting with the Industrial Revolution and moving through to the developments based on chemicals, in particular after World War II, and the contribution naturally of the motor vehicle and all that surrounded it in the early years of the last century.  The thing that was constant in all of those of course was the contribution of science and technology.  
I am also like Chris Anderson something of a devotee of the speeches of Dr Alan Greenspan.  I've had two meetings with him since being prime minister and at both of those, I've asked him the very simple question which I'm, along with many other people, am desperate to know the answer to and that is why is it that the United States' economy is doing so well.  Well Chris has only given you half of his answer.  The first part of the answer that he gave me when I first asked him was I don't really know and I always think it is the mark of a highly intelligent man or woman that he or she will admit that there are some questions that you don't know the answer to.  But he said, I'll have a go and I think in having a go I have to say that the investment that the investment that the United States has made in technology has been one of the main reasons why there's been so much sustained economic growth in that country.  
But today is an opportunity for all of those Australians who value CSIRO and respect the lead that it has given in the national scientific life of  Australia, it's an occasion to uplift the morale of those people and to demonstrate in a very practical and I think very customer friendly way what CSIRO does.  I was encouraged to hear that you're booked out for almost a year from the schools around Australia that are anxious to participate in the facilities and to carry out their experiments here.  And in the short time that I've had the opportunity to enjoy this facility, it really is something that is engaging to people of all ages.  When I sort of did the finger touch bit to get, to get a response on gene technology I instantaneously went to the bit that provided the explanation of what it was.  Because I always think that one of the greatest challenges of science, it's like the challenges to the law, economics and politics, and that is to make what you do and what you're on about readily understandable and readily explicable to the lay people of the world who mightn't share your scientific understanding of it.  And I have to say that the explanation was very succinct and I thought a very good indication of the care that has been taken in putting this wonderful project together and the care that has been taken to ensure that people can relate very directly and very easily to what CSIRO is doing and the contribution and the role of science within our community.
There is a debate going on in the community at the moment about levels of financial commitment to science and technology both from governments and from private industry.  And the Government has recently received an analysis of many of those things and the worth of science within our community from the Chief Scientist who's present, I acknowledge here today, Dr Batterham.  And I'll be receiving the final report in relation to the Innovation Summit later this year and the Government then, and particularly my colleagues Nick Minchin and David Kemp will be making and putting certain recommendations to us.  That is not to say that in the past four and a half years we have been idle in particular areas that are very important to the human condition so far as science and research are concerned.  And I am particularly proud of the doubling of the provision for medical research that was announced in the Budget before last coming out of the Wills Report.  
I think all of these things are a token of the growing recognition of the importance of science in our community. I've said before to a not dissimilar audience that one of the great experiences that I've had as prime minister and somebody who is very much a layman as far as scientific matters is concerned, is to have chaired the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering and Technology Council.  I've found that a particularly stimulating and a great learning experience and something that has certainly communicated to me in a very effective way the extraordinary role and contribution of science and not least of course the role of the CSIRO.
CSIRO has made a truly legendary contribution so far as discovery and achievement and the examples of it are very numerous and indeed too numerous to list on occasions such as this.  But they stretch right across the spectrum.  They of course are very relevant to medical science and to the relief of disease, the alleviation of suffering, they are very, they go very much to matters relating to the environment, to energy conservation, to every nook and cranny of productive behaviour in the Australian community, the CSIRO has played a role.
Chris Anderson was kind enough to make the observation that the project being launched today, Discovery, is a good live example of mutual obligation or the social coalition at work and it certainly is.  And one of the very pleasing aspects of today is in fact for me to record the $3 million that has been contributed by Cable and Wireless Optus, the contribution of $1 million by the Government of the Australian Capital Territory, Nortel Networks has contributed a quarter of a million dollars towards the virtual reality theatre and I'd also like to thank Bayles Myer, the head of arguably the most philanthropic family this country has seen the Myer family, to be congratulated for his personal contribution of $100,000 to the Discovery Centre and the contribution of the Discovery tapestry in the lecture theatre. That tapestry, worth some $50,000 was designed and woven by the Victorian Tapestry Workshop and presented to CSIRO by the Myer family and it does continue a great tradition of philanthropy from that family and their generous work in support of CSIRO.  The sponsors of the Discovery Centre are more than financiers, they've provided important moral support and advice and in their ongoing involvement with the centre derive mutual benefits along with CSIRO through for example the development of themes for the centre to take into account the ACT school curriculum, opportunities for Optus staff to learn about the latest technological advancements by visiting the centre and involvement in the Discovery Centre Board of Management from both Cable and Wireless Optus and the ACT Government.  
Australia has a very rich tradition and one that demonstrates very clearly that we have always performed above our size and our population when it comes to discovery and when it comes to the development of ideas.  Sometimes we've not been as clever at converting those ideas, we've not been as clever in the process of innovation as we have been in the process of discovery and in the process of generation of ideas.  And part of the debate that is going on in the community at the present time is to ensure that we get in place both from the government and from business the right responses and the right attitudes that will ensure that not only do we continue to generate the ideas and have the discoveries and the inventions but we also have the capacity commercially and otherwise to convert those to enduring benefit for the Australian people.  It is true that maintaining a positive, benign economic climate and environment is important to all of these endeavours, that's the underpinning and then the specialty is delivered by organisations such as CSIRO and the companies that are supporting it.
So I am delighted on behalf of the Government and through that the Australian people to be associated with this project.  To again record the great admiration I have for the CSIRO and the work that it's done for the people of Australia over decades, it is one of those really great and enduring Australian institutions, it is a very precious part of our national life and one that needs protection and support.  
So I would now like you to find the envelope you've been given and that contains a pair of glasses and we're going to officially open the Discovery Complex by showing you a 3D programme aimed at giving you a sneak preview of the centre and the many exciting areas of discovery.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: e-commerce; education
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Steve Harris, on behalf of Fairfax Publications, the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald.  To Sandra Milligan and Dean Ashenden, in particular, I extend a welcome and to three of my parliamentary colleagues, Senator John Tierney, Mr Steven Martin and Mr Ian MacFarlane, all of whom in different ways have taken a particular interest in education and in particular universities.
Over the past decade the Good Universities Guide has been an important part of providing students with reliable, easily accessible information about the qualities and the courses on offer at the various Universities in Australia.  The guide was established in 1991 and Sandra Milligan and Dean Ashenden are both the authors and the founders of the guide which has been published continuously since 1991.
As Steve indicated, the theme for this year's award is preparing graduates for an e-world,  which university best prepares graduates for the new world of information technology.  There is almost and I say almost with deliberation, an overload of emphasis on the importance of information technology and the importance of the impact of e-commerce on the commercial life of our country.  But I use the world almost advisedly because in reality, given the transforming effect of information technology and the capacity of e-commerce to critically and positively influence Australia's economic performance, there can never really be too much emphasis on the important component of those things in our daily lives.
Electronic commerce is assisting business and consumers to do any number of things that were undreamt of only a few years ago.  I often refer to the remarks of the chairman of the American Federal Reserve, Dr Allan Greenspan.  When asked to explain the remarkable economic performance of the United States in recent years, replies to the effect that he doesn't really know but if he were pushed to have a go at the explanation, he would say the contribution of the investment in technology and information technology in particular has transformed modern economic conditions and the way in which businesses go about their daily operations.
The Australian community of course is very adept when it comes to taking up the applications of new technology and we recognise the advantages of it and are willing to give it a go.   The e-commerce Beyond 2000 report forecasts that rapid adoption of e-commerce by business will add 2.7% to Australia's GDP by the year 2007 and the government in different ways is supporting developments in this area in providing $158 million under the Building IT Strengths programme, to promote the growth of innovative Australian information and communications technology businesses.
However one of the keys to continuing to keep pace with new information and communications technology is of course in education and training.  And education is central to the prosperity of individuals, communities and nations.  
Australian universities are playing a leadership role in harnessing the benefits of the e-world.  Electronic technology and communication has opened up new research, teaching and education opportunities.  One of the prime examples of this and always important in the Australian environment is that of distance education.  And Australia's success in the international market place will increasingly depend of course on the technological skills of its people and the government has recognised this in many ways and in particular has provided $25 million under the science lectureships initiative to attract students to innovative science and technology related courses. And as I remarked yesterday when opening the Discovery project of CSIRO here in Canberra, the government has before it the outcomes of the Innovation Summit and will have before it by the end of the year the final coming together of the analysis of those outcomes and will be responding appropriately to those recommendations.
We are very conscious as a government of the need for university students who live outside the major capital cities as well as those living within the capital cities to share in the opportunities of the information technology era.
The value of course of the Good Universities Guide is that it provides to students and potential students, very necessary data and information about what universities offer.  Australian universities now are not only more numerous, but also more complex, more innovative and more flexible organisations than used once to be the case.  And it is important that students have available to them something that gives a reliable, accurate and objective guide of what universities have to offer.  It's a document that has certainly been thumbed through on numerous occasions in the Howard household over the last eight or nine years, having had three children in that period of time who have been in various stages of university life and it's a document I know that is widely appreciated by the student body of Australia and it's a document that's made a very, very important contribution to a better understanding of what is on offer.
It is important that Australian universities continue to adapt to social, economic and labor market and educational changes and the award which has been sponsored and supported by the Sydney Morning Herald and the Melbourne Age over the last nine years is a very important way of recognising the contribution of universities to the national life of our community.  And I want on behalf of the government to congratulate the Fairfax organisation and the two newspapers for their continued sponsorship and support of this award.
I think awards that mark excellence and achievement are important, whatever the endeavour is. It's a valuable, national recognition for people to come, whether it be here to the national parliament, or to some other appropriate gathering place and just in a few moments to recognise achievement and it's very important that people's performance and excellence be marked, not just in sporting and cultural and entertainment endeavour, but also when it comes to something so fundamental as education.
So having said all of that ladies and gentlemen and having very warmly commended the Age and the Herald and the authors of the guide, could I announce the joint winners of the 2000-2001 University of the Year are: The University of Wollongong and the University of Southern Queensland.  The University of Wollongong is recognised for preparing graduates for the e-world and the University of Southern Queensland is recognised for developing the e-university.  Congratulations to both of those universities.


Subjects: Tim Horan's contribution to Australian Rugby Union
E&amp;OE..................
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you Andrew, Tim Horan, and the other person I think I should especially acknowledge particularly after their fantastic performance at Durban, John Eales. 
It';s pretty easy to come to a rugby lunch like this.  It';s pretty easy to stand up after you';ve had a week, indeed four and a half years of arguing the toss about all sorts of controversial political issues to know that everybody in the room is going to agree with every single thing that you say.  It';s a rare experience, in fact it';s a first for me.  
But it is a great delight to just say a couple of words in praise of a remarkable decade or more of contribution to Australian rugby.  It actually coincides with, undeniably the greatest decade ever in the history of Australian rugby.  And you have been part of a wonderful tradition I think I can call it that has really helped to put Australian rugby right up there in the sporting achievements of our country.  
You were part of the 1991 team that won the World Cup.  Fittingly of course you were part of the 1999 team that magnificently won the World Cup in Wales at the end of last year.  And I think very fittingly you were named as the player of the World Cup.  On a scale of rugby achievement it really doesn';t get any better than that.  But in the middle of that decade you had a serious health challenge, you came back in fantastic style.
And you';ve been part of a group of men who';ve really done this country enormous credit.  You';ve not only been great sportsmen, great rugby players but you along with all your other team mates have been fantastic ambassadors for Australia.  
And at a time when the sporting focus of the world is on Australia, is on Sydney isn';t it terrific to take a moment off to savour the wonderful success of our rugby players and to pay tribute to Tim Horan who really has been an ornament to the game, has played it hard, has played it fair, has played it with great skill and great dedication and kept his reputation on and off the field.  
And I really have enjoyed my association with Tim as member of the Wallabies team.  I wish him and his family every health and happiness.  I thank you Tim for the way you';ve played the game, for the contribution that you';ve made to Australian rugby, for the enjoyment and pleasure with your try scoring skills and the zest and speed and the capacity with which you';ve played the game and helped give us this wonderful decade of Australian rugby. 
Tim Horan thank you very much. 
[ends] 


Subjects:
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Professor Snyder, to the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor of the Sydney University, Mr Nelson Mandela, our honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I didn';t know Allan Snyder until I awarded him the Australia Prize in 1997.  And I realised having spent a bit of time with him that that had been one of those gaps in my human experience that with foresight I might have attended to earlier.  
He raised with me very early in our acquaintance this proposal of his to have this very special gathering.  And on the eve of the Olympics how appropriately to ask and inquire on the subject of what made a champion.  
There are many things that make up a champion and tonight and tomorrow this special, unique gathering of Australians and visitors, welcome visitors to our country from overseas, will examine the ingredients of championship.
And having dealt with Allan I think one of the ingredients of a champion is the capacity to ask somebody to do something and for that person to really feel that they had no alternative but to do it.  And that is certainly a quality the Professor Synder has in abundance.  I really felt when he said I want you to be the sponsor and I';d like you to invite and make sure Nelson Mandela comes, I really felt I had no alternative such is his infectious personality and his absolutely unbounded enthusiasm.  
To have gathered together such a cross section of the inquiring minds of thrusting, pugnacious intellects from academia, the world of the arts, the world of business, the world of politics and the world of the media and there';s always an interplay between the media and politics.  As I look around this room I can see many a person with whom I';ve had the odd parry and thrust in a political and media environment over the years, and will no doubt do so in the years ahead. 
But the idea, the concept of conducting an inquiry into what makes a champion on the eve of the Olympics, I think is so beautifully Australian because we are so often accused of elevating sporting excellence beyond excellence in any other field.  I think it is appropriate and so very Australian that we should choose on the eve of the greatest sporting event the world celebrates and only the second time that it';s been in Australia and here in the City of Sydney where the Olympic Games are to be celebrated to establish an inquiry into what makes a champion in other fields, on the eve of those Olympics both celebrates the importance of sport in the lives of Australians, but also celebrates the importance of excellence of achievement in all other areas of human endeavor.  
And I do want to say to you Allan and to those who';ve organised this marvellous project that you do the intellectual life of Australia a great service.  And I know that out of tonight and tomorrow';s gatherings will come a great deal of reflection and a great deal of helpful analysis, as to what does mark people out in their chosen fields- the balance of environment, the relative importance of determination, the answering of the age old question as to whether a man or a woman make his or her times or the extent to which the times make the man or the woman. 
They';ve been part of the restless inquiry of mankind for centuries and I dare say they won';t be resolved tonight or tomorrow.  But there will be out of this conference, by the calibre of the people present and those contributing they will make a very special contribution.  
It is appropriate that the keynote speaker, and our very honoured guest should be Nelson Mandela.  It would be fair to say that no person has quite touched his times in the way that he has.  He has made an impact of a scale that is unmatched in his generation, and in the eyes of many, in any generation.  He';s displayed many qualities and they are well known through the world and they have been rightly honoured and they will go on being honoured.  The contribution that he has made to his own country, the example of commitment to an open, tolerant multi-racial world as well as an open, tolerant, multi-racial South Africa.  Those deeds are so well known and so properly honoured not only in his own country but internationally.
I think of his so many qualities the one that stamps itself above all is his intense generosity of spirit.  For a person to have endured what he endured and to find it within himself to extend the gift of forgiveness and understanding to those who forced him to endure what he had to go through is I think amongst his finest if not his finest quality.  But perhaps one of the examinations, which is one of the issues that might be examined tonight or tomorrow is the contribution that the generosity of spirit makes to the building of a champion.
We are very honoured indeed to have Nelson Mandela with us.  He is one of the honoured and revered citizens of the world.  He has made an immense contribution to mankind, he';s set a wonderful example.  And he';s done both this conference and he';s done Australia a very great honour in coming to participate, to deliver the keynote address.  
We are very happy indeed Mr Mandela to have you amongst us, we honour you, we respect you.  And I think not only Australia but the world is in awe of the moral contribution that you have made to the human condition and we very, very much welcome you amongst us. 
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................................
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you Malcolm.  It's entirely appropriate that this little presentation ceremony should take place before a meeting of the Supermarket to Asia Council because the Supermarket to Asia Council is all about promoting the virtues of every aspect of food production, marketing and distribution in Australia into the Asia Pacific region.  
And the scholarship programme that Malcolm's outlined to you is part of making the world and the region more aware of what Australia has to offer and very importantly it's also part of encouraging young Australians in agribusinesses. 
And I'm delighted at the initiative, it's part of the New Industry Development Programme.  And from quite a wide field, three people have been chosen.  The scholarships give a certain number of options to the recipients.  The courses need to be completed within a certain period of time, but they are a very important recognition of the skill and initiative of a lot of younger Australians involved in agribusinesses and I'm delighted to associate myself and the Government with the initiative.  
I thank Malcolm for standing in for Warren Truss, he's on important Government business in Queensland to do with the sugar industry.  And I therefore invite Malcolm to name and invite to come forward in order each of the winners.
[ends]


E&amp;OE................................
Distinguished Co-Chairmen, Secretary-General, Fellow Leaders.
The ideals a nation holds for itself, and for others, are often found more in the everyday speech of its people than in the rhetoric of politics or diplomacy.
Thus in Australia, it is said that all men and women, and by extension all nations, are entitled to a 'fair go'. For Australians, those two short words carry within them the universal right to freedom, for the peaceful pursuit of prosperity and for the attainment of self reliance and self respect.
And at the beginning of a new century, it is appropriate to recognise the effort and achievement of the United Nations in striving for these goals.
Australia was a founding member of the UN. And in all the years since, our fellow member states have never found us wanting in practical support for countries in distress, for international human rights or the pressing economic needs of the developing world. Indeed, bridging the economic divide must remain a key objective for us all.
We are, and will always be, committed to the United Nations Organisation and the principles of mutual support upon which it was founded. The concept of a 'fair go' requires not merely passive observance of others' efforts but active assistance in their endeavours.
Australia is blessed with natural resources, animated by the creativity of people drawn from around the globe, and shares with every other nation on earth ties of history or geography or culture or mutual interest.
And in claiming our rights as a sovereign nation, we freely acknowledge the contribution we must make to others. We know that for nations, as with individuals, no rights come without responsibility, no prosperity comes without price.
For that reason, since 1948 Australia has willingly participated in over thirty UN peacekeeping and peace monitoring operations, including UN efforts in Korea, the Middle East and Cambodia. Most recently, we acted upon the specific request of the Security Council to help restore safety and security to the people of East Timor.
The success of the INTERFET operation is self evident and I wish to acknowledge, without qualification, the utter professionalism and dedication of every member of the international forces. Australia has also been proud to be a major contributor - both through its significant involvement in the UNTAET peace-keeping operation and through its aid program - to the continuing effort under UNTAET.
The road to true peace and prosperity for East Timor will be long and it will be hard. The tragic incident overnight at Atambua, close to the East Timor border, illustrates the continuing danger of the situation and the threat posed by the militia. Your continuing support will be vital if East Timor is to complete the journey begun by the UN a year ago towards true independence and autonomy for the East Timorese people.
Finally, Fellow Leaders, we all want this organisation to be well-equipped to meet the challenges of the future.
Australia believes that this can best be done through the UN focussing on its core strengths and responsibilities, such as the peaceful resolution of disputes, disarmament and the relief of suffering and want.
We also believe that aspects of the UN treaty committee system need reform. Australia's recent experience has been that some of these committees give too little weight to the views of democratically-elected governments and that they go beyond their mandates.
Australia will intensify its work with other states on reform of the treaty committee system. We have recently announced a series of measures aimed at improving the operation of the UN treaty committee system. Australia's strategic engagement with these committees will be dependent on the extent to which effective reform occurs.
Australia endorses calls to expand the Security Council's permanent and non-permanent membership in line with today's realities and to improve the Council's effectiveness and authority. A better geographical spread is needed. In particular, Australia has been a long-standing supporter of permanent membership of the Security Council for Japan.
Over the coming weeks, Australia will have the honour of hosting the first Olympic Games of the new Century. I hope that this Summit and the Games, each in its own way, will help cement the cause of peace throughout the world.


E&amp;OE................................
I often wanted to know, you know, how many megabites, whatever it is, made eleven thousand.
Lloyd, thank you very much, I've had some interesting introductions in my time. That was fascinating, I think you got the point across about the band width. Is Richard Alston here tonight?
Now, this isn't the sort of serious speech from me of the convention. And as you know I've sort of done a bit of flying in the last four days, so if I say Albania instead of Afghanistan or if I don't know the Prime Minister of Pakistan they don't have, or whatever, you will understand why.
The ABC's not here are they, I was assured they weren't. Henshaw!?!
But, ladies and gentlemen, can I say again, it's a huge pleasure to be with you and to first of all say to all of my fellow Liberals here in Queensland, thank you very much for what you have done for our great Party over the last twelve months. It really has been terrific.
I do want especially to thank Con for the tremendous organisational leadership that you have given to the Queensland Division. It's a pretty hard job running a volunteer organisation and in the end a political party is a volunteer organisation. I mean I've been in it for a long time as you might have noticed, the Liberal Party that is, and I mean I know how, you go through various stages, and it's, when you are doing well, everybody is your friend. I mean, when you have done very well in the election and you haven't seen, and Con was talking a lot about business men and the support they give, I mean when you do unexpectedly well and you see that businessman on the other side of the road who you haven't seen hide nor hair of for a couple of years, come racing over and say, John, didn't we do well? Last Saturday? And you remember that he hadn't been around when we weren't doing so well. And that of course is where a political organisation really counts. And the people in this room are the people who have kept the faith of the Liberal Party over so many years. And I'm, I really am very, very grateful for that.
But to you Con, and to Graham and to all of the office bearers of the Division. To all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues from Queensland and they are a very strong team that make a tremendous contribution. Queensland is very important to the future of the national government of Australia. One of the reasons we won in 1996 and for those of you who are hooked on political statistics, in case you didn't know, in the political history of Australia since Federation, the largest single two party preferred vote, on a state basis in a federal election, ever polled by either side of politics was in Queensland in 1996 when the Coalition got 60.05% of the two party preferred vote. And it is very important that we hold all of our seats here in Queensland and on top of that win a couple that we don't hold at the moment. And I think of one, what's the first one that comes to my mind, Dickson! That's right. Now why did I get that response? I can't imagine why. But ladies and gentlemen, the next election will not be easy. The third one is always hard and there is always a tendency to think that you can experiment with change. There is always a tendency to think well the economy is going pretty well, we can have a bit of flirt with the other side, we can try another few ideas, and it's not going to be easy. We have a very strong record and I looked at that video tonight and it was almost a trailer for what we have done over the last twelve months. Because in the last twelve months we have brought about the biggest, systemic economic change that this country has seen since World War II.
I have to confess to you that tax reform has gone better than I in my wildest dreams imagined and hoped and prayed it might. I can still remember the 30th of June this year. It was sort of a mixture of Christmas Eve and election eve. And I wondered what was going to happen. And I still remember a sense of relief after spending an hour or two going around some of the small shopping centres in my own electorate in Sydney and talking to the twenty or so small businessmen and women, all of whom to my great delight were ready for it. And the thing that cheered me up even more was when I watched the television bulletins that night and I had the footage of me going around to all these shops in Top Ryde in Sydney. For those of you who know Sydney, Top Ryde is quintessential middle Australia, it's got a mixture of everything. And then I watched my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition, where was he? Not in a shopping centre in Perth or Sydney or Brisbane, he was inside the Labor Caucus room in Canberra surrounded rather coldy and icily by photographs of former Labor Prime Minister. And I drew a little bit of heart and comfort from that, that you know, I was the bloke that was meant to be on the back foot. I was the fella that was introducing this eight hundred pound gorilla of a tax reform package and I was out there meeting people and he was sort of in his comfort zone of former Labor leaders. And in a sense it marked quite a turning point in the psychology in politics. I think a lot of you wondered a bit what was going to happen on the first of July, I certainly did. And I don't mind admitting it. I was a bit nervous. And I, but as the days went by and the change was assimilated and accepted and absorbed by the Australian people, I drew a great deal of encouragement from that. And what it more than anything else demonstrated to me was that if you take our fellow Australians into your confidence, if you explain to people why you want to do something, if you persuade them that it is good for our country and you convince them that it is fundamentally fair, they will go along with you. And the news that I have for you is that reform is not finished. For anybody who thinks that having done tax reform and all these other things we spend the next fourteen months in sort of, with the motor just idling, you are wrong. Because I think what the Australian people want us to do is to continue changing things that need to be changed. And in these days of, I guess, less tribal politics where some of the ideology that existed thirty years ago is no longer present. People judge you more on what you achieve in practical terms and they expect us to keep making changes, and we will go on doing that. Sensible changes. Not changing things that continue to work. Not allowing people to push us around when we shouldn't be pushed around. We have demonstrated our determination over the last few weeks not to allow that to happen. But really changing those things that ought to be reformed. And I've always believed that the art of good political leadership and good political management is to have a nice balance between defending those traditional values and institutions that have served us well, and at the same time really willing radically if necessary to reform and change those things that no longer help.
But enough of the serious stuff. This is an occasion, as Con said, to enjoy ourselves. To you, David, good luck in your battle in the next twelve months, there have been very interesting electoral developments here in Queensland. Very, very interesting. Very interesting indeed. Very encouraging. And the best thing about tonight is the great spirit. People are in a good mood, and you ought to be in good mood, because the Liberal Party has achieved a lot over the last year. And we are living in a terrific country, the best in the world. We have got a great international focus on it. I've just spent a couple of days in New York and it was a great opportunity to remind myself of both the value of those sort of international contacts but also the enormous advantages that our country has over every other country on earth.
But ladies and gentlemen, I will say more to you tomorrow. Thanks a million for all the loyalty and support that you have given to me, to my federal parliamentary team. It's been a great year, but there is an even greater year ahead of us and I look forward to coming back again next year and many years into the future.
Thanks a lot.


Subjects: The Olympic Games
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Tony.  To Sir Donald and Lady Trescowthick, to Steve Bracks and Terrie Bracks, to John and Julie Olsen, John and Pauline Coates, to Michael Knight and Mrs Knight, to Jeff Kennett the President of the Organising Committee, to all the other distinguished guests.  And most importantly, can I say, all past and present Olympic representatives of our great nation.
When I became Prime Minister Janette said one of the things you';ll have to do is a little bit of entertaining - I';ve got to say this is the biggest yet.  And there';s something marvellously symbolic that here we should be in the Royal Exhibition Building in Melbourne.  A wonderful building.  Indelibly part of the history of this country.  The place of the inauguration of the first National Parliament, the place to which many of us will return on the 9th of May next year to commemorate that event.  And here we are, back in Melbourne, the first Australian city to host the Olympic Games.  The home city and providing the school to which our only representative in 1896, Edwin Flack, who won a gold medal.  So there is great symbolism about this event in this building.
I want very sincerely to say to the corporate community, particularly of Melbourne, how magnificently generous you have again been in a great national cause.  Can I say that the business community of Melbourne does these things better than any other part of our country and I am profoundly grateful for your generosity.
We are, as everybody knows, great lovers of sport and what';s unfolding now is really, in every sense of the expression, a dream come true.  Because over the last couple of years this nation arguably has had its greatest sporting successes on the international stage ever.  In cricket, in rugby union, in tennis, in rugby league, in women';s golf, netball, the list goes on endlessly.  And all of it is, in a sense, but a great national preparation for the event that will begin in Sydney in a few days time.
I was in Brisbane last night and this morning, and here in Melbourne I can find, indeed all around the country, a tremendous sense of enthusiasm.  And that sense of connection between our nation and our sporting men and women is always with us.  
At two o';clock tomorrow morning I know many of you will be up wishing Lleyton Hewitt the very best of success in his semi-final against Pete Sampras.  And to meet, as Janette and I had the privilege of doing, that wonderfully enthusiastic young man in New York three nights ago with his parents and his girlfriend, to see his great enthusiasm to do great things for his country was just another reminder of what the men and women who represent this country in sport have done for us.
Can I join Donald Trescowthick in congratulating Michael Knight and the other members of the Organising Committee for the tremendous work that they have done in getting Sydney ready.  The facilities are superb and what will happen there will do, not just Sydney, but importantly the entire nation proud.  And what will be on display is the openness, the tolerance, the friendliness and the warmth, and the great decency of all of the Australian people.  
I want, on behalf of the nation, to wish our 627 Olympic competitors, the largest team that we have ever assembled.  I want to wish every one of them the greatest of success.  I know the hopes and the feelings and the support and the passion of the 19 million sports loving Australians will go with them.  It will be our greatest sporting event ever.  It will be a great world event.  It will do great credit to our nation and the support that you are demonstrating tonight will deliver a great deal of that reality.
I wish our Olympians well.  I thank the people of Melbourne for this wonderful occasion.  Donald, I congratulate you and your Organising Committee on the work you have done and I hope all of us have, as I know we will, a wonderful night.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much, Con, I think I must be back in Queensland.
But, ladies and gentlemen, a more important salutation, my fellow Liberals and my fellow Australians. It is a great pleasure to be back at this annual convention of the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party. And when I was making plans a few weeks ago for my visit, brief visit as it was to New York for the meeting of the United Nations, I was determined to allow sufficient time to make certain that I could meet all of my commitments here at this great Convention gathering.
It's almost a year since I last spoke to a very similar gathering in 1999. And as I look back over the last year I think all of us are entitled to look back with immense pride at what we have achieved together over that twelve month period. And I emphasis that we have achieved it together. I'm fortunate enough because I'm the Prime Minister and I'm the leader of the Federal Parliamentary Party to have some of the nice things said when things go okay. There's also another side of it, when things don't go okay, even things I know nothing about - they're all my fault. But, I mean, that naturally goes with the territory. But it really is a team effort and I want to thank all of you for the tremendous loyalty and support that you have given me over the last twelve months. And as with you, I look back over that twelve months, and I list some of things that we have achieved together as a Government. We have continued to preside over probably the strongest growing, if not one of the stroingest growing economies in the entire industrialist world. And I was reminded of that again over the past few days as I met world leaders. And there is really only one other country that has grown at as equal rate, or perhaps a little faster and that is the United States. And the continued strong growth of the Australian economy and the fact that we were able to stare down the worst of the Asian economic downturn, and the fact that that is widely recognised in financial circles, not only in New York but around the world, ought to be source of tremendous pride to all of the Members of the Government and all of the Members of the Federal Parliamentary Party and all of our rank and file supporters throughout Australia.
But of course as I have so often said, good economic figures, strong economic growth, low inflation, lower interest rates, all of those things are not ends in themselves. You don't do those things to pass some economics examination. To get an A+ in economics examination. To get an A+ in economic rationalism. You do those things because they produce good outcomes for the men and women of Australia. Social progress and greater human contentment and greater human fulfillment is the flesh and blood of good economic policy. Because without the goal of making people happier and more secure and more contented, economic policy has no purpose. Good economic policy, good economic management is not an end in itself, it is only a vehicle to deliver a more contented and happier and more secure people. And that is why of all of these statistics I might mention in the context of our economic performance, none is source of greater pride to me than the fact that we have generated 833,000 more jobs since we came to office. We have a lower rate of youth unemployment now than we had. A dramatically lower rate, in March of 1996. We have a far better capacity through the Job Network to find work for the unemployed. The Job Network continues to outperform the old Commonwealth employment service. We continue to generate jobs at a rate far beyond what our political opponents predicted.
And another great achievement over the last twelve months has been the unqualified success of our policies to bring people back into private health insurance. The renaissance of private health insurance as a result of the policies pursued by the Government, the tax rebate, lifetime health cover, all of the other policies that we have followed, in order to encourage people back into private health insurance, that has been one of the great triumphs of our policy work over the last four and half years. When we came to government, private health insurance membership was hemorrhaging. People were deserting the private health funds in their tens of thousands. The product was regarded as unattractive, of lacking incentive. And private health insurance was widely predicted to be doomed in this country. And that was no accident, that was the design of the Labor party. The Labor Party does not believe in private health insurance. Don't believe what they say, remember what they did. When they were in office they allowed private health insurance to run down. They even ignored the warnings of their former Health minister, Graham Richardson, who said that once you fall below forty percent of the population, you start to lose critical mass in private health insurance membership. And Carmen Lawrence when she was Health Minister presided over the steady erosion of public support for private health insurance. Jenny Macklin is ideologically opposed to private health insurance. And as sure as I stand in front of you, if Labor were to win the next election one of the things that would be on the chopping block would the thirty percent private health insurance rebate. Make no doubt about that, be in no doubt, make no mistake about that.
So that has been one of our very important policy achievements to bring the membership back to a level of forty one and a half percent at the end of June with perhaps even stronger news in the pipeline for the September quarter.
But of course the biggest reform of all, the biggest systemic change to the Australian economy has been achieved over the last twelve months when finally with the introduction of the new tax system on the first of July we bought an end to what has really been a twenty five year oddessy. A twenty five year campaign, sometimes willingly, sometimes unwillingly, but nonetheless, always recognising that eventually this country would need to summon the courage to change its taxation system. And we'd need to find a government that had the courage to lead us towards that change. You all knew the risk we took in October 1998. You all shared with me as the months went by concern of perhaps the difficulties that were arising with the introduction, but you were all steadfast in your belief that eventually, if we stuck to our guns, if we remained determined, if we promoted the public interest in tax reform, if we made sure the changes were fair and were good for Australia, that eventually it would be accepted. And so it was on the first of July when the new system was introduced it was accepted by the Australian people in a way that was immensely satisfying, I know, to the Government, and immensely disappointing to the Australian Labor Party.
The Australian Labor Party hoped, and politically prayed, that tax reform would be a total disaster. They invested all of their electoral hopes on tax reform being a failure. They didn't want any other policy. As a member of caucus famously said, Kim Beazley address in December of last year, and he said, comrades, we are going to surf to victory on public hostility towards the GST. They were his words in December of last year. And it showed a man bereft of any alternative policy for the future of this country and merely wanting to trade in cheap political fashion on the inevitable short term difficulty that any government has in introducing a much needed reform. I mean, it's easy to feed off public concern about major change. It's a lot harder to propose a major long term change for the benefit for the community as an alternative government. And the Labor Party deserves all of the odium that has been heaped on them. They deserve all of the political embarrassment of the frank exposition of views by John Della Bosca over that famous lunch. Because he did speak the truth. And he lost his head as a result. Others in the Labor Party who haven't spoken the truth have preserved their jobs. But the reality is that Kim Beazley knows that tax reform was needed. Anybody holding any position of any responsibility in either of the major political parties in Australia over the last twenty five years has known that some day, some time, some government would have to summon the courage to fix up our decaying taxation system. And this government has done it.
And whatever happens in the future, nobody can ever take away from all of us that magnificent achievement. Because we have done something that will endure for the benefit of the Australian economy many years into the future. It will make us stronger. It will continue to reinforce our very impressive economic credentials around the world.
But ladies and gentlemen, we haven't confined ourselves to some of these broader and fundamental economic changes. We've also recognised over the last year when it's necessary for the government to step in and give a helping hand to an industry that's been struggling through no fault of it's own. It's been willing to do so. And I refer in particular to the action taken by the government to help the sugar industry of Australia and particularly the sugar industry here in Queensland. I want to tell you what a magnificent campaign your Liberal representatives waged on behalf of the sugar industry. It was a great team effort once again. They came to me ad said there was legitimate problem. And when I addressed the industry people in Cairns a few months ago and I gave them an undertaking that we would listen to their proposals and that if we thought we could help we would help. And that is exactly what we have done. And it's the greatest injection of sensible government assistance the sugar industry of Australia has ever had. It's assistance that will help them help themselves. It's assistance that will enable them to weather the adversity that has been inflicted on them through no fault of their own. And there is never a doctrine of economic management that says that a government should be insensitive to adversity over which those suffering the adversity have absolutely no control. And I'm very proud of the role that has played by the Queensland Liberal Members in advocating change and assistance in that area.
So, my friends, as I look back over the last year, as together we look back over the last year, we can look back with immense pride at what we have achieved together. We have kept this country growing. We have generated jobs. We have reformed the new taxation system. We have revived private health insurance. We have given the jobless of this country a far better method, via the Job Network of finding new jobs. We've continued to try and reform the industrial relations system and all the while we have looked across the divide in Federal Parliament at an opposition which has sought on every occasion on every turn to win political advantage by negative attack and hoping that something would fail rather than to propound an alternative policy.
And as I look at the Labor Party, and we are entitled increasingly as Australians to look at the alternative government in Australia, they are the alternative government, we are all political realists, elections are held every three years, and they are contests between the incumbent government and the alternative government. And we're entitled to have a look at the alternative and we're entitled to assess the threat that Labor poses. The first threat of course is that Labor will roll back the taxation reform plans. I know that is a word that is, you know, you dare not utter now, if you are a member of the front bench of the Labor Party, but it's still there, it's still the policy. And whenever they are asked, they say, yes we will have a rollback. But what does rollback mean? What rollback means, ladies and gentlemen, is almost inevitably if it's done in serious measure, it means higher personal income tax. Because Simon Crean has said that he is going to have a bigger surplus than we have got. To use the AFL exhortation, I'd like to see that. He also says, of course, that if they rollback the GST they are not going to take any of it from the States. I mean, they made him sign that in blood, Beattie and Bracks and Bacon got Beazley to sign it in blood at Burnie in Tasmania. But if you rollback and you don't take it away from the States and you are going to spend more money on health and education, that's right, remember that? And you're going to have a bigger surplus than we've got, now don't tell me you can do that without jacking up income tax, you can't. And that in reality what rollback means. And that is why I am so passionate in my belief that one of the first things to go will be the non means tested private health insurance rebate and that is why neither Jenny Macklin or Kim Beazley will give an unconditional guarantee that that is going to be retained.
But it's not only rollback in the area of taxation. But you are already starting to see it at a state level and you will see it again at a federal level if Labor wins, you are going to see a rollback of industrial relations reforms. One of the reasons that we are doing so well and one of the reasons why I can look every working man and woman in Australia in they face and say you are better off under us than you were under Labor is that not only are their interest rates lower, but their real incomes are higher. Labor boasted about cutting the real wages of workers. I boast about the fact that we have seen an increase in the real wages of workers. But it's been an non inflationary increase and it's been a non inflationary increase because our productivity is now higher. And one of the reasons why the United States and Australia are in a sense stand out performers amongst the world economies now is that we have seen significant gains in productivity and that means you can lift somebody's wages without it feeding in to inflation because it's based on productivity improvement. And one of the reasons we've got greater productivity now is that we've got a better industrial relations system.
We have an industrial relations system where deals are negotiated at a work place level. I opened a food export capacity in Perth a few weeks ago. A wonderful Greek Australian family, the Calus family [inaudible] that has been incredibly successful in exporting out of this country and Michael or Tom stood up, the chairman and he said, 'this has been made possible Prime Minister by many things, but he said most of all it's been made possible by the fact that every one of the 450 people in this organisation is on an individual contract. And because we have a better industrial relations climate, we have now won a marvelous export market for TV dinners in to Japan. And he said that we've won that because of your industrial relations system and he said if Labor gets in and changes that we will no longer be able to sustain that performance. Now that is the sort of difference that a Coalition committed to higher productivity through better industrial relations represents to this country. And that is on the things that will be under threat if Labor were to be elected.
So my friends I would increasingly exhort you. Over the time between the now and the next election, the next 13 or 14 months or whatever. I mean the last time I said that, that was a dramatic story. I mean the last election remember was in October in 1998 and three years on top of that is October of 2001 and that is the normal cycle and I think, I am enjoying being in government. [Inaudible] I mean I didn't agree with Paul Keating on many things. But there was one thing he did say that I agreed with and he said you work very hard to win an election in this country, there's got to be a very good reason why you want to go before your time, for the election that is. So over the next 14 months, we've got a lot of work to do. We can't afford to be in any way complacent. I've said before and I will say it again, it's going to be hard. Winning the third time around is always difficult. There is always a tendency if the economy is going is going well for people to say, 'well we can risk a bit of change, we can fiddle around at the edges, you know they will have learnt, they won't be so bad and you know they tend to forget, their memories become a bit faded. It's our job to make sure that people's memories don't fade, that they are reminded of the threat that Labor represents to all of what we have achieved over the last four and a half years.
The other thing we have to do over the period between now and the election is to keep the reform process going. The last thing you do in politics these days is having achieved a few things to think that you can rest on your lorels and that there is an automatic electoral reward in having had the courage to reform some things in the first few years that you've been in government. So the reform process must go on that we'll face over the coming months a number of important decisions that will be of long term importance to Australia.
I've said before this country need to spend and will have to spend more resources and more money on the defence of this country in the years ahead. And we're in the middle of a white paper process and that white paper when released and I expect it to be toward the end of this year. That white paper will project forward for many years to come. A defence outline and a defence plan for this country.
And we have been reminded in recent days that the region in which we live is a lot less stable, a lot less secure and therefore deserving of ever greater vigilance from this country, even in the cases being in the past. And it's a reminder to all of us of the emphasis that we will need to devote to defence issues in the months and the years ahead.
So my friends as I look back over the last 12 months and as I look forward to the next 12 months, I do so, I hope with legitimate pride about what has been achieved. I do so with genuine gratitude for the help and loyalty that you've given and I also look forward with a measured pragmatic view of the challenge that lies ahead.
Elections are always hard to win. In these days of perhaps a less tribal commitment by the Australian population. The less sharp division in some areas than used to be the case, it is doubly difficult. But I am encouraged as I go around the various divisions of the level of commitment and the level of preparation.
And I want to thank you Con for the leader you have given to the Queensland division. I want to thank David, Watson, the Leader of the Parliamentary Party in Queensland for the partnership between us and the way in which we have worked together. And I know that you have one or two juicy morsels in front of you at the present time. The electoral politics of the Queensland Labor Party never ceases to fascinate me. I mean when Graham Richardson's famous for a phrase whatever it takes but I always thought that he belonged to the Mounterey branch of the Labor Party, not the Mundingburra one.
But ladies and gentlemen, the next 14 months will be tough. We'll all have to work together, we'll need to replicate an even greater measure the strong partnership that we've had over the last four and a half years.
It's been am immense privilege to lead my Liberal and National Party colleagues and I want to thank all of the Liberal members and senators from Queensland. You have a magnificent contingent in Canberra. They fight for the Liberal Party, they work for the interests of Australia, but they always but in a good word for Queensland. And that is how Queensland Liberals should always behave. They are Australians first, but they never let you know .. how attached the are to the maroon and all that goes with it.
But ladies and gentlemen, it's been a great four and a half years. It's been a great source of pride to me to be the leader of a government that has dedicated itself to making a difference.
You only get one chance in political life really. When you're actually there in the top stop, you only get one change to make a difference. What really matters is what you do while you are there, not what you say before hand, or what you say afterwards but what you actually do while you are there and that's what matters. I believe that we have made a difference. We have our critics, we've made our mistakes, we've probably made undeservedly some enemies. But at every stage over the last four and a half years, we've worked damn hard to make a difference for the benefit of the benefit of this country and it has been a team effort and I thank all my colleagues for the tremendous loyalty and support they've given me and lets redouble our efforts to win again in 2001.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Introduction
I am delighted to have been asked to address this forum.  A gathering of so many distinguished participants representing governments and business organisations from around the world is a unique opportunity to build shared understanding and to forge important links for the betterment of all nations.
To our overseas guests I extend a special welcome.  Let me characterise to you, from my perspective, the key features of the economy of the nation which is so pleased to host this World Economic Forum.
You are welcomed to a country whose economy is performing better than it has for more than three decades.
An economy whose growth is probably more soundly based than at any time in the nation's history.
An economy that was resilient and, importantly, flexible enough to ride out the Asian economic collapse.
An economy which has been greatly strengthened by successive waves of systemic economic reform.
Also, you are welcomed to a nation which attaches great importance to a strong social security safety net - as an important ingredient in social harmony.
In the words of The Economist's current special supplement on Australia, we boast a welfare system that is lean but not mean.
We have a health system with probably a better balance between public provision and private incentive than any in the OECD area.
Our nation derives great economic strengths from ethnic and linguistic diversity.
We are, nonetheless, a nation which has no illusions about the nature of international economic competition.
It is never a race against one's economic past but only ever a fierce contest with present day economic realities.
The Australian Government, which I lead, will never believe, for a moment, that the economic reform process is ever completed. 
The international character of this Forum, of course, mirrors the spirit and unity of purpose that will be evident throughout the Sydney Olympics after its opening in only 4 days time.  We are here representing our own interests, as each country's athletes will, but like them, we are also united in a desire to see the boundaries of human achievement extended.
It's interesting the Olympic analogy holds true particularly when considering the outcomes desired from globalisation.
It is no coincidence that the great advancements in human sporting accomplishment have only been made since the Olympics facilitated international competition.  When the opportunity was created for nations to compete freely with each other, and literally on level playing fields, the standards of all rose.
As an example, in the hundred years between the first modern games held at Athens in 1896 and those at Atlanta the winning time for the Men's Marathon fell from 2 hours 58 minutes to 2 hours 12 minutes.  An incredible 46 minutes had been slashed from this classic Olympic event.
But the real value of this comparison is that in Sydney, all athletes - not just those from nations which are powerful, not just those which are well resourced - can be expected to better the winning efforts originally set in Greece at those first modern games.
In sport, as with economies, open international competition continuously lifts the standards for everyone.
Concept of Globalisation
And just as sport has grown naturally from spontaneous local contests into highly organised international events, globalisation is simply an extension of the tendency throughout human history towards increasing specialisation and trade.
It offers people access to a range of new ideas, technologies, information, resources and, most importantly for developing countries, to markets.  If the opportunities of globalisation are taken up they can lead to more jobs, more investment and ultimately stronger sustainable economic growth.  
As President Clinton stated at an earlier World Economic Forum, 'open markets are the best engine we know of to lift living standards and build shared prosperity'.
But, of course, in Seattle, in Davos and now here in Melbourne, we're reminded by a noisy minority that some do not share this understanding.  To some, globalisation is a mere stalking horse, a convenient scapegoat for all that is not right in the world.
The collective responsibility we all hold, in government and in business, is to convince people otherwise.  To effectively communicate that benefits are attainable for the poor as well as the prosperous is a crucial issue and one I'll return to later.
'Ticket to Prosperity' for Developing Nations
Those opposing globalisation as a concept, carry as their banner the notion that poorer, developing nations will suffer, that open trade will entrench the misery of their peoples and that its proponents seek only the continuance of economic inequality.
I know it is a source of some frustration for us all that these misguided and ill informed views can persist despite the overwhelming historical evidence to the very contrary.
It is only through building market access that many of the least developed countries can ever hope to lift their standards of living.  It is no accident that those developing countries that have grown fastest over the last forty years and made the greatest reductions in poverty are those that developed sound institutions, aggressively pursued export opportunities and aggressively utilised the market openings made available to them.
Put simply, globalisation has been their 'ticket to prosperity'.
It's interesting to compare those countries which chose, during the post war period, to abstain from participating in the global economy with those that chose instead to actively trade within it.  Their contrasting experiences are profound.
In 1960, South Korea's per capita GDP was the same as Algeria's, and its third largest export was wigs!  Today, even after the Asian crisis, South Korea is the world's thirteenth largest economy and its third largest export is computers, earning its citizens more than $US 7.2 billion per year.
This type of example, this indisputable evidence that globalisation can help fulfil the national aspirations of developing nations, is precisely the reason why governments of so many countries are now choosing to turn their backs on past policies and instead actively seeking international engagement.
Continued Barriers
Nevertheless, an important element of the global economic framework remains seriously skewed against the developing countries.
Many developing countries are denied the opportunity to trade their way to sustainable growth and higher 'core labour standards' because of the barriers in much of the developed world to their agricultural and other exports.
Developed country protection against agriculture imports is five times higher than protection against manufacturing imports.
Farm protection in the OECD area is about seven times as high as its members' total foreign aid and almost 13 times as high as the value of the forgiven debts of the heavily indebted poor countries under the HIPC initiative.
I would not be the first to point out that the benefits of debt relief for the poorest countries pale compared to the malign effect of rich country trade barriers in agriculture and textiles.
Indeed, in this regard I note the comments made by the recently appointed Managing Director of the IMF, Horst Kohler that "Protectionism in industrial countries is the core problem in the fight against poverty.  If markets are not opened, debt relief is hard work for small change".
Failure of Seattle / Renewed Call for Equity
One of the great failures of the international community to respond to the challenges posed by globalisation was its inability to launch a new round of global trade negotiations in Seattle last year.  The launch of a new WTO round is crucial for developing countries to reap the benefits of the opportunities that globalisation offers.
It is crucial to address the flagrant imbalance in international trade rules that favour most of the world's rich countries, including the US and the EU, against efficient agricultural exporters, including Australia.
In this respect, there is growing anger in Australia at the unfairness of existing world trade rules.  There is a double standard.  What applies to manufacturing exports does not apply to agricultural exports.  Even within the agricultural sector, Australia is heavily penalised.  Subsidies are allowed to American and European farmers which are not permitted for Australian agricultural producers.   To be fully effective, all sectors need to be adequately covered by the WTO rules.  At the moment, agriculture has been put in the too hard basket.  To be quite blunt, I'm not encouraged to believe that there will be any change of heart within either the United States or the European Union on this issue.Australia will continue to campaign very strongly for further reform of world trading rules, and especially for further liberalisation of this sector.
Misconceptions
Coupled with this disappointment, were the organised demonstrations that took place in the streets of Seattle.
Some of those very same protesters - protesters who profess to be acting in the interests of the world's poor - are doubtless outside today.
As I said before, if you want to cripple the future growth prospects of the poor nations of the world; if you want to leave it in the hands of a number of relatively rich and highly protective trade nations of the world; then the way to do this is to suppress free trade.
Activists out to get a better deal for the poor should instead expend their energy pressuring rich country protectionists to tear down their trade walls against the exports of the developing countries. 
The fact is that globalization is a powerful force through which to improve the plight of the millions living in misery.  A recent World Bank study of 126 countries over 40 years details that openness to foreign trade benefits the bottom one-fifth of the population as much as it does the population as a whole. Indeed, this report argues that "anyone who cares about the poor should favour the growth-enhancing policies of good rule of law, fiscal discipline and openness to international trade".
The Chief Economist of the ANZ Banking Corporation, Mr Saul Eslake, recently made a compelling point.  He noted that the people who are actually elected by the poor - as opposed to their self-appointed spokespeople, who wreaked such havoc and violence in Seattle, and who seek to disrupt today's proceedings - in fact do favour these policies.
The Prime Minister of India, Atal Behari Vajpayee, speaks - with all the authority that a fair and democratic election provides -  for more of the world's poor than anyone else on this earth. This is what he says: "All of us should realize that globalization is an irreversible phenomenon. No country can keep away fully from it without hurting itself".
Fernando Henrique Cardoso is the twice-elected President of the developing world's fourth-most populous country, Brazil.  He says: "if Brazil is not prepared to be part of the global economy, it has no way of competing . It is not an imposition from the outside. It's a necessity for us".
Mr Eslake properly asked - on what basis, and by what right, and with whose authority, do those who want to 'shut down' the World Economic Forum claim to know better what is in the interests of the people of developing countries than the elected leaders of some 1 billion Indians?, or 165 million Brazilians? 
Communication and Government Responsibility Vital
At this pivotal point in the development of the world economy, the greatest challenge for governments must be to communicate the benefits of globalisation to their citizens.
Some of the changes that come with globalisation are unsettling and it's not enough for anyone - in government or in business - to explain that present difficulties are simply for the long term good of the community.
Some of the reforms demanded by globalisation are, for many people, counter-intuitive.  Responsive and responsible, democratically elected governments must explain these issues in ways that are relevant to peoples' daily lives and their aspirations for their children.  Why hard decisions have to be taken to open up the economy for the benefit of the entire community.
Business also has a crucial part to play.  To explain the benefits - not just in economic jargon - but in terms of higher living standards, more jobs, higher standards of social services such as health and education and a greater diversity of consumer products and services.
We all need to explain that we are not interested in economic reform out of some kind of blind ideology.  We don't believe in economic reform to satisfy a theory or as some kind of exercise in intellectual self satisfaction.
It is a flesh and blood way of delivering benefits for people.  The goal of economic reform is human contentment and human achievement and human happiness.And if economic reform does not deliver benefits for people then it's not worth embracing.
As fundamental as the need to communicate, governments and businesses must also recognise that these changes will produce losers as well as winners, both within and among nations.  And in that recognition, policies must be developed to ensure the difficulties of adjustment are eased and new opportunities found.
Specifically, governments will need to provide strong and flexible 'social safety nets' and additional resources, creatively allocated, for education and to generally promote innovation.
International institutions also must be capable of dealing sensibly with the consequences of enormous and sometimes volatile flows of capital.  When difficulties occur and markets react with the severity and speed that they did in the Asian financial crisis, the international financial institutions must be able to respond in a way that best suits the circumstances.
Australia, for example, was able to push strongly for the International Monetary Fund to adjust the conditions of its package for our close and important neighbour, Indonesia.
This need for intensive, ongoing communication and for the development of appropriate mechanisms to counter transition difficulties is not merely a moral issue.Without these measures, the future of globalisation, as we know it, as we desire it, could well be cast in doubt.
I raise this plainly because in the past there has been a tendency to regard globalisation as both inevitable and irreversible.  
This view has no doubt been fuelled by the remarkable technological advancement over recent years.  Certainly, none could disagree with Dr Alan Greenspan's comments that "By lowering the costs of transactions and information, technology has reduced market frictions and provided significant impetus to the process of broadening world markets".
However, the world has experienced globalisation before and yet seen it recede in the face of international suspicion and populist calls for renewed protectionism.
The increase in world trade as a share of world GDP was proportionately greater in the 50 years before the First World War than it has been since 1975 and net capital flows were larger relative to world GDP than they are today. 
And yet, in the decade following that war, governments around the world deliberately rebuilt trade barriers by raising tariffs and imposing restrictions on the movement of capital.
The direct consequences for the world economy and each of the individual national economies within it are well known.  In short, my message is that globalisation, both as a concept and in practice, must be nurtured by governments and businesses who believe in its potential to build prosperity for themselves and for others.
Australian Economic Strength / Our Embrace of Globalisation
For its part, through a combination of good economic management and bold reforms, Australia has set out to position itself to benefit from globalisation.
Over the past two decades, Australia has opened its markets to trade, reformed the financial sector, increased competition in goods markets, and increased flexibility and productivity in the labour market.
Australia is also reaping dividends from a robust macroeconomic policy framework.  We have consolidated our fiscal position and sharply reduced the national debt.  We have also set in place an arrangement that delivers a transparent framework for the conduct of monetary policy to maintain low inflation.
Most recently we have reformed the taxation system to make it fairer, simpler, more efficient, and I would add more supportive for venture capital and high technology start up companies.
The dividends associated with this sound macroeconomic framework, together with a transparent, liberalised and prudentially sound financial sector, were evident as international confidence in Australia was maintained throughout the Asian financial crisis.
During the Asian crisis Australia also saw the benefits that flowed from the decision some 17 years ago to float our exchange rate.  A depreciating Australian dollar ensured that our exporters were better able to divert their products to markets outside Asia, including in North America and Europe.
Looking back over the past decade, the overall value of these reforms has been amply demonstrated by a prolonged period of economic expansion and commensurate improvements in living standards.
The most recent data released by the IMF suggests that over the period 1992 to 2001 the Australian economy will record an annual average growth rate of 4.1 per cent.
An essential building block to the significant improvement in Australia's economic performance in recent years has been the reform of our labour markets
Our labour market policies have introduced flexibility at the enterprise level, resulting in real gains for both employers and employees.
It has delivered higher productivity, higher profitability, real wages growth and most importantly strong employment growth.  We know that the best way to deliver someone from poverty is to give them a job.
These reforms have helped create a favourable environment to encourage risk taking and innovation and - importantly it has allowed firms to better assimilate the new technologies generated and effortlessly transmitted within the globalised economy.
Australian businesses are innovators in the area of information technology and are increasingly winning overseas contracts to provide information technology services.  
One Australian success story is the internet search engine company, LookSmart.  
With the assistance of a start up investment grant from the Government, LookSmart was successfully developed by two Australian entrepreneurs and is now one of the top search engines on the internet, claiming over 50 million users a month.  And in August last year listed on the US NASDAQ stock market, valued at over $A2 billion.
Many other established Australian companies are embracing the new realities.  There is a genuine enthusiasm to apply new technology to existing business operations.  There is also a recognition that technological change can have a cascading effect, delivering benefits to the whole of the economy.
This is reflected by the 'coming of age' of our financial sector.  The Australian Stock Exchange is now one of the largest exchanges in the Asia Pacific region with a market capitalisation of around A$700 billion and the Sydney Futures Exchange is the largest financial futures and options exchange by volume in the Asia Pacific region.  
While reform in the financial sector to date has made the sector more transparent, efficient and stable, it stands ready to continue to innovate and use new technologies in response to future demands.
For instance, the Australian Stock Exchange was one of the first exchanges in the world to move to electronic trading, while the Sydney Futures Exchange is also globalising its operations and recently began trading Dow Jones indices.
Of course it is important not to lose sight of the fact that new technology is only as effective as the people who use it.
As I said earlier, in the new knowledge-based economy, education and training have a critical role in ensuring employees have the necessary skills to get the job done.  
The Australian workforce has a well-deserved reputation for being highly skilled.  Around 40 per cent of the working age population have university, diploma or trade qualifications, and more than two and a half million Australians speak a language other than English at home.
Conclusion
Ladies and Gentlemen, I opened this address with an Olympic analogy and given the understandable pride Australia takes in hosting the first Games in this new century, perhaps you'll forgive me for concluding with another.
Elite Athletes have always dared to do the impossible.  The 4 minute mile, the 10 second 100 metre sprint, going under 15 minutes in the 1500 metre freestyle were all seen as simply beyond the physical limits of human capacity.  Yet those limits were conquered and, no doubt, over coming weeks we'll all watch as more impossible records tumble.
So too, there are those that claim that world-wide prosperity is a mere dream, an illusion, its achievement simply beyond the limit of human capacity.
Your attendance here at this Forum gives hope that this is not impossible.Over coming years, all of us will be called upon to make decisions which could contribute to its realisation.
I urge you, when that time comes, to believe, as our athletes do, that with determination and courage nothing is beyond our reach.
[ends]


Subjects: Olympic Games
E&amp;OE................................
Your Excellency and Lady Deane, Mr John and Mrs Pauline Coates, the Premier of New South Wales Mr Bob Carr and Mrs Helena Carr, Mr Beazley the Leader of the Federal Opposition, other distinguished guests, overseas visitors, ladies and gentlemen.
In these wonderful facilities, in this beautiful city, in this magnificent country of ours it is a rare and special privilege for me as Prime Minister to say a few heartfelt words of good wishes and good luck to the largest Olympic team that Australia has ever assembled.
Our nation is renowned around the world not only for its love of and passion for sport but also for its great capacity in every area of sporting endeavour. And those of us who love sport, know how much our country has done and performed in the sporting arena in so many areas over the past few years. And it's almost as if those experiences, those victories and those triumphs of past years have been but a preparation for the Games in Sydney at the beginning of the Millennium.
You carry with you in the Games that start in a few days time the heartfelt good wishes of all Australians. We know how much you've trained, we know how much you've strained every sinew of that extra bit of effort to bring your performance up to its absolute peak. And we know that you will represent our wonderful country in a magnificent and effective way throughout the entirety of the Olympic Games.
It is the greatest sporting event known to mankind. It's the greatest sporting event in the world. And it is a huge honour and a huge privilege for everybody associated with the Games and most importantly of all those who will compete in the name of Australia and in the name of sport.
Can I say to all of you, thank you for what you have contributed. To your chosen sport, thank you for what you've contributed to your nation. You are champions, you are achievers, you are men and women of high excellence. I know that in every contest you will do your best for yourselves, your families, your loved ones, and very importantly in a collective way for your country.
It's a moment of great excitement in the sporting history, but more than that in the history of our nation.
We are but one of a precious handful of countries that has maintained an unbroken thread from the original Summer Games of 1896 and that's a magnificent tradition and we all feel it tonight and I know we'll all feel it throughout the entirety of the Games.
Thank you for what you have done for your sport. You go with our passionate good wishes and nineteen million proud Australians will cheer you every second of these Games.
Thank you.


Subjects: Juan Antonio Samaranch; Cathy Freeman; Women athletes
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
JOURNALIST:
Prime minister, very sad news with President Samaranch’s departure from Australia. Can you give your reaction to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, I’m so sorry to hear that, but I knew that his wife was very ill and he had hoped that her condition had not deteriorated so that he had to go home but sadly it has been necessary but we all hope that she pulls through this latest health crisis. But she has been ill for a long time and our good wishes and thoughts are with both of them and it’s an enormous strain for him and we wish him and his wife well.
JOURNALIST:
What your reaction to the Opening Ceremony – it’s very successful from a national point of view?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think it was fantastic. I think Ric Birch and David Atkins deserve the praise of all Australians. It was a very impressive opening ceremony and it was very tight. It was comprehensive and what it demonstrated to the world is the depth of talent that this country has in the arts. It was very creative and I think Ric and David should feel a great deal of pride and they deserve our thanks and our congratulations. So, we’ve got off to a great start.
JOURNALIST:
Cathy Freeman lit the cauldron….(inaudible)… made a statement for reconciliation… how would you describe it?
PRIME MINISTER:
I thought it was a terrific choice and I think the decision to salute Australian women athletes in the last segments was also entirely appropriate. I think, in fact, women have won more medals in the games than men and they deserve an enormous amount of credit and it is a hundred years and I think it was nicely capped off.
Thank you.


Subjects: Olympic Games opening ceremony; Cathy Freeman; Ric Birch &amp; David Atkins; Australian athletes; Olympic Star Club
E&amp;OE................................
Can I say John that last night was magnificent, it really was. And we have a saying in Australia whether something is the right to do or whether you've made a go of it, you say "Does it pass the pub test?". Well, when I go for my morning walk I try and avoid the pub, but I can tell you that last night passed the early morning walker test. Because walking around the harbour this morning, which was a great experience, no fewer than 15 or 30 people spontaneously said "Wasn't last night terrific?" and it was for me a very eloquent statement on behalf of the Australian community. I think everything you decided to do about lighting the flame, the choice of Cathy Freeman, the dedication of that last segment to the women of Australian athletics. I think all of that was just so nice and I think it will have a very deep resonance in the Australian community.
It is great to be an Australian always, particularly at the present time, and it is wonderful to see Sydney, the city we all love so much at its sparkling best. Last night was a tremendous start and it's going to be a wonderful few weeks. We are going to have some wonderful experiences and it is a magnificent opportunity to look all of our guests from around the world in the eye and in a friendly way. and also with a steely reminder of course that there will be a lot of fierce Australian competition in the pool and in various playing fields and on the track.
I want to thank Carlton United, and for the concept of this club, which will provide a marvellous drop-in centre for so many of the people connected in different ways to this magnificent event. The athletes, the officials, the visiting media, the corporate visitors from around the world, corporate visitors coming from other parts of Australia and visit this wonderful drop-in centre. I think it adds another dimension to all of the supporting facilities that have been provided for this magnificent event. It is a joyous moment in our history, it is, of course it is a clich‚ to say that Australians love their sport. They love it in every dimension and last night that love was very much on display. There's something very important about it and that is a mature and deeply held pride in what this country can do. Not only in what it will do in sport but also can I say a word of special congratulations to Ric Birch and David Atkins.
When you decide to stage something like that and the people who are entrusted with the job of putting it on, they are the masters of the universe so far as the Opening Ceremony is concerned. And you've really got to trust their artistic judgement and the trust that was imposed on them was repayed a hundred-fold last night and it has showed the depth of artistic talent that this country has, the depth of imagination that those involved in artistic endeavour have and I think they are very much to be admired.
So that's enough of speeches, it's all about athletics. But to all of you I hope that this club provides a nice drop-in focal point for so many people in different ways who are being touched by the Olympics in Sydney in the Year 2000. It's going to be a great few weeks, a great time to be here in Sydney.


Subjects: Australia open for business; trade and international investment; globalisation; Asian economic
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Mark, ladies and gentlemen.  
Somebody suggested when I arrived here that instead of giving a speech Janette and I should repeat how we reacted last night when Australia won the women';s waterpolo.  And somebody said you know it might be a little more entertaining.  So I';ll try and match it but in a rather different vein.  
Can I first of all thank the Clifford family for this marvellous facility.  It';s a great Australian export industry, it';s a great performer and it';s had to do it against some pretty fierce competition.  And you know we don';t have some of the protective devices that exist in other countries such as requiring you know under the Jones Act - some of our American friends will be aware of what the Jones Act is - and I think the company Incat has done absolutely brilliantly.
But ladies and gentlemen it';s very, very difficult for anybody to be other than super enthusiastic about Australia in every conceivable way at the present time.  Australia of course is on display to the world and if I may say with a great deal of deeply felt pride of the men and women of Australia who are doing it marvellously.  
There';s going to be a lot written about the Games and how successful they were and who was responsible and so forth.  I think the people that have made the Games so successful are the people of Australia and the friendliness and the spontaneity with which our volunteers welcome people.  And the thing that has warmed me most of all is to be grabbed by the arm by visitors to our country and told that the Australian people are very friendly towards them.  And that really is worth everything because in the end it';s the decency and the friendliness of your people that counts more than anything else. 
But I haven';t just come here tonight to say that Australia is a wonderful place because the Australian people are wonderful.  I do want to say a couple of things about the quality of investment life in this country.  
Australia is, as Mark said, a very strong economy.  It is, given the size of its population, a very big economy.  And over the last ten years Australia has had a growth of more than four percent per annum.  We have one of the lowest government debt to GDP ratios of any industrialised nation in the world.  Our rate of growth over that ten year period has been more than double that of the OECD average.  
We are a country that has enjoyed very low levels of inflation.  We have been able miraculously in the eyes of many to stare down and live through the Asian economic downturn.  That of course thankfully is starting to pass into history.  And I';m delighted to note the recovery of so many of the economies of the Asian Pacific area.  And the way in which the governments of many countries such as Korea and Thailand set about implementing the very difficult adjustment measures that were needed a couple of years ago is a object lesson to many others around the world. 
And it is something of curious interest, more than curious interest perhaps to foreign observers of Australia that this country was able against all predictions, and occasionally, I have to confess against the expectations of many people in the Government and many of our advisers that we were able to escape the worst of that Asian economic downturn because so much of our trade was directed to the Asian Pacific area.  
And I';ve often been asked why it was the we were able to do it.  I think Mark touched on some of the things that were important.  The fact that we do have a very stable political system.  I say that not in a partisan sense, although if you prompt me I will, but I say it more in an institutional sense.  I mean this is a very mature, stable democracy.  It has a robust parliamentary system, it has a free press, it has an incorruptible judiciary which are really the three ingredients in my view more than anything else you write down on paper, they are the three ingredients for really flourishing, stable and mature democracy.  It';s also a country that has very clear rules of corporate and legal governance.  It manages and prudentially supervises its financial institutions very effectively.  They are some of the things that stuck to Australia in a positive sense when the collapse occurred in our part of the world.
I also think it';s important particularly in the context of debate at the present time and discussion about the relative levels of currencies around the world I think it';s important to remember that one of the reasons why Australia was able to sail through the Asian economic downturn was that we had a flexible exchange rate.  And the adjustment that was taken by the exchange rate a couple of years ago was indeed fundamental to the economic salvation of Australia at that particular time.  I think it is important to remember that when you operate in the environment of a flexible exchange rate as we do and we will continue to do it';s very important to remember to take a longer view and not to take a short term view in relation to the relative comparisons of the exchange rate value of the Australian dollar against other currencies. 
So they are some of the things that were important when this country was able to work its way through that very difficult economic situation for our region.  The way in which we were able to divert quite a lot of our exports to Europe and North America in the face of disappearing markets in the immediate region was of course part of the economic salvation of Australia at that particular time. 
And of course it';s a matter of very great encouragement to us that in now changed circumstances and recovering economies in our part of the world that we are once again rebuilding many of the markets that disappeared during those couple of very difficult years. 
But the stability of the investment climate in this country of course we regard as very important.  And that means you need to have a government and to have a climate in which it is possible to continue to undertake desired economic reform and economic change. 
We';ve had a great deal of debate in recent weeks in Australia through the courtesy of the World Economic Forum about two issues.  One of them about globalisation and one of them about this rather false dichotomy between the old and the new economy.  And I use that expression 'false dichotomy'; quite advisedly because there is in my view, and it';s a proposition I';ve put on numerous occasions in the past, there is in my view a false divide a false dichotomy.  What really matters is the use to which a nation and the use to which a company puts modern technology particularly information technology.  
I am, as I believe the leaders of all modern industrialised nations should be, quite a student of the speeches of Dr Alan Greenspan the Chairman of the American Federal Reserve system, a remarkable figure in the economic life of the world if ever there has been one.  And his observations about the value of technology, his observations about the extent to which investment in technology and the use of technology has boosted the productivity of the United States'; economy and thereby contributed to the remarkable years of economic growth in the United States I think are compulsory reading for all of us who are concerned about the operation of our own economies.  And many of the things he says about the United States can be adapted very readily to the Australian experience.  
His observations too about the importance of the flexibility of labour markets are in my view compelling arguments in favour of the Australian Government';s continued pursuit of further reform of workplace and industrial relations.  Because it is an interesting fact that those economies which have freed their labour markets more than others have generated more jobs and experience higher levels of economic growth.  And one of the astonishing things about the United States compared with the European Union is in the area of job generation.  And the extent to which the United States has generated so many jobs over a comparable period of time compared with relatively more modest performances by the European Union I think does owe something to the fact that the labour markets of the United States and to a lesser extent but none the less to a marked extent better than the European Union with the possible exception of the United Kingdom has been the Australian experience as well. 
So the investment climate in Australia is of course something that a government has at the forefront of its thinking in all the policy decisions it takes.  It is why we pursued very vigorously polices of taxation reform, industrial relations reform taking the view that the best thing that we can do for the investment climate in Australia is to create a generically attractive and generically strong economy.  That does not gainsay the importance of specifically targeted policies or approaches.  And Invest Australia where we have a targeted approach in certain areas where a particular proposition meet certain criteria then some special assistance will be given provided they satisfy rigorous tests.  
And I want to acknowledge here the presence of Mr Fergus Ryan the Investment Coordinator, Special Projects Investment Coordinator and the work that he';s undertaken and the work of Invest Australia because not only is it important to have a generically strong economy but it is also very important where appropriate to recognise that on occasion some specific action by the government is needed to make that vital bit of difference in the end in relation to the attraction of a chunk of investment into this country.  
We have, as I said a moment ago, heard a great deal in recent weeks about globalisation.  And there are a number of false views about globalisation.  One of those is analysed very effectively in the latest addition of the London Economist which took apart the notion that there is something irreversible about globalisation.  You may think that but in reality there is nothing irreversible about it and that it';s incumbent on those in government and the corporate sector who believe in the long term benefits of globalisation to the economies of the world, it';s important that they never lose the opportunity to argue the advantages.  
If you look at the economies of the world, you look at the remarkable transformation since 1960 of the Korean economy when it';s third best export was wigs to an economy now which is robust and strong and a tremendous export performer by any measure.  You look at all of the economies of the Asian Pacific region and you can see a clear difference between those that have embraced globalisation and thereby enhanced the living standards of their populations and those who haven';t.  
And the arguments when you analyse them in favour of globalisation as a way of lifting the living standards of the poorer countries of the world those arguments are very compelling.  I mean, to give you a very simple example of the value - if I can put it that way - or the cost is a better way of describing it of the trade protection policies of the richest countries in the world have a far greater impact by factors of seven to thirteen-fold of a far greater impact on the economies of the developing world than do their levels of official development aid.  
And those people who run around either in the streets or who write in the columns of newspapers or through other news outlets arguing that the cause of the poor in the world is aided by going back to a more protectionist approach to trade completely misread the reality and completely misunderstand what has happened to the world over the last thirty to forty years.
But can I say to you that it is a superficially attractive argument that you help the poor by re-erecting barriers, that in some way or other globalisation is only for rich countries.  It';s a superficially attractive argument, it is intellectually false, it';s morally wrong and there';s an obligation on those of us who believe very strongly in the benefits for the world economies of globalisation to argue with greater passion and fervour the advantages of it. 
But ladies and gentlemen tonight is very much about saying to you how much the country I have the privilege of being prime minister of is open for business.  A country that has long been nourished economically by foreign investment and the history of the developed countries of the world is a history of recognising that at every stage of your development you need large amounts of foreign investment.  We are a country that has a very stable legal and economic system.  We';re a country that has been willing to undertake major reforms.  We are a country that recognises that interconnection of the world economies.  We are, as Mark said, a great devourer of new technology.  And we are a country that is not misled by the false dichotomy between old and new economies.  We are proudly a nation that has long derived a lot of export income from our agriculture and our mining industries.  And the farming and mining sectors of Australia are amongst the most efficient within those sectors around the world.  
And no Australian prime minister would be doing his duty without lamenting in the context of any trade or economic speech the fact that the trading system of the world still remains loaded against the efficient agricultural performers of this country.  Not only are we denied access to markets but we find that the existing world trade organisational rules work in favour of other agricultural exporters to the detriment of this country. 
But tonight ladies and gentlemen is an opportunity for me to say to all of you who are thinking of investing in Australia that we are in every sense of the word open for business.  We are able to cooperate across party political lines in the national interest.  It wouldn';t have escaped the notice of many of you here tonight that the Olympic Games are being conducted in Sydney which is a state Labor government with the total and enthusiastic support and involvement of a federal Coalition government. 
When it comes to promoting the interests of this country as you';ve seen on the sporting field in the last few days you will see in the business world and on the business field that we put aside other differences and we unite in the national interest.  The national interest of this country has been fervently and passionately on display over the last week.  
I would like you to take away the belief that when it comes to the business playing field we can be just as passionate and fervent and competitive and committed and we are.  And Invest Australia is a tangible demonstration of that and I believe it';s a very important part of the armoury of promoting this country around the world for what it is - not only a marvellous place in which to live and to have the privilege of being a citizen of, but also a country in which companies from around the world can invest in hope, with great security, with a great sense of stability and as you are all entitled to do with the proper and reasonable expectation of making and retaining a very good profit. 
Thank you. 
[ends] 


Subjects: Attendence at Olympic Games; Petrol prices; blockade
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
ZEMANEK:
On the line from somewhere here in Australia the Prime Minister of Australia Mr John Howard. Good morning Mr Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
How are you Stan?
ZEMANEK:
I’m not too bad. Where have we found you?
PRIME MINISTER:
You’ve found me in my Sydney office.
ZEMANEK:
Very good. Now that’s going to keep a lot of people happy because there’s a lot of small-minded people out there who complained about you going to the Olympics all the time. But I think it’s fantastic that you’re there.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I go because it’s the right thing to do. I’m not only very interested in sport but this is the greatest sporting event that has ever come to Australia’s shores in the lifetime of most of us, certainly since 1956 when we had the Games in Melbourne. And it’s the right thing for the Prime Minister of the country to be out there cheering the Australian participants on and taking the opportunity where appropriate in a proper sportsman like manner of congratulating representatives of other countries where they’re successful.
And I might point out that it’s not only as one small-minded editorial this morning suggested, not only medal winning events for Australians that I’ve attended. I’ve attended the heats and elimination rounds in a number of sports where unfortunately we haven’t come through. And my hope is to try and show an interest in as many sports as possible because this is the culmination of a life’s work for many of these young men and women. And they’re supported by thousands of volunteers who slave their insides out at weekends and so forth keeping sporting associations going. And I think the least somebody in my position can do is show interest and support.
ZEMANEK:
Absolutely right. The story today is these blockading truckies in the oil refineries down in Melbourne and by all reports its got the potential to spread right around Australia. What do you say to those blockading truckies?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t agree ever with blockades. We have processes for resolving situations and people who take things into their own hand and prevent people lawfully going about their business, that is never to be condoned by any government state or federal. I don’t like the high price of fuel. Of course it’s lower in Australia than it is for example in Britain where it’s more than twice the level it is in Australia. It’s well over $2 a litre in Britain but of course that doesn’t make it easier here.
The increase in the price is due to the trebling of world oil prices over the last eighteen months. You’ve even seen the President of the United States who leads the most powerful nation the world has ever seen having to dip into that country’s strategic oil reserves. It’s a move that’s been a bit controversial in the United States but that’s a matter for them.
So not even the President of the United States has an immediate answer. Pressure will continue to be put on the oil producing countries to increase the production of crude oil. And if you increase the supply then the price should fall. Now it is a difficult issue but it won’t be solved by people imposing blockades. I mean governments don’t respond, certainly no government I lead will respond to a blockade. That is not the way that you do things in this country.
ZEMANEK:
But the truckies are saying this morning though that if the Government cuts back on its taxes and levies and fees and excises as far as the petrol cost is concerned it could go a long way to bringing down their costs because they’re saying something like 65% of their running costs is all to do with fuel. And they say that a lot of that cost obviously goes to government taxes. Now what do you say to those truck drivers who say okay yes we are taking a lot of taxes? Why can’t you drop some of the taxes?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well let me use a figure to get a… I mean you wouldn’t sort of regard a reduction of anything less than say five cents a litre as being even touching the sides would you. I mean the current price of fuel is bobbing around depending on where you are in Australia, bobbing around a dollar or a bit under or over depending where you are. And it bounces around even from street to street in the same suburb. Now if you were to cut the price of petrol by five cents a litre which in the eyes of a lot of people would not be nearly enough, that would cost $1.7 billion, $1.7 billion.
Now I’ve got to say that it wouldn’t in the present climate of world financial markets it would not be economically wise of the Government to take $1.7 billion out of its surplus. Now there’s a lot of loose talk about Government coffers being swollen by additional revenue. I don’t know that. The indexation of excise cuts both ways. If inflation goes up more than we expect and there’s no guarantee, there’s no evidence that it’s going to - let me make that clear - then you have to increase the payments you make to pensioners and there’s as much hit on the expenditure side of the budget as there is again on the revenue side.
ZEMANEK:
But obviously if the sale of petrol, if the cost of petrol is going up then obviously you’re making more taxes, more excises out of it.
PRIME MINISTER:
No the excise is a fixed amount. The GST revenue could be effected by, if the price of petrol stays at a higher level it could be but the excise is a fixed amount per litre it doesn’t go up automatically with the increase it’s a fixed amount per litre. It’s a volumetric tax.
ZEMANEK:
But government charges though are taking 49%.
PRIME MINISTER:
That’s right, that’s right.
ZEMANEK:
49%.
PRIME MINISTER:
They’re taking 75% in Britain and many European countries so the orders of magnitude are very different.
ZEMANEK:
Yeah, okay well I understand…
PRIME MINISTER:
75% it is taking in Britain. So people who are looking to Europe as an example to follow in relation to blockades should bear that in mind. I mean I could understand the anger if that were the proportion in this country.
ZEMANEK:
Before this gets out of control though would you be prepared to talk with these truck drivers.
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t think it’s appropriate for people in government to talk under duress. I mean I don’t deal that way. Look if people have a proposition to put in an orderly fashion then I’m always ready to talk. But I’m not going to ever be in a situation of saying look you’ve done this and yes if you agree to take it off I’ll talk to you. I mean I don’t operate under duress, let me put it that way. If people want to approach, I mean, we’ll talk to people but it’s not an easy situation. If you were, can I go back to my example because people have this idea that all you’ve got to do is tweak the excise and the price of petrol comes down by ten or twenty cents a litre. It’s not like that. I repeat, to cut the fuel excise by five cents a litre and thereby bring down the price of petrol by five cents a litre that would cost $1.7 billion a year in revenue.
ZEMANEK:
Yeah but can you understand though the truckies plight though, in their case? I mean one of their major costs is petrol. They just see it’s eating away their profits all the time and the truckies as we all know…
PRIME MINISTER:
But many of them of course run on diesel don’t they?
ZEMANEK:
Well a lot of them do.
PRIME MINISTER:
And one of the things in the tax plan was a cut of twenty or more cents a litre in the price of diesel was one of the centrepieces of the tax package. It’s not as if the Government has been insensitive to the costs of running those businesses. We are very sensitive to them and I do understand the difficulty that is faced but it’s not an appropriate remedy to impose a blockade. That’s the point I’m making. You just don’t do, you can’t run a country on the basis of responding to threats of blockades. I mean we don’t operate that way.
ZEMANEK:
If they pulled off their blockade this morning, if they pulled off the blockade would you then talk to them?
PRIME MINISTER:
No look I’m not going to get into a situation of effectively, by saying yes to that means that I promise to do something and they withdraw the blockade.
ZEMANEK:
Because it did get out of control in England though didn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes but this is not England and I don’t want to buy into who handled what in England. I just make the point though that it did get very messy there and you had farmers involved. I understand the farmers have indicated very sensibly and very responsibly and I congratulate them for it that they’re not going to get involved in this blockade and that is one big difference between Australia and Britain. And of course I repeat, the price of petrol in Britain is more than double what it is in Australia, more than double, it’s up to $2.20 a litre and the government take there is about 75% of the total price, it’s less than fifty in this country.
Now I know it’s high, I acknowledge that and I know that if we were to cut the excise by five or ten cents a litre that would be popular but it would not be seen as going anywhere near far enough to solve the problem and that would cost an enormous amount of money. And if you were to take several billion dollars out of the budget surplus at the present time that would send the wrong signal on the exchange rate, it would send the wrong signal on interest rates and variations, adverse variations there would do even more damage to people in the trucking industry and elsewhere and in the economy generally.
It is a difficult period in relation to petrol prices through which Australia is living. We are the victim of world movements over which a country of our size has no direct control. And I want people to understand I’m aware of that and where there’s opportunity for the Government to move, but it’s certainly not in relation to the level of excise, we would do so. But it’s one of those things where we are at the receiving end as other countries are of very high world oil prices.
ZEMANEK:
Mr Howard unfortunately we are going to have to leave it there. I do thank you for being on the programme and we will talk again.
[ends]


ubjects: sports funding; Olympic Games; reconciliation; Australian dollar; Conrad Kalejs; petrol prices; school funding; former President Suharto; Australian citizenship; New Zealand’s commitment in East Timor; MRI investigation.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
MITCHELL:
On the line first is the national cheerleader, the Prime Minister, Mr Howard, good morning.
PRIME MINISTER::
Hello Neil.
MITCHELL::
Imagine what this bloke could do if he was a wowser.
PRIME MINISTER:
Indeed, he’d be unstoppable.
MITCHELL:
Now, the Games, great performance. Will this mean more funding for sport from your Government?
PRIME MINISTER:
We are having a look at what we might do long term about funding over and above what has already been a very generous provision. There was over and above the general funding, there was a special programme for these Olympics, recognising that because they were in Australia we would have a much bigger team than normal and then on top of that we increased the base funding in the last budget for the Australian Sports Commission. But I have commissioned an examination of options as to whether there might be some further contributions made and I will be making some decision in discussion with my colleagues about that over the next few weeks.
MITCHELL:
Yeah, I guess it’s fair enough, the sports are expecting a cutback because they got the extra allowance for these Games .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they got extra for this, and it’s not a cutback..
MITCHELL:
No, no but they [inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Its just that that particular programme runs out and I'm just having a look at whether we mightn’t provide some support over and above what has already been provided.
MITCHELL:
It’s a bit tempting isn’t it, because we seem to be, well there is argument that we on the edge of making a significant step up as a sporting nation.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we are already a very significant sporting nation.If you do it on a weighted population basis, ours has been probably a better performance than any. But I don’t want to dwell too much on national comparisons, that is not meant to be the spirit of the Games, but you can’t feel other than as an Australian, and particularly as Prime Minister because I’ve got the responsibility of taking these decisions and it is very much part of our way of life. I would like to feel as well as focussing on elite sport and that’s of course what the Olympics is all about, that we could find ways of encouraging some of the children, particularly in our schools, who don’t play sport quite as much as perhaps people of earlier generations at school seemed to play a bit more sport. And it is one thing to have elite sports men and women performing well and winning medals, it’s also very important to have a fitter nation and people who participate more themselves, particularly when they are younger in sport and the participation at the grass roots doesn't always match the elitism at the Olympics or the AFL Grand Final or the cricket or the rugby.
MITCHELL:
That’s true, this could just be the spur that it needs for kids to do a bit more.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it could because there is no doubt with other sports when you win a cricket series or a football series, particularly against another country, it does encourage more young people to play and follow that sport, that's been measured on many occasions.
MITCHELL:
I think you said to me a couple of weeks ago on the eve of the Games you were going to be the national cheerleader, the number one fan. And you copped a bit of flak about it, people were a bit cynical about it. What was the highlight for you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, there is a blend of memories. The women’s water polo was fantastic. Cathy Freeman's win. Michael Diamond's shooting victory. Many of the swimming events, there were so many of them. They were all good. Last Monday night there was a particular symbolism I guess in the fact that you had an Aboriginal Australian in Cathy Freeman winning a gold medal and you had Tatiana Gregoriava winning a silver medal and she's a very recent immigrant from Russia so there is a nice valid symbolism I guess in all of that. But there is no one thing that you say is sort of just as the only or principle memory, there has been a whole blend of memories. It’s been a fantastically successful thing for Australia. The best thing about the Olympic Games is that we have demonstrated to the world, for those who didn't know it, there are many, that we are a modern sophisticated, capable, can- do country which is able to do these things well. It's not just the technical proficiency but the human adequacy. The friendliness of the volunteers, the way in which people have been received in a very open, helpful, friendly, cordial fashion. It really has presented Australia in the best possible light to the rest of the world and it’s a bit of put down to those who are always sort of putting us down. I mean Australians more- I mean there are too many Australians who are negative about this country's image around the world. This country has a good image around the world. It has a much better image as a result of the Games.
MITCHELL:
Reconciliation, the word reconciliation has perhaps political implications so I will use another one. Do you think that Catherine Freeman’s medal will a have unifying effect on this country?
PRIME MINISTER:
Of course it will contribute to that. But I think it is more than that. What the positive response,Neil, indicates that we were probably a lot more unified or reconciled on these issues than of many of the critics had allowed for. Everybody was happy. She’s a great athlete, she’s a very nice young person. She was very excited about it and she’s an Aboriginal Australian. So everybody was very happy about that, and the fact that everybody is happy about that probably drives home the point that as people who say there are deep rivers division in the Australian community are I think wrong and exaggerating the situation. There are probably fewer divisions within the Australian community on these issues than the critics and the doomsayers allow for. That’s what I think is important about Cathy Freeman if there is reconciliation – slash – social significance in it. But lets not politically highjack her win. She’s a great athlete. There have been great Australian Aboriginal athletes in the past, I mean Yvonne Goolagong, the Ella brothers in Rugby. There are many.
MITCHELL:
Doug Nicholls.
PRIME MINISTER:
Exactly, it goes on and on and on. But I mean Cathy is a very attractive person, she’s got a nice vivacious personality. A lot of our athletes are great role models. Susie O’Neill I think is a magnificent role model for young Australian women as well.
MITCHELL:
I guess what it’s done is create an atmosphere, or a mood around her victory that perhaps is unifying and perhaps puts more attention back on the government to take a step towards an apology.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think that is a separate issue.
MITCHELL:
You don’t think it puts that pressure on?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I don’t. I think you are misreading the significance of it. I think what, I mean people are very, I think what it demonstrates is that we are a more reconciled country than many people previously thought. The question of a formal apology is something that is, that people have different views on. That doesn’t mean to say we don’t all believe in reconciliation and we aren’t all happy. I mean, what in effect that says is the only way you can truly feel happy about her win is to adopt one side of the argument concerning a formal apology. I think that’s a mistake.
MITCHELL:
[inaudible]…I’m afraid all this isn’t going to boost the dollar though is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, they are separate considerations.
MITCHELL:
Well, we talk about the image of Australia, the standing of and Australia sending a message to the world that Australia is a can- do country. Will all this be a positive impact in that sense?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don't think the success of the Games is going to be automatically reflected in the level of the dollar, that’s not realistic, there are other considerations. I think in relation to the dollar what we have to do is try and take a much longer view. We have to recognise that with a floating exchange rate, things - the level of, the dollar is going to go up and down. We did, of course, find a great deal of solace in effect in a floating exchange rate a couple of years ago. It was a floating exchange rate that helped us through the Asian economic crisis and we therefore have to accept that it will be at different levels over differing periods of time. And I think it would be a mistake to apply too short a time frame to the level of the dollar.
MITCHELL:
Okay, we will take a quick break here and come back with more from the Prime Minister away from the sport.
[ad break]
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, the suspected war criminal, Conrad Kalejs is to be charged, Latvia wants to extradite him from Australia. Will we object, or will we go along with it?
PRIME MINISTER:
We will facilitate the extradition application. In fact we have worked very hard with the Latvian authorities to put in place an extradition treaty. But the proper processes of the law will be followed. Like any other Australian citizen, he is entitled to a presumption of innocence and he should be treated correctly according to the processes of the law.
MITCHELL:
Now, I read today that there will be announced today, figures showing surplus of the financial year of several billion dollars higher than expected. Is that correct?
PRIME MINISTER:
For the last financial year?
MITCHELL:
Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, there is going to be a statement made and Peter Costello and John Fahey are going to make it at 10 o’clock this morning.
MITCHELL:
And it's healthy?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, it’s good. But I don't want to speculate any further than that.
MITCHELL:
Okay, can I ask you then about the petroleum resource rental parity pricing.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah, sure.
MITCHELL:
I'm told that's brought in an extra $470 million above what’s expected. Is that right?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think you are talking about the projections as to how much more might be gathered this year.
MITCHELL:
Yes, from parity pricing.
PRIME MINISTER:
From parity pricing.   I’ve acknowledged before that if the present world price of oil is maintained right through the financial year and provided there are not any contra items in relation to the operating expenses of the companies, there could be an increase in the take from the resources rent tax. But it’s too early to conclude that there will be because we are only three months into the current financial year.
MITCHELL:
Well, with that prediction and let’s assume that what I’m saying, what I’m suggesting or what’s reported about the 10 o’clock announcement is right.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, but the 10 o'clock announcement, I'm sorry, we're confusing years. The 10 o'clock announcement is about the financial year that’s finished.
MITCHELL:
Yes, but it’s put us in a healthier position hasn’t it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, except that you have to wait and see what the composition. I mean sometimes you can have a bigger surplus than expected because some of your anticipated expenditure didn't occur, but it is going to occur in the subsequent year. But you really have to ….
MITCHELL:
The point is I’m saying there’s plenty of money there.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I thought you were saying that. Neil, we may finish this current financial year, we may finish it in a better position we may not. I honestly can’t know that yet because we’re only three months into it. And can I say in relation to people and I know the Royal Automobile Club of Victoria is one and I know its put that figure of $470 million around. But can I say to them that for them to call on us now only three months into the financial year on the basis of only a three month figure, to commit to a $470 million reduction in petrol excise is asking us to be irresponsible. I can’t do that.
MITCHELL:
You’ll be four months in, an extra four months in by February. Will you look at it then?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we’ll obviously keep monitoring the situation but I’ve said before that I see no merit in running the surplus down for an excise reduction, no merit at all. Look I have to say again that the driver of higher oil prices, petrol prices is the world price of crude oil. I mean that has become even more evidenced since you and I last spoke two weeks ago. President Clinton has now accessed America’s strategic crude oil resource which is something they haven’t done since the Gulf war, which drives home the point that even the most powerful country in the world is finding it hard to deal with this problem.
MITCHELL:
True. But the amount of tax you’re taking out of this is still increasing and will increase.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you can’t know that until you are further into the financial year because, well two things can happen. The present price could change and you only get that extra $470 million if the current level is sustained for the next 9 months. If it were to go down then that amount would go down and then there are other contra items in the budget. I mean we may find in other areas quite unrelated to revenue but we’ve ended up having to spend more than we calculated and the extra you spend there cancels out the extra money you get from the resource rent tax. You see if you’re the Royal Automobile Club of Victoria you just focus on resource rent tax and nothing else but I can’t just do that. I don’t have that luxury. I’ve got to worry about increased outlays in other areas.
MITCHELL:
The Victorian Premier ended the truckies’ blockade here in Melbourne by saying he would in effect that he would lobby you, would take it to a Premiers’ conference. Will you listen to his arguments?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think Mr Bracks has been grandstanding on this issue. I mean,he’s calling on us to cut excise. He’s not making any contribution or offer himself in relation to anything that the Victorian government might do. I think the blockade by the truckies ended because they realised that we were not going to negotiate with them. While they were in favour of blockades…..but if people want to put a point of view to me on petrol excise or anything I’m happy to listen to it. But I don’t think the Premiers’ conference is the forum for what has just become a political exercise in Canberra bashing by the Victorian Premier.
MITCHELL:
Do you recognise that the truckies have other problems with….?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yeah but they’re quite unrelated to the price of fuel. The irony about the truckies’ blockade is that the great bulk of those drivers use diesel and we’ve cut diesel by 24 cents a litre. I mean it’s bizarre. I mean most of those were big trucks, I think over 20 tonnes, and they will use diesel and they received a 24 cent a litre reduction under the tax package that came in on the 1st of July. They weren’t blockading over petrol prices, they were blockading over the terms of their industrial arrangements with their contractors. Now that’s a separate issue and it’s quite -just political stunting by the Victorian Premier to say this is all to do with petrol prices. I mean that is transparently wrong.
MITCHELL:
Well it started to get the petrol flowing again so I don’t think Victorians mind it too much.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I would argue that one of the reasons that the people called off the blockade is that we indicated we weren’t going to negotiate under duress.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, on to another issue, $700 million extra for private schools. Now really I think Dr Kemp says it will be the extra funding to the schools based on the income and education levels of the parents.
PRIME MINISTER:
That’s right.
MITCHELL:
Well how do the schools know that?
PRIME MINISTER:
How do the schools know that?
MITCHELL:
Well how does anybody know that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you carry out surveys of the school population.
MITCHELL:
Well I’ve got kids at a private school. I’ve never been asked and I’d object to answering.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I can’t answer …… I mean you’re entitled to have whatever views you like….
MITCHELL:
Well I’ve never known any school to ask a parent what their income is or what….
PRIME MINISTER:
No well there are socio-economic surveys carried out in relation to the areas from which the parent bodies are drawn and it’s a far more reliable measure of the capacity of parents to pay. This is a much fairer formula.
MITCHELL:
So what’s the aim, to brings fees down?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the aim is to fairer….distributing in a fairer fashion government assistance and that will make it possible for some schools to reduce fees and a number of schools have indicated that they are going to reduce fees. And I think it’s important to point out that under this formula you’re going to have the federal government providing funding of only 13.7% of the total cost of educating a child at the so called 67 most well to-do communities. But that figure will rise to 70% in relation to schools in the less well to- do parts of Australia. So when you look at it in that sense it’s an extremely fair way of providing government assistance to independent schools.
MITCHELL:
Are there any strings on how the schools spend the money?
PRIME MINISTER:
They’ve got to meet educational standards.
MITCHELL:
Of course, but I mean they don’t have to bring down fees. They can….
PRIME MINISTER:
They are not forced to bring down fees, they never have been. We think that represents too great an interference in the independence of the schools. You’ve got to strike a balance between…. I mean if you as a government are providing only 13.7% of the cost of educating a child it might be regarded as too much interference to require a reduction in fees as distinct from expecting as will be the case with many schools that those fees will come down.
MITCHELL:
So if the fees don’t come down how does that government money or public money help get people with less private money, less well off, into the private school system?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it some cases it will mean that fees won’t go up at the same rate that would otherwise be the case. It’s a bit like private health insurance premiums. There’s no doubt in the world that the 30% tax rebate has meant that premiums have not gone up. They haven’t necessarily come down but I think most people who’ve got private health insurance are very grateful that the premiums haven’t gone up by anything like the same rate. Now that’s a very similar comparison.
MITCHELL:
Can I ask you quickly about a couple of other issues? Former President Suharto. No prosecution to go ahead. You’re reaction to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’m reluctant to comment too much on the judicial system of another country. But I guess I express some surprise.
MITCHELL:
Damir Dokic, Jelena Dokic’s father says he’s going to give up his Australian passport and go back to Yugoslavia. That disappointed me a bit. I mean Australian citizenship isn’t a tradeable commodity is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you don’t have to remain an Australian if you don’t want to. That’s right. I mean if you say you’re going to surrender your Australian citizenship you’re not trading it. You’re not nominating it go to somebody else. You’re just saying that you’re going to cease to be an Australian.
MITCHELL:
Yeah that’s right but once you became a citizen you were sort of doing it for life really.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there have been some fairly highly publicised examples of people who cease to be Australian citizens.
MITCHELL:
Yeah but Rupert Murdoch was born here wasn’t he?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah but I think a person, I mean I think being an Australian citizen is the greatest privilege in the world but if somebody wants to cease being an Australian and take on the citizenship of another country or resume their citizenship in another country I don’t see why they should be stopped from doing that. I think they’re mad but I don’t see why they should be stopped from doing that.
MITCHELL:
Would you be disappointed if he did?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m always disappointed if people cease being Australians. Always.
MITCHELL:
You met the New Zealand Prime Minister yesterday. There were reports that they may be cutting back their forces in Timor. If that happens what will that mean to Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well she didn’t tell me that. The New Zealanders have actually cooperated very well with Australia in Timor. And the help they gave us up front right at the very beginning was most welcome and our forces and their forces have cooperated very closely in East Timor.
MITCHELL:
The MRI issue, I read today $8.4 million its cost to investigate all that which is a hell of a lot of money.
PRIME MINISTER:
A lot of money yes.
MITCHELL:
Out of a leak. I mean who wears that waste?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well unfortunately the investigation was carried out to find out whether you could mount a case to prosecute anybody. And the independent Director of Public Prosecutions, and we don’t control him, has said there’s not enough evidence to justify prosecution.
MITCHELL:
But, well we found ourselves in this situation because of a leak didn’t we, no matter where the leak came from?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that was the allegation. I mean we’re in the hands of due process. I mean we run a country according to the rule of law. You can’t charge people on caprice . You’ve got to have a proper investigation and if the independent Director of Public Prosecutions, the Crown prosecuting authorities say there’s not enough evidence to mount a case then we can’t as a government come in over them and say;’ no charge ‘em’.
MITCHELL:
Are the MRI machines, are those machines necessary sitting out there in the community? We don’t need them.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they’re certainly very helpful in detecting conditions.
MITCHELL:
But there’s no rebates paying on them?
PRIME MINISTER:
I beg your pardon.
MITCHELL:
No rebate being paid on them I read?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in some cases that is the situation and I guess the Health Minister will investigate what can be done with them. But I’ve got to stress that the decision not to prosecute is a decision taken by the independent Director or Public Prosecutions. I mean there’s nothing we can do about that.
MITCHELL:
Thank you for your time. Enjoy the end of the Games. What do you think of the new Australian national anthem – Aussie Aussie Aussie?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s rendered with great fervour, but gee so is the official anthem.
MITCHELL:
Have you actually done it – Aussie Aussie Aussie?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’ve done it once or twice. I’m not going to repeat it on air. But I’ve had a lot of people accompanying me before. But these Games have done great things for the Australian popularity and also the popularity of the anthem.
MITCHELL:
Thank you Prime Minister.
[Ends]


Subjects: The success of the Australian Olympic Team at the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games
E&amp;OE..................
Along with 19 million of my fellow Australians I've had an absolute ball over the last two weeks and I've been filled with pride at what our country and what our people have done.  Over the last two weeks everything that Australia is good at came together all at the same time.  We displayed to the world our great capacity as a modern sophisticated country.  We displayed our great capacity for warmth and friendship towards visitors to our shores.  We displayed that great volunteering spirit which has always been part of the Australian way of life.  
But above all and the thing that made the last two weeks so memorable was that the men and women who made up this greatest Australian Olympic team ever demonstrated the great capacity of Australians in all forms of sporting endeavour.  It is frequently said and how true it is that sport binds Australians together like nothing else. And over the last two weeks we've seen that in ample demonstration.  And in the end it was the great achievement of our men and women, the members of our team, that made the last two weeks so memorable. And it was their performance, and on behalf of your 19 million fellow Australians I congratulate every single member of the Australian Olympic team for the absolutely fabulous job you did in the name of our country.
As you may have noticed Janette and I couldn't stay away from the events.  We loved it.  We loved the exhilaration, we loved the sportsmanship, we loved the skill, we admired the commitment, and we're thankful to the coaches for what they've done.  We're also thankful to the parents and the friends and supporters of all the various sports of Australia because we all know that at the grass roots level it's those early mornings for swimming training, it's appearing at weekends, helping people with their athletics meetings. They're the things that begin to build great champions of Australian sport.
I'm very proud to be the Prime Minister of this wonderful country.  We've had a fantastic two weeks.  We've been an exemplar to the world of decency and friendship and sporting skill and sportsmanship and every last of those 19 million Australians has every right to feel very proud indeed.  
I congratulate the organisers of the Games.  I congratulate Channel 7 on its magnificent coverage.  And I thank everybody on behalf of 19 million Australians from the bottom of my heart for what you've done for our nation over the last two weeks.  Thank you.
[Ends]  


Subjects: science and technology
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much for those kind words of introduction.
To my ministerial colleague Nick Minchin, my other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, to the award recipients, to their families and friends. And how delightful it is to have the mothers of our two young scientific recipients with us tonight and I welcome them very especially and honour the journey that they have made to be present on this very important occasion.
Before awarding the inaugural science prize to Dr Liz Dennis and Dr Jim Peacock I would like to say a few words about the Government's view of the role and importance of science and technology within the Australian community.
As everyone knows over the past two weeks or more our entire nation has been preoccupied with the pursuit of excellence in the sporting arena. We've done it, in the main, in an unashamed, unabashed, patriotic fashion. We've done it with a sense of verve and enjoyment and we've admired the skill and the dedication and the discipline and the commitment of the young men and women who've brought such honour to our country in their sporting endeavour and have participated in such a hugely successful gathering of tens of thousands of people from all around the world.
And I don't think it is being in any way trite, I don't think it is in any way exaggerating a proper comparison that ought to be made for me to say that it ought to be the goal of all of us and not least the government to see the same level of commitment and striving for excellence and the same place of honour within our society accorded to the men and women of Australia who achieve excellence in areas of science and technology.
Our Chairman Dr Anderson spoke very properly of the importance of science and technology within our society. And I know and I guess everybody in this room knows that towards the end of this year the government will be receiving the final tranche, if I can put it that way, of reports and examinations involving the work of Dr Robin Batterham the Chief Scientist and also the reports coming out of the innovation summit. And the government will have before it a number of very important decisions to make. I'm not in a position to announce tonight what those decisions might be. I do however want to assure you that we do place a very high premium on the importance of science and technology within our society.
I came to the job as prime minister quite untrained in scientific matters. My academic discipline many years ago was very different. I have to say to you that I have drawn a great deal of understanding I hope in a lay sense of scientific and technological issues from the work that I have greatly enjoyed chairing the Prime Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation Council. It's a gathering of the most talented, the brightest and the best within our community. And one of the things I should say to Dr Peacock and Dr Dennis that follows your winning the Prime Minister's inaugural science award is that you will join my science council for a period of twelve months.
And it is appropriate that one of the young scientists honoured tonight, Dr Schmidt should have been the recipient of an award dedicated to the memory of Malcolm Macintosh who was a wonderful contributor to that science council and had an unerring capacity to illuminate to the most ignorant laymen in scientific matters the great value to the humanity of the world of science.
And the inaugural award goes to two people tonight who've done pioneering scientific work and research in an area the application of which will be of enormous long term benefit to people not only on developed countries such as Australia but also to developing societies around the world.
And when I heard Dr Dennis speak so strongly and warmly and keenly of her idealistic commitment to the role that science can play in our lives I thought that the contribution that she is being honoured for tonight fits very neatly into that very laudable goal.
There are many issues that are being debated at the present time regarding the role of science and technology and the relative contributions of the public and private sectors to those endeavours within our community.
All of us are caught up in one way or another with the enormous changes that technology spearheaded by science in so many areas have delivered in our society over the last few decades. We have made extraordinary advances as a society in relation to medical science. The changes and improvements that have occurred in that area over the last generation have been quite astonishing.
And as many of you know in the budget before last, as an earnest of our very strong commitment to the role of medical science within Australia and as a recognition of the world quality of so many of our medical scientists in the great institutes that our country has produced, the Government committed itself to a doubling of funding for health and medical research in Australia over the years immediately ahead of us.
And we will in the considerations that we bring to the various reports that will come to us later in the year conscientiously address the needs and the responsibilities of the government and the sort of contributions that we ought to be making in those respective areas. Not of course that I would be doing my job and if I didn't of course point out to you tonight the very strong commitments that we have made not only in the area of health and medical research but in the financial provision for the CSIRO and the financial provision we have made in other areas relating to science and innovation and technology.
But the impact of science and technology on not only our world and the way in which we live our lives but the structure of the world economy over the last thirty years has been immense. And I was struck by an observation I read in The Economist magazine a few weeks ago in the context of something else which is topical at the present time and that is the world price of crude oil where it was trying to draw some comparison between the economic impact of current rises in the world price of crude oil as compared with the rises that occurred in the early 1970's when the OPEC countries almost quadrupled the price they charged for producing crude oil. And the observation was made by the magazine that the cost in dollar terms adjusting for constant dollars of course of producing the world's GDP currently the cost accounted for by the cost of fuel was only half of what it was back in the early 1970s. And what of course that demonstrated was the way in which science and technology had not only transformed human behaviour and human endeavour but the enormous change that it had brought about in relation to the structure of our economies.
There's no doubt in my mind as there's no doubt in the minds of many who are much closer to economic activity in the United States that the importance and the emphasis placed on investment in technology in that country has played a very major role in strengthening the economy and producing the remarkable run of quarters of economic growth that the most powerful economy in the world has seen. I think it is equally important that we keep the debate in this country in proper perspective. When we look at the technological achievements of Australia we look at the way in which we have literally devoured the instruments of information technology and how in every sense of the word we are technologically a very sophisticated country. To quote yet again a very contemporary example it is quite inconceivable that the Olympic Games could have been carried off with such style and success if this country had not been a technologically sophisticated one and if our application of and use of information technology should have been up there amongst the best in the world.
Ladies and gentlemen this is an important occasion. It's an occasion to recognise both in a symbolic way and may I say also in a very practical way the achievements of the brightest and the best within our scientific community. I was delighted to learn of the contributions of Dr Morgan and Dr Schmidt in their respective fields. I share the enthusiasm and the pleasure expressed by Senator Minchin that both of them represent a reversal of that frequently referred to 'brain drain'and we welcome both of them as Australian citizens.
But what I do tonight is to honour two very remarkable scientist whose work has been outlined to you. I'm delighted that I have the privilege of presenting the awards and honouring them on your behalf in the presence of so many members of their respective families. All of us who pour our lives into one or other endeavour need the support and the sustenance of our families and others around us. Life gets very lonely and difficult in any area involving a concentrated human commitment without the understanding and support of your families. And I am delighted that so many of them are with you tonight.
To you Dr Dennis and to your Dr Peacock what you are receiving tonight is the nation's most prestigious award for scientific endeavour. It represents a proper tribute to both of you for the excellent and dedicated work that you have done - patiently, laboriously but always with great dedication and intelligence you've both applied yourselves to your professions over a long period of time. You have been honoured by your peers, you have their respect. You have the gratitude of the Government and I, in inviting you to come to the stage to accept your awards, I wish both of you well and I thank you very warmly for the contribution that you are making to Australia and the contribution that you make to humanity through your marvellous scientific endeavour.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: contribution made by older Australians to the nation
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Bronwyn, to David Deans, Kate Carnell the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory, my other parliamentary ministerial colleagues, ladies and gentlemen and a very special welcome to the representatives of the various companies that have sponsored this very important event and have given such tremendous support to the awards throughout the year.
I won't say very much before announcing the winner except to express my great pleasure at the fact that no fewer than one thousand five hundred entries to this award were received right across the whole spectrum of Australian society in every part of our country.  I think that demonstrates an extraordinary level of interest in what is a very important award.  And which is an award which makes a very simple statement and that is that we accord to people respect and honour according to their contribution, their commitment and their worth not according to their age or according to their background or according to their material possessions.   
It is tremendously important in a society that tries to marshal all of its resources and assets and use them in the best possible way to appreciate the individual worth of every man and woman within our community.  And that is the essence of an egalitarian society something that we've always prided ourselves on.  And that egalitarianism not only extends to us having always given away and been rather repulsed by notions of class and privilege but it also extends to recognising that we shouldn't try and demarcate people according to their age or indeed any other classification.  And I, like Bronwyn, thought it was marvellously symbolic that the Olympic Games should have been closed by Slim Dusty leading us in the rendition of what is without doubt the most emotional, evocative and Australian of all songs without doubt.
So ladies and gentlemen can I simply say in announcing the senior Australian of the year that on behalf of the rest of the Australian community can I say a very simple but sincere thank you to all of those senior Australians at what they've done and what they continue to do and what they represent about the future of our country for their contribution to building the country we feel so incredibly proud of not only at the moment but was always do.
Ladies and gentlemen this year's senior Australian of the year is Professor Freda Briggs.  
[ends] 


Subjects: Olympics.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Bruce.  John Coates, the Chairman of the Australian Olympic Committee, Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, Jackie Kelly, the Federal Minister for Sport, my other Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, Peter Bartels, the Chairman of the Australian Sports' Commission and very importantly our magnificent Olympians.
Ladies and Gentlemen this is a very easy speech to make, the only I suppose constraint is the important discipline of time.  I want to say on behalf of the Government and I am sure I can say it on behalf of the entire community, of the National Parliament and on behalf of all of the Australian people, how incredibly proud we are of what you have collectively done for the reputation, the good name, for sporting excellence, the competitive spirit and the sheer decency of the Australian people and the Australian nation.
It's the biggest team we've ever sent to the Olympic Games, the spread of sports is the biggest, the number of medals won is the biggest, the organising effort that you John as the guiding light of the Australian Olympic Committee have put into the long campaign we in politics ever see things almost unavoidably in terms of campaigning for gold and you've done that so magnificently.  And you personally deserve a great deal of thanks for organising.  
It has been a great partnership.  It's been a partnership between the athletes and the Australian Olympic Committee, the role of the Australian Sports' Commission and the Institute of Sport I agree with everything you had to say about it John.  The co-operation you've received from both sides of politics over the last few years in preparation for these games, all of it has come together and it's wonderful when such a combined partnership produces such a magnificent outcome.  
We all have many memories. I and my wife enjoyed ourselves immensely, we took great personal pleasure and pride in being there supporting the magnificent young men and women who so magnificently represented Australia.  I said before that as I think a token of what and an earnest of what the Australian people think about our Olympic achievements and how important sport bulks in the life and the psyche and the sense of identity in the Australian people, the Government is reviewing the current level of support which is very significant for sport and we do intend to make a further contribution and we are going to increase funding. I hear an interjection from one of my Ministerial colleagues and he's fully supportive - the Treasurer.  Fully supportive and I'm not verballing him, it's true.  It's absolutely true.
But ladies and gentlemen I have asked the Olympic Committee and the Sports' Commission to jointly put proposals to the Government.  Governments have all sorts of commitments and priorities.  We think sport does bulk very large and we think it important that although inevitably there would be a special effort made because the Games were being held in Australia, that there is a case for making additional provision over and above the very generous provision that was contained in the last Budget and we will have some further discussions with the representatives of the Olympic Committee and the Australian Sports' Commission regarding that.
So to all of you can I just say again how proud you've made us.  I think it is nice and appropriate symbolically so that the last of your many gatherings celebrating your magnificent success should be in a building that represents the aspirations of all of the Australian people.  It is a building that itself sees many fierce competitive contests, all of them played in a particularly Australian way.  You represented, you represented your country and you gave great credit to the nation that feels very proud of all of you.  Thank you from the bottom of our hearts for what you've done.  I wish all of you well and I want to say that you've contributed to giving to the people of Australia four of the most delightful, enjoyable weeks that I've experienced in my lifetime and I think I can say that without fear of contradiction from anywhere in the country.  Thanks and good luck to you all.
[Ends] 


Subjects: Youth Roundtable; Reconciliation.
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much David.  Can I first of all thank David and his Parliamentary Secretary Trish Worth for all of the work they have put into organising and facilitating this Roundtable, which of course is another dimension.  And can I thank all of you for coming along and making a contribution.  
I'm not going to take my allotted time in haranguing you or delivering a formal speech.  I want to convey a couple of observations to you about the presentations that have been given to me and in the time available I'd like to invite you to take the opportunity of asking me some questions.  The whole purpose of gatherings like this is to give you access not only to the Minister responsible for affairs particularly affecting young people, but also to give you the opportunity of questioning me. 
I take seriously my role as Prime Minister in giving people the opportunity in an uncomplicated informal Australian way of asking questions and putting their point of view to me.  One of the things about Australia which is different from virtually any other country in the world is that the relationship between people in elected office and the general population is less formal, less structured, and therefore more accessible than is the case in most other countries. And I think the idea of a roundtable is excellent because I look around, I've read the CVs of all of you.  I know some of you from other contexts, and you do represent a huge cross-section of the young people of Australia.
And I've been impressed with the note of both realism as well as the note of optimism in the presentations that have been made.  You've identified clear areas of concern, but what you've put forward has not been a litany of negative comments, tinged with suggestions very sharply put in some cases for changes and reforms and improvements, it is also an acknowledgment that we have made a lot of progress.  Australia in the last few weeks has had the opportunity of putting on display to the rest of the world what a remarkable country it is and what tremendous young people we have.  And as I read the CVs before I came to the meeting here I was reminded of the great diversity.  You've got people who have been very active in student affairs, you've got people who've been very active in running small businesses, you've got people who've been particularly active in putting forward the cause of people with disabilities in our community, you've got young people who represent different ethnic views, you have an emphasis on the aspirations of indigenous people in Australia, and importantly you have a group of people all of whom recognise that employment opportunities are fundamental to fulfilment at a personal level for young people.  You are alive to some of the modern blights to young people within Australian society such as the alarmingly high level of youth suicide.  Whenever you list the good things about Australia, there are many.  When you list the things that are of great concern, it always seems to me the very high level of youth suicide particularly amongst young men in rural parts of Australia is one of those things that is deeply distressing and bewildering.  Not bewildering to the extent that at a government level we shouldn't try to find solutions and we do have a program and Michael Woodridge would have told you something of it to tackle the problem of youth suicide.  But I'm sure to all of us it's something which is of concern and bewilderment that in a society of such great opportunity and adequacy for so many there should be so many people who should feel such a sense of desperation about their own sense of human fulfilment and identity that they want to take their own lives.
Can I assure you that what you've put will be considered seriously.  I won't insult your intelligence by saying that I agree with everything that's been put.  I won't delude you into believing that we're going to act on every single thing that's been put forward.  We won't do that.  No government will.  But we will take it seriously and we will take you seriously.  I can promise you that.  And perhaps in the spirit of exchange you might like to ask me some questions, raise some issues that are on your mind.  I don't mind what they are.  I'm very happy to respond to any sort of question you want to put to me but can I say that I do enjoy this opportunity.  I always enjoy an intellectual interaction with young people and I appreciate very much the contribution that all of you are making to Australian society and I think it's a remarkable thing that we can get such a huge cross-section of young opinion around a roundtable that is indeed not round, and that all of us can I think derive a great deal of benefit.  And again David I think you and Trish for what you have done.  And we'll study what you've put forward and I'll be very happy to try and respond to your questions.  Thank you very much.
QUESTION:
I was wondering, you understand that the youth view on reconciliation that the government should be perhaps a bit more proactive within that and that there's a lot of concern that things aren't moving quick enough at this point in time.
PRIME MINISTER:
I'm glad you asked that question and I thought somebody might.  Look, I think it's very important to understand that there is virtually nobody in Australia who is against reconciliation.  The debate in the Australian community is not about whether we should have reconciliation.  I'm very strongly in favour of it.  The debate is really about the form that it should take.  Some people identify reconciliation with the delivery of a formal national apology by the federal government in relation to past policies.  Now, and people are critical of me and critical of the government because we don't do that. Other people see reconciliation as closing the opportunity gap between indigenous Australians and other Australians in areas like employment and education and health.  I put far greater emphasis on that.  I know that people are critical of me in relation to the formal apology.  I have to wear that.  We considered that.  We take the view that you apologise for something that you did.  I'm sorry for past injustices as a person, very sorry indeed.  But I don't believe it is appropriate for the current generation to accept formal responsibility for what was done by earlier generations sanctioned by law at the time and in the eyes of many at the time with positive objectives.  I don't think we achieve a lot by spending too much time navel gazing about the past.  It's important to understand the impact of the past on the present and the future.  But it's even more important in my view to recognise that if you have the right programs any Australian can aspire to the best of their ability. There's nothing that an indigenous person given the right opportunity can't achieve that the rest of the community can achieve.  My ideal of reconciliation is equality of opportunity and the way you deliver equality of opportunity is to try and bridge the gaps.  What I don't like about the reconciliation debate is that there is a view that the only people who believe in reconciliation are those people who believe in a particular form of reconciliation.  Reconciliation means different things to different people.  To me it's about bridging the gaps, it's about respecting the fact that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders have a special culture that is very old and is a very important part of our history, and it's about ensuring that people have equality of opportunity.  It's not so much about the delivery of a formal apology.  Now there'll be people in this room who'll disagree with me but I think we'd go on talking about that.  But in the end what matters is that we all have a commitment to achieving reconciliation and I certainly do and my government does too.
QUESTION:
First of all it's a great honour for us to be here.  I'd also just like to say without wanting to cause too much controversy that not all young people in Australia disagree with the Government's position on that subject and not all of us have great problems in accepting what is happening with reconciliation, thank you.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, I'm Cameron Mellam from Melbourne.  My community access project deals specifically with reconciliation and you spoke about achieving reconciliation and that you are in favour of the process as a whole.  Do you see that reconciliation with indigenous Australians achievable without a formal national apology?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I do, but others don't.  I also happen to believe that we have a great deal more reconciliation in this country than a lot of critics allow for.  I don't think race relations are as bad as I keep reading in the newspaper.  I never read positive stories, I always read negative stories.  I never read, do you know that the number of indigenous students attending TAFE colleges in Australia has increased quite significantly over the past few years?  Do you know that even in some of the difficult areas of health measurement we have had improvements.  We are filled with negative stories and I think that's very unfortunate and I think one of the difficulties is that the debate has been so hijacked by and so focused on forms of description of the past rather than on practical measures to remove disadvantage that we are in danger of being altogether too negative about it.  
And I find as I go around the country that on the ground there's a lot of goodwill.  I was out in Moree recently.  I've been to many remote parts of Australia where there has been difficulty in the past between aboriginal communities and other parts of the Australian community and when you actually find towns grabbing their own solutions and working together and giving employment opportunities I wonder sometimes whether some of the people who write and talk about these things have ever been to some of these communities and have any real idea of the goodwill that exists.  I was out to the Croc Eisteddfod in Moree a few months ago which is a wonderful thing, encouraging indigenous young artists.  And there's a wonderful employment programme started by the cotton industry in that part of Australia and it's a vivid example to me of what happens when communities get together.
Now they're not debating whether you know what language should be used about the past, what they are trying to do is to get people in the year 2001 an opportunity of getting a job, an opportunity through that job of looking after their families and giving them a decent education.  Now I accept the fact that there is a debate about issues such as a formal apology and I accept that a lot of people don't agree with my position, a lot of people do.  I mean that is part of the democratic process, if people don't agree with my position they won't vote for me at the next election, that's the way democracy works on this or any other issue and I accept that.  
But while we're having that debate can we please not allow it to engulf the whole indigenous issue, why don't we focus on those areas where we all agree?  We all agree we should have better educational opportunities.  We all agree we should improve aboriginal health.  We all agree that communities should work together.  We're all against racial discrimination and we're all against respecting aboriginal culture and their position as the first people of this country.  Now we all agree on that and I think that's a marvellous base on which to build common points on reconciliation.
QUESTION:
Luke Martin from Hobart.  On a different issue Prime Minister, do you see the immediate and future benefits and flow-ons from the Sydney Olympics are reaching down to rural and regional Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
I just missed the first bit, I am sorry.  I am a little bit deaf.  So would you just repeat that question?
QUESTION:
Do you see the immediate and future flow-ons and benefits caused by the Sydney Olympics flowing down to rural and regional Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in a, I mean the benefits of the Olympics are both tangible and intangible.  The more intangible benefits are the sense of national achievement and pride they've given us and the feeling that Australia can do anything if it puts itself to it.  And that certainly comes through very strongly.  There will be very strong tourist benefits in my opinion.  I believe that the exposure of Australia, particularly to the more affluent tourist, potential tourist markets of North America will be of great benefit to many parts of Australia, not just to Sydney and the large cities, but also to the more popular holiday resorts and tourist resorts in regional Australia.  I think the boost that's been given in that area will be of very great benefit.  
There has been talk both by the Federal Government and some of the State Governments about encouraging some of our athletes to act as ambassadors for more healthy lifestyles all around Australia.  I think that's a very good thing.  It's very important we not only focus on elite sporting performance in Australia but we also focus on encouraging more people to play sport at what I might call a modest level.  Most people who play sport play it modestly, but they want to play it to a certain degree of proficiency and they want to get a certain enjoyment out of it.  And I regard a sports mad country as not only being a country that loves our successes, the successes of our elite athletes and sportsmen and women but also comprises millions of people who try to play sport in their own way more frequently and don't stop playing it after the age of thirteen or fourteen which unfortunately is the case.  I think we have a bit of a disconnect between a lot of the facilities we have and the use of those facilities particularly after the end of ordinary school hours and things like that I am hoping to discuss with the State Premiers at the next COAG meeting - that's the meeting of all the governments of Australia which is going to take place in November.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, my name is Radal Van Hoop I am from the Environment Group.  Throughout all of our research that we carried out over the period, even though we dealt with really different issues, one point that kept coming up from young people is that they really desire more education on environmental issues.  So while they recognise that the Government is spending a lot of money on things environmentally related such as the $1 million to the Australian Greenhouse Office and your recent commitment to solving the salinity problem there's a desire for information.  So my question is do you foresee more money being spent in the future in the particular area of environmental education?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I wouldn't, I think you ask me do I see more resources, I think it's, I certainly don't rule that out.  I think it does have a certain place in an overall supportive approach to the environment.  I do give a slightly greater emphasis to tackling what I might call the practical environmental challenges such as salinity, such as greenhouse gases, those things which directly affect our lives. But, and part of the process can I say of effectively tackling those issues is to provide people with far more environmental education.  Everybody is far more aware of environmental issues now than they were when I was your age.  Far more aware.  And in a generation's time I suspect people your age will be even more aware than you are.  You might find that, many of you, hard to imagine because the environment's a very important issue to many of you and I understand why.  But it used to be in political terms what you could loosely call a peripheral issue, it's not any more, it's a mainstream political issue, everybody is very committed to sensible policies on the environment.  There's debate about how you do it and there's debate about the different approaches but there's no real debate about the fact that it's a very important part of our lives and I think the process of its elevation has meant that people are a lot more educated and a lot more aware.
MC:
I am afraid we've run out of time now.
PRIME MINISTER:
One more.  One more.
MC:
Yes?
PRIME MINISTER:
Emily?  Sorry.
MC:
Emily, were you going to ask a question?
QUESTION:
I am also from the Environment Group, but on a different topic, at the Olympics when you went crowd surfing, was that a spontaneous decision or something you'd been thinking up for a while?
PRIME MINISTER:
Was it spontaneous? Absolutely.
Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Prue and your children and their families, your Excellency, Premier, Julie, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  
When I think of David, I think almost instinctively of three words - I think of decency, I think of optimism and I think of reasonableness.  And in many ways those words encapsulate the experience I had in my various dealings with him.  I always found him a decent, honest, straightforward man, you always knew whether you were going to reach an understanding with David.  All those years that if an understanding were reached, he'd honour it.  There was never any double dealing, there was never any trickery, there was never any posturing in public that was different from private advocacy.  And I found in my dealings with him as Premier of South Australia, myself as then Treasurer in the Commonwealth Government, I found that kind of trust a priceless thing.
I always found him optimistic.  I remember a conversation with him I think in front of a very delightful fire in the family home over a drink just at the commencement of the 1979 election campaign when circumstances happened that I was in Adelaide just after the election had been called. And at that stage his prospects were not rated all that highly but that was to change very rapidly in the course of what was a very skilful campaign.  And he was optimistic, although realistic about the challenge ahead.  And he had that same sense of reasonableness and optimism when three years later I rang him from Sydney to commiserate the fact that he'd been defeated in the 1982 election.  And I had a sense that he had enjoyed the privilege and the opportunity of doing things while he was in government.  But he was not going to allow defeat to get him down and that a lot of life lay ahead of him as indeed it did.  
I had some very happy personal experiences with David.  It sometimes happens in political life, you deal with somebody on a political formal level and then you unexpectedly have the opportunity of dealing with them on a more personal level.  And as circumstances happened, on the advice of a doctor in Sydney that the best man to do the job was in Adelaide I came to Calvary Hospital in December of 1985 for a  major ear operation.  And I couldn't fly for a few weeks, but that's in the literal sense - some of my critics said I couldn't fly anyway - but that's another matter.  And it was suggested that I should stay in Adelaide for a while and David and Prue extended a very warm invitation to stay with them.  And I found in that two week period a delightful experience of getting to know somebody on a more personal, family basis that you weren't able to do so much in more formal setting and I will always remember the kindness and hospitality and civility that both of them and their families extended to me.  And then later on I had the opportunity of being the recipient of some wonderful Tonkin hospitality in London when David was the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.
I think Roger's message from the Pitjinjarra people was wonderfully evocative of the variety of things that David was able to achieve in his political life.  And he did apply those principles of decency and optimism and reasonableness in all of his dealings and that is why this wonderful gathering of the cross-section of the people of Adelaide representing the people of South Australia is evidence of the mark that he made on this State.  I found in my dealings with him as Premier of this State that he was always a fearless advocate of its interests.  He saw rightly that his first responsibility was to prosecute the case for South Australia, to advocate the cause of South Australia, but he never lost sight of the fact that he led a State that was part of the nation and he was always above all a very passionate Australian and a great believer in the national goals of our wonderful country.
To have achieved excellence in three endeavours is a remarkable accomplishment for any person.  He achieved high rank and great esteem and great excellence in a humanitarian profession.  He then devoted his life to politics and he became Premier of his State, a very respected national figure in the Liberal Party of Australia and I was so glad only a few weeks ago to have the honour on behalf of the Liberal Party of Australia in presenting David with an outstanding service award on the eve of the South Australian Division's Conference.  And I am just so happy that we had the opportunity of marking his great contribution to our party.  
But most importantly of all, and I know that he and all of you would agree, that he achieved excellence in what is after all the most important thing in life and that is to build a happy family environment.  And the evidence of that is here with us.   What a wonderful example of his and Prue's life as a couple and their wonderful family, is a very vivid testament to what he achieved in after all the greatest endeavour of all.  He made a great contribution to the people of South Australia.  He is well remembered by all of us who knew him well around Australia and to you Prue and to all the members of your family I extend my condolences and that of the Federal Government.  He's a person well loved and well remembered and one who made a wonderful contribution.
[ends] 


Subjects: National Suicide Advisory Council; youth suicide; mental health.
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you Professor Webster and I would like first of all to welcome in particular the members of the new National Advisory Council on Suicide Prevention.  
There are many things that we find especially perplexing about life, I suppose one of the most puzzling, perplexing, saddest things I find is that in a country like Australia which has so much going for it and in so many ways is doing so well and is such an exemplar to the world that we should have up against that great national achievement, that we should have such a high level of suicide particularly amongst young people, particularly amongst young males, particularly amongst young males living in non-metropolitan areas of Australia.  Now that's only one part of the challenge of Mental Health Week, but it's something that of course is the focus of the work of the newly appointed members of the Council and I do want to thank them very much for accepting the Government's invitation to join the body.  And I'm encouraged by what Professor Webster said about the way in which Australia is endeavouring to tackle this particular issue.  
I hope it's not too much nationalistic hyperbole to say that in some of these areas that involve co-operation between what could broadly be called a public health approach and the private side of health in Australia we do rather better than many.  And the fact that we've got a national body, just as we were able in the early years of the challenge of AIDS and HIV infection, we were able to do better than many although we can't be complacent in that area for a moment.  So it is I hope that we can do rather better than others, not from a point of view of winning some kind of international competition but because it is a particularly challenging problem.
I can assure you that the life, the work of a Member of Parliament brings him or her into contact with the devastating effect of suicide on families.  And I've said before at gatherings like this that among the most moving and difficult and distressing conversations I've had in my work as a Member of Parliament has been talking to parents grappling with the tragedy of the suicide of their children.  And many of us on both sides of politics have been touched by this and only last week I had a conversation with one of my colleagues who in a very direct way had come into contact with this terrible experience and no doubt there are many in this room that have been touched by it in a very direct way.  And I hope in a small but effective fashion over a period of time what the Government is doing will make a contribution to a better understanding.  
We have allocated a programme of $48 million to finance in particular support for groups in the community and I am announcing today the first allocation of $2.9 million for various groups in the Australian community and much of your work over the months and I hope several years ahead will be to advise the Government on the allocation of the rest of the $48 million.  But these go to a group of organisations and activities which we think will make some difference.  And it can only be some over a period of time.  It's important to have a great deal of commitment and a great deal of resolution, but it's also important to be realistic about what we might be able to achieve.  But the important thing is to have a sense of co-operation between the Government, between the public service, the public side of health provision and also the volunteer organisations and the established committed welfare organisations in the Australian community.  All of whom do very good work.  And I do want to foster with this as I do with many other things the notion of a social coalition, or a social partnership where you don't say the Government has all the answers but equally government health services have a lot of experience and they have a very important role to play.  I don't want anybody marginalised in the effort, I want everybody to work together in a co-operative fashion.  
And there are many things that we need to help.  I've always been impressed with the valuable support that organisations like Kids' Help Line provides.  The fact that so many young people feel so disconnected with their families, with their friends, that they would feel desperate enough to take their own lives is one of the things that we have to come to terms with and I've certainly believed all my life that the work of those organisations that provide 24 hour counseling and help at the end of the telephone are a very important weapon in fighting the scourge of suicide particularly amongst the young within our community.
The broader question of mental health of course is something that's always in the health debate in the Australian community.  When I think of the balance sheet of human advancement and human achievement in my lifetime and I think of the things where I believe that we handle so much better now than we did when I was a young person, one of the things that springs to mind is mental health.  Years ago there was a bit of a conspiracy of silence about mental illnesses, there was clearly within the community a view that it was something to be shut away and not talked about.  I think that's changed permanently for the better over the last generation.  There'll be arguments about the balance of institutional care versus supportive independent living, and there'll always be a bit of a debate about the balance that should be struck.  But undoubtedly the community has a far more compassionate, mature, sensible attitude towards mental illness now than used to be the case and the medical profession and many others have played a major role in bringing about that change.  And Mental Health Week seeks to focus that sensible approach within the community and it's something that I think as a society and as a nation we very properly observe.  
I have taken a keen personal interest in government efforts to deal with the problem of suicide, along with Michael Wooldridge who apologises for not being here today because he's at a health conference in Washington.  We are both very committed to working with the members of the council and we're working with all in the community to see if over a period of time we can make a difference.  And I do thank Professor Webster and all the other members of the council and everybody else connected with this very very important effort.  And I hope that after a year or two of the council's operations and particularly after the resources have started to filter through that we can feel that we've made a difference.  
I think in many of the other challenging areas we have in the community such as fighting the problem of drugs, and of course drugs and suicide are related, we are starting to make some difference with a collaborative approach.  We have I believe started to make a practical difference and just as in the drug area there will be continuing debates about policy emphasis, as to most of the things that people try to do there's overwhelming agreement.  And I believe the same exists in this area and it is very much a bipartisan thing.  I don't see fighting the scourge of suicide within our community as being a party political issue.  I see it as something of a national crusade and I know that members of the Opposition will support what the Government is trying to do in this area as indeed we endeavoured to support the efforts of the former government when it was in office.  This is the sort of thing that should not become a play thing of party politics.  There is goodwill to try and do something about it.  
I have great pleasure in formally welcoming the members of the council, thanking them for their commitment.  I wish the work of the council well and it's entirely appropriate that this meeting take place as it does in Mental Health Week.  And it's very important humanitarian work and something that makes public service very worthwhile.  Thank you. 


Subjects: Social and economic policies; Olympic Games
E&amp;OE..................
Well, I'm glad those votes didn't exist 25, 23 and 20 years ago but thank you very, very much Pauline for your kind words of introduction, to Karin Abrams, the National President, to the many distinguished guests and particularly can I acknowledge the presence of my parliamentary colleague Kevin Andrews and can I say what an intelligent decision the preselection committee of Menzies made last weekend.
Celebrating 25 years of an organisation is always a special moment and when one thinks of all of the things that have happened in political and national and social life in this country and around the world, the last 25 years has been an extraordinary period.  It almost exactly not totally but almost exactly mirrors the period of time that I have been a member of the House of Representatives.  I was elected to the House of Representatives as the Member for Bennelong in May of 1974, half way through the three year term of the Whitlam Government.  I will come to politics gently in a moment but it does represent a very remarkable period of change in Australian society.  
A lot of those changes have been very positive, a lot of them, many would argue have not been so positive.  It's been a period of time that has seen furious debate on social issues, it has been a period of time when major economic change has brought about very significant social change.  It has been a period during which the country has gone through some deep recessions and economically now we are in arguably the strongest and brightest period economically that we have had for more than 30 years.  But I haven't come along tonight to talk excessively about economics although it is never possible to talk about the national condition without referring a little bit to the economic state of the country.  But yours is an organisation that has championed vigorous social debate, you've championed the cause of something that is fundamental to my personal philosophy and that is the notion of choice.  Particularly but not only for women within the Australian community.  The role and status of women, the relationship between men and women within our community, the enormous changes in gender roles within our society over the last quarter of a century, remain issues that still excite, understandably a great deal of debate.  
I remarked earlier to my companions at the dinner table that I believe that the younger women of today, in many ways, despite some of the burdens to which Pauline referred were increasingly being seen in my view as having a more mature and a more relaxed attitude about the role and status of men and women within our community.  Many of the legitimate goals of equality of treatment and opportunity have now been achieved.  That doesn't mean that men and women either within or out the paid workforce are treated equally or are afforded equality of opportunity.  But it does mean that we now live in a society that recognises that the aspirations and the horizons of women have changed for all time.  But it is also a society, I know and particularly your organisation, that would argue that although those horizons have properly changed that doesn't alter the fundamental and enduring value of many of the institutions of our society and I know to an organisation such as your own as to the government and as to my own personal political philosophy the family unit remains the central and most stabilising influence in the life of the nation and in the lives of most Australians.  
The challenge of Government in the 21st century is to recognise that and support the fact that the family remains the most important group unit in our society.  It continues not only to provide most people within our community with the immediate source of their emotional and often their spiritual being and sustenance.  But it is also something that in economic terms provides the best social welfare system that man kind has ever devised.  What we all must recognise is that although the family remains central to our lives and central to what we think of ourselves, how we learn to relate to each other and how we learn to relate to our fellow human beings, it is now operating within a very different environment than what it was 25 or indeed 50 years ago.  It is no less relevant, it is no less important, it's no less held dearly by the community and one of the things I find fascinating is that whenever a survey is done of the aspirations of young people within our community you normally find at the very top the aspiration of personal happiness, security, family life, stability, all of those things that you tend to associate with traditional attitudes towards family life within our community.  And what I think we draw from that is that people still want the stabilising influence of family in their lives.  They still see it as the most immediate source of support but families today are going to operate under different rules.  Family members are going to relate to each other differently.  The opportunities for family members are going to be different and particularly the opportunities for women are going to be different.  
Many of the things that were spoken of as the goals of your organisation and many of the things that we have achieved if I may say so together, in areas such as taxation are all built around a very important philosophical notion and that philosophical notion is the notion or concept of choice.  The driving force of so much of the philosophy of the party that I am privileged to lead, the Liberal Party of Australia is a belief that the most important thing that we can provide to the Australian community is to give to the men and women of Australia the maximum range of choices that we possibly can and what I've sought to do and I have been a long term advocate and I am glad that the changes that we brought about in our taxation reforms are recognised for the achievement that they represent.  I have been a long term advocate of greater equity and justice within the taxation system for different family formations.
I don't think Governments have a right to tell families how to organise their paid and unpaid working lives.  I don't seek as Prime Minister to say to parents of young children you should have this or that child care arrangement, that is not my right.  But it is my responsibility as far as possible to allow parents in Australia to exercise the choice they want in relation to their childcare arrangements and if they want childcare to be in the form of home care by one or other parent on a full or substantially full time basis they should not suffer a severe economic penalty if they elect to go down that path.  I believe that the changes we have made have reduced that penalty.  I don't think I can say it has disappeared all together but certainly it has been substantially reduced.  It remains our goal to maintain choice.  We don't mandate conduct, rather we facilitate choice.  And of course that same commitment to choice underlines the attitude of the government in another very important area that touches the lives of all families and that is the area of education.  
The Government believes very strongly that Australian parents have the right to choose the education they think best suits the interests of their children.  I don't believe in commercial monopolies, nor do I believe in education monopolies.  We have in many ways the best mixed system of government and independent schools to be found anywhere in the world.  We have provided a climate for growth of choice against the back drop of a well funded strongly supported government education system and I speak myself as totally the product of the government education system of New South Wales.  A quality of education to which I remain indebted to the schools that gave me that education.  But I believe very strongly, that we should always provide parents with the maximum level of choice and the new funding arrangements introduced by the government and currently before the Senate have been the subject of some debate within parliament and within the media in recent weeks and the aim of those policies is to increase the choices available to Australian parents.  The aim of those changes are not to confer privilege on small sections of the Australian community but rather to expand the choices available.  We have done so by introducing new funding arrangements and new measurements of the capacity of parents to pay and we believe that as a result of those new arrangements there will be far greater choice available to Australian parents.  
Can I say to all of you that organisations whether they be the Women's Action Alliance, whether they be political parties, whether they be service organisations or other voluntary organisations within the Australian community, all of them face the challenge of competing for the attention of an increasingly busy community.  We are a different society from what we were two generations ago.  People do not automatically join organisations the way they did 20 or 30 years ago therefore the attempts of all organisations to remain strong advocates for their causes and to enlist the aid and support of people within the Australian community, that challenge is increasing every year.  And I congratulate an organisation such as this that has remained, I believe a very steady and sensible voice for the opinions of a large section of the mainstream of the Australian community.  I think that we need strong advocacy of organisations which don't have any formal alliance with either side of politics and I guess I address here tonight a gathering of people who represent all strands of political opinion within the Australian community and that is how it should be because one of the distinguishing things about Australian politics in the 21st century is that it has become a lot less tribal than what it used to be and I find it of intense fascination and interest as I move around the Australian community the number of people who identify themselves as having had a particular allegiance in the past that may not necessarily be mine finding points of agreement on issues that I am supporting or propagating and equally on occasions I come across people whose traditional allegiance is my own that have points of disagreement or points of criticism on attitudes that I am taking.  And it is a reminder to me that politics today is more plural, less tribal and therefore in that sense a lot more challenging in many ways than what it was when I entered federal parliament 25 years ago.
Can I say to you that although I have not said a lot tonight about the economic condition of the country I am sure that you would all agree that the capacity of a government and the capacity of a country to deliver stable economic conditions, strong economic growth, rising job opportunities, lower interest rates and low inflation, all of those things, create better conditions for Australian families.  One of the things that gives me a great deal of pride is that today we have a set of employment figures, unemployment figures which show not only an unemployment level of 6.3% over the last month but also the lowest level at 18.5%, the lowest level of youth unemployment that we have had since 1978.  Now those figures represent if I can put it, the flesh and blood of economic policy and economic achievement.  
We hear a lot these days about whether we have become a society which is obsessed with economic efficiency and economic achievement and I can understand why people occasionally express concern about a tendency by some to be preoccupied with economic outcomes because running an efficient economy is never an end in itself.  I don't seek a strong growing stable efficient Australian economy in order to please the economic purists of the world or of the International Monetary Fund.  I do it because I see it as a way of delivering a better life for individual Australians and for their families.  Because more people in work, more satisfying work, more career opportunities, more family opportunities, they are the outcomes, they are the flesh and blood of strong economic policies and effective economic achievement.  I have often been asked to describe as best I can the broad philosophical goals and objectives of the government that I lead and I have sought to describe the modern Liberal Party of Australia as being very much a party that believes in principles of economic liberalisation when it comes to economic policy and a Party that believes in modern conservatism when it comes to social policy.  What I mean by modern conservatism in social policy, I mean that we are a government that believes that there are some enduring values and some enduring institutions in our community that are as relevant and as precious and as valuable to us in these early months of the 21st century as they have ever been and I have touched on some of those tonight.  But equally we live in a society where the conditions in which those institutions operate and contribute to human happiness and human fulfillment are different from what they were a generation ago and the challenge of modern society is always to maintain the enduring value and importance of institutions such as the family but ensure that we do it in a way that retains its relevance and its support and its value for the modern community.  And I think organisations such as your own do recognise that.  You are not arguing that the conditions in which families operate are the same now as they were when your organisation was formed.  Having achieved some of your goals you are now very sensibly moving on to others and I congratulate you for that and that does mirror in a very significant way the approach that the Government has taken to many important elements of social policy in Australia.
The last thing I want to say to you and I find it quite impossible to address any gathering of Australians anywhere in our country at the present time without saying what I feel about the tremendous success and the tremendous value to our sense of national pride and national achievement constituted by the wonderful Olympic Games in Sydney only a few weeks ago.  I think that event demonstrated the tremendous capacity of the Australian community to do something in the eyes of the whole world in an efficient, modern, sophisticated, friendly, relaxed and above all, I think very courteous and very Australian way and it was a reminder to those within our community that seek to denigrate the Australian achievement and the capacity of Australians to do things effectively, it was a reminder of how much this country has been able to demonstrate to the world what a remarkably successful amalgam it is of so many people from so many different parts of the world.  A classless society that values in a very relaxed and friendly fashion strong and spirited sporting competition.  
Can I thank the Women's Action Alliance for the contribution that it has made to economic and social debate in Australia.  Can I encourage you to continue your work, can I encourage you to find new forms of advocacy, can I encourage you to continue to put them to my government and any future government of Australia.  We may not agree with everything but we certainly will always listen to you, will always respect your commitment to family life, your commitment to effective choice for men and women and your belief, a belief that the government shares, that there are some enduring institutions in our society which are as relevant and as important today as they have ever been and the support of those institutions is very important to the future of the whole of the Australian community.
Thank you very much
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Louise for that very kind introduction, to all of my parliamentary colleagues, to Rino Grollo, the President of the Italian Australian Institute and ladies and gentlemen.  
Before I address some remarks to contemporary political and economic issues I'd like to acknowledge very warmly on your behalf the contribution of the Italian Australian Institute and particularly its president Rino Grollo for the sponsorship of this Ad Lib Lunch.  And in the process of thanking Rino and his colleagues in the Institute can I formally launch this, well I can't call it a slim volume because it is fairly substantial but it is very important and it is called In Search of the Italian-Australian into the New Millennium and it records the proceedings of the conference held here in Melbourne on the 24th &amp; 25th &amp; the 26th of May which traced the wonderful Italian story in Australia.  And for the many people who have their heritage from Italy in Australia and many others who are friends of those and friends of Italy it will make very good reading.  
Can I say to you Rino, in particular, and to others connected with the Institute that one of the more significant things about the Olympic Games particularly the opening night were the unprompted responses of the 110 000 strong crowd at the Olympic Stadium as the various national teams walked past and it was very interesting to note the unprompted response of the crowds to particular national teams, and there was no doubting the affection and warmth and spontaneity of the applause and the welcome extended to the Italian team as it marched into the Stadium.  And that was a demonstration of the affection in which those of Italian heritage, numbering more than a million within the Australian community the affection in which they are held by the broader Australian community.  So thank you again for your sponsorship and more broadly thank you again for what your magnificent community represents as part of the 19 million strong Australian community.
There is a little bit of a sense in Australia at the moment, both politically and psychologically of, well, haven't things gone very well, particularly with the after glow of the Olympic Games and more narrowly but very importantly at the political level after the very successful introduction of the new tax system there's a bit of a sense of what is going to happen now?  And one of the things that I would like to try and do today is to share with you my thoughts of what is going to happen now and the short answer is quite a lot.  The longer answer will take a few more minutes but it is certainly the case that the New Taxation system which came into operation on the 1st of July has been accepted and assimilated by the Australian community to a far greater extent and far more quickly than even the most optimistic proponents of it, such as myself, dared imagine.  And all of those prophecies of doom and all of those suggestions from the Labor Party and others that the world would come to an end on the 1st of July, all of their prayers that that might happen weren't realised of course.  They did want it to be a disaster, they wanted it to be a political catastrophe for the government so they would be in a position to say "there we told you so" and to use Mr Beazley's rather inglorious phrase the Labor Party might then hope that it would surf to victory on the back of voter dissatisfaction with the new taxation system.  
Well of course none of that transpired and the Australian people have seen the reform for what it is and that was a very serious attempt to give this country a new taxation system that it's needed for more than a quarter of a century.  Now I don't pretend that there aren't some individual problems of detail and there won't be areas of concern, there won't need on occasion to be some fine tuning of the way the new system operates but fundamentally the reform has been accepted and the reason it has been accepted is that it was seen as structurally sound and very comprehensive.  It wasn't just a reform of the indirect tax system, it delivered very large reductions in personal income tax, it got rid of provisional tax, it almost halved capital gains tax, it's cutting company tax from 36 cents in the dollar to 30 and it is doing a number of other very positive things that we have needed to be seen done for a very long period of time.  And the other reason why I believe that it has been well received is that the public see it as part of a pattern of change and reform that this government has embraced over the last four and half years.
If you look at our economic performance, our inflation rate is low, our interest rates are much lower.  We recorded yesterday the lowest unemployment rate this country has seen for more than 10 years.  We now have the lowest level of youth unemployment at less than 19% that we have had for perhaps 20 years.  We still have very strong levels of business investment, we have a strong budget surplus.  We've recorded 11 or 12 quarters of economic growth in excess of an annual rate of 4%.  We are seen around the world, despite what some people say, inaccurately, as a country whose productivity performance is stronger and better than the productivity performance of most.  And recently we have had a very ill informed debate about the relationship of new technology to the Australian economy and there is a false view being put around by some people that because this country is not a major manufacturer as opposed to a major user of new technology, particularly information technology, it is seen around the world as an old economy.  And against that background I found some comments contained in the most recent Bulletin of the United States Federal Reserve System very instructive and very enlightening.  And I am not prone at speeches like this as many of you will know to read extracts from reports or indeed to read anything at all.  But I do want, if you will bear with me for a moment, I do want to read a short extract from that bulletin because it goes very directly to this rather fatuous and completely erroneous argument about new technology.
What the bulletin says is that the most prominent explanation for the pick up in productivity growth, and the Bulletin here is talking about economies generally, centres on new developments in the high technology sector, in particular the proliferation of computer and information technology.  In so far as most of the recent technological  advances in this area are available to businesses worldwide it is natural to expect them to contribute to faster productivity growth abroad as well.  The availability of new technology on a worldwide basis need not however translate into an automatic improvement in productivity performance.  An economy's structure, institutions and regulations influence the rapidity with which technological advances are adopted and the extent to which adoption of these advances leads to heightened efficiency.  And the Report goes on to find that with only a few exceptions, labour productivity in foreign countries to the United States does not appear to have accelerated in the latter half of the 1990's.  And they go onto say that only two of the foreign, industrial economies in our sample, Australia and Switzerland show a rise in labour productivity growth over 1996/98 compared with earlier periods.  And the extract concludes by saying this, that for Australia, the acceleration in labour productivity was particularly strong, an increase of two percentage points in 1996/98 over its average during the 1980's. 
Now that rather dry, but nonetheless very relevant extract from the Federal Reserve's monthly bulletin makes a very emphatic point and that is productivity improvement is based on the adoption and the use of new technology. And when you look around the world Australia and Switzerland are the star performers according to the United States' Federal Reserve system and out of those two Australia has done the best of all. And that rather does give the lie not only to this argument about the inability of Australia to effectively use and adapt new technology but it also drives home another point that Louise made in her introduction and that is that one of the things that's been very important to economic change and reform in Australia over the past few years has been the way in which we have been able, through industrial relations reforms, through the use and applications of new technology to lift the productivity in the Australian economy.  
One of the reasons why working men and women in Australia now are better off than they were a few years ago is that they have been able to enjoy real gains in their incomes without there being inflationary costs.  They've really got the double benefit of lower interest rates and higher real wages.  And that has been due in no small measure ladies and gentlemen, in no small measure to the fact that we have seen a very significant boost in productivity. 
So when you look back over the last four and a half years, culminating with the introduction of the new taxation system, it has been a pattern and a policy of consistent change and reform.  And that process must go on. We now live in an economic climate where there is really no alternative to the process of change and reform and the process of globalisation.  The last time I addressed a gathering in this very auditorium was a dinner gathering of the World Economic Forum held on the eve of the Olympic Games, remembered perhaps more for the riots and the demonstrations rather than for many of the very substantive contributions that were made.  But on that particular occasion we were really talking about the merits or otherwise of globalisation.  And the reality that came out of that conference to me and the reality as you look around the world, is that so far from globalisation being something that has weakened, enfeebled and impoverished countries and people, globalisation has brought economic gains and individual economic liberation to millions of people.  
I used on the occasion of my address at that gathering, I used the example of Korea.  A country that had in every sense of the word a third world economy back in the early 1960's, one of whose best exports was wigs, but a country which opened up its economy, embraced globalisation, became a world competitor and now has within the Asian Pacific region one of the strongest GDPs and strongest growing economies of all.  And when you compare the Korean example with the example of countries that have kept their economies closed to the rest of the world but have turned their faces against globalisation, and as a consequence have poorer, more impoverished populations, we might begin to understand that globalisation is not something brutally imposed on the world by rich capitalists, rather it is something of long-term benefit and long-term gain to hundreds of millions of people around the world.
Now if I look back over the last four and half years we can point to a lot of real achievements.  In politics nothing is ever static.  There is always an obligation to move on.  There is always an obligation to tackle new issues and new horizons.  And the Government's agenda is not limited to economic issues.  Securing good economic outcomes is not an end in itself.  It's only of value if it increases the store of human happiness and human contentment.  And that is why the most warming thing to me about our economic progress over the last four and a half years is to know that we have generated more than 800,000 additional jobs.  That we've got youth unemployment down to a twenty year low.  That we have unemployment generally down to a little over 6%.  But we want to go further.  And if we can maintain economic growth at the present rate we can go further.  
But going broader afield there are other major challenges which Australia faces.  Last week I announced a Federal Government commitment to one of the most important, if not the most important environmental challenge that this country has.  And that is the problem of salinity and the deteriorating quality of water throughout Australia.  Many people coming metaphorically from Mars might wonder how it was that a country such as Australia had a problem with water.  Yet in reality it is one of our long-term challenges.  One third of all Australian rivers are of inferior quality.  And unless we do something to reverse the deteriorating quality of the water supply in this country, in twenty years time the drinking water for the people of Adelaide will be unfit for human use in two out of every five days. The problem of salinity which has been with us for a very long time, but has been essentially left untackled until elements of the Natural Heritage Trust plan were put in place after the 1996 election.  That along with water quality represents the biggest environmental challenge probably we have.   And we announced a Commonwealth plan that I will take to the meeting with State Premiers on the third of November to work together in partnership over a ten year period identifying the twenty catchment areas around Australia that have serious salinity and water quality problems.  And building in each catchment area a plan, working with local communities to tackle those problems.   Recognising that compensation for particularly primary producers who may be affected might well need to be paid.  
But it is one of those challenges which is very much for the long-term.  It's something that will reflect in years to come on the stewardship of the present generation of Australians with those assets that we hold in trust and the quality of our water and the quality of our soil are certainly prime amongst those assets - the assets that we hold in trust for future generations of Australians.  
The Government will also have before it, before the end of the year our internal response to the McClure Report which recommends some new directions for Australia's social security system.  Contrary to what so many people said on the left of politics in Australia when we came into office in 1996 this Government has not demolished the social security safety net, it's never been part of the philosophy of the Liberal Party to leave people in need in the Australian community without assistance.  Indeed if you go back over the period since World War II most of the really big, lasting changes to the social security safety net of this country were introduced by Liberal Governments.  And therefore it was never going to be the philosophy or the policy in action of a Coalition Government to interfere or hack away at the social security net.  And as time has gone by that realisation has come throughout the Australian community and now increasingly the Australian community feels comfortable with the idea of moving on to further change and reform in the area of social welfare.  They have embraced the notion of mutual obligation which says that we have an obligation as a society to look after those in genuine need, but where possible and I stress where possible, people who receive assistance should reasonably be asked if they can to give something back to the community in return.
I don't regard that as an exercise in punishment, I regard that as an exercise in co-operation.  I regard it as a principle and an approach which not only has wide support in the Australian community, but provides people with a pathway out of welfare dependence.  And there's an increasingly strong view within the Australian community and indeed elsewhere around the world that we need to find ways to break the cycle of welfare dependency.  Not in a heartless insensitive way by denying those in the community who need help and can't get anything back the necessary assistance, but rather to recognise that it's far better over time to assist people out of welfare into work than to encourage a continuation of welfare dependency.  So much of what the McClure Report on social security was about was to address issues of that kind.  
We'll also be taking some major decisions in relation to transport matters including, but not limited to, decisions in relation to what arrangements should be made in relation to further airport facilities in Sydney but of course that decision will have an impact on transport matters that go far wider than Sydney or indeed New South Wales. And in the area of technology and innovation and education we'll be responding to a number of major reports indicating some new pathways in that area.  
So the message I would give to all of you is that the process of change and reform must go on.  And speaking as I am to an audience that is particularly supportive of our efforts at a political level, can I say to you that as in all of these things we keep a balance between economic necessity and political realism.  In the long run the obligation of any political party is to remain in office so that you can implement the philosophy in which you believe.  The best way to do that of course is to govern well and to deliver competent, responsible government for all of the Australian people.  And that is what we have sought to do. And we've sought in the process to give the maximum amount of choice.  Louise mentioned two other things in her introduction.  One of those was health insurance and another was education.  And when I think back to only two years ago when we were struggling after the 1998 election to get our private health insurance rebate, our tax rebate through the Senate and it was only with the help of Senator Harradine that we were able to get that legislation through the Senate.  And the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats voted against it and it's widely rumoured that at the time the legislation went up, elements of the Labor Party in New South Wales sent a plaintive request to Brian Harradine to vote in favour of the legislation with the rider that of course that the Labor Party couldn't support the legislation but it had, because it opposed it during the election campaign, but it really wanted it to go through anyway because they were frightened that it would be seen in a very poor light in the context of the New South Wales state election if that legislation were defeated.   Now that struck all of us at the time as a monumental exercise in hypocrisy, but of course the final evidence of the Labor Party's hypocrisy on this issue is that having done all of that they announced a couple of weeks ago that after all they would keep the health insurance rebate if they were elected.   A commitment that I don't think given their track record believe for a moment, but in any event it demonstrates their hypocrisy and bankruptcy on this issue.  
And health has been one of those issues which over the years we've been told constantly by the political analysts is something where we're meant to be struggling in relation to the Labor Party.  The reality is that the Coalition Government has now established because of its support for private health insurance a better balance between public provision for health in this country and private provision, working in partnership, a better balance than we've had in this area than for probably a quarter of a century.  
And the final area is the area of choice in education.  And recently we've had a very vigorous debate in Parliament about the Government's new funding arrangements for independent schools in Australia.  And I want to acknowledge in his presence the tremendous work that David Kemp as Minister for Education has done  in this area.  Choice in education has always been a very important Liberal principle.  It's built upon the commitment to one central proposition and that is the parents of Australia should be given the maximum choice to decide the way and where their children should be educated.  And this country has probably the best mix of public and private provision for education of any advanced industrialised country in the world.  There's a far greater choice available.  We recognise that choice in not only religious denominational terms, but also in terms of the method and the quality of education.  And what this Government stands for above all else is giving the parents of Australian children that right of choice and that is best delivered through an education system that has a strong public component, properly resourced by the state government which historically has provided most of the funds for Government schools, supplemented where necessary by the Federal Government and also a strong independent sector funded by a funding system that recognises the capacity of parents to pay rather than outdated notions of what is a wealthy or not so wealthy school and recognising the increasing diversity of the school population within the Australian community.
Well ladies and gentlemen I have gone on for too long for a luncheon gathering.  Can I say to you that what I've tried to convey in these few moments is that yes a lot has happened over the last four and a half years.  We've had a new tax system.  We've had in recent weeks the tremendous excitement of the great success for Australia in every way at the Olympic Games.  But much remains to be done.  Governments never automatically win re-election.  The next election will be hard, the third one always is.  Politics is volatile, it's unpredictable, it's less tribal than it once was.  And no prime minister, no government can rest on its laurels and assume that good government has its automatic reward.  The Australian people demand of us good government.  They expect us to address with courage the difficult problems a country faces.  They applaud commitment and resolution in the face of political difficulty.  They expect us to show an understanding and compassion for those in the community who deserve it.   And they expect us above all to continue to govern in the interests of all of the Australian community.
Let me say to all of the members of the Victorian Division and supporters who are here today, I know it's not easy in the first twelve months of opposition at the state level.  I've experienced opposition, I know how awful it is.  I'll never go back to it.  I promise you that.  And I will do everything I can to help and co-operate with my state colleagues in Victoria.  We have a big fight ahead of us here in Victoria and around Australia over the next twelve months in the lead-up to the Federal election.  I am encouraged by the support shown by this luncheon today and I thank you very warmly for coming along and demonstrating your commitment to our very important cause.
Thank you.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Ladies and gentlemen, Janette and I are absolutely thrilled to be with you tonight and we're going to be thrilled to come and watch you compete for Australia.  This is the biggest Paralympics ever.  We do have a team of 437 now.  We are really looking forward, and we really do say, on behalf of all of the people of Australia, we hope the Games are a huge success.  We admire the dedication.  All of you have worked very hard to get ready and it's going to be a terrific climax of your athletic careers in so many different sports.  
From 1960 when the first Paralympic Games were held, they've got bigger and better each year.  There are 4000 athletes from Australia and all around the world and these are the biggest ever.  You have tremendous facilities but most importantly you have the spirit and the encouragement of 19 million people behind you.  
There's a special quality - there was a real buzz out there tonight - and Janette and I are just so happy to be a small part of it and we'll be out there barracking really hard for you and participating very, very strongly.
Telephone interruption
A spy from another team trying to learn our secrets!  It's not allowed.
From all of us, the rest of the 19 million Aussies, good luck.  We'll be very proud of you.  We admire enormously what you have done.  Can I now just very seriously and very genuinely thank you, thank your families, your coaches, the whole Paralympic movement and all those people that have made it possible for you to compete in this tremendous atmosphere and to achieve your dreams of representing Australia at the Paralympic Games.  Good luck and I know it's going to be a tremendous couple of weeks.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much.  To the Premier of South Australia, John Olsen, the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Denis Burke, Rick Allert, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
It is said that if you wait long enough, everything predicted eventually comes true.  In his speech to the first session of Federal Parliament in May 1901, that's 100 years ago next May, the then Governor-General said this and I quote "no doubt the progress of railway connection between the Northern Territory and the southern states will before long assume great public importance".  Well it was a fairly long time.  It was a prediction that ultimately became reality or is becoming reality.  But this is a very historic occasion.  It does mark the real time commitment of the three governments:  the Federal Government which I lead; the State Government of South Australia; and the Government of the Northern Territory.
This particular project, which has been a dream of so many people for so long, is now going to happen.  Believe me, it's real.  There's no turning back.  The three governments have committed $480 million and that's $165 million from the Federal Government and the rest coming from the Territory Government and the Government of South Australia.  The private sector is going to invest $750 million.  It's one of the biggest infrastructure projects in Australia's history.  It's going to provide 7000 jobs during the construction phase.  The work is going to really give an enormous charge and injection of economic activity and vitality into the city of Whyalla.  It's going to involve the construction of 120 bridges and the provision of 2.3 million concrete sleepers.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, this is a very exciting day because one of the responsibilities of the national government is to engage, where appropriate, in providing capital assistance for the renewal and the revitalisation of the infrastructure of the nation.  If you had listened entirely to the nostrums of pure economic rationalism, this railway would not be being built.  Whilst I am a great believer in many of the nostrums of economic realism, and of course a total believer in the nostrums of economic responsibility, there are occasions when the government has got to invest a certain amount of dollars in its own commitment, its own vision, its own sense of excitement and sense of the future of the country.  And supporting the Darwin to Alice Springs railway is precisely the kind of project that ought to demand and get financial support from the Federal Government.
We are at a time in our history where we do need to think years ahead about the kind of country we want, the kind of infrastructure we need.  Last week the Government committed itself, in co-operation with State and Territory Governments to tackle the enormous problem of salinity and water quality.  I don't need to remind an audience of people from Adelaide that unless something is done about that problem in 20 years time two out of five days your drinking water will be unfit for human consumption.  Although salinity and water quality may appear a long way away from the construction of the railway which will link the north and the south of our nation and fulfil a century old dream, in a sense they are really part and parcel of the same belief that I have and I know John and Denis have, that we do need in government to not only attend to the day-to-day responsibilities but we do need to make decisions that provide for a stronger, better and a more adventurous future.
Can I say that I am delighted that this day has come.  I will enjoy even more the day when the first sod is turned on the construction phase.  I do want to congratulate John and Denis for the tenacity, persistence, the eloquence, the advocacy that they have embraced over so many years.  I also want to pay tribute to their predecessors in their respective roles.  And can I congratulate Rick Allert, the chairman of the consortium, who has done so much to bring about this project as a commercial reality.  It is a triumph of government commitment but more importantly it is a vindication of what is so necessary to achieve many things in our country and that is a partnership between the government and the private sector.  
I wish the project well.  It will be a huge success and it will vindicate the faith of those people who decided to back it.
(ends) 


Subjects: Minister Reith; GST; Economy; petrol prices.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, good morning.
PRIME MINISTER:
Hello Neil, how are you?
MITCHELL:
I’m well thank you. Mr Howard I suggest to you that the people of Australia believe Peter Reith should be sacked or the inquiry widened and that he should be stood down. Will continue to hold out against that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Neil, can I just bring back the facts. The first fact to make is that Peter Reith is paying the full $50,000 even though those calls were run up without his authority. He accepts that…..
MITCHELL:
It was his responsibility.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he accepts that because he gave the details wrongly to his son in the first place, even though he did not authorise the card to be used in the way it was, he has to cop that. Now he’s paying that and can I say that again – he’s paying that. That seems to have been lost sight of. The second point I’d make is that after investigation the Director of Public Prosecutions has said that there is no basis for laying any criminal charges against Mr Reith, and on top of that the Solicitor General has said that he has no civil legal liability. Now in those circumstances for me to succumb to the media frenzy on this…..
MITCHELL:
I’d suggest it’s a public frenzy as well.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I understand why the public is cranky but I do have an obligation in a situation like this to look to the merits of the issue and nothing has happened since last weekend apart from the fresh statement made by Ms Odgers which is being examined by the police, and in any event contradicts what Mr Reith’s son said, not what Mr Reith said. Now bear in mind that Mr Reith was not present in that house when either the details of the card were copied down or overheard, if you believe Mr Reith’s son, or given to Ms Odgers if you believe her version. Now you don’t know, I don’t know, I wasn’t there. The only thing I can do in circumstances like that is to accept the verdict of the people who’ve interviewed both of them. Now I haven’t interviewed both of them. I’ve interviewed Mr Reith and I’ve discussed this matter at length with Mr Reith and I’m satisfied of three things. I’m satisfied that he was in error in giving the card to his son way back in 1994. I’m satisfied that he knew nothing of the irregular use of the card until August/September of last year. And I’m satisfied that after he found out about the irregular use he did his best to get to the bottom of it and I can also repeat that he came to see me on the 8th of May this year and by the 10th of May of this year the matter was in the hands of the federal police, I having taken advice from the Attorney General.
MITCHELL:
Do you believe he’s been entirely honest through this?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have not discovered anything in this matter to suggest that Mr Reith has been less than forthright.
MITCHELL:
Well he talked about a hotel receptionist may have been responsible when he’d known for months about the involvement of Ingrid Odgers. That’s what he told us, it could have been a hotel receptionist when he knew about Ingrid Odgers.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Neil, I haven’t been present at every single conversation he’s had with everybody but…..
MITCHELL:
That was reported Mr Howard.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah I know that, I know that was reported but he was like anybody else in a situation like that, I suppose he was speculating. But look….
MITCHELL:
But he knew about Ingrid Odgers at the time and he wasn’t telling us about that.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yes, but he didn’t know the circumstances in which the card details got into her hands other than the versions given to him by other people.
MITCHELL:
Is there an issue here of ministerial standards and what you expect from ministers, and has that not been breached?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes. Well the one clear thing that Mr Reith did wrong, the only one clear thing which he has done wrong in this in my view was to give the details to his son back in 1994.
MITCHELL:
He’s done something else wrong. He gave the details….I’ll tell you. He gave the details to his son. He knew that his son then ran up a bill, fair enough. He didn’t pay it until he got caught. Why didn’t he say I’ve given it to my son, I owe you a grand? He didn’t do it until he got caught.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well when I asked him about that his explanation is that he didn’t believe his son had used the card because it was given……
MITCHELL:
No hang on..
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m just telling you what he said to me.
MITCHELL:
He’s given his son the card and invited him to use it, we’ve paid for it. He knows we paid for it, even if it’s two calls. He hadn’t offered to reimburse the people until he got caught.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well can I put the other version to that? The other version to that, and I think the one that I think has been lost sight of, is that when Peter was informed that the card had been improperly used he initiated an investigation that resulted in the thing going to the police. And the police were investigating him and his son as well as other people and that investigation could have led to the laying of criminal charges against Mr Reith or his son.
MITCHELL:
Isn’t it true he only instigated that inquiry when he was told he could be liable to pay the whole $50,000?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he instigated the inquiry Neil, as I understand, on the basis of what I’ve been told, he instigated that inquiry when he found out, or he instigated the investigation which led to that inquiry, when he found out that the card had been improperly used. I mean what people lose sight of is the fact that no matter what has been in any newspaper including this morning….
MITCHELL:
The Sydney Morning Herald today?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah, that Peter Reith himself was not informed by anybody, Telstra or by DOFA, of irregular use of that card until August/September of last year. Nor I am told was the Minister for Administrative Services – Special Minister of State Chris Ellison – he was not told until August/September.
MITCHELL:
But something’s gone wrong.
PRIME MINISTER:
No but okay. But if anybody has the right to perhaps be a little irritated, any individual has a right to be irritated about not having been told, if anything should have been told, until August or September last year it was Peter because the longer he was not told so the irregular use of the card continued. Isn’t that….
MITCHELL:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
No, but you say OK you’re moving…..
MITCHELL:
I think there are many questions about Peter Reith and there are even broader questions like this Sydney Morning Herald material released today that says that Telstra fraud investigators told the Finance Department this rort was going on in July 1998, thirteen months before the investigations were started. They also showed that the department wanted the police called in in September last year well before Mr Reith called them in. Why?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well let me answer that. I have been told that in July of 1998 there was contact between a Telstra person and somebody in the department. And the decision was made by somebody in the department after investigating the matter that there was no basis for taking it any further, that there was a proper explanation for what appeared to be irregular use of the card.
MITCHELL:
And what was the explanation?
PRIME MINISTER:
The explanation apparently – a query was raised as to the use of the card in one part of the country as opposed to another, and on investigation, so I am told, it was found that Mr Reith in fact had visited the part of the country in which the card had been used so the use of the card was not irregular.
MITCHELL:
But even use of it in 1998. I thought he said he’d stopped using it well before that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I just finish the explanation? So I’m told that on the basis of that the DOFA employee decided that there was no point in taking it any further. But there was no reference made to Mr Reith. He was not informed of this inquiry by the Telstra employee, nor was the minister in the department. Now in those circumstances to blame Mr Reith for that is palpably unfair. You can say that there was something wrong with the system, you can say all of that, but Peter Reith was not told of the irregular use until August/September of last year.
MITCHELL:
Was he using the card at that time, has the department decided, or was somebody else using it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I can’t answer that question but I can…..
MITCHELL:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, and nothing has emerged Neil with respect, to disprove what Peter has said.
MITCHELL:
But I think what….
PRIME MINISTER:
No no, hang on. You see everybody’s running around saying Peter Reith hasn’t come clean. Peter Reith has had a consistent story and that is that when he was told about the improper use of the card he set about trying to get to the bottom of it and that was in August or September, August/September last year. And nothing has emerged to shake the truth of what he has said about when he first found out about this. And what you are referring to and what the Sydney Morning Herald is referring to does not shake in any way what Peter has said about August/September of last year.
MITCHELL:
But it does shake the issue of whether he was using the card which is a key issue. If the department accepted in July 1998 Mr Reith had been using the card legitimately at some place he was in the country. Mr Reith said he wasn’t, he hasn’t been using the card for years. Now that is a very key inconsistency.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well what the department concluded was that they apparently made some investigation about movements on the basis of some travel claims and they established that he was in one part of the country and that that indicated that he probably used the card. They didn’t actually ask him whether he used it.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, with respect we’ve got ‘probablies’, we’ve got ‘apparentlies’, we’ve got, ‘you are told’, and fair enough, you’re getting reports. Isn’t it time that all these probablies and apparentlies and you being tolds were put to a broader test in a full inquiry, Senate inquiry, judicial inquiry, whatever?
PRIME MINISTER:
Hang on, you’re suggesting therefore the Solicitor General of the Commonwealth who when he was appointed was probably one of the most highly regarded Queens Counsel in the country, is not as competent on these things as you and I, and journalists?
MITCHELL:
No no. I would suggest that a judicial inquiry or a Senate inquiry would be more appropriate because there are holes in the….report of the Solicitor General…the police have already gone back for further inquiries.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes because further claims were made.
MITCHELL:
Well with respect that shows the police inquiries initially were insufficient.
PRIME MINISTER:
Not necessarily.
MITCHELL:
Well on the version of Ms X.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah, okay, well that’s right, well on the version, well what Ms X has said is in conflict with what Peter Reith’s son has said. It’s not in conflict with what Mr Reith has said. Mr Reith is the Minister. Mr Reith was not present at the house. He has no direct knowledge. He can only go on versions given to him by other people. Now you see you’re calling for a judicial inquiry. That’s what the Labor Party’s calling for. A Senate Inquiry, well you know that would just be a political witchhunt. I mean nobody with any serious commitment to finding out the truth of this matter would support a Senate inquiry. Look what is happening at the moment is you’ve had an investigation by the Solicitor General. He said no civil liability by Reith. Despite that Reith is paying the money. You’ve had a police inquiry and a DPP inquiry that says there’s no obligation, there’s no evidence to pursue criminal proceedings. Some discrepancies have emerged between the statement given by Ms Odgers to the police and a subsequent statement, and quite properly in the exercise of an independent responsibility the police are further investigating. Now as far as I’m concerned, if out of all of these investigations if anything substantially different emerges obviously I’ll respond to that. I mean as far as I’m concerned the police can investigate whoever they like. They can go back and question Mr Reith again, his son again, they can question anybody in the Department. I have nothing at all to hide on this. And I remain consistent with the position that was put when this first came to light.
MITCHELL:
Well if more information comes out, will you then consider a further inquiry – a judicial inquiry if necessary?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look I would only consider a different course of action if there were issues – substantially different material or issues – that emerge. But nothing has come out to shake what Mr Reith has essentially said all along. What he said all along is yes, he made a mistake giving the card to his son. He’s paid for that to the tune of all of this plus $50,000 and he’s paying every last cent of that.
MITCHELL:
Has he paid yet, the lot?
PRIME MINISTER:
He’s making arrangements to pay it. I mean can you write a cheque immediately for $50,000. I can’t. I’d have to make some arrangements. Fair go, he is clearly going to pay the money. Can I just say, that is an example of how ridiculous this whole thing has become. Is anybody seriously suggesting he, having said he’s paying the money, that he’s not paying.
MITCHELL:
Nobody is.
PRIME MINISTER:
Ok.
MITCHELL:
Can I ask you further. Let’s get to the principle. The Financial Review reports a case today in the Industrial Commission. A Telstra sales executive runs up a bill of $10,000 on his business credit card – personal costs. He says he didn’t know it was against policy, repays the money. He’s sacked. The Industrial Relations Commission when he goes to it says it was right that he was sacked. Is there a difference there?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’ll tell you, there is a difference there. He got the benefit of the expenditure on the card.
MITCHELL:
Well, indirectly, so did Peter Reith?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, how has he got it?
MITCHELL:
Because he gave it to his son. That’s the whole thing. If he hadn’t given it to his son it wouldn’t have happened.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, but the $50,000 of calls were not made by Mr Reith or by his son.
MITCHELL:
Is Peter Reith’s political future severely compromised?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look, Neil, never write anybody off in this game.
MITCHELL:
Yes, but he has been seen as a successor to you, hasn’t he?
PRIME MINISTER:
The question of who succeeds me, when I ultimately decide to give it away, is a matter for the Liberal Party.
MITCHELL:
Yes, but there has been Liberal Party polling done on the differences between Peter Costello and Peter Reith and Peter Reith comes out, before this, was stronger wasn’t he?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you say Liberal Party polling. I’ve got to say, I haven’t seen it.
MITCHELL:
I’ll see if I can get you a copy.
PRIME MINISTER:
See if you can get me a copy of that will you. I have not seen that particular polling and look, I’m not sort of interested in successors. I’m enjoying the job.
MITCHELL:
We’ve still got $36,000 or thereabouts unaccounted for haven’t we? Isn’t that reason for further inquiry?
PRIME MINISTER:
$36,000?
MITCHELL:
Yes, Paul Reith’s paid $1000 – has run up $1000 rather. “Mr Y” has run up $13000. Let’s say “Miss X” a couple of thousand dollars, there’s $36,000.
PRIME MINISTER:
But from a crude public interest point of view, Peter Reith’s paying the whole lot.
MITCHELL:
Yeh, but from a principle point of view we still don’t know how that $34,000, $35,000, $36,000 went.
PRIME MINISTER:
Look Neil, that is not something that the Government can establish other than through the police and the law authorities and that is exactly what we are doing. I can’t carry out an investigation. I can’t go and personally interview Miss Odgers and Paul Reith.
MITCHELL:
I’m not suggesting you do Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
And neither, can I suggest, can journalists competently do it either. The people who should do this are the police. Now the police have been asked to do it. Some more comments have been made and the police of their own initiative in exercising their independent authority, are talking to her again. I don’t mind what comes out of that. If they come back and say something completely different from what they’ve previously said we’ll I’ll have a look at that and I’ll respond to that in an appropriate way.
MITCHELL:
You’re still open to an inquiry in that case?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well all I can do is to react to the circumstances and the material that is in front of me. And as I speak to you, on the morning of the 20th October at ten minutes to nine, the situation is that:   Peter Reith is paying the money; the police and the Director of Public Prosecutions have said there’s no basis for having a criminal prosecution; the Solicitor-General has said there’s no civil legal liability; nothing has shaken Peter Reith’s assertion, nothing, that the first he knew of this was late August/early September and then he set about trying to get to the bottom of it; and, as soon as the matter came to my attention it was sent packing to the coppers. Now nothing has shaken any of that. I can read 20 front pages and I can hear 20 exhortation from different people to do this and do that. My responsibility is to act according to the facts and the merits.
MITCHELL:
Well let’s hear a little from the public. Phylis, go ahead please. What do you think?
CALLER:
Mr Howard, does this mean that any politician now that’s given a card can just hand it to anyone?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, it does not mean that. It means that if you do that you pay a very heavy price. Namely you pick up the bill for any unauthorised use of the card and that is exactly what Mr Reith is doing.
MITCHELL:
But will it be a hanging offence if it happens in the future?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you’d look at each situation on the circumstances surrounding it Neil.
MITCHELL:
Are there any more suspected?
PRIME MINISTER:
Other people doing this?
MITCHELL:
Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’m not aware of it.
MITCHELL:
Have they been investigated? Have the cards been checked?
PRIME MINISTER:
In two or three weeks the details of the telecard use of every member of Parliament is going to be made public. Just for the record it’s zero on my card in the whole time I’ve been Prime Minister. These telecards aren’t used much now because people have mobile phones.
MITCHELL:
You’re not aware of any other problems?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m not aware of it but I mean, Neil, I can’t answer that.
MITCHELL:
It could be the Opposition?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don’t know. You go and ask Mr Beazley. He’ll probably give you the same answer. He’d say he’s not aware of it and that’s all, quite honestly, that’s the only answer anybody in our position can give.
MITCHELL:
Hello Freddy. Go ahead please Freddy. Freddy are you there? No. Ray, go ahead please.
CALLER:
Look I feel the jury’s still out on Peter Reith but as a concerned citizen, my main concern is what appears to be the massive incompetence of the administration of these cards, both from maybe Telecom or whoever it is and also maybe Peter Reith’s department. If something like this can go on for four or five years, you know, where the hell is the control over the administration?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don’t want to, because the matter is still being debated, I don’t want to make final judgements about that but I can only repeat that the first Mr Reith knew of the irregular use of the card was August/September of last year. I repeat, August/September of last year and as soon as he heard of the irregular use of the card he set about doing something about it. Nothing has happened to shake that assertion.
MITCHELL:
Ok, given, just to get back to the Sydney Morning Herald point. 1998 the Finance Department was aware of it. Does the Minister carry responsibility for that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’m obviously going to get further information about that but I was told this morning exactly what occurred and I tried to explain it to you a few minutes ago. If you’re not told something, this is an ordinary common sense test, it’s a bit hard….
MITCHELL:
But it’s not a very good defence for a Minister – ignorance – is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m sorry, that is just not correct. You don’t take responsibility for every remote error that is made. On that basis, every time the tax office makes a mistake the Treasurer gets the blame, every time somebody in the Army makes a mistake, the Defence Minister takes the responsibility. There’s got to be some personal involvement or some dishonesty on the part of the minister or some neglect or sloppiness by the minister personally or in his office. Now, if information doesn’t even get to the Minister’s office, can I say this very firmly, if information doesn’t even get to the Minister’s office, it’s a bit unreasonable to say the Minister is to blame.
MITCHELL:
We need to take a very quick break here. I’ll come back to wrap up with the Prime Minister.
(Advertisements)
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard, if I may, another couple of issues just quickly. Do you think it’s fair that people going to the football pay a GST on tickets, people going to the opera do not pay a GST on tickets?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they only don’t pay the GST on the tickets if those tickets are provided on a non-commercial basis.
MITCHELL:
But that, I’m told, is most of the major opera, ballet and symphony orchestras in the country.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it can apply to those but one of the reasons for this is that those bodies, along with many other bodies, are bodies that have what’s called a deductible gift recipient status. In other words, you can make tax deductible gifts to those organisations.
MITCHELL:
But is it fair?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well.
MITCHELL:
I mean if the average bloke going to the footy is paying GST arguably the toffier lot going to the opera are not paying GST.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in some cases they will, in some cases they won’t. The problem of separating something like the opera from the museum – they both have the same gift deductible status. If you apply the rule that you are implying ought to be applied to the opera, you’re going to have to do the same with the museum and you’re going to have GST charged on entries to museums.
MITCHELL:
But I’m just looking at is it fair?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well this is a ruling being made by the Tax Office and I mean obviously I’m going to have a look at the application of it but my first reaction is to say that it’s pretty hard to disaggregate opera from museum and I repeat, it only applies where the tickets are provided on a non-commercial basis. Whereas in the case of a football match, they’re not provided on a non-commercial basis and there is no gift deductible status applying to the people who run the football match or the cricket match for that matter.
MITCHELL:
The dollar, Mr Howard?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m not even going to comment on it indirectly.
MITCHELL:
What about the economy beginning next year?
PRIME MINISTER:
The economy’s running very well. We have the lowest unemployment for ten years.   We have a strong Budget surplus although you can never be certain about the precise size of that but it’s still quite strong. We have lower inflation. We have a very interesting report coming out from the ACCC later today which deals with the subject of petrol prices. It will be very interesting to see what the report has to say in relation to the impact of the new tax system.
MITCHELL:
You’ve got an idea obviously.
PRIME MINISTER:
It will be very interesting to see what it’s got to say.
MITCHELL:
Ah, you’ve got a leak on it.
PRIME MINISTER:
There’s no leak on it. I’m just drawing your attention and that of your listeners to the fact that there’s a report coming out.
MITCHELL:
Do you think it won’t be critical of the Government?
PRIME MINISTER:
Our position has always been that the reason petrol’s a very high, painfully high price now is the world price of oil and I don’t think anything in this report is likely to shake that.
MITCHELL:
Thank you very much. Are you going to survive this week – the Government?
PRIME MINISTER:
Neil, it’s been a difficult week but I look to the merits of it and I don’t believe the grounds exist for Mr Reith to leave the Government and I’m sticking by him.
MITCHELL:
Thank you very much, Prime Minister John Howard.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much.  This is a fantastic Paralympic Games. I mean I will say it now, I don't want any visitors from anywhere else to say it - it's the best Paralympics ever.  I really is wonderful the way in which Australia and Australians have supported the Paralympics, it is just fantastic.  And the crowds, the enthusiasm, the support and the energy, the encouragement that's been transmitted to all of our athletes at these Games has been something wonderful.  Janette and I had a ball at the Olympics, we're having a ball at the Paralympics.  The only thing we're troubled about is that it's sort of going to end eventually I mean . . . we don't sort of know what, we're going to have to go back to all those dreary things prime ministers have got to do.
But anyway, I haven't come here to make a long speech.  I just want to say that it is a fantastic event.  I said yesterday and I will repeat it here tonight, that I made a commitment after the Olympic Games that because everything had gone so well that we were going to put some extra financial resources behind our Olympic athletes, can I tell you that we are going to do exactly the same thing for our Paralympians.  
It really is, it really has been to me and to Janette an absolute inspiration.  It's been a highly competitive experience.  There are some wonderful stories behind each of the challenges you've all had.  And I've got to say that, I hope I put this right, I would like to believe after this experience I've learnt something and I am a better person that has a bit of an understanding of some of the challenges. And good on you, it's been a fantastic experience and I know that that focus is going to continue sort of as it is now and that is a great credit to all of you.  And tonight's performances and to be able to present some gold medals to Australian victors, it is quite an experience.  I've had some fantastic experiences as Prime Minister, but to hang a gold medal around the neck of an Australian winner takes some beating.
Thanks a lot.
[Ends] 


Subject: funding for Paralympics.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
WILKINS:
The Paralympics, Prime Minister, are they worth more money in terms of funding?
PRIME MINISTER:
They will get a funding increase just as we’ve promised the Olympians a funding increase, we’re going to do the same for the Paralympians.  We’re not going to treat them unfairly.  We’re going to give them the same generosity that we’re going to display towards the Olympians.
WILKINS:
Has that been disclosed to them yet?
PRIME MINISTER:
I discussed it with a number of their officials yes.  So, you know, if there’s an ‘X’ percent rise in the Olympic funding, we’re going to try and be reasonable and fair and generous to the Paralympians as well.
WILKINS:
An yet undisclosed amount?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, as yet undisclosed but I just wanted to make it plain that we are going to be even handed.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Janet.  Ladies and gentlemen, Janette and I are again very pleased indeed to support this magnificent breakfast which is about double or three times the size it was last year.  And it's a tremendous tribute to the organisers such as Janet, but it is also a token of the community's concern about the number one health threat to Australian women.  It's a recognition of the willingness of people to talk openly about the threat that cancer poses to the lives of so many Australians, particularly breast cancer to Australian women.  It's also a measure of the co-operation between the governments of Australia, the State Governments, large companies, medical researchers, doctors and most importantly of all, people who have suffered breast cancer. And the willingness of men and women increasingly in the modern Australian community to talk in a feeling, sensitive, communicative way about diseases that affect them, about illness and thereby impart to their fellow Australians a better understanding of what is needed to prevent illness occurring in the first place, of coping with it when it does touch you and then sharing the rehabilitation process.  And I think the willingness of so many people to do that is a very heartening thing indeed.
As Janet has said, one in eleven Australian women are touched by breast cancer.  In many cases it proves fatal, in an increasing number of cases it doesn't.  Early detection is of course absolutely essential and for a number of years now, governments at both a state and federal level have provided very strong support for screening processes which are designed to accelerate the process of early detection.  With a particular targeting of women in the 50 and over group, but of course not restricted to people in that age cohort.  And I am very pleased to announce that tomorrow we'll be relaunching a TV campaign at a cost of $2 million to advertise the screening programme and to bring to the  attention of all Australian women the importance of undergoing screening for breast cancer.
But all of these things are best tackled, not by just leaving it to the government, not by just leaving it to doctors and their patients, not just leaving it to great voluntary organisations, many of which are represented here today, but very importantly getting all of those groups working together.  The Government has a major ongoing role to play in relation to health and medical research.  That is why as a result of the recommendations of Peter Wills' committee, we are over the course of a period of years, doubling the amount of Federal Government funding going into health and medical research.  But we also need to enlist the aid of so many people in the community and that is what thrills me about a breakfast like this.  This is the outcome of the active interest and campaigning if you like and participation of some very public spirited people in the city of Sydney.  And I do congratulate you Janet, and all of those, and Sally Redmond and everybody else associated with the energy that's been put into organising this, because it's not just a breakfast and heaven knows to get 700 people at a breakfast on Monday morning in Sydney is a considerable achievement.  I've been to a lot of breakfasts . . .  we're all a bit slow on Monday morning.  Particularly if you've been cheering at Paralympics as I have, or doing all sorts of other things that the rest of you have been doing.  
But ladies and gentlemen, getting everybody together, making people feel that it's a community crusade, a community challenge and it's something you've got to talk about to understand and to deal with it, and that those who haven't been touched by it should have an understanding of the challenge for those who have and the extent to which those who have are willing to share their experiences provides those in the future who might be affected by it with a source of encouragement and hope and inspiration in a time of great personal trauma and difficulty.  And I can only say that my admiration for people who cope with this particular form of illness, overcome it, get on with their lives, continue to provide love and support to those around them, my admiration for them is absolutely unbounded.  And this breakfast as much as anything is a tribute to them and also a reminder that not everybody makes it and that can only intensify our determination as Australians, as a Government, as organisations, as individuals, as medical practitioners to do everything we humanly can to fight this terrible scourge within our community.  
I hope the Pink Ribbon Week is a huge success and I hope it further impresses upon the Australian community the importance of maintaining this very strong campaign against breast cancer.  Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: WTO ruling; ABC; Senator Trish Crossin.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………….
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, the World Trade Organisation’s ruling in favour of our sheep farmers is very good news.
PRIME MINISTER:
It’s very good news.  The first bit of international trade justice Australian farmers look like getting for a long time.  There is time for appeal by the Americans and they have that right and the thing won’t be finally resolved until December.  But the Government has always thought that the American position was wrong.  That’s why we fought so hard in the World Trade Organisation on behalf of Australian farmers.  And I’m keeping my fingers and toes crossed, as are farmers all around Australia, that at long last there may be a modicum of international trade justice for them.
JOURNALIST:
Would you urge The Americans not to bother with the appeal because they don’t have a very high success rate - appeals from the World Trade Organisation.
PRIME MINISTER:
The Americans play it very hard when it comes to trade.  They will appeal.  If they’ve got a right to appeal they will appeal and I hope that what has been provisionally given to the Australian lamb producers is kept.  It was always wrong, the imposition by the Americans.  We always thought it unfair and that’s why I’m so encouraged and I congratulate the Trade Minister Mark Vaile and his department on the work that they have done on behalf of Australia’s lamb producers.
JOURNALIST:
There is the vexatious matter of compensation.  Would you be……
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s too early for me to be talking  about that.  There is a process.  I respect that process.  And it’s in the interests of Australian lamb producers that I continue to respect that process.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, the cuts to the ABC’s news and current affairs budget aren’t going down too well in the bush.  Are they justified?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that is a matter you should question the ABC about.  We provide the ABC with a good budget and it’s up to the ABC as an independent broadcaster to decide how the money is allocated.  I was not at the board meeting, I was not consulted, and I shouldn’t be.  You really have to take that up with the ABC.  I’m not going sit in judgement on the independent authority of the ABC.
JOURNALIST:
On the issue of Trish Crossin [inaudible], what’s your understanding of that situation and do guidelines need tightening there?
PRIME MINISTER:
I know nothing more of that incident than what has been in the press and I don’t have any comment on it.
JOURNALIST:
Not another case where guidelines need to be looked at?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t have any comment on it.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think it was proper use of the car?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t have any comment on it.
JOURNALIST:
Is there any disquiet amongst the parliamentary Liberal Party backbench about just generally guidelines…..?
PRIME MINISTER:
Nobody has raised concerns with me.   Thank you.
JOURNALIST:
One last question.  On the trade matter, the process we appear to have had with this win, and if the appeal doesn’t succeed, that would go a long way do you think in silencing the critics about our involvement with the WTO on freeing up…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well one swallow doesn’t make a summer.  But it’ll be good, it’ll be really great because Australian farmers have had a terrible time on the international trade field for a long long time and it will encourage them to believe that there is a modicum of international trade justice.  Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Cleaner fuels. 
E&amp;OE  …………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Mr Nicolaides, Mr Greg Bourne, Wayne Swan the Federal Member, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
I guess it would be no overstatement to say that anything associated with fuel and the price thereof is very much in the news at the moment due to the escalating world price of crude oil and therefore it’s particularly relevant and apposite that at a time like this, this wonderful project that represents an investment by a number of major companies of $500 million should finally come to fruition.  And this project will make a massive contribution to the more environmentally friendly production of fuel in this country.  And it will be a very important good news story along the road towards cleaner, more environmentally friendly energy production in Australia.  
I guess all of us now are in one way or another environmentalists.  The concern for the environment is very much a mainstream issue for Australians, it’s no longer at the periphery of either political life or of the lives of individual Australians.  We all look to opportunities to ensure that we can do something in a way that’s a little more sensitive to the environment and I do congratulate all of the companies that have been involved in this project.  
It does involve the investment of $500 million to upgrade and expand the Bulwer Refinery.  It will produce an industrial gas plant to supply the refinery and industrial markets, a 32-megawatt co-generation plant.  Importantly always it will create 700 jobs during the construction phase and 25 new jobs at the expanded refinery.  And it’s going to lift production from 73,000 barrels to 88,000 barrels a day.  
It is very much another example of the ‘can-do’ nature of Australian business and that’s very important.  The capacity of Australian business to collaborate with each other, to do things in a technologically sophisticated fashion. That of course couldn’t occur without very skilled people.  It couldn’t occur without a willing, highly intelligent workforce.  And it couldn’t occur without intelligent, progressive management.  And as is always the case with successful, large projects you need a co-operative spirit between the management and the workforce and I know that that will be the case with this project and as it is with so many other projects that are brought to successful fruition in Australia.
Exciting developments are occurring in energy and transport with cleaner fuels and energy sources as well as transport coming on line.  And Australia is very well placed to be part of this global revolution and the Government will stand with business and communities in taking advantage of this.  One of the Government’s, might I say and this is always an opportunity for the odd reference to what the Government is doing, one of the Government’s proudest achievements is that we’re spending record amounts on reducing greenhouse gases and air pollution.  And it’s very important to draw your attention on an occasion where there’s a bit of focus on the successful introduction of the new taxation system which has resulted in the lower than expected CPI figure yesterday, I just mention that along the way if I may, that one of the elements of the agreement that the Government negotiated with the Australian Democrats were the setting aside of some hundreds of millions of dollars to support projects that will produce better environmental outcomes in the years ahead.  And that’s a very important element of the agreement that was made and we intend to honour that agreement because we treated seriously the concerns that they had and also the Government had in relation to environmental issues.
So can I say that I am delighted to have been invited to come here today because it’s a big investment, but it’s very much an investment in something that we all believe in and that’s clean fuel.  I congratulate the companies involved.  Large corporations, particularly large corporations in the energy business are easy targets for people, it’s easy to slag off against big companies, easy indeed.  And therefore when you find a prime example of those companies getting together to produce something for the common good but something that also happens to be commercially sensible it’s a remarkable double and it ought to be acclaimed and it ought to be respected for what it is.  All of the companies involved in this project are being very good corporate citizens in Australia and I want to say on behalf of the Government how much we thank them for their commitment.  We applaud the technological sophistication of the scientists and the industrial engineers that make these things possible and most importantly of course we applaud the calculated risk taking that’s always involved when you invest a few dollars and in this occasion it’s 500 million of those few dollars and that’s a big investment in anybody’s language.  It’s a good, it’s a good outcome for the country, it’s a good outcome for this part of Queensland and I have enormous pleasure in being here today and marking this remarkable project in the appropriate way.  Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Paralympics
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Helen. To the Leader of the Opposition, Kim Beazley, Senator Meg Lees, the leader of the Australian Democrats, the President of the Senate, the speaker of the House of Representatives, Greg Hartung, Tim Fisher, Lois Appleby and Dr. John Grant of the organising committee, if they're here, my Parliamentary colleagues, Jackie Kelly, the Minister for Sport, and most importantly of all our wonderful athletes. Welcome to all of you.
It's difficult at a time like this to sort of avoid that horrible feeling of gee it's all over and . the Paralympics are over what'll we do now? I want to say that the experience that Janette and I had, and I know that hundreds of thousands of Australians had at the Paralympics was quite extraordinary. These Sydney 2000 Paralympics have altered forever the perception of Paralympics around the world. They have changed forever any previous mind sets that people may have had. And I think what they have done for the cause of athletic competition amongst elite athletes in the context of the Paralympics is absolutely outstanding. And the way in which the Games were supported by the people of Australia, the tremendous exhilaration and excitement that the spectators experienced and the sheer delight and joy that I as one of those spectators, and I know many of you derived from participation in the achievement of our athletes is one of those things that will stay with me for the rest of my life.
It wouldn't have been possible of course to have enjoyed that experience and to have experienced that exhilaration without the tremendous effort and organisation that went into the Games. And there are so many people in whose debt we are because of that. The tremendous work done by the Australian Sports Commission and I acknowledge the presence here of both Jim and John, both of whom have played a magnificent role in both the Olympic Games and the Paralympics. The tremendous work of Greg Hartung and the inspirational leadership he's given to the Paralympic movement. And do you Paul the "Chef-de-mission" of the Australian Team, and we had an opportunity during the Games to share a meal with the athletes at the Village, and the relaxed atmosphere, the easy communication, the great sense of camaraderie that existed between the members of the team was a great tribute to the leadership that you showed throughout the entirety of the Games. 
But our athletes were superb. They did beat the rest of the world. They made Australia feel very proud. They gave intense pleasure, great entertainment and great competitive sport to the more than one million spectators who came along to support the Games. 
Let me say that we intend to do our bit as a Federal Government to maintain the momentum that has clearly come out of the Paralympics. I said after the Olympics Games at a not dissimilar function to this that we would be providing additional resources for elite sport and also to encourage some additional grassroots participation, over and above what had already been announced by the Government before the Olympic Games. Let me confirm tonight that we will do exactly the same thing in relation to the Paralympics. We don't intend to in any way lose the opportunity to build on the great spirit that has come out of these Games. 
It's very hard of course when you reflect on all the magnificent events you've seen. Janette says to me, that the sheer enthusiasm, the wheelchair rugby, was pretty good. I unfortunately could only attend the training session. But the swimming events, that magnificent experience on the middle Sunday night spending a couple of hours at the swimming venue and to see the venue totally packed and to see event after event producing sheer exhilaration and excitement. The tremendous performances, track and field. The unique experience of watching the sit down volleyball, a match between Australia and Bosnia Herzegovina. The wheelchair basketball. The volleyball. The list goes on. And all of it has left an indelible impression on millions of Australians. And it speaks volumes for the spirit, the determination, the effort and the striving to achieve and to succeed. And can I say to all of you, you've been an inspiration, you've given great joy, you've driven home the great sporting capacity and competitive spirit of the Australian people. You've done us proud, we thank you for the example you've set to the nation and to the world. And your contribution caps what has been a remarkable period of weeks in the experience and the life of the Australian nation. And your part in it is permanent and distinctive and will always be remembered by your fellow Australians.
Thank you
(ends) 


Subjects: Health and Fitness, Olympic Games, Parenting
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much to Lisa and her husband Grant Kenny, ladies and gentlemen. I wanted to launch this book for two reasons. The first is that I greatly admire the contributions that Lisa has made to Australian sport and also the contributions through her writings that she's made to lifting the level of national fitness. And the second reason I wanted to launch the book is that I have been struck by the paradox that has really emerged in the wake of such an enormous preoccupation, understandably so and properly so, with the Olympic Games, and that paradox is that we are in every sense of the word a great sports loving nation. I don't think anybody would contest that. We do have a passion for sport and we do have an identification with sport and it is one of the great levelers and one of great bonding agents of the Australian community. Yet on the other hand despite all of that we are a society, if you look at the statistics, that has at the very least a tendency to become lazier rather than more energetic. And it couldn't be more timely in the wake of the Olympic Games and the encouraging signs that they have encouraged people to become more actively involved, to have come on the market a book which is written in an understandable fashion, written in a way that parents can readily
relate to, which is really espousing the cause of fitness and physical activity, sporting endeavor and good health and healthy living habits amongst Australian children. The message is very well directed towards Australian parents.
Lisa has an unrivaled capacity to communicate it well and her background as a champion swimmer, her dedication and devotion along with her husband Grant to their three children, and the way in which she has held herself into promoting the cause of healthier lifestyles, , not only amongst children, but she has some very helpful hints for health amongst people of more mature years and she has taken the opportunity of communicating a few of those suggestions to my wife for passing onto me. And I am regular walker, she suggested perhaps I can walk even longer of a morning and if I didn't have so many radio interviews to do early in the morning I might walk an hour rather than half an hour every morning.
But anything that contributes towards Australians becoming more physically active has got to be a very good thing. I said when the Games finished that we wanted to encourage two things, we wanted to encourage elite sport because that is the flagship of our sporting endeavour and it is a very important part of that national psyche and you have always got to encourage excellence in whatever you do. But we also wanted to encourage grassroots participation and what is so good about this book is it's a very simple guide for parents in very practical things, packing school lunches, all of those things that as parents over the years we've had involvement with.   The routine involving physical activity, the diet that you have for your children, the balance of take away and prepared meals, all of those things are very important and parents know the value of that and it's increasingly important to use that old clich‚ in our ever increasingly busy lives - it is very important that we get the right balance and the right mix. And both as a sports woman, a champion one who did Australia proud not only at the Olympic Games but also and most particularly at Commonwealth Games, Lisa and of course her husband whose own participation in sport has been quite an achievement to - also quite legendary - she is in a quite special position to do it.
I read of course of that famous remark of Lisa's after Shane Gould had won so many medals at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich that she said that one day she would represent Australia at the Olympic Games and her teacher patted her on the head and said go on dreaming and she did and she not only dreamt but she also competed and trained. And one of the things that she took a very strong stand for was to have as much sports preparation be a joint endeavor of women and men and the idea that you should separate the training of women from the training of men was not a notion that she ever embraced, quite correctly taking the view that the more the training took place together the more competitive the athlete at the end of the process was.
I commend this book, I commend it to Australian parents. We need role models like Lisa to talk about these subjects because they talk about it from a perspective of achievement, they also talk about it from the perspective of being a dedicated parent and I can't think, in relation to children's health, I can't think of a better combination. Somebody whose in her own right a great athlete and a great sports star for Australians and also somebody who along with her husband puts the welfare of her children above everything else and that is a great role model for anything and for something like this, the fitness of children, it's the ideal role model.
So I have very great pleasure in launching "Fit Kids". It's very readable, it will be a very valuable contribution and it addresses this paradox, we are a sports loving nation but for a moment we shouldn't be complacent about the level of physical activity and the level of physical participation. And it starts with instilling good habits into children because if you don't do that it gets very hard to reverse bad habits later in life and Lisa's book will make a great contribution to that, I wish it well, I congratulate Harper Collins on deciding to publish it. I know it will be warmly received and widely read by Australian parents.
Thank you very much.
(ends)


Subjects: Centenary of Federation; federation, Canberra, Paralympics
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Senator Macdonald, Air Marshal Evans, the Chief Minister, the President of the Senate, Mr and Mrs Peter Henderson, ladies and gentlemen. May I commence my remarks by honouring the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which this building stands. And can I also compliment the Woden Valley Youth Choir as well as the Isabella Plains Primary School students for the magnificent rendition of Waltzing Matilda and the National Anthem and also the very evocative and relevant reminder of the debates that went on about the location of Australia's National Capital.
It is appropriate as we draw very close to the Centenary of Federation that we focus on all of those things that have contributed to the building of the Australian nation. Last night here in Canberra we honoured the Paralympians and that bought to an end an extraordinary two months in the life in the Australian nation. And it is a two months that wherever we live in Australia we will remember very fondly. But it also means that in terms of national observance we now turn our attention to the event that will run the whole year, commencing on the 1st of January next year, and the honouring of the Centenary of Federation will enable all of us, wherever we live, whatever our views may be on different issues, will enable all of us to honour the Australian achievement of the last one hundred years. And part of the Australian achievement has of course been the creation of Canberra as our national capital. It is a beautiful city, it is a city that does blend so many things as Senator Macdonald said. It's a city, of course, that first and foremost is seen by people around Australia as a centre of political fervour and activity but it is seen by the people as the Australian Capital Territory as their home and a very beautiful place in which to live and to raise their families.
This particular location has a special place in the history of Canberra. It was of course here that was originally constructed to view the construction of Lake Burley Griffin and it was on this veranda that one of my, indeed my most illustrious predecessors, inaugurated Lake Burley Griffin, or marked the completion of it in 1964 and in a few moment I will rededicate the plaque that was unveiled to mark Sir Robert Menzies' opening of Lake Burley Griffin back in 1964. But this is an event which reminds us of the importance of our history, it reminds us of a number of things about the Australian character and the Australian nation. As our young players told us only a few moments ago it's part of the Australian way to keep arguing and it's part of the Australian way to exchange vigorous points of view about political issues and long may it remain part of the Australian way because our capacity to do that with relative good humour, even in the most robust of circumstances, is one of the reasons why we have achieved such stability and such cohesion as a nation. There has always been rivalry between different parts of Australia, it's very much, I suppose, the yeast of the national existence and there's nothing wrong with that. Competitive federalism is alive and well as we have seen over the past few days in relation to some commercial rivalries between different states of Australia, that's why you have a federation. You have a federation to allow that kind of thing to happen but also to express the collective national will and there is nothing inconsistent with having a strong sense of regional identity, which Australians have, but at the end of the day recognising that we are Australians above everything else. And Canberra is a reminder of that.
In the time that I have been a Member of Parliament, which now stretches back to 1974, I have seen many changes. I have seen of course the opening of the now well established Parliament House and I was reflecting last night as I dined with the Paralympians at the Old Parliament House that some 14 years of my existence as a Member of Parliament was there and some 12-13 years in the new building. I have seen the opening of the new High Court and the dedication of many other, the gallery, and many other very important buildings. And this is the latest very important edifice to the spirit and the character of Canberra. And in the centenary year we will of course dedicate the National Museum. As I look back over those years and particularly over the last four and a half years there have been many examples of the commitment of the Government to building Canberra to even greater splendour as our National Capital.
Ladies and Gentlemen I congratulate Air Marshal Evans and the members of his authority on the leadership that they have displayed in cooperation with my ministerial colleague Ian Macdonald. I think this facility and that fact that it attracts I understand something like 330,000 visitors a year, I think it's a reminder of the growing interest of people in Canberra. The droves of school children who come through Parliament House and it's always an enjoyable experience for Members of Parliament to spend a few moments with them and to hear them talk excitedly of the different places they have visited in the national capital is a reminder to all of us of the special affection that so many people hold for the city of Canberra and for the Australian Capital Territory.
Ladies and Gentlemen I thank the authority and the Minister for inviting me to perform the honours today and if somebody hands me a pair of the traditional scissors I shall have great pleasure in cutting the ribbon.
[ends]


Subjects: Strike in Victoria; COAG meeting; petrol prices; banks; education funding; Fiji.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard good morning.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL:
Now these wildcat unionists are blaming your industrial laws for this power strike.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they always do that. Unionists always blame Liberal governments. This is happening under Mr Bracks’ government. Instead of giving us opportunistic grandstanding lectures on the price of petrol, Mr Bracks should be looking after his own backyard. Instead of stunting on the national stage he should be worrying about what is occurring in his own state. I have no doubt that unions in Victoria regard the Bracks Government as a much softer touch than the former government and Mr Bracks should tend to his own affairs, do something that he can have an influence on rather than grandstand about petrol prices. And to suggest that it’s due to our laws is quite ridiculous.
MITCHELL:
Well it’s what the unions are saying. They’re saying that because the negotiating period’s being cut.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they always say that. I mean unions always blame Liberal governments because Liberal governments stand up for free choice in the workplace rather than handing over monopoly bargaining positions to unions. This has been a long running difference of opinion. All over Australia in the last four-and-a-half years under my Government we’ve had record low levels of industrial disputes in Australia, record low levels. You look at different states of Australia: New South Wales has fewer strikes than does Victoria even though it has a Labor government. One of the reasons for that is that the Labor government in that State is not regarded as quite as soft a touch as Victorian Labor governments always have been.
MITCHELL:
So you think that the Victorian people are in for a tough time?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well can I say I hope not and I sympathise with what the Victorian people are going through at the moment. In a modern economy, I mean this seems absolutely absurd to me, a nation that has just pulled off one of the great achievements of our age and that is running in a superbly efficient way the Games should have to put up…..if the citizens in the second largest city should have to put up with this kind of inconvenience. I mean it really is an affront to commonsense.
MITCHELL:
Is there anything your government can do? You do run the industrial relations system.
PRIME MINISTER:
This is the behaviour of a union which regards the industrial climate in the state of Victoria as being more benign. I’m not seeing this kind of thing happening in other parts of Australia. So to suggest that it’s in some way related to the national industrial relations scene is ridiculous. Mr Bracks should spend more time dealing with these sorts of issues than giving pious lectures in a politically opportunistic way to me about petrol prices, although I acknowledge that petrol prices are too high. They’re too high because the world price of oil has gone up.
MITCHELL:
It seems as if you think the Victorian unions are rabid.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they have a record over the years and it’s got a lot to do with the historic fallouts from the break up of the Labor Party years ago and the fact that Labor governments in Victoria have always been more compliant to unions than Labor governments in other parts of the country. That’s an historical fact.
MITCHELL:
What can Steve Bracks do about this? I mean it’s a wildcat strike, the union movement condemned it, the union leadership’s condemned it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I say one of the reasons why I think you’re going to get more of these sorts of things is that the union movement in Victoria senses it has a more compliant government.
MITCHELL:
But this isn’t the union movement. It’s a wildcat strike.
PRIME MINISTER:
But Neil it’s a well understood fact that the behaviour of individual parts of the union movement often reflects a broad union view of the attitude of a government towards the union movement. I mean this government is regarded as more benign and accommodating towards the union movement than was its predecessor, and than is some Labor governments in other parts of Australia. And in those circumstances it’s not surprising that you get this kind of conduct.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard you’re setting a scene for an interesting meeting with the Premiers today. I mean in the first five minutes you’ve taken Steve Bracks’ head off. What sort of atmosphere are you going to have in that meeting?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’m just making the point that over the last 48 hours all we’ve heard from Mr Bracks is opportunistic lecturing on petrol prices. I mean he knows and every Premier, Labor or Liberal, knows that the price of petrol is high in Australia because the world price has doubled over the last 18 months. That’s why it’s high and they’re being quite opportunistic. They never acknowledged that. I mean what they’re asking for is that the February indexation adjustment be frozen. Now if you did that, the impact of that on the price of petrol would be less than two cents a litre. I can’t imagine the Australian motorist, although they would like that, they would like petrol to be on average always two cents a litre cheaper, they wouldn’t see that as solving the problem. They want a reduction of 5, 10, or 15 cents a litre and you’re only going to get that if you have a fall in the world price and that adjustment of less than two cents a litre would cost on a full year basis up to $600 million. And all I’m saying is that the Premiers all know this and hitting Canberra on petrol is an easy political mark.
MITCHELL:
It’s a very important one [inaudible].
PRIME MINISTER:
It is a very important one and I am very conscious of that, but I also have a responsibility not to give in to opportunistic calls. I also have the responsibility to devote resources to other very important things. This country for example has to put a lot more money into defence. We have to put more money into roads.
MITCHELL:
Do you expect that your promise that petrol prices would not go up as a result…..petrol tax would not….
PRIME MINISTER:
No I said….what the commitment was that the price of petrol need not rise as a result of the GST.
MITCHELL:
Do you expect it has?
PRIME MINISTER:
Not as a result of the GST. I expect it’s risen because the world price of oil has gone up quite dramatically.
MITCHELL:
Do you think that you’re getting $2 billion extra in unexpected….
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t expect that for a moment. We are getting some additional revenue because….
MITCHELL:
How much?
PRIME MINISTER:
It would be several hundred million dollars, no more.
MITCHELL:
Well why not give that…..
PRIME MINISTER:
Well hang on. We’re getting that but in addition we for quite legitimate reasons have to pay out more money for the tax rebate on the private health insurance membership because that policy has been more successful, far more successful than we anticipated. We will be paying out $600 million more to the retired people of Australia under the retired persons savings rebate under the new tax system. In other words there’ll be $600 million more available than we anticipated for retired people. Now those two items together are about $1 billion. Now there may be some contras on the other side. We may find when we do our mid year adjustment there could be some revenue increases in other areas. I don’t know the final figures. But I do know this, that you can’t just isolate the several hundred million dollars more you’re going to collect in Resources Rent Tax because of the higher petrol prices without also taking into account the fact that we have to outlay additional monies on the other side of the Budget. Now, …
MITCHELL:
Look, I’ll just quote you some of the commentators. Terry McCrann claims that John Howard’s claim the Budget can’t afford a freeze on petrol excise tax is utter nonsense. Utter nonsense fiscally. That is what a lot of commentators …
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I can only … I mean, that is rhetorical comment.
MITCHELL:
Well he goes into detail.
PRIME MINISTER:
I’m going into detail. Neil, I know that the price of petrol is very high at the moment. It is very high because the world price of oil has gone up and I can’t change that. Steve Bracks can’t change that. Nobody can change that in this country. You could have a small cut in the price of petrol at a very high cost to the Budget. I suggest to you that the motorists of Australia would not regard a reduction of less than two cents a litre in the price of petrol as being a satisfactory answer to the problem. I suggest to you that most people listening to this program would say, well if the Government really wants to make a big impact it’s got to cut it by at least five cents a litre. That would involve about $1.7 billion. Can I also suggest to you that at the present time to run down the Budget surplus at all, and certainly to any significant degree, is probably going to put upward pressure on interest rates. It is probably not a smart thing to do in the eyes of the currency markets. I mean, I’ve got to take all of these things into account. I know how critical people are of the price of petrol and I have to say I think all of the Premiers with one exception, the Premier of South Australia, have behaved in a completely opportunistic way on this issue.
MITCHELL:
(inaudible) discussions around petrol today at the Premiers’ Conference just a waste of time?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have always said that this is not the forum to raise it.
MITCHELL:
But you agreed to discuss it today.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s always been possible for the Premiers to raise it if they want to. But over the last 48 hours you’ve seen the most shallow, opportunistic campaign on this issue. They know, they are intelligent men, I give them full credit for that, they know that the world price of oil is the driver of high petrol prices. I heard one Premier yesterday say well don’t start linking the world price of crude oil with the price of petrol in Australia. I mean that is the reason why you have to link it.
MITCHELL:
But these same intelligent men are saying that you have got an extra $2 billion as a result of the excise increase and also the Rent Resources Tax.
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I tell you that is absolutely wrong.
MITCHELL:
Even with the Resource Tax?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. When you say excise, you mean over and above what was in the Budget?
MITCHELL:
Two billion.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, well that is just wrong.
MITCHELL:
What do you reckon? Several hundred million?
PRIME MINISTER:
It is much closer to $500 million.
MITCHELL:
Can’t we have that back?
PRIME MINISTER:
But what about the $1.1 billion extra I’ve got to find for the private health insurance rebate and the savings ..
MITCHELL:
Are you going to have a surplus?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I would expect, well I’ll tell you what, we need a surplus.
MITCHELL:
But $500 million’s not going to make a difference to the surplus is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
No hang on. We need to have a substantial surplus to repay debt. And incidentally the surplus doesn’t sit in the bank. The surplus doesn’t sit in the bank. The surplus is used to repay debt. So every time you generate a surplus you don’t waste it or dissipate it. It doesn’t moulder in the bank. It is used to repay debt. Neil, if we don’t have a solid surplus, we’ll be marked down by the foreign exchange markets and that …
MITCHELL:
Is it that fragile? Does it come down to $500 million or $1 billion and they’ll decide on that basis whether to trash the dollar?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, they don’t just decide but all of these things are building blocks in a perception. Now the perception of Australia at the moment is that we have a strongly growing economy, which we do, we have low inflation, we have a very progressive Government in terms of economic reform but there has been upward pressure on interest rates and its always been in my mind the most important responsibility of the Government, economically, apart from generating jobs and we’ve done a very good job of that, to keep pressure off interest rates. What the Premiers are really advocating is just sort of political opportunism. It’s an easy hit.
MITCHELL:
OK.
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I just say one other thing Neil? If we have some additional resources and we have, not because of petrol but because of other factors, additional resources, I think the Australian public would rather see them invested in something of long-term value such as additional roads. Certainly they want additional resources spent on defence, people want additional resources devoted to science, people want additional resources devoted, as we’re going to, to tackling the problem of salinity and water quality.
MITCHELL:
The point of it is, it’s unequivocal. There will be no reduction or drop in the excise in February.
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
MITCHELL:
And if there’s money to be spent, it will be spent in other areas.
PRIME MINISTER:
We have no intention of doing that because we don’t think in the long-term that is going to make any appreciable impact on the price of petrol. What is needed to secure relief in that area is a reduction in the world price of crude oil. That is the reason for the current controversy and I put a far higher priority on things like – if we have the capacity – things like road funding. Certainly we are committed to putting extra resources into defence.
MITCHELL:
But Mr Howard, that sounds to me like you are gathering the war chest and that we get to election time and we’ll have money for roads, and we’ll have spending on …
PRIME MINISTER:
When you say I’m gathering the war chest, I’m, Neil, I’m damned if I do, I’m damned if I don’t. You ask me a question. I equivocate and I don’t give you and your listeners some idea of my priorities, I’m accused of being secretive. Then when I try and give you an order of magnitude, if we have the capacity, I’m accused of gathering a war chest. Look, it’s not as crass as gathering a war chest. I happen to think that spending money on national infrastructure is very important. I happen to believe …
MITCHELL:
Do you know people are saying, critics are saying, you’re doing that so you can buy an election. Collect all this money, don’t give us a petrol excise cut, then buy an election.
PRIME MINISTER:
But they are people who’ve been calling for additional road spending for a long time. You’ve questioned me on your program.
MITCHELL:
Yep, sure.
PRIME MINISTER:
You campaigned very hard – what the Geelong Freeway.
MITCHELL:
Yes.
PRIME MINSITER:
You’ve asked me about the Scoresby Freeway, you’ve asked me about a whole lot of things on your program. You’ve been doing that for two years. You haven’t been doing it in the shadow of an upcoming election. People have been asking for additional commitment in areas like roads for a long time. I’m not saying we can doing any of these things. I’m just trying to paint for you and your listeners a picture.
MITCHELL:
OK, if we make a couple of quick calls and see what’s the reaction to what you said. Rhonda go ahead please. Quickly.
CALLER:
Very quickly. I am a Liberal voter. I won’t be any more because I think everything you have said is a load of tripe. I have got a small business. GST. We are no better off. I don’t care what you say. Petrol is absolutely disgusting. You say unemployment, the economy is better. It’s not. What about the 45 year old that can’t get unemployment benefits that are out of work?
MITCHELL:
OK Rhonda.
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t think she is a Liberal voter, but anyway.
MITCHELL:
Another call. John, go ahead please.
CALLER:
Good morning Neil, Mr Howard. Mr Howard, do you know how much a litre of petrol costs or better still a litre of diesel.
PRIME MINISTER:
Of course I do, I see it every day. It varies. In Queensland it’s about nine cents a litre cheaper than what it is in Victoria. The weighted average capital city price is about 91.3 cents a litre, according to the latest Shell website. It’s nine cents a litre cheaper in Brisbane than it is in the other States and that is because the Queensland Government subsidises the price of petrol and one of the observations I’ve made in the face of the calls of Mr Bracks and others is that if the States believe it is such a problem why don’t they just dip into their budgets and subsidise it like Queensland does.
MITCHELL:
That’s an interesting point. Peter Costello’s saying Steve Bracks could drop the price . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
He could if he wanted by . . . he could because the States apart from Queensland have at their disposal under the new arrangement about $1.6 billion that they could use to cut the price of petrol. Now they have chosen to give higher priority to other things. Now I am not necessarily criticising them for doing that but they’ve got a nerve saying that I shouldn’t have that same freedom, haven’t they?
MITCHELL:
To other things, the National Australia Bank, profit eight record profits on the trot, would you ever look at regulating them to force them to provide a basic cheap service?
PRIME MINISTER:
We don’t like that sort of regulation because it doesn’t in the long run work. But I would have to echo the concern that a lot of people expressed that banks sometimes don’t understand the perception of the community that charges are going up at the time when they’re making big profits. Australian banks are profitable.
MITCHELL:
This is very profitable. Closing branches, putting people . . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
I understand and I would have to echo the warning of others to the banks about that. I am not a regulation man, I don’t like regulation because it’s costly and it doesn’t work.
MITCHELL:
They haven’t listened to you have they?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well some of them I have to acknowledge that I was told by one of the banks, the ANZ several years that they weren’t going to have any more closures. I remember having a meeting with the Chairman in Melbourne. And I saw John Macfarlane the Managing Director on the 7.30 Report last night make that point and I have to agree with him, to my understanding the ANZ has kept its word in relation to that. Now I am not kind of necessarily singling the ANZ out for particular praise but let’s give it credit where credit is due. The banks do have to if I can use that biblical expression heal themselves a bit on this. They’ve got to exercise some discipline, internal discipline. I’m, as somebody who is fundamentally against regulation, I really don’t like regulation because I don’t think it works, I do ask the banks to understand that there is a lot of anger in the community about these charges. I don’t want them to not be profitable, I think profitable banks is good for the country because it means our deposits are safe and it’s in our interests to have profitable financial institutions, but they’ve got . . . I’ve got to deal with perceptions, I mean I’ve just spent twenty minutes dealing with both the reality and the perceptions of petrol prices, that’s part of my daily job you have to and can I say to the banks they have to as well. And I say that with good will, not with malice.
MITCHELL:
Okay, Westpac profit later today.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes.
MITCHELL:
David Kemp – how is this possible that he’s threatened to cut . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I’ve had a look in . . .
MITCHELL:
Public schools in Victoria if he doesn’t get to open them?
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I say that I have examined this and there was an agreement that was entered into back when the Labor, Federal Labor Government was in power that where the federal government provided money there would be some acknowledgement of the federal government’s role in the spending of that money. And I understand that the thing is being sorted out with Victoria. We don’t want to withhold funds but on the other hand we don’t think it’s reasonable that if we make money available the state government claims all the credit for spending it.
MITCHELL:
What’s more important, the result or . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think you’ll find in Victoria the result is that it will happen and I think you need commonsense on both sides, but that also involves the Victorian Government not claiming credit for something it hasn’t done.
MITCHELL:
But Prime Minister how petty is this?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well . . .
MITCHELL:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in the end can I say I, I mean I want them . . . the money will flow and commonsense will prevail.
MITCHELL:
And flow regardless of whether David Kemp will . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
The money will flow.
MITCHELL:
You agree it was petty?
PRIME MINISTER:
No look . . .
MITCHELL:
For the Minister to say they couldn’t have the money to do things it did need unless he got credit?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well what he’s told me is different from that.
MITCHELL:
I’ve seen the letter, have you?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have been told, I have been told that it started when the Victorian Government sought to claim credit for something it hadn’t done that’s what I’ve been told.
MITCHELL:
“I’ve determined to reduce the allocation unless I get an assurance official openings are being arranged and they’ll be held in a reasonable timeframe.”
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I understand that but I also ask you to accept that if a state government gets money from the federal government and then claims it’s made it available that’s misleading isn’t it?
MITCHELL:
Sure but I think the children . . .
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look in the end.
MITCHELL:
Are more important than the politicians.
PRIME MINISTER:
In the end getting the money to the children is not only more important than the sensitivities of either state or federal governments, it is, I agree with that completely. And in the case of Victoria I will ensure that it happens.
MITCHELL:
Thank you. Fiji, what’s happened over night will Australia be involved?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well not directly, I can’t see that occurring but it’s very disturbing. It does appear that the forces loyal to the government have re-established control, lost perhaps 11 lives on both sides. It’s a reminder of what happens when you encourage mutiny. It’s also a reminder that the stance that we have taken regarding the jury as still being out on a return to democracy in Fiji is also valid. It’s a very unhappy country but as Alexander Downer said last night once you sanction by your passivity the use of armed force to throw out a constitutionally elected government you create a huge problem.
MITCHELL:
We’ll take one more quick call for the Prime Minister. Alex, quickly please?
CALLER:
Hello Mr Howard?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes Howard?
CALLER:
I just think, I don’t know who’s advising you but you coming on the radio this morning and attacking Steve Bracks the way you have you’re attacking all of the Victorians and I don’t think you’ll gain any extra support in Victoria by the way you’ve come on the radio today. All it’s been is bagging us, bagging our education system and I think it’s really unfortunate. You’re supposed to be our Prime Minister uniting our country but you’re sort of dividing the Victorians against everybody else.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that assumes that every Victorian agrees with Mr Bracks and I mean look let’s be realistic Alex I mean Mr Bracks has been giving lectures instead of looking at his own patch.
MITCHELL:
Mr Howard thanks for your time. You’re going to the Melbourne Cup?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, Parliament’s sitting unfortunately.
MITCHELL:
Derby tomorrow?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I’ve got unfortunately a longstanding Liberal Party commitment in Sydney. I can’t, much and all as I like sport, I can’t attend every sporting event.
MITCHELL:
Thank you very much for your time.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you Abraham.  Kerry Chikarovski the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, Shane Stone, the National President of the Liberal Party, Tony Staley, my Parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals.
Once again I'm delighted to address this annual convention of the New South Wales Liberal Party.  And it's an opportunity to reflect on what's happened over the last year and it's also a chance a year out from the next election to throw ahead and project the challenges that lie in front of the Government as it nears the fifth anniversary of its election in March of 1996.  
The last twelve months has been a truly momentous period of time at a national political level.  We have seen the successful introduction of the largest systemic economic change that this country has had since World War II. And all of the forebodings of doom and despair and disaster that came from our political opponents, all of the hand-wringing, all of the desperate hoping and praying that the tax system would be a disaster and thus confer political advantage on the Australian Labor Party of course came to nought.  It's almost a year since Kim Beazley told the Federal ALP Caucus that they could surf to victory on the back of public discontent over the new taxation system.  That really says more about him and about the Labor Party than it does about the Australian people.  It indicates a negative mindset, it indicates an unwillingness to present to the Australian public an alternative.  And it's a metaphor for the negative, uninspired alternative government that Australia has at the present time. 
This Government has been since the moment of its election an active, reformist government.  We have taken the view that the privilege of office is never to be squandered.  We've taken the view that when you are given the great privilege of office in this country you use that to do good things in the time available for all of the people of Australia.  And over the last four and a half or more years, we have seen a very significant strengthening of the Australian economy.  We are now enjoying the highest levels of employment for more than ten years.  We've generated more than 800,000 jobs.  We've cut the unemployment rate to a level of 6.3%.  We've cut the youth unemployment rate to its lowest level for more than ten years.  We've boosted the productivity of the Australian workforce.  We've increased the real incomes of Australian working men and women.  We've introduced successfully against tremendous opposition, even political sabotage from our political opponents, a major overhaul of the Australian taxation system.
But we haven't been a government only focused on economic reform.  Of all the pieces of persistent political misinformation that is spread by our political opponents and others who seek to bring us undone politically, is the claim that we are only interested in an economic agenda - we are not.  We are certainly committed to maintaining the economic strength of this country.  We are certainly committed to repaying in full the $80/90 billion of government debt that we inherited from Mr Beazley and we are well on the road to doing that.  We now have one of the lowest government debt to GDP ratios of any country in the world, a marvellous base for further growth and expansion in the twenty-first century.
But we are a government that has a broader horizon than just economic reform.  We have never seen economic reform as an end in itself.  You want a strong economy to improve the lives and the wellbeing of Australians and their families.  You want a strong economy to generate jobs.  You want a strong economy to create greater family and individual opportunities.  And economic achievement and economic efficiency is never an end in itself, it is only a way of delivering the great social and human dividends of higher employment, more contented families and individuals enjoying greater and ever broadening personal opportunities.  
And as I look back over the last four and a half years, I can reflect on some of the great non-economic achievements of the Government.  And in an area such as the environment that the Labor Party once pretended was its alone to claim and to talk about, the environmental credentials of the Coalition Government have been impressive indeed.  And yesterday we went a great step further.  The really important thing that was discussed yesterday was the Federal Government's initiative to tackle what in my opinion is the biggest single environmental challenge we face and that is the problem of salinity and water quality.  And unless something is done about salinity we face a deteriorating economic base.  We face a progressive retreat of the farm sector.  We face in twenty years time unless something is done about water quality, the truly astonishing proposition that in three out of five days the people of Adelaide will not have water fit for human consumption, an absolutely disgraceful prospect for a modern industrialised country such as Australia.  And the commitment at the instance of the Commonwealth and as a result of Commonwealth leadership, the commitment of the Federal Government and all of the State and Territory Governments to a $1.4 billion plan over the next seven years to isolate and begin developing appropriate responses in twenty catchment areas around Australia to deal with the problem of salinity represents the most consolidated attempt yet by any government, federal or state to tackle this problem.  
And this initiative my friends builds on many other environmental initiatives of the Government.  It builds on the Natural Heritage Trust.  It builds on the Regional Forest Agreements that we have progressively negotiated, sometimes with little co-operation from State Governments, but on other occasions with their enthusiastic help.  And it all adds up over a period of four and a half years to a government that is active and committed and in a very practical way to the improvement of the Australian environment.  
But of course it is not only in areas such as the environment where the Government's credentials of a non-economic kind, rather of a broader national kind, have been very much on display.  And over the weeks ahead you will see revealed by the Government its thinking and its long-range plans in relation to that area which is always the first responsibility of any national government and that is the defence of Australia.  In December we will release a white paper on defence policy.  That white paper will be the outcome of the most fundamental re-examination for decades of the security environment in which Australia now finds herself.  Australia's defence priorities and the capabilities required to meet those priorities.  It will build amongst other things on the lessons that we have learnt from the ADF deployment in East Timor.  Especially the need for Australia to be able to respond to the many contingencies that might arise in our immediate neighbourhood.  As part of its preparation of this white paper the Government has undertaken a process of public consultation and a group of Australian citizens led by Andrew Peacock, a former Opposition Leader and minister and former very distinguished Australian Ambassador to Washington, that public consultation has formed a major part of the input to the preparation of the white paper.  And the Defence Minister Mr Moore will release the results of that public consultation during the course of the coming week.
The Government does set a very high priority on maintaining a strong defence capability.  We do need as a nation to spend more money on defence.  The white paper will indicate the degree of additional financial commitment that Australia will make to the defence of this country and the security of the neighbourhood in which we live.  It is the first priority of government and it is always the first responsibility of any government to ensure that the defence forces are not only appropriate to deal with the great unlikelihood of a direct assault upon Australia but also to make a contribution to greater stability and a more secure strategic environment in the area in which we live.  
And we have been reminded not only in relation to East Timor, but also in relation to what has occurred in Fiji and the Solomon Islands that we do live in a less stable part of the world than we might otherwise have thought.  And that does require an intelligent response.  It won't be a threatening response but it will be a response that will deliver a sense of continuity and stability and security and standing to the role of Australia in our region.  We have already in the defence area done quite a lot this year.  We have made a number of announcements to enhance the role of the Reserves.  We have improved the employment security of people who serve in the Reserves, thus meeting one of the frequently stated criticisms of past policy of governments in relation to Australia's defence reserves.  And we are also proposing legislation to enable the deployment of reserves overseas, thus reversing a long-term previous policy.  We have extended the principle of mutual obligation to include reserve service.  And when the White paper is released in December we will have in front of us as a nation, one of the most carefully prepared and thorough going assessments of the defence and strategic environment in which Australia finds itself but also in a very consistent and credible way the response that we propose to those circumstances.  
And that White paper will be yet another element of a broad ranging approach by this Government to the many problems that face Australia, the many opportunities and the many challenges.  In about a year's time an election is due.  And we will need all of our campaigning muscle and every sinew of political effort to secure re-election.  Winning elections are never easy and this will be our third attempt to secure a favourable result.  And it will be a challenge.  I have no doubt that we have both in the personnel of our existing sitting members here in New South Wales but also the candidates that we will assemble in the marginal seats that we hope to win from Labor, and there are a number here in New South Wales, that represent real opportunities, I am sure we have high quality men and women.  And I want to tell you, the rank and file of the membership of the Liberal Party here in New South Wales what an outstanding Federal Parliamentary team you have in Canberra.  In depth and quality the men and women who hold the marginal seats and those who hold the less marginal seats.  And I want to thank them and all of my federal parliamentary colleagues for the tremendous support and loyalty that they have given to me over the last twelve months.  
We have come a long way in the last year.  In many senses, the last year has been a time in which any doubt that anybody may have had that this Government was going to make a lasting contribution to changing for the better the way in which Australia operated was removed.  There are always out there, some of those people who wondered about the wisdom of tackling something like taxation reform.  There were many who crossed their fingers and held their breath when we took taxation reform to the last election.  There were many who rather skeptically said well you may have won the election but you will never get it through the Parliament.  And there were others who said well you might have got it through the Parliament with a few changes, but the public will never accept it.  Well the Australian public did accept it and the reason the Australian public accepted it was because it fulfilled those two essential conditions of any fundamental reform and that is we were able to persuade the Australian people that it was good for their country and we were able to satisfy them of its fundamental fairness.  And the reality is that the reception of the tax system changes have been much better than even the most optimistic of us imagined.  
That doesn't mean that there aren't challenges in relation to the detailed implementation, it doesn't mean that some fine tuning in relation to that won't be undertaken.  But all of the doom and disaster predicted by the Labor Party simply didn't come to fruition and we now have this pathetic situation from our political opponents that they have a policy they dare not mention.  And that policy is Rollback.  It was exposed by John Della Bosca for the fraud that it was.  And you now have the unbelievable situation that Kim Beazley knows that John Della Bosca was right but he is unable to say so.  And you now have the situation where rollback is there but you can't talk about it.  It's a policy that dare not speak its name.  But it is there, I promise you it's there.  And I promise you that if Labor wins they will implement it.  And if there is one thing that the small business community wants like the proverbial hole in the head, it's rollback.  Because rollback will add confusion.  Rollback will undermine the improvements of the new taxation system.  Rollback will create inequity.  Rollback will discriminate against small business and rollback will be resented and rejected by the small business community of Australia.  That is why the Labor Party dare not speak its name.  Yet Mr Beazley is unable to do the honest decent thing and repudiate it because it will represent a final policy humiliation of him and will represent the vindication of the man in the Labor Party, John Della Bosca, who was sacked for telling the truth about Labor's federal taxation policy. 
So ladies and gentlemen, we have ahead of us a very challenging year.  We have achieved a lot together, we cannot afford to relax and I promise you we have no intention of doing so.  In the modern political and economic environment the reform process is never over.  You have to keep going, otherwise you go backwards.  And in the twelve months ahead of us we will be unveiling further policies and further reform agendas.  And I have outlined some of the thinking that will lie behind the Defence White paper, so important to our future, which will be released in December.
Finally can I say to you that I can't win the next election on my own.  I can't win it without the support of all of my federal parliamentary colleagues not only here in New South Wales but around Australia.  And we cannot win it without your help.  I have always regarded the link between the parliamentary party and the organisation as absolutely essential to our political success.  When it is close and productive we win, when it is distant and ineffective we lose.  And it is important that the organisation here in New South Wales play a major role.  It's important that your efforts be directed outwards and not inwards over the next twelve months.  It's important that your efforts focus on defeating the Labor Party and nobody else.  It's important that your effort remembers that in politics you cannot achieve anything unless you win political office and have the opportunity of implementing the philosophy and acting according to the values that you hold dear.
We won a great victory in 1996.  Against significant political odds we won again in 1998.  We have kept faith with the commitments we made in 1998 and we have taken the agenda even further.  And we will offer once again in the next election a real agenda for continuing reform and improvement for Australia and we will be able to contrast ourselves with a Labor Party that is obsessed indeed, mired in negativism and seeks only to win political support through relying on the negative reaction of the public to either adversity from elsewhere or the inevitable difficulty in the short term of introducing major change.
I have a lot of faith that the Australian people will see through that.  I have a lot of faith that the Australian people will in the end give us credit for having a go.  For trying to do the right thing against difficult odds for the long-term future of Australia.  But we can't just rely on that faith we have to match it with a lot of hard work, a lot of unity, a lot of discipline and lot of cooperative effort between the parliamentary party and the organisation.  
I warmly thank you again, it's always a special personal privilege for me to address a gathering of the New South Wales division of the Liberal Party with which I have had such a close personal association all of my adult life.  I warmly thank you, I am greatly in your debt for past help and past loyalty.  I look forward to its continuation over the next year.  Thank you.
QUESTION:
[Petrol prices and fuel excise]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I will deal very directly with that question that the reason for a high fuel price is the doubling of the world price of crude oil.  It is not the GST.  If it hadn't been for the doubling of the world price of crude oil this issue would not be on the national political agenda.  It is the reality that the doubling of the world price is causing the difficulty.  If the indexation in February is deferred the impact on the price of petrol will be less than two cents a litre which you will appreciate could easily be devoured by subsequent fluctuations in the world price of oil.  It would involve in a full year almost 600 million dollars on an ongoing basis and it wouldn't just be for one year because you will have had an impact on the revenue base.  It is not an easy situation, I acknowledge that but I don't see merit in the proposition given the other responsibilities of the government and I wasn't joking when I said we would have to put more resources into defence and I don't mean $50 million more a year I mean a lot more and we have a lot of other responsibilities.  We have a lot of requests for additional road funding and that is something I think is important and we have a lot of other areas of request.  The other thing we have to make absolutely certain is that we don't run down the budget surplus.  If we do that we will exert upward pressure on interest rates and I can't think of anything that would be less welcome in rural Australia at the present time than interest rates that are higher than they might otherwise be.  They are lower now than they were but I would not want to do anything as Prime Minister to exert upward pressure on interest rates.  And when you take all of those things together that is the explanation for the government's position.  
Now we have seen over the last week the most blatantly opportunistic cooperative stunt from all of the State premiers with the exception of one and I single out John Olsen, the South Australian Premier who took a rather broader national view on the subject and quite rightly said that salinity was more important than political grandstanding.  Nobody likes high petrol prices.  I understand the unpopularity of them in rural Australia, indeed in metropolitan Australia.  But it is due to the world price having been doubled and I think anybody who puts a contrary view is simply misstating the truth.  If the world price had not doubled we would not be debating the matter this morning, we would not have discussed it yesterday.  It's not because of the GST, it's because the world price has doubled.
  QUESTION:
[Government funding for science and information technology]
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, okay.  Yes science one, information technology two, okay.  Well we have in front of us right at the moment some reports one of them coming out of the Innovation Summit held earlier this year, one of them coming out of the Prime Minister's Science Council which deals with this broad area.  Senator Minchin, Senator Alston and David Kemp the three ministers with direct responsibility are working with me on this issue right at the present time.  I think I could broadly say we will be having something to say about it.  I have spent a lot of time myself looking at the various submissions, some of them make a great deal of sense, some of them don't.  And it shouldn't be assumed that every proposition that's put to the Government in this area is necessarily going to be supported.  I think investment in science is very important to the future of this country, very important indeed.  There's a lot of misinformation around.  This country is one of the great devourers of information technology in the world.  Our Internet usage, our e-commerce server usage, all of those things are already very mature and very sophisticated in Australia.  This very odd proposition that because we're not a manufacturer of certain types of technology than we're an old economy is about the most unintellectual argument I've had presented to me for a long time.  But it is an issue that's quite high on the Government's agenda and of course I would make the gentle point that we've heard, I've talked about defence, I've talked about roads, you've talked about extra resources going in a particular area and we want to keep a Budget surplus, so you know we've got to always remember that it's all got to add up in the end and you can't do everything.
QUESTION:
[Collins Class submarines]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Bob we didn't inaugurate the Collins' Class Submarine project, I think you're aware of that, it was started when Mr Beazley was Defence Minister.  But we want to make the project work, we believe that the remedial measures that we have adopted in order to deal with clearly a lot of difficulties, a lot of mismanagement of the project and a lot of cost blow-outs we believe that those arrangements and they include the acquisition of the Submarine Corporation so that we can get control of the project and thereby ensure that it is properly completed within reasonable budget constraints.  All of those things are directed towards making sure that the submarine, having consumed as a project billions of dollars over a period of years, that it is a useful and integral part of the defence framework of Australia.  Now this will be dealt with in some more detail when the white paper is released.  But you will I am sure accept that our obligation, our national interest obligation is to make sure that the submarine is operational and effective.  Now we believe it can be very operational, of course very effective and can make a strong contribution.  
As to separately what might be said about the way in which the project was originally conceived and the way in which it was managed well that is a separate matter and that may well receive attention and should receive attention.  But I don't want that to take priority over the national interest and the national interest is having invested so much money in the submarine we've got to make sure it's useful and is employed in our defence array.  And I believe it can be and I believe it will be and it's important that we keep the two things, one's a defence national interest issue, the other's an area of legitimate political analysis.  Neither of them will be left begging but it's important that we keep the two of them separate.
[ends] 


Subjects: Centenary of Federation
E&amp;OE..................
Archbishop Hollingwoth, John Anderson the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Kim Beazley the Leader of the Opposition, Senator Meg Lees the Leader of the Australian Democrats, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. And may I also acknowledge the Ngunnawal people on whose traditional land this building stands and this very important launch event takes place. 
This is in every sense of the word a uniting occasion. It is one of those events that reminds us again that the things that unite us as Australians are much greater, and more enduring, than the things that divide us. It's an occasion for me on behalf of the Government and I know on behalf of everyone here, to already thank Archbishop Hollingwoth, Mr Tony Eggleton, and all the members of the Council for the Centenary of Federation, for the enormous amount of work and inspiration that has gone into preparing our nation for this very important year long event.
We celebrate the centenary of federation at a time when for a combination of reasons, not least of course the very fact that we have reached 100 years as a nation, of growing interest by Australians of all ages and of all backgrounds in the history and the achievement of our country over the last 100 years. The scale of the Australian achievement has been quite remarkable. And as we go through the year commencing on the first of January 2001, we'll have occasion to honour what has been achieved over that 100 years. We'll be able to marvel, and I use the word very deliberately, marvel at the fact that Australia has been one of but a handful of nations which has remained continuously democratic throughout the entirety of the centenary of our existence as a nation.
We'll honour the fact and remember with pride that this country in proportionate terms did as much as any other nation on earth to defend the cause of human liberty and freedom on several occasions during that 100 years. We'll reflect on the Australian achievement, we'll also, if we're sensible, we'll address the short comings and the blemishes, as well as the great scale of the Australian achievement, which by any measure has been quite remarkable. We'll also take the opportunity to think in our own way and talk in our different ways and in different forums, about the values that are uniquely Australian. We'll think of our sense of mateship, we'll think of our capacity, probably unparalleled in the history of the world, of being able to absorb people from more than 140 nations and produce a united country of great harmony and great cohesion. We'll reflect upon the other things that bind us together. And also importantly we'll think about the future. The young people of Australia will play a major role in the celebration of our centenary. Because reflecting on 100 years of achievement and history is not only about honouring the past and respecting the continuing values that we have as a nation, but also projecting about the future.
It is indeed fitting that the events of the first of January 2001 will start at Uluru, thus honouring at the very beginning of the centenary year the first people of the Australian nation. This will be a year for great national pride, not triumphal national pride but nonetheless strong national pride. An unapologetic assertion of what Australia stands for and what Australia believes in. A united honouring across other divides of the bonds that keep us together and the things that we do share in common as Australians. 
I also would like to thank Coles Myer, a company in it's various forms and ancestries older than federation itself. It's support a reminder of the constant nourishment that this country has received over the last 100 years from the forces and activities of private enterprise. But ladies and gentlemen this is a fine and memorable occasion for this Great Hall of the national Parliament. It brings together all of the political parties, our divisions and differences put aside in a common love of Australia, a common honouring of our history and a common desire to make the next 100 years even better and more successful than the last.
I promise you on behalf of the Government that we will do all we can to make this a truly memorable year and a wonderful occasion to reflect upon the sheer joy of being an Australian.
Thank you
[ends] 


Subjects: Torres Strait Light Infantry Battalion
E&amp;OE..................
To my colleague Bruce Scott, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Assistant Defence Minister and Bill Heffernan and Ross Cameron and other parliamentary colleagues.  I am quite delighted that for the first time some of the veterans of the Torres Strait Light Infantry Battalion and the widows of some of the former members of that battalion who either died in action or subsequently died, who've come down for the first time as a group for a Remembrance Day observance here in Canberra.
The history of your battalion is perhaps not as well known as it should be.  It's a fact that the enlistment rate in World War II of Torres Strait Islanders was amongst the highest, if not the highest, of any group of Australians.  And the contribution that you made in the war against the Japanese is one that other Australians will always remember.  And you played a very major role in much of the activity of the Australian Army in the Torres Strait area.  The things that you did and the contribution you made to repelling the Japanese invasion was something that we will always remember.  
I think it is important that as a group you are honoured in the national capital.  There is a special quality about the life of the men and women of the Torres Strait islands and your distinctive contribution to indigenous culture in Australia is something that all Australians recognise.  I've had a small sample of it today.  I have a lot of experiences in this building - I don't normally get greeted in such a warm and moving fashion.  I think to substitute that singing for the hour and a half of Question Time would be a marvellous innovation.  But as you all know, one of the many things that Australians are proud of is the contribution that our defence people made, our soldiers, sailors and airmen made in the two World Wars and in other conflicts, and the special contribution of the indigenous people of Australia is a very central element of that very important Australian tradition.  Your light infantry battalion has a special place in that tradition.  
I really am so pleased that I've had a few moments to come here to thank you on behalf of your fellow Australians for what you did to save us in World War II.  The rest of the country is in your debt and it is so nice that you are able to come to Canberra and we are able in a very simple but sincere way say thank you and welcome you to the national capital.  Thank you for your singing and I hope you all have a marvellous time here in Canberra.  I've visited your part of the world on some occasions and I'll have to get there again before long.  Warren, of course, represents your interests with great vigour.  He's always talking about your interests down here and he does it with very, very great vigour and you really have a great representative in him.  Ladies and gentlemen thank you again for the great contribution you've made to our country and to its security and we're delighted to have you among us.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
JOURNALIST:
With the US election campaign looking ever so close. How would you feel if you were in that position?
PRIME MINISTER:
I’d be nervous. I don’t know what’s going to happen. It’s fascinating. There’s no crisis though. They still have a President, his name’s William Jefferson Clinton until January. So all this talk about stalemate and suspension and everything, it’s just the normal democratic process. Sometimes votes are close. We had an election here in 1961 which was remarkably close and it’s just a function of the democratic system. But isn’t it fantastic, the largest democracy in the world, the outcome of an election is being determined in a transparent, free, democratic fashion. I think that’s a testament to the strength of democracy rather than a criticism of the process.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think the fact it’s so drawn out, will it have any impact on trade in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. I don’t think it will have any adverse effect at all. I think it’s just a reminder that in a democracy you can have landslides, you can have close results, you can have ultra close results, and you can have complete cliffhangers. And this falls into the last category. But for students of politics like myself it’s quite fascinating. I obviously feel for the two candidates but then I’ve sort of been through a few tense moments in political life myself and it’s all part of the game.
JOURNALIST:
As far as constitutional crises go, we have an anniversary of one of our own. Have you got thoughts on the 25th anniversary of Whitlam being dismissed in office?
PRIME MINISTER:
No except that the matter was resolved as it should be in a democracy through the ballot box. It’s always been my lasting take out of November 11th 1975. In the end the Australian people resolved something that the political leaders of the time could not resolve. The only other observation I would make is that I think the opprobrium that was heaped on the shoulders of the late Governor General was always quite unfair. It was essentially a political deadlock which was resolved by him transmitting it to the Australian people for decision and in a democracy the Australian people always decide in the end. We don’t decide, the people decide and that is how it should be in a democracy.
JOURNALIST:
Just on Remembrance Day, being tomorrow morning, perhaps your thoughts as Prime Minister on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it’s always a time, along of course with ANZAC Day, to remember the huge debt that we owe to those more than 100,000 Australians who died defending this country and defending the things that we believe in. And our debt to them is as strong today as it has ever been over the last century and I think it is an occasion for all Australians to pause and reflect on what we owe to those brave men and women who gave everything to give us what we now have.
JOURNALIST:
Are you confident the Australian dollar will bounce back like Mr Macfarlane said?
PRIME MINISTER:
I thought everything Mr Macfarlane said was absolutely spot on. I endorse it 100%. I thought it was a very good speech and I thought the point he made about technology, which I emphasised in my own remarks earlier today, was absolutely right.
[Ends]


Subjects: Bennelong Electorate; Information Technology; The Internet; Lucent Technologies; Bell Laboratories
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much for that introduction, and can I say how very pleased I am that Lucent-Bell Laboratories has decided to make home well and truly in the place that has been my electoral home for almost 27 years. Because this part of Sydney has been continuously part of my electorate of Bennelong since I was first elected to it in May of 1974, and over that quarter of a centenary or more I have seen many aspects of the character of Bennelong changed, I have seen the continuity of a lot, but I have also seen particularly in this part of North Ryde, Mr Chairman, I have seen an emergence of so many examples of new technology, of new industries, of the information and communication technology era which is now so much part and parcel of our lives as Australians.
And the phenomenal success in such a sort period of time of Lucent and the optimistic way in which Mr Pike has spoken of your company's future is a source of tremendous encouragement, but more importantly a great example to other companies and a great example of what this country can achieve. It is also, might I say, an emphatic piece of evidence to support the remarks of many, including recently in a speech last night the Governor of the Reserve Bank refuting this rather odd and completely false proposition that in some way Australia is an old economy. To those who say it is an old economy I would invite them to come here to Lucent, to come to this marvellous opening, and look around and open your ears and just hear the story of what this company has achieved in such a sort period of time. I'd remind them of the extraordinary Internet penetration, second only to the United States, which has been Australia's experience, I would remind them that we have the second largest usage of e-commerce service of any country in the world. We have the third highest expenditure to GDP on Internet technology. We have penetration rates P.C usage by commerce, which are some 10% or 15% higher than the highest user of that technology in Europe, which is the United Kingdom. So by any measure this country is a world leader in the use and the adaptation of information and communication's technology. 
It is true that we have very proud history of being an extremely efficient farm producer and we have an extremely sophisticated and successful, and normally very profitable, mining industry, and long may our expertise in those two industries continue. There is in fact, in my opinion, a totally false dichotomy between the so-called old economy and the new economy. The successful company, today whether they are in technology, whether they are in mining, or manufacturing, or the farming industry, or the service sector generally, the successful companies are those that are able to adapt to modern technology and use it to their advantages, no matter what their activity is. You can't be a successful miner now unless you have a highly sophisticated use of information and communication's technology. You can't be a successful manufacturer, you can't be a successful exporter, there has been no falser dichotomy promoted in recent times than the proposition that in some way there is a division between old industries and new industries. 
Lucent, ladies and gentlemen, is investing $30 million in research and development in Australia. And this includes an amount of $25 million over 5 years on the wireless research program at Bell Laboratories here in North Ryde. And this investment is a sign of confidence in Australia's research capabilities. When I heard Mr Pike speak of the, not only the financial achievements of your company over only 19 months, but also the tremendous addition to your staff, and I know and I look around to see the array of people, many of them very young, people with great technical skills and all of you dedicated to your companies future. And as I know the management of the company respect and understand, no company is successful if it relies only on capital, it is only successful if it gets those right combinations of the intelligent use of capital and also the engagement and commitment of skilled and dedicated staff. And company after company in Australia, whatever its field of operation, is understanding and embracing that, but we practicing it and recognising that to be successful you have to engage and include and encourage and inspire your staff and make the staff of the joint collaborative effort.
Bell Laboratories has produced inventions that have helped to shape the modern world, such as the transistor, the communication satellite, the cellular mobile and optic fibre communication unix operating system. In other words all of you are part of a great technological and inventive heritage. The antecedents of your company and of your organisation has made a massive contribution to inventions over the last three-quarters of a century. And I am just so delighted that a company which is so much of the leading edge of information communications technology, it should have decided to make North Ryde here in the electorate of Bennelong it's home, and I do very warmly thank you for that. I congratulate all of you on the example that you represent of the new and modern and young and progressive face of the Australian economy. There will be many more like you but you'll be able to look back and recognise that in so many ways you have been the trailblazer. I thank you very warmly for the contribution that you've made already and I know that you will make in the future and I have very great pleasure in declaring Bell Laboratories well and truly open and I wish all of you well and great success.
[ends]


Subjects: Australian Womens Cricket Team
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Elaine.  Belinda Clark, Quentin Bryce, Cheryl Kernot, John Boultbee, John Mulcahy, all the other members of the Australian Women's Cricket Team and squad, ladies and gentlemen. Janette and I are really very happy to be at this very special dinner.  It's always nice to have an occasion which appropriately honours the importance of an overseas sporting excursion.  And despite the recent notoriety of Stadium Australian in Sydney, it remains the case that this dinner is taking place in what is without doubt the most prestigious and hallowed sporting arena in Australia.  And to have a gathering at the Melbourne Cricket Ground is I think something very special.
But it does of course honour a very special team. A team that has won four World Cups in cricket, a team which represents at the pinnacle a growing number of Australian girls and women participating in a sport which now claims the allegiance of about 37,000 participants throughout Australian.  One of the interesting things about sport in our country, particularly against the background of the great euphoria of the Olympic Games is that euphoric though we were about the Games and all they represented, it remains the case that 70% of Australians who participate in sport play non Olympic sports.  And of course cricket in its various manifestations - men's cricket, indoor cricket, women's cricket - when you add them all together it is still a sport that in those different forms claims the affections of so many.  
I am, as nominated by Mark Taylor, the ultimate cricket tragic.  I plead guilty to that.  I regard it as a great term of endearment.  One of the great things about sport is that it transcends so many boundaries in Australia.  The great thrill of being an Australian in a sporting event where your team is there and you're barracking for it is something very special and you forget about other things, no matter what the sport was.  Like a lot of rugby followers I stayed up till quarter-to-four the other morning to watch the Wallabies.  
I've got to say that the most thrilling moment for Janette and I at the Olympic Games has got to be that wonderful victory by the women's water polo team.  An absolutely astonishing example of the determination of a group of Australian women dedicated to their sport. And the Australian women's cricket team falls into the same category.  When you look at the team sports one has to acknowledge on any test that the contribution of Australian women in team sports - be it in cricket, be it in water polo, be it in hockey, be it in netball - has been absolutely remarkable. And the Australian women's cricket team which has claimed four of the World Cups that have been staged since it began in 1973 has really brought an enormous amount of credit to the sport and an enormous amount of credit to the participants.  
But tonight is also an occasion to thank the people in the background, to thank the coaches, to thank very particularly the sponsor.  Sponsorship is so important to the future of sport and that breakthrough point so often for sport is when you get that sponsor who's prepared to stick with you. And I want to thank the Commonwealth Bank and all the others that have been so generous in their support for Australian women's cricket.  It's really been very very important.  But I also want to thank the mums and the dads, and the girlfriends and boyfriends and other supporters because all of our sport ultimately starts in the local park, the local swimming pool, the local field and it needs the support of people who are prepared to give their time without any kind of reward other than the satisfaction of seeing their sport enjoyed and played by so many people and I think it's very very important that that grassroots element of Australian sport and not least your own game is acknowledged.
I do particularly as well as generally congratulating the 14 members of the squad, I do want to pay particular tribute to Julie Hayes and Louise Broadfoot who are the two new caps in the team on this occasion.  And to you Belinda particularly the contribution that you have made and you've now travelled that path from player to administrator and to be a successful player and to be able to turn that talent and passion for the game into administration is a very important thing.  And to you and Karen Rolton, your vice-captain, and to your coach John Harmer and your manager Janine Stainer, I wish you a great deal of good fortune.  I will follow very keenly, not only your first encounter, but there's always special edge about a sporting contest between Australia and New Zealand.  I'll follow that encounter with enormous interest.  And there'll be a lot of Australian sportsmen and women barracking for you and very enthusiastically wishing you on. 
I think you've brought tremendous credit to your sport and you've been marvellous ambassadors for your country.  And it fills me as Prime Minister with tremendous pride to see the wonderful ambassadorial role of our sportsmen and women whatever the sport is.  By and large they do it with great style, they do it with a great sense of dedication and a great sense of responsibility, but also as befits Australians a great sense of fun and as well as being competitive a willingness to enjoy yourselves.
So I hope you have a wonderful series.  I hope you win, I hope you get that rapturous welcome at the Boxing Day Test here at the MCG because you'll be delighting so many Australian cricket fans both men and women, and you'll be doing great things for a sport that is growing in leaps and bounds.  I wish you all well and I hope you win the cup and you'll have a lot of enthusiastic support from here in Australia.  Thank you.  [Ends] 


E&amp;OE................................
Thank you Mark for those very kind words of introduction. To the Premier of Victoria Mr Steve Bracks and his wife, to the acting Governor of Victoria, to former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, former Governor General Sir Zelman Cowan, Mr and Mrs Frank Cicutto, Mr and Mrs Liebler, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, the Ambassador of the State of Israel, ladies and gentlemen.
It is, for Janette and I a very special occasion to be amongst you, to share some reflections with you about our visit to Israel in April of this year, but also more importantly to take the opportunity of expressing particularly at this time of such distress and anguish about what is occurring in the Middle East, to express to you on behalf of the Government and I know on behalf of all of your fellow Australians, a sense of great compassion and great concern for what is occurring in the Middle East.
To say to all of you that you have in the Government of Australia and you have in the people of Australia both an understanding Government and an understanding group of fellow countrymen and women.
Our visit to Israel in April of this year was my third and Janette's first. As Mark said I went to Israel long before my entry into Australian politics. In part that visit was inspired by some deep friendships that I'd formed with members of the Australian Jewish community first at Sydney University and more generally within the community afterwards. It was an experience that reminded me of the great tenacity and capacity to survive which has had to be a hallmark of the existence of the State of Israel since its formation in 1948. It brought home to me for the first time in a very vivid way how important that part of the world has been to the creation of many of the spiritual streams of the entire world. The contribution that it made not only to Judaism but also to Christianity and to Islam.
I went again in 1988 as Leader of the Opposition. I felt I hadn't travelled all that far because in 1964 as a relatively modest traveller, or a traveller of modest means as well as being a modest traveller, I'd stayed at the YMCA in Jerusalem. In 1988 I returned to stay just across the road at the King David Hotel. So things hadn't moved all that far.
So it was with a great sense of anticipation and genuine warmth that I went to Israel for the first time as Prime Minister of Australia. I preceded my visit to Israel with a visit to Gallipoli on ANZAC day and subsequently to the battlefields of the Western Front in France. I was reminded of course on both of those occasions of how deeply entwined and embedded in the history of this country is the contribution of the Jewish people. One of the seven Australians who won a Victoria Cross at Lone Pine was Jewish and of course the greatest field commander of World War I and arguably Australia's greatest Jewish son was of course Sir John Monash. And those references are a metaphor for the partnership that we have enjoyed down through the years, for the contribution that Jewish people have made to our country and the way we have worked together to shape the destiny of this most tolerant of nations.
The situation in the Middle East now is nothing short of heartbreaking. The sense of optimism and hope that was clearly present in April and which I experienced, and might I say to demonstrate my understanding of how very committed to the peace process, not only the people of Israel but also the Jewish community here in Australia, I remember announcing for the first time on Melbourne radio that I would when visiting Israel, go and see the Chairman of the Palestinian Council, having previously been unwilling to invite him to visit Australia because I did not believe the peace process had advanced far enough. I was questioned about the wisdom, or perhaps the consistency of that decision and I responded to the interviewer to the effect that circumstances had changed and it was in the interests of the peace process that all of those who were friends and staunch allies of Israel, as well as acknowledging the legitimate aspirations of the people, the Palestinian people to have their independence, that we should all get together and do what we could to encourage the peace process. And I was greatly encouraged to know that later in the day I think both Mark Liebler and Colin Rubinstein rang the station to express support for the decision that I had taken. That demonstrated the passionate desire of the Jewish people of Australia as well as the desire of so many around the world to see the peace process succeed.
I was encouraged to go to visit Yasser Arafat. I was encouraged by the Government of Israel. I was accompanied on that visit by members of the Australian Jewish community. I still have a photograph of the Chairman, Isi Liebler and myself. It was a reminder of how close in a sense the world had got to achieving an absolutely wonderful breakthrough. And to see that now in great peril is of course tragic and heartbreaking to so many people.
But as Mark said we must not surrender hope because when you surrender hope than you are ultimately of course giving in to those who don't ever want to see peace. I don't believe any Prime Minister of Israel could have offered more than did Ehud Barak at Camp David. As Mark said he went 90% of the way in relation to territory and he was agreeable to joint suzerainty in relation to Jerusalem. It was an offer that should have been accepted and it is tragic in the extreme that it has not been accepted. But we must all of us who remain staunch and reliable friends and allies of Israel, we must all of us continue in our different ways to encourage diplomatically and otherwise the resumed move towards peace. In the end I believe there is a deep desire, certainly in the hearts of the people of Israel and I believe also in many Palestinian hearts for peace. That is what I find as I move amongst the different communities here in Australia. People are tired of the killing, they are tired of the terror, they are tired of the insecurity and they want a brighter future for their children. I believe Barak displayed very great courage and he should be encouraged for the efforts that he has so far displayed.
I believe that all countries have a responsibility to urge commitment, renewed commitment, to the peace process. Only today I received a letter from the Israeli Prime Minister detailing the terrible circumstances of the bombing of the bus carrying those children in Israel. And yet despite the understandable anger expressed in that letter, there was a continued commitment to the process of achieving peace.
So my message to you tonight, ladies and gentlemen, is two-fold, in two senses. It's a personal message from John Howard, a long standing friend of the Jewish community of Australia and a long standing admirer of what the state of Israel has achieved against such tremendous adversity in the last 50 years. It's also a message from the Prime Minister of Australia on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, that we admire the contribution of your community to our country and to our country's history. We admire the way in which you have contributed to every facet of Australian life, the values of family, of hard work, of loyalty, of charity and civic decency, that your community has always been famed for. It is also a message of renewed hope, I suppose, that somehow the peace process in the Middle East can be back on, can get back on, track. And I believe that there is residual good will in the appropriate areas for that, with appropriate application to be achieved.
Your contribution to Australian society has been immense. And the contribution of the Jewish people around the world, to wisdom and to culture and to learning, has been absolutely legendary. That great and famous part of the world has given great gifts to the people of the world. And that makes the present time of peril and present time of distress all that much harder to bear. But the hallmark of the Jewish people and the hall mark of the state of Israel has always been faith and commitment and tenacity. You, and they, have displayed it in the past and I know it will continue.
Often in life when all apparently seems lost, out of that sense of despair, new hope can be retrieved. I think all of us must hope that that will be what occurs in the Middle East. All of us must hope and pray in our different ways and according to our different faiths, that that can be brought about. Because the desire for peace is very deep, and it's very strong and the desire of the friends of the Jewish people and the friends of Israel, all around the world, not only to continue to enjoy their great company and their great contribution to our different societies, but also the desire to see the home land of the Jewish people in Israel live in security and peace, that desire is very strong.
My Government will always remain committed to the territorial integrity of Israel, the right of the people of Israel to live in peace behind secure, defined and defendable boundaries. We also recognise, as we have for many years, the proper and legitimate right and aspiration of the people, Palestinian people, to aspire to have their own state. And we feel for them in relation to the suffering and the aspirations that they legitimately have. We can all hope that good men and women will triumph, and good will and the desire for peace will in the end win out.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it was an honour for me to represent our country in Israel as the Prime Minister of Australia. The vitality of the state of Israel, the obvious and the overt friendship of the people of Israel towards the people of Australia, the burgeoning information technology and other economic links, the honour conferred on me by the Bar Ilan University, the particular pleasure that I derived from being a accompanied or assisted when the degree was conferred on me by two distinguished members of the Australian Jewish community. All of that left an indelible impression on me.
Israel has been a wonderful source of inspiration to the Jewish people of the world, it's been a wonderful example of racial harmony and tolerance and of openness and a willingness to receive people from all around the world, not unlike, of course, our own country. And as many people have remarked, there are many similarities, and of course many differences, between our two societies. We are both robust democracies, we sometimes have noisy Parliaments, both of us. We have a very strong commitment to the rule of law, we each have a very strong sense of independence, and a willingness to defy difficult odds. It's a close friendship and it's a friendship that I hope I have made a small contribution towards nurturing and improving. I will remember with very great affection the three visits I've paid to the state of Israel. None of course will be remembered with greater pride than the most recent one, because I not only went there as John Howard a friend and admirer of the state of Israel, but I also went there as John Howard Prime Minister of Australia, a strong, reliable and faithful ally and friend of the state of Israel.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Introduction
In only a few short weeks, Australia will celebrate a century of nationhood.  A century during which only 4 generations fashioned a unique culture, created a decent, tolerant and cohesive society, built a thriving modern economy, nurtured some of the finest democratic traditions ever practised and earned gratitude and respect from nations around the world.
And it was the century when our distinctive national character was formed, marked by good humour, a sense of fair play, generosity of spirit and independence.
Despite the distance travelled, we approach the Centenary of Federation confronting many of the same broad issues as faced our forebears a hundred years ago.
Now, as then, there are those torn between protecting the status quo, between protecting narrow vested interests or pushing boldly on with necessary reform.
Now, as then, the decisions we make as a nation in coming years will determine our prosperity over many years.
Now, as then, fundamental and unprecedented challenges lie ahead.
Economically, the forces of globalisation, access to new technologies, enhanced communication capability and highly mobile labour and capital markets present us with both great opportunities and great risks.
The same forces are also driving immense social change.
Our social cohesion, flowing directly from a quite unique form of egalitarianism, is arguably the crowning achievement of the Australian experience over the past century.  Yet this cohesion will be tested if wealth and opportunity can';t be fairly and broadly distributed across society as they have in the past.
And importantly, public policy needs to factor in the growing power, and attendant responsibility, these changes have placed in the hands of individuals.
In the past, Australia has been successful in reforming institutions where necessary to meet modern needs whilst retaining institutions and practices which continue to serve the best interests of the country.
It';s this vital aspect of statecraft I wish to speak of today - how we';ll continue to maintain this balance in future decisions and deliver constructive change, economically and socially, to the Australian people.
The Liberal Party of Australia is the trustee of both the classical liberal and conservative traditions in Australian politics.
We have, therefore, pursued what I have called in the past liberalisation in economic policy and modern conservatism in social policy. Australian Values
The detailed policies we have implemented in government have followed a clear set of principles which in turn have been reflective of the Australian people.  This will continue to be our approach in the future.
In a world driven by competitive pressures, national character is an important factor in achieving prosperity.  No-one doubts that the self confidence and entrepreneurial spirit of the American people fuelled their rise to world power.  No one doubts that the success enjoyed by many Asian countries over past decades was underpinned by the tremendous work ethic and single-mindedness of their citizens.
The Australian people too have outstanding qualities which set us apart.  There is an Australian Way - different and so often better than that of other comparable societies.
For example, the choice available to Australian parents in school education, between and within the public and independent spheres, is more comprehensive than probably anywhere in the world.  Our policy delivers good standards, appropriate levels of competition and provides an expanding horizon of choice in the years ahead.
Over the past four and a half years, my Government has created a correlation between the principles, the priorities and the aspirations that Australians carry within themselves day to day, and the policy development framework of their national government.
Specifically, we';ve sought to constantly relate four distinct and enduring Australian values to the circumstances of our own time.  And, let me be clear, these values not only have a sound philosophical base but have been applied in a practical way to the deliberations of government.
Governments are presented every day with an astounding array of choices - the responsibility is heavy and the judgements made can affect the lives of millions.  Without fixed principles against which to measure all of the options available, it would simply be impossible to govern effectively.
Political leadership should be about certainty of purpose.  These values allow us to provide that certainty to the Australian people.
Self Reliance
The first of these principles goes to the heart of the Australian ethos, to the heart of our national self-image and to the hopes we hold for ourselves and for our children - Self Reliance.
We believe, as we always have, that "the only real freedom is a brave acceptance of unclouded individual responsibility". 
And in making policy since we took office, that encouragement of self reliance, of giving people choice, of rewarding those who can and do take responsibility for themselves and their families has been at the forefront of our efforts.
In my view, this is the most fundamental difference between our own beliefs and the ideology of our political opponents.  In championing the continuance of institutionalised and organised labour, of highly regulated industrial relations policy, of intrusive bureaucracies, of the legitimacy of the traditional welfare state where citizens are conditioned to long term dependence, the Labor Party is marching to the beat of an old and worn-out drum.
In contrast, Australians are in step with the times - they have and always will place great store in encouraging independence, initiative, of individuals being accountable to themselves.
For instance, the community has overwhelmingly accepted the value of mutual obligation, and in particular 'working for the dole';.  Not to punish young people anaesthetised by passive welfare but to develop their skills and awaken an enthusiasm for independent life.  The facts speak for themselves - over 91,000 participants involved in 4 thousand community projects.  84% believe that their involvement has been worthwhile, improving their skills and restoring their morale.
Similarly, the Tough on Drugs Diversion Programme offers a foothold for young drug offenders sliding down towards lifetime addiction and crime - but only if they';re prepared to take personal responsibility for their recovery.
The far reaching and fundamental changes to industrial relations law give back power to individual workers.
The incentives for private health insurance encourage people to accept responsibility for their own family';s health.
The child immunisation programme encourages parents to protect their own children.
The changes to education funding improve the choices available to parents.
Our support for self funded retirees, for share ownership, for first home buyers, for elderly Australians wishing to remain in their own homes longer - all these initiatives have as their foundation, a desire to empower and enrich the lives of individual Australians - to make and keep them self reliant.
'A Fair Go';
And yet whilst self reliance is an ambition being pursued throughout the world, the Australian way also emphasises a balance with the other principles we hold dear.
And the second of those is to ensure equality of opportunity and equality of treatment, of 'doing the right thing'; and ensuring that all Australians are given 'a Fair Go';.
This nation was built upon the principle that whatever your birth, whatever your starting point, each one of us is owed a chance to succeed.  Each one of us has a right to health, education and opportunity.  And each one of us deserves a leg up if times get tough.
For this reason, we have held as immutable an unwavering commitment towards both Medicare and the social security safety net.  Despite my political opponents attempt to portray the Government as forsaking those in need, the reality is we';ve sought to lift them out of isolation and hardship.  I resolved, as Prime Minister, to provide a modern welfare system - not one entrenched in the past - which embraces prevention as much as it affords cure.
This is another example of where the Australian way has been better.  
We have avoided the relative harshness of the American approach where the needy can often be left penniless.  Yet we';ve eschewed the excessive paternalism of some European societies, which leave individuals dependent on bloated and unsustainable public sectors.
The principle of 'a Fair Go'; has been at the core of decisions to improve basic services to rural and regional Australia.  For instance, over a half a billion dollars has been directed towards improving medical, health and aged care services in the bush.
Australian families, struggling to juggle the demands of their busy lives have been assisted through increased family payments.
Similarly, we';ve done the right thing by workers, with a safety net protecting their entitlements in the event of employer insolvency.
And the principle of a 'fair go'; underpins our belief that practical reconciliation - giving indigenous Australians equality of opportunity in respect to education, employment, health and housing - is the best way forward to redress past wrongs and ensure national unity.
In many ways, it has even been one of the drivers of the tax reform agenda - we determined to give a fair go to Australian workers, 80% of whom no longer pay more than 30 cents tax in each dollar earned.  And to Australians who';ve worked years to acquire their assets by reducing Capital Gains Tax.
Finally, no one would dispute that the courage and commitment of the Australian Defence Forces ensured a fair go for the East Timorese people, struggling to rebuild their shattered lives and safeguard their hard won freedom.
Pulling Together
Self reliance and the concept of a fair go are values prized by individuals, but Australians also have a particular way of seeing themselves collectively as a people.
Our third guiding principle is the notion of communities and families 'pulling together';.  Particularly in times of trouble or challenge, this willingness to unite, to help others remains intrinsically ingrained within Australian culture.  It';s a pioneering virtue, the mark of a young country with talent and enthusiasm freely shared and bent towards a common goal.
We see it in the sheer scale of generosity when good causes seek support.  We';re seeing it now throughout New South Wales as communities battle floods to save their homes and livelihoods.  We saw it with the magnificent efforts of the volunteers at the Olympics.
It is something quite special yet we accept as normal a level of goodwill towards each other, utterly unknown in many, indeed most, countries around the world.  At the Sydney Games, the world may have been astonished but we shouldn';t have been surprised.  It was simply our daily lives writ large and on display for all to see.
The Government is committed to draw upon that sense of unity, not ignore it.
Social coalitions, in direct and marked contrast to Labor';s enthusiasm for bureaucratic intervention, harness the diverse skills, energy and resources of the various levels of government, the corporate sector, charitable institutions, communities and individuals in order to achieve better outcomes.
Families and close-knit communities provide the moral support, advice and comfort that no government could or should try to replicate.
For these reasons, under the overarching value of 'pulling together';, we';ve brought about relationships from across the full social spectrum to address major issues and to strengthen families and the communities in which they live.
There is no better example of this concept than the establishment of the Job Network - an initiative leading the western world in creatively tackling unemployment.
As has been said many times, the Government believes that people motivated by high ideals, stirred by a sense of vocation, guided by local knowledge of their communities, and unashamedly desiring reward if successful at their task, can help job seekers better than a bureaucracy forced to work to rigid regulation.
And so it';s proved.  By creating a strong and robust economy, by making it easier for businesses to employ and by implementing new ways to tackle seemingly entrenched unemployment - new ways such as Job Network - there are now 200,000 fewer Australians living on the dole than when we won office and now able to enjoy the benefits of self reliance.
We';ve moved to encourage greater corporate and individual philanthropy. 
We';ve established the Community Business Partnership programme seeking tangible linkages between businesses and the communities that support them.
We';ve established the Australian Rural Partnerships Foundation to attract contributions to assist projects in the bush.
Through the Stronger Families and Communities Strategy, we';ve provided practical skills and support to help young families with parenting.  And, amongst a multitude of other targeted programmes, we';re helping local groups instigate community projects such as converting unused buildings into local community centres.
Many of these initiatives were not supported by our opponents.
This is a path down which Labor, constrained by old loyalties, burdened by old ideology, simply cannot travel.  The new concept of working through others, of being ally not superior, is simply impossible for a party historically committed to bureaucratic intervention and for a party so utterly dominated by the trade union movement.
They simply cannot accept that others can be trusted with resources and with responsibility.  The reality is that Australians, when allowed to pull together, can achieve anything.
'Having a Go';
Of course, great achievement comes about only when people are animated by a sense of purpose.  When they set goals and have the commitment and the nerve to set out after them.
This, the fourth of our key values, is an important concept because arguably, our willingness as a nation, to 'Have a Go'; will determine the quality of our future.  The world is changing and most Australians accept that unless we change also, we';ll be left behind.  We';d bequeath to our children a nation far diminished than that we inherited ourselves.
But again, having a go is a great Australian virtue.  Calculated risk taking, creativity and having the courage of your convictions are innately part of the Australian psyche.
You need to look no further than Australia';s dynamic and highly successful small business sector to see that our people are willing to pursue their dreams.
One of the primary responsibilities of national government is to create the conditions by which its citizens can dream, can succeed and can have a go.
As a Government, we';ve tackled the fundamental structural issues that would have held Australia back in the decades ahead and stopped individuals and businesses fulfilling their potential.
The old tax system was unfair, uncompetitive, and in the long term, unsustainable.  We knew it, the Labor Party knew it, the Australian people knew it.  But, unlike Labor in 1985, having the courage of our convictions, we fixed it.
We';ve modernised industrial relations and the workplace environment.  We';ve delivered the more deregulated arrangements needed to reflect the changing nature of work in the information era.  The move towards services, the shift to smaller, decentralised operations and the differing ways in which people will want to combine work and family commitments all required a new creative approach.
I can';t stress enough the importance of these two most fundamental of reforms.  They will underpin the capacity of businesses, large and small, home-grown and those attracted here from overseas, to grow, to innovate, to take risks, to employ and to prosper.
And we did it all despite the constant spoiling tactics of the Opposition.  Despite obstruction by people who knew these reforms were in the long term interest of this country.  People prepared to place political point scoring ahead of the progress and prosperity of those they';d claim to represent.
In contrast, this Government is seeking to foster a climate of entrepreneurship and confidence in the ability of Australians to achieve anything they set out to do.  The Olympics proved, beyond doubt, that we are a can do country, able to match the best in the world.
And we';re practising what we preach.  Working with the states, with corporate consortiums, with communities and with talented individuals, we';re having a go at some of the major infrastructure issues left by other governments for decades.
The Alice to Darwin rail link is an exciting and highly visible example of a government focussed on enhancing Australia';s physical assets.  Promised 100 years ago, some would still say that the economic case for its construction has not been fully proved.  But, just as we seek to encourage others to follow their vision, we';ve determined to invest funds into this remarkable undertaking.
And we';re supporting men and women at the very cutting edge of research and development, men and women genuinely having a go.  The doubling of support for health and medical research by an additional $600 million - building on our world class achievements in this area, our funding of comprehensive R &amp; D across a wide range of areas but noting biotechnology and IT in particular, the financial assistance given to private consortiums engaged in ground breaking developments in science and industry - are all proof that this government passionately believes in Australians striving for excellence.
Responsible and Competent Government
These then are the four principles, on which we have and will base our Government - self reliance, a fair go, pulling together and having a go.
And yet, unless a political party offers responsible and competent government, then policies which encourage independence, equity, shared endeavour and bold enterprise can never be implemented.
The benefits that come from responsible and competent government - national security, strong and sustained economic growth, lower interest rates and inflation, declining public debt, falling levels of unemployment and high rates of investment - are the foundations upon which everything else can be built.  Over the past four and a half years, our delivery of responsible and competent government has made possible the implementation of policy reform in accordance with the principles I';ve outlined.
Time and time again, in stark contrast to our political opponents'; ever changing and populist agenda, this government has proven its willingness, its courage to do what';s good for the country, whatever the short term political costs.
It';s borne results.  Our businesses are thriving;  more Australians are now working than at any other time in the history of this nation;  more Australians own shares than ever before;  home loan interest rates remain at levels unknown for a generation;  and by June next year, we would have paid back more than $50 billion of Labor';s mortgage.
Our young people are increasingly engaged with their communities, volunteering their enthusiasm and their effort, and actively participating in national celebration and commemoration.
Moving Forward
By any measure, Australia is ready to face this new century.  And it';s encouraging to realise that values, developed within a people over a century or more, can apply so readily to today';s issues and those of tomorrow.
I have previously foreshadowed significant decisions in a number of critical areas.
The forthcoming Defence White Paper will involve a considerable increase in resources and the most significant reshaping of the Defence Forces in decades.  Without belittling the value we place on our alliances, we intend Australia to exhibit national self reliance in relation to security matters.
By tackling salinity and ground and river degradation - a problem that affects every Australian, whether they live in the bush or in the cities - we';ve set for ourselves an immensely ambitious goal.  In short, we';re having a go at a major problem that';s been sucking the life out of the land for decades.
We';ll have a go at building Australia';s scientific and research capability by a detailed and effective response to the two innovation reports we earlier commissioned.  We';ve agreed with those reports that enhancing the nation';s intellectual capital will directly influence our capacity to compete internationally in the years ahead.  We don';t intend for Australia to be left behind.
And our broad support of the directions set out in the McClure Report is based upon the recognition that they encourage self reliance without removing basic fairness.  And the ideas suggested will utilise the talents of many within the community, all pulling together to achieve specific solutions tailored to an individual';s circumstances.
Our decisions in regard to each of these, and indeed to the entire policy programme planned for next year, will reflect a strongly Australian perspective and apply the same values of those they are intended to benefit.
For this reason, next Sunday, I look forward to announcing with the Deputy Prime Minister a significant roads package that will give a fair go to Australians isolated from basic services and a fair go to all, in cities and in the bush, dependent on effective local road systems for their welfare and their livelihoods.
Whatever Labor might say, Australians do want well maintained roads on which they and their families can travel safely, quickly and easily. They want funds spent on national assets that will last decades and benefit millions.  And this long term investment plan, in addition to all else, will deliver fair outcomes.
You know it';s easy to be cynical, to sit on the sidelines and snipe, to come up with glib words and slick phrases instead of proposing real policies and real solutions.  That';s the real boondoggle - that';s what';s trivial, wasteful and unnecessary.
In closing, I';m once again reminded of the words of Sir Henry Parkes, that great champion of Australian federation.  Over a hundred years ago, he declared Australia ready for unity, for what he called the dazzling prize of nationhood because of 'the vigour, the industry, the enterprise, the foresight, and the creative skill of its people';.
Those words are truer now than they were then and I have no doubt that Australia stands on the threshold of a century of even greater achievement than that which has gone before.
   ENDS 


subjects: CJC inquiry; education policy; floods in NSW; Kerry Packer.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
JOURNALIST:
…….CJC inquiry in Queensland…..?
PRIME MINISTER:
There’s plenty of debate going on in Queensland about that and I think we’ll just leave it at that for the moment. The facts speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, it’s really important to be here today, Muslim Australians you’ve spent a fair amount of time here and they are really chuffed that you came here….
PRIME MINISTER:
Well this is a very diverse country and I’m particularly supportive of what our education policy does for communities like this. Our education policy, the changes we made when we came to government made it easier for a school like this, which services a low-income area, to be established. If we hadn’t changed our policy, if we’d have not thrown out Labor’s new schools policy it would have been harder for this school to have been established.
JOURNALIST:
A big day tomorrow with a huge meeting about the floods. Obviously the Commonwealth and the States working together on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look it’s very important that the Commonwealth and the States work together. You put politics completely aside when you have a natural disaster. And that’s the approach that John Anderson, who’s been in daily contact with me about this, brings to it. Any cooperation that is needed between Mr Carr and myself will be forthcoming. I intend to visit the flood devastated areas probably on Saturday. And as far as I’m concerned you suspend politics when something like this happens and you work together to help our fellow Australians who have lost so much.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister the Labor Party suggests that the low Australian dollar means that the half-a-billion dollars to be spent on the defence upgrade will not be as effective as if it was good times for the currency. Is that a reasonable theory?
PRIME MINISTER:
The something that always distinguishes the Australian Labor Party is that they never generate an idea of their own. They always pick up the paper and whatever is on the front page they echo it. I don’t think that’s very impressive for an alternative government. Somebody asked me a question about Mr Packer?
JOURNALIST:
Mr Packer. He just undergone kidney transplant surgery, do you wish him well?
PRIME MINISTER:
I do. I know Kerry Packer well. I wish him well. Anybody who is going into an operation like that, it’s a hazardous experience and naturally I wish him well.
[ends]


Subjects: Cultural diversity; Education
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Michael
My Ministerial Colleges Philip Ruddock and Jackie Kelly, to His Excellency Dr Abdullah Omar Naseef the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Saudi Arabia, His Worship the Mayor of Auburn, Laurie Ferguson the Member for Reid and Ross Cameron the Member for Parramatta, Alan Cadman the Member for Mitchell, my other Parliamentary Colleges and other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is something of a special occasion, it is the first opportunity I’ve had in the time that I’ve been Prime Minister to be involved in the official opening of an independent school instructed by the beliefs of Islam.  And it’s therefore an important milestone in the very successful walk of our nation along the road of greater understanding, greater tolerance and greater diversity.
The Party I lead and the Government I now lead has long believed that choice in education is something very sacred.  We believe that education should have basic standards.  We believe that education should be available to all and we also believe that parents should have a right to choose the kind of education they think is best for their children.  And that right to choose not only relates to academic issues but it also relates to issues of culture and issues of spiritualism.
I looked at the motto of the school, I always look at school mottoes and it reads ‘Faith, Knowledge and Success’.  There’s something quite logical about that.  If you have faith and if you acquire knowledge and you mix the two of them in an intelligent fashion you are normally more likely to be successful.  Not just successful in a material sense but also successful in a personal and individual sense.  
I want to acknowledge as other speakers have done the great generosity of the Government of Saudi Arabia towards this center and the establishment of this school.  That interest, your Excellency, has been ongoing, it has been consistent and it has been a great act of generosity to my fellow Australians of Islamic faith, particularly those living in this part of Sydney.  And I do appreciate that.
Many of the previous speakers have spoken of the great gift of being an Australian, of how we have created something very special in our country.  And how so much of that special character has been built on tolerance and understanding of difference.  And we have been remarkably successful and it is important on an occasion like this to salute that success.
I thought as I came here today and I met a representative of the Bosnian community, I thought of the tremendous impact on people very different who came to Australia from the former Yugoslavia, of the tragic events in that area of the world over the last 10 years. I can understand the depth of feeling that people had at the time, whether they were Bosnian, whether they were Islamic, they were Croatian Catholic, they were Serbian Orthodox or whatever the great diversity was, the sense of feeling and identification and outrage yet compassion for what was occurring in their former homeland or the former homeland of their parents must have been very intense.  Yet remarkably, miraculously although those feelings remain very strong and understandable they did not exhibit themselves into discord and unreasonable anger and conflict here in Australia.  What that tells us is that the bonds we have as Australians keep us together in a way no other force can pull us apart and that is the great success of this country.  And the reason that that is so, is complex yet simple.  It is so because what binds us together is always greater than what might pull us apart.  But it is also so because we do practice the sort of tolerance and understanding and respect for difference of which Dr Rowe, representing the Uniting Church here in Auburn, spoke so eloquently.
So this today is a great celebration of a number of things.  It is a celebration of the commitment that many Governments in Australia have had not least my own to the course of choice in education.  It is true that the establishment of this school was made easier by the changes to the new schools policy brought in by the Government in 1996.  Without those changes it would have been a great deal harder.  It is true that the maintenance of choice in education remains a cornerstone of our philosophical approach.  It is also true that the support of the Islamic community drawn from so many different countries around the world has been absolutely crucial to the establishment of this school, as indeed has been the practical support of the local council here in Auburn, and I thank them for their contribution to it.
The very last thing I want to say is directed to the really important people here today and they are the teachers and the students.  I visit many schools.  They’re different, each has a special character.  This visit today was very different again, yet it was also very familiar. The songs, the interacting between the teachers and the students, the open happiness, the innocence of the younger children, the dedication of the teachers.  Can I say to any of the students that may be here perhaps to their parents who will no doubt tell them that your teachers are a very important part of your life.  Teaching is a very noble profession.  It’s very important to the nurturing of future generations and I want to place on record my admiration for the teaching staff of this school as I do for the teaching staff of any school that I visit.  What students learn from their teachers just as what students learn from their parents are things that stay with them all of their lives.  And if those lessons that we were shown today are the lessons of this school the students who come out of this school won’t go far wrong in life and that is a wonderful legacy for the school to leave.
Thank you very much for having me.
[ends]


Subjects: Industrial relations reform; welfare reform; Defence White Paper; tax reform
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much John; to my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues.  It is of course approaching the active end or the heavy business end, I might say, of the festive season and therefore on an occasion like this I am tempted, and I will succumb to the temptation, of saying a few things about what has happened over the last year, of what the Government has sought to do and also project forward with some of the plans that we have for further reforms and changes to the Australian economy and further things to do in what is one of our most fundamental responsibilities as the government of Australia, and that is to continue to produce very strong economic management.
I thank the chamber for the very strong professional relationship it has established with the Government.  You have a very professional outfit.  You represent your members well, you agree with the government on some things and you disagree with the government on others.  And that is how it ought to be with an organisation representing such a diversity of business groups and businesses around Australia, and a government whilst it is proud to say it belongs to no single constituency in the country and is not owned by any interest group nor dominated by any interest group, is nonetheless a government that generally espouses in a very consistent way the principles of private enterprise.  It has a strong belief in capital accumulation, on proper and fair terms, and it has a very strong belief that market solutions are normally the best solutions, although it does recognise from time to time that there is a proper and strategic role for government involvement and government intervention where the market is not delivering the right outcome.  
And as I look back over the last twelve months, it has been a year of extraordinary change and extraordinary achievement.  One of the things I resolved when I became Prime Minister, and I know it was a resolve shared by all of my colleagues, was that we were going to be an active government.  We were going to be a government that was not afraid to take decisions and a government that would rather be remembered as having perhaps on occasions taken decisions that were unpopular and difficult and suffered some adversity in the process, than a government that would be remembered as one that essentially didn't take the full opportunity presented by its mandate.  And as you know we campaigned very hard before our election on economic reform. And I suppose of all the areas of economic reform that I have been personally identified with over the years, and one that I shared very strongly with the members of ACCI, was of course the cause of industrial relations reform.  And if you look back at what has happened to the Australian economy over the last four-and-a-half years, you can see the fruits of the implementation of the Government's policies of industrial relations reform.  
There are many things you can say about the economic performance of Australia.  You can talk about the sustained and very high growth rates; you can talk about the lower interest rates than we inherited; you can talk about the very low rates of inflation; you can talk about the fairly consistent patterns of business investment.  But one of the most exciting things to me about what has happened over the last four-and-a-half years is that we have presided over what in the end is as good a mark of good economic credentials as any, and that is we have presided over increases in real incomes of Australian workers which have been based on higher productivity. And the gain in labour productivity in Australia of something like 3.4% a year since 1996 according to the United States' Federal Reserve's recent analysis, even more meritorious than that of the United States, has been the thing that more than anything else has underpinned our capacity as a community to deliver what in the end we all want to deliver and that is higher real wages for our employees.  Because in the long run if you want to run a business successfully for a sustained period of time you do need to have well remunerated and contented employees.  And if you've got the capacity with a high productivity economy to deliver real income gains without inspiring or bringing about a resurgence of inflation than that truly is something that you can reflect upon with a certain amount of satisfaction.
And key to the lift in productivity has been the industrial relations reform record of this Government.  And he's here tonight and I want to thank Peter Reith for the work that he's done in relation to industrial relations' reform.  A couple of years ago the most difficult element of that industrial relations reform programme was embraced and that was reform of the Australian waterfront.  It was a reform package that attracted enormous criticism and relentless scrutiny and it involved an immense amount of personal and political courage on the part of the Minister and it was a reform that is now paying very handsome dividends in terms of higher productivity levels expressed in particular in higher average crane rates on the Australian waterfront.  The Australian waterfront has changed forever for the better as a result of that reform programme.  And I do remark that in all the years I've talked to business about the need for industrial relations reform, the constant entreaty from business was that we do something about the chronic state of productivity on the Australian waterfront.  And I am very proud to say, difficult though the process was, that we have achieved significant things on that front.
And if I could be permitted, however fleetingly to draw a political comparison about a policy area, the one I would point to as posing the most threat in terms of a change of government would be the area of industrial relations.  Because make no mistake the present Federal Opposition and therefore a future Federal Labor Government would turn back the clock on industrial relations' reform.  They make no bones about it and it's very important that that be borne in mind as assessments are made by the Australian business community over the next year.
Ladies and  Gentlemen the last twelve months of course has been very much dominated by taxation reform.  Taxation reform is something that this country has needed for a generation.  It was being talked about when I came into Parliament in 1974.  I well remember the Whitlam  Government tabling the report of the Asprey Committee which recommended the introduction of a broad-based indirect tax and it recommended the abolition of the wholesale sales tax and a number of other changes.  And that was twenty-five years ago.  And at various stages over that quarter of a century, governments revisited the issue of taxation reform only to walk away from it.  An Opposition tried it and failed in the attempt in 1993.  We went to the last election with a programme of taxation reform.  We won that election and we set about implementing the programme that we had been elected on.  We didn't get everything through the Parliament because we don't control the Senate.  But we got through the great bulk of what we'd taken to the Australian people.  There were plenty of prophecies of doom before the 1st of July and there were many people who politically were hoping it would all fall in a heap.  But of course it didn't fall in a heap and one of the reasons that it didn't fall in a heap is that we had magnificent co-operation from the business community.  And I take this opportunity in addressing a body that represents I think probably the biggest cross-section of Australian businesses at a national level of thanking the business community of Australia for the way in which whatever their own individual circumstances were they put the national interest in front of their own personal interest.   And on this issue your organisation was outstanding in the understanding and co-operation that it extended to the Government in the months that led up to the introduction of the new taxation system. This was an occasion when Australian businesses rose to the national interest.  They rose to the occasion.  They said for years we have argued for taxation reform and whatever may be the impact on our individual circumstances, we're going to put those aside and we're going to embrace taxation reform and give it a fair go.  
Now I know that when you bring in something different like this it's always hard, the adjustment process.  And I know getting used to the new system is difficult, we understand that.  And we are prepared to listen to people's concerns about the administration of the transition.  I made some comments the other day about one of the forms that is in the news lately and I know that there is a very sympathetic understanding of the adjustment process.  I also know that when you change over to a new system it's an enormous challenge to the administration.  And since the Commissioner is here tonight I would like to record my thanks to you the Commissioner of  Taxation on behalf of the Government for the way in which you and your officers have handled the very, very difficult transitional process.  It's not easy, nobody's perfect, we all need a little bit of fine-tuning in relation to something of that kind.  But there's been a great willingness on the part of the tax administration as there has been on the part of the business community to get behind a reform that is fundamentally beneficial.  And I also acknowledge the contribution of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission whose Chairman Alan Fels is also with us tonight.
It has been a mammoth task, but it's been a mammoth task very much in the national interest.  You don't get many opportunities in public life to be involved in a change of this kind.  And we were determined having at long last got the opportunity to implement this major change, we were determined to see it through.  And I have no doubt that it will be greatly to the credit, greatly to the benefit rather of the Australian economy in the years ahead that we have made this change.  Because in a globalised economy you no longer have the option of sitting on your hands, of resting on past achievements, of thinking that somehow or other the world will pass you by and you will still be able to retain your standards of living come what may.  That is no longer an option for Australia and there will always be a need for further reform.  And we haven't lost our commitment to economic reform.  We understand the challenges facing the Australian economy.  The fundamental condition of the Australian economy is very strong.  But I acknowledge the points made by Doctor Cannery in his introduction about some of the recent challenges to the business climate in Australia to which he made reference.  And I appreciate that the dialogue that exists between the Government and the Chamber makes it possible for us to discuss those things with you and with your members.
We're coming to the end of what has been a very busy year, but we're going to end the year in a very busy fashion.  You are aware that a couple of weeks ago the Treasurer released the mid-year economic and financial overview.  It disclosed that the projected Budget surplus was going to be $4.3 billion on a cash basis rather than $2.8 billion.  And I announced that because we're in a stronger budget position we would make a significant additional investment in local road maintenance and construction around Australia.  Road construction and maintenance is very important in a country as big as Australia.  The need to maintain our roads in good condition and the benefits that accrue from that for all Australian producers I know will be readily understood by an audience of this kind.  It does in our view represent a very important long term investment in the future of some basic infrastructure in our country.  Your President referred also to the initiative we'd taken in relation to salinity and water quality.  An initiative which I am very happy to say won the unanimous backing of all of the State Premiers and Chief Ministers at the recent COAG meeting here in Canberra.  And together we can begin the process of arresting years of decline in our soil quality and tackle a situation which I suppose is best epitomised by the realisation that if we don't do something about it in twenty years time on two out of five days the drinking water of the city of Adelaide will not be fit for human consumption.  
So those two commitments, the salinity and water quality commitment, the commitment of additional funds of $1.6 billion distributed in a very fair and equitable fashion throughout the whole of Australia going directly to local government, those two decisions represent very important long term investments in the future infrastructure of this country.  
Next week we will also be making a very important announcement which affects the future security of this country - we'll be releasing the long awaited Defence White Paper.  That White Paper will represent the biggest revamp, the biggest, the most comprehensive reappraisal of our defence capacity in decades.  It will involve the announcement of significant additional financial resources for the defence forces of this country.  I have believed for many years and certainly for all of the time that I have been Prime Minister that this country does need to spend more on defence.  I don't say that aggressively, this is not a belligerent country, it is a peace-loving country.   It is a country that has never sought to impose its will by force on others.  But it has always been a country that has been willing to assume its responsibilities and it is clear that the circumstances of our region now are less predictable than perhaps they were ten or twenty years ago.  And our response will be appropriate, it will be measured, it will be clearly understood and seen by our neighbours in the region, as not an act of belligerence but rather the prudent response of a very responsible middle-power with very strong liberal, democratic traditions.  And the Defence White Paper to be released next week will be a very important element in a very valuable and intensive public debate that is going on in this country about its defence preparedness.  
I am also conscious as your President mentioned, of the many views that have been put to the Government by those who think there should be a greater emphasis on science, research and innovation.  They are very important components of our economic strength.  They are quite fundamental to our economic future.  And I've shared with Doctor Cannery the pleasure of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council. As a person trained in the law and therefore having beyond passing chemistry and the leaving certificate back in the 1950s a fairly modest understanding of matters scientific, I've got to say to you that I've found the experience and the eye-opening propositions put to that Council one of the more enjoyable and rewarding parts of my prime ministership.  And we will I hope in the New Year give a definitive response to the several reports that have come out of the Innovation Summit and have come out of other propositions that have been put to the Government.  
We're also going to have from Senator Newman a directional statement in relation to the Government's response to the McClure Report into social welfare.  I take the opportunity of saying again that we are a Government that is very strongly committed to the maintenance of the social security safety net.  We do not want a welfare bill which is larger than it should be, but equally we do not want a society that neglects or poorly cares for the more vulnerable and the poorest elements of our community.  It has always been the Australian way to strike a balance between prudent use of the taxpayers' dollars and the need to give adequate support for the more vulnerable in our community including those groups in our society who clearly suffer significant economic disadvantage.
Now ladies and gentlemen as I look back over the last year and more generally over the last four and a half years, I can say that the partnership we've had with your organisation has been a very important element of the communication between the Government and the business community of Australia and I hope that process continues.  We have come a long way over the last few years.  We've repaid $50 billion of government debt, we are now running a Budget which is balanced and the surplus is being used to either fund affordable additional commitments or to retire additional debt.  And can I assure you John and your members that we have no intention of frittering away the hard-won economic gains of the last four and a half years.  But that commitment does allow for the Government to make provision for important areas of expenditure that must be incurred in the national interest and one of them is facing us right at the very moment - it will be necessary for the Government to spend more money in order to assist those farmers of Australia who've been so badly devastated by the floods in northern New South Wales.  Those kind of things are a collective national responsibility and it's always the role of government to step in and lend a helping hand on those occasions.  But I can assure all of you that we know that the foundation of business profitability is low inflation, a strongly growing economy, a loosely regulated environment that allows business to take decisions which are in the interests of its own future and the interests of its employees.  And we intend to maintain in the years ahead that balance of policies that has brought to Australia its longest continuous period of economic growth since the 1960s.  A period of economic growth that frankly I didn't believe could be maintained some two to two and a half years ago when we were hit by the Asian economic downturn. But through a combination of the fruits of economic reform, the flexibility of our exchange rate a point that should not be lost sight of in the current debate about the Australian currency and the innovative skill and capacity of the Australian business community we were able to emerge from that period of downturn in Asia with our economy essentially unscathed.  
I can assure that we won't lose touch with the concerns of the business community.  We are alive and sensitive to how easily circumstances can change and how important it is to maintain the channels of communication between all of the members of the Government and you and all of the people that you represent.  I congratulate ACCI on a very valuable and positive year in representing the interests of their members.  I thank them for the lines of communication and exchanges that you've established with us and I wish all of you a very enjoyable Christmas and a very prosperous New Year in every sense of that expression. 
Thank you.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Ian, Senator Newman, Larry Anthony, Peter Reith, my other Parliamentary colleagues, Dr. Switkowski the chief executive of Telstra, Jonathon Shier the managing director of the ABC, Scott Parker from the United Kingdom Employers' Disability Forum, and many other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is, I think, the third or fourth award dinner that I have attended and I do so in a number of capacities and for a number of reasons. First and foremost is to demonstrate, from the highest level, the Government's commitment to the cause of employing people with disabilities throughout the public and private sectors in Australia. I also do it because I find the various programs that companies have adopted, the great variety of Government agencies, as well as private companies, that have innovative and focused schemes to provide, not only more opportunity for people with disabilities in employment, but also to harness for their own enterprises or organisations the enormous benefits of employing people with disabilities. 
There's no doubt that the Paralympics were a watershed in the community's understanding of the place of people with disabilities in our community. It was a watershed because it drove home the most obvious of all realities, and that is that people with disabilities can provide not only the capabilities of valued and loyal employees, but they can also in sporting contests provide ultimate levels of excitement and keen competition. 
As is known I attended a lot of Olympic events, and as is also known my wife and I attended a lot of Paralympic events. And the incredible excitement that we derived from so many of the latter really was a great demonstration to me that once those competitions started you forgot about the disabilities, it was just a great sporting contest. And to see those great wheelchair basketball contests, the wheelchair rugby, the sit down volleyball, and all of the marvellous competitions which provided tremendous exhilaration for the spectators, fierce competition for the competitors, an enormous sense of individual and national pride on the part of those who were successful. And of course can I say in the presence of Lois Appleby who did so much of the organising, what an absolutely tremendous job she did and what a huge success, what a huge success those games were. So I think it will never be the same again after the Paralympics, because that was a quantum leap forward in community understanding, a quantum leap forward in community acceptance of the absolute place within our society of people who have one or other form of disability. And in that sense it was really such a wonderful transforming experience for our country, and I do think for the world in relation to people with disabilities because we did it better than anybody had done it before, and isn't that fantastic. 
I don't really want to say a lot more, tonight is a night to honour those who've made a contribution, for me on behalf of the Government to thank my many ministerial colleagues who are involved, Jocelyn Newman, Larry Anthony, Peter Reith in particular, but in different ways the heads of Government departments, and we have a very strong policy in this area. And we have a strong policy in this area not only because it meets the aspiration of the Australian fair go, but we also have a strong policy in this area because it returns a great benefit. And the quality of employees with disabilities in the Commonwealth public service is of an extremely high order.
So to all of you thank you for the contribution that you are making. These award nights are a very important national occasion, they're an important national occasion because they recognise here in the national capital that employing people with disabilities is a national priority, it's not something that you occasionally do if you've got room, it's something that you should be encouraged to do for your own benefit and it is something that is part of the matrix of national goals that this country has. So again I welcome you, I thank my colleagues and I thank all of those people who've been responsible for organising this wonderful night, and I wish all of you involved in the cause of employing people with disabilities great good fortune, further recruitment, further success and further good business dividends as a result.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: Child water safety; McDonalds; social coalition
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Laurie and Ted Russo of McDonalds, ladies and gentleman. I've come here today because I think this is a terrific way of getting a very simple message of safety across to the whole of the country. Australian's love their summer, they love their water, and of course there's nothing more tragic than the loss of young lives through swimming accidents, it's something that haunts all of us, when my children were you it was something that was always on my mind and I know it's on the mind of all young parents all around Australia. And it is absolutely marvellous that one of the icons of Australian swimming, Laurie Lawrence, and a very public spirited company in McDonalds have come together to create this very simple, I think, ear and eye-catching and I hope emotion-grabbing way of getting a very important message of water safety across.
The notion of "Keep Kids Alive - Do the Five", very simple, very catching, very compelling, is of course the product of the incredibly enthusiastic and public spirited mind and spirit of Laurie Lawrence. He's something of a legend in Australian swimming, he's certainly an icon amongst Australian sports spectators, there's nothing quite like him. But I also commend very warmly the public spirited character of McDonald's, for being willing to make the resources available, it's a great example of the social coalition, of somebody whose an icon in Australian swimming and a company that has given so much to Australia, has employed so many young Australians and given them their first job and an understanding of what it's like to be in the workforce.
But ladies and gentlemen I'm delighted to launch this campaign, I know it will be successful because it has all the ingredients of a successful public campaign. It's got an enthusiastic promoter, and when you have an enthusiastic promoter there's really nothing you can't achieve. And Laurie is certainly an enthusiastic promoter, I wish him well. I've got to say this is not as noisy as Question Time is on occasions, and I can assure all of you Laurie has our very good wishes, congratulations to both Laurie and McDonalds to get together in such a public spirited way for a great cause. Let's have no child drownings this year, let that be part of the result of this campaign.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Ladies and Gentleman, at this moment I have been asked to say a few words.  This is not the first Sports Hall of Fame Dinner that I've had the privilege of addressing, but in many respects I couldn't have imagined coming to the end of a year as a sports loving Prime Minister of a sports loving nation.  And having the opportunity of reflecting with such immense pride on the sporting achievements of Australia over the last year indeed over the past several years.
One runs out of superlatives to describe the achievements of Australia's sporting men and women over the last few years.  The triumphs of the sporting field, the international competition go on endlessly.  Only last weekend we added another World Cup in Rugby League.
And of course the extraordinary pinnacle the superlative, the highlight of the year, indeed the highlight of the experience of so many of us were the two great triumphs in Sydney.  The Olympic Games and the Paralympics.  And acres of newsprint have been consumed in describing what happened and there have been many speeches made and much analysis of what it all means.  I think it all means in short that we became in those few weeks the envy of the rest of the world.  And that was driven home to me a few weeks ago when I attended an Apec meeting in Brunei.  And just before the formal part of the meeting started we gathered as leaders of the 19 or 20 pacific countries to talk before our meeting started and there was only one topic of conversation in 10 minutes.  And that was the success of the Olympics and the Paralympics in Australia.  And those who contributed to the rather enthusiastic talk included not only the President of the United States Bill Clinton but also the President of the Russian Federation and the President of the People's Republic of China.
What that performance did for Australia in so many ways is something that will endure for decades to the enormous credit of your nations.  Just as what was achieved here in Melbourne in 1956 shaped our attitudes to what we can do as a sporting people.
It was appropriate back in 1985 that when the first inductees into the Hall of Fame were honoured, and the fittingly Don Bradman accepted Membership and so did 119 other inductees.  The Hall of Fame honours the sporting achievements of men and women from every sport in this country.  They honour excellence, they honour the sporting traditions of this country.
They also honour the fact that champions are the end product of years of dedication and years of effort.  And they're also the end product of the support and the love and the nurturing of mothers and fathers, and boyfriends and girlfriends, and coaches and supporters, of fundraising drives for local clubs and everything that's bound up with grassroots sporting activity in Australia.  And all of that comes together on an occasion like tonight.  It's an occasion, in a very unselfconscious way, all of us here tonight are going to enjoy because if there's one thing probably above everything else that binds Australians together, no matter what our attitudes may be and our disposition might be on other things and that is our love for sport.  We indulge ourselves on sport we do it well whether we're players or spectators and of course there is no greater sports loving city in Australia than here in Melbourne.  Your passion for sport and the commitment of the people in Melbourne as spectators of sport has the envy of the rest of the world.
So tonight will be another great chapter in the celebration of sporting achievement in this country.  We're going to find out tonight the recipient of the Don Awards.  And each of the nominees Cathy Freeman, Susie O'Neill, Ian Thorpe, Louise Sauvage and Jane Saville have demonstrated great ability combined with dignity, integrity and courage.  And these as we know are qualities that Sir Donald Bradman held so dear during his playing years and the years of administration that followed.  And ladies and gentlemen I thank you and particularly I thank the chairman Neil Fraser for the tremendous work that he's done as head of the Hall of Fame.  It's a great pleasure to be amongst you and I'm sure that we're going to have a wonderful evening together celebrating the great Australian sporting traditions.  Thankyou. 


Subjects: Centenary of Federation; local government; salinity and water quality; road funding; petrol prices; tax reform
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Mr Ross, Senator Ian Macdonald, ladies and gentlemen.  It is for me a real pleasure this morning, the beginning of the last sitting week of the national parliament this year, to have this opportunity of addressing the largest national gathering of representatives of the network of local government throughout our country.
From the 1st of January onwards we begin a year long celebration of the Centenary of Federation.  It's a celebration that essentially will mark that great achievement a hundred years ago of the then six colonies coming together to form the Commonwealth of Australia.  During the year we'll have an opportunity of commemorating the triumphs, recognising some of the failures, but overwhelmingly celebrating the great achievement of Australia over that one hundred year period.  
It will overwhelmingly be a grass roots celebration.  There will be some national highlights, in particular the commemoration of the inauguration of the Commonwealth in Sydney on the 1st of January, and also the commemorative sitting of the first federal parliament in Melbourne on the 9th of May.  But it will be remembered as a year of celebration and a year to reflect on the Australian achievement if it is something in which the people of Australia at a grass roots level can play a role.  And in that I draw an analogy between the way in which we celebrate our centenary as a nation and the contribution made by the various local government organisations of Australia.
It's often been said that this country is over governed.  If you looked at it from a purely theoretical point of view you may in fact endorse that view.  But if you understand the size and the history of this country you will all understand all too readily why it is we have three levels of government, and why it is that it's part and parcel of the political life of this country for those three levels of government to vigorously interact. 
There are imperfections in our federation, there are overlaps, there is duplication, in some cases there's triplication, and alongside that there are things that fall between the three schools of government.  But overwhelmingly the last hundred years has been a period of success and achievement and local government has played a very significant role.  That is not to say its role in the next one hundred years will be exactly the same.  That is not to say there won't be ongoing debate about the size and the responsibilities of local councils, and inevitably within different districts of our country, argument about the size of councils and whether some should be made smaller or indeed some should be made larger by amalgamation.  
But if you look back on the last one hundred years it has been a period of achievement and a period of success. And my message to you today before everything else on behalf of the federal government is that we respect and appreciate, and support the key role of local government in the overall governance of Australia.  The old idea that local government was purely a creature of state government and dealt only with state governments is of course an outworn notion.  We might differ as between the federal government and your association about such things as constitutional recognition.  But there can be no doubt that we in the federal government believe that there is a lively and active and very productive direct relationship between the federal government and local government.  And I'll return to the issue of that direct relationship in a moment.
As you know we currently allocate very significant general financial grants to local government to the tune of $1.3 billion in the current financial year.  And around 881 of that $1.3 billion goes to councils within rural and regional areas.  And over the last year there has been very understandably because of the difficulties faced by many communities in country Australia, there has been a focus on services and support systems within rural and regional Australia.  But it's important from a federal government perspective that when we look at local government in Australia we not only look to the role of councils in country areas, but we also importantly look to the role of local government in the major metropolitan centres because the spirit of localism in Australian politics now whether it's in the country or it's in the cities is as strong and as lively as it has ever been over the last one hundred years.  And as I look around at the plethora of intense local issues that are debated out with great passion in the major metropolitan areas of Australia it reminds me very forcibly of that.
But over the last several years, indeed in the time that we have been in government, the Coalition Government has made a number of very important decisions and inaugurated a number of very important programs that have required the ongoing involvement and commitment not only of local community groups, but also importantly of local government.  
At the last meeting of the Council of Australian Governments, when your councils were represented by your President John Ross, who sat around the table with the representatives of the Federal Government and the various State and Territory governments, I won the support of Premiers and Chief Ministers to the development of a salinity and water quality action plan.  A commitment between governments of $1.4 billion over a period of six to seven years, to begin for the first time in this country's history to put together a really comprehensive plan to tackle the ongoing problem of salinity and water quality.  And we did that against the background of all Australians recognising that one of our most precious assets is the quality of our soil, and the quality and the adequacy of our water supply. And when you bear in mind that unless action were taken in 20 years time the drinking water for the city of Adelaide might be unfit for human consumption in two out of five days you have an idea of the dimension of the problem.
We'll only be able to successfully tackle the salinity and water quality problem if we can marshal federal government, state governments, local government and local communities together, all working towards the same objective and that is what our salinity action plan designs to do.  And in many of the 20 catchment areas that have been denominated as being the areas of greatest challenge, and they come from all around Australia, there will be a very important role for local government.  I was reminded only the weekend before last when with the Deputy Prime Minister I went to Gunnedah to get some first hand briefing on the damage done to local communities and the damage done to the wheat crop of that very important part of rural Australia, of  the role and the importance of local government especially in country communities.
So we see that ongoing partnership between the federal government and local government as being of great importance.  It's also important in areas such as flood mitigation programs.  Local government has played a very important role in the implementation of the Government's extremely successful Work for the Dole schemes.  Local government has also played a very important role in relation to expenditure under the Natural Heritage Trust, $1.25 billion made possible through the sale of the initial 30% of the government's ownership of Telstra. Local government has played an important role in the programme of Networking the Nation which is designed to improve communications and communications facilities throughout the bush.
So in all of these areas we can't operate effectively unless we have the support and the understanding and the co-operation of local government.  This country is simply too big and the distances to be travelled between population centres are too long for any national government to imagine that it can operate without the co-operation of local government.  And we don't just  seek that co-operation through state governments.  State governments are sometimes on some issues even less decentralised than federal governments and sometimes the best way to get the right outcome is for the federal government to deal directly with local government.  
And that of course is what we decided to do in relation to a very significant announcement I made here in Canberra just a week ago today.  As you are aware in the current financial year the federal government has allocated $406.4 million to local councils for local road purposes.  I have been aware for a long time of the concern of local councils about the state of local roads.  I've seen the poor condition of many of them as I've travelled to every part of Australia.  Whenever I go out of the capital cities and indeed in some areas of capital cities as well I find that there's always a very strong argument to spend more money on local roads.  And that is why we decided because of the fortuitous circumstances being advised by the Treasury that our prospective Budget surplus this financial year was going to be greater than we thought at Budget time we've decided to allocate an additional $1.6 billion over the next four years for expenditure on roads throughout Australia.  And of that $1.6 billion, $1.2 billion will be added to the Local Roads' Programme which as you all know is essentially administered by local government.  That represents a 75% increase in the amount of money being spent by the federal government, the amount of money being given by the federal government direct to local government for local road purposes.  
In addition we're going to allocate $400 million for the purposes of augmenting and further supporting expenditure by the federal government over that four year period on national highways and roads of national importance.  And importantly and to those who have sought to portray this decision as being politically distorted as between different areas of Australia, what we have done in relation to each portion of money allocated to the councils within each state is to say that that money will be allocated strictly in accordance with the criteria laid down by state grants' commissions some ten years ago.  In other words within each state the money will be allocated to each council in accordance with a formula devised when the former Federal Labor Government was in office.  And the money will therefore be distributed without regard to the political colour of the federal representatives of the different areas.  And also I hasten to say without regard to the political colour of the people who run the various local councils.  The money will go directly to the states and provided there is no opposition offered in Federal Parliament this week by either the Labor Party or the Australian Democrats, the legislation will be passed when Parliament rises for the Christmas break at the end of this week. So that from your point of view the money can begin flowing almost immediately as soon as you can authorise and commission the beginning of additional work.  
$850 million of the $1.2 billion will go to councils in rural and regional Australia.  The remaining $350 million will be allocated to councils in what could be broadly described as the greater metropolitan areas of Australia.  In other words it's not some kind of porkbarrelling for the bush, it's a genuine injection, a genuine increase of 75% in the amount of money available to all local councils in every part of Australia.  And I believe that it is the best possible way of delivering quickly and fairly and as easily as the circumstances require, additional resources to the people who know how best to spend it to the benefit of local communities.  And there is no doubt that the state of many local roads, particularly in country areas is a matter of concern.  As the rate bases of many country councils due to declining economic circumstances in rural communities have declined so the burden that is thrown on those councils in relation to road maintenance has risen.  
It's an important ingredient of what the Government is doing that current levels of expenditure on roads by local councils be maintained.  And it's a condition of the money going to each council that commitments to that effect be given. I've also sought assurances from every state government in Australia that none of them will take advantage of our decision to increase our share of money going to local government by 75%, I've sought assurances from each of the state governments that none of them will take advantage of that to reduce the money that they give to local councils themselves for local road purposes.  In the case of two states, namely Tasmania and South Australia it won't be difficult for them to give that undertaking because at the moment they don't give any money according to my advice to local government for local road purposes.  Now, but I do want all you as part of this compact directly between us to make certain that in those states where money is given for local road purposes, none of your state governments whatever their political complexion and I'm completely neutral on this part of it, whatever their political complexion, none of them are allowed to say oh well the Federal Government's giving you more money so we'll wind back what we're now giving you.  Let me assure you they're going to do very well out of the GST.  Very well indeed.  And they will have greater resources rather than fewer resources in order to provide you with additional assistance.  Now we can all be winners out of this and most particularly ladies and gentlemen the constituencies you service and the services that you have responsibility for, you can all be winners out of this if current funding levels both by local government and by states and I would encourage those councils in the states that don't give any money for local roads to increase your lobbying efforts, your lobbying efforts on local councils within those states so that they might try and match the contribution of those states that are being a little more generous.
So it does represent a very important, even an historic additional injection of resources.  And it was made against the background of a stronger financial position.  It was also made against the background of the Government believing that putting another $1.6 billion into road funding in Australia was something that would last for decades.  None of us like expensive petrol.  I don't like it - you don't like it.  We would all like to see the price of petrol come down.  It's more expensive than it normally is because the world price of crude oil is higher than it normally is.  And we all look to an improvement on that front.  Some relatively minor reduction in fuel excise - a one to two cent reduction costing $600-$700 million a year could have been given but that could have disappeared overnight with a fluctuation in the world price of crude oil.  And we asked ourselves was it a better long-term investment to put another $1.6 billion into roads or into what might prove to be a transitory adjustment to a very small degree in the level of excise.  As governments are constantly required to do, we took a decision.  We decided it was a better long-term investment in the future of this country to put the $1.6 billion into additional road funding.  
That doesn't alter our concern about the level of fuel prices.  That doesn't alter our determination in terms of international lobbying to do all we can to bring about some abatement in that price.  And of course the price of petrol can be affected not only by the world price of crude oil but also by the exchange rate of the Australian dollar against the United States dollar.  I can't let the opportunity go by without reminding this audience of the very significant additional measures in the tax reform plan that were designed to reduce to a lower level than it would otherwise have been the cost of certain fuels, not only in rural and regional Australia but also in the metropolitan areas.  And I refer in particular to the reduction in the excise on diesel fuel, the extension of the full rebate to certain usages of diesel fuel, not only for on-farm purposes but also in relation to rail and other areas.  
And if you look at the totality of the fuel package, although this has been disguised and indeed overwhelmed by the increase in world fuel prices over the last four months, you will see dotted throughout that taxation package, you will see many examples of the willingness of the government to give very particular concessions to people who depend for their livelihood on the use of fuel.  
The tax reform plan represented a major reversal of a trend away from relative financial independence for the states towards a greater accumulation of financial authority in Canberra in the hands of the Commonwealth Government.  One of the great advantages of tax reform was that we gave to all of the states of Australia something they'd asked for for forty years - and that is a guaranteed source of revenue.  They get all of the proceeds of the goods and services tax and over time the amount of money they will have for their ordinary purposes will rise very significantly.  On current indications the transition period whereby we guarantee they get the same amount of money as they would have got under the old formula, before the benefits of the GST click in, on current estimation that is certainly well on target and it may possibly in the case of one or two states, certainly in the case of one, it may arrive ahead of time.  So can I say in your dealings with state governments don't be misled by propositions that the financial arrangements between the Federal Government and the state governments have left them disadvantaged.  Despite political posturing on the GST, there was no reluctance on the part of any Premier to sign up on the dotted line because each of them, even those who'd spoken the loudest against the new tax plan in public, recognise that the new system would provide them with access to a growth source of revenue, something that they had been asking for for a long time.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a very important time in reflecting upon what this country has achieved over the last one hundred years and it's a very important time in projecting to the future.  There are many things that in the life of a hundred years in a nation will change.  And if we look back over the last century we think of the unbelievable change in the social, the political, the economic and the lifestyle landscape of our country.  We think of all that has been achieved, all that has been endured, the mistakes as well as the achievements and the triumphs.  But the fundamental importance of having representative government, the fundamental importance of having a network of governments that gives proper expression to local opinion, whilst marshalling a focus where it is necessary on a national outcome or a national goal, is the challenge of any system of government.  
We Australians have made our mistakes but by and large we have done things well.  We remain a very cohesive, open and democratic society.  We are a country that has succeeded in successfully absorbing people from 140 different nations around the world.  And although the different groups that have come here have not lost a feeling for their respective homelands, which is very understandable, they have always put the interests of this country against those, above and beyond, those affections and those natural links.  So the Australian achievement at the beginning of the year 2001 is a very considerable achievement.  Our country was on best display at the Olympic Games and the credit that was bought to this country, all around the world, is so evident when you travel overseas now.  And the great volunteer spirit which is so important to your local communities was also very much on display.  And local government plays a very major role in fostering that sense of volunteerism and that sense of local commitment and local effort.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I thank your President, Mr Ross, for the way in which he effectively communicates the concerns and the aspirations of local government to the Federal Government.  And can I particularly thank my colleague Senator Ian Macdonald who has ministerial responsibility for local government matters for the very energetic and urgent way in which he has put the concerns of local government to us.  I can assure you that when we decided on the roads package, he was one very happy Minister because he knew that it was a concern of all of you and he knew it was something that was going to address, in a very practical way, a very legitimate concern of local government.
I thank you very warmly for the invitation to come here.  I regret that I can't stay with you after my address because I have to return to a Cabinet meeting which is still in progress but I do want to assure you on behalf of all of my colleagues that we have a very strong commitment to the maintenance of the role of local government in our system of government throughout Australia.  Where appropriate we like to deal direct with local government as we are doing in relation to local road funding, because when you deal directly with local government you don't have the decisions of the Federal Government filtered by the local political priorities of state governments.  And I think that is a benefit to you as it is a benefit for us.  I wish all of you and your families and your staff a very merry Christmas and a year in 2001 in which all of us - whatever our political views, whatever our backgrounds may be - can reflect with an enormous amount of pride on the scale of the Australian achievement over the last one hundred years to which local government itself has made a very important contribution.
[ends] 


Subjects: Defence
E&amp;OE..................
I present to the House the Government's White Paper on defence policy, "Defence 2000 - Our Future Defence Force".
This White Paper represents the most comprehensive reappraisal of Australian defence capability for decades.
It announces major increases, over a long time scale, in defence funding.  And it complements the Governments strategic view of the circumstances in which Australia is now placed in our region and beyond.
At the outset, I acknowledge the Government's debt to the Minister for Defence, the Hon John Moore MP, for his tireless commitment to both policy and management reform within the defence area.
As a people, Australians have never taken their freedom for granted.   As an independent and self-reliant nation, we've accepted the unique demands placed upon us as the privileged occupants of an island continent.We've accepted responsibility for defending ourselves, our homes, our way of life and, when called upon, to defend the rights of others.
Today's White Paper ensures we can continue to do so.  The Government's purpose is to provide Australia with the Defence capability it will need over the first few decades of this new century.
We are grateful for the role played by many Australians during the process of preparing the White Paper.  Under the leadership of Andrew Peacock, former Minister for Foreign Affairs and Ambassador to the United States, we undertook the most extensive public consultation on defence issues in Australia's history.
His report, published a few weeks ago, shows that a strong national consensus on defence issues exists throughout the country.  The views gathered were extremely useful in making our decisions on Australia's future defence force needs and I would like to personally thank all those who took part in this important consultation process. 
It must be said, we have not undertaken this defence review because we face an urgent strategic crisis.  There are of course some important challenges, yet Australia remains a secure country.
In peaceful times it is sometimes easy to forget how essential a strong military capability is.  However, as we were all reminded last year, there are times when the whole country looks to our service men and women to do extraordinary things under exceptional circumstances.
That does not happen by itself.  We recognise a responsibility to recruit and retain the best people possible, to equip and train them to world standards and to ensure that all is done so that they may successfully face whatever tasks lie ahead.
But all of that costs a great deal.  Defence is one of our most expensive national undertakings.  We have an equal responsibility to ensure that Government funds are spent wisely.
Over the past few years, the Government has given high priority to reforming the Defence organisation and we have regarded this as an essential precondition for serious consideration of our long-term defence and funding needs.
Important reforms have begun.  Management practice has improved, waste and inefficiency cut, and responsibility and accountability tightened.  Great credit is due to the Minister for Defence, and also to his predecessor, Ian McLachlan.
The Government has ensured that the Defence Force was able to meet the demands placed upon it.  Defence alone was exempted from the budget cuts necessary in our first years in Government, and we have maintained defence spending in real terms ever since.
Early last year we took what proved to be a prudent and far-sighted decision to increase the readiness of our land forces, so that we were ready to meet the crisis in East Timor when it arose.  And we have provided substantial additional funding to support our East Timor commitments.
But, at the same time, the Government has been determined to step back from the day-to-day demands and review the basics of our strategic policy.  For the past twelve years Australia's defence funding has been flat in real terms, and indeed fell slightly in the early 1990's.  Over the same period, costs have increased in real terms in many areas of the defence budget.
The result has been a long-term squeeze on our capabilities, and on the people in uniform.  The Government became concerned that our defence budget was no longer adequate to sustain the existing set of capabilities.  Without action, defence spending as a percentage of GDP would have continued to decline.  So we have undertaken a comprehensive review of all aspects of our strategic policy, force structure, and funding needs.
Our basic objective was to provide a stable and sustainable basis for our defence policy by aligning our strategic objectives, our capability requirements, and our defence spending.  That is the essence of this White Paper.
We have taken a long-term view of all these issues.   Our key defence decisions are not just about what we need this year or the next: the reality of a modern combat capability highly dependent on advanced technology is the need to plan for the next decade, and even the decade after that.
We started by acknowledging the many positive trends in our strategic environment.  Economic growth and regional integration augur well for the future security of the Asia-Pacific.  But they cannot be taken for granted.  The relationships between the region's major powers will be critical for the stability of our entire region, and they pose challenges as well as providing opportunities in the years ahead.  Continued US engagement in the Asia-Pacific will be the single most important factor in maintaining security in the region over that period.
Closer to home, several of our most important neighbours are confronting new and difficult circumstances.  Indonesia's political transition and economic situation obviously pose major challenges to its Government.  Australia's commitment to supporting Indonesia's stability and territorial integrity remains steadfast.  PNG and many of the island states of the Southwest Pacific likewise face a range of domestic challenges.
The White paper reaffirms that we take a total view of security that goes beyond military and defence issues.  It builds on the assessments of our environment and the broad direction of our international posture set out in the Government's Foreign and Trade Policy White Paper published in 1997.
The White Paper reaffirms that Australia seeks to work with other countries to achieve our strategic objectives, and it recognises the strategic interests and objectives we share with our friends and neighbours in the region.  It places strong emphasis on our international defence relationships, including our key alliance with the United States, our bilateral and multilateral regional linkages and the importance we place on cooperating with a strong New Zealand Defence Force.  We emphasise particularly our long-term interest in good defence relations with Indonesia.
The Government believes that Australia's armed forces will continue to have a vital role in our overall strategic and foreign policy. We cannot easily predict when or where Australia might need to deploy its armed forces.  We think it important to both clearly establish our enduring strategic interests and objectives, and ensure we have forces to protect them under a wide range of circumstances.
This has been the approach we have taken in this White Paper.  We have aimed to provide a clear and comprehensive statement of our strategic imperatives, and to spell out the principles that guide our force-development decisions.
The Government has reaffirmed the primacy in our defence planning of self-reliance in defending our own territory from direct attack.  Such an attack is not at all likely under current circumstances, but Australia should, as a matter of enduring national policy, maintain the capacity to independently defend its sovereign territory against any threat that may emerge.
This means the maintenance of air and naval forces able to deny maritime approaches to any hostile forces and the capability to defeat any incursions onto our soil, without relying on help from the combat forces of other countries.
But while the self-reliant defence of Australia remains the basis of our defence policy, it is not the limit of that policy.  Our security equally depends on developments in our neighbourhood and beyond.
Over recent years the demands on the ADF, especially for peace keeping and other lower-level operations, have increased sharply.  Many of these operations have been far from home - in Africa and the Middle East, including the Gulf.  But the most pressing demands have been for operations in our immediate neighbourhood.
Today the ADF is deployed on operations in East Timor, Bougainville and Solomon Islands.  These operations serve important Australian security interests, as well as urgent humanitarian needs.  We may be called upon again to take a leading role in such operations.  The Government is determined to ensure that our defence forces are adequately prepared and equipped to work with our neighbours to protect shared interests and fulfil our responsibilities in the immediate region.
Beyond our immediate neighbourhood, Australia has important interests in helping to support the stability of Southeast Asia, the wider Asia-Pacific, and the global security framework.  The Government is realistic about the scale of contribution Australia can make to the security of the wider region and beyond.
We will not develop capabilities specifically to undertake operations beyond our immediate region.  But where our interests are engaged and circumstances warrant, Australia will be prepared to contemplate providing forces to coalitions supporting regional security.  The forces we develop for the defence of Australia will give us a significant range of options to make such contributions.
To meet all these strategic objectives, the Government has decided that Australia needs to maintain two key sets of capabilities.
First, we need high-technology air and naval forces that can defend Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches.  These forces can also contribute to regional coalitions in higher-level conflicts, as well as support forces deployed in our immediate neighbourhood.
Second, we need highly deployable land forces that can operate both in the defence of Australia and to undertake lower-level operations in our immediate neighbourhood.
To do this, we need to maintain the full range of military capabilites we have today, and significantly enhance many of them over the coming decade.  We need to increase the readiness, deployability and combat weight of our land forces, and progressively upgrade our air and naval forces to keep pace with evolving technologies and capabilities.  The government is determined to ensure that the ADF will have the capability to both fight and win.
This will require an increase in Defence spending.  The effective use of that increase, as well as the existing level of expenditure, also requires a new approach to defence planning to provide Defence with a clear long-term program of development to meet Australia's strategic objectives.
The Government has provided this in the Defence Capability Plan, which is set out in the White Paper.  The Defence Capability Plan sets goals for the development of each major group of capabilities, and provides detailed, costed programs for their development.  It tells Defence exactly what the Government expects, and provides a much clearer basis for financial management and programming within Defence itself.
The Defence Capability Plan covers the next ten years, and takes account of the need to invest within that period on new capabilities which will only come into service in the decade commencing 2010.  Within the disciplined framework of the Plan, the Government has made major decisions about the future of all our major capabilities.
The Army will be maintained at the increased levels of readiness that it has reached following the INTERFET deployment.  Under this plan six battalion groups will be held at high readiness including a parachute battalion, two light infantry air-mobile battalions, a motorised battalion and a mechanised battalion.  The current SAS regiment will be maintained and the commando battalion will be fully developed.  The logistics capacity for the support of these units  will be greatly improved.
Their firepower and mobility will also be enhanced.  Two squadrons of Armed Reconnaissance Helicopters will enter service, providing the Army with a major new capability.  An additional squadron of troop lift helicopters will also be deployed.
To better protect our forces, the Armoured Personnel Carrier fleet will undergo a major upgrade; new air defence missile systems and highly mobile mortar systems will enter service in the coming years, and our battalions will receive advanced thermal surveillance systems.
Soldiers within our deployable land forces will receive improved body armour, weapons, night vision equipment and communication systems.  In combination, these systems will ensure the Australian soldier remains one of the world's most effective combatants - in both peacekeeping and war.
The capabilities of our soldiers will be further improved by development of an enhanced combat training centre at which sophisticated computer systems will allow the most advanced simulated training possible.  This will be a world class facility.
The Government has given particular attention to the Reserves.  They will be given a major new role in providing the follow-on troops to sustain long-term deployments.  Legislative changes we have already announced will enable the Government to call forward reserves in a much wider range of circumstances, to help meet the demands which may well be placed on the ADF over coming years.  For those who join, the Reserves will become a more demanding, but also a more rewarding commitment.
The Defence Capability Plan commits the Government to a sustained program of investment in the air and maritime capabilites so important to the defence of Australia.  The plan includes upgrades and eventual replacement for the F-18 and F-111 aircraft, new air refuelling aircraft, a major upgrade to our surface fleet including the construction of a new class of major warship later in the decade, and a program to bring the Collins submarines up to their full potential.
And, after careful consideration, the Government has decided to proceed with the acquisition of four AEW&amp;C aircraft, with an option of up to another three at a later date.
All of this will cost a great deal.  To achieve the capability enhancements set out in the Defence Capability Plan, the Government will increase defence spending by $500 million in financial year 2001-02 and by a further $500 million in 2002-03, providing an additional $1 billion that year.  Thereafter defence spending will continue to rise by 3 per cent in real terms in each year of the remainder of the decade.
The capability enhancements in this White Paper will result in a $23 billion increase in Defence funding over the coming decade - a significant increase in defence funding by any standard.
This is a much more specific funding commitment than in any White Paper over the past twenty-five years.  It will provide the first significant real increases in defence spending in fifteen years. And we have taken the unprecedented step of providing funding projections over the entire decade.
On the basis of current expectations that the economy will grow about 3 per cent per annum over the decade, Defence spending will therefore be maintained at its present percentage of around 1.9 per cent of GDP.
This firm commitment to realistic increases in Defence funding will be welcomed by the vast majority of Australians, who recognise the importance of our armed forces to Australia's long-term future.  It will, of course, be especially important to those men and women who accept the special challenge of a career in our Defence Force.
This White Paper places special emphasis on the people of Defence.  They are a tremendous national asset.  The Government intends that this White Paper will make clear not just what the Government expects of them, but also that the Government understands what they need to do the job.  They are immensely committed to the vital work they do - I hope the decisions and commitments we are announcing today will demonstrate how strongly we value their contribution.
The White Paper also details a range of measures and initiatives to address some of the real issues, which confront our service personnel.  The men and women of the ADF do a job unlike any other, and they are in so many ways exceptional people.  But they are also people like the rest of us, who wish to raise families, own homes and educate their children.  We need to make sure that the special demands of service life do not make these things harder than they should be.  Getting these things right, so that we can recruit and retain good people into the ADF, will be one of the keys to our future military strength. 
The Government has decided to increase support and funding for the Australian Services Cadets Scheme. It believes the scheme provides worthwhile and challenging experiences for many young Australians and can result in a lifetime interest in the Australian military.
The Government believes that the White Paper's decisions and commitments will also provide certainty to those in industry who make a vital contribution to our defence.  The ADF needs to rely on a wide range of people and businesses to develop and deliver the capabilities needed, and the Government places high priority on building effective partnerships between Defence and the private sector.
We also want to use our defence investment to help foster skills, innovation and technologies in Australia and, of course, provide jobs where possible.  The programs announced in this White Paper will have important consequences for many sectors of Australian industry.  For example, our shipbuilding industry should benefit from plans to undertake major upgrades and new construction work.
Of course there are many more important elements to this White Paper.  They are detailed in the document and will be spelled out in more detail by the Minister for Defence and his colleagues, the Minister assisting him, the Hon Bruce Scott, and Senator Abetz.  I would like to thank them and their team in Defence for the work that has gone into this White Paper.  I would also like to thank my colleagues in the National Security Committee of Cabinet and officials from the departments of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Foreign Affairs and Trade, Treasury and Finance and the Office of National Assessments, all of whom have made a major contribution.
In addition, I particularly thank the Chief of the Defence Force and the three service chiefs for their valuable input in the course of preparing the White Paper.
The Government has every reason to be proud of this White Paper.  It is one of its major achievements.
It sets new standards in the clarity with which the fundamentals of our strategic policy are explained.
It sets new standards in the detailed program we have set down for the development of our defence forces.
It sets new standards by providing specific and unambiguous long term funding guidance for Defence.
And it sets new standards in the way in which the people of Australia have been drawn into the policy process.
I believe the result should maintain the healthy level of bipartisanship on the basics of Australia's strategic policy that we have seen in this place for many years.
The decisions set out in this White Paper ensure Australia will gain and maintain, well into this new century, the capabilities needed to defend this nation and make a responsible contribution to the security of our region.
I seek leave to table "Defence 2000 - Our Future Defence Force".


Subjects: Prime Minister's XI
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Gary.  To Gary Humphries the Chief Minister of the ACT; Mr Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Federal Opposition; Senator Margaret Reid, the President of the Senate; Malcolm Speed, Chief Executive of the Australian Cricket Board and very importantly of course Adam Gilchrist and Jimmy Adams representing the two teams taking place in what is I think is the twenty-fifth Prime Minister's XI against the touring team.  
These new facilities are fantastic and it is a great pleasure to be here, it is always a pleasure to be here but the change that has been brought about on this ground by these new facilities it has really made them into, not only a classy sporty arena by Australian standards but a very classy sporting arena by world standards.  And the combination of cricket and Australian Rules that is going to use these magnificent facilities I think will bring enormous credit to the ACT Cricket Association, great benefits to the people of Canberra and great enjoyment to spectators of both cricket and Australian Rules.  And I do want to pay tribute to the work of the ACT Government, both Kate Carnell and Gary Humphries, the contribution the ACT Government made I think of $8 million towards this with the Federal Government contributing an additional $1 million out of Federation Funding and my colleague Margaret Reid worked tirelessly as an advocate for the development of these new facilities.
The Prime Minister's XI is one of the highlights of the political calendar as far as I am concerned anyway.  And it's a very pleasant way to end the year.  This is the last parliamentary sitting day I hope, that's the intention anyway that we don't sit beyond today or perhaps the wee hours of tomorrow morning.  But it's a wonderful way to end the year and it's always a great pleasure to have our friends from the West Indies here, it really is.  And the way the match is shaping . . . the very first Prime Minister's XI match was against the West Indies in 1951 and the tradition that's gone on since then with some interruption after Sir Robert Menzies went and then to his great credit Bob Hawke bought the tradition back in 1983 and it's been carried on ever since.  And I am sure that there's bipartisan support for the makings of a very, very fine tradition of a Prime Minister's XI.  
So ladies and gentlemen, I simply want to say to you Adam thank you very much for being Captain of the Prime Minister's XI.  You have a great team.  It's a great time for Australian cricket, we're very proud of Steve Waugh's mighty team, we're very proud of what they've achieved but we also remember the years when West Indies' teams humbled us match after match and we always remind ourselves that there are ups and downs in life and there are ups and downs in sport.  And so it is that we keep that in mind, we always see the West Indies as great competitors, great entertainers and I'm delighted to welcome all of you here today.  I thank the ACT Cricket Association for what it is doing for cricket.  I thank the Cricket Board for its continued patronage of this game and I also want to particularly thank Hewlett Packard who's the principal sponsor of this game. As Malcolm Speed knows and all the other cricket administrators know these days you can't have these wonderful occasions without sponsors.  And I do thank the company as I acknowledge all other great sponsors of Australian sport, they make a huge contribution, they keep it all going.  I hope we all have a great afternoon, I'll be back later and I hope by then we're moving towards you know a very exciting climax and I look forward to sharing a drink with both teams after the game is concluded, but I hope you all enjoy yourselves.  
Thanks a lot. 
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much.  First may I acknowledge and pay respects to the Ngunnawall people, the traditional owners of the land where we meet.
Dr Evelyn Scott, Chairman of the Council for Reconciliation; Leader of the Opposition, Kim Beazley; the Deputy Prime Minister, John Anderson; Leader of the Australian Democrats Senator Meg Lees; and may I also acknowledge the presence of Senator John Herron, the Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs; and Philip Ruddock, not only the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, but also the Minister assisting me in matters relating to reconciliation; and also very appropriately I acknowledge the presence of Geoff Clark, the Chairman of ATSIC.
May I start Evelyn on behalf of everyone in wishing you a very happy birthday, a very very happy birthday indeed.  And it has a special meaning because in the time that you have been Chairman of the Council you have given it dignified, inspiring, strong and always very positive leadership. And much of what has been achieved, and I'll say something of that in a moment, much of what has been achieved particularly over the last year is due to the dignified and positive leadership that you yourself have displayed.  
I agree with what you had to say in your speech Evelyn.  Whatever may be the debate about the form that reconciliation should take there can be no doubt that the mood of the Australian community is overwhelmingly in favour of reconciliation.  It is and should be an unstoppable force and you yourself and the members of your council over the last ten years have played a very major role in bringing about a change in public attitude.  You have opened doors, you've provided avenues, and you've given opportunities.  And as a consequence I believe the nation has been enriched and is a better, more united nation as a consequence.
The process of reconciliation is not complete and some will argue as to whether you ever finally complete such an ambitious enterprise.  But the mood and the spirit of the community in relation to reconciliation is so much better and so much stronger despite inevitably as we must acknowledge some differences not only of emphasis but also of direction.  But there are so many things that unite us, and an expression that I've from time to time used in public life to speak of major challenges to the Australian nation is that the things that unite us are infinitely greater and more enduring than the things that divide us.  And so it is in relation to reconciliation.
We will consider the propositions that are contained in the document.  We will of course as a government consider them against the background of positions that we have stated previously.  But I can assure you Evelyn, and the other members of the Council, that we will consider them in a spirit of immense good will and a desire to the maximum extent possible, given some different perspectives, to achieve the maximum level of agreement and the maximum level of harmony.
There are practical issues to be addressed in relation to reconciliation.  There are also symbolic issues.  Today's gathering - the morning of the last sitting of the national Parliament before the end of the ten-year legislative lifespan of the Council for Reconciliation. And you present this document to the leaders of the four recognised political parties in the national Parliament.  In the presence of a gathering of people who in their different ways have tried so hard over the last ten years to make a contribution and thereby to make a difference.
Much has been achieved during the past 12 months in particular, and you Evelyn in your very gracious speech have drawn attention to it.  I can assure you that reconciliation will, not withstanding the expiry of the Council's legislative remit, remain a major focus of the Government.  
It is the intention of the Government so that the momentum towards reconciliation and the reconciliation process is not lost to contribute a sum of $5.5 million seed funding to the Council's successor body - Reconciliation Australia.  I'm also pleased to announce that from today donations and contributions to that trust, that foundation, will be fully tax deductible.  
Many of you will be aware ladies and gentlemen, that last May I announced that it was the intention of the Government to set aside in the Parliamentary Triangle here in the National Capital a site to honour the importance of reconciliation in the nation's life. And I'm very pleased to announce that the site for what will be known as 'Reconciliation Place' will be located on the East West Promenade in the Parliamentary zone.  The site will link the National Library of Australia and the National Science and Technology Centre on one side to the High Court of Australia and the National Gallery on the other.  
And so we will have in a symbolic sense in the centre of the nation's political life and national life we will have an area set aside to perpetuate in the minds of Australian public the importance of the reconciliation process.  And the construct of Reconciliation Place will of course recognise the shared journey between the different peoples of the Australian nation, and will include a memorial and depiction of the removal of children from their families as part of the very difficult and traumatic experience of the indigenous people of this community.
The last thing I want to say my friends, is that we are coming to the end of the year, we're coming to the end of ten year legislative span of the council.  And this breakfast brings together so many people who've played a role in that.  And whatever may be our different perspectives and the different views we might hold as to how to achieve our goals, I believe it can be said with total sincerity and total accuracy that there is, within the Australian community, a great level of good will towards the indigenous people of our nation; a determination whatever our political perspectives may be to honour in a sensitive and understanding way the special place that they will always occupy in the life of this nation and a determination to bring about those changes in the circumstances of their education, their health, their employment and their housing opportunities that will enable this country in the fullness of time to say that in relation to each of their citizens and to each of the groups that make up the Australian community that all are receiving a fair go; that all are sharing in the Australian dream and all are in every sense of the word fully and equally part of the great Australian Nation.
I thank you Evelyn and I thank your council for its work and what it has done in a great and important cause.  
Thankyou
[ends] 


Subjects: Federation Exhibition
E&amp;OE..................
Thanks Kerry Stokes the Chairman of the Gallery Council, Peter McGauran, Brian Kennedy, John McDonald, Betty Churcher all the other Gallery Council members, ladies and gentlemen.  I first say how nice it is that the launch of this great Centenary of Federation Exhibition should coincide with the retirement of Kerry Stokes as Chairman of the Gallery Council.  I want on behalf of the Government to thank him for his tireless and very skilful chairmanship of the Council over the last seven years.  It's a very large slice of the 18 year period that the Gallery has been open and it has become a very important focal point of the artistic life of Australia.  And it is just so appropriate that his retirement should coincide with opening of what I think will be a wonderful part of a year long celebration of our centenary.
In many respects, ladies and gentlemen, this exhibition is the first major event in Australia of the celebration of the centenary.  And as Betty Churcher said it's a wonderfully varied exhibition and if you walk around you see many of the famous Australian paintings.  You also as Betty said see many that nobody virtually has seen before.  It depicts the happy times of the last 100 years it depicts the sad times of the depression, the challenging tragedy of drought, it depicts war, it depicts sport, it has a strong indigenous perspective at so many points.  It reminds us of the immigrant roots of this country, it is therefore, I think a marvellous representation.  It contains some of the most iconic paintings of our 100 years as a nation such as the Longstaff, Menin Gate.  I noticed as I passed that is even pairs together the famous Whitely and Drysdale paintings depicting a certain game that a few of us follow very closely.  It is the sort of exhibition that I think will reach out to so many Australians and remind us of who we are and what we've been through over the last 100 years.  It will remind us of the various stages through which the visual arts have passed over that period of time.  It will remind us of the great artists that this country has produced.  It is in that way the ideal point an which to open in earnest of the celebration of the Centenary of Federation of the Australian Nation.
And may I say to Betty Churcher and Tony Eggleton and Rodney Cavalier who are representing the Council here tonight, how wisely they have invested in this exhibition.  And what's good about it is it will travel around Australia.  One of the things that all of us have wanted to do is to take art to the people.  It sounds cliche, it sounds very trite but it's very important in a country as large as Australia that we endeavour to do that.
I want to thank, and mark my congratulations to John McDonald for the work that he's done as curator of the exhibition.  I think the way in which it's been put together, the different categories and the emphasis within those categories and the mixture of the old and well known with the less well known and less orthodox.  I think he's achieved an extremely fine mix.
It is a remarkably large exhibition I understand something of the order of 270 different works of art.  And perhaps the largest the gallery has had.  I think it will be a wonderful focal point for the celebration of the centenary.  I think it will attract people in their tens of thousands and it will do great things for the credit of this great national institution.  And to all of those who are associated and particularly you Brian can I take the opportunity of again saying what I believe to be the marvellous job that you do as Director of the Gallery.  You have brought a great deal of zeal and energy to the job and the Gallery has well and truly burgeoned under your direction.  I think it is entirely appropriate that Betty your predecessor who did so much for the Gallery should also be associated with this opening.  I therefore have very great pleasure in declaring the exhibition open.  I believe it is a marvellous launching pad of our celebration of our centenary, I think it does remind us very much of our uniqueness as a people, what we've been through over the last 100 years.  I think it will be a huge success and bring great credit to this Gallery.  Thankyou. 


Subjects: economy; budget; Liberal Party leadership; petrol prices; Sydney’s second airport; welfare report; relations with Indonesia; research and development.
E&amp;OE………………………………………………………………………………
GLENN MILNE:
Well we're headed into an election year after the Christmas break, but there are some worrying signs on the horizon - home lending is down, unemployment is up, for the moment interest rates are on hold. But do you think the economy could afford to slow any further?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think the economy is moving a little more slowly than it was a year ago and that's not necessarily a bad thing. We had very strong employment growth three months ago, stronger than I thought, and you therefore are seeing understandably a bit of an adjustment in the figures in the last couple of months.
So it's too early to talk about unemployment rising. After all it's still near a 10 year low. 
GLENN MILNE:
So you could expect it to drop again?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't know. I can only in a sense repeat the best advice we have from the Treasury and that is that unemployment is likely to remain about where it is now well into next year.
GLENN MILNE:
Well you told your party room this week that the Government had probably had the best year of its term so far. Your previous public remarks have been all about an election probably sometime after October next year. Are you still locked into that timing?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you're never locked into a particular timing but the election is due around October/November of next year and at the moment I can't really say any more than that. That's when it's due. You fight too hard to win elections to go earlier than your appointed time.
Three years is a pretty short period by world standards. I'm in no particular hurry to go to the public. But I accept that, under the constitution, I've got to go to the public and, as you should in a democracy, by the end of next year. And I can't really say any more than that.
GLENN MILNE:
Well I thought one thing that might hurry you up is the turmoil in the Labor Party over alleged electoral rorting at the present time. I mean Queensland in particular is in a terrible mess. You're not tempted?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no, I think that would be seen very cynical. You don't get any marks for that. What the public want from us is good government and that's what we're trying to deliver and we're making decisions. 
We just brought down the biggest defence revamp in a quarter of a century. We've delivered this huge change in the tax system. We've got a major directional statement from Jocelyn Newman on welfare policy this week. So it goes on.
I mean while the Labor Party wallows in internal recrimination and rorting, we'll get on with good government.
GLENN MILNE:
But it's clear of course the problems with rorting are spilling over to both sides and there's general cynicism amongst voters. One of the things that the Labor Party is suggesting is that the Electoral Commission ought to come in and oversee internal party ballots to stop this sort of practice. Do you think that's something you might embrace?
PRIME MINISTER:
Glenn, there's no former member of the Liberal Party in gaol for criminal fraud. That's how this all started in Queensland. So let’s have none of this business of, oh, it's six of one and a half a dozen of the other. It's not.
GLENN MILNE:
All right, so you're not tempted to go early? We're still looking at October probably. Do you think though that, given you're sitting on a large budget surplus, that personal tax cuts could be on the agenda next year?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we've just had a huge personal tax cut.
GLENN MILNE:
Well you know what voters are like, they'll always take more from Government.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's understandable because, afterall, it is their money. It's not our money. It's theirs and they're entitled to have a strong view about what's done with it.
Glenn, we've just had a very big personal tax cut. We need to maintain a decent budget surplus. I'm not going to get into speculation about further rounds of tax cuts. We'll obviously look at our budget position when the budget is brought down. 
We've got other commitments. In the New Year I'm going to have something to say about innovation policy, and that's a very important thing about the country's future, our science base, our technological base, our innovative capacity. All of those things are very important. So there's a lot to be done on the nation building side in the broadest sense of the word. But we always try and keep these things in appropriate balance.
GLENN MILNE:
Well an appropriate balance sounds like tax cuts dependent on size of budget surplus. Is that a fair equation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they're your musings. They're not the Prime Minister's responses.
GLENN MILNE:
Equation. 
Okay, you've signalled that you'll probably retire mid term if you win the next election. But you seem to have kept the language deliberately vague. Is there any chance that you would stay on?
PRIME MINISTER:
Glenn, what I said in that interview I did on my 61st birthday was that, by the time I got to the age of 64, I'd start thinking about my future. Now I think that's an honest statement of the position. I neither add to that nor subtract from it. It's always been the position. It's been the position since I made that statement, and nothing I have said since has qualified it or added to it.
GLENN MILNE:
Governments get shock wall, of course, after time. What's your assessment of your relationship with the Australian people now? Do you think they still like, trust, respect you?
PRIME MINISTER:
I would hope that the Australian public think we're doing a good job. I don't expect every decision we take to be popular but we have tried to do the right thing by the country, rather than serve sectional interest groups or respond to transient political pressures. We've tried to take a long-term view.
That was most evident with things like tax reform. That was very unpopular, and I'm sure I've probably made some enemies along the way in the process of implementing those changes. But I've probably also made some friends in the terms of people, even though they may not like my policies, they respect the doggedness and the consistency of the Government in always trying to do the right thing.
GLENN MILNE:
I was going to say, do you think you're a Prime Minister whose relationship with the people is built on a sort of grudging respect rather than an emotional bond of some sort?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that is for others to decide. I am not like some of my predecessors who are preoccupied with, you know, self-analysis. I try and do the right thing by the Australian people. I find, when I mix with the Australian people which is very frequently, that my relationship with them is easy and open and friendly. That's not hard because Australians are easy people to relate to. They are very direct. People are very direct with me, sometimes critical, sometimes supportive. And that's how it should be. And I do spend a great deal of time talking directly to people - far more than many allow for.
GLENN MILNE:
So you don't consider your Government is at the same stage as, say, the Government that Paul Keating led?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I don't find, as I move around Australia, a sort of visceral political hatred of the Government. I certainly don't. I find people happy about the broad direction of what is being done, critical on particular issues. I mean everybody is very unhappy at the moment about the price of petrol. So am I.
GLENN MILNE:
But there are signs it's coming down, don't you think?
PRIME MINISTER:
There are, and they're welcome. Any strengthening of the exchange rate of the Australian dollar against the US dollar helps and other things help as well.
In the end what you've got to try and do is deliver good government for the generality of the Australian people. And if you do that, and you don't get preoccupied with your own political persona, as distinct from doing the right thing by the public, then I think you can keep them supportive of what you're doing.
GLENN MILNE:
Is Peter Costello now your obvious successor, do you think?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Peter is very competent and he'd obviously do a very good job as a party leader. But I have always taken the proper view that it's not for me to decide who my successor is when the time comes to choose one. That's not my job. It's the job of the parliamentary party.
GLENN MILNE:
Are there any other candidates?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the question whether there are other candidates, and I think there a lot of other competent people in the party as well, is a matter for the parliamentary party at the time. Now we don't know when that is, nobody does. And all I can say is it will be their decision. I owe my position to their decision and my successor will owe his or her position to their decision as well.
GLENN MILNE:
Prime Minister, before we get to those big, domestic agenda items we were discussing - Indonesia. We had the first visit by a Ministerial group to Australia since our difficulties over East Timor. It was an on again, off again visit. Encouraging signs, do you think?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, I thought it was good that it finally happened and the substance and the atmosphere of the meeting was excellent. Our relations are improving. There's still a long way to go and you have to take it in a measured way that is consistent with the political dignity of each side.
But we are seeing an improvement at the Government level and that's very encouraging. I had a very long discussion with the Ministers and particularly with the Foreign Minister, Mr Shihab and…
GLENN MILNE:
He's not a great fan of Australia…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he has been critical in the past, yes. But he indicated to me that, to use his own language, we are on the upward rather than the downward. And that's good.
GLENN MILNE:
Any sign of a visit from President Wahid?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's a matter for President Wahid. He is welcome if he wants to come. And I hope he will come. I've had three very productive meetings with him in different parts of the world - in Tokyo, New York, and Brunei and I hope the next meeting might be in Australia but that's a matter for him. He's very welcome.
GLENN MILNE:
Right, to Sydney airport. You've said that we're going to have a decision on Sydney airport, the second Sydney airport by Christmas. Is that still going to happen?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I said that I hoped to be able to say, or the Government hoped to be able to say something substantive about it by Christmas. Now we're going to discuss the matter again at our Cabinet meeting this coming week so perhaps somebody ought to ask Mr Anderson a further question about that after the meeting.
GLENN MILNE:
So, it will be before Christmas?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I can only repeat what I've just said. I don't…
GLENN MILNE:
I'm just interested in the form of words you're using. This is clearly not going to be a final decision.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think, if you go back and have a look at what I've said before, I've…Whatever comes, there will be a statement about the situation of some kind before Christmas. Now it may not be a completely final decision. It's a difficult issue and it's a moving game.
I think a lot of people were impressed with the capacity of Sydney airport during the Olympic Games. And that has had an impact on the thinking of some of our aviation advisors. It's one of the things that you have to keep in mind.
GLENN MILNE:
In Parliament last week on that sort of theme you mentioned that Sydney airport, one of its great advantages was that it was close to the CBD and that was an advantage on which we should be building. That seems to suggest that Badgerys Creek is a long way from the CBD.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Badgerys Creek is a long way from the CBD. But we have to keep a number of options open and that is what we are doing.
GLENN MILNE:
Like Kurnell.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to rule anything out. I understand people's sensitivity wherever you look. I mean you can always expect that people in an area that might conceivably be affected will be unhappy. That applies to Badgerys Creek. It applies in relation to people who live around the existing airport. It applies to any other option that's ever been considered. There is nothing surprising about that.
But I just want to say that, when we take the final decision, it will be one that is in the best overall interests, including a concern that no one section of the Sydney population carry all the noise burden. That is something we will not do.
And the other thing we will not do is relax the curfew.
GLENN MILNE:
The McClure Report on Welfare: That's another big agenda item that we referred to earlier. What is the Government going to say about those welfare reforms?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'll leave that to Jocelyn Newman. She's making a directional statement next week. You can be certain we won't be using welfare reform as a cost-cutting exercise.
GLENN MILNE:
So does that mean more money for welfare?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it could mean up front some additional resources, yes. If you look at McClure, McClure is about expanding what he calls participation. The long term dividend of that is that you'll have fewer people on welfare and more in work. So in the short term it might involve the investment of more money. In the long run it will be beneficial to the budget because there will be fewer people dependent on welfare.
GLENN MILNE:
So in other words, spending more money at the start to save more later.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's another way of putting it, yes. But I do want to make the point that this is not a cost cutting exercise. We believe in a social security safety net. We don't believe in casting people off when they are most vulnerable. That's not part of the Australian way and we certainly won't do it.
GLENN MILNE:
Now, the research and development innovations package that's due next year. Will that involve a restitution of tax breaks for research and development?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to get into the detail of that. There are a lot of things involved in the general umbrella of research and development innovation and tax concessions are only one relatively small part of it. There's a lot more to it. There's the whole sort of university infrastructure. Promoting ideas: Australians are very good at ideas. We really punch above our weight. The big weakness we have is converting the ideas into positive commercial outcomes.
GLENN MILNE:
And keeping them here.
PRIME MINISTER:
And keeping them here. I mean it breaks your heart to see these great Australian ideas sold off because nobody will risk investing in them in this country. And we've got to try and alter that culture and we’ve got to stop bright men and women leaving this country, and we've got to bring them back.
And we also have to be as attractive as possible to bright people from around the world. And one of the things we ought to do is have, I think, a more open view perhaps in relation to our immigration policy in concerning this. I mean we want the brightest and the best, not only to stay here, but also where possible the brightest and the best from around the world to come here. I think that's very important.
GLENN MILNE:
So a more flexible approach to those with skills.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's one of the things that we have under consideration, very much so, and I think it would make a positive contribution as one of the things the Americans do. And I've given this a lot of thought. I believe that greater flexibility in that area would be part of any really broad approach to innovation.
GLENN MILNE:
Prime Minister, you've obviously got a lot of work to do before the holiday break, but do enjoy your Christmas.
PRIME MINISTER:
I will and merry Christmas to you and your listeners, Glenn.
[ends]


Subject: road funding.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Good evening. As I have travelled across country Australia the need for better local roads is glaringly apparent.
That’s why we recently announced the greatest federal increase in local road funding ever.  We have decided to boost our funding to local councils for local roads by 75 per cent.  That’s $1.2 billion over four years. $850 million will go to councils in rural and regional areas according to a fair and non-party political formula so local councils throughout Australia can make their own decisions about how to improve local roads.
For example, the Kalgoorlie-Boulder Council will receive $2.4 million, Maitland City Council $1.8 million, and Townsville Council $3.2 million. 
We could have spent around $600 million and cut petrol prices by less than two cents a litre but that reduction could have disappeared overnight.  Instead, we have made a long term investment to last for decades – an investment to create better roads and thousands of jobs.
We will also increase our funding for national highways and roads of national importance by $400 million, taking our total new roads program to $1.6 billion.
The Labor leader Mr Beazley may think putting additional funding into roads is trivial and unnecessary but we see it as a long term investment in better roads and more jobs.  Goodnight.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Ladies and gentlemen first may I acknowledge that I speak to you on the traditional lands of the Eora people.
This is an important day.  The Menzies Lecture Series has traditionally been an opportunity for Liberal leaders to speak on issues of national significance and to present our party's perspective on matters fundamental to the well being of this nation.
Today is no different and I'd like to thank Andrew Robb and his team for arranging today's event - an opportunity to properly put into context the Government's approach to policies affecting indigenous Australians and how we may best move forward together towards a shared and prosperous future.
I am also pleased that this lecture series will later include contributions by Joseph Elu and Leon Davis.  Both are prominent and highly respected Australians and will be able to offer useful insights into the views held within their respective constituencies.
Today's address comes just a few days after the Government received the final report of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation and the announcement of our support for a new body, Reconciliation Australia through seed funding and ongoing tax deductibility. 
We have also committed to construct a site within the Parliamentary Triangle to be known as 'Reconciliation Place' to honour the importance of reconciliation in the nation's life and to recognise the shared journey between the different peoples of the Australian nation.  It will also include a memorial and depiction of the removal of children from their families as part of the very difficult and traumatic experience of the indigenous people of this community.
As I did last week, I would like to acknowledge the dignified and inspiring leadership of Dr Evelyn Scott and the fine work of the Council in general in promoting the cause of reconciliation throughout Australian society.
In just a few weeks, we begin celebrating the Centenary of our Federation.  It will be a time when Australians will look back on past accomplishments but of equal importance, consider the type of nation and the type of people they wish to be in years to come.
I regard Australia's social cohesion, born out of a distinctive form of egalitarianism, as the crowning achievement of the Australian experience during the last one hundred years.
Yet we can never feel satisfied, nor can we feel complete, until that cohesion is extended throughout all sections of the community and specifically until indigenous Australians enjoy the same opportunities and the same plentiful lives as any other Australian.
This is significant because, as we approach the end of 2000, there can be no doubt that the mood of the Australian community is overwhelmingly in favour of reconciliation.  Over the last twelve months in particular, it has become an unstoppable force and I believe the nation has been enriched and is a better, more united nation as a consequence.
In May, Australians witnessed Corroboree 2000, an historic event involving every political leader - State, Territory and Federal - in which a commitment to address ongoing indigenous disadvantage was made.  And, importantly, a commitment to recognise the special status Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders are entitled to feel as Australia's first peoples.
On the same weekend, the walk across Sydney's Harbour Bridge gave an opportunity, the first of many, for Australians to demonstrate their strong support for the process of reconciliation.
There can be little doubt that the Olympics was a momentous and positive event for Australia and Australians and many people saw the Games as making a major contribution to furthering reconciliation.
Others felt their very success demonstrated that our nation was far more reconciled than had been previously allowed for.  If true reconciliation is manifest by a sense of pride and unity shared by all Australians - indigenous and others - then the Games proved beyond doubt that Australians have travelled a great distance towards this goal.
There can be nothing more crucial than preserving and nurturing this mood of public support if we are to complete the journey towards reconciliation.
For this reason, it is important to focus on building on the gains made over past years.  I am reminded that the Council of Reconciliation's Corroboree 2000 vision acknowledged that there are many paths to reconciliation.  That's true.  
On issues as complex and difficult as the call for some form of legal treaty or formal national apology beyond expressions of personal sorrow and regret, people of genuine goodwill can and will legitimately hold different points of view.
It is important to acknowledge that reconciliation is, as I've said, now an unstoppable force and rather than a disproportionate focus on what is the preferred path, our collective priority must be to strengthen support for the ongoing process and, most importantly, improve the lives of indigenous Australians.
Whatever differences may be apparent, of emphasis and direction, in any meaningful discussion of indigenous issues, there are many more areas on which we can all agree.
I believe that, within the Australian community, a great level of good will exists towards the indigenous people of our nation and a determination is apparent to honour in a sensitive and understanding way the special place that they will always occupy in the life of this nation.
The respect owed to them now and into the future does not mean we are reluctant to acknowledge past injustices.
Indigenous Australians have suffered enormously in the past, and as a defined group, continue to do so.  No one can, nor should attempt to, deny the devastating impact the introduction of western culture has had upon their civilisation.
I have said many times, there can be no doubt that the treatment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in earlier times represents the most blemished chapter in our history.  Most Australians accept that.
It remains true that basic living standards - from employment to health, from education to mortality rates - remain unacceptable.
It is true, as was noted recently  that past policies designed to assist have often failed to recognise the significance of indigenous culture and resulted in the further marginalisation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people from the social, cultural and economic development of mainstream Australian society.
This led to a culture of dependency and victimhood, which condemned many indigenous Australians to lives of poverty and further devalued their culture in the eyes of their fellow Australians.
The inconsistencies between indigenous and non-indigenous approaches remain at the root of much of the current difficulty.
It is captured in what one commentator recently described as the gaps "between immediate sharing and individual accumulation, between loyalty to kin and impartiality to all, between individual autonomy and the authoritarian practices of the school and industrial workplace, between individual advancement and remaining at one with the community, between exploiting land and living with it" .
We are determined to design policy and structure administrative arrangements to address these very real issues and ensure standards in education and employment, health and housing improve to a significant degree.
The Council of Aboriginal Reconciliation's vision seeks an Australia which not only promotes mutual respect but provides "justice and equity for all".  Who would not agree?  Yet the fulfilment of these two principles is inextricably bound to improving the day to day realities of life for indigenous Australians.
For this reason, our focus has been, and will be, on addressing the needs of today's Indigenous Australians. This is a living, active community, not a generation from the past.
These are people who can be found, not in the pages of history books, but in our cities, in our towns and in remote corners of our country.  Among them are Australians whose children are sick, whose lives are empty, and whose prospects are dim.  Among them are Australians who need our help.
Symbolic expressions of support are important.  However, they are given real meaning when backed with improvements in living standards.
That is why we place a great degree of emphasis on practical reconciliation.
A measure of the genuineness of the government's commitment to practical reconciliation is that the $2.3 billion now annually spent on Indigenous-specific programmes is, in real terms, a record for any government - Coalition or Labor.
I have looked at the level of progress made over the past 20 years and while no one denies that as a nation we need to do better than we have in the past, there are examples of real achievement in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.
I don't agree with those that say that the community has little to show for what is now some 30 years of effort.  This criticism, that nothing is getting better, is common to both extremes of the debate - those who would abolish all such special programmes, and to those who say that nothing less than a legally enforceable treaty and special Constitutional rights will 'solve the problem'.
Neither view is correct, nor is the underlying premise that things haven't been improving.  There is in fact indisputable evidence of long-term improvement in many Aboriginal socio-economic indicators.
For example, the proportion of indigenous Australians who own their own home has increased from 1 in 4 to 1 in 3 since the 1970s.
The proportion of indigenous students completing high school has quadrupled over the same period.
The infant mortality rate has been cut from up to 20 times the non-Aboriginal rate to 4 times the national average today.
Aboriginal enrolments in higher education increased by 60 percent in the 1990s.
At least 15 percent of the continent is now Aboriginal owned or controlled.
And the Aboriginal imprisonment rate relative to that of non-Aboriginals has been trending down (and over the past 3 years on average per capita deaths in prison custody for Aboriginals have been lower than for non-Aboriginals).
It is particularly encouraging that improvement is occurring through harnessing the talents, the resources and the enthusiasm of those within governments, within business, within community organisations and most importantly within indigenous communities themselves.
Whether you call it a social coalition or simply pulling together, it has particular relevance to indigenous issues.
For instance, the Army has been working alongside community members in some of the most needy Aboriginal communities in Australia, developing and building important infrastructure.  
In Bulla, a remote community in the Northern Territory, ten new dwellings were built, a reticulated sewerage and septic system constructed and the community airstrip refurbished.
The success of such projects is not only measured by infrastructure improvements.  In each community, the Army has been able to deliver additional services such as primary health, dental and veterinary care as well as providing training opportunities for local community members ranging from health, hygiene and home management to trade and construction skills.
We have seen Australians within communities such as Moree decide they are simply not willing to allow division and disharmony to affect the day to day lives of their citizens and the future which awaits their children.
Moree's Aboriginal Employment Strategy, managed and operated by Indigenous Australians and centred around the magnificent cotton growing industry of that region, works with both prospective employers and Aboriginals to find employment opportunities within mainstream sectors - retail, manufacturing and on farms.
Towns like Moree are proving the critical correlation which exists between employment and the restoration of fractured community leadership and cohesion.
For this reason, it is especially pleasing that some 34 major Australian corporations have given a commitment to the Government to generate more job opportunities for Indigenous Australians.  The Commonwealth is funding a scheme to train one hundred trainees at the Century Mine project.  Western Mining is set to employ a similar number of young Aboriginals on its mine sites in West Australia.
These types of initiatives are important to the reconciliation process.  Yet true reconciliation can never be said to have occurred until indigenous Australians enjoy standards of opportunity and treatment the equal of their countrymen and women.
There are distinct and disturbing problems to be confronted if this equality is to be realised and I am heartened by the increasingly candid and open discussion of these complex issues by a number of courageous indigenous leaders.
This Government is guided in its policy deliberations by core Australian values.
And the principle of equity and a fair go, at the heart of the Australian character, is also at the heart of practical reconciliation programmes.
It is a matter of basic Australian fairness, and indeed basic Australian pragmatism, to seek to redress disadvantage, and poor education, to tackle systemic ill health and joblessness, to combat tragic levels of domestic violence and substance abuse.
But causing and sustaining many of these problems is the loss of dignity and specifically the loss of self reliance by individuals and their communities.  And the promotion of this last virtue is a key goal of this Government.
We are gaining new understanding of the links between economic and social engagement.  The McClure Report ranks paid employment as a major source of self esteem.  Without it, people become disengaged from - or fail to develop - employment, family and community networks.  Material poverty is compounded by poverty of purpose.  And as the report makes clear this often leads to physical and psychological ill health - to life opportunities being reduced both for parents and their children.
Indigenous leaders are saying the same thing.  Evelyn Scott regards welfare dependency as "almost totally destroying Aboriginal culture".  
Peter Yu asserts that communities are being "crushed with the weight of the welfare economy".
And Noel Pearson argues persuasively that "the scale and nature of indigenous problems changed dramatically after passive welfare become the economic foundation of their communities".  He contends "there is a causal connection between the change in their economy and their social relationships" and it is "passive welfare combined with substance abuse that threatens to disrupt traditional values" - values which had previously mandated reciprocity and responsibility.
My point is this.  Through policy initiatives that will flow from perceptive investigations such as the McClure Report, we can develop new and better ways to empower individuals and promote self reliance throughout their communities.
New and better ways to help all Australians, indigenous and non-indigenous.
As I said earlier, this Government is committed to maintaining and strengthening broad based support for reconciliation and for proper respect to be shown towards Australia's first peoples - the respect so evident in past months.
True reconciliation is, in our view, to be best found within practical means to improve the well-being and happiness of indigenous Australians and raising standards to levels enjoyed and expected by all of us.
There have been very real resources applied to this end.  A 50% increase in spending on Aboriginal health since we won office.  A national indigenous literacy and numeracy strategy.  Housing programmes which account for 20% of estimated total Commonwealth spending on public and community housing.  And in this years budget, funding of a further 1500 places in ATSIC's Community Development Employment Projects scheme.
In short, a targeting on the basics, with almost three quarters of the Commonwealth's $2.3 billion indigenous specific budget directly applied to the priority areas of housing, health, education and employment.  Things that can change lives.
That being said, we all know, it's not simply a matter of spending more money.
We need to ensure funds are spent wisely and applied to those most in need.
We need to work with communities and individuals with local knowledge and a real understanding of how we can best make a difference.
The Round Table hosted in October showed a commitment to cooperative effort and, in the years ahead, this type of approach will loom large in how we identify problem areas and address them.  For instance, Senator Newman and Senator Herron announced on that occasion that $20 million would be earmarked under the Stronger Families and Communities Strategy to help strengthen indigenous communities, build self reliance and rebuild self respect.  
The Roundtable, comprising respected indigenous community leaders, has been asked to advise the Government on how best to use these funds.
The COAG meeting in November committed the Federal Government and all of the States and territories to collectively pursue new approaches - to invest in community leadership, to deliver practical measures that support families, children and young people, to tackle the symptoms of community disfunction such as substance abuse and violence, and to forge greater links between the business sector and indigenous communities.
Ladies and Gentlemen, in conclusion, we have come a long way in recent years.
In many ways, we are the envy of the world - rich in resources, rich in opportunity, united in our values and united in the hopes we hold for the future.
The way forward towards true reconciliation is surely to build upon this unity and the many areas of common agreement.
In this, as in other important national endeavours, the things that unite us are far stronger than those that divide us.
By working together, by sharing endeavour, and by sharing goals, I have no doubt we can all ultimately share success. 


Subjects: economy; budget; Liberal Party leadership; petrol prices; Sydney's second airport; welfare report; relations with Indonesia; research and development.
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
GLENN MILNE:
Well we're headed into an election year after the Christmas break, but there are some worrying signs on the horizon - home lending is down, unemployment is up, for the moment interest rates are on hold. But do you think the economy could afford to slow any further?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think the economy is moving a little more slowly than it was a year ago and that's not necessarily a bad thing. We had very strong employment growth three months ago, stronger than I thought, and you therefore are seeing understandably a bit of an adjustment in the figures in the last couple of months.
So it's too early to talk about unemployment rising. After all it's still near a 10 year low.
GLENN MILNE:
So you could expect it to drop again?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't know. I can only in a sense repeat the best advice we have from the Treasury and that is that unemployment is likely to remain about where it is now well into next year.
GLENN MILNE:
Well you told your party room this week that the Government had probably had the best year of its term so far. Your previous public remarks have been all about an election probably sometime after October next year. Are you still locked into that timing?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you're never locked into a particular timing but the election is due around October/November of next year and at the moment I can't really say any more than that. That's when it's due. You fight too hard to win elections to go earlier than your appointed time.
Three years is a pretty short period by world standards. I'm in no particular hurry to go to the public. But I accept that, under the constitution, I've got to go to the public and, as you should in a democracy, by the end of next year. And I can't really say any more than that.
GLENN MILNE:
Well I thought one thing that might hurry you up is the turmoil in the Labor Party over alleged electoral rorting at the present time. I mean Queensland in particular is in a terrible mess. You're not tempted?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no, I think that would be seen very cynical. You don't get any marks for that. What the public want from us is good government and that's what we're trying to deliver and we're making decisions.
We just brought down the biggest defence revamp in a quarter of a century. We've delivered this huge change in the tax system. We've got a major directional statement from Jocelyn Newman on welfare policy this week. So it goes on.
I mean while the Labor Party wallows in internal recrimination and rorting, we'll get on with good government.
GLENN MILNE:
But it's clear of course the problems with rorting are spilling over to both sides and there's general cynicism amongst voters. One of the things that the Labor Party is suggesting is that the Electoral Commission ought to come in and oversee internal party ballots to stop this sort of practice. Do you think that's something you might embrace?
PRIME MINISTER:
Glenn, there's no former member of the Liberal Party in gaol for criminal fraud. That's how this all started in Queensland. So let’s have none of this business of, oh, it's six of one and a half a dozen of the other. It's not.
GLENN MILNE:
All right, so you're not tempted to go early? We're still looking at October probably. Do you think though that, given you're sitting on a large budget surplus, that personal tax cuts could be on the agenda next year?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we've just had a huge personal tax cut.
GLENN MILNE:
Well you know what voters are like, they'll always take more from Government.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's understandable because, afterall, it is their money. It's not our money. It's theirs and they're entitled to have a strong view about what's done with it.
Glenn, we've just had a very big personal tax cut. We need to maintain a decent budget surplus. I'm not going to get into speculation about further rounds of tax cuts. We'll obviously look at our budget position when the budget is brought down.
We've got other commitments. In the New Year I'm going to have something to say about innovation policy, and that's a very important thing about the country's future, our science base, our technological base, our innovative capacity. All of those things are very important. So there's a lot to be done on the nation building side in the broadest sense of the word. But we always try and keep these things in appropriate balance.
GLENN MILNE:
Well an appropriate balance sounds like tax cuts dependent on size of budget surplus. Is that a fair equation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they're your musings. They're not the Prime Minister's responses.
GLENN MILNE:
Equation.
Okay, you've signalled that you'll probably retire mid term if you win the next election. But you seem to have kept the language deliberately vague. Is there any chance that you would stay on?
PRIME MINISTER:
Glenn, what I said in that interview I did on my 61st birthday was that, by the time I got to the age of 64, I'd start thinking about my future. Now I think that's an honest statement of the position. I neither add to that nor subtract from it. It's always been the position. It's been the position since I made that statement, and nothing I have said since has qualified it or added to it.
GLENN MILNE:
Governments get shock wall, of course, after time. What's your assessment of your relationship with the Australian people now? Do you think they still like, trust, respect you?
PRIME MINISTER:
I would hope that the Australian public think we're doing a good job. I don't expect every decision we take to be popular but we have tried to do the right thing by the country, rather than serve sectional interest groups or respond to transient political pressures. We've tried to take a long-term view.
That was most evident with things like tax reform. That was very unpopular, and I'm sure I've probably made some enemies along the way in the process of implementing those changes. But I've probably also made some friends in the terms of people, even though they may not like my policies, they respect the doggedness and the consistency of the Government in always trying to do the right thing.
GLENN MILNE:
I was going to say, do you think you're a Prime Minister whose relationship with the people is built on a sort of grudging respect rather than an emotional bond of some sort?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that is for others to decide. I am not like some of my predecessors who are preoccupied with, you know, self-analysis. I try and do the right thing by the Australian people. I find, when I mix with the Australian people which is very frequently, that my relationship with them is easy and open and friendly. That's not hard because Australians are easy people to relate to. They are very direct. People are very direct with me, sometimes critical, sometimes supportive. And that's how it should be. And I do spend a great deal of time talking directly to people - far more than many allow for.
GLENN MILNE:
So you don't consider your Government is at the same stage as, say, the Government that Paul Keating led?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I don't find, as I move around Australia, a sort of visceral political hatred of the Government. I certainly don't. I find people happy about the broad direction of what is being done, critical on particular issues. I mean everybody is very unhappy at the moment about the price of petrol. So am I.
GLENN MILNE:
But there are signs it's coming down, don't you think?
PRIME MINISTER:
There are, and they're welcome. Any strengthening of the exchange rate of the Australian dollar against the US dollar helps and other things help as well.
In the end what you've got to try and do is deliver good government for the generality of the Australian people. And if you do that, and you don't get preoccupied with your own political persona, as distinct from doing the right thing by the public, then I think you can keep them supportive of what you're doing.
GLENN MILNE:
Is Peter Costello now your obvious successor, do you think?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Peter is very competent and he'd obviously do a very good job as a party leader. But I have always taken the proper view that it's not for me to decide who my successor is when the time comes to choose one. That's not my job. It's the job of the parliamentary party.
GLENN MILNE:
Are there any other candidates?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the question whether there are other candidates, and I think there a lot of other competent people in the party as well, is a matter for the parliamentary party at the time. Now we don't know when that is, nobody does. And all I can say is it will be their decision. I owe my position to their decision and my successor will owe his or her position to their decision as well.
GLENN MILNE:
Prime Minister, before we get to those big, domestic agenda items we were discussing - Indonesia. We had the first visit by a Ministerial group to Australia since our difficulties over East Timor. It was an on again, off again visit. Encouraging signs, do you think?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, I thought it was good that it finally happened and the substance and the atmosphere of the meeting was excellent. Our relations are improving. There's still a long way to go and you have to take it in a measured way that is consistent with the political dignity of each side.
But we are seeing an improvement at the Government level and that's very encouraging. I had a very long discussion with the Ministers and particularly with the Foreign Minister, Mr Shihab and…
GLENN MILNE:
He's not a great fan of Australia…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well he has been critical in the past, yes. But he indicated to me that, to use his own language, we are on the upward rather than the downward. And that's good.
GLENN MILNE:
Any sign of a visit from President Wahid?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's a matter for President Wahid. He is welcome if he wants to come. And I hope he will come. I've had three very productive meetings with him in different parts of the world - in Tokyo, New York, and Brunei and I hope the next meeting might be in Australia but that's a matter for him. He's very welcome.
GLENN MILNE:
Right, to Sydney airport. You've said that we're going to have a decision on Sydney airport, the second Sydney airport by Christmas. Is that still going to happen?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I said that I hoped to be able to say, or the Government hoped to be able to say something substantive about it by Christmas. Now we're going to discuss the matter again at our Cabinet meeting this coming week so perhaps somebody ought to ask Mr Anderson a further question about that after the meeting.
GLENN MILNE:
So, it will be before Christmas?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I can only repeat what I've just said. I don't…
GLENN MILNE:
I'm just interested in the form of words you're using. This is clearly not going to be a final decision.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think, if you go back and have a look at what I've said before, I've…Whatever comes, there will be a statement about the situation of some kind before Christmas. Now it may not be a completely final decision. It's a difficult issue and it's a moving game.
I think a lot of people were impressed with the capacity of Sydney airport during the Olympic Games. And that has had an impact on the thinking of some of our aviation advisors. It's one of the things that you have to keep in mind.
GLENN MILNE:
In Parliament last week on that sort of theme you mentioned that Sydney airport, one of its great advantages was that it was close to the CBD and that was an advantage on which we should be building. That seems to suggest that Badgerys Creek is a long way from the CBD.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Badgerys Creek is a long way from the CBD. But we have to keep a number of options open and that is what we are doing.
GLENN MILNE:
Like Kurnell.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to rule anything out. I understand people's sensitivity wherever you look. I mean you can always expect that people in an area that might conceivably be affected will be unhappy. That applies to Badgerys Creek. It applies in relation to people who live around the existing airport. It applies to any other option that's ever been considered. There is nothing surprising about that.
But I just want to say that, when we take the final decision, it will be one that is in the best overall interests, including a concern that no one section of the Sydney population carry all the noise burden. That is something we will not do.
And the other thing we will not do is relax the curfew.
GLENN MILNE:
The McClure Report on Welfare: That's another big agenda item that we referred to earlier. What is the Government going to say about those welfare reforms?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'll leave that to Jocelyn Newman. She's making a directional statement next week. You can be certain we won't be using welfare reform as a cost-cutting exercise.
GLENN MILNE:
So does that mean more money for welfare?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it could mean up front some additional resources, yes. If you look at McClure, McClure is about expanding what he calls participation. The long term dividend of that is that you'll have fewer people on welfare and more in work. So in the short term it might involve the investment of more money. In the long run it will be beneficial to the budget because there will be fewer people dependent on welfare.
GLENN MILNE:
So in other words, spending more money at the start to save more later.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's another way of putting it, yes. But I do want to make the point that this is not a cost cutting exercise. We believe in a social security safety net. We don't believe in casting people off when they are most vulnerable. That's not part of the Australian way and we certainly won't do it.
GLENN MILNE:
Now, the research and development innovations package that's due next year. Will that involve a restitution of tax breaks for research and development?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to get into the detail of that. There are a lot of things involved in the general umbrella of research and development innovation and tax concessions are only one relatively small part of it. There's a lot more to it. There's the whole sort of university infrastructure. Promoting ideas: Australians are very good at ideas. We really punch above our weight. The big weakness we have is converting the ideas into positive commercial outcomes.
GLENN MILNE:
And keeping them here.
PRIME MINISTER:
And keeping them here. I mean it breaks your heart to see these great Australian ideas sold off because nobody will risk investing in them in this country. And we've got to try and alter that culture and we’ve got to stop bright men and women leaving this country, and we've got to bring them back.
And we also have to be as attractive as possible to bright people from around the world. And one of the things we ought to do is have, I think, a more open view perhaps in relation to our immigration policy in concerning this. I mean we want the brightest and the best, not only to stay here, but also where possible the brightest and the best from around the world to come here. I think that's very important.
GLENN MILNE:
So a more flexible approach to those with skills.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that's one of the things that we have under consideration, very much so, and I think it would make a positive contribution as one of the things the Americans do. And I've given this a lot of thought. I believe that greater flexibility in that area would be part of any really broad approach to innovation.
GLENN MILNE:
Prime Minister, you've obviously got a lot of work to do before the holiday break, but do enjoy your Christmas.
PRIME MINISTER:
I will and merry Christmas to you and your listeners, Glenn.
[ends]


Subjects: The Centenary of Federation; Australian achievements
E&amp;OE................................
Your Excellencies, Premiers, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls. In this magnificent setting, on this most beautiful of Australian days, I can only express to you I believe to be the emotion of many Australians on this very special occasion as we reflect upon what has been achieved over the last 100 years. It is an occasion to recall the important historical events that we celebrate today. It's an occasion to honour the tradition of that day 100 years ago and to honour what has been achieved and what is observed today.
But it is also an occasion, my fellow Australians, to look back with both pride and gratitude on what our nation has achieved during its 100 years of existence. To express as one Australian to thousands of other Australians my very simple pride in the way in which this country has remained true over the last 100 years to the principles of freedom and individual liberty.
As we think of that 100 year period, we think of the sacrifices of many, we think of the sacrifices of the thousands of young Australians who died defending the liberty of this country, and defending the cause of freedom around the world. We also think with pride and gratitude of the wisdom of our political leaders 100 years ago who bought the then six colonies of Australia together. We reflect upon the simple fact that Australia is one of but a handful of nations around the world that has remained continuously democratic for 100 years. It is one of but a handful of countries that has remained faithful and true to the principles of the rule of law and representative democracy.
But it's also an occasion to reflect upon the other great Australian achievements. To reflect upon the remarkable way in which this country has absorbed people from 140 nations around the world, in a social experiment without parallel in modern history which has produced a degree of social cohesion which is the envy of the rest of the world. And might we also celebrate that marvellous capacity we have as Australians to choose many of those things from our past and our heritage that work and are of value. And yet we exercise the discretion and the wisdom to put aside those that do not suit the Australian ambience and the Australian attitude.
Though we have many reasons, my fellow Australians, to be very grateful today, we look back with pride and gratitude on what has happened, we reflect upon the astonishing artistic achievements of Australians. We reflect, of course, on the astonishing sporting achievements of the men and women of Australia who represent us on the sporting field with such great distinction. It is in every sense of the word, and a day that unites all of us, and reminds us of that enduring truth that the things that unite us as Australians are always more important and more substantial than the things that might from time to time divide us.
I hope that throughout this day and in the weeks and months to come celebrating the Centenary of Federation, we enjoy ourselves, we look back with pride and gratitude and above all we celebrate together the simple joy of being an Australian.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
The story that we have just followed and we will resume in a moment has been more than a story about constitutional formation, it's been more than a story about the coming together of six colonies important though that was and successful though that was.  It's been more than the story of inspiring political leadership one hundred years ago.  Most importantly of all it has been the story of one hundred years of the Australian spirit.  It's been the story of how over a century the spirit of Australia and the spirit of the Australian people in so many ways in the right time when required has come to the fore to give to this nation of ours a reputation around the world that is so well deserved. 
It is a spirit that saw so many hundreds of thousands of Australians go forth to defend their country and the freedoms that we value so dearly in two world wars.  It's the spirit of a people that pull together in times of adversity.  It's the spirit of a people that can call forth the volunteer efforts of tens of thousands of Australians not only in adversity but also in times of great national celebration such as the Olympic Games.  It's the spirit of a people that has produced the most fiercely competitive sporting nation on Earth.  It is the spirit of a people which population wise has produced well above its weight some of the most outstanding medical scientists in the world.  It's the spirit of a people that has produced men like Macfarlane Burnet, and Victor Chang.  It is the spirit of a people that has produced great artists. But very importantly my fellow Australians it is the sprit of a people that has produced a level of social cohesion and national unity that is indeed the envy of the world.  
On this day of all days it is important for all of us as Australians to acknowledge the reality that those things that unite us as Australians and bring us together as part of the great Australian nation are always more important, they're always more enduring, and they're always more emphatic than the things that divide us.
We are a people that have found the great genius to select those things from our heritage which are of enduring value, yet to reject those things of our heritage which will hold us back.  We embraced from the British the great principles of the rule of law and parliamentary democracy, but we rejected from the British and other Europeans notions of class-consciousness.  The great egalitarian spirit of this country which has meant so much to us over the years and will mean so much to us in the years ahead that is very much a gift of this soil, it is a gift of the air we breath together, it is a gift of the land that we share together.
And one of the other great aspects of the spirit of Australia my friends is the way in which this nation has been able to absorb from 140 countries around the world a great variety of people.  We have come together particularly since World War II to build a nation of great diversity yet nonetheless a nation that honours the long-standing traditions of the Australian community. And thus as we celebrate one hundred years, our anniversary as a nation, this beautiful evening here in Sydney, I say to all of you my fellow Australians we all have great reasons for deep pride.  We owe a debt of gratitude to those who formed Australia.  We owe a great debt of gratitude to those who fought to defend it.  We owe a great debt of gratitude to all of those who have gone before us.
We have every reason to feel pride, we have every reason to feel a great sense of hope and optimism about the future.  We are a nation that has achieved its ambitions.  But like all nations we must set ourselves further ambitions and strive to achieve further goals in the years ahead.  
We celebrate a great one hundred years.  We face the future with tremendous faith that under God we can achieve so much more for our people and build upon the great inheritance and the great legacy of the years that have gone before us.
My friends, one of the great characteristics of Australia has been the way in which we have taken people from so many parts of the world and have seen them contribute so vitally to the building of the great Australian nation. And the next segment of this program will be very much about the story of the journey of people from different parts of the world that have contributed so much to the building of the modern Australian nation.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Can I thank Wisden for the opportunity of participating in this very nice little ceremony. I didn't have a vote but let me say I have no quarrel at all with the decisions that are made. I saw four, I've seen four of the five play.  I of course (inaudible) of age didn't see Sir Jack Hobbs play.  I saw Sir Donald play only once.  That was here, his very last appearance at the Sydney Cricket Ground, the Kippax-Oldfield Testimonial where I reclined...I didn't recline really, it was very crowded, on the hill, to watch that.
But I think it's a great tribute to Wisden that it was able to assemble such a cross section of such a representative group of selectors to make the choice.  Wisden of course itself is part of cricket.  Anybody who loves cricket knows a lot about Wisden. Anybody who respects the traditions and the accuracy of the records of the game will understand how important Wisden is.
In their own individual styles these five cricketers have played a tremendous part in the affection for the game that so many of us have.  I have certainly, I'm very happy to say, that my enjoyment of the game has been very greatly enriched by the many times that I saw Garfield Sobers and Viv Richards and Shane Warne play.  I've never forgotten literally racing away from the very last law exams I sat at Sydney University to the Sydney Cricket Ground to see the Third Test in 1960 when Garfield Sobers hit 168 and contributed mightily to the West Indies victory on that occasion during that absolutely memorable series.
And I had the opportunity also in 1993 when I happened by sheer coincidence because of official duties to be in England at the same time as an Ashes tour I saw some magnificent bowling by Shane Warne during that series.
But the luncheon break is short.  Presentations are more important than the speeches.  But to those five wonderful gentlemen, one of whom is here - Viv Richards - and through their representatives convey to, well we can't to one, he's no longer with us - Sir Jack Hobbs.  But to convey our admiration for all that they have achieved and all that they've represented to the game.  I'll be very happy now to officiate Mr Hague.  Thank you.
[Ends] 


Subjects: Young Australian of the Year; inflation figures.
E&amp;OE..................................
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, a good [inaudible] Young Australian of the Year?
PRIME MINISTER:
Absolutely fantastic.  Wouldn't have liked to have been a judge.  It would have been very hard.  But I know it might sound like a clich‚ to say it but it really isn't.  An occasion like this is totally inspirational because it shows an utterly positive side of young Australia and it shows what enormous reservoirs of talent and commitment and decency there are amongst young Australians and I found it quite inspiring.
JOURNALIST:
What do you think stood James apart from the rest..?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look I don't want to get into comparisons.  He's a terrific choice.  They were all good and in all of these things there can only be one winner.  But his acceptance speech showed the quality of the man, but all of them were fantastic and it was a great inspiration and delight to be involved in the occasion.
JOURNALIST:
And great inflation result today for government?
PRIME MINISTER:
Great for the country.  It's what matters for Australia that's important in these things and it is a very good result for Australia.  It is an excellent result for Australia.  It shows that inflation is under control, it shows that the inflationary impact of the GST was no where near as great as even we thought it might be, and it is just very good news for our country and that's what matters.
[Ends]


Subjects: Australia Day; young Australians
E&amp;OE...............................
Thank you very much Sandra, Lisa Curry-Kenny the Chairman of the National Australia Day Council, Marjorie Turbayne, David Kemp, Archbishop Hollingworth, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I say how delighted Janette and I are to be here and to play a small part in this very national recognition of the contribution of young Australians to the vibrancy and the health of our community.  More than perhaps on earlier years because it's the Centenary year in which we look back on what our country has achieved over the last one hundred years.
This Australia Day Council brings a focus on everything that is good and positive about Australian life.  And recognising the achievement of people, giving people a pat on the back and saying that in your own endeavour you've done something rather special for our country is a very important way of contributing to that great sense of cohesion and harmony that exists within Australia.
I've had many emotional experiences as Prime Minister over the last 12 months.  It's a very moving experience to have the privilege of being Prime Minister of such a remarkable country.  And as I look back over the last year I would have to say that by far the most moving experience that I had, and there were many, was a few hours I shared with some 12 to 15,000 young Australians on Gallipoli Peninsula on ANZAC Day of last year.  And this gathering interest and commitment of young Australians to that particular part of the Australian story, that very special part of the Australian story, means now some 10 to 15,000 young Australians gather enthusiastically in their inimitable relaxed yet respectful way on Gallipoli Peninsula each ANZAC Day.  And to have the opportunity as my wife and I did to move amongst them and talk to them and to share their sense of excitement yet their sense of wonder at that part of the history of our country brought home to me probably better than any other experience that I could have had over the last year, the sheer quality, decency and positive attitude of young Australians.  And as we celebrate the achievements of young Australia today, as we honour those who have been put forward and as particularly later on we honour the person chosen as the Young Australian of the Year we give thanks to today's younger generation for what they mean to us, we hope and pray that they do not have to do what the younger generation of earlier years that we honour on ANZAC Day had to do so tragically in defence of our country.  But most importantly we give thanks that our country has produced such remarkably talented young people in so many fields of Australian endeavour.  I thank all of them on behalf of the nation, I pay tribute to them and I express my unbounded confidence in the capacity of young people to build an even better and greater country in the next one hundred years.
Thankyou
[ends]


Subjects: Australian wine, Centenary of Federation
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Rick Allert, Ladies and Gentlemen. I suppose the contribution that the wine industry makes to the economic strength, quite apart from the social enjoyment of life in Australia, is best encapsulated by my reflecting that about 36 years ago when I had a working holiday in the United Kingdom, Kangaroo Butter was probably the largest export to that country.   And I was talking to one of my sons a few weeks ago - he's planning to have a working holiday in the United Kingdom starting sometime this year - and I reminded him that the largest single export to the United Kingdom is now, I understand, red wine. And that little story in a sense is a metaphor for the way in which the wine industry has assumed such economic importance in Australia and of course the contribution that it's made to the enjoyment of life and the way in which the wine industry and everything associated with wine has become part and parcel to the Australian experience is something that all of us are very familiar with.
I do want to thank the generosity of the Australian wine makers for the Centenary of Federation blend. I understand the contributions total in value some $2 million and the wine makers throughout the country's wine regions each contributed 225 litres of their premium red wine from their 1999 vintage. And in December last Len Evans, Brian Coser, John Hanley and Ian McKenzie got together to produce the all Australian red wine. And 40,000 magnums of the Centenary of Federation Wine have been produced and this is the first time such a blend has been made. Each magnum is to be numbered in a present and put in a presentation box. And that'll include information - you'll be pleased to hear Mr Tony Eggleton, the National Director of the Council of the Centenary of Federation - will have information about the Centenary of Federation, it may even identify our first Prime Minister in terms of that extraordinary successful ad. And all aspects of the industries' contribution as I said amount in value to some $10 million.
And proceeds from the sale of the wine are going to go to a number of important projects including the Wine Foundation. And one of the responsibilities of that body will be to promote more research and better understanding in relation to the abuse of alcohol within our community and some of the resources from the sale of the wine will also go towards producing an oral history of the wine industry in Australia.
So I really am delighted that I was asked to be patron not only of this Centenary project but also of the Wine Foundation. I think it's a splendid idea and the Wine Centre in Adelaide which is taking very very quick shape and I understand will be ready for official opening in August will bring together in a very very effective way all that is so wonderful about the wine industry in Australia.
It is a great Australian industry. We are now after only France the second largest exporter of wine to the United Kingdom having replaced countries such as Italy and Spain and Germany in recent years. And when you understand the horrendous trade barriers through which we must sell and don't get me started on that subject or you'll be here in this hot environment for a very long period of time. It is a remarkable tribute to the quality of the product and it also is a remarkable tribute to the tremendous enthusiasm of the people who have made the Australian wine industry great. And I'm delighted that some of the great names in the industry such as John Hanley and Len Evans are here today. I really do appreciate that very much. And I'm delighted to see my former colleague and old friend David Brownhill who's Chairman of the Wine and Brandy Corporation also with us and to you Rick for the leadership that you've given to the industry and to John Kubrick as President. Can I say thank you to all of you, you're very warmly welcome to the Lodge.
I have great pleasure in launching the Centenary of Federation Wine Project, I think it's a wonderful way to mark the Centenary of Federation. Just think 100 years ago the place of wine drinking in the Australian community was quite different from what it is now. There was a very very different scene a very different attitude, a far more exclusive thing, the consumption of table wines in Australia 100 years ago. And fortunately all of that has changed and it is now something that, to use that frequently invoked word, is a far more inclusive pleasure than what it was 100 years ago and that is a terrific thing.
Wine is enjoyed by all sections of the Australian community and I think this project is a wonderful way to mark the Centenary and it is very important that the proceeds from the sale will go to such very appropriate causes. I have great pleasure in launching the project, thanking the wine industry for it's immense generosity and to the tremendous contribution that it's made to our country.
Thankyou.
[ends]


Subjects: science; technology and innova
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Robert.  To the director of Questacon, to my ministerial colleague Peter McGauran, the Chief Scientist Robin Batterham, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
This is in a way the first event in a week that is going to be very important for science, technology and innovation in Australia.  Next Monday I'll be delivering for the government a major statement which will contain a series of very important announcements which will commit additional resources and reassert on behalf of this government and I know on behalf of all of the Australian people the very critical importance we place on the intellectual capital of this country, its creative people, its genius for clever inventions, and most importantly a commitment to ensuring that the fruits and the benefits of inventions and new ideas are effectively harnessed to the overall and future benefit of the Australian people.
I thought our players, in a very entertaining and very Australian fashion reminded us of the incredible array of inventions right across the gamut of human need and human achievement for which Australians over the years have been responsible.  I could almost hope that that little performance could be videoed up or bottled up and sent overseas to drive home to people around the world just how effectively when it comes to inventions that this country has been able to punch above its weight for so many years over such a wide range of activities.  
And it is important when you spend a bit of time as we are as a people at present reflecting on what the country has achieved over the last one hundred years, it is important to try and gain a better knowledge of just how many areas of endeavour and achievement and how very effective on the world stage our scientists have been.  And as the director reminded us, save and except for Patrick White, the Nobel Prize winners in Australia have been in the area of science and technology.  And in so many of those areas we have won world renown.
And we are getting a better balance.  I know on occasions people lament the fact that we spend, they don't perhaps lament the fact that we spend too much time following sport, I would certainly never do that.  But they perhaps lament the fact that we don't spend enough time focusing on other areas of Australian achievement.  I think that is changing.  I think there is a growing pride, certainly amongst our young as well as older aged cohorts, I think there is a growing sense of pride in how much we have been able to achieve in areas of science.
It's very interesting, last year one of the television channels ran a poll amongst its viewers as to an outstanding Australian contributor of the last one hundred years and that was won by the late Dr Victor Chang who as you all know played such a major role in medical science, particularly in relation to heart transplants, over the years that preceded his very tragic death in 1991. And it was something of bellwether of perhaps a changing attitude in the Australian community where there is a greater recognition of scientific achievement.
From a personal point of view I don't mind saying that as somebody whose discipline was the law and whose acquaintance with science was less extensive because of that discipline than many others in this audience, one of the most thrilling experiences I've had as Prime Minister is the opportunity it's given me to chair the Prime Minister's Science, Innovation and Technology Council.  And that brings to me and to my senior colleagues the scientific cream of Australia and the people who have the responsibility not only of carrying the burden of research but also the people who are involved in converting that to commercial advantage and to longer term benefit. And the things I've leant in chairing that council and the insights I've been given, the introduction in many cases that I've enjoyed to the finest minds in scientific Australia has been something that I remember very very vividly. 
We haven't always been as good as a nation in hanging onto our inventions. So often we invent something and then it goes off overseas and some of the inventions to which reference was made during the presentation a few moments ago are certainly very vividly in our minds when we think of that. And one of the responsibilities of government, one of the responsibilities of the business community and one of the responsibilities of the scientific community is to try and ensure that there are fewer examples of the bright idea occurring in Australia but then disappearing overseas and the commercial benefit being enjoyed by other countries and other people.
We are of course, citizens of the world, but we're also first and foremost an Australian community. And we are entitled to feel not only a sense of pride but also a certain degree of ownership in the brilliance and the ideas of our scientists and those who contribute so much in creative thought.
Questacon of course has been aimed very much at taking science and technology to the community, and the emphasis that it has placed in its 13 years of existence on attracting younger people and children and introducing younger Australians of all ages to the relationship between science and creativity and their daily lives has been one of the reasons why it has been such a very very successful concept. And we remain indebted of course to the generosity of the government and the people of Japan for the contribution that was made as a Bicentennial gift towards the establishment of this centre.
 So I'm delighted to be with you, I'm delighted again on behalf of the Government to salute and thank the scientists, the men and women of this country who've contributed so much in the realm of ideas and creativity. And I hope that the climate in which they will operate in the years ahead will be more encouraging, there's a growing appreciation of the important role they play in our community. And this wonderful exhibition will take to the Australian people, particularly to young Australians, an interpretation of the relevance of inventions and creative ideas to our daily lives. And I therefore have great pleasure in declaring open the exhibition "Our Clever Country", I salute those who've created a clever Australia and may they be followed in the years ahead by many more talented men and women of Australia.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Centenary of Federation, history of Australia
E&amp;OE..................................
Thank you very much Anne-Marie, acting director general of the archives, your Grace, Tony Eggleton, my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I share the enthusiasm of the acting director general and the Archbishop for the importance and the relevance of this gallery and most particularly this exhibition in the context of the celebration of the Centenary of the Australian Federation. 
That wonderful advertisement which is resinated around the country which depicted the young boy asking his father the identity of the first Australian Prime Minister has served two great purposes. Firstly it's made a lot more Australian's aware of the name of our first Prime Minister, and secondly its driven home to many Australians a quite remarkable and precious thing about the birth of this country constitutionally. And that is that that birth was achieved not through revolution or blood shed, but was achieved in peace and relative harmony. And history records, and I've had it reconfirmed over the Christmas holidays when I read Jeffrey Bolton's magnificent biograph of Edmund Barton. History records that the only area of real contention between the then colonial Governments and Joseph Chamberlain the colonial secretary, acting on behalf of the British Government about the form of the Australian constitution, was indeed the circumstances in which appeals might lie from the soon to be established federal supreme court of Australia, to be called the High Court, and the privy council. And it was resolved in a way that was not originally the desire of the leaders of the Australian colonies that fell well short of what was originally wanted by the British Government.
But when you think of it it was a quite amazingly small area of dispute and difference, and of course over the last 100 years at various stages along that journey there have been important documents, important acts of Parliament which have been sign posts and expressions of change. And so it is that the galleries of our, charters of our nations this exhibition comprises seven charter, or foundation documents of the Commonwealth of Australia. The royal assent of Queen Victoria, dated as the acting director general said, on the 9th of July 1900. An event that was commemorated in July of last year during the very successful Centenary of Federation visit to London by myself and most of State Premiers and the Speaker and the President of the Houses of the Australian Parliament. A wonderful week which drove home to many of us the importance attached by our British hosts to the shared link between our two societies.
The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act itself, which as my quick recollection serves me, was in fact first repatriated, or exported, or however one might describe it to Australia in 1990. And it was brought here by the then Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Jeffrey Howe, at the request of my predecessor Paul Keating, my predecessor Bob Hawke as Prime Minister of Australia. The letters patent constituting the Office of the Governor General, and the proclamation of inauguration day 1900. 
But they are all documents of course dated 100 years ago, but three other very important documents are included. There's the statue of Westminster adoption act of 1942, which some 11 years after the passive of the statue of Westminster by the British Parliament saw the incorporation of the provisions of that act which declared the essential equality of status between the member states of the then British Commonwealth. The constitution alteration act of 1967 which gave expression to the desire of 90% of the Australian people to right an historic wrong done to the indigenous people of this country through their exclusion from the census of the Australian population and the hither to inability of the Commonwealth Parliament to legislate for the indigenous people of this country. And it did demonstrate that decision the desire of the Australian people overwhelmingly quite remarkably given the indifferent record of other attempts to change the Australian constitution to determination of the Australian people to address that wrong. And finally the Australia Act of 1986, which put beyond argument whether there was any residual right of the British Parliament to legislate in relation to the affairs of Australia. Although it would have to be acknowledged but in pragmatic political real terms, any capacity to do so had long since expired by the changed relationship between our two nations.
They are therefore seven very important documents. They record the legal experience and the legal marks to the present state constitutionally of Australian nationhood. But importantly they're part of the historical record of this country. And one of the really exciting things about Australia is the growing interest of this country in its history, and it's occurring in all generations in all parts of Australian societies. 
I spoke today at the presentation of awards in the Young Australian of the Year ceremony of the emotional impact on me of the time I spent on Gallipoli Peninsula, ANZAC day last year. Moving amongst the some 12 to 15 thousand young Australians who were marking that particular occasion, the crowd that was probably 10 or 15 years earlier no more than 500 or 1000. A vivid demonstration of just how there is a growing respect, a growing curiosity, a growing desire to learn and to understand on occasion properly to question but most importantly of all to feel that as part of our history and it's part of heritage. 
And I think this gallery will make an important contribution, but of course it will serve to remind us that important those documents may be, important but, thought the written letter of the law may be, ultimately the values and the practices of our democratic society are of infinitely greater importance. And the robustness and openness with which we practice parliamentary democracy in this city in the national capital, may on occasions draw criticism and adverse comments, but in the end it is one of the great board walks of our freedom. The strength of our commitment to the rule of law, the incorruptibility of our judiciary and importantly also the openness, the scepticism, the criticism from time to time of our media. All of those three things are very important guarantors of the ongoing liberty of the Australian people and the ongoing strength of Australian democracy.      
I congratulate the archives of Australia and I congratulate the council of the Centenary of Federation for its initiative in bringing this exhibition together and its initiative in supporting the Federation gallery. It will be one more reason for Australians in their increasing numbers come and visit the national capital, the growth of interest in the Centenary of Federation, and the contribution that this gallery and this exhibition will make are very important further landmarks in the role of Canberra of our national capital. 
So ladies and gentlemen I have great pleasure in declaring open the Federation Gallery and the exhibition, Charters of our Nation.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Lisa.  Mr Gary Humphries, my parliamentary colleagues, Archbishop Hollingworth, ladies and gentlemen. 
The 'Honouring Women' Initiative is a recognition that despite the unbelievable contribution made to Australian life by Australian women, in many of the awards that are given for outstanding service by Australians and many of the other forms of recognition, the ranks of women are not as well represented as might be the case.  This is particularly so in relation to awards under the Order of Australia.
It is not because, let me hasten to say, any conscious act of discrimination or indifference.  Rather it is because in proportionate terms the number of nominations put forward of women is nowhere near as great as is the case in relation to men.  And so the 'Honouring Women' Initiative is designed through the recruitment of thirty very well known and very successful Australian women, thirty ambassadors to go throughout the community, to draw attention to the ways in which there could be more recognition and honouring afforded to women.  
And in launching this initiative this afternoon I am inviting to the stage four people, all of whom have achieved very great distinction in Australian life.  Two of them, Dame Margaret Guilfoyle and Joan Kirner have agreed to co-chair the initiative and the other two, the Chairman of the Australia Day Council, Lisa Curry-Kenny and Professor Freda Briggs, the Senior Australian of the Year, are also very well known and much admired for their very special contributions to Australian life.
So if I could invite Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, Mrs Joan Kirner, Professor Briggs to join Lisa Curry-Kenny on the stage to assist me in launching this initiative.
Thank you.
Now I am going to present a pin which marks the initiative to each of the very fine and very prominent Australians who've agreed to take part in this very important initiative.
Thank you.
[Ends] 


I am pleased to announce the re-appointment of Mr Roger Beale, Mr Andrew Podger, and Dr Neil Johnston to their respective positions as Secretary of the Department of the Environment and Heritage, Secretary of the Department of Health and Aged Care and Secretary of the Department of Veterans' Affairs when their current appointments expire on 10 March 2001.
The new appointments will be for periods of three years.
1 March 2001 


E&amp;OE..................
To Lisa Curry Kenny - thank you for your kind welcome, to the other members of the National Australia Day Council, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
In the months ahead, communities all over Australia - in city suburbs, in towns and in the bush - will participate in events to mark our Centenary of Federation. All Australians will have an opportunity to ponder past success and plan, with eager anticipation, a new century of Australian achievement.
Many will dwell on the sheer scale of what';s been achieved in only a hundred years and, by any measure, it is remarkable.
In the arts, in scientific endeavour, on sporting fields and on battle-fields, in the building of all the infrastructure of a modern nation, in the respect offered to us by other nations and in the creation of a stable and harmonious society from people drawn from the four corners of the earth - Australia';s achievements are impressive and a source of great pride for us all.
And what is staggering to contemplate is that all this was accomplished in essence by only four generations of Australians. So short has been the time involved, we have among us men and women whose own lives have spanned the entirety of our nation';s life.
And yet, a nation will not be remembered or respected in history for its achievements alone but equally for the beliefs of its people and the things they stand for.It is the values that drive Australian success, or even at times glorious failure, which should be celebrated tomorrow.
A celebration of this kind should never be a negative or sombre occasion.   Equally however, it should not be a time to gloss over the failures and blemishes of the past. 
If the celebration of our centenary is to have lasting value it should not only infuse us with an even greater sense of pride in the magnitude of the Australian achievement but also help us to better understand the past so that it';s mistakes might be minimised in the future.
Late last year, I spoke of the values I felt were uniquely part of the Australian character - a desire for self reliance, the willingness to have a go, the capacity to pull together both in good times and in adversity and finally an ethic which demands from each of us and for each of us the giving and receiving of a fair go.
These values developed out of necessity, sometimes bitter experience and the great genius Australians seem to possess in selecting the best from our heritage and other countries, yet rejecting other things unsuited to our needs or character. For instance, we embraced many things from the British including those great principles of the rule of law and parliamentary democracy which are the very basis of our civil society yet rejected European notions of class-consciousness.
In refining our own values, we have likewise selected the best from our past and moved boldly away from attitudes or practices we now feel are unworkable or unjust. 
The commitment of Australians over the past one hundred years to democracy and individual freedom has been both remarkable and constant.
For instance, women in Australia enjoyed voting rights years ahead of women in other democracies.In my view, the strength and vitality of Australian democracy during the past century has been due overwhelmingly to three great institutional pillars.
Firstly, with its limitations, there has been Australia';s strong, effective and robust political and parliamentary system where the opportunity exists for open debate and endless diversity of views. 
There has been the rule of law underpinned by an independent and incorruptible judiciary.
And there has been a free and frequently sceptical press.
These three institutions are the real title deeds of Australian democracy. 
They are an infinitely greater guarantee of liberty than any formal enshrinement of personal rights in our Constitution or a Bill of Rights. 
In a Bill of Rights, no matter how skilfully crafted, the potential will always exist for misinterpretation or accidental exclusion and there are many examples in history where fine phrases within some code or bill have failed to protect the basic rights of a nation';s citizens.
To speak of democracy and personal freedom in Australia is of course to speak of values which are now closer to being universal than they have ever been in the history of mankind.
Today, however, I want to reflect on three particular achievements which stand out in the Australian centenary story.
They not only illustrate particular Australian approaches but importantly have continuing relevance and therefore provide hope and reassurance about our ability to respond to future challenges.
Social CohesionOur social cohesion, flowing directly from a unique form of egalitarianism, is arguably the crowning achievement of the Australian experience over the past century.
We remain a relatively classless society, aspirational yet egalitarian, competitive yet ultimately accommodating.
Australia';s social cohesion was in evidence at the time of Federation. It survived the bitter conscription debates of World War I as well as the depredations of the Great Depression. Post World War II migration saw a socially cohesive Australia not only successfully absorb millions of people from over one hundred different sources but also abandon a racially based immigration policy.
Our social cohesion is well demonstrated by the great volunteer spirit of Australia - some may even call it mateship - so evident not only in time of war and other adversity but also when, such as with the Sydney Olympics, the opportunity is there for Australians to present a united positive image to the world. There is little doubt that one of the many reasons for the success of the Olympic Games was the essentially open and egalitarian spirit of the Australian people. 
It is appropriate therefore that this year marks not only Australia';s Centenary of Federation but also the Year of the Volunteer. Australians give nearly 106 million hours of their time each year to worthy causes. That incredible figure represents participation rates double, even triple that found in other advanced nations.
Today, I unreservedly acknowledge the selfless efforts of Australian volunteers. Through their work in hospitals, in bushfire brigades, as coaches in children';s sporting teams, in countless community and charitable organisations, we have all become richer by their generosity and commitment.
Our social cohesion is a priceless asset. It will underpin the future progress and harmony of our nation.
For this very reason we have an obligation to seek out and address those flaws in our society which threaten our community';s cohesion. 
It is unrealistic for any society to ever aspire to equality of outcomes but we should always seek to the maximum extent possible to deliver equality of opportunity.
Practical assistance to those in need is very much a hallmark of the Australian character - the capacity for decisive action and great initiative yet directed in support of time honoured and traditional values.
That the Australian people retain an innate and selfless sense of what';s right has been brought home by the widespread community support for the efforts of our magnificent peacekeepers in East Timor.
I have tremendous faith that Australia';s social cohesion and the values which underpin it will continue.
As a community, we are moving forward to safeguard it and indeed to extend its reach. For instance, the growing level of commitment to addressing indigenous issues and our desire to acknowledge the special place of Indigenous Australians in the nation';s life seeks to foster better understanding between us all.
FederalismThe second matter I wish to speak of today is Australian federalism itself - conceived not as an act of revolution but through the rule of law, not with bloodshed - but with a vote.
I am no states rightist. I am an Australian nationalist. State and provincial loyalties which tug against the national interest should have no place in the modern Australia.
Yet in straight pragmatic terms a nation as geographically large as Australia must have a decentralised system of government. That is why we have kept our federal system.
Despite its shortcomings and the inevitable tensions between the national and state governments and even on occasion between individual states, our federal system has been a conspicuous success.
It is an inherently strong system. It';s been noted that of the world';s 180 countries only six, Australia among them, survived 'the furnace of the twentieth century'; with both their fundamental political and legal institutions intact. And, of that number, four were federations.
The division of political authority between a national government and a number of states has given us the best of both worlds. Particularly in a country as large and diverse as Australia, it satisfies a natural desire to see specific regional differences and priorities accommodated without impeding the emergence of a single strong national identity or allowing for sensible national standards to be developed.
Australian federalism, despite the occasional call for smaller and more numerous states seems particularly robust and effective. Its creation and maintenance throughout one of history';s more turbulent centuries is something in which Australians should take great pride.
And the continued faith placed in our constitution and federal system is evidence that it still reflects the core values and aspirations held by the vast majority of our countrymen and women.
Under Australian federalism, sweeping constitutional changes are difficult. Australians will however emphatically change our constitution if they believe an injustice should be addressed. 
This was dramatically demonstrated in 1967 when more than 90 per cent of our citizens approved historic changes of lasting value to indigenous Australians.
A significant Australian achievement over many years has been an ability to maintain the integrity of institutions gifted to us from the past, while finding new and innovative ways to address pressure points and deal with issues not even dreamt of a hundred years ago - issues such as global communication and the incredible growth of the services and information sectors.
More recently, through their decision to mandate the modernisation of the taxation system, Australians ensured renewal, and a safeguarding of the federal structure. It mended a dangerous and divisive fault-line that had developed - one that I recall particularly well, gaping even wider at Premiers'; conferences - namely the growing separation between revenue raising and government service provision.
We';ll move forward into this century better equipped for federalism to work as intended through the states, at last, regaining access to a significant growth tax in their own right, vastly enhancing the alignment between constitutional responsibility and the ability to make financial decisions.
Federalism, by passing executive power to levels of government closer to citizens and their day to day lives, ensures greater accountability and, by extension, greater government responsiveness.
And put simply, in the words of a recent Economist article entitled, by the way, 'Australia';s Iron Constitution'; - "The good thing about all those layers of government is that Australian voters get plenty of opportunity to tell their law-makers what they think of them".
The Public Private BalanceFinally, I';d like to touch on what I regard as one of the great unsung success stories of our last one hundred years. 
That has been Australia';s success in balancing public and private resourcing of what I would broadly describe as human services.That balance, achieved by successive Australian governments in key areas such as health and education, has contributed much to our social stability as well as continuing to foster personal self reliance.
Australians are fiercely independent and for that reason, we demand choice - rejecting single 'one size fits all'; solutions imposed upon us by others.
And yet, the principle of a fair go also requires that all Australians, but particularly those in need, are offered care and access to quality services.
In other words we believe that Government has a limited but strategic role to play in our lives. 
Australia, through trial, error and experimentation over many decades has achieved a better balance than most other nations in creating two complementary and high quality systems - one provided by government, the other by the private sector.
The notion of a social coalition which seeks to join not only governments and welfare organisations but also business and philanthropic individuals in addressing pressing social problems, builds on the success Australia has historically achieved in balancing public and private resourcing of human services. 
In the crucial area of health care services, the Commonwealth and State Governments through Medicare, provide funds for public hospitals, local GP services and prescribed medicines and importantly, ensures universal access to quality health services. Other services such as private hospitals and dentistry are provided through the private health system.
In education, the Commonwealth assists the states to fund a quality public system. Federal funds are also the predominant source of support for non-government schools to the value of around 50 per cent of the cost of educating a child in the government system. The vast bulk of the additional cost is met by parents willing to make sacrifices in order to gain choice in respect to their children';s education.
The case for nurturing a partnership between the public and private sectors of education is overwhelming. It is a social coalition on a strategic scale and one that will continue to reflect the needs and the character of the Australian people.
Providing choice in health, education and other areas of human services not only meets a community aspiration but also limits the calls made on government to fund these services.
It is always a worthy pursuit to aim for a government that is modest in size. After all, governments have no money of their own, only that which they tax and borrow from other people.
My view is that we have gone closer than most others to achieving the optimum balance between state intervention and private responsibility in the provision of human services across the spectrum of community life.
The generic evidence would appear to support this proposition. In 1999, general government outlays in Australia as a percentage of GDP were just under 32 per cent. This is higher than that of the United States where individuals in need are sometimes left without the assistance they should have. Yet, it is much lower than that needed to support the bloated bureaucracies found in many European countries where government outlays can exceed the equivalent of more than half their GDP.
ConclusionLadies and Gentlemen, on the eve of Australia Day, it';s the very nature of Australians we should celebrate.
People who demand, for themselves and for others, a fair go. People animated by a sense of independence, of self reliance and responsibility. A nation willing to take risks, to have a go, at life';s opportunities.
Australians knowing that together, no challenge will be too great, no goal beyond their grasp.
None of us can know what the next hundred years will bring. But whatever course is before us, I believe it will be travelled by Australians infused with the same decent values, the same constant virtues as their forbears and willing to stride boldly forward into the future.
I know I join with my fellow Australians in looking forward to the year ahead. There is much to celebrate but also much to do.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
I am frequently asked as I move around Australia and most particularly by children and younger people what is it about my job as Prime Minister that I like and enjoy the most. And I was asked this yesterday by a group of young children who were visiting Canberra as part of a visit by all of those children in Australia who are educated through distance education. I invariably reply, because it is the case, that the thing I enjoy most is the opportunity that it gives me to meet different groups of Australians, men and women in all different walks of life, in different parts of our country. And one never tires because one is constantly fascinated and reinvigorated as one meets new groups of Australians and understands the incredible diversity and vivacity of our population.
Because I guess it';s the Centenary of Federation year and because of the great focus on Australia of the Olympic Games, we';ve had occasion to look at ourselves a lot more over the last year and the world has looked at us a lot more and the world has been pretty pleased at what it';s seen. That is not to say that this country is without blemish or without flaws. But it is a country in good heart. It is a country that has produced and continues to produce great people and we';ve seen a large number of them on display tonight. And if you look back on that special honour roll of distinguished Australians, the past Australians of the Year, you find a great variety of people who';ve made their mark on our nation and impressed the rest of the world. 
We are a nation of great individuals. We are a nation of courageous people. We are a nation of contributors and achievers. And past Australians of the Year all qualify for all of those descriptions. And it is therefore with great pleasure that I announce that the Australian of the year for 2001 is Lieutenant General Peter Cosgrove.
[ends]


Subjects: Australia Day
E&amp;OE..................
To Gary Humphries, the Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory, Admiral Chris Barrie, Major General Peter Cosgrove, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
In this quite magnificent setting and with the support of the magnificently and newly formed federation guard, this is as Marjorie said, a very special Australia Day. It is Australia Day in the year in which we celebrate the centenary of the federation of Australia.
It is an opportunity, and I join Marjorie Turbayne in the doing so, to welcome to the family of Australia those people who have become Australian citizens on this Australia Day, the 26th of January 2001. 
We are entitled because of the community we are, to celebrate Australia Day in whatever way we choose to do. And that is, we reflect upon the last 100 years in particular, it is an occasion to honour those who have done to so much to build such a magnificent nation over that period of time. And especially in this year of the centenary of the formation of the Australian Army, we acknowledge with great depth the people of Australia who laid down their lives in the wars in which this country was involved and who defended this country and the cause of freedom around the world.
It is also an occasion to honour every other section of the Australian community which has built such a harmonious and united nation. We were on display magnificently to the rest of the world last year with the Olympic Games, but as a freedom loving, tolerant and cohesive community we are always on display, not only to ourselves, but to the rest of the world.
We have much to be grateful for in this country. We owe an enormous debt of gratitude to those four generations of Australians who over the last 100 years have built this nation to what it is today. That places a great responsibility on current generations to preserve the values of the past that are worth preserving but also to address those flaws and those difficulties and challenges within modern day Australian life that need to be efffectively addressed to build an even greater future. 
I invite all of you to celebrate Australia Day, celebrate in whatever way you see fit, but I think most of all that we will together celebrate the sheer joy of being Australian.   Thank you.


E&amp;OE..................
Well Colin you certainly know how to get to a man's heart with an introduction like that.  But can I say how delightful it is to be back here in Perth and a particular privilege to speak in support of the re-election of Richard Court as Premier of Western Australia.  
Politics is not just about having the title or the car or the office.  Politics is very much about making a change and making a difference.  And if ever a man inherited an economic and political mess Richard Court inherited it from the Lawrence Labor Government back all those years ago.
And in the time that he's been Premier he has transformed the economy of the state.  It is true that national government gives national economic direction.  But the quality of economic management at a state level can have an enormous impact on how individual states perform.  It is therefore to me no surprise that Western Australia should have the lowest unemployment rate and the best performing small business sector of any of the Australian states.
And that is because the Court Government has seized the opportunities of a strong national economy and contributed to the building of our economy and contributed to the strength of the Western Australian economy.
The Court Government has been a reforming government.  Along with the Coalition Government in Canberra since 1996 it has understood the importance of industrial relations reform.  Of all the changes that a future Labor government here in Western Australia or a future Labor government in Canberra, of all the changes they would bring about that will do the most damage to the new more internationally competitive economy Australia now has, none would be more serious than their plans to wreck the industrial relations program of the last six or ten years.
Whatever Mr Gallop now says, in government a Gallop Labor government would go back to the discredited union dominating industrial relations policies of all Labor governments, just as a Beazley federal Labor government would do the same thing.
It has been my pleasure to work in partnership with Richard Court as the Premier of your state since I became Prime Minister in March of 1996.  We have worked together cooperatively in the national interest.  But whenever the occasion has demanded it Richard has stood up and fought for the legitimate interests of Western Australia.
He has never been reluctant to say I want something done for the benefit of Western Australia and he's never been reluctant to argue with me or the Premiers of the other states.  In other words he's done his job by the people to whom he is accountable.  And that is what Premiers should do in a federal system such as Australia.  
Richard played a major role in giving support to our far sighted tax reform plan.  For the first time in fifty years the states of Australia have within their grasp a growth tax.  The GST revenue is flowing in greater measure each year to the states, will give them more resources to provide more services.  And just remember whenever Mr Gallop or Mr Beazley promise to spend more you've got to remember that both of them opposed the taxation reform that have put the finances of Western Australia in the years ahead on a much sounder footing.  
It was Richard Court who stood up for the interests of the mining and pastoral industries of Western Australia in working with me to secure improvements to the native title legislation.  And the lingering difficulties with that legislation are one hundred percent the fault of Labor voting in Western Australia and in Canberra who frustrated our attempts, the attempts of Richard Court and myself to get rid of all the difficulties and complexities of the Keating legislation.
Ladies and gentlemen don't underestimate the task ahead.  It is always hard winning a third term and our political opponents here in Western Australia and elsewhere will try to present themselves as some kind of moderate continuum of the strong economic management that has been provided here in Western Australia under Richard Court.  
But remember Labor's record in economic management in government.  Remember the debt left to Western Australia by Carmen Lawrence and Peter Downing and Brian Burke.  Doubtless you remember the debt left to the Commonwealth of Australia by Paul Keating and Kim Beazley.  
It is an important choice that Western Australians will make on the 10th of February.  It is a choice between continuing the growth and the prosperity and the stability and the productivity of Western Australia under Richard Court or taking a huge risk, a huge gamble in electing a Labor Government.  
I have hope, I have confidence in the people of Western Australia who'll respond to the strong leadership, leadership and integrity that Richard and Hendy Cowan and their team have provided over the time they have been in Government.
 Ladies and gentlemen I will do everything I can to secure the re-election of a Court Government.  Richard has my friendship, my confidence and my strong support.
Ladies and gentlemen, will you welcome to this great campaign launch the Premier of Western Australia, Richard Court.
[Ends] 


Subjects:  Centenary of Federation; Australian character; Bob Tucker..
E&amp;OE  ..............................
Well thank you very much.  Can everybody hear me?  Right, that's always a good thing to check.  Can I first of all say to all of you, thank you very much for having me and Bob Tucker, my friend and who is the Liberal candidate in the by-election in Ryan with you this morning.  
As part of the many things that I do as prime minister and indeed long before I became prime minister in the various other jobs I've had in the almost twenty-seven years that I've been in federal parliament, the most stimulating, the most enjoyable and the activity that keeps renewing my enthusiasm for public life is the opportunity of going around Australia and meeting different groups of Australians.  I am often asked when groups of school children visit Canberra and they come around to the Prime Minister's quadrangle and they have a photograph taken with me and then I say "why don't you come into my office".  And they crowd around my desk and I point out to them that the desk I sit at was the desk first made in 1927 and used by the then prime minister of Australia; it was the desk that Joe Lyons used; it was the desk that Sir Robert Menzies used and it was the desk that John Curtin used during World War II. I mean it's a very bipartisan desk, it belongs to both sides of politics and it was the desk that Ben Chifley used and then it sort of got sort of discarded and I discovered it a couple of years ago and I had it brought back because I think it's important to have a bit of history and a bit of continuity.  And as we gather around and talk inevitably the young students will say to me "what's the best thing about being prime minister?" and I truly say to them and I truly  believe it, the best thing about being prime minister is the opportunity to meet different groups of Australians in different parts of our country.  And I never lose my enthusiasm for that.
And as part of my going around the country I visit a lot of retirement villages and hostels and nursing homes.  They vary.  I haven't been to one that is any more., this is a wonderful place and the atmosphere of this.  And I want to say that the RSL does a fantastic job in providing for the aged care facilities of people who fought for our country, or people who were related to those who fought for our country.  And I can't let the opportunity go by without saying how really touched I am to see my good friend Eric Abraham who I've met on a number of other occasions and is a wonderful Australian.  He's just a sort of exemplar of a wonderful generation.  And many of you here belong to what I frequently call the 'heroic generation of Australians'.  You were either, in Eric's case he fought in World War I.  The case of others you would have been young children in World War I, you went through the Depression and then you went through World War II and you witnessed the enormous change in our country that occurred after World War II and you've made an enormous contribution to Australia.  And particularly in our Centenary year it's something that I want to say on behalf of your fellow Australians how much we admire the contribution that you have made to our country.  
I of course come to Queensland very frequently and you all know there's a by-election on, I'm not going to come heavy with a policy speech. I wouldn't dare do that.  But I just want to say Bob Tucker over there is a good bloke.  I've known him for a long time.   He comes from this area, he's raised a family in this area, he's made a business in this area and he's part of this area and he'll work damn hard for you if you elect him next Saturday.
Looking after our retired citizens is a very important responsibility of any government.  And we've tried very hard since we've been in government in different ways  to do that.  And I think it's one of those areas where if you could ever get the ideal, and that's very hard in life and it's certainly very hard in politics, if you could ever get the ideal you'd like to try and take some of the party politics out of aged care.  Let us argue and debate over other things, but let us agree that when it comes to looking after retired people in our community we can try and reach some common agreement.  And governments providing assistance to aged care facilities started way back in the 1950s and it's continued over the years but we couldn't do it without, effectively without the help of great institutions such as the RSL and the other great institutions of society.  And most of the problems of our society and most of the challenges of our society can be met by the government, welfare organisations, groups of local citizens and public spirited individuals getting together and working with each other to try and solve our difficulties. And if we can work together in a partnership and a coalition we can do all of that. 
I think this is of course the most wonderful country in the world in which to live.  And I've counted it as an extraordinary privilege to be prime minister of Australia in the year in which we're celebrating the centenary of the Federation of our country.  And we can look back over that one hundred years, sure we have made mistakes, we've done a few things wrong, of course we have and we haven't always got it right but the great bulk of the history of this country has been one of outstanding generosity and achievement.  The way in which we played our part and this group know better than most in Australia, we played our part in two world wars, we stood up for freedom, we never tried to impose our will on anybody else, we merely tried to help people who were being oppressed and we did it magnificently at enormous cost of course for a very small country.  And that's a tradition that's continued.  It's a tradition that was played out in East Timor when our troops magnificently implemented the resolution of the United Nations and did Australia proud in a quite remarkable way.  
So when I look back on the Centenary, I look back the one hundred years I think of what this country has done to defend freedom, I think of what your generation did so very directly particularly but not only in World War I and World War II.  And I also think of the way in which we've been able to absorb wonderfully from around the world people who have added richness and colour and difference to our society but all the time being very much part of the Australian community.  So it's a great honour.  It's a great privilege to be prime minister of Australia at any time but it's a particular honour and a particular privilege to be prime minister during our Centenary year.
Thank you very much for having me.  I think you live in a wonderful retirement village.  I wish you good luck, good health, good fortune and remember Bob next Saturday.  Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
In this centenary year of Australia's Federation it is my great pleasure to present this year's Federation Address and, in so doing, launch the Government's Innovation Action Plan for the Future, Backing Australia's Ability.
In last year's Federation Address, I looked ahead to the year 2010 and expressed my firm belief that Australia could not only consolidate but entrench our current economic strength through the tangible benefits generated by technological change, software revolutions, scientific innovation and the expanding frontiers of the knowledge economy.
My optimism that this can occur is now higher than ever.  
More and more people are coming to understand that innovation, as a concept, is not the preserve of just a small group of Australians, but the means by which all of us, in small business, as employees in larger companies, as primary producers, as parents wanting better opportunities for our children, will succeed.
A compelling reason for my optimism stems from our tremendous progress over a century of nationhood.  In that time Australians have revealed themselves as an innovative and resourceful people - a people willing to have a go.
Australian invention and innovation has taken many forms, from the most humble practical changes to great nation building projects.  And although sometimes not given the public recognition deserved, we have had particular success in the area of scientific endeavour.
This success has not only changed the lives of Australians, it has improved the welfare of people around the world - the estimation that the lives of 200 million people have been saved by the development of penicillin, in great part by Howard Florey, remains a startling figure.  Of all our Nobel Prize winners, all but one, have been recognised for outstanding achievement in the fields of science and medicine.
Yet, as fine as our achievements have been, the fruits of our ingenuity and inventiveness must be realised here in Australia.  In an extremely competitive world of highly mobile capital and labour, it is all the more important that Australia has the right incentives and opportunities to translate Australian ideas into income and jobs at home for Australians.
In launching Backing Australia's Ability today, the largest group of measures ever put together by an Australian Government to foster innovation, and in calling upon those in the scientific, education and business communities to take up the opportunities offered by it, I am confident that, together, we can create a climate to harness the talents of our best and brightest and effectively compete in the world of which I've just spoken.
By providing significant additional resources and the means by which talented Australians can have a go in the field of science and technology, we are seeking today to nurture a new generation of young scientific minds capable of achieving great things for their country.
 SETTING THE RIGHT CLIMATE
Innovation, as a concept, can't flourish in isolation.  People, no matter how talented or entrepreneurial, can't be expected to have a go if they lack confidence in the environment that surrounds them.  
For this reason, the success of the initiatives being announced today will be very much underpinned by the Government's record in providing an economic climate in which innovation can thrive.
Our tax reforms have provided Australia with an efficient and internationally competitive tax system including, from the first of July, one of the lowest company tax rates in the region.
The new capital gains tax system rewards entrepreneurial behaviour and offers incentives for the provision and management of capital.  It's encouraging to note that in the year following the introduction of these reforms, nearly twice as much venture capital was invested in Australian companies.
Australia now has a more flexible labour market better suited to the needs of emerging industries while also Iimproving the efficiency of more established industries.
These and other fundamental economic reforms of recent years have created a vibrant and competitive economic environment with high growth and productivity and, as was confirmed last week, low inflation.  An environment in which Australians can have confidence and can be innovative.
PAST PROGRAMMES / BACKGROUND TO BACKING AUSTRALIA'S ABILITY
The group of initiatives I am delighted to announce today is the fulfilment of a major Coalition election promise and the next step in a series of wide ranging programs undertaken by my Government over recent years to stimulate and encourage innovation.
The Investing for Growth statement in 1997, the new policy and funding framework for higher education research and research training announced in Knowledge and Innovation and the government's decision in 1999 to double base funding for health and medical research by an additional $614 million over five years are all examples of our past commitment to innovation.In 2000/2001 alone, my Government will have provided approximately four and a half billion dollars funding for innovation including a record $2.7 billion for science, research and industry innovation programs, $1.8 billion for higher education research and research training and additional funds for specialised programmes such as those targeted at the ICT sector.
But, notwithstanding all the good work done to date, Backing Australia's Ability takes that commitment to a new level.
In putting this group of measures together, we have been extremely fortunate to receive astute and expert advice from a great number of people, many of whom are in this room today.
To the Chief Scientist, to all the members of my Science Council, to David Miles and the members of the Innovation Summit implementation Group, to the BCA for their role in hosting that Summit, to all who participated in it and the many others who provided their views through other forums, we owe a great debt of gratitude.
I also wish to acknowledge the great effort and enthusiasm of the three Ministers who shared responsibility for the development of this strategy and the often difficult task of achieving an appropriate balance between often competing and compelling priorities - Nick Minchin, Minister for Industry, Science and Resources, David Kemp, Minister for Education, Training and Youth Affairs, and Richard Alston, Minister for Communications, Information Technology and the Arts.
Backing Australia's Ability supports the essential ingredients for a dynamic, productive and innovative economy identified by so many of those whose advice we sought -
The strengthening of our ability to generate ideas and undertake research;  accelerating the commercial application of these ideas; and developing and retaining Australian skills.
Backing Australia's Ability will provide $2.9 billion of additional funding over 5 years for these purposes, as I've said the largest commitment to innovation ever made by an Australian Government, and I'd like now to take you through some of the key initiatives within each of those three elements.
STRENGTHENING OUR ABILITY TO GENERATE IDEAS AND UNDERTAKE RESEARCH
A main aim of the strategy is to ensure that our research base, the backbone of any nation's innovative capacity, remains strong and internationally competitive.  For that reason, substantial support will be provided to foster research in both the public and private sectors.
To support internationally competitive research, the Government will double funding over the next 5 years for national competitive research grants administered by the Australian Research Council.  
These grants cover an enormously broad range of research and the additional $736 million will provide the type of boost for general research as that received by medical research two years ago.  This funding will directly support ground breaking research in areas in which Australia enjoys, or wants to build, a competitive advantage.
We have recognised though, that creative minds often require specialised equipment in order to take their ideas forward.  For that reason, more than $337 million will be provided towards increased project-specific infrastructure over the next five years. 
This will support not only ARC research but also that undertaken through the National Health and Medical Research Council grants scheme.
Moreover, we will provide $246 million over the next five years to fund the best infrastructure proposals from universities to upgrade their scientific and research equipment, libraries and laboratories.
Over the next five years, we intend to establish world class Centres of Excellence in ICT and biotechnology at a cost of $176 million to ensure that Australia continues to play a leading part in these key technologies. With strong industry participation, these centres will undertake cutting edge R&amp;D, focussing on commercialisation and encouraging spin-off companies.
In respect to encouraging biotechnology more generally, $20 million has been earmarked to double the Biotechnology Innovation Fund.
The Government will also provide significant funds towards establishing collaborative Major National Research Facilities.
The Government will introduce incentives to stimulate increased business investment in R&amp;D.  Initiatives include new tax concessions to encourage companies to increase R&amp;D efforts, a rebate to assist small companies to undertake R&amp;D and continued direct grant assistance. 
Specifically, the Government will enhance the R&amp;D tax concession arrangements.  In addition to the existing 125 per cent R&amp;D tax concession, companies that undertake additional R&amp;D will be able to access a premium rate of 175 per cent on the additional investment. This premium targets the labour-related components of R&amp;D expenditure and so will help develop Australian skills and expertise.
In accordance with the approach taken to business tax reform, effective-life write off will apply to the Government's existing R&amp;D tax concession scheme, simplifying it and providing a consistent treatment between R&amp;D plant and other capital items in the tax system.
The reform of the existing R &amp; D concession scheme will ensure that the commercial realities surrounding the conduct of these activities are dealt with more adequately and collectively, the changes being made will provide Australia with one of the best tax based R&amp;D support mechanisms in the OECD.
We've also recognised that often the most exciting developments may emerge from smaller companies and the Government will introduce a tax rebate for the R&amp;D tax concession to help the cash flow of these type of organisations. Over five years, it's estimated up to 1300 small companies that are in tax loss will get early access to $30 million at a net cost of $13 million.
Finally our absolute commitment to the small and medium enterprise sector will see $535 million over five years used to maintain the highly successful START program into the future - it becoming an ongoing mechanism to help the hundreds of companies where grant assistance is most appropriate.
ACCELERATING THE COMMERCIAL APPLICATION OF IDEAS
At the very heart of our plan is to turn Australian ideas into incomes and jobs for Australians.  That's been a common concern in the past - we don't intend for it to be in the future.
It's a complex issue that requires several different approaches - better flow of finance into business innovation, encouraging start ups directly out of research institutions and strengthening intellectual property management processes.
It's also vital to bring together the skills of those in business, universities and governments to pull together ensuring the best Australian ideas can be transformed into products and jobs.  Backing Australia's Ability will assist the greater commercial application of research from universities and public sector research agencies, like the CSIRO, by encouraging the commercial linkages with industry and removing impediments for promising research to go forward to the stage of commercial viability.
The Cooperative Research Centre concept has tremendous potential to further the spin-off opportunities from industry research collaboration.  The Government will boost the CRC Program by 80 per cent over the next five years at a cost of $227 million.  
Greater flexibility will also be incorporated to allow for larger CRCs to be established and small and medium enterprises provided with greater access to the program.
And, once again, with an eye to improving opportunities for the SME sector, an extra $40 million over four years will more than double in value the highly successful Commercialising Emerging Technologies, or COMET Program as its known, to provide early assistance to firms by improving their commercialisation skills.
Also of significance to this sector, funding of $100 million will be provided for an Innovation Access Program to ensure Australian access to the best overseas technology and science and develop international bilateral agreements for this purpose.
Assistance of $79 million will be given to help commercialise public sector research in the form of pre-seed funding, allowing universities and public sector research agencies to take proposals to a venture capital ready stage.
To accelerate efforts to improve Australia's performance in the development and commercialisation of new agribusiness products, services and technologies, an additional $22 million over five years will be committed to the New Industries Development Program. 
And, finally, we're conscious Australian ideas need to be protected.   The Government will set out to further increase awareness and understanding of Intellectual Property issues by a number of educational and legislative and other measures including acceding to the Madrid agreement regarding international registration of trade marks. 
DEVELOPING AND RETAINING AUSTRALIAN SKILLS
The last key element in our drive to foster innovation on a wide and sustainable scale is to equip our own people to be world competitive.  
Education and skills development is an essential prerequisite in any serious attempt to strengthen the long term research base of this country and encourage further collaboration with the world's best.
As I said in my introduction, history is with us and present day Australians are well-educated, highly familiar with new technologies and, through being culturally diverse and export focussed, used to dealing with the world.
However, our skills base does need to be strengthened in key disciplines such as science, mathematics and technology.  Students need to be excited by the possibilities open to them in these fields.
Rewards and incentives are needed to attract and retain leading researchers.
I am particularly pleased to announce that over the next five years, each year, an additional 2,000 new university places will be created with priority given to ICT, mathematics and science.  
Over that period, this will result in 21,000 equivalent full time student places at a cost of $151 million.
To encourage lifelong learning and to help Australians upgrade and acquire new skills, we will also establish an income-contingent loan scheme for postgraduate fee-paying students.
To attract and retain leading researchers in key positions, part of the new funds to be provided for national competitive research grants will be used to introduce 25 new Federation Fellowships worth $225,000 a year for five years. In addition, the number of Australian Postdoctoral Fellowships will be doubled from 55 to 110 and remuneration of these positions will be improved.
We must be realistic, often the skills we need may not necessarily be available in Australia to meet short term needs.  The Government will streamline immigration arrangements to retain ICT qualified overseas students in Australia to work alongside our brightest talent. 
In the future, ICT specialists will make up an even larger proportion of the skilled workers entering Australia through the permanent migration and temporary entry programs.
As indicated last week, an additional $130 million over four years will go to government schools in those States where the Enrolment Benchmark Adjustment (EBA) is triggered.  These funds will be exclusively and strictly applied to raise the standards of science, maths and technology. 
Whilst the bulk of funding responsibility for government schools has historically been one for the states, the Federal Government provides substantial additional funds for these schools.
Indeed, last year in a number of states including Queensland and New South Wales, Federal funding for public schools rose at a faster rate than did state funding.
With this new initiative designed exclusively to improve science and maths education, the Federal Government will be further increasing its already high level of commitment.
And finally, in a meaningful and practical move to enhance student access to quality learning opportunities and provide experience of ICT as a learning tool, $34 million over five years will be provided to help develop online curriculum content in schools. 
NEXT STEPS
Ladies and Gentlemen, all of you have the full detail of the programme before you so I won't linger further on specific detail.  However I do want to stress three important things.
Firstly, the entire program will be subject to a comprehensive and rigorous implementation plan, overseen by a high level Ministerial Committee that I will personally chair.  I have taken great pleasure in my involvement with the Prime Ministers Science Engineering and Innovation Council.  
I've learnt many things and through that involvement, I've become convinced that the issues being addressed through this group of initiatives are absolutely vital for the future of this country.
Backing Australia's Ability will be delivered and defined, tangible outcomes will be achieved as a result of the significant funding we are putting forward.  Strict accountability for all programs will apply.
Secondly, I wish all to understand this is an important step for Australia but we acknowledge that it is a single milestone in a long and unending journey.  This government recognises that more must be done, on a continuous basis, to build our national capacity for innovation.
We've achieved a lot.  The economic basics have been vastly improved, significant programs have been implemented over recent years, record funding applied to key areas.  
This latest initiative Backing Australia's Ability addresses some fundamental shortcomings and it offers some real opportunities.
This statement further illustrates the government's continuing policy energy and our determination to be active in policy reform and development.  In the highly competitive global environment in which we all live, no government can afford to be policy lazy or idle.
Over future months, we'll be closely examining other areas affecting the capacity and willingness of individuals and organisations to engage in serious innovative and entrepreneurial activity.  Employee share ownership, the attractiveness of teaching as a profession and the ways to enhance it, the remaining barriers to commercialisation, philanthropic encouragement of innovation are just some of the areas where Australia could benefit government review and action.
That brings me to my last point.  The Government can play an important role, a strategic role but equally, it is and indeed should be limited in its reach.
The people within this room represent key elements of those sectors who really can drive Australian innovation and prosperity.  Through your involvement advising us in the preparation of these initiatives through your presence here today, you've indicated both an understanding of the importance of these matters and a willingness to take up the challenge.
That augurs well for the future.  The greatest challenge before all of us, and those we represent, is to pull together - to make this happen.
I've got no doubts we can.  Just as we have a proud heritage in inventiveness and innovation, as we've been reminded so often in recent months, we can draw upon a past rich in examples of unity and shared endeavour.


Australian cricket team captain Steve Waugh and Test fast bowler Jason Gillespie will take opposing sides in an historic cricket match in Canberra next month.
Steve Waugh will captain the Prime Minister's XI and Jason Gillespie an ATSIC Chairman's XI in the match to be played at Manuka Oval on April 19.
The Prime Minister and the Chairman of ATSIC are delighted that these two players, who have both played such an important part in the success of the world record breaking Australian team, have agreed to lead the respective sides.
The involvement of the Australian captain and one of his exciting frontline bowlers in this special event is testament to the enormous goodwill the match has generated.
It will also help achieve a key aim of the match - the development of more young Indigenous cricketers into first class players.
Indigenous players were the cricket pioneers forming the first Australian team to tour England back in 1868.
This match will enable young stars to have the experience of playing against and alongside some of the world's best.
It will also kick-off a development process with the Australian Cricket Board which hopefully will lead to more Indigenous cricketers playing first class cricket, and in the Australian national team.
The Chairman of ATSIC said he wants to see Indigenous cricketers "back where we belong."
The response from talented Indigenous cricketers to the cricket match has been overwhelming. More than 100 top-class cricketers have sought selection.
The Prime Minister and the Chairman of ATSIC are finalising the selection of their respective squads and an announcement will be made in the near future.
11 March 2001


Subjects: volunteers; local communities; Bega cheese company; change in communities; Australian economy
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you Gary, Russell, ladies and gentleman. This gathering here brings together, I've learnt as I've gone around and from what Gary has told me, just about every voluntary organisation that is, in so many areas like this around our country, the glue that keeps the local community together. And I would like to start my remarks in picking up Gary's reference to it being the International Year of the Volunteer. One of the remarkable things about Australia is that we have embraced and demonstrated the volunteer tradition far more, and far more effectively, than just about any other country in the world. At any given time we have double or triple the number of people involved in volunteer work than do other industrialised countries, other countries with which it is reasonable to make a comparison with Australia, and that says a lot. And it's always been a feature of our society and it's particularly been a feature of our society in non-metropolitan areas.
I spend a great deal of time, particularly when Parliament is not sitting, travelling outside of what I call the larger metropolitan concentrations of Sydney and Melbourne, and Canberra and Brisbane and so forth. And I've been to Gary's electorate on a number of occasions since he became the member in 1996, and those visits drive home to me just how important volunteers are, how important community spirit is. No matter which Government is in power and no matter what views people may hold about politics, the contribution being made by the local community is enormous. And I want to on behalf of the Government, on behalf of all our fellow Australians, express our appreciation of the untiring volunteer work that is done by so many magnificent organisations. Some of them are based on faith, some of them are based on a long tradition, such as the Country Women's Association, some of them are based on sport, some of them are based on concepts of service which originated in Australia, some imported into Australia from the United States and other countries. And you can find, and some of course, are based on common service in defence and sacrifice in defence of our country during war time. And there's a very long list, and when you add them all together you have a mighty army of volunteers and people all making a contribution.
And it's really only by organisations like that and the business community and the Government working together that we can solve a lot of our communities challenges. I often speak about the social coalition and it's a strong belief of mine that we shouldn't really waste any energy arguing about whether this or that should be done by the Government or the private sector or by volunteer organisations, rather we should recognise that in so many areas each has a role to play each has a responsibility and each has a contribution to make.
Another reason why I'm particularly pleased to be at the co-op is that Bega cheese is one of those great regional success stories. We read a lot of stories in the papers and we hear a lot of stories over the radio and see them on television of things going backwards and things closing down. And there are so many negative stories, and often there's an undue preoccupation with the negative to the detriment of the positive. And this company has demonstrated a capacity over the last 10 years to become a great export industry in cheese. It's gone against the trend, it's bucked the idea that there's no future for exports in many of these industries. And that is a good news story that's to be replicated all around Australia, and if you go to many regional centres of this country it's not all despair and things closing down, there are many good news stories of companies that are expanding and thriving. And there are changes that we all have to cope with, and I'm very conscious that people in regional and rural communities have had to cope with a great deal of change over the last few years.
Most change in our lives is unavoidable, some is avoidable, and some should be resisted because it's change for the worst. But I also know that change for the better can often only be better in the long term and in the process of getting to the longer term people go through a lot of difficulty and challenge and I want to say as the leader of a Government that has supported sensible change I'm very aware and I'm very conscious and I'm very understanding and very comprehending of the pressure that change can place on communities. And part of our job as a Government is to identify things that should be changed for the better, but to be sympathetic and understanding to communities as that change is undertaken. Because we are a society and a community before anything else, and preserving that sense of society and that sense of community is so very important to our identity. And that applies all over Australia, but it applies particularly in the smaller communities of Australia, such as here in Bega.
The other thing I wanted to say is that I'm delighted to stand along side Gary, who's represented your electorate in Federal Parliament since 1996. Eden-Monaro's got a bit of everything, it starts on the outskirts of Canberra, with Queanbeyan, and it comes down to the coast and it goes into some of the mountain areas, it's a very diverse electorate. And it contains a lot of different communities, and it's quite a task and he does it very well, he does it with an unerring commitment to achieving something for Eden-Monaro on every conceivable occasion. And the grant out of the rural adjustment program, that Russell referred to, which will be so very important, the $660,000 grant for the co-op, which will be so very important in facilitating and helping the adjustment process for the dairy industry in this district. And that is an example of what I spoke of a moment ago. Some change for the industry was really unavoidable and it's a question of how you manage that change, and if the Government can help to smooth the way and make it easier for people to adjust, then in the long run that change and that goal can be achieved, but in the process people are not unfairly treated, or unduly hurt. And that's our aim in quite a number of these areas where some kind of change is necessary.
I don't want to give a long speech about the Australian economy except to say that we have over the last few years as a nation grown very strongly. Not every part of the country has had an equal share of that prosperity, I understand that. And one of our aims is to try and even out the differences as far as we possibly can, recognising that you can never even them out completely. We are going to, as a world community, face a few more challenges over the next year, because there's some evidence of a slow down in the United States, and that has a ripple effect all around the country. But we've got a lot of things going for us, we've got a very low inflation rate, we've made a lot of big changes, and I think very beneficial changes, to our tax system. We have a very strong export performance at present, we're very competitive, as many primary producers would know, on world markets. And we've also seen a very strong growth in employment over all. And we want to hang onto these gains, and by running the economy carefully and sensibly, but by the same token being able to make provisions for very important nation building projects such as the investment we made, Backing Australia's Ability, in science and innovation only a few days ago. And the very important investment we made in the defence of the country at the end of last year. And also the investment we're committed to make in tackling the problem of salinity and water quality, which is so very important to this country.
So it's, as always, trying to find a balance. If you don't run a strong economy, if you don't manage the economy well, you can't really afford to do anything much in the long term because you're fighting rising debt levels and deficit budgets, and when you get into that situation everybody suffers. But you've got to have a point at which there's a dividend, there's a social bonus out of good economic management. And I see our capacity to do such things as invest in science, tackle salinity, to spend more money on defence, to spend $1.6 billion on roads over and above what we allocated in the last budget, I see that very much as the social bonus that has come out of the sensible economic management the Government's brought to Australia over the last few years.
But my friends, I'm frequently asked by people all over Australia, most particularly by the many hundreds of school children that I invite into my office when we have picture opportunities, as they call them, in the Prime Minister's courtyard, I'm frequently asked what's the best thing about your job. They also go on to ask me what some of the worst, bad things are about it too. But they say what is the best thing about your job, and I always say, because I believe it, that the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia is the endless opportunities it offers you in meeting different groups of people in different parts of the country. And today is another illustration of the best part of the job, and that is the opportunity to meet the people who put so much into the Bega community, that hold it together, that through, in most cases, their volunteer efforts they make life happier and more bearable and more fulfilling for their fellow Australians, and it's part of the experience of the best part of the job of being Prime Minister of Australia that I come here today and have this opportunity of meeting you.
I want to pay tribute again to Gary for the tremendous hard work that he puts in on your behalf, and to you Russell thank you very much for your warm words of welcome. It's great to be amongst you again and I wish you all well and again I thank all of those who put something into this community for the way in which they are contributing to our wonderful country.
[ends]


Subjects: Australian achievements; education; teaching
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Andrew.  To my ministerial colleague, Peter McGauran, the school principal, the shire president, students, parents and other visitors.  
I'd like to thank the Orbost Secondary College for inviting me here to give me the opportunity for a few moments to share with the student body some thoughts I had about modern Australia and the future that lies ahead of this country.
I always try when I visit electorates to include in the schedule a visit to a school or college, a TAFE or a university because it does enable me to communicate a few ideas and also listen to the views of young Australians. As you know we are celebrating this year the Centenary of the Federation of our nation and we are entitled and proud members of a very cohesive community, we are entitled to reflect on what this country has achieved over the last one hundred years.  And it has achieved much.  It's been one of only six nations that remained continuously democratic throughout the entire 20th century and that is a remarkable achievement.  
It's a country that has welcomed people from the four corners of the world and it is a country which has been built on concepts on equality, of opportunity and concepts of a fair go and concepts of pulling together to achieve common goals and common outcomes.  We have made our mistakes, we have our blemishes and any country which reflects on its history must reflect on the errors as well as reflecting on the achievements.  But the achievements far outweigh the mistakes and the flaws and the attraction of this country to the rest of the world is quite remarkable.  And that positive image was greatly reinforced last year with a very successful Olympic Games.  And this country also won a great deal of respect in our region and around the world for the moral and political leadership we displayed in defending the people of East Timor.
As young members of the Australian community you have the great bulk of your lives in front of you.  You are fortunate to be members of a student body of a well respected school.  Education in Australia sets very high standards and every student body I address is reminded of the importance in their lives of their school years and the importance in their lives of what they learn from their teachers.  Teaching is one of the most noble of all professions, perhaps not honoured as much as it should be.  I believe that the influence of teachers, whose roles and responsibilities now are greater in a way than they were a generation ago, the influence of teachers can be life long on students.  
You will be entering a world, those of you who are leaving school at the end of this year, you will be entering a world that has a great array of opportunities.  We are living in a world which has been dramatically transformed by information technology and the way that's changing people's lives every year is quite amazing.  And in the next twenty-five years I predict that the advances in medical science that will be enjoyed because of the influence of biotechnology will probably have an equally great impact on people's opportunities and people's lifestyles and people's life expectancy.
Earlier this week I announced on behalf of the Government an investment over the next five years of about $3billion in boosting science opportunities and innovation in our universities and in the broader community.  Science is very important to this country's future.  You may not know that all the Noble Prizes that have been won by Australians, all of them bar one, that awarded to Patrick White the novelist, have been won by scientists and researchers.  And this country has always produced medical scientists and other scientists who performed, if I could put it this way, well out of proportion to the population of this country.  And the world renown of many of our doctors and scientists has worked very much to our credit.  
You will be entering a world that will go on changing, a world that will provide you with a great number of employment opportunities, and also a world that is different to the world I entered when I left Canterbury Boys High School in a suburb of Sydney in 1956.  In those days we lived in a different world.  Life was a bit more predictable in some respects but in other respects there were fewer opportunities.  Certainly we had very low levels of unemployment but we tended to live as a nation more to ourselves more than we do now.  And all of that has changed and the secret of life is to hang onto those things that continue to be relevant but also continue to embrace change and to take advantage of new opportunities.
You live in a small community.  That carries with it great advantages but also carries with it disadvantages.  The isolation of a small community can add to the cost of living but it can also add to the lifestyle.  And when I came into Marlo this morning and I went via the jetty near the mouth of the Snowy and I met a man who said he'd been here for three years, he used to holiday, and he was just sitting there in his ute and he said, he said there was a bit of restructuring in my firm in Melbourne and I decided to come down here.  And he was just sitting there at half past nine in the morning looking at this absolutely idyllic sight and I thought to myself yes there are some drawbacks in living in an isolated community, but there are also some massive advantages.  
People who live in communities like this work together with each other a lot more and one of the great strengths of the Australian nation is that we have a volunteer spirit.  I did a speech the other day at the National Press Club talking about some of the characteristics which make Australia different from the rest of the world.  And one of the things that makes it very different is that we are great country of volunteers.  Our volunteer levels are about two or three times what they are in nations like America and England and France and Germany and Japan, which it is reasonable for us to make comparisons.  So there's an enormous benefit in living in a community which co-operates and works together and your own school community is very much about that.
I want to leave two thoughts with you.  The first thought is most importantly of all is to take a very positive towards life.  The people who have the greatest happiness and the greatest success in life are those people who always have a positive attitude, not only about their own future but also about their relations with other people.  Seeing good in people and seeing something positive about the people with whom you work and who you go to school with and who you relate to, while it may on occasion seem very difficult for some people it nonetheless over your lifetime will give you far greater pleasure and far greater happiness.  The happiest people I've met in my life are the people who are positive, not only about their own future but also about the people with whom they live.  You can always find something good about anybody, sometimes it's a little harder but in most cases if you just take the time to look you can find it and I can promise you it will give you a far happier and far more fulfilled life.
The other piece of advice if I may is to value and treasure the associations you make in school and in your early years; always see in the contribution that teachers are trying to make in your life, a desire to give you a very, very strong start because that's what they're endeavoring to do.  And you probably get lots of advice from lots of people and I'm never one to overdo the advice particularly to a younger audience.But can I say that I get a great buzz from visiting schools.  I've visited them all over Australia.  They make me, they renew my sense of enthusiasm, optimism and hope.  And when I saw at the Olympic Games not only in our athletes but also in the volunteers the positive attitude that they displayed to so many people, it gave me an absolute sense of long term assurance and hope and optimism about the future of our country.  
I wish you good happiness and good health and good fortune.  I hope you leave this school with fond recollections.  I compliment the teaching staff on the role that it is playing in educating you and I hope that each and every one of you achieves in your occupation and in your personal lives the goals and the happiness that I would hope that would be the lot of each and every one of you.
Thank you.
[Ends] 


Subjects: Gippsland visit; road funding; Networking the Nation.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Mr Shire President.  Peter McGauran my ministerial colleague, members of the local council, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm told that this is the first visit since according to the Melbourne Age, and who am I to argue with the Melbourne Age, since 1938 of a serving Prime Minister to this part of the world.  Well whether that's true or false it is the first occasion as Prime Minister that I've been to this part of the world although I have on a number of occasions visited the electorate of Gippsland and I particularly acknowledge the presence of my good friend and former member Peter Nixon at whose invitation I first paid a visit I think in 1976 as a very junior minister to part of this electorate.   
But Peter was right when he said that I wanted an opportunity to spend more than a cursory second or minute or two to actually talk to people and try and understand what their priorities were.  These gatherings bring together everybody who's doing anything in the community.  And they remind us of the great volunteer glue that holds Australian society together.  And wherever I go, particularly in the non-metropolitan areas of Australia, one finds groups of volunteers that are working together probably more than ever.  Now one of the reasons for that is that some of the challenges of smaller communities are greater now than they used to be and the need to work together has been brought about through force of circumstances as well as by the natural inclination of people to get together and to help each other. 
 But there's always been a wonderful community spirit and earlier when I arrived at Lakes Entrance and I went to the Rotunda and launched that manual on the monitoring of water quality and had an explanation given to me afterwards of the different groups of people that comprise the water monitoring group - people in business, people who have had a life long commitment to the environment, school children, and so on - and it was just another reminder to me of how tremendously important that sense of local cooperation and local volunteerism is to a community such as here in Lakes Entrance, and communities like it all over Australia.
We face an interesting situation in Australia at the present time in that at a national level, although this year is going to be tougher than last year partly because of the apparent slowdown in the American economy, our national economy is performing very well.  We have a lower level of unemployment than a few years ago, we have quite low levels of inflation, we've undertaken a lot of necessary reforms, we have reduced our budget deficit and got it into a healthy surplus although that's necessary because when you have a stronger budget position you can return some of it by way of a social bonus to the community as we demonstrated last year in relation to our increased spending on defence, the increased commitment for doing something about the problem of salinity and water quality, the $1.6 billion program for improving local and other roads, and of course earlier this week I announced a very major program that will be very important in encouraging greater investment in science, and innovation, and technology which is so very important to the future of our country.
But whilst you look at it nationally, when you look at different communities around Australia you do find that not every part of Australia is feeling a sense of ownership in that national strength and that national prosperity.  And one of the responsibilities I have as Prime Minister and one of the responsibilities that all of the members of the government have is to make certain that at a time of general national economic strength and wellbeing as far as is possible the benefits of that are spread throughout the community.  And we have now over quite a lengthy period of time been trying to isolate and find out what are the needs of particularly non-metropolitan communities.  About a year ago I spent a week travelling around regional parts of Australia and of course it's something that I've done on a regular basis since I've been Prime Minister.  
But during this weeklong visit to different parts of Australia it became apparent to me that there were a number of general concerns that people had.  One of those general concerns was about health services, particularly as you got further out from the capital cities.  Another concern was about the quality of local roads, particularly once again as you got further out from the large centres of population.  And largely as a result of that we made certain that in last year's budget there was a big injection of money into a program that over a period of years is going to deliver a lot more general practitioners into regional areas, and generally strengthen the flow of medical services back to country areas.  Now many of you will immediately say well we'd like to see that happen very quickly and I understand that.  A lot of you will say well it's a while coming.  I accept all of that and it's not something that can be dealt with overnight.  But the will is there and the commitment of $500 million in a new program was made in last year's budget. 
 And I mentioned earlier the commitment we made to local roads.  Now I've had a lot of representations from country people about the state of roads in the time that I've been Prime Minister.  I've also had a lot of representations from people all over Australia about the price of petrol, not only since I've been Prime Minister but generally.  And we sat down as a Cabinet last year and we thought about the question of the indexation of the excise.  And that's in the news today and I never duck things that are in the news today.  I always think I should deal with them in an up front fashion.  
But we made a decision and some of you will agree with it and some of you won't.  That's the nature of decisions made by prime ministers and governments.  We made a decision that it would be a better long term investment of $1.6 billion to inject it into additional road funding than to have a one off freeze in the excise adjustment because the value of that could disappear overnight with the price increasing as a result of a fluctuation in the world oil price.  And after a few days even, and certainly after a few weeks and a few months people would not really think that anything long term had been done.  And we decided that we couldn't do both.  We couldn't freeze the excise and spend more money on roads because we had some other commitments, and we decided, rightly in my view - perhaps wrongly in the view of others but that's as I say the democratic process - we decided to invest $1.6 billion into more spending on roads.  
And that represents a 75% increase in the amount of federal money that goes direct to local councils for road funding and that will be of benefit over many years into the future.  Because I do understand that with declining rate bases many of the non-metropolitan councils find it more difficult to maintain local roads and that they are so tremendously important to the travel and the needs of people the further you get away from the centres of population.  I say that very deliberately because it wasn't an easy decision.  And we thought about it for a long time and we made a judgement and it's a judgement that I believe in the long term will be of greater benefit to the community because of the lasting value of improvement in the nations roads.
Now Mr Shire President, you were kind enough to thank the Government for a number of things and you then said like Oliver Twist, you dared to say more please.  Well unlike what happened to Oliver I am happy to say there is more.  And it so happens, and this is not I assure you in any way coordinated with the Shire President, I assure you that there is more.  I am very pleased to announce today that the Government is going to make available out of the Networking the Nation programme - which incidentally is being funded out of the sale of the second part of Telstra - we're going to make available an additional $5.8 million to enable Victorian councils to go online and to provide services to their local communities over the Internet.  And many councils in rural and regional areas of Victoria and indeed in every other state of Australia currently lack the resources to develop on line delivery service.  
And this project is going to enable Victorian councils to make services such as tenders, planning and building applications, new payment options and a range of information on community facilities available over the Internet.  For example it would enable residents to comment on development proposals - you'll have no absence of those, I'm sure - using the Internet, pay their rates on line - an interesting innovation - and improve the capacity of local businesses to sell to local government.  
And this particular project has been recommended by the Networking the Nation board based upon a strategy put forward by the Municipal Association of Victoria.  Now this is a proposal that has been made possible out of the proceeds of the sale of the second part of Telstra.  And the Networking the Nation proposals long term goal is to make certain that people who live in the non metropolitan parts of Australia have the same opportunities as the people who live in the cities to participate to the full in the information technology revolution.
The only other thing I want to say ladies and gentlemen is to commend very warmly to you the work that Peter McGauran does as your local member.  Peter has been the Member for Gippsland since 1983.  He's now making a very valuable contribution not only as a local member and as somebody who puts forward a regional non metropolitan point of view in the Joint Party Room.  But also someone who's doing an excellent job as the Minister responsible particularly at the present time for all of the activities associated with the celebration Australia's centenary as a nation.  And it is particularly appropriate that in the year that we're celebrating the Centenary of the Australian Federation I should have the opportunity of visiting Peter's electorate.  And in doing so to commend very warmly to you the effort and the work that goes into his representation.  He has drawn specifically to my attention a lot of the particular challenges of this electorate.  It's very diverse, it's very beautiful it has great variations in some cases of income and it has a variety of different challenges.  It's one thing to represent a few square miles in metropolitan Sydney or Melbourne where the variation in the problems is not very great.  It is entirely another thing to represent an electorate such as this, Gippsland, or to represent the electorate of Eden-Monaro which I visited yesterday in NSW which starts from the outskirts of Canberra and swings around towards the coast and takes in some of the snowy mountains area.  And it takes a particular application and a particular skill on the part of a local member to do that.  And I am delighted to commend him very warmly to you.
Thank you very much for coming.  I again on behalf of your fellow Australians express my gratitude to all of the people who volunteer their services and all of those who work so very well and in such a committed fashion in the local community.  I think Australia has a great community spirit.  We have a tradition of volunteering which is far away ahead of that of other countries with which it is fair to make comparison and it's one of the things of which we can be especially proud and I'm delighted to thank all of you who make that happen here in Lakes Entrance and generally in the East Gippsland area.
Thank you very much.
[Ends]


Subjects: education, Centenary of Federation.
E&amp;OE..................
Students and teachers,
I would first of all  like to thank the Plenty Valley Christian School for inviting me here.  It is a magnificent view and I can imagine that people's attention might wander during assemblies.  It's certainly a great part of the world.
I always like when I visit somebody's electorate, I always like the opportunity to visit a school or a university or a TAFE college which gives me the opportunity for a few moments to talk to young men and women whose future is very much in front of them. And particularly a group like this, you'll be studying for the VCE which is a very important exam, in a very important year for people within the Victorian education system.  And the world that you're going to go into, is a world  that in one sense is possessed of opportunities and avenues and openings that didn't exist thirty or forty years ago, and the variety of careers that are now available to people are much greater than what they used to be.  But in other respects the world, because it's undergoing so much change is perhaps a little less predictable and a little less secure that what it was.  And therefore the importance of education and also the importance of having a value system for your future life is even greater now than what it might have been several generations ago.
We live in a world where change and the impact of change is quite unavoidable and what we have to do as a community is to try and manage the change that is important and valuable and unavoidable, but also hang onto certain things from our past which provide us with anchorage and points of reference.  And that is why your parents have chosen a particular environment in which you are to be educated.  And one of the cornerstones of our education system is to give parents choice in the type of education their children should receive, and they've elected in your case to have you educated at a christian community school.  
- 2 -
And we support that choice very strongly and in a free and open society we believe parental choice is absolutely paramount when it comes to education.  And we have in Australia one of the best mixtures of public and private provision of education, perhaps the best that can be found anywhere in the world.
As you know, we're celebrating this year the Centenary of the Federation of Australia and it is a time for all of us to look back on what this country has done and achieved.  And when you look back on a century of nationhood, you look at the achievements and the successes and the values that have come through, but you also recognise that errors have been made, and things could have been done better than they were, and that part of the lesson of looking back is to make certain that some of the errors and the failures of the future are not repeated.
Australia has been a magnificent example of an open, tolerant country.  It's been an example of a country that's welcomed people from all around the world and we have treated them as part of our community.  It's been a country which is now seen increasingly around the world as something of an example.  I certainly have found as the Prime Minister of Australia in my dealings with leaders of other countries since the Olympic Games last year, what a tremendously positive image that left about what a modern, vibrant, successful, cohesive country Australia really was.  And the moral leadership that Australia displayed just over a year ago in helping the people of East Timor, has also left a very powerful impression on the rest of the world.  So there's a lot as we celebrate this year of the Centenary of Federation.  There is a lot that we should be proud of in relation to the Australian community.  
But of course there remain a lot of big social challenges.  The challenges of drug abuse, the challenges of family breakdown, the challenges of violence within relationships.  They are things that do remain very significant social challenges.  We have them of course in common with societies all around the world.  No society in the world is immune and no section of any society is immune from those sorts of challenges.  And one of the responsibilities of the education system is to bring younger people to an understanding of the reality that those things exist, but also to equip them with the attitude and the value system that enables them to ensure that it is not something that affects their lives.
Your relationship with your teachers is very important.  Teachers are a very important part of the life of young people and never underestimate the impact they have on your lives and never underestimate the commitment that teachers have to the wellbeing of their students.  I think teachers represent a very noble profession within the Australian community and a profession that has a very, an enduring impact on the lives of the people that they deal with.
I want to wish all of you well.  You are embarked upon a very important phase of your life and I do hope it is successful.  - 3 -
I do hope that each of you achieves what you want to in your final years at school, and I hope all of you have the opportunity of choosing and winning the careers that you will hope.  Some of you will be disappointed.  Inevitably I hope not many and those that might be disappointed the first time, I hope that you will come back and try again.  Because persistence and continuing to try even though you may not make it at the beginning, is very much part of succeeding in life.  I said to the kindergarten, and I said to another group of school students that I addressed in Gippsland yesterday, that if I could leave a student body of your age with one piece of advice if I may, and that is to always try and find in a relationship you have, either with an individual or even with a group of people that you may not necessarily have a lot in common with, always try and find something positive about that person or about that group of people.  If you try hard enough you can normally find something positive about, just about everybody you meet.  I know it's a lot harder with some than it is with others, but if you try hard enough and think about it long enough you can normally find something in a person that is positive and is to that person's credit. And that's not only important for that person's happiness, because if somebody's treated well they react in a very positive fashion.  But it is also very important for your own happiness and contentment.  The happiest people I've met in my life are the people who have positive views and think the best of everybody they come into contact with.  The most miserable, disgruntled people I have ever met in my life are those whose instantaneous reaction is to put somebody down and to grizzle about them, and to find fault.  
Now you may think it's a piece of simplistic advice.  Some of you may even think it is a little trite, it's neither.  It happens to be absolutely true.  Because by having a positive attitude towards people you relate to, you not only give them something but you also give yourself something and that is far greater enjoyment of life and far greater self fulfillment.  
Cherish the education you receive at this school.  Thank your parents for the choice that they have exercised to send you here and I wish all of you the very best of good luck in the years ahead.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: strength of Australia; industrial relations; petrol prices; road funding; achievements of the Government; innovation statement; economy; Fran
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Fran for those very kind words of introduction, Ladies and gentlemen I'm particularly delighted to be in Fran Bailey's electorate, because if ever there was a political fighter, and I admire political fighters, it is Fran Bailey. 
This isn't, in political terms, an easy call.  It's a very diverse electorate.  It's an electorate that's always sat on a knife edge and as such you need a particular character and a particular level of personal commitment.  And I want you to know, in carrying the Liberal banner in the electorate of McEwen at the next federal election, Fran has the unswerving and enthusiastic support of her Prime Minister and also of all the other senior members of the Federal Government. This morning is an opportunity for me to say a  few words very directly to you, predominantly as supporters not always uncritically of the Government and of the Party, about where I see our country and where I see the Government.  
In many ways you look at the state of Australia, if I can put it that way, you look at it from two perspectives.  If you look at it as a nation, it's rarely in my view in its history been stronger economically and stronger in a psychological sense.  Over the last year the experiences we've had with of course the Olympic Games and the wonderful respect that Australia won for what it did in East Timor, the other great sporting achievements of Australians in other fields of sporting endeavour and generally the attitude that is now held around the world towards this country.  I don't think it has ever been as high as it is now.  And that's not just the idle boast of a Prime Minister knowing that there's nobody in this audience that is going to disagree with him.  But it is borne out by the experience that I've had in mixing with world leaders as recently as the last APEC meeting in Brunei.
And economically the country, if you look at it as a nation, it's very strong.  We have still very strong levels of economic growth,  we have low inflation, we have lower interest rates than we used to have, we've got our budget back in order, we have undertaken major reforms and there are more on the way.  Unemployment is a lot lower than it used to be.  
But having said all of that I also recognise that the benefits, and this is where you really get looking at Australia from another perspective, the benefits of that national prosperity  in particular are not always as evenly shared as they might be.  And of course in no society can you ever evenly share prosperity.  What you must seek to do is to give people an even break as far as opportunity is concerned and to have a decent social security safety net to look after people who can't look after themselves.  And then accept that some people inevitably in life are going to be more successful and do better than others.
So one of the challenges of the Government I lead is to make as certain as we can in a difficult environment, that the benefits of national economic strength and national economic prosperity are spread throughout the community.  
Now I know that as I move around Australia that things aren't the same everywhere.  They do vary.  There are challenges in non metropolitan Australia that don't exist in some of the metropolitan areas and vice versa.  
The long term decline in commodity prices has had a very devastating affect on the incomes of farming communities all around our country and it's a generational trend and no Australian Government can reverse a worldwide trend in the prices of our commodities.  But we can understand what's happening.  We can do our level best to ensure that services are retained in rural areas of Australia and we can also make certain that small businesses which are the backbone not only of rural communities but of outer metropolitan communities, that small business is given as good a go and as great a break as any Government can possibly give it.  
And one of the things that has driven me for the last ten or fifteen years of my political life from a policy perspective has been the importance of having an industrial relations system that is as kind and accommodating to small business as it possibly can be.  
I suppose when I became Prime Minister there was nothing I was more enthusiastically committed to than the cause of  industrial relations reform.  Because I had long thought that this country needed  an industrial relations system that allowed people at a workplace level to make their bargains and to make their agreements.  And an industrial relations system that didn't give a monopoly of power to the trade union movement.
Now some of you may wonder at why I even mention things like that because it is said that we have a new era and that everything has changed.  Well I am concerned as Prime Minister that there does appear to be an industrial relations regression going on in Victoria with the new Government.  And I think that is disturbing and I think many of the industrial relations reforms that were undertaken by the former Victorian Government are under threat and from a national perspective that is disturbing to me.  From a Victorian perspective I think it would be particularly disturbing to a lot of people in small business. 
As I've moved around I listen to people.  I know for example that people are very unhappy about the price of petrol.  I want you to know that the Government is very unhappy about the price of petrol.  I would also like to say that the major reason why petrol is much dearer now than it was is that the world price of crude oil has gone up a great deal over the last nine or twelve months. And that is something I have to say to you with all the candor I can muster, I can't control. President Clinton, when he was in the White House, couldn't control it, and much and all as I welcome the accession of President Bush to the White House, I will predict that he won't be able to control the world price of crude oil either. Now we affect the price of petrol by imposing a petrol excise, and that petrol excise has been imposed by Labor Government's and by Liberal Government's. And every six months the excise is increased in line with the inflation rate, and the reason you do that is that excise is, what's called a volumetric tax and it's not an ad valorem of tax, it's a fixed rate. If the price of an article to which the GST applies goes up, well the nominal tax collection goes up because it's an an valorem rate. And that's the reason why you have half yearly indexation, and that was introduced back in 1983 on petrol and on tobacco and on alcohol by the former Labor Government. Now we continued that, I'm not going to pretend that we didn't  continue it, I think there's been too much humbug in this debate, particularly from our opponents about what they, I mean it's very easy to criticise and then run away from committing yourself to implement the natural consequences of your criticisms, but I'll come to that in a moment. 
Now we looked very hard before Christmas at the possibility of postponing in some way the excise increase that took place yesterday, because we knew it would attract criticism, and we knew there'd be a lot of people arguing that we should defer it. And we decided, after a lot of careful consideration that it would be better, from a long term point of view, to invest $1.6 billion of additional money over four years, that's $400 million roughly a year, into road funding and for most of that to go to councils for local road purposes. We took the view that that would be of more lasting value than action that would affect the price of petrol, potentially, and not necessary actually but potentially, by no more than 1.5 to 1.7 cents a litre. The sort of adjustment that could be wiped out by a fluctuation in the world price overnight. Now we thought about it very hard, and the reason I'm spending a few moments addressing it this morning is that I know it's something that's on peoples minds. And I listen to what people say, and I know that it is very much on their minds. And you are entitled to know, both as citizens and also as supporters of the Government, and of Fran's, you're entitled to know our thinking. You should know that we have not ignored the issue, you should know we've thought very hard about it. From a budget point of view we couldn't afford to both spend money, extra money on roads, and also provide the excise relief which would have involved about, up to about, $450 to $500 million a year, we couldn't do both so we decided to spend it on roads. 
Now some of you will agree with that and some of you will disagree with it, as will other people around the country. But that was the reasoning that we went through. Now we hear Mr Beazley say he's going to introduce a Private Members Bill next week, well I mean that is just a stunt. I mean Mr Beazley will be credible on this issue if he stands up in the Parliament next week and says if I become Prime Minister after the next election, I will reduce petrol excise by 1.7 cents a litre. Now I mean he may do that, I don't know what he's going to do, thus far he's been the most policy lazy Opposition Leader I've ever seen, but that's a matter for him. But in this game increasingly Australians are looking for plain speaking and they are looking for their political leaders to acknowledge that you may have inherited a policy of the former Government and that you've continued it, I mean I'm not pretending that the Labor Party is responsible for the half yearly indexation of excise just because it was started under the Hawke Government, I mean we've continued it so when you continue the policy of a former Government you're responsible for it. I think it's humbug to pretend otherwise, and equally to be taken seriously the Opposition Leader has got to do more than introduce a Private Member's Bill, he's got to say well I'll cancel that increase and he's also got to tell us where the money's coming from, he's also got to tell us whether he's going to maintain the road funding commitment as well.
But in the five years, ladies and gentlemen, that we have been in Government, there's one thing that I have endeavored to do year in and year out, and I'll continue to do through this year and beyond, if the Australian people re-elect us. And that is to continue the process of reform and change in those parts of our lives and in those parts of our economy where I believe that change and reform is necessary. I often think that the art of good Government is to find those things that need changing, because they're no longer working, and work like fury to change them in a way that people find comfortable and accommodating. But equally those things in our community that don't need change, and continue to work and continue to be of value and relevance, to hang onto those with an equal degree of commitment. And I guess some people who occasionally scribble things in the newspaper about the Government and me, sort of scratch their head and say it's funny you know he believes in reform in certain areas but he doesn't believe in change in other areas, and some of these scribes think that's peculiar. I think if you looked at your own lives none of you will find that particularly peculiar. There are some things about your lives that are no different in terms of the emphasis you place on them, and the importance you place on them, your attachment to your families, your attachment to your local community, your attachment to your local football club, your attachment to the sport or activity of your choice, that's probably been the same for most of us for 30 or 40 years, or more, or less, depending on our age. 
But equally there are other things that have changed beyond all recognition, the way in which information technology is now affecting us. I mean our young son is returning home from overseas from five or six weeks tomorrow morning, and I reflect upon the number of times I've spoken to him at my expense on the mobile phone since he's been away. And I compare that with the time when I had a working holiday in Europe in 1964 and I rang my mother, I've got to say at her expense, on one occasion. That one occasion I think was then 30 pounds for about a three minute conversation, and we all know how those sorts of things have changed dramatically. And that in a way has been something of a touch stone of the approach that the Government has tried to take. There are things that we need to change because they're no longer working. We needed a change to the tax system because it was no longer working effectively, we needed to change our industrial relations system because it was no longer working effectively. We needed to stop the habit the former Government had got into of spending beyond the nation's means. I mean it was no easy task to inherit an accumulated national debt of about $80 or $90 billion and then to find that the people who left to you then tried to stop you doing anything about it, that was no easy task either. So what we've endeavored to do in the time that we have been there is to embrace reform and change where it's necessary, but where it's not necessary we've tenaciously defended those practices and habits of the Australian people which continue to serve us in very good stead.
Now I don't underestimate it, if I can talk to you as supporters of Fran's, I don't underestimate the political challenge that is ahead of us. It's difficult, we live in a less tribal political world than we did 30 or 40 years ago. There are fewer utterly rusted on supporters of both sides of politics, there is a belief in a world where a lot of change is occurring that occasionally you hear people offering simplistic solutions, and that they can be enticing, although in the long run they're not very effective. And in the lead up to the election we're going to continue to embrace change and reform that's beneficial to the community. We've had to take some difficult economic decisions, and I know that a lot of people have had to adjust to the change involved in those, and I'm very pleased that as a result of the budget being in better condition that we're starting to see the emergence of what I might loosely call something of a social bonus from those changes. If you look back at the period since the Olympic Games of last year you've seen some very major initiatives by the Government. We announced a $1.4 billion program in conjunction with the states to tackle the problem of salinity and water quality. From a long term point of view there's hardly an issue more important than that to Australia. If we don't do something about it in 20 years time the drinking water of the people of Adelaide will not be fit for consumption in two out of five days, and that's a disgrace for a modern nation such as Australia. The Defence White Paper is the most comprehensive blueprint for the future defence needs of this country you've seen in a generation. And it's been very widely acclaimed throughout the defence community and the Australian community, and it's seen as a very strong blueprint for the future, and it's given an injection of morale and hope to our armed forces. You've also seen, as I mentioned earlier, that major roads program. That increased by 75% the money coming to local councils for local roads. And with declining rate bases in many of the outer and non-metropolitan areas of Australia that's a very important injection of money. 
And as Fran mentioned, earlier this week I unveiled a $2.9 billion program to put more resources into science, innovation and technology, and that's going to double the number of Australian research grants. And research has always been a great strength of this country, it is amazing just how many inventions and discoveries and bright ideas that have come out of this country, and of all the Noble Prize winner's Australia has produced only one of them, Patrick Wright, was other than a scientist or a researcher. And there's a great deal of legitimate pride in Australians in what our scientists and our researchers can do. We need to stop some of them going overseas, you never stop all of them, and you shouldn't try to, and it's a two way process. The new head of the CSIRO is not an Australian, he was chosen after a world wide search, just as we send bright people to other parts of the world, equally bright people from other parts of the world come here. And I mention these things to make it plain that the Government's agenda, although it is very much focused on insuring that we have a strong and growing economy, it's also not neglecting other things that are very important to our country's future. 
Managing the Australian economy this year will be harder than what it was last year or the year before, because there is a degree of unevenness occurring with the United States economy, and that's been made very plain by Dr Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, probably the most influential economic figure in that country. And that will have a consequence for Australia, it need not be, if the economy is properly managed, it need not be an unduly negative consequence. I remind you that two or three years ago when the Asian economies went into a tailspin, most people thought that was going to engulf Australia, well it didn't. And the reason it didn't engulf Australia was that we had taken a number of steps to protect ourselves, and because we had a flexible exchange rate we were able to move a lot of our exports out of Asia into Europe and North America. And because we'd got our budget in shape international financial markets took a more positive view of Australia and it really was a very major economic achievement that we were able to avoid the impact of that Asian economic downturn. But we are going to have a challenge to manage the impact of the US slow down, and also other influences such as very high world oil prices. And it will require a degree of skillful economic management which the Federal Opposition clearly is not possessed. They're not good economic managers, they demonstrated that in Government, and they've demonstrated through their policy laziness in Opposition no real sign that they've changed in Opposition. And in the end  I believe the Australian public will make judgements on the capacity of people to manage our economy, but also the capacity of the two sides of politics to deliver good outcomes in many of these other important non-economic areas. 
I don't take anything in politics for granted. I've been in politics now for 26 years. II have to say I find it more stimulating and rewarding and satisfying now than I have at any time in my political life, because I have an opportunity to do some positive things. And I promised myself when I became Prime Minister that I would spend every waking hour trying to make a difference for the better. You only get one shot at it and you've really got to use the time that's there to have a go. Now I can't keep on having a go unless I've got people around me who've been given a go by their voters and their electors, and that really brings me back to where I began, and that is the importance of the re-election of Fran as your local member. She is a very hard working person, she's a very forthright person, she's spoken to me very directly about the concerns of this electorate. We all recognise the importance of having local members who are willing to articulate the concerns of their constituents. She's spoken to me about the impact of fuel prices, she's spoken to me about the impact of some of the adjustments for small business in relation to the new taxation system. She's made it very clear to me that overwhelmingly the tax system has been very well received in her electorate, but there are issues relating to the Business Activity Statement, and other documents that people are required to fill out that she wants the Government to look at, and we are, I've indicated that. We've always said that we would be willing to fine tune the implementation details of it. We think the tax system, over all, has been well received in the Australian community. Certainly it's had a less inflationary impact then the federal treasurery, a lower inflationary impact than the federal treasurery predicted. But we'll go ensuring that the implementation is as smooth as it can possibly be.
But I do want to warmly commend Fran to you as a very hard working dedicated conscientious member. As a person with a small business background she understands the life of a lot of you in this room, because many of you are involved in small business. And it is the backbone of so many communities and I do hope that all of you will give her the strongest possible support that you can.
I believe that if we continue to be an active enthusiastic committed Government, and a Government that relates to the cross section of the Australian community, we have a good chance of winning the next election. But it will be tough, and it will be no tougher anywhere in Australia than it will be here in McEwen. And that is why it's so tremendously important that all of you give Fran the maximum possible help. I'm most encouraged by this gathering this morning, it is a great pleasure to be back in Fran's electorate. I wish her well, and I'll do everything I humanly can to get her back as the member for McEwen and I ask all of you to do exactly the same.
[ends]   


Subjects: Chinese-Australians; immigration; Olympic Games; volunteers; Chin
E&amp;OE..................
Ladies and gentlemen, can I first of all say to you Ken thank you very much for the warmth of your welcome, thank you very much for the tremendous contribution that you and your association are together making towards the welfare of Chinese Australians. I listened very carefully to your speech and there was a section in it when you said you can't please all of the people all of the time, I felt very much at home, I really did. 
And, but more seriously ladies and gentlemen tonight is really an occasion to me to salute the incredible contribution that Chinese people from so many different countries have made to Australian society over such a long period of time. It would take a very long speech to enumerate all of the different ways in which the Chinese have had a beneficial and lasting impact on Australian society. I want you to understand, to know, on behalf of the Government, and I know I can speak for all of your fellow Australians in expressing their collective gratitude for the extraordinary contribution that Chinese people have made to the building of the modern Australia.
Robert McLullen touched on some of the different things that are important about the Chinese contribution. The driven determination and often in the face of enormous adversity, many members of the Chinese community of Australia have come to this nation in search of freedom and an open society denied to them in the countries from which they came. And it will always be to the credit of this nation that over the last few decades it really has been one of the most open and welcoming nations in the world in relation to refugees. I understand that over the last 50 years this country has taken something in the order of 600,000 refugees from all around the world, and makes it second only to Canada on a per capita basis the number of refugees it's taken. And it's also important to remember that some 25 years ago no country in the world, on a per capita basis, took more refugees from Indo-China than did Australia, and many of those people were ethnic Chinese. 
But tonight it really an occasion to celebrate everything that we have in common as Australians, to celebrate the opportunities we have, to celebrate the shear joy of being an Australian, which to me is still something that we can have so greatly in common. People talk frequently about the contribution that the Olympic Games made to bringing all of us even closer together. And I don't think there is any doubt about that, and I can certainly say to you, as I said to Ken earlier tonight, that if I needed any reminding of what a great impact that event had made, not only here but around the world, it was driven home to me when I went to the APEC meeting in Brunei and there meeting people like former President Clinton and the Russian President Vladmir Putin, the President of China Chung Zui Ming, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong C.H. Tuong and other leaders. Their sole topic of conversation at the first social gathering was, whoa, sorry Kerry, I like you, I mean I got nothing against you, sorry. It was the sole topic of conversation and what made that event of successful, and what makes it such a pleasure to live in this country, is the way in which whatever our different backgrounds may be, whatever our various (inaudible) may be, we are bound together with the common bond of all being Australians and all wanting to share a future together. 
And it's in that sense that I say particularly to all the almost 300,000 residents of Sydney of Chinese background, and the many more hundreds of thousands in other parts of Australia, you are a precious and treasured part of our community. And the contribution that you make is one that I value and I know that all my fellow Australians value. 
And lastly and very importantly, and I direct a comment towards your association Kenneth. And that is that through the volunteer work that you are doing to help those within your own community who need assistance, you are acting out a very great and distinctive Australian tradition and that is the tradition of the volunteer. Australia in fact has a level of volunteer participation in community life that is double or treble that of countries with which it is fair to make comparisons. No body will ever forget the contribution of volunteers to the Olympic Games, as we speak and as we eat tonight there are volunteer fire fighters in South Australia coping with devastating bush fires. There are volunteers in the northern part of New South Wales coping with floods, there are volunteer organisations that are represented here tonight, such as Mission Australia, a great organisation, represented here by Patrick McClure. And of course very particularly tonight there's the Australian Chinese Community Association of which you are the president. And that organisation is not only doing great work for the Chinese people of Sydney and of New South Wales, it is part and parcel of a nation wide network of volunteers. And I want to honour you for what you are doing in that great Australian tradition of working together as a group of public spirited people, desiring nothing other than to help, and where necessary relieve the difficulties and the suffering and help people within your own community to meet the challenges of life.
So can I say to all of you on behalf of the Government, and personally from Janette and myself, how absolutely delighted we are to be here tonight, to wish you all a very happy Chinese New Year, (.). Enjoy yourselves, thank you for what you are doing for Australia, and I know that the year ahead will be, not only the year of the golden snake but a year of very great prosperity and very great happiness for all of the people of Australia.
Thank you very much.
[ends] 


Subjects: Queensland; Queensland Coalition; Queensland Opposition.
E&amp;OE..................
Deputy Prime Minister, John Anderson, Rob Borbidge, David Watson, my fellow Australians, and fellow Coalition supporters. There's nothing quite like the atmosphere of a Queensland election rally. In fact there's nothing quite like the atmosphere of most things Queensland. 
And I was reflecting as I came up from Canberra earlier this morning with John Anderson and Ron Boswell, I was reflecting on the fact that I've now been in federal politics for almost 27 years. You'll be seeing a lot more of me. And for most of the 27 years that I've been in federal politics, for most of those 27 years Queensland was governed by Coalition Governments or National Party Governments. And interestingly enough the years of Coalition Government coincided with the years of greatest prosperity for Queensland. And it's no accident, as we got the unemployment figures this morning, to find that the unemployment rate of Queensland still remains at over 8%, well above the national average. Indeed we have found over the last three years that the Queensland Government, the Labor Government of Queensland has been monumentally uncooperative with the Federal Government in implementing the changes and the reforms that have given to Australia a level of national prosperity and strength that we have not had for years.  I mean my great recollection of the Premier of Queensland, Peter Beattie, in recent years, was his attitude towards taxation reform. He railed against it in public, he said it was going to do Queensland in the eye, but he practically grabbed the pen out of my hand to sign the interstate agreement. And there's a very good reason for that, that particular change, that great reform, is in terms of what it does for the states of Australia of greater benefit to Queensland, and more immediately of greater benefit to Queensland than any other state in Australia. Yet the current Premier of Queensland publicly, along with his federal colleague, Mr Beazley, did everything he could to prevent that reform being passed into law. 
Ladies and gentlemen, if you look back over the years in Queensland, the quality of economic management of this state has always been superior when it's been in the hands of Coalition Governments. It's always been the Coalition in Government that has put Queensland ahead of other states around Australia. 
And ladies and gentlemen, my friends, in inviting you in a few moments to welcome the Liberal Leader, David Watson, I'm inviting you to reflect upon the fact that he would bring, to the position of Treasurer of this state, he'd would bring the skills that his commercial, business and accounting background have equip him to bring. And that is an understanding of business and economic issues, a recognition that economic management and economic strength is extraordinarily important in the global economic environment in which we live. But you would also be part of a different Government in Queensland, a Government that wouldn't self-destruct and implode in a way that the Beattie Government has done, quite remarkably, and without parrell, because of the behaviour of so many members of that Government over the past few months. It used to be legendary around Australia that Queensland was strong and well run economically, and that was at a time when this State was governed by the Coalition. And it gave it a strength and it gave it a competitive edge that has been frittered away in the Beattie years. It gave it an economic place in Australia, that I know that so many Queenslanders in their hearts would like to bring back. 
Queenslanders have great pride in their State, and they have every reason to feel proud of the great contribution that the State and the people of Queensland make to the Australian nation. The people of Queensland deserve and need a Coalition Government. This State would be better governed economically and in so many other respects in a Government lead by Rob Borbidge and David Watson.
David will bring to the position of State Treasurer the skill, the experience, the strength, the understanding, of economic and business issues that is so necessary for that critically important position. He will also bring personal decency and integrity to the position, which is so tremendously important. 
And so my friends, my fellow Coalition supporters, my fellow Australians, will you please welcome to the stage David Watson, the Liberal Leader in Queensland.
[ends] 


Subjects: Sophie Panopoulos; Internet Rates; Labor's lack of policy.
E&amp;OE..................
Well Sophie, other Parliamentary colleagues, Brian Loughnane, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm particularly pleased to have the opportunity on this visit to Benalla to participate in a Liberal Party rural conference here in Victoria that brings together three electorates.  I'm particularly pleased to have the opportunity of opening Sophie's campaign office here in Benalla.  She's a very energetic, effective Liberal Party standard bearer in this electorate and I believe that she will do extremely well, she'll win the seat and she'll go on to be a very long serving member of this district in the Federal Parliament.
I have watched her over a number of years.  She has a great capacity to advocate the things she believes in.  Politics is about having beliefs and having the willingness and the courage to argue those beliefs even though the going may get a bit tough and as the months go by in the year 2001, and we get closer to the election, people will more and more focus on the fact that it's going to be a choice.
When you go to an election you don't decide whether you like the Liberal Party or dislike the Liberal Party, or like the Labor Party or dislike the Labor Party, you have to make a choice.  You have to decide which of the two sides of politics can better govern this country for the next three years.  
We have now been in Government for almost five years and even our critics will say we've done a lot.  They don't like some of what we've done but at least they acknowledge that we have done a lot.  We have tried to make things better.  
Sophie mentioned my visits to regional Australia.  I spent a week travelling around the regions of Australia at the beginning of last year and one of the things that came through very strongly to me was the unhappiness that people felt about the inaccessibility of health services for people in some of the more remote parts of Australia and as a direct result of that we had in the Federal Budget last year a $500 million dollar programme that over years will put more general practitioners into country areas. 
Likewise the announcements we made concerning road funding at the end of last year were a direct response to the concerns that people had expressed regarding the amount of money being made available for local roads.  The roads built by local councils.  And so it is as we go through the year where there are areas of concern, the Government will respond.  But in the end our greatest responsibility is to effectively run the national economy and as we face a less certain time this year nationally than last time the quality of economic management is even more important and as the months go by there'll be more focus on our opponents.   
Mr Beazley frequently says that he's been a Minister for more years than I have been.  You know that's actually literally correct.  He has been.  He's been a minister, I think, one or two years longer when you put his career together, than I have.  But that in a sense proves my point.  He may have been a minister for all those years but nobody really knows what he stands for.  People know what I stand for.  They mightn't like it on some occasions.   They may disagree as some people did outside which is their democratic right.   But they know where I stand.  They know what I believe in.  My political opponent has had five years to tell the Australian people what he believes in and what he would do if he were to become Prime Minister and he's not taken advantage of that opportunity.  Now this is going to become more and more an issue in this election year because people want to know what you believe in so they can make a decision.  I know what Sophie believes in, I know that Sophie believes in the individual, Sophie believes in the right of giving people opportunities, she believes in the value of hard work, she believes in self reliance but she also believes in a society that's got to look after people less fortunate and can't look after themselves.  Now I'm proud to have her as the Liberal Party Candidate in this electorate because I know that she'll go out to the people of Indi and she'll say this is what the Government has done this is what I Sophie Panopoulos believe in, this is what I'll fight for when I get into Parliament as your representative.
Now give me that any day even if she gets a bit of flak for some of the views that we might hold, give me that any day to the wishy washy say nothing, sit on the fence Labor Party Opposition that we've got at the present time.  I mean they've had five years to define themselves.  I mean you've got to deliver after five years, I've delivered, you mightn't like it - some of it - you might say 'I wish he hadn't done that, I wish he'd done a bit more' but at least I've done something.  At least I've stood up for the kind of Australia I believe in and I've argued my case.  My political opponent has done absolutely nothing to define himself other than an opportunistic Opposition Leader who will criticise but never propose.  
Whenever we make an announcement he's out there criticising.  I mean interest rates went down the other day, they went down, every body welcomed that.  It's worth $40 to $50 a month for the average home buyer in Australia, it's a great benefit to farmers and small business.  But instead of Mr Beazley saying 'oh, I'm pleased for the home buyers and the farmers of Australia' he says 'oh it's gone down for the wrong reasons'.  The reason he didn't like it is that the rest of the community liked it.  And in the end the public gets sick of negativity, in the end people want to know what you believe in, what kind of Australia you are passionate about and what kind of changes you want to bring about.
Now that's what I communicated to the Australian people in March of 1996, that's what I've communicated over the last five years.  Not everybody has agreed with it but that's a democracy and that's what I'm going to go on doing and as the months go by the Australian people are going to say 'Hey Mr Beazley, what do you stand for? What do you believe in?  What do you offer?  What are your policies?'.  And he's had five years to do that and so far he's merely produced a blank sheet of paper.  And I don't think that's good enough for an alternative Prime Minister.
Sophie, I'm delighted to have you as a candidate, I think you'll do a great job here in Indi, good luck to all of your supporters.  I look forward on election night to an absolutely thumping result here in Indi for the Liberal Party.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: Weary Dunlop memorial; economic management; industrial relations reform; health policy; tax reform; Labor Party's lack of policy; road funding.
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Sharman for those very warm and generous words of welcome. Denis Napthine, the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria, Sophie Panopoulos the Liberal Party candidate for Indi, Ian Carson the State President of the Party in Victoria, my other parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals and in particular my good friend and former parliamentary colleague, Ewan Cameron, the former member who I understand is in the audience.
Benalla does have something of a place in my recollections of the time that I've been Prime Minister. I certainly do remember that remarkable Sunday morning when I had the privilege of speaking on behalf of all Australians, and particularly although I was not of that generation myself, that heroic generation of Australians who sacrificed and suffered so much to defend our country in the dark days of World War II and the inspiration of Weary Dunlop lives on. And I was very warmed this morning to be approached by a seven or eight year old boy with the wonderful Sue Ebury biography of Weary Dunlop that I have read and I commend to all of you as one of the finest pieces I have read and to be asked to autograph and endorse that book and I would have thought for a young person growing up in this country the inspiration of his sacrifice and forgiveness and far-sightedness is very much a role model, indeed a lodestar for the behaviour of people in the years ahead.
I congratulate the three electorates of Indi and Murray and McEwen for putting together this special country conference. It's an opportunity for me to come again to regional Victoria, where I was last week visiting the electorates of Gippsland and McEwen and I'm no stranger to these parts. It's an opportunity to talk about some of the things the Government has done and is doing, but more particularly as this is a Liberal Party conference, and this is the beginning of a year that is going to be very important for us politically, it's an opportunity for me to define the choice that faces the Australian people over the next twelve months.
You know Government goes in phases. I've found that to be my experience over the last five years. You win office after particularly a long period in Government and you set about tackling the really difficult problems that you inherited and we inherited an accumulated national debt of $80-$90 billion from the former finance minister, Mr Beazley. We inherited, I believe, a very confused electorate regarding issues such as native title. We inherited a welfare system, that although it had some very, very good, bipartisan underpinnings of supporting a safety net that everybody believes is important and part of the Australian way of life, we inherited many, but nonetheless, a welfare system that needed some reforms and of course we inherited an industrial relations system that was run for the trade union movement to the great detriment of small business. And therefore in our early years we set about changing these things. We set about in the face of fierce opposition from the Labor Party to get rid of our budget deficit. I mean it's one thing to leave you with an $80-$90 billion debt, pretend you had nothing to do with it but it's a remarkable form of political cheek to then turn around and try and stop you eliminating the debt. And when you have eliminated the debt, say oh you really ought to spend it again, and that is basically what has happened over the last few years.
We spent our early years getting the house very much in order but we also set about some very major reforms and the industrial relations reforms which have done so much to increase the productivity of this country are one of the finest achievements of the government I've led over the last five years.
I want to pay tribute to the job that Peter Reith did as the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. He did it against very difficult odds. No minister of mine can I tell you was subject to more intimidation and more outright thuggery than Peter Reith faced at the time of his waterfront reform in 1998.
I can remember over the last twenty years going to Liberal Party gathering after Liberal Party gathering, all around Australia, going in to business gatherings and being told "when are you people going to have the guts to do something about the waterfront because it's crippling the productivity of this country". Peter Reith did something about the waterfront. He earned the lasting abuse and the enmity of the trade union movement. He ought to have the lasting gratitude of the producers of this country because we now have a more efficient waterfront and we are now achieving the goals and the crane rates and so forth that we set out to achieve.
But that industrial relations reform has laid the ground work of one of the really important achievements of this government and that is that ordinary wage and salary earners in Australia are now better off than what they were under the Hawke and Keating Governments. And one of the crowning ironies of Australian politics is that we have looked after the average worker far better than the party that is meant to represent them. The reality of course is that we represent them and represent them better because we represent all Australians. And if there's one thing that silences the Labor Party - it takes a lot to silence them in the parliament - if there is one thing that silences them more than ever it is when you read out a list of statistics on living standards. You remind them that on a $100,000 mortgage in 1990 you would have to pay $1,400 a month in interest. $1,400 a month because interest rates hit 17 percent. It is now about $680 a month.
In the four years we've been in Government, as a result of the fall in interest rates that occurred the other day, the average homebuyer in Australia is paying $250 a month less in interest. On top of that, we have the real wages of Australian workers increasing and the increase is not off the back of unsustainable high inflation, they're increasing off the back of higher productivity and we've got higher productivity because we have a better workplace relations system.
So not only do they have lower interest bills, they have higher wages and on top of that they are able to go back into private health insurance. I mean private health insurance was allowed to bleed to death under the Labor Party. They wanted it to die. They wanted the patient to die. They didn't believe in it. Carmen Lawrence was ideologically opposed to private health insurance. Her predecessor, Graeme Richardson, said they'd have to do something about it or it'll die.   And when we came into office, private health insurance was going down like that and if we hadn't done something about it, if we hadn't pumped a big subsidy into, if we hadn't introduced lifetime community cover, if we hadn't given people the incentive to go back into private health insurance then it would have disappeared altogether and there would have been an unsustainable burden placed upon the public hospital system of this country. And we did that. We did that in the face of huge opposition from the Labor Party. Kim Beazley and Jenny Macklin said it was a gift to the wealthy, that it was a flawed policy, that it was a waste of money. And they attacked it month after month and they said we were filling the coffers of the private health insurance funds. And then, all of a sudden, although not in the dead of night, but under the cover of Cathy Freeman's wonderful victory in the 400 metres at the Sydney Olympic games, they had a meeting of the shadow cabinet - I think in Ballarat? And it was about half past ten that night they put out a press statement saying the Labor Party is not going to reverse the private health insurance policies of the government if it is returned to office. I think if you really want to bury something choose the night Cathy Freeman wins the 400 metres. And that's basically what they've done.
So we had this journey. We've tackled the problems, we've reformed industrial relations. I think we've delivered a stronger health system. And of course before the last election we put before the Australian people a plan to restructure Australia's tax system. That was risky. I remember when I told the Liberal Party's pollster that we were going to do it. He almost had a heart attack. He said you can't do that. Well I said we're going to announce it and we're going to do it because it does need to be done. And it was risky and we lost some colleagues in the process that we'd won in 1996. But this country has needed tax reform for a long time. We won and once again we faced opposition from the Labor Party. At every turn they Labor Party opposed it. They hoped and prayed that the thing would be defeated in the 1998 election. They then hoped and prayed that if we couldn't get it through the Parliament with the support of Senator Harradine they'd talk the Democrats out of negotiating with us and it'd all fall over. But having got it through the Parliament they then banked their all on it being a disaster on the 1st of July last year and ever since then they've run a totally negative campaign.
And you've watched in relation to every single thing we've done a completely negative Opposition. I've dwelt for a few moments on that my friends because as we come into this election year, this election year is about defining a choice for the Australian people. Elections are not referendums on governments. They are decisions about alternative governments. And what the Australian people have to do is have a look at the alternatives. They might not like everything that we have done. I know that. Not all of them may like me. I know that. That goes with the territory and I know there are many things that I stand for that are are disliked by some Australians but at least I stand for something. At least I believe in a certain kind of Australia.
But I'm now faced by an opponent who boasts about the fact that he's been a minister longer than I have, and that's true, but that really proves my argument - what does he stand for. He's had all of those years to identify himself to the Australian people. He's had all of those years to develop a commitment to a particular way of leading this country. When I returned to the Opposition leadership in January 1995 people knew that I stood for industrial relations reform, for family tax relief, for privatisation, for supporting the private health system. They knew that. I have to say to you I don't know what my opponent stands for. He talks vaguely about a commitment to some areas of education but we've produced the policies. The Innovation Statement released the week before last is the most comprehensive commitment and investment to science and innovation that this country's seen from any government. I mean we've done something about it.
They talk vaguely sometimes about the environment. As Sharman pointed out, not only through the National Heritage Trust but also the commitment that we've made to salinity, we're actually doing something about it. Salinity and water quality is one of the biggest long-term problems that this country faces. If we don't do something about it in two out of five days in 20 years time the drinking water of the people of Adelaide will be unfit for human consumption. That is a deplorable thing to contemplate in a modern sophisticated country such as Australia.
We produced a defence white paper at the end of last year which commits us to a $13 billion dollar increase in defense spending over the next decade and which is the most comprehensive blueprint for improving the defense of this country that any government has produced since World War II. Now are tackling the long term problems of this country and we are faced by a policy lazy opposition whose sole tactic is to feed off inevitable unhappiness the electorate has on particular issues. There's no government in the history of mankind that has ever been completely popular all of the time on every issue. That's political utopia and none of us are going to achieve that. And I know that there are always, for governments, difficult areas. And I know some of the problems in regional Australia and I've focussed very heavily since the end of the last election, after the last election, over the last two-and-a-half years in visiting regional Australia and listening to people.
But not just listening. That's important but it's only half the job. You then have to do something. You have to recognise that there are some things that we can do. We can't stop the long-term decline in commodity prices driven by world economic influences. But we can do something about ensuring that services that are important to people where possible are retained or even returned. We can recognise as we did last year in the budget that the availability of health services, of general practitioners are very important and put more resources into it. We can recognise as we have done over the past 12 months the need to have more nursing home beds in regional Australia. And then of course we can recognise the sensitivity of fuel prices to people, not only in regional Australia but everywhere. Now let me say to you I understand how unhappy people are about the high price of petrol. I don't like it. I wish I could wave a magic wand and bring the price of petrol down by 10 or 15 cents a litre because that's the kind of relief I think people want. The only way that's going to happen is if there's a sustained fall in the world price of crude oil. If you cut the excise by 10 or 15 cents a litre, what are you looking at there, something in the order of $300 million to $400 million for every cent, and you do the sums.
We had a look before Christmas at the possibility of postponing the February increase in excise. I know that's been talked about and I know there are a lot of people that would have liked to have seen it happen. And that would have involved something in the order of $500 million a year. We decided it was better to put an extra $400 million a year over four years into road funding. All of that road funding will go into local roads. None of it goes into national highways or to roads of national importance. All of it goes into road funding. For example here in Indi the Alpine Shire will get $1.6 million, the Delatite Shire which is partly Indi's, partly in the joining electorate, $3.4 million, the Indigo Shire $2.5 million, the Moira Shire $4.8 million, and so the list goes on. And the reason I mention that my friends is that we did look at the possibility of having a freeze in the excise and we decided it was a better investment to put it into road funding.
While on the subject of road funding let me say something briefly about an item that was on the media last night and in the papers this morning about this alleged shortfall of $2.9 billion. Can I tell you there has been no under spend of $2.9 billion. There's been no underspend of even $2 in relation to the money that was economically and responsibly available for the expenditure on roads. And when I here Mr Bracks running around saying I've got to give another billion dollars to Victoria what he's really saying is that I should take a billion dollars out of what I've given Victoria for schools and hospitals and local road funding and state road funding and exchange it with a cheque that I give to him for road funding. That makes no sense at all. The idea that there's some $2.9 billion sitting there that hasn't been spent already on other roads is absolutely plain dead wrong. And I make that very very clear. This is an argument, essentially an accountant's argument about classification. It is not an argument about whether the government has short changed the motorists of Australia.
I would love to be in the capacity to both spend more money on roads which we announced before Christmas and also reduce excise. But if you do that you've got to ask the inevitable question where's the money coming from. I don't think we can afford to do both of those things and we decided to put more money into roads. That was our decision. And once again some of you will agree with that decision and some of you will think it was wrong. That's the nature of things in a democratic community.
So ladies and gentlemen we do face over the next year as Liberals a very big political challenge. Winning a third term is always difficult. I never take the Australian people for granted. I won't complacently assume I'm going to win as Mr Beazley did at his first press interview after his holiday when he said to the interviewer on the morning program he said you've got to understand, he said, that I expect to be in the Lodge in March of next year. Now that struck me as a piece of arrogance. I mean I don't expect to be in the Lodge in March of next year, I hope I am. I don't know. None of us do. That's in the hands of the Australian people. I'll work very hard to be in the Lodge but I can't, and I wouldn't conceitedly say to you oh I'm going to be in the Lodge in March of next year. That's the mindset of somebody who thinks he can lazily cruise to an election just criticising the government and never offering any alternative. Now I think we have to make certain that the Australian people understand that they have a government that has done things and believes in things led by a person who's done things and believes in things, and a policy lazy opposition who believes that all you've got to do is criticise and carp and be negative and then eventually some how or another you'll stumble across the line. Now I don't believe in the end that is what the Australian people will want for their Government.
But we have a very big responsibility all of us, to work very hard to ensure that we get a third term. Because if we get a third term we can be certain that in a slightly more challenging world economic environment this country will be better managed, economically. There's no doubt that we have, I think, properly, earned respect and credit around the world for the way the economy has been managed. And Peter Costello in particular as Treasurer has done a fantastic job in the work that he's done as Treasurer. And we work together. We don't always get everything right, but if you look at the big picture, the economy stared down the Asian economic down turn, we have low inflation, again we have falling interest rates, we've got the budget in surplus, we've reformed the tax system, reformed the industrial relations system. And we've made it very clear that we are responding to the concerns of small business about the simplification of the Business Activity Statement. We're working on that right at the moment and that's going to be fixed, I've made that clear, we're going to fix that. There were always going to be some transitional challenges, there were always going to be some fine tuning, but what you do is you listen to what people say, you don't change it every month. You allow people to have the experience of one or two forms and when it's clear that some simplification and change is needed you talk to people and you announce the changes. And that's what we're going to be doing very shortly.
But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for all of the support that you have given us over the years. I can't speak too warmly of the members that you already have in the electorates that are here today. Fran Bailey who has done a fantastic job as the Member for McEwen, a difficult electorate, marginal, enormous focus from the Labor Party, great Labor Party resources being put in to try and beat her. Another great woman, Sharman who has done a first class job with so many skills in different areas since she became the Member for Murray in 1996 and as a Parliamentary Secretary. And Sophie, who's office I opened today is the Liberal Party standard bearer in Indi. I think she is going to be a terrific Member for Indi. She brings enthusiasm, conviction and advocacy skills which are so very important. People increasingly I find are looking for somebody who can transmit sincere commitment to what they believe in and not just the latest public relations blurb their party has given them. And I find that some of the cynicism in the Australian community about main stream political parties is that there doesn't seem to be any flesh and blood about the way in which some members of mainstream political parties articulate their ideas. You can never please everybody, I've found that out, very much. There are always a lot of people who are going to disagree with what you believe in and what you do and what you stand for. But the most important thing in political life is to have values and beliefs and go out there and stand for them and argue for them even if you don't always persuade people of the wisdom. And that is the approach that I've tried to bring to Government, I'm very proud of what the Government has done over the last five years. I think we've made Australia a stronger, better, prouder, more respected country, and that's very important. We've got a lot of fight left in us. I think we are a much better Government than our alternative. We need your help, we need to return Fran, we need to return Sharman and we need to elect Sophie for the first time as the Member for Indi and I hope the contribution of this conference and the activities of the people gathered here today will play a very major role in that very laudable pursuit.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: ABN AMRO; globalisation; advantages of businesses in Sydney; Australian economy.
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Steve Crane, Wil Jiskoot, Peter Young, ladies and gentlemen. I didn't have very far to come tonight, my office is next door and I've heard the progress of construction of this building over the last 18 months. But I was remarking as I came up in the lift that I forgive all that noise because it's nice to come to the opening of a branch of a bank.
But I do want to take the opportunity of thanking ABN AMRO for its contribution to the financial community in Australia. It is the sixth largest bank in the world and its operation employs something like 750 people in three locations in Australia. And I can't but agree with our friend from the Netherlands that this location is quite an outstanding one and I'm sure you will not want for willing applicants to work in such marvellous surroundings.
But an occasion like this is yet another reminder to all of us of the processes of financial and economic globalisation. It's a word that's invoked frequently, it's a word that embraces a large number of economic activities, and it's a description of change and a process which is with us forever. Properly managed and properly understood and properly harnessed, it can be of enormous benefit to people all around the world. But as all of us understand it carries costs and it carries adjustment impacts on people. And it's particularly incumbent on we in Government, and you in the business community, who perhaps see more immediately than some others the benefits of globalisation, to understand that not all of the people of Australia are as perhaps enthusiastic about globalisation as many in this room may be. That is not a suggestion that we should in any way turn our backs on it, but it is a reminder that we need to understand that it can have disparate impacts on different sections of the community. And we should understand that and be sensitive towards it.
I will of course be forgiven for remarking that any sign of increased investment in this country, any sign of the expansion of large organisations in this country, which the opening of this new head office represents, is a further indication of the world wide esteem in which Australia is held, and the particular attractions of this country, and particularly of the city of Sydney, as a centre for the location of financial organisations. There are few cities in the world that can match the attractions of Sydney, the relatively low costs, the stable economic environment, the coherent, predictable and reliable and transparent legal system. The magnificent lifestyle and the openness and the friendliness of the people of this city, and indeed the people of our nation. And I'm very pleased to work with the State Governments, not only here in New South Wales, but all around Australia to attract companies to establish their headquarters.
And I'm very pleased to say to you, Will, and to all of your board, that you find an Australian economy, which according to the latest advice from the Reserve Bank, is still growing quite strongly. We will of course be affected in some way by the cooling off, if I can put it that way, which has occurred in the United States, and it's unrealistic to imagine that that won't have some affect on Australia. But because of decisions that have been taken over the past few years and the strength of the foundations of the Australian economy, there's every reason to believe that the impact will be modest, the impact will be containable and that although there will be some slowing in the rate of economic growth, the slowing will not be such that it will cause any significant concern. And just as this country was able to manage the impact of the Asian economic downturn, and stare it down in a way that exceeded the expectations of so many, I think it will also be the case, properly managed, that we can do the same in relation to the impact that is going to be felt in Australia by changes in the focus of the American economy over the next 12 months.
ABN AMRO has had a very long association with Australia. It goes back to 1970, it's played a major role in many interactions between the Government and financial sector in Australia, its been a significant contributor to the financial sector advice that has come to the Government I lead. It's lead by a very highly regarded and respected group of people, and can I say on behalf of the Government that I'm delighted to be associated with this activity, with this opening. I wish ABN AMRO well. I hope that the association between our two countries and the association between Australia and your bank continues and grows. And I see tonight's event as a very positive demonstration of the appeal of Australia and the appeal of Sydney as a financial centre. I take the opportunity of thanking AXIS, the Government organisation led by Les Hoskings, which has played such a major role in extolling the virtues and the benefits of Australia as a centre of financial activity. We think it's got enormous benefits, we think we've added to those benefits with the reforms that we've undertaken as the Government over the past few years. We intend to maintain the momentum of those reforms and we hope to see more ABN AMROs years into the future taking advantage of the very welcoming climate that Australia offers for this kind of headquarters.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE................................
There is nothing more sacred in the collective national life of our nation than to pay homage and to express gratitude to those who died defending Australia and those who died defending the cause of liberty and the cause of freedom. There is of course no hierarchy of sacrifice. All Australians who died anywhere in the world defending our country and defending what we stand for, to them we owe an equal and unlimited debt of gratitude.
Today we honour in particular those young men of USS Peary and those other sons of the United States who sacrificed their lives to defend Australia and to give us the freedom that we now enjoy. There is as the Ambassador said a very deep relationship between our two countries. We have fought together side by side since the days of World War I in pursuit of the values and the ideals that we hold in common. And hundreds of thousands of Americans died defending the cause of liberty. And here today in Darwin we commemorate that terrible day 59 years ago that brought home to the home front in Australia all the impact and the devastation of attack from an enemy that seemed to be all conquering. It was a moment of terrible truth for the Australian population. It confronted us with the realities of the invasion of our own country. And there side by side defending us were the young men of the United States.
And as we honour them and we thank them and we pay respect to them we also honour the deep friendship between our two nations. We also express our gratitude for all that the United States has done in the years that have passed since World War II with their great power and strength to defend the cause of Liberty and the cause of democracy around the world.
There are few nations in the world that can say that they have been continuously democratic and free through the entirety of the 20th century. The United States and Australia are two of those nations. We have shared much together because we believe in much together. And today we honour those brave men of the USS Peary and I particularly welcome to Australia those two wonderful - Mr Duke and Mr Widick - those two wonderful veterans from the United States. And the sparkle of your contributions and the feeling that you expressed for your long departed comrades was very deeply moving. Long may the relationship between our two countries remain close. We owe it to those who died defending our country 59 years ago. We owe it to all who died together in the defence of the values that we hold so dearly.
[ends]


Subjects: Commemoration of bombing of Darwin.
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you Administrator. Chief Minister, Admiral Fellin, and our other American guests, Defence Minister, Leader of the Opposition, ladies and gentlemen.
This has really been quite a remarkable day or so in commemorating a very important event in Australia's history. And I want to congratulate the Northern Territory government, the Chief Minister, and the committee for the Centenary of Federation from the Northern Territory for a marvelous commemoration. Absolutely marvelous.
I go to a lot of commemorations. It goes with the territory.   Most of them are very rewarding. Some of them, you know, of the political kind commemorate things I'd rather forget. But I thought this morning's service was as good as it gets. You had a bit of everything. You had history, you had a local flavour, you had the Australian/American association, you had a magnificent representation of the indigenous contribution to the defence of Darwin and the defence of the Northern Territory, and you had a recognition of the cosmopolitan character of this community.
And there it was in this beautiful memorial with the sea in the background and a permanent reminder to all of the Australians who were there that Darwin is the point that in a sense from time to time in our history is interpreted in ways we may not always like to the rest of the world. So I think Chief Minister, you and your mates up here have done a really first class job.
And it's a great year to be an Australian. It really is. It's always a great year to be an Australian but this a particularly good year because there are so many things about our history that we now have an opportunity to talk about and have it better explained to us. There's a growing passion and nostalgia in the Australian community for the history of this country. I've often said that the most moving experience I've had as Prime Minister over the last year, probably in the whole time I've been Prime Minister, was last ANZAC Day when Janette and I took part in a wonderful service at Gallipoli. And the best thing about it was that there were 12,000 to 15,000 young people there, young Australians mainly, but a lot of New Zealanders as well and others. And they were quite unselfconsciously wandering around with flags draped around their backs and with all sorts of representations of the Australian flag and hats. And the enthusiasm, you know that wonderful sort of friendly involvement, yet a reverence and respect for what was so important and sacred about the occasion.
We have really turned the corner I think in an understanding and respect for and passion for our history and I think that is a wonderful thing. You wouldn't have seen that 30 years ago. People would have been too self-conscious. It was not fashionable 30 years ago to wander around like that. And I just think it is something that whatever our views are on other things on occasions like this we forget our differences on other things. This is an Australian occasion. I think that is wonderful.
And what you've done here with this ceremony is give us your particular part of that because it is different in every part of the country. And the bombing of Darwin was very different because it was the first time there was this open assault on the Australian mainland and that's why it's so much a special part of our history..
So can I simply say to you Dennis and to your colleagues who've organised this it really has been a marvelous occasion in a marvelous year. To our American friends, I was saying to the Admiral we fought together for the first time at the battle of Hamel on the Western Front. I couldn't help saying of course the commanding officer on that occasion was Sir John Monash, probably the greatest field commander that Australia has produced and in the eyes of many people the greatest field commander of World War I.   But it was the beginning of a long partnership.
There's never been a significant military conflict since in which we haven't fought side by side. And again can I say that this is an occasion not only to honour our own history but particularly to include in that honouring a very special and treasured place for the contribution of the people of the United States have made. Well done and nice to have you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Commemoration of bombing of Darwin.
E&amp;OE..................
Your excellencies, Chief Minister, United States Ambassador, my ministers, Leader of the Opposition, my fellow Australians. There are many expressions buried deep in the Australian idiom, and one of those that is very familiar to all of us is the expression "it can';t happen here". And if this commemoration of the bombing of Darwin represents many things, and it does, it certainly represents a recollection of a dramatic repudiation of that particular view. Because what occurred here 59 years ago demonstrated that anything could happen here in Australia, it did happen, and of course it is a vivid reminder that it could happen again.
To have real meaning, a commemoration should not only be an occasion for sacred and emotional reflection and gratitude, which we do to those brave men and women of Australia and America who died defending our liberty 59 years ago. In expressing that gratitude we express the gratitude of the people of Australia today, to the people of all backgrounds here in Darwin 59 years ago who laid down their lives. We thank the indigenous people of the Northern Territory for their contribution, we salute the contribution of our friends from the United States, and we reflect how differently life might be today had it not been for their ultimate and total sacrifice.
It is also an occasion to reflect on an alliance in war between 1941 and 1945 that delivered us the peace that we now enjoy and again we honour the presence of so many of our friends from the United States.  We also reflect upon the flowering of that alliance in war into an alliance in peace.  The ANZUS pact between Australia and the United States has done more to deliver the security of the Australian nation in the years that have gone by since World War II than any other international arrangement.  
This is an occasion therefore my fellow Australians not only to express our thanks to those who died and our thanks to God for their sacrifice and their commitment, but it is also an occasion to reflect on what has delivered us the peace in the 59 years that have gone by.  War is a terrible thing and the death of the young overwhelmingly in war is a poignant thing beyond the experience of just about anything else because it';s always the young who die in their thousands and millions in war.  And as I walked in here today and I gazed upon those young children from the Northern Territory I thought to myself, please God they will never be asked to make the sacrifice that their grandparents and in many cases their great-grandparents were called upon to make.
So this commemoration is not only an occasion to give our thanks and to honour those who sacrificed all but it';s also an occasion to remember what has kept the peace since.  It is also an occasion to understand that we live forever as part of the international body of mankind, that we have to have friendship with all people of the earth and we have to have friendships with all of our fellow Australians.  We need our friendships with the people of the United States, we need our friendships with the people of Timor, with the people of Papua New Guinea, the people of Indonesia, the people of our region.  So often in the history of this country Darwin has related the events of the world to the rest of the Australian nation.  It occurred here 59 years when Darwin was bombed.  We were reminded of the linkage again two years ago when this was the focal point of the movements of men and women and materials into the INTERFET operation in East Timor.  
I say to my fellow Australians who live in Darwin and contributed so much to the history of this city and the history of our nation, I thank you for the special part you have in the history of this country.  I join all in honouring and paying homage and tribute to those who died that we might live in peace and happiness and freedom and we might have the capacity to express the hope that never again will the young of the world lay down their lives in war and bloodshed.
[Ends] 


Subjects: Darwin and the Northern Territory; Centenary of Federation; Adelaide to Darwin railway; Western Australia and Queensland
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Dennis for those very kind remarks.  Shane Stone, the federal President of the Liberal Party, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It';s a great delight to be back in Darwin.  I think in the time that I';ve been Prime Minister this is either the fifth or sixth visit that I';ve paid to the Northern Territory.  It is a special part of Australia and to come here as part of the celebration of the 59th anniversary of the bombing of Darwin, which is a centerpiece event of the year commemorating the Centenary of Federation, is quite an experience for Janette and for me.
I said at the luncheon today that I thought the arrangement for the celebration, the commemorative service this morning, reflected enormous credit on the Chief Minister and his government, and on those people responsible for the organisation of the centenary observance here in the Northern Territory.  It was a wonderful moving event and the people of Darwin and the people of the Northern Territory have every reason to be not only reflective but also very proud of the very important role that has been played by this city and this territory in the history of our country.
I';m delighted to see so many people supporting a CLP function.  It brings home to me the vitality and the energy and the vigour of this particular and unique branch of our broad Liberal Party organisation.  Territory politics are different.  They have a special character and long may that be the case.  Australia is a big country and you do need to have a decentralised approach to decision making not only in government but also in the management and organisation of political parties.
One of the things that Australia has done very well is to find the right balance in a geographically large country of allowing the emergence of a very strong national sentiment and a very strong national spirit when it';s needed, but equally allowing the emergence and the development of decentralised forms of government that allow for local options, local choice and local decision making where that is necessary.  And when I delivered the Australia Day Address in Canberra only a few weeks ago and I reflected for a  moment on what some of the particular achievements of the Australian federation had been it';s fair to say that I came to the conclusion that Australia has been better than most countries in achieving that balance.  
They either make the mistake in other countries of giving all the decision making power to the centre and ignoring the outlying areas of the nation, or allow too much fragmentation and too much decentralisation.  I mean we had if I may say so with no disrespect to our great American friends, we had an example of that with the recent presidential election.  I must say as the Prime Minister of a federation I find it astonishing that a country would have a national electoral process which is not in the hands of a national electoral commission but was in fact in the hands of local and county electoral commissions.
So Australia has been very good at striking the balance and what you have achieved here in the Territory, and it remains the policy of the government I lead if it is the view and the desire of the people of the Northern Territory that the Northern Territory should achieve full statehood.  That remains our policy.  But that is a matter for the people.  All of these things in the end are in the hands of the Australian people and it';s for the people of the Territory to make a decision on that matter.  But I want to tell you that we won';t stand in your way and we won';t be reluctant to put in place the necessary support and necessary government decisions that are needed.
Since I';ve been here over the last couple of days a few people have said something about a railway.  It emerges everywhere I go.  I went to the concert last night.  Got the biggest cheer.  Come along here and there';s a song.  They';ve written a song about it.  They don';t write a song about me.  Now it is true, it is true that as the Chief Minister was kind enough to say, that unlike any previous federal government we made a solid financial commitment first negotiated between John Olsen, Shane Stone and myself.  And we subsequently added a bit more to that.  And we decided to go the extra distance.  I might say in the face of criticism from some people who look at government decisions entirely in the narrow confines of pure economics, but we decided to go the extra distance because we actually think there';s a nation building component in this railway.  And that has been our view for a very long time.
Now recently, as Dennis alluded to, there have been one or two qualifications that have emerged.  Without going into the technical jargon and you know, jaw breaking merchant bank language that is normally employed when you come to these sorts of deals, let me say very clearly to you that in relation to any potential shortfall, subject to the federal government receiving a formal commitment and understanding from the consortium that providing the extra resources will guarantee the commencement of the project, we in the federal government are prepared to join the Northern Territory government and the South Australian government in delivering that extra commitment so that the project can commence.
I think we';d better get that poet from the commemoration this morning.  So thank you very much.  But it is a very important project and at a time when much of the current focus of political debate is about an alleged divide between one part of Australia and another part of Australia, and the other part of Australia being the more remote parts of the Commonwealth, it is very important that national governments ensure that they are prepared to go the extra mile in providing financial support for valuable infrastructure.  Some will criticise the federal government';s support.  Some will look at it entirely in bean counting terms.  That is a mistake.  I am as strong a believer in budget surpluses and rigorous economic policies as anybody who';s occupied the position of Prime Minister, and I will make bold to say an even stronger believer in those things than quite a number of my predecessors.  But there does come an occasion, an occasion where you cannot simply apply straight economic considerations. And I believe that this has been one of them and I do hope, and I have every reason of course to believe that the Northern Territory government will join the commitment I';ve made and it would be my hope that the South Australian government would do the same.
When the railway goes ahead it will mean a lot to the Territory.  It will also mean a lot to the people of cities such as Whyalla in South Australia, and indeed it will mean much to the economies of both South Australia and the Northern Territory. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a gathering of the friends and supporters of the CLP and therefore of the broad Liberal/National Party side if I can put it in Commonwealth wide terms of our side of politics.  Since the Queensland election on Saturday, and also before that following the Western Australian election, there was quite a bit of debate about the reasons for those two very adverse results.  There has been a vigorous debate about the impact of federal issues on those two election outcomes.  
And I';m very disappointed about what happened in Western Australia.  I thought the Court Government had been a good government but it lost.  And it lost overwhelmingly in my opinion because of state considerations.  And equally I believe that the Beattie Government in Queensland was returned because people in that state decided that the Beattie Labor Government offered stability and security and predictability whereas I';m sorry to say the Coalition alternative in Queensland did not offer that.  
Now there';s no point on occasions such as this in mincing words.  Supporters of a political party are entitled to know exactly what the leader of that political party thinks.  And I happen to think we lost in Queensland and Western Australia because of essentially state considerations.  But having said that I';m the last person in Australia to put my head in the sand and to pretend that every single thing that the federal government has done has been popular, or to pretend that there are not some areas of criticism and concern.  
The art of good government and the art of good politics is simultaneously to retain a strong commitment to good policy and commonsense decision making in government, and also to listen to and to understand the people who you are responsible and accountable to when they have concerns.  
I know that people have concerns about a number of things.  One of the things people have concerns about is the complexity of the Business Activity Statement.  I';ve talked to a lot of people tonight as I';ve gone around.  I should tell you that last Friday in Sydney I convened a meeting of the Treasurer, the Minister for Small Business, representatives of eight major business organisations including a good cross section of the small business community.  I had the Commissioner of Taxation there and the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation.  We sat down for three hours and debated the changes that ought to be made to the Business Activity Statement.  And those changes are going to be announced by the Treasurer on behalf of the government later this week. And they will meet in my view the accumulated concerns that people have communicated to the government over the past few months.
Now in a sense a process like this is inevitable.  When you introduce a new taxation system there is always some challenge in the change involved and the administrative task of absorbing the requirements of the new system.  And we said that we would be willing to fine tune it.  We said that if there were difficulties with the technical implementation we';d react.  And that is what we';re going to do and I hope that the announcements that are going to be made on behalf of the government later this week will be seen by the small business community of Australia, which is in many ways the lifeblood of the Liberal and National parties around Australia, will be seen by the small business community as meeting the concerns that they have legitimately expressed.  And I hope people will see that as an example of the willingness of this government while maintaining in the full its commitment to good policy will also show the willingness of the government to respond in a flexible and commonsense way to the concerns that people have.
I also know, and people who live in the Territory would feel it very acutely because of the distances involved, I also know that people don';t like the high level of petrol prices.  I don';t either.  The high level of petrol prices at the current moment are overwhelmingly due to the world price of crude oil being dramatically higher than what it was only a short time ago.  And I have to tell you in all honesty I can';t force the oil producing countries of the world to cut the price of crude oil, and neither could President Bush and neither could his predecessor President Clinton.  Although we';ll continue to agitate with all the means available to achieve a moderation in that price.  
We did look before Christmas at the possibility of deferring the excise increase last February.  We decided instead to put $1.6 billion extra into local roads around Australia.   We thought that was a better long term investment.  And I wouldn';t want anybody to go away from this gathering tonight thinking for a moment that I wasn';t very sensitive to and very comprehending about the concern of people around Australia about the high cost of fuel.  
I mention those two issues because they have featured very heavily in the media and in public comment about the position of the federal government.  The next election for us will be very tough because when you are shooting for a third term, I mean you people up here are masters at it, you';ve sort of won nine or ten times.  I don';t know what the secret is.  I';ve no intention of transferring from Canberra to Darwin.  But can I say that it will be tough for us because we will be going for a third time.  And it';s very easy third time up for people to think well this is an opportunity to give them a bit of a flick, this is an opportunity to demonstrate our concern or this or that about this or that area of government policy.  
And that is why it is tremendously important for us as supporters of our cause, and there are many in the room tonight, I know not all and I';m glad that it';s a mixture of both supporters and interested observers, even critics.  The more the better.  I think it';s tremendously important as we think about these things to focus on the choice.  Now I';ve acknowledged that there are some areas of public concern about the government.  And can I also assert that there are many areas where the government is entitled to point with enormous pride and satisfaction about what has been achieved.  And when we go to the election towards the end of this year I';ll be doing that, I';ll be doing it in spades. 
I';ll be reminding people that when I became Prime Minister there was an accumulated federal government debt of between $80 billion and $90 billion.  $80 billion to $90 billion of accumulated deficits, most of which had been run up in the last six years of the Keating/Beazley Government while Mr Beazley was the Finance Minister of Australia.  I';ll be reminding people that interest rates hit 17%.  Bill rates for many farmers were 19% or 20% in the Hawke/Keating years.  I';ll remind people that unemployment went to 11.2% when Mr Beazley was the Employment Minister in the Hawke/Keating years.  
And I';ll also remind people that when we tried to do something about that they tried to stop us at every turn.  Not only did they leave government with $80 billion or $90 billion of national debt.  When we set about trying to reduce it they tried to stop us.  I mean it';s the equivalent of setting fire to the house and then preventing the fire brigade from putting out the fire.  That is exactly what they tried to do.  And now they have the nerve to parade themselves as responsible economic managers and fit to return to government.  Now you may not agree with everything we';ve done.  The Australian public may not like us on this or that issue. But we have delivered to the Australian community an economic strength and resilience that this country';s not had for a generation, not for a generation.
Three years ago I addressed this gathering, in 1998.  And we were about to experience so we thought the full impact of the Asian economic downturn.  Yet we were able to stare down that downturn largely because of the economic reforms that my government had put in place.  And in the five years that we have been in government we have reduced that Beazley national debt of $80 billion to $90 billion by almost $50 billion.  We now have one of the lowest debt to GDP ratios of any developed country in the world.  For practical purposes we no longer have a significant debt problem at a national level and that has been achieved through the careful economic management of the government.  It may sound dull, it may sound even obsessive.  But can I tell you in terms of the long term economic security and the future wealth generation capacity of this country, it is enormously important.  
And I say without any fear of contradiction, without any doubt [inaudible] that that would be at risk at the election of a Labor government.  So by all means let us acknowledge that we have made our share of mistakes, that there are areas where people want change, they want amelioration, they want a shift of emphasis.  But let us never lose sight of the fact that there is a clear choice between the stability and the security that we have offered, we have delivered, and we will guarantee if we are re-elected - and a return to the 17% interest rates, the 11% unemployment, the $80 billion to $90 billion of national debt which were hallmarks of the last time that Mr Beazley was involved at the high levels of government in this country.
Now it is important because there is quite a debate going on at the moment.  There are attempts being made to over-read federal implications into the results in both Western Australia and Queensland.  And as somebody who has the ultimate responsibility for guiding the national fortunes of our side of politics in Australia let me say to you that that is a complete distortion of the facts.  Yes there are areas where messages were being sent to the government and messages are being heard by me and by my colleagues.  But Australians have a great capacity to distinguish between state and federal politics.  And no group of Australians are more adept at doing that than the people of Queensland.  They have a very long history of voting differently. And they have a very long history of changing very rapidly from one point of view to another if they think the circumstances warrant it.  And that is what you witnessed in Queensland on Saturday. And in a partisan sense I suppose it grieves me a bit to say it but I think the Premier of Queensland ran a very effective campaign and credit in a political sense should be given where credit is due.
But politics is about choice.  You';ve always got to decide whether you want one side or the other and at the end of the year people will have to decide whether they want us or they want Mr Beazley and the Labor Party and what each of us stand for.  And that is the real choice and that applies whether you are primarily a Liberal voter or a Labor voter or you are primarily a voter for a minor party because if you';re a voter for a minor party you';ve got to decide where your preferences go.  And if you decide to give them other than to the Coalition you';re going to elect Mr Beazley.  And it';s very important that that message be understood.
But can I say to all of you who are here tonight, particularly those of you who are involved in business, that providing a strong and growing economy remains our most important goal.  The Australian economy will grow a little more slowly this year than last year.  But the latest advice I have is that the rate of growth will still be very strong by historical standards.  If there is significant unevenness coming out of the American economy that will have some impact on us.  But the stronger we are domestically the less will be the impact. Just as we were able to stare down the Asian economic downturn so it will be that we will be able to minimise, not eliminate, but minimise the impact of what comes out of the United States if we continue to keep our economic house in very good order.
Now I know that tax reform has been a challenge for many people in business.  And I thank the small business community of Australia for the way in which they';ve overwhelmingly set about absorbing and accepting the changes and getting used to them.  And we will be responding as I said earlier to some of your concerns about the Business Activity Statement.  But there are long term benefits for Australia in taxation reform.  The states and territories get a much better financial deal.  They have access to a growth tax which will underwrite their capacity to increase essential public services in the years ahead.  It';s good for our exports because they';re free of GST.  Resources from the GST will enable us to, along with other measures, to significantly reduce the level of income tax.  And from the 1st of July this year under the arrangements signed with the states and the territories, Financial Institutions Duty will disappear altogether which will be a very significant benefit to many people in the Australian community, a reform and a measure completely forgotten by most people since the introduction of the GST in the middle of last year.
Reform is never easy.  But we live in a world where if you try and stand still you go backwards.  And the challenge of government is to continue the reform process but to do it in a way that minimises the hurt it imposes on the more vulnerable sections of our community.  And the concern felt by many in the less wealthy parts of regional Australia is really the consequence of economic change and social change on some communities that find it bewildering.  I can understand that.  The answer is not to turn your back on reform and change.   The answer is to provide more assistance to people to cope with change and to show more understanding and to show more concern.  I understand that.  That';s one of the reasons why we';ve endeavoured in a variety ways in the last five years to cushion the impact of that change.
But it is a challenging task because the ideological divide that used to sharply distinguish political parties is perhaps not as deep as it was many years ago.  And where politics in this country is less tribal than what it used to be it';s quite important that we recognise that it is more challenging and people';s loyalties can change more rapidly and they can be more fickle. And that is part and parcel of the world in which we live.
It';s an enormous privilege to be the Prime Minister of Australia.  The greatest privilege that any man or woman can have is to be Prime Minister of this magnificent country.  And to be Prime Minister in the Centenary of Federation year where you have the opportunity of involvement in so many events that have shaped the nation we now have.   And as I watched that wonderful commemorative service and participated in it this morning, what was so wonderful about it is that it touched every part of the rich life of the Territory.  It';s frontier aspect, it being the place where for the first time in our history we felt the brunt of an assault upon our mainland, the contribution of the indigenous people of the Territory to the defence of Australia, the contribution that perhaps in the past we haven';t as Australians recognised enough and more is now being done to fully recognise and to express our gratitude and thanks for that contribution.
The cosmopolitan character, the ethnic diversity which has always been part of the special quality of the Territory and this was so strongly evident today.  Cooperation with our friends from the United States, the proximity of Asia.  I mean Darwin was critical during World War II and as soon as we became significantly involved as we did recently in Timor Darwin once again became the centre of attention, the point of departure and the point of intersection.  And all of that was brought home to me and I know to many others this morning.  I started by saying that I think you';ve done a wonderful job.  And the government and Dennis as Chief Minister in particular, and everybody else associated ought to be congratulated on a wonderful job.
Can I lastly say to all of you who over the years in different ways have supported the CLP.  Thank you for that support.  You like us will have a tough fight whenever your poll is held.  Elections are never easy.  They';re always challenging.  We live in a democracy where in the end we';re all ultimately accountable.  But in the end you win if you retain support and people believe you';re a better alternative than your opponent. And if you can';t win that argument than you';re not going to succeed.  And that is of course how it ought to be.
I want to say to you that I';m very proud of what my government has done over the last five years.  We';ve made Australia a more stable more secure, a safer country economically and in so many other ways.  I want to make it even safer and more secure and even stronger in the years ahead.  And I';ve got a great zeal and a great passion to achieve that, to lead my government and my Coalition to victory at the next election and to provide the Australian people and the Australian community with the sort of stability and security that we';ve had.  And only a Coalition government can do that.  Thank you.
[Ends] 


Subjects: Aboriginal health, education and childcare
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much.  Janette and I are really very moved to have the opportunity of spending a few hours on this beautiful island.  It is my first ever visit and I gather the second visit ever by a serving Prime Minister.
I have been very heartened by what I';ve heard and what I';ve seen and what I';ve felt over the last few hours.  Not only was I touched by the warm and spontaneous welcome but it is clear from what people have said both here at lunch and also as I';ve moved around the island and as I';ve observed the facilities on the island.  It is very clear that many people, many Tiwi people and others associated with them and committed to improving their opportunities in life believe in a society where there is an appropriate balance between care and compassion on the one hand and self reliance on the other.  And that is something that I believe in very strongly.  The kind of Australia that I believe in is an Australia where you do look after and help people who need assistance but you always aim to promote the greatest degree of self-reliance and independence.  Because unless people have self-reliance and independence they are robbed of dignity and they are robbed of self-respect.  And there is mounting evidence that indigenous communities all around this country need the sort of opportunities to achieve economic independence and a control over their own lives that has clearly been achieved amongst the Tiwi people.
I don';t think it';s saying too much for me to remark that I was really quite thrilled when I visited that dialysis unit.  I was equally thrilled when I visited the soon to be opened child care centre that will not only deal with childcare as we normally understand that expression but will also have a zero to twelve years of age total approach to caring for children, they';ll look at dietary problems.  And I was so pleased to hear those significant improvements, the elimination or the dramatic reduction in the suicide rate because so often we hear the bad news stories about indigenous communities.  We are told constantly that nothing is being achieved and that is sending the worst possible signal to the Australian community.  Because if you tell a population often enough that nothing is being achieved through the resources they commit to something they';ll want to stop committing those resources.  That is human nature.  But what is so important to me about what I';ve heard today and learnt is that progress is being made.  That if you give people independence, you give people dignity and you give people the opportunity - where they can achieve it - to grab self reliance then they will do so.
I came here to express the gratitude of the Australian people in the context of the commemoration of the bombing of Darwin for the role of the Tiwi people in the defence of our country.  Of how as Australians together we stood against the then enemy.  Having come to this island to express that gratitude, on behalf of all of the Australian people I have learnt a lesson.  I seem to be hearing a lot lately that I should learn lessons, seems to be the John Howard directed mantra of 2001.  Well I have learnt a lesson today, I';ve learnt the lesson that having faith in giving communities control over their own lives delivers results.  And that is something that I have believed in all my life.
There still remains an enormous gap between the health standards and opportunities of communities like this and the rest of Australia.  And of education opportunities and employment opportunities.  That';s the continuing reality but the good news is that gap is beginning to close and what matters is the direction in which you';re heading rather than the absolute comparison.  And the direction in which we are heading is the right direction.  And the sort of policies that have been spoken about today, not by me, but you all said it before I got up to speak.  But I have to say I agree with just about everything that I heard and it';s rare that I go anywhere in Australian where I can honestly say that.  But I did and I';m quite excited about the sense of commitment you have to working together.
One of the great things about the Territory is that it';s a living, a vivid example of how people of different racial backgrounds can work together as Australians.  And the notion of working together as a cosmopolitan community is something that the Territory understood long before the more modern words to describe that were thought of and I think you';ve been a great demonstration of that down through the years.  So can I say to all of you wonderful people, it';s been a real privilege for me to come here today.  I';ve enjoyed it, I';m cheered by it, I';m encouraged by it.  It reinforces my faith in the sort of things that we';ve been arguing for and I know Michael Wooldridge as Health Minister and Larry Anthony and others have close contact with the people of this island and the Tiwi people.
And I wish you well, I want to come back one day and see even more progress and even more achievement and hear even more positive stories.  But Janette and I say thankyou, not only for what you did for our country all those years ago but for the living example you are of how if you combine compassion and self reliance you can conquer all manner of disabilities and disadvantages.
Thankyou
[ends] 


Subjects: Drug policies; petrol snifing diversion project; education policy
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much, Denis Burke, Chief Minister of the Northern Territory; to Mr Gerard Keating, the Principal of St Johns, students of St Johns, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm very happy to be with you and I'd like to particularly welcome Major Brian Watters who's not only a serving officer of the Salvation Army but in the context of today's launch he's Chairman of the National Council on Drugs and one of the principal advisers to me on drugs. And somebody who's been at the forefront of the Tough on Drugs strategy which has involved the commitment of an additional $500 million by the Federal Government in fighting the scourge of drugs within our community.
I think everybody who read those quite moving and for me very important articles in The Australian newspaper which spelt out to people who don't live here and who don't have day-to-day contact with the drug problem, the devastating effects on young lives from petrol sniffing. They were amongst some of the more pathetic and moving newspaper articles that I've read in the time that I've been in politics. And they had an effect on me, as my staff will testify, so we have to demonstrate initially with a commitment of money for some pilot projects a determination by the Federal Government out of the money that we're making available to the Territory from the Tough On Drugs strategy to see if we can find some way of tackling this terrible problem.
So in the end you know better as a school community than I do that providing people with love and security in their families and in their school and community environment is the best antidote of all against the kind of behaviour that drives people into drugs. And there can never be a substitute for that. And if young people don't have that they miss out on something that other young people have. But communities and governments can try and make some difference. They can augment what families and schools do and that is what these programmes under Tough on Drugs are designed to do.
There's a common misconception and that misconception in the community amongst those people who believe that the answer to the drug problem is to throw up your arms and say nothing can be done and we ought to legalise it all and encourage people that it's just part of life - there's a common misconception by those people that all of the money and all of the effort that governments have put in to tackling the drug problem, all of it's been to no avail. Now, I'd be the last to assert to you that we're anywhere near on top of the problem. We often feel as though we're running on the spot or even going backwards but we are making progress. There are some great stories. There is evidence that the seizure of drugs such as cocaine and heroin have increased dramatically and it's starting to have some effect within the Australian community.
There is cooperation across the political divide in Australia between the Federal Government and the State governments in providing rehabilitation facilities. When it comes to an issue like drugs political differences mean nothing to me and I'm happy to work closely with political opponents at a State level in order to provide proper programmes because this is one of those things that is undeniably above politics.
And what I'm announcing today is Commonwealth funding of $1 million to reduce the problem of petrol sniffing in the Northern Territory. We intend to establish a number of pilot programmes. We'll work with communities such as St Johns. We want to find out what are the best ways in which we can, at an early stage through early intervention, that age old adage that prevention is better than cure applies in relation to illicit drug taking probably more than it does in any other area. Part of our approach is to educate people about the consequences of drugs. Part of our approach is to make them unfashionable. Part of our approach is to persuade people that not commencing drug taking is the best way, not believing that you can handle it and minimise the harm and get on top of it if it threatens to be a problem. There are plenty of devastated lives that are testimony to the fact that that is absolutely impossible and that the best way of tackling this problem is to educate people against the dangers of it.
Now, this initiative is a beginning by the Federal Government. We want to work with local communities. We want to understand the particular needs of indigenous communities in relation to this problem. And the initiative will commence with an initial pilot with funding of $150,000 to be undertaken in the top end. And subject to evaluation of this pilot the remaining funding will be used to expand the approach to other communities.
As I said earlier we've committed $500 million, which represents the largest ever investment by a Federal Government in tackling the problem of drugs. And it has started to yield results. Drug hauls in the last two financial years have been five times larger than the average seizure of heroin and cocaine for each year between 1990 and 1996. The cynics will say that means more of it's coming into the country. The realists will see it as not necessarily saying that more is not coming in but as evidence that the law enforcement effort supported by the additional resources of the Federal Government have started to bite and have started to become more effective.
But it is a never-ending battle and it does involve three components. It involves educating and intervening at an early stage to prevent people falling into the patterns of social behaviour and despair that lead to drug taking. It means educating young people about the dangers of drug taking, including the dangers of the use of cannabis, of marijuana, this belief that somehow or other that is a safe drug and it has no debilitating effects is disproved time and time and time again. It also means strong law enforcement. It also means providing adequate rehabilitation facilities and rehabilitation facilities have not been adequate in the past and we are working with governments at both the state and territory level to try and improve that.
I've taken a very strong personal interest in this issue. I believe it represents one of the greatest threats to the essential fabric of our society, it's a source of despair and concern to so many parents and it's something that strikes across the social/economic divide. It's not just to be found in certain communities, it's to be found everywhere and it's very important that the government's response reach everywhere. And here our response is to try and provide a lead, a help in the Northern Territory, particularly in relation to petrol sniffing and the horrible effects of that I think are familiar to so many of you.
And I am very grateful to St John's for providing me with the forum and the opportunity for this launch. And can I take the opportunity in the presence of the Principal and in the presence of the Director of Catholic Education in the Northern Territory to reaffirm the federal government's very strong support for the Catholic education system. The decisions that we took a few months ago maintain the funding level, the existing funding levels of schools that might otherwise have been affected by the introduction of the new SES system and result in significant levels of funding increase for other schools that were not receiving as much commonwealth assistance. We believe very strongly in choice in education and we've given very strong very strong effect to that in the announcements that we have made.
But I am delighted to have the opportunity of launching this initiative. I hope it will make a difference. It's intended to and it's designed to tackle at its source a horrible social challenge and something that I know frightens the daylights of parents, out of parents all around Australia. Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Millennium forum, Australian politics; state elections; Australian economy; tax system; dairy deregulation; laziness of Opposition; forthcoming election; changes to BAS
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you Michael, to State Opposition Leader Kerry Chikarovski, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. First my I again express my gratitude to you Michael, and through you to all of the supporters of the millennium forum which have, collectively, done so much to restore the sinews of war, if I can put it that way, of the New South Wales division of the Liberal Party, and therefore struck a very important blow in presenting one side of the political debate in Australia.
I have addressed this millennium forum now on a number of occasions, and I've always endeavoured, when I've addressed it, to speak to you in a very direct way and to frankly analyse the political and economic scene as I see it. And today will be no exception. It's fair of me to say to you that right at the moment the Government faces, in political terms, the most difficult period it has faced since its re-election in 1998, and some would argue since its election in March of 1996. I say that quite directly because it is true, and my 27 years in parliament have left me, I hope, with some understanding of the political challenges and the political realities of life.
There has developed, over the last month a widespread perception amongst political commentators, based almost overwhelmingly on the results of two state elections in Western Australia and Queensland, that a change of Government at a federal level is well night inevitable and something that can be taken as a matter of course. Now I recognise that that is a perception that is being put around, I also recognise that as with all perceptions it is always based in some part in reality. And it is my responsibility as the Prime Minister and as the ultimate custodian of the political fortunes of the Liberal Party throughout Australia, and as somebody who is accountable in that position to those who belong to and support the Liberal Party, to face the reality of the present situation. But also in the process of facing that reality, to seek to remind those who I meet and address of some of the constants that always exist in Australian politics. And one of the constants of Australian politics, particularly in the era in which we now operate, is its extraordinary volatility. Australian politics now is greatly more volatile than what it was 20 or 30 years ago. I have often said to people that when I first joined the Liberal Party, and was taught a little bit about campaigning by my good friend John Carrick, who's here today, that you could operate on what I called the 40-40-20 rule. And that's not something you borrow from the financial community, it was something I learnt in my early political days. 40% voted Labor, 40% voted Liberal, and the 20% were in the middle. Now I think its fair to say that we live in 30-30-40 rule, we live in a different political dispensation. And it is more volatile, people are less rusted on, they are less committed to the party of their fathers and mothers. They are less likely, if they're living in one particularly suburb to vote one way or another. So much of what used to be predictable and constant about Australian politics 20 or 30 years ago has now changed.
Now that of course represents an enormous challenge, but it also represents, and presents great opportunities for us. And it's very important to bear in mind that just as there is a negative perception about the Government at present, that that is the product of the volatile circumstances in which we live, just as that has come rather suddenly, it is something that in the right circumstances can also change very significantly.
There were two very big reversals for the Liberal Party in Western Australia and in Queensland. And we have to be frank about that. I believe that in each case they were due overwhelmingly to state political factors, but that doesn't blind me to the fact that there are a number of areas on the federal scene that people are concerned about. I believe that there is a widespread recognition in the community, that this Government inherited a very challenging economic environment in 1996, that we worked very hard to reduce the budget deficit, that we got strongly into surplus, that the Government led this country through the Asian economic downturn, and contrary to the predictions of so many, we were able to stare that economic downturn down and emerge stronger and better than just about anybody expected. There is also a widespread view in the community that this Government has had the courage to tackle long term economic reform. For a generation people have known on both sides of politics that this country needed a new tax system. This Government has delivered it. For generations people have known that we've needed to change our industrial relations system, and this Government has delivered it. We would have liked to have delivered more but the Senate stopped us amending such things as the Unfair Dismissal Laws which are such a burden for small business. This Government has given Australia its lowest levels of interest rates for 30 years, the lowest levels of inflation for a generation. And has also presided over the generation of more than three-quarters of a million jobs. And we still have the lowest unemployment rates for many years. We inherited unemployment rates much higher than obtained today, and because of the strong growth that we've presided over we are able to look back over a four year period in which we have generated hundreds of thousands of additional jobs.
This country is now seen around the world as being a secure, stable, modern, sophisticated, tolerant, caring society. As Prime Minister I have the opportunity to talk to world leaders about their attitude towards our country. And I can report to you, particularly from the experience I had at the APEC leaders meeting in Brunei, held just after the Olympic Games, that the perception of this country is, built largely upon three things. Its economic strength, the moral and political leadership it displayed over East Timor, and the remarkable success of the Olympic Games. But those three things mean that Australia has rarely been more warmly regarded around the world than it is at the present time. Now I'm no so conceited as to suggest that all of those things are the singular product of what the Government has done. But I'm not going to be reluctant in saying that we have made a mighty contribution. And if as a measurement of the worth and the quality of a Government is what it does to a nation's sense of esteem and self respect, then there is a great deal that we can look back with with enormous pride over the last four years.
But despite that, because of the volatility in which we live, because of the clear sense of alienation that some within the community feel, a sense of being left behind, of left out, of not sharing the national prosperity, we face a very big political challenge for the remainder of the year. There's been a lot of debate in recent weeks about the rise of One Nation, there's been a lot of debate about rural and regional alienation. And it does exist, I've always thought that the attraction of minor parties has been essentially an expression, particularly in rural Australia, of a sense of dispossession and of having been left out. And the stronger you are generically speaking, the stronger the Australian economy is nationally, the greater sense that you're missing out on something is felt by those people who are not sharing that national wealth. And there is an obligation on us to understand it, there's an obligation on us not to be insensitive to people who are affected by and left behind by economic change. It's of no comfort to an impoverished bankrupt dairy farmer to turn on his television set, if he's still got one, and be told by somebody, from all the security of an academic view on business or economics, that globalisation if good for you. You have to do better than that, we all have to do better than that. And the great responsibility of Governments is to do their level best to explain the overall benefits of economic change and reform and also to recognise that there are victims of change and reform and that those victims have to identified and helped. The answer is to identify and help them, not to turn your back on change and reform. The reality is that in a globalised economy you can't turn your back on change and reform. It's going to happen anyway, and it's a question of whether you manage it in an intelligent fashion, in a sympathetic and compassionate fashion, or whether you pretend that you can stop it and stand by as it imposes itself in a far more indiscriminate ad-hoc fashion.
Part of the political challenge we face is understanding the impact of economic change, and helping people to adjust to it. It is clearly not to turn our faces against change. It is easy when you are a minor party to peddle false notions, it is easy to appeal to prejudices, it is easy to identify and point to scape-goats, it's very easy to say that if only you said no to change, everything would be in order.
Let me give you one example of the point I make, there has been a lot of discussion in the media about deregulation of the dairy industry. The reality is that the deregulation plan that was developed by the Federal Government, in consultation by with the State Governments, was requested by of the Federal Government by the dairy industry itself. And the reason it was requested of the Federal Government by the dairy industry was that the dairy producers of Victoria had decided that they were literally going to smash through the regulated dairy industries in New South Wales and Queensland. And as a first year student of constitutional law will know, and I'm sure that most people in business and Government in Australia would know, that one of the corner stones of the federation is the absolute guarantee of free trade and commerce between the states. In other words, if the Victorian dairy farmers had have decided that they were going to sell through the regulated systems of the other states, there was no legal way in which that could be prevented. To put it another way, deregulation was going to happen whether the dairy industry of Queensland or New South Wales wanted it or not. And that is why the dairy industry all around Australia came to us and said deregulation is going to happen, we don't want it to be chaotic, we want you to put in place a transition plan, we want you to put in place a support scheme funded by a consumer levy over a period of years so that you can support those people who by restructuring can stay in the industry and provide some financial assistance to those people who will be forced out of the industry.
Now that is the reality of what has obtained in relation to the dairy industry, yet minor parties, One Nation and others come along and say well the answer is to stop deregulation. The answer to that answer is that deregulation was going to occur whether the dairy farmers in New South Wales or Queensland wanted it, not because of what the federal government had decided but because of what their fellow dairy producers in Victoria had followed.
Now I've spent a moment or two detailing that particular example as an illustration of the sort of challenge intelligent contributors to the political scene in Australia have over the months and indeed the years ahead. It's not easy, but equally the way out is not to abandon those things that are based on commonsense or to abandon those things which are based on a sense of economic responsibility and economic thought.
In the end political contests do involve a choice. Kerry was right when she said that in the end the next election was going to be based on a choice between us and a choice between the Australian Labor Party. There'll only be one government after the next federal election, it's either a Labor government led by Mr Beazley or a Coalition government led by me. And as we go through the months ahead our responsibility as Liberals is to try and sharpen that choice. To remind the Australian electorate that it will be a choice between what we have achieved and delivered with all our faults and mistakes and what the alternative offers. We'll have an obligation to remind the Australian people that the last time Mr Beazley was a senior minister in five years his government ran up $80-90 billion of federal government debt. And that we've now paid off $50 billion of that $80-90 billion despite the strenuous opposition of the Labor Party at almost every turn. It will be our responsibility to remind the Australian people that the last time Labor was in office interest rates were 17%, farmers were paying bill rates of 19% and 20%. It will be our obligation to remind them that unemployment reached 11.2% when Mr Beazley was the minister for employment. It will be our obligation to remind the Australian people that if a Labor government is elected all of the industrial relation reforms of recent years will be wound back. The power of the trade union movement which now attracts the loyalty of only 25% of the Australian workforce will once again be restored to the centre stage so far as the government of Australia is concerned.
So in the end my friends politics is about choice. It's about defining what the alternatives are and that will be our responsibility and our commitment in the months between now and when the election is held. I have been asked on a number of occasions over the last few weeks in the numerous interviews I've done what my response on this or that issue is going to be. And I can't for a variety of reasons detail what all of those may be, but let me make one or two things very clear in general terms, all governments need to have a degree of flexibility. Any prime minister who pretends that he never gets messages from the electorate is doomed to early defeat and that is not a prospect that encourages me one bit. I think that this government I lead has done very fine things for Australia and I've every intention of doing everything I can to ensure that it is re-elected. But in responding to the messages that the electorate sends me and sends the members of my government, it's my responsibility to face reality and to tell the truth. There are some things I can't change - no prime minister of Australia can reverse the effect on rural communities of the longterm decline in commodity prices. Anybody who stands up and says that you can stop the process of globalisation is not telling the truth. Any prime minister who believes that you can ignore completely the sentiment of financial markets in the shaping of domestic economic policies is deluding himself.
And I want to make it very clear that in the flexible responses that the government will inevitably provide, the way in which we respond to the expressions of concern, we do not intend to abandon in any way our commitment for responsible economic policy. I have intention of seeing the Budget of this country go back into deficit. I have no intention of squandering the economic gains that this country has made over the last four or five years. But I do have every intention of listening to proper expressions of concern about the detailed implementation of some of our policy changes. The Treasurer will probably in the next day or so, be announcing our detailed response to the concerns that have been expressed to us about the Business Activity Statement and some of the other documents that are involved in compliance with the goods and services tax. What he will announce will be the result of a long process of consultation with representatives of the business community. I acknowledge that there were some mistakes made in relation to that form. It was, particularly the IAS, needlessly complicated and we've taken that message on board and we're doing something about it and it's my confident expectation that what the Treasurer announces within the next little while will in fact meet the very legitimate concerns that have been expressed to us.
I'm very conscious of the pain and sense of dislocation felt by many people in our rural communities. That is why we introduced in the last Budget a programme worth $500 million over a number of years to put more doctors back into rural areas. It's why we decided at the end of last year to spend $1.6 billion on national road funding to go to local government. It is why we're opening in rural areas regional transaction centres to bring some basic services back to rural communities. And it is why we're so committed because low interest rates are so important to farmers and small businesses in regional communities, it is why we remain very strongly committed to those economic policies that are likely to maintain and deliver low interest rates.
I've endeavoured today my friends, to paint the scene as I see it. We had a great win in 1996, we took a bold policy to the 1998 election and were re-elected and against all expectations we've implemented that policy in a remarkably smooth and effective fashion. And now on the eve of the fifth anniversary of our election, we do face a very significant political challenge. But the first solution to, or the first way of effectively responding to a challenge is to recognise that it exists, to remind people of the context in which it has occurred, to remind people of the extraordinary capacity of the electorate to change its mind very rapidly. And I venture to suggest if we'd had this months and five weeks ago it wouldn't have been against the background of the political commentary that has occurred over the past couple of weeks and that drives home my friends the opportunities of that very volatility of the Australian electorate presents to us. I have no doubt that if we can effectively present the choice that I outlined a few moments ago that we'll win the next election but I do not underestimate the challenge that lies in front of us. We are living with an electorate which is less rusted on in its political beliefs and that volatility is something that all of us have to understand.
I'm very grateful for the support that all of you have provided. It's very important because the strength that the grassroots of a political organisation provides to its parliamentary leadership is enormously important. We have achieved together an enormous amount over the last five years. There isn't any serious commentator in political affairs in Australia who doesn't acknowledge the very good job that the government has done in strengthening the Australian economy and the contribution it has made in so many areas of Australian life. I have a very strong Cabinet, the reshuffle carried out before Christmas has promoted a number of people and achieved a number of portfolio changes that have given the Cabinet a sharper focus. And in doing that I want to acknowledge the contribution that the three retiring ministers, John Moore, Jocelyn Newman and John Herron have made to the government over the last five years.
Yes it is true that we are under attack at the present time, it is true that we are being very heavily criticised, but it is also true that when the mist of that criticism clears there is that stark choice of which I spoke. We face a policy lazy opposition that seeks to surf into office on the basis of a combination of populist sentiment and the inevitable criticism that any government that has been in power for a number of years attracts. That is not a recipe for building a stronger Australia. In the end political parties do good things for their country if they believe in certain principles and they have certain policies. Our political opponents are the most policy bereft opposition I have seen in the twenty-seven years that I have been in government. The Hayden opposition between 1977 and 1982 had more policy guts and more policy commitment than the present opposition has displayed. And for that reason and for many others we owe it to ourselves to ensure that we inject as much energy and enthusiasm and commitment as we can into the campaign that lies in front of us. I feel a great sense of responsibility to make certain that that choice is effectively communicated. I will do that, my colleagues will do it, we will need your help, we will need your advocacy in the workplace and we will need your financial help, we will need your understanding as supporters of the party. If we can do that I have no doubt that we will be successful and we can be given the opportunity of working again after the next election for the good of the Australian people.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Helen.  To Robert Cotton, the Australian High Commissioner to New Zealand, and Simon Murdoch, New Zealand High Commissioner to Australia, ladies and gentlemen. 
Janette and I are truly delighted to be again in New Zealand to continue a pattern of regular bilateral visits established with one of Helen's predecessors when I became Prime Minister in March of 1996.  There are no two countries in the world that are closer historically, culturally, and economically than Australia and New Zealand. It's a relationship that has substance and durability beyond the political complexion of governments in power in Canberra and Wellington.  And can I say that I have found in working with Helen the relationship to be close and cordial and very effective in the long-term interests of relations between our two societies.
The economic association is extremely close and your Prime Minister has outlined some of the dimensions of it.  And it's worth adding that CER has been one of the great examples of a bilateral trading relationship working to the benefit of both of our societies.  We do have a number of economic challenges in common.  
We are societies that are expected to maintain and deliver to our populations continued high living standards.  We are societies that believe in a decent social security safety net.  We are societies that believe in low unemployment.  And we are societies that will only thrive and prosper in the future if we have a very strong business sector.  
For Australia's part over the last few years we have undertaken a series of major economic reforms which have been designed to make our economy more competitive.  You beat us to the gun by something like ten years in introducing a broad-based indirect tax system.  And you of course don't have an upper house, we do.  And that of course involved some changes to what was originally planned.  But we now have well and truly bedded down a new taxation system.  There's been some fine-tuning in relation to some of the administrative requirements but over all taxation reform has worked remarkably well. 
We've also enjoyed significant productivity gains as a result of the industrial relations changes that have been made in Australia particularly during the first two years of my government being in office.  The economic outlook in Australia, which is important to New Zealand as it is to Australia, remains quite robust despite the fact that we will inevitably be effected in some way by the slower levels of economic growth that are emerging out of the United States.  But despite that the advice we currently have from both our Treasury and our Reserve Bank indicate that over the next year the rate of growth, although slower than what it was over the last two years, will still be in the order of 3.5% or more.  Now that represents by historic standards a very strong level of economic growth. 
And I want to thank the business men and women of New Zealand for the contribution that they have made to the economic associations between our two countries.  There are numerous examples of the intermixed and intermingled economic and financial commitments of corporations from our two countries. And on a daily basis I find myself meeting business men and women in Australia either from New Zealand or associated with companies that operate in New Zealand or have their origins in your country.  
It's a very strong and robust economic relationship.  It is a demonstration to other countries that open more liberal trading policies always work for the benefit of societies and always add value to the living standards of communities.  We in Australia face a constant challenge to explain and communicate effectively the benefits of economic change.  We live in a world where globalisation is unavoidable.  There is no option of saying to the world stop I want to get off.  We are all, whether we may like it or not, part of a global economy which means that those who survive and do well are those that can harness the advantage of the globalisation whilst reassuring those within our society who are adversely affected by the process of globalisation and where necessary providing those people so affected with a degree of support and a degree of understanding.
In any democracy there's a constant challenge to explain and defend and communicate the benefits of change and reform.  That is a challenge for New Zealanders as it is a challenge for Australia, and particularly it is a challenge for the business communities of our two societies.  And I know it is a challenge that the leadership of the business community here in New Zealand will certainly respond to as it always has in the past.
Janette and I look forward very much to the next two days that we will spend in your beautiful country and I hope in this brief visit to make a further contribution to a close relationship built on history, a deep emotional commitment, a shared strategic future, and very much a shared economic destiny.  Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: Australia-New Zealand relations; death of Sir Donald Bradman.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Prime Minister, Professor Peter Davis, Jenny Shipley the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Speaker, ministerial members from New Zealand, ladies and gentlemen. It is, for me, and for Janette, a particular pleasure to be back in New Zealand again. This is the third of my bilateral visits to New Zealand in the time I';ve been Prime Minister, and added to that was the very crucial meeting of APEC in New Zealand at the end of 1999.
I do, as both the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition said, attach particular significance to our relationship. I said last night at our High Commissioner';s residence, that amongst the more memorable experiences I had last year as Prime Minister was to join your Prime Minister on Gallipoli on the 25th of April on ANZAC Day to take part in the ANZAC commemoration, and to dedicate a new memorial. And the most astonishing thing about that experience for me was to move amongst some 12,000 - 15,000 young Australians and New Zealanders who were making what was visibly a pilgrimage to that very special place in the world that means more to us, our two peoples, than any other place on earth. And therefore it is a very important thing to honour in association, not only in symbolic and emotional ways, as we did by going together to Gallipoli, but it';s also important to honour it in a practical ongoing sense. The history of a relationship is very important, the sentiment and the emotions of a relationship are very important, but so is the modern day flesh and blood of it. You need both. You need the history and the emotions but you also need the common sense, coincidence of interests.
And in my discussions with Helen Clark over the last two days, as was the case in my discussions with Jenny Shipley and Jim Bolger before her, we';ve concentrated on the modern day reality. It';s a modern sophisticated relationship built on common needs, common values and common interests. The economic relationship now is deepening by the month. The new social security arrangement is a win-win for both of our countries. We have dealt in a common sense fashion with a problem that had to be addressed. And I';m sure that it will be seen by the people of our two societies as the most practical and sensible way of dealing with a challenging issue. 
I want to take the opportunity, in the presence of this gathering, of recording my immense gratitude on behalf of the Australian people and the Australian Defence Force, of the contribution made by New Zealand to our deployment in East Timor. It made a very heavy call on your armed forces, and it was a very considerable commitment for a country of your size. And I want you to know that it is deeply and continually appreciated in Australia. And I can';t speak too warmly of the positive and approving way in which General Cosgrove, and others who served with him, spoke of having the New Zealanders by their side from the very beginning of the deployment.
We have a lot in common. We';ve shared a lot of history, we';ve shared a lot of contests, sporting and otherwise, and will do a lot more of those into the future. Can I in that context express my thanks for the words of condolence that were conveyed by both your Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition concerning the death of Sir Donald Bradman last night. In many ways he was the most remarkable figure that Australia has produced in the last 100 years, he had an impact on our country that is difficult to properly calculate, not just his sporting prowess but what he meant to our society at a time of despair and economic suffering during the years of the depression. And I do express on behalf of the Australian people and the Australian Government your very kind acknowledgment.
Thank you again for having both of us. We know many New Zealanders, both here and in Australia. We hope that in the years ahead, whoever has the responsibility of occupying various political positions in our two societies, that the relationship will continue to grow and continue to deepen. In the end it is driven by, not only ties of history and sacrifice in war and harmony in peace, but it';s also driven by shared values and shared commitment to democracy, decency, tolerance and openness. They';ve always been hallmarks of our two societies and may it long be the case into the future. 
And I, as Prime Minister of Australia, invite you to join me in again honouring a very important toast, and that is a toast to the friendship between the people of Australia and the people of New Zealand.
   [ends] 


Subjects: Bob Tucker; Ryan by-election; tough on drugs; five-year anniversary of election of Howard Government; Policy lazy opposition.
E&amp;OE................................ 
Well thank you very much Bob, to Greer and the other members, all generations of the Tucker family, Con Galtos, Shane Stone, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
Bob was right when he said this by-election is primarily about what kind of person you want to represent the electorate of the Ryan in the national parliament. He was also right when he said it was going to be a tough fight. By-elections are always unpredictable and it's important that none of us take this by-election for granted. Bob is not taking it for granted, he's out there doorknocking, he's drawing on his vast experience as a long time president of the area and participant in the affairs of the electorate of Ryan. He brings to his candidacy a number of great strengths. The first and most important thing he brings is that he understands the people of this electorate. He is no blow in, he's somebody who knows what type of communities make up the electorate of Ryan. 
He also brings an understanding of, may I put it this way, the ethos of a large part of Brisbane, and a large part of Queensland. And that is the idea that you go out there and start building something and by the sweat of your brow and your commitment you make something of your life, you accumulate a business, you gather around you a family and you gather around you a successful enterprise. I mean if the Liberal Party means anything it means creating an environment where people can start with nothing and build a business and make a success of their lives.
Australia, Queensland, areas of Australia like Ryan have been built by small entrepreneurial efforts. The are the heart and soul of what our community, in the end, is very much about. And Bob epitomises that, his local involvement and commitment, his family commitment, his business and his business success. You need people in parliament who can articulate what you believe in, and you need people in parliament who stand for what you believe in. And that is the quality that Bob brings as the Liberal candidate for the seat of Ryan.
By coincidence today is the 5th anniversary of the defeat of the Keating Government. Give or take a few days, it's five years since I became Prime Minister. And it's also five years since Kim Beazley became Opposition Leader. And it is important, at a five year period, to reflect on what has happened and who's done what and who's achieved what over that five year period, because in public life it's not only people in Government who have responsibilities, people in Opposition have responsibilities as well. The notion that an Opposition does nothing and sits there and waits for the Government to fall over has always been wrong. And I look back over the last five years, I look at the fact that we have put almost 800,000 more Australians in work, I look back at the fact that when we came into Government the accumulated Federal Government debt of this nation was almost $90 billion. $90 billion, and it has been run up five successive deficit budgets presided over by the Finance Minister in the Keating Government, who was Mr Beazley. And in the five years that I have been Prime Minister we have reduced that Federal Government debt by $50 billion. And that's not an economics statistic, what's been delivered is lower interest rates. 
If there's one thing I will forever associate with Labor Government's in this country, if there's one thing every small businessman and every farmer in Australia should forever associate with Labor in this country is high interest rates. You remember the days when they went, the bill rate went to over 22% and 23%, when it was normal to borrow at 17 or 18% if you were lucky. That was what Labor delivered, that was the hallmark of economic management in the Keating, Beazley years. 
But we've not only reduced our debt, we've not only delivered lower interest rates, but we've also delivered very strong levels of economic growth, last year probably the best in the industrialised world. We've reformed the industrial relations system, we've reformed the taxation system, we've resuscitated from its death bed private health insurance. Private health insurance was on the way out until this government introduced tax incentives that have drawn people back into private health insurance. They may have said that they will keep it for the purposes of the election but fundamentally the Labor Party hates private health provision. They believe in a government monopoly in this area and they could never be trusted to keep the private health insurance tax rebate intact if they ever won federal government.
So ladies and gentlemen over that five-year period we have done many things. We have not been reluctant to change and reform where it's been necessary. We could have taken the easy lazy option of absolutely sitting there and doing nothing. I made a number of promises to myself when I became Prime Minister. One of them was that I would not lose the opportunity that office gives you to actually make a difference. There is nothing to be gained by sitting in the office and thinking isn't nice to be Prime Minister. The only way that you can make a difference is to address the challenges and the problems of our society. 
And we haven't restricted our initiatives to economic ones. We are not just a government concerned about economic conditions. We are also a government that believes in a society where you have the right balance between care and compassion on the one hand and self-reliance on the other. 
I've just come from the Brigidene College where I've launched an initiative that's part of our Tough on Drugs Strategy which is designed to educate the young people of this area about the danger of starting drug taking in the first place. I'm not one of those who believes that you've got to some how or other encourage young people how to safely experiment with drugs. I'm a person who believes they should be persuaded by every appropriate means not to commence drug taking in the first instance.
There's nothing soft about our approach to drugs. We also recognise, and this is why we've committed $500 million over the last two years over and above funding commitments at earlier levels, to helping the state governments in the campaign against drugs you've got to tackle it through education, you've got to tackle it through law enforcement, and you've also got to tackle it through rehabilitation. And slowly we are starting to have some wins. We're starting to see some evidence in some of the states of a fall in the number of deaths from heroin use. But it's a long tough campaign, but it's a campaign that is vital to the future of our children and for future generations.
We're also a government that has been strongly committed to the concept of choice in education. I went to a state government school in Sydney and I'm very proud of the education that I received from the New South Wales education system, and I exercised my choice as a parent to send my children to both state government and also independent schools. I believe that choice should be available to every parent in Australia. I believe in choice. I believe in a system of education that has first class government schools and first class independent schools. And one of the things that we have done is to give choice to low income people to send their children to non-government schools if that is their wish. It's all part of our philosophy of choice. Political parties have got to believe in things as well as governing well, and one of the things we believe in. It's reflected in relation to health insurance, it's reflected in relation to education. We believe in the notion of individual choice, particularly parental choice.
We're also a government that is very proud of how we've made our community safer. I'll always be proud of the role we played in bringing in national gun control law almost five years ago. But I'm also very proud of the role that Australia has played in the world over the last five years. This country is more widely respected, is seen as having a more confident stance, and is seen as being economically less vulnerable than probably at any time over the last 25 years. And the policies of this government have played a major role in that.
Now ladies and gentlemen, as you look back over the last five years on the eve of this Ryan by-election you look at what we have done. We have made our mistakes, but I referred to one of them yesterday. Prime Ministers and political leaders should never confuse strength with stubbornness. Occasionally, occasionally we get it wrong, and when we do we ought to fix it and acknowledge it and move on with the business of government. But over the last five years the balance sheet is one of very great achievement and it is a balance sheet of hard working people. It is a record of achievement.
But as it's a by-election, and in by-elections you're meant to choose. Let's have a look at the other side. It's now five years since they went into Opposition. I said on radio this morning in comparing the present Opposition Leader with a former Opposition Leader Gough Whitlam, who incidentally was the worst Prime Minister Australia has had in the last 40 years. But paradoxically enough he wasn't a bad Opposition Leader. He actually did something. He actually became Opposition Leader early in 1967, and five years later he'd actually tackled the problems of his party. He tackled the weakness of many of the state branches. He developed an alternative program and people actually knew what the Labor Opposition stood for, much and all as they detested it they knew what it stood for at the beginning of 1972 and so did most of you who were around then. 
But I don't know what this Opposition stands for except they're against us. I know that. And every time there's a problem for us, and every government has problems, they're in there having a go. Now that's fine if you've also got an alternative vision and you've got an alternative philosophy. But this is the most policy lazy Opposition that this country has had. And when you come to by-elections you do have to make a choice. I mean if people give policy laziness the tick they'll only encourage them to continue it. If people think oh well I'll vote Labor as a protest, what are you protesting against? You're voting in favour of an approach which says we can take the Australian public for granted. We don't believe in that. I've never taken the Australian people for granted. Bob Tucker is not taking the people of Ryan for granted. He's not saying oh I've got a 9% .(inaudible). from the last election. I'll just sort of, you know, put out a pamphlet and write 'em a letter and man the polling booths. He's out there with his coat off from day one working hard because he doesn't take the people of Ryan for granted. But my political opponent is taking the Australian people for granted. The normal ebb and flow of the difficulty that any Government has particular (inaudible) a reforming government is going to put the Lodge in his lap. He was on television a few weeks ago saying "Look I expect to be in the Lodge in a year's time". Well I was asked the same question and I said "I don't know. I don't know whether I'll be in the Lodge in a year's time or not. That's a matter for you to decide, for the Australian people to decide, and I'll never take it for granted". There's a sense of complacency developing already but after five years you'd think we'd have an idea of what they believe in and what they stand for but we don't.
So my friends, 27 years of politics has taught me to always expect something unexpected, it's never a dull game, something comes out of a clear blue sky. It's interesting, it's the best game in town in terms of personal fascination of interest but the most important thing that we have to understand as Liberals is that what matters in the end is how we serve the Australian people. And you serve the Australian people through a combination of what I might call the two L's, Leadership and Listening. On some occasions where you have to say 'I stand here and irrespective of what you say I'm unmoveable because this is what is right for my country' there are other occasions where you must be willing to listen and you must be willing to demonstrate some flexibility. A flexibility that is always consistent with the long-term national interest of this country.
That is the philosophy and the approach that I have tried to bring in the five years that I have been Prime Minister. It's important that the people of Ryan in choosing who to vote for. There's only effectively two alternatives, the Liberal Candidate, Bob Tucker and the ALP candidate. It's important that they reflect upon the sort of choice that I've outlined over the last few minutes. Warts and all we've tried to do the right thing for Australia, we've been active, we've tackled the problems, we've not been frightened to take some very big and difficult decisions. And we may in the process have upset some people but we've had a go and we've been in there fighting for what we think is right for the country. By contrast, we have a group of people on the other side who think politics is all about cheap opportunism and waiting for the inevitable adversities of politics of incumbent Governments to deliver you office. I don't think that's good enough. I ask the people of Ryan on the 17th of March to decide if it's not good enough either.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: tough on drugs; Don Bradman; George W Bush; education system; teaching.
E&amp;OE................................ 
Thank you very much Mrs Sayer and to the students of Brigidene College, the students of the other schools that are associated with this gathering today, to the teachers and parents of the college and other visitors. May I thank the school for the courtesy it has extended to me in allowing me to visit it and to launch another initiative to be funded out of the Federal Government's Tough on Drugs strategy which is combining elements of education, law enforcement and rehabilitation services to tackle the problems of drugs.
And before I come to the details of the local programme that I am announcing today, can I take this opportunity at Brigidene College of saying again how very strongly the Federal Government supports the Catholic systemic education system all around Australia. Freedom of parental choice in education has been a fundamental philosophical belief of my Government and the party I lead for many years. We believe that parents have the right to choose the kind of education their children should receive and I have long admired the commitment of Catholic parents around Australia to maintain a strong, independent system of their own based on the values that they hold dear and they believe are important to the education of their children. For many years they received no government help but that of course ended in the 1960s and now their schools are supported, particularly by the Federal Government and our recent funding decisions guarantee years into the future the financial security of the Catholic systemic system. And indeed the financial capacity of parents to choose other independent schools if they want for the education of their children and we do that side by side with strong support, beside State governments for the maintenance of a strong state government school system.
Can I say to all of you that it has not been possible, as an Australian, over the past week, to be other than quite moved and overwhelmed by the reaction of our people to the death of Sir Donald Bradman. Indeed, the other day I had a brief telephone conversation with President Bush who rang to discuss a number of issues. And the first part of our conversation was taken up with a reference to Sir Donald's death and I indicated to him, a baseball fan, that on a proper comparison I understand that if you use baseball language, Sir Donald would have had a batting average of five hundred plus. And when you bear in mind that Joe Di Maggio and Babe Ruth were in the four hundred plus area he was fairly impressed and so he might have been. But the honour paid to the memory of Don Bradman is not just for his sporting prowess but as your principal said, it is an honour paid for the sort of values he stood for and the kind of contemporary society that Australia has become but also preserving its traditional strengths and its traditional values.
Today, ladies and gentlemen, I am announcing funding of $80,000 for the Brisbane West Youth Partnership Programme and this partnership is designed to work to prevent the use of illicit drugs. And the partnership brings together not only Brigidene College but Brisbane Boys College, Kenmore High, Indooroopilly High, Drug Arm and some other local community agencies. And this is an extension of an initiative based at Indooroopilly High where Drug Arm focuses on crime prevention strategies for young people after school. It also builds upon successful programmes by Drug Arm at the Bundamba State High School in Ipswich last year. It is very worthwhile that this partnership will involve students from the state, the independent and systemic schools as well as other young people who are not at school. The project will provide training for peer leaders and adult mentors and implement a community youth forum in western Brisbane. A project committee to oversee the partnership will include representatives from the project partners, the Queensland drug courts, the Queensland Police, local businesses and others including representatives from local action teams to be formed.
This is a part of a $500 million programme that the Federal Government launched more than two years ago to provide extra support for the campaign against illicit drug taking around Australia. I am very pleased to say that it is a programme where the Federal Government has been able to work in very close partnership with State governments of both political persuasions because tackling the drug problem is something above and beyond party politics and we have also been able to work very effectively with community organisations.
The Tough on Drugs strategy is not just focus on crime prevention, important though that is. It is also focussed equally on education. On explaining in a sensible direct understandable fashion how unwise it is to commence experimentation with drugs in the first place and how to use that old expression but still very relevant expression that prevention is better than cure. And therefore an important part of everything we do is education. And another very important part of it is to provide rehabilitation services. One of the gaps in tackling drugs around Australia that is evident all around the country is that rehabilitation services have not been adequate. But there is nothing more sad for me to be on a talkback radio programme and a mother to ring up and say my child wants to kick the habit but I can't find anywhere that is going to give her the support and the attention and the care that will enable her to do so. And therefore we have to as both Federal and state governments to provide more facilities to help young people, indeed any people who have a drug problem that they want to get rid of to receive rehabilitation and help. So we are tackling it in three ways. We are tackling it at an education level, we are tackling it at a crime prevention level and we are tackling it at a rehabilitation level. 
Now it is fashionable for some people to say that it's a waste of effort, the fight has been lost, that we should give up. That we should accept that there is no way you can reduce the incidence of drug taking or reduce the ravaging impact of drug taking on the lives of some many people. That is not a view I hold and I don't think it is a view that most Australians hold. And there are now some tentative signs, they are tentative, and we still have a long way to go that some of the initiatives of both state and federal governments over the last few years are beginning to win some gains. 
We're starting to see some evidence, particularly in New South Wales, of a reduction in death through heroin use. We're starting to see through the more successful campaign of drug seizures by the Federal Police working in cooperation with the state police we're starting to see some impact on the availability. It's a long and tough campaign but it's a very crucial one. And the important part of it is to educate, particularly young people, but all people, about the long term devastating effect of drug abuse. There used to be a view that marijuana could be used with no effect no matter what the length of use was. That is now a proposition that is heavily disputed by all sorts of evidence by people in the medical profession. The reality is that the use of illicit drugs has damaging social, physical and psychological effects no matter what the circumstances may be.
Tough on Drugs and the campaign that I've announced in this part of Brisbane today, which brings together community leaders and schools and those who understand the problem better than most. It is an initiative designed at a local level to display and advocate cause but not to mention drug taking in the first instance. And I am very pleased to announce this initiative today. I want to thank Drug Arm which has had a conspicuous success here in the state of Queensland in the campaign against drugs. And to say once again this is a partnership between the government, schools and the local community. And it is only through bringing all of those together that we can have a hope over time of not only bringing the drug menace under control, but gradually eliminating it.
Can I finally address one or two remarks the students who are here today particularly those from Brigidene College and elsewhere who have entered their last year of school. The last year of school is always the most challenging one because it is the one that more than any other to chase your opportunities in life. You're entering a world that is very different from the world that I entered when I left Canterbury Boys High School in the suburbs of Sydney in 1956. It was a very different world then. Some aspects of it were more secure than today, but other aspects of it were less exciting than the prospects that lie in front of you as you leave school today. 
You are really at a time and in an era when the opportunities are far less limited than what they were in the 1950s. The benefits and the horizons opened up by information technology, that the reality of living in a country which is about as stable and cohesive and tolerant and open as any that you can find in the world, and whose lifestyle is so attractive that it is the preferred place of residence of an increasing number of people from all around the world, presents you with enormous opportunity.
It is more competitive to get into a university now than what it was in the 1950s, yet the range of courses offered is much greater than was the case then. And the job opportunities are much greater. I can only say to all of you that the best piece of advice I would ever give to final year students at any school anywhere in Australia be it a Catholic school, another independent school or a government school, is always retain a positive view on life. I've found that in relation to people you always find something positive about everybody you interact with and I say that even after 27 years in political life there's always something positive in people you interact with. And that if you find your relationship with your fellow students, your teachers, your family, your friends, if you seek the opportunity of looking for what is positive in that person you'll have a far fuller and a far happier life. 
Of all the happy fulfilled people I've met in life have been the people who've looked for the positive side in their fellow man. People who I've found most miserable are those who essentially adopt a negative view of those with whom they interact. Now I know that's a wonderful piece of advice for all of you. I know that people will be marvellously impressed that I've given it and they would think it might make a contribution to relations between the teaching staff and the students.
Can I also say to the teachers that teaching is a very noble profession. And I know on occasions all of us when we've been through school wonder about that proposition I think the longer you are on this earth the more you appreciate the contribution that teachers make to the shaping of your life. And I look back on my years at school now with even greater appreciation of the contribution that teachers made. I honour the contribution they make to Australian society. I thank the principal and the students and the staff of Brigidene College for paying me the courtesy of letting me come here this morning. I wish all of you who are finishing exams at the end of this year the very best of reports. I hope you get the results you work for, I hope you get the tertiary opportunities that you seek, and I hope you have happiness and success in life that I know all of you want. Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Women in parliament; marginal seats; childcare; new tax system; education; 5th anniversary of Coalition Government; gun laws
E&amp;OE................................ 
Well thankyou very much Deidre. To all of my parliamentary colleague's, particularly can I welcome a former parliamentary colleague Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, ladies and gentlemen. It is important at the beginning of what is going to be a very crucial year politically for the Liberal Party throughout Australia, it is important that the Federal Women's Committee should have decided to organise this seminar. And I wanted to share a few thoughts with you, not exclusively about the roles and responsibilities of women within the Liberal Party, but also as well as touching on some of those things about the nature of the political challenges and opportunities that present us at the present time.
The first and most obvious thing to mention as all of you know that the Liberal Party over the years has prided itself on the principle of equality of opportunity within its own ranks, within its organisation. And increasingly over recent years without the compulsion of a quota or anything approaching that, the Liberal Party has seen a very significant increase in the number of women entering Parliament. That of course has been a reflection of the changing character of Australian society. It's a change that has occurred in most cases comfortably and in a very supportive and welcoming environment. There still remain in my view too few opportunities for women in sections of the Party so far as parliamentary representation is concerned. And that is something which will over a period of time be cured, some of you will find the pace at which it is cured too slow, others will find it about right. The important thing of course about the Liberal Party has always been that we hold very dear two important considerations. One of those is the principle of choice and the other of those is the merit principle. And in many ways so many of the attitudes the Liberal Party takes towards policies that effect both men and women are based upon those two considerations. It probably hasn't escaped the notice of this group that at it's very formation in some parts of Australia the Liberal Party mandated equality of opportunity and equality of responsibilities for both men and women. I think it varies around the divisions. And if you go around Australia if my understanding of constitutions still serves me correctly, the Victorian Division more precisely requires an equality of opportunity than some of the other divisions. Although increasingly we find as constitutions are remade the requirement that a certain number of positions be occupied by women. Federally of course the Liberal Party saw 1996 as the high watermark of female representation - as far as numbers are concerned - within the Federal Parliament. We had a very large number of the new members who flooded in in 1996 were women. And I'm very pleased to say, and I'm very conscious as I speak in the Federal Electorate of Hughes, of some of the quite outstanding individual performances in marginal seats in 1998. And indeed I say without any fear of contradiction that the difference between us winning and losing in 1998 was the capacity of our female members to hang on to marginal seats. That is not to say of course for a moment that we don't have some good blokes in marginal seats. And it's not to say incidentally that marginal seats are only for women. I thought I'd get a few head nods on that. We don't have any 5% rules in the Liberal Party and as you know driving around Australia the increasing numbers are examples of women holding, winning pre-selections for, and holding what are traditionally regarded as safe seats. So we have progressed a very long way and what I'm pleased to say about the representation of women in the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party is that they represent all the experiences of women in life. They represent women whose lifes experience in many of its years of being in a caring family role combined with careers. Represented women who've come into Parliament a younger age than some others. Women who've had a very early and long association with the Party and who are very preoccupied with and fully committed to the long term philosophic interests of the Party in a very special and focused way. In other words the women who've come in to our Parliament in the Liberal interest that represent increasingly the broad spectrum of women within the community. And that of course is how it ought to be. And it's how we have tried to apply politics in a time that we've been in Government.
Now as you know I'm not the regarded as the most politically correct Prime Minister that Australia has had and. as a result I've not been somebody who'd been very fixated on what I might call doctrinaire anti-discrimination. Just as I am interested in practical reconciliation, so it is that I am interested in providing practical freedom and equality of opportunity for all sections of our society. And to me life under the Liberal Party is very much about offering people, particularly women in our community, two very important things. It's about offering respect and it's about offering them choice. It's about understanding that men and women share many things in common. It's also about fully recognising that there are some things that women do better than men in our community and women have special skill at doing. The same thing can equally apply in relation to men. It think it's silly of us to pretend that life is anything else but that. The important thing is not to be hidebound by some stereotype as to what peoples roles are. Just as many of you would have found it unacceptable 30 years ago that when you heard the overworked expression that a woman's role is this or that. Just as so many of you would have found that unacceptable, equally women have a right to find it as unacceptable women who choose not to have either a full time or a part time career in the paid workforce, those women have every right to resent any depiction of them as having a second class existence. In other words what we have tried to do is to maximise the choices available. It is not for me to say that a family should organise its childcare responsibilities in a particular way, it is my responsibility as Prime Minister to try and generate policies that give the women of Australia the maximum choices in relation to the care of their young children. And one of the things that I'm particularly pleased about is that the impact of the new taxation system has been to significantly reduce the aggregate cost of childcare within Australia and also to provide far greater opportunities. And we get criticised as a Government over a lot of things, all Government's do. But I note with some satisfaction that over the last year of so the volume of complaints about the adequacy and the variety of childcare facilities in Australia has significantly declined. And it is because the new taxation arrangements have made those facilities more affordable for low and middle income families and they have also particularly in relation to after school day care expanded the opportunities. I'm also very pleased that the new taxation arrangements have given some additional support and incentive to those families that decide that when one or more of the children are particularly young one of the parents shall remain out of the paid workforce.
Most of those things are emblematic and also in a practical way make a contribution towards our commitment to providing people with the maximum freedom of choice. And that choice principle runs through another thing that is very important to Australian parents and that is the education that they choose for their children. I'm a very strong believer in freedom of choice in education. As the very satisfied product of a state government education system here in NSW let me say that I enjoyed the opportunity as a parent to choose to send our three children to Government schools at a primary level and to send them to independent schools at a secondary level. I'm not saying that that's the best choice, I'm saying that it was our choice. And what I'm also saying is that everybody in Australia as far as reasonably possible should have the same choice. And if you look at the policies that we've pursued in this area you'll find that the choice that's been opened up has been very considerable indeed.
This happens to be as you know, ladies and gentlemen, the by the day, if not by the date, the 5th Anniversary of the election of the Government in 1996. And I was saying earlier out at a gathering in Liverpool organised by Danna Vale that I had many happy recollections of that night. And I know that quite a number of you in this room, particularly those of you who were elected for the first time, had many happy recollections. And that includes at least three of four in this room who were elected for the first time. One of the really vivid recollections of that occasion of course was when the news came through that Danna had secured the seat of Hughes with a swing of something like 11 or 12%, one of the biggest anti-Labor swings that have been achieved in the country.
Over that past five-year period of course we've done a lot of things. And I believe our country is a better and a safer and a stronger country as a result. One of the things that I'm particularly proud of that we were able to do in that five year period were the changes that we brought in relation to uniform gun laws. And those changes have made Australia a safer country and although they caused some resentment amongst some of our traditional supporters they remain to me as one of the most important social achievements of this Government. Because providing a safer community in which to live, although it is more directly the responsibility of State Governments within our Federal system, maintaining a sense of safety and a sense of security is an enormously important thing for Governments to seek to achieve to do. And when I look back over the last five years and I think of some of the Government's achievements I do think very much of that particular achievement.
We do, as I said in my introductory remarks, we face a big challenge. We've had some big setbacks at State level, we face some challenges Federally. I don't underestimate the nature of the fight that lies ahead of us. I've always tried to be a political realist and I've always recognised that in politics that if you lose touch with reality then you cease to have long term usefulness to the Australian public. I believe that we have a good story to tell. I believe that our record of achievement over the last five years is a very strong one. And I believe that we have within us both the capacity, the people and also the policies to provide the most acceptable alternative when the election arrives at the end of the year.
Can I just say a few words specifically directed towards what is the purpose of this seminar. It is very heartening to me that this seminar should have been, first of all, organised on a national level. I think it is important that we share our experiences around Australia. It is true that there are different pressures and different demands and different challenges in the various States of Australia. But certainly from a national point of view there are a lot of common experiences to be understood and realised. We do live in a very different political environment now to what we lived in a quarter of a century ago. I've often said that we have fewer rusted on supporters of either side of politics. It was always the case when I first joined the Liberal Party and was working in election campaigns when Sir Robert Menzies was Prime Minister that I would come across people who would say 'gee I think the Liberal Party is making a mess of things but I could never bring myself to vote Labor'. And likewise I would come across people who would say 'well I can't abide what the Labor Party is doing but of course I'd rather die than vote Liberal'. That was a very common thing, and there is still plenty of people like that, I certainly hope there are people like that, but there are fewer of them, there are fewer of them and there are more people now who are inclined to switch their allegiance, there are fewer people who - particularly amongst the young - who regard voting for one or the other side of politics as utterly unacceptable. And that represents a very big challenge to all of us and it makes the process of campaigning more difficult. It also means that we have to be a more representative political party. I know it's an old cry from a party leader and somebody who came through the organisation but both sides of politics have to worry a lot about our shrinking membership base. Too much from both sides of politics we see a diminishing number of people arguing with great ferocity and intensity about control of that diminishing number rather than trying to expand our horizons. We have to find new and different ways of recruiting the interest and the commitment of people whose lives are busier and more complicated, and this particularly applies to women, than they were a generation ago. We have to challenge some of the assumptions about our meeting structures and times in the way that we mightn't have thought likely 20 or 30 years ago. We have to recognise that when political parties membership base becomes too narrow they cease to be representative. This is a challenge of course that our political opponents have, I mean you look around the Federal Senate, on the Labor Party side just about every person is a former trade union official or party apparatchik. It is an appallingly narrow interest group that represents that Party. And it's very important that our Party not become like that. We need to put into Parliament people with a multiplicity of backgrounds, we need to put into Parliament people who, yes some people who've had a life long commitment and involvement in party activities, even political staff experience. We also need to have people who've been successful in business and professions. We need to have people who've been successful in what you might loosely call life. In other words people who understand what it is to raise a family, who understand what it is to grow up in a loving family environment, who understand what it is to combine raising a family and running a business and being part of a community. We need all of those talents, and we have to try harder now to make sure we get the right mix. It happened rather more naturally on earlier occasions but we have to try that much harder. And that's why a seminar like this that brings together a group of people who, I guess represent all of the experiences that I've touched on. Not a group dominated by any particular age cohort, not a group dominated by any particular experience in life, not a group dominated by any particular ideology but just brought together by a common Liberal bond and philosophy. And I therefore think the seminar is very timely and I congratulate those who've put it together and organised it. And I think it's wonderfully symbolic that it's held in the middle of an electorate that we captured from the Labor Party in 1996. An electorate where the sitting member's majority rose in 1998 and it really is an electorate that, in many respects, represents the many sides of the city of Sydney. It's metropolitan yet it's outer metropolitan, it's aspirational yet it's not the what you call the leafy blue-ribbon suburbs so inappropriately sometimes used in relation to some parts of our heartland. It's got a bit of everything that makes up the variety of Sydney and I think it's a very appropriate place in which to hold this seminar.
Can I thank all of the members of the committee, to you Deidre in particular and all of your other colleagues at a State level for the contribution that you've made to the Liberal Party over the years.
We have a tremendous opportunity in front of us. There's no reason why we can't win a third term. We've struck some turbulent weather at the moment but that is always the case. I don't know, and I read a lot of political history, I reflect on the experiences of previous governments, I think of some of the difficulties through which previous Liberal Governments passed and how they came out of them. I reflect upon the difficulties that previous governments of other political persuasions went through only to come out of them. We need commitment, we need good people, we need good policies, we need a strong party organisation and all of those things are brought together today and I thank you very warmly for the support that you've given.


E&amp;OE.................................
Thank you very much Peter for those warm words of introduction.   I am quite relaxed about my Treasurer going door knocking because, unlike one of my Labor predecessors, I'm confident that my Treasurer has put his tax return in on time.
Ian Carson, President of the Victorian Division, Dennis Napthine, Peter Costello, my Ministerial and federal and state Parliamentary colleagues, fellow liberals.
Thank you very much for your welcome.   Janette and I are delighted again to be amongst our friends and supporters and people dedicated to the liberal cause within the Victorian Division.  
It's now just a little over 5 years since the government I lead was sworn to office on 11 March 1996 and it is for a moment an occasion to reflect on what has been achieved over that five year period.  To remember the state of Australia five years ago and to contemplate the state of Australia today.  To acknowledge the enormous improvements that have been made to the underlying strength of the Australian economy, to recognise that this country has a more balanced and appropriate set of foreign affairs and defence relationships with the rest of the world, to know that over the last five years we have swept away the then rising tide of political correctness that would always substitute the interests of minority groups ahead of the interests of the mainstream of the Australian people.
It is an occasion for reflection, not an occasion for complacency or nostalgia, but certainly an occasion for reflection.  And it's also an occasion to remind ourselves of what it was all about and why we did the things we did because economic reforms are not ends in themselves.  Having a balanced budget is not sort of a spiritual value, having a balanced budget means that you can do other things.  And in the end if you look back at what we have done over the last five years, what we now do and what we will do in the years ahead, it has all been about one single goal and that is securing our future.   Securing our future as a nation through securing the future of our economy.   Of securing the future of our education system.   There is now more choice within the education system of this country than ever before. 
I spent the day in the electorate of Dunkley yesterday, campaigning for our magnificent member, Bruce Billson, and as I went around probably half a dozen principals of catholic schools and small independent schools, not the principals of very well known GPS schools in Sydney and Melbourne, but the principals of small, independent and small Catholic parochial schools whose students are not the children of wealthy people but of mainstream Australians, and person after person said to me, thank you for what you have done to allow the parents of our students to exercise more choice.
Last week I was in Queensland.  In fact I was in Queensland the week before and the week before that and I spoke to the head of one of the largest catholic private hospital complexes in Australia and he said to me I want to thank you and your government for saving the private hospital system of Australia through your private health insurance rebate.
I don't pretend to you that the health system of this country is perfect.   When you look around the world, the balance that we have between private and public in the health system just as the balance we have between private and public in the education system, is superior to any that you find in a comparable country.   And I simply say that if you're on a modest income, it's better you get sick in Broadmeadows or Bankstown than in the Bronx or Brixton because the conditions that you'll be treated under are infinitely better.
So as we look back over the last five years, we see a pattern of reform.  Some of it has been, in the eyes of some in our community, at a dizzy pace, but it's all for a purpose.   And the purpose is securing our future, of building a more secure Australian community.  Without economic security, we can't have a stable society.   Without the secure provision of basic services, we can't deliver fair outcomes to all of our people.
And Peter dwelt a moment ago on hypocrisy of the Labor states in relation to the GST.   The greatest single gift of the GST is for the first time since World War II it guarantees growing revenues to the states of Australia to fund the provision of basic services for their citizens.
I mean that should never be forgotten and by what the year after next Peter, the state of Queensland will begin to be ahead of what it is under the current arrangements and the other states are going to follow and one by one they will become increasingly better off and they will have the wherewithal, the financial sinews, to provide growing levels, not diminishing levels of public services.   But today, as well as reflecting on what we have done to secure our future in the policies we've followed over the last five years I want to focus for a few moments on the alternates because in the end political contests in this country are two horse races.   There'll only be one result at the end of the year - the government I lead will be re-elected, or the opposition led by the Australian Labor Party will be defeated.   They're the only possible outcomes.  A Freudian slip.  There are only two possible outcomes, we win or they win.   If they win, Australia loses, if we win Australia wins.
But I do for a few moments very seriously want to take you through the implications of a Labor win.  Because it's important that we communicate these implications to the Australian people.   It will be no tiny adjustment, it will be no tiny shift back in time.  You won't be, as Mr Beazley would want you to believe, just adjusting a little bit of the edges and life will go on virtually the same.   If Labor wins federally, you will with the exception of South Australia, have federal and state Labor governments in all of the states.  You will have blanket Beazley, wall to wall, trade union dominated governments throughout the whole of Australia.  And the implications of that in an area like workplace relations are absolutely horrifying, because of all the cultural things that Labor will again change to the disadvantage of this country it will be the culture of the workplace.
Make no mistake.  Even though union membership now may be only 19.7% in the private sector and 25% overall, make no mistake my friends, the federal parliamentary Labor Party is more dominated and more beholden to the trade union movement now than at any time in the 27 years that I've been in federal parliament.  And the latest example of that was the installation at the whim of the New South Wales Labor executive of Jenni George - Jenni George - she will join Martin Ferguson and Simon Crean and all of the others who held high office in the trade union movement.  I watched this extraordinary phenonomen as fewer and fewer Australians like trade unions, particularly the young, I've seen the membership of trade unions halve in the years I've been in politics.   Despite that, ladies and gentlemen, you see their increased power and their domination of the federal parliamentary Labor Party.  And if Labor wins federally in co-operation with Labor governments in all but one of the Australian states, except in South Australia, they will have an unrivalled historic opportunity to return power to the trade union movement, the like of which we've not experienced for 30 or 40 years.   What that's going to do, will of course be to destroy free bargaining which now exists in the workplace.   Australian workplace agreements will be abolished.   Compulsory unionism will come back and there won't be any kind of you know, muffled, gentle, compulsory unionism, it will be full on compulsory unionism and if you don't believe me, look at the moves that are already under way to force non unionists effectively to contribute to union funds. Now, if you think you've seen the thin end of the wedge in relation to that you have and if you get a federal Labor government they'll do a deal with every single state Labor government around Australia to create a defacto compulsory unionism in every workplace in this country.
There'll be an enormous threat to the independence of contractors.  You've got a taste of that here in Victoria and the assault that is being launched by the Bracks government on the small businesses of Victoria via their employment contracts legislation and congratulations to Dennis Napthine and his colleagues for their guts in opposing that legislation in the Victorian Upper House.
But in many ways and bizarrely and perversely for a party that still says it believes in helping the working men and women of Australia, the real victims of a federal Labor government will in fact be the wage and salary earners of Australia.  Because the wage and salary earners of Australia have been better off under our government than they were under the governments of Mr Hawke and Mr Keating.  They've been much better off.  I know a lot of Labor people find this hard to believe, but in fact because of the increased productivity in the workplace which has flowed directly from our approach to industrial relations, workers now have higher real wages, and have had higher real wage increases over the last five years, than they did in 13 years of Labor.  And when you add to that the fact that the average home loan is now costing that person $270 a month less than it did when I became Prime Minister, it adds up to the reality that they are much better off in real terms.  Now that will be at risk under a Labor government because if you go back to a union dominated imposed collective bargaining system you will not get the same productivity gains.  You will lose them.  
And all the productivity gains that have come out of more flexible arrangements of the workplace, which have allowed the business to work better, particularly small business.  All of those gains are going to be lost.  So on that one central issue, and in the years before I became Prime Minister I probably poured more of my intellectual and political energy into a campaign to free the industrial relations system than any other single thing because I regarded it as the greatest blight on the productivity of this country that we had inherited from pre World War II days.  And I believe very passionately as did Peter Costello and many others that what we had to do in this country was to change our industrial relations culture and we have done it.  And we've done it against terrific odds.  You'll all remember the very difficult and bruising waterfront dispute in 1998.  Something that year after year members of the Liberal Party, state councils all around the country, all of our leading business supporters told us that somebody, one day, some time might have the guts to tackle it, and we did.  
We tackled reform on the waterfront.  There was a lot of bruising in the process but in the end we now have a waterfront that is functioning efficiently to the benefit of the Australian people.  We have achieved a productivity level ahead of the benchmark that we set ourselves in 1998.  And enormous credit is due to Peter Reith for the leadership that he displayed as Industrial Relations Minister on that issue.  
But ladies and gentlemen there is an enormous risk, worse than that there is an enormous cost to all of us if Australia goes back to Labor in the area of industrial relations.  And as I reflect over the five years about what we have done, I look at the Labor Party and I ask myself what has Mr Beazley done in the five years that he has been the Opposition Leader. I mean five years is a long time.  I haven't wasted my time.  I haven't let the grass grow under feet.  I haven't swanned around in a white car and said gee it's nice being Prime Minister.  I put my head down along with all of my colleagues and I've worked from day one.  And not everybody has agreed with everything that we have done but they know that we have tried and in many areas we have succeeded in making a huge difference for ht benefit of Australia.  
But by contrast what has the Labor Party done over the last five years?  Can you think of one single policy that you can undeniably identify with Kim Beazley?  Rollback?  Somebody says rollback.  Well Michael Egan who is actually in government as a state Labor Treasurer says we won't know what rollback is until Mr Beazley tells us.  I mean the reality is that in five years he has achieved nothing.  He's identified himself with no great policy cause.  He has no political branding. He does not stand for any clear fundamental change in direction in any area if he becomes Prime Minister.  Now as you want to do in politics you make comparisons.  So I won't be unfair.  I won't compare him with a Liberal.  I'll compare him with a member of the Labor Party.  And let's choose somebody who I think it's fair to make a comparison with - let's compare him with Gough Whitlam. Gough Whitlam of course was the worst Prime Minister this country has had since World War II.  But I tell you what he was a much better Opposition Leader than Kim Beazley. At least he did something when he was Opposition Leader.  He took on the Labor Party.  Political historians will know that it was his determination to reform the Victorian branch of the Labor Party.  In the early 1970s it paved the way for Labor to win seats in this state in the early 1970s.  And at least he was identified as standing for things. You know, the cities and the outer-metropolitan renewal and urban redevelopment and all of those things.  I mean it all went wrong, hopelessly wrong when they got into government but the point I'm making is that if you go back to the time after he'd been Leader of the Opposition for five years at least people had a clear idea that if Whitlam won he would do this and this and this and this.  They didn't know that he was going to absolutely destroy the economy of the country.  He kept that under wraps.  
But the point I make my friends is that you have responsibilities in opposition as well as having responsibilities in government.   We are all part of one political process.  The Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Treasurer think they can talk the Australian economy down, they can refer to recessions without there being any consequence and when they're taxed about it they say we're only the Leader of the Opposition.  Don't ask us, don't expect us to have any kind of responsibility.  Well they do have responsibilities.  And in the long run the Australian people will judge you on what you do both in government and in opposition.  
And in that context as I look back over the last twenty years, and I look at the way in which the Australian economy has changed in that twenty year period.  And there's really been five grey areas of reform and it's very instructive to look at how the two sides of politics have behaved in relation to those areas of reform both in government and in opposition.  It's very instructive of the mind set and the sense of irresponsibility of the Australian Labor Party. Financial deregulation.  The intellectual stimulus for that came from the Campbell Report which I initiated as Treasurer.  To their credit the Labor government when it came to office began to implement those recommendations. But we made it possible because we supported it.  We supported it because it was right for Australia.  It wasn't politically convenient for us to support it.  We could have run a whole lot of interference from Opposition.  Just imagine the fear campaign you could have run about foreign banks.  I mean there's a potential to run a campaign against domestic banks.  Just imagine the fear campaign that could have been run about foreign banks.  But we didn't and the reason we didn't do it is because we believed it was right for Australia even though we were in opposition and they ended up getting the credit for it even though they opposed the idea in the first place.  And Mr Keating's first utterance on foreign banks when I announced their entry as Treasurer in the last days of the Fraser government were to say that letting foreign banks in was a surrender to the foreign multi nationals of the world.  He quickly changed his tune when he became Treasurer.
Fiscal consolidation as the pointy heads call it, or getting back into the black as the rest of us would call it - they never got seriously into the black when they were in government.  And in opposition not only did they admit their guilt, but they tried to frustrate every single attempt that Peter Costello endeavoured to undertake to repay that enormous government debt we inherited.
Tariff reform, necessary.  Introduced by the Labor government, we supported it. We could have run a fear campaign on that.  We could have run around every manufacturing industry in Australia, every blue collar establishment in Australia in many of the regional areas and say this is outrageous, it's going to destroy all your jobs. But deep down we always knew that if we were going to give our efficient exporters a chance, if we were going to give some kind of long term future to the efficient industries of Australia we needed to have sensible tariff reform. So we behaved responsibly as an opposition.  
The two other great reforms that have been implemented under this government of course - industrial relations reform fought tooth and nail by Labor, and taxation reform fought tooth and nail by Labor.
So you see in that little story you see a very clear pattern.  When Labor was in government and implemented things that were good for the country they got our support as a responsible opposition.  When we are in government and we implement things that are good for the country those things are opposed tooth and nail in a completely opportunistic fashion by the Australian Labor Party.  And of course nothing is more redolent of that approach than the treatment of taxation reform by the Australian Labor Party.  Labor has been utterly and completely opportunistic on the issue of taxation reform.  You would almost if you closed your eyes and in your minds eyes imagined what they would be saying as they discuss their tactics, they would be saying to each other well we shouldn't say it but this country really does need tax reform but it's pretty hard if you're the government that brings it in.  And they've had a go at it.  Gee I hope it falls over, and isn't it good they've done it. And if the transitional difficulties continue long enough they might lose and we'll get the benefit of the reform that they had the courage to bring in and we will have been seen to have opposed it all along, now isn't that a great outcome Simon.  
Now that basically is, I believe, deep down what the Labor Party is on about. Now that's a challenge for us.  I don't deny that there have been transitional difficulties with the introduction of the new system.  That was inevitable.  You can't bring in such a mammoth change in this country without some dislocation, some adversity, and some challenges.  And it's our responsibility in the months between now and the election to ensure that those are well and truly ironed out and dealt with and that the longer term benefits that tax reform will contribute to securing our economic future are well and truly understood.
But there's something else that we have to do over the months ahead and that is to remember some of the highlights of Labor's last years in office - the things that you know really lifted our spirits like housing interest rates of 17%, of bill rates paid by farmers of 22% and 23%.  And that 11.2% unemployment rate that was achieved when Mr Beazley was the Minister for Employment, and the $85 billion of government debt that he racked up as Finance Minister during the last five years of Labor government.
We have paid back $50 billion of that $85 billion in the face of unrelenting opposition and interference from the Labor Party.  We now have a government debt to GDP ratio of 6.4%.  In other words the debt owed by the federal government is only 6.4% of the total amount of wealth generated by the entire Australian economy every year.  And if you think that's a bit profligate, it's 130% in Japan and it's about 45% in the United States, and the industrial world average is about 35% to 40%.  In other words we have restored the fiscal stability and strengths of the Australian economy.  Now all of that will be at risk, all of it. And I ask all of you in the months ahead just to keep those three things very much in your mind.  I mean you should almost have a little sign over your bed at night, it's not the economy stupid, its just you know, sort of, 17, 11.2 and 85 and every time you see somebody and every time you engage anybody in a political debate, just remind that that was what it was like when Mr Beazley last helped run the affairs of this country.
And in the last five years he has done nothing to give flesh and blood and meaning to what he stands for in relation to the future of this country other than that.
My friends, with your help and your loyalty and your understanding the government has come a long way in the last five years.  Modern politics is more challenging by the day and by the month.   We deal with a more volatile electorate, we deal with an electorate which is increasingly demanding, we deal with an electorate which in general understands the need for change, but in specific (inaudible) terms is often challenged and unsettled by change and it is a supreme test of our political skill that we maintain the necessary momentum for change and improvement because it's needed to secure our future, to secure our living standards and to secure jobs, and to understand the need on all occasions to communicate the purpose of change and to make sure that those people left vulnerable by change are protected to the maximum extent possible.
There's going to be a great fight over the months ahead.   It's a fight that I enter with energy and enthusiasm, commitment, but most of all an unshakeable sense of self belief that the only side of politics that can deliver a secure future for our country is our side, our team and our great party.
[Ends]


Subjects: Hotel Industry
E&amp;OE................................ 
Thank you very much Tim. Graham Edwards, Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, Meg Lees, Leader of the Australian Democrats, Richard Mulcahy, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to thank the Association for the idea of making this contribution to the celebration of the Centenary of Federation. That great Australian and great historian, Geoffrey Blainey will say some things later on tonight about the place of hotels, of pubs in the culture and the history of Australia. 
All of us in some way of course have been touched by hotel experiences. Those of my age will remember the enormous social changes that occurred in 1955. I grew up in Sydney when six o'clock closing was abolished, I can still, at the age of 16 living about three streets away from the Earlwood Hotel, I can still recall the enormous cheer that went up at five past six, that sort of echoed from the corner on which the hotel was built to our home in William St Earlwood. 
I remember that the very first law case in which I was involved as an articled clerk was in fact a dispute between a hotel broker and a publican and I still vividly remember that the name of the plaintiff was James Francis McMahon and the name of the defendant was Manus Patrick Heffernan. And because there's a little bit of a reminder that there is a, you might call a narrow stream of the Irish-Australian heritage running through into the hotel business and I recognise the presence of the His Excellency the Irish Ambassador. 
The importance of the hotel industry in Australia's history is well understood and known but of course in recent times as Richard mentioned in his remarks, the hotel industry has become part and parcel of the burgeoning of the recreation, tourism and entertainment industry of this country. And in the process it has changed quite dramatically and the social ambience of hotels have changed enormously over the years. I was remarking to Richard and his colleagues over drinks before the dinner commenced tonight that in the early 1960s when I went to England on a twelve month working holiday I experienced for the very first time what would have been an unusual thing to do and that was to take a woman into a public bar of a hotel because in the early '60s in Australia it was still a relatively uncommon thing to occur. But of course over the years their social place has changed enormously and the industry has changed in the process. 
It's a huge employer. I acknowledge as a former treasurer, as a current prime minister, the contribution that the industry makes to revenue. That's been the case down through the years and I acknowledge the various views that have been put by the industry over the years to the Government in relation to that.
Tonight is not only a night to celebrate the important contemporary contribution of the hotel industry to our nation but it's also an occasion of course to in indulge in a bit of nostalgia. All of us have our recollections of the famous Australian country hotel. I've not forgotten a night I spent at the Railway Hotel in Gladstone Road, Calliope. Calliope is a town in Queensland I think about thirteen miles or so out of Gladstone. We, a mate and I had driven there to go for a holiday in Heron Island and we arrived at Gladstone, couldn't find any accommodation there, we did what a lot of people used to do then and perhaps still do and that was go to the local police station and ask if they knew where there was any accommodation and I don't know if it was our appearance or not, but the police officer seemed fairly anxious to move us on from Gladstone. And he said 'oh well you could drive out to Calliope and Bert, and I've forgotten his surname, runs the Railway Hotel out there'. And we went out there and it was everything that one could recollect as epitomising a country hotel - the galvanised iron roof, the name Railway Hotel was painted on the roof, the you know you had to walk down the hall at night of course, and it was a very, very, very representative Australian country pub. It's a 105 years old, it's still in existence. My office rang up and checked about its current standing and prosperity and it seemed to be going extremely well. My friend and I still remember that hotel with very great affection as being an experience of that particular aspect of Australian country life. 
This is a year in which we celebrate all different aspects of the Australian nation and the Australian achievement. And one of the things we celebrate of course are the circumstances in which Australians have congregated together, congregating in a pub, in a public bar, in a beer garden, in all sorts of other perhaps more elaborate surroundings under the general rubric of gathering at a hotel, they've all been part and parcel of Australian life. And the people who run those hotels and the people who've made a contribution to those hotels understand that very well. 
There's always of course been in the Australian community a variety of attitudes towards the consumption of alcohol. Enjoying drinking in civilised circumstances and in fact the expression 'civilised drinking' was the catchcry in the movement in the 1950s that led to the abolition of six o'clock closing. And down through the years I think we have become a far more civilised people in our drinking habits, we've learnt to enjoy the pleasure of drinking whilst making our different contributions to the curbing of its excesses. And I think the hotel industry has been extremely responsible in recognising that although it is a wonderful lubricant of social exchange and pleasure and enjoyment it does carry, if it's abused its negative connotations and I want to congratulate the industry for the sense of responsibility that it's displayed. And most importantly to thank everybody in the hotel industry for being such a rich and important part of Australian life over the last one hundred years and a very rich and important part of Australian culture during that time.
[ends]


Subjects: Breast Cancer
E&amp;OE .......
Thank you very much Janet, Michael Wooldridge, Professor Redman, Dr Trish Shephard, my other Parliamentary Colleagues, ladies and gentleman.  It is my pleasure to be involved in the launch of this public information programme for country women.  Designed to take to the women of country Australia the commitment and the concerns of a number of bodies concerned about not only women's health in general but specifically the challenge of breast cancer within Australian society.  It'll bring the message of the importance of early detection of breast cancer straight to the target audience, and that is country women, in a very personal and a very relevant way and it will include a number of ambassadors of the programme including Janet McDonald and Judith McGrath.  They and their colleagues will be promoting the key messages of the programme.
I'm sure I don't need to tell an audience such as this that breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death amongst Australian women.  In one in twelve Australian women will develop breast cancer in their lifetime.  There has been a clear steady downward trend in the number of deaths since 1995.  And for this reason I welcome this extensive information programme aimed at making sure women, especially those in the country, understand the importance of early detection of breast cancer and increasing the number of country women who present promptly with breast symptoms.
The programme includes workplace information programs and general practitioner ones, the pro-active promotion of the message and is sensitive to the needs of women in rural areas of Australia.  I want to say that this programme is made possible through the generous support of the AMP Foundation, which entered into a sponsorship agreement of more than $1 million with the National Breast Cancer Centre in 1999.  And it involves radio, television and print media as well as state and regional public meetings.  The partnership between the AMP Foundation and the National Breast Cancer Centre is exactly the type of community spirit and coalition between the private sector and Government supported organisations, which the Government seeks to promote under the general rubric of the social coalition.  Corporate social responsibility of the type being demonstrated by the AMP is precisely the kind of responses we seek to build in our society.  In the 1999 Budget the Commonwealth committed an additional $2 million per year over four years to the continued operation of the National Breast Cancer Centre.  And also in that budget $4.I million was provided over four years to assist in developing improved approaches to supporting women with breast cancer and their families, particularly in rural areas.
The Government provides ongoing support for the Breast Screen Australia programme including funding of $2 million to re-launch the Breast Screen Australia mass-media campaign last year.  The media campaign aims to increase the number of women in the target age group of 50 to 69 years attending the Breast Screen Australia programme.
Before I conclude and declare the programme launched, can I particularly acknowledge the commitment of my colleague the Health Minister, Michael Wooldridge.  Not only to the cause of improving health, both public and privately health facilities in Australia, but also his particular commitment to specific areas of concern in relation to the health of women.  And I would also like to acknowledge the roll played by my former Ministerial colleague Jocelyn Newman, who's present here today.  And also my other parliamentary colleagues Helen Conan and Trish Worth and a number of others, who've taken a particular concern and interest in the promotion and support of policies specifically targeted to the particular concerns relating to the health of Australian women.  There is no Government responsibility more important than the physical and physiological health and well being of the men and women of Australia.  We hear a lot of discussion about the health of what is collectively called the economy, and that's important, but even more important is the individual sense of well being and health of the men and women of our society.  And whilst most of our programs are directed towards health challenges which are common to both men and women, there are some particular health challenges which relate to women only as some relate to men only.  And tackling the challenge of breast cancer is clearly in that category.  And it has been a priority of this Government and it's been a priority of the Minister and I congratulate him and his colleagues for the work they've done.
In declaring officially launched the Country Australia Public Information Campaign, I thank Professor Redman and Janet McDonald for their untiring work in the cause of increasing awareness of the challenge of breast cancer.  And pleasingly as a result of that work seeing a significant improvement, but also with that improvement comes a necessity to carry the message even more widely and this is about carrying it to women of country Australia and I launch the programme and I wish it well.
Thankyou.
[ends]


7 March 2001
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Tim. Graham Edwards, Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, Meg Lees, Leader of the Australian Democrats, Richard Mulcahy, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to thank the Association for the idea of making this contribution to the celebration of the Centenary of Federation. That great Australian and great historian, Geoffrey Blainey will say some things later on tonight about the place of hotels, of pubs in the culture and the history of Australia.
All of us in some way of course have been touched by hotel experiences. Those of my age will remember the enormous social changes that occurred in 1955. I grew up in Sydney when six o’clock closing was abolished, I can still, at the age of 16 living about three streets away from the Earlwood Hotel, I can still recall the enormous cheer that went up at five past six, that sort of echoed from the corner on which the hotel was built to our home in William St Earlwood.
I remember that the very first law case in which I was involved as an articled clerk was in fact a dispute between a hotel broker and a publican and I still vividly remember that the name of the plaintiff was James Francis McMahon and the name of the defendant was Manus Patrick Heffernan. And because there’s a little bit of a reminder that there is a, you might call a narrow stream of the Irish-Australian heritage running through into the hotel business and I recognise the presence of the His Excellency the Irish Ambassador.
The importance of the hotel industry in Australia’s history is well understood and known but of course in recent times as Richard mentioned in his remarks, the hotel industry has become part and parcel of the burgeoning of the recreation, tourism and entertainment industry of this country. And in the process it has changed quite dramatically and the social ambience of hotels have changed enormously over the years. I was remarking to Richard and his colleagues over drinks before the dinner commenced tonight that in the early 1960s when I went to England on a twelve month working holiday I experienced for the very first time what would have been an unusual thing to do and that was to take a woman into a public bar of a hotel because in the early ‘60s in Australia it was still a relatively uncommon thing to occur. But of course over the years their social place has changed enormously and the industry has changed in the process.
It’s a huge employer. I acknowledge as a former treasurer, as a current prime minister, the contribution that the industry makes to revenue. That’s been the case down through the years and I acknowledge the various views that have been put by the industry over the years to the Government in relation to that.
Tonight is not only a night to celebrate the important contemporary contribution of the hotel industry to our nation but it’s also an occasion of course to in indulge in a bit of nostalgia. All of us have our recollections of the famous Australian country hotel. I’ve not forgotten a night I spent at the Railway Hotel in Gladstone Road, Calliope. Calliope is a town in Queensland I think about thirteen miles or so out of Gladstone. We, a mate and I had driven there to go for a holiday in Heron Island and we arrived at Gladstone, couldn’t find any accommodation there, we did what a lot of people used to do then and perhaps still do and that was go to the local police station and ask if they knew where there was any accommodation and I don’t know if it was our appearance or not, but the police officer seemed fairly anxious to move us on from Gladstone. And he said ‘oh well you could drive out to Calliope and Bert, and I’ve forgotten his surname, runs the Railway Hotel out there’. And we went out there and it was everything that one could recollect as epitomising a country hotel – the galvanised iron roof, the name Railway Hotel was painted on the roof, the you know you had to walk down the hall at night of course, and it was a very, very, very representative Australian country pub. It’s a 105 years old, it’s still in existence. My office rang up and checked about its current standing and prosperity and it seemed to be going extremely well. My friend and I still remember that hotel with very great affection as being an experience of that particular aspect of Australian country life.
This is a year in which we celebrate all different aspects of the Australian nation and the Australian achievement. And one of the things we celebrate of course are the circumstances in which Australians have congregated together, congregating in a pub, in a public bar, in a beer garden, in all sorts of other perhaps more elaborate surroundings under the general rubric of gathering at a hotel, they’ve all been part and parcel of Australian life. And the people who run those hotels and the people who’ve made a contribution to those hotels understand that very well.
There’s always of course been in the Australian community a variety of attitudes towards the consumption of alcohol. Enjoying drinking in civilised circumstances and in fact the expression ‘civilised drinking’ was the catchcry in the movement in the 1950s that led to the abolition of six o’clock closing. And down through the years I think we have become a far more civilised people in our drinking habits, we’ve learnt to enjoy the pleasure of drinking whilst making our different contributions to the curbing of its excesses. And I think the hotel industry has been extremely responsible in recognising that although it is a wonderful lubricant of social exchange and pleasure and enjoyment it does carry, if it’s abused its negative connotations and I want to congratulate the industry for the sense of responsibility that it’s displayed. And most importantly to thank everybody in the hotel industry for being such a rich and important part of Australian life over the last one hundred years and a very rich and important part of Australian culture during that time.
[ends]


Subjects: doubling of First Home Owners Scheme; Shell/Woodside takeover.
E&amp;OE................................
Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  I'm sorry for the early start.  I announce today that the Government will from today double the First Home Owners Scheme grant from $7,000 to $14,000 for new dwellings.  This increase will relate to contracts entered into from today until the 31st of December 2001.  After the 31st of December 2001 the amount of the grant will revert back to the current level of $7,000.  There will be no increase in the grant in relation to existing dwellings, and the same rules in relation to the availability of the grant under the present scheme concerning the principle place of residence, in other words it's not available for investment properties, will obtain.
This action has been taken by the government in a targeted immediate way to help an area of the economy identified by the recent National Accounts as having experienced a good deal of contraction.  I met representatives of the Housing Industry Association some ten days ago and they explained to me some of the difficulties of the industry.  And after the National Accounts figures came out on Wednesday discussions took place and senior colleagues and I formed a view yesterday that a measure of this kind would be desirable, it would be responsible, it would communicate a determination to boost confidence in a very important industry, and it is how a government should respond when economic figures indicate that although in many areas of the economy the signs are very positive there are some areas where that is not the case.  And therefore the Government has taken this measure.
It will cost approximately $60 million this year, and $90 million next year. The Housing Industry Association, and I acknowledge the presence at this gathering of Mr Ron Silberberg, the Housing Industry Association has welcomed the Government's announcement and has indicated that the revamped First Home Owner's grant combined with the recent interest rate reduction will boost confidence and generate an additional 16,000 new home starts and demand for 24,000 jobs over the next nine months.  
Importantly because of the very wide geographical spread of the housing industry many of the new jobs for which there will be demand are located in regional Australia.  Indeed given the relative price of land in different parts of the country a $14,000 package of this kind will be of very special help to people buying their first home in the outer metropolitan fringes of the major cities and also in many country areas where land is obviously cheaper than what is the price of land in the more densely populated metropolitan areas.
The housing industry is a very important industry to this country.  It is made up literally of tens of thousands of small businesses.  This is very good news for small business in Australia.  It is a signal from the Government that it believes in the housing industry, it recognises that it has contracted more sharply than was originally expected and that the right thing to do is to act to boost confidence in the industry, to do it in a way that targets an identified area of weakness and to do it in a way that is eminently affordable and also do it in a way and do it for an industry that will be able to respond as quickly and as immediately as any industry can respond to this kind of government initiative.
I have written to the Premiers today.  They of course administer the scheme although it is fully funded by the Commonwealth. This increase will be fully funded by the Commonwealth.  We don't ask the states to contribute any of the funding.  But we do ask the states to do their bit by giving stamp duty relief to new home buyers.  If they do that than the value to the industry of an increased package will be that much greater.  I'm not making it a condition of the Commonwealth's new money. We're giving that new money, we're doubling the grant, we're picking up the bill come what may.  But I very strenuously press upon the state governments of Australia that they have capacity to help with stamp duty.  It may vary from state to state but some of them are awash with extra stamp duty because of changes in house prices and the valuations of land and so forth.  
They can afford to come to the party with a stamp duty cut and I hope the community and the industry puts pressure on the states to come to the party.  I don't prescribe what it ought to be.  I don't make what we're doing conditional upon what the states are doing. But I seriously ask them if they're interested in the state of the building industry, the home building industry in their respective states, and if they care about the employment levels and the investment levels and the activity levels, let them come to the party with further stamp duty relief.  And if that happens then we really have an even better package.  
But whether they do or they don't is a matter for them, but irrespective of what they do this decision announced by me this morning will have an immediate and dramatic beneficial effect on a key industry. It will be good news for young home buyers, it will be good news for the industry, it will be good news for employment, and it will directly target an area which the national accounts revealed was the area that suffered the greatest contraction.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Laurie, a lot of people put a lot of things to the Government, and we knew that there would be some downturn, that was to be expected because you had two things operating before the first of July. You had a lot of normal activity at a high level, and on top of that you had the pull forward. And we accepted, and I think the industry accepted that you're going to have a huge build up before July, you couldn't get a tradesman, it was very very difficult, the industry was booming and we expected a contraction. I think what happened was that the contraction was greater. Well industries tell us lots of things, and I'm not saying that they were misrepresenting the situation, I don't say that at all. What I'm saying is that you make your best assessments at the time and we now have clear and unmistakable evidence of a contraction and we're doing something about it.
JOURNALIST:
So you were wrong back then.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we made an assessment, we now have clear and unmistakable evidence that action is needed.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, [inaudible] days ago, the Treasurer made the observation after national accounts came out, that the forward indicators, dwelling approvals, housing plans commitments, showed that the industry was in an upturn. On the same day the Reserve Bank cut interest rates, the capacity of home buyers had improved to [inaudible] industry. What's changed in the last two days?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well nothing has changed, I mean there's nothing inconsistent in saying that there's an upturn, noting that interest rates have been cut but then deciding that you're going to accelerate the upturn. And that's what we've decided to do. What this will do will be to dramatically accelerate the upturn, that's what it will do. There's nothing inconsistent in doing that. We decided that this additional measure was needed.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister isn't it an admission that it wasn't just the transition to the GST that was the problem [inaudible], that the GST itself was a problem for the industry?
PRIME MINISTER:
No it's not that at all, it's not such an admission. We always knew the transition was going to be there.  The downturn has been greater than we would have liked and greater than what we were told by our advisers would be the case. And we've decided to do something about it. But it doesn't alter the fact that in the long run the new taxation system is highly beneficial.
JOURNALIST:
A week ago the Treasurer, in particular, was giving a strong lecture to his colleagues, including it seemed to you even, about the need for a tight budget. Now this is a lot of money even though you say it's affordable...
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in the totality of the Government's budget it is a relatively modest sum given the impact that it will have, the importance of the sector and I don't see any inconsistency between both my and the Treasurer's commitment to a sensible budget and this particular decision.  I mean we have to preserve a sense of proportion, you cannot have a situation that just because the Treasurer and the Prime Minister say you've got to have a tight budget you can't do anything anywhere, I mean that is just, that is just sort of.
JOURNALIST:
But [inaudible] quite a lot everywhere.
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't think we're..a lot of people would be calling on us to do, I mean somebody asked me this morning would I cut excise by 10%, you've really..
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
.once again.what did I say, I said no, Laurie. I mean a sense of proportion please.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister why did you decide to make December the 31st a cut off point for the enhanced package?
PRIME MINISTER:
Because we wanted it to be a short period, I mean the aim of this measure is to accelerate the upturn, quite deliberately. It is an activity measure, it's not so much a social measure. Although it will have beneficial social consequences for people who want to buy a new home. But its principal purpose is not social, its principal purpose is activity and you've got to have a cut off point, and we think a cut off point of 31st of December is the right one. If you have it any shorter you're not allowing long enough time, and if you have it much longer it's probably being over generous.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister The Australian uses the word panic in its headline, is this a panic measure?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. Easy for somebody to say, I mean you're, in a sense, damned if you do and you're damned if you don't. I mean my take out of the national accounts was that there's clearly a problem in the dwelling construction industry, and it clearly contributed far more than anything else to the downturn. And we're confident that the downturn is temporary, we're confident that the economy will resume growth, exactly by how much and when I don't know. Now for us to sit on our hands when we have the capacity to do this kind of measure is just being silly and stubborn.
JOURNALIST:
What prompted this movement Mr Howard? You're saying that you met with the HIA a week ago, which is before the National Accounts. Was this something you were originally contemplating for the budget?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I never get into what we may or may not be contemplating for the budget. But look, I had an hour long discussion with the HIA about 10 days ago and they had all their movers and shakers from around the country, and you know they gave it to me both barrels and in their typical style and I listened to what they had to say and I thought they made a bit of sense. And I said, well look, we'll have a, I'll have a look at it, I'll come back to you. And I knew the accounts were coming up and I wanted to see them because I didn't know until the morning precisely what the contraction was.  I feared there would be a contraction, I felt it in my bones, but I thought it might be slighter than it was. But I decided that after having seeing that and when it was so clearly the problem area, that the sensible, measured, targeted, responsible, effective thing to do, was to do something for the housing industry. And that's what we've done.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you and the Treasurer have made great play of the Government's standing as an economic manager in the last couple of days, in particular. And also saying, including today, that the economy looks like it's going to improve rather than anything else. In that environment, can you understand why the dollar is so weak, and are you concerned about it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to talk, or give in the nature of a commentary on the dollar, I'm not. It is just too dangerous for a Prime Minister to start sort of giving a running commentary on the level of the dollar. And I'm just not really going to get into that. Beyond the observations I've made in the past that you have to take a long view of the value of the dollar and not just take a snapshot.
JOURNALIST:
Well, on that basis, wasn't it dangerous to be attacking the Reserve Bank on its interest rates decision since that's been taken as a very bad sign in international financial markets?
PRIME MINISTER:
There's nothing in the monetary policy understanding between the Government and the Reserve Bank that precludes in any way observations on monetary policy by the Government.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you're off to Ryan today, was this decision timed so that you could campaign on this issue in Ryan?
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think it will win Ryan for you?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't think it will have any particular effect on Ryan.  No I don't.  I don't.  I mean, this measure's been taken in response to what we identified arising out of the economy.  I can't see that it will have an enormous effect either way.  I hope it is seen for what it is meant to be and that is a deliberate and careful and responsible attempt by the Government to inject more activity and confidence into a very important industry that manifestly has contracted more than any other section of the economy and, therefore, has contributed more than any other section of the economy by that contraction to the negative figure.  Now, the figures came out on Wednesday.  I took the view that if we were going to do anything we should do it immediately.  And this is about as immediate as you can get to do it on the Friday morning.
JOURNALIST:
How concerned are you that it could be counteracted by the price of new houses going up considerably in the wake of this decision?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think the level of competition that there'll be.there's a lot of excess capacity in the home building industry at the moment and I think that will act as a very severe constraint on that.
JOURNALIST:
Are you expecting that people will change their decision from buying an existing house to buying a new house rather than bring more people into the market?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't know.  I can't tell that.  I am sure that it will induce a great deal more activity.  Just whether that's bringing new players on to the field who wouldn't otherwise have offered to play or it brings about a change.I think it's more likely the former than the latter, that would be my guess but I don't know.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, on another issue, when can we expect the decision from the Treasurer on the Woodside/Shell matter?
PRIME MINISTER:
When he's in a position to make it.  I'm not going to speculate about that.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, would the stamp duty.what sort of financial difference could that make for average people.?
PRIME MINISTER:
It depends on how much the relief would be.  But I mean, I'm just putting it on the States and they really do have an obligation to come to the party on this.  They're awash with extra stamp duty, particularly States like New South Wales.  And they owe it to the home building industry and employment in their States to come to the party.  Now, I want to make sure I'm not making this conditional on them doing anything.  We're doing this whether they're wiling to chip in or not but they ought to chip in and they should, sort of, put the politics aside on this and chip in and help the industry.
JOURNALIST:
But are the States, as the newspaper suggested this morning, awash with more GST revenue than expected?
PRIME MINISTER:
The ABS's measure, Laurie, is different from ours and there's nothing in what came out yesterday to alter what we've previously said and that is that the GST collections, according to our measurements, are running according to plan, not significantly ahead but certainly up.  It may be that when we have the final numbers in there'll be a little variation on that.  I don't expect so. 
Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Australian Army
E&amp;OE................................ 
You excellency, General Cosgrove, other distinguished guests, the men and women of the Australian Army, ladies and gentlemen. Today we come, both to give thanks, and also to honour. We come to give thanks as a nation to what the personnel of the Australian Army over the last 100 years have done to give us the life and the peace and the security and the contentment we now as a nation enjoy.
As we go through this great year of centenary celebrations, we will mark and honour many things. But there is no group in Australian society to whom more is owed than those who fought, and in many cases died, and suffered or were wounded in the defence of this country. And nothing I can say, or anybody can say, on behalf of the nation can adequately express the deep sense of gratitude which is owed to that long tradition of members of the Australian Army who have done so much and sacrificed so much for this country.
We do have in Australia a great military tradition. It is not a tradition of brutality or triumphalism, it is a tradition of being willing to sacrifice all to do the right thing in the cause of freedom. And over the last 100 years the contribution made by the members of the Australian Army to that cause has been immense. In many world conflicts, particularly in World War I and World War II, but more recently in Korea and Vietnam and Malaya, so much has been done and sacrificed and so many young lives have been cut short. 
And through that 100 years three things have stood out. Valour, flair and compassion. The valour of the fighting men of the Australian Army has been without parallel, and it has earned the deep and lasting respect of people around the world. Their flair and their inventiveness and their individual initiative has made them a great fighting force, and one that has won deserved battle honours in every part of the world. But it is also an Army that has displayed great compassion. The modern Australian Army is not only a suburb fighting force of men and women, it is also a group of Australians dedicated to peacekeeping, dedicated to helping the oppressed and the suffering and the sick, and that was so brilliantly and wonderfully demonstrated under the command of General Cosgrove in East Timor. 
So today, as your Prime Minister, feeling a great sense of pride and emotion in the debt that we owe to so many who gave so much let me thank all of you, the men and women, of the Australian Army for what you have done, and let me give you a pledge of behalf of all of the people of Australia. You will always be honoured, you will always be respected, and you will always have a very special place in the heart and in the lives of our nation. You are part of our identity, you are part of our language, you are part of our inheritance. Without you we would not be where we are today.
It is now my pleasure to invite his excellency the Governor General Sir William Deane to present the new Army banner to General Cosgrove as a gift of gratitude and respect from all of the Australian people.
[ends]


Subjects: The role of community organisations; social coalition.
E&amp;OE................................ 
Thank you very much Mal, well it's good to be back in Queensland. I've got to say aren't you all tremendously proud of what Matthew Hayden has done for Australia and for Queensland. If that betrays a small partiality of mine, you'll understand it but this state has produced some of the great Australian sportsmen and women over the years.
Ladies and gentleman this little gathering is an opportunity for me and for all of the members of my Cabinet to listen to you. We set out when we travel around Australia to have community gatherings. This is not a $200 a plate gathering, this is a gathering of people who are the backbone of the community this is a gathering of people who care about their fellow Australians and this is a gathering of great volunteer organisations.
I've talked about a lot of things in the five years that I've been prime minister. Some of them you probably agree with, some of them I'm sure you don't. But I hope that one of the things that you will agree with me on is that we always get the best results in Australia when we pull together. That giving ourselves goals in life and setting out to work together as a community to achieve them, with each part of our community doing what it does best, always produces the best results. And I've talked a lot in the time that I've been prime minister about the social coalition. That's not a political description, it's a description of Australians working together to achieve common objectives. There are things that the government can always do that others can't do. We have the capacity to provide a social security safety net of providing pensions and benefits and everything else to provide people with the wherewithal to live. We're the only part of society that can do that and it's our responsibility always to go on doing that. 
But there are things that organisations that touch people's lives that are represented here today, can do in a way that no government and no bureaucracy could ever dream of doing. And in the half an hour that I've been here I've been touched by the personal stories of people who are here - of sadness, of struggle, of desperation, of despair but also a sense of hope that there is a lot of humanity in our community and a lot of people in our society who want to help their fellow citizens. And your organisations really represent the flesh and blood of human compassion and practical Christianity if I can be allowed at a civic gathering to use that expression because I'm the sort of bloke that, when I talk about something like that it seems to me to be the best way of describing it. It's not meant offensively to people of other faiths, it's just my way, according to my upbringing of describing what I mean. And I think your organisations do provide a well of support for people. You need our help, you need our understanding, many of you receive, not all of you receive, as I've found out today, government funding. Those who receive government funding want some more. Those who don't want some at least. And those who have got quite a bit naturally say they are entitled to every part of it, and I'm sure that's correct. So somehow or other in the middle we've got to make some sensible decisions about all of those things. It's not easy, and we never please everybody.
But what I see before me are a group of men and women who are dedicated to helping their fellow Australians. We want to work with you, we want to cooperate with you and I've tried over the last five years to build the idea of a social coalition. The Government doing what it does best, of the welfare sector doing what it does best. Always using the efforts and the talents of volunteers and also encouraging the business community to make a greater contribution. I never say to the business community that business should give more, I always say that more businesses should give. Because there are a lot of businesses that give generously but there are a lot that don't give at all. And when I talk about mutual obligation I don't only talk about the people who are on unemployment benefits, if they're able to do so, to do some work in return, I also talk about corporates who've done very well out of a strong economy to contribute something back to help their fellow Australians.
So ladies and gentlemen I don't want to say much more than that except to say to all of you that part of the job, part of the life of a prime minister is to move around the country to meet people. We talk a lot about making sure the economy works efficiently and that's important. But even more importantly of course is to make sure that our society works effectively, that our society works in a caring and compassionate fashion. There's no one of us, there is no one group of us that can deliver a society that is harmonious and compassionate and decent. We can only deliver it together. We in the Government have a role to play, you in the volunteer sector have a role to play, people representing business represent a sector that has a role to play and all of us as individuals, inspired in different ways, also have a role to play. And that's what I have in mind when I talk about the social coalition, it's about all of us pulling together to get the right results. 
And when I think of Australia I think of a number of concepts, I think of mateship, I think of the fair-go, I think of resilience and I also think of pulling together. We're at our best when we pull together, it's normally when we face some kind of disaster or common enemy, but often pulling together in a local community is confronting the common enemy of loneliness for the elderly, the common enemy of drug abuse which wreaks such tremendous havoc on the lives of people, and I've been touched by some of the stories that I've been told in the last half an hour about that. And these are enemies of society that all of us have to pull together to fight. And if today's gathering has given me an opportunity of communicating my commitment and my dedication to that pulling together I'm deeply grateful and we're very pleased to have you as our guests and I hope I can meet as many of you as possible.
Thank you.
[ends]


24 June 1997
E&amp;OE....................................................
Well thank you very much Sir Colin, and ladies and gentlemen. It is for me a very great pleasure to talk to the Confederation of British Industry and I must say Sir Colin in response that I suppose if you are faced with the combination of an Australian Prime Minister and 63 years of cricket history, your almighty is your only resort.
Ladies and gentlemen, I speak to you today as not only as Prime Minister of Australia, but somebody who on a personal basis is very strongly committed to the depth of the Anglo-Australian relationship. And as somebody who sees that relationship in anything but exclusively historical terms. It would of course be tempting given all of the history and all of the values and all of the shared experiences that our two countries have in common, it would be tempting to luxuriate entirely in the past and to think of our relationship as an entirely an historical one. And that my friends however accurate it may be in some respects, would of course be an enormous error. And one of the aims of the days that I've spent in the United Kingdom is to reinforce what is to my mind the great value of the relationship, and that is what it offers now and what it can offer to both our countries and both our societies in the future. And I am very happy to say that in the discussions I had with the new British Prime Minister, Mr Blair, last Thursday and in the discussions I've had with most of his senior ministers, and I'll be seeing the Foreign Secretary immediately after this luncheon, it is also the view of the new British government, and might I say also the view of the new leadership and the former leadership of the Conservative Party in this country, that the Anglo-Australian relationship is something that no matter what the richness of its history, ought to be seen in contemporary and futuristic terms.
We have of course not only deep bonds of values and culture and history and language and philosophy, but we also have very very deep and enduring economic links. For example, the aggregate foreign investment from the United States in the Australian economy is $107 billion. The United Kingdom is a bare $6 billion behind that at $101 billion and those two countries are significantly ahead of Japan, which is the third largest foreign investor in Australia at $55 billion. The United Kingdom remains for Australia a major destination of external investment, something in the order of $27-$30 billion and Australia competes with France and Germany for third position so far as the level of direct foreign investment in the United Kingdom is concerned, after the United States and The Netherlands.
So I speak to you against that very strong background of economic association and very much as seeing the relationship between our two countries in contemporary terms. I also take the opportunity to echo Sir Colin's remarks about the strength of the Australian economy. Our economic growth according to the OECD in the coming financial year is projected to be stronger than the averages of any of the G7 countries, at around 3.75 per cent. We expect to maintain an inflation rate of around 2 per cent.
My government inherited a fiscal deficit in an underlying sense of about $10.3 billion and by the end of our first three years in government, we will have converted that on projections into a surplus of $1.6 billion. By the year 2000 we will have almost halved the general government net debt as a ratio to GDP from 19.5 per cent to 10 per cent. Public debt and outlays to GDP in Australia will be the third lowest in the OECD area. Our housing interest rates are lower now than they have been since 1973. Business investment is running at 13 per cent of gross domestic product, a record in real terms. It grew 16 per cent in 1996-97 and is projected to grow at 8 per cent in 1997-98. And the most reputable, or one of the most reputable of the independent economic forecasters in Australia, projects that $92 billion is the aggregate of possible, probable and committed investment projects in Australia.
I mention these statistics because it is important that visiting Prime Minister states the bald facts and the important underlying facts about the strengths of our economy. It does have very great strengths and it has very great optimism. And some of that is due to past decisions, a lot of it is due to the changes that we have implemented since coming to power. We do have a coherent, integrated economic strategy. We want to raise national savings, and we want to pursue micro-economic reform to increase the growth potential of our country.
We have brought in a charter of budget honesty which entrenches principles of fiscal transparency. For example, whenever the next Australian election is called, the Federal Treasury will automatically publish a statement of account giving the real position of the budget, rather than a mythical, election-influenced version of that particular statistic. We have given the Reserve Bank of Australia an inflation target and we have formally established greater independence for the Central Bank.
Our landmark changes to the workplace relations legislation which came into operation on the 1st of January this year are now beginning to flow through with beneficial effect to the Australian economy. They entrench freedom of association, they contain effective sanctions against secondary boycotts, they facilitate non-union workplace agreements, and they significantly modify the anti-employment, unfair dismissal laws of the earlier legislation. We are implementing significant competition policy in the electricity - gas areas and from the 1st of July this year there will be a major deregulation of the telecommunications industry.
We've also made major changes of benefit to the small business community, and once again from the 1st of July any small business operator in Australia will be able to sell his or her small business and invest the proceeds of the sale of that business, up to a total of $5 million, without incurring any capital gains tax liability of any kind and that investment can take place in any kind of business and not just one of the type of the business that's been sold.
We are in the process of completing a very ambitious programme of privatisation, including of course the privatisation of all of the major airports of Australia. We secured Parliamentary approval to the sale of one-third of Telstra, the telecommunications operator in Australia, and that will comprise at a Federal level the largest privatisation in Australia's history. And I am interested to note that at a State level, the NSW government - its own internal party processes willing - will undertake a sale of the electricity operating capacity of that State, following the very successful privatisation programme carried out by the Coalition government in Victoria.
I mention those things to reinforce the fact ladies and gentlemen, that through Australia there is a very strong commitment to an ongoing process of micro-economic reform. The enquiry into the financial system chaired by Mr Stan Wallis, has made major recommendations which the Government will respond to very soon, and those recommendations if implemented could yield significant benefits in cost savings and efficiencies in the Australian economy.
And importantly, I have also re-opened the issue of taxation reform in Australia. We do have in Australia over-reliance on personal income tax as a source of revenue. I was reminded of this the other day in some discussions with group of British advisers, including the head of your Treasury, and it was pointed out to me that the reliance in the United Kingdom on income tax as a source of revenue is in the order of about 25 per cent of your total revenue. The figure in Australia is closer to about 50 per cent.
And that of course underlines the importance of tackling taxation reform. It has been a difficult issue in the past, many of you will be familiar with the views that emerged from the 1993 election campaign in Australia, but we cannot forever continue with a taxation system that has deleterious effects on incentive, and as time goes by will suck ordinary wage and salary earners into an unacceptably high level of personal taxation at the marginal rate.
I've already touched to my friends upon the strength and the importance of the bilateral economic relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom, but can I just make one thing that's very important about that relationship and that is that quite naturally the United Kingdom's future is very bound up with the future of Europe. That is understood by Australia and although there may be some features of that association which from time to time because of its impact on Australia may draw adverse comment, it is nonetheless an historical development which my country and my government understands only too well.
It is equally the case that Australia's economic and political future is very heavily involved with the Asia Pacific area. I've frequently been asked on my visit to the United Kingdom is my government any more or less committed to the links between Asia and Australia than the predecessors to my government. The answer to that is no. If there is a difference of emphasis, then the difference of emphasis is that we are following an "Asia also" approach and not an "Asia only" approach, and that we believe that the links between our country and the United Kingdom, our country and the nations of Europe and our country and North American remain very important in that they can be pursued in a way that is utterly complimentary to our relationship with the nations of the Asia-Pacific region. And when you think about it there are no two countries respectively in Europe and Asia who know each other better, trust each other more, and can contribute to each other more than Britain and Australia.
And perhaps one of the features of our modern and future association is that we can further help each other to understand and to interpret the respective regions which are our respective destinies in the future. All of us ladies and gentlemen will gain from further trade liberalisation. The APEC grouping in which Australia plays such an important and energetic role will push that agenda in our region. The WTO remains very important to the process of trade liberalisation, and we, if you will understand it - I am sure you do - will continue to argue very strenuously for reforms to the common agricultural policy of the European Union.
And no Australian Prime Minister ought to visit the United Kingdom or indeed any part of Europe and fail to remind European governments of the disproportionate impact of the common agricultural policy which involves a fifty percent subsidy for agriculture within the European Union, compared with a nine percent subsidy for Australia and it is a subsidy in the case of the European Union that absorbs almost half of the European Union budget and if I might throw in for good measure the average of manufacturing tariffs in Australia at the present time is about four percent.
Ladies and gentlemen, I therefore come and talk to you as first and foremost the Prime Minister of a country whose economy is strong, whose future prospects are exceedingly strong, and a nation and a people that has a very deep commitment to continued close association with the United Kingdom and the other nations of Europe, but a nation that fully understands the depth and the breadth of its future associations with the fastest growing region in the world and in the Asia-Pacific region.
We are good friends and the true test of a good friendship is that it can absorb disagreements and differences of opinion without that friendship being undermined. It is only in the fragile friendships and the peripheral friendships that cannot afford to absorb and cannot sustain differences of opinion. And it is inevitable that when you have a close relationship you will have disagreements, and how to handle those disagreements is a measure of the purity of the relationship. And one disagreement of some importance to my country which is emerging at the present time relates to the issues of climate change.
Australia's economy is very different from the United Kingdom's. We are an energy exporters, we are an efficient supplier of raw materials and a processor of those raw materials to the fastest growing region in the world. The proposals that the United Kingdom and other European Union members are pursuing in relation to Climate Change would have an adverse affect on the Australian economy.
If implemented they will lose, cost us around 2 percent of our GDP in the year 2010. The sectoral impact would be quite large, for example, our aluminium industry would be half its projected size and overall wages would have to fall against projections by nearly 20 percent by the year 2020 to accommodate the necessary adjustments to the Australian economy.
The welfare loss for the average Australian would be greater than that for the average European. No government in Australia could tolerate this impact and I can say without fear of contradiction that the Australian opposition agrees with us on this point.
In our view the pursuit of legally binding, uniform emission targets is unfair and an arrangement is that unfair will not be effective. And part of the reason for this is that the growth rate in emissions from developing countries is much higher than for developed countries.
By the year 2020, non-OECD countries will be producing over 70 percent of global emissions. The European Union's proposal will actually encourage emission intensive industries to move from developed countries to developing countries, thus helping to defeat the purpose of the whole exercise. For example, aluminium smelting which is done very competitively in Australia largely for export to the rest of the world would move to developing countries. There the smelting would continue to emit at the same rate if not at a greater one there would be no gain for the environment, the Australian economy would suffer and people in Australia would lose their jobs. And the global economy itself would also suffer.
Legally binding targets are therefore not only unfair, they are ineffective as a response to climate change and they are economically inefficient. For this reason, Australia has been proposing different targets for different countries. That would result in a more equitable sharing of the costs of reducing emissions, and a better chance of bringing developing countries into a global approach. The EU itself clearly recognises the logic of what I am arguing because it itself has agreed to different targets for member countries within an overall EU target or European Union bubble as it is described in the language of this particular debate.
Let me be clear in relation to this. I am not saying that there is no need to respond to the challenges of greenhouse gas emissions. Nor am I saying that Australia wants a free ride. We are prepared to pull our weight in developing energy efficient policies domestically, and our government and our industry has begun to make creditable progress in key areas.
For example, we have a co-operative programme with companies comprising 45% t of green house emissions and by the year 2000 they will reduce their projected emission levels by 14 percent below what otherwise would have been the level.
We are in the process of reforming electricity and gas markets. The Natural Heritage Trust of Australia which will invest $1 billion in restoring the Australian environment will reduce vegetation loss and revegetate degraded land. We have recently announced that we will phase out leaded petrol by the year 2010.
But an approach to reducing greenhouse gases which requires every developed country to make the same arbitrary cut regardless of the structure of the country's economy, regardless of the relative efficiency with which the country can reduce emissions, regardless of massive differences in costs to the individual economies into the global economy, and regardless of the need to find a way of engaging developing countries strikes us as irrational and ultimately unworkable.
What does not seem to be widely understood, is that the European Union's proposal would produce only marginal gains in terms of the world's total level of greenhouse gases. For example, if the EU's proposal were accepted, ie that OECD countries reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 15 percent by the year 2010, then global emissions would be around 7 percent lower only than if we were to proceed as usual.
Australia is arguing for a comprehensive approach which differentiates amongst all countries on a fair basis and will have a real and lasting impact on climate change.
Sir Colin and ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank the Confederation of British Industry for the opportunity that you have given me today to say a few words about the features and characteristics of the strength of the Australian economy, to reaffirm the tremendous importance that my government in Australia and the Australian people and the Australian business community places on the economic association between our two countries. And also, to take the opportunity of expressing the considerable respect that I have for the current state of the British economy. I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that the British economy is more robust and stronger and a more attractive place for investment than just about any economy in Europe and compares very favourably with others around the world.
I welcome the fact that in the discussions that I have had with your new Prime Minister and other senior members of his Government that there is an emphasis on the pursuit of pro-business policies. And that there is an emphasis on maintaining the quality and the momentum of the very significant economic reforms that were undertaken in this country in the 1980s and the early 1990s.
As somebody who first came to Britain as a just graduated working Australian who did Europe over a period of 12 months and who lived in this country for a large part of that time in the early 1960s and who has visited it on a number of occasions since, I must say that the apparent strength and robustness of the British economy and the optimism of its people is greater now than I think I have experienced at any time over that period of 30 years. And for somebody who puts store on the Anglo-Australian relationship and who wants to make his own small contribution to the strengthening of that relationship that is a very welcome development and I thank you most warmly for your courtesy and for your hospitality.
Thank you.


Subjects: Drug abuse prevention
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Major Watters, the Premier of Queensland Peter Beattie, Mr Tony McGrady the Police Minister, Police Commissioner, members of the Australian National Council on Drugs, ladies and gentlemen.
I share completely the personal commitment of the Premier to doing all we can in our respective roles to address the drug problem and the drug challenge in Australia.  It is a terrible human tragedy for so many people.  Like the Premier, my wife and I have three children, they';re a little older, they';re now in their 20';s but we went through the concern that he spoke of.  Touch wood, we hope they';ve emerged unscathed.  But nobody should imagine that any part of society, any parent in Australia is somehow or another immune or can be divorced from the drug menace.  Parents have to be vigilant, parents have to talk to their children, parents have to explain, parents have to reason, parents have to be realistic enough to understand that it can touch anybody.  And they need help, they need the reinforcement that Government policies bring, they need the assistance of the police, they need the understanding of great welfare organisations that are at the coal face of fighting the drug problem.
Yesterday as some of you know the Cabinet had a community luncheon - Federal Cabinet - at the Greek Club.  And we invited people from different community organisations to come and talk to us.  The second person I met was a lady who';s story appeared in the Courier Mail this morning who';s daughter had died the day before from a drug overdose.  And I spent 10 or 15 minutes doing what I could to comfort this poor lady who';s beautiful daughter had taken a drug overdose the day before.  And she was carrying her photograph and she was a beautiful girl in her 20';s.  Those sorts of things are the, the absolute ultimate sharp end if you like of the human dimension.  I tried as best I could to offer some words of comfort to her, of course you can';t in a situation like that.  But it drove home to me in a very direct way the ongoing challenge that';s involved for all of us.  
And that';s why it';s important on issues like this that political and state-federal differences are put aside and I';m very happy to say that in relation to the diversion agreement program that comes out of our $500 million Tough on Drugs strategy I';ve had the total cooperation of all of the state governments irrespective of their politics.  I';ve had strong cooperation from the Labor Premiers of NSW and Victoria and I';m now delighted to say that we';ve now signed an agreement with Queensland.  And it does involve this principle of diversion, of giving people who are caught up in a preliminary way with the criminal justice system the option of undertaking rehabilitation and treatment or getting sucked into the criminal justice system.  And we';re focusing in Queensland initially as the Premier said on the possession of small amounts of cannabis.  And the whole idea is to confront people with a choice, right at the beginning to give them the option that if they undertake treatment and rehabilitation - there';s no problem with the criminal justice system - but if they don';t they run the risk of being caught up in it.
And the whole Tough on Drugs strategy is based on three approaches.  One of them is of course to invest resources in law enforcement.  And I want to salute the role of the Police, the State Police and the Federal Police and the Customs Service for what they do in relation to seizures of drugs.  And despite all of the criticism and cynicism in the media and the bad news stories and the sense that we';re swimming against the tide in relation to drugs, the seizures have actually gone up dramatically in the last few years.  And there';s been tremendous cooperation between the Federal Police and the State Police and no one agency can do it on it';s own, they need to work together.  And I thank the Police Commissioners in the various states for what they have done.
The second element is education and that is trying to practice the old adage that prevention is better than cure.  That educating people at an early age not to start taking drugs and that involves a responsibility of schools.  But I will say one thing in a completely non-political way about the recent by-election.  I was delighted to see the school principal suggesting that one of the candidates who was advocating the proliferation of marijuana use, I was delighted to see the school principal throw him off the grounds of the school.  I think all the other candidates involved, what ever their differences on other issues, would have felt exactly the same way.  We need school principals in both the Government sector and in the independent sector to take a tough stand on drugs and I applaud the stand that is taken by so many schools in both the Government and the independent sectors to take that stand.  
And the third and very important element in what this agreement is all about is committing resources, more resources towards rehabilitation.  I';ve met many people who';ve been touched by the drug problem in a very direct, personal and tragic way.  I';ve had a lot of talk back radio calls on the issue.  And the most heart rending in a way of the calls I get are from mothers who say that their children want to get onto a programme but they can';t find one or can';t find one quickly enough.  And any thing that any of us can do to increase the commitment to programmes and in the case of this diversion agreement we';re committing $19 million towards it at a Federal level in total cooperation with the State Government.
What it will do is to confront people with the opportunity of going into rehabilitation rather than going into the criminal justice system.  I think it is a better approach, it is a new approach, it';s an approach that maintains a balanced attack on the drug problem.  You need tough law enforcement, you need to grab and prosecute and jail indefinitely the peddlers, you need education and you also need rehabilitation.  And we need the cooperation of everybody and that';s what this is about.  It';s not about one person or one agency doing it on it';s own, it';s a nation wide assault on a scourge and I';m delighted to have the cooperation of the Queensland Government and I thank the Premier for his total support and the Police Minister.  And we';ll work together, I promise you, very closely to make sure that this campaign of ours together will make a difference.  And what';s involved of course is the most precious commodity of all, and that is the preservation of the life of our young. 
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: National Illicit Drugs Strategy
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Michael.  To Major Brian Watters; to Ross Cameron, the federal member for Parramatta.  I think appropriately this launch is taking place in Ermington in the electorate of Parramatta, very much in the middle of middle Australia because this is a campaign which is very direct and very unambiguous in its intent. And I also acknowledge the presence of the Mayor of Parramatta - Councillor Wearne, and my parliamentary colleague Senator Bill Heffernan, and all the other members of the National Council on Drugs which has been so material in helping the government to put together this campaign.  And particularly to Professor Margaret Hamilton, the Chairman of the reference group who worked so very hard on collating so much of the material which is contained in the booklet that is going to be distributed to every home in Australia over the next few days.
This is a very direct, some would say confrontational, if so, I offer no apologies for that, unambiguous appeal to the parents of Australia who are our greatest resource in fighting the drug problem to join not only the government but also each other in making a difference by talking to, explaining, discussing, exploring with their children the dangers of beginning to take drugs, the consequences if you do, frankly acknowledging drug taking of their own if that has occurred, exercising patience and understanding, but equally not being afraid to set limits.
There are acres of news print and hours of television and radio time which are committed to describing the dimension of drugs and the impact that they have on the lives of Australian families that they visit with tragedy and death and sadness and a sense of despair and failure.  Only last week at a community gathering in Brisbane I was met by a lady clutching a photograph of her daughter who died from an overdose the day before.  And all I could do was put my arm around her and say in an all too inadequate way how I would try and understand the sense of loss and devastation that she felt.  Of the experiences that I';ve had as a member of Parliament, sitting in my electorate in Gladesville and talking to people whose children have overdosed, whose children have died by their own hand largely in many cases because of the impact of taking drugs.
I am very personally committed to this campaign.  I feel a sense of responsibility as the head of the government to be very directly involved.  And it';s not a campaign which is obsessed with ideology. It is a campaign that obsessed with concern.  It';s obsessed with a desire of finding different ways of trying to help people.  It';s based upon three things. It';s based firstly on education and I';ll return to that in a moment. It';s also based on law enforcement, it';s also based on rehabilitation.  And as Michael Wooldridge said it';s a campaign, the Tough on Drugs campaign is something that commands in relation to 95% of what it says : the total cooperation across the political divide of all of the governments of Australia.  
I';m pleased to say that in the last year I have personally launched diversion programs in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane with the Labor Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland.  I know that each of them along with the other premiers of Australia, irrespective of their politics, are deeply concerned about the threat posed by drugs to the young in our community.  They';re determined to work with me, they';re determined to work with each other and I acknowledge the cooperation of the federal and state health departments, I acknowledge the cooperation of the federal and the state police, and I particularly acknowledge the cooperation of so many welfare voluntary organisations and individual parents who';ve suffered the sadness and tragedy of losing children to drug abuse.  I thank all of them for the contributions that they have made.
Now this part of the program seeks quite unashamedly to appeal to the families of Australia to share the burden, to play a part.  It encourages them to talk to their children.  That';s not always easy.  All of us as parents encounter occasions when it';s difficult to broach subjects with our children. None of us is a genius at that.  And any Australian parent who feels oh this is a bit difficult my message to them is you are not alone.  There are millions of other Australian parents who feel an equal sense of difficulty.  As a parent myself I don';t claim any particular expertise.  All of us bring to our parental responsibilities, a sense of commitment, a love of our children, and a sense of responsibility about their future.  Interestingly enough the research that';s been carried out to underpin this program has revealed the fact that something like 70% of children are anxious to talk to their parents about things such as drugs.  
And what this booklet seeks to do in a very understandable, direct, no-nonsense fashion, is to talk about what parents might say to their children in relation to drugs.  It doesn';t lecture them, it doesn';t sermonise, it doesn';t moralise, but it does provide information.  It provides valuable information about the different substances, about their street names.  It provides valuable information about the likely responses of children. It provides valuable guidance for parents.  It encourages them not to be judgmental, but it equally imposes them not to be reluctant to set limits.  
Like all things in life good parenting is a balance.  You shouldn';t drive your children away by sermonising and moralising, but equally you shouldn';t be afraid to set limits because you do bring to the relationship an experience and a maturity which they respect.  And trying to achieve that balance is not always easy. But maintaining communication with your children, the ability to talk to them about anything and everything at a time not of planning but at a time when somehow or other through some coincidence of circumstances you both find it convenient and easy to talk.  That is the time when parents must seize the moment to talk very directly to their children.
I';m quite unashamed in my view that our strongest defence against the drug problem are families.  Properly functioning, stable, united loving families, whatever their composition, are still the best antidote against most of societies ills.  So this is a $27 million public education program. It seeks to persuade young Australians not to begin illicit drug taking.  It is as simple as that.  It';s an old adage that prevention is better than cure. And persuading young Australians not to start drug taking in the first place is still the best remedy.  As Michael Wooldridge pointed out this country has a very proud record in relation to public education campaigns on health issues. It';s one of the areas where the rest of the world should follow the Australian example rather than Australia following the rest of the world.  Michael mentioned the success of the drink driving campaign, he mentioned the success of the campaign against tobacco consumption.  I might also add to that the very successful, in relative terms, campaign in relation to Aids where Australia has been relatively speaking more successful than most other countries.
Now I hope that this campaign, designed very directly and in a way that I hope will make an impact, and in a no holes barred fashion, I hope that what it will do is to encourage millions of parents around Australia to redouble their efforts in relation to their children, particularly in their vulnerable and sensitive years, encourage parents to talk in a sensible, even authoritative, but understanding way to their children.  If they can reach them on this subject then we have a real hope in this country of overcoming this problem.  It isn';t easy.  You can never declare victory.  But you can keep trying to make a difference and you can keep trying to enlist the resources and the commitment and the dedication and the goodwill of people throughout the entirety of the Australian community.
I do what to thank Major Brian Watters, the Chairman of the Council, and all the current and former members of the council, for the tremendous effort that have put in to advising me and helping me.  Can I say to them and can I say to you ladies and gentlemen that there is a far greater sense of unity and goodwill and commitment throughout the Australian community, both at a government and a non-government level in relation to this problem.  There is a strong view that we need to educate our children.  There is a strong view that we need to maintain tough law enforcement measures, and there is a strong view that we need more rehabilitation facilities.  Our Tough on Drugs strategy in cooperation with the state governments of Australia is designed to do precisely that.  In a moment I';ll launch and you will see the television campaign and in launching this campaign and these television advertisements will be shown across au tonight in prime time.  
They are designed to provoke, they are designed to provoke discussion and debate and I hope agreement about the need for greater parental involvement. They are designed to remind people of the devastating personal consequences of drug abuse, and above all they are designed to instil in the Australian community a greater sense of urgency and a greater sense of responsibility about this terrible scourge that our community faces.  I thank you very warmly for your attendance and I have very great pleasure in launching the National Illicit Drugs Campaign.  Thank you. 


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Ella.  To Rob Bastian, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It is an important occasion this.  It does represent the first national small business summit and I congratulate COSBOA on the enormous effort that has been put in to organising this gathering. 
It';s not only important because it';s the first time such a gathering has taken place, but it';s also occurring at a time when for very understandable reasons which I will address very directly in the course of my speech, there is a very big focus on the role of small business in the Australian economy.
I come to this gathering not only as Prime Minister but also as somebody who';s very proud of his own small business heritage.  My father was a small businessman having run as many of you know a petrol service station in the inner suburbs of Sydney between the late 1920s and the mid 1950s.  As a young child, as a teenager I knew something of the frustrations and challenges of somebody running a small business. I';ve never forgotten the fairly peremptory way in which the local council instructed my father to remove the petrol pump from the kerb side apparently without much feeling as to the impact of such a bureaucratic instruction on the conduct of his business.  So when small businessmen and women speak to me of government and bureaucratic insensitivity, and I say government and bureaucratic because sometimes the insensitivity flows from political decision making and not all of it can be apportioned to bureaucratic decision making, I do have some understanding of what people are really talking about.
The small business sector is of immense importance to the Australian economy.  This is probably an audience better than any that understands just how much employment it accounts for.  And when we came to government we were determined to try and make a difference for small business, we were determined to try and improve the economic conditions in which you operate.  And I would argue with great passion and conviction that despite some of the criticisms you may have to make, and I';ll deal with those in a moment, we have by and large delivered on that promise. 
The economic climate in Australia now is vastly stronger and better than what it was five years ago.  We do have lower interest rates, vastly lower interest rates now. Many of you will remember the interest rates of 20% to 21% that obtained in the early years of the '90s and the in the late '80s.  You will all remember those and none of you I';m sure will want to return to those rather dismal days.  We did set our face very determinedly towards reforming Australia';s antiquated industrial relations system.  And to me it remains a source of very considerable pride that we have changed the industrial relations culture of this country.  Now that means different things to different people in small business.  To some of you that doesn';t matter very much because you were not in businesses that were touched by the activities of unions. 
But many of you are in businesses that were and will in the future if there';s a change of government be touched by the activities of unions because if there';s one thing we can be utterly certain of without any contradiction that if there is a change of government at the end of this year the union boys and girls will be back in the box seat and that will make an enormous difference.  And we saw an example of it last night in the Senate where a measure that your own Chief Executive - Rob Bastian - said would generate 50,000 jobs in small business - that is Tony Abbott';s legislation to get rid of the unfair dismissal laws - that was again, what for the fourth time, thrown out by the combined votes of the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats.  Now that particular measure we will continue to put up and we';ll continue to pursue it. I  regard the existing unfair dismissal laws as an absurd impost on the small business community of Australia. 
But we have tried to create a better and a stronger economic climate.  We';ve not only seen interest rates fall, we';ve not only seen other changes, but of course we';ve also seen a very significant reduction in government debt.  You all know that when you have debt you';ve got to service it.  I don';t want to burden you with too many figures tonight but the federal government';s debt to GDP ratio in Australia now stands at only 6.4%.  And if you think that sounds too much let me remind you that in Japan it';s 130%, and in the United States it';s something like 45%. And repaying that debt has given an underlying strength to the Australian economy which was very important at the time of the Asian economic downturn and is very important now that we have moved into a somewhat more challenging economic circumstance.
You are all aware that we recorded in the December quarter the first negative growth figure for nine years.  And that was a set back, it was a disappointment.  It was a matter of regret to the government and to many in the community. It';s important though we keep a sense of perspective about it.  Something like 95% of the Australian economy continued according to our advice to grow at roughly 4%.  But the remaining 5% comprising largely of the construction industry suffered a severe downturn. The downturn in the housing industry after the introduction of the GST, we expected a significant downturn because of the natural pull forward of economic activity prior to the introduction of the GST, the downturn in that sector was much sharper than we had believed was likely. And when we saw the December quarter figures you will be aware that the Government decided within the period of two days to inject a further $150 million over the next 12 calender months into the economy via a doubling of the first homeowners grant for new dwellings. That combined with very significant reductions in interest rates that have occurred over recent months will we believe act as a major source of stimulus to economic activity in the housing and construction industry over the remainder of this year.
But it is enormously important at this particular time when for the first time in years we are dealing with a negative quarter of economic growth to keep a sense of perspective.  One quarter of economic growth does not devour five years of achievement and progress.  One quarter of economic growth does not mean that in the irresponsible words of one newspaper headline Australia has hit the wall.  One quarter of economic growth does not presage a recession.  It certainly does not represent a return to the days of astronomical high interest rates and much greater high unemployment.
The only real threat we have to continued economic prosperity in this country is if we talk ourselves into a sense of doom and gloom and despair, if we lose confidence in our capacity as a nation and a people to deal with economic challenges.  And my strongest request, entreaty to all of you is to have a sense of proportion and a sense of balance about what has occurred, to understand that when the basics of our economy are so much stronger than they were a few years ago we have a much greater capacity to deal with temporary adversity.
As all of you know we went to the 1998 election with a detailed plan to change Australia';s taxation system.  We have needed taxation reform in this country for more than a quarter of a century.  And we decided before the 1998 election to put that plan in detail in front of the Australian people and to invite them to support it or reject it.  They decided to support it. Not without some reservation, not in the eyes of many people without some trepidation but they decided to support it.  It was a risk both politically and otherwise.  But we decided that it was a reasoned risk that was worth taking politically because we believed that in the long run it would be of fundamental benefit to the Australian economy.  And that remains my very passionate conviction.  I know we are going through some difficulties with it at the moment.  I am aware of the political adversity that the Government is suffering at the present time.  But that is not shaking my conviction that what we are doing and what we have done is the right thing.  
I want to say to all of you as representatives of the small business community in Australia that I am very grateful, the Government is much in your debt, and the Government is very comprehending of the challenges that you have had to deal with in implementing the new system. I knew that there would be challenges for the small business sector. The consumer acceptance of the new tax proved to be better than the doomsayers and our opponents predicted and wanted.  But the small business sector has had some challenges, particularly in relation to the compliance regime.  I';m aware of that and as early as November of last year I said that if changes in the Business Activity Statement, and other changes in relation to compliance were needed, the Government would be willing to respond.  And many of you will know that we had a lengthy meeting in Sydney attended by your President on behalf of COSBOA and many other organisations with the Commissioner of Taxation, and the Treasurer, the Small Business Minister and myself, and we sat down and we broadly reached agreement on changes that would be made.
Now I don';t regard those changes as representing in any way a backflip or a retreat.  But if they are in the eyes of some well so be it.  The important thing is that we are engaged in implementing the biggest change to Australia';s taxation system in the lifetime of anybody in this room.  And when you are elected to high office, particularly to the office I hold, you really have two choices.  You can opt for the easy life of enjoying the privilege of being Prime Minister, and it is an immense privilege to be Prime Minister of this wonderful country.  Or you can decide that in certain areas of public policy you';re going to try and make a difference, you';re going to try and see it through until a change that you believe in and you believe is important to the long term benefit of the country is achieved. We are going through some of the more difficult aspects of implementing that change.  I certainly don';t underestimate the challenges that many of you face and I certainly don';t underestimate the broader political challenge that I face. But if I had my time over again I wouldn';t have adopted a different course because I do believe that when it is bedded down we will have a much better tax system. I also know this, as certain as you can be of anything that if we are replaced by our political opponents at the election in a couple of years time you won';t see much difference in the tax system either.  
The reality is that deep down everybody of any consequence in Australian politics has known for years that we';ve needed a new tax system.  We';ve been running away from it as a country for a generation.  The difference is that the Government I lead decided that we should stop running away from it and we should face up to our responsibility to bring about change.
Now we will continue to monitor very closely and we';ll continue to consult very closely.  And may I say that one of the reasons in the reshuffle that I appointed a minister specifically, with the sole responsibility of dealing with small business and it';s Ian Macfarlane, somebody who';s had a small business background and small business experience, was to increase the level of communication and increase the level of contact between the Government and the small business community.
Now we';re going to continue to listen and communicate very closely with you about the further implementation of the tax changes.  And we stand ready, if it';s necessary, to further finetune the compliance procedures.  Now somebody here might jump up and say 'oh that';s rollback'; - how ridiculous.  Rollback is when you take the tax off items that it is on, it';s not when you elect to improve and make smoother the administrative implementation of the new system.  When you bring in a new system of this magnitude, the very suggestion that you could have every single administrative procedure exactly right at the very beginning and never have to change any of it is palpably absurd.  I believe the changes that were made and announced by the Treasurer on behalf of the Government a few weeks ago represent very, very significant and very important and I believe lasting changes.  And the reaction that I';ve had from most people, certainly here tonight, mean that they are changes that by and large have met the concerns that people have expressed.  
I don';t know whether there are any food retailers here tonight, but can I say to them as an example of our ongoing determination to make further improvements and changes where it';s necessary that you';ll be aware that food retailers were given access to certain simplified accounting methods with an annual turnover of between $1 million and $2 million.  And that $2 million ceiling was originally intended as only a transitional arrangement during the first twelve months of the operation of the new system.  I can now inform you tonight, that that will become a permanent feature, up to a level of $2 million, of the new system.  And that means that the transitional measure, those.no longer a transitional measure, that those businesses up to a level of $2 million will be given access to the snapshop, the snapshot rather and the analysis of purchase, simplified accounting method operating under the new taxation system.  
I remind you that on the 1st of July, financial institutions'; duty will be completely abolished as an incidence of the new taxation system.  I';d also remind you that company tax is scheduled to fall from 34 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar on the 1st of July also under the new taxation arrangements.  It is important that we constantly remind ourselves that we are dealing here with a total change to the taxation system.  We';re not dealing just with a GST, we';re not just dealing with cuts in personal income tax, we';re not just dealing with the virtual halving of capital gains'; tax.  We are dealing with what in aggregate is the largest tax change or revolution that this country has had, as I said before, in the lifetime of anybody in this room. And it';s my view that given the magnitude of the change and the challenge and the task that was involved, that the Australian community has responded in a quite magnificent fashion.  
It';s not only represented a huge change in the way in which the business community and in many cases individual Australians interact with the taxation system, but it also has brought in a huge change in the financial relations between the states and the Commonwealth.  Under the new tax system all of the GST revenue goes to the Australian states, every last dollar.  Not one dollar of the GST revenue goes to the federal government. And can I say on the subject of revenue, and I say this in specific response to a gentleman who spoke to me about it just before I got up to deliver this address, can I dispel very deliberately and very explicitly the false notion held by many in the community perhaps as a result of rather careless reporting, that we are collecting billions more under the GST than we were advised would be the case.  We are not.  We are not billions ahead.  We';re not even hundreds of millions ahead.  Indeed the Treasury Tax Office estimates in relation to collections have proved certainly not to have been too conservative and indeed any suggestion that we';re ahead at all in relation to collections on the latest advice that I have, is completely wrong.  
Now it';s important that I make that point because there is a view to be found in some small business circles as well as generally in the community that we are raking in billions more than we predicted we would.  Ladies and gentlemen I have to tell you that that is not right.  We are broadly collecting what our advisers said would turn out to be the case.  And I repeat that all of that GST revenue goes to the states and as the years go by for the first time since the introduction of uniform taxation as a war time measure in 1942, the states of Australia will have access to a growth tax which will deliver rising revenues to them in the years ahead.  The year after next will see the state of Queensland, the first of the Australian states to be better off under the GST arrangement than they would have been if they had continued with the old arrangement.  And as each year goes by other states will join Queensland in being so advantaged by the introduction of the new tax system. Now this means that the states will have growing capacity as a result of our taxation reforms which most of them opposed politically but happily signed up to, they will have access to growing revenues to provide schools and hospitals and police services and all the other day-to-day bread and butter responsibilities which are important to keep a community together and are important to good government.  
So ladies and gentlemen I have greatly welcomed the opportunity.  Tonight';s gathering is timely for me.  I hope it';s been timely for you.  I say again how personally committed I am to the role of the small business community in Australian life.  It is the great employer.  It is the great innovator.  It';s the great engine room of activity and enterprise within the Australian community.  It suits the Australian character.  We are not a people that happily accept regimentation, we are not a people who easily lend ourselves to conformity.  Australians like nothing other than to start with nothing and to build something up and leave a bit behind.  Australians are always impressed with the notion of achievement, of individual initiative and of self-reliance.  There are many great Australian characteristics and that characteristic of self-reliance is to be found very much within the small business community of Australia.  I know that the Government has its critics in the small business community.  I know that not all members of it are our supporters.  But that matters not, in the end what does matter is the desire and the commitment of this Government to sympathise with your sector, where we believe we can in the interests of good public policy introduce policies which are beneficial.  We believe we have done that overwhelmingly in the economic climate that we have created.  We believe that our commitment to free industrial relations, our determination to resist the intrusion of union power into the small business sector is very important to your wellbeing.  We acknowledge with gratitude the way in which the small business sector has grappled with the implementation of the new tax system. 
We will continue to listen very closely to your concerns on that front.  We believe that the benefits of that new system will continue to become apparent to the Australian people and in the end most of the community will look back on this period in our economic experience of being one in which a government with the co-operation of the business community was prepared to undertake a change that in the short-term may have presented challenge and it certainly has, but in the medium to longer-term will leave this country stronger and better economically, more modern, more competitive and more able to work effectively in the broader world community.  And in the end that is the key to the ongoing prosperity of the Australian community.  I thank you very warmly for your understanding and your partnership in this very important enterprise. Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Work for the Dole
E&amp;OE..................................
Thank you very much Mal the Minister for Employment Services, Tony Abbott the Minister for Employment, Workplace Relations and Small Business, Peter Shergold the Departmental Secretary, my other Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and Gentlemen.  I'm delighted to be associated again with this achievement night, honouring those people who've contributed so much to the outstanding success of a programme which, I believe, has proved to be a new effective and encouraging way of coping with an age old difficulty and an age old social challenge.  And that is reconnecting people who are out of work with the experience needed to give them the confidence and the skills and the capacity and most importantly the encouragement and the moral to become full time members of the workforce.
Work for the Dole was introduced in 1997 and it's been successful for three major reasons.  It's been successful because it gives expression to Australian principles.  It gives expression to the notion of encouraging people to be self-reliant.  It's also been successful because its implementation involves encouraging different sections of the Australian community to pull together and work towards a common goal or a common cause.  Also importantly it's been successful because it carries a label which everybody can understand.  One of the more challenging things in modern society as it becomes increasingly more complicated and increasingly more intricate and detailed and technical is to find a way of communicating with one another about something in terms that everybody can understand.
I had a very strong view from the very beginning that we ought to introduce this scheme under the description of Work for the Dole.  Because although in the eyes of some that was a politically incorrect way of describing something my very strong view, despite those reservations was something that everybody could understand.  And in the end, communicating what you are on about in simple unmistakable terms is very important.  And the people who have been the greatest advocates of Work for the Dole are in the main the 110,000 Australians who passed through it.  Who have enjoyed, as a result of the experience that they have received in Work for the Dole programs, they have enjoyed a remarkable success rate in obtaining full time employment.  They've not only got jobs but they've been given back self respect and hope and morale and encouragement.
And I've visited a lot of Work for the Dole projects and it really is very important that people who participate in those schemes do get a sense of satisfaction and a sense of well being.  And I know a number of anecdotes have been delivered by Peter Shergold in the presentation he made tonight and certainly I read his speech in advance and certainly those anecdotes resonate very much with me.
We talk a lot quite properly in our society about the importance of economic achievement and economic efficiency.  But of course economic achievement and economic efficiency are never ends in themselves, they are merely means to producing a happier and a more contented and a more fulfilled Australian society.  And one of the things that is an absolutely essential ingredient to a more contented and more fulfilled Australian society is that we leave no stone unturned to provide every Australian man and women with an opportunity of playing a meaningful role in the Australian workforce.
Unemployment is a constant challenge, it's lower now than it used to be but it's higher than it ought to be.  And we should never rest in the ceaseless quest to find new and better ways of getting people back to work.  Economic growth is part of it but also giving people skills and giving people a sense of respect.  And if you can do that by involving the community, if you can enlist the good will of individuals of a philanthropic bent, if you can utilise the skills and the understanding of the great welfare organisations of Australia and if you can involve the Government agencies, and I want to thank Peter Shergold and his department for the quite magnificent job that he and they have done in implementing the Work for the Dole scheme.
It's a great example of how our system of Government works.  A new Government comes in and implements a completely new policy.  A policy that was bitterly criticised by many when it was first mooted.  A policy that had been explicitly rejected by earlier Governments of both political persuasions to their great credit and bureaucracy says right that's the policy of the Government, it's our responsibility to see that it works.  And they have done that and they have discharged their responsibility in relation to that quite magnificently.
I also want in his presence to thank Tony Abbott for the work that he did specifically in relation to Work for the Dole in the time that he was Minister for Employment Services.  Now I'm pretty proud of what's been done and the reason why I'm proud of what's been done is I think it's given meaning and hope and encouragement and restored faith to tens of thousands of mainly young Australians.  And that really is the most worthwhile thing that any Government can do.  That's a far more heart-warming thing than some kind of impressive economic figure or statistic.  Because what you're dealing with here is you're dealing with human happiness and you're dealing with personal fulfilment and personal contentment and I think Work for the Dole is part of the many things that we try to do as a society to make people feel part of the nation in every sense of the word.  To make people feel that they are important.  To remind every individual that he or she has a place in our community.  And Work for the Dole is part of the many things we do to achieve those goals.  So I am delighted to be here, I'm delighted to thank and congratulate all of those involved and to wish well to everybody who will be involved in the year ahead.  We hope to place something like 50,000 people in Work for the Dole during the current financial year and that is a measure of how the programme is going from strength to strength and I thank all of those who've contributed to that achievement most warmly.
[ends]


23 June 1997
E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard are you willing to accept a sunset clause in the Work for the Dole scheme?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. I think we should get the whole bill and I welcome the change of heart by the Labor Party. They have caught up with the rest of the world, including here in Britain where there are lots of similarities between the approach of the new Labor Government and our approach. You need a number of strategies to do with unemployment and our Work for the Dole proposal is but one of those - an important one, and I welcome the fact that the Labor party appears to be shifting ground.
JOURNALIST:
But the Senate battle is not over.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the minute to minute detail is something my colleagues back in Australia can handle but the Labor Party has given up on the threshold issue and that is very welcome.
JOURNALIST:
On the trip, Prime Minister, you promised the party before you left you would attack Pauline Hanson in tonight's speech and you haven't. Why is that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, what I said is that I would deal with the issue, but I decided...
JOURNALIST:
You said you would in that speech?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, no. I decided that as the issue was raised in the context of the interviews that I did on the BBC it was.... I had covered the issues then. And I hadn't expected that and that is why I decided not to deal with it.
JOURNALIST:
Do you stand by Geoff Prosser?
PRIME MINISTER:
Absolutely.
JOURNALIST:
Isn't it an issue though that needs further reiteration?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I think there is a balance you have to strike between on the one hand dealing with it, and where appropriate attacking, and on the other hand keeping the untrue and negative publicity associated with it going. I mean every time you talk about it it gets another run. And everybody says "isn't this ridiculous and outrageous and terrible" but you keep talking about it. So, you're really between the devil and the deep blue sea. As the issue was raised on the BBC with me by three commentators and one was stupid enough to talk about "rampant racism" in Australia, I mean, I nearly fell of my the decision after that interview not to further refer to it lest I run the risk of perpetuating the new urban myth that appears to be around.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Mr Prosser has misled the House over his business dealings...
PRIME MINISTER:
This is my last answer but I don't know what exactly, exactly what he said in the House today. And I really think the last sort of figleaf of a London convention should be preserved in relation to not sort of talking about..... don't ask me to interpret what was said in the House a few hours ago. I mean, I have a lot of confidence in him. Full confidence in him. But as to the nuances as to what was said in the House today, leave that to the boys and girls back home.


E&amp;OE................................
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I've called this news conference this afternoon to comment on the plan revealed in the Australian newspaper yesterday by Simon Crean that a future Labor Government would increase the superannuation guarantee charge from the maximum now legislated of 9% to 15%. If that were to occur up to 200,000 jobs would be at risk. It would be a direct addition to labour costs. It sits very oddly with the claim made in the same interview that Labor would reduce unemployment to 5%, and it represents another savage impost particularly on small business.
When we were elected in 1996 we said that we would honour the legislation put in place by the Keating Government. The Coalition if re-elected will not increase the charge beyond the existing 9%. Labor by contrast would slug the business community another 6%. It would not only be an additional burden particularly for small business, but it would cut the number of jobs up to 200,000 according to economic modelling normally employed with these things, coming on top of Labor's opposition to unfair dismissal changes, secondary boycott protection under the Trade Practices Act, and general commitment to wind back workplace relations reform under the present Government, all of which have been promised at the behest of the trade union movement. It shows just how unfriendly a future Labor Government would be to the business community, particularly to small firms.
JOURNALIST:
So do you believe the 9% is adequate?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes. We don't have any commitment to go beyond the 9%.
JOURNALIST:
Where will those 200,000 jobs come from?
PRIME MINISTER:
They could be right across the board. I mean economists say that a 1% addition to labour costs has a half a per cent impact on employment growth. Even applying that figure conservatively, given Mr Crean's promise, it represents quite a threat to employment growth and incredibly enough in the same jumbled interview he says that a future Labor Government would have an unemployment target of 5%. Like so many of the other promises made in a quite remarkable interview, which is full of internal contradictions, that simply doesn't add up.
JOURNALIST:
Would you reduce it?
PRIME MINISTER:
No. We promised when we came to government that we would honour the legislation put in place by the former government. And the former government legislated to a maximum of 9%. We don't favour going any further than that. We think that is a burden enough for the business community, particularly small firms. We have other provisions encouraging people to make their own arrangements for superannuation. We are not in favour of going above the 9%.
JOURNALIST:
Labor's always said the next election will be won or lost on economic management. So what do you think this says about their economic management policies so far?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I found Mr Crean's interview yesterday bizarre and contradictory and certainly the interview of somebody who is still driven by his trade union roots.
JOURNALIST:
Can I just ask you about the Sunday program just in relation to an abattoir business in Victoria apparently involved in some union busting techniques. I guess people think of the stevedores immediately. Do you see any relation there at all, any correlation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don't know anything about it. I didn't see the program.
JOURNALIST:
Well okay. It was about..
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to comment on something I didn't see.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister are you disappointed with the Democrats' ballot?
PRIME MINISTER:
That's a matter for the Democrats.
JOURNALIST:
But if you're working with the leader of an opposition party..
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'll deal with whoever's the leader of the Australian Democrats. People have got to be judged on how they deal with particular issues not on their general political rhetoric. I'll just wait and see. I'll deal with the new leadership team. I congratulate them. I also record my respect for what Meg Lees did as leader of the Australian Democrats. History will record that she did the right thing by Australia in backing taxation reform. This country needed taxation reform. This country will be better for taxation reform and in the medium to longer term the benefits of that taxation reform will be apparent to everybody and Meg Lees is to be thanked for putting Australia's interests ahead of other interests.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Ian. To Tony Muller, Mr Wen, ladies and gentlemen. First of all can I welcome those of you who don't work here to what those who work here and people like myself who represent this division in Federal Parliament, welcome to the high-tech capital of Australia. Because undoubtedly North Ryde has become increasingly well known, indeed almost famous for being a location of and the home to so many companies which are involved in high-tech businesses, not the least, telecommunications and communications generally.
I want to very warmly thank JDS Uniphase for the multi-million investment that it has made here. For the jobs that you have created. For the exports you have generated and for the lustre that your company has brought to the reputation of Australia as being a country of ideas, as having people who are able to participate at the leading edge of the communications revolution that is occurring around the world.
I understand that this operation alone accounts for about 10% of Australia's telecommunications' exports. This investment here and the R&amp;D capacity has resulted in the generation of hundreds of jobs and as Mr Muller just pointed out as a result of the additional investment even more jobs are going to be created. What you are doing here is part and parcel of a great surge in the commitment of the Australian people and Australian companies, in partnership with companies from around the world in making sure that our country has a sizeable share of the communications revolution which is taking place.
Only two months ago I announced on behalf of the Government, a programme of expenditure of $3 billion under the title of Backing Australia's Ability which represented the biggest ever investment by a federal government in technology, innovation and scientific research. And the various measures that comprised this package will give further strength to the commitment we already have as a nation to the development of high-tech industries. The good news about the communications revolution is two-fold. It is of course bringing people and nations closer together and the closer together we are and the more readily we communicate with each other the less likely it is that we will have enduring conflict and enduring disputes.
The other piece of good news about the communications revolution of course is that it is generating jobs. And here is a wonderful example. Here as I look out at a sea of faces of young Australians, not all young but youngish. I can sort of say that. A sea of people who have hope and enthusiasm and ability and commitment at the leading edge of an industry that they know is part of the future. And what this industry will do for this country and indeed what this industry will do for the world over the next generation is quite unlimited. And one of the elements of our Backing Australia's Ability programme was to generate in Australia two centres of excellence that we believe would become world class. One of those was to be in biotechnology and the other was to be in information and communications' technology.
And we've identified those two areas because they are areas where Australians have always punched above their weight. They are areas where Australians have always performed beyond what you would expect a nation of 20 million people to be able to do.
Now I couldn't be more appreciative of the financial commitment and the sense of investment in the future that your company has demonstrated in the investment it has made here. This very successful fibre optics research and manufacturing facility originated as a spin-off company from Australian Photonics Co-operative Research Centre and that was a CRC, a co-operative research center, associated with the University of Sydney. And I'm pleased in that context to mention that in our Backing Australia's Ability programme announced in January, we intend to boost our investment as a government in CRC's by a further 80% over the next five years, involving an additional government outlay of $227 million. And this means that the total federal government investment in CRC's over the next five years will be $947 million. Those collaborative research centres create a synthesis between academia if I can call it that, the business community and entrepreneurs who are prepared to invest their dollars and take a reasoned risk on a proper return through the patient development, through research, of a new scientific frontier.
In his remarks, Mr Muller quite rightly acknowledged that the temporary challenges being faced by this industry worldwide were but a blip in the inevitable growth and expansion of communications around the world. I could almost take that as a metaphor for how I would describe one or two of the setbacks that the Australian economy has seen over the past few months. We did have a negative quarter in December, there is focus on the exchange rate of the Australian dollar against the United States dollar, but they do not distort or alter or in any way undermine the reality of the great economic strengths of Australia in the year 2001. They don't alter the fact that over the past nine years and particularly over the past five years. We've had very strong and continuous economic growth. That we have created about 800,000 new jobs in the last five years, many of them in your own industry. That we have historically low rates of interest, very welcome to small business and homebuyers, not I might acknowledge so welcome to people who live on their fixed interest investments, on their interest bearing deposits or investments. We have very low rates of inflation. We have seen major economic reforms implemented in this country. And just as you are in an industry that cannot stand still, I am in a job where in a policy sense I cannot stand still either. You don't have an option in today's modern world in government of doing nothing if you want to serve the longer term interests of your country. The responsibility you have is to try and mould and change and secure the future for the benefit of the people of the nation and that does involve taking decisions. And just as companies take difficult decisions to secure a longer term benefit, and those decisions may involve some short term adversity, so it is with a government, so it is with the government I lead. We've taken some decisions that will secure great advantages in the medium to longer term for this country, but in the short term may involve some transitional challenges and some difficulties. But all of our goals have been about securing the future of this country, just as all of the goals of this company have been about securing its future in a rapidly expanding, great global industry.
The last thing that I want to remark upon before I formally declare this facility open is to say how important the employees of this company are to its success. The strength of a company is the commitment and the skill and the ingenuity and the sense of partnership of the men and women who work for it. Good relations between a company and its employees is still the most important ingredient of success. If you have a happy, well remunerated, well motivated, totally dedicated workforce you can achieve anything. And it is evident from the expansion of this company, it is evident from its success that that is the philosophy its management has brought to this operation.
Again may I say thank you for investing in Australia. Thank you for investing here in the electorate of Bennelong, in North Ryde. I welcome it. Thank you for creating Australian jobs because yours is a great expanding industry, an industry very much of the future as well as of the present and I know an industry that's going to bring employment and hope and excitement to the people of Australia into the future. I declare this facility open and I send my good wishes to all who work here for great success and great job contentment. Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: tax reform; industrial relations; Kyoto agreement; Western Australian election; economy; first home owners grant.
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Colin for the warm words of welcome. To you and to Max Trenorden, the newly elected Leader of the National Party in Western Australia, Chris Ellison the Minister for Customs and Justice in the Federal Parliament, my other federal and state parliamentary colleagues and Peter Middleton the Chairman of the 500 Club, ladies and gentlemen.
I am both encouraged and delighted at the large turnout today here in Perth because it does give me an opportunity to talk very directly to a cross-section of the business community here in Western Australia about the political and economic condition as I see it at the moment. Some of the political challenges that face the Federal Coalition over the remainder of the year and some things that are of particular relevance to an audience in Western Australia.
Can I start by saying to my state colleagues, here in Western Australia that I regretted very much the defeat of the Court Government. I thought it was a good government that provided solid conditions for economic growth here in Western Australia. It worked very hard with the Federal Coalition Government after 1996 to bring about more intelligent native title laws. Unfortunately we have been frustrated in that goal by the stubborn anti-development attitudes of The Australian Democrats, fanned by the Western Australian resident leader of the federal parliamentary Labor Party, Mr Beazley. And the combined attitude of the Australian Democrats and the Beazley federal Opposition in the Senate has done untold damage to the resource and pastoral industries of Western Australia and there's no point in mincing words about that. I was in Kalgoorlie yesterday and the lack of commitment of dollars to prospecting because of the continuing uncertainties of native title is not something that any of us on our side of politics should tire of talking about because it remains a very significant barrier to the development of which you spoke Colin which is so important not only to Western Australia but also to the entire nation.
We live at present, to vary the old Chinese proverb, we live in challenging and interesting economic times. There is no doubt that there is a degree of turbulence on world financial markets. There has been an economic slowdown in the United States which came at unexpected speed, evidenced by the decision of Dr Greenspan, the Chairman of the Fed to cut interest rates for the first time in January. The economic indicators coming out of the United States remain contradictory, they are good one day, they are indifferent the next. There is undoubtedly a lot more nervousness in relation to tech stocks and obviously some of the exuberance of which Dr Greenspan spoke disapprovingly last year, some of that exuberance has disappeared. As to how all of that will work out on the rest of the world, I can't be certain, indeed nobody can. The Japanese economy remains very sluggish and some of the improvement that has been apparent in economies in Asia generally over the past few months some of that is now slowing down, although economic growth in many of the European countries remains quite strong.
So I have to tell you that the picture is very mixed. You probably concluded that from your own study and your own reading of the press on economic conditions around the world. They are mixed and there's a degree of turbulence and there is a degree of uncertainty. One of the consequences of that has been the flight to quality and strength that always happens on the currency markets when you have a degree of international turbulence and that has occurred in relation to the American dollar and that remains the major reason why the Australian currency is undervalued at the present time. I think it's very important at a time like this, more important than usually to keep a sense of perspective. I don't believe in ignoring reality, I don't believe as prime minister in coming to an audience like this and saying 'well you know everything, every where in the world is absolutely marvellous, don't worry, nothing bad is going to occur and everything is going to be rosy' - that is plainly ridiculous.
But I think it's also important to try and keep a sense of perspective and a sense of balance about the economic conditions in the world and the economic situation of Australia. We do have very strong economic fundamentals, now you've heard me say that before and you've heard Peter Costello say it before, but it's not a cliche, it's a reality. The last time we had a recession in this country that recession was preceded by a sustained period of crushingly high interest rates. It was almost a necessary precondition to that recession. The former Government and the former banking authorities in this country used high interest rates as an attempt to control what they thought were some of the excesses of the economy and the weakness of our current account. And the effect of that was when interest rates went to 17 and 18% for homebuyers and for many farmers, bill rates of 22 and 23%, the effect of that of course was to crush the life out of the economy.
Now we are living at the present time with historically low interest rates. Now there are good reasons for that, inflation is much lower than it was and I think the monetary authorities around the world have got more clever at managing the variations in interest rates levels. But I think it's important when you hear people talking down the economy and there's no shortage of people around who are willing to do that, to bear in mind that to talk of a recession against the backdrop of the sort of interest rate levels we have at the present time is plainly ridiculous and something that should be firmly discouraged. We also have a much stronger fiscal position in the Federal Budget than we had the last time we were hit by a recession. We have historically a very strong government debt position. The accumulated federal government debt is only 6.4% of the annual wealth that the Australian economy generates each year, by comparison in Japan it's 130%, in the United States it's about 40% and the OECD average is in the order of 45%. We've paid off about $50 billion of the federal government debt that we inherited in 1996 against the fierce opposition, at virtually every turn I might add, of our political opponents. But I think it's important because if you start from a strong position as far as national debt it concerned you don't need to run excessive surpluses. We're going to have a balance in our Budget in May, we're not going back into deficit. But you don't need to run a big surplus particularly if you have only 6.4% of GDP as government debt. So once again it's a question of keeping things in perspective.
And we've also achieved higher productivity in our economy. One of the things that I'm exceptionally pleased about and very pleased when I hear our opponents talking about having a fairer industrial relations system and I'm going to return to industrial relations in a big way in a moment. But when I hear people talking about a fairer industrial relations system it is almost as if Rip van Winkle-like they have ignored what's occurred over the last five years. Because one of things we have actually been able to do in this country over the last five years is to boost the after-tax incomes of Australian workers in a quite substantial way. And we've done that through three devices. We've seen a lift in productivity and that means you can run nominal wage increases at a fairly good level without it becoming inflationary because your productivity is improving. And we've actually seen an improvement in the wages of workers over the last five years at a much faster rate than occurred over the thirteen years of the Labor Government and one of the ironies of economic performance in this country is that that the allegedly employers' party, the Liberal Party has in fact delivered higher real wages for workers than the allegedly workers' party, the Australian Labor Party did during the previous thirteen years. And I won't bore you with the statistics, but let me assure you they are there to back up that claim.
On top of that you have seen very significant reductions in mortgage interest rates. And for people on modest incomes with families paying off a home still remains the biggest single financial commitment. And paying off a home is on average $300 a month less than it was five years ago and that is very significant. Very significant indeed.
Now we've had in this country until a few weeks ago, we'd had quarter after quarter of successive economic growth and then in December the economy statistically went into reverse and we had a contraction of 0.6% of GDP. Now that wasn't in the fairly irresponsible words of the headline writer of the Sydney Morning Herald evidence that Australia had hit the wall, it was simply evidence of the fact that for a combination of transitional reasons and one-off factors the economy did go into reverse in the December quarter. It was overwhelmingly, not entirely but it was overwhelmingly due to the impact of the transitional affect of the GST on the housing sector. We knew that there would be a transitional impact because there was a lot of housing activity dragged forward before the 1st of July and we knew that once that happened that after the 1st of July it would slow down. It slowed down a lot more sharply than many, not all, some in the housing industry had predicted it would fall down that sharply, I should acknowledge that, but certainly more sharply than our official advice suggested and that contributed mightily to the contraction in December. I think high petrol prices played a part. I think the distorting effects on sections of the economy of the Olympic Games also played a part and obviously some people felt the fluctuations in the currency were unsettling to confidence and may also have played a part. Our view is that the housing sector will rebound very strongly through a combination of the doubling of the First Homeowners' Grant for new dwellings and also the significant reductions in interest rates, 1.25% which have occurred over the past few weeks. And we believe the combination of those will produce a very strong and buoyant housing sector in some months' time.
Now I've taken a few moments to try and put into perspective what I think has happened and what I'm saying to you is that I think the economy is fundamentally very sound. It has had a setback in the December quarter, there's no point in ignoring that but there are reasons for it and there's no reason at all why the long-term momentum of economic growth shouldn't be regained and indeed go on for a significant period of time because if you have a sound fiscal position in the federal budget you have low inflation and you have low interest rates, and you otherwise have a beckoning economic climate there is no reason why high levels of investment should not be generated. Bearing in mind always of course that we live in a global economy and what happens in other parts of the world particularly the United States will have an impact.
Now much of the economic debate over the past few months has of course been concentrated on the introduction of the new taxation system. Introducing a new taxation system was a mammoth undertaking. We needed tax reform in this country. For twenty-five years politicians on both sides of the house in Canberra have known in their hearts that we've needed to reform the tax system. I've known that for a long time, Bob Hawke knew it, Paul Keating knew it, Kim Beazley knew it and so the list goes on. Now some aspects of it people didn't like. If I had my time over again I wouldn't have essentially altered anything that I endeavoured to do. I don't have any regrets about taxation reform and I believe very passionately that it will deliver long-term benefits to the Australian economy. I think you do need a better taxation system to have a pro-development environment because if you have a more pro-competitive taxation system you will encourage more investment. There were inevitably going to be some implementation challenges and I am conscious that there has been some burdens place upon small business in particular I adjusting to the new system. And we have as a government tried to respond as rapidly as possible to the concerns that people have expressed about the Business Activity Statement, the IAS and other aspects of the implementation of the new system.   
But it has been the biggest systemic economic change that this country's probably had since World War II and it would have been truly astonishing if something like that had not involved some upheaval, some difficulties and some challenges. But what was the alternative? The alternative was to sit on your hands and do absolutely nothing. And when you get into government and when you become a prime minister you've really got two alternatives, you've got Plan A or Plan B. Plan A is to actually try and do something to improve the economic and social condition of the country. Plan B is to swan around in the white car and think isn't it terrific being prime minister, I'll go out of my way not to offend anybody, I'll smile at everybody, I'll say yes to every request and I'll make whoopee for a few years and to hell with the consequences when I'm defeated. I mean that, they are really the two plans that you have. And I made a promise to myself and my colleagues and I collectively made promises to each other that having finally got there after thirteen years, pretty frustrating years in Opposition. And having on earlier occasions perhaps in government been accused of not using a mandate when we controlled both Houses of Parliament - God what an idyllic situation that would be now - I resolved that what we were going to do was to try and make a difference, to try and grab hold of the reins and with the power and authority we had in the Lower House and whatever persuasion we could exercise in the Upper House, to try and make a difference.
And one of the things of course we set out to do after the last election having won a mandate on it was to reform the tax system. And we should remind ourselves of the reasons why we set out to change it. To start with we had a very old-fashioned indirect tax system, multiple rate wholesale tax system fell on some people not on others, very complicated, very old fashioned, very cumbersome, I don't think anybody in this room would really like to go back to it. We also needed to reform Commonwealth/State relations. I'd grown tired as both a prime minister and a treasurer of endless arguments with states about a growth tax and for the first time since the Commonwealth assumed uniform tax powers as a war time measure in 1942 we now have a revenue-sharing arrangement whereby the states will get a growing source of revenue to fund the schools, the hospitals, the police, the roads and all the other public services that state governments need to provide. And this represents a revolution in Commonwealth/State financial relations, it will take several years before Western Australia is better off under this system than it is under the existing arrangement, but once it becomes better off the gains grow very significantly. Queensland will begin to be better off I think the year after next and I can assure you that notwithstanding what some of the Labor premiers have said about the new taxation system, they fell over themselves to sign the interstate agreement with me which guaranteed them the tax revenue. And there are no votes for rollback amongst state Labor premiers because rolling back means reducing their revenue and I remind you again that every dollar of the GST goes to the states, none of it comes to us. Every single dollar. And when you're talking about rolling back, you're rolling back the revenue that will go to the states.
It was of course designed to take some of the load off high marginal tax rates for middle income earners. We didn't go as far on that as we would have liked to because of the obstruction of the Senate which cut the proposal to bring the top marginal rate in at $75,000 rather than the level that was imposed by the Senate of $60,000. On the 1st of July this year the company tax rate will fall from 34 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar and we've effectively halved capital gains tax for individuals. So it's important in the debate about the administrative implementation of the tax system for people to remember what the fundamental reasons driving tax reform really were. And I've reprised some of those reasons.
But it wasn't only in tax that we set out to make major change, and if I were asked what was the area of economic change that I think in a lasting sense has probably been as important as tax or perhaps even arguably more important I would say industrial relations. As many of you know in Opposition I campaigned very strongly for industrial relations reform. I think one of the great achievements in this state of the Court Government were the changes brought in in the area of industrial relations. Changes that closely mirrored our policy at a federal level and they are changes that have reduced the unreasonable reach of union power and they're changes that have helped boost the productivity of individual workplaces. Those changes have helped deliver the productivity of which I spoke earlier. And those changes have brought about I think a very significant transformation of workplaces within this country. And we should keep reminding ourselves that only 25% of the workforce of Australia now belongs to a trade union. And the enrolment level in the private sector has fallen slightly below 20%. Now, only one in five workers in the private sector of the Australian economy now belong to trade unions. And when you look at it from that point of view it is truly astonishing to find the level of ideological commitment that's still retained by the Labor Party to the role of the trade union movement within our society.
I have noticed in Western Australia that already in the few weeks that the new Government has been in office the re-emergence of the 'no ticket, no start' rule on construction sites and the general return of the influence of trade unions into the economy of this state. I have to say to you that it will get much, much worse if a federal Labor government is elected. Bear in mind that if the federal Labor Party wins at the end of this year you will have a Labor government in Canberra and you will have a Labor government in five of the six states of Australia. You will have an almost unprecedented level of Labor government and therefore an unprecedented opportunity for trade unions to impose their unreasonable views in relation to industrial relations. Now I don't argue that there is no role for the trade union movement in our society nor do I argue and in fact as prime minister I have led a government that's delivered better wage outcomes for the workers of this country than did our political opponents. But what I do argue against and what I argue very strongly is that it would be absolutely tragic for this country's economic future if the industrial relations gains of the last five or ten years, both at a state and federal level, were rolled back.
And that is exactly, I swear to you is what is going to happen if we have a change of government at a federal level. Don't think for a moment that this government, this Labor Party in government would be less beholden to the trade union movement than previous Labor governments, that will not be the case. The level of former union official membership of the front bench of the federal Labor Party is higher than what it was in earlier years. And there's a natural career path progression from president of the ACTU through to a senior position on the Labor Party frontbench. You will see a repeal of Australian workplace agreements, you will see a reimposition of compulsory unionism, you will see a destruction of the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act and you'll see a combined return of union muscle and union power at both a state and federal level if you get the combination of the two.
Now some of you may say it's alarmist. Can I tell you it's not. I think it's very important in politics to have both a positive and a negative message. I don't support those political leaders and those political parties whose whole stock in trade is to run negative message about their opponents, but I think if you have been an active government as we have been for five years, if you've taken political risks as we have to achieve long term national interest outcomes, if you've been prepared to have a go to implement difficult policy, and you have got a fair degree of that accepted by the Australian people, I think you have a both a moral and a political right to define the negative aspects of your political opponents.
Colin is right. This election is going to very hard for us to win. It's always hard for us to win a third term but there's a lot at stake. There has been a cultural change in the attitude of people towards economic growth and economic activity in Australia over the last five years. We have been a strong, high growth economy. We have generated hundreds of thousands of jobs. We are seen around the world as being an economy with a government that's been prepared to implement long term valuable reforms. We don't need a government that will really just try and wind a lot of those reforms and a lot of those changes back. Now, it is true that you need, in appealing to the broad electorate, you do need to talk about things other than economics, and I do.
This is essentially of course a business audience and I focus most of my remarks on economic issues and government policies that relate to economic issues. But I'm particularly proud of a lot of the things that we've done in the non-economic areas. If I were asked to name the three biggest things this government has done, I would probably include two things that are not economic. One of them is uniform gun control laws, and the other was the leadership we gave in relation to the saving of East Timor. Both of those things represent high watermarks of taking a stand on important issues that define the character of a country and show a determination to create a safer society.
I think we've also come a long way in the country in creating probably the most equitable system whereby people can make an effective choice about how and where their children are educated. There's been a lot of debate about support of government and independent schools in the Australian community.   And speaking as somebody himself who is the product of a public education system in NSW and who believes that parents ought to have the right to choose where their children are educated, I'm very proud of the fact that in the last five years there's been a very significant growth in the opportunities for low income parents in this country to exercise the choice of sending their children to independent schools. So much of the debate surrounds the so-called 'elite' schools. They are but a fraction of the independent school sector and the real growth has not been in that area, the real growth has actually been in the low fee new independent schools. And in many ways Australia has achieved the best balance between public and private provision of education of any country in the world.
And even our much maligned health system which becomes a ritual political football, not only between federal and state governments with constant finger pointing and blame shifting and cost shifting, but is also a political football in a ritualistic way between state governments and state oppositions. I sometimes, as I go around the states, I turn on the news bulletins, I close my eyes, I hear the soundtrack talking about the state opposition criticising the waiting lists and the dialogue is almost the same. The only difference that in one state it is a state liberal government with a state labor opposition and in another state the situation is reversed. But despite all fo that, we ought to see our health system as being infinitely better than any other system in the industrialised world. I mean, the reality is that if you are of modest means, if you are a battler, don't get sick in the Bronx or in Brixton, much better to get ill in a suburb of Perth or a suburb of Sydney. And we have through our 30% tax rebate and our lifetime health rebate, we have in fact resuscitated private health insurance in this country. It was bleeding to death when we came to power and our resuscitation attempt has been so successful that the Labor Party has, theoretically anyway, abandoned its commitment to repeal the private health insurance rebate. I don't really believe them but that is their formal position because they recognise that that policy has been extremely successful.
So I would readily acknowledge that there are things that are important to people other than economic issues and the condition of our society, we often talk about the efficiency of our economy. The last couple of weeks I've been involved firstly in the launch of a 'tough on drugs' television campaign. It was designed to encourage more Australian parents to talk very directly to their children about the dangers of illicit drugs. Last Sunday my wife and I attended a service in the Sydney Domain of parents of children who for a combination of reasons had taken their own lives. And confronting, in a modern prosperous sophisticated society such as ours, the horrendous problem of youth suicide - particularly amongst young males in rural areas of Australia - is an arresting and sobering social experience. And it is a reminder to all of us that when we talk about the condition of Australia we don't always and only talk about the economic condition, the condition of our budget, the condition of our businesses, but we also talk about the condition and the quality of our society and the sort of pressures that we place on the more vulnerable members of the Australian community.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude by saying how encouraged I am by such a large gathering. I can assure you that I have a lot of stomach and a lot of determination and a lot of energy for the fight that is ahead over the next few months. I've been in a lot of political scraps over the years. I know what success is, I know what defeat is, I know what disappointment is. There's been no really successfully political leader in this country who hasn't at various stages of his or her career tasted adversity as well as success. We deserve to win the next election because we have tried to do good things for our country. That doesn't guarantee that we are going to win it, but it gives us a head start over the alternative, and that is if we hadn't set out and tried to do good things for Australia. We have got a good story to tell. We'll have more things to say as the year goes on about the future. We have a policy barren opposition. For five years the Labor Party has not developed one realistic alternative sustainable policy and there are a lot of things at stake, they are important for Western Australia and they are important for our country overall. I need your support. I appreciate the expressions of support I've received today and if we work together in that spirit of extolling our positives, but not losing an opportunity to define the negatives and deficiencies of our political opponents then I have every reason to believe that we are going to win.
Thank you.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Jim War. Obviously, one of the big issues of the election is going to be the GST. It would seem to me the problem from a business point of view is not the tax itself, which most of us are happy with, but the way its administered. Is there anything at all you can do to bring the ATO into line and stop them making an art form of complication out of the simplest piece of legislation?
PRIME MINISTER:
I know what you're saying. Can I relay a discussion, can I repeat a discussion I had with those on my table.
When we had the complaints about the Business Activity Statement and the IAS, I called a meeting in Sydney of myself and the Treasurer and the Deputy Prime Minister and Ian Macfarlane, that's the political Ian Macfarlane not the bank governor, he's the Minister for Small Business and we had representatives of nine small business and professional organisations, the ACCI and we also had the Commissioner of Taxation and the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation and the Senior person in the Treasury dealing with taxation matters.
We worked through all of the concerns that were raised by people and instead of sort of listening to the concerns of the business organisations and then going away and separately raising these concerns with our tax advisers, we put these concerns to them on the spot. I think by workshopping the concerns people had about the forms and the processes that were used, I believe that we emerged with quite a lot of changes, all of which have been announced and are now in the process of being implemented.
I think those changes will make a big difference. I have to say that that is my anecdotal experience as I move around the country. I am an impulsive asker of questions about the GST. Every business person I spoke to in Kalgoorlie yesterday I asked them about the GST. I got a variety of responses. Some supportive, some peremptory, some unrepeatable, but overall I got the impression from talking to these people that yes there had been some challenges but no, they were not insurmountable. Yeah you've made some good changes and we are getting on top of it.
Now, that's not universal, and I remain ready to further fine-tune the administration. I mean our opponents say your rolling. look rolling back is taking the GST off individual items, we're not into that and I take your point that you're not unhappy with the GST, you're unhappy with the administrative implementation of it.
Now we've tried to respond to people's concerns and we'll go on responding to legitimate concerns that people have about the administration. I don't make any apologies for that. You can't implement a change of this magnitude without going through some teething difficulties with administration. Its such a big change and I'm quite happy to further fine tune it so that you get the balance absolutely right and I'll put up with the smart alec comments from the opposition along the way.
I mean its easy I suppose, to stand on the sidelines and throw stones at those who are trying hard to actually improve the way our tax system works and we just have to put up with that and I don't really mind it. Those stones really do bounce off me because in the long run I know what we are doing is good for the country but we will continue to fine tune if that is necessary.
I do think the changes we have made as a result of a number of complaints we got at the beginning of the year have been beneficial but we'll keep a very close eye on it.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, just a question in relation to the environment. I was interested but not unsurprised by George W Bush's decision on the Kyoto Protocols and the greenhouse gas omissions for which I think a number of people in this room would think were, even with the generous, sort of generous treatment that Australia got out of that particular round, were still unachievable. But one thing that certainly resonated in the West Australian election was from the community perspective, people still willing to put their votes with green parties and of course a new leadership, Cheryl Kernot's dream team with the Democrats will put that particular focus on the environment at the next election.
What can we give to business but also the community in terms of direction on the environment coming out of the United States decision?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well our position in relation to Kyoto, if I can use that as a metaphor for controlling the growth of greenhouse gas omissions, our position is that we are going to stick with the domestic measures that we adopted to control greenhouse gas omissions after the Kyoto meeting in 1997.
We're not going to walk away from any of those things. We do, however, understand why the American's have done what they've done and it didn't surprise me in the slightest because their fundamental position is right and that is that unless you get the developing countries under the tent, you cant have an effective agreement. Otherwise the dirty industries will simply leave countries like Australia and go to countries that don't have any restrictions. So, unless you get the developing countries involved, you're not going to get a worldwide agreement.
The Americans are not totally negative about achieving a comprehensive agreement, in fact they are very strongly for it, but there argument is that it can't proceed unless you have the involvement of the developing countries and there is a degree of selectivity in relation to the approach of the European's.
The starting dates in relation to the benchmarks are convenient. They allow credit for the environmental positives, for example, pit closures of coal mines in the United Kingdom, the reindustrialisation that occurred in eastern Europe after the collapse of communism, you add all those things together and it all sort of conveniently starts to allow credit for that, but it doesn't allow credit for other countries that while they're not in the same situation, are none the less entitled to say, well, where you start has a big impact on what we can do.
But, our position is very much that we are going to stick to the commitments we made after Kyoto as far as the domestic scene is concerned. We are going to work closely with all the countries, but certainly with the Americans to see if we can develop initiatives that will get everybody involved.
We are in an unusual position. We're industrialised country that's a net exporter of energy and that creates particular difficulties for Australia which don't exist for many other industrialised countries.
As a domestic political issue, environmental matters are very important. I watched what happened here in Western Australia and, in a sense the Coalition got hit on both sides. It appeared to lose votes in the urban areas to people who wanted a greener approach and it appeared because of its stance on the Regional Forest Agreements which was different from our stance on Regional Forest Agreements, we were rather more sympathic to the work, some of the blue collar people affected, it appeared to lose some ground there.
Now, I sympathised with the dilemma that was faced by the former Government and it is something that we have to work through.
We have a very good story to tell on the environment, our Natural Heritage Trust resources. Last year I announced $1.5 billion program, half from the Commonwealth, half from the States that for the first time is tackling in a systematic way the problem of salinity, and that's very important to Western Australia because there is an enormous area of this state that is degraded by salt and this is one of the big long term challenges that this country has.
Balance and reasonability and trying to achieve both environmental preservation and economic development, that has to be the catchcry of a Liberal Government and of the Liberal Party. The 100 to nil balance approach of the extreme greens is utterly unacceptable but equally the rampaging 'develop at all costs' attitude of some is also unacceptable. You do have to strike a sensible balance and I'm very conscious of that and I'll work very hard to achieve that kind of balance but it's not easy because there is a trivialisation and a sensationalising of this issue through the media that makes reasoned argument and reasoned debate very difficult. And the sort of attitudes taken by Bob Brown or some people in other parties just presents an extreme position knowing full well as they do that they will never have the responsibility of government.
There's an intoxicating liberation in politics when you know you never will be asked to implement the absurd propositions you've argued for.
(ends)


Subjects:  The Smith Family; social coalition.
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Elaine Henry, Brian France the Chairman of the Smith Family, to Mr Howarth and Mr Chandler, Mr Carpenter, the State Minister for Education and Aboriginal Affairs, my federal colleague, Senator Chris Ellison, ladies and gentlemen.  
I';m delighted to be associated with the launch of the activities of the Smith Family into Western Australia.  It is a well known, very highly regarded organisation that has done in simple language, great good work for many people over a long period of time.  It was formed by a group of decent public-spirited businessmen who wanted to do their bit in a very unostentatious way to help relieve the underprivilege of children in certain parts of Sydney way back in the 1920s.  And out of that has grown a great organisation. 
But today is also significant because it is another milestone in the development of something I';ve been very keen to support in the time that I';ve been prime minister and that is the notion of partnerships between welfare organisations and business for the benefit of individuals and the benefit of the community.  I speak a lot about the social coalition and that is a concept that brings together the government, welfare organisations, business and individuals, each pooling their respective talents and each working together in ways that they are best suited to do to bring about very positive outcomes.  And recently I was present at a gathering where Westpac committed $1 million towards to the Learning for Life programme and it';s partnership and that of Challenge Bank.  And the partnership of many other companies with the Smith Family is supporting this wonderful Learning for Life programme and what it seeks to do is through a variety of ways has been outlined to you by Elaine Henry and by Mr Chandler.  It seeks to provide not only financial support and educational opportunities but also the accumulated wisdom of life that can be transmitted by people who are willing to spend time as mentors with individuals.  I suspect that in the next generation mentoring will bulk more largely in the activities of organisations. Increasingly over the next twenty or thirty years we will have large numbers of people who';ve been very successful in life who are in active and physically healthy retirement with a willingness to make their time and their talents available to help people who, with the personal guidance of a mentor, can achieve so much.
I';ve heard a little of the contribution that both John and Oral McGuire have made as role models to many people in the indigenous community here in Western Australia.  And one of them of course is to participate next week in a very important cricket fixture between the Chairman of ATSIC';s XI and the Prime Minister';s XI at Manuka Oval.  And it will be a way in which we can demonstrate to the Australian population the great talents of young indigenous Australians in that very fine game.  But of course their talents have not only been in cricket, they';ve also been in football as well.
But today is an occasion for me to honour the contribution of the Smith Family to not only the relief of distress and underprivilege in the Australian community over eighty years but also having the wisdom and the foresight and the vision to diversify its activities, maintaining its strong commitment to its core responsibility of looking after underprivileged families but also recognising that there are new and different ways of helping people and it';s to be commended.  But also to be commended is the Challenge Bank, KPMG and all those other philanthropic organisations that are so keen to work in partnership with welfare organisations.
My plea to business is always not so much that business should give more but rather more businesses should give and the involvement of so many companies and the growing embrace of the concept of corporate philanthropy, the burgeoning number of partnerships between business organisations and welfare organisations is a wholly welcome development in our society.  And it does give the lie to the rather stereotyped, inaccurate view that so many people hold of the business community of Australia that they';re only interested in making profits.  Of course they';re interested in making profits and so they should be because making profits generates revenue for governments that enable them to provide welfare services for people who need help.  And anybody who decries profit making is of course decrying the basis of our economic and social wellbeing.  But they do have social obligations, they have an obligation to put something back as we all have an obligation to put something back into our community that has given us opportunities in life and I welcome the fact that so many Australian companies are magnificently discharging those social responsibilities and it all makes for a better society.  And on the eve of Easter it is important that we reflect upon those ways in which we can work together as a community to build a more decent, sensitive, caring Australian community and the Smith Family';s been doing that for almost eighty years and the Learning for Life partnership is a great demonstration of the co-operative effort of corporate Australia and welfare Australia.  
I have great pleasure in formally launching the Smith Family, I think I';m meant to do that, into Western Australia.  I know you';ll flourish in this vibrant Western Australian environment that I know so very well on my numerous visits to the state.  I wish you well.  I thank the Challenge Bank. I thank all of those who';ve contributed so magnificently to the work of the Smith Family.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Jackie, Peter Bartels, ladies and gentlemen.  
I am pleased first of all to report to you that early this morning I had my regular 6.30am walk in the misty rain of Canberra wearing an Australian Institute of Sport tracksuit which was given to me when I was last here.  And I am delighted to have this opportunity of launching, Backing Australia';s Sporting Ability here at the Australian Institute of Sport which has done as an institution so much to enhance the sporting talent of young men and women and, indeed, Australians of all ages and to well and truly maintain and expand the international respect of Australian sportsmen and women around the world.
We are mainly as Australians quite unapologetic about our interest in and passion for sport.  It is one of those things that undeniably binds Australians together.  It is something that pushes away barriers.  It is something that provides so many of us with a common ground, a common sense of involvement, a common pride and a common sharing of goals and long term objectives.  Australia has passed through a remarkable period of sporting achievement and we are as a people who have devoted so much time and energy and talent to sport, we are entitled to take very legitimate pride in what our athletes and our participants in so many sports have achieved and continue to achieve over the years. 
You will all be aware that towards the end of the Olympic Games in Sydney last year I gave certain, broad undertakings on behalf of the Government.  And as a consequence of those undertakings I established a task group involving a number of very prominent sports administrators and leaders all of who are here today.  And the purpose of that was to give flesh and substance and advice as to how best the Government could implement the broad commitment that I';d given in the wake of the Olympic Games.  And the product of that work and what I launch today is the document entitled Backing Australia';s Sporting Ability, A More Active Australia.  
It has two goals.  It has a goal of providing sustained, further financial support at a record level for excellence and high achievers in sport, elite sportsmen and women.  And it also has, as a twin, an equally important aim to expand the grassroots participation, not only of young Australians but Australians of all ages in a more active life, which will repay in very handsome measure in terms of better health, greater enjoyment of the unequalled lifestyle of Australia and a more contented and harmonious community.  We are going to do this by injecting an additional $161.6 million into Australian sport over the next four years.  And this will bring the Government';s total commitment to sport to a record level of $547 million over that period, which is the largest amount ever committed to sport by an Australian Government.
It delivers on the commitment that I made after the Sydney Olympic Games.  It has, as I said, the two objectives - to build on the foundations of our sporting system to allow our best athletes to continue to compete successfully and also to achieve greater participation in grassroots sport.  This is a policy which is designed to provide opportunities for all Australians.  And in putting it together we have drawn very carefully on the consideration of our strengths at the Sydney 2000 Games, and in putting it together we have very widely consulted.
Backing Australia';s Sporting Ability provides athletes with the systems and backup needed to enable them to continue to compete successfully at international sporting events.  The new Sports Excellence Programme for High Performance Athletes will replace the Olympic Athlete Programme, which finished after the Sydney 2000 Games.  A number of sporting organisations urged the Government to, in putting together this new programme, include a wider number of sports, for example, netball, which is a Commonwealth Games sport but not an Olympic Sport.  And I am pleased to announce today that the new Sports Excellence Programme does include support for sports that were not part of the Olympic athlete programme.  
The programme will support our athletes attending the Olympics, the Commonwealth Games and the Paralympics and competing in other international championships.  It will be an Australian athlete programme.  And, importantly, this programme will support Australian athletes competing at the Goodwill Games in Brisbane being held from the 29th of August to the 9th of September.  
In preparing athletes for the peak international sporting events the role of coaches, as you all know, is quite crucial and the new programme recognises this.  We';ll utilise world class coaching techniques through the Australian Institute of Sport.  Backing Australia';s Sporting Ability will provide an additional allocation of $122 million over four years for Australian athletes, taking Government funding for high performance sport to an unprecedented level.
The Government, as I said a moment ago, believes that we should convert Australia';s passion for sport into greater numbers of people participating at the grassroots level, right across Australia, including in rural and regional communities.  We';ll support a fresh approach to grass roots participation involving partnerships between the Federal Government, national sporting organisations, local sporting clubs, schools and the business community.  We';ll build on the legacy of the Sydney Games by implementing in partnership with the Australian Olympic Committee an Olympic Youth Program to provide through our Olympians an enduring message of sports participation and healthy drug free lifestyles to school children and local communities. 
The package of measures in Backing Australia';s Sporting Ability includes an additional allocation of $32 million for the more active Australia initiative.  And this package includes $4 million for the Olympic Youth Program.  The additional funding means that total government resources for increasing grassroots participation will be worth $82 million over a four-year period.  In addition I';m pleased to announce today that we will continue our support for national water safety organisations by providing, separate to the sports funding package, $1.6 million for grants to continue their excellent work in saving lives and preventing water accidents for the benefit of all Australians.  
The philosophy behind this policy is a belief that just as it';s important for governments to back the intellectual, scientific, and technological excellence of Australians, so it is important that we back the sporting prowess and sporting excellence of our elite athletes. And it is also necessary to expand that passion and that commitment as far as possible into the grassroots of the Australian community.
The final element in Backing Australia';s Sporting Ability is Tough on Drugs in Sport.  Australia proudly has been a world leader in the fight against drugs on sport.  We took a tough on drugs approach in the lead up to and during the Sydney Olympics.  And this determined approach meant that athletes were subjected to the toughest anti doping program ever undertaken at the Olympics.  We';re therefore going to provide an additional allocation of $7.4 million for new anti drugs research, additional testing, and to meet international obligations.  This additional funding brings total government funding for Tough on Drugs to nearly $24 million over a four year period.
Ladies and gentlemen, in concluding this short presentation can I thank a number of people.  Can I warmly thank and commend my colleague Jackie Kelly, the Minister for Sport, for her tireless and persistent advocacy of the cause of increased government financial support for all sporting activity in Australia.  She has been a constant, energetic and very effective advocate for your cause and her efforts have certainly not gone unrewarded.  I do want to thank Peter Bartels and all the other members of the Australian Sports Commission for the leadership they';ve shown and the counsel they';ve given me.
The Sport 2000 Taskforce headed by Ross Oakley that presented the Shaping Up Report to the government.  To John Coates and the Australian Olympic Committee for assisting in the establishment and the consultations of the working group which I established after the Sydney Games to make recommendations on new policy.  To Greg Hartung and the Australian Paralympic Committee, to Sam Coffa and the Australian Commonwealth Games Association, Sport Industry Australia, and the heads of the National Sporting Organisation.
But finally and of course most importantly can I thank the young men and women of Australia who through their sporting prowess have brought such pleasure and pride and sense of national identity to us, not only at the Olympic Games last year but on the cricket fields, the tennis courts, the rugby league and rugby union playing fields, on the golf courses and I could go on endlessly.  In netball and basketball, and all the other achievements that thrilled millions of Australians and have made us very proud. 
And allied with that expression of thanks can I also express my thanks to the hundreds of thousands and indeed millions of sporting volunteers who without any reward other than the satisfaction of doing something good for their own children and for their children';s friends and for their local community turn out each weekend rain hail or shine to keep the sinews of local sport going.  We';ve always been better than any other country in the world at doing that.  We are a great nation of volunteers and the real infrastructure that sustains Australia';s sporting capacity is to be found in the voluntary efforts of those hundreds and thousands of Australians week in and week out.  And in a sense this policy is dedicated as much to them as it is dedicated to the high profile elite performers that bring such pride and sense of happiness and satisfaction in being an Australian.  
I think it';s a great policy. You expect me to say that but it really is. I think it will give great hope and great inspiration and encouragement to all those who participate and administer sport, and I wish all of you the very best of good luck in the future.  Thank you. 


23 June 1997
E&amp;OE..........................................................................................................................
Thank you very much Mr Russell, ladies and gentlemen. As I indicated to those of you who were at the Menzies lecture a few moments ago, one of the things that I've endeavoured to do in the few days that I've been in Britain, is that whilst acknowledging absolutely the history of the relationship between our two countries, I have wanted to focus people's energy and attention on the potential of the relationship into the future.
And this organisation bringing together as it does the people who are involved in business between Australia and Britain and through Britain into other areas into Europe, plays an absolutely crucial role in building that more effective future for the relationship. There are a lot of people who don't understand just how heavy is the investment relationship between Britain and Australia.
There is something like $87 billion Australian dollars of British investment in Australia and Britain is of course the second largest source after the United States of foreign investment in our country and surprisingly to many Australians and to many other people there is on the other side about a $27 billion Australian direct investment in the United Kingdom and although the pattern of trade between Australia and East Asia has grown enormously over the last few years, over 60% of our trade goes to East Asia, when it comes to outward foreign investment Britain and some of the other nations of the European Union are still by far the preferred outward destination of foreign investment in Australia.
Without in any way wanting to oversimplify it, Britain is to many Australian corporations and to many Australians a gateway to the rest of Europe and equally Australia is increasingly to Britain and to other countries in Europe a gateway to the Asia Pacific region and there are of course a very large number of British companies which have their regional headquarters in Australia. There are a lot of similarities between the growth rates of the British economy and the growth rates of the Australian economy at present and whilst there are of course many dissimilarities we do have an opportunity to build a far more positive relationship. I want to congratulate your organisation Mr Russell on the foresight and the leadership that it is giving to the economic relationship between Australia and Britain and Australia and the whole of Europe. It is very important that we don't see the world in terms of self contained economic units.
It is very important that we embrace totally to the concept of globalisation and that although our future is very bound up with the Asia Pacific region and Britain's with the European Union, we are increasingly living in a world that is economically speaking and in so many other ways that it has become so completely globalised. And your organisation plays a very important role in that and is a very very important standard bearer in reminding Australians, Australian companies, Australian investors and most importantly Australian governments and State governments of the continued importance of the bilateral association between Australia and the UK and the continued importance, economically, politically, and socially of Australia's links with the entire European economy.
So can I congratulate ABE, can I thank you warmly for the courtesy that you have extended to me tonight for putting on this reception. I wish your organisation well and I thank it most warmly for the contribution it makes to building a better investment climate between Australia and Britain and reminding Australian companies of the immense value of the huge market represented by not only the European Union but the other nations of Europe.
Thank you.


Helen Clarke the Prime Minister ofNew Zealand, Ministers of the New Zealand and Australian Governments, other distinguished guests and particularly the serving men and women of the defence forces of our two nations, ladies and gentlemen.
I join the Prime Minister of New Zealand in expressing my honour in participating in this very important ceremony. Speaking from ANZAC cove during the Gallipoli campaign an Australian poet soldier remarked : "we can hear a gentle sobbing from the south". He was undoubtedly speaking of the sense of shared grief held by so many people in our two nations during that terribly costly campaign.
First and foremost, but not only, this is a memorial to those men and women of Australia and New Zealand who in various conflicts have given their lives for their countries and also for a set of ideals that we have in common.
It is also a reminder of the strength of our contemporary relationship. I remarked earlier today that there are no two countries in the world that share a closer association than do Australia and New Zealand. It is an association of history. It is an association of the mingled blood of the sacrifice of so many young of our two countries.
It is also an association which has been built on common values. Those common values took us together to the beaches of Gallipoli. Those common values led us to fight the Nazis and the Japanese in World War ll. Those common values took us to other theatres of war since. And those common values have us working together to keep the peace and to build a new nation today in East Timor.
And I well remember the remarks of General Cosgrove and others at the time of the INTERFET operation when they expressed their absolute pleasure that first and foremost they would have at their side the men and women of the defence forces of New Zealand.
So today my fellow Australians and my friends from New Zealand, I express on behalf of the people of Australia our gratitude for those young of our two countries who have sacrificed so much to give what we have today. I honour the close bonds between our two nations. Not only built on history and common contemporary interests but also shared recreation and shared contemporary values. And we also in a sense dedicate this memorial to the future strengths of a relationship that will always be important to our two countries. Whatever history may deal to us in the future nothing can separate us, our destiny will forever be together and we'll forever share this part of the world and we'll forever share a common set of values that mean so much to all of us.


Subjects: The Anzac tradition.
E&amp;OE................................
Your Excellency the Administrator and Lady Green, Your Excellency Mr Simon Murdoch, the High Commissioner for New Zealand, other very distinguished guests and my fellow Australians.
All over Australia, all over the world today, our countrymen and women are gathering - drawn together almost by instinct, by a great silent summons to repay a debt to the past. Each year the numbers of us grow. Each year, more and more young Australians hear the call, though far removed, in time and circumstance, from those they seek to honour.
The story of Anzac is a remarkable one. At Gallipoli itself, amid the mud of France and Flanders, in the heroic defence of Greece and Crete exactly 60 years ago, in Korea exactly 50 years ago, in deserts and in jungles, in air battles and on broad ocean seas throughout the world, Australians have shown themselves willing to fight, and if need be die, for the cause of freedom. Australian courage has ensured that foreign names like Beersheba and Villers Bretonneux, Tobruk and Changi, Kapiong and Long Tan have become for this nation, treasured mementos of a past rich and steeped in great bravery.
Yet, Anzac Day should not only be about the past.
We would be a shallow people if all we sought on this day each year, was to bask in the pale reflected glory of others' deeds. We would be foolish if we felt our own safety assured by the service and sacrifice of earlier generations. Australians are neither shallow nor foolish.
Today we do pay homage to those men and women who either offered or gave their lives in war. We remember the fallen and give grateful thanks to the veterans among us. In the words of the War Memorial's founder, Dr Charles Bean, 'their story rises, as it will always rise, above the mists of ages, a monument to great hearted men and for their nation, a possession forever'.
And also today we think of those still abroad in our name in places such as East Timor and Bouganiville.
But as importantly, we gather in ever-increasing numbers to each pledge anew our determination, not merely to dwell upon the legacy of the past, but also to build upon it. To extend a culture of proud self reliance and personal initiative. To create a just society where an individual's rights are respected but their responsibilities are also recognised. To offer our children, and their children, all the possibilities of the world should they only have the heart and the will to grasp them. To build strong communities where men and women strive together for the common good and none need live in fear or isolation.
We gather to be reminded of the values so evident among Australians in time of war and adversity but that we too can use to face the challenges within our own lives. Courage, unity of purpose, compassion and selflessness - these virtues, so compelling and so commonplace amid the horror of battle, seem to subside so often in the calm of peace. Anzac Day reminds us all that it need not be so.
Anzac Day reminds us that we each have a task before us. Blessedly, not to fight new wars, not to bear the loss of sons and daughters, but to use the peace and prosperity purchased for us at so high a price. Anzac Day reminds us that our nation is capable of the most extraordinary achievements if only we dare to reach them.
Just after World War One drew to its bloody close, as the troop ships brought home our heroes, a young Australian poet asked how those of us, unscarred by battle, unmarked by war, could ever hope to repay the debt we owe. Her answer is as true today as it was then. As true for us as it was for those who waited the arrival of those troop ships. She wrote:
'Let us make haste and let us build
Great worlds with strength and wonder filled,
Then shall they know their peace has come'.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well Richard, Mrs Griffin, Mrs Inge King, ladies and gentlemen.  Janette and I are delighted to have you here at the Lodge on this beautiful Canberra Autumn morning. 
I';d like to take the opportunity of saying a few words in praise of the work of the Australiana Fund over the last thirty years.  Naturally my acquaintance with it has been close over the last five years and Janette and I have taken a very close interest and a very appreciative interest in the work that it';s done.  And it has in that period of time been responsible for the accumulation and the benefaction through its fund raising efforts to the four official establishments of some beautiful pieces of furniture, some fine works of art, and as Richard indicated the conservative value is somewhere in the order of $3.5 million.  And to you Richard and to all the other members of the council, a number if whom are here today, I express the warm thanks of the government.  
It was a great idea of Tamie Fraser';s back in 1978 to establish the Australian Fund and the work that it';s under taken ever since I think has enhanced the appearance, the quality and the value of the four official residences. I think it is appropriate that we in the year of the Centenary of Federation that we unveil on the same day here at the Lodge and at Yarralumla two pieces of art work commissioned by the Australiana Fund marking the Centenary of Federation, sculptured by two very eminent Australians who are so widely respected within the artistic community not only here but around the world.  And Inge, it';s a great delight to have you here with us. I know that you were here during the physical installation of the work of art that we are about to unveil.  But it';s an opportunity for me on your behalf to salute your work. Since you arrived in Australia way back in 1951 and particularly in recent years when your work has won wide acclaim from not only around Australian but indeed throughout the world.
We are doing many things in this year of the Centenary of Federation.  This is but a small but a very very important occasion.  And again can I say how much I value it and I know that my predecessors as Prime Ministers from 1978 onwards valued the work of the Australiana Fund and it';s a fund that will go on.  As governments come and go the Australiana Fund will continue because it is dedicated to a quiet unassuming role in soliciting and attracting support from individuals and from companies for the purpose of adding to the beauty and the taste and the colour of four very fine official residences. And certainly for our part Janette and I have found the work of the Fund positive in so many ways and we are very much in the debt of all of those who have worked so very hard to make it successful. Many of you are here today. I thank you.  You are a small group but you';re very dedicated and your work is greatly appreciated by me, by Janette, and I know by many others in the government.
Welcome and we look forward to chatting with you over morning tea in a few moments.  Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
I am delighted to be here today.  The genesis for today's conference came about during my visit to Japan in July 1999.  I well recall the late Prime Minister Mr Obuchi's immediate and enthusiastic endorsement of the proposal when I first raised it with him.
In agreeing to hold such a conference - involving not only our political leaders but also key business and academic figures - Mr Obuchi and I recognised a need to reflect upon the character of the bilateral relationship as we move into the next millennium.
No one can doubt the great strength of the relationship between Japan and Australia and the many benefits each of our nations gain from it across a wide spectrum of areas.  Yet we would be foolish to take it for granted by not exploring opportunities for even closer links in the future.
The relationship between Australia and Japan does have a very special quality.  It is a magnificent model to the rest of the world of how two countries with vastly different cultures and very different histories can come together and achieve, through the recognition of their common objectives and their common goals, a great friendship.
In the last fifty years, we have built a relationship that has developed far beyond our obvious economic complementarity.  It is now the most broadly based relationship that Australia enjoys in our region - because of shared strategic interests, political cooperation, and the interaction between our societies.
This bond is being strengthened by growing contact and better understanding between our two peoples.
For instance, in 1978 there were 116 Japanese students in Australia.  In 1999 there were 9,825.  Conversely, the number of Australians studying Japanese has grown from less than 1,000 25 years ago to more than 10,000 today.  Japanese was the most popular foreign language among Australian Year 12 students in 1999 and through their studies, these young Australians are gaining an insight into Japan's ancient and special culture and its way of life.
Australia receives more visitors from Japan than from any other country except New Zealand, with more than 720,000 visitors in 2000 and in a recent survey, Australia rated the most liked and trusted foreign country by Japanese people.
Exchanges in the arts are thriving in all areas, aided by Australia-Japan Arts Network and other promotional activities.
Scientific cooperation underwritten by government and private sector agreements is also increasing in the areas of e-commerce, agribusiness, environmental science, engineering and radio astronomy.  I understand that agreement has been reached between the Australian Academy of Sciences and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science to promote exchange of research sciences.
However, the real success story underpinning the relationship remains our economic ties and the immense trade that flows between our two countries.
As I said earlier, there is a complementarity about our two economies which it is rare to find amongst two countries in the world.
For many years, Japan has been Australia's largest trading partner and the largest consumer of our exports.  Put simply, Japan is our best customer with merchandise exports to Japan of $21.8 billion in 2000, up a staggering 31% over 1999.
To this can be added an increasing number of service exports, mostly in tourism and transport, which last year totalled a further $2.3 billion.
Australia is Japan's fourth largest source of imports and we're proud that, in a very real sense, we've provided and continue to provide, the energy and raw materials needed for Japan's economic development.
Australia is also increasing its direct investment in Japan in areas vital to every modern economy such as financial services, telecommunications and information technology.
For our part, Australian imports from Japan were over $17 billion in 2000, again a considerable increase over previous years.
Japanese investment in Australia in 1999 was $44 billion, making Japan our nation's third largest foreign investor.  It's also significant that Japanese affiliated companies directly employ about 50,000 Australians and are responsible for an additional 200,000 jobs through the supply chain and as subcontractors.
We look forward to an even closer economic relationship.  As a result of my Government's reform measures over recent years, Australia's standing as a competitive exporter, reliable supplier and as an attractive place to invest will continue to grow.
We are stronger because of clear economic and social policy directions and because of the increased confidence of our society. This makes us a valuable bilateral and regional partner for Japan.
Within the region, Japan and Australia have a tremendously important role to play.  I continue to believe that the Australia-Japan partnership is one of the most important foundations of the region's stability and economic prosperity.
We have worked together on a number of key regional issues.  Australia and Japan were the only two countries to provide support to all three crisis affected countries in 1997. We worked together to bring peace to East Timor. We share a common interest in maintaining US engagement with the region and are both significant supporters of Indonesia's transition to democracy.  Japan has played a particularly constructive role in the South Pacific.
The region needs a strong and confident Japan that can give a lead in dealing with the serious challenges we face. The recovery of its economy is not only important to the Japanese people but is vital to build prosperity throughout Asia and indeed the entire world.
Equally important is Japan's capacity, as a central player in the strategic and political as well as the economic structure of the region, to exercise leadership in policy directions and regional institutions.
Australia supports wholeheartedly a greater role for Japan in global affairs, including a permanent seat at the UN Security Council.
In exercising those global responsibilities, however, Japan must play a leading role in ensuring the start of a new comprehensive global trade round and in ensuring its ultimate success.
In past decades, Japan's success in modernising its economy has been a model and an inspiration to all other nations.  That success has been founded on an ability to sell its products into large markets such as the United States and areas of Europe.  For that reason alone, we would urge Japan in the period ahead to show leadership by progressively opening up its own economy and demonstrating faith in an open world system.
Australia and Japan, as two international economies, have important shared interests in this respect.
The evidence is compelling that open economic policies improve prosperity.  Open economies grow faster, are more robust, and deliver improvements in living standards for their citizens.  More open trade delivers greater choice for consumers, greater industry efficiency and, as Australia can well attest, can mean resilience in the tough times.
The collective responsibility we all hold, in government and in business, is to convince people of the advantages of open trade and to effectively communicate that benefits are attainable for both developing nations and those like our own.
Currently many developing countries are denied the opportunity to trade their way to sustainable growth and higher core labour standards because of the barriers in much of the developed world to their agricultural and other exports.
For all these reasons, the launch of a new round of multilateral trade negotiations at the Fourth WTO Ministerial Conference in Qatar in November this year is Australia's highest trade priority.
We know that a new round offers the best prospect for opening markets worldwide for Australian exports.  It would deliver better access for exports of Australian agriculture, services and industrial products in a relatively short time.
Equally, better market access would benefit not only Australia, but all other countries including Japan.  For instance if all trade barriers were removed, it's been estimated the annual gain to the world economy would be some US $750 billion.
In short, reducing trade barriers through a new round of multilateral trade negotiations would remove some of the more perverse elements in the international trading environment while providing real benefit to developing countries.
The current anomalies relate particularly to trade in agricultural produce.  Developed country protection against agriculture imports is five times higher than protection against manufacturing imports.
Our views on market-distorting agricultural subsidies are well known.  It is clear that such subsidies, particularly high both within both the EU and Japan, corrupt world agricultural markets and provide justification for other countries to subsidise their producers.  In addition, the cost of these subsidies is invariably transferred to other sectors of the domestic economies of the nations involved.
Further opening of agricultural markets is vital for a comprehensive and balanced WTO package from which everyone will benefit.
Developing countries would be among the major beneficiaries.  OECD Farm protection is 7 times the total OECD development assistance and 13 times the debt forgiven under the Heavily Indebted Poor Country initiative.
It is crucial to address the imbalance in international trade rules that favour most of the world's rich countries, including the US and the EU, against efficient agricultural exporters such as Australia.
In short, to be fully effective, all sectors need to be adequately covered by the WTO rules.
Notwithstanding our support for further multilateral liberalisation and a strong multilateral trade system, Australia has and will continue to actively pursue free trade agreements and closer bilateral economic partnerships.
This approach in no way conflicts with our unwavering support for multilateral agreements.  However, bilateral FTAs have the potential to significantly improve access for Australian exports in a shorter timeframe than would be possible under the WTO.
For instance, some market barriers can be removed faster in FTAs than in the WTO since they involve fewer negotiating partners.
Furthermore, countries can address complex issues such as e.commerce and trade and competition more easily in bilateral or regional trade agreement than in WTO negotiations.
I'm also convinced that they can act as a catalyst to multilateral WTO negotiations by maintaining momentum for trade reform.
Whatever the means, our aim is to simply reduce barriers to Australia's export markets and, more generally, to build greater international competitiveness among all nations.  I know that's a goal that our friends in Japan fully share.
There are many more areas where we can work together in the coming years.  I believe both Australia and Japan are beginning to gain a better insight into the full potential of their relationship.  
For a long time I suspect Australian and Japanese firms had outdated perceptions of each other.  So both were losing out by not discovering the newer goods and services produced by the other.  This hopefully is changing.
Areas such as information technology certainly offer great potential.  We have strong and, again, complementary industries that are well placed to take advantage of rapid changes in this sector.
Australia has often been described as the lucky country because of our rich natural resources and our lifestyle.  We also have a reputation for inventiveness and high quality research far out of proportion to the size of our population.
Our goal now is to become what we might call the "can-do" country.  We want to become more successful in translating these endowments into widespread practical application and commercial products.  Through tax and labour market reform and the 'Backing Australia's Ability' science and innovation package announced in late January, the government is encouraging risk-taking, rewarding innovation and increasing the opportunities for higher education and research.  Our reforms are also designed to attract higher levels of venture capital, both from within our own domestic economic and from nations such as Japan.
Other potential areas of mutual benefit to explore in the near future could include such issues as climate change and ensuring stability in the global financial system.
I'm sure that this gathering of eminent Australians and Japanese from such a diverse range of backgrounds will identify many more.  I wish you well for the next few days and I look forward to learning of the outcomes of your discussions. 
In closing, whilst among so many of his countrymen, I'd like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Koizumi for his recent election as Japan's Prime Minister.
I know he is familiar with Australia, having visited here three times.
I am pleased that Mr Koizumi has signalled his intention to pursue strong economic reform.  As I said earlier, the strength of the Japanese economy is of vital importance to all within our region.  His success will depend on some difficult decisions, requiring widespread support.
I look forward to developing as close a working relationship with Mr Koizumi as I had with Mr Mori and to meeting with him at the APEC leaders' meeting in China this October.
Once again, I wish you all the best for the conference.
[ends]


Subjects: Society of St Vincent DePaul; social coalition; welfare organisations.
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Mr Rogers, Mr Pat O'Flynn, Mr John Moore, Mr David Barr, Councillor Jean Hay the Mayor of Manly, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm very pleased to have the opportunity to involve myself in the launch of this winter appeal by the Society of St Vincent de Paul. I am so for a number of reasons. First and foremost it does give me an opportunity to publicly honour the great work of the society in helping the disadvantaged, not only in Australia, but around the world.
The society is one of a number of great institutions which have been in existence for a long time who've been based upon a desire to help our fellow country men and women who have either fallen upon hard times or through other combinations or circumstances are in need of help. And it is a reality that no matter how generically wealthy any community may be, no matter how much we may be able to boast of economic growth, and from time to time dazzle ourselves with economic statistics about national economic performance. There are always a group of people within our community who have missed out. And a group of people who are deserving and understanding of dignified support, of sensitive treatment, and of what I'm sure all of us would describe as practical warmhearted Christian charity. And the society has been in the forefront of welfare organisations in Australia and it has built up a great reputation, a deserved reputation for helping the disadvantaged within our community.
In the time that I've been Prime Minister I've spoken a great deal about the importance of trying to build within the Australian community a social coalition to tackle social and welfare issues. And it's important when talking about a social coalition to understand that that is not some kind of euphemism or some kind of excuse for the Government reducing its role or retreating any way from its responsibilities. There will always be a fundamental and important role for governments to provide income support, to draw upon the general fund of taxpayers to help the needy and the less fortunate in our community. That responsibility can never be abandoned, it should never be abandoned and it can never be negotiated away.
But there are, I believe, approaches which better combine the capacities of the Government, philanthropic individuals, the welfare sector, and the business community. And the social coalition is really about each of those groups getting together and doing what they can best do in order to help the disadvantaged within our society.
Governments are good at writing checks. Governments are good at drawing upon the tax payers money to provide pensions, unemployment benefits and forms of welfare support. Governments are not always good at the coal face. And that of course were organisations such as your society come in. The human compassion dispensed by the Society of St Vincent de Paul, by the Salvation Army, the Wesley Mission, by Anglicare, and I can go onto name the great welfare organisations of Australia. That kind of human compassion is irreplaceable and unmatchable and can only be provided by the warmhearted members of organisations such as your own.
But your organisations can do more than provide relief and human compassion at the coal face of disadvantage. You can only provide, drawing on your experience, you can also provide policy advice. And you can be involved in reshaping and remaking the policy approaches that governments adopt in relation to welfare problems. And one of the things that we also have endeavoured to do is to draw upon the policy expertise of the welfare organisations of Australia. And I know most of you will be aware of the McClure report, taking its name from Patrick McClure the executive director of Mission Australia, another great welfare organisation. And that report has given the Government a blueprint for welfare reform, and that will be a focus in the budget to be delivered on the 22 May. It won't be, as I mentioned earlier, any kind of platform or excuse for the Government reducing its role, rather for the Government more energetically involving itself in the process of welfare reform.
And we have endeavoured to involve organisations such as your own in building a new approach, a better approach, in relation to the delivery of welfare assistance. But there is a role also of course for the corporate sector of Australia. I frequently call on the corporate sector to give and support those in need. My call is not so much that business should give more, but rather that more businesses should give. There are some very spectacular examples, and you would know many of them, of great generosity on the part of wealth people in Australia. The point of course is that not all people who are able to give do give. And I hope that the spirit of corporate philanthropy, which I'm pleased to say is focusing more prominently in the thoughts and in the attitudes and in the minds of many business leaders in Australia, I hope that spreads even more widely. And the growth of partnerships between companies and welfare organisations in providing relief and help for the disadvantaged has been a very welcome feature of the whole welfare scene in Australia over the past few years.
Your organisation deals right where it occurs. Yours is an organisation which daily comes into contact with human suffering and human misery. And you bring to the relief of those in need a sense of compassion, of Christian understanding, a spiritual commitment which is the basis on which the Society was formed, taking it's guide from that great injunction in St Matthew's gospel. It is an organisation that I very warmly support, I admire, I appreciate the battles that it has fought over the years in the name and in the interest of the disadvantaged within the Australian community. I hope that this winter appeal is a great success. I announce that the Commonwealth Government will itself contribute $100,000 to the winter appeal. I know that you will provide warmth and comfort to many Australians in need of that assistance, and I renew the commitment I've made on many occasions that the Government seeks to work in a constructive manner, in as bipartisan a political atmosphere as possible with organisations such as your society to provide help and hope and sustenance and inspiration to those within the Australian community who are less fortunate than us. I declare the appeal open, I wish it a great success, I commend it to generous Australians. And I hope it provides a real vehicle for the relief of distress and suffering within the Australian community.


Subjects:  President of Germany; Australian-German relations; greenhouse gas emissions; Australian wine.
E&amp;OE..................
Your excellency Johannes Rau, Mrs Rau, Minister, other members of the German delegations, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s a special delight for Janette and I to welcome you Mr President to Canberra, to the capital of Australia, and to take the opportunity of expressing on behalf of the people of Australia the great warmth we feel towards our relationship with Germany and the German people.
Our two countries have much in common.  We are both modern, industrialised nations. Germany is the world';s second largest trading nation and the third largest economy, indeed being in economic terms almost as large as the United Kingdom and France put together.  Australia is the fourth largest economy in the Asia-Pacific. German investment in Australia is very important.  It exceeds $13 billion.  50,000 Australians are employed directly and indirectly by German companies.
More importantly still, the personal and family links between our two countries are very strong and they go back a very long way.  Something in the order of 500,000 Australians claim German ancestry.  And I';m pleased to say that the very newest recruit, the very newest appointment to the Ministry that I lead in the Federal Parliament, Eric Abetz, was in fact born in Stuttgart.  And it';s a reminder to many of us of the long history of the association between our two nations.  A history that has been touched by tragedy and conflict, but a history which in post World War II days has seen a coming together in a mutual involvement in the democratic processes, a desire to tackle human rights challenges around the world, and a desire to work together in the building of a more harmonious and cooperative world. 
You yourself Sir have had a very long and a very distinguished career in German politics. You were, I understand, for 20 years the Premier of Rhineland Westphalia.  And you have served in politics for a much longer period than that, I think in the order of 41 years, which is a remarkable achievement.  It';s certainly a sign of great resilience.  After almost 27 years my mind boggles at the prospect. 
But Mr President, you and your wife come to an Australian nation very confident of the various links that we have with different parts of the world.  We are a nation that owes much of our history and our heritage and much of our origin to the peoples of Europe.  Not only to the United Kingdom and Ireland but also increasingly since World War II to the hundreds of thousands, indeed millions of people who';ve come to this country from different parts of the world, and most particularly from Europe.
You come to a country that is proud of those associations and those links, but is nonetheless a country that sees itself as playing a very significant role in the Asian-Pacific region.  And the immediate political and economic destiny of Australia does lie very much in our own region.  And you yourself are no stranger to the largest country immediately to our north, and that is Indonesia.  We talked this morning about the challenge of the political and economic transformation which is now occurring in Indonesia.  And we compared our reminiscences of some of the key figures in Indonesian politics of recent times and the great importance all of us attach to a successful transition of the Indonesian republic to a democratic condition.
You have played a major humanitarian role within your own country in bringing about a better understanding between people of different ethnic backgrounds and different attitudes.  You have been a peacemaker and a reconciler and a person who has reached out the hand of friendship to the less privileged within your own society.
There are many things which we share in a political and economic outlook with the people of Germany.  We both value the importance of a strong private sector.  We both value the stabilising social influence of a strong social security safety net.  We both value the importance of world trade, we of course would like to see a slightly higher emphasis put on world trade in agriculture than does currently the member states, or do currently the member states of the European Union.
We spoke of that this morning.  We spoke also of our common commitment to controlling greenhouse gas emissions around the world.  I took the opportunity of informing you, Mr President, that Australia remains committed to the achievement of an effective world wide understanding in relation to greenhouse gas emissions.  The domestic commitments we made following the Kyoto summit will be maintained by Australia.  But we do share the concerns of a number of other countries including the United States that an effective world wide protocol on greenhouse gas emissions cannot be achieved without the involvement of the developing countries.
We also believe that the issue of sinks and the issue of tradeable credits must also form an important part of that agreement.  I know the importance that your country attaches and the government of your country attaches to this issue.  And I believe notwithstanding some differences of emphasis that we can work together very effectively.
Mr President, I want to say to you and your party how important it is to us that a relationship such as ours, which is now a very old and stable and mutually respectful relationship, should always be properly cared for.  And the attention that is brought to it by visits such as your own.  Only a few years ago the then Chancellor Helmut Kohl visited Australia and not so long before that one of your predecessors as President of the Federal Republic visited our country.
Germany has contributed so much to civilisation, to the European culture of which we feel some kind of joint involvement and ownership along with you.  The contribution of German people to probably one of our great export success stories - that is the wine industry - and I know that you shared reminiscences with the speaker, who represents the great wine growing district of South Australia, the Barossa Valley, during your encounter.
All of these things are reminders to us of what a rich and important relationship it is.  But most importantly as with all relationships between nations the personal links, the exchanges of students, the exchanges of political visits, the common values, the common culture, the common commitment to the dignity of the individual and democratic institutions, those links are far and away the most important and your visit here reinforces those links.
You are most welcome.  I know you are going to Melbourne after being in Canberra and you were talking enthusiastically of the possibility of going to an Australian Rules football match.  I commend it very warmly to you, I know it is not widely played in Germany, but you may have seen it on television.  It really is a remarkable game, a great spectator sport and I hope you get the opportunity of seeing a match.
But to you and your wife, welcome to our country.  I hope you enjoy your time in Australia and I now invite Mr Kim Beazley the Leader of the Opposition to support my remarks.  
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Science and innovation.
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Professor Anderson, Professor John Shine, Ladies and Gentlemen. It's a special pleasure in a symbolic way as well as in the practical sense of it to be associated with the formal launch or opening of the refurbished Shine Dome here in Canberra this morning.
It's a very symbolic and appropriate way in the presence of so many eminent Australian scientists for me to on behalf of the government honour the contribution of the science community to modern Australian life. It's an opportunity to recall in a slightly nostalgic way the involvement of my predecessor - Sir Robert Menzies - 33 years ago in laying the foundation stone. It's also an opportunity for me to honour on your behalf the extraordinary personal generosity of Professor John Shine who contributed so much of himself to the cost of refurbishing the dome. And to make the observation that it is but the latest example of the willingness of so many Australians who find themselves in a position to do so to contribute in a philanthropic way to the nurturing of the talents that we have, not only scientific talent but also talents in so many other walks of life.
And what has happened over the last few years in relation to the science community in Australia, and I'm very proud of the government's involvement in a number of those things. The contribution to medical science which came out of the Wills recommendations and involved the doubling of research funding for medical science represented an important expression of long term confidence and faith in the capacity of our scientific and medical community. And the role played by so many people here today in helping the government put together its statement Backing Australia's Ability which provided a long term blueprint for investment in science and innovation in the years ahead.
Now I would be the last to assert that that has completed the job so far as the government is concerned. But I think we have seen over the last few years a new assertion of the faith in all sections of the Australian community in the contribution being made by our scientists. I think there is a greater respect and a greater understanding and a greater appreciation of the value that science adds to Australian life. There is a growing awareness amongst the young of the importance of it, but we still have particularly through the education process a very long way to go.
This building I'm told is something of an icon for the scientific community of Australia. And refurbishing icons is always important both in a physical sense and also in an intellectual sense. And what today's opening does is to allow me on behalf of the government to express my gratitude and that of the government for the contribution that all of you make to Australian life, for me to emphasise the ongoing commitment the government has not only to the full and speedy and complete recommendations and announcements of the January statement, but also in a broad sense the ongoing priority that the government attaches to the role of science and innovation within our community.
In the end we as a nation will succeed, or perform in a fairly mediocre fashion, according to the capacity we have over the years ahead to effectively utilise our intellectual and inventive capital. We have great natural resources, we have an enviable lifestyle, but those things alone will not guarantee Australia's security and a high standard of living. Unless we effectively utilise and put to good positive use our intellectual capital, our capacity for inventiveness, and very importantly our capacity to convert good ideas and knowledge to effective practical use, unless we can do that more effectively as a community we're going to fall behind. And that's why you as a community are so very important to us. The opportunities in biotechnology and information communications technology are almost limitless and Australia has some great advantages of the natural and intellectual kind, we have great advantages that will allow us to punch above our weight if we are skilful in putting the resources in the right areas and giving the area the right priority. And that is why today's opening in a symbolic way is so very important.
I want to again on your behalf thank Professor Shine for his extraordinary personal generosity, others who've contributed. I do want to join Professor Anderson in acknowledging the contribution that Margaret Reid and John Ralph and Kate Carnell made to the campaign, to ensure that the government gave the right priority to this particular project. I know how tireless all of them were in those efforts. And can I say that this is a magnificently refurbished facility and I know that all of you will see it as a fitting physical reminder of the centrality of science and all that goes with it in the national life of our country. Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much John, my colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  Before saying anything about this building can I say John how delighted we all are to see you back on deck.  I am sure everybody will agree that rugby league players are made of very tough teak and it';s terrific to have you back.
This building is one of the more gracious office buildings that the Commonwealth or indeed any government has in Australia.  It was I think the first purpose built federal building and its refurbishment out, partly out of the funds of the Federation Fund completes a pattern of restoration of heritage buildings in Treasury Place.  The idea of the refurbishment I think was jointly cooked up between the former Victorian government and our government and we didn';t take much persuading that the office did need a bit of refurbishment and I think the money has been well spent.  It will provide accomodation for myself when I am in Melbourne, two former governors-general, Sir Zelman Cowan and Sir Ninian Stephen, both of whom are with us today, Victorian based members of the Federal Ministry, visiting ministers and also adequate facilities for the Leader of the Opposition and for the Shadow Ministry.  
John has already alluded to the rich history of this building and we only need to remind ourselves of everything that went on in Melbourne prior to 1927 and the opening of the temporary Parliament House in Canberra to reinforce the central role that this building would have played in the Commonwealth Government in its early years.  I have to say having sampled Commonwealth buildings in various parts of the country and prime ministerial offices in various parts of the country, the view of the Treasury Gardens is unsurpassed.  So from - although I';ve got to say, looking at Daryl Williams, that view out of the Commonwealth Building over the Swan River';s not to bad in Western Australia, but you';re so high up there';s a surreal quality about it that doesn';t apply here. But it is a beautifully located building and the restoration work, and I want to thank the architects and the project designers, the people from the Department of Finance and Administration and from my own department and all of the others that have been responsible. I think you have all done a first class job in having it essentially ready for occupancy and use this very special week in Melbourne is something we appreciate very much.
So particularly my thanks are directed to all of those people who have been responsible, we do appreciate that. I think the ambience of the building now is greatly improved, it certainly did need a bit of a facelift.  I think the office that I previously occupied or the previous condition of it was a mixture of what you might call late Whitlam and early Fraser as far as the period was concerned. I don';t think very much had changed as far as the carpet or anything else since then and I want to thank everybody associated with it and I declare the building officially, not only refurbished, but open for good government in the interests of the people of the Commonwealth of Australia.  Thank you.
[Ends] 


Subjects: Centenary of Federation
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Philip, my friend and colleague, the Federal Member for Deakin, Senator Tsebin Tchen, Senator for Victoria, Mr David Jewell the principal of the school, to all the other distinguished guests, the Mayor, Mr Ross Kimber, the regional director, ladies and gentlemen and students.
A few years ago, like fifty I think, I was in 6A of Earlwood Primary School of Sydney, a school very much like this, not dissimilar area of Sydney than where we are now and that was when we celebrated fifty years of the Federation of the six Australian colonies to form the Commonwealth of Australia and that was in 1951. And we got presented with a medallion, a memento and I thought as we were coming up to the celebration of the 100 years it would be a very good thing if every single schoolchild in Australia received a medallion to mark this very special occasion.
And the idea is that as far as possible around Australia there should be little gatherings like this where the medallions are presented. Now I can't go to every school, it's a bit difficult, but what I did want to do on this very special day and there are two days above all days that we celebrate in this year of 2001, there's the 1st of January when we had a celebration in Sydney of the actual start of the Commonwealth of Australia and the formation of the first government. And the next one is today here in Melbourne because a hundred years ago today as that beautiful painting by Tom Roberts shows us, the first Parliament of Australia was opened at the Royal Exhibition Building here in Melbourne. And we're going to in a way re-enact that. It will be a bit hard, the dress is different, the manner of speech is a bit different and we won't really try and completely re-enact but we will certainly celebrate that occasion.
Now I wanted to come to a school that was representative of Australia's future, because we're going to talk a lot about the past, but all of us are also very interested in what's happening now and what goes on in the future. And you are our future, for all of us. What happens in Australia over the next one hundred years you will shape, rather than somebody of my generation and therefore it's very important that I as prime minister honour the importance of the young people of this country, the children, the students and all of those who are going to play a part in building the kind of country I know we all want to have over the next hundred years.
This is a wonderful country. It is the best country in the world in which to live. It's a country where people get on very well together, they treat people decently. It's a country that hasn't been touched by war and it's a country where people are free to go about their lives and live their own lives as long as they don't interfere with the freedom and the happiness and the contentment of other people.
And the education you receive at this school in the state education system in Victoria is a wonderful education. And I always say to gatherings of school students, remember what your teachers do for you, they are a very important part of your life and without their care and attention your lives will in the future be a lot less than they would otherwise be. And you owe a lot to them, you not only owe them respect, but you also owe them the gratitude of what they impart to you while you are at school.
But this is not a day for long speeches because I remember when I was at school, I didn't like too many long speeches from any of the visitors. I'm . being a federal, being a prime minister, I can't declare a holiday, that is a matter for the state authorities and I won't get into that. But I'll simply say that it's a real pleasure for me to take a break from all of the official functions and all of the big speeches and all of the other things that are a very important part, but to actually come to spend a few minutes with Australia's future, because that is what you represent. And I want to thank your principal. I want to thank all the teachers at this school for the tremendous job they do in educating. It's not an easy task and there are a lot more burdens carried by teachers now than I suspect was the case thirty or forty years ago.
But to all of the teachers, the students, the parents associated with Blackburn Lake Primary School, happy days. I hope you all enjoy your school days here with great affection and you remember them years into the future and let us all remember how lucky we are to live in the most wonderful country in the world.
Thank you.
[Ends]


As Edmund Barton and Alfred Deakin and all the others gathered here a hundred years ago there was no way that they could predict what lay in front of Australia. They would not have foreseen that within fewer than 20 years 60,000 out of a male population of 2.5 million would die in a horrible war. They would not have foreseen the Great Depression. They would not have foreseen the social changes. They would not have seen the determination of later generations to overturn the White Australia policy, regarded by those generations as morally repugnant. They would not have foreseen the technological and fashion changes that were to occur. And indeed if they were to return to our gathering today they would find much that was unfamiliar.
But if they were to move amongst us and talk to us they would find some things that were very familiar. They would find that we were still a federation, and that what they gifted us in the constitutional sense had worked. They would find that some of those fundamental values that helped cement the federation remain. They would find that we were still an egalitarian society. They would find that we were still a nation that sought to give basic national standards for all of our citizens. They would find that we were a nation that pulled together in time of adversity and that we had a great volunteer spirit, and they would hear wonderful stories of how the volunteers did us proud at the Sydney Olympic Games.
They would find as we were in the 19th Century an innovative, can-do society. And they would find that over the last 100 years creating a climate where individuals could strive and achieve and where the family unit was the most cohesive element in our society, had remained true and constant.
And perhaps this commonality of values amidst a sea of change in other areas gives us a clue about the next 100 years. We cannot imagine what will come the way of this nation over the next 100 years. We have no way of knowing. We can of course predict though that the application of the values that have served this country well over the last 100 years are likely to produce better outcomes than otherwise.
We know that we face a world which is increasingly borderless, a globalised world. We know that we face a society where medical science presents us with not only great ethical challenges but also enormous opportunities. We carry, as did the people of the last 100 years, a great responsibility to nurture and strengthen those constant Australian values. Only by preserving egalitarianism, only by preserving a society in which individuals can work hard and achieve, and where the family is honoured as a great national institution can we dare to hope to respond effectively to the challenges of the next 100 years.
The great challenge ahead of the Australian nation is to remain true to those values which Barton and Deakin would have identified amidst a world and a changed environment that would have been beyond their comprehension.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mr Sam Lipski, Mary Delahunty, the Minister for Centenary of Federation in Victoria, Denis Napthine, the Leader of the Victorian Opposition, Dame Elisabeth Murdoch, and other members of the Murdoch family, ladies and gentlemen.
There are a lot of things happening in Melbourne at the moment. There's a lot happening today. I've just come from presenting but 2 of 2,000,000 Centenary of Federation medallions to some school children in a little primary school out near Nunawading. And it's a reminder of course that a day like this is not only a day to reflect on the past but it's also a day to dedicate to the future. And as I looked at that excited gathering of school children I reflected upon the fact that fifty years ago I was one of those excited schoolchildren receiving as, so timing would have it, a medallion to mark the fifty years of the Australian Federation at a not dissimilar school.
But we've come here to open an exhibition and to recognise that in the reality of our life and in the reality of the life of the nation, there is a sense of belonging for each of us. We all have images of where we came from. We have images of where we are. We have experiences that are frozen either in our own recollection or in photographs that we treasure and keep. And what this exhibition I think very beautifully does and I've had the opportunity, albeit altogether too briefly to have a look at it, what it does is to remind us of the sense of belonging and the sense of place that we each have in so many different ways. And it is important at a time like this when we properly honour and we properly celebrate what's been achieved and we try and throw ahead we also pause for a moment and reflect upon what a sense of belonging and a sense of identity and a sense of security has meant in different ways to different Australians.
We all have those images from childhood. We all have those comfortable recollections of the Christmas holiday in the Blue Mountains if you grew up in a certain part of Sydney or later on it was a beach holiday. If you were a migrant you would have some recollections of your first experience with Australia. If you were an indigenous person you would have a mixture of recollections. If you were a bushman it would be different. If you were somebody who grew up in the suburbs of Sydney and who identified your youth with the Victa mower and the Hills Hoist you'd probably have a sense of belonging that was in common with many millions of Australians who grew up in those circumstances.
But this exhibition is a result of the contribution of many people and I do particularly want to commend the four very prestigious collecting institutions that are involved, the State Libraries of Victoria and New South Wales, the National Library of Australia and the National Archives of Australia. It is I understand the first time that these four institutions have collaborated together in this particular fashion. It's also a culmination of a widespread programme of community consultation, including thirteen workshops held across the country and consultations by an indigenous advisory committee with indigenous communities and individuals to develop 'We belong to the land' section of the exhibition.
I would like to join Sam Lipski in expressing my thanks and that of the nation for the contribution of $5 million by Dame Elisabeth Murdoch and the Murdoch family to the State Library for this exhibition space. It is so appropriate that the memory of the late Sir Keith Murdoch should be marked in this way in his home town and a city to which he gave so much and his family has given so much and through it given to the nation. I also want to thank and congratulate AAMI on its support for the exhibition. And also for the National Council for the Centenary of Federation which has supported this exhibition to the tune of $300,000. Corporate sponsorship is absolutely essential for successful exhibitions in the times in which we live and we should never take it for granted and we should never lose an opportunity to express our gratitude as I do to AAMI for its generosity.
Ladies and gentlemen this has been, as Sam indicated, a great time not only to be alive as an Australian, but a great time to share the hospitality and the generosity of the people of this beautiful city and to enjoy its wonderful autumn weather and to share the sense of community excitement that I find here in Melbourne about the events particularly the events that we are to mark today with the re-enactment or the commemoration of the first gathering in the Royal Exhibition Building in a few hours time and of course tomorrow a ceremonial sitting of the Federal Parliament in its old place of debate and encounter, what is now the Victorian Parliament. But life is not only about politics, life is also about the cultural and artistic contributions and it's also about the personal reminiscences of people. We are an aggregation of wonderful and intriguing personal stories and family histories and personal circumstances, many of them are joyous and happy, all too many of them are sad and difficult, but all of them are part of the history of our nation. And we all need a sense of security. We all need a sense of belonging to people, we need a sense of belonging to a place, we need a sense of belonging to a nation. And I think this exhibition is a very important ingredient of a proper commemoration of the establishment of the Commonwealth Parliament in Melbourne and I have very great pleasure in declaring it open.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Your Excellency, Mr Speaker, my fellow Australians. Today above all days is a day to celebrate in an appropriate way the great success of Australian democracy over the last one hundred years.  
Democracy is a practice of government common to many nations and to millions of people. But to work effectively in any society it must reflect the values, the mores and the attitudes of each community to which it is applied.  And the great success of Australian democracy, of parliamentary democracy, has been that over the last one hundred years it has expressed the values and the aspirations and the mores of the Australian community.
We find in that compact between a popularly elected House of Representatives and a Senate with equality of representation from the states, that fair go concept between the different parts of the Commonwealth so that the voices in the more sparsely populated areas of Australia are not drowned out by the predominance of votes from Sydney and Melbourne.
In building our constitution the founding fathers borrowed not only the British parliamentary system, but also the American federal system of dividing power between the centre and the states.  We provided with a certain degree of caution that the Constitution would not be easy to change. Yet if the people want change as they so demonstrably did to right a moral and historic wrong in 1967, they voted overwhelmingly to include the first Australians in full participation in the political and constitutional life of our nation. 
Our democracy has been strong and true and effective because we have put our faith above all else in functioning vigorous institutions. The three great guarantors of liberty and democracy in this country are our robust parliamentary system with the free play and exchange of political views and ideologies, an independent and absolutely incorruptible judiciary, and finally a strong and on occasions a very sceptical media.  Those three things together have done more to guarantee liberty and freedom and the Australian way than any other set of institutions.
And so as we gather here today in Melbourne on the 9th of May and give thanks to God for the privilege of being an Australian alive at the beginning of the 21st Century, let us honour some people.  Let us honour those people who put the Constitution together.  Let us honour their patience, their persistence, their forbearance, and their foresight.  And let us thank them for what they gave us and what has proved so durable over the last one hundred years.  
Let us also thank the political leaders of the past.  Let us honour them.  And may I particularly honour two of them.  May I honour the contribution of John Curtin whose great leadership during World War II was so important to our nation.  Let me also honour the great Robert Gordon Menzies, the founder of the party I am proud to lead now, for the contribution that he made in giving Australia its post war strength and prosperity, laying the foundation for so much of what we enjoy today.
And let us lastly but most importantly honour those Australians who died that we might meet in peace and freedom here in Melbourne on the 9th of May 2001.  We owe much to those people who gave us the Australian Constitution, who gave us Australian democracy. We owe an even greater debt to those who made the supreme sacrifice that we might live to enjoy it to its full.
[Ends]


Subjects: volunteerism; Country Women's Association;  dairy deregulation;
E&amp;OE.................................
Thank you very much Alex, the Mayor and Lady Mayoress, to my Cabinet colleague and friend and former Federal Member for this area, the continuing member for Wide Bay Warren Truss, ladies and gentlemen.
This is quite a big meeting and it's great to have an opportunity of moving around and meeting people who represent one of the great Australian traditions.  And that is the great Australian volunteer tradition.  There are a couple of things I want to say about issues of particular concern to Gympie and of particular concern to this part of Queensland and Australia.  
But before I do that can I express on my behalf and on behalf of your fellow Australians the tremendous admiration we all have for those countless number of volunteers and volunteer organisations that are the real cement of Australian society.  Australia has the greatest volunteer tradition of any country on earth.   It was marvellously on display for the rest of the world at the Sydney Olympics.  But when you look back over the history of our country it is not surprising that we developed the great volunteer tradition.  There we were separated by vast distances with a small population having to pitch in and bond together in order to achieve common goals.  And often the common goal was bare survival.  And on top of that we are by nature, thank heavens, a relatively classless society with a great egalitarian spirit.  Some even dare to call that egalitarian spirit mateship.  And that spirit of mateship and egalitarianism means that we work together in order to tackle and to solve common problems.  And without the people who keep the local charities going; without the contribution of those thousands of Australian parents on Saturday morning who get up early to make sure their children can get to their sporting fixtures; without the help of such other wonderful organisations that keep the community going, and can I on this occasion pay special reference to that great organisation the Country Women's Association that of course has provided. yes, let's given them a hand.  And of course the electorate of Fairfax which is named after the founder of that great organisation, Lady Fairfax.  And it's an organisation that has represented the concerns and the aspirations and the views communicated so effectively by women in country rural Australia, the bush, whatever name depending on what part of Australia you come from, you want to give to non-metropolitan Australia.  And I want to thank the members of that organisation and that organisation for the tremendous role that they have played in keeping together the social infrastructure of non-metropolitan Australia over such a long period of time.
I don't pretend ladies and gentlemen when I come to a community such as this, I don't pretend for a moment that you've had it easy.  And I know that within the framework of a national economic outlook which is fundamentally very strong, indeed stronger than it's been for a generation with low inflation and much lower interest rates.  And having repaid a large amount of the government debt that we had five years ago, and having for rural people a particularly competitive exchange rate and having undertaken quite a number of changes to our industrial relations system and our taxation system that were long overdue.  I know that there are within that framework communities in Australia who are not doing as well as other parts of our country.  And it's the responsibility of the government, it's the responsibility of the government I lead at a federal level, and it's the responsibility of governments at a state level and at a local government level to try within the limit of our resources to deal with some of the particular issues that communities such as Gympie and other communities in this part of Queensland have to face.  We've endeavoured to do that.  You have a higher level of unemployment than the national average.  Part of that is due to long term structural change to the industries in your area.  It is also due to the negative effect over long years of bad practices, particularly in the area of industrial relations.
I know that your district has been affected by the process of dairy deregulation.  I know that.  A number of people have spoken to me about it this morning.  And that's one of the values of encounters like this, it gives people an opportunity to tell me first hand how it's affected them.  It gives people an opportunity to put forward some ideas about how some of the assistance that is now being delivered might be redirected.  
I want to say in relation to dairy deregulation, of course State Governments control the quota system in relation to milk, they control the question of whether you have a regulated industry or a deregulated industry.  The Federal Government's role is not to decide whether or not there should be regulation or deregulation.  We don't have the power to do that.  But we do have the power to do what we have done, and that is to impose a national underpinning to ease the pain of deregulation for people who are being adversely affected by it.  I'm very pleased to say that partly and certainly importantly through the advocacy that Warren Truss brought to the Cabinet as the Minister responsible, it was possible for us to put in place a $1.8 billion dairy assistance package funded by a consumer levy which has financed the adjustment process.  Now deregulation has had a differential impact on parts of Australia.  In some parts of Australia diary deregulation has been warmly received and has brought great benefits to dairy farmers.  That applies particularly in the case of Victoria and Northern Tasmania, and some other parts of Australia.  And it should be remembered in relation to dairy deregulation that once the dairy farmers in Victoria decided that they were going to sell across the state borders of Australia there was no way that a process of deregulation could have been stopped, because under our constitution free trade between the states is absolutely guaranteed.  And there was no way that any State Government in Australia, in Queensland or in New South Wales or Western Australia would have had the constitutional power to stop that happening.  So we were faced with a situation of whether we had deregulation willy-nilly or we had deregulation that was conducted in as orderly a process as possible with Federal Government help.  We were presented with the reality of deregulation by the decisions taken by dairy farmers in other parts of Australia and through the acquiescence after a process of consultation by State Governments in that process.  And we said okay, we'll provide some assistance at a national level.  And we have done that through the levy.  And more recently Warren has announced some further measures that address some of the particular areas of difficulty and pain.  I know it affects quite a number of dairy farmers in this area, and a number of dairy farmers in northern New South Wales and in some parts of Western Australia.
And part of the process of trying to cushion the impact of deregulation, we decided to establish a dairy regional assistance programme.  And that was designed to fund projects all around Australia, in many cases to provide alternative employment and business opportunities for communities who were affected by the process of dairy deregulation.  And I'm therefore pleased to announce here in Gympie this morning that out of that fund we're going to make available an amount of $1.6 million to the Australian owned meat processor Nolan Meats.  This is going to finance a five-year extension and expansion of that company's abattoir here in Gympie.  And it's going to provide greater training opportunities for workers and a significant number of additional jobs in the region.  The project represents the start of a $20 million, five-year expansion programme for the abattoir.  And up to 150 permanent and 30 contract jobs are expected to be created for the shire and surrounding regions as a result of this expansion.  
As many of you will know Nolan Meats abattoir is a modern well equipped facility, and there are approximately 114 dairy farms in the surrounding area.  Now this is not going to of itself make a difference to some of those people who have been affected.  But it will make a difference to the morale and the spirit of the community.  It is more than a token, it is a significant practical contribution towards helping a successful local industry, and also recognising a very important fact.  There are some changes in our community that we can't stop occurring because habits change, the forces of economic activity in other parts of the country have an impact on what is happening here, or in other parts of the world have an impact of what is happening in Australia.
We can't stop that.  No government can.  No political party can.  And any political leader who comes to you and says I can put my hand up like King Canute and stop it is deluding you and deluding himself or herself as well.  But there is something a government can do, and that is to provide assistance and to manage the process of change and to help people out as they adjust to that change.  And one of the important pledges I give to you because you are in many ways very representative of communities in Australia that have to grapple with the impact of economic change.  There are many parts of Australia where economic change leaves people unaffected.  Their jobs go on, their businesses go on and their prosperity goes on.  You are at the cutting edge, you are affected by it.  Many of you are associated with industries that have been changed beyond all recognition by the way in which our economy has developed and the impact of global forces on our economy.  Now what I can say to you is the government is very sensitive to that and we are prepared, as demonstrated by the announcement I have made to give assistance to communities to help them adjust to the process of change.
And when you add those sorts of policies to what I might call the generic economic policies we have - we have much lower interest rates in this country now than we used to have a few years ago.  And I haven't come along here to make a violently partisan speech because this is a community gathering.  But I have to say in defence of the economic climate we now have in this country we do have interest rates that are the lowest they've been for 30 or 40 years.  We have tackled some of the industrial relations deficiencies this country had a few years ago.  We have reformed the waterfront.  We have brought about very big changes in areas like that.  And importantly we have paid off the nation's debt.  I mean one of the things that I am very proud of is that the government debt of this country is about the lowest you will find anywhere in the world.  And the good thing about that is we're not burdening the future generations of Australians, the young Australians I see as I move around this hall, we're not burdening them with interest bills.  We are now spending $4 billion a year less on paying off debt as a nation than five years ago.  That $4 billion hasn't gone into my pocket, hasn't gone into Peter Costello's pocket, it's gone on things like defence and roads and expenditure on salinity and on the Natural Heritage Trust.  And over the last few months we have made a lot of announcements.  We've invested a lot of money in Australia's future.  I believe in spending more money on the defence of this country.  I think the defence of this country is very important.  I believe in spending more money on local roads - we've provided another $1.6 billion to local councils for local roads.  I believe in investing more money in the Natural Heritage Trust.  I believe very strongly in providing the additional $1 billion over five years that we're going to provide.  I believe in the extra $500 million we've put in over five years to get more doctors into the country.  And also the additional money that's gone into getting practice nurses into rural areas of Australia.  The list is very long.  They are all important, long overdue investments in the future of this country.  And they have in part been made possible because we don't have such a big interest bill.  And people who run businesses, and there'd be hundreds of you here today, know that there's nothing worse than the money you feel you've got to pay or devote towards the interest payments on your loans, if only you could invest that in the future operation of your business you'd feel a lot happier.
So ladies and gentlemen, my message to you today is first and foremost a message of gratitude and a message of admiration on behalf of the Australian government and the Australian community to all of those countless thousands of Australians who devote their lives to making the lives of others happier and more fulfilled and more purposeful.  My other message to you is that I understand and the government I lead understands that within an overall scene of a strong Australian economy, an Australia that is more respected and is stronger and more secure in the world than it's been for a long time, I do understand that some communities are not sharing to the same degree as others.  And I say to you that not only do I understand that but in various ways my government is endeavouring with particularly policies to address those difficulties.  It's not easy if you're in a region that is affected by economic change and by the departure of support for one industry unless there are replacements.  And I know that you do face in this community particular challenges.  I'd like you to know that I lead a government that is sympathetic to that.  But more than being sympathetic to it, it's a government that is trying as I hope the announcement illustrated today to try and do something in a practical way to address those challenges.
Can I say to all of you again the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity it gives me on a regular basis to meet and talk to and listen to countless thousands of Australians in their local communities.  It is something that inspires and enthuses and invigorates me on every occasion.  And this morning has been no exception.  To have the opportunities you can in this great democracy of ours to move around and to meet people from all parts of the community, to hear their advice, to try and answer their questions, to shake their hands, to share a word of sympathy and encouragement is a very very important part of the privilege of being Prime Minister of this wonderful country.  And I want to thank you very warmly for the greeting you've given me this morning and the opportunity that has come my way to meet you.  And finally can I say in Warren Truss you have a great and articulate and energetic representative.  And can I say in your new representative Alex Somylay you have an equally articulate, energetic and enthusiastic representative.  They're two really good blokes to use the Australian vernacular and I couldn't commend them to you too warmly.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: electorate of Franklin; economic management.
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Senator Paul Calvert, Senator Eric Abetz, the Special Minister of State, Sue Napier, the Leader of the Opposition in Tasmania, but very importantly my friend and we all hope and we will work to achieve, the next federal member for Franklin, Mr Peter Hodgman.
I always have a very strong commitment to winning seats from the Labor Party, don't we all? But my determination in relation to winning seats from the Labor Party here in Tasmania is fuelled by the spectacle of an arrogant, complacent, take-it-for-granted attitude Labor Party that believes that the five House of Representatives' seats here in Tasmania are in the bag and aren't in any way under threat.  
And if you look at the Labor Party's posturing in the lead up to the election campaign, they just assume that it's a given that every seat they now hold in Tasmania will be retained at the next federal election.  Well I have never known in my twenty-seven years of being in public life, I have never known a Tasmania to lightly take being taken for granted.  And that is what is occurring with the Labor Party here in Tasmania, they assume that all of their seats in Tasmania are absolutely impregnable. And it is up to us, it is up to us as local Liberals, it is up to us at a national level to prove them wrong and where better to start then here in the electorate of Franklin by getting behind Peter Hodgman.
This is a lovely spot to launch an election campaign.  I've launched a lot of local campaigns in my lifetime.  I think this is the first one I've launched against the backdrop of a magnificent new achievement by Australian industry and I want to congratulate the company.  I mean doesn't this give the lie to those who say we don't have manufacturing capacity in this country?  Doesn't this give the lie to the fact that you can't generate new jobs through new industries here in the state of Tasmania?  And if you look at what has occurred here in Tasmania, particularly over the last five years you see a state that is getting the benefits of the improved national economic condition.  
Not only is Tasmania benefiting from the lower interest rates, the higher levels of business investment, the reductions in taxation and let me remind you that the company that is building this vessel will from the 1st of July be paying a company tax rate of only 30 cents in the dollar instead of at present 34 cents in the dollar and it was paying, any company in existence was paying 36 cents in the dollar when this Government was elected in March of 1996.  And any exports of these vessels abroad will of course enjoy the total exemption from GST that is the case in relation to exports of all goods and services.  So there is a lot to reflect upon in terms of the economic benefits that have come to this state from the general improvement in economic conditions in Australia over the last five years.  
The unemployment rate in Tasmania is lower than what it was in '96.  But in addition to that no state has derived more specific benefits to address its particular disadvantage than has the state of Tasmania.  Over the last five years this state has done far better than any other state in relation to the development of educational services, information technology and many of the other benefits that have flowed from the sale of shares in Telstra.  This state has been able to punch above its weight.  This state has been more benignly looked upon in relation to those areas of disadvantage than any other part of Australia and I make no apology for being a prime minister that has set out to give a leg-up to the people of Tasmania.  When premiers of other states have said to me 'hey John, you're giving Tasmania too much', I've said to them 'it is nothing more than they deserve'.  Because this island state has disadvantages because of its separation from the mainland.  It does have challenges.  It has a crying need to retain its young people in employment in this island and it's the responsibility of the federal government to do something about that.  And we have discharged our responsibilities to the people of Tasmania and we will go on discharging our responsibilities to the people of Tasmania.  It's too early to talk at this stage about specific packages for Tasmania, but let me say we've never let the people of Tasmania down in the past and we won't be doing it the next time the federal election comes along.
Federal elections are about choices.  In the end you've got to decide whether you want to return the Coalition Government, whether you want to retain me as Prime Minister and John Anderson as Deputy Prime Minister and Peter Costello as Treasurer.  Or alternatively do you want to elect Kim Beazley as prime minister.  I mean that is what a federal election is about in the end.  You can put aside all of the other argy-bargy, all of the other debate.  In the end people will have to decide do they want to go back to a man that helped give us 17% interest rates,  $96  billion of national government debt and 11% unemployment when he was the minister for employment.  I mean that is the Beazley record.  Let no Australian forget what interest rates were like when Labor was last in office.  Let no farmer forget that they were paying 21% and 22% bill rates.  Let no homebuyer forget that they were paying 17% and 18% on their mortgage.  Let no Australian forget that when we came to office we were spending more money in meeting the interest bill on Labor's debt than we were spending on defence.  And that was a measure of the debt that had been run up.  We were spending $8.5 billion a year on servicing our debt - an extraordinary figure. 
And in the last five years we have repaid $50 billion of the debt that was run up irresponsibly by Mr Beazley and Mr Keating.  And not only have we repaid it, but we have been obstructed and opposed and frustrated and sabotaged and undermined at every turn.  Not only did they leave us with a debt but they then tried to stop us paying it back.  And then they've got the nerve to give us lectures about financial responsibility.  They would not understand what the term means.  Because when they were last in office they gave us historically high interest rates, historically high levels of unemployment and historically high levels of government debt.  And it's been our responsibility over the last five years to get the finances of this country back in order.  
But in the end elections therefore my friends are about choice.  They are about whether you want to return to that kind of approach, you want to rollback the industrial relations' reforms.  Do you want to give the trade union movement of this country a free rein to re-visit the sort of approaches we used to have - the high levels of strikes, the crippling impact of across the board wage adjustments that paid no regard to the profitability and capacity to pay of small firms.  And mark my words, if you superimpose a federal Labor government on top of five state governments of Australia in Labor hands, you will be delivering in this state, in New South Wales, in Victoria, in Western Australia and Queensland, you will be delivering the double pro-union whammy of having both a federal and a state Labor government.  And in those circumstances it is inevitable that the trade union movement will disproportionably influence and exercise power over government decisions.
The last thing I want to say to you my friends is that Tasmania has always demonstrated through the years a capacity to make decisions based on personalities more than any other part of Australia.  Tasmanians love their political personalities.  They like a local member that they can meet on a daily basis.  They like somebody who identifies with their locality.  They like to feel that they're not just voting for a Liberal or a Labor person, but they're also voting for an individual they feel they can relate to them.  Now Peter has demonstrated as the state representative that he's been, the state minister he's been, the contribution he's made as a senior minister in past Liberal administrations here in Tasmania, Peter has demonstrated a capacity to identify with the people of Franklin.  He is not a johnny-come-lately to the electorate of Franklin.  He's lived in Franklin virtually all his life, he eats and  breathes and sleeps and thinks Franklin.  He's identified with the area.  He loves the area.  He believes in it.  And he'll make a great local representative and I'm just so delighted that he's your candidate and I ask you all to give your all to get him elected as the federal member for Franklin when the election is held.Thank you.


Subjects: Pilgrimage to Greece and Crete
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Bruce Scott, Mrs Scott, Your Excellency the Ambassador for Greece, Your Excellency the Administrator of the Northern Territory, General Leahy, General Stevens, Bruce Ruxton the President of the Victorian RSL.  And very importantly the men and women of Australia who are going in our name and in remembrance of what you did 60 years ago on this very special pilgrimage to honour the battles of Greece and Crete 60 years ago.
It is appropriate in what is proudly the largest Hellenic Centre outside of Greece that we should gather here in the city of Melbourne to farewell this pilgrimage.  To say again on behalf of a grateful nation how much we are in the dept of those people who risked all and in too many cases gave all in the defence of freedom 60 years ago.  The men of Australia and New Zealand with their British and Greek allies faced overwhelming odds in the battles of Greece and Crete 60 years ago.  And out of that tragic but valiant encounter, there developed a bond of friendship between the people of Greece and the people of Australia that is remembered very warmly today and is symbolised by the gathering here, not only of the veterans of that campaign but so many members of the Greek community here in Melbourne.  
That battle was the prelude to the Nazi occupation of Greece which was to claim through starvation some 425,000 Greek lives and the execution of some 25,000 through reprisals.  It was therefore a very tragic and long remembered moment in the history of Greece and also in the alliance between the people of Greece, the people of Australia and other democratic, freedom loving countries.
But very importantly today is also an opportunity for me, on behalf of the people of Australia, not only the Government but I know that all the people of Australia to express our gratitude to the men who gave so much, to their widows and to all of those associated with that campaign 60 years ago.  It was very costly in lives, it did not achieve its immediate military objective, but it cemented the bonds between the people of Greece and the people of Australia.  And as the Minister has already said it brought together for the first time on the 26th anniversary of the landing of Gallipoli, it brought together the ANZAC troops, the troops of Australia and New Zealand once again fighting under the name ANZAC.
I think it is important that this country take care to honour, not only in a general way the contribution of those who fought to defend our freedoms, to preserve the Federation that we have so proudly celebrated over the last week here in Melbourne.  But I think it';s also important as part of an understanding of the history of our country and the history of our fighting men and women that we focus specifically on individual campaigns.  And I know that the 22 members of this pilgrimage that will go to Greece and Crete will go with many memories.  It will be a very emotional occasion for them.  It';s an occasion, can I say to all of you, that you should experience with unconditional pride.  And you should know as you go on your pilgrimage to Greece and Crete that you go with the good wishes of the people of Australia.  You go with our thanks, you go as the creators of a great legacy of friendship between the people of Greece and the people of Australia.  But most importantly you go as representatives of an heroic generation of Australians who sacrificed in too many cases and in all cases risked all to defend the way of life that we enjoy here today.
So on behalf of the Australian Government and personally on my behalf I wish all of you bon voyage.  I hope you enjoy it, I hope it is a source of warmth and pride and recollection and nostalgia.  You also go, I know, with the good wishes of all Australians of Greek descent, for whom your deeds and your valour mean so very much in a very special way.  I hope it';s a great pilgrimage and all enjoy it and all return well and nourished by such an experience.


Subjects: 'Youth at the Centre'; social coalition.
E&amp;OE.............................
Well thank you very much Kay, Kevin Lingard, the State Member for Beaudesert, the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.  
This is a wonderful example of something that I have talked a great deal about in the time that I have been prime minister, and that is the notion of what I call a social coalition.  And that is where you recognise that the only way you're going to get anything done is for everybody to work together in a co-operative way at a local level with each person, or each group contributing what they can do best.  TheGgovernment has a role, the local community has a role, public spirited and philanthropic individuals have a role and organisations that have a speciality in getting things done also have a role.
And if you look at the ingredients of the 'Youth at the Centre' project, you find all of those things present.  You find that the Commonwealth Government contributed $200,000 out of the Stronger Families and Community project in order to provide some capital for the setting up of 'Youth at the Centre'.  And that was augmented by a contribution of $50,000 from the foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal and that is a foundation established by probably the greatest philanthropic family Australia's ever seen and that is the Myer family.  That money comes, originally out of the Sydney Myer Trust.  Then of course you had this magnificent community and of course spearheaded by the energy of young people.  They're joined by their peers and their colleagues from all around Australia today, but the driving force behind this particular project which stands behind me.  I understand it's been sold to the local school and I'll come back to that in a moment.  But having been inside and having observed the view, I think there'll be an application to the Queensland Education Department to shift the school up to here rather than shift this magnificent building down to the school.  And then on top of that and you've heard quite a bit about it from the previous speakers, there has been the fantastic support from local businessmen and women from all of the local communities and as I look out on this audience everybody's here, in this beautiful Queensland afternoon, everybody's here.  I mean you've got the young people, you've got the service organisations, you've got the people who care for the disadvantaged, you've got the mayor, you've got the businessmen and women, you've got my magnificent colleague Kay Elson who's about the most energetic representative in any federal electorate, any where in Australia could possibly have.  
And you've all come together to make a statement about the importance of retaining young people in rural and regional Australia.  Now as a person who spent his young days growing up in the suburbs of Sydney, I can understand the sense of despair that people feel when their young people think they have no alternative but to leave the community they've grown up in.  And I understand the desire of so many local communities to try and reverse that trend.  And a lot of things can bring about a reversal of that.  A lot of things can . you have better economic conditions, you have lower interest rates and all of those things that we talk about quite properly in the national political debate, they're very important.  But another thing that is very important is for every local community to have a sense of its own capacity to make a difference and to make a contribution.  And what is so remarkable about this project and this concept run by an organisation magnificently called, can I say, Bank of Ideas, I think that's a wonderful description for any organisation, I wish .you know I think there'll be a lot of people Mr O'Meara who would have wished they had thought of that name long before you or whoever it was who thought it because it is in a way is what the future is all about.  If you have a bank of ideas you will always find a solution to problems and a solution to challenges.  And I really do want to congratulate the young people of Boonah.  I want to congratulate the young people of Australia who are associated with this project.
I have little doubt that the current generation of the young people of this country are as well equipped to make a contribution, in many ways better equipped, to make a contribution than previous generations of their age cohort.  They face different challenges.  Thankfully they'll never have to face the challenge of war as earlier generations of young Australians had to do.  But they have other challenges.  And the important thing is that we all feel part of one community. Australians have a great capacity as we colloquially call it, to pitch in and get something done because we can all work together. We're better at working together than any other country in the world because we've had to do so from the very beginning.  We faced distance, we had small populations and we had to try and cope with those problems.  And because we're a relatively classless, egalitarian society we don't have any difficulty at all working together no matter what our different backgrounds may be.  And that is why you get projects like this that are so enormously successful. 
So I am really quite touched by the enthusiasm of all of these young people and this magnificent structure put up in two or three days - incredible, great view as I said and it will make a great contribution.  I understand you've struck a bargain with the local school, get $25,000, I am very happy to say we'll match that $25,000 from the Federal  Government, so there'll be another $25,000 on top of that to go into the local foundation.
But it's the concept that's involved here that is so terrific.  This is a concept about people grabbing hold of their own, making their own opportunities.  I was asked this morning on radio just before I came up to Queensland, I did a radio interview in Sydney and the interviewer said, you know just before you go are you going to tell us about the sort of things that you think are in important for the future of our country.  And I said well I'd like to see a country where people are given plenty of choice, they're given plenty of incentive, they're encouraged to be self-reliant.  And being self-reliant is a very important thing.  We've always had to be self-reliant in this community of ours and we're very good at it and you've seen a wonderful example on display.  And of course I also said we had to be a community that cared for those who are less fortunate and those who are disadvantaged.  And you put those four things together and you drape all your future actions around those sorts of values and I think we'll get most things as a community right.
I have great optimism about Australia's future.  Tremendous optimism.  And an occasion like this just sends that optimism even higher because I'm warmed by the enthusiasm of the young. I am warmed by the generous support of the local business community.  I am encouraged and enthused by the way in which community leaders have got behind this project.  But most importantly of all it's always an inspiration to look out on a group of Australians, different backgrounds, different views, different interests, but all coming together to achieve a common objective for the betterment of their local community.  And I think that's fantastic and if 'Youth at the Centre' is about that then it has my and my government's total support.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: Subjects: National Farmers Federation; foot and mouth disease;  rural Australia; Native Title
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Ian Donges, to my parliamentary colleagues, our visitors and guests from overseas, ladies and gentlemen.  I particularly want to acknowledge our friends from other parts of the world and can I say especially to our British visitors tonight how much the Australian rural community I know and the Australian people feel for the enormous travail through which British agriculture has passed as a result of foot and mouth disease.  It must be very distressing for your industry, it is economically very damaging and it strikes at the heart of the viability of an industry that is a very important part of your nations way of life.  
I take the opportunity on that subject to say that my Government will leave no stone unturned, will spare no expense in making absolutely certain within our capacity that foot and mouth disease is not bought to Australia.  This country has been free of foot and mouth disease for 130 years and I want to say very firmly that whatever we've done in the past will be doubled or trebled if necessary in order to make certain that any possibility that we can foresee of the disease coming to Australia is stopped.  Because the devastation that it would wreak to our precious rural industries would be very expensive.
Can I say how much I enjoy on a personal level being invited again to address this annual gathering.  I look around the room and see many people that I've been associated with in different capacities over the years.  Can I particularly acknowledge Graeme Blight who I think was the first ever, well the first Australian rather since 1946 to head the International Agriculture body.  I think of a long association with the NFF and I think of the contribution that the National Farmers Federation has made to the quality of the debate about economic reform in this country over the 22 years that it's been in existence.  If my recollection serves me correctly the National Farmers Federation was probably the first major industry body in this country to simultaneously argue the cause of financial sector deregulation and tariff reform.  The National Farmers Federation was amongst the first bodies, if not the first industry body in this country to argue for the floating of the exchange rate.  And I got the impression from an aside with Ian Donges just before I got up to speak that the people you represent Ian are not entirely unhappy with the current level of the Australian dollar.  I will make no predictions about where it might go, it tends to get people my size into trouble if we do things like that.  
But it has been a very long association and I want to record the respect I have for the contribution that your organisation has made to the debate about economic reform in Australia over the last 20 years.  It has been quite a momentous period of reform in our country.  And without the steady advocacy of bodies like the NFF in the cause not only of financial deregulation, not only of tariff reform, not only of tax reform, but very importantly may I say on an issue that's been very close to my heart and that is industrial relations reform, the strides that have been made in these areas would not have been nearly as great.  
This is an occasion for plain speaking between a Prime Minister and an industry association.  It's an opportunity to share our joint passion and commitment to the importance of your industry to the future of our nation.  As you know I come from urban Australia, I grew up in the suburbs of Sydney, I've had no direct family connection with the land.  But I've always had a special place in my heart when I think of Australia, for the bush, for rural Australia and for the importance that it represents, not only to our country economically but what it represents to our country in a social and historical sense.  And I find it quite impossible to imagine the Australia that I grew up to love and the Australia we all love now without a very central part of it being a thriving and strong and growing and purposeful rural sector.  And I'm therefore delighted that this conference takes place at a time of greater optimism amongst people in rural Australia.  I choose those words carefully, I speak relatively, I speak comparatively, I certainly don't make any absolute declarations.  But it is the case that through a combination of circumstances there has been a very welcome lift in the export side of things, in prices and some improvement in farm incomes.  Now it's a long time between drinks is an old Australian saying, and it can certainly be applied to the fortunes of rural Australia.  And I think I get the nod of everybody in this room in saying that you probably need about 10 more years like the last before you could think that you're even beginning to draw even.  I can see one of my rural parliamentary mates clapping very furiously there.
But can I say it is welcome and it gives us a sense of hope and optimism because you have been through incredibly difficult times and you've been waylaid and torpedoed and ambushed by some very unfortunate circumstances over many long years.  And it is therefore a source not only of satisfaction and hope for people in rural Australia but also for the entire nation.  And the contribution that the farm sector continues to make to the export income of this country is incalculable and it is something that I and I know all other Australians very deeply appreciate.
In the time that we have been the Government we have tried to do the right thing by the rural sector.  We haven't always done things that completely pleased you.  I know on occasions that we have fallen short of your expectations.  And in the nature of things that will always be the case.  But we do have a deep identification with the things that you regard as important.  When we came to office we did set about tackling some of those long standing problems that you have.  Ian mentioned the annual meeting at Longreach two years ago.  I remember another meeting at Longreach that I attended with Tim Fischer a year earlier and that meeting was about Native Title.  And I know how difficult that issue has been for rural Australia.  And I'm very pleased that we were able to make some changes.  I'm sorry that because of the obstruction of the Labor Party and the Democrats in the Senate we couldn't make more changes.  But we did at least produce an outcome that was vastly better than what we inherited in 1996.  I think that particular debate was a very unhappy one and one that I wished our country hadn't had because it did create divisions.  But I thought the Native Title Act we inherited in 1996 was grossly unfair to Australian rural people and I'm glad that we were able to make a large number of reforms.  
We also identified workplace relations reform, industrial relations reform, as being one of the key areas of change.  And I know over the years when I was in Opposition how much I appreciated the support and the counsel and the advice of the National Farmers Federation in relation to the changes we sought to make in that area.  And I'm intensely proud of the fact that we have changed the face of industrial relations in this country over the last five years.  And no area of course was more important than the changes we made in relation to the waterfront.  I came to NFF meeting after NFF meeting in Opposition and was quite rightly told that one of the things a Government of this country would one day summon the courage to do, and that is to tackle the power of the unions on the waterfront of Australia.  Now we did that in 1998 and it was very difficult indeed.  And as the pressure piled on people peeled away.  But one group that didn't peel away were the farmers.  And I want to record my gratitude and I know that Peter Reith would thank me for recording his gratitude for the tenacity of the support that we received from the rural community.  And you didn't do it out of bloody mindedness, you did it because your lifelines had been threatened over the years by the sort of thuggery on the waterfront that our reforms were directed to removing.  And at long last we have seen a much needed lift in waterfront productivity.  We have seen the crane rates go to unimaginable levels of over 25 an hour.  They were talked about, thought about, dreamt about a few years ago but now they have been a reality and I am therefore delighted to say to this gathering that industrial relations reform does represent one of the big areas of change that has occurred under this Government and it will of course represent one of the areas of total reversal of reforms if there is a change of Government at the end of this year.
It is an occasion to speak plainly at a gathering like this.  And one of the things that will change if there is a Labor Government in Australia is industrial relations.  Make no bones about, I make no bones about it and make no mistake about it.  If we have a Federal Labor Government and five out of six state Labor Governments the landscape will be ripe with a dramatic resurgence of union power in this country and a reversal of most of the fundamental reform that my Government has carried out over the last five years.
Ian you mentioned in your remarks taxation reform.  And that has been a major goal and a major achievement of the Government over the last five years.  And I want to record the appreciation of the Government for the advice and help that we received from the National Farmers Federation along the journey towards taxation reform.  You will recall the undertaking I gave to the annual meeting of the National Farmers Federation at Longreach two years ago.  I said that none of the changes that would be visited upon the package as a result of the negotiations I was about to enter with the Australian Democrats would result in removal of any of the benefits in the package for rural Australia.  And I'm very happy to report that not only was that promise honoured but indeed in the final wash up the benefits for rural Australia were in fact increased.  The reductions in excise on diesel and the other changes in relation to fuel taxes are of important long term benefit and gain for farmers throughout Australia.  Now I know that fuel prices in Australia are painfully high and I know that that is a very big cost burden for farmers.  You are aware of the cut in excise, you are aware of the abolition of six-monthly indexation of fuel excise which over a period of years will deliver a very valuable discipline on whatever Government is in power in this country. 
Taxation reform will deliver and has already begun to deliver major long-term benefits to the Australian economy.  It has made our exports even more competitive.  It has rid us of a very outdated, uneven, unfair indirect taxation system through the wholesale sales tax.  It has delivered $12 billion of personal income tax cuts.  And let me illustrate a point that I made the other night to a meeting of the Institute of Company Directors, that we've had a lot of talk recently about income tax cuts in the United States.  Those tax cuts of President Bush's are worth about 1.3% of United States Gross Domestic Product.  By comparison the net value of the personal income tax cuts contained in our taxation reform represent a higher figure of about 1.7% of Australia's Gross Domestic Product.  And importantly we should remind ourselves that on the first of July this year company tax will fall from 34 cents to 30 cents in the dollar, and it was 36 cents when we came to Government.  Financial Institutions Duty will be totally abolished.  As will stamp duty on share transactions.  And together that represents a further cut in aggregate taxation of something in the order of $4 billion.  
Can I take the opportunity of reaffirming the commitment of the Coalition to in no way in any changes it makes in taxation interfere with the legitimate use of family trusts as a means of running a rural or farm business.   The legislation that was put out for comment and exposure was certainly commented upon by the farm sector, often candidly, frequently and variously.  And as a result of those comments we decided to shred that legislation.  We are looking at a way of making sure that any abuses of trusts are tackled but I want to make it very plain that we're not going to revisit in any way the approach that was mooted before.  It's unworkable and it would have interfered with legitimate usage of trusts.  And I'm not playing with words in saying that we have absolutely no intention of doing that.  I don't regard the normal use of a family or trading trust by Australian farmers as tax avoidance and we don't intend to act in any way in the future as if it were.  
It is important also for me to simply record the fact that as I've gone around rural Australia, I have endeavoured to respond to the particular concerns that people have raised in many areas.  I am aware that there is a shortage of doctors in rural Australia.  I'm aware of the concerns people in the farm sector have about communications.  I'm aware of the feeling that we mustn't have in this country those who are part of the information technology revolution and those who are left out of it.  And I would hope that the announcement made by Richard Alston earlier today will further reinforce in your minds, the absolute determination of this Government to make certain that there is a complete equality of treatment between people living in rural Australia and people living in the rest of the country, so far as the availability of information technology is concerned.
Our policy commitments in relation to the sale of Telstra are fully conditional on meeting problems and dealing with the concerns of people in rural Australia regarding the availability of communications.  And until that has been properly done to your satisfaction we do not intend to proceed further.  But I do take the opportunity of pointing out that the announcements made by Richard Alston today were made possible through the proceeds of the earlier sales of shares in Telstra.  We believe that the investment of the proceeds of those sales in the expansion of the communications facilities throughout rural Australia have been a proper and well targeted use of those resources.
Ian was kind enough in his remarks to mention the importance of the road funding announcement we made before Christmas.  And many of you will be aware that much needed money is now flowing to local councils throughout Australia to tackle the appallingly inadequate state of so many of our local roads.  That commitment was a much needed commitment and the need was very great and I know that it has been very warmly received throughout rural Australia.
There are just one or two things I want to say about the future.  I want to recommit my Government to the maintenance of sound general economic policies.  I want to say that the budget to be brought down by the Treasurer next Tuesday night will be a budget that keeps Australia in the black.  We have fought long and hard to reduce the high Government debt that we found ourselves confronted with in March of 1996.  We have repaid $50 billion of a $96 billion Government debt.  And Australia now has a Government debt to GDP ratio of 6.4%, which is the lowest I think in the industrialised world and it compares with an OECD average of about 45% and a figure of some 35 to 40% in the United States.  Low interest rates, low inflation, sound fiscal policy, all of those things are fundamental to the prosperity and the wealth of the farm sector.  None of you wish to return to the 21, 22 and 23% bill rates that many farmers had to pay in this country in the late 1980's and the early 1990's.  And we have no intention of presiding over policies that in any way rob the Australian community of the very low interest rate environment in which we now operate.
I want to recommit my Government to the cause of more open trade around the world.  A cause which has at the forefront a healthy regard for the Australian national interest.  This country needs a more open world trading environment.  And no sector of the Australian community will benefit more from open trade than the farm sector.  We are too small a nation to imagine any other outcome.  It remains the cruelest and most grievous of international trading injustices that a nation of Australia's size with such an efficient farm sector should still be so heavily penalised by a world trading system that does not pay proper regard to the cause of agriculture and still continues to operate under rules that even amongst agriculture producing nations heavily discriminates against efficient producers such as Australia.  We will continue to push the cause of more open, more liberal world trade in the various international fora in which we operate.  We continue to advocate a new world trade round.  We were intensely disappointed with the failure, and it was a failure, of the meeting at Seattle a couple of years ago.  And we hope the upcoming meeting in Qatar produces a more positive outcome.  I welcome the statements that have been made by the new Bush Administration regarding the importance of more open trade.  I also, in the American context, welcome most warmly the decision of the World Trade Organisation in relation to lamb exports.  The measures imposed by the Clinton Administration were always indefensible and it is a source of great satisfaction to the Australian Government and I know to Australian farmers that our case was upheld in the councils of the World Trade Organisation.  
As you know the United States Government and representatives of the Australian Government have had what can only be called at this stage exploratory discussions regarding the feasibility and desirability of some kind of free trade arrangement between Australia and the United States.  That will be pursued by me and it will be pursued generally by the Government.  As with all of these things it is something that we would seek to achieve and negotiate if there is a benefit for Australia and there can only be a benefit for Australia if there is movement on agriculture.  Without movement on agriculture there is no real benefit for our country.  I know the hard heads amongst you will appreciate in matters of trade you never lose an opportunity to get a benefit.  Whether it's multilateral of bilateral you grab the opportunity that might be available.
I guess the only other thing that I would say about the future is that now as in the past and I know in the future there will never be any shortage of populist solutions to complicated and difficult problems, and that is the case in rural Australia, it is the case in urban Australia.  There is no comfort and there is no deliverance for Australia economically from those who argue that in some mystical way we can stop imports from coming into this country yet continue to increase our exports.  Trade is a mutual thing.  If you impose unreasonable constraints on imports coming into this country you pay a price internationally.  And that is all the more so with a country of Australia's size.  Expanding international trade is the economic way of the future for Australia.  There is no hope, there is no resort, there is no succour to be found in some kind of insular retreat to a protectionist defiance which doesn't make proper allowance for the kind of world in which we live.  That doesn't mean that this country agrees to any deal in the name of more open trade.  I have no naive belief in notions of level playing fields.  I'm a believer in more open trade, I'm a believer in freer trade, I don't have some kind of purest commitment to free trade no matter what the cost or what the price may be.  I do not believe that I lead a Government that automatically says yes to every single proposition for additional foreign investment in this country.  But I do lead a Government that knows that the current wealth and strength of our nation has derived from many things including the benefits of foreign investment.  And that the future wealth and prosperity of Australia will depend very heavily on our capacity to expand international trade and to boost our export income.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, can I say both as Prime Minister and as an Australian just how delighted I am that in a number of areas of rural Australia things are looking a little better.  I know it has been a long hard battle and I know the wretched vagaries of the elements.  It can turn that sense of hope and optimism around very quickly.  But your fellow Australians appreciate the central part you play in our sense of what it is to be an Australian, how important the rural sector is to the wealth of this country.  I say to you on behalf of the Government, we have your interests at heart.  We will defend the long term interests of Australian farmers, not only domestically but around the world and we will do our level best to deliver policies that preserve and nurture rural Australia and lay the basis of strong and growing returns on your investments.  Thank you.  
[ends]


Subjects: Westfield, Frank Lowy.
E&amp;EO.....................................
Thank you very much Anne, to Frank and Shirley, Peter and David and Steven, their families, Leader of the Opposition, Premiers, ladies and gentlemen.
Frank in that style that so many Australians have come to love and certainly in a style that over the years I have come to love and admire very much said thank you Australia. I think I would be speaking on behalf of all the Australian's present if I returned the compliment and said thank you Frank Lowy.
Thank you for what you and your family have contributed to our country. Thank you for the inspiration that you and so many new Australians are you were called when you came to this country, migrants, whatever description one chooses. That people who came to this country after World War II in particular, leaving behind the most appalling circumstances humanity had experienced, made a new life in our country, taught us new ways. Embraced many of our old ways and contributed in a spectacular fashion, not only to the business and commercial life of Australia, but also to the cultural and communal life of our country. And when you look at the story of Frank Lowy and John Saunders you see a story of not only of people who set out to be successful in business. But you also see the story of people who contributed mightily to their communities. And the announcement Frank that you've made tonight of the $2 million contribution to teachers is a recognition of the importance of education within the Australian community.
You're example Frank has been a remarkable one. You've been successful. You've experienced the ups and downs of business. And most importantly you have retained at all times your integrity and your high reputation for honest dealing.  
I'm very pleased and proud to call you a friend. Not just somebody I've come to know as Prime Minister and you as a leading business figure in Australia. You've been a friend of mine no matter what position I've had in public life. And that friendship has been constant and enduring. And that's something that I value very warmly. And speaking as I do tonight before a wide-cross section of the Australian business community I know that I speak for everybody present in saluting the contribution that you have made to business. And when we look back over the last 40 years, it's a period that has seen Australian transformed. We've been transformed cultural and economically and we've been transformed commercially as well.
And tonight is a night to honour you personally and your wonderful family. But also to honour what you and your generation of people who came to this country from Eastern Europe and many other parts of the world immediately after World War II have contributed to the building of the wonderful success that we celebrate in modern Australia.
You did bring us some new ways. You bought us some very positive ways and ways that have changed us forever for the better. And in the process you taught us a broader tolerance and a greater understanding of different cultures and different attitudes. You reminded us of the centrality of family life within your communities. And the Lowy family is a magnificent example to so many of us of a strong, united, purposeful family that has worked and lived together and contributed so much as a group of people.
You contributed greatly to the sporting life of this country. Your work and contribution through the Hakoa Soccer Club and soccer in particular over such a long period of time is warmly remembered by followers of that sport.
You also have taught many people in business a great capacity to survive through adversity and to triumph over challenges and to achieve great success. 
So tonight ladies and gentlemen is a night to celebrate what Australia has been able to achieve over the last 40 years. It's an occasion to salute the contribution that migration has given to this country, the diversity its bought us. It's also an occasion to celebrate the success of capitalism. I use that word unashamedly and quite deliberately. The success and the contribution of decent fair capitalism to Australia is one of the reasons why we can all look back with enormous pride over the last 4o years. You've always been, Frank, an unashamed entrepreneur. You believe and have practiced hard work. You believe that companies exist to make profits for their shareholders. You believe that as a result society is enriched. And in the process your companies have contributed mightily to the successive ejectors of Australian Government's for which I collectively on their behalf thank you, most warmly over the years.
But importantly your success is a reminder that if people work hard, if they have imagination, if they have character and they have purpose, and most importantly if they bring a positive attitude to what they do there's no limit to what they can achieve.
I've had the privilege in my life of knowing a number, Frank, of people who've had a similar experience in their early years to you. People who came from those appalling circumstances of Eastern Europe. And I've admired many things about them and one thing above all that admired, and you exemplify it, is the extraordinarily positive and forward looking view that you've always bought to life. Never for you has been focusing on the pessimist and the negative, but always focusing most remarkably on the positive.
So can I say to you Frank again, thank you for what you done for us. Thank you for what you and your family and your companies have contributed to Australia. Thank you for the greater understand that you and your generation have helped bring to other Australians. The Lowy family is warmly and properly so regarded within the Australian community. I wish you ad Shirley and your family the very best of good fortune and good health and thank you for being such wonderful Australians.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Everald for your very kind words of welcome.  Ladies and gentlemen, I';m absolutely delighted to hear that our tax initiative has had such wide spread support.  I always wanted to be a Prime Minister for all seasons.  But it is for Janette and I a pleasure to be able to keep the commitment I made some time ago to address this conference, to renew my association with many of the people who';ve led this organisation, and to express my admiration and respect for the wonderful job it does in representing the senior section, the more experienced section, and a section of the Australian population that still has so much to offer in the years ahead to the Australian community.
I often think of how things have changed in relation to some fundamental political attitudes in the 27 years that I';ve been a Member of Parliament.  And it';s only 24 years since a constitutional amendment was carried to place an age limit on the tenure of office of federal judges.  At the time in the late 1970s that was regarded as something that was a desirable, normal, natural thing to do.  I actually believe that if such a proposal were mooted now, and I don';t believe it would probably be by either side of politics, it would very likely be resoundingly defeated.  Because I think we have in the space of a generation passed from a point at which the vogue so to speak was early retirement and the vogue was to classify people according to the age cohort in which they fell, now quite rightly the attitude of Australians increasingly is that people are judged according to their enthusiasm, their capacity and their desire to contribute to the Australian community, irrespective of their age.  And I think if this organisation celebrates anything, and it celebrates many things, it celebrates that very mature and that very intelligent approach.
I';ve had a very close association with the leadership of your organisation over the time that I';ve been Prime Minister and I';ve always found it a source of very good advice in relation to policies that are relevant to senior Australians.  And over the past few months that has been no exception.  Many of you will be aware of the measures that were included in this year';s budget, and I can say to you without any fear of contradiction that the advice and the representation and the advocacy I receive from your organisation, the National Seniors'; Association, that that advice played a very significant part in assembling the policies that we implemented in the May budget.
But our approach since being elected five and a half years ago, and I hope you will forgive me because this is an election campaign if I stray occasionally, just occasionally into partisan advocacy, but our priority has been to serve the interests of what I normally describe as the mainstream of the Australian community. In other words to look at the challenges and the issues that affect different sections of the Australian population, without any perceived notions regarding age or background or occupation or any other thing that might in a superficial way define people other than the contribution  they make to the Australian community.  And so it was that we decided when we put together the budget in May of this year, we recognised for example that whilst low interest rates are of enormous benefit to people who are buying their homes, and low interest rates are of enormous benefit for people who are running small business, and they';re of enormous benefit for people who run farms, they';re not undiluted joy so far as many retired and senior Australians are concerned.  Because many of you rely on income from investments for your livelihood and for your income stream.  And that is why I was determined when we put together the budget in May of this year, I was determined in the measures that we introduced that affected retired Australians and senior Australians, I was absolutely determined that both through the tax mechanism and the extension of the Commonwealth Seniors'; Card that we would go some of the way towards recognising that lower interest rates, while great for home buyers and others were not so great for your section of the Australian community.
And as a result, as you are aware, we introduced a number of very significant changes to, some very significant changes to the taxation system that have resulted in a significantly enhanced taxation break, so much so that people in relation to a single income stream of up to $20,000 and then a couple income stream in the order of $32,500 before any tax liability is imposed.  And I';m very proud of that particular measure because I think it has gone a significant way towards recognising the fact that lower interest rates has a differential impact according to what section of the population you are in.  And I may make the same comment in relation to the extension of the Commonwealth Seniors'; Card so that that is now available to some tens of thousands of additional Australians as a result of the changes that we have introduced in the May budget.
One of the other things that I spoke of, or rather the Treasurer spoke of, when he brought down the budget in May of this year was our desire to begin the process of ensuring that retired or senior Australians who were not in receipt of the pension or the part pension might begin to enjoy some of the fringe benefits that are available to people in those two groups but are currently not available to Australians of the same age.  That does involve the process of negotiation with the various states because so many of those things are provided by state and territory governments throughout Australia. But today in the context of that commitment in the budget I am in a position to announce that the Coalition will, if it is re-elected, commit $20 million to two initiatives to enhance the community participation and activity of Australia';s seniors.  We will provide greater access to public transport for seniors, we';ll remove some corporate governance barriers, and we also intend to fund a productive ageing initiative.
The major announcement I have to make today in this area is that the Coalition, if re-elected, will provide $19 million over four years to fund reciprocal transport concessions to enable state government seniors card holders to travel on concessional rates in any part of Australia.  It really is not acceptable that those sorts of concessions should be limited to intra-state travel and this will be an initiative of the Commonwealth Government that will effectively remove any state or territorial barriers to the use of those entitlements.  And this commitment will assist many senior Australians to continue to enjoy a more active life, allowing them to maximise participation in their local communities.
We also intend if re-elected to amend the corporations law to remove the upper age restriction for directors of public companies under section 201c of the Corporations Law because we believe that the current restrictions are an unwarranted discrimination against older Australians.
And we also intend to provide, as I foreshadowed a moment ago, a $1 million contribution over four years towards the establishment of a productive aging centre at the University of the Sunshine Coast in Queensland.  We believe that it is not only important to provide initiatives which enable people to live a very active and fulfilling life in their senior years, but also to fund study into different methods in which that goal can be achieved.
Ladies and gentlemen, senior Australians contribute to the Australian community in many different ways.  Many of them contribute through ongoing full time employment, others choose to gear their employment and business contributions in a more part time way, others choose to do an increasing amount of community or volunteer work, and others of course combine those responsibilities and those pursuits with a very significant variety of roles as carers within the Australian community.  As you all know this country has a great volunteer tradition.  As the Sydney Olympic Games demonstrated, the most positive face this country presented to the world on that particular occasion was the great volunteer spirit of the average Australian. And that volunteer spirit manifests itself in so many ways, it doesn';t only manifest itself when there is some kind of national challenge, when there are bush fires or floods or other community challenges, it doesn';t only manifest itself in relation to the wonderful work of the volunteers at a great national event or international event such as the Olympic Games.  It also of course manifests itself 24 hours a day, seven days a week in which in a very selfless way probably millions of Australians in different ways to different degrees care for their loved ones, care for relatives, care for friends, make life a little happier, a little easier for those who are less fortunate than what they may happen to be.
And therefore the role of carers within the Australian community and in a sense being a carer is the ultimate and most profound expression of the Australian volunteer spirit.  It';s a contribution normally based on love and affection but it';s a contribution that makes an immense difference to the kind of country in which we live and the kind of people we are.  And therefore it is important that we continue as a society and as a nation to honour the enormous contribution that are made by carers within the Australian community.  Many of them carry enormous burdens, burdens that many of us perhaps will never fully comprehend or never fully understand.  And therefore as part of our election policy commitments I want to announce today that the Coalition will provide an additional $80 million over four years in new funding to support Australia';s 2.3 million carers with special attention being given to carers of people with dementia and ageing carers of people with disabilities.
The Coalition';s election commitments to providing more resources for residential and community care now exceed half a billion dollars following today';s announcement I, having announced yesterday some elements of that overall package, and the Deputy Prime Minister on behalf of the Government having announced our additional commitment to the funding of nursing home and other retirement arrangements in country Australia.  The Coalition';s commitments are specifically designed to give people the choice to be cared for at home and close to family and friends.  The $80 million carers package is a recognition of the significant contribution made by Australia';s 2.3 million carers.  It will provide additional support to carers by providing expanding respite services, targeting support for carers of people with dementia and support for ageing carers of people with disabilities.  The package includes $10 million to expand the number of respite services with a particular priority given to respite services for carers in rural and remote areas.  $10 million to assist with the cost of equipment and transport, $10 million for emotional and psychological support for carers, $30 million targeted to supporting ageing carers of people with disabilities, a particular area of need, including aged care packages specifically for ageing carers of people with disabilities, a pilot programme to educate and train volunteer carers and assistance with the cost of respite, transport, equipment and other services for ageing carers and $20 million targeted to supporting carers of people with dementia, including assistance with the cost of residential respite and the expansion of psycho-geriatric care units. These initiatives are designed to build on a number of initiatives that have been announced by the Government over the past few years to expand the support that we give to the 2.3 million carers within the Australian community. And taken together with the announcements that the Government has made in the area of nursing home, residential aged care, community aged, community care packages, it represents the most comprehensive outline of new funding and new programmes that the Coalition has launched over the last five and a half years, directed to provide support in this particular area.
Ladies and gentlemen as I think all of you know it is one thing to have a series of specific initiatives which are designed to meet a need and to respond to a legitimate concern in a particular area of the Australian community.  You also in addition to that, you also must have the capacity through a strong and growing economy to fund the many things that you want to do.  I';ve said frequently over the past few weeks, indeed I';ve been saying it in the whole time that I';ve been Prime Minister that we may have aspirations to spend more money on particular areas, we may have goals to increase our support for this or that section of the Australian community, but unless we have a strong and growing economy which generates the revenues, provides you with the economic capacity to fund the expansion of those services, all the aspirations and all the promises in the world are going to amount to nought. And that is why the Government in the time it has been in office has placed such a premium on managing the economy well so that we are in a position to provide the additional services and the additional support that we would like to provide. There are many things that we have introduced over the last few years that have been of benefit to senior Australians, I think back over for example of the introduction of the 30 per cent tax rebate for private health insurance.  We now have almost 45 per cent of the Australian population covered by private health insurance, when we came to office that figure was about 33 per cent and it fell to the dangerous level of about 31 per cent.  Now we have injected $2.5 billion a year into supporting the choice that many of you make and many of your fellow Australians make in order to have private health insurance, to give yourself the extra security, the extra choice, the extra opportunity that we believe all Australians should have and as well as introducing that tax rebate we've also introduced lifetime health cover, which is designed to bring younger Australians and to provide them with an incentive to take out private health insurance.  But that is one of many examples of things that have been made possible because of the prudent way in which the Australian economy has been managed.
We are approaching a difficult time, not only in Australia';s experience as part of the world community but also the world itself. We';re all very conscious of the changed circumstances of the world since the appalling attack in the United States on the 11th of  September.  That is not only an appalling event in its political and human implications but of course it is going to have an impact on world economic growth and world economic activity.  And that is why it is so important that Australia now be able to draw on the economic strength that we have gathered over the last few years. It is fortunate that Australia at the moment has a balanced budget, it is fortunate that we have repaid so much of our national debt, it is fortunate that we have low interest rates, it is fortunate that we have low inflation, it is fortunate that we have a new taxation system which in the years ahead will deliver growing revenues to provide increasing services to an aging population.  The reality is that the reforms to the taxation system, which I recognise were controversial in many sections of the Australian community, but I still firmly believe were to the long term benefit of this country. And one of the greatest benefits that tax reform has delivered to Australia is that it has given us a revenue base which in the years ahead will grow with the economy and as a result we will have increasing resources to provide a growing number of services that will be needed by an active fit energetic but aging population. And of the things that we have done over the last few years none in the economic sphere has been more difficult than that particular change. But it was necessary in Australia';s interests.  The easy thing would have been to have shelved it and said it was too hard, the popular thing would have been to have shelved it and said it was too hard, but that would not have been a keeping faith with the longer term benefits that have come from taxation reform and the longer term contribution that I believe taxation reform has made to the strength of the Australian economy.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a challenging time for Australia but it is not a time to feel daunted, although we are engaged now in an important struggle with our friends in the United States and our friends elsewhere.  And although that of course is a concern to all of us we ought to draw an enormous comfort from the fact that we have some fundamental strengths and we have a spirit and a determination as a group of people that bring us together.  Because out of the tragedy and the disaster and the horror of those events in the United States in September has come the reality that whenever there';s a challenge to the Australian community Australians have a great capacity to work together and to pull together for the common good. And I know that that will be the spirit that will be reflected throughout the Australian community over the months ahead and that is something that as Prime Minister I feel now and I know that many people feel as they move around our country.
May I again say to all of you that you belong to a very strong organisation, you belong to an organisation that has a great capacity to articulate the needs and concerns of the section of the Australian community which you represent.  All of us as we pass through life make different contributions at different stages of our contribition and participation in Australian society.  And it was no accident that yesterday I sought in the plans that I outlined for the future on behalf of the Coalition, I sought to touch upon the needs and the aspirations of different sections of the Australian community. We are a healthier community than we were a generation ago, we are living longer, we have legitimate aspirations for very long and healthy lives. Most importantly we all have legitimate aspirations to be able to contribute to Australian society at every stage of our lives, according to our willingness and according to our ability and not to suffer any barrier or restriction or discrimination according to our age or according to our background. And I know that that is a goal of the seniors association, it';s a goal that I respect, it';s a goal that I share and it';s a goal that the Government in the time that it has been in office has endeavoured to respond to in so many ways.
I thank you very warmly for inviting me along here today, I promise you that if I am re-elected as Prime Minister on the 10th of  November I will continue the very strong dialogue I';ve had with your association, I will continue where possible to respond to our advocacy and to respond to the propositions that you put to me on behalf of this very very important and growing section of the Australian community.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well ladies and gentlemen I'd like to welcome you to this, I think very important gathering to mark a very important treaty between two very great countries and two very great societies.  And I'd particularly like to welcome Senator Michael Enzie from Wyoming, and Senate Sargent at Arms James Ziglar and their wives, Vice-Admiral Jim Metzger the Commander of the Seventh Fleet and his wife, and also to the captain and the crew members of USS Blue Ridge.
When Sir Robert Menzies who was Prime Minister of Australia when the ANZUS Treaty was signed retired in 1966, he was asked to say at his farewell press conference what was the single finest thing that he had accomplished during the time that he'd been in government.  And he rather unhesitatingly said the treaty between the United States and Australia and New Zealand signed in 1951.  And it's against that background that I welcome all of you here tonight to this very special celebration.  And it would be quite difficult for anybody to disagree with the assessment that Sir Robert made as you look back over the past 50 years. 
And indeed it's very hard for any of us here, particularly the Australians, to imagine that we ever didn't have the ANZUS Treaty that has become an important and constant part of our lives and our understanding of the relationship between our societies.  And the reason for that is that I think it's been a relationship more than most that's been based on conviction rather than on convience.  And it's also been a relationship that although expressed in security terms really expresses shared values and shared ideals between two societies.
In typical flourish, Menzies in explaining the basis of the friendship between our societies said that we were warmed by the same inner fires and with our experiences over the last 50 years it's very difficult to argue other than that those events have vindicated the sentiments he expressed.
Yet no matter how natural the relationship now seems, it wasn't so natural and automatic in the late 1940's.  And in the late 1940's the idea of a formal security relationship between Australia and the United States was a rather awkward, perhaps for some even an uncomfortable thing.  Because despite our close and crucial partnership in World War II and the debt that Australia owed to the help that came from the United States in World War II there was hesitancy on both sides.  Particularly on the part of the United States who's defence commitments in the face of Soviet activity in Eastern Europe in the late 1940's meant a certain hesitation on her part about an involvement in Asia.
But the Menzies Government saw the overwhelming strategic advantages in a trans-Pacific pact, and pushed hard in the Australian interest, and it should be recorded against some British sensitivities at the time, to forge the great alliance that we celebrate tonight.
Of the many people that were invited tonight and who were not able to come, I am particularly sorry that due to his being overseas my former Liberal Parliamentary colleague and Australian ambassador to France John Spender was unable to be with us.  Because it was John's father, the late Sir Percy Spender, who as Minister for External Affairs as it was then known, essentially negotiated the ANZUS Treaty on behalf of Australia and arguably did more than any other Australian at the time to smooth the path towards ANZUS.
Australia and the United States were both in Korea together when the alliance in its formal sense was born.  And our Defence Forces have since than served together in Vietnam, the Persian Gulf and in other operations around the world.  Indeed commencing with their engagement at the battle of Hamel on the 4th of July 1918 under the command of that great Australian General Sir John Monash, Australians and Americans have fought side by side in every major conflict of the 20th Century.  And most recently Australia gratefully received invaluable logistic and intelligence support from the United States for our INTERFET peacekeepers in East Timor.
Together, and though at times at great cost we've passionately championed the concept of individual and national freedom.  And we've seen those concepts spread more widely throughout the world than most would have dared imagine might be the case back in 1951.
The great majority of the people of Australia still very strongly support the alliance between our two countries, believing it to be as relevant and important to Australia today and into the future as it has been for the past 50 years.  That majority of Australians rightly perceive that the global strategic environment in which we now live, although permanently changed by the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the disappearance of its reach is nonetheless unpredictable and potentially very volatile. 
This attitude of the Australian people was made very clear to the government last year when it went to the people in a wide ranging community consultation to support the development of the Defence White Paper under the then Defence Minister in the Coalition Government John Moore, who I'm happy to welcome here tonight.  That consultation also revealed the depth of popular feeling that our relationship must be one of mutual support not dependency, and a strong self-reliant Australian defence capability had to be maintained.  And the Defence White Paper that came out of that consultative process sets out a far reaching plan to achieve that strength and that self-reliance.
Through the 1990's to the present, the Asia-Pacific region has become less certain with very complex currents at work in both the economic and security spheres.  We all must hope that the major political and social changes occurring within the region will continue the trend towards more democratic and institutional reform.  We in Australia anxiously view events now unfolding in Indonesia.  Our relationship with that country is most important and Indonesia's recent embrace of more democratic processes and institutions is a very welcome development.  We wish the people of Indonesia well and express the hope that current issues will be resolved within the constitutional framework of that nation.
The Asia-Pacific region is of overwhelming strategic importance to Australia and it's also the region in which the United States is likely to face the toughest issues in shaping her own future strategic role.  It is my deepest hope, and I believe the deepest hope of most Australians that Australia and the United States together can work in the Asia-Pacific to help this region meet the challenges of the new century and to obtain lasting stability and prosperity for all the nations within it.
Some may ask how ANZUS is relevant to this high aim for in its most literal interpretation the treaty simply pledges that in time of conflict there will be consultations between Australia and the United States.  And that each of us will act to meet the common danger.  But the answer is quite obvious, ANZUS lies at the heart of a wide ranging and deep co-operation between our two nations which extends across all fields of common security.  It is not simply to be taken literally.  It is the foundation stone to what has become a vital, comprehensive and evolving security relationship.  A contemporary example of the alliance's ongoing value to both Australia and the United States is our ability to contribute to the discussion of missile defence issues.  This is of course a sensitive and complex matter and one needing careful consideration by all nations affected.  We have told our American friends that we well understand their desire to develop a missile defence system.  Equally we appreciate their readiness to consult close allies such as Australia and their recognition of the need to work with others such as Russia and China.
The ANZUS Treaty is of fundamental importance to both our countries and the goodwill and mutual support implicit within it will never be taken for granted.  It is a relationship that has been nourished over the years by leaders from both countries.  And I'm very happy to welcome here tonight a number of former Australian Ambassadors to the United States, including and I can see him over there Andrew Peacock who served as the Ambassador several years ago, and also I understand Rawdon Dalrymple and Sir Robert Cotton.  I'm also very happy to acknowledge the presence of the former Prime Minister Gough Whitlam and also can I say many others here in the local business community who have contributed so much to building the relationship between our two societies.
I myself expect to have the opportunity of seeing President Bush in Washington early in September and we will, during our discussions, have the opportunity of reaffirming the tremendous commitment that both our governments, the American administration and the Coalition Government here in Australia have to the relationship.
Can I conclude my remarks with a story of an experience which I think illustrates the close ties of common cause and shared sacrifice between our two societies.  In 1997 I had the honour to visit the Arlington National Cemetery and pay my respects at the grave of an Australian, Frances Milne, and an American, Joseph Paul who died together in a fighter plane that crashed in New Guinea in 1942.  Their remains were found in 1987 and as those remains could not be separated they will rest together for all eternity.
All of us desire only peace, and it's our hope that never again will it be necessary for young Australians such as Frank Milne, or young Americans such as Joseph Paul, to give their lives in the defence of freedom. The alliance that we celebrate so proudly tonight expresses and supports that firm hope.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much, Pat, for that very warm introduction.  And can I simply say to you, Pat, and I know I speak on behalf of hundreds of thousands of Australians in saying this, that by your life and your commitment to other people you are an inspiration to so many of us and we admire you greatly.  And I acknowledge Liz Kernohan, Graeme West, the two local State members, Margaret Appleby, Peter Donnelly, ladies and gentlemen.
When my friend, Pat Farmer, asked me to come tonight I readily agreed because I've known something of the work of Lifeline over a number of years.  Lifeline is something very special and an organisation, indeed, an approach to life that was formed almost 40 years ago by the great churchman, then Alan, now Sir Alan Walker, who was then the Superintendent at the Methodist Mission in Sydney.  And it was an organisation that was dedicated to reaching out to people at a time of distress and sadness and desperation.  And over the years the reach of Lifeline has gone all around Australia, it's gone overseas.  It became a role model for many other telephone counselling services.  And I can't applaud enough the tremendous work that it does in bringing people back from the brink of despair and unhappiness and trauma and sadness.  
And as a local member of Parliament I have to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that some of the most difficult and gripping and traumatic moments I've had have been to sit down and listen to parents pouring out their grief and their sadness regarding the suicide of their loved ones.  Too many times I've sat in my Gladesville office and listened to people tell me of the suicide of their loved ones.  Too many times I've tried to understand how they're feeling, failing, of course, completely to have the same perhaps sense of grief but endeavouring to empathise with them and to try and provide them with some comfort.  And the soul searching, the sense of guilt, the sense of desolation, of failure that has pervaded those conversations is something that I'll never forget.  And they certainly have brought home to me, as a local member of Parliament in talking to people, the dimension of human suffering that suicide can cause.  
There are many things that we, as Australians, should be very proud of.  One thing we shouldn't be proud of is that we have a suicide rate that is far too high and the suicide rate, particularly but not only, amongst young men is especially high.  There are a whole lot of reasons for it and I don't pretend to have all the answers, nobody has all of the answers, and there's no one single cause.  But what we do need is a determined and compassionate response, and organisations like Lifeline provide that.  And the wonderful thing about Lifeline is that it rests upon the efforts and the commitment of volunteers.  And we are a wonderful volunteer society.  We have the greatest volunteers in the world, we Australians, and we had to be volunteers, there were few of us in a very big country and we had to work together, club in, pitch in and make sure we tackled problems together.  And out of that necessity grew this great spirit of volunteerism and the contribution of volunteers to the face of Australia will be forever writ large to the rest of the world as a result of the Sydney Olympic Games.  But that was really just a public external face of something that's been there ever since we began, and that is this tremendous willingness on the part of people to help each other.  And I'm so inspired and encouraged by the fact that every school, high school, in this area is represented here tonight.  And I agree with Ray Hadley, I think the young of Australia offer enormous hope and inspiration.  I don't accept for a moment people who despair about the future of this country.  The current young generation of Australia are capable of reaching the same heights and delivering the same outstanding leadership that earlier generations have done.  There's an openness and directness and decency about them that I find incredibly refreshing.  
And I just want to say that to be associated with this organisation is, for me, a privilege.  We can't, as a government, no matter what political persuasion you are - and put that aside for tonight - no government can deliver all of the goods, no government can solve all of societies problems.  We have a role to play, we have responsibilities and we intend to discharge them to the best of our ability.  We need the help, we need the partnership, the comradeship, the mateship, of volunteers within the community and Lifeline is fulfilling a wonderful job.  It is discharging a great social obligation and the Government is only too happy to provide financial assistance to organisations like Lifeline and other similar organisations.
So can I say, on behalf of all of your fellow Australians, Margaret, to you and your wonderful army of volunteers, can I salute you for the work that you do.  Living in a big city, living on the outskirts of a big city, has its advantages and its disadvantages.  One of the greatest challenges in modern life, particularly in large concentrations of people, is the challenge of loneliness.  That old saying that you can be so terribly lonely in a crowd is very true of people who live in big cities.  The further out you get the more people tend to reach out to each other and put their arms around their neighbour and try and help them.  And providing a bit of hope and joy and, quite literally, a lifeline to people is delivering them a priceless asset.  
Now, I thank you very warmly.  I thank Peter Donnelly and all the other people associated with this wonderful occasion.  I urge you to give generously to it.  It's a wonderful cause.  It's what practical Christianity is all about, helping people who need help, and I think that's a wonderful goal and a wonderful objective.  And, Pat, thank you very much for asking me to come tonight.  You're a great bloke.  You're supporting a great organisation and I'm absolutely delighted to be here.  Thank you.
[Ends]


Subjects: achievements of the Coalition Government; Labor Party; new taxation system; defence; environment; health care; education; social security.
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Bob for that warm welcome. Can I first of all congratulate John Herron on his assumption of the presidency of the Queensland division. Can I wish him well and can I thank him for the commitment he makes in taking over the helm of the division at a very important time in its history. Can I also record my personal thanks and the thanks of the federal parliamentary party to Con Galtos for the tireless energy, the great commitment and the great personal devotion that he's displayed towards the Liberal Party in the time that he's been president and also in the years earlier.
There is a big task ahead of rebuilding the Liberal Party, both at a state level and organisationally here in Queensland. But the rewards are enormous, the incentive is real, and if people work together in harmony and unity I have no doubt as to what the outcome will be. At a federal level much is at stake here in Queensland. We hold a large number of seats, all with impressive sitting members, very impressive. Well that's got the front row on side. But there are also one or two seats held by Labor that I would like to see won back. Seats, without being in any way exhaustive in my list, seats like Dickson. That got a few more rows on side. And Capricornia, and so the list goes on. But this state, and yes I'll go through the whole list, Lilley and Bowman and Griffith and Brisbane and the whole lot. But ladies and gentlemen, this is a very important state, you'll all agree with that, it's a very important state in every sense of the word. It's important to Australia economically, it's important to us politically, and of course it's also very important to the membership of the Wallabies team that represents Australia so very magnificently. I'll stay away from the game that I'm going to watch tonight in Sydney, as Prime Minister I am strictly neutral in the State of Origin.
But ladies and gentlemen there is a huge task in front of us. And that task goes beyond our responsibilities as Liberals, it goes very much to the heart of our responsibilities as members of the Australian community. We have come a long way in the last five years. This country is stronger, it's more widely respected around the world, it is more at peace with itself, and its economy is more soundly based than what it was five years ago when we came to office.
We have done so much together and we have not been content merely to rest in the political luxury of being in government. We have not sought to adopt a steady as you go, don't do anything in case you might offend somebody attitude towards government. We have taken the view that you only have the opportunity once in your lifetime to be part of the government of this country and you have to seize the moment and seize that opportunity to try and make a difference, to try and make changes for the better. And that is what we have done. And over the last five years or more our constant goal in every area has been to secure Australia's future. To deliver a more secure future for all of our citizens. And where ever you roam in the policy areas of the Federal Government you find that that has been our constant touch stone. If you look in the area of our economic record it is a truly magnificent period of economic strengthening ,change, and reform. When we became the government of Australia, the accumulated Federal Government debt of this country was $96 billion. By July of next year when the budget handed down by Peter Costello a few weeks has worked its way through, we will have repaid $58 billion out of that $96 billion of government debt.
There are two things I'd say about that repayment of debt. It's all been achieved in the face of unremitting opposition from the Australian Labor Party. I mean it's a remarkable achievement of political malfeasance to leave the $96 billion in the first place, but then to spend all of your waking hours in Opposition to try and stop it being paid back is truly extraordinary. As a result of repaying that debt, we now have $4 billion a year more to invest in the future of Australia. People often wonder what all this repayment of debt means in practice.What it means is we're not paying as much interest, and when you're not paying as much interest on debt as every one of you knows you can spend it something else. And we've been able to spend it on investment in important areas such as defence, tackling the problems of the environment, road funding, health, education, the list goes on. We've also been able to devote some of it to reducing the personal taxation burden.
We've not only reduced that debt, we've now had our fifth successive budget surplus. We have the lowest interest rates in 30 years. 30 years ago you have to go back in order to find interest rates we now have. $300 a month less is being paid on the average mortgage in Australia now than was the case in March of 1996. We've reformed our workplace relations, we've reformed the waterfront. People said that could never be done, people said no government would have the guts to tackle reform of the Australian waterfront. And that has been true for 30 or 40 years of governments of both political persuasions. But in 1998 our government tackled it. And as a result we now have productivity levels on the Australian waterfront that were undreamt of only a few years ago. And that is working greatly to the credit and to the advantage of our exporters. As a result of our industrial relations reforms we have lifted the productivity of the Australian workforce. Australian workers are better paid under the Liberal Government than they were under 13 years of Labor Government's. One of the things of which I'm immensely proud ladies and gentlemen is that it's been the Coalition Government that has put more money, more disposal income, into the pockets of ordinary Australian workers than did Labor. Not only did interest rates rob the real value of wages under Labor Governments, but because of their approach to industrial relations you actually saw a fall in real wages under Labor, whereas a result of the higher productivity under our government you've seen a rise in real wages over the last five years.
After 25 years of people thinking about the need to reform the Australian taxation system, and 25 years of government's not having the courage to reform the Australian taxation system, the government I lead introduced from the beginning of last year the biggest taxation reform this country has seen since the end of World War II. Now that change has done a number of things. It's lead to a significant lowering in the personal tax burden. It's provided with the states of Australia, to the states of Australia, a revenue base for the future that they would never have dreamt imaginable under the old system. I had a Premier's Conference in Canberra on Friday, they now call it this complicated thing called COAG, I still call it a Premier's Conference because everybody can understand what a Premier's Conference is. But it was a Premier's Conference with a difference. And the difference was that there wasn't anymore an undignified brawl about money. I've been to probably 13 or 14 or more Premiers' Conferences, either as a Treasurer or as a Prime Minister in the 27 years that I've been in parliament, and this was different. This was a sign of the new era in Commonwealth/State financial relations. And can I assure you ladies and gentlemen that no matter what they may have said on the way in or the way out, or what they might say in the future, not one State Premier complained to me about the Goods and Services Tax. They know the truth of that old saying, you never look a gift horse in the mouth. And if ever there's been a taxation gift horse to the states of Australia, it's been the Goods and Services Tax. And the state that will benefit the most and the first is the state of Queensland. Because of the GST no Federal Government has treated a state better than this Federal Government has treated the state of Queensland. Because Queensland will be the first state to find that under the GST it will be better off and increasingly better off than it would have been under a continuation of the old Keating financial formula.
And we have therefore seen in the last week a very significant transformation in the debate about the GST and about the debate in taxation in Australia. When you introduce a new taxation system you have to accept that there will be some transitional challenges, that there will be criticisms, and that there'll be some need for fine tuning. And there'll be some administrative mistakes made along the way. And all of those things happened, and I acknowledge that. And we've set about responding to people's areas of concern. And when the GST was first introduced and the personal tax cuts began to flow there was very strong support. And as a few months went by and there was some difficulties emerge in relation to the Business Activity Statement there was some criticism. And then when we had those bad December quarter figures three months ago the Labor Party leapt on those figures with glee. Their goal had always been to surf to victory on the back of public discontent with our taxation reforms. It had always been the Labor Party's belief that we could do the heavy lifting, 'leave the reforms to the Liberal's, we'll hope there'll be a bit of unpopularity as a result, we'll get into office and we'll take the benefit'. That's always been the Labor way. Leave the policy heavy lifting to the Liberals, let them do the hard work to get the economy in order, then we get into government and take the advantage of a strong economy and a growing revenue base as a result of the tax reforms. Well it's our job ladies and gentlemen to deny them that opportunist benefit. The faces of Mr Beazley and Mr Crean and all their other colleagues on the frontbench of the Opposition in Canberra were a study itself on Wednesday after the March quarter National Accounts had come out. All their fondest hopes lay in ruins. They'd been talking the Australian economy down for at least three months, and indeed months and months earlier. Kim Beazley told his caucus in December 1999 when he was asked about policies, he said we don't need policies we're going to surf to victory off the back of GST discontent. Well you began to see my friends last Wednesday the really serious unravelling of that. Because what the accounts last Wednesday demonstrated, and the figures that came out the following day which showed that we had the lowest Current Account Deficit since 1981, the lowest Current Account Deficit since 1981, the figures that came out demonstrated very clearly that the downturn in December had indeed as Peter Costello said at the time had been an aberration caused by some one-off factors which had not recurred. And you saw an economy coming back very strongly, you saw the Australian people saying to the doomsayers and the pessimists that we can embrace taxation change, we might communicate some of our discontent about the detail, but we know in the long run it is good for the country's future, and what is good for Australia is good for us. And that fundamentally represents a very very significant and a very important change in the debate that is going on within our community, not only about taxation but about economic management.
You cannot be a strong effective government in the area of economic management, you cannot manage a modern economy in a globalised world economy without having the courage to undertake necessary change and reform. And you cannot change and reform something as fundamental as a taxation system without there being some transitional difficulties.
So ladies and gentlemen I'm extremely proud of the fact that the Australian community shrugged off the pessimism and the doomsday talk of the Labor Party and many in the media and have worked their way through some of these transitional difficulties and we now see a return of the very strong economic growth that this country has enjoyed over the last five years. We see rising activity in the home building industry. We see a very strong export performance. We see better prices and better conditions in the bush than we have seen for probably 10 years. And don't they deserve it? They have suffered appalling economic conditions, great seasonal difficulties,the distortion, indeed the perversion of commodity prices because of the corrupt trading practices of the Europeans and many others in world agricultural markets. And if ever there's a group of men and women in Australia who deserve a break it's the rural people of Australia and I'm very pleased the things are.I'm very pleased that things are coming together so that they are beginning to have a little more good fortune.
But my friends it's not only in the area of economic management that this government has worked to secure Australia's future. In the area of defence and foreign affairs this government from the day it took over set out to rebalance our foreign relations. We regard our relations with the countries of the Asia-Pacific region as first and foremost and clearly the most important of all our international relationships. But we don't have a relationship with the region to the exclusion of our relationship with the peoples and the nations of Europe and North America. And it's important that any Australian government adopt a balanced approach to our international relationships. In producing as we did at the end of last year a White Paper on Australia's future defence needs, this government gave not only to the defence community but also to the broader Australian community after a process of detailed consultation, we gave the clearest blueprint that any government has provided for the last 25 years. And we've not only provided a clear blueprint but we have also dedicated the money in rising amounts over the next 10 years to fund a stronger defence commitment by the Australian government on behalf of the Australian people. And I take the opportunity in talking of the White Paper to record my gratitude to the former Defence Minister John Moore of the tremendous work that he put into the preparation of the White Paper. It does represent a very important document in the history of the past five years, not only so far as defence is concerned but the capacity of this government to provide for a more secure future. Because although the Cold War is long since behind us, and although the great ideological divides of the past are no more internationally, we do as every knows live in a very turbulent region where there is much uncertainty, as illustrated by the action that was taken to defend and protect the people of East Timor a little over a year ago.
We moved to areas such as the environment, and this government has pursued policies that are for the long term protection of Australia's environment. When we came to office we invested a billion dollars out of the partial sale of Telstra in the Natural Heritage Trust. It's been a remarkable programme of providing support at the grass roots level for so many environmental programmes. And in the last budget we announced that we'd be continuing that programme over a five year period and investing a further $1 billion. I announced last year that we would join the states in investing $1.4 billion, if the states come to the party on a dollar for dollar basis, investing $1.4 billion in beginning to tackle the huge problem of salinity and water quality within the Australia community. It's a sobering thought that if we don't do something about this problem, in 20 years time the people of Adelaide won't have fit water to drink in two out of five days. Now that is long term environmental challenge. They're the sorts of things governments should be focusing on. They shouldn't be focusing on high profile, short term faddish demonstrations of a commitment to the environment. They should be focusing on such things as salinity, of water quality, of revegetation, of oceans policy, of cleaning up our rivers and of tackling in a way that doesn't compromise industry or Australian jobs the challenge of greenhouse gas emissions.
We move onto ares such as health and education. We hear a lot about health and education from the Labor Party. In other words we hear the words, I mean it's a bit like this thing called Knowledge Nation, it's a mantra, it's not a policy. Health and education, the Labor Party says oh we're interested in health and education, so is everybody in this room. There's nothing we're more interested in than our health and the health of our families and the health of our friends. And over the last five years we have worked mightily across a whole range of areas to strengthen health provision within the Australian community.
When I became Prime Minister private health insurance was dying in this country. We were down to about 31% of people belonging to private health insurance. And as a result of our policies that figure has risen to the staggering level of almost 45%. And it happened because we did what you've always got to do to change behaviour, we provided people with an incentive to change their behaviour. We provided people with a tax break, we provided people with the incentives comprised in life time health cover and as a result of those two measures we've seen millions of Australians either return to or take out private health insurance in circumstances were they might not have otherwise done so.
We hear a lot from the Labor Party and from Labor Premiers about the funding of public hospitals. And I know the circumstances relating to this vary from state to state. But public hospitals are owned and operated by the state governments of Australia. They are not owned, operated or controlled by the Federal Government. But despite that we provide, successive Federal Governments have provided large funds under the Medicare arrangements to help the funding of state hospitals. And under the most recent health care agreement there will be a 28% increase in real terms, 28% increase over and above inflation in real terms over the next five years of Federal money flowing to state hospitals. As a result of the incentives we've provided that have got people back into private health insurance we are taking some of the load off the public hospitals of the state system. So don't let me hear any Premier coming to me saying we need more money for state hospitals, we've provided 28% more in real terms, we've taken the load off state hospitals by getting more people back into private health insurance. I know that this country's health system could be better. No health system anywhere in the world is perfect. Let me say that we have a responsibility not to denigrate it unreasonably because when you go around the world, with all it's faults, the Australian health system with it's combination of public and private provision is infinitely better than the health system of any other comparable country. If you're a battler, don't get sick in the United States or the United Kingdom. It is infinitely better to be cared for in this country and the health provision in this country is infinitely better than you will find in any other comparable country in the world.
And two other areas I'll mentioned very briefly, because it's important not to see the achievements of this Government as simply being in the area of economic management, impressive though those achievements are. But in education we've not only put $3 billion, the biggest investment made by any Government in the area of science and technology and innovation. We have actually put down our policies for the intellectual future of Australia. We have committed ourselves to additional spending on research, we're going to double the spending on health and medical research in Australia over the next four years. We're going to double the funding of Australian research grants. We're going to provide thousands upon thousands of more opportunities for post graduate students in Australia. We're going to fund the establishment of two world class centres of excellence in Australia. One dealing with information technology and the other dealing with bio-technology. We're going to attract many of the best and the brightest back to this country to attractive programs. And I announced all of that in January of this year and it's received a very enthusiastic reaction from the education and scientific community. But importantly at the grass roots level of school education, this Government has done two very important things. It's stood up for the importance of the basics like literacy and numeracy. It has said that a school education system that does not produce numerate and literate Australians is a school education system that is not serving the country well. And although the direct responsibility for schools lies with the states, we work very hard through our federal programs to boost the importance of literacy and numeracy within the school education program. And we make no apology at all for the policies that we have adopted in relation to providing Australian parents with the full range of choices as to the schools they send their children to. We believe it is the fundamental right of every Australian parent to decide what type of education their child should receive and where their child should receive that education. And the politics of envy being played by Mr Beazley on this issue of private schools is the thin end of the wedge for an attack by the education unions on the role of independent schools within Australian society.
And finally in the area of social security, despite all the predictions that we would be a hard hearted indifferent government to the disadvantaged within the Australian community we have maintained and strengthened the social security safety net. We've improved the pension, we've linked it for the first time to a percentage of average weekly earnings of the rest of the community. We've made certain with the compensation arrangements that people were not only compensated for the impact of the goods and services tax, but in fact delivered a real increase of at least 2% in the value of pensions generally. We've respected and introduced the principal of mutual obligation. A principal that says that a humane society has an obligation to look after the disadvantaged and those who can't look after themselves but it also has a right to say to people who get the help of others that if you are able to do so you should put something back to your community in return. Work for the Dole is an expression of that principle. It's a program that would clearly go under a Labor Government despite what they might now say to the contrary. Their colleagues in New Zealand abandoned it a few days ago and I'm certain as I am of anything in politics that if Labor wins at the end of this year, one of the things that it will do is scrap Work for the Dole because the unions do not like it.
Ladies and Gentlemen they are some of the things that we have sought to do over the last five years and all of those have been directed towards one thing. And that is providing a more secure future for Australia and for the people of Australia. As we look ahead we face a great political battle. It's always hard to win a third time because it's so easy for our opponents to run a negative campaign. And we face an opposition that after five years has produced no policy alternatives. We face an opposition that runs entirely on the politics of negativity. It is a party of total opportunism. When the good national account figures came out on Wednesday the Labor Party tried to run the line that our national savings were being run down. And they said oh look at this tiny figure here in the accounts which says that this particular measure of savings is lower than it was earlier. They completely neglected all the other measures. And particularly the measure that said that aggregate national savings had increased and not fallen in the five years that we'd been in Government. I mean it's a very very strange thing that you now hear Mr Beazley and Mr Crean weeping tears over national savings.They weren't doing that when they were running up $96 billion of Government debt. They weren't doing that. they weren't doing that when they ran five successive budget deficits when Mr Beazley was the Finance Minister. He wasn't a distant bit player, he was right there in the middle of the engine room when this country ran into debt to the tune of $96 billion, a debt burden on future generations which if this government had not had the courage to tackle would now see this country with a lower standard of living, with higher inflation, higher interest rates and fewer bright prospects for the future.
So we will face at the end of the year a choice. A choice between a government that has sought on every occasion and on every issue to secure Australia's future. A government that believes in a society that should give people a number of things. Liberal's believe in a society that gives people incentive, we believe in a society that gives people choice about how they lead their own lives. We also believe in a society that encourages self-reliance, a society without self-reliance is a society which is doomed to decline. So those three great things of incentive and choice and self-reliance are great Liberal principles.
We are also a party that believes in caring for the disadvantaged. We're not a party that says if you can't make it too bad, we're a party that says you should try to make it and if through no fault of your own you need a bit of help we'll give a helping hand. That's always been the Australian way and it's always been the Liberal way. We face as an alternative a group of men and women who when they last had management of this country not only gave us $96 billion of government debt but they drove unemployment to a post-depression high of 11.2%. They gave us housing interest rates at 17%. And farmers had to pay bill rates of 21 and 22 and 23%. They gave us a society that was governed root and branch by the dictates of trade union power and trade union officials. And don't imagine that that would be different if they win again. In fact the membership of the frontbench of the Labor Party is even more replete now with former union officials than what it was during the Whitlam and Hawke years.
We do face a choice, we face a choice of continuing with a government that has sought at every turn to secure this country's future. A government that is committed to those great Liberal principles I enunciated, or returning to a government that when they were last in office demonstrated a monumental incapacity to manage the Australian economy. Demonstrated an almost manic desire to serve and placate every interest group in the Australian community according to the volume of noise that that interest group produced on a given issue. When we said in 1996 that we were going to govern for all of us, it was no mean commitment. It was a statement of a philosophy, it was a statement of a value system, it was a statement of Liberal belief about the kind of society we are. Of the many great things we can say about Australia as a society, none is more important than that treasured commodity of egalitarianship, egalitarianism, some would even call it mateship. And it's a great quality. It's a quality that says that everybody has a right to aspire and to achieve what the best that his or her talents will allow him to achieve. That we live in a society where if you give people incentive, you give them choice and you encourage them to be self-reliant and they can achieve whatever their dreams, wherever their dreams will take them.
And we have sought to govern for all Australians. And in the process we may have offended some interest groups, but I don't believe we have offended the broad national interest. We have secured the broad national interest, we seek your support and your help and your commitment whenever the day comes to make sure that we can continue that great task for the future benefit of all Australians.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE................................
I am pleased to be here today to present the 'Centenary of the APS Oration'.
I share with you the hope that today's conference and the other events being held this week will publicise the significant role the Australian Public Service has played in building the strong and vibrant nation that both public servants and politicians have the honour to serve.
It has been a remarkable century of achievement, well documented during the Federation celebrations of recent months. But today is an occasion to recognise that behind all the successes, in peace and in war, have been generations of dedicated Australian men and women working for the common good as public servants.
Whilst we must always be careful not to mythicise the past and those who lived within it, clearly the efforts and the vision of many of your predecessors made a profound and lasting difference to the character of our society.
The great national issues of the past century - the turning of the dream of Federation into reality, post war reconstruction and repatriation, the peaceful settlement of millions of migrants, the vast nation building projects like the Snowy and our rail and road networks to name just a few- were made possible through the enthusiasm and the commitment of those within the APS.
It remains the constant challenge of today's public servants to match in vigour, imagination and talent those they follow.
Before addressing some of the future issues I believe the Service will face in contributing to good governance and the task of nation building, it's appropriate that first, on behalf of the wider Australian community, I thank you and all of your colleagues, past and present, for your outstanding contribution to Australia's prosperity and unique social cohesion.
Whatever the future may bring, there are aspects of our law and legislative processes that must remain immutable. Significant change in these areas would mean erosion of the very fundamentals of Australian democratic process.
An accountable, non partisan and professional public service providing to a democratically elected government sound and fearless advice is one such element and, as I've said many times before, preserving its value is a priority for my government.
The quality of any government is dependent, in large part, upon the quality of advice it receives. To believe otherwise - that a responsible and successful government can be sustained in the long term without the support of a dynamic and dedicated bureaucracy - defies logic and history.
So whatever the extent and direction of change in the future, Australia must be assured that its governments, of whatever political persuasion, will be guided by considered, honest advice based on rigorous analysis, sound knowledge of administrative practice and sensible precedent.
Australia is fortunate to have a modern, flexible federal public service, increasingly animated by a culture of quality service delivery and whose administrative processes measure up to the best in the nation and the world.
That the Service is world class is amply demonstrated by the numerous requests from other countries, particularly in the Asia Pacific region, for assistance in studying or adopting Australian models of public service practice and reform. In areas as diverse as budget management, developing codes of conduct, remuneration policy and illicit drug strategy amongst others, Australia is looked upon by many as a source of best practice in public administration.
That is not to say however that occasionally, some structural change to the Service isn't needed to meet the contemporary needs of the society it serves. Excellence is never static and regular review and renewal will always be required.
The latest Public Service Act legislated in 1999 fulfilled this purpose. The Act builds on the 1902 and 1922 Acts initiated by the Coalition parties' political forebears and is tangible evidence of our commitment to measured and responsible public sector reform when necessary.
APS TO BE REFLECTIVE OF CHANGING SOCIETY
Most change affecting the APS however is not legislative but arises from the ongoing necessity for the Service to reflect the times and the environment in which it operates, the values and priorities of Australians, and the specific needs of government.
Whilst maintaining its intrinsic integrity, a healthy public service cannot be discrete from its environment. Indeed, its very value and relevance in the future will depend largely upon a capacity to keep abreast of social, technological, economic and, increasingly, ethical developments moving at an ever increasing pace both within Australia and internationally.
The APS cannot stand alone, immune from the fundamental changes occurring around it. I am heartened that few signs exist that it wishes to do so.
In many ways, not least in the nature and composition of its workforce, the Public Service accurately reflects the wider community. For example, the APS of 50 years ago was essentially a male domain. Over the past 10 years, the gap between men and women in the Service has narrowed steadily with the proportion of women employed now nearing 50 per cent. Women now make up half of trainees including those in the graduate intakes.
Although clearly there is a way to go, it is particularly encouraging to see the proportion of women in senior APS management positions increasing. In the 25 years since 1976 when females held only one per cent of such positions, the proportion has grown to over 25 per cent.
The APS now has an industrial relations regime that largely mirrors that of the private sector and increasingly, more emphasis is being given to 'family friendly' practices - again a reflection of broader community attitudes.
The introduction of contracts and workplace agreements was a significant and fundamental departure from the past. Although criticised by many, their use does reflect the greater flexibility in employment arrangements that prevail throughout the entire community, and the vastly changed working environment from that which obtained when the service was established.
Such contracts and agreements ensure the quality of performance and productivity level expected by the community from individuals entrusted with great responsibility and rewarded accordingly without compromising the provision of frank and fearless advice.
Sensibly, the debate over out-sourcing is now largely a matter about the quality of services not their delivery. A collateral benefit of such activity, in addition to the financial and efficiency gains sought, is access by the Service to contemporary business practice and a better understanding by both sectors of the imperatives which drive the other.
In addition, over the last decade or two, there has been a blurring of the divide between the public and private sectors as government business enterprises have become more competitive, more interactive with the dynamics of the marketplace and some have been privatised.
This enthusiasm and capacity for change within the Public Service augurs well for Australia. The effects of open trade, of enhanced communication and information flow, of highly mobile capital and labour markets, of greater competitive pressure will continue to be felt at every level of Australian society and within every part of its economy.
Through a combination of good economic management and bold reforms, Australia is well positioned to benefit from globalisation.
We've opened many of our markets to trade, reformed the taxation system and financial sector, sharply reduced the national debt and increased flexibility and productivity in the labour market.
Yet, the continued reform of the Australian economy will be greatly assisted by the responsiveness and ongoing capacity of the APS to support these changes.
By less focus on process and more on outcome, by a stronger client service ethos, by the acceptance of many of the standards and challenges placed on Australian business itself, the Public Service is making great strides towards doing so.
A major challenge for each of you, and those you collectively represent, is to maintain this pace of reform whilst preserving, on behalf of the Australian community, prudent levels of risk management.
WHOLE OF GOVT APPROACH
Another challenge is the capacity of departments to successfully interact with each other in pursuit of whole of government goals and more broadly, for the entire Service to work in partnership with other bureaucracies, with business and with community groups as resources and responsibility are devolved closer to where problems or opportunities exist.
We live in an increasingly complex and interdependent environment and there is no doubt that, in recent years, issues have more consistently reached across traditional portfolio boundaries. This trend will continue.
Whole of government approaches, collectively owned by several Ministers, will increasingly become a common response. The Government's January Innovation statement, an initiative championed collectively by Ministers Kemp, Alston and Minchin, and the recent Welfare Reform package, jointly managed by Ministers Abbott and Vanstone are two cases in point.
Senior Public Servants and their staff will need to find ways to minimise any limitations associated with what could be described as the 'Silo effect'. A methodology for rapid and effective integration of work units from traditionally unrelated departments will need to be further refined to achieve broader government objectives.
Similarly, complex issues such as regional development, environmental repair and protection, scientific and industrial research, overcoming entrenched social problems among others, will only be addressed through collective action by governments at all three levels, by business, community groups and impassioned individuals. All of us have responsibility to ensure that meritorious claims for assistance don't go unanswered for the lack of coordinated effort.
The public service has a significant role to play in this regard, both in ideas and implementation.
A vital issue that comes to mind in this respect is dryland salinity. By the late 1990s about 2.5 million hectares of land in Australia was affected, with projections of up to a sixfold increase within 30 to 100 years. The economic and social impact is already immense - it's a problem that must be fixed.
The Federal Government has taken national leadership in this matter but it will take effective political and bureaucratic co-operation between the Commonwealth and the States.
Salinity is indeed a good example of both the successful establishment of a taskforce drawn from various parts of the Government to tackle a complex whole of government issue and the development of a future plan of action incorporating participation by a wide range of government, business and local community organisations.
CONTESTIBILITY OF ADVICE
Another future challenge facing the APS is, in my view, one that strikes at the very heart of the Service's traditional role - the contestability of advice to government.
There can be no doubt that a competitive environment has emerged for the provision of policy advice to government. In addition to individual government departments and agencies, Ministers obtain advice from within their own offices, government initiated reviews and inquiries and, in increasingly sophisticated ways, external sources such as interest groups, industry bodies and lobbyists. The revolution in communications represented by email has also led to a vast increase in direct contact by constituents.
This is a positive and healthy development. Elected representatives should canvass views and take advice from as wide a range of legitimate community sources as possible.
Ministers are also entitled to depend on their personal staff to a considerable degree.
I noted in the Sir Robert Garran Oration in 1997 that Ministers are taking greater control of policy planning, detail and implementation and that this is in part a response to a more demanding electorate that expects, quite properly, to see members of the government responding to community needs and answering for their decisions in a public and continuous way.
On this basis, it is appropriate that they have staff around them with whom they can properly discuss both policy and political issues and from whom they can receive advice that would be inappropriate for a departmental public servant, acting in a non partisan way, to give.
Ministers can and do, of course, employ public servants in their private offices. It's appropriate that ministerial offices draw from the full range of skills - political and public administrative - that's available. And it's tribute to the quality of training and range of experience offered within the APS that some of the finest Ministerial staff that I have known had previous careers within the Service. My own Chief of Staff, Mr Arthur Sinodinos and those of the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer are among many others working with senior Ministers who would fall within these category.
In many ways, it's the ideal - someone who understands the detailed workings of government but is fully attuned and sympathetic to the Government's political and policy objectives.
In such an environment, today's Public Service needs to be flexible in dealing with new concepts. It needs to be highly selective and skilful at identifying relevant data. Recognising the Government's priorities, it needs to be responsive to new information and be able to turn that information into quality advice. Public servants have always known their advice must be rigorous, relevant and creative - if it is to be useful to government. That has always been the case but as conditions become more complex, the challenge to maintain the quality of your advice will grow.
Unlike many other players, the APS is unique in being able to provide genuinely impartial advice, devoid of vested interest, framed for the longer term and backed by corporate wisdom and experience now dating back 100 years.
This growing contestability of advice should in no way diminish the traditional role of the Public Service to contribute in the area of policy development. Good policy requires a strong working relationship between the Public Service and the government of the day, and we should resist any tendency to undermine this balance and to confine the Service to mere implementation.
I, like my predecessors, regard the capacity for continuing, impartial, quality advice as one of the essential values of the service. And it is a tradition the great majority of public servants are continuing at this very moment.
BALANCE / SIZE
Finally, I'd like to touch on what I regard as one of the great unsung success stories of our last one hundred years.
That has been Australia's success in balancing public and private resourcing, particularly in what I would broadly describe as human services.
That balance, achieved by successive Australian governments in key areas such as health and education, has contributed much to our social stability. Those wishing choice can have it and yet all Australians, particularly those in need, are offered access to quality services.
This isn't, and has never been, a question of ideology but of the best and fairest way to deliver services to the Australian people.
In this and in all aspects of the national life, the Government has a limited but strategic role to play.
In the crucial area of health care services for instance, the Commonwealth and State Governments through Medicare, provide funds for public hospitals, local GP services and prescribed medicines and importantly, ensures universal access to quality health services. Other services such as private hospitals and dentistry are provided through the private health system.
In education, another area in which the APS has a vital role, the Commonwealth assists the states to fund a quality public system. Federal funds are also the predominant source of support for non-government schools to the value of around 50 per cent of the cost of educating a child in the government system. The vast bulk of the additional cost is met by parents willing to make sacrifices in order to gain choice in respect to their children's education.
The case for nurturing a partnership between the public and private sectors of education is overwhelming and the Public Service will continue to be a key part in the management of that relationship.
In short, Australia, through trial, error and experimentation over many decades has achieved a better balance than most other nations in creating two complementary and high quality systems - one provided by government, the other by the private sector.
In addition, it is always a worthy pursuit to aim for a government that is modest in size. However, the appropriate size of the Public Service will always be relative not absolute.
The generic evidence would appear to support the proposition that Australia, more than most other nations, has achieved a balance between affordability and service provision. In 1999, general government outlays in Australia as a percentage of GDP were just under 32 per cent. This is higher than that of the United States where individuals in need are sometimes left without the assistance they should have. Yet, it is much lower than that needed to support the bloated bureaucracies found in many European countries where government outlays can exceed the equivalent of more than half their GDP.
CONCLUSION
Ladies and Gentlemen, in celebrating its Centenary of Federation, Australia has much to be proud of. In celebrating a century of public service, you and your colleagues also have a great deal to be proud of.
You can be proud that much of the impetus for change and continuous improvement has come from within the public service itself. Quality people want to work in an atmosphere of excitement, innovation and best practice. They want to know their achievements can make a real difference to people's lives. That is true of the modern APS.
The APS over the past century has been a prized national asset servicing the national interest, adding value to the directions set by the government of the day. As I've said before, the responsibility of any government must be to pass on to its successors a public service which is better able to meet the challenges of its time than the one it inherited. My government clearly continues to accept that responsibility.
You have responsibility to meet the great challenges ahead and adapt, just as this nation must adapt, to thrive in the faster, more competitive world of the 21st century. Some of those challenges I've mentioned today - the contestability of your advice - the maintenance of its quality, your capacity to work effectively both within the Service and with other sectors and other jurisdictions, your ability - in structure, work practice and acceptance of accountability- to more fully reflect the society that you serve.
In looking ahead to the APS's next century of service, I have no doubt that you, and those who follow in your footsteps, will contribute immeasurably to the dynamic and prosperous future of this nation and its people.
[ends]


Subjects: Aston by-election; Scoresby Freeway; economy.
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Chris. To Peter Costello, to Andrea Pearce, my other federal and state parliamentary colleagues, Graeme McKewin, the Chairman of the Aston Electoral Council, and supporters.  None of us wanted a by-election in Aston and as Peter said it came about unexpectedly and in very sad circumstances. And it is important as we contemplate the last three weeks of the Aston by-election campaign that we recognise the very high quality of the representation and the local character of the representation that Peter Nugent brought to the seat of Aston.
And in looking forward the Liberal Party has chosen in Chris somebody who really does represent and resonate with the local issues that are important in this part of Melbourne and really will in my view be an outstandingly energetic representative for the people of Aston in the national Parliament.
More and more people in Australia, whether it's here in Melbourne or in Sydney or in Brisbane or in the regional parts of our country, are looking to have representatives who resonate and connect with their local communities. They are becoming increasingly impatient with political parties and political movements who believe they can move candidates around as though they were pieces on a chess board. They want somebody who comes out of the district, they want somebody who feels for a  district, and they want somebody who can represent that district in the national Parliament. And when I heard of Chris's interest in running for the seat, and I was told of his background, his commitment to local government, his very strong business background, somebody who understands the real world, who knows what it's like to get out there and make a quid to use that well beloved Australian expression.  And after all isn't part of our nation about people starting with nothing and building up a business and achieving through hard work? That's always been very much part of the Liberal ethos.  
 And Chris has all of those attributes and he also has a strong commitment to local community and church organisations. And all of those things in this day and age are very important to the quality of representation. So when you examine all of those things, if you're asking yourself who is the best local, who is the best person able to articulate the local concerns and the local interests, there can be little doubt that the man who's been chosen as the Liberal Party standard bearer - Chris Pearce - is the person who fits that bill.  
But over and above that he's also identified with some causes and some policies that are tremendously important to the people of Aston. He's identified first and foremost with the construction of the Scoresby Freeway. And let me remind you ladies and gentlemen that the first federal voice that unconditionally committed itself to the construction of the Scoresby Freeway was the voice of the Howard Government, the voice of the Liberal-National Party Coalition.  We were the ones who got out there first.  And last week I wrote to Mr Bracks and I said our money's on the table, the beginning of it's in the budget.  We'll match you.  We'll not only match you with the initial commitment of $220 million but we'll also form a partnership with the Victorian Government so that in collective partnership with the private sector we can fully fund the construction of this very important transport corridor.  
Now what reaction do we have from federal Labor?  We have Simon Crean, that great master of walking both sides of the street and the middle at the same time. We have Simon Crean saying oh look, I want some Greens preferences so what will I do? I will hold out the prospect that we won't construct the Scoresby Freeway. And when the Greens said that they had three demands, one of which was total opposition to the Scoresby Freeway what did Simon Crean say?  He said that sounds fairly reasonable, I'll have a look at that. And then when he was pinged on that he said oh no I'm really in favour of it. I mean you can't believe them, any more than you can believe them in relation to so many other issues. 
Now I know the importance of the construction of this freeway to the people of this part of Melbourne.  I remember the representations that Peter made in the Party Room. I remember the advocacy of his colleagues in the federal House.  Of Phil Barresi and Bruce Billson and Bob Charles and of Michael Wooldridge and many others, and Kevin Andrews and Kay Patterson and the list goes on. Your Victorian members, your Melbourne members have been fighting for this freeway now for months and indeed probably over a period of a couple of years.  Now we have made a firm and unconditional commitment. If you want it built stick with the Liberal Party. If you want doubts cast over of its construction then go way and vote Labor or something else. But at the end of the day we are the only party in town that is really unequivocally and unconditionally committed to its construction.  So that my friends is a very powerful local reason why you should support Chris in this by-election.
But there are a number of other reasons that have a particular resonance locally, although they also have a resonance nationally. Now Peter Costello couldn't have put it better when he said that the last time the Australian Labor Party held the seat of Aston interest rates were at 17%.  And this is an electorate which has disproportionately large number of people paying off a mortgage. Of all the federal electorates in Australia none in my understanding has a higher percentage of people who are paying off a home and therefore servicing interest on a home mortgage.  And therefore above all other general things the level of interest rates is of great importance to the people of Aston. 
And when I think back on those 13 years of Labor rule, and I think of the claims now being made by the Labor Party to be given another chance.  And make no mistake if they win the seat of Aston they will think they're on the road to victory at the next federal election. Their complacency, their tendency to take the people of Australia as well as the people of Aston for granted will only grow. And when I look back on that period in office there are three things that stand out to the great economic management shame of the Labor Party. The first of those is 17% interest rates on housing and it often went higher for small business and farmers. The second thing is $96 billion of government debt. And the third thing was the 11% unemployment that we reached when Mr Beazley was the Minister for Employment in the Keating Government. 
Now those three things are the hallmarks if you like, the symbols, the metaphors of the failure of the Labor Party as economic managers when they were last in power.  And there is no sign that they have learnt anything or they have changed anything.  One of the distinguishing features of Labor in Opposition is that it has wasted its more than five years. It has developed no policies, no alternatives, no vision, no alternative way, no new approach to the governing of Australia.  The sole political stock in trade of the Labor Party is to criticise, to undermine and to sabotage. Not only did they leave us with a $96 billion government debt, but they have tried at every turn to stop us introducing the measures that have been required to reduce that debt. And despite their worst efforts, despite their guerilla tactics they have not been successful.  
And as Peter said in his Budget Speech in May, by July of next year we will have repaid almost $60 billion of the $96 billion of government debt that we inherited from Mr Beazley and Mr Keating. And remember we did inherit it from Mr Beazley. He was the Finance Minister. He produced five budgets each of which were severely in deficit. And as a result of paying back all of that debt we now have the wherewithal to invest in Australia's future.  When you have a smaller debt as you all know you have a smaller interest bill. And our interest bill now is $4 billion a year smaller then it was when we first took over government. That's why we can afford to invest in the Scoresby Freeway, that's why we can afford to spend more money on defence, that's why we can afford to tackle the really serious environmental challenges such as salinity and water quality, that is why we're able to afford to give people the incentive of a 30% tax rebate on their private health insurance.
So ladies and gentlemen, this by-election overwhelmingly is about who is the best person to represent the people of Aston in the national Parliament. It's overwhelmingly about who is the best local candidate, it's overwhelmingly about the man or woman who is best able to articulate the concerns of the people of Aston. But it is also about some broader judgements, it's also about whether you reward negativity and political sabotage, or whether you reward political courage undertaken in the national interest. We knew there were challenges in reforming the tax system. We knew that in the process of transition to the new system there'd be some criticism and there'd be some difficulties. But we also knew in the long run that it would be good for Australia and it will be. It is.  It is already proving to be effective for our country. We are growing strongly again. We had one quarter of interruption due to some transitional factors and we are now back growing more strongly at the moment than just about any economy in the world.  
Now that is the behaviour of a government that believes that Australia's interests are more important then its own political interest.  That's the behaviour of a government that believes that you have the responsibility to try and do good things for your country, not just feather your own political nest. And over the last five years we've been faced with a group of men and women who've never adjusted to losing power.  They really thought that 1996 was a temporary interruption to long sunlit years of Labor government. And all they have done is to carp and to criticise, to oppose, to trip, to torpedo and to sabotage. At no stage have they tried to build any kind of authentic honest alternative. And you see it time and time again, the politics of negativity, not the politics of building some strong visionary future alternative.
Those things are important in this by-election.  This by-election is going to be very tough. All by-elections are. There's always a natural tendency for people in by-elections to say oh well I'll give the government a bit of a kick in the shins, it doesn't matter, it's not the real thing, we'll have another one towards the end of the year and if I don't like the decision that I took in the by-election I can always vote a different way in the general election. And don't for a moment imagine that that mood isn't abroad here in Aston. Of course it is. There's always a danger in by-elections that people will lodge a protest vote no matter what the circumstances surrounding the vacancy might have been.
Now it is important that we continue to campaign hard. But isn't it encouraging when you've got a good product to sell.  I mean you've got a candidate here who commends himself naturally to the people of Aston. You've got a candidate  here who I think will resonate and represent and be able to advocate the causes and the concerns of the people of Aston in an extremely effective way.
Ladies and gentlemen I commenced my speech by saying that we didn't want a by-election.  It came in very sad circumstances. The people of Aston had been very well served by Peter Nugent since his election in 1990. He understood you well, he worked very hard for you. But he is with us no longer. And we now have in Chris Pearce somebody, different style, different temperament, different resonances and different connections to the electorate, but equally strong, equally powerful.  He's a family man.  He knows what it's like to raise young and teenage children, he knows the challenges of paying off a housing mortgage, he knows the importance of business, he knows the importance of community linkages and he certainly knows the value of the Scoresby Freeway.  
So ladies and gentlemen I couldn't commend him more strongly to you. I think he'll make a great representative. I think he'll work his heart out for you, I think he'll identify with your concerns, and I think he will continue in his own way the very strong work of a strong well connected grassroots local representative for you in Canberra.  I know that you'll work very hard. Keep doing it right up until six o'clock on polling day. It's a tough fight, it's a real challenge. We can't and we won't take anything for granted but if we get behind him, we all work for him, I think we can get him over the line.
Ladies and gentlemen give it all your heart. It's a great cause and if you win you'll have a great member in Canberra.  Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Mr President, Madame Wahid, Leader of the Opposition, my parliamentary colleagues, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
Mr President, I've already had the pleasure of meeting you on three occasions at international events - in Tokyo, New York and in Brunei. 
But now I am delighted indeed to welcome you and your wife and your party on your first visit to Australia as the President of the Republic of Indonesia.
Your visit is historic.  It is the first by an Indonesian President to Australia's national capital since 1972 and the first by an Indonesian President to any part of Australia since 1975, when President Suharto visited Townsville.
My own first major overseas visit as Prime Minister was to Indonesia.  That decision reflected the importance that I attached to our relations with your country.  My belief in the fundamental value of that relationship has remained as firm ever since.
You and Madame Wahid are, of course, no strangers to Australia and I hope this is an opportunity to renew old friendships, make some new ones, and learn a little more of our nation and its society.
Your country, Mr President, has an important place in the region and in the world.  I take advantage of your presence here today to remind my fellow Australians of the scale and the size of our northern neighbour: with over 210 million people, Indonesia is the world's fourth most populous country and the world's largest Muslim community.  It is a huge nation in the process of embracing democracy. 
Traditionally, Indonesia has played a major leadership role in Southeast Asia and been an important voice in the whole of Asia.
The stability and wellbeing of Indonesia is vital for the security of our region.  What happens in Indonesia touches upon all its neighbours and beyond and we recognise that a united and prosperous Indonesia is in the best interests, not only of your own citizens, but also those of Australia and the entire region.
For that reason, Australia has, and will continue to strongly support the territorial integrity of Indonesia. 
We applaud your commitment to peaceful and lasting solutions through the development of special autonomy in Aceh and Irian Jaya, which are now affected by tension and violence.  
We, like other friends of Indonesia, urge you and your government to seize the historic opportunity offered by autonomy provisions to resolve these problems.
Indonesia is engaged in a transition to a modern, inclusive, decentralised democracy after thirty years of autocratic and centralised rule.  Given the size and importance of your country, Mr President, this is one of the most momentous changes in the post-Cold War period.
No-one could expect this to be an easy transition and you have our understanding of the challenges that you and your fellow countrymen and women face.
Your visit Mr President is further evidence of the determination of our two nations to move on from the difficulties of the recent past.  
I have said on many occasions that no two countries could have experienced the events in East Timor that we did without strains developing in their political relationship. We would therefore be less than honest with each other if we did not acknowledge the sharp political and diplomatic differences those events produced. 
But none of us seek to dwell upon those differences, or maintain them as a continuing source of difficulty between our two peoples. 
Importantly, the tensions of those events did not greatly affect, and in many cases didn't affect at all, the underlying foundations on which our long term future will rest - in trade, investment, education, development assistance, law enforcement and many other areas.
Whatever has occurred in the past, Australia and Indonesia now have a shared interest in working together to create secure and stable conditions for the future independence and development of East Timor.
You, Mr President, have shown statesmanship and vision in calling for the normalisation of Indonesia's relations with East Timor.  
The Australian government looks forward to an active and positive role by the Indonesian Government in maintaining security along its border with East Timor.  
We understand that the resettlement of those who fled East Timor is vital for the security of that border, and we are prepared to help with that resettlement.
While there is still work for us to do together in relation to East Timor, I am confident that we can overcome the difficulties of yesterday, and move forward with a renewed sense of mutual understanding and respect.
In building such a future, you have our commitment to help in any way that is appropriate.  Australia showed during the Asian financial crisis that it was ready to help Indonesia and our other friends in the region in their time of need.  
My government committed more than US$1 billion to the IMF's rescue package for Indonesia. We pushed hard for IMF terms that took due account of the many difficulties that Indonesia faced in its momentous transition. 
It is also in support of this transition that we have shaped our substantial aid programme. 
I can assure you, Mr President, that Australia will continue to encourage the international financial institutions and others to tailor their advice and terms to Indonesia's needs and abilities.
At the same time, economic reform and prudent, predictable economic management are crucial for Indonesia's national cohesion and prosperity.
Millions of Indonesians have been lifted out of poverty in the last three decades.  The financial crisis reversed some of these gains.  But the ground lost can be made up with stable policy-making and a clear determination to implement economic reform over time.  
A reform of global trade rules through a new round of multilateral trade negotiations will open markets for Indonesian agricultural and textile products. 
I look forward to working closely with your country at this year's APEC leaders' meeting to support a World Trade Organisation round and to build more open trade and investment flows in the Asian Pacific region.
Mr President, the people to people links between our two societies are as strong as ever.
The 18,000 Indonesians studying in Australia represent the largest number of foreign students in our country, and are probably the largest number of Indonesians studying overseas.  
In their understanding of Australia and her people, a priceless investment is being made - one that will yield significant returns for both our nations in the years to come.
Our economic ties are strong.   About 400 Australian companies have a presence in Indonesia.  Two-way trade is now worth about $7 billion a year.  Indonesia is Australia's 10th largest merchandise market, and Australia is the 10th largest investor in Indonesia.  The visit of the Trade Minister Mark Vaile to Indonesia in February with an investment mission saw agreement on something in the order of $500 million worth of business.
I was also particularly pleased with the solid outcomes from the Ministerial Forum in December last year, which produced agreements on transport, education and health. 
And I would like at this stage to particularly to thank the Indonesian government for its help in our fight against the smuggling of people to Australia.  I look forward to further cooperation between us in this area.  
I also welcome the signing today of a Memorandum of Understanding on tourism which provides a framework for public and private sector cooperation in this important area.
Mr President, the first half century of relations between Indonesia and Australia began with strong Australian support for the independence of your country.  The second has begun with Australia's unqualified support for Indonesia's great journey towards a modern democracy.
Mr President, your presence here makes this an historic occasion and its significance should not be lost.
For although our nations are inextricably linked by the accident of geography, our shared place in the world in the years to come will have little to do with marks on the map.  Instead, mutual respect and common purpose must determine our borders.
The distance between us should not be measured by the width of the Timor or Arafura Seas but by our willingness to work together to promote greater understanding and goodwill.
On behalf of the government and all Australians, I thank you for the resolve you have personally shown in coming to our nation. 
I also wish to invite you and the government of Indonesia to join us in a renewed effort to forge ever closer ties between our two peoples and our two economies.  There is much to be gained should we succeed.  But there is much to lose should we fail.
Mr President, you and your wife and your party are very welcome indeed in Australia.
[ends] 


Your excellency, Lady Deane, Madam President, Mr Speaker, Mr Beazley Leader of the Opposition, distinguished guests, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Tonight is an occasion of mixed emotions. It's an occasion to allow all of us collectively on behalf of the Australian people to express our regard and our gratitude towards Sir William Deane, the retiring Governor General of Australia. It's also of course an occasion that brings to an end an association between Sir William and Lady Helen Deane and so many of us in a personal sense and also in an institutional sense, the end of his very distinguished term as Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the Commonwealth.
When Sir William Deane was appointed as Governor General of Australia on the recommendation of my predecessor as Prime Minister he capped a very long and distinguished career in the law. He served as an outstanding barrister at the New South Wales bar taking silk at an early age and then successively on the Federal Court and the High Court of Australia, he left his mark on a profession that he served with such great distinction and he loved so very much. And his appointment to the office of Governor General was a fitting climax to a very distinguished public career.
It is fair to say that there would be nobody of consequence who would argue with the proposition that he has filled the Office of Governor General with great compassion, great commitment and great sincerity. He has brought to that office a warmth and a dignity and a concern for the disadvantaged and a capacity to empathise with different sections of the Australian community that I know has won the admiration of people from all walks of life. I would want to say to you Sir William and to Lady Helen Deane on behalf of Janette and myself that in the nature of the two offices that we hold we have a lot of personal contact. And you have on all occasions displayed unfailing courtesy and warmth towards us and on a personal note I record our gratitude.
Sir William has represented the interests of the Office of Governor General and he has served the people of Australia with particular distinction over the last five and a half years. His evident compassion for and concern for the disadvantaged within the Australian community is something that has been a hallmark and a feature of his time in office. His identification with the cause of reconciliation to which he is very sincerely committed is also something which has been a feature of his term. His understanding of the relationship between the various arms of Government and the institutions of our nation of course is quite unrivalled and his background in the law has made that even more possible.
In so many ways he has been a person who has represented the passion of the nation at times of great sadness. It comes with the responsibility of the beholder of the apolitical office of Governor General to sometimes say things and to represent feelings on behalf of the nation that perhaps nobody else can. And that's an important character and feature of the office of Governor General within our system of Government. I don't think any Australian will forget the moving way in which he and Lady Deane represented the feelings of the Australian people at that very tragic service at Interlaken in Switzerland which was a memorial to the deaths of those young Australians who died so very tragically. And that particular event and the way in which the feelings of the Australian people were expressed by him is a metaphor for the way in which in similar situations he has by his words and his deeds and his gesture and his evident decency spoken on behalf of all of us.
It is therefore with a mixture of the happiness of having the opportunity of saying thank you and expressing our affection and admiration but also the sadness of the end of a very positive and very fruitful association that we are gathered here tonight. And gathered here tonight at Sir William's request are not only representatives of the Parliament, of the judiciary, of the diplomatic core, but also of course the representatives of many organisation with which he had a great deal of contact not only in the time that he was Governor General but also previously.
It is customary for Governments to present the outgoing Governor General with a gift. On this occasion and in accordance with Sir William and Lady Deane's expressed wishes the Government has decided that a gift be made in their name to Charles O'Neill House in Sydney, one of the charitable projects with which they are associated. Charles O'Neill House is an initiative of the Matthew Talbot Hostel. The building is currently being refurbished to provide long term accommodation for homeless men making the transition back to independent living. The gift from the Government and the people of Australia in the name of Sir William and Lady Deane is for the plants and gardens for the two courtyards of Charles O'Neill House to provide an attractive outdoor area for the residence.
Ladies and gentlemen can I say to you Sir William, Bill as we exchange to each other of course on a personal basis and to Lady Deane can I say to both of you thank you for the service that you have given to the people of Australia. Thank you for the integrity and decency that you have bought to the high office you have occupied, I know that you leave that office with the admiration and the affection and the goodwill of the Australian people. You have done well and faithfully by the oath of office you took five and a half years ago. We wish you good luck, God's blessing and a long life and great happiness in the future.
[ends]


Subjects: Aston by-election; Interest Rates
E&amp;OE................................
Well thank you very much Mr John Kay, Chris Pearce who is the Liberal Party candidate for Aston in the by-election, ladies and gentlemen. I travel around Australia a great deal and this is not the first time that I've had the opportunity of calling in on a retirement village, saying a few words and then having a cup of tea and hopefully a friendly discussion. It's part of the great democratic tradition of this country that the Prime Minister, whoever he or she may be, what ever political party, travels around a lot all the time and has the opportunity in face to face exchanges to get a better understanding of what people are thinking, what their concerns are and what their aspirations and hopes for the future of the country are.
I of course pay this visit coincidently with the by-election which is being held on the 14th of July. People don't like by-elections, I understand that, but this was unfortunately brought about through the death of Peter Nugent who'd been the member of this area and a very hard working, very capable, very popular member of this area since 1990. And I'd like to very warmly commend Chris Pearce to all of you. You'd expect me to do that because he's the candidate of my party, he's a Liberal and I'm a Liberal, in case you haven't noticed and. but over and above that he really has a first class background in the area. He's associated, having been on the Knox Council, he's associated with many local community activities. And I think increasingly people want somebody to represent them who comes from the area, who's identified with the area, who's raising a family in the area, somebody of Chris's age and who's been involved in a lot of local community causes. In a very positive way I think he'll be a wonderful and very worthy replacement for Peter Nugent. And I know that if you vote for him, and this is going to be a very tough by-election for us, by-elections are always difficult. We only held the seat by 4%, 4.2% at the last election and some people think 'oh gee it's a by-election, we will give them a bit of a shove'. Can I say there's no reason to do that on this occasion. The by-election was very unavoidable, we have a very good candidate, he comes from the area, his family is from the area and he's going to work very hard on your behalf if you are kind enough to give him your support on the 14th of July.
More generally, can I just say one or two things about what the Government has tried to do for Australia since it was elected in March of 1996. I think the main responsibility of any Government is to provide the nation and the people of the nation with a sense of security. I often talk when I make speeches to different groups of the importance of securing our future. We set out when we became the Government to secure our nation's economic future by paying back a lot of the Government debt of about $96 billion that we inherited. We've set out to secure our defence and foreign relations future by investing a lot of money in the form of defence of our country. We've set out to secure our nation's environmental future by tackling some of the big environmental problems that the country has. We've set out to secure our nation's intellectual and scientific and educational future by investing though the announcement I made at the beginning of this year an additional $3 billion in doubling research grants for all kinds of research in Australia. And doubling our grants for health and medical research. And doesn't it make you proud as an Australian, for when I was a young fella if people wanted a miracle operation they often went to England or America to have the miracle operation. Now the young child comes from England to Melbourne for a miracle operation. Now doesn't that say something about the intellectual capacity, the scientific capacity and the brilliance and the skill and the capacity of Australian doctors and Australian medical scientists. And I think that is a metaphor for the way in which this country has changed so much and how good we have become and how we are seen around the world as being an absolutely outstanding country in areas like that.
And in all sorts of different ways we've set out to secure people's future. And we of course in many of the policy decisions we've taken we have not forgotten and we've tried to provide security for your future, to try to provide you with a sense of security. You belong to a generation that has gone through some of the most difficult periods in Australia's history, particularly World War II and the great post war World War II reconstruction years and some of you earlier through the years of the depression. Now they were very difficult years and you've given so much to our country and one of the things that we've sought to do is to provide for your security as well. Now I know that when you run around talking about low interest rates it's terrific if you're paying off a home and it's terrific if you're running a small business, but it's not so terrific if you are living off your investments. And I know a lot of people in your situation sort of look at me rather quizzically when I say how fantastic it is that we have lower interest rates. It is good for somebody, and this electorate has got a lot of people, many of you will have children and grandchildren who are buying homes and they'll be very happy that their mortgage bills are 3, 4, $500 less than what they were a month, that is what they were a few years ago. But, if you're running a business it is good to have lower interest rates, they used to be 17, 18, 19%, now they're less than half that, it's the lowest we've had them in 30 years. Now that is good if you're buying a home, it's not so good if you're living off your investments. And that's one of the reasons why we took a lot of decisions in the budget that we brought down recently to address the interests and the needs of retired people. We made a number .. we of course have the $300 payment, some of you would have been entitled to that, some of you wouldn't. A couple of years ago we dramatically expanded the eligibility for the Commonwealth Health Card, the Seniors Health Card, we've expanded it again in the last budget to single people and up to, I think, about $60,000 and couples up to about $80,000. But on top of that we've also began the process of giving to self-funded retirees the same entitlements in relation to concessions that are available to pensioners and part pensioners. So starting with the telephone concession and we're going to negotiate with the States to extend that to other concessions that are available to pensioners and part pensioners. And we've also made some very significant changes in relation to the taxation levy of self-funded retirees which will mean very very significantly lower levels of taxation for people in that category and on top of that these things of course must be added to the other changes that we've made particularly in relation to health services, the introduction of the 30% health rebate which has made it much easier for people of all ages to take out and retain private health insurance.
Now the purpose of a Government is to provide individual security for people and also to provide collective security. And as I look back over the last five and a half years I see a country that is economically a lot stronger. We've paid back 50 to $60 billion of the $96 billion of debt we inherited. We've got much lower interest rates, we've got much lower inflation rates, we've had very strong economic growth, we've undertaken some major reforms. Not all of it's been easy, not all of it's been popular but it's a pretty bad Government that always seeks to do things that are always without exception invariably popular. Because in the end if you govern for short term popularity you condemn the country to long term decline because you really do have to make changes on occasions that do incur a bit of short term flack but in the long run have very great long term benefits.
So ladies and gentlemen it's been for me a tremendous experience being Prime Minister of this country. I have had the opportunity when Parliament's sitting of having lots of school groups. They come to Canberra, they come around to the Prime Minister's courtyard, we gather around for a photograph and then I invite them into my office and they sit around the office and I explain to them, the desk that I work behind was the desk that was custom made for the Prime Minister S M Bruce, I think in 1927, it was the desk that was used by Joe Lyons in the 1930's, it was the desk that was used by John Curtin during World War II, the desk that was used by Ben Chifley, then the desk used by Bob Menzies and Harold Holt. And it was Mr Whitlam came in he got a slightly different arrangement and this desk was put into storage and I found it a couple of years ago in Old Parliament House and brought it back. And you tell this little story to the young people of Australia and the first question they ask me, almost without exception, they say, what is the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia? I always answer, the best thing about being the Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity it gives you to meet different groups of Australians in different parts of the country. You never tire of that. There's always an extra piece of interest and value and excitement in meeting different groups of people and it's an opportunity to engage in the great face to face democracy for which Australia is famous. In terms of people being able to talk directly to the people they try and represent there is no country in the world that's better than Australia. You can wander anywhere, you can talk to people, they have an opportunity, they can come up to you, they can tell you off, they can give you a bit of advice, they can pat you on the back, they can shake your the hand, they're not meant to punch you on the nose, but sometimes you know it can occur. I mean there's a fellow in England who sort of demonstrated what you did if any body tried that sort of caper. But it is a great thing about democracy in this country, and it's one of the things that I enjoy enormously and I find incredibly stimulating about the job.
Ladies and gentlemen thank you very much for having me into your home. I've learnt something of this retirement village from Chris and some others. It seems a lovely place, I've not been here before, I'm sure you're very happy here and please remember this man on the 14th of July, he's a really first class bloke. And I guarantee you he's terrific, give him your support and he won't let you down.


Subjects: mental health
E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Judge Frank Walker, ladies and gentlemen. This is one of those very important local occasions for me, which is not only a local member doing something in his own electorate, but it's also through it, an opportunity to mark the importance of the ongoing sensitive community response to issues of mental health and mental illness.
This building of course has had a long historic association with psychiatric illnesses and mental health for a very long period of time. And it is symbolic in many ways that part of the Federation Grant of $25,000 has been used to create a small library in the period of the 1870s and also to help restore and refurbish a plaque honouring the large number of employees of Gladesville Hospital who served in WWI. And I remarked to Frank Walker as we had a look at it on the way in just how many out of this one organisation - something in the order of 40 - volunteered to serve in WWI. It's a reminder of the large number of people who were employed in stand alone institutions of this kind in the early years of the last century. And that in itself is a reminder of how approaches to mental health, the change away from the large number of stand alone institutions to a more community based approach, how those things have changed over a long period of time.
The Government, indeed all Governments, have been very committed over the years to being as sensitive and helpful to challenges of mental illness and psychiatric illness within our community. And I'm very pleased that the second mental health plan was kept going and resuscitated in 1998 and I'm also happy that in the last Budget it was possible to find some more resources to encourage General Practitioners to get more directly involved in helping their patients in relation to mental illness. So on both a local level and a national community level can I say how very pleased I am to be here today to open the library and to be associated with the other things that have been made possible through the Federation Grant.
I also want to pay tribute to the Schizophrenia Fellowship. Like so many voluntary organisations within our community it brings together people who in some way themselves may have been touched by mental challenges, or even if they haven't been, they know of people who have or they have family members who have. Or even if they haven't had that, they are just public spirited Australians who want to get involved in helping each other. And one of the things we do better than any country in the world with which it is fair to make comparisons, is that we volunteer and do things. We're the greatest volunteer society on earth and we have a record which is second to none. And increasingly we're getting Governments and community organisations and philanthropic individuals and committed people who've got resources out of the business community, getting together and working so very hard. And this city is very warm hearted in that relation.
I was reflecting as I came over here this morning that I'm being associated with this gathering and then tonight I'm attending a dinner to honour the work of the Victor Chang Institute - it being 10 years since his tragic death in 1991. Both of those events are for me a reminder of the great humanity and decency of the Australian people. We often put ourselves down, we often criticise our national psyche, we often despair at this or that. We shouldn't. There is an enormous amount of good and decency in most Australians. And you just tap them and ask them - and even if you don't ask many of them - they volunteer. And your Fellowship is a great example of that. I'm very proud to be associated with this little gathering in my electorate.
I won't keep those in the shade waiting any longer. It's cooler on the 4th of July than it is at other times of the year, but can I simply say that I'm delighted to be amongst you. I congratulate the Fellowship and I hope its work goes from strength to strength. Your aims will always be aims shared by the Federal Government. Your aims will always be aims shared by men and women of goodwill on all sides of politics.


Subjects: information technology
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Mr Knott, Mr Pat Field, the Mayor of Ryde, Ivan Petch, ladies and gentlemen.  Over the last year or two I';ve come to a succession of opening events here in North Ryde in what we choose to call in the local lingo the Silicon Valley of Australia because it is a part of Australia which has attracted a large number of high tech leading edge companies and enterprises of all different sizes and of all different varieties. 
But today is really something very special in that list and that succession of important openings of leading edge companies or expansions of existing companies which are at the cutting edge of the characteristics of the information technology age in which we all live. And it really is something of a feather in the cap not only of North Ryde but also of Australia that I should be opening here today what will become the largest hosting centre in the worldwide network of the largest global network carrier. Now that is something quite remarkable.  And to me and I';m sure the significance of it is not lost on you, it is a metaphor for the way in which Australia is at the very forefront of the information and computer technology age in which the world is now living. 
Those who suggest that we are dragging our feet and behind the game and missing out should come here today and observe what we are marking because what we are marking is really a triumph of the capacity of our country to take advantage of all of the opportunities that modern technology offer the world and offer the people of the world. In a moment I';ll be throwing a switch, turning on an illumination which will drive home to all of us and to people around Australia that right here in Sydney in North Ryde we are opening a centre which in every sense of the word is the nerve centre of information and computer traffic around the world.  Now that hasn';t happened by accident. It';s happened because we have the people, we have the incentives, and we have the beckoning climate in so many other ways for companies to see this as an ideal location.
Australia is a very fortunate country largely because of its people. The greatest asset that Equant has, the greatest asset that any company has is the ingenuity and the intelligence and the commitment of the people who work for it.  And over the last decade Australia has embraced the information and computer technology age with gusto matched by few countries in the world. Our rate of take up of things like personal computers, mobile telephones, our Internet usage, our e-commerce usage, our capacity to adapt, our capacity to take advantage of the fact that in an information and computer technology era it really doesn';t matter where you are in the world, it';s how well you do it that matters.
If ever anything has demolished that famous remark of Geoffrey Blainey';s about the tyranny of distance it is information and computer technology. And the amount of Internet traffic, the amount of data that is passing through this centre, the fact that your company has this remarkable array of clients including the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and all that secret foreign Affairs traffic, all of the traffic coming out of the national Parliament.  And heaven knows we generate a lot of traffic particularly when we meet.  Some of you may wonder about some of the traffic we generate but we generate traffic and traffic is business and you';re not complaining.  And you';re probably pleased to see us meet even more often.
But ladies and gentlemen this is a real day of celebration and success.  Because it';s yet another reminder of how well Australia is doing in what is the technology of our age and of our era.  Those of us in the room who are over the age of 50 of which I am one indeed over the age perhaps of 45 will know of the absolute transformation in lifestyle that the Internet and information and computer technology generally has bought to the world.  The difference it';s meant to the generations but pleasingly the capacity of older people in the community to adapt, to enjoy, to utilise and to employ is quite remarkable.
Yes it is true that these things are second nature to the young, but they can with a fair degree of concentration and application also in time become second nature to the older section of the community.  And they open up opportunities and what IT is doing and what the communications revolution is doing is, and it';s a revolution that is ongoing that is opening up opportunities which are going to change the way and have already changed the way in which so many of us live.  We do live in a very technologically sophisticated country.  We live in a country of incredibly talented people.  Here I am opening this largest hosting centre of the biggest global provider of this service.  A couple of weeks ago we had the, I think the metaphor for the great talent of Australia';s medical scientists - when I was a young person, if you needed a miracle operation you sent your child to England or America.  They now come from countries like that to have the miracle operation performed in Australia.  It is another reminder of just how talented we are, we have so much at our disposal.  We have the challenge and the responsibility to keep those talented people in our country, but to recognise of course that part and parcel of living in a globalised economic and social environment is that people will always go to other countries for a period of time and equally people will come to our country.  We should never be so insular, so provincial and so selfish and inward looking as to imagine that it';s not part of the work experience of a talented person to spend some time in another county.  The important thing is that Australia must have the capacity to take advantage in a second to none way of the state of the art technology.  Now what we';re witnessing here today is a dramatic illustration of our capacity to do that.
When it comes to information and computer technology it doesn';t get any more impressive than what we're seeing here with Equant to provide this hosting centre to have been chosen by the company we here in North Ryde, we here in Australia, to have been chosen is quite a tribute to the workforce, it';s quite a tribute to the congeniality of the economic environment in Australia and I put in a plug for that.  I think it';s very good indeed.  And I think anybody who doesn';t invest in Australia at the present time is very ill-advised.  Very ill-advised indeed.  We';ve got low interest rates, low inflation and a booming economy.  
I';ll rest my case on that ladies and gentlemen but can I say to Equant thank you for your confidence in our country and particularly for me as the Member for Bennelong thank you very much for bringing your activities here to North Ryde.  And with that I have very great pleasure in declaring open this hosting facility for Equant, well may it remain at the forefront of the information and communications technology revolution. 


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much to Helen, to Shane Stone, Chris McDiven, Kerry Chikarovski.  My federal and state parliamentary colleagues and my fellow members of the New South Wales Division of the Liberal Party.
Can I start this address by expressing my thanks to all of the members of the rank and file of the Party here in New South Wales for the enormous loyalty and support that you have displayed towards me and to my government and to my federal parliamentary colleagues over the last twelve months.  
We are as I said after the Aston by-election, we are well and truly back in the game.  But we are back in the game because of a collective effort.  And can I take the opportunity of congratulating our colleagues in the Victorian Division on a tremendous team effort.  That entire electorate was door knocked.  The whole electorate was doorknocked during the campaign.  And we won the Aston by-election because we had a great local candidate in Chris Pearce.  We had a great grassroots effort from our friends in the Liberal Party in Victoria.  And we also had a message.  And we also had Mr Beazley who doesn't think we pay too much income tax.  So it has been a great effort.  
But I think it's important in reflection of that so preserve a sense of proportion.  I've always tried to level with the Party's supporters.  I think the first obligation of a political leader to his followers and supporters is the obligation of candour and honesty.  We've had a bad six or nine months.  We were doing very badly a few months ago.  We were doing even more poorly a few months prior to that.  We're now doing a lot better.  Whether it's good enough to win at the end of the year or whenever the election is held - but I think as each month ticks by the options are narrowing let me say that, without any fear of contradiction, unless some of you want an election on the 12 January 2002.  And I don't think that is very attractive, certainly not for me, there's bound to be some cricket match on that I ought to go to.  I mean having missed the Ashes series I'm not going to miss what's on in January.  
But ladies and gentlemen, seriously we are doing better politically and it's important that we understand why and it's important we focus on the choice that people face at the end of the year.  Because elections in the end are about choices.  There can be only one outcome at the next federal election.  You can have a Coalition Government led by me and supported by John Anderson and Peter Costello and all of the other members of the front bench.  Or you can have a Labor Government led by Kim Beazley with Simon Crean as Treasurer, and all of the other people you can think of who might comprise that team.  Now that is the choice.
Now I think we are doing better essentially for three reasons.  I think we are doing better because we have had the commonsense and the strength to be responsive to people's concerns in a number of areas.  I have never subscribed to this theory of politics in Australia that you never adjust your policies, you never fine tune them, you never change anything.  I mean that is the language of my predecessor.  That is the language of political arrogance to say to the Australian public everything we've ever done from the time we got in was one hundred percent correct the first time and how dare you suggest that we adjust any of our policies or show any degree of responsiveness.  
No government has embraced more reform in five and a half years than this government.  No government has tackled the big issues, no government has taken on board the need to reform those things that have been left unreformed for a generation.  None has done it with more vigour or more energy than the present government.  And in the process of that inevitably there are going to be things that need to be fine tuned and things that need to be changed at the margin.  And it is the essence of good government to have both the strength to tackle the fundamental reforms but also the commonsense and responsiveness to fine tune those reforms when fine tuning becomes necessary in the public interest.  So that's one of the reasons why we're doing better.  
Another reason why we are doing better is that the Australian public has now seen through and beyond the temporary interruption to economic growth occasioned by the December quarter national accounts.   And they now realise that the fundamentals of the Australian economy are the best they have been for a generation.  And that those fundamentals have been made better and stronger and more durable and more lasting by the economic reforms that we have carried out.  They now see the situation where Australia next year, if we continue to head in the right direction, Australia next year will grow more strongly than any industrialised country.  Will grow more strongly than the United States.  Will grow more strongly than the nations of the European union.  They see a country that has got on top of inflation that has delivered the lowest interest rates in a generation.  That marvellously has doubled the number of apprenticeships over the last five and a half years.  
I mean one of the things that really makes me very proud of what this government has done is the way in which we have delivered to the so called traditional constituency of the Australian Labor Party.  Under this government the working men and women of Australia are better off than they were under the Hawke and Keating governments.  The working men and women.  The working men and women of Australia have higher wages because we have higher productivity.  The working men and women of Australia have much lower interest rates because of our good economic policies.  The working men and women of Australia have more jobs because we've generated more than 825,000.  And the sons and daughters of the working men and women of Australia, whatever their aspirations have more opportunities through things such as the doubling of the number of apprenticeships in this country.  Isn't it interesting that for twenty years the level of apprenticeships in this country languished because of the union dominated apprenticeship system.  But in five and a half years we have more than doubled the number of apprenticeships for Australians to more than 300,000.  Now that used to be the bread and butter of people's working opportunities, but they languished and it's taken a Liberal government, it's taken a Coalition government to revive them.
But I think the other reason ladies and gentlemen why we are doing better is precisely because we are getting nearer and nearer to the moment of choice.  As each month goes by and people realise that the next big political decision will be to choose the future government of this country they are beginning to realise there is a choice.  It is not a question of kicking the government in the shins without any particular consequence other than to sort of get it out of your system because you are cranky about some particular aspect of what the government has done.  And every government makes mistakes, every government upsets some section of the community if it tries to do something for the long term benefit of the nation.  But as we get a little closer people are beginning to realise there is choice.  There is a choice between a government that whatever its faults or failings it has been prepared to govern in the long term interests of the mainstream of the Australian community.  It's a government that is not bullied into submission by minority groups.  It is a government that does look to the long term mainstream interests of the Australian community.  
It's a government that doesn't believe that the privilege of office is something that should be enjoyed as a privilege of office but should be discharged with commitment and energy every day of our waking lives as members of the government.  We are a government that has transformed not only the economic strength of this country but we have also lifted the esteem of this country in the eyes of the other nations of the world.  The reputation of Australia around the world is stronger and better now than it's been at any time in my lifetime.  The reputation of this country.  We are seen as a strong and open and fair and successful and progressive and cohesive society.  We are seen as a nation that is a beacon of tolerance and humanity for the rest of the world.  No nation has more successfully absorbed people from all around the world in such harmony and peace as has the Australian nation.  And no nation deserves the reputation of a tolerant cohesive society more than does Australia.
So ladies and gentlemen as we get closer to the choice, the moment of decision people are starting to focus on that choice.  That's one of the reasons we did better in Aston let's face it, than people predicted.  That's one of the reasons why in his heart Mr Beazley knows he should have done better.  That's why everybody knows that it has given us heart and hope.  Because on the one hand you have a government that has been willing to take the political risks involved in fundamental reforms.  Everyone knows we needed a new tax system for twenty five years.  Mr Beazley knew that when he supported Option C way back in the 1980s when it was put forward by Mr Hawke and Mr Keating.  Keating and Hawke both knew it as both Prime Minister, in the case of Keating as Treasurer as well.  I've known it.  John Hewson knew it.  Everybody who has held any position of responsibility in either side of politics in the last generation has known that sooner or later somebody has had to summon the courage to do something about it.  I knew it would be difficult.  I knew there would be flak.  I knew there would be administrative troubles, I knew there would be transitional difficulties.  I knew there'd be criticism for some aspects of bringing it in.  And I know there are some people who are unhappy with aspects of it.  And I say to them we continue to listen to you and if it is necessary to fine tune it then we stand ready to do so.  But the fundamental message is that we had the guts to do it and that makes the difference.
I think out there even those people who may be unhappy with it, they know deep down it was necessary in the long term interests of this country.  And I also know that we needed industrial relations reform.  One of the great success stories of this government is that we have transformed our nation's industrial relations without the industrial turmoil, the strikes, the days lost, the loss of productivity and production that was predicted by the Labor Party back in 1996.  Remember when Bill Kelty stood up in front of that meeting and he said you are going to have the sonata and the symphony and the overture and all the other warnings that he gave about all of the industrial strife.  Well none of that has come to pass.  And the reason it has not come to pass is that the rank and file of the working men and women of Australia support our approach to industrial relations.  They know that the best industrial relations are where employer and employee make common cause for the overall benefit of the firm.  Because the firm makes a bigger profit and they get a better return.  They know that an industrial relations system that enables people if they want to, to negotiate subject to decent minimum standards their own working conditions, that that is a far better system and a far better way of operating an industrial relations environment.
So as we approach the decision day ladies and gentlemen there is a choice.  There is a choice between a government that has taken the difficult decisions.  Has sort to govern for the longer term.  A government comprised of men and women drawn from all sections of the Australian community and not just from the councils and halls of power of the trade union movement and the apparatchiks of the Australian Labor Party.  We are comprised of a group of men and women who have business and professional, academic and other areas of background and experience.  And it's a government that has sought to govern for everybody and not for one section of the Australian community.
But the contrast is with a Labor Party which after five and a half years is no closer to telling the Australian public what it believes in, what it stands for than it was on the 3 March 1996.  A party led by a man who told his caucus in 1999 don't bother me with policy, we are going to surf in to office on the back of public discontent with the GST.  A man who is prepared to criticise and oppose.  A party that is prepared to be negative and tear down but to offer nothing positive in return or to try and build an alternative constituency for change and reform within the Australian community.  We are opposed by a group of men and women who are prepared to allow the Liberal Party to do the heavy lifting of reform and change in the hope that in the transitional friction they will benefit politically.  Mr Beazley famously hates the GST so much that he is going to keep it.  
The last few days of the Aston by-election were very revealing because they focussed the public spotlight on the great dilemma the Labor Party faces.  And they are now running out of time to explain just how they're going to do it.  How you are simultaneously going to roll back the GST which, if that is to mean anything will cost hundreds of millions if not billions of dollars.  That's number one.  You're going to roll that back.  You're not going to do it at the expense of the States because when Mr Beazley went to Burnie he gave a guarantee to Bracks and Bacon and Beattie, at Burnie, that they weren't going to be left any worse off.  So you leave the States alone.  You roll back the GST, that costs hundreds of millions or a couple of billion to mean anything.  Oh, but of course we're going to have a bigger surplus than the Liberal Party.  I mean, I'll just repeat that, a bigger surplus than the Liberal Party.  So you add that and on top of that of course we're going to spend more money on health and education and science and a whole lot of other things.  And having criticised the Liberal Party for spending money on country roads of course in the fine print of our policy commitment we're not going to take that away either.  And at the end of the day of course it all simply doesn't add up.
It is impossible to simultaneously roll back the GST, maintain the surplus, spend more money, not take it away from the States.  It is impossible to do that unless you increase income tax.  That is the only way you can do it.  And we got a clue two days before the Aston by-election when Mr Beazley said and I'll quote him accurately - I say this with some vigour, I do not believe that Australians pay too much income tax.  Well in the Australian idiom if you say you're not paying too much what you are really saying is that you ought to pay a bit more.  We all know that, it's our way of speaking.  That's what he means.  He is preparing the way.  He thinks in the end it's better to pay more income tax than to sacrifice any of the things he said.
Well as far as we are concerned we are going to pursue Mr Beazley with the logical impossibility of his position every day from now until the election.  Until we get an answer.  If he has a problem with this, it is a problem of his own negative construction.  If your only political stock in trade is to snipe and trip and attack and oppose you can't complain when you get cornered by your own negativity.  And that is exactly what has happened.  While we have been busy building the future of this country, heading in the right direction, he's been seeking to construct a negative pathway into power and that negative pathway has brought him to this absolutely inexplicable and completely illogical dilemma.  And I say to him again if you are to have any credibility as the alternative Prime Minister of this country, please tell the Australian public how can you simultaneously rollback the GST, maintain revenue to the States, keep the budget surplus, spend more money on education and not increase income tax.  It is impossible.
And ladies and gentlemen I think the growing realisation that after five and a half years, the alternative Prime Minister of this country has done nothing to build an alternative political philosophy and alternative policy, that is one of the reasons I believe that we achieved the result that we did in the Aston by-election.
Let me say to you my friends that the next four and a half months, give or take a month or two or a week or two or a day or two, the next four and a half months so described is going to be very hard.  Winning a third term is difficult.  We would be foolish, with the natural enthusiasm and heart we feel as a result of the Aston result, we'd be foolish to interpret it as meaning that the next four and a half months is going to be anything other than extremely difficult.  We are still behind, and I still believe that if the election was held now that we'd be struggling to win.  I don't mind saying that.  One of the things I've learnt after 27 years is that in the end the public gets a bit tired of you not sort of talking in language that they regard as real and that they can understand.   And you do go up and down in politics.  We live in a community where people are less rusted on to political parties than they used to be.  And they are more volatile and that is why we have been able to recover ground this year.  But we can lose that ground again if we don't focus clearly and sharply and in a co-ordinated fashion on the alternatives I laid out at the beginning of my speech.  
Our position is very simple.  We have restored the Australian economy.  We've undertaken major reforms.  We've committed major budget resources to many important areas such as defence and roads and salinity and other aspects of the environment and welfare reform.  And when people say to me what is your agenda for the third term I say that agenda is in large part the implementation of the programmes that we have laid out over the last twelve or eighteen months.  The defence of Australia is not something you come and leave in the space of eighteen months.  The defence of Australia is a long term undertaking.  And every last dollar committed in that White Paper will be delivered by the Coalition if it is returned.  
Tackling the problem of salinity is not something you deal with other than over a ten year period.  Repairing Australia's country roads will take years to undertake and so the list goes on.  But I say to you again as we have said repeatedly over recent months that our priority if additional resources through higher budget surpluses become available, our priority will be to further reduce the level of income tax in this country.
Our priority is not to spend all of those additional surpluses on rolling back the GST or additional government spending.  So that is our priority and it is a very clear priority.  But I make that commitment off the back of leading a government that has made a major long term investment in necessary areas of government responsibility.  A government that has restored the balance between public and private provision in health.  A government that has injected something in the order of two and a half to three billion dollars a year extra into encouraging people to take out private health insurance.  A government that has restored and strengthened the freedom of choice that ought to be available to the parents of Australia to decide the type of education their children receive.  And under the guise of what I can only describe as envy politics, the Labor Party would put that choice at risk.  Make no mistake the Labor Party's policies in the area of independent schools are the thin edge of the wedge to wind back proper treatment of independent schools within Australia.
So ladies and gentlemen we have a very, very clear choice ahead of us.  We have a tough battle.  We have to make certain that we return a government that has undertaken so much over the last five and a half years.  We want to make sure that the Australian public rejects a party that has simply sought to thrive on the politics of transitional discontent when major reforms are undertaken.  We want to be aware of the fact that if Labor wins the next election you will have not only Labor governments in five of the six States of Australia, but you will have a federal Labor government as well.  And that will give to the trade union movement of Australia an unparalleled opportunity to impose its industrial anarchy and power and thuggery on the workplaces of Australia.  You only have to see what has happened in Western Australia since the election of the Gallup Labor Government.  Within weeks of the election of that Government, courtesy of a blind-eye turned by the new Labor Government, the notorious no-ticket no-start rule was restored to the building sites of Western Australia.  The anarchy that is occurring on certain industrial sites in Victoria.  The clear willingness of the trade union movement to exercise its industrial muscle to the detriment of the long-term national and public interest.  If that willingness is obvious and stark with Labor in opposition federally, can you imagine how naked and open it will be before a weak, indecisive Labor Prime Minister if Labor were to win federal power as well.  
So ladies and gentlemen, an additional element of the choice that people will have to make at the end of this year is whether they are prepared to take the risk of giving unparalleled, unprecedented political room to move for a rampant trade union movement within the Australian community.  And I think that is something else that the Australian people focussed on in Aston.  I think it's something else that the Australian people will focus on as we move to the end of this year.  
Ladies and gentlemen, again my thanks.  Can I say that to have been the Leader of a Coalition Government over the last five and half years has been a tremendous privilege.  To have been the Prime Minister of our country of course has been the greatest privilege that can come the way of any Australian.  And the opportunity it has given us to change this country for the better, the opportunity it gives us if we win again, to continue that work and to take our country forward, places on all of us a very special responsibility.  This Division delivered handsomely for the Government in 1998.  New South Wales has magnificent sitting members and we want to get a few more.  There are a few more seats that we could win in New South Wales.  
Can I tell you, I'm looking forward to the next three or four or five months.  I'm going to enjoy it, because above all, I believe in it.  I've never been more committed about any political goal in my life, than winning the next federal election.  My energy and enthusiasm for the job is to say the least not inconsiderable.  I'm supported by a wonderful team of Cabinet ministers and I particularly want to record my thanks to John Anderson, the Deputy Prime Minister, Peter Costello who's done a fantastic job in a very difficult portfolio over the last five and a half years.  To Robert Hill and to Richard Alston and to Mark Vaile and to all the other ministers, particularly those who are gathered here today from New South Wales and a number such as Rod Kemp who've come from interstate.  Many of them have had some difficult challenges.
Can I just simply record to you Philip my gratitude for a job extremely well done.  Nothing. I mean many things in politics make you angry on occasions, but when I hear people criticising Philip Ruddock, a person whose political life has been a metaphor for fighting for fairness and decency and racial tolerance, when I hear him criticised for upholding the opposite that really does get the fifty per cent of my Irish well and truly up.
So I want to say to all of you you've done a great job.  We have a long fight ahead of us.  I admire the way people who have got very thin margins, sorry to single people out but perhaps on this occasion Ross Cameron for example who is fighting a really heroic battle.  And people like Pat Farmer who is carrying the banner in Macarthur as a new candidate.  And to all of you thank you very much for the support.  We can win this.  We really can.  I believe that in all my heart we can win this.  We might have had our doubts a few months ago but over the past few weeks there has been a sea change.  As you start to see the whites of their eyes the Australian people are putting a bead on us and saying hang on what do they stand for.  What do they believe in.  Are they really offering an alternative.  We may not be happy with this or that but I tell you what, at least they stood up for what they believed in.  They have at least tried to change the country in the direction they want it to go and at least they stand for something.  And that is a lot more than they can say for the Australian Labor Party.
Well I think that is about all the workout I can give my voice today.  Ladies and gentlemen again my thanks.  We are going to have a tremendous fight over the next few months.  If we work hard, we stick together, we stay on message, we point out the contrasts, we can make it and we can go on to govern for the benefit of the whole Australia community.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, Lyndal Curtis from ABC Radio.  You've always said your intention is to go to an election at the end of the year.  Given there's only a short window of opportunity for you to go earlier than that, once that window closes, why not order the Finance Department to release the charter of budget honesty figures say in the beginning of October so you and Mr Beazley can begin to detail your policies and their cost and commend the phoney war and let people have longer than three weeks to look at what's being offered before they vote?
PRIME MINISTER:
My life is full of windows opening and closing.  Look, I think what we'll do is just follow the normal rules.  When the election's called there are certain things that have got to be done by the secretaries of the Treasury and the Department of Finance and that's what happened last time and that's what will happen this time.
QUESTION:
Fran Kelly from the 7:30 report.  Prime Minister you say, you said today, you've said repeatedly that it's impossible for Kim Beazley to roll back the GST, spend more on health and education and stay in surplus unless he puts up income taxes.  If you can promise tax cuts out of future surpluses, why can't Kim Beazley promise rollback and spending without putting up taxes.  Isn't the same pot of money potentially available to you both?
PRIME MINISTER:
But Fran, look, it's all an order of magnitude.  I mean what he's doing is he's promising rollback and to be serious, rollback's got to be several billion dollars.  I mean he can't go to the people after all the song and dance he's made about rollback and say oh rollback is just this and this and you know, that's rollback.  I mean that would be a great fraud, I mean, he's campaigned for two and a half years, three years - so he's really serious about rollback, he's got to have a substantial rollback and then on top of that he is promising to increase spending in a very significant way.  I mean I have quite a modest list of costed things.  I mean he's promised a Medicare alliance, the announcement of country hospitals, that's $104 million over four years.  Establish a national health commission, that's $68 million over four years.  Extra professional development of teachers, $80 million over four years.  Regional University research training places, 68 million.  New research fellowships, 126 million.  University online, 850 million.  Some additional funding in aged care and he's promising a lot more in relation to a new coastguard service.  When you add all of that up you get to about 3.5 billion.  I mean my point is this, that's he's not only promising, if he weren't promising any additional spending at all, then there might be some validity in your argument.  But he's promising rollback plus additional spending and he sort of tried to promise, eventually at some stage, a return of bracket creep yesterday but I mean the really difficult question he's got to answer is how can you simultaneously roll back the GST in any meaningful way, maintain the surplus, not take it away from the states, finance additional spending without putting up income tax.  And nothing has happened over the last few weeks and I don't see how anything can happen unless he goes back on one of those commitments over the next few months, is going to alter that equation.
QUESTION:
Laurie Oakes from the Nine Network, Prime Minister.  I'd like to ask you about the first of the choices you said Australians face at the election.  You called it the choice of competence.  I have here a report from the Australian National Audit Office, tabled today.  It's a report on the divestment of a billion dollars worth of Commonwealth Government property and divestment and leased back.  And if I can quote bits of it, it says; 'The Government was advised that the sale of the properties would increase the budget outlays in the longer term as future rental payments to the private sector grew'.  On the next page; 'Finance (The Department of Finance) advised ANAO in April 2001 that it's role was to implement a property divestment programme endorsed by Ministers, but it was not charged with the role of protecting the overall interests of the Commonwealth'.  Can I put it to you, Prime Minister, is this what you regard as competent Government?  And how much better off might the budget be if we had some real competence in this sort of thing?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Laurie, I haven't read that report.  I will, and obviously I will see that the Government's mind is directed to it.  The competence of which I have spoken is the competence that has enabled us to repay all of the debt we have repaid.  I mean we have a debt servicing burden as a nation now.  Ratio of Government debt to GDP of 6.4%.  In Japan it's over 100%, in the United States it's 45 and the OECD average is about the same.  We do have lower interest rates, we have implemented our - be it with some frictional difficulties, a massive new taxation system.  We've undertaken a extraordinarily successful privatisation process, of course there will have been, like any other Government, there will have been some errors along the way, without commenting on that because I haven't read it and I'm not in a position to give any kind of response.  But, the competency of which I've spoken is the competency that enables this country to compare itself very favourably in a time of international economic difficulty with the economies of most of the industrialised world and enables a magazine with the prestige of the London Economist to predict that on current trends, Australia will have by far the highest rate of economic growth next calendar year of 16 industrialised nations.
QUESTION:
Good afternoon Mr Howard, unconfirmed wire reports from Japan this morning says that Mitsubishi Boss Rolf Eckrodt will tell you on Friday in Tokyo that they're pulling out their manufacturing from Australia.  Are you aware of the veracity or otherwise of that report?  And secondly have you got anything else that you're planning to offer Mitsubishi on Friday in a bid to keep them to stay above and beyond what's already been offered by the State and Federal Governments?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have no way of knowing whether there's any veracity in that report or not, I understand the indication coming out of the local Mitsubishi people is they have absolutely no knowledge of that.  Those reports do appear from time to time.  I happen to have the opportunity amongst other things of speaking to the Mitsubishi people in Tokyo.  The main purpose of my visit is of course to talk to Mr Koizumi, the new Japanese Prime Minister and Mrs Tanaka and other senior Ministers in the Government, but if the opportunity presents itself I will naturally be pushing the case for Mitsubishi to maintain its operations in Australia.  We already have massive inducements, there was no more passionate advocate of tax reform than the removal of the wholesale sales tax on cars, and there was no more eloquent advocate of the overflowing benefits of a broad base indirect tax in Australia than the motor manufacturing industry.  And when you add to that the industrial relations reforms and many of the other incentives and the additional and specific benefits, we have already provided very significant benefits to the motor manufacturing industry, we want it to stay in Australia.  We think we have a better economic and, of course a much better lifestyle climate as well and I will be putting all of those propositions to the company.  In the end they have to make decisions but I would certainly be advocating very strongly that what the Government has provided, both at a Federal and State level has been extremely generous and contains many incentives and assurances for a continued heavy investment by Mitsubishi in Australia.  But I repeat you should not assume that there's any particular relevance in that report.  I don't know anything more than what I've indicated and these reports tend to come out with considerable regularity.
QUESTION:
Louise Dodson of The Age, you were talking about superannuation needing to operate efficiently, Mr Howard.  Are you saying that you'll reform it for review it or overhaul it in the next term?  And I also wanted to ask you about who you support, Bradman or Chappell over their differences?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have immense regard for both of those last mentioned gentlemen and won't be getting into that at all, except to say that in my all time Australian team as far as batsman are concerned after Don Bradman I think I next put Greg in the team.  So I think he's a class act.
As to the first on, what I indicated in my speech was the centrality of superannuation to the retirement plans of many Australians.  Look I think superannuation is one of those things that a government a must always keep under review.  There's a lot of debate about it, there's a lot of controversy about it.  I heard somebody this morning from another country suggesting that the taxes on superannuation in Australia were significantly higher than those in other comparable countries.  That's not my advice, in fact I got some advice on that from a very reliable source this morning and I'm told that that's not the case at all, that the level is in fact lower than the average of the OECD in Australia.  What I'm saying to you at the moment is that we don't have a specific plan to lay out at present regarding reform in that area, we do as the Treasurer said on a number of occasions want greater simplicity and it will obviously be something that we'll need to continue to address in our next term.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister there are two court cases in Queensland this week involving senior Liberals fighting each other affected the federal seats of Ryan and Moncrieff.  And at the same time Liberal nominations for the seats of Oxley and Rankin closed without any response.  Could I ask two questions, one do you stand by your statement that Bob Tucker is the best candidate for Ryan and are you concerned at all about the ability of the Queensland Liberals to fight the forthcoming election?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well political litigation is not confined to one party in Queensland.  I mean there's been a few pieces of, there's been a few court proceedings involving members of another party, I don't mean One Nation, I am thinking of another party earlier this year.  Look, I'm not going to comment on, for obvious reasons, those two cases.  Do I have any doubts about the capacity of the Queensland division to fight the campaign? No I don't.  the Queensland division has gone through some difficult times but we have established an administrative committee and we've got a president in John Herron who brings a great deal of experience and great conciliation skills.  And I mean just remember in case you're losing a sense of proportion if my memory serves me correctly the whole of the administrative structure of the Queensland ALP was sort of set aside wasn't it before the state election and they didn't sort of end up doing too badly if I remember correctly in that election.  I think you got to get a sense of proportion, I mean people feel strongly inside political parties and that applies to all parties and we just work our way through.  Look I'm not going, I thought Tucker fought a good by-election campaign, I've not ever said there shouldn't be some pre-selection process and how that works out is entirely a matter for the division.
QUESTION:
James Grubel from AAP Mr Howard.  Just taking you back to your trip to Japan, I wonder what is it that you'll be telling, or saying to the new Prime Minister Koizumi about his economic reforms in Japan.  And if as is reported it's going to take three years for Japan's economy to bounce back, what kind of impact is that going to have on economic activity and growth in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I won't be presuming to give any, to Mr Koizumi any lectures.  I'll be interested to hear what he has in mind.  I hope that he does persue a very strong reformist programme because it's very important to Japan because Japan is the second great economy of the world.  As an individual country it's important that it strengthen its economy so you know I think we all have an interest in that.  And look that will be of help to Australia, although it is fair to say that Australia has suffered rather less because of the character of our trade with Japan and that so much of it is you know long term resource contracts but actually suffered rather less than many people feared might be the case.  Particularly through the Asian economic downturn.  
But there's a lot of hope invested in the new Prime Minister.  He won office in a way that was atypical for Japanese Prime Ministers, he enjoys very high popularity, he's just had a very successful Upper House election and he is committed very strongly to reform.  And I will bevery interested to hear his plans, I will naturally encourage him but in the end these are decisions of course for him to make and I know that that's the same view that's been expressed to him by the United States administration.  But it does open up possibilities and obviously if the Japanese economy recovers over time that will be good for the region, it will be good for the world and it will be good for Australia.  But we are I repeat in the fortunate position of not having suffered over much from the decline that Japan has experienced over such a long time.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Sue Dunlevy from the Daily Telegraph.  The same access economics that you quoted today has estimated that we would need to triple the GST in the next 30 years to cover the cost of our ageing population.  And most experts say that Australians should be saving up to 12 to 15 per cent of their income if they are to expect a comfortable retirement.  How will a Howard Government ensure that people do save more of their retirement as current policy only requires them to save 9 per cent.  And if you don't require them to save more how would you fund the welfare burden that will ensue without increasing the GST?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well if I can take you back to what I said in my speech that the great strength of the GST is it has given to this country a tax that will grow with the economy and most particularly it will grow with the areas of the economy that are growing fastest.  I mean the weakness of the wholesale tax system and it was identified by Access was that you had, effectively you had a wasting tax base because the goods component was being overtaken by the services component, the services component was untaxed and you had a dwindling base but an increasing need.  My first proposition, one that holds completely is that we have with a GST a better chance of funding the needs of an ageing population because although the GST goes in its entirety to the states, the states have important responsibilities particularly in the areas of hospitals and community services that bear upon things are required by the aged.  And of course to the extent that the states have a growth tax in the years ahead their demands for additional resources to the Commonwealth, from the Commonwealth would be significantly reduced.  So I think that was the thrust that I was saying.  
On the question of retirement, incomes and the needs that people have, we essentially the moment we have a system in this country of where you've really got the pension system, you've got super guarantee charge, the SGC, and of course you have the various inducements to private savings.  And you've got to bear in mind that even though super has grown enormously because of the use of the levy there's a lot of evidence that a great deal of substitution has taken place and that superannuation is not the only vehicle whereby people make provision for their savings.  And people do tend to react according to where the incentives are.  
We are not attracted to, at all, to an increase in the levy.  We think that would just represent another impost on small business.  And I know the Labor Party is going to put the levy up but having reduced company tax for many small businesses we're not in the business of putting the levy up.
I think you should focus a little on the remarks I had in my speech concerning ways of making it easier for people to remain in the workforce longer.  I do believe very strongly that this is a neglected area of change.  I think we do have to face the need as a community as we age to make it easier and more attractive for people to remain in the workforce longer.  Now that I won't obviate the need for adequate retirement incomes, I'm not suggesting that for a moment.  But I do think that it is an element of the way in which we respond to the challenge.
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, Dennis Shanahan of the Australian.  In your speech you mentioned two issues which required a whole of government approach, you named a third which required the cooperation of all governments in Australia, yet for the issue which you nominated as the matter of highest national priority, Australia's ageing population you still do not have a whole of Government approach with a population policy.  Why are you reluctant to adopt a population policy?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't think that the answer to the challenge of the aging population is necessarily to have, well let me put it another way, you could have a population policy but that wouldn't solve the problem of the aging population because there's a common misunderstanding about what can be achieved.  I mean when people talk about population policy they are essentially talking about the size of the migrant intake. They may also be talking at the margins of ways in which you may slightly alter fertility rates.  And I'm not saying that there aren't policies that can have some impact on the age, particularly the age at which people have their first child and therefore perhaps the pressures that are on couples as to whether they have two rather than one child.  I mean policies can have some effect on that. 
But when people talk about population policy they are really talking most of all I think about the size of the migrant intake. Now we have I believe restored the integrity of the immigration program. We have dramatically altered the balance, we have a lot more skilled migrants now and they are making a big contribution and I would see that process going on, and you will be aware that over the last several years we have modestly increased the intake each year and I'm certainly fully in support of that.  But there is a mistaken view in many quarters that you simply solve the problem by a dramatic doubling, trebling, quadrupling of the migrant intake over a few years.  That won't solve the problem. I mean this has been the subject of some very very serious analysis and it simply doesn't of itself solve the problem.  
And we're going to have, you know, we're going to have this challenge of an aging population in a way irrespective of what kind of migrant intake we have and what other policies that we follow. They will have some impact at the margin and I'm all for them having a beneficial impact at the margin.  But you have to find other ways of coping with the problem.  Fortunately it's not as big a difficulty for Australia as it is for some others but we are till generically speaking in the same category as most other western countries.  
You do very seriously need a more secure revenue base. I mean we would have been facing a hopeless position on this issue if we had not changed our tax system and provided for a growth tax going to the states, and provided a more secure revenue base.  How anybody imagined in their right mind you could have faced this issue with the old indirect tax system we had is ridiculous and I explained in my speech my reasons for that. But I think there's a danger in this debate of people saying well you solve the problem by issuing a document called population policy.  
This issue's been debated a lot and I'm sure it will be debated a lot more in the future and it should be debated a lot more in the future and I hope it is.  But there are many immovables about it.  I mean the immoveable is our fertility rate has fallen and continues to fall, our population is aging, people are living longer and healthier lives and that process is likely to continue.  Now you won't reverse that in short order or even in long order no matter what you do with the immigration program. You may have some impact on it at the margin.  You may be able to alter birth rates a little with policies and indeed there's always a case for providing people who are contemplating having families with greater choices than perhaps they have now although we have tried very hard in our tax policies to provide them with greater choices.  
But in the end we have to find what I might call internal ways and I think one of the things that we have to focus on  a lot more heavily is providing people who want to do so and feel they have the capacity to make a contribution to remain in the workforce much longer. And there's no reason why they can't given improving health standards. There are many people who don't want to and I'm not suggesting that this should be compulsory. I'm simply saying that there is a vast and growing reservoir of extraordinarily experienced and talented people who if given the right encouragement over time would stay in the workforce longer, would make a contribution and would slow down the impact of this aging process on the Australian community.  You're not going to slow down the aging, you're going to slow down the impact of it, no I haven't found a solution to that.  You slow down the impact of it on the economy.
QUESTION:
Paul Kelly from the Australian Prime Minister.  You've told us today that income tax cuts must come onto the political agenda. I wonder therefore if I could draw you in relation to income tax?  First to demonstrate your bona fides would you be prepared to consider a return of bracket creek on an annual basis? Secondly are you prepared to consider the revenue haemorrhage involved in the gap between the corporate rate and the top marginal rate?  And thirdly can you give us some indication as to what your priorities are, will you look at the 30 cents rate or the top rate?
PRIME MINISTER:
Paul I'm going to disappoint you and say that today, today I'm not going to indicate the priorities I might have.  I obviously have and am giving this issue some thought. And so there's no misunderstanding and somebody doesn't later on come at me and say you said this and you said that. What I'm stating today no more no less is that our priority is that as surpluses are available we give them back through lower income tax.  I can't at this stage be more specific than that and I'm not being more specific than that. That is stating a very clear priority and it's obvious today is not the time to start getting any more specific than that.  You've mentioned three areas. Obviously bracket creep is an option, it's an option. I can't say any more and I won't say any more than that. I think the gap between the company rate and the top rate is unfortunate. I think it's been exacerbated by the short sightedness of the Labor Party and the Democrats in the Senate. I mean we tried.....had a modest proposal that the top rate come in at $75,000.  I mean you've got a Labor government in Britain where the top marginal rate is what 40% and coming in I think at a higher equivalent rate. I mean the top rate in this country does come in at a very low level.  There's no doubt about that and it does aggravate the problem of which you speak.  But we had a go at that and the Senate said that was outrageously generous to the wealthy and they therefore cut it back to come in at $60,000.  So it's obviously an area.  And the other one you mentioned, you asked me would I do something about this or that rate.  Well that really invites me to sort of tell you what, precisely what we're going to end up doing. I can't do that, not because I'm trying to be secretive. It's just that at this stage we are committed to returning, and I'm obviously aware that as we get closer to the event, I will have to be a little more specific about that and I accept that responsibility and I will be. But today's not really the right time to be speculating further about that other than to reiterate that our commitment is that as surpluses become available we return them through income tax cuts rather than a whole lot of additional spending.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Catherine McGrath from the AM and PM Programmes, ABC Radio.  Could I turn your attention to One Nation preferences and Western Australia.  Will you be able to guarantee that the State Executive in Western Australia will in consultation with candidates, be able to deliver One Nation last and if you can't will that be an unravelling of your policy to put One Nation last?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well my position on this is well known, I went to Perth last week and I spoke to the State Conference and I explained to them why I believed they should take the decision I hope they do.  Look, it's a matter for the State Executive.  One of the things we must all understand is that all of our parties have their own constitutional processes.  One of the interesting things about the two major political parties in this country is that in relation to the power of the Prime Minister or the Party Leader in the Parliamentary Party, the leader of the party has, on our side has more formal power than the Leader of the Labor Party has because he has a right and power to choose the Cabinet whereas the Leader of the Labor Party only allocates the portfolios, although everybody says each of those powers is in some way qualified and that's true.  When it comes to the organisation, the Labor Party's organisation is more centrally held and the National Executive of the Labor Party has more power than our Federal Council has.  Now people can say that's good for the Labor Party and bad for the Liberal Party, or some people who believe in a more participatory process think that's good for the Liberal Party and bad for the Labor Party, and you can take your pick.  And I'm not asking you to make a choice I'm simply making the point that we all have our constitutional processes and in the Liberal Party the allocation of preferences is the constitutional responsibility of the State Executives of each state division.  
Now it's always been like this, I mean I can remember one of the very first State Executive meetings I attended in 1963, we were in the process of being asked by the then Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, as a State Executive, to reverse a decision we'd taken two weeks earlier to run a Liberal candidate in the normally Country Party held seat of Cowper, which the Labor Party had won in the credit squeeze election of 1961.  It was pretty likely we were going to win it back and the Liberal Party at that time thought it was a good idea to run a candidate and Jack McEwen and Bob Menzies didn't think it was a good idea to run a candidate.  They didn't sort of issue a statement saying 'you're not running a candidate', they got in touch with us and they said we'd be graciously pleased if you would reconsider.  And we did and you know we kept being told it is your decision.  We got this, you know, I had this report from the State President, the late Brigadier Jock Pagan said you know, Bob has said it's your decision ladies and gentlemen.  We sat around for an hour and we talked about it, we knew it was our decision and we reversed it.  Now that is how, I mean, I don't know whether that's, you know I hope that that might be the case, I hope it is.  But you've got to, I mean it's very important if you want people to belong to a political party, no matter what the issue is, you've got to, even if you are the Prime Minister, you've got to extend to them the courtesy of their role in the processes of the party.  Now, I believe in the end the Western Australian division will do the right thing.
QUESTION:
Michelle Grattan, Sydney Morning Herald.  Mr Howard your Government has put aside its proposed legislation on entity taxation.  What are your plans for bringing it forward and how extensively would that be changed? And secondly also on taxation, how significant do you think the tax minimisation problem still is in particular through artificial schemes and what more can be done in this regard?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well as far as the entity taxation is concerned we are always keen to find ways of eliminating the abuse of the trust structure but I want to make it very clear we are not going to revisit any kind of legislation which interferes with the normal commercial use of trusts by many small businesses and farmers. I mean we're just not going to do that.  There's nothing to be achieved by it in my view and we certainly won't be revisiting that. But there are some exotic uses to which trusts are put and particularly those that have trust upon trust upon trust upon trust.  And there are some ways in which you can curb the improper use of those. But in the process we are simply not going to go down areas that are going to catch up situations where farms and small businesses and trading trusts associated with them which can't be put in the category I first described are going to be caught up.  I mean I've made that very clear and that remains our position.
Now It's impossible to get a proper steer on the minimisation thing. I mean there's obviously tax minimisation does go on and we have this eternal argument where's the boundary between tax minimisation and tax avoidance and tax evasion. And I know the theoretical dispute and I understand all of that and I think you'll always have this sort of constant battle.  I do believe over time that if you have marginal tax rates that came in at higher levels, more realistic levels, top marginal tax rates, I think that would remove some of the incentive. I mean it is, you know, it is a fact of life that if you have a rate of tax coming in at $60,000 and people are earning hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars a year there is a temptation for minimisation arrangements.  Now I don't approve of that.  I've paid the top marginal rate of tax on the appropriate share of my dollars all of my working life and I know hundreds and hundreds of thousands of Australians who have.  But I'm just recognising the predilections of people. I do believe that over time, despite some of the contrary articles, I do believe over time the GST will reduce the black economy. I mean it's had some, apparently had a few spectacular well publicised successes in obliging people to indicate they haven't filed tax returns for a very long period of time and that's not so much the GST but rather the operation of the Australian Business Number which is a very very effective way of bringing people out of the woodwork and I'm all for that.  I mean I believe very strongly in lower tax and with everybody paying their fair share. I think we all do.  But it's very very difficult to sort of put a handle on tax minimisation and what is minimisation in the eyes of some is abuse in the eyes of others. Now the Tax Office has had a lot of strains put on it with the new tax system and I appreciate that. I think it's also important to recognise that we are an economy that's undergoing a great deal of change and whenever you provide people with incentives to do things you provoke other people to imitate those activities in order to get the benefit of the incentive. I think that sort of thing is unavoidable in a capitalist society. If I can go back again and say I have long believed in a broad-based indirect tax.  One of the reasons I've believed in it is the advantage it brings in because it is harder to evade than income tax and I think that's one of its great strengths and that's why I can't understand why anybody who believes in fairness in the tax system wants to wind it back.
QUESTION:
Michael Harvey from the Herald Sun Prime Minister.  Over the last nine months the Govern


E&amp;OE..................
Later this year, the Australian electorate will face a stark and important choice. 
It will be a choice in three key areas - that of competence, philosophy and the capacity to respond to future challenges and I want to discuss each with you today.
A CHOICE OF COMPETENCE
You have heard me speak many times about good and competent government.  The comparison between this government and our political opponents is clear.
We are a government that has secured Australia's economic future by driving interest rates to their lowest level in a generation, repaid more than $50 billion in Labor debt, reformed Australia's taxation and industrial relations systems, created 817,000 new jobs and lifted productivity growth to a level amongst the fastest in the developed world.
We are a government that has secured Australia's future in other ways - by directing record spending to the environment, by promoting greater choice and better standards in schools, by rewarding Australians for taking responsibility for protecting their own family's health, by making our Defence forces strong and self-reliant. We have protected the vulnerable, strengthening the social security safety net.
We are a government that has never shirked the hard decisions needed in Australia's long term interest and we've provided good economic management and pursued the strategic long term objectives vital for this nation's future.  Australia is now heading in the right direction.
In contrast, the Opposition has a well-deserved reputation for economic mismanagement and an instinctive tendency towards a tax and spend approach.  It's a political party that hopes to surf into office without presenting a concrete or cohesive alternative.  It's a party influenced not by mainstream interests, but by the constant pressure of interest groups, particularly trade unions.
Our record needs stating again, and we will do so in a document to be released in the coming days. I commend it to you - it is a record not just of the Government's achievements, but also the distance Australia itself has travelled over recent years.
Shortly before my trip to the United States I will deliver a major foreign policy address that will cover the government's achievements and future priorities in this area.
A CHOICE OF PHILOSOPHY
There will also be a choice between the two fundamentally different philosophies which underpin the major parties.
From their inception, the Coalition parties have championed the virtues of self reliance and independence, of balancing a person's rights with their responsibilities and allowing individuals and communities the freedom to make their own decisions.
Take every significant government policy area - from work for the dole to greater choice in education, from encouraging the take-up of private health insurance to industrial relations reform, from Natural Heritage Trust funding to practical reconciliation - and you will see a distinct philosophical basis for each of those decisions.
A major political battle ground of coming months will be industrial relations.  Our differences are profound.  A Beazley Labor government will hand back control of industrial relations to the organised trade union movement, despite the growing indifference of Australian workers towards trade union membership.
Fewer than one in five Australians now belong to a trade union.
Do the million or more Australian small businesses really want a federal Labor government added to five state Labor governments with all the massive increase in trade union power and union interference in their businesses which that development would bring?
The tax discussion of recent weeks has also highlighted the clear philosophical and policy differences between us.
It's drawn attention to our emphatic commitment to return tax revenue to the people whenever possible - to our recognition that individuals should be allowed to choose how best to spend their own money.  In recent years, we have delivered strongly both on that commitment and, given the remarkable growth of the economy, invested in areas of pressing social and national need.
Let me underline the magnitude of the personal tax cuts delivered through the new tax system by a comparison with the recent tax cuts given by President Bush and seen as critical to the future wellbeing of the US economy.
As a proportion of our gross domestic product, the personal income tax cuts under the new tax system in Australia total about 1.7 per cent - significantly above the American cuts which correspond to about 0.7 per cent of their GDP.
Now, 80% of Australian workers pay no more than thirty cents in the dollar in income tax.  
Notwithstanding these achievements, further reductions in income tax must be on the agenda.  It is inherently part of how we view the relationship between government and the people.  It's a fundamental aspect of our political philosophy. Lower taxation encourages enterprise and initiative.  It promotes choice and creates new opportunities.
That is why, as surpluses become available, they will be returned to the Australian people through lower personal income tax.
Mr Beazley has also made it plain what his views are.  In one response, he has revealed that Labor's priority is to spend more rather than tax less. 
Let me quote him exactly.  When asked if Australians are paying too much income tax, he replied "No, I don't believe so and I will say that with vigour".
Well, I can say with equal vigour, drawing on 27 years in public life, that when a politician says that, he's really saying he'll put up income tax.
And he'd have to - it is impossible, simultaneously, to roll back the GST, maintain the surplus, spend more money and not take it away from the states.  It is impossible to do that unless you increase income tax.  That is the only way you can do it.
For our part, we'll continue to be a government committed to practical outcomes and offering choice and opportunity to individual Australians.
We've given the working men and women of Australia the practical benefits of higher wages, lower interest rates, more jobs and better opportunities for their sons and daughters.
And in the last regard, I'm especially proud of the stunning results we achieved in rebuilding the apprenticeship system left wrecked by Labor - increasing the number of positions from only 135,000 around the country in 1995 to an impressive 300,000 this year, in both traditional and new industries such as retailing, tourism and telecommunications.
Nearly a third of these positions now go to women - up from just 16 per cent when we took office.
Almost a third of all positions are in regional areas.
Five times as many indigenous Australians and five times as many Australians with disabilities are enthusiastically taking up the challenges offered to them.
And over nine out of ten apprentices have unsubsidised jobs within three months of finishing their training.
FUTURE CHALLENGES
The third choice is that of responsiveness to future challenges.  Today's address allows me to identify some of those challenges and the way in which we have already begun to respond to them.
But before I do, I'd remind everyone that much of the detail of our third term agenda has already been released.  
Defence, innovation, environmental repair and welfare reform form central planks in our third term agenda.  All four were the subject of long public consultation and evaluation - and hard decisions on priorities and resource allocation.  All have been released - all have been widely acclaimed - all will demand great attention from the Government as they're successfully implemented.
THE CHANGING AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY
First among the future challenges is the need for an ongoing response to a change of historic proportions within our society - the ageing of our population.
The fact is that two thirds of all people who have ever lived beyond age 65 are alive today.  Australia is no different from most other developed countries in facing an unprecedented ageing of its population.  In just over a decade, the rate of growth in the over 65 group will reach 4 per cent contrasting with an overall population growth rate predicted to be well under 1 per cent.
Put another way, by the time today's toddlers are starting their own families, the ratio of working age Australians to retired Australians would have fallen from more than five to one as it is today to under three to one.  
This development demands many responses.  
Most critically, it requires a future revenue base that will not only grow with the economy so that we can fund the services needed by an ageing population but also in a way which does not impose an incentive-sapping burden on working age Australians through ever increasing income tax.
That is one of the major reasons why we introduced a goods and services tax.
That is why its maintenance - unimpaired -  is essential to our economic and social future.
History will judge that the government's introduction of the goods and services tax will have done more to prepare our economy for the demands of an ageing population than any other single tool of public policy.
Had we not taken steps to reform Australia's taxation system my remarks to you today could well have been focussed on the extent to which income taxes would need to rise if we were to adequately fund essential services over the years ahead.
We recognised the shortcomings of Australia's old indirect tax base - with its over-reliance on an outdated wholesale tax system and its lack of reach into the growing services sector of the economy.
We understood that unless there was change the retirement of baby boomers in coming years meant that an ever increasing tax burden would fall on Australian workers through higher rates of personal income tax. 
Those people who argue that the GST should be rolled back must be held accountable - they are, in effect, arguing to consign our children to ever higher rates of personal income tax.
Access Economics has found that without the GST, there would have been a substantial shortfall in Australia's indirect tax take in a generation's time, equivalent in today's dollars to more than $11 billion.
Without a broad based goods and services tax, this gap alone would have all but wiped out the total value of the personal tax cuts delivered last year. 
The first step in ensuring the long term viability of the health system and its ability to cope with the demands of an ageing population has been taken by our promotion of choice in health care and greater usage of the private system.  The health reforms have enabled millions more Australians to take more responsibility for their own health and medical care and, in doing so, eased the growing pressure arising from an over-reliance on the public system.
Our vastly stronger fiscal position has increased our capacity not only to support but also reinforce the social security safety net via the pension system which is so crucial for retired Australians. 
The massive repayment of Labor's debt has provided $4 billion a year in interest savings which can now be invested into areas of social need.
The absence of the government from financial markets has helped lower interest rates.  The earlier repayment of mortgages which this has facilitated will allow Australians to boost their capacity to save more and build up their assets for retirement.
We will also encourage the wider spread of employee share ownership which builds on the reduction of capital gains tax and encourages asset acquisition.  This will also foster a more balanced approach to retirement planning.
Superannuation is at the heart of the retirement plans of millions of Australians.  Governments must always ensure that it operates simply and as far as possible in a fair and efficient manner.
Pursuit of this goal must be balanced against the need to avoid endless changes which have been an often unwelcome feature of the operation of the system over the last 20 years.
The impact of our changing demographics will accelerate in the next few years.
A continuation of the more balanced immigration programme, fostered by this government, with its much greater emphasis on skills, will be part of our response to the challenge of an ageing population. 
The proposition, however, that the impact of an ageing population on our economy can be reversed by a sharply increased migrant intake over the next few years is not supported by critical analysis.
For social as well as economic reasons, our response must include greater use of the skills and experience of the increasing number of Australians over 55 - Australia's 'gold collar' workers.  Expert opinion agrees that even if only 10 per cent of people aged between 55 and 70 choose to remain in the workforce, on either a full-time or part-time basis, it would have a significant effect upon our national per capita productivity.
For this to happen labour markets will need to be sufficiently flexible to suit their needs and respond to the choices they wish to make. 
In recent years, we have driven industrial relations reforms to promote this kind of flexibility and choice in the labour market.  In coming years, I intend to explore every opportunity to bring about even greater cultural change within the Australian workplace.
In contrast, the ALP's stated aim to return to a highly prescriptive, regulated labour market would diminish the capacity of older individual Australian workers to choose when they wish to retire, the hours they wish to work and the specific rewards they want to receive.  And it would diminish the capacity of Australian business and industry to maintain the level of success and productivity so evident in recent years and that would leave all Australians worse off.
Australia' changing demographics is a matter of the highest national importance, economically and socially.  It presents challenges but also opportunities. 
Utilising older Australians' talent and wisdom in a whole range of community activity, in schools and as business mentors; greater support for those wishing to remain in their own homes and communities as they age; addressing service gaps in regional Australia; using Australia's world class medical research capabilities to combat diseases associated with ageing and greater support for carers are all exciting areas that the Government can be actively engaged in.
BALANCE BETWEEN WORK AND FAMILY
Intertwined with this need for a workforce structurally equipped to meet the future is the issue of the quality of working lives - quality expressed by the balance between work and family.
We all know the importance that individuals place on their family and social relationships and I, for one, do not aspire to an Australia where our growing wealth has been built at the expense of our families and communities.
The key to ensuring this does not happen is choice - the greater choice of individuals in respect to their working conditions, the ability to leave the workforce but re-enter it later on, the means for a parent to remain at home caring for children themselves if that is their wish, and in areas such as the provision of more sophisticated and flexible childcare arrangements.
The return of more than $2 billion a year to over 2 million families in family tax benefits and $12 billion a year in income tax cuts to them and others in the general community has been a great step forward. 
As importantly, we'll continue to pursue an industrial relations model that entrenches an individual's right to negotiate for conditions that suit his or her own circumstances and needs - whilst of course ensuring proper standards are protected.
In this area also, a crucial start has been made.  Hundreds of thousands of individual work place agreements and certified agreements have been negotiated.  Agreements that Labor has vowed to tear up should they come to office, forcing these workers back to either unregistered common law contracts, collective agreements negotiated by union bosses or more lowly paid awards.
It's estimated that three quarters of all workplace agreements and certified agreements contain at least one family friendly provision.  Provisions that include flexible start and finish times to coincide with school hours, purchasing additional leave to spend more time with children, carers' and paternity leave, job share arrangements, the ability to work from home, community service leave and structured career breaks.
It is glaringly obvious that centralised wage structures are simply too slow to respond to modern workplace needs - both from the employer and employees' perspective.  By relying on precedent, they're invariably suited to the needs of the majority and by entrenching standardisation, they diminish individual choice.
We are back to the clear philosophical difference between the two major parties.  One standing for self reliance, individual choice, reward for effort and the maintenance of a safety net, the other championing centralised decision making and a one size fits all approach.
A future Coalition government will remain committed to pursuing greater flexibility in the workplace.  Offering choices to workers does not have to compromise the productivity of Australian business.  In fact, balanced lives will contribute best to Australia's industries in the 21st century.
Expanding child care choice has been a high priority of the government with more than 150,000 funded childcare places created since we won office.  Initiatives within the Stronger Families and Communities package have targeted those who traditionally had difficulty accessing childcare such as shift-workers, families with sick children and Australians in regional areas.  Last financial year, this government allocated close to $1.4 billion to supporting the childcare system and the latest CPI figures show that cost of child care has dropped by nearly 9 per cent since last July.
In short, supporting the needs of working families and ensuring a balance between their responsibilities will require a whole of government response.  In a third term, we can make great progress in promoting choice and opportunity within the workplace whilst strengthening families and the communities in which they live.
SUSTAINABILITY
Balance and quality are not just goals for our society, for our working and family lives but also vitally important to our environment.  Australia's current and future success is the combination of its people's talent and the land's health and capacity to sustain a prosperous population - both must be nurtured.
Australia has already played a vital role in devising effective global responses.  At home it is essential that continue to pursue domestic sustainability and that is the third area of challenge of which I speak today.
Environmental issues should never be dealt with as separate from the profitability and sustainability of our industries and the quality of life we enjoy and hope to pass on to our children.  The reality is sustainability is an expression that increasingly denotes the inter-related health and wellbeing of both the environment and the economy.  
A whole of government response is vital - the success to date and ongoing potential of both the Natural Heritage Trust, renewed in the budget by a further $1 billion commitment, and the Action Plan on Salinity have convinced me of that.  I've found that there is great cause for optimism - both in regard to the ability of new technologies to solve  once intractable problems and the willingness of communities and impassioned individuals to become involved.
The technological and scientific advances being made would have been unimaginable even a decade ago and increasingly profitable businesses and industries will be marked by their efficient use of scarce natural resources.  Australia already has a dynamic and vibrant environmental industry sector, ready to provide solutions, not simply identify challenges.  The success of this sector, over coming years, will have enormous implications for Australia, both in its local application and because of its export potential.
There is every reason to believe that these advances can also reinvigorate some of our regional areas and potentially open up vast new opportunities for settlement and industrial development.  For instance, new salt and drought resistant crops have the potential to revolutionise agriculture.
We have a long term commitment to regional areas and recognise that, in many ways, those communities have been more practically aware of the consequences of land and water degradation than many others.  As the stewards of vast tracts of the Australian landscape, they'll also play a critical part in the environmental repair so desperately needed.
Gains in areas such as biodiversity and energy must be made, but at the heart of this agenda in the time ahead will be water.
Salinity and water quality issues are seriously affecting the sustainability of Australia's agricultural production, the conservation of biological diversity and the viability of our infrastructure and regional communities.
In a dry continent like our own, with an economy that derives $28.5 billion in export income each year from the land, with the drinking water of millions of Australians potentially affected in years to come - there is no more pressing issue than tackling water quality and salinity issues.
Governments must come to grips with issues such as river health and efficiency of river irrigation system.  In many cases, water related issues are as pressing in the cities as they are in regional Australia.
Importantly, co-operative effort between governments at all levels, industry sectors and local communities, pulling together, will be needed to fast-track the behavioural and structural changes required for the future. 
This is already the essence of our approach.  The Natural Heritage Trust gives resources and accountability directly to local communities to fix local problems and this emphasis on community ownership is also the foundation of our Action Plan on Salinity.
In the process the property rights of individual Australians must be fully respected.  The right to compensation must be included in our policy prescriptions.
CONCLUSION
Ladies and Gentlemen, at the last election I argued for policies that would leave Australia a better country, that would make Australia a stronger country, that would give Australia a capacity to compete more effectively in the outside world.
And we've delivered.  Whatever the self serving doomsayers may say, Australia enters the twenty first century more secure, more prosperous, more respected, with its people possessing greater potential than ever before in its history.  This nation is clearly heading in the right direction.
The major policy announcements in recent months, in defence, in innovation, in welfare, and in environmental repair will be pursued with the vigour and determination for which this government is well known.  Their successful implementation coupled with the safeguarding of low interest rates, low inflation, high productivity growth and the repayment of Labor's debt will be key features of our third term in office.
Australia is widely admired for its openness, its cohesion, its sense of fairness, its competitive spirit and its economic strength.
Much has changed for the better over the last five years.  We are a stronger, more respected nation.  We will work hard to keep it that way.
As in the past, the key to Australia's future is the spirit and attitude of its people.  With choice, incentive, opportunity and a fair go,  there is nothing they cannot aspire to achieve. 


E&amp;OE..................
Mr Muto, and Mrs Moriyama, and Mr Yanagisawa, other members of the Japanese-Australian Diet League.  On behalf of all of the Australian party here, I would like to thank you very much for your very courteous gesture in hosting this breakfast.  This is my fourth visit to Japan since being Prime Minister of Australia.  I look forward very much later this day in meeting your Prime Minister and other senior members of your government.  The relationship between our two countries is a very close one.  It is not only a strong economic relationship but it is also one that is strengthened by the many exchanges of people, not least the almost  of a million Japanese tourists who come to Australia and the widespread learning of the Japanese language in Australian schools.
It is important in close relationships of this kind that we do not take those relationships for granted and that we find new ways of making the relationship even stronger.  That is why both your Prime Minister and I sponsored the Japan-Australia Council meeting a few months ago in Sydney.  And that meeting was designed to provide some new directions and new strength to the relationship.  One of the proposals to come from that meeting was a proposal for a Trade and Investment Facilitation Agreement to be discussed and negotiated and concluded between Australia and Japan, an agreement which really builds on earlier proposals which led to agreements over the long history of our close relationship since World War II.
Japan is clearly Australia';s best customer and Japan has been a wonderful trading partner.  And the trade between our two countries, worth some $43 billion, is very important to Australia, as I know it is to Japan.  Both Australia and Japan have an interest in further opening up world trade.  Neither of us has an interest in seeing the world retreat into higher protection and it is important that both of us work to achieve a new World Trade Organisation round when that organisation next meets.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman for your kind remarks regarding the Government';s reform programme.  Over the last five years we have seen a very significant strengthening of the Australian economy largely due to the many reforms that have been undertaken in our country.  Not only over the last 5  years but indeed over the last 10 or 15 years.  The latest indications are that the growth forecasts brought down in our last budget are likely to be achieved and that despite a temporary glitch during the December quarter, the Australian economy is on a very strong growth path.
Can I again very warmly thank the members of the Diet League for not only being here this morning, but also for the enormous contribution you have made to keeping very strong this very close relationship between our two countries which is very important to me and I know very important to the people of Australia.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE..................
Mr Imai, gentlemen.  Thank you very much for your warm words of welcome.  Can I say how great it is to be back in Japan and particularly to be amongst people and leaders of companies that have played a major role in the economic progress and development of Australia over the last 40-50 years.  
The companies represented around this table from Japan have been strong investors and they have been partners in the economic growth of my country since the late 1950s.  And I take the opportunity of recording my gratitude to those companies and my gratitude to Japan, which has been one of the major foreign investors in Australia,  whose markets have consumed large volumes of Australian goods and services, whose economic partnership continues to be at the very top level of the economic relationships that Australia has.  
Economically there is no country which is more important to Australia than Japan.  Japan has been a good friend, a very reliable customer and a true economic partner.  And it is important that the character of that relationship be reaffirmed and where the opportunity presents itself, to be further strengthened.
My visit to Japan allows me to renew friendships with many of you.  It also allows me to meet leaders of your government who are embarked upon major historic reforms of your economy.  To express our understanding and support and our respect for the nature of the challenge that lies ahead.  It's also an opportunity at a business gathering for me to say again how important it is that all of us, at both a government level and also at a business level, resist those around the world who would seek to return to high protectionism and to look inwardly in relation to economic matters.  It is important that all of us argue the benefits that globalisation has brought to the economies of the world and the benefits that globalisation has brought over time to poorer countries.  
We cannot walk away from globalisation.  The challenge for governments is to harness to the advantage of their citizens the benefits of globalisation.  To ensure that the vulnerable are assisted to adjust but not to turn their backs on globalisation.  The responsibility of governments and businesses together is to explain and advocate more vigorously the benefits of globalisation and greater openness in our economic activities.  That is certainly my objective, I know it is the objective of the business community here in Japan, I know it is the objective of the business community in Australia, and I know it is the objective of your government and your Prime Minister.  
Can I say again gentlemen, it is very good indeed to be back with you.  To say again how important our partnership is with Japan and the Japanese business community and I look forward very much to our discussions over lunch.  
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE..................
Introduction
I am delighted to be here to address this National Conference of Mission Australia.  
This forum provides an appropriate opportunity to recognise the role that your organisation has played, together with the individual City Missions over nearly 140 years, to assist individuals in need and to strengthen our community.
In the words of its own mission statement, Mission Australia exists 'to spread the love of God and meet human need'.   The city mission movement began in July 1862 when a public meeting resolved to establish a Sydney City Mission based on the London City Mission.  The relatively recent emergence of Mission Australia after a process of amalgamations and new formations has spread the movement's work to over 450 services, drawing upon the efforts of 3,000 staff and over one thousand volunteers.
In establishing the Sydney City Mission in 1862, Benjamin Short was not only working to meet human need but he was also demonstrating that strong, fair and cohesive communities rely upon successful partnerships between individuals, business, government and the community, each contributing their own unique resources and expertise to tackle disadvantage at its source.
This is the notion of a social coalition that has guided much of the Government's thinking about the implementation of good social policy.   
It was soon after the last election that I addressed the ACOSS national congress about the values and principles that would underpin our second term social policy agenda. It is now appropriate, almost three years on, to reflect upon that speech, assess our progress and draw instruction for the future.
In my ACOSS address I said that a legitimate role for government is, in a very strategic way, to protect the dignity of the individual so as to strengthen families and communities.  Strengthening families and communities has been the focus of much of the Government's energy in its second term, while maintaining steadfast support for a strong social security safety net.
We have sought to harness the ambitions of parents to make a better life for themselves and their children, the energy and sensitivity of community organisations to those in need as well as the drive and innovation of business, both large and small, to produce real results.
Working together in a social coalition, partnerships of these different groups are able to respond to entrenched social problems in new and flexible ways that embrace prevention as much as cure.
Strong Economic Foundations 
A prime role of any Government is to secure the nation's economic foundations without which acceptable living standards are impossible to achieve.  Far from being mutually exclusive, a government's social and economic goals should support each other.  Just as without a strong economy, a cohesive community is that much harder to achieve, so too, responsible individuals, caring families and robust communities are fundamental to building a strong economy
In the task of responsible economic management the Government has made considerable progress.  High rates of economic growth have led to the creation of more than 800,000 jobs since March 1996 and reduced the rate of unemployment from well over eight per cent to under seven per cent today.
Productivity growth at rates amongst the highest in the world has ensured that real wages could grow by an average of two per cent a year, six times faster than under the previous Government.
Responsible economic management has taken the burden off families in a number of ways.  The average annual inflation rate has been more than halved and the fall in interest rates means that the average home buyer is saving more than $300 a month on their mortgage interest bill compared to March 1996.
Tax reform has also returned money to the people. The largest income tax cut in Australia's history in July 2000 now means that the average taxpayer is facing a marginal tax rate of 30 cents in the dollar rather than 43 cents.
As far as the Government's own finances are concerned, paying back $50 billion of the previous Government's $96 billion Government debt has saved $4 billion this year alone in interest payments which is now being spent on meeting the Government's important social obligations.
Strengthening our Modern Social Safety Net
One of the benefits of good economic management is the capacity for sustainable strengthening of the social safety net.
There has been much debate of course over recent years concerning the Government's changes to the Australian taxation system.  And once again this is not a forum that I choose to go into a detailed analysis of those changes, except to the make the point that one of the fundamental virtues of a broad based indirect tax such as the Goods and Services Tax is that it gives to any government the wherewithall to fund in growing proportion over time the responsibilities it has to provide services to the community.
All of the GST is appropriated to the states.  It means in the years ahead there is a built in growth tax for those states to provide for the ongoing bread and butter services which are the responsibilities of states under our constitutional arrangements.  
So in a very direct sense a Goods and Services Tax provides a guarantee of the capacity of a compassionate community to care for those who need help years into the future.  Without a Goods and Services Tax governments would have to look to other areas of revenue raising that would be both less efficient, less palatable and therefore likely to be less available for the provision of those services which are so important.
The implementation of the new tax system has also provided an important opportunity to review and improve our support for families and others in need.  The New Tax System provided an extra $2.4 billion a year in additional assistance to over two million families including increases in family assistance and child care benefits.  
Pensions and allowances were also increased permanently in real terms. 
We have also kept our promise to strengthen Australia's public health care system - Medicare.  By giving the States a record $31.6 billion for public hospitals, this commitment is reflected in a 28 per cent real increase in the funds to run the public hospital system over the current Health Care Agreement period.
Where we have differed from our political opponents in health policy is that we have encouraged and rewarded families who choose to take greater responsibility for their own health care, through the combination of lifetime health cover and the 30 per cent private health insurance rebate.
Between December 1998 and the March quarter this year, private health fund membership soared from 30 per cent coverage to 45 per cent of Australians, an increase of more than three million people. 
The consequence of these measures has been to encourage the development of a viable private system to run in tandem with and take the pressure off Australia's public health system.  
The Government has also demonstrated its commitment to older Australians who have made this country what it is today.  We have built on the achievements for older Australians in our first term of government, where we linked pensions to 25 per cent of male total average weekly earnings.  In this term of government we extended eligibility for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card which provides concessional pharmaceutical benefits, to a further 220,000 people from January 1999 and an estimated additional 50,000 people in this year's budget.
Stronger economic foundations also allow the Government to make a suitable investment in education and the jobs of the future.  
One way this has been undertaken is to focus on school standards.  We have worked to improve rates of literacy and numeracy, by implementing the first ever national literacy and numeracy plan, testing students in years three and five.  It can be a source of satisfaction to parents that between 1996 and 1999 the proportion of third graders who could not read to a suitable standard has been virtually cut in half. 
Important though university education is, our efforts have also been concentrated upon the 70 per cent of young people who do not go on to university.
In five years we have rebuilt the apprenticeship system, more than doubling the number of new apprenticeships to over 300,000.  Similarly, the number of students participating in vocation education and training in schools has reached more than 165,000, a six fold increase compared to 1995.
Last week, Senator Vanstone released encouraging figures on the circumstance of low income workers, unemployed and poor people. For example, the proportion of jobless sole parent families fell from 54.8 per cent in 1993 to 48.8 per cent in 2000.  Families on low incomes using childcare have experienced increases in real incomes by up to 22 per cent between 1995 and 2001.  Senator Vanstone's figures do not support the claim that the rich are getting richer at the expense of the poor: there has been no significant change in income shares over the past five years.
New Directions in Social Policy - Building the Social Coalition
As I indicated in my ACOSS speech, maintaining and strengthening the social safety net is not enough to meet modern social challenges.  
Our unique contribution in Government has been to build the capacity of the social coalition to provide effective help to communities, families and people in need and provide more opportunities.
Our efforts in this second term of Government have centred upon applying the important principles underpinning the social coalition in several new frontiers of policy.  Principles including:
? all partners in the social coalition contributing to policy formulation;
? engagement of community organisations to deliver services relevant to local needs;
? focus on early intervention and prevention; and
? encouragement of  participation rather than passive dependence.
I have said on numerous occasions that business has a key role to play at both a national and local level to strengthen communities.  In my ACOSS speech, for example, I said that my goal is to cultivate a greater philanthropic tradition in Australia.
That is why I established the Prime Minister's Community Business Partnership two years ago to raise the profile of corporate social responsibility.  Members of the Prime Minister's Community Business Partnership have helped develop a suite of new taxation measures designed to encourage greater corporate and personal philanthropy.
Key measures have included new concessions to promote gifts in kind, including gifts to environmental and heritage organisations and the removal of capital gains tax penalties applying to bequests.  We have also established a new type of  private charitable fund providing families and individuals with greater freedom to set up their own trusts for philanthropic purposes.  
It is appropriate here to acknowledge the contribution of Patrick McClure - a member of the Prime Minister's Community Business Partnership tax working group - to these specific initiatives.  I look forward to working with this group on further such initiatives in a third term Coalition Government. 
There are many other instances in our approach to social policy where we have used the social coalition to draw on the expertise of different sectors to not only implement but design our response to specific social problems.
Our approaches to tackling the unemployment problem provide good examples.
The success of the Job Network over the government run monopoly it replaced in putting jobseekers in work is, to a large extent, a function of better incentives and the mission that many Job Network providers possess to satisfy human need.  According to the OECD, the Job Network and associated programmes have been at least as effective as former programmes in helping participants find work at about half the net cost to taxpayers.
Similarly, the key to the success of Work for the Dole has been the way it has involved charitable and community organisations to complete important local projects.
Added to this are the improvements to the self-esteem and work ethic of the young unemployed that are encouraged by Work for the Dole.
A study into the scheme last year found that 30 per cent of participants were no longer on unemployment benefits three months after leaving the programme.  The same study found that the prospects of getting off the dole were 76 per cent higher for those who had participated in Work for the Dole compared to similar job seekers who had not been part of the scheme.
I would like to acknowledge the role that Mission Australia continues to play in countless Job Network outlets and Work for the Dole projects across the country.
Likewise, through the Australian National Council on Drugs, chaired by Major Brian Watters of the Salvation Army, our $516 million Tough on Drugs strategy involves health professionals, law enforcement officers, non-government and community organisations with frontline experience as well as government.
The most recent development of Tough on Drugs is our drug diversion initiative.  This aims to divert minor drug offenders away from the criminal justice system and into treatment and rehabilitation.  It is also another example of the principle of mutual obligation that says to drug users: if you want to be free from the criminal justice system you have a personal responsibility to work to be free of drugs. But if you make that commitment the Government will help you get the treatment you need.
Members of the Australian National Council on Drugs, including Major Watters, worked closely with the Government on the design of the diversion initiative in the lead up to the COAG meeting in April 1999.  Two years on, we have now signed Drug Diversion Agreements with every state in Australia and the ACT.
I note that Mission Australia is an approved provider under this Diversion initiative in a number of States.
A more recent social coalition initiative is our $240 million Stronger Families and Communities Strategy, launched last year.
The Strategy develops practical projects at a local level to identify and encourage potential community leaders, build up the skills of volunteers, and help communities promote their own 'can do' spirit - objectives very much in harmony with the theme of this Conference.  It also aims to help families with young children, given the crucial importance of the early childhood years.
We have already committed funds to many practical projects, such as Jumpstart, a Queensland Police Citizens Youth Welfare Association initiative to help address the training needs of young unemployed people in Brisbane who did not complete high school.
The work we are doing with the National Advisory Council on Suicide Prevention to develop the National Suicide Prevention Strategy is also an example of the social coalition in action.  We have committed $48 million over five years to this initiative and funds are now being rolled out.  In October last year I announced the first round of projects to be funded including an extra $100,000 each year to the youth counselling service, Kids Help Line to allow the service to take an additional 15,400 calls a year.
This being National Homeless Persons' Week, we have an opportunity to take stock of what we, as a community, are doing to address homelessness.  It is also a time to recognise and commend those organisations and individuals, including Mission Australia and its staff, who do so much every day to tackle this difficult issue and support those who find themselves in this situation.
Tackling homelessness has been a high priority for my Government.  In my ACOSS speech, I mentioned our Youth Homelessness early intervention pilots as an early example of the Coalition Government's social policy approach.  
The report of the Advisory Committee on Homelessness, released yesterday by Senator Vanstone, indicated areas requiring further attention.  Of course, this must be seen in the context of more spending on crisis and support services than ever before, including over $800 million for five years on the Supported Accommodation Assistance Programme.  More recently, we have announced extra support through the Australians Working Together package to help vulnerable groups, such as those who are homeless, to get the help they need.
Welfare Reform
The Reference Group on Welfare Reform, established by the Government in September 1999 and chaired by Patrick McClure, was a further demonstration of our commitment to use the social coalition to review major areas of policy.
This forum is an appropriate place to play tribute to Patrick for the tremendous contribution he has made to the development of Australia's welfare reform agenda. He brought a wealth of practical experience and compassion to the work of the Reference Group. 
The notion that every Australian of working age should be encouraged and supported to participate in society was central to the recommendations of the Report of the Reference Group. 
For many people, the most desirable kind of participation is an economic one.  It is participation in paid work that so often provides independence, builds self-esteem and self-reliance.  Without jobs, many people can lose hope as well as self-esteem and feel alienated from society.  Children growing up in jobless families are at greater risk of ending up jobless themselves.
The $1.7 billion Australians Working Together package announced in this year's Budget was the first step in the reform process charted in the McClure Report. The package is a clear demonstration of the Government's commitment to striking a fair balance between providing help and requiring participation.
The package was also a significant investment in Australia's social infrastructure - an investment that will deliver returns to taxpayers over the years in the forms of less joblessness and less welfare dependence.
Australians Working Together expanded the support and assistance available for all to participate, including $324 million for unemployed people, $251 million for parents, $177 million for people with disabilities and $83 million for indigenous Australians.
The package also took an important first step towards addressing the financial disincentives against taking up paid work through the $506 million Working Credit initiative.
The McClure report recognised that together with economic participation, social participation is also important. This is because social participation brings many of the same benefits.  It builds self-esteem and self-reliance, promotes mental and physical health and well-being, builds social cohesion and helps to foster sense of community.  A large number of people receiving income support already make a significant social contribution through parenting and caring, voluntary work and community work.  Our approach supports and values these contributions.
We also recognise that community participation can also help people in the transition to paid jobs by building and maintaining skills, self-esteem and social networks.
To ensure that people can participate to their full capacity, Australians Working Together included significant additional spending on support for people who experience severe barriers to participation.  For example, we are spending $140 million on Centrelink Personal Advisers and $154 million on a Personal Support Programme.
Next Steps in Welfare Reform
Australians Working Together was the first step in a longer process of welfare reform.  We will continue to work with the Welfare Reform Consultative Forum to develop a strong medium to longer term agenda, consistent with the McClure Report.
We are committed to taking further steps to move Australia's excessively complex income support systems towards the McClure ideal of a single benefits system.  The McClure model of a layered single benefit structure, including a basic payment, and supplements to assist with participation costs and provide participation rewards, will guide initiatives further.  This approach is already in evidence with the training supplement announced in the recent budget.
We are also committed to taking further steps to reducing the inbuilt disincentives of the present systems to move from welfare to paid work - the so called poverty traps.  Significant progress in this direction was made in the Government's tax reform package which reduced marginal tax rates and reduced withdrawal rates of family benefits.  The Working Credit measure announced in the budget was a further step.
The following principles will underpin all future work:
? our commitment to making up front investments that will deliver returns to taxpayers later on as people move from welfare dependence to economic and social participation;
? our commitment to working in consultation with the community, through the Consultative Forum; and 
? our undertaking that nobody's benefit will be cut as a result of changes in the benefit system.
Building social partnerships and community capacity was a high priority of the McClure Report and will be a high priority of a third term Coalition Government.  We want to motivate business to work in more effective partnership with their surrounding communities through better workplace policies and practices.  Policies that give people more choice of when and how to work throughout their working lives.
The Prime Minister's Community Business Partnership is uniquely placed to take this initiative forward, given its representation from the business and community services fields.  Funds have already been allocated to support this activity in the Australians Working Together package.
The problem of regional unemployment also warrants further examination including  a strategy to improve employment services in regional areas and, through community capacity building, building on the results of our Stronger Families and Communities Strategy.
Welfare reform, like tax reform is something that most of us have known for years is necessary.  As with tax reform, the Government has shown that it is willing to make decisions that are both strong and fair.  With welfare reform, we have established a comprehensive inquiry, built a robust mechanism to consult with the community and spent months on the painstaking policy work before the budget.  These credentials equip us well for the work to be carried out in a third term.
Conclusion
In my Press Club Address last week I identified a number of other issues that will be important priorities for a third term Coalition Government.  I spoke of the challenge of Australia's aging population, planning for the health and aged care needs of the future and encouraging greater self reliance through higher savings and retirement income planning.  I also spoke of the need to help parents to balance their work and family responsibilities.
Our efforts to continue building the social coalition provides a strong linkage between each of these priorities and welfare reform.  The idea of the social coalition has proven remarkably fruitful in our time in office.  It has enabled us to advance new frontiers of policy but there is considerably more to be done.
Since I made my ACOSS address almost three years ago the Government has worked hard to encourage greater personal responsibility and use the social coalition to address some of the key social challenges such as combatting unemployment, drug abuse, suicide and homelessness as well as building stronger families and communities.
I believe that we should not stand back and merely accept these problems simply as facts of modern life.
Supporting self-reliance through participation as well as early intervention and prevention offers new hope to build a stronger, more cohesive Australian community and to work to ensure that no individual is left behind. 


Subjects: Australian industry, economy, tax, employee entitlements, SA Government, Industrial Relations.
E&amp;OE..................
Mr Ivan James, the Acting President of the AIG, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.  Could I first of all thank you Mr James for your kind welcome, and if I may say so a very thoughtful and reflective speech on many of the challenges that face Australia at the present time.
Tonight is an opportunity for me to express my gratitude to the AIG on behalf of the Government for the contribution it's made to the development of policy and for the partnership we've had together over the last five-and-a-half years. If my memory serves me correctly it is almost three years ago to the day that I launched the AIG representing as it did an amalgamation of two other great industry associations.  If my memory also serves me correctly again, two days after that I launched the new tax system. I'm not promising you that we will in two days time, although we are a government that prides itself on surprises from time to time, launch a policy initiative quite as momentous as that.  
But it is a reference point to what has happened over that period of time and it's a reference point for me to respond and comment upon a number of the issues which were raised in Mr James's address.  As I listened to what he had to say and agreed with so many of the points that were made, particularly his reference the inexorable forces of globalisation within our community. I was reminded that during my well publicised and important meeting with Mitsubishi in Tokyo last Friday that my interlocutors were respectively from Germany, the United States and Australia, we were there in the Japanese capital with no citizens of that particular country present. And it was just one of those simple but regular reminders that one receives that the world has indeed changed forever and any notion that that changed world can be turned back, any notion that somehow or other we can shrink away into a corner and ignore the globalised environment in which we exist is completely ill founded.  
Our challenge is not to avoid or resist globalisation. Our challenge is to master it, to manage it, to harness and garner its benefits, and where appropriate assist people who are too harshly affected by it. And that remains one of the great and enduring challenges of all governments of industrialised countries as we enter the early years of the 21st Century.  
Tonight I do of course wish to say a few things about the economic journey  of the last few years and also the prospects for the Australian economy. I am pleased to say with some fervour and emphasis that the Australian economy is well and truly back on a very strong growth path.  We did have a bad December quarter, we did have some transitional effects from the introduction of the new taxation system.  But all of the indicators now point to gathering strength within the Australian economy, such that many predict that next calender year the Australian economy will grow faster than any other in the industrialised world. 
That growth is characterised by a very strong trade performance aided by a number of factors: certainly by a  super competitive exchange rate; a return to far better conditions in many parts of rural Australia - long overdue given the many difficult years through which our primary producers have passed; the contribution of the new taxation system, to which I'll return in a moment, to Australia's export performance likewise should not be discounted.  A tax system that removes all embedded indirect taxes into our exports of goods and services can only be beneficial to our overall trade performance.
We've also over the last five-and-a-half years enjoyed very strong productivity growth and that is a tribute to a number of things not least the cooperative culture which exists between most employers and most employees within Australia. And out of that higher productivity I'm very happy to say that I can speak of five-and-a-half years in which the real incomes of average Australian workers have increased and when added to the benefits of personal tax reductions under the new tax system, and the significantly, indeed dramatically lower housing interest rates which have been a characteristic of the last few years, present a situation where it can be argued with some force that the real living standards of millions of Australian workers have been enhanced.  
I welcomed Mr Acting President your reference to the increasing importance being placed in the political debate within Australia to issues related to science and innovation and technology.  Backing Australia's Ability, which was the product of several years of dialogue between senior ministers in the Government, and I particularly thank Senator Minchin, Dr Kemp and Senator Alston, the three who are principally responsible for that work, for the enormous effort and diligence that they committed to producing that policy. 
I also want to thank industry for its very valuable contribution and not least the Australian Industry Group that worked very closely with the Government and was particularly helpful after the launch of the policy in helping to refine the 175% premium R&amp;D tax incentive.  The way in which that policy was put together, the way in which in a very open and transparent fashion there were exchanges between the Government and various industry bodies and scientific groups within the Australian community was I think something of a model for the way in which policy of that kind should be made.
There is little doubt that this nation did need more investment in innovation and there is little doubt that the success of that policy and matters related to it will be very important to the long term economic future of this country.  
As you are aware the most significant economic reform to which this Government has been responsible during its second term was the introduction of the new taxation system. I believe that history will judge the Government as having done the right thing for the long term economic strength of Australia in persevering with the introduction of a new taxation system. I do not pretend for a moment that there have not been some transitional difficulties.  And I want to thank businesses, particularly small business, for the patience and understanding and the commitment they have made in the process of the introduction of the new taxation system.  
But there are very important benefits and much of what your Acting President had to say tonight and much of what is beginning to enter a lot of the political debate at the present time surrounds the undeniable demographic trend within the Australian community and that is of an aging population.  And there are many ways in which governments must respond to that and many of the observations made by your Acting President are very relevant and are observations which I support. 
But one of the important ways in which a government can respond to an aging population is to provide a revenue base which will grow commensurate with the development of the economy as the demographics change.  And the weakness of the indirect tax system that we threw out a year ago was that it was a declining revenue base.  It was posited entirely on goods and then in many respects a limited area of goods and totally ignored the burgeoning service sector.  And the maintenance of that system was utterly antagonistic to what was needed as the economy and the demographic composition of the Australian population over the years changed. And one of the strongest single arguments that can be advanced in support of the introduction of a broadly based indirect tax - the goods and services tax - is that it will provide a far sounder revenue base from which to fund the increasing demand for services to support the aging of the Australian population.  And with the dedication of all the proceeds of the goods and services tax to the Australian states also responding long years after the need to one of the weaknesses of the financial arrangements within the Australian federation, that is a very important characteristic.
I can't of course let a reference to the introduction of the new tax system go by without referring to the fact that the company tax rate has fallen from 36% to 30%, and that for individuals in certain entities the capital gains tax has been effectively halved.
I also want to take the opportunity of thanking the AIG in the context of corporate tax reform. I have not forgotten that this group came out very strongly in favour of the fundamental changes that were ultimately embraced by the government in that area, not withstanding the fact that some of your membership in terms of their own specific company situations might not necessarily have been advantaged.  And it was an example may I say of an industry group putting the national interest very much in front of individual sectional interests.
If I may very briefly turn to a large section of your Acting President's address and that is the very unfortunate and very difficult industrial dispute which is affecting the automotive industry in Australia at the present time. Can I say in general terms that we are in fact enjoying a period of almost record freedom from industrial disputes within Australia and one of the things of which I am especially proud as Prime Minister of a government that is some times unfairly been criticised as being antagonistic to the interests of working people is the fact that over the last five-and-a-half years the financial position of working men and women of Australia has been greatly enhanced by the fact that we've had so few days lost from industrial disputes.  And might I also tangently say that another thing of which I'm especially proud is that over that same period of time we have seen a quite stunning rise in the number of apprenticeships and traineeships.  That level having languished at between 120,000 and 150,000 for a period of some years until 1996 has now more than doubled so that we have in excess of 305,000 Australians in apprenticeships at the present time
But generally the industrial scene has been one of rising productivity, of rising employment, of rising real incomes, and of almost a record freedom from days lost from industrial disputes. That of course makes the dispute now underway all the more regrettable and all the harder to defend in any sense.  I don't think it needs me to repeat the obvious that anything that casts doubt on the stability and continuity and the sense of common purpose of the Australian motor vehicle industry, the manufacturing motor vehicle industry at the present time is counterproductive in the globalised environment in which we all live and of which I discussed with officers of Mitsubishi corporation in Tokyo last week.
I hope that the workers at Tristar and the union of which they are associated see the wisdom of listening to what the umpire has had to say. We have designed a new industrial relations system which has made a powerful contribution to higher levels of productivity and has made a powerful contribution to the enhancement of the real incomes of the working men and women of Australia. And part of that new construct is a role for the industrial relations commission which is different from its role under the old system that we replaced with the new system. But where it has a role we respect that role and we support that role and we ask others to respect and support that role because where there is a role for the industrial umpire then the verdict of that umpire should be adhered to.
I am aware  of the very legitimate concern within the Australian community and amongst employees whether they belong to unions or not about the payment of entitlements when companies go into receivership or liquidation.  Let me make it very clear that workers are entitled to receive their entitlements and there has been much debate about the most effective way to respond.  I share the views of Mr James regarding the unsuitability of the Manusafe proposal. It is possessed of all of the flaws that he outlined. It is not appropriate for the circumstances of protecting worker entitlements.
I do not believe as a matter of principle that response to the failure of a very limited number of companies that the financial burden of that should be passed on other companies that are doing the right thing. That has always struck me as being particularly unjust and unreasonable. And any scheme that interferes with the necessary cash flow of firms, particularly small businesses, is a scheme to be avoided. But there is nonetheless a responsibility on the part of the general community through its governments to provide a safety net where entitlements are at risk. And I believe that subject to a very important proviso, and that is the states joining and sharing their responsibilities as governments which have in fact been responsible, quite properly, for the laws that have given rise to many of the entitlements in the first place subject to them entering that scheme, then I believe the proposals that the Government adopted last year represent a fair and proper basis for providing a safety net scheme for workers unfortunate enough to be employed by companies that get into difficulty.
To date there has been a negative response from the states.  But I am pleased to announce to you tonight that earlier this evening the Premier of South Australia indicated to me that his government would join the federal government's scheme with effect from tomorrow.  I would ask the premiers of the other states of Australia to follow the lead of South Australia. I will be in communication with all of them.  It is not an unreasonable request.  There are state responsibilities, there are state laws involved, there are state awards involved, and I think it does in the words of your Acting President represent a proper basis for responding to the very legitimate concern within the Australian community and the justice of the cause of people whose entitlements are denied to them.  But the way in which to deal with an issue such as this is not through strike action which can only hurt the families of those on strike and can only hurt the workers and the families of the workers who through no desire of their own are consequently stood down or potentially thrown out of work.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finally say that I very much welcome the forward looking character of the address made by your Acting President. This country is in my view heading in the right direction. We have come a long way in the last 20 years in terms of economic reform and economic change. In his kind introduction Mr James mentioned my long association with your predecessor organisation, particularly the Metal Trades Industry Association.  And thinking back over that period of 20 years I can recollect as to how the Australian economic debate has changed.  
I think we have learnt a lot about our own country, we have learnt a lot about adjusting to a very different world.  We've embraced five major areas of reform of which taxation reform has been the last and certainly in many ways the most challenging. But what has come out of that in my experience has been men and women in business in Australia always having a capacity to think in a futuristic way and always having a capacity to think of the national interest as well as personal and sectional interest.  We are forever part of the globalised environment in which we all now exist. We have as governments the responsibilities I outlined, and you as leaders of business and leaders of the union movement and others have your responsibilities in relation to responding to those challenges.  
We are an aging population like all other industrialised nations and that carries with it the challenges identified in your Acting President's address.  We have some precious assets few other countries have.  We have an essentially classless society, we still have a deep egalitarian streak, we still have a very profound sense of justice and fair play, and we are a remarkably cohesive country.  Few nations on Earth can boast a social experiment of Australia's post war migration program, and few countries on Earth can boast the success of that program and the contributions it's made to the building of a modern, outward looking, sophisticated liberal democracy.  
Ladies and gentlemen may I thank you all again for the contribution that you have made through AIG to the development of important policies in partnership with my Government. I thank those members of my Government present here tonight for their role in responding to those policy challenges.  We have been a reformist government and in the process we have probably offended some, we have presided over some transitional difficulties in certain areas. But in the end the role and responsibility of government in the kind of economic environment in which we live is to change and to adapt and to provide leadership in the process of change and adaptation. I believe that we have done that, and looking back over the last three years I can reflect that the Australian economy is strong and robust, it is increasingly respected around the world. The Australian business community has played a very major role in bringing that about and I thank you most warmly for your contribution.
[ends]


Subjects: Indonesia; Tax Reform; Rollback; Economic Management
E&amp;OE..................
To Bruce and Danna and to Malcolm Kerr and all of you it is great to be back in the Electorate of Cook in a joint function in honour of both Bruce and Danna.  And it';s great to be back here at this magnificent Doltone House.  I think I';ve been to a number of functions in the past.
Can I start by saying that it';s always a pleasure to be associated with two of my colleagues who really have worked their heart and souls out to represent their electorates in a very effective way.  We are now living in a political climate in which you can never take anything for granted.  The Australian people are now a little less rusted-on in their political allegiances than used to be the case.  People don';t automatically vote for the Liberal candidate if they';re Liberally inclined without having a look at the candidate to see what he or she is like and deciding whether that person would make a good representative.  And the same I';m sure applies on the other side of politics.  
But I';m very proud indeed that the Sutherland Shire is so brilliantly represented in federal parliament by Danna and by Bruce.  What Danna has done to the electorate of Hughes since winning it with what was an absolutely delectable swing, way back in March of 1996 and the way in which Bruce has consolidated and built his support in the electorate of Cook.  Both of those things are very heart warming to a party leader as inevitably we enter a period that can loosely be called the beginning of an election campaign.  
The election of course will be towards the end of the year, that is give or take a few weeks or a month, or whatever!  I';ve been saying now for 6 months that the election would be toward the end of the year.  And as each day goes by people are more disposed to believe me in relation to that particular commitment.  
But you will forgive me because this is a gathering, unashamedly to support and contribute to the resources that will be needed by Bruce and Danna to campaign in the election.  You';ll forgive me if I do address a few very partisan remarks as to why not only should you support them but you should do everything you humanly can and a bit more if you feel inclined to help the Coalition in its effort to be re-elected.  
But before I touch on that can I just briefly say that as you know I returned this morning from a very brief but very important visit to Indonesia.  I was the first foreign leader to meet and discuss bilateral issues with the new Indonesian President Megawati Soekarnoputri.  It was a very important meeting for relations between our two countries, but I can say that those relations are now on a very realistic but very positive level.  I';ve used the expression positive realism to describe our relations with Indonesia, Indonesia is an important country to us, it';s our nearest neighbour, it';s the fourth most populous nation in the world, it is the largest Muslim nation in the world, it has a population of 220 million people.  And it';s very important that we have the right balance in our relationship.  I think in the past we didn';t, I think we, in earlier years as the country and through certain governments we invested too many expectations in the relationship.  And as you know whether it';s the relationship between people or a relationship between nations or groups in society if you invest too many expectations in a relationship you are doomed to strike trouble and to be disappointed.
We took a stand you know in relation to East Timor which was the right stand and a stand that as won Australia great respect and great credit around the world.  That is something that we now move on from.  We don';t walk away from it, we don';t retreat from it, we don';t in any way apologise for it.  But we move on and we look to focusing on those things that we can find common ground with Indonesia on.  And I was very encouraged with the attitude of the ministers I met, their determination to rebuild the Indonesia economy, their desire to focus on the positive aspects of our relationship as two very different countries but thrown together forever by destiny in this part of the world.  And I came away feeling that we have been able to establish an understanding that for the future we would focus in a realistic fashion, we wouldn';t build a relationship into something it couldn';t became but we would try and focus on those things that we had in common.  And I had a very encouraging business luncheon about this time yesterday in Jakarta attended by a large number of leading businessmen from both the Indonesian side and the Australian side and there was a sense of almost excitement and certainly a great sense of enthusiasm and anticipation about what the new administration and the new Ministers chosen by the President could bring to the future not only of Indonesia but also the future of relations between our two societies.
So I returned with a sense of optimism but always a realistic view of what can be achieved but also an understanding of the importance of not exaggerating expectations about what might be the character of our relationship years into the future.
Well ladies and gentlemen as I said a few moments ago at some time between now and the end of the year the Australian people will be asked to elected a government. They';ll have to decide in very simple terms as to whether they return the Coalition led by me and the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson and Peter Costello as Treasurer.  Or whether they elect a Labor Government lead by Kim Beazley with Simon Crean as the Treasurer.  (Crowd interjects) That is a good start!  One of the things that happens in politics is that you can go for a period of time and it can all sort of be a bit vague and a bit indeterminate as to what people are thinking but as you get closer to the event people have to make a choice.  And at the end of this year when the election is held there can only be one of those two choices emerge as a result.  Now we';ve been the government  for the last five and half years and I would the last person to pretend that we haven';t made our share of mistakes. I';d be the last person to pretend that there hasn';t been some things that we might have done differently, some things we might have done better, or some things that we might have responded earlier to.
But if you look at the sweep of what has happened over that last five year period some of the things that Bruce mentioned in his introduction really highlighted the difference that has occurred, particularly on the economic front so far as our country is concerned.  We have been a government I think that has been distinguished be two or three things.  The first thing is that we have been an active government, one of the things I promised myself when I became Prime Minister was that I wasn';t going to waste the opportunity that the Australian people had given me, the great honour and the great privilege of being Prime Minister. I wasn';t going to sit in that office and drive around in that white car and simply enjoying being Prime Minister and being in office was what it was all about.  I was absolutely determined to try and make a differences, and to try and make a difference in a number of key areas.  Certainly the Australian economy is a much stronger economy and is much more respected and much more envied around the world now than what it was five and a half years ago.  I was saying over lunch to a couple of my companions, lunch companions that in the last few years I find as I go around the world two things that have really lifted the esteem of the rest of the world towards Australia.  It was always very high, the two things that have really lifted it.  The leadership role we displayed over East Timor and the other thing was the extraordinary success of the Olympic Games.
Can I say to you that I also find as I move around the world and particularly with the evidence that';s emerged over the last few months that there is great respect for the quality of economic management that this government has bought to Australia over the last five and half years. It is not political propaganda for me to say that our growth prospects at the moment, and this is not according to me or Peter Costello, it';s according to such authoritative commentators as the London Economist or the OECD, our growth prospects are better than those of the United States, those of just about every European country and just about every nation in the Asian Pacific region.  It give me no joy to say it but many of our Asian neighbours at the moment are going through successive quarters of negative economic growth and the United States which I believe is still the great engine of the world economy and has such a flexible economic structure that it will rebound very rapidly.  The United States is going through some challenging periods as far as economic growth is concerned.
On the score of economic management we do have a very strong economy.  We did go through for a bad December quarter, the overwhelming reason why we went negative last December was that the transitional impact of the GST on the housing industry was much great than many people thought it might be, including the Government';s advisers.  Now we did something about that, when we got those figures in March of this year it took me about 24 hours to decide that something had to be done.  And what we did was to double to home savings grant for new home buyers.  And that exercise in the experience and the response of people in the home building industry of that policy change is a demonstration that whatever else may have changed in the theory of economic management a little bit of selective stimulus in the right area as far as the economy is concerned has still producing a dividend and the combination of that plus the further lowering of housing interest rates has meant that we are seeing a very strong and broadly based recovery occurring in the home building industry which is so important in this country.  It';s not only important emotionally and psychologically but it';s also important because of the flow on effects of whitegoods and all the other things that are associated with the home building industry.  
But we did go through that glitch but all the evidence is and certainly in the March quarter we came back very strongly and the Reserve Bank, if you don';t believe me, said that all the evidence was that the economy was growing very strongly in the June quarter as well.
Now I know it is unrealistic of me to address a gathering like this, indeed any gathering in Australia without saying something about taxation reform.  And I know when I mention taxation reform that there';ll be some mixed reactions.  There have been some problems with the implementation, some aspects of the GST, I recognise that and what we';ve tried to do is be responsive to people';s concerns.  But can I just remind you what tax reform was all about in the first place.  Tax reform was all about giving Australia a taxation system that would be adequate for the 21st century.  One of the realities of this country is that we are like all other western societies an ageing population.  We';re not ageing as rapidly as the Japanese population, we';re not aging as rapidly as some European societies but we are none the less an aging population.  And one of the things that I';ve felt for a long time was that we needed to have a revenue base in this country that provided a revenue growth that would help us fund the services we increasingly needed for an aging population and also a revenue structure in this country that did not impose too greater burden by ever higher income tax on those people who remain part of the working population.  And that was one of the very strong structural, if you like, philosophical reasons why I favoured the introduction of a broad based indirect tax.  Because the problem was that the old indirect tax base we had was a wasting base.  It was a tax that hit goods and not services, although the services sector of the economy was growing far more rapidly than the goods sector, and it was also a wholesale tax that was disproportionably loaded into one area of goods and that is motor vehicles.  And by every criterion it was a indirect tax that was becoming less and less relevant.  I mean to give you an illustration in, broadly speaking, in 1975 the wholesale sales tax base represented something like 25% of our GDP by 1995 it had declined to something like 17 or 18% and that trend was going to go, continue.  So we faced a very simple situation in this country that if we didn';t get rid of the old indirect tax base and get ourselves a new one, in order to get the additional revenue we would need to fund the services for an ageing population we';d have to have further increased income tax or otherwise gone unacceptably into debt, we had really no other alternative.  
And those people who argue we shouldn';t have brought in a GST are really arguing over time we should have had much higher income tax.  Because otherwise you simply would not have had the revenue base to provide the services.  And the great virtue of the GST is that all of the proceeds of that revenue are given to the States and the States over time will have more resources to fund the services that are needed for our population.  Public hospitals, public schools, roads, police and all of the other things that are important bread and butter services that are provided.
So that my friends was the fundamental, long term, what';s good for Australia reason why we decided to introduce a broad based indirect tax.  Now in the process we were able to get rid of a number of unacceptable state taxes and more of them will disappear in the years ahead.  The Financial Institutions Duty went on the first of July.  We were able to reduce Company Tax from 36% to 30%.  We were able to effectively half Capital Gains Tax for individuals.  We were able to take about $3.5 billion of embedded indirect taxes off exports.  I mean one of the reasons exports are going gang-busters at the moment is that we have a super competitive exchange rate, I acknowledge that, if you';re a farmer of a miner, or a manufacturing exporter, the super competitive exchange rate is very good, .(audience applause). thankyou, very good indeed.  Now it';s a matter for the market, I can see that, I can see some farmer and miners down there who are clapping that, that';s very good.  It';s good to have everybody represented at a lunch like this.  But that is one of the reasons why we are doing well in exports, another reason why we';re doing well in exports is that we have taken $3.5 billion of embedded taxes out of the cost of our exports because you don';t pay GST on exports.  
And can I also say another reason why we';re doing very well on exports is that Peter Reith had the courage in 1998 to take on reform of the Australian waterfront.  I mean he got knocked around from pillar to post, he got criticised by the media, he was railed against by the unions and the Labor Party but this is something that this country had wanted attended to for a generation.  And at the time we started on that people said the goal of having a 25, what is it, 25 a crane rate of 25 an hour was unachievable.  We were than about 19 or 20, it is now 27.5, which has been an extraordinary turnaround.  And you can now, you now have a guarantee that if you take an export order you can get it out of the country on time.  And I was talking to a couple of beef producers in Queensland last week and they were pretty happy because beef prices aren';t too bad.  And they were saying it';s good, he said that the prices are good, we';re getting expanding markets he said, and you know it all gets out on time because you';ve fixed up the waterfront.  And I thought that was a nice little metaphor for a number of different things that have been achieved.
So back to tax reform, it';s achieved all of those things.  Now there have been some transitional troubles, I know that.  There was some trouble with the BAS and we';ve tried to be responsive to that and I';m unashamedly of the view that when to introduce a massive reform of that kind you are going to be required to do a little bit of finetuning along the way and I certainly make no apologies for having done that and the Government remains ready where it';s appropriate to fine tune the administration of the new taxation system.  But having as a community gone through the difficulty of changing the tax system, and no big reform can be achieved with ease, otherwise they all would have been done a hundred years ago.  I mean that is the reality, every big economic reform, whether it';s carried out here or whether it';s carried out in another country has involved a certain degree of struggle and a certain level of difficulty and taxation reform is part of that, industrial relations reform of which waterfront reform was a very important part was also part of it.  But having gone through the process of changing the tax system, I think the Australian community wants like the proverbial hole in the head the idea of going back on it and the idea of trying to role it back and the idea of revisiting it.  
I mean I';ve had a very simple view about tax reform, that if you are against it as the Labor Party says it is, and if you think it';s visited so many maladies on the Australian economy and Australian society and the Australian community, you ought to have the political courage to commit yourself to its total repeal.  And not go through this absolute charade of saying it';s absolutely terrible and we';ll oppose it every inch of the way, but P.S if we win the election of course we';ll keep it.  Which is basically what their philosophy is.  Their philosophy is to let us do the heavy lifting of necessary economic reform, hope we do it, hope we have inflicted on us a whole lot of political damage and political pain in the process and they';ll ride in on the back of the public discontent with the change.
Now that';s the challenge that we';ve had over the last three years, and I knew it was going to be difficult, and I realised it might be a near run thing, and it could be.  I think the next election is going to be very close, anybody here who thinks we';re a shoe-in is kidding themselves, but anybody who thinks we';re out of the game is also kidding themselves.  We are absolutely back in the game.  We had a by-election down in Victoria a few weeks ago and I. we won, that';s right.  And can I tell you that he, that';s my political opponent, he knows that I know he realises he should have won it.  And it';s true, I';ve been in this game for 27 years and if an Opposition were on an unstoppable surf - which is a good sort of word to use in area like this, surf into victory, if they were unstoppable surf they';d have gone right over us in that by-election, and they didn';t.  And the reason is that we';re now getting close to the moment of choice.  And what people are saying to themselves is well we may not agree with everything Howard';s done, we may think they could have done this a little differently or that a little differently but gee he';s had a go, they';ve done things that nobody was prepared to touch for years, they';ve worked to deliver us with a very strong economy, they';ve lifted the international reputation of Australia around the world even higher and what after all does the Opposition really stand for, (interjection) - nothing - that is right, a very astute interjection, if I may say so, a very astute interjection.
But Ladies and Gentlemen that is what I believe is happening as we get closer to the event.  People are starting to think, well we';ve now got to make a serious choice, we may have some complaints but they';ve had a go, the economies running better, we';ve got 800,000 more people in jobs, interest rates have never been lower, they';ve fixed up the waterfront, they';ve brought in this new tax system, we';ve got higher productivity, real wages have actually gone up under the Liberals, they went down under Labor.  So you add all of those things together and they look at the other side and they see a very opportunistic Opposition.
The Opposition has had only one policy since the last election, and that is to hope and pray everyday that we fell in a heap because of tax reform.  I mean that basically, you know to put it bluntly in language that I think we all appreciate, that basically is what the Opposition has been all about over the last three years.  Now, it will be up to you and 19 million of your fellow Australians to decide whether that is an appropriate path way to Government in this country.  And as always with elections I will accept the verdict of the Australian people, they always get it right.  I didn';t agree with Bob Hawke on a lot of things but I think it';s fair to say that, and I certainly have warmed to his philosophy on this over the last couple of elections, that Australian people do get election results right.  And, so in the end they will have to make that judgement and I would hope and I would work to pursuade the Australian people to accept the view that a Government that has been willing to tackle the difficult reform issues, a Government that, although having made it';s share of mistakes has been responsive to community concern.  A Government that has been, I think willing to govern for the mainstream and not the noisy minorities, which is a very very important characteristic of the philosophy that we give to Government.  I mean we had a slogan in 1996 that said 'For all of us'; and that literally means for all of us.  We are as a political party, the Liberal Party is owned by nobody.  It';s not a business party, although we';re very sympathetic to business and we try and create good economic conditions but in the end we';re not owned by the business community.  We';re not owned by the trade union movement, we';re not owned by any individual religious or cultural group within the Australian community, we represent everybody.  We reflect the diversity of the Australian population and very proudly and very importantly and we are a party that therefore does represent better than any other political party the mainstream of the Australian community.
So when we get, inevitably to that moment, that day of decision, later this year, it is important that we focus on that choice.  We have tried to make Australia a better and a stronger and a more respected nation.  And I certainly believe we have achieved our goals in that area.  We are faced by an Opposition that has not had the courage to articulate a clear alternative.  One minute it';s rollback, the next minute it';s more spending on health and education without specifying it.  Then Mr Beazley said he was going to state his entire political career on the document that is now colloquially referred in the trade as 'noodle nation'; rather than 'knowledge nation';, he was going to focus his entire political career on that and yet after five and a half years I don';t have any clear idea of what the Labor alternative in that area is.  Now we do need to invest more money in science and innovation and we have.  As many people connected with the medical profession in this audience would know that this Government has doubled the amount of public support for health and medical research in Australia.  Last January I made an announcement that doubled the Federal Government funding going to Australian research grants, that';s in the non medical area.  We are increasing university places going to people in science and mathematics, we are putting more resources into research and development.  We have actually made those announcements and we are implementing that programme, but to date we don';t have an alternative after five and a half years from the Labor Party Opposition.
In our system of government it is not only the Government that has a responsibility to argue a case for election it is also the Opposition.  It';s no longer sufficient, merely to attack the Government and hope that the inevitable difficulty some people find with change and the resentment it produces will be enough to deliver the Opposition support.  
I';m very proud of what the Government has been able to do over the last five and a half years.  I';ve had a very good Ministerial team behind me and I';ve had tremendous loyalty from my colleagues in the parliamentary party such as Bruce and Danna.  It';s never easy in Government, it';s always a little bit more difficult to in a political party that has a culture of respecting individual views, and not imposing a rigid caucus discipline but I wouldn';t want it otherwise, because the Liberal Party is a party of individuals and there is always room within the ambit of a cohesive government for individuals to express in a proper and articulate fashion their strong and passionately held views on particular issues.  And we';ve tried to do that and to accommodate that within the ambit of a cohesive and very united government.
So Ladies and Gentlemen can I conclude by saying that I do appreciate the expression of support that this luncheon represents to both Bruce and Danna.  This part of Sydney I do know very well, it has enjoyed a great economic revival, it has very clear and partisan sporting passions and I respect those and I congratulate this part of Sydney, I congratulate the Southern Shire on the enormous contribution it makes in its own very distinctive way to the culture to the great city of Sydney.  I ask all of you to do everything you can and a bit more to help Bruce and Danna and through them to help our marginal seat colleagues.  We don';t have a big majority, many of our colleagues hold their seats by tiny margins.  I was in Townsville last Thursday and last Friday, helping Peter Lindsay who I think holds the seat of Herbert by about 150 votes, now that';s a pretty thin margin, 150.  And we need through our, perhaps, more strongly held seats to provide assistance to those who are on slimmer margins.  But it is a great cause, we have a great story to tell.  We are very proud of what we';ve done and as the weeks go by and we sharpen the choice I get more confident of what the ultimate result will be.  
Thankyou. 


Subjects: Volunteerism
E&amp;OE..................
To Bruce Baird, ladies and gentlemen.  It is a real pleasure for me to share the platform this afternoon with Bruce, particularly as we are having a little ceremony, an occasion, to honour and thank and acknowledge the people who really when the chips are down really hold our society and our community together.  And that is the hundreds, indeed tens indeed hundreds of thousands of Australia who for no reward other than the satisfaction of helping their fellow Australians, no reward other than the satisfaction of bring a facility to a community, of getting a sporting activity going, they are prepared to give up their time to build a happier and more cohesive society.
Australia in many ways is the greatest volunteer society in the world. One of the reasons for it is that because in our early days we had large distances and small populations and no help from outside, we really had to club together and to make things work in local communities.  And out of that necessity we have built a fantastic volunteer spirit and every level of Australian life that voluntarism, and every stage in our history has been an example of Australians to the rest of the world.
It';s not often remarked upon but when you think of the size of our population we probably raised the highest volunteer army in history in World War I and all of our people were volunteers.  They volunteered in a very tragic conflict and many and didn';t return.  But that spirit of voluntarism in happier circumstances is to be found in ever area of our community and my purpose in coming here today is not to make a political speech but simply on half of the government, of myself and on behalf of your fellow Australians to express my respect, my admiration and my profoundly held view that without the volunteer spirit that is represented here from the Sutherland Shire in this large gathering this afternoon, without that our society would be poorer, our facilities would be less adequate, and lives would be less happy and the opportunities that people have, particularly the young and the comforts for older people, a lot of those opportunities and a lot of those comforts would disappear.
We';re honouring people this afternoon who';ve risked their lives on occasions to help others.  We';re honouring people that have spent countless hours comforting others.  We';re honouring people that spent countless cold Saturday mornings assisting local sporting teams.  We';re honouring people in so many different ways that have helped their communities and have risked and have given everything.  And I just want to say to as Prime Minister I';m very proud of the volunteer spirit of our country, it';s everywhere.  And Bruce is right in what he said about the Olympic Games and the spirit of the volunteers that was so much part of it, it gave it an edge, and gave it a distinctive Australian character that you wouldn';t have found in other parts of the world.  And it is therefore a very special occasion, an opportunity for me to say thank you, to honour what you';ve done for Australia and to rejoice in the fact that we are now as we have been through all our history a nation that has always been able to overcome other distances and work together.  The great Australian capacity to work together in adversity, I call it mateship, others may call it something else, I think you all know what it means and that is that if you';ve got a challenge you all work together and solve that problem and help your fellow Australians, your neighbours and your friends and it gives us a better and a happier community and I';m delighted to be part of this very important ceremony to extend my personal thanks and the thanks of your fellow Australians for what you are doing through our nation.
Thank you. 


Subjects: Economy; GST; Indonesia; Government achievements
E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much John, Julie, Rosemary Craddock the President of the South Australian Division of the Liberal Party; my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleman.
Thank you John for your very warm words of introduction. Your very warm encouragement of continued federal government support for the initiatives that your government has undertaken. And can I say without any sense of exaggeration or any sense of political rhetoric that I agree with your assessment of the fundamental strength of the South Australian economy.
In the almost twenty-seven or now twenty-eight years that I have been in federal politics and have therefore been visiting in one guise or another the State of South Australia on a very, very regular basis I don't think I have found a time when the sense of economic and business optimism has been better or stronger than it is at present. And I think there has been a transformation. I don't pretend that every problem has been solved. I don't pretend that there aren't continuing challenges. But there is more underlying strength and optimism and sense of purpose and a sense of hope about the future caused by a number of things, all of which John alluded to in his address.
But as we all know economic confidence is fundamental to the sense of optimism and the sense of hope that any state or indeed any nation can have. We are of course now barely a few months away from a federal election. This is a Liberal Party gathering and you will therefore not be surprised if I strike a slightly partisan note. And I encourage you to sort of focus on the sort of choice that lies in front not only of Australians living in South Australia but Australians all around the country.I can say to you that in straight political terms we are travelling a lot better than we were a few months ago. But I would hasten to add we damn well needed to be because a few months ago we weren't travelling very well at all. Things have changed. The Aston by-election in Victoria was quite a milestone in the government's recovery. That is a by-election that the Labor leader Mr Beazley knows that he should have won. And it's a by-election that he knows that I know that he should have won too. Because he only needed a swing of 4.2% and if the Opposition were on an unstoppable roll towards victory he would have gained that. Just as Oppositions in similar circumstances prior to earlier changes in government would also have won.
So it has given the Party not only in Victoria but all around Australia a great sense of heart and a great sense of hope and a great sense of optimism. But having said that we still face a very tough fight. We don't have a big majority. We're going for our third term. We've been a government that has undertaken difficulty policy changes and whenever you make difficult policy changes you always upset some people in the process. You always cause some transitional friction and you always create some hurdles for people to clear in order to get the benefits of the reform that you are offering.
And if you look back over the years that we have been in government we have been a very active reformist government. But as we get closer to the moment of choice I think a number of things are occurring. I think people are starting to focus on the alternative. It's one thing to ask a person when there is no election in prospect do you like or not like the government and that is essentially a judgement in isolation on how they are reacting to the government. It becomes a somewhat different thing when they are really making a choice not between liking and disliking the government but making a choice between hanging on to the present government or switching to an alternative.
We have made our mistakes. We have fallen short of people's expectations in a number of areas. But if you look at the fundamentals they have rarely been better in Australia's post-war economic experience. We have the lowest interest rates in thirty years. By the end of this financial year we will have repaid $60 billion out of the $96 billion of federal government debt that we inherited in March of 1996. We have a very low inflation rate. For the working men and women of Australia we have really delivered the trifecta. We have given them high real wages off the back of higher productivity. I mean one of the astonishing statistical differences between us the Keating and Hawke governments is that real wages fell under Labor and they boasted about it. But real wages have risen under us. They've risen off the back of higher productivity. So we've given them higher real wages; we've provided a reduction of $300 per month in the average mortgage repayment. I mean everybody will remember the housing rates of 17 or 18 percent. Or if you were a farmer a bill rate of 22 or 23 percent. And the 19 or 20 percent interest rates that small business used to groan under not so terribly long ago when Labor was last in government.
Thirdly we have generated more than 800,000 new jobs. The unemployment rate is markedly lower than what it was and the job prospects medium to longer term continue to be very strong. And there is another thing that we have done that often doesn't get the publicity it deserves. It's a constant focus when it comes to post school training and education. There's almost a constant obsessive focus on the people who go to university and that's important. But it is still only 30 percent of the people who leave school. Seventy percent of them don't go to university. And in that area in the five and a half years we've been in government we've done something quite remarkable. And that is we have achieved a doubling of the number of Australians in apprenticeships. For a period of something like fifteen to twenty years the number of apprenticeships in Australia languished between 120,000 and 150,000 and in the five and a half years that we have been in government because of the changes we've made to apprenticeships we have more than doubled that figure and it is now 305,000 Australians annually in apprenticeships. Now that is delivering in more than in full on a commitment that we made in March of 1996 to revitalise the apprenticeship system.
But the things we have done of course go beyond the economic area. And although policies that strengthen business and policies that strengthen the economy are tremendously important, indeed overwhelming important, there are other things that are very important to the health and the life of the nation. I have just come back from a visit to Indonesia and in a sense that visit completed the circle of a very significant change in Australia's relations with that country. Our relations with Indonesia are now on a more realistic plane. We no longer indulge the insubstantial notion that there is some kind of special relationship between our two societies. It is very important in international relations to be realistic, to have expectations at the right level. I have described our relations with Indonesia as 'positive realism'. We're realistic enough to recognise that there are big differences between us. We are also realistic enough to recognise that we do have a number of things in common. We are close neighbours, we are forever part of the Asian pacific region, we need to know each other better, we need to work with each other more closely. But we need to build that relationship and develop it on the natural strengths it has and not pretend that we can build it and achieve something that the relationship can never deliver. And I believe that our relationship with that country is now on a more realistic plane.
We have moved on from the obvious differences that we had over East Timor. But we haven't moved on on the basis of Australia in any way resiling from or in any way taking a step back from what we did two years ago in relation to East Timor because it was the right thing for us to do not only in terms of the stability of the region but it was also morally the right thing to do in defence of a small country. That change of relations and that restoration of realism with Indonesia is part of a process that we've undertaken of rebalancing Australia's foreign relations over the last five and a half years.
When I came to Government there was in my view an almost total pre-occupation with Australia's relations with the South East Asian and Asian Pacific region to the detriment of our relations with other parts of the world. I haven't sought in any way to downplay our relations with Asia, but I've sought to remind Australian's that we are in every sense of the world, every sense of the word a citizen of the world as a nation. And we need to have strong links with North America, we need to have strong links with Europe both politically and economically. Because we are unique we're the only sophisticated western society that has both a geographic presence and other linkages with Asia, but also very strong and profound links with North America and Europe. And I ask the rhetorical question, where might Australia have been when the Asian economic crisis hit us in 1998 if we had not been able to divert many of our export to Europe and North America. Where indeed would Australia be if we had not remembered that we had important trade and other linkages with those parts of the world.
And in his introductory remarks, John was kind enough to mention the contribution the Government has made to tackling the problem of salinity and water quality, which is so very important, particularly important here in Adelaide. And I'm very proud of the environmental credentials that the Government has achieved over the last five and a half years. We have not pursued a mindless obsession with development at any cost, nor have we mindlessly embraced the radical green agenda and the stance that has been taken by Australia so ably articulated by Senator Robert Hill as Environment Minister on behalf of Australia at two very significant conferences on climate control. One in Kyoto and the other in Bonn, I think have given Australia a new standing and a new respect in the area of climate control and climate change. Australia is almost unique, we are as a highly industrialised country a net exporter of energy. And in those circumstances our position and our needs are different from the countries of Europe. And what we have consistently said is that we favour an effective international protocol on climate change and greenhouse gas emissions but there are two very important elements that must be part of that protocol if it is to be lasting and be effective. And the first of those is that it must embrace the developing countries. It is self evident to an audience like this that if Australia were to accept a protocol that imposed restrictions on a nation like Australia but didn't impose on countries to which certain industries could easily transfer and relocate that would be of enormous disadvantage to Australian industry. And the second condition has been that as the major industrialised power and the major emitter of greenhouse gases in the world, the United States, must be part of any international protocol for it to be effective. Now I remain optimistic that we can in time achieve an effective international understanding on this issue but it has to include those two very important elements.
Inevitably ladies and gentlemen much of the economic and political debate over the past few months has continued to centre on the implementation of the Government's new taxation system. If I had my time over again I would not have behaved differently in relation to our embrace of a new taxation system. I have no doubt that the new system has contributed already in a very material way to Australia's economic strength. We've had a wonderful trade performance and one of the reasons we've had a trade performance is due to what I call our super competitive exchange rate. It's also due to a wonderful recovery in many areas of the farming sector and the commodity prices that we're getting in areas like beef and lamb and grains are the best we've had for many years. And all I can say is that the Australian farmer has long deserved a break and it's the first time in years that many of them have got a decent return on their investment and I think all Australians will say to them they deserve it and long may it last.
But one of the other reasons that we're doing well on the trade front is that for the first time in our history we have removed the impact of $3.5 billion of embedded indirect taxes in the cost of our exports. We tend to forget that. So much of the media commentary is focused on implementation details of the GST, we tend to forget some of the simple facts of the new tax system. And one of those simple facts is that by getting rid of the wholesale tax system we got rid of a whole lot of embedded indirect taxes that affected our export performance. And one of the many reasons why our exporters are doing better is that we no longer have that burden because of course the GST does not apply to exports.
I acknowledge that there have been some transitional difficulties and some transitional friction with implementation of the GST. We have made a number of administrative changes in response to what people have put to us and I certainly make no apology for that. I've always believed that with a change as big as the GST administrative complexity was going to be present and Government needed to be responsive and fine tune the administration and the implementation of the new system in order to minimise that friction. So the fundamental justification for tax reform remains as valid today as it was in August of 1998 when I launched in Canberra the proposals for the new taxation system. We do have a simpler more comprehensive broad-based indirect tax. We are paying $12 billion a year less in personal income tax, the company tax rate is now 30% and not 36%. Capital Gains Tax has been effectively halved for individuals.
But importantly, perhaps more importantly than all of that, we have provided ourselves with a long-term revenue base to fund the services that will be increasingly required by an ageing Australian population. Like every other country in the world, Australia has an ageing population and unless we had introduced a broad based indirect tax, a GST, we would have faced the unavoidable future of having to pay ever higher rates of personal income tax in order to fund the services needed for an ageing population. People often forget that the indirect tax base we got rid of when we brought in the GST was a declining and wasting indirect tax base. In 1975 the wholesale sales tax was 25% of GDP. By 1996 it had fallen to about 17.5 to 18% of GDP. Now you superimpose that on an aging population and see what happens, inevitably to the level of personal income tax. And this is very relevant to this whole debate about the tax alternatives that are going to be offered in the next few months because he who argues for a lesser contribution to revenue from GST is arguing for a higher contribution from personal income tax. Because the demand for Government services is not going to decline with an ageing population, it is going to increase. And therefore from a long term revenue base point of view a broad based indirect tax has been absolutely imperative for introduction in this country now for many years. And for us to roll it back or turn our backs on it or pretend that you can roll it back and simultaneously as the Labor Party is pretending that that doesn't have implications for the level of personal income is to defy arithmetical gravity. Because ageing population equals demand for greater services, equals demand for a revenue base that grows with the economy. And that is what the GST delivers you, it's a revenue base that grows with the economy and all of the proceeds of it of course are going to my very good friends the State Premiers and they will have over the years, they'll have over the years the opportunity as a result of that to fund the increasing demand of an ageing population for services such as hospitals and community services and all the other things that are necessary to accommodate an aging population.
We will have a tough fight to win this election. I think our prospects now are a lot better than they were. Here in South Australia the Liberal Party has magnificently delivered to us an above average representation in terms of quality and in terms of numbers you have great representation in South Australia but we have three very marginal seats held by three magnificent marginal seat holders and campaigners. And we need all our effort and all our resources to hold on to those seats here in South Australia. If we can hold what we have in South Australia that is a magnificent base on which to hold Government around the country. It will be a difficult campaign, I'm encouraged by the inability of the Opposition to articulate what three or four months out from the election precisely what they stand for. Five and a half years as Leader of the Opposition and I still find my political opponent to be somebody who is very vague at the edges when it comes to questions of policy alternatives. One minute roll back is number one, next minute health and education are number one, the next minute they are equal number one. And so the list goes on. Our position is clear. We've had the courage to reform the tax system, we've had the courage to reform industrial relations, we've reduced Australia's debt, we've cut interest rates, we've produced a low inflation economy, we've generated 800,000 more jobs. But we've also committed massive additional ongoing investment in education and health. It was this government that revived the private health insurance industry with a rebate that costs $2.5 billion a year. And it's this Government that has increased the payments to the states under the Health Care Agreement by 28% in real terms over the next five years to assist the funding of public hospitals. And having done those things and having provided ongoing increases of investment in health and education and related areas our view is that if there are available surpluses in the future then those surpluses should be applied towards further income tax relief. Because we need a society that balances the provision of services with the provision of incentives and the creation of an aspirational sentiment within our community. We've always got to keep government responses properly balanced. We don't want a society that ignores the need for basic services. But we also don't want a government that ignores the fact that you've always got to give people an incentive to work harder and to aspire to do better because that is very fundamental to the Liberal Party ethic and the Liberal philosophy of life. 
I've spoken both as Prime Minister and as Leader of the Opposition and as a Shadow Minister to many gatherings here in Adelaide and most particularly here in this room at the Hyatt Hotel. The next few months are going to be very challenging for me, they are going to be very challenging for my colleagues and they are going to be months in which we are going to be asking our friends and supporters to come to our aid, to advocate our cause to fund our campaigns and to remind their friends and their work mates of the sort of choice that is going be involved at the end of the year. 
I believe in all my heart that this is a better, stronger, more respected, more secure Australia than what it was five and a half years ago. We have tried to tackle the difficult issues, we haven't shirked the responsibility of sometimes radical reform, and I think as a result the Australian nation is more widely respected now than it has been in a generation. To risk all of that, to through away the industrial relations reforms, to hand the national government of Australia over to a union dominated, a union boss dominated Federal Labor government on top of five state Labor governments will be to undo all of the progress that we have made on industrial relations. And if we were to lose the next election, the thing that would grieve me most would be that I would know, as surely as night followed day, Federal Labor would roll back, not only the GST but also the industrial relations reforms that this country has enjoyed over the last five and a half years and have made such a tremendous difference to our productivity. There is a lot at stake when the election comes. We are working very hard. We appreciate the loyalty and support that you have given. We ask you to re-double it and to work hard for the return of the government when the opportunity comes. 
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: Tax debate; Immigration; Rollback; Expenditure on infrastructure, health, education; Industrial Relations;
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you John for those very kind remarks.  Rosemary Craddock, the President of the South Australian Division, my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals.  Can I start this address by expressing my gratitude to the members of the party here in South Australia for the tremendous support and loyalty that you have given me and my Federal parliamentary team over the past twelve months.  Can I also record my particular thanks to my South Australia parliamentary colleagues.  It is true that South Australia now has, I think on a historic basis since Federation the largest ever representation in the Federal Cabinet.  And I want to thank Robert Hill and Alexander Downer and Nick Minchin and Amanda Vanstone and the parliamentary secretaries and all of my other colleagues here in South Australia for the way in which in a sense you have punched above your weight in proportionate terms inside the Federal Government.  And when I mention those names, each of them has made a real impact on the constituencies and a real impact in the ministerial areas for which they have been responsible.  In the case of two of them, Robert Hill and Alexander Downer continuously over the last five and a half years.  And part of the restoration of the respect in which Australia is now held around the world and part of the reason why we have successfully re-balanced our foreign relations, moving away from an obsession with our region to a proper priority for our region but also recognising that we have important linkages with Europe and North America.  A great deal of the credit for that success must of course go to the Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer.  
My friends we meet within a few months of a Federal election.  That';s give or take a month or two or a few weeks, or a few days, and if that hasn';t totally confused the picture of when it will exactly be, because I don';t know yet but it has to be before the end of the year and I know this as each day goes by that claim by me becomes more believable.  
We meet at a time when within a few months we do have a very important challenge.  We have the challenge, against the odds in a sense, of being re-elected for a third time.  We have a challenge against the odds in a sense of being re-elected as government that has not been unwilling to undertake massive change and reform for the long term benefit of the Australian people and the Australian community.  But it has not been easy.  We went through a horror stretch earlier this year, everyone knows that.  I believe that we are now performing a great deal more effectively.  And I find that as I go around the Australian community there is a growing recognition as we get closer to the moment of truth.  But in reality people are no longer just passing a judgement on whether they agree on everything the Government has done or whether they disagree with some of those things that we have done.  But we are getting closer to the moment when people realise that they have to make a choice.  They will have to decide whether they want to go back to the seventeen percent housing interest rates, the vastly higher home mortgage repayment of $300 a month or more, as was the case under Labor, the $96 billion of government debt that we inherited from Mr Beazley in March of 1996 and by the end of this financial year we will have reduced by about $60 billion.  Or the 11.1 percent unemployment rate which was the peak when the Labor Party was last in office.  Or whether they want to continuation of the trifecta for the working men and women of Australia whereby we have delivered higher real wages, lower mortgage repayments, more than 800,000 additional jobs, and we have more than doubled the apprenticeships available, remembering that seventy percent of young Australians when they leave school do not go on to university but they in fact go on to some other kind of training or education.  And apprenticeships in that context are of incredible importance.  And one of the really proud things that this Government has done is to give a far better deal to the sons and daughters of the working families of Australia who don';t want a university choice than was ever available under a Labor Government.  I believe that there has been a recovery in our fortunes. But we';ve still got a long way to go.  
The Aston byelection in Victoria was a great result for the Liberal Party.   It was a byelection that the Labor Party knows it should have won.  And they know that I know they know they should have won it as well.  It was a by-election that was there for the taking, you only need a swing of 4 to 5% on average you get that on average in by-elections and they didn';t get it.  And it marks something of a physiological turning point.  It said to me and it said to many people, many Liberals around Australia that while the public may have been unhappy with some things that we';ve done they are not embracing Labor, they see no clear alternative.  And as the weeks have gone by since then, people have been focusing on that choice, they recognise that this Government has delivered a stronger Australia and a better economy.  That we are despite our mistakes - inevitably we';ve made them - and I acknowledge that, but this country is fundamentally heading in the right direction.  It is stronger and better than it was five and a half years ago.  Our economy is the best it';s been since the late 1960';s.  In many ways it';s even stronger than it was then because it is less cloistered and more competitive and less protected.  We are increasingly seen around the world as a nation of the future.  Three great things have happened to give this nation of ours greater lustre internationally: the magnificent stand we took over East Timor, the huge success of the Sydney Olympic Games which radiated all that is great about Australia to the whole world and the impressive economic performance of this country which has led such magazines as the London Economist to predict that in calender year 2002 Australia will out preform any other industrialised nation.  
But the other thing that has started to focus the minds of the Australian electorate on the choice and begun to incline more people back to us or towards it is a recognition that there is not clear alternative to the current Government.  Mr Beazley has now been Leader of the Labor Party for five and a half years and I have no clearer picture now than I did in March of 1996 what he stands for or what he believes in.  He keeps telling the Australian public that he';s had as much or more Ministerial experience as I';ve had.  Well whether that is right in years or months matters not, it';s what you achieve in the years that you have political responsibility and what you achieve as the Leader of the Opposition.  Leaders of the Opposition, and I';ve been there and I know a bit about it, I know how up and down it can be and how difficult it can be, but Leaders of the Opposition, my friends, have responsibilities to their nation as much as do Prime Minister';s.  When I was Leader of the Opposition I took the view that if the Government of the day put up a good idea it ought to be supported in the national interest.  And indeed many of the changes that were made that were beneficial to the Australian community in the years particularly of the Hawke Government were only achieved because of support from the Opposition in the Senate.  We took the view that if it was good for Australia it ought to get a tick.  This mob take the view that if we propose it it ought to get a cross.  And that is fundamentally their approach irrespective of the merits of a proposition and you see it everywhere.  
You see it in the contest of something that is very important at the present time and that is the tremendous battle that Philip Ruddock and the Government is having on this very difficult issue of illegal immigration.  And I think Philip is doing a magnificent job, not only on behalf of the Government but also on behalf of the Australian people in an extraordinarily difficult situation.  He';s trying to balance the humanity of this nation with our absolute right to control who comes here, it';s as simple as that and no nation can afford to surrender to that, and we have no intention of doing that.  And we have tried to make it less attractive for people smugglers to send people here and one of the reasons why it is not as unattractive as it ought to be is that we haven';t been able to get legislation through the Senate because of the hostility of the Labor Party and others in the second chamber and they have blocked it.  And I think what they have done in relation to that is this kneejerk Opposition against the national interest, this approach that if the Government proposes it then we';re against it.  Now we were not like that when we were in Opposition and we are a party that believes that whether you are in Government or in Opposition you have an obligation to the people of Australia to behave in a responsible fashion.  
But this week my friends, we have seen an extraordinary demonstration of the lack of cohesion, the lack of any clear sense of direction from the Australian Labor Party.  We are a bare few months from a federal election and we still don';t know the priorities of Mr Beazley.  There he was talking about roll back.  There he was saying, I';m going to roll this tax back and then along comes an opinion poll.  They put their finger in the air and went "oh, maybe rollback is not such a good idea" so they trot Bob McMullan out to try and rationalise it all and he says "oh no it is not rollback it';s health and education", and then thinking that might be a bit difficult they then send Simon Crean out and he says "no it';s not rollback, it';s not health and education", he says "it';s both".  And I ask the rhetorical question : Who is going to tell Mr Beazley what to believe in next week?  Is it going to be Carmen Lawrence, or Chris Schacht or Michael Lee or Simon Crean? The reality is that after five and a half years, the Australian public does not have a clear picture of what the alternative prime minister of this country really believes in.
Politics is about doing things that you believe in when you are in government and about propounding what you want to do when you are in opposition if you are fortunate enough to get into government.  And when we were elected in 1996 people had a clear idea what I stood for.  They may not all have agreed with it, and they certainly don';t all agree with it now, but they know where I stand on the fundamental issues that effect the Australian community.  They have no idea where Mr Beazley stands,  but as the weeks and indeed the months go by between now and the election, it will be necessary for him to articulate to the Australian people exactly what his priorities are.  And of course much of the debate will be about taxation.  That won';t be the only issue but it will be an important element in the debate. 
As you know one of the things that has preoccupied so much of our time in the last few years has been the introduction of the new taxation system.  And it is well to remind ourselves why we brought in the new taxation system.  We certainly didn';t do it for our immediately political health.  We didn';t do it for fun.  We did it because we thought it was necessary in the long term interests of the Australian community, the Australian economy and Australian society.
Remember an undeniable fact about the Australian community.  And that is we are a ageing population.  Like all other western societies our population is slowly ageing.  In those circumstances you need a revenue base that will provide an automatic growth in revenue to fund the services needed to look after an increasingly ageing population.  
And that is one of the fundamental reasons why we reformed the Australian taxation system.  Because in 1975 which is a generation ago the ailing direct tax system, the wholesale sale tax system was contributing about twenty five percent of our gross domestic product with the equivalent of about twenty five percent of the gross domestic product.  By 1996 it had fallen to something like eighteen or nineteen percent and it was destined to continue on a declining and in those circumstances if we had not introduced a broad based tax, a goods and services tax that extended the tax base into the growing services area and the proceeds of which will grow automatically with the Australian economy.  If we had not introduced that we would have been deemed to ever increasing levels of income tax in order to pay the increasing services required by an ageing population.  And it remains the case now that he or she that argues for a reduction or a removal of the goods and services tax in reality is arguing for higher levels of income tax.
It is an inescapable result of applying our tax base to the ageing demographics of the Australian population and sometimes in this debate about taxation we lose sight of the fundamental long term reason why we brought in a new tax system.  Not only of course has it provided us with a natural growth tax, a natural growth in revenue as the economy grows but of course the new taxation system has enabled us to cut personal taxes by $12 billion per year, to cut company tax to 36 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar and to effectively halve capital gains tax for individuals.
Now ladies and gentlemen there is a fundamental divide on the issue of taxation in Australia.  Those who attack oppose and seek to rollback the goods and services tax are in effect arguing for income tax to carry a much greater burden in the future.  Because there is no other result.  If you have an ageing population and a demand for more services and you rollback the indirect tax base that grows naturally with the economy you are going to throw a greater burden on income tax.  And that of course is why Mr Beazley said on the eve of the Aston by-election that he didn';t think Australians were paying too much income tax.  Well can I tell you after twenty seven years in public life when a politician tells you he doesn';t think you';re paying too much tax in a particular area he is really saying you ought to pay a bit more.  Because that';s what he';s really saying and I think all of you know that that is in the mind of somebody who says that.
Over the last year my friends we have invested very large amounts in an ongoing basis in many important areas of social and economic infrastructure.  Earlier this year I announced a $3 billion programme called Backing Australia';s Ability which began the process of increasing investment in innovation in universities in technology and in science.  And as the months go by we will be announcing different details and different aspects of that programme.  That additional expenditure was necessary.  We did need to put more resources into those areas.  I am also very proud of the fact that in the five and a half years we';ve been in government we have resuscitated Australia';s health system.  It may not be perfect.  It may need improvement but compared with the health systems of the rest of the world it is infinitely superior.  We';ve but $2.5 billion into reviving private health insurance, something that Labor reluctant dead of the night fertive sort of way.  I think at a Ballarat meeting of the Shadow Cabinet the same day that Cathy Freeman won the 400 metres at the Sydney Olympic Games, guaranteed to get front page with the Shadow Cabinet announcement if you choose that date.  The Labor Party has said oh well if we get back into office we';ll really hang on to the private health insurance rebate.  I wouldn';t at all be certain about that.
But in addition over the next five years under the Australian Healthcare Agreements there is a 28 percent real increase in the money flowing from the federal to the state governments in relation to public hospital provision.  Our health system is not perfect but the federal government has injected already massive additional amounts via the private health subsidy of about $2.5 billion a year and all the additional money that is flowing under the Australian Healthcare Agreements.
And in addition to that we have provided a guarantee of the long term fair trading treatment of the parents of Australia in relation to the choices they intend to make regarding the education of their children.  It has always been a sacred principle of the Liberal Party since the introduction of direct assistance to independent schools in the 1960s by Sir Robert Menzies that Australian parents should have the right to choose the school which educates their children.  We are a government that supports that choice.  We are a government that supports high quality government education and under present funding arrangement 78 percent of money from all government sources goes to the 70 percent of children who are educated in government schools with only 22 percent from government sources going to the 30 percent that are educated in independent schools.  And that gives the lie to the argument peddled by Labor that in someway our policies are designed to assist the wealthy within the Australian community.  Indeed at this moment a bill to provide establishment grants for many low fee independent schools is likely to fail in the Senate because of the hostility of the Labor Party and others in that Chamber.
I have made it very clear that off the back of the ongoing increased investment that we have already made in areas like health and education.  In the area for which Robert has responsibility, salinity and water quality, an additional $1 billion into the National Heritage Trust.  The massive increased expenditure on defence which has given us the best blue print for the defence of this country in a generation.  The $1.6 billion we';ve put into the Roads for Recovery programme, the great bulk of which is going to local roads in regional and rural Australia.  Off the back of all of that investment in social and public infrastructure, it is our belief that if there is a surplus available, then the next bit of the cherry out of that surplus ought to be applied to further income tax relief.  Because we believe in a society which is cohesive and prosperous.  A society that is generous to its vulnerable but also a society that encourages people to aspire and to achieve.  And governments should never lose sight of the fact that the wealth of a nation is built on the aspirations its people have to work hard and the incentives they have to aspire and the incentives they have to achieve.
The other issue that I';d like to briefly mention is that of industrial relations.  It will not have escaped your notice and it certainly hasn';t escaped the notice of my friend the Premier that South Australia is the only state in Australia which is still in Liberal hands.  And I ask all of you to contemplate the industrial scene in this nation if the Australian public wakes up - I won';t tell you which Sunday - the Australian public wakes up on a Sunday later this year and discovers not only does it have five state Labor governments but it also has a federal Labor government.  Can I tell you the person who will be first out of bed that Sunday morning will be Sharan Burrows, the President of the ACTU.  Because she will know that all her heavens have come at once.  She will know that all of her opportunities have suddenly arrived in one stroke.  And if we were to lose the next election I would grieve for a number of things in relation to policy and in relation to Australia.  But the thing I would grieve about most is the certainty that federal Labor will combine with state Labor in five of out of six states to rollback the industrial relations reforms that have transformed the productivity of the Australian nation over the last five and a half years.  The union boys and girls would be back in town.  The union bosses would be back around the Cabinet table.  Australian workplace agreements would go.  The thugs would be back on the building sites not only in Western Australia but also in other parts of Australia.  The Trade Practices Act protection for small business would be swept away and all of the productivity gains that the working men and women of Australia have enjoyed over the last five and a half years would begin to disappear.  Because the supreme irony of all of this is that working people are better off under us than they were under Labor.
When we were in Opposition Labor boasted about cutting their real wages because when you ran an industrial relations policy that was anti-competitive - an industrial relations policy that didn';t encourage productivity - the only way you could control inflation was to cut real wages.  Well we';ve found a better way of doing it.  We';ve actually found that if you increase productivity you can pay people more as a firm without going broke.  I mean it is a pretty simple proposition but it has taken a Liberal government to implement it and make it work.  So all of that will be totally at risk and there will be no compromise on that.  They will rollback our industrial relations reforms.  The unions of Australia will force Kim Beazley to do what the unions of the United Kingdom did not force Tony Blair to do and that is to rollback the industrial relations reforms of his predecessor.  Labor has pledged itself to do that.  Labor will be forced to do that.  Labor will co-operate federally with Labor in five states of Australia in order to achieve it.  And of all the things that we might grieve about the impact of a Labor government it would be the rolling back of those industrial relations changes.
So we have ahead of us my friends a tremendous challenge.  We have picked up.  We are doing better now than we were a few months ago but we still have a long way to go.  We don';t have a bit majority.  We have a very tough fight ahead of us.  In the process of reforming and changing the Australian economy we have inevitably trodden on some toes and offended some people.  But deep down I believe that we can win this.  I believe that we have recovered momentum.  I believe that people are listening better.  I believe the recovery of rural Australia will help us and I can only say that the millions of Australians who don';t live in the rural parts of Australia are ever so pleased that their fellow Australians in the bush are now enjoying better prices, a super competitive exchange rate, better seasons in many parts of Australia, not all.  And at long last slightly better conditions and a brighter future.  
But we have a huge fight.  Here in South Australia our great challenge is to hold on to those three very marginal seats.  We have magnificent members in Trish Worth and Christine Gallus and Trish Draper.  But it will be tough.  It will be very difficult and we';ll have to strain every sinew but the prize is great.  To win again will give us the opportunity to entrench and consolidate the reforms and improvements of the last five and a half years and put it beyond the capacity of a Labor government elected years into the future to reverse those trends.  It';s too soon.  A Labor government elected in a few months time can roll things back.  They can turn back the clock if we can win again we can put it beyond their capacity to do that.  That';s a huge incentive.  It';s a great prize.  And I ask all of you to join me in working to achieve it.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you Anne, my colleague Senator Amanda Vanstone, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  This gathering gets bigger each year . what I choose to call a social coalition.  That is an approach to tackling some of Australia's challenges, particularly in the welfare area, a partnership, a coalition, between those who work at the coalface such as our great welfare organisations, philanthropic individuals, the government and very importantly the business community of Australia. 
I was asked during a newspaper interview a few days ago to say what kind of Australian society I wanted in one sentence.  You always get plenty of warning and plenty of notice to those sorts of questions.  And I said I wanted a society that was prosperous and cohesive, generous to its vulnerable, which encouraged people to aspire and achieve.  And the social coalition is part of the cohesion and part of the generosity to the vulnerable.  I don't say that in any patronising sense because in many ways the social coalition and many of the changes to welfare policy that the government in cooperation with many have championed, overturned some of the more patronising welfare dependant notions of earlier years.  We need a society where there's a decent social security safety net, where people can rely absolutely on the willingness of their fellow Australians to give them help in their hour of need or difficulty.
We also need a society that encourages people to leave welfare dependency and re-enter the active workforce.  We need different ways of encouraging people to do that, we need role models, we need role models in individuals, we need role models in organisations and we need role models in the business community.  And tonight's awards are all about recognising excellence in those areas.  Tonight's awards are about saying thank you to the businesses that give of their resources, give of their time, and give of their other talents other than financial resources.  I've often said as I say it again tonight I'm not asking businesses to give more, I'm asking more businesses to give because many Australian businesses, and they're represented here tonight and many Australian families and individuals have magnificent, wonderful philanthropic records and philanthropic traditions and it's often not recognised by the Australian community the depth of generosity of many of our citizens over long years.
Business and community partnership group that I will be meeting with Amanda Vanstone later this week brings together some of Australia's most successful and best business brains.  It also brings together many of the leaders in the welfare sector.  And it brings together people who are committed to the notion of community and business partnerships.  And I welcome so many of the members of that body who are with tonight.  
As you are aware several years ago I announced a number of changes to the taxation act that were designed to provide people with more incentive to give and to provide bequests and other charitable contributions.  And they have already begun to make an impact on the pattern of giving that I've sought the advice of a number of people including David Gonski and others who are here tonight in giving the government advice regarding those taxation concessions.  In May of last year the parliament passed a package of measures worth $51 million which provided a range of income tax and capital gains tax incentives for those who make donations to property, including gifts under the cultural gifts programme and donations to environmental and heritage organisations.  In March of this year I announced two new tax initiatives to further encourage greater corporate and personal philanthropy.  An averaging provision to allow income tax deductions for all donations of property to deductable gift recipients to be spread over five years and the release of guidelines for prescribed private funds to provide businesses, families and individuals with greater flexibility to start their own trust fund for philanthropic purposes.
To build on these initiatives I can tonight announce a further measure to encourage philanthropy, I'm announcing our intention to amened the income tax law, to allow income tax deductions to land holders who enter into perpetual conservation covenants for no consideration with deductable gift recipients.  This measure was recommended by the partnerships taxation working group.  Last year I asked the group to review the recommendations outlined in the CSIRO report Sustaining the Land.   The conditions applying to the deduction will be consistent with the existing gift provisions in the tax law in relation to donations of land and other property.  Deductions will be available for convents that are supported by state legislation and accredited by the Commonwealth Minister for the Environment.  
This measure will provide an incentive for land holders and environmental philanthropic organisations to enter into conveyance to conserve land in perpetuity in order to maintain its environmental value for all Australians.  The measure complements recently announced changes to the Capital Gains Tax rule which ensure that land holders who set aside part or all of their land for conservation in perpetuity considerations are not disadvantaged.  I want to thank those on the partnership responsible for this recommendation.
Looking ahead, next year will be of course a year in which the major recommendations of the McClure report which have been adopted by the government regarding welfare reform will begin to be implemented.   We're investing something in the order of $1.7 billion over a number of years to give affect to the programme of Australians working together.  The notion that every Australian should be encouraged and supported to participate in Australian society was central to the recommendations of the report of the reference group chaired by Mission Australia's Patrick McClure, a partnership member, and was a guiding principle of our welfare reform package.
A key role of the community business partnership will be to work with business and the community to increase opportunity for people with disabilities, mature aged people, indigenous people and parents returning to work.
And also ladies and gentlemen you will be aware that at last year's awards presentation I announced an independent inquiry into definitional issues related to charities.  It was high time in our view for a review because the current common law definition of a charity is based upon an English legal concept going back to 1601.  And although it may have served us fairly well over the last 400 odd years, we thought it was reasonably timely even in the context of how the bureaucracy and government move rather slowly, we thought it was rather timely after 1601 that we should have another look at it.
I indicated that the partnership would play an important role in the review and later announced that David Gonski would a member of the review committee along retired justice Ian Shepherd as chairman and Robert Fitzgerald a former member of ACOSS and a former director of the Society of St Vincent de Paul.  I'm pleased to say that the committee's report has been received by the Government and I expect to release for public comment and public scrutiny very shortly.  I think in the main it's an excellent report, I think its contents will be reassuring to the charitable sector and I want to take the opportunity to again assure the welfare sector that the purpose of this inquiry was not to make it less attractive and to reduce the incentives for people to contribute to charities but rather to provide a long overdue overhaul of the law applying in this area.
Can I conclude my remarks for tonight by thanking all of you for the contribution that you have made to the spirit of the social coalition, the contribution you have made to the notion of Australians pulling together to solve our common problems.  I don't think there is a society in the world that has the capacity to generate the cooperative spirit that we are able to generate in this country in getting people with different responsibilities, the government contributing its bit, the welfare sector its expertise and compassion, the business community its skill and its resources, and importantly philanthropic individuals who only want to make the life and the being of their fellow Australians a little easier and a little happier. And the partnership awards are a recognition of the excellence in this field and the fact that we have double the number of people here tonight and that the fact that it is now a permanent fixture on the annual political calender here in Canberra speaks volumes for the popularity of the concept and I think it says a great deal about the warm inner feelings of the Australian community and this kind of response says to me that there's nothing wrong with the heart of Australia, there are a lot of people out there who want to help their fellow Australians, they want to give something back, they want to say thank you to Australia for making life good for me, can I make life better for some of my fellow Australians.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
At the beginning of the twenty first century, Australia is an active player in a world vastly changed from that which existed even a decade ago.  It's a world no longer divided along defined bi-polar lines and one in which the United States holds a pre-eminent position, both economically and militarily.
When the Coalition government came to office five and a half years ago, we did so with the conviction that Australia's foreign policy was unbalanced and unsuited to this changed environment.
We recognised that the end of the cold war fundamentally altered the global strategic environment and that, in the area of national security, regional tensions and uncertainty had replaced the traditional balance between two super powers.
Equally, we were determined to respond to the trends of globalisation, increasingly fuelled by advanced communication and technology, and the massive and rapid flow of international capital.
For that reason, we were convinced that a preoccupation with one particular region, at the expense of others, was ill conceived and at odds with this country's national interest.
We felt that it was not necessary to choose between our relationships with Asian countries, and those in Europe and North America - to choose between our history and our geography.
We were convinced that it was not only possible - but essential - for Australia to build and maintain links with all the major centres of global power and influence, while ensuring that key regional relationships were kept vibrant and strong.
Subsequent events were to vindicate that approach.
Australia's experience in the East Asian financial crisis was a watershed in defining how and where we fit in the international system - and in confirming the fundamental strength of the government's approach.
It has also revealed the risks of adhering to a static framework, and of the folly of rigidly defining the focus of a nation's  international attention.  This country's successful response to that crisis has displayed the benefits of setting balance and flexibility as the benchmarks of Australia's international relationships - both economic and otherwise.
Immediately before the crisis 60 per cent of Australia's merchandise exports were directed to East Asia.
There was an expectation in late 1997, as one after another of the economies to our north shuddered to a halt, that Australia would be badly damaged.
Yet Australia continued growing strongly throughout and beyond the crisis.  It recorded across the decade of the 1990s one of the strongest levels of growth among all developed countries.
A flexible exchange rate and his government's sound economic management and bold reforms lie at the heart of the explanation.  They have given Australia strength and standing in a world of rapid economic change.  We have consolidated our fiscal position, produced low interest and inflation rates, overhauled the taxation system and modernised industrial relations. 
In addition, over the past two decades, Australia has opened its markets to trade, reformed the financial sector, increased competition in the markets for goods and services and improved flexibility and productivity in the labour market. 
Within that framework our exporters demonstrated great resilience and enterprise in the wake of the crisis, expanding their sales strongly in non-Asian markets such as North America, Western Europe and the Middle East.
The government has matched this effort by a quite deliberate strategy to strengthen links with key parts of the globe.  The right domestic policies, combined with certain national attributes, have provided Australia with the capacity to contend with the challenges and disciplines of the globalised economy.
These include our robust national political institutions, an impeccable commitment to the rule of law, high standards of corporate governance, and a private sector and wider community that are confident in dealing with the new information age.  
Australia stands confidently positioned to succeed in an era of globalisation - both to handle its challenges, and to seize its opportunities.
It is my firm belief that globalisation is a process that provides major opportunities for this country, and for all countries, to grow and improve the standards of living of their peoples.  Importantly, it provides opportunities for the poor as well as the rich.
The opponents of globalisation, the self-styled champions of the poor and the marginalised, speak for no one but themselves.  They certainly do not speak for the world's developing nations.  They seek to deny those countries the benefits of more open markets for the goods they produce; of international investment flows and the jobs they create; and of technologies and the new industries they stimulate.
It is no coincidence that those developing countries that grew fastest over the last forty years and achieved the greatest reductions in poverty are those that developed sound institutions, forcefully pursued export opportunities and aggressively utilised the market openings made available to them.
For instance, in 1960, South Korea's per capita GDP was the same as Algeria's, and its third largest export was wigs!  Today, even after the Asian crisis, South Korea is the world's thirteenth largest economy and its third largest export is computers, earning its citizens more than $US 7.2 billion per year.
 Developing countries that are integrated with world markets have seen average incomes rise, and inequality fall, for the majority of their population.  Countries open to international trade have achieved double the annual average growth of other developing countries that have not.Opponents of globalisation are arguing for a return to protectionism.  On the contrary, developing countries need more, not less, market liberalisation to meet their needs.
Many developing countries are denied the opportunity to trade their way to sustainable growth and higher 'core labour standards' because of the barriers in much of the developed world to their exports, particularly in agriculture.
According to a World Bank study to be released later this year, current levels of protection in developed countries cost the developing world more than USD100 billion - that is twice the amount of total aid they receive.  
Although the nation-wide benefits of globalisation are immense, some groups of people can be left behind by economic and technological change.  It is an important part of a country's successful management of the process that the needs of these people are met.  
Governments must speak out about the reality of globalisation, and carry their people with them in meeting its challenges.  Failure to do so is ultimately a failure of national trust and responsibility.
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In the broadest sense, Australia's international relations shape the prosperity and security of Australians.
First, the basics need to be right.  Particular emphasis needs to be given to the self-reinforcing links between the strength of the national economy, the effectiveness of foreign and trade policy, and capabilities of the defence force.
I have already underlined the importance of a strong and prosperous domestic economy able to withstand international pressures, to take advantage of global opportunities, and to assist other nations in times of need.
We also need to keep our alliances and key relationships in good order and, by doing so, have greater influence than if we acted alone.
We need to work to ensure that our region, the part of the world that has the most direct bearing on our fortunes, is as stable and prosperous as we can make it.
And we need to have an armed force that has the capacity to defend us if necessary, and to act with others in support of regional stability.  The government has acted decisively on this front with a commitment to increase defence spending by $23 billion over the coming decade. 
Second, we need to find the right balance in the conduct of our foreign relations between the principles we believe in, and a pragmatic and clear-eyed defence of the national interest.  Our commitment to democracy, to fundamental human rights, to freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and the independence and authority of the rule of law must not be compromised.  That said, our relations with countries having different cultural and political traditions, must be based on mutual respect.  We will give them the same respect and acknowledgment of sovereign authority that we ask be given to us.
There will be times, such as in East Timor, when we must reach out to assist the vulnerable who need and deserve our assistance.
Key Relations
The maintenance of strong bilateral relationships remains a cornerstone of this government's foreign policy approach.
Asia is, of course, of vital importance to us - it lies at the forefront of our policy focus.  The region has huge potential and, despite recent difficulties, has taken some major strides down the path of political and economic reform. 
The nations of Asia matter because they are important political partners with whom we have worked for many years to build a more stable and secure region.  They matter because of where they are.  Their proximity inextricably links their future prosperity and security with ours.  And they matter because of what they are - our largest export markets and the source of much of our investment and imports.
Japan is Australia's key economic partner, our best customer by far, and our closest diplomatic partner in Asia.  We have watched with concern the malaise of the Japanese economy and been encouraged by the determination of Prime Minister Koizumi to overhaul Japan's political and economic structures. 
The fact that there are no major problems in the economic and political relationship between Australia and Japan should not be cause for complacency.  
Prime Minister Koizumi and I agreed that we must be attentive and vigorous in ensuring that this key relationship is kept in good repair.  As part of a broader effort to this end, we will continue to outline the benefits of a bilateral trade and investment facilitation agreement with our Japanese friends.
China's growing influence and economic strength is giving it a greater say in the region and the world.  We value the positive role China can play.  The relationship between an increasingly confident China and a globally preponderant United States is the key to stability in the Asia Pacific region.  Australia is a close ally of the United States; we have a fast-growing economic partnership with China.  We have a major stake in China's successful integration into the world economy, and in seeing these two powers working together for the common good.
Australia's own bilateral relationship with China is more productive, realistic and sustainable than at any time since the establishment of diplomatic relations in the seventies.  We are direct with China about differences in values and seek to manage these differences sensibly.  We have said clearly to China that we will adhere to our One China policy and have resolved differences of interpretation with firmness and courtesy.  Both we and China are keenly aware of the potential benefits of strategic economic cooperation, including in key sectors like energy.
The relationship we have with the United States is the most important we have with any single country.  This is not only because of the strategic, economic and diplomatic power of the United States.  But of equal, if not more significance, are the values and aspirations we share.  Our fifty-year-old alliance retains its relevance and vitality in the post-Cold War world and makes an important contribution to stability in our region.  It gives us access to technology and information that strengthens our ability to pursue our interests.  It showed its worth in the events surrounding the East Timor crisis.  And, as the recent visits by Secretaries Powell and Rumsfeld reminded us, Australia is of diplomatic and strategic importance to the United States.
Our relationship is more than a security alliance.  It is based on ties of friendship built up through common struggle over the century against threats to security and freedom in many parts of the world.
My visit to the United States in a little over a fortnight's time will be an valuable opportunity to formally recognise the significance of the ANZUS alliance and its ongoing relevance.  It will also allow us to explore new ways of strengthening an already vigorous relationship, particularly in the trade area.
The European Union is a major economic player in the world and remains vital to our interests. 
 It is Australia's largest economic partner - our largest merchandise trading partner, our largest market for services exports, our largest source of foreign investment and Australia's second largest investment destination.  Its influence stretches far beyond its borders, shaping the institutions of the countries of the former Soviet Union, Africa and the Middle East.  
Making Australia's voice heard in Brussels is one of the most important diplomatic tasks we face.
Closer to home, Indonesia's transition to a modern, inclusive, decentralised democracy after thirty years of autocratic and centralised rule is one of the most momentous global developments since the fall of communism.  Its stability and well being are vital for Australia, our region and beyond.
We will give Indonesia our attention, respect and assistance.  Having frankly acknowledged the inevitable political strains over East Timor, we are ready to move to a new phase in the bilateral relationship. 
I hosted President Wahid's visit to Australia in June this year - the first by an Indonesian president to Australia for more than a quarter of a century.  And I responded swiftly and positively to President Megawati's generous invitation to visit Jakarta - the first by a foreign head of government since her election.
The openness and candour now being demonstrated between us augers well for a future relationship based on what I have termed 'positive realism'.  This should not be a relationship burdened by the kinds of unrealistic expectations that featured so prominently at certain times in the past.  Rather it should be based on a realistic appreciation of the differences between our two societies and cultures, but positively focussed on our many shared interests and on a mutual respect for each other. 
Regional Stability
Australia's security environment is affected by increasing instability and unpredictability in our near Pacific neighbourhood.  We have a substantial and special responsibility in the vast expanse of the South Pacific.  A number of these countries face formidable challenges.  The problems are complex - the breakdown of law and order, severe social stresses within complex communal structures, and the uneven course of economic and social development. 
We have provided and will continue to provide strong support for Prime Minister Morauta's economic and political reforms in Papua New Guinea.  This country remains a special place for Australia, one for whom we retain a unique interest and enduring responsibility.
We have shown commitment and perseverance in Bougainville to good effect.  In the Solomon Islands we moved quickly to deal with the crisis of spiralling civil war.  And in Fiji we have worked hard for the peaceful reinstatement of constitutional democracy.
Many of these small island states are economically vulnerable and politically fragile.  They will need support from Australia and others, including the United Nations, the Commonwealth, Europe and other donors.
Yet, only the countries of the South Pacific can find the solutions.  Australia cannot, nor would we attempt to determine the course of events in the region.  We will help where we can, and generously. But our role in the South Pacific must be based on recognition by the countries of the region that independence means taking responsibility for their own destinies and a commitment by their governments to work in the best interests of their people.
Global Engagement
The resources and attention of the government must also focus on global issues that affect the lives of Australians and further the values that they believe in.  I have called on the United Nations to focus on its core strengths and responsibilities, including the peaceful resolution of disputes, disarmament, human rights and the relief of suffering and want.
Australia has been a steadfast and important supporter of the United Nations since its establishment.  Given our support for UN operations throughout the world and particularly in East Timor, none could doubt our commitment to remain so.  We are keen however to work with others to ensure it is an organisation well structured to meet the challenges of the future and that the views of democratically-elected governments are given sufficient weight.
A decade has passed since the end of the Cold War.  The strategic environment has changed, and we no longer live with the threat of superpower confrontation. But the threat posed by nuclear, chemical and biological weapons remains.  And the continuing proliferation of ballistic missiles, which can be used to deliver the weapons of mass destruction over great distances, is a cause of concern not just to the United States, but also to Australia, Russia, and many other countries.
Consequently we understand the US intention to develop a new security doctrine that combines offensive and defensive elements to help counter this threat.  We welcome and encourage the dialogue that the United States is pursuing with its allies, and with Russia and China, on missile defence and on ways to enhance global strategic stability.
Much remains to be done in the area of arms control where Australia has played a pivotal role in the negotiation of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and in addressing the problems of land mines, and biological and chemical weapons.  
The international negotiations on climate change are a major foreign and domestic policy challenge for Australia.  We occupy a unique place internationally, being both a developed country and a net exporter of energy.
I am pleased that the most recent round of negotiations made unexpectedly good progress.
The burden of scientific evidence is overwhelming - the nations of the world must take action to reduce or mitigate their emissions of greenhouse gases.  The government continues to maintain that Australia must be part of an equitable global understanding on climate change.  I emphasise the need for global action.  The problem is not one that can be divided along diplomatic lines, like groupings at a convention.  Developing and developed countries must be part of the solution.  And it is self evident that the involvement of the United States is critical.
Australia will remain an active participant in any organisation that seeks to further parliamentary democracy and economic prosperity. 
 In October this year, in Brisbane, Australia will host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, the largest gathering of world leaders ever held in this country.  The Commonwealth is not a rich countries club.  It is a dynamic international organisation of over 50 countries, most of them developing nations, which brings together one third of the world's people with a shared heritage and values. 
The Commonwealth played a crucial role in decolonisation, dismantling apartheid in South Africa and returning Nigeria to civilian government.  It is working for a return to democracy in Fiji and for stability in the Solomon Islands.  Many of its members are small states, struggling with basic problems of building democratic governments and fighting against corruption.  The Commonwealth has a proud record in addressing the needs of these small states and ensuring their voices are hears in international forums, like the United Nations.
The Brisbane Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting will tackle practical issues of good governance, economic development, poverty reduction and international peace and cooperation.
Concerns have been expressed at the possible attendance of President Mugabe at the Brisbane meeting.  I can understand those concerns.  The exclusion of Zimbabwe from CHOGM or suspension from the Commonwealth is ultimately a matter for the Commonwealth to decide. 
But the Australian government has been very deeply troubled at the deterioration of law and order in Zimbabwe, and we have made clear the need to uphold the rights of all Zimbabweans, black and white.
It is disappointing that Zimbabwe has refused to receive the ministerial mission proposed by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group.  We will be actively supporting other international efforts to address some of the problems facing that country.
Trade Relations
I said earlier that flexibility and responsiveness to rapidly changing conditions must remain the hallmark of our foreign policy and this is particularly true in regard to Australia's trade relations.
Our exporters are now more successful than ever - assisted by a competitive Australian dollar and the tax reforms put in place last year.  In 2000 Australian exports grew by 25 per cent to reach a total value of $143 billion, the best export growth for 21 years.
Australian exporters have a right to expect their government will be as committed and as creative in finding solutions, as they themselves are.  We will not be hamstrung by ideology in the trade arena, but will pursue our economic interests internationally in a clear sighted and flexible way.
Our aims remain clear and unambiguous - to open markets for Australian goods and services and for fair and transparent trading arrangements.  And we will work through whatever medium will achieve those ends.
We continue to give the strongest support to the multilateral trade rules of the World Trade Organisation.  This is not, as I have said, because of an ideological fixation on multilateralism.  It is because those rules, though imperfect, provide an important protection against the unfair, and sometimes predatory behaviour of others.
The failure to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations at Seattle in 1999 was a great disappointment for Australia.  But we will not be deterred.  We remain one of the most active proponents of a new round with the prospect it offers of fairer rules for trade in agriculture and better opportunities for other Australian goods and services.  We will be arguing energetically for WTO members to agree on the launch of a round when they meet in Doha in November this year.
We are also making active use of the WTO's dispute settlement system.  We have won important victories that will improve the access of our beef exports to Korea and, I am confident, remove the quite unjustified safeguard measures imposed by the United States on our lamb exports.
APEC remains the peak organisation of the Asia Pacific region.  It continues to struggle with the challenge of an internal trade liberalisation agenda.  However APEC remains a critical player in expressing the region's trade and economic priorities.  We will continue to argue that APEC should lend its substantial weight to the early launch of a new trade round.  It has also embarked on an important trade facilitation and capacity building program aimed at freeing up the movement of goods, capital and people among its members.
We are also actively pursuing bilateral and regional free trade agreements, wherever we see solid and practical gains that can be delivered more quickly than through the WTO.
I expect such benefits in due course from our negotiations with Singapore.  I hope, too, that the results of a study we are about to begin with Thailand will lead to negotiations for a free trade agreement.  We will continue to deepen our very close economic partnership with New Zealand.
The government has proposed to the United States that our two countries negotiate a free trade agreement.  This would add an economic dimension to the strong security ties between us.  Both our economies are largely open, although we both have areas of sensitivity.  But I believe that a worthwhile agreement could be achieved, one that would improve our access to each other's markets and that would be a positive example to others. 
We recognise that the timing of such a negotiation will need to take account of a complex and multifaceted trade strategy currently being developed by the new US administration.  I look forward to putting these points to President Bush during our forthcoming discussions.
In the case of Japan and Korea, where protection of politically sensitive agriculture makes it difficult to pursue free trade, the government has developed a different approach.  A trade and investment facilitation agreement with Japan, as we have proposed, could produce real benefits beyond the traditional area of tariffs - in standards, electronic commerce, investment and services.  With Korea, we will soon be finalising parallel studies on a Strengthened Economic Partnership between our two countries, and examining specific recommendations on how to broaden this key trading relationship.
 Conclusion
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Our world is framed by the forces of globalisation.  Liberated from the strictures of the Cold War, it is less threatening but less certain.  Our own region is one characterised by change, and to some extent, unpredictability.
These are not however tendencies to fear, so long as you have the credentials and institutions to deal with them.
Australia stands poised, not merely to survive in this environment, but to prosper.
Our economy is flexible and resilient.  Our national political, legal and financial systems are transparent and robust.  Our foreign and trade policy goals are clear and focussed on the national interest.  Our political and diplomatic resources are substantial, appropriately deployed, and internationally respected.  We have strong alliances and healthy bilateral relationships.  We have a military force capable of defending our shores if necessary, and of contributing to the security of our region.
And our people remain, as always, our greatest resource.
We understand the challenges of our environment, and have the capacities and the confidence to succeed.


Subjects: ANZUS Treaty; East Timor.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Doctor Calvert, Foreign Minister, other Parliamentary colleagues, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.  And I would like to particularly acknowledge the presence of Mr Ralph Harry aswell, a very distinguished former Australian diplomat who played a major role in the then department in drafting this very important treaty.
This is an occasion that is rich with a lot of symbolism as well as being in it's own right a very important event.  I want to congratulate the department on once again producing an excellent volume that is an important part of the historical record of a very important event.  This is not the first of those publications and I hope it won't be the last.  I think it's very important to a longer term understanding of our history and particularly the evolution of Australia's foreign policy over the last half century that publications of this type take place.
It's also a very symbolic moment, it's on the eve of the [50th anniversary of the] signing of the ANZUS Treaty in San Francisco on the first of September, 1951.  1951 of course celebrated 50 years of the Australian Federation.  The year 2001 celebrates 100 years of the Australian Federation.  And this treaty which has underwritten Australia's great sense of security over the last half century has therefore been enforced for half the life of Australia as the Commonwealth of Australia.  
It's also important to reflect on the circumstances of the time.  1951 was a world far different from what we now live in.  1951 was an era dominated by a fear of the expansion of Soviet Communism, when Communist China as it was then called, had not long begun to assert itself seemingly in the eyes of so many as a belligerent force for authoritarian behaviour in Asia and particularly in South East Asia.  Australia looked to the United States for a great sense of security, Australians and Americans had fought first together in World War I and they had just emerged from a terrible conflict in the Pacific, victorious against the Japanese and they were at the time of the signing of the ANZUS Treaty fighting together in South Korea in response to the attack on South Korea by then Communist North Korea.
It is important also to reflect that this treaty was signed during the early years of the Menzies Government.  Robert Gordon Menzies is often misunderstood in the historical foreign policy record of this country.  The ANZUS Treaty demonstrated yet again, despite his very legitimate and unapologetic affection for the links between Australia and the United Kingdom, links that were well grounded in history and culture and respect for the rule of law and Parliamentary democracy, he none the less had a clear eyed view of the strategic importance, indeed the strategic centrality of the relationship between Australia and the United States and he unhesitatingly encouraged his then Minister for External Affairs, the late Sir Percy Spender, who played such a major role in negotiating this treaty on behalf of Australia, to pursue the idea of the ANZUS Treaty.  And through the years it has been a cornerstone of our relationship.  And I will certainly on behalf I know of both sides of politics be able to convey to the President of the United States, when I see him in a few weeks time, the on going commitment of the Australian people to what is a very rich relationship between our two societies.
ANZUS is but the outward manifestation of a very deep and abiding relationship between our two societies.  A relationship which has led us to fight together in every major conflict of the 20th century.  A relationship that has produced a common commitment to individual liberty, personal freedom but importantly a relationship that I think is best kept together by the common sense of values and the common traditions that our two societies have.  The ANZUS Treaty of course has underwritten the closest possible military and intelligence association between our two countries.  And that is an association that has developed over the last 50 years, it is an association which of necessity has changed but it is none the less an association that remains very deep and abiding and that was brought home to me most vividly only a couple of weeks ago when the United States Secretary of State, General Colin Powell and Mr Don Rumsfeld, the American Defence Secretary along with the Deputy Chairman of the joint Chiefs of Staff, came to Canberra for the regular AUSMIN talks.  And those talks were conducted in an atmosphere of close friendship, an atmosphere of a shared determination to work together to confront the new challenges of our region.  
And those new challenges of course emerged in East Timor only two years ago.  And the other piece of symbolism in a sense about the launch of this publication today is that it's on the eve of the first ballot for the election of a democratic government for East Timor.  And that was the last occasion on which Australians and Americans, or could I say the most recent occasion in which Australians and Americans cooperated together militarily.  And although Australia led that operation as indeed ironically and coincidently it was an Australian who commanded the first military operation in which Australians and Americans fought together at Harmel and that was Sir John Monash, probably the greatest military figure in Australian history, it is a reminder that we have been together in many military operations both large and small over a very very long period of time.  And it is an interesting piece of symbolism that on the eve of the anniversary of ANZUS we are also contemplating the election of the first democratic government available to the people of East Timor.  And we wish the people of that small country the very best as they venture into democracy and that is really what the Australian/American alliance is all about.  It is all about giving small nations such as East Timor the opportunity to decide their own destiny, to choose their own future, to elect their own government and to seek out their own destiny in friendship with Australia and Indonesia but none the less as an independent country.  And more than anything else that really enshrines the ideals of the ANZUS Treaty and the ideals that have brought the people of the United States and the people of Australia together.
So Ashton, I do congratulate your department, I think it's an excellent initiative, I congratulate my colleague the Foreign Minister for the intense interest and guidance that he's brought to this project and I have very great pleasure in launching the latest edition of documents on Australian Foreign Policy, the ANZUS Treaty 1951.  I think it's a volume that will be widely read, it will bring new insights and it will reinforce to all of us the ongoing relevance and strategic significance and enduring philosophical value of the relationship between our two great societies.
[ends] 


Thank you very much to the Governor of Victoria John Landy, the Premier Mr Steve Bracks, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Simon Crean, the newly elected Lord Mayor of Melbourne, Sir Gustav Nossal and my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It's great to be back in the forecourt of the Exhibition Building here in Melbourne. And it's particularly pleasing that I return on the 100th anniversary of the first raising on the 3rd of September in the year 1901 of the flag chosen as a result of a wide competition to represent the newly created Commonwealth of Australia. There were some 32,823 entries received in that competition from all over the world. I understand that one of the entries came from an unnamed State governor and there were five people who shared the winning of that competition, and they were Annie Dorrington who was a well known artist from Perth; Ivor Evans a 14 year old Melbourne school boy who's father owned a flag making business; Lesley Hawkins an 18 year old from Leichhardt in Sydney who was apprenticed to a Sydney optician at the time; Eggbert Nutall an architect with the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works; and William Stevens, a first officer with the Union Steamship Company of New Zealand.
And as all of us who have presented probably hundreds if not thousands of flags at various schools ceremonies, the original flag we will know, we will know that the original flag chosen in 1901 featured a six-pointed Commonwealth star representing the Australian states, and a seventh point was added in 1908 to represent the territories, the first of which was Papua. It is true that it took a long time before there was unambiguous acceptance of the flag chosen as one central undeniable national emblem of Australia.
But it is equally true that from the very early times, after the choosing of the flag in 1901, it began to be very widely recognised particularly by the Australian military forces. This flag is flown on the ships of the Royal Australian Navy since its inception in 1911. In 1914 the flag was flown over HMAS Australia in its famous engagement which sank the German raider the Emden near Cocos Island. It was carried by our soldiers at Gallipoli. It was used in the famous Cooee march from Gilgandra in country New South Wales in 1915. It was often flown on the Western Front during WW1. And there is of course in WWII, the famous Changi Flag, the proud possession of Captain Strawbridge who kept it hidden inside a calico bag in his pillow during his time in the Changi prison camp, risking execution if it were found. This flag became a symbol of hope for many men in the camp and was proudly flown when the camp was liberated.
And in 1945 the Australian flag was raised in Singapore following the Japanese surrender. Australian prisoners had made an Australian flag in secret and this was the first flag to fly over a liberated Singapore after the Japanese defeat. And that particular flag is now held at the Australian War Memorial.
So it has a long history of passionate identification with a separate Australian identity. My personal commitment to the flag as an appropriate symbol of the Australian nation is based both on history and tradition, but also recognition of an historical truth. It represents the special characteristics of the Australian identity with the Southern Cross and it acknowledges our history with the Union Jack in the corner of the flag which in turn itself is a combination of the symbols of England, Scotland and Ireland and Wales. It is appropriate that we express our respect for the Australian national flag as a symbol of the achievements of the Australian nation and on an occasion such as this it is appropriate to reflect on what has been achieved over the last 100 years. And I would have thought that everybody who participated either as an athlete or as a spectator, either in person or on television, would have been greatly moved and warmed by the passionate commitment of Australian audiences both to Advance Australia Fair and the Australian National Flag at the Olympic Games in Sydney last year. And having just...and having had the great privilege last Saturday night, and I say this not with any trepidation before a Victorian audience, but having had the great privilege last Saturday night to see the magnificent victory of the Australian Wallabies over the All Blacks in the Bledisloe Cup, the obvious warmth, the obvious warmth that Australian crowds have toward the Australian flag and the Australian national anthem make it very plain to me that they will indefinitely remain great unifying national symbols of all of the Australian people.
So I am really delighted to be here today. I congratulate the Australian National Flag Association on its support for the Australian flag and its commitment to the continuity of the history of this country. Its traditions, its past, its present as well as its future and long may that beautiful flag fly over the Commonwealth of Australia.
[ends]


E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Phil for those very kind words of introduction. To my other parliamentary colleagues and Remo, thank you very much for the wonderful hospitality of this very fine club.
I know as Phillip said that there are many people here today through who's volunteer efforts we have a more compassionate and a more caring society and a more caring community. And not only because it's the International Year of the Volunteer, but also because in an ongoing way volunteers have helped shape Australia and make the Australia of which we are so proud in the year 2001, that I would like on behalf of the Government and on behalf of your fellow Australians to express my thanks to all of you who in different ways have worked to make Australia a kinder, gentler place. And have worked to make the lives of people less fortunate than us more bearable. And who have worked to provide such a great sense of community and a great sense of cohesion. Because of all the things on which we pride ourselves, nothing is more important than our sense of cohesion and our sense of one-ness as an Australian community.
I want to say a couple of words in a moment about the issue that has preoccupied my attention and I guess the attention of the Australian people over the last ten days. But before I do that can I just remark upon the fact that as I moved around this great gathering and as I met people I was reminded very much of the modern face of Australia. It is a mixture of people. Many people born here. Many people whose parents and grant parents were born here. Many people who came to Australia after WWII, some of them speaking a slightly different accent of mother English than I speak, but none-the-less recognisable as coming form such places as Yorkshire and Scotland and so forth. Still other groups who were born in countries that didn't speak English, that came to this country after WWII not least of course the wonderful people from Italy who've made such a magnificent contribution to Australia. But from all around Europe there are people who've come to Australia and you've all become part of the Australian community and we all share in common a great Australian heritage. And then more recently people have come from Cambodia and from Laos and from other parts of Asia, some people from the Middle East, in other words people from all around the world.
No country in the world has more successfully achieved the bringing together of people from different parts of the world than has Australia. And everybody in this country, whatever their heritage, is entitled to an equal place under the Australian sun. Everybody is entitled to the same fair treatment irrespective of their ethnic background and irrespective of their religious belief or if they have no religious belief. That is a matter of free choice.
The other thing that I would say, and it naturally connects with the matter that has been in the news recently, this country has the second most generous record in accepting refugees on a per capita basis of any nation in the world. Australia has always been generous. There is only one country on a per capita basis that takes more refugees than Australia and that is Canada. We are up there with the most generous and the most welcoming. And it's really partly in that context that the Government has taken the stance that it has in relation to the people who were picked out of the international waters, in an Indonesian search and rescue area by that Norwegian vessel.
We took that stand because we wanted to say to others that this country continues to be welcoming. This country continues to be willing to take refugees provided they are assessed and determined to be refugees in accordance with normal international practice. That's why we took the stand we did. I can't represent to you that by taking that stand we will solve the problem. It's an ongoing problem. I can't say to you there won't be other boats that will arrive and that we will not take those people. We will not endanger the lives of people. We didn't endanger the lives of these people, in fact we went to great lengths to ensure their lives were not in danger. And it was because their lives were not in danger that we were able to take the action we did.
But we do hope that the combination of that and also the increased surveillance that I've requested be undertaken by the Royal Australian Navy and the other defence authorities in international waters, the combination of those things will increase the element of deterrence. I'm not saying it will stop. There will be other boats that will arrive and they will arrive in circumstances different than the circumstances covering the Tampa.
I think what we have done is to bring to the attention of international agencies and bring to the attention of other countries the urgent need to involve the international community in finding a better solution to this problem. It's not a solution where Australia puts up its hands and says no. Rather it is a solution where Australia says we will continue to take our fair share indeed more than our fair share of refugees provided it occurs in a proper fashion. And provided those who have superior refugee claims get first chance. Because there are millions of people living in pitiful conditions in refugee camps who don't have the money to buy a passage on a boat to Australia. They don't have the money. They don't have six or seven or eight thousand dollars. And yet according to the international agencies their need is greater than the need of others. And yet every time others are able to force their self-determined priorities ahead of those people whose need is greater, those people whose need is greater suffer. And that is the reason why, amongst others, we've taken the stance we have.
As I said a moment ago, it's not something that's going to be fixed overnight. And it will take quite a while. We will need to persuade some countries in our own region of the need to cooperate in a more effective way. And obviously Indonesia is one of those countries. But we have begun, I believe, the process of establishing a more effective response which over time will I believe reduce the number of people who come here illegally. It will increase the effectiveness of the international refugee response.
I do want to take the opportunity again of saying how much I appreciate as Prime Minister of Australia the assistance that I've received from our friends in New Zealand, in Papua New Guinea, and in Nauru. It is very much a Pacific solution. And the spontaneity of the response of those countries and the willingness of the New Zealand Prime Minister when I spoke to her on Friday afternoon, the willingness of our old ANZAC partner to provide a way of dealing with this problem is something that I'm very grateful for. And also of course the contribution of our other Pacific friends, Nauru and Papua New Guinea.
This has not been an easy issue for me or for the Government and it remains an issue that will continue to present challenges. There are court cases, I don't at this stage wish to say anything about them. It is not appropriate for me to do so. But in the end these are things that you have to take a stand on. These are things where you have to communicate your view as to the national interest. We took the stance we did in the unexpected circumstances that arose because we thought that stance best served Australia's long term interests.
Now there are people in the community who are critical, that is a democracy. That is what our society is about. It is about the right of people to express a view and to have complete freedom of speech. It's also about the right of the will of the people, ultimately, to determine these things. And it is also very much about the right of people to express their views without fear of intimidation, or without fear of threats of any kind of physical violence or physical harm. We have a long and honoured tradition of vigorous, robust, and rambunctious political debate in this country. But we do settle our disputes through debate and not through physical force. And that is the Australian way and the Australian tradition.
Can I say to all of you, echoing some of the remarks that Phillip made, that over the last 5 « years we have done a number of things as a Government that have been designed to build a stronger Australia and to have this country heading in the right direction over the longer term. Not everything we've done has been right. Not everything we've done has been executed perhaps as efficiently as it could have been. Not everything we have done has been popular. Like every other government in the end we are judged by the Australian people. That is the democratic way and the democratic process. But what we have tried to do in each of the areas we've tackled, we've tried to produce a stronger Australia than the one we inherited. And we do have a stronger economy now than we used to have. A vastly stronger economy. My colleague Peter Costello's mum is over there, he's done a magnificent job as Treasurer of this country in producing this much stronger economy. We are a more respected country despite what some of the doomsayers and some of the broadsheets have said over the past few days.
When I go around the world and I meet world leaders they talk in admiration of a number of things about Australia. They talk about the strength of our economy. I mean our economy is growing stronger, more strongly now, than the economy of just about any other western country. They talk about that, they talk about the leadership and strength we displayed over East Timor and they of course talk about the magnificent projection of Australia to the world at the Olympic Games last year. Just a year ago. And what was the most special thing of all about the Olympic Games, even above all of the medals that our magnificent athletes won, the really crŠme de la crŠme of the specialty of the Olympic Games was those wonderful volunteers. I mean some of the world leaders I met at the APEC meeting in Brunei just a few weeks after the Olympic Games asked me about those volunteers. I explained that it was no accident that we were able to project such a wonderful volunteer face to the rest of the world because we have such a long tradition. I suppose it was because this country started in circumstances where we had a small number of people living in a very large and essentially empty country in very remote circumstances that they really had no alternative but to get on with each other and to make the show work. And therefore out of that grew this great volunteer tradition.
The other thing that makes volunteerism work in Australia better than any country in the world is that we are not a class driven society. We are an egalitarian society. Every person is as equal or as good as the next. And if you have that kind of spirit you can work together in times when national unity is needed. You can work together in harmony when you need to achieve a common objective. And the way in which everybody worked together to make those Olympic Games such a wonderful success and people volunteered, I've never forgotten a lady from Caringbah, which is a suburb south of Sydney, and she was, the lady was in her early eighties and she said, John she said, the only thing wrong with this job is they will only work, let me work eight hours at a time. And she was really disturbed about that fact that she couldn't go on as long as she was able to do so. But it did remind me and it warmed me no end to think that you had that tremendous spirit. And that really was the rest of the world being told what we know to be a day to day reality in our community. That sort of thing happens all the time. Every day of every week in Australia right here in your local community, here in Melbourne as it does around our nation. I think it's a wonderful thing about Australia and it is an opportunity for me to say thank you again for what you have done.
The last thing that I do want to say to you is to endorse everything that Ron said about Phillip Barresi. Phillip has been your representative since 1996. It's one of those areas as you know that is a bit like this politically. Some areas are always over there. Some are always over there. And there are some that go like this. And look after him, he's a terrific bloke. Now you would expect me to say that. But I say it with some feeling because he is a very conscientious member. He agonises over things that effect his community and when something that we do he doesn't think is the right thing for Deakin he really lets you know. He lets me know, he lets Peter Costello know, he lets a whole lot of people know and in the end you give in and you fix it. And that is what a good local member should do.
Ladies and gentlemen thank you very much for coming along, it's been great to be amongst you and I hope to have the opportunity as I move around to meet a few more of you. Thank you very much.


E&amp;OE................................
Major General Phillips and Mrs Phillips, Mr Bruce Ruxton and Mrs Ruxton, Mr Rusty Priest the President of the NSW Branch of the RSL, Senator Chris Schacht representing the Leader of the Federal Opposition, my other parliamentary colleagues and particularly a welcome to our visitors from overseas, from Indonesia, from the United Kingdom, from New Zealand and from elsewhere and also representing the Chief of the Defence Force, General Muller.
It is for me a great pleasure to address this RSL National Congress and take the opportunity on behalf of the Government, and I know on behalf of the people of Australia, to again honour the contribution to national life of your remarkable organisation over a very long period of time.
A National Congress of the RSL is an opportunity to take stock. It's an opportunity to reflect on what has happened to your organisation and what has happened to those things to which your organisation has an abiding interest over the past 12 months. It's also for me an opportunity as Prime Minister, and respecting as I should the proper bipartisan traditions of the RSL, to reflect on a number of issues I know are of great and continuing significance to your membership. The values for which the RSL stands are as relevant to Australian life now, although they may be expressed in a more contemporary and different fashion than was previously the case, they are as relevant to the Australia today as they were many years ago.
The importance of pursuing legitimate national interests, the importance of hanging on to those parts of our history that continue to be very important for future. And the importance of nurturing amongst younger generations an understanding of the sacrifice of those who gave us the peace and stability we now enjoy are as important now as they have ever been. And the good news is I think that that goal is being achieved.
Probably the most emotional experience I've had as Prime Minister of Australia was the opportunity last year on ANZAC Day on Gallipoli Peninsula to be involved with the Prime Minister of New Zealand in dedicating the new memorial and taking part in the services on that day. And the experience of mixing with quite a number of the 15 or so thousand young Australians and New Zealanders and a few from other countries was a powerful message to me of the growing relevance of our history and the growing interest of the young in the sacrifices of earlier generations. And there's increasing evidence that with so many of our young connecting with those events, connecting with those sacrifices and connecting with those deeds is increasingly a rite of passage for many of the young men and women of Australia. And how different it is from what it might have been 25 or 30 years ago. It is a reminder to all of us that you should never lose faith in the capacity of each successive generation to understand and treasure the things that are important to our communities and are important to our history.
This is also an occasion for me to reaffirm the continued commitment of the Government to the provision of generous benefits to veterans of all conflicts in which Australia has been involved. I will not weary you with a recitation of the various things that have been done but simply to remind you that many of the things that I spoke of when I last addressed the National Congress in 1998, many of those things, including the measures that were contained in the last Budget, have been implemented. And we continue as a Government to have an extensive ongoing dialogue with the RSL, particularly through my frequent contacts and that of Bruce Scott, who may I say does a remarkably fine job on behalf of the Government in connecting with the RSL and representing the interests of veterans around the Cabinet table. And our commitment to the maintenance of those benefits and the expansion and the improvement of those benefits remains firm and unswerving.
The last couple of years of course have seen a number of decisions made about the erection and of course the dedication of memorials marking particular aspects of Australia's involvement in wars. On Anzac Parade in Canberra, the Australian Service Nurses National Memorial and the Australian National Korean War Memorial were completed and dedicated in October 1999 and April 2000 respectively. And earlier this year on the eve of ANZAC Day, the memorial honouring the association between our ANZAC partner New Zealand was jointly opened by myself and the Prime Minister of New Zealand Helen Clark. And when I was in London last year for the centenary celebrations I discussed with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Tony Blair the erection for the first time of a memorial, an Australian memorial in London to remind the British people of the enormous contribution that this country made to the defence of the United Kingdom, especially in World War II, and that, the site of that memorial has now been selected and the anticipation is that it will be ready for opening on ANZAC Day in the year 2003.
The Government has also maintained its very strong commitment to maintaining and expanding the Australian War Memorial. And very recently I opened the new ANZAC Hall at the War Memorial and the Government provided almost $12 million towards its construction as a major project of the Centenary of Federation. And produced at a cost of $5 million the 8-part documentary Australians at War was screened on ABC Television from ANZAC Day this year.
All of these things along with the maintenance and upgrading of benefits represents a proper, necessary and I believe very fully supported commitment by the Government of Australia to honouring the contribution of people who died defending this country and honouring our continuing obligations to those who survive and live amongst us. There's no group in the Australian community to which more is owed than those who put their lives on the line to defend this country. And there is no group in the Australian community more deserving of the ongoing gratitude and respect of their fellow Australians.
As time goes by we live in ever expanding hope that this country will never again be engulfed in the kind of conflict which overcame us in 1914 and again in 1939. But the League's great motto is of continuing relevance. And in recent years action taken by this country, most particularly the action taken to defend the people of East Timor, is a powerful reminder that although we live in an environment which is no longer bedevilled by great power rivalry of the kind we had before the collapse of soviet communism in the late 1980s, and although we no longer have that to bedevil us, we nonetheless live in a region which is probably more turbulent, more unsettled and therefore potentially more threatening than it might have been 25 years ago.
And we need to maintain a capacity in our defence forces to respond to small scale but nonetheless very significant regional disturbances. It's been an important element of the Defence White Paper released by the Government at the end of last year. That Defence White Paper which I'm pleased to note has brought bipartisan support, is a document which sets out in a very comprehensive way a defence strategy for the future of Australia over the next 25 years. It was prepared after widespread community consultation. The ministerial consideration of it was intensive and a consideration in which myself and the other senior members of the National Security Committee of Cabinet devoted a great deal of time. And it represents our best effort to produce an expanded investment in the future defence of Australia. Something that is defensible in terms of the contribution it makes to the first responsibility of the Government regarding the security of our nation. But it also gives us a capacity to act in regional areas as and when the circumstances require.
So it is very much an occasion ladies and gentlemen for us to reflect on the events of the past year. For me on behalf of the Government to renew our unswerving commitment to the welfare of the returned men and women who have served this country in war. To again honour the contribution of those who did not return. And to repeat on behalf of all of the people of Australia the continuing sense of debt and gratitude we feel to those who gave everything to deliver the kind of society in which we live today for which we are so eternally grateful. Thank you.
Thank you.


Subjects: regional Australia; economy; trade; water rights; illegal immigrants.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. This is the first time I've addressed in the five-and-a-half years I've been Prime Minister this joint gathering and I welcome very much a forum as representative as this to address some remarks more particularly to the outlook in country Australia and to take the opportunity that this forum gives me to say a few things about the Government's approach to some of the challenges and some of the opportunities in those parts of Australia outside the large metropolitan centres.
It is of course in looking at the scene in country Australia it is something of a paradox.  We do so against the background of over the last five to ten years having experienced and gone through a growing debate about the divide between country and city Australia.  And the concern that many have expressed about that divide and about the disadvantage suffered by many communities in country Australia has been well founded and quite justified.  And yet right at the moment if you examine the experiences of many commodities, if you look at many communities in country Australia, we find that some of the conditions are the best that those communities have enjoyed for many years. We have very high export prices for most key farm commodities and they're expected on our advice to be sustained through the current financial year. Wool in the last financial year is up 34%, dairy products are up 33%, cotton is up 29%, beef 22%, wine 19%, and wheat 15%.  And at its Outlook 2001 forecasting conference ABARE predicted the net value of farm incomes to rise by 29% in the year 2001-2002.
And if you look at the employment scene, contrary to the conventional view, employment growth in many of the non-metropolitan areas of the Australian states has been larger than it has been in the metropolitan areas. And employment in Australia's agricultural, fisheries and forestry sector, has grown by around 4% since late 1998, led by 19% growth in the Victorian agriculture, fisheries and forestry industry over that period.
So we are, in trying to examine the economic conditions of country Australia we are presented with that paradox.  I think all of us welcome the very significant upswing in commodity prices. There are a number of reasons for it. It's not because we have a low dollar, it's because we have a super competitive exchange rate.  But our export industries are doing extremely well. I would also argue very strongly, indeed passionately that another reason why our export industries are doing well is that the introduction of the new taxation system over a year ago has taken all of the embedded indirect taxes that used to constrain our export performance out of the whole export sector.  The export sector, particularly the farm export sector, has benefited enormously from the improvement in industrial relations that have taken place over the last five-and-a-half years, most particularly the greater efficiency and the greater productivity on the Australian waterfront as a result of the reforms introduced quite courageously by Peter Reith back in 1998.
But when you take a broader longer term view it does nonetheless remain the case that there are some significant ongoing challenges in many parts of country Australia.  You can't generalise. Many of the regions of country Australia are doing very well, and indeed even before the upturn in commodity prices of which I've spoken they were doing relatively well compared with the rest of the rural sector.  But it's a belief that there still needs to be a longer term response and a longer term declaration of ongoing commitment to country Australia that my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister released on the 29th of August, his  Stronger Regions, a Stronger Australia document which sought to put into perspective not only the individual things that we have endeavoured to do for country Australia over the last few years, but also some of the proposals we have for dealing with those areas of country Australia that are suffering particular disadvantage.  
Of course the foundation of rural prosperity remains national economic wellbeing and country Australians along with the rest of us have benefited through dramatically lower interest rates - another reduction today of a quarter of a percent. And when you reflect of the days of bill rates of 21 and 22 percent for many of Australia's primary producers it is a world away from that experience.  The lower levels of inflation, the stronger industrial relations scene, the other benefits for non-metropolitan Australia in relation to taxation arrangements for diesel.  Adding all of those things together the generic economic condition remains of enormous significance to country Australia. And it remains my view and I think the view of many who observe the rural scene, that the greatest thing that has happened for country Australians, particularly people running farms and businesses over the last few years, has been the significant fall in interest rates because the significant fall in interest rates has made a contribution to tackling the enormous debt problems that many people in rural Australia have faced and continue to face for years ahead.
But in his statement released less than a week ago, what the Deputy Prime Minister sought to do was while recalling the many things that the Government has done for country Australia he sought to outline an approach based on what he called the stronger regions package whereby as a centrepiece of that approach local communities were to be encouraged, drawing on advice from government organisations such as CSIRO and others, local communities were to be encouraged to put forward proposals to the Government as to the most effective way of achieving economic revival and economic recovery within their individual regions. And what was different about this is really the process has been reversed. I can recall having a very lengthy discussion with the Deputy Prime Minister about this approach a few months ago when he indicated to me that after examining very exhaustively other approaches that are being adopted in other parts of the world to deal with the challenge of economically under performing regions and economically challenged regions, the view had been formed that the best approach was to invite local communities in a spirit of self initiative and self help to propose after a proper process of filtering and consultation the most effective way of achieving economic renewal and economic recovery.  There will always be, given the long term trend in world commodity prices, there will always be certain regions in country Australia that are going to be under severe pressure and there will be some areas of country Australia that will undergo major social and economic change and will need major and significant economic restructure.
But what we have endeavoured to do was a number of approaches, most importantly of course is our generic commitment to strong national economic conditions, has been to put a floor under conditions in those regions and then provide through the new strategy that Mr Anderson has outlined, opportunities for those regions to strike out in new and different directions into the future.  He outlined as the centrepiece of the initiative a sustainable regions programme that will cost $100 million over four years and be based on helping community leaders in selected regions to develop local solutions as solutions to the challenges that they face.  The regions will be selected on the basis of criteria including unemployment, family income and also the region's commitment to taking charge of their own future.  And I just want to take the opportunity for a few moments to expand upon the philosophy that under pinned that statement made by the Deputy Prime Minister. 
Regions are productive, they have a future and they are integral to achieving Australia's national goals and objectives.  Our belief is that in relation to the regions that are performing less effectively, a philosophy of self help in partnership with the Government is the best approach to apply public policy for the future.  And that's why we believe it is up to those regions to formulate their own plans in local communities and it's the responsibility of the Government after those plans have been formulated to respond in the best way that we can to facilitate their goals and objectives.  So rather than the Government having formed a view that a region is in need of assistance, proposing particular solutions which often aren't appropriate and are unlikely to work, we are intending in the future to reverse that process and invite those regions to put forward proposals to the Government.  And in this context we're providing resources and tools for analysis and I mentioned the role of CSIRO.  And we also intend as part of this strategy to conduct a comprehensive analysis of regional business needs.
But of course putting out this philosophy and maintaining a very strong commitment to strong generic economic conditions has not been the only way that the Government has responded to the particular needs of country Australia.  I made it clear some years ago that I accepted that not every part of Australia was enjoying an equal measure of the economic prosperity that we were seeing as being quite evident at a national level.  And I recognise and I acknowledge that the Government had a responsibility to respond to particular areas of disadvantage and particular needs of country Australians.  And that is why in four or five major areas you will recall that over the last 18 months to two years the Government has responded in a very substantial way to the under provision of services and a very strong argument that the divide between country and city Australia ought to be closed as much as possible.
In the area of road funding, the Roads to Recovery Programme involving a commitment of $1.6 billion, the bulk of which will go to country Australia has responded to an oft repeated and long advocated need.  The challenge of providing more effective and accessible medical services in country Australia was also something that was brought home to me on my many visits outside of the metropolitan area to different parts of Australia.  And in the budget last year and also apart from the budget process, and again in the budget this year with our practice nursing proposals the Government has sought to respond in a long term way to the desperate need of many country communities to retain the general practitioners and the specialists and also in many areas to gain access to their services where they are now not available.
In the area of communications, the Government has and continues to make very strenuous efforts to bridge what Senator Alston has called the digital divide between city and country Australia.  And we can look to a very long, and I think impressive record of responding.  The Government for example, through the $250 million Networking the Nation Programme which was established from the proceeds of the first partial privatisation of Telstra and also the $670 million provided under the social bonus initiatives from the second partial sale of Telstra.  And the money coming from both of these provisions has resulted in improved access and lower costs for telecommunications services in rural communities through programmes to deliver un-timed local calls, increased mobile phone coverage, enhanced television reception and improved access to the Internet.  We carried out a telecommunications inquiry under the chairmanship of Tim Besley and we've announced a $163 million response to that service inquiry.  And we've made it clear that we want to be satisfied that the communications needs of country Australia have been properly addressed before we give further consideration to additional privatisation of Telstra.  And that $163 million involves an $88 million provision to improve mobile phone services including the provision of mobile services to nearly all towns with more than 500 people.  A $52 million programme in partnership with Telstra to improve Internet performance over Telstra's dial-up network.  $52 million to establish a national communications fund for significant telecommunications projects in rural and remote Australia involving the education and health sectors.  And also a strengthening of the regulatory safe guards.
And in the very important area, the fourth area I foreshadowed, in the very important area of natural resource management the Government has a very creditable record of performance from the time that it was elected.  Because we have placed enormous emphasis on protecting and enhancing the health of Australia's natural resources because that's important to underpinning our future economic growth.  The Natural Heritage Trust, inaugurated after the 1996 election was renewed in the budget with another $1 billion, making a total of $2.5 billion over a period of 11 years.  And that Trust has supported almost 11,000 individual projects across Australia with hundreds of thousands of people involved.  And the great bulk of the projects that have been funded by the Natural Heritage Trust are in country Australia.  And we also, in that same general area, are the first government at a national level to tackle the enormous problem of salinity and water quality.  More than a quarter of Australia's rivers are close to or beyond sustainable extraction limits, nearly 6 million hectares of Australian farm land are at risk of dry land salinity and it's said that this could treble in 50 years to 17 million hectares being at risk.
This programme which involves cooperation with the states on a dollar for dollar basis will involve initially $1.4 billion over a period of years and I use the word initially quite adviseadly,  and the programme will address salinity and deteriorating water quality across 21 priority regions throughout Australia.
I've also announced recently after my visit to the wheat belt of Western Australia not only particular measures in relation to the declaration of exceptional circumstances but also a review of the criteria applying to exceptional circumstances decisions because I do not believe that they have been operating as expeditiously and as efficiently and in some ways and areas they have been operating in a quiet arbitrary fashion under the existing guidelines.  And we have established a number of working groups of Commonwealth and state officials to examine how they might operate more effectively.
And finally of course, to any audience concerned about country Australia, the issue of trade equity looms very large.  It is of course the ongoing view of the Government and I buess of  to just about everybody in this room that the rules of the World Trade Organisation work very much against the interest of a major agriculture exporting nation such as Australia.  It remains our very strong commitment to do all we can at multilateral fora and also bilaterally to obtain improved access in world markets for Australian farm exports.  We have had some success.  We've had, paradoxically, given what I've just said about the World Trade Organisation rules, we've had real success in relation to our fight with the United States regarding Australian lamb exports. And the agreement that the America assistance would cease in November represents a significant achievement by Mark Vaile as our trade minister and does indicate that on occasions the World Trade Organisation rules can work to our benefit.
I indicated yesterday that I did not expect that in principle commitment would be reached with the United States, when I go to Washington next week, to negotiate a free trade agreement between Australia and the United States.  The reason for that is that right at the moment the administration is endeavouring to get trade promotion authority from congress and if negotiations for free trade agreements with individual countries were on foot or immediately in prospect of being on foot at the time of those negotiations and discussions between administration and congress that would be likely to compromise the outcome that the administration wants.  I regard this as very much an issue of timing and it is my view that the issue will be returned to after the question of trade promotion authority has been dealt with.
Suffice it to say, and I say it to this audience and through you to the rural community of Australia, we have absolutely no intention of entering into any free trade agreement with the United States or indeed any other country that does not involve significant benefits for Australian agriculture.  It is of course a desire to get a better deal for Australian agriculture that is one of the driving forces behind our interest in negotiating a free trade agreement with the Americans.
I don't pretend to you it will be easy, I don't forecast that it is going to happen.  But given the size of the United States economy and the overall complementarity of our economy and that of the Americans it makes good sense particularly against the background of rather faltering progress in multilateral fora, it makes a great deal of sense for this country to least examine the possibility and see if we can achieve the negotiation of an agreement on satisfactory terms.
The very last thing that I want to say to you is something of a non-economic and a non-trade character so far as country Australia is concerned.  I am as you all know somebody who like the majority of Australians grew up in the suburbs of a major city, in my case Sydney.  But my understanding of and my attitude towards my view of and my sense of identification with my country has always been very heavily defined by the contribution that country Australia or the bush as I tend to call it more often, has made to the shaping of our identify as a nation.  And therefore when I as Prime Minister think of ways and means in which we might help country Australians, and help the regions that are in difficulty I'm not only thinking of it in  economic terms, I'm thinking of it in national identity terms, I'm thinking of it in social terms.
I cannot conceive of an Australian nation and the sort of nation that I grew up to love and identify with, I cannot conceive of it without a strong and thriving rural sector.  The prosperity of the rural sector is going to wax and wane like the prosperity of other sectors of our economy.  And some regions will do better than others, some regions will need to adjust, some will adjust beyond all recognition with what they may have been a generation ago.  But there does need for overwhelming social and national identity reasons, there does need to be maintained in this country a strong and enduring rural sector.  And that remains a bedrock commitment of the Government I lead, it's the reason why we've endeavoured to achieve generically strong economic conditions, it's the reason why we have responded very generously in many of those areas such as health and roads and communications and the like of which I've spoken.  And it's why in his major address to the National Press Club last week John Anderson outlined his new philosophical approach to responding to the needs of particularly disadvantaged regions.  The Australia of the future must have as an integral part a strong and thriving rural sector and all of the policies of my government will continue to be directed towards achieving that outcome.
JOURNALIST:
This morning the Shadow Trade Minister Peter Cook responded to your comments yesterday on trade and he's made the suggestion that the trade and investment agreement with the US that excludes agriculture might be a way forward for Australia to at least foster some kind of agreement.  I'd like your response to that PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think that's a bit defeatist. I mean surely leaving the politics of it aside, surely the logic is that you should see if you can negotiate a free trade agreement.  Put it all on the table and see what comes out of it.  And if at the end of that process you can't well you might look at something else.  But I just can't for the life of me see why we would, if the opportunity becomes available, and it's, for the reasons I've outlined, we're not going to get an in principle agreement next week.  But once the exchanges between the congress and the administration have been resolved satisfactorily, it makes far more sense to see if you can't negotiate a full free trade agreement.  Now if you can't, well you might look at something else.  But I think it's fundamentally defeatist not to endeavour to try and negotiate a broader understanding.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister you mentioned regions helping themselves.  How would that actually work.  Will it be local government areas?  
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don't think we would seek to be arbitrary about what's a region.  This is one of the problems we've run into with exceptional circumstances.  I found when I was in Western Australia that you quite literally have a, you can have a situation where one please.side of the road is declared with exceptional circumstances and the other side of the road is supposed to be over- brimming with prosperity.  And of course it's never quite like that.  I wouldn't seek to be prescriptive in advance. in a way the regions would be self-selecting according to the particular circumstances.  They might coincide with local government areas.  They might coincide with commonly understood geographically described areas.  They might be a mixture of the two.  But the important principle that John outlined at the Press Club last week was that instead as so often happens, has happened in the past, you get a region that's performing poorly, its got a lot of difficulties and the Government, the Departments all get together and say well what we ought to do is this, that or the other or perhaps say nothing at all.  What John's philosophy represents is an attempt at the local level for those leaders of that region taking advice from many organisation to develop a proposal which can then be put to the government and if they're appropriate assisted to provide help in those areas.  The other great value of this approach is of course it recognises that, as I said in the beginning of my speech, that there are many areas of country Australia that are now doing very well.  And there are some areas of those areas that have been doing relatively quite well even through the general difficulties of country Australia and we do have to have a capacity to separate those from the areas that aren't performing nearly as well.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister one of the biggest issues facing rural Australia today, or probably all Australia, is water.  Who's got it, who doesn't have it, how's it allocated.  Certainly successive Victorian governments have led the way in determining a process whereby water can be allocated and that has come at some expense to many Victorian farmers.  Recently NSW, a group of farmers were given a multi-million dollar compensation pay-out I suppose you might call it for, to give up a lot of the water that they have in their areas for the greater good of the community.  Would the federal government consider doing something similar for Victorian farmers equally affected?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I support the view that, I mean water rights properly defined are in the nature of property rights.  I don't think people who have their property rights taken away from them by governments should be regarded as ineligible for compensation.  I'm not going to sort of make an open ended commitment to the Victorian Government as you invite me to do.  The Victorian Government of course is going to be pretty well off as the years go by as a result of the GST they don't want.  And the whole purpose of, I mean I noticed the other day Mr Bracks was trying to shed responsibilities, its interesting you get a growth tax for the first time in 50 years and you want to get rid of some of the responsibilities.  But I'll resist the temptation to say anything crasser than that on that subject.  But look, the point you make is a very serious one.  Water rights are a huge problem for many farmers.  What has happened in NSW might be a model or it might not depending on what responsibility governments are prepared, particularly state governments, who have the legal power to allocate water.  We don't have the legal power to allocate water.  We don't have any legal power to take away rights.  We wouldn't seek to argue that any government should take away property rights without providing proper compensation.  When I announced our salinity action plan I did indicate that if down the track it became necessary for action to be taken that might affect existing property rights, and that action could only be taken by state governments, legally, we would be willing to consider providing some assistance in relation to that.  And I made that general commitment in those terms and subject to those conditions when I got the endorsement of the Premiers to the Salinity Action Plan.  And of course action on salinity is clearly related to at some stage, water rights.  But I just want to underline the point that my approach is that people who have rights should not have them taken away by government without proper compensation.
JOURNALIST:
What have you learnt about the talents of the Taxation Department in understanding and handling smaller enterprises in the light of the need to rectify the Tax Department mistakes in BAS and contracting legislation.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I learn a lot about it from reading you Robert.  Look, there are a number of aspects of the implementation of the new tax system that I wasn't happy with.  And I was very active in bringing about some changes.  I was very active in getting some changes to the Business Activity Statement, very active in getting changes to aspects of the contractors legislation, and I guess what has to be said is that when you have an enormous number of changes of this kind, an unprecedented level of change to our taxation system, that is going to put a strain on the administration and I think in a way the jury is still out as to whether the tax office responded magnificently to that challenge or responded ordinarily, or responded in the way that I think you suggest it did.  I think to some extent the jury is still out on that.  There has been a series of, how shall I put it, transitional challenges, in the introduction of the new system.  I am very much alive to that can I assure you.  And a number of my colleagues are very much alive to it.  And we are very keen to, consistent with not rolling back the GST, to continue to fine-tune the administrative implementation of the system.  I don't make any apology at all for fine tuning the administrative side of the new system.  We'll continue to do that.  And I think we shouldn't get hung up about whether that's a back flip or a triple pike or whatever.  I mean the reality is that you bring in a new taxation system and you bring in changes of the magnitude that we have you are going to have some administrative glitches and you're going to have some administrative challenges.  And I just want to repeat here today that we continue to be ready to fine-tune it.  And that, as you know, is quite different from lifting the GST on particular items or particular activities.  That is roll-back and we're against that.  We're not going to do that.  I think I'd say the jury is out on the main question that you asked.
JOURNALIST:
Given that the Tampa crisis has now passed, do you see some scope to restore bipartisan consensus to the treatment of this issue?  And specifically given that Kim Beazley says he supports 90% of the legislation now before the parliament dealing with the processing of asylum seekers in Australia, would you be prepared to compromise on any aspects of that legislation to ensure an outcome before parliament rises before the election?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don't know.  I hadn't intended myself to raise this issue.  But you've raised it and that's fair enough I'll answer it.  I don't frankly know what the Opposition's position is on this.  My criticism of Mr Beazley on this is that he's flip-flopped from one side to the other.  When I made the statement to the parliament that we had asked the SAS to go on board the Norwegian vessel, he immediately got up and said at a time like this the last thing the Government needs is a negative, carping Opposition.  And I thought that was a pretty fair statement.  Four and a half-hours later, after we introduced our Border Protection Bill he was saying that I was fanning racism, exploiting wedge politics and promoting Hansonism.  At the weekend when I announced a deal with New Zealand and Nauru, he said that was a humanitarian solution to the problem.  And the next day Bob McMullan said it was a humiliating solution to the problem.  I mean you can't have it both ways.  I mean on an issue like this you've either got to be for essentially what the Government is doing or against it.  Now if the Border Protection Bill had been passed, we wouldn't now be having a court case.  If the Border Protection Bill had been passed in the amended form that I offered and that was with a sunset clause of 6 months, it would have then run out in February of next year.  And if you had a Labor government by then well they could just decide to leave it run out and if we were returned well we'd consider whether we were going to revive it.  
Now as far as the legislation is, the other legislation that is held up in the parliament is concerned, he says he's in favour of 90% of it.  But like all of these things the 90% is not the problem.  It's the 10% that he's against.  And the key thing is whether you're going to have what they call, they lawyers call, a privitive clause.  Whether you're going to have a provision that once a tribunal in effect has made a decision you can't go on endlessly appealing that decision.  That's the problem.  That's the problem that Philip Ruddock's been railing about now for a couple of years.  And I see no sign that they're going to give way on that.  I mean he says that he wants bipartisanship, and yet sort of acts in a different fashion.  I mean we determined a course on this and if the Opposition is prepared to give us bipartisanship well that's fine.  I don't think bipartisanship is an end in itself unless you're bipartisan about the right thing.  I mean it's not good public policy for the Government and the Opposition to agree about the wrong policy.  It's desirable to have bipartisanship on issues involving our relations with other countries where there is an immediacy about them and where there is particular sensitivity and particular tension.  Now it ought to have been possible in my view for the Opposition to have maintained bipartisanship on this issue, consistent with his initial response.  But he has gone from one side to the other almost on a daily basis.  And that Border Protection Bill, if that had been passed by the parliament then, and could have been passed on the basis of a 6 month sunset clause, then all of the concerns he had would have only related to a 6 month period which would have involved an election with the possibility of him being in charge of things after the election.  I hope not.  But that's in the hands of the Australian public.  And that election as you know will be held before the end of the year.  
So you're essentially looking at a period of three months during which all of these unimaginable disasters might have been perpetrated under that Bill.  Hardly likely as it would involve at least a period of 4 or 5 weeks of caretaker government during the period of the election.  It seemed to me that that was a very very simple proposition to have accepted.  It would have obviated any legal doubt because it would have put beyond the reach of the court what many people regard as the right of government to decide these things.  Now it hasn't been passed.  That was his decision.  I don't really think it's very credible for him to come back and say well look we opposed you on things but we're still interested in bipartisanship.  I mean I'll be convinced they're interested in bipartisanship if they demonstrate it on 


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you my fellow Australians for that very warm welcome and it is for me for quite a pleasure to come to Ocean Grove at the invitation of my very good friend Stewart MacArthur and to spend a few moments with you addressing some of the things that we've endeavoured to do to head Australia in the right direction and to strengthen our country over the last five and a half years.  Over that five and half years we have done a lot of things, we haven't been perfect, like any other government we've made our share of mistakes and where we have made mistakes we've tried to acknowledge them and we've tried to be responsive to people's concerns.  But what I think we can say is that looking back over that five and a half year period Australia is fundamentally stronger and better respected around the world than what it was in the early months of 1996.
Domestically we certainly have addressed the need to give Australia a strong and growing economy.  When we came to office the Federal Government owed $96 billion.  By the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 of that $96 billion.  I can't think of anything you can better do for the future generations of Australians than to give them a relatively debt free future because whether you inherit debt on a personal basis or whether you inherit it on a national basis it really represents an encumbrance on what you can do and what you can hope to achieve in the years ahead.  And as a result of reducing that debt and many other things we've been able to see some of the lowest interest rates that this country has had for 30 or 40 years.  Now low interest rates are fantastic if you're buying a home, they're fantastic if you are running a business, they're not quite so fantastic if you're living on fixed investments. I understand that, I do understand that let me assure you I'm very much alive to that little economic reality and that is one of the reasons why in a number of areas and indeed most recently in the last federal budget the Government introduced a number of special measures to give additional help to self funded retirees within the Australian community.  That's why we introduced a number of additional tax concessions for self funded retirees.  It is why we extended the seniors card very significantly to people in middle and higher income brackets, and it's why we have progressively over the past few years introduced a number of other very important measures.
Now it is true that as Stewart said that we have undertaken major reforms to give this country a capacity to compete far more effectively than would have been the case if we had left those things unattended.  We don't live in an easy international economic environment, back in 1997 when an economic downturn hit the nations of Asia most people predicted that it was going to spill over into the Australian economy.  People predicted that we were going to be sucked into the whirlpool, that we were going to be engulfed by the same economic downturn that affected the Asian economy.  But we were able to sail through that relatively unscathed and the reason that we were able to sail through that relatively unscathed is that we had undertaken a lot of economic reforms.  If we hadn't of cut the budget deficit in 1996, if we hadn't have set out to reform the industrial relations system than it wouldn't have been as easy for us to take that Asian economic downturn head on and achieve a situation where Australia was relatively unaffected by it.  And the same thing applies at the present time.  Internationally there are some clouds on the economic horizon.  I'm not excessively gloomy, I have a rather more positive view about the American economy than many others, the American economy is very big, it's very flexible, it has a great capacity to bounce back and the fundamentals of the American economy remain very strong.  But whenever there's a bit downturn in American and Europe inevitably that will have some wash over into other parts of the world.  But so far this country is avoiding the impact of that.  We are growing at a faster rate than America or Europe.  We have very low interest rates, we have a low inflation rate and because we don't have a budget deficit and because we are seen by international financial markets as having undertaken very important economic reforms we're seen as a better risk by  those financial markets than many other countries.
And the other thing that working I'm very happy to say in our favour at the present time and it is long overdue and that is the rural sector is now enjoying some of the best seasons that it's had for years.  And isn't that welcome?  It's been a long time between drinks for the farmers of Australia.
Right at the moment we're getting the best prices for beef and we had a great breakthrough with the American's on lamb and that ridiculous quota that President Clinton imposed on our lamb exports is going to disappear altogether in November of this year and that is a terrific outcome for Australia's lamb exporters.
If you're a farmer or a grazier or any type of primary producer in Australia you don't normally get many wins on the international trade front.  But on this particular occasion we were very successful. But overall we are doing better in the farm sector.  And one of the reasons that we're doing well is not because we have a low dollar, it's because we have a super competitive exchange rate.  And that super competitive exchange rate is working very much to our advantage.  Another thing that's working to our advantage is that we now have efficient waterfront and you may remember a few years ago we had a bit of a fight to get to an efficient waterfront and Peter Reith did an absolutely fantastic job on behalf of the Government in achieving that outcome.
And the other thing can I say and to people who may be a little sceptical about some aspects of the tax reform system that we now have as a result of tax reform we have taken $3.5 billion of embedded taxes out of the costs of exports from this country, because when you have a GST you don't have any tax on exports and by introducing a GST we've given a greater competitive advantage to Australia's exporters and that's one of the other reasons why we now are having a marvellous time and achieving great things on the export front.
So ladies and gentlemen those are some of the things that the government has been able to do,  some of things that the Government has been able to achieve.  And in the process of doing that we haven't neglected the more vulnerable sections of the Australian community.  Some of you may have read a very detailed analysis in the Melbourne Age a few weeks ago of the impact of the new tax system on various groups of families within the Australian community.  And contrary to all the propaganda that is hurled at us by our opponents, in the media and on the other side of politics, what that survey showed was that the people who got the most benefit were the people at the lower income ranges.  And that is contrary to all of the propaganda that is hurled at us.  They say 'Oh,Howard's only for the rich', 'the Liberal's are only lookinf after the well heeled'.  The reality is that under our taxation system the family benefit part of it, the people who got the greatest benefit, and this is not me speaking, this is an independent economic research organisation based in the Australian National University.  And they often produce stuff that's critical of us.  So they're a very reliable witness on this issue and they said that surprisingly after they did all the analysis that the groups that fared best were the low income groups. I don't find that surprising because that's what we intended to do.  We never intended taxation reform to be something that was going to penalise the more vulnerable and the poorer section of the Australian community.
So ladies and gentlemen, we do have a good story to tell, but we don't say it triumphantly and we recognise that we've got a few things wrong and we've made our share of errors. But I do believe that over the past few weeks in relation to the very challenging issue of people smuggling this Government has taken a very strong stance.  I keep reading in the papers that 'Oh,he's done it for the polls'.  What, I arranged for that to happen? I mean what a ridiculous proposition. Two weeks ago I had no idea that these events were going to unfold. We have been grappling with the problem of people smuggling and illegal immigration now for several years.  And we are responding to that problem against a background of being the second most generous country in the world in taking refugees.  We're the second most generous.  And there is only a handful of countries in the world that will take refugees and Australia is one of them. And I get as mad as hornet, and I bet you do, when I read people lecturing us about our alleged hard heartedness and yet some of them come from countries that won't take any refugees like Australia does.  
Now we are a humane country and we will always in relation to this issue, we will always act both legally and decently. We have sent a signal through what we did, in relation to the people on the Tampa, we have sent a signal that this country is no longer a country of easy destination or a soft touch for people smugglers.  We have also by deciding to increase naval surveillance of international waters between the Indonesian Archipelago and Australia, we also hope to increase the deterrent for other vessels to come to this country. I can't guarantee you that more won't come. I make that clear.  And we will behave in response to them both legally and decently as you would expect any Australian government to do.  
Right at the moment Mr Ruddock who I think has done a magnificent job as an Immigration Minister on this issue, magnificent, right at the moment Philip Ruddock and Peter Reith and Alexander Downer are in Jakarta on a difficult mission.  And the purpose of that visit is to try and persuade the Indonesian Government to enter an agreement with Australia that will discourage people from coming to Indonesia in the first place because it will no longer be possible for them to easily transit through Indonesia onto boats and come to Australia because that is the core of the problem.  And we have been trying for months to persuade Indonesia to reach an agreement and we'll go on trying. And I don't want to condemn Indonesia because I understand that she has a lot of major problems - a population of more than 200 million, a weak economy, a lot of people in that country very poor - and on their scale of priority dealing with this issue is obviously not as high as many of the other issues. 
But fundamentally a long term solution to this problem does involve an agreement with our neighbours and we have been endeavouring to achieve that agreement now for some time.  When I was in Jakarta only a few weeks ago I raised this issue with the President of Indonesia and her senior ministers. And I offered on behalf of Australia through an international organisation to fund the construction of a processing centre for illegal immigrants in Indonesia which would be handled by the international migration organisation - the United Nations High Commission for Refugees. And our offer was we will fund it through that organisation, they will look after the processing of people to determine their refugee status and while that was going on the people would be held in the detention or processing centre in Indonesia.  Now that represented a genuine fair offer to assume all of the financial costs made on behalf of Australia.  Now that proposal, it wasn't rejected but it was not accepted either and that will be one of the proposals that will be put on the table again by my three ministerial colleagues when they are in Jakarta because my friends it is self evident that if we can create a situation that people coming to Indonesia know that in future they won't automatically be able to come to Australia then that will discourage them from going to Indonesia in the first place.
Now I don't for a moment play down the enormous problem the world has with refugees. There are over 20 million people who can be broadly classified as refugees around the world at the present time. And many of them are living in pitiful conditions in refugee camps and many of those people have a greater entitlement to come to this country as part of our refugee program than many of the people who are preyed upon by people smugglers and placed on boats to come to Australia. And that is one of the arguments that we have constantly advanced that the only way in which we can fairly deal with this problem is to have everybody assessed according to the same rules and in the same fashion so that the most necessitous cases are put at the front of the queue and the most necessitous cases are given the most immediate and the most compassionate response.
This will continue to be a difficult issue for our country but we have over the last several weeks by the actions that I have outlined we have presented to the world and to the people smugglers a clear message that we are not going to be a soft touch, we are going to continue to defend as every country has the right to defend the integrity of its borders, and we are also going to assert the right as every country has the right to assert and that is to decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come.
The last thing I want to say on this issue is that I am very proud of the fact that we have a non-discriminatory immigration policy and that we have been able to welcome to Australia people from all around the world. And I think it has added to the richness of this country, it has strengthened this country.  As I walked around this room, as I met people and I realised like all other communities I meet as I move around Australia, that we are made up of people from all around the world and that is a wonderful thing of which Australia can be very proud and we have achieved a degree of social cohesion in this country despite our ethnic diversity that few other countries have been able to achieve. And I think that is something that's very precious for this country and it is something that I know everybody in this room would want to hang onto. 
So my friends there is just one other thing that I would like to talk about, and then I'd like to continue moving around and to meet as many of you as I possibly can, and that is to say something in commendation of my very good friend and colleague Stewart Macarthur who invited me to come here today. Stewart has been a representative in the national Parliament now since 1983.  He's been a very good friend of mine, he's been a great advocate for this electorate. As I drove down the Geelong Road from Melbourne this morning I saw all of this work going on and I thought well this is going to make it easier to travel and I thought of that great decision the Government took last year to support the construction of the Geelong Road.  And you know, roads are generally a state responsibility. I can assure you ,but there are categories of roads where there is a federal component as well as a state component and the Geelong Road is one of those and there's another one in Melbourne called I think the Scoresby Freeway that's had quite a lot of publicity recently.  But I just want to say what a terrific, hard working, committed, dedicated local member you have in Stewart Macarthur. 
Ladies and gentlemen thank you very much for receiving me this morning.  I look forward to meeting as many of you as possible as I move around the room.  Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE................................
Thank you very much Phillip, to Dennis Napthine, the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria, Vasan, all of my parliamentary colleagues, both federal and state, ladies and gentleman.
The first time that I visited India was in 1964. It was long before I had entered parliament, I had read quite a bit about India, I understood many of the things we had in common, the most important of which is represented by names like Laxman and Tendulkar, which of course transcends anything else as far as the common bonds between our two societies are concerned. And I remember going there in 1964 and I wandered into a sitting of the Supreme Court of India and having not long graduated from the Sydney University Law School I still retained some memory of the Constitutional law that I had been taught and there I sat down in the Supreme Court of India and heard a Constitutional law case and it was all very, it was all to become very familiar. It was an argument between the Federal Government and the State Government. The only difference is that it was India and not Australia but you know as the years went by I was to be reminded of that and to cap it all off the lawyers were arguing about the balance of power between the federal government and the state government and the lawyer for the state government quoted a couple of cases decided by the High Court of Australia in furtherance of his argument and it just bought home to me that although there are enormous differences in size and culture and history between India and Australia there are many, many things that we have in common. Beyond of course the one that I treasure so much and that is our common love of that great game.
But ladies and gentlemen may I say how much I appreciate the warmth of the welcome that was extended to me tonight. Can I congratulate the Lotus Liberal Club for the tremendous support that it has been extending to the Liberal Party now for a number of years, it really is very warmly appreciated.
This gathering here tonight is very much the face of the modern Australia. It brings together all of the elements of our very rich and diverse community. Our traditions, the addition to those traditions and the changing of those traditions that have come from so many different groups, which are in their different ways tributaries to the river of the modern Australian community. And it is a night of course that brings together many ethnic groups but it is a night that is being particularly sponsored by the Young Liberals of Victoria and by the Liberal Indian Community here in the Eastern Suburbs of Melbourne. And I had the opportunity having visited India for the first time in 1964, I had the opportunity to go back there in the year 2000 and visit the current Indian Prime Minister and to meet many of his senior Ministers and to have brought home to me the very important links that exist between Australia and India and I know that is important to many people here tonight.
But even more important to everybody here tonight irrespective of whether you were born in Australia or where you were born overseas, we are above everything else we are Australians together. And the great strength of what we have been able to achieve in Australia is that yes, everybody is entitled to retain and treasure and protect their cultural identity and their heritage. Everybody has a soft spot for the country in which they were born and nobody should ever be expected to give up that soft spot, nobody. But while we respect that, we've also achieved in this country a sense of cohesion and a sense of unity and it's something that is the envy of the rest of the world and there are number of reasons why we have done it. One of the reasons is that we are essentially a classless society, we inherited many wonderful things from our British and Irish forebears but one thing we didn't inherit, thankfully, is class distinction. We are an open, egalitarian community.
We have extended the gift of welcome to people from 140 different nations around the world and there is no society around the world that has done it quite in the way that we have been able to do it. And when you think that over the last 10 years we have seen the disintegration of the old Yugoslavia and we have amongst the Australian community hundreds of thousands of Australians who owe their background to the old Yugoslavia whether they be Serbian or Slovenian or Croatian or whatever and despite all of the difficulties that have occurred in that former country, those difficulties have not really been played out within the Australian community. Because although many Australians of those particular heritages would have followed the events often anxiously and with a great deal of feeling they recognised that they've moved on from that and they now live as Australians more than anything else within the Australian community. And I think it is a tremendous tribute to the sense of unity and cohesion in the Australian community and the same thing has been played out with the very difficult circumstances that exist in the Middle East and people, whatever their feelings are about that, they always remember that above everything else we are Australian and the unity of the Australian community is far more important than any depth of feeling people may have about something that is happening or occurring in their former homeland.
So we have a lot to be thankful for in this country, we have achieved more in terms of social and ethnic cohesion in Australia than I believe any society on earth. And that is why we have a right to look the rest of the world in the eye and say we will decide who comes here and on what terms. Because we have an immigration policy which is non-discriminatory. We don't exclude people on the grounds of their race or their religion. We abolished the White Australia Policy in the 1960s and we have a very strong commitment to the non-discriminatory immigration policy and nations that have that approach have a right within the embrace of a non-discriminatory approach to immigration to decide who comes here and in what circumstances. And the other point I would make is that this is the second most generous country in the world in taking refugees after Canada on a per capita basis.
And if you go through the history of Australia, the acceptance even in the late 1930s and the early '40s of Jewish refugees from Europe. The acceptance after the war of what were called displaced persons from many of the refugee camps of Europe and the fact that in the 1970s on a per capita basis Australia took more Indo-Chinese refugees than any country in the world including the United States. Now with that background we are entitled, as we have done in recent weeks and will continue to do, to resist within the limits of the law and within the limits of decent humane behaviour we'll continue to resist the attempts of those who would come here illegally and without any kind of authority. We're not seeking in any way to deny to genuine refugees the opportunity to come to Australia along with the opportunity of going to other societies. We'll continue to maintain a generous refugee programme but what we ask is that everybody must be assessed equally, everybody must be assessed in accordance with the international rules because there are millions of refugees whose entitlement and whose claim on grounds of equity and fairness is vastly superior to many people who would seek to come here illegally. And that is why it is important that we take the stand that we have. Now I don't seek to guarantee to you and I can't that we can stop all illegal entry into this country but I can promise you is that we will try and reduce it as much as we can. We will try to continue to send signals to those who would come here illegally that we will do everything within our power to stop it and that is why we took the stance we did last week. It is why we will pursue as vigorously as we can with the government of Indonesia the negotiation of a bilateral agreement about the movement of people out of that country and that is why Alexander Downer and Peter Reith and Philip Ruddock, and can I say what a magnificent job Philip Ruddock has done in a very difficult portfolio over the last few, and that is why the three of them are going to Jakarta in two days time. It won't be easy, we've been trying to negotiate an agreement with the Government of Indonesia now for some time and we will continue to persevere but I hope in the end that it might be possible to do so but I also hope that the events of the past couple of weeks have not only, as it undoubtable has, focussed the Australian community on this issue but also I hope focussed the attention on the world community on the need for a more concerted, cooperative, collaborative effort between the various nations of the world and the various of the international agencies to try and deal with this very difficult and at this time quite grievous problem.
But I haven't only come here tonight to talk about that issue, much at all as it has preoccupied my time and preoccupied the attention of the Australian community but also to say a couple of words about the challenge that lies ahead for the Liberal Party over the next two or three months. We are going to have an election and, sometime, before the end of the year. I have said all along that it would be towards the end of the year as each week goes by, people tend to believe me a little bit more.
The latest constitutional date to hold an election, I'm told is the twelfth of January the year 2002. I can assure you I won't interrupt the Boxing Day test, that would be sacrilegious and I won't interrupt the New Year's Test in Sydney either, that would be equally sacrilegious so I think on that basis I can let you into a secret. We will have the election before the end of the year. Just exactly when, like all other Prime Ministers I'll decide that at some stage a bit closer to where it has to be held. But it will be a tough fight. We are doing better now than we were doing a few months ago but it is still going to be very hard to win a third term. We have a very good story, we have a very good record, we have affected a lot of big changes that this country has needed for a long time and over the past five and half years we have been a very active government and I promised myself when I became Prime Minister that I wasn't going to squander the opportunity of having the highest and most priveleged office in Australia. That I was going to use the, whatever period of time that the people of Australia gave me in cooperation with my colleagues, I was going to use that time to change those things that ought to be change but equally to defend and protect those things that continued to serve the country and continued to stand us in very good stead.
And as we look back over the last five and half years we have come a long way. We've made our share of mistakes, we haven't don't' everything as well as we might have but fundamentally the country is heading the right direction. We are a stronger country than we were five and half years ago. We are stronger economically we have stronger defences, we have greater respect around the world, we've had the courage to confront some of the great reform issues that we have needed for a long time. Taxation reform has been a huge challenge. It has probably cause a few people in this room a bit of transitory angst in its introduction but we are as a result of that tax system, we do have a sounder revenue base and can I just make one emphatic point to you about the whole debate on taxation and its contribution and the people of this country. My political opponent, the Leader of the Opposition, the alternative Prime Minister of Australia is saying that he wants more resources put into health and education yet in the same breath Mr Beazley says "I want more money put into health and education but I am against the taxation system that will in the end deliver in the end more resources for health and education" And we are an aging population and we therefore have to find a revenue base that will grow with the economy so we have more money in the years ahead to pay for the services that an aging population will need. And that is why fundamentally we brought in a Goods and Services Tax. That is the strongest argument of all for the changes that we made to Australia's taxation system because the old indirect tax system was literally dying on it's feet. It was contributing less and less to the future revenue base of Australia because it was restricted to goods, it didn't apply to services and it was restricted to a dwindling area of the goods sector and if we hadn't have introduced the GST, in the years ahead we would have had to have resorted to much higher levels of personal income tax in order to fund the services that we would need for an aging population and that deep down is why Mr Beazley on the eve of the Aston bi-election when he was asked the question "Do you think Australian's pay too much income tax?" He said "No I don't" and can I say after 27 years in public life when a political leader says that he doesn't think income tax is too high what he is really saying is give me an opportunity and I will make it even higher and that really, is an inherent contradiction in the position that the Labor Party is taking in relation to the funding of health and education services because the GST goes to the States and as the years go by the states will get far more money out of the GST than they would have got out of the old revenue sharing arrangements. Indeed the year after next Queensland will be the first state to be better off and as time goes by all of the other states will be much better off and they will therefore have more money to spend on public hospitals and government schools which are two of the principle areas where provision is made the health and education. So there is a fundamental contradiction in the position the Labor Party takes.
But it is not only in the area of taxation that where we have some stark differences. In an area that is very important to my heart and something that I devoted a great deal of time to in my years in politics and that is changing Australia's Industrial Relations system. Of all the things that might happen if a Labor Government were to be elected at the end of this year, none would grieve me more than the thought that our Industrial Relations reforms would be rolled back and that is what would happen. You would have coast to coast Labor governments because you now have State Labor Governments in five out of six states and if you impose a Federal Labor Government on top of that you would give an almost unprecedented freedom of movement and freedom of action for the Trade Union heavies of this country. You have already seen here in Victoria the re-immergence of Trade Union muscle since the change of state government. You have seen the notorious no ticket, no start rule come back on building sites in Western Australia. As somebody said at lunch time today "If the Labor Party wins the next election you will have every living former ACTU President of the front bench of the Government with the exception of Bob Hawke, he would probably be running around settling all of the disputes that would be created. Well trying to settle them, so it will be a very different picture and don't underestimate the change that would come over this country if you did have to coast to coast State and Federal Labor Governments. So my friends there are a lot of reasons why we should work very hard over the weeks and months ahead. We have changed Australia and strengthened Australia in so many ways. It is more respected around the world as a result of the actions that we have taken in so many areas but don't anybody imagine that that can't be changed and can't be rolled back. We need a third term to bed down, forever, the changes that we have introduced over the last five and half years. Two terms is not enough to really make a permanent difference. The great changes that was made the United Kingdom in the years that Margaret Thatcher was Prime Minister. Those great changes have not been rolled back by subsequent Labour Government in that country because they have become imbedded but if you are only in power for five or six years and not a longer period it is possible for a new government to come in and roll back all of those changes. So it is important that the gains we have made on the economic front, the gains we have made with much lower interest rates. That great line of Peter Costello's during the Aston bi-election that the last time Labor held the seat of Aston interest rates were at 17%. Where they are now, $300 a month less is the product of months of paying off your home, is the product of the changes we have made. Any of you in small business? You will remember that during the Keating recession you were paying interest rates of 19% and 20% and our farmers were paying bill rates of 21% and 22% compared with the sort of interest rates we are now paying it almost seems in retrospect something of an economic nightmare.
And we have lots to defend, we have a lot to protect, we have a lot of things that we still must do in the long term interest of Australia. And very importantly we must maintain the great social cohesion and harmony that the Australian community has. So ladies and gentlemen can I say once again how delighted I am to be here tonight and can I pay tribute to Australian's of Indian heritage for the contribution that they have made to our nation. I thank them for what they have done for Australia. May I thank them very warmly for what they have done. In doing so I think all the other groups who are represented here tonight and most importantly of all can I thank the collective Australian community for the tremendous example that it represents to the rest of the world. We are modern and social and community harmony. We respect each other, we emphasis our similarities, we respect our differences and that is the way in which we can live together in cooperation and harmony and that is the why we all together what ever our back ground we celebrate the shear joy of being Australian.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Peter.  John Olsen, ladies and gentlemen.  This is a special honour and privilege for me to come tonight, I hope on behalf not only of the Government, but of the entire Australian community to honour one of Australia's truly great painters.  To express my admiration and awe at the wonderfully entertaining and apt and eloquent tribute paid to John by Edmund Capon.  And to take the opportunity very briefly before I make the presentation to say how important it is that a nation that seeks to be a fulfilled and great nation in the proper senses of those two words, that a nation honours its achievers and its outstanding sons and daughters in all walks of life.  
It's commonly said that Australia is obsessed with sport.  It's frequently said that we don't honour enough those who contribute through the arts and contribute through business and contribute in other walks of life.  Whether or not that accusation is true is not really to the point tonight because what we are doing tonight is to honour a truly great painter and in the process to honour the contribution of the visual arts to the life of our nation.  This particular medal has only been awarded on four previous occasions; to Roger Kemp and to Lloyd Rees and to Louis Kahan and ladies and gentlemen it is fitting for all of the reasons that were outlined by Edmund Capon, it is very fitting that it should be awarded tonight to John Olsen.  
He has had a very distinguished career not only as a painter but also as a teacher.  His efforts have previously been honoured with the awarding of the Wynn Prize in 1965 and again 20 years later in 1985.  Edmund has mentioned that his mural Salute to Slessor's Five Bells hanging in the northern foyer of the Concert Hall is probably one of the most viewed paintings in Australia.  And as demonstrated by that and other pieces his work has been extraordinarily versatile and it's been greatly informed by his travel and by his love and appreciation of literature.  His identification with the Australian landscape comes through in all of his work.  
As a nation we owe a great deal to him as we do to all of our great visual artists for what they have done to interpret who we are, to interpret to us what our land is and help us understand the connection between our land and who we are.  The lives of all of us and the life of our nation is enormously enriched by our artists.  Our artists are irrepressibly putting views and expressing attitudes about our society.  We don't always find them comfortable we don't always agree with them but we always find them challenging and refreshing. And we will always want a society that encourages and honours its artists.  
As a Government, and this is not meant politically it's meant generically, as a Government we place great store on the role of the arts in the Australian community.  We've done a number of things over the last few years to demonstrate that commitment in the various art forms. And recently as you know we've initiated an inquiry into the contemporary visual arts and crafts sector to look at issues affecting the sustainability, the development and the promotion of that sector.  And that inquiry is being conducted by Rupert Myer and is due to report in March of next year.  And I understand advertisements will appear in this weekend's media calling for submissions to the inquiry and an issues paper will be released in the near future.  I hope it provides an opportunity for those concerned about the future of the sector, those who treasure its place and its role in Australian society to make submissions.  And echoing the remarks made about the never ending identification of your industry like others with the taxation office, I'm pleased to note that a submission has been forwarded to me by the Association concerning taxation issues affecting visual artists and that's going to be considered by the inquiry as well.
Organisations such as your own do much to remind the Australian community of the place of your particular sector of the arts in our life and in our community.  But tonight is a night for a very special man, it's for a person who has been part of the visual arts scene of Australia for decades.  He's somebody who has not only given much through his artistic talent, but he's given much through his wonderfully rich personality, his lively wit, his wonderful identification with those things that so many of us as Australians hold very dear.  I have a very great pleasure in inviting John to come forward to join me on the stage and to receive from me the medal, the Artists and Sculptors Medal to join those other four great Australian visual artists, Arthur Boyd, the one I forgot to mention before, Louis Kahan, Lloyd Rees and Roger Kemp.
[ends]


Subjects: Internet Assistance Programme; Federation; information technology; teachers.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Maureen for that lovely introduction, Fran Bailey my Parliamentary colleague and Member for McEwen who has invited me to her electorate today, Monsignor Brigadier and my Ministerial colleague Richard Alston, Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen and students of St Mary's and other schools in the Seymour district.
That was a great performance of the Federation Rap.  It really was.  As I've gone around Australia over the last year I've enjoyed many different presentations of the Federation story and that was different, I haven't heard that one before and I haven't heard one done quite like that before and it really was very entertaining and I think it's a demonstration of what a wonderful opportunity Federation has been for all of us to rediscover our passion for Australia and all of us to rediscover in our own way the enormous things that our nation has achieved over the last 100 years.
And the really good thing about the Federation celebrations are the small ceremonies that it's given people an opportunity to have in small parts of Australia.  It's not just the a big parade through the streets of Melbourne or the re-enactment of the opening of Parliament at the Exhibition Building, or the big celebrations in Sydney on the first of January and the other great celebrations in different states, but I think the way in which it's been possible for local communities to connect with the history of our country.   And I remember the day when we had the re-enactment of Parliament on the 9th of May I went out to a tiny primary school in one of the suburbs of Melbourne and had the opportunity with the local member Phil Barresi of presenting the Federation medallions to the children and it was a wonderful ceremony and it reminded me a bit of having been presented with a 50 year medallion when I was at the Earlwood Primary School in Sydney back in 1951.  
But ladies and gentlemen I'm delighted to be amongst you this afternoon, this is a group of people who represent the volunteer community spirit of Seymour.  It's a group of people who bring together the educational and civic leaders of the district.  It's an opportunity for me because this is not only the year of Federation celebrations, it's also the year that we celebrate the wonderful contribution of volunteers to our community, it's an opportunity for me to say thank you to all of the volunteers who make our community so much happier and so much more cohesive.  
Australia is the greatest volunteer society in the world, I think it's because when we began there was so much distance and so few people that we all had to club together to get things done.  And out of that grew that great natural spontaneous volunteer spirit and when you put on top of that the fact that we are not a class driven society in the way that other societies are and we mix easily with each you have the perfect conditions to create a genuine volunteer tradition.  And I know as a parent, my children have now grown up, the youngest is 21 and we celebrated his 21st birthday with some joy last Sunday, and I know that in our younger days when our children were your age everybody volunteered in relation to our local schools and that's always been the Australian way.  And it is an opportunity though for me to say thank you to all of those wonderful people who work together and cooperate to make our local community function all that more effectively.
The other thing that I'm reminded of course of today and I was down at Ocean Grove this morning on the other side of Melbourne and I attended a not dissimilar gathering to this, I'm reminded of course as I move around Australia and particularly when I go out of the metropolitan area of the tremendous importance to communities, the further you get away from the big metropolitan centres, the tremendous importance of having effective communication.  I had the opportunity before I came into this hall to meet some of the children who were constructing their own website on their computers.  And I marvelled.  One little girl told me she was eight and she had made her own webpage and I asked her how long she'd been doing it, I said did you start when you were six?  And she said no. And I said did you start when you were seven?  She said no.  I said when did you start?  She said I started this year.  And I thought to myself gee you're a long way ahead of a few people I know who are roughly around my age and a little bit older indeed even a few years younger.  And it just is a reminder of how the world has changed.  
I'm reminded of how the communications have transformed everything.  I had the opportunity when I was back in the 1960's, when I was in my middle 20's to go overseas and have a working holiday in London and sort of the big communications event of my being away for a year was to ring my mother once on the phone, reverse charges I have to confess, and to say hello and that happened once.  And I have a son overseas at the moment on a similar working holiday about the same age and of course we communicate very very regularly and easily on the mobile telephone.  And of course it's a different world, you don't write as much now as people used to then and the whole things changed.
And isn't it a fantastic experience and what the information age and information technology and the speed of communications has done, it's bought people together, its demolished distance, it's tackled the tyranny of distance that Geoffrey Blaimey so eloquently described as being one of the great challenges facing Australia historically.  And I think that's a great experience and I think it's a great opportunity to bring people together.  And that's one of the reasons why the Government has put a lot of emphasis on trying to ensure that people who don't live in the city have the same opportunities to access the Internet and they have the same opportunity to share in the information technology revolution as people who live in the big cities.
So Richard Alston who's my sort of resident ministerial guru when it comes to information technology, anything to do with communications or culture or film he's your man.  He is really very good and this afternoon Richard and I are announcing a $50 million programme called The Internet Assistance Programme as the next stage of our programme to respond to the recommendations of an inquiry into the communications needs of country Australia chaired by Mr Tim Beasley.  And this IAP, the Internet Assistance Programme, is a $50 million joint initiative with Telstra to improve Internet data speeds to achieve the equivalent of at least 19.2 kilobits per second across Australia.  And the idea is that if you think you're under speed you can find out what your speed is and then you can get advice on how to get up to speed so that we will have right across Australia a minimum Internet speed of 19.2 kilobits per second.  Now there are many parts of country Australia that don't have that speed at the moment and what we're doing with this programme is allowing people to find out where they are and also get advice and information as to how they can get their speed, their Internet speed up to that minimum standard.  Now it might sound very technical but really it's not.  This is a major step to ensuring that Internet access is as accessible, available and as instantaneous as it is in the major population centres of Australia.  And we certainly don't want a community in this country where the advantages of the Internet and the advantages of information technology are only fully available to people who live in Melbourne or Sydney or Brisbane and the other large population centres of our nation.
So I thought it would be appropriate Fran, if I took the opportunity here in Seymour, particularly in a, in the hall of a school that has placed, as all schools in Australia do, such enormous store on teaching the young information technology and computer skills at a very early age.  And Richard I know will be available to talk to others later on about the details of that very important initiative.
But there are just two other things I would like to say and I particularly want to address some remarks to the school students who are here today and to say something about the important role in your lives that teachers occupy.  Teachers have a very responsible and important job.  There will be occasions in your school life when you will think that you don't necessarily want to take the advice of your teachers you'll wonder on occasions whether the things they're telling you to do are the right thing.  Can I say that as you get older you'll look back with great affection and respect on what your teachers have done for you and the way in which they've given you guidance during your life.  Teachers have very big responsibilities, I think they have pastoral care responsibilities now of an order that 30 or 40 years ago they didn't have.  And what they teach you, the values they try and impart to you are very important and they are values that stay with you as you get older.  And I've found as I've got older I've thought more about the contribution that certain teachers have made to my life, I've never forgotten the contribution that a teacher of my 6A class at Earlwood Primary School made to my life and I've never forgotten the contribution that somebody who tried, with some degree of success, not spectacular success to teach me Latin and he taught me sufficiently to enable me to succeed it in the Leaving Certificate.  But I remember those two people who at various important stages of my life were very very significant influences and I think all of you will go through that same kind of experience.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, again can I say how much I appreciate the opportunity as Prime Minister of coming to civic gatherings like this.  When Parliament is sitting one of my regular things almost every day is to have a school group come around to the quadrangle outside my office and I go outside and have a photograph taken with the children and then they come in and they sit around the desk and I've got an old desk that was built in 1927 and it was the desk that John Curtain sat on when he was Prime Minister and the desk that Sir Robert Menzies used and it's a desk that a whole lot of Prime Ministers before me have used.  And we sit around and they ask me questions and one question I always get asked by the school children, no matter where they come from they say what is the best thing about being Prime Minister?  And I say the best thing about being Prime Minister is the opportunity to move around the country and to meet different groups of Australians in their own local community environment.  And every group is different.  You never ever get tired, you never ever don't get a buzz out of meeting a different group of people in their local community.  And this afternoon is an example.  This is a wonderful little gathering, the school students are here the civic leaders are here, we're reminded of the connection of this district with the  Puckapuntal military establishment, we are reminded of the importance of good quality rural and regional policies for an area such as Seymour and it's just a reminder to me of the special character of this part of country Victoria.
So Ladies and Gentlemen it is a great pleasure for me to be here and finally can I say to all of you what an absolutely fantastic local Federal Member you have in Fran Bailey.  I really do think she's absolutely wonderful.  She is a dogged advocate for the interests and the concerns of her electorate and grown Ministers have been known to run for cover when Fran approaches them with a new demand for the interests of the people of McEwen.  And she does it very very effectively and she has been a wonderful representative and if at any time over the next few months you have the opportunity of deciding whether you want her to remain as a wonderful representative please take my advice and stick with her, she's a great lady for McEwen.  Thankyou.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very very much. That's quite a thing to present a political leader on the eve of an election.  Thank you very very much.  
Secretary Norton and Secretary Veneman, ladies and gentlemen.  And I'm quite touched by this little ceremony because we were rather proud to be able to send our firefighters to the United States.  We think we have fantastic firefighters.  We share in common with the United States the ever-present threat of bushfires - we call them. And whether it's the country areas, the outback of Australia, where a fire can devastate land and destroy stock or the threat of fire in and around the major cities of Australia.  We've gone through periods when many of the suburbs of Sydney, our largest city, have been threatened only a few years ago. We had fires ringing the whole of Sydney in one very hot January. So it's part of the Australian experience to always have at the back of your mind, even if you live in the suburbs, that one day there'll be a bushfire in the suburbs or in the outback that is going to devastate it. And so we therefore appeal for other countries that have a similar experience.
From my very early days I've seen movies about the forest fires in the Untied States, and there's been some pretty effective ones made about them over the years.  And I'm very conscious that you have to grapple with this problem along with us and I'm just so proud that my country was able to provide the assistance. I can empathise with those Australian firefighters going 16 days without a beer.  But can I say that this is a really lovely gesture and I know that it will greatly appreciated by the agencies back in Australia and it's just another example by the way in which the most natural of friends, which Americans and Australians are, relate to each other.  Natural that we should want to help you, and natural that you should respond in such a generous and heartfelt way.  And I really am very touched by it and thank you very much. 
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Michael Thawley and Deborah.  To you Vice President and Lynne Cheney; Mr Secretary of State Colin Powell and your wife Alma; Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and your wife; Secretary for the Interior and Secretary for Agriculture; your Honours, and we are particularly honoured to have two serving members of the bench of the United States Supreme Court with us tonight; other very distinguished guests; and most importantly of all friends of the relationship between Australia and the United States.
When I think of the relationship I can't do any better than sort of imagine this evening.  A beautiful balmy evening.  This could be Sydney or Brisbane or Perth in January or February. It's a glorious balmy evening and it's a wonderful opportunity for me to say to you Michael thank you for tonight's hospitality, to say to our American friends that of all the people with whom we relate around the world, of all the nations that we value and whose friendship we cherish, there's no relationship more natural, more easy and one more deeply steeped in shared experience in common aspiration for the kind of world we all want our children to grow up in than the relationship between Australia and the United States.  
And I will have an opportunity tomorrow to talk to your President, a man whose values I admire and in many ways share, a man whose aspirations for his own society are very similar to many of my aspirations for the Australian community, a man whose undoubted leadership of the free world and the leader of the most powerful democratic nation and the most powerful economic nation on earth is very important to all of us.  I look forward to meeting him. I look forward to exchanging some views about not only our bilateral relationship but what we feel in common about the future of our globe.
But it's great to be in America. It always is. I admire your country. I respect and salute its contribution  to civilisation, its contribution to the democratic way, and I thank all of you very warmly for the honour that you've paid to me but more importantly the honour you've paid to my country which I love so dearly, in being here tonight.  And I would like to propose a toast to something that we all feel for very strongly and that is the friendship of the people of America and the people of Australia. Can you join me in honouring that toast?  To the friendship of the people of Australia and the people of America.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Free Trade Agreement; Lleyton Hewitt; National Missile Defence
E&amp;OE..................
JOURNALIST:
Mr President, how do you feel about a free trade agreement with Australia?
PRESIDENT BUSH:
We';ve had a good discussion about it.  
JOURNALIST:
Progress, Sir?
PRESIDENT BUSH:
I think we';ve made some good progress.  You bet.  I appreciate the Prime Minister being here.  Australia is a great friend of the United States and it';s an honour to welcome him and the delegation here.
 JOURNALIST:
.  this year..
PRESIDENT BUSH:
We';re making good progress.  He';s certainly making a good case.
JOURNALIST:
If you had to choose between education and your tax cuts, which would you choose?
PRESIDENT BUSH:
I';m going to Florida today to talk about education.
I hope the Australian press is kinder to you than the American press is to me!!
PRIME MINISTER:
Now have you heard that Dennis? 
SHANAHAN :
Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:
Just listen to the man.  He speaks great common sense!
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, how have you found the discussions so far with Mr Bush?
PRIME MINISTER:
Very good.  We are very close friends.  We covered just about everything you could cover in the time.  We are going to continue over lunch to talk about some of the regional issues and it is a great opportunity to reinforce what a deep friendship it is and the President and I have a great similarity of views on many issues and it';s a great experience to be able to exchange them with somebody who has the views he does.
JOURNALIST:
Have you provided an update on the HMAS Manoora at all?
PRIME MINISTER:
Haven';t discussed it.
JOURNALIST:
Mr President do you congratulate Lleyton Hewitt for winning the US Open?
PRESIDENT BUSH:
Yeah I do.  Man, you are talking about a guy who can play tennis.  He was ..clearly tennis is one of Australia';s best exports.  And by the way now that you are here, I do want to say hello to my old friend John Newcombe.  I knew him years ago.  He represents the best of Australia.  And by the way, we get along well because if there is any place that is like Texas, it';s Australia.  That';s a high compliment, I want you to know!
JOURNALIST:
Mr President, do you see a role for Australia in the development of your missile defence treaty?
PRESIDENT BUSH:
I do.  The close allies will have close consultation and I look forward to the Prime Minister';s continuing advice.  We';ve had a great discussion about the Far East and his advice is very valuable for our foreign policy.  There';s nothing like a friend who will tell the truth.
[ends]


Subjects: defence; US-Australian relations
E&amp;OE..................
Mr President; Mr Secretary of the Navy; Admiral Vern Clark; Vice Admiral David Shackleton; Chief of the Royal Australian Navy; Rear Admiral Chris Weaver, Washington District Commander; Ambassadors; ladies and gentlemen.
Today's simple but moving ceremony in this historic Navy Yard here in Washington is a very powerful symbol of the ties that bind our two nations. On behalf of the Australian people Mr President I want to thank you and the American Navy for this very kind and symbolic gesture, a gesture that does underline what we have been through, what we have meant to each other in the past, what we mean to each other now, and I know we will mean to each other in the future. 
As you have done Mr President, may I take the opportunity of saying on behalf of the Australian Government how highly my Government regards the men and women in uniform who serve in different ways to defend Australia and to work with our allies when required.  Your Navy Secretary mentioned the priority that you had given to budget appropriations for defence in the United States. Can I likewise say that when my Government came to office in March of 1996 and we were faced with the requirement of reducing government expenditures, the one area around which we placed a circle and said no reductions would take place, was in the area of defence.  And at the end of last year we unveiled a white paper that projects in the defence area over the next decade a very significant increase in expenditure for all areas of defence. And that is a recognition by the Australian Government and by the Australian people of the enormous importance of providing proper health and proper recognition to the men and women who look after the defence interests of our nation.   It is also a recognition that although we live in a world no longer influenced by the old bipolar divisions between the Soviet Union and the west led by the power of the United States, we nonetheless live in a world which is potentially very unstable particularly in the region in which both our nations operate and where from time to time the deployment of our forces for peacekeeping operations would be necessary.  
So today's gathering is not only an historic occasion, it is not only an emotional opportunity for me to say on behalf of the Australian people and particularly Australian Naval personnel, and can I also acknowledge the presence here of our wonderful survivor from the original Canberra, Mr Gregory.  How wonderful it is that you've been able to make the journey from our homeland to come here for this very special ceremony. It is not only therefore an occasion to recognise the symbolism and the importance placed by that symbolism on the association between our two nations, but it is also an opportunity for me to reaffirm on behalf of the Australian Government and on behalf of the Australian people the great strength and continuity of the defence association between Australia and the United States.
It is 50 years ago this month that from that day in San Francisco in 1951 when the ANZUS Treaty was signed.  And in the half century that has gone by since then both the United States and Australia have lived out the covenants of that treaty to the full.  We have fought side by side with the United States in many conflicts, we have worked together in peacekeeping operations, most recently in East Timor. And both of us have been forces for the expansion and not the contraction of democracy. And one of the great dividends of the ANZUS alliance and indeed one of the great dividends of the alliances around the world between free peoples such as the people of Australia and the United States has been the way in which we have seen democracy expand rather than contract.  And by living out the covenants of the ANZUS Treaty our two nations and our two societies have demonstrated to the world that values based on freedom and individual liberty in the end win acceptance. But they only win acceptance if behind the commitment is a determination on the part of nations who believe in those values to defend them, if necessary fight for them, and always be ready to repel those who would seek to take those freedoms away. 
Mr President, your gesture today and the gesture on behalf of your nation is one that touches the hearts of all Australians here today. We value our alliance.  More importantly we value the common things that we believe in. The greatest strengths of the American-Australian alliance is that we believe in the same things - we believe in freedom, we believe in democracy, we believe that open societies are better societies than closed societies.  Through the years we have fought to defend those values and this token of yours is a warm gesture marking the close World War II relationship between our two countries and I know it will be very warmly received in Australia and seen for what it is - a potent symbol of the great affection that exists between our two great societies.  Thank you.
[ends]


14 September 2001
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Subjects: ANZUS Treaty; Ansett.
E&amp;EO....................................
PRIME MINISTER:
Well ladies and gentlemen the federal cabinet had a special meeting today primarily to consider the consequences of the awful events that have occurred in the United States in recent days. We came very quickly to the view that the provisions of the ANZUS Treaty should be invoked in relation to the attack upon the United States. Quite clearly these are circumstances to which Article IV of the ANZUS Treaty applies. We have discussed this matter with the United States and I would expect that this is a view with which the Administration will concur. The consequence of that is that we will consult the Americans regarding responses which might be deemed appropriate to what does amount to an attack upon the metropolitan territory of the United States in accordance with the provisions of the ANZUS Treaty.
As I indicated in Washington and I repeat today, and it's the unanimous view of the Cabinet, that Australia stands ready to cooperate within the limits of its capability concerning any response that the United States may regard as necessary in consultation with her allies. I do want to stress of course that although the greater loss of life, the overwhelmingly greater loss of life as a result of these attacks, has been American, there are still some 80 or 90 Australians unaccounted for and there are confirmed deaths of at least three Australians. And at no stage should any Australian regard this as something that is just confined to the United States. It is an attack upon the way of life we hold dear in common with the Americans. It does require the invocation of ANZUS. The provisions of ANZUS do in our view apply and the Cabinet came to that view and I have released a formal statement to that effect that will be available to you at the end of this news conference.
I might also say that we discussed the situation surrounding the putting of Ansett into liquidation. I must say for myself, and I know I speak for many of my colleagues, that this is a very sad event, particularly for the Ansett employees. It's a company that I was certainly well served by for a period of more than 20 years. I was a regular customer of Ansett. I found their staff on all occasions to be unfailingly energetic and polite and helpful. And I feel very deeply for the staff of Ansett. Many of them have served that company loyally for a period of more than 20 years. The proposition of the Leader of the Opposition that we should fund the operation of the company for another two weeks is monumentally irresponsible. We've been told that it would cost between 120 and 170 million dollars to keep the company operating until tomorrow evening. If you extrapolated that out, you're looking at a cost of up to a billion dollars on the budget if you were to pick up Mr Beazley's suggestion.
And where do you stop? Do you fund for a period of two weeks every other company that gets into severe financial difficulty? Plainly that is not the solution. And I made it very plain to the union and other representatives of the employees of the company that I met this morning - I saw two groups, one in Sydney just after my return from the United States, I heard that they were in the vicinity and I agreed to meet a delegation. I explained to them directly that the Government could not bail out Ansett. And I repeated that advice to a group that I saw in Canberra. We believe that there is strong legal advice to the effect that ultimately this is a matter that the liquidator's got to nail down because he's now in charge of the affairs of Ansett which after all was a private company and is not an organisation in which the Government had any financial stake. That's been apparently forgotten by the Leader of the Opposition. It's a matter for the liquidator to sort out the precise legal position. But there are grounds for believing that Air New Zealand has legal obligations in relation to the obligations of Ansett, particularly in relation to employee entitlements. We would expect that the liquidator pursue any obligations that Air New Zealand might have as vigorously as the legal circumstances would allow.
We are nonetheless as a Government concerned about the employees entitlements and we would not wish to see them denied their entitlements. And without prejudice to the pursuit of Air New Zealand, we would seek to see a situation where essentially what could be called the statutory entitlements of the Ansett employees, that is unpaid salary although there may not be any unpaid salary, I don't know - that's a matter for the liquidator, long service leave and holiday pay, matters of that nature. Those statutory entitlements, that they should be met and also redundancies up to what could be loosely called the community standard - that's no more than eight weeks. There are some redundancy arrangements in the Ansett company that are particularly generous by community standards. Obviously for the Government to meet those it would be a very severe budgetary burden and we therefore would consider it necessary the introduction of a special levy on airline tickets to fund those obligations. Now those remarks of mine and those dispositions of the Government are without prejudice to the pursuit of Air New Zealand.
It is our understanding that quite a large number of the employees of Ansett could find quick reemployment in other..in Qantas and Virgin, and there are a number of indications, and Mr Anderson may say something further about this, of interest in parts of Ansett by other companies. It's a little too early to be hard and fast about that. But there's no way that we can be expected as a government to bail out a company that through no fault of the Government has got into difficulty. I do feel very sorry for the employees. I don't think they've been very well served. There is a well founded belief that Air New Zealand has tried to cast Ansett off. I find that a strange thing, a difficult thing to accept given that Ansett is a wholly owned subsidiary of Air New Zealand. But that is a matter that ultimately has got to be resolved in accordance with the law and the initiative lies with the liquidator. We remain concerned about the entitlements. We would expect Air New Zealand to meet its legal obligations and without prejudice for that being vigorously pursued, we would not want to see the employees go without, broadly speaking, their statutory entitlements and community standard payments in relation to their redundancies and if that's necessary that would be funded by a levy on airline tickets.
We've also in the context of this given consideration to the general issue of employee entitlements. I'll be announcing further details of this, or Mr Abbott will be next week, that we're disposed to make the existing scheme somewhat more generous for future circumstances where entitlements are left unpaid, broadly along the lines that I've announced in relation to Ansett. And one very important change is that we have decided that in future, that is prospectively, what could be called statutory entitlements of employees in a liquidation of a company that employed them, will rank ahead of the entitlement of secured creditors. That is the statutory entitlements - pay, long service leave, holiday pay. There will be some caps in relation to that and some further details that will be announced next week.
The safety net approach will continue to apply in relation to redundancies. We think that represents a fair extension. We do not favour the imposition of a new tax as Mr Beazley does via an increase in the superannuation guarantee charge. We nonetheless recognise that the issue of workers' entitlements is an important one and we think both in relation to what we've proposed in the particular circumstances of Ansett and the adoption of a generally more generous scheme in future along the lines I've outlined is a reasonably, indeed very fair response to people's legitimate concerns whilst not imposing too heavy an additional burden either on the corporate sector or the general community.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, what was your personal response to the August 14 letter from the Air New Zealand Chairman to you claiming the financial..[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
My personal response, well I don't have personal responses to letters directed to me in my capacity as Prime Minister. I respond on behalf of the Government. I think you could glean the situation.it is obviously a very difficult position and our concern is two fold. Our concern is to ensure that the travelling public is not disadvantaged any more than what is unavoidable given the problems of Ansett, and I want to thank and congratulate John Anderson and those around him for the speedy way in which they have put in place arrangements to cope with the difficulty being suffered by the travelling public and he will want to say something further about it. He's a lot more conversant with the detail.
Our other concern of course is with the employees. In the end it's got to be understood that companies are run by individuals and when companies get into difficulties you don't start sheeting blame home to governments whether they're the New Zealand government or the Australian government.
The corporate sector can't have it both ways. It can't assert rugged individual freedom and the right to do as it chooses to the greater glory of the market, but when things get into difficulty you turn around and expect governments to bail them out. It's just not like that. Ansett has been a household name and I'm very sad that it's got into trouble and I'm particularly sad for the employees and we want to do what we can to help. But in the end those who ran the company have to be accountable for what occurred and we of course will encourage a full and proper investigation. I understand that ASIC has announced an investigation. We support that and we'd like to know the full story. I think the Australian public would like to know the full story and that of course includes an investigation in relation to Air New Zealand.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, how does the time line on the entitlements work? You say Air New Zealand has the obligation, you want to chase that down. That could take some time. Workers obviously left without any money..
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not going to see them..we're not going to see..I mean the exact timeline is something that we will say something more about early next week. But we're not going to see the workers left swinging.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, are you proposing that your general broadening of the entitlements scheme will be something like an increase in the Medicare Levy or..
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, what type of military support [inaudible] United States?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don't think that's the sort of thing I should speculate about in advance. I've said that we would be willing to participate to the limit of our capability. The Americans haven't at this stage made any requests for particular support but we will consider any requests that is made. The important thing is that by invoking ANZUS, it puts us in consultation, it represents a determination on our part to identify with the Americans. If ANZUS is meant to cover a situation, surely it covers this.
JOURNALIST:
[Inaudible] the enemy Mr Howard.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no you don't, not my reading of ANZUS, no.
JOURNALIST:
Did you invoke ANZUS as a gesture of solidarity on your own initiative or was it sought by the Americans?
PRIME MINISTER:
Its sort of happened simultaneously. It was something that we though made a lot of sense and I think the Americans about the same time came to the same conclusion.
ALEXANDER DOWNER:
We've been talking with each other about this.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes and it's just something that emerged, I mean it wasn't sort of a question that you know, we'll ring you and you'll ring me kind of thing, I mean it was just something that emerged.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, what does invoking ANZUS..[inaudible] ANZUS as a living document that doesn't really need to be invoked. What is the formalising thing.?
PRIME MINISTER:
There's no I mean there's no particular. there's no form that's laid down but the fact that I have said after a cabinet discussion with the full authority of the Government, and I did communicate the Cabinet's decision, I couldn't get Mr Beazley because he was in the air, but we communicated with his office our decision and I gather from the response, but I mean I may have misunderstood, that he would support the action that was being taken by the Government but that's a matter for him to speak on. We think it appropriate to make it clear. It has both a symbolic resonance but it also means something in substance and it does mean that if there is action taken then we will naturally consider any requests from the Americans for assistance.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, is there any consideration of taking action against Air New Zealand with regards for instance to their rights in Australian air space.
PRIME MINISTER:
No. And I think that would be foolish.   I mean we've got to, this is a difficult position, we have a strong view about the treatment of Ansett and the Ansett employees. On the other hand, New Zealand is a close friend. We have no closer friend and we have to balance it, and I don't think this is a time for punitive behaviour. There is no merit in that kind of response at all and I am totally against it.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think Air New Zealand misled the Australian Government?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Mr Anderson can better answer that question than I. I mean he's been the captain of the ship on the sort of the detail on this and I think I'd better let him do it.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
Let me make the obvious point at the outset Jason, that this is a New Zealand managed company and it's a private company, so firstly we did not have access to the books. That 14th August letter to the Prime Minister copied to me, did not contain financials. It was not the opening of the books. It was a lobby, a strong lobby in graphic language for us to support their recapitalisation programme. But in relation to that the New Zealand Minister for Finance has today released a very interesting statement which I commend to all of you, you may find it in your pigeonholes up in the gallery which sets out very clearly what happened and the reality is that they didn't know, members of the board didn't know, shareholders didn't know what the true situation was. They couldn't have. They were putting up a recapitalisation plan which would have raised around $850 million at best, New Zealand not Australian, and as we now know in retrospect and as the New Zealand Minister has pointed out would not have saved them, wouldn't have gone anywhere near it, particularly if Ansett had remained part of the group.
The other thing about that letter that I want to say is it made it very plain that the two companies were intermeshed and could not be disentangled. That was the board's position three weeks ago and I just wonder when it was that they started to talk amongst themselves about disentangling it and letting Ansett go free. The first that we heard of that was a phone call on Sunday morning. So did we have complete information - brother we did not. But we're looking for it and ASIC has today asked the New Zealand Securities Commission to have a look at what happened in terms of disclosure. This is a company that eight days ago gave a report to the New Zealand Stock Exchange saying steady as she goes, our recapitalisation plan is still on the table. They obviously didn't know what they were doing.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] they met - Gary Toomey and John Sharp met you and the Prime Minister and told you that they were losing $2.6 million a week. How can you insist that you had no idea this company was in such bad shape when [inaudible] for months?
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
Linda, we've never denied that it was in trouble and it needed recapitalisation mainly because they were saying they needed new aeroplanes. And the Prime Minister was well aware of that and we talked about it. Alexander and I talked about it. In fact we talked about it in all of the forums of the Government. But while they were saying they were losing..actually the figure given to me at that meeting was around $15 million a week and they were saying obviously we're trying to rectify that and fix it. Remember it wasn't so long after what happened at Easter Time. We're trying to get our costs down and our yields up. But, and this was also said in the media, we've got around a billion in cash reserves. Now we need to restructure, the timetable was basically early September when we've got to report to the markets and the process then would have involved due diligence and all the rest of it and then the issuing of a prospectus as they went out in the market place to try and raise more money. As Mr Cullen points out today that might have all happened about November. What do you think would have happened if a proper due diligence had been done, you know, as part of this process and they started to have a really close look at it all? Exactly what's happened now.
JOURNALIST:
..Cabinet's today about access, continued access particularly for regional areas now that Ansett has come out..?
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
Yes, we put a lot of work into that and I thank the companies that have helped us. As it states.look it hasn't been easy in our major airports. Things are starting to ease today. There was a stoppage at Sydney Airport today, I understand that that was in large part about workers' entitlements and we understand that concern and we're now addressing it and I'm very thankful they've gone back. Now the major airlines believe that they can basically have the major trunks back in reasonable shape over the next couple of days. Qantas has started to pick up those regional networks or many of those regional centres that were previously serviced by Ansett alone and had no alternatives. We will be putting in measures very quickly to seek to have new suppliers, new companies servicing those routes that are missing out in the regions. We've got a lot of planning going on there and part of the better news is that we're surprised at how much interest is coming out of the woodwork here and internationally in purchasing various trunk roots, various regional roots. That part of it is looking quite good. Can I say to you although it's flat at the moment in Australia, the aviation market is a bit flat, in trend terms it's been growing at about 8% a year. There is no reason to believe that that is going to stop. It's had a hiccup, one that we don't like, one that we're very sorry about indeed. But this is a sector of the Australian economy that has been growing and will recover. There will be new entrants and we'll make certain that the access bar is not inappropriately set. We want more people like Virgin to succeed.
JOURNALIST:
With the demise of Ansett, do you think that there's some merit in having price caps on air tickets given the reduced competition? And do you have any response to suggestions that Air New Zealand took Ansett engines off planes and other things?
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
Well on the latter one there are some very alarming reports starting to emerge from around the country and we'll wait to see how that unfolds. But it just adds to my sense of outrage at what has happened. If it is indeed true. well I won't say any more than that. But I understand that there's some stories along those lines circulating now and presumably. I don't know whether they're true. But if that was an attempt to lower the cost of trying to restructure and recapitalise Air New Zealand separately from..in a separated form from Ansett then I can understand why Ansett staff feel even more aggrieved.
I'm sorry, the other part of your question. Look, can I say to you it's too, in my view it's premature to talk like that. We don't know what the liquidator going to be able to help if you like, put back into an appropriately robust competitive environment in the Australian aviation sector. It's premature in my view to be talking too pessimistically about a lack of competition. I mean Virgin is being very aggressive indeed in saying that they intend getting out there and expanding their trunk network. We've got a number of other players - some very, very interesting players - I hope they come to fruition - you realise for commercial reason I can't say too much at this stage - coming out of the woodwork and that's very hopeful. Can I just say again no one, no one wanted more than me and no one worked harder than I did and I think the Prime Minister would agree with this, to try and keep that airline in the skies. You know, we were negotiating until all hours as late as last night and even down to the wire on trying to secure payment, wages and what have you, to bring them up to date but in the end when the administrator finally got hold of some hard numbers and let's put this into some sort of context - those figures released yesterday that everybody sort of withdrew from in horror - the worst corporate result in New Zealand - they are still unaudited figures. They are still unaudited. And when we finally got some hard numbers to make some decisions on yesterday, we started looking at the bills that were immediately due if we were to keep them flying, and it was just appalling. And what Mr Beazley's talking about as he walks around with a big grin, and very appropriately with a big grin on his face, with a bit of political opportunism - what he's talking about is absolute nonsense and I don't believe he believes it or would have done it anyway.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister are you looking at further fiscal stimulus through extending the first home owners grant beyond December 31 this year to ensure that the Australian recovery remains on track, given the events this week in New York.
PRIME MINISTER:
The issue hasn't recently been before me.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister can you clarify what you were talking about, the broad scheme. There is a special levy on...
PRIME MINISTER:
The levy is on tickets for Ansett, if that's needed but we have also in that broad context decided to make our general scheme a little more generous and to significantly alter one aspect of it, and that is to alter the order of application of assets in the event of an insolvency so that the statutory entitlements, not the redundancy, and there is a big difference between a statutory entitlement and a redundancy. A statutory entitlement under law accrues as time goes by, whereas the redundancy is not an entitlement until somebody is actually retrenched and there's often a complete misunderstanding and complete confusion of these two things. And the idea is that generally speaking, and we'll announce further details of it next week, generally speaking the statutory entitlements - long service leave, holiday pay etc - those things will rank ahead of secured creditors in future liquidations. Now that's quite a significant change.
JOURNALIST:
Have you thought about a levy to fund?
PRIME MINISTER:
No we're not talking about a levy to fund it, no.
JOURNALIST:
.that limit is currently $10,000 you're talking about lifting that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there will be, it will be more generous, and there are.. it will be more generous. You can use whatever description you like about that Fran. But.
ANDERSON:
And I'm sure she will.
PRIME MINISTER:
I'm sure she will too. It will be more generous and more details will be announced early next week.
JOURNALIST:
On the US situation, have you spoken to the Australian families who have lost people in New York? Or do you plan to?
PRIME MINISTER:
I plan to. I haven't been able to yet. I have, I got back as you know only just before the Cabinet meeting and I've been tied up in the Cabinet since. I have made a number of enquiries, of course when I was in the United States, through the Ambassador, I was kept regularly up to date and I also had a number of conversations with the Consul General in New York, Mr Allen, and I also spoke to Mr Lowy, Mr Frank Lowy, whose company of course is part owner of the World Trade Centre. And I was able to ascertain from him within a few hours of the situation in relation to the employees of his company. Fortunately in their case, the retail activities were on the ground floor and the people were able to get out. Others, sadly, were not so fortunate, but I will certainly in time do that.
Could I also say a couple of other things about the loss of life - Australian and American - in this tragedy. We'll be inviting Australians to treat Sunday, this coming Sunday, as a National Day of Mourning. And we'd hope that flags will be flown at half mast and no doubt special reference and observance will be kept in churches of ..and other faiths throughout the country. I also intend that a National Memorial Service be held in the Great Hall next Monday. I will invite the Leader of the Opposition to join myself in reading one of the two lessons and there will be appropriate contributions from other people. It will be a religious service and give an adequate opportunity for observance of the great loss of lives of Americans and Australians and the impact that this has had on both our communities, particularly the United States.
I'll also introduce, and I'm sure will be supported by the Leader of the Opposition, a resolution condemning what occurred in unequivocal terms and allowing an adequate amount of debate on both sides and then propose that the House adjourn after that on Monday as a mark of respect for those who lost their lives in this very tragic event. I propose that Mr Reith or Mr Downer on my behalf consult the Opposition regarding the wording of the resolution and it is proposed that it not only condemn the outrage but also incorporate a reference to the Government's decision in relation to the application of the ANZUS Treaty.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister on the ANZUS activation, will Australian personnel serve under..whose command will they serve under and on what basis will they be (inaudible).
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we won't go into that with any hard and fast view. I mean you have to be practical. Just as it was practical on the first occasion that Americans and Australians fought together for the command to be in Australian hands, it will almost certainly be practical that the overall command on this occasion be in American hands. I mean we will naturally assert the rights that an independent nation always does in relation to these matters but when you're together with somebody the idea is to work together and have a practical attitude towards command.
JOURNALIST:
You've got 260 people still at Ashmore Reef. They don't want to go to Indonesia and you don't want them to come to Australia - what will you do if Nauru won't take them?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, we would expect as a result of the agreement made by Mr Reith with President Harris that Nauru will be willing to take quite a number of people. We had some further consideration of that issue today. As you know the Full Bench of the Federal Court, I hope will deliver a judgement on Monday morning. We remain very strongly of the view that everything the Government has done has not only been in Australia's national interest but also legal, and I can but say again if the Labor Party had not rejected the Border Protection Bill, this issue would not be in front of the Australian court.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Mr Reith suggested yesterday that the events in New York provided an extra justification for action with respect to asylum seekers, his proposition being that extra border protection helps to keep out terrorists. Do you think that the events in New York give a justification that was not there before for taking this line you have with the people on these ships?
PRIME MINISTER:
As you know Geoffrey, we took the action we did in relation to the people on the Tampa before those awful events. I thought what we did - before those awful events - was one hundred percent justified. You can't have anything more than one hundred percent. I haven't seen precisely what Mr Reith said, I've been rather preoccupied with other things. I simply make the point that what we did in relation to the Tampa was a stand alone, 100 percent justified exercise. People are shaken beyond belief about what happened in New York and I don't really want to say any more than that.
There is just one other thing I would like to add and I think it is important to say it. And that is that it is important for all Australians to bear in mind that there are probably a couple of hundred thousand Australians of Middle Eastern descent and heritage in our country and like any other ethnic group the overwhelming majority of them are wonderful Australians, law abiding and committed to the unity of this country. And it is essential that in the wake of what has occurred and the not surprising assumptions that have been made about where people may have come from, that those actions..that the naturally hostile and angry responses to those actions are kept well apart from our attitude towards Australians of Middle Eastern descent. They should not bear the burden of things that they despise as much as I do and it's important, especially important at a time like this, that people of different faiths, indeed people of no faiths at all, that everyone be treated in a decent, understanding and tolerant fashion. I know that there are many Australians of Arabic descent who would share my horror and disgust at what has happened, and I want to make that very plain and I extend to them goodwill and the hand of friendship as a fellow Australian.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Mrs Marjorie Turbayne, Sir Alastair Goodlad the British High Commissioner in Australia and Lady Goodlad, Sir John Mason, Baroness Gardner, Madam President, Chief Minister, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Today is a wonderful occasion and Janette and I are delighted to have been extended the honour of participating in this opening ceremony.  Quite rightly Sir Alastair referred to the importance of the values at stake in the response by the civilised world to the terrorist attack on the 11th of September.  And in the context of this gathering it is worth remembering that many of the common ideals and common values that are shared by the people of Britain, the people of Australia and the people of the United States and indeed the people of many lands in the 21st century, many of those ideals and values in fact find their origin in the Magna Carta. And that is the historical context and the great historical significance of an occasion like this.  
I can';t imagine as a faltering but nonetheless dedicated student of the history of our country and the shared history and our country and the experience of the United Kingdom, I can';t think of things that are more important in binding us together than those common commitments to the liberty of the subject; the importance and the primacy of private property within an orderly democratic society; the freedom from arbitrary arrest and the right of people to be judged by their peers according to the evidence made available in that process.
They are things that we have grown up to take for granted,  they are things that the people of Australia and the people of Britain have held in common through the life experience of everybody here today.  They are not things of course that have been experienced throughout the lifetime of many people around the world.  And it';s those values, those principles and those freedoms and all the other associated freedoms that our peoples have stood for through the centuries which were assaulted on the 11th of September.  So when I and others have spoken of that attack not only being an attack upon the people and the values of the United States but also an attack upon the people and the values of Australia and the people and the values of the United Kingdom, we have an understanding of what is involved in that.  
Because in the end our societies are judged by their values, they';re judged by the things that they are prepared to stand for and defend.  And in the long history of the association between the people of Great Britain and the people of Australia there have been many examples of their shared determination to stand together against the forces that would deny the liberty of the subject against the forces of tyranny, the forces of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial.  And it will always be to the enduring credit in the history of mankind that the people of Great Britain and Australia and New Zealand and Canada and other parts of the then British Commonwealth stood together and alone against the worst tyrrany the world had confronted in the 20th Century.  And then in 1940 they were standing for the things given birth in part by that compact between King John and the Barons of Runnymede.
And so today when we express our gratitude to the Australia Britain Society, we express our gratitude to the generous contribution from the Government of the United Kingdom.  We reflect upon the tremendous heritage that we have in common.  The people of Australia and the people of Britain have a lot in common.  We share a language, we share a common cultural tradition, we share a common love of sport, we share a common commitment to robust parliamentary institutions.  We have inherited much we in Australia from Great Britain. We';ve inherited so many of those things and many more.  And today is an occasion for us to celebrate the freedoms that we have in common, for we Australians to acknowledge our debt in those areas to the people of Great Britain and all that that has meant in the formative stages of our nation.
It';s also an occasion for us to recognise that in the 21st Century it is a partnership in every sense of equals.  It is a partnership of two nations which although in different parts of the world and often being cast in very different situation are nonetheless two nations that still have great affection towards each other, who still feel in the same way about certain fundamentals of life, who still react with the same indignity and anger when the fundamentals of our society are obscenely assaulted. So today is an occasion to celebrate what we have in common. It';s a day for all of us to express our gratitude to those people who have fought for the fundamental liberties we have.  Those people who';ve died for those fundamental liberties and sadly there are far too many of the young men in earlier generations of both our nations who died defending freedom and died of course to give us the kind of life that we enjoy today.
So ladies and gentlemen I am delighted to be here today.  I congratulate the Australia Britain Society.  Marjorie I can only say you are magnificent, your leadership of that organisation, your inspiration, your cajoling, your capacity to apply pressure ever so subtly, ever so effectively, ever so humbly but always very successfully is quite legend, not only in this city but in many other parts of Australia.  It';s a lovely occasion, it';s a thoughtful, ever so appropriate contribution to our Centenary of Federation by the Australia Britain Society.  I hope it will be a place to which people who love freedom and believe in the values of our two societies come to reflect upon what they can do to contribute to the common maintenance of those values and the shared experience of their benefits in the years ahead. Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER   THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP   PRESENTATION OF THE PRIME MINISTER';S PRIZE FOR SCIENCEGREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Subjects: Science, technology, innovation, CSIRO
E&amp;EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..
Thank you very much Tim, Senator Minchin, my other parliamentary colleagues, members of the Australian scientific and research community, ladies and gentlemen.  It is again a very special privilege for me to be here tonight to associate myself as Prime Minister very emphatically with the contribution that scientists and researchers have made, are making, and will continue to make to every aspect of Australian life.
I think its very important for any nation if it is to mark the esteem in which it holds individuals in the community, to mark that esteem in a variety of ways.  Tonight';s gathering and the prize that';s awarded in my name, or in the name of the Prime Minister of Australia whoever that person may be, and the other prizes that have been awarded earlier by Senator Minchin, they are both symbolic and also substantive recognitions of the contribution that scientists make to Australian life.  And tonight';s gathering which brings together so many people who are involved in science and innovation and research, is a wonderful opportunity for me to enthusiastically thank you and to say again what a tremendous premium we in the Government place on the contribution that you make to our community.  
There have been occasions in Australia';s past when we haven';t really recognised adequately the role of scientists and the role of research.  And I know there';d be many in this room who might argue that the recognition is still not as great as it ought to be.  That';s loosened the audience up.  But I hope you might agree that over the past couple of years we have begun to see a sea change.  I';ve said before at gatherings like this that for me, somebody trained in the humanities, for me the experience of chairing the Prime Minister';s Science Council has been a journey of great personal discovery and a great learning experience.  And I don';t think of all the bodies I';ve chaired or been associated with in the five and a half years that I';ve been Prime Minister, none has more totally taken me from a position of certainly interest and commitment and support, but through a process of instilling me with a degree of wonderment and enthusiasm for what is involved and the enormous potential that research and scientific discovery holds for this country.
And as I look back, and I suppose its at that time of the political cycle when somebody in my position looks back as well as peers forward in hope.  But I look back over the last five and a half years, I can honestly say that one of the things that I list as a very important and a very proud achievement of the Government were the things that we';ve done in the area of scientific endeavour and research.  And I';m particularly conscious of the decision to double the funding of health and medical research in the 1999 Budget and the many initiatives that have flowed out of the Backing Australia';s Ability, the $3 billion programme that I announced which has been put together with the cooperation of people in the scientific and innovation community and I want to thank Nick Minchin and David Kemp and Richard Alston for the collective contribution that each of them made to the development of that policy. 
And I';m particularly pleased for a moment to reflect on the fact that we didn';t just make an announcement at the beginning of the year and then leave it to the long, slow processes of government implementation.  I';m very pleased that we have made a lot of progress in the time that';s gone by since the beginning of the year in implementing the announcements that I made.  For example, in the area of major national research facilities, 15 facilities worth $155 million were announced last month.  The legislation introducing the premium 175% R&amp;D tax concession and the small business tax concession rebate should pass the Senate this week.  The new CRC guidelines and the next CRC round with the additional $227 million in funding will be announced within the next fortnight.  The details of the Innovation Access Programme were announced last month.  The first round of biotechnology innovation fund grants were announced last month and the next round will be announced next week.  The call for expressions of interest to operate the Biotech Centre of Excellence will be released within a fortnight. Tenders have already been called for the pre-seed fund.  Additional business advisers for the COMET Programme have been appointed.  Legislation to support the new post-graduate education loan scheme has passed the Senate.  There';s also been a doubling of the Australian post-doctoral fellowships from 55 this year to 110 next year.
And today I was very pleased to announce with David Kemp the first 15 Federation Fellowships which have been funded through the additional money given to the ARC under the Backing Australia';s Ability Programme.  These fellowships are designed to attract and retain leading researchers to Australia by paying internationally competitive salaries.  And I am delighted that six of the fellowships were awarded to Australians who will be returning home from abroad to conduct their research in Australia.
So although I acknowledge that more can be done and more needs to be done, I hope that we have made a serious start.  I hope that we have begun to address the deficit that was there and had been there for some years in the area of commitment to research and innovation.  But more importantly than that, I hope we have brought about a change in attitude within the Australian community.  I hope that what we did with the programme announced at the beginning of the year and what we do with gatherings such as this, which give us all an opportunity to honour the central role of science in both the current and future life of the nation.  I hope that all of those things together send a very strong signal to the Australian community that we are not only a nation that is interested in excellence and achievement and champion performers in areas of sport and in areas of business.  But we';re also people who believe very passionately that the future of this country increasingly will depend on the way in which we encourage and nurture the scientists within our midst.  
And if I can… I think there';s a certain symbolism, if I can make bold to say, given the nature and the character of the Australian community that this gathering tonight and the announcement of the winner of the Prime Minister';s Science Prize should follow the awarding last night in Melbourne of the Brownlow Medal.  Now I say that very deliberately because you know the role that sport occupies in the life of the Australian community.  And you know of course that I have a reputation like so many of our, of we Australians, of being a great lover of sport.  For me, with my football passions I would like to see tonight as a combination of the Brownlow Medal and the Bledisloe Cup.
But can I simply say that we do need in our own way to develop and exhibit the same passion for scientific performance, scientific achievement, and scientific excellence that we exhibit in relation to our sporting achievements.  We need to acclaim and applaud and to salute your role in the Australian community as we do the great performers on our sporting fields.
So ladies and gentlemen, I want to say to all of you, thank you for the tremendous contribution that you make to our community.  I want to thank all of the members of the Prime Minister';s Science, Innovation and Engineering Council that I';ve had the opportunity of working with over the last five and a half years.  As Nick put it so well it would be for the judgement of the Australian people whether I have the opportunity of chairing another one of those gatherings.  But that belongs to another day and to another event.  But whatever may be the outcome of that I have regarded it as an enormous privilege.  A great adventure and a great learning experience to have been associated with the work of the Australian science community. 
And of course this event also provides us with an opportunity to recognise the work carried out by a great Australian institution, and that';s CSIRO, now in its 75th year.  And as Senator Minchin said, the CSIRO continues to compare with the best of the best around the world and he spoke of the very privileged and very elite place it occupies within the top one percent of similar institutions around the world.  And that is an enormous achievement, and it is an enormous tribute to those men and women who';ve worked over that 75 year period to build the CSIRO into that great Australian icon that it remains.  And we very strongly support the renewed emphasis of the CSIRO on partnering with our universities and other research providers in underpinning very much a Team Australia approach.  
And can I say tonight that I';m delighted to thank Charles Allen for his work as Chairman of CSIRO over the past years.  He has done a wonderful job and I do want to endorse everything that Nick Minchin said about his contribution.  And having done that I want to announce my intention of recommending to the Governor General the appointment of Mrs Catherine Livingstone as the new Chairman of the CSIRO.  Ms Livingstone is the former Managing Director of Cochlear Limited, is a member of the Telstra Board, she is also on the board of Q-Vis a company producing solid state lasers for corrective eye surgery.  She spent six years at Cochlear and after guiding it through public listing in a period of rapid growth in shareholder value, she left the role of Managing Director with the company in a very strong position.  I believe that she will bring a very high calibre level of managerial experience in leading edge technology companies to her role as the Chairman of the CSIRO Board. 
So in thanking Charles Allen, and wishing him well for the future, I congratulate Catherine Livingstone.  I thank her for her contribution to the Board already, and I think she will make a first class Chairman and replacement to Charles Allen.
And finally, and most importantly of all, can I say just a few words about the recipient of the Prime Minister';s Prize for Science for this year.  To Professor Donald Metcalf of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, the award of this prize recognises his outstanding achievement in an area of science that above everything else promotes human welfare.  Professor Metcalf';s research into stimulating the production of blood cells has led to very significant clinical applications in areas like cancer treatment.  Three million cancer patients have benefited from treatment arising directly from his work.  And that figure alone is an astonishing tribute to the excellence and the dedication and the quality of his work.  His work has led to the creation of a world wide billion dollar biotechnology industry which is contributing to Australia';s wealth and reputation as a leading innovator in biomedical research.  The fact that his research on blood cell production has spanned four decades bears testament to the vision and commitment that he has brought to his life';s work.  
I hope, amongst the many honours and recognition that he';s received in his long and very distinguished career, Professor Metcalf might see tonight';s prize as a very collective expression of admiration and gratitude and a very important salute from his country.  An expression of recognition of great excellence, of great dedication, and a wonderful period of years of service to mankind in a discipline, in a profession, which ultimately has as its aim in the relief of human suffering and a contribution to greater human happiness.  So I join everybody else in congratulating Professor Metcalf, in wishing him well, and above all thanking him for the contribution he';s made to the reputation of Australian science and the contribution he';s made to the relief of suffering and the curing of serious illnesses.  Thank you. 


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Peter, to my state parliamentary colleague Andrew Tink the member for Epping, ladies and gentlemen. I would particularly like to thank all of my many friends and supporters in the electorate of Bennelong who have been so supportive of me over the last 27 years. 1974, it seems only yesterday that I stood for the first time and at that stage the geographical centre of my electorate was Lane Cove but over the years the vagaries of redistribution commission it';s moved into the wonderful area of Eastwood over the past few years. And I';m delighted to represent as part of my Bennelong electorate the people of Eastwood.
But this is first and foremost for me this morning an opportunity to thank the people of Bennelong for the help they';ve given me over the years, to ask them again to support me, to thank in anticipation you Peter and all the other wonderful people who are going to work for the Liberal Party cause here in Bennelong over the next five weeks.
This, contrary to what some people are saying, this will not be an easy election for the Liberal Party to win. A swing of less than one per cent, a loss of seven seats to the Australian Labor Party will elect Kim Beazley as Prime Minister and Simon Crean as Treasurer and it is therefore important that all of understand from the outset that this is going to be a tough election. Always when campaigns start polls begin to tighten, people return to some of their tribal allegiances of the past and this election is going to be no exception. We do have however a wonderful opportunity as a Liberal Party to win a third term. If we can over the next five weeks promote one single and very important notion and that is that at all stages over the last five and half years the Government I have led, the Liberal/National Party Government, has put Australia';s interests first. At every turn we have endeavoured to govern in the interests of the mainstream of the Australian community. We';ve been willing to undertake difficult, unpopular, tough decisions for the long term interests of Australia. We reformed the taxation system despite all the opposition of the Labor Party, we reformed the workplace relations system which has boosted the productivity this country. By the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of government debt that Mr Beazley as finance minister left us in March of 1996. Interests rates are at a 30 year low, the budget is back into surplus, our current account deficit is the lowest it has been for almost 20 years. And so the list goes on. It is an impressive list of economic reform and economic achievement. And as we face the inevitability as a country of being affected by the world wide economic downturn aggravated by the awful terrorist attack in the United States, as we face the inevitability of being caught up with that world wide downturn we do so in the knowledge that what we have done over the last five and a half years has better prepared Australia for the impact of that downturn than just about any other country in the western world.
If we had not fixed the tax system, if we had not paid back debt, if we had not fixed industrial relations, if we had not delivered lower interest rates we would be far more vulnerable to the world economic downturn than will otherwise prove to be the case. But we will not be left unaffected by it and like every other country it will have some impact but that impact will be all the less as a result of the reforms that have been carried out by my government. And those reforms at every stage have been dedicated towards strengthening the Australian economy and governing in the overall interests of the Australian community.
Ladies and gentlemen this suburb of Eastwood is a wonderful microcosm of the capacity of the Australian people to absorb immigrants from all around the world. Eastwood has welcomed many people from many lands and it';s a demonstration of the decency and the openness and the tolerance of the Australian community and the willingness of Australians to embrace people from all parts of the world. So one of the great achievements of this country is the way in which we have embraced people. But it';s important in saying that for me to re-emphasise how determined this government is to maintain not only the integrity of our immigration programme but also the integrity of our border protection system.
We have had a clear consistent resolute single minded position on this issue. By contrast our political opponents have flipped and flopped and reflipped and if they happen to win the election they';ll flip again because when the bill was debated in the Senate many of their spokesman such as Senator Schacht who would be a minister in a Beazley Labor Government said we';re only passing this bill because it';s politically expedient to do so. If we';re elected to Government we';re going to make changes to it. Now that is the attitude of a person belonging to a party that has been totally irresolute and inconsistent on this issue. They';ve gone from one side of the road to the other under the pressure of political expediency, devoid of any principled response or principled position. And it';s important in the weeks ahead that the Australian people understand just how expedient the Labor Party has been on this particular issue.
Ladies and gentlemen I will be travelling around Australia very extensively over the next five weeks. In the middle of the election campaign I will unapologetically represent the interests of this country at the APEC meeting in Shanghai. I cannot understand why Mr Beazley should attack me for not passing up the opportunity of attending a meeting that is on my advice to be attended by the President of the United States, the President of Russia, the host will be the President of China, it will attended by the Prime Minister of Japan and by the President of Indonesia. And one of the issues that will be discussed is the issue of the world wide response to terrorism and that has been put on the agenda by the chairman, the President of China, as a direct result of a suggestion that I made to him shortly after the 11 September. And in the face of all of that Mr Beazley says I shouldn';t be going. Well can I say to Mr Beazley it is in Australia';s national interest that I go and by going I am putting Australia';s interests first and Mr Beazley should understand that.
Finally ladies and gentlemen we will over the next five weeks be unveiling a series of policies which will deal with many of the domestic challenges for Australia in the years ahead. I hear a lot from my political opponents about health and education. I';ve heard those words over the last five and a half years but I haven';t heard any policies to indicate just exactly how they would do things differently. And I know that people will look forward with very great interest to hearing how things might be different and how they are going to improve conditions because the reality is that we have brought back the private health insurance system of Australia. We have rebalanced our health system. We support very proudly the provision of educational choice, we support the right of Australian parents to choose the education that they best believe will suit the interest of their children. Parental choices are very important issue for Australian parents. As somebody who is very proud of the education he received in the Government school system of New South Wales, let me say we support both systems and importantly we support the rights of Australian parents to choose the school they think is best for their son or their daughter.
My friends thank you for coming this morning, I look forward to seeing you again at regular intervals throughout the election campaign. I never take anything for granted, never. I';ve never taken an election for granted in my life and I can promise you I';m not about to start with this particular election. It will be a tough fight, a fight that I believe that I can win but I can only win with your help and I can only win if we consistently point out to the Australian people that the last thing that this country needs at the present time is to abandon a tried and tested team of men and women who have bought resolution, commitment, steadfast determination and a steadiness of purpose and replace them with a leader and a group of men and women who after five and a half years of opposition have still not communicated to the Australian people what they stand for or what they believe in. It is not a time to replace steadiness and commitment with obscurity and irresolution and I ask all of you to campaign on that ceaselessly and tirelessly over the next five weeks.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


7 October 2001
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Danna for those very kind words of welcome and introduction. To my other parliamentary colleagues – Bruce Baird, Senator Marise Payne, and Malcolm Kerr, Senator Helen Coonan – to Mr Bernard Hurley the President of the Menai Catholic Club, candidates and my fellow Australians.
I have a special tinge of affection and indeed political emotion about today’s campaign launch. It’s not only an occasion for me to launch Danna’s campaign, but it’s also an opportunity for me to release a document which is a chronicle of the last five-and-a-half years of achievement and also a road map of the major initiatives for the next three years that the Coalition Government has already put in place.
To me the prize of Hughes has always been rather special. It was one of those seats that swung magnificently to us on the night of the 2nd of March in 1996. It was a seat that we were able to hold, indeed in slightly even more impressive terms in 1998. It represents an area of Sydney which brings together all of the great aspirations of the mainstream of the Australian community. This part of Sydney which I know so very well, the electorates of Hughes, the electorate of Cook and just of course across the George’s River into the electorate of Barton and then into the St George area is a part of Sydney which has always represented to me what middle Australia is all about. And if you listen to the people of this part of Sydney you’ve got a pretty good idea of what the people of Australia are thinking and what the people of Australia want from their leaders. And I want to say to you Danna and to you Bruce in particular who are the sitting federal members for the electorates of Hughes and Cook what a fantastic job both of you have done in representing the aspiration of the people of the Sutherland Shire.
But today is as well a nationally important day in the campaign to win the support of the Australian people on the 10th of November. It’s an opportunity for me to release a document that brings together the great achievements of the Government I’ve led over the last five-and-a-half years. It reminds the Australian people that by the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of federal government debt that Mr Beazley so unkindly left us in March of 1996. It will also remind us that in the five-and-a-half years that we have been in government we haven’t seen the education of school leavers exclusively in terms of going to university important though that is. 70% of young men and women who leave school do not go to university. They go into apprenticeships, they go into traineeships, they go into other areas of tertiary education. And one of the proudest achievements of my Government is that in the last five-and-a-half years we have more than doubled the number of young men and women in apprenticeships and traineeships around Australia. We have done for the sons and daughters of the working men and women of Australia something that a Labor government was unwilling and unable to do. We have given them tertiary education opportunities that they never had under a Labor government because the level of apprenticeships stagnated at a figure of about 150,000 for almost 20 years. And we have lifted it to more than double that figure.
This document will also remind you that in March of 1996 it cost $350 a month more to service a mortgage on a housing loan. And that indeed was lower than what had been the peak under the Hawke/Keating years with interest rates of 17% or 18% on a housing loan, with interest rates of more than that on a small business loan, when farmers were paying bill rates of 21% and 22%. It will also remind you that in the last five-and-a-half years we’ve created 900,000 new jobs. It will remind you that unemployment peaked under the Labor Party when Mr Beazley was Employment Minister at a figure of just on 11%.
The document will remind you of the many courageous things this Government has done of a non-economic kind. It will remind you of how we seized the moment in the tragedy of Port Arthur to implement uniform national gun laws to bring a measure of safety particularly to the women and children of Australian society which has been the envy of the rest of the world over the last five-and-a-half years. It will remind you of the leadership that Australia displayed in giving freedom to the people of East Timor in assembling in a record short period of time an international force gathering a United Nations mandate and then under the command of General Cosgrove magnificently implementing that mandate. To the great credit of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, many of them drawn of course from establishments within the electorate Hughes, and to the enormous credit of Australian and the enormously increased standing of Australia in world circles.
So my friends it is a document which extensively lists the achievements of the Government over the last five-and-a-half years. It will remind the Australian people of the great commitment we’ve made through the Natural Heritage Trust to the environment of Australia. It will remind the Australian people that the white paper on defence brought down at the end of last year is the most detailed, comprehensive, blueprint of Australia’s defence needs produced in a generation. And it commits Australia to additional expenditure totalling some $27 billion over the years ahead.
It is a reminder of how industrial relations reform has lifted the productivity of the Australian economy. It will remind you of the epic fight to reform Australia’s waterfront so courageously waged by Peter Reith as Minister for Workplace Relations which has brought about a dramatic improvement in the productivity of the Australian waterfront. It will remind you of the great performance on the trade front of how as a result of the many reforms and the competitive character of the Australian exchange rate we have now seen reductions on the level of our current account deficit that would have been undreamt of ten years ago.
It’s also a reminder my friends of the many things that we have announced over the last year that will work their way through Australian society and the Australian economy over the next few years. I’ve mentioned the long term commitment to extra resources to defence. But over the last year we’ve also invested additional resources in tackling the problem of water quality and salinity. There is no greater environmental challenge in Australia than the challenge of water quality and salinity. We are a dry continent and we need to invest over the long term through a partnership between the Commonwealth and the state governments and local communities in order to tackle that problem.
It also reminds the Australian community of the ongoing commitment in the area of road funding, our ongoing commitment in areas of health and education. In the five-and-a-half years that we have been in government there has been a massive increase in the federal government supplementation of the cost of running government schools throughout Australia. We are the party and the government that is committed to high standards of quality and excellence in all areas of education. We have a dual commitment to both the government education system and the independent education sector. I am forever grateful for the high quality education that I received from the state government high school that I attended here in Sydney and I’m very grateful for the start in life that that education system afforded to me. But I also believe very strongly in the right of parents to decide what school their children should attend. And we will have none of this envy politics that comes from the Australian Labor Party that seeks to reopen old divisions and old wounds on an issue that I thought had been resolved a generation ago. The overwhelming majority of parents who send their children to independent schools make very significant personal sacrifices in order to do so and their sacrifice should be honoured and not denigrated and made the object of an attack based on class division and outdated notions of elitism.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is also a document that will remind the Australian people of how we have resuscitated private health insurance in this country. When we came to government something like only 33% of Australians had private health insurance and that was in a state of virtual free fall and I think it got as low as about 31%. And as a result of the tax subsidies we have introduced it is now back at 45%. And what that means as a result of that annual injection of about $2.5 billion into private health insurance not only have we expanded the viability of private hospitals in Australia, but we have begun to take the pressure off the public hospital system which is the inevitable consequence of reviving private health insurance. But not content with that we have also increased by 28% in real terms in the current five year duration of the Medicare agreements the amount of money being provided by the federal government to state governments to run public hospitals. And when I hear Mr Beazley saying that he’s going to talk about health during the course of this election campaign I ask myself where are the dramatic new initiatives that are in any way going to seriously replace the underpinning that we have provided for health and indeed for education in the five-and-a-half years we have been in government.
But ladies and gentlemen, we have done something far more important for the provision of resources for health and education than all of those things that I have just mentioned. And this is something that Mr Beazley threatens. This is something that he’s fought against for the last three years and that is that we introduced a broad based indirect tax, a goods and services tax, as part of the program of comprehensive taxation reform. And you might think to yourselves well what’s that got to do with the funding of health and education. I’ll tell you what it’s got to do with the funding of health and education. Because all of the proceeds of the GST go to the state governments as the years go by and the revenue from the GST rises because the nature of a broadbased indirect tax is that the revenue yield grows as the economy grows. And as more money flows in the coffers of the states, they have more resources to spend on public schools, public hospitals, police and all the other public services for which the state governments are responsible. And the reality is that the political leader in Australia and the politician in Australia who opposes the GST is opposing additional expenditure on schools, additional expenditure on hospitals, additional expenditure on police, additional expenditure on roads because the GST will provide the growth revenue in the years ahead and that is the fundamental reason why we brought in taxation reform. It’s the fundamental reason why we went against conventional wisdom and argued for tax reform in 1998. Because if we had persisted with the old indirect taxation system, it was making a declining contribution to funding Government services where the GST will make a rising contribution, the only way you could have provided more resources for those public services in the years ahead would have been to increase income tax because if your indirect tax yield is falling and not rising and you want to provide the same level of services you have no alternative but to dig deeper into the hip pocket of the average Australian working man and woman through increases in his or her level of income tax.
And that is the great dilemma facing Mr Beazley and the Labor Party in this election campaign, they champion extra spending on health and education yet they oppose the vehicle by which that extra spending will become available in the years ahead. You can’t have it both ways, you can’t say that you love spending more money on health and education but you hate the way that you’re going to find the more money to spend on health and education. And that’s an issue that Mr Beazley has to answer and if in the end he says oh no well we won’t have as much rollback as we originally intended he will be revealed as being somebody who’s embraced monumental political hypocrisy over the last three years.
Introducing tax reform was not easy. There were many people who told us in 1998 that we were politically crazy to even try it. But I have known in all the time that I’ve been Prime Minister that it was necessary at various stages to take difficult decisions. And when we decided before the 1998 election to seek a mandate for tax reform, one of the major reasons we decided to seek that mandate was that we knew as the years went by with an aging population unless we introduced a broadbased indirect tax to fund the growing demands for public services of that aging population we would be failing to match the need of the nation as years went by. And that is why we took the risk, that is why we embraced taxation reform and it is to the eternal discredit of the Australian Labor Party that they have adopted an opportunistic approach towards taxation reform. At every turn they’ve tried to frustrate to sow fear and doubt, to denigrate and to try and prevent us introducing a long needed reform. And it’s up to the Australian people of course on the 10 November to pass a judgement on that. And I hope that judgement will be harsh.
I also hope the judgement will be harsh on an opposition which has sought on so many issues to walk both sides of the street. Not only have they sought to do that on illegal immigration but they’ve also sought to do it in relation to many of the spending programmes that are outlined in this document. I constantly hear Mr Beazley complaining about the fact that we’ve spent money over the last 18 months. And he says as a result there may not be as big a surplus for me to get my hands on. That is basically what Mr Beazley is saying. But I don’t hear him criticising the things that we’ve spent the money on. I mean the next time Mr Beazley goes on television and says oh over the last 18 months the Howard Government has spend hundreds of millions of dollars and therefore the budget surplus might be a bit lower. Think to yourself what we’ve spent it on and ask the question did Mr Beazley oppose it? We’ve spend it on defence, did he oppose that? No, he supported it. We’ve spent it on salinity. Did he oppose that? No, he supported it. We’ve spent the money on road funding. Did he oppose that? No, he supported it. We’ve spent the money on cutting petrol excise and getting rid of automatic indexation of petrol excise. You’ll notice that in August of this year the price of petrol didn’t automatically rise as a result of the automatic indexation of the government’s tax tape as it had for the last 15 years, or more than that, 18 years, through a measure introduced by the Hawke Government in 1983. And I can go through the list of all the things that we have spent money on and no issue, on no occasion has the Labor Party said we are opposed to that, you should leave the money for something else. The reality is that he’s walking both sides of the street again. He wants the programme but he doesn’t want any money spent on it. Well you can’t have it both ways. The reality is that we have wisely expended resources on necessary priorities for the Australian people. And the last party in Australia that can lecture us on the size of budget surpluses is the Australian Labor Party. They left us with a Federal Government debt of $96 billion five and a half years ago. They have opposed every attempt that we made to pay back that debt and despite that opposition by the end of this financial year as I mentioned earlier we will have paid back $58 billion of that $96 billion of government debt.
My friends this is going to be a very difficult election campaign for the Coalition. Don’t believe some of the hype of recent weeks. Don’t be mesmerised by generic public opinion polls. Once election campaigns start many of those polls change, they tighten, huge leads evaporate, local campaigns become more important. You can’t win an election generically, people are voting for me in the electorate of Bennelong but they’re voting for Danna and Bruce and all of our other candidates in electorates here. And therefore the force and the strength and the relevance of local election campaigns is tremendously important. But allied with that of course are some fundamental national choices. We are living in a period of uncertainty. There is an unease around the world and in our own nation that I haven’t felt in my 62 years. There is an unease and a sense of foreboding from a combination of circumstances that we must respond to. We must respond to it with determination, but we must also respond to it with a sense of hope and a sense of optimism. And we must respond to it in a traditional Australian way. And the traditional Australian way of course is never to impose the wishes of this nation on others but rather to work with our friends and our allies to defend the values we and they hold dear. And other the weeks and months ahead precisely how that will work out I cannot tell you today. But what I can tell you is that the journey will be a journey together with likeminded people. With nations whose values are the same as ours, with nations who believe that the liberty of the individual and the right of people to follow a political cause, to worship their god or not worship any god at all is the fundamental right that individual men and women have. Australia has been one of the very few, indeed you could number them on the fingers of both hands, very few countries that have remained continuously democratic for the last 100 years. And we have never been reluctant to defend the principles of freedom and the principles of democracy in association with our allies.
The threat we now face is different, it is not an conventional military threat in the sense that the last wars have taught us, it is a new and in some respects a more forbidding and frightening prospect. But it’s important in all of that to remember that we here in Australia have things going for us that no other country has got. We’ve got an economy that’s better able to withstand the economic downturn following not only the weakness of the American economy but the events of the 11 of September. And we have a resilient people that I know and I believe can carry nation forward together with our friends and allies in response to this very real threat.
At a time like this we need certainty and predictability. We need strength, we need resolve, we need a group of men and women, we need a team, and every successful government is a team. It’s not a one-man band, it’s a team. And we need a team that know what it believes in and has got the courage to stick to it. We don’t need a new team that doesn’t know what it believes in, that’s had five and a half years to identify itself to the Australian people and has failed miserably to do it. As you read through the pages of this document you will find it to be a story of a government that has always known its mind. The story of a government that was determined to change those things that needed changing, yet defend those things traditionally which have served Australia well and ought not to be altered. And my plea to you this morning in launching Danna’s campaign is to support a government that has given strength and purpose and direction and certainty to this country over the last five and a half years. That has helped build the esteem of Australia around the world and a government, far more than the alternative, which has within it men and women capable of continuing that stability and that certainty in the three years that lie before us.
So my friends can I conclude by saying this is, as all election campaigns are, difficult and serious. But there's an element of difficulty and an element of seriousness about this campaign that perhaps has been absent for a number of campaigns. And speaking personally can I say to you that I’ve never been more mentally and physically committed and resolved to achieve a goal than I am to the successful leadership of the Coalition during this election campaign. It is important for Australia that we win again. It is important for Australia that we have a majority that will enable us to implement the mandate the Australian people I hope will give us on the 10 November. I ask for your help, knowing it will be a long and hard fight. I take nothing for granted, I assume nothing. The Labor Party will fight tenaciously with all its will and it enormous resources. And nobody should take this election for granted. But if we can get the issues out into the homes and the clubs of this area and all around Australia and I believe in the end the good sense of the Australian people will come on our side. Do that here with an extra edge and an extra energy and you do it I know in support of some magnificent members and magnificent candidates.
Thank you very much.


9 October 2001
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Chris, Dennis Napthine the Leader of the State Opposition, my other Federal colleagues, Bob Charles and Phillip Baressi and I know how much Bruce Bilson had wanted to be here today as well, but another engagement made that impossible. To my State Parliamentary colleagues, many of them gathered here today, to our candidates for the coming Federal Election of Ros Clowes in Chisolm, and Reg Steel in Bruce, my fellow Australians.
This is an opportunity for me to address a group of people representing a part of Melbourne and a part of Australia which has benefited enormously from the policies of my Government over the last five and a half years. And I was wanting a few moments to turn to some of those issues which are so important to the living standards of Australians in this part of Melbourne. But before I do so, can I touch just briefly on the world circumstances which are unfolding as we meet and as I speak.
It is a time of very unwelcome uncertainty. It is a time of enormous economic and strategic challenge. But it is important that we as Australians in response to that challenge, understand the great strengths of our society and understand the great capacity of free peoples around the world to work together to stare down and to effectively confront the face of evil which revealed itself with such deadly precision in the United States on the 11th of September.
It is important at a time such as this that we draw inspiration and strength from the fundamentals of our society. This is not a struggle between religions, it is not a case of Christianity and Judaism versus Islam, nothing could be more wrong or more unacceptable.
It is a case of those who believe in the right of free men and women around the world irrespective of their religious beliefs and indeed whether they have religious beliefs or not to live out lives free of disturbance and free of terrorism. But it’s important to effectively stare down the threat of terrorism that we get on with our daily lives. It is important to remember the great strength of Australian society, the great strength of the Australian economy, the great strength of democracy, to reach out again to people of all religions and of all races and of all creeds and of all backgrounds within our own society.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We’ll be signalling that the terrorists have had a victory if we discriminate against all the unfairly treated, a person within our own society according to that persons religion or according to that persons racial background.
This is above all is a time for unity and inclusiveness and harmony and of the Australian people drawing on their great inherent strengths. It’s also a time for hope and optimism because we are a strong country. We’re not only economically strong, but we’re also strong in our belief, our democratic beliefs and in our Australian values and this is a time for us to balance the legitimate concern we have about events but also a sense of optimism.
I am confident that the action now underway under the leadership of the United States is action that is carefully targeted. It is action which is designed to respond in a powerful but effective way against those who visited the terror so indiscriminately and so brutally with such precise evil on the people of New York and the people of Washington on the 11th of September. And it is important in the context of all of those events that we here in Australia continue to debate the great issues that will face the Australian people and which need to be resolved through their choice of Government on the 10th of November.
We do so against a background of and influenced by the events unfolding around the world but we also do so in the context of what the two sides of politics are offering. And when you compare the two sides of politics in this election campaign we not only compare what they are offering during the five weeks of the election campaign, but perhaps more importantly what they have offered and what they have done over the last five and a half years. And can I say to you that I am very happy indeed to have the judgement of the Australian people on the 10th of November, made and delivered on the basis of what I and my colleagues have done over the last five and a half years compared with what Mr Beazley and his colleagues have done over that same period of time.
It’s important to remember that Mr Beazley’s been Leader of the Opposition for the same time that I have been Prime Minister and if he now says he has a difficulty in defining himself in five weeks before the Australian people, well that his fault it is not mine. It is his fault it is not the fault of the Australian people.
I am very proud of what this Government has done to change Australia for the better over the last five and a half years. Over the last five and a half years we have never shirked the difficult decisions. We’ve never been reluctant to court short term political unpopularity in the name of doing what was right for Australia. We have never been reluctant to take on the great reform challenges and the very strength and resilience that the Australian economy now has which will enable it to withstand better than most the inevitable downturn as a result of an already weakening United States economy compounded by the impact of the terrorist attack. We are in a better position to withstand that and that is due overwhelmingly to the reforms that my Government has put in place over the last five and a half years.
Reforms, I might remind you, that were opposed at almost every turn by the Australian Labor Party. Never let it be forgotten that not only did Mr Beazley leave us with $96 billion of Federal Government debt, but he also opposed each and every measure we took to repay that debt on behalf of the Australian people. And it will always be to their double discredit that they not only created the problem, but endeavoured to stop those elected in March of 1996 to address that problem and to put in place solutions.
But of all the things that we have done which have been of benefit to the Australian people over the last five years, no resonates more with the people of this part of Melbourne, none resonates more with the voters of seats such as Latrobe and Deakin and Dunkley and Aston and beyond - nothing resonates more with those people for what we have achieved in the area of lower home loan interest rates.
A very simple comparison tells you that in March of 1996 a person on $100,000 loan, which is certainly not an above average loan either here or in many parts of Australia, that person was paying $350 a month more to service his or her mortgage than they are paying at the present time. And indeed as this bar chart over here demonstrates, the levels in October of 1989 were dramatically high than what they even were in March of 1996. And I often speak of Labor’s triple legacy to the Australian people when they were voted out of office in March of 1996. They left us $96 billion of Federal Government debt. They left us interest rates which had reached levels for homebuyers of 17 and 18 per cent and even higher for farmers and small business men and woman and they also of course left us with a very high level of unemployment in peaking at just on 11 per cent during the time that Mr Beazley had been Minister for Employment. So let me say that of all the achievements of which my government is proud of the things we have done and the interests of Australian families and the interests of people wanting a start in life both with their first home and with their small business. There is no prouder achievement I have in what we have done to deliver to the Australian people decent and affordable levels on both to their homes and to their business.
Now as you know ladies and gentlemen, at the beginning of this year the National Account figures showed that the December quarter, because of some of the transitional impacts of the New Tax System on the home construction industry, that quarter went into negative due overwhelmingly to the impact of the downturn in housing constructions. And immediately, indeed within 48 hours of those figures being made public, the Government decided to act with a special additional measure and that is we doubled the First Home Owners Scheme. It was $7,00 for both new and existing homes and we doubled it for new homes from $7,000 to $14,000. And that measure combined with the sharp fall of interest rates that’s accorded under this Government has breathed new and great life into the housing construction industry in Australia. Now that extension is currently due to expire on the 31st December this year. When I announced it I said it would be $14,000 on a new dwelling until the end of this year.
I’m very pleased to announce today that if the Government is re-elected on the 10 November and to ensure that the recovery and consolidation of the housing industry is not affected as a consequence of the $14,000 reverting to $7,000 on the first of January in the year 2000, there will be additional assistance extending beyond the end of this calender year. And I announce therefore that from the first January next year until the first of July next year the first home owners grant for newly constructed homes will be $10,000, reverting to the original $7,000 beyond the first of July in the year 2000.
In addition the building commencement and completion requirements currently applying to the $14,000 grant will be liberalised. Under the new rules construction of the home must commence within 26 weeks of entering into the contract, instead of 16 weeks at present. And the contract must specify a completion date of 18 months, instead of the existing 12 months.
What we are therefore doing with this announcement ladies and gentlemen is that we are ensuring that there will be no adverse affect on the construction industry as a result of the sudden end, even thought it was announced when I made the decision some months ago, that there’ll be no sudden withdrawal or sudden impact on the industry as a result of the grant dropping back from $14,000 to $7,000 for new homes at the end of this year. We are going to phase in the return to the original level of $7,000 and we’re going to liberalise the conditions attaching to the utilisation of the grant. And as result of these measures the recovery and the consolidation of the home building industry will be assured. The coupling of these measures, the benefit the doubling to $14,000 over the past months, the coupling of that with the sharp fall in interest rates means that conditions could not be better both for new home buyers and for the housing construction industry, not only here in Victoria but all around Australia. And I know that this particular announcement will be widely welcomed by not only the housing industry association but also by new home buyers and indeed first home buyers all around Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen occasionally over the past several years whenever I talk to my federal colleagues who are here today and one or two of them who aren’t here, I occasionally get reminded of the important of a particular freeway. I think they call it the Scoresby Freeway. In fact I’m certain they call it the Scoresby Freeway. And I mean there’s a certain kind of sort of ministerial side step, if I can use a rugby expression, ministerial side step, well known around Parliament House and it’s called the Scoresby side step because whenever certain Ministers see certain colleagues from this part of Melbourne striding determinedly towards them in any of the corridors of Parliament House they know for certain they’re going to say something about the Scoresby Freeway. Well I want to say something about the Scoresby Freeway today. I want to say to you in the plainest possible terms that the Commonwealth Government is absolutely an unconditionally committed to finishing this $890 million road by June of 2008. There won’t be any tolls on the road.
When I first declared that this would be a road of national importance I announced an initial allocation of $220 million with the balance to be funded by both Governments following agreement with the private sector. The issue then to be resolved was how and over what time frame this would be done. I now announce that the Commonwealth Government will fund our entire 50 per cent share right out to the end of financial year 2007/2008 which is the total period of construction and that as a result the total Commonwealth funding will therefore be in the order of $445 million over this period of time.
This is an iron clad, unconditional, straight forward, black and white commitment. A memorandum of understanding as I gather been signed which commits the Victorian Government to matching the Commonwealth Government contribution. So after a lot of prevarication they claim that they have finally came to the party. But let me make it very clear we are committed to the construction in full of the Scoresby Freeway, we’ll contribute 50 per cent of the money and we’ll do it over the time frame that I’ve outlined. And I wait with interest the reaction of the federal opposition to this because it was only a few months ago that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Simon Crean said in response to a statement by the Greens that they wanted the road stopped, he said that was a reasonable request, it was worth looking at.
Ladies and gentlemen, this election on the 10 November is being fought in different circumstances. And obviously the issue of experience, of stability, of leadership strength and all of those things will be issues that the Australian people will take into account. But not only take them into account in assessing the capacity of myself as leader of the government and Mr Beazley as Leader of the Opposition to deal with in terms of the immediate challenges but they’ll also look back over what we have done over the last five and a half years. And if there’s been a feature or hallmark, an exemplar of what we have tried to do over that period of time, it’s been our determination to put Australia’s interests first. We have embraced some very difficult issues. We have tackled things like Australia’s involvement in the defence of the freedom of the people of East Timor. We have embraced comprehensive taxation reform, that wasn’t easy and some aspects of it drew criticism. And it was necessary to fine tune the administrative details of it. But nobody can deny that Australia needed taxation reform. We’ve needed it for a quarter of a century but it took this Coalition Government, it took this Liberal Government that I’m proud to lead, and very ably supported by a Treasurer in Peter Costello who poured his heart and soul into the development of the new taxation system. It took the team that we represent to the Australian people, it took us working together in order to bring about something that had been needed for more than a quarter of a century.
We have lower personal income tax to the tune of $12 billion a year, we’ve effectively halved capital gains tax for individuals. One of the reasons why our export performance has been so outstanding over the last year is that we have taken the impact of embedded indirect taxes out of our exports. And so the list goes on. We’ve been courageous enough to tackle industrial relations reform. Once again a reformed, indeed a transformed competitive Australian waterfront made possible through the commitment of Peter Reith in particular as Minister for Workplace Relations. That is another reasons why our export performance is so outstanding. In other words over the last five and a half years we have not sought to sit idly by and allow events to influence and overwhelm us. We have at every turn endeavoured to influence events and to move them towards a direction which is putting Australia’s interests first.
So when we vote on the 10 November the Australian people will have a clear choice. They’ll choose between a government that has made Australia strong, a government that has prepared the Australian economy for the inevitable pressure that it’s going to suffer over the months ahead. A government that has never shirked responsibility of taking difficult decisions. A government that has generated almost 900,000 more jobs and a government that has cared for the needs of people living in electorates such as Aston and Dunkley and Deakin and La Trobe.
I mean one statistic that really is a metaphor for what this government has done for communities such as this was given to this morning. Can I tell you that there are currently 1,444 women doing apprenticeships in the electorate of Aston and the comparable figure six years ago was a mere 176. Back to the 30th of June this year there were 320,800 new apprenticeships in Australia. It’s 140 per cent higher than what it was in 1995. There’s an increase of 15.5 per cent since June of last year and the growth in apprenticeships is the biggest ever over the last five years that the Australian apprenticeship system has ever experienced. And the message in this that it’s taken a Liberal Government to give to the sons and daughters of the working men and women of Australia a greater opportunity to get an employment and training place in the sun than any Labor Government in their 13 years of office were able to do.
The final reason ladies and gentlemen why I ask you and I ask all of the people of the electorates represented here today to return their sitting Liberal members and in the case of the other electorates, in the case of Bruce and Chisholm to elect Reg Steel and Ros Clowes, the reason why I ask that to be done is that in the case of our sitting members they are outstanding representatives. In the short time that he’s been the member Chris has won the respect of all of us and we see him as a very fitting and worthy successor to the late Peter Nugent who did so much for the electorate of Aston. And can I say to you Chris that your victory was a tonic like none other for the Coalition when it occurred. If there’s been any moment in the fortunes of the Coalition this year, when one felt the times were a changing it was the night we stated to get the results flowing in from the by-election in Aston. It was a magnificent campaign, a great tribute to the Liberals of Victoria and a tremendous reminder to all of us that if we have good candidates, good representatives, we communicate our message with passion, we work hard, then you can resist tides and you can turn things around.
To all of my colleagues, to Chris and to Phil Barresi and to Bob Charles and to Bruce Bilson who’ve represented this part of Melbourne so magnificently I express my very warm thanks. It's not going to be easy winning this election, don’t believe the talk that you read about certain results being ordained, they are not. Election campaigns are always hard, winning third terms are extremely difficult. So I exhort all of you to work as hard as you possible can to give all the help you can to these magnificent candidates and if we do that we can hope that in the 10 November we’ll be given the privilege once again by the Australian people of governing this wonderful country. Can I finally say to you as I’ve said to many audiences already as I’ve moved around Australia, I have never been more committed to anything in my political life than winning the election on the 10 November.
I am absolutely determined with my colleagues to see Australia through these new and difficult economic and other challenges which we face. With your help and with the good will of the Australian people we can once again be given that privilege and that opportunity. Don’t take it for granted, you never can. You have to work hard to the very end to earn and retain the support and the respect of the Australian people. We’ve done that in the past and we can do it again and I look forward to a great result of the 10 November.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: education
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much David, Charles and Valerie Collins, Michael and Kate Ronaldson, my other friends and my fellow Australians.  Can I start my remarks, because this launch takes place in the city of Ballarat in the electorate of Ballarat, can I start my remarks by expressing my gratitude to Michael Ronaldson for the tremendous way in which he has represented the electorate of Ballarat since being elected in 1990.  
I would like to wish Michael and Kate and their family good luck and good health and much happiness in the years ahead.  You have been a great servant of the people here Michael.  But in Charles we have a great successor and today is not only about launching the Schools Policy of the Coalition.  It';s also about making the very simple and obvious and I hope politically compelling point that we need to hold on to seats like Ballarat if we are to hold onto government.  You can';t have a Howard Liberal Government unless you have a Charles Collins held seat of Ballarat.  So if there is anybody out there, I don';t mean right here, who sort of thinks you can have a Coalition Government without having a Liberal held Ballarat, please disabuse them of that notion.  This is historically a marginal seat and it';s a seat that has moved around very much according to the quality of its representation and we have to work and fight very hard in order to retain the seat of Ballarat at the next election and I am delighted Charles has been chosen as the Liberal Party candidate and the standard bearer to replace Michael Ronaldson.
In launching this policy document today which deals with the schooling aspects of the Government';s far sighted educational programmes can I say that our educational policies so far as schools are concerned are really based on two great principles.  There is the principle of high standards and there is the principle of maximum parental choice.  Standards and choice are fundamental to the Liberal way so far as education is concerned.  Uniformity and standards imposed only in accordance with union permission is the hallmark of the Labor Party';s alternative approach to education.  
Over the last five and a half years this government has spent record amounts for a federal government on both government and independent schools.   The Labor Party seeks to turn the debate on school education in Australia into an envy-driven debate.  Their incessant attacks on so-called privileged or elite schools are a campaign from a party that is still fundamentally, in this area of policy, driven by their trade union affiliations.  Our education policy is built on the principle that all Australian children are entitled to a quality education to give them the skills they need to participate in employment or further training and study.  It';s based on fairness, on recognising there is a public benefit in the education of all of our children whether in the government or the independent sector.  
It';s also built very heavily on the concept of lifting standards and when the Coalition came to office, almost 30% of year 3 and 5 students did not have the literacy skills that they needed.  And the acquisition of literacy and numeracy skills is a fundamental right of each and every Australian child.  And by making literacy and numeracy his priority, and I thank David Kemp for the tremendous work he';s done in recent years to lift public understanding of the need to have higher standards of literacy and numeracy, by making it our priority over the past 5 years we have delivered the first measurable improvement in the literacy skills of early and middle primary students in almost 30 years.  We have invested over $1.1 billion since 1996 to enable schools and teachers to help all students improve their literacy skills.  
Labor, as David pointed out, has tended to see post secondary school education exclusively in terms of the 30% of Australians who seek to go to Universities, and ignoring the 70% of school leavers who don';t go to university.  And I';m very proud of the fact, and I mention this although this is a schools policy launch it';s still very relevant, I';m very proud of the fact that one of the great things my Government has done is to double the number of Australians in apprenticeships and traineeships over the last five and a half years.
What we have succeeded in doing is to give to the sons and daughters of the working people of Australia a far better opportunity to get a career in a trade through an apprenticeship or the like.  Far better opportunity than any Labor Government did in the course of 13 years.  We';ve lifted the number of people in apprenticeships and traineeships by something in the order of 150,000 five and a half years ago to more than 305,000 in 2001.  And we';re very very proud of that and we';ve introduced many new initiatives as part of this programme to boost apprenticeships.  We';ve introduced about 6000 school based new apprenticeships around Australia.  We';ve established the Enterprise and Career Education Foundation to link schools, business and the community to help students become work ready before they leave school.  And over 50,000 businesses and 90,000 students are participating in that programme.
Without any argument the most socially and educationally disadvantaged group in Australia are indigenous students.  And the Coalition';s National Literacy and Numeracy Strategy, which the Labor Party plans to throw out, is producing real results for Australia';s indigenous students.  In 1999, less than 2 years ago, 66% of indigenous year 3 students had met the national reading standard which is a massive improvement since 1996.  Year 12 retention rates for indigenous students have also improved up from 29% in 1996 to 36% in the year 2000.  
As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks the Labor Party';s education policy, reaffirmed today by the Leader of the Opposition, launching it in Brisbane, is based very much on the politics of envy.  It seeks to cut funding from a so called hit list of schools formally classified as category 1 under the Labor Party';s old flawed funding system.  The Labor Party argues that all of these schools are rich schools, in fact nothing could be further from the truth.  Certainly some of them are well endowed, but many of them aren';t.  I understand for example there';s a school on the Darling Downs of Queensland which is apparently the only category 1 school in the whole of the state of Queensland, where Mr Beazley is today, and it';s resources are by any description really meagre compared with the resources of many other schools both Government and independent in the city of Brisbane and throughout the rest of Queensland.  But apparently a school like this school at Warwick, the Warwick Community School is on the hit list but many other schools such as say Churchy and so forth in Queensland, not that I';m suggesting that they should be on any hit list, they are not.  And I mention that comparison to drive home the point that this policy of the Labor Party of saying ‘Ah, you';re on this list, therefore automatically you are wealthy schools'; is completely flawed.  
And could I say, and I say this particularly in a regional area in Australia, and it will resonate all around country Australia, that more than half the schools on the hit list are boarding schools that serve rural Australia.  And this envy driven, discriminatory policy of the Labor Party will strike another blow at country people.  Many country people have no alternative, if their children are to get a good education, than to send them to boarding schools.  And if the Labor Party wins this election and is able to implement this envy driven policy of theirs, which discriminates against tens of thousands of Australian parents who work very hard, often taking on an additional job in order to afford the fees to send children to the school of their choice that those people will be very heavily penalised.  These schools will lose up to $2000 a student under a Labor Government and it will mean that the parents of boarders, many of them living in rural areas that have gone though very difficult economic circumstances over recent years will have to make up the difference through much higher fees.
Labor is also going to end our funding guarantee.  And that';s our guarantee that no independent school will lose funding.  And there are 254 schools around Australia including independent schools, non-systemic Catholic schools and Jewish day schools that will be in the firing line as a result of that decision.   Labor has refused to commit  to the Coalition';s National Literacy and Numeracy Strategy which is delivering the first measurable improvements in literacy in decades.  The Coalition, if re-elected, will continue to ensure that every young Australian achieves the literacy and numeracy skills that are the key to success at school in further study and at work.  We will if re-elected expect to secure state and territory reporting to all parents of their child';s skills in literacy and numeracy against national standards.
We will have none of this union driven view that parents do not have the right to full access to details of their own childrens proformance against literacy and numeracy benchmarks.  We';ll invest a record amount in schooling with Government schools to get $9.1 billion over the next four years.  Non-Government schools will receive legislated increases in funding which will give them the certainty to plan under funding arrangements that reward them for taking students from low income communities.  We have put in place funding arrangements for non Government schools which guarantee that no school will lose money over the next four years.  And we';re going to invest $1.4 billion over four years to improve the learning outcomes of educationally disadvantaged students and the provision of education services for students with disabilities.
As many of you will know, school based new apprenticeships provide an attractive option for many school students.  By providing them with work ready skills, school based new apprenticeships encourage many young people who may otherwise have dropped out to stay at school while they complete Year 12.  I now announce that a third term Coalition Government will expand new apprenticeships in schools by encouraging more employers to offer apprenticeship places to school students.  We will provide an extra incentive of $750 to employers who are willing to take on a new apprentice while the young person is still at school.  And this will help some 30,000 young Australians to get a head start in their career.  The Coalition also wants to ensure that the transition from school to the world of work for these young people is as smooth as possible.  We want to make sure that young people have as much stability as possible during what are very important years in their lives.  A third term Coalition Government will also provide a retention bonus of $750 to those employers who continue to employ the young person as a new apprentice within six months of that person completing year 12.
It is expected that up to 27,000 people will be eligible for the bonus.  The measures will cost $40 million over the next four years.  Can I just make the observation that in the electorate of Ballarat there are currently over 2700 new apprentices in training and that is up from a figure of 1140 in 1995.
Ladies and Gentlemen, in seeking a third term the Government appeals to the Australian people across a very wide range of policies.  We are very proud of what we have done to restore the economic strength and economic stability of the Australian nation.  We do face difficult times ahead.  Even before the terrible events of the 11th of September, the United States economy was slowing and many of the other major economies of the world were experiencing difficulties.  And those dreadful events have compounded that process.  Fortunately, Australia is better able to cope with these new pressures than most.  Our inflation is low, our interest rates are low, we have repaid almost $58 billion of the $96 billion of Government debt left to us by the former Labor Government.  We';ve had the courage to restructure our taxation system.  We';ve reformed our workplace relations system, our exporters are doing better thanks to the new tax system, a reformed waterfront and the super competitive exchange rate environment in which they are operating.  In other words, we do go into difficult times but we go there well prepared because of the policies of the Government that I';ve led over the last five and a half years.
And never forget, that over the last five and a half years, all of the things that we have done, almost without exception, to strengthen the Australian economy, prepare it for the difficult days ahead, virtually all of those things have been opposed by the Labor Party.  They not only left us with a massive debt, they opposed all of our attempts to get rid of that debt.  So my friends this is not only an opportunity for the launch of the schools policy, it';s also an opportunity to remind you of what is at stake on the 10th of November.  This country, this electorate of Ballarat and the State of Victoria deserves at a national level, we deserve a government that has had the courage to do the difficult things to prepare Australia for the more difficult times ahead.  It needs a government that is prepared to govern in the interests of the mainstream of the Australian community.  It needs a government in areas like education that will advocate the maintenance of high standards, that will support and promote the great principle in education of parental choice.  We have a mixed school education system in Australia, something in the order of 30 percent of our children are educated in independent schools.  At a secondary level here in Victoria almost 40 percent of children are within the independent system.  Throughout the nation the remaining 70 percent are educated in government schools.  And despite all the propaganda that comes from the Labor Party to the effect that we favour, and the system favours, non-government schools, the reverse is the case.  78 percent of total government funding from all sources goes to the 70 percent of students that are in the government sector while 22 percent goes to the schools that educate 30 per cent of children in the non-government sector.  Now those figures alone disprove this miserable attempt to introduce the politics of envy and division back into the education debate in this country.  We want good government schools, we want independent schools.  They are both part of our system and I speak with some feeling on that subject as somebody himself who is the product of the state government education system in New South Wales.  Government education has always been important to the Coalition but so has education within the independent sector and I say with a great deal of feeling how strongly I am opposed to this attempt by the Labor Party, by Mr Beazley to reintroduce the politics of envy and the politics of division back into the education debate.  Those days are long gone I had thought and hoped yet the policy announced by Mr Beazley today seeks to reintroduce them back into the education debate in Australia.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, once again can I warmly commend Charles Collins to you.  Just go out and tell all the people of Ballarat one very simple thing.  If you want a Howard Liberal Government after 10 November, the only way you are going to get it is to vote for Charles.  You can';t sort of vote for me or vote for somebody else away in Canberra and exercise some kind of other option right here in Ballarat.  I can only win if he wins.  If you don';t get him, you won';t get me.  If you vote for him you will get me and you will get a continuation of the Coalition Government.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Bruce, to my other parliamentary colleagues, Senator Bill Heffernan, Senator Maurice Payne, senators from New South Wales, Kerry Chikarovski the leader of the New South Wales opposition, Andrew Tink the shadow minister for police and correctional services and the member for Epping, and Brian Pezutti a member of the New South Wales upper house. Can I also again thank Charles Brown and Peter Strachan of the Epping RSL club for making this magnificent facility available for this launch. I really do appreciate it very much.
The Epping RSL club in the tradition of all RSL clubs in Australia is a great community organisation and makes it facilities available to all shades of political and community opinion. And it is a great credit to its leadership and to its membership.
I am particularly pleased to be able to launch this veterans’ affairs policy of the Coalition here in my own electorate. I do so with a great deal of pride and a great deal of conviction. And may I say how particularly pleased I am to launch this policy in front of a flag for which I have always had unwavering support.
It has always been the policy of my party and always will be, without qualification, without bowing to temporary fad or fashion to support the retention of the Australian flag as a proper expression both of the history, the contemporary experience and the future of our nation. I’m also conscious that I launch this policy at a time when inevitably our thoughts may well turn to people who in the not too distant future might become on behalf of our country and in the name of freedom, veterans of military combat and military participation. It is therefore an especially poignant time to be launching a veterans affairs policy. It is an opportunity for me again to record my admiration and respect and gratitude for my generation on behalf of all of those of earlier generations and of future generations who served their country and put their lives on the line to preserve the freedom that we enjoy.
The world does face an enormous challenge at present. The fight against terrorism is difficult, it is new, it is unprecedented in its scale and the future is difficult to know with certainty. But one thing we can be certain about and that is this, that history tells us if we turn away from threats in the vain hope that they will disappear of their own volition, we will be sadly mistaken. And as the generation I look out on and that is the generation of World War II, knew and learnt far better than any generation in the history of Australia, indeed the history of the world. It was the refusal of free peoples and free men and women to recognise the nature of the challenge in the 1930s that bought about the terrible events with such awful consequences of World War II.
Now although the circumstances and the scale is different, the principle involved is the same. We must and we will stand with our American allies and our American friends in defence of the things that we hold so dear and we hold in common. And we think at a time like this not only of people who were veterans of World War I and World War II, of Korea, of Vietnam, of Malaya, but also those that in more recent times have served with such great distinction in places such as Bougainville and East Timor. We think also of the magnificent service under very difficult circumstances of the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy who have served on vessels such as HMAS Manoora which has taken some of the illegal asylum seekers to Nauru. We think of those who are serving on HMAS Adelaide and all the other vessels and we think particularly of those who may at some time in the not too distant future be asked to serve the cause of liberty, the cause of freedom and the cause and the defence of their own country as part of allied activity against terrorism.
We are very proud of the policy launched today, entitled “Supporting Those Who Served”. Because what this policy does is to build on five and a half years of improvements to the support available to our veterans and to our war widows. And it also commits the Coalition to further extending recognition health care and compensation to these Australians who have a very special place, not only in our community but in our hearts. And at a time when Australia has once again committed itself to international efforts against aggression we are reminded of the contributions of earlier generations. And it is the acknowledgment of this proud tradition by a grateful Australian community since World War I that has ensured that we have the most comprehensive and best repatriation system in the world.
Over the last five and a half years there have been a number of initiatives of the Coalition Government. And in recording these initiates let me also pay tribute to initiatives of earlier governments of both sides of politics that have contributed to looking after the veterans of Australia. As many of you will know I have always endeavoured as far as it is possible in the nature of political combat and political rivalry to ensure that attitudes towards benefits for veterans is kept on as bipartisan a basis as possible in accordance with the very proud bipartisan traditions of returned service men and women all around Australia.
Over the last five and a half years the Gold Card has been extended to provide comprehensive free health coverage to a further 38,000 Australian veterans aged over 70 with World War II qualifying service.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the last budget the Coalition provided a $25,000 tax free cash payment to Australian service personnel and civilians held prisoner of war by the Japanese during World War II and to their surviving widows. The Coalition Government legislated to link the service and war widows pensions to 25 per cent of male total average weekly earnings when consumer price index increases failed to maintain that benchmark. We also restored the pension rights of thousands of war widows who had their pensions cancelled when they chose to remarry. And can I on a personal note say that it was in the boardroom of this very club some six or seven months ago that I met two constituents of mine representing the interests of that category of Australian war widows and it was that conversation that in the end proved conclusively to me that this was a priority that ought to be dealt with in the last budget.
In the area of health, $3.2 million has been provided to support Vietnam veterans and their families addressing the validated findings of the Vietnam veterans health study. We’ve also spent over $391 million since 1996 to help older veterans stay in the family home through initiatives like veterans home care. For the 150,000 veterans living in remote and regional areas of Australia we have spent over $40 million in health and counselling initiatives and opened more than 70 veterans affairs regional offices. In the last budget we extended the repatriation pharmaceutical benefits scheme to up to 47,000 British, Commonwealth and allied veterans who are aged 70 or over, have qualifying service from World War II and have lived in Australia for more than ten years.
In the area of commemoration this government has of course has been an active and generous supporter of the Australian National War Memorial and I was especially touched and proud when some eight weeks ago during the Ausmin talks attended on behalf of the United States by the Secretary of State Colin Powell and the Secretary of Defence, Donald Rumsfeld and the Commander-in-Chief of the American Forces in the Pacific Admiral Blair, we had dinner at The Lodge with them as our guests and my two ministerial colleagues Alexander Downer and Peter Reith. Admiral Blair and the Secretary for Defence remarked to me how tremendously impressed they had been with our War Memorial. In fact Admiral Blair said it is without doubt the best War Memorial in the world and one for which Australians should be particularly proud.
Now we will continue our generous support of plans to expand the War Memorial. I recently opened the commemorative ANZAC Hall and I expect to have discussions with the Chairman of the Council of the War Memorial and also with the Director to discuss further plans for the development and expansion of what remains the outstanding point of attraction for Australians who visit our national capital. We also funded the $5 million documentary series Australians at War. We provided $1.2 million for the new ANZAC commemorative site at Gallipoli which I opened along with the Prime Minister of New Zealand on ANZAC day in the year 2000 and $6 million for a new memorial to Australian servicemen and women which is scheduled to be opened in London on ANZAC day in the year 2003 and it will be the first permanent and significant memorial in the United Kingdom to those tens upon tens of thousand who put their lives on the line in the defence of Great Britain particularly during World War II. Those are the things that we have done and they are an earnest of our commitment to the support of the veterans’ community in Australia.
I am very pleased to announce three new initiatives that will be implemented by the Coalition Government if it is returned to office at the election on the 10th of November. We are of course particularly concerned to meet the health needs of veterans within our community and therefore this policy commits the Coalition to extending the Gold Card to Australian veterans of Post World War II conflicts who are 70 years of age or over and who have the necessary qualifying service.
Secondly and of equal importance the Coalition will also ensure that our war widows receive more appropriate compensation. We therefore intend to unfreeze the income support supplement that was frozen in 1986 and to index the payment to increases in male total average weekly earnings or the Consumer Price Index which ever is the greater. This measure, which will cost some $70 million over four years will directly benefit about85 000 war widows in Australia.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Coalition is also aware that some groups of ex-servicemen and women may have a claim to entitlements under the Veterans Entitlement Act but are currently denied access to benefits because of perceived anomalies and injustices in the definition of qualifying service. These groups include some World War II veterans currently without qualifying service. Veterans of the British Commonwealth Occupation forces of Japan, participants of British atomic testing in Australia and servicemen engaged in counter terrorist and special recovery training. The Coalition is committed to a high profile and independent review to consider anomalies within the current eligibility criteria for veterans’ entitlements. This review will be conducted in the early New Year and in close consultation with the ex-service community. It will seek to focus on perceived anomalies and injustices in the current provisions determining access to veterans’ benefits. We’ll continue ladies and gentlemen to encourage younger Australians to learn more about and commemorate the sacrifices made by Australians of earlier generations who secured for the young of today the freedoms they now enjoy and I know to all of us whether we are veterans or not, one of the most pleasing things about the evolution of Australians’ attitudes towards this country and its history and its past and its achievements is the way in which the young are taking to themselves an understanding and an affection for what the men and women of earlier years did in the defence of this country.
I have said before and it is appropriate that I repeat it again this morning that probably as moving a day as I have had in the five and half years that I have been Prime Minister of this country was on ANZAC day last year when Janette and I attended along with the Prime Minister of New Zealand and her husband, the ANZAC Commemoration on ANZAC Cove and opened the new commemoration site. It was a very moving service, it was a magnificent day made absolutely unforgettable by the 12 000 to 15 000 young Australians and New Zealanders who packed the shores of ANZAC in a robustly Australian but always totally respectful commemoration of what those deeds long ago meant to them and meant to our country. It has almost become to that generation a rite of passage as an Australian young man or woman. It was moving, it was different and it was something a generation ago I don’t think many of us would have thought was likely to come about. And it is a reminder of the great affection in which a generation of Australians that the great body of his room represent. It is a reminder of the great affection in which you are held by your fellow Australians and I hope the repatriation programs that have been put in place by successive Australian Governments of both sides of politics and I hope these policies which I have announced today if the Australian people re-elect us and we therefore have the opportunity of implementing them. I hope that they will be part of a long continuum of the never ending gratitude that Australians feel for those who put their lives on the line. Many of those lives were lost, thankfully so many were not, and the least we can do is to honour their service for the rest of their lives.
So again to you Charles thank you for making Epping RSL Club available. I commend this policy to the Veteran community. I reaffirm my strong personal support for you, my great respect for what you have done and the ongoing desire of the Government to help you. And very finally can I think Bruce Scott for the tremendous job that he has done as the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs. Bruce is a very good friend. Bruce is a very good friend to veterans and I know and I can assure you he is a powerful advocate for your cause.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much John, to Julie Olsen, Rosemary Craddock the president of the South Australian Division, Senator Robert Hill the Leader of the Government in the Senate, my other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to thank you very warmly for supporting this lunch which provides me with an opportunity to launch and to highlight some of the main features of the Government’s policy statement relating to wealth generation and the interests of the business community of Australia. You are all aware of the extraordinarily difficult and challenging times in which we live and the stressing circumstances that confront not only Australia but all other freedom loving nations at the present time. It is an occasion that requires all of us who care about the values that we hold dearest, the values of liberty and freedom, for all of us to work together and to stay together and cooperate both within Australia and around the world, to effectively counter the terrible challenge of terrorism. It will not be easy, it is not without danger, it is not without immense challenge. But we have no alternative, the world simply cannot close its eyes and hope this terrible threat will go away because it will not. And only by taking the most tenacious actions of the type outlined very effectively and very courageously by President Bush will in the end we triumph over this challenge to our age and this challenge to what we believe in and what we stand for.
And one of the many challenges that have out of the sad events of the 11th of September is the impact it’s had on the economies of the world. Of course the human toll is immensely more saddening and immensely worse but the economic toll is widespread. It’s more severely felt in some industries than in others and it’s more severely felt in some nations than in others. Fortunately and not least because of the good economic policies my government has followed over the last five and a half years, we are better prepared than most to cope with the harmful aftershocks economically of the terrorist attacks. If we had not got our budget back into balance, if we had not repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of Labor debt, if we had not reformed our taxation system, if we had not reformed our industrial relations system, if we had not delivered the lowest interest rates in 30 years, if we’d not cut the company tax rate from 36 to 30 per cent, if we’d not halved the capital gains tax for individuals, and so the list goes on. If we’d not taken all of those measures we would now have a far gloomier economic outlook. And it’s very important, especially in the context of the next four weeks of this critical election campaign that we remind the Australian people that the actions we have taken, many unpopular at the time over the last five and a half years, but all calculated to aid Australia’s national interest, to put Australia’s interest first, the great dividend from those actions is that we enter this new difficult and challenging period better prepared and in better shape than would have otherwise have been the case.
Now one of the goals of the Government has been not to slavishly serve every whim of the business community of Australia but broadly to promote its interests because our goals and your goals are really the same. We all want a prosperous Australia, we all want rising employment, rising profits, growing international competitiveness, a more attractive investment climate, the most benign taxation system that a community can have consistent with the need to raise revenue to provide necessary services. And there’s no doubt that the Australian business sector has enjoyed the benefits of the economic times of the last five and a half years. The higher productivity, the lower inflation, the lower interest rates, the more internationally competitive taxation system, the better industrial relations climate, fewer strikes, less union interference and union domination. So much of that would be at risk if a Labor Government federally were to be elected.
But today ladies and gentleman I don’t speak only of the government’s record, impressive though I believe it to be. Today’s an opportunity in launching this policy document to outline a number of initiatives for a third term of the Coalition Government if it is re-elected on the 10th of November, which will be directed to building on the changes we’ve made over the last five and a half years to make us even more attractive to overseas investment, to stimulate greater investment within Australia and also to respond to some of the concerns that have been expressed to the Government by the business community, legitimate concerns, about the operation of some government agencies and some statutory office holders within the broad Federal Government structure.
One of the things that the Government has an obligation to ensure is that its dealings with Australian business are efficient, fair and transparent. And this is particularly true in the two key areas of taxation and regulation. A lot of the interface between the Government and the business community in these areas takes place through the Commonwealth statutory authorities and office holders. And it’s here that the business community is entitled to expect and to receive the highest levels of good governance. The Government will therefore focus very much in its next term, if it receives one, on improving the structures and the governance practices of all of its statutory authorities and office holders. And particular attention will be afforded to those that impact on the business community. But as a separate and quite distinct initiative and bearing in mind in part a number of concerns that have been expressed from time to time over recent years and recent months, the Government proposes through a new initiative to strengthen the advice given to Government in respect of matters of taxation administration and process.
We intend therefore to establish a new position, that is the position of the Inspector General of Taxation. This person will be an advocate for the ordinary tax payer. The position will report to the parliament through the Treasurer and will provide a new source of independent advice. His role will be to act as an advocate for all taxpayers, including Australian business. And to provide an avenue for more effective conflict resolution between taxpayers and the Australian Taxation Office than currently exists.
Ministerial control of tax policy and legislation will remain as it should with the Government and the inspector general’s activities will not be directed towards legal adjudication. But it has become very evident to me as Prime Minister and also evident to the Treasurer that there are areas of legitimate complaint and concern between the business community and the taxation office which cannot be resolved through the normal political process because of the need, quite properly, to insulate the individual affairs of tax payers from the political process. Yet the issue cannot remain unaddressed and the Government believes that the establishment of this new office will provide people with a capacity to ventilate their legitimate concerns, it will impose greater requirements of good governance on the Australian Taxation Office. We are all accountable, you are accountable to your shareholders, I am accountable to my 19 million shareholders and no aspect of Government, be it the taxation office or any other agency of government should in any way be immune from full accountability.
The second announcement I make is that we intend, if re-elected, to carry out a comprehensive review of the competition provisions of the Trade Practices Act. Australian business both large and small need to be assured that legislation and administrative practice will not act against continued growth and productivity. Strong but effective trade practices legislation remains crucial to the Government’s commitment to encourage the success and the fairness of business activity. We need legislation of this kind to promote effective competition. We need to make certain at all times that the balance between big and small business in the competitive interaction of economic behaviour is always correct. And while various aspects of the trade practices act have been reviewed over the past few years, a wider review of the competition provision is now warranted. We therefore, under the chairmanship of an independent person, will carry out a review of the Trade Practices Act to report by August of next year. Its terms of reference will be to continue to encourage an environment where Australian business can grow and compete internationally; provide adequate protection for the balance of power between small and large businesses; support the growth of businesses in regional Australia and deal fairly with the affairs of individual companies.
The third area of great concern I know to many in this room, to me and to all Australians is the need to ensure that we resist the trend towards Australia becoming a branch office economy. And one of the more pressing issues facing business leaders is how to run and expand their companies in an increasingly competitive global environment. We remain very strongly of the view that Australian companies can effectively compete and succeed on the global stage while remaining based in Australia. The need for globally competitive taxes and taxation systems is vital if Australian based firms are going to compete successfully. That’s why we introduced a more internationally competitive company tax rate of 30 per cent. However the pressure that remains on some companies to relocate their headquarters offshore underscores the need for further improvement. The recent protocol amending the double taxation convention between the United States and Australia, which removed withholding taxes on most dividends, was a major step in facilitating a competitive and modern tax treaty network. More broadly the Government will as a matter of priority on re-election examine where the features of the current taxation arrangements still exist which effect the decisions of businesses to remain in Australia or to relocate here in preference to other countries. We’ll pay particular regard to whether Australia’s international tax regime acts as an impediment to Australian companies attracting domestic and foreign equity, acts as an impediment to them expanding offshore and whether it acts as an impediment to holding companies and conduit holdings being located in Australia.
I turn to a fourth item, namely that of venture capital. So very important in a growing and expanding and innovative Australian economy. Because in an increasingly competitive global environment reducing taxes on equity flows will significantly enhance the ability of companies to manage their capital base. The Government therefore intends to extend the previously announced exemption for capital gains on venture capital investments by providing venture capital limited partnerships with flow through taxation treatment. The Government’s decision will provide Australia with a world’s best practice investment vehicle for venture capital and is expected to result in increased international investment in Australia. It will also improve Australia’s access to overseas expertise for start up and expanding companies. These changes, which will apply from the first of July next year stem from the Government's commitment in Backing Australia’s Ability to ensure that venture capital investment is encouraged.
Fifthly I turn to the area of the taxation treatment of expatriates. While positioning and encouraging Australian companies to take on the world we must remain mindful of the fact that a global company needs access to global talent. The government recently announced changes to various tax rules which reduced the cost of employing skilled expatriates. In recognition of the importance of attracting highly skilled workers from around the world the government will further enhance and amend certain foreign source income and foreign investment fund rules for expatriates, resident in Australia for less than four years. The Government will also seek to address concerns that departing non-residents have with capital gains tax liabilities on the unrealised gains on their foreign assets. These changes will further reduce disincentives for the recruitment of skilled executives and professionals to Australia.
And finally in the very important area of winning investment the Government intends to respond to the recommendations of the report delivered some months ago by Dr Ian Blackburn who conducted a review into the Commonwealth’s effectiveness in promoting and attracting foreign direct investment. We intend to accept broadly the recommendations of the report which will continue our activity in encouraging overseas direct investment. A national strategic framework for investment promotion and attraction in Australia will be developed as a matter of priority. And that framework will be developed in the context of Australia’s overall objectives for economic growth, industry and regional development. Investment promotion and attraction will in future be delivered through an autonomous prescribed agency to be known as Invest Australia. It will involve a greater partnership with the states and territories and the investment activities of other Commonwealth agencies will be incorporated into Invest Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen the specific policy commitments I have outlined there represent a very significant part of the Government’s third term agenda for continued activity, reform and change in response to the needs of the Australian business community. But crucial to those changes and indeed crucial to everything that any Government can hope to do is the maintenance of very strong economic growth. It is only through a growing economy that we have the capacity to fund the public services that a modern society needs and a compassionate society expects. Over the last five and a half years we have been an active reformist Government. We haven’t always got things 100 per cent correct, we have made our share of mistakes, but we’ve been willing to respond to expressions of concerns where those mistakes have been made. It is undeniably the case that the Australian economy is stronger, more diversified, more internationally competitive and less cloistered than it was five and a half years ago.
The strength of the local economy here in South Australia is a product of that national economic prosperity. It is also due in no small measure to the pro-business policies pursued by John Olsen’s Government. I have always been very sensitive to the particular economic needs of South Australia. And the actions we have taken in relation to the motor manufacturing industry, the actions we took to support the construction of the Darwin to Alice Springs railway, the commitment we’ve made to the wine industry and a whole list of other initiatives undertaken by the Government which are of particular importance to South Australia and to the people of Adelaide as well as being of great national significance.
Finally can I say to you that over the course of the next four weeks we have a great challenge as Liberals. This is not a lay down misere this election, it never was, it isn’t and it won’t be. The electoral climate in Australia is always volatile and always very challenging. We have a strong record to look to, we offer at a time of intense international uncertainty and concern a capacity as well as a record of stability, of predictability, of knowing what we believe in, in what we stand for. We are opposed to a group of people who for the last five and a half years have sought to do nothing other than feed off the inevitable friction caused whenever major change is undertaken. The whole philosophy of the Leader of the Opposition over the last five and a half years was summed up in a moment of total candour to his Labor caucus in December of 1999 when he said comrades, we’re going to surf to victory off the back of discontent with the GST. That was their whole philosophy. Their whole philosophy was to hope and pray that the world would come to an end when the GST was introduced. They cared not a jot for Australia’s national interest, they did not put Australia’s interest first, they put the Labor Party’s interest first. Their whole pattern of behaviour over the last five and a half years has been to criticise, to oppose, to be negative and to engage in guerilla tactics. And now as they approach the election and they find that their capacity to define and explain themselves to the Australian electorate is very limited they are looking around to blame everybody other than themselves. If they have a difficulty defining and explaining themselves they are the victims of their own negativity and their own shortsightedness.
Over the last five and a half years we have taken a lot of tough and difficult decisions. And I know there are people in this room who violently disagreed with some of the stances I’ve taken and my colleagues have taken. But they’ve always been stances that have been taken in the cause of putting Australia’s interest first. And the end result is that we have a stronger, more respected, more resilient Australian nation, both economically and socially.
But we are not resting on our laurels. I don’t seek to be re-elected as Prime Minister simply on the basis of what I have done but also on the basis of what I want to do. And some of the things I want to do in the area of business policy I’ve outlined today, and are contained in the larger document. But what I do want to do over the next term is to ensure that the conditions of prosperity, now widely enjoyed by the Australian business community, certainly under some pressure as a result of the post September 11 climate, but nonetheless there’s a capacity to continue those conditions of prosperity and growth. I ask for your help, not only over the next four weeks but if we are successful over the subsequent three years to continue the process of growth and expansion and development of the Australian economy. Recognising always that the wealth of a nation is ultimately dependent upon the entrepreneurial spirit, the risk taking disposition and the animal spirits of its business community. We cannot have wealth without entrepreneurs. We cannot provide revenue for taxes unless people make money. A nation needs profitable businesses to be successful and all of our policies are committed to achieve that outcome.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Trish, Senator Grant Chapman, Mr John Dawkins, ladies and gentlemen. It would not have escaped your notice that we are in the early stages of an election campaign. But before I come to that there is an issue I would like to briefly address, very much in my role as Prime Minister as well as of course in my role as leader of the Liberal Party and therefore involving this election campaign. You’ll be aware that today there have been a number of reports of anthrax scares around Australia. A few moments ago I spoke to the head of the Protective Security Coordination Centre in Canberra, the person responsible for coordinating the responses of all of the various agencies such as the Federal Police to challenges of this kind. I’m told that thus far the investigations indicate that what are involved in these scares are hoaxes, that there is no reason for the Australian people to be concerned. That is not to say that we can afford to be complacent but it does mean that I’m able to tell you as of now that there is no indication that any of these are other than hoaxes where a powder has turned up. In some other cases suspicious envelopes have been treated as such because for example in one case the mailed address was Florida which understandably excited the concern of the people involved. Shortly the director will be, through the Attorney General, will be issuing a statement giving a little more information. But I thought as citizens and given the understandable concern you may have had, as there are some 16 reports in all in various parts of the country that you should be aware that there is no need for people to be concerned. There will always the need and the particular need in present circumstances for people to take great care and the statement that will be coming out this afternoon will be giving some guidance to people in relation to that.
It is important concerning all of these things that as soon as information is made available to me that I should seek to communicate it directly and as clearly as I possibly can to the Australian people. These are unusual circumstances for us but I know that the great cooperative spirit of the Australian people will come to the fore. We always are at our very best when there’s any kind of challenge to us. We put aside our differences, our differences of politics, our differences of background and ethnicity, our differences of sporting allegiance and we all work together to make sure that there is a full blooded and effective Australian response.
So ladies and gentlemen can I first of all having given you that report, can I thank Mr McCard very very warmly for inviting me into this club. This is volunteer Australia writ large. This is what this country is renowned for. And that is a group of citizens getting together without any material reward but just the simple pleasure of providing a sporting outlet for themselves, for their families and for the community. And most particularly providing the young of the community with a very healthy and positive diversion. I mean we all benefit from playing a bit of sport. As you know I’m fairly fanatical about different forms of sport, I’m pleased to know that this club is affiliated, has associations and sponsors and patronises the sport that I’m most identified with. Of course naturally being a South Australian club it doesn’t go down some of the football predilections of mine but I’ve got to say I’ve developed over the years a very very warm enthusiasm for Australian Rules and I’ve got to say the Grand Final, as a rugby league follower, that the AFL Grand Final this year turned out to be one of the more enthralling ones. I know you might have been happier if some other team, Trish, would have been involved.
But sport is very important to Australians. It expresses our optimism, it expresses our enthusiasm, it expresses a sense of competition and the sense of mateship, and most importantly of all it expresses through clubs like this and there are thousands of them around Australia, thousands of them around Australia, and this is really what grassroots sport is all about. So when I announced a few months ago the full detail of the ongoing support that the federal government was going to give to what you might call elite sport in Australia, in other words the ongoing support we were going to give to getting our athletes ready for the Olympic Games in Athens in three years time and making certain that the great king tide that carried us to so many medals in Sydney, that the momentum of that was maintained, I also said that we weren’t going to overlook the need to support grassroots sporting participation. And I’m therefore very happy to say that one of the things we will do if we get re-elected is out of the grassroots sports fund is to contribute a sum of $10,000 to this club to assist it with all of its sporting activities, and also to make a like contribution of $10,000 to the Pooraka Sports Club for similar purposes.
Now I understand that both the clubs field AFL, netball, cricket and softball teams. And the $10,000 to each of the clubs – the Ingle Farm Sporting Club and the Pooraka Sporting Club – will enable you to expand your junior grassroots sporting involvement. And that is what promoting sport in Australia is all about just as much as making sure that we give our best athletes the best opportunity to do their very best internationally and at Olympic Games. It’s no good having a nation full of elite sporting champions if nobody plays sport at a grassroots level, no good. And let’s face it most of the great champions start at local clubs. And you think about the stories of all of our footballers, of our cricket players, of our swimmers, of our tennis players. All of them, they started at a local club and that’s where they learnt it and they got the enthusiasm. And that of course is where so many of us make lifelong friendships. Janette and I still have friendships that we developed along the sidelines of the Greenwich Soccer Club in Sydney where our boys played prior to going to secondary school and the local cricket club. So it’s very much part of our life and I can empathise very warmly and very directly with a gathering such as this.
Now the other reason that I’m absolutely delighted to be here of course is that it’s in Trish Draper’s electorate of Makin. Now Trish is very important to me, very important to me. She has fought and won two magnificent election campaigns – one in 1996 and one in 1998. Now in the jargon of the political trade this is a classic swing seat. It goes like this, one side to the other. I wanted the barometer to settle on one side for a while, for at least another term and if it settles for another term I’ll come back and try to persuade you that it could settle for another one yet.
But ladies and gentlemen Trish has been a magnificent member for this electorate. She’s identified with the people. She’s been prepared to fight their causes. She’s been prepared to articulate the grassroots concerns of the people of Makin. When she talks about the drug problem I know she talks from experience and the tragedy of some parents in this electorate. I know that she speaks for them when she talks about interest rates and expresses the gratitude of thousands of homebuyers in this electorate, and there are thousands whose mortgage bills are hundreds of dollars cheaper now than they were in March of 1996, I know she speaks for the people of Makin. I’m sure she was speaking for the people of Makin when she complained some months ago about petrol prices. I’m pleased to say now they’re much lower. I mean I can’t give all of the credit for that to Trish. But she certainly made it known that the people of this electorate wanted something done and of course you remember we did cut the excise by 1.5 cents and we abolished the automatic indexation of petrol excise. And last August was the first August for 18 years that the tax level on petrol didn’t go up automatically as a result of an increase in the CPI. Now she has been a very active articulate local member. She’s always been somebody whose hopes have risen and fallen with the people she represents according to the challenges of the time.
The late Tip O’Neill who used to be the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the United States and was something of a mentor of the former President John Kennedy, or a friend of his, he had this famous saying, it became very famous – that all politics is local. And it is because in the end what really matters is how you are represented in the Parliament. Increasingly people demand as representatives men and women who aren’t just automatic ciphers of one particular point of view. Sure you need to act as a disciplined government. You can’t have a parliament of 148 independents. You’d never get anything done, you’d never decide anything. But consistent with proper party direction and discipline you do need people who are going to stand up for the different needs of their electorate.
Now one of the things that I’m most proud of as leader of the Liberal Party and as Prime Minister is that I’ve got a very diverse group of men and women sitting in the Parliament behind me. They’re not sort of Identikit look-a-likes. You have people that have got a business background, you’ve got people that have had an academic background, people who’ve had a background in the services, you’ve got people from rural areas, you’ve got people who’ve got a nursing background. You’ve just got a whole variety. You’ve even got one or two who’ve got a legal background as well, but fewer I must say now than used to be the case. And don’t say hear hear. But the reality my friend is that ours is a representative party. We’re no longer capable of being branded the party of the bosses or the party just of capital. We believe in free enterprise, we believe in profits, we believe in decent compassionate capitalism. It’s what generates wealth and therefore makes it possible for a community to look after its more needy. But we are a very diverse party.
And Trish has come into the Parliament over the last five-and-a-half years to represent the people of Makin. And I want to say to all of you with all the passion and conviction I can muster that she is a fantastic representative for you. You’ll do the right thing for yourselves and the right thing for the district, the right thing for the people of Makin, and the right thing for the people of Australia if you re-elect us and if you re-elect Trish as your member. We’re not going to have an easy fight to win this election if I could speak in a very partisan way for the moment.
Winning an election is always hard, it’s very hard for the third time. We face a lot of problems at the moment, many of them visited upon Australia as a result of those terrible events in America just over a month ago. But fortunately we have a number of things going for us. One of the things we have going for us is that our economy is fundamentally very strong. We’ve paid back a lot of debt, we’ve got low interest rates, our budget is balanced, we have low rates of inflation, our unemployment rate is lower now than what it was when we came to office, we’ve got a very competitive exchange rate, rural Australia is doing a lot better now than it was a few years ago with all of those things going in our favour. And of course we’re going to need them. As a result of the terrorist attack the world economy’s going to experience slower growth particularly in the United States. And we can’t avoid the ripple affect of that. It’s going to percolate around the world. It’s going to have an impact on all of us. But the good news is that we’re better able to handle it than most and the reason we’re better able to handle it is that we had the courage to put Australia’s interest first and make a number of changes that were needed. Not all of them were popular in every part of their detail. Our reform of the tax system. I know not every body like every part of it but gee it’s helped our exporters because they don’t carry the burden of indirect taxes. We have lower personal tax. We have a lower company tax rate which makes our businesses more competitive. And we have a better revenue base for the Australian states because they get all of the GST and that enables them to provide more money for government schools and for public hospitals which are very necessary parts of what state governments have got to do.
So my message ladies and gentlemen is that it is going to be difficult in the months ahead and we do need people in charge, people in government who’ve got the runs on the board, who are prepared to take tough decisions in easier times, they are therefore far better equipped to take the right decisions in tougher times. You can’t have people in charge now who can’t make up their mind where they stand. You can’t have people in charge now who go from one side of the street to the other according to the pressure of political events. I know not everything I’ve done has been popular and I know on occasions probably people in this room have grumbled about what I’ve done. I understand that, I respect that. I’ve made my share of mistakes. But the man or woman in politics who’s never made a mistake has never made a decision and over the last five-and-a-half years I’ve made a lot of decisions that have all involved putting Australia’s interests first. Whether it was gun control laws, helping the people of East Timor, introducing tax reform, reforming the waterfront. They were all very difficult decisions. All very different, all very difficult. But they were all done because they were good for Australia and they were important to Australia’s future.
Now I need Trish to remain. As Prime Minister, it’s as simple as that. If you don’t re-elect her, well the Government is not going to get returned. But more importantly than that if you want good representation please vote for her again because she really is a crackerjack member. She worries the life and bothers the life out of ministers if they don’t give her what she wants. I can testify to that. She is very persistent. Ministers run away from her in the corridor when she approaches them because she is very persistent. And that’s what you want. You don’t want somebody who’s flattered and patronised by ministerial staff. You want somebody who’s prepared to go in there and make a nuisance of herself in order to get something for you and that is exactly what she’s done. I commend her for it. I thank her and most importantly I ask you to support her on the 10th of November. She’s a great member and I hope you’ll return her to the national Parliament. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you John Olsen, John Prescott the Chairman, Han Off, ladies and gentlemen.  I am delighted to announce confirmation of the fact that all of the Collins Class Submarine refits will be carried out here, the Australian Submarine Corporation in Osmon.  That means an injunction over time of about $1 billion at least into the local economy.  You';re looking at something in the order of years of work, many years of work.  It will guarantee a certain level of employment at this establishment.  It will also put to rest some very legitimate concerns and anxieties that people have had about the longevity of this particular establishment and therefore the business which is underpinned by the Government';s decision.
State Premiers of course always barrack for their states.  Can I say as Prime Minister of the whole country this is a very good decision for Australia and I can say to my Western Australian friends that there will be quite a lot of maintenance work to be carried out in Western Australia and it';s a question of sharing around according to the capacities of individuals establishments in different parts of the country.
The Collins Class Submarine project has had its share of publicity.  And there';s been afar amount of debate about it and there';s no point at this stage going over that.  But what ought to be said and said very clearly and unconditionally is that there ahs never been any debate or any qualification or any concern about the engineering and technological skill and capacity of the Australian workforce that has contributed to the construction of these submarines.
I';m very conscious and I';m sure that all of you are that I make this announcement at a time when more than, at any time in a number of years, there has been a focus on this nations defence capacity and the importance of this country having an efficient, well trained, well equip defence force of Army, Navy and Air Force.  And the decisions that have been taken regarding the refitting of the Collins submarine and the confirmation that that work will be carried out here will be a great deal of consolidation to that part of our defence effort and I know it will give a great deal of satisfaction to the corporation ad those who work here and I know it';s a very important decision so far as the Royal Australian Navy is concerned.
This is an occasion for me to emphasis the linkage between the defence forces of Australian defence industry.  Defence industry is a very important part, in fact it';s a crucial part of the overall Australian defence effort.  We have moved as a nation into les certain and less predictable times.  And more than ever there is going to be an emphasis on the capacity of this country to contribute in different ways to the defence of those things, whatever our political beliefs may be, those things that Australians in common hold very dear and which we hold in common with the free nations of the rest of the world.
Australia needs a strong efficient defence force, that is why the Government has committed additional resources to defence and out of those additional resources will of course come an additional commitment to Australia';s defence industry.
I want to wish the workforce well, I hope to have the opportunity after I finish speaking of meeting as many of you as possible.  It';s great to come onto this site.  I think it';s quite an exciting and very important day for the people of Adelaide, for industry here in South Australia. But it is overwhelming a decision based on what is in the best interest of defence and the best interests of defence industry in Australia.
Prime Minister';s always watch with interest the passionate advocacy by Premiers of different political persuasions to the interests of their state.  I have to keep separate and apart from that, I';m not even game because I';m a rugby league follower, I';m not even game to take sides between New South Wales and Queensland in the State of Origin through fear of getting into strife but I';m certainly not going to get caught up in any cross fire between Premiers but let me say this, that John Olsen from day one when I got involved in all of this has been in there batting very hard for the people that he represents and that his job and I complement him on that.  But importantly it';s  a good decision for the industry, it';s a good decision for re workforce, I wish all of you well, I think it is a great project and I hope today';s announcement will bring to an end concern about whether all of the refits were going to be carried out here.  It is the right decision, it will go ahead and it will provide a considerable degree of employment and a considerable degree of assurance and continuity for the industry here in Osmon for years into the future.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much, Philip, for those kind words of welcome; to Mr and Mrs Fazzalari; to Christine Gallus, her husband, Alex; my other Parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Australians.
Can I first of all say how delighted I am to be at this community centre.  And can I say, on an occasion like this, which is the launch of a policy designed to continue the enormous success that Australia has had over the last 50 years in particular, in a great experiment of nation building out of diversity, can I say very warmly on behalf of all your other fellow Australians what an enormous contribution, an incalculable contribution, that Australians of Italian descent have made to the building of the modern Australia.
Your warmth, your passion, your commitment to family, your commitment to business, your commitment to community, your commitment to building a tolerant society has been quite remarkable.  As you know it';s the largest of the non-English speaking background tributaries, if I can put it that way, of the modern Australian nation.  And every part of Australian life has been enriched and benefited by the people who';ve come to our nation from the Italian shores.
This is an occasion to celebrate not only the contribution of Australians of Italian descent but also to celebrate the remarkable success of a great, in particular, post World War II experiment.  No country in the world has done it better than Australia.  No country in the world has been more successful in achieving the twin goals of loving Australia but always keeping a place in your heart for the land of your birth.  And that, in my language, is how I can best describe Australian multiculturalism.  We all love Australia but we never forget where we came from and that';s important.  And it';s important that Australians, like myself, who were born in this country understand that people who';ve come from another land will always have a special place in their heart for that country and that doesn';t in any way diminish the love they have for Australia and the contribution that they make.  And that is why communities, such as your society, are so important because they join, they fuse those two strands of Australian life.  They preserve what is best of your heritage but in the process enable you to make such a wonderful contribution to the modern Australia.
And it is important that we remember these binding values at a time like this.  We have been incredibly successful in this country in keeping out ancient hatreds from other countries.  I sometimes, when I hear people say, you know, there';s a lot of tension around - and I want to come in a moment to some of the inevitable strains for some of our fellow Australians caused by recent tragic events – but really we have been so successful.  When I think of the conflict that has ravaged the former Yugoslavia and the way in which Australians of different ethnicities that have come out of that part of the world have put those conflicts behind them.  They';ve been concerned, they';ve naturally been touched and affected and saddened by many of those events but they have remained part of the great, united Australian community.  
And it is important, I do want to stress at the beginning of my remarks, that in the present difficulty through which the world is passing and the need for this country to stand beside the United States in the fight against terrorism, it';s very important to remember that our fellow Australians of an Islamic faith and of an Arab background are as passionately opposed to terrorism and the death and destruction it brings as the rest of us are.  This is not a conflict between Christianity and Judaism on the one hand and Islam on the other.  It';s a conflict between good and evil and all who oppose evil and terrorism are entitled to our friendship and our embrace.  And at a time like this it is important that if we have Islamic friends, friends of Arab descent, fellow Australians of those faiths and those heritages, that we reach out to them and include them and make them feel more than ever before part of the Australian community.  Because the evil doers that we oppose in the name of fighting terrorism will have succeeded if people of that descent and that faith are made to feel in any way unwelcome in our society and it';s very important on an occasion like this that we emphasise it.
The policy I launch today entitled ‘Strength Through Diversity'; promotes the values that unite all of us as Australians.  I';ve frequently said in my political career that the things that unite us as Australians are infinitely greater and more enduring than the things that divide us.  And the things that unite us, tolerance, fair play, call it, in the Australian vernacular, mateship, are really the principles that underline our approach to multicultural affairs.  The policy I launch today is designed to build on the great successes of the past.  
We hold very firmly to the belief that all Australians have the right to be active and equal participants in Australian society, free to live their lives and celebrate their cultural traditions in a diverse, accepting and open society, united by an overriding commitment to our nation and its democratic institutions, its laws and its values.  And on an occasion like this, which is the launch of the Liberal Party';s policy for this election in this area, I do remind – and it';s important that I do – of the great contribution of Coalition governments going back to the Government of Robert Menzies, elected in 1949, to post World War II nation building in Australia.  It was the Coalition government that ended the White Australia policy.  It was a Coalition government that oversaw massive post-war immigration, welcoming people from all around the globe, not least from Italy.  It was a Coalition government that established the most comprehensive settlement services in the world, ensuring that our newest residents had access to formal English language training, education and job seeking services.  It was the Fraser Government, a Coalition government under Malcolm Fraser, that created SBS television, which is admired and awarded internationally for the breadth of its purpose and the depths of its professionalism.  Now, that is an enviable, generous, sweeping record and I';m very proud that we';ve been able to continue that process.  
We have, I believe, restored a sense of integrity to Australia';s immigration programme.  We have shifted the balance in favour of skilled migration.  The Government stresses very strongly the notion of citizenship.  We introduced Australian Citizenship Day on the 17th of September as the day to celebrate citizenship annually.  We';ve introduced affirmation ceremonies enabling all Australians to publicly affirm their loyalty to Australia and its people at appropriate civic events.  We instituted a citizenship promotion campaign to highlight the importance of citizenship and to encourage eligible non-citizens to take out Australian citizenship.  And I want to acknowledge the Australian Citizenship Council for the significant contribution it has made in these areas.
But our record in multicultural affairs is equally impressive.  We';ve given a renewed focus ensuring that every Australian benefits from cultural diversity.  Rather than being a policy aimed at preserving the cultural traits it is more than that.  It is now a policy aimed at drawing all Australians together while not merely preserving but actively celebrating our different backgrounds.
We have committed $12.5 million to the Living in Harmony initiative to combat any signs of racism within our society.  And the campaign focuses on what makes us all Australians and emphasises, importantly, our common values, the values that unite and strengthen us in opposition to those who would divide us on racial or cultural grounds.  And central to this is the community grants programme.  Harmony Day, falling on the 21st of March, was introduced by the Government to encourage Australians to reflect on our success as a diverse and harmonious community.  And over 800 schools, businesses and community organisations at every level participated in Harmony Day this year.  And I was delighted to launch the National Multicultural Advisory Council';s report to the Government two years ago and we responded to that delivering our comprehensive plan for the new Century entitled, The New Agenda for Multicultural Australia.  We established the Council for Multicultural Australia, reporting directly to me and to the Minister. 
Education is vital to this process.  Accordingly we implemented the Australian immigration, the Facts initiative, to inform the public of the true facts about immigration and the manifold benefits that this country has derived from immigration and from its cultural diversity.  And the latest element of the campaign, Australia 2030, encourages young Australians to learn about the contribution migration has made to the development of our nation and to explore ways in which migration in the future might shape the Australian nation.  
In the last five-and-a-half years that we';ve been in Government we have made settlement programmes more accountable and outcomes oriented.  They are now aimed at ensuring that newly arrived migrants and refugee and humanitarian programme entrants become independent and active participants in Australia';s society as speedily as possible.  We';ve introduced the settlement website to ensure that migrants are able to access valuable settlement information in areas such as employment, education and health services.  Our translating and interpreting service has been transformed into a world class service operating with enhanced technology 24 hours a day, seven days a week.  We';ve introduced a doctors priority line ensuring medical services are delivered more effectively to patients from a non-English speaking background, particularly to those in remote and rural areas.  And we';ve enhanced the adult migrant English programme ensuring its greater flexibility.  And $14.3 million is being committed, annually, to a holistic, better targeted and responsive approach to the settlement needs of refugees and humanitarian programme entrants through the integrated humanitarian settlement strategy.  As some refugees and entrants have been subjected to torture and trauma, the programme incorporates one-on-one case management and trauma counselling.
They are some of the things that we have done over the last five-and-a-half years.  But let me spend a few moments on the future because this election campaign is not only about what the Government has done and is doing, it';s also about what it will do if it is re-elected on the 10th of November.  If re-elected the Coalition Government will invest an additional $47 million over four years in multicultural citizenship and settlement programmes.  Our policy seeks to develop a coalition of the community, the corporate sector and every level of government, thereby engaging all Australians in the task of building a united Australia and reaffirming our shared commitment to its democratic institutions, its laws and its values.
A great deal has been achieved, but as I said at the beginning of my remarks but we cannot rest on our laurels as a harmonious, decent, tolerant and open society.  Recent events in the United States and the fears and the doubts and the prejudices that have surfaced in their wake challenge, as I said earlier, all of us to redouble our efforts to engender tolerance, respect of cultural diversity and community harmony.  
A re-elected Coalition Government will commit $1 million annually to promote Australian citizenship as the single most unifying force in our community and to encourage eligible, permanent residents to take out citizenship and participate fully in our democratic society.  We';ll provide annual funding of $3.5 million to the Living in Harmony initiative.  We';ll introduce an annual Living in Harmony grants round in recognition of the fact that communities are best placed to develop a solution to local problems and to combat racism and intolerance at a grassroots level.  And, finally, ensure, importantly, that our settlement programmes remain the most comprehensive in the world by maintaining on an ongoing basis the funding first committed in the 1997/98 budget at a cost of $29.2 million over four years.
Ladies and gentlemen, before I conclude my remarks I would like to pay tribute to two people.  I would like to pay tribute to Philip Ruddock for the quite outstanding job he';s done as Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, particularly over the last 12 months.  In the years that I';ve been in public life I don';t think I have seen anybody in a particular portfolio have to cope with so many difficult issues on a daily basis.  And I';m filled with admiration for the job that Philip has done.  He';s protected Australia';s interests, he';s protected the integrity of the borders of Australia but he';s done it in a way that has been wholly consistent with his humanitarian liberal values and his deep commitment to the relief of suffering humanity and it is a great achievement.  He';s been a wonderful Minister and in the time that he';s had that portfolio, which is, indeed, quite a long period of time now, I don';t think I could say there';s a day gone by without his having been a very powerful advocate of the cause of the diversity of Australia, which is so well represented here today.  Philip has lived and fought for the cause of multicultural and ethnically diverse Australia and he has been a very impressive and powerful contributor to the Government';s activities and success over the last five-and-a-half years.
Can I also very warmly commend to you Christine Gallus, the Member for Hindmarsh, not only for the work that she has done as the Member for Hindmarsh since 1990 but also the tremendous work that she';s done over the last 12 months as a Parliamentary Secretary to Philip and the way in which she';s very energetically represented this very diverse community.  She is a person who understands this community, she';s a person who';s fought for it, she';s a person who believes in diversity and she';s a person who';s powerfully advocated it.  It';s not an easy seat this if I can be very partisan for a moment, it';s a tough seat.  It hasn';t always been on our side of politics and it';s going to be a tough fight to hang on to it.  She';s going to need all of your help and the only way, if you want a re-elected Liberal government, the only way you can do it here in Hindmarsh is to vote for Chris Gallus.
So can I say to Christine and to her husband, Alex, who';s a great supporter and partner of hers in her representation of the electorate of Hindmarsh, thank you very much for the contribution you';ve made to my Government, the contribution you';ve made as a Parliamentary Secretary.  I wish you well and I ask all of you to rally behind her and give her all the support you can because if you want somebody who represents and understands the diversity of this community, somebody as I understand it, somebody born in Hungary and, of course, therefore understanding the great ethnic diversity of Australia in a first hand sense.  But as I say, she';s been a great representative.  I hope you get behind her and thank you very much for having Janette and myself today.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Mr Bruce Scott. To Brigadier Kelly and Mrs Gabrielle Kelly, Colonel Campbell, Peter Lindsay the federal member for Herbert, ladies and gentlemen of the Australian Defence Force.  Janette and I are quite touched to be back at this wonderful military establishment and to have the opportunity after my very brief speech to say a few words to you personally and to express to as many of you as I can the admiration that I have for you and I know that all of the Australian people have for you.  And that is something which is expressed across the party political divide. When men and women go abroad as members of the Australian Defence Force they go in the name of our entire country and I have certainly not forgotten the time I spent here in September of 1999 on the eve of the East Timor deployment, at a time when none of us could know quite how that would work out, none of us would know precisely, could know precisely the challenges that you would face. But we did know that you went there well prepared and you had the right to know that you went with the support and the respect and the prayers of the entire nation.
And I';m very conscious as I know you are that we';re meeting today in the aftermath of the announcement that was made yesterday about the commitment of some 1,500 Australian defence personnel side by side with the United States and others in the new fight in relation to the terrible challenge of terrorism.  And the men and women who go abroad in the days and weeks ahead as part of that commitment will go with the similar support and the similar respect and the similar regard of all of the Australian people.
I have great admiration for those who commit themselves to service life. It';s not easy. It has its ups and downs like any other career.  But at a time such as this all of us are reminded of the debt we owe to you.  All of us are very conscious that you so often stand between the way of life we all tend to take for granted and those who might in some way want to take it away from us.
What is being done and what has been done in East Timor has been enormously to the credit of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force. I can say that wherever I go around the world as Prime Minister almost spontaneously people will say what a magnificent job Australia did in East Timor.  And they speak not only of the diplomatic initiatives at the political level but very importantly and very feelingly of the professionalism and skill of our armed forces.  They did great credit to Australia and I understand from lieutenant Colonel Campbell that some 65% of those who were part of the new deployment have in fact been to East Timor before.  Speaking to you and speaking to those who are going for the first time you';ve made all of us feel very proud.
The other thing I want to say is that we promise that your families will be well looked after while you are away.  It';s always possible to improve on the way in which military personnel';s families are cared for while they are away.  And  that side of the operation I regard as equally important as looking after the men and women actually on the ground because if you have peace of mind about the way your families are being cared for it enables you to discharge your very important responsibilities with even greater skill.
Today is a moment of great poignancy for me and for the entire nation.  Here I am in one of the great military establishments of this country farewelling many people who are once again going in the name of this country on military deployment under the flag of the United Nations but nonetheless part of a great Australian military tradition which has never sought to impose the will of this country on others but only to defend those things that we regard as dear and important to Australia.  And it';s at a time when we are again committing ourselves to a new military challenge.  Different in kind from perhaps others but nonetheless potentially very dangerous and one that will require the summoning of all the skill and the training for which the Australian Defence Forces are renowned and respected.  
And I know the thoughts of all Australians will be with you and also with those who will go abroad in the next few weeks to join the campaign against terrorism.  It is a campaign that has to be fought and it';s a campaign that has to be won because by ignoring it it won';t go away, it will only be encouraged to renew its ferocity and to broaden its targets and to include new victims in its onslaught. And it';s therefore very important that this country joins that exercise.
But to you men and women, thank you very much for what you';re doing for Australia. Thank you for the credit you bring to our country. I wish you well, I wish you all a safe deployment.  We';ll look after your families. I wish you all a very safe return.  And I want to pay my respect to Brigadier Kelly, to Colonel Campbell, thank them for welcoming us once again to Lavarack.  It';s a great military establishment and it';s one that looks after people who do great credit to our country. I thank you most warmly on behalf of all of your fellow Australians.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Mr Jackson, Peter Lindsay the Federal Member for Herbert, Councillor Tony Mooney, the Mayor the City of Townsville, and Ian Macdonald the Minister, Senator Ian Macdonald the Minister for Regional, Local Government and to Senator John Herron and other members of the Liberal Party Senate team, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s always a pleasure to come to Townsville and over the years that I have been in politics, which is now 27, I';ve visited this city on numerous occasions.  The last time I was here was for the magnificent Federal North Commemoration as part of the Centenary of Federation, in fact we were here in this very building and that absolutely fantastic military tattoo which made a wonderful contribution to North Queensland and Northern Australia';s celebration of the Centenary of Federation.  And I';ve come here of course the very day after the full extent of Australia';s military commitment to the fight against world terrorism was made known and I had the opportunity to visit the Laverick Barracks which are of course are very much part of the heart and the soul of this city.  The link between the Australian Defence Force and the people of this local community has deepened and broadened as the years have gone by.
It';s not only emotional very important to this city as the relationship is to the whole of Northern Australian but it';s also economically very important.  And one of the things that has been very high on the Government';s list of priorities is an increase in defence expenditure and the White Paper that was delivered at the end of last year projected very significant increases in the order of $27 billion over a ten year period which does represent a major expansion of this country';s commitment to defence.  And any sceptics or doubters or critics at the time that White Paper was brought down might now take pause and wonder as to the wisdom of the criticism that was offered.
We do find ourselves as a nation, and as a world community in very unfortunate and very sad and very challenging circumstances.  And much has already been said about the obligation on all of us who care about the way of life we have taken for granted, whatever our party politics may be, over the years we know the obligation and the responsibility of this country to work with our friends and our allies to fight the scourge of terrorism because by turning our back on it and pretending it';s not there it will not go away.  All of the history of the 20th Century instructs us as to the folly of imagining that people and groups with evil intent will look kindly on those who walk away from the challenge they present to free people.  That was the experience of the world between the wars and it';s been the experience of mankind in all history.  It';s not going to be easy and we all think and feel very much for the men and women of the Australian Defence Force that will be involved.  Just as you here in the city of Townsville would have felt very much for the men and women who were deployed to East Timor two years ago and Janette and I have never forgotten that.  Sunday evening in September when we came to say goodbye to them and I was reminded very much of that this morning when I had the opportunity of saying a farewell to a new deployment of defence personnel to East Timor.  
So it is a challenging time and it';s a time when we fall back very much on those fundamental values that bind us together as a community and the differences we may have on some local issues are really put into perspective and their relevance is diminished.  I don';t say that, suggesting for a moment that legitimate political differences are trivial.  They';re not trivial.  They';re not trivial.  They';re not trivial – they';re important – and as part of the democratic process that they be respected and they be debated.  But the challenge we face now is a reminder that in the end the things that unite us and bind us as Australians are far more important and far more enduring than the things that might put us apart.
We are of course engaged in a federal election campaign and quite unashamedly as the Leader of the Government, as the Leader of Liberal Party and as Prime Minister for the last five and a half years, I am asking the people of Townsville and the people of Herbert to once again put their confidence in Peter Lindsay as their Federal Member.
Peter has been a very energetic advocate for the people of Herbert.  He';s had a great deal of success in winning the support of the Government and winning the support of Ministers for particular things that have been of concern.
Let me recognise immediately that the aftermath of the 11th of September and also the grounding of Ansett has had an impact on the tourist industry and that is having an impact on the people of Townsville.
There are a number of things that the Government are doing for both of those developments.  We have through the provision of the ticketing guarantee, the provision of the underwriting insurance facility in relation to third property damage which has been extended to all of the airlines of Australia and which carries a contingent liability of $10 billion dollars and made necessary by the withdrawal of normal insurance underwriting as a result of the circumstances of the 11th of September and importantly the commitment we have made in relation to the entitlements of the employees of Ansett.  
We have done a number of things.  In fact we have responded  to all of the requests that have been made of us by the Administrator of Ansett.
I think all of us were saddened when the company went into administration.  We can debate the rights and wrongs and the relative areas of responsibility but even some of the employees and others who have been commentators on this issue amongst the government';s fiercer critics on the issue have acknowledged in the end it was a failure of administration at the corporate level that brought it about.  And whilst it is the responsibility of Government';s to render assistance where it can consistent with its obligation not to become a funder of last resort of companies that get into financial difficulties because this audience more than most would understand the utter folly of any government embarking down that path.  But I am hopeful that out of the difficulties of Ansett there will emerge a slim down, whether you call it Ansett Mark II or Mark IIA or Mark III or whatever, but there will emerge an operation that will once again carry that banner and once again provide greater competition.  
I am aware of the impact it';s had on the city of Townsville and the fact that you';ve not been able to meet all of the capacity demand, although there have been improvements over time.  I';m also aware that the $20 million package announced by the Tourism Minister, Jackie Kelly, several weeks ago will provide some support for small business operators in particular that have been left stranded financially speaking of following the collapse of Ansett.  And they will let me foreshadow the, a number of other things that the Coalition will say about the tourist industry in the weeks remaining between now and the election.  
I do understand the importance of the tourist industry to North Queensland and very importantly to Queensland and the entire nation.  A generically strong economy with low interest rates…
Sound economic conditions, that is very important to the future f the tourist industry all around Australia.  There';s no doubt that it';s been one of the transforming economic development in this country of the past generation.  The way in which young Australians are now embracing a career in the recreation and hospitality industry is quite remarkable.  
This election campaign is, of course, not only about the present and the past it is also very much about the future.  It';s very much about the future role of the business community in this country.  And earlier this week I unveiled quite a range of policies that were directed towards issues that I know are of importance to the Australian business community.  You won';t mind me reminding you, I hope, of many of the benefits of tax reform.  Of a corporate tax rate which is now 30 cents in the dollar rather than 36.  Of the halving of the capital gains tax for individuals.  Of the reductions in personal income tax.  For larger companies some of the changes that have been agreed between Australian and the United States in respect of dividend withholding tax that are going to help many companies continue to have their main base of operation in Australia although they may trade extensively in countries such as the United States.  
But for the future we';ve laid out a number of changes that we think are important.  One of the constant areas of debate in the business community is the inevitable tension that arises on occasions between small business and large business.  It always concerns me, even distresses me, when I hear debate about which is the better.  A large business or a small business?  The reality is that the Australian economy needs both.  The reality is that we can';t remain a serious international player and therefore get the full benefit of globalisation unless we have sufficiently large business units to compete in certain areas.  But equally small business is the lifeblood of local communities.  A city like Townsville depends commercially from day to day on the strength and the vitality of its small business.  And recognising that that tension sometimes arises we have decided, and the terms of reference will pay particular regard to regional considerations, we';ve decided to undertake a review of the Trade Practices Act, a piece of legislation that has not been seriously reviewed I think since I was a Minister for Business an Consumer Affairs way back in the late 1970s. And this review will try and see whether the balance between large and small and there';s been, and the proper recognition of the importance of sufficiently large units in a globalised economy whether the right balances have been struck.
I was also pleased to announce that the other day the development of some further taxation reforms through allowing the formation of limited partnerships to encourage more venture capital.  We need in the future more people engaged in investment risk taking, we need people and entrepreneurs who are prepared if necessary with further tax incentives to invest in new enterprises and to chance their arm in new ventures.  And the changes that we have announced there which will come into operation in the middle of next year if the Coalition is returned, they will give to this country a world class incentive so far as venture capital is concerned.
Now I know that the business community comes into contact frequently with the operation of our major regulatory organisations and major statutory office holders such as for example the Commissioner of Taxation.  Now let me say immediately as a former Treasurer that I understand the challenging character of tax administration. It';s not a popular job, it';s not an easy job, and it';s not a job that anybody would chase after as the ideal statutory office in the Commonwealth of Australia.  But it is a very necessary position and there have been very heavy burdens placed upon the Taxation Office in relation to the transitional impact of the goods and services tax.  But consistent with that recognition I do acknowledge that sometimes the dealings between the business community and the Taxation Office they could be different and could perhaps be improved. And one of the things the Government intends to do if it is re-elected is to created a new office called the Inspector General of Taxation. And the purpose of this new office and those around the office holder will be to act as something of an advocate for the ordinary taxpayer and most particularly the small business taxpayer, not to act as a policy adviser to the government - the crafting of tax legislation and policy advice will remain responsibility of the government – but to provide something of a facilitation between sections of the community, particularly the business community, and the Australian Taxation Office.
We';re also going to undertake a further examination of the operation of taxation laws to the extent that they might still discourage investment in this country. We must always as a nation be on the lookout for more investment opportunities both domestically and internationally.  We should never be frightened of foreign investment in this country. We should never fall into the trap of chauvinistic attacks or xenophobic attacks rather on foreign investment because in the end this country will always need a steady stream of overseas investment to fuel the rising living standard that we all want so much.
Now ladies and gentlemen much of the future agenda of the Coalition Government in a third term if bound up with maintaining the strong economic growth we';ve had over the last five years and also in a number of the areas that I';ve identified moving into new areas of responsibility.  We are legitimately very proud of the fact that the Australian economy is better able to whether the inevitable storms we are going to have as a result of the events flowing out of the 11th of September. We are better able to whether those storms because of the reforms that have been undertaken. And it was no particular surprise to me to learn this morning that the World Economic Forum had lifted Australia from 11th place in the scale of world competitiveness to the 5th place in a relatively short period of time.  Now that is an international body having no interest in the domestic political debate in Australia saying that the competitiveness of the Australian economy has improved and that is a very strong endorsement of the cumulative benefit of reform.  And I';ve never been unwilling to give credit where it';s been due to a former government that undertook certain reforms and I refer in particular to the floating of the Australian dollar and the deregulation of the financial system.  And I give credit to the former government for having done that.  They did it incidentally with our support. But in the same breath let me claim credit for our reform – taxation reform, workplace relations reform, fiscal consolidation, repayment of $58 billion of the $96 billion of government debt that existed in March of 1996. I might say in parenthesis we didn';t get any help from the current Opposition in undertaking those reforms. Now where we are now and the circumstances we face we face them with greater strength because of the reforms that have been undertaken over the last five-and-a-half years.  
Now I know that the process of tax reform, the administrative process of tax reform has not been easy for some sections of the business community.  It wouldn';t have been easy for people in this room. I know that. I want to say as I did when the reforms started that I';ve remained very aware of that and we have tried in many areas to be responsive.  We responded to concerns about the Business Activity Statement and we';ve responded in a number of other areas and we remain ready if re-elected to continue the process of fine tuning.  But the taxation changes are now in place and there is no merit in trying to turn back the clock. There is no merit in trying to rollback what has been introduced over the last year.  I have no doubt that one of the underlying strengths of the Australian economy at the present time is that we have had the determination and the tenacity to persevere with taxation reform which in the long run ins going to deliver  very significant economic benefits to this country.  Apart from anything else, and it';s important in the current debate, that taxation reform will guarantee that the revenue available to the state governments of Australia, and Queensland will be the state cab off the rank the year after next. Queensland will be better off under the new taxation arrangements ahead of any other state and that will mean that there';ll be more money available to the go vernment?? of Queensland whatever its political complexion in the years ahead to spend on government schools and public hospitals and the other government facilities.
So ladies and gentlemen times are challenging. They are unexpectedly challenging because of the events of the 11th September.  And the other night when the President spoke to me about Australia';s military involvement I reflected to him that only on the 10th of September, the very day before those attacks in New York and Washington, he and I had spent almost three hours together on my visit to Washington. We had an opportunity of talking about the bilateral relationship, of reaffirming the importance of the ANZUS Treaty as embodying in a long term sense the very close relationship between our two communities.  And of course the city of Townsville more than many others would historically be aware of the resonance of the Australia and United States relationship in World War II as indeed particularly would the state of Queensland.  
So they are a new and dangerous and different day. But the good news is that the democratic heart of Australia is very strong and the determination of all Australians, whatever their political conviction on other issues, to work together to meet this terrible challenge, that is the good news. And the other good news is that economically we are better able to meet the inevitable pressure that is going to be put on our economy. I mean if we had high interest rates, if we had a big budget deficit, if we had high inflation, if we hadn';t have had the courage to reform the taxation system think of the difficulties that we might now face. And we would not be able to say confidently to the world that we are better able to face these pressures than many others.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you again for having me with you.   Janette and I are always delighted to come to Townsville. I feel I know the city well. I';ve come in different political guises over the years holding different positions being held in various degrees of regard or ill regard by the Australian people. It';s varied. I';ve experienced all of them – good, bad, indifferent, bloody awful and getting a little bit better.  But fundamentally I';ve always found the people of North Queensland to be open, direct and to embody the great Australian spirit. And in that vain can I please ask you to vote 1 Peter Lindsay on the 10th of November. Extend the hand of mateship to a great North Queenslander, a great Liberal and a great representative of the people of Queensland.  Thank you.
[Ends] 


19 October 2001
E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you Ian, my other Parliamentary colleagues, to the Liberal Party Candidate for the seat of Dickson, Peter Dutton. Can I say how delighted I am to be in the electorate of Dickson carrying the fight on behalf of the Liberal Party into a Labor Party marginal seat.
This is a political election campaign in which the Liberal Party is in both an attacking mode and a defending mode. We are attacking Labor marginal seats and we’re also defending those seats that we hold by small majorities. The election campaign has now entered a very important phase and today I’ve chosen to come to the seat of Dickson to lend my very strong support again to a candidate in Peter Dutton for whom I have a very high regard and who is doing a great job in carrying the Liberal flag in this very important seat. I’m also taking the opportunity to release the Coalition’s policy on Small Business. Like Peter, I grew up in a small business environment and I learnt from my earliest years that to start your own business and to work hard and hope to accumulate a little bit of capital and to leave your family better off than you were was one of the great objectives of the Australian dream. And that is certainly an experience I had and the kind of Australia I grew up in had as part of it’s ethos the opportunity for men and women start their own businesses and to work hard and to be decently rewarded. And as a result the Liberal Party has always retained a special place in it’s collective heart for the small business community. And there are many reasons why the small business community in making it’s decision as to how it will vote on the 10th of November should think favourably of the present Government. That is not to say that everything we have done has been perfect for small business, it’s not to say there hasn’t been some transitional difficulties in relation to the new tax system, an issue to which I’ll come in a moment. But the greatest thing that we have done for small business is that we have generated an economic climate where they’ve had an opportunity of getting on with making money, getting on with employing people and getting on with deriving the benefits of a stronger economic environment and stronger economic growth. Of all the things that we have done for small business, nothing has been more important than the climate we have created which has allowed interest rates to fall dramatically over the last five and a half years. The worst feature of life for small business under the Keating Government were the Himalayan levels to which interest rates soared during the Labor Party years. I’m sure men and women in small business will never forget those remarks about how “you’ve never had it so good” which came from the lips of the former Prime Minister. Many in this room in small business will remember that overdraft rates reached 20.5% or even more. If you were a farmer you were paying a bill rate of 22 or 23%. And the greatest thing I believe we have done for small business is to give you a decent interest rate environment and the greatest single threat to small business from the election of a Labor Government will be a return of the very high interest rates that obtained under the Labor years. The trilogy that I call it of $96 billion of Government debt of 17 to 20% interest rates and unemployment at levels of almost 11% when Mr Beazley was Minister for Employment. They were the principal elements of the Labor Party legacy that we inherited in March of 1996. And over the last five and a half years we have delivered lower interest rates, we have generated more than 830,000 new jobs, we have reduced unemployment, we have reduced the company tax rate from 36% to 30%, we have halved the capital gains tax for individuals, we have introduced an industrial relations system that is far more amenable and friendly and sympathetic to people in small business. We have abolished compulsory unionism, we have strengthened the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act, we have endeavoured against fierce opposition from the Labor Party and others in the Senate to further reform the iniquitous unfair dismissal laws that are denying small business the right to employ probably an additional 50,000 Australians. We have acted to protect the employment prospects of young people by protecting aged based wages. In other words across all those fronts we have taken action which has created a climate, an economic climate which is far more conducive to the small business community. The reduction in small business overdraft interest rates since the Coalition was elected means a saving on interests costs of around $2500 a year for a small business with a $100,000 outstanding. As I mentioned earlier, we have repaid, by the end of this financial we will have repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of government debt that we inherited in March of 1996. And if you think that is an academic Treasury figure of no meaning to a man or woman running a small business, let me remind you that it is when governments go into debt that pressure is generated in the money markets that force up interest rates and make them less affordable for people who are operating businesses. I am proud of the fact that we are the first government to appoint a minister specifically designated to look after the interests of small business and I want to thank Ian McFarlane for the pragmatic down to earth, energetic way that he has gone about fulfilling that job in the months that he has been in office. He has done a great job of getting around the Australian community, he has conducted scores and scores of round table discussions with small groups of people in small business designed to understand what their concerns are and I want to warmly thank you Ian for the tremendous job you have done for the Coalition.
Ian’s advocacy and Ian’s approach has delivered some outcomes for small business in specific areas. He recently announced a package of measures worth $21 million to reduce administrative complexity and promote the take up of e-commerce by small business. I mentioned a moment ago that reforming the unfair dismissal laws has been a constant objective of the Coalition.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We have already achieved a three month probationary period for new employees on federal awards before they can make an unfair dismissal claim despite the continuing opposition of the Australian Labor Party. But we must go further. I therefore commit the Coalition if it is re-elected on 10 November to securing through Parliament, laws to provide a full exemption for small business from all unfair dismissal claims.
And let me underline the importance of this to employment growth. Getting rid of these vexatious unfair dismissal laws is not some kind of one-sided gift to the small business community, it is certainly of value to small business but it will also open up job opportunities because if you are running a small business and you don’t have the Damacles sword of a vexatious unfair dismissal claim hanging over your head, if you take somebody on you are more likely to take on more staff and I have lost count of the number of people over the years who have come to me at gatherings and said if only we didn’t have these unfair dismissal laws I would take a risk and I would take more people on but I have only got a small business, I can’t afford to settle a claim for $20,000 or $30,000 out of court. A big company may be able to do that, the government may be able to do that but I can’t therefore I won’t give the young person a go. Now that is basically what happens. And it is because the Labor Party either doesn’t understand that or doesn’t care about it that they remain so completely insensitive to the issue of unfair dismissal claims.
But moving on I also commit the Coalition government to a $3 million programme to streamline Australian Securities and Investment Commission and Australian Tax Office reporting systems. Both of these bodies currently collect similar information from businesses for company registration and Australian Business Number applications. These processes will be rolled into one in order to reduce administrative expense and complexity. This commitment builds on the recent commitment made by Mr MacFarlane to abolish annual company returns for our 700,000 small proprietary companies and to cap their annual ASIC fees at $200 for the next three year period. The Coalition will also introduce a new $36 million small business assistance programme. This new programme will consolidate the small business enterprise culture programme and the small business incubator initiative. The new programme will fund small business incubators and projects that promote enterprise in the small business sector as well as initiatives that promote small business development and industry best-practice. The Coalition will also provide $24 million to extend the popular small business assistance officer initiative into metropolitan areas. This initiative has been piloted in 46 country areas since July of this year. Small business assistance officers provide small business operators with access to personalised services on a range of federal, state and local government issues.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They also offer networking and mentoring and skills development help for small business to help them access government programmes and assistance.
Earlier this week I made a number of announcements in a broader business policy release that are of importance to the small business community. Many of you will be aware of debate in the community about the operation of the Trade Practices Act. There is an ongoing debate as to whether that act properly reflects the balance that should exist between large corporations which are necessary to the full participation of Australia in a globalised economy and the smaller enterprises which are so important in the employment of Australians and so important to the dynamism of our economy at a local level. Some argue that the trade practices act is too restrictive. Others argue that it doesn’t provide enough protection to the small business community. I therefore decided that if we are returned to Government we’ll immediately initiate a full scale review of the competition provisions of the trade practices act. I intend to appoint somebody whose skills and understanding of the operation of competition law and the terms of reference will enable the debate to be fully ventilated as to wether a right balance and a proper balance exists between large and small businesses. And that committee will be invited to report to the Government by August of next year and we will ensure that small business representatives and advocates play an essential role in the conduct of this review.
I don’t imagine there’d be any man or woman in small business that doesn’t from time to time of course have dealings with the taxation office. And if there are, you wouldn’t be telling me, but collecting tax is not an easy job and I have to say as a former Treasurer I have some sympathy for the administrative challenge that is involved in the operation of the Australian taxation office. But it is very clear to me that there is a deal of difficulty, a deal of friction between the business community and the taxation office on occasions. Sometimes it’s the fault of the taxation office and sometimes it’s the fault of others. You need to preserve the political independence of the taxation office, you cannot have a situation where people are lobbying Ministers about their tax assessments. But you do need a new mechanism, a different mechanism to allow people who feel they have a legitimate complaint about the operation of the taxation office and not just a generalised gripe about the fact they have to pay tax and most of us at various stages sort of feel a bit uneasy about that but we accept it as good citizens that it’s our obligation as it is because we can’t run a decent society unless everybody pays their fair share so that we can provide for an army and we can provide for public services that we need. But recognising those concerns and also recognising the need to preserve the political independence of the Taxation Commissioner and the Australian Taxation Office the Coalition intends if it is returned on the 10th of November, in order to provide a new source of independent advice to Government in respect to taxation matters and also to act as an advocate, a champion if you like, a facilitator of behalf of people in the business community and the taxation office, we intend to create a new position to be called the inspector general of taxation, this person will not supplant the roll of the Treasurer in providing policy advice on the tax laws he will report, or she will report through the Treasurer to the Parliament but I think it will provide an opportunity for many people who feel, although they are meeting their obligations they have some legitimate grievance or complaint about their taxation affairs it will provide a vehicle for those people in relation to their dealings with the taxation office.
Ladies and Gentlemen I mentioned and Ian mentioned to you the impact on the small business community of the new taxation system. I said when the new system was introduced that it would involve a challenge for many, it is a new system, it is a better system but like all significant changes it is required a process of adjustment and fine tuning. This country has needed a new taxation system for at least a generation. Everybody in politics who is making a serious contribution knows that. And in the end some Government, some Prime Minister, some Treasurer had to summon the courage to so something about it. The easy thing would have been for us to have said, oh no it’s too hard, we’ll do it if we get elected a third time, we’ll put it off, we’ll have another review, we’ll go around the country and we’ll listen to people, I mean listening is very important but it’s only important when you do something about what you are told when you listen. And people have been telling us for years we needed a new tax system. And we bit the bullet, we went to the people in 1998, it was politically risky, we won the election, we set about introducing the new system. And at every stage we were blocked and obstructed and hindered by the Australian Labor Party, and their fervent prayer since 1998 has been please Lord will the new taxation system fall over, make Howard unbearably unpopular and therefore we can win the election off the back off discontent with him. That was their prayer every night. They said please let that happen. Now I’ve got news for them, I’m working very hard to stop that particular prayer being answered. And there’s blind negativity. And that was their game plan. Serve the victory off the back of discontent with the GST. Now I know that the administrative challenge of the GST for quite a number of people in business has been difficult. And I want to thank those men and women in small business who are here today for the way in which they have cooperated. Can I say to them that we are aware that some aspects of the Business Activity Statement were too complicated and we did change them. We did respond, some called it back-flip, I don’t care really what they call it, it was the right thing to do. I mean in the end if you’ve got something administratively wrong you ought to change it. I really mind what anybody says about me changing something that ought to be changed. What we’ve done is we’ve fine tuned the administration, we’ve kept the integrity of the new taxation system, we haven’t rolled it back. The mail I get from small business is they want roll back like a hole in the head, they want to move on, they may have been cranky about some aspects of the new taxation system but they’re getting used to it, they recognise the Government has made some changes, they want to get on with life, they don’t want further change and that is the message that I fundamentally get from people in the small business community. But there have been a lot of benefits from the new tax system. One of the reasons why our exports are booming at the moment is that we’ve taken $3.5 billion of embedded indirect taxes out of the cost of goods and services we export. Fuel in the bush is cheaper than it would other wise have been because of our changes as part of the new taxation system. We’ve as I said earlier reduced company tax, we’ve reduced capital gains tax, we’ve been therefore able to introduce fundamentally a more coherent, more effective and a simpler taxation system. It has been a big change, the biggest single systemic economic change that this country’s ever undertaken. But if you want fundamental change made you’ve always got to turn to the Coalition to do it. We needed a new tax system and we did it. We needed water front reform and we did it. Remember the great water front dispute of 1998? Remember the courage that Peter Reith displayed in standing up to the Maritime Union of Australia? And the result of that is that in 1998 the number of container movements on Australian ports was 16.9 an hour. We set ourselves a goal of 25, the unions and the Labor Party said you’d never do it, many people in the business community were sceptical, I can now tell you that we’re moving 27 containers an hour as a result of the reforms carried out by the Coalition Government.
Ladies and Gentlemen they are the sorts of things that the Coalition has done. This election, despite what some people suggest is going to be a very tough fight indeed. It’s always hard to win a third term. It’s easy to run a negative campaign and that essentially is what the Labor Party has done for over the last five and a half years. And if my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition, is having difficulty explaining what he stands for in the time remaining between now and election day, he’s got only one person to blame for that and that’s himself. He’s had five and a half years to tell the Australian people what he stands for, he’s been Leader of the Opposition as long as I’ve been Prime Minister. I didn’t have a head start on him, he always tells me how much experience he’s had as a senior minister in Labor Government. I know he has been a member of ministries for a long period of time but he is running for Prime Minister and so am I. He has had the same amount of time to tell the Australian people what he believes in. You know what I believe in, you know what I stand for, you know that I am rock solid behind the interests of small business, you know that I’m for lower interest rates. I’m for opposing compulsory unionism. I’m for defending the right of people to start a business and if they work hard get a decent reward and I’m in favour if the government is returned of carrying on with those sorts of policies and those sorts of programmes. So please for the sake of small business, as well as for many other sections of the Australian community, don’t go back to the Labour Party on 10 November, don’t go back to 17, to 20% interest rates, don’t go back to union domination, just imagine, if we elect a Federal Labor Government on 10 November, the Australian people will wake up on the morning of Sunday 11th and they will effectively have coast to coast Labor governments. If you think the unions are pushing small business around in Queensland at the present time, or on the building sites of Western Australia because you have got Labor state governments just imagine what it will be like if you also have a fully compliant federal Labor government. The men and women of the trade union bosses will have the sort of power and the sort of authority they could have only dreamt of a few years ago.
So ladies and gentlemen, get behind this man, he is a terrific candidate, he will be an energetic, youthful, enthusiastic representative for the people of Dickson and he will it the sort of on the ground 24 hour attention that an electorate like this deserves and I hope you elect him on 10 November.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you Mr Jiang for your kind introduction, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great honour to be here in Shanghai in China, in one of the fastest developing parts of one of the fastest developing countries in the world. It is fitting that the APEC Leaders’ and other meetings are taking place in this city. Australia and China are different in many ways, but we are both experiencing strong growth: China is the fastest developing country in the region; Australia the fastest developed economy.
I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to you today and later to take your questions. APEC’s main goal is to further the economic integration of the economies of the Asia Pacific region, to the benefit our businesses and our communities. So the input of business is crucial for governments. We need business to tell us what it needs.
The threat of terrorism
I want first of all to talk about the terrible events of September 11. The terrorist attacks in the United States have forced us all to re-think what more we, as a community of Asia-Pacific economies, must do.
Not only what we must do to eradicate the scourge of international terrorism that threatens the peace, prosperity and security of all people, of all faiths, of every nation, but what we must do to ensure that terrorist acts do not distract us from persevering with the economic integration and reforms needed for prosperity among our peoples.
APEC’s response to terrorism is squarely on the agenda for this meeting of leaders. This is as it should be: the attacks on the United States were an attack on all civilised countries, a monstrous abuse of economic and political openness and a threat to the well-being of us all
I want to congratulate President Jiang Zemin for responding quickly and positively to proposals by myself and other leaders that we discuss these issues.
It is essential that the international community provide all possible assistance and support to eliminate the threat of terrorism. Peoples around the world must work together to stare down and confront the evil that revealed itself with such deadly precision on 11 September.
I am confident that the international action now underway under the leadership of the United States is carefully targeted. It is designed to respond in a powerful but effective way against those who visited terror so indiscriminately and brutally on the people of New York and the people of Washington.
Australia has been steadfast over the years in working with other countries against international terrorism. We are now coordinating closely with the United States and other countries in response to this most recent outrage. We have invoked the ANZUS alliance with the United States, just as NATO invoked Article V of the Atlantic Treaty. We have taken the entirely proper but grave step of making available for military action Australian special forces troops, military aircraft and naval vessels as part of the US-led international military operations. The magnitude and unpredictability of the threat that we all face from terrorism is ample justification for Australia to take the grave step of risking the lives of its young men and women in possible military action.
APEC response to terrorism
Military action alone will not be enough to rid us of this scourge. The fact is that, while globalisation in the form of the growing openness and interconnection between economies has brought great benefits, it has also created opportunities for small, evil groups to operate outside civilised and democratic norms. These people have sought to pervert the most hopeful development in the history of mankind for lifting the bulk of humanity out of poverty and hopelessness.
It is thus essential to strengthen international cooperation at all levels in order to allow the further development of economic integration and the openness and prosperity of our economies. The meeting of leaders hosted by China is a major opportunity to act decisively to do this.
We must stop the flow of funds to terrorists by accelerating and deepening the work of APEC finance ministers on combating financial crimes.
We must strengthen air and maritime security – APEC transport ministers should examine airport, aircraft and port security at their next meeting and ensure that all APEC economies strive to implement effective standards of security that do not unduly hinder the legitimate movement of people.
We must strengthen APEC cooperation to protect critical sectors such as energy and telecommunications.
We must achieve better enforcement of laws in areas such as customs and people movement while minimising the impact on legitimate business.
These are tasks of no small magnitude. They will require the cooperation of APEC economies, working together to make our region safe for the exchange across borders of people, goods, ideas and investment and the prosperity that this exchange brings to our peoples.
APEC gets on with business in uncertain times
The attacks on the United States have accentuated a global economic downturn that was already underway. Most perniciously, it has struck at confidence just at a time when confidence was needed for many faltering economies to return to strong growth.
The impact of the global downturn will also be felt in Australia, for many years now one of the strongest growing of the developed economies. Even in the midst of the downturn the Australian economy will achieve good results, but growth will be slower than might otherwise have been the case.
These uncertain times underscore the importance of APEC and the need for us to get on with the business of APEC.
APEC has made a vital contribution over the past decade by creating a more certain and open environment for trade and investment. APEC economies have more than doubled their exports, created 195 million new jobs and generated nearly 70 per cent of global growth. Tariff and non-tariff barriers have been substantially reduced. APEC's average tariff levels declined by one third over the last five years, from 12% in 1995 to 8% in 2000.
It is essential that APEC economies continue to sustain trade and investment liberalisation. Now is not the time to adopt protectionist measures. Governments and businesses must support the expeditious conclusion of a new WTO round which I hope will be launched next month.
APEC leaders can give strong and valuable support for the launch and quick conclusion of a new round. The need for further global trade liberalisation continues to be great and self-evident: protection in rich countries costs developing countries more than US$100 billion each year – twice the total value of aid flows to those countries from the countries that block their exports of agriculture and textiles and other goods. OECD subsidies and other farm support last year were a staggering US$327 billion - equivalent to the entire GDP of Sub-Saharan Africa.
Practical business facilitation is another area where APEC has achieved much and can set itself ambitious goals. APEC has already simplified regulatory and administrative arrangements and reduced costs for business. There is considerable potential for further cost savings of up to 15 per cent for some goods in some economies. Savings could be worth around US$60 billion for APEC economies. Trade facilitation is a key area where APEC can work for business. I am pleased that APEC leaders will be highlighting trade facilitation as a focus for APEC’s work in coming years. We should be able to commit ourselves to reducing the transaction costs of trade that are a burden on consumers and businesses alike.
Economic and technical cooperation in APEC is helping member economies to refine policies and strengthen systems of governance to manage better in a globalised world. As leaders, we must deliver the domestic structural and institutional reforms needed to ensure growth. We must encourage investor confidence by getting on with economic and technical cooperation to ensure strong institutions, sound corporate governance and financial regulation and microeconomic reform.
APEC has done well in its first ten years, but it needs to move ahead in its next decade. It will no longer be enough simply to call for the attainment of the goal of free trade and investment by 2010 for developed economies and 2020 for developing economies. A way to achieve this is necessary. So I am pleased that at this APEC leaders meeting we will be endorsing in the Shanghai Accord a strategic, forward agenda for the coming years. This will include the new Pathfinder mechanism, a practical way of moving forward by which APEC economies that are able and ready to move more quickly on specific initiatives will do so, with other APEC members joining when they are ready to participate. APEC should thus be able to move at a faster pace.
Maximising the advantages of globalisation
We must not allow ourselves to be deterred from welcoming and managing the benefits that our communities can gain from global economic integration. It is appropriate that a focus of this CEO summit is globalisation and its challenges.
It is ironic that the very economic globalisation that has delivered genuine economic and social progress has been attacked by some as a cause of poverty and inequality.
The truth is otherwise. Since economic globalisation accelerated in the second half of the 20th century, income growth and poverty reduction have been unprecedented. According to the World Bank, the proportion of the world’s population living in poverty has been steadily declining and in recent years the absolute number has started to fall. The very poorest group of countries now represents less than 8 per cent of the world’s population compared with just over 45 per cent in 1970. Income inequality fell 10 per cent between 1965 and 1997 across the world as a whole, and by 23 per cent among APEC economies.
Most of this progress has taken place in newly globalising developing countries accounting for around 3 billion people. During the 1990s their growth in gross domestic product per person was 5 per cent a year, compared with 2 per cent for rich countries.
It is crucial we do not loose sight of the tremendous gains made by globalising developing countries. The message is straightforward: participation in the global economy, with the right economic and social policies, allows countries to lift people out of poverty.
APEC was itself conceived in the realisation that cooperation to further market integration is beneficial.
It is right that governments and citizens be concerned about the adjustment challenges that integration into the global economy brings. The financial crisis and the global economic slowdown have underlined that those challenges are real and difficult. But we cannot allow them to weigh more in the balance of policy consideration than the enormous overall benefits of economic globalisation.
Australian reform experience
One of the reasons that Australia has taken a leading role in APEC work to explain the benefits and challenges of globalisation has been our own experience of sweeping microeconomic reform and managing a long and major process of adjustment in our own economy.
Australia is achieving good economic results even in the midst of a global downturn. Economic growth averaged 4 per cent annually over the last 5 years – 3.6 per cent through the 1990s compared to 3.2 per cent in the United States. 3 per cent growth has been forecast through year to June quarter 2002.
The latest Economist poll predicts Australia’s economic growth will be the second fastest in 2001 and the fastest in 2002 among industrialised nations.
Australia would not have been in such a strong position had we not taken the hard decisions in getting macro and micro-economic policies right.
The Government’s domestic reforms have made Australia an internationally competitive exporter and world-class place to invest, as recognised in the latest authoritative survey of global competitiveness by the World Economic Forum, in which Australia moved from 11th to 5th place in the list of the world’s most competitive economies.
Tax reform – a subject close to my heart – has reduced the tax burden on business significantly, giving Australia a 21st century tax system.
Labour reform over the past 5 years has lifted labour productivity 2.6 percent annually, consistently well ahead of US and OECD averages. Waterfront reform has delivered record crane rates and a guarantee that business can get export orders out of the country on time.
The government has made a strategic commitment to ensuring Australia’s research and innovation capacities remain at the forefront of international standards, providing substantial support to foster public and private sector research including through generous R&amp;D tax concessions.
Business support for APEC
It is essential as I said at the start to have the advice of business. The practical recommendations from the APEC Business Advisory Council have guided APEC work. I am delighted that ABAC will hold its second meeting of 2002 in Sydney on May 13-15.
I want in particular to express my pleasure with the work of the APEC Automotive Dialogue chaired by Ian Grigg. It is generating very sensible recommendations which I hope APEC ministers will consider. I have similar hopes for the chemicals dialogue launched this year.
Conclusion
Shanghai, the venue of the APEC Leaders’ meeting, shows us what is at stake in our work in APEC. By embracing the global economy, pursuing openness and reform, China as a whole and Shanghai in particular have lifted enormous numbers of people out of lives of poverty. Nowhere provides more effective testimony than Shanghai to the power of global economic integration allied with a stable economic framework to provide better and healthier lives for millions.
China’s further integration into the global economy, particularly by its membership of the World Trade Organisation, will open more opportunities for its own people, for its trading partners and for the global trading system as well. Australia, as a significant strategic partner in China’s economic development, looks forward to working with China in the future.
APEC was founded in the belief that further economic integration and openness would be in the interests of our peoples. The vicissitudes of recent years, principally the financial crisis and the blow dealt by it to millions in our region, have only underlined the need to work together to open our economies to each other. The current economic slowdown will, sadly, set back the regional recovery that was underway. The terrorist attacks and the diminished confidence flowing from them are another blow.
We must not be deterred from building a better life for our peoples. Together with the fight – military, diplomatic and economic - against the evil of terrorism, we must strive to allow our peoples to exchange goods, ideas, capital and skills with each other. We must support strongly a new round of trade negotiations. We must develop ways for APEC to move forward to achieve its goals of free trade and investment. We must manage as effectively as we can the benefits and the challenges of globalisation.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Sir Charles, Admiral Barrie the Chief of the Defence Force, Lieutenant General Peter Cosgrove the Chief of the Army, Mr Kim Beazley Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Beazley and I are both here today to send a very strong message of unified regard and support for the work that you are about to undertake on behalf of our country.  A regiment such as this does not need to be reminded of the physical and mental challenges of battle.  A regiment such as this doesn';t want to be reminded of the potential danger you may face.  You are to be involved in an unusual but nonetheless incredibly difficult and incredibly important military operation.  The terrorist attacks on the United States in September were attacks that have not only unsettled the world and struck terror and unease in to the hearts of men and women and children all around the nation but they were, in a very direct sense, an attack on Australia and what we value and what we hold dear as much as they were an attack on the United States.
It is not something that we can walk away from.  A score or more Australians died in the World Trade Centre but above and beyond that, important though that is and tragic though it was, they were going about their daily lives.  They were doing the things that free men and women should be able to do anywhere in the world.  And what we do need to do is to present to the world a united response and a determined response.  You won';t beat terrorism only by military operations.  Other things are needed.  Diplomatic things are needed.  An understanding of the historical causes of discontent.  A willingness to assemble a very broad coalition of countries.  All of those things are necessary but the military component of it is also crucial.  And that is why from the very beginning the United States made it plain that she would want to mount a military operation.  And she also made it plain that she would like to have involved in those military operations the forces of a number of countries of which Australia is very proudly one who fought beside the Americans in the last.  
The reputation of your own regiment is well known around the world.  Yesterday I had the opportunity in Shanghai of talking to President Bush about the progress of the American military operation and he spoke of his forces, special forces and he turned to me and said very warmly I understand your special forces are pretty good Prime Minister.  And I said more than that but I certainly endorsed everything he said.  So it was no idle comment.  It was a comment of a man who had obviously been informed by his own military of the very high regard in which all of you are held.
This is not of course a struggle as some are trying to make it between the forces of Christianity in the west against the forces of Islam.  It';s a struggle between people who believe in allowing men and women to live their lives decently and peacefully and live our their dreams and those who would deny them that.  And once again we should remind ourselves that hundreds of those who died in the World Trade Centre, were of the Islamic faith.  So it';s a very unusual operation but it is a very important operation for the continuity of the sort of life we have taken for granted.  
You go into a very challenging environment.  But you go superbly trained.  You should also go in the knowledge that to the extent that it is humanly possible for a nation to care for and look after those of your family and other loved ones that you leave behind that will occur.  I promise you that we will do everything to make it as easy as it possibly can be for those of your families who are left.  It won';t be an easy time for them.  It will be a time of very considerable anxiety.  
You also go as part of a very great Australian military tradition.  It';s a military tradition that has won respect in all of the conflicts in which our men and women have been involved.  But it is also a tradition which has never sought to impose our will on others but rather to stick up for what is right and to defend what we believe in.  I know that many of you recently have been involved in relation to border protection activities.  Some of you were involved on the Manoora.  Some of you have been involved in relation to the Tampa.  Many of you were involved in East Timor.  In other words today';s commitment or the commitment that is about to commence is but the latest potentially one of the most challenging of a career that has been very distinguished.
Can I say that I admire the commitment that you men have.  A nation needs fit, young, highly trained, intelligent people who are willing to undertake dangerous tasks.  We try very hard to minimise the occasions when that sort of commitment is needed but you can';t always prevent it happening on occasions.  So thank you very much for your commitment.  You go with our thoughts and our prayers.  We wish you all well.  We wish you all a safe return.  You are doing good work for our country and what it stands for.  You go in the name of all of us and we hope your mission is successful and that you all return home very safely.
[end]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Admiral Barrie.  Lieutenant General Cosgrove and Mrs Cosgrove.  Mr Kim Beazley the Leader of the Opposition and his wife Susie.  Brigadier Lewis, Colonel Gilmore, the men of the SAS regiment their wives children and all others here.
For Janette and myself this is an important moment for us together to you as families Mr Beazley having separately spoken to those who are about to be involved overseas as part of the coalition operation against terrorism it is important that Janette and I say as people who treasure our own families - our own family more than anything else in the world -how much we feel for and understand and want to help the members of the families of the men who will be going overseas very shortly.  
There is no point in pretending that it won';t be other than somewhat challenging and difficult and stressful period of time.  
I want to say from the outset that the government through the defence forces and through the Veterans';Affairs Department and all the other agencies and I know that I will speak on Mr Beazley';s behalf in saying this as well, that we will do everything we humanly can to make it easier for you and to help you to try and understand some of the challenges particularly in relation to the anxiety of your children while your men are away.
We don';t disguise the fact that this is a difficult and potentially dangerous operation.  It';s different from some operations we';ve been involved in the past.  Everyone is different.  It is an essential operation for Australia.  We';re not embarked on some kind of frolic just for the sake of being there alongside  the Americans.  That';s not the point of it.  Because what happened on the 11 September was as much a strike at us indeed more than twenty Australians died in the World Trade Centre and it was also a strike at the type of life we take for granted.  And the world is now very different.  It';s a more anxious, apprehensive world.  The sort of behaviour we are opposing now is not the sort of behaviour that will stop if we do nothing.  There are some people out there who say well if you just curl yourself up and make yourself disappear or make yourself inconspicuous it will go away.  It';s not like that.  People who are prepared to behave with such ruthless indifference to human life including their own are people who would hold that kind of behaviour in contempt and it would in fact encourage them even more so to embark upon what they have done in the past.  So we do need as a nation, as a group of nations, to respond to this threat in a variety of ways.  Part of that response is a military response.  Part of that response is a specialised military response and that of course brings us to this particular regiment which is held in such high esteem not only within Australia but around the world.  And yesterday when I was in Shanghai and spoke to President Bush about the progress of the operation he spoke with great affection of the special forces of the United States and he turned to me and he said I hear that your special forces are pretty good and I said you bet they are.  And that of course is not only the truth but it';s evidence that the reputation of this regiment and what it has done, what it stands for and it';s great skills resonate around the world.
So Janette and I are very conscious of the important of the next few days and the weeks ahead for all of you.  We both wanted to be here to express our feeling for you.  Not only to wish your men folk well and a very safe return home but also so express a very strong sense of gratitude to you all for undertaking the often difficult life of being in the services.  It has its rewards but it';s not an easy life.  There are a lot of challenges there are a lot of strains put on the emotions of the character of your relationships and I do understand that.  And it presents challenges so far as the always difficult task of raising children.  And we';ve all in different ways gone through that and service life puts a particular challenge, a particular edge on that because of the absence often for very long periods and I do know that and I do acknowledge that to the wives and mothers here today just how long your men folk are away from you.  Even apart from them being involved in the sort of operation they face in the future.  
So they go overseas with our great gratitude, our sense of immense respect and affection we hold for the tradition they represent, our prayers for their safe return and very importantly to all of you who will be here we will do everything we can to make it easier for you.  We can';t take away the sense of absence but what we can do is try and make it more bearable, make it easier and I promise the men that is what we will do.  And I promise you all again we certainly will try and make it as easy as we possibly can.  But we are very proud of what these men are doing.  They are doing a wonderful thing for our country and for what this country stands for.  And I couldn';t be more proud of them and I know you feel exactly the same way.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you Terry and Val, Sir Charles and Lady Court, my senate colleagues Alan Eggleston and Ross Lightfoot, Ray Halligan MLC, Kim Keogh the State President of the Liberal Party, Andre Shannon the Liberal candidate for Cowan, Louise Smith the Liberal candidate for Fremantle and David Johnston who’s also on the Liberal Party Senate ticket, and ladies and gentlemen. The story that Terry has just retailed to you and he’s told me about over a number of months is really quite an inspiring story of the fight back of Australian manufacturing industry. In many ways what has happened with this business and what it’s been able to achieve is a metaphor for the changed economic environment that this country has had over the last six years. Now you might expect that I would say that because that six year period coincides almost exactly with the period that the Government has been in office. But if you actually look at what has occurred it really is a very encouraging, indeed quite inspiring story.
All of the machinery that has just been shown to me, all of it has been manufactured in Australia. It was six years ago roughly speaking that the last manufacturer of these batteries closed shop in Australia and went offshore. And over the last six years the fight back represented by Ultimet and spearheaded by Terry and Val and their wonderful workforce, the fight back of this section of manufacturing industry here in Western Australia has been made possible by the right economic climate. And that’s why quite deliberately say it is a metaphor for what has happened because without the lower interest rates, without lower inflation, without what I choose to call very accurately a super competitive exchange rate, without better industrial relations laws it simply wouldn’t have been possible. And I don’t make any apology at all for linking the success of this enterprise with the better economic environment that we have seen over the last few years.
And when you add an encouraging economic environment to a talented entrepreneurial businessman and his wife working together as a great partnership you have the recipe for great economic success. And this is the kind of story that I would like widely known and understood, not only here in Western Australia but all around the country. What has been achieved here gives the lie to the charge so frequently and wrongly made that this country has a diminishing manufacturing capacity. The future of Australia is not based in any one sector of industry. We need the lot. And what is so interesting about this success story here in Perth is that it has occurred in a state whose contribution to the export earnings of this nation, and I’ve been frequently told by both Sir Charles and Richard that with 12 per cent of the population Western Australia contributes more than 25 per cent of Australia’s export income. And the good news is that with this enterprise that 25 per cent is on the rise and that 25 per cent in relation to this business is coming out of the manufacturing sector. It is not coming out of the primary industry sector, it’s not coming out of mining, it’s not coming out of farming, it’s coming out of manufacturing.
And I think it’s great because so many people identify the manufacturing of batteries with a traditional view of manufacturing in this country. And so often we are told that the future of this country lies exclusively with so called high-tech industries and information technology industries. Well what you see in there is the same as what I saw a few months ago when I went to the marvellous export facility of the Callis family where they’re delivering custom ordered TV meals for the Japanese market. What you see is a combination of a traditional skill with all of the add on value that the information technology and high technology brings. What these successful industries, be they in the so called traditional areas of manufacturing or in other areas or in the service sector demonstrate that there is no such thing as a new economy and an old economy. There’s only a successful economy and a successful economy marries the traditional capacity and skill, in the case of Ultimet a traditional manufacturing skill, with all of the modern high tech capacities and the machinery that I’ve just been shown represents a modern, sophisticated approach to a very traditional skill. And that really is the future of Australia. The future of Australia doesn’t lie in putting all of our eggs in one industry basket. It doesn’t just lie in mining, it doesn’t just lie in tourism, it doesn’t just lie in high tech, it lies in getting the best possible distillation of all the skills we have. And that of course includes superior workplace relations skills. You can’t have a successful business without a highly skilled workforce.
And one of the things of which I am immensely proud of what the government has been able to do over the last five and a half years is the way in which we have been able to double, dramatically change by more than doubling the number of apprenticeships and traineeships available. 70 per cent of young Australians who leave school do not go to university, they go onto some other kind of tertiary education and acquire some other tertiary qualification. And in the last five and a half years we have lifted the number of traineeships and apprenticeships from somewhere in the order of 135,000 to more than 310,000. And we have the highest number of not only young men and women, many people who are taking on mature aged traineeships and apprenticeships and there’s been a dramatic improvement and increase in the number of apprenticeships being taken on by women, indigenous people, and in other words there’s been an absolute explosion of apprenticeship opportunities under this government. And that’s all happened in the last five and a half years. We languished at 135 to 150,000 for almost 20 years and when we decided to reform the system it was all part of our more innovative flexible approach to industrial relations it’s made possible that expansion.
So today’s success story which this enterprise represents the restoration of a manufacturing capacity in this form of battery, absent from Australia for six years, a market of $300 million, a goal of perhaps $100 million of exports, that has been made possible by a number of things. It has been made possible by a far better economic environment, without question. It’s been made possible by very good workplace relations laws. It’s been made of course possible by Terry Jackson’s incredible drive and energy and enthusiasm. I’ve known Terry and his wife for a very long time and he is one of the most persistent entrepreneurial people I’ve met. He epitomises the investor. He epitomises the measures risk taker which you need in business. We will always need people who are willing to take risks and the important thing is that Terry’s a person who takes risks with his own resources and his own future, he doesn’t gamble others. What he does is he provides a future and he provides opportunity for other people. And I want to thank him for the contribution that he’s made to, particularly the economy of Western Australia. There’s something about Western Australian entrepreneurs, they’re a special breed, they bring particular characteristics to the totality of Australian business. And Terry has certainly been a wonderful example of that so I’m delighted to come here Terry and Val with Janette to mark this successful fight back by Australian manufacturing industry and it’s one of those great, good news stories that should resonate all around the country. It demonstrates that if you give Australians the right environment, the right incentive, the right opportunity they will achieve any thing. And it demonstrates that there’s no such thing as a past industry in this country if you’ve got the right combination of skills and the right people driving it from the top.
So not surprisingly given the event that is to take place on the 10 November I am talking to you this afternoon about the improved economic climate that we’ve had over the last five years. And this company, this success story, this enterprise is a metaphor for what better economic conditions combined with entrepreneurial flair can both achieve and deliver for this country. Congratulations to both of you for what you have achieved. You’ve been great Australian contributors and we’ve very proud of what you’ve done and thank you very warmly.
Thanks.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Bob. Philip Ruddock, Chris Ellison, Kim Keough, Allen Eggleston, Sue Knowles, David Johnston, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It is for me a particular delight to come to the division of Stirling in a political sense to carry the fight into a seat held by the Australian Labor Party with a resolve to win this seat back to the Coalition on the 10th of November, and to express my very strong support to the outstanding candidate in Bob Cronin that we have carrying the Liberal banner here in the seat of Stirling.
Political battles are fought at two levels. They’re fought at a national level and they’re also fought at a local level. And in order to win you need to have the right message and a strong consistent theme at both levels. And I’ve got every confidence that you have a strong consistent theme here in the division of Stirling with such a candidate.
The other reason why I’m particularly pleased to be here this morning is I have the opportunity right on the edge of the Indian Ocean to launch a policy which is very important to Australia’s future. And the policy is entitled – “Protecting our Borders”. And unlike the Labor Party’s border protection policy which is only $15 million more to create a new bureaucracy that will do great damage to the Royal Australian Navy, the policy I launch today commits the Coalition if it is re-elected to spend an additional $175 million over a period of four years in additional border protection measures.
The contrast could not be starker. Labor is offering $15 million more and a new bureaucracy and damage to the Royal Australian Navy. We are offering the maintenance of Coastwatch which has delivered a 98.6% success rate in coping with illegal immigration, plus an additional $175 million in new investment in different ways to improve the operation of our Coastwatch capacity. It is a very clear difference. We have a plan for the future in relation to further strengthening Coastwatch. The Labor Party offers a new bureaucracy and in the process do great damage to the Royal Australian Navy.
The challenges that Australia now faces in relation to border protection includes people smuggling, often organised on an international scale; internationally controlled rings of illegal drug traffickers; well organised and resourced terrorist groups; transnational crime syndicates; the relatively new phenomenon of sophisticated cyber crime; new outbreaks of old health challenges such as tuberculosis; outbreaks of foot and mouth and other potentially devastating diseases; threats to native wild life, and illegal fishing operations in Australian waters.
Australia’s security in the hands of highly trained committed professionals, the Defence Force, Customs, the Australian Federal Police, and AQIS, their border protection activities at present are coordinated by a world class surveillance network known as Coastwatch. Coastwatch is here now, it works 98.6 success rate in the relation to the interception of illegals. And we are determined to maintain that record of success. But not being idle, we’re going to augment it in a very significant way with the new resources, the new investment, the new initiative, the new policy that I’m announcing today in the area of border protection. We’re acting on a realistic plan to further strengthen our borders and invest record amounts in defence, law enforcement and other security agencies.
The package being announced today under the description of “Protecting our Borders” entails as I said an expenditure of $175 million of additional money over a period of four years. We’ve chosen to focus on the vital areas of maritime surveillance, enhancing our radar and communications capacity, and detecting illegal material being smuggled into ports. It’s far better to spend $175 million on that than to spend $15 million more on a new bureaucracy, at great cost to the operations of the Royal Australian Navy.
The Protecting our Borders package will build on a the success achieved in recent times, illustrated by the 98.6% of people suspected of entering Australia illegally being intercepted. The Labor plan will undo all of that with a one size fits all bureaucratic approach. Its immediate effect would be to strip the Royal Australian Navy of 15 patrol boats, take $430 million from the defence acquisition budget, and transfer the positions of 600 sailors who now crew and maintain the patrol boats thus reducing Australia’s overall defence capability and lowering morale within the service. This is the worst possible time to fragment any of the resources of the ADF, any of the resources of the Royal Australian Navy. It is a disgrace that the alternative government of this country should put forward a policy that would in any way have the potential to lower the morale or to fragment the personnel structure of the Royal Australian Navy.
Labor’s coastguard idea will not provide for one single new vessel, plane, radar installation, or patrol boat. Their plans are both dangerous and impractical. By contrast our policy, specifically outlined in the document I’m releasing today, directs resources to the sharp end of border security. That is where it matters.
Firstly we will strengthen Australia’s expensive radar network with $12.8 million in additional funding to conduct an operational valuation of new high frequency surface wave radar technology. This will significantly increase the surveillance coverage of high threat approaches to Australia. We will significantly expand Coastwatch surveillance flights monitoring the northern approach routes to Australia. An additional $33.2 million over four years will increase flight surveillance time by 1600 hours. We will double Custom’s National Marine Unit’s surveillance and response capability with additional funding of $72.4 million over four years.
The package also provides for the purchase of additional container x-ray machines for Fremantle and Brisbane ports by providing a further $39.8 million over four years, and a further $9.2 million over four years for four additional palate x-ray machines for Customs in Sydney, Perth, Brisbane and Adelaide. We’ll allocate an additional funding $8.1 million over four years to utilise the latest digital and satellite technologies, enhancing Coastwatch’s communication capability.
These are all new measures, they will bring additional state of the art technology to all of the operating elements of the existing coast watch surveillance network. They will build on new initiatives we have already announced. And they include the replacement of the Navy’s 15 Fremantle patrol boats with a new class of patrol boat to be built in Australia at a cost of $450 million. The undertaking of a major refurbishment or replacement of the RAAF’s P3C long range maritime surveillance aircraft at a cost of some $2 billion and the allocation of $275 million to significantly enhance Australia’s over the horizon radar capabilities. The investment of $160 million in the development and future purchase of the global hawk surveillance aircraft and the purchase of four airborne early warning control aircraft.
To meet the challenge of people smuggling in addition the Coalition has already introduced tough new laws to curb trafficking in people, including jail sentences of up to 20 years and fines of up to $220,000. Legislation which has excised Christmas Island, Ashmore and Cartier Islands and Cocos Keeling Islands from the migration zone. And also the negotiation of off shore processing arrangements with a number of countries in the pacific area.
So in this area as in so many other areas - border protection, there is a clear choice offered to the Australian people. It is now only on the one hand what the Coalition has done in government and that is establish Coastwatch, an effective surveillance and protection network which has a 98.6 per cent success rate, but also a determination on our part to do something about the illegal immigration problem over a number of years. We’ve had a lot of debate in the last few weeks about who’s done what in this area, I do know this and my colleague Phillip Ruddock whose handled his portfolio responsibilities in this area magnificently and to the great credit of his reputation.
For two years we’ve been trying to get tougher legislation through the Senate and it was only the onset of an election and the likely harsh judgment of the Australian people that induced the Australian Labor Party to finally let that legislation go through the Senate. And this morning may I say we’ve had the absolutely contemptible contribution of the Leader of the Opposition in the wake of that appalling human tragedy where something like 350 lives appear to have been lost when a vessel sank in Indonesian waters, probably containing people wanting to come to Australia. It sank in Indonesian waters, yet Mr Beazley has tried to exploit that human tragedy to score a cheap political point. He implied that that happened because of a failure of policy on our part. I think that is contemptible. It’s alright to attack your opponent on legitimate grounds but to try and score a cheap political point out of an immense human tragedy such as that I regard as completely contemptible. If anybody is to be blamed for that appalling tragedy it’s the people smugglers, not the Government of Australia, not the Government of Indonesia but the people smugglers. And for the alternative Prime Minister of Australia to try and score a cheap political out of that is as I say absolutely contemptible.
Ladies and gentlemen this election campaign is about many issues. It is about who you want to govern the country in very difficult and challenging times, not only difficult and challenging from a military and strategic point of view but also from an economic point of view. It’s an election campaign which is not only about what is said during the five weeks of the campaign but it’s also an election about what people have done and not done over the last five and a half years. My opponent talks a lot about accountability. Well I am happy to be accountable to the Australian people for what I’ve done over the last five and a half years. I’m happy to looking back on where Australia was five and a half years ago and happy to compare that with where we are now. And I’m also happy to be judged on what we put forward to the Australian people during the course of the election campaign. And today I have launched a border protection policy, here in Western Australia, here on the edge of the Indian Ocean in the division of Stirling which presents a very clear contrast. We not only have the record which is better than Labor’s but we have the plan for the future which is better Labor’s. They have $15 million in a new bureaucracy that will hurt the Royal Australian Navy, we have the maintenance of a system that’s delivered more than 98 per cent of success and we have a $175 million investment in strengthening in practical ways our capacity to deal not only with people smuggling and illegal immigration but also with the drug menace. Cause what this policy does today will further underpin the unrelenting, unremitting campaign of this government against the surge of drugs. I will have more to say about that issue as the campaign develops. I’ll be unveiling new measures in the government’s fight against the menace of drugs. But integral to that is our capacity to protect our borders. We have the runs on the board, we’ve achieved that success rate, we have a plan. Labor has a bureaucratic rearrangement which will damage the Royal Australian Navy.
Finally my friends can I say in relation to this particular policy how proud I am of the tremendous contribution that two of my ministers have made. Phillip Ruddock who’ve I’ve already mentioned and Chris Ellison of course a native of Western Australia and who’s done an absolutely terrific job in the time that he has been the minister for customs and justice. His work and that of Philip has meant that I’ve had two very safe pairs of hands in a very important area.
Election campaigns are judgments on lots of things, they’re judgements on the past and they’re judgments on future plans. They’re also judgments on the quality of your team. Leadership’s important but no political leader is a one man or a one woman band and should never presume to be so. And the success that I have achieved as Prime Minister has in no small measure been due to the quality of the people who have supported me. And people say ask the question what is a vote for John Howard for? It’s a vote for me, it’s a vote for Peter Costello, it’s a vote for Philip Ruddock, it’s a vote for Chris Ellison, it’s a vote for John Anderson, it’s a vote for a very high quality group of men and women and who’s served this country well.
So I want to record my deep appreciation to both Philip and Chris for the work that they’ve put in as Ministers and the contribution that they have made to the development of this policy, very important to the whole of Australia, particularly important to the people of Western Australia and especially important to the people of the electorate of Stirling.
Final thing I say to you is that this is an important election. In a sense of that word with perhaps other elections in recent times haven’t been. Because we are entering challenging times, they are not times for despair, they’re not times for alarm, they are serious challenging times. We need strength, we need commitment, we need a clear plan for the future and in this very important area of border protection the Coalition has provided that.
I urge all of you to work your very hearts out to get Bob elected. I need Bob as the Member for Stirling to provide strong government in the future, I really do. And I ask all of you to bend even a little bit of extra effort to make sure that we capture this seat from the Australian Labor Party on the 10 November.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Colin.  Kim Keogh, the president of the Western Australian division, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I say in relation to that jacket Colin that when I came back from the APEC conference in Vancouver 1997, the garb there was a beautiful leather bomber jacket.  My 19 year old son sort of had seen it on television, then 19 year old son, and when I arrived he said “Dad I';ll look after the jacket, you';re not quite hip enough to wear that”.  But he didn';t do the same thing with the panta jacket, I can assure you of that.
But ladies and gentlemen, this election campaign is now at its half way point.  And it is appropriate to assess the decision that the Australian people will make over the next two and a half weeks and deliver that decision through the ballot  box on the 10th of November. It is a difficult election campaign for the Liberal Party.  Make no mistake about that.  To win a third term is always difficult, but I think we can see that two very clear issues have emerged to dominate the campaign, and issues that will shape the decision that uncommitted voters will make. And those two issues are of national security  broadly defined and economic management, and you can gather under those two generic descriptions all of the individual policy decisions that the Australian people need to make.  
Today I visited HMAS Stirling and having left the base I';m releasing the Coalition';s Defence Policy.  And the Coalition';s defence priorities for a third term in office will provide Australia with a long term plan for the future security of our nation, our citizens and our interests.
We have, as a coalition, a proven capacity to manage the defences of Australia.  We have since 1996 produced a sharper more effective Australian defence force.  I';m very proud of the fact that when I became Prime Minister in March of 1996 and found that Mr Beazley as finance minister had left us with a government debt of $96 billion and an annual deficit of $10.5 billion and that we had to set about cutting expenditure right across the board, the one area that was quarantined from any expenditure reduction was Defence.  It was the one area that I said from the very beginning – I don';t care how much debt we have, I don';t care what the size of the deficit is – you will not cut defence. And not only did we not cut defence in 1996, but in the white paper that was produced last year, we provided over a 20 year period an additional $32.4 billion, and that in fact is the increase in real terms over 10 years.  
That White Paper represents the most comprehensive distillation of the defence challenges of Australia and our responses in more than a generation.  And just think  how timely it has been.  It came in the wake of the every successful deployment in East Timor.  And I have said frequently to audiences I';ve…
[tape break]
…on the international stage.  I am reminded of the fact that we assembled a Coalition and got a United Nations mandate in East Timor in record time.  And the way in which the military operation was carried out under the generalship of Peter Cosgrove was quite outstanding.  And not only is that respected  in the Pentagon and in defence circles in the United States.  But indeed all around the world.  And enormous credit is due to the men and women of Australia';s Defence Force.  
I announced last week when I was at the Lavarack Barracks in Townsville that we will introduce a modern flexible remuneration system for ADF personnel along with enhanced family support mechanisms.  Under a future Coalition government the international effectiveness of the ADF will be consolidated through very sound relationships with our allies and our regional partners.  We have built partnerships in our region based on mutual respect.  The foundation of a proper relationship between two nations is a realistic assessment of what you have in common and also a realistic assessment of your differences.  And right at the moment we are part of a major military operation to fight the challenge of the modern age and that is the challenge of terrorism.  We cannot walk away from that fight.  We cannot roll ourselves into a little ball and hope it will pass us by.  We cannot just leave it to the Americans.  We cannot cherry pick a relationship which ultimately is the one guarantee we have of the future survival of the way of life that we believe in.  We should never forget as Australians that it was the United States that ultimately stood between us and the expansionist plans of Japan in World War II.  And when I in the United States committed Australia militarily to be part of an allied response I did so against a background of a long history of co-operation between our two countries.  But more importantly than that I did it because we were responding to an attack not just on America but an attack on Australia.  More than a score of Australians died in the World Trade Centre at the hands of that terrorist attack.  And what was attacked there and what was assaulted there in Washington was a shared set of  values and a shared way of life.  And for us to imagine that the heavy lifting in defending that way of life should alone be carried by the United States would have been a complete abdication of our national responsibilities.
We are making a serious military deployment.  And that serious military deployment has been made possible by the way in which we have built up and strengthened the ADF over the last five and a half years.  And if re-elected we';ll continue to ensure that our alliance with the United States which is ultimately the cornerstone of our security remains safe and sound.  A new strategic role for the Reserves will be established changing their function from mobilisation to meet remote threats to that of supporting and sustaining the types of contemporary military operations in which the ADF may be increasingly engaged.  We';ll adopt a more strategic industry policy approach based on sustaining key industry capabilities critical to Australia';s national security needs.  We are going to effectively double the counter terrorist capability of the Special Forces and reinstate the Specialist Incident Response Unit whose capabilities in responding to chemical, biological, radiological and explosive incidents were in place during the Sydney Olympic Games.  We are also going to further enhance the ADF';s patrol boats.  Maritime surveillance aircraft and intelligence capabilities that are fully engaged in the day to day monitoring and policing of our maritime approaches.  And yesterday here in Perth I unveilled a $175 million addition over four years to the Coastwatch capability.  It is worth remembering that the success rate of Coastwatch, the current system we have which brings together the various agencies in intercepting illegal immigration to Australia over the last three years has been 98.6%.  The Labor Party would dismantle Coastwatch, cripple part of the operational capacity of the Royal Australian Navy by taking the new patrol boats away from them and add a new bureaucracy romancing in the title of Coastguard at an additional financial commitment of only $15 million.   It doesn';t make much sense to me to abandon an arrangement that';s been 98% effective and is going to get another $175 million of additional high tech sophisticated assets and replace that with a new bureaucracy that will cost $15 million with no additional assets and a very serious impact on the operational capacity of the Royal Australian Navy.  
So we do have a very strong record in the area of defence.  We quarantined it from cuts in 1996.  We';ve increased the commitment in real terms.  We';ve played a major role in restoring peace and security in East Timor and we have a capacity to meet the demands of the contemporary challenge of terrorism.  Ladies and gentlemen that is part of meeting the national security challenge this country has and it is part of the reason why on the score of national security the Coalition is entitled to ask the Australian people to be returned on 10 November.  
But the other central element in this election campaign is of course economic management  From economic management flows a nation';s capacity to provide more resources for human services.  You can';t credibly present yourself as being able to put more resources into things like education and health unless you can credibly present yourself as an economic manager.  Without a growing economy there is not capacity to increase provision for health and education.  And of all the claims that the government makes for re-election  there is no claim stronger than the claim we make that we will be a superior economic manager of the affairs of this country over the next three years than the Australian Labor Party.  And today we have had some dramatic evidence of the quality of the Coalition';s economic management.  The inflation rate today has fallen from an annual figure of 6 percent to an annual figure of just 2.5 percent.  That is a magnificent result.  Not only have we seen the one off effects of the GST completely washed out of Australia';s inflation rate.  We said that would happen and it has happened.  It';s happened on time.  It hasn';t been bigger than what we predicted.  It';s exactly what we said would happen when we introduced the GST.  It is very good news for wage and salary earners because it means that the real value of their tax cut is what we said the real value of those tax cuts would be.  They have not been eroded by additional inflation.  They have not been eroded by one off CPI lingering on in the annual calculation of the inflation rate and the quarterly increase of 0.3 percent is in fact below market expectations.  It means that we approach this election, it means that we enter a period of great challenge for the Australian economy with the fundamentals in better shape than they have been for more than a generation.  There is no doubt that the world is entering a difficult economic phase.  The United States economy was stagnating before the 11 September.  There was a belief entertained in the very highest circles and particularly by the Chairman of the Fed, Alan Greenspan that if September 11 had not come along then there might have been the signs of a significant recovery in the United States in the first half of next year.  But that tragedy did come and not only has it brought incalculable human suffering and great political and foreign policy challenges, but it has also had a dramatic effect on the American economy and therefore on the world economy.
And that means there';s going to be additional pressure on the Australian economy.  But the good news is that we are better able to cope with that pressure over the next fews years and particularly over the next 12 months largely because of the reforms that we have undertaken.  Our inflation is now very low.  By the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of government debt.  Our unemployment rate always higher than we would like, always, but lower than what it was in 1996.  And we';ve seen the generation of more of 830,000 new jobs.  In fact our government debt to GDP ratio if I can bore you with an economic statistic and it sounds like an economic statistic when you say government debt to GDP ratio.  It is at five and a half percent. The OECD average is about 45 percent and Japan';s is more than 100 percent.
Now that is a measure of the soundness of our debt position and don';t we need that?  Wouldn';t it be awful if we now, with what we face, if we hadn';t have repaid all of that debt?  We';ve been derided over the last five and a half years for having done it.  Every time we';ve tried to trim the budget and repay debt we';ve been criticised by Mr Beazley and Mr Crean.  They';ve attacked every attempt we';ve made to get the budget back into balance and repay that debt.  But just imagine where Australia would be now if it weren';t for the fact that we';d repaid all of that debt.  And over that last five and a half years we';ve been able to do those things because we';ve had the guts, if I can put it that way, to introduce necessary reform.  It wasn';t easy getting the budget back into balance.  It wasn';t easy introducing industrial relations reform and there';s still more to be done on that front and if we get another term we';re going to have another go at getting even better unfair dismissal laws through the Senate.  We';re going to legislate to deliver secret ballots before strike action in certain circumstances.  We';re going to legislate to give the ACCC the right to take representative action on behalf of small business in relation to certain boycott activity.   We';re going to continue to pursue our industrial relations agenda and I';ve frequently said that of all the things I would grieve about none I would grieve about more if we lose the election than the thought of what would happen to the industrial relations landscape of Australia if you have coast to coast Labor governments.
The Perth business community knows better than any the change in industrial relations that occurs as a result of a change from a Liberal government, which in this State after 1992 under Richard Court';s leadership, changed the industrial relations scene for the better and that is now being all rolled back.  The notorious “no ticket no start” rule is once again prevailing.  Just imagine what you';re going to have if you impose on that a federal Labor government, dominated by Geoff Gallop';s Oxford University mate, Kim Beazley.  Just imagine.  Just imagine what the trade union movement will be thinking the Sunday after the election if you have these coast to coast Labor governments. 
So, of all the things that I would grieve about none would be more than that.  But we had the courage to reform the industrial relations system and if we';re re-elected we';ve got a third term agenda for further reform in that area.  And, of course, we had the courage to undertake taxation reform.
The taxation reform was not easy, but it was necessary.  We';ve needed it for a generation.  We needed to reform the ramshackle character of our Commonwealth – State financial relations.  And one of the great virtues of tax reform is that the States of Australia are guaranteed over time significantly larger revenues with which to fund all of the things that they are responsible for.  Government schools, public hospitals, police, roads and all the other public services that we need to go about our daily life.  And what the Labor party opposes in opposing taxation reform is the very mechanism whereby you can increase in guaranteed measure the amount of funding you make available for all the necessary government services that they say are so important.
Taxation reform has made us a more competitive nation.  There';s rarely been a better export scene for Australia.  We have a super competitive exchange rate and we now have exports that no longer carry the burden of embedded indirect taxes.  We';ve delivered $12 billion of personal income tax cuts and we have successfully introduced a far more coherent broad based indirect tax to replace the mishmash of old fashioned indirect taxes that we';d inherited from pre-World War II days.
So when you look at what has been achieved over that five and a half year period and when you project ahead over the next three years, nothing you might hope to do economically can in any way escape that fundamental question.  Will the quality of economic management deliver a growing economy, or will the inadequacy of economic management mean that there are fewer resources available from a growing economy to fund the expenditure commitments.
And I would say to the Australian people that if you want increased resources devoted to public services, which we have done over the last five and a half years, you must first have a government that delivers a growing economy because if the economy doesn';t grow the capacity to fund increased resources will not grow.  And that is the central and very strong claim that this Government makes as we approach this very crucial election.
It will be difficult because of the changed world economic circumstances but it is achievable.  There is no reason why Australia cannot do in relation to the oncoming world economic difficulties what we are able to do in relation to the Asian economic downturn in 1997.  When that downturn occurred many people believed that Australia would be sucked into it.  That we would go down with the countries of the Asian Pacific region, but we didn';t and the reason we didn';t is that we had set about making this country more internationally competitive.  And if you think that is a figment of my imagination let me remind you that a few days ago the World Economic Forum released its annual index of competitiveness and it showed that Australia had moved from 11th position to 5th position over the last twelve months.  Another example of just how strong and how highly regarded the Australian economy is around the world.
But we don';t ask just to be re-elected on the basis of what we have done over the last five and a half years.  We ask to be re-elected on the basis of what we can do over the next three years.  We can deliver a stronger and a growing Australian economy far more effectively than our political opponents.  
We will continue our quest for further industrial relations reform.  We will maintain balanced budgets.  We will continue to repay government debt.  We will in the business area carry out a major review of the competitive provisions of the Trade Practices Act to see if the balance between big business and small business is appropriate  To see whether for example the merger provisions of the Trade Practices Act are appropriate to an economy Australia';s size.  We will, recognising the concern that many in business feel about the inter-relationship with the Australian Taxation Office, establish the position of the Inspector General of the Taxation Office designed to act as an advocate and champion for taxpayers in their dealings with the Australian Taxation Office.
We will in the area of venture capital introduce a world';s best practice regime that through the use of flow throughs we will attract increasing amounts of involvement in venture capital.  
We';ll reassess the taxation laws that bear upon people who invest in this country to ensure that Australia remains the optimum place in the world both from a lifestyle point of view as well as from an economic point of view in which to invest.  And we';ll continue to review the operations of taxation laws to ensure that there is no undue discouragement for either individuals or companies to invest in this country.
So ladies and gentlemen, on both of those issues that I outlined at the beginning of my remarks, national security and economic management, issues that in a generic sense are going to dominate the decision that the Australian people make on the 10th of November, we do have a superior claim.  As I said at the beginning it is not going to be easy.  
And can I say that it is not as some commentators suggest a “tweedledum, tweedledee” choice.  There may be some areas where in the national interest there is agreement between the two major parties.  But there are many other areas where there is not agreement.  Where there is quite fundamental difference. Life under Labor economically will be different.  It will be dominated by the trade union movement.  They will be a bigger spending government.  They will run the budget into deficit despite what they now say.  Just look at what they did when they were in office.  You can';t run up deficit after deficit after deficit and leave $96 billion of government debt and pretend that after five a half years when you have opposed every attempt to get rid of that debt that somehow or other you';re a born again believer in balanced budgets because in reality they';re not.  They will revert to their old habits right at the time when Australian can least afford it.  The last thing we want as a nation next year is a government that is not a prudent economic manager.  That will spell economic disaster for Australia and whatever else you may think of some of the things that we have done or not done Australia does need imperatively, Australia needs strong economic management to handle the difficult international economic challenges in the next twelve months.
In the time that I';ve been in public life I have addressed many gathering of the business community here in Perth.  I have addressed you in good times and bad times both economically and politically.  I';ve addressed you when my popularity has been like this.  I';ve addressed you when it';s been like this.  I don';t quite know where it is now but can I say to you I';ve always tried to be open and direct with you.  I';ve not tried to gild the lily and I';m not gilding the lily when I say that the economic and national security choice to be made is fundamental to how this country fares over the next year.  We face a more difficult time than any I can remember in the twenty-seven years I';ve been in public life.  And in very significant measure the next election could be determined here in the city of Perth.  Unlike for example the city of Melbourne all of the marginal seats in Perth are held by the Labor Party.  In Melbourne all of the marginal seats are held by the Liberal Party.  We have opportunities but they';re not easily grasped here in Perth to make ground.  It could be an election where the result varies from state to state.  And it is oh so important that we mount the maximum possible Liberal Party effort here in Western Australia.  I ask you to give all the support you can to our candidates.  There is a lot at stake.  We really will suffer badly if we have a Labor government after the 10th of  November and I earnestly ask you to make sure that that doesn';t happen.
Thank you.
[end]


E&amp;OE..................
Well, thank you very much Captain, Defence Minister, ladies and gentlemen. 
I';ve just said to the rest of the ship';s company, this is the third time in the space of thirteen or fourteen years that I';ve been on the Adelaide.  I first visited her in 1988 in Sydney when I was Opposition Leader and been on it again recently.  Today of course is a visit in different circumstances from certainly the first one and different again from the second visit.
I do want to thank the ship';s company for the tremendous work that they have done as part of operation Relex over the last few weeks.  That was a difficult operation and because of the context in which it';s taken place and the enormous public interest and ongoing commentary about the issue of Australia';s response to asylum seekers, it was inevitable that the actions of the navy and of HMAS Adelaide, as part of the navy operation came under great scrutiny and I want to say for my own part and I believe for the vast majority of the Australian people that we were very proud of what you did.  It was difficult.  It involved sensitive responses and it involved handling a very delicate situation and you did it superbly well and I do want all of you to know from me that that is the very strong view of the Government and I believe is a very strong view of all of the Australian people.
We are committed to a military operation which is a challenging and potentially dangerous one and as you know there will be a point at which you will be deployed as part of that.  You will be deployed with the overwhelming support, the respect and the affection of the Australian people.  You will go abroad in the name of the whole country and not in the name of one or other shade of political opinion and you';ll enjoy the bipartisan support and encouragement and good wishes of both sides of politics as it should be.
Service life has its challenges, it has its moments of real fulfilment and enjoyment.  It has of course its moments of great danger and challenge and I imagine that all of you have a mixture of mixed emotions of anticipation and anxiety and I understand that and I want you to know that when you do go you will go with that sense of the whole community understanding your feelings.  We will do our very best, while you are away, to look after your families.  I know that in going abroad in these circumstances in one sense you are fulfilling the ambition of joining the services and being involved in some kind of potential action, although that could involve danger, but your training has been for that sort of operation.  You are very highly trained.  The Royal Australian Navy and all the ADF has a great sense of professionalism and you';ll certainly have tremendous support and your families and friends and loved ones back here in Australia will continue to have very strong support.
I always admire the work that the men and women of our ADF do for our country.  In more normal circumstances, and particularly in the abnormal circumstances that we now face, the work of the ADF in East Timor, the work of the ADF in the Gulf over a period of 10 or 11 years and that has been a particular role for the Royal Australian Navy.  The work that you';ve done on our behalf in relation to asylum seekers, all of it has been done in a superbly professional manner and I';m very grateful for that and you have my very warm respect and great admiration and I wish all of you well and, of course as always, a very safe return home to Australia.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Michael, to my many parliamentary colleagues and in particular Mr Denis Napthine the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria, ladies and gentlemen.
May I start by thanking the Australian Defence Association and also the hospitality of the military and naval club which has given me an opportunity in a more formal way and with a considered text to set out the reasons why Australia now is committing herself to the international coalition against terrorism.
It is important in the nature of political debate that no assumptions be made about continuing support for a political position that appears at the very outset to draw almost overwhelming support and response from within the Australian community.  History is littered with many examples of where an early strong tide of support subsequently dissipates through the propagation of false criticisms of involvement and through the advocacy of false positions and false attitudes.  And it';s for that reason I';ve sought this opportunity and I do thank you Michael and the other members of the defence association for the opportunity that you';ve given me.
Only six weeks ago, the world was awakened to an event so shocking in its own right and so far-reaching in its implications that it will define world affairs for years to come.  On that day, we witnessed the deliberate and cold blooded destruction of the World Trade Centre in New York, an attack on the Pentagon in Washington, a building which incidentally I had visited only the afternoon before to have discussions with the American Defence Secretary, and the premeditated murder of over 250 innocent passengers on board four commercial airliners.  In New York, up to 5,000 people died as they were just going about their daily lives, doing the things that free men and free women should be able to do anywhere in the world.  And the dead were not just Americans.  There were 22 Australians, there were people of many countries and many religions.  There were people from about 80 other nations, 14 of which have Islam as their predominant faith. 
No one now doubts that the Al Qaida network, led by Usama bin Laden, was responsible for the attacks and that the Taliban has allowed Afghanistan to become a safe haven for international terrorism.  Bin Laden';s hatred for the United States, and for a world system built on individual freedom, religious tolerance, democracy, and the international free flow of commerce, is non-negotiable.  These virtues of the modern world are an affront to bin Laden, and an obstacle to his objectives.  He wants to promulgate an extreme form of the religion he blasphemously claims to represent.  He wants a wholesale confrontation between the Islamic and non-Islamic worlds.  He wants to spread fear, create uncertainty and promote instability, hoping that this will cause communities and countries to turn against each other.  He and his supporters will use any vehicle, or any cause, to achieve these ends.
There have been claims, including by bin Laden himself, that the September 11 acts of terror are a product or can be justified by the failure of the Middle East policy of the United States.  This notion must be rejected categorically.  First let us be clear about bin Laden';s motives.  He has no interest in a negotiated resolution of the Palestinian issue.  He has an apocalyptic version of the Middle East in which Israel is simply swept away from the region.  He cynically uses the tragedy of the Arab-Israeli conflict to define his crimes in pan-Islamic terms.  For him, the worse the conflict gets, the better.  
It is true all want a settlement in the Middle East.  There has been too much misery and suffering inflicted … He cynically uses the tragedy of the Arab-Israeli conflict to define his crimes in pan-Islamic terms.  For him, the worse the conflict gets, the better.  
It is true all want a settlement in the Middle East.  There has been too much misery and suffering inflicted on the peoples of the region. The fact remains however that the United States has invested enormous capital in trying to resolve that conflict.  It has proven to be one of the few international players that has the weight and the influence to help chart a path toward peace.  And the region has been brought to the brink of peace.  From the Madrid Conference, through the Oslo Agreements to the attempts at Camp David last year when Ehud Barak offered so much and brought his government and the Palestinian Authority so close to a resolution, the US has been in the thick of the negotiations. And if I can interpellate I shall not forget the two days I spend in Israel last year, including at the suggestion of the Israeli Government that Ehud Barak visit to Yassar Arrafat of the Palestian authority, hopes were very high and that was only May of 2000 that peace could be achieved. And it';s a tragedy that that has not proved to be the case.
It is therefore in my view and the view of the Australian Government a monstrous falsehood to blame a conflict so complex and heart wrenching, and one that occupied the world for a good part of the last century, on the United States.  The Australian Government agrees with the United States that the parties must return urgently to the negotiating table.  A solution must be found which guarantees Israel';s right to exist behind secure, recognised and defensible borders.  At the same time, the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to self determination need to be realised.
September 11 was a defining event.  It demonstrated the appalling means that terrorists now have at their disposal to inflict unimaginable casualties with evil precision.  The attack was designed not only to shatter our faith in the ability to live our lives in a free and open manner, it was also designed to shake the world';s economic foundations.  It had the twin goals of causing crippling fear and economic chaos.  The sheer scale of the carnage inflicted has taken terrorism to a new level unprecedented in the history of mankind.  The world, including Australia, must respond. 
Even a cursory reflection on history must lead you to the irrefutable conclusion that passive indifference in the face of evil achieves absolutely nothing.  The threat will remain, growing more ambitious and more powerful and feeding on the unwillingness of decent nations to decisively confront and defeat it.  There is a saying that for evil to triumph, it requires only good men to do nothing.  The lesson of history tells us that it is equally true for nations.
We would be foolish indeed, in the very first years of the twenty-first century, to forget the most hard learned lesson of the twentieth century, that evil cannot be appeased.  On the day before the attack, the 10 September, I issued a joint statement with President Bush of the United States celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the ANZUS treaty.  We reaffirmed the strength and vitality of the bilateral relationship that has been the keystone of Australia';s national security for half the life of our nation.   We expressed the conviction that the alliance has been a pillar of stability in the Asia-Pacific region, and I welcomed the President's commitment to continued active US engagement in our region.   Within only a few hours of that meeting, the following morning, the United States was attacked in an act that was more cruel and more lethal than the attack on Pearl Harbour some sixty years earlier. 
Accordingly, on 14 September, the Australian Government, in consultation with the United States, decided that the relevant provisions of the ANZUS Treaty would be invoked.  Under ANZUS, we each agreed that an attack on the other partner would be dangerous to our own peace and safety and that we would act to meet the common danger in accordance with our constitutional processes.  This was not simply an attack on America.  We were all the targets. Remember that Australians were among those who died so tragically.  In a very direct way, September 11 was an attack on the right of Australians, especially young Australians, to go about their daily lives and to move around the world with ease and freedom and without fear.
If we left this contest only to America, we would be leaving it to them to defend our rights and those of all the other people of the world who have a commitment to freedom and liberty.  We will not do that.  We admire their strength and their greatness, but Australians have always been a people prepared to fight our own fights.  To do anything less on this occasion would be both strategically inept and morally indefensible, especially given the strength of our mutual commitment with the United States under the ANZUS Pact.  Other civilised countries of the world have also recognised the global nature of the threat and the need to meet it.
The United Nations Security Council unequivocally condemned the attacks in New York and Washington, and affirmed the need for all nations to combat by all means the threats to international peace and security caused by such terrorist acts.  The European Union gave its support and called on all "member states to stand ready to act, each according to their means". NATO declared that the attack on the United States could be considered an attack on the entire 19-nation alliance, thus for the first time in NATO's 52-year history invoking the North Atlantic Treaty's mutual defence clause. 
The cause with which we are allied is just.  It is no simple act of revenge.  It is no knee-jerk response to combat terror with terror in return.  It fits completely within the measured guidelines advocated by the UN, that all nations should do their utmost to banish terrorism from the face of the earth, and that "the force we use to fight it should always be proportional and focused".  The response under the coalition of nations involved in this campaign has been proportional, it has been focused and above all it has been patient.  We waited until the evidence showed beyond doubt where the guilt was hidden.  When convinced by the evidence, we gave more time than was necessary for the Taliban regime to give up bin Laden and the other leaders of the Al Qaida and to dismantle terrorist training camps.  Nearly a month passed before those supporting and sheltering the terrorists were brought under attack.  The quality of the leadership that has been demonstrated at both the political and military levels among the coalition of nations, and notably by the United States, since September 11 should be reassuring to all of us.
At the highest political levels, we have been in constant consultation with the United States.  At the military level, our defence leaders agreed on the deployment that would be recommended to their respective governments.  In the fight against terrorism, the United States welcomed Australian military participation for two reasons.  First, they know, as we know, that an important message is sent to our enemies by the concentration of an international force against them.  A coalition of national forces acting towards a single military aim is a tangible and utterly compelling demonstration of the solidarity of world opinion and world resolve.  The threat of international terrorism hangs over each of our nations, it is only right that the risk and the cost for its eradication should be shared.
But Australians will also take their place within that coalition as highly respected and highly prized comrades in arms.  Through decades of close military co-operation, in peacetime and in war, America has grown to respect the quality of our soldiers, our sailors and our airmen.  In training, equipment and, most of all, in personal courage and commitment, the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces are the equal of any in the world.
We should be clear about our aims in this operation.  The immediate goal is to seek out and destroy Al Qaida and ensure that Afghanistan can never again serve as a base from which terrorists can operate.  The task they face is particularly suited to the temperament of Australian service personnel.  In Afghanistan itself, the mission is likely to be pursued through precision, ground operations conducted by small teams of special forces.  The hallmark of Australian soldiers has always been one of personal initiative and independent action.  It remains so to this day and the decision to include Australian SAS soldiers was recognition both of the highly targeted nature of the coming campaign and the important role our soldiers could play within it.  So too, the participation of Australian frigates, long range maritime aircraft, tanker aircraft and FA18A fighters to protect and support the coalition';s military efforts recognises both the technical compatibility of our forces and the traditional capacity of Australians to work efficiently and effectively with their allied counterparts.
Our contribution is both significant and important and should be seen as such by the Australian people.  We have made it clear that this is a deployment without restrictions except those inherent within Australian rules of engagement.  In contrast to past operations, the special forces detachment will not be limited to search and rescue roles.  Our deployed forces will be given all of the tools, the resources, the support and the freedom to do the job asked of them.  The safety and welfare of our serving personnel will be given the highest priority by the Government as will the support of families and loved ones left behind here in Australia.
Our forces will be placed under the operational control of the appropriate coalition commander for agreed tasks. However, Australian personnel will act only under the direction of the Australian Force Commander and ultimately the Australian Government.  The Government considers that our current level of commitment is appropriate for this specific mission.  However, I do stress that should the nature or scale of this conflict change substantially, requests for further contributions may be made and they would then be carefully considered.  Our resolve to join other nations to rid the world of this insidious scourge should not be doubted.
Two points are certain though.  First, this is a war that will be fought by highly trained, highly professional combat forces using the most modern intelligence and weapons systems.  For that reason, I can rule out the introduction of conscription.  Although National Servicemen have served our country with immense distinction in the past, the Government believes that in the present strategic circumstances, national service is neither necessary nor appropriate.
Secondly, Australia';s response to any future requests will be assessed against the extent of our operational capabilities.  I am satisfied, on the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force Admiral Barrie, that the deployments are within the capability of the Australian Defence Force.  They will not jeopardise other operations such as our commitment to East Timor and ongoing responsibilities including border protection, counter-terrorism readiness and search and rescue.
Whilst the destruction of the Al Qaida network must be our first priority, the long-term aim of this campaign is to demonstrate that organised, international, state-sanctioned terrorism will not be tolerated by the world community.  We know that our mission will not be easy.  It will be prolonged and against an enemy hiding in the dark corners of the world.  An enemy who will falsely portray our objective to destroy terrorism as an assault upon Islam.  The war will be a new kind of war.  There will be few, if any, set-piece battles to bring it to an end.  Rather it will be a sustained effort, requiring sturdy patience, and the careful marshalling and coordination of resources.
There can be no valid comparison with Vietnam, for example, or other wars of the past.  Vietnam was a Cold War conflict with two states, each backed by super powers, competing for territory and where large conscripted forces were necessary for major land battles and frequent armed confrontations.  In contrast, today all the major powers of the world are as one in their opposition to international terrorism.  In the present situation, we are not at war with any other nation.  We do not have it is a goal to subjugate Afghanistan or indeed the people of Afghanistan.  We are certainly not at war against any faith or against the Afghanistani people, who are the victims of the very terrorism that we are opposing.  What is more, there is bipartisan agreement in Australia, just as there is a consensus among the civilised nations of the world, that this terrorism must be stopped.
It will not only be fought through military action but through concerted international action on the intelligence, law enforcement and financial fronts.  And it will also need to feature effective diplomacy and international aid to address the serious inequalities that the terrorists seek to exploit for their own ends.  We will participate and have the power to do so in all these efforts and activities.  Already, Australia has committed over $23 million to assist the refugees and other victims since the crisis began.  The great bulk of current humanitarian activity is, of course, centred on Pakistan.  It';s very important that parallel with our taking of military action, we are ready to join with others in providing humanitarian relief.
There is no doubt that the coalition forces will win, but it would be irresponsible to predict when we will win.  To ask the question of when it will end is to betray a misunderstanding of the nature of the enemy.  The challenge to our civilised way of life will not be resolved quickly, but it will ultimately be resolved.  In the meantime it';s important, consistent with our military and diplomatic and humanitarian commitment that we do get on with our lives and maintain the momentum of our economies to ensure we do not bow to the terrorist challenge.  This was the importance of the attendance of world leaders at APEC in Shanghai last weekend and it can also be shown by each of us moving on, building our homes, taking our holidays and investing in our businesses.
Finally, and very importantly, we must acknowledge that the risks are not insignificant.  War has its costs and as always, the main burden of risk will fall on our young people.  Thus, whatever the cost, they and their loved ones will have all the support the nation can give them.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I began this address with my view that September 11 was a rare moment when evil emerged to challenge the human decency upon which our democratic societies are built.  It was not a local challenge, it was global, and it called for a global response.  I am proud to be an Australian citizen for many many reasons, but none seems more relevant in today';s troubled world than our extraordinary achievement of building a single nation drawn from so many cultures and religious traditions. The success of terrorists depends not only on the fear generated by their actions, but also on ignorance and suspicion within the communities they seek to manipulate.  Australia';s political and military commitments to the Coalition against Terrorism are important, but history will also show that our wider contribution lies in the continuing openness and tolerance of our whole society – qualities that are lethal for today';s international terrorist.
With this in mind it is a time for every one of us to reach out within our communities, across those different cultures and traditions, and reassure our neighbours that the hatreds embodied by September 11 can only destroy what we humans value most  I would say again to Australians of Islamic faith and Arab decent that you are just as much a part of our society as anyone else and deserve the respect and the tolerance and the friendship owed to all Australians.  The certainty that Australia had to be part of the global response to terrorism does not make the decision to send young Australians into peril any easier. I know that each one of them will be foremost in the minds and prayers of Australians until they come home safely, they will certainly be in mine.
I know the men and women of our armed forces will carry out the task they have been given with great commitment and great distinction.  They will be working within a Coalition of like-minded nations, united in a shared abhorrence of this terrible crime and the perverted that that crime represents.  The stakes are very high, even determining the security of the world that we hand to our children and grandchildren.  In both our contribution to the international coalition, and in the example shown by our whole society, Australia will be seen to have played its part.
Ladies and gentlemen again can I thank the Australian Defence Association for the opportunity you have given me to present in a more formal fashion and in the course of an inevitably partisan, not bipartisan, election campaign the case for Australia';s involvement in this very difficult and unusual military conflict. I have to say that of all of the events that I have been in any way touched by in the 27 year that I';ve been in public life, none has had a more profound impact on me than has this.  None has quite ripped what I might broadly describe as the younger generation of Australians than has this.  It represents a sudden interruption and a sudden threat to an apparently believed continuity of peace and security.  Because of the nature of the buildings that were struck, it represented both symbolically and in reality a most precisely lethal strike against the financial heart of the major power of the world and the military might of that same nation.
It is important that we continue to associate ourselves very strongly with the international coalition.  But it';s also important that we continue to argue the case for that involvement.  Those of you who do support that involvement should not assume that public support will continue without interruption and without qualification.  My experience in politics has always been that you need a continually advocate your cause, continue to argue your case, continue to repel your critics and continue to strike down their false arguments and their false nations.
I';ve seen many and apparently unassailable argument and proposition for Australians to do one thing or the other in the past to be lost in the heat and burden and turmoil of international debate and with the passage of time the belief on the part of many in the community that the events should be forgotten and left to history.  That should not occur in relation to this involvement because what we are fighting against is something that does in a very direct fashion threaten our security and threaten the kind of world we wish to hand to future generations.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Subjects: health.
E&amp;OE..................
(tape break)… I think it';s particularly relevant in the light of some of the initiatives I';m going to outline that we are releasing the Coalition';s health policy right here in an outer-metropolitan area of Melbourne because much of this policy is directed towards the needs of people living in outer-metropolitan Australia, which will build on the many initiatives that the Government has undertaken over the last five and a half years.
Can I stress at the outset that the new measures that I announce today which are worth $306 million and will build very significantly on the improvements to health policy and health provision in Australia over the last five and a half years, they are, unlike the policy proposals of our opponents, eminently affordable.  We are half way through this election campaign, we have two and a half weeks to go and Labor is back to its old deficit tricks.  If you look at the promises Labor has made to date they already have a budget deficit for next year if they were to win, in the red to the tune of $200 million.  And we';re only half way there.  Think what it';s going to be like by the 9th of  November.  So I stress at the outset that what I announce today is affordable and all of the policies that we will be announcing between now and the election will fall into that category.
Labor asks us to believe that they are born again believers in keeping the budget in surplus.  Don';t listen to what they say, remember what they did.  When they were last in Government they left us with an accumulated national debt of $96 billion.  By the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 of that $96 billion, they';ve tried to stop us doing that. If they get back into office they';ll run the budget into deficit as surely as night follows day and that will drive interest rates up as surely as night follows day.  So my first message to you today is that unlike Labor';s accumulated promises, which are already projecting a deficit of $200 million in the coming financial year, our policies are affordable.  Because my friends the foundation of any social policy is a growing economy with low inflation and low interest rates and the capacity to grow further into the future.  If you don';t have growth you don';t have revenue, if you don';t have revenue you can';t spend more money on health and education and all the other public services our community needs.
In announcing this policy today I take very great pride in telling you that the Coalition is building a balanced health system that ensures that all Australians have access to high quality health care.  We are committed to a strong and sustainable public health system, Medicare,  that provides access to high quality care regardless of income.  We are also committed to strengthening Australia';s private health care system to give people more choice and to help sustain Medicare by taking the load off the public hospital system. And we are committed to rebuilding health and medical services in Australia';s country towns, our regions and urban fringes so that people have access to high quality services regardless of where they live.
The initiatives that I announce today build on five and a half years of solid achievement by the Coalition Government in health policy.  This financial year, the Coalition Government is spending $29 billion on health, compared with $16 billion, $16 billion in the last full financial year of the Keating Government and that was 1994-1995.  We have strengthened medical services provided through Medicare.  Under the Coalition, the number of services bulk-billed has increased substantially.  More Australians have access to free medical services than ever before.
The 2001 Budget alone provided an extra $750 million, $750 million over four years to Medicare to improve access to GP care for all Australians.  These funds will enable General Practitioners to provide better care to patients with asthma, diabetes or mental illness.  We are also funding GPs to increase the number of women being screened for cervical cancer, especially women living in rural and regional areas, migrant women and indigenous women.
The Coalition has also provided record funding of about $32 billion to the states and territories for public hospitals through the Australian Health Care Agreements.  This my friends represents a 28 per cent increase, 28 per cent real increase, that';s over and above the inflation rate, over the five-year lives of these agreements, compared with a real increase of only 18 per cent under the last agreements negotiated by the Keating Government.  Once again I invite you to compare what they say they will do with what they did do when they were last in Government.  This increase includes about $3 billion that the states had previously agreed to pay back if private health insurance membership rose to its current level.  We have allowed the states to keep this money, even though their public hospitals come under less pressure when more people use the private health system. Now that is a very important consideration, we subsidised people taking out private health insurance, we lifted the number of people in private health insurance.  The original health medicare or health care agreement says that if it got to a certain level then the state would have to repay a certain amount of money to us.  We have forgiven that obligation and as a result the states have under our Government an additional $3 billion that they had previously agreed to pay back.  
The 2000 Budget provided $562 million over four years under our Regional Health Strategy,  the most ambitious initiative ever to provide more health and medical services across country Australia.  That strategy will provide 200 post-graduate training places each year in the country for General Practitioners, leading to an almost immediate increase in the number of rural GPs.  It will establish nine new clinical schools in the country to train medical students.  And doctors trained in the country as everyone knows are more likely to stay in the country. It will also establish more health and medical services in rural communities, including 85 more of the popular Regional Health Services.
The Coalition has also revitalised Australia';s private health system and given Australians more choice in health. Our 30% rebate, worth $2.5 billion a year, which the Labor Party voted against and we only got through the Parliament with the support of Senator Brian Harradine and remember that when they go around the nation saying they';re in favour of the tax rebate, they voted against it, they voted against it after the 1998 election.  And other initiatives like lifetime health cover and closing the gap have also made private health cover more attractive and improved industry performance.
These measures have led to approximately three million more Australians with private health cover.  Today, 45 per cent of Australians have private health cover, compared with fewer than 34 per cent in 1996.  More people using more private health services are already taking pressure off our public hospital system.
Importantly in the area of preventative medicine the Coalition has immunised Australia';s children.  Today, 95 per cent of infants and 95 per cent of school-aged children are fully immunised.  The 1998 Measles vaccination campaign alone immunised over 2 million children.  That is a world-class achievement.  
And since coming into office, the Coalition has doubled spending on indigenous health services.  44 indigenous communities, some with populations over 1,000, have gained access to basic health services for the very first time.  Our ATSIC/Army Community Assistance Programme has improved the delivery of essential services, like power and water, to indigenous communities.  
The 1999 Budget doubled the funds available for health and medical research, with an extra $614 million for the NHMRC over a period of six years.  By doubling the money being provided to Australia';s world class medical researchers, we will maintain the reputation that this country has always had in the area of medical research of punching well above its weight.
Turning now to the future and for our third term agenda the Coalition will build on its achievements over the last five and a half years with a comprehensive plan to further strengthen Medicare, strengthen the private health sector and provide better access to health and medical services across Australia, regardless of where people live.  Today I announce a $306 million package to provide more doctors in outer-metropolitan areas, better after-hours care, better treatment for cancer patients, better palliative care in the community and better care for people suffering from arthritis.
Firstly more doctors for outer-metropolitan areas.  Doctor numbers in outer-metropolitan areas need to keep up with recent rapid population growth in these parts of Australia.  Therefore the Coalition will increase the number of doctors who work in the outer-metropolitan areas of all six state capitals. And this initiative is directed very much at electorates like La Trobe and this initiative is all about making sure that Australians who live in the outer-metropolitan areas of our big cities have access to the same services as all other Australians.  To that end we';re going to provide $80 million over four years to bring an additional 150 doctors to practice in these areas.  Specialist trainees and researchers will be enabled to work in supervised general practice programmes in these areas and they will be encouraged to work after hours and on weekends. Doctors undertaking the general stream of the GP training programme will be required to train in designated outer-metropolitan areas. And GPs can complete a fast track vocational registration programme by working in a designated outer-metropolitan area and thus become eligible for higher Medicare rebates and for practice incentive payments.
The next item of new initiatives for the third term is better after hours care. The Coalition has already acted in this difficult area by increasing after-hours rebates under Medicare by 50 per cent this year but  we will go further and provide $43 million over four years to establish 32 after-hours clinics across Australia, predominantly in outer-metropolitan and rural areas that do not have good access to after-hours care.  These clinics will be set up in collaboration with local GPs.  Once again an initiative aimed very much at the legitimate concerns and the legitimate requests of people living in outer-metropolitan areas such as the electorate of La Trobe and the area where we are now meeting.Thirdly, in the area of providing better treatment for cancer patients it is important for all of us to bear in mind that people with cancer must have access to world-class diagnosis and treatment.  Therefore, we will provide $73 million over four years to improve access to radiation oncology services for people living in country Australia.  At present, there are only eight of these services located outside capital cities.  Up to six new services will be funded under this proposal.  The location and the operation of these new services will be determined by the results of an inquiry into radiation oncology recently announced by the Government and due to report in early 2002.
We will also provide $44 million over five years for six new Positron Emission Tomography scanners around Australia.  Those scanners are especially useful in diagnosing and treating cancers of the brain and of the lungs.  These new scanners will provide people with cancer and their doctors with access to the latest technology.
Fourthly, the area of better palliative care. People who have terminal illnessess deserve to be treated in a dignified manner and in circumstances of their own choice.  The Coalition will therefore provide $55 million over four years to equip health workers such as GPs, community nurses and other allied health professionals to improve the standard of palliative care offered in their local communities, including pain management.  This measure will support people choosing to die at home and will also provide more assistance to families of those who choose palliative care.  A strong emphasis will be placed on the delivery of palliative care for people in residential aged care and people living in regional and remote areas.
And finally the area of arthritis treatment. As our population ages, arthritis will become an increasingly major health issue.  Three out of four Australians will develop some form of arthritis during their lifetime. The Coalition will provide $11.5 million over four years to  improve access by GPs to quality treatment and prescribing information  and help arthritis sufferers and their families with advice and support in managing diet and exercise. In addition, we will make managing arthritis better a National Health Priority area, in consultation with the states and territories.  Disability brought about by arthritis is a common form of entry and reason for entry into residential aged care and better management of the condition can be very effective in helping people to remain at home for a longer period of time.
Now those, ladies and gentlemen, are the specific new health initiatives, totalling a $306 million package which will add to the health achievements of the Coalition Government over the last five and a half years.  I';m very conscious that in the area of health that new agreements  with the states and territories are due to commence in July 2003.  And the Coalition will initiate negotiations with the states early in the next term, with the following major objectives. Firstly, reduction of public hospital waiting lists and waiting times. Secondly, reduction of  medical mistakes in public hospitals. Thirdly, more investment in step-down care and rehabilitation services and infrastructure to allow people discharged from hospital to be treated and cared for at home wherever practical. Fourthly, improving on the strong safety and quality focus that is a feature of the current agreements. And finally ensuring that the states and territories share in overall increases in funding commitments to public hospitals.  And in addition I commit the Coalition to a situation where the agreements will not contain any penalties on the states should private health insurance membership reach particular levels. In other words, if people in private health insurance continue to increase then there';ll be no clawback or no penalties despite the fact that in the process additional strain is taken off the public hospitals.
The Coalition will not allow Labor states to get away with under-funding their public hospitals or ignoring peoples'; wishes to have more post-hospital services provided in the community and at home.
Can I just before concluding say one or two things about the alternatives offered by the Labor Party in the area of health.  I happen to hold the view ladies and gentlemen that although our health system is far from perfect and although it is an area where there is always room for improvement and it';s an area where more money can always be provided and used, if you look around the world, health services in Australia, particularly for the less well off are better than anywhere else in the world.  If you look at the health system of the United States, if you look at the health system of the United Kingdom, if you look at the health system of other European countries and then with all its imperfections you compare it with the health system in this country you find that ours is superior.  It does need improving and I';ve outlined a number of initiatives where it can be improved, but the charge being made that our health system is in crisis is inaccurate.  
The charge being made that it';s all the fault of the federal government is wrong.  The reality is as I have outlined, that over the last five and a half years we';ve provided massive further funds off the back of a growing economy and as a result of a growing economy rising revenue collections.  And we';ve introduced a taxation system which over the years ahead will provide the states with more money each year, more money each year to spend on public hospitals and to spend on government schools and police and road services and all the other public services that state governments should provide.
The Labor Party showed after 13 years in government and five and a half years in opposition that they do not really understand what constitutes good health policy.  Private health insurance coverage was 65 per cent when Bob Hawke defeated Malcolm Fraser in the 1983 election and it fell to under 34 per cent in 1996 when they were defeated in the election that year.  And the reason it fell is that they don';t believe in it and it';s important to remember that when you look at their commitments during this election campaign to retain it. GPs and specialists left rural and regional Australia in large numbers and rural health services declined. Our childhood immunisation rate under Labor fell to 53 per cent, that is a third world standard, it was a disgrace that a few years ago the immunisation rate in this country for children was barely over one in two.  And we have as a result of the campaign we introduced, we have lifted that with enormous ongoing benefits in the years ahead to the health of Australian children.  Medical research was neglected and in their last term, Labor cut the forward estimates of the NHMRC Budget by $50 million a year.
But now in this election campaign the Labor Party is proposing what is called a Medicare Alliance with the states.  With almost no detail on how this alliance will work, Labor';s policy is little more than a public relations exercise providing no real assurance of additional health and medical services. Yet it';s the core of the alternative offering of the Labor Party in this very important area.  At the heart of this alliance are what are called Medicare Joint Accounts for each state that would pool Commonwealth and state funds covering hospitals, aged care, medical benefits and pharmaceuticals.  This proposal raises a number of fundamental questions that the Labor Party has not answered.  For example, how could Labor assign Commonwealth medical and pharmaceutical benefit funds to the joint accounts without capping them?  Would the states be required to contribute to cost overruns above the funding caps?  If not, how could the alliance be a panacea for cost-shifting, one of the main benefits claimed by Labor Party?  Would a requirement to contribute to cost overruns entitle states to a say in medical and pharmaceutical benefits policy?  This could lead to different policies between the states. Let me illustrate.  An expensive pharmaceutical could be on the PBS list in New South Wales but not in Queensland.  GP rebates could be higher in Victoria than in Western Australia, with consequent lower bulk billing rates in Western Australian. Labor';s Medicare Alliance would fragment or balkanise Australia';s health system.
When pressed in a question in the Western Australian Parliament yesterday on the risk-sharing arrangements to underpin Labor';s Alliance, the Western Australian Premier Dr Gallop admitted that it was only, quote,  “an agreement in principle” and the details would be worked out later.  Quite clearly, Mr Beazley and Dr Gallop don';t have a clue about how the centrepiece of their health policy is going to work.  The Alliance is nothing more than an illusion.  The only certainty in Labor';s policy is more bureaucratic, more commissions and talkfests.  They can';t guarantee any reduction in public hospital waiting lists which are fundamentally the responsibility of state government administration.  States run and substantially fund public hospitals, we supplement their funding with generous payments under the Medicare agreement.  We don';t run the hospitals, therefore the responsibility in relation to waiting lists rests with those that do run them.  They can';t guarantee any more doctors and medical services in country Australia.  They can';t guarantee any progress on key public health goals for asthma, cervical cancer or anti-smoking.  And they can';t really given their track record in government and their refusal to support the legislation after the 1998 election give any plausible guarantee that if they were to become the government they would retain the 30 per cent private health rebate in full.
Ladies and gentlemen the Coalition';s agenda for health involves retention and further strengthening of  Medicare.  It involves a retention of a very strong commitment to a balance in our health system between public and private provision.  But most importantly of all what the Coalition offers for the next three years is a strong, growing economy and a strong growing economy is the foundation for the capacity of any government to provide increased funding in areas like health and education.
It';s one thing to promise you';ll spend more on health and education, it';s another thing to have the ability to run the economy at a sufficiently higher level of growth without inflation breaking out and interest rates going up to guarantee that you';ll have the funds to meet the promises that you make.  Over the last five and a half years we have met our promises on Medicare.  We promised in 1996 that we would retain it and strengthen it and we have.  We said we';d make provision for private health insurance and we have.  We said that we would strengthen medical research and we have.  And we are committing ourselves to five very important initiatives worth more than $300 million which are of particular benefit to outer-metropolitan Melbourne.
Ladies and gentlemen it is a credible building for the next three years on the health policy achievements of the last five and a half years and the policy that I announce today is of particular benefit Bob to the people that you represent. And we';ve done that because the need in outer-metropolitan Melbourne as in outer-metropolitan Sydney and outer-metropolitan Brisbane is in the areas that I';ve outlined and I know those initiatives will be very warmly supported by the Australian people who live in those parts of our country.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Michael; to Andrew MacCallum the newly elected chairman of ACOSS; the Lord Mayor of Melbourne, Denis Napthine the leader of the opposition in Victoria; Mr Geoff Clark the chairman of ATSIC, ladies and gentlemen.
I was not only delighted but indeed determined to keep my commitment to address this annual conference of ACOSS because I have valued the contact I';ve had with your organisation in the time that I have been Prime Minister.  And this is a marvellous opportunity for me, and I hope you derive some benefit from it as well to report on the social policy approach of the government over the last three years and it is also an opportunity for me to canvass some of the detail of the Government';s third term agenda of welfare reform.  And I do so during a day here in Melbourne in which I';ll not only be canvassing the Government';s third term agenda in relation to social policy, but also in the important area of health policy.
Our plans for welfare reform will provide for further strengthening of the social security safety net and dramatically improve the incentives for Australians in welfare to achieve the transition which we all support to employment that is both paid and satisfying.
Our contact with ACOSS is valuable in the formation of policy.  We don';t always agree, we often disagree very strongly and if we continue to be the government after the 10th of November, I am sure that there will continue to be areas of agreement and disagreement.  But what we have always done is to maintain a dialogue and you will remember that I addressed this congress just under three years ago shortly after the return of the Government in which I outlined our approach to the social coalition.  It is because we don';t always agree that the opportunities for dialogue are important.
As the Lord Mayor has said our world has changed, tragically for the worst, since the 11th of September and that tragedy underlines the need and indeed encourages all to seek out each other just that little bit more and to build on those common values and common bonds that bring our community together.
Whatever our political beliefs and however we vote on the 10th of November we all want an Australian society that is cohesive and prosperous and cohesive, that offers opportunity and choice, that draws strength from its diversity, that is generous to its vulnerable, that assists the disadvantaged, and encourages people to aspire and achieve.
My government';s social policy record is built on a set of shared Australian values of :
- opportunity and choice;   - a fair go for all;   - increasing self-reliance;   - working in partnership; and- mutual obligation.
In advancing these values, we realise that governments cannot do it all and cannot do it alone.
We need to draw on the strengths that businesses, that communities, that families and individuals bring to our shared society.
That is why in my address to the ACOSS nearly three years ago I committed the government to working more closely with all of the partners in what I called then and still call the social coalition.
This is a coalition of governments, community, businesses, families and individuals, working together to address the challenges we face and to build opportunities for us all.
It draws on the perspectives, the experience, the expertise of the organisations and individuals all represented here today who every day are exposed to the causes and consequences of the problems we face as a society, and who have an important role in helping to find the solutions.
The government has a critical role to play in the social coalition, ensuring that the Australian economy is strong enough to generate opportunities and choices for all Australians.
We are very proud of our record of economic management.  It has delivered strong economic growth, even in times of marked regional economic downturn.
More than 830,000 new jobs have been created since March 1996.  The unemployment rate, although I would like it to be lower, has significantly fallen.
Real wages have grown strongly, by more than 9% under my government, compared with growth of just 2.3% between 1983 and 1996.
Inflation has been more than halved under this government.  And yesterday';s CPI figure, right in line with the government';s predictions at the time the new tax system was introduced.  We have now passed through the transitional phase of the new taxation system.  The one-off price effects have been washed right out of the system and that augurs well for the future climate in relation to interest rates.  
It also confirms the real value of the tax cuts that were delivered at the time GST was introduced and it also confirms the government';s argument about real gains in the value of the pension and other benefits.  In our view the economy has benefited greatly from the introduction of the new tax system.  It hasn';t been easy, it hasn';t always been popular and it remains in the eyes of many something they wish to criticise.  But there is mounting evidence of the acceptance of it and the value it is adding to the strength of the Australian economy.  Because it has increased the capacity of industry to grow.  It';s also enhanced through the removal of the old wholesale sales tax and other hidden, indirect taxes our export capacity.
The ability of businesses to claim input tax credits has reduced the retail price of many items. 
Income tax cuts worth around $12 billion are boosting spending, with flow through effects for every industry.  Indeed part of the underpinning of the strengths of the Australian economy particularly on the retail side has in fact been the size and the value and the placement of those personal income tax.
Strong economic growth is the foundation of any government';s capacity to fund social initiatives.  Strong economic growth also in the  Australian context under the new tax system will produce strong growth in the GST and its revenues, and that of course has become, because all of the revenue from the GST is given to the states.  It has become a major underpinning of the future capacity of states to provide more money for government schools, the public hospitals and for all the other public services which it is their duty under our constitutional arrangements to provide.
Australia';s strong economy has already enabled us to strengthen the social safety net that ensures that Australians get a fair go.
Tax reform has enabled us to improve the assistance we provide to Australian families.
Over 2.2 million families, and more than 4 million children, have benefited from increased entitlements under the new family payments system.
This is more than 90% of all Australian families with dependent children.  And as I';ll explain in a moment, there is considerable evidence that the greater benefits out of the new arrangements have in fact flowed to lower income families which was the intention of the government when we introduced the new system.
The new system promotes choice, allowing families to decide how they receive their benefits.  Lower income families in particular have experienced substantial gains as a result of the New Tax System and family assistance policies.
A single income family with two children and on minimum wage has seen a boost in its real disposable income of 15.5% between 1995 and 2001.
Almost a third of this increase was due to the New Tax System, with the balance stemming from real increases in wages and family assistance.
For families using child care, the increase can be even greater, rising to 22% or more.
I am aware that the ACOSS Congress this year has a focus on the issue of income inequality and that is a subject deserving of ongoing debate and attention and advocacy within the Australian community.
And I do wish to make the point that contrary to media and other claims, recent ABS figures show that there has been no significant change in income inequality since 1994-95.  That is not to say that the present disposition is perfect but simply to make the observation that the frequently repeated mantra that the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer is not borne out by the most recent ABS figures.  They show that the proportions of income going to richer and poorer households have not changed in that period.
In fact, families with children have made significant advances under our policies.
Recent NATSEM research, commissioned not by the Government but by a media organisation, comparing the disposable incomes of a range of families with children between March 1996 and March 2001 indicated that these families had increased their disposable incomes, with gains of between 7 and 19%.
This was primarily due to changes in government benefits for low income families, including increases of up to 75% in some cases.
Sole parents relying totally on government assistance have been greatly assisted and indeed the research showed that they were the single group that were the greatest beneficiaries.
I am proud of these facts, I';m not complacent about them but I am proud of the gains that have been made in these areas and I do derive some satisfaction from the knowledge that it is the children of low income families that have proved the key beneficiaries of the Government';s policies. 
We also legislated to make sure that the single pension rate never falls below never falls below 25% of Male Total Average Weekly Earnings.
Good economic management and labour market reforms have allowed sustained growth in average weekly earnings, and this legislation ensured that pensioners also benefit from this growth.
The result is real pension rates are now 4.5% higher, real pension rates than they were in 1996.
The government has further strengthened the social net by restoring balance to Australia';s health system and ensuring its longterm viability and I will have something further to say about the health system later today when I release the government';s health policy for the next three years.. 
We have introduced the 30% rebate, lifetime health cover and range of other support measures.
Private health insurance has increased by around 3 million since the rebate was introduced.  I don';t think it is a shame when you introduce a measure that takes the load off the public hospital system and I also don';t think it is a shame, I don';t think it is a shame to point out to you Sir that under the current health care agreements the money flowing directly from the Federal Government to the state governments to augment their ongoing responsibility for public hospitals will rise by 28 per cent after inflation over the period of the agreement compared with the agreement of the previous government.  
If we';re going to have a debate about health policy in this country let us have a debate based on the facts.  Let us have a debate which is based upon the reality that we need in the Australian community, we need in the Australian community ladies and gentlemen to have no stunts conducted about health policy but a very very sensible debate conducted about health policy.
Mr Chairman public health insurance membership, public health insurance membership has increased by around three million since the rebate was introduced and private hospitals have experienced increased growth in utilisation and in the benefits paid.  And we';re also moving to fix the gap and as I said in answer to that question that public hospital funding to states will increase 28 per cent in real terms over the five years of the current Australian Health Care Agreements.
Mr Chairman, the social coalition, early intervention and increasing self-reliance have also been central to our approach to welfare reform.  Our welfare reform agenda was informed by the recommendations of the Reference Group on Welfare Reform chaired by Mission Australia';s Patrick McClure.  It affirms the principle that every Australian of working age should be encouraged and supported to participate socially and economically wherever possible.  This is because economic participation promotes independence, the ability to make choices and to take up opportunities.  It builds self-esteem and it builds confidence.
In contrast, unemployment can have a devastating effect on self-esteem, leaving people dispirited and socially alienated.
The $1.7 billion Australians Working Together package, announced in the 2001-2002 Budget, initiates the process of welfare reform recommended by the McClure Report.
And implementation of the Australians Working Together package will be a major social welfare priority, indeed a major policy priority for a third term Coalition Government.
Most of the measures under Australians Working Together begin to take effect in the early months of the next financial year and it will be progressively implemented over subsequent years.
The package represents a careful balance between requiring participation and providing the assistance and the incentives needed for people to help themselves.
We believe that it is not only necessary, but it is also fair in proper circumstances, to require people to participate.
And once they have begun, most people recognise the benefits of participation.
Australians Working Together expands the support and assistance available to encourage participation:
 $324 million for unemployed people, including16,500 extra Work for the Dole places and 30,000 Job Search Training places.    $251 for parents returning to work, including more after-school child care places and a new Transition to Work Programme.    $177 million for people with disabilities, including 28,300 new employment assistance and rehabilitation places. $83 million for Indigenous Australians, including help for 10,000 CDEP participants to get a job through Indigenous Employment Centres.
It will also take an important step towards fixing financial disincentives to taking up paid work through the creation of the $506 million Working Credit initiative.
All of these spending initiatives are committed to by the government and they apparently represent some of the spending priorities of the coalition which have been roundly criticised as profligate and unnecessary by the Labor Party during the course of this election campaign.
Social participation is also important because builds self-esteem and self-reliance.  It promotes mental and physical health and well-being, it builds social cohesion and a sense of community.
A large number of people receiving income support already make a significant social contribution through parenting and caring, voluntary work and community work.  Our approach greatly values and respects these contributions.
Community participation also facilitates the transition to paid work by building and maintaining skills, self-esteem and social networks.
Our welfare reform agenda recognises that some people may find participation difficult, because of a lack of opportunity or skills, or because of difficult personal circumstances.
To ensure people can participate as fully as possible, Australians Working Together provides significant support for those people facing barriers to participation.
For example, we are spending $140 million over four years on Centrelink Personal Advisers, and $154 million on the Personal Support Program which will help people facing severe or multiple personal problems such as homelessness, drug or alcohol addiction, mental illness or domestic violence.
We want to build people';s self esteem, both to improve their personal circumstances and to build capacity in our community.
Building self-reliance is an increasingly important aspect of our approach to practical reconciliation.
We want to help Indigenous Australians with practical measures that build the capacity for self-reliance.
The 2001-02 Budget includes new spending of more than $327 million over the next four years to build on the Government';s approach to reducing Indigenous disadvantage through practical reconciliation.
Our programs are helping indigenous Australians break the welfare dependency cycle by providing effective training, creating jobs and encouraging sustainable economic development in indigenous communities.
We remain through the course of all of the policy implementation I';m outlining during this election campaign, utterly committed to the principle of sound economic management given that jobs can only be created and lived helped in a strong economic environment.
In another forum recently, I emphasised the Government';s commitment to:
 Involving all partners in the social coalition in the policy formulation process.
 Enabling community organisations to deliver services relevant to local needs.
 Focusing on early intervention and prevention; and
 Encouraging participation rather than passive dependence.
Participation will remain the underlying principle of our welfare reform agenda.
Implementation of the $1.7 billion Australians Working Together Package will be a major priority for a third term Coalition Government.
As I have said previously, our medium to long-term agenda for welfare reform is also to move Australia';s excessively complex income support system towards the McClure ideal of a single benefits system.
The McClure Report recommended we develop a system involving a base payment, with supplements to assist with participation costs and provide participation rewards, such as the training supplement announced in the recent Budget.
We also want to remove disincentives to people moving from welfare dependence to paid work.
The Working Credit initiative is a valuable step in this direction.  Advances were also made through reductions in marginal tax rates and reduced withdrawal rates for family benefits which were a principal feature of the Tax Reform package.
I know the welfare sector is particularly anxious about the effect of welfare reform on the most vulnerable in our community.  In response to that very natural concern, I want to re-state the assurances I have previously given:
 The government is committed to working in consultation with the community, through the Consultative Forum we have established to aid and advise us on the implementation of the welfare reform measures;    We are committed to making upfront investments that deliver future returns to taxpayers, as people move from welfare dependence to economic and social participation; and Nobody';s benefit will be cut as a result of changes to the social security system.
The problem of regional unemployment continues to warrant ongoing attention.
In a third term we will work to integrate the government';s $240 million Stronger Families and Communities Strategy with the participation focus of Australians Working Together.  This will build capacity and generate opportunities in regional communities.
Welfare reform is about strengthening our society by supporting and encouraging people to identify and make the most of opportunities. 
We are committed to helping all Australians share in this country';s prosperity and future.  No one should be left behind, least of all because they lack the skills, the support or the opportunities to participate in our community';s social and economic life.
As I think we all know, children and young people are best guided and nurtured in their transition to adulthood by strong families supported by strong communities.
Balancing the demands of family and the workplace in modern Australian society is an increasingly important and challenging issue.
We need, amongst other things, to cater for the realities of an environment where around 50% of school aged children have two working parents or a sole custodial parent who works.
The Government';s approach has not only been to improve the value of benefits as such but also to support and expand the choices that are available for families to make.
The Family Tax Benefit gives families more choices about how they balance their work and their caring for their family responsibilities.
Child care arrangements are obviously central to that challenge.  We are building more flexible child care arrangements.  Through Australians Working Together, the government has provided $16 million to expand the childcare available through the Jobs Education and Training Program and to fund outside school hours childcare places for some 5,300 more children each year.
To make child care more affordable for all Australian families, and especially low and middle income families, we have allocated a massive $6 billion for child care over the four years to 2004-05, that';s in addition to spending more than $4.3 billion over the last 4 years. 
The introduction of the Child Care Benefit last year as part of the new tax system has significantly improved affordability, particularly for low and middle income families.  
As a result of the assistance provided through the Child Care Benefit, child care costs have fallen by 8.7% since 1 July 2000.
And the enhanced flexibility of Australian workplaces is fundamental to greater balance in the lives of working Australians.  I remain strongly committed to the maintenance of a flexible workplace relations system.  I do not believe that the balance of work and family will be enhanced and facilitated by a return to a rigid and award dominated industrial relations system.   I believe that it will be best facilitated by an industrial relations climate that encourages employers and employees to come to agreements which best accommodate the balance between the family and meeting your workplace responsibilities that working men and women of Australia want.
I';ve stressed over the past few years the important role that business has to play in helping identify and generate participation opportunities for all Australians. I';ve frequently said, and many of you would have heard me use the expression, but my plea is not so much that business gives more but rather that more businesses give.  There are many outstanding examples of generosity on the part of Australian businessmen and women but we need a lot more of them to further enhance the social coalition.
The Prime Minister';s Community Business Partnership has been asked to work with business to identify opportunities for mature age workers, for parents of people with disabilities and for Indigenous Australians. 
I established the Partnership in 1999 to advise on ways to promote philanthropy and partnerships across all sectors of the Australian community.
The Partnership has dramatically raised the profile of corporate social involvement and it';s helped to put a number of important issues on the agenda.
It';s helped make business involvement more part of the norm and therefore more to be expected of more businesses.
And our efforts are producing results:  A report by the Centre for Corporate Public Affairs and the Business Council of Australia published in 2000 showed 52% of a sample of Australia';s large companies are engaged with the community in some way.  And that';s a significant improvement on the participation rates of earlier years.  
A prime example of the effectiveness of the social coalition approach is the growing number of strategic and mutually beneficial partnerships between businesses and non-profit organisations.  The government itself has played a significant financial role in encouraging this process.  We';ve changed the taxation system to encourage philanthropy in a number of ways and the cost of revenue of between $50-$100 million.
Amongst the many things that we';ve asked the Community Business Partnership to consider are ways of promoting the benefits to our economy and to individual businesses of mature age workers.
Mature age workers have skills and experience that will be lost to our society and our economy and society if we do not make a greater effort to develop and to maintain and to value them.
Perhaps the most challenging issue facing any Australian government in the future is our ageing population.  A shift from a youthful and growing population to one that is ageing and potentially declining is being experienced by most developed countries.
In my National Press Club speech last July, I observed that in just over a decade, the rate of growth in Australia in the over 65 age group will reach 4%, in contrast to an overall population growth rate of well under 1%. 
This transition has profound implications for our society, particularly for our social and economic structures.  Government and policy makers must respond to these challenges. 
The government';s taxation reform programme, specifically the introduction of the broad based GST, is a step in this direction.  The GST will provide a sound and more sustainable revenue base from which governments in the future can fund the services needed by an ageing population and it remains to me a grievous contradiction for people to express a concern about the impact on the capacity of this economy to afford services for an increasingly aging population, yet at the same time criticise the adoption of a revenue base that over the years ahead will provide a growth in taxation in order to fund those very services that we will so clearly need.
In previous forums, I have stated that we do have to make better use of the skills and experiences offered by the growing number of Australians aged over 55 years.
One way of doing this is to enhance the flexibility of labour markets, and the government has promoted this flexibility in the past through its workplace relations reforms and in the Australians Working Together package we will take that process further. But we need to do more.  I have asked the Minister for Family and Community Services and the Minister for Employment, Workplace Relations and Small Business to work together to build on this package and develop a strategy for mature age workers.
And the implementation of that will be a high priority for a third term Coalition Government.  Because not only must we, as a matter of good economic and social policy  draw on the skills and experience of older workers that we must recognise that as a matter of respect for human capacity and human dignity that opportunity and choice shouldn';t cease to apply at the age of 65 or indeed at any age at all.
And in that context, you';ll be aware that on the 11th of October, I announced a new initiative to increase access to community care.
This initiative included an additional 6,000 Community Aged Care Packages, at a cost of $68 million over four years.  This will bring the total number of packages to over 34,000 by the end of 2005-06, compared with just over 4,000 when we took office.
I also announced a pilot Partners in Care program, at a cost of $14 million over four years, to provide personal care to residents of retirement villages.
Retirement village living reduces or delays the need for other services, such as residential care.
These initiatives signal the priority we will give in a third term to providing greater access to quality community and home-based care for older Australians.
Ladies and gentlemen, there are many other things that I would wish to canvass in the course of giving you a broad sweep of the government';s social policy approach and our commitments for the next three years.  In particular in the area of young Australians we are very proud of the fact that recognising that 70% of young Australians who leave school do not go on to university but we have presided over more than a doubling of a number of apprenticeships and traineeships within the Australian community.  And that doubling has embraced a dramatic increase in the number of women involved in apprenticeships and traineeships and has also seen a significant increase in the number of indigenous Australians who are taking advantage and being provided with choice and opportunity in that area.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I said at the commencement of my address, I value the contact I have with this organisation.  I hope that over the last five and a half years we have had a constructive, respectful and if at times vigorous debate and an acceptance of the need to agree to disagree.
But we have endeavoured and I think succeeded in that endeavour in maintaining a dialogue.  I would like in finishing my remarks to record my appreciation to Michael Raper for the work that he has done as chairman of ACOSS.  Michael has been, I think he would agree, a frequent visitor to my office.  We have always been ready to talk and listen, both myself personally, and members of my staff.  We have not always agreed, in fact we have frequently and vigorously disagreed.  But that is in the nature of a participatory democracy.  It is in the nature of a civilised democratic society which values dialogue and differences of view.
The other thing I said at the beginning of my speech is that all of us want a cohesive society.  We all want prosperity.  We all want to encourage people to aspire.  We all to care for the vulnerable and disadvantaged.  We don';t have a difference of goals.  We don';t have a difference in the emotional commitment we have to helping the needy.  We disagree from time to time how best one achieves that goal.  
I';ve tried today give an account to you and through you to the Australian people of what we have tried to do in this very important area.  And can I conclude by reminding those of you who were present when I delivered a speech to the ACOSS congress in October of 1995 when I was still the leader of the opposition and I gave a number of commitments on behalf of my party which would be binding on it if it were to win the election of March of 1996 and the central commitment that we made was that we would preserve and protect the social security safety net and I believe with all my heart that we have done that.  We';ve not always done everything you';ve wanted.  We';ve often done some things that you haven';t wanted and you haven';t agreed with but we have preserved and protected the social security safety net.  We have added to it, we have broadened it and we have introduced a number of improvements and a number of initiatives.  And can I say that has been made possible because we believe in social justice, we believe in a fair Australian society.  We also believe in an Australian society where people can aspire to achieve and to better themselves.  But we also believe that you can only deliver a fair and just society if you have a strongly growing economy and the foundation of the capacity of any government whether it is Liberal or Labor to deliver better social welfare benefits in the years ahead, more funding for health, more funding for education is a sound and growing economy with well constructed taxation and industrial policies.  And unless you have that, you do not have the capacity to aspire to deliver the kind of decent balanced society that I know all of us, whatever our politics or our backgrounds, really believe in.
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish you well in the work you do for the less privileged in the Australian community.  It is work that the government respects.  It is work that your fellow Australians respect and I appreciate very much the opportunity you have provided to me this morning to outline some of the government';s plans for the next three years. 
Th


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much David, Richard Alston, Peter McGauran, Elizabeth Butcher, John Clarke, Acting Vice-Chancellor, students of NIDA and ladies and gentlemen.
In a fairly long political career one is often asked to reflect on some of the major changes that have occurred in the Australian nation over the period of time of involvement in public life.  And there are many, but one that does stand out very much to me and which has already been referred to is the way in which in my lifetime from, particularly from the late-1950';s through until now we have seen such an enormous transformation in all the aspects of the arts, not least dramatic art and how it expresses who we are, how it expresses what we think of our past and how we would like to see our future.  And John Clarke touched upon how different it is now, how we have such a capacity as a nation to produce world class actors, world class performers, world class theatre, world class dance and world class film.
We look back over the last 30 and 40 years, we recall the extraordinary renaissance of the Australian film industry, we recall the extraordinary bursting forth into international acclaim and maturity of the opera, of the ballet, of dramatic art, of different forms of dance. And all of these things in a way come together on an occasion like this because this institution, this organisation, this wonderful collection of material and human assets really has no parallel around the world.  We have really developed a model that others should copy.  And isn';t it interesting that in a nation which is so often seen around the world as having as its greatest demonstration and its most recognisable face to the world its excellence in sport should also be a nation which through this great organisation has demonstrated an excellence in dramatic art and thus its excellence in the arts.
And the reality of course is that the place of the arts in Australia, the place of institutions like this in Australia and the people they have produced and what they mean to the future of the Australian community and how they see themselves is every bit as emphatic and every bit as triumphant as our performance on the sporting field.  And that of course is said by a Prime Minister who';s never been shy or reluctant about parading his credentials as either a cricket tragic or somebody who has a great love of many of the other sports that Australians play.  So today is very much a celebration of what has been achieved by so many men and women, especially over the last 40 or 50 years in representing this country to its people and to the people of the world.
It';s also, this organisation, a metaphor for something that I have a particular passion for and that is the idea of a social coalition.  The belief that you get the best outcomes if you bring together the government, the professionals in a given area, the business community and that endless dream of passionate committed individuals who have a particular dedication to particular activities.  And NIDA is a great example of that.  It is true that NIDA has been magnificently assisted over the years by a number of governments.  And I am very proud that my Government was able to make the contribution of $25 million out of the Federation Fund to NIDA because the Federation Fund was meant to be a fund out of which contributions would be made to projects, to buildings and to activities that would be permanent reminders of this federation year.  And I couldn';t imagine that we could make decisions on the allocation of that money without having as an important part of it a contribution to the continuity of an institution that will enable us in the years ahead to produce wonderful actors to Australia and to the world.
I don';t need to remind an audience like this of the sort of people that are graduates of NIDA.  The people who have become household names in not only Australian theatre and drama and film but also household names in many other countries.  So today is very much a celebration of that coalition because not only do we bring together the professionals and the aspiring professionals but we also bring together the business men and women who over the years have made a great contribution. We also bring the academic and institutional ambience of the University of New South Wales.  And can I also say we bring a great deal of ministerial passion and commitment to NIDA and can I take the opportunity of publicly recording my thanks to both Richard Alston and to Peter McGauran for the wonderful work that they have done in a day to day way on behalf of the government.
I of course come from a profession that is often accused of trying to imitate dramatic art on many occasions, on many stages and in many circumstances.  So I do feel a particular affinity with so many of you.  I';ve been engaged in some wonderful performances, I';ve sometimes appeared to packed houses in my 27 years, on many occasions people have left at half time.  But I';m pleased to say a lot of them came back before the end and I';m rather hoping that that might be a metaphor for future events.
But it is an enormously exciting occasion to be here today, it is an occasion on the day in which Richard and Peter have released the Government';s arts policy.  I don';t want to make a long speech about that, it hardly seems appropriate on an occasion like this except to say that whatever may be the preconceived notions entertained in some circles of the Australian community the passion and interest and the inspiration that we in the Coalition derive from the place of the arts in the Australian community is quite without fear and quite undiminished.  We share the very strong view that the arts in Australia are a feature of our life which indelibly reminds us of where we are in the world, it reminds us of what we believe in or don';t believe in.  It is a forum and a conduit through which we can interpret ourselves and it gives us a glimpse into our own lives and it gives us a view of ourselves, we may not always agree with, we may not always like and we may over time see it change.  But it is part of a free and open and expressive society.  And it';s an enormous source of pride to me, both as an Australian citizen and as a Prime Minister to watch the way in which the arts in Australia, and not least dramatic art has really over the last few decades, has not only come of age but has permanently put this nation on the world arts map.  And today more than anything else is a tribute to that, today more than anything else is a celebration of what the artists of this country have meant to us over the years and what they will mean in the future.
It is therefore, ladies and gentlemen, with an enormous amount of pleasure that I thank you for inviting me here today.  Can I especially wish the students at the institute the very best of success.  I was saying to John Clarke as we went around that magnificent theatre under construction that, I said two things to him, I said it might make a good venue for a policy launch at a future election, and the second thing I said to him was that as I go around Australia and visit schools I inevitably say to the final year students what would you like to do?  And some of them say I want to be an actor but increasingly those that want to be an actor say to me I would like to go to NIDA.  And they say that whether it is in Sydney, or in Adelaide or in Rockhampton, or in Darwin. In other words NIDA has become a very widely respected, for good reason, Australian institution.  So particularly I wish all of you well, I hope you derive not only skill but pleasure and inspiration from the opportunity that has been given to you and you go on to entertain us, to amuse us, to anger us, to provide on occasions inspiration.  But always performing in an excellent fashion and exhibiting that great exuberant sense and behaviour which is so permanently part of the Australian character.
I therefore have very great pleasure, if I';m handed the remote control, that';s later is it?  I got that cue badly wrong, very badly wrong but can I simply say I have great pleasure in being here and being part of the wonderful opening of this building.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Peter Costello, Chris McDiven, my parliamentary colleagues and my fellow Australians. This campaign, more than any other that I have been involved in, is very much about the future of the Australia we know and the Australia we love so much. The one single, irrefutable question that must be asked and answered by the Australian people on the 10th of November is who is better able to lead Australia over the next three years into difficult, challenging but times and circumstances which ought not to be daunting. And in making that judgement they must do three things; they must examine what we have done and not done over the last five and a half years and they should examine what the Labor Party has done and not done over the last five and a half years. They must also ask themselves who is better able to lead this country in the dangerously different strategic and economic circumstances in which the country now finds itself. And finally they must make a judgement about the plans and the hopes and the aspirations that we have and our opponents have for the future of Australia.
I will turn in a moment to some of the things that will influence the judgement about us over the last five and a half years. But first I want to talk a little about the many plans we have about the future of this country. And I intend to announce in the course of that presentation a number of new initiatives which deal with essential areas of Australian life. We all know that Australia is the best country in the world in which to live. Our aim over the next three years is to make it an even better country in which to live. We know that in the process of doing that we will face some unexpected difficulties, that’s the challenge. But the good news is that because of the great work that we have done over the last five and a half years this country is better placed than most to deal with a stagnating world economy. This nation is stronger and better prepared to withstand the impact of that. And over the last year we have announced plans that will come into effect over the next three years that will add immeasurably to the strength and the resilience of Australian society and the Australian economy.
In the important area of defence alone, our defence white paper has made the greatest ever additional provision for the future defence needs of Australia of any government in more than a quarter of a century. Over the next ten years we will invest an additional $32 billion in the defence of Australia. And how proud I am to say to you that when we came into government in March of 1996 and we found not withstanding what Mr Beazley had told us during the election campaign that our budget was $10.5 billion in deficit, that we’d accumulated as a nation $96 billion of federal government debt, the one restriction I put on Peter Costello and John Fahey in getting the budget in shape was you will not cut any money out of defence. And not only didn’t we cut any money out of defence we in fact increased defence expenditure, and just as well because in that five and a half year period we’ve had the demands of East Timor, of Bougainville, and now the commitment to the war against terrorism which is as much our war and our fight and our struggle as it is for the people of the United States.
We’ve heard a great deal from the Labor Party about science and innovation or ‘noodle nation’ or ‘knowledge nation’, whatever description you choose, they’ve talked about it, we have done something about it. Over the next few years our $3 billion science and innovation plan unveiled at the beginning of this year, which is the greatest ever single provision for science, technology and innovation made by any Australian Government. It’s going to double research grants, it’s going to add thousands of more places to Australian universities, it’s going to endow centres of excellence, it is going to, through the Federation Fellowships, it is going to bring back and retain the brightest and the best of our scientific minds and it’s going to continue to allow this nation to do something it has always done and that is to punch above its weight in the area of science and research. And the good news is that that plan is up and running, it is being implemented and over the next three years the full measure of the value of that policy launched at the beginning of this year will become apparent to the Australian people.
In the area of welfare reform, over the next term we’ll invest $1.7 billion to reform Australia’s welfare system. Isn’t it interesting when we ran for office in 1996 we were accused by the Labor Party of wanting to destroy the social security safety net. We were accused by the Labor Party of wanting to weaken the financial position of the poor in our community. The reality is that after five years of Coalition Government the safety net for social security is stronger and better than ever. The gap between the rich and the poor has not, contrary to their mantra and their rhetoric, widened and particularly as a result of the reforms under tax reform, low income families’ financial position is now vastly better and strengthened compared to what it was when we came to office in March of 1996. So it will be the Coalition under Amanda Vanstone’s leadership and assisted by Tony Abbott that will blaze the trail of welfare reform over the next three years, of reducing welfare dependency, of giving people an incentive to be in work and not be in welfare. Of reconnecting mature age workers with the work force. In other words giving to Australia a modern, progressive social welfare system, the goal of which is to involve people in the community rather than to leave them wasting on welfare dependency.
Then there is the area of primary, secondary and tertiary education. An area talked about so much by our opponents over the last few years. An area whose standards have been derided quite wrongly by the Australian Labor Party because the reality is that according to international measures, apart from pre-school, which is the exclusive responsibility of states, the standards in primary and secondary and tertiary institutions in Australia are above the industrial world average. In our roles in education we have continued to argue for improved standards and benchmarks and measurements. Better education is not only more dollars, it’s better standards, better philosophies of education, better teaching and better attitudes to the orthodox rigours of learning. The great attack of the Labor Party of course has been that we have impoverished and weakened the government schools of this country to the benefit of the so called wealthy independent schools. Well let me say as a very proud product of a government high school in Sydney, that this Government has been a faithful and generous supporter of the government education sector in this country. Let me remind you that since 1996, the amount of federal money going to government schools in Australia has risen by 43% while the enrolments in government schools around Australia over that same period have risen by only 1.3%. Now they are hardly the figures of a government or a response of a government that is intent on doing damage to the great public education system of this country. The truth is 69% of all Australian children go to government schools and those schools receive 78% of total government funding. Once again, hardly the proportions of a government that has some kind of philosophical commitment against government schools.
The truth as distinct from the Labor fiction is that we believe in excellence in both government schools and independent schools. The truth is that we genuinely believe in the absolute freedom of parental choice when it comes to the education of children. We believe that it is the right of every parent to decide the education for their children and we believe that governments should support and facilitate, not frustrate and deny the exercise of that freedom of choice. Let me sound a warning to the parents of children at all independent schools: Labor’s hit list of independent schools is merely the thin end of the wedge. There will be one group this campaign, there’ll be another group in the future if Labor is elected because their union masters, the education union’s ultimate goal is to remove all government assistance to all independent schools.
Meanwhile, as well as having given record funding increases to government schools, we’ve also been very successful in lifting standards and I want to thank and congratulate David Kemp for the wonderful job that he’s done in lifting standards of literacy and numeracy within Australian schools. In 1995, 27% of children could not properly read, now that figure has fallen to 13%. That’s the kind of eduction policy Australian parents really want. That solid practical achievement that’s not rhetorical abuse based on the politics of envy.
In the area of health I’ve long held the view that despite its undoubted weaknesses and despite the need constantly to add to and improve Australia’s health system, it is better than any I have seen or read of anywhere else in the world. And over the time that we have been in government we have done two things, we have revived from its death throes private health insurance. Private health insurance was allowed to bleed to death under Labor because they didn’t believe in it. And never let it be forgotten that when, after the 1998 election and we put up the bill for the 30 per cent tax rebate, the Labor Party voted against it. They voted against it and it was only passed through the Senate with the support of Brian Harradine. They may now say they are in favour of it but once again don’t listen to what they say, remember what they did.
What we have done with that rebate is to lift to 45 per cent the number of Australians in private health insurance, and that has taken the load off public hospitals, as well as enabling many people to assume responsibility for the health care of themselves and their own families. We’ve massively increased the money going to the states under the health care agreements. In the current five year period the money going to the states is 28 per cent higher after inflation, that’s 28 per cent higher in real terms than what it was in the last year of the Keating health care agreements. That is hardly the policy or the approach of a government that is trying to starve the public hospitals of Australia of their necessary resources. In recent years we’ve added a special $500 million country health programme that’s going to bring more doctors to rural areas. Proudly we have doubled the amount of money going to health and medical research, we’ve doubled that as a result of the recommendations of the Wills Report. And can I applaud the work of Michael Wooldridge in the preventative health area.
If you want a real outcome in health, if you want something that really matters for the future listen to this. Our childhood immunisations rates in 1996 were 53 per cent, that was a disgraceful third world standard. As a result of Michael’s policies that figure is now more than 95 per cent. And in this campaign we’ve announced a $306 million programme for outer-metropolitan doctors, for more after hours clinics, for new funds for the fight against cancer and arthritis and for palliative care. And later in the campaign I’ll be announcing some policies of benefit to carers within the Australian community.
I don’t think, ladies and gentlemen, Australia has had a better Minister for the Environment then Senator Robert Hill. He’s negotiated a great position for Australia at two very difficult international conferences. He’s presided over the introduction of the Natural Heritage Trust. And there’s going to be a five year extension of that trust which will run through our next term and hopefully the term afterwards. And that’s been the largest and the most successful environmental restoration in Australia’s history. There are 400,000 volunteers involved in it and on top of that for the first time because of federal leadership we have an agreement between the states and the Commonwealth to do something about the problem of water quality and salinity. I mean it is a disgraceful thought that if we don’t do something about this the drinking water for the people of Adelaide in 20 years time will be unfit for consumption in three out of five days of the week. Australians want a global agreement on greenhouse gas emissions. But we’re not going to ratify the Kyoto Agreement until the full cost to Australia of that ratification is known. Unlike Mr Beazley we’re not going to sign away Australia’s freedom of action until we know the full cost to Australian industry and Australian jobs of that particular action. Everyone in this area who thinks about it knows that the only way you can have an effective international arrangement on greenhouse gas emissions is to include the United States of America and also the developing countries.
So ladies and gentlemen they are some of the many policies for the future which have been announced by the Government during the last 12 months. But I now want to turn to a number of areas which are also very important to Australia’s future and particularly important to Australia’s families in different aspects of their lives. Strong, stable, united, loving families is still the most prized asset that this nation has. Without them we have no real soul, without them we have no real hope as a community for the future. And every arm of government policy should be directed towards assisting and strengthening Australian families. That is why low interest rates are so important. Just remember a few years ago when you were paying 17 or 18 per cent, if you were lucky to get a loan, in order to buy a home. And in that one area alone the average homebuyer is paying $350 a month less as a result of the policies of this government and as a result of the fall in interest rates.
Our health policies are of great benefit to families, and of course families receive very major benefits as a result of taxation reform. And it’s clearly demonstrated in recent independent research the great bulk of those additional benefits went to low and middle income families, they didn’t go to the big end of town, they didn’t go to the well-off, they went to the great family mainstream of the Australian community who were genuinely in need of that assistance. So assistance for families has always been a hallmark of this government and it’s been amongst our highest priorities since our election. We gave $2 billion to the family tax initiative in 1997, and quite apart from the tax cuts another $2 billion of family benefits in last year’s new tax system. And today I’m committing a future Coalition Government to further improvements in the tax system so far as it relates to families.
I have outlined during the year some of the government’s priorities in a broad sense for its third term. One of these is the ongoing challenge of the balance in our lives between work and family. I guess of all the many discussions around the community and neighbourhood barbeques, that particular balancing act for so many families with young children probably comes up more frequently then any.
One of the things therefore that we have thought of in formulating our policies is precisely that. And we know that one of the hardest times for families comes on the birth of their first child, when typically the family, a couple, loses one of its two incomes for a period of time during which the mother or father gives up or reduces paid employment to care for the child. This means for example that a mother who might have been earning $30,000 when her first baby was born and then leaves the workforce for the first four years of the child’s life would pay over $5,000 in tax while someone receiving the same $30,000 earned evenly over the same five year period would pay no tax at all. This issue of fluctuating incomes has been dealt with in the taxation system in our provisions to allow farmers and artists for example to average their income to smooth out these peaks of taxation liability. The Coalition therefore believes that it is fair to have similar provisions to cover fluctuations that occur on the start of a family when the first child is born and in addition of course assistance with family formation is very much in Australia’s long term interests.
Therefore if elected the Coalition will introduce the First Child Tax Refund. This proposal will repay to parents who act as a prime carer after the birth of the first of their babies, born after the first of July 2001, the tax they paid on their personal exertion income in the year or the year prior to the birth of the child. It will be repaid in full over five years if the parent stays out of the paid workforce, or in part if they return to work at a reduced income. This means that the refund is available for the first child born to a couple after the first of July 2001, whether or not they have other children. The tax refund will be paid after the end of each year as part of the parents’ assessment. It will be capped at $2,500 a year, if the baby is born during the year of assessment the benefit will be paid pro-rata based on the baby’s date of birth, but the benefit is payable for the full five year period.
The Coalition is aware that some families do not have the challenge of losing a substantial part of their income when perhaps the mother or father was not in paid work prior to the birth. But they still face increased expenditure on the birth of their first child. We will therefore under this plan guarantee a minimum payment of $500 for each full year for a parent who earns less than $25,000 in the relevant assessment year. The proposal will benefit about 240,000 families in the first year and as payments continue for five years after the baby is born the families covered by this proposal will peak at about 905,000 at the end of the five year period.
The Coalition also wishes to use the First Child Tax Refund to promote a wider spread of national savings and we will be releasing further proposals in our savings policy later in the campaign. Can I say ladies and gentlemen that when we looked at our position and our capacity in relation to taxation it was very clear that with the prospective budget position across the board income tax reductions would not have been plausible over the next few years. We have therefore decided to target that income tax relief at the very point in the experience of a couple’s lifecycle, that is the birth of the first child when the maximum economic pressure is being experienced, and I believe that this measure, quite new, quite different, quite innovative, this measure will go a long way towards providing significant financial relief for young couples in middle Australia wanting to start having a family. Thank you.
Can I now turn to an issue that is important to all of us and it has been something that has always helped to define what kind of society we are and that is the care of the elderly within our community. Once again, it’s something we have heard a lot about from the Labor Party over the last few years. But as I think I will demonstrate in a few moments the package that I am announcing in this election campaign goes a lot further than anything that has been proposed by the Australian Labor Party.
And let us first of all remind ourselves that when we came to office Labor had run down aged care homes by cutting capital funding by seventy-five per cent in the last four years to only $10 million a year. The Coalition in the time it’s been in government has increased spending in the sector by 68% and our other reforms are working. Building and care standards have improved and a capital stream of some $8.5 billion has been generated over the ten years to 2008.
In this campaign we are announcing a $416 million package of additional funding to provide more places, more capital funds and better care. As announced by the Deputy Prime Minister last week, the Coalition will provide $100 million over four years in additional capital funding for aged care homes in rural, remote and urban fringe areas of Australia. In addition, the Coalition will provide $200 million over four years to assist providers to meet the nursing and other staff costs of our higher standards.
We will also hold a review of the price and costing arrangements underpinning residential care substance. Under the Coalition’s policies, the total number of available aged care places will grow from about 168,000 today to almost 200,000 by June 2006. That’s an increase of 30,000. 21,000 of them are residential places and 9,000 are the very popular and sought after community care packages. And on that score can I remind you that when we came to office there were only 4,000 community care packages. They are the packages where the services are taken in the home so that the elderly person can stay in his or her home environment much longer. And we have dramatically increased that so that under our policies you will have a total of about 34,000.
In contrast to this, in contrast to this the Labor Party offers capital loans. They say they are not grants. Lower support for operating costs than our $200 million commitment and in reality a phantom 12,000 additional beds because there has been no provision made in their costings for ongoing funding.
In addition, recognising the critical need to attract more nurses into this sector and into other sectors, the Coalition will provide $28 million over four years to encourage more people to enter or re-enter aged care nursing, especially in rural and regional areas. This initiative will offer 250 scholarships worth up to $10,000 a year for students undertaking appropriate courses at rural and regional university campuses. Our new accreditation standards require continuous improvement in care standards and the Coalition will provide $20 million over four years to fund the training of up to 10,000 care staff in small aged care homes to help them meet these standards.
Ladies and gentlemen, that $416 million package by its size, its scope and its emphasis on the areas of real need in the aged care sector goes infinitely further than has the Labor Party in dealing with the challenges of this most important part of our social welfare responsibility.
One of the many things that I have been very proud to have been associated with as Prime Minister and in which I have taken a relentless personal interest is the ongoing campaign against the scourge of drugs within the Australian community. Our Tough on Drugs programme which has already led to the Commonwealth Government committing a record $516 million is the largest single initiative ever undertaken in this country to fight the drug programme. It fights it on three fronts. On education and law enforcement and rehabilitation. And there is solid evidence despite the negative doomsayers who want to run up the white flag and throw up in surrender and give up the fight. Over 5,800 kilograms of illicit drugs with a street value of over $2 billion has been seized. There has been a dramatic and pleasing reduction in the number of deaths from heroin overdoses and can I take the opportunity of thanking both Amanda Vanstone and Chris Ellison, my two parliamentary colleagues and also let me thank the magnificent men and women of the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Customs Service and the State police services for the work, the dangerous work but the crucial work that they have been doing on our behalf in this very important area.
Under Tough on Drugs we have already allocated $98 million over four years to the Australian Federal Police and $70 million for the Customs Service, $60 million to 133 community based treatment programmes to rural and regional Australia, $27 million under the National School Drug Education strategy and $110 million to provide, with the states a national system of diverting drug users into compulsory expert assessment and onto education and treatment as an alternative to being caught up in the criminal justice system.
Today I am announcing a $109 million package to expand the Tough on Drugs strategy further with particular emphasis on more funds for community treatment and prevention. We will invest a further $60 million over four years in the non-government organisations treatment grants programme. In allocating funds from this new commitment we will continue to take advice from Major Watters of the Salvation Army and the Australian National Council on Drugs. We will provide another $14 million to the community partnerships and in an important new initiative we will also spend $28 million over four years to develop and introduce retractable needle and syringe technology into Australia. Evidence suggests that this will reduce the risk of needlestick injuries that can transmit blood borne viruses. Australian industry will also benefit from the research and development that this initiative will generate and I daresay many parents of young children whose great fear when their children are out playing in the park or on the beach are needles, will welcome this initiative very warmly. We will also provide another $4.7 million to expand the National Heroin Signature programme to track the origins of cocaine and amphetamines. And we will provide an additional million dollars to the Croc Festivals which do such wonderful work in building self-esteem, confidence and shared enterprise and those festivals of course support indigenous communities.
And finally, unlike the Labor Party we will oppose and give no aid and comfort of any kind to either heroin trials or heroin injecting rooms.
I think it is fair to say ladies and gentlemen, that despite the efforts of so many thousands of men and women in the police services of the Australian states, law and order, the increasing vulnerability that people feel in relation to possible personal injury or theft of property and the sense that Australia is not quite as safe as it was to live in a generation ago, although it is still infinitely better and safer than any other country in the world, I think that is a prevalent view within the Australian community. The simple answer for a federal government of course is to say, well that’s just a matter for the states. And can I acknowledge that the constitution does give the power of day to day policing to the states. Commonwealth law enforcement and security activities are really at a national and international level. But it’s got to be borne in mind that international crime and terrorist groups have no regard to state or national borders, yet their activities now and can in the future affect all Australians and our law enforcement agencies must be able to act quickly and powerfully when responding to organised crime and terrorism.
Under the Coalition the Australian Federal Police has had its role massively enhanced, it’s been given for the first time in its history the resources to do the job of a true national police force. And later in the campaign we’ll be announcing further measures to significantly strengthen the capacity of the Australian Federal Police.
But can I say whilst acknowledging the cooperation that does exist between federal and state agencies, I believe that the current environment calls for far greater coordination and a much clearer definition of the role of the Commonwealth in the area of day to day law enforcement. And also I am not satisfied as prime minister that our cooperative arrangements and institutions work as effectively for the national interests as they might.
Therefore if I am re-elected I intend to call a special summit of state and territory leaders to develop a new national framework to focus on international crime and terrorism, the reformation or replacement if necessary of the National Crime Authority, and also importantly a reference of constitutional power to the Commonwealth over these areas of law enforcement. Some further details of that initiative will be released during the campaign.
So ladies and gentlemen they are some of the new plans we have for Australia’s future. They build on the other things that were announced over the past 12 months that will take effect over the next few years. But I now want to bring my remarks very much to the context of this election campaign. I said in Perth during the week that this campaign and all the individual things that are being said in it, are being fought against the background of two overriding issues. They are the issue of national security and the issue of economic management. We are as you all know in a new and dangerous part of the world’s history. The tragic events of the 11th of September have changed our lives, they have caused us to take pause and think about the values we hold in common with the American people and free people around the world. That was an attack on Australia as much as it was an attack on the United States.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It not only claimed the lives of Australians but it assaulted the very values that we hold dear and that we take for granted. So therefore a military response and wise diplomacy and a steady hand on the helm are needed to guide Australia through those very difficult circumstances. National security is therefore about a proper response to terrorism. It’s also about having a far sighted, strong, well thought out defence policy. It is also about having an uncompromising view about the fundamental right of this country to protect its borders. It’s about this nation saying to the world we are a generous open hearted people taking more refugees on a per capita basis than any nation except Canada, we have a proud record of welcoming people from 140 different nations. But we will decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come. And can I say on this point what a fantastic job Philip Ruddock has done for Australia.
What a contrast with the Labor Party. The morning, well the day I made the announcement that we had to board the motor vessel Tampa I was told by the Leader of the Opposition that the last thing I wanted or Australia needed was a negative carping opposition. But in four and a half hours he was accusing me of engaging in wedge politics and fanning Hansonism. He voted against the Border Protection Bill, he ultimately voted for it although it covered a wider area and while the debate was going on in the Senate many of his colleagues were darkly muttering if we win the election we’ll change it. We have had a single irrevocable view on this, and that is that we will defend our borders and we’ll decide who comes to this country. But we’ll do that within the framework of the decency for which Australians have always been renowned.
I want to place on record my gratitude as I did when I spoke to some of them in Western Australia earlier this week, my gratitude to the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy who have not only been protecting our borders but saving lives in the process of doing it. Now that’s the face of Australia to the world. We will be compassionate, we will save lives, we will care for people but we will decide and nobody else who comes to this country.
And then there is the issue of economic management. You can promise, you can express a hope, you can speculate, you can plan, you can do anything you like in any area be it health, education, roads, anything you like, but unless you have a strong growing economy you do not have the capacity to deliver. The foundation of the delivery of all of our aspirations in these important social welfare and human services area is a strong and growing economy. If you don’t start with that you can’t even get to the top of the hill in restoring and adding to human dignity. Unless you have as your launching pad a strong growing economy you can never realise these wonderful dreams. In that area I can look back over five and a half years and say what a difference the Coalition has made during that five and a half year period. And particularly what a difference it’s made having Peter Costello as Treasurer of Australia. It’s not an easy job, I know, I once had it. But it’s such a responsible job and I can’t think of anybody in the time that I’ve been in public life who’s done it better than Peter has done and I congratulate him for it very warmly.
But Peter and John Fahey, whose role as Finance Minister I warmly acknowledge as well, can I say both of you, working with your colleagues, have delivered to this country a level and a breadth of economic strength that give me hope in these challenging times ahead. Just think where we would now be if we had not repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of government debt that we inherited. Think where we might be now if we were still struggling with 17% interest rates, if we were still struggling with 8%, or 9% or 10% unemployment, think where we would now be if we had not reformed Australia’s taxation system.
And when you think of that think of the way the Labor Party behaved towards our efforts to reform the Australian economy. I have never forgotten that when I was in Opposition, I never forget that - no intention of going back to it either! But the Labor Party put up some good ideas and they did occasionally in relation to economic change. We supported it. We supported foreign banks being let into Australia; we supported tariff reform; we supported, after Beazley said he wasn’t going to do it and then decided he wanted to do it, sounds like something else, the privatisation of the Commonwealth Bank. In other words we behaved in a consistent fashion. By contrast at every turn the Labor Party not only refused to accept responsibility for the damage it had done but it endeavoured to frustrate and to stop our economic reform. And they not only left us with a $96 billion government debt, they tried to stop us paying it back. Now that is a double political and economic crime.
But I’ll always be proud of the fact that this Government had the courage to tackle the two great areas of reform that were needed when we came into government. This country needed workplace relations reform. And can I say to you my friends that if we were to lose this election I’d grieve over a lot of things but the one thing I would grieve over most would be what would happen to the industrial relations reform because as surely as night will follow day if Labor wins federally you will have coast to coast Labor government, there will be an enormous return of union domination of the political affairs of Australia. All of our workplace relations reforms will go by the board; the secondary boycott protections will be ripped out of the Trade Practices Act; no ticket no start on building sites will come all around Australia and not just in Western Australia; Australian workplace agreements will be abolished; union bosses will be allowed to barge into small businesses whether or not they’re welcome or any of the members of the workforce belong to them. In other words ladies and gentlemen, the workplace relations reforms of the last five and a half years that have delivered such massive gains in productivity such that I can say as a Liberal Prime Minister of Australia in the last five and a half years real incomes for Australian workers have risen by 9%, yet in the 13 years of Labor they rose by only 2.3%.
We had the guts to do that and may I record my great admiration to Peter Reith for the immense courage that he displayed in April and May of 1998 in that historic fight to reform the Australian waterfront. They said it could not be done but it was. So ladies and gentlemen they said that couldn’t be done. The crane rates were then 16.9, the container rates 16.9 an hour. They are now a fantastically competitive 27. And that is something that for a generation we were told by the business community of Australia that sooner or later would need to be confronted.
Taxation reform of course has been more in people’s minds in recent years. It was difficult but it was necessary. I went to the Australian people in 1998, I stood on this equivalent platform in Parramatta in 1998, and I asked to be judged according to whether or not the Australian people wanted taxation reform. They voted in favour of it. I’m not saying that everybody loves it, not to say that now, but deep down people knew that this was necessary. And deep down I believe out there all around our country people are saying well we may not have liked it but we did need to have it and thank goodness Howard and Costello had the courage to do it.
Because it has made a difference. We’ve had a fantastic exporting year and that’s because those exports are cheaper. We’ve looked after low income families. We’ve looked after people on fixed incomes. We’ve protected the position of the pensioners. The CPI affect has come and gone exactly as we predicted. There were some difficulties for small business in relation to transition. I acknowledge that and I thank the small business community of Australia for its patience and understanding in getting used to the new system. But I would say to them that whatever concerns you may have had about implementation of the new taxation system just remember those up to 20% interest rates when Mr Keating and Mr Hawke were Prime Minister. Just remember the union thuggery that abounded in many of your businesses. Remember the efforts that we have made to reform the unfair dismissal laws and just imagine how those changes will be rolled back if Labor wins. And just remember that the company tax rate under tax reform has fallen from 36 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar and the capital gains tax has been halved for individuals.
So ladies and gentlemen, we do have a justifiably proud record in the area of economic management. There can be no doubt that going back to Labor at this crucial period of time in Australia’s economic history will put at risk so much of what we have achieved over the past few years. They were bad economic managers. They now claim to be born again believers in budget surpluses. Once again I ask you to remember what they did and don’t listen to what they say. They left us with an horrendous debt legacy, they drove interest rates to unconscionable heights, they were insensitive to the plight of the average worker through levels of unemployment. By contrast we’ve reduced interest rates, despite their obstruction we’ve paid back debt, we’ve generated 830,000 more jobs, we have a wonderful story to tell, and that is the foundation of the strength of the Australian economy in the years ahead.
My friends, the last five and a half years has been an occasion of immense privilege and immense opportunity for me and for the members of my team. And it has been and it always will be a team. It’s a group of men and women beholden to no one interest group in Australia.
I remember when I stood in the then Wentworth Hotel in March of 1996 on the evening that we won the election and I pledged to give my all to work for the people of Australia and I promised then that I would govern for everyone. I said then that it was a proud boast of the leader of the Liberal Party that he was not owned by any section of the Australian community and that remains the case now. We are believers in profitable businesses but we are not owned by business. We are believers that the great mainstream of the Australian community holds within its hands the capacity to achieve even greater results in the years ahead.
I started by saying that this was the best country in the world in which to live and I’ve outlined some of the plans we have to make it even a better place in which to live. Although I’ve been in politics now for a number of years I have never felt a greater sense of dedication, enthusiasm and energetic commitment to the task that lies ahead. We do face unusual difficulties at the present time. They will test me if I am re-elected, they will test my colleagues, they will test the Australian people.
But I am comforted by two great things. I’m comforted by the fact that we have achieved an internal economic and social strength that enables us to face the future with conviction and strength. But I’m also comforted by something even more powerful than that and that is the spirit of the Australian people. The thing that drives me most in public life is the spirit of the Australian people. Their great capacity to reach out to each other and work together when there is a common challenge, their essential decency and their openness, their willingness to have a go, their willingness to look after those in the community who are genuinely in need of help but equally to require of everyone that they do their bit for the common good. And I have an unshakeable belief that we will see our way through as a nation these current great difficulties. We’ll see it through because of our spirit.
I want to be part of that seeing through. I want to lead this country in these very difficult and dangerous times because I believe my instincts, my energy, my experience, my successes to date, and my sheer commitment to the land I love best equip me for that job.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Teresa. Councillor Bolton, my many parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Particularly I acknowledge the presence of Senator Chris Ellison, the Minister for Customs and Justice.
Last Sunday I announced in the broad the program that the Government would implement if it were returned to office on the 10th of November. I necessarily focused on Sunday on issues that were important to Australian families of all ages, not only baby bonuses, but also proposals that were of relevance to people in older age cohorts of the Australian community. And we have presented a plan for the next three years that covers the whole spectrum of the responsibilities of the federal government.
Underpinning everything we hope to do if we are re-elected are two broad capacities. The first of those is the national security of this country and national security is made up of a number of things. It’s made up of the capability of our defence forces; it’s made up of the effectiveness of our international relations; it comprises the effectiveness of our border protection capability; and together all of those things deliver national security.
The other broad area which really underpins everything we hope to do is of course the quality of our economic management. You can promise the earth in areas such as health and education but unless you deliver a strong economy you can’t deliver the earth. And interestingly enough on Sunday I unveiled a comprehensive policy in the area of aged care, an issue that the Labor Party has talked about incessantly over the last three years, which was in every respect an infinitely more generous, comprehensive and better policy in that crucial area than that offered by the Australian Labor Party. And I know that policy will be very important to the people of Petrie and very important to people in many parts of Australia.
But today having visited the regional headquarters of the Australian Federal Police in Brisbane I’ve come here to Petrie to make a number of announcements which relate to the federal government’s responsibilities in the area of law enforcement. Having safe, secure communities is the first legitimate requirement of citizens in a free society. We all probably suspect with good reason that life isn’t quite as free and easy and quite as safe and quite as secure as it used to be. That old Australian dream that you could sleep with your door open at night is not quite the reality for many people that it once was. It seems to be the unavoidable way of many modern societies. But we should never adopt the attitude of surrender, we should never run up the white flag in relation to crime, and we certainly shouldn’t run up the white flag in relation to fighting the scourge of drug abuse within the Australian community.
One of the things I made very clear on Sunday was that unlike Mr Beazley, while ever I am Prime Minister of this country there will be no heroin trials and there’ll be no heroin injecting rooms with any assistance at all from the Commonwealth government.
But ladies and gentlemen ongoing campaigning against crime and ongoing policing is of course essentially the responsibility of state police services. In difficult circumstances they do an extraordinarily fine job and I want to as I did at the Federal Police headquarters in Brisbane I want to commend all of the men and women of the police services of Australia for the tremendous job that they do in very difficult circumstances. It’s a thankless job. It has many unpleasant aspects and sometimes unreasonable demands are made of our police and I’ve always respected very warmly the contribution that they make to our community.
There are many forms of crime within the Australian community. Increasingly we have to grapple in our local communities with sophisticated criminal syndicates which operate without regard to international borders let alone any regard at all to state borders within the Commonwealth of Australia. And the plan that I’m releasing today as part of our law and order policy if I can put it that way is to act both at the community level and also to attack the criminal syndicates and the potential crimes of terrorists, a new and very real threat to our community.
Before announcing some new initiatives can I remind you that we have delivered in full on the promises we made in 1998 in this area. We promised $50 million for Crimtrac which is an automated fingerprint identification system; a DNA database; national firearms licensing and registration system. I decided to commit that money to Crimtrac as a result of representations personally made to me by a number of the police commissioners of the various states of Australia. Now that is a Federal Government initiative which has given to the police services of Australia a hitherto unrivalled capacity to access fingerprint data and DNA databases.
We’ve also embarked upon a national crime prevention program involving early intervention and crime prevention initiatives, particularly at a local level and very importantly we’ve had a $50 million partnership program against the problem of domestic violence. An issue that no community should be unwilling to talk about, an issue that remains at the forefront of my concerns. Domestic violence is an unacceptable crime wherever it occurs and it’s something that a Coalition government should be very steadfast in opposing.
We have provided significant additional resources to the Australian Federal Police and under our stewardship over the last five and a half years, the role, the morale, the standing, the reach, the effectiveness of the Australian Federal Police has been dramatically expanded.
We have seen $315 million in additional funding going to the Australian Federal Police since we came to office and we are now starting to see the results. We have had greater drug seizures. That has had an impact. There are fewer heroin deaths in Australia now than there were two years ago. You don’t hear that talked about very much because it doesn’t suit the social and political agenda of many commentators in Australia to acknowledge that we might in fact be making progress on that front. Theirs is a counsel of surrender and despair on this issue, whereas ours is a steadfast belief that if you apply the resources and you make a commitment you can make a difference.
We’ve had magnificent results because we’ve enhanced cooperation with overseas governments. There’s been great cooperation between the Federal Police and the Customs Services and there’s been great cooperation between the Federal Police and the State Polices of the various states of Australia.
Now amongst the initiatives that I’m announcing today is a proposal that if I am re-elected as Prime Minister, and the Government is returned on the 10th of November, one of the very first things I will do is put in train the convening of a special conference of Premiers and Chief Ministers of the States to develop a new cooperative framework under which trans-national crime and terrorism can be dealt with by law enforcement at a national level. Whilst there is a high level of cooperation I am not satisfied it is working as effectively, as effectively, as it might and I’m not satisfied that all of the responsibilities of the Federal Government are sufficiently clearly defined and have sufficient amplitude to respond at a national level to crime and terrorism, which of course do not respect international borders, let alone State borders within Australia.
I believe that the structure of the National Crime Authority is too cumbersome for these challenging times and I hold open the possibility of that body being either restructured or absorbed into other arrangements.
I want to announce today that we are going to commit additional resources of $135 million over four years to fund comprehensive law enforcement initiatives. This will include $47 million of new funding to expand the successful law enforcement cooperation program and this importantly enhances Federal Police cooperation with overseas law enforcement agencies. In the fight against the drug menace nothing is more important than having a capacity overseas to identify a potential threat by drugs to this country. Far better to intercept it at its source in another country than to devote the resources when it actually arrives here. And the placement of Australian Federal Police and other agencies, personnel overseas, has played a major part in the improvement of this country’s capacity to fight the drug menace.
We’re going to provide a similar amount of $47 million of new funding over three years to double the Australian Federal Police’s mobile strike team capacity to 200. And they’ll be deployed around Australia to respond to serious crimes at short notice, including illicit drug trafficking, people smuggling, major fraud, terrorism and politically motivated violence.
We’re going to provide $21.5 million to expand the Australian Federal Police Axiom undercover policing program that will enable the AFP to conduct more effective targeted operations into serious and organised criminal activities. We’re also going to provide $7.2 million of new funding to boost the rapid response capabilities of the AFP. Two new AFP remote command centres, complete with fully operational telecommunications, computer and intelligence facilities and a mobile forensic laboratory capable of being deployed anywhere in Australia or overseas.
There’ll be $9.5 million of new funding to upgrade the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence Alert database and this will provide law enforcement with an intelligence forecast capacity to identify and then aggressively target existing and emerging criminal activities. And also $1.6 million to expand the research, forensic science and development capabilities of the Australian Federal Police.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And finally as a recognition of the extraordinary good job done by the National Crime Stoppers Network, we’re also going to provide $1 million to support the highly successful National Crime Stoppers Network in consultation with each board of directors of that network around Australia.
We’re going to expand our Crimtrac initiative to implement very importantly a National Stolen Motor Vehicle Register as part of a comprehensive plan to tackle motor vehicle theft. And we’re going to implement legislation for the return of the proceeds of crime to ensure that the illgotten gains seized from criminals is invested in the fight against crime and into supporting drug treatment and diversion programs for drug addicts.
Ladies and gentlemen that represents a commitment as I said of an additional $135 million to support in the main the law enforcement activities of the Australian Federal Police, but many of the benefits of those commitments will flow through to the State Police Services of Australia. Cooperation between the State and Federal Police Services is always essential and I again say to all of you that I take the opportunity of recording my gratitude, I hope on behalf of all Australians, to the men and women of the police services of this country at a State or at a Federal level, they put their lives on the line, they go often through great danger.
There is from time to time a tragic loss of life in police work, all in the interest of providing us with a safer community. They don’t always get the expressions of gratitude they deserve and the quality of their work is not always as widely respected within the Australian community as it should be. And I want to take this opportunity as Prime Minister to make it very plain that I am a great admirer of the work of the police in this country. They are essential for the safety of the community in which we live and they are essential to provide all of us a greater sense of security and a greater sense of safety.
And having made that announcement could I just say one or two other things if I may. First of all Teresa can I say what a great pleasure it is to visit your electorate and could I say to all of you what a fantastic local member you have in this person. Can I say to you those of you who want to see her return on Saturday week keep working very hard. Don’t let up, don’t believe any newspaper headlines about what the result is likely to be, work very, very hard because this is one of those seats that’s always tough and if you want this magnificent local Federal Member return you work damn hard over the next ten days to ensure that it’s going to happen.
And the other thing I say ladies and gentlemen is it is important that all of us understand some of the changed circumstances in which our country now finds itself. We do need to strengthen all aspects of our national security, but we also need to have a sense that beyond some of the concern that we now have there are some fundamental strengths about Australian society that will see us through that. We have of course the great spirit of the Australian people. The willingness of Australians to work together against a common threat is absolutely unrivalled anywhere in the world and that spirit and that cooperative attitude will sustain us through any challenge and I think that the other thing that we can draw comfort from is that our economic circumstances are stronger and better than those of most other countries. And I ask the rhetorical question on many occasions, where would this country now be, facing the difficulties we do, if we hadn’t paid off about $58 billion of that $96 billion of debt we inherited five and a half years ago. Where would we now be if we hadn’t reformed the Australian Taxation system? Where would we now be if we had 17 or 20 per cent interest rates which were a common feature of life only a few years ago? How would people be able to pay off their mortgages, they’d be paying at least $350 a month more for their average mortgage than what they are paying now? How would you run a small business again in that kind of economic environment? How would you if you were a farmer and the rural community remains incredibly important to this country where would you be in relation to the bill rates that many of the Australian farmers had to pay?
So the message is yes we have new and different and unexpected challenges but we are better able, better prepared, in better shape and more protected in responding to those challenges. Now we can’t put that at risk. When the Labor Party was last in office they were appalling economic managers. I ask you again on the question of economic management, don’t listen to what they say, remember what they did. And it’s only five and a half years since they had a go and it was a pretty horrific go. We were left with all of those economic problems. We were left with an unreformed taxation system. We were left with a union dominated industrial relations system and if we lose on the 10th of November, if we lose, you’ll have a Federal Labor government and you’ll have Labor governments in every State of Australia except South Australia and they are circumstances to deliver to the bosses of the ACTU an unrivalled degree of power over the Industrials Relations Workplace Relations laws of this country and that would be bad news for small business, it’ll be bad news for the productivity of this country. So there are many reasons and I only touched on a few of them why if you want this lady back work very, very hard. I can’t be certain of being Prime Minister again after the 10th of November unless we win seats like Petrie. It is absolutely crucial. There’s no local option. You can’t say well I’ll have a bit here, and a bit there, it’s either one thing or the other. If you want a Howard Liberal Government and you want the magnificent four elected to the Senate and you want this lady elected to Petrie and the House of Representatives, you’ve got to get behind her. She’s done a great job for you and I’m delighted to be associated with her in her electorate. I wish her well and I think you’ll be delivering a good representative for your constituency if you return her again.
Thank you very much for coming.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
All over Australia, all over the world today, our countrymen and women are
gathering - drawn together almost by instinct, by a great silent summons to repay
a debt to the past. Each year the numbers of us grow. Each year, more and more
young Australians hear the call, though far removed, in time and circumstance, from
those they seek to honour.


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Colin for the warm words of welcome. To you and to Max Trenorden, the newly elected Leader of the National Party in Western Australia, Chris Ellison the Minister for Customs and Justice in the Federal Parliament, my other federal and state parliamentary colleagues and Peter Middleton the Chairman of the 500 Club, ladies and gentlemen. 
I am both encouraged and delighted at the large turnout today here in Perth because it does give me an opportunity to talk very directly to a cross-section of the business community here in Western Australia about the political and economic condition as I see it at the moment. Some of the political challenges that face the Federal Coalition over the remainder of the year and some things that are of particular relevance to an audience in Western Australia. 
Can I start by saying to my state colleagues, here in Western Australia that I regretted very much the defeat of the Court Government. I thought it was a good government that provided solid conditions for economic growth here in Western Australia. It worked very hard with the Federal Coalition Government after 1996 to bring about more intelligent native title laws. Unfortunately we have been frustrated in that goal by the stubborn anti-development attitudes of The Australian Democrats, fanned by the Western Australian resident leader of the federal parliamentary Labor Party, Mr Beazley. And the combined attitude of the Australian Democrats and the Beazley federal Opposition in the Senate has done untold damage to the resource and pastoral industries of Western Australia and there's no point in mincing words about that. I was in Kalgoorlie yesterday and the lack of commitment of dollars to prospecting because of the continuing uncertainties of native title is not something that any of us on our side of politics should tire of talking about because it remains a very significant barrier to the development of which you spoke Colin which is so important not only to Western Australia but also to the entire nation.
We live at present, to vary the old Chinese proverb, we live in challenging and interesting economic times. There is no doubt that there is a degree of turbulence on world financial markets. There has been an economic slowdown in the United States which came at unexpected speed, evidenced by the decision of Dr Greenspan, the Chairman of the Fed to cut interest rates for the first time in January. The economic indicators coming out of the United States remain contradictory, they are good one day, they are indifferent the next. There is undoubtedly a lot more nervousness in relation to tech stocks and obviously some of the exuberance of which Dr Greenspan spoke disapprovingly last year, some of that exuberance has disappeared. As to how all of that will work out on the rest of the world, I can't be certain, indeed nobody can. The Japanese economy remains very sluggish and some of the improvement that has been apparent in economies in Asia generally over the past few months some of that is now slowing down, although economic growth in many of the European countries remains quite strong.
So I have to tell you that the picture is very mixed. You probably concluded that from your own study and your own reading of the press on economic conditions around the world. They are mixed and there's a degree of turbulence and there is a degree of uncertainty. One of the consequences of that has been the flight to quality and strength that always happens on the currency markets when you have a degree of international turbulence and that has occurred in relation to the American dollar and that remains the major reason why the Australian currency is undervalued at the present time. I think it's very important at a time like this, more important than usually to keep a sense of perspective. I don't believe in ignoring reality, I don't believe as prime minister in coming to an audience like this and saying 'well you know everything, every where in the world is absolutely marvellous, don't worry, nothing bad is going to occur and everything is going to be rosy' - that is plainly ridiculous. 
But I think it's also important to try and keep a sense of perspective and a sense of balance about the economic conditions in the world and the economic situation of Australia. We do have very strong economic fundamentals, now you've heard me say that before and you've heard Peter Costello say it before, but it's not a cliche, it's a reality. The last time we had a recession in this country that recession was preceded by a sustained period of crushingly high interest rates. It was almost a necessary precondition to that recession. The former Government and the former banking authorities in this country used high interest rates as an attempt to control what they thought were some of the excesses of the economy and the weakness of our current account. And the effect of that was when interest rates went to 17 and 18% for homebuyers and for many farmers, bill rates of 22 and 23%, the effect of that of course was to crush the life out of the economy. 
Now we are living at the present time with historically low interest rates. Now there are good reasons for that, inflation is much lower than it was and I think the monetary authorities around the world have got more clever at managing the variations in interest rates levels. But I think it's important when you hear people talking down the economy and there's no shortage of people around who are willing to do that, to bear in mind that to talk of a recession against the backdrop of the sort of interest rate levels we have at the present time is plainly ridiculous and something that should be firmly discouraged. We also have a much stronger fiscal position in the Federal Budget than we had the last time we were hit by a recession. We have historically a very strong government debt position. The accumulated federal government debt is only 6.4% of the annual wealth that the Australian economy generates each year, by comparison in Japan it's 130%, in the United States it's about 40% and the OECD average is in the order of 45%. We've paid off about $50 billion of the federal government debt that we inherited in 1996 against the fierce opposition, at virtually every turn I might add, of our political opponents. But I think it's important because if you start from a strong position as far as national debt it concerned you don't need to run excessive surpluses. We're going to have a balance in our Budget in May, we're not going back into deficit. But you don't need to run a big surplus particularly if you have only 6.4% of GDP as government debt. So once again it's a question of keeping things in perspective.
And we've also achieved higher productivity in our economy. One of the things that I'm exceptionally pleased about and very pleased when I hear our opponents talking about having a fairer industrial relations system and I'm going to return to industrial relations in a big way in a moment. But when I hear people talking about a fairer industrial relations system it is almost as if Rip van Winkle-like they have ignored what's occurred over the last five years. Because one of things we have actually been able to do in this country over the last five years is to boost the after-tax incomes of Australian workers in a quite substantial way. And we've done that through three devices. We've seen a lift in productivity and that means you can run nominal wage increases at a fairly good level without it becoming inflationary because your productivity is improving. And we've actually seen an improvement in the wages of workers over the last five years at a much faster rate than occurred over the thirteen years of the Labor Government and one of the ironies of economic performance in this country is that that the allegedly employers' party, the Liberal Party has in fact delivered higher real wages for workers than the allegedly workers' party, the Australian Labor Party did during the previous thirteen years. And I won't bore you with the statistics, but let me assure you they are there to back up that claim.
On top of that you have seen very significant reductions in mortgage interest rates. And for people on modest incomes with families paying off a home still remains the biggest single financial commitment. And paying off a home is on average $300 a month less than it was five years ago and that is very significant. Very significant indeed. 
Now we've had in this country until a few weeks ago, we'd had quarter after quarter of successive economic growth and then in December the economy statistically went into reverse and we had a contraction of 0.6% of GDP. Now that wasn't in the fairly irresponsible words of the headline writer of the Sydney Morning Herald evidence that Australia had hit the wall, it was simply evidence of the fact that for a combination of transitional reasons and one-off factors the economy did go into reverse in the December quarter. It was overwhelmingly, not entirely but it was overwhelmingly due to the impact of the transitional affect of the GST on the housing sector. We knew that there would be a transitional impact because there was a lot of housing activity dragged forward before the 1st of July and we knew that once that happened that after the 1st of July it would slow down. It slowed down a lot more sharply than many, not all, some in the housing industry had predicted it would fall down that sharply, I should acknowledge that, but certainly more sharply than our official advice suggested and that contributed mightily to the contraction in December. I think high petrol prices played a part. I think the distorting effects on sections of the economy of the Olympic Games also played a part and obviously some people felt the fluctuations in the currency were unsettling to confidence and may also have played a part. Our view is that the housing sector will rebound very strongly through a combination of the doubling of the First Homeowners' Grant for new dwellings and also the significant reductions in interest rates, 1.25% which have occurred over the past few weeks. And we believe the combination of those will produce a very strong and buoyant housing sector in some months' time. 
Now I've taken a few moments to try and put into perspective what I think has happened and what I'm saying to you is that I think the economy is fundamentally very sound. It has had a setback in the December quarter, there's no point in ignoring that but there are reasons for it and there's no reason at all why the long-term momentum of economic growth shouldn't be regained and indeed go on for a significant period of time because if you have a sound fiscal position in the federal budget you have low inflation and you have low interest rates, and you otherwise have a beckoning economic climate there is no reason why high levels of investment should not be generated. Bearing in mind always of course that we live in a global economy and what happens in other parts of the world particularly the United States will have an impact.
Now much of the economic debate over the past few months has of course been concentrated on the introduction of the new taxation system. Introducing a new taxation system was a mammoth undertaking. We needed tax reform in this country. For twenty-five years politicians on both sides of the house in Canberra have known in their hearts that we've needed to reform the tax system. I've known that for a long time, Bob Hawke knew it, Paul Keating knew it, Kim Beazley knew it and so the list goes on. Now some aspects of it people didn't like. If I had my time over again I wouldn't have essentially altered anything that I endeavoured to do. I don't have any regrets about taxation reform and I believe very passionately that it will deliver long-term benefits to the Australian economy. I think you do need a better taxation system to have a pro-development environment because if you have a more pro-competitive taxation system you will encourage more investment. There were inevitably going to be some implementation challenges and I am conscious that there has been some burdens place upon small business in particular I adjusting to the new system. And we have as a government tried to respond as rapidly as possible to the concerns that people have expressed about the Business Activity Statement, the IAS and other aspects of the implementation of the new system.   
But it has been the biggest systemic economic change that this country's probably had since World War II and it would have been truly astonishing if something like that had not involved some upheaval, some difficulties and some challenges. But what was the alternative? The alternative was to sit on your hands and do absolutely nothing. And when you get into government and when you become a prime minister you've really got two alternatives, you've got Plan A or Plan B. Plan A is to actually try and do something to improve the economic and social condition of the country. Plan B is to swan around in the white car and think isn't it terrific being prime minister, I'll go out of my way not to offend anybody, I'll smile at everybody, I'll say yes to every request and I'll make whoopee for a few years and to hell with the consequences when I'm defeated. I mean that, they are really the two plans that you have. And I made a promise to myself and my colleagues and I collectively made promises to each other that having finally got there after thirteen years, pretty frustrating years in Opposition. And having on earlier occasions perhaps in government been accused of not using a mandate when we controlled both Houses of Parliament - God what an idyllic situation that would be now - I resolved that what we were going to do was to try and make a difference, to try and grab hold of the reins and with the power and authority we had in the Lower House and whatever persuasion we could exercise in the Upper House, to try and make a difference. 
And one of the things of course we set out to do after the last election having won a mandate on it was to reform the tax system. And we should remind ourselves of the reasons why we set out to change it. To start with we had a very old-fashioned indirect tax system, multiple rate wholesale tax system fell on some people not on others, very complicated, very old fashioned, very cumbersome, I don't think anybody in this room would really like to go back to it. We also needed to reform Commonwealth/State relations. I'd grown tired as both a prime minister and a treasurer of endless arguments with states about a growth tax and for the first time since the Commonwealth assumed uniform tax powers as a war time measure in 1942 we now have a revenue-sharing arrangement whereby the states will get a growing source of revenue to fund the schools, the hospitals, the police, the roads and all the other public services that state governments need to provide. And this represents a revolution in Commonwealth/State financial relations, it will take several years before Western Australia is better off under this system than it is under the existing arrangement, but once it becomes better off the gains grow very significantly. Queensland will begin to be better off I think the year after next and I can assure you that notwithstanding what some of the Labor premiers have said about the new taxation system, they fell over themselves to sign the interstate agreement with me which guaranteed them the tax revenue. And there are no votes for rollback amongst state Labor premiers because rolling back means reducing their revenue and I remind you again that every dollar of the GST goes to the states, none of it comes to us. Every single dollar. And when you're talking about rolling back, you're rolling back the revenue that will go to the states. 
It was of course designed to take some of the load off high marginal tax rates for middle income earners. We didn't go as far on that as we would have liked to because of the obstruction of the Senate which cut the proposal to bring the top marginal rate in at $75,000 rather than the level that was imposed by the Senate of $60,000. On the 1st of July this year the company tax rate will fall from 34 cents in the dollar to 30 cents in the dollar and we've effectively halved capital gains tax for individuals. So it's important in the debate about the administrative implementation of the tax system for people to remember what the fundamental reasons driving tax reform really were. And I've reprised some of those reasons. 
But it wasn't only in tax that we set out to make major change, and if I were asked what was the area of economic change that I think in a lasting sense has probably been as important as tax or perhaps even arguably more important I would say industrial relations. As many of you know in Opposition I campaigned very strongly for industrial relations reform. I think one of the great achievements in this state of the Court Government were the changes brought in in the area of industrial relations. Changes that closely mirrored our policy at a federal level and they are changes that have reduced the unreasonable reach of union power and they're changes that have helped boost the productivity of individual workplaces. Those changes have helped deliver the productivity of which I spoke earlier. And those changes have brought about I think a very significant transformation of workplaces within this country. And we should keep reminding ourselves that only 25% of the workforce of Australia now belongs to a trade union. And the enrolment level in the private sector has fallen slightly below 20%. Now, only one in five workers in the private sector of the Australian economy now belong to trade unions. And when you look at it from that point of view it is truly astonishing to find the level of ideological commitment that's still retained by the Labor Party to the role of the trade union movement within our society. 
I have noticed in Western Australia that already in the few weeks that the new Government has been in office the re-emergence of the 'no ticket, no start' rule on construction sites and the general return of the influence of trade unions into the economy of this state. I have to say to you that it will get much, much worse if a federal Labor government is elected. Bear in mind that if the federal Labor Party wins at the end of this year you will have a Labor government in Canberra and you will have a Labor government in five of the six states of Australia. You will have an almost unprecedented level of Labor government and therefore an unprecedented opportunity for trade unions to impose their unreasonable views in relation to industrial relations. Now I don't argue that there is no role for the trade union movement in our society nor do I argue and in fact as prime minister I have led a government that's delivered better wage outcomes for the workers of this country than did our political opponents. But what I do argue against and what I argue very strongly is that it would be absolutely tragic for this country's economic future if the industrial relations gains of the last five or ten years, both at a state and federal level, were rolled back. 
And that is exactly, I swear to you is what is going to happen if we have a change of government at a federal level. Don't think for a moment that this government, this Labor Party in government would be less beholden to the trade union movement than previous Labor governments, that will not be the case. The level of former union official membership of the front bench of the federal Labor Party is higher than what it was in earlier years. And there's a natural career path progression from president of the ACTU through to a senior position on the Labor Party frontbench. You will see a repeal of Australian workplace agreements, you will see a reimposition of compulsory unionism, you will see a destruction of the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act and you'll see a combined return of union muscle and union power at both a state and federal level if you get the combination of the two.
Now some of you may say it's alarmist. Can I tell you it's not. I think it's very important in politics to have both a positive and a negative message. I don't support those political leaders and those political parties whose whole stock in trade is to run negative message about their opponents, but I think if you have been an active government as we have been for five years, if you've taken political risks as we have to achieve long term national interest outcomes, if you've been prepared to have a go to implement difficult policy, and you have got a fair degree of that accepted by the Australian people, I think you have a both a moral and a political right to define the negative aspects of your political opponents.
Colin is right. This election is going to very hard for us to win. It's always hard for us to win a third term but there's a lot at stake. There has been a cultural change in the attitude of people towards economic growth and economic activity in Australia over the last five years. We have been a strong, high growth economy. We have generated hundreds of thousands of jobs. We are seen around the world as being an economy with a government that's been prepared to implement long term valuable reforms. We don't need a government that will really just try and wind a lot of those reforms and a lot of those changes back. Now, it is true that you need, in appealing to the broad electorate, you do need to talk about things other than economics, and I do.This is essentially of course a business audience and I focus most of my remarks on economic issues and government policies that relate to economic issues. But I'm particularly proud of a lot of the things that we've done in the non-economic areas. If I were asked to name the three biggest things this government has done, I would probably include two things that are not economic. One of them is uniform gun control laws, and the other was the leadership we gave in relation to the saving of East Timor. Both of those things represent high watermarks of taking a stand on important issues that define the character of a country and show a determination to create a safer society. 
I think we've also come a long way in the country in creating probably the most equitable system whereby people can make an effective choice about how and where their children are educated. There's been a lot of debate about support of government and independent schools in the Australian community.   And speaking as somebody himself who is the product of a public education system in NSW and who believes that parents ought to have the right to choose where their children are educated, I'm very proud of the fact that in the last five years there's been a very significant growth in the opportunities for low income parents in this country to exercise the choice of sending their children to independent schools. So much of the debate surrounds the so-called 'elite' schools. They are but a fraction of the independent school sector and the real growth has not been in that area, the real growth has actually been in the low fee new independent schools. And in many ways Australia has achieved the best balance between public and private provision of education of any country in the world.
And even our much maligned health system which becomes a ritual political football, not only between federal and state governments with constant finger pointing and blame shifting and cost shifting, but is also a political football in a ritualistic way between state governments and state oppositions. I sometimes, as I go around the states, I turn on the news bulletins, I close my eyes, I hear the soundtrack talking about the state opposition criticising the waiting lists and the dialogue is almost the same. The only difference that in one state it is a state liberal government with a state labor opposition and in another state the situation is reversed. But despite all fo that, we ought to see our health system as being infinitely better than any other system in the industrialised world. I mean, the reality is that if you are of modest means, if you are a battler, don't get sick in the Bronx or in Brixton, much better to get ill in a suburb of Perth or a suburb of Sydney. And we have through our 30% tax rebate and our lifetime health rebate, we have in fact resuscitated private health insurance in this country. It was bleeding to death when we came to power and our resuscitation attempt has been so successful that the Labor Party has, theoretically anyway, abandoned its commitment to repeal the private health insurance rebate. I don't really believe them but that is their formal position because they recognise that that policy has been extremely successful.
So I would readily acknowledge that there are things that are important to people other than economic issues and the condition of our society, we often talk about the efficiency of our economy. The last couple of weeks I've been involved firstly in the launch of a 'tough on drugs' television campaign. It was designed to encourage more Australian parents to talk very directly to their children about the dangers of illicit drugs. Last Sunday my wife and I attended a service in the Sydney Domain of parents of children who for a combination of reasons had taken their own lives. And confronting, in a modern prosperous sophisticated society such as ours, the horrendous problem of youth suicide - particularly amongst young males in rural areas of Australia - is an arresting and sobering social experience. And it is a reminder to all of us that when we talk about the condition of Australia we don't always and only talk about the economic condition, the condition of our budget, the condition of our businesses, but we also talk about the condition and the quality of our society and the sort of pressures that we place on the more vulnerable members of the Australian community. 
Ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude by saying how encouraged I am by such a large gathering. I can assure you that I have a lot of stomach and a lot of determination and a lot of energy for the fight that is ahead over the next few months. I've been in a lot of political scraps over the years. I know what success is, I know what defeat is, I know what disappointment is. There's been no really successfully political leader in this country who hasn't at various stages of his or her career tasted adversity as well as success. We deserve to win the next election because we have tried to do good things for our country. That doesn't guarantee that we are going to win it, but it gives us a head start over the alternative, and that is if we hadn't set out and tried to do good things for Australia. We have got a good story to tell. We'll have more things to say as the year goes on about the future. We have a policy barren opposition. For five years the Labor Party has not developed one realistic alternative sustainable policy and there are a lot of things at stake, they are important for Western Australia and they are important for our country overall. I need your support. I appreciate the expressions of support I've received today and if we work together in that spirit of extolling our positives, but not losing an opportunity to define the negatives and deficiencies of our political opponents then I have every reason to believe that we are going to win.
Thank you.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Jim War. Obviously, one of the big issues of the election is going to be the GST. It would seem to me the problem from a business point of view is not the tax itself, which most of us are happy with, but the way its administered. Is there anything at all you can do to bring the ATO into line and stop them making an art form of complication out of the simplest piece of legislation?
PRIME MINISTER:
I know what you're saying. Can I relay a discussion, can I repeat a discussion I had with those on my table.
When we had the complaints about the Business Activity Statement and the IAS, I called a meeting in Sydney of myself and the Treasurer and the Deputy Prime Minister and Ian Macfarlane, that's the political Ian Macfarlane not the bank governor, he's the Minister for Small Business and we had representatives of nine small business and professional organisations, the ACCI and we also had the Commissioner of Taxation and the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation and the Senior person in the Treasury dealing with taxation matters.
We worked through all of the concerns that were raised by people and instead of sort of listening to the concerns of the business organisations and then going away and separately raising these concerns with our tax advisers, we put these concerns to them on the spot. I think by workshopping the concerns people had about the forms and the processes that were used, I believe that we emerged with quite a lot of changes, all of which have been announced and are now in the process of being implemented.
I think those changes will make a big difference. I have to say that that is my anecdotal experience as I move around the country. I am an impulsive asker of questions about the GST. Every business person I spoke to in Kalgoorlie yesterday I asked them about the GST. I got a variety of responses. Some supportive, some peremptory, some unrepeatable, but overall I got the impression from talking to these people that yes there had been some challenges but no, they were not insurmountable. Yeah you've made some good changes and we are getting on top of it. 
Now, that's not universal, and I remain ready to further fine-tune the administration. I mean our opponents say your rolling. look rolling back is taking the GST off individual items, we're not into that and I take your point that you're not unhappy with the GST, you're unhappy with the administrative implementation of it. 
Now we've tried to respond to people's concerns and we'll go on responding to legitimate concerns that people have about the administration. I don't make any apologies for that. You can't implement a change of this magnitude without going through some teething difficulties with administration. Its such a big change and I'm quite happy to further fine tune it so that you get the balance absolutely right and I'll put up with the smart alec comments from the opposition along the way.
I mean its easy I suppose, to stand on the sidelines and throw stones at those who are trying hard to actually improve the way our tax system works and we just have to put up with that and I don't really mind it. Those stones really do bounce off me because in the long run I know what we are doing is good for the country but we will continue to fine tune if that is necessary. 
I do think the changes we have made as a result of a number of complaints we got at the beginning of the year have been beneficial but we'll keep a very close eye on it.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, just a question in relation to the environment. I was interested but not unsurprised by George W Bush's decision on the Kyoto Protocols and the greenhouse gas omissions for which I think a number of people in this room would think were, even with the generous, sort of generous treatment that Australia got out of that particular round, were still unachievable. But one thing that certainly resonated in the West Australian election was from the community perspective, people still willing to put their votes with green parties and of course a new leadership, Cheryl Kernot's dream team with the Democrats will put that particular focus on the environment at the next election.
What can we give to business but also the community in terms of direction on the environment coming out of the United States decision?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well our position in relation to Kyoto, if I can use that as a metaphor for controlling the growth of greenhouse gas omissions, our position is that we are going to stick with the domestic measures that we adopted to control greenhouse gas omissions after the Kyoto meeting in 1997.
We're not going to walk away from any of those things. We


Subjects: National Health and Medical Research Funding.
E&amp;OE..................
Thank you Mark very much, Malcolm, Michael Wooldridge, Tony Bastion, Doctor Hallwitz, ladies and gentlemen.  
It is the third occasion that I';ve been to the Sydney Institute and on the two previous occasions I came to indicate a level of Federal Government support for the work of the institute.  Medical institutes are one of the great success stories of the Australian experience over the last 100 years.  Around the world it';s always been accepted that Australia has, to use the vernacular, punch above her weight in the area of health and medical research. For our population we do extremely well.  For our population we produce a remarkably high number of people who go on to win world acclaim and world respect for the work they do in research.  And I and my colleagues saw it as one of the responsibilities of the Government to ensure that that reputation was not lost over a period of time.  
And many of you will be aware that we commissioned the inquiry chaired by Peter Wills which looked into the level of funding of health and medical research in Australia and rising out of that recommendations was the principal proposal of Peter Wills, namely that we should double the level of health and medical research funding in Australia over a period of years.  And that was the highlight of the 1999 budget brought down by the Treasurer and I know it was a proposal which not only had the enthusiastic support of the Health Minister, it was also a proposal which I know he was particularly proud as I was to be associated.
And the purpose of my being here today is to announce that the Coalition Government will allocate from the National Health and Medical Research Council to Australia';s world leading health and medical research in the year 2002, a total of $367 million out of the funds currently available and that funding allocation which is for next year represents the most substantial and comprehensive investment in Australia';s health and medical research ever undertaken.  An investment of this magnitude was made possible by our decision in the 1999 budget to allocate $616 million and thus double NHMRC funding over a period of six years.  
Under the revamped guidelines and funding system, the allocation includes project, program and fellowship grants.  Project grants provide Australia';s outstanding health and medical researches with unprecedented funds to pursue their research goals.  The new program grants provide more funds for longer term grants and bigger teams of researches to target health and medical research needs.  Australians are entitled to expect health and medical research to provide new prevention measures, new treatments and cures and growth of industries based on the knowledge gained from research.  We are now very well placed to deliver these vital outcomes.
I want to thank Professor Alan Pettigrew, the inaugural Chief Executive Officer of the NHMRC, and Professor Warwick Anderson, the chairman of the Research Committee, for their work in establishing the new stream line grants program.  The NHMRC is continuing to lead the way in funding internationally recognised world class health and medical research for the benefit of all Australians.  Increasingly this research is forming the basis of an innovative biotechnology industry in Australia and would ensure Australia retains its place at the cutting edge of international health and medical research.  Nationally the 2002 allocation is funding  408 project grants, that';s taking $143 million; 16 new program grants, that';s taking $115 million; 46 fellowship grants which is taking $25.5 million; and that totals $283.5 million.  And the remaining $83 million includes funding for training awards, career development awards and block funded institutes.  Full details of the 2002 funding allocation will I understand be provided by the NHMRC later on today so that all of the detail can be available for people in the medical and research community.
Meanwhile, I am delighted to announce that one of the 16 Australia wide new program grants approved by the Government goes to the Centenary Institute.  We have approved an $8.575 million for a program dealing with the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying adaptive immunity in health and disease and I know that that particular grant will be put to very very good use indeed by the Centenary Institute.  
The program tackles fundamental issues in contemporary immunology that should enhance our knowledge substantially of immune responses underlying auto-immune diseases and allergies, a major health problem in Australia.  Knowledge gained from the program will have direct relevance to other clinically important areas including vaccination and organ transplantation.  Considerable intellectual property is likely to emerge during the course of the program.  I want to congratulate the Institute and Professor Tony Bastion on the Institute';s behalf in winning this grant for such incredibly important work.  
Ladies and Gentlemen the Centenary Institute has over the past few years grown in an impressive way.  It has begun to make its mark as a very highly respected research institute not only here in Sydney and in Australia, but around the world.  I have frequently in my time, especially over the last three years, spoken of the need in tackling contemporary, social, health and other issues and the need to have a partnership, or I call it a coalition.  I know in present days ‘coalition'; has a rather political connotation but once you pass from the phase of an election campaign if you can talk about a small ‘c'; coalition then you really are talking about the attitude of mine, the behaviour whereby different sections of the community with different backgrounds but a common interest in achieving certain goals come together.  And medical institutes are a wonderful example of the social coalition at its very best.  
You have the dedicated medical practitioners and the medical professionals, you have very committed generous philanthropic men and women from the business community whose expertise is elsewhere but whose heart is very much in helping blaze new trails of research and find new areas of discovery and deliver new hope of long and healthy lives to Australians.  Then you have governments that from time to time and quite properly are called upon to make the community';s money available and to see it';s well spent.  And you also have an ambience in these sorts of institutes of commitment and dedication and the inevitable zeal and skill of young researchers.  This county has an enormous number of talented young researchers.  The work of this institute and also the aim of the Backing Australia';s Ability science, technology and research policy that I released at the beginning of January.  It is designed amongst many things to retain within Australia to the extent that is sensible, because it has always been part of educating yourself in particular professions to spend a bit of time overseas and I don';t think we should be so insular as to take fright at the idea that at various stages in a person';s professional life they might go abroad to better themselves.  I think we should be careful that when we talk about the brain drain to remember that we have always had many of our young go over and get more experience and equally we have had the young of other countries come to Australia and give them experience.  It is a two way process.  The important thing is to make certain that the facilities and the opportunities and the lifestyle here are sufficient that a proper percentage of those who do go abroad ultimately come back.  And many of the programs that we have outlined in Backing Australia';s Ability such as the quite outstanding and generous Federation Fellowships, the first batch of which I announced several weeks ago in Canberra, are designed to do exactly that and there is already evidence that those particular programs are working.  
So ladies and gentlemen this is a tremendous day for health and medical research in this country.  We did, as I say, make a very strong statement and a very big financial commitment when we said we would double the research over a period of years. This is a very large element of that doubled research.  I am very happy to say that some of it through the proper processes of assessment is coming to this institute where I know it will be used very well.  Because this may possibly be, in the light of his announced intentions, may possibly be the last medical gathering that Michael Wooldridge and I are at together in our current positions or his current position.  Can I simply say that Michael has been my health minister for the last five and a half years.  I think he has done and outstanding job.  I want to thank him.  What I have liked very much about Michael is that he has been a very engaged health minister.  He hasn';t always taken the advice either of his department or of the medical profession.  He sometimes, like all of us, got it wrong but on most occasions I believe he got it right. 
People sometimes forget that being a good health minister is not just about winning the debates of medical politics and providing such things as tax rebates for private health insurance and doubling medical research funding but it is also very much about something that is so important to the future and that is lifting our immunisation rates for children.  I couldn';t believe that a few years ago when I learnt that our immunisation rates were 53% which was about the level of a third world country.  And the program that we introduced in order to bring that up to a much higher standard the very strong campaign he has waged in relation to the health effects of smoking, irksome to some people.  I have to say on occasions I …..you think smokers are the most persecuted group of people in the Australian community.  But the medical evidence is overwhelming and as somebody who gave the habit away twenty-four years ago I am not going to preach to anybody about it but simply say we now have a smoking level which is amongst the lowest of western world countries and that has to have long term benefits for the health of our country and long term benefits for the health budget.
Health is always a controversial area of policy.  Can I say Michael you have made a wonderful contribution.  Our health system is not perfect, it can always be improved but I have frequently said and I mean it if you are of poor means it';s better to be ill in a country like Australia than a country like the United States or any European country or most of the countries with which we normally compare ourselves because with all of its imperfections it does provide a very high quality of service and that is in no small measure due to the tremendous professional dedication of doctors and nurses and everybody else connected with the profession.  It';s a profession that I admire a great deal and I am always very pleased to be associated with commitments and announcements that strengthen the partnership between the Federal Government and the medical profession of Australia.  
I wish the Centenary Institute well.  I again record my thanks to the NHMRC for the work that it has done.  And to all of you who are here today that are associated either in research or other capacity with the Centenary Institute, I hope this endowment gives you the wherewithal, the tools, the opportunity to carry on your wonderful work.  You are doing tremendous work for the future of this country.  You are an enormous credit because we are so good at this and providing we tap the enthusiasm of young researchers in medical areas and we give them sufficient financial support there is nothing they can';t do and there is no area of endeavour that can';t be occupied in the future by a famous Australian name.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thankyou very much Michael, to all of my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I thank you very warmly for turning up in such very large numbers under the Yabsley summons, just ten days out from a very important election.  I think you have made a sound decision to be here.  And I think the enterprise is therefore very soundly based.
As you can imagine I am totally and utterly and compulsively focused on the next ten days.  In ten days time the Australian people will, in the great democratic tradition of which we are proudly part, the Australian people will decide whether I remain as Prime Minister with my team or Kim Beazley becomes the Prime Minister.  That is the choice and that is the stark reality that faces all of us in political combat.  We are ultimately accountable to our masters and our makers and that is the Australian people.
Overlaying everything in this election campaign are two predominant issues.  Everything flows from the assessement you make in relation to these two issues.  And those issues are the national security of Australia in its broadest sense and the other issue is the economic management of Australia in its broadest sense.  We all know, because of the terrible events in the United States of the 11th of September, seared in the minds and the hearts of the people in this country in a way like no other event in my life time and impacting on me in a special way because Janette and I were in Washington the day it occurred and we had seen the President for 3 hours only the day earlier.  But it';s an event that has altered the world.  It';s altered the way we must behave as nations, it';s altered the way we have to respond to challenges.  And it has multiplied the national security challenge of this country.  Not in the sense that the threat to Australia is as great as the threat to other countries, but we are all now more vulnerable and it means above everything else we need a group of men and women governing this country that have got a proven record of having taken difficult decisions in difficult times.  It';s one thing to expound the theory of national leadership in a time of security crisis, it';s another thing to have demonstrated a capacity to take difficult decisions in difficult circumstances.  And if I can be very specific on this issue because the Australian people in 10 days time have got to make a very specific choice.  If you want somebody to lead the country at a time of great security challenge, surely you would choose somebody who has a track record of having in his earlier experiences taken difficult decisions and swum against the tide of public opinion.  And I think there';s one thing that I can, I hope with no immodesty claim, over the last five and a half years is that we have demonstrated a capacity to tackle difficult decisions.  
Industrial relations reform was not easy.  Reforming the Australian waterfront, the mantra of the business community of Australia – there';d probably be 100 or 200 business men and women in this room who at various stages have come to me in my various political guises and said, one day, sometime a Prime Minister of this country has got to summon the courage to take on the Maritime Union of Australia and clean up Australia';s waterfront.  We did that, we did that in 1998.  And this country and its economy will forever be in the debt of Peter Reith for the extraordinary courage and tenacity he displayed on that occasion.  
It wasn';t easy introducing tax reform, I can tell you.  You know it.  It had its complications, it inflicted some transitional difficulties on a number of people in business.  I know that, I regret that and we tried to respond to their concerns.  But we all knew in the end it had to happen.  The easy thing would have been to have coasted to the 1998 election without a program for taxation reform.  But we decided that in the long term interests of Australia it had to be undertaken.  And I ask the rhetorical question, bearing in mind the sort of economic challenges that John Simons referred to that we undoubtably face because of the downturn accelerated by the terrorist attack in September, where would we be economically if we had not reformed our industrial relations system.  If we had not reformed our taxation system.  If we had not by the end of this financial year repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of Federal Government debt that was our inheritance in March on 1996.  The fact that we have run a growing economy, a strong economy, a more open economy over the last five and a half years means that we can face calender year 2002 more confidently and more robustly than would otherwise have been the case.
So if you are somebody who is undecided and I address this question beyond the people present in this room, but I never make assumption about anybody, I';m a cautious person by nature.  And I address this question to the generality of the Australian community that if at a time of great security challenge, when you do need a steady hand at the helm, you do need somebody who is willing to take difficult decisions in difficult times.  Surely a track record of having done so over the years is a very compelling argument for that person to be given preference and to be given support.  The management of the Australian economy over the next few years will be more difficult than it has been over the past three years.  I don';t want to overstate that but equally I don';t want to hold back in candidly acknowledging that it is going to be more challenging.
America was stagnating economically before the 11th of September.  Although the more optimistic view was that by the first half of next year it would have begun to come out of that.  The 11th of September has knocked the stuffing out of large sections of the American economy, although certainly by no means all.  And never underestimate the extraordinary recuperative powers of the Americans.  Because of the great flexibility of their economy, their largely unregulated economic life means that they can bounce back in a way that no other economy in the world has the capacity to bounce back.  But that can';t alter the fact though that it is going to be more difficult.
But the good news is that we are in better shape.  The good news is that we have very low levels of debt.  The good news is that we have very low interest rates and John Simons is particularly buoyant on that subject and that is very important.  I know it sounds a simplistic way of putting it but gee it';s relevant.  The average home buyer in Australia now is paying $350 a month less than he or she was paying in March of 1996.  And that same average person, courtesy of the higher productivity that our industrial relations reforms has delivered, that same person is taking home a higher wage and is paying less tax as a result of the introduction of the new taxation system.
There are many ironies in political life.  But two really hit me in the face in this election campaign.  The Labor Party';s passionate historical cry is that it';s for the working man and the working woman.  That the Labor Party cares about individual workers, yet interestingly enough in the time that we have been in Government, real wages have risen by 9.2% and in the 13 years that Mr Hawke and Mr Keating were Prime Ministers real wages in Australia grew by only 2.3%.  Now I would have thought that at its most basic, looking after working men and women in this country was all about ensuring that their interest rates were low and that their real wages continued to grow.  The reality is that we have been far more successful in delivering greater take home pay and more disposable income after looking at the necessities of life such as the mortgage and the food bills and the rent and the like than the 13 years of the two Labor Prime Ministers.
And the other very interesting thing is the almost total neglect in the Labor years of apprenticeships and traineeships.  We';ve heard a lot today from Mr Beazley about university education, and that is very important, it';s enormously important to all of us but we ought to remind ourselves that 70% of the young men and women of Australia who leave school do not go onto university and those people were ignored during the Labor years.  And one of the things I boast of most readily and with great pride about our five and a half years in office is that we have presided over a 140% increase in the number of apprenticeships and traineeships in Australia, 140%.  It';s gone from something like 135,000 where it had languished for 10 or 15 years to more than 305,000.  And that has involved a dramatic lift in the number of women in apprenticeships and traineeships and also a very significant increase in the number of indigenous Australians in apprenticeships and traineeships.
The reality is, my friends that, and I was reminded of this reality when I saw the three words, jobs, health and education on the Labor Party logo at the launch in Hurstville this morning of Mr Beazley';s campaign, and I thought to myself well we all believe in jobs and good health and good education and then the thought crossed my mind and it has at many times during this campaign that the foundation of job growth, the foundation of having the resources to spend more money on health and more money on education is a growing economy.  Unless you have a growing economy you can';t spend more money on health and education, in fact you will end up spending less.  Unless you have a growing economy you can';t generate jobs.  You can';t create a better health system, a better education system and more jobs in isolation from a growing economy.  
And one of the great myths of course that has been put around about this government of mine over the last five and a half years is that we have left public education in this country impoverished and that we';ve been biased or displayed a prejudice in favour of independent schools.  Let me just give you three very simple facts.  Fact number one is that in the time that we have been in government the Commonwealth has increased its expenditure on government schools over five and a half years by 43 per cent, although the enrollment in government schools over that period of time has grown by 1.8 per cent.  At the present time 69 per cent of Australian children are educated in government schools and the financial provisions for government schools from all governments is 78 per cent of the total amount of money spent on education by all governments.  And the other statistic I would simply give you is that in the time that we have been in government total Commonwealth spending on all forms of education has risen by 17 per cent in real terms.
The last five and a half years have been for me and for all of my colleagues a period of immense privilege.  I have never at any time in my political career, and certainly not in the time that I have been Prime Minister, I have never taken the Australian people for granted.  And can I tell you I';m not taking them for granted now.  This election is not an easy fight.  Don';t believe in their simplest terms, the polls published yesterday in the Australian or in the Sydney Morning Herald.  Because of the decision of the Australian Democrats for the first time in their history to go in for discriminatory preference allocations, the challenges we have in many of the marginal seats is much greater.  And what the Democrats have done is to display their pro-Labor bias, to put their pro-Labor colours on display.  And as a consequence the task in front of us is that more difficult.
The other challenge that we have of course is that when you';ve been in office for two terms and you';re coming up for a third term there';s always a tendency for people to think well they';ve had two terms, they might not have done a bad job but we might as well give the other crowd a go.  And that is a tendency that the government has had to fight through the whole of this election campaign.  There are many reasons of course why I would grieve if we were defeated, why many of you would join me in that reaction.  But I guess the greatest single challenge and the greatest single threat this country has and most particularly can I say very directly the business community of Australia has if there is a change of government on the 10th of November is that you will have Labor Governments in Canberra and Labor Governments in every state of Australia with the exception of South Australia.  You will have wall to wall, coast to coast Labor Governments and the implications of that for industrial relations are enormous.  
Two terms is not enough to entrench fundamental change, you need at least another term to entrench fundamental change in the economic and industrial culture of a nation so that even if a government of a different persuasion is subsequently elected they feel under no pressure to rollback those changes.  Look at what';s happened in Britain, Tony Blair hasn';t rolled back any of the fundamental industrial relations changes that have been made by Margaret Thatcher, because the conservatives had been in power for sufficiently long a period for that not to be realistic.  But mark my words, if Labor wins on the 10th of November they will have no compunction at all about rolling back our industrial relations changes.  The Australian workplace agreements will go, the secondary boycott protections in the Trade Practices Act will go, the right of automatic union entry into a workplace, even if there are no employees associated with that union will be restored, compulsory unionism will be brought back, this pernicious practice that I think started here in New South Wales where the union can bill a non-unionist for the alleged improvements the unions have gained in their terms of work and condition, that will become part and parcel of life throughout Australia.  
Now I don';t exaggerate this because I';ve read in detail Mr Beazley';s industrial relations policy and his rollback of industrial relations will actually take us back to the period that operated in the early years of the Hawke Government, he would actually go back further than the Keating Government was prepared to go in the area of industrial relations.  He has a more orthodox, traditional, Labor Party view about industrial relations than even his predecessor.  Now I don';t normally talk in comparably favourable terms of his predecessor so it must be a pretty important distinction for me to acknowledge it. But it is a distinction, believe you me there was just a tiny smidgen of recognition in the fist year of the re-elected Keating Government in 1993 about the need to change, but it disappeared pretty quickly.  But that is a pretty serious issue, the no ticket no start signs are up in Perth, and they';ll be up all over the country if you have a Labor Government on the 10th of November.  And I don';t exaggerate because the frontbench of the Labor Party, if it wins government, will have every former living ACTU President there with the exception of Bob Hawke, and he';ll no doubt be giving a little bit of advice from the sidelines.
So my friends that is not just a rhetorical attack you might expect from a Liberal Prime Minister 10 days out from an election, addressing a business gathering in the CBD of Sydney, it';s not.  It';s a statement of the reality. Because of the many issues that I';ve devoted myself to - policy issues - in public life there';s none I';ve been more passionate about than the need to reform our industrial relations system. It was the biggest single cultural change we needed for our economy, even bigger in a sense than taxation reform, although not as far reaching and not as comprehensive.  But once we started to change the culture of Australia';s industrial relations system we had within it the capacity to lift our productivity.  And one of the reasons why our productivity has gone up so much over the last few years is we';ve got a much better industrial relations system.  And if we throw that away as surely as we will if we elect a federal Labor government on the 10th of November this country is going to pay a very heavy price indeed.
And my friends this is therefore a very critical election.  All elections are important but this has about it a tinge of immediacy and gravity that perhaps even the election of 1998 and some other elections in the last few years haven';t had.  Because we have entered a more difficult and potentially dangerous period of our history.  I don';t sound undue alarm, I simply state the obvious.  We are engaged in a world coalition against terrorism, we have no alternative in our own interest other than to be part of it.  Because that foul attack was an attack on us as much as it was an attack on our American friends.
We have found ourselves in an area of the world where so much of our future economically and politically lies.  Our relations with the nations of our part of the world are important, indeed they';re crucial.  But those relations have got to be based on mutual respect, they cannot be based on unilateral accommodation, which appears on occasions to be the mantra of my political opponents.  We have to over the next year or two chart a course for this country that maintains the strength and the durability of our alliance with the United States, which reaches out to our neighbours in the region, that reinforces our credentials for tolerance and cultural accommodation within our own country.  The struggle we're engaged in at the moment is not a struggle against Islam or against the people of Afghanistan, and I';ve said on many occasions and I would say it again that each of us, whatever or own background might be has a responsibility to reach out to the 300,000 Australians of Islamic and Arab background and make sure they feel every hour of their lives that they are as much a valued part of the Australian community as any other person.  Because what the terrorists assaulted was a way of life more than anything else and what is worth defending and what is worth fighting for is a way of life more than anything else.  And that way of life is tolerance and openness and cohesion.  A nation that respects people according to their contribution and their ultimate commitment to their country and that is really what being a fair minded Australian and it';s what the Australian fair go is all about.
This my friends is not a time to risk it with somebody and with people who have a great capacity for flexibility.  Particularly on policy and even within the space of 24 hours.  It';s not a time to elect a party which for three and a half years has told us that the Goods and Services Tax is poison and is responsible for every single calamity in the Australian nation, without exception and then when they finally unveil their rollback they tell us they';re going to keep 97 per cent of it.  
It';s not a time to elect a group of people who having left us with a $96 billion debt, spend all their waking hours in opposition trying to stop us implementing the policies to roll back that debt.  And it is not a time to elect to the treasury benches of Australia a group of people who are perfectly prepared to behave like political guerillas in relation to attacking all of the reforms that this government has bought about. And then to have the nerve to complain that we haven';t left them enough money to spend on their particular pet projects.  Because of all of the more outrageous complaints I';ve heard from Mr Beazley over the last year he keeps complaining that I spend money on things that he';s asked me to spend money on.  I mean he says look the surplus is not big enough.  What have I spent the surplus on?  I spent the surplus on extra defence, he says he agrees with that.  I spent the surplus on extra road funding, he said he agrees with that.  I've spent some of the surplus on welfare reform, he said he agrees with that and he wants more.  I spent some of the surplus on getting rid of half indexation of petrol excise, he said he';s in favour of that too. I spent it on science and innovation, he said we should spend more on that and so the list goes on.  In fact I put out a list of expenditure programmes that totals $17 billion over a four year period and every single item was an area of expenditure where he had called for government action.  Apparently he wants the programmes to be supported but he doesn';t want any of the money spent on them. Well that of course is not real life, every last dollar of that expenditure was important for supporting the economy and important to achieve the social goals of this government.  Because government is not just about the bottom line, it';s not just about good economic management, although that';s the foundation of the capacity to do other things. It is also about those important social provisions that maintain a cohesive and united Australian community.
Finally ladies and gentlemen as I look around this room I see many many familiar faces.  I';ve addressed many luncheons of this type over the years here in Sydney and many of you here have been my very good friends through thick and thin.  I said the other day when I opened NIDA that there was a bit of similarity between a politician and an actor.  That you often played to full houses and sometimes by interval it had emptied, or half emptied and then some of them started to come back.  Well I';ve gone through that experience.  People have started off listening and they';ve gone away and then some of them have come back, the trick of course is to get them to come back at the right moment and I';ve been working hard on that over the last 3 or 4 weeks.  But can I say to those of you here who have been great friends of mine over the year, thank you very much.  Whatever the outcome is on the 10th of November, I will remain forever grateful to you for the support and the loyalty that you';ve displayed towards me over the years.
I';m cautiously hopeful about what the result is going to be.  But I';ve been in this game so long as to be incredibly suspicious even of cautious hope.  That you really do have to play it right down to the wire and the last thing I want to say to you is that although I';ve been in public life for a very long time, I have an incredibly energetic commitment to the next term.  If I can be given the opportunity of serving the Australian people again as Prime Minister I won';t let them down.  I will see them through what is probably the most difficult and dangerous time this country has faced in the last quarter of a century.  I';ll set about from day one implementing the program we have outlined.  I will renew with great energy my commitment to the job.  I have to say that when people talk to me about stress, they say do you suffer any stress? And I say to them I have a theory, and that theory is you don';t suffer from stress unless you are doing something you don';t like.  I can tell you I';m not suffering any stress at all.  I';ve never been more stimulated by this job, I';ve never felt more equal to it';s challenge and I will be so very honoured if the Australian people ask me to continue to serve them.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Bob, to Richard Colback the President of the Tasmanian Division, my Federal Parliamentary colleagues, my fellow candidates, my fellow Australians. This is a very, very important election.  Prime Minister';s always say that on the campaign trial but it does have a special resonance on this particular occasion.  Because we do face my dent on the circumstances that Bob referred to in his introduction, we do face a more uncertain future.  We must neither ignore that nor be overwhelmed or daunted by it, it';s important to see through some of that concern and so that unease to a time and a circumstance where we can look back on these very difficult challenges as a period in our history.  But that is still a while into the future and in the meantime what Australia needs to do is to alliance herself with those forces in the world that are prepared to stand up in the things in which we believe.  Shortly before coming to the dinner tonight, I was a little delayed because I had to make comment at a news conference on some remarks that had been made by the Taliban ambassador in Islamabad at a news conference earlier today in which he vindicated that the jihad would be extended to include Australia.  That did not come as a surprise to me and indicated that the sort of heightened alert that was clearly necessary was implemented immediately after the attacks on the 11 September.
I made the point in that news conference and I make it tonight at the beginning of my remarks that it is not the Americans, it is not President Bush, it is not me, it is not the British Prime Minister or any foreign leaders who are injecting religion into this conflict, it is in fact those who harbour and relieve and protect the terrorists.  Because this is not a struggle between the religions of the world, what we are opposing is something that should be repugnant to the true principles of all the great religions of the world, be that Christianity, Islam, Judaism or indeed any of the other great religions of the world.  And we should never loss site of the fact that many people of Islamic faith died on the 11 September, they were equally innocent victims of a vile attack as were their Christian and Jewish and indeed non-believing fellow citizens of the world.
What we face here is a very clear and challenging responsibility as part of the civilised world to stand against something that if it is allowed to go unchecked will undermine the very basis of the kind of society we believe in.  the objective is not only flatten people in a physical sense, but it is also to undermine the economic infrastructure of the industrialised world.  And there';s no doubt that the American economy has suffered some severe blows as a result of what happened in September. And while the Australian economy is in very good shape and better able to withstand the after shocks of the 11 September than most other economies we can';t hope escape completely unscathed.  So we do need to see ourselves as making common cause with our friends in the Unites States and other around the world because the attack was as much in a sense an attack in what we believe in and what we stand for as it was on what the United States believes in and what the American people stand for.
And it';s also very important that we maintain to the full measure our own record of tolerance and inclusion and harmony within our own society and we should reach out to those of our fellow Australians who are of Arab and Middle Eastern background and of the Islamic religion.  This is not their fault, they shouldn';t carry any distain of this, they should not be gathered up and be the object of any of our rage or our rancour.  They should be treated with the respect and decency which is accorded to all the citizens of this country because on the great things about Australia is that we judge people according to their passion for this country, for what they stand for, what they can contribute and not according to the country of their birth or their religion, their race or their nationality.
Now I';ll just simply say again on this before I move onto other issues, it is not the people of the United States, it is not the people of Australia, not the people of other like minded countries that seek to define this conflict, this struggle in religious terms, it is others.  And that of course is where part of the evil lies.  It is true as Bob said in very kind introduction that from time to time during this election campaign people have said it ought to be fought on domestic issues rather than international issues.  Can I simply say to you that this election campaign should be fought on all the issues that are relevant to Australia';s future.  And can I say to Mr Beazley I (inaudible) this election campaign fought on my economic record and have it compared with his economic record when he was the finance minister of this country.  I';m also very happy to have his record as defence minister and his presiding over the extraordinary blow out in the cost of the construction of the Collins submarine and all the other things.  I mean he keeps talking about his record as a defence minister, when you examine it, it doesn';t bear up very well under that scrutiny.  But truly this is an election campaign where I have to be accountable both in relation to the international and national security issues and also the issues of economic management.  And all the other policies, be they in the areas of education, or health or the environment, or law and order, all of them flow in a sense from the overarching impact of those two areas,  because unless you run a strong economy you don';t have the resources to improve health and education provision within our society.  Unless you are prepared to undertake economic reform you can';t offer to a population which will increasingly age because of our demographic into the future the wherewithal to fund the growing number of services that an aging population will require.
I';ve heard a lot from my opponent about education and health, let me say but two things about those issues.  It is said of me and it is said of my Government that we are hostile to Government schools and to public education.  Can I say in reply to that that we stand for freedom of choice, we believe that the parents of Australia have a right to decide the type of education that their children should receive.  And that they have a right to decide which school educates their children.  But in case anybody believes that that translates into some kind of discrimination against government schools let me give you but one statistic, in the five and a half years that we have been I government we have increased commonwealth provision, commonwealth payments, commonwealth funding of government schools around Australia by 43 per cent.  And during that period of time the enrolments in Government schools in Australia have risen by only 1.8 per cent.  So if you fund an increased enrolment of 1.8 per cent with a 43 per cent increase and when you bear in mind that historically whether we';ve had a Labor Government or a Liberal Government the states of Australia have picked up the funding to the tune of about 88 per cent of the operation of government schools.  And in relation to the remaining 12 per cent there';s been a 43 per cent increase and enrolments have only gone up 1.8 per cent.  It can barely be argued with any credibility at all that we have discriminated against Government schools.  And can I say that I support a dual system of education, I';m a product of the government school sector myself, I believe in it. But I also believe in choice and I';m also very proud of the fact that it was Sir Robert Menzies who ended the discrimination against the independent school sector, particularly the Catholic school system of Australia when he introduced direct assistance for government schools in the early 1960';s. and it was the Liberal Party under the leadership of Menzies that ended that discrimination and we are the only party that stands unambiguously for freedom of choice.  Mr Beazley talks about talking money away from privileged schools, his hit list includes a lot of schools that aren';t by any measure privileged and what he';s proposing now is the thin end of the wedge, it will that group of schools one day, it will be another group of independent schools the next.  So if you believe in freedom of choice in education the only party, the only side of politics that';s going to guarantee fair treatment of both is the Coalition.
But the same sort of argument is raised in relation to health.  there are weaknesses in Australia';s health system.  It could be improved.  But can I say to you that it';s infinitely better than the health systems of most other countries, infinitely better.  And if you';re in modest circumstances it is far more likely that you will be well treated in the Australian medical system than say in the medical system of the United States or many of the countries of Europe.  And we';ve set out to do a couple of things very importantly in health.  we have resuscitated private health insurance. When I became Prime Minister the number of people in private health insurance was about 33 per cent and falling.  It is now 45 per cent and stabilised.  And that is the result of the $2.5 billion subsidy, via the tax system, that Labor voted against and we only got through with the vote of Senator Harridine in the Senate, but the Labor Party opposed it, they voted against it, even though we had a mandate after the 1998 election.  So those of you who might wonder about where they stand on private health insurance, can you please do what I';ve asked all audiences to do whenever they look at what Labor says it';s going to do, don';t listen to what they say, remember what they did.  And what they say about private health insurance is that they';re going to keep the tax rebate, but what they did when they have an opportunity was to vote against it.  And now of course they say they';re going to keep the budget in surplus if they become the Government, they want to believe that they are sort of born again believers in fiscal purity, but when they were last in Government they left us with a $96 billion Federal Government debt, and not only left us with that debt but every single time we tried to wind it back they voted against that as well. I mean I regard that as a (inaudible) political crime, to leave your successor with a debt and then try and stop him repaying it. And that is essentially what they did. But despite their worst efforts we have repaid $58 billion, we will have by the end of this financial year, $58 billion of that $96 billion of Government debt.
And yet for the record can I remind you on public hospitals that under the current Medicare agreement, the health agreements, we';re providing to the states 28 per cent more in real terms than was provided under the Keating Government';s health care agreements with the states.  But what we';ve done in the health goes further than that and I think Michael Wooldridge has done a fantastic job as a health minister oevr the last five and a health years. And one of the things he's been particularly successful at is implementing the old adage that prevention is better than cure.  When we came inot Government the immunisation rates for children in this country was at a third world level of 53 per cent.  In a few short years he';s lifted that figure to over 95 per cent.  In many other areas of preventative health he';s prioneered changes and reforms.  So I would say in relation to health I can always be an area where you can make additional provision. But those who argue that in some way the health system has been weakened by this government, those who argue that Labor offers a more viable alternative are ignoring the facts and ignoring the reality of the last five and a half years.  And can I just say one other thing in relation to the whole question of government services.  Introducing tax reform was not easy, we were opposed by the Labor Party, they tried at every turn to score points of the inevitable challenges of introducing a new system.  And their whole political strategy was erected upon the edifice of hoping and praying that tax reform would be so unpopular that it fall over and the government with it, they would have to offer no alternative policy and they would coast to victory. And there was a famous Caucus meeting at the end of 1999 when the Leader of the Opposition was asked about policy development and he said look, don';t worry about that, we';re going to surf to victory on the fact of unpopularity with the GST.  Now that was their philosophy, and they probably thought to themselves that that was a very canny, but negative, but nonetheless likely to be successful policy.  What of course they didn';t bargain on is the common sense of the Australian people.  Because over time the new system has been bedded down, it';s had it';s problems and I appreciate the way in which many in the small business community have accommodated. And we have tried to response and we have in a number of areas where they';ve expressed their concern, particularly the Business Activity Statement and a number of other areas.  But there have been a lot of benefits of tax reform, $12 billion of tax cuts, a company tax rate down to 30 cents in the dollars, effective halving of the capital gains tax, the taking of tax off exports.  All of which together have strengthened the Australian economy.  But there';s one other great virtue of tax reform and that is that all of the proceeds of the GST, every last dollar from the GST goes to the states.  Every last dollar.  What that means in practice is that as time goes by, it will start to happen probably the year after next with Queensland being the first cab off the rank, and then as time goes by the other states also, as that time goes by the states will receive increasing amounts of revenue from the GST because the GST is a growth tax, it grows with the economy. It';s guaranteed to grow with the economy, that';s the nature of it, it';s a broadbased indirect tax.  And that means the states of Australia over the years ahead will have more money to spend on things like public hospitals and government schools and police services and roads.  And if we do face as a nation the challenge of an aging population, which we do, and the need to fund the services for that aging population, you need a growth tax, you need a growth revenue in the indirect tax area.  And the old indirect tax system did not provide that and one of the great virtues of the GST is that it does provide that growth factor.
Now I have to acknowledge there have been some challenges and they';ve been criticism, no great reform is ever without criticism and without some implementation friction.  But if I had my time over again I';d have still pursued tax reform with the same vigour because in the end what you have to do if you have the responsibility of Government is to implement reforms that you know in your heart are in the long term interests of our country.
And one other reform area I know is very important to anybody in business and certainly very important to our small business supporters, as well as of course larger corporations, and that';s the area of workplace relations reform.  Of all of the reform causes with which I';ve been associated in the various positions I';ve held in the Liberal Party over the last 15 years, none has received in a sense more of my energy and commitment than industrial relations reform. I believed years ago that unless this country could break out of the old union dominated industrial relations straightjacket we would never realise our full productivity and growth potential.  That that straightjacket represented a massive speed limit on our growth potential and it manifested itself in so many areas, the award system, it didn';t allow enough flexibility for people to negotiate workplace arrangements according to the circumstances of their own industry.  That the awards system induced uncompetitiveness in our exports industries where world economic conditions and globalisation required great flexibility.  And that was very apparent in many sections of the mining industry. And of course as all of you will know, particularly people working and living in an island state for years one of the great industrial relations scandals of this country was the monopoly of power held by the maritime unions of Australia on the Australian waterfront.  (inaudible) and I tell you of the number of times I';ve been to business lunches, business dinners, received delegations from the business community of Australia who said to me sooner or later somebody will have the courage to do something about the monopoly of the MUA and the waterside workers federation as it used to be called on the Australian waterfront.  Now finally that person did arrive in the form of Peter Reith in April of 1998.  And that struggle was a struggle for the further economic competitiveness of this country, it wasn';t easy, we didn';t receive assistance from some quarters we';d hoped to receive assistance from, but that';s how things work out.  I don';t know that the performance of all of the state governments  around Australia on that occasion, I';m not talking about here at the time but others was all that it might have been.  But in the end reform was achieved and when we set out to implement that reform we had a container movement weigh of 16.9 per cent per hour on the Australian waterfront.  And we set ourselves a target of 25 and the cynics said it couldn';t be achieved, that it was impossible dream. I can tell you that last month the report of the independent assessor indicated that that rate now sits at 27 an hour, which is a massive increase.
And that has meant delivery on time, exports on time, it';s meant millions and millions of additional dollars of export earners for Australia. It';s been a wonderful outcome for Australian farmers because their produce no longer runs the risk of rotting of the wharfs of Australia because of the inefficiently of the waterfront.  Now they my friends are some of the reforms that we';ve implemented. And can I assure you, I assure you of many things, but can I empathically assure you of one things in particular and that is that if we loss this election the area of reform that will the first casualty of a Beazley Labor Government will be reform of our industrial relations system.  Because we will then have a Labor Government at a national level and we';ll have Labor Government's in every state unfortunately expect South Australia.  With a Labor Government in the Northern Territory and a Labor Government now in the ACT you';ll have coast to coast, wall to wall Labor Governments and that is a ready made circumstance for the trade union bosses of Australia to reassert their authority.  Every former living ACTU President will be on the frontbench of a Beazley Labor Government with the exception of Bob Hawke, and he';ll be in there somewhere giving a bit of advice on the side.
Now that';s the scenario, I exaggerate not one tiny bit because if there';s one thing that they will rollback in earnest, they haven';t rolled back the GST at all, they';ve kept the GST, after all the huffing and puffing and everything they';ve kept the GST, they';ve kept 96.8 per cent, that's a pretty good vote, that';s all I can say.  If you keep 96.8 per cent of the GST you';re keeping it.  But they won';t keep 96.8 per cent of our industrial relations reform because it';s cultural, it';s part of their history as a party, they are still dominated by the trade union movement and they will roll that back 100 per cent.  And all of the productivity gains that have accrued as a result of industrial relations reform will be at risk. And don';t everybody imagine that this is some anti-worker clarion call from me, because the delicious irony of this debate is that under my Prime Ministership the wages of average Australian workers have risen at a much faster rate than they did when Mr Hawke and Mr Keating were Prime Minister's of Australia, they really have.  Real income has risen by about nine per cent over the last five and a half years, they raised by about three per cent in the previous 13 years.  And when you add to that the fact that interest rates are lower, throughout Australian the average homeloan repayment is $350 a month less, that we';ve generated 825,000 more jobs, then you really harping at a situation where this has been a government that has sought to protect the interests of the working men and women of Australia.
Just two others things I want to say and then I';ll sit down and let you have your main course.  And that is this, that I will be making a number of policy announcements tomorrow that are of particular relevance to the state of Tasmania.  We';ve always had a Tasmanian package and I';ve definitely very proud of that because there are economic disadvantages inherent in the physical separate in terms of this being an island state, Tasmania, from the rest of the Australian nation.  And there has always been a case for some additional measures, and I';ll be making some announcements in relation to that. But there';s one thing that I can indicate to you tonight that I think will be good news, although there';ll still be a number of things that will need to be done by the Tasmanian Government and that is in relation to the Duke energy
[tape break]
$650 million, pipeline will run from Bellbay power station to Port Larder in the North-West of Tasmania with an extension of the pipeline from near Rosevale to near Springfield.  The Commonwealth environmental approval includes conditions to ensure that that protection of threaten species such as the Swift Parrot, the Wedge Tailed Eagle, the Spotted Tail Mole and the Giant Freshwater Crayfish, we are a government, we are concerned about industrial development and we are concerned about environmental preservation and so that should be the case.
Can I say that the Duke Energy project is the first project assessed under the bilateral agreement on environmental assessment signed by the Commonwealth and Tasmania in 2000 and this bilateral agreement ensure that a rigorous but streamlined assessment process is followed, reducing delays and providing a high level of certainty for proponents in Tasmania.  So can I say in relation to that very important project that so far as the environmental issues are concerned we';ve done out bit, we';ve given it a tick, that';s been approved today and we hope that any  further action that';s required at a state level will come speedily so that the project can be bought to fruition.
Very finally can I say how very proud I am of all my House of Representatives candidates here in Tasmania. And I';m very proud of our Senators too. But they're in office, we want to get our House of Representatives, we want to transfer them from being candidates to being members. Now we do have a big challenge here in Tasmania, we don';t hold any House of Representatives seats, we've got to do something about that on the 10 November. And we have some great local candidates, we have some great issues, we have a population that I think is listening to our message, we have people in the Tasmanian community who are responding to the determination we';ve displayed in relation to quite a number of issues.  Can I say to all of you we have a great opportunity if we can win again on the 10 November to really bed down the changes to Australia that we';ve introduced over the last five and a half years.  Two terms is not enough, you need more than that to really bed it down.  I think of the analogy of Tony Blair and Margaret Thatcher, it was too late and too many years had past and he was not abler to rollback the reforms that had been introduced by the Thatcher Government which transformed the face of Britain and improve her economic strength many fold.
The same thing in a sense applies here. We need at least another couple of terms, (inaudible) things are bedded down and we must win some seats here in Tasmania.  We';ve got the issues, we';ve got the candidates and we've got the opportunity and I sense tonight in this room a great amount of enthusiasm and a great commitment.  Please work your hearts out between now and the 10 November, and see if we can deliver as many as possible of the House of Representatives seats so that I can look around in Question Time and see some shining Tasmanian faces behind in the House of Representatives, instead of having to look (inaudible).  And you know get the odd (inaudible) from our political opponents over there.  So can I just ask all of you to work very hard, there are great (inaudible) to be won, there';s a lot at stake and this is a very important election for us to win for the sake of our country and of course for the sake of our party.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you Fran, Senator Robert Hill, my parliamentary colleague Petro Georgio, ladies and gentlemen, it';s nice to be back in Warburton.  I am of course no stranger to Fran';s electorate, I';ve visited various parts of it on numerous occasions over the last five and a half years and I';m delighted to be here during the course of this election campaign, not only to launch the Coalition';s environment policy, and what more beautiful setting there could be, I';m a little sort of, I cast a longing eye towards the first tee, I haven';t had much time for that over the last several months and I certainly won';t have a great deal of time for it, in fact no time for it at all over the next couple of weeks.  But ladies and gentlemen it';s great to be in Fran';s electorate. Can I say to you she is an outstandingly energetic and enthusiastic advocate for the people of McEwen.  She gives anybody heaps who doesn';t do the right thing by McEwen, doesn';t matter if it';s the Prime Minister, a minister, doesn';t matter, she';s in there punching for her electorate.  And it';s a diverse electorate, there are very few electorates in Australia that have quite the diversity that the electorate of McEwen has.  And therefore it';s no easy task but she gets around and she represents the different parts of it with great skill and great application.  And can I say speaking from a Liberal Party perspective, as you might expect me to do from time to time during this election campaign, it';s a tough seat too, not an easy seat, don';t take it for granted, I know she doesn';t and its going to be a tough seat for us to hold on to but if we continue to work hard and to apply ourselves to issues that are important to people then I';m sure that Fran is going to get over the line on the 10th of November.
There are many things that I could talk about this morning, this election campaign is really being conducted under the umbrella if I can put it that way of two overriding issues and two overriding concerns.  And they are the issues of national security broadly defined and the issue of economic management.  Now in the area of national security we do live in difficult and challenging times. And we';ve made it very clear that national security is something that embraces not only the defence of this country and our involvement in international relations but it also involves the very important issue of border protection.  And I';ve made it very clear now for months that we';re going to decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come.  And we also make that declaration against the background of having over the years been a very open and generous society to people from different parts of the world.  There is no country in the world that has absorbed within its borders and within its cultural embrace people from such diverse backgrounds and it';s one of the great strengths of this country and it';s going to remain that way.
And of course the issue of economic management remains central to who ought to govern the country over the next there years. You can';t achieve anything in areas like the environment, in areas like health, in areas like education, in areas like aged care unless you have a growing economy.  And over the last five and a half years we have been able to pour record resources into those areas.  And I';ll come to the environment in just a moment.  But let me just quote one example of the record resources that we';ve been able to pour into those very important areas because we';ve had a growing economy.  We are frequently accused by the Labor Party of shortchanging government schools.  Can I remind you that over the last five and a half years the federal government has increased by 43 per cent the amount of money it has devoted to government schools, even though the primary funding responsibility for government schools rests with the state governments to own and operate.  And that is despite the fact that enrolments in government schools over that same period have only risen by 1.8 per cent.  So against the 1.8 per cent increase in enrolments the federal government, my government, the Coalition Government has increased federal government funding by something in the order of 43 per cent.  
But ladies and gentlemen I';ve come here particularly to launch the Commonwealth Government';s, the Coalition';s environment policy.  And I really am delighted to have Robert Hill here because Robert has been the Environment Minister in the Coalition government for the last five and a half years.  And one of the features of our policy over the last five and a half years has been the priority that we have given to the environmental area through the senior status of the minister who has had responsibility for it.  As leader of the government in the Senate and the third ranking member of the federal parliamentary Liberal Party, Robert is the most senior minister at  a federal level that has ever had responsibility for environment matters in the history of this country.  The concern for the environment is, and has been for some years, a mainstream political issue.  It is not something at the periphery, it is not something that just interest groups are fond of, if we';ve got a bit of time and a few resources left over.  Everybody now believes passionately that we ought to aspire towards having both a growing economy and also a willingness to nurture and care for our environment. We don';t see them as exclusive, we don';t see them as competing, we see the two of them as reinforcing.  And that has been a hallmark of the approach that we have adopted in the time that we have been in government.
And we have over the last five and a half years from the time I launched our environmental policy in 1996 in the Dandenongs with Bob Charles and Rod Kemp and a number of others and it was the beginning of a wonderful record of achievement on the environment. I don';t believe any federal government has done more for the environment in a practical, achieving, lasting way than has this government.  We established for the first time ever the Natural Heritage Trust. That';s $1.5 billion of investment in literally thousands of projects all over Australia. And we now have something in the order of 400,000 men and women around Australia who';ve been involved in 11,800 projects that have been funded by the Natural Heritage Trust. And we';re not going to stop at that. We';re going to add to that. We';ve renewed the Natural Heritage Trust to the tune of another $1 billion and there';ll be many thousands more projects that are going to be funded out of the Natural Heritage Trust.  Because we believe that Australia';s current and future success will depend to a very large extent on how we find a balance between generating economic growth and economic wealth and how we nurture our environment. And our agenda in the environment for the next term delivers on that desire to achieve a balance with a major focus on areas that are facing particular stress where the environment and development come together.
Improvements to water quality are a key indicator that the environment is going to be protected and preserved.  And when I spoke to the National Press Club in July of this year and threw forward to some of the challenges that would face the next government of Australia, I identified as one of the three great challenges, I identified the challenge of water quality and salinity. And if you are interested in solid practical environmental policy and achievement as distinct from some kind of superficial touching of the issue then you';ll look at long term programs that tackle the problems of water quality and the problems of salinity.  It';s a lamentable reality that unless we do something about water quality in 20 years time the  drinking water for the people of Adelaide will not be fit for human consumption in three out of every five days. So if we are serious in a long term and not a gimicky sense about the environmental future of this country we will put very heavy emphasis amongst other things on water quality.
And in our third term, if we are given one by the Australian people, we';re going to maintain the high level ministerial focus on the environment. One of the things that I have found very beneficial as Prime Minister is the opportunity it gives me in a number of specific areas to chair special Prime Minister';s committees which involve both cabinet ministers and also outside experts. I have learnt a great deal about the scientific, innovative, and technological challenges and needs of this country through chairing the Prime Minister';s Science, Engineering and Innovation Council over the last five and a half years. And it was largely the work of that body that led to our $3 billion Backing Australia';s Ability program which I announced at the beginning of this year and is really giving practical expression to the commitment we all have to lifting our performance in areas of science and research.  And because of that very good experience and because I believe it kept me and my senior colleagues in very close contact with the needs of that area, I intend if we are re-elected to establish a new environment committee of Cabinet which I will chair and will naturally include the Environment Minister, and the Minister for Agriculture, and the Minister for Resources. And it will, like the Prime Minister';s Science Council, from time to time draw on the expert contribution of people who have a lot to contribute in the environmental area.
We are as I said going to devote another $1 billion over the years ahead, over the next five years for the extension of the Natural Heritage Trust. And one of the focuses, one of the key focus of that investment of $1 billion will be the issue of water quality.  We intend to go on working with the states and territories to develop agreed national standards for water quality, salinity and biodiversity. You will recall that a year ago I committed $700 million to be matched on a dollar for dollar basis with the states to tackle the very challenging problem of salinity and water quality. We have negotiated arrangements with the states. There';s been a little bit of dragging of the feet on the part of some of the Labor states in the lead up to the election and I have no doubt that if the Coalition is successful then that sort of nonsense will stop and we';ll immediately achieve some further progress.
But can I commit the Coalition today that out of the money that';s going to be invested in the Natural Heritage Trust, the additional $1 billion, I commit the Coalition to very high priority of expenditure on issues of water quality and measures to improve the quality of the water of Australia. We would expect out of that $1 billion to spend at least $350 million on measures to improve our water quality. And the rest of the Trust expenditure will also lead to improvements in water quality as well. For example expenditure on protecting biodiversity and restoring native bush will also help improve water quality because they will bring about an improvement in the overall health of the catchment.  The environment is of course the whole system and not something that can be looked at in self contained compartments.
These funds will provide support in areas like restoring native vegetation, along river banks, improving farm management practices to reduce nutrient run off, and changes to infrastructure such as weirs and dams.
The trust is going to have a very clear focus on regional outcomes and we';ll work with communities in developing work plans and targets.  We';ll support communities, not dictate  to them.  And this extra provision of at least $350 million out of the $1 billion of the renewed Natural Heritage Trust will of course be on top of the $700 million that we have committed to already in partnership with the states with their matching money of $700 million to tackle the problem of the environment. And as well as of course the $75 million that we';re providing to improve environmental water flows in the Murray River.
It will take years to adequately restore areas of Australia that have been damaged by salinity and the struggle to improve water quality and to stabilise the quality of water and prevent it deteriorating further is not something that is going to be dealt with overnight. It is not something which involves flashy environmental headlines, but it is something that will do more to contribute in the long term to the preservation of Australia';s natural environment than anything else. 
There were many people in 1996 that didn';t believe me and didn';t believe us when we said that we would be a pro-environment government. There were many people who said we were going to be a government that would believe in development at all costs, we would be a government that would only be interested in placating potential polluters and rather indifferent to the environment.  I believe over the last five and a half years, particularly under the stewardship of Robert Hill who may I say has achieved two quite outstanding results at international conferences for Australia in the area of the environment and greenhouse gas emissions. Everybody will remember the difficulties we faced at Kyoto in 1997 and he came away from that meeting with a magnificent result for Australia but a result that committed this country to achieving, indeed surpassing many targets in the area of greenhouse gas emissions. And he did the same thing at the Berlin conference this year where we came away with an outcome where in areas like carbon sinks and  trading that people never imagined that Australia could possibly do. The reality is that we have punched above our weight in the international environmental debate. We want an all embracing international agreement in relation to greenhouse gas emissions. But to be all embracing it must include the United States which is the major industrialised country and it must of course include developing countries otherwise Australia will be left at a competitive disadvantage. 
But Robert has done an outstanding job as our Environment Minister and under his leadership we have been able to stare down those critics of ours who said that we were only interested in what they would call rampaging development and completely indifferent to the environment. We have been able to achieve a balance. We have been able to match economic growth and economic strength with environmental concern and environmental nurturing and I am especially proud that a Coalition Government has achieved this. We have delivered on those commitments and I';m very proud to launch this policy. It renews our commitment, it puts real dollars into practical areas of environmental concern and environmental improvement.  And I know that if we are re-elected on the 10th of November one of the great beneficiaries will be practical projects for the Australian environment.  I again warmly commend this policy to you. I thank Robert Hill for the tremendous job he';s done as my Environment Minister. And most importantly of all today here in Warburton I commend Fran Bailey to you. She';s a great lady, a great fighter for you.  But please don';t take anything for granted. It';s going to be tough. It';s always difficult getting a third term.  Always. And we have preferences directed against us in a number of seats by the Australian Democrats who I regret to say have displayed their pro-Labor bias. The Australian Democrats used to rejoice in the description of keeping the two major parties, they described in very unflattering terms, the two major parties honest. This time they have abandoned any pretext and their preference policy is blatantly pro-Labor and I find that particularly to be criticised given the very strong environmental record of the Coalition over the last five and a half years.  So that bit of extra effort will be needed to make certain that Fran wins on the 10th of November. Please get behind her. She';s a great member and she';s a great representative for the people of McKewen. 
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much Jocelyn.  To Tony Benneworth, Eric Abetz, Paul Calvert, John Watson, Bob Cheek, any other parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals, ladies and gentlemen.  In a few moments I would like to start drawing together at the end of this the fourth week of the election campaign the main issue that is crystallising before those members of the Australian public who';ve yet to decide who they';re going to support. And that final decision here in the electorate of Bass is more important than in most seats because this is the quintessential marginal seat. They don';t get any closer than Bass and they won';t be any more interesting to watch on election night than this particular electorate.
But before I do that and appropriately because I am in Launceston, in Bass, in northern Tasmania, I want to release the Coalition';s Tasmanian package, the Coalition';s list of policies specifically designed to address the particular problems and challenges of the island state of Tasmania.
I';m pleased to announce today that if the Government is re-elected we will put in place policies worth $38 million to continue the support we';ve provided in the past for investment and jobs in the state of Tasmania. A stronger economy for Tasmania and a higher standard of living for the Tasmanian people is the centrepiece of our next plan for the Tasmanian state. We';ll be funding new measures to make it easier for tourists to come to Tasmania; we';ll be upgrading important roads; we';ll support upgrades to tourism infrastructure; we';ll make significant further improvements to telecommunications; and we';ll provide a further boost to Tasmania';s credentials in the area of education.
It was as you know a Coalition Government that introduced the Bass Strait Passenger Vehicle Equalisation Scheme.  It was us.  This has led to a doubling of vehicles coming to Tasmania with big benefits for the tourism industry. We are going to further expand this important scheme to make it even more attractive throughout the whole year and more accessible for members of the community by increasing the rebate to a flat $300 a car on a return trip, increasing the rebate for motor-homes and caravans, and allowing equal access to the rebate for people with disabilities.
Furthermore we will fund upgrades to the Lilydale-Scottsdale Road and the Arthur Highway.  We will fund improvements in local tourism infrastructure in Launceston; Low Head; Burnie; and other places around the state.  Tasmania will also get its fair share of the $65 million tourism plan I outlined in Hobart earlier today. We will provide $3 million in agriculture infrastructure and introduced new scholarships and provide funding for a new course in environmental and town planning at the University of Tasmania.
These measures and others in the package which I';m releasing today represent real support for Tasmania. They are not the token support offered by the Australian Labor Party.  The lack of real support for Tasmania from Labor which frankly takes Tasmania for granted – their attitude in this election campaign is that Tasmania';s okay, Tasmania';s in the bag. When they start counting the gains their starting point is Tasmania';s in the bag. Don';t worry about Tasmania, they';ll always vote Labor at a federal level. They';ll always support us. We can take them for granted. We start five-nil in Tasmania and then we try and win seats back.  Well we';re here to tell you they shouldn';t take Tasmanians for granted.  And what did they say? They said they';re going to maintain the value of the Bass Strait Passenger Vehicle Equalisation Scheme. That';s a pretty pallid generalisation compared with the offer that we have made.  We want more people coming to Tasmania and we';re going to pay more through the subsidy to achieve this.  
The Coalition has a long history of support for Tasmania be it through the $110 million under the Regional Forest Agreement; the $150 million provided under the Natural Heritage Trust; the $20 million of the Abt Railway; or many other such measures.  We have over the years provided very strong and real support for Tasmania. We have worked hard to get a balance between the natural desire of all people in this state to protect and care for the environment, but also to support the important forest and paper industries which are very important to jobs.  We want both. Surely it is not beyond the width of Australians in the early years of the 20th century to devise a set of policy that simultaneously look after the environment but also create job opportunities for young people. And there is no state in Australia where that double goal is a greater imperative than it is here in Tasmania.  And unless you have industry that provide jobs for young people you won';t stop the flow of your young to the mainland of Australia and that is why special measures over the years to support the Tasmanian economy are so absolutely essential. And I believe that when you read and digest the other details of our Tasmanian package, mind you, crafted not just as Labor';s is to help people in two electorates – namely Braddon and Bass – but rather tailored for all Tasmanians and providing measures that help all parts of the state of Tasmania, I believe it will win very wide support.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is now just over a week to go before the election. At eight o';clock tomorrow morning in a week';s time those polling booths will open and in the course of the next few hours my fate will be sealed one way or another, and the fate of a lot of other people around Australia and that is how it should be in a great democracy and we wouldn';t want it otherwise. And isn';t it a privilege to live in a country that allows that kind of process to happen.  And isn';t it a privilege to live in a country where you can wander around and interact with people, get a pat on the back, get a few vigorous handshakes, cop a bit of abuse, a bit of abuse gratuitous or otherwise. But that really is what electioneering Australian style is all about and long may it remain like that.  And that';s why you';ve got a good man here in Bass in Tony Benneworth.  And I';ve been through a few malls in my time.  He';s a good mall walker.  I mean he sort of stays with you. He doesn';t mind meetings people.  It';s amazing some candidates.  No, none here, no names. You go out and you sort of wonder whether they really want to be out there with you or not. But Tony he';s terrific and he knows a lot of people and he interacts very well. 
But this is going to be a very tough fight.  We all know that. Never underestimate sitting Labor members.  They hang on tenaciously, they use the resources provided to them to the very last degree to hang onto office. They';re never easy to root out of office. And you';ve got to fight very very hard. You shouldn';t assume that because with such a tiny margin there must on the law of averages be a swing back to the Liberal Party at the next election.
Now there are two issues that should resolve the minds of those people who';ve yet to decide who they';re going to support and it';s really the answer to the question – who is best able to deliver for Australia in those two important areas - that should resolve the question of who you';re going to vote for.  And those two areas are nationals security and economic management. They';re both important.  One is no more important than the other. I';ve heard at various stages in this campaign people say we';ve got to get off national security issues and get onto domestic issues. That';s nonsense.  It';s equally nonsense to say we should only talk about national security issues.  You';ve got to talk about both. You can';t have the one without the other. If we had no national security it doesn';t matter how well you manage the economy you might lose it and equally no matter how strong our national security is if we decay economically than the protection we have provided ourselves amounts to a fairly vain effort.  
And it';s in those two areas where I believe the Coalition, the Liberal Party, my Prime Ministership matched against the Labor Party and Mr Beazley';s leadership of the Opposition that we are entitled to another term from the Australian people. 
We do face a number of security challenges. We are involved alongside the Americans in a fight against terrorism. We can';t wash our hands of that responsibility. We can';t say to the Americans well you look after us if we get into difficulties but now that you';re under assault you look after that on your own. I can';t think of anything which is more strategically and morally indefensible than that.  And that attack on America in September was also an attack on us. It killed Australians and it also assaulted the values and the principles on which our country is built. And nobody should think that the terrorists will go away if you don';t say boo to them.  This naive view that some people have that the way to deal with them is to sort of pretend it didn';t happen and hope they won';t notice it. That';s the sort of the dealing with the crocodile theory. It will always eat you. It might eat you last but it will always eat you.  Now that in the end is the sort of challenge we face and we are there beside the Americans because what is at stake is the right of Australians to go about their ordinary lives free of the fear of terrorist attacks, free of the dislocation to our economy that those attacks produce, and free of the attack on the values of a free society that are so tremendously important to us.There are other elements to national security. We';ve had quite a debate in this country over the last few months on the question of illegal immigration.  I hold very strongly to the view that this country has an obligation as part of the international community to conduct a generous refugee program and we have done so to our credit now for some decades. We are one of only nine countries in the world that has a resettlement program and we take more refugees on a per capita basis than any country in the world accept Canada. But my friends we will decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come and we';ll decide that applying humane equitable principles and international refugee assessment. What is involved in this debate about asylum seekers is the proposition that some people have, namely if people can quite literally present themselves at Australia';s borders and demand entry no matter what the background or no matter what the circumstances are. And don';t any of you imagine that the Labor Party has been as avowedly in support of the position we now take as they currently claim.  When we presented our Border Protection Bill to the Parliament the Labor Party voted against it.  Having four and a half hours earlier through the Leader Opposition said that he supported what I was doing in relation to the Tampa they then changed their position and they voted against it. A few weeks later they voted in favour of it and then while it was being debated in the Senate many of their members said that if they won the election they would reserve the right to alter that particular piece of legislation.  
Once again when it comes to the Labor Party don';t believe what they say, remember what they did. And when they had the opportunity to vote on that legislation they first voted it down and it was only I believe a political calculation on their part, not a sincere change of heart, that led them to alter their position.  The reality is that we must assert and maintain the undoubted right we have as a sovereign nation to control our borders. It is the first element in a basic national security policy not only to have adequate defences for the country but also to have the right to decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come.
Over the course of this campaign I have reminded the Australian people of the foresight of the Government in providing for a greater defence build up.  When we came to office the one area that was quarantined from spending cuts when we found courtesy of Mr Beazley that we had a big deficit, was in fact defence spending. It was the only area where no cuts were allowed.  More than that through the defence white paper we have massively increased defence spending. And that has meant that we are in a position to make the commitment that we have made to the US led coalition against terrorism. It is why we were able because of the increase in brigade strength of the Army we were able to make the effective deployment into East Timor. And it';s why we have been able to effectively be involved in peacekeeping operations in Bougainville.  So national security in its broader sense is a very important issue in this election.
But the other issue which is so overridingly important in this election is that of economic management. All the promises in the world in the area of health and education and roads and all the other things that we know are important amount to nothing unless we run a strong growing economy. And I would say without any qualification that our commitments in those areas are more credible, more deliverable, and more likely to be implemented in full than the commitments made by the Labor Party for the fundamental reason that if we are returned to office we will be able to manage the Australian economy through the difficult months ahead infinitely better than will the Australian Labor Party because in the time we have been in Government we have turned the Australian economy around.  
When I became Prime Minister our federal government debt was $96 million. By the end of this financial year we would have repaid $58 of that $96 billion.  When I became Prime Minister we had a much higher unemployment rate.  When I became Prime Minister we had about 135,000 apprentices a year. We now have more than 310,000 apprentices a year. When I became Prime Minister our rate of economic growth was slower than the average of the last five and a half years. When I became Prime Minister we had an un-reconstructured old fashioned industrial relations system.  When I became Prime Minister we had a union dominated inefficient Australian waterfront.  In those two areas we have brought about massive change and massive reform.  
All of you will remember the great struggle to reform the Australian waterfront in 1998 and when Peter Reith took on the Maritime Union of Australia with the support of his colleagues and the support of many, but not all people in the business community, the container rates per hour was 16.7.  We set ourselves a goal of 25 and the rate is now 27 an hour, a rate that was completely unheard of.  Completely unheard of years ago.  And the changes that have occurred in our industrial relations system. We';ve abolished compulsory unionism; we';ve encouraged workplace agreements; we';ve put the secondary boycott projections back into the Trade Practices Act. We';ve tried and tried again with limited success and we';ll keep trying if we';re re-elected to get rid of the ridiculous unfair dismissal laws which are so damaging to small business.  
And you can be certain as surely as the proverbial night follows day that if Labor wins this election there will be massive rollback in one area and one area alone and that';s industrial relations. They may be intending to keep 97% of the GST and the tax reform package but they will abolish 100% of the industrial relations reforms that this government has brought in. And any member of the Australian business community who thinks that some way or other they will be a business friendly government is deluding themselves because the industrial relations policy that Mr Beazley has committed himself to is far more regressive, far more pro union, and represents a far greater turning back of the clock than even the industrial relations policies of the Keating Government because his policy involved a total abolition of workplace agreements, a wrecking of the secondary boycott provisions in the Trade Practices Act, a restoration of the right of unions to demand entry into premises even when no members of the firm are members or want to be members of the union. And if you have a federal Labor government but Labor governments in every state with the exception of South Australia it will be absolutely open season.
So ladies and gentlemen, wherever you turn on the issue of economic management we';ve not only got the runs on the board but we';ve also got a commitment for a continuation of that strong economic growth. It';s no accident that the London Economist predicted that next year the Australian economy would grow more strongly than the economy of any part of the industrialised world. And the reason for that is that we have had the courage to implement and to go on implementing genuine and important economic reforms.  Tax reform was very hard. Bits of it were unpopular and I know there were transition difficulties for the small business community and I thank them for that and we tried to respond to their concerns. But now that it';s there the last thing we want is to muck around and try and take bits and pieces out of it and fiddle around at the edges and pretend that we';re rolling back.  Let';s get on with our lives, lets'; get on with the future so far as the operation of our tax system is concerned. And it has brought great benefits - $12 billion reduction in personal income tax; a company tax rate down from 36% to 30%; a halving of the capital gains tax for individuals; taking the embedded indirect taxes out of exports which is one of the reasons why we';ve had the eight successive trade surplus announced only a couple of days ago. Something nobody would have thought possible. 
I mean that is the measure of the strength that this government has brought to the Australian economy.  The Labor Party';s trying to sneak through this election campaign when it comes to economic management saying me too, me too, yeah we believe in balanced budgets.  They ran five deficits in their last five years in government and they left us with $98 billion of debt. I mean they expect us to believe, accept that they are born again budget balancers.  I mean really these are the men and women who gave us that $96 billion. These are the men and women who gave us 17% interest rates. Mr Beazley was the Employment Minister who took unemployment to 11%.  I mean these people have form.  They are past masters.  [tape break]  They really do. They have plenty of priors I can tell you.  They have plenty of prior convictions.  I mean they were there at the scene of just about every serious economic crime inflicted on the Australian public in the last ten or fifteen years.  They gave us the recession we had to have, they gave us those high interest rates.  They gave us that $96 billion of government debt. And now they';re coming back saying look we';ve learnt our lesson, we';re pure, we';ll never do it again, we won';t offend again your honour. I mean I don';t think the Australian public are going to believe that unless of course we are so foolish as not to remind them, unless of course we become part of some sort of acceptance, oh no well you can';t talk too much about their past, we';ve got to sort of talk only about the future. In an election campaign you';ve got to talk about the present, you';ve got to talk about the past, and you';ve also got to talk about the future. And on all of those scores we have a very strong story to tell.  
We';ve heard a lot from the Labor Party about health and education.  Can I just give you two little figures no health and education.  They run around the country saying that we are against government schools.  70% of Australian children are educated in government schools and in the five and a half years that I';ve been Prime Minister we have increased federal government spending on government schools by 43%.  43%.  And in that period of time the enrolment in government schools has risen by 1.8%, 1.8%.  And our spending has gone up by 43% and so it should because government schools educate 70% of Australian children.  And the other statistic I';ll give you on this issue because it';s part of the Labor Party propaganda war to say we don';t care about kids who go to government schools  69%, just on 69% or 70% of Australian children are educated at government schools and they get 78% of the total government funding both federal and state which is made available for education.  Now if you look at those two figures nobody can make any kind of case that we have neglected government schools. Certainly we believe in freedom of choice. We support independent schools because we believe in the right of parents to choose the education they think best suits their children.  But the exercise of the implementation of the polices that deliver that choice are not in any way polices that have discriminated against the operation of government schools and the provision of generous federal government funding of those schools.
Ladies and gentlemen this is a very important election.  It';s a very important election for Australia because I don';t believe this country can afford on Saturday week to go to a government that really doesn';t know quite what it believes in. Over the last five and a half years the Labor strategy has been to say nothing and hope the other mob fall over.  I mean Mr Beazley said that at a famous caucus meeting when somebody questioned him about policy and he said don';t talk to me about policy, our policy is to let them introduce the GST and then surf into victory on the back of the public discontent. And that was their philosophy for year after year. They didn';t develop any policies and now they';re running around saying we need more time to argue their case. If we had another week they';re saying briefing the journalists we';d do better. But they';ve had five and a half years and they can';t have outlined themselves and defined themselves to the Australian community over the last five and a half years it';s a pretty sorry pass for now for them to put up their hand and say we';d like another week in which to campaign around the Australian community. They have run the most negative opposition I';ve experienced in my 27 years in public life.  And on that ground alone they don';t deserve to win.
But it';s also a very important election for one other reason. You need three terms at least to be down fundamental changes to a society particularly when you';ve come in after 13 years of government by the other side.  We';ve made a lot of changes but many of them would be at risk if we lose on Saturday.
Now ladies and gentlemen that brings me back to Bass. It is one of those seats that has a very special place in the Liberal pantheon. It was a great historic, memorable, never to be forgotten here in 1975 which was the welcome harbinger of the defeat later that year of the Whitlam Government which undeniably is the worst government that Australia has had since World War II.  And it was a government that had brought a great deal of economic distress to this part of Australia and the people of northern Tasmania demonstrated how they felt.  And it was a great victory by the late Kevin Newman on that particular occasion.  And since then of course since Kevin retired it';s sort of been in and out of Liberal hands and now it is ever so narrowly in Labor hands.  And she will fight like crazy to hang on to it.  And we';ll win this seat if we can present to the people of Bass a clear choice at a national level between the sort of things I';ve spoken of and the Labor alternative.
I need Tony to win in order to be certain that I';ll remain Prime Minister. You can';t assume that we';ll have even swings throughout the country.  I need Tony Benneworth in order to remain Prime Minister. Of course seats can go in different directions and seats like Bass we need to win back from the Labor Party. We need to give ourselves a foothold here in Tasmania. I want more seats than Bass. I mean I';d be delighted to have the lot. But because I';m here in Bass I';m focusing on the need to win Bass. It will be a very tough fight but if we work hard, if you work doubly hard between now and Saturday we can have a wonderful surprise on the night of the 10th of November when the results start going up and you will have delivered back to the Liberal Party fold a seat that has a very special place in the history of our party. And in Tony the people of Bass will have a magnificent local representative.  Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much ladies and gentlemen.  The peripatetic behaviour of political leaders in election campaigns brought me to Hobart last night.  On learning that there was going to be this marvellous conference here and having seen some of it reported on television last night and knowing that the Coalition';s tourism policy was about due for release, the conjunction of the events was irresistible and so I sought the indulgence of my colleagues in the tourism industry to say a few words.
May I first and most importantly welcome visitors from overseas to Australia and to Hobart.  The tourist industry in Australia is a strong, proud, fundamentally critical industry to the economic future of our country.  Australia is a wonderful safe welcoming friendly place to visit.  We have wonderful people, a great environment a very strong economy and wonderfully enthusiastic group of people who are active in the industry.  So my fundamental message to you this morning is one of enormous optimism and enormous enthusiasm about the future of the industry here in Australia and those Australians present will know also the critical importance of the tourist industry to the state of Tasmania.  
I don';t need to tell you that this conference comes at a difficult and challenging time for the tourist industry.  The impact on your industry of the attacks in New York and Washington on 11th September, the near paralysis of parts of the American domestic travel and tourist industry, the effect, the frightening effect that';s had on the travel plans of millions of people around the world have of course cast a very long shadow so far as your industry is concerned.  And that is of concern to us because tourism has contributed mightily to the growth of the Australian economy over the last twenty years and the people who work in and represent the tourism industry in Australia have been very successful in building new markets overseas and taking Australian tourism to the rest of the world.  
Now this of course has not happened by chance.  The industry has built a reputation for quality and dependability combined with the many advantages of Australia';s unique attractions.  The Australian tourist industry proved how stunningly capable and sophisticated it was in the outstanding contribution it made when Australia hosted the hugely successful Olympic Games in Sydney last year.  They were recognised throughout the world as a triumph not only of Australian sporting prowess but also a triumph of Australia';s technological sophistication. Most importantly of all it put on display the easy, affable, friendly, open character of the Australian personality.  And that really was the greatest single, the most prized asset that came out of the Olympic Games.
The industry is facing a big challenge at the moment.  The aftermath of the 11th of September has been compounded by some subsequent events overseas and also the impact of the Ansett shut down here in Australia.  And I know that you are legitimately, whether you come from overseas and more particularly those here from Australia are very concerned about the future of your industry and the government shares that concern and it has tried in a number of ways to associate itself with that concern and to respond.  I attended, along with my minister Jackie Kelly who is with us this morning, the tourism summit in Canberra in September and it was decided then that an industry working group would be formed to monitor the impact of recent events on the tourism industry and report back to the government.  That working group handed across its report on the 12th of October and because the election campaign had begun, the report was provided to all political parties here in Australia.  I want to thank the members of the working group for their work and for their thorough comprehensive report.  In particular I thank Andrew Byrnes who along with Jackie Kelly were co-chairmen of the working group.  The report not surprisingly found that much of your industry was doing it tough here in Australia as is the case in other parts of the world.
So as a result of that I want to announce today four commitments involving some practical measures worth in all about $45 million in response to the difficulties faced by the tourism industry.  Three of these commitments pick up on key recommendations of the working group report and I can therefore inform you today that a re-elected Liberal government will one, provide additional funding to the Australian Tourist Commission of $24 million over five years including an additional $6 million in this current financial year and a further $6 million next financial year for additional promotion in international markets.  We will provide additional funding for the ‘See Australia'; domestic tourism promotion of $8 million over four years.  We will provide increased funding to the regional tourism programme of $8 million over four years and we will make a one-off contribution of $5 million to be paid this financial year to the travel compensation fund to be matched by state and territory governments which have primary responsibility for travel agents'; licencing.  This is to be a once only payment in recognition of the exceptional nature, the causes of the current downturn in tourism.  
This package of measures worth $45 million builds on the policy initiatives already in place that are assisting the tourism industry.  On 8 October the government announced a $20 million tourism assistance package, most of which is to help small businesses in the tourism industry directly affected by the collapse of Ansett as well as to assist in the downturn following the terrorist attack.  It includes $15 million for small business that honoured components of holiday packages for which they were not paid in order to keep faith with their customers.  It is to be made available in grants for small businesses as a contribution for losses borne.  $5 million has been provided for the travel industry to provide incentives of $150 for every holiday package purchased with a total value excluding airfares of $750 or more.  The total commitment therefore in direct help to the tourism industry is $65 million.  
In addition, the Coalition government has assisted the tourism industry both directly and indirectly by providing a number of guarantees and loans to enable Ansett Mark II and regional services around Australian to resume flights.  The steps the government took to assist with the resumption of air services, particularly in regional Australia was very important to the tourism industry.
The Deputy Prime Minister has already announced in the election campaign, almost $12 million worth of commitments to boost regional tourism.  The Coalition has also given a commitment to extend the diesel fuel rebate scheme to include small retail hospitality businesses that produce their own electricity from diesel.  This is worth $80 over four years and will greatly assist tourist operators in many of the more remote parts of Australia.As you know the Government introduced a ticket levy as a means of ensuring the proper funding of the entitlements of Ansett employees which we have guaranteed.  It was not a measure that we enjoyed introducing and I understand that on its own it is not a particularly attractive measure.  Levies on industries never are and I have been in politics long enough to understand that and I very freely acknowledge it.  So I do want to repeat to you this morning a commitment that I made to the tourism summit in September which was perhaps not as widely reported at the time as it should have been, so I take this opportunity of repeating that commitment.  That if at a future time we recover the funds from those legally responsible for meeting the entitlements of the Ansett employees, then any revenue collected from the ticket tax, not therefore needed for the entitlements, will be returned to the community and in particular in the process of returning it to the community we will ensure that a significant proportion of that return goes to the tourism industry. 
There are just one or two general observations I would like to make about the economic and industrial climate that effects your industry.  I';m sure I don';t need to remind a consumer sensitive audience such as this that the general health of the Australian economy is quite crucial to the future of your industry as is the general health of the world economy.  The world economy has taken a very heavy knock following the 11th of September.  The American economy at that time was stagnating.  The optimists thought that other things being equal it would begin to grow again in the first six months of 2002.  The events of 11th of September changed that and it';s now fair to say that the American';s stagnation will continue somewhat longer.  Although I have always had a more optimistic view about the recuperative powers of the United States economy than many others.  That economy is so big, it is so lightly regulated and so flexible and so entrepreneurial in character that it has a capacity to bounce back like none other any where else in the world and despite all the challenges the Americans face, all the heavy burdens they face, all the natural domestic uneasiness that Americans experience, their capacity to bounce back is very real indeed.  The good news for Australia is that our economy is in better shape than just about any industrialised economy in the world.  The indicators have held up longer, the growth has stayed longer, employment rates are still very strong, investment is still pretty strong, retail sales yesterday fell by a tiny fraction as a result of the impact of the September quarter, they were predicted to fall by much larger amounts.  The stimulatory measures we took in the housing industry have helped enormously and I can report to you that the Australian economy is in pretty fine fettle and the indications are that that will continue.  And the reason it';s in pretty fine fettle is that we have over the past few years undertaken some major reforms, some of them weren';t easy, some of them weren';t popular, some of them would have been criticised by people at this gathering, I know that.  There are aspects of tax reform that weren';t popular and now that it';s been introduced the last thing we want to do is start fiddling with it at the edges and rolling it back here and there would only create boundless confusion for no real gain.
Tax reform was needed, it';s given us a stronger revenue base, it';s helped our exports, it';s given us lower personal tax and lower company tax and lower capital gains tax and it';s been a very important reform and I want to continue to maintain it in all of it';s details.
The other great area of reform of course that is very important to your industry is workplace relations.  If ever there';s an industry that needs a capacity to work out deals at a workplace level free from undue union interference it';s the tourist industry.  The essence of your industry really is effective, flexible working groups and individual enterprises, with people having a fixed view of a common goal, of making the business work, having a happy, dedicated staff, paying them well, encouraging them with incentives and if you succeed making sure that they share in some of the success.  It is the ultimate service oriented entrepreneurial part of our economy and I';ve always felt that it';s the last part of our economy that can be benefited by unduly restrictive industrial relations practice.  
So I do want to say to you, incase any of you are giving any casual thought over the next week or so as to how you might cast your vote, you know time';s running out, I would like you to just bare in mind as far as your own industry is concerned that one of the things that really will be a threat if the other crowd get in is the more flexible industrial relations of the  last five and a half years.  Really I assure you, they might run around saying they';re not going to touch this, we';re not going to touch that, but they';re going to roll back industrial relations big time because that';s something that means a great deal to a government with that political culture, it has a great trade union history and links.  There';s nothing wrong with trade unions, providing they don';t try and run enterprises, they don';t have any of their employees and or any of their members, they don';t try and force people to join unions, they don';t try and charge non unionists for benefits that they say they';ve got for them and they don';t start pushing small businessmen around and also I remind you of course we';ve been working very hard to get those very foolish unfair dismissal laws abolished all together, we';ve made some progress, we';re gonna keep trying, because they are a real impediment to employing additional staff in small business and we going to of course keep age-based wage rates that we think are very important to employment.  
What you need in your industry, more than in most is to have complete flexibility in relation to employment conditions.  You want guaranteed minimums, sure, nobody wants or would tolerate exploitation.  But you want flexibility, flexibility of hours, you want flexibility of the remuneration arrangement, you want a capacity to talk to your staff without interference from outside and to work out the best arrangements that suit your business.  And of all of the differences that exist between the government that I';ve been very proud to lead over the last five and a half years and my opponent that bear upon your industry is of course in the area of industrial relations.
So ladies and gentlemen it';s been very kind of you to allow me, because of the circumstance of my being at the hotel at this particular time to drop in and say a few things about our tourism policy.  We have tried to listen.  When I went to that meeting in September I listened to a lot of people and they had very genuine case, you are doing it tough.  You have been hit by a double whammy and that';s not easy.  We understand that, we have tried to respond in a specific way.  I hope the practical measures that I';ve outlined today will be of help.  I might also interpolate that I';m going up to Launceston now and I';m going to be releasing a series of policies of particular relevance to Tasmania and I should indicate that those policies will contain some further individual measures of support to the tourism industry here in Tasmania.  So it';s been a good day I hope for tourism, not only in Australia but most particularly here in Tasmania.
Can I conclude by saying to all of you, I think you belong to one of the great success stories of Australia over the last 20 years but I think back at what life and attitudes was like 25 or 30 years ago in Australia and how people';s attitudes and tastes have been transformed during that period.  I can';t think of a greater change than in the whole area of entertainment and hospitality.  It was something that many Australians did not naturally take to a generation ago and in that short period of time their attitude has been transformed and we are as good, and if not as good – better than any in the world in providing high quality entertainment in providing friendly affable and efficient service and in providing congenial and safe surroundings in which people can enjoy their leisure.  Tourism has given mightily to the Australian economy over the last few years and it will continue to do so and Australia will grow in its appeal as a likeable, safe, desirable destination for international travel.
I thank you very much for the contribution that all of you';ve made to the Australian economy and the image there is of Australia around the world which is so very positive.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Thank you very much Ross for your kind words, Gordon and Beverley Moyes, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Whatever the circumstances and whatever the time I have always been delighted to be associated with the activities of the Wesley Mission. It is one of the great welfare organisations of Australia and the work that it does in so many fields to help the less fortunate, to extend the hand of practical Christian charity, it’s pioneering work in so many areas is really very widely respected all around Australia. It has a very long and rich history. It’s predecessor I think was the Central Methodist Mission which was the first as I understand it, welfare agency anywhere in the world to introduce the notion that if people felt like taking their own lives they should get on the phone and ring somebody and talk over the problem. Incredibly enough I think that was only in about 1960, it was only about forty years or more that Lifeline was inaugurated by the Central Methodist Mission under the leadership of that great figure in the Australian church and great figure of great causes Alan Walker who has been a tower of strength to so many people.
Through the years the Central Methodist Mission and then in its post-1977 description the Wesley Mission has continued this magnificent work and I really take the opportunity today as I have on other occasions and I hope to have the opportunity to do in the future to very warmly salute the work of the Wesley Mission and in particular I come here to salute it’s work in relation to the terrible problem of suicide. I say how delighted I am to hear Gordon Moyes talk about how we are making progress. It’s important that message goes out because so frequently in these difficult social areas because there seems to be almost a predisposition amongst those who comment or write about these issues to give the impression that there is really no hope, that it’s getting worse. And everything that is being done is a complete failure and it means that the world is completely coming to an end and it’s all the fault of a society that is rotten to the core and everything has got to be turned on its head. It’s the same sort of philosophy that is adopted by so many in relation to the challenge of drug abuse. The reality is that we are making some progress on that front. It’s slow, it’s very hard but the deaths from heroin overdoses have fallen significantly. You don’t hear about that very much because in a sense it’s not a fashionable outcome. That wasn’t meant to happen in the eyes of the doomsayers and the people who say it’s all the fault of society and we need to completely turn society on its head.
Now youth suicide, suicide of any age is the most moving traumatic thing that I imagine anybody could go through. As a local Member of Parliament for twenty-seven years I have had some discussions with constituents about everything. The ones that have had the lasting impact on me is to sit with the parents of a young man or a young woman who has taken their life when they apparently had everything in front of them. And to hear the anguished recriminations against themselves, to hear the sense of despair and hopelessness and that awful feeling that this is something that you can never expunge or erase from your experience or from your consciousness. And I remember attending a function in the Domain a few months ago in relation to suicide and it was a very moving function where a number of people who'd gone through that awful experience spoke of that and organisations such as the mission and the others that are associated with trying to do something about the problem, they offer to people who’d gone through that trauma and opportunity to share their pain and to talk about their experiences and for others who’d gone through the same situation and others who may not have but have empathy and have an understanding to reach out to them. And if ever you need friends and a loving community and wonderful organisations like the Wesley Mission, you need them on occasions such as this.
So I’ve come here today to do a number of things, I’ve come here to renew the commitment of the Coalition to the fight against the devastation of lives through suicide. About 2,500 people take their lives every year and in 1999 we established the National Suicide Prevention Strategy and we’re going to commit $40 million for four years from the year 2002 to build on this strategy with funds to help communities build local partnerships to protect their people against suicides. And this will bring to a total of the funding to fight suicide to an amount of $66 million.
As Gordon Moyes pointed out that the next target area is really men aged 25 to 44 years. That’s not to say we’re going to let up in relation to young men and women, particularly young men in rural areas which at one stage I think, embarrassingly and shamefully for Australia we had the highest youth suicide rate in the world amongst that, or within that particular age cohort.
A new priority under the strategy that we’re supporting, and it’s run by the National Advisory Council chaired by Professor Ian Webster, is we’re going to make a $2 million commitment to research and development, aimed at reducing suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning through motor vehicles. Sadly, carbon monoxide poisoning is the second most common form of suicide for both men and women in Australia. And there are also, as we all know, many tragic incidents of carbon monoxide poisoning where young children are involved. We’ll try and help reduce these incidents. We’ll fund the development and the trial of a cabin air monitor and obtain an Australian design rule for the introduction of the monitor in new Australian motor vehicles. We’ll also develop and introduce tail pipe modification devices for used cars.
The other thing I would like to say today and say very positively how we have here with the partnership between the Wesley Mission and Percomm, an Australian company, we have a great example of the social coalition at work. We have a great example of what Ross Cameron spoke of. That the government can’t do it all, although the government has got to go on doing a lot, and go on providing a lot of money, but the real skill and the real expertise in so many of these difficult social area is held in the hands of the people who work in great organisations like the Wesley Mission. And we do need the help and the support of commercial organisations and I’ve been greatly encouraged by the large number of Australian companies that have risen to the occasion in relation to matching money provided by governments. My mantra is that not so much that businesses should give more although I’d be very happy if they did that as well, but rather that more businesses should give and what I think the social coalition has been able to do is to extend the network of businesses that provide funds.
So amongst other things ladies and gentlemen, I want to announce today that the government will provide a $500, 000 grant to Wesley Mission to support their LifeForce work on suicide prevention. Can I also say that that money is allocated from the National Suicide Prevention strategy and it is going to matched in full by a grant from the Percomm Company. This is a wonderful example, a terrific gesture by that company and can I thank it and congratulate it and hold it up as an exemplar of the sort of activity that other companies should do. And that will provide the Wesley Mission and its LifeForce with a million dollars to expand its activities and to do its good work particularly to help men in the 25 – 44 age group which is now the age group and the age cohort most at risk of suicide.
I’m also announcing today a further $2.4 million in project funding for 22 community groups across Australia to pursue local suicide prevention activities. I won’t list all of them and the details are going to be provided by Michael Wooldridge in a separate release but they’ll include a project such as $355, 000 for Anglicare Top End to establish and coordinate a Northern Territory wide suicide intervention trainers network and the Coalition has started this concerted fight with the aim of saving Australian lives from the despair and the tragedy of suicide.
Ladies and Gentlemen, can I again take this opportunity of thanking all of the welfare organisations of Australia, not only but of course most particularly because I am here today at Lottie Stewart Hospital not only but certainly including the Wesley Mission and all the other great organisations that do so much because of their dedication, their sensitivity, their coalface experience and their sheer understanding of the human cost of suffering, of poverty, of suicide, of family break up, of alcohol and other substance abuse, of domestic violence, and all the other things that cause misery and unhappiness within our community. We will never I guess achieve the utopian world where all of those things can be banished. But we can make a difference if we work together. And the important thing to say to the community is that you can make a difference if you work together. There are too many people who run around saying look it’s all too hard, it won’t work, it’s all the fault of this rotten society in which we live, and until we bring this rotten society to its knees we are not going to get any justice. Now, of course that is absolute nonsense, it’s a counsel of despair, it’s a counsel of social anarchy and what is really needed is the sort of cooperative effort that is demonstrated here today. And what is also needed is a communication to the public that when you do get good results, when you do apply the right programs then you do achieve progress and this is happening with youth suicide and I’m glad Gordon mentioned it, and I’ll mention it every time I make a speech on suicide from now on. And the same thing applies with the campaign against drugs. Sure we’ve got a long way to go and sure the heroin drought has made some contribution to the fall in the number of deaths but so have the measures governments have undertaken and we’ve got to keep fighting these social challenges, and we’ve got to keep our will and our nerve and importantly of all we’ve got to share our capacities with each other. We can’t do it on our own. We can provide money, and we should, because it is the community’s resources and the community that needs help. But we need your help. We need the help of individuals, we need the help of the business community and can I thank Percomm very warmly for what it has done. It’s a very very generous gesture and it is the sort of example for the rest of the business community that I applaud very very warmly.
Thank you.
(ends)


E&amp;OE..................
Well thank you very much John, Jan Herron, my parliamentary colleages, Bob Carroll, ladies and gentlemen.  As John said we are in the home stretch, which is probably the appropriate sporting analogy this week.  We';ve got the last days of a very tense test match to use a sporting analogy with which I';m even more familiar.  And can I say to you very directly and very genuinely I think this election is anything but over. I think we do face a very tough fight, the preference deal that';s been made between the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats, which has involved an enormous amount of compromising of policy, particularly in relation to the deal with the Greens. That particular preference deal is going to mean that the Coalition will on this occasion be required to drive its primary vote to a much higher level than we achieved in 1998.  But although the result is I believe still very much in the balance the issues in this campaign could rarely have been more clear cut or more compelling.  
There are two overriding questions that undecided voters must ask themselves.  The first of the overriding questions is who as Prime Minister and which people as a team are better able to lead Australia and to guide Australia at this time of particular challenge on the national security front?  And the second overriding question is that of economic management, who is better able at a time when through no fault of our own we are going to face some challenges next year, who is better able to lead and manage the Australian economy through that very difficult and challenging period?  Because in the end my friends you can propound a set of policies, you can promise to put more resources into areas like health and education and aged care but unless you have a functioning growing economy you do not have the wherewithal to deliver on those commitments.  
And that is really the core of the Labor dilemma so far as their programme is concerned. Everybody';s in favour of making more provision when you can afford it for necessary social services and social infrastructure, providing the money is properly targeted and properly directed.  And in fact because of our good management of the Australian economy that is what we have been able to do over the last five and a half years.  I don';t want to besiege you with a lot of statistics at a lunch like this but one issue that the Labor Party has talked incessantly about is our alleged discrimination about government schools throughout Australia.  Can I just say to you as a great believer in freedom of parental choice in education, a great believer in it, can I say to you that over the last five and a half years we have increased federal government spending on government schools by 43 per cent, even though the enrolment in government schools over that period of time has only risen by 1.8 per cent.  Now that hardly represents discrimination against government schools, it hardly represents the alleged trashing of the public education system that we have been constantly accused of by the Labor Party. But the point I make is that because we have run a better economy we have been able to do that.  When we became the Government in March of 1996 and we became that Government by courtesy of a tremendous Liberal Party result here in the state of Queensland, an absolutely tremendous result, when we became the Government in March of 1996 the accumulated Federal Government debt was $96 billion.  The Labor Party had run five successive budget deficits and they gave us an accumulated government debt of $96 billion. By the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 of that $96 billion of Government debt, we were opposed every inch of the way by the Labor Party in our attempts to repay it. 
But the good news out of that is not only the strength it gives us for the future but also by repaying debt we have a lower interest bill and that lower interest bill has meant that we have had $4 billion a year more available to spend on things like hospitals and roads and schools.  And what it means ladies and gentlemen is that we go into this time of international economic challenge stronger and better able to face it than we would have been if the government had not undertaken the changes and the reforms to the Australian economy over the last five and a half years.
We are as a nation better prepared than most, we have probably the lowest interest rates in 30 or 40 years, we have the lowest debt to GPD ratio of just about any western country in the world.  We have reformed our industrial relations system, we have reformed our taxation system, we have put in place a better system of commonwealth state financial relations with the states getting all the proceeds of the Goods and Services Tax and thereby having the capacity as our population ages to fund the services that an ageing population needs, and I';ll come to that issue in a moment in the context of superannuation policy and I haven';t forgotten that I';ve got to launch it.  I haven';t forgotten that I';ve got it here, it';s a very good policy and you';ll love it but there are just a few of the fundamentals that I want to touch on about this election campaign.  Because the last thing Australia can afford at the present time going into a period of international economic difficulty, the last thing we can afford is to elect a government that proved when they were last in office that they were hopeless economic managers.
Now we haven';t been perfect, we';ve made a few mistakes, I acknowledge that there were some transitional difficulties in relation to the implementation of the new tax system and we endeavoured to respond to a number of those.  But that taxation system has helped make the Australian economy stronger and better able to withstand the challenges ahead.  And I guess of all the things that would grieve me most if we were to lose at the weekend, of all the great policy changes the one that would really be at total risk, of total repudiation and total change, it would be the reforms that we have enacted in the areas of workplace relations.  Because if Mr Beazley wins on Saturday you will have a federal Labor government and you will have state Labor governments and territory Labor governments everywhere except South Australia.  You will have wall to wall, coast to coast, one end of the country to the other end of the country Labor governments.  And can you imagine the outcome, it would be an industrial relations and economic diaster because what you would have - it would be a capacity for the ACTU and the trade union movement to reassert its authority. 
Now if we had in the course of introducing our industrial relations policy, if we had visited unimaginable evil on the average working men and women of Australia the Labor Party would have an argument.  But the reality is that our industrial relations policy and our economic management has delivered a trifecta to the working men and women of Australia. To start with their real wages are higher.  Real wages under my prime ministership have risen by nine per cent, in five and a half years.  They rose by 2.3 per cent under Hawke and Keating.  Interest rates are vastly lower, I mean interest rates are now $350 at least a month on an average mortgage lower than they were in March of 1996.  We';ve generated 830 000 more jobs, we have more than doubled the number of apprenticeships in this country.  
When the Labor Party talks about higher education and tertiary education they only ever talk about universities. Now universities are very important but 70 per cent of people who leave school don';t go to universities, they want a traineeships or they want an apprenticeship, and apprenticeships were languishing under Labor, they were about 135,000 for 15 or 20 years.  And we have lifted them to a figure of 310,000 a year and I am really proud as a Liberal Prime Minister of Australia that we have done more to provide opportunities and apprenticeships and traineeships than a Labor Prime Minister in 20 years even dreamt of.
But the threat of a total rollback of industrial relations if Labor wins is quite real.  They will abolish workplace agreements, they will rip the secondary boycott protections out of the trade practices act, they will re-establish the right of union entry into workplaces whether that union entry is wanted or not, either by the employer or by the workers.  They will impose on non-union members of the workforce, which is 80 per cent of the private sector workforce, a financial obligation in relation to benefits gained, allegedly by union action. The problem in the industrial relations area is that the Beazley prescription on industrial relations is even more pro-union and more retrograde than the approach adopted by either Bob Hawke or Paul Keating.  Each of them, particularly Keating at some stage paid some lip service to the need to have a more flexible approach to industrial relations.  But so total is the influence of former ACTU presidents and trade union officials on the frontbench of the Beazley opposition and therefore on the frontbench of a Beazley Labor Government that you will not go back to Hawke and Keating with industrial relations, but indeed you will go back further if there is a Beazley Government elected.  And any incremental progress which has been made by small business on such things as unfair dismissal will go out the window, so far from us having a hope if we are returned of going even further on that front.
But of course my friends the other issue that';s very important I mentioned earlier is the issue of national security.  Dealing with the number of illegal immigrants that have attempted to come into Australia has not been an easy issue for this government.  It has been one of the most difficult issues that I have faced.  But I have a very simple view and it is a view shared by all members of the Liberal Party and all members of the National Party.  We will retain a generous approach to our refugee intake.  We';ll continue on a per capita basis to take more refugees than any country in the world except Canada and that bears repeating because we are constantly lectured by people from countries that take fewer refugees than we do, that we are not pulling our weight.  While maintaining that policy, we are going to decide and nobody else, who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come.
We do not intend to hand over rights of entry into this country to the people smugglers, we intend to reserve our right as a sovereign nation to decide who comes here and the circumstances in which they come.  You can have no assurance at all that if Mr Beazley becomes the Prime Minister on Saturday he will maintain that policy.  He says so for the purposes of the election campaign but already members of his own party, his own candidates are fraying at the edges, already they are saying that once they get in they';ll review the border protection legislation.  They don';t really privately agree with the line that Beazley';s taken, but you know he's got to take for the purposes of the election campaign.  With Labor it';s always important not to listen to what they say but rather to remember what they did.  When we put up the border protection bill he voted against it, and then he changed his mind and voted for it and many of his members when it was being debated said that once they got into office they';d amend it and change it and really they were beging dragged reluctantly to support it and they were really just doing it for the purposes of the election campaign.
So ladies and gentlemen they are the two overriding issues and they will define I believe the choice that the Australian people make on Saturday.  But I do want to say a couple of things about a very important area of specific policy and that is superannuation because providing, through savings, for the future retirement plans is very important for any nation but it';s particularly important for a nation that faces, like all other western nations, an aging of her population over the years ahead.  And the importance of retirement planning and savings should therefore occupy a very significant place in policy formulation.
Today therefore I have released and I am announcing a series of measures that will strengthen the foundations of the superannuation system to encourage a higher level of voluntary contribution and a strong savings and investment culture.  It will provide greater access to superannuation, more incentives for voluntary contributions and removal of significant inequity in the system to assist both single income families and also couples where there is a significant disparity in the earnings of the two members of the couple.  In particular I believe that the announcements I';m making today will be welcomed by Australian women, the self-employed, older Australians and those on low incomes.  And a quick reading of that list suggests that only the blokes have missed out, but that's not true.  
Today';s policy ladies and gentlemen also cuts the rate of the superannuation surcharge.  We are committed as a government to assisting families to maximise the benefits available in superannuation.  We';ll amend the superannuation laws to allow spouses to split their superannuation contributions.  The splitting of superannuation contributions will apply to both personal and employer contributions.  And this measure will be of particular benefit for families where one spouse is working in the home or is receiving a very low income by enabling contributions to be made by one spouse into a separate account in the other spouses name.  Single income families will get access to two RBL';s, reasonable benefit limits, and tax free thresholds in the same way as do dual income families.  In light of the significance of this change a thorough process of consultation will occur, particularly to ensure that any administrative burden does not fall on employers.
In an important new measure we';re going to change arrangements to allow for the first time superannuation contributions to be made on behalf of children.  Superannuation should be seen as lifetime savings, as a strategy for all Australians from their earliest years.
Savings made on behalf of young people can yield considerable returns on account of the wonders of compound interest.  Let me give you an example.  If just $800 is invested each year for a child';s first eighteen years and then that lump sum is left to accumulate interest with no further contributions the value of investment will be worth almost $400,000 by the time the child reaches age 65. 
The Coalition will therefore extend the circumstances under which contributions to superannuation can be made on behalf of children who would not otherwise have superannuation.  Contributions up to a maximum of $1,000 a year will be allowed on their behalf and this will enable parents, grandparents, other relatives and friends to give a child an important foundation on which to build for their future.  It will mean that if parents, grandparents, friends, relatives wish from a time that child is born to establish a superannuation status, a superannuation entitlement, that can be then rolled into the superannuation arrangement of that young person when he or she enters the workforce and commencing the traditional pattern of a superannuation contribution, then they can do so.
This represents a very major decoupling of the link between superannuation and paid employment and it represents a major broadening of the circumstances which over time people can build a superannuation entitlement.  And of all of the policies, I believe that have been released during this election campaign, this says more about the long term importance of responding to both the ageing of our population and the need over time to build greater private national savings than any other policy that has been released.
In the area of self- employed people, under existing legislation, self-employed workers can claim an income tax reduction for personal superannuation contributions.  The current $3,000 limit for full deductibility will be increased to $5,000 with 75 per cent deductibility for contributions above $5,000 up to the age base limits.  
We';re also determined in our new arrangements to provide more help for low income earners to save for their retirement.  We';re not in favour of a further increase in the superannuation guarantee charge, we would regard that as a further tax impost on Australian business, particularly on small business.
Those on low incomes are currently entitled to a maximum rebate of a hundred dollars for un-deducted personal superannuation contributions up to a thousand dollars.  If re-elected the Coalition will replace the current $100 rebate with a far more generous co-contribution, whereby the Government will match personal superannuation contributions up to a limit of $1,000 a year.  The maximum co-contribution of $1,000 will apply to those on incomes of $20,000 and will taper off on those on incomes between $20,000 and $32,500.  This is a very important further incentive and assistance for people on low incomes to begin the process of accumulating savings and superannuation for their retirement.
The, as I mentioned earlier, the Coalition remains committed to ensuring its superannuation is attractive and the system encourages all Australians to save for their retirement.  Commencing on the 1st of July next year a re-elected Coalition will reduce the superannuation surcharge imposed in 1996 by a tenth of its current level over each of the next three years.  That is by a maximum of 1.5 per cent each year.  We will review it at the end of our next term, our capacity and the desirability of further movement in that area.  
We recognise the need for some change and reform in relation to that surcharge and I believe that this will go a distance towards meeting the concerns that have been expressed throughout the community about certain aspects of the impact of that particular measure.
The impact of an ageing population on Australia';s economy will accelerate substantially in coming years.  For social and as well as economic reasons our response must include a greater use of the skills and experience of the increasing number of Australians over the age of 55.  In seeking to encourage older Australians to remain in the workforce, our so-called gold collar workers, the Coalition recognises that many will want to continue to contribute to superannuation.   So as a further contribution towards encouraging that I announce today that a re-elected Coalition government will further increase from 70 to 75, the age that working members of superannuation funds can make personal superannuation contributions.
I thought that would be widely supported.
There are a number of other ancillary measures.  We';re going to extend the circumstances under which contributions to a superannuation fund can be made to ensure that the first child tax refund, which has become known in the trade as the “baby bonus”, can be contributed to the recipient';s superannuation fund and if you think for a moment when you add that to the announcement I';ve made about the splitting of contributions and also the matching on a co-contributory basis by the government of any payments that people with incomes under $20,000 and you put the three of those together it represents a huge advance, I believe for low and middle income females in the community and when you put all of those together it';s an extraordinarily attractive package and I believe will be a widely supported measure to assist Australian families.
We also recognise that the excessive component of a superannuation fund eligible termination payment can be subject to high effective marginal tax rates so we';re therefore going to put in place measures to ensure that the effective tax rate does not exceed 48.5 per cent.  We';re going to push ahead with our choice of fund policy which will give workers a say where superannuation contributions made on their behalf are invested.  And recognising recent developments in retirement income products, the Coalition will examine the tax and social security treatment of certain market-linked income streams including growth pensions.  The Coalition will also help safeguard employees super entitlement by requiring employers to make quarterly contributions on their behalf and the prudential regulation of superannuation will also be enhanced and further consultations will take place with a view to introducing minimum capital requirements, compulsory annual general meetings for superannuation funds and applying a universal APRA Prudential Licence for superannuation funds.  And we';re going to provide some additional resources to APRA to expand its superannuation investigation and enforcement capability.  
And finally we';re going to provide non-residents who are permanently departing Australia the option of accessing their superannuation benefits early, reflecting the fact that they will not be returning to this country.  Access to this, to these benefits will however be subject to withholding arrangements to return the tax concession provided for the superannuation benefits.
So ladies and gentlemen, I think that represents a very comprehensive, innovative and might I say, importantly, an attractive savings and superannuation policy.  It has been tailored, having regard to our financial circumstances, it meets concerns that have been expressed in a number of areas, it trail blazes particularly in the area of superannuation for children, an entirely new policy area.  It provides relief for middle and upper income earners in relation to the surcharge, but it also importantly provides a lot of additional help through the co-contribution of a $1,000 a year to people on low incomes.  And when you add the effect of that in relation to the baby bonus and the new arrangements for the splitting of spouse contributions it does add up to a policy that recognises what I think we all know and understand.  That the more you can promote policies both in relation to taxation, industrial relations, superannuation savings and so forth that are family friendly, recognise the fact that we are an ageing population and also recognise that with younger families the great debate is always the balance between work and family.  And we need tax policies and savings policy and superannuation policy that facilitate the choice to be made particularly, but not only, by Australian women.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I just on a personal note, thank all the members of the Queensland Liberal Party for the tremendous support, John Herron in particular, Bob Carroll, Bob Tucker both former Presidents of the Party, to all former executive members.  The Queensland Liberal Party at a Federal level has given me tremendous help and tremendous support.  And whatever happens on Saturday I';ll always be very grateful, but can I tell you I want to be back.  I want to win on Saturday.  I intend to win on Saturday and I';ll be back  addressing you at gatherings like this for a long time into the future my friends.  We work hard, try hard, put that extra bit of effort in and if we do that there is the real prospect that we can have a great and famous victory for Australia on Saturday the 10th of November.
Thank you.
(ends)


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Peter.  To your wife Kim and your two children Brooke and Michael.  To my parliamentary colleagues, Gary and David, my state parliamentary colleague Mr McGill, the Mayor of Logan City, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This gathering, and what I';ve heard from Peter, is really a metaphor, a wonderful metaphor for entrepreneurial Australia.  And it is a wonderful metaphor for the kind of Australia from a business point of view that I really believe in, and if we could have more examples like this all around our country in the years ahead, there';ll be absolutely no doubt about the economic vitality and the economic strength of our nation.  Because all of the ingredients are there.  You are starting with nothing, the idea conjured up in a pub.  It';s a family oriented business.  You';ve started in an area which has had its ups and downs over the years.  I was reflecting Peter a few weeks ago at the beginning of the election campaign that way back in 1974 when I first ran as a candidate in the Sydney seat of Bennelong which then it was marginally based on the north shore of Sydney and it';s shifted its location a bit since then but we';ve sort of debated as to whether we would spend much money on placing newspaper advertisements in the Northshore Times.  Because at that time you still had afternoon newspapers in Sydney, you still had the Daily Mirror and The Sun and local newspapers were a bit like this.  Now the first thing we do in a campaign is to make sure you book plenty of space in the local newspaper and you';ve actually seen over the years I believe a very significant renaissance of the importance or regional and local newspapers because in the bigger cities the afternoons have gone and I certainly find though with younger people there is a greater interest in local newspapers than was the case with their comparable age cohort a generation ago.
And you';ve surfed that wave, I think you';ve been part of it, and I really do admire the story and I';ve read a little of it. I admire your tenacity.  Yes, you have benefited from the lower interest rates, that has not passed my attention.  You';ve also benefited from the better industrial relations laws and the last thing you want is a return to the old industrial relations laws where you can';t work out the right deals with your workers to your mutual benefit.  And we also want even more flexible industrial relations laws.  I agree with you.  Most small-medium businessmen and women I meet around Australia, the only thing they want from the government is a reasonable playing field and a reasonable environment.  They don';t want hand outs they want low interest rates, they want a sensible taxation system, the lowest company tax rate that the nation can afford, well it is now 30% rather than 36% and a number of other good industrial relations environment.  And I do applaud the place that you have given to the contribution made by your staff.  There';s only one good industrial relations philosophy and that is to see the effort as a team effort and to appreciate the contribution that everybody makes to the enterprise.  It is tremendously important and people who work hard are entitled to a return and if the business does better they are entitled to get something out of it as well as the people who own it.  
But this nation will always need people like Peter and Kim and their children.  And it is so clearly is a family effort and this really is the heart and soul of small business Australia and I think the energy and enterprise and I look around at this huge new facility and I think it is tremendous when so much of the focus, the reporting of the media is on the large media conglomerates and that';s very natural and very understandable because in the world in which we live, the globalised world in which we live you do need size to be a global participant.  But you also need local relevance to serve a community and that obviously is what successful local newspapers do.
I think you';ve chosen the course so wonderfully descriptive and evocative descriptions for the two mastheads The Reporter and The Times.  You would be in no doubt as to what they were and I think that';s obviously been part of your marketing success.  Entering the printing business is of course a huge step forward and it adds to the success you';ve had with your publications since 1989.  Could I just simply say that this is one of the highlights of the last five weeks, I mean that, because everything has come together here.  You';ve got a united family working together for a common purpose.  You';ve got people who are prepared to take a risk for the future of their family and the future of their country. You';ve got people working together in the work place for a common goal.  You';ve got an owner respecting his employees, and you';ve got employees giving loyalty and support to the people who employ them.
Can I say - and you said it didn';t get any better – for me, for my ideal of what Australia is all about in the future it doesn';t get any better than this because (applause) and all of these things have come together.  So I am delighted, Janette and I are absolutely delighted to be here.  I';ve always believed in the notion of an Australian nation where somebody can start with nothing and work their insides out and build something up, involve their family in it and really make a contribution to the community.  And we will always need an environment that makes it possible for people like the Falvey family to achieve that.  So I';m really touched to be here today and thank you very much for what you';ve done for your local community and what you';ve done for your country.
I declare this magnificent facility duly opened for printing and long may it prosper and I';m quite certain that you were serious when you said if any of your competitors have any printing troubles you';d be prepared to help out.  
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Bob who as you all know is the Liberal Party candidate for the seat of Paterson. I’d also like to welcome Ian Shaw who is the National Party candidate for the seat of Paterson. And on all of the issues that are important for this electorate the Liberal and the National Parties are as one.
I know this area very well. I’ve felt as though I was driving up to my annual holiday as I came up the freeway and I’m sorely tempted to keep going and spend the rest of the week of the campaign on Hawks Nest Beach, but I’ve got news for Mr Beazley – I don’t intend to do so. I intend to keep campaigning until 6:00 on Saturday evening because this is going to be a very close election and one of the reasons it’s going to be very close is because the Labor Party has sold out many people in many regional areas and many working people of this country in order to buy Green preferences. The undertakings Labor has entered into in relation to the unconditional ratification of the Kyoto agreement will do great damage to industry, it will do damage to industry in the Hunter, it will do damage to the forest industry. For example, it will lift the cost of power. Generators have to implement costly measures to cut emissions, it will undermine the cost competitiveness of industries like aluminium smelting in the Tomago area. Modelling by the Australian Bureau of Agriculture Resource Economics has estimated that the output of the aluminium industry will be reduced by over 10%. Tomago smelter alone employs more than 1000 people. Likewise it’s estimated that petrol prices will rise by 3.2 cents a litre and after making such a big deal about petrol prices he’s now following policies that he knows will lift petrol prices.
The other area of great concern out of Labor policies for the people of Paterson is road funding. Now we have allocated, and I know just how important road funding is to this part of New South Wales. And we have allocated $8.8 million to the Paterson electorate for local roads under the Roads to Recovery Programme. The Labor Party has said that they will review the priorities of this programme and they need to say before the election, they need to tell the people of the Hunter, they need to tell the people of Paterson how much money they’ll take off this seat in order to fund the $410 million of extra road funding commitments that have been made. So you can’t have it both ways. You can’t say you are going to have the same amount of money, you’re going to draw from the same pot of money, say what you are going to additionally spend it on without at the same time being honest enough to say what you’re going to take it off. And I want to know and Bob wants to know and all of the people, Ian wants to know – Bob and Ian both want to know what projects in Paterson are going to lose out as a result of this re-prioritisation. And I think it’s very important in this campaign and it’s very very important for local people.
See one of the things that the Labor Party gets caught out on is they try to be all things to all men. They want to be, they want to court the Green vote but they say they’re in favour of looking after the interests of working men and women. The reality is that on some of these issues you’ve got to decide which you’re going to support and it’s very clear that the Labor Party has decided that in order to placate the Greens they’ve decided to sell out the interests of many Australian industries and to sell out the interests of many working men and women around Australia.
But ladies and gentleman, one of the things I additionally and specifically want to announce today is a very very important commitment by the Federal Coalition of $20 million towards the costs of upgrading the Bucketts Way. Now the Bucketts Way, and I’m sure the locals will know this, it’s a 158 kilometre road that connects Raymond Terrace, north of Newcastle with Gloucester, Wingham and Taree. The remaining cost of course, as is appropriate, will need to be contributed by the NSW Government. Bucketts Way is the principle transport route from Gloucester and its surrounding districts. It provides access to the Barrington Tops National Park and it’s used by tourists as an alternative to the Pacific Highway. The upgrade of the Bucketts Way is part of the Coalition’s future action plan for transport in this region. And only the Coalition has an integrated plan to improve our regional roads. And can I just, on this point of road funding make the observation that throughout the whole of this campaign, every time he has a news conference the Leader of the Opposition complains that we have spent too much money. Fancy him, Mr - $96 billion of national debt – Beazley complaining that we have spent too much money and he apparently thinks that you know we shouldn’t have spent money on certain things so he could have spent it on the things that he wanted to spend it on.
But one of the things that we spent money on and he criticises is local roads. And I’d like him to come to Paterson and tell the people of this electorate, I’d like him to go to the other electorates in the Hunter, whether they’re held by his party or not, and most of them are held by the Labor Party. I’d like him to go to all of those electorates and say well, not only am I against that road funding that Howard committed himself to, but I’m going to take it away so I can spend it on something else. The reality is that once again he wants it both ways, he wants to be able to criticise us for having spent money but he doesn’t want to be associated with any opposition to the projects on which we’ve spent the money. Because every single project that we’ve spent money on over the last year has been totally justified. Australia needed more local road funding, it was desperately needed particularly in the country areas.
We needed to do something about getting rid of the half yearly indexation of petrol excise. I mean the price of petrol is very low at the present time, which is very good, but can I remind you that last August is the first August in 18 years that the price of petrol has not gone up due to an automatic increase in the excise. And that is a result of our decision to abolish it.
We spent a lot of extra money on defence and we’re very proud of that. Clearly Mr Beazley’s not saying any of that should be wound back. So once again he has this inherent contradiction, he complains that there should be more money there for him to spend but he doesn’t have the courage to indicate the areas that he reckons money should not be spent on, and roads is a very good example of that.
Ladies and Gentlemen this election is going to be very close and the Liberal Party, the Coalition needs Paterson, it really does. And in the end the election will be decided by one issue more than anything else. People will make all sorts of judgements but in the end the issue that more than anything else will decide the minds of undecided voters is who they believe and what team do they believe is better able to govern this country over the next three years in the very difficult and challenging circumstances that this country now finds itself in. Do they really believe that with their record of high deficits, of high interest rates, of high debt, do they really believe that the Australian Labor Party under Mr Beazley can better manage the Australian economy over the next three years than the Coalition can under my leadership and with Peter Costello as the Treasurer and John Anderson as Deputy Prime Minister. Now that’s the first question that people have got to ask and that’s the question of economic competence and economic management. And all of the capacity of a Government to fund the promises it makes flows from the strength of an economy. You can promise to spend a billion dollars on education but if your economy is going backwards you can’t. You can promise to spend a billion dollars on health but if your economy is going backwards you can’t do that either. So all of the capacity of anybody to deliver flows from economic confidence so that’s the first question.
And the second question that people have to ask themselves is who is better able to guarantee in an effective fashion all of the elements of Australia’s national security and that means an intelligent defence policy, a strong foreign policy that is based on Australia’s national interests, because in the end a foreign policy exists to promote the interests of this nation and the values for which it stands. And also which person and which party and which Coalition is better able to guarantee the security of Australia’s borders. This has been an issue in the election campaign because it goes to the very heart of one of the responsibilities of government. And that is that any sovereign government has the right to decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come. We are a marvellously diverse society and we are a better and stronger and richer and a more respected nation because of our ethnic diversity and because of the way in which we have welcomed people from 140 nations around the world, particularly over the last thirty years. And that will continue to be the philosophy that we adopt into the future. We will never abandon a non-discriminatory immigration policy and it was the Coalition that broke down many of the areas of discrimination. It was the Coalition that finally ended the White Australia policy, it was the Coalition that was responsible for building so much of the wonderful heritage of post-War immigration, along, I acknowledge, with the contribution originally made by Arthur Calwell as Minister for Immigration in the Chifley government.
But ladies and gentlemen this issue of border protection and this issue of illegal immigration is a separate issue that goes to the heart of the right of this country to decide who is coming here. And can you really believe with all of the pressures on it with all of the fraying at the edges that is now occurring that if Mr Beazley were to become Prime Minister on Saturday, he would maintain the policy that I have adopted over the past few months. I think the answer to that most resoundingly would be no he wouldn’t. He wouldn’t be strong enough because he has changed his position several times already. He started off opposing, he started off supporting then he opposed and then he came back again. And during the course of the Senate debate so many of this colleagues went around saying once we get into office we are going to review the operation of the border protection legislation. Now I would say to the Australian people who regard this as an important issue, Mr Beazley cannot be trusted to maintain the line that I and my colleagues have adopted on this issue if he were to become Prime Minister.
The very last thing that I want to say my friends is that this is an area, the electorate of Paterson and indeed many communities in the Hunter which is well known as an area that has a very strong and thriving small business sector. Small business is very much the heart of so many of the communities here. Small business is really the heart and soul of so much of regional and country Australia and can I say to any small business men and women who are here today, just remember when Labor was last in office what interest rates were like. Just remember that they went to 18 and 19 and 20 per cent, that if you were a farmer you often had to pay a bill rate of 21 or 22%. Remember the stultifying effect of many of the industrial relations laws of the former Labor government and every single one of those bad industrial relations laws plus more will come back if Labor is to win. Because although Mr Beazley’s roll back of the GST is a real damp squib because he is really keeping about 96 or 97 per cent of the GST, I mean he really believes in it but he just can’t bring himself to say so. I mean it has been the greatest political fraud of this campaign, he is meant to be against the GST and as Peter Costello said he hates it so much he is going to keep it. And that is the reality ladies and gentlemen, he hates it so much he is going to keep it but it’s different on industrial relations.
If he wins you will have a Labor government in New South Wales, a Labor government in Queensland, a Labor government in Western Australia, a Labor government in Tasmania, a Labor government in Victoria, a Labor government in the ACT, a Labor government in the Northern Territory and a Labor government in Canberra. Now that will have the conditions precedent for the greatest return to providence of organised trade union bosses that this country has had for a generation. And that will mean a total roll back of all of the industrial relations changes we have made and that is not political rhetoric it is there in their policy. They will abolish the secondary boycott provision of the Trade Practices Act. They will abolish AWAs. They will give unions the right of entry whether they are wanted in small business or not. They will allow unions to in effect impose monetary contributions on non-unionists on account of changes in working conditions. They will restore a lot of the inflexibility and if anybody imagined that by doing so they would bridge some kind of economic Nirvana for the working people of Australia they seem to have forgotten that under us with our industrial relations regime real wages have risen at a much faster rate. Working people are better off under this government, their wages have gone up, their interest rates have come down, their taxes have come down, their jobs have gone up, apprenticeships have more than doubled. So ladies and gentlemen, there is no Nirvana around the corner for either small business or for people in middle income or low income areas. They have had a far better deal under a Coalition government then they would get under Mr Beazley so get behind our two wonderful candidates according to your Coalition choice. Get behind, they are working together, they are working for a common cause to get rid of the Labor member for Paterson, to add Paterson to the Coalition list on Saturday night, don’t mind what time in the evening it comes, just as long as it gets on the list.
But my message to both of you is work until you drop. And work until you drop and that means you work until six o’clock on Saturday evening because it is going to be very tough. Those preference deals have given Labor an enormous leg up but there is a price being paid for that and the price will be paid by many of the working people of areas like the Hunter Valley area of Australia.
Thank you very much.
Any questions?
JOURNALIST:
Labor has promised to fund a stadium [inaudible] …?
PRIME MINISTER:
We don’t have a proposal on that.
JOURNALIST:
Michael Barns says that…
PRIME MINISTER:
Michael who?
JOURNALIST:
Sorry, I mean Greg Barns.
PRIME MINISTER:
I thought you said Michael Baume. Golly what’s he doing?
JOURNALIST:
Greg Barns says there is a case for increasing the refugee intake…
PRIME MINISTER:
I don’t believe there is any case for increasing the intake. Of course the refugee intake is quite separate from the question of illegal entry. We have a refugee programme and one of the things that we are arguing is that the people who are trying to come here illegally should be assessed like the refugees by the United Nations in accordance with the consistent procedure and not try and come here illegally and not to try and come here by courtesy of the people smugglers. So it’s a quite…. but anyway I am not, so it’s clear they are two separate issues but we are not advocating an increase in the intake.
JOURNALIST:
What do you say to the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry who say it would be better for business and better for Australia over time if the total immigration [inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, our view is that the intakes in both areas at present are appropriate.
JOURNALIST:
The figures out from the department of immigration [inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Where are you? Where are you, I’m sorry? I didn’t see you.
JOURNALIST:
Do the leaked figures from the department of immigration showing that the number of illegal arrivals has risen quite sharply in the last few months mean that the Coalition’s attitude towards this issue has failed?
PRIME MINISTER:
No it doesn’t. It probably means almost the complete opposite. There are a number of reasons why there has been an increase in the number of boats coming. You’ve got to remember that there has been a build up in Indonesia, the people have seen the need, particularly with the onset of the wet season which makes travel extremely difficult and even more hazardous than tragically we found out a couple of weeks ago, the need to get in ahead of that.
One of the reasons that we took the action we did some weeks ago, was a concern based on a large number of reports of the great build up of people in Indonesia who were wanting to come to this country, and I believe that what we have done already will act as a very powerful deterrent to people entering the pipeline.
But could I rhetorically propose the alternative. If you abandon what we are doing, which is what Laurie Brereton said last Friday in effect we should do, the only alternative you have is to process these people on the Australian mainland. I mean, that is the real Labor alternative, courtesy of Laurie Brereton, is apparently to process on the Australian mainland. Now of course we’ll continue to discuss the matter with the Indonesians, but in the absence of an agreement in that area, what you have to do is to behave in a way that sends a clear message that this country is not going to allow a situation where people can present themselves at our borders and in effect demand entry. I mean, we’re just not going to continue with that situation, and that is the message we’ll continue to send around the world.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Kim Beazley says it would be very easy under the Coalition to either increase the rate of the GST or extend it into other areas. Is he running a scare campaign or is that true?
PRIME MINISTER:
Mr Beazley is getting a bit desperate. I mean, I heard him on the radio coming up, and he was carrying on about the GST. I mean, to get a change in the rate of the GST you need the support of federal and state governments. Now isn’t it more likely if you had a federal Labor government and you had Labor governments in five out of the six states, isn’t that far more likely to produce the conditions precedent, for an increase in the GST. And the other problem of course you’ve got is the more you roll back, the greater the upward pressure there is on the rate. You know that old doctrine, the broader the base the lower the rate, the narrower the base the higher the rate. End of story.
But just for the record Tom, there will be no increase in the GST under a coalition government.
JOURNALIST:
[Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I’m not going to start going into the details of some intelligence advice. I believe that the policy is working, there is evidence available to us suggesting that the number of people entering the pipeline is lower than it would otherwise have been if we had not adopted that policy, yes. …… we’ll have two more.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] people that high immigration is good for the economy and boost economic growth and that increasing the intake could be a good thing and will … on the boil in the years ahead.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Paul, I’ve been asked this question sort of every month for the last five and a half years, and we make an assessment each year of the migrant intake and the refugee program and we assess that the current program is appropriate. Now, we make an assessment each year of that, and we’ll continue to do that and we’ll take account of views that are expressed by people when we make that assessment.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Beazley was asked if he stood by Bob Horne his local member after his …. And then it emerged that your candidate was being investigated by the federal police… (inaudible)…?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I understand that’s a pretty old furphy and I’m informed that there’s been a complete clearance, and I stand by my Liberal Party candidate, and I respect my National Party candidate. Applause. They’ve done well, thank you. I want to mingle.
JOURNALIST:
In May this year you defended the Superannuation measure as a fair measure. Why have you gone soft on the top end of town and why are you making these changes?
PRIME MINISTER:
There are a lot of people who wouldn’t be regarded as the top end of town, who pay the superannuation surcharge. I mean, with respect, I think that’s not quite the right expression to use. It is paid by middle and higher income earners. What we are proposing is not an abolition. We are proposing a small reduction in it, and we think that is entirely appropriate.
But you’ve got to look at the totality of the super package. I mean, the reduction in the surcharge rate is one element of it, but the most visionary, forward-looking element of that superannuation package is that for the first time we are decoupling paid employment and superannuation entitlements. From now you will be able to establish the superannuation entitlement for a person from the time of that person’s birth. Now I think that is a tremendous message to send to a community that you want to save for, and the combination of that and the first child tax refund and also the ability that people will have in the future of couples to split their superannuation contributions and thus establish two superannuation identities if I can put it that way, I think that represents a very significant reform. It is quite openly appealing to the family savings instinct that I think is deep inside most Australians. The idea that if you have the capacity to do so you make some provisions for a child’s future from a very early age.
I mean, one of the things we have got to do in this country is encourage people to acquire the instinct for saving, and making provisions for the future from a very early age. I mean, that was the philosophy behind lifetime health cover, where the problem with private health insurance was it was haemorrhaging because it was top heavy age wise, and you had to get more young people into it. And you’ve got to start adopting the same philosophy in many of these other areas.
I mean, we’re talking about the future in this election campaign. I think of all the policies that have been put down, none speaks more of the future savings capacity of this country than that particular policy. But it does say an enormous amount about the future.
Many of you will remember I made a speech at the National Press Club in July and at that National Press Club I talked about three issues. I talked about the aging of the population, I talked about the balance between work and family, and I talked about the environmental challenge of water quality and salinity, which is far more important long term to the environment than some of the more faddish issues that the Labor Party and the greens wrap themselves around, and you will note in this election campaign, and I’ll have more to say about this later in the week, that we have within the limits of the available resources, we have targeted policies in those three areas very directly and very openly and they are areas that are very important to our future.
I think that’s enough. Thanks.
[ends]


Subjects: illegal immigration; Telstra; higher education; economic management
E&amp;OE..................
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Dennis Shanahan at the Australian.  You';ve talked about policies being a continuum of the years past, but one of the issues which has dominated the campaign has been border protection, those policies that you';ve introduced are literally only weeks old.  Many of them were meant to address short time problems.  What are your long term solutions for border protection given the unsustainable strain that the pacific solution places on both our Navy and on our fiscal situation.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Dennis I think you have to first of all deal with the short and medium term as well as projecting forward to the longer term.  Everyone knows and I have myself said on many occasions that if people didn';t endeavour to come to Australia in the first place there wouldn';t  be a challenge.  They endeavour to come to Australia for a combination of reasons, one of the reasons is that until quite recently it has appeared to the rest of the world that it';s been fairly easy to get to Australia and once you get to Australia it';s been fairly easy to stay here.  
Now, we set about with a number of the changes we made, we only got final Parliamentary approval to some of them, to alter that.  And our policy at the present time, which I don';t accept is unsustainable, our policy at the present time is to send a message to the rest of the world that what was previously perceived to be the situation is no longer the situation.  And there is evidence, intelligence and otherwise, to the effect that the number of people coming into the pipeline is beginning to slow.  There were or was a bank up of people in Indonesia and, of course, inevitably they arrived in Indonesia prior to many of the actions the Government has taken that has sent a different signal to the rest of the world.  We will continue to discuss, if re-elected, with the Indonesian Government, as we have done previously, the possibility of achieving a different approach and an agreement about the departure of people from Indonesia.  It is said by our political opponents that all is needed is a change of government to bring that about.  That, of course, is demonstrably not the case.  People such as Ali Alatas have made it very plain that there is really no discernible difference between the two sides of politics so far as Indonesia is concerned.  
The reasons why it';s been difficult to get an agreement with Indonesia to date goes not to the political colour of the Australian Government but goes to the domestic political priorities of Indonesia, which are not going to change if there were a change of government on Saturday.  This is a difficult issue and it';s an issue which gets down to the fundamental right of this country to decide who comes here.  And I yield to nobody in my determination to maintain the absolute right of Australia to decide who comes here and the circumstances in which they come.  And I repeat what I have said on a number of occasions throughout the election campaign, I do not believe that the strength of this policy would be maintained if Mr Beazley were to win on Saturday.  I believe the internal pressures within his own party to bring about a change of policy would be immense and I believe just as he';s changed before he will change again.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Sarah Clarke, ABC Television news.  Number one, will you state your preference on whether you believe that Telstra should or would be better off fully privatised and your Party';s preference?  And number two, if you trusted Mr Besley to point out the problems of Telstra in the bush and then endorsed his report, why not bring him back to be the final arbiter on whether or not Telstra should be sold off and when it should be sold off?
PRIME MINISTER:
Sarah, what I';ll do is state the Government';s policy.  The Government';s policy is we won';t sell another share in Telstra until we are satisfied that things in the bush are up to scratch.  The idea of talking to Tim Besley, he';s always pleasant to talk to, I may well, having done, you know, all the things that he said, talk to the NFF – hear that Ian – and talk to all of my rural colleagues and talk to a lot of other people, I may well further talk to him.  But the position is, Sarah, we';re not selling another share until communications facilities in the bush are up to scratch.
JOURNALIST:
What about your preference, though, your preference on whether or not you believe…
PRIME MINISTER:
Sarah, I';m stating Government policy and my preference is exactly the same as Government policy, what a surprise.
JOURNALIST:
Paul Bongiorno, Network Ten, Prime Minister.  We have a clear idea of what a Howard Government would set out to achieve in its third term but it';s also a fact that no Prime Minister can lay out how his successor will implement or lay down his policies.  Would the Australian people know, for example, that a Costello government would have a different view, for example – and it';s only an example, Prime Minister – on the republic, reconciliation and saying sorry and even how a Costello government might deal with a boat load of people trying to get in illegally?
PRIME MINISTER:
Very hypothetical.  There are only two governments on offer on Saturday, a Beazley government or a Howard government and you know my views on those issues.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Fran Kelly, the 7.30 Report.  Defence sources are saying today that the photos released by the Defence Minister';s office some weeks ago of the people in the water from that sinking boat were captioned when they were handed to the Government and that those captions clearly showed that the people were in the water because the boat was sinking, not because people had been thrown overboard, children had been thrown overboard.  Will you now ask the Minister of Defence to release those photos with captions as originally provided by the Navy?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Fran, I don';t know what defence sources you';re referring to but let me just take you through the sequence on this very quickly.  The claims that were made by Mr Ruddock and Mr Reith on the Sunday, I think it would have been Sunday the 7th of October, it was just after the election was called, they were based on advice from defence sources.  My own comments were based on my discussions with Mr Ruddock and Mr Reith.  On the 9th of October I received an ONA report that read in part as follows:  Asylum seekers wearing life-jackets jumped into the sea and children were thrown in with them.  Such tactics have previously been used elsewhere, for example, by people smugglers and Iraqi asylum seekers on boats intercepted by the Italian Navy.  
Now, I make the offer to Mr Beazley and, I';m sure he will respect the sensitivity of it, that if he wants to have a look at the ONA report in its entirety he';s very welcome to do so and I';m very happy for him to do so.  Now, look, the whole basis of our claim was the advice we received.  Now, if you get that kind of written advice and you get the sort of advice that both Mr Reith and Mr Ruddock received at the time, that';s the basis of the allegations that are made.  Now, I mean, you can ask endless questions about releasing this or that but the basis of the claims were the advice not the video.  The video didn';t come into…the discussion of it didn';t come into the public domain until, I think, the 10th on evening television and then in the newspapers on the 11th.  But can I say with respect, Fran, that although this is important – I don';t want to trivialise it because it was a traumatic, emotional turn to the issue – it';s not really, you know, directly on the issue of whether you agree or disagree with the policy that we are pursuing.  I mean, the Australian people are concerned about the policy that we';re pursuing.  Those who support it, support it and those who don';t, oppose it.  But that';s the central issue in the debate but I have to say to all of you who';ve sort of raised queries about this, if you get….if the Defence Minister and Immigration Minister get verbal advice from defence sources and the Prime Minister gets that kind of written advice I don';t think it';s sort of exaggerating or gilding the lily to go out and say what I said.
JOURNALIST:
Laurie Oakes, Nine Network.  That';s not a bad question Prime Minister. I';d like to ask you that question.  I';d also like to ask this one: the unemployment figures today show the unemployment rate in October is up by 0.4% to 7.1%, full time employment fell by 56,800.  Can you tell us please do you expect unemployment to get worse before it gets better and how much worse? And could you explain for us how these figures, tens of thousands of Australians losing their jobs, bolster the Coalition';s claim to superior economic management?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well let me say in relation to those figures Laurie that total employment increased by almost 18,000 in October. The increase in the unemployment rate was due to a change in the participation rate. And if you';r talking about employment trends the answer to your question is that employment rose by 17,900 in October, notwithstanding considerable economic uncertainty. It';s now right of me to say, accurate of me to say, that since March of 1996 we';ve created 851,200 new jobs. The unemployment rate now is of course lower than what it was when we came to office. I';m not going to attempt to forecast about future unemployment levels. It is undoubtedly the case that we are facing more difficult economic times.  We can';t escape it. The world economic downturn and the fact that America has now had a quarter of negative economic growth, that Japan is in recession, and that other nations are in recession, of course that';s going to have an effect.  I';m not saying to the Australian people that we can remain unscathed from the world economic downturn. What I';m saying is that because of what the Coalition has done over the last five and a half years we are better able to face that downturn, and because of our superior economic credentials we';ll be better able to lead Australia through that downturn than our opponents. That is what I';m saying.
JOURNALIST:
Louise Dodson from the Age Mr Howard.  I wonder given that there is some uncertainty about this video about the children being pushed overboard, do you regret saying that those people shouldn';t be allowed….they';re not the sort of people we';d like to have in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don';t regret saying, I should go back and have a look at exactly what was said, but I don';t regret ever saying that people who throw children overboard aren';t welcome in Australia.
JOURNALIST:
But given there';s some uncertainty about whether they did….
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in my mind there is no uncertainty because I don';t disbelieve the advice I was given by defence. And can I just say again Louise when you get defence giving advice, and the statements I made were based on advice, I wasn';t there, neither of the ministers were there.  They get advice, it is then confirmed in writing in terms that I have described. I think in those circumstances it';s perfectly reasonable and legitimate of me to say what I said and I don';t disbelieve the defence advice.
JOURNALIST:
Malcolm Farr from the Daily Telegraph.  You would agree I';d presume that Australia as an advanced western industrialised country should be able to boast of having at least one university within the top ten, fifteen universities of the world. Why is it that after five and a half years of your Government we don';t and we don';t look like having an entry on that list for quite a while yet?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Malcolm I don';t know what particular league table or measurement you';re talking about. I don';t mean that response disrespectfully. I just don';t know.  But I do know that the OECD comparisons of all the levels of education in Australia show that Australia at a primary, secondary and tertiary level is at or above the OECD average. The one area where we';re below it is in the area of pre-school which is totally the responsibility of the states.  
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard just to Saturday there';s quite a strong field of independents running this election in the Lower House seats. There is a possibility of a hung Parliament.  Do you fear that more than you fear a Labor victory.
PRIME MINISTER:
There';s nothing worse than a Labor victory….for Australia.  I would simply say to people who are listening to this program that  you can';t sort of have both. I visited the electorate of New England last weekend and my pitch to the people of New England, some of whom think the idea of having an independent is compatible with having a Coalition Government. It might come down to the wire, I don';t know.  I don';t mind saying that the preference deal Labor has struck with the Democrats and the Greens is pretty good for them. It';s making our task a lot harder.  So any conservative rural voter for example in the electorate of New England, don';t imagine that you can have an independent and also have me. I mean, you know, from some of them I mightn';t like the answer they give. They';ve got to make the choice.  But I suspect the great bulk of them want the Coalition to be returned but they might think well we can have a bit on the side. In the end that could prove to be totally illusory.   Obviously I would like the Coalition to have a clear working majority. That';s what I';m going to be fighting for until 6:00pm on Saturday night. And I don';t get into hypothesising about what I might not do if that is not the case. But whatever you do don';t vote Labor.
JOURNALIST:
Paul Cleary from the Financial Review Mr Howard.  I';d just like to point out that Mr Reith did say on ABC Radio on October 10 that there was a video which confirmed that the people were thrown overboard.  Will you discipline Mr Reith in light of those remarks?  But also my substantive question is about what you';ve said in the past about refugees, that the Coalition';s acceptance of more refugees per capita from Indo-China in the Fraser Government was one of your proudest achievements. You';ve said that a number of times.  The Vietnamese in particular have gone on to become entrepreneurs, they run great restaurants, they represent 1% of the population yet 5% of their kids are at university.  Aren';t the Afghanis like the Vietnamese in that they';re risk takers, they';re risking everything for a better life, and aren';t they the sort of people you want in this country?
PRIME MINISTER:
Can I just say Paul that I was proud of what the Fraser Government did in relation to the Vietnamese people, very proud. We had a particular and special responsibility in relation to them because we had largely, in relation to most of them, fought on their side in the Vietnam War we had a particular responsibility in relation to them.  But I  thought that was great policy. And I';m not making any general aspersions or unfairly comparing the Afghani or the Iraqi people with the Vietnamese.  What I';m saying is that we believe you';ve got to run an orderly refugee program and we are facing a situation….I mean it';s very easy for people to criticise what the Government is doing. I ask my critics to contemplate the alternative. I ask my critics to say to me and to tell the Australian people, you dismantle what is called the Pacific Solution, what is the alternative.  The alternative is that you will be sending a signal, I mean if after everything that has happened if we reverse policy that will be seen as a magnet, in current economic circumstances, to great and increasing numbers of people to endeavour to come to this country.  And that will present an enormous difficulty for Australia. 
And can I say to you that I';m not the only person who has concerns about this. I think I';ve said before that when Tony Blair rang me to say he couldn';t come to CHOGM he talked about the aftermath of the 11th of September and he drew a link between that aftermath and the problem of asylum seekers. I mean can I just read something to you? ‘Here in this country';, this is the quote, ‘and in other nations around the world laws will be changed, not to deny basic liberty but to prevent their abuse and to protect the most basic liberty of all – freedom from terror.  New extradition laws will be introduced, new rules to ensure asylum is not a front to terrorist activity, terrorist entry. This country is proud of its tradition in giving asylum to those fleeing tyranny. We will always do so but we have a duty to protect the system from abuse.'; Now they were the words of the British Labour Prime Minister to the party';s annual conference in Blackpool or Brighton, I forget which, on the 2nd of October of this year.  
Now I haven';t said, I haven';t made the allegation that there are terrorists on any particular boat loads of people, what I am saying is that we have a heightened obligation to make absolutely certain who is coming to this country, which further underlines and validates the attitude this government has taken and I';m not alone in saying that because the sort of argument that I used is almost identical to the argument that the British Labour Prime Minister used to his own party conference a little over a month ago.
JOURNALIST:
(inaudible).
PRIME MINISTER:
I';m sorry?
JOURNALIST:
Mr Reith';s comments on October…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I';ll have a look at Mr Reith';s comments, I think Mr Reith has been an extremely good member of the Government and I have a very warm regard for what Mr Reith has done.  And can I just say to you again Paul the claims that were made were based, about children being thrown overboard, were based on advice before the video even came into the public domain.
JOURNALIST:
Reka Bakta from the Indian Post Prime Minister.  You mentioned the aging population and the young families, can I reiterate it again, the percentage of older citizens are growing, population is not supplemented by new births as we desire, fertility rate is frighteningly low.  With the growing economy we need a larger workforce, you did mention in the Great Hall the aged population working longer.  You have yourself given 64 as the benchmark, two years from now.  Isn';t increasing immigration intake the answer?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well can I just say a couple of things, I don';t believe in any kind of compulsory retiring ages and can I say I think if the nation had a vote again as it did in the late 1970';s about the retiring age for federal judges it would probably deliver a different verdict because I think there';s been a complete change in the last generation.  It';s one of those issues that I';ve watched go from one side to the other in the time that I';ve been in parliament.  In the late 1970';s it was all about sort of having early retiring ages, so forth, I think all of that has turned around.  
In relation to your question about immigration, before that irreverent interjection, can I simply say to you that there';s a lot of popular mythology about the impact of a different immigration intake and I've said in the past that I';ve got an open mind from year to year about the level of the intake and we have varied it somewhat between years since we';ve been in office, and I retain an open mind on that. The reality is, and this has been borne out by a lot of treasury studies I';ve seen, that you would have to have a massive increase in the level of immigration to have a noticeable effect on the demography of this nation.  A really quite massive increase and I';m not opposed to having a debate about the level, I mean we have a debate all the time about it and we have certain principles that we';ll continue to maintain a completely non-discriminatory policy, we have shifted it more in favour of skilled people.  But there is a bit of mythology that all you';ve got to do is lift the migrant intake by a couple of hundred thousand a year and you fix the demography, you don';t.  And you would have to increase it massively according to the studies I';ve seen to have any appreciable impact and that would of course you know create tensions in other parts of the economy, not least the environment and unless you';re going to direct people where they go then you create problems in their city or area of first choice.  So I think there';s a degree of mythology about that.  I think the current migrant intake is appropriate, but as I say I';ve got an open mind from year to year about the level, as has the government.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, James Grubel from AAP.  Can I just return to the economic management comments you made earlier.  Given today';s higher unemployment rate do you think that now gives the Reserve Bank some room to move on interest rates?  I note this week it made no announcement, do you think it';s because of the election that';s coming on the weekend.  And finally how would your approach to economic management help prop up the Australian dollar which is languishing in the low 50';s?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I';m not going to give any advice to the Reserve Bank at this gathering.  It';s a matter for them what the rate is.  And I don';t normally talk about the future direction or otherwise of the Australian dollar, I simply make the observation I think we have a super competitive exchange rate.
JOURNALIST:
Tony Wright of the Bulletin Mr Howard.  Yesterday Kim Beazley had pointed out to him that he';d spoken of you as the most considerable conservative of the generation.  And then went on basically to say that well yes he did feel good things for you at times and that…
PRIME MINISTER:
He went on to bag me did he?
JOURNALIST:
And that he felt that it was reasonable to say those sort of things, even about a Liberal because he was a man generous of heart and there was nothing wrong with that. I wonder whether you could give your assessment of Kim Beazley at this stage of the campaign, putting aside the heat and dust of it for a bit and find something nice to say about him. Or would that constitute weak leadership?
PRIME MINISTER:
No it wouldn';t, look, I';ve said a number of things about Mr Beazley.  I bear him no personal malice.  I disagree with him on a lot of policy issues, I don';t think he';s very resolute on many but I once said and I freely acknowledged on a well known current affairs programme at the weekend that I had said it, that if there were a war cabinet I';d put him in it, but I';d be the Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST:
Tony Walker, Financial Review Prime Minister.  This follows on from several questions about the jobless rate, but with the jobless rate at 7.1 per cent and trending up and if elected…
PRIME MINISTER:
And what?
JOURNALIST:
And trending up.  
PRIME MINISTER:
Trending up, well I';m not …..
JOURNALIST:
Well we could have a debate about that I guess.  But to ask the question, if elected does this provide an argument for a further loosening of monetary policy and stimulatory government spending to maintain economic growth.  That';s the first question.  And the second question is do you categorically rule out running a budget deficit in the first two years of a third Howard Government before your much talked about retirement?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in relation to further fiscal stimulus, Tony if you believe, if you believe and others believe that the jobless situation is going to worsen and I';m not saying that, you';re saying that, that makes a complete nonsense of the fiscal stimulus represented by the additional discretionary government spending that has been undertaken over the last 12 months… I mean hasn';t Mr Beazley spent most of this election campaign running around Australia saying that we have wasted money, that we wasted it on defence, we wasted it on road funding, we wasted it on a whole lot of other things that have provided a very necessary fiscal stimulus, the $12 billion of tax cuts.  I mean if you look back over the last couple of years I think the timing of the tax cuts and the timing of those expenditures have together been major contributors to the ongoing strength of the Australian economy.  As far as the question of deficits are concerned it is not the policy of the Coalition, it is not my policy to run a budget deficit in any year.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister Gerard McManus from the Sunday Herald Sun.  Two days out from the election the Labor Party still have not produced their immigration policy.
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
I was just wondering why anyone in the Liberal Party has failed to capitalise on this clear vacuum in the Labor Party';s policies?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I will now.  Perhaps they can';t make up their mind what to put in it. But I';m serious, I think immigration is an issue where there are very deep divisions inside the Labor Party.  I would reiterate the point I made earlier that I do think if Mr Beazley wins on Saturday he will be under enormous pressure not to maintain the line that I have in relation to border protection.
JOURNALIST:
Michael Harvey from the Herald Sun Prime Minister.  One of your themes in Government has been that the things that unite are greater than the things that divide us.  How much has that suffered in this campaign with its emphasis on the desirability of people from other countries, et cetera.  And what would you do…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well hang on, you say this emphasis, on the what?  Just what are you inferring by that Michael?
JOURNALIST:
I think that the backdrop and the overtone to this campaign on issues which have dominated and the way in which they';ve been responded to on the desirability of certain people to come to this country, that';s just one.  Well if  I can take it in a boarder sense then.  My question is what long term plans would you have as a re-elected Prime Minister to repair some of the divisions in the community over these issues.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well can I just say Michael that I think that is a, I think it is a false representation of our position, a completely false representation.  We have not sought to exclude people on the basis of their race or country of origin.  We have sought to exclude people on the basis that they have sought to come here illegally and we would have the same attitude whether they came from Japan or Britain or America or anywhere else.  It';s got nothing to do with their race and its got nothing to do with their religion.  It';s got everything to do with the circumstances in which they have sought to come here.  I don';t find the divisions of which you speak of.  I don';t find them as deep as you imply.  I think Australians find this, as I do, a difficult issue.  I don';t find it one of the easiest or the more enjoyable parts of the job that I have had over the last five and a half years and of course, like any human being, I was very touched by that tragedy in Indonesian waters and that poor man who lost his three daughters.  I';m human like everybody else and that touched me very greatly and that is why I was so angry that Mr Beazley sought to imply in some way that I and my colleagues were responsible for it.  But you have to, in the position I have, you have to, you should respond to your emotions but you';ve also got to respond to the other responsibilities that you have Michael but I do want to emphatically reject totally the notion implicit in your question that the basis of the exclusion of these people is ethnic.  Well I am sorry Michael, that is how I heard your question.  If that is what you, if you didn';t mean that then, I accept you didn';t mean it and that is good and we don';t have a difference but we have sought to exclude them, not on the basis of their religion or their ethnicity but on the basis of the improper way in which we believe they have sought to come here.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister I asked you a question in Melbourne yesterday about the analysis of this campaign by Mr Oakes that a key element of your election strategy was dog whistle politics.  You told me at the time you hadn';t seen it.  Have you now looked at it and how do you respond?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well yes I have now seen it and I have now read the column.  I don';t agree with the analysis by Mr Oakes.  I don';t believe at all what he says is accurate and I reject it completely.  This election, as you know, is being held against the background of a set of circumstances that have come upon us.  It';s being held at the time it';s constitutionally required.  I find the suggestion in that article is inaccurate.  It';s politically offensive.  People are entitled to attack me, I am not personally offended by it because I';m used to a fair degree of personal attack and journalists are entitled to state their views plainly and passionately.  
Look, I have done what I have done in relation to border protection because I genuinely believe that it is in the national interest to do so.  I haven';t done it because I am catching up with somebody else on the subject.  I';ve done it because I genuinely believe it.  I think if we were to reverse that policy now we would send the wrong signal around the world and I think the challenge we would then face would be enormous.  You have got to control you borders.  It';s a fundamental exercise of national sovereignty.  That is all I have sought to do.  I know it is subject to a lot of criticism and a lot of that criticism has a moral overtone to it and like everybody else I examine criticisms of my behaviour that have moral strictures contained in it like other strictures but I am satisfied within myself that what we are doing is in the national interest.  Others wait.  Others have waited interminably to come to this country and I have found as I have moved around many people who went through that long process of waiting would be offended if the Government abandoned its policy and believe what the Government is doing in relation to this is fundamentally correct.  
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much Ken Randall and my fellow Australians.  More than five and a half years ago, the Australian people gave me the opportunity of serving as their Prime Minister.  It has not only been an opportunity for change and improvement but has also been an immense personal privilege to be Prime Minister of this magnificent country.  Today, in my final national dress, I ask the Australian people for a renewed mandate to continue many of the policies that have been successful over the last five and a half years, but also to implement a number of new initiatives announced in the lead up to the election and during the campaign.
Like all Prime Ministers before me, I have brought my own personal style, some of my own personal beliefs, my own personal commitments and my own personal passions to this job.  Every day of the five and a half years has been spent in what I have tried to make the service of all of the Australian people.  I have done some things that people haven';t liked, I have, on occasions, been in accord with popular opinion, on other occasions I have been against it.  I believe very passionately that this is the greatest country in the world and I have tried in my time in office, and I will try again if I have that opportunity to make it an even better nation.  
All of us are driven by certain personal philosophical values.  They are grounded in our up bringing, they are part of what connects us with our nation, they are part of what connects us with all the things we experience in life.  I';ve had a number of personal beliefs that resonate, of course very deeply with the political party, the Liberal Party, that I have been privileged to lead.  And over the last five and a half years the commitments to self reliance, to having a go, for pulling together but always providing a fair go for the less fortunate in the Australian community have been the guiding lights of the policies that I have introduced.  There are, my friends, two great issues that overlay the whole of this election campaign and that will be crucial in resolving the minds of those Australians who are yet to decide how they are going to vote.  And those issues are of national security and economic management.  All else flows from national security and economic management.  And my claim to re-election, my request to the Australian people to re-elect me is based on my belief that I, more than my opponent, can give better and stronger and more certain leadership to the Australian leadership to the Australian people in those two areas.  
When I speak of national security I don';t just speak of the way in which this nation has properly and honourably responded to the terrorist attack of the eleventh of September.  I speak also of the long preparation of the White Paper, I speak of the public consultation the commitment of an additional $32 billion over a decade to the defence of this country, the build up that enabled us to magnificently save the people of East Timor two years ago.  I speak also, of course, and contemporaneously of our response to the terrorist attack, of our joining the Coalition against terrorism.  I';ve said before and I say it again because I believe it, that attack of eleventh of September was as much an attack on Australia as it was on America.  It not only killed Australians in the World Trade Centre, but it also assaulted the very values on which this nation is built.  National security also importantly included effective protection of our borders.  That has been an issue of debate in this campaign, and quite properly so.  Protecting Australia';s borders against illegal immigration is an important national responsibility.  Every nation has the right as an exercise of its fundamental sovereignty, to decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they will come.  It is important of course in the wake of the attacks on the eleventh of September to do as we have done, to join the worldwide response, to take additional security precautions in Australia, to do a number of things that we would not have ordinarily have done, but we must do because of the heightened security threat in our own country.  But it is also important that we get on with our own lives that we stare down what the terrorists seek to create around the world and that is a paralysis, not only of fear but also an economic paralysis.  
The terrorists win if they intimidate us out of living our lives.  The terrorists win if they dislocate our economy.  The terrorists win if they make us turn one upon the other and it is very important with these challenges that we reach out to all within the Australian community, irrespective of their religion of their race.  And particularly to those in the community of Arab decent or of the Islamic faith, because this war against terrorism is not a war between Islam and the rest of the world, it is a war between good and evil.  And they';re good men and women in all faiths and indeed of no faith at all.  So ladies and gentlemen, national security will be for years into the future an important issue.  It will define the way we relate to the rest of the world and my qualifications I put to the Australian people as superior in that area to those of my opponent.
The other great area of course, the area of economic management.  There can be no argument, and even in their more desperately rhetorical tones, not even our political opponents mount a serious argument against the proposition that the economic strength of this nation is infinitely greater than what it was five and a half years ago.  And the world that was changed forever after the eleventh of September, is not only a world facing far greater security challenges but it is also a world facing far greater economic challenges.  And because of the measures that we have taken and because of what we have done over the last five and a half years, this country is better able to cope with that new world environment.  We have delivered very strong economic growth.  We now have interest rates, which for the average home buyer are $350 a month, at least, lower than what they were in March 1996.  We have dramatically reformed our industrial relations system, and although roll back of the GST was nothing other than a damp squib because Labor proposes to keep ninety six to ninety seven percent of tax reform, I can say to my fellow Australians that if Labor were to win on Saturday, roll back of the industrial relations system would be no damp squib.  
What we would see is a wholesale destruction of the industrial relations reforms introduced by this government over the last five and a half years.  And they have not been reforms that have led to lower wages and more strikes and fewer jobs, they have been reforms that through the heightened productivity that they have brought forth have led to higher wages, more jobs and fewer strikes.  I mean, we have had a trifecta of success despite the warnings that were delivered in March of 1996 by Bill Kelty and Paul Keating who forecast, metaphorically speaking, blood on the industrial relations'; streets of Australia.  The reverse has, in fact, been the case.
We';ve also, of course, seen the Australian waterfront';s productivity soar as a result of the courageous stand taken by Peter Reith and the Government in 1998.  They said we could never reach 25 container movements an hour.  It has gone from just under 17 to just over 27.  There has been a remarkable change on the Australian waterfront.  It';s one of the reasons why our trade performance now is so much better than it was a few years ago.  
And, of course, of all of the financial symbols that marks and defines the success of this Government over the last five-and-a-half years is that by the end of this financial year we will have repaid $58 billion of the $96 billion of Government debt that we inherited from Mr Beazley and Mr Keating in March of 1996.  But that is not some kind of dusty statistic.  What it has done, because it';s reduced the annual interest bill on Government debt, it';s allowed us to invest about $4 billion a year more in necessary public and human services.  It';s one of the reasons why we have been able to increase by 43% Commonwealth spending on Government schools, even though in that period enrolments in those schools have only risen by 1.8%.  It';s one of the reasons why over the lifetime of the health agreements we will, compared with the last health agreement of the previous government, we';ll increase funding for public hospitals by 28% after inflation.  And it';s also a great source of pride to me because 70% of Australians who leave school do not go on to university, we have more than doubled the apprenticeships in this country over the last five-and-a-half years.  They languished at 120,000 to 130,000 for years.  We';ve now taken them to more than 310,000.  And there';s been an enormous increase in the number of women and a significant increase in the number of indigenous people who are part of that great surge in apprenticeships.
But, ladies and gentlemen, that is about past achievement.  They are impressive, they are undeniable and those achievements have provided the foundation for the strength that Australia now has to face an undoubtedly more difficult world economic environment.  But because of the reforms, because of taxation reform, because of industrial relations reform, because of the repayment of debt, just as we were able in 1997 to stare down the Asian economic downturn, we';ll be able to stare down and come through, not completely unaffected but far better than would otherwise have been the case, the economic challenges that we now face.
But my friends, a forward agenda for an election campaign is not only about the policies that are announced during the campaign period itself.  It is a long continuum of planning and policy announcements which project years into the future.  And over the past 12 months this Government has made major announcements in many areas and the full impact of many of those announcements will be felt over the next three years.  We believe that our policies can give the Australian economy continued economic growth, the London Economist predicting, next calendar year, better than most industrialised nations.  
We propose, if re-elected, further reforms in the area of industrial relations.  We';ll try again to further liberalise those unfair dismissal laws.  We';ll require secret ballots in relation to certain strike action.  We';ll empower the ACCC to take action on behalf of small businesses that are not in an economic position to do so against more formidable opponents.  We intend, importantly, to put down the first planks of the long-term reform of the welfare system.  Money was provided, $1.7 billion, in the last budget and it will be a Coalition Government, not a Labor government, that will begin the process of serious reform and strengthening of the welfare system, all within the underlying commitment that we are not going to reduce the strength and the quality of the safety net.  And one of the great achievements of this Government over the last five-and-a-half years is to remove forever the notion that in some way the Liberal and National Parties are the enemy of the social security safety net.  And that, in fact, has even been acknowledged by the President of ACOSS, not always the person who frequently praises the policies of this Government.
We';ll see over the next three years the full impact of the science and innovation programme that I laid down at the beginning of this year which will double basic research grants that will provide generous Federation fellowships to retain and bring back the brightest of the best.  We are doing these things.  Our opponents continue to talk about them.  We';ll review the competition laws, an important commitment for the business community.  It is time we had another look at whether the competition laws of this country preserve the right balance between large and small within our community but, equally, allow for the development of sufficient critical mass amongst our larger corporations that they can fully participate in a globalised economic environment.
Many of you will remember that when I last addressed the National Press Club, and that meeting took place in the Great Hall of Parliament House, I identified three issues that I believed would be very important domestically to this country in the years ahead.  And those issues were the ageing of the population, the constant challenging attempt for families, particularly young families, to balance the responsibilities of work and family.  And, finally, in the area of the environment, the whole challenge of water quality and salinity.
We are an ageing population, which of course is one of the reasons why the Government reformed the Australian taxation system.  And of the many things that we have done over past years none was more difficult, none was strewn with more politically inspired obstacles, none was the subject of more bitter recrimination and negative attack from the Labor Party than our, I believe, successful policy of reforming the Australian taxation system.  And one of the great values of that system is that it has given us a revenue base that will grow with the economy into the future and as a result give us the resources, the tools, to provide a growing number of services for an ageing population.  And if there';s one thing I would say in relation to the whole taxation debate amongst many with even greater conviction than most and that is those people who presume to be relevant to the future of this country yet simultaneously attack the very taxation reform that provides us with a revenue capacity to provide the services into the future are guilty of a very grievous contradiction.  I have tried and the Coalition has tried during the course of this election campaign in different ways and within the constraints of limited budget resources to address each of those three areas – the ageing of the population, work and family and the particular challenge of water quality and salinity.  
Our proposals in relation to superannuation I believe when further disseminated and more widely understood throughout the Australian community, particularly the proposal to decouple paid employment from a superannuation entitlement and the development of superannuation from birth and the interlinkages of that with the other superannuation changes we have made will make an enormous contribution to encouraging the young to provide for their superannuation at a very early age.  And I can';t think of anything conceptually which is more important in a nation whose population is ageing.  
The proposal in relation to the first child tax refund will, I believe, provide further targeted but very welcome relief for that most difficult period of all for young couples and that is when they lose an income when the first child is born.  We';ve already provided, through our tax reforms, very significant benefits for low-income families both couple families and also sole parent.  And it may have come as a surprise to many in the community and to many of our critics that the survey by NATSEM which demonstrated that the greatest winners out of tax reform have, in fact, been the low income families, the single income families and the sole parents families, are diametrically opposed to the mantra put around that somehow or other tax reform was something for the upper, middle and high income earners.  That first child tax rebate will add further to the assistance and make a welcome contribution towards further easing the pressures of balancing work and family.  And it';s against the background of a government which has provided thousands of more childcare places and a government which according to the ABS is actually reduced the cost of childcare by something like nine per cent over the last 12 months. We haven';t heard much criticism about childcare and the government during this election campaign and that is no surprise to me because our policies have in fact increased the availability of childcare to Australian parents and have in fact at the same time reduced it.
In the area of course of salinity we are the first Government, first Commonwealth Government in the history of Australia to propose a national plan.  We';ve committed $700 million and if that is matched dollar for dollar by the states we';ll have a fund of at least $1.4 billion to begin developing an overall national response to this huge environmental problem.  And over and above that what we have done is that we have dedicated at least $360 million out of the $1 billion reinvestment in the Natural Heritage Trust announced at the beginning of the campaign to the fight against salinity.  It remains a matter of national concern that if we don';t do something about this issue in 20 years time the drinking water for the people of Adelaide will be unfit for consumption in three out of five days.  We do have a long term plan for that and we do have a long term commitment to do something about that particular problem. 
So ladies and gentlemen let me go back to what I said at the beginning.  This election campaign is overwhelmingly about who is better able and what is team of people are better able to manage the affairs of this nation, to provide stewardship to this nation  in these very difficult times.  At the beginning of the election campaign my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition, in the television debate posed the rhetorical question, ask yourself whether you feel better off now then you did five and a half years ago.  There';s only been one poll done on that and for what it';s worth it recorded that the majority of people answered they did feel better off.  And perhaps that is not the answer that the Leader of the Opposition wanted.  But although the past is relevant, it guides as both us to the present and to the future.  This election particularly in the light of what happened on the 11 September is very much about he future.  It is about the future capacity of the Coalition compared with the Australian Labor Party.  It is very much about our future economic capacities.  Because in the end you can promise the earth in relation to things like health and education and all those other very valuable services which are so important in our community.  But unless you deliver a growing economy you have no capacity to deliver in relation to those commitments.  And in the end a capacity to deliver a growing economy, a capacity to provide the wherewithal to provide and supply those additional resources for all those public services is fundamental.
I have now been in public life for 27 years.  I have served as five and a half years as Prime Minister of this country.  I seek with enormous energy and commitment and dedication the opportunity of serving my country again as Prime Minister.  We do face very challenging and difficult times.  But they ought not to daunt us and the spirit of the Australian people, the capacity of the Australian people to combine and work together to meet a common challenge has always been a hallmark of this nation';s existence and a hallmark of this nation';s contribution to the world.  We face twin challenges in the immediate years ahead of leadership on national security and economic management. I ask my fellow Australians to again give me the opportunity and the privilege of leading them because I believe I am better qualified than my opponent to provide that leadership in those two areas which will so totally define the direction in which this nation goes in the years ahead.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Ladies and gentlemen, I first wish to address some remarks to all of my fellow Australians. I cannot express to you the sense of honour and privilege I feel in once again being elected as Prime Minister of the greatest country in the world.
My resolve, my commitment, my dedication is to the service of the Australian people in the years ahead. We face as a nation some new and unexpected challenges. All of us are deeply conscious of the changes that have come over the world and therefore over our own nation since the terrible events in the United States of the 11th of September. And it requires of all of us of good will and of faith in freedom and a belief in the great principles upon which this nation has been built that we come together, we behind together in unity, not only one with the other but also with like minded people around the world. Those terrible deeds were done to us as much as they were done to our American friends and we have a duty as part of the free world to respond to them.
I would like to thank Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Australian Labor Party, for his gracious words, he was kind enough to ring me earlier this evening, I thank him for that. I pay respect to him as an honourable political opponent. I wish him and his wife Susie and his family well and I record my respect for the contribution that he has made to his own party.
Can I say to all of the members and supporters of the Liberal Party of Australia what a wonderful result tonight is. Not only have we won for the third time but this is the greatest two-party preferred swing to an incumbent government since 1966. You will all, and to grasp the scale of what our party have achieved we will remember the depths of political despair that many of us felt earlier this year and the long battle back began months ago. And those who will seek to record wrongly that we only began to recover late in August forget the great turning point of the Aston by-election, and the way in which our party and our National Party colleagues in Coalition responded to the concerns of the Australian people in many areas.
Can I record my gratitude to a number of people. I want to thank John Anderson the Leader of the National Party of Australia. There is no more decent man in the Federal Parliament and his understanding of the concerns of country Australia is something that I value very much. I would also want to thank my colleague and friend the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party Peter Costello. For the stewardship he’s displayed in relation to the Australian economy and the great contribution that he’s made to our victory. And to all of my Liberal Party colleagues, to all of those people, those men and women of Australia who have shared in this victory. And I know it’s very dangerous on an occasion like this but I do want to pay particular tribute to three people tonight. I think what Ross Cameron and Pat Farmer have achieved and can I also express my unbounded admiration for Ron Boswell of the Queensland National Party. Ron, I do think you are pretty effective.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
So to all of my colleagues and our supporters, I particularly thank the leaders of the Liberal Party organisation, to Shane Stone and Lynton Crosby. Nobody could have had a more wonderful campaign director than I had in Lynton Crosby. Every day virtually of our waking existence for the last six months we have worked together and if it hadn’t been for the superb organisation we would not have achieved this victory tonight. Lynton to you and your team I record my immense gratitude.
We have ahead of us some difficult and challenging years. But I know that the spirit of the Australian people will be equal to the task and to the challenge. There is something special about being an Australian. That’s an expression I used on this very platform and this very hotel more than five and half years ago when the Coalition was returned to power in March of 1996. That Australian spirit, that capacity, that mateship that allows us to pull together in times of challenge and times of adversity that is something very special. It has always been part of my belief and my faith as an Australian that the things that unite us are infinitely greater and more enduring than the things that divide us.
We have had a difficult and on occasions, as always happens in an election campaign, a bruising political exchange. That is part of a democracy. It is not something that we should ever shrink from, it is not something that we should ever recoil from. It is part of the democratic system that people will passionately argue their points of view but once that battle is over, we all have a duty, each to the other to come together as part of the great Australian nation. We face some difficult days. They are different. They bring new challenges, both of an economic and of a political kind. But I have no doubt that the spirit of the Australian people will enable us to respond to all of those challenges and to all of those events. And I want tonight, having received in a very humbling way the support of the Australian people once again. I want to dedicate my self and all of the members of my parliamentary team to the service from tomorrow morning onwards to the interests of the Australian people. There is no greater honour that can be conferred on anybody than the honour of being prime minister of this magnificent country and I commit myself and my being and all of the energy and all of the capacity I have to the service of my fellow Australians from this night onwards.
And finally there are two other groups of people I want to thank. I want to thank my personal staff. There is nothing more arduous, trying, stressful, testing of good humour and good temper than a political campaign. Political campaigning made all the more burdensome I guess by the ongoing responsibilities of government at a time of particular challenge and difficulty of our nation. And can I extend to my personal staff, to Arthur Sinodinos my Chief of Staff and Tony Nutt my principal private secretary, to all of my members of staff, thank you from the bottom of my heart for the tremendous loyalty, support, professionalism, 24 hour dedication because you have been, as much as I have, a part of this great victory that we’ve won tonight.
And finally and very importantly, can I express my affection and my gratitude for my wonderful family. To Janette and to Melanie and to Richard, and if somehow or other you can hear me Tim, you are over in London, I think you are on your way to Twickenham to see the Wallabies beat England. When you get there have a pint for me and I’m sure you will. But to my family, to my extended family who are here tonight, thank you for all the support you have given me. You can’t do this on your own, you really can’t, and I have been blessed with a wonderful family and wonderful friends and they have sustained me and I feel so deeply grateful to them tonight.
And finally can I say again tonight to all my fellow Australians I feel an enormous sense of honour and privilege at what has been given to me tonight. I won’t let you down. It is a great trust, it is a solemn trust and will discharge it to the very best of my ability.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................
Thank you very much.  Thank you for that very wonderful welcome. First of all can I congratulate all of you who have been re-elected and that of course means most of you in this room.  There are a few continuing Senators. But can I say to all of you I know and understand just how hard fought it has been and in a few moments after the cameras have left us and we';ve dealt with a few other formalities I want to welcome to the Party Room the people who are coming here for the first time.
But we are entitled as a party, as the great Liberal Party of Australia formed in 1944 by Robert Gordon Menzies, and now clearly the most successful political party since the federation of Australia.  We are entitled to savour for a moment but only for a moment the victory that we won on the 10th of November.  It was a victory let it be said against the odds.  We were, to use that great Australian aphorism, we were gone for all money seven or eight months ago. There';s no doubt about that.  And our opponents were already selecting their staff and they were allocating the Ministerial….. their rooms, they were. They were selecting their staff and we know that. And they were allocating the ministers. And we did stage a great recovery and in so many ways different people played a part in that.
But having savoured that victory just for a moment we then have to get on with the job. The Australia public has reminded people in my position, in our position time and time again that if we have attacks of hubris or get carried away, we';re quickly brought down to Earth. They';ve done that before to others and they';ll do that to us again. And that is  a warning many of you will remember I gave when we had a similar gathering such as this in 1996.  
But we shouldn';t underestimate what';s been achieved.  To have gone to the1998 election on tax reform and to have undertaken the herculean task of implementing that. I mean we shouldn';t forget it. It';s sort of slipping now into history because it';s been done. But it was done against the odds. Everybody said you were crazy to go in 1998 with tax reform as a policy and then others said having won in 1998 well they';ll lose in 2001. And there are a few journalists who wrote that and there are a few of our critics who wrote that and we all remember it. 
But we do have, now that we have won, we do face as I said on election night because of the world economic situation so sadly exacerbated by what happened on the 11th of September, we do face a very difficult international economic climate. Peter at lunchtime today is going off to a very important IMF meeting in Ottawa to be attended by Alan Greenspan and all the other major central bankers and his equivalents in the industrialised world. So we are living in a difficult economic climate and also in some respects there';ll be other challenges on the international scene and particularly in our own region.  So the Australian public will want us to get down to work and to get down to work immediately. 
I think it is also very important that we remember that the genesis of our success at the last election was our determination at the previous election to pursue a reform agenda. And it would be a terrible mistake if in this term we thought everything had been accomplished and no more reform were necessary because there will always be a need to have an activist reform agenda.  It will change, it will differ according to the political clime, but it will always be there.  Good government is a combination of getting the right synthesis between reforming and changing those things that need change and reform, but defending and preserving those other things in our society that provide Australians with a  sense of continuity and a sense of cohesion and a sense of stability.  And getting that synthesis right is one of the reasons why we';re still here and the Labor Party is somewhere else and we';ve got to continue to do that.
Finally can I thank all of you again. Can I thank particularly Peter Costello as Deputy Leader of the party.   And I also want to thank the other members of the leadership group – Robert Hill and Richard Alston. And can I send a special thank you to Lynton Crosby, the Federal Director.  I couldn';t have had better cooperation between my office and the federal organisation than I received. I would also like to record my gratitude to Arthur and Tony in my office – Arthur Sinodinos and Tony Nutt, and Tony O';Leary and others in the Press Office, and all of my staff.  But it';s been a great team effort for the Liberal Party this. The Liberal Party has had a very good election and the main reason the Liberal Party had a good election if I may say so is that we';ve had outstanding candidates. And of course none of you would argue with that, with that proposition. But it has made a great difference.
But finally, and then I';ll ask the ladies and gentlemen of the media to leave us, can I just again say on your behalf to all of the people of Australia it';s an incredible honour and incredible privilege and a great trust that';s been given to us for a third time. We must not let the Australian people down, we will not let the Australian people down. We will govern well and face them boldly and with confidence in three years time.  Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE..................
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER   THE HON JOHN HOWARD MPADDRESS AT NEW SOUTH WALES STATE COUNCIL
E&amp;EO…………………………………………………………………………………………...
Thank you very much Madam President, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Liberals. Today is a wonderful day for the Liberal Party throughout Australia but it';s a particularly special day for the Liberal Party here in New South Wales.  The federal result in New South Wales on the 10th of November was the best federal result achieved by our party in this State since the formation of the Liberal Party of Australia in 1944.  It will not have escaped the attention of any in this room that on the 10th of November we, in fact, achieved for the Liberal Party in New South Wales a result better than that achieved for the Liberal Party in the election of 1996, which saw the defeat of the Keating Government.
So to all of you I express my heartfelt thanks.  Can I particularly congratulate you, Madame President, both on your re-election unopposed as President of the Division, a very just and intelligent judgement by the rank and file of the membership of the Party.  Can I also congratulate Scott Morrison in his maiden role as a campaign director in providing the organisational stewardship here in New South Wales for such an outstanding result.
There are many people who deserve thanks.  I';m very indebted to Michael Yabsley for the work that he';s done through the Millennium Forum, and for many others in resuscitating the financial fortunes of the party.  But I am always in the debt of the rank and file members of the Party organisation here in New South Wales.  There have been plenty of post mortems and there have been plenty of reflections as to why we won.  And we are undeniably entitled, for a short time, to savour the moment.  All political parties toil to achieve their political and philosophic objectives.  And when they do achieve the great prize in Australian politics of a third Federal victory in succession we are entitled just for a moment to savour that victory, to legitimately reflect with satisfaction and pride on what has been achieved and to ask ourselves why it happened.  
I think it happened for three reasons I think first and foremost it happened because our Party, our Government was seen to stand for something.  We stood for policies.  Not everybody agreed with them, in fact, about 49% of the electorate didn';t agree with them.  That is the reality of modern politics and something we should always bear in mind.  But even those who didn';t agree with us respected the fact that we stood for something.  And I don';t normally draw on the utterances of Greg Combet, the Secretary of the ACTU, but he made the remark that ‘I didn';t agree with him but at least Howard stood for something and went out and articulated it within the electorate';, the implication of course was that my opponent didn';t.  So I think that is one of the reasons why we won.  
We also won because over the last five-and-a-half years we have passed the test of good government.  If you look at the history of federal politics in this country since World War II governments only get thrown out of office when there is an overwhelming feeling within the Australian community that they have failed the test of good government and the time has come for them to be removed.  That happened in 1949, it happened in 1972, it happened with a rush in 1975 after only three years of the worst government this country has had since World War II.  And never let it be, in this old sort of nostalgia be forgotten, it was a terrible government and it laid the foundations for much of the malaise that was to be the responsibility of subsequent governments to fix.  It was sadly the judgement made in 1983 when the Hawke Government was elected and our Party was defeated and, of course, it was the judgement made in 1996.  So we did pass the test of good government, not perfect government but we passed the test of good government.  And that was dramatically illustrated in the support that we received within New South Wales, the support that we received in seats where the benefits of lower interest rates, of falling home mortgage repayments were dramatically apparent.  
And, finally and very importantly, and I want to spend a moment on this because it carries with it great lessons for the future, not only federally but also at a State level here in New South Wales, we won because we had superior candidates.  Far, far superior candidates.  We had candidates who were part of local communities.  We had candidates who were not seen as sausages produced by an insensitive, remote political machine but rather people who had worked hard and identified themselves with local communities.  And if I were asked to identify one process or one collection of acts representing a process that here in New South Wales helped deliver the outcome that we achieved on the 10th of November, it was the systematic way the party went about getting the right candidates in the right places in 1995 in the lead up to the 1996 election.  
When we were able to find and recruit people like Joanna Gash, who incidentally achieved the highest two-party preferred swing of any Liberal candidate anywhere in Australia.  And just contemplate this, you have a seat, Gilmore, that was held by the Australian Labor Party until 1996 which now has a two-party preferred Liberal margin that';s better than Bennelong or North Sydney.  Now I don';t know what that is a metaphor for.  I hope it';s not a reflection on the sitting members in Bennelong and North Sydney but I do know this, that it represents a wonderful illustration of the outward expansion of the Liberal Party.  And what the election, particularly here in New South Wales, was about was the outward expansion of the Liberal Party into areas that were previously not regarded as ones where we could be successful.  So in that election Joanna Gash in Gilmore, Kerry Bartlett in Macquarie, Bob Baldwin in Paterson – welcome back, Bob, wherever you are – and of course Jackie Kelly in Lindsay, Ross Cameron in Parramatta and so the list goes on.  Gary Nairn in Eden Monaro and all the seats that we won in 1996, at the last election, save and except for the seat of Lowe, which was lost in 1998 through the extraordinary behaviour of the former sitting member and that';s the only reason the seat was lost in 1998 – all of these seats, because Bob won back Paterson, all of those seats were retained with enhanced majorities.  And the reason that happened was that we identified and supported candidates because they were the best people suited for the seat and the people most likely to win the seat.  Another great illustration of my point is that another seat we won in 1996 for the first time and that is the seat that Danna Vale won from Robert Tickner, the seat of Hughes, every single polling booth in that seat was won by the Liberal Party on the 10th of November.
Now of course the process didn';t stop. On this occasion we not only held and enhanced but we also added to our number very impressively with two quite outstanding victories. The second largest two party preferred swing in the nation was Pat Farmer in the seat of Macarthur.  In fact of the thirteen seats throughout Australia that achieved the highest two party preferred swings to the Liberal Party, ten of those thirteen seats were in New South Wales which is a wonderful reminder of just how effective our campaign has been. And the other great victory, one that those of us who have sat through inane questions on education at Question Time was of course Ken Ticehurst';s wonderful victory in the seat of Dobell.  As you know Janette and I for twenty years with our children holidayed at Hawks Nest.  I';ve now worked out I can drive to Hawks Nest without going through a Labor seat.  So thank you Ken, thank you to all of you. 
And  also, and I don';t say this with any animosity towards our Coalition partners and friends in the National Party, I';ve always been a staunch Coalitionist and I will remain a staunch Coalitionist and people who believe that we can govern federally without a close partnership with the National Party are plain wrong and do not have the long term interests of our side of politics at heart.  But whenever there';s a vacancy under our arrangement we run a candidate, we reserve the right to run a candidate and magnificently we ran a candidate in Farrer and to Susan Ley what a wonderful victory she achieved on the 10th of November.  Farrer was once a Liberal Party seat, it is again a Liberal Party seat, and I predict it will remain a Liberal Party seat for so long as Susan chooses to remain in public life and I';m sure that will be for a long time.
So ladies and gentlemen it has been a fantastic result. It is a result that always carries with it the responsibility of delivering. We have won a third victory, we have achieved the biggest two party preferred swing in favour of an incumbent government since 1966, since Harold Holt';s victory over Arthur Calwell in 1966 which is 35 years ago.  Eight or nine months ago there were many political commentators who wouldn';t have given us any chance of victory. Eight or nine months ago there were probably many in this hall who wondered about our prospects of winning. Eight or nine months ago we set about addressing the reasons why we had lost the level of support that we needed to retain government and without in any way walking away from the things that we believed in, the things we regarded as important to the future of this country we began to address those concerns. We understood that people were concerned about petrol pricing. I knew that it was fundamentally due to high crude oil prices around the world but they wanted a gesture from the government that it understood the difficulty that was inflicting on ordinary families. We set about addressing concerns amongst self-funded retirees and we delivered on those responses in the federal budget in May of this year. 
We continued of course to demonstrate our superior economic management skills. The decision taken early this year to double the home savings grant for first homebuyers of new homes has provided as the Reserve Bank indicated the other day a much-needed floor under economic activity. And as I look back at all of the decisions that have been made by the Government over the last year, that have added to federal expenditure, every single one of those decisions now viewed in the light of the weakening of the world economy and the impact of that weakening on the Australian economy has given a level of economic activity and economic growth that against the background of deteriorating world circumstances was absolutely essential. The proud reality is that this country is facing difficult world economic circumstances better than any other, and this country is in better economic shape as a result of our economic management than any comparable economy anywhere in the world. 
I don';t pretend that next year will be without difficulty. The impact of the terrorist attacks in the United States on world economic confidence has been immense and that will have an effect and we can';t escape it, and that should be said and said very directly. But because of domestic measures that we have taken, because of the value of taxation reform, of industrial relations reform, of the super competitive nature of Australia';s exchange rate, all of those things have delivered to the Australian economy a strength and a resilience which will enable it as we did it 1997 when we stared down the Asian economic downturn, to stare down and see through the economic challenges of the next 12 months. 
We do as a nation face the next three years safe in the knowledge that we have a strong economy also secure in the knowledge that we have built a network of relationships not only in our own region but also around the world that properly match the needs of Australia in the 21st Century. We are not a nation that sees our future only within our region, although it is primarily within our region. We';re also a nation that sees itself as having important linkages with Europe and North America.  Our willingness to stand beside our American friends, and let us not forget as we meet here today men of the Australian Defence Force are at the very frontline of the final stages of the operation in Afghanistan against the Taliban and against the terrorists that the Taliban has been harbouring and supporting for so long. And let us remember and not forget that that conflict is yet to be finally resolved and finally won, and to understand and to always remember the danger that those men face in that very difficult terrain, in that very very difficult situation.  
Over the past few months, and it will continue, the policies the Government has adopted in relation to illegal immigration has come under attack from various quarters not only here in Australia but also around the world.  This is not an easy issue and I want to make it very clear to you that the Government';s resolve to remain, to retain its present policy and its present approach is absolute. We will not be altering our policy on that issue.  I saw yesterday that the Victorian Premier said that we should abandon, the Victorian Premier Mr Bracks said that we should abandon the so called Pacific solution, in fact he said it should never have been started in the first place. Well can I say to Mr Bracks and can to I say to all people who agree with Mr Bracks that if you don';t have a policy of saying to people smugglers, to asylum seekers that we are not going to allow people to be processed on the Australian mainland, if you abandon that policy what you are really saying is that in future we will bring asylum seekers onto the Australian mainland and have them processed there. And once that occurs you will be sending an invitation to the people smugglers to resume their trade with renewed vigour and renewed enthusiasm.  Now I don';t pretend that the pipeline has dried up. But there is evidence that our policy is having a deterring effect. There is evidence that we are achieving the objectives of that policy. But it will remain a very very difficult challenge for this country and I want to record here today the appreciation the Australian Government feels for the cooperation of a number of nations within the Pacific area.
Madam President there are one or two other, shall I put it, domestic things that I would like to say.  The first of those is that now that we have won the federal election, and now that we have done so well federally here in New South Wales, it is only natural and proper that the party organisation should turn its energy and attention to the next great political battle that lies in front of the party organisation here in New South Wales, and that is the challenge of the state election that will be held in a little over 12 months.  And to you Kerry and to all of the members of your team, I want to say that we will do all that we can at a federal level to assist you.  Can I make a charge and plea to the party organisation here in New South Wales.  Having done so well federally, can we take some lessons from that federal victory.  Can we understand that we won very well here in New South Wales because I found in the 6 or 9 months leading up to the federal election, I found a level of cooperation between different sections of the party that I haven';t seen for several years.  Can I therefore make a plea, as I suppose somebody who from the New South Wales Division can occasionally make himself heard above the clamour of political debate and political exchange, can I make a plea to all of you in very very simple terms.  If you want to win the next state election, put aside for good the divisions that have wracked this party and this division too much too often and for too long over recent years.
Emulate what we have done over the last 6 or 9 months - you will not win the next state election unless you have the right candidates in the marginal seats that you need to win from Labor.  And you will not get the right candidates in those seats if they are chosen on the basis of a division of factional spoils.  If you do that, you will not succeed.  If you do what we did in 1995 and you go around and find candidates that have a community identification, you find people who can gather local support, you find people similar to Jo Gash and Pat Farmer.  And they are out there wanting to support us.  The people of New South Wales, given the right encouragement, want to change government.  They are starting to grow tired of the present administration.  But don';t imagine the present administration in New South Wales is a pushover – it is not.  It understands the needs for responsive politics.  It knows it';s in difficultly and that';s why it';s changing a lot of personnel and changing a lot of attitudes and a lot of policies.  Nobody should imagine that there is a natural momentum coming out of the federal result.  People do vote differently at state and federal levels.  And people suggested that our defeats in Western Australia and Queensland were because the Federal Government was unpopular in those two states.  Well the 10th of November put an end to that proposition.  And the reality is that people look at each state quite differently.  And they look at federal and state differently.  And I think we have a great opportunity here in New South Wales but its important that we work together in unity and it';s tremendously important that in choosing a candidate the only thing that matters is the capacity of the person to win back the seat.  And our great challenge is to find 15 really first class candidates.  Even if a number of them now are not members of the party that does not matter.  We';ve got to find the right people.  We';ve got to be open minded enough to do that because the Australian community wants people who identify with the electorates they represent.  And we proved that on the 10th of November and we need to do that at a state level.
And we also need to spend the time between now and the next state election articulating in detail what we stand for.  You can';t persuade people in the last 6 weeks of what your policies are.  The most pathetic thing to me about Kim Beazley in the last election campaign was running around almost with that sandwich board declaration this is what I stand for.  Well if you haven't in five and a half years told people what you stand for, you can';t do it in five and a half weeks.  And I think we have a responsibility starting now to spell out the alternatives that we offer to the people of New South Wales.
So ladies and gentlemen it';s a great pleasure to address you today.  I have spoken on many occasions to this State Council.  I would have addressed this body more than any body - I would have addressed this forum rather more frequently than any other forum within the Liberal Party anywhere in Australia at any time in my life.  I feel at home here because this is my political home.  I';ve been a member of the New South Wales Division since 1959.  I value my membership of the Liberal Party very very deeply.  It';s a precious thing to me.  I believe very deeply in the Liberal Party organisation.  It';s gone through difficult times.  We need to have more members.  We should use the momentum of the federal election to recruit some more people.  I know it';s hard.  But it';s easier when you';ve won.  It';s awful when you';ve lost and if we are to maintain any ongoing momentum out of the 10th of November for our party organisation, it ought to be in the area of membership.
So my friends thank you from the bottom of my heart for all that you have done.  I congratulate all of you again on delivering such a wonderful result.  But remember what delivered it.  It was good policies, organisational unity and outstanding candidates.  And if we can carry that winning formula forward, Kerry can have the wonderful pleasure of addressing you and speaking to you after a successful election.  So merry Christmas to all of you. It';s a wonderful privilege to lead this party of ours.  It';s a great privilege beyond all expectations any man can have to be the Prime Minister of Australia.  And with your support we have won a famous victory and one that I very happily share with you because it belongs to you as much as it does to all of my colleagues.  Thank you.


Subjects: Prime Minister';s XII; bushfires.
E&amp;OE...........
PRIME MINISTER:
Well ladies and gentlemen I';m delighted to announce that there';s going to be a rematch of the Prime Minister';s XI  versus the Chairman of ATSIC';s XI on the 8th of March at Manuka oval.  I thank ATSIC and particularly its Chairman Geoff Clark for helping us arrange this and also very particularly the Chairman of the Australian Cricket Board, Bob Merryman and his colleagues, because this fixture is going to be conducted under the patronage of the Australian Cricket Board and also the ACT Cricket Association.  It was a huge success last year and the two teams will once again compete for the Mullagh trophy as a mark of the desire of the government and I know the Australia Cricket Board and I know ATSIC to the further involvement of indigenous Australian cricketers in the sport.  We all want to see more of them participate.  The team did very well last year as Mr Clark will be ready to remind me and it was a great win and it was a great match and we';re going to have it at Manuka again in March and probably the year after we may find another location.  But I';m delighted that we';ve been able to do this again and the Australian team will still be abroard in March but I';m sure there would be plenty of others to draw from and I';ll be working very hard in consultation with the ACB selectors to ensure that we get the team that might beat your mob on this occasion, Geoff !
CLARK:
Prime Minister as you know you are known as the come back kid now, they sort of all dismissed you last time but we hope that this will be a repeat of last year.  We';re very pleased to be able to play the Prime Minister';s XI, that he';s accepted the challenge once again.  It';s a continuing process of reconciliation, reconciliation doesn';t stop today and finish tomorrow, it';s a process of change and I think that change has been embodied by the Prime Minister and giving opportunities for representation in a particular sport and this time it is cricket.  I know that we';re disappointed that the Chairman';s Allstars and the Carlton team';s not going ahead on the 26th of January.  But I think other than that this will be a great game and we encourage people to come along.  I think on one note Prime Minister we';d like to announce some sort of donation, possibly to the fire appeals as part of the gate possibly… if you would be agreeable.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes that would be a good idea.
CLARK:
And I think that would be a nice gesture and we';d like people to come along and support that as well.
JOURNALIST:
Any suggestion of maybe moving it to a weekend to attract a bigger crowd this time?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we have to pay some regard to the available calenders and with other obligations.  We';ve fixed on the 8th of March,  we think that';s a date that suits everybody.
JOURNALIST:
Just on another issue Prime Minister there';s reports out of the United States that the owners of the sky crane have already had preliminary discussions with the Federal Government about buying a couple more of these ‘Elvis'; helicopters.  Is that the case?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I indicated yesterday that we wanted to help, they don';t necessarily need to be bought, they can be leased. What we will do, as will the New South Wales Government do, is take the advice of the experts.  And the thing is being discussed by the New South Wales Government with its experts.  We felt as a gesture, given the seriousness of the fires and the way in which they have affected so many communities on the eastern seaboard of Australia that it was a contribution the Commonwealth could make. The actual details and the need and the arrival and the arrangements and everything will need to be worked out on the advice of the experts.
JOURNALIST:
The reports suggest that the helicopters could actually get to Australia within four to six days.  Do you think it';s something that you';d like to see fast-tracked?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well once again I';ll leave that to the experts and I am not a firefighter and neither is the Premier of New South Wales and both of us will be taking the advice of people like Phil Koperberg.  I just wanted to indicate by what I said yesterday a willingness by the Commonwealth to help because anything that can be done will be done and we want to work with the New South Wales Government because they are the principal authority but we';re there to help because it';s a very serious community challenge.
JOURNALIST:
To combine cricket and bushfires, do you see merit in Steve Waugh';s idea for a benefit match for the firefighters?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that';s, once again, it';s a great gesture, let me say thank you, I think we should assess the final wash up and damage and so forth.  But it';s a terrific gesture and once again we';ll just see how it all works out.  I want to thank Steve Waugh for that offer of assistance.
JOURNALIST:
Can I ask you just again on a cricket matter, do you have some sympathy for the South African Team';s attempts to move towards multiracialism?  It may cause difficulties for them in a competitive sense on the field at least initially, but do you have sympathy for the aim…
PRIME MINISTER:
I think the aim of having a team that is reflective of a society is a very laudible aim.  As to other arrangements, I';m not going to start commenting either way on the selection on the basis on which overseas teams compete against Australia are selected.  But I would clearly come down on the side of wanting to see cricket spread throughout the entire population of South Africa and not be something that is just limited to the white population of South Africa and narrower portions of the non-white population.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you very much Dean, to you and to the Premier Rob Kerin, Rosemary Craddick and Senator Robert Hill, Minister for Defence and Leader of the Government in the Senate, my other Ministerial, State and Federal Parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals. It is a real delight for me to be here and to associate myself in every possible way with the campaign to re-elect the Liberal Government of South Australia and to maintain in office in Rob Kerin a person who South Australians have taken to as the quintessential, down to earth, authentic and genuine good bloke that we all want in Australian politics.
This State over the next period ahead needs the leadership of a person who understands the aspirations of the men and women of South Australia who is adding his own life';s experience, the opportunity to successfully found and build a small business, who';s come to politics with an understanding of every day needs and aspirations. Over the last few years I have observed on the frequent visits that I have made to South Australia the extraordinary resurgence of the South Australian economy. I';ve now been in Federal Parliament for 27 years and I';ve paid regular visits to South Australia over that period of time and I have to say to you that on every criteria the South Australian economy is stronger, its growth prospects are greater, the sense of optimism of its business community and the sense that the State has a real future is greater now than at any other time over the last 27 years. Some of that is of course due to the enlightened policies of the Federal Government. I just wanted to get [inaudible].
But you can';t run a successful economy, you can';t run a successful regional economy such as South Australia';s unless you have a Government that is sensitive to the needs of the business community, a Government that is a pro work Government and a Government that is going to give opportunities and keep the State moving forward.
This is an important election. It will be hard. All elections these days are on a knife edge and all of you should work until you drop at 6 o';clock on polling day and then if necessary for a bit longer in all of the very close seats because it will be very hard and you shouldn';t take it for granted. And we had a great result here federally in South Australia, we had great candidates and we had a great campaign, but this is very much a campaign about the future style of government in South Australia. Do you want somebody as Premier who is a quintessential good bloke, a person who relates and empathises to the needs of the average Australian living in South Australia or do you want somebody who is the cynical product and apparatchik of a political machine whose whole life existence has been about putting together factional deals and number crunching with little of the life experience that Rob has had in his business life and all the other lives that proceeded his entry into state politics. I suspect that if that comparison is effectively made over the next few weeks, I believe it will prove to be very important and very crucial in the assessment that swinging voters will make in this very important state election. 
But in the years of Liberal Government, South Australia has grown stronger, the business base of the state has been strengthened, it has responded to some very difficult challenges, but there is a spirit of optimism, a climate of hope, a sense that some of the inevitable decline that the state governments were suffering, particularly in the debt ridden years of previous Labor Governments and never forget the association of the current leader of the Australian Labor Party in South Australia with the debt ridden policies of former Labor administration, don';t ever forget that [inaudible] with the policy that gave this state the enormous debt that the Liberal administration faced when it was elected in the early 1990s. Its never easy to win a third time, but I can tell you it can be done and it can be done very well.
Ladies and Gentlemen this is a very important election. It will be close that';s what [inaudible] a propaganda [inaudible] in the election we need every vote, even yours if we can get you on the roll. But ladies and gentlemen there is an opportunity for the progress of the last few years to be maintained. There is an opportunity for that greater sense of hope and optimism of which I have spoken to be entrenched, but it can only happen under the stewardship of the man I now invite to address you, Rob Kerin. The hope of South Australia for the next four years, a man who South Australians have taken to their hearts in the time that he has been Premier and I am sure a person who can give the [inaudible] of saving South Australia a sense of security, a sense of steadiness and a renewed sense of hope and determination about this State';s future, will you greet Rob Kerin, Premier of South Australia.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you Mr President. 
May I first extend my congratulations to you on the assumption of the Presidency of the Council. Might I also acknowledge Madam Deputy Secretary General, Louise Frechette and also very particularly Jose Ramos Horta with whom my Government and the people of Australia have had a significant association over the past few years.
This, I understand, is the first time for some years that an Australian Prime Minister has addressed the Security Council and I think it';s appropriate that the address takes place in the context of a debate on the future of East Timor. Australia was a founding member of the United Nations and in fact provided the first President of the Security Council and we continue to very strongly support the relevant role of the Security Council in the modern world. 
Its contribution to the emphatic response of the world to the outrageous terrorist attacks in this city last year is current evidence of that relevance as indeed is illustrated again by the debate today on Afghanistan.
Australia has been a strong supporter of the world';s response to that, to those terrorist attacks and we were one of the very first nations to send military forces to assist the United Nations, United States'; efforts within Afghanistan.
We strongly support the work done in the United Nations to ensure there is a broad international front against terrorism and it';s critical that this international co-operation be one of action as well as words and this is what Australia will look to from the United, from the Council in implementing its resolutions.
I want to thank Sergio Vieira de Mello for his report in the name of the Secretary General in relation to the renewal of the mandate for East Timor until independence. I take this opportunity of recording Australia';s admiration for his stewardship over the last two and a half years. It has been an example of United Nations work in difficult circumstances at its very best. I also join others in saying how much we look forward to East Timor assuming her independence in a hundred and ten days time. I shall be delighted myself to represent Australia at the Independence celebrations on the 18th to the 20th of May.
East Timor, as I said, has been a prime example of the Security Council's capacity to respond promptly and decisively to pressing issues. The mandate that enabled the deployment of INTERFET laid the foundation for a successful and effective long-term resolution of a difficult and chronic problem and Australia is indeed honoured to have played such a key role in that success.
Two years ago the Security Council entrusted UNTAET with a major and unprecedented task and the success of UNTAET is manifest in East Timor';s rapid move towards independence. I do pay tribute not only to Sergio Vieira de Mello';s own leadership but also to his UNTAET team, including the members of the Peace Keeping Operation, the United Nation';s civilian police, East Timorese members of the Transitional Government and Secretariat officials here in New York. 
The renewal of the UNTAET mandate prefaces a new phase of UN involvement in East Timor. The Security Council must now give priority to preparation and planning for the post-independence UN mission. Decisions taken by this Council in the coming months will have a crucial bearing on the long-term success of East Timor. We cannot rest on the successes, great though they are over the past two years, for without continued support, those successes cannot be sustained.
East Timor remains a small fragile country. A start to reconstruction has been made, but there is still a long way to go. Australia and other donors are committed to East Timor';s long term sustainable development. But there also needs to be an assurance of solidarity from the UN system.
You';d be well aware of the significant contribution Australia has made to the UN peacekeeping operation in East Timor, through both military and civilian police contingents. Over the period July 1999 to June 2001, Australia spent A$1.4 billion on its military contribution. We';ve also committed A$150 million for the four years from July 2000 to help with reconstruction and development in East Timor.
I will inform the Council that Australia will continue to play its part, both through the United Nations and also bilaterally to support East Timor. We are committed to a substantial bilateral assistance program to reduce poverty and build capacity of the East Timorese people to govern their country successfully in a peaceful and democratic fashion. In the Timor Sea Arrangement, we have agreed on generous arrangement for revenue from the Timor Sea gas fields which will make a big contribution to East Timor';s future.
We look forward to working closely and pragmatically with our new neighbours, both on bilateral issues and, as fellow Member States of the United Nations, in regional and global organisations. In this regard, I am pleased that we shall begin trilateral meetings between East Timor, Indonesia and Australia on the 26th of February when senior East Timorese representatives will meet representatives of my Government and the Government of Indonesia in Denpasar.
The relationship between those three nations is very important to the future of East Timor and its people. East Timor will, however, need more than the help and goodwill of its nearest neighbours. A seamless transition from UN administration to a functioning post-independence government is vital to success in the long-term. We should not undo the good work already done by skimping on resources. It is critical that the UN stay to course and Australia will play a significant part in the staying of that course and leaves East Timor well equipped to deal with the challenges of independence. This is the best guarantee of minimising the country's longer term reliance on international support. 
Australia agrees that the UN's role in East Timor is not open-ended. The Security Council must set in place an exit strategy that preserves the international community';s investment in East Timor';s future. And that in turn will secure East Timor's capacity to function effectively over the long-term. 
I conclude by assuring you that Australia will continue to play a significant part for so long as that participation is needed. We will work closely with you to support United Nations efforts and the new East Timorese government.
I record again the overwhelming sentiment of the people of Australia in expressing to Jose Ramos Horta and through him to the people of East Timor our goodwill for your future. There is concern and sentiment in my country towards you and your people. We wish you well. We look forward to working with you as fellow members of the international community and as participants in our part of the world. I again congratulate Sergio de Mello on his great stewardship and Mr President I thank you most warmly for the privilege of addressing the Security Council.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........
I am, as your President has said, somebody who is an unapologetic and long-standing friend of Israel and of the Jewish community particularly in Australia.
It';s a friendship that predates my entry into politics. My first visit to Israel occurred in 1964 and I have visited in a political capacity on two occasions since. Unapologetic and unstinting friends win themselves the right from time to time to express views their friends may not necessarily agree with. But in the years that I have been in public life, and in the time that I have been Prime Minister of this country, Australia has continued, and will continue, to express a sympathetic understanding of the horrific pressures faced by the State of Israel in what remains still the most difficult and fraught region of the world. 
All of us continue to be appalled by the violence occurring in the Middle East, all men of good will must want that violence to end. All of the parties must continue to work ultimately towards a just settlement and a peace which has as its first ingredient the right of Israel to exist behind secure defensible boundaries, but also includes the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a homeland. 
The last time I visited Israel was a tide of hope. I had just come from visiting Gallipoli and the old battlefields of World War I where so many Australians died defending France and defending the cause of freedom in World War I, and I had been encouraged by the then Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak to visit Yasser Arafat, to go to Ramallah, to talk to the Palestinian Council. And can I say when I first disclosed on Melbourne radio that I was to visit Yasser Arafat and I was questioned by the interviewer as to why I should be doing it, and I explained that it was an important contribution that a friendly government towards Israel, but also a government that understood the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to a homeland that was the thing to be done. And I am very happy to say that within minutes of my saying that on radio, that two people who rang in to defend my decision I think included Colin Rubenstein and Mark Leibler. 
And that my friends is what two years, less than two years ago. And it was a time of hope, and how distressing, how sad how heart-wrenching it is that all of that has disappeared over the last twenty months. And I have to say against the background of all the commitment of the Australian Government towards supporting the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people - and they do have legitimate aspirations, they do have a right to aspire to a homeland – until stronger and more effective efforts are taken by the Palestinian Council, by Yasser Arafat and others, we can only continue to condemn them for what they have done and for what they have failed to do in relation to the restraint, necessary restraint being imposed on the random acts of terror which are so frequently visited upon the people of Israel. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, can I say just two other things.
I take this opportunity in the great metropolis of New York, whose lifeblood, whose existence, whose special character has been so heavily shaped and influenced by the contribution of Jewish Americans. And I acknowledge the enormous contribution in this great city of the Jewish community to the life and the being and the existence of Australia. The contribution of Australian Jews to our community has been immense. It has been rich, it has been in every area and it has been a force for good, a force for progress, and a force for understanding. And I count it as one of the privileges of my public life to have been associated with so many of those people who have made that contribution. 
The other thing I wish to say of course is that nobody now can visit this city without thinking of September 11. I was due to come here on the12th of September. I saw President Bush on the 10th and I visited the Pentagon Building on the afternoon of the 10th. And of course in the light of what occurred, I was not able to come to New York. I want to say how strongly Australia supports the actions being taken by the United States Government and by the American people in the name of the world to fight terrorism. 
Some people have said to me why is Australia so heavily involved, because proportionately our military commitment is, given the size of our own forces, is as big if not bigger than that of any country, safe and except of course the United States. We';re involved because of what happened then and what happened in this city was as much an assault on the things that we believe as the things are believed in by the people of the United States. And we are constantly told that we live in a globalised world, we do. The world has shrunk; we';re all so much more together. And all of that is right. And in those circumstances, an assault upon liberty and the right to go about your daily life in one part of the world is as much an assault in other parts of the world on people who hold those same values. 
There are Australians who died in the World Trade Centre. There were many Australians left bereaved and affected by those events. And in those circumstances we see it as very much an attack on our way of life. We';re also involved because of our very long association with the people of the United States. President Bush and I on the 10th of September last year did mark the 50th anniversary of the ANZUS Treaty, and in fact Australia has fought beside the United States in every major conflict since World War I when their forces first went into battle together at the Battle of Hamel. I might say under the command of an Australian General, one of Australia';s most distinguished Jewish sons, General Sir John Monash. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a very long association between our two nations that I also mark by my presence today. I admire the contribution of the American people. I admire their spirit. I admire the resilience of the people of New York, and I made a quiet resolve after it was necessary to cancel my visit last time, that I would reprise it at a time in the not too distant future. And I am glad that that has happened, and I particularly thank the good offices of my friend, Colin Rubenstein and others that have made it possible.
My friends, it';s a great pleasure to be here today, and I hope in a small way, it makes a contribution to further strengthening the links between our three great nations, Australia, the United States, and the State of Israel. 
Thank you.
Good afternoon, I';m David Harrelson. I would like to thank you first of all Prime Minister Howard. I think all of you in this room now understand exactly why we chose to honour this great statesman and leader. His words spoke beautifully. He has agreed to answer questions. We would like to take questions not from the media, however, but from the members and guests of the American Jewish Committee. And so if only those people would raise their hands I would be happy to call on you in the order in which I see you.
Sam Lipski: I am from Australia, and I';m from the Brides'; side!. Prime Minister, if I can ask you a topical media question about President Bush';s State of the Union address last night which I think has had a pretty resounding effect throughout the world, because apart from reiterating commitment to the campaign against terror, he opened up a second area very much looking ahead as we said into the next decade in which the United States is committing itself to oppose those nations which not only support in the part of terrorists but also which may threaten the peace of the world because of the unconventional weaponry that they have or could have at their disposal. I wonder if from your perspective, what is your reaction to this second front if I can put it that way, and where do you see the Australian government having a role to play in that …(inaudible)…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I understand why the President would have said what he did. The point he makes, and it is a very logical and forceful point, is that international terrorism has no particular boundaries and that the defeat of terrorism in terms of the al Qaeda in Afghanistan is not of itself a guarantee that you won';t have other terrorist attacks supported by and emanating from other parts of the world. I think it signals a determination to go the distance in fighting terrorism. That is both understandable and something that should be supported. The Australian government';s position was that we gave uncompromising support to the initial American response. We have involved our forces in the campaign in Afghanistan. If we received a request to be involved with the Americans elsewhere that is something that we would look at according to the circumstances of the request but against the background of us wanting to oppose, effectively oppose terrorism, because nobody could imagine that it won';t come to their part of the world and Australians would be foolish indeed to imagine that in some way because of our geographic remoteness from Europe and North America that we are immune. 
Now I don';t say any of those things belligerently, it is just a plain statement of the new reality in which we live. I mean, we all live in hope that the processes of internal political activity in certain countries will lead to a change and the President last night was very keen to stress, and I am very keen to stress now that the argument of the United States is not with Islam, is not with Islamic people. Islamic people died in the World Trade Centre, many hundreds of them did, and it';s very wrong of the critics of the United States and the critics of some of the positions the Australian government has taken to portray or typify it as some kind of fight by us against Islam. It is not. I separate out Islam as a faith from the strictures that I deliver of terrorism and we have taken a lot of steps in Australia as you will know, as President Bush has done here in this country, to reassure our citizens of an Islamic background that our criticism is in no way directed at them. And it';s a time in the world';s history where we should reaffirm the common values of the world';s great religions rather than allowing these difficulties to separate. 
I understood fully why the President said what he did. It was a sober reminder that terrorism doesn';t have any boundaries and we went into the commitment in Afghanistan with our eyes open, and obviously if we were asked to be further involved we would look at that as a separate issue, but against the background of our broad support and very strong support for the American response to terrorism.
Thank you. Ron Wiener please.
Ron Weiner: Thank you. Ron Weiner from New York. First of all, I would like to thank you. I was in Sydney on September 11 while you were in Washington and I would like to … get the same plane out that you were able to get back. We do have an enormous amount of emotional … and support from the Australian people while you were there. I was really quite …(inaudible)…
My question is somewhat along the same lines as Southeast Asia. It appears to be increasing political and unstable …. the countries. At the same time there are large … terrorist activities …. particularly in Malaysia, the Philippines and elsewhere. I was wondering what the Australians have …. (inaudible) … and were you see this evolving.
PRIME MINISTER:
It';s fair to say that the region immediately to our north and our region generally, there are many pockets of instability, but there are also many areas that are quite stable, that it would be unwise of me to generalise and to say that the whole region is unstable. Certainly in the Pacific area there has been a great deal of instability. In the countries you mention, I think there is an appreciation, a very strong appreciation, that the leadership of the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia of the need for all of them, and for all of us to be vigilant about terrorism. 
One of the great advantages to me of the APEC meeting that was held in Shanghai last October was the opportunity it gave such a diverse group of countries and that meeting was attended by, as well as your President, and the President of Russia, it was attended by and hosted by the President of China and in fact the most significant international gathering in China since the communist take over in 1949, it was also attended by the Prime Minister of Malaysia, and of Indonesia, and the President of the Philippines. I think there is a lively concern in all of those countries about the potential for terrorist activities. I think the discovery by the Singaporean authorities of a plot in relation to the American Embassy and the British and Australian High Commissions was a reminder of the potential spread and also reinforces Sam Lipski';s, the basis of Sam Lipski';s question. I don';t think any country in that region, and I include Australia in it, can be in any way complacent. 
But equally, we must understand and respect the commitment of the governments a lot of those countries to fighting terrorism, and the United States is cooperating very closely with the Philippines in relation to Special Forces and the like. I will be seeing President Megawati on my way home to Australia after having left New York, and no doubt that will be one of a number of issues that we will need to discuss. 
I think, going back to my point about the conference in Shanghai, it was a great bringing together of world leaders directly affected and one of the by-products of this awful tragedy is it has brought the President of Russia and the President of your country closer together. I think that';s a very good thing, because in the long run the relations between American, the only real superpower in the world now, and Russia and of course China. That relationship is very important and to see the President of China and the President of Russia and the President of the United States, not agreeing on everything and certainly not agreeing on all the responses to terrorism, but certainly agreeing that it constituted a common threat and the experiences of the President of Russia because of the Chechyen conflict and the connection of some extremes of Islam because of that conflict was I think a valuable opportunity and so out of horror and disaster as always there can be some positive developments.
We will take one more question. The Prime Minister will be going to Ground Zero and we want to be mindful of his schedule - Ruth Millar.
Ruth Millar: inaudible…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I';m very happy to give as much publicity as I can to my country';s economic philosphy. Look, we economically at present are travelling fairly well. We';ve maintained a very strong rate of growth, our productivity levels have been growing very strongly, and next year, this year I';m sorry, the London Economist has predicted that our economy might grow faster than any in the industrialised world. I hope The Economist is right. 
Globalisation, we are very strong supporters of globalisation. The problem with globalisation is that its benefits are not adequately advocated and explained. It';s just too easy for the S11';s and these other outfits around the world to sort of paint it as the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer. I mean I always when I';m asked a question about this, talk about South Korean wigs, and it';s not of the political variety, but the variety that people have on their heads, that in 1958 the South Korea';s major export was wigs. Now as a result of pursing an open approach to economic policy, relatively open approach, the South Korean has just grown magnificently. I mean, despite all the devastation suffered in the Korean War, it a very important country to Australia, it';s vies with the United States for being our second or third best customer after Japan, and it';s a perfect illustration to me of just how if you get a more open trading system, a more open world economy, you get benefits. And if the developed countries were overnight, which they won';t, but if they were to remove all of their trade embargoes, trade restrictions, on the developing countries of the world, that would be the equivalent of something like is it ten or thirteen times the current value of overseas development assistance given by the richer countries in the world. I mean, I think that figure';s right, I say it with some hesitation because, but it';s a generous multiple, let me put it that way. That will make the point. 
Now I think the biggest failing we have with globalisation is that we don';t tell the story. I don';t think any government in the world, any side of politics that believes in it successfully communicates it. I don';t think America does, I don';t think Australia does, I don';t think the nations of Europe that believe in it very strongly do it either. I don';t think the business community does it well enough. I mean, some of them have started to do it and I think they';ve got to do it a lot more. Because it';s so easy to sell the simplistic story, especially to the news media that it';s all the rapacious behaviour of the capitalist nations which are feeding of the underprivileged. The reality is that globalisation has done more to empower the poorer nations of the world relatively speaking than anything else and I think it';s a story that is largely left untold.
[ENDS]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Councillor Pringle, Mrs Pringle, my parliamentary colleagues Philip Ruddock and Andrew Tink, ladies and gentlemen.
First and most heartfelt remarks are directed to those men and women and those families who will become part of the broader Australian family today by becoming Australian citizens. It seems so very natural and appropriate and relaxed that this citizenship ceremony should take place in the open air. I have to say it is a new experience to sing the national anthem to a didgeridoo, it's a great experience and I congratulate the Hornsby Shire Council on being, as the Mayor said, probably the only Council in Australia sponsoring that kind of arrangement. 
Today is an occasion of celebration, it's an occasion of reflection, but above all, it is an occasion to give thanks and an occasion for gratitude.
It is a privilege to be an Australian. This is a blessed country.It is a country of great democratic traditions, it's a country of strong values, it's a country of distinctive identity, its a country that has become the home to people from probably a greater variety of countries than any other nation on earth.It is also a nation that has maintained some deep rooted values from its past that sustained it into the future.
The Mayor mentioned the recent bushfires. If ever an event reminded us some of the core capacities and values of the Australian community those bushfires and the response of the Australian people to those bushfires did. I first visited one of the affected areas on the morning of boxing day and when I arrived at the Rural Fire Service Centre at Rosehill to get a briefing from Commissioner Koperberg about the challenge of the bushfires the first group of men and women I met were volunteer firefighters from Victoria and they had forsaken the enjoyment of the rest of their Christmas day and had made arrangements to travel overnight to New South Wales and they were there at 11 o'clock in the morning at Rosehill on boxing day in order to provide assistance to their fellow Australians.
Now that should encapsulate better than any words, that encapsulates better than any words I can muster, the sense of warm heartedness, the spirit of mateship, the willingness to pull together in circumstances of travail and difficulty which is so characteristic of the Australian community.
It is a day of course that we particularly welcome, as I said a moment ago those who come to this country from so many different parts of the world.   I hope that you will never regret the step that you have taken today, I don't believe you will. You are very warmly welcomed into the Australian community. I hope you make a vigorous contribution according to your own interests, you're own tastes and your own capabilities.
On behalf of all other Australians here today I do bid you a very warm welcome.
The world has had a difficult 12 months. It has been changed by the terrible events in September in the United States but as always happens in the challenges that mankind faces, adversity brings out hidden capacities and a hidden resilience and hidden capacity within all of us and the way in which the world has cooperated and how some of the boundaries around the world have been dissolved in the fight against terrorism is a source of reassurance and a source of comfort.
May I simply say to all of you I hope you enjoy today, I hope all of us continue to count our blessings at being an Australian, it is rare privilege, this is an extraordinarily precious country and we have and extraordinary responsibility to discharge the trust as Australians, not only for current but also for all future generations. 
Thank you.
[ends]
Top


E&amp;OE...........
CHAIRMAN:
John Howard, from your vantage point far away from here, how do you see the role of Australia in a more integrated Asian context?
PRIME MINISTER:
Mr Chairman, firstly can I join others in congratulating Davos for its emphatic act of comradeship and empathy with the people of New York and the people of America in shifting this conference to this extraordinary city, and to congratulate the Secretary of State and his fellow countrymen and women for the extraordinary resilience evident here in New York in the time I';ve been here with which they have responded to those quite extraordinary events.
I';ve periodically been asked why is Australia, geographically so remote from here, why is Australia so heavily involved. We';re heavily involved for three very important reasons. The first and most important of those is that in every single conceivable way I saw and most Australians saw what occurred as being as much an attack on our way of life as it was on the American way of life.  We don';t delude ourselves, or only a few Australians delude ourselves that we are in some way immune from such a potential attack. It could have been on Sydney or it could have been on Melbourne.
 We also of course have a very long-standing defence and other close friendship and alliance with the United States.  A few days after the 11th of September our two  governments agreed for the first time since its 50 years of existence to invoke the ANZUS treaty, the security pact that binds the United States and Australia together. And the fact that it was invoked for the first time in its history is a measure of the depth and the seriousness of the Australian response.
There are other dimensions of course to the terrorist attack and the threat of terrorism not only here but around the world. Australians as you know are, particularly amongst its young, are much travelled and are much travelling people and many of us saw the attack not only an awful attack on a huge metropolis but we also saw it as an attack on the capacity of the world to maintain that human mobility and that easy movement of people particularly amongst the young which has become a constant characteristic of the experience of nations such as ours in the decades that have gone before us. So for those reasons we saw ourselves as much needing to be part of the response as indeed the nations of Europe and the other close allies of the United States. 
I think it has been an extraordinary coalition and that have led the United States of course deserve congratulations for the diplomatic and military skill with which the coalition has gone forward. It has achieved very early and very widespread success but I will join others who are saying that the campaign against terrorism is by no means over.  And I think we must recognise that the possibility of activity elsewhere in the campaign against terrorism is very real and it would be failing to understand the character of what we are facing if that were not recognised.
I share views of other speakers about the need to find greater and more effective responses to poverty around the world. I think we should be careful not to see globalisation itself as a cause of the anger which in turn has produced terrorist behaviour.  The failure of globalisation is not so much that its value is not there. If there';s a failure in relation to globalisation it is a failure of business and political leadership all around the world to advocate more effectively its benefits. The reality as so many of you will know is that if the benefits of globalisation could be extended through such things as the removal of many trade barriers to developing countries then their economic fortunes would be very significantly enhanced by globalisation.
It is necessary to, however daunting the task is, to try and find a solution to the hideously intractable problem of the Middle East.  That can only be upon the basis of an absolute acceptance without qualification of the right of Israel to exist unmolested by secure and defensible boundaries, and equally to recognise the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a homeland.  It is a tragedy that what looked so bright and aspiringly hopeful in the Middle East only a little over a year ago has turned into now such an awful nightmare. But all of those who have any influence on that troubled part of our globe have an ongoing responsibility to do what they can to bring, however difficult it may seem, to bring about that peace, that will make a contribution. 
But finally Mr Chairman, I think the coalition has been an extraordinary success out of great difficulty and travail.  I think those terrible events have encouraged people to talk together about what they have in common more than perhaps they have done for a long time. And on a personal note I found attending the APEC meeting in Shanghai in October which was attended of course by President Bush and President Putin and the President of China and the Prime Minister of Japan and so many other leaders, we saw people whose views many issues may be different talking together and making common cause about what they could do to mobilise the world against terrorism. That was a source of encouragement, even inspiration, at a difficult time and a reminder that out of awful tragedy new alliances and new momentums can be generated.  Thank you.
Further remarks during panel discussion
Well, I don';t think you can effectively pursue the goal of a fairer world and thereby remove some of the bases of the emergence of terrorism without an infinitely more successful prosecution of policies of more open trade.  I said in my introductory comments that the developed world, the wealthy nations of the world could do more to help the developing countries of the world by the removal of trade barriers than they could by several multiples increasing the amount of official development assistance which is now provided to developing countries. And the last 30 or 40 years of the world';s economic experience is replete with examples of countries which have pursued more open trade policies and have lifted people out of poverty.  I think it';s also important in relation to poverty to bear in mind that we have made progress. 
There';s always a danger when we talk about poverty, of repeating scenarios of despair, of talking as if no progress has been made. The reality is that progress has been made and if you adopt proper measures according to absolute numbers you can clearly argue that there has been a great deal of progress made and trade and openness of trade play an enormous part and I think the most voluble point in relation to globalisation visa vie the cry of the poor of the world is that remaining punitive trade barriers of many of the richer countries of the world do work an injustice to some of the developing countries and in a sense in so far as those who argue that globalisation is the problem, the answer is more globalisation via an even more open trading approach. We don';t as political leaders, business leaders in capitalist society, we don';t do a good enough job of explaining the benefits of globalisation. 
We lose the argument, the rhetorical argument all too frequently, to the political anarchists who try to lay at the feet of globalisation all the sins of the world. So I think it plays a very big part, not only in substance but speaking as all of us are as practicing politicians, the political challenge is to win - to use that old clich - the hearts and minds of people about the benefits of globalisation. We';re too defensive, we';re all too readily think that humanising globalisation is to concede some of its critics'; arguments. Humanising globalisation is to point out the benefits it';s brought to poorer countries over the last decade or more and the benefits it can bring even more to those countries in the years ahead.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
Madam President, Mr Kiemas, Ministers, Mr Chairman, the Auditor General, the Chief of the Defence Force, the Governor of Jakarta, ladies and gentlemen.
Madam President, Janette and I are delighted to be with you and we appreciate very much the gracious hospitality that you have extended to both of us and to our travelling party.  This is the fifth occasion on which I';ve had the privilege of visiting Indonesia as Prime Minister of Australia.   My visit comes at a time when it is opportune to reaffirm the importance of the relationship between our two nations and our two societies.  On this occasion for the first time I will also visit Yogyakarta giving myself an opportunity to understand better the important cultural epicentre which that city is to the life and to the experience of this country.
In our talks today Madam President, you and I have ranged over all aspects of our relationship and as you mentioned in your speech in such a gracious way our relationship does stretch back to the very beginning of the Republic of Indonesia. The formation of that Republic of course was an event greatly shaped by your late father who played such a dominant role in the independence movement. The relationship between our two countries has inevitably had its ups and downs and I believe that within both societies and within the leadership of the political communities in both nations there is a determination to build a closer, more realistic and more enduring relationship and association between Australia and Indonesia. 
I am very conscious of the great economic challenges that your country faces. We were ready as a friend and neighbour to assist Indonesia when the Asian economic downturn in 1997 unfairly robbed this country of the fruits of a great deal of economic change and economic commitment, and we stand ready as a friend in the future to continue to work closely, recognising in a process of adjustment, which your country must undertake, does need to take account of social pressures and social realities. And just as in 1997 Australia was willing to argue Indonesia';s case for a slightly different pace of adjustment before the International Monetary Fund, it remains our view that the process of economic adjustment must take account necessarily of social realities, a point to which Madam President Your Excellency, you alluded in your remarks tonight.
We live in an environment that has been changed permanently by the tragic events of the 11th of September 2001.  And the fight against international terrorism is something which must be joined by all nations of goodwill. You and I both attended that very important gathering of APEC leaders in Shanghai last October where nations representing vastly different experiences and different traditions united in their condemnation of terrorism.
I welcome very much the fact Madam President that you and I have had an opportunity today to initiate a discussion of cooperation between Australia and Indonesia in the fight against international terrorism.  I also welcome very much Madam President the fact that over coming weeks important meetings involving both of our nations at a ministerial level will take place here in Indonesia. An important tripartite meeting between Australia, Indonesia and East Timor will take place here in Bali on the 25th of February followed by the regional conference on people smuggling jointly convened. Another demonstration of cooperation between our two societies jointly convened by Australia and Indonesia.  
Both of these meetings are a demonstration of the practical commitment of our two governments and our two peoples towards tackling regional problems and bringing about regional solutions. The challenge of people smuggling is not a challenge that can be solved by Indonesia and Australia acting alone.  We have interests in it and we have responsibilities in relation to it, but it is also something that challenges the nations of the entire region.  
You spoke passionately Madam President of the unity of your nation. National unity is something very precious to any nation and any people and I want to make it very clear that Australia fully and unequivocally respects the integrity of the Republic of Indonesia and strongly supports the desire of your Government to maintain the national unity of your people. It is an immense challenge to be the President of a nation comprising over 200 million people, stretching across a vast archipelago of more than 3000 islands.  I wish to say to you Madam President that we are your friend and your companion in the challenge of working through difficult regional problems.  We should have a relationship which is built on several things. It should be built on mutual respect, it should be built on an understanding that we have both issues and attitudes and causes in common, but we also have some different traditions and different histories. And you get a good relationship between the two countries if those two things are always understood.  It should be a relationship built on candor and a recognition that when difficulties arise there is a willingness to sit down and work our way through those difficulties.
But most importantly of all it is a relationship that must be built upon the links between our people. I said at our meeting this afternoon that if all that exists between two countries in terms of their relationship is a dialogue between the members of the government, it is a relationship of an empty shell.  But if it is a relationship which is best expressed in the linkages between people it is a relationship that has much substance. And when we look back over the history of our association over the last fifty or more years it is a relationship which has been enriched by linkages between our peoples. Stretching back to the late 1940s young Indonesians in there thousands under the Colombo Plan and otherwise came to study in Australia. As I speak there are 17,000 or 18,000 Indonesians studying in Australia, more than from any other country I believe in the world and that is something that more than anything else in a way expresses the real future of the relationship between our two countries. Tens of thousands Australians come to Indonesia, and I have to say a great number of them go to a particular part of Indonesia - namely Bali - for their holidays. That also is an expression of the links between our two countries. But the most important thing is of course the people to people links and you were gracious enough to mention the contribution of people such as Tom Critchley to the early years of the association between our two countries and that continues through the present day.
And Madam President, can I say that I am really delighted to be a guest again in your country. We have had over the past few years some fluctuations in our association in political terms, but I believe deep down the links that exist between our two countries have continued unimpaired. For my part I will continue to work as leader of the government to build a relationship based on those considerations and those principles that I mentioned. I believe that there is much that Australia and Indonesia can do together, not only in our region but also as a demonstration to others around the world of the capacity of two societies with different cultures, different backgrounds, different traditions, to come together and make common cause to serve come values that they have in common and goals that they seek to achieve together.  
Again on behalf of myself and my wife I say to you Madam President, to you, to Kiemas, to all of your colleagues in your Government, thank you very much for the hospitality you have extended to me. Can I invite all of you to stand to honour a toast to the President of the Republic of Indonesia – Megawati Soekarnoputri – and to the friendship of the people of Australia and the people of Indonesia. 
[ends] 


E&amp;OE........... 
Thank you very much for that very warm introduction. To the State Minister
 for Research and Technology, and the State Minister for State Enterprises,
 other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I am particularly
 delighted that it was possible to include in this my fifth visit to Indonesia
 as Prime Minister and my eighth visit in different capacities, this luncheon
 of the Australian Indonesian Business Council because it gives me an opportunity
 to say a few things in two areas. It gives me an opportunity to say something
 having just come from a meeting of the World Economic Forum in New York,
 or colloquially called Davos in New York, an opportunity to reflect upon
 attitudes towards economic growth and recovery in the United States; but
 also and most importantly to stress the critical importance of growing
 business relations and economic links between Australia and Indonesia
 to the bilateral relationship between our two countries.
We are all aware that for a combination of circumstances the relationship
 between our two countries has gone through at a political level some strains
 and some difficulties in recent years. But we also know that sustained
 by very strong person to person links in so many areas, and this large
 gathering of people here today at this luncheon is a testament to the
 strength of those personal links in the area of business activity and
 business investment. We know that the basic infrastructure of the relationship
 has remained very strong because it is the person to person links in the
 end that drive a relationship more than anything else and it';s a
 happy fact that as I speak to you today there are some 18,000 Indonesian
 students studying in Australia, more than from any other country in the
 world and it';s that kind of linkage which over the years has been
 the constant in the relationship between our two countries.
May I say that on this visit of mine I have been very graciously received
 by the President and all of the senior ministers of her Government. We';ve
 had an opportunity of talking about the areas of similarity, the areas
 of debate, and the areas of difference that those discussions have been
 conducted in a spirit of wanting to achieve better outcomes and of recognising
 that geography and circumstance and the fact that we are regional neighbours
 means that our two societies are with each other forever and there is
 a responsibility in charge on all of us to do what we can to contribute
 to the maintenance and the development of very strong relations between
 our two countries.
Indonesia suffered grievously and in my view unfairly in many respects
 from the impact of the Asian economic downturn in 1997. And I was very
 pleased as Prime Minister of Australia that we were able to provide material
 and valuable assistance in relation to the IMF package in 1997, and we
 were also able to advocate to the international monetary fund at that
 time a more realistic approach to the reform process that was to be undertaken
 in Indonesia. And once again economic circumstances have combined to put
 pressure on Indonesia';s economy at a time when it is going through
 a process, along with the political structure of this country, a process
 of great change and great reform.
All economies of the world now are inevitably influenced by what occurs
 in the United State more than at any time that I can recall in the almost
 thirty years that I';ve been in public life. The influence of the
 United States politically and economically is strong and dominant. I believe
 that the American economy is already in the early stages of recovery.
 It may not be as strong a recovery as many would want but a recovery nonetheless.
 And I certainly found in New York both in the discussions I had with the
 Secretary of the United States Treasury – Mr Paul O';Neill,
 and other senior people in the business and financial community, not universal
 but nonetheless majority, optimism about the future of the American economy
 and a belief that the strength of consumer spending underpinned by the
 very low interest rates, historically almost low interest rates, than
 America has enjoyed in recent times, and the capacity because of the increase
 in wealth of so many middle class Americans to leverage off that increase
 to support their consumer spending there is a belief that an economic
 recovery is on the way.
Naturally of course the American economy and the world economy took an
 enormous confidence hit on the 11th of September and I have no doubt that
 the objectives of those who perpetrated that foul deed included a desire
 to harm and damage the exuberant economic confidence of the United States
 and of the American people. The good thing that I can report to those
 who care about investment not only here in Indonesia but all around the
 world, the good thing that I can report from the time that I spent in
 the United States in New York is that the exuberance and the confidence
 of the American people, although very seriously assaulted on the 11th
 of September, is nonetheless still there and their determination in their
 commitment to economic growth and enterprise, their determination to continue
 and to resume the patterns of growth that existed until last year should
 not be doubted. So I came away from that meeting with a great sense of
 hope and optimism about the United States economy.
And I can also say to you today as Prime Minister of Australia that I
 believe the economy of Australia in this calendar year will grow very
 strongly. Some such as the Economist magazine predict that our growth
 could be greater than that of any other industrialised country. Whether
 it reaches that level or falls a little short of it it will nonetheless
 be the case that we will experience very significant economic growth.
 I';m very happy to report that the last year has seen a steady growth
 in the trade flows between Australia and Indonesia. There';s been
 a very healthy growth in both exports and imports. I recognise that as
 I am reminded by my Indonesian ministerial friends that there is an imbalance
 in the pattern of trade and one of the things that we committed ourselves
 to in our discussions yesterday was to ensure that there were no unnecessary
 impediments between trade and investment flows between our two nations.
The Australian economy has benefited greatly over the last few years
 from a series of economic reforms some of which were undertaken by the
 government of Australia before I became Prime Minister and many of which
 have been undertaken by my Government over the last almost six years.
 In particular in the area of labour market reform we have made changes
 which have boosted the productivity of the Australian economy, made it
 more competitive, and that productivity boost has enabled us to maintain
 a faster rate of economic growth than has been possible over earlier years.
 For many years the great challenge of the Australian economy was to try
 and find a way of taking the speed limits off economic growth. We experienced
 the unhappy phenomenon of having a period of economic growth which led
 to a period of inflation or a blow out in our current account deficit
 which necessitated the imposition of a more restrictive monetary or fiscal
 policy which in turn suppressed economic growth. But by undertaking structural
 reform, by first of all floating our exchange rate which proved to be
 quite important in relation to Australia';s adjustment to the Asian
 economic downturn in 1997 and more recently under my Government bringing
 about a fiscal surplus position with our budget in recent years, major
 labour market reforms, significant reforms to Australia';s taxation
 system which represent one of the biggest systemic changes to our economy
 in recent years. These things have all combined to create a situation
 where some of the speed limits that used to be there on Australia';s
 economic growth are no longer there.
I also believe that we have benefited very greatly from a very stable
 legal and political climate in Australia. Certainly our political environment
 is robust and combative as the Australians and many others in the audience
 will know, but it is nonetheless a stable political climate. The certainty
 of corporate governance and the clarity of our legal system, all of those
 things are very important.
And I agree that increasingly in this borderless world, the use the frequent
 clich, and a world of globalisation, countries with predictable and stable
 codes of corporate governance, prudential supervision and legal systems
 will be the beneficiaries of increasing levels of foreign investment.
When I was in New York there was much debate of course about the impact
 of globalisation, there was much debate about the impact of the tragic
 events of last September on how nations relate to each other, and how
 the process of globalisation might be affected. I think a very strong
 view emerged from those to whom I spoke that we must do more if we believe
 in globalisation to explain the benefits, to offer the critics of a more
 open economic system around the world, are allowed to propagate falsehoods
 all to infrequently those who understand its benefits are silent or inarticulate
 in expressing the benefits and explaining the advantages. The reality
 is that developing countries do, despite some of the anti-globalisation
 rhetoric, the reality is that developing countries do have much to gain,
 if globalisation involves as I believe it should, the opening up of markets
 for greater access to the products and the services of developing countries.
It';s frequently been said that if the protective trade barriers
 of the industrialised world were to be removed, then the value of that
 one single act to the wealth and the export income from developing countries
 would multiply by many times the existing level of foreign aid from those
 industrialised countries to the developing world. And if in fact you look
 at the experience and the history of nations over the last forty to fifty
 years, comparing the experience of those that have started off being under-developed
 with others of a similar situation, the first group adopting more open
 economic policies and the second group adopting more closed economic policies,
 the first group has turned out to be infinitely more successful.
I recognise that the process of economic change and economic adjustment
 is very difficult in a nation such as Indonesia. I know the importance
 to the many citizens of this country of a lot of the arrangements that
 have been in place for many years. But as a politician of now some twenty-seven
 years in the Australian Parliament, and almost six years as Prime Minister,
 I know in my own country how resistant many people are to change, and
 how difficult it is to explain the longer term virtues of change and reform,
 particularly if that involves some short term cost. And I do empathise
 very strongly with the Indonesian people, the Indonesian Government, and
 those in the business community who are seeking to lead this country';s
 transformation in so many areas.
And I want to leave you with my most important remark today, and that
 is, that in that process of change and reform which is so very important
 to the people of Indonesia, and to the people of this region, the people
 of Indonesia do have a firm and constant and understanding friend in Australia.
 We are a country that values the relationship we have with Indonesia.
 We have had our differences, and will have our differences in the future.
 But I believe that those who carry influence in both societies understand
 that being neighbours and because of shared history and shared experiences,
 we do have a future together, and a future that I know people in both
 countries want to build on and make more fruitful, and I hope that in
 a small way my visit on this occasion has contributed to building ever
 closer links between our two communities.
But it is very important that what this room represents, and that is
 the economic dynamism of the relationship, that has a very prominent part
 because without investment, without economic growth, without the beneficial
 effects of entrepreneurial risk taking, without achieving a proper balance
 between the role of the state and the role of the private sector, growing
 living standards and reaping the benefits globalisation will not be available
 to Indonesia. I know there are many in the Australian business community
 who are keen to support Indonesia';s future economic growth. Like
 all people in business, they like a good return, and that is understandable.
 They like certainty and predictability. They respect the efforts being
 made to bring about change and reform, and at a political level, I look
 forward to better and growing relationships between our two nations. And
 I say that sure in the knowledge that our association which has now been
 very long standing, Australia having been one of the very first supporters
 of the independence movement in Indonesia in the 1940';s, that it
 is an association that is built on very sound foundations. And I am delighted
 to be back here in Jakarta, and I wish all the members of the Council
 the very best of good fortune.
Thank you.
[ends]


Subjects: Information Technology;Adelaide
E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Alder, to Richard Alston my federal minister for Information and Technology, State Ministers, particularly our honoured guests from overseas, ladies and gentlemen.  On behalf of the Australian Government and on behalf of all of the Australian people I particularly welcome to the lovely city of Adelaide our guests for this conference, this congress, which is a remarkable tribute to the capacity of this city with its special attributes, most of which have been mentioned, but two more I';ll add in a moment. It';s a great contribution to the city of Adelaide that it should have been chosen for this congress.
It is an IT centre in Australia and it is very much a cultural centre of our nation.  It pioneered the promotion of culture and the arts to many parts of the Australian community.  Adelaide of course is also the capital of the state which now produces one of the fastest growing exports from Australia which doesn';t immediately have a lot to do with information technology, and that of course is the wine industry. It';s an interesting change in circumstance to recognise that Australia';s largest export now to the United Kingdom is wine.  We are second only to France as an exporter to that country and pressing them very hard.  And of course the great bulk of those exports come from the state of South Australia.  And also I might add, reflecting my own prejudices, Adelaide is home to arguably the most beautiful major cricket field in the world, certainly in Australia.
So can I say welcome to Australia, welcome to Adelaide, we';re pleased to have you amongst us in these early years of the 21st century. You';ll be welcomed by an Australian nation and by an Australian people very confident and very positive about our place in the world and the contribution that we can make to it.  A nation that identifies itself very strongly with the great liberal democratic tradition.  A nation that has aligned itself unambiguously with the leadership of the United States in the fight against terrorism.  A nation uniquely placed in the Asian-Pacific region and being steadily enriched by new settlers from that region who are contributing greatly to the diversification of our skills base, and not least in the area of information technology, but also a nation that has very deep roots with Europe and North America.  You';ll find a modern, thriving, innovative nation, you';ll find a nation with a strong and growing economy.  A nation which over the last 20 years has undertaken major changes and reforms to her economy which have enabled Australians to withstand the buffeting and the shocks of major economic downturns and most particularly the Asian economic downturn of 1997.  You';ll find a nation whose growth prospects in the year 2002 are better than most. And you';ll find a nation whose levels of government debt are extremely low by world standards.  
But you';ll also find a nation which is very adaptive and very innovative when it comes to information technology.  A nation that through all of its history has very pragmatically embraced and adapted new technology.  And one of the little known features of the Australian character to many foreigners has been the way in which we have been devourers, almost instant devourers of new technology, whether it be in the area more recently of information technology or in earlier years other inventions.
In the area of information and communication technology usage it';s already been said that 67 per cent of Australian households have a PC.  That 52 per cent of Australian households are online and 72 per cent of Australians over the age of 16 have access to the Internet. These put us at the very top of Internet and IT usage around the world. There';s been an enormous transformation in the balance of activity in the Australian economy reflecting the use of information technology over the last 10 years.  Ten years ago the mining, agricultural and manufacturing industries of Australia accounted for 74 per cent of the stock market value of Australian companies. Now 10 years later finance and services comprise two-thirds of that stock market value, with one-third in those three industries. That is not to denigrate the role of those industries because it remains the case that in terms of technological sophistication and general efficiency the Australian mining and agricultural industries are at the top flight of world performance. Indeed it is a regular complaint of the efficient farmers of Australia that the predatory trading and subsidy practices of the European Union and of other countries do great and enduring damage to the competitive position of Australian rural exports.
And I make those comments and I draw those comparisons to illustrate the way in which the Australian economy has adapted and transformed.  We have preserved the best of our traditional industries and they are still massive and important wealth producers and employers and adders of value to the Australian economy. But we have embraced new industries, and more particularly we have embraced new technology and applied it to all industries and in the process we give the lie to this rather dated proposition that in some way there is a set of old industries and a set of new industries. There are in reality either efficient industries or inefficient industries. And both varieties can be found in all industry sectors and the key to efficiency so often is the ready adaptation of information technology to a particular business endeavour. And one of the features of the development of the Australian economy over the last few years has been the way in which we have seen productivity levels rise. The key to rising incomes and rising employment and low inflation is to have increases in productivity. And the contribution that the use of information technology has made to increases in competitiveness and increases in productivity has been quite remarkable. It';s an illustration of the use to which we are putting information technology, can I simply say to our overseas visitors that you would have under our electronic travel authority system, you would have automatically obtained your visa without any further effort when your travel ticket was purchased by your travel agent. And this is an Australian innovation which is a demonstration of the way in which information technology can be put to effective use.
There is of course nothing complacent about our approach to information technology and its uses in Australia. We do not pretend that there aren';t weaknesses in the matrix of capacity that we have in this country.  And that';s one of the reasons why at the beginning of last year I launched a $3 billion programme entitled Backing Australia';s Ability which was designed amongst other things to put more investment into research, not only but particularly in the area of information and communications technology. And one of the elements of that programme will be the establishment of a world class centre of excellence in ICT as part of that Backing Australia';s Ability programme.
I';m very conscious that one of the great policy issues for governments all around the world in the area of information and communications technology is broadband and the harnessing of broadband and the reaping of the dividends of social advance and advantage from it is very important. We';ll be announcing, and Senator Alston will be giving more detail of this, we';ll be announcing at this congress a joint Government/Industry group to be chaired by Senator Alston which will ensure that the social benefits of broadband developments are captured and used for the benefit of the entire Australian community.  And we';ll also be announcing ladies and gentlemen the establishment of a high level ICT industry strategy group to be chaired by Senator Alston, and the purpose of that will be to develop a framework for the future of the ICT industry in Australia.
I';m also very happy to report to this congress the reaching of a number of milestones and one in particular that we set ourselves back in 1997 when I outlined in a major statement to the Australian people some of our industry objectives. And one of the things I promised was that we would put all Commonwealth Government services online.  And I';m pleased to announce today that that goal has been achieved in full over the last four years.  We now have 1,665 individual Commonwealth services and agencies which are fully online. And I doubt that in terms of national government services it is possible to draw a more favourable example or find a more favourable example around the world.
But I think it is important, and I know that this congress will focus on this issue, to remember that in debates about information technology just as in the endless debates about globalisation, that the end goal of human and intellectual endeavour in area such as this is the improvement of the overall lot of mankind.  
This congress brings together people from all around the world. It brings together people who are the leading ledge of, the intellectual leading edge of our civilisation. It';s an opportunity therefore to restate the value system that ought to underpin our activity. It';s an opportunity to relate the advances in areas of information technology to the relief of human misery. I';m very proud of the fact amongst the many things that my country has been able to do over the years is the fact that in areas of medical science and medical research we have been able to punch well above our weight. And the contribution that information technology is making to that effort is absolutely enormous. I';m also particularly proud of the fact that one of our recent initiatives with the strong support of the Federal Government is our involvement in partnership with the World Bank in what is called the virtual Colombo plan in which we are investing $200 million to work with the World Bank in bringing, through information technology, the benefits of teaching and learning to the developing world. In the post World War II years the Colombo Plan was one of the most practical ways in which Australia connected with the developing nations of the Asian-Pacific region. And it remains an enormous source of inspiration and pride to me as Prime Minister of Australia whenever I visit countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia and Singapore and Thailand I constantly run into people who remind me of the contribution to their lives made through the Colombo Plan of a university or technical education in Australia.
Now that all occurred before the burgeoning of information technology in our world. And it';s fitting therefore that in a virtual Colombo Plan we should be part of a project which is deigned to bring through information technology the benefits of learning and understanding to developing parts of the world.
So the end goal of our endeavours has always to be the relief of human suffering, the bridging of the divides between the rich and the poor.  There are many ways in which that can be done, development assistance, importantly more open trading systems, indeed the rich nations of the world can do more to help the undeveloped nations of the world by demolishing trade barriers than they can by virtually anything else. And the contribution that the spread in an affordable way of information technology and all that it brings to the developing world is an important part of our endeavours.
I am delighted ladies and gentleman that you have chosen to come to Australia. I';m delighted that you have chosen to come to this great convention city of Adelaide.  It';s an optimally sized city for a congress of this nature. It has everything that is needed but in a number of respects it perhaps lacks, desirably, some of the pressures of a larger metropolis. I couldn';t think of a better location in Australia in which to have this congress. On behalf of my fellow Australians I welcome all of you to our nation. We always welcome friends and visitors, we are an open hearted generous people who are very proud of our cultural diversity, very proud of our egalitarian values and always ready to extend the hand of welcome and friendship to those who come to our shores. I wish your congress well and I declare it open.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
To the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.  To the Leader of the Opposition, to my Ministerial colleagues, members of the President';s travelling party, including a number of his senior ministers, ladies and gentlemen.
This is something of a milestone in the bilateral relationship between our two countries. It is the first occasion that we have had a visit to Australia by a serving Nigerian head of state. But it carries with it more than that symbolic significance, it carries with it the opportunity for us to salute and honour a man who has suffered much in a personal way in pursuit of his democratic ideals.  Nigeria and Australia share democratic values and democratic ideals. But none of us who serve in the Australian parliamentary system have been through the personal fire and difficulty and pain and discomfort that our honoured guest has experienced in his long struggle, including a period of imprisonment, to achieve a return to democratic rule in his country. And it';s for that reason as a warrior for democracy that we, as well as his position as the President of Nigeria, we welcome him here today.
Australia and Nigeria are fellow members of the Commonwealth. Our nations share the values of that organisation and we recognise very much the significance of Nigeria, Africa';s most populous nation of 110 million people, one of the major oil producers of the world and a country which under the leadership of our guest has done much to address the great challenges of economic development and the need to alter and restructure the Nigerian economy.
The President and I have had a very constructive dialogue. We';ve examined areas where our two nations might work more closely together.  He visited one of the jewels in the Australian sporting crown this morning, the Australian Institute of Sport.  And just as in Australia in Nigeria, sport bulks large and Australians know well the fiercesome competitive competence of amongst other things Nigeria';s soccer players and Nigeria';s athletes and we admire very much the performance of Nigeria on the world';s sporting stage.
But I recognise as Prime Minister of a developed country, as one that is described as well endowed and not without good reason. I recognise the enormous challenges that a country such as Nigeria faces.  I admire the fact that the President and his administration have gone down the path of economic openness, have gone down the path of encouraging private sector investment.  And I would hope that Australian companies would increasingly, where commercial opportunities are present, look to Nigeria as a destination for investment because the success of the renaissance of democracy in Nigeria, as in so many countries around the world will depend very heavily on the extent to which, as the President put it to me this morning, there is a democratic dividend and that democratic dividend must be rising living standards and improved economic performance.  And in that pursuit Australia will be an ally, a friend and a partner of Nigeria';s.
The President of course has visited Australia on one earlier occasion, back in 1974, as a young army officer and he also formed with a predecessor of mine, Malcolm Fraser, the partnership when they were joint chairmen of the Eminent Persons Group appointed in relation to South Africa in the middle 1980';s.  And as the President remarked coming to this luncheon the report of that eminent persons group was a watershed in the change of attitude and climate within South Africa and towards South Africa which led ultimately to the release of Nelson Mandela and ultimately to the transformation of South Africa into a democratic state where all races were recognised on a basis of equality.
So Mr President you are a very welcome and a very honoured guest to our country.  We will together at Coolum over the next few days meet as leaders of two Commonwealth nations. It is a unique association.  It brings together many races and many religions. It is a modern exercise in religious and racial tolerance and respect.  And as I remarked in another place in another set of circumstances last night more than ever in the wake of the events of September of last year the world needs fora and organisations that bring together different races and the different religions of your world.
To you Mr President on behalf of the Australian Government I extend a very warm welcome. I think this visit of yours will do much to lay the foundations of an even stronger relationship between our two countries. We honour you as the President of an important Commonwealth partner of Australia';s but even more than that we honour you personally for what you have done and what you have suffered and endured in the cause of the democratic values that we all share in common. I would now like to ask the Leader of the Opposition, Simon Crean, to support my remarks.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Majesty, it';s a great honour for me as host Prime Minister and as Prime Minister of Australia to read the following tribute from the Commonwealth heads of state and government.  
“At the opening of their meeting in Coolum the Commonwealth heads of Government have asked me to convey to Your Majesty there sincere greetings and congratulations on your completion of fifty years as the head of the Commonwealth.  We warmly appreciate your presence at Coolum notwithstanding the pressures on you at this time.  We are grateful for your dedication in the service of the Commonwealth and your strong commitment to the association over half a century.  We wish to reaffirm the warmth and the esteem in which you are held.  
Our aim at Coolum is to chart a clear course for the future of the Commonwealth which will preserve its relevance and credibility as a major force for good in global affairs and enable you to remain proud to be the head of our association.  We are confident that our deliberations will strengthen the Commonwealth ethos of mutual understanding and cooperation and deliver practical action consistent with their own dedication to and work for the Commonwealth family.” 
Ma';am, we are delighted that you have been able to join us once again as head of the Commonwealth and as somebody who more than anybody in this room, has faithfully served over the years served the ideals of our organisation.
  When I watched the video of the Opening Ceremony today and I watched that great historical panorama of personalities, of leaders, of people who have shaped the affairs of our nations over the last fifty years, there was one constant in it all that was yourself. And it';s been a remarkable influence.  You have been eyewitness to extraoridnary events and you';ve dealt with as great a range of men and women in government that any person could deal with in half a century. And through all of that time you have of course been assisted so ably by Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh and we';re delighted that he';s also with us tonight.  
I can but say to both of you thank you for half a century of loyalty, fidelity, dedication and commitment to an organisation which has its many critics, has constantly and wrongly over the years been dismissed as an anachronism, yet in the wake of as I said at the opening today the terrible events of last year, its multiracial, its religious diversity, its great spread of ethnicity, is an organisation that presents opportunities for reaching out to each other that perhaps none other in the world offers.
It is therefore my very particular pleasure ma';am to say but two other things to you. Firstly the words that I';ve read from, the declaration will be suitably subscribed by each of the heads of government present here at Coolum and will be placed in that magnificent folio and then sent to you within the next few weeks. And finally and very importantly I have very great pleasure on behalf of all of my colleagues in inviting them to rise and to join me in a toast. 
And that toast is to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, head of the Commonwealth.  Her Majesty.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Majesty, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. May I welcome all of you who have come to our nation, to Australia.  May I wish my fellow Commonwealth delegation leaders an enjoyable and productive Commonwealth conference at Coolum.  Particularly do we, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, honour and salute the presence of the head of the Commonwealth Her Majesty the Queen.  Ma';am, the modern Commonwealth was first given form by your late father King George VI and in the fifty years of your reign you have served the Commonwealth with great commitment and great dignity and we rejoice in the opportunity of being with you in this fiftieth year of your time as head of the Commonwealth.
The modern Australia that greets all of our visitors is a very rich and diverse country. It is as proud of its scientific and artistic achievement as it is of its prowess on the sporting field. Its cultural and linguistic and religious diversity is a source of enormous strength.  Inevitably at this meeting we will focus not only on the past achievements of the Commonwealth but also its current strengths. And more than ever those great strengths of diversity in both religion and race and also in culture, they are more important now than perhaps at any other time in the history of the modern Commonwealth. The terrible events of September last year have driven home to the entire world the importance of reaching out to one another, of respecting difference in race and religion and ethnic background. And no organisation in the world does that better than the Commonwealth. It reinforces the relevance of the Commonwealth in the modern world when you examine those strengths.  
 The Commonwealth over past years has been a staunch upholder of democratic values and the new governance arrangements that we will discuss when we look at the High Level Review Group Report chaired so ably by President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa will give new relevance to those governance arrangements which lie so much at the core of the modern Commonwealth.
There are two other matters that I hope this conference will focus very much on. The first of those is to recognise that the Commonwealth is made up of many nations. Some are rich and some are poor, some are developed and some are developing. And at the end of the day the greatest antidote to those gaps is a more open and a freer trading system. If the developed countries of the world were to do more to dismantle their trade barriers that would do more than any other single act to help enrich the hope and nourish the future of the people of the developing world.  
And it';s also appropriate that there be a focus on the youth of the Commonwealth at this meeting and a charge has been made to the heads of governments from the High Level Review Group that we focus on the contribution that youth can make to the modern Commonwealth and the ties through youth that bind us together.
Your Majesty, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, to all visitors to Australia, enjoy our hospitality. We are a warm, direct, open hearted people. We are honoured to be the host nation of the first Commonwealth meeting in the 21st century and we hope that all of you will take away very happy memories of Australia 2002.  
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Tony. To Tony and Cherie Blair, Justin Madden, my other fellow prime ministers, presidents, heads of delegation, to Ron Walker, [Michael] Fennell and all the other people who';ve gathered today to express our solidarity at a political level with the cause of sport through the Commonwealth Games.
I don';t need to remind anybody in this audience of the central part that sport plays in the life of the Australian nation.  And many of our great sporting moments of the last 20 or 30 years have been at Commonwealth Games events.  The performances of Robert de Castella, Tony Charlton mentioned recently the 1998 Commonwealth Games and who of us will forget the wonderful performance of so many of our swimmers and our athletes at those games.  But importantly today we honour the place of sport in the Commonwealth. 
There are many sports that preoccupy the activities of the young and not so young men and women of the nations of the Commonwealth. Many of us are attracted to a sport that is played passionately by some Commonwealth nations and not so passionately by others, and in one or two cases not at all. But all of us whatever our other sporting passions come together to participate in the Commonwealth Games. Today';s lunch has a nice symbolism because it is jointly hosted by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and of course Manchester will be the host city for the Commonwealth Games later this year, and by the Australian Prime Minister. The city of Melbourne, the scene of the great 1956 Olympic Games and also may I say proudly as the Australian Prime Minister probably the location of one of the great sporting arenas of the world – the Melbourne Cricket Ground.  
Can I say it';s a delight for me to share the hosting of this lunch with the British Prime Minister and to you Tony and your wife Cherie we bid a very special welcome. I';m also delighted that Peter Bartells, the Chairman of the Australian Sports Commission, is here and he will be playing an increasingly active and participatory role in the activities of the Commonwealth Games. And that indefatigable organiser of special events sporting and otherwise, Ron Walker, who of course is responsible for the organisation of the Commonwealth Games in Melbourne in 2006.  
Ladies and gentlemen welcome to this sports lunch. The cause of sport in the Commonwealth is a great cause and we all remember the Gleneagles Declaration which made it absolutely clear that it was a fundamental principle of sport within the Commonwealth that it should be conducted in circumstances where there was absolutely no discrimination or prejudice on account of race, ethnicity or other variation in background.
But ladies and gentlemen, welcome to this lunch.  It';s a gesture of support from the Commonwealth to the Games in Manchester and four years after that to the Games in Melbourne. And to our British friends can I say we wish you well in organising the Games. We wish it a great success. We suspend judgement on who should win the various events if they';re not Australian successes. But we know that it will be organised in the true tradition of Commonwealth sport and I';m delighted to have this opportunity of hosting this lunch with the British Prime Minister. 
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
[tape begins] This I think is the second or third, I think the third of these gatherings that I';ve attended and it really does drive home something that';s very obvious to me, six years in as Prime Minister of Australia, and somebody who';s had his share of set tos on occasions with received opinion from the Australian Capital territory, the changes that have occurred in the public/private mix of the Canberra and regional economy. It is an economy transformed over the last five or six years. There';s not the slightest doubt that the private sector now bulks far larger in the life and the economy of the ACT than it did only five or six years ago. And certainly far more than it did 15 or 20 years ago. That is not to in any way denigrate or downplay the public sector importance and the special role of Government in the economy of the ACT and the special place of the public service in the life and the aspirations of the Australian Capital Territory. I think the ACT has adjusted extraordinarily well to many of the changes that my government was responsible for, many of them in the face of ferocious criticism and opposition at the time. But in the process I think we have together brought about a transformed economy in our national capital and the surrounding region and tonight';s gathering is a good illustration of what';s been achieved and I want to join others in thanking Ericsson for the tremendous support and the patronage that it';s bought to tonight';s function and to honour its contribution to the Australian economy, particularly to the communications industry.
It is true as the Chief Minister said that the unemployment rate in the ACT is lower than any other jurisdiction in Australia.  The participation rate of the labour force by dint of the special economic and social structure of Canberra is higher than in any other part of Australia. And an enormous amount has been achieved by the ACT';s economy, largely by the people in this room, the entrepreneurs, the investors, the business men and women who';ve played such a significant role in the restructuring and the revitalisation and the regeneration of the ACT';s economy over the last few years.
This dinner inevitably takes place in the wake of some extraordinarily good economic news that was released last week and something has been said about comparisons between the Australian economy and the economies of other parts of the world. And I agreed with Professor Smith that Australia should never try and imitate anybody, Australia should always be herself because being herself is a pretty good thing to be. In fact there';s none better.  But we can learn from other people and other people can learn from us.  And we can also learn not to be frightened of our success. We should learn not to be too surprised when we keep hearing and having it confirmed that we are performing economically better than most other countries. Now that';s not a cause of any kind of triumphalism, it oughtn';t to be a cause for us abandoning the tools of economic reform or the zest for it. But it should certainly be an encouragement for us to take advantage of the enormous opportunities that are presented to Australia at the present time.  If you look at the figures that were released last week, by far the most encouraging part to me of those figures is not the headline 4.1 per cent of growth, although that';s very reassuring and very valuable as a confidence booster for the entire community, but to me the most exciting thing about those figures is that they demonstrate the extraordinary productivity improvement that has occurred in this country over the last decade. And if I were asked to single out one particular descriptor of the Australian economy that I thought was more important than anything else I would single out the improvement that has occurred in our productivity which has really been quite remarkable. And that of course has been fuelled by a lot of things, it';s been fuelled by labour market reform, it';s been fuelled by other reforms, it';s also been massively contributed to by the way in which this country has embraced information technology.
I keep learning and understanding more things about the character of the Australian economy and the character of the Australian people every day that I';m in my current position. And one of the things that we should never underestimate is the historic capacity of the Australian community to innovate and to indulge itself in and devour new technology.  We are some of the most rapid embracers if I can put it, the most enthusiastic embracers of new technology that mankind has ever seen. And it only seems a short while ago that we were having rather sterile arguments about whether in order to be a high-tech country you had to actually manufacture IT or whether the measure of it was in fact the extent to which you utilised and applied it to the purposes of your business.  And I think we';ve demonstrated pretty convincingly with our productivity performance that that';s a pretty sterile and irrelevant argument.  The other sterile, irrelevant argument that';s now fallen by the wayside, it was in vogue only a couple of years ago, is this idea that there is such a thing as a new economy and an old economy. The reality is that there are not new businesses and old businesses there are only efficient businesses and inefficient businesses. And the efficient businesses are those that apply information technology to their advantage and convert it to the productivity improvement of their activities. And Australian businesses have been extremely adept at doing that over the last few years. And that';s one of the reasons why productivity has boomed so much and one of the reasons why that';s underpinned the economic performance of Australia. 
There are other reasons.  Our changed labour market approach - there';s no doubt in my mind that if this country wants to hit a brick wall in further economic development and further economic growth it only has to turn its back on deregulation of the labour market and it will go a long way to achieving that outcome because the change that has come across the Australian economy as a result of the fact that we have freed our labour markets has been enormous. And I hope that it will be possible during this term of the Government that we can make some further progress on that front and it is devoutly to be hoped that at a state level there is not a turning back of the clock in that area. It would be tragic and inimical to the long term interests of employment growth in this country if we were to turn our backs on the enormous gains in productivity that has accrued from the freeing of labour markets of the last few years at both a national and at a state level. And it would be a particularly grievous blow to our small and medium sized businesses which are so much part of the Canberra economy if that were to occur.
So we do have an opportunity, atypically of many industrialised economies at the present time, to take advantage of very strong economic conditions. But we';ll only be able to do that if we continue with the process of reform and change.  In a globalised economy we can';t afford to be static, we have to continue reform, we have to continue to innovate not only in our businesses but also in our economic management.  And we have to continue a practical partnership between business and government.  I spoke a few moments ago of some of the features and characteristics of Australia and Australians. One of the things that I believe that this country has done better over the last 100 years than many other societies is that we have got the public/private sector mix and balance a little better than most. We seem to spend a little less time in Australia arguing as to the level of involvement of the government or the level of involvement of the private sector in many of our key social areas.  And when I as Prime Minister of Australia look on the one hand perhaps at the United States and I look on the other hand at Europe I think one of the things that we have done rather cleverly in this country in areas like health and education, for all the improvements that are still needed in both of those areas at a federal and state level, is that we';ve managed to get the public/private sector mix rather better and more in balance than many other societies. We';ve avoided some of the harshness of an approach that does sometimes allow people to fall through the safety net and on the other hand we have avoided the stultifying impact of too great a level of state intervention. And in areas like education and health in particular I think we have achieved a rather happier balance that has been the case in so many other societies.
I';m very proud of the fact, if I can say directly to our hosts and to our visitors, of the Government';s own performance. We now have a Federal Government that is completely online.  There are 1,665 different agencies of the Federal Government which are now completely accessible on line so far as their services are concerned. And a project and a goal that we set ourselves only a few years ago and I think it was back in 1997 seemed to be unachievable, has in fact been achieved. And I was very proud at the conference, the information communications conference that I attended in Adelaide only a couple of weeks ago, was able to tell our  six or 800 visitors from overseas that that was one of the achievements that Australia, in the Government sector, has been able to chalk up.
So ladies and gentlemen I';m delighted at the progress that the Canberra, the ACT and regional economies have made over the last few years. There is a sense of optimism and hope and prosperity in the ACT region. It';s due overwhelmingly I believe to the efforts of the business men and women in this room. What you have done is participate in a transformation of the economy of the national capital and the surrounding region.  It';s a transformation that has preserved the best of the traditions of the old Canberra but transplanted it into an atmosphere of modernity, of a greater involvement of the private sector and a recognition that the Government and the private sector must work together. 
I';m very thankful for the contribution that my own senior colleagues, many of whom are here tonight and particularly I want to acknowledge the presence of Richard Alston who';s been responsible for the communications and information technology area in the Government for the past six years. And the contribution that so many of my own ministers have made to that transformation should not be underestimated.
Again to Ericsson thank you very much. I compliment all of the business men and women here tonight for the role that they have played and take heart that you belong to a country whose economy is outperforming most and whose economic conditions and prospects of further growth and prosperity have rarely been brighter.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Subjects: 2001 Election; tax reform; welfare reform; media laws; Labor Party.
E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much, Chris; my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals.  May I thank you very much for that warm welcome and can I say how delighted I am to be back in Australia after one of the more active diplomatic weeks that Australia has had for a very long period of time.  And you were right, Madam President, in saying that it was a week in which Australia was able to make a very important contribution on the international stage, and it was a reminder to me of one of the many things that this Government was elected to do only four months ago.  
And this morning I want to take a few moments to inject what I might call a reality check into Australian politics in March of 2002.  And in the process of injecting that reality check to remind you and to remind the Australian people of why we were elected and what we were elected to do in November of last year and also as a footnote to remind you why the other side of politics was not elected in November of last year.
There are those who falsely assert, and they do it with greater frequency every week, but falsely assert that this Government has no third term agenda.  Let me take a few moments this morning to remind you of what we were elected to do in November of last year and what we are doing to implement the agenda that we took to the last election. 
First and foremost we were elected in November of last year to keep Australia strong.  And that expression of strength is many faceted.  We were elected to keep the Australian economy strong and it can barely be said that we have failed in that objective.  Our economy is growing faster than that of any industrialised nation in the world.  I visited last week the second fastest growing economy in the industrialised world and that's the United Kingdom and the rate of growth in the United Kingdom is less than half what it is in Australia.  In fact, Australia's economy is growing at ten times the rate of the OECD average.  We've had growth of 4.1% in the last 12 months and we saw a couple of weeks ago some quite remarkable employment figures.
Our economy is the envy of the industrialised world.  When I saw the British Chancellor of the Exchequer in No. 11 Downing Street a few days ago he was asking me about our recipe for success and certainly not the other way round.  The reality is that this country is held in very high regard and people marvel and wonder at our capacity not only to work our way through the Asian economic downturn of 1997 but also to avoid the impact of the downturn in the United States and the downturn in many other countries over the last year.  And it's been no accident.  And I look back over the last 12 months and I remember all the things that we were criticised for.  We were told last year that we were carelessly spending the surplus.  If we had not spent some additional money on roads and reducing petrol excise, on defence, on salinity and a whole host of other things, our economy now would not be performing as well as it is because one of the advantages of that additional spending was that it put a floor under the level of economic activity in Australia at exactly the same time as external events were exerting a weakening pressure on the Australian economy.  And we were elected to maintain the strength of the Australian economy and we have done that and we have done that magnificently but we are also elected to maintain the respect and esteem that Australia has around the world.  
My great criticism of the foreign policy approach of the Keating Government was that it was over-preoccupied with our own region.  I didn't for a moment suggest, and I never would suggest as Prime Minister, that the Asian Pacific region isn't the most important region of the world to Australia.  It is where our destiny will always be but our linkages with the Asian Pacific region are not linkages that ought to be to the exclusion of linkages with other parts of the world.  And I have constantly, in the last six years, sought to rebalance our foreign policy and I can say now that the alliance between Australia and the United States has never been in better condition at any time since World War II than it is at the present time.  And it's a relationship that is built on self-respect.  It's a relationship that is a two-way relationship and that was demonstrated very dramatically a couple of weeks ago when in the face of what was an indefensible decision taken by the Bush Administration on steel tariffs, my Government was able to achieve, dare I say it, a rollback.  But this is a good rollback.  There are bad rollbacks - bad rollbacks are when you change something that's good and good rollbacks are when you change something that's bad.
And, ladies and gentlemen, make no mistake, that was the first occasion in my Federal Parliamentary political memory where the Australian Government was able to persuade an American Administration to change its mind after it had made an adverse trade decision.  It was something never achieved by earlier governments and I don't denigrate that, I simply make the point to demonstrate that we were able to achieve an outcome that means that 85% of BHP's exports to the United States will be unaffected by this particular decision.  Now that is a decision that's achieved when you have an intimacy of a relationship between two close friends and allies which respect each other and understand each others needs and we remain a firm and, on occasion as necessary, a not uncritical ally of the United States but always a loyal friend in the fight against terrorism, in the fight to defend the common values and the common principles that both our societies hold dear.
And our global respect has been maintained an enhanced over the last six years.  When you go from this country and you listen to the views of Australia by others you are reminded of the very high respect in which this country is held.  But it's not only the tremendous achievement of the 2000 Olympics that will be forever to the credit of this city and of this nation but it's the role that we played in East Timor.  It's the belief that this country is economically strong and economically progressive.  It is the respect that we have in many quarters for the fact that we understand that consistent with a generous and open and non-discriminatory immigration policy this country has the right to take the necessary steps to defend the integrity of its borders against illegal immigration.
And let me tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that when I spoke to senior members and I spoke to all of the senior members of the British Labour Government, I did not encounter any criticism of our illegal immigration policy.  I encountered a great deal of interest, a great deal of understanding amongst all of the people to whom I spoke.  And I wondered what, you know, I just wondered about the difference in the media reporting of alleged attitudes and the reality that I encountered.  And part of the reality check we ought to face concerning Australian politics at the present time is that around the world amongst ordinary people there is a great deal of understanding and sympathy about the position that Australia's taken. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are also elected to maintain the momentum of economic reform.  We are elected to maintain the momentum of labour market reform.  I understand that last night you offered a dinner in appreciation of the work that Peter Reith did as a senior Minister in my Government over the last six years.  And by far Peter Reith's greatest achievement was that he led the Government's campaign to modernise the Australian waterfront and to break the debilitating grip of the trade union movement on the maritime position in Australia.  And it was his achievement and the achievement of the Government in that area that has contributed so much to the competitiveness of the export sector of the Australian economy.  But we have more to do on the labour market front.  
We need further reform, we need to further loosen the shackles on small business in the area of the unfair dismissal laws.  One of the reasons why the Australian economy is so competitive now is that it's more productive and it's more productive because we have reformed our labour markets.  But it could be even more productive if we could have more reform in the area of labour markets.  
We are also elected to implement, as we will begin to do this year, major reform and restructuring of Australia's welfare system.  Isn't it interesting, it's been left to a Coalition Government to begin the serious renovation of Australia's welfare system.  It's a Coalition Government that has maintained the social security safety net while building into the Australian compact the notion of mutual obligation, the idea that we owe to the unfortunate in our community the dignity of safety net economic support.  We are not a society that allows people to fall between the cracks and we should never be a society that takes the view that if you don't make it, well bad luck whatever the circumstances.  It has always been the Australian way to look after people who, through no fault of their own, don't make it or temporarily find it hard to make it.  But it's equally fair that if society gives people help then they ask those people, if they are able to do so, to give something in return.  That is really the Australian way.  It's the modern Australian way and it's a modern Australian that endures widespread support and respect within the Australian community.
We are also elected to bring about major reforms in the area of savings and superannuation.  And when those reforms are implemented we'll not only provide more choice for women and more opportunities for women in relation to superannuation, it will also open up a major new opportunity for people from the time of birth to access superannuation benefits.  And I believe that that particular reform, when it is implemented, will open up a completely new dimension in the area of savings and in the area of superannuation. 
We've also been elected to achieve, if we can, a reform in the area of Australia's media laws.  There's been a lot of debate about that in recent days, in recent weeks.  The aim is recognise the modern reality and that is that artificial divisions between print media and electronic media are increasingly anachronistic and increasingly irrelevant.  And we ought also to remember that the laws that now govern media in this country were put in place by the Keating and Hawke governments.  I use those words advisedly in that order, or those names in that order, not as an act of visionary policy but as an act of retribution and punishment against media organisations in the mid 1980s that were not regarded as being sufficiently pro-Labor.  I mean, I know that sounds almost an oxymoron in the light of some of the media that has emanated from Canberra over the past few months. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I've taken a few moments to talk about these things because we have this curious notion put around by our opponents in the Labor Party and elsewhere that in some way this Government was elected by accident, that this Government was elected without an agenda, that this Government was elected off the back of negative prejudice and not because of a positive embrace of a government that have done good things for this country over the last six years and offered the prospects of doing even better things over the next three years.  
But the other reason that we were elected, my friends, is that the Australian public had a bit of a look at the other side and they didn't like what they saw, or perhaps more importantly, they couldn't see anything at all.  Because the true message out of the last election is that he who stands and waits and hopes that his or her opponent is going to self destruct and he or she will get the benefit of that self destruction without even trying, is doomed to political disappointment.  Now, this is a political message that ought to resonate all around this country that in this age of detribalised political allegiances, in this age where you have far more swing voters than ever before, in this age where people's political allegiances are more transient, particularly those under the age of 30 and they will chop and change from one election to the next between State and Federal, between candidate to candidate, you always need to offer a positive reason why people should vote for you.  You can never believe that you can exploit a negative perception towards your opponents and particularly so when you completely fail to understand that that negative perception is nowhere near as strong as you imagine it might be.  
And everyone knows that last year the Labor Party's strategy was to surf to victory off the back of the believed and perceived unpopularity of the GST.  Four months have now gone by since the last election, do you hear the Labor Party talking about the GST now, do you hear the Labor Party talking about rollback, do you hear the Labor Party saying what a monstrous thing it is?  The only statement I've heard about the GST since the last election from a Labor Party politician came from the Premier of Queensland during the CHOGM meeting when he announced the biggest ever shake-up of Queensland education, he announced the expenditure of untold millions of additional dollars in the years ahead.  And when he was asked how he was going to pay for it he said, I'm going to pay for it out of the additional revenue we get from the GST.  And yet in the middle of the election campaign, some of you may remember during the debate, I had the temerity to say that the best thing that we have ever done in this country for health and education expenditure was the introduce the GST because it would give a growing source of revenue to the Australian States, the worm turned against me - it seems as though the worm has now turned against them.  They ran ads, they rubbed their hands together.  Bob McMullan was down there at Saatchi and Saatchi putting the ads together and he said, oh we've got him now, this is Howard's great campaign blunder, such a blunder that now it's become sort of received doctrine in the ranks of the Labor Party.  My friends, it was always the case that the GST was going to enrich the States as the years go by.  It was always the case that Queensland was the first cab off the rank.  It was always the case that if you really believe in giving the States more resources for education and health and for public schools and for roads and for police you had to have a growth tax.  And if you're an ageing population you've got to have a growth tax that's not built on an ever increasing share of the tax take from income tax otherwise your marginal rates of income tax so far from coming down will have to go up.  And that was one of the fundamental, intellectual reasons why I always believed that it was necessary at some stage for this country to have a look at the issue of taxation reform.
The reality, my friends, is that the Labor Party always has an excuse when they lose an election.  And when I hear them talking about how we had a tainted victory, when I hear them talking about how they was robbed and how, in reality, if somebody had said this on a different day, in a different tone of voice, with a different coloured tie and shirt they might have been successful.  But I'm reminded, you know, in my very young days of following Australian politics and I give my age away in saying it, I can remember the 1954 election - it wasn't the first one I remember, incidentally - but I can remember the 1954 election.  And that was the one when Dr Evatt thought he'd one but then he'd lost and he went, so he said, he went to bed on the Saturday night thinking he'd won, I mean, I can't believe how if you were that close how any  Opposition Leader could think about going to bed.  I mean…I tell you what, if I'd have been an Opposition Leader in that situation I wouldn't have been able to sleep.  And he said he went to bed on the Saturday night and he woke up on the Sunday morning and he found he'd lost and he had to develop a theory, he had to develop an explanation.  He had to find a conspiracy and, of course, as many of you know he lighted on the Petrov Inquiry called by the Menzies Government a couple of months before the 1954 election.  
And when I've sat in Parliament, and I'm sure my colleagues have had the same experience, sat in Parliament over the last few weeks and listened to the Labor Party say how terrible it was about the boat and the children and everything and how shocking it is and so on, and I was reminded of that.  I mean, the only thing missing now is a Soviet Foreign Minister for Leader of the Opposition to write to!  They lost because they weren't good enough. And it came to the issue of border protection the Australian people voted for us because they genuinely believed that we were serious about protecting this country's borders whereas they disbelieved the commitment of the Labor Party to that obligation.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is much on the third term agenda of the Coalition Government.  We have great responsibilities to maintain our economic and our diplomatic and our international strengths and our respect.  We face a Labor Party that should have begun the process of renewal they now claim they are embracing six years ago.  We are the great reformers in the areas of health and education and social welfare.  And this morning before I came here I saw Brendan Nelson outlining magnificently on the Sunday programme some of the initiatives and some of the approaches that we have in the area of education.  Education is crucial to the future wellbeing of this country and it will ever be to the credit of these Coalition parties that we are the ones that upheld the great principle of freedom of choice of parents in the education of their children.  We are the parties that offer them the great hope of choice in the future education of their children and of themselves.  
So, my friends, can I say again as I did when I addressed you a few months ago, I am ever grateful for the tremendous support and loyalty that you have demonstrated to me and to all of my colleagues.  Can I say how proud I am of the Federal Parliamentary contingent from the State of New South Wales in the Federal Parliament.  No State did better for our national cause in the last election than did the State of New South Wales and it will forever be one of my, how can I put it, most warming comparisons to think that the seat of Gilmore, which we won from Labor in 1996 via that magnificent representative, Joanna Gash.  There was a bigger two-party preferred majority than Bennelong or North Sydney.  
The last thing that I do want to say to you this morning is that over the next year, although what happens in Canberra on the national political scene will always be of overwhelming importance and significant, we have a great fight here in New South Wales that has to be won for the good of the future of our State.  We have before us a year to turn around attitudes in New South Wales.  No political contest is either unwinnable or unlosable in modern politics.  There is no reason why we cannot win the next State election if we have the right policies, we steadily release them, we remain united, we focus on the weaknesses of a now ageing and a tiring Carr Government but also propound the alternative that we present to the people of New South Wales.  There is a willingness, I believe, in this State to positively look at an alternative government.  And can I say, Kerry, that in your quest for the premiership of New South Wales you will have my total support and the total support of all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues.  I don't like the idea of going to a Premiers' conference with no Liberal mates there because when I had a few Liberal mates there we always agreed.  But I'd rather disagree with some Liberal mates at a Premiers' conference than be faced by - I don't know what you'd call it - a clutch of Labor Premiers and Chief Ministers, a gaggle, a mob….  well, I must be careful.  
So Kerry, good luck and I think you've had a great launch for the campaign year here this weekend and I know how committed your friends and supporters in the rank and file of the New South Wales Liberal Party are and all of us are going to do everything we can to install a Liberal government in New South Wales in March of next year.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Lieutenant Colonel Gilmore, to Admiral Chris Barrie the Chief of Defence Force, Lieutenant General Peter Cosgrove Chief of the Army, Simon Crean the Leader of the Opposition, Tom Schieffer the Ambassador of the United States, to Brigadier Lewis and ladies and gentleman.  And very importantly and most importantly, to the men of the SAS who are returning on the first rotation and I say to you, not only welcome home but can I say to all of you on behalf of a very proud and grateful Australian nation, what a magnificent job you have done in our name, on our behalf and in our joint interest in Afghanistan.
Can I say that what you have done over the last four months has been immensely to the credit of the great reputation of the members of the Australian Defence Force.  You have demonstrated again to the world the quality of the fighting men of Australia.  You have joined your American and other allies in a fight that is important to the future of this country.  It';s a fight that may seem distant to some, but to those who ponder but for a moment they will understand that the fight against terrorism is something in which Australia has as much an interest as the other nations that we are fighting alongside.  And when the World Trade Centre was hit on the 11th of September, that was as much an attack on the values that the Australian people stand for as it was upon the people and the values of the United States.  
We are saddened of course that Sergeant Andrew Russell is not with us and I know that our thoughts particularly will be with Kylie, their young child and Andrew';s parents.  And I know that the support that has been given to her by the Army and the great extended Army family, which is represented here today, has been of enormous value and enormous support to her.  
We say how delighted we are to see Christian Salvatore on the mend and back amongst us and I know that we all wish him a very positive and thorough rehabilitation and we';re delighted to have you amongst us today.
The other person, if I may be forgiven for particularly mentioning, is Sergeant Matt Bouillaut, who has been awarded the Distinguished Service decoration for the remarkable work that he did and the remarkable acts of leadership and heroism that he displayed in Afghanistan.  I know that in the nature of the tradition of the Australian Army, nobody tends to be particularly singled out for special praise because an individual';s effort is only as good as the team work that makes that possible.  And I want to say that what you have done over the last four months, has made all Australians very proud.  You';ve fought well, you';ve remained disciplined, you';ve remained loyal to each other, you';ve made Australians feel very proud of what you';ve done.  And very importantly can I say to the mothers and the fathers, the wives, the children, the sweethearts of the men of the SAS how pleased we are that you';ve been able to join us in this gathering.  I hope that you can have some well earned time together.  We treasure the contribution that your loved ones have made to our country.  All that a nation can do for people who put their lives on the line to defend the values of that country, is to honour that commitment, to care for them if they are hurt, to generously support them and to make certain that their loved ones are cared for and looked after.  I hope that we have done that over the last four months and I hope that in the months and the years ahead, that we will continue to do that.  
From all Australians, again may I say thankyou, you have done us proud, you mean a lot to us, you are a wonderful emblem of what this country stands for and we';ll always be very proud of your contribution to the fight against terrorism.  Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well, thank you very much Diedre. To my ministerial colleagues Amanda Vanstone, Kay Patterson, Helen Coonan and Danna Vale, and particularly to Dame Margaret Guildfoyle, delegates, visitors, ladies and gentlemen. 
Once again it is my privilege to address this Women's Forum as a very important element of the party';s Federal Council meeting. It takes place at a time when I believe that the Liberal Party, more than at any other time in its history, can speak with utter confidence without any fear of serious contradiction from objective people, as a party in Government that has delivered practical choice and real additional opportunities for the women of Australia.
It is now just over six years since the Government was first elected to office. And as I look back over the last six years, we can see significant changes in Australian society for the better in relation to attitudes towards equality of opportunity for women. We can see major policy implementation, and I';ll touch on a few of those in a moment, which have been of enduring benefit to Australian women. 
Of the many principles that have hallmarked the Liberal Party of Australia, none is more important than the principle of individual choice and the opportunity for individuals to make their own lives according to their own desires, if they are given freedom and equality of opportunity. Most of us have been attracted to the Liberal Party, in part at least, if not overwhelmingly, because more than any other party on the Australian political landscape, it has been the party of personal freedom and individual choice. And as I reflect on what the Government has done in policy areas touching on women in particular in the Australian community, I can say that we have been faithful, very faithful indeed, to the principle of choice and freedom of choice for Australian women. 
Last year when I addressed the National Press Club, I identified three long term policy issues that would be important for whatever Government won the then upcoming election, because they were relevant to the type of society that we were going to create. Those three issues were the ageing of the population, the balancing of work and family within the Australian community, and a number of environmental challenges, particularly that of salinity. 
And I want in the few moments I';m speaking to you today, to touch very briefly on one of those issues, namely the balancing of work and family. And can I say at the outset that although I address it at a Women';s Forum, I say quite unapologetically that the responsibility of balancing work and family for Australian families is as much the responsibility of Australian men as it is the responsibility of Australian women. They are shared responsibilities, those challenges, and I certainly encourage the men of Australia increasingly to see them as a totally shared responsibility, and not just the responsibility of Australian women.
There have been many tracts written about the choices faced by both men and women after marriage and in contemplation of, or in the reality of having children. Catherine Hakim, the British writer, in a publication entitled Taking Women Seriously, late last year summarised an analysis that I think many would find realistic and compelling. She said that essentially there were three categories in which women fell in relation to the challenge of balancing work and family. That 15 percent of women, in her analysis, could be regarded as work-centred or overwhelmingly career-oriented, that another 15 percent could be regarded as home-centred or overwhelmingly home-centred, but the great majority – 70 percent – could be what she regarded as adaptive. In other words, they saw themselves as having both aspirations and hopes and dreams in the area of both career and family. And it';s the responsibility of Governments, whether it';s the Australian Government or indeed any other Government, it';s the responsibility of Governments to implement policies and to create a climate that allow people, whichever category they fall into, whichever one of those three categories, or indeed any other category they might like to describe themselves as falling into -  it';s the responsibility of Governments to create the climate for both men and women, to follow whatever pursuit and put themselves in whatever category they might choose.
I';ve been criticised for many things, in all areas of course, but particularly in this area, for an identification with a dwelling and something that surrounds it – I think it';s called a picket fence - and it has a certain model car in the driveway, and there';s a certain sort of emblematic number of people forming the family, augmenting that very happy scene. I don';t particularly mind that description. I think the notion of stable, united, caring families is about as positive a notion as anybody can have for a society, whatever situation that family might find itself in economically. 
But what I';ve always argued in this whole area, is that it';s not the role of Government to tell people how to organise their lives. The question of whether both parents work in a family and for how long and whether they should both be part-time or both be full-time or one full-time and one not in the paid workforce at all, or whatever combination they choose, is their business. And it';s not my business as Prime Minister to tell them what is better for them, or what is better for their children. But it is my responsibility as Prime Minister to create a climate where they are assisted and facilitated in whatever choice they make, and we';ve certainly done that. I mean, only yesterday we had some absolutely stunning employment figures which show the strength of the Australian economy, and inside those employment figures is a wonderful story of expanding opportunities for women within the Australian economy and within the Australian community. And when we look at the strength of the economy, we should remember that the economic strength we';ve enjoyed over the last six years has expanded the horizons of opportunity for Australian women as much as it has for men.
Two areas where I believe we have been particularly successful, and we ought to trumpet this success as Liberals perhaps more than we do, and that is in the area of supporting families with young children, both in relation to the value of the benefits accruing under the New Taxation System and most particularly in the area of child care provision. Now, attempts have been made over the last six years to represent this Government as being indifferent towards, even neglectful, of child care facilities because of an alleged preference for people not being in any kind of formal child care. Nothing could be further from the truth. One of the many unheralded successes of this Government has been the way in which it has expanded not only the number of child care places, but has also rapidly improved the affordability of child care within the Australian community. I wonder how many people in this audience know that since the introduction of the New Taxation System, the cost of child care has fallen by 13 percent. We';ve not just avoided adding to the cost of child care by some kind of set-off between the various elements of taxation reform, but we have in fact reduced significantly the cost of child care for Australian parents. And there are now, not only as a result of those changes, but of other changes we';ve introduced, since we were elected there are 151,300 more places – child care places, within the Australian community.
And the other area where I believe we need to say more about the achievements of this Government has been in the area of the child benefits and child payments under the new taxation system. There was a very revealing study produced by NATSEM, a national economic think tank based here in Canberra, completely neutral in a political sense, certainly not known as a body that produced analysis with the goal of being helpful to the Liberal Party or to the Government. But this analysis produced for both the Sydney Morning Herald and the Melbourne Age, revealed a very significant increase in the level of support for low-income families with children as a result of the arrangements under the New Taxation System. And it said of all the groups that had benefited from the changes -  and at every level families with children were held to be better off - at every level they were held to be better off, and the group that benefited most, the income group that benefited most were low-income, single-income families and within that group in turn again, the group that benefited most were sole parent single income families in receipt of low incomes. 
So if you look at that reality against the stereotype that our critics have endeavoured to implant in the minds of the Australian community, you see a complete contrast. You see a Government, yes, that is very strongly in favour of choice for Australian parents. You see a Government that defends the right of Australian parents to organise their work and family arrangements in the way that they think is best. But you also see a Government that is determined to give to low-income, single-income families, and most particularly sole parent families, greater support because of their greater need.
As we meet for this very important Federal Council meeting, a Federal Council meeting that will not only reflect for a moment which we are entitled as Liberals to do, to reflect upon our political achievements and what we have done for the Australian people over the last six years, but will also importantly be a Federal Council meeting that will look forward to our agenda for this our third term.
And can I finally on a very party political note, say what a tremendous contribution the women of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party have made at every level of the party';s and the Government';s activities over the last six years. In 1996 we came into Government with a record number of women members of Parliament, and those numbers, although not precisely the same as they were then, in terms of emphasis and in terms of rough proportionalities, those numbers have been maintained. And the contribution being made is such that increasingly we don';t think in terms of gender contribution, we simply think in terms of the contribution of outstanding individuals who are playing a major role in the reshaping of the modern Australia. And it';s in that context that I';m delighted to participate in this forum to thank you Diedre, and to thank all members of the Women';s Council and the various branches of the Liberal Party throughout Australia that have played such a major role in our political success and as a result of that, played a major role in what we are now doing for the benefit of all of the people of Australia. 
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very Shane, my Federal Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I start by thanking all of you, and I address my remarks particularly to the business observers and representatives who've supported this Federal Council meeting.  
It';s a number of years now that we have been doing this, of having an association of this kind at our Federal Council meeting, and it';s a very important link in the communications chain between the Liberal Party and the business community of Australia.  And it';s an opportunity for me at the outset to reaffirm the nature of the association between our party and the business community of Australia.  
As you all know, we pride ourselves on the fact that we are a political organisation and a political party that is owned by no one particular section of the Australian community.  We are a political organisation that endeavours to represent everybody and at the end of the day we try to act as free men and women in a political sense after having, hopefully, won office.  But that doesn';t alter the fact in any way that many of our goals in government are consistent with the goals of the business community of Australia and indeed, with the business community of the world.  
We are a government, it needs to be reaffirmed even though it may seem to have an element of fundamentalism about it at a gathering such as this.  It does need to be reaffirmed that we are party that believes that the driver of national wealth is private entrepreneurial endeavour.  We are a party that believes that people should be encouraged to take risks in order to make profits.  That people should be encouraged to invest, and they should be encouraged to make long term investment decisions in their commercial interests which are consistent with the national interest.  And whilst we are a party that believes that some elements of a regulatory framework are necessary in the public interest, and we are not so nave as to believe that on every single occasion every person who seeks to make a dollar acts with a total disregard to the self interest and the total commitment to the national interest.  We nonetheless believe that overall the ethics of the business community of Australia are sound, and they are men and women who are acting broadly in the national interest.  
You may think that kind of declaration is unnecessary.  I never think the fundamentals of what a party stands for can be repeated too often, and in the ongoing political debate in this country our commitment to the broad goals of the business community should not be disputed.  And we have endeavoured over the last six years to deliver on some of the things that the business community has thought government should deliver on for many long years.  
And I think particularly of industrial relations reform, and if you asked me what policy change has made the single greatest contribution to the economic strength of Australia at the present time, over the last six years that is, I would have to say the changes that we have made to industrial relations.  Because the driver of our economic success at present is very much the higher productivity that the Australian economy enjoys.  Our productivity performance over the last five, six or seven years has really been the standout among industrialised countries.  It has been better than the productivity performance of the United States, and her productivity performance has been very strong indeed.  
And that in turn has been due in no small measure to the benefits of industrial relations reform.  And that is why I said in the lead-up to the election that of all the things that would grieve me, if we lost the election that is, the one that would grieve me most would be the rolling back, dare I use that expression, the rolling back – there are good roll backs and bad roll backs – the rolling back dare I say, of the industrial relations reform, not only implemented at a Federal level, but also implemented by our colleagues at a State level over the years.  And we are seeing some evidence of that at a State level, particularly but not only in Western Australia.  
Though I do think that of all the things we';ve done over the last six years, none has contributed more than industrial relations reform, and if I may specifically refer also to the benefits that we have derived from waterfront reform.  Of all the things that I used to be regularly assailed with when I went to boardroom lunches, I went to gatherings of businessmen and women, they would thump the table and they would say somebody';s got to have the courage to do something about the waterfront, it';s a disgrace.  And it was, and something ought to have been done about it.  And it will ever be to the credit of Peter Reith that he had the courage, with the support of his colleagues, to take on the maritime unions just four years ago.  It';s four years ago almost to the day or to the week, that that campaign began, and as a result of that we are now achieving hourly crane-rate times on the waterfront that people wouldn';t have even dreamt were possible five or ten years ago.  And it has made an enormous impact on the impression people around the world have of the Australian economy.  
Right at the moment the Australian economy is performing, even our critics would admit, remarkably well.  I notice the expression “gangbusters” that I was exuberant enough to use a few weeks ago to describe the Australian economy, and I have to say that the first politician I remember to use the expression “gangbusters” in the Australian context was, I have to acknowledge and my partial plagiarism, was in fact Neville Wran, who used it to describe the performance I think of his government or of - how surprising - or of the New South Wales economy.  
But I think the reason why it is doing well right at the present time deserves just a couple of moments of analysis.  Because when you do achieve something like that you ought to understand why it';s happened, both because it';s interesting to know why it';s happened, but also it';s a guide not to get too carried away about the inevitable continuation of it, and to remind yourself that you';ve got to do a number of things to keep it going.  I think we';re doing well at the present time for a number of reasons.  I think we are getting the cumulative benefits of economic reform that has taken place in this country over a period of twenty years.  
And even at a Federal Council meeting of the Liberal Party I';m prepared to give credit to the former government for a number of changes that it made.  I am prepared to give it credit for the deregulation of the financial system, the floating of the Australian dollar.  We don';t have a low dollar, we have a super competitive exchange rate.  And one of the reasons why we have a super competitive exchange rate is self-evident, that is, we now have a floating exchange rate.  And it was a very sound policy decision that had of course the total support of the then Opposition, and it was a case where good policy was supported on both sides of politics.  
But when you add to the changes that were made by the former government to our economic benefit, and I also include in those changes the beginning of the process of tariff reform, particularly in the late 1980';s.  When you add to that the other reforms, the labour market reforms, the taxation reforms, our pro-competitive policies.  When you add to all of those reforms over a period twenty years, they have created a far better and a far stronger economic climate.  
I do think our success in staring down the Asian economic downturn in 1997 was, in significant measure, a function of our flexible exchange rate.  If we';d not operated the flexible exchange rate system we would not have been able to so readily divert many of our exports away from the Asia Pacific region to Europe and to North America.
I also believe that one of the reasons why we have done better over the last five or six years is that we have subtly but importantly adjusted the way we look at the rest of the world.  I think we ran a danger, prior to the change of government, as being increasingly seen around the world as a nation that was only interested in the Asia Pacific region, instead of a nation that should be principally, but not exclusively, interested in the Asia Pacific region.  I describe that subtle change as going from an Asia-only policy to an Asia-first policy.  It is self-evident that the Asia Pacific region is the most important region - economically, strategically and politically – to this country.  And it will be the case for all time.
But it is also self-evident to me that we have very important linkages with other parts of the world.  Only a couple of weeks ago we were reminded of the importance of the United States as a destination for Australian exports.  It actually became marginally, and perhaps only for a brief period of time, an even greater buyer of Australian goods and services than Japan.  And it';s a reminder of how important those links are.  And we also have very important links with Europe.  
And I think the experience of 1997 drove home to us that no nation like Australia that must export to survive, can ever see its export destiny in narrow geographical terms.  We have to always see our export destiny in terms of grabbing an opportunity wherever it exists.  People sometimes say to me when I go to different countries, do you have a bilateral or a multilateral attitude towards trade, and my response unfailingly is, it depends on what is of greater benefit to Australia in a given situation.  If a bilateral arrangement is going to help this country, I';m a bilateralist.  If a multilateral arrangement is going to help Australia, then I';m a multilateralist.  And I think that is the only way, the only attitude that we can adopt.  
And can I say that the significance of the link with the United States was driven home a few weeks ago when we were able to achieve an adjustment in relation to the decision taken by the United States Administration on steel tariffs, of the type that I don';t think any Australian government has been able to achieve in relation to an adverse American trade decision in the twenty-seven years that I have been in Federal Parliament.  I think that particular outcome demonstrated the point I am making about the importance of the relationship and the significance of export markets in North America and Europe, as well as the significance of export markets in the Asia Pacific region.  
I think another reason why the Australian economy is doing well at the present time is that last year we took a number of decisions, a number of expenditure decisions, which were seen then exclusively in a political context, and I would not pretend for a moment that there wasn';t dimension to some of those decisions.  Of course a Prime Minister and a government has to take political considerations into account.  Good statecraft is getting the right balance between the economics and the politics of a decision.  You have to be in government to implement good policy.  You have to have good policy to remain in government.  And you have to get a judicious mix.  
And last year it was necessary that we respond to community concerns in a number of areas.  Areas such as fuel pricing, roads policy and other issues that were the subject of government action last year.  But in the process, many of those expenditure decisions helped to put a floor under economic activity which proved to be very timely, given the circumstances of the world economy last year, and the way things have worked out.  
I';d have to say to you that in terms of an economic and, dare I say it - political dividend, that the decision we took to double the home savings grant for first home buyers buying new dwellings, I think probably provided the greatest economic and political dividend of any single decision that I have been associated with in a long time.  Because it was the right decision economically.  The housing industry had suffered a sharper downturn than had been predicted.  And may I say it, of course it was also a decision that had a great deal of political resonance and a great deal of political support.
So when I look back over the last year, and I look at the state of the Australian economy at the present time, can I say to you that the decisions we took to support those areas, particularly of government spending, those decisions added to the economic strength that we now have.  And if we hadn';t taken those decisions I don';t believe our economy would have been as strong now as it is.  And we';re in the fortunate position that we had built up a very healthy budget position.  
We have one of the lowest, if not the lowest, debt to GDP ratios of any country in the world.  It is quite extraordinary when you look, that the OECD average is 35 to 40 per cent.  Government debt to GDP, our figure is about 6.  You look at Japan, I think it';s 120 per cent or thereabouts of GDP.  The United States something in the order of 45 per cent.  They';re the broad orders of magnitude, the figures may not be exactly right, and ours is down to 6 per cent.  It meant that the cumulative affect of the decisions we';ve taken from 1996 onwards to reduce the deficit and pay back debt had put us in a position where when we needed to spend a little more in a number of areas, all of which had a crucial national significance such as roads and defence, we were in a position to do so.  
When you look at the history of last year, you look at the reasons why we are where we are, don';t lose sight for a moment of the value, economically as well as, dare I say it, politically, of the decisions that we took in those areas.  
But as always, what you have achieved is something that people perhaps not in appreciation of on the way through to what is going to happen in the future.  There is every reason to believe that the economic growth that we have at the present time can go on.  One of the reasons is that we have removed many of the fundamental speed limits on growth.  We set ourselves the goal when we came into office, of removing speed limits on growth.  The problem, a generational problem of the Australian economy had always been that we';d have a burst of activity and things would look good, but they it would overheat and then we';d have to slam on the brakes by a tougher fiscal policy or higher interest rates to slow things down.  That inevitably caused an over-reaction and the economy went into a slump.  
Now I';m not so foolish as to say that we have abolished the business cycle.  I';m not so foolish as to say that this country won';t ever again in the future have a severe economic downturn.  I can';t make that claim.  I wish I could, but I';m not going to be so foolish as to make that claim.  But I do think that we have removed many of the historical speed limits on economic growth in this country.  We now have a far better balance between our fiscal and monetary policy than we';ve had in the twenty-seven years that I';ve been in Parliament.  We no longer have to look to monetary policy as the main item of economic adjustment, and the reason for that is that we have got rid of our accumulated government debt.  And that has made a tremendous different, and it does give us a greater freedom of movement.  It does mean that we can be in a situation as we are now, of having gone through what experience the backlash of what the world had last year, but to see hopefully our unemployment rate continue to fall, and levels of 4 per cent or thereabouts economic growth being in prospect.  
We do need to maintain a sensible budget position.  I';m not going to speculate about levels of surpluses or the like in the upcoming Budget except to make the point that we don';t have a capacity to embrace large additional expenditures.  
We will as a nation have to spend more on defence for some years into the future.  That is undeniable and may I say to you that one of the strong commitments I made in 1996, and I remember making the commitment when I went to the Lavarack Barracks in Townsville in the lead-up to the 1996 election campaign, I said that the one area of government expenditure that would be quarantined from any reductions was defence expenditure.  And it';s a commitment that I have held to tenaciously as a matter of strong personal belief and as an important element of government commitment.  And we put down a White Paper that involved additional expenditure over the next ten years.  That White Paper was put down before September 11th 2001, and it was put down before it became necessary for us to spend a great deal more on border protection policy.  
So inevitably we have to find more resources for defence and that inevitably has consequences for expenditure in other areas.  Not consequences that will be those that produce any social dislocation, or unfairness, or difficulty.  We are going to maintain the full integrity of the social security safety net.  We are not a government that is going to push the vulnerable around.  We';re not a government that is going to be insensitive to people in the community who genuinely need assistance.  
So keeping a balanced fiscal policy remains very important.  We have to continue, difficult though it is, with the state of the Senate.  We have to continue the process of industrial relations reform.  There is still more to be done on that front.  Our labour markets are freer now than they were, but they could be a lot freer.  We need to continue to reform our savings and superannuation policies.  And one of the commitments that I made in the leadup to the election was in the area of significant changes to encourage greater savings.  Now this is an issue that will continue to attract a great deal of attention and a great deal of debate.  But it is an area were ongoing reform remains important.  
We need to examine whether our competition laws strike the right balance, and one of the things I hope we will be announcing very shortly is the composition of the enquiry into the reform of the Trade Practices Act, because that is an important commitment.  This country has now had trade practices legislation for something like a period of twenty-eight or thirty years of the type that was put in place by the Whitlam Government in 1975, and it has been changed on a number of occasions and there continues to be, I think, a need to examine whether some further adjustment in that area to see whether we';re striking the right balance between the needs of an economy as small yet as global as the Australian economy to consolidate where necessary to achieve an export advantage, as to whether the rules relating to that strike the right balance.  
We';ll need as a community to continue particularly looking at the international side of things continue the process of taxation reform.  The major work in taxation reform has been done, but there are still elements about our taxation system that disadvantage the international face of the Australian economy, and that';s one of the things that the Treasurer and I have committed ourselves to do over the next twelve months.
We also need to continue to ensure that we have effective competition laws in all parts of the Australian economy, not just in relation to what I alluded to a moment ago, the merger laws, but also other aspects of the operation of our competition laws.  We need to ensure that we operate effectively our cooperative Federal arrangements.  We had a good example a few days ago of cooperation between State and Federal Governments in an important area of scientific and medical and social policy.  We need to ensure that to the extent that it is possible, those cooperative arrangements work well to the overall benefit of the Australian economy.
And finally we need, as I alluded to a moment ago, we need to make absolutely certain that the trading policies of this country are always attuned to the national interest.  We are at the present time a nation that continues to be severely disadvantaged by the predatory trading policies of a number of the world';s trading blocs.  We seek to negotiate free trade agreements with countries where there is a benefit for Australia.  Negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States is going to be very difficult.  But the benefits if it were to be achieved are significant and therefore it';s an enterprise that ought to be undertaken with vigour.  I don';t promise you it can be successfully concluded, it is going to be a very long process, but the benefits are great.  We are also at present in the process of negotiating free trade agreements with both Singapore and Thailand.  And if they can be concluded to the mutual benefit of Australia that will also strength the international face of the Australian economy.
Now ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude by saying that I don';t report to you this morning with any sense of smugness or complacency.  Yes, it is a source of quiet pride to me that the Australian economy is the strongest growing in the industrialised world.  It was a source or satisfaction a few weeks ago to call on the British Chancellor of the Exchequer and to be told by him that the British economy was growing very strongly and then it to be acknowledged that our was growing even more strongly.  And for enquiries to be made as to what additional changes I might suggest.  I was not so presumptuous.  Might I say I was not presumptuous enough to give any advice, I always think Prime Ministers who go around the world giving other people advice are, sort of doomed to be shortly denied the opportunity of continuing the habit.  So I don';t address you in any sense of smug complacency, but I do think our experience, the Australian experience, has been instructive.
I really do want to end on that note.  And this is something I feel not only about economic policy, but also about policy in many other areas, that there is discernibly I believe an Australian way and an Australian balance.  Whenever you look at the performance of an economy, there is always a tendency to compare it, to say well we are like America, we';re like Europe, we';re not like Europe, we';re not like Europe, or we';re like the Asian Pacific region.  The reality is that we';re not quite like any other economy in the world.  And one of the things that I believe Australia has done better than just about any other economy in the world, certainly the economies with which it is fair to draw comparisons, and that is I think we get the balance between the public and the private sector particularly in the provision of many services, better than most other countries do.  
Let';s take, I see Brendan Nelson there who I think is doing a fantastic job as our new Education Minister.  And I say in an area like education we actually have the balance between the public sector and the private sector better than any other country in the world.  We have a healthier and stronger private sector education at the schools level than exists in most other countries, yet we also have a very strong public sector which provides strong educational opportunities for people irrespective of their means.  If you go to the more depressed areas of the United States the quality of public education there is appalling compared with the quality of public education in this country.  And the opportunities that are available for people from all socio-economic backgrounds in Australia, despite obvious areas for improvement, are much greater.  So I think one of the things that Australia has been better at than most and perhaps it';s because we have this capacity given our history and our geography to sit back and eclectically gather experiences and patterns and paradigms from other parts of the world, but produce a particularly Australian methodology.  I think we have been rather better at mixing the public and private approaches.  
But that is something of a penultimate diversion from what I was about to say.  We are doing well economically but that success is always a combination of some good fortune, a lot of good policy, but overwhelmingly the entrepreneurial flair and the commitment of the Australian people.  I think the business culture in this country is better and stronger and less averse to caution that it used to be.  I think the businessmen and women of Australia are thinking globally, they have changed enormously, they are a lot less cautious, they are far more willing to adapt and to change than they used to be even ten years ago.  And I think that has played an enormous part in the economic success of Australia, and long may it continue.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Peter, Mr Federal President, my fellow Liberals, ladies and gentlemen.  I thank you very warmly for that welcome.  I feel a very great sense of privilege and a great sense of moment and occasion to address this 5th gathering of the Federal Council of the Liberal Party of Australia since our magnificent electoral victory in March of 1996 which ended 13 years of Labor rule in Australia.
As I survey the national scene, as I reflect with you on the state of the Australian nation, we see a nation stronger, prouder, more respected and having a brighter future than was the case in March of 1996.  We see a nation with an economy restored.  We see a nation whose economic strength is now increasingly the envy of the rest of the industrialised world.  But we also see a world less certain, less predictable, more challenging, more dangerous than was the world we faced in March of 1996.  And it is as well ladies and gentlemen that the domestic strength of the Australian economy and the spirit of the Australian nation is what it is now because all of that strength and all of that spirit will be needed to deal with the less certain and more challenging world economic and political environment.
As we look over the last six years we have seen this country stare down two major international economic challenges. We stared down the Asian economic downturn of 1997.  And last year we stared down the impact of the contraction in the American economy and the great economic uncertainty that followed the events of the 11th of September.
Make no mistake my friends, Australia';s esteem and respect around the world is higher now than it has ever been in its history.  We are seen as a successful, progressive, modern, competitive nation. We are a nation that has punched above its weight in so many areas, both economically and politically. We remain widely admired and respected for the leadership we displayed in relation to East Timor.  Without question the most positive and noble act by Australia in the area of international relations in the last 20 years.  We are seen as a modern progressive and open society by reason of the magnificent success of the Olympic Games in Sydney in 2000.  We are seen as a nation that is able to contribute because of her domestic economic strength increasingly in the activities and the councils of the world.  
Our foreign relationships now are as strong as they have ever been.  Next month I will welcome the Prime Minister of Japan and the Prime Minister of Thailand. The leaders of two nations whose economies are very important to this country and the leaders of two nations that have very close links with the Australian people. In addition I will visit China at the end of May in order, amongst other things, to press the case for export of LNG from Australian sources into the Republic of China. It will also give me an opportunity on behalf of the Australian people to mark the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and the People';s Republic of China.
It can fairly be said that the alliance between Australia and the United States, so vital to the defence of Australia in the 1940';s in World War II, of continuing fundamental relevance to our security and our defence, that alliance has never been stronger and has never been closer. And the way in which we were able in the appropriate fashion to argue successfully our case in relation to the application of steel import tariffs imposed by the American administration, such that 85 per cent of the exports of BHP to the United States will not be affected by those tariffs was a token and a real earnest of the closeness of that relationship and I record my gratitude to the administration for the way in which it responded.
Our relations with the United States of course were cemented further in the aftermath of the tragic events of the 11th of September. For the first time we invoked the ANZUS treaty, we demonstrated to the President and to the people of that great society our commitment to the common values that our two peoples share, the common values that we have been prepared to fight for in every major conflict over the last 100 years.  The war against terrorism goes on.  It is not over, it will not be over until all the potential sources of terrorism, of the type that was unleashed on the people of New York and the people of Washington, are addressed in the appropriate fashion.
As I';ve said on many occasions ladies and gentlemen when we came to office we sought to rebalance the foreign relations of this country.  Australia';s primary area of concern will always be the Asian/Pacific region. It is our region to which we as a people can contribute in a unique fashion. But it is not the only region that is important to Australia.  And I have sought, and I believe successfully, in co-operation particularly with Alexander Downer who';s done an outstanding job as the Foreign Minister of this country since March of 1996, I have sought to rebalance those relationships so that we can quite rightly speak of the closeness of our association with the nations of the Asian/Pacific region, but we can also speak very proudly and strongly of our association with the people of North America.  And not to forgot the special links historically, culturally and also economically that we have with the United Kingdom, Ireland and the other nations of Europe.
We are as a nation at the beginning of the 21st century in every sense a true citizen, not just of our region but a citizen of the world. A nation that is seen as successful, strong, free and open.  And that is the kind of society that it has always been the dream of Australians to create.  And it';s a society that we can proudly say does exist in Australia and is seen so around the world in the early years of the 21st century.
Ladies and gentlemen, we do live in a world which is in greater turmoil and more challenging than it was a few years ago.  The tragic events of the conflict in the Middle East where all semblance of trust and reciprocity and respect appears to have disintegrated is a cause of enormous concern to me and I know to all Australians.  We endorse very strongly the efforts now underway by the American administration, particularly the visit to the Middle East by Colin Powell, the Secretary of State.  Although it seems a long way off and although it seems beyond hope and beyond reach we must never despair of the possibility of achieving a peaceful settlement in that very troubled part of the world.  And the basis of that settlement must always be the undeniable right of the people of Israel to exist behind secure, defensible and internationally respected boundaries. And it must also recognise the right of the people of Palestine to aspire to and to have a home land. That was the basis of the Oslo Accords and that was the basis of the peace negotiations that occurred just under two years ago between Chairman Arafat and the former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak.  And it remains to me, and I know to millions of people around the world, a great tragedy and a sense of great loss that the prospects of peace that existed so brightly just under two years ago did not come to reality.
Australia some time ago recognised the need to increase our commitment to defence.  And in December of the year 2000 we brought down a Defence White Paper.  It provided for the largest increase in defence spending in more than a generation.  Over a 10 year period it provided for significant increases in our financial commitment to the defence of Australia in all areas.  And I would remind you that that White Paper was bought down before the events of the 11th of September and it was bought down before the need for this country to invest additional resources in the pursuit of the protection of this country';s borders against illegal immigration. And when you assess the world scene at present you see the wisdom of the Government';s decision to produce that White Paper almost 18 months ago.  That White Paper has laid the foundation of the increase in our defence capability that is required to respond to the challenges that have come and may in the future come from the changed and more difficult economic circumstances in which we live.  And while that White Paper made the appropriate provision as we saw it, it may well be that in the years ahead this country will need to make an even greater financial provision in the area of defence.
Ladies and gentlemen as we look domestically we see the challenge of the next two and a half years as very clear.  That challenge is first and foremost to further secure and maintain the economic prosperity of the Australian people.  We have achieved levels of economic growth as I said at the beginning of my remarks that are the envy of the industrialised world.  We haven';t achieved those levels of economic growth by accident.  We haven';t achieved them by good luck. We';ve achieved them because we have been willing to take the decisions that are needed to lay the foundation of enduring national economic prosperity.  Economic and political success is never conferred by providence of by accident on any political party. It is earned by dint of hard work, steadfast commitment to policy and a willingness to pursue over a period of years a forward and progressive economic agenda.  There would have been five years ago many people in this room who would never have imagined that we could have come the distance that we have over that period of time. And we look at what has been achieved domestically in our time of office, it does represent a mammoth achievement in transforming and further modernising the Australian economy. But the process of economic change and economic improvement is never completed.  The Australian people know that we live increasingly in a borderless, globalised world economic environment. We cannot close our eyes to the rest of the world, we cannot seal this country off from the impact of world economic change and world economic developments.  We must be part of world economic change, we must benefit from it and we must contribute to it.  And all of the policies of your Government have been designed to achieve that purpose.  
We now have low inflation.  Falling unemployment, record low interest rates, a more flexible labour market, effective competition policies and internationally an economy that is seen and has experienced an increasingly level of competitiveness. But over the next two and a half years we must pursue further change and a further agenda which increases the modernisation and the competitiveness of the Australian economy. We must recognise, as I did lay out in the speech I delivered to the National Press Club in July of last year, that over the next decade this country will face a number of very important medium and long term challenges.  Like all Western societies we will face the challenges of an aging population. We must address that challenge frankly, but we must not be panicked by it.  We must recognise that policies are needed to allow older Australians to contribute longer and more positively both through work and other activities in the life of our nation. We must recognise the importance of policies that encourage the maximum possibility for family development, for young couples to have children and if they desire to do so, to have those children earlier in their lives.  We must recognise that one of the great continuing challenges of our modern society is the need to find the right balance between the responsibilities of work and family.  And when I spoke to the Women';s Forum on Friday I reminded those there of the policies that the Government had implemented in this area which have provided not only increased child benefits but cheaper, more available child care.  And I made the observation which I repeat here this morning that the responsibility of balancing work and family is not only the responsibility of Australian women, it is equally the responsibility of Australian men.  Because we live in a society where people do want greater choice, they don';t want to be told by the Government what their family arrangements should be.  They want the government to provide an economic and industrial framework that enables them to work out the balance that they regard as most important.  
We';ll also face, and we are beginning to respond to this challenge in a cooperative way with the States of Australia, a number of long-term environmental pressures.  And the most important of those in my view is the challenge of salinity.  Salinity is destructive of the economic capacity of this country.  Salinity is a problem all over the nation and can only be challenged and solved in a cooperative effort between the Commonwealth and the States.  And long before the last election I put to the State governments of Australia a proposal involving in the first instance the expenditure of $1.4 billion to deal with areas of salinity earmarked in a cooperative way between the Commonwealth and the States.  And that process will go on.  It will go on for years.  But it is an area which is fundamental to the credibility of any environmental policy that this government might have.  
Ladies and gentlemen, in the more immediate future, our responsibility is to implement specific commitments that were laid out in the election campaign. The area of welfare reform, and I';m very proud of the fact that it will be a Coalition government and not a Labor government that will undertake the first major restructuring and reform of the Australian welfare system for many decades.  Not only has the government I lead maintained the social security safety-net; not only has the government undertaken policies that have led to the creation of almost one million additional jobs in the Australian community since March of 1996, but the government will also be the group of people who will tackle the longer term challenge of welfare reform and welfare dependency, and to implement policies that will speed the transition from welfare to work and will provide as any modern welfare system must, greater incentives for people to leave welfare and to enter the paid workforce.
It will also be our responsibility over the coming months to implement the superannuation changes that were laid out in the election campaign, opening up amongst other things for the first time, the possibility of superannuation provision for children immediately after they are born.  Providing greater incentives and opportunities and choice in the superannuation area for married couples, particularly for women who have been out of the workforce for a long period of time and either go back part-time or never return because of family responsibilities.  And we will also of course, in this term, begin the processes committed of reducing the superannuation surcharge.
It will also be a continuing priority of this government to pursue further workplace reforms.  As I indicated at the breakfast yesterday morning, one of the stand out achievements of the Australian economy has been the dramatic improvement in productivity over the last six years.  It';s that productivity improvement coming off the back of reforms to the Australian workplace which has made such a tremendous contribution to the economic strength and the economic growth of the last six years.  
But there is, my friends, more to be done in the area of labour market reform.  We can create the circumstances where even more jobs can become available, particularly in small business, for all age groups within the Australian community if only we were able to secure the passage through the Australian Parliament of our unfair dismissal law.  We have been trying for five years, ladies and gentlemen, to get the unfair dismissal laws through the Federal Parliament.  And on every occasion until now we have been blocked by the Labor-Democrat majority in the Senate.  Let me say to you this morning, that that Bill is in the Parliament again.  It will, after it returns from the Senate Committee, be voted upon by the Senate, and I again ask the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats to allow that Bill to go through.  
We have much lower unemployment now than we had in March of 1996, but given the level of economic growth we are now enjoying, we could have significantly lower unemployment if further changes were made to the workplace laws of this country.  And I say very directly to the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats – if you are interested in a greater dividend from the magnificent economic growth we now have, via even lower unemployment, then you have an opportunity to join in delivering that dividend to the unemployed of Australia by allowing the passage of that legislation through the Senate.  
And could I also say to them that if that legislation is not passed on this occasion it will be presented again to the Parliament, because we are determined to create greater opportunities for job generation.  We are determined to create greater opportunities, particularly for people in small business to achieve their employment goals.  With a growth rate of 4 per cent, or thereabouts, this country can and should have even lower unemployment than the level of 6.3 per cent which was announced and recorded last week.  But the only thing standing in the way of still lower unemployment and the generation of even more jobs, particularly in small business, are the continuing barriers to job creation represented by many of our outdated industrial relations laws that we have not been able to remove because of the attitude of the Labor Party and the Australian Democrats in the Senate.
It is of course, my friends, important on an occasion such as this not only to reflect as Australians on the state of our nation and the esteem and the place of our nation amongst the nations of the world, but it is also important as Liberals to reflect upon the journey of the last six years.  We are entitled in an appropriate way to feel a sense of pride and a sense of celebration about our victory in November of last year.  That was a victory against many of the odds.  It was a victory that few would have conceded the possibility of a year ago.  It was a victory widely unexpected, not only by our critics, but indeed by some who had a more neutral attitude, or even those who may have wanted us to achieve a victory.  
And it is important to understand why it was achieved.  And there are lessons in that, not only for us at a Federal level in the future, but also for our colleagues at a State level.  In celebrating that victory and reflecting with pride, never forget that it was in part the product of the success of the very policies that I have talked about over the past few moments.  It was also the product of a superb campaign which saw the optimum level of cooperation between the parliamentary party and the organisation.  As somebody who was in every sense of the word a child of the Liberal Party organisation, I have always respected and treasured its role and its capacity.  And I have never believed that it';s possible to win an election, from either Government or Opposition, unless there is total faith, total trust, and total cooperation between the parliamentary party and the organisation.  Whenever they get out of sync, whenever they lose contact with each other, they lose elections.  And that is a message not only for the Liberal Party, but it';s also a message for our political opponents.
But we won that election in November of last year also because we retained contact with the mainstream of the Australian community.  That';s an expression that I have used on numerous occasions, and it';s an expression that we should continue not only to use but to also understand what it means.  The great majority of the Australian people want their leaders to do good things for them and good things for our country.  They are interested in outcomes, they are interested in results, they are interested in what leaders can achieve.  They are more interested in those things than they are in ideology.  That doesn';t mean to say that values and commitments and beliefs aren';t required to underpin the day-to-day pragmatic actions of people in government.  But we did demonstrate particularly in relation to issues such as border protection and many other areas, a capacity to relate to the concerns of the mainstream of the Australian community.  And that capacity played a very major role in the victory that we were able to achieve.
But I think the other reason why we were successful in November of last year was that our political opponents played the lazy game.  They played it from the very moment they went into Opposition in March of 1996, and if ever you wanted a metaphor for the policy laziness and the policy failure of our political opponents, it was that near-pathetic sight of the former Opposition Leader literally walking the shopping centres of Australia with a policy sandwich board saying “this is what I stand for”.  Well I can say to you, ladies and gentlemen, very simply that if after five and a half years the Australian public has no idea of what a political leader stands for, he or she has no earthly hope of communicating what he stands for in the space of a few weeks of an election campaign.  
And there';s a message in that, may I presume to say, to all of my State colleagues, sadly at present in Opposition.  You never win elections in the modern environment believing you can profit only from the failures of your opponents.  It is because we live in an increasingly detribalised political environment where political allegiances are volatile, they are mobile, they are not as fixed, they are not as driven by family voting patterns, they are far more transient than ever before.  It is precisely because of that environment, that you have to put on display well before an election the essence of what you believe in and what you stand for.  
And I can proudly say that over the last six years, even if many of the things that I have stood for have been criticised, even detested by some people in the Australian community and by some media commentators, there has never been any doubt in the minds of the Australian public as to where I stand on issues or what the government I believe stands for.  Because in the end your first responsibility as a political leader is to communicate to the public you seek to lead and to influence what your beliefs are, what you stand for, what your hopes and your dreams and your prayers are for the country you seek to lead.  And there is a message in that, may I respectfully say to all of our colleagues, and there is also a message in that to instruct in the future the Federal Government and the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party.
Finally, can I say a very simple thank you to everybody in this room, and through you beyond to the great Liberal family around Australia.  It is an immense privilege, one that is awe-inspiring to me every day, to be the Prime Minister of Australia.  It is a privilege that has come my way because the Liberal Party chose me as its leader and the Liberal Party, through its combined resources, was able to command the respect and the support of the majority of the Australian people.  
Our success in November of last year, our success over the last six years has been a team effort.  And I do want to record my very deep gratitude, particularly to Peter Costello as the Deputy Leader of the Party, and the person more than anybody else who has carried the grind and the day-to-day burden of economic management and economic policy.  He';s done a  magnificent job, and I record my thanks to him.  
To Robert Hill, now Australia';s Defence Minister, a crucial, sensitive portfolio  at a crucial, difficult time for Australia';s Defence Forces.  To Richard Alston and to all of my other Parliamentary colleagues, can I record my profound thanks and my profound gratitude.  
I will always be in debt to the Liberal Party organisation.  I said yesterday, and I repeat it today, that Lynton Crosby is a superb Federal Director of our Party.  He';s also the outstanding political professional around Australia at the present time, irrespective of what Party you are looking at.
And to those of you who were at the dinner last night, I had the opportunity of addressing a few remarks about my friend Ron Walker, and I simply say again Ron, how profoundly I am in your debt, the Party is in your debt, the nation is in your debt for the contribution that you have made to our collective cause over such a long period of time.
And finally, to Shane as President.  I want to thank you for the organisational leadership you have brought, for the political understanding, because of your past years of being in office in the Northern Territory, the friendship you have displayed towards me and the zeal and the commitment you have.  And through you I address my thanks to all of the State Presidents, and all of the State Directors for their magnificent work.
The final thing I say to all of you ladies and gentlemen, is this – that the political challenge never ends.  The political stage must always be occupied with activity, with purpose, and with commitment.  We have come a long way over the last six years together.  We have seen Australia transformed both domestically and in terms of her international esteem.  We have, through the combination of the government';s policies, a domestic strength which will be needed and will be drawn upon in great measure in the time immediately ahead of us because of our difficult international political environment. 
But the lesson of the last six years is that you always push forward.  The task is never done.  The reform process is never completed.  The economy is never perfect.  Our international relations are never completely right, there are always challenges ahead, and we have over the next two and a half years, the challenges that I have outlined.  And if the Liberal Party together can respond in the way that we have responded over the last six years, there is no reason why we cannot gather again after the next election and with quiet pride and satisfaction celebrate another victory. To all of you, thank you for your support.  I value it greatly.  It means a lot to me.  It means that together we have achieved so much for Australia.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Premier, General Leahy, Dr Palazzo, Dr Denis Napthine the Leader of the Opposition, my other parliamentary colleagues, and supporters, former members, friends and those committed in the past and into the future to the history and the traditions of the Third Australian Division.
It is appropriate on the eve of Anzac Day that in this magnificent setting of the Victorian Parliament which is such a wonderful reminder of our federation history, it is appropriate that this book, which is a wonderful history of the experiences and the contributions and sacrifice of the men of the Third Division to the defence of Australia, should be launched.  The first Commander of the Third Division was of course undeniably in my view the greatest military figure Australia has produced – General Sir John Monash.  He was a great Australian, he was a great Victorian, he was a great example to the commanders of other nations in World War I of how to fight and how to lead with great military effectiveness but also with a lesser loss of life than was the outcome of other methods.  And Monash and the example that he set has illuminated and instructed people who';ve served in the Australian Defence Forces and people who';ve admired the contribution of the Australian Defence Forces to the defence of freedom ever since.
It';s also an occasion of course to honour the citizen soldier and the continuing role of the reserves within Australian military life and the importance that they play.  And to note of course changes have been made extending the capacity of governments to deploy reserves in different theatres of war, deployment for people who';ve served in the reserves.
But this book documents the formation of the Third Division, it';s training in England before going to France, and its subsequent participation at Passchendale and subsequently in the final battles of World War I where as Dr Palazzo said it along with other Australian units played such a decisive role in the final battles in September, October and early November of 1918. And arguably, given the size of our nation, one of the greatest contributions that this nation has made in its existence to the defence of the way of life in which we believe.
It is an occasion for me on behalf of all of the Australian community to honour those who died defending this country, to honour those who put their lives at risk, to pay tribute to all of you returned servicemen and women who are here today, to thank you for what you have done for our country. It';s something that';s said often but it can';t be said too often, we owe what we have now, my capacity to speak freely as the leader of a political party and to put my point of view, the capacity of the Premier to put his point of view, of Dr Napthine and others and all of us, we owe that to men and women like you and sadly to those who didn';t come back. And it is an occasion for me to say on behalf of a very grateful nation not only thank you to the men of the Third Division, but also thank you to the hundreds of thousands of Australian men and women who';ve put their lives at risk in the defence of this country and particularly we honour the more than one-hundred-thousand Australians who paid the ultimate sacrifice in the defence of this country.
It';s also on an occasion such as this, it';s also timely to remember that as we gather here today we have deployed overseas probably more people than we';ve had deployed at any time since the Vietnam War and they are doing a magnificent job. Australia has won new renown and the men of the Australian Army have won new renown around the world, and women, for what they did in East Timor and more recently and currently the participation of our special forces in Afghanistan and in other theatres of activity in Bougainville and elsewhere around the world. The reputation of the Australian Defence Force has never been higher and deservedly so.
And it';s also an occasion where without any equivocation the Government has committed more resources to the defence of this country. We are increasing resources. I said the weekend before last and I repeat it here today that the circumstances of the world are such that we may have to commit even more financial resources over and above what has already been committed in the White Paper to the cause of the defence forces of this country in the years ahead. The men and women of the Australian Defence Forces when they go abroad, they don';t go abroad in the name of any government or any side of politics, the go abroad in the name of the Australian nation and they go abroad to defend what the Australian nation has always believed in and what the Australian nation has always stood for.  
The origins of the Third Division came out of a great volunteer spirit which is one of the things that sets Australia apart from any other nation. It is still to me an amazing thing that during World War I we had, what, a male population of 2.5 million and close on 400,000 of those volunteered for service.  And when you think of the efforts of people subsequently in World War II, when you think of the volunteer spirit of Australia in so many areas of activity I think it';s a reminder and a heart warming reminder to us of what we are really as a people, of what we stand for, of what we believe in.
Can I say to the author, writing a book, writing it painstakingly as you have done is always an enormous challenge and I thank you Doctor for your scholarship, I thank you for what I know will bring a great deal of interest and a great deal of warmth not only to people in this room but also to others around Australia that will want to enjoy the story of a great division and enjoy the story of men who gave so much to the defence of this country.  So ladies and gentlemen the Third Division and all of those who support it do me a great honour in asking me to come here today. I';m delighted to launch this book. I congratulate those who organised this gathering. I think it is a wonderful Australian occasion and a wonderful Melbourne occasion in this lovely building. I wish you well and again on behalf of a very grateful nation may I say in this week of Anzac Day – thank you for what you have done and what you mean to our nation.   [Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Marc. To you and Eva and to other members of the Besen family, to Sir James and Lady Gobbo, Dame Elisabeth Murdoch, John Olsen and all the other very distinguished people here associated with the Arts and also with the philanthropic life of Melbourne.
This is a very special gathering, not only by dint of the people who are here but it is also quite a milestone in the new partnership between the Government and generous Australian individuals who have had a vision over long years about building something which is representative of contemporary Australian artistic achievement, and in the process contributing enormously to our society.
Marc and Eva are examples of the great philanthropic tradition which is found in many parts of our country, but nowhere more so than in the city of Melbourne, because the philanthropic tradition of Melbourne is an example may I say to the rest of the country in so many walks of life. And to you Marc and to Eva, can I say on behalf of a very grateful nation, thank you for what you have contributed in so many ways to our country. You have contributed in the business community, you have contributed in a community sense in defining that word and that concept most broadly as possible, and certainly you have contributed in the Arts.
It is true that some of the changes that we have made to the taxation laws have helped to encourage and develop this new partnership, but you do need willing, generous individuals to make changes like that work. And this is, as I understand it, the first example of a public gallery if I can put it that way, that has been brought forth by that new partnership and it is so therefore a very important occasion. And I hope it is the harbinger of others. And the scale of the contributions already runs into millions of dollars of the contribution and of course your own massive, in so many senses of that word, collection is something that so many people have spoken to me about and so very widely admired around the Australian artistic community.
I want to join in acknowledging the contribution of the Victorian Government in the refurbishment of this gallery which will be the temporary home. And it does make a very temporary home for the Tarrawarra Museum until the completion of the museum in the Yarra Valley. And I';ve had a look at the scale model and I know many of us will look forward, all of us will look forward very much to the opening of the Museum.
Marc came to this country as a young man and he has in every sense of the word made an enormous impression. He has been a very successful and widely admired businessman and his wife and their family have contributed so much to our community. And what I want to particularly thank him for today is his recognition from an early stage of the importance of the Arts and most particularly the Visual Arts in defining how we see ourselves and defining Australia to the rest of the world. 
We are a country that does well internationally and is seen around the world for many things. We have for a long time been defined around the world as a great sports loving nation and quite properly so. And long may it remain the case. But in more recent decades I think we have also begun to be seen increasingly around the world as a nation that performs above its size, population wise, in so many other fields. 
And nowhere is that more apparent than in the Arts, and I regard the artistic achievements of this country and the artistic excellence of this country every bit as importantly as I treasure and value all the sporting prowess and the sporting achievements of this country. A nation for all its people is a nation that honours artists as much as it honours sportsmen. It honours successful businessmen and women as much as it honours other achievers, and also may I say honours its medical scientists and those who contribute so much to the relief of human suffering as it honours others in the community.
But today is an occasion for us to not only formally open this temporary home but also to honour two people who exemplify the finest philanthropic traditions of our country. And the contribution that Marc and Eva and their families have made to that tradition is one that I certainly on behalf of a grateful nation do that. And I thank you for what you have done for Australia, and I have great pleasure in declaring the Tarrawarra Art Museum open. 
I know it will be successful and popular in its temporary home and it will in the years ahead become a great regional art museum and it will be a great monument to two very dedicated Australians who have given so much, and also might I meekly say, also a monument to a very successful new partnership between the Australian taxpayer and philanthropic Australian individuals. And long may that partnership flourish and long may the others who will emulate the magnificent example of Marc and Eva Besen.
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Major Watters.  To my parliamentary colleagues Trish Worth and Ross Cameron, the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police Commissioner Mick Keelty, other officers of the Salvation Army, citizens, fellow Australians.
I am always delighted to be associated with the work of the Salvation Army.  It is a force for good and a force for tackling, at the coal face, at the grass roots, the social problems of our community. And there is no group of men and women who are held in higher esteem in the Australian community when thoughts turn to helping people that need assistance.
My purpose in being here today is to formally launch the Salvation Army post-detoxification service here in Parramatta. It will be supported by Commonwealth Government funding of $450,000.  It was promised that funding during the election campaign and I';m pleased to be able, in announcing the launch of this initiative, to confirm the delivery of funding over a period of three years and it will support the Follow on Youth Recovery Support Team of the Salvation Army.  This team will provide support and assistance to young people aged 16 to 25 who have been through detoxification and rehabilitation.  And it will help them at that crucial moment after having been through the programme to re-establish themselves in a healthy and positive lifestyle within the community.
Brian Watters understands better than most the challenge of the drug problem in Australia.  Nobody has a simple easy solution, nobody anywhere in the world has a simple easy solution.  And the progress you make on something like this is incremental and steady over a period of time against the background of having a strong commitment to doing something and also a willingness to devote the resources that are needed over a period of time.  And the team that we are supporting here in Parramatta will work in a comprehensive way to address the complex issues that young people and their families face in recovering from drug problems. And what this service recognises is that detoxification is only the first step in recovery from drug problems and that people need continued support to prevent a relapse.
The Tough on Drugs programme which we launched about five years ago has involved committing $625 million at a Commonwealth level. And I';m pleased to say that as to the great bulk of our activities and our objectives we work in total cooperation with the State Governments, irrespective of their political persuasion.  Major Watters talked about the diversion programmes which involve the court mechanisms, if I can put it that way, of the states and additional federal money for rehabilitation. And I';ve had excellent cooperation from the New South Wales Government and I';ve had excellent cooperation from governments around Australia. And offering people the opportunity of going into the rehabilitation programme rather than being ensnared in the criminal justice system is a really positive step forward and it has the support of Governments, it has the support of people such as the Salvation Army working in the field, it has the support of the police and it also has the support of most importantly the families of people who might be caught up with the drug problem.
Now we posited our Tough on Drugs approach in three areas. We said we had to be uncompromising in law enforcement, in trying to stop drugs getting into Australia and catching and prosecuting and throwing in jail and where possible throwing away the key in relation to the drug traffickers. We believe very strongly that rehabilitation had been neglected for too long by governments at all levels. We also believe very profoundly in a greater educative role for governments to persuade people of the ills of drugs in the first instance and to try and talk them out of trying, rather than trying to pick up the pieces later on. And we all understand that great injunction that prevention is better than cure and that applies with everything.  I';ve always found that one of the more bizarre things of modern society that we quite rightly here in Australia have devoted enormous effort into persuading people not to start smoking yet hand in hand with that are some people who believe that the way you handle the drug problem is not so much to try your hardest to stop them starting but somehow or other manage the problem once they get involved with it. The two things don';t seem to fit particularly well together, but life is like that on occasion.
We have been as Brian said very successful, not complacent when I say this, but we have been very successful in our campaign to increase the number of seizures and to slow down the rate of drug entry into Australia.  There has been an unprecedented rise in the seizure of the hardest illicit drugs since 1997, almost six tonnes including 1.3 tonnes of heroin and 2.6 tonnes of cocaine, compared with just two and a half tonnes of illicit drugs seized in the five years immediately preceding the commencement of the programme. And a reduction in the availability of heroin on Australia';s streets and there has been a reduction in deaths from opiate overdose.  Now I don';t want to claim in any sense victory on that, nobody can.  It might go into reverse in the future, we all hope and pray it doesn';t.  But there has been some progress, we are seizing more drugs, there are fewer deaths, the programmes that we are implementing in cooperation with the community are working.  We can';t as I say declare any victory, we can';t be complacent, but we are making some progress and what the message that is contained in this little booklet that is being made available to the public is that we are making progress on a number of fronts.  We are, through greater seizures, and can I pay unqualified tribute to the Australian Federal Police, to the Customs services of Australia and also to the state police forces, all of which have worked in cooperation and we have a higher level now of cooperation between the police forces of the Commonwealth and the States than I believe we';ve had for a very long time. And all of that is contributing to the good news, and those figures that Brian read out earlier, I hadn';t heard them before, they';re terrific figures, they are encouraging and they ought to give heart to all of the people who are here today but more importantly they ought to give heart and encouragement to the parents of Australia who have to grapple with this problem.
And on that particular subject I remember when we released our booklet as part of the education programme we were attacked and you know the usual suspects said oh well he';s wasting money on this, it should be better devoted to other programmes in the drug area.  Now that';s an easy criticism to make but we';ve had an evaluation done of the campaign and that found that three in five parents found that the campaign made it easier to talk to their children about illicit drugs.  All of us who have been parents know that difficult conversations with children are difficult conversations, doesn';t matter who we are, from time to time you might have some communication challenges with your children as no doubt our parents had with us.  And getting parents communicating with their children about difficult social challenges is one of the biggest responsibilities that parents have.  And we tried to provide a bit of easy to read, easy to understand assistance in relation to that and the result of the survey is that three in five parents found that the campaign made it easier for parents to talk to their children.  One in two young people felt the campaign helped them to talk to their parents.  And 78 per cent of parents talked to their children about drugs.  Now once again it';s only part of a whole series of things you';ve got to do. But the message out of that is we are making progress, we are seizing more drugs, we are starting to see some impact on overdose deaths.  We all hope that it will last.  We cautiously, but nonetheless genuinely welcome the figures, we see evidence that the education programme is working and importantly we are putting a lot more money into treatment services.  Treatment services had been neglected.  I mean people were entitled to say it';s not much good putting all your resources into law enforcement if you don';t provide enough help to people who are trying to kick the habit. And that really brings us back to what I';m launching today. 
This programme is about the Salvation Army doing what it does best and that is helping people who need help and also helping people who recognise they';ve got to help themselves.  And the first and most crucial decision that people have got to make when they';re involved in drugs of course is to try and do something about the problem. And if you';ve been through a detoxification programme then you';ve certainly taken that first step and you';ve gone through the programme.  And then as you start to re-enter a normal life pattern you inevitably run into the challenges that people face, and the enticements and the inducements to go back and the temptation to return to former patterns of behaviour, and that is where this programme will be of enormous assistance.  So I';m delighted that this Commonwealth money is being made available to it, every last dollar of that money will be extremely well spent.
I do want to thank in launching this programme, I naturally wish to thank the Salvation Army for the wonderful work they do in the drug area.  I also want to thank Trish Worth and her office for working so very hard in coordinating arrangements for this launch and also the particular responsibilities that she has really effectively running the health and ageing side of the Tough on Drugs strategy. It is a never ending fight, you never win the fight against drugs and people in the community who search for a point at which you can say we have beaten the drug problem are deluding themselves and they';re defying human experience.  But what you can do is to make a difference with a comprehensive programme.  Now I believe very passionately in what the Federal Government is doing about drugs.  I';m an uncompromising opponent of the philosophy of throwing up the hands and saying it';s all to hard and you can';t make a difference.  That doesn';t mean to say you don';t adjust your programmes, it doesn';t mean to say you don';t listen to new views and get new advice.  We';ve done that.  But if you look at what';s happened over the last few years I think we have begun to make a difference, and that';s been possible because we';ve put more money into it, it';s also been possible because we';ve been able to enlist the involvement of the community, of great organisations like the Salvation Army. We have involved the police and the welfare agencies in giving advice, not only on their immediate areas of responsibility but in relation to the overall problem. 
So can I say I';m delighted to launch this initiative.  Relieving human misery is the great mission of the Salvation Army and there';s a lot of human misery involved in drugs.  It';s all human misery unfortunately but from time to time it';s tempered and brightened by individual success stories and there are a growing number of those and that';s the message that comes out of this booklet.  I thank you to the officers of the Salvation Army for their magnificent work and I have great pleasure in launching this initiative, it';s one of many that I believe is making a very positive contribution to creating a better environment in this country and to slowly, not conquering, as you never totally do the drug problem, but certainly turning the tide of battle in the fight against the drug scourge in our wonderful country.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Major Watters.  To my parliamentary colleagues Trish Worth and Ross Cameron, the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police Commissioner Mick Keelty, other officers of the Salvation Army, citizens, fellow Australians.
I am always delighted to be associated with the work of the Salvation Army.  It is a force for good and a force for tackling, at the coal face, at the grass roots, the social problems of our community. And there is no group of men and women who are held in higher esteem in the Australian community when thoughts turn to helping people that need assistance.
My purpose in being here today is to formally launch the Salvation Army post-detoxification service here in Parramatta. It will be supported by Commonwealth Government funding of $450,000.  It was promised that funding during the election campaign and I';m pleased to be able, in announcing the launch of this initiative, to confirm the delivery of funding over a period of three years and it will support the Follow on Youth Recovery Support Team of the Salvation Army.  This team will provide support and assistance to young people aged 16 to 25 who have been through detoxification and rehabilitation.  And it will help them at that crucial moment after having been through the programme to re-establish themselves in a healthy and positive lifestyle within the community.
Brian Watters understands better than most the challenge of the drug problem in Australia.  Nobody has a simple easy solution, nobody anywhere in the world has a simple easy solution.  And the progress you make on something like this is incremental and steady over a period of time against the background of having a strong commitment to doing something and also a willingness to devote the resources that are needed over a period of time.  And the team that we are supporting here in Parramatta will work in a comprehensive way to address the complex issues that young people and their families face in recovering from drug problems. And what this service recognises is that detoxification is only the first step in recovery from drug problems and that people need continued support to prevent a relapse.
The Tough on Drugs programme which we launched about five years ago has involved committing $625 million at a Commonwealth level. And I';m pleased to say that as to the great bulk of our activities and our objectives we work in total cooperation with the State Governments, irrespective of their political persuasion.  Major Watters talked about the diversion programmes which involve the court mechanisms, if I can put it that way, of the states and additional federal money for rehabilitation. And I';ve had excellent cooperation from the New South Wales Government and I';ve had excellent cooperation from governments around Australia. And offering people the opportunity of going into the rehabilitation programme rather than being ensnared in the criminal justice system is a really positive step forward and it has the support of Governments, it has the support of people such as the Salvation Army working in the field, it has the support of the police and it also has the support of most importantly the families of people who might be caught up with the drug problem.
Now we posited our Tough on Drugs approach in three areas. We said we had to be uncompromising in law enforcement, in trying to stop drugs getting into Australia and catching and prosecuting and throwing in jail and where possible throwing away the key in relation to the drug traffickers. We believe very strongly that rehabilitation had been neglected for too long by governments at all levels. We also believe very profoundly in a greater educative role for governments to persuade people of the ills of drugs in the first instance and to try and talk them out of trying, rather than trying to pick up the pieces later on. And we all understand that great injunction that prevention is better than cure and that applies with everything.  I';ve always found that one of the more bizarre things of modern society that we quite rightly here in Australia have devoted enormous effort into persuading people not to start smoking yet hand in hand with that are some people who believe that the way you handle the drug problem is not so much to try your hardest to stop them starting but somehow or other manage the problem once they get involved with it. The two things don';t seem to fit particularly well together, but life is like that on occasion.
We have been as Brian said very successful, not complacent when I say this, but we have been very successful in our campaign to increase the number of seizures and to slow down the rate of drug entry into Australia.  There has been an unprecedented rise in the seizure of the hardest illicit drugs since 1997, almost six tonnes including 1.3 tonnes of heroin and 2.6 tonnes of cocaine, compared with just two and a half tonnes of illicit drugs seized in the five years immediately preceding the commencement of the programme. And a reduction in the availability of heroin on Australia';s streets and there has been a reduction in deaths from opiate overdose.  Now I don';t want to claim in any sense victory on that, nobody can.  It might go into reverse in the future, we all hope and pray it doesn';t.  But there has been some progress, we are seizing more drugs, there are fewer deaths, the programmes that we are implementing in cooperation with the community are working.  We can';t as I say declare any victory, we can';t be complacent, but we are making some progress and what the message that is contained in this little booklet that is being made available to the public is that we are making progress on a number of fronts.  We are, through greater seizures, and can I pay unqualified tribute to the Australian Federal Police, to the Customs services of Australia and also to the state police forces, all of which have worked in cooperation and we have a higher level now of cooperation between the police forces of the Commonwealth and the States than I believe we';ve had for a very long time. And all of that is contributing to the good news, and those figures that Brian read out earlier, I hadn';t heard them before, they';re terrific figures, they are encouraging and they ought to give heart to all of the people who are here today but more importantly they ought to give heart and encouragement to the parents of Australia who have to grapple with this problem.
And on that particular subject I remember when we released our booklet as part of the education programme we were attacked and you know the usual suspects said oh well he';s wasting money on this, it should be better devoted to other programmes in the drug area.  Now that';s an easy criticism to make but we';ve had an evaluation done of the campaign and that found that three in five parents found that the campaign made it easier to talk to their children about illicit drugs.  All of us who have been parents know that difficult conversations with children are difficult conversations, doesn';t matter who we are, from time to time you might have some communication challenges with your children as no doubt our parents had with us.  And getting parents communicating with their children about difficult social challenges is one of the biggest responsibilities that parents have.  And we tried to provide a bit of easy to read, easy to understand assistance in relation to that and the result of the survey is that three in five parents found that the campaign made it easier for parents to talk to their children.  One in two young people felt the campaign helped them to talk to their parents.  And 78 per cent of parents talked to their children about drugs.  Now once again it';s only part of a whole series of things you';ve got to do. But the message out of that is we are making progress, we are seizing more drugs, we are starting to see some impact on overdose deaths.  We all hope that it will last.  We cautiously, but nonetheless genuinely welcome the figures, we see evidence that the education programme is working and importantly we are putting a lot more money into treatment services.  Treatment services had been neglected.  I mean people were entitled to say it';s not much good putting all your resources into law enforcement if you don';t provide enough help to people who are trying to kick the habit. And that really brings us back to what I';m launching today. 
This programme is about the Salvation Army doing what it does best and that is helping people who need help and also helping people who recognise they';ve got to help themselves.  And the first and most crucial decision that people have got to make when they';re involved in drugs of course is to try and do something about the problem. And if you';ve been through a detoxification programme then you';ve certainly taken that first step and you';ve gone through the programme.  And then as you start to re-enter a normal life pattern you inevitably run into the challenges that people face, and the enticements and the inducements to go back and the temptation to return to former patterns of behaviour, and that is where this programme will be of enormous assistance.  So I';m delighted that this Commonwealth money is being made available to it, every last dollar of that money will be extremely well spent.
I do want to thank in launching this programme, I naturally wish to thank the Salvation Army for the wonderful work they do in the drug area.  I also want to thank Trish Worth and her office for working so very hard in coordinating arrangements for this launch and also the particular responsibilities that she has really effectively running the health and ageing side of the Tough on Drugs strategy. It is a never ending fight, you never win the fight against drugs and people in the community who search for a point at which you can say we have beaten the drug problem are deluding themselves and they';re defying human experience.  But what you can do is to make a difference with a comprehensive programme.  Now I believe very passionately in what the Federal Government is doing about drugs.  I';m an uncompromising opponent of the philosophy of throwing up the hands and saying it';s all to hard and you can';t make a difference.  That doesn';t mean to say you don';t adjust your programmes, it doesn';t mean to say you don';t listen to new views and get new advice.  We';ve done that.  But if you look at what';s happened over the last few years I think we have begun to make a difference, and that';s been possible because we';ve put more money into it, it';s also been possible because we';ve been able to enlist the involvement of the community, of great organisations like the Salvation Army. We have involved the police and the welfare agencies in giving advice, not only on their immediate areas of responsibility but in relation to the overall problem. 
So can I say I';m delighted to launch this initiative.  Relieving human misery is the great mission of the Salvation Army and there';s a lot of human misery involved in drugs.  It';s all human misery unfortunately but from time to time it';s tempered and brightened by individual success stories and there are a growing number of those and that';s the message that comes out of this booklet.  I thank you to the officers of the Salvation Army for their magnificent work and I have great pleasure in launching this initiative, it';s one of many that I believe is making a very positive contribution to creating a better environment in this country and to slowly, not conquering, as you never totally do the drug problem, but certainly turning the tide of battle in the fight against the drug scourge in our wonderful country.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Mr Mayor, my Federal Parliamentary colleague Kay Hull, my state colleague Daryl Maguire; Your Grace; group captain; Colonel, other councillors, ladies and gentlemen.
25 years is too long a gap between prime ministerial visits but I';m delighted to be in the city of Wagga Wagga.  I';m delighted to be here not only as a guest of the city council but also a guest of my very esteemed, hard working, Federal Parliamentary colleague Kay Hull who does an absolutely fantastic job.
People often say to me, and not least school groups that come to Canberra, and they';ll come around to the Prime Ministerial courtyard and we';ll chat for a while and then I';ll invite them into my office and they';ll gather around the old desk that I';m very pleased to occupy which has been used by most Australian prime ministers since the old Parliament House was built in 1927.  And invariably the school children will say to me what is the best part of your job?  And I say to them, and I say to you today, the best part of being Prime Minister of Australia are the endless opportunities it gives you to meet different groups of Australians in their home town or city environment, whether it';s in the metropolitan areas of Australia or in the country areas or in big regional cities such as Wagga Wagga.  And it';s an opportunity to go around our vast and wonderful country and to have the opportunity of talking to a cross section of Australians in their own home environment.
The city of Wagga Wagga is a remarkable place, I don';t need to tell you that, I won';t have any argument in this audience, you';d expect me to say that but I mean it because it has a combination of just about all you need for congenial living.  It is the largest inland city in New South Wales.  It relies very heavily on a lot of different industries, it has a very powerful education heart with the TAFE college and other facilities, it is a very important defence centre and I';m delighted that the RAAF base will continue long into the future as a very important element of the life and activity of the city of Wagga Wagga.  Not to forget of course the important contribution made by the Army as well to this part of New South Wales and this part of Australia.
It';s a part of Australia that depends very heavily of course, despite all its other industries, it also depends very heavily on the traditional rural industries of Australia.  So it';s really got just about everything. But of course on top of that it';s got another characteristic that endears it very much to Australia and that is it has an incredible capacity to produce talented sportsmen and women. I mean I did an interview on the local FM station and the interviewer said to me are you going to drink the water? I said of course, I would drink the water.  She said well that';s the reason why we produce so many good sportsmen and women, she said it';s the water. And I can say I had the pleasure of spending some time with one of your, I might say I might be forgiven for saying because of my known passions in this area, arguably the greatest sporting export that';s come out of Wagga Wagga - Mark Taylor.  And I spent some time with him yesterday and he asked to be warmly remembered, as did his mother and father, to the people of Wagga Wagga.
So when you put all of that together it';s a pretty remarkable place.  But the other thing that makes any community remarkable, and Wagga Wagga is no exception, is of course the network of community services that sustains it. And as I moved around the room this morning, came across the representatives of Mission Australia, of the Smith Family, the principals of the high schools, the teachers, the ambulance services, the police, and a gathering like this is a great opportunity for all of us to remind ourselves of how much we depend on each other.
One of the great things about Australia is that we work together very well for the common good.  Because we';re not a pretentious people, we';re not a snobbish society, we don';t have a class structure.  When we';ve got a goal that we want to achieve we';re very good at working together because we respect people for what they do and who they are, not where they come from or what particular social strata they might presume to belong to.  And a community gathering like this is a powerful reminder not only of the diversity of a great city such as Wagga Wagga but it';s also a very powerful reminder of what we all share in common and Australians through the years and right now we';re doing it again, we work together very very effectively in order to tackle common problems.
Now right at the moment the Australian economy is going pretty well, but that doesn';t mean to say everything';s perfect and I';m very conscious of the fact that we could do with a little more rain, not only in this part of the world but many other parts of rural Australia.  And along with everybody else who cares about the future of the country in Australia we hope that rain does come because over the last couple of years our farmers have had a slightly better break than they';ve had for a long time and gee they deserved it because they had years and years of drought and low world prices. Some years ago they had to suffer very high interest rates. So we hope that the good, the relatively good news of the last few years will continue.
Now I don';t come to these gatherings of communities to make partisan political speeches. I think you';ve got a rough idea of which party I belong to but I welcome everybody to a gathering like this because we are Australians above everything else. And at a time when Australia has important international responsibilities we have at the moment more Australian service men and women overseas than probably at any time since our involvement in the Vietnam War back in the ‘60s and early ‘70s. Not only in Afghanistan but continuing a very large contingent representing Australia in East Timor and a continued presence in Bougainville and various units and groups of Australian defence personnel in other parts of the world.
And it';s an important reminder to all of us, particularly a city that has a very powerful ADF connection, It';s an important reminder that commitment to the defence of Australia and commitment to Australia';s role in the world wide fight against terrorism is a very important national priority at the present time. We have put more money into defence spending and unless circumstances change significantly it may be the case that we will have to put even more money into defence spending in the years ahead.  And it';s an important commitment because what happened last year in the United States was an as much an attack on the values that we stand for as it was an attack on the values for which the American people stand.  And we all know how interconnected the world is and we can';t wash our hands of some kind of role and responsibility in dealing with that and we therefore have a very important responsibility as part of a world wide response to that.
But ladies and gentlemen can I say to the Mayor that I appreciate very much the very warm words of welcome that he';s extended to me and can I say how delighted I am that so many school children and students are here. And might I say to those school students how much I admire the work that is done by your teachers. The teaching profession is a very important profession in our community. Teachers mould and shape the lives and the attitudes of children very much. A good teacher is priceless asset in the upbringing of a child, it is a priceless asset in forming and moulding the character of children. Sometimes we, as schoolchildren and pupils we sometimes have mixed reactions to some of the things we';re told to do by our teachers. That';s human nature. I was no different when I was at school than I guess you are.  But I do remember as time has gone by, can I say to the school students here, as time goes by you will remember it in an increasingly positive way the influence that many of your teachers have had on you.
So finally might I say to you that being here in Wagga Wagga is a reminder to me of a number of things. It';s a reminder of the power of local communities, it';s a reminder that the world doesn';t just revolve around Canberra and Sydney and Melbourne, that Australia is made up of big cities but it';s also made up of small local communities. I';m going out in a few minutes to Ganmain to open a rural transaction centre. It';s a little town with a population of what, 250. It';s a very small community. But it has needs and it has rights, the people who live there have a right to have access to services the same way as people who live on the north-shore of Sydney or in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne.  And part of what the Government has tried to do in a lot of these areas is where towns have fallen in their population to a certain level and they can';t sustain services what the Government has tried to do is to take those services and to try and put some of them back because we don';t want to see our country towns continuing to decline. It';s good to have thriving hub cities like Wagga Wagga and Dubbo but it';s also very good to have strong, small, local country towns and that gets increasingly harder when there';s a decline in some of the traditional industries.  And the role of the Government is to try and not only create the economic conditions to keep people on the land and try and keep the farms more prosperous, but it';s also the role of the Government where it can to take some services back which we';ve tried to do with rural transaction centres.
So Mr Mayor you';ve been very gracious with your words. I want to thank you for that. I want to thank the people of Wagga Wagga for the contribution that they are making to Australia because you are a prime example of a thriving regional city that really has had its act together for a long time and is contributing an enormous amount to our country. And finally can I thank all the volunteers who are here today.  That probably in its various guises includes just about everybody because in different ways everybody in Australia seems to volunteer their services for something because we have a great volunteer tradition in this country. It was on wonderful display to the world at the time of the Olympic Games but you and I both know that it';s been there since this country began and it will always be there because it is very much part of the Australia spirit.
So Kay and Daryl and Mr Mayor thank you for inviting me. I';m delighted to be back in Wagga Wagga and I look forward to seeing a little more of you and the surrounding [inaudible] over the next day or two.  Thank you very much.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much to the Mayor, to Councillor Harding, my Federal Parliamentary colleague Kay Hull, citizens of Ganmain, my fellow Australians.  It really is quite exciting to come to a gathering like this, to see the whole street closed off - they don';t do this in Sydney or Canberra for me.  And to be part of what is I think a tremendous event for the town both in reality and also symbolically.  Because the Rural Transaction Centre programme and the latest example of it which is the opening of this Rural Transaction Centre here in Ganmain, it is a declaration of the Government';s determination to do everything it can to preserve small country towns throughout Australia.
I don';t believe in an Australia which is only comprised of big cities and large regional hub cities.  I believe in Australia where you have the big cities and they';re wonderful cities, you have the great hub cities like Wagga Wagga and Dubbo and Toowoomba and so forth but you also do everything you humanly can to maintain what is needed to preserve those wonderful small country towns which have given this nation so much of its identity, that have given this nation so much of its wealth and it';s seen by all of us, wherever we were born in Australia or if we';ve come to Australia from another country, is seen as part and parcel of what Australia has always been and what we will always hope that Australia will continue to be. 
It';s not easy, the changing nature of rural industries, the very difficult circumstances that traditional rural industries have had with perverse trading conditions around the world, and that';s not getting any easier.  The major trading blocs of the world are still determined to provide subsidies which do immense damage to the efficient farmers of Australia.  It';s not easy but fortunately in the last two or three years there has been some turnaround in the fortunes of country Australia.  I can';t unfortunately, because I don';t control the weather and I don';t control world markets, I can';t promise you that that';s going to continue.  
But at least over the last two or three years, people in the country have had a bit of a respite and they';ve had an opportunity to rebuild and repay some debt and to put something away for more difficult times in the future.  And it';s therefore very important that governments at every level do all they can to help stabilise the situation.  We can';t totally reverse the process but we can help.  
And the whole idea of the Regional Transaction Centre programme, and there are now something like 190 of them either opened or in the process of being established around Australia, the whole idea of this programme was to guarantee basic services in small country communities.  And what is behind me is a metaphor for what the programme is all about.  And I want to congratulate the Credit Union, congratulate you Councillor Harding and all of your colleagues and the Credit Union and the Credit Union movement, because the Credit Union movement the Credit Union movement has proved itself to be a great mate to country Australia because it has brought a lot of services back. 
And you need basic services, you are entitled to have the sort of facilities that are going to be offered here.  I mean you shouldn';t have to live in a town of a certain size to have some of these basic services and that';s what the Rural Transaction Centre policy has been about. And we';re going to maintain this policy and to provide as many of these centres as we can around Australia.  And it needs a great co-operative effort and you get the Australian volunteer co-operative spirit on display to its very best of course when you come to country Australia.  It';s always been necessary for country people to work together for a common goal. They know how to do it better than anybody else. And to bring about this Rural Transaction Centre that';s been necessary. 
It is true that your local Federal Member has driven everybody mad in order to get the facility, and good on her, that';s her job and she is a very, very vigorous person.  And you';ll have banking facilities, the full range of financial services, you';ll have access to Centrelink, Medicare, rural counselling services. And all of this will be under one roof.  And it';s become very much a focal point for the local community.
But importantly what I hope it will do is say to the people of your community that the Government does care about you, you may not always agree with what we do, we might not always get it right, which we don';t, but we really care very much about the preservation of small country communities as the heart and soul of rural Australia. Because if we lose them our nation will be deprived forever of something that has always been part of the Australian identity.  So it';s not just an economic thing, it';s not just a consideration of responding to public opinion and public feeling but it';s also a belief that the part of the Australia that I love and you love is represented at a gathering such as this.  You wouldn';t get a gathering quite like this anywhere else in the world.   You don';t get gatherings like this in communities in the big cities.  We all tend to blend a bit each into the other.  But each rural community has its own very distinct identity. And of course this community has a very long history and the book that was commissioned about the Coolamon Shire for the Centenary of Federation details the links with this part of the Shire with some of the rural industries of Australia.  So we';re reconnecting with a bit of Australia';s history and the history of this part of Australia in opening this today.
And I want to thank the wonderful school children for their beautiful rendition of the national anthem.  And I want to thank all of the men and women and the children of Ganmain.  And I';m told that just about everybody is here, it';s a very, very large gathering.  I want to thank all of you for coming along but most importantly, can I thank everybody who';s worked hard to make this event possible. Sure there';s been a financial contribution from the Federal Government and I';m glad that we';ve done that and I want to do it in other parts of Australia that have a similar need.  But you needed the Credit Union, you needed the co-operation of the local community, you needed the energy of your local council, and I congratulate you Mr Shire President.  And you also needed of course the energy of your local Member of Parliament.  But most importantly this is a celebration today of the continuing spirit of country Australia.  And I can';t tell you how much I feel privileged to be part of this quintessential Australian gathering, the main street of the country town closed off, everybody turning up, a beautiful rendition of the national anthem.  And doing something that';s bringing back services to country Australia and I';m really delighted to be part of this and I';m glad the Government';s been able to be part of it. 
I wish you well, thank you for what you have done for our country in the past and I hope that the facility that I now declare officially open will help you to continue to contribute to our great nation for years into the future.  
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Colonel. General Cosgrove, ladies and gentlemen of the Australian Defence Force.  Janette and I are very pleased to have the opportunity of meeting you and for me to say a few words very directly to you on behalf of the Australian nation a few hours away from independence for East Timor, made possible by what I regard as one of the most noble things that Australia has done in the area of foreign affairs and defence over the past few years. 
As I go around the world I hear various comments about Australia and one of the consistent patterns in those comments is the great respect and admiration that people around the world have for the role that Australia played in bringing independence to East Timor and most particularly the role played by the Australian Defence Force. The Australian people are very proud of what you have done over the last two-and-a-half years.  Not only from the military point of view but also the civilian work you have done, the way in which you have reached out to the local population, the way in which you have shown to the people of this soon to be very small new independent country that the military forces of Australia are not only a great fighting force, but they';re also a great human force for doing good things, and winning the confidence and support of the local people. 
 When we made the decision back in 1999 to commit a very large contingent of Australians to Interfet we didn';t know quite what was going to happen.  I have never forgotten and Janette has never forgotten the visit we paid to Townsville on the eve of the first deployment and as we moved around and spoke to many of the personnel there, we were very conscious that their emotions were a mixture of anticipation, with understandably a degree of nervousness and trepidation.  But it was a wonderfully executed operation, and it reflects great credit on your commander at the time and on all of you.  And the way it went from being an Interfet operation to being a United Nations  operation has reflected enormous credit on you and on the entire Australian Defence Force.
As the Colonel said it was one of the most successful United Nations operations in recent memory.  The mandate was very robust.  The assembling of the international force occurred in a very short period of time, and the execution was as close to being flawless as anything can be in those circumstances.
It is likely that we will continue to have a presence as part of the United Nations force for some time yet. Australia has invested a great deal in many ways in the future of East Timor and we want the country';s new experience to be successful and very positive. The relationship naturally changes after midnight tonight.  It will become a relationship between a large, sophisticated democracy such as Australia  and a new, small country of fewer than a million people and grappling with all of the problems of independence.  The things that East Timor has going for it include the immense good will of the Australian people.  There is a strong bond between Australian soldiers and the people of East Timor going back to World War II days, when often at very great risk to their own lives, the people of this country extended the hand of assistance and friendship to Australian servicemen.  And that has never been forgotten by older generations of Australians, and some have seen what we have done in recent times as, in part, a repayment of debt that we owe for the help and assistance that was given.  
To all of you who have made Australians feel very proud of you, you have done a wonderful job and you have fulfilled the best traditions of Australia';s military forces.  You have been good citizens, good ambassadors, good friends and very importantly you have been good soldiers and sailors and airmen.  And to all of the men and women of the Australian defence forces can I say on behalf of myself and on behalf of the entire nation, thank you for the job you have done, the credit you have brought to your country and to your services.  It is widely respected in the Australian community.  Thank you very much.
[ends]


Subjects: East Timor
E&amp;OE...........  
PRIME MINISTER:
This is a very important moment for East Timor and it';s a very important moment in the history of the relationship between our two countries.  Australians of many generations have had particular reason to feel an affinity towards the people of East Timor, and the World War II generation had special reason to be grateful to the people of East Timor for the assistance given them at critical times during campaigns. And of course the independence movement in East Timor attracted a great deal of support in Australia. And whilst this is very much an occasion to look forward to the future relationship between Australia and East Timor and for all of us to wish the people of East Timor well and to commit ourselves to continued assistance and friendship, it is also an occasion to reflect on the contribution that Australia working with other member states of the United Nations made in the bringing about the independence of East Timor. 
I think it';s very important that relations between Australia, East Timor and Indonesia be developed to the full.  The way in which the East Timorese leadership has stressed the positive aspects of their country';s relationship with Indonesia is very important to this country';s future. So I would like having just arrived in this soon to be independent country to wish the people of East Timor well on behalf of my Government and on behalf of all of the Australian people.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister you mentioned Australia';s assistance to East Timor so far, will you be announcing any new programmes or assistance ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I will be announcing some new programs in relation to East Timor';s health system. Since late in 1999 Australia';s been working with the East Timorese to improve basic health services and build the capacity of the Minister of Health and through our overseas aid agency AusAid we';re going to build on these efforts in three significant areas. We';re going to establish a $3 million specialist medical services project which is going to provide specialist medical services. At present there are no practicing East Timorese surgeons or specialists, and the Ministry of Health has very limited resources to maintain essential minimum surgical capability.  This project that I';m announcing will provide a general surgeon and an anaesthetist to the Hospital Nacional Dili for three years, and involve approximately 13 visits a year for three years by visiting specialist teams including plastic and reconstructive surgery, eye surgery, ear, nose and throat surgery and also pediatrics.  The specialist medical services project is going to be managed by the Royal Australiasian College of Surgeons and we';ll also offer training and surgical and anesthetic services to East Timorese medical personnel.  
We';ve also, I think you';ll be aware because the ambulances have arrived, provided 10 four-wheel-drive ambulances for the East Timor District Ambulance Service and they will be at the hospital that I am visiting this afternoon. And there';ll be a training package that will also be delivered to ambulance personnel such as drivers and nurses. At present the Ministry of Health has just four ambulances based in Dili, Baucau, Viqueque and Same.  The additional vehicles will assist in establishing a simple, sustainable and low cost district ambulance service in East Timor.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, there';s been some complaints by UN officials and members of the local parliament about the way Australia conducted itself in negotiations on the Timor Gap Treaty, people saying that Australia played a very hard game, and that Australia has unfairly denied East Timor the opportunity to appeal in the international court, if there';s a dispute on boundaries.  How do you respond to that ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I know that whenever you';re negotiating these sorts of arrangements there are strongly held views but when you look at the 90/10 split and the other arrangements that have been agreed I don';t think, consistent with the obligation of the Australian Government to always look to our own national interests which every government must do, I reject the suggestion that we have been unfair. We have looked after Australia';s interests but we';ve also I believe tried very hard to accommodate the interests of East Timor as the split indicates. So I would not agree for a moment that the description you have alluded to is an accurate description of the way in which Australia has behaved.
JOURNALIST:
[Inaudible] Australia';s troop commitments be beyond independence?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we';ll continue to be part of the force, the UN force, and as the overall UN force comes down so will our contribution. They have done a fantastic job both as part of the Interfet force and subsequently as part of the United Nation';s force.
JOURNALIST:
Can you give us numbers?
PRIME MINISTER:
We';ll probably go down to around 1200 and then there could be further reductions after that. But just exactly when I don';t know.
JOURNALIST:
How long do you think Australian troops will be here for?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have never tried Ian to put a date on that. I think that';s unwise. We would want the United Nation';s presence to remain for so long as necessary and Australia will continue to be part of that presence in a significant way for so long as necessary. I can';t put a time on it. I think if I try and do that I could get into difficulty.
JOURNALIST:
If Australia is so confident of their right to the oil in the Timor Sea why not submit it to the International Court of Justice?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we think the arrangements that have been worked out are fair and reasonable and the position we';ve taken in relation to the international legal position is perfectly consistent with our rights.
JOURNALIST:
Was Australia prepared to give up any land in negotiations on [inaudible]?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we think the provisional arrangements that have been reached are fair. I mean we have all ready made in relation to the 90/10, split we didn';t start off in that position and we gave significant ground, or made significant concessions along the way and we think what has been agreed so far is a fair apportionment.
JOURNALIST:
So boundaries are not negotiable?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we think the provisional agreements that have been reached in relation to that are fair but obviously these things are going to be discussed.
JOURNALIST:
The East Timor parliament plans, as one of its first pieces of legislation, a law on its boundaries, and Dr Alkatiri said the other day they wanted negotiations as soon as possible with Australia on maritime boundaries, when do you thing those…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we will obviously respond to requests that come from the newly independent country of East Timor.  We will sit down and talk to them. We';ll be fair and sympathetic but like any other country we';ll also have regard to our own national interest and I think that is understood. We';ve been, I believe in the negotiations so far extremely accommodating and fair to East Timor and it';s important that that be recognised and understood and I don';t for a moment accept that Australia has been unfair.
JOURNALIST:
How would you characterise the strategic relationship with East Timor, Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well first of all it';s important because we are partners, or will be from midnight tonight, partners with each other in this part of the world.  We have a common interest in good relations with Indonesia but those relations have got to as always be based on mutual respect. We will continue to be a friend of East Timor';s. We understand her natural desire to assert her own identity and to mark out her own way of dealing with affairs in this region. We want to be a good friend and obviously the security of East Timor is important to Australia. We wouldn';t be where we are now if we hadn';t taken that view some years ago.
JOURNALIST:
[Inaudible] to Dr Habibie first started this ball rolling some years ago, did you expect it would get to this point so quickly and how do you feel today, yourself, about this.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I believe that what Australia did in relation to East Timor was correct. I am pleased that East Timor now has her independence. I don';t say that with any belligerence towards Indonesia.  Quite the reverse. I have encouraged the East Timorese leadership to reach out to Indonesia and I';ve encouraged Indonesia to reach out to East Timor. I';m very pleased that President Megawati Sukarnoputri is coming to the gathering tonight, the celebrations tonight.   But of the things that we have done in the area of foreign policy over recent years none has been more noble than what we did in relation to East Timor.
JOURNALIST:
[Inaudible] what is Australia';s policy towards military ties with Indonesia?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Australia has a sensible approach to military exchanges with Indonesia. We see value in maintaining contact at an appropriate level.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, this flotilla of vessels from the Indonesian Navy in the last couple of days, would that suggest that there are significant elements within Indonesia that don';t really wish East Timor the best ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think that';s a matter for you to talk to my friend Jose Ramos Horta about.
JOURNALIST:
[Inaudible] at a time when East Timor is celebrating, when it is so fresh in the minds of the Timorese, the involvement of the Indonesian military, that they would choose to send four or five warships just off the coast.
PRIME MINISTER:
I think that';s something you ought to ask Jose Ramos Horta and the Indonesians about. I respect the capacity and the right of the East Timorese leadership to respond to that matter on their behalf according to their assessment of the interests of their soon to be independent country.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER:
I would say that if you want another reaction you talk….I have nothing to add to what I';ve already said.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] I gather the aid budget for East Timor is about $150 million over four years.
PRIME MINISTER:
I think it';s about $157 million over a four-year period.
JOURNALIST:
I';m just wondering how adequate do you think that will be given how poor this place is?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you have to take into account all of the other commitments we have made. I saw a figure, I forget the exact figure, but when you take in the cost of the military commitment it';s I think somewhere in the order of $2 billion. It';s an enormous figure. Look I';m not ruling out further aid but at the moment I don';t have more to announce.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister when do you see East Timor as being able to stand on its own two feet without relying on substantial international support?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think it will be quite a number of years and I would take this opportunity of appealing to the international community not to forget East Timor';s needs after midnight tonight. And I';m pleased at the  donor conference, the pledges that have occurred are very good.  But the other thing that';s got to be borne in mind is that the long term viability of the East Timorese economy will depend on this country';s capacity to create a good business environment and to attract foreign investment and I would respectfully urge the leaders of East Timor to adopt policies that attract foreign investment. The experience of small newly independent countries over the last thirty years is that those that adopt policies that encourage investment and recognise that in order to invest companies must be given reasonably stable economic circumstances, predictable taxation and corporate governance regimes, is that I hope East Timor goes down that path because that';s quite important.  If that doesn';t happen all the aid in the world will not be sufficient. 
The reality of poor countries and under-developed countries is that it is not official overseas aid which is the key to their future prosperity. It';s business investment and a more open trading system around the world. Those two things are more important and can bring more prospect of rises in living standards than superficial overseas aid. There';s a focus I know on that but I think it';s a misplaced focus.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible]in light of that would it be better to give the Timorese a better deal  on the oil rather than…
PRIME MINISTER:
We';ve already given them a very good deal on this….
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] saying that';s not the cast…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don';t agree with them.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister the money to be made from Timor Sea oil is largely downstream in processing , will there be any share of that for East Timor ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the share will be what has been negotiated.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] greater downstream.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that is the nature of how these things operate.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard are you pleased with Indonesia';s progress on bringing to justice those responsible for crimes against humanity here in 1999 and before ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think there has been some progress made and I think given all of the circumstances I think it is more than some expected.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister you opened by talking about Australia';s historic connections with East Timor, in that light do you regret the role that you played and that Coalition governments played from ‘76 to ‘83 in recognising Indonesian sovereignty here, in severing radio links with Darwin [inaudible] shipments of independent aid [inaudible]. Do you have any regret about that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well let me put it this way, I think that the policies that have been adopted over the past few years, given the circumstances that arose in those years were the right policies. As to what was done in the past it';s possible to criticise governments of both political persuasions in Australia for what has been done in the past. But for my part I';m pleased to say that over the last number of years we have adopted a policy stance which was right, it was fair, it was just, and it';s something of which I';m very proud.
JOURNALIST:
Hr Howard on the question of prosecutions, you say that some progress is being made, and it';s more than some expected, but isn';t the point that not enough is being done ?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there will be a range of views on that and I have responsibilities as the Australian Prime Minister in relation to what Australia does and I have a capacity to put views in an appropriate way to other countries. It';s not always appropriate to put views other than through the normal diplomatic circles.
JOURNALIST:
[inaudible] behind closed doors.
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I';m simply making the point that there are a lot of considerations that the Indonesian Government has and my responsibility is to balance all of these things and it';s not to run around with dare I say a megaphone.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, will you be inviting the new defence force to annual military exercises….
PRIME MINISTER:
Which new defence force?
JOURNALIST:
The East Timor defence force.
PRIME MINISTER:
Look we haven';t…. I mean I';m not ill-disposed to that at all but I think it';s just a little bit early to be talking about that. That';s something that I think I';ll refer to the Defence Minister.
JOURNALIST:
The reconciliation process in this country [inaudible]. If Timor needs international assistance [inaudible]?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think that';s the sort of thing that we would respond to if we were asked. I';m not going to flag it in advance. It sounds, you know, I';m not going to presume to tell the people of East Timor how to conduct their internal affairs. That is a matter for them.  I';m certainly not going to say other than if an approach were made to us then we would consider it on its merits at the time but no approach has been made and I';m therefore not going to presume to say other than that because it';s really a matter for the people of East Timor.  Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Excellency the Australian Ambassador to China and Your Excellency the Chinese Ambassador to Australia,  Mr Luo Bingsheng, Mr Lewis, ladies and gentlemen. 
I';m delighted to be associated with this ceremony which marks in a formal, and I know a very warm way, a very important strategic partnership between our two countries.  For those who are committed to the further deepening of the already close relationship between Australia and China the HiSmelt project has everything.  It brings two very strong, competent, proven performing companies together, it has the support of the Australian Government and the support of the Chinese Government, and very importantly it is underpinned by a superb new technology which if it becomes fully effective will revolutionise steel making.
It also has two other great qualities. It';s environmentally friendly. It gets a green tick. And it also unites commercially companies from Australia, from Japan, from the United States, and from China and that is a very good commercial as well as political metaphor.  This strategic partnership builds on many commercial links between Australian and Chinese companies over a long number of years which has seen for example the growth of Australian exports to China, over the last five years, almost double.
There is great commitment in Australia to further developing the relationship between our two countries. I come here not only to mark the 30th anniversary of that extension of diplomatic relations, but also very importantly to talk about a new and expanded era of economic partnership and cooperation between our two countries. 
I thank the two companies for their strategic partnership. I congratulate them on their technological skills and their commitment to a high-tech future in the new process that they are developing.  I know that they will use the $125 million Australian taxpayer dollars extremely well. They know how difficult it is to extract even $10 million let alone $125 million from the Australian Government. I congratulate them on doing that as well.
It is a great demonstration of partnership between our two countries. It is an investment in the economic future of the bilateral relationship between Australia and China. There will I hope be many other investments in that bilateral future in the years to come and I hope it will properly be seen as another symbol of the growing and deepening friendship between the people of Australia and the people of China.
And I would now like to propose a toast to the friendship of the people of Australia and the people of China.  May I also thank my interpreter. He did it without a text. 
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Foskett.  To Australia';s Ambassador to China, and the Chinese Ambassador to Australia, Mr Vice Minister, Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen.   For myself and my party we are very pleased indeed to have this opportunity this morning on the first of my full days in China to talk very directly to a group of people who have played a major role in the development of what is now a very strong and soundly based bilateral relationship.  Symbolically the visit also marks the 30th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Australia and China and whilst it is important to look back over the last thirty years, to mark up the achievements, to recognise that we';ve had a capacity as two very different societies to work through differences whilst at the same time sensibly focusing on the things that we have in common, it is also important as we mark the 30th anniversary not to focus in any complacent sense on what has been achieved.  
The opportunities for deepening the relationship are almost limitless and it';s deepening the relationship and broadening it even further which is the major goal for this my second bilateral visit to China.  
The achievements of the last thirty years have been very impressive and nowhere more impressive than in the area of people to people links. Something in the order of 20,000 to 25,000 Chinese students a year go to Australia.  Chinese dialects, after Italian, are more widely spoken than any other language in Australia with the exception of English. And the contribution made by people of ethnic Chinese descent to the development of the modern Australia, and very particularly the major cities, in particular again Sydney, has been quite remarkable. And of course the other growing symbolism which we hope for our part we will translate into practical assistance between Australia and China and more specifically Sydney and Beijing is the fact that Beijing has won the right, which delighted us, to host the Olympic Games in the year 2008.
China is Australia';s third best trading partner. China has taken an increasing number of exports from Australia. Indeed over the last five or six years Australian exports to China have more than doubled and I share Mr Foskett';s enthusiasm for increasing those flows and those patterns of trade between our two countries.  Australia is delighted that China has won accession to the World Trade Organiatoin and the Vice-Minister and I exchanged a few reminiscences regarding that over breakfast. I think the arrangements concluded between Australia and China in relation to the World Trade Organisation are very beneficial to both countries. 
Tourism is another area where the opportunities for expansion are huge.  China is rapidly approaching a situation where it';s fair to estimate that by the year 2010 there could be a million visitors a year to Australia from China and she will easily therefore surpass other sources of tourism to our country.
At a political and diplomatic level I have sought since becoming Prime Minister to focus on those things that China and Australia have in common. No relationship can be free of difficulties and challenges.  There is no flawless bilateral relationship anywhere in the world and I have sought to be realistic both about our differences and also those things that we have in common. Australia and China are different societies. We have different history, different politics, different geography, and different experiences through the centuries. But in the modern world, in the 21st century, there is an increasing complementarity between our two communities and our two countries. 
We are both part of the still very fast growing Asian Pacific region.  We have survived the worst of the economic downturns that have affected other countries. In  fact Australia and China share the distinction of being two countries that have successfully passed through the Asian economic downturn and again some of the difficulties that we experienced last year.
Speaking for Australia I can report to you that we have now had a number of years of very strong economic growth and there';s every reason to believe that Australia will be if not the fastest than very close to being the fastest of the highly developed countries in the world this year. We have implemented a number major economic reforms  most particularly in the area of industrial relations and taxation.  We have paid off large amounts of  government debt through very tough fiscal policies. We have a very competitive and a very open economy and that has enabled us to be flexible enough to deal with the challenges of economic downturns in our region.
Looking at China I see a very impressive record of growth. It is a transformation of an economy of historic proportions. Given China';s size and China';s obvious influence not only in the region but around the world the economic change which is occurring in this country is of quite historic proportions and has huge and I believe beneficial implications not only for the people of this country but also for the region and the world.  Australia seeks to be a partner with China not only in the region but more generally. We want to share your economic growth.  We have contributed in the past in many areas, not least in the area of resources but not only in the area of resources, and we want to continue to contribute.  And now that your country has entered the World Trade Organisation, embrace the opportunities for further growth in your trade and further growth in your economy is very considerable.  
Both Australia and China have a strong and mutually shared interest in the security and the stability of our region.  I have to say that of all of the international meetings I have attended either as Prime Minister or previously none was more important than the meeting I attended of APEC leaders in Shanghai in October of last year.  Coming as it did so soon after the 11th of September the leadership displayed at that meeting by President Jiang Zemin was widely respected and applauded by all of the other leaders and it provided all of us at that meeting, the Chinese President, the President of the United States, the President of Russia, the Prime Minister of Japan, the President of Indonesia and all the other leaders, provided all of us with a forceful reminder of how dependent we are each on the other for the maintenance of stability and security in our region and around the world and the need for the nations of the world to co-operate against common threats such as terrorism.  And I came away from that meeting with a very strong belief not only in the importance of the role to be played by China in the future security architecture of the region and the world, but also the willingness of the leaders of those countries to work together to achieve common goals.  
So I can say to you today as Australian Prime Minister on my third visit to your country in office, and the second bi-lateral visit, that the state of the relationship between our two countries is soundly based.  We have come a long way in the last thirty years but the importance is to focus on how we can expand and make that relationship better and stronger.  And that is where the men and women in this audience are so important.  Because no matter what the size of an economy may be and where it may be in terms of growth and development, the fundamental of the economic growth and wealth of any nation is private sector business activity.  
Two days ago I attended the Independence celebrations for East Timor.  East Timor has fewer than a million people.  It is one of the poorest nations by ordinary economic measurements in the world and it will need a lot of help from a lot of nations and Australia will continue to play a very significant role as we should because of our historic association with that tiny country.  But in my remarks when I was in East Timor I made the point that whilst foreign aid would be important, and whilst programmes of foreign assistance would always be important, in the end the success or failure of the East Timorese economy would rest on the capacity of her people to encourage private business investment and private enterprise.  
And so it is with a country that small as it is with a country as large as China.  What is happening to China now is this historic transformation, the burgeoning role of the private business sector and the potential that that has unleashed and will continue to unleash.  Australia is excited about the prospect of being a partner in that development.  The government I lead brings very strong private enterprise credentials.  We see private enterprise and business as the generator of wealth in our country and we seek, not always perfectly and not always flawlessly, but we seek nonetheless to create conditions in Australia that encourage business growth and business investment.  And in our interface with the leaders of China we will always encourage the growth and the development of that same approach.
Can I congratulate the Chamber for bringing this gathering together.  It gives me an opportunity to speak directly to you about the importance I place on the relationship.  I have never resorted to empty superlatives about bi-lateral relationships.  What matters in a relationship is what you achieve in practical and real terms.  We have achieved a great deal over the last thirty years.  We have achieved a great deal economically.  We have achieved a great deal politically and strategically.  We have an understanding of China and Chinese people in Australia that our country men and women of thirty years ago wouldn';t have dreamt of.  And that is of course overwhelming due to the presence of so many Australian citizens of Chinese descent.  And I believe that in the years ahead we can build on all of that and a very important element will of course be the role played by the business communities of our two nations.  And that is why this breakfast is important to me on this visit and that is why the Chamber is very important, Mr Chairman to the bi-lateral relationship.
I thank all of you for the contribution that you have made.  Keep doing it.  Keep pushing harder to make the relationship even deeper and stronger.  We will certainly do it at a political level and we will work in partnership with you.  And can I thank you Mr Chairman for your kind remarks about the quality of Australia';s representation in this country.  It is important.  No bi-lateral relationship works well unless there is harmony and co-operation and common purpose between the nation';s diplomatic and political representation and its business community.  And I';m delighted to learn that that relationship is in such good state here in Beijing.
I thank you very warmly for your contribution to this very important bi-lateral relationship.  I wish you well.  It';s been a great opportunity to be with you.  Thank you.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
On the very day in December 1915 that a boy soldier – exhausted, feverish and dangerously ill - was evacuated off that perilous beach at Anzac Cove, a few hundred yards away, his commanding General scribbled a brief message. “No words of mine” he wrote “could ever convey to readers in Australia… one half of what their boys have been through, nor is my pen capable of telling them of the courage and determination and cheerfulness of those who have willingly fought for… their country';s sake”.* 
I fear today, 87 long years later, that once again mere words must fail.
In honouring the life of that boy soldier, Alec Campbell, the reflective silence of his countrymen and women and the gentle stirring of half flown flags can speak more eloquently of the respect we feel and the debt we owe to this grand old man and those he came to represent.
But we must try - for Alec';s life, so typical of his generation, was far from ordinary. Within it can be found much of the richness of our nation';s history. Within his boyhood experience of war, can be discovered the bonds of friendship and sacrifice that will forever link the peoples of Australia and New Zealand. Within this one man';s journey, we can chart the story of Australia itself. Within this one life are illustrated the living values that transformed Australia from the hopeful young federation of Alec';s childhood to one of the great developed nations of the modern era.
We should know those values will not pass with his passing, nor indeed when all of Australia';s wars to defend freedom slip gently from memory into history.  
Every Anzac Day, though veteran ranks thin, youthful crowds swell – testament to the desire of a younger generation to draw strength from something which will be forever Australian. Every year, tens of thousands of young Australians visit that once fatal shore, perhaps mindful of a poet';s words of the horrible cost of war that:
“…not one foot of this   Dank sod but drank   Its surfeit of the bloodOf gallant men”.
By those acts, and by the respectful observance of this one man';s death, our nation pledges itself once more to an ethos of selflessness and shared determination, courage and compassion. We make a silent promise that the values for which so many Australians have died and by which others, like Alec Campbell, have lived, will remain secure within our own lives. We signal our understanding that the freedom under which we shelter needs to be nurtured and, at times, defended anew. We think of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force now serving in Afghanistan, East Timor, Bougainville and elsewhere.  
The spirit bequeathed by Alec and his generation though born of war';s adversity, still slumbers within our people, ready to rise and draw new breath when disaster strikes or danger threatens. An essence that continues to define our nation';s identity and the standards by which we judge ourselves.
That the message of Anzac is as relevant to times of peace, as it is to war is apparent from the life we honour here today. Fate chose wisely in selecting Alec Campbell to illustrate this truth. Here was a man devoted to home and family and friends – a beloved husband, adored father of nine, loving grandfather and great-grandfather. On behalf of a grateful nation, I offer them our heartfelt sympathy for their loss. We share your evident pride in a wonderful life.
Here was a modest unassuming man dedicated to hard work, self-reliance and an unending quest for self-improvement. This was a man for whom adventure, challenge and self-fulfilment never lost their appeal. His great love of the sea and love of nature are now well known to us all. Most of all, throughout his life, Alec Campbell was a man committed to the service of others – in his youth on the battlefield, hauling water, step by step, up murderous paths to comrades above. In manhood, within the trade union movement and assisting disabled Australians, many of them veterans of a later, equally terrible war. In old age, although fame was unsought and in many ways unwelcome, shouldering the weight of history imposed upon him.
In all these ways – love, endeavour, challenge and service - Alec Campbell, Gallipoli';s last sentinel, embodied the Anzac spirit that we have come here to honour.
87 years ago, as scores of wounded and sick men were ferried off a crowded beach, General Birdwood continued to write.  His note went on “I shall always regard my time as a comrade of the brave and strong men from Australia and New Zealand as one of the greatest privileges that can be conferred on any man, and of which I shall be prouder to the end of my days than any honour which can be given me”.
Today, our nation says farewell to the last of those brave and strong men. We thank Alec Campbell and we thank his generation for all that they gave to Australia. And we thank God for them. Their sacrifice, their legacy, their values and their spirit will always be with us.
[Ends]
  *Message by Lieutenant General Sir WR Birdwood used as the introduction to ‘The Anzac Book';, published in 1916.


E&amp;OE...
PRIME MINISTER:Well ladies and gentlemen, the Defence Minister and I have called this news conference to announce a number of very significant, indeed the most significant defence appointments for Australia. Before making the announcements in relation to the new appointments, may I take this opportunity of saying a few words about a number of serving officers who will be retiring from the ADF.
First I would like to express, on behalf of the Government and on behalf of the Australian people, our sense of gratitude to Admiral Chris Barrie for the remarkable work he has done over the last four years as Chief of the Defence Force. During that time he has given very high quality military and strategic advice to the Government. His stewardship as ADF has straddled one of the most difficult and important periods in Australia's post World War II history so far as the ADF is concerned. It has covered both the deployment of the INTERFET forces and Australia's leadership role in that to East Timor. It has covered the period of the preparation of the White Paper and importantly also and most recently, it has covered Australia's role in the war against terrorism. If it hadn't been for the advice given to the Government by the ADF and most particularly by Admiral Barrie regarding the state of readiness of Australian forces in 1999 and the decisions taken as a result of that advice, we would not have been able to take the decision we did and to commit the forces we did to the East Timor deployment, which has been so much to the credit of Australia. 
And I want to publicly record my thanks and that of the Government to Admiral Barrie and to all the other people involved in that advice. I also want to thank him for the role that he and his supporting officers play in the preparation of the White Paper, and I would very much like to commend him for that. And also I want to commend him most recently for the role that he played in relation to the war against terror because that has involved the deployment of Australian forces into a very dangerous theatre of military conduct.
I would also like to thank General Des Mueller who served as the Vice Chief of the Defence Force. He has often attended National Security committee meetings and has been very active and forthright in extending his advice to the Government in relation to a wide range of military matters.
And to Vice Admiral Shackleton who served as the Chief of the Navy over the past three years, I would like to thank him for the part he has played in that very important role. It has been a period in which the Navy has had some difficult tasks to undertake on behalf of the Government. They have not been, as you know, without comment and without controversy. I want to personally thank the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy for the very important and difficult work that they discharged on behalf of the nation at the request of the Government, particularly in relation to the role they had in northern waters concerning unauthorised boat arrivals. It was hard work. It was nasty work. And the Navy did it to the highest service standards in the Australian tradition. And I want to thank Admiral Shackleton and the men and women, particularly of the Royal Australian Navy, for that work.
And to those three men, I do wish them well in their future life and I thank them very warmly for the service that they have contributed to firstly their respective services and also more generally in relation to the ADF.
I would like, having said something of those who have served in these very senior positions, I would like to say something of the new appointments. I announce that Lieutenant-General Peter Cosgrove, currently Chief of the Army, will be appointed as Chief of the Defence Force. Lieutenant-General Cosgrove has brought great leadership in his role as Chief of the Army. He is well known for the outstanding role he played in leading the Australian component and also the total component of the INTERFET force which so successfully involved itself in East Timor 1999. He was Australian of the year in 2001 and is widely known and respected within the Australian community. I would like to congratulate Lieutenant General Cosgrove, he will be promoted to the rank of General on taking over the new office and I know that he will bring very great energy and distinction to that role. I'd like to announce the appointment of Rear Admiral Russ Shalders, to the position of Vice Chief of the Defence Force. He's had very considerable experience in a number of strategic areas and I think will bring a very good balance in that role to the work of the soon to be, General Cosgrove, in the position of Chief of the Defence Force. I announce the appointment of Rear Admiral Ritchie, to the position of Chief of the Navy. He's well known, not only in naval but in other circles and he will I think, fill that role with particular distinction and bring very great leadership to it. For General Cosgrove's replacement as Chief of the Army, we have appointed Major General Peter Leahy, who is currently Vice Chief of the Army. Major General Leahy has shouldered already a considerable burden in relation to army affairs in the roles that he's had and particularly in supporting General Cosgrove in that position. The Chief of the Airforce, Air Marshal Angus Houston continues in that role. He is a person who's brought very great direction and leadership to that position in the 12 months in which he's served in his current term of three years, he has the full confidence and support of the good wishes of the Government in continuing that very important leadership role as Chief of the Airforce. Ladies and Gentleman, I think we have a very good, new leadership team. I again thank those who have served Australia so well in these very important positions. In the end, there is always a special role in Australian society for all the men and women of the Australian Defence Force. They ultimately expose themselves to greater danger in the national interest than any of the rest of us, and they continue to deserve in my view, a very special place in our society and I'm delighted at the quality of the people available. I think the new team will be as effective and as distinctive as the team that they are replacing. I wish them well. I'm going to invite Admiral Barry to say a few words and then Lieutenant General Cosgrove and then we'll take some questions. Thank you.
ADMIRAL BARRIE:
Thank you, Prime Minister. This is a terrific day for the Australian Defence Force and from my perspective an important culmination of an agenda which sees me being able to hand on a succession team which will deliver more effectiveness, better leadership and stronger management for the Defence Force in the 21st century. I know the choices have been tough and I know there will be some disappointed people in the ADF that they weren't able to be selected. Nonetheless, this is a very strong team. It's got a good range of skills and capabilities, very strong leadership profile. And so I look forward to the ADF going on and delivering even better results in the future. I'd also just like to take this opportunity to thank all the men and women in the Australian Defence Force and in the Department of Defence for all the support they've given me over four years. When I took on this job in July of 1998, I could not have dreamt of the challenges we would face. And certainly from where I stand, I could not of dealt with those challenges without very strong support from all the people at work inside the organisation. To each and every one of them I say, thank you very much, I will be watching from afar but confident you are going to deliver the goods to the Australian community. Thank you.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL COSGROVE:
Prime Minister, Minister, colleagues, ladies and gentleman. I'd like to say just a few words. First and foremost of course, I'm greatly honoured by my selection of Chief of the Defence Force and very much aware of the great responsibilities that imposes upon the Chief. And I'll be working hard to create around me the sense of teamwork and professionalism that is necessary to discharge that office. I'd like to very warmly congratulate and thank the outgoing team on the tremendous results and performance they produced in an extraordinarily busy time for the ADF and make a pledge that we will continue to look after the ADF in the best possible, professional style for all those many thousands of service men and women we're responsible for, and of course for their nearest and dearest, and for the people. I'd like to say I look forward very much with the team to working for the Minister and the Government and through the Government for the Australian people. And I'd like to congratulate the new team, most warmly. They're a tremendous bunch of people that I happen to know very well indeed. I'm very confident that this leadership team can look after the ADF in the manner that the Australian people will expect. I particularly note with...that I'll have Air Marshal Angus Houston, a close friend and a very professional colleague and leader as part of the team. And finally, I'd say that my detailed thoughts on what my job will entail and any program at work I might set for myself and others I'll naturally be working on now and I'll say more of that after I assume the CDF. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Any questions?
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, given that the... children overboard, and Admiral Barrie is now retiring... take this opportunity to apologise or express any regret that ...political use you made of his evidence before the children overboard inquiry?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't think it's appropriate for me to do that and I don't intend to. I think my views on the role of the Defence Forces were clearly expressed a few moments ago. I think they did wonderful work for Australia in a very difficult operation and I thank them very warmly for that. And that is really all I propose to say on that.
JOURNALIST:
Lieutenant-General Cosgrove, senior military figures have been drawn into political controversy in recent months because of the children overboard affair. I'm wondering, as you take over, how will you seek to shape your relations with Government in the light of that experience?
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL COSGROVE:
Be in no doubt the ADF must always work closely with the Government because after all, through the Government we are serving the people. And I expect that we will work to have a clear and professional and accountable relationship with the Government on everything we do. And I expect that is what every other senior leader and subordinate thinks I must do in relation to the Government. I will be looking forward to working extraordinarily closely with our elected leaders.
JOURNALIST:
Lieutenant-General Cosgrove, how do you propose to repair some of the damage that we heard in testimony last week from the Australian Defence Association that has been done to the relationship between the military and the Government over this issue?
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL COSGROVE:
That is an opinion put by one particular set of people. My observation as I travel through the Army is that folks in the Army are focussed on the job. They know that the Australian people rate them very highly and every time the Government has expressed its opinion about the ADF they have said that we are performing very satisfactorily and deserve some praise. I'm working on that basis.
JOURNALIST:
Lieutenant-General Cosgrove, what do you think of the stand-off in South Asia at the moment. Do you have an opinion on the situation?
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL COSGROVE:
You might want to ask the CDF that.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, there is some evidence at the Estimates Hearings today about the Secretary of your Department, Mr Max Moore-Wilton being in communication with his PNG counterpart on the day that the caretaker period came into operation before the last election, and a suggestion that inducements in the form of general aid and defence aid were offered in relation to PNG taking asylum seekers on Manus Island. What do you say about that, and the timing of those discussions?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I haven't seen the material because I've been at a Party Meeting. As always, I will have a look at it. Prima facie there wouldn't be anything strange about the Secretary of my Department being in touch with his PNG counterpart at any time. The caretaker convention doesn't turn public servants into trappist monks. The caretaker convention means that you shouldn't make any appointments or you shouldn't initiate any inquires or initiate major changes of policy without consultation with the Opposition. The ordinary services and roles of Government don't come to an end during the caretaker convention. I would be extremely surprised if Max Moore-Wilton had done anything that was in any way improper. I have every confidence in him. He is a person of very high calibre and probity. But I will have a look at the evidence as always.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, given your role in the commonwealth at this period, do you have any particular role to play in what's happening between India and Pakistan as members...
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Australia, of course, has a role to play not only as a commonwealth country but also as a close friend of both India and Pakistan. The Foreign Minister has already been very active. He's been in touch with the Pakistan Foreign Minister yesterday. He'll be talking to Jaswant Singh, the Indian Foreign Minister today. I discussed the issue generally with the secretary general of the commonwealth. Of course, as Pakistan is currently suspended from the councils of the commonwealth there is no proximate body to which both of them would be drawn in any commonwealth centred initiative. But we are active and if there is a further role at a Prime Ministerial level at this stage, I'll naturally discharge it. The current efforts of Australia and the United Kingdom and of the United States have been at the foreign minister / secretary of state level. I think you know that the British foreign secretary Jack Straw is in the sub-continent at the moment and I understand that Rick Armatage the Deputy Secretary of State to Colon Powell will be going there next week. So, I don't rule out further initiatives at certain levels on our part. I think what we've done to date is appropriate. It's a very difficult situation, nobody should underestimate the potential for further deterioration, although the current impression is that there has been a slight pull back. But it's an area that's been bedevilled ever since, of course, partition and the circumstances of Kashmir's accession to India at the time of partition, it's been bedevilled by conflict and terrorist activity and there is not much trust between the two countries.
JOURNALIST:
Are there any implications for our people in Afghanistan? If not immediately, perhaps in...
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I'm not advised of any particular implications, I mean obviously one of the factors in the whole equation has been the role played by Pakistan in supporting the war against terrorism and I believe that General Musharraf deserves credit for that. It has not been a very easy role for him and he's done it very well.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, on a non-defence matter.
PRIME MINISTER:
On a non defence matter, yes.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think that Mr Kennedy should be interviewed for the ABC job?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think that is a matter for the board. As you know I have confidence in the board, I have confidence in all members of the board, I think the decision as to who the next Managing Director of the ABC should be in the hands of the board. And I know they will approach that conscientiously and I think that it's really a matter for them to decide how to go about it. I guess the only observation I'd make is that I think you should look as far and as wide as possible when you're making decisions in relation to these things and the quality of people available, all of the people should be examined but exactly how you go about that...
JOURNALIST:
inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER:
Beg your pardon?
JOURNALIST:
inaudible).
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Michelle you will sort of put any interpretation you like on it. Be my guest.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think it's a good idea to continue political appointments to the ABC?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we haven't made any political appointments Dennis, we've appointed people of merit. I mean if you look at them, are you suggesting that Maurice Newman was a political appointment?
JOURNALIST:
No, but there have been political appointments to the board?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don't think we appointed any former Liberal Premiers of States. 
JOURNALIST:
The point I make is that they are...
PRIME MINISTER:
Look the present system is that the Government appoints the board and the board appoints the Managing Director. My concerns about the ABC have been expressed before and they relate to the balance of programmes. I mean if I can, seeing you've invited me to, I actually think the model ABC current affairs programme is the Insiders. I think the Insiders is very balanced and I think it's a wonderful programme and it has some outstanding personalities appearing on it.
JOURNALIST:
We'll just go back to a defence matter, Admiral Barrie, did the Government at any stage seek to extend your term, this time? And do you have any regrets as you step off the stage?
BARRIE:
Well I can't answer the question about the Government seeking to extend my term. All I'll say Ian, is when I took on this job in 1998 I had a four year perspective, it is my belief that you need that sort of period of time in leadership at the top. You'll be aware that my initial contract was for two years and it was extended for another two years. I think I can leave the ADF now very pleased with the outcomes, I mean it's a very different Defence Force that I leave after four years. It's a very busy Defence Force, the operational tempo is something we haven't seen since I'd say the second war. I think the leadership of the ADF is in very good hands, I think that's just testimony for the team that's going to take on this job now. So for those reasons, and I think also for the way the community now sees it Defence Force, I leave after four years feeling very pleased about the job that has been done. But that's not to underestimate any of the challenges that lie ahead because those pressures are going to be with us, I think, for a long time yet.
JOURNALIST:
Are you concerned at all that your role in the children overboard affair may overshadow some of your achievements as CDF?
BARRIE:
I think that's always a very difficult question to answer in the terms of the way others might see it. But the way I see it is, no I don't. I think it's always been, I think an important objective of any leader in the CDF or any other senior position in the ADF to play a straight bat and that's what I did.
JOURNALIST:
Admiral, are you confident that your role in the children overboard affair, and other members of the ADF's leadership who were embroiled in it, played no part in the appointments of the new team? Are you relaxed about that?
BARRIE:
I'm very relaxed about it. This is a fantastic team.
JOURNALIST:
Admiral Barrie, can I just ask you on your parting thoughts on Afghanistan given there's going to be a third rotation of troops there, our people in the middle of the year and the guerilla nature that it seems to have become over there. Would it be fair to say we could be stuck there for a long time with no clear exit strategy?
BARRIE:
Well I think Afghanistan is still a very difficult problem. The Minister and I were in Afghanistan not that long ago. I think we've got to be very sensitive to becoming complacent early on that we've solved the problem. And I see plenty of evidence that there's still a lot of work to be done in Afghanistan, and I think the nature of that work may change as time goes on and there'll be issues of humanitarian support and work, there'll be issues of governance, the Loya Jirga and the outcomes of those sorts of processes. So I think there will be a lot of work to be done, whether or not that's work for Australians and whether that's work for the ADF, I think they're the decisions that'll be made by the Government in due course.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you.
[ends]
Top


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Peter. To Senator Rod Kemp, Simon Crean the Leader of the Opposition, Senator Kate Lundy, ladies and gentlemen, and most particularly the athletes that will represent Australia at the Commonwealth Games in Manchester in July.
It has been correctly said that nothing quite matches sport in helping to define the Australian character or to help dissolve differences that Australians might otherwise have over other issues. Nothing gets Australians more united in excitement and enthusiasm than a great sporting contest, and particularly a great sporting contest which pits the young men and women of our country against the athletes of other nations.
All of us have memories and recollections of great international sporting events, whether they are Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games, Test Cricket matches, Rugby tests or whatever the situation might be. Sport is a great unifier. It is a great identifier of all the best characteristics of the Australian community.
And I';m delighted on behalf of the Government to be here this morning to repeat the very strong commitment of the Australian Government to the Institute of Sport, to say to the young men and women here who will be representing Australia at the Commonwealth Games in Manchester, a team of some 400, which is about 100 more than the very large team that went to Kuala Lumpur, that you go there with our very good wishes. We will follow with I think meticulous application all of your participation in all of the events. We will get very absorbed in the outcome of all of the events in which you participate. And we will have some quiet satisfaction in knowing that whatever the outcome of individual events, Australian men and women representing our country will as always do their best and will as always be wonderful ambassadors for the Australian nation abroad.
Peter Bartels has been kind enough to speak of the financial support that the Government has given to the Institute of Sport. I';ve always regarded that as a very worthwhile investment in the long-term future of this country because part of the pride of Australia is in our sporting success. And you can only hope to achieve sporting success in the modern world if it is gone about in the way that we have gone about it here in Australia over the last 20 years. And the AIS has been quite integral to what we have achieved.
Peter is right. The Olympic Games are the pinnacle of international sporting competition. But the Commonwealth Games, the "Friendly Games" as they';re called, have always had a special place in the hearts of Australian sports men and women, and it will be no exception at Manchester. I wish the team well.
Can I announce that the Government has decided to contribute an additional $500,000 to the Commonwealth Games Association in order to defray the cost of sending the team to Manchester. I believe the team will not only be very well supported. It will perform extremely well. I know it will be keen to do even better than our team did at Kuala Lumpur and in striving to achieve that goal, you will have the affection and the support and the enthusiasm of millions of your fellow Australians.
Thank you.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Ella, to Mike Potter, to my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, and particularly to Joe Hockey the Minister for Tourism and Small Business.  Ian has had to return to the Parliament, one of the few privileges of being Prime Minister is that you have a permanent pair with the Opposition  Leader and that means you can come and address things like this, although I have known occasions when pairs have been cancelled but that';s by other less responsible Oppositions than I hope the one we have at the present time.
Now, can I say first and foremost how important it is that the Government be represented at a gathering like this at the highest level because all of my political life, as Ella indicated, I';ve had a very strong commitment to the small business community of Australia.  And I regard the role of small business in the growth and development and underlying strength of the Australian economy as absolutely irreplaceable and quite fundamental.  And you can plot the surges and the slow downs in the Australian economy over the years according to the strength and vitality of the small business community.
It is important, not only as a generator of wealth, it';s also very important as an employer of people, it';s also very important as an innovator and it';s very important in, I believe, maintaining the fundamental vitality of our economy.  Because the risks are really taken at a small business level, the chances are taken, the experiments are made, and new techniques and new attitudes are embraced at a small business level that sometimes don';t occur in larger, more conservative organisations.
There';s little doubt that over the last year the Australian economy has performed better than many of us expected.  There';s also little doubt that as you go around the world the Australian economy is outperforming those of most other Western developed societies.  And it';s fair to say that over the last few years we';ve had a rate of growth that has impressed the rest of the world and on occasions surprised all of us here in Australia.  And I want as Prime Minister to express my thanks to the men and women who run small business in Australia, and Ella is absolutely right, the growing proportion of women in small business is one of the major features of the growth of the small business sector over the last 10 years.  She';s absolutely right in relation to that.
I do want to thank those men and women for the contribution that they have made to Australia';s economic strength and Australia';s economic recovery.  I also want to thank the small business organisations, and particularly COSBOA, for the way in which you have represented the interests of small business to the Government and to the public service here in Canberra. It';s not always easy, you will have disagreements, you will have periods of anger, you';ll have periods of feeling that you';re not being listened to, you';ll have feelings of not being able to penetrate the impenetrable, a wall of indifference some people have even said, of ministers in the bureaucracy. I hope that';s only been a passing phase because I can say on behalf of the Government we have tried, and I know those who advise us in the public service, in the tax office and elsewhere, have also tried very hard over the last year to listen to your concerns in a number of areas.  And I want to touch on a few of those things and also a few issues that I know are very important to small business people into the future.
Can I reiterate a couple of basic objectives of the government in areas that I know are very important to small business. We';ve had a lot of industrial relations reform over the last six years, but we need more.  I regard what we have done in the area of workplace relations as being essentially work in progress, we';ve made a lot of progress but we still have a distance to go.  And I want to assure all of you that we will not weaken or tire in our efforts to secure the passage through the Senate of further reforms of the unfair dismissal laws.  They remain to me one of the great blots on the escutcheon of small business.  I hold strongly to the belief that if we could get rid of the restrictions we';re trying to get rid of we would see more jobs generated in the small business community.  There is no reason, according to our current advice and according to current economic indicators, there is no reason why unemployment in Australia can';t fall to a figure approaching six per cent by the end of this year. If we could get those unfair dismissal changes through the Senate, you could go as close as possible in delivering a guarantee that you could get unemployment below six per cent, and for the first time in over 20 years have a five in front of the unemployment figure in this country.  And I want to say to all of you we will continue to push very hard on that.  If the legislation is rejected again in the Senate, we';re going to put it up again and we';re going to keep pushing and trying and urging you to talk to people who are obstructing it in other political parties because this is something which is fundamental to the flexibility of small business needs and it';s also very important, very important indeed ladies and gentlemen, to the prospects of achieving further falls in unemployment in Australia.  Because you all know that the great capacity for making further gains on the unemployment front is to give greater flexibility to small business operations around Australia.
Now I know that there has been very properly debate as a result of the release of the human rights commission paper on maternity leave, there has been debate on that issue.  I think it is a debate this community should have, I believe we need a very broad debate on issues of population growth, we need broad debate on issues related to the fertility rate in this country because all of them bear very heavily on the economic future of this country and they bear very heavily on our capacity, with an ageing population, to fund the public services that that ageing population is going to need.  And a legitimate part of that debate is asking ourselves as a community whether we have the right range of policies which provide the maximum number of choices to men and women with young children. And particularly to those who are having their first, second, third children to amass the right set of policies in order to give them the maximum number of choices.  And one of those issues is clearly the issue of maternity leave.  And I also want to say to you that I will not support any policy in relation to maternity leave that imposes an additional burden on the small business community.  I want to make that very clear and I say that as somebody who is not resistant to an examination of all of the options that are involved in this area and I';m not resistant in any way to further change, but it shouldn';t be a change at the expense of the small business sector.  The small business sector already carries a large number of burdens and imposts, which are part of overall national policy.  And I don';t believe that there should be additional burdens and imposts as a consequence of changes that might be made in this area.  And in any event I think if Governments were to move unwisely in implementing a policy in this area, which involved an additional burden on small business, so far from that improving the opportunities for women in the workforce, I think it could well work in the opposite direction and I think that is important that we don';t make that mistake.
The other issue that I want to touch upon very briefly is that of public liability insurance and insurance matters generally.  People in my position should always be very careful of sort of over dramatising things and indulging in too much rhetoric because it';s easy to talk about a crisis, it';s easy to talk as though Armageddon is around the corner, and it';s easy to needlessly scare people and in the end if your rhetoric has no common sense, or to use an expressions that a lot of politicians properly use, it doesn';t pass the pub test, then I think you can lose your impact and you can lose a lot of credibility. But we do have a very serious problem in this country in relation to insurance generally.  Government';s at both levels have obligations and I';m certainly not going to spend my time tonight attacking the state governments or attacking local government, what I want to say tonight is that each level of government has a responsibility to try and respond to some of the difficulties that are there. It may not have been of the government';s creation, either state or federal, but it is a national problem and we each have responsibilities.  
I think we need, as a community, to change many of our attitudes towards what we expect when misadventure strikes us.  I think we have to understand that as a community we are running the danger of going down the American path of becoming too litigious.  Six years ago when we had the common sense and gumption to introduce uniform national gun laws in the wake of the Port Arthur disaster I said that I was determined that Australia would not go down the American path in relation to gun control. I want to say in relation to the challenge of public liability insurance I hope all of us will work hard not to go down the American path so far as the easy resort to litigation is concerned.  Because I think it will involve very considerable costs in the long term.
Now a number of things are needed.  We do need to reform the law of negligence in this country.  And I welcome the fact that most of the states are starting to move in that direction.  Now we can argue about whether you should do it here and there or whether every single thing they';re doing is in the right direction, but there';s no point in my trying to analyse that tonight.  And that is ultimately something that has to be dealt with at a state parliamentary and a state legislative level. But we are starting to move in the right direction.  I would like us to go a little further.  I think as well as reforming the law of negligence it may well be that we';ve reached a stage in the Australian experience now that we have to look at certain activities and in effect quarantine them all together from concepts of the law of negligence. The idea that a local sporting or charitable activity should be something where the law of negligence automatically applies, the law of negligence in its present form automatically applies, I think that is a notion that we should question.  I think most Australians would take the view that you go to a local football match to watch your children play as part of the local soccer or Australian Rules or rugby league or rugby union, I';ll cover all of them, club and if something happens there, unless a person has behaved in a malicious or totally reckless fashion the idea that you should in effect expect to be compensated or covered and thereby the organisation staging the event required to take out public liability insurance, I think that is a notion that really we have to start to question. Because I don';t think we can any longer afford a situation in this country where those  sorts of events run the risk of being abandoned or only staged in circumstances that place an unfair burden on people who participate in them, I mean if we';re going to maintain that sort of situation I think we';re going to have a lot fewer of those events and we';re going to have a situation where the quality and the nature of our lives are fundamentally altered.  We boast about the fact that we are one of the great volunteer societies in the world.  Now if we are to maintain the volunteer tradition in Australia we have to fundamentally rethink the attitude we have towards liability and the application of the law of negligence in this country.  And I hope that in considering the various changes that they are making, I hope that the state governments of Australia, and I welcome in a very positive way the measures they';ve already taken and we';ll continue to work with them in a constructive fashion.
The Federal Government of course has very little legislative writ as far as the law of negligence is concerned, very little.  We can make speeches, we can give leadership, we can express views, we can encourage, but in the end the fundamental decisions have got to be made by state governments because they control and can alter the law of negligence in this country.  But we do have a direct role in a number of areas, particularly medical indemnity insurance, which although is not generically relevant to the small business sector it is obviously very important to all of you as individuals and it';s very important to the medical profession and it';s quite important to the legal profession.  And I do think that the steps that are being taken there which involve the Federal Government as well as the medical profession and the states, we are starting to come to grips with that issue and the Federal Government will be having a little more to say on that within the next week or so. But we have in relation to UMP, we have stabilised the situation, we have provided a short term guarantee which has now been accepted by the courts and we are working with interested parties, including the provisional liquidator and the Australian Medical Association in order to find a medium and longer term solution to that particular issue.  
It does involve a number of important social challenges and one of those of course is the need to maintain specialist services from doctors in country Australia. And the notion that specialities such as obstetrics can become unprocurable in many country areas of Australia because of the prohibitively high premiums is something that we can';t as a society simply accept. But once again we have a choice, we can';t have it both ways.  We can';t have a right to sue a doctor at the drop of a hat and there being no limit on the verdict that might be obtained under a very loose and permissive law of negligence and yet complain when the obstetrician is not available when you need him or her because the insurance premium for that speciality is only procurable at a prohibitively high level.  And that is the kind of challenge that is involved but as with all of these things people have to make choices.  You can';t have your cake and eat it to use that old cliche in relation to many of these issues and what I guess I';d like to say more than anything about this particular matter tonight is that it';s one of those issues where some fundamental community rethinking has to take place. It';s not just a question of the Government changing a few laws and life going on as it has been before.  I think it is a case where people to have to say well because the whole cost structure of insurance has altered and because the pressures on the insurance industry, on insurance premiums have so increased over the last few years, and the resort to litigation is a big part of it, the propensity of people to sue is a very big part of it but the world wide effects of events such as the terrorist attack in September of last year and other insurance calamities have also come together to create the sort of difficulties that we now face.  
But that is an issue that we as a community have got to face, I have responsibility as Prime Minister, State Governments have responsibilities, the medical profession, the legal profession, the small business sector generally, we all have responsibilities and as a community we do really have to tackle it in a very aggressive and fundamental way in order to bring about a satisfactory outcome.
Ladies and gentlemen the last thing I want to say to you tonight is whenever I address a gathering of men and women in small business I';m reminded of what the Government';s ultimate responsibility is.  And the Government';s ultimately responsibility is of course to create the right economic climate and I think we have a good economic climate in Australia at the present time.  It';s not perfect, I hope the Government has contributed in its own way to some of those good conditions.  You have certainly played a major role.  We do have low inflation, we have very low interest rates, we have a strong external trade sector, we don';t have a low dollar, we have a super-competitive exchange rate and that is making a very very significant contribution.  And Ian mentioned our visitors from China.  I was in China last week and I did have one or two things to say about natural gas, it';s a fairly important commodity and the opportunities there for this country economically are enormous. Our exports to China have doubled over the last five years, which is a very impressive figure. China is now our third or fourth best trading partner.  We are a more valuable trade ally to China than is Russia and increasingly as you move around the major cities of China you find the presence not only of large Australian corporations but also of many small businesses.  China has 1.3 billion people and it has a growing middle class which has all of the purchasing power and capacity of the great bulk of the Australian people and in sheer mathematical terms you don';t need a huge middle class in a country as large as that to have an enormous potential purchasing pool for the products and the services of this country.
Now I speak to you in a sense therefore of pretty considerable optimism and hope about the future of the Australian economy.  We have stared down two external economic challenges.  The Asian downturn of 1997 and then the downturn that afflicted the United States and much of Europe last year.  Now it';s been through a combination of good policy, of Australian adaptiveness and just a combination of circumstances that have all come together to make it possible for us to achieve all of that.  But we are I think as a nation experiencing a sense of self belief, a sense of optimism and a sense of hope about the future.  That';s not a call to smugness or complacency and it';s not the declaration of somebody who believes for a moment that everything in the garden is rosy.  But it is the declaration and belief of somebody who believes very firmly that because we have worked together over a number of years, and I have never been reluctant at gatherings like this or elsewhere to give proper credit to some of the decisions taken by former governments in this country that have made a contribution to our economic competitiveness because you';ve got to take a longer view of these things and I think we are in a situation where people are entitled to feel a sense of stability, of security and optimism about the future.  We have those good economic indicators and I hope that all of you continue to work and derive the benefit from them.
So ladies and gentlemen thank you very very much for inviting me to come along tonight.  I';m sorry that in the acknowledgements I made earlier I didn';t acknowledge my colleague Rob McClelland, one of the Shadow Ministers for Industrial Relations and a number of other matters, Attorney General for the Opposition. The reason why I always make particular point of acknowledging him is because we support the same football club in Sydney and we had a good result at the weekend and we';re both feeling pretty pleased about it and it was a long time coming and we';re delighted about it.
But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very very much for having me tonight, thank you for what you';ve done for Australia over the last year. I wish you well and I can promise you that we will continue to maintain a very close association with your sector, we';ll continue to listen to you because we believe in you and we think you are very important to Australia';s future.
Thank you.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...........  
Dr Thaksin, the Prime Minister of Thailand; your Ministers; your Excellencies; ladies and gentlemen.  
I am delighted to welcome you, Mr Prime Minister, and your party and so many others who've come here today to honour a very important bilateral relationship and that is the relationship between Australia and Thailand.  It's a relationship that we tend instinctively to think of in its contemporary terms but, indeed, it's quite an old relationship.  Perhaps some Australians and certainly many of our Thai guests would not be aware, for example, that the most famous, indeed, iconic racehorse in Australian history, in folklore, Phar Lap, was in fact named after, or using the Thai word for lightening, and it derives from the fact that the owner of Phar Lap had a part interest in a tin mine in southern Thailand.  More recently, of course, Australians of World War II generations remember the circumstances, some of them of their incarceration in Thailand during World War II, not at the hands of the Thai people but they do remember, in particular, the kindness that many people from that country were able to extend to them.
So, Prime Minister, I welcome you here today as the honoured guest of a country which is very proud of its association with your country.  And in celebrating that association we remark on the important people-to-people links, not only but very particularly, in the area of education.  Thailand now has the situation where it sends more of its students to Australia for their education than any other foreign country and Australia has just surpassed the United States as the primary destination of Thai students abroad.  And as part of our discussion today we have agreed to explore ways of further deepening the education links between our two nations.  The Thai community is a respected and integral part of the culturally diverse, modern Australia and in so many different ways the influence of that community is felt and enjoyed by the broader Australian community.
I do particularly want to thank you, Mr Prime Minister, in your capacity as the current Prime Minister of Thailand for the wonderful contribution that your country made at a crucial stage to the INTERFET deployment in East Timor in 1999.  That involvement gave to that deployment an ASEAN texture which was very important.  And the speedy response of your predecessor and the fact that the current and one previous force commander of the current United Nations' forces come from Thailand is a source of very considerable pride and pleasure to Australia, and it's a very contemporary example of our two nations working together to achieve a positive outcome.  And since then, of course, the relationship between our countries has, of course, continued to improve.  Our bilateral trade is worth about $5 billion a year and Australia was ready in 1997 to provide financial assistance as part of the IMF intervention package to assist Thailand at the height of the Asian economic downturn. 
But those are things that we have done in the past together.  What we have agreed upon today relates very much to the future.  And in our discussions this morning, which have involved not only myself and the Prime Minister but also senior ministers on both sides, we have agreed on a number of measures that will further intensify the relationship.  We have agreed to negotiate a closer economic understanding.  We want to develop something akin to, if we can, the CER arrangements that exist between Australia and New Zealand.  Those negotiations will not be easy.  I've described it in our discussions as free trade plus.  It's a question of seeing where we can reach agreement and giving effect to those agreements was moving on to other areas that may prove to be more difficult.  But our determination to negotiate that CER understanding or agreement is an example of our desire to build closer relationships between our two societies.
We've also agreed to commence negotiating a memorandum of understanding on terrorism, similar to the memorandum of understanding that Australia has negotiated with Indonesia and other countries in the region.  And as a companion to that we will seek ways of further enhancing the already close and effective law enforcement relationship between Australia and Thailand.
As an important initiative to increase the exchanges between our two countries amongst young people we have agreed to commence discussions on the development of working holiday visa arrangements between Australia and Thailand.  Once again, the negotiations will not be easy and there will need to be checks and balances and safeguards on both sides but just as it is in the case of our resolve on the CER understanding this is yet another intention of ours to intensify the relationship, particularly between the young people of our two societies.
And finally and very importantly, given the ongoing concern that all Australians have about the impact of the drug traffic on young Australians - and I know that is a concern that is shared by the Government of Thailand - we have agreed to explore with Thailand some Australian involvement in some crop substitution programmes in Burma.  Again, it will not be easy to reach an understanding and there will need to be rigour applied to ensure that the commitments achieve the goals that are sought but the concept is not only entirely proper, it's very laudable because anything that governments can do to reduce the devastating and annihilating effect of the drug traffic on the young of our societies and, indeed, on the young of all societies is something that I know will have the support of all of the Australian people.
So, Mr Prime Minister, this is the first visit to Australia by a Thai Prime Minister since 1989 and you are very particularly welcome.  Australians like the people of Thailand, they like Thailand.  They go in their hundreds of thousands to Thailand for holidays and I know that the tourist exchange between both of our countries will only increase over the years ahead.  We've had a friendly relationship over many years built on mutual respect.  We feel easy and relaxed in the company of the people of Thailand.  It is a relationship that I believe we all feel very comfortable and positive about.  Your visit has given it a new focus and a new emphasis and I believe that the arrangements that we have come to today represent a road map for a further enhancement of a relationship which is already strong and true and one to which my Government and I know all of the people of Australia attach enormous importance.
Thank you very much for honouring us with your presence, you are very welcome, as are your Ministers and I invite the Leader of the Opposition to support my remarks.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Ian, Dr Nelson, ladies and gentlemen.  One of the features of the Backing Australia';s Ability programme was a commitment to establish some world class centres of excellence and already announcements have been made in relation to information technology and today I';m really delighted to be associated with the announcement of the centre that will establish and run the Biotechnology Centre of Excellence.  And I can announce today, ladies and gentlemen, that the successful applicant to establish and operate Australia';s Biotechnology Centre of Excellence is the Centre for Stem Cells and Tissue Repair.
This centre has been chosen from an outstanding field and will receive $43.55 million over the next four years.  Under Professor Alan Trounson';s leadership the centre for stem cells and tissue repair will provide the vehicle for Australia to compete in the rapidly growing area of tissue regeneration and cell therapies.  A key area of research will be the potential application of both adult and embryonic stem cells in the treatment of diabetes, vascular, bone and nerve damage, kidney disease and diseases of the blood and the skin.  The centre will be truly national with its headquarters in Victoria and nodes in South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory, providing a valuable boost to the Australian biotechnology industry.  Partners in the centre include the Monash Institute of Reproduction and Development, the Universities of Adelaide, Melbourne, Queensland, New South Wales and the ANU, and the Victor Chang Cardio Vascular Research Institute.  I hope that the centre will attract the world';s best researchers to Australia, especially many of our best and brightest who are currently working overseas.
Biotechnology as we know from debates of recent months is a sensitive area of research and all government funded research including the centre of excellence will be required to comply with the legislation that regulates biotechnology. This includes regulations arising from the recent decisions taken by COAG on the 4th of April 2002.  The Government will ensure that scientific breakthroughs are guided by the community';s ethical considerations.
I';d like to thank the advisory panel of prominent Australian scientists and researchers, and its chairman Dr Peter Johnson, who oversaw the rigorous biotechnology centre of excellence research process.  I would also like to thank the offices of Biotechnology Australia and the Australian Research Council and my ministerial colleagues on the biotechnology ministerial council for their efforts in bringing this initiative to fruition.  
This is a very exciting day for Australian research, it really is. One of the goals of Backing Australia';s Ability was to put Australia';s name up in lights in two specific areas by establishing centres of excellence. You have to specialise, you have to carve out some organisations and units that are better than any others and you';ve got to give them the financial support to achieve their goals.  We had a rigorous, and I believe fair, selection process.  Inevitably some are disappointed.  I think the choices made in both cases, that is in relation to information technology and also in biotechnology, I think the choices have been above reproach, have been quite outstanding and I think there';ll be great excitement in the Australian research community because the potential, particularly in the area of biotechnology and stem cell research, is quite literally unlimited.  And I want as Prime Minister, I want Australia to be up there with more than a reasonable slice of the action and I think today';s announcement, and I know the work that Professor Trounson and his team will commit to this enterprise over the years ahead is going to deliver that.
So I';d like to congratulate Professor Trounson, I want to thank Dr Johnson and everybody else for the work they';ve put into and I wish them well, it';s a great day for Australian research.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well Mr Chairman, can I first of all thank the Vice President for the clarity of his message, the leadership that his government and his administration has given to the world, particularly over the last nine months, and in this your nation';s capital, Mr Vice President, can I say I know on behalf of everybody here that there is a strong sense of commitment and support to the administration and to the people of the United States. And there is a great sense of admiration regarding President Bush and you yourself in the leadership that you have given to the world';s response to the monstrosity of the 11th September last year. You have our strong support and the deep commitment of like-minded countries and governments all around the world.
   [Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
William thank you for that very generous introduction, and can I say how honoured I am to have been elected Chairman of this organisation and I will do my level best to bring the same sense of duty and application to that job as William has over past years.
I thought what I would try and do, recognising as one must that no two countries, no two parties even broadly on the same side of the divide, are similar, to share a few thoughts with you based on my own experience as Leader of the Liberal Party in a couple of broken periods in the Australian political scene.
Perhaps I should, I hope not sounding in any way like a university lecturer which I could never be or a school teacher, perhaps I should just explain very briefly the Australian political structure for those who may not understand it as well as others. Australia is a federation. Our Constitution is very rigid. It is a remarkable amalgam of British and American constitutional practice. Like the American Constitution, it gives particular powers to the central Government with the residue left to the States. We are of course entirely based on the British parliamentary system of responsible Government where power resides with a Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Australia is a quite conservative country when it comes to changes of Government. I regard that now as a wholly noble trait. There was a time of course when I wished the disposition was otherwise. We';ve had five changes of Government since World War II. We had a very long period of centre right Government between 1949 and 1972. And for 16 of that 23 years, one person was Prime Minister of Australia, Sir Robert Menzies, who was in fact the founder of the Liberal Party of Australia. I assume of course that you all understand that Liberal in Australia doesn';t mean what liberal means in North America. We govern in Coalition with a smaller centre right and conservative party, the National Party, whose members are drawn entirely from rural areas of Australia. Although I should remind you immediately that the Liberal Party actually holds more rural seats than does the National Party. But we have governed very closely in Coalition over that period of time.
We had a very long period of Labor Party Government between 1983 and 1996 when the Prime Ministers were successively Bob Hawke and Paul Keating. And it was in its early years politically a very successful combination. That is just a little bit of background to our country. We have, unlike just about every other country in the world, we have compulsory preferential voting which of course makes for very different outcomes. We have a House of Representatives and we have a Senate. The Senate like the American Senate is elected with an equal number from each State but the powers, the Constitutional powers of the Senate, are effectively co-extensive with those of the House of Representatives. And that was demonstrated fairly dramatically in 1975 when the Senate refused supply and it led to the dismissal of the then Prime Minister and the election of Malcolm Fraser as Liberal Prime Minister. Well that is just sort of a little bit of background for those who may not have been as familiar with the Australian political system.
William was kind enough to tell you that we have had three electoral victories in a row. There is no particular magic formula to that. Like all political successes, it has many fathers. But there are some lessons that I would like to share with you. Tip O';Neill  famously said that all politics was local and that is right. And that is still very much the case. Could I add also, perhaps not as famously, but I think it is very relevant to all of us… it has certainly been very relevant to the Liberal Party in Australia, is that as well as all politics being local, all politics now is less tribal than it used to be. And that I think has been the most significant change that I have witnessed in the 29 years that I have been a Member of Parliament in Australia. 
When I first joined the Liberal Party in the late 1950s and was active in campaigns in the early 60s, I used to think the Australian electorate divided on a sort of 40, 40, 20 basis – 40% always voted Labor, 40% always voted Liberal and we had 20% that would move around in the middle. I now have the sense that we divide on a sort of 30, 30, 40 basis. That the number of committed people on both sides of politics now is less. I think that is due to the intensely aspirational character of Australian society. Class has never meant a lot in Australia. It means even less now than it would have in the 1950s and the 1960s.
One of the ingredients of any political party';s success of course is to engage in the process of base broadening. You start with a core constituency and you build on it. And you don';t accept that any constituency is unreachable. We certainly didn';t, particularly in the last election campaign. I think the last election campaign we probably eroded in many respects in some parts of Australia more of the traditional blue collar vote that went to the Labor Party historically than we had in 1996. 
Clearly economic competence and the strength of a nation';s economy is an enormous weapon in the hands of an incumbent Government. Australia has experienced over the last few years economic growth averaging about four plus percent. We were able through a combination of a very flexible exchange rate and the cumulative impact of other economic reforms, we have been able to avoid the effects of the Asian economic downturn in 1997. And that was one of the very strong assets that we had. 
On the other side of the coin, we faced an Opposition that I think made a mistake that I hope… I didn';t mind them making the mistake, but I hope you here who are Oppositions don';t make that mistake, and that is to imagine that you don';t have any need to define what you stand for while you are in Opposition. There used to be an adage in Australian politics, there still is but I think it is less relevant now than it used to be and I guess it is still the case in other countries, and that is that Oppositions don';t win elections, Governments lose them. Now I think there is still a lot of truth in that because if you have been in power for a long time and you lose credibility and the economy goes bad on you and you have a few internal tensions, and those three things all seem to come together and one feeds on the other or the one causes the other, then inevitably you are likely if you have got a half-decent Opposition to be voted out.
But I think it is precisely because politics now is less tribal that people are looking for a sharper definition of what the alternative Government stands for. When I was a young activist in politics, I used to meet people who would say I think the Liberal Party is doing an atrocious job, but I could never vote Labor because my father would turn in his grave if I voted Labor. I don';t hear that very much any more. People are far more willing, particularly the young, to move around. Far more willing. I think that is a phenomenon that probably affects all countries. The under 25s are in many respects in Australia more conservative than people in the age bracket of 30 to 45 or 30 to 50. They are not joiners. Young people don';t join organisations as much now as they used to. I think that is a phenomenon that is probably common in all of our experiences. They have more options and you have to find different ways of communicating with them and different ways of reaching them. They are very aspirational. They are very material. But they are not indifferent to the value system of the nation. I think it is a mistake to assume that young people are just interested in material comforts. I think they are interested in any sense of direction that a political party or a political leader can give them.
Now I would modestly encourage all of you who are in Opposition not to make the error of assuming that you just have to wait until the Government implodes. Apart from anything else, it might not. And you might face many more long years in Opposition.
The Australian experience with the media is instructive. Like all democratic nations I guess, Australia is no different in the sense that there is a greater preponderance of people in the media of a… how should I put it mildly and gently and diplomatically… of a gentle centre left disposition. Talk back radio is tremendously important in Australia. Enormously important. It has played a greater role in shaping and determining the outcome of elections over the last few years than perhaps has been the case with other sections of the media. I was having a discussion with Ian Duncan Smith earlier and I said to him that radio in Australia I found to be the iron lung of Opposition. We would always get a run. There is so much of it. And you couldn';t devour enough of it. And whether that is the same in all of your countries, you individually will know. 
But I think having said all of those things and having described this process of the detribalisation of politics which has had a profound effect on the way the Liberal Party has campaigned and the way we have projected ourselves. And it is also true to say that some of the more ageless messages of political campaigning are still relevant. You do need to convey a simple essence to the electorate of what you believe in and what you stand for. And precisely because we live in a society where there are so many competing communications messages, it is very important. You only almost have an instant on any given issue to get a message across. And with a busy community, it is extremely difficult for you to establish a brand identification if you don';t convey very simple and very direct messages. 
So dragging all of that together, I don';t pretend to have any blinding insights that probaby from the experience of all of you would not be available. I have been fortunate. I have had a great party organisation. It is a very ‘in the beltway'; observation to make but I';ll make it to a gathering like this because you understand it very well. You have to have a very close relationship between the Parliamentary section of your party, to use the language of the Westminster system, and the party organisation. If there is any competition between the two of them, you are dead. If they work closely together and the one recognises the role of the other and they reinforce each other in a respectful fashion, then your prospects of victory are very good.
Party discipline and party unity is always important. I think it goes without saying that if you run an ill disciplined show in Government or Opposition, you lose the respect of the public. If you run a disciplined show and you have complete cohesion and complete party unity and you have reciprocal loyalty… leaders are entitled to receive loyalty, but leaders owe the people they lead reciprocal loyalty as well. When your colleagues get into trouble, if you are the leader you have an obligation to stick up for them, not to shed them and abandon them. And I have certainly found over the years that that has sort of worked and worked effectively. Because in the end the public does make a judgement on the totality. They may say, well in the case of Australia, the Liberal Party is John Howard. But they don';t… they say that, but they also look at the total performance. And if you look as though you are a purposeful team, then I think the prospects of victory are much stronger.
Just two final observations. There is no doubt that the tide around the world at the present time is moving in the direction of centre right parties. You can';t fail but be struck by what has occurred in Europe, what has occurred in other parts of the world. It is not uniform. It is not inevitable. It can be reversed. I think people are seeking some of the assurance and some of the sense of purpose and commitment. But also they recognise that the sort of values that our parties stand for, particuarly in terms of individual liberty and economic confidence and economic performance, that they are the things that have delivered outcomes.
I think if you look back over the last 30 years and you bear in mind that the two people who I regard as the towering figures of world conservatism over that period, Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan… I think those two people although they are now long removed from the political scene in their respective countries, I think the imprint they put on the politics of the world and the imprint they put on the way in which centre right political parties conduct themselves has been enduring. Margaret Thatcher of course transformed her own country and led I think an intellectual, brought an intellectual rigour to conservatism around the world that has had a lasting impact. And of course Ronald Reagan achieved the remarkable authority of bringing to an end the hegemony of the Soviet Union in eastern Europe and in a way represented the final triumph of freedom over collectivism and command economies and dictatorships.
I think the legacy of those two people has been quite remarkable and I think it is a legacy that a gathering like this should remember. It is certainly a legacy that has instructed me in my understanding of what my own Party stands for. 
And can I finally say that I am as William said a loyalist to my own Party, the Liberal Party of Australia. I owe it what I have achieved. It has been very kind to me. I think political parties should always remember what they owe to their parties as well as always asking their parties to remember what they have given to them. We are teams. You can';t win an election on your own. And anybody who imagines they are such a genius that they can win an election on their own is deluding themselves. But the best Prime Ministers I have seen are those that have worked effectively with their colleagues. And I think that is true also of Opposition Leaders. 
And the very last thing I would say is this. That Opposition is awful. Absolutely awful. I had 13 years of it and I am never going back to it. I promised myself that. It is the hardest job in politics in a democratic system. Being Prime Minister carries more responsibilities. But in straight political terms, being an Opposition Leader is the hardest task of all. And I feel for those who are in Opposition. I encourage you to change your state. I offer you any advice that you may think you can take, but as I say there is no particular magic to it. Circumstances differ from one country to another. 
But it is an extraordinary opportunity, can I say finally, to be with you. I thank you very much for the honour you have paid to me. But it is an honour paid to my country. And it is also an honour paid to the Liberal Party of Australia, which I have been very proud to lead. 
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. May I first of all on your behalf express to the President our gratitude for your gracious hospitality. May I join you in thanking William Hague for the outstanding job that he has done as Chairman of the IDU over the past three years.
Can I salute the contribution to the gathering we have had today made by the National Committee of the Republican Party. It is wonderful to be in Washington. It gives us an opportunity to share our collective passions. It also gives us an opportunity to express our admiration to the President of the United States for his great leadership, particularly since September of last year.
The ties that really bind all of us are common values.  Commitments to individual liberty, the centrality of the family in national life, a belief in robust but ethical capitalism, and also a belief that we have a responsibility to expand the horizons of democracy and expand the horizons of the common political values that our parties share.  It is important that we meet from time to time to exchange experiences. We have much to learn from one another and we have much to demonstrate to the rest of the world. 
Can I simply say to you Mr President, thank you for what you are doing not only for your own nation, for the cause of freedom, but also for mankind generally around the world. The leadership of the United States has been magnificent. Your own personal contribution to the values we all share and hold so dear has been exemplary.
I would like to invite all of you to rise and to honour another toast. Ladies and gentlemen, I give you the health of the President of the United States. The President.
   [Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you very much Mr Chairman. May I first express my thanks to all of you for the confidence that you';ve placed in me. I will do my best to discharge the common values and aspirations of this organisation and in the time that I am Chairman, do everything that I can to advance the cause of political parties around the world based on the beliefs that the individual is more important than the state; based on a belief that competitive capitalism more likely delivers rising national incomes for nations; and that the role of the family within our society remains absolutely paramount.
I would like to join you, Mr Chairman, in thanking our American friends and particularly the Republican National Committee for the courtesies extended to us in characteristic American friendliness. Can I also congratulate you Mr Chairman on the tremendous work that you';ve done as Chairman over the past three years. You';ve worked very hard, you';ve brought about many reforms, and the chairmanship that you graciously pass to me today is of an organisation that is in infinitely better shape as a result of your efforts and I';d like everybody to thank you very warmly for that.
And in that spirit I would like, as I understand is the customary right of the incoming Chairman, to nominate you, the Right Honourable William Hague as the Vice Chairman, and I know that we will work together very closely over the next three years.
Finally, can I say that I hope at some time during my chairmanship it will be possible for Australia to extend hospitality to a gathering of the IDU. We have done so in the past, and I hope the opportunity arises over the next three years.
May I conclude by echoing the sentiment you expressed Mr Chairman, and that is that we meet at a time of considerable success for the view of life that politically speaking that brings us here together here in Washington. And we also meet at a time when a reaffirmation of our close relationship with the people of the United States is more than ever appropriate. I thank you Mr Chairman, and most importantly I thank all of you for the honour you have paid to me and very importantly, to my country, Australia.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Speaker. It is a special privilege for me to be here and the honour of addressing the Joint Sitting of Congress is one that is extended not only to me but more importantly to my country. And I want to say that I appreciate very, very much the opportunity, the hospitality being extended by the Speaker, the warmth and generosity and the welcome that I have received in Washington from Congress, from the Administration and from the American people. America has no better friend anywhere in the world than Australia and today is a great opportunity for me to reaffirm that to the elected representatives of the American people.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Speaker, Mr President of the Senate, distinguished members of the House of Representatives and the Senate of the Congress of the United States, may I say how very touched I am by the warmth and generosity of your welcome.
I appreciate very deeply the honour that you have extended to me today, and more importantly the honour you have extended to my country Australia. Can I on behalf of over 19 million freedom loving Australians convey to you their deep affection and their warm greetings and their sense of solidarity and friendship.
The bonds between Americans and Australians are as strong as they are genuine. And that is because we share so many values in common. A belief that the individual is more important than the State. A belief that strong families are a nation';s greatest resource. A belief that competitive capitalism is the real key to national wealth. And a belief that decency and hard work define a person';s worth, not class or race or social background.
My friends, let me say to you today that America has no better friend anywhere in the world than Australia. Australians and Americans enjoy each other';s company. We share a love of sport and in some of them we are fierce competitors. And we even from time to time share the Academy Awards.
When I last came to this great chamber of democracy on the 12th of September last year, the smoke still hung in the air over New York and Washington. Brave and courageous policemen and firemen with no regard to their own safety, searched in the hope of finding survivors. The scale of loss and destruction was yet to be fully calculated. 
In seeking justice and not revenge, in choosing calm consideration over blind fury, in turning to friends before turning on enemies, the United States over recent months has led a great reaffirmation of all of those great values and principles on which both of our societies are based.
America fought back magnificently – and in the process has won the admiration of the world. You demonstrated to the world that where fundamental freedoms flourish, evil men can do their worst, cause death and devastation but in the end they will never win.
In his inaugural address, George Washington spoke of the destiny of the American people to preserve ‘the sacred fire of liberty';.  That promise has been kept for more than two centuries – but never more so than since the appalling events of September last year.
Through these times Australians have shared your shock and anger and have been partners in your resolve. We have taken our place beside you in the fight against terrorism,  because what happened last year in the United States was as much an attack upon our nation and the values that we hold dear, as it was upon yours. As we meet, Australian and American troops are fighting side by side in Afghanistan. And it is our constant prayer that they all return safely home to their loved ones.
In these past months President Bush has displayed the tenacity, the strength and the depth of character of a very great leader. And he is also applying those great qualities to the tensions in the Indian sub-continent between India and Pakistan and the intractable situation in the Middle East.
It is a special privilege for me to return to this historic place, to address the representatives of a great nation whose people we hold in such high regard and who we feel great warmth and affection towards.
Like you, Australia enters the new century strong and prosperous. Over the past decade, the productivity and growth of our economy has been ahead of most other developed nations. Our pioneer past, so similar to your own, has produced a spirit that can overcome adversity and pursue great dreams. We';ve pursued a society of opportunity, fairness and hope, leaving – as you did – the divisions and prejudices of the Old World far behind.  
Like your own, our culture continues to be immeasurably enriched by immigration from the four corners of the world. We believe as you do that nations are strengthened not weakened, broadened and not diminished, by a variety of views and an atmosphere of open debate.
Most of all, we value loyalty given and loyalty gained.  The concept of mateship runs deeply through the Australian character. We cherish and where necessary we will fight to defend the liberties we hold dear.
Australian and American forces fought together for the first time in the Battle of Hamel, in France, in World War I.  The date of the attack – the 4th of July 1918 - was deliberately chosen by the Australian Commander, General John Monash, to honour your countrymen. One of the Australian units held in reserve for that attack was the Third Pioneer Battalion,  and it had a young signalman called Lyall Howard.  He was my father.
From that moment to this, we';ve been able to count on each other when it has mattered most.  Let me say, and I know I speak on behalf of all of my fellow Australians, in saying that we will never forget the crucial help that America extended to us during the darkest days of World War II. Without that help, our history and our society would have been totally different.
Successive generations of Australians and Americans have fought side by side in every major conflict of the twentieth century – in the jungles of New Guinea, in Korea, in Vietnam, in the Gulf, in skies and oceans around the globe and now, in another new century, among the rock-strewn mountains of Afghanistan.
The ANZUS Treaty of 1951 pledged each country to come to the aid of the other if it were under attack. And so it was that in a United States Airforce plane made available to me on the 12th of September last year to enable me to return to Australia, and high above the Pacific Ocean, I informed the United States Ambassador to Australia Tom Schieffer that it was our intention for the first time in the 50 year history of the ANZUS Treaty, to invoke that Treaty in response to the attack upon America.
America was under attack. Australia was immediately there to help. 
My friends, both of our societies are built on a deep respect for the worth of each individual. “The worth of a state, in the long run” wrote John Stuart Mill in 1859 “ is the worth of the individuals composing it … a state which dwarfs its men in order that they may be more docile instruments in its hands even for beneficial purposes – will find with small men no great thing can really be accomplished”.
America and Australia are societies which extol the precious worth of each individual man and woman.
Like you I see family life at the heart of a nation';s existence. Not only does the family nurture and educate our children but it provides emotional anchorage for all of us as we travel through life. The strength of the family of course goes beyond the spiritual and the emotional. United, caring families are the best social welfare system mankind has ever devised.
Both of our societies draw great strength from the spirit of volunteerism. The huge, exuberant success of the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000 owed a lot to the warmth and infectious dedication of tens of thousands of volunteers. They gave the Games a sense of exhilaration and joy which contributed enormously to their success.  Edmund Burke once called voluntary groups society';s “small platoons”.  They are in fact the living tissue between the government and the people.
I think we would all agree that political life in both of our nations is undergoing great change. I find, as I am sure you do, that politics now is a lot less tribal than it used to be.  Lifelong allegiances are looser and less frequent.  Modern society has given young people infinitely more options than was the case a generation ago.
Governments must be decisive but also modest. Grand gestures without practical results help no-one. People want outcomes not political fireworks and constant battles. And above all, they want space from governments to get on with their own lives.
I';ve spoken much of our common values, our shared history and our deep respect and affection for each other as peoples. Let me say that we also share a common interest in spreading and better understanding the benefits of globalisation. The balance sheet of globalisation is overwhelmingly favourable to mankind. We must, however, better understand and explain its advantages to all of our citizens.  
Trade reform and liberalisation have delivered benefits to people in many countries and I believe they can deliver much more. I understand that the demands of local constituencies and international responsibilities must be finely balanced.
As a true friend let me say candidly that Australia was intensely disappointed with the passage of the recent Farm Bill. It will damage Australia';s farmers.  They are efficient producers with very little government support.
I know that the farm and export subsidies of, for example, the European Union are much greater than those of the United States. Indeed, OECD agricultural subsidies are two-thirds of Africa';s total Gross Domestic Product. The cost of these subsidies is at least three times all of the Overseas Development Aid to developing countries.
 This only serves to illustrate the urgent need for global reform of agriculture within the World Trade Organisation framework. The challenge is to achieve a comprehensive Doha trade round. And that will require close cooperation and collaboration between Australia and the United States within the WTO.
American leadership will be crucial. May I respectfully express the hope that Congress gives the President full authority to negotiate new trade agreements. 
At the same time, we in America and Australia have an historic opportunity to give even greater momentum to our bilateral economic relationship. And that is why Australia has proposed the negotiation of a free trade agreement between our two countries. A comprehensive free trade agreement, by boosting trade and investment between us, would add a stronger economic dimension to the very deep bilateral ties that are already there.
Turning for a moment to the strategic challenges of our own region, let me say that Australia welcomes and encourages a full and active engagement by the United States in the Asia Pacific. It is immensely important not only to the nations of that region, but also to the interests of the United States. There is no region in the world more dynamic and changing more rapidly than the Asia Pacific region.
For ourselves, Australia is proud of the leadership role that we were able to play in East Timor. And to share the great independence celebration of that tiny country of fewer than a million people only a few weeks ago, and savour for a moment their sense of hope and exhilaration was a very moving experience. We stand ready to work in partnership with America to advance the cause of freedom, particularly in our shared Pacific region.  
Mr Speaker, Mr President of the Senate, ladies and gentlemen of the Congress, you have as I said at the beginning, paid a great honour and compliment to me, but more particularly to my nation Australia, in inviting me to address you today.
Our relationship has been long. The ties between us are strong. The bonds, on a people to people basis between Americans and Australians are deep and rich. This relationship is nourished by many things. It is nourished by shared history. It is nourished by common commitment to democratic ideals and values. And it is nourished by our deep and resolute commitment to the role of the individual in society and the place of the family in the national framework of both of our nations.
I express to you on behalf of my fellow countrymen and women a sense of commitment to the constant struggle to preserve democracy and freedom around the world. I say it with great warmth because there is nothing false or phony or lacking in spontaneity in the relationship between our two peoples. It is not contrived. It is genuine. We like each other and we don';t mind saying it.Could I say to you today that as we move forward into this new century, we do so in the knowledge that no matter what will happen - and there will be many paths of difficulty requiring courage and grit and sacrifice - we travel through the century in the constant company of a true and great friend. 
May God bless peoples of America and Australia.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. 
This has been a very special moment in my political life. I have been a member of the Australian Parliament for 28 years. I';ve been Prime Minister for six and a half years almost. And I was the Leader of the Opposition - that';s a terrible job in politics, it';s tough in our parliamentary system, you always try to get out of it -  and I';ve held a lot of ministries. I can';t quite compare any of those experiences in a particular sense with today. 
To have the privilege of addressing the most influential group of legislators anywhere in the world, is a rare honour. It is an honour I know that personally came my way but I appreciate that it has been extended to my country. And I want to say to my American friends here, and Tom thank you very much for your very warm personal remarks… can I say just how very much we appreciate it and how we care about this relationship. I think it was Dr Johnson who said that we should keep our friendships in good repair and part of the visit of an Australian Prime Minister to Washington is in that vein of making sure that a close relationship is never taken for granted, of keeping that relationship in good repair. 
I';ve had wonderful access here in Washington. I have had this enormous privilege today. I';ll be seeing the President tomorrow at the White House before leaving to return to Australia. And I have seen many senior people in Congress. And I want to say how much I am touched by the bipartisan character of the welcome. We have our political differences and we have our partisan battles, both in Australia and America, but there are certain things that transcend those differences and I can say that the affection for the United States is a bipartisan affection in Australia. And I know that I would be speaking on behalf of the Australian Labor Party in saying today to all of you that they share our commitment to the American alliance and I know that they would want me to say on their behalf that the friendship that is felt between our two countries is felt across the political divide in Australia, as I know it is felt across the political divide here in the United States.
America has given extraordinary leadership to the free world for long years now and no more so than over the past few months. And the way in which your country responded, I don';t think I have seen anything more emotional in a public life sense, than the appearance of all of you on the steps of the wonderful Capitol building the day after the attack and singing God bless America. It was a very touching demonstration in political solidarity that sent a message around the world. And it sent a message to those people who would do damage to your country and to the fabric of our two societies. 
So thank you very much for having Janette and myself here today. On behalf of all of the Australians present, we thank you most warmly for the hospitality that you have extended. I hope all of you in Congress who haven';t yet visited Australia do something about that as soon as possible. You will be very welcome. We will show you around the odd urban area and we might also show you a few farms as well. But you are welcome whenever you want to come because it is the most natural friendship in the world between our two peoples. So thank you very very much Mr Chairman for your gracious hospitality.
Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Mr Brough, Dr Peter Boxall, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Nights like this are important because they allow me on behalf of the Government to pay tribute to all of the people who';ve worked so hard in connection with Work for the Dole projects over the five years that the programme has been in operation.  And in that time something in the order of 180,000 places in Work for the Dole have been filled, involving 9,500 projects.  And it';s covered a variety of activities, many of them extremely exciting and all of them very rewarding, especially for the people who';ve been helped and given motivation and a greater sense of purpose and learned new skills and new capacities as a result of being involved in Work for the Dole.
It';s also an occasion to congratulate the achievers, to compliment all of the participants and generally to reflect on a programme which did, as Mal said, have its detractors, there were those who said it was wrong to ask people to put something back in return for the provision of basic support which is the obligation of any decent society.  But as time has gone by the doubters have disappeared and the hesitations have gone away and the difficulties have dissolved.  And it really is a programme that has been very successful.  I did have a particular commitment to its introduction and I';m personally delighted that the Department, and I want to congratulate Dr Boxall and his Department for the splendid work that he and they have done in making this programme so successful.  And I also want to thank Mal Brough, and before him other ministers for the tremendous energy that they have bought to this project because it was a new concept in the Australian experience. It was said for many years you couldn';t do this, there was this vague idea, it proved to be a complete furphy, that it in some way violated Australia';s international obligations.  I don';t think something that helps 180,000 people can violate any of our obligations, international or otherwise.
I think it';s something that is reaching out to people and involving them.  And what it does is to bring together the sinews of a decent positive society.  It brings the Government, it brings the business community, it brings motivated community groups and it brings individuals together in a great social coalition as I';m fond of calling it.
And I am delighted once again to be involved here tonight, to congratulate everybody, to thank the Minister and the Department and most importantly of all to wish those people who are here tonight as beneficiaries of Work for the Dole, to wish them well in their future careers, to remark upon the turn around in so many lives that Work for the Dole has provided and to wish them great success and going from strength to strength in the years ahead.
I thank everybody associated with Work for the Dole, it';s been a great success, it';s going to be expanded and improved and added to from the first of July and it will be bigger and better when I come back next year.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Ambassador, Mrs O';Sullivan, Minister, ladies and gentlemen.
I would like to thank all of you for coming here tonight to give me the opportunity of saying a few things about the bilateral relationship between Australia and Germany, and sharing a few brief thoughts with you about the journey of economic reform that Australia has travelled over the past few years. 
May I first of all though, as the Prime Minister of a self-confessed sports loving nation, extend my commiserations to you on the outcome of the soccer World Cup. Everything is relative. Unfortunately because of the superior play of Uruguay, Australia didn';t qualify – in soccer that is. But I would of course hastily remind my German friends here tonight that we do hold the World Cup currently in both cricket and rugby. They are not sports that have deep penetration, particularly the former, here in Germany. 
But ladies and gentlemen, it is an occasion to say something about a very important bilateral relationship to Australia. The Ambassador traced some of the personal links between our two countries. Britain and Ireland aside, Germany is, after Italy and Greece, the third largest tributary, if I can put it that way, to the modern Australia. Some 750,000 Australians would owe their ancestry to Germany. And over many years in every walk of life, Australians of German descent have made an enormous contribution. 
Our cultural links are of course overwhelmingly European and when I come to Europe I am reminded of those links and they are links that are not only found of course in the United Kingdom and in Ireland. They are also found in every part of Europe, and very particularly here in Germany. And the influence of German literature, of German thought and of German music has been immense not only in Europe but of course around the world and Australia has been very much a part of it.
So it is a relationship that is well founded in the things that matter, and that is a sense of identity and of shared links and shared attitudes. But it is also a relationship that has a great deal of contemporary economic resonance. 
As I look around this room tonight, and I';ve had the opportunity of talking to you, I';m conscious of how deep is the German investment and the German economic state in the modern Australia. Just before I left we announced the sale of Sydney Airport. It is the largest airport privatisation I think in the world and a German company has a major holding in the consortium that bought the airport. I think of the great construction works that have been undertaken in Sydney in particular in recent times and the role of German capital and German engineering and German know-how has been very evident. And the investment of Germany in Australia is very deep-seated. Siemens, a very well known German company, in fact has its headquarters in my own electorate of Bennelong in Sydney. And I';m very conscious of the German involvement in many of the pharmaceutical and high-tech companies that also have their headquarters in my electorate in Sydney.
So what I want to do in the time that I have here in Germany and broadly of course in Europe, is to emphasise not only the collective link between the European Union and Australia, but also the individual characteristics of the bilateral relationship between our two countries. And what I want of the relationship with Germany and I will be expressing this view to your Chancellor, Herr Schroeder, when I see him in Berlin tomorrow, is that Germany can be a growing and even more important partner in her own right with Australia in so many areas of economic endeavour. 
Australia';s economic performance over the past few years has been very gratifying. Last year we had I think the fastest economic growth of any developed country. And I';ve been asked on occasions, what is the reason.  Every country has a share of good fortune but also successful economic managers make their own luck. The main reason why I believe the Australian economy is performing so well at present is that we are now enjoying the cumulative benefit of widespread economic reform across all of the relevant areas. And I';m quite happy to say that some of those economic reforms have been carried out by Governments of the opposite political persuasion to mine. But they have been successful because in those areas where our political opponents acted, they had our very strong support from Opposition.
In five key areas, we have reformed the Australian economy over a period of 15 to 20 years. We have deregulated our financial system and floated the Australian dollar and that occurred late in 1983. Importantly we carried out very significant reforms in the area of tariff reductions in the late 80s and early 1990s. Under my Government, the single biggest enduring reform I believe has been the changes that we have made to the labour market. When I became Prime Minister, we had a very rigid, inflexible labour market. It is still too rigid and too inflexible from my point of view, but it is infinitely less rigid than it used to be. And that has made a very big contribution to boosting the productivity performance of the Australian economy. 
We have also, as the Ambassador said, converted a large Budget deficit into a Budget surplus. In Australian dollar terms we have paid off something like $57 billion of Federal Government debt in six and a half years. And our Government debt to GDP ratio now is only 4.6% against an OECD average I think of somewhere in the order of 35 or 40%. Some of that of course has been achieved through privatisations but it doesn';t alter the fact that the Government debt has been eliminated and privatisations have become an instrument of economic policy in most countries around the world in recent times.
And finally, and very importantly, it is now two years almost to the day – in fact it';s two years to the day here on European time – since we introduced the new taxation system in Australia, which involved the introduction of a broad-based indirect tax or a Goods and Services Tax, levied at a uniform never-to-be-altered rate let me say – I never lose an opportunity of making that point – never-to-be-altered rate of 10%. The introduction of that new taxation system was accompanied by extraordinary prophecies of gloom and despair and despondency. The stars were sort of meant to change their position and all sorts of strange things were to occur, and people were to go mad in the process. But it didn';t work out that way, and two years on it is barely talked about because it has been very successful and it has made a very great contribution to improving the competitiveness of Australian exporters because as you would know, as a value-added tax community for many years, one of the great advantages of such a system is that it does make your exports more competitive. 
We have I think created as a result of all of these reforms a more business-friendly environment. We reduced as part of tax reform our company tax rate to 30%, which is quite competitive internationally. I think we have seen very great productivity growth in Australia. Without boring you too much with statistics, let me tell you that labour productivity in the second half of the 1990s grew at an average rate of 3.7% a year and in the 12 months to March of this year by 4.2%.
We have also become a world leader in the application of new technology. It';s very important I stress application. We';re not great manufacturers of IT but we are great adaptors. Australians are very adaptive in having new invention and new idea readapted and use it. And we have some of the highest rates of internet and other IT usages of any country in the world. 
I think the practical demonstration of the strength of the Australian economy is to be found when in 1997 and 1998 the Asian economic downturn took many countries with it. And many of us thought that the same thing would happen to the Australian economy. But we were able to weather that storm and that owed something to the fact that we had a very flexible exchange rate that took some of the economic adjustment on the exchange rate, and the cumulative effect of those economic reforms was also beginning to bear fruit. And equally last year when there was a dip in the United States and other economies, that did not affect Australia.
The reform process of course is an ongoing one. Once a Government loses the appetite for economic reform, it loses some of its rationale for existence. And we would like to see more reform of the labour market and we are embarking upon some major reforms of our welfare system. Like all societies, we are an ageing one. The demographic challenges for Australia are not quite as sharp as they are for many of the European societies, but we are nonetheless trending in the same direction. We have a low fertility rate of 1.7% and although as I say the dimension is not quite as acute as it is in many European countries, it is nonetheless of the same broad order of magnitude. And we have to come to terms with ways of dealing with that particular issue.
Another thing that pleases me very much about the Australian economy is that over the last year we have become a net direct foreign investor. And this has not been achieved because of a slump in direct investment to Australia. But we are in fact investing a lot in other countries. I understand that tonight in I think Dusseldorf, I may be wrong, there will be a merger consummated involving a $2.8 billion Australian investment by Amcor, one of our highly successful paper companies and Schmalbach-Lubeca, a very significant example of what I just mentioned. This is $2.8 billion of direct foreign investment from Australia coming into Europe. And it is an example of the sort of modern partnership that can build a better and closer relationship because Australians and Germans when they do business together, do it efficiently, do it on the basis of trust and confidence, and do it to their mutual benefit.
There is just one other thing that I would like to mention and that is the broader agenda of reform.  Reform is not just a nation specific thing, it is also, dare I say it, a European Union specific thing, and also a world specific thing, and we do as a group of nations, we do as a world community need, hard though it will be, to address the challenge of trade reform.
It will come as no surprise for you to hear a prime minister say that he doesn';t like the Common Agriculture Policy – and I don';t.  If you will forgive me, we don';t find very acceptable a situation where the level of subsidy to agriculture from the european union is 35% of the total value of agricultural production in the European Union – 35%.  In the United States it is 21%, and in Australia it is 4%.  We have very efficient farmers, they feel aggrieved by the current world trading system and we think it ought to change and we will argue very strongly and very passionately to the European Union.  I';ll be in Brussels next week and I will put the same views to individual government leaders in Europe, difficult though it is, we do need to address as a world community, the challenge of trade reform.
We';ve just had a meeting of the G8 in Canada and pleasingly one of the things that came out of that was a new commitment to economic development of assistance in Africa.  Very worthwhile, very laudable, and something that Australia strongly supports.  But can I gently but nonetheless relevantly make the point that removing trade subsidies is worth by degrees of three or four the total value of current foreign aid by the developed countries to the developing countries.  You get a far greater return for developing countries by reducing trade barriers than you do by increasing direct foreign aid and foreign assistance.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I say on a personal note how different it is to be here in Frankfurt than it was on the occasion of my first visit.  I spent Easter of 1965 at a youth hostel somewhere here in Frankfurt, I';ve forgotten exactly where, it was my first visit to Germany.  I was not then in government.  I hadn';t long left university and I was doing what most Australians of that generation did, they went and worked for 6 or 9 or 12 months in London and to use the vernacular of the time they spent another 6 months ‘doing Europe';, travelling around.  It was my first experience of your country.  I had a very warm and friendly reception from the Germans I met there and the Germans I met subsequently in Berlin in both the then West and East Berlin and subsequently other German cities.  And although the circumstances of my being here, and I';ve been several times in between, particularly when I was Treasurer, given Frankfurt';s status as the financial capital of Germany, on every occasion I';ve been received with very great warmth and very great friendliness, and I want to thank all of you for coming along tonight to give me a few opportunities to speak of the importance I feel for that relationship and share with you some of the things that Australia has endeavoured to do.
I think we can build a stronger, even better, more purposeful distinctive economic and social and political partnership between our two countries and I';m sure that in the room tonight there are many men and women who are very strongly committed to that goal.
[ENDS] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much for those very warm words of welcome and introduction. I would like to especially thank the Deutsche Bank, the Council in Foreign Relations and the German Confederation of Industry for providing me with this opportunity tonight to share some thoughts with you, not only about the bilateral relationship between Australia and Germany, but also in the context of our relations with Europe and the broader world community. 
Deutsche Bank of course has had a very long association with my country. Back in the days before we floated our dollar and deregulated our financial system, we from time to time would borrow for balance of payment reasons and Deutsche Bank was a valued advisor and a valued source of assistance, and I'm very reflective of the association that I developed as the Treasurer or read Finance Minister in the German context in a former Coalition Government and I had many dealings with your bank.
But tonight ladies and gentlemen, I want to assert one or two things. The first thing I wish to assert is that the bilateral relationship between our two countries, although it is very strong and the Chancellor and I at our meeting over lunch today agreed that there are essentially no particular problems in the bilateral relationship. It is one that I believe can be made much stronger. And one of the things I have endeavoured to do in my short time in Germany on this occasion is to put forward to my German hosts the view that Australia sees Germany in her own right as a very important and growing interlocutor for Australia in Europe. We seek not to relate to Germany just in the context of Europe, important though that is, but also to draw upon the essential strength of a bilateral relationship that very importantly is underpinned by very close people to people links. 
Of all of the non-English speaking countries that have been demographic tributaries to the modern Australia, Germany ranks number three after Italy and Greece, and some 750,000 Australians owe their heritage to Germany. Our identity as an essentially European derived nation, but located in the Asian Pacific region, means of course that we share the culture and the inheritance of western civilisation to which Germany over the centuries has made a massive contribution. Though the importance of the bilateral relationship in its own right and quite separately with the links we have with Europe collectively is something that I have sought to stress in the time that I have been in Germany.
I also want to assert that Australia does occupy in the world a quite unique intersection of history, geography and culture. Australia alone is a country of simultaneously of western European origin with very strong and enduring common values and links with north America, but located in the Asian Pacific region. To underline that point, let me say that 15% of Australians speak a language other than English at home. The largest city in Australia, Sydney, where I was born and have lived most of my life, the foreign language most frequently spoken - that is the language other than English most frequently spoken - are various dialects of Chinese. Melbourne can rightly claim to be the third largest Greek city in the world. 
We are therefore in a very real sense a nation that blends those elements of being a projection of western civilisation in the Asian Pacific region and of course our most important defence alliance - it has been for more than 50 years - is our association with the United States of America through the ANZUS Treaty. And we in fact decided as a Government for the first time to invoke the ANZUS Treaty on the 12th of September last year after the terrorist attack on New York and Washington.
I stress that position of Australia to underline not only in a broad strategic sense, but also in a pragmatic economic sense, our value to a nation such as Germany. The fact that we have been enriched particularly in recent years by so many people from the Asian Pacific region does give us a capacity to interact and relate with that region which we believe is of continuing relevance and value to your nation and indeed to many other nations in Europe. 
I speak to you today as the Prime Minister of a country that has enjoyed considerable economic strength and development and growth over the last 10 years. Like all countries, we have had our share of luck. People call Australia the lucky country. That's true. We are lucky. We're a country that has not, as far as our own domestic scene is concerned, been touched by war, although we have played our part in the conflicts of the 20th century and continue to play our part alongside the forces of your nation in the war against terrorism in Afghanistan. 
We are lucky, but like all successful nations, we have sought to make our own luck. And the story of Australia economically over the past 20 years has been very much the story of a country that has sought to make its own luck and has sought through a process of sustained economic reform and change, to build a stronger economic infrastructure. And there are some encouraging signs that that project has been successful. We did enjoy in the year 2001 the fastest economic growth of any developed country and current projections are in the order of a continuation of that growth at around 3.5 to 4%.
When my Government came to office we had an accumulated Federal Government debt of about 96 billion Australian dollars, and by the completion of this financial year we will have paid off about 61 of that 96 billion and we will have a Federal Government debt to GDP ratio of 4.6% against an OECD average of somewhere in the order of 35 to 40%.
I mention that we have really been embarked upon a 20 year reform process. I can well remember the beginning of 1980 I was Federal Treasurer in the former Coalition Government. And I was invited to give a speech to a gathering of the financial community in Sydney. And I was asked to identify the four or five major economic reform challenges that lay in front of Australia over the year decade to follow. I identified the need for taxation reform, the need for industrial relations reform, the need for tariff reform, the need for financial deregulation and the need to ensure that we achieve Budget surpluses and maintain them. I'm very happy to say that over the last 20 years those reforms have been realised, and I'm also very happy to say that a contribution to realising those reforms has been made by both sides of Australian politics.
Australian politics can be quite partisan. It can be quite willing to be quite colourful. But it is very important that the representation of a nation abroad is a faithful representation of the contributions that all have made to the development of the strength of the modern Australian economy. Two of the five things that I identified were achieved by the former Government, I'm happy to say with our assistance from Opposition. That is the deregulation of the financial system and significant reforms in the area of tariff reductions and industry protection. Reform of the financial system was in fact commenced from the time that we were in Government some 20 years, but really given full force of effect by the former Government. And the same applies with the process of tariff reforms. And over that 20 year period we have succeeded in implementing those reforms.
Since my Government has been in office, and that is from March of 1996, we have undertaken major reforms of our labour market. If I were asked to nominate the most significant economic reform that Australia has had in the last 20 years, I would argue that reform of the labour market would have to be at the top or equal top. We had a very rigid, inflexible industrial relations system six years ago. Although I don't regard the process of freeing it and making it more flexible as having been completed, we have come a very considerable distance, and that has made a very big contribution to the productivity growth of the Australian economy over the last five to ten years. And our productivity growth has been impressive by comparison with other nations.
We have also completed major restructuring of our taxation system through the introduction of a broadly based Goods and Services Tax. It is now just over two years since that was introduced and despite the predictions of doom and despondency and despair and the end of civilisation as we know it, which were the warnings of those who opposed those changes, I'm very happy to report that that has been successfully introduced. It carries with it a company tax rate of 30% which is a reduction of 36% and also the elimination of a wide range of state taxes which impacted heavily on the business community, particularly the small business community.
I have also of course indicated to you in the earlier part of my remarks the progress that the Government has made towards taking the Government Budget out of deficit and placing it in surplus. So the economic story is very much a story of a 20 year process of reform. Economic reform is always difficult. I don't pretend for a moment that Australia is the only country that has achieved economic reform. Different countries have had different experiences with it. My own experience tells me that economic reform is, even of a radical kind, is achievable with two essential preconditions I addressed. And I speak as a practising politician as well as an economic reformer. And those preconditions are firstly the aggregate national benefit has to be identified. In my country's terms, you can't sell a reform unless you believe and you can persuade the public that it is good for Australia. And the second precondition is that the elements of the reform not only must be good for the country in question, but the elements of the reform must have a fair and even impact on all the citizens of the country. And if in the process of introducing a reform, you are asking one section of the community to carry a disproportionate share of the burden of that reform, then that reform is not going to be realised.
I've spoken thus far of some of the changes that we made in Australia and some of the changes that have enabled us to strengthen our economy. We drew great satisfaction as a nation from the fact that the Asian economic downturn did not engulf Australia in 1997 and 1998. And we were pleased that because of the economic reforms that have been undertaken, we were able to shift many of our exports which otherwise would have been lost to us because of disappearing markets in parts of the Asian region, with those exports to both Europe and to North America. And it was a timely reminder to all Australians that we are very much an economic citizen of the world and not a country that should only see her economic and trade future in our immediate region.
And that of course brings me to an issue that you would expect me to unapologetically canvass and that is the importance of European union of Germany, of the United States indeed of all developed countries in addressing the challenge of trade reform in the context of the next world trade organisation negotiation, the so-called Doha round.
I think it is fair to say that the cause of trade reform does appear to be lacking enthusiastic supporters and enthusiastic participants. As a very close and good friend of the United States, Australia was very disappointed with the passage of the American farm bill.  We of course remain in a continuous state of disappointment about the operation of the common agricultural policy.  We assert that criticism and that sense of disappointment not so much in any plaintive sense in our own interest - although they are very strong, and I'll come to those in a moment - but more in the broader context of the contribution that trade reform of a thorough going nature could make to the cause of assisting the developing countries of the world.  Impressively the G8 countries have offered greater assistance to the very poor countries of Africa which proposes to link economic assistance to governance improvements, and I talked to your Chancellor about it today, and it does represent an impressive and generous contribution of the developed countries of the world to Africa.  But might I gently remind you that by a factor of three or four the removal of trade barriers would do far more to assist the developing countries than all of the foreign aid that is now provided to them by the developed world, so the cause of trade reform is not something that an Australian Prime Minister takes up only in the interests of his own country.  But in the broader context of the contribution that it can make through the developing nations of the world, but of course there is a legitimate Australian argument and a legitimate Australian interest the subsidy value of support to agriculture from the European Union is thirty-five percent of total production, it's 21 percent of total United States production from United States tax payers, the comparable figure in Australia is four percent.  We do have efficient farmers, they do feel legitimately aggrieved to current trading arrangements and it will remain a very active part of Australian trade advocacy around the world to bring about in the context of the World Trade Organisation round that reform, I acknowledge over a period of  time of existing arrangements.  I do believe that if we don't make a start as developed countries down the track of reform in this current round, particularly in the developing world, emerge a sense of greater frustration and great despair.  It is as much in that context as in the context of a legitimate Australian national interest that I would argue the cause that reform.
No audience in a democratic nation that needs to be reminded today of the enormous importance of the fight against terrorism and Australia and Germany are joined together in that cause.  I've just come from a very brief but moving ceremony at the Airlift Memorial and I reminded myself that somebody of my age that was one of the very first international events that I followed as a young child.  The symbolism of that partnership then between former enemy countries in the pursuit of freedom was certainly not lost on me and it has it's contemporary resonance in what is now occurring in the partnership between Australia and the United States, and many other European nations and Australia in Afghanistan.  That struggle will not be easily won and none of us know how long it will continue.  But Australia as I know is Germany is a very strong and committed partner with the United States in that cause.  
Ladies and gentlemen the final thing that I want to say to you is to return to the theme of my opening remarks.  And that is that I see my visit here to Germany as not part of a European visit although it is literally part of a European visit.  You don't come all that distance from Australia just to visit one country at a time.  It makes a great deal of sense in so many ways to do a number on each visit.  But the stand alone bi-lateral relationship between our two countries is very important and it can be made much stronger.  It's built on a lot of things that we have in common and a lot of things we complement each other on.  German tourists are growing in their contribution to the exchequers of the Australian Tourist industry.  The growth in the backpacker industry in Australia which brings so many young Europeans from Germany, from Britain, from Ireland and from so many other nations is making a very important and vibrant contribution to the modern Australia.  But was said at the very beginning of this gathering we do have a lot of values in common and those values of course are first and foremost our commitment to liberal democratic systems of government.  Our respect for the rule of law.  And in a broad sense our commitment to open and freer markets and what I might loosely describe as competitive and I hope ethical and compassionate capitalism.  Because the keys to national wealth remain in my view a vibrant competitive capitalist system.  And without a commitment to such a system based on ethical principles and practice the kind of societies that I believe both of our nations aspire to are not going to be achieved.
Can I thank you for giving me this special opportunity of sharing some thoughts with you.  The sponsors of this gathering tonight bring together the great economic and financial experience and strength of the German nation but also its contribution to world affairs.  I admire what Germany has achieved in recent decades.  I salute her contribution to Europe but also in her own right separately from her association with Europe her contribution to the cause of freedom around the world.
Thank you.
QUESTION:
Somebody has to make the start-off.  Prime Minister, to identify myself until '99 I used to be in Brussels as German permanent representative to the EU and in '96 - 7 your Foreign Minister Downer came with great enthusiasm to Brussels and we negotiated a framework agreement political strategic declaration on the cooperation between Australia and the European Union.  Now I don't blame you that you didn't mention this historic declaration which we worked out today.  Nevertheless may I kindly ask you to comment if this declaration still of value for Australia/European relations not only in the economic field, but also on strategic matters.
PRIME MINISTER:
You ask me whether this framework agreement is still in place that is my understanding, very much so.  It is very much so.  And it's like so many of those international agreements it appears to say very nice things about everything but does symbolise an attitude of mind.  And there are so many things on which Australia and the European Union agree.  But it is important to have a framework agreement of that kind.  We have some disagreements but the agreements far out way, but it is certainly still in place and the Minister you mention Alexander Downer is still in place too.  And he is doing an excellent job and he did bring great enthusiasm to that I remember it very well.  And we had some vigorous discussions about the human rights part of it.  But it all worked out well and everybody is very happy with it.
QUESTION:
My name is Nicholas Langer from the ANB Australian, New Zealand, German Business Association in Hamburg.  Prime Minister you mentioned the many similarities and connections between our two countries.  Let me say we have one more thing in common also - that is a refugee problem and I would be interested if you could give me an update on the refugee problem in Australia and the situation in Nauru and Papua New Guinea and Woomera.  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I would be very happy to.  Australia has for a long time had a non-discriminatory immigration policy.  We will take somewhere in the order of 105 - 110 - 115,000 migrants in the next year.  Extrapolating into the German context that is about 450,000 given the population difference.  And in addition to that we have a off-shore humanitarian refugee programme of 12,000 a year.  Now that is the legal immigration .  In addition of course we have the problem of illegal asylum seeking.  Australia is different from most nations in that we are an island continent and therefore the challenges are different than they are for nations such as Germany.  We take the view that any country has the right to decide who will become its citizens and who will live there.  We have taken a firm line in relation to illegal immigration and the measures that we took last year have resulted in no further illegal arrivals for a period of six or seven months and we have over that period of time in cooperation with the United Nations and the International Organisation of Migration processed people.  Some in Nauru, some in Papua New Guinea.  Previous arrivals have been held in detention in Australia.  It is fair to say that the great majority of those who have been judged not to be legally entitled to refugee status, the return of those people is not easy.  We have commitments under the 1951 Convention against any refrailment of people who are fleeing oppressive regimes and we will continue as a signatory to that Convention to fully respect our obligations in relation to that.  We are hopeful of encouraging the return of quite a number of refugees, asylum seekers rather, from Afghanistan.  We are providing financial assistance to enable their resettlement.  
We don't like the policy of mandatory detention but we have made the judgment, and in fact it has been over a ten year period a bipartisan policy in Australia.  Mandatory detention was in fact introduced by the former Labor government some ten years ago with our support in Opposition.  And we don't like it but we take the view that there really no alternative that in the words of the NSW Labor Premier, if you don't have a policy of mandatory detention then the illegal arrivals will simply melt into the community.  I should of course emphasise that my country has taken people from 140 different nations.  I mentioned in my introductory remarks that 15% of Australians speak a language other than English at home.  Ours is a non-discriminatory policy.  We did have a White Australia policy up until the 1960s which generally meant that people other than of European origin weren't accepted as migrants.  That all changed forty years ago and I stress of course that we have the situation where so many people living in Sydney now especially are of Chinese background.  But the contributions to our community are not just from China but from all the other nations of Asia as well.
We think it is the right policy.  It's attracted attention.  We don't seek to
upon other nations what other countries do is a matter for them.  We think it is right for Australia and we are not in any way reluctant to defend it anywhere.
QUESTION:
I am a student of political science here at the University of Berlin.  My question goes a bit in the same direction.  Today underlined the values which Australia shares with Europe and the United States and the western values fill the very basis of the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Refugees and other human rights bodies.  So my question is : how can the Australian government assume policy which locks innocent people and children up in detention camps when the only crime they have committed was to ask Australia for protection.  How do these values go together with the deployment of Australian Special Forces against leaky fishing vessels carrying desperate people.  Where are the western values when Australia denies potential asylum seekers the right to seek protection from persecution by exorcising parts of the Australian territory from the migration zone?  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I would say to that, I've heard that criticism before.  It's been voiced by some of the Government's critics in Australia.  There is nothing we are doing that is in conflict with our obligations under international conventions.  We in fact in the action we've taken to deter illegal immigration to Australia, the action we have taken has been humanitarian and consistent with our obligations and the men and women of the Australian Naval Forces in particular that have been involved in those actions have often put their own lives at risk in order to save the lives of many of the people who have sought to come to Australia.
It is not an easy issue and it's fairly simplistic to mouth an emotional criticism of what we are doing.  I do ask those who criticise it, and I think the questioner is fairly critical of what my Government is doing, I do ask them to bear in mind that every time an illegal arrival comes to any country which has a humanitarian off-shore refugee programme, then a place that might otherwise have been available to somebody who might be judged by international organisations as being more deserving of that place is lost.  We have a programme where we say we will take several, some 12,000 refugees a year.  If those places are filled willy-nilly in an ad hoc fashion by people who come illegally then our capacity through that off-shore refugee programme to provide assistance to people who are judged by international organisations as having a more meritorious claim is diminished.  And any one who has visited refugee camps around the world including refugee camps in various parts of south-east Asia will realise that people living in those are living in particularly desperate circumstances.  And if you are talking about what is humanitarian and what is ethical and what is moral I would have thought that when is comes to refugees, maintaining an international protocol and regime which allows organisations such as the High Commission for Refugees and the International Organisation and Migration to decide who has the superior claims to refugee status amongst those countries that are willing to offer humanitarian places, that those organisations are better able to make the judgement.  People smuggling and illegal immigration challenges the whole basis of that.  And that is one of the many reasons why Australia has taken the stance that she has.
QUESTION:
The Director of STEP-IN, Student Travel Education Programs International.  When Australia and Germany signed the working holiday agreement and we are one of the facilitators in Germany to assist and advise young people to go to Australia.  Australian Tourist Commission says that last year about 3,000 visas were applied from young Germans.  This year it is probably 6,000.  New year it will be 10,000.  Unfortunately, young Australians are not coming to Germany at this stage in those numbers.  Of course we like to encourage them as it is a mutual agreement on mutual ideas, on mutual visa numbers.   Do you see that there will be a cap in the near future for young Germans to earn a working holiday visa to Australia, a ceiling.
PRIME MINISTER:
No.  I wouldn't have thought so.  I think over time there will be a reciprocity but I can't see why there would be any reason why there would be any cap placed on that.  I think these working visa arrangements are excellent and I recently had a meeting with the Prime Minister of Thailand, visited Australia and we've agreed to commence a dialogue about possibly introducing such an arrangement with the young people of Thailand and Australia.  We are very keen to encourage those arrangements with as many countries as possible because the experiences you learn in a nation other than your own where you may either work or be educated is an experience that you keep with you for the rest of your life.  And I have to say that as I go around the world whenever you come across people who work for a lengthy period of time in Australia or been educated in Australian universities it is something they remember and remember with very great affection.  So I would hope that over time the number coming from Australia to Germany will rise but I certainly am not aware of any reason why we would seek to place a limit.  And in fact we would encourage as many young Germans as possible to take advantage of the scheme.  
[ends]


Subjects: 2004 Olympic Games; terrorism.
E&amp;OE...........  
PRIME MINISTER:
Mrs Angelopoulos, ladies and gentlemen. I would like to say for myself and I know all of the party travelling with me, how very impressed we were with the briefing we received from your colleagues about preparations for the 2004 Olympic Games to be held in Athens.
For a whole host of reasons that I don';t need to remind any of you of, Australia feels a special bond with the Olympic effort in Athens for the year 2004. I have no doubt that it will be an extremely successful Olympic Games. I have no doubt that between now and then, there will be occasions when you will wonder about that. But could I assure you Madame Chairman that that was exactly the same in the lead up to the Sydney Olympic Games. There were critics. There were sceptics. There were people who were ready to find fault, but everything came together in a very effective way. In any manner we can, Australia will be there to help and I know already you have established some valuable linkages with individuals who so successfully contributed to the Games in Sydney. We know it will be successful. We';ll be, as a team, as a national team, we';ll be fiercely competing as we always do in international sporting contests. But above and beyond that, we will hope in a very special way that it is a wonderful Olympic Games. The birthplace of the Olympic concept, the place where the modern Olympiad was reinaugurated in 1896, and for all the other reasons that we';re familiar with, that we';ll be particularly keen to see it be very successful.
Can I also present you with Mrs Angelopoulos with a quilt. This was a prize-winning quilt from a fundraising event organised to support the 2000 Paralympics in Sydney. It was a very successful fundraising event and this was a prize-winning quilt that pays tribute to the Olympic ideal and I would like as a gesture of friendship, a gesture of support and a gesture of goodwill, not only to the Olympics but also to the Paralympics, to present this quilt to you with my very good wishes.
GIANNA ANGELOPOULOS-DASKALAKI:
Thank you very much Prime Minister. May I open it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Please.
GIANNA ANGELOPOULOS-DASKALAKI:
It';s very nice. Mr Prime Minister, I would like to start differently than the text that I had prepared. Mrs Howard, distinguished members of the Prime Minister';s delegation, ladies and gentlemen. Allow me to say that I';m moved because this token that you brought to us really symbolises for us more than a traditional token that can be given from a Prime Minister to a President of the ATHOC Organising Committee. It shows more the (inaudible)  that our two countries they have anymore and the warmth that your country showed to the world that invited your country for the Olympic Games. And allow us to say, for this is very important and it is a great honour to have you here because you remind us not just how successful your Olympics have been. That I had the unique chance and opportunity to be there. Not just the help that your country, they give us, during this hard everyday preparation. Not just the warm feelings that the Australian Greeks, this very vibrant community, showed to us, to the world, to everybody during the Games. But also what the Olympic spirit can create. And this is peace. This is friendship. This is warmth. This is welcome of everybody that can be from the whole world to a place that has the honour and the privilege to organise the Olympics. You know, everyday we say to our people the lesson that you taught me prior to our coming here in the President';s office, that it will be difficult, it will be tough, it will be the last moment the kind question mark, but never give up because what comes is the work of everyday, the optimism that arises around people, not just in the Athens Headquarters preparation team, but also in the whole country. What comes is what is being added everyday to an excellent work that can showcase, not just pieces of infrastructure and services like hosting people or security or sport but it can show also the face of a country. And I believe that we are in the same position, Mr Prime Minister, because you know very well how the Olympic Games, they can affect and they can really show the world the repositioning of a country in the international life, helping to do with the Games. It has to show the world what is the character of the country and of the people of the country and what they can offer, not just with themselves, but to the whole world. That is why it is very important. And that is why this unique present that you gave me that has been created from people that really, I believe, the Olympic Games. It';s so important for me. Thank you very much.
Allow me… Greece as you know, it';s a very small country. And that is why we believe that the human factor will play a very important role during the Games. And we believe that the people, they are the heart of the Games. That is why this emblem of the Athens 2004 being just over your heart Mr Prime Minister, would be an honour for us.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much. Thank you so much.
JOURNALIST:
Madame President, can I ask you a question?
GIANNA ANGELOPOULOS-DASKALAKI:
Yes please.
JOURNALIST:
What is your assessment of the threat to the Olympic Games of the terrorist organisation ‘November 17';?
GIANNA ANGELOPOULOS-DASKALAKI:
I think that everybody knows that terrorism is a global concern. There is no country that can underestimate this continued threat for the globe. My country is preparing very very very carefully for the Olympic Games of 2004 because what counts is to host the world in a friendly country, to host the world in peace, in friendship. Remind the world that they can play together and they can live together.
PRIME MINISTER: 
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Dimitris Avramopoulos, Mayor of the City of Athens, Vice-Mayors, ladies and gentlemen. May I say to you Mr Mayor that you have done me a very great honour today in this very touching ceremony, in awarding me the Medal of the City of Athens. It is touching for me personally, but it is also a great honour that you have paid to my country Australia.
The ties between our two countries are very strong. Importantly, they are based on shared loyalties involving some six to seven hundred thousand Australians who love their mother country Greece but love and respect and are great contributors to their new country Australia.
As the leader of a country that had the great fortune to remain continuously democratic through the whole of the 20th century, one of the few in the world, I am particularly conscious of the debt that I and my country owes to Athens, the cradle of democracy.
Along with another 100,000 or more spectators, I first met you Mr Mayor at Stadium Australia during the closing ceremony of the 2000 Sydney Olympics. When the Olympic flag, which you showed me in your office, was passed into your custody to be retained and proudly flown at the Olympic Games here in Athens in 2004.
We know that the Games of Athens in 2004 will be a huge success. Australia will help in any way it can, but we know that in their own special way the people of Greece will deliver an Olympiad that will long be remembered.
And finally Mr Mayor, I will have the opportunity on Sunday of visiting Crete, where I will have the chance of paying homage and respect to the sacrifices of Greeks and Australians together in the cause of freedom and in defence of the values that you did so much to give birth to and which in the modern era we share together. 
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Ambassador, ladies and gentlemen.
Apart from the formal farewell from the Prime Minister later this afternoon, this is the last occasion that I will have for the opportunity of saying a few words publicly to my Greek hosts and I';m particularly delighted that it';s an occasion to speak briefly to representatives of the business community in Greece.
It';s fair to say that the historic, cultural, immigration and people to people ties between Greece and Australia are the ties that most of us think about and there are a thousand stories of people who came to Australia at a very early age from Greece and have made their fortune and their fame in every part of Australian life.  I have never forgotten in the year 2000 I attended a function and some of you may know I';m rather fond of sport, like many Australians and I';m sure many Greeks as well, and I attended a function in Sydney organised by the Archdiocese of the Greek Orthodox Church in Sydney and it was to honour Australian sports men and women of Greek heritage and I was impressed by two things.  I was impressed by the almost one hundred percent turn-up of every sort of known Greek who';d made a contribution to Australian sport and I was also impressed by the equal number of unknown Greeks, unknown to me, who';d made a huge contribution to Australian sport.  And I have to say that apart from one area of sport very, very close to my heart that wasn';t terribly well represented and that is cricket, just about every other sport that Australia plays and plays with great energy and that was a metaphor to me of the wonderful contribution that men and women of your nation have made to the building of modern Australia. But it is also important that we keep, not only keep our friendships as countries in good repair, as Dr Johnson said we had to do, but it';s also very important that we look for new ways of building links between our two nations.
We have what you might call a good economic relationship, but there';s a lot more that we could do to make it even better.  Many of you here today have investments in Australia, many of you may be contemplating investments in Australia.  Let me say to you that the Australian economy is in sparkling form at the present time.  We have enjoyed a number of years of growth averaging about four percent.  We are predicted to have the fastest economic growth rate of any highly developed country this calendar year.  We have very low inflation.  We have quite low interest rates.  We have paid off an enormous amount of government debt.  Our debt, Federal Government debt, the GDP ratio is only 4.6 percent and the OECD average is about 35 percent and that gives us a very strong base for the future.
This has come about largely because over a period of twenty years we have embarked on a lot of economic reform and both sides of politics, let me say, have made a contribution to that reform process.  We deregulated our financial system and floated our exchange rate back in the early 1980s.  We had some major tariff reforms which reduced the barriers, let me say that again, reduced the barriers to entry, as I';m addressing a European audience, reduced the barriers to entry into Australia of goods exported from other countries and since my Government has been in office we have undertaken three very big and important reforms.  
We have freed our industrial relations system quite a lot.  The level of union membership in Australia, in the private sector, is now lower than twenty percent.  We have no quarrel let me say with union membership.  We do have a quarrel with any laws that provide a monopoly on the supply of labour to individual unions and some of the laws that used to exist in Australia did have that effect.
And we';ve also undertaken a very big change to our taxation system.  Our company tax rate was cut to thirty percent two years ago and we';ve introduced a broad based indirect tax.  You call it a value-added tax, we call it a goods and services tax.  We had a lot of political agony and a lot of political punch-ups in bringing it in, but it';s now bedded down and nobody talks about it any more. It';s two years now and it';s all in the past and also of course in the last few years we have consolidated our budget position and paid off a lot of debt.  
So I present to you a picture of a, of really a sparkling Australian economy and one that is as strong as it has been in my lifetime and in many respects it';s stronger than at any time because we have got rid of a lot of the artificial elements.  We used to be a country that had very high tariff protection, very high tariff walls and apart from a couple of isolated areas such as motor vehicles and they';re coming down there as well, and textile, clothing and footwear they are coming down as well.  We have virtually no tariffs to speak of and we are vigorous exporters.  We would like to be even more vigorous but we find we hit a few walls when we reach the European Union.  Now, I';ve put some views about that rather strongly to your government and I';ll be putting those views even more strongly when I go to Brussels in a couple of days time.  But there are, I believe, the ingredients for success in expanding the economic relationship and as an expression of the sort of contemporary face of that  I';m delighted that John Rothwell is here today.  He';s Chairman of Austral Ships which is a hugely successful shipbuilding company in Western Australia and his company knows quite a bit about ferries and has been very, very successful and I hope even more successful in slicing into markets and opportunities here in Greece and all around Europe.
Now I mention that company, not because it';s the only one, but just an illustration.  I say another metaphor for the fact that we don';t come just talking about some of the things you traditionally associate with Australia.  You mightn';t traditionally associate shipbuilding and fast ferry expertise with Australia but you should now because as well as having this armory of efficiency in so many other areas we';ve also got it in areas that in the past have been regarded pretty much as the preserve of Europeans and pretty much as the preserve of Americans.
So ladies and gentlemen my story to you is a very, is a very direct and a very simple one.  We have a wonderful bi-lateral relationship in the human areas and the history and the warmth that Greeks display towards Australians is evident and I can';t speak too highly of the warmth with which I have been greeted as I';ve travelled around your city, your capital and to have met your political leaders, that there is an opportunity to add a dimension to that, a greater economic dimension.
It';s not easy, we have to work through some differences when, in respect of Greece';s membership of the European Union, I understand that and I understand some of the benefits that have accrued to your country from the membership.  But in the end the future of our society and the future of yours does lie in a more open trading system because we live in a globalised world and I';m sure all of you understand that.  That the world is your market and eventually that reality has to be faced by all of us.  We can';t expand, Australia can';t expand with a population of 19 and a half million people which is about double Greece';s.  We don';t believe that we can go on expanding unless we can keep winning new markets and because we don';t have a big enough domestic base with only 19 and a half million people we have to go abroad.  Now if that is true of a country with 19 and a half million people it has to be true obviously of a country of 10 million.  Now you have achieved a lot of that in the European Union and that is terrific.  
I hope that the European Union, which is due to be enlarged over the next few years, will more positively see the value of reaching out beyond its borders and I hope that is true also of the United States because if we are to get success in the next World Trading Organisation round of negotiations, then it can only happen if both the European Union and the United States have a resolve together to bring about change and reform and I hope that that message is received in both Washington and in Brussels but can I just finally say that it has been a sheer delight for my wife and I to be here and to be reminded of it by courtesy of coming across Mr Vardos over here who owned arguably one of the most famous coffee shops in the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney in the 1960s and 70s, Georges where I have to say I went there with my wife when she wasn';t my wife on several occasions and it';s a terrific pleasure to catch up with him and he';s a better, he';s another, I';m talking, I';ve found a lot of metaphors at this lunch but he is another example.  Made his fortune, did well in Australia and has come back here and is doing just as well and remembers with great affection his years in Australia.  We remember him with great affection.  He ran a terrific establishment.  I';m not surprised he now runs a very elegant hotel here in Greece.
So ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for coming.  I want to thank the Ambassador for giving me the opportunity of talking to all of you but I';ve had a wonderful time in Greece.  We have great affection for your country.  You';ve given a lot to us.  You';ve given wonderful people to us and you';ve helped give us a culture and a civilisation when it comes to our method of government and we remember that and we hope we can build on it.
Thank you. 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well Mr President, thank you very much for your very warm welcome. You came to Australia in 1997. There is a very good link between our countries at a parliamentary level as well as at a Government level, but most importantly there is a very strong link people to people, which is very very important. 
Your remarks about the assistance that Australia sent to Greece during World War II are very deeply appreciated. There are some six or seven hundred thousand Australians at least who claim a Greek heritage and the contribution of those people to the building of modern Australia has been quite remarkable and is very widely appreciated and admired within the rest of the Australian community.
I';ve had a very good discussion with your Prime Minister, a very lengthy discussion. I have seen your President again and meeting you today gives a very important parliamentary dimension, which I appreciate very much and I really thank you for it.
[Ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Eminence, Mr Mayor, Mr Prefect, my parliamentary colleague the Federal Member for this area in the Greek Parliament, Lieutenant General Andrianis, Captain Taylor, Ambassador of Australia to Greece and Ambassador of Greece to Australia, ladies and gentlemen.
The Australian war correspondent Kenneth Slessor, in a dispatch from Greece in 1941, said that the Greek spring with its piercing light, its floods of sun, its clear, sharp water and above all its exiled eucalypts reminded Australians, who had last seen their country in Fremantle, more of their homeland than any country they had seen.
This memorial honours the shared sacrifice of the young men of Greece and Australia and other allies who fought for freedom against the Nazis in 1941 in the Battle of Crete and more generally in the battles for Greece that preceded the Battle of Crete.
Two hundred and seventy four Australians died in the battle of Rethymno. Some 500 were wounded and several thousand were taken into captivity. It was a battle that was itself successful but ultimately Crete and all of Greece fell into Nazi occupation.
Ultimately after four years of occupation, the tide turned and Australia and Greece as allies, as nations sharing the same values, sharing the same commitment to personal freedom and liberty, were successful. And today I want to honour the modern friendship and affection between the people of Australia and the people of Greece.
Australians of Greek heritage play a major role in the modern Australia. And from Crete and every other part of Greece, people have come to settle in our country by the hundreds of thousands and have played a major role in shaping the modern Australia. What we in Australia, whatever our heritage may be, have in common with the people of Greece, is a commitment to freedom, to liberty and to shared values.
In celebrating our modern freedom, we must never forget the sacrifices of those who made it all possible, who gave their lives that we might have the freedom we now enjoy. We particularly remember the brave young men of Australia and Greece who died in the various Greek campaigns and particularly here on the island of Crete.
May they always rest in peace.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Ambassador for your very kind remarks. The Honourable Antonio Marzano, Minister for Productive Activities, Senator Lamberto Dini, the Vice-President of the Senate and former Foreign Minister who I recall visited my country not so long ago, Professor Valori, the Chairman of the Rome Union of Industrialists, Dr Marzotto, the President of the Italian-Australian Business Council, and Sir James Gobbo, Patron of the Global Foundation.
May I say how delighted I am as the leader of a free enterprise Government that a central part of my visit to Rome is this gathering which brings together business leaders of our two countries. 
The human and family links between Australia and Italy are very deep and emotionally felt. The contribution of Australians of Italian heritage to the building of the modern Australia is something that Italians all around the world should be immensely proud of. And as Prime Minister of the modern Australia, can I say that those of your fellow countrymen and women who made their way to our country over the years have made a massive and never to be forgotten contribution to the building of our country.
For that reason alone, a visit by an Australian Prime Minister to Italy is important and very necessary. But in addition I want to speak of the economic links and even more importantly, the economic future of our two countries.
I hope with no sense of complacency, because none is intended, I can say to you today that the Australian economy is performing as well as I can remember in my lifetime, probably better. And our rate of growth is probably the best in the industrialised world. This economic growth is no accident. It is the product of 15 years or more of sustained economic reform and contributions have been made to that economic reform by both sides of Australian politics.
Those reforms have included almost total deregulation of Australia';s financial system which was completed in the early 1980s, major reductions in the level of tariff protection so that the Australian economy is now one of the most open in the world, the total or near total restructuring of Australia';s taxation system, a very difficult reform that was carried out some two years ago, major industrial relations reform and very importantly, the conversion of a very large Budget deficit into a significant Budget surplus.
The result of the last mentioned change in relation to the Budget surplus is that over the last six and a half years we have paid off about 57 billion Australian dollars of Federal Government debt. And our Government debt to GDP ratio is only 4.6% against an average of the OECD area of something like 35%.
Australia is now an aggressive, diverse exporter. We see ourselves as a country not only seeking direct foreign investment, but also a country which is now in the business of large direct foreign investment itself. And in the room today are examples of Australian and Italian companies which have practised that.
Over the last 12 months in fact Australia has sent more direct foreign investment from her shores than we have received from other countries. We see our economic future as being tied up with all of the major economic centres of the world. We have in Japan our best customer. We';re also a major exporter to countries such as Korea. But in terms of an overall economic partnership, our relationship with the European Union and the individual countries of the Union is of equal importance.
We also have a major economic partnership with the United States and the Americans are still the largest single source of foreign investment in Australia, although the direct foreign investment from the United Kingdom and other European countries follows it as a close second.
I don';t know whether I should say this before an Italian audience, but although Japan is our best customer, I should inform you that our largest export to the United Kingdom is now Australian wine, it having replaced the old reliance on dairy products which of course disappeared with the entry of the United Kingdom into the common market.
It is therefore a good economic story that I with every conviction bring to you today. But I don';t say that in any sense of complacency. And if I have learnt anything and my Government has learnt anything from the experience of the past few years, it is one simple fact and that is that the task of economic reform and change is never completed.
Australia needs more economic reform. We are embarked at present in an assessment of the international aspects of our taxation system to ensure that they adequately promote our aims. We have embarked upon an important examination of the operation of our tertiary education institutions, which are so very important to the educational and economic future of our country. We are also embarked upon an examination of the adequacy of our competition laws and importantly, my Government is advocating and pressing for further reform of our industrial relations system.
We think Australia needs more economic reform. We also respectfully believe that the industrialised world as a group needs to pursue further economic reform including importantly reform of the world trading system. I welcome indications that are emerging of a willingness of the European Union to examine some aspects of the operation of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is important that the next World Trade Organisation series of negotiations not fail as the Seattle meeting so abysmally failed a few years ago. It will be necessary for both the United States and the European Union as well as other large nations such as Japan to contribute together towards ensuring the next round is successful.
There is every reason ladies and gentlemen to believe that the economic relationship between Australia and Italy can be expanded in just about every field of investment and business activity. We start from the very sound base of warm relations between our two countries, the Australian experience over decades of highly successful, profitable Italian companies investing in Australia and increasingly the same experience in the opposite direction. [inaudible] me and I know those of my Australian colleagues who have come here today, we can build further on that very sound foundation.
And as I look around the room, I think of the diversity of that relationship. The resource sector, airport ownership, financial houses, airlines, so the list goes on. And when I reflect on the economic development of Australia from the 1950s onwards, just about every area of that activity has involved at some point the commitment and investment of the funds of Italian enterprise.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finally say to you that I am a very passionate believer in the benefits of globalisation. If you look at the balance sheet over the past 20 or 30 years, you can find examples of previously very poorly developed countries but whose condition has been transformed by them opening up their economies and thereby obtaining the benefits of globalisation.
But I think it is fair to say that globalisation enjoys a bad press. And that is not meant to be a criticism of journalists. I think it is a recognition though that sometimes Governments and businessmen are not as good as they should be at explaining and selling and communicating the benefits of globalisation.
I often think of the Korean example – 30 or 40 years ago that country';s major export was wigs. You would hardly think of that as an export or feature of the Korean economy of the year 2002. And it is a very good example of what the benefits of greater openness and globalisation have brought to a previously poorly developed country.
But this is a joint responsibility for business and Government. It is an issue that I will naturally, amongst other things, talk to the Italian Prime Minister Mr Berlusconi about when I meet him tomorrow.
I finally say again how very happy I am on a personal note to be in this beautiful city and to have the opportunity of reaffirming to all of my Italian friends here today the immense warmth and affection that all Australians feel for Italians and for your wonderful society.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well I';d like to thank both the Mayor and Professor Valori for that very warm welcome and also to acknowledge the presence of the Minister, the Honourable Adolfo Urso and Sir James Gobbo, an old friend of mine and Patron of the Global Foundation. And I join the Professor in extending my appreciation to the Global Foundation for the magnificent work it does in promoting the overseas economic interests of Australia and bringing the industrialists of Australia and other countries together.
There is a wonderful symbolism about our meeting here this morning. When I arrived, the Mayor took me to his famous balcony and showed me that magnificent view of the Forum and I thought to myself, that would soothe the greatest anger of the most difficult municipal interlocutor anybody could find. And we do that and we';re reminded of Rome';s ancient glories and then we come in here and we think of the future that both Australia and Italy have together as modern, sophisticated industrialised nations.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have three very simple points that I would like to put to you this morning. The first of those is that Australia when you think about it really does occupy a quite unique historical, geographical and economic intersection in the world. We are the only highly industrialised society that is simultaneously essentially of European origin, with very close political and economic links with North America but located in the Asian Pacific area. And that special intersection gives us, I believe, a special attraction and a special quality to nations such as Italy.
And to emphasise the point, let me remind you that Italy is the largest non-English speaking source of citizens of the modern Australia. Much greater than any other. Yet in Sydney, the largest city in Australia, the language most frequently spoken, other than English of course, is a dialect of Chinese.
The second point I would like to leave with you is that the current strengths and growth potential of the Australian economy has been the result of 15 years of major economic reform which has touched every aspect of Australian economic life. And that if that reform had not been carried out, and I pay proper tribute to the contribution to that reform of both sides of Australian politics, if that reform had not been carried out Australia would not now have probably the fastest growing economy in the highly industrialised world.
That reform essentially covered a number of areas – financial deregulation, reductions in tariff protection, industrial relations reform, taxation reform and very importantly, getting our Budget out of very heavy deficit into balance, which has enabled us to repay very large amounts of Federal Government debt.
And of course, and this is the third point to make, is that I do not believe that that process of reform has finished. That in the modern globalised world, the reform process is never over. And that Australia is pressing ahead in a number of areas including in particular a review of our competition laws, further industrial relations reform, a review of the international aspects of our taxation system. Because we believe that you cannot stand still in the process of economic reform and we think there is a lesson in that for all countries, not only for Australia.
And speaking globally, we believe very strongly that the process of reform must include further reform of the world';s trading system, which works very unfairly against developing countries because trade barriers cost developing countries infinitely more than they gain from direct foreign aid from developed countries.
Australia of course is not a developing country but it is a victim of a world trading system that does unfairly discriminate against our very efficient rural sector where something like 35% of the total value of European Union agricultural production is accounted for by support, about 21% in the United States, yet only 4% in Australia.
Gathered here in the room are industrialists and businessmen and women from both Australia and Italy, who represent the modern face of the economic relationship and also represent much of its future potential. We are both highly sophisticated, modern, technologically driven, IT-literate nations. We therefore, given the base we have of very strong people to people links, I think we have a very strong and bright economic future as partners.
There are already very many highly successful and profitable Italian companies operating in Australia. Many have done so for very long periods of time and I believe that the work of the Global Foundation, and I hope in a small way my own visit, will do something to further build those links. And in that context, I particularly welcome the presence in this room of a number of very prominent members of the Australian business community who have not only been successful activists in Australia, but have also carried Australian investment abroad.
And it is a two-way process. Australia not only seeks investment, but also has the capacity to invest. And it may interest some of our Italian friends to know that over the last 12 months, Australia has in fact directly invested more abroad than has been directly invested in Australia. And that is a sign of the increasing international and global character of the operation of Australian companies and of the Australian economy.
And finally on a personal note may I thank the Italian Government through its representative here today, the Minister, and the Mayor of Rome for their very gracious hospitality. I was saying to the Mayor earlier that I first visited Rome in 1964. On that occasion I think I stayed at the YMCA. I can say that some of the buildings have not changed a lot since 1964. Many have. One thing has remained constant and that is the warmth and the friendship and the vitality of the Italian people which Australians have always been so tremendously attracted to.
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well I';d like to thank both the Mayor and Professor Valori for that very warm welcome and also to acknowledge the presence of the Minister, the Honourable Adolfo Urso and Sir James Gobbo, an old friend of mine and Patron of the Global Foundation. And I join the Professor in extending my appreciation to the Global Foundation for the magnificent work it does in promoting the overseas economic interests of Australia and bringing the industrialists of Australia and other countries together.
There is a wonderful symbolism about our meeting here this morning. When I arrived, the Mayor took me to his famous balcony and showed me that magnificent view of the Forum and I thought to myself, that would soothe the greatest anger of the most difficult municipal interlocutor anybody could find. And we do that and we';re reminded of Rome';s ancient glories and then we come in here and we think of the future that both Australia and Italy have together as modern, sophisticated industrialised nations.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have three very simple points that I would like to put to you this morning. The first of those is that Australia when you think about it really does occupy a quite unique historical, geographical and economic intersection in the world. We are the only highly industrialised society that is simultaneously essentially of European origin, with very close political and economic links with North America but located in the Asian Pacific area. And that special intersection gives us, I believe, a special attraction and a special quality to nations such as Italy.
And to emphasise the point, let me remind you that Italy is the largest non-English speaking source of citizens of the modern Australia. Much greater than any other. Yet in Sydney, the largest city in Australia, the language most frequently spoken, other than English of course, is a dialect of Chinese.
The second point I would like to leave with you is that the current strengths and growth potential of the Australian economy has been the result of 15 years of major economic reform which has touched every aspect of Australian economic life. And that if that reform had not been carried out, and I pay proper tribute to the contribution to that reform of both sides of Australian politics, if that reform had not been carried out Australia would not now have probably the fastest growing economy in the highly industrialised world.
That reform essentially covered a number of areas – financial deregulation, reductions in tariff protection, industrial relations reform, taxation reform and very importantly, getting our Budget out of very heavy deficit into balance, which has enabled us to repay very large amounts of Federal Government debt.
And of course, and this is the third point to make, is that I do not believe that that process of reform has finished. That in the modern globalised world, the reform process is never over. And that Australia is pressing ahead in a number of areas including in particular a review of our competition laws, further industrial relations reform, a review of the international aspects of our taxation system. Because we believe that you cannot stand still in the process of economic reform and we think there is a lesson in that for all countries, not only for Australia.
And speaking globally, we believe very strongly that the process of reform must include further reform of the world';s trading system, which works very unfairly against developing countries because trade barriers cost developing countries infinitely more than they gain from direct foreign aid from developed countries.
Australia of course is not a developing country but it is a victim of a world trading system that does unfairly discriminate against our very efficient rural sector where something like 35% of the total value of European Union agricultural production is accounted for by support, about 21% in the United States, yet only 4% in Australia.
Gathered here in the room are industrialists and businessmen and women from both Australia and Italy, who represent the modern face of the economic relationship and also represent much of its future potential. We are both highly sophisticated, modern, technologically driven, IT-literate nations. We therefore, given the base we have of very strong people to people links, I think we have a very strong and bright economic future as partners.
There are already very many highly successful and profitable Italian companies operating in Australia. Many have done so for very long periods of time and I believe that the work of the Global Foundation, and I hope in a small way my own visit, will do something to further build those links. And in that context, I particularly welcome the presence in this room of a number of very prominent members of the Australian business community who have not only been successful activists in Australia, but have also carried Australian investment abroad.
And it is a two-way process. Australia not only seeks investment, but also has the capacity to invest. And it may interest some of our Italian friends to know that over the last 12 months, Australia has in fact directly invested more abroad than has been directly invested in Australia. And that is a sign of the increasing international and global character of the operation of Australian companies and of the Australian economy.
And finally on a personal note may I thank the Italian Government through its representative here today, the Minister, and the Mayor of Rome for their very gracious hospitality. I was saying to the Mayor earlier that I first visited Rome in 1964. On that occasion I think I stayed at the YMCA. I can say that some of the buildings have not changed a lot since 1964. Many have. One thing has remained constant and that is the warmth and the friendship and the vitality of the Italian people which Australians have always been so tremendously attracted to.
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Vansteenkiste, ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your very warm words of introduction and this is the final opportunity I have before returning to Australia tonight to address a few words to a European audience - it's really a mixture of European and Australian audience - about the goals of this 12 day visit to Europe, which has taken me to Germany, Italy, Greece, the Vatican and finally here in Brussels, the capital of Belgium, and of course the centre of the European Union.
I come as the Prime Minister of a country that has very deep economic links with three parts of the world. Japan is our best export market, the United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia, and European Union in aggregate terms is our largest trading partner. It means that we must as a country have a balanced trading and economic approach to those three constellations of economic power and influence. We cannot put all of our eggs in the one basket. We demonstrated in 1997 the folly of imagining the only economic future Australia has is in the Asian Pacific region because if it hadn't been for our capacity to better interact and shift markets to both Europe and North America, the Asian economic downturn would have overwhelmed us. 
Equally however, the potential for growth in Asia, especially with growing potential markets such as China and the continued strength of the Japanese and Korean markets to Australian exporters is a daily reminder of how important our primary region geographically of interaction economically and otherwise, how important it is. 
In coming here to Europe on this occasion, I have sought as well as the proper courtesy that the Prime Minister of Australia owes to nations that have contributed so much to our history, I've also sought to put some direct views to individual Governments and also collectively to the European Union. We do have concerns about some aspects of European economic policy, to which I will come in a moment. But ours is a broad relationship. I don't see it in one dimensional terms. It is not only about the concerns we have with individual trading barriers. It is about building a stronger relationship with Europe as a whole and also building relationships on a bilateral basis with the individual countries that I visited. And I can speak with some degree of satisfaction, and I hope over time more success, in relation to a number of those bilateral relationships.
As the Chairman was kind enough to say in his introduction, the Australian economy at present and indeed for the past number of years, has been performing strongly. It is possible that in the current year the Australian economy will grow faster than any developed country. We've had an average growth rate of in the order of 4% over a period of four or five years. And that has been overwhelmingly the result of 15 years of steady, comprehensive economic reform.
If I were asked why is it that the Australian economy has done so well over the last few years, I would unhesitatingly say it is because over a period of 15 years, we have deregulated our financial system, we have cut almost to the point of disappearance except in two areas, tariff protection, we have reformed our industrial relation system as far as the obstructionist behaviour of Opposition parties in the Upper House will allow us to do. That is the one domestic salvo I will give you. We have reformed our taxation system and we have put our Federal Budget into balance and repaid a very large amount of Government debt so that the national debt of Australia is only 4.6% of GDP - the national Government debt, which by OECD standards is remarkably low.
Now that is the reason why we have, I believe, been able to record those rates of growth. The message out of that is that you do get a dividend from reform, but you should never be complacent about it. Reform is never over. We have more reform tasks ahead of us. 
We have further need of industrial relations reform. Australia has an unemployment rate of in the order of 6.5%. That is still too high and Australia's unemployment rate would come down much further if we were able to get further industrial relations reform, including in particular the abolition of burdensome unfair dismissal laws that particularly restrict the capacity of small business to take on more people. But we have come a long way with industrial relations reform. Our labour market is a lot more open than it used to be. Productivity levels as a result are much higher. We have, because of our deregulated financial system, our flexible exchange rate has played a very important part in the process of economic adjustment when that has been needed to accommodate changing external circumstances. And that was particularly true in relation to Australia responding to the Asian economic downturn in 1997.
We need to reform further and so does the world. I have argued in every capital I've been to in Europe and I argue again here this morning that the world does need further trade reform. We must ensure that the current WTO trade round, the Doha round, is successful. If it is not successful, there will be a major collapse of confidence around the world in the multilateral trading mechanisms of the world. For it to be successful, we need an active commitment to its success from the European Union, from the United States and from the Cairns group of countries led by Australia.
The message I took to the Commission yesterday was that we are prepared to engage directly, actively and positively with Europe in working towards greater trade reform. We are not frightened to have any of our trading practices thrown open for examination. We believe they can withstand proper examination. We believe that we run, in relative terms, an extremely open economy and our trade barriers now are miniscule compared with those of most other countries.
You would expect, and you will not be disappointed, to hear the current Australian Prime Minister say that we remain profoundly unhappy with the agricultural policies of the European Union. I welcome the announcement made yesterday by the Agricultural Commissioner. I'll be seeing Mr Fischler this morning, indeed immediately after this breakfast. And I will look forward to getting some more details of his proposals.
If they result, if they are accepted, and if over time they result in smaller surpluses and therefore a lower expectation of export subsidies, then that could in time prove beneficial to Australia. But there are a lot of ifs, buts and maybes along that path. But it does represent to us and I believe to Europe, a positive step. And I welcome it and I certainly hope that it gathers the necessary domestic political support. But I'll say no more of that through fear perhaps of compromising its prospects of gathering that support.
But ladies and gentlemen, there is also to this visit of mine, those individual bilateral dimensions. I understand the politics of Europe reasonably well for an Australian. I've been a student of European history all of my life. I understand the interaction between the Commission and the member states. There is a sharing of sovereignty in Europe. I understand that. But there are also fiercely independent and national points of view being pursued, and the job of an Australian Prime Minister is to interact with both.
And in doing that I have made it very plain to all of the Governments that I have seen, and I'll be seeing the Belgian Prime Minister just before I leave to go to Paris this afternoon, and I'll convey the same message to him that Australia remains intensely interested in providing a benign, encouraging economic climate for investment in our country. And I know that a number of major Belgian companies represented here by their managing directors have substantial investments in Australia and understand the Australian economic scene well. 
And we'll continue to provide that economic environment of which the Chairman spoke. We'll continue to provide low inflation and low interest rates. We are examining the international aspects of the operation of our taxation system to see if there aren't further ways in which that can be reformed. We are also internally examining our competition laws to make certain they don't work against the balance of large and small business that is needed in an economy such as Australia. 
So the message Mr Chairman and to all of you, is that yes the Australian economy is performing very well. I don't mind the description that you gave to it at the beginning of your remarks. But we're performing well because we worked hard on reform over a long period of time and I've said in every capital that some of the contribution made to that reform process came from the other side of politics in Australia. And when it did, they received our support in Opposition. But over the last six and a half years, our labour market reform, our major taxation reforms and our fiscal consolidation together, have provided us with a degree of strength that many would not have thought possible about ten years ago.
So it is a good message but it's not a complacent message. And we are very much committed to the idea of a partnership both individually and collectively with the nations of Europe. We relate, as I said at the beginning of my short remarks, we relate to those three economic constellations around the world. None is more important than the other. Each of them need careful attention and each of them have special contributions to make to the further growth of the Australian economy.
And it is in that context that I thank you very warmly for having me here. I say to all of those who represent Belgian business interests here this morning, if you have the inclination to further invest in our country, you are very welcome. I know that there is a trade mission coming to Australia from Belgium later this year. I spoke to the Minister who will be leading it last night and I assured her and all the members of that mission of a very warm and accommodating welcome from the Australian Government at the highest level. And I do hope that this short interlude between us this morning makes a contribution to better economic interaction between our two societies.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Burgomaster, Secretary of State, Ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen.
It's 85 years since the terrible battles of 1917 and earlier, but it's still quite impossible to come to a place such as this as an Australian and to participate in the sort of ceremony that we did a few moments ago without literally tears coming to your eyes and a lump developing in your throat. It's important that Australians remind each other of the scale of our contribution to World War I. We were a nation in 1914 with just two and a half million men. Almost 360,000 of those volunteered for service in World War I.  We suffered more than 60,000 dead, an enormous casualty rate and here, in the period of the Third Battle of Ypres, something in the order of 13,000 Australians lost their lives - 1917, we lost 20,000 men in that year and in October of 1917 has to be the most tragic month in recorded Australian history, where we lost some 6,405 men from that tiny country population-wise.
It's part of our history. The names that are recorded here are recorded on memorials all over our country. In fact, the battle of Ypres had in it people from every city and every major country town and every bush area of Australia. And it really reached every part of our country. And all 60 battalions of the first AIF marched past this building as it then was. Today therefore, I feel quite touched to be amongst you and I can say on behalf of all the Australians here that we are warmed beyond description by the generosity of your welcome, the genuine nature of your affection for our country.  
The Last Post ceremony has been performed 25,000 times.  It was interrupted only during the period of the German occupation - I understand that it resumed the day after the Germans left in 1944. That's a commitment to a memory that we appreciate very much and may I say, speaking on behalf of all of the Australians here, that we are touched by the very genuine character of the welcome. This wonderful surrounding, the very moving ceremony and also by the many things that you've done over the years.  The contribution of the lions from the Menin Bridge to the Australian War Memorial, the inspiration that the Menin Gate provided to Longstaff's wonderful portrait of the Menin Gate and the spirits of the dead soldiers rising, which had an enormous impact on Australia when it was taken around the country in 1927.
But very importantly, tonight is an occasion to reaffirm the determination of our peoples to pursue and maintain the peace. The most awful thing about war is that it takes the young. You look around the cemeteries and you see the ages - they're 18, they're 19, they're 21.  They're the ages of many of our children. And the terrible cost of that war and of course World War II, has naturally guided the political instincts and the political behaviour of the European nations and their determination to put in place mechanisms that will prevent those terrible things occurring again.
Over the years, as I mentioned, you've been very kind in marking our contribution to the defence of Belgium in World War I.  And I'm very pleased to announce tonight that, as a small contribution from Australia, we're going to contribute a multi-media package to the Museum, "In Flanders Fields", which will provide in I think, a quite comprehensive way in a modern, contemporary fashion, some depictions and detailed remembrances in a personal fashion, of the contributions of Australians to the defence of your country.
What is moving also about an occasion such as this is to see so many young people feeling part of the ceremony. It is something that we Australians experience on Anzac Day and you visit Gallipoli or you visit the cemeteries of Belgium and France. You see the young, you see Australians with the Australian flag around their shoulders, you see them proud of who they are and wanting to connect with their heritage. And in talking to the Burgomaster, I find that that is a similar circumstance here in Ieper, that people are reaching back and wanting to understand.
So tonight can I say thank you for providing such a moving occasion for me and for all of my Australian colleagues. And we remember the terrible losses of our country, but we also remember the terrible losses of Belgium, and the terrible losses of the French, the terrible losses of the British and the Indians and the South Africans and the Canadians, and also the terrible losses of the Germans. They all left behind mothers and fathers, whatever side they fought on and it's just an occasion to remember all of them and to rededicate ourselves to ensuring that it doesn't happen again. 
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Burgomaster, Secretary of State, Ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen.
It's 85 years since the terrible battles of 1917 and earlier, but it's still quite impossible to come to a place such as this as an Australian and to participate in the sort of ceremony that we did a few moments ago without literally tears coming to your eyes and a lump developing in your throat. It's important that Australians remind each other of the scale of our contribution to World War I. We were a nation in 1914 with just two and a half million men. Almost 360,000 of those volunteered for service in World War I.  We suffered more than 60,000 dead, an enormous casualty rate and here, in the period of the Third Battle of Ypres, something in the order of 13,000 Australians lost their lives - 1917, we lost 20,000 men in that year and in October of 1917 has to be the most tragic month in recorded Australian history, where we lost some 6,405 men from that tiny country population-wise.
It's part of our history. The names that are recorded here are recorded on memorials all over our country. In fact, the battle of Ypres had in it people from every city and every major country town and every bush area of Australia. And it really reached every part of our country. And all 60 battalions of the first AIF marched past this building as it then was. Today therefore, I feel quite touched to be amongst you and I can say on behalf of all the Australians here that we are warmed beyond description by the generosity of your welcome, the genuine nature of your affection for our country.
The Last Post ceremony has been performed 25,000 times.  It was interrupted only during the period of the German occupation - I understand that it resumed the day after the Germans left in 1944. That's a commitment to a memory that we appreciate very much and may I say, speaking on behalf of all of the Australians here, that we are touched by the very genuine character of the welcome. This wonderful surrounding, the very moving ceremony and also by the many things that you've done over the years.  The contribution of the lions from the Menin Bridge to the Australian War Memorial, the inspiration that the Menin Gate provided to Longstaff's wonderful portrait of the Menin Gate and the spirits of the dead soldiers rising, which had an enormous impact on Australia when it was taken around the country in 1927.
But very importantly, tonight is an occasion to reaffirm the determination of our peoples to pursue and maintain the peace. The most awful thing about war is that it takes the young. You look around the cemeteries and you see the ages - they're 18, they're 19, they're 21.  They're the ages of many of our children. And the terrible cost of that war and of course World War II, has naturally guided the political instincts and the political behaviour of the European nations and their determination to put in place mechanisms that will prevent those terrible things occurring again.
Over the years, as I mentioned, you've been very kind in marking our contribution to the defence of Belgium in World War I.  And I'm very pleased to announce tonight that, as a small contribution from Australia, we're going to contribute a multi-media package to the Museum, "In Flanders Fields", which will provide in I think, a quite comprehensive way in a modern, contemporary fashion, some depictions and detailed remembrances in a personal fashion, of the contributions of Australians to the defence of your country.
What is moving also about an occasion such as this is to see so many young people feeling part of the ceremony. It is something that we Australians experience on Anzac Day and you visit Gallipoli or you visit the cemeteries of Belgium and France. You see the young, you see Australians with the Australian flag around their shoulders, you see them proud of who they are and wanting to connect with their heritage. And in talking to the Burgomaster, I find that that is a similar circumstance here in Ieper, that people are reaching back and wanting to understand.
So tonight can I say thank you for providing such a moving occasion for me and for all of my Australian colleagues. And we remember the terrible losses of our country, but we also remember the terrible losses of Belgium, and the terrible losses of the French, the terrible losses of the British and the Indians and the South Africans and the Canadians, and also the terrible losses of the Germans. They all left behind mothers and fathers, whatever side they fought on and it's just an occasion to remember all of them and to rededicate ourselves to ensuring that it doesn't happen again.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Burgomaster, Secretary of State, Ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen.
It's 85 years since the terrible battles of 1917 and earlier, but it's still quite impossible to come to a place such as this as an Australian and to participate in the sort of ceremony that we did a few moments ago without literally tears coming to your eyes and a lump developing in your throat. It's important that Australians remind each other of the scale of our contribution to World War I. We were a nation in 1914 with just two and a half million men. Almost 360,000 of those volunteered for service in World War I.  We suffered more than 60,000 dead, an enormous casualty rate and here, in the period of the Third Battle of Ypres, something in the order of 13,000 Australians lost their lives - 1917, we lost 20,000 men in that year and in October of 1917 has to be the most tragic month in recorded Australian history, where we lost some 6,405 men from that tiny country population-wise.
It's part of our history. The names that are recorded here are recorded on memorials all over our country. In fact, the battle of Ypres had in it people from every city and every major country town and every bush area of Australia. And it really reached every part of our country. And all 60 battalions of the first AIF marched past this building as it then was. Today therefore, I feel quite touched to be amongst you and I can say on behalf of all the Australians here that we are warmed beyond description by the generosity of your welcome, the genuine nature of your affection for our country.  
The Last Post ceremony has been performed 25,000 times.  It was interrupted only during the period of the German occupation - I understand that it resumed the day after the Germans left in 1944. That's a commitment to a memory that we appreciate very much and may I say, speaking on behalf of all of the Australians here, that we are touched by the very genuine character of the welcome. This wonderful surrounding, the very moving ceremony and also by the many things that you've done over the years.  The contribution of the lions from the Menin Bridge to the Australian War Memorial, the inspiration that the Menin Gate provided to Longstaff's wonderful portrait of the Menin Gate and the spirits of the dead soldiers rising, which had an enormous impact on Australia when it was taken around the country in 1927.
But very importantly, tonight is an occasion to reaffirm the determination of our peoples to pursue and maintain the peace. The most awful thing about war is that it takes the young. You look around the cemeteries and you see the ages - they're 18, they're 19, they're 21.  They're the ages of many of our children. And the terrible cost of that war and of course World War II, has naturally guided the political instincts and the political behaviour of the European nations and their determination to put in place mechanisms that will prevent those terrible things occurring again.
Over the years, as I mentioned, you've been very kind in marking our contribution to the defence of Belgium in World War I.  And I'm very pleased to announce tonight that, as a small contribution from Australia, we're going to contribute a multi-media package to the Museum, "In Flanders Fields", which will provide in I think, a quite comprehensive way in a modern, contemporary fashion, some depictions and detailed remembrances in a personal fashion, of the contributions of Australians to the defence of your country.
What is moving also about an occasion such as this is to see so many young people feeling part of the ceremony. It is something that we Australians experience on Anzac Day and you visit Gallipoli or you visit the cemeteries of Belgium and France. You see the young, you see Australians with the Australian flag around their shoulders, you see them proud of who they are and wanting to connect with their heritage. And in talking to the Burgomaster, I find that that is a similar circumstance here in Ieper, that people are reaching back and wanting to understand.
So tonight can I say thank you for providing such a moving occasion for me and for all of my Australian colleagues. And we remember the terrible losses of our country, but we also remember the terrible losses of Belgium, and the terrible losses of the French, the terrible losses of the British and the Indians and the South Africans and the Canadians, and also the terrible losses of the Germans. They all left behind mothers and fathers, whatever side they fought on and it's just an occasion to remember all of them and to rededicate ourselves to ensuring that it doesn't happen again. 
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Chris, Andrea, Peter and Tanya, Pam and Anthony and Phil Barresi, my many other federal and state parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals.  This is a fantastic night of, dare I say it, tribal political celebration.  I';m not one who is prone to that kind of expression but tonight really is an opportunity to, metaphorically speaking, let our political hair down and recollect for a moment what a magnificent thing we did on the 14th of July in the year 2001.  It was a fantastic thing.  
In the long history of Australian politics there have been seminal by-elections which have really told the world if you bothered to analyse in a realistic way, and I saw a succession of Labor blokes fail to do that on the first of those videos, if you really analyse what';s happened they';re going to tell you something about the immediate political future.  We had the famous Bass by-election in 1975 which saw the extraordinary swing against the Labor Party in northern Tasmania.  We had that remarkable Flinders by-election in 1982 which the Labor Party should have won but didn';t.  It not only denied the Labor Party the seat but it also resulted in Bill Hayden losing his job as Leader of the Opposition and then that resulted in the defeat of the Coalition in 1983.  We had the Canberra by-election in 1995 when Ros Kelly so obligingly resigned and it was dismissed as a mere municipal aberration by my immediate predecessor.  16 per cent swing is some municipal aberration.  And then we had the great result here in the seat of Aston.  
We were in a lot of political trouble in the middle of last year, we were in even more political trouble in the early part of last year. But we began as any Government that';s in trouble ought to do, we asked ourselves why we';re in trouble and we decided what we could do to get out of trouble.  I mean I';m a great believer in politics that if you';re in trouble you don';t just sit there imagining that your undiminished genius is going to win out in the end.  You';ve actually got to do something about the trouble that you';re in.  I';ve watched a succession of former Prime Minister of Australia, particularly my immediate predecessor imagine that they could never be defeated.  One thing you ought to understand about politics, and that is that you can either win or lose and normally if you';re foolish enough you end up experiencing as many losses as you do enjoy wins.  And what we set about doing last year was addressing the reasons for our political difficulties.  We started with a great Budget, we followed it up with a number of other very important initiatives in areas of policy concern.  But importantly here in Aston we chose what is the imperative in any political contest, and that is a candidate who is right for the electorate and right for the times.  And that is exactly what we did with Chris.
 And I remember that night very well. I perhaps don';t remember it quite as well as Chris, but I think I remember it immediately after Chris.  I wasn';t here, I was watching and very emotionally involved in another contest.  It was a rugby test between Australia and the British and Irish Lions.  And just as I got the first results in that showed a swing to us, we scored a try.  And so it went on.  And we had a magnificent win over the British and Irish Lions that night and when I got the final for the night and I guessed as Peter Costello guessed and I could tell by the look on his face even though he said we';re only fractionally in front on the two-party preferred vote, it seemed to me that we were going to make it.  And I said next morning through a laryngitis afflicted voice on the inaugural programme of the Insiders on the ABC, I said that we were now back in the game.  And I really believed that with all my heart. I thought if Labor can';t win a seat like Aston in a by-election in the circumstances that faced them then, then they weren';t going to win the general election.  And I believed that then and my belief in our capacity to win was not to waver or to be shaken from then until the 10th of November.
It was a great tribute to the rank and file of the Liberal Party members in Victoria that we won it.  I was overwhelmed when I arrived at that meeting and learnt that 500 members of the party here in Victoria, which still has without doubt the most committed rank and file members of the Liberal Party anywhere in Australia, had door knocked the entire electorate.  It was a wonderful community effort and of course we went on and I can';t describe the sense of exhilaration that I felt when Chris was sworn in as the new Member for Aston.  And as he will remember and as the title of the first video said, in my speech at the Wentworth Hotel on the night of the 10th of November, I said that the Aston by-election had been the turning point in our recovery. 
It taught me a lot of political lessons, and that is that you can retrieve a difficult political position if you apply yourself, if you get the right candidates and if you remember that in the end politics is a battle of ideas and a battle of commitment.  I think one of the reasons the Labor Party lost the last election was that they were lazy for five and a half years, they did no policy work, they thought that they were going to ride in off the back of public discontent with the GST.  They failed to realise that aspirational sense in the Australian community that they will support a Government that is doing the right thing for the country.  I';ve just come back from a visit to Europe and it reminded me again of the great esteem in which this country is held.  And the three things that define the contemporary regard for Australia, we';ve always been well regarded but the three things that have really lifted us in the eyes of the world are our magnificent economic performance, people know and understand that we';ve got the fastest and strongest growing economy in the Western world.  They also admire what we did in East Timor, they saw us speedily and effectively and professionally stand up for a small country that was being pushed around by a bigger country.  And their sense of innate fairness and decency came through and they supported it. And they also greatly admired the face that Australia projected to the world through the Sydney Olympic Games of 2000.  They saw a face of Australia, the open warm-hearted volunteer face of Australia that we Australians know and understand  and feel is our innate being, but which perhaps many other parts of the world don';t fully understand.
So ladies and gentlemen, this is a night to feel pretty happy about what we did a year ago.   But it';s also a night to remember that we';ll repeat it only if we continue to govern well.  The Labor Party is having a lot of trouble at the present time.  They';re 60/40, they';re 50/50, I think John Button got it right.  I think John Button';s analysis of the Labor Party is the best thing I';ve read about the Labor Party for years. And if I were the Labor Party I would take a lot of notice of what he says, which means that they will totally ignore his advice.  I don';t think it really matters whether you';re 60/40 or 50/50, I was bought up on the simple democratic principle that one man or one woman';s vote was worth the same as the next person.  Didn';t really matter whether you belonged to a union.  We don';t have block company votes in the Liberal Party, you don';t have 50 per cent of branch votes at conferences in the Liberal Party being dictated by the Business Council of Australia.  So why should people throw their hats in the air if the national conference, which Mr Crean has convened for October of this year after a lot of argy-bargy says yes, we';ll have 50/50.  That';s not going to solve the problem, just read what former Senator Button and former Senator Schacht have said.
But the other thing we';ve got to do is to continue being the party and the Government of ideas.  And that video identified a number of things that I';ve regarded as important for the policy agenda of the Government during the current term.  And nothing is more important than the debate that goes on in the community, I call it a barbecue stopper, about the balance between work and family.  I find that if you really want to get a conversation going, particularly amongst younger people, you';ll start talking about the competing challenges of work and family.  We';re having a bit of a debate at the moment about paid maternity leave. Now Janette and I are at a stage in our family existence where we';re not seeking any qualification for that.   But let me say this my friends that it';s part of an overall debate and it';s very important that we as a Government give a lead in identifying the issues that are involved in trying to strike the right policy balance in this very important area of work and family.  
It';s important that we don';t make the mistake of thinking that there';s a one size fits all approach.  The proposition that we should have some kind of paid maternity leave is a proposition that ought to be examined providing the interests of small business are properly protected, because I don';t believe a government should mandate something like that at the expense of small business.  But it should be examined as part of an overall policy package.
I';ve been very impressed with some research I';ve read recently by an English researcher by the name of Catherine Hakim who said that as a result of her research you could divide parents, particularly women in terms of their attitude towards work and family into three groups, those that were overwhelmingly home-centred, those that were overwhelmingly career centred, and the 60 to 70 per cent who fell in the middle who sought in different ways to balance both their families and their work responsibilities.  I think it';s important in this whole area that we don';t make the mistake of saying to the community well this is a particular prescription for a particular section of the community and we';re going to mandate it for all sections of the community.  
 I think it';s important also to remember what government has already done in this area to assist families.  We brought in a baby bonus at the last election, I';ve noticed in recent days that that';s been attacked by a number of bodies, including the Australian Industry Group.  I want to reject that criticism because that particular proposal recognises what everybody who has become a parent for the first time remembers very well, and that is that one of the economic difficulties particularly of having your first child is that sudden loss of the income of the mother.  And the baby bonus is designed to do that, it';s designed to recognise the loss of income that is suffered at the time, particularly when the first child is born.   And I think it';s also important to remember the value of what we have already done in this very important family area, and I came across, when I was getting ready for tonight, I came across an excerpt from the Melbourne Age.  I do read the Age from time to time, very carefully.  And this was an article written by Bettina Arndt for  both the Melbourne Age and the Sydney Morning Herald, and she said this, that the surprising news of research commissioned by the Age into the impact on families of six years of the Howard Government is as follows.  Conducted by the National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling the research compared the disposal incomes of families in 1996, the last year of the Keating Government, to March of this year, that';s March of 2001.  Every family studied from affluent dual income couples through to struggling sole parents showed increases in disposal income.  But it was sole parents on welfare who saw the greatest improvement.  Sole parent, two child families totally reliant on Government assistance have gained $59 a week, a 19 per cent increase in disposable income over the last five years.  This is largely the result of a 37 per cent boost in family assistance.
I mention that ladies and gentlemen to make the very simple point, that in this very very important area of assisting families to balance their work and family responsibilities, we as a community have a lot of challenges ahead of us.  We do have a declining birth rate, but you shouldn';t be so naive as to imagine that introducing a paid maternity leave support of a period of 12 or 14 weeks is going to on its own suddenly reverse the declining fertility rate in this country, that is simplistic and naive in the extreme.  But what is not simplistic or naive in the extreme is to have a range of policies that recognise that government';s can facilitate the choice of families as to how they balance their work and their family responsibilities.  And we have been doing that for the last six and a half years and we';re going to go on doing that with the assistance of people such as Chris and Tony and Phil and others, we';re going to go on doing it for the remainder of this current term.
I just want to finish on one note and that is that politics is a team effort.  I';m the Prime Minister of Australia because I have the support of the Liberal Party, I have the support of all of you and I have a wonderful parliamentary team.  And I have an extremely good parliamentary cohort from here in Victoria.  In the six and a half years I';ve been Prime Minister I';ve had around the Cabinet table from Victoria outstanding Ministers.  I mean you couldn';t get a more outstanding Treasurer than Peter Costello.  And I don';t know anybody who handles media moguls with quite the flair that Richard Alston does, I mean he never bats an eyelid, he';s always got total control, he always does extremely well out of the ERC, he does extremely well.  And in former Ministers, in Peter Reith who showed conspicuous courage in what he did to reform the Australian waterfront in 1998, in what Michael Wooldridge did as Health Minister, Kay Patterson the new Health Minister, David and Rod Kemp.  I mean fancy being both the Minister for the arts and sport, I mean that is, I know it';s a hardship post Rod, people say to me what did Rod Kemp do to offend you?  You give him such a terrible portfolio. And so ladies and gentlemen the list goes on.  
I just want to say to all of my colleagues from Victoria, and finally and very importantly to the Victorian division of the Liberal Party what terrific and loyal and sustained and committed support that you';ve given me in all the years that I';ve been Leader of the Liberal Party and especially over the last six and a half years.  We have come a long way in that period of time.  This country is regarded with affection and esteem and respect all around the world.  And that is because we as a Government have stood for something.  The worst thing to do in politics is to inherit government and do nothing with the authority and the responsibility it gives.  And even if some of the things we do are unpopular, and we';ll probably do a few things between now and the next election that will make us unpopular, but they';ll be done in the name of strengthening and improving our country and they';ll be done in the name of fulfilling the things that we stand for.  Because in the end what matters are the values you espouse, what matters are the changes that you endeavour to bring about for the benefit of your country.  You think of the great figures of Western politics in the last 30 or 40 years, the ones that stand out are people like Thatcher and Reagan who turned the tide of history, who inherited a country, in the case of Margaret Thatcher, that was literally the joke of Europe, a country whose economy was declining, a country whose social structure was collapsing, whose self respect was diminished. And she turned that around.  And Ronald Reagan, no greater President in the post-war period the United States has seen.  His legacy to history as he destroyed the moral will of the Soviet Union and led the ultimate triumph of the forces of political and economic freedom over the forces of political centralisation and state control.  Now they are the role models in my view of the sort of governments that we should have in our country.  They';re the sort of approaches and the attitudes that have inspired me and they';re the sort of approaches and attitudes that inspire the members of my Government.
But tonight is a night particularly to celebrate and endorse the victory of a great local member in Chris Pearce.  Thank you Chris for what you';ve done, we rejoiced in your victory a year ago, it was the turning point and we rejoice in tonight';s celebration.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Chief Executive, to Clive Brown representing the Premier of Western Australia, members of the hospital staff and members of the community here in Perth, ladies and gentlemen.
I fly often to Perth and it';s always a reminder of the distance you need to travel to get from different points of this country to others.  And that is the context and the backdrop of the announcement that I make this morning.  It is a big country, we all know that and we believe as Australians that the 37 per cent of our population who choose to live outside the big cities have the same right to services and facilities as those who choose to live in cities such as Sydney or Perth.
So, they are entitled to new technology in communications and ways of overcoming isolation.  And today is an occasion to announce a new chapter in our assault on the disadvantages of people in areas such as medical and educational services for people who live in the remoter parts of our country.
I';m announcing today out of the National Communications Fund an allocation of $50 million for investment in large scale telecommunications projects that will deliver practical health and educational outcomes and benefits to rural and regional Australia.  This allocation of $50 million which  will be shared on a fair proportionate basis amongst all states and the Northern Territory is part of $163 million that the Government committed to address areas of need in telecommunication services in regional Australia following the Besley report, formerly called the Telecommunications Service Inquiry.
I announce today eight projects that will be funded from the National telecommunications Fund.  They cover as I said all states and the Northern Territory and each of them I';m pleased to say is a partnership typically involving the Federal Government and matching resources from state governments, local governments, universities and non-government organisations.  And in that context on top of the $50 from the Commonwealth, the project partners including the governments and other bodies I';ve mentioned have committed a further $60 million in financial and in-kind contributions.
Network Western Australia receives $8 million out of the $50 million Commonwealth allocation and that is to be matched dollar for dollar by the project partners here in Western Australia.  And they are the Departments of Industry and Technology, Education, Health, Training and the university sector.  Network Western Australia will see the upgrading of telecommunications infrastructure and improved bandwidth at health and education facilities in remote parts of the state allowing real improvements in services for people living in those areas.  Areas to benefit will be selected from across all nine state development regions: the Gascoyne, Goldfields-Esperance, Great Southern, Kimberley, Midwest, Peel, Pilbara, South West and the Wheatbelt.
For example we use technology that allows someone living thousands of kilometres from Perth to see a city medical specialist using video conferencing and we see a diagnosis with neither person leaving their office or their town.  Technology also that allows School of the Air students or children in remote indigenous communities to access new education and health services.  Technology that gives professional people living and working in remote areas access to new training and professional development opportunities.  And there';ll also be flow on benefits to local communities and to local businesses.
Ladies and gentleman I';m particularly pleased to be at this magnificent Royal Perth Hospital which is the great teaching hospital of Western Australia and has an enviable reputation as a teaching hospital and as an environment that has cared for people for decades, an enviable reputation all around Australia.  And I want to thank the Perth hospital for allowing me and allowing the representatives of the Western Australian Government the use of this auditorium to launch this commitment of Commonwealth and state resources to addressing the disadvantages of people who live in remoter parts of Australia.
We want people who live in remote parts of Australia to enjoy to the maximum extent they can the lifestyle they now have.  There are advantages in not living in big cities, I think we';re all aware of that.  As somebody who';s lived a large part of his life in Sydney, it';s a fantastic city, but there are some disadvantages in living in big cities and there are a lot of advantages in living in remoter communities.   But there are also additional costs and additional burdens and disadvantages and one of them of course is when somebody gets ill or when you have to educate a member of your family and you can';t afford or have no desire for obvious family and personal reasons to send them away from where you';re living.  And anything that we can do as a government, federally or at a state level, to demolish the disadvantages of distance we ought to do.  And that is what this allocation by the Federal Government of $50 million, matched by state governments and other bodies is designed to do and I think it';s a first class initiative and a practical way to help people who live in remote parts of Australia to access the sort of facilities that we who live in the larger cities take for granted.  And I know there';s going to be a little demonstration of some of the capacities that will flow from this fund.  But again thank you very much to the Royal Perth Hospital for allowing us to use your facilities.  Congratulations for the contribution that you and the members of your dedicated staff make to the health needs of the city of Perth and to the broader Western Australian community and I';m particularly pleased to be here today and to be involved in this joint project which is of such great importance to demolishing what Geoffrey Blainey so famously and evocatively called the tyranny of distance.  Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Mr Kyle, my parliamentary colleague Don Randall the Federal Member for Canning, Mr Mark Anderson the Chief Executive, ladies and  gentlemen. I';ve never opened a wind turbine before in my life, I';ve never sort of pushed the propeller of a wind turbine before to get it moving so I was looking forward to getting up on a ladder and going like that.  But the rain has prevented that occurring so I';ll symbolically declare it open and pull the cord on that curtain in a moment.  But before I do that can I thank you for your very warm words of welcome, can I express my admiration for the way in which the Fairbridge organisation has changed and adapted with changing times and changing circumstances, but in the process kept faith with the original concept of providing opportunities for young people who have been denied the same chances and same opportunities of many other young people.
The pursuit of giving people a decent opportunity in life, of helping to put together the pieces of individual lives, that pursuit is about the most noble pursuit that any group of men and women can have in our community.  And this organisation is a great example of that and it's a great example of what you were right to say Mr Kyle, I identified as one of the philosophical goals of my government, and that is the notion of a social coalition.  And that is in order to solve many of the problems in our community you need to get the different sectors of our community working together and each contributing what they know and do best.  
In the 28 years that I';ve now been in politics I hope I';ve learnt a number of things.  And one of the things I believe I have learnt is that if you leave everything to the government you often get very bad results, and that is irrespective of whether it's a state government or a federal government, or whether it';s a Liberal Government or a Labor Government, if you leave everything to the Government you get very bad results.  Governments can';t run businesses, governments are often remote and insensitive, they tend to look at things in terms of columns and figures and formal outcomes rather than in the human terms.  Now that';s no disrespect to people who work in the public service, they';re dedicated men and women, it';s just the nature of an organisation.  If you leave everything to the business community you get some good profits and some happy shareholders, which is good, I';m all for good businesses and happy shareholders.  I';m a competitive capitalist, I believe in the capitalist system.  But you sometimes get a very narrow focus.  If you leave everything to the welfare sector, to volunteers, you get wonderful enthusiasm, you get tremendous spirit, you get great personal individual endeavour.  But you don';t always have the resources, you don';t always have the business skills that are needed, you don';t always have the discipline that a Government approach and sense of responsibility to the overall welfare of the taxpayer producers.
So surprise, surprise if you put all of those groups together and you tackle the problem in a cooperative fashion you can get the best of all worlds.  And for a long time we didn';t do that very well, we tended to say well this is the Government';s responsibility, this is the responsibility of the Salvation Army or the Society of St Vincent de Paul, or Fairbridge, or whatever, and we just leave it to them and we occasionally give them a tax deduction or something like that.  But I think over the last few years we';ve begun to do things a lot better.  And if you look here you have an example of the contribution of corporate Australia.  I looked at the honour roll so to speak of contributors and benefactors as I drove past in the biodiesel powered bus.  And I saw the names of the large companies, I mean Alcoa is an extraordinarily generous benefactor, and all the other companies here.  And I understand that Alcoa is the owner of the property and therefore the landlord of the village.  But all these other companies have contributed and so many individuals have contributed, and the Federal Government, I';m very proud that we were able to help with that Federation Fund grant and that was the sort of thing that the Federation Fund was established to help, it was to mark the Federation of Australia and this village was part of the history of this part of Western Australia and part of the history of a period, of the first 100 years.
But very importantly coming here today gives me an opportunity to meet some of the people that the Fairbridge organisation and the Fairbridge village is now assisting.  And I hope the young people I';ve met today benefit.  I want every young person in this country to have an opportunity of contributing and becoming a positive and strong contributor to our community. I remain sufficient of an idealist and an optimist to believe that if every person is given a decent opportunity they';ll want to contribute in a very positive way.  And sadly some don';t get it, through no fault of their own.  And it';s the role and the responsibility of governments and of this organisation and so many other around Australia to give them that opportunity.
I';ve just come back from spending 12 days in Europe and it';s a great experience to travel on behalf of your country as a Prime Minister does.  And to learn of the respect and the esteem in which this country is held around the world.  And one of the things that hits people in the face about Australia, and many things hit people in the face about Australia, I mean our sporting achievements hit people in the face on most occasions, and the strength of our economy.  But the fact that we have a great volunteer tradition and people are still talking to me about the Sydney Olympics and it';s now almost two years and the reason, and one of the reasons they talk about it is there were volunteers.  And can I say as somebody who you may have noticed I went to the Olympic Games just about every day to cheer all of the Australian competitors, and one of the great things about those games, which says a great thing about Australia is all the volunteers. And organisations such as this are really sustained by volunteers.  People who could be doing other things with their time but they want to give a bit back to the community.  They've been lucky, they';ve perhaps come through the Fairbridge organisation, I know there are a number of people here today who have, but otherwise people who just want to make a contribution.
So can I compliment the village and compliment the trustees and the board and particularly you Mr Kyle and Mr Anderson for the work that you do.  Can I say that the cost benefit ratio is astonishing, I can';t believe those figures, and the figures of course are only one part of it but they';re an important part.  The services to do cost money and it is true in every area that if people can be helped so that they don';t need the care and so forth of the state, not only are they enriched and bettered and given a better opportunity but the rest of the community has saved an enormous expense.  I often say that the greatest social welfare institution that mankind has ever devised is a strong functioning family and where families are not strong and functioning if the community can provide something of a substitute then that is an equally strong and effective social welfare system. And it';s strong and effective in a personal and a spiritual sense and it';s strong and effective in an economic sense as the comparisons that Mr Kyle has made today have demonstrated.
So ladies and gentlemen, my congratulations to all of you, congratulations to those who';ve been involved in the rebirth and the resuscitation of the Fairbridge village and for all of those who';ve made that contribution I extend my congratulations and the ongoing good will and support of the Federal Government and I have much pleasure in declaring open my first wind turbine.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Colin for those very kind words of introduction, Kim Keogh the State President of the Liberal Party in Western Australia, Ian Warner the Chairman of the Finance Committee, my many parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It';s always a great pleasure to me to come to Perth.  I';m spending four days in Western Australia on this occasion and it';s a particular pleasure to renew my links with the business community of Perth and to have the opportunity of sharing with it some thoughts about where Australia sits at the present time and in particular where the Australian economy sits and where I think it might be heading.
It';s fair to say that there is a degree of uncertainty about the world economy.  The United States economy suffered some severe shocks last year, the Australian economy managed to avoid any backwash from those shocks.  And there is still a degree of uncertainty in the United States, particularly in the wake of a number of controversies that have surrounded the financial affairs of a number of large companies.  And can I say on that issue, because it';s something that I feel quite strongly about, that it';s very important when you have some disappointing financial collapses, you have a lot of talk and a lot of legitimate examination of the behaviour of company executives in certain organisations, it';s very important that we preserve a sense of perspective.  It is necessary to severely punish wrongdoers.  There are laws against fraud and misbehaviour that should be very vigorously enforced.  And when men and women in business break the codes of proper behaviour and behave improperly, even illegally, then they do a great disservice to all of us and they do a great disservice to the cause of competitive capitalism which is the basis of the generation of wealth in this country and the generation of wealth in other similar societies.
But I think it';s important in the process of saying that that we don';t overreact and we don';t in the wake of concern about the behaviour of some embrace a whole plethora of regulation and legislation that encumbers and affects the activities of the great majority of men and women in business which whilst they are robust, they are entirely proper, completely ethical and in accordance with the sort of standards that the Australian community would expect.
I say that because I detect in some of the debate that';s swirling around in the community at the present time a bit of a reaction that says oh we';ve had this terrible  Enron, we';ve had terrible behaviour in Worldcom and we';ve had this and that, we have to bring in a whole raft of new regulation.
I have to say to you that I am not going to get swept along in that tide.  I';m in favour of changing regulation and changing laws when I';m presented with a compelling case in the national interest to do so but I think it';s very important that in the wake of these things we don';t overreact because in the end the business community does need room to move, it does need air to breath as far as regulation is concerned.  We already have a lot of regulation in this country that affects the business community and we always have to run the public interest test over any propositions that that level of regulation should be changed or in some way strengthened.
As you know, I';ve been away a little more often over the last couple of months than has been my wont.  I';m not a Prime Minister who believes that you make an art form of overseas travel as one or two of my predecessors some years ago did.  But it is necessary, given the globalised circumstances in which we live, it is necessary that the Prime Minister from time to time travel and from time to time interact with the leaders of other countries.
And I have to say that the visit I just paid to Europe was rewarding in many ways but what was the most rewarding element of it is the evident high regard in which Australia is held at the present time.  And the remarks that were made to me by the Prime Minister of Italy, Prime Minister of Germany, Greece and other people I met were the remarks of leaders of countries that have taken real notice of what Australia has been able to achieve over the last few years.  And the high esteem in which Australia is held at the present time is very much due, in my opinion, to three factors – the very strong performance of the Australian economy, and it';s not engaging in any kind of political triumphalism for me to say that our economy last year and likely this year has and will grow more strongly than that of any other developed country.  And when you go to Europe and you talk about growth rates of 4% and you recite the series of reforms that have been embraced in the Australian economy over a period of 15 years that have lead to this very vibrant, robust Australian economy, it is a very strong and a very meritorious story and there is respect and regard for Australia as a consequence of that.
There is great regard still for this country because of the stand it took over East Timor.  It was seen as the behaviour of a country that was willing to accept its responsibilities in this part of the world and it was ready to face the difficulties that would come in our relationship with Indonesia, our nearest neighbour, as a result of the stance we took but we nonetheless took it.   And the way in which we have been able, in my view, positively to move on in our relationship with Indonesia, to rebuild it, after the events in East Timor is also widely noted.
And on a personal level of course Australians projected themselves so magnificently two years ago with the Olympic Games and put on display to the rest of the world all of the characteristics that we like to believe are most associated with being an Australian.  Our openness, our lack of class consciousness, our easy going character, our technological sophistication and not least of course our sporting excellence.
So when you travel as a Prime Minister now of Australia, you are travelling at a time when this country is held in very high regard.  I was asked frequently by the media as to whether I encountered any criticism of our stance on border protection.  I have to report to you that certainly at a government level, and I didn';t detect it apart from one or two occasions which is understandable in great democracies, I didn';t encounter it at other levels either, I think it is fair to say that the difficult problems of illegal immigration are affecting all countries.  It';s not an easy issue.  Anybody who imagines that my government enjoys taking the stance that it does at the present time is mistaken.  And anybody who thinks that there is some perpetual vested political interest on our part in a continuation of this state of affairs is also wrong but we frankly have no alternative other than to follow the policies that we are following at the present time.  And I certainly had reinforced, when I was in Europe, the proposition that most other countries are looking in the direction of tightening their policies on border protection rather than going in the opposite direction.  And whilst I wouldn';t for a moment suggest that this country is being seen as a situation or example to be imitated in other parts of the world, each country is different, it is nonetheless the case that the stance that we took is widely understood around the world and so far from it being a source of shame and criticism of Australia it is seen increasingly in different parts of the world as a stance that difficult, but nonetheless understandably, taken.
I think it';s very important as we look at what Australia has been able to achieve particularly economically over the last few years that we don';t get to a stage where we become complacent or believe that the moment has arrived to rest on our laurels so far as economic reform is concerned.  The process of economic reform and you';ve probably in this very room heard me say this before.  I';ve probably said this at the time that I was arguing the cause of taxation reform, I probably said it as I was arguing the cause of industrial relations reform a number of years ago, that the process of reform is never completed.  And the globalised character of the world economy in which we live at the present time means that the reform process must go on and that is why the government is going to continue to persist with a number of reform projects it has especially in the economic area.
We are going to continue to persevere in trying to achieve further industrial relations reform.  I regret very much that since the election of Labor governments in all of the Australian states industrial relations reform has not only stalled but has begun to go backwards at a state level.  I think the changes that were made here in Western Australian were very regrettable at a state level.  I think they have diminished the business climate here in a way that I don';t think is in the interests of the state.  We';re going to continue to persevere in trying to get our unfair dismissal laws through the Senate.  Some people have said to me well you';ve been trying for years, you might as well give up.  Well I don';t have any intention of giving up because I believe that if we could get rid of those existing unfair dismissal laws, that more than any other single thing would make a contribution towards a further reduction in the level of unemployment in Australia.
Our unemployment rate now is a lot lower than what it was when we came to office and there are signs that if we can maintain the current level of economic growth we can get it down even further.  But I think if we could achieve further reforms on the industrial relations front, we would be able to achieve something that might have been thought undreamt of a few years ago, and that is having a five in front of our unemployment rate.  And that is why we are going to persist because you all know that the great generator of jobs in the Australian community is in the small and medium enterprise area.  And if we can remove the impediments and the restrictions in those areas then I think we can make further progress on the unemployment front.
Can I say in relation to the sale of Telstra, which has been very much in the news, and I noticed that there was an opinion poll published earlier this week which said that a significant majority of the Australian community believe that the Government should retain majority ownership of Telstra.  That poll did not surprise me because support for the sale of Telstra by the Government is not something that draws top of head or automatic support. It';s one of those issues that is not instantaneously popular, for reasons that I can understand.  But we have a situation where if you pause and think for a moment, and perhaps this is an audience that might be predisposed to agree with me on this, I don';t know.  But if you pause and think for a moment there is no logic in staying where we are.  Staying where we are inhibits the capacity of a large corporation such as Telstra to perform freely and competitively in the marketplace.  It can';t for example raise equity by share issues.  We';re not going to buy, as a government, shares.  It can';t go through a process of, to use a very old fashioned expression, of renationalisation.  Is anybody in Australian politics seriously running around saying well if there';s a change of Government, an incoming Labor Government is going to buy back from the Australian public the shares that were sold over the past few years.
So you';re left with really only one alternative and that is at some time, and subject to the condition that I laid down during the election campaign, and that is that we have to be satisfied that services in the bush are, and I';ll use the colloquialism, up to scratch.  And I think they are improving, and I think the point at which that judgement can be made is approaching, then subject to that there is no logical alternative other than to proceed with the sale of the remaining shares in Telstra. Now I don';t think it';s, as I say, instantaneously popular, and the fact that the majority of the public appears to be opposed to it puts an obligation on me in particular and all of my colleagues to continue to argue the case very strongly.
We';re also going to persist ladies and gentlemen in maintaining what we regard as one of the better business environments that this country has had over the last 30 years.   Prime Ministers and Treasurers don';t mandate interest rate levels.  In the sort of economic society in which we now live interest rates are determined by the Reserve Bank in response to market influences.  But governments can make a contribution to the climate that conditions the response of the Reserve Bank to those market conditions. And the fact that over the last six and a half years we have repaid a very large amount of government debt, the fact that we have a debt to GDP ratio which is 4.6 per cent against an OECD average of about 35 per cent is a sign of course that we want market conditions conducive to interest rates which are as low as possible.
We';re not reluctant to take specific interventionary action to address a weakness in the economy as we did at the beginning of last year in relation to the housing industry.  I';ve remarked to a number of my colleagues that although the doctrines of John Maynard Keynes no longer hold the sway they once did in relation to economic thought and economic practice, the doubling of the home savings grant for new homes that we announced early last year in response to the slump in housing activity in the December quarter of 2000 was a reminder to me that the nostrums of Keynesian  intervention are not entirely dead even in the globalised economy in which we now live.
We continue ladies and gentlemen to be committed to the maintenance of budget surpluses.  We continue to believe that although major taxation reform has been carried out and I hope bedded down and I again want to thank the business community of Perth and through it the business community of Australia for the way in which they co-operated, often with some individual difficulty because of the varied impact of tax reform on different companies, but nonetheless co-operated to bring about a reform that we all knew at some stage had to be undertaken and at some stage had to be carried out.  But taxation reform in a way is never completed.  There are some aspects of international taxation which bear upon the competitive performance of Australian companies and bear upon their taxation obligations in other parts of the world that are under study at the present time.  And in particular we want to be satisfied that further reforms in that area that are needed to support the competitiveness of Australian companies are undertaken.
As a great trading nation Australia of course continues to be buffeted by negative world trading practices.  You will be aware that when I was in Brussels, and while I might be tempted to do so I can';t claim that it was entirely as a result of my representations on behalf of Australian farmers, the European Union announced a proposal for the first time to begin the long process of changing the structure of the common agricultural policy. I was reported, and it';s an understatement to say so, I was reported as having reacted very cautiously to what the European Union proposed.  And I had good reason for that caution because the proposals at the moment have only come from the commission, they have to be approved by all of the member countries, there is strong opposition to them from the French farming lobby, there is great scepticism about them from the Irish and the Greeks who are both great beneficiaries of the common agricultural policy.  And even if these reforms are implemented, what they propose is to decouple the payment of subsidies from levels of production and if that is implemented what that means is that over time, because the payments are not related to production there';ll be smaller surpluses generated by European farmers and therefore the European Union won';t feel the need to subsidise the export of those surpluses into third world countries.  Which is one of things that has proved so damaging to the efficient Australian farmer.
All of that represents a very faint glimmer at the end of a very long tunnel and there are many ifs, buts and maybes that lie between that announcement and some ultimate benefit to Australia';s very hard pressed rural producers.  I leave you with one statistic in this area which demonstrates the task that we face.  The level of subsidy in the European Union is 35 per cent of the total value of all production within the European Union.  The level of subsidy in the United States for their farmers is 21 per cent of the level of total production within the United States.  The level of subsidy in Australia is only four per cent of the total value of farm production in this country.  When you occasionally read a spokesman for the European Union talking about what they want in return for any concessions to be made on the agricultural front I would say with respect to them that it is a pure negotiating ploy.  Our levels of protection are lower, our trading policies are more transparent and our approach to world trade is more internationalist and global than most of our major trading partners.  And the reason that it is so is that it is in Australia';s long term interests that we do everything we can to encourage an open world trading environment.
And as great exporting states such as Western Australia, and I am very conscious of the statistical comparisons between the population of Western Australia  and the contribution that population makes to the total export earnings of the Commonwealth of Australia, I';m reminded of those statistics, I';m reminded of those statistics every time I come to Perth.  I';m reminded of the contribution particularly of the mining industry but also the rural industries of this state.  And I think of all of the states of Australia there is none that has a greater interest in an open world trading environment than the state of Western Australia.
The last thing I want to say ladies and gentlemen is to direct some remarks to the Liberal Party itself around Australia.  We are in an unusual position at the present time, we hold power nationally but we';re out of office at a state level and at a territory level in every area of government.  That poses a challenge for us here in Western Australia as it does in New South Wales and indeed in all of the other states.  Can I say speaking from a national perspective that the spirit and the morale of our federal parliamentary party is very high.  Our opponents at the present time federally are very divided and directionless and going through one of those periods in politics that every political party will go through. Can I say to all of you that whilst it is a situation that from time to time is of interest and of satisfaction to me, I';ve seen enough of politics over the 28 years that I';ve been in Federal Parliament to not develop any sense of complacency or any sense of smugness out of the disarray or difficulty of one';s political opponents.
We live in a very non-tribal political world.   People';s political affections are more fickle now then they';ve ever been in the time that I';ve been in politics.  Attitudes can change very rapidly and I';ve constantly warned and encouraged my colleagues in the Federal Parliamentary Party not to fall into any sense of complacency or any smug belief that because of the current difficulties of our opponents that that guarantees the outcome of the next election.  Politics is a very uncertain game.  I dare say that many in this room who might have attended luncheons that I addressed in the early part of last year in Perth probably would have thought to themselves that it might be the last time they were hearing me speak as Prime Minister.  Because our fortunes in the early part of last year were to say the least fairly ordinary and we were seen by many as in the terminal phases of a period of government.  And I have to say that there were periods and although I never lost enthusiasm and hope and commitment, there were periods when I recognised that we were facing a very tough fight.
So all of that is a reminder of just how changeable and how variable politics is.  And the message I have for my Federal Parliamentary colleagues and the message I have for the supporters of the Liberal Party here today and all around the country is that it is precisely when your political opponents are going through difficulty, it is precisely when they appear to be suffering adversity, when it is time for an incumbent government to redouble its efforts to remain in touch with the community and to redouble its efforts to present itself to the community as a government of new ideas and of ongoing spirit and ongoing determination and commitment.  And that is what we hope to do over the next two and a half years.
And in our relations with the business community can I repeat something I';ve frequently said at gatherings such as this.  The Liberal Party, unlike our political opponents, is not owned by any one section of the Australian community.  We don';t have a 60-40 rule operating at any of the state conferences of the Liberal Party.  We don';t have 10, 20, 30, 40 or any percentage of votes allocated to business interests.  But we do, very importantly, we have a broad sympathy with the philosophy of the business community of Australia.  We don';t always agree with you and you won';t always like what we do.  But we are a party that is committed to the cause of competitive capitalism.  When I addressed the US Congress in June I identified some of the values that I held in common with most of the people in that Congress.  And I said that one of those values was a strong personal belief that competitive capitalism was the true source of generating national wealth.  And that remains the core economic philosophy of the government and I know it is a value that we share very much in common with the men and women in this room.
Can I thank you for the support that you';ve given to the Liberal Party organisation here in Western Australia.  Can I think Kim Keogh for the great leadership that he';s given to the party organisation over the last 12 months in challenging times, and with his leadership the organisation was able to give tremendous help to me as federal parliamentary leader in a very difficult climate.  I thank you for your past support, I encourage you to maintain it, not only for us but also for Colin Barnett and his colleagues at a state level.  They face the difficulties and challenges which I remember only too well of Opposition.  It';s the toughest job in politics being a leader of an opposition, be it federal or state, Liberal or Labor, I remember it very well, I have no intention of going back to it but I can empathise with somebody who';s currently experiencing it.
Thank you very much for coming today, as always it';s a great delight to be back here in Perth. Thank you.[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Michael, Professor Stanley, Mr Kevin Campbell, Julie Bishop the Federal Member for Curtin, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen and children.
As you might expect over the years Prime Ministers have a lot of presentations, that is pieces of advocacy presented to them arguing a case or putting a proposition.  I guess in the six and a half years that I';ve been Prime Minister I';ve had hundreds of presentations made to me, some of them have been particularly memorable, others, and no disrespect meant, not so memorable.  I have to say that one of the most memorable I had presented to me was in fact presented by Professor Stanley when she put forward some views about early childhood intervention and most particularly the linkages between health, family relationships, schooling, developing anti-social tendencies, and ultimately of course criminal behaviour.  When you think about it, and when I thought about it afterwards, it seemed the most natural thing in the world that there would be such linkages.  But sometimes you need somebody who has a touch and a feel for those sorts of things to really focus your attention on it.  And this presentation that Fiona Stanley made to a regular meeting of the Prime Minister';s Science Council, which I chair on a regular basis, and as somebody who had a relative unscientific upbringing, and there';d be a lot of people who from time to time would readily concur with that, I found it an absolutely gripping and certainly a very convincing presentation.  And it started me and other members of my Government thinking about ways in which we might in collaboration with other governments and with companies, with talented researchers and dedicated people in this sector, see if we couldn';t find some additional solutions and adopt some additional policies which might assist in a comprehensive way to address these problems.  
And I know that this alliance has that kind of objective very much in its sights.  I know of the formidable reputation of the institute, of the tremendous work that it';s done and it is an organisation which has rightly attracted not only a great deal of financial and other help here in the city of Perth and within in the Western Australian community, but also very importantly on a national basis.
It';s very important that the hubs of excellence in research, particularly in the area of medical science and the behaviour of the young, that those hubs of excellence be spread around the country and they not be concentrated just in one part of Australia but indeed spread around the country.  And I';m sure I';m not overstating it to say that in this particular area of research and this particular discipline there is no institute and there';s no part of Australia that enjoys a greater reputation than does this institute here in the city of Perth.
What is encouraging to me about the alliance which I';m launching is that it is a collaboration.  We have provided financial assistance, corporations have provided financial assistance, the state government, its agencies, the lotteries commission and others have provided financial assistance. And importantly it will draw on the talents of dedicated researchers of this institute.  I';ve met some of them this morning and have been told in the brief period of time that';s inevitably available on these visits of the great work that has been done, particularly but of course not only in relation to the health challenges of indigenous children.
I';m very very committed to providing what support within all the competing demands that government has made upon it for the work of this alliance and of course over the years in research capacity a great deal of federal money has been provided for the institute.  We now have a specific Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Larry Anthony, who';s working to develop a comprehensive Commonwealth programme for early childhood development.  And the Government is focusing very much on the sorts of things that Professor Stanley raised in that presentation some two years ago for the development of a comprehensive inter-governmental and indeed community response to early childhood challenges.  The need, as I found a reminder of this morning when a met a young girl who participated in the Raine study going back over a period, a number of them are here today, going back over a period of just under 11 years.  And it';s a reminder to somebody such as myself of the requirement for patient regular painstaking research.  And unless you do that you don';t really have the database, you don';t really have the factual information on which clinical judgements can be made and very importantly the factual data on which policy decisions can be made by governments.
One of the things you find in government is that no amount of good will is enough, no amount of good policy direction is enough, unless you have accurate information at your disposal. And the use of taxpayer resources to achieve particular goals can be very frustrating if in fact the database on which those policies are based and the objectives are pursued are inadequate, or worse inaccurate.
And that of course brings us to the research alliance that I';m very pleased to launch today, because what it will do is to provide that information, it will augment the effort of people who are trying in their different ways around the country to assist young people and children who need assistance, to promote policies of early intervention for families and children who are at risk and to follow their experience and their patterns through life.  We are a keen supporter of the alliance, the Federal Government, we';ve committed $600,000 in establishment funds for the alliance over the next 18 months.  I applaud those corporations and those agencies of the Western Australian Government that have been involved in it and I';m delighted to launch the alliance, I can assure you that I will follow it with great interest. I think it';s working in an area which is of enormous national importance to all Australians.  I wish it well, and it will continue to have the good will and the practical support of the Commonwealth Government.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you Colin for those very generous words of introduction, Kim Keogh the State President of the Western Australian Division and my many Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, Sir Charles Court and Richard Court, two former Premiers of Western Australia, fellow Liberals.  
As always, it';s a tremendous pleasure to address this State Conference.  I have addressed quite a number as Leader of the Party over the past ten or fifteen years.  Each has been different.  Each Conference has been conducted in its own distinctive political environment and atmosphere and as I throw my mind back a year ago our emotions and our feelings were probably very different from what they are today.  We had just come off at the time of last year';s conference what I regarded as the great turning point of the political struggle in the lead up to the last election.  That was the magnificent victory in the Federal by-election in Aston in the suburbs of Melbourne on Bastille Day, the 14th of July 2001.  It was a victory for the revitalising forces of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party.  It gave us both heart and hope after a long period of political adversity and political set backs.  And it is well as people try and re-write political history that we remind them that the recovery politically of the Coalition government and of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party really began with that victory in the Aston by-election.  And it moved on to deliver what historically was a great win.  We achieved the largest two party preferred swing to an incumbent government since the 1966 election victory of Harold Holt.  
And I want to start my remarks today by expressing my heartfelt thanks to all of you for the part you played in that win.  It was not my win, it was the win of the Liberal family throughout Australia.  I was the fortunate public beneficiary and the public face of it but without your help, without your service on the polling booths and fundraising and as candidates, as sitting members, it would not have been possible.  And I particularly extend my thanks to Kim as the State President, to Peter Wells and I';ll be saying a little more about Peter';s service to the Liberal Party at this evening';s dinner.  But to Kim and Peter in particular and to all of the members of the Liberal Party in Western Australia you all have an honoured role and place in what was a defining victory in Australian political experience.  
So as I come here today to speak to this the 53rd State Conference of the Western Australian Division, I express my thanks as always to the branch members of the Liberal Party for the part that you have played in the place that we now occupy as the National Government.
I also of course reflect for a moment on our political opponents.  I reflect for a moment on the fact that we have an opposition leader who is trying to persuade the Australian public to believe that it';s a revolution in political control to reduce the mandated influence of the trade union movement on State ALP Conferences from 60% down to 50%.  
I predict now that he will win his reform.  He will stand before the rules  conference on the 5th and 6th of October in Canberra and he will win a reduction.  I mean he can hardly do otherwise than win a reduction from 60% to 50% particularly as you are going to trade off as part of that reduction, you';re going to trade off a veto over the policies of a future Labor Government handed to trade union leaders in the revitalised National Labor Advisory Council.  Of course they will agree to that deal.  They';d be crazy if they didn';t.  If I were Bill Ludwig or one of the other trade union heavies I';d grab that deal with both hands and run away laughing.  
But what will strike the Australian public as strange and what should strike the Australian public as strange is that it will be declared a great victory that you have reduced from 60% to 50% trade union control over Labor Party Conferences when fewer than one in five Australians who work in the private sector now care to belong to trade unions.  The new revitalised, reformed, modernised Labor Party will have a double democratic deficit.  To start with, any idea that any percentage should be mandated to a vested interest is contrary to the principles of democratic party organisation.
I thought the Labor Party believed in one man one vote.  I thought the defining characteristic of a man or woman';s influence on a political party was membership of that party.  In the Liberal Party, there are no first and second degree tiers in membership.  If you belong to the membership, to the party you';ve got the same rights as any other member.  No more, no less.   The Business Council of Australia doesn';t have 50% of voting rights at our State Conferences. They don';t have any percentage.  We are a democratic party.  We';re owned by nobody.  We might share some values in common with the business community but we are not controlled by them.  
But the other part of the double democratic deficit of course is that not only will you continue to have mandated influence by vested interests, but on top of that you will have as part of this modernised Labor Party 50% of the power in State ALP Conferences belonging to organisations that fewer than one in five Australians care to belong to if they';re employed in the private sector.  There may have been some numerical logic a few years ago although not democratic principle in this idea of 50% when 50% of the Australian workforce belonged to trade unions but that is no longer the case and yet we will be told on the 6th of October that it has been a triumph of modernisation and democratisation to have brought about this result.
Ladies and gentlemen, I speak to you at this Conference at a time when the esteem and the regard in which Australia is held around the world has never been higher.  I had the great privilege recently of representing Australia as Prime Minister on a visit not only to the United States but also to four countries in Europe with which we have very close historical, cultural, family and enduring links.  And the constant experience of that visit was to be reminded that the modern Australia is not only punching above her weight as we have so often done, but the modern Australia is seen around the world as an exemplar of economic strength, as a country that is prepared to stand for what it believes in and defend its policies in the face of internal criticism and is also a nation that is playing an increasingly important role not only in our own region but the affairs of the world.
And the things that stand out in the attitude that people have towards Australia are our great economic strengths.  The fact that we do have the fastest growing economy of all developed countries.  That we are now getting the dividend out of fifteen years of sustained economic reform.  That we not only stared down the Asian economic downturn of 1997 but we also sailed through any adverse effects from the difficulties the United States'; economy encountered after the 11th of September.
People also remember with great regard and warmth the role that we played in giving political and personal deliverance to the people of East Timor.  They understood the difficult diplomatic challenge we faced.  They realised that it would involve a temporary strain on our relationship with Indonesia.  They now see that relationship repairing and let me give a full measure of credit to President Megawati for the role that she has played, not only in the rebuilding of our relationship with Indonesia but also in the process of reconciliation between the people of East Timor and the people of Indonesia.  And her act of attending the Independence celebrations in Dili two months ago in the face of fierce domestic criticism was amply rewarded by the friendly and spontaneous welcome that she received from the people of Dili and the people of East Timor at those celebrations.  
And of course the people of the world also remember the  exuberant enthusiasm, the panache, the commitment, the technological sophistication and not least of course the sporting prowess that Australia displayed at the time of the Sydney Olympic Games in the year 2000.  
When you put those things together, the rest of the world now sees an Australian nation of strength, of confidence, of a sense of contentment with our own identity.  A nation that is simultaneously of Asia, of Europe and of North America but always above everything else profoundly and distinctively Australian.  A nation that continues to play in the councils of the world a very significant role.  
But this has come about not through good luck, it';s come about through the efforts of many over a long period of economic and other reform.  And can I also say to you ladies and gentlemen that contrary to what you might occasionally be told by some media commentators, I did not encounter criticism of our border protection policies when I visited Europe or the United States.  Rather, I experienced a sober understanding and realisation that this is a difficult issue and faced with a difficult situation the Australian government took action which it properly regarded as being in the Australian national interest.  An action that while it may not be necessarily duplicated in other countries is nonetheless action that has been carefully studied as the nations of the world come to deal with this vast human problem.  And come to understand that if there is to be a solution it lies in the improvement of conditions in the countries that produce many of the people who seek in one way or another to enter other countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are the beneficiaries of fifteen years of economic reform and particularly the economic reforms that have been carried out over the last six and a half years.  We have done a lot in that six and a half year period.  We have transformed our national industrial relations scene.  We have modernised and made more efficient the Australian waterfront.  All of you will remember over the years how Liberal governments were exhorted to do something about the disgrace of the Australian waterfront and in 1988 we did that.  We took on the Maritime Union of Australia.  It was difficult.  We were criticised.  We didn';t get enough support from certain areas that we should have got support from.  But in the end we triumphed in that struggle and we have delivered a level of efficiency on the Australian waterfront that would have been undreamt of ten or fifteen years ago.  
We took on taxation reform. Remember that? We';ve  talked about it enough. We went through some very difficult periods with it.  It wasn';t perfect in every respect but it is now well and truly bedded down.  We have provided a revenue base for the States of Australia which will grow as the economy grows in the years ahead and it will underwrite the capacity of the States to provide the essential services for which they are constitutionally responsible.  It has reduced the cost of our exports.  It has lowered the rates of personal income tax paid by most Australians.  And it has provided us with an essentially comprehensive broad based indirect tax in place of the old cumbersome wholesale sales tax.
We have paid off massive amounts of Labor debt.  Amongst the many statistics I was able to quote to my European audiences none drew more visible gasps from audiences than when I told them that the Federal Government debt of Australia was 4.6% of our annual wealth generation against an OECD average of 35%, a figure in Japan of 120% and a figure in the United States of 45%.  Now that is a legacy that we are bequeathing to the future generations of Australians.  A debt free future.  And one of the reasons why we should fight with all our might to deny federal Labor the opportunity of again resuming the treasury benches in Canberra is that all of us know that if they get their hands on the exchequer again they will squander that legacy of our children';s future.
But my friends the reform process is never finished.  One of the reasons we are in a strong political position at the present time is that we have not fallen for the line that you should do a certain amount of reform and then give it a break.  There is always a tendency to do that.  I have people coming us to me all the time saying hey look John it';s been terrific up to date but why don';t you know you just take it easy, enjoy it.  I have no intention of taking it easy.  I';ve no intention of treating my responsibilities as the source of any kind of personal enjoyment.  Every day of my life I regard it as a day that I must use to promote the interests of all of the Australian community.  And while ever we as a national government continue to do that we';ll continue to enjoy the respect and the support of the Australian people.
There are reform challenges that lie ahead of us.  Before the last election I identified three broad areas that I believed we had to tackle as a community in the years ahead.  One of them was the demographic challenge of the ageing of the population.  Another was something that has been receiving a lot of publicity recently and I';ll return to it in a moment and that is the great modern day challenge of balancing work and family responsibilities.  And the other related to the challenges of sustainable development involving amongst other things something that is very important to the people of Western Australia and that is the depredation imposed on our land by salinity.  
In recent days there has been a lot of debate about the balance we need to achieve between work and family responsibilities.  I called it one of the great barbecue stoppers of modern experience.  And that is true because it affects people at different stages of their life.  And what I sought to do in identifying the challenges that are in this policy area, to make the point that there is no one single policy response that is going to address the issue.  It is not an area where a one size fits all policy approach is desirable.  There is no one policy that is going to provide a total answer to the legitimate aspirations of modern Australian families to have their choices supported.  
We, at the last election, committed ourselves to the introduction of a baby bonus or a first child tax rebate to give it its full technical name.  The aim of that policy was to recognise something that everybody knows, that typically when the first child is born one income is temporarily, perhaps semi permanently, lost or certainly reduced.  And the baby bonus was designed to provide a financial cushion for the loss of that income and I want to make it very clear that we are very proud of that policy and we have absolutely no intention as some people have suggested of compromising or watering down that policy in order to fund some alternative policies in this area.  It is a very strange notion that says to a political party eight months after it has been elected with a certain range of policies that the right thing to do is to break one of the promises on which it was re-elected.  Well I want to tell you we won';t be breaking our commitments in relation to the baby bonus.  
But what we will be doing is building on what we have already done in this area.  The issue of paid maternity leave is something that ought to be considered.  It is part of the debate but it';s not a magic cure.  It';s not the one single answer as some people have argued.  The reality is that different families within the Australian community want to organise their families in different ways.  Some want a situation where both parents are full time earners to the maximum extent possible.  That is a choice that we should respect.  Other families want a situation when children come along that one parent is out of the work force full time, perhaps indefinitely, and certainly for a considerable period of time perhaps with both parents returning eventually in either a combination of full time or part time work.  That is a choice we should also respect.
And we should also respect the fact that the great majority of Australian families face a constant juggling act between the responsibilities of family and the responsibilities of earning an income to support that family and of fulfilling their legitimate career aspirations be they men or women.  
So what we have in modern society is not the replacement of the old view of what a normal family was and that is a single, normally male, breadwinner with the mother of the children a full time home-maker.  We shouldn';t replace that with the other extreme of assuming that every family in Australia now has a situation where both parents have equal full time career aspirations.  We have a whole mix and we should respect the choices of all of those family formations.  We shouldn';t deride the choice made by those who wish to have a mother or father home full time to care for infant children.  We should respect that choice.  We should not only respect that choice but we should also support it as we have over the last six and a half years with policies which make it easier for that to be done.  But equally we should respect the other choices that are made.  In other words the role of the government is not to tell people how to behave in relation to their families, the role of the government is to support the choices that people make in relation to their treatment of their families.  And it ought to be our role over the next period to build on what we have already done in this area.  And it';s quite impressive.  The baby bonus was but the latest of a number of policies which have provided more tax support, more incentive, more help and more choice for Australian families.
Can I just direct ladies and gentlemen before I finish a few remarks to the state political scene here in Western Australia.  Let me say to you Colin and to all of your colleagues that you are at present going through the most difficult period that any political party can go through and that is the early months of Opposition.  I';ve been there.  I  know what it';s like.  I mean one of the advantages I have is I';ve been in just about every situation you could have been in, in Australian politics.  It certainly gives you a thick hide and it gives you a great deal of experience.  But believe me Opposition is dreadful.  There is nothing worse in politics than Opposition.  Never forget that.  If you are in Opposition work as hard as possible to get out of it and if you are in government work as hard as possible to avoid returning to Opposition.  I have no intention of going back into Opposition.  I';ve had enough of that but I want to share my experiences and can I say to you Colin it is difficult but politics is volatile.  We live in a very detribalised political state.  People are not rusted on like they were.  I mean a year ago people thought One Nation in this State was a huge political threat.  Do they think it now?  Of course they don';t.  The reality is that the political scene changes very sharply.  And what a political party has got to do is always be ready to take advantage of that through unity, through the development of policy alternatives and the pursuit of the weaknesses and the vulnerability of ones political opponents.
And very finally ladies and gentlemen, as you all know in the end political parties exist because they have common beliefs and common values.  They exist to win government to implement the practical manifestation of those common beliefs and those common values.  And it is always important at a time like this to remind ourselves of what we are all about as a political movement.  To put aside the daily detail of a political party';s existence and the daily detail of its policies and to remember that it is common values in the end that bind us together more tightly than anything else. 
 And so it is with the values that bind nations together.  And when two months ago I had the immense privilege of addressing on behalf of Australia a joint sitting of the United States Congress in Washington I tried to distil some of the values that Australia had in common with the United States.  And I could do no better than to state some values that not only bind our two nations together but also I believe resonate particularly with Liberals all around Australia.  And I said that those values were a belief that the individual is more important than the State.  A belief that strong families are a nation';s greatest resource and that a united caring loving family is the best social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.  A belief that competitive capitalism is the real key to national wealth and a belief that decency and hard work define a person';s worth, not class or race or social background or privilege.  
They are values that I hold very dear.  They are values that I believe the overwhelming majority of Australians hold dear.  And we should never forget that that is the great connection between this great mainstream political party and the Australian people.  We have been successful federally because we have identified with the aspirations of the great mainstream of the Australian people.  We have not played the special interest group game.  We';ve identified with the Australian national interest and we';ll continue to be successful if we continue to hold to those values and in so doing continue our connection with the aspirations of the mainstream of the people of Australia.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
I first acknowledge and honour the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place, Air Marshal and Mrs Evans, my parliamentary colleagues, particularly Philip Ruddock and Wilson Tuckey, President of the Senate, Senator Aden Ridgeway the Deputy Leader of the Australian Democrats, Evelyn Scott and Ian Spicer, Fred Chaney, Jackie Huggins, Geoff Clark the Chairman of ATSIC, ladies and gentlemen.  
This is a beautiful morning, it';s a stunning Canberra July morning.  It';s also a very special occasion.  People come here with different emotions and different views about the reconciliation process, but I think we are all bound together with a genuine desire to move it forward in a positive fashion.  And Reconciliation Place is designed in that spirit and with that in mind.  People will have different views as to how to advance the reconciliation process and there will be a legitimate further debate about the contributions that will need to be made to Reconciliation Place.  But there will be no debate about the desirability of placing at the symbolic national centre of the constitutional life of this nation, a special area which not only honours the contribution of indigenous people to this country and their central role in our being as Australian, but also honours the importance of the process of reconciliation.  There is no one single thing that can be done that will once and for all reconcile people.  It is a process requiring patience and goodwill and acknowledgment of the sadness that people have suffered and the legitimate sense of injustice they feel, but also a desire to emphasise those things that bind us together and to emphasise the common future that all of us have.
And in that spirit, this place does not represent any kind of conclusion of the reconciliation process.  It is a contribution and it will develop over time as further slivers are added to depict the stories and the issues that are important to the reconciliation process.  It was designed and planned in consultation with the steering committee.  And I want to warmly thank in particular, Evelyn Scott, Ian Spicer and Matilda House for the contribution that they have made.  We also congratulate the talented design team that developed the overall design, including the architect Simon Kringas, the indigenous artist Sharon Payne and the exhibition design consultant, Alan Vogt.  
The slivers acknowledge some of the many indigenous Australians who';ve made a contribution to our national life.  Amongst them Cathy Freeman and the first Australian cricket team to tour England in 1868.  We honour also the example of Captain Reg Saunders, the first indigenous Australian to be commissioned as an officer in the Australian Army and who was accepted unreservedly by the men who served with him because false values do not flourish amongst frontline soldiers.  There are many parts to reconciliation and the central circular mound that rises out of this Reconciliation Place shows the different and unique horizons that exist and that each position offers an individual perspective on reconciliation.  
In reaching today I want to thank many people.  I want to thank the people who';ve joined in the design process.  I want to thank Fred Chaney and Jackie Huggins, the co-conveners of Reconciliation Australia for the leadership role that they have demonstrated.  And I also want to thank very warmly the understanding and the cooperation of the Sorry Day Committee and welcome the presence of Audrey Kinnear here today.  And to say that we intend in a spirit of understanding and goodwill to work and discuss the future design, the future composition of the slivers, recognising that although there is common goodwill, there are some different perspectives that need to be further discussed.  But I think today is a wonderful day for Australia.  It gives me on behalf, in a political sense, of the people of Australia who say to all those who';ve come here to Reconciliation Place, will become an important focal point, not only to acknowledge the centrality of the place of the indigenous people in the life of this nation, but also the importance of the ongoing goodwill and commitment of all of the Australian people through the process of reconciliation.
So it is in that spirit, ladies and gentlemen, I declare open Reconciliation Place.  I invite you all after the formalities are concluded to observe the slivers and I hope for years to come this will be a gathering point, a focal point of recollection, a focal point of hope and a focal point for Australians of different backgrounds who reflect upon those things that bind us together and give us our common values as Australians.  Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Lisa, and first of all can I say to George and Brianna and all the other pupils and the teachers and particularly the principal of Northbridge Primary School thank you very much indeed for having us on your school grounds this morning.  I can';t think of a better place in which to launch the nomination process for the Australian of the Year Awards 2003 than at a local primary school on this beautiful late winter morning and to do it front of Australia';s future.
The Australian of the Year Awards are about honouring people who provide inspiration and hope and represent the things that we like to believe demonstrate what it is to be a good and true Australian.  And when you look back over the careers and the examples of people who have been Australians of the Year or Young Australians of the Year, you have the variety which is Australia, you have people who have been great medical scientists such as Professor Peter Doherty, you have great sports men and women, you have people who';ve excelled in the arts, you';ve had people such as General Peter Cosgrove, who I welcome here today, the Chief of Australia';s Defence Force who gave great inspiration and leadership in the military area.  And you have people who have represented Australia';s best and compassionate instincts in working for the less privileged and the less fortunate within our community.
And today we launch not only the search for the Australian of the Year, but we also launch the search for the Young Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian and a new part of the Australian of the Year Awards, the local heroes award, and there';ll be a little bit more said about that in a moment.
But I';m here today not only to launch these nominations but particularly to thank the many sponsors, and Lisa asked you to put your right hand on your left shoulder and pat yourself on the back, I can';t somehow or other ask you to crane your neck around and read the names of all of the sponsors that are on the back of your jumper, but if you look at the jumper in front of you, you don';t have to crane your neck to do it, you can just look at the one in front of you and you will see the names of all of those Australian companies and other organisations which have sponsored and supported the Australian of the Year Awards, and I want to thank those companies, quite a number of them are represented here today, for their very great generosity.  I mean, companies exist to make profits and keep their shareholders happy, and so they should, and to employ a lot of people, employing many of your mums and dads I';m sure, but they also make a great contribution to society when they help organisations and help things such as the Australian of the Year Awards.  So I think we ought to put our hands together and thank all of the companies that have been very generous to the Australian of the Year Awards.
And I also want to thank Lisa Curry Kenny and all the other members of the Australia Day Council, a number of them are here today.  Lisa you give great leadership to the council and to all of you who have devised the new format, and I think it';s terrific we';re launching it like this and it means that there';ll be a build-up and when the awards are announced around Australia Day next year there will be a great level of interest and great level of excitement.
I want to thank Scott for what he said today.  Another example of how, I mean I bet you don';t know too many paleontologists, I bet you don';t.  and I think if most of us are honest with ourselves we mightn';t have had a very well developed idea before Scott won the Young Australian of the Year eight months ago of exactly what they were.  But every time I see those digital representations on the ABC of those dinosaurs, Scott I was about to say I think of you, and that sort of came out the wrong way.  But I do sort of think of what it is to be a paleontologists and it';s just a example of the dimensions that this award has bought to an understanding of what Australia is.  And when you look at the history and the experiences of people who';ve won that awards, I mean Ian Kiernan is here today, I don';t think anybody has done more to inculcate into the Australian community a sense of individual responsibility for caring for the Australian environment than Ian has done.  And when I think of the medical scientists who have won recognition in the Australian of the Year Awards, it reminds everybody of what a richly diverse and able country we are.  We are constantly reminded of how good we are at sport, we';ve had plenty of sportsmen like Pat Rafter and Mark Taylor and Allan Border who';ve been Australians of the Year.  But we also need to remind ourselves that we';ve equally as good at many of other things, and that';s what the Australian of the Year Awards are very much about.
So on this beautiful morning at the end of a wonderful Commonwealth Games, that must have bought a bit of a nostalgic tear to Lisa';s eyes as she watched and heard it, and I know we send our congratulations to the Australian team that has done so wonderfully well at Manchester.  Let';s give them a round of applause.
And finally and most importantly can be celebrate this morning the sheer joy it is to an Australian in this wonderful and very blessed and very fortunate country and it';s in that spirit that I launch the nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards for 2003.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you very much Mr Salter. To my parliamentary colleague Senator Ian Campbell who may I say has carried much of the detailed workload of the Government in the broad area of corporate regulation, and I take this opportunity at this very representative luncheon to record my personal appreciation to you Ian for the tremendous job that you have done on behalf of the Government in that very important area. Ladies and gentlemen, I think it goes without saying that this luncheon and the subject that I will address is fairly topical and it';s fairly timely and it has some interesting coincidences.
What I intend to say today about corporate governance is said properly in general terms against the background of the economic and political climate in which we in Australia live at present. We do have a strongly performing economy. It';s not perfect, it';s not without challenge and it';s not without its weaknesses. But it is and has performed better than any economy virtually in the developed world. And that is principally the result of about 15 years of successive economic challenges and reforms, coupled with a capacity on the part of the Australian business community to change and adapt and to reach outwards. We wouldn';t have achieved our current economic strength without the reforms and the initiatives of Governments, and I say deliberately Governments, because I';ve never been reluctant to give credit to earlier Governments for some of the things they did in earlier years to improve the competitiveness of the Australian economy. We wouldn';t have achieved what we have now without the work of Governments, but equally we wouldn';t have achieved what we have now without the contribution and the skill of these men and women of the Australian business community.
When I had the privilege in June, an enormous privilege of addressing a joint sitting of the United States Congress, I tried to outline some of the things that Americans and Australians believed in in common. One of the things that I presumed to say, perhaps only in this case on behalf of a majority of Australians as distinct from all Australians – I said that we believed in competitive capitalism as the best way to generate national wealth. That belief lies at the core of the Government';s approach to economic management. We think a capitalist society operating in an ethical, competitive fashion is the best way to generate wealth. In fact the experience of the last 20 or 30 years suggests that it';s really the only way to continually generate national wealth over any sustained period of time. And the reason that corporate governance is so tremendously important as an issue and the quality of it is so tremendously important is that it is part of the process which has produced and will continue to underpin the success of competitive capitalism. Take away good corporate governance and you take away one of the struts that underpins competitive capitalism. It is like taking away sound macroeconomic management – that is another strut. If you take that away, you also attack and endanger competitive capitalism.
Much has been written about corporate governance in recent times and I applaud the contributions that have been made by the two bodies sponsoring this lunch, by the corporate regulators and by others, to addressing it in the Australian environment. And it is proper that all of us do so because none of us, particularly those and I guess that';s the overwhelming majority here today, who share my faith in competitive capitalism, none of us should underestimate the depth of public unease in the Australian community at present regarding what our fellow Australians describe as corporate excesses. The unease may be too judgmental. It may in some cases, certainly in a generic application, be unfair. But that it exists, let there be no mistake. It does. And it';s the responsibility of all of us together to address that unease in a reflective, active and sensible fashion. The Australian public and indeed our obligations to maintaining the strength of competitive capitalism in Australia, require us to respond to this issue in a balanced and sensible fashion. They will expect of us a combination of improved self-regulation coupled with appropriate, but not excessive, levels of Government involvement and intervention. 
We do need to preserve a proper sense of perspective. It is necessary to severely punish wrongdoers. There are laws against fraud and misbehaviour of other kinds and they should be vigorously enforced. But it';s also important that we don';t overreact. It';s also important that we don';t impose on ethical but nonetheless robust business operators in our country, a new layer of unproductive and ultimately self-defeating regulation. Now I';ve already made it clear and I repeat it here today that I don';t intend that the national Government of Australia gets swept along in a tide of simply embracing fresh regulation for its own sake. Nothing would be achieved by that. But I do want to put on record respectfully what I see as the expectation of the Australian community to whom I am ultimately accountable – their expectations of Australia';s corporate leaders. They expect them to work unceasingly to ensure that good governance practices are met at all times. That those leaders must meet the highest levels of ethical behaviour, and that those corporate leaders as a matter of routine should continually review their governance practices and let their customers and their shareholders know that they are doing this. In other words, we have the responsibility to respond effectively and if we are to ward off and render unnecessary an excessive level of Government intervention and response, we will see to it that in cooperation, our practices of self-regulation and self-discipline are made effective and are appropriate to the climate and the mood of the times. 
Much of the debate of course in this country is influenced by what has happened in the United States. That of course is not the only driver of the concern. Some very high profile corporate activities and collapses and failures, which you will understand I will not touch in any kind of detail for the most obvious of legal reasons, have coloured and influenced the attitude of the Australian public. But it';s also true that what has happened in the United States, the most dynamic part of worldwide competitive capitalism, has had a big impact on all of us. It';s very important once again to get a sense of perspective about the relevance of what has occurred in the United States to what is occurring here in Australia. A lot of it is highly relevant but some of it can be understood in the context of some differences in the corporate governance approach between Australia and the United States. To name but a few, the practice that has been followed in this country, wisely in my view, but maintaining in most cases a fairly strict separation between the office of company chairman and the office of company managing director or chief executive office. A practice that has not been followed to anywhere near the same extent in the United States or on my understanding and reading of what has occurred there that blurring of those responsibilities has been at the heart of many of the problems that have overcome in a high profile way a number of the United States companies. 
I think it';s also fair to say that the super litigious character of American society, an aspect of American life that I think all the Governments of Australia should fight with all their might to keep out of this country as best we can, and I say that in the context of being a fairly unashamed admirer of many aspects of the United States life, particularly the very strong commitment to the competitive spirit. But there are some American practices that we can well and truly do without and the litigious contagion which is lapping at our shores, if I can mix my metaphors, is certainly something out of the United States that we can do without. But the United States does have as you all know, a very rules-based or black letter law approach. I think it';s fair to say without too much exaggeration that Australia has more of a principles based approach. Rules excessively written can encourage avoidance, an attitude of 'show me where it says you can';t do it', rather than an approach that seeks adherence to certain principles. 
I think it';s also fair to say that one of the other significant differences that could well have been relevant in recent corporate failures in the United States is that we here in Australia have requirements of continuous disclosure, where as the United States has the practice of periodic reporting. And I think in certain critical cases that can mean the difference between more timely disclosure and the concealment of information.
That ladies and gentlemen is what I might call an overview of the thinking that I and therefore the Government brings to this issue. It is an important subject on the minds of many Australians and it';s just not on the minds of shareholders, it';s on the minds of citizens generally.  It';s not as important as the monthly mortgage bill.  It';s not as important as the Commonwealth Games.  It';s not as an important as a number of other things that are really important, but it is very important and more important than what it was a year ago and that';s because people think something has gone wrong and I think some people have been getting away with murder in terms of corporate excesses.  And I think we';ve got to agree that some people have been guilty of excesses and my responsibility and yours is to fashion the response that';s needed and will be effective, but is a response that doesn';t do damage to the essentially healthy and ethical character of corporate behaviour in Australia.  The great bulk of company directors and business men and women in this country do behave ethically and correctly and they don';t deserve a whole plethora of additional regulation that will only make their businesses less profitable and their life more difficult.  But we do need to recognise that a mere ritualistic lip service to reform and change will not be enough.  
You are aware that the corporate law economic reform program commenced under this Government in 1997 and particularly through the work of Ian Campbell and others it';s modernised business regulation and our approach to corporate regulation is focused on a number of key principles including, market freedom, investor protection and disclosure of relevant information.  Clear guidance regarding appropriate corporate behaviour and swift enforcement if breaches occur, remain as key elements in insuring that markets function effectively.  The Australian Securities and Investment Commission has made a very important contribution to Australia';s relatively stable corporate environment.  In particular it has taken an aggressive approach to upholding the Corporation';s Law.  And before accounting problems emerged internationally ASIC embarked on a campaign to target abuse of accounting standards in Australia and in 1999 ASIC effected re-statements of reported accounts in the listed sector to the tune of almost $1.5 billion.  And last month ASIC announced a new accounting surveillance project directed to the areas of accounting abuse recently uncovered in the United States.  And in recent years it';s stepped up its enforcement activities and in the last financial year some 19 offenders were jailed as a consequence of various ASIC investigations.  And it';s also stepped up its enforcement of disclosures in prospectuses and to the market.  
I think you';re also aware that the pursuit of a single set of high quality accounting standards has been an objective of the Government going back to the first CLERP initiative.  And this recognises that uniform accounting standards, which are accepted in major international capital markets will greatly facilitate cross border comparisons by investors, reduce the cost of capital and assist Australian companies wanting to raise capital or list overseas.  And in April the Australian Accounting Standards Board agreed that Australia';s accounting standards should be harmonised and eventually converge with the International Accounting Standards Board standards.
Australia in my view, and I dare say I won';t encounter much disagreement at this luncheon, is very well served by a highly skilled and confident accounting profession.  However, it is time, and in view of the widespread questioning overseas of the quality of financial disclosure, and also here in some cases, for Australia to review its own regulatory framework in this area.  The Ramsay Report, with which you are all very familiar, on the independence of Australian company auditors, made recommendations to the Government designed to ensure the independence of auditors from the companies they audit.  Later this month the Government will release a discussion paper or CLERP 9, which will address issues raised in the Ramsay Report together with a number of other issues on financial disclosure.  As well as providing a response to the report, the discussion paper will consider a range of issue relating to the quality of audit, including a review of oversight structures for the profession and for auditing standards.  Final implementation of reforms in the audit area will of course need to take in to account any relevant recommendations that come out of the HIH Royal Commission and some further developments overseas.  It will be our desire to seek as soon as possible the views of the profession and others on the material raised in the discussion paper, so that we can then fairly speedily consider the implementation to the extent that we think appropriate with any changes of the recommendations of the Ramsay Report.  
It is inevitable in any public discussion, and properly so, of corporate excesses with the issue of executive remuneration should come up.  To many in the community, even those who recognise and advocate the essential importance of properly remunerating highly competent company executives, there is nonetheless a view in a community particularly in relation to some spectacular examples of high remuneration despite poor company performances that those practises are seen in many respects the worst possible light by the general community.  And in the wake of the collapse of One Tel, the Government announced that it would be amending the corporation';s legislation to permit liquidators to reclaim payments made by a company in the lead up to the liquidation.  The Corporations Act already contains provisions that commit liquidators to apply to the courts to reverse transactions made by a company whilst it is insolvent within certain time limits.  The Government is proposing to extend the existing ability of the liquidator to permit them to apply to reclaim unreasonable payments made to the directors in the four years prior to a liquidation, regardless of whether the company is insolvent at the time or not.  This proposal would not enable liquidators to apply to reclaim reasonable payments made to directors whist the company is solvent.  The issue of executive remuneration is always a difficult one.  We do not want to generate an envy society in this country.  We do not want a culture which accepts as perfectly normal that people with highly developed entertainment and other skills should be remunerated very lavishly, yet people who do less apparently spectacular but arguably more important work in generating wealth and leading companies in this country are envied what is their proper remuneration.  But I think we all know that whenever that approach and whenever the trust involved in that approach is abused and whenever arrangements which amount to no more than plundering the assets of a company are agreed to or entered into, immense damage is done to the willingness of the general community to support the levels of remuneration that are needed to retain and attract the high quality people needed to run the major companies of Australia.  
Well ladies and gentlemen, I welcome the fact that the leaders of the accounting profession and the securities industry and the representatives of company directors around Australia and indeed the entire business community of this country is addressing itself to this subject.  It';s a very important issue and if we';re sensible and we get the balance right, we can make the changes that are necessary without going overboard.  And we really do have so much going for us in this country at the moment.  We have an economy, I can assure you as somebody who';s recently visited both the United States and Europe as Prime Minister, we have an economy that is highly regarded.  People do think this country is turning in a pretty stellar economic performance.  We are respected for having been able to embrace change and reform and when you look at how far we have come in areas like industrial relations and taxation and fiscal consolidation, when you recognise that our national debt is 4.6 per cent of GDP, in Japan it';s 130 per cent and in the United States it';s 45 per cent.  And you think of all the change and reform that we have embraced, which as contributed to the economic strength we have at the present time, we would be negligent in the extreme as a community if we didn';t take the steps necessary to ensure that our corporate governance provided that strut to the competitive capitalism, which has underpinned our wealth generation that I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks.  It will require some changes by the Government, not overly regulatory or prescriptive, but some changes.  It will require a willingness of the accounting and legal professions and the securities industries all to play their part.  It will require all of us to understand the implications of what is happening overseas for Australia, but also to ignore those aspects of what have occurred in other countries that are due to different practice.
We must respond to the concern. If we don';t through a measure of
 self-regulation make changes then far more clumsy and far more ill-conceived
 changes and far more costly changes, will end up one way or another in
 being imposed. But I think we';d be the poorer as a consequence.
 So at a time we have every reason to be very confident about Australia';s
 economic strength and economic future, we also have a responsibility to
 respond in the fashion that I have tried to outline generally today to
 issues of corporate governance.
I';m very committed to working with all of you to bring about the changes that are needed.  We are not a heavy handed prescriptive Government when it comes to business regulation.  But we are a Government that doesn';t entertain the naive belief that there';s nobody out there in the corporate sector who isn';t misbehaving.  We do believe some changes are needed.  If we can work together to bring them about, that essential strut to our competitive capitalism will remain and the economic strength that Australia now has will be even more available to all of the Australian community.  Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Shire President, Warren Entsch, Dr Clarke, the other councillors of the Mareeba Shire, ladies and gentlemen, local elders. It';s great to be here – this sure beats Question Time in the House of Representatives. It';s very peaceful, it';s very beckoning and I can understand why people love it. And I';m very glad to have the opportunity of a few moments to have a look at just how, and experience just how peaceful and enjoyable these heritage trails and the beautiful rainforests of far north Queensland are.
This is one part of a network of heritage trails around Queensland that the Federal Government has provided $48 million towards out of the Centenary of Federation fund that we established back in 1997. And when we established that fund, we invited the various State Governments of Australia to nominate some projects in their various States that they thought should get the funding. We didn';t agree with all of the nominations that were made, I might say. I mean in the end we decided that there were some good projects nominated by States around Australia, and there were some pretty bad ones as well. But I';m pleased to say that one of the projects that was nominated by the former Queensland… the Queensland Coalition Government, was in fact supportive of the heritage trails. And it appealed to me because it included in it a proposition that we give some money to a project such as what we';re opening today. So that';s the origins of our involvement in it, and it is one of those things that is very much about the heritage of the country. 
It';s about our environmental heritage. It';s about our indigenous heritage. It';s about the heritage of local communities working together. And we';re very good at that in Australia. We';re much better at working together in a cooperative volunteer fashion than a lot of other societies and local communities do it well, countries do it well. We did it very well at a national level with the Olympic Games. And if you give an Australian community a common goal and you get a few energetic men and women in the community, you will normally get a good result. And the way in which the funds made available for the construction of these wet tropics trails, the way in which that was done, is a credit to the local Kuranda community. It';s a credit to the people of the Mareeba Shire and it';s a credit to the leadership of all of the local people.
So can I say ladies and gentlemen, I address a lot of meetings, some of them in the open air. A few of them stop the traffic, as this one is succeeding to do. Sometimes I attract other people who stop the traffic in order to stop me. But that';s part of our great democracy. But you can';t feel other than at peace with the world and not wanting to argue with anybody, and just wanting to sort of wander through and be left alone, when you go down that trail which I did a few moments ago with your Shire President.
Can I also say if I may, and I';m sure I can, what a wonderfully energetic bloke you have in Warren Entsch as your local Federal Member. He really batters doors down like nobody else. I mean he';s bigger than most and he has a great capacity to batter doors down in the interests of the people of Leichhardt. And he has worked very hard for this community and when I was coming here today he put together a programme that allowed me to see different parts of this community and different experiences. And I met Sue… is that the guide? And she told me that she had done part of her honours course wandering through here… wandering through the wet tropics. And I thought that would be one of the most strung out honours courses that you would find anywhere because the temptation to make it go as long as possible would be enormous.
So ladies and gentlemen, I';m delighted to be with you. This is a great and different part of Australia. I';ve been to different parts of Warren';s electorate on six or seven times in the six years that I';ve been Prime Minister. He takes me to a different part on just about every occasion. I think Cooktown is the next one that he';s going to take me to. But this is very special. The wet tropics of far north Queensland are not only renowned throughout Australia. They';re renowned for very good reason throughout the world. And they are a very rich and important part of our environmental heritage. They';re also a very important part of the economic infrastructure of this community because eco-tourism is now a growing, indeed a boom industry, and sensibly nurtured and properly supported by governments and by local communities and by businessmen and women, it can really provide a great deal of hope and a great deal of employment for people for years and years into the future.
So it';s in that spirit very much that I thank you for inviting me and I have great pleasure in declaring these heritage trails well and truly open. And for years I hope people will enjoy them and commune with nature and reflect on what a wonderful country we have.
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Warren, Mr Mayor. And could I thank the traditional owners and the dance group for their very, very kind welcome and also their very nice gift. And I pay tribute to them and acknowledge the land on which this gathering takes place.
Mr Mayor, I want to thank you and your staff for making it possible for us to have this regional Cabinet meeting in Cairns. We try to come to major regional centres on a regular basis and by any definition, Cairns is one of the great regional centres of Australia. And the courtesy that your staff has extended to us, the facilities you have made available and the general warmth of the reception that we have received from all of the citizens of this city, is very greatly appreciated. And I know that the opportunity all of my colleagues have had to be here over the past couple of days has allowed them to learn more of your particular contribution to Australia';s economy and Australia';s social infrastructure, and also to know a little of some of the challenges and opportunities that exist.
It';s always a delight to come to Warren Entsch';s electorate. As I said last night, he';s a character. He has his own distinctive qualities as a local Member. I can assure you he makes a big noise in Canberra on behalf of far north Queensland and I don';t think the people in this room would want it otherwise.
I';m very conscious that this is a gathering that brings together people who contribute in different ways to the life and the heart and soul of this city. It brings together representatives of community groups, people who volunteer their time and dedicate their lives to helping people who are less fortunate in our community. And one of the things that I';ve been able to do over the past day or so in Cairns is not only to talk to the business community, but to meet some of the school teachers and young students, to meet people as I am at a gathering such as this, who are involved in keeping the social cement of this community not only well and truly mixed, but making its contribution to holding society together.
The Governments have mixed responsibilities. We have three levels of Government, as the Mayor pointed out. Historically that';s the system we have, and it';s our obligation to make it work as effectively as possible. And one of the reasons that we introduced tax reform a couple of years ago – we don';t hear much talked about it now, it';s become part of the system and people have got used to it – but one of the reasons that we introduced tax reform several years ago was to answer requests that State Governments had made of the Federal Government decade after decade and that';s to give them access to a growth tax. And what happens under the new taxation arrangement is that all of the proceeds of the Goods and Services Tax go to the states – all of it. Every last dollar. And under the new arrangements, in time every state will be better off as a result of the GST than they were under earlier arrangements. And the good news for a Queensland audience is that the state which will be better off first will be the state of Queensland, because with effect from the 1st of July next year, the state of Queensland will be receiving under the GST arrangement more money than it would have received under the old arrangement that we inherited.
Now I don';t want to be any more subtle than that, but I just want to make the point that I agree with you Mr Mayor – that we do have to address the distribution of responsibilities in this country. I think you always have some buck passing between the different levels of Government. My belief is that the public gets sick and tired of arguments between State and Federal Governments about who is responsible for what, and between Local and State Government, Local and Federal, and so forth. They really expect us as elected representatives to discharge responsibilities that we have, and where we have shared responsibilities, to work together in a cooperative fashion.
Now one of the shared responsibilities that I would like to work with the Queensland Government on is of course the care of the Great Barrier Reef. And the Queensland Premier and I have released a statement today announcing that we';ve reached agreement on, and signed a memorandum of understanding about the future care and the way in which we will maintain the quality of the reef and the surrounding waters so that it will remain forever a magnificent icon environmentally not only for Australia, but for the whole world. It also maintains the enormous potential that the Great Barrier Reef represents to far north Queensland. That';s the kind of cooperation that the Australian public wants. The Australian public is not interested in name calling between Governments. The Australian public is interested in us working together and discharging our different responsibilities.
These regional Cabinet meetings are a reminder that Australia doesn';t revolve around Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra. It';s a reminder of the contribution that northern Australia makes to our export capacity. It';s a reminder of the importance of the tourist industry. It';s a reminder as the Mayor said, of our linkages with those hundreds of millions of people in our region. And it';s also a reminder of some of the difficulties of the older industries of this country. Older in the sense that they';ve been here for a long time and one of those is the sugar industry.
There is a problem with the sugar industry. I met the elected representatives of the industry yesterday afternoon. I spoke to some of the men and women from the industry outside the Council Chambers this morning. They were all putting their view, as Australians have a right to, to their elected representatives and asking us to respond. We will respond. We';ll be sympathetic. We';ll also be realistic. We have a responsibility to respond to their requests. We have a responsibility to recognise the importance to a whole string of towns on the Queensland coast of the sugar industry. We also have a responsibility to recognise that unless there is some fundamental long term change and reform, simply providing short term assistance is not an answer. Successful industry restructuring occurs where Government assistance is matched by internal reform and industry response. Where that occurs, the partnership, the package can work. Where it doesn';t occur, the problem is back on the Government';s lap in even greater measure within a relatively short period of time. Now that is the philosophy that we';re going to bring to this issue. We';re not going to ignore the plight of the sugar industry. Of course we';re not. We know how important it is and how fundamental it is to so many people in so many communities. But we operate in a world where there is a massive oversupply, with sugar at a very heavily depressed price. We have to deal with that reality. And if there is to be Government assistance it has to be matched by some significant areas of change and reform, and that';s the kind of approach we';re going to bring to it and I hope that the deliberations that we will bring will be seen as fair and reasonable not only to people in the sugar industry, but also to the rest of the Australian community, and I';m sure it will be.
But finally ladies and gentlemen, it';s a great pleasure to be here. I';m departing literally in minutes to get ready to go to Papua New Guinea where I';ll be spending just a day and then going over to Suva for a meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum. And while in Papua New Guinea I';ll have the opportunity… the great privilege of unveiling a memorial to those Australian soldiers who died defending this country in one of the most crucial battles in this country';s history, and that was the Battle of Milne Bay which represented the first defeat on land of the Japanese Imperial Army in World War II and was in so many ways an historic turning point in the battle of Australia 60 years ago. And I know that I';ll be speaking for all Australians of all political persuasions in expressing the views of a grateful nation to those wonderful people.
But Mr Mayor, thank you for having us. You';ve made us very welcome. We';ve enjoyed being here. I detect that there is an air of prosperity and confidence in the city of Cairns. I';m sure it has much to do with the civic leadership of the city. I';m sure it has also much to do with the quality of the Federal representation. And I';m sure the State representation is hard working as well. So to everybody can I simply say thank you for having us. It';s great to get out of the big smoke, it';s great to get around regional Australia and it';s great to savour the entertainment, the delights… well I';d better rephrase that – it';s great to savour the hospitality and the entertainment of the people of far north Queensland.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Chairman. My ministerial colleagues - Richard Alston, Brendan Nelson, Kay Patterson, Peter McGauran - very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. This is a very important night for science in Australia. We not only announce the winners of some very special awards but it's an opportunity for the Government through its head, the Prime Minister, to say something about the view of the Government and therefore the view of the nation of the role of science in our lives. 
I was not trained in a scientific discipline. The best I can claim was to have done chemistry successfully for the leaving certificate at Canterbury Boys High School. I then went into the law and had I suppose what you might loosely call a liberal arts education. My strongest subjects were history and English. I have to say that when I became Prime Minister of all the bodies that I came into contact with none has made a greater influence, or had a greater influence on me than the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council.  It really has, and I don't mind admitting it, opened my eyes to the enduring relevance of science in our community and I want to say tonight what a very high priority this Government places on scientific achievement in Australia by Australians.  
As a passionate lover of sport can I say our scientific achievements are as meritorious and are as important to this country and in an enduring sense even more important than our magnificent sporting achievements.  And tonight is an opportunity for me to say on behalf of the Government how much we are in debt to the scientists of this country, how proud we should be of their world excellence, how gratified we should be that this country has in fields such as medical science always punched well and truly above her weight.
This audience better than most would know of the great scientists that Australia has contributed to the world. This audience better than most would know the quality and the value of their research, the life saving and prolonging effects of their discoveries, and the relevance in so many different areas of life that scientists have to Australia as a nation.  
One of the most important policy statements I've made in the six and a half years of being Prime Minister was the Backing Australia's Ability Program launched at the beginning of last year, put together by the hard work of a number of my colleagues with a great deal of outside advice in which I'm very pleased to say is being implemented very much in line with the schedule laid down at the beginning of last year.  And amongst other things on the 29th of July this year Brendan Nelson announced the second tranche of the Federation Fellowships to 11 highly distinguished researchers who are regarded amongst the best in the world in their fields following the first 15 fellowships announced last year. And a total of 125 of these fellowships will be presented over a period of five years.  And on the 30th of May this year I announced the successful applicant to establish Australia's $49 million Biotechnology Technology of Excellence, the centre for stem cells and tissue repair in Melbourne. And on the 22nd of May this year the Government announced the successful joint venture consortium to establish Australia's $129 million Information and Communication Technology Centre of Excellence.
Now I don't claim, and very few in this audience would agree with me if I did, that everything the Government has done in the area of science has been perfect or that what we have announced is in any way in a long term sense totally adequate to the scientific needs of this country. But what I hope we have endeavoured to do in cooperation with the scientific community of Australia is to place the role of science at the centre of our existence, to accord it the respect and to accord its practitioners, its researchers, its brilliant men and women the respect that a modern sophisticated nation should give to those people who contribute so much to who we are, to find what we stand for and also making enormous contribution to the quality of the lives that we enjoy.
Tonight it's for me to announce and to say something of the winner of the Prime Minister's Prize for Science. Could I just cheat in advance of what somebody else is going to say and remark how personally delighted I am amongst many other things tonight that we have for the first time some prizes for the teaching of science at schools because the quality of science teachers is enormously important to the inculcation in the young of the value of scientific learning and scientific discipline.
Science has changed the way that all of us live. More importantly it has made it possible for some to live.  And tonight's recipient of the Prime Minister's Prize for Science has made a difference to the lives of millions of people, not just here in Australia but around the world.  And I'm delighted to announce that the winner is Professor Frank Fenner.  
Can I say, in case there's anybody here who doesn't know a little of his remarkable career, let me just touch the highlights. He's the Visiting Fellow at the John Curtin School of Medical Research and a pioneer in the field of virology. He graduated as a doctor in 1938, did a diploma in tropical medicine and served in the Australian Army in World War II for five years including as a malariologist in New Guinea and the Dutch East Indies. In 1946 he worked with the legendary Sir MacFarlane Burnet at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute discovering that mousepox was a good laboratory model for smallpox. 
In 1949 he was appointed Foundation Professor of Microbiology in the John Curtin School of Medical Research at the ANU and he was appointed its director in 1967.  Between 1951 and 1965 in collaboration with the CSIRO his laboratory work on myxomatosis provided a basis for its effective use for the biological control of rabbits. Famously in the early 1950s when there were concerns between a possible link between myxomatosis and an outbreak of encephalitis, Fenner and MacFarlane Burnet injected each other with the myxoma virus to put public fears to rest.  Fenner says that this was - quote - no big deal - unquote - but it was still very reassuring to the public.  
Between 1969 and 1980 Fenner's knowledge of pox viruses led to involvement in the campaign to eradicate smallpox. Appointed Chairman of the Global Committee for the Certification of Smallpox Eradication and announced the eradication of the disease to the World Health Assembly in 1980. In 1973 he was the Foundation Director of the Centre for Resources and Environmental Studies at the ANU and he retains as a long term resident of Canberra a strong interest in environmental sustainability.
In 1988 he was awarded the Japan Prize along with D A Henderson and I Arita; in 1995 the Copley medal of the Royal Society. In 2000 he was awarded the Albert Einstein World Award for Science, and in the year 2002 the Clunies Ross Lifetime Contribution National Science and Technology Award.  
Can I say ladies and gentlemen that is a truly gold medal performance in every way of an outstanding scientist of the world and one that we very proudly claim as an Australian. I congratulate the Professor. He's been a wonderful contributor. He's brought life and hope to millions and I feel very honoured to have the opportunity tonight to award him his prize and to thank him for his great contribution to humanity.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Excellency the Governor of Queensland, the Leader of the Opposition Simon Crean, Danna Vale the Minister for Veterans'; Affairs, Major General Phillips, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start my remarks by joining others in extending my congratulations to Mrs Ruff-O';Herne for the very significant recognition which has been extended to her today and to record I know on behalf of everybody our sense of admiration and regard for the dignity, the forgiveness, the forbearance, the understanding and the strength that she and so many others displayed in such awful circumstances.
I am delighted again to have the opportunity of addressing this annual congress of the RSL. The RSL is a very special body in the life of Australia. It is profoundly non-partisan political, it is non-sectarian, it is bound together by the common experiences of men and women and a common bond of deep affection to the welfare of this nation and of all of its people.
And I commence my address by again on behalf of the Government, the Parliament and all the Australian people of renewing the sense of debt that we owe to the more than 100,000 Australians who died in all the wars in the name of the defence of this country. To those who were wounded, to those who were fortunate enough to return without the impairment of life or limb. There is no greater debt owed by any nation than the debt it owes to those who put their lives on the line to defend the nation';s freedom and to defend the nation';s values. And in honouring those who died in defence of Australia or served this country, we do particularly as the anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the United States on the 11th of September last year, as that anniversary draws near we think particularly of the men of the Australian Defence Force who are serving in Afghanistan and elsewhere alongside our American friends and allies in the war against terrorism. They are doing important things in the name of this country and they continue to be very much in our thoughts and our prayers.
This year of course has been a time of very considerable change for the RSL and I want to pay special tribute to Rusty Priest, to Bruce Ruxton and to Derek Roylance, all of whom have given great service to their respective state branches over many years. And I welcome the three new state presidents to this congress – Brigadier Evans from the ACT, Mr Keith Hall in New South Wales and Major General McLachlan from Victoria.
This past year has marked, or does mark this year, the 60th anniversary of very special and pivotal events in our national life and our military history. I include the bombing of Darwin in northern Australia, the 60th anniversary of that, and the submarine attacks in Sydney and in Newcastle. And in this connection it was a special honour for me on behalf of the country to attend the inauguration of the magnificent memorial at Isurava on the Kokoda Track. That was an occasion to honour, and I was accompanied by Senator Mark Bishop, the Shadow Minister representing the Leader of the Opposition… to honour what those battles represented, what they meant to Australia at that time and the sense of heart and hope that the achievement of our men in those battles gave to the people of Australia. I';m also very pleased that the new memorial at Milne Bay and the refurbished memorial at Popondetta will be opened in November and that commemorative missions sponsored by the Federal Government will attend these important events. And also there will be a commemoration at El Alamein which will be a reminder of the crucial battles that we fought there alongside our British and other allies at a crucial moment in the Middle East campaign in World War II.
Indeed this year I';ve had the opportunity not only of going to Isurava, but also in the course of representing this country abroad, to participate in that always moving dusk ceremony at the Menin Gate in Belgium. A great tribute maintained in memory of so many Australians and others who died in the defence of Belgium in World War I. And also to visit Crete, the scene of fierce fighting alongside our friends from Greece and other countries in World War II. And it is always a moving experience to be reminded again of the sense of friendship and gratitude and honour that is felt by the peoples of those countries. This nation';s reputation for doing the right thing in difficult circumstances, and its citizens risking their lives in defence of the values they hold in common with others, our name for doing that is held in very high and warm regard and those deeds are long remembered by our friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, this congress gives all of you an opportunity to recollect, it gives you an opportunity to discuss issues important to the RSL and important to the nation. I would, I can say without fear of contradiction, that concern and respect and gratitude towards our returned men and women is something that is shared across the political divide. My own Government is committed to a number of initiatives that we announced in the last election campaign including the removal of the fees on income support supplement rates from war widowers and also the extension of the Gold Card eligibility to all Australian Defence Force veterans 70 and over with qualifying service from the first of July last. It is estimated that an extra 4,000 veterans with post World War II service will immediately become eligible as a result of that change, adding to the 282,000 members of the veterans community who already benefit.
The Minister has already announced a number of other initiatives in the area of commemoration. We';re undertaking health studies in the veterans of atomic testing and also the Vietnam, Korean and Gulf Wars.  We remain committed to addressing possible anomalies in the Veterans'; Entitlements Act and as you are aware an independent review of veterans'; entitlements was established to examine issues such as access to veterans'; entitlements and benefits provided to veteran disability pensioners. The committee has received over 2,900 submissions and is due to report in mid November of this year.
The obligation to care for our returned men and women is an unqualified and an ongoing obligation. I value very much the dialogue I have and I know my Minister has with the RSL. I want particularly as he is present today to record my gratitude to Bruce Scott for the work that he did as Minister for Veterans'; Affairs until the last election. Bruce was a hard and indefatigable worker for the interests of veterans and I know that many in the veterans'; community will remember with great affection his commitment to their cause.
Ladies and gentlemen, again may I say how very pleased I am to be here today. Of an organisation there is none that sits more easily at the centre of Australia';s life and Australia';s history than does the RSL. As the Governor said, you may have received constitutional form in 1901 but the deeds of successive generations of the fighting men and women of this country have given purpose, have given commitment, often in very tragic circumstances, as to what this country stands for. We have been reminded through the awarding of that Anzac Peace Prize that occasions such as this are to remember those who died in war, but they are above all else occasions to rededicate ourselves to peace.
One of the great paradoxes of Australia is that we are by nature and instinct non-belligerent, peace-loving people. For a non-belligerent, peace-loving people we have over the years made a very big sacrifice of lives and blood in the defence of values that are important to us and important to the other nations of the world. And that is a further spur and inspiration to all of us to work for the preservation of peace, for harmony amongst countries, but always remembering that the world is never quite as ideal and as benign a place as we would like it to be. And that it';s important for the preservation of the kind of nation that we have been, we are, and we hope always to remain, that occasionally we have to take action in concert with our allies.
Finally can I say that this is also an occasion to remember the contribution of all people who have come to this country from different parts of the world, to the building of the modern Australia. One of the great things about this country is its sense of fair play and its sense of tolerance and its open heartedness. And can I say to all of you, we have much to be proud of because we are Australians and there is no group of men and women in our midst to whom more is owed for what we now have than the men and women of Australia that you represent here by your presence. I say on behalf of the rest of your fellow Australians, thank you for what you have done, thank you for what you have given us, and thank you for what you continue to mean to us.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Excellency the Governor of Queensland, the Leader of the Opposition Simon Crean, Danna Vale the Minister for Veterans'; Affairs, Major General Phillips, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start my remarks by joining others in extending my congratulations to Mrs Ruff-O';Herne for the very significant recognition which has been extended to her today and to record I know on behalf of everybody our sense of admiration and regard for the dignity, the forgiveness, the forbearance, the understanding and the strength that she and so many others displayed in such awful circumstances. 
I am delighted again to have the opportunity of addressing this annual congress of the RSL. The RSL is a very special body in the life of Australia. It is profoundly non-partisan political, it is non-sectarian, it is bound together by the common experiences of men and women and a common bond of deep affection to the welfare of this nation and of all of its people. 
And I commence my address by again on behalf of the Government, the Parliament and all the Australian people of renewing the sense of debt that we owe to the more than 100,000 Australians who died in all the wars in the name of the defence of this country. To those who were wounded, to those who were fortunate enough to return without the impairment of life or limb. There is no greater debt owed by any nation than the debt it owes to those who put their lives on the line to defend the nation';s freedom and to defend the nation';s values. And in honouring those who died in defence of Australia or served this country, we do particularly as the anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the United States on the 11th of September last year, as that anniversary draws near we think particularly of the men of the Australian Defence Force who are serving in Afghanistan and elsewhere alongside our American friends and allies in the war against terrorism. They are doing important things in the name of this country and they continue to be very much in our thoughts and our prayers.
This year of course has been a time of very considerable change for the RSL and I want to pay special tribute to Rusty Priest, to Bruce Ruxton and to Derek Roylance, all of whom have given great service to their respective state branches over many years. And I welcome the three new state presidents to this congress – Brigadier Evans from the ACT, Mr Keith Hall in New South Wales and Major General McLachlan from Victoria. 
This past year has marked, or does mark this year, the 60th anniversary of very special and pivotal events in our national life and our military history. I include the bombing of Darwin in northern Australia, the 60th anniversary of that, and the submarine attacks in Sydney and in Newcastle. And in this connection it was a special honour for me on behalf of the country to attend the inauguration of the magnificent memorial at Isurava on the Kokoda Track. That was an occasion to honour, and I was accompanied by Senator Mark Bishop, the Shadow Minister representing the Leader of the Opposition… to honour what those battles represented, what they meant to Australia at that time and the sense of heart and hope that the achievement of our men in those battles gave to the people of Australia. I';m also very pleased that the new memorial at Milne Bay and the refurbished memorial at Popondetta will be opened in November and that commemorative missions sponsored by the Federal Government will attend these important events. And also there will be a commemoration at El Alamein which will be a reminder of the crucial battles that we fought there alongside our British and other allies at a crucial moment in the Middle East campaign in World War II.
Indeed this year I';ve had the opportunity not only of going to Isurava, but also in the course of representing this country abroad, to participate in that always moving dusk ceremony at the Menin Gate in Belgium. A great tribute maintained in memory of so many Australians and others who died in the defence of Belgium in World War I. And also to visit Crete, the scene of fierce fighting alongside our friends from Greece and other countries in World War II. And it is always a moving experience to be reminded again of the sense of friendship and gratitude and honour that is felt by the peoples of those countries. This nation';s reputation for doing the right thing in difficult circumstances, and its citizens risking their lives in defence of the values they hold in common with others, our name for doing that is held in very high and warm regard and those deeds are long remembered by our friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, this congress gives all of you an opportunity to recollect, it gives you an opportunity to discuss issues important to the RSL and important to the nation. I would, I can say without fear of contradiction, that concern and respect and gratitude towards our returned men and women is something that is shared across the political divide. My own Government is committed to a number of initiatives that we announced in the last election campaign including the removal of the fees on income support supplement rates from war widowers and also the extension of the Gold Card eligibility to all Australian Defence Force veterans 70 and over with qualifying service from the first of July last. It is estimated that an extra 4,000 veterans with post World War II service will immediately become eligible as a result of that change, adding to the 282,000 members of the veterans community who already benefit. 
The Minister has already announced a number of other initiatives in the area of commemoration. We';re undertaking health studies in the veterans of atomic testing and also the Vietnam, Korean and Gulf Wars.  We remain committed to addressing possible anomalies in the Veterans'; Entitlements Act and as you are aware an independent review of veterans'; entitlements was established to examine issues such as access to veterans'; entitlements and benefits provided to veteran disability pensioners. The committee has received over 2,900 submissions and is due to report in mid November of this year. 
The obligation to care for our returned men and women is an unqualified and an ongoing obligation. I value very much the dialogue I have and I know my Minister has with the RSL. I want particularly as he is present today to record my gratitude to Bruce Scott for the work that he did as Minister for Veterans'; Affairs until the last election. Bruce was a hard and indefatigable worker for the interests of veterans and I know that many in the veterans'; community will remember with great affection his commitment to their cause. 
Ladies and gentlemen, again may I say how very pleased I am to be here today. Of an organisation there is none that sits more easily at the centre of Australia';s life and Australia';s history than does the RSL. As the Governor said, you may have received constitutional form in 1901 but the deeds of successive generations of the fighting men and women of this country have given purpose, have given commitment, often in very tragic circumstances, as to what this country stands for. We have been reminded through the awarding of that Anzac Peace Prize that occasions such as this are to remember those who died in war, but they are above all else occasions to rededicate ourselves to peace. 
One of the great paradoxes of Australia is that we are by nature and instinct non-belligerent, peace-loving people. For a non-belligerent, peace-loving people we have over the years made a very big sacrifice of lives and blood in the defence of values that are important to us and important to the other nations of the world. And that is a further spur and inspiration to all of us to work for the preservation of peace, for harmony amongst countries, but always remembering that the world is never quite as ideal and as benign a place as we would like it to be. And that it';s important for the preservation of the kind of nation that we have been, we are, and we hope always to remain, that occasionally we have to take action in concert with our allies.
Finally can I say that this is also an occasion to remember the contribution of all people who have come to this country from different parts of the world, to the building of the modern Australia. One of the great things about this country is its sense of fair play and its sense of tolerance and its open heartedness. And can I say to all of you, we have much to be proud of because we are Australians and there is no group of men and women in our midst to whom more is owed for what we now have than the men and women of Australia that you represent here by your presence. I say on behalf of the rest of your fellow Australians, thank you for what you have done, thank you for what you have given us, and thank you for what you continue to mean to us. 
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Excellency the Governor of Queensland, the Leader of the Opposition Simon Crean, Danna Vale the Minister for Veterans'; Affairs, Major General Phillips, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start my remarks by joining others in extending my congratulations to Mrs Ruff-O';Herne for the very significant recognition which has been extended to her today and to record I know on behalf of everybody our sense of admiration and regard for the dignity, the forgiveness, the forbearance, the understanding and the strength that she and so many others displayed in such awful circumstances. 
I am delighted again to have the opportunity of addressing this annual congress of the RSL. The RSL is a very special body in the life of Australia. It is profoundly non-partisan political, it is non-sectarian, it is bound together by the common experiences of men and women and a common bond of deep affection to the welfare of this nation and of all of its people. 
And I commence my address by again on behalf of the Government, the Parliament and all the Australian people of renewing the sense of debt that we owe to the more than 100,000 Australians who died in all the wars in the name of the defence of this country. To those who were wounded, to those who were fortunate enough to return without the impairment of life or limb. There is no greater debt owed by any nation than the debt it owes to those who put their lives on the line to defend the nation';s freedom and to defend the nation';s values. And in honouring those who died in defence of Australia or served this country, we do particularly as the anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the United States on the 11th of September last year, as that anniversary draws near we think particularly of the men of the Australian Defence Force who are serving in Afghanistan and elsewhere alongside our American friends and allies in the war against terrorism. They are doing important things in the name of this country and they continue to be very much in our thoughts and our prayers.
This year of course has been a time of very considerable change for the RSL and I want to pay special tribute to Rusty Priest, to Bruce Ruxton and to Derek Roylance, all of whom have given great service to their respective state branches over many years. And I welcome the three new state presidents to this congress – Brigadier Evans from the ACT, Mr Keith Hall in New South Wales and Major General McLachlan from Victoria. 
This past year has marked, or does mark this year, the 60th anniversary of very special and pivotal events in our national life and our military history. I include the bombing of Darwin in northern Australia, the 60th anniversary of that, and the submarine attacks in Sydney and in Newcastle. And in this connection it was a special honour for me on behalf of the country to attend the inauguration of the magnificent memorial at Isurava on the Kokoda Track. That was an occasion to honour, and I was accompanied by Senator Mark Bishop, the Shadow Minister representing the Leader of the Opposition… to honour what those battles represented, what they meant to Australia at that time and the sense of heart and hope that the achievement of our men in those battles gave to the people of Australia. I';m also very pleased that the new memorial at Milne Bay and the refurbished memorial at Popondetta will be opened in November and that commemorative missions sponsored by the Federal Government will attend these important events. And also there will be a commemoration at El Alamein which will be a reminder of the crucial battles that we fought there alongside our British and other allies at a crucial moment in the Middle East campaign in World War II.
Indeed this year I';ve had the opportunity not only of going to Isurava, but also in the course of representing this country abroad, to participate in that always moving dusk ceremony at the Menin Gate in Belgium. A great tribute maintained in memory of so many Australians and others who died in the defence of Belgium in World War I. And also to visit Crete, the scene of fierce fighting alongside our friends from Greece and other countries in World War II. And it is always a moving experience to be reminded again of the sense of friendship and gratitude and honour that is felt by the peoples of those countries. This nation';s reputation for doing the right thing in difficult circumstances, and its citizens risking their lives in defence of the values they hold in common with others, our name for doing that is held in very high and warm regard and those deeds are long remembered by our friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, this congress gives all of you an opportunity to recollect, it gives you an opportunity to discuss issues important to the RSL and important to the nation. I would, I can say without fear of contradiction, that concern and respect and gratitude towards our returned men and women is something that is shared across the political divide. My own Government is committed to a number of initiatives that we announced in the last election campaign including the removal of the fees on income support supplement rates from war widowers and also the extension of the Gold Card eligibility to all Australian Defence Force veterans 70 and over with qualifying service from the first of July last. It is estimated that an extra 4,000 veterans with post World War II service will immediately become eligible as a result of that change, adding to the 282,000 members of the veterans community who already benefit. 
The Minister has already announced a number of other initiatives in the area of commemoration. We';re undertaking health studies in the veterans of atomic testing and also the Vietnam, Korean and Gulf Wars.  We remain committed to addressing possible anomalies in the Veterans'; Entitlements Act and as you are aware an independent review of veterans'; entitlements was established to examine issues such as access to veterans'; entitlements and benefits provided to veteran disability pensioners. The committee has received over 2,900 submissions and is due to report in mid November of this year. 
The obligation to care for our returned men and women is an unqualified and an ongoing obligation. I value very much the dialogue I have and I know my Minister has with the RSL. I want particularly as he is present today to record my gratitude to Bruce Scott for the work that he did as Minister for Veterans'; Affairs until the last election. Bruce was a hard and indefatigable worker for the interests of veterans and I know that many in the veterans'; community will remember with great affection his commitment to their cause. 
Ladies and gentlemen, again may I say how very pleased I am to be here today. Of an organisation there is none that sits more easily at the centre of Australia';s life and Australia';s history than does the RSL. As the Governor said, you may have received constitutional form in 1901 but the deeds of successive generations of the fighting men and women of this country have given purpose, have given commitment, often in very tragic circumstances, as to what this country stands for. We have been reminded through the awarding of that Anzac Peace Prize that occasions such as this are to remember those who died in war, but they are above all else occasions to rededicate ourselves to peace. 
One of the great paradoxes of Australia is that we are by nature and instinct non-belligerent, peace-loving people. For a non-belligerent, peace-loving people we have over the years made a very big sacrifice of lives and blood in the defence of values that are important to us and important to the other nations of the world. And that is a further spur and inspiration to all of us to work for the preservation of peace, for harmony amongst countries, but always remembering that the world is never quite as ideal and as benign a place as we would like it to be. And that it';s important for the preservation of the kind of nation that we have been, we are, and we hope always to remain, that occasionally we have to take action in concert with our allies.
Finally can I say that this is also an occasion to remember the contribution of all people who have come to this country from different parts of the world, to the building of the modern Australia. One of the great things about this country is its sense of fair play and its sense of tolerance and its open heartedness. And can I say to all of you, we have much to be proud of because we are Australians and there is no group of men and women in our midst to whom more is owed for what we now have than the men and women of Australia that you represent here by your presence. I say on behalf of the rest of your fellow Australians, thank you for what you have done, thank you for what you have given us, and thank you for what you continue to mean to us. 
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Excellency the Governor of Queensland, the Leader of the Opposition Simon Crean, Danna Vale the Minister for Veterans'; Affairs, Major General Phillips, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start my remarks by joining others in extending my congratulations to Mrs Ruff-O';Herne for the very significant recognition which has been extended to her today and to record I know on behalf of everybody our sense of admiration and regard for the dignity, the forgiveness, the forbearance, the understanding and the strength that she and so many others displayed in such awful circumstances. 
I am delighted again to have the opportunity of addressing this annual congress of the RSL. The RSL is a very special body in the life of Australia. It is profoundly non-partisan political, it is non-sectarian, it is bound together by the common experiences of men and women and a common bond of deep affection to the welfare of this nation and of all of its people. 
And I commence my address by again on behalf of the Government, the Parliament and all the Australian people of renewing the sense of debt that we owe to the more than 100,000 Australians who died in all the wars in the name of the defence of this country. To those who were wounded, to those who were fortunate enough to return without the impairment of life or limb. There is no greater debt owed by any nation than the debt it owes to those who put their lives on the line to defend the nation';s freedom and to defend the nation';s values. And in honouring those who died in defence of Australia or served this country, we do particularly as the anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the United States on the 11th of September last year, as that anniversary draws near we think particularly of the men of the Australian Defence Force who are serving in Afghanistan and elsewhere alongside our American friends and allies in the war against terrorism. They are doing important things in the name of this country and they continue to be very much in our thoughts and our prayers.
This year of course has been a time of very considerable change for the RSL and I want to pay special tribute to Rusty Priest, to Bruce Ruxton and to Derek Roylance, all of whom have given great service to their respective state branches over many years. And I welcome the three new state presidents to this congress – Brigadier Evans from the ACT, Mr Keith Hall in New South Wales and Major General McLachlan from Victoria. 
This past year has marked, or does mark this year, the 60th anniversary of very special and pivotal events in our national life and our military history. I include the bombing of Darwin in northern Australia, the 60th anniversary of that, and the submarine attacks in Sydney and in Newcastle. And in this connection it was a special honour for me on behalf of the country to attend the inauguration of the magnificent memorial at Isurava on the Kokoda Track. That was an occasion to honour, and I was accompanied by Senator Mark Bishop, the Shadow Minister representing the Leader of the Opposition… to honour what those battles represented, what they meant to Australia at that time and the sense of heart and hope that the achievement of our men in those battles gave to the people of Australia. I';m also very pleased that the new memorial at Milne Bay and the refurbished memorial at Popondetta will be opened in November and that commemorative missions sponsored by the Federal Government will attend these important events. And also there will be a commemoration at El Alamein which will be a reminder of the crucial battles that we fought there alongside our British and other allies at a crucial moment in the Middle East campaign in World War II.
Indeed this year I';ve had the opportunity not only of going to Isurava, but also in the course of representing this country abroad, to participate in that always moving dusk ceremony at the Menin Gate in Belgium. A great tribute maintained in memory of so many Australians and others who died in the defence of Belgium in World War I. And also to visit Crete, the scene of fierce fighting alongside our friends from Greece and other countries in World War II. And it is always a moving experience to be reminded again of the sense of friendship and gratitude and honour that is felt by the peoples of those countries. This nation';s reputation for doing the right thing in difficult circumstances, and its citizens risking their lives in defence of the values they hold in common with others, our name for doing that is held in very high and warm regard and those deeds are long remembered by our friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, this congress gives all of you an opportunity to recollect, it gives you an opportunity to discuss issues important to the RSL and important to the nation. I would, I can say without fear of contradiction, that concern and respect and gratitude towards our returned men and women is something that is shared across the political divide. My own Government is committed to a number of initiatives that we announced in the last election campaign including the removal of the fees on income support supplement rates from war widowers and also the extension of the Gold Card eligibility to all Australian Defence Force veterans 70 and over with qualifying service from the first of July last. It is estimated that an extra 4,000 veterans with post World War II service will immediately become eligible as a result of that change, adding to the 282,000 members of the veterans community who already benefit. 
The Minister has already announced a number of other initiatives in the area of commemoration. We';re undertaking health studies in the veterans of atomic testing and also the Vietnam, Korean and Gulf Wars.  We remain committed to addressing possible anomalies in the Veterans'; Entitlements Act and as you are aware an independent review of veterans'; entitlements was established to examine issues such as access to veterans'; entitlements and benefits provided to veteran disability pensioners. The committee has received over 2,900 submissions and is due to report in mid November of this year. 
The obligation to care for our returned men and women is an unqualified and an ongoing obligation. I value very much the dialogue I have and I know my Minister has with the RSL. I want particularly as he is present today to record my gratitude to Bruce Scott for the work that he did as Minister for Veterans'; Affairs until the last election. Bruce was a hard and indefatigable worker for the interests of veterans and I know that many in the veterans'; community will remember with great affection his commitment to their cause. 
Ladies and gentlemen, again may I say how very pleased I am to be here today. Of an organisation there is none that sits more easily at the centre of Australia';s life and Australia';s history than does the RSL. As the Governor said, you may have received constitutional form in 1901 but the deeds of successive generations of the fighting men and women of this country have given purpose, have given commitment, often in very tragic circumstances, as to what this country stands for. We have been reminded through the awarding of that Anzac Peace Prize that occasions such as this are to remember those who died in war, but they are above all else occasions to rededicate ourselves to peace. 
One of the great paradoxes of Australia is that we are by nature and instinct non-belligerent, peace-loving people. For a non-belligerent, peace-loving people we have over the years made a very big sacrifice of lives and blood in the defence of values that are important to us and important to the other nations of the world. And that is a further spur and inspiration to all of us to work for the preservation of peace, for harmony amongst countries, but always remembering that the world is never quite as ideal and as benign a place as we would like it to be. And that it';s important for the preservation of the kind of nation that we have been, we are, and we hope always to remain, that occasionally we have to take action in concert with our allies.
Finally can I say that this is also an occasion to remember the contribution of all people who have come to this country from different parts of the world, to the building of the modern Australia. One of the great things about this country is its sense of fair play and its sense of tolerance and its open heartedness. And can I say to all of you, we have much to be proud of because we are Australians and there is no group of men and women in our midst to whom more is owed for what we now have than the men and women of Australia that you represent here by your presence. I say on behalf of the rest of your fellow Australians, thank you for what you have done, thank you for what you have given us, and thank you for what you continue to mean to us. 
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Chief Justice for those very warm words of welcome, your Grace the Archbishop of Brisbane, Scott McLennan, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, and students of St Leo';s.
I';m very pleased indeed to have the opportunity at last of responding to an invitation that was first extended to me more than two years ago, to participate in this annual lecture in honour of a man who has interested me for a number of reasons to which I will allude in a moment. But the generic reason why I particularly enjoy the opportunity of being here tonight is it allows me to meet and talk to a cross section of young men studying in this College at this University, and in that way to reinforce my understanding of the attitudes and the aspirations of contemporary young Australians. 
Sir James Duhig, as I am told, was the youngest Bishop in the Catholic Church when he was appointed by the Pope in 1905 and I also understand he was the oldest Bishop in the Church or served longer than any other Bishop alive when he died in 1965. He had a remarkable career in the Church. He was described by many people instinctively as Duhig the builder, like so many of the prelates of the Catholic Church that shaped the Church through the 20th Century. He was born in Ireland and he epitomised the magnificent contribution that people of Irish descent have made to the development of this country. And I';m reminded that the last time I shared a table with the Chief Justice and the Archbishop was in fact at the St Patrick';s Day dinner here in Brisbane, held by the Irish Association whose President, I think his name was Kennedy, told me as the evening wore on that in fact Brisbane had the largest Irish Association in the world. I wondered about that but given the boisterous character of the evening and the enthusiasm with which the Doyles and Cosgroves and O';Connors were greeted, I didn';t think it was politic to argue with him.
But James Duhig was a robust contributor to political debate. I read a little about him in preparation for this lecture. He was a person who corresponded with Frank Ford who was briefly Prime Minister of Australia between the death of John Curtin and the election by the Labor Party of Ben Chifley as Prime Minister. He was a great admirer of John Curtin but he formed a very deep commitment to the founder of the Liberal Party, Sir Robert Menzies. And that association between Menzies and Duhig was well known in the 1940s and the 1950s. He did something in the 1940s that I don';t think any person occupying a like position in any Church would do today – he openly attacked the Government of the day during the election campaign. He campaigned very strongly for the Menzies inspired referendum to ban the Communist Party in 1952. That proposition failed, and I have to say with the benefit of hindsight it was probably a good thing for civil liberties in Australia that it did fail, and the Australian people demonstrated on that occasion as they so frequently do when faced with very difficult choices, a capacity to make very wise decisions. Some of you may of course say he would hardly argue with that proposition.
Duhig did make an enduring contribution to the place and the role of the Church, particularly in education in the state of Queensland, and particularly in the city of Brisbane. He of course died in 1965, only a very brief period after the great breakthrough had been achieved in relation to justice for Catholic education in this country. As this audience, young though it is, would know better than most of the same age of groups within Australia, that for about 100 years since the passage of the Public Education Acts in the various states of Australia, the Catholic component of the Australian population had operated under a great injustice of being denied any Government assistance for the maintenance of their education system. And despite that very considerable burden, maintained with enormous commitment and success an education system until the arrival of Government assistance in the early 1960s. And it';s one of life';s ironies that the person who described himself as a humble Presbyterian, Sir Robert Menzies, was in fact the first Prime Minister of Australia to really provide a breakthrough in the 1963 election, offering direct grants for science blocs without discrimination between Government and non-Government schools. 
And so began a change in Government policy which produced more equitable treatment. If Duhig were alive today he would be proud of the strength and the virility of the Catholic education system and he would marvel at the greater degree of equity and the fair treatment and the recognition of that fundamental principle that in a society such as Australia parents and parents alone should have the right to decide the nation and the place of the education of their children. And that was a principle that was for many decades denied to people in Australia. We now have arguably the best mix of Government and private education of any like country in the world with some 70 percent of our children being educated in Government schools, and some 30 percent in non-Government schools. And as somebody who himself was a very grateful product of the public education system in New South Wales, let me say that I';m very proud of the contribution that my own Government has made to the maintenance and the expansion of opportunities for not only Catholic parents in the education of their children, but all Australian parents in the choice of the institutions in which their children should be educated.
The President of the Club invited me to address my remarks to the cultural development of Australia. He then was kind enough to go on in his letter of invitation to say well of course, you can talk about any subject you choose. I have thought that tonight would be an opportunity for me to focus briefly on three areas which are important to the development of this country and the cultural development of this country in the very broadest sense. And they are areas of priority that were identified by me as leader of the Government before the last election, not as issues that had to be addressed in the very short term, but issues that were important to the long term development of Australia.
The first of those surrounds something that will be of enormous significance and challenge to so many of the students who I am addressing tonight in the not too distant future, and that is the challenge of balancing your work and your family responsibilities. Family life remains at the heart of our society and it is important on occasions such as this that I state my very strong commitment to governments, whatever their political persuasion, of following policies which encourage and strengthen families, encourage and strengthen people to make commitment to their own families, and also encourage and allow policies which permit people to make the choices they want concerning the care and the upbringing of their own children.
We live in an age where people are demanding far greater choice, and of all the things I find as I move around the Australian community, none excites and interests quite as much in all generations of the constant juggling act that is involved particularly with young children, in balancing work and family. Many of you will look at me and say well that is of no particular interest to me at the moment, and at the moment I';m sure it is of no particular interest to the great bulk of you in this room tonight. But in the not too distant future it will and one of the aims of the aims that the Government has is to promote taxation policy, welfare policy, industrial relations policies and to encourage the States to promote policies relating to such things as school hours, which give to Australian parents the greatest degree of flexibility in balancing their work and their family responsibilities. 
The second area that I wish to see my Government focus on not only in the years immediately ahead but hopefully years after that, is the challenge of the demographic change that is now occurring in Australian society. Every western country has an ageing population. The good news is that the challenge for Australia in that area is not as great as it is for many other countries. The bad news is that unless we now adopt policies which provide incentives for a number of things to occur, many of the difficulties that will be faced earlier by European countries, where the ageing process if further advanced and has been aggravated by inadequate public policy, we will find that those challenges and those problems are overtaking our society.
We are an ageing population for a combination of reasons. Our fertility rate, along with all other western countries, has fallen sharply with a very strong decline occurring in the 1970s. It';s also the case that we have workforce participation rates in some age cohorts that are lower than what they are in equivalent countries. And the significance of that with an ageing population is that the fewer people in the workforce means that a greater burden is thrown on those that remain in the workforce to support an ageing population which by definition has fewer workforce participants.
I never like on these occasions to trouble my audience with too many statistics. But one in this debate about the ageing of the Australian population and the participation of older people in the workforce that struck me very forcefully a few weeks ago was to learn for the aged cohort of 55 to 64 the workforce participation rate in Australia was 49 percent. In the United States it is something like 60 percent, and in New Zealand and most other comparable countries it is between 57 and 60 percent. Now that statistic is a metaphor for part of the problem that we face in our society. People are being encouraged out of the workforce at too early an age. We have employment practices in the private sector which I think are increasingly out of date and antagonistic to the longer term workforce participation interests of this country, and all of us has a responsibility to make a contribution both in Government and in the private sector to creating a society in which the value of the contribution of mature aged workers is counted far more than it is now, that we alter employment practices that provide automatic retirement from partnerships and other participation in terms of far too early an age. But ladies and gentlemen, developing policies around those two issues are very important in the medium and longer term. 
But tonight I would like to address some particular remarks to the third area that I identified before the election and which I mentioned a moment ago, and that is the issue of sustainable development. It';s current and topical because of the world summit on sustainable development which is taking place in Johannesburg as I speak. And it';s also contemporary because of the debate that surrounds the decision of the Government not at this stage to ratify the Kyoto Treaty. And I want to say a few things about that decision because I know how important issues relating to the environment are, not only to young people in this country but also to people of all generations. The environment is no longer a boutique political or social issue. It is something that is of importance and interest to all sections of the population. It';s almost a clich to say that we are all environmentalists now, but it is substantially the case. We are all concerned about environmental degradation. We all have a responsibility to arrest such things as the appalling levels of salinity in Australia. We all have a sense of concern and an obligation to do something about the level of greenhouse gas emissions.
There will be debate in Australia and around the world about how rapidly the global warming is occurring. There will inevitably be debate about the quality of the science that has been injected into this discussion. But in my judgement there can be little argument that there is a strong body of opinion which suggests that global warming is occurring, that is having a deleterious effect on the environment and that all countries have a responsibility to do what they can to address that particular issue.
And I want to make it clear from the outset that my Government and Australia therefore is very strongly committed to meeting the greenhouse gas emission targets that were set for our country at the Kyoto meeting two years ago. We were provided with a target of 108, the baseline year of 100 being 1990 and we were allowed to have greenhouse gas emissions of up to 108 in the target period which is between 2008 and 2012. So although we are not ratifiers of the Protocol, we are as a developed country prepared to commit ourselves to meeting the target we were given by the international community, and it';s very important that that point be made. And it';s very important that we understand that under the Kyoto Protocol there is a very big difference between the treatment of developed countries and developing countries. A developing country can ratify the Protocol without assuming any obligations under the Protocol. They are not given greenhouse gas emission targets, whereas developed countries such as Australia, if they ratify, are given targets and are subject to other obligations which don';t attach to developing countries. 
What we have chosen to do is to commit ourselves to the target that we were given but at this stage because we don';t think it is in our national interest at present, and I';ll come to an explanation of that in a moment, we have declined to sign the Protocol. I want to make it also clear that our refusal to sign the Protocol is not because the United States has refused to do so. If we come to the conclusion as a Government at some time in the future that it is in Australia';s interests to sign the Protocol, then we will sign that Protocol irrespective of whether  the United States has signed it or not, just as we decided after a lot of internal debate in the Government party room, in fact one of the best debates I';ve seen in the six and a half years as Prime Minister, to join the International Criminal Court even though the United States was strongly opposed to being a member of the International Criminal Court. It is easy for people to make the erroneous assumption that because we share the same view as the United States on certain issues, we take the view we do because it is the United States view without analysing that there is an individual national interest in taking that position.
One of the reasons why we take the position we do on Kyoto is that Australia is in a very unusual position for a developed country. We are a net exporter of energy. We rely very heavily on energy and on the resource sector, not only for production in this country but also to earn export income. And in that sense we are very different from many other countries, developed countries, and therefore the impact of the international arrangements in this area fall rather more heavily than they do on other countries. The baseline for calculating obligations under the Kyoto Treaty is 1990 and without in any way being unkind or disrespectful to our friends in Europe, I am constrained to say that a baseline of 1990 was particularly convenient to many of the European countries. For example, 1990 happened to neatly capture for the United Kingdom the benefits of the closure of large numbers of mines and pits in the United Kingdom carried out in the 1980s for reasons unrelated to compliance with international demands to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. And it';s also fair to say that the deindustrialisation of Europe, particularly eastern Europe and eastern Germany which followed the fall of the Berlin Wall, also has conveniently delivered greenhouse gas emission credits when you have a base year of 1990 to many of the countries of eastern Europe.
It is very important therefore that Australia';s position in relation to this issue be understood that';s not the attitude of a country that is blindly following the United States, it is not the attitude of a country that is unwilling to meet her internationally allocated targets but is the attitude of a country that is unwilling to commit itself in stages two and three of the Kyoto process to targets in those stages which have yet to be allocated and could impose burdens on this country which are out of proportion to our contribution to greenhouse gas emissions and out of proportion to the obligations that a country like Australia should carry.
It should be borne in mind that if you have developing countries that do not have targets and, for example, a new aluminium investment is involved and the investor has to choose between locating the investment in a country such as Australia where it will have to effectively buy carbon credit in order to establish the industry and a developing country where no such obligation would be involved, naturally for economic reasons the investor will locate the industry in the developing country.
Now our argument very much is that until all countries are treated on an equal basis there will remain very strong arguments in the national interest as to why Australia should not at this stage join the Kyoto Protocol. 
Ladies and gentlemen there are just two other thoughts I want to leave with you tonight and both them relate very much to the political culture of this country.
As you would imagine, and you were reminded of it in the Chief Justice';s very gracious introduction a short while ago, I have been very strongly committed to and involved in political activity in this country for all of my adult life. I joined the Liberal Party because largely the environment in which I grew up and the values that I envied as a child from a father who had a small business in which he worked very hard for very long hours and occasions for not a particularly large return, left me with a very deep sense that people who stuck out on their own and started with absolutely nothing and ended up with something to pass onto their children represented about the best that people could aspire to in our community.
Politics in this country has changed a great deal over the last 30 years. It has become a great deal less tribal that it used to be. 
When I was growing up and first became involved in the Liberal Party I thought there was a thing called a 40-40-20 rule. 40% of people voted Labor, 40% of people voted Liberal and 20% of people moved around in the middle. 
Politics along time ago unfortunately was more sectarian than thankfully it is today. For socio-economic reasons Irish Catholics in Australia tended for economic reasons to adhere to the Labor Party, not because their philosophy was automatically more Labor but rather for economic reasons the Labor Party identified more strongly with the trade union movement than because of their economic conditions that actually involved a significantly high proportion of them. 
That of course changed as economic conditions and opportunities changed and we became in every sense an even more egalitarian and upwardly mobile society.
We have, I think, a society in which there is no longer a 40-40-20 rule but sometimes as I wonder around the country I think there is about a 30-30-40 rule. You have 30% who always vote Liberal, 30% who always vote Labor and 40% who move around in the middle. Now I';m generalizing but I think you understand my meaning. 
I no longer hear as many people coming up to me saying – I think you';re doing a good job, or I think you';re doing a terrible job but I couldn';t possibly change my vote at the next election because my father has always voted Labor or always voted Liberal and he would turn in his grave at the thought of me changing my vote. I think all of that has changed a great deal.
Politics has become somewhat less ideological than it was. For most of my political experience world politics and there was a projection of it into the Australian domestic scene, world politics was defined by the struggle between the American led west and the Soviet led east. I have to say that the most dramatic political event of my lifetime was the collapse of Soviet communism, the fall of the Berlin Wall and what it represented as a triumph of western Liberalism, using Liberalism in its very generic sense, western Liberalism over the centrally planned economic and political approaches of Soviet communism and communism around the world.
Now those divisions had a projection into this country and that had an impact on the policies adopted by the various political parties in our community. That of course has now disappeared and many of the old divides and the old clich s that used to be relevant, even up until about 15 years ago, are now no longer relevant and it probably strikes many of you, the young here tonight and that';s the bulk of you, as faintly odd that we would have even contemplated a referendum 50 years ago to ban a political party that now doesn';t exist for all practical purpose, the Communist Party of Australia. In fact it reminds me of an ironic exchange that I had at a place which is also very ironic for a Liberal Prime Minister to address.
I was in China recently advocating the cause of Australia';s natural gas industry, an advocacy which in company with the efforts of many other people proved to be very successful, and I became the first western political leader to address a meeting of the cadres of the Communist Party in China and I went out, and we talk about somebody';s father turning in his grave – perhaps my father may well have experienced that if he could have contemplated that I would do that, and I addressed this very large gathering which is just like a large university lecture ampi-theatre though a lot more polite to me than students are on some occasions when I go onto campuses in Australia. They were very very polite indeed and they asked me a whole series of questions and I had just left Australia immediately before the Dalai Lama had arrived and there had been some criticism of me in Australia because I hadn';t seen the Dalai Lama and when I gave my speech to the cadres. I then had a question time and one of them got up and said – you said Prime Minister in your speech that you are in favour of good relations between Australia and China and I said, “yes I am”. Why therefore did you allow the Dalai Lama to come to Australia? I thought that was a delicious irony. Here I was leaving Australia being criticized because I hadn';t seen the Dalai Lama, who incidentally I had met on his earlier visit and somebody for whom I have a very considerable personal regard and respect, and I arrive in China and I am criticized for allowing him to come to Australia and I thought to myself how can I possibly, in terms that won';t be offensive to my guests, how can I possibly explain myself away and explain my country away and I thought to myself I will tell them the story of the referendum to ban the Communist Party carried out in Australia 50 years earlier and I patiently explained that we once had a referendum, a vote in this country, to ban your political party and I said you probably think that';s pretty terrible but I said the good news is that having been given an opportunity to decide whether or not we should ban the Communist Party the Australian people in their wisdom decided that we would not ban the Communist Party.  And I somehow or other think that resolved in their minds what they saw to be the unfriendliness of our decision as a country in allowing the Dalai Lama to come here.
Now ladies and gentlemen can I conclude by saying to you that I always enjoy very much the opportunity of coming to a residential college, I have been to many of them around Australia. 
I know something from colleagues of mine from Queens land of the reputation of this college. That struck a cord! It';s all good and you can make what you will of what I mean by good. It will mean different things to parents and different things to students and I understand that but I do enjoy the opportunity of engaging I hope in some exchange of thoughts about the future of this country.
With no exaggeration can I say that one of the questions that I get asked most frequently as Prime Minister, particularly by school groups who will come and have a photograph taken in the Prime Minister';s quadrangle and then I will invite them into my office for a while and they will stand around and ask questions and give me a bit of advice, and very readily and very freely, and invariably one of them will say what is the best thing about being Prime Minister, and my answer to that and I mean it very sincerely is that the best thing about being Prime Minister is the opportunity it gives you to meet so many different groups of Australians in their own environment and in the circumstances in which they interact with each other and interact as part of the Australian community and it leaves me always with a sense of enormous optimism.
You would expect me to say this but I mean it very genuinely, this country is held in very warm regard around the world. I have the opportunity, especially this year, to represent Australia in many places for many reasons and the regard in which we are held for our economic performance and strength, the regard in which we are held for the moral stand we took to help the people of East Timor two years ago, and the regard in which we are held for the friendly face we projected to the rest of the world at the time of the Sydney Olympic Games are but three examples of positive reactions I received as Prime Minister.
It is a huge privilege to have met the Australians who are part of the St Leo';s family. I commend the stewardship of the College, of the Church, of the Jesuits to this institution and the contribution that so many have made over the years.
I wish all of you well in your studies and your future life.
I have three children whose ages are not all that, in fact they are very close to the ages of most of the students here, and I therefore have some familiarity and understanding with your aspirations and motivations and they are ones that enthuse me, ignite in me a belief that the younger generation in this country is capable of everything and more than equivalent younger generations in earlier years of this country were capable of and able to contribute.
Thank you very much for having me tonight. 
God bless you all and I hope you will have very long and successful lives and careers. 
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Major Watters, my parliamentary colleague Cameron Thompson the Federal Member for Blair.  William Bonnor, thank you for your very warm welcome. I knew and admired your uncle but even more than that, it is wonderful to receive such a generous welcome from representatives of indigenous Australia and particularly from the Jagera people and we thank you very warmly for that. I';d also like to especially welcome the presence of representatives of the Queensland Police Force because the police of Australia play an absolutely critical role in the Tough on Drugs campaign, and I';ve also noticed the presence of another of my Federal parliamentary colleagues Peter Dutton, the newly elected Member for Dickson.
We started a Tough on Drugs strategy at a Federal level in 1997 and since then at a Federal level we have committed $625 million, which is the largest injection of money from a Federal Government to fight the drug scourge in Australia. The money is committed in three ways. It is committed to bolster the fight against the drug barons, in other words the law enforcement side of the campaign. 
I make no apology for the fact that I am totally opposed to heroin trials and I';m totally opposed to heroin injection rooms. And while I am Prime Minister of this country I will not see the Federal Government do anything to allow a breaking down of that policy. And I believe incidentally that I have the support of many people on various sides of politics in Australia. 
One thing I want to say is that by and large there has been great cooperation between State and Federal Governments to fighting the drugs scourge. This is not a party political issue. It is a crusade issue like to help prevent the scourge of drugs capturing the young in our community. That is what it is about. And it';s also about helping people who want to break the habit. We all find it hard to break habits. I used to smoke. I stopped smoking back in 1979. I found it very easy to stop smoking on about 14 or 15 occasions before that. Very easy. I mean, you know, I lasted for a day or two or three, but eventually I got sensible and stopped completely. Now that was a minor challenge to what I can only imagine is the challenge of somebody who has been addicted to heroin for a long period of time. And they, along with the disapproval we voice, they also need to have our support and our understanding, and that is why the second limb is about rehabilitation of people. 
And for too long until a few years ago, too little was done about rehabilitation. And I';ve often said at launches such as this that the most distressing experience I have in talking to Australians about drugs is to be on a talkback radio programme and to have the mother or father of a young person affected by drugs ringing me up and saying I';ve been trying for months to get my son into a rehabilitation program and there are no places available, and nobody will take him. Now that is terrible. And that really should affect all of us. So we have injected a lot of extra money into the rehabilitation side of the campaign against drugs. And an element of that is what is called our diversion initiative where we effectively say to people, that the police and the law enforcement authorities say to people whose drug habit is starting to bring them into conflict with the criminal justice system, we say to those people – righto, you';ve got a choice. You either go away and try and get yourself rehabilitated or you can ultimately end up in the slammer, let';s face it, because you';ll start breaking into somebody';s home, you';ll start assaulting somebody in order to get some money and to buy some drugs, and you';ll be in trouble. And you';ve got that choice. And that diversion program we are operating in conjunction with the States. It varies a bit around the country. It works better in some parts of Australia than others but I';m pleased to say that once again by and large there has been very strong cooperation between the Federal and State Governments. 
And the final element, the third element, is education. In other words, recognising that prevention is always better than cure, recognising that you can communicate to people at an early stage the damage they do to their bodies, to their lives and the lives of people around them, by falling into the use of illicit drugs and indeed the abuse of other drugs such as alcohol, then that will have a very beneficial impact. Now that';s the theory of it. That is a description of the goal. 
What I';m pleased to say is that we have some hard evidence it is working, not reported enough because it runs against the popular view. The popular view in many sections of the media and amongst commentators is you should more or less sort of take all the constraints off, give in, don';t bother fighting, you can';t stop it, get on board, forget about trying to fight it. Now that';s not a view I accept and it';s not a view the majority of Australians accept. And that';s one of the reasons why the success we';ve had over the last few years is not as widely reported as it should be. I mean over the last few years we';ve seized almost six tonnes of illicit drugs and the cooperation between the Federal Police, the Customs and the State Police has been quite outstanding. 
And over the last three years, there has been a 23% reduction in the proportion of  people using illicit drugs. You don';t hear much about that, but a 23% reduction. And one of the reasons is that people are starting to respond to some of the programmes of the States and the Federal Government and various community groups. Heroin overdose deaths among 15 to 44 year olds fell from 958 in 1999 to 725 in 2000, which is a drop of almost 25%. And the early signs in relation to subsequent years are also very encouraging. Now I';m not saying all of that is due to the campaign, but some of it is. And once again I don';t know that all of you would have perhaps thought that. You would have perhaps been persuaded by some of the headlines that the heroin, the deaths were continuing to rise, and the thing was careering out of control and you know, why don';t they just sort of give it all away and stop wasting our time and our money? Now that is not the reality, as those figures demonstrate. And in 2000/2001 there were 30,000 treatments provided to drug users by the 133 Tough on Drugs funded treatment services, and that was up to about 19,000 in the previous year. So this is the rehabilitation treatment side of the equation starting to break through and starting to have an effect in our community. I mean we are a society that is interested in outcomes. It';s all very well to make a fine speech and explain the theory but you want to know, is it working? Now the cautious claim I make is that is is beginning to work. I don';t put it any more strongly than that. And I do want to thank the community groups that have played such a very big part in the campaign. And I do especially want to thank Brian who provides magnificent leadership to the Council on Drugs and is a real power of strength and consistency and personal commitment to fighting this problem. 
I was also very encouraged by the results of the material we distributed. I remember launching that booklet, and I think it was out in West Ryde in Sydney one Sunday morning. We got a bit of a rubbishing from a few of the usual suspects who said, you know this is another waste of Government money, and he';s off on a delusion and it makes him feel good, or something or other. It was nothing of the kind. And the survey results – compiled independently, they weren';t compiled by my office or by the Liberal Party or anything like that, they were done quite independently – and what it had to say was that as a result of that campaign, of people surveyed 78 percent of parents had talked to their children about drugs during the campaign period, and they';d clearly been influenced by this literature, by the advertisements on television and the literature that had arrived in their mailboxes. And 71% of 15 to 17 year olds said that advice from my parents had steered me away from drugs. The interesting thing about that statistic is that for all that we read that doom and disaster has descended upon the Australian family and the influence of the family is disintegrating, the fact is that most young people are still more likely to be influenced by their parents and by their siblings than by anybody else. And that the capacity of parents and siblings to influence to the better the behaviour of their children and their younger brothers and sisters, is still an enormously potent force. It doesn';t always work. They';re not always very good role models. We all know that. But in the great majority of cases, they still remain the most potent influence for good and for changed behaviour, and this is what that campaign was designed to do.
Now today I';m announcing the funding of a further 18 organisations to receive community partnership initiative funding. Now this is an element of the overall Tough on Drugs campaign, and what we';re doing is we';re funding particular local initiatives. Drug-Arm, a great organisation run here in Queensland by Dennis Young, is a great organisation and it';s going to benefit from today';s announcement. 
The Ipswich Caring Community Project, a very local project right here in this part of Queensland, has been designed to bring together supporting members of the community and young people who are likely to experience the problems of drugs and crime. And that project will include business and community leaders, Government and non-Government agencies, juvenile justice, the Magistrate';s Court, the Children';s Court, the Ipswich City Council, teachers and churches. And it will help to defuse the tense situation that has developed from a group of aggressive young people where there is a high risk of assault and further assaults taking place. And a Youth Committee will be established to drive the project comprising of young people and community leaders. 
And as part of today';s announcement, as Brian alluded to, some $80,000 will go to Intjartnama Aboriginal Corporation and the Alice Springs Youth Accommodation and Support Services. And this will support what';s called the Talking Up Life Stories with Young People project, to encourage young people to speak out about their own drugs problem. 
Since we started our Tough on Drugs initiative, we have funded 116 projects in a mix of metropolitan, rural and regional locations throughout Australia. And these projects have included community development, training schemes, peer education programmes for young people and parents, and the dissemination of information. As Brian Watters rightly said, the Government, the law enforcement authorities, can';t maintain this campaign on their own. We';re not good enough to do it all on our own. We can provide, and we should, a lot of financial support. We can give our very strong legal and moral support to the law enforcement authorities, but we can';t comprehensively prosecute the campaign without the involvement of local community groups, of churches, of sporting organisations, and very importantly, of parents. And that is why within this year';s Budget, the Government announced further funding of $14 million over four years to the Community Partnerships Initiative of which the initiatives involving some $1.36 million that I';m announcing today, form part. 
Very importantly, our research has told us that if we invest early in preventative projects, the dividends out of that can be very significant. We all know that from our life';s experience. You don';t need a researcher to tell you that if you invest in preventative action at an early stage, you are far more successful than if you try to put together the pieces after somebody';s life has been shattered, and in many cases tragically ruined.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am personally very committed to the Tough on Drugs campaign. I';ve had a very deep personal involvement in it stretching back to 1997 when I decided that the Federal Government had to do more. It is something that is above party politics to me. I will go anywhere with any Member of the opposite side of politics to me in order to secure a good outcome in the campaign against drugs, because we are talking about the moral and social fabric of our society. We are talking about the impact on young lives. We are talking about the safety of old people, which is often now not as easy to take for granted because they are subject to assault from people who are desperate for the money in order to feed their drug habit.
So there';s a lot of communities involved within this and there';s a lot at stake. And I want to thank everybody who has been involved. I do again want to thank you Brian for your personal commitment and leadership. You have my total and very enthusiastic support in the leadership that you are giving to the campaign. I want to thank the Seventh Day Adventist community of Ipswich and also the Mormon community of Ipswich for their very, very warm welcome and that beautiful singing which is really a reminder better than anything I could say about what this campaign is all about. It';s making sure that those young children go through their lives free of the scourge of drugs and they don';t have visited upon them the tragedy that has ruined so many other young lives in Australia and brought such enormous grief and heartache to their parents and their friends.
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Margaret, Cameron Thompson the Federal Member for Blair, Senator George Brandis the Senator for Queensland in the National Parliament, Todd and Holly, the principal of the school, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to share a few moments with you this afternoon.  The welcomed I received as I walked in from the students was a little different from the welcome I received at the University of Queensland last night, but that just shows that a wonderfully free and diverse country we really live in.  You really wouldn';t want to have it otherwise.
I';ve been told a little bit about some of the famous people that the Ipswich state high school has produced.  There were one or two pretty famous Queensland sportsmen that this school that we';re speaking in has produced and this afternoon in this hall is an opportunity for me to acknowledge the thing that does more than anything else to hold this country together, and that is the work of people in a volunteer way at a local community level.  I want to endorse the remarks made by Margaret on behalf of Rotary, the idea that people working together in a positive friendly way at a local level can solve just about any problem and meet just about any challenge.  For those of you who are here this afternoon representing some of the older sections of the Australian community, particularly those from the RSL and all the other people of that generation to which all later generations of Australians owe so much, can I simply again as I did at the RSL congress in Brisbane yesterday, express the gratitude of a nation that is forever in your debt.  Can I say to all the people that are involved in local community and sporting organisations, it is your efforts on Saturday mornings, on the weekends, that produce in the long run the champion footballers and cricketers and swimmers and athletes and tennis players which make this country so incredibly proud.
To the school students who are here I just have two very important messages.  The first of those is that you live in a country and at a time of enormous good fortune and enormous opportunity.  The world has challenges, many, and there are a lot of injustices in the world that in different ways all of us want to address and put right.  There aren';t many countries in the world that are in as fortunate position as Australia.  Through a combination of hard work, of a bit of good luck and some wise attitudes taken by people over the years this country is seen around the world as an ideal.  It';s an open free country, cohesive friendly country, we are made up of people who';ve come different parts of the world but we all blend together pretty well and we';re all Australians before we';re anything else.  And that is how it should always be.  We';re a country that despite the challenges of the drought, and I know it';s very difficult for many people in this part of Queensland and in other parts of our nation, we';re are a country that by and large blessed by nature with a wonderfully benign climate in which to live.  
You will leave school at a time of great opportunity. Don';t waste the opportunities you have. Always remember the contribution that your teachers have made to the moulding of your character and what you learn.  Teaching is a very noble profession and I want to take the opportunity of acknowledging the contribution of all of the teachers who are here this afternoon and I think we ought to put our hands together for the teachers of Queensland.  It';s not an easy job, it';s more challenging now than I think it was when I went to a school not terribly dissimilar from this, I went to a school called Canterbury Boys High School in Sydney. It was a school that had about 8-900 pupils at the time and although the climate wasn';t quite as balmy as it is here most of the time it was pretty pleasant.  I haven';t forgotten those school days, at times I probably some aspects of them were a bit irrelevant, I questioned on a number of occasions some of the things that I was taught and told, no doubt you do the same and that';s part of the process of growing up and the process of learning.  But as time has gone by I';ve looked back on those years and I';ve remembered with growing affection the contribution that many of the teachers at the school made to my capacity later in life, I hope to make some contribution to the Australian community.
The second thing I';d say to you and it is a message that I try to leave with any gathering including young people and pupils at schools or university students at university and that is always try and find the positive in the people that you relate to.  I';ve found one invariable experience in life and that is the happy people I find are the people who always look for the good in somebody, the miserable people are the people who always are trying to find faults.  The reality is that nobody is totally good, and there are very few people who are totally bad, there is normally something positive and inspirational and beneficial that you can find in anybody, even the person you sit next to in class who you might get a bit cranky about.  Even the teacher you may not like or the kid down the street you may not get on with or the person who doesn';t play fair in the football match the weekend.  You can normally find if you think hard enough, you can normally find something fairly nice to say about them and nice to think about them.  And I have to say in my life';s experience that the really happy people I';ve known and I';ve known a lot of really happy people, you know what their secret is, they never complain about other people, they never say or she';s such and such or he';s a terrible person or you know so and so sort of thing, you never find them doing that, they always say oh isn';t so and so nice to have said hello with a smile at me this morning.  Now somebody who may think that sounds corny, can I tell you it';s not because if you really want to be pretty positive and pretty happy about life thinking and trying to find the positive in people you mix with during the day, I can tell you you end up a great deal happier than the people who take the opposite point of view.
It';s very nice to be amongst you, I enjoy more than any other part of my job as Prime Minister, I enjoy the opportunity of visiting different parts of Australia and meeting the local communities of those different parts of Australia gathered together.  Ipswich does have a special niche in the history, not only of Queensland and the history of Australia. It did have as Margaret said, it had what many people would describe as a battler beginning, it had a deep connection with the mining industry, it has produced over the years some very famous Australian sportsmen.  But above everything else it';s a very warm hearted generous community.  It really is.
But if you really want to find a demonstration that is a very classless egalitarian nation Australia, you come to places like Ipswich and you see people of all different backgrounds all mixing together trying to do the right thing by their fellow man and trying to produce a better society and better nation.  So to all of those who are doing the final exam at the end of the year, your school certificate, you see I go from state to state and I have a different name, I mean it';s a high school certificate in New South Wales, it';s the VCE in Victoria.  But to all of you who are doing that I hope you do as well as you want to, I hope you get the TAFE/college place where 70 per cent of students who leave school still go to.  I hope those who want to go onto university get their places.  I just wish all of you every success and every happiness and thank you very much for the warmth of the welcome that you';ve extended to me this afternoon.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Ian for those very kind words of introduction. Michael the State President, Bob Quinn the State Parliamentary Leader, my many Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, and very importantly the men and women of the Liberal Party of Queensland.
I am as always delighted to be back here in Brisbane. I';m spending on this occasion some four or five days and I';ve had a great opportunity of visiting a number of electorates, making a bit of noise and receiving a bit of noise at a university I seem to recall a couple of nights ago. And there are a number of things I would like to say about the domestic political situation in Australia to which I will return in a moment.
But ladies and gentlemen we meet at a time of remembrance. We meet in the shadow of the first anniversary of those terrible events of the 11th of September 2001 when suddenly without warning and with terrifying and audacious success a terrorist attack was executed against the financial and military citadels of the most powerful nation that mankind has seen. And it';s become a clich to say that the world changed on the 11th of September, but it did. Because what those events revealed was the vulnerability of the most powerful, the fragility of previous assumptions about security, but very importantly, the indivisibility of the cause of defending common values. 
And we went to the aid of the United States. We demonstrated our friendship to the United States because those attacks were as much attacks upon this country and upon the values that we hold dear in common with the United States, as they were upon our American friends. And I don';t think any Australian who understands the history of his or her country and understands the values that we hold in common with our American friends, will for a moment apologise for the closeness of the relationship between our two nations.
We share the same values. We share the common belief that a person';s worth is not determined by race or colour or creed or religion or social background, rather by the contribution that each individual man and woman is prepared to make to their society. We share a common commitment to competitive capitalism as the fountain of national wealth and we share a common commitment to the centrality of the family unit as the bedrock institution of our society. 
So as we approach the anniversary of those terrible events, we are reminded not only of the people who died, we are reminded of the deaths of ten of our fellow Australians, we';re also reminded of the wonderful resilience of the American people in the face of that attack. We';re also reminded of the things that we hold dear together and we share in common. 
We also meet of course against gathering discussion and debate about Iraq';s continued defiance of the United Nations Security Council resolutions. And in that context I can inform you that this morning President Bush telephoned me to discuss the situation in relation to Iraq, and I can tell you that we both share concerns and we certainly share American concerns about continued Iraqi defiance of the United Nations Security Council resolutions. 
Australia had previously at a diplomatic level through our Ambassador in Washington put the view to the United States that involvement of the United Nations in the events surrounding Iraq at present is something that Australia would support and something that we believe would be beneficial in the context of trying to achieve a resolution of this difficult issue. Because it must be repeated as often as this issue is discussed that the cause of the present difficulty, the cause of the present concern, the cause of the present apprehension of the United States, particularly against the background of what occurred last year and what it represented, is Iraq';s continued refusal for a number of years to comply with the resolutions and requests of the Security Council. I repeated our view about the involvement of the United Nations in the discussion I had with the President this morning. 
I think it';s important to make the point that the United Nations has obligations. The broader world community has obligations in relation to this issue. It is not right, it is not appropriate for all of the responsibility and for all of the obligation to be seen to fall upon the United States. The Administration and the President has not taken a decision to pursue military action against Iraq. When I spoke to the President earlier today, I was talking to a man who shares the same abhorrence and distaste of military conflict as all of us do. Anybody who imagines otherwise does not understand the man, does not understand his motivations. But I was also talking to someone who is determined to do the right thing, not only by his own country, but also by the wider world community.
We all would hope that this issue can be resolved without any military action. And that has been Australia';s view and has been Australia';s objective and will remain our objective. We are not a people who as I have said on a number of occasions since I';ve been here in Queensland, we are not people who seek conflict. We are a peace loving nation. We share the abhorrence of people all around the world of war but we should understand that the cause of the problem is Iraq';s defiance. And I pose the rhetorical question to those who talk of evidence and those who talk about producing material, and that is a separate and important issue in its own right, the reality remains is that if indeed that country had nothing to hide and nothing to conceal from the world community, why has it repeatedly refused to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council?
This is not an easy issue for the United States. It is not an easy issue for Australia. It is not an easy issue for the world. We would all hope that difficult things would go away but we don';t live in an ideal world. We would all hope that we could wake up tomorrow morning and we didn';t have this problem to deal with, but that won';t happen. I think we all know that. And we must work carefully and patiently, but firmly, through the issue, informing as I intend to continually do, the Australian people regarding the Government';s own thinking and the Government';s own objectives. 
We';ve put the view to the United States that UN involvement is very desirable. The President will be addressing the United Nations General Assembly within the next week. Because of our alliance with the United States, we';ve had a number of Australian defence personnel within the American military complex from the time the war against terror commenced. And as a consequence of that we have an up to date understanding of military thinking in that country.
Ladies and gentlemen, those are some of the context in which this conference takes place. And necessarily it';s a sober and difficult issue but it';s an issue that I know with goodwill and determination and common sense, the community not only here in Australia, but the world community, can work through.
Can I return my friends to Queensland. Can I return first of all to the magnificent Queenslanders of November the 10th, and that is all of you.
I can remember saying to John Herron when he was the President of the Party here, and I thank him for assuming that responsibility at a challenging time; I said you have got one responsibility. You';ve got to hang to every Federal seat we hold here in Queensland and you';ve got to win back Ryan and you';ve got to win Dickson. 
And he delivered, he delivered in spades, he delivered - to borrow an expression of the Treasurer';s - he delivered in full on time on budget. We got all of them, we held all of our seats, we won back Ryan and we won Dickson and I want to thank the Queensland Division for the outstanding Federal result that all of you delivered.
It was a very crucial part of a remarkable victory. A victory that many of us a year ago might not have predicted. A victory 18 months ago probably none of would have predicted but a victory nonetheless when we look back over the events of last year was well deserved and a victory on the merits.
I didn';t agree with Bob Hawke on many things, I did on a few. Some of our common love of sport and a few other things, but what I did agree with him very much on was when he once said that the Australian people rarely get it wrong when it comes to choosing their national government. I mean you might be encouraged to thing that I find that an easy proposition to assimilate at the present time. But it is true when you look back over last year the real seeds of Labor';s destruction at the polls was not planted on the 26th August, it was planted on Bastille Day on the 14th July last year when the Labor Party failed to win the byelection in the seat of Aston where they needed a swing of only 4.2%. A bi﷓election taking place incidentally in a city where all of the research had indicated our Federal fortunes were poorer than any of the other capital cities of Australia. And that to me was the turning point of the political debate last year. 
When we held Aston I knew that we were back in the game. When we held Aston I knew that we had a real prospect of winning and we held Aston because when it actually came to people indicating a preference for the continuation of the Coalition Government or the election of a Labor Government they weren';t going to risk a return to Labor. They weren';t going to embrace a party that didn';t have policies. They weren';t going to embrace a group of men and women who decided to try and benefit politically off the inevitable difficulty of introducing a major economic reform namely the new taxation system.
Never let it be forgotten that it was Mr Beazley who told his Caucus at the end of the year 2000, don';t worry brothers we are going to surf to victory off the back of discontent about the introduction of the goods and services tax and that was their strategy. That was the strategy, the disastrous strategy so accurately identified by John Della Bosca in that very prescient interview in the Bulletin when he said that the Labor Party should abandon roll back and abandon its opposition to the GST and move onto something else. And it demonstrated that particularly in the modern political era what Australians want above everything else what Australians want are clear declarations of where people and parties stand and what they stand for even more importantly than what they stand against. And political parties have got to identify positive platforms and the success of the Government I led over the last six and half years has been due in no small measure to the fact that we have had an active reform agenda.
If we had rested on our laurels after the 1996 election we would not have won in 1998. I can well remember having a dinner with some backbenchers at the Lodge in 1997 and just about all of them had been elected and many of them from Queensland in 1996 and I remember saying to them that a certain approach was needed to win in 1996 but that approach wouldn';t work in 1998 and if we just thought we could just sit there and talk about Keating again in 1998 or 1999 we were kidding ourselves. He';d gone, the public had thrown him out they weren';t interested in him any more. They wanted to know what we were going to do for the future and I said we needed to have even a radical agenda in order to win again in 1998 and that';s one of the reasons why we decided to embrace taxation reform and that';s the reason why we were still again successful in 1998.
And again in 2001 we needed different approaches and different policies and the same will be the case in 2004 because it is necessary for all political parties to be seen always as having an ongoing agenda and that is why before the last election I identified three very important areas that were going to effect the future of this country separately from the need to provide strong economic management and strong policies on national security and border security and those three areas were the ageing of the population, the balance between work and family and sustainable development and they are policies that are receiving increasing attention from all of my colleagues.
We are like all other western countries coming to terms with the impact of an ageing population. The good news is that the process is not as rapid in this country as in others but we have to find the answers to why for example our workforce participation rate amongst people between 55 and 64 is only about 49% whereas countries like the United States and New Zealand it is somewhere near 60%.
We are as a nation discarding the talents and the value of people in that age cohort all too readily and we need a cultural change not only within the community generally but very particularly within the business and professional communities where the statutory retirement of people from partnerships and so forth at the age of 60 is quite ludicrous and is throwing on the scrap heap people who have an enormous amount of talent, an enormous amount of experience to contribute.
Like all countries our fertility rate is falling. It';s falling for a combination of reasons. I don';t believe that Government policies can dramatically reverse it. They can have some impact at the margins. I frequently describe the struggle of many young parents with children to balance their work and family responsibilities as the barbecue stopper of Australian society, because it';s something that engages everybody';s attention and concern.
Not only do parents involved  but involved but obviously their children and their own parents and their friends. And we need a mix of policies. We';ve already gone a long way down that path. The Family Tax Benefit policies introduced in 1996 and broadened and liberalised and made more generous with the tax reform package, the Baby Bonus introduced in pursuance of an election promise and things such as paid maternity leave will all be considered as part of the ongoing reform process. The one qualification I will make at this stage in relation to paid maternity leave, is that it';s not something that we would introduce as a mandatory requirement to be imposed on small business because I do not believe that it';s the sort of obligation that small business should be required.
I just say that our economic strength is well known and well recognised around the world, and the main reason why we have a strong economy in Australia now is that we have had the courage at a Government level to implement the reforms that are necessary to strengthen our economy. The reform process can never be regarded as completed and the day a Government says, well I';ve done enough, the economy';s humming beautifully, I';ll just sit there and have a look at it out my window, the day you do that you';re dead politically because it means that you';ve given up and you';re not trying anymore. So the process of change and economic reform must go on.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very conscious that although we have done very, very well at a Federal level, the Party here in Queensland faces very significant challenges at a state level. I would be failing in my duty if I didn';t say that and recognise it. Like all family difficulties, there is blame on all sides. I';m not here to take anybody';s part of it, or say somebody';s right or somebody';s wrong. All I can say is to the State Division, if you don';t stop fighting you won';t win. I don';t want to say any more than that. I loves youse all. But believe me, I';m right when I say that. And believe me, the public thinks that. And that';s what is important because we are the servants of the public, or you are the servants of the public of Queensland in a state context, and I am the servant of the public of Queensland in a Federal context, that wants a strong Liberal Party to vote for, and there are hundreds of thousands of Queenslanders that hunger after a strong united State Liberal Party to vote for and it';s you alone as a group of men and women who can deliver that.
My friends, I';ve addressed many State Conventions of this Party. I';ve addressed those Conventions in difficult days for the Liberal Party federally, and we had them here in Queensland largely at the behest of some of our erstwhile colleagues in a former manifestation. But that';s a long time ago. It';s long distant from now. Long distant from now. We';re enjoying good times federally and the Government is in a strong position. But there';s not one of us here today as Members of the Federal Government who are in any way complacent. The political scene can change against us very quickly. Out of the clear blue sky something can come along and can knock you off course and everything can change. And we are constantly vigilant about that. 
But I do in conclusion, I want to thank all of you for the tremendous loyalty and support that you have directed towards me and my colleagues over the last six and a half years. We have made an enormous difference to Australia. We have improved this country';s reputation around the world. We have strengthened Australia';s economy. We have made this a more secure country. We have liberated this country';s foreign relations from some kind of ongoing debate about who we';re most associated with. 
The reality is that a nation such as Australia is in every sense of the expression, a citizen of the world. We have great links with the Asia Pacific region. Our relations with countries like China could not be better. We have of course a very close association with our friends in the United States and we will always have very deep emotional and cultural ties with the people of Britain, Ireland and the rest of Europe. We don';t have to choose which is more important. They';re all important. They';re all important to us politically and culturally and they';re all important to us economically. And Australia should always have seen her place in the world in those terms. Now that';s what I believe six and a half years of united Liberal-National Party Government has delivered to this country. It';s a recipe and a formula that really does work and it wouldn';t have worked without your help. 
I want to thank all of my colleagues. I want to thank you Michael and Brendan Cooper and the Party organisation here in Queensland, and all the other Members. I want to thank my Federal parliamentary colleagues from Queensland and all my other Federal Cabinet Minsters who are here. I';m very proud of everything that they have done. They';ve been a great team. I';ve got great Ministers. I';ve got great Members and great Senators. And we are above everything else a team. And we have only one political enemy and that';s the Australian Labor Party. And we';ve never forgotten that.
So my friends, thank you for what you have done. It';s great to be back in Queensland. You delivered magnificently at the last Federal election. I shall never forget that and I will always be in your debt.
Thank you.


E&amp;OE...........
Your Excellency, Mr Ambassador, Opposition Leader, other distinguished guests, my fellow Australians and fellow citizens of the world.
My very first thoughts today are for the families of those who died a year ago, and I know we all hope that this remembrance service can be of some sustaining comfort and that we may in some way, however inadequately, share the sense of grief and loss that you must continue to experience.
As I reflect on those terrible events, I';m reminded of so many of the strengths of our society. I';m reminded of the remarkable resilience of the American people. I';m reminded of the remarkable acts of heroism and bravery of individual policemen and individual firemen. But above all I';m reminded of the simple reality, and that is that barbarism has no ethnicity, evil has no religion. What was done a year ago today was done in the name of pure unmitigated evil. And in recollecting those events, we must keep that one central reality in our minds. In reaching out to each other, which we must always do at a time of tragedy, we must always draw upon our decent instincts, our instincts of courage, our instincts of compassion and our instincts of tolerance and love. And just as the Ambassador reminded us that the most poignant message to come from that terrible day a year ago was the simple expressions of love, so we should be guided by those expressions in our dealings with one another.
I think also today and my thoughts and prayers are very much with those men of the Australian Defence Force who are taking part along with their comrades in distant fields, in the war against terrorism. I hope they return safely and my thoughts and my love are very much with their families.
A year ago today something happened that we never imagined would happen. A year ago today we were reminded of our vulnerability. A year ago today any sense of complacency that it could never happen here, was swept away. These were attacks, in the minds of Australians, not on distant, unfamiliar places or cities. The cities of New York and Washington are very much the cities of our common culture. And we as Australians felt those things very keenly, and instinctively we reached out to our American friends.
It was also an attack upon the globalised world in which we live. It was an attack upon the mobility of the young of our current generations. But above all, it was an evil attack on mankind and an evil attack that had to be, in a measured, resilient way, responded to.
I was in America at the time and my heart spontaneously went out to our American friends. I tried in my inadequate way to express the representative and collective sense of grief and compassion that we felt on that occasion. And out of the despondency and despair and tragedy of those events, I believe some good has come. The determination of decent men and women around the world to work together to fight terrorism, the determination of decent men and women in our country not to scapegoat individual religions or ethnicities, to recognise that evil is unmitigated and unconditional.
So as we gather in this Cathedral in our national capital to remember those terrible events, we grieve for those we lost, we grieve for the families of those ten Australians who died, we grieve with our American friends. We resolve to work ever closer together to root out evil, we resolve ever more firmly to extend the hand of Australian friendship and mateship to all Australians irrespective of their religious or ethnic background. We are Australians together. We are Australians and Americans and others together in the campaign against evil. We owe to the memory of those who died a year ago today a commitment to a continuance of the values of tolerance and decency which are above all else the foundations on which our society is built.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you very much Mr Randall. A year ago yesterday, on the 10th of September, I met President George Bush for the very first time. I had spoken to him twice on the phone, but we spent together at different gatherings and in different ways three hours together on the day of the 10th of September. We attended a splendid ceremony at the Naval Dockyard in Washington, where the bell of the United States ship, Canberra, was handed over to Australia as a momenta of the alliance and friendship between us in World War II. Both of us at the ceremony reaffirmed the centrality of the ANZUS alliance and that particular ceremony was a way of marking, during my visit to Washington, the importance of the alliance to both of us. We then had a lengthy discussion in the White House. I was impressed with the President's extraordinary grasp of the whole range of world issues. And I was particularly struck, and I think it's important in the context of current events, at the commitment he had to building a very constructive relationship between the United States and Russia. And he spoke very warmly of his personal regard for President Putin. Later that afternoon, I went to the Pentagon, renewed my aquaintanceship with Donald Rumsfeld, who I'd met with Colin Powell when they came to Canberra the previous July for the Ausmin talks. And then, as many in the media know, I had dinner with Rupert Murdoch in Washington and a few people remarked that they thought that was going to be the story of the visit. But sadly of course, events unfolded the next day which have, although it's a clich to say so, it's nonetheless absolutely true, events that have changed the world. It's difficult to say anything new or different about those extraordinary events, but one must try.
To me, the two things that have left their deepest impression is that was in so many ways a very modern catastrophe. The most poignant reminders, and the Ambassador touched on it in church this morning, were those deeply personal messages left or conveyed by mobile telephone, that wouldn't have been possible a mere decade or two ago. And the fact that the attack on the Trade Centre in particular was an attack on one of the great outward manifestations of the globalised world. It's also an attack on a world that is very well known to the young, not only of this country but of so many other nations. Because the young have always been mobile, but I think the young of this generation are about the most mobile younger generation the world as ever seen. And there are none more mobile within that worldwide cohort than indeed the young of Australia, who are very mobile in every sense of the word. That is the first lasting impression it's had on me. I think the other of course is how it has driven home to us the vulnerability of all in the modern world to acts of unrestrained terrorism. And of course to an Australian, an attack on New York or Washington is not an attack on a distant, unfamiliar place – and I don't say that unkindly or disrespectfully of any other city in the world - I simply state the reality that because of the commonality of so many features of our culture, an attack on New York and Washington was bound to be felt more deeply and bound to be linked more immediately to the Australian psyche, than attacks on just about any other cities in the world. Not only have many Australians been to both cities, some have lived there for lengthy periods of time. But of course on top of that, we almost nightly see images of both places. But the revelation to all of us and if we reach into our hearts and minds and ask the question – did we really imagine, except in a very retrospectively theoretical sense, did we really image that something like this would have happened, I have to say to myself, I would have the answer was no. And that is why, I guess like everybody else, when I was told by Tony O'Leary, my Press Secretary, that the plane had hit, one plane had hit the Trade Centre, it wasn't of course until the second one that one began to grasp the concept that this was not a terrible accident, it was something far far more horrific.
I think the other thing that brought home to me the enormity of what had occurred is, I don't think I can recollect an event in my lifetime which, and my birthday is well publicised, in my lifetime which was more talked about for so long after the event. Many of us, of course, of my generation will say what were you doing when President Kennedy was assassinated? Older people might say, do you remember the dropping of the bomb on Hiroshima, the end of World War II, Australians will talk about the 11th of November 1975? But I can't think that any event goes near this in terms of the way in which it seized the consciousness of the world. And why is that so, because it was utterly devoid of any moral or political justification. It was a blind act of indiscriminate destruction and hatred. It needs to be said again that it was an attack as much on the decent values of Islam as it was an attack upon the decent values of Christianity and Judaism and all the other religions of the world. Barbarism has no ethnicity and evil has no religion. And it's a message that all of us should understand.
I think it's of course in the sense of fragility and vulnerability that it's induced that it's had it's most significant and lasting impression, not only in a personal sense but also in a political sense. It is now the case that no country can assume that another country possessing a capacity to inflict that kind of devastation on its citadels or indeed a group of people not necessarily belonging to a state. And indeed the masterminds of this particular outrage were, in proper senses of the word, stateless. It's a reminder of course that it can happen again. And it can have therefore very very significant implications for the willingness and the justification for nations taking action to prevent attacks of that kind being made upon their people and upon their assets. All tragedies of course bring forth no matter what their dimension is, bring forth good things and good deeds. The individual acts of heroism have been recounted time and time again. And the Ambassador gave us in his very eloquent way this morning, some examples of those.
I think the other benefit, if I can beg to use that expression, that has come out of the events of the 11th of September 2001, has been in many ways a level of cooperation between countries and within countries in the war against terrorism and the general bringing together of the nations of the world. I've attended, as you might expect a Prime Minister who's been in office for six and a half years, I've attended a lot of international conferences. I don't think I've attended one that was more impressive and more encouraging than the APEC meeting I attended in Shanghai in October of last year. This was a very special meeting for two reasons. It was the first significant international gathering since the 11th of September, or after the 11th of September. It was also, I believe, the largest international gathering hosted by the people of China since the communist revolution in 1949. And it brought to that great country, it brought the President of the United States, the President of Russia, the Prime Minister of Japan, the President of Indonesia and of course many others. And I found the sense of common purpose of that meeting so very ably chaired by President Jiang Zemin, I found the sense of common purpose and the identification of a common threat to very different societies. I found that deeply impressive, and none more impressive than the contribution of the Russian President who disabused in my mind any belief on his part that the terrorist attack was the automatic product of a particular dispute between two particular countries or groups of people in a particular part of the world. And he as a leader who had experienced, and continues to experience, the difficulties of terrorism within his own country, was left in no doubt about that.
The Shanghai meeting symbolised a very common determination of the world jumping over previous difficulties and barriers to combat terrorism. And subsequently of course in the campaign in Afghanistan to which our own defence forces have contributed so magnificently, and on this day as well as all other days, remain very much in our thoughts, the response of the world collectively was also very strong and very impressive. As indeed was the steady way in which the President led the American people to that response.
I think it';s also important to understand that in the wake of something of that magnitude, some previous conceptions and some previous attitudes were in fact changed and removed for all time. I think one of the things it has done is to encourage the world to have a somewhat better understanding of different cultures and different religions. And in the process of exhorting people not to scapegoat particular groups or particular religions, either here in Australia or elsewhere, I think all of us have benefited from a reaching across of previous cultural divides to bring about a better understanding.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I reflect – because being in Washington at the time did give a particular personal dimension to it – the sense of grief and identification I felt with our American friends was immediate and immense. And the sense of grief one felt for all of the victims of those terrible attacks was equally the same. When the President and I spoke on that beautiful morning on the 10th of September of the strength of the alliance and its resilience, we put it very much in a historical context. Neither of us had the faintest notion that within 24 hours we would be contemplating the invoking for the first time in its 50 year history of the provisions of the ANZUS Treaty, something that I discussed with the Foreign Minister over the excellent communication system in Airforce Two as we travelled across the Pacific with the American Ambassador Tom Schieffer, with his wife and their son.
So those personal dimensions are relevant but they are but a sidebar to the impact these events have had on the history of the world, the impact the've had on how we relate to each other within the world community. The've also of course brought forth a natural focus on the relationship between Australia and the United States. And I want to take this opportunity of saying that I will never apologise for the depth and the strength of the relationship between Australia and the United States. It is not a relationship which is the only relationship that matters to our country. We have many relationships that are deeply important and rich and greatly treasured by the Australian people, and there is no reason why a nation cannot have a whole series of relationships which in their different ways are very important. And I';m not in the business, and I think it';s a rather pointless thing to be in the business of trying to grade the intensity of the bilateral relationships that this country has.
But we do share with the United States a rich and deep history. We share with the United States, as we do with many other nations that are represented in this room, some common values and we share with all the nations of the world the universal human values of respect for life, respect for the individual personality, a belief that there is a difference between right and wrong, and there are evil deeds in the world which require an appropriate response. We share with the American people a comradeship in arms in all of the wars of the last 100 years. We share a belief that the worth of an individual is not derived from that person';s race, religion, ethnicity, colour or social background, but rather the innate decency that a person represents and the contribution that that person wants to give to society.
We also share broadly speaking a commitment to what I would please to describe as competitive capitalism - some would choose another description but I won';t get into that debate today – which is the foundation of the generation of national wealth. The United States has meant a great deal to Australia in the past. We have our differences, not just on the sporting field, but we have our strong differences on a number of trade and economic and political issues. But there are some shared values and a shared commitment to the sort of future we both believe in, that is enormously important. And I take this opportunity in the context of our nation';s reflection on what happened to America and to Americans overwhelmingly a year ago, to state the importance to me and my Government of that relationship.
It is impossible of course, and it would be delinquent of me as the Prime Minister of Australia on this occasion, not to address some remarks to the debate which is now developing over Iraq and her non-compliance with the resolutions of the Security Council. I start by saying something that I hope would be self-evident but sometimes things are not self-evident, and that is that we have no quarrel with the people of Iraq. We have no desire, and I can say based on the conversation I had with him last Saturday morning, nor does the President of the United States, have any desire to have a military conflict. I hate military conflicts and so does he. I was not speaking to somebody last Saturday morning who was eager to have a war. I was talking to somebody who was eager to go the extra distance to achieve some other solution, and I have no doubt that will be the thrust of what he has to say to the United Nations General Assembly within a couple of days.
We face the difficulty we do in relation to Iraq because of her repeated refusal to comply with resolutions of the Security Council. This is an issue that focuses not only on that but also focuses on the unwillingness to date of the United Nations to do its job. Australia has been a faithful, full fee paying member of the United Nations since it was founded in 1948. And in fact the first President of the United Nations, if my memory serves me correctly, was the late Dr Evatt?, who was then the External Affairs Minister in the Labor Government. And we have good credentials when it comes to faithful membership of the United Nations. We don';t always agree with it. We are highly critical of some aspects of its committee system, but we are nonetheless through Labor and Liberal Governments, we have been a member in good standing of the United Nations. And we will along with a number of other countries, I hope the great majority, look to the United Nations to do its job over the weeks ahead in relation to the Iraqi failure to comply.
People are asking the rhetorical question, what is the link between September 11 and the difficulties in relation to Iraq. The question of whether there was a direct link or not is something, to use the expression, on which the jury must be out. I don't assert it to be in the affirmative, I don't acknowledge that it is conclusively not the case, I simply join others in saying that one can't be absolutely certain. But what one can be certain of is that the fact that September 11 was able to occur, the fact that such an audaciously successful attack was able to be launched on the economic and military citadels of the most powerful country mankind has known, that must transform in the minds of all nations and not only the United States their attitude in the face of a potential threat which is not addressed. That is, in my view, the linkage that exists between the events of a year ago and the challenges that are now faced, not just by the United States, in fact, not primarily by the United States but, indeed, by the United Nations, by all of us.
It is not right, as the British Prime Minister said, that all of the responsibility should be on the United States. It is not right that the United States and her behaviour should be in the dock. I mean, what we have is an indisputable situation of non-compliance, repeated non-compliance over a number of years and against the background of evidence in the public domain of the possession of agents of warfare, both biological and chemical, and also an aspiration to develop a nuclear capacity which could be turned a reality if fissable material were imported from another source, take much longer if they were left to domestic sources. Now, they are the given facts. People can argue about some of the detail but they are given facts, attested to as recently as the report two days ago of the Institute of Strategic Studies in the United Kingdom.
So the world has a collective responsibility in relation to this issue and I've often said over the past few weeks and I'd repeat it here today that if over the course of the weeks ahead Iraq were to comply fully with the United Nations resolution and if there were inspectors allowed in again, under circumstances of where any requests made or instructions given became absolutely enforceable in a completely protected way then that would transform the situation overnight. And I think I would be expressing the collective prayer and hope of people around the world that that is what would happen. And I hope that in whatever way is chosen by the Untied Nations that is what is expressed or aspired to over the days and the weeks ahead.
That is our position in relation to this very difficult issue. It is not, in my view, an unreasonable position. It's not a belligerent position, it's not a militant position, it is a reasoned position. And I think it is probably the reasoned position of the great majority of people and I';m sure it would be the reasoned position of many nations in the Middle East and many nations that might have some differences with our country on a number of other issues.
There are just two other things that I would like to say before I sit down and take your questions and that is that I mentioned briefly my remarks about the Australian Defence Force. I do want to take this very public opportunity of thanking the men and women in the leadership of the Australian Defence Force for the role they have played over the last year as part of the Coalition Against Terrorism and the contribution that's been made. The leadership initially of Admiral Barrie, the then Chief of the Defence Force, and with him the now Chief, General Cosgrove and all of the other men and women of the Australian Defence Force, they have as always impressively and courageously represented this nation's interests. And they've gone abroad, as all Australian forces desirably go abroad, not in the name of the Government but in the name of the nation and the nation thanks him for that contribution.
Now, I also want to thank the many other people within the broad national security network of Australia for what they have done. The Australian Federal Police, the intelligence services, people working in the Protective Services and all the other Federal Government agencies, because a lot of things have changed over the last year. We do have to go through a lot more procedures, we do have to go through a lot more checks and it's likely to be that for a long time into the future. We have, of necessity, tightened our security laws. I believe through the great parliamentary processes that this country has I believe that we have got the balance right. There's argument at the margins. Nobody wants to take away people's civil liberties but, equally, when you live in a world that has changed and has been rendered permanently more vulnerable as a result of what occurred last year you do have to make changes. And for all of those who have cooperated in that I want to thank you.
And very finally, ladies and gentlemen, this is a day of sadness for many tens of thousands of people around the world, it's a day of sadness for the many hundreds of relatives and close friends of the 10 Australians who lost their lives and we have the opportunity, in a very moving way, at St Christopher's this morning hearing from a representative of them. But it's also a day, amidst all of the sadness, where the great capacity of the human spirit to recover and to soar above adversity is apparent. There's a lot of sadness and heartache and a lot of tears in the recollection but there's also a million stories of great inspiration. The Ambassador mentioned some of them this morning. One that always stuck in my mind and I'll always remember was the story of Father Michael, the Chaplain of the New York Fire Department, who went back into building to administer the last rites of the Catholic Church to a number of dying firemen only to lose his own life. And we all react in different ways to these things and different stories have different impressions on different people. That's one that stuck with me. It seemed to symbolise the unity of service and faith which are so very important ingredients of a decent society.
Thank you.
[ends]
See Question and Answer session


E&amp;OE……………………………
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, you've said that the jury's out on the link between Saddam Hussein and terrorism. Do you think Saddam Hussein is evil, say in the way that Adolf Hitler was evil or Pol Pot?
PRIME MINISTER:Well, I’m not very impressed with any of them. As to how you sort of gradate them, I mean, look, you are dealing with somebody who used poison gas against his own people. You are dealing with somebody who runs on all of my understanding and enormously repressive regime and you are dealing with somebody who was involved in a war that cost the lives of a million people. I could go on. I mean, I don't think anybody is arguing that it's not an evil regime. How you compare it with other regimes, look, I’m just not going to get into that sort of game, I don’t think it's particularly productive and, you know, you can perhaps write a PhD thesis on it at some stage in a different set of circumstances. But the point that I was making is that the real link, the real significant is that September 11 exposed the vulnerability that none of us previously thought might exist, or very few did. And I think you have to understand the sense of vulnerability, particularly the American people feel but it ought not only to be Americans that if it's possible for the group that perpetrated that attack to achieve with such audacious success such a devastating attack, in that set of circumstances then clearly there's a capacity for others to do likewise and that has implications for the way in which the world deals with people who might have both the capacity and the motive to do it in the future. That really is the link that, I think, truly exists.
JOURNALIST:You've said in the past that conflict or military intervention in Iraq is probable. Is that still your view, have you upgraded it to inevitable? And while you say you wish to avoid conflict at all costs, what positive steps are you and President Bush taking to avoid military conflict with Iraq?
PRIME MINISTER:Well, we are taking action in a number of ways. We are taking action to encourage the United Nations to assume its responsibilities to enforce the resolutions already passed in relation to Iraq. And this is a view that I instructed our Ambassador in Washington to put to the administration before I spoke to President Bush last Saturday morning. In fact I had Michael Thawley speak to both the Deputy Secretary of State Rich Armitage, and Hadley the Deputy at the National Security Council, late last week to convey the view that we believed the United Nations should be involved and we have also offered in relation to any United Nations actions sought by the United States to advocate with countries that may perhaps, for whatever combination of reasons be reluctant to do so, to support the role of the United Nations. I think that is a very significant contribution. I mean if, I can only repeat Dennis that if Iraq were to comply in the circumstances that I outlined, I don't think there would be many people around the world who would not see that as being a transformation of the situation overnight. I mean, it strikes me as strange to the point of perversity that the focus should be upon the motives and the conduct of the United States and not upon the motive and the conduct of Iraq and the responsibilities of the United Nations in relation to that.
JOURNALIST:Some analysts have observed that a war in Iraq might stoke more Arab discontent and therefore terrorism. What do you say in to those in the Arab world who have been saying that Israel has, they've been UN resolutions against Israel that have been ignored for decades, why go after Iraq but not Israel?
PRIME MINISTER:Well, you're not dealing with a similar situation. I mean, Israel for all that many people will criticise it, like any other nation it is not beyond approach. Israel is the one full,truly functioning democracy in the Middle East. The rule of law even in the height of the most difficult situations between the Palestinians and the Israeli's, the rule of law still prevails there. I'm not aware that Israel has a stockpile and used chemical agents. I don't think the sort of things of which Saddam Hussein has been guilty can be said in relation to Israel. I think it's also to fair to say that it has been the policy of the Australian Government and I'm very pleased that there's been a more open expression of it from the United States in recent months. That the long-term solution in the Middle East is a home and a state for the Palestinians, as well as the protection of the right of Israel to exist behind secure and internationally recognised boundaries.
JOURNALIST:Look, despite the importance of the war against terrorism and the need to bring Iraq into compliance with UN resolutions, Australia's primary interest, the strategic area of interest remains the so-called arc of instability South East Asia round to the South West Pacific. Are you concerned that the strong political support we are giving to the United States in this, could complicate relations with in Indonesia in its present situation? And are you confident that Australia has the resources to actually meet any crisis in the region, as well as to make a contribution to a probable war in the Middle East?
PRIME MINISTER:Geoffrey, I agree with you that the arc of instability, the potential pressures immediately in our region are our first area of responsibility. And let me make it clear that any commitment we might hypothetically - I'll say that again – hypothetically, make in relation to activities a fair way from our shores, would pay regard to our continuing capacity to deal with any situations that might emerge. In other words, we're not going to overstretch ourselves or our military resources. If we were asked to make those contributions, either in the context of Iraq or indeed something similar. We're not going to do that - and I've made that clear before and I'll make it clear again. As for our support for the United States, my experience has been as Prime Minister that if one explains and articulates the reasons for taking a particular stance and if proper regard is played for the national interest on other nations, when their vital interest are involved it doesn't automatically flow that, if I could put it in this abstract way, nation C that is not necessarily as close to nation B as nation A, being Australia, is not automatically offended if you strongly express and articulate that close relationship. I don't think the world is quite as simplistic as that. I think it's a lot more subtle and a lot more sophisticated. We as a Government have worked very hard on our relations with countries to our immediate north and further within the Asian Pacific region. We've had some very impressive demonstrations in the last few months of the capacity of this country to deal, in a very constructive way, with major nations in the region. The relationship we have with Indonesia is very important. We both share a concern about terrorism and the MOU on intelligence sharing that we signed when I was in Jakarta in January, is an illustration of that. And indeed in a number of areas, the campaign against terrorism has contributed to our two countries getting closer together. It's not been the only reason, but it has certainly not been something that has held it back.
JOURNALIST:You painted for us today a vivid picture of flying back from Washington to, I think, Honolulu. When you first embraced the idea with the Foreign Minister of invoking the ANZUS Treaty, of course this underpins Australia's significant strategic alliances, but it's a far from perfect treaty. One of the partners, New Zealand, their Prime Minister said last year they were no longer in it. So the very least, our strategic devices which have taken us to Afghanistan and possibly further, seem somewhat imperfect. And I wonder if you think in a post-September 11 world, you think there's time for Australia to look at a new strategic alliance?
PRIME MINISTER:With the United States?
JOURNALIST:Yes.
PRIME MINISTER:Look, I as you know in other contexts, I'm a Burkean conservative and I don't believe in abandoning something that continues to work unless I'm convinced that it's no longer of value. The modern manifestation of the ANZUS alliance bilaterally is of course, we now call, when we have discussions between our Defence and Foreign Ministers and the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defence, we call them the Ausmin talks. Look, there is a different view taken of the relationship by New Zealand. I might quickly interpolate that has not in any way affected the closeness of the relationship between Australia and New Zealand. May I say that I've worked very hard with three New Zealand Prime Ministers I've dealt with and certainly very much with the current one, with whom I have a very good and very close constructive working relationship to keep our two countries that are so historically linked very much together. I don't see and need to alter the formal architecture of it. I think it works albeit in a different form, but it works very effectively, as between Australia and the United States. New Zealand has a, by her choice, a more passive role but that's a matter for New Zealand and the United States. I've not been in the habit in the last six of and a half years of giving public advice to the New Zealand Government and I don't intend to do so today.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, your Defence Minister Robert Hill yesterday spoke a little bit about the changing nature of the conflict in Afghanistan with the current war on terror. Is the Government, I was just wondering is the Government thinking or has it been looking at planning ahead for any change in our commitment in Afghanistan?
PRIME MINISTER:Any change in our deployment?
JOURNALIST:Our deployment – bringing home the SAS for example and replacing them with more conventional troops. And are you optimistic or is there any hope for optimism at this stage of an end to what is happening in Afghanistan?
PRIME MINISTER:Well I think broadly the campaign in Afghanistan has gone very well. And a lot has been achieved, an enormous amount has been achieved. The Taliban regime after all has been removed and 1.6 million refugees who were in Pakistan - I think 1.6 is the figure - have gone back to Afghanistan. So that’s a very considerable achievement. Like everybody else, I was disturbed at the bomb attack last week and the attempted assassination of the President. There are some disturbing signs about a possible push back by the Taliban. I wouldn’t want to put it any more strongly than that. In a situation like this, you always keep talking at the appropriate level regarding a military commitment. You owe it to the men and the soldiers involved, you owe it to them to keep the thing under constant review and we’ll always take decisions that protect to the maximum degree their security and their safety. We don’t have any plan to make any change at present. They’re there to do a job. If that changes, then we’ll obviously inform the Australian public in the appropriate way. But we don’t have any plan at present to change. They’ve done an outstanding job and I know their contribution is greatly valued.
JOURNALIST:The events of September the 11th had an impact on the US economy which in turn had a domino effect on other economies around the world, including Australia. The Treasurer last week highlighted the global slow down as the main risk to the Australian economy, coupled with the severe drought now in parts of Australia, and new figures yesterday show the further downgrade for this year’s winter crop. With these risk factors in mind, what is your assessment now for the outlook for the US economy and for Australia for the second year after September the 11th?
PRIME MINISTER:Well it is true that the downturn last year as a result of September 11 did have an effect around the world. It actually didn’t have as big an effect on Australia as it did on most other countries. I think the outlook for the American economy is mixed. My experience when I was in New York at the beginning of the year was that the economists and the financial community were a lot more optimistic than the businessmen. But that’s often the case. Although sometimes it’s the other way around – the businessmen are more optimistic than the economists and the financial community. I suppose it depends what stage of the business cycle you are at. There’s obviously some hesitancy in the American economy and the big question is whether the decline in the stockmarket, which has been far more marked than it has been in Australia, because we didn’t go up as high, and that old adage about what goes up must come down didn’t affect as badly as it did in the United States. And if that decline has a prolonged impact on middle America’s spending capacity, then you will then start to see some effects. So I’d have to say it is a question mark. I’d agree with the Treasurer’s assessment. The drought is a problem. Of course we have some other things going in our favour. We have some – and you’ve heard me talk about them before but that won’t stop me mentioning them again – you’ve got some very strong fundamentals. You don’t have the low dollar but you do have a super competitive exchange rate and all of that reform over a long period of time has made a very significant contribution. And we’re better fitted to deal with the problem than many others but Peter’s right in sort of drawing attention to those two things.
JOURNALIST:A question about propaganda. Saddam Hussein has shown himself to be an effective user of weapons of mass communication. Over the last few days we have seen an American former United Nations weapons inspector prominently escorting international media to sights to, in his words, prove that they’re not what the United States and other enemies of Iraq assert them to be. How should ordinary Australians interpret this material that we’re seeing each night, and does it not put more pressure on you and your Government to make available any reliable information you haven’t yet made available to the Australian people?
PRIME MINISTER:Well the answer Greg to that is that we live in a very open, robust democracy, and long may it remain so. And the media and everybody else makes their contribution to that and they choose to run certain stories and not run others. We have an obligation, and I’ve acknowledged this before, we have an obligation to explain and defend everything we do. I mean Government’s are accountable. Everybody is accountable in the modern world, even more so than they were in earlier times, and I’m no exception to that and I accept the responsibility of explaining myself and putting my case. I take the opportunity in the context of that of saying or asking rhetorically if indeed there is nothing to hide in Iraq, why can’t the inspectors go in in an unhindered fashion? And why can’t in an unconditional way any instructions of the United Nations be carried out? I think that is a question that Australians listening to this broadcast would probably want to ask. Most of them nod their heads about it because in the end, you know when you’ve got claim and counterclaim, when you’re saying your hands are clean and you’ve got nothing to hide, why don’t you demonstrate it?
JOURNALIST:A little over 12 months ago you made some comments which caused some questions to be asked about your future tenure as Prime Minister. They must seem like not 12 months but a light year away at least given recent developments.
PRIME MINISTER:It was actually two years ago.
JOURNALIST:And revisit it every 12 months.
PRIME MINISTER:You do.
JOURNALIST:Are you now more inclined to stick around given the growing international uncertainty?
PRIME MINISTER:I always think that TV journalists learn a lot when they look at the interviews conducted by other TV journalists, and if I could refer you to an interview I did with Kerry O’Brien on the 7.30 Report a few months ago, in other words I don’t have anything to add to what I’ve previously said on that subject.
JOURNALIST:Just sort of on your Prime Ministership, between Vietnam and you winning Government in 96 we only had one real major commitment overseas and that was in the Gulf War of our troops. Since you’ve been in power we’ve had two – Timor and Afghanistan. And here you are today sort of talking about the possibility of a third. Do you think your legacy will be a military one as much as anything else?
PRIME MINISTER:Well I don’t believe so. But you can’t start talking about legacies until you reach the point of saying you’ve got one. What else can I say? But look, no – if you ask me what things am I most proud of that my Government has done over the last six and a half years, I would unhesitatingly say one of them was the intervention in East Timor. I think that was enormously to the credit of this country. We stood up for the right thing and it was difficult. It’s now history. It’s now behind us. We are very importantly, we’re building our relationship and we’re well along the road to doing it with Indonesia. I’m very proud of what we did in relation to gun control. And I think the evident strength of the Australian economy in the face of an Asian economic downturn and the downturn last year, and the strength of that economy, all of those things are things if you ask me right now, sort of on work in progress basis, what I thought were the great achievements for the Government so far – I’d say those three things in particular.
JOURNALIST:Last night Henry Kissinger told the ABC that he thought that what Colin Powell meant by UN involvement in Iraq, he meant the return of weapons inspectors after Saddam Hussein had been removed. I don’t know whether that is your understanding of the role of the UN, but is that your understanding? And secondly, would Australia support an attack on Iraq if Russia and China abstained from the resolution in the Security Council?
PRIME MINISTER:Well look I’m not going to start hypothesising on such a very, very important, sensitive issue. I’m not going to answer the last part of that question other than to say I’m not going to hypothesise. There is no proposition in front of the Australian Government about an attack on Iraq. I hope that doesn’t come because I would like to see this issue resolved in another way. So I’m not even going to hypothesise on that, lest people think I’m predisposed, which I’m not, to a particular set of circumstances. I’m not going to try and define exactly what the future involvement of the United Nations may be, beyond saying that it would be to transform the whole issue completely if everything the United Nations had requested in the past were in fact done. And that would be a very good start. But I think you have to in relation to future United Nations action and involvement maintain a degree of flexibility. When I spoke to President Bush last Saturday morning, I don’t think he had precisely made up his own mind as to exactly what the United States was going to put to the United Nations, and I could understand that. I mean it’s something of a… you’re dealing with the UN and different nuances in different resolutions, it is something of a movable feast. And it’s a bit early to be sort of committing yourself to an exact formulation of words and I’m certainly not in the business of answering the other hypothetical question.
JOURNALIST:You said just a few minutes ago that one of the consequences of the atrocity 12 months ago was that people have changed, there was a better understanding of different cultures and religion and less of a tendency to scapegoat other groups for apparent offences. Are you convinced that that lesson has permeated all sectors of the Australian community? The Government has consistently said to effect that just because someone's a Muslim doesn't mean they were cheering on the planes on New York 12 months ago but is there more you could do to spread the message that there are Islamic extremists and then there are other followers of Islam.
PRIME MINISTER:Well, I think you perhaps summarised my remarks in a slightly firmer form than I'd given them. I’m not saying that there's others and, you know, benign accident, I’m not suggesting you did it deliberately. But look, I said I thought there was some greater inquiry about different religions and different cultures. I don't think people are necessarily more…dramatically more informed, I think there's just been a greater effort by some people to get a little bit of an understanding and to see common good in all of the world's great religions, whatever your own individual religious face may be. Look, there's intolerance in Australian society from some people but I think overwhelmingly we have been a very tolerant people and I think we have been remarkably receptive. And there have been some recent surveys that indicate that. And we…we have to understand that when you bring people from all around the world you can only build a united society around a set of common values. And my view has always been that when people come to this country, no matter what their origins, they should seek to become what I call in plain, unmistakable terms, I think they should seek to become Australians no matter where they come from. And that means adhering to a common set of values but it doesn't mean you abandon the special place in your heart for your homeland or that you abandon particular customs and cultures that are important to that connection with your homeland. Now, there is a happy medium in all of this.
I mean, there are some common, accepted Australian attitudes and values. They clearly include free and open expression, they include a respect for the equal roles of men and women in our community, they include a respect for our democratic institutions, they include freedom of religion, they must include a proper embrace and usage of the English language without, of course, in any way [inaudible] the right of people to use other language as well if that is their wish. But all of these things I think are commonly understood and accepted. And can I say I think we have done this very well. I mean, we get so critical of ourselves, some people do. I mean, when you think of how this country is now composed to what it was 50 years ago - I mean, it hasn’t changed perhaps as much as many people think it is, it depends on what part of Australia you live - but we have been incredibly successful and I think we should be a little more confident in expressing that than sometimes we are. And do you think of how, of what we've gone through? Phil Coorey asked me a moment ago of things that have happened over the last few years. We have gone through, in the last 10 years, we've gone through - or 15 years or more - the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia and I would think on a rough calculation we would have between, what, 6, 700,000 people owing their origins to the former Yugoslavia, the Serbians, Croatian, Slovenian, Albanian, so it goes on, maybe, 6 or 700,000, maybe it's only 500 but it's a lot.
Now, by and large, that disintegration occurred with all the tension that that involved and all of the tragedy and the ethnic cleansing and everything that occurred in other parts of the world with remarkably little resonance in this country in terms of open conflict. And the same thing with a very difficult situation in the Middle East. I think we're handling that well. I mean, people feel [inaudible] about it but in the end what gets to them is that they're Australians more than anything else and that is how it should be. I don't want them to be indifferent. I mean, if I were an Australian of Croatian descent and I had some relatives living still in Zagreb and I know a bloke in this very situation, I'd worry about what was happening. I'd be interested in it but in the end when it came to me relating to Australians of other ethnicities and descents what would matter most to me was that we were Australians together and I think, by and large, we have done that, we've done that to a remarkable degree. I think we fret about this too much. I think we navel gaze too much about this. I think we've just done it better than most and we ought to be pleased about that and we ought to just get on with being Australians and continuing to accept in a proper basis of integrity for our immigration programme, continue to accept people from all around the world. I mean, I was very happy to say when I was travelling around Europe, as you would have heard me on a number of occasions, and I surprise many of my European hosts by reminding them that the language most widely spoken in Sydney, the biggest city in Australia now for English, is the dialect of Chinese. And there were very few of my European hosts who sort of thought that was possible. But the fact that they didn't is a sign, isn't that we've done it pretty well. I just think we ought to relax and realise we have done it well.
JOURNALIST:[inaudible] arrangement or understanding prior to the election that the appointment might be made?
PRIME MINISTER:Well it was a proper appointment and he’s a very good appointment. And I know it has been criticised by the Courier Mail and by some others and I accept that criticism. There’s always criticism of the appointment of people who have had a political background – not always, but in many cases. I made it very clear before the 1996 election that I would reserve the right for the Government to make some appointments out of political ranks and I think the ones that we have done over the last six and a half years, like Andrew Peacock and David Connolly and John Spender have all been very good appointments, as indeed were appointments of the former Government such as Doug McClelland as the High Commissioner to London. They’ve been very, very good appointments. But as to the exact circumstances of it, I mean I’ve got to tell you Dennis that in the lead up to the last election who was going to be Australia’s Ambassador - no disrespect to the wonderful Irish or to His Holiness - who was going to be the Ambassador in Dublin or the Holy See was not my major preoccupation. I see Lynton Crosby out of my mind’s eye. I don’t think I can remember talking about it to Lynton Crosby. Look we went into that election not knowing what was going to happen and I don’t think anybody going into that election had any firm understanding about diplomatic appointments.
JOURNALIST:You’ve said a couple of times today that if Iraq were to comply fully with the UN resolutions, then that would transform the situation entirely and completely. George Bush and Tony Blair as recently as the weekend were still talking regime change. In your mind, in your view, what is the priority and the top agenda here? Is it unfettered access for weapons inspectors or is it regime change?
PRIME MINISTER:Well I think the… it’s not a situation where I want to get into saying which is the more – different people are going to have different views about what is more important. Speaking theoretically if you had a regime change you would probably get a different approach in relation to the United Nations, but let me phrase it this way – if there were a sudden, dramatic transformation and a new approach, a new dawn in relation to weapons inspections, the dismantling of all the weapons and so forth, I think regime change might not be seen as quite as important. But from our point of view, we want the potential threat posed removed. And one way of removing it is to allow the inspectors in. I hope that happens, but it’s not just allowing inspectors in. They’ve got to come in in circumstances where they have unhindered access. I would even offer the view they have protected access and that any instructions given to remove and destroy and so forth are carried out, and there is supervision of that process by another body perhaps. I mean these are possible ways of handling it. I don’t want to get too prescriptive, somebody to write down and say that’s the precise new articulation, but I’m trying to answer your question as best I can. Look I think everybody would like to see the regime change in Iraq. I think a lot of Iraqis would like to see the regime change. I think a lot of Middle Eastern countries would like to see the regime change – a lot, perhaps even a majority. The threat posed by the agents of war, the chemical and biological and so forth, is the major concern but in a sense it’s a different side to the one problem.
JOURNALIST:You spoke again today about the close and special relationship that Australians have with the United States, and I just want to draw your attention to some comments today by the Australian Institute of International Affairs which described the September 11 attacks as moral anathema, that said that we do need to understand why the United States is so hated that young men will commit such acts against the symbols of American power. I just wanted to ask you what your response to those comments are, and whether or not you’ve asked yourself the same question?
PRIME MINISTER:Well clearly if you believe in blind terror and indiscriminate killing as an agent of human behaviour and human activity it is, and I’m no psychologist, it is more probable than not that you will seek to do it against the most powerful and the most high profile nation in the world. I mean one way of looking at America’s dilemma is to say yes, they have the… I mean to be an American is… to be the most powerful country in the world is an enormous advantage, but it also makes you an object. I mean bear in the mind that the backgrounds of many of the people who were involved in these terror attacks, as I have been told and read and we’ve all read, did not necessarily come out of a particular dispute in the Middle East. I mean people have sought to draw a connection between the conflict between the Palestinians and Israel and I mean let me say, I continue to argue very strongly for a settlement of that and I regard it as one of the great tragedies of the last ten years that Arafat did not have the courage in the end to embrace what Barak offered him. But I also believe very strongly that Palestinians are entitled to a homeland and they have as much right to have a homeland as do the Israelis.
But part of the reason why America was attacked is because of who she is, because she is the strongest. That does not necessarily indicate moral turpitude or any kind of moral justification for it. America is not flawless. I mean it’s a deeply flawed society in many ways. All of our societies have deep flaws. There are many aspects of American life, particularly in the area of social security benefits, that I don’t agree with. I think the safety nets we have in this country are better. There are American characteristics that I don’t relate to as readily as others, but I mean we’re all different and I hope we remain different. I’d hate to live in a world where all our national differences were blanded out in some kind of grey blancmange where all of our differences had been removed. So I think you have to bear that in mind. When you are the biggest kid on the block, people are always more prone to have a go at you. That is a simplistic way of putting it but I think there is a lot of truth in that and I don’t think that of itself connotes moral failure or turpitude on the part of the United States.
Can I also just finally remind you this is the great dilemma all free societies have, is the eternal struggle between allowing people the freedom that we believe we should have to move and speak and do things in an open democratic society, but the inevitable risks that that exposes you to. I mean that is a dilemma that this country faces. I mean we always come out, and properly so, in favour of keeping a society – I mean that’s why we say the attack a year ago, was on our values and one of those values is to have these kinds of exchanges for people to then go away and rubbish absolutely everything I’ve said and so forth. But that’s what society is all about. But I do think you should allow for the fact that when you are the most powerful country in the world, therefore you are going to be an object of violence. It’s not necessarily because of your moral failure.
[ends]
See: National Press Club Address


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Sir Daryl,members of the Menzies family, ladies and gentlemen, it';s a great delight for me to be here today. I think it';s the first time I';ve actually…it';s not a virtual visit it';s a real visit to this building and the ambience of it fits the man whom the foundation honours. And I do want to thank the tremendous efforts of those who';ve supported and run the Menzies Foundation over the years and I see around the room many of the people who';ve guided the foundation. It has been a truly non-political body and I';m delighted to acknowledge here amongst others the presence of  Frank Crean, the former Federal Treasurer and parliamentary colleague of mine for a number of years. And it is right and fitting that these foundations are supported and conducted in a totally apolitical fashion.
The foundation over the years has carried out a tremendous amount of valuable work in supporting wide range of scholarship and research and public health activities.  The items that were mentioned by Sir Daryl and I know something of the Menzies Centre in London and  it';s very pleased that the federal government was able to provide it with some additional support of some $5 million a couple of years ago. I understand that when the foundation was established and when Clarendon Terrace was restored for the National Trust in 1981 a museum of Menzies memorabilia was very high in your aims. And I also know the difficulty you had to achieve this and you considered different ways of honouring Australia';s longest serving Prime Minister. That special video you produced ‘Menzies in his Time'; in 1994 was an important part of the historical work of remembering the man.
And I';m quite excited that you have decided to launch this, or invite me to launch this virtual museum because what it does is to bring in contact with modern communications and technology the life and times of this remarkable Australian who in the view of many, myself included, is the greatest Prime Minister that this country has had and whose contribution covered such a remarkable period of this country';s history.  Someone who had his first vote in the election that Menzies went closest to losing, namely 1961, and in those days you had to wait until you were 21 to get a vote, I of course, all my conscious political years from the time I started following politics and the first election I followed with any degree of interest was 1949 which was the one that brought Menzies to power and amongst other things ended petrol rationing. And seeing that I was the child of a garage proprietor in inner-Sydney we thought that was a pretty terrific policy and there was much enthusiasm and rejoicing when the election was called.
But he was a remarkable figure.  He had an extraordinary influence on this country and I think what is important about today is that it';s another way of reflecting on the history of that period of time. We are getting better in Australia at remembering past events, we';re getting better at honouring people who';ve made a previous contribution and I think we have to go a lot further because we have remarkable personalities and remarkable characters in all aspects of our life as a nation and to be Prime Minister of a country even for one years involves a lot of work and a lot of achievement but to do it for 16 years is quite amazing. And in that time he presided over enormous prosperity in this country but very importantly his memory is being honoured in a way that he would be very proud of.
I remember watching on television his final press conference in 1966 and he was asked to nominate some of the things for which he would want to be remembered and one of the things he singled out was the contribution of his government to higher education and it';s therefore appropriate that the work of the foundation has been very much about encouraging and nurturing the intellects and the scientific and engineering and medical and legal aspirations of so many young Australians. And as I walked in with Daryl Dawson he pointed out that honour board, if I can describe it, of those people who benefited from the foundation';s support. I think that is a terrific way to remember him because he was a great intellect. He cared about scholarship, he cared about the precision of the both spoken word and the written word. There hasn';t been a more eloquent public speaker in my experience than Robert Menzies and having heard the recordings of the greatest around the world I don';t think there was anybody who could hold a candle to him in terms of his capacity to seize a moment and articulate it in a fine way and that could only be possible because he had a well disciplined mind and the fact that his memory is supported through this foundation, the aspirations of people who would emulate that I think is a wonderful thing.
I think this virtual museum will be an invaluable educational  resource particularly to young Australians. Daryl has mentioned that it contains 750 images from all periods of Sir Robert';s life. I will look forward to browsing through it with great interest having read with great interest the two volumes of Alan Martin';s biography of Robert Menzies. And biographies are a wonderful part of understanding the rich political history of this country and I';m so delighted that it was possible for John Gorton';s biography to be completed and for me to be able to launch it shortly before John';s death because that was a very interesting and active period let me put it in the politics of Australia and particularly the politics of the Liberal Party at that time. But it';s all part of the pattern and it';s al part of the colour of Australian public life and Australian political life.  And I understand that the future features will include such items as extracts from speeches and essays under the title of ‘The Forgotten People';, broadcasts that have now come to be seen as quite seminal in forming the attitudes and the values of the party that Menzies led back into office in 1949 and therefore had such an enormous impact on the future of this country.
So I want to congratulate everybody involved in the development of this website including your previous Executive Director Eric Wigglesworth, your current Director Professor John Coghlan, and your General Manager Sandra Mackenzie. It gives me very great pleasure therefore to officially launch the Menzies Virtual Museum.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr Chairman, Mr Speaker, Mr President, my parliamentary colleagues, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
Confucius nominated 30 as the age at which a person became either mature or fully established, or both. 
Using that measurement we can certainly say that the relationship between Australia and China is both mature and fully established.
This year we mark the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and China.  But in marking that important milestone in the relationship between our two people we should regard the relationship as being very much a work in progress because there is always a lot that can be done and a lot more that can be achieved.
Mr Chairman, we are delighted to welcome you and your wife as our guests to mark the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations.  You last visited Australia in 1988 as Premier, a year of course that was very significant in the history of this country.
Successive Australian Governments have worked very hard to build the relationship over the last 30 years and we can look back on that time as being a period of great achievement.  The most important achievement of course has been the building of personal people to people links between our two societies.
I am very fond, Mr Chairman, of pointing out that in Australia';s largest city Sydney it is the various dialects of Chinese which is the most widely spoken foreign language. A fact that many European hosts of mine on a recent visit to Europe found quite astonishing.
I take a very personal interest in this Mr Chairman because in my own constituency of Bennelong the enrolment includes more than 10 per cent of Australians of Chinese decent.
We have a very close education relationship with China and with 25,000 students from China expected to study in Australia this year, China is our largest education market.
The tourist market is growing at a very rapid rate and by the year 2010 it is estimated that more than one million Chinese people a year will visit our country.
The relations between our two countries will grow even closer as the occasion of the Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008 approaches.
We offer to you Mr Chairman and to Beijing and to the people of China our friendship and any help that you may ask for in relation to the staging of those games.
I remarked to you Mr Chairman over dinner that in the six and a half years that I have been Prime Minister of Australia there is no world leader I have met more frequently than your President Jiang Zemin.
The relationship between Australia and China is sound because it is built upon the important principles of mutual respect for each other and a recognition that societies that have different cultures and have different histories can nonetheless work together very closely if they understand those differences and they focus on the things that bring their two societies together.
My last visit to China was in May of this year, it focused very heavily on the negotiations then going on in relation to the contract for the supply of LNG.
We Australians were delighted at the decision taken by the authorities in China to award that contract, the largest ever trade agreement Australia has made with any country to the consortium from the North-West Shelf.  We think your decision was wise and a decision that will contribute very greatly to the relationship between our two countries.
It was an important illustration of how much our two countries can work together and it was a reminder of how much we have in common.
And that visit was also important because I had the opportunity of addressing the cadres attending the Central School of the Chinese Communist Party in Beijing and I understand that I was not only the first leader of a centre-right party in the Western world to addressing that gathering but indeed the first leader of any political party to address that gathering. It was a rare experience for me and it was a reminder of how two countries with different histories and different cultures can work together in a respectful way.
Mr Chairman, Madame, we welcome you, we hope you have a most enjoyable time in Australia. We wish you well and your country well, we value very deeply the relationship between our two societies.  We have come a long way in 30 years, I am sure in 30 years time we will celebrate many more achievements and an even deeper and richer relationship between our two peoples.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Scholz for your very kind words of introduction, Tony Staley, my parliamentary colleagues Senator Kate Lundy and the Honourable Greg Pearce, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is as you';ve been reminded, in this very building, this quite historic building in the experience of Australian industry, that on I think the 29th of January last year I launched the Backing Australia';s Ability programme which involved a $3 billion commitment by the Government to boosting technology, boosting science, boosting research and trying to capture for future Australian generations not only the technical but also the intellectual capacity of this country in so many diverse areas of innovation and technology.
One of the fascinating things I thought about your Association as I listened to your President describe it and trace it, is that it does represent in many ways the long journey of Australian industry from arguably its real beginnings in this very building on this very site in 1870 to the modern transformed manifestation which incorporates the best of the history of manufacturing in Australia, but also combines that with all of the leading edge technology which is available to companies in Australia and around the world in the year 2002.
I want to congratulate your Association on the way in which it has gathered together the various strands of manufacturing, the various strands of high tech, and how it has preserved as I say the best of what we inherited with all of the advantages and all of the opportunities of modern technology. 
It is certainly a good time to be in business in Australia in 2002. We';ve rarely had stronger economic conditions. Only yesterday the International Monetary Fund reminded Australia that our economic performance is superior to that of just about every other developed country in the world, and the prospect of maintaining continued economic growth, around about four per cent per annum, is very much there for us to have if we maintain the stance of current sensible economic policies that have delivered low inflation, low interest rates, a secure and predictable investment environment. 
That has come in no accidental fashion. That has come off the back of many reforms in many areas over a number of years. Most recently of course have been the transforming effects of the introduction of a new taxation system – difficult to do at the time but the benefits of that are now very much available and not least for our exporters because one of the great advantages of the new taxation system is that it took the burden of indirect tax off our exports. And the benefits of industrial relations reforms and one of the great things about the Australian economy through the 1990s and into the 21st century was of course our very superior productivity performance. Along with the United States, we had the best productivity performance of all of the major economies over the last decade and if we can maintain that kind of momentum, then we can continue to enjoy the rates of growth that we are experiencing at present.
Tonight specifically, I want to mark this occasion by announcing an important practical measure to help small and medium businesses in this industry to win export contracts or to expand their export businesses. The Government will open a national TradeStart office specifically for this industry and in partnership with AEEMA. AusTrade has signed the partnership agreement with AEEMA and I';m advised that AEEMA has already appointed its TradeStart officer to be based in Brisbane but assisting businesses right across the country. 
TradeStart is the Federal Government';s information and advisory service for Australian exporters. We currently have 24 TradeStart offices and we aim to lift that to 50 by the middle of next year. In this year';s Budget we committed $21.5 million over four years to expand the successful TradeStart export assistance network, a small but important practical measure designed specifically to enhance the export potential and the export capacity of all of the small to medium sized firms under the umbrella of your Association.
Ladies and gentlemen, the final thought that I want to leave with you tonight is I hope seen as far and away the most important. And that is this – that in the globalised world in which we now live, a capacity to change and adapt is the most important single quality that I believe business men and women need. We can';t escape, nor should we endeavour to, the consequences of living in a globalised economy. There are enormous benefits to be derived from the globalised economic environment in which we live. But they';re only going to be derived and they';re only going to be converted to Australia';s national benefit if we continue to show to ourselves and more importantly to the world, the capacity to change and adapt. 
And the overwhelmingly most important reason why the Australian economy has proved so strong and resilient and successful in recent years is that we as a nation, and more importantly, we as a people, have shown a capacity to change and adapt. And you only have to think of the experience of your own industry to understand how it has changed and adapted. How it has moved away from some notions that were regarded as sacrosanct only 20 years ago. How you';ve reached out and sought and won export markets, how you';ve converted high technology capacity to true and trusted manufacturing techniques. And it';s the capacity and the adaptability of Australians more than anything else that has delivered the strong economy that we have at the present time. 
I think one of the great assets Australia has is that we have an adaptable people. Australian employees are sought all around the world because they have a capacity to adapt. We don';t have a view that the Australian way is the only way, but we do have a view that part of the Australian way is a capacity to adapt to new and challenging horizons and new and challenging opportunities. And your industry is a metaphor for that Australian capacity to adapt and to change, to embrace new technology. There is no nation on earth that has been a greater devourer, when you think of it, of new technology than Australia. And that';s one of the reasons why we';ve been successful in the modern world. It';s one of the reasons why your industry has changed and adapted, and why you';re making such a very important contribution to the strength of the modern Australian economy. I thank you for that. I congratulate in advance all of those who participated in the awards process and I look forward to the awards component of the evening later on tonight.
Thank you.
   [ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
[tape begins] Vice-Marshal, my parliamentary colleague Kerry Bartlett, the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.
May I very simply and very directly say to the men and women of the Royal Australian Air Force who';ve just completed the deployment in Kyrgyzstan that a very grateful and a very proud nation welcomes you back. We welcome all of you back and we';re overjoyed that all have returned safely. We are very conscious of the anxiety of your families and your other loved ones during the time of your absence. It has been an immensely successful deployment and it has played a major part in the successful coalition campaign against terrorism which arose out of the tragic events of the 11th of September 2001.
And as a measure of the refuelling contribution, I understand that during the deployment the amount of fuel transferred would be enough for an FA-18 Hornet to fly to the moon and back again. And perhaps that is some measurement of the ongoing character of this deployment and its importance.
I know that all of you are so happy to see your families, your wives, your husbands, your mothers and fathers, your other loved ones, your young children. And I just want to say to all of you that I';m very proud, the entire Australian nation is very proud of what you have done. It is never an easy thing for a Government to ask the young men and women, and the sometimes not so young men and women, of the ADF to go overseas in the name of this country, doing something in the name of the values to which this country stands. As Prime Minister I am very conscious of that, I am very conscious of any decision that might potentially put the men and women of our defence force in harms way. And no decision of that kind is ever taken lightly. And it certainly was not in relation to the deployment that followed the events of the 11th of September.
But once again the men and women of the Australian Defence Force have done this nation proud. You have won the admiration not only of your fellow Australians, but you';ve also won the respect and the admiration of the military forces and the leadership of the United States and of many other of our coalition partners in the campaign against terrorism.
But ladies and gentlemen can I say again to all of you thank you very very much. And can I also say that such is the measure of our regard and our gratitude for what the 84 Wing Detachment efforts have represented for the Australian Defence Force, that I have very great pleasure this afternoon on behalf of the Governor General of Australia of awarding a meritorious unit citation to 84 Wing Detachment Manas and I would like to invite the two Commanders, the two detachment Commanders to come forward, Wing Commander George Kollios, the Detachment Commander of the first rotation, and Wing Commander Trenton Breeze, the Detachment Commander of the second rotation, to come forward to accept this citation of behalf of the 84 Wing Detachment. Yes, let';s give them a round of applause.
I haven';t done one of these unit citations before so if I get any of the protocol wrong gentlemen, will you please excuse me. But can I tell you that the meritorious unit citation was introduced on the 15th January 1991 to provide recognition to units for sustained outstanding service in war like operations. Out of the many existing Australian Defence Force units, only seven since the establishment of this citation have previously been awarded the citation. And I will now read the citation and it reads as follows. Number 84 Wing Detachment';s continous engagement in air refuelling combat support operations from the middle of March until the end of the September 2002 made a significant contribution to the effectiveness of coalition operations in the global war against terrorism. Their outstanding aviation skills, ground support and dedication to duty earned the highest praise and respect of Australian and coalition leaders and military commanders. The provision of air-refuelling support missions during Operation Slipper by Number 84 Wing Detachment was instrumental in the success of the coalition force in this operation. The acceptable command, aviation and ground support skills of the men and women of number 84 Wing Detachment Manas were in the finest traditions of the Royal Australian Air Force and the Australian Defence Force.
That is the citation issued under the authority of the Governor General of Australia. I therefore have immense pleasure in presenting the citation to the two commanding officers and again through them thank all of the men and women who';ve served with them. A grateful and proud nation welcomes you back, wishes you well and expresses the absolute delight of everybody here that all of you are back safe and sound and long may that remain the case.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Mr Doughty, ladies and gentleman.  I want to thank the chamber for the invitation to address it today and I do so against the background of course of a very long and close and deeply embedded bilateral relationship at so many levels between Australia and the United States.  And I think it was the great English diarist Dr Johnson who said that we should keep our friendships in good repair.  And the friendship between the United States and Australia is no exception to that injunction.  And it's never wise to take close relationships, either of a personal nature or indeed relationships between two societies, for granted.  And it's always essential that we do, in different ways, build on those relationships.  And the American-Australian Association of course is most deeply rooted in the common values that our two societies share.  
And when I had the privilege of addressing a joint sitting of the United States Congress in June of this year, I said that there were many things that our societies shared in common.  We shared a common belief in individual liberty.  We shared a belief that a person';s worth was determined not according to class, or race, religion, or social background, but rather the strength of character of the individual and the contribution that he or she was willing to make to society.  I also said that we shared in common two other very important values and one of those was a belief that competitive capitalism was the true foundation of a generation of national wealth.  And that is certainly a credo by which my own party, the Liberal Party of Australia, exists and is certainly something that I have endeavoured to defend in the time that I've been Prime Minister.
I want to say something in a moment about the economic relationship between our two countries.  But before I do so, it would be unrealistic if I did not address some remarks to the current situation surrounding Iraq and the responsibilities that are falling upon, particularly but not only, the President of the United States and others who are concerned to ensure that a realistic approach is brought to bare on this very challenging issue.  Nobody wants a military conflict about anything.  I say that unequivocally and unconditionally.  And in the past few weeks, I've had the opportunity of talking personally to the British Prime Minister and in a lengthy telephone conversation with the American President.  And can I say very deliberately that in relation to both of those gentleman, I was talking to two people who are committed to achieving a peaceful, diplomatic outcome to the current challenge - if that is at all possible.  No right-minded person easily contemplates any kind of military conflict and all of our experience tells us that it is something to be avoided, if at all practical and if at all humanly possible. 
We do face at the moment an issue that won't go away.  History tells us that potential threats don't die of their own volition, they only disappear if appropriate action is taken.  And in that context, I want to strongly support the attempts that are now being made by the United States and the United Kingdom to secure the passage through the Security Council of a new resolution, because a new resolution is needed to deal with the problem of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.  
And we've had a perfect demonstration of why a new resolution is needed within the last 24-hours, because we've had an agreement reached between the United Nations weapons inspector and the Iraqis which is faithfully echoing the existing resolution and that is the problem because the agreement that has been reached does not provide unconditional comprehensive access to all potential weapons sites within Iraq.  And the reason it doesn't is that it's based on the old resolution and the old resolution has many gaps in it.  Part of the agreement that was announced overnight was the exclusion of the so-called presidential sites, there are 8 or 9 of them.  
And in case anybody imagines that a presidential site in Iraq is some kind of tiny holiday shack, let me, just for your information, give you an idea.  Now, this is an illustration, not my illustration, this is an illustration taken from the dossier tabled in the House of Commons last week by the British Prime Minister, which in turn is based upon the assessments of British intelligence.  So, it';s not just a figment of some Downing Street spin doctor. It has been faithfully compiled. In case anybody is wondering what that red spot is, that';s Buckingham Palace. There';s the presidential site and this is Buckingham Palace, appropriately in old Empire red, which gives you an idea of how big this particular presidential site really is. There are apparently eight or nine of them, and I';m not saying they';re all that big. It gives you an idea of how big that one is. 
Now you take those out of the weapons inspection regime and you don';t have - to use an old Australian expression - you don';t have a fair dinkum inspection. And that is why the President is quite rightly, with the support of the British and many others including Australia, that is why the Americans and others are calling for the passing of a new resolution. And in fairness to the weapons inspectors, they can only operate under the existing resolutions of the Security Council. And that is why it is necessary that efforts continue to get a new resolution. 
Now this is a difficult issue. We';d all like it to go away. We';d all like to wake up tomorrow morning and find that it had miraculously disappeared. But unfortunately life is not quite as simple as that, and it has to be dealt with in a very painstaking, systematic, serious fashion. And we here in Australia, difficult though the situation is, very strongly support the approach that has been taken by the United States and the British Government. 
And I think it is important that we acknowledge the responsibilities that are carried by the United States Administration. It';s very easy to be critical of the strongest country in the world. It';s very easy to be critical of the understandable sensitivity that is felt within the United States on this issue. But there are many reasons why America is taking the stance she is. Not least of course is the greater sense of vulnerability that country very understandably feels as a result of the attacks of the 11th of September last year, because they have introduced into world security consideration a new hitherto unimaginable dimension. Because however much we may look back and try and rationalise what our state of mind may have been before that event, if people are honest to themselves they will accept that not many of us imagined that something like that would ever happen. And it having happened, it is now very understandable that nations should factor in to their national security arrangements a capacity to safeguard against and where possible and where appropriate, prevent the occurrence in advance of indiscriminate terrorist attacks orchestrated from abroad.
Ladies and gentlemen, over the weeks and months ahead it is important that we carefully assess and take the decisions that ultimately of course here in Australia will be governed by our assessment of this country';s national interest. And this country';s national interests are never served in my view by walking away from international realities. This country';s national interests are never served by separating ourselves without proper reason from those countries whose values and whose view of life is similar to our own. And that naturally includes amongst many other countries, the United States and the United Kingdom.
So much then my friends for the international situation which is understandably occupying the minds of so many of us. But it is important I say a few things about the economic linkages between Australia and the United States. And I say that against the background of being Prime Minister of a country whose economy is performing probably better than most, if not all developed countries in the world at present. And that strong economic performance has not been accidental. It has been the product of reform carried out in many areas over the last 15 or 20 years in Australia. 
And what in particular has happened in the last five and a half years in Australia is that we have had underlined to us that Australia has very close and enduring economic linkages with what I call the three economic constellations of the world. That';s the Asia Pacific region, Europe and North America. It is self-evident to any Australian, and indeed to any American living in Australia or doing business with Australia, how important the Asian Pacific region is to us. Only a few weeks ago we were successful in obtaining the largest ever trade deal that this country will sign and that is the natural gas deal with China, which is a very important symbol of the close relationship that we have developed, despite our different histories and our different cultures, the close relationship we';ve developed with China. That underlines graphically the importance of the Asian connection. 
But as I have stressed continuously since I became Prime Minister in March of 1996, our policy is one not of, when it comes to economic and other issues, of Asia first but not Asia only, and that we do have very important links with Europe and the United States of an economic nature as well as of course, as you all know, of a political, cultural and historic character.  
And the significance of those economic links was illustrated in 1997 when the Asian economic downturn overwhelmed most of the countries of our region, it didn';t overwhelm Australia.  And one of the reasons it didn';t overwhelm Australia was that we were able to shift so much of our economic activity and our export performance to the countries of North America and of Europe.  And one of the reasons that we were in turn able to do this is that we have an improved capacity because of economic reform to participate in the process of globalisation. When you look back at the Australian economy of 20 years ago and you reflect upon the way in which we have been able to change and reform to marshal the benefits of globalisation it is a very strong and a very compelling story. The floating of the exchange rate and the dismantling of exchange controls were an important component in that regard. I mean the flexible exchange rate, the way we were able to take the adjustment on our exchange rate in 1997 and 1998 was one of the reasons that we were able to ride out the Asian economic downturn. 
The members of this chamber will be well aware of the important commercial links that exist between Australia and the United States.  The United States is our second largest trading partner and it provides our largest source of imports. But of growing economic interest and importance apart from those trade flows is the growing importance of the investment flows between our two countries. We remain as you all know a net capital importer. That';s consistent with our historic experience of attracting overseas funds not only from the United States but also very much from Britain and after World War II from Japan to exploit local investment opportunities. And a very significant feature of Australia';s recent economic performance has been a marked increase in the level of direct investment abroad by Australian companies. You may not know that Australian direct investment abroad is now greater than direct foreign investment in Australia and this is occurring as highly efficient Australian companies go elsewhere.  And recent ABS data shows that the bulk of foreign direct investment by Australian firms is into the United States.  Direct investment by Australian companies in the US at June 2001 was $95 billion, or 55 per cent of total direct foreign investment from this country.  The second most important was the United Kingdom at almost $30 billion, less than one-third of the total direct foreign investment from this country to the United States.  Your Chairman has already mentioned the importance of the Social Security agreement and most significantly the importance of the double-taxation renegotiation which was completed last year and has removed some very important impediments that existed between the two countries.  The review of Australia';s international taxation system is currently underway and it';s examining issues relevant to Australia as a location for international entities.  So already we have a solid base of economic linkages.  And they are linkages which are very much of the present and the future as well as linkages of the past.  We are not looking at an economic relationship which is slowly disappearing over the horizon.  Rather we';re looking at an economic relationship which looks more to the future than it does to the past.  And that is why my Government has committed itself very strongly to exploring the possibility of negotiating a free trade agreement between Australia and the United States.  I don';t make the claim that it';s going to be realised and I acknowledge up front that it';s going to be very difficult.  There are clashing interests, sectoral interests, agricultural to start with. The American farmer is highly protected, highly subsidised and by Australian standards very pampered, and that is a reality.  And there will be a strong resistance at a political level in the United States for many people against any kind of arrangement that assists in changing that situation.  
And to give you an illustration if you think my language is exaggerated, the value of assistance to the Australian farmer as a percentage of annual production is four per cent, is Europe it's 35 per cent and in the United States it';s 22 per cent.  And in Japan it';s also very high but I';ve forgotten the figure.  Now you can understand against that background the sensitivity of Australian farmers when we start talking about a free trade agreement.  And I';ve made it very clear to them and I repeat it today that we are not going to bargain away the interests of Australian farmers in any free trade negotiation with the United States. And if it becomes impossible to achieve that agreement without sacrificing the interests of Australian farmers, well we won';t be signing the agreement because Australian farmers are an important part of the Australian society, they';re an important part of the Australian economy and they are also by world standards a very efficient and a very lowly protected industry sector.
But despite all of those formidable barriers that we should recognise up front the stakes are very high because if we could negotiate a free trade agreement between our two countries, on a proper basis, there would be enormous economic and other benefits to flow.  Studies have shown that there would been tremendous boosts to the GDPs, particularly of Australia but also of the United States, if we were able to achieve further tariff and non-tariff reductions.  And the indirect benefits of greater facilitation of investment would also be very significant.
Now it';s going to be a very long journey and it may not reach the destination and we should be realistic about its prospects up front.  But I believe that there is political will on the part of the Administration and there are certainly political will so far as Australia is concerned.  But we have to understand as we travel that path that we are looking here about trying to achieve a commercial agreement that is in the economic interests of our two countries.  I';m often asked, particularly at the present time, about the interrelationship between political and economic alliances.  I have to say in very direct and practical terms that I don';t trade the two off.  This country takes a stand in relation to international issues, according to our assessment of the values at stake and the strategic interests at stake.  When it comes to economic negotiation I recognise the inherent self-interest of all industry sectors in all countries, including the United States and including Australia.  And we';ve got to be hard headed and we';ve got to be pragmatic. But having said that I think there is a sentiment in the business communities of both countries to work as hard as possible to achieve a free trade agreement.  When I was in New York at the beginning of this year at the meeting of the World Economic Forum, the Australian Ambassador and the United States got together 40 of the leading business figures in the United States for a morning discussion about the prospect of free trade agreement.  And there';s certainly an industry and in the financial community very strong support in the United States, and I would encourage all of you who have linkages into industry leadership in the United States to do what you can inside your own organisations to promote the cause.  Because it will meet a lot of domestic political opposition in the United States, there are interest groups that will be feel threatened, understandably, particularly in the rural sector, and they will need to be argued against and advocated against by those who see some of the longer term interests.
So ladies and gentlemen the relationship as I said at the beginning of my remarks is one deeply embedded in history, it';s deeply embedded in the experience of our two societies over a long period of time.  And it';s certainly been given the lively expression here in Australia through the investment and the involvement of American companies and as a result of Americans in Australian business life and culture and in the broader Australian community. It is a cliche to say that we live in a highly globalised world and a world that is much smaller in so many ways than what it was, even 20 years ago.  But despite those developments, despite the greater globalisations, despite the shrinking of the world, it nonetheless remains the case that there are some societies that are closer and share more values in common than others.  And when I think of the countries with which Australia relates most easily and most readily and most naturally, one automatically thinks amongst others of the United States.  And in the end it is about values and about an attitude to life more than anything else.  You can have your disagreements on trade, on economics, on politics, you can even play very different sports on occasions and have all sorts of other differences, but in the end the thing that holds nations together more than anything else is a common view of what is right and wrong and a common set of values.  And in the long history of our two countries it';s those values and that common assessment of what is right and what is wrong and when it is right and appropriate to take a stand that had mattered most.  And no two countries have shared values more closely over the years than have Australia and the United States.  And I believe that will continue to be the case in the future.  
And I want to thank all of you who';ve made a contribution to the Australian economy, to the great success story of the Australian economy, I won';t go into any more detail about that because I might detain you a little too long.  But can I say that the investment flows from the United States, the commitment of so many American companies and personnel to this nation of ours has played a very significant role in the economic achievements of the past few years.  And I want to record my thanks to all of you for that, I want to congratulate the Chamber for the contribution I know it is making to the strength of the bilateral relationship, particularly at an economic and business level.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE.............................
I move that this House:
1. expresses its outrage and condemnation at the barbaric terrorist bombings which took place in Bali on 12 October 2002;
2. extends its deepest and heartfelt sympathy to the families and loved ones of those Australians killed, missing or injured in this brutal and despicable attack;
3. offers its condolences to the families and friends of the Indonesians and citizens of other countries who have been killed or injured;
4. condemns those who employ terror and indiscriminate violence against innocent people;
5. commits the Australian government to work with the Indonesian government and others to bring those who are guilty of this horrendous crime, and all those who harbour and support them, to justice;
6. reaffirms Australia';s commitment to continue the war against terrorism in our region and in the rest of the world.
For the rest of Australian history, 12 October 2002 will be counted as a day on which evil struck, with indiscriminate and indescribable savagery, young innocent Australians who were engaging in an understandable period of relaxation and whose innocence was palpable and whose death and injury we join the rest of the Australian community in marking and mourning today.
In many respects the word terrorism is too antiseptic an expression to describe what happened. It is too technical and too formal. What happened was barbaric brutal mass murder without justification. It is seen as that by the people of Australia and it is seen as that by the people of the world. It is a terrible reminder that terrorism can strike anyone anywhere at any time. Nobody anywhere in the world is immune from terrorism. It is a reminder that, in this time of a borderless world with a particularly mobile young population, Australia can scarcely imagine that it can be in any way immune from such horrible attacks.
I know that the thoughts of everyone in this parliament—and, indeed, the thoughts of millions of Australians—are with those of our fellow countrymen and women who still do not know whether their daughter or their son or their brother or their sister or their lover or their mother or their father or their mate is alive or dead. The agony of waiting at the end of a mobile telephone for a call is an anxiety that we can only begin to think about and try in our own inadequate way to share, and we hope that that effort is of some comfort to them. I know that the hearts of every man and woman in this parliament will go out to them and to those who know the worst already, and our thoughts and prayers are with those who are coping with injuries, many of them horrendous burns as a result of the flames that followed the bombing of the nightclub.
At present, the best advice I have is that there is a total of 181 dead. Very few of these have been identified. According to advice from the Indonesian authorities and our Consulate-General in Bali, 14 Australians are now confirmed among the dead and at least 113 Australians have been hospitalised following the attacks. We are still trying to establish the precise number of people evacuated to Australia, but the best advice is that it is in the order of 67 to 70. There are still 220 Australians unaccounted for. It should not be automatically assumed that all of those are dead but, given the very high percentage of Australians who were in the nightclub at the time of the bombing, we should as a nation prepare ourselves for the very real likelihood that the death toll of Australians will climb significantly when the final tally and identity of the fatalities is known.
As the House and, I am sure, the nation will be aware, a major rescue and medical evacuation operation has been under way since news of the attack came through. On behalf of this parliament and all of the Australian people, I want to express our gratitude to and admiration for the officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, particularly the Royal Australian Air Force; and the doctors, nurses and paramedics, many of whom have worked in very difficult circumstances. I also record my thanks to the various state governments that have offered help, to Qantas and to many other private individuals who have provided help and assistance. The willingness of the government to provide evacuation facilities for all Australians and, indeed, others in need of medical attention remains. No expense will be spared and no limitation will be placed upon our willingness to do that.
This foul deed—this wicked, evil act of terrorists—has not only claimed the lives of Australians but also claimed the lives of many of the innocent people of Bali, a beautiful, hitherto peaceful part of Indonesia. Bali is much loved by so many Australians. In many cases, it is the first place that young Australians visit. Many of us will feel the poignancy of this attack coinciding with the end of the football season in Australia. So many of the young people in that club that night were members of Australian rules football teams, rugby league teams and rugby union teams. They were having a bit of fun at the end of a hard season. It is that connection with the everyday occurrences of life which we know so well and embrace so lovingly, that cruel conjunction, which makes something such as this that much more despicable and something that all Australians will utterly repudiate to the depths of their being.
We must remember, though, that this will have an enormous impact on the people of Indonesia and the economy of Bali. The Indonesian economy is a fragile economy. It relies very heavily on tourism. Those who did this are no friends of Indonesia. Those who did this sought to inflict misery on and deliver hatred to not only the people of Australia and the people of the other nations who lost their sons and daughters but also the people and the government of Indonesia. We must understand essentially what has happened. This is a vile crime which has claimed the lives of an as yet uncounted number of Australians on Indonesian soil.
All of us have a right to feel a sense of deep anger and a deep determination to do everything we can, as a nation and as a community, working with the government and the people of Indonesia, to bring to justice those who are responsible for this crime. We owe it to those who died, we owe it to those who have been injured and we also owe it to a proper sense of justice. Nothing can excuse this behaviour. No cause—however explained, however advocated, however twisted, however spun—can possibly justify the indiscriminate, unprovoked slaughter of innocent people. That is what has occurred here. We must do all we can, as a nation and as a community, to mete out a proper response—a measured, sober, effective response—which brings to justice, if we can, those who are responsible.
It is necessary, in the course of this, for us to cooperate with the government and the people of Indonesia. Yesterday I spoke by telephone to President Megawati. She expressed her horror at what had occurred. She agreed with me that, on all the evidence available to us, this was clearly the act of terrorists. There can be no other explanation. Both of us agreed that every effort should be made to bring those responsible for this act to justice.
In that context, the House will be aware that a number of Australian Federal Police and some ASIO officers have already gone to Bali. I can also announce that the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Ellison, will travel to Indonesia either tonight or tomorrow morning. They will go first to Bali to visit a number of those who are still hospitalised there and will then go on to Jakarta for discussions with the Indonesian government regarding cooperation between our two governments in the pursuit of those who have been responsible for this outrage. They will do that against the background of the memorandum of understanding against terrorism which was signed in Jakarta during my visit earlier this year. They will be accompanied on their visit by Mr Mick Keelty, the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, and also by Mr Dennis Richardson, the head of ASIO. Their mission will be to maximise cooperation between Australia and Indonesia in pursuit of the murderers. Their mission will be to emphasise, by their presence and by what they convey on behalf of the Australian government, the willingness of Australia to offer all available resources to assist the Indonesian authorities in tracking down those responsible.
I can also inform the House that this morning the National Security Committee of cabinet met in the wake of this outrage. We discussed the proposal that the two ministers travel to Jakarta. We also decided to institute a review of the adequacy of domestic terrorist legislation. It is inevitable that, in the wake of what occurred in Bali over the weekend, the thoughts of Australians will turn to the potential vulnerability of our own soil, our own mainland, to a possible terrorist attack. There is no point in ignoring that. I do the Australian people no service if I pretend that, in some way, it cannot happen on the Australian mainland. In a sense, this is sequential. I do not think any of us believed that something like 11 September 2001 would happen until it really happened. We might have intellectualised afterwards and said, ‘Oh yes, we thought that might happen,'; but in our hearts we did not really believe it was going to happen.
Equally, I do not think many Australians contemplated that what happened at the weekend in Bali would in fact occur. It is therefore very important that we disabuse ourselves for all time if any of us entertain the notion that something like that cannot happen in one of our cities and on our own mainland. We must dedicate and commit ourselves to doing all we can to guard against such an event. We therefore need to again assess the adequacy of our domestic law. I know it has been only recently reviewed, but further events have occurred and we are required as a matter of responsibility to almost 20 million Australians to do that. It is also necessary that we review the adequacy, which I have asked be done, of our counter-terrorism capacity. Once again, that was the subject of significant review after 11 September 2001 and major augmentation of the assets followed as a result of that review. It is therefore timely that those assets and that capacity also be reviewed.
I do not say these things lightly or in any sense of overdramatising the situation, but we are living in different circumstances and different times. That has been the case since 11 September last year; it is dramatically more so the case now, because what happened at the weekend claimed our own in great numbers, was on our own doorstep and touched us in a way that we would not have thought possible a week ago or even three days go. It has been the case that all the world, including Australia, has been more vulnerable to potential terrorist attacks since 11 September last year. In relation to the events in Bali, it is obvious that the Australian government has been concerned for some considerable time about the existence of extremist groups in the region, especially in Indonesia, with links to al-Qaeda and the real possibility of terrorist attacks against Western interests. That has been not only a concern of the Australian government but also a constant concern of the government of the United States. That concern, and the concern of our American friends, has been regularly communicated to the Indonesian authorities. It was one of the reasons that lay behind the negotiation of the memorandum of understanding on terrorism, to which I referred a moment ago.
I can inform the House that the intelligence available to the government highlighted the general threat environment but was at no time specific about Saturday night';s attack in Bali. Indeed, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade';s travel advice reflected the heightened level of concern which followed the terrorist attacks in September of last year. It was very much against the background of the general threat disclosed by intelligence that the government issued its alert in early September about the possible threat to Australian interests in the region around 11 September 2002.
It is apparent from the words of the resolution and from what has been said over the last 36 hours and what is self-evident from an examination of the realities that confront Australia and the rest of the civilised world today that the war against terrorism must go on in an uncompromising and unconditional fashion. Any other course of action would be folly. Retreat from the war against terrorism will not purchase for the retreaters immunity against the attacks of the terrorists. That has been the experience of the last year; that has been the experience of mankind through history. You will not escape the reach of terrorism by imagining that if you roll yourself into a little ball you will not be noticed, because terrorism is not dispensed according to some hierarchy of disdain; it is dispensed in an indiscriminate, evil, hateful fashion. Those who imagine that it is dispensed according to a hierarchy of disdain do not understand history and are deluding themselves.
The war against terrorism is not, as has frequently been said in this place, a war against Islam. People of good Islamic faith will abhor what happened in Bali. They will find it as despicable to the tenets of their faith as Christians, Jews and many others will find it despicable to the tenets of their faith. It is therefore important that we reaffirm again our commitment to a tolerant Australian community—an Australian community that, while embracing all, is an Australian community bound together by common values of openness, individual liberty and individual freedom. We fight terrorism because we love freedom; we fight terrorism because we want to preserve the way of life that this country has; we fight terrorism because we share the values of other countries that are in the war against terrorism; and we fight terrorism because it is intrinsically evil and you do not seek to covenant with evil and you do not seek to reach an accommodation with those who would destroy your sons and daughters and take away the security and the stability of this country.
In the hours that have followed this terrible outrage—this dark day for the people of Australia—there have been many expressions of concern from world leaders. I spoke at length this morning to President Bush of the United States and I received a call last night from British Prime Minister Tony Blair and the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Helen Clark. Her Majesty The Queen has sent a message of sympathy and condolence and I have received messages from many world leaders. All of them have a common theme and a common resonance, and that is that, in the world in which we live, our problems are the problems of others and the problems of others are so often ours as well. We live in a globalised world. We live in a world in which the young, in particular, are more footloose and more mobile than even their mobile parents and grandparents, and there is no escape in those circumstances from the reaches and the ravages of terror.
I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the constructive way in which we have been able together to discuss these challenges to our country. Our country belongs to all of us, and this is a challenge to the fabric of this country and what it stands for. The Leader of the Opposition wrote to me and suggested that we might have a national day of mourning in relation to the events, and I am very happy to support that proposition. I propose that next Sunday be observed as a national day of mourning. It is of course sadly the case that we do not know the full extent of the horror that has overtaken our people—the precise death toll may not be known for several days—and it does seem that a national day of mourning next Sunday would be appropriate, and perhaps at some later stage it would also be appropriate to have a national memorial service.
In different ways, different communities in different parts of our country will mourn the abrupt and brutal deaths of so many and reflect on their own lives. In our own way we must try to offer comfort, care and hope to their bereaved friends, lovers and relatives. It is a very sad time for our country but it is a time—as always in cases like this—that has brought forth heroism, decency and goodness. Already stories of people assisting others at enormous risk to themselves are emerging, as are stories of the dedication of the staff of the hospitals and the commitment of so many. We think also of the lovely people of Bali who have been such friends to so many Australians of so many generations on so many occasions. We extend our thanks, our warmth and our affection to them.I am saddened beyond words of proper description by what has happened. I hope I speak for all Australians in sending my and their love to those who are grieving and in expressing the fierce determination to do everything I and we can to bring to justice those who have done such evil things to our people.
[ends]-


E&amp;OE...........  
As the sun sets over this beautiful island, we gather here in sorrow, in anguish, in disbelief and in pain. There are no words that I can summon to solve in any way the hurt and the suffering and the pain being felt by so many of my fellow countrymen and women and by so many of the citizens of other nations. I can say though to my Australian countrymen and women that there are 19.5 million Australians who are trying, however inadequately, to feel for you and to support you at this time of unbearable grief and pain. 
The wanton, cruel, barbaric character of what occurred here last Saturday night has shocked our nation to the core. I know the anguish that so many are feeling, the painful process of identification which has prolonged that agony for so many, the sense of bewilderment and disbelief that so many young lives with so much before them should have been taken away in such blind fury, hatred and violence. I can on behalf of all of the people of Australia declare to you that we will do everything in our power to bring to justice those who were responsible for this foul deed. We will work with our friends in Indonesia to do that and we will work to others to achieve an outcome of justice.
Can I say to our Balinese friends, the lovely people of Bali, who have been befriended over the decades and the generations by so many Australians who have come here, we grieve with you, we feel for you, we thank you from the bottom of our hearts for the love and support that you have extended to our fellow countrymen and women over these past days.
As the Chaplain said, there will be scars left on people for the rest of their life, both physical and emotional. Our nation has been changed by this event. Perhaps we may not be so carefree as we have been in the past, but we will never lose our openness, our sense of adventure. The young of Australia will always travel. They will always seek fun in distant parts. They will always reach out to the young of other nations. They will always be open, fun-loving, decent men and women.
And so as we grapple inadequately and in despair to try to comprehend what has happened, let us gather ourselves around each other, let us wrap our arms around not only our fellow Australians but our arms around the people of Indonesia, of Bali, let us wrap our arms around the people of other nations and the friends and relatives of the nationals of other countries who have died in this horrible event.  It will take a long time for these foul deeds to be seen in any kind of context. They can never be understood. They can never be excused. Australia has been affected very deeply, but the Australian spirit has not been broken. The Australian spirit will remain strong and free and open and tolerant. I know that is what all of those who lost their lives would have wanted and I know it is what all of those who grieve for them would want.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 3.1Mb - 350secs)
The outrage in Bali on the 12th of October has touched and resonated through and shocked our nation like no other event in the lifetime of all us in this gathering. Not only are we consumed with a national sense of grief and sadness and justifiable anger that in such a brutal way so many lives, especially young ones, should have been cut short. 
But this event has told us something of our nation. It has reminded us of things that we knew and understood about our nature and our character as a people. It has reminded us of the great verity of Australian life that in crisis we are all mates together. And the sense of mateship that ensured that within 48 hours the injured were evacuated back to Australia and the support mechanisms that have been delivered to people in the days that have followed the tragedy have reminded us of that great trait of the Australian character.
The other great characteristic of which we have been reminded is our sense of defiance. We will not be deterred from living our lives. The young of Australia will not be deterred from travelling in the years ahead. We will not forsake the values of this nation which mark it with great respect around the world. We will continue to live the kind of lives that we regard as the birthright of all Australians. And we've also been reminded of the great tolerance of the Australian people. The Australian people deeply angered and grieved as they are are not about to abandon the spirit of openness and tolerance which is also one of our great hallmarks. 
I also think my fellow Australians that this terrible tragedy has perhaps revealed another side of our nature - the uninhibited outpouring of compassion towards those, and many are gathered here today, who have lost so much and grieved so much and will continue to grieve for so long into the future, and national outpouring in an uninhibited way of a sense not only of sadness but also of deep compassion. 
The nation has literally been moved in unison and in grief in response to these terrible deeds. And they have taught us something perhaps that we didn't quite appreciate before. We may in times of stress and challenge and crisis be as tough as tungsten, but we're also a soft and loving people who will wrap our arms around those who have lost so much and will reach out to those who have suffered so much. 
This terrible event has also taught us something of the world in which we live. It has told us in a brutal and in cruel fashion that terror's reach is potentially everywhere. We cannot imagine avoiding it but we are in the response to terror with all the other nations of the world and only the united resolution of the Australian people and the united resolution of the nations of the world can adequately respond. But it must be a many faceted response. It must be strong and determined and defiant where necessary. It must also be a response that reaches out to unite in tolerance in the nations of the world. 
It has also reminded us that although we are in the fight against terror with all the other nations of the world ultimately the measure of the security of this nation will be the contribution that we as Australians together are willing to make towards our own security. 
Can I say to those who are here today who have lost their children, their mothers, their fathers, their brothers, their sisters, their husbands, their wives, their lovers, or their mates - there are no words that can adequately salve the sense of grief and hurt you feel. I hope that this gathering is more representative of the strands of Australian life and the responsibilities held in Australian life than I think any gathering held in this building since it was opened in 1988. I hope it is a united mark of a loving and caring nation and I hope you go from this gathering thinking that in every corner of nineteen-and-a-half million Australian hearts there is a place for you and for the person you have lost. And however inadequately we are endeavouring to give you all the love and compassion that you deserve, you need, and we can deliver.
[ends]
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 3.1Mb - 350secs)
Top


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Chairman, it is a great honour to have the opportunity of addressing this business gathering on the eve of the APEC meeting, a body which brings together the dynamic economic area of the Asian Pacific region.  This year';s meeting sadly meets under the shadow of a terrorist outrage, the one at Bali on the 12th of October which has taken the lives of so many people, including a large number of the lives of my fellow countrymen and women.  And just as the APEC meeting in Shanghai last year took place under the shadow of the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, so again as APEC leaders and as leaders of the APEC business community we must not only address the awful personal horror involved in terrorism, but also its economic impact and in that context what further measures can be taken by the nations not only of APEC but also the nations of the world to respond more effectively to terrorism.
Nations can make declarations together, nations can cooperate together to share intelligence, to enforce multilateral understandings which make travel safer and security stronger.  But in the end the sum total of the strengthened determination of the nations of the world to combat terrorism is the determination of individual nations through their sovereign governments to take the steps that are needed inside the borders of their own country to counteract terrorism. No amount of international exhortation can substitute for the determination of individual governments who know they have a terrorist problem within their borders to do something about it.  And that is a view which is strongly held by my government, understandably held by my government, and a view that I communicate to all of the people gathered here today and all of the governments of this region.
We meet of course not only under the shadow of those attacks, but also against the background of a year which has had some reversals so far as the goals of APEC are concerned.  It';s a year that';s had some indifferent growth in many countries, although there are some, including my own I';m pleased to say, where growth has continued to be strong.  It';s a year in which corporate governance has come under the spotlight and I know that representatives of the business community of our various nations are conscious of the importance to the strengthening of competitive capitalism and more open trade to ensure that corporate governance is as strong and as transparent and as open and acceptable as it can possibly be within individual countries.   It has also been a year in which levels of protectionism have been on the rise and it';s very important that the business gathering, as well as the leaders, reassert the importance of resisting the re-emergence of protectionist tendencies within our nations.
We must do more to resist those tendencies, we must reassert by our practice as well as our rhetoric that the original goals of APEC remain desirable goals and goals that are not only achievable but goals that must be achieved.  Because the key lesson of the last 50 years is that those countries that open their markets develop the most.  Those developing countries which over the last 50 years that have practised open trading, have practised open policies towards foreign investment, that have put their faith in a more free market approach, those have done best.  Those developing countries that have put their faith against opening markets have done worse.  And the lesson of the last 50 years has been very strong.  APEC has played a very important role, not only in the region but also as a body reaching out to the rest of the world in not only arguing but demonstrating some of the value of more open markets.  Our own experience in Australia as a developed country, but nonetheless a country that in the 70s and 80s saw that it could do better if only it brought about a number of internal reforms, has been very instructive.   Between 1985 and 2001 tariffs in Australia have been reduced by over 80 per cent.  That';s from a general level of 22 per cent, an average level of 22 per cent, to a level of about four per cent.  The result in that, or from that, has been that we have become a more open and competitive economy.  We have more competitive and we have more export oriented industries.  Our export mix has become far more diversified, we have long been seen as a major exporter of agriculture and mining products.  But we';ve also known become, without in any way derogating from the very important contributions that the mining and the farming sectors make to our economy, we';ve also roughly doubled our manufacturing exports over the past two decades as a proportion of total exports.  And one of the reasons that we were able to withstand the negative effect of the Asian economic downturn in 1997, one of the reasons, was that our export face has become more diversified.  There were other reasons, our flexible exchange rate shouldered a great deal of the adjustment process and we learnt in that experience that no one part of the world economically is the permanent salvation of a trading country such as Australia and our capacity to ship many of our exports lost to markets in the Asian region to Europe and to North America was a very important element in Australia being able to withstand that downward effect.
So the lesson from all of this is that those who try the open markets normally do better, those that remove protective barriers always do better.  But there';s another side to it and that is that those countries which are endeavouring to lift themselves from developing to developed status do need access to more open markets.  And that of course is where APEC, and most particularly, the World Trade Organisation Doha round comes into the equation.  Doha remains central to Australia';s trade agenda, although we stand ready where there is mutual benefit in seeking to negotiate free trade agreements with other countries.  Reduction in protectionism and domestic support would have enormous benefits to developing countries.  A 50 per cent reduction in protection worldwide would deliver global welfare gains of around $400 billion United States dollars annually.
The export earnings of the world';s poorest countries are depressed by at least 10 per cent because they are shut out of the worlds biggest agricultural markets, the United States, the European Union and Japan.  And speaking as the Prime Minister as an agricultural producing country, but not a developing country, can I say that the levels of protection in agricultural maintained by the United States, by Japan and by the European Union have an extremely adverse effect on many developing countries. And it remains a central objective of Australian trade policy to argue and agitate and negotiate against those protective barriers.  I declare of course in Australian interest, but more importantly we should declare a world interest in opening markets for the developing countries.  The OECD nations spend nearly six times more on agricultural support than on official development assistance to poor countries.  When I hear calls for increases in foreign aid by the more developed countries in the world I understand the generosity of spirit which is behind those calls, but those calls would have more resonance, they would deliver more benefits and they would mean a lot more to developing countries if they were matched, or even replaced by the breaking down of trade barriers.  Because in the end that will do more to help the poor than to develop an assistance.
Australia has a strong commitment to opening markets to the poorest countries to help them trade their way out of poverty.  And I';m pleased to announce today that Australia will grant tariff and quota free access for 49 least developed countries, as well as East Timor, which is so far not been developed, not been listed rather as an LDC by the UN.  And this is a gesture by Australia to demonstrate our commitment.  And can I say that the benefits of liberalisation are not just confined to developing countries.  Wealthy developed countries, the engine rooms of continued world growth, also get a double bonus because reduced costs for taxpayers when expensive subsidies are abolished and cheaper goods for consumers when high tariffs are removed, and those deliver benefits for wealthy developed countries.
I do not need to remind an audience such as this that the starting point for economic growth is of course sound macroeconomic policy at a domestic level.   Australia has enjoyed a very strong period of economic growth for the last six or seven years.  More than anything it';s a product of some major economic reforms carried out over a period of 15 to 20 years, including the floating of our exchange rate, the removal of exchange control, major reductions in tariffs, the restructuring of our industrial relations system, although we';d like to go a bit further but we';re encountering a bit of domestic political opposition there but we';re continuing to work on that subject, and also major changes in Australia';s taxation system.  The lesson for us out of that is that you often have to wait a while before you get the dividends of economic reform, but if you are willing to undertake the major reforms and face down some of the short term political challenges you do in the end get the benefit of those reforms.  Our economy would not now be amongst the fastest growing of those in the developed world and have been in that position for such a long time had it not been for the many reforms that we have carried out.
The last few weeks has been a difficult time for my country and many of my fellow Australians have been saddened by the tragic events in Bali.  They have had a great impact on our nation, but what they have not done is to diminish in any way the determination and the commitment of Australia and Australians to be active, positive citizens, not only of the Asia-Pacific region but of the world.   We are a nation made up of people from many parts of the world, we are a nation that has always had great links with many parts of the world, we have always travelled, we always will travel, we thank our many friends for their messages of condolence and support, they are deeply appreciated.  We remain in every way a committed citizen in a national sense of APEC and a determined contributor to the economic and social growth of mankind.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE……………………………………………………………………………………
Well thank you very much Ambassador for your kind words of welcome, Minister, Governors, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Mexico City on my first visit to your country and I first want to acknowledge, I know on behalf of all of the other leaders, what a magnificent job your President did in chairing the APEC meeting at Los Cabos and the outstanding generosity and hospitality that has been extended by the people of Mexico to other leaders and delegations who’ve come to this APEC meeting.
The just completed APEC Meeting made some important declarations. Much in our mind as Australians of course, and I know many others, were the recent terrorist attack in Bali which has claimed the lives of likely of between 80 to 100 of our fellow countrymen and women. And the focus on terrorism and the determined declaration of the leaders of APEC to work together closely to combat the surge of terrorism was the first and I believe the most important item on our agenda. But there were other important declarations from the meeting, and amongst the others the most important clearly was the determination of all of the member countries of APEC as declared in the Leaders’ Declaration to work to bring about a successful outcome of the Doha World Trade Organisation round. It is imperative, if the rhetoric of freer and more open trade is to be turned into greater reality, it is imperative that the Doha trade negotiations be successful. And crucial to the success of those negotiations is of course a breakthrough on the agricultural front and the refusal of countries and groupings, and I have particularly but not only in mind the European Union, the refusal thus far to open their markets is having not only a damaging effect on world trade but a particularly depressing effect on opportunities for the least developed countries in the world.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It has been calculated time and time again that the wealthier countries of the world would do more to help to the poorer countries of the world by dismantling trade barriers than they do by giving direct foreign aid. And in fact a dismantling or a significant reduction in trade barriers from groupings such as the European Union would by factors of four or five exceed the value of the official development assistance that is given to those countries.
So out of APEC are two declarations. A determination to do what we can collectively to fight terrorism, which is touching all countries, nobody is immune from the reach of a terrorist attack. In the increasingly globalised mobile world, especially for the young, the young of the world travel now more than ever before. And that applies to my country, I know it applies to yours. And nobody can be immune. And the second important commitment coming out of APEC is a renewed effort by all countries to achieve more in the Doha round in the area of trade liberalisation.
The bilateral relationship between our two countries has improved and strengthened in leaps and bounds over the last few years. I want to publicly thank our Ambassador and all the other representatives of Australia in Mexico for the way in which advantage has been taken of opportunities for cooperation and greater trade. We’ve more than doubled our bilateral trade over the last five years, and I know it is dwarfed naturally by the weight of economic linkage with the countries of North America. But can I say in the whole of Latin America Mexico is far and away Australia’s strongest economic partner. And I believe because of the complementary nature of our two economies we have an opportunity of doing even more. The Australian economic story is a very strong and successful one, we’ve averaged four per cent growth over the last five years, which for a developed country is very good. We have low inflation, low interest rates and a government debt of only 4.6 per cent of GDP. We have an excellent central bank governor who’s making a great contribution to the successful management of the Australian economy. And I know how much your central bank appreciates our polymer currency notes and they were recently launched by my colleague the Treasurer Peter Costello.
What our experience over the last few years has taught us, and I know the same applies to Mexico, is that countries that undertake domestic economic reforms reap the benefits of that change and that reform. Over the last 20 years, under governments of both political persuasions in Australia let me acknowledge, we have undertaken a serious of major reforms. If you go back 20 years Australia had a fixed exchange rate, it had high tariffs, it had an old fashioned taxation system, it had a union dominated industrial relations system and it essentially had a still far too inward looking attitude to world trade. Now it was a prosperous stable high living standard country, let’s keep these things in proportion. But over the last 20 years we reformed our financial system, dismantled exchange controls, floated the dollar, we significantly reduced tariffs and in the last few years under my administration we’ve done three very important things. We have undertaken a major reform of our industrial relations system, and I regard economic reform as being fundamentally dependent upon having a free and open labour market. And unless you have a more open labour market you eventually find it impossible to absorb the impact of international economic changes.
In 1997 and 1998 the Asian economic downturn threatened to engulf Australia, but it didn’t. And one of the reasons it didn’t is that because we had a flexible exchange rate we could take a lot of the economic adjustment on our exchange rate and we were able to shift some of the exports that otherwise would have gone to Asia, to North America and to Europe. And that meant that we, in an economic sense, sailed through that downturn without any real damage. And we were able to see a depreciation of our exchange rate not have an inflationary impact and the reason it didn’t have an inflationary impact was that we had domestically made our economy more flexible. And with greater price competition we were able to absorb the impact of that lower exchange rate without any adverse domestic consequences. Now I am very conscience, having spoken to the two Presidents of your country at length at APEC meetings, I’m very conscience of the economic reforms that have been undertaken in this country. And the way in which, particularly since Mexico acceded to the North American free trade agreement in 1994, the change and reform that has been undertaken in this country is very admirable indeed.
Mexico faces of course, unlike Australia, some very great social challenges as well. A very large population and the need over time to tackle, as all countries must with varying degrees, the gaps between the rich and the poor. But I believe the path being chosen, the path of freeing your domestic economy and the path of a more open trading environment around the world is the right path.
Finally can I say that the bilateral relationship between our two nations can be made stronger and better. There is often in Australia an assumption that parts of the world are not so much no go areas but they’re parts of the world with which we don’t have much contact. And then over time we find to our great surprise and mutual benefit that we can build bilateral relationships with nations with which we’ve previous had very little contact. And that of course is very much the case with Mexico. I think the potential in many areas is very significant. The most important thing we have in common at the present time is a roughly comparable view of the world economically. We both believe in expanding our horizons, we both believe that open and freer and more liberal world trade will be of benefit, not only to the world but be of enormous benefit to our two communities. 20 years is too long a gap for visits by Australian Prime Ministers to this country. I want to thank the people of Mexico for the warmth of the welcome that they have extended to my delegation, both in Los Cabos and also here in Mexico City. We’ve had a lot of ministerial visits by Australians over the last year, I think we’ve had four ministerial visits in the last 12 months and a business delegation is coming from Mexico to Australia later this year. All of these are signs of a growing economic relationship.
And finally can I thank MIM for its generosity in sponsoring this gathering and I hope it makes a contribution, this gathering, to further building the relationship between our two countries, that is important to me, I know it’s very important to President Fox and I’m sure it’s important to everybody gathered here this morning.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Your Excellencies, Air Marshal Houston, Admiral Ritchie, General Leahy, ladies and gentlemen.  Today we gather in our national capital to honour one of the great parts of the fabric of the Australian nation.  We gather to honour the tradition, the loyalty, the dedication and the sacrifice of the men and women of the Royal Australian Air Force and the Australian Flying Corp over a period of almost 90 years.
We give thanks to the almost 400,000 Australians who have served our nation and the cause of world peace and world justice through the RAAF.  We think of its history and its tradition.  We think of the bravery of those men who flew in the Middle East and over the Western Front in World War I.  We remember that when Winston Churchill remarked famously that never in the history of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few that there were Australian pilots amongst the few who comprised that small number of people who stood against the worst assault of tyranny in World War II.  We think of the awful sacrifices of those who fought in Bomber Command.  And it has been calculated that although the members of Bomber Command comprised only 2% of those who enlisted in World War II, in all services they comprised some 20% of the fatalities, an enormous sacrifice of young Australians in the defence of freedom.
We think of the bravery of those who fought in North Africa, and closer to home we think of those who took part so decisively in the battle for Australia.  We remember the pilots of the Mustangs and the Meteors in the Korean War and, subsequently, the participation of the Royal Australian Air Force in Vietnam in vastly different circumstances but no less heroically and also in Malaya and, more recently, in the Gulf.  And in remembering their sacrifice we also honour a great tradition.  And this is an occasion, particularly at this time of national challenge for Australia and for the values that we hold dear in common with other nations of the world, it is a time to particularly honour and give thanks to our great national institutions such as the Royal Australian Air Force, formed to give expression to the determination of this nation to defend, where necessary, what it believes in and what it stands for and what it values most but also an organisation that is founded on decency and a respect for the dignity of human beings.
Just before coming here my wife and I, in company with Air Marshal Houston, have had the opportunity of visiting Richmond Air Base and to give thanks to those wonderful people of the Royal Australian Air Force who carried out the evacuation of the injured from Bali in the wake of the atrocity committed on the 12th of October.  They did wonderful things in the name of Australia.  The speed and the skill and the professionalism involved in the way in which they assembled and then went to Bali and brought the injured back in such a short period of time was to me inspiring and it was a vivid reminder and communication to all of us that the capacity of the young of Australia - and most of the people I met this morning were in their 20s - their great capacity to rise to the occasion and to do what is needed in the name of Australia.  And as I talked to them and thanked them you could see on their faces and hear in their voices a sense of pride that they had done something good for Australia, that they had been Australians together in helping their Australian mates.  And it encouraged me, it warmed me to think that that spirit called upon in a different circumstance, very distressing and very challenging in its own right, different, though, and less challenging and less fatal than the experiences faced by so many of the 14,000 who gave their lives in the service of the Royal Australian Air Force, it was nonetheless in the same spirit and in the same tradition of loyalty and commitment and quiet dedication to an ideal and a set of values for which this country stands.
So as we think of those who gave so much, as we honour the men and women of the highly professional, superb Royal Australian Air Force of 2002 we, above everything else, we remember those who died and we salute the values for which they fought and died and for which this country stands.  They are what gatherings such as this are all about.  They are about the values that unite us all in a determination to preserve this way of life of ours and a determination to do what is right in the world.  That has always been the commitment of the men and women of the Royal Australian Air Force.  We thank them for that and we join in this solemn dedication of a memorial to one of the great traditions, one of the great services and one of the great parts of the Australian nation.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
[tape begins] and he's expressed to all of you his great pride in what you were able to do in the hours and days that followed the atrocity in Bali on the 12th of October.  And I';ve come here on behalf of the entire nation to thank you for the extraordinary achievement in evacuating so quickly all of those people who required medical evacuation to Australia.  It was an amazing effort that within 16 hours you had the most serious cases back in Australia and it was quite astonishing that all of those requiring evacuation were evacuated within a period of some 36 hours.
When an outrage such as this occurs the priorities are very clear.  The first priority is to evacuate and care for the injured and then sadly you must turn to the task of identifying and burying the dead.  And the way in which everybody came together so quickly and in such a team spirit and in that great Australian tradition of being able to work together and pull together in adversity I can tell you has filled the nation with great and very emotional pride in our capacity as a people to react and work together in such tragic circumstances.
It would have been a very challenging task for all of you and I want to join the Air-Marshall in extending my thanks to everybody.  The medical staff on the plane could not have done what they did without the skill and professionalism of the ground staff in getting them ready.  And it';s on an occasion like this that the professionalism and the sense of dedication come through.  Without there being a great feeling of comradeship and mateship amongst the men and women of the Royal Australian Air Force this task would not have been completed.  So it speaks volumes for the esprit de corps of the Royal Australian Air Force, it speaks volumes for the spirit of this particular airbase.  And above everything else it speaks well of the good heart and good intent of all Australians when our country is subjected to such an outrage, and it was an outrage and I think all of us tried that much harder to respond as best we could and none better than you men and women.  It was just an amazing effort to do it so quickly, to do it so well, to do it so compassionately.  Without any exaggeration it has won the admiration, not only of Australians but of others around the world who';ve spoken to me of the way in which people were so well cared for so quickly, the parents, the relatives, the friends of people who you assisted and others are filled with admiration.
So on behalf of Australia I say thank you for a fantastic job and I';m delighted to have the opportunity of being here today, to thank you, your commanding officers and to Wing Commander Stead, I think it is, Wing Commander?  I';ve given him a promotion?  Air Marshall Stead.  But I just want to thank you and everybody else for doing such an absolutely fantastic job.  You were, and are, magnificent.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Ladies and gentlemen, in the 29 years that I've been in public life I've noticed that some things change for a while and then go back, others disappear from the public consciousness but when you look back over that period of almost three decades there are a lot of things where there's been a huge and fundamental change in public attitudes but one of the areas where there has been is conserving the environment.  It is now a mainstream political issue.  It is something that everybody is concerned about.  It's something that everybody believes in.  We might have different  ways of trying to bring about changes in behaviour and changes in public attitudes.  We may think that one aspect of the environment is more important than the other but recognising that what we leave to our children in the way of a better environment is a very important part of the legacy of this and future generations.  So, can I say to all of you, as far as the public interest is concerned, you are very much on the money and all of us are in being very concerned about the care and the future of our environment.
And I also say as an avid watcher of television all of my life as, I guess, is a description of all of us in this room, there are a few campaigns and a few commercials amongst the thousands that you've heard and seen that have really stuck and "Do The Right Thing" really hit the mark.  It was something that stayed with me.  I still have the image of that advertisement.  The words have become part of the Australian vernacular and the notion of doing the right thing sort of fits the laconic, candid, blunt way in which Australians describe them.  I mean, it's not convoluted, I mean, you get the message and that, of course, is why everybody remembers it.  
It's, as a phrase, it's a masterpiece of direct communication to Australians and, therefore, I responded very enthusiastically to the invitation to launch this.  I want to congratulate the Beverage Industry Council.  I want to congratulate the public's spirited commitment of all who are here today at Channel Nine for the support, characteristic of the network, for the public interest and the support that it's putting behind this campaign.  
I want to say that the presentation was absolutely fantastic.  And can I say what a marvellous communicator we have here.  I thought that was an absolutely fantastically enthusiastic piece of communication.  And as you all know as marketers, all of us know marketers, passion and commitment to the message you are communicating is the essence of getting it across.
So I congratulate everybody who's behind this.  I think the contemporary, "don't waste Australia", I can certify that that is language that a younger generation than mine understand, understand so very, very well, coupled with the slogan that older Australians or middle-aged Australians that feel very familiar with it seems to me to be the perfect marketing campaign.  Importantly, it's in a very, very good national cause and that is a cleaner Australia, an Australia that in every way, physically and emotionally and culturally, of which we can be very proud.  So, it's in that spirit that I'm happy to be here today and I have great pleasure in formally launching the "Do The Right Thing" campaign.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you very much for that very warm welcome. There is a wonderful story about the fact that the Armenian Church of the Holy Trinity should relocate in one of Australia';s oldest Anglican Churches, or Church of England it would have been called when it was established 175 years ago, and it';s in that spirit of reaching out to one another that I come here today to congratulate the Armenian community of Ryde, particularly the congregation of this Church, for the strength of their faith, the strength of their commitment to the members of their own community, but very importantly also for the contribution that all of you have made as citizens of Australia.
The Armenian community has been a wonderful example of the willingness of so many different communities from around the world to come to Australia, to give their first loyalty to Australia above all other loyalties, but equally to retain an affection and a special place in their heart for the country from which they came, the tradition in which they were raised and the faith that they were taught as children.
Australia is a nation of many religions and indeed of many who have no religion. We are not a nation that mandates a particular faith, our customs and our attitudes have understandably and properly because of our history, been guided and shaped by the Judai-Christian ethic of which so many of us here today are broadly part. But we';re also a nation that extends the hand of welcome to people who do not belong to that tradition and particularly at this very challenging time for our country, we must reaffirm our commitment to absolute religious tolerance and absolute respect for differences of religious opinion and differences of religious belief and indeed an absolute respect for those within our community who do not have any religious belief.
The genius of the Australian compact, the Australian unity, has been our capacity in so many different ways in different generations to live and let live. It';s an old Australian saying and it';s as relevant now as it has been at any time in our history. We reach out to people of different religions, we reach out to people of the Jewish faith, to people of the Islamic faith, to people of Buddhists, Hindus – all the different faiths of Australia. They are all entitled to be treated with respect. They are all entitled to practice their values and beliefs. All we ever ask, as we ask of all Australians, is that their loyalty at the end of the day be to this country, its values, its principles, its belief in what it stands for and what it has stood for, above all other things.
We have been touched by sadness in a way that I think many of us never thought possible. But it has also brought out in us that great Australian grit and capacity to work together and to reach out to each other at a time of adversity. We must always reject violence and terror. Those who murder and maim in the name of God dishonour the God whose name they invoke. The taking of innocent life and the maiming of innocent people can never be justified in the name of any religion that it calls itself a religion, and certainly any of the great religions of the world – Christianity, Judaism or Islam.
Can I thank particularly the community of Ryde of the Armenian heritage. I understand it is one of the largest, if not the largest, concentrations of Armenian descendant Australians anywhere in our country. And your contribution goes back a long way and your contribution has always been to, in a very full way, to the activities in the mainstream of the Australian community. Your commitment to family life, your contribution to business and to community life generally has been quite remarkable. And in my life I';ve met many people of Armenian descent. I think the very first one I met was the best batsman in the Canterbury Boys High School First XI in 1956 and he was a better cricketer than a lot of the Anglo-Saxon boys that were attending that school at the same time.
But yours is a wonderful community and you have enriched the people of Ryde and the community of Ryde, and I want to remark very warmly upon the generosity and the spirit of Christian brotherhood that the Minister and congregation of St Anne';s at Ryde, this historic beautiful Church, have extended to the Armenian community. It is an example of what Ryde is like, it';s an example of what practical Christianity is about and it';s an example of what the modern Australia is about.
Thank you for what you have done for our country. I wish you well and I hope your Church grows from strength to strength. This indeed is the second church opening, if I can put it that way, that I have participated in in the last two weeks and it';s an occasion therefore of considerable pleasure and pride to me that one of those two should be taking place within my own electorate. I wish you well and thank you for everything that you have done for Australia.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...........
Thank you very much Professor Webster, Major Brian Watters, Senator Scullion, ladies and gentlemen. I am really very pleased to have the opportunity during this visit to Alice Springs to participate in the launch of a contribution of about a million dollars out of the Alcohol Education and Rehabilitation Foundation towards the problems of alcohol and other drug abuse within communities, particularly indigenous communities, here in Alice Springs.
This is a practical program with practical objectives, not judgmental but rather compassionate and a program that is designed in a very realistic way to recognise that in a cooperative fashion if we can assist in a way that understands the nature of the problem, progress can be made with all communities in reducing the incidence of alcohol and other drug abuse. 
It is interesting that within indigenous communities in Australia, as I understand it, the incidence of abstinence is higher than it is amongst the general community. In other words, there are more indigenous people who don';t drink proportionately than there are other Australians who don';t drink. On the other hand, frustratingly, the incidence of heavy drinking clearly is much heavier amongst indigenous communities. So that is both a positive and a negative and when you';ve got a positive and a negative, the negative is depressing but the positive is encouraging. 
And what this is designed to do, and it comes out of a fund of $115 million over four years and that flowed out of an arrangement – let me acknowledge immediately the contribution of Senator Meg Lees and the Australian Democrats that she then led – an arrangement was made in relation to some disagreement over some aspects of the tax reform legislation and it sort of had a happy ending. The changes went through for the future but the $115 million instead of being handed back effectively to the breweries, was put into a fund that was set aside. And the idea was that under the guidance of some experts and people who were dedicated to trying to improve the situation in this area the money was to be allocated. And that is what we are here to do and one of the rules applying to it was that 20 per cent of the projects had to be for indigenous communities – one in five. And that is what it is about.
Now I think we all have an understanding of the dimension of the problem. I don';t have any clever solutions. Let me make it clear immediately. It worries the hell out of me – the level of alcohol abuse and the terrible family and domestic consequences that flow from it, whether it is in the indigenous community or elsewhere. Sadly, as we all must frankly recognise, the incidence of it is higher in indigenous communities, but nobody should imagine that the rest of Australia is in any way immune from or untouched by the curse of domestic violence, the evil that men do to women in domestic situation. It is something that the whole nation has to grapple with.
So here I am in Alice Springs this afternoon to announce that we';re going to make a million dollars available and it';s going to help in a very practical way. The Tangentyere – I hope I';ve pronounced that correctly – Tangentyere Council currently operates community run night patrols in Alice Springs for eight hours a night from Tuesdays to Saturdays to reduce drinking and to prevent public disorder. And we';re going to provide more than a million dollars over three years to add a day patrol to operate from 1.30 to 6.30 on Mondays to Saturdays. Now that is a very practical extension. But as I say, I don';t have bright ideas but it seems to be as a matter of common sense that if you can augment the night patrol with a day patrol, that is going to make a contribution.
The funding will also help the Council to employ two referral officers to case manage problem drinkers, to help their families and to create better links with police and hospital services. And can I, as I almost always do at gatherings like this, acknowledge the tremendous work of the police in this difficult area. It';s not an easy job. They are the law enforcers but they are also human beings who respond to difficult social problems. And I think they do an outstanding job and they deserve our understanding and our support. 
We';re also providing over $36,000 to the Central Australian Aboriginal Congress for after hours youth support service involving a mobile youth drop in centre, and this idea has been developed in cooperation with a number of youth services, the Alice Springs Town Council and the Northern Territory Government – who also, let me acknowledge, provide funding for this initiative. 
And there will be $63,000 to the Central Australian Aboriginal Alcohol Programmes Unit to employ a Life Skills Officer to help its residents be active members of the community and gain skills to get work and accommodation.
Now these projects will follow specific efforts of the Alice Springs and surrounding communities to restrict liquor sales and in fact they';re a piece of the local initiatives that have been taken. I stress that no one response to this problem is any kind of panacea. If I';ve learnt anything in relation to these sorts of issues since I have been associated with them, particularly as Prime Minister, it is that there is no one simple solution. There is no one person who has got all of the answers, least of all me. But I do know that if you persist incrementally over time, you can make a difference. The worst thing to do is to throw your arms up in the air and say well it';s too hard. And one manifestation of that is what I call the let it rip philosophy in relation to drug abuse which says well you know, zero tolerance or a tough line doesn';t work, so let';s pretend it';s not a problem and it will somehow or other go away. I';ve certainly learnt that doesn';t work.
We have tried in the whole drugs area to confront the problem in three ways. We recognised that there are criminal elements in relation to drug trafficking and we will be as ruthless and as tough as possible in relation to them. We also know that a lot of people want rehabilitation and can';t get it and we';ve got to provide more services to help people rehabilitate. And we';ve also got to educate people, particularly when they are young, against the dangers of illicit drug taking.
Alcohol is different in one sense but it is part of the same problem because it can have the same debilitating effects. And I';m glad that Professor Webster linked the challenge of suicide and all that flows from the abuse of drugs and alcohol because it is all tied up and anybody who imagines that there is not a link between marijuana abuse and suicide, anybody who imagines that there is not a link between the violence that flows from alcohol abuse and suicide also doesn';t understand the nature of the problem.
It is a big problem. Can I say to the members of the Australian indigenous community who are here today and all of those who are working with them, we really are trying to help. We want to offer you hope. We want to offer you practical assistance. We have not come here to be judgmental. We';ve come here to be helpful. We';ve come here to extend the hand of friendship to you. 
And finally can I especially thank Professor Webster and Brian Watters who are providing leadership in this area in their respective ways – Professor Webster as the Chairman of the Foundation and Brian Watters as the Chairman of the National Council on Drugs. Over the years I hope we have made a small difference. I hope that incrementally working together, I';m encouraged for example that the recent reports indicate that, and I know Professor Webster will be cheered by this, that the suicide rate among young males in rural areas in Australia has actually declined a little in recent years and there are some encouraging signs that the heroin death rate in Australia has also declined. Now some of that has been due to the heroin drought. Not all droughts have unhappy consequences. That particular drought has had a happy consequence. But long may it continue. It may not. 
But what those two things demonstrate to me is that if you keep plugging away and you have good motives and you work with people and you don';t get too judgmental but you are practical and understanding, I think you can make a difference. And I hope these grants help locally. They are meant to. And I want to thank Professor Webster for the work that he is doing as Chairman of this Foundation. I';m very happy to announce these grants. I wish all of those here in Alice Springs who are working to make a difference, particularly for indigenous communities who do have special needs, special problems and a special claim on our concern and our compassion, I hope these will help.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Well thank you very much Sally, Principal, Senator Scullion, students, ladies and gentlemen. This has been quite a special time for me coming to this College. I have heard quite a bit about it and I was told that it provided an opportunity for Aboriginal young people from different parts of central Australia and the top end to come and further their education, particularly to get a better knowledge of English. But actually coming here and seeing the special classes and understanding the need to provide personal help in relation to language and other things has been quite an eye opener.
This is the second experience I have had today of what I might call distance education. I spoke on the School of the Air recently, a few hours ago, and that of course took me to people all over the top part of Australia and here I am at Yirara College which brings together young indigenous men and women from different parts of about the same area.
I never believe at gatherings like this in making long speeches but to leave a simple message and say something that I hope might be of help and people might remember a little – and that is to say to all of the students here the most valuable thing that you can do and the thing that will help you most if you want a happy and good life is to learn and to have a good education. That is very, very important. I know some of you, I';m sure all of you, are thinking of your future and can I say to you that there is nothing more important to that future than to take every chance, every opportunity to learn. Stay here as long as you possibly can because it will make a huge difference to your future. 
All the experience I';ve had in life tells me that if you have a good education and you have the support of that, it does make a huge difference. And I know that it looks good perhaps to leave school and to try something else but it doesn';t work out as well in the long run. If you stay at school, you';ll learn as much as you possibly can, you';ll get a better job – you';ll get a job, you';ll get a better job – and you';ll have more opportunity to enjoy your life and if you know more and learn more, you';ll understand a lot more and that';s going to help you a lot in the years ahead. And that';s really all I wanted to say to you. 
This is a great school. It is supported entirely by the Federal and the State and the Territory Government. A very special project from the Federal Government in relation to language and literacy but the caring environment of the Lutheran Church adds something special to it and I certainly want to endorse that that Church has a great record of mission work in this part of Australia.
My message to you is please stay at school for as long as possible because in the end that will mean more to you than anything else. You might not think so at the moment but please believe me – it does matter in the end. The more education you have, the greater likelihood there is that you';ll have a happy life and you';ll have a long life and a full life and that is I';m sure what all of you want.
Thank you very much for having me and good luck to all of you. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...........  
Councillor Ross, Chief Minister, Leader of the Opposition, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It goes without contradiction that the nation';s mind is of course very firmly fixed on the terrible events that were just remarked upon in the resolution carried so effectively and so unanimously and as in our experience as Australians we have come to recognise out of disaster and challenge and tragedy and horror so many of the great characteristics of the Australian people emerge, renewed and strengthened and on display not only to our people but to the rest of the world. And in the past three weeks my own emotions have been a mixture of anguish and grief but also immense pride in the way in which the Australian people have together unitedly, without regard for individual position but in a great spirit of teamwork and mateship, responded not only to help those who have been left  bereaved and injured but also to communicate to the world in a defiant yet dignified resolute fashion the determination of the Australian people to fight this evil in partnership with others likewise effected by its ravages but also to retain that spirit of openness and friendship towards not only all Australian communities, but also the rest of the world. 
And I thank the Local Government Association for that expression of concern and unity because it echoes the mood of our nation, it echoes the determination of our people and it echoes the resolution and dignified defiance of Australians historically exhibited during times of challenge. 
Can I congratulate you for choosing Alice Springs as the first non-Canberra location, at least in many years perhaps ever, for this assembly of Local Government Associations from all around Australia. 
It does epitomise in so many ways what we want to identify with when we think of the Year of the Outback. As a community in its own right it has some special characteristics unlike any other part of Australia and I think it is a marvellous concept of bringing your convention here. 
The other event, and it goes on sadly, that is very much in our minds at present is the terrible drought that is afflicting so many parts of Australia. This is one of the worst droughts we have had in long years. It is crippling to those directly effected by it both psychologically as well as economically and it will increasingly cast a longer economic shadow. Whilst the Australian economy remains by world standards very strong and very robust, while it remains very strong and very robust for all Australians, it is nonetheless the case ladies and gentlemen that the drought will rob us of national income, it will detract from what otherwise would have been a higher level of economic growth. Fortunately there are two factors which mitigate to some extent, and I say to only some extent. One of those is that for those fortunate enough to have escaped the worst ravages of the drought, commodity prices are stronger than they were in earlier droughts and on top of that the farm management deposit scheme, introduced by the Government several years ago, has meant that during one or two quite good rural years when incomes were high many of Australia';s farmers took advantage of those deposits and put away income before tax so that now in more difficult and challenging years withdrawals can be made in a way to tide them over at least for a while, some of the challenges they face at the present time.
But overall the drought is of course very bad news for Australian farmers, it';s very bad news for the Australian economy and the community response in so many ways to the drought is another illustration of the Australian spirit during a time of adversity and the generosity of individual Australians, the majority of whom live in major cities of our country, is a reminder of how all of us have regarded the outback and country Australia as being part and parcel of the Australian identity. And the drought of course is a time for all governments to work together. It is not a time for blame-shifting or point-scoring. The farmers of Australia have no patience with that from any level of government, be it Federal, State or Local. And it';s a time for all levels of government to work together in a very cooperative fashion. Each have roles and each in my view are discharging those roles fully at the present time and I seek no political argument or political divide over this nation';s response to the effects of the drought.
Inevitably the drought raises in our minds the long-term challenge to this country of all issues related to the availability, the distribution and the cost of water. There is no simple easy solution. Tomorrow in Brisbane the Sustainable Environment Committee of the Cabinet will be receiving the first of a series of submissions and presentations on this issue. There are many aspects of it. A lot of people have said that the answer is major additional infrastructure. Others have argued that the answer lies in reform of water markets. Others have argued that the answer in part lies in change and reform in the area of on farm practices as with so many of these issues the true answer is probably a mixture of all of those to some degree.
It is not an issue that any government, State or Federal, can produce an answer to overnight. It is a clich to say that this is a dry and arid continent, of course it is. There is a lot of water wasted in Australia and we have to find ways of reducing that wastage in the future, but it is a very large country and we shouldn';t imagine that there is any simple pie in the sky solution to the challenge of water distribution. But it is an issue that increasingly governments at all levels must address and they must address it in cooperation and as Prime Minister I want to work with the Premiers of the States, the Chief Ministers of the Territories and the Leaders of Local Government in order to achieve an improvement over time in this area. And it is very important that we seek that cooperation. 
We have sought it in relation to the national action plan against salinity. Some two or three years ago we identified the need at a Federal level to put additional resources into tackling the problem of salinity and on a dollar for dollar basis with the States we have established initially a fund of $1.4 billion to tackle some of the biggest salinity problems in Australia over a period of years. I want to thank Local Government for the role that it is playing in that very important undertaking.
Salinity has been with us and has been a growing problem, degrading not only rural areas but also encroaching into metropolitan areas over a very long period of time and the response that is now coming is an overdue response but it is certainly a very important response. And in a way it';s of a piece with our Natural Heritage Trust where we have committed additional resources over a period of time to numerous natural heritage projects around Australia.
I agree with Councillor Ross that local government in Australia is alive and well. If I can be permitted a personal reflection on this, I find as I go around Australia that when it comes to government, the sentiment of the community is increasing a sentiment that has two components to it. We think increasingly in national Australia-wide terms. We think of the Australian need and the Australian interest increasingly with a focus and a passion that may not have been present ten or twenty years ago. But we also think there is no contradiction in these two. We also think increasingly of the amenity of our local community who I see the two dominant government sentiments, if I can put it that way, as being both nationalistic and also a spirit of local identity and localism, and in those circumstances the role for local government is enduring.
There will always be, in a democracy, there will be competitive tension between the different levels of government. If you were starting Australia all over again you wouldn';t have the structure of government that we have now, but we are not starting Australia all over again, so that is an empty theoretical exercise. We have a structure, it';s a federal structure, we have a sense of identity as Australians, we are a remarkably homogenous country when it comes to national sentiment despite our size. But we are also a people who believe in a certain distribution of power and in a big country you have to have strong local government units. If you don';t have strong local government units then it is not going to be a sufficiently responsive government structure. 
Local Government of course owes its legal force and authority to State Governments and that';s unlikely to change in the near or even the more distant future. Local Government of course is the first port of call for many communities particularly in rural areas and we are very conscious that one of the by-products of rural economic decline and drought of course is the rate revenues of many rural local government units have been depleted and it';s one of the reasons why at the end of the year 2000 we decided to increase by 75%, through the Roads to Recovery Program, the amount of money that the Federal Government provides to Local Government for local roads. We are very conscious that not only has there been a decline in financial capacity because of the impact of economic change and economic decline, but also through decisions taken by State Governments in other contexts the amount of money available for local roads from State Government sources has been less than in earlier years.
The Roads to Recovery Program represented the determination of the Government, at the time that program was announced to make available to Local Government the additional resources to renew the basic road infrastructure, particularly but no only of so many rural communities.
During the current financial year local councils will receive around $1.5 billion in financial assistance grants from the Commonwealth. Of this just over $1 billion is for general purpose assistance and $445 million is for untied local road funding.
The Commonwealth Grants Commission recently carried out a review into local government financial assistance grants and found that from the introduction of untied financial assistance which first occurred from the Federal Government that is in 1974 until 1998 Commonwealth assistance to local government had remained relatively constant from 10.5% to 12% of local government revenue. But during that same period the level of assistance from the States had declined from 15% to 7% of the total level of local government revenue.
You will be aware that in the last election campaign we committed ourselves in the context of local government to an inquiry into the issue of cost-shifting and we are holding that through a Parliamentary Committee and we have received over 320 submissions and 200 of these have come from local councils and that will play a very important role in formulating our response and guiding the conclusions of that committee.
I want also to acknowledge the very important role of Local Government in relation to broader greenhouse gas and environmental issues. Local Government not only plays an important role in relation to issues such as salinity and other matters concerning the environment but as its delegation of two included in the group that went with David Kemp to the Johannesburg Summit on Sustainable Development indicated, the Federal Government values Local Government';s role in the broader environmental challenge and the commitment that we are making as a nation to the challenge of controlling greenhouse gas emissions. And we can argue the toss about different aspects of the Government';s response to the Kyoto Protocol but in the end the measure of any nation';s bona fides in the area is our commitment to the growth of greenhouse gas emissions, and this country has for some years now had a very active program and the present indications are that we are on track despite the fact that for good national interests reasons we haven';t signed the Kyoto Protocol, we are on track to meet the emission targets designated under that protocol for Australia without assuming some of the burdens which in the Government';s view is not in Australia';s interests by adhering to the protocol as it is presently phrased.
Ladies and Gentlemen can I say just one or two other things before concluding and one of those relates to the contribution that your President, Councillor Ross, has made not only as the Leader of Local Government in Australia, but also as a member of the Council of Australian Governments and also as an interlocutor on behalf of Local Government with the Federal Government.
I am aware that the inter-relationships between Local Government, State Government and Federal Government inevitably involves, as I mentioned earlier, some degree of competitive tension, that is as it will always be in a democracy and if it were otherwise you';d scratch yourself and wonder if you were still living in Australia. But it doesn';t alter the fact that in the end the measure of cooperation that exists between different levels of government often rests upon the sense of trust and goodwill that exists between the leaders of different levels of government and can I say that your President for the past three years has been a strong contributor to COAG meetings. He';s been a person who has always faithfully represented Local Government';s view at those meetings and I want to record to you Councillor Ross my respect and my thanks for the role that you have played as the Leader of Local Government in Australia over the past three years.
The final thing that I want to say to you is really to return to a theme that I mentioned earlier and that is the mood of the nation and the response of the nation to some challenges we have at present.
When we last met, when I last addressed this gathering, it was in December 2000. We hadn';t had the horrors of the 11th of  September 2001, we weren';t facing and enduring a terrible drought and we hadn';t experienced the horrors of the 12th of October 2002. 
Life of course must and should go on and a measure of our capacity to overcome adversity is the extent to which we can continue on a path which is not distracted by tragic interventions but nonetheless incorporates a sympathetic and effective response to those tragic interventions. Both events have cast a long human shadow and both events have economic consequences as well. It is inevitable as I have said on several occasions that the Government will need to look again at its level of financial commitment to both defence and security issues. It doesn';t automatically flow from that that massive additional expenditures will be required but it is incumbent upon us as our first responsibility as a national government to assess the adequacy of not only the level but the appropriateness of the distribution of the expenditure which is now undertaken under the heading of defence and security. 
It is also important to acknowledge that the drought will have, as well as a human cost, it will also have a significant economic cost. But against that background can I strike a brighter and optimistic note and that is that for all of those challenges the Australian economy is strong and resilient. We do have a very low level of debt, we do have low interest rates, we do have low inflation, we still have quite good business investment prospects, we still have quite a strong labour market, we could do with a few additional areas of liberalisation and deregulation in that area but the detailed discussion of that belongs to another place and to another day.
So against the background of those challenges that I mentioned we are as a nation not only of good spirit and strong resolve but as a nation we are economically very resilient and because of the reforms that have been undertaken over a number of years we are in a stronger position to stare down some of the economic challenges we now confront. Just as we were able to stare down the Asian economic downturn of 1997 and the immediate effects of the terrorist attack on the United States on the world economy particularly America';s last year. So I believe that we are well prepared to give a good response to our contemporary challenges.
In that we need the cooperation and the understanding of Local Government. We will continue to provide as fair a provision for Local Government as we can consistent with our other responsibilities. I can';t and I won';t say more than that but in saying that I mean it and I am very conscious of the responsibilities that Local Government has.
I want again to congratulate you for going out of Canberra. We all do it when Parliament doesn';t sit and I think coming to Alice Springs is a wonderful idea, it';s a great part of Australia, it is a very special part of Australia and I therefore have very great pleasure in declaring this Congress open.
Thank you.  
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........
PRINCIPAL:
Good morning boys and girls. It';s Mr Bobos here from the Alice Springs School of the Air. For our very special assembly we have the Honourable Prime Minister Mr John Howard sitting here. Mr Howard, would you like to say good morning to the boys and girls.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning boys and girls. This is quite an exciting moment for me. I don';t think I';ve spoken out of the Alice Springs School of the Air before but hello and good morning and I';m looking forward very much to hearing your questions.
PRINCIPAL:
Boys and girls do we have any listeners?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh you';ve got millions. Hello there, how are you?
PRINCIPAL:
Boys and girls, we might start our assembly as we always start an assembly – with our national anthem. So could you all please stand to sing our national anthem.
[singing of anthem]
PRINCIPAL:
Well done everybody and the Alice Springs community. Boys and girls we have many, many people here in the studio. I';m not about to try and introduce them all but we have many special guests. Katie, are you listening? Katie is actually on the speakerphone on the phone on your right hand side Prime Minister. She';ll be speaking to you. Katie can you go ahead please.
STUDENT:
Thank you. Good morning Prime Minister Howard.
PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning Katie.
STUDENT:
My name is Katie Hayes and I';m the president of the Alice Springs School of the Air student representative council. I live 130km from Alice Springs at The Gardens Station. The highlight of being at School of the Air are going on excursions, seeing my friends when we';re in town and talking through the radio. Every year we get the opportunity to come into town four times. Most of the students go into town for at least one of these four weeks. In town we get to see each other and do lessons like most children. Some of the disadvantages about being on School of the Air is not being able to play team sport and not being able to be heard when the radio plays up. Some of the good things about being in the Outback are learning how to use a motorbike to hunt up cattle and learning stockwork. I also like helping my dad cut up the meat after we have killed a cow, steer, etc. On behalf of everyone listening on the radio, I would like to welcome you to School of the Air.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much Katie. That is a very, very nice welcome and what is good for me being on the School of the Air is a chance to not only hear from you and to answer your questions, but also to say what a wonderful job Mr Bobos and all the other teachers and people who run the School of the Air do. Because this is something that Australia did before any other country in the world and we have taught other countries how to teach children who live in remote areas of their countries, and that is something that we Australians – all of us, whether we live in the city or in the bush or the outback – can be very proud of. And thank you very much Katie for your outline of what you do and the advantages and the disadvantages of having to have a School of the Air for your learning.
PRINCIPAL:
Thank you Katie. Wade, are you able to hear me? Wade Watts – are you there?
STUDENT:
Yes I am Mr Bobos. 
PRINCIPAL:
Wade, you';ve just knocked the Prime Minister off his seat. You';re absolutely booming in.
 PRIME MINISTER:
That';s alright. I';m a bit deaf so don';t…
PRINCIPAL:
Wade would you like to speak to the Prime Minister please.
STUDENT:
Good morning Mr Prime Minister. My name is Wade Watts and I am 12 years old and I live at Jameson community in Western Australia which is about 930km south-west of Alice Springs. The reason I live here is because my mum is the acting adviser of Jameson but my dad is the roadworks supervisor of the Shire. Radio lessons can be very hard because of the weather and because sometimes you can';t hear your teacher and your classmates. For radio lessons I have to get up at 6.00am to get to a 6.30am lesson, which is 8.00am in Alice Springs.
PRIME MINISTER:
That is terrific. That is a story that I will tell the next time I talk to a class at a school in one of the suburbs of Sydney which is in my electorate and I will tell them that unlike you Wade, they don';t have to get up at 6.00am to be at lessons by 6.30am, and maybe if they had to they mightn';t complain quite so much about what they had to do when they go to school. I think those sorts of simple stories remind all of us of how different conditions can be in different parts of our very vast country.
PRINCIPAL:
Thank you Wade. Wade, you had a question for the Prime Minister that I am particularly interested to hear the answer to. Go ahead Wade.
STUDENT:
Mr Prime Minister, do you support a football club and if you do, which club is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well my first and most passionate football allegiance because I follow Rugby is for the Australian Wallabies which is our great rugby union team. Now I know probably most of you would have grown up in a more Australian Rules environment and if you';re from Western Australia, you certainly would have. And in Rugby League, because I grew up in Sydney, I am a supporter of the St George Illawarra Rugby League Club. I started supporting it when it was just St George and of course the St George Club achieved a feat that no other football club that I know anywhere in the world achieved – and that is between 1956 and 1967 St George won 11 straight premierships in a row. There is not an Australian Rules club in the old VFL or the Western Australian league or certainly not in the AFL because it hasn';t been going that long and I don';t think there has been an English soccer club which is the other sort of football I follow. They';re my football interests. When I was at school I played both Rugby Union and Rugby League and when I left school I played soccer for about five years. In fact the only one of the four football codes in Australia I didn';t play when I was young was in fact Australian Rules because in those days in Sydney, Australian Rules was not very widely played and if you grew up in Sydney you played Rugby or soccer. If you grew up in Melbourne or Perth you played Australian Rules or occasionally a bit of soccer. But I like Australian Rules and I saw a terrific match between the Fremantle Dockers and the West Coast Eagles at Subiaco Oval in July and it was a great match.
PRINCIPAL:
Thank you Prime Minister and thank you Wade. Well done. Camilla, are you able to hear us. Camilla? Camilla you';re very, very faint. Just have a go Camilla and see if we can hear you. Go ahead Camilla.
STUDENT:
[inaudible]
PRINCIPAL:
She';s talking to you Prime Minister about the benefits of satellite communication. Camilla was part of the trial that occurred last November where she could actually see her teacher and her younger sister actually benefited because she was learning to read and she could see what it was that her teacher was trying to do for her. And she wanted to thank your Government also for providing the funds.
PRIME MINISTER:
Hello Camilla. Well Camilla that was a little bit crackly but it will be much better with the satellite communication. And I know that you had an experience with that and it was good for you and also for your sister. Well I';m very pleased that this satellite communication is coming in so soon and it is going to be quite exciting. And once again this will be something that Australia will do before any other country in the world. It will be the first country in the world to have this method of distance education and I think and I believe that it will make an enormous difference to the way in which people can communicate with each other and you will feel a lot more together – you won';t just feel that it';s you and the teacher over a crackly line. You';ll think that you';re all together and it will be one big outback classroom in a more real sense than what you have had in the past, so I';m really quite excited about this and I';d like perhaps to come back at some stage in the future after the satellite is up and running for a while and go on it because it will certainly bring things together a lot more and I think the communication system won';t be as subject to the variations of the weather. But thanks Camilla.
PRINCIPAL:
Indeed Prime Minister. And you would be more than welcome to come back and be a part of our satellite group Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER:
I';d love to.
PRINCIPAL:
Okay boys and girls. I';m going to open it up for a few questions now and I know that we';ve got some people in Year Four who have some questions to ask. Joshua Smith – are you able to hear us Joshua? 
STUDENT:
What did it feel like to be a couple of kilometres away from the attack on the Pentagon?
PRIME MINISTER:
You mean on the 11th of September? Well it was quite an experience. I had been to the Pentagon the afternoon before to see the American Defence Secretary and then the next day, that morning, I had been out for a walk and I was in fact having a news conference in a hotel next to the White House when the plane hit the Pentagon and I pulled back the curtains and you could see the smoke billowing from the Pentagon building. So I certainly remember it and of course we all know that very sadly for us here in Australia, we have had that terrible attack in Bali and all of those young people who lost their lives and the way in which our country has come together to express our sadness and grief to their mothers and fathers and husbands and wives and mates has been… in a sad situation it has shown how much we work together as a people. But it is scary for people who are nearby but it is tragic for people who have lost loved ones and a lot of people have. But we have to work together and be strong and look after each other and also reach out our hands to everybody in our own country and make people who might be a little bit different from us but are still Australians, make them all feel welcome. Because we are a country of many parts and providing everybody puts Australia first, everybody is entitled to be treated the same.
PRINCIPAL:
Thank you Prime Minister. Someone from Year Five – could someone from Year Five call in please. Go ahead Beth.
STUDENT:
Do you have a boss?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I tell you what – my wife and I talk things over. But I tell you what – as Prime Minister, you know who my boss is? It';s you. It';s all the people of Australia. You';re my boss. And as Prime Minister I';m answerable to all of you and your mums and dads, and they can decide whether I stay here or get thrown out. And every three years they have the opportunity of doing that. So if they don';t like what I do, they sort of vote me out or vote my colleagues out at the next election. That';s how a democracy works.
PRINCIPAL:
Okay, thank you Prime Minister. Someone from Year Seven please. Go ahead Danielle.
STUDENT:
My name is Danielle Braitling and I live at Numery Station which is196km from Alice Springs. I';d like to know why the Government spends more money on helping the Aboriginals instead of fixing up dirt roads outside of Alice Springs because they need quick access to go to town in case of emergency. Also the amount of damage that the rough roads do to vehicles. And also when trucks come out, they only have to travel 196km but it takes them up to six hours due to the condition of the roads and because of the extra amount of time it takes them to come out here cattle are dying because of the shocking state of roads out here. So [inaudible] only take a couple of hours to come here and it takes us four hours. So I hope you take this into consideration and do something about it. Thanks for listening.
PRIME MINISTER:
Danielle I';m not sure that if you add everything up – I don';t know the answer without doing the sums – I don';t know whether if you add everything up all of the money spent by States and Federal Government on roads, whether you end up spending more on Aboriginal affairs than you do on roads. But in a country like ours we have to try and do a certain amount of both. Roads are very important and I know they are particularly important for people who live in outback areas and that is why about 20 months ago we brought in this Roads to Recovery program which provided a lot of extra money for Local Government to go to roads, and those roads of course are available for use by everybody. There is no doubt when you look at Aboriginal affairs, there is no doubt that the life expectancy and the infantile mortality rate, babies dying, that rate is much higher amongst Aboriginal people than it is amongst the rest of the community. And they are things that we have to try as a country to not only understand, but try and remove the causes of it. And it';s important in those areas because they are Australians. We';re all Australians together. It';s important that we try and bridge those gaps and try and create a country where people have an equal go. So we have to try and balance all of those priorities and we try and make as much money available as we can for roads and we also have the responsibility as a Federal Government for the health and employment and education outcomes of all of our people.
PRINCIPAL:
Thank you Prime Minister. Well done Danielle. You researched that question well and asked it well too. Alright, do we have someone from Year One? Go ahead Bodie.
STUDENT:
What are your hobbies?
PRIME MINISTER:
What are my hobbies? I don';t have a lot of time for hobbies. I really have things I do when I have a bit of spare time. I follow cricket very closely. I like sport. Cricket is my favourite but I also, as you could tell, follow football very closely. But I try and play golf. I have been playing more golf in the last few years now that the youngest of my children has left school and I don';t have weekend sport with him, I now try and play golf. I read quite a bit. I read mainly non fiction. I read biographies of people. I find biographies very fascinating because you not only learn about a person but you also learn about the age and the period and the history of the country in which that person lives, and I find biographies absolutely fascinating. I';ve just finished reading a biography. It was called The Three Roosevelts. It was about Franklin Roosevelt who was the President during World War II and his wife Eleanor and then his uncle Teddy Roosevelt who was a President of the United States before World War I. And it was a very interesting book because it covered a huge period of American history and I found it not only… the insights into the people. They were all quite remarkable and very different. But also the insights given into American history – I found that very fascinating.
PRINCIPAL:
Okay, thank you Prime Minister. Boys and girls we';re rapidly running out of time. I would like to give the Prime Minister an opportunity if he wished to actually just address our community if he so wishes, or if you wish we can continue to take some questions.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I';ll take some more questions. I mean I want to hear from them.
PRINCIPAL:
Right. Great stuff. Okay, transition – this is Gavin';s class. Do we have any transition children listening? Go ahead Eliza.
STUDENT:
How long have you been the Prime Minister for Mr Howard?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have been the Prime Minister since the 11th of March 1996. That';s when I was officially sworn in. I actually won the election about nine days earlier but there has to be a bit of a transition when there is a change of Government and that transition took about eight or nine days and so I have now been Prime Minister for a little over six and a half years.
PRINCIPAL:
Excellent. Thank you very much Eliza. Eliza actually sang us a song on the assembly last week Prime Minister called Ellie the Elephant and stole the show. Well done Eliza – good girl. Okay, Year Six. Do we have any Year Six';s listening? Go ahead Kristy-Lee. You';re nice and loud and clear.
STUDENT:
Well mum and dad have put in a lot of ads and stuff for people who want a job – vacant and stuff. But they';re all [inaudible] people like that is unemployed, so kind of what is the Government going to do about that situation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that is a good question. I think I understand – you';re saying that your mum and dad have advertised for somebody and can';t get anybody, yet there are still a lot of people out of work. Why is that so? That is a very difficult question for anybody to give a full answer to. Part of it is that a lot of the people who are out of work don';t have the skills to do the jobs that are available. That is one of the reasons. Another reason is that some people who are out of work in one part of the country don';t want to move to other parts of the country where there are jobs. Another reason – and this only applies to a small number, but it still has to be said – some people who are out of work don';t really want to work. There are some people like that and that has to be said. And that is one of the reasons why we have introduced something called Work for the Dole, where we say if you are out of work, and unless it';s harsh and unfair for it to happen, we say that you have to do something in return for getting the unemployment benefit. And that';s only fair to the people who work very hard and pay their taxes and many people, and it probably applies to many of the mums and dads of the children I';m speaking to now, wouldn';t earn a lot of money because many of them are going through drought conditions and even when there is not a drought, many rural incomes have been very low over the last few years. So they are some of the reasons why we have that difficulty and it has been with us for a long time. And we have tried through things like Work for the Dole to tackle the problem. We do have a lower unemployment rate now than we used to have. We think it is still too high. If we could get some laws relating to small business changed so that they could have more freedom to let people go who might not be doing a good enough job, without being punished in the courts, then we might get a lot more jobs created in small business. And that would be very important. That is very important in the Northern Territory.
PRINCIPAL:
Thank you Prime Minister. Okay, I think we';ve got two classes left. We';ve got a Year Two and a Year Three class. Do we have any Year Two';s listening? Go ahead Jade.
STUDENT:
How much money do you get a day?
PRIME MINISTER:
How much money do I get a day? Well I get paid about… I get paid I think it';s $254,000 a year – I think. You have to sort of divide that. But I pay tax. I can assure you I pay all my taxes and I pay 48.5 cents a dollar on a lot more than half of that. Everything over $60,000 you pay 48 – with a Medicare levy – cents in the dollar. And you know it';s not as if it all goes into my pocket, I can assure you. That';s what I get. And how that works out on a daily basis – that can be your next maths project to work that out on a daily basis. But it is a high salary by a lot of community standards. It';s not such a high salary by standards of people who run big companies. But I tell you what – it';s such a wonderful job, the salary I have to say doesn';t really come into it as far as I am concerned. But I';m fortunate and it';s not really an issue I really talk about unless people ask me questions and I just answer it honestly like that.
PRINCIPAL:
And I think the huge responsibility that the Prime Minister carries, I think he probably deserves every cent of that. Go ahead Kehara.
STUDENT:
I live on a cattle station and I was wondering what was happening between Australia and America';s beef industry.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I tell you what is happening – not enough. We are not happy with the restrictive access that our beef industry has not only from America but from around the world. And one of the things we complain about a lot is that the Europeans, the Japanese and the Americans are far too restrictive. They don';t allow our products enough access and the reason they don';t is that if they allowed them free access they would sell better than some of their own products and that';s why they are so tough. And we did have some quota – we still have some – but nowhere near enough. And we keep complaining about this and we are talking to the Americans about trying to agree on what is called a free trade agreement. A free trade agreement is where everybody can sell anything they have in the other person';s country. We';re going to have a lot of difficulty reaching agreement on this because the American farmers want their Government to protect their industry. And can I try and… I hope this is not too complicated but to give you an idea of how different it is – if you think of the total value of everything our rural community produces and say the total value is 100, and everything that the American farm community produces – it';s also 100, and everything the Europeans produce is also 100. Now in order to produce that 100 – we in Australia give our farmers 4; the American Government subsidise their farmers 22; and the Europeans 35. And that is a huge subsidy and it is very hard because our farmers are much more efficient than what the American and European farmers are. The European Government are the worst. They are much tougher than the Americans. The Japanese aren';t too good either I have to say when it comes to some of these quotas, they';re not too good either. So we';ve still got a big problem and because we';re a small country with population wise and we still have to fight very hard to get a better deal and we';re doing that, and we';ll continue to argue very, very strongly. And sometimes when the Americans put things on like that, they take them off when we make a special case. That happened with steel. They put some quotas on our steel. That doesn';t help you very much – not much steel produced in the Northern Territory – but we managed to get a change there and we';re going to keep fighting very hard because our farmers are the most efficient in the world and they don';t  get a fair go from these countries that shut off their markets.
PRINCIPAL:
Okay. Thank you Prime Minister. Alright girls and boys, Michelle is going to say goodbye to us all.
STUDENT:
Good morning Mr Howard. My name is Michelle Murphy and I';m 13 years old. I live at Idracowra Station – 370km south-east of Alice Springs. As secretary of the SRC, I would like to thank you on behalf of the students and community of Alice Springs School of the Air for coming here today. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very, very much Michelle and can I just say to all of the boys and girls that have been listening, this has been a really beaut time for me. I';ve heard a lot of questions on a lot of subjects – some of which I thought I might get, many of  which I would never have dreamt of getting. And I really have enjoyed it very much and I';m very proud of all the people connected with the School of the Air. We have 19 Schools of the Air in Australia. It is an Australian first and the changeover to satellites will be an Australian first, and it really makes you feel you';re part of the real Australia when you come to something like this. And I want to take the opportunity of congratulating all of the people associated with education in the Northern Territory and Western Australia and Queensland and everywhere, all the State Government departments that work so very hard, and the teachers, and everybody who works so very hard. And also the parents who encourage their children to stay with it and I hope that the satellite makes it easier, better and I do hope that I have the opportunity when the satellite is up and running to come back here or to another School of the Air that has got a satellite and talk to you again. So thanks very, very much. Good luck. And isn';t it a wonderful country.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
[tape begins] Leader of the Opposition, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  This gathering of the Liberal Party in Tasmania is both an opportunity to assess some of the lessons of the past and asses them in an open, frank and realistic fashion.  But also, and more importantly, it is an opportunity to focus on the future.  The Liberal Party in Tasmania has great and important challenges, it has two clear objectives and responsibilities.  It must rebuild its stocks at a state level, they have faltered to almost historically low levels.  And they must begin the process of winning back representation in the House of Representatives at the next federal election.  It is not acceptable to me, nor is it acceptable to any of my federal parliamentary colleagues from Tasmania, that we remain unrepresented amongst the five House of Representative seats from this state.  That must be said, not in anger, but in realism.  It is said as an encouragement to the party organisation to focus on winning back at least one of the five House of Representatives seats in two years time - [power interruption] - I hope that';s a reflection on the encumbrance of those five House of Representatives seats! I hope it portends, I hope it portends a mighty shift and after all power is a state responsibility isn';t it, electricity? It hasn';t happened for a while, I must say that, it';s a while since that';s happened to me.
So ladies and gentlemen, we do face that very important challenge and I encourage the party as it looks federally to do that, we have a federal election in just two years time, tomorrow is the first anniversary of the re-election of the Federal Government on the 10th of November 2001.  Elections come around very frequently at a federal level, we';re on a three year term, therefore I can';t understand why anybody who';s on a four year term would go only after three years, but I';ll leave that to another day and another forum.
At a state level can I repeat what I said last night, and that is congratulate Rene Hidding on the realistic and energetic way in which he has set about rebuilding the fortunes of the party at a state level.  We need more party members, we need to represent to the ‘Liberally inclined'; but not ‘Liberally belonging'; people of Tasmania that we are a party that is open and united and welcoming towards new members and new supporters.  We must have an open mind as to who our future parliamentary representatives should be that so people of ability in the community who have something have to offer but do not have years of party membership behind them can feel that they would have an equal chance of being considered on their ability and on their merit.  One of the great strengths of the Liberal Party over the years has been that it';s been a party that has been beholden to no one interest group in the community.  It';s been a party that has represented everybody and we have to renew that strength, we have to keep asking ourselves whether that continues to be the case.  We are certainly a far more representative political party than the Labor Party.  The Labor Party';s trade union domination grows proportionately stronger as its own membership base shrinks.  And the proportion of Federal Members of Parliament representing the Labor Party who have had a trade union officer background grows rather than diminishes as time goes by.  
So they are the two challenges that should be said to the party.  Of course you will have your reflections and post-mortems on the last state election, that would be unrealistic if you didn';t.  But I urge you to spend more time, having done the post-mortems, to spend more time in going forward to the future, on recognising that there are opportunities here in Tasmania, there are vulnerabilities of the Bacon Government, because of the number of new members that came in at the last election, disappointing though the overall result was, you have an opportunity to build for the future.
At a national level the Government faces two very significant challenges.  We face an international climate which is more unsettled in our own region because in particular of the terrible events of the 12th of October in Bali.  And domestically, although we have a very strong economy which by world standards is a star performer, there are nonetheless two storm clouds hanging over it.  One of those is the drought which is gripping increasingly all parts of Australia, except Tasmania, and the slow down in the world economy, particularly in the United States.  
Last night as many of you all will know the Security Council of the United Nations passed unanimously a new strong effective unconditional resolution dealing with Iraq, calling on Iraq to comply with a strict weapons inspection regime and to unhesitatingly declare and surrender any weapons of mass destruction.  I warmly welcome on behalf of Australia the passage of that resolution, it was carried without dissent, even Syria voted amongst the 15 members of the Security Council in favour of the resolution, that is a very welcome development.  Because that resolution is the whole world saying to Iraq you must disarm, you must admit the weapons inspectors, you must stop delay and obstruction otherwise there will be consequences.  None of us want a military option in relation to Iraq, I don';t, President Bush doesn';t, I spoke to him as recently as last night after the council dinner when I telephoned him to, amongst other things, to congratulate on his magnificent victory in the mid-term congressional elections.  And as has been apparent to me on earlier occasions he is not a man who';s wanting a military option, he would like the matter resolved without resort to force, we all would, nobody likes war, we hate it, it';s a terrible thing.  But we cannot allow weapons of mass destruction to remain in the hands of a country which in the past has demonstrated a willingness to use those weapons, not only against her own people but also to threaten their use and in fact use them against the nationals of another country.  And the ultimate nightmare in the world in which we now live is that weapons of mass destruction might fall into the hands of terrorists because they would not hesitate to use them, they would have no scruples about using them.  And that is one of the reasons why it is so important that the issue of Iraq be dealt with.  And the passage of that resolution, unanimously and in such strong terms, last night in New York is a vindication of a strong but patient leadership that President Bush has displayed on this issue.  Australia has wanted the forum of the United Nations to be used, we support the use of the United Nations, it was a challenge to the authority and the backbone and the fibre of the United Nations and I am delighted, as I know all Australians will be, that all the members of the Security Council have risen to the occasion, without exception, and voted in favour of the resolution.  You couldn';t have a clearer signal to Iraq, you couldn';t have a clearer more unanimous expression of world opinion, the five permanent members, the United States, Great Britain, France, China and Russia and then a diverse group of countries making up the non-permanent members of the Security Council.  We call all hope that the terms of that resolution will be enforced strictly and the terms of that resolution will be fully complied with.  And I would hope that in the interests of the people of Iraq who have suffered a lot under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein, suffered enormously, but for their sake as well as the sake of many other people that the resolution is fully and totally complied with.
Ladies and gentlemen I mentioned a moment ago the impact of the drought and the impact of the slow down in the United States and in other parts of the world on the world economy.  They are the two impediments to continued very strong economic growth.  And despite the fact that they are impediments we will still have very strong economic growth in this country.  A few days ago we had an unemployment figure of six per cent, it';s one of the lowest figures we';ve had in the last 10 or 15 years.  Since this Government has been in office we have created more than a million new jobs, we could create tens of thousands of more jobs if the Labor Party and the Democrats and others would allow our changes to the unfair dismissal laws presently hampering small business to pass through the Senate.  That bill will be presented to the Senate again before Christmas, and the Labor Party and the Democrats will have another opportunity of voting in favour of jobs for small business. We will only get a further significant reduction in unemployment in Australia if we can create more opportunities for small business to employ people.  Small business remains the great job generator in Australia and that is why policies should always be directed towards removing the impediments that small business labours under regarding the employment of people.  And these unfair dismissal laws remain a serious impediment to the creation of tens of thousands of additional jobs.  Now I know I';ve talked about this a lot, we';ve been trying for six and a half years to get sensible unfair dismissal laws in this country.  And for six and a half years we have been frustrated by the Labor Party and the Democrats and others in the Senate.  Well I want to say to them that we';re going to persist, we';re going to put that legislation back again and if the Senate rejects it again the Australian public will know they don';t want to further reduce unemployment in this country.  Because the evidence is very clear, we';re not talking here about sanctioning discrimination against people, we';re talking here about removing a law that intimidates small business out of employing people in the first place.  Anybody who';s run a small business knows that with a small staff if one or two out of four or five are not pulling their weight and are not doing the right thing, if you can';t let them go easily then you';re not going to employ them in the first place.  You can';t afford the cost of a lawsuit, you can';t afford having to settle for $20 or $30,000 to avoid having to go to court, a big company can afford that but if you';re running a small operation where you mightn';t be making more than $50 or $60,000 a year or less, how can you afford $20 or $30,000 to settle a lawsuit?  So you';re not going to employ the person in the first place.  And then the same people who preside over the preservation of those laws go around the country wringing their hands and saying unemployment is still too high, although unemployment now is much lower than it was when we came to office, it was eight and a half per cent when I became Prime Minister in March of 1996, it could be a lot lower if we could get rid of these ridiculous unfair dismissal laws.  And we';re going to put that legislation up again and we';re also going to persist ladies and gentlemen with many other reforms that we have advocated in the past.  
Yesterday we had the Estens inquiry on Telstra, we';re going to have a look at that inquiry, we';re going to see whether what it assesses to be the state of telecommunications in rural Australia and what it further recommends, whether taken together those two things meet the test I laid down during the election campaign last year, namely that we wouldn';t proceed to a further sale of shares in Telstra until we were satisfied that conditions for telecommunications in the bush were up to scratch.  I expect that that examination will take place quite soon and I';ll be able, on behalf of the government, to indicate our future course of action.  Once again we have to ask ourselves the fundamental question, is it plausible that in the long term forever a company like Telstra, having to operate in the market, having to compete with telcos on world-wide basis and otherwise, whether it is realistic.  When all the constraints that are involved that it should continue indefinitely to be half owned by the government and half owned by the private sector.  Because there is, you can';t go back, no government is going to take back into public ownership the 49 per cent that';s already been sold, now you have two choices, you either on proper satisfaction regarding conditions in the bush, you either proceed further or alternatively you continue indefinitely with the present unsatisfactory situation where it';s half owned by the government and half owned by the private sector.  Now they are issues that we will be examining as a government, but our commitment to rural Australia is rock steady, we';ve got to be satisfied arising from our examination of the Estens inquiry that conditions are up to scratch in the bush. The inquiry was clearly very positive in that direction, clearly found that a great deal of progress had been made and it indicated one or two areas where further work needed to be done and we';ll be paying very close attention to those.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the seventh occasion that I';ve had an opportunity of addressing this state council meeting in Tasmania since I was elected and my government was elected in 1996.  And as we look back over the achievements of the government and the way in which our country has been changed for the better and strengthened during that six and a half years we can draw a number of very important lessons.  As a political party at a federal level we can draw the very important lesson that unity and common purpose delivers re-election and it also delivers positive outcomes for the Australian people.  Ours has been a very unified government. We have a full range of views, as you would expect, from the Liberal Party of Australia which has always been simultaneously the trustee of the classical liberal tradition in our community as well as the conservative political tradition.  And we have accommodated those range of views and the policies that we have produced have been a reflection of the range of views within our great party.  But we';ve worked together with great purpose, we';ve been unified, we have people of ability from different parts of the country, all of which have made their contribution.  And the other thing that has been a key ingredient of what we have achieved, and that is that we have been willing to undertake long term reform even though it might involve a short term level of unpopularity or short term obstruction or difficulty.  If you look back over that six and a half years, industrial relations reform, reducing a budget deficit that was running at about $10 billion a year to a situation where we have just about the lowest government debt to annual wealth generation of any country in the world. Our level is 4.6 per cent, the OECD average is about 35 per cent, the United States is about 45 per cent, and Japan';s is about 120 per cent.  And that is a measure of how effective we have been in reducing debt.  We have of course undertaken major taxation reform, we';ve continued the process of industry reform, we are now a major exporter of motor vehicles, we have a motor vehicle plan which of particular benefit to the people of Adelaide and the people of Victoria.  We have delivered a fair outcome in relation to forest policy, we';ve bought stability to the industry while protecting and respecting environmental values, always a difficult balance and the regional forest agreement that I signed just on five years ago with Tony Rundle, that regional forest agreement is going to be maintained and honoured by the government I lead.  We';ve given stability and security to the industry but we';ve also protected important environmental values.  The Natural Heritage Trust, which we funded out of the proceeds of the sale of the first trounce of Telstra represents the biggest investment in one single programme in Australia';s environment in our nations history.  We';ve committed ourselves to a major programme to tackle the problem of salinity, we';ve got a very comprehensive oceans policy and we are addressing the enormous challenge of water conservation in this country.  Now these are the things that are being done by the a Liberal Government in order to protect and promote the environment.  And when you add all of those things together it is a record of reform and commitment, to which all of us collectively can be proud. And also always in politics and public life the reform process is never finished, there is never a point at which you can say well we';ve done a lot, we can take it easy. Once you think you can take it easy you';re no longer doing the job.  We can';t take it easy, we can';t be complacent, there';s a lot more reform to be undertaken, we have an ageing population and we have to adopt polices in the years ahead that address the problem of the ageing of the Australian population.  If we don';t make some changes, we don';t make for example the very modest changes in relations to pharmaceutical benefits, that were bought down in the last Budget, the cost of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme in the years ahead is going to become increasingly unmanageable.  An ageing population has implications for the cost of health, the retirement policy, pharmaceutical benefits and a whole range of other issues, we have to find new opportunities to keep older people in the workforce, we have a very low participation rate for people in the age cohort of 55 to 64.  We have a much lower percentage of people in that age cohort still in the workforce than many other comparable countries and we have to ask ourselves why and if there are responses that need policy change than we have to be willing to embrace those.
So Mr President there is still an enormous amount to be done, we have been successful in the past but that won';t guarantee our success in the future unless we maintain our unity, retain our stomach and zeal for continued reform and finally and very importantly remain in contact with the Australian people.  All governments must constantly avoid the risk of remoteness and complacently.  Ultimately we should always remember that we';re beholden to nobody other that the Australian people, the Australian people have an unerringly finally honed capacity to spot complacently and inertia on the part of any government.  And if we demonstrate any of those ingredients than they will responded, as they should, accordingly.
Ladies and gentlemen a lot has been achieved for Australia over the last six and a half years. During that period of time we';ve had some wonderful moments as nation and we';ve joined together and celebrated those wonderful moments and we';ve had some very tragic events, the most tragic of all of course being the events of the 12th of October which have saddened and bought grief collectively to our nation of the type that I haven';t experienced in my time in public life.  But as always is the case out of events of that horror, the level of horror, something good and positive has come and that is a reminder to all of us of the great capacity of the Australian people to show strength and mateship and warmth and affection to our fellow countrymen and women who have lost so much, and the demonstration of that warmth and affection and willingness to share and help to the maximum extend possible was a vivid and evocative reminder to me and I believe to all of us of the great and unique strength of the Australian people.  Our unpretentious spontaneous capacity to help a mate in need [tape break] determined in a measured sensible fashion to see that justice is done, but also a nation determined that in the process we do not reduce or abandon our warmth and tolerance and our embrace of people of different backgrounds and different beliefs. We ask of all people in this country but one thing above everything else, and that is their loyalty and commitment to Australia, it';s values and its beliefs and traditions and its mores be the most important commitment they make.  And having done that we respect the fact that people do bring different traditions and different backgrounds to this country and in that process make the contribution to the modern Australian community.
Finally ladies and gentlemen can I thank all of you for the great loyalty and assistance that you';ve demonstrated towards me.  To you Doug you';ve shown great organisational leadership in a difficult time, it';s not easy after a big defeat to pick up the pieces and you and Rene together have gone about that task in a very purposeful, practical way, you';ve understood and acknowledged the magnitude of what happened but you haven';t morosely dwelled exclusively in the past, there';s nothing to be achieved by that, life goes on, there';s a new mountain to climb, there';s a new challenge to respond to, there';s a new political opportunity. No government is invulnerable, that';s one of iron laws of politics and the Federal Government';s not invulnerable, if we drop the ball we';ll pay for it and the state government';s not invulnerable either, if it drops the ball it should pay for it.  Importantly as an Opposition here in Tasmania you';ve got to be ready to pick up the ball and to use a rugby analogy, perhaps not appropriate in this gathering, but pick it up and score a try.  But to all of you thank you very much for your help and good luck to you in all of your endeavours in the years ahead.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Thank you very much Mr Carroll, Peter the President of the National Farmers'; Federation, Warren Truss, Jeannie Ferris, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is for me always a special pleasure to be invited to address a gathering of the National Farmers'; Federation. I have had a long association with this body stretching back to when I was first a member of the Government and then 13 long years of opposition. We shared a few political battles, usually on the same side and most particularly in the cause of industrial relations reform. Of all the policy issues to which I have been committed in my political life, none I attach greater significance to than reforming our industrial relations system. And there was no body that was more unswerving in its support for the cause of industrial relations reform than the National Farmers'; Federation. There were others that were very good too but the persistence of the National Farmers'; Federation and its commitment on a lot of issues to sensible economic outcomes and not just a narrow parochial argument. 
The National Farmers'; Federation was one of the bodies that argued long ahead of other industry bodies for freeing our financial system and floating the Australian dollar. And I want to pay tribute to the NFF for the role that it has played in shaping the economic climate in this country and pointing it in towards the paths of righteousness, if I can use an almost semi-biblical expression, because these things are sometimes forgotten. Over the last 20 years you think of the debates we have had on financial deregulation, on industrial relations reform, on taxation reform - on all of those things the National Farmers'; Federation… tariff reform, how could I ever forget that talking to a gathering of farmers. The National Farmers'; Federation has played a hugely influential role and has argued for the long term policy position that would be of maximum long term benefit to Australia. 
So it';s against that background that I';m very happy to be here tonight and I';m particularly conscious of the difficult circumstances now being faced by so many Australian farmers. I';m glad that your President has struck a number of positives because in all of these situations there are positives as well as negatives. I agree that farmers are resilient. They will emerge, many of them strengthened by the difficulty. Some won';t and may need to be assisted and their position needs to be understood. You all know how severe the drought is. At our Cabinet meeting in Brisbane last week John Anderson gave us a detailed briefing based on discussions he had with the Met Bureau and it indicates, as I probably don';t need to tell you, that you have serious to severe rainfall deficiency in about 70 per cent of Australia. Virtually all of New South Wales is in drought and some areas are experiencing their worst rainfall in recorded history. They';re facing their third successive year of drought. 
And what I want to say to you on behalf of the Government is that we understand this. We are sympathetic. We are endeavouring to deliver some practical measures and we have a commitment to provide all reasonable assistance that should be provided by Government at a time such as this to Australia';s farmers. Fortunately there are some things that are mitigating the severity of the drought. Your President and Mr Carroll were kind enough to mention the benign interest rate climate. That is of enormous benefit. And the general strength and prosperity of the economy is important at a time like this.
The Farm Management Deposits have proved to be hugely successful and their introduction prescient, and I want to especially pay tribute to John Anderson the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the National Party, for his passionate advocacy of these several years ago – an advocacy that I supported and shared. But John worked and campaigned very hard because he could see the longer term value of putting in place a financial instrument that enabled farmers in better years to put something away with a tax advantage, knowing that eventually there would be some bad years when you would need to pull them out at a lower rate of tax. And so popular have they been that 43,000 farmers have invested, which is a very significant proportion. There is about $2 billion in the deposits at the present time and in tax forgone terms you';re looking this year at something in the order of $500 million which is available in the rural community that would otherwise not be available if these management deposits didn';t exist. And I think it';s important when we';re looking at the overall climate in which the rural community is trying to cope with the drought, that we bear that in mind. Now we are very committed to the maintenance of the Farm Management Deposits and we';re frankly pleased that we brought them in, and I think they have been of enormous assistance.
Exceptional Circumstances, which is a policy that has now been operating for a number of years, it has been subject to a bit of criticism. I think it has been caught in the crossfire of interjurisdictional politics, if I can put it that way, which I must say Australians whether they are farmers or city dwellers get very angry with when you';re dealing with something that';s important to the country. Now can I say that my heart goes out to Warren Truss as my ministerial colleague who has got to be at the sharp edge of all of this and to deal with the administration of a system that does involve straddling both State and Federal considerations. As you know, there have been a number of applications lodged. We did change the criteria. We made them more benign. We now make an assessment based on a prima facie judgment and the welfare assistance is available for a provisional period of six months from the date of that prima facie judgment. And that has meant that in cases where applications have been made recently, that assistance begins to flow far more easily. We';re already providing under existing declarations about $75 million on an annual basis for areas in Queensland and Western Australia and I have no doubt that that could treble or quadruple or even go five fold over the months ahead. Even if there were to be a sudden change in weather conditions, and unfortunately there is nothing to suggest that, there are two recent applications and I expect Warren to be saying something about that even as early as tomorrow morning. 
Can I just round off what I';ve said about the drought in saying again it';s very important that this peak body accept this very directly from me on behalf of all the members of the government. We are intensely acutely aware of the pain and adversity that the drought is inflicting on so many farmers. We want to work with you. We recognise that not everybody is affected by it and even in these difficult times there are some very good stories, but we also understand that other people are struggling and we want to work with you with the policies we have and commit ourselves to responding in the most effective way and can I say in a cooperative way with state governments I do not want to argue with state governments in relation to drought policy. I don';t think farmers want state and federal governments arguing. They want them both working together to produce an outcome which is important for the nation.
There are three other issues that I know are very important to you that I want to canvass in my remarks tonight. The first of those relates to the issues that your President identified as the signature or number one issue of the National Farmers'; Federation and that is the question of water property rights of land holders. This is crucial to you, it';s crucial to the long term water policy of this country, it';s also crucial to long term environmental values of Australia.  We do need serious comprehensive reform. We recognise the fundamental Australian principle that if somebody';s property right, be it a water property right or some other property right is disturbed and diminished or cancelled then that person is entitled to a proper level of compensation and that is a very important principle. State water regimes do need to be improved to provide better investment certainty. We have to remove what we';ve come to call the rail-gauge problems that exist in relation to water property rights around Australia. I think the ideal of having a common water right across the nation if we could achieve that would be of enormous value, and it';s important that we move in this direction because the absence of greater uniformity and the existence of a sort of varied regime between the states is holding up water trading between regions and across borders. The water issue is, if I could put it this way, blind to state borders, and state differences and state borders are a hindrance rather than an aid in this area.  This will be on the agenda for the COAG meeting which is now to be held, because of the Victorian election, is now to be held on the 6th of December rather than the 30th of November.
We did as you know have a very lengthy presentation to the Cabinet meeting last week from the Murray Darling Basin group and also representatives of the so called Wentworth Group of scientists. It was a very valuable presentation. to those of us in the Cabinet who are not as well versed in matters relating to water as some of the others it was a very informative session. I was saying to Peter earlier that the issue of the long term availability and use and quality of water in Australia has become in the last 12 months, and especially in the last few months, a topic of general conversation and interest to the entire Australian community. I know a range of views have been put up and perhaps some of the views that have been advanced may not be realistic. But can I say in relation to all of those who are putting forward views they are doing so properly motivated for the national interest and there are a lot of people out there who';ve had no previous connection with rural Australia that are concerned about this issue and want something done about it, and want to help, because they have the long term interests of Australia and particularly the long term interests of rural Australia very much at heart. And can I just say in relation to that that I think the public spiritedness of those who sponsored the Farmhand appeal should be applauded by this group and I pay tribute to all of those in the media and otherwise that have been involved in it, and John Anderson will be saying something in relation to that on behalf of the Government tomorrow.
Can I mention in the context of water that our $1.4 billion national action plan for salinity and water quality is a very important beginning in tackling the problem of salinity. Once again cooperation between the Commonwealth and the states and local government is absolutely crucial. If we don';t have that it';s going to be very slow moving.  We are making progress. It varies a bit from state to state, but we are beginning to make progress on that and importantly a significant financial contribution has been made by the two levels of government.
Telecommunications has inevitably been in the news with the release of the Estens report. As all of you will know in the last election campaign I made a commitment on behalf of the government that we would not sell any more shares in Telstra unless conditions, meaning telecommunications conditions, in the bush were up to scratch.  Some people sort of wondered about such a generic colloquial way of describing it. But I think I conveyed a meaning that most people understood and we were serious about that and that led to the establishment of the Estens inquiry. We got that inquiry result a few days ago and the Cabinet will be examining it and formulating a view within the next week or so. I think it';s fair to say that although the Estens inquiry didn';t find that things were perfect, they did find that a great deal of progress has been made and they did, of course, place a great amount of stress on future proofing and I think that's very understandable and very justified.  The report did find that pockets of substandard service remain and that looking forward there were challenges in ensuring that regional Australia shares in the benefits of broadband and other telecommunications advances.  
Can I commend the NFF for working with Telstra on improvements to the customer service guarantee as it applies to rural and remote areas. The CSG was introduced and strengthened by this Government and it provides guarantees on connection times and fault repairs and it's a key part of the legislation framework of consumer safeguards.  In relation to mobile phone coverage, which is important to all of us but certainly very important to rural Australia, there are a number of Government contracts under a $50 million program to improve mobile phone coverage in regional Australia, which is still being rolled out, including a $20 million program to improve mobile phone coverage to 62 sites on 34 regional highways.  And we've also committed $43 million to improve mobile phone coverage to 187 regional towns.  It goes without saying that the mobile phone coverage issue is very important.  And we believe that on completion of Government initiatives, the terrestrial mobile network will cover 98 per cent of the population and for the remaining two per cent, satellite mobile services are supported through significant Government subsidies for handsets.  The CDMA network has provided extended mobile coverage, approximately twice the coverage of the former analogue network.
Telstra has been an issue on the Australian political scene now for some time.  Quite plainly, we're not going to go further in relation to the sale of further shares until we are satisfied having examined Estens that it has responded in a way and we're able to respond in a way to what it said to meet the stipulation that I laid down on behalf of the Government during the election campaign.  Clearly, if we were to reach that conclusion, and I speak hypothetically at this stage because Cabinet has not considered it in detail, there would be two other issues involved.  One of those, of course, would be to try and secure legislative authority for a sale of the remaining part of Telstra and if that were obtained, then importantly, a sale would have to take place at a time and in circumstances which maximise the return to the Australian people.  
In the long run, you can't have a telecommunications company like Telstra, in my view, which is half-owned privately and half-owned by the Government.  I don't think that is good for the Australian public.  I don't think it's good for the fortunes of Telstra as a commercial enterprise. I think it hobbles and inhibits its commercial operations. And I recognise that Telstra is no ordinary corporate beast.  It has special responsibilities and has a special place in the information infrastructure and, of course, it's integral to the communications network of Australia.  And therefore, I stress again that further action by the Government in relation to Telstra will be heavily conditional upon us being satisfied in relation to our obligations to rural Australia and also being satisfied that the guarantees that are now in place remain and they provide for the delivery of improvements in telecommunication services right through out Australia in a way that are reasonably equivalent to the services that are available in metropolitan areas.  
Issues have arisen regarding the disposition of the proceeds to the sale of Telstra.  There is still a widespread belief in the community that if you sell Telstra, the rest of Telstra for say - and I emphasise that expression very much - for say $30 billion, that that $30 billion comes on the income side of the Budget and that if you spend $5 billion in the year in which you receive the $30 billion, the Budget's $25 billion better off - it's nothing of the kind. The accountants do not let you do that.  They raise objections.  They say that's dodgy accounting and so it is.  And it flows from that that the only real gain to the budget of the sale of an asset such as Telstra are the net savings in public debt interest that accrue from the liquidation of debt with the proceeds of the sale.  And that, of course, will vary according to what you get, the share price and assessments made about the dividend flows under existing arrangements.
One of the reasons why we have low interest rates, ladies and gentlemen, is that we have low levels of Government debt.  And I myself have held the, perhaps simplistic view, that one of the best things that this Government could do for future generations of Australia is to leave them entirely free of Federal Government debt.  And repaying debt with the proceeds of the sale of assets if that sale takes place, and I stress again that it's conditional on the things I've indicated is very high on my priorities, I know it's very high on the priorities of the Government.  But you'll hear a little further on issue as we examine the Estens report.
The other issue that I want to touch on very briefly is that of world trade.  I've had an opportunity this year to rail on your behalf in many foreign capitals, including the United States Congress, about the perfidy of the trading practises of other countries, especially but not only the European Union.  There's probably no audience in Australia, indeed probably no audience in the world, that is better versed in the arithmetic that… what four per cent of the total value of farm production in Australia is subsidised in some way, it's 35 per cent in the European Union and it's 22 per cent in the United States and it's certainly very high in Japan, but I don't have the figure readily to mind.  The signs out of Europe are not good.  When I was in Brussels in July and spoke to the Farm Commissioner Fischler, he was talking optimistically about some beginnings of change to the common agricultural policy of taking away the production subsidy element and tying the subsidy, still in contemplation at the same level I might say, but tying it not to production levels but tying it rather to environmental standards and other considerations and other agricultural values, whatever that might be defined to me. But it looks as though even that very tentative start has not received a lot of political support and there are suggestions that understandings have been reached between the French and the German governments to delay, perhaps to the year 2013, the beginning of any reform.  It will be crunch time on this issue during the Doha round because unless we can get a significant beginning on agricultural reform at Doha, it';s not going to work.  The Cairns Group of countries are not going to see an arrangement that doesn';t include a significant start on change with agricultural as being in any way a genuine comprehensive trade negotiation.  At the initiative of Mark Vaile we';re having a mini-ministerial on world trade meeting in Sydney this Friday, and it';s going to be attended, amongst others, by Bob Zoellick the special trade representative from the United States, from Mr Lamy from the European Union and from many other senior figures.   And it will be a very important opportunity for us to argue not only our case but importantly in a world that talks a lot about the imbalance between the rich and the poor but the impact of farm subsidies and farm protection on the poorest countries in the world.  Getting rid of even a modicum of the levels of protection now would do as much if not more for underdeveloped countries than the value of all of the foreign aid they now receive from the wealthier countries.  And I can';t think of anything that';s more likely to help them in a dramatic enduring way than that.
So it remains, as always, as a huge challenge.  I';ve just seen the Japanese figure, I';ve forgotten it, it';s 59 per cent. So Japan';s agricultural support was 59 per cent of the value of their production, the European is 35 per cent, the American is 21 per cent and the Australian is four per cent. Now those figures say it all very dramatically and emphatically on our behalf and it';s a case that we argue with great passion and great commitment.
The final issue I want to mention is that of the possibility, and I can';t put it any more strongly than that on negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States.  This is an issue that has been discussed between myself and the President, between Mark Vaile and Bob Zoellick and between representatives of the different organisations.  It will be difficult, I can assure you that we are not going to in any way compromise or sell out the interests of Australian farmers in pursuit of a free trade agreement with the United States or indeed with any other country. But given the size of the United States economy and given the value to Australia in the long term if we could negotiate an arrangement and given the fact that there are many elements inside the United States that are very strongly supporting the idea of a free trade agreement, it is a process if the Americans are willing to sit down and start talking to us, it is a process which is worth investigating to see what outcome can be achieved.  And I think in the long term if we could reach a proper basis for an agreement with the United States it would be of incalculable enduring benefit to the Australian economy but there is not a natural fit between our farm constituency and the farm constituency of the United States.  I';ve noticed that, I';ve observed it, I';ve picked that up as I';ve moved around both the United States and I';ve moved around Australia and the farm bill was not something that we saw as going in the right direction to say the least and there';ll need to be clearly a change of attitudes.  But importantly with these things you have to be prepared to exhaust the possibility listen to all the arguments, try and engage the Americans because what we are doing at the moment is adopting a very pragmatic attitude towards trade. We';re not ideologues when it comes to trade, we';re interested in only thing and that is a better outcome for Australia and Australia';s producers, whether they';re on the land or elsewhere and that means really taking a dual track approach, of course we try and get outcomes multilaterally through the World Trade Organisation but if we can do a bilateral agreement with another county that confers advantage on Australia, which we look as though we';re on the eve of doing with Singapore, we';re crazy not to take advantage of that opportunity.  And that';s the philosophy that we bring to talking to the Americans.  I have no blinkers, I have no misconceptions about how difficult it will be and it may come to nothing but it';s worth trying and they now have trade promotion authorities so if they';re willing to commence the negotiations then that';s a matter for them at this stage to indicate then we would be certainly willing to sit down in the circumstances and on the conditions that I';ve stipulated.
Can I just finish ladies and gentlemen by again thanking you for having me here tonight.  We are as a government and as a group of men and women in that government very committed to rural Australia, not only for what rural Australia means economically and that';s huge because of its contribution, not only in food production but it';s enormous contribution to our export income.  But we're also, even more importantly than that, very committed to rural Australia because of what it represents in the fabric of the Australian identity.  It';s one of the things that has shaped our country, it';s one of the things that marks our country out and our people out to others around the world.  And that';s one of the reasons why the vitality and the survival and the resilience of Australian farmers is so tremendously important and I';m encouraged to come here tonight and to hear that despite that all the adversity you have you find pockets of optimism and hope and positive things to say, that is characteristic of Australians, particularly of Australian farmers and we in the Government want to help you all we can through these current difficulties.
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...........  
Mr President, my parliamentary colleagues, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I start by congratulating the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry on 10 years of very fruitful and effective representation of an enormous spectrum of the Australian business community.  As I look back over that 10 year period I particularly remember the contributions that your organisation has made to the development of economic reforms and the process of economic policy debate within our community.  
Your President spoke earlier of the economic strengths of Australia and I'll deal with some of those later in my remarks but it's fair to say that the economic strength of Australia at the present time, the fact that we still have one of the fastest growing economies in the developed world, the fact that we have low rates of inflation, low rates of interest, an extraordinary low rate of Federal Government debt, that that economic strength is the result of cumulative economic changes that have occurred in this country over the last 15 to 20 years.  And if I had been a guest or addressing a gathering such as this 15 to 20 years ago in the old Parliament House, 20 years ago we'd have had still a fixed exchange range and a highly regulated financial system, we'd have had very high tariff levels, we'd have had a completely unreformed taxation system, we'd have had budget deficits instead of budget surpluses and, worst of all, we'd have had a totally arthritic labour market.  
I heard Peter Hendy this morning on AM and he was talking about the cause of labour market reform, a cause that many of you know has been very close to my heart in the many political positions I've held over the last 15 to 20 years, and he likened it to a journey between Sydney and Brisbane.  The only thing that I baulked at a little bit, I liked the analogy, very graphic, very Australian, the only thing I baulked at, he said that we'd only sort of got to Albury.  I was a little bit…I thought he might at least concede that we got to Canberra or Sydney.  But what he was talking about was, of course, that it's a journey begun but it's a journey not completed.  And what I'd like to say to all of you is that your organisation and its predecessors have played a major role along the various journeys that we've travelled.  And particularly in the last 10 years the support that you've given to the cause of labour market reform and the very strong commitment you gave to the cause of taxation reform, something that many of us thought, while not dead and buried, almost unachievable six or seven years ago and as we, from the vantage point of 2002, look back over that 15 to 20 year period we can see some milestones of economic reform.  And I've never been reluctant to acknowledge the contribution in one or two of the major areas of reform made by the previous government and particularly by the prime ministership of Bob Hawke in relation to both financial deregulation and tariff reform.  Because the message out of all of this is that countries that don't maintain the momentum of economic reform squander the gains of earlier reforms and, over time, return to positions of uncompetitiveness.
Australia is performing strongly at the moment because we have reformed our economy.  We'll only continue to do so if we maintain the momentum of reform.  And whilst at this stage I';m not in a position to endorse the particulars of the 10-year blueprint that you have laid down for further labour market deregulation, let me say that I strongly support further labour market deregulation.  I would like to see the further reforms currently stalled in the Senate go through and I would like further reforms to occur in that area.
One of the strengths of the Australian economy in the last five years has been that we've had very high levels of productivity.  We were talking at the table a few moments ago about the level of the Australian dollar.  We don't have a low dollar, we have a highly competitive exchange rate!  And that highly competitive exchange rate has not had inflationary consequences in Australia, which in a sense is the old, conventional wisdom in relation to the impact of exchange rates.  And the reason why it hasn't had an inflationary impact is that the domestic economic environment is now less regulated, more productive and more competitive and as a consequence we have been able to absorb the impact of that exchange rate without inflationary consequences.  And that is a very vivid and live example particularly to Australian exporters and domestic manufacturers of the value of living in a less regulated, more competitive Australian economy. 
The Australian economy continues to perform very strongly.  There are two clouds.  One of those is the very severe drought, the other is the uncertain state of the international economy.  It's a very bad drought.  It's approaching the dimensions of that in 1982 and in the years immediately after World War II and immediately after Federation.  About 70% of the nation is suffering a severe or very serious water shortage and the most reliable estimates at this stage indicate that there won't be any significant change in the weather pattern until about March or April of next year.  Fortunately some measures put in place several years ago will cushion the impact of the drought for a lot of Australia's farmers.  The farm management deposit scheme, which encourages through tax incentives farmers in good years to put away money to draw out to live on and to fund their operations in bad years, that has been extremely successful.  And about 43,000 Australian farmers have taken advantage of that.  There's about $2 billion in the deposits and the revenue foregone this year is estimated to be in the order of $500 million. 
 The Exceptional Circumstances arrangements will increasingly be needed by different areas of Australia.  And the sad thing for many Australian farmers about this drought is that it has followed a number of good years which was the first they'd had for a long time and at a time, of course, when world prices for many commodities are very high.  So that's going to have an impact and the weakness of the international economy is also going to have an impact.  And later this month the Treasurer will be releasing the mid-year economic review that we'll respond in more detail to the impact of those things.  But, fundamentally, I want to reiterate what was said by the Governor of the Reserve Bank two nights ago that despite those challenges the Australian economy does remain very, very strong indeed and likely to do so over the years ahead.
There are one or two specific things I would like to turn to and they arise very much out of the commitments that the Coalition made in the election campaign just over a year ago.  In launching the Government's business policy I made a number of specific commitments.  One of those was a review of the competition provisions of the Trade Practices Act.  The inquiry being conducted by Sir Daryl Dawson is now well advanced and I would expect to receive the report, or the Government expects to receive the report, by the 31st of January 2003.  We also committed ourselves to the establishment of an office of the Inspector-General of Taxation recognising some concerns about the relationship between the business community and the Australian Taxation Office.  Legislation to establish that office has passed through the House of Representatives.  It's gone to a Senate committee.  There is some suggestion that it may be opposed in the Senate.  I hope that that doesn't prove to be the case.  The Treasurer is proceeding with the review of Australia's international taxation arrangements and in August he released a consultation paper on that issue and the review is examining whether these arrangements are consistent with the increasingly global outlook and global behaviour of so many Australian companies.  In September of this year the Government announced measures giving effect to the commitment to expand venture capital tax concessions.  And the Government has also introduced legislation to give effect to certain changes to the tax treatment of foreign expatriates recognising the importance for Australian companies operating globally to have access to highly skilled workers from around the world.  And in the important area of winning investment the Government has responded to the Blackburn report and Invest Australia is being revamped under its newly appointed CEO, Mr Garry Draffin.
But tonight I want to announce the details of the implementation of another important government initiative, fulfilling an election promise.  I';m pleased to say that the very distinguished Australian businessman, Mr John Uhrig, a former chairman of Westpac and former chairman and director of many Australian companies, will conduct a review at the request of the Government into the corporate governance of Commonwealth statutory authorities and office holders.  As you know the performance of statutory authorities and office holders is critical for business and the overall health of the Australian economy.  This is particularly so in the areas of taxation and regulation where businesses have the right to expect the highest levels of efficiency, fairness and transparency in their dealings with the Government.  The objective of the proposed governance review is to improve the performance of statutory authorities and office holders and, most particularly, their accountability frameworks.  
The review will examine structures for good governance as well as the relationship between statutory authorities and office holders and portfolio ministers, the Parliament and the public, including the business community.  The specific focus of the review will be on a select group of agencies with critical business relationships including the Australian Taxation Office, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, the Australian Financial Regulation Authority, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, the Health Insurance Commission and Centrelink.  In addition to examining existing governance arrangements the review will also address the selection process for board members and office holders, the mix of experience and skills required by boards, their development requirements and their relationship to the Government.  And expected outcome of the review, which should be completed within six months, is the development of a broad template of governance principles.  As a second stage to the process and following the review the Government will assess statutory authorities and office holders against these principles and reforms will be undertaken on a whole-of-government basis.  
As you are aware, ladies and gentlemen, today marks a very important day in the bilateral relationship between Australia and the United States.  The United States' special trade representative, Ambassador Bob Zoellick, informed me and my Cabinet colleagues this morning that he'd been authorised by President Bush to give the required statutory notification to the American Congress as a prelude to the commencement of negotiations between Australia and the United States for a free trade agreement.  This opens the prospect of a momentous forward movement not only in the economic relationship between Australia and the United States but also in the further broadening and further globalisation of the Australian economy.  
The United States economy is, of course, the biggest in the world.  Some estimates have said that a free trade agreement, if negotiated, could add something like $4 billion annually to Australia's gross domestic product.  We will enter these negotiations very committed to achieving a positive outcome.  We will work very hard to do that and we are greatly heartened by the Americans indicating to us that they would like the negotiations completed during the next 18 months.  There is no incompatibility between negotiating bilateral agreements and also pursuing further progress in the multilateral area, particularly the World Trade Organisation Doha round.  And, indeed, Ambassador Zoellick's visit to Australia is primarily to attend a mini ministerial meeting of Trade Ministers, convened by Mark Vaile and to be held in Sydney tomorrow.  
I don't underestimate the challenges that will be faced by us in negotiating an agreement and we are particularly conscious of the importance of it being comprehensive and, therefore, of the importance of agriculture.  And no Australian Prime Minister is ever unmindful of the imbalance of existing arrangements concerning agriculture around the world and the way in which they work to the disadvantage of Australia.  Let me illustrate - subsidies in Australia represent 4% of total farm production in this country.  In the European Union they represent 35%, in the United States, 22% and in Japan, 59%.  We believe that Australian farmers are entitled to a better go on the world scene.  We will ensure their interests are properly and vigorously pursued in our bilateral negotiations with the United States but the opportunities, given the complementarity of the Australian economy and the United States' economy in so many areas, the opportunities that a free trade agreement opens up are very considerable indeed.
The last thing I want to mention, ladies and gentlemen, is one touched upon by your President and that is the question of the environment and, most particularly, the debate surrounding the Kyoto protocol.  At present we are unwilling to ratify the protocol because we believe that would not be in Australia's national interest.  We are on track to achieve the emission targets allocated to Australia under Kyoto.  We remain very committed as a government to achieving significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.  Concern for the environment is a mainstream political and social issue in our country.  We are aware of that and we remain very strongly committed to achieving improving greenhouse gas outcomes.  But the present cast of the Kyoto arrangements with the differential treatment and more liberal treatment being afforded to many of Australia's competitors, given that we are almost uniquely placed being a highly developed country, which is also a net exporter of energy and we don't have the advantage, for example, that the bubble arrangement affords to the member countries of the European Union and given the absence of the United States from the Kyoto protocol agreement at this stage we remain unconvinced that it is in Australia's national interest to sign.  
We would like to have a very open and frank dialogue with the business community on this issue.  There are a range of views in the community and there's also, I gather, quite a variety of views in the business community.  And in August the Government began an extensive dialogue with the business community on reducing greenhouse gases.  It received widespread support from industry and this is a valuable opportunity for industry to work with the Government on ways to reduce greenhouse gases while also protecting our competitiveness.  Industry has long and legitimately called on governments to consult them in formulating greenhouse policy rather than handing it down from on high.  And our willingness to have an open dialogue with the business community represents a significant opportunity for business to work with the Government on this very important issue.  And I urge ACCI and, indeed, all other business organisations to take advantage of it.
Can I finish my remarks, ladies and gentlemen, by again thanking your organisation for the contribution that its made over the last 10 years and its predecessors before that in the very important area of dialogue with the Government.  I lead a Government that I';m very proud to say is not beholden to any one section of the Australian community but I do lead a Government that has a very deep commitment to private enterprise, has a very strong commitment to what I choose to call competitive capitalism, a Government that believes in wealth generation and believes very strongly that the foundation of national wealth is private, competitive business activity, risk taking and entrepreneurial flair.  We don't always do things that please the business community, we haven't in the past and we won't in the future but we'll always be very mindful of your views, we'll always stand ready to talk to you, to listen to you and to work with you in achieving common objectives.  That's a commitment I make on behalf of all of my ministerial colleagues and I make it confidently believing that it's a view that all of them share.  We are fortunate to be living in a time, economically, that has been so favourable to Australia.  Sadly, that circumstance is challenged by non-economic issues which have thrown a cloud and a shadow over our nation and over our people.  In responding to terrorism, in responding to the new security and intelligence and defence demands that inevitably have been put upon us over the last 12 months and very recently over the last five or six weeks the strength of our economy will be something that will aid us very greatly.  It's never easy to respond to those sorts of challenges but if you are responding to them from a vantage point of economic strength and economic achievement then the solutions are more readily at hand.
I thank all of you for the personal and corporate contributions that you have made to Australia's economic condition.  Without cooperation between the business community and the Government of the day nothing can ultimately be achieved and I am very conscious of the contribution that all of you have made.  Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE........... 
Well thank you very much Senator Kemp, Anne-Marie, Fran Kelly, Gough
 Whitlam the 21st Prime Minister of Australia, Lady Nancy Gorton, Mrs Heather
 Henderson, Senator Faulkner, ladies and gentlemen.
This is quite an important and I believe significant occasion in the
 developing curiosity and growing interest of all Australians, not only
 in this country';s history but also in the personalities, the strengths,
 the foibles, the weaknesses and the capacities of the 25 Prime Minister
 that we've had since Federation. And I do want to compliment the National
 Archived getting this material together, I agree entirely with Anne-Marie
 that it will become a much used resource, it will be an extraordinarily
 valuable aid not only for discipline students of Australian history but
 also for that growing army of Australians who increasingly find and not
 to their surprise but in an increasingly natural fashion that people who
 have risen to high office in this country have had the same capacities,
 the same weaknesses, the same abilities and the same responsiveness to
 times of challenge and particular stress as men and women who have risen
 to equally high office in other countries. I would agree with Senator
 Kemp that there is a burgeoning fascination and interest in Australian
 history. We do things differently here because we are a different people.
 We acquired our political independence in a different way from many other
 countries and as a consequence we respond very differently than others
 do, no less passionately and intensely in our own way and I think we have
 seen in recent weeks in the wake of the awful atrocity of the 12th of
 October a depth of national passion and unity in a uniquely expressive
 Australian fashion, the like of which I haven';t seen in my lifetime.
Reflecting on the lives and the interests and the commitments of the
 24 predecessors I';ve had in the office, I am now uniquely privileged
 to hold, I';ve always found very fascinating. They were a group of
 men, so far no women, I have no doubt that will at some time in Australia';s
 future, many will hope not too distantly, also be right to say men and
 women. They are a cross section, they';re very different, we all
 have our views on them, I';ve known some of them very well, naturally
 the bulk of them I didn';t ever meet, it fascinated me, most recently
 I read David Day';s biography of John Curtin when travelling back
 and forth to London earlier this year and needing the full length of both
 plane journeys to do so. I found it a fascinating read, its insights into
 the times in which Curtin lived, particularly his earlier years. Many
 years I was fascinated to read Fin Crisp';s wonderful biograph of
 Ben Chifley, the Prime Minister that I was first conscious of as a Prime
 Minister. I was born during the first and very short lived prime ministership
 of Robert Menzies and first became very interested in politics around
 in the time of the 1949 election when Robert Menzies returned to office
 and ended the prime ministership of Ben Chifley. Each has been different
 and special in their own way. I have never forgotten those words of Tom
 Hughes at John Gorton';s memorial service when he said that John
 Gorton was both a larrikin and a gentlemen, something that I dare say
 most Australian men would like to be described as at different stages
 of their life.
So we have had, I think, a very rich and very special group of people,
 this is of course not an occasion to start running political rulers over
 them. Naturally with my own prejudices I have a long and abiding affection
 for the contribution to this country of Robert Gordon Menzies our longest
 serving Prime Minister and I';m very delighted that his daughter
 Heather is here today. I remember the first weekend that Janette and I
 spent at the Lodge after the election in 1996, we had the privilege of
 inviting Heather and Peter around and we deliberately chose a drink much
 loved of her late father to celebrate with them in a very personal way
 our being at the Lodge. But his contribution was immense but I have never
 been unwilling to acknowledge the enormous contribution to this country
 of John Curtin during World War II in times of extraordinary stress, or
 indeed to acknowledge the contribution in a number of areas to economic
 change in Australia of the prime ministership of Bob Hawke. The most recent
 occupants of the office of course have both been Labor Prime Ministers
 and inevitably prior to myself, inevitably, we have been political opponents
 and political contestants but I hope all of us who';ve been touched
 by the office are generous enough and thoughtful enough of the national
 interest to recognise the contribution of all irrespective of their political
 backgrounds. When I first came into Parliament Gough Whitlam was Prime
 Minister, I entered half way through Gough's three years as Prime Minister,
 he was a very dominant parliamentary figure and certainly somebody who
 represented an exponent of the art of parliamentary performance that had
 a impression on me as a very young Member of Parliament entering in 1974.
The website offers some quite fascinating insights into the lives of
 our Prime Ministers. Our longest serving Member of Parliament of course
 was Billy Hughes, he served for 51 years, he helped found three political
 parties and was expelled from all of them. Frank Ford must have been the
 unluckiest Prime Minister, he was the shortest of all terms, eight days.
 He apparently lost the ALP leadership ballot to John Curtin by one vote
 in 1935 and lost his state by one vote in 1957. Bruce led the first all
 Australian born Cabinet, Deakin refused honorary degrees from Oxford and
 Cambridge, membership of the privy council and the title of Right Honourable.
 Only the lives of Gorton and Whitlam I';m told spanned the lives
 of all 25 Prime Ministers. That';s an interesting calculation, I
 hope it';s right, but I';m sure I';ll be corrected by one
 of the people I';ve named if I';m wrong. Only Lyons and McMahon
 had children born while they were Prime Minister. John McEwen had to wait
 33 years in Parliament before he became Prime Minister. He had the longest
 wait before becoming Prime Minister of any of the people who';ve
 held that office.
Ladies and gentlemen Australian history is encroaching more and more
 on the affections and the interests of our fellow countrymen and the women.
 The reasons for that are less important than the reality that it is occurring.
 We have a special political tradition in this country, fortunately it
 draws on the strengths of the heritages that have contributed to the modern
 Australia without, I';m pleased to say, drawing on some of the weaknesses.
 Our politics is fundamentally very egalitarian, our politics does by and
 large reflect the views and the mores of the Australian people. We do,
 to use that popular expression, have the political figures we deserve,
 some of them, indeed most of them in my experience on both sides have
 been very committed men and women, most people who come into the national
 parliament in particular do so because they have pretty strong views and
 pretty strong passions. Like any group of men and women in a professional
 activity some do it rather better than others, and I think back over the
 almost 29 years that I';ve been a Member of Parliament I';ve
 been privileged to live through, to have an influence and ultimately to
 shape many of the national political things that have occurred over that
 period of time and it';s been an enormous privilege - so much has
 happened since May of 1974 and now November of 2002.
One thing that has happened undoubtedly is that politicians now are infinitely
 more accessible in a mass communications way than what we were 29 years
 ago. We often lament the demise of the street corner meeting, I do, I
 lament the demise of the Town Hall meeting at the eight o';clock
 in the evening. I think many of us would be very happy to be able to incorporate
 those sorts of things in our daily political lives, alongside the availability
 that all of us must have to the media. The media occupies a special role
 in political life, it';s often a role productive of tension and acrimony
 but I have frequently said that the three great guarantors of liberty
 in this country are not what is written in the Constitution or a putative
 bill of rights but rather a robust Australian parliamentary democracy,
 an incorruptible judiciary and a free press. If we have all of those operating
 they will stand the test of time in protecting our freedom, we have those
 I believe in abundance in this country and they are our unique guarantors
 of the freedom and liberty of the Australian people.
Can I again thank the archives for this project, it';s a wonderful
 use of our modest investment and I think it will be a rich store of information
 and knowledge for years to come and I know as time goes by and people
 reflect further on the history of Australia this website will be an important
 part of that.
Thank you.
[ends]
The website is available at: http://primeministers.naa.gov.au/


E&amp;OE...
E&amp;OE...................................................... 
Thank you very much David for those kind words, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I particularly welcome this opportunity to address CEDA tonight, to canvass some of the Government's longer term strategic objectives and also as it happens to make an important announcement regarding our defence and strategic dispositions and also to outline broadly the approach that we are going to take in two very important areas requiring long term policy planning, namely water and energy. 
But before coming to that let me start with some important points of philosophy to set the context for what the Government has done and continues to do. I think all governments need a clear understanding of the values that are important to Australians. And I think governments must identify national priorities so that they can develop coherent, long-term programmes based on these values. I think Australians want from their governments and believe in relation to themselves four important things. Australians do believe in self-reliance. We largely want to be self-reliant individuals with an equal measure of rights and responsibilities. We believe very much in what we call in our own colloquial way a fair go for all Australians. We do want to ensure a equality of opportunity and equality of treatment for all Australians and whatever our starting point, each one of us deserves an equal chance to succeed and a leg up when we hit troubles. We believe in pulling together as a community. And this willingness to unite and help others is ingrained in the Australian culture. And as a government we have a partnership between the Government and the community through the social coalition at the heart of many of our policy decisions. And fourthly we believe in having a go. Australians do rise to the occasion on the sports field, in the broadrooms, overseas, indeed everywhere. And calculated risk taking, creativity and having the courage of your convictions is very much part of the Australian psyche. We do seek a strong, fair and decent Australia based on these values. And in recent days in responding to the Bali tragedy, we as a nation have seen those great values on display. We have seen the compassion, mateship and unity like I've not seen in my political lifetime. And I have to say it's been one of the most inspiring and warming experiences of my life.
Another strong conviction that I brought to office was that Australians needed and wanted a government prepared to carry out vital reforms. And that suited me and it suited my senior colleagues, I've never seen any point in being in government unless you use the opportunity to change things for the better, where change is needed. 
Modern reforming governments face two areas of policy where they must get things right. They must oversee economic management and they must care for the defence and the security of the nation. And on behalf of the Government I can report tonight a substantial and continuing record of progress in our management of both of these areas. Success in economic management and national security underpin the quality of Australian life. And it's worth reflecting on some of the economic data. Our economy continues to perform very well. It has grown at a solid annual rate on average of 3.8 per cent per annum since March of 1996. Total employment under the Coalition Government has grown by one than one million. We have delivered fundamental labour market reform, historically low interest rates, a better tax system and significant personal and business tax reductions. Headline inflation has averaged a low 2.3 per cent since March of 1996. We've cut Commonwealth debt so that at present Commonwealth Government net debt stands at 5 per cent of our Gross Domestic Product against an OECD average of about 45 per cent. This record of economic management underpins our capacity to perform the other core responsibility of government, that's the defence and the security of Australia. 
Defence and national security was already a high priority for my Government well before we found ourselves living through a dramatically changing environment. Mounting a strong, focussed and resolute defence of Australia and our national interests is the most critical continuing challenge that we face. Not since the early 1960s have we faced a more complex and uncertain region. Some trends, particularly the emergence of terrorism clearly run deeply counter to our interests. And Australia's national security will therefore require the highest priority and continuous review by the Government. And I'll return to that in a moment. 
But before I do that I want to highlight four important points about the business of making policy. Firstly, let me stress that our strategic programme for the years ahead is made up of both whole of government issues that cross many portfolio areas and some of the more strategic issues often covered by a single portfolio. A large part of our strategic policy agenda centres on the more focused policy areas. New agreements with the States on health, disability and housing, the White Paper on Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Dawson Review of the Trade Practices Act and our ongoing tax reform programme. They're all on our current agenda. And only last week we importantly added the negotiation of a Free Trade Agreement with the United States, if achieved of enormous long term value and significance to our economy. And John Uhrig's review of corporate governance of statutory authorities. 
The second point about policy making is that we've set out to strengthen the structures and processes of Cabinet so that we can focus more on the things that are very important whilst ensuring that the more second order items are not treated in a peremptory fashion. 
Thirdly, I think it's important to recognise that different governments have different styles of government. Our predecessors on office favoured summits, accords with the union movement and summits with peak organisations. We take a different approach, one more open and broadly consultative and drawing on our concept of a social coalition. 
Finally, and most importantly, a key requirement of strategic management is flexibility, particularly the ability, and the courage, to move resources to where they are most needed. All of this is, may I say, made harder by the brand of opportunism so much a current feature of the Senate's approach to fiscal measures. Opposition parties in the Senate continue to adopt a cherry-picking approach to many of our policies and downright opposition to those that are needed to improve the long term sustainability of particular programmes. And I think particularly of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, envied around the world as providing a very valuable safety net for people, essential for modest reform and change in order to maintain its viability against the background of an ageing Australian population. 
I now want to turn to areas that Cabinet has agreed are key whole of government strategic policy issues for the years immediately ahead of us. And our focus has been on those complex whole of government issues which engage the attention of a number of ministers and different agencies. We have concluded as a result of a recent assessment that the whole of government priorities for new policy making over the next year and beyond are as follows: national security and defence; balancing work and family life; the demography of Australia; science and innovation; education; sustainable environment; energy; rural and regional affairs; and transport. I have not presented these in any particular order. Clearly, national security is a more fundamental than any of the others, but there is no pecking order, they all have a special importance of their own. The first key whole of government strategic area is obviously national security and defence. And faced with the twin dangers of rising international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, these are challenging times for countries like Australia that value freedom and tolerance. I know I speak for everyone in saying that this Government and this nation will not be intimidated by terrorist threats. Our support for Australia's Defence Forces has always been strong. And in the 2000 White Paper on Defence we committed to building a more combat-capable Defence Force. And we agreed to additional defence spending of $27 billion over this decade. 
As you know Australian soldiers from the Special Air Service Regiment have been deployed continuously in Afghanistan now for almost a year as part of our contribution to the war against terrorism. They have played an important part in defeating the Taliban and severely disrupting the Al-Qaeda presence. Their contribution has been acclaimed by United States political and military leaders. And they make all Australians feel very proud. Tragically, the contribution has not been without cost with one member of the regiment, Sergeant Andrew Russell, killed and another seriously injured in land-mine incidents. 
Largely as a result of coalition military efforts, the tasks for Australian special forces in Afghanistan are now much reduced. The focus of military operations is shifting towards support for reconstruction and institution building. These efforts are crucial for the future of Afghanistan but do not require the same level of involvement by our highly trained Special Air Service Regiment. Therefore the Government has decided on the advice of the Chief of Defence Force, General Cosgrove, that this, the third rotation to Afghanistan, will complete Australia's special forces contribution. The SASR Task Group will begin withdrawing from Afghanistan in late November, and most will return to Australia before Christmas, allowing them to celebrate the holiday season with their families. On behalf of all Australians I want to thank them for their professional and highly effective contribution. 
The RAAF deployments of tanker aircraft to Kyrgyzstan and fighter aircraft to Diego Garcia have also been successfully completed. The Bali atrocity has only strengthened our resolve to fight and defeat global terrorism. Australia will continue to make a strong military contribution to the international coalition. We still have two frigates deployed with the Multinational Interception Force in the Persian Gulf, and two P-3C maritime surveillance aircraft will join coalition forces in the region from January 2003. 
Following the terrorist attacks in the United States, we strengthened Australia's counter-terrorism arrangements at a cost of $1.3 billion over five years. This included enhancements of a second Special Forces Tactical Assault Group and a permanent Incident Response Regiment to improve Defence's ability to respond to chemical, biological, nuclear and other incidents. We introduced a counter-terrorism legislation package, much of which became law in July. The remaining bill, the ASIO Legislation Amendment Bill, will enhance ASIO's ability to gather intelligence about possible terrorist attacks. At the Leaders' Summit held on the 5th April this year, I agreed with Premiers and Chief Ministers to establish the Australian Crime Commission. This will improve information exchange between the various law enforcement agencies on the links between organised crime and terrorist organisations. On the 24th October I signed an inter-governmental agreement with the Premiers and Chief Ministers on counter-terrorism cooperation. In addition, the States will refer powers to the Commonwealth to support federal counter-terrorism offences with national application. After the Bali atrocity, I commissioned a further review of Commonwealth counter-terrorism arrangements, I announced a number of initial and urgent measures to be implemented as a result of that Review. This was but the first part of a continuing process. 
The international community, and that of course includes Australia, cannot walk away from the challenge posed at present by Iraq. Some may, and indeed, have questioned this. They ask why is it that there is such a focus on Iraq when other countries, such as North Korea, possess weapons of mass destruction. The crucial difference is that Iraq has form. Iraq has used weapons of mass destruction, not only against a section of her own population but also against Iranian forces during the Iraq-Iran war. Moreover Iraq has been aggressive towards her neighbours, as evidenced by her invasion of Kuwait in 1990 and missile attacks on Saudi Arabia, Israel and Bahrain. Iraq supports Palestinian suicide bombers, who cause such death and destruction in Israel. Iraq also has a long history of giving support to terrorist groups. What is more Iraq has been in continuous breach of resolutions of the United Nations Security Council for more than a decade. 
In the current international climate made so stressful by the almost constant terrorist threats, the ultimate nightmare must surely be the possibility of weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of terrorist groups. That is a powerful additional reason why a country such as Iraq, which has previously been willing to maliciously use weapons of mass destruction, should have those weapons denied to it.The Australian Government has strongly endorsed the recent United Nations Security Council Resolution on Iraq. This resolution reinforces the demand of the international community that Iraq eliminate its weapons of mass destruction. It calls for a comprehensive programme of weapons inspection. 
It is now up to Iraq. It can choose to co-operate fully with the weapons inspectors and remove its WMD capabilities. This would deliver a peaceful outcome and offers the best chance to avoid armed conflict. Iraq should fully understand that if it does not meet its clearly understood international obligations, it must face the consequences. All Australians want a peaceful resolution and hope, if at all possible, that no military action will be required. And, as previously stated, if the Australian Government were to decide to commit Australian military forces to action involving Iraq, there would be a full Parliamentary debate on that decision. 
The Defence Minister and I have indicated on earlier occasions that Australian military personnel have been attached to the American Military command structure for some time. They and others have had contingency discussions with the United States as a matter of prudent military planning. During these discussions, it has been made clear that any Australian contribution in a new theatre such as Iraq would need to be within our resources and not detract from immediate defence and national security needs. As a broad indicator, it has been noted that our contributions to operations in and around Afghanistan has met that basic test. As the Australian public would expect the Australian Defence Force itself has made appropriate contingency arrangements. 
In my pre-election speeches to the National Press Club in August and November of last year, I identified the problem for families, particularly young families, of balancing work and family life as a key policy challenge. The Government in 2000, through the tax package and elsewhere, had already brought in significant changes to support families, particularly with the introduction of the Family Tax Benefits and Child Care Benefits as part of A New Tax System. Our key policy goal in this area is to facilitate choice for families and not mandate particular behaviour. We need to respect the different priorities that individual families have and the different choices that they want to make. I have on other occasions described this issue as a barbeque stopper. I find in the context of social policy no issue as I move around Australia quite excites the lively interests of different generations and not just those with young children in trying to achieve a balance between work and family. We have already done much, the solution to further challenge in this area will not be bound up with one particular policy decision and I've established an inter-departmental Taskforce chaired by my Department to review all of the options that might better facilitate choice for families in balancing their work and family lives. We're also developing a National Agenda for Early Childhood. Research indicates that in appropriate cases very early intervention, young children can make an enormous difference to their prospects later in life.
  The dramatic changes in the structure and the composition of our population present many challenges as well as opportunities for our country. The Intergenerational Report, released by Peter Costello with the last Budget, was a very important step in recognising and preparing for population ageing issues. The report revealed that although Australia was relatively well placed compared with other OECD countries we must act to ensure we maintain this advantage. The Government believes that the three pillars which underpin our retirement incomes policy remain relevant in the future. They are a targeted safety net age pension payment, compulsory private savings through the Superannuation Guarantee, and opportunities for individuals to save voluntarily, backed by tax concessions that will exceed $10 billion in the current financial year. In maximising labour force participation, it is important that the skills and experience of older Australians are fully utilised and that the social safety net is focused on those in need, yet does not deter participation and self-reliance. It is worth interpolating here that the participation rate in the age cohort of 55 to 64 in Australia is significantly lower than the participation rate for the same age cohort in comparable OECD countries. 
Let me turn to an equally vital area of Government strategic policy interest, and that is science and innovation. Investment in science and innovation is an investment in Australia's economic and social prosperity. New knowledge and new ways of doing science enable us to push the boundary of what is possible with our resources and help build solutions to issues in areas such as health, the environment and industrial development. This is why, at the beginning of last year, we put in place a $3 billion, five year strategy called Backing Australia's Ability, the largest commitment to science and innovation by any Australian government. Shortly I will announce the Government's first set of national research priorities. These will integrate Australia's science and research effort even more closely with the community's economic, social and environmental goals. This is the first time an Australian government has implemented a national, coordinated and strategic approach to setting research priorities. The next step is to take stock of the state of Australian science. And I announce tonight that I've asked the Minister for Education, Science and Training, Dr Nelson, to undertake a major initiative in mapping Australia's science and innovation activities across the public and private sectors.Such a comprehensive picture of Australian science surprisingly for the year 2002 does not exist. Yet it will be fundamental in planning the future strategic direction for science in this country. Dr Nelson will conduct this exercise in cooperation with state and territory governments, industry and the research community and other interested parties. 
Education, more broadly, is naturally one of the Government's highest national priorities. No issue could be more important to Australia's future than creating the best learning and development opportunities for people of all ages. Responsibility for education is, as you know, divided between the States and Federal Government and there are many different options for primary, secondary and tertiary education. We expect this conglomerate system to produce people with the right mix of skills, values and trained abilities that Australia needs for the future. Dr Nelson, as you know, has conducted an extensive review of higher education over the second half of this year. This is a very critical sector for Australia, and one that produces the skills, talent and capacity for innovation the country needs to sustain economic growth and build a better society into the future. We are determined to provide an environment in which universities can deliver superb teaching, engage in scholarship and undertake world class research. As reforms are developed, we will be guided by four key principles - diversity, quality, equity and sustainability. We need a higher education system that is diverse in its specialisations and objectives, is characterised by exceptional quality and high standards, that provides all Australians with the opportunity of a higher education experience, and is sustainable not just three or four years on, but for the next 20 to 30 years. I'm very encouraged by the quality of the ideas that are coming forward from Dr Nelson's review, which the Government will consider in detail in the context of the next budget. 
Our use of natural resources must be put on a sustainable basis for future generations. After the election I established a Sustainable Environment Committee of Cabinet, which I chair, which brings together the strands of natural resource issues and making sure the costs and benefits of proposals are properly weighed. There are few issues more important to our nation than water reform. In our last term of office, our focus was on the water salinity problem and we have been working hard in that area through the National Action Plan for Salinity and Water Quality. There is still a great deal to be done on the salinity problem, but we are beginning to make progress and we're widening our focus now to also address the broader question of the efficient and sustainable use of Australia's water resources. The Government believes very strongly that clearly defined and nationally recognised property rights for water are fundamental to delivering the best outcome for efficient and sustainable water use. There is still a way to go here. It is, if you will, a twenty first century equivalent of the old rail gauge problem. At present the States and Territories have separate approaches to managing water property rights. What is needed is a national approach that creates consistency across our internal borders. Neither our river systems nor indeed the Great Artesian Basin recognises State borders. 
At the December meeting of heads of government, with the Premiers and the Chief Ministers, I will outline the Government's key principles for achieving sustainable water management. This will include the urgent need to accelerate reform to create more certainty over water access rights, better trading regimes, and adjustment assistance for those severely affected by the transition to reduced water access. When competition payments were established in April 1995, it was understood that the monies available, which under the agreement totalled an estimated $5 billion dollars over the 10-year period, it was understand that those monies could be used to aid the process of adjustment. Significant progress has been made across the board, including in water. It is not unreasonable that in future years, given the extent of adjustment required in regional Australia, that competition payments made to the States should be available for financial adjustment required by water reform. It should also be noted in this context that an additional justification in 1995 for the establishment of the competition payments regime was that states of Australia lacked access to a growth tax. The introduction of the Goods and Services Tax in 2000 has of course dramatically altered that picture because the entire proceeds of the GST goes to the states and under the transitional arrangements Queensland is better off this year and successively the other states will become better off over the next few years.
In relation to greenhouse emissions, a strong body of scientific opinion is suggesting that global warming is occurring and it is having a negative effect on the world's environment. That is now taken as a statement of the obvious. And all countries have a responsibility to do what they can to address this challenge. We are therefore committed as a government and as a nation to meeting the greenhouse gas emission target set for Australia at Kyoto. We are doing this through developing and funding domestic programmes to meet the emissions target. Currently we do not believe it is the Australia's national interest to ratify the Kyoto Protocol because under the terms of this arrangement many of our competitors do not face the obligations we would face.If we were under present conditions to ratify Australia would lose investment to these countries and the greenhouse gases would simply change location. Indeed many countries have less stringent environmental standards than Australia. To be truly effective, every country must help to reduce greenhouse gases, but at this point developing countries as well as the United States are strongly resisting any move to place binding targets on them. For example, under the Kyoto Protocol, a company wishing to establish a new aluminium plant in Australia may face a greenhouse-reduction cost penalty that they would not face in countries like China and India. In a competitive global market, this cost burden may be enough to see the plant is built elsewhere, leaving Australia the poorer without any global gain. Our position is that we must tackle our environmental and our energy concerns together in a way that makes sure our policies satisfy both objectives of sustaining the environment and also continuing economic growth. 
Competitive, reliable energy has underpinned Australia's growth and economic prosperity. We must ensure that our energy policy continues to support economic growth and development while also contributing to reduce air pollution and greenhouse gases, and while we develop new technology. Australia is entering a very exciting phase in terms of energy policy. We have large amounts of competitive fossil fuel energy sources, a growing natural gas industry that, as the recent LNG deal with China shows, has enormous export prospects. Rapid advances in technology are giving us cleaner vehicles and fuels as well as growing scope for renewable technology. We are developing a strategic plan for Australia's long term energy policy, bringing together and enhancing many areas of policy work already being done. Our policy responses must and will not be constrained by the traditional boundaries of Commonwealth Departments. I've therefore establish and will chair a Ministerial Oversight Committee comprising, in addition to myself, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, and the Ministers for Environment and Heritage, and for Industry, Tourism and Resources. A critical task, to be carried out with the support of our own advisers as well as appropriate private sector advice, will be to work on energy market reform now underway, including the findings of the recently released Parer report which aims to aid the building of a truly national and efficient energy market. 
We have important and enduring priorities in the area of rural and regional policy. These include a national response to the drought along with ongoing and future programmes for sustainable and stronger regions. The current prognosis for the drought in Australia is extremely grim. We are experiencing an extreme drought of a severity that is likely to occur only once in twenty or twenty five years. This is, of course, a tragedy for all Australia, it will affect our growth, but it is especially heartbreaking for country Australia. The Commonwealth expects that on a conservative assessment that we may need to provide as much as $365 million in Exceptional Circumstance relief payments to farmers this year and next year. Our Farm Management Deposit scheme has proven to be a very effective way for primary producers to manage incomes that fluctuate over good and bad seasons. As at the 30th of June last, 43,000 Australian farmers had deposited over $2 billion dollars in the scheme. This reflects an approximate cost to the Commonwealth of $500 million in foregone tax revenue. 
This scheme and the size of the deposits reflects a strengthening of farmers' self-reliance and will contribute not only to helping them through the ravages of the drought but also to building stronger regional and rural communities. Our broader rural and regional policy is another area where a whole of government approach is necessary. Our objectives were outlined last year in the Stronger Regions statement and this brings together some $28 billion of specific regional programmes across many different areas like education, health and transport that the Government has put in place since 1996. Stronger Regions also includes a $100 million prototype regional development programme under which the Commonwealth is working in partnership with local communities to help strengthen regional self-reliance and to ensure that we all share in Australia's economic progress. This programme is being trialed in eight regions around Australia, providing access to what could be described as a toolbox of support measures and a flexible problem solving approach driven by the local community. 
Transport policy, another of our key priorities, is an area where policy coherence is critical because more than in any other issue, transport infrastructure is the concern of each of the three levels of government. The States have much of the direct responsibility, but in an area so vital to Australia we can't overlook the necessity of a strong national focus. John Anderson has recently announced the development of a new framework for planning, developing and funding Australia's land transport infrastructure network, which we call AusLink. This strategy is necessary now because movement of freight alone will double between now and the year 2020. Our existing infrastructure is quite inadequate to the task. AusLink will develop an integrated network of land transport links of strategic importance to the nation. The AusLink Green Paper released by the Deputy Prime Minister on November 7th will be the basis for consultation over the next few months and it will be followed by a White Paper in about May of next year. We will then finalise a new land transport inter-governmental agreement with the States and Territories to enable AusLink to be implemented in the middle of 2004. 
We are also pursuing major reform of the national rail system by offering the New South Wales Government a package under which the state's mainline track would become integral to the national track. The Commonwealth would contribute to establishing a dedicated freight route through Sydney. This could cut freight rail transit times between Sydney and Melbourne by three hours, and between Sydney and Brisbane by three-and-a-half hours. 
Ladies and gentlemen I have taken perhaps a little more of the time of an audience such as this than I normally do because I wanted to deliver a speech of a type and at a time that did a number of things. It properly recorded the achievements that we together have been able to make and deliver the benefits of to the Australian people over the last six and a half years. I wanted to outline the broad strategic framework that the Government has in mind, not only for the next two years of its term in office but hopefully beyond. And also because I believe that the essence of good public policy making is a thoughtful and intelligent dialogue between the Government and the business community and others who are interested in the development of policy. And of the many originations that might claim ownership of that description, CEDA of course has been in the forefront. And I want to thank both CEDA and Westpac for their joint sponsorship of this gathering. 
You can't meet and talk anywhere in Australia about the affairs of this nation at the present time without feeling a more sombre mood than has normally been the want of we Australians on earlier occasions. We are a changed nation because not only of what happened on the 11th of September last year in the United States but very particul


E&amp;OE..................  
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, Pat Daley from the Salvation Army.  We heard Dr Morgan suggest that we should have embraced the GST back in 1985, the Option C,  we fully agree with that, I';m sure many of us do.  A national ID card, an Australia car, surely that must be well and truly on the agenda, we should have embraced that years ago, your comments on that as well.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well literally it';s not on the agenda of the Government at the present time.  Pat, I always listen carefully to any suggestions you make, I';ll think about.  My initial reaction is hmmm, I';m not too keen on it.  I think there';s a fair amount of checking, what was that thing that we bought in with the GST?  The Australian Business Number, that seems to have flushed out a few of the things that an ID card flushed out without some of the privacy drawbacks of an ID card.  I';ll think about it but I don';t want that to be interpreted by any of the fourth estate as suggesting that I';m going to introduce it.  But I have to say you';re the first person who';s raised it at me at a meeting in the time I';ve been Prime Minister.
QUESTION:
Gerard Henderson, the Sydney Institute.  Just wanted to follow up some of your important comments about terrorism, as I understand it you';re visiting the Philippines next year which I think is your first one to one visit to the Philippines since you';ve been Prime Minister apart from the Subic Bay APEC meeting.  And I';m just wondering what kind of discussions you might be having with the Philippines President in view of the significant problem of Islamic terrorism in the south of the Philippines, it seems that the US is apparently withdrawing from its support that it';s given and it';s possible that it might be an area where Australia with its low key approach to these areas might be able to make an important contribution to a country where we';ve been traditionally quite strong allies.
PRIME MINISTER:
I think that';s a fair assessment Gerard.  We have already had some discussions, that';s the President and myself on the terrorism issue in ways in which our two countries can co-operate more closely, that was one of the things that we talked about when we had a bilateral meeting at Los Cabos at the last APEC meeting.  I think in this whole area you get more by low ley bilateral exchanges perhaps than grand summits.  It';s worth making the point that for all the high profile static that occurred a week or 10 days ago in the wake of the ASIO raids on people in Australia the co-operation between the Indonesian and Australian police in investigating the Bali atrocity continued completely unhindered and the framework of that co-operation was put in place two days after the 12th of October when Alexander Downer and Chris Ellison went to Jakarta along with the Federal Police Commissioner and the head of ASIO and I have to say that the Indonesian have, at the relevant operative level have remained strong and consistent and the evidence so-far, and I don';t wish to comment, on operational things, but the evidence so far is that the investigation is proceeding very effectively.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Lorraine Berends, chair of the Association of Superannuation Funds of Australia.  You mentioned at the outset that to incorpotate between inportant areas of long term planning and (inaudible) third to that which is superannuation and that has been recognised in the intergeneratonal report.  However if you work in the superannuation industry an aboslute barbeque stopper, particularly if it';s a barbeque for the baby boomers, is superannuation and the topic tends to be how complicated it is and particularly in relation to the taxation on superannuation.  So maybe if I can have your views on whether in the long term you do see superannuation as a method of collecting tax or ultimately whether there';s a plan to simplify the taxation and to truly make it a long term savings vehcile.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the proposition inherent in the last part of your question is that superannuation is not a long term savings vehicle.  I don';t quite agree with that proposition.  I know that there is a view that the current taxation arrangements of superannuation are complicated, and you';re right, they are complicated.  Most things associated with the Tax Act are complicated.  In fact everything just about, it seems to be a given.  Look, people argue that the current superannuation arrangements are in need of radical overhaul and reform, I have to be honest and say I don';t see them being radically overhauled, I think there is a capacity for incremental improvement and change.  I think it is a very important element of policy making when you';re looking at the impact of an ageing population.  I think we do have a number of features of our present system including the targeted age pension which have meant that we don';t have quite the same public sector challenge that many European countries have.  I know you have to look at the Australian system in isolation but if you look at the retirement income arrangements in this country and compare them across the board to the entire income arrangements in Europe and then you look at the size of the public sector and therefore the size of the tax take in most of the European countries, you start to be reminded that maybe our system is not quite as bad as many of the critics suggest.  I would indicate that I don';t think we';re going to turn the superannuation system on its head, I think there are some improvements, some changes, that can incrementally be made.  I think the argument is conditioned a bit by how you look at it.  Taxation of course is not irrelevant to it, it';s fundamental, there are big changes made in the 80s when you had that big revenue pull forward which altered very much in the way in which tax is collected and self-evidentially you can';t alter that in the short term without a significant revenue impact.  So the best answer I can give you is that it';s certainly not off the agenda, certainly not in the too hard basket but I don';t think it';s something that we';re going to turn on its head but I do think there are some valuable incremental changes that can be made which will make it, I hope, more attractive.   But I would have to, to go back to the beginning of my answer, I';d have to contest the proposition that the present arrangements aren';t an adequate savings, aren';t a useful savings, they may not be adequate for everybody but I think for many it';s a very useful savings vehicle, I think we have a better superannuation set up now than we had 20 years ago, even though many will argue it';s more complicated, I think it is more equitable and there is greater access over time for people of the lower income range, and I think that';s very important.
QUESTION:
(inaudible) chief executive of Environment Business Australia.  Prime Minister you mentioned that it does not currently appear to be in Australia';s interests to ratify the Kyoto protocol.  But I would ask you has the government looked into the insidious attack on health, environment and economy from global warning?  In fact 19 of our trading partners and competitors in that part of the international Kyoto (inaudible) that we cannot participate in. And also the lost opportunity, not only to the environment and the sustainability industry which is now cited as the second fastest growing industry sector after IT in the world.  But also the other sectors of mainstream industry that really need to be on the front foot to be able to compete in tomorrow';s world where we';re already seeing differentiation in favour of sustainable production and consumption and global warming and addressing global warming being at the very forefront of that. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I did quite deliberately say it';s not currently our policy to ratify the Kyoto protocol, that';s an accurate description. I';m not saying that there mightn';t be circumstances in the future where that could occur.  But I';ve got to say after looking at this very carefully I';m not convinced that it';s in Australia';s national interest to do for the reasons I outlined in my speech.  Can I stress again that we are on track to meet the emission target set by Kyoto for Australia.  I';m sure you with your evident knowledge of this area would realise that a country like Australia was from the beginning not put in a very good position. By our nature we are a developed country which is a net exporter of energy.  I think the only other country that is quite in our position is Norway, Norway has the advantage of being part of the European bubble which allows some countries to have 127 per cent over the 1990 base line because countries like the United Kingdom which fortuitously closed a lot of coal mines in the 1980';s can claim the credits from that and many of the countries of Eastern Europe because of deindustrialisation after the collapse of Communism can also accumulate enormous credits.  And that enables them to move the credits around within the aggregate, and that allows a country like Norway, and I';m not sort of picking on Norway, I';m just sort of citing it as an example of how in many respects the modalities for Kyoto were designed by countries having very different economies, very different interests and very different structures from Australia.  The key thing is that we are working to meet that target but I don';t for the reasons outlined in the speech, I don';t want to see this country sign up to something which immediately puts it at a competitive disadvantage with other countries in the energy area whose environmental records are infinitely worse than what Australia';s are.  And that would be on the present settings the consequence of Australia signing because it should be remembered and in at least some of the coverage that came out of the Johannesburg summit it seemed to be completely ignored, and that is that countries that can loosely be called developing countries, even if they ratify the protocol do not have binding targets during the first stage of the arrangements and it';s self-evident if you realise that that can put a country like Australia at a stark disadvantage with those countries, particularly in areas such as energy.
QUESTION:
My name';s Peter (inaudible) Treasurer of the Association of Relatives and Friends of the Mentally Ill…
PRIME MINISTER:
From where?
QUESTION:
The Association of Relatives and Friends of the Mentally Ill New South Wales.  And I';ll put to you Mr Prime Minister that it';s often said that if you want to get a job done go to the busiest person and certainly I would think that you qualify for that.  What I would wish to bring to the attention of this gathering is the fact that Australia severely underfunds its resources with respect to mental health and this has been statistically demonstrated and even more severely in New South Wales.  And what I would really like to consider is that in a gathering of this for example there would probably be five families who have a very severe impact from mental illness, even within a gathering such as this.
PRIME MINISTER:
I';m sorry, I have a bit of a hearing problem…
QUESTION:
Right, anyone who';s experienced the impact of mental illness in the family know the extremely deleterious effects that it has in terms of that capacity, that families capacity to be able to operate within this community.  So what I would really ask of a very busy person is there anything that';s forthcoming in the Government';s objectives to highlight the need for greater resources being delivered to the mental health sector and also the other thing is to act on it positively because new medications and what have you are actually creating enormous opportunities for very sustainable recovery for people with mental illness which wasn';t available before.  So really it is actually an entrepreneurial and also a scientific threshold that we could possibly take much more considerable advantage of.  So I would just leave it with you, is there any possibility that the resources or attention to funding could be given to the mental health sector?  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Sir I agree with you, I think we all agree that the presence in a family of somebody with a marked mental illness does impair the capacity of that family to function within the community.  You asked me about funding, as in so many of these areas there are mixed federal and state responsibilities.  You talk about the availability of modern drugs, I';m conscious of the availability of many of those, not only in this area but elsewhere.  Can I use that reference to put in a commercial plea again to the Senate to pass our very modest increases in the co-contribution for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme because one of the ways in which you will sustain the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and therefore make it possible every time a new drug is discovered and comes on the market is of course to keep its financial stability.  The, can I say that you know through all of the fog and understandable concern about things such as mental health and so forth is there are a couple of bright things on the horizon.  We have a lot of talk about the incidents of depression and I know there';s a debate about degrees and so forth which I don';t intend to get into.  But I saw the other day some very pleasing statistics which indicated that the suicide rate amongst young Australian males has began for the first time to decline.  And that';s been the result of some very effective collaborative programmes between the Commonwealth and the States.  Some of those programmes of course have been supported by additional resources, including but not only from the Commonwealth.  We are going to negotiate a new health care agreement between the Commonwealth and the States and I would expect Senator Patterson to make certain that mental health gets a proper priority in that negotiation.
QUESTION:
Bob Cooper, Tobari Management.  Mr Howard, this is a very impressive presentation to us of national coherent policy and we haven';t really had something of this breadth and deepth before.  There are a dozen questions I would like to ask you but I was hoping that this document that you have, or this presentation, could be put forward in a document that we at CEDA can have distributed widely and it could well be the source of further debates on specific issues on substance that could contribute to advancing your ideas?
PRIME MINISTER:
Consider that done.
QUESTION:
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................  
Well thank you very much Paul, for those very kind words of introduction, Mr Chairman, my parliamentary colleague George Souris, ladies and gentleman. 
I'm particularly pleased to be here this morning because it allows me to open a very large conference of a group of men and women who, when it all boils down, are very much in the engine room of what keeps our economy going.  Financial Planners are in many ways a credential representation of the small business [inaudible] of this country.  They're also people who relate to millions of Australians, who in their daily lives are exemplifying the Australian dream.  And this it of starting with very little, working very hard, frequently looking after what you earn and how you invest it, and providing hopefully for not only a long life, but also a financially comfortable retirement.  And on the way, you make a whole series of pedantical decisions, be those decisions relating to the purchase of a home - which is still far and away the single most important financial decision that most Australians make.  Be it planning your superannuation, be it planning your investment, they're generally arranging the financial affairs of your family.  And all of you play a very major part in that and therefore you are integral to the functioning of our economy and you are integral to the free enterprise system in Australia.
I can report to you, as I open this conference, that the Australian economy is in very good shape.  We've had five years of almost four per cent economic growth.  We've had the strongest performing of all of the developed economies in the world over the last few years.  And although the growth immediately ahead is going to be less, because of the impacts of the severe and also the hesitancy which is surrounding the United States economy, the outlook is still extremely good.  I can report to you that we have payed out a lot of debt.  We have planned our finances very carefully.  The Commonwealth debt now is only five per cent of GTP, only five per cent of our annual wealth generation.  And when you remember that the average for the developed world of the OECD countries is 45 per cent, [inaudible] is a 130 and the United States is 45 - that is a statistic at which I am exceptionally proud.  And it has been the result of a number of things.  Sure it's been the result of applying the proceeds of some privatisations, to debt retirement, and it's also been the proceeds or the product of running budget surpluses of curving unnecessary expenditure.  And in the process, we have been able to fail the tax package, deliver very significant reductions in personal and corporate income tax.
The drought will clip our economic wings a little.  It will take something off growth.  It's heading to be as bad as drought as the one 20 years ago and something like 75 per cent of Australia is either deprived or seriously deprived of water.  So, that is something that we have to grapple with.  It is not only very costly in economic terms but more importantly, it's very costly in human terms and the debilitating effect it has on the spirit and the optimism of our rural, our countrymen and women is at large.  But as has always been the case in the past, they work their way though with extraordinary stoicism.  Australia faces in the year ahead, on the economic front, a number of other very important challenges. Internationally, we have the opportunity over the next 18 months of negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States - the largest economy in the world by far.  It won't be easy.  We won't be able to sign a free trade agreement with the United States unless we can receive from the Americans some significant concessions in relation to agriculture.  But it's a journey worth undertaking and it's a goal worth pursuing with perseverance.  And because if it can be brought off, it will do an enormous amount to underwrite Australia's economic future.
We have a very simple philosophy as a Government when it comes to external trade issues.  We are not the least bit ideological about trade.  We are very pragmatic and we pursue one thing and that is the Australian national interest.  And if that national interest can be pursued by negotiating a bilateral free trade agreement with a country like Singapore and we're about to conclude one.  With a country like Thailand and we've started to talk.  And very importantly, with a country such as the Untied States, then we'll do so.  Side by side with that we'll continue to argue very strongly in the multilateral forum of the World Trade Organisation to bring about a new world trade round which might hopefully, at long last, get on to the negotiating table issues relating to agriculture which is so very important to Australia and Australians.
We are a nation that has trading interests all over the world.  We demonstrated a few months ago when we won that 25 year, $25 billion liquid natural gas contract with China, that we have a capacity to inspire confidence because we are reliable and stable that within the leadership of the largest country of the world.  And as we showed in 1997 when we shifted a lot of our exports away from the Asian Pacific region to North America and to Europe, that the diversity of our economy, our flexible exchange rates and the fact that we've undertaken a large number of economic reforms, not least labour market reform, that we were a country and were an economy that had a capacity to adjust very significantly through sudden changes and to sudden shocks.
Your industry, I know, is particularly interested in a number of issues that are on the Government's plate at the present time.  When the budget was brought down by the Treasurer in May, Peter Costello released a document entitled the Intergenerational Report.  And it's one of the most important pieces of economic and social analysis that the Federal Treasury has done for many years.  Because what it did is to spell out in detail what we all sense - we had a partial growth loss - and that is that Australia's population in common with those of all western countries is ageing and that has implications.  The problem is not as bad as it is for many other countries.  Years ago we turned our back on the universal non-means tested notion of social security embraced by so many European countries after World War II.  We also turned our back on the rather too harsh as a fair approach to social welfare embraced by our American friends.  And as is so often the case Australia, I believe, got it largely right.  We developed a social welfare system that did provide a safety net for the needy.  It was not so all embracing and [inaudible] that it required ever increasing levels of taxation in order to fund it.  That has been the curse of the social security systems, in my view, of many European countries where taxation levels are infinitely higher.  And the [inaudible] effects and consequences more [inaudible] than what they are in Australia.
But we are an ageing population.  We have to face that.  We have to realise that that has implications for funding health, funding things like a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. It also has implications for retirement incomes policy.  As a nation we have to encourage people, if they wish, to stay in the workforce longer.  Australia has a marginally lower participation rate in the age cohort of 55 to 64 than other [inaudible] countries.  It's about 39 per cent in Australia, against a figure of 58 to 60 per cent in countries such as the United States and New Zealand.  There has to be a reason for that. That reason has to be addressed and there have to be changes.  We have to recognise that the cult of early retirement that we encourage so enthusiastically as a community a generation ago, it should be changed because we have a valuable asset - people with enormous experience, increasingly better health and enthusiasm to make a commitment and a capacity to do so.  We have to become ever more flexible in our attitudes to working hours.  Professional firms have to abandon many of their automatic retirement polices which have [inaudible] firms at far too early an age, people who have an enormous contribution to make.  And we must as a community understand that if we are to sustain valuable universal services such as the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, it must be put at a properly sustainable basis.  
Nothing is going to be more spectacular, in my view, over the next 25 years than the additional advances that medical science in developed countries will make.  And that will carry with it not only exciting breakthroughs in the treatment of life threatening diseases, but it will carry with it the availability of drugs that will further save and prolong, in an effect and an enjoyable way, the lives of millions of men and women around the world.  And here in Australia that means that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme we have right at the moment needs to be preserved and kept at a proper financial basis so that we can afford these new wonder drugs that will come in the market. And that importantly, they can be available for all of our people and not just available to people who can afford to pay for all of them themselves because it's always been the corner stone of egalitarian Australia's beliefs that every person in this country is entitled to the hope and the expectation of proper and decent medical treatment.  
I look to a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme because it's a metaphor for many of the challenges we face as an Asian community.  We're going to need it ever more as the years go by by definition.  We're living longer.  There are more effective drugs available and therefore the demand for them is going to be greater.  What that means is that if these new drugs are to be available, it means that we have to make certain that the scheme is an assigned financial footing, otherwise it will become unaffordable and the benefits that I've described will disappear.  That's one the reasons why we proposed a very modest increase in the co-payment in the last budget.  At the moment that is being blocked in the Senate and I'm angry about that because it's so short-cited and it goes so much against long term planning for the future.  We have an ageing population, the cost of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme will continue to rise very sharply, much greater than the ordinary rate of inflation because the population's ageing.  More and more drugs are becoming available, we want people to have them but the only way that we can make certain people have them is that the contribution that all of us make is kept in touch with reality.  And that's why we're proposing that particular change.  And we'll face a lot of these challenges as a community in the years ahead.  And also as a community, we must properly harness and utilise more and more of our citizens of more mature years retain their contribution and retain the role that they are playing within our community.  
Paul mentioned a number of things that we have had a dialogue with your association about.  I do remember the discussions concerning the application of the GST.  I am very pleased that that issue was properly resolved as it should have been.  And the views that were put to me in particular to my office were put very cogently and very effectively.  And I believe that the way in which the matter has been resolved has been extremely satisfactory.  But I mentioned briefly the issue of choice in superannuation.  Choice is a cornerstone of what my Government is about in so many areas.  We believe in choice in heatlhcare, that's why we provide tax help for private health insurance.  We believe in choice in education and that's why we support both government and independent schools. We believe in choice in superannuation that's why we have been trying for six and a half years really to change the present system which we both believe [inaudible] enough choice.  I know this is very important to the operation of the members of your association, but it has merit in its own right.  It is as natural as anything that allowing people to choose their superannuation fund is an ordinary element of a capitalist society.  We're still negotiating it, I hope, through the Senate.  There are some interesting, let me put it that way, in neutral way, oppositions as to how it might operate.  And I hope in the end the essential direction of what the Government has been trying to achieve now in this area for a very long time has achieved.
Ladies and gentlemen, I know something of the agenda for this conference to a large gathering it brings together people who are, as I said at the beginning of my speech, very much in the engine room of economic activity and economic growth in Australia.  It meets at a time when Australia's mind is very preoccupied with issues of security, of issues of terrorism, at a time when the nation is still in a sense of grief and shock about the atrocity of Bali on the 12th of October.  But in the wake of that an in present circumstances all of the things that we hope and believe were good and strong about our country has been demonstrated to be good and strong and that is very reassuring.  The fact that we still work together and don't allow differences on other issues to prevent us from doing so, in a time of national adversity, that has shone though brilliantly in recent weeks.  The fact that beneath that sometimes rather brusque, and tough, and [inaudible] exterior, Australians are deeply compassionate and sensitive people.  That has shone though very strongly.  Also what has shone through very strongly, but although some of the circumstances in which we may have to live our lives have changed, some of the things we thought would never come to this country have come, it hasn't in any way altered the fundamentally enthusiastic, and optimistic, and hopeful, and positive attitude and spirit of the Australian people.  If anything, I detect a determination that it won't be allowed to get us down.  Of course we will take appropriate precautions, of course we will be more vigilant, of course the world has changed and none of us like it, but it's not going to stop us living our lives, it's not going to stop us being open, tolerant, friendly people.  I think that is a spirit which is immensely reassuring to all of us. 
So, with that sense of continuing optimism and recognising very much the contribution that so many of you are making and your association is making to the growth and the change in the Australian economy, I hope this conference is a success.  I wish you well.  I thank all of you for the contribution that you are making to the modern Australian economy.  And I have great pleasure in declaring this conference of the Financial Planners Association of Australia open.
[ends] 


Subjects: Australia terror target, NSW Liberal team, Iraq, Water reform, Lynton Crosby
E&amp;OE
Thank you, John and my parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals for that very warm and encouraging welcome. A lot has changed for all of us since I last address this State Council some eight or nine months ago. Terrorism has come much closer to all of us. We have been permanently affected and changed by those awful events in Bali on the 12th of October. But there are some things that haven't changed and one of the things that hasn't changed and mustn't change is the character of Australia as a free and open and tolerant and decent nation. That must never change. And when I am asked what do the terrorists hate about Australia my answer is: they hate us for the virtues we represent as a free and open and decent and tolerant nation.
They are the things that mark Australia out from so many other nations. And they, in the end, are the things that those evil people despise in us. And it is very important in the weeks that go by, and as a nation we try and come to terms with the awful reality that some 80 to 90, largely young lives, were brutally claimed in an act of bilious, despicable violence unjustified by anything that this country has ever done, either alone or in concert with other nations. It's very important that we retain our sense of justified self-belief in the national virtues and values of Australia. We must not, in any sense, blame ourselves or the values or the practices of Australia for what occurred. What occurred was an act of violence directed against those largely young people because they were westerners and nothing can change that. We are part of western civilisation. We're a nation that believes in an open, democratic way of life. We are a nation that believes in the freedom of expression of the individual. We're a nation that believes in the equality of men and women.
We are a nation that believes in welcoming to our shores, provided they accept the modalities of Australian life, people from the four corners of the earth, of different nationalities, of different religions, of different ethnicities and of different faiths. That is the modern Australia. We can't change that, we won't change that because we shouldn't change that because that is what makes this a very special country. So there are many things that have changed and there are many things, though, that have not changed since we last met. I will never forget what those evil people did to our citizens and I don't believe the Australian people will ever forget it either. We are living in a different world. We're living in a world that is more challenging.
We're living in a world where the possibility of a terrorist attack on our own soil is more likely than it would have been a year ago or even six months ago. It's important that we understand that but it's also important that we keep a sense of proportion. It's important that we continue to live our daily lives. It's important that we don't allow the new and less certain environment in which we live to prevent us behaving to each other as we have in the past. And it's important that in the process that instead of pointing a finger at somebody or some group, we should perhaps extend an arm of friendship and welcome to them. Deep down the Australian people I know will respond to this new changed environment with that remarkable mixture of strength and commonsense and good humour and mateship that has always characterised our people. There is no nation on earth that can better respond to a national challenge or crisis than Australia because we are a classless country and that means that when s confronts all of us, we come together.
We forget our different backgrounds, our different attitudes, our different stations in life, and this was driven home to me when I visited the Richmond RAAF base several weeks ago to thank the young men and women who participated in bringing the 67 injured out of Bali on the morning of the 13th and 14th of October. And, still obviously affected by the trauma and the tension and the difficulty of the harrowing experience, this young airforce person - a young woman - said to me, you know we just all got in and did it, I worked beside the group captain, our ranks didn't matter, we had a job to do to get those people and we all just got on together and did it. That is just so typical of the character of this country. And it is a very special precious thing that we have and we must hang on to it because it gives us a strength and a capacity to work through these difficulties and these challenges. We all have a responsibility, I have a responsibility as a prime minister to level with the Australian people, that is why Senator Ellison made the statement he did on our behalf a few days ago.
We were criticised by some people, they said it wasn't specific enough. Of course it wasn't specific enough, because the intelligence didn't indicate a level of specificity, but if we had not made that known to the public and subsequently it had emerged that we'd received a warning of that kind in one stroke trust between the government and the people so essential at a time like this would have been destroyed. I think it is also important that the media preserve a sense of proportion in relation to the reporting of intelligence issues. And this morning there's a story on the front page of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Melbourne Age indicating that Australia is now on level pegging with the United States and Israel as a primary terrorist target.
Can I say, without downplaying the new and more dangerous environment in which we now exist, that is not a justifiable assessment, it is not based on any information that has come to the possession of our intelligence agencies and it represents an unnecessary racheting up of concern within the Australian community. So, we all have a responsibility. These are different times. They are not times where we should lose our sense of proportion. They are not times in which we should lose our sense of fair play and decency towards each other and towards other nations. It is inevitable that in these months and perhaps years ahead, defence and national security issues will continuously bulk larger in the concerns of the Australian government than other issues.
But that is not to say that we will neglect the domestic political and economic issues. The foundation of strong defence forces is a strong economy. If you don't have a strong economy, you don't have the resources to adequately arm yourselves and to adequately fund the intelligence services. And it continues to be the case that Australia has the strongest performing economy of most of the developed world and although the drought and the hesitancy in the American economy will take a little bit of growth off the Australian economy this year we are still going to perform very well, we are still going to maintain strong employment growth, we are still going to maintain low inflation and low interest rates and we still have the capacity to implement a very aggressive agenda of domestic economic change and reform, many of the details of which I was able to spell out in a major speech a few days ago here in Sydney. But the emphasis must be necessarily on defence and national security issues.
I announced a few days ago that because of the magnificent way in which in cooperation with our allies, the Australian special forces have performed in Afghanistan we would begin at the end of this month withdrawing that detachment so that they could all be home for Christmas. And I want, I know on behalf of everybody, not only Liberals, but people of all political persuasions, I want on behalf of the Australian people to record our admiration and gratitude for those men for what they have done in our name, in the name of Australia, of all Australians in the war against terror. They have won the admiration of our allies, they have won the admiration of our nation and they have done their job extremely well. It is not possible, ladies and gentlemen, to talk about international issues without addressing, head on, the issue of Iraq. At present the weapons inspectors have entered Iraq. I hope, the Government hopes, the world hopes, that this issue can be resolved without military action.
I don't want to see anybody involved in a further military conflict but we can't walk away from the challenge that Iraq faces. Iraq does possess weapons of mass destruction. People say to me, well, why do you pick on Iraq, North Korea has weapons of mass destruction, why the difference? Well, let me tell you the reason why there's a difference. Iraq has form, Iraq has used weapons of mass destruction against her neighbours. She invaded Kuwait. She used weapons against Israel, against Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. She used poison gas in the Iraq-Iranian war. There is a long history of Iraq assisting terrorist groups. Iraq gives support to the suicide bombers who cause such death and destruction in Israel. And there is a pattern of behaviour and it can't be ignored. And I think the ultimate nightmare would be if weapons of mass destruction ever got into the hands of terrorists because, make no mistake, they would use them. They would use them without regard to life or limb.
When you have fanatics blowing themselves up in order to destroy the lives of others you are dealing with a new dimension of evil and you are dealing with a group of people who don't respond to the normal modalities of reason. They don';t have an instinct for survival, they have an instinct for destruction and terror. That is their purpose and that is their motivation. None of this is to in any way understate my own personal desire to see this issue resolved through the councils of the Security Council. But let us not lose sight of reality. The United Nations was re-energised into doing something about Iraq because of the leadership of the United States. There are no shortage of critics of the United States around the world but the United Nations involvement in relation to Iraq through the Security Council would not have occurred if President Bush had not gone to the United Nations General Assembly on the 12th of September and laid out a case for the United Nations responding to its world responsibilities, and that is what he did.
And he showed great strength and he showed great leadership. And I have little doubt that the 15-0 vote in the Security Council of the United Nations was ultimately a consequence of skilful diplomacy and strength exercised by the United States. It's easy for countries and other critics to criticise the Americans. When you are the most powerful country in the world people somehow or other feel a license to criticise you and to find fault. But in the end if you look at the scoresheet of history the United States has made a remarkable and constant contribution to the preservation of freedom around the world. And those who understand and remember the history of this country will know the debt of gratitude we owe to the United States and the people of that great country. Ladies and gentlemen, if I can just touch on one or two more domestic but, nonetheless, extremely important issues. I know that everybody is metaphorically and perhaps literally in many cases united in prayer for rain around Australia at the present time.
This country is suffering a crippling drought. Seventy-five percent of Australia is either deprived or seriously deprived of water and unless there is a sustained break in the weather pattern soon we could have a drought as bad as the one that afflicted us in the early 1980s and perhaps worse. There are some things that are helpful on this occasion. One of the things that is helping is the fact that several years ago we brought in a Farm Management Deposit Scheme. Forty-three thousand of Australia's farmers have deposited $2 billion in that fund and the tax concessions this year are worth about $500 million. And the great virtue of that scheme is that it allows people, in a tax effective way - and we all like things that are tax effective - in a tax effective way to deposit money in a good year and to pull it out in a bad year. Well, there were a few good years a couple of years ago but this one's a very bad year and that scheme is working to cushion the impact of the drought. And we also have a very effective Exceptional Circumstances scheme.
And it's been estimated that we'll be providing this and next year, on a conservative basis, about $365 million through the Exceptional Circumstances scheme to assist Australia's farmers. But the severity of the drought raises the whole issue of water availability and water conservation in this country. And it's an issue that does have to be tackled nationally because the great river systems of Australia and the great Artesian basin don't recognise State borders and we have to deal with this thing on a national basis with the States and the Commonwealth playing their part. And it will be a major issue at the COAG meeting or Premiers' Conference to be held on the 6th of December.
And I'll be seeking the cooperation of the States and I'll be arguing, as I indicated a few days ago, that now that we have made a great deal of progress in relation to competition policy around this country, of the competition payments that were established in 1995 should increasingly be made available to compensate farmers who have their water rights either removed or diminished. Because it's a cardinal principle of fair dealing between governments and individuals in Australia that if a government acquires or cuts back your property rights it has an obligation to compensate you for the loss. And many farmers, particularly in New South Wales, are facing drastic reductions in their entitlements. And it was always envisaged that some of the competition payments would be available to assist in relation to that competition and I'll be arguing, amongst other things, that that increasingly be the case as we address this issue. And what we need to do is establish in Australia a common water property right or a common property right system throughout the country. And if you will, this is a 21st Century version of the old rail gauge problem and you won't solve it until you adopt a similar approach and we have a different system. The States are different.
We don't need uniformity for the sake of uniformity but we want a system which neutrally recognises and is, therefore, nationally facilitatory in relation to this issue, just as we have arrangements that give full faith and credit to criminal apprehension laws, so we should have a system that allows water rights to be recognised on a national basis. The other issue, ladies and gentlemen, that I hope will be able to bring some finality and sharpness to at the Premiers' Conference meeting on the 6th of December is that of handgun control. I hold a very strong view that the overwhelming majority of Australians do not want this country to go down the American path when it comes to guns. They do not want that. There is much that I admire about America and there is one thing that I do not admire and that is their extraordinary attitude towards the possession of weapons. And there is no doubt at all of the direct correlation between the availability of firearms and the very high murder rate in that country.
There is already evidence that the ban on longarms implemented in 1996 has begun to reduce the murder rate related to guns, or based on guns, in this country. And there's every reason to believe that if we can go much further in relation to handguns then we can lay the basis of a set of nationally consistent laws that will provide a safer Australian domestic environment. And this can be done, I can assure you, without interfering in any way with the legitimate rights and aspirations of genuine, and I stress genuine, sporting shooters within the Australian community. Ladies and gentlemen, let me finish on a more personal note. This could well be, in fact, it will always certainly be the last state council meeting that Lynton Crosby is at in sort of his capacity as the outgoing Federal Director. I mean, he's sometimes…and he's announced he's going, he's still going, his successor has not yet been put in place so, in a sense, he's still the Director, although he's not, if you can understand what I mean.
But can I just take the opportunity of saying what a tremendous mainstay and right hand and captain of the organisational ship Lynton has been for me and for the party. Under his direction the Liberal Party federally has enjoyed some of its greatest years of success since it was founded in 1944. It really has. And here in New South Wales the last election, as I think I may have said before from this platform, the last election gave us, in many respects, our greatest federal harvest in New South Wales since the party was formed. And Lynton has played a crucial role in bringing that about. So let me thank you, Lynton, again in front of your fellow Liberals here in New South Wales for what you have done. I acknowledge the debt I personally owe to you. I wish you well in your future career. I know that the Liberal Party, both here in New South Wales and all around Australia, will be ever willing to see you again to get your views and to listen to your advice. Well, finally my friends we face a very important State election on the 22nd of March in the year 2003. And I thought one of the best pieces of television imagery I'd seen in a few weeks of State politics was that carpark encounter. I mean my mate of boxing blue fame, Tony Abbott, may well be called to give some seconds advice.
Can I say, what it demonstrated to me was that you have a State leader with a backbone, a State leader with the strength of his own convictions and somebody who can spontaneously and, therefore, eloquently express a proper sense of outrage against a frightening attack. It won't be easy. It will be very hard because the Government is not shy of exploiting incumbency. There are an enormous number of seats to be won but what I have seen over the past few months is a determination and a resilience and a level of activity from any candidates which is very encouraging. Only yesterday John and I were in that great electorate of Bennelong and in the right part of Bennelong, with Paul Nicolau, an outstanding candidate, in a seat that we need to win in order to win government in New South Wales.
And I saw a large gathering of people from the community interested to hear and meet our candidate and interested to hear and meet the State Liberal Party Leader, John Brogden. It will be a very tough fight. John, you have the support, you have the enthusiasm, you have the commitment of your federal colleagues. To all of your colleagues, work hard, you have no right to have any Christmas holidays, you must all work very hard over Christmas. You must try in the period between now and the election, of course, now that Parliament has risen, to get as much publicity for your policies and for your candidates as you can. I think the New South Wales people are looking for an alternative. They want a choice.
This government has been in power for a long time. It's getting tired, it's getting complacent. There are issues about it that wreak of complacency and contempt for normal process and I think if you work hard you can bridge that gap but it won't be easy and along that journey you'll have our very strong support. So, ladies and gentlemen, can I again say thank you for the great support you've given me. Thank you for the great members of Parliament that you've given me from New South Wales and the wonderful Ministers, all of whom have made a great contribution. John recently was kind enough to say some things about me. We have been successful because we're a great team.
Politics is about teamship, politics is about loyalty flowing in both directions and the ingredients of our politic success are to be found in those political realities. We do live in a more stressful, difficult time and I have no doubt that if we display, as a nation, the unity and the sense of humanity and openness that has always characterised the Australian people we can handle these issues and handle them well. Out of great sadness and tragedy and adversity often comes something that is reassuring and inspiring.
And what has been reassuring and inspiring about the last six weeks has been the remarkable spirit, that remarkable sense of openness and mateship which we deep down know makes this country distinctive and different and gives this country a special character and a special identity that the rest of the world knows, the rest of the world recognises and the rest of the world admires. And it's something that we should hold on to, we should protect and we should allow to guide us through the more difficult weeks and months and, perhaps, years ahead.
Thank you. [ends]


E&amp;OE..................  
Well, thank you very much Minister, to his Excellency the Ambassador, to Mr Lionel Woodward the Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Custom Service, Commissioner Mick Keelty the head of the Australian Federal Police, and all other guests, and very particularly the men and women of the Australian Customs service.
It's obvious that a country as large as Australia, and being an island continent, faces a particular challenge in relation to the protection of our borders.  And in different ways over the last year or more, there has been an increased emphasis placed on different measures and different policies all designed to make Australia a more secure, a more protected country, while maintaining its traditional openness and friendliness towards people and countries that bear it no ill will, and want to share the benefits of globalisation and a world that is growing closer every year.  
And I think it's particularly symbolic also that in this - the year that commemorates the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and the Peoples Republic of China - that the state of the art acquisition that I commissioned today is of course the product of a Chinese company.  It's also been a year in which Australia and China have signed a very large trade deal in relation to Australian natural gas and although the purchase of this wonderful X-ray equipment, valuable thought it is, won't quite match the size of that contract, it is a very important ingredient and a very important demonstration of the sophistication and the diversity of the trade relationship between Australia and China.  This is world class, high tech, state of the art equipment and it will add enormously to the sense of security that Australians have.  And the value that it will bring to our attempts to prevent the importation of illegal drugs, weapons and any other material that would seek to be used by people to do harm to this country or to do harm to the citizens of this country.  It's also noteworthy that as well as providing superior protection it's also going to reduce the waiting time for people who are legitimately wanting their containers and their cargoes processed as quickly as possible.  So, it has the double benefit of not only being far superior in its protection capacity, but also in speeding up the process of putting containers through.
So, can I say that I have a very special personal interest in this project. I was determined, along with my senior colleagues and the Minister, I was determined that we were going to, where possible, put more resources into a more comprehensive and a more failsafe method of x-raying and providing surveillance for containers that come into this country.  This will make a contribution, obviously, to the fight against illegal drugs.  And I';m very happy to acknowledge the presence also of Major Brian Watters, the Chairman of the advisory council for me on drugs.  We are making progress as a result of the resources put into that campaign and this is going to be a further element.  And it's also going to be an aid to the combined efforts of the Commonwealth and the States to make it even more difficult for handguns to be used in this country because what this will do will make it even harder for handguns to be brought illegally into Australia and that will supplement the efforts that are already underway and I hope they'll be brought to fruition over the next ten days between the Commonwealth and the State Governments to really take out of the community weapons that should not be freely available to people.  
There is no case, in my view, for the ordinary citizens of this country to have access to lethal firearms whether longarms or handguns and they should only be available to the police and the security services, the custom services where appropriate, and people who are engaging in properly supervised sporting shooting activities.  Beyond that, I just don't think they should be available and I think that's a view that is widely held throughout the Australian community, not only in the cities but also in the rural areas.  Now in order to give effect to that, you need an agreement of all of the governments and you need to underpin that agreement with a capacity to detect guns improperly being brought into Australia, as well as a willingness to take them off the streets on the part of both the National Government and the State Governments. And of course, this wonderful new equipment will, because of the things it can do, coincidently make a contribution to the broader campaign we have underway in Australia to protect this country against terrorist behaviour.  And although the facility was primarily designed of course for the reasons I've outlined, it is self-evident from the impact that it will have that it will make a very important coincidental contribution towards that.  
So for all of those reasons ladies and gentlemen, I';m delighted to be here today.  And can I take the opportunity of addressing an expression of gratitude to all of the men and women of the Australian Custom Service for the magnificent job they do in making our borders and therefore our country safer and more secure.  It's meticulous painstaking work.  It requires a great deal of individual responsibility and initiative.  And I';m delighted that with the acquisition of equipment such as this, the personal intuition and initiative of the individual men and women of the service is going to be augmented by the most sophisticated equipment that is available anywhere in the world.  And that will, I know, add to their sense of job satisfaction and the environment in which they will work will be enhanced by the acquisition of this equipment.
And can I also take the opportunity, ladies and gentlemen, and I know that all of you would like me to do so in the presence of the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, to say to you Commissioner on behalf of the entire nation what a magnificent job your officers are doing in the investigation into the Bali atrocity.  We read everyday of developments.  I've chosen very deliberately and I intend to adhere very rigidly to that decision of not myself to make any operational comment, I leave that to the professionals.  But I want to express our gratitude.  It is obvious that there's been fantastic cooperation between your officers and the officers of the State police forces under your leadership and the Indonesian Police.  We all hope that those responsible are brought to justice and we're all deeply grateful for the superbly professional way in which your officers have gone about that work.  And you have the respect and the gratitude of all of the Australian people.
Well on that note ladies and gentlemen, I have very very great pleasure in declaring this facility open, it will make a wonderful contribution to better and further protecting our borders and Mr Hawe thank you very much for the hospitality that you've provided to us and I know that this equipment will be very useful and it will be professionally used by the men and women of the Australian Custom Service.  Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................  
Well thank you very Mark, to all the other special guests, to Cathy Freeman, to Ross Adler the Chairman of Austrade, Mr Peter O'Byrne, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
This is an occasion to honour people, who through their effort in relation to exports, contribute so much to the wealth and the well being of our country.  This has been quite a remarkable year for the cause of Australian exports.  The highlight has undoubtably been the fact that over the past year Australia has signed the largest ever export contract in this nation's history and that was the 25-year, $25 billion liquid natural gas contract signed with the Chinese Consortium only a few weeks ago and negotiated over many years.  And it was very much a triumph of what could be called the team Australia approach.  It was an effort that brought together not only the companies as the bidders and the suppliers, but it also involved the active support of Austrade, the active support of the Federal Government, the active support of the Western Australian Government and the active involvement and support of so many people.  
And the fact that in this one year we have been able to sign that huge contract, the biggest ever in our history, with the Peoples Republic of China, but also courtesy of the prodigious, negotiating effort of Mark Vaile as our Trade Minister, we were able to announce only two weeks ago, the beginning of the process whereby we will try to negotiate a free trade agreement with the United States - the largest economy in the world and in fact, the largest economy the world has ever seen.  Those two events illustrate a very important message about this country's trade linkages and that is that we are a nation that will export to any who will buy.  We are a nation that has not put all of our trade or export eggs in the one basket, but we are a nation that simultaneously can entertain negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States and also signed that huge deal with the Peoples Republic of China.  It repudiates suggestions that in some way in endeavouring to negotiate a free trade agreement with the United States in some way prevents our capacity to trade effectively and trade increasingly with the nations of the Asian region.  The reality is that a country such as Australia must simultaneously pursue bilateral trading opportunities, as well as continue to push the case for freeer and more open multilateral trade through the World Trade Organisation.  And I want to take this opportunity at this dinner to thank my Minister, Mark Vaile, for the tremendous work that he has done as the principal spokesman and Minister for the Government aiding the cause of Australia's exporters and aiding and promoting the cause of Australian trade.  
When it comes to exporting, Australia is in every sense of the expression a citizen of the world.  Our major trading partners, many of them are to be found in the Asian Pacific region. And Japan's still our greatest export destination and a country which is of enormous significance to this country when it comes to exports.  To Korea - a wonderful market and the trust and confidence that exists between Korea and so many Australian exporters would be well known to people in this room.  China - a market that has more than doubled in the last five years, our third greatest trading partner and a country of great, indeed limitless, commercial and trading opportunities.  But that's not the only part of the picture.  We're also a nation that faced in 1997 a huge challenge when there was an economic downturn in the Asian Pacific region and the fact that we were able to diversify our exports away from contracting markets in the Asian region, to expanding a new market in Europe in North America, drove home the point that a nation such as Australia must always seek markets in every part of the world.  And the flexibility of the Australian economy, and particularly the flexibility of the Australian dollar, meant that we were able to shift those markets.  The fact that we have a highly competitive exchange rate is a very important element in our trading and our exporting success.  And the fact that we are now enjoying the benefits of 15 to 20 years of cumulative, domestic, economic change and reform is a lesson that should not be lost on any person in this room.  
Australia's economy is strong, Australia's economy is outperforming the economies of most other nations because we've had the courage as a nation and as a people to change and reform our economy in the past, to sweep away restrictions and barriers that have held us back, to reform our industrial relations system, to reform the Australian waterfront - which was a national joke until the problem of reform was tackled by Peter Reith on behalf of the Government in 1998.  And collectively, when you look at what this economy has achieved, the reforms we have undertaken, it is a reminder to all of us of the fundamental importance of economic reform and a reminder that the process of economic reform never ends.  
We are about to embark upon an effort through the World Trade Organisation to secure a more open, multilateral trading environment.  Mark Vaile hosted a very important mini ministerial summit in Sydney several weeks ago that brought together the trade ministers of all the major contributors to what will need to be a very positive outcome for the latest World Trade Organisation round.  It is necessary that we get agriculture on the negotiating table.  It is necessary for the credibility of the World Trade Organisation that the current Doha round be successful.  We can't afford another failure like the fiasco that occurred in Seattle several years ago.  And in order for the next round to be successful, it will require the strong involvement and commitment of the major trade constalations of the world.  It will need the requirement and require the commitment obviously of the United States.  And the fact that the special trade representative, Bob Zoellick, was present in Sydney that the ministerial meeting was extremely encouraging and the commitments he made on behalf of the Bush Administration were equally encouraging.  
It will require a change of heart on behalf the European Union.  It will require the European Union to be willing to put on the table the restrictive trade barriers of that block, which have locked so many exports out of Europe, not only from Australia but also from the developing countries of the world.  It will also require a commitment from a nation the size of Japan and when it comes to agricultural subsidy, it's worth all of us remembering that that total value of subsidies from Australia to her farmers and primary producers is four per cent of total output.  In the United States it is 22 per cent.  In the European Union it 35 per cent and in Japan it is 59 per cent.  And those four figures illustrate the burden carried by Australian farmers who must export in order to survive and who, as we're very conscious of at the present time, carry the additional burden of the periodic ravages of the drought.
So we achieved a lot as we look over the last year.  We've achieved the great breakthrough of the gas contract with China - a wonderful symbol of the strong bilateral relationship between Australia and China, in this the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries.  We have begun the process of negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States.  We have seen the Australian economy continue to outperform most other economies.  We have continued to deride the benefits of cumulative economic change and economic reform.  
And I want to conclude my remarks tonight by thanking the exporters of Australia for the contribution that you are making to our national strength, and to our national, and our national well being.  We quite rightly honour the men and women of the sporting field such as Cathy Freeman, who brings such great credit and lustre to our nation and our nation's name around the world. But we should equally honour the men and women who go out and win competitive races in the area of exports. That Liquid Natural Gas Consortium won a very competitive race, they had many handicaps, but they won because of their persistence and their reliability.  And that's a story that is replicated all around Australia in so many areas.  The fact that now 40 per cent of our exports are in the service sector and in manufacturing is an illustration of just how much our export base has diversified over the years.  And the men and women here tonight represent that great achievement.  
And on behalf of all of your fellow Australians, can I thank you for the contribution that you have made.  Can I in advance congratulate those who are successful in so far as the awards are concerned and can all of us together look back on a year, which in the area of exports and trade, has been a highly successful one and is another demonstration that no matter what the field, no matter what the contest, no matter how hard the competition is, that if Australians get down to it and apply themselves there's nobody that they can't defeat.  Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................  
Ladies and gentlemen. It is of course a great pleasure to be back in Gunnedah, it';s not, as the Mayor indicated, the first time I';ve been here. I remember very well Ralph Hunt and that sheep, extremely well, I think everybody enjoyed that experience and it';s one of my vivid recollections of (inaudible) Gunnedah in the 1980';s. Of course two years ago I came as you said on Saturday and we went out to a property owned by the Hoadal's and we were knee deep in mud.  And two years later this afternoon we went there again and experienced the parched, dusty, unforgiving and relentlessly hot conditions under which this part of Australia suffers at the present time.
I';m very conscious of the hardship of the bush, of country people in many parts of Australia right at the moment.  This is one of the worst droughts that Australia has had since Federation and when you get to the dimension of disaster and distress that Australia is experiencing at the present time in a way it matters not whether this is the worst or the second worst or the third worst or whatever, they';re all very bad.  I don';t know when it';s going to end.  The best that I can do is to listen to what the met bureau says and they';re talking about March or April of next year, which is a pretty depressing, discouraging outlook.  Governments must help and respond and work with people to assist them through these adversities.  I was asked this morning on a radio interview what were my first impressions in Cobar, I said the first impressions were that it was every bit as bleak and despairing as I had been told and my other equally dominant reaction was the tremendous fight and determination and spirit and stoicism of people that I encountered. And that of course is a remarkable characteristic of country Australians.  It';s one of the things that gets this country sharpness of national character and special identity because that willingness and that capacity to endure something that you';re not to blame for but is hurting you is one of the great national characteristics of Australians.
We are providing a number of things to help people in relation to exceptional circumstances, in relation to the ongoing assessments of the farm management deposits and I';ll be announcing a number of other smaller measures later today which will provide some special assistance in relation to the control of feral animals, in relation to counselling, some financial assistance to the Country Women';s Association as it does such a wonderful job, a special provision in relation to the farm management deposits whereby if they';re withdrawn by a depositor who';s in an area of exceptional circumstances in under the 12 month period that won';t affect the eligibility of that depositor for the taxation benefits of those farm management deposits.
There are other things that must be looked at and addressed in the recovery phase.  We all optimistically look to a recovery phase, the drought must end, it will end, as all droughts do. And what is important is that a community and a regional economy is essentially left unimpaired and has a capacity to recover. And I am aware of the moral consequences and I am aware that the real impact of a drought is often not felt until months later on the local small business and the local regional economy.  And they are issues that John and I have been talking about all day and they';re issues that John and I have been talking about over past weeks.  
Can I say that you have in John somebody who is so dedicated to this area and understands it and when it's needing or unhappy about something so is your local member. I';ve never met anybody in politics who empathises more spontaneously and genuinely with the concerns of the people that he is honoured to represent than does John Anderson.
So it';s not an easy time, I want you to know that I understand that, the Government understands that. Can I also say to other Australians, I heard somebody on the radio this morning say that people in Sydney don';t care about people in the bush - that could not be more wrong. My universal experience as somebody who grew up in the suburbs of Sydney, as therefore being identified with urban Australia in the personal sense all of his life, all my universal experience is that cities dwellers care very much about the country.  The response to the Farmhand Appeal, people don't want the way of life of the Australian bush to be lost because they regard it as indelibly part of what makes us very distinctive as an Australian community.  
So can I say that, not for the first time, I disagree with something I've heard on the radio. I  occasionally do.  I mean, I agree with some of the things I hear on the radio too.  But I think it is wrong that anybody in country Australia to think that your fellow Australians in other parts of the country don't care about what is happening.  We worry about the drought, the rest of the community hopes and prays that the drought ends and they all want to see the quality of rural life preserved and enhanced.  And we are very [inaudible] that it's not just economic cost, it's also social cost.  We worry about the emotional toll that it exacts on families, on marriages, on people's sense of self esteem and self achievement and all of those things are tremendously important in a holistic understanding of what a drought does as a country.  According to our advice, something like 75 per cent of Australia is now deprived or seriously deprived of necessary water supplies and that is a staggering figure.  As I said a moment ago, it matters not whether this is the first, or the second, or the third most severe drought, once you get to a certain point they all represent major disasters.
Can I finally say that country is, as the Mayor rightly said, going through challenging times.  What happened in Bali shocked, and saddened, and I know appalled all of us and it has brought home to us just how different the world is in which we live.  And we do face some challenges now that we've never faced before and we have to find our way as a community through the process of responding, of responding in anyway that meets the challenge and protects our people, but also preserves our open and free and democratic way of life.  And trying to strike that balance is a very important challenge in our community.  And instead of pointing fingers at people, we have to reach out to people and more than ever find a sense of national unity and a sense of purpose.  The last few weeks, have in some respects, in many respects, been the most challenging I've had in the time that I've been Prime Minister since 1996.  They have also been in other respects some of the most inspiring because I had seen the Australian spirit on display with all its great strength and great resilience and vitality.  But the way in which Australians unite to confront a common foe, the way in which Australians forget their differences when there's a really serious challenge they've had, the way in which Australians for all our tough exterior, are very emotional and compassionate people when they see their fellow citizens hurt, particularly the young.  And as the Mayor said there is nothing more tragic than to see young lives cut short - nothing ever can alter that fact, it's the tragic experience of all tragic experiences when  young lives are cut short.  
So it's not the happiest time our nation's had, but we're not daunted by it.  I don't see any dimunition of the Australian spirit.  I don't see any intention on the part of Australians to remain other than very defiant and very determined to preserve their way of life.  Nor do I detect any sense of these unfortunate, these tragic events are our fault.  We have nothing as a nation to apologise for for whom we are.  We have made mistakes.  We have blemishes.  We're not perfect, but on a scale of ten we're very high up as an open, free, democratic, welcoming, generous society and we should bear that very much in mind as we work our way through these difficulties and challenges. 
So can I say to all of you, thank you for the hospitality that you've extended.  It's a great community.  I hope that the next time I come the drought is well and truly broken and the Australian rural economy is well and truly on the road to a very strong recovery because we need you. The Australia I grew up to love would never be the same if we lost rural Australia because it's so much part of what indelibly makes us a distinctive community.  And that's why we all need you and we'll all make sure that we help you to stay an integral and important part of our society.  
Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE..................  
Thank you very much Senator Vanstone, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I';m delighted once again to have the opportunity of participating in this very important award presentation. This is the fourth year of the Prime Minister';s Awards for Excellence in Community Business Partnerships and the awards are a great opportunity to recognise those who are contributing in a very direct way to what I have called the social coalition.  
And as I look around the Great Hall today, I see people from the welfare sector, people from Government, people from the business community, and philanthropic individuals who are moved by a sense of commitment and service and generosity to try and do something to improve the lot of their fellow Australians. And Amanda in her introductory remarks has outlined some of the remarkable things and some of the innovative combinations that the Community Business Partnerships have brought together, and the finalists today are a wonderful metaphor for what has been achieved. 
And I believe that over the past few years we have brought about something of a cultural change. We still have a long way to go but I find within corporate Australia the idea of partnership and the idea of contributing to other than the economic growth and strength of our country, which is of course very important – critically important in its own right – I think there is a growing sense of its role and its responsibilities. And there';s also a growing appreciation of the need for all of us to work together because each of us has something to offer uniquely from our own perspective – the Government of course has a basic and ongoing responsibility to provide not only a social security safety net, but also policy and national leadership.
We need to continue to nurture and encourage the great welfare organisations of Australia whose coalface understanding and experience of people';s adversity and life';s challenges is unrivalled and unmatched by the experience of other sectors of the community. We need also to harness the generosity of individuals and we need of course to tap the generosity and the spirit of those within the business community who wish to play a full role in our community. And I was reminded when I was coming here of perhaps the impact of some of the measures and some of the changed attitudes by some figures I was given which analysed donations to charities between 1999/2000 compared with 98/99 – the immediately preceding year. And these are the latest years for which comparative figures are available, and they show in that period an 11 per cent increase in the giving between those two years. A small indicator, perhaps not the final story. There may be other explanations and there may be, just maybe, some of the initiatives that we have sponsored and some of the spirit that has come out of the Community Business Partnership movement has also played a contribution. And as a direct result of the tax initiatives suggested by the Community Business Partnership to allow prescribed private funds, about 81 new foundations have been established. Once again a small but very important beginning. 
Last year';s winner in the Large Business Category was the partnership between the Smith Family and Cisco Systems. The Smith Family is now reaping the benefits of this partnership, and as part of the Smith Family';s Learning for Life program, thousands of student updates are produced each year to provide feedback to the sponsors. These updates each need an internal review to ensure that there is no information that may reveal the identity of the sponsored child. And in the year 2000, 12,000 updates were checked in-house and each update took just under eight minutes of processing in total. Two years later, with substantial growth in the program, 18,000 updates are being checked at an average of just 40 seconds each, generating a saving of $45,000 annually. And this 90 per cent reduction in processing time has been made possible through an Internet-based system built with the assistance of volunteers from Cisco.
I';d like to take this opportunity of announcing a number of additional taxation initiatives which build on earlier initiatives the Government has announced to encourage Community Business Partnerships. In the past, key reforms in this area have included a range of income tax and capital gains tax incentives to those who make donations of property and providing business, families and individuals with greater flexibility to start their own private trust funds for philanthropic purposes. Today I announce that from the 1st of July next year, taxpayers will be able to spread deductions for cash donations made to deductible gift recipients in instalments elected by the taxpayer over a period of up to five years. This will make it more attractive for individuals and businesses to make donations to deductible gift recipients sooner and it will also make sure that donors receive the full benefit of deductions for their giving and will ensure that cash and non-cash gifts are treated the same.
And second, and in line with the Partnership';s consistent encouragement of tax incentives to promote workplace giving, employees will no longer have to wait until they receive their tax returns to benefit from the tax deductions associated with their donations. They will in future be able to receive the benefit of the tax deduction in their weekly or fortnightly salary. The new arrangements will encourage more employers and employees, I hope and believe, to enter into workplace giving arrangements.
Ladies and gentlemen, these awards and this little but very important ceremony is an important date on the Government';s calendar of events here in the Great Hall and in Canberra. We have many functions here in the Great Hall. We honour the work of many Australians and others in many walks of life. None engenders the great collaborative spirit of the Australian community more effectively than the Community Business Partnerships. I';m very proud of what has been achieved to date. I want to thank all of the members of the Community Business Partnership committee or group that advised me and Amanda Vanstone. I valued their work. We take most of their advice, not all of it, and the bit we don';t take is not that we don';t think that it';s good advice but sometimes not everything that is asked of Governments can be delivered because of other obligations. 
I thank all of the groups in the community and all the sectors for the contribution you make and I';m delighted to once again welcome you and to congratulate and thank you for what you have done over the last year.
   [ends]  


E&amp;OE..................  
Thank you very much Mr Walden, Mr Paul Hughes the Principal, Pat Farmer my parliamentary colleague, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s a great pleasure for me to, in a way, end my year as Prime Minister by coming to this school and spending a few moments and saying just a few things to the students of this school. It is always a delight to talk to school students. It';s always an opportunity for all of us to remind ourselves of a few things. To remind ourselves of how lucky we are to live in Australia. We have arguments about the best way of running Australia. Some people want to do this, and other people want to do that – just like we find arguments in our daily lives. But in the end, living in Australia is the greatest privilege that any person can have in the world because when you put everything together, there is no country that is freer and stronger and more tolerant and more open in the way it treats all of its citizens.
We are a lucky country but we have to work very hard to keep it that way. And your school is a reminder of the different backgrounds that make up the modern Australia. And if I have a message for you, particularly at this time of good will towards people of all different backgrounds – it doesn';t matter what a person';s racial background is, it doesn';t matter what the colour of their skin is, it doesn';t matter what their religion is – that';s a matter for them. But if they are good and if they love Australia before anything else and any other country and they treat everybody well, then you should do the same because it';s the worth of people and how they treat each other and relate to others that really matters most of all.
Another thing that I would like to say to you is that if you try hard enough, there is nothing you can';t achieve. Sometimes it can be hard and some people can be luckier in the start they have in life than others. I know that. I know it';s harder for some children than it is for other children. But I know so many children that started in difficult circumstances and overcame them and achieved what they set out to achieve. And if you set your heart on achieving something, you will get it in the end. And that is a very important lesson in life.
Could I also encourage you to listen always to what your teachers tell you. I know on occasions you think – oh maybe not, maybe that';s not such a smart thing to do. But I was like that when I was your age. I didn';t always think what they told me to do was right, but I learnt later on that it was. It';s not an easy job being a teacher because they';ve not only got to try and help you to learn things but they';ve also got to give you a lot of other advice and a lot of other help as well. Please take notice of them because they do mean well, they do want to make your lives better, and if you listen to them your lives will be a lot better.
So can I say to all of you that it';s a tremendous pleasure to be here. Can I thank the parents and other members of the local community for supporting the school. Community support for a school is tremendously important. It';s one of the great strengths of the public education system, not only here in Sydney but all around Australia.
I went to a public school in Sydney when I was your age. I went to a public school in Earlwood, which is closer in to the heart of the city than Campbelltown is. And I know that having people in the local community supporting the school is very important. I want to thank them for that.
Can I join the District Superintendent or Supervisor in thanking Pat Farmer for the way in which he has represented all of you over the last year. He is a very energetic person and he helps everybody – it doesn';t matter what their politics are, Pat';s in there to help them if they';re from his local area, and that';s very, very important.
And finally can I wish all of you a Merry Christmas. It';s a time to spend with your families. It';s a time for a lot of people for spiritual renewal. It';s also a time for all of us to display tolerance and generosity and kindness to our fellow Australians, and if we do that then the good country that Australia is now can be made even better and the things that you want in your life and you want to achieve for yourselves I believe you can achieve.
I';ve learnt a little bit about this school over the past few days. It has some special programs, it has some special challenges, but it has some special achievements. And it has a lot of special teachers and most importantly, a lot of very special students. And you can achieve what you want as much as any other group of children at school anywhere in Australia and I congratulate Mr Hughes the Principal and his staff on the wonderful things that they have done. I thank them and through them I thank all of the teachers of the New South Wales public education system for the wonderful job they do for our young Australians.
Thank you.
BRIANNA GREEN, 8 years old, Camden South Public School.
What was the most important thing that you learnt at primary school?
PRIME MINISTER:
The most important thing that I learnt at primary school was that even if you got angry with people, and there were some people you liked and some people you didn';t like – this was the first time that I mixed with a lot of children – I really found that if you tried hard enough, there is always some good in even the person you didn';t like much at all. And I found that that was a lesson I learnt at primary school and it stayed with me through life. And you do find you';re a lot happier if you try and find what is good in people, even if it might be harder with some people than others. I know that. It is hard. But I found that the happiest people are the people who think best of others and the most miserable, sad people are the people who think the worst of others. And I think it';s a very good thing to learn, and it helped me a lot.
CHRISTOPHER NELSON, 11 years old, St Andrews Public School.
When you were younger, what did you want to be when you grew up?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it changed a lot. At one stage I wanted to be an Australian test cricketer. That didn';t last very long because I realised fairly early, probably younger than you are, that I probably didn';t have quite the talent to wear the baggy green in a proper way. So I sort of moved on from that. At one stage I actually wanted to be a policeman but in those days you had to be a bit bigger than I am to be a policeman. They had different height and weight restrictions than they have now. I thought I mightn';t be a bad detective but then I sort of moved off that. And then I sort of wavered between being a lawyer and, would you believe, a journalist. I was actually quite interested in that. And then when I was at high school, at Canterbury Boys High School, I got quite interested in politics. I was always a bit interested in politics at home because I had three older brothers and a mother and father, and they all talked about politics. We talked about politics and sport at home, and so I sort of developed that interest. And by the time I had left school I sort of decided I wanted to be a lawyer, which I became one and I practised law for 12 years before I entered Parliament, but I always had this deep interest in politics and then that';s how I sort of ended up being there. And I haven';t regretted it – but I enjoyed being lawyer, and I also enjoyed writing the occasional newspaper article, but I sort of can';t do that for a living naturally. But I try and influence the articles – sometimes not very successfully, but I try nonetheless.
CHELLISA ANTONIO, 9 years old, Briar Road Public School.
Would it be hard for a female to become Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I think it is only a matter of time before Australia has a female Prime Minister. Many other countries have had female prime ministers. Other countries have been slower. America has never had a female President. Britain had a female Prime Minister in 1979. In fact the longest serving British Prime Minister in the last century, Margaret Thatcher of course, was a woman. And the first female Prime Minister I think was in what is now called Sri Lanka – Mrs Siramavo Bandaranaike. She became Prime Minister of a country then called Ceylon. And Israel had a female Prime Minister in Golda Meir. She was very successful, very strong, very effective. I think it';s only a matter of time. I think what happens is that for a long time many women didn';t pursue careers and they just saw their role entirely as a homemaker. Now that has changed. People mix the roles up. They want to have a career and a homemaker. Or some want to be a homemaker all the time and some want to do a career all the time. Whatever people want they should be entitled to do. But I think it';s only a matter of time before we have a female Prime Minister. We';ve had several female Premiers. Mrs Carmen Lawrence was the first. There was her and then there was Joan Kirner in Victoria. So there is absolutely no reason why it won';t happen. Just exactly when and who it will be I don';t know. But it will happen.
JEFFREY WAETCHLER, 9 years old, Briar Road Public School.
Mr Howard, why did you want to be Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I get asked that a lot. I wanted to go into politics because I wanted to be active in doing something good for Australia and trying to change things for what I thought was the better. You know when you get into a group, a team – you normally think after a while that you could probably captain the team as well as anybody else. And I began to think after a while that there were things that I could do as well, if not better, than other people and I felt that I could offer myself. But the main reason that you want to hold the sort of position I hold is that you have a very strong love of your country and you want to change things for the better. Now not everybody agrees with everything I do. I know that. And there has been no Prime Minister of Australia, and there never will be a Prime Minister of Australia, who gets support for everything that he or she does. But if your motivation, if your aim, is to try and make things better, then you can normally succeed. I really wanted to be Prime Minister because there are things I wanted to do to improve Australia and I hope I';ve done them and I hope I have the opportunity of continuing to do them.
 DERYA UZAL, Year 2.
What time do you go to bed at night and wake up in the morning?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, what time do I go to bed at night and what time do I wake up in the morning. Well the answer to the first question – it varies a lot. Sometimes I go to bed at sort of 12.30 or 1.30. Other times I go to bed at 10.30. It just varies a lot. I normally rise quite early. My normal routine is I wake up sometime between 5.30 and 6.00 – sometimes a bit earlier but not usually – and I go for a walk. I go for a walk every morning for a fast walk wherever I am. I went for a walk this morning around the harbour because I was staying at Kirribilli House, and I went for a walk for half an hour. But I';m going to be in Perth overnight. I';m going to Perth tonight. So I';m going to welcome home the men of the Special Air Service regiment that have been in Afghanistan, and to thank them for the job that they have done for Australia. And so I will go for a walk along the river in Perth tomorrow. I normally have a walk around 6.30. So it varies when I go to bed, and I get up quite early. I mean I';ve become a very early riser. It drives my wife mad because, you know, sometimes I inadvertently wake her up when I get out of bed early and I get into trouble.
JEMMA MALLOY, 9 years old, Briar Road Public School.
Is it hard making such important decisions for the country, and who helps you make those decisions?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well sometimes the decisions are hard. They';re very hard when they put people in danger. I remember when we had to make decisions to send a lot of Australian troops to East Timor. I worried about that a lot because I was frightened that some of them might get killed or wounded. Fortunately we didn';t suffer any battle casualties. We were very lucky. And that is the hardest thing because you can';t as a Prime Minister, you can';t avoid taking those decisions because you have to think of the results further down, further on if you don';t take a stand. I mean the easiest thing is whenever you have trouble, is to run away from it and hope it will go away. But unfortunately trouble follows you, even though you may have run away from it. And history has told us that if you run away from trouble in the hope that it will disappear, it doesn';t disappear – it follows you and it';s often a lot more menacing and a lot stronger when it catches up to you. And so sometimes we have to take decisions that are not very popular at the beginning. So that';s very hard. What helped? I get advice from my Cabinet colleagues. In general terms – obviously I can';t talk about secret things – but in general terms I talk to my family about issues and they';re very good. And my wife is good and I have three adult children who will give me their opinions, if I ask for them, on different things, and sometimes when I don';t ask for them I';ll get their opinion. But that';s good. That';s very healthy. And they';re very helpful. And I have lots of advisers and I have very good people. And I have people like Mr Farmer here, who has a great understanding of how people feel and what people think. So you listen to all of those and you think very hard, and at the end of the day you try and do what is the right thing. And then you';ve got to go out and explain it. Some decisions are harder than others, and the hardest things are decisions that might put people in danger, because that is quite a big responsibility and you have to discharge that very, very carefully.
[ends]


E&amp;OE..................  
Well thank you very much General Cosgrove, Robert Hill the Defence Minister, the Acting Leader of the Opposition, the Attorney General, Fran Bailey Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Defence, the men of the SAS regiment and the families of the broader community of special forces in Australia.
This is an occasion when a nation comes together unconditionally to express both its thanks and its admiration for what the men of your regiment have done in the name of Australia.  When Australian forces go abroad they do not go abroad in the name of any particular government, they go abroad in the name of all the Australian people and it is therefore appropriate that you should be welcomed back formally to the home base of your regiment on behalf of all of the Australian people.
Over past months you have magnificently upheld not only the traditions of the Australian Army and the Australian Defence Force but the very special and illustrious position of the special forces of the ADF.  You have a fine and well deserved reputation amongst your peers around the world.  That is evidenced not only by the public commendation that you have received from our allies but also from the many private remarks passed to me and my colleagues by leaders of our allies about the work that you have done.
Our country finds itself in a new and different defence circumstance.  The war against terror is probably something that many of us mightn';t have thought likely a decade ago, or even five years ago.  But it';s a new and different and dangerous and threatening reality.  It requires the special, highly developed professional skills that you have and it requires a special discipline that your training gives to you.
It also requires the love and the understanding of your wives and your parents and your children and your sweethearts who also carry from day to day the worry and the dread of bad news.  Bad news came to one family, that of Andrew Russell and we think particularly of him, we think very much of all of the families and especially at Christmas.  I understand from lieutenant Colonel Gilmore that this, for many of you, is the first Christmas you';ve had home for a couple of years.  And I know that Santa and the children will have a very special resonance in your homes because of that.  And can I, for myself, and I know for all Australians, say to the wives and the children and other family members and sweethearts of the men of the regiment, thank you for what you have done.  Without your care and your support and without your understanding it wouldn';t have been possible.
To the men in the regiment, you have done wonderful work.  The success of the coalition campaign against al-Qaeda in Afghanistan, the role played battalion special forces in Operation Anaconda and the progress that has been made in the war against terror, in which you have played such an integral part, is something that all Australians admire and all Australians thank you for.
The process of committing the armed forces of a nation to military service is properly and very necessary to be a difficult one.  It';s the hardest decision a government can ever takes. But in the end it is men like you who carry the ultimate responsibility and the ultimate danger.  And as Prime Minister of Australia I';m very conscience of that and that is why I can';t express too deeply and too warmly the sense of admiration and gratitude I have for all of you.
A little while later I';ll be making, along with the Defence Minister and the CDF, some announcements about the enhancement of our forces, particularly in the area of special forces, very necessary as a consequence of the new circumstances in which we now find ourselves.  As part of that there';ll be the necessity of some promotion, which I know will be very warmly welcomed and very warmly applauded within the Defence Forces.  But also collectively to the unit, can I say that I';ve been asked on behalf of the Governor General, who conveys his good wishes to you as Commander in Chief of the Defence Forces on this particular occasion, he';s been here on earlier occasions.  I';ve been asked on his behalf to award the meritorious unit citation to the Special Air Service regiment in recognition of the magnificent work the regiment has done in the war against terror.  The meritorious unit citation was introduced on the 15th of January 1991 to provide recognition to units for sustained outstanding service in war like operations.  And out of the many existing Australian defence force units, only eight have previously been awarded the citation.  It is therefore very appropriate on this occasion that I invite lieutenant Colonel Gus Gilmore to come forward to accept this citation on behalf of his regiment and the citation in its short form reads as follows:
“The Special Air Service regiment commitment to war like operations in Afghanistan has significantly contributed to the effectiveness of the Australian Defence Force';s support of Australia';s national interests.  The regiment';s significant contribution to the effectiveness of the coalition's operation against global terrorism has drawn the highest praise and respect.  The exceptional leadership and soldiering skills of the members of the regiment and their sustained outstanding performance are in the finest traditions of the Australian Army and the Australian Defence Force.”
With those words I again thank you on behalf of your fellow countrymen and women and present the citation and the award to lieutenant Colonel Gilmore.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this address (MP3 - 465Kb - 158secs)
As we come to celebrate Christmas with our own families, we think particularly of those families of the victims of the Bali atrocity that will celebrate their Christmas without their loved ones. And our thoughts and prayers are especially with them at what will be a difficult time. We look back on that terrible assault on humanity and as a nation we resolve to do all we can to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice. We also, feel for the families of people from other nations who died at the hands of that terrible act of terrorism. It's also an occasion to think of our struggling farmers, in many cases, grappling with the worst drought in more than a hundred years. And in different ways we can, as fellow Australians, give them assistance.
It's not, of course, been a year that will be happily remembered by many Australians, but it has been a year of very solid achievement in a number of areas. Our economy has continued to grow strongly and many tens of thousands of additional jobs have been generated. It's also been a year when tragedy has brought out the best in us and the way in which we have responded to Bali and helped our fellow Australians in so many different ways, shows that the Australian heart is good and strong and generous.
As we celebrate Christmas, we think of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force looking after our interests around the world and we thank them for that priceless gift of security that they give us. It is a time when the Christmas message encourages all of us to display good will towards our fellow Australians. Let us practice that in everything that we do. 
Janette and I wish all of you a very happy Christmas. And as we celebrate Christmas, let us think of the incredible privilege we all have of being Australians and living in such a wonderfully free and stable and happy country. 
Listen to this address (MP3 - 465Kb - 158secs)
Top


The Governor-General, the Chief of the Defence Force, the Defence Minister, Chief of the Navy, ladies and gentlemen and, very particularly and very directly, the men and women of the Australian Defence Force who are gathered here on this vessel as it is about to depart for the Persian Gulf and, also very particularly their family members and other loved ones.
 This is an important day for you. It's an important day for the Australian Defence Force and as the head of the elected Government you, above all other Australians, are entitled to know from me a number of things. You're entitled to know from me why it is that the Government has asked you to undertake this task. You go to the Persian Gulf as part of the existing multinational interception force but it may be, given circumstances that are now unfolding in relation to Iraq and that country's response to certain UN resolutions, it may be that this vessel and the deployment here are involved in wider operations. We hope that is unnecessary. We will work as a nation and as a people to render that unnecessary if at all possible.
 No person in their own mind embraces military conflict without trying to the maximum extent possible to avoid it and to seek another alternative. We would all like to live in a world in which there were no challenges and no problems and that you could simply by turning your back on a challenge of a rogue state possessing weapons of mass destruction hope it would go away. But the world has never been quite as simple as that and it's not as simple as that now.
I believe that it is right for the international community to try and disarm Iraq. I believe that if the international community baulked at that task, if it walks away from it, if it gives up because it is too hard, Iraq will not oblige by giving up her weapons of mass destruction. She will be emboldened not only to retain them but to also expand them. And the example of that successful defiance will be copied by other countries and we will increasingly live in a world where a growing number of rogue states possess weapons that could do enormous damage not only to their neighbours but to the broader community. And that, in the essence, is the challenge that the international community faces and over the weeks ahead we'll debate and resolve as an international community how best it can respond to that challenge.
 We are working very closely with our friends and allies through the United Nations to achieve an outcome through those councils. But you cannot unrelate or disconnect the forward deployment or forward positioning of military forces with a diplomatic effort because as the Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, said last weekend he did not believe the weapons inspectors would be in Iraq had it not been for the military deployment undertaken by the United States.
Can I say very directly to the men and women who are carrying the hopes and the prayers and the good wishes of all Australians of all complexions, of all political persuasions and of all the variety of views you inevitably have in a great democracy on important political issues, can I say to you, you go with the united good wishes and prayers of all Australians. I can promise you, on behalf of the Government, that we will do everything we can not only to keep you out of harms way, consistent with the (inaudible) I've outlined, but also to bring about a peaceful resolution of this very difficult issue. Can I say to your families who are left behind who will provide you, through the defence community, with all of the support and the love and affection that you are entitled to have in these difficult times.
Finally, can I say on behalf of all Australians, I know, all Australians, how immensely proud we are of the courage, the tradition, the professionalism, the commitment and, very importantly, the mateship of the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces, good luck to you all, we wish you a safe return home. Thank you.
[ends]


Mr Speaker, my purpose today is to explain to the House and through it to the Australian people the government's belief that the world community must deal decisively with Iraq; why Iraq's continued defiance of the United Nations and its possession of chemical and biological weapons and its pursuit of a nuclear capability poses a real and unacceptable threat to the stability and security of our world; why the matters at stake go to the very credibility of the United Nations itself; why the issue is of direct concern to Australia and why, therefore, the Australian government has authorised the forward positioning of elements of the Australian Defence Force in the Persian Gulf.
Although there is considerable debate about the best course of action to resolve this crisis I want, for a moment, to focus on the one thing that unites us all - and that is a common abhorrence of war.
I know that in this I speak for every member of this House, every Australian. We, all of us, hope that it will still prove possible to find an outcome acceptable to the international community without military force being used. The government will not make a final decision to commit to military conflict unless and until it is satisfied that all achievable options for a peaceful resolution have been explored.
The other point of agreement shared by members in this House, by our community and by the community of nations is that Iraq must not be allowed to possess weapons of mass destruction - for the security and stability of our world, it must be disarmed.
For years the nations of the world have sought to persuade Iraq to abandon these most offensive of weapons. The Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, has refused to comply and now the weight of the world's attention has fallen on him.  Only one nation can determine whether force will be necessary or not. Only one nation, acting alone, can make the choice for peace. That nation is Iraq.
Full disclosure by Iraq of its chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programmes and immediate and total cooperation by Iraq with the provisions of resolution 1441 of the Security Council will remove the need for military action.
In his report to the Security Council, Dr Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations weapons inspection body for Iraq, made it clear where he believed that the responsibility for the current terrible impasse lay, and I quote:
"Iraq appears not to have come to a genuine acceptance - not even today - of the disarmament, which was demanded of it and which it needs to carry out to win the confidence of the world and to live in peace".
Of at least one thing we can all be absolutely certain - if the world turns its back on the threat posed by Iraq; if the community of nations gives up because it is all too hard, then Saddam Hussein will not reward us with benign behaviour.
Such weakness, such an abject failure of international will, will - as in the past - be treated with contempt.
Iraq will not only keep her current weapons but will add to them. Saddam Hussein will not abandon his chemical and biological weapons programmes. He will keep striving to build a nuclear capacity. And he will almost certainly, at some time in the future, use these weapons to fulfil his ambition to dominate his region.
Given his aggressive history, who could blame his neighbours, when faced with an Iraq allowed to keep, through the default of the international community, weapons of mass destruction, if they decided that their own security necessitated a corresponding arsenal.
Worse still, other rogue states observing the world community's failure to deal with Iraq will be encouraged to flout the international conventions on arms control and develop their own chemical, biological and even nuclear weapons.
 We should all be deeply concerned about a world in which weapons of mass destruction become the norm. The more nations that possess these weapons the greater the risk that they will be used. The likelihood of them falling into the hands of terrorists multiplies as their numbers proliferate. Proliferation of these weapons will make the world a much more dangerous place for all of us.
Through failure to deal once and for all with Iraq, the world will have effectively given a green light to the further spread of these weapons and have further undermined the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty and the conventions on chemical and biological weapons which the world - and not least Australia - has worked so hard to build over the last 30 or more years.
At the heart of this debate must be a recognition of the threat posed to the security of the world through the progressive break down of the international covenants against proliferation of nuclear weapons and the spread of chemical and biological weapons.
 The world has developed over time a series of treaties, conventions, protocols and control regimes both to prevent the proliferation of chemical, nuclear and biological weapons and, where possible, to eliminate such of those weapons as may exist.
Australia is vehemently opposed to the proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. We do not possess these weapons and we wish to ensure that they do not become an acceptable part of every nation's arsenal. They are too dangerous. Their destructive power is hundreds of times greater than conventional weapons - terrible as they may be. Their destructive force is not easily contained or controlled and their effects can span the generations. These are no ordinary weapons.
Every time a nation is allowed to undermine the international treaties and agreements put in place to restrict or prohibit the spread of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons, the world becomes more dangerous for all nations.
Australia - under both Coalition and Labor governments - has been a staunch supporter and active proponent of multilateral action to stop the spread of these weapons.
We, therefore, have a direct and lively interest in ensuring that the international order against the spread of such weapons is not eroded but rather reinforced.
It is true that too many nations already include weapons of mass destruction in their armouries. Other nations have developed nuclear weapons - but only two stand accused of breaching the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty: Iraq and North Korea.
Iraq has been thumbing its nose at the United Nations persistently and publicly for 12 years. In North Korea's case the extent of its breach of international commitments has only recently become apparent.
The international community, with Australia playing a leading role, has begun to deal with North Korea. The security of our region and that of the broader world demands that North Korea be brought back into compliance with the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty.
It is ludicrous to suggest, as some have, that because Australia wants the Iraqi issue resolved, then we are passive or indifferent about North Korea. Both pose great threats to world security. Both are of intense interest to Australia. It is not a question of choice - both must be dealt with.
I pose the simple question. What hope does the world have of dealing peacefully and effectively with North Korea if the Security Council is seen to deal weakly with Iraq?
Just as we accept without reservation that stability in North Asia is crucial to our economy and our security, we must recognise that the Middle East is not remote or irrelevant to Australia.
Australia is home to several hundred thousand people of Middle Eastern background. We welcomed them, some of them refugees from Saddam Hussein's brutal regime, and we appreciate their contribution to our nation. Many of them could be torn between seeing Saddam brought to account and the possible dangers facing their families back in Iraq. During this time, they will need our compassion and our support. All Australians should ensure that this is offered.
For almost 20 years Iraq has been a constant threat to its neighbours. If Iraq emerges from its current confrontation with world opinion with its arsenal of chemical and biological weapons intact, the potential for Saddam Hussein's aggression against his neighbours to be renewed will be greatly enhanced. Iraq will again feel free to coerce and intimidate countries in the region.
 The old policy of containment is eroding. Saddam Hussein has increasingly been able to subvert the sanctions. Smuggling of oil from Iraq and the illegal importation of proscribed goods into Iraq have increased dramatically in the last few years.
 Despite the valiant efforts of the weapons inspectors - who destroyed far more of Iraq's weapons programmes than Saddam Hussein ever expected - Iraq has still been able to hang on to most of the knowledge and equipment it needs.   Inspectors have never been able to eradicate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programmes - at best they slowed their development.
There will be no stability - no security - for the nations of the Gulf until Iraq is disarmed of its weapons of mass destruction - totally and permanently.
Disarming Iraq will bring enormous benefits to the Middle East and will be widely welcomed.
Clearly, however, the international community must redouble its efforts to resolve the seemingly intractable Israeli - Palestinian conflict.
I again call on both sides to bring an end to the violence affecting Israelis and Palestinians. Neither side should make the mistake of alienating, through violence, those who are willing and ready to negotiate a settlement.
Israel has no stauncher ally than Australia in its pursuit of the right to exist within secure and internationally recognised borders.
Australia strongly supports the creation of a viable independent Palestinian state.
It remains a great tragedy that the courageous efforts of Ehud Barak, the former Prime Minister of Israel, who offered the Palestinians the great bulk of their demands, were ultimately repudiated by the Palestinian Chairman Yasser Arafat.
As a genuine friend of Israel's, I urge Ariel Sharon to use the authority of his re-election to take whatever opportunity might reasonably arise to engage the Palestinian Authority in constructive peace discussions.
 He should facilitate all bona fide international attempts to bring the parties together.
Can I, however, Mr Speaker, say this to the members of the Palestinian Authority.
How can the Prime Minister of Israel be expected to do these things while ever the murderous pattern of suicide bombing continues to be inflicted on the Israelis?
In the end result, however, any action taken against Iraq must be justified on its own merits. It will not and cannot be predicated on whether or not other challenges to world security have been addressed.
The overriding concern about Iraq is its record of aggression and willingness to use weapons of mass destruction. Saddam Hussein clearly does not see them as weapons of last resort. He has used them against his neighbours. He has used them against his own people.
This is a doleful distinction, which Iraq shares with no other country.
Iraq has form. Saddam Hussein has without provocation invaded Iran and Kuwait. He has fired missiles at Saudi Arabia, Israel, Bahrain and Qatar. He has bullied, threatened and extorted Syria, Jordan and the Gulf States.
 Who knows what other horrors he might have perpetrated on the Kurds or the Shia Muslims if not for the no-fly zones which Britain and the United States have enforced for these last 12 years.
Iraq also has a long history of training and supporting regional terrorist groups. It supports Palestinian suicide bombers who have caused such death and destruction in Israel.
Iraq's history of relationships with and support for terrorist organisations magnify our concerns. The rise of international terrorism adds a new and frightening dimension to the threat posed by the proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.
The ultimate nightmare for us all must be that weapons of mass destruction fall into the hands of terrorists. The more the world leaves unchecked either the possession of such weapons by rogue states or the spread of those weapons, the more likely it becomes that terrorists will acquire and use them.
 It cannot be stressed too strongly, Mr Speaker, that all of this is added to the fact that Iraq has flouted with impunity the resolutions of the Security Council of the United Nations.
The Australian government knows that Iraq still has chemical and biological weapons and that Iraq wants to develop nuclear weapons.
We share the view of many that, unless checked, Iraq could, even without outside help, develop nuclear weapons in about five years.
 Even before the report of the Head of the United Nations weapons inspection body there was compelling evidence to support these beliefs within the published detailed dossiers of British and American intelligence.
On the basis of the intelligence available, the British Joint Intelligence Committee judged that:
Iraq has a useable chemical and biological weapons capability, which has included recent production of chemical and biological agents.
 Iraq continues to work on developing nuclear weapons - uranium has been sought from Africa that has no civil nuclear application in Iraq.
Iraq possesses extended-range versions of the SCUD ballistic missile in breach of Security Council resolutions, which are capable of reaching Cyprus, Turkey, Tehran and Israel.
Iraq's current military planning specifically envisages the use of chemical and biological weapons. In its view, Saddam Hussein is determined to retain these capabilities.
The analysis provided by the Director of US Central Intelligence reached similar conclusions - viz:
Iraq is reconstituting its nuclear weapons programme.
It has begun renewed production of chemical warfare agents, probably including mustard, sarin, cyclosarin and VX.
All key aspects - R&amp;D, production, and weaponisation - of Iraq's offensive biological weapons programme are active and most elements are larger and more advanced than they were before the Gulf war.
The intelligence material collected over recent times, to which Australia has contributed, points overwhelmingly to Saddam Hussein having acted in systematic defiance of the resolutions of the Security Council, maintained his stockpile of chemical and biological weapons and sought to reconstitute a nuclear weapons programme.
 Given the strong and critical language of the Blix Report, the nations which comprise the Security Council face a stark and difficult choice.
The Council must either act to ensure full compliance by Iraq with resolution 1441 or, through either excessive delay or indifference, risk crippling its own authority.
To emphasise the weight of responsibility, which rests upon the current members of the Security Council, it is worth recalling to the House some brief history of this matter.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council wanted to ensure that the Iraqi President was no longer in a position to launch any more unprovoked attacks on his neighbours. It resolved that Iraq must declare and then destroy all of its chemical and biological weapons and any materials or facilities connected with Saddam's attempt to achieve nuclear capability - his weapons of mass destruction. Iraq was prohibited from ever again possessing such weapons.
When an aggressor is defeated it is a normal and wise practice for the world to seek greater security by demanding the destruction of its offensive weapons - both Japan and Germany were required to disarm after World War II. Both did so and have maintained their commitment to, and championed the cause of, peace.
 Saddam Hussein too agreed to disarmament - to allow the United Nations to supervise and record the destruction of his arsenal of chemical and biological weapons and his nuclear capacity.
 On this basis, and this basis alone, the world community agreed to cease hostilities against Iraq in April 1991. Iraq was allowed to maintain a conventional force - no one questions Iraq's right as a sovereign nation to protect itself by maintaining conventional defensive weapons.
The cease-fire effectively was conditional on Iraq continuing to comply with the terms laid down by the Security Council - including, and importantly, the commitment to renounce weapons of mass destruction. To ensure compliance, the UN determined to continue economic sanctions against Iraq.
For 12 years the community of nations has tried to cajole and encourage Iraq to honour the Security Council resolutions.
For 12 years the international community has tried to contain his ambitions and limit his capacity to keep or manufacture weapons of mass destruction.
For 12 years Australian navy personnel have supported the Multinational Interception Force in the Persian Gulf, which enforces sanctions against Iraq - the crew of the HMAS Kanimbla, which was farewelled on 23rd January last, are our most recent contribution to this important operation.
For 8 years the Iraqi President obstructed the weapons inspection teams, who were charged with verifying his compliance with the UN resolutions. And for the last four years, until last December, he refused them entry to Iraq.
 Iraq has not complied with 24 out of the 27 provisions contained in successive Security Council resolutions. Over the last 12 years the Security Council has passed no fewer than nine resolutions condemning Iraq's non-cooperation with weapons inspectors. Iraq has had a lot of time and plenty of opportunities to get it right.
The government has consistently argued that the United Nations needs to deal with Saddam Hussein's continued defiance of the Security Council's authority.
 This was the view I put to President Bush shortly before his address to the General Assembly of the United Nations, in September last year. I then argued to him the merits of working through the United Nations.
That has been the steady theme of a strong diplomatic effort by Australia, ably led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
We have supported a leading role for the United Nations in addressing this threat. Our close relationship and our ready access to the US administration has meant that our views are heard and respected.
We approached Security Council members in capitals and in New York to encourage a constructive resolution. We recently sent an envoy to South East Asia to consult key partners in the region and inform them of Australia's position.
 The Foreign Minister's consultations in Europe last week demonstrated we are not alone, neither in our concern, nor in our preparedness, ultimately to act if necessary.
 On 8th November last year, the Security Council passed resolution 1441. The nations which comprise the Council, large and small, from all the regions of the world, of almost every faith and political persuasion decided, unanimously, that Iraq had been, and remained, in breach of its obligations. In particular they drew attention to Iraq's failure to cooperate with United Nations weapons inspectors and to complete the required disarmament actions.
The resolution puts Iraq on notice - the consequences of non-compliance will be serious.
If the compelling terms of this last resolution are not enforced, then the Security Council's deeds will have failed to match its rhetoric and serious long-term damage will have been done to the United Nations.
In hindsight the world has been too trusting - not careful enough in our dealings with the Iraqi President. But the situation is different now. Iraq has not changed - but we have. We now understand, after the events in Bali and those of 11th September 2001, that we are living in a world where unexpected and devastating terrorist attacks on free and open societies can occur in ways that we never before imagined possible.
There is a new dimension to international relations and we cannot ignore it. The atrocity in Bali demonstrated something Australia had never fully understood until then - that we are truly vulnerable. In light of this we have reappraised the way we view and deal with the threat of terrorism. We understand the danger of leaving threats unaddressed.
As the British Prime Minister, Mr Tony Blair, said last Saturday there are two grave issues the world must now confront: the problem of weapons of mass destruction and the challenge of international terrorism.
 He said that if both were not dealt with, they would sooner or later come together with terrifying consequences for the world.
On 8th November, the Security Council decided to - and I will use the words of resolution 1441 - "afford Iraq a final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations".
 The Security Council has given the Iraqi President one last opportunity to demonstrate his willingness to fulfil the commitments he gave in 1991. The terms of the resolution are explicit and prescriptive. Iraq is required to demonstrate compliance. The onus is not on the inspectors to find prohibited weapons or programmes. It is on Iraq to prove it has destroyed its weapons and dismantled its programmes.
And how has Iraq responded?
 The weapons inspectors have given their first comprehensive report. They have been very critical of Iraq's attitude - In Dr Blix's view Iraq has cooperated on process but not on substance. The studied impudence of Iraq to the rest of the world has again been on display.
Without Iraq's active and sincere cooperation the weapons inspectors are wasting their time. Inspectors can assist Iraq disarm, they can verify to the world community that Iraq is disarming - they cannot, simply by their presence, achieve disarmament.
Dr Blix did not expressly ask for more time. He did, however, ask for more co-operation. Those who argue that the key issue is to give the inspectors more time have missed the point.
 The inspectors don't need time. They need Iraq's cooperation. If Iraq was demonstrating full compliance, I would argue they be given all the time in the world. But this is demonstrably not the case.
 At the end of last month, Dr Blix reported to the Security Council that all the questions concerning disarmament of Iraq remain outstanding.
The resolution had posed two important tests by which Iraq could demonstrate compliance - the provision of a full and accurate declaration of the regime's weapons of mass destruction and active cooperation with the inspection process.
 Dr Blix reported that Iraq has failed both tests.
The point must clearly be understood that, following its defeat in the Gulf War, Iraq admitted to possessing chemical and biological weapons and to developing a nuclear programme. In those circumstances the overwhelming imperative is that Iraq demonstrates to the world that it has destroyed those weapons and disbanded those programmes. That, in fact, is what this debate is all about.
The world demands to know precisely what happened to Iraq's pre-1998 weapons and material. Iraq claims to have destroyed them - but Dr Blix is right to demand proof.
There are 6500 chemical bombs - including 550 shells filled with mustard gas, 360 tonnes of bulk chemical warfare agent - including 1.5 tonnes of the deadly nerve agent VX, 3000 tonnes of precursor chemicals - 300 tonnes of which could only be used for the production of VX, and over 30 000 special munitions for the delivery of chemical and biological agents - all unaccounted for.
In 1995, the international community was confronted by Iraq's massive programme for developing offensive biological weapons - one of the largest and most advanced in the world.
 Despite four years of intensive inquiries and searches, the weapons inspectors did not even know of its existence until Saddam's son-in-law, Hussein Kamal defected. Faced with its duplicity Iraq finally admitted to producing aflatoxin - which causes cancers, the paralysing poison botulinum and anthrax bacteria.
It admitted to manufacturing 8 500 litres of anthrax. A single gram is enough for millions of fatal doses. Dr Blix wants proof that the anthrax has been destroyed - and so do we.
Iraq must account for the large quantity of undeclared growth media for biological weapons and for all its SCUD B ballistic missiles. It must explain why it has rebuilt equipment and facilities destroyed by previous inspection teams.
 It must allow the unfettered, unrestricted reconnaissance flights so relevant data can be collected and analysed. And it must allow the inspectors unsupervised access to relevant members of the Iraqi science community.
Other countries have, in the recent past, volunteered to undertake a disarmament process - South Africa, Ukraine and Kazakhstan. Disarmament can involve complex technical checks and processes - but it is still relatively simple provided there is a high-level political commitment to disarm, sound planning and most importantly full cooperation and transparency with weapons inspection teams.
The transparent, openly cooperative, behaviour of those three countries in disarming could not present a more vivid contrast with the stubborn, deceitful behaviour of Iraq, which has all the hallmarks of a nation which is hiding something.
The world community is not asking the Iraqi regime to prove the impossible. It is asking for straightforward answers to a series of very serious questions.
Now is not the time to relieve the pressure on Iraq.
And there is only one form of pressure that Saddam Hussein understands - the threat of military force.
 We have tried sanctions and containment. Sanctions can be a very powerful instrument of persuasion but have little influence over a dictator who cares nothing for the wellbeing of his people.
The brutal treatment by Saddam Hussein of his own people can be seen through his cruel and cynical manipulation of the oil-for-food programme developed by the United Nations.
For the last 12 years Iraq has been able to trade its oil for humanitarian goods - food and medicines - under United Nations supervision.
Tragically for the Iraqi people, Saddam Hussein has rorted the programme, violated its provisions and evaded its constraints. A significant portion of the humanitarian goods are re-exported from Iraq for cash, and oil is routinely smuggled out and sold illegally so that Saddam Hussein can finance his weapons programmes.
It is the threat of military action which has proved to be the most effective, and perhaps the only, means of attracting President Hussein's attention.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations has recognised the value of this strategy. Kofi Annan has stated publicly that in his opinion if the Americans had not applied military pressure through the build-up of forces in the Gulf, the weapons inspectors would not now be in Iraq. There can be no stronger statement of the diplomatic value of the military deployment. There could be no more explicit rejection of America's critics.
The Australian government has the same view. Like the Secretary-General, we recognise the value of this strategy and do not consider that the burden of it should fall to the United States and the United Kingdom alone.
That is one of the reasons why elements of the ADF are being pre positioned in the Persian Gulf.
Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that Australia has pre-positioned forces in the Gulf, both to apply diplomatic pressure against Saddam Hussein and in anticipation of possible military action against Iraq.
In 1998, in the lead up to Operation Desert Fox the government pre-positioned Special Air Service forces and two refuelling aircraft with British and American forces in the Gulf. We did so in the absence of any new, specific, Security Council authorisation and on the understanding that a final decision to commit to military action had not been taken at the time of deployment. The aim then, as now, was to put pressure on Saddam Hussein. The circumstances of the pre-positioning of Australian forces in 1998 are so similar as to be nearly identical.
 In 1998, the then Leader of the Opposition, the Member for Brand - a former Defence Minister - recognised the value of the strategy, when he said and I quote:
 "Part of the reason why we have supported the government in giving our approval to the steps that they've taken thus far, has been to assist in putting pressure on Saddam Hussein. And there's no doubt in my mind if there had not been pressure coming in from those who are prepared to be part of the coalition, the energising of the United Nations Security Council and the energising of a couple of members of the United Nations Security Council - Russia and France - to try and find solutions, simply wouldn't have occurred".
In deciding to pre-position our troops, we were also responding to advice from the Australian Defence Force that if, at some time in the near future, we wish to participate in military action our troops would be advantaged by having the opportunity to prepare and acclimatise.
 Mr Speaker, over the past few months there has been sustained criticism from some quarters, both here and abroad, regarding the role of the United States on this whole issue.
So much of that criticism has been either wrong, unfair or downright prejudiced.
No criticism is more outrageous than the claim that US behaviour is driven by a wish to take control of Iraq's oil reserves. Self evidently, if cheap oil supplies were America's dominant motive, then years before now the United States would have done a deal with Iraq to lift the sanctions in return for plentiful supplies of low-priced oil.
I have no doubt that the driving force behind American policy towards Iraq now is that, in the wake of the events of 11th September, they have a justifiable concern that the twin evils of weapons of mass destruction, in the hands of rogue states, and international terrorism come together with horrific consequences.
The United States has also been falsely accused of acting unilaterally and thus in contemptuous disregard for the role of the United Nations.
The issue of Iraq is now before the Security Council precisely because of the actions and pressure of the United States.
For almost four years the Security Council had left Iraq in the too hard basket. On 12th September 2002, President Bush addressed the General Assembly and reminded the United Nations of its responsibility to deal with Iraq's repeated defiance of Security Council resolutions.
 Unless, therefore, it is regarded as provocative and contemptuous of the United States to charge the United Nations with the obligation of enforcing its own decisions, this allegation against the United States is without any substance.
The issue of Iraq will again be before the Security Council tomorrow, 5th February, at the express request of the United States. And its Secretary of State, Colin Powell, will present some new material to Council members.
I have authorised the use of some Australian-sourced material in that presentation, which will include material from a number of countries. So as to protect sources, it is not possible for me to be specific as to what material has been sourced in Australia. I am sure that the House will understand this.
It can barely be denied by anyone that all the actions of the United States, at present, are designed to ensure that the Security Council acts to compel compliance with its own unanimously adopted resolution 1441.
Australia is a close ally of the United States. No nation is more important to our long-term security. Australians will never forget the vital assistance we received from the United States during World War II.
Our value systems - while far from identical are nonetheless similar. We share common democratic values. We have made common cause in the fight against terrorism.
Australia and the United States have a common interest in preventing the spread of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.
Australia's alliance with the United States has been and will remain an important element in the government's decision making process on Iraq.
The crucial long-term value of the US Alliance should always be a factor in major national security decisions taken by Australia.
In an increasingly globalised and borderless world, the relationship between Australia and the United States will become more and not less important.
The most intense desire of us all is that this challenging issue is resolved without war. No one wants war. We all hope it can be avoided.
Given the past intransigent attitude of Iraq, it is very difficult to conceive that even the full weight of Security Council opinion, unanimously expressed and threatening imminent military action, will induce Saddam Hussein to comply with his international obligations.
The only hope of a peaceful solution will be if the Security Council acts clearly, decisively and unambiguously.
The greater the hesitancy, the greater the blurring at the edges, the more likely it is that Iraq will again dismiss world opinion.
These are some of the views I will put next week in my discussions with President Bush, the British Prime Minister, Mr Blair, the Secretary-General of the United Nations and others.
I will make it clear that, if military action does become necessary, Australia's strong preference is that it takes place pursuant to a new Security Council resolution.
This is not because Australia believes, as a matter of international law, that a new resolution is required.
It is because the passage of a new resolution, authorising the use of force, will bring forth the greatest level of international support for, and involvement in, military action against Iraq.
There is a strong argument that the terms of 1441, when coupled with all the previous resolutions passed by the Security Council about Iraq, provide a sufficient legal basis for military action, without the express need for a further resolution.
 In fact in 1998, the government agreed to the deployment mentioned earlier - with the support of the then Opposition - in the clear knowledge that those personnel deployed could be involved in action against Iraq, believing that adequate legal authority existed for that deployment and any subsequent military action under then existing resolutions of the Security Council.
I have said frequently that the outcome from the Security Council may not be a black or white one.
The sense of the Security Council could be that it acquiesces in, or acknowledges the need for, military action without giving it direct sanction.
It is possible that the majority of the Council members could vote for military action but the resolution could be subsequently vetoed by a Permanent Member.
That proposition clearly was in the mind of the Leader of the Opposition, when on 15th January he said, and I quote:
"We won't support any military action outside the authority of the UN ... The exception to this position might occur in the case of overwhelming UN Security Council support for military action, but where support for such action was subject to veto. In other words, we might need to assess such a situation in light of the circumstances of the veto".
If the Security Council produces a grey rather than a black or white outcome, choices on final action and commitments will need to be made by many nations, including Australia.
In reaching its final decision the Australian government will be influenced not only by our powerful desire to stop the spread of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and our alliance with the United States, but also importantly by the past practice of nations which have taken collective military action in the interests of world or regional security.
For example, NATO countries conducted bombing attacks against Serbia in 1999 without any kind of direct Security Council authorisation. That authority was never sought because of an apprehended Russian veto.
A subsequent joint Sino-Russian motion condemning the NATO action was defeated. There the matter rested. The Security Council was taken to have acquiesced in the NATO action.
Our goal is disarmament. We want to see a renewed commitment to the principle of non-proliferation. We want to see Iraq free of weapons of mass destruction. We want to see the sanctions lifted. We want Iraq back in the community of nations - because it would be good for the world, good for Australia, and good for the people of Iraq. Most of all we want the conflict resolved without resort to military force.
If the international community does not act now to disarm Iraq, it will have made a mockery of years of effort to stop the spread of weapons of mass destruction. It will have encouraged others to mimic Iraq. It will make dealing with North Korea almost impossible. And, most importantly, failure to act will gravely compromise the authority of the United Nations.
Clearly the pre-positioning of Australian forces and the contingency planning with the US military - to which Ministers and I have referred frequently over recent months - has put Australia in a position where it can effectively, and in circumstances providing the best assurances of safety for our forces, contribute to a military operation against Iraq, should a final decision be taken for this to occur.
The moment for that final decision has yet to arrive. That decision ultimately will be guided by the judgement which the government makes as to where Australia's national interest lies.
This issue poses great and difficult choices for Australia. We all hate the very thought of war in any form. Our natural instinct is to recoil from it. The temptation to turn our backs on the problem and hope it will go away is great.
Yet the realities of the world in which we now live do not permit us that luxury.
We all know that history is replete with examples of the community of nations retreating from difficult decisions through fear of the immediate consequences only to find that those difficult decisions must ultimately be addressed and at an infinitely greater cost.
Finally, Mr Speaker, our thoughts must turn to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force on deployment doing their duty and maintaining a long tradition of courage and professionalism in the service of Australia.
Whatever may be their role in the weeks and months ahead, we admire them and wish them well. We are united in our prayers and hopes for their safety and wellbeing.
  [ends]


Well thank you very much, Paul. In case any of you don't know, he's the Liberal Party candidate for Ryde in the State election. And after that introduction I've learnt that not only do Greeks bear gifts but they steal lines. I'm going to build my speech around the restoration of our AAA rating. So I'll still do a little bit of that but, first of all, to Edwin Matuik, the Chairman of the Ryde business forum; my parliamentary colleague, Andrew Tink, the member for Epping; Greg Pearce MLC, who's been the Duty Upper House member for the area; Anthony Roberts, who's the Liberal Party candidate for Lane Cove, Paul Nicolaou and ladies and gentlemen.
 It is, for me, always a pleasure to come back to this forum. I've addressed it on a number of occasions in the time that I've been Prime Minister and it's an important part of my responsibilities as Prime Minister to look after the people who send me to Parliament, that is the people of the electorate of Bennelong, which of course includes the city of Ryde and I acknowledge the presence of Councillor, Edna Wilde, the Mayor of the city of Ryde. And, of course, it's part of Australia that boasts a very vibrant and diverse business community. People are legitimately entitled to call North Ryde the Silicon Valley of Australia. It's a part of Australia that boasts a very large number of pharmaceutical manufacturing companies. It's a part of Sydney and Australia what has become home to a variety of communications and IT companies. It's also a part of Australia that has a very vibrant university and a very strong educational sector. And many of these influences and many of these activities come together in a quite remarkable way. It's also an electorate of great ethnic diversity. The most widely spoken language, I guess, in the electorate of Bennelong after English would be the various dialects of Chinese. It has a very large Korean community and, of course, a very well established, Greek, Italian and many other communities all coming together in a very positive and united Australian blend.
 We're celebrating something very important today and that is the rain. It's a measure of the despair that many of us have felt about the impact of the drought on this country and its economy and on the people of Australia, particularly the people of the land, that we should think something as basic as that is so very important. But there are a number of things that represent clouds on the horizon, no pun being intended, in relation to the economic strength of Australia and the drought has been one of them. It's too early to say that it's been broken but if, in fact, these rains continue and we do see the end of the drought it will be something of immense relief not only to our farmers but to the nation generally because nobody should underestimate the human cost of it, nobody should underestimate the economic cost of it and nobody, of course, should underestimate the sense of injustice and frustration that farmers in our country will feel that they have so few good seasons. And they had a couple after years of bad seasons, they suffered the corruption of world prices, largely due to the bad trading practices of the European Union and the United States and Japan - and I'll come in a moment to some of the differences that we have with different parts of the world when it comes to trade. But the breaking of the drought, if it occurs, will be of enormous benefit to this country.
Our economy is fundamentally stronger than it has been at any time, in my view, since the late 1960s. And there is an argument that it's even stronger than it was in the late 1960s because it is less protected and less propped up by restrictive, regulatory, protectionist policies. In the late 1960s we didn't have a floating exchange rate. In the late 1960s we had very high tariff barriers under which a lot of inefficiency flourished in this country. In the late 1960s we had a very highly regulated labour market. In the late 1960s we had still, I think, a very primitive view of the merits of foreign investment.
 Now, a lot of things have changed in this country in the 35 years that have gone by since that period. And why I would argue that the Australian economy now is perhaps fundamentally even stronger than what it was in the late 1960s is that we are better able to survive in a hostile world than was the case then. We don't need as many supports as we needed then and we demonstrated that in 1997 when the Asian economic crisis engulfed our region. Everybody thought that the Australian economy would go under with the economies of Indonesia and Korea and Thailand and Malaysia. That didn't happen. And one of the reasons it didn't happen was that we had basically changed the way in which we ran our economy so that we were able to survive in a more hostile environment more successfully. We lost a lot of markets in Asia in 1997 and instead of losing them forever, we were able to divert those markets to Europe and to North America. And we were able to, through a flexible exchange rate, we were able to win markets in America and Europe that we had lost in Asia. And because of the other reforms that we had undertaken, we were able to ride out that crisis and it barely dented the growth that had returned to the Australian economy. And if you look back over the past six or seven years, there is an impressive record of gathering economic strengths, and in a symbolic way it culminated in the decision of the rating agency last week to restore our AAA credit rating.
 We lost that AAA credit rating in 1986, at the time when the then treasurer Mr Keating warned of the possibility of Australia becoming a banana republic because of our very weak balance of payments situation. You don't recover a credit rating like that by accident. It's not like being sent off for 10 minutes, and then allowed back onto the field after the time has expired. If you lose a credit rating like that and you don't change your economy, you never get it back.
 But we did change our economy, and one of the things that symbolises, more than anything else, the reason why we got our credit rating back is that our total Federal Government debt as a proportion of our annual wealth generation - the economists call it GDP, I think it's more readily understood if it's described as an annual wealth generation, the total amount of wealth we produce each year - our Government debt is only three per cent of our total annual wealth generation. In Japan it's 76 per cent, in the United States it's 49 per cent and the average of the OECD, which are the industrialised countries of the world, it's 47 per cent. So by any comparison that is a remarkable achievement and it's one of the reasons why we have very low interest rates, but it's also one of the reasons why, in a long-term sense, the nation that we will bequeath to our children and grandchildren, will be relatively freer of debt than the nation that some of the current generations have inherited.
 Now, some of the things that we have done in order to arrive at that position have not been popular, and they have not been easy. But in the long run, if you don't address the difficult issues that confront you right now, in the long run they become more difficult and addressing them is only accomplished at an infinitely greater cost. Now, nations that put off immediate economic challenges because they shy away and recoil from and come back from the short-term pain and difficulty, don't enjoy the experience of those problems disappearing as time goes by. They never disappear. They in fact magnify and the cost of addressing them further down the track is that much harder and that much more painful. And there is a parallel in a non-economic area that I will come to in a moment, but if you look at the story of the Australian economy, particularly over the last seven years, it's the story of a willingness to address in the short term, in the immediate term, the challenges, knowing that if you don't do them now, they will still have to be addressed in the future, it will be that much harder, and the adjustment burden will be that much more painful for the people of this country.
As you know, I have just returned from a very brief visit to three countries that are very important to us in different ways, and the fact that I chose to go to Washington, London and Jakarta, in a sense is a metaphor for the triangular character of the relationships that Australia has in the world. We're quite unique as a nation. We are a western society in the Asian Pacific region with very profound historical and cultural links with Europe, but also an enduring and increasingly important relationship with the United States, and there is no nation in the world quite like that.
 And it's something that must define the way we deal with the countries of those regions, and the way in which we conduct our foreign policy and our security projection. You must never see Australia as exclusively being identified with one part of the world. You must always see it as being in that very special, almost unique, occupancy of an intersection of geography and culture and history. And that explains the nature of the Australian economy. It will always be important for this country to place an enormous emphasis on our economic and our political and our human relations with the countries of Asia.
 I claim it as one of the real economic achievements of my Government, the economic relationship that we have built with China. We've had a strong economic relationship with Japan and Korea for many years, but over the last five years our exports to China have doubled. And last year we were able to win, through a remarkable combination of effort from the business community, the Federal Government, the State Government of Western Australia - both sides of politics in that state - and many others, were able to win a long-term, a 25 year natural gas contract with Guangdong Province in China, winning it against very fierce competition, and win it because we were seen in the end as being the most stable, reliable, dependable supplier of that natural gas. And the significance of that to the long term economic relationship between our two countries is very important. That country of course contributes enormously to the character of the region. It also is a growing power in a country with which we must build very, very strong relationships.
 But we're also a nation that has a very close relationship with the United States, and that of course has been the subject of a lot of comment, some criticism, and I think deep down, overwhelmingly, something that is supported and approved by the majority of the Australian people. The United States is the most powerful country mankind has seen. It's got its flaws. We disagree with it on a number of things. I don't think the trading policies of the United States, particularly their subsidies for agriculture, are of any assistance to Australia. They are against Australia's interests. And one of the reasons why I am enthusiastic about trying to negotiate a Free Trade Agreement with the United States, if it can be achieved, is that we may be able to remove some of those barriers. If we can achieve a Free Trade Agreement with the United States, we will, I believe, lay the foundation, not only for a stronger bilateral relationship between our two countries, between Australia and the strongest economy in the world, and a growing economy, and an economy of great diversity which is valuable both to our export industries and also our import industries, but we will also, I believe, be able to achieve markets and opportunities for many of Australia's producers. But the road to a Free Trade Agreement with the Americans will not be easy.
But the security character of that relationship has always been important to this country, and those who remember the critical assistance given to Australia during World War II will never forget the importance of the United States of America to the history and to the survival of this country. That doesn't mean to say that you follow the American point of view right or wrong, but it does mean that when you are looking at the national security interests of this country, you always take into account the importance of that relationship and the fact that relationships and alliances are two-way streets, and when an alliance exists between a large country and a smaller one, it should never be assumed that it's always the large one that has to give.
 The world expects a lot of the United States when it needs the United States' help. The world often takes for granted the United States' willingness to come to the assistance of others and to make a contribution. There is, of course, an enormous amount of debate in our country, as there should be, concerning the challenge that Iraq represents most particularly to the immediate and longer term future of the United Nations. Of all of the issues at stake in relation to Iraq, none is more important than the acid test it represents for the United Nations. If the Security Council of the United Nations walks away from its responsibilities in relation to Iraq, it will fatally cripple its own credibility. You cannot pass 18 resolutions, you cannot stamp your foot 18 times metaphorically speaking, and expect the person of whom you're stamping your foot to take notice of you, if you don't do anything else.
 Many people are understandably concerned about the belligerence of North Korea. I'm concerned about it. You all should be. But can I pose a rhetorical question. If the Security Council cannot discipline Iraq, what hope does it have of disciplining North Korea. It has no hope of disciplining North Korea. People say you should deal with North Korea first. I say you should see North Korea and Iraq as part of the one challenge and that is the challenge to the authority of the Security Council. The Security Council was set up...the United Nations was set up after World War II in the wake of the terrible loss of life and the terrible devastation of that war and knowing full well how the League of Nations had failed in the 1930s. And the job of enforcing the collective will of countries, of guaranteeing the peace, of delivering collective security was given to the Security Council. And that 15 member body now carries with it the responsibility of whether history will judge it as having failed the test or having done something about it. Nobody wants military conflict. I don't. I hate it. Every person of ordinary natural human instincts abhors military conflicts. But we face a very difficult challenge. We live in a different world now. We're all brought up to think of war in the sense of armies rolling across borders. That is no longer how we define it. We no longer exclusively define it like that. We live in this age now where if countries like Iraq are able to retain chemical and biological weapons, and if they're able in time to develop a nuclear capacity and they're not stopped, they're not restrained, and they're not prevented by the international order from having them other countries will do the same thing. And then you have the ultimate nightmare, the marriage, the fatal marriage if I could call it of those sorts of weapons in the hands of rogue states and international terrorists. That is the fear that has influenced my view, it is the concern that the British Prime Minister Tony Blair has, it's the concern that President Bush has, it's the concern that many leaders of many countries in Europe have, it's the concern that the leadership of a number of countries in Asia have.
 People say to me if a military conflict breaks out there will be casualties. Sadly that will be the case. But people who are concerned about that must put against that concern the one-and-a-half million lives that have been taken under the current Iraqi regime. They must put against it the possibility that if we don't do something about this problem down the track, perhaps not too long, the nightmare scenario of which I spoke will be realised and the loss of life in that could be positively horrific. This is a traumatically difficult issue for the world and I can understand the natural human desire of people to turn away from it. I'd love to be able to do that. I wish I didn't have to talk about it. I wish I could talk to you exclusively about the economy, about sport, about a whole range of things. I'd love to be able to do that but I can't. And I know there are a lot of people who disagree with me. I respect their views, I understand that. We're a democracy. You can demonstrate in the streets of Australia without suffering any penalty and long may that be the case. That's our birthright. You can't demonstrate in the streets of a lot of other countries. And I thought a great metaphor for in a sense the competing influences in the Middle East was in the recent Israeli election the Prime Minister of Israel was giving an election broadcast and suddenly they pulled the plug on him and his broadcast went off the air. He was taken off the air by the electoral commission because the electoral commission said he was breaching the electoral law. I don't think the President of Iraq would have been taken off the air in Baghdad as he cruised to a 100% victory in his re-election. And it sort of in a sense was a reminder of what some of these things are about and it's a reminder of the fact that we do face an issue that is grounded in the sort of values that our society has. Now we remain very strongly committed to doing everything we can to see the passage through the United Nations Security Council of another resolution. It is not legally necessary. There is plenty of authority in international law for action to be taken under the resolutions that have already been passed. The reason why I think another resolution would be necessary and indeed is desirable is two-fold. I actually believe that the one real hope of achieving a peaceful solution is for the whole world to say the same thing to Iraq. Just imagine if there were a fifteen-nil passage of a strong second resolution. If anything is likely to communicate the combined and solemn view of the world to Iraq it would be that. That's the first reason why I would like to see another resolution. The second reason why I would like to see another resolution is if the use of force did become necessary, as much and all as we would like to avoid it, then if you had another resolution you would have more countries involved and there would be a greater contribution by other nations.
So ladies and gentlemen, I know this is a business forum and I had said something about the economy but I think there would have been something unreal about my talking to you today without saying something about this challenging issue. It's certainly the most difficult issue that we have faced as a government in the time that we have been in office. I understand the flows and differences of public opinion. In the end governments are charged with the responsibility of doing what they believe is right according to their assessment of the national interest. I respect the fact that others have a different view. We agree to disagree and I will continue to argue on every platform, in every forum that I'm given around Australia the reasons why the Government has taken the action we have.
 We are not in this because of a blind commitment to the American alliance. I respect the American alliance. It's very important. But we are predominantly doing what we are doing because it is in the national interest of Australia to deny chemical and biological weapons to nations like Iraq because not only will they use them irresponsibly but if they are allowed to retain them other rogue states will get hold of them and ultimately you will have that nightmare of them falling into the hands of terrorists. Now that is the new dispensation, that is the new challenge, the new order that we live under now and we have to respond to it differently. It's not easy. It's challenging and it's complicating but it is compelling and that is the reason why I feel so very very strongly about this issue and that is the message that in a sense was reinforced to me in the time that I spent overseas, and in many respects one of the most valuable parts of my visit was to Indonesia. And it's important in our tolerant open society to emphasise something in that context. Indonesia clearly will have a somewhat different view of this issue than does Australia. But one thing is not different in Indonesia's view and it's important because Indonesia is the largest Islamic country in the world and that is the Indonesian government does not see the stance we are taking as being anti-Islam and nobody should. The Islamic people of the world abhor violence, and hatred as much as do the Christian and Jewish and other people of the world. We have no quarrel with Islam. We have a quarrel with a country that happens to be Islamic and that is Iraq. But can I remind you that in 1999 when the United States finally gathered some of the nations of Western Europe to do something about the ethnic cleansing of the Muslims of Kosovo they took action against the Orthodox Serbians led by Milosevic. I think it's important to remind people who are too prone to paint out what we are doing as anti-Islamic that in 1999 the western nations took up the cause quite rightly for the Muslims of Kosovo against what was happening to them at the hands of the Serbians. And I think it is very important that at a time like this we say to all Australians of Islamic background that you are a welcome part of our community, that we are a tolerant nation, and we extend to them the hand of Australian friendship and the hand of Australian welcome and it's very important that be done.
So ladies and gentlemen I'm sorry to have sounded a little solemn and a little intense but it is a solemn and it's an intense issue and to pretend otherwise is to ignore the realities of the world in which we live. The good news is that it's raining. The other really good news is that we do have an economy and a capacity to deal with adversity far greater than used to be the case a few years ago. And can I finish by saying this - that when the economy goes well the government sometimes gets the credit for it, when the economy goes badly the government gets all of the blame for it, I understand that. But can I say that one of the reasons why the Australian economy has done so well over the last seven years has been the remarkable capacity of the Australian business community to adjust to the need for change. Australians have many great attributes. One of the greatest attributes Australians have is their adaptability. Because we are a classless community we adapt and we adapt very rapidly. And I want to say to the business people of Ryde as I say to the business people of Australia thank you for the adaptive contribution that all of you have made to the remarkable performance of the Australian economy over the last seven years.
  QUESTIONS &amp; ANSWERS
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Graham McMaster, I'm the Chief Executive of BOR Australia here in North Ryde and my question is related to trade reform and more specifically the agricultural sector. It links that visionary statement of yours some two years ago on 'Backing Australia's Ability' and an action plan for innovation for this country. It appears that as far as it may be raining for farmers today but unfortunately we're stuck with what some consider to be outdated agricultural marketing structures and I'd invite your comment, perhaps more specifically with respect to the free trade agreement or the proposed free trade agreements with the US, and is it possible that these just might free up the Australian farmers to be able to innovate and allow innovation to flourish?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I certainly hope so and if it doesn't then you'll have to question the value of our entering into it. The biggest hurdle Australian farmers face at the moment, apart from the ravages of natural disaster and rain and drought and fire, the biggest challenge they face is the corruption of world markets. To give you a simple figure - the total value of subsidies to Australian farmers is 4% of the total wealth Australian farmers produce, the value of subsidies to American farmers is 22%, the value of subsidies to the farmers of the European Union is 35% and I'm sorry to say the value of the subsidies to Japanese farmers is much higher than that to European or American farmers. So on a scale we're not very happy with the Americans, we're really unhappy with the European Union and, I'm sorry to say, our friends in Japan - and Japan is a very important market and a very important country for Australia, their level of subsidy is also unacceptably high. Now, that is the issue that the world to us has got to address more than anything else. Now, there may be other structures that we embrace that can be reformed to advantage but you would be missing the main game if we didn't focus on that. And in all the discussions I've had with Americans about this, that is an issue that is central. Unless we can do something effective about that Australian farmers are going to continue to be very badly treated.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Richard Sainsbury from radio station 2MSV but also President of Chatswood Chamber of Commerce. Prime Minister, will you stay in your present position to see this crisis off?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I've been asked that question already today and...look, my position is that I have made it crystal clear that there's no way I'm going to do other than see the Australian people through this current Iraqi crisis no matter how long that takes. As to my longer term future, I haven't made any decision on that but I do want people to understand that I'm a very full-on person as far as my commitment to the job is concerned and while ever I have the privilege of occupying the position it will get a 150% effort from me. I'm not thinking about my future at the moment, I'm thinking very much about Australia's future. I don't really think debate about my future is particularly relevant. What is important is this country's future in so many different ways and that's my position.
QUESTION:
My name's Ken Barnes, I'm a solicitor. I read somewhere, Prime Minister, that the Canadians are talking about possibly making their contribution to the Iraq problem by deploying troops to Afghanistan. If this second resolution is not passed, the one you want, is it realistic to think about [inaudible] down the problems you'll have here to deploying troops to Afghanistan and so free-up other American troops to do the work in Baghdad? Is that a realistic possibility or is that something that just isn't on the drawing board?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, let me put it this way - given the structure of the Australian Defence Force and given the fact that we have still very significant peacekeeping obligations in East Timor, which isn't likely to be diminished over the months ahead, perhaps even the next year or two, the sort of contribution that would be represented by the forces we have sent to the Gulf, if we do decide to commit them, is the kind of contribution that Australia would be able to make without reducing our capacity in other areas. And it's not...the deployment of a large number of people in a place like Afghanistan is not something that could be as readily accommodated given the other responsibilities we have, let me put it that way.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, with the farmers with so much down time at the moment, what is the Government doing to occupy the farmers, to get value out of them, to help them improve themselves so that when the rain does really come that they can take advantage of that opportunity?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I'm not saying every farmer in Australia is efficient but efficiency is not a problem by world comparisons with Australian farmers, they are fundamentally very efficient and their problems are corruption of world markets. Obviously in some of the rural industries you still have a size problem and that's particularly the case in the sugar industry. And we've offered an adjustment package for the sugar industry which involves providing them with some financial assistance, those who should exit the industry. We're doing that already. The dairy industry package was very controversial but it's resulted in a growth in dairy exports, it has resulted in a lot of people leaving the industry but it's also resulted in a consolidation into more efficient units of those who remain. And over the years we have tried to help different primary industries adjust. Some of you may remember that in 1998 I went to a place in Queensland called Wondai and I had a fairly lively meeting with some people who were in the pork industry and I certainly was very unpopular with them. They wanted a lot of subsidies and so forth and we said no to that but we did try to help them get into exports. And I went back to a place near Wondai three-and-a-half years later and there were 600 people in the room and they gave me a very warm welcome and it's a demonstration of how you can turn things around.
 I think our farmers are efficient. You've got to keep helping them restructure. Those who can no longer survive, you've got to try and help them to leave the industry with dignity. But the real problem, apart from the drought - and that's a huge problem - the real problem is the corruption of world markets. And the tragedy of this last drought has been that it followed a couple of really good years and it also came at a time when many of them were starting to enjoy the benefit of strong world prices because there were shortages in other parts of the world and if it could end early they might still get - that's the drought - they'll still get the advantage of that. But generally speaking Australian farmers are pretty efficient and that's what, of course, makes them as mad as hornets because they're efficient, they play by the rules, they do the right and they're shut out of markets by the huge trading blocks, particularly but not only the European Union.
[Ends]


Thank you very much Helen, your husband Professor Peter Davis, parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm always very happy to be in New Zealand. This is the fourth visit I've paid to your country since becoming Prime Minister of Australia, and it's an opportunity again to express how close Australians feel to New Zealanders, and how important our shared history, our shared sense of the same values, and our shared commitment to a future in partnership, just how important that is to all Australians.
A lot of things bind us together - history, language, law, and all the other things of which we are very conscious. I think I'm on fairly safe sporting ground in just simply saying congratulations to both of our cricket teams for getting into the super sixes. And I can't let the occasion go by without extending my very genuine commiserations in relation to the America's Cup. You successfully defended it once, which is more than what we were able to achieve, and I wish you well in your future endeavours.
But we're here tonight particularly to mark the extraordinary success of the Closer Economic Relationship, and in doing that I want to pay tribute to two men in particular - Doug Anthony who was then the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, and Brian Talboys, who I think were the two people in the respective Governments of the time that worked harder and deserve more credit than anybody else for bringing about CER, which came into being 20 years ago this month back in 1983.
And over that period of time, it has stimulated the explosion of economic links between our two societies, and if you look back over that 20-year period, the two economies in many respects are barely recognisable. The change and reform that has occurred in both countries - the deregulation of the New Zealand economy was a trailblazer for many other countries, and the strength and the vitality of so much of what you have now is due to reforms carried out in the 1980s and continued by successive Governments. And the same applies with Australia. Reforms carried out by Governments on both sides of the political debate in Australia have produced a situation where we're very pleased to see that in terms of OECD performance, Australia has probably had the best five or six years we've had since the 1960s. And a very important part of that has been the strength of the relationship, economically and business wise, between Australia and New Zealand. And what has underpinned it have been the principles of CER.
And your Prime Minister is absolutely right when she says that the CER is a model in the eyes of the World Trade Organisation, a model for what a free trade agreement should be like. And it was put together years before many of the other free trade agreements that have become perhaps better known around the world in the 20 years that have gone by since. And it has been of great benefit to both countries. There will be sectors in Australia that will say New Zealand got more out of it than we did, and there will be sectors in New Zealand that will say Australia got more out of it than the New Zealand sectors did. But overall it tells a story of a 500 per cent expansion in the trade and the importance of New Zealand as an export market for Australia is very impressive indeed. And the stimulation of trans Tasman investment, the way in which increasingly the companies of our two nations operate on the basis of a truly common market between Australia and New Zealand, is an everyday feature of their business life.
 And I, like your Prime Minister, am keen that the momentum is maintained. I would like still closer economic linkages, and I'm delighted that Dr Cullen and Mr Costello were able to sign that agreement a few weeks ago that solved the triangular tax issue that has bedevilled the operations of a number, particularly of New Zealand companies over recent years.
So can I say to you Helen that Janette and I are delighted to be your guests again in New Zealand. The opportunities that are given on these visits, and likewise the opportunities when you come to Australia, as you do on a regular basis, to talk about developing further an already very close and intimate bilateral relationship, are quite without parallel. It was Dr Johnson who said that you should keep your friendships in good repair. There is a deep and abiding friendship between our two nations, and it is based on a lot of things of which so many of us are very familiar.
 But all friendships do need to be kept in good repair. They should never be taken for granted, and I have tried in the time that I have been Prime Minister of Australia, to work on the relationship between our two countries, never to take it for granted, always to try and seize an opportunity to make it better and stronger. And I'm very happy to say in the dealings I have had with Helen in her time as Prime Minister, as was the case in the dealings I had with her two predecessors with whom I have dealt, the response from the New Zealand side has been the same. And as a result, over that period of time, although we've had differences and there have been difficulties on individual issues, commercial and otherwise, we've always been able to work our way through on the basis of mutual respect and commonsense, and that will always guide my focus to the relationship and I want tonight to join all of you in celebrating a huge success.
 The partnership between our two nations, our two business communities, that has added value to both, has generated jobs for Australians and New Zealanders, and has brought our two countries closer together, consistent of course with the maintenance of our own distinctive identities and our distinctive ways of doing things. Let us record our thanks to those who pioneered CER and let us continue together to build further on a relationship that is very important to all of us in this room.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Prime Minister, Professor Davis, the Leader of the Opposition, Ministers, Chief Justice, Chief of the Defence Force, two former Prime Ministers of New Zealand, ladies and gentlemen.
Janette and I are again delighted to be in your country. We are delighted to reaffirm the deep friendship between our two nations and the warm affection that the people of Australia feel for your country and your people. We join unanimously in congratulating our respective cricket teams for getting into the Super Six. I report that I will have left the jurisdiction before tomorrow night's clash occurs. And we look forward to welcoming your magnificent rugby team to our shores later this year.
 The links between our two nations are well known. They are of history, of language, of culture and very importantly, of shared values. They are also links that have been forged in tragedy on the battlefield and they are links on the sporting field. And as we look at the world around us and we experience the new dispensation of international terrorism that we must all face, we are most of all reminded of the things that matter to us most, and that is the way of life we have and the things that we believe in, and the things that we stand for.
Australia and New Zealand, never let it be forgotten, are two of fewer than ten countries that remain continuously democratic throughout the whole of the 20th century. It is a small select band and is no mean achievement but the peoples of our two societies are numbered amongst that group which is fewer than ten. This visit particularly marks the signing twenty years ago of CER and I will join Bill English and Helen Clark in paying tribute to Brian Talboys and Laurie Francis and Hugh Templeton for the role they played, but also can I especially record Australia's gratitude to Doug Anthony who was the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the National Party, Australian version, in the then coalition government. They worked very hard, they had a vision, they believe that Australia and New Zealand could set a pattern and so it's been, the modalities of CER were in advance of those sorts of agreements and to this day CER is seen as a model for other countries entering into those arrangements. I hope that we can build on the achievements of CER and the agreement signed between Dr Cullen and Peter Costello only a couple of weeks ago which dealt with the nagging problem of triangulation, I think they call it in the taxation parlance, and will mean greater investment opportunities for New Zealand companies and will lead to greater commercial and business harmonisation. We have achieved a great deal already. We have broken many of the traditional barriers to trade, we must try and expand the combined blended business opportunities that the trans-Tasman market offers to both Australian and New Zealand business people.
 Your Prime Minister quite correctly pointed to the economic performance of our two countries. We live in a world that is experiencing sluggish economic growth. For Australia's part we have been afflicted with in some parts of the nation the worst drought in a hundred years and that has cut about 17 per cent off our farm income and it is going to nonetheless leave us with a growth this year of about 3 per cent. Like New Zealand we have a budget in surplus, we have an extremely low level of government debt but we see a fairly sluggish United States economy. We see a continuing weakness in some of the other major economies of the world, most particularly in Europe, where the need for such things as labour market reform, except in the United Kingdom, appears not to have arrived in the political consciousness.
 We see, by contrast, in North Asia, in China, we see a nation whose economy is growing almost exponentially. That offers great opportunities for Australia and it also I know is offering great opportunities for New Zealand. So in many ways, as in the past, so it will be in the future, that we will tread paths together. We may not always agree on every single thing, we know that, no good friends ever do, but the fundamentals of the relationship will never be shaken. The fundamentals of the relationship are built on too much history, too many shared values and too many common democratic views as to the sort of world we want to have for our own children in the world in which we wish to live.
 We are of course living in a world changed forever by 11 September 2001 and by 12 October 2002. Our own definitions of conflict have to be revised. The old views we had about how we react to situations must be look at anew against this new international order. But one thing won't change and that is that nations that share democratic values in the end will share common goals and common aspirations. Most of all I am here today to reaffirm the commitment of Australia to this very close and very treasured friendship that we have with the people of New Zealand. Janette and I are delighted to be in your beautiful country again - this is the fourth bilateral visit and the fifth visit, if you count APEC in 1999, that I have paid to New Zealand since I have been Prime Minister. We should never take our relationship for granted, we should always work on it and build it and expand it. I am delighted to say that has been the view of the three New Zealand Prime Ministers with whom I have dealt in the time that I have been Prime Minister of Australia. It is something we should work on and make even better and both of us will be rewarded for this effort.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Michael, John and Lucy, Chris McDiven, my State and Federal parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I could imagine that Michael Yabsley has been making a few phone calls. I think he's probably made almost as many phone calls as some of the permanent representatives on the Security Council of the United Nations. But I want to share with you a few thoughts of mine today about the choice that the people of New South Wales, the largest state in Australia and a state that is enjoying a very strong economy courtesy of the economic management of the Federal Government.
 I share the results of the Yabsley poll. I think the New South Wales Government has become tired. I think it takes for granted that it will win on the 22nd of March. I think it has become arrogant. And I have to say to you John, I think you have run a very courageous and energetic and admirable and enthusiastic campaign. I know what it's like to campaign in Opposition when you're doing very badly, in Opposition when you're doing better and they expect you to win, in Government when you're doing very well and you end up not winning as well as they thought you might. I've experienced every point on the popularity compass, and I know somebody who is authentically connecting with the public when I see him, and John I think your fresh, open, intelligent approach is starting to resonate with the New South Wales public.
 I think you have avoided the pitfall of earlier oppositions in that you have taken the trouble to articulate alternative policies. I think your education policies in particular have struck a chord with the public. I think the ideas that you have brought to the health debate and to the transport debate are also new and different and refreshing. And I therefore want to say to all of you, please believe me when I say that no election campaign is over until it's over, to use that old expression. And yet in the nature of modern politics, people don't really focus until the last week, especially in State election campaigns, and especially when the campaign is being fought under the shadow of very serious international issues. So I want to thank all of you for the help that you have given. I want to encourage you, to use a word from Michael Yabsley, to give even more and more. I'll leave the details to him. But it is not just a good cause, but I think it is an investment in a future for this State, which is very important to make. And I do, on behalf of all of my Federal parliamentary colleagues here in New South Wales and all around the country, wish you well John, and you and your colleagues. We will give you every help we can between now and the 22nd of March.
It would surprise you ladies and gentlemen if I didn't take this opportunity of just saying one thing about the international issue that faces the entire world at the present time. I want all of you to know and to understand that I and the Government I lead has taken the stance it has, not out of some kind of blind, automatic loyalty to the United States, although I value that alliance very dearly and so should every right thinking Australian, but we have taken the stance we have because we believe very much that it is right. I don't want this country to live in a world in which rogue states like Iraq are able to retain chemical and biological weapons and continue to aspire to the development of nuclear weapons. I don't want Iraq to get away with that because if Iraq gets away with it, other countries will seek to do the same.
 And as the Prime Minister of a country in the Asian Pacific region, can I pose the simple rhetorical question - what earthly hope does the world have of disciplining North Korea if it cannot discipline Iraq? And that is one of the considerations that rests very much on my mind, and I know on the minds of all of my colleagues. It is very likely that as far as the United Nations is concerned, this issue will come to a head over the next few days. Exactly when and exactly what form, it is just not possible to say at the present time. But it is in the national interest of Australia to live in a world that is as free as possible of the threats of which I have spoken. The more nations that have weapons of mass destruction, the more likely it is that they will be used against other countries. The more that have them, the more likely it is, by either gift or chance, they will fall into the hands of international terrorists. And to me, the ultimate nightmare of the modern world is that chemical and biological weapons will get into the hands of terrorists, and believe me - they will use them. They will not care about the costs. They will not care about the trauma or the damage or the death or the destruction they do to the countries against, or the peoples against which they are used.
The world did change, not only for the United States but for all of us, on the 11th of September. And the risks that could have been taken before then can no longer be taken, and that lesson was painfully delivered to many of our own people in a different way, but nonetheless very painfully, on the 12th of October last year. We are living in a different world we would all wish we weren't. We would all wish that we could turn our back on this problem and go away and pretend that it would disappear. But it is not like that, and our history reminds us time and time again that when the community of nations recoils from doing something that is difficult in the short term, in the hope that it will go away, it learns that it must ultimately return to that problem at a later time at infinitely greater cost. And that has been the experience of the world and that is what, in many ways, is at stake at the present time.
So ladies and gentlemen, I owed you some remarks about that issue, but today is a day where I ask all of you to support, to the maximum you can, a very fine Liberal leader in John Brogden, a Coalition that has put behind it the disagreements which have bedevilled its existence in the past in this state. It has learnt the lesson of cooperation that we practice so effectively at a Federal level. I ask you to welcome, to applaud, and most importantly to vigorously support the New South Wales Liberal leader John Brogden.
  [ends]


Mr President, ladies and gentlemen.
 The issue of Iraq is challenging, difficult and perplexing. It is an issue that I know has produced divided responses not only in Australia but around the world and that is perhaps not surprising because in many respects, how to respond to Iraq in the current circumstances is the very first test for the world in the new international circumstances in which we find ourselves as a result of the terrorist attacks on the United States on the 11th of September, which have so changed not only the attitude of Americans towards their security but how other liberal democracies must view security issues around the world.
 The response to that terrorist attack, of course, was relatively clear-cut in terms of public opinion. This is more challenging and more perplexing. And I want to say immediately that I understand why some of my fellow Australians do not agree with the stance that the Government has taken. I respect their view but in return I ask them to respect and understand the depth of feeling and commitment that I have to the policy the Government has embarked upon, the sense of concern I have for the security of this country in the medium to longer-term if the twin evils of the spread of weapons of mass destruction and international terrorism are not confronted and are not effectively dealt with. It is an issue that goes to the very heart of national leadership and it's an issue that requires and summons all of us to give very deep thought and very serious consideration.
 We believe that it is very much in the national interest of Australia that Iraq have taken from her her chemical and biological weapons and denied the possibility of ever having nuclear weapons. Not only is it inherently dangerous for a country such as Iraq with its appalling track record to have these weapons but if Iraq is allowed to get away with it other rogue States will believe they can do the same because they will have seen a world effectively stand by and allow it to happen. And as these dangerous weapons spread so the risk that they may fall into the hands of terrorists will multiply. And if terrorists ever get their hands on weapons of mass destruction that will, in my very passionate belief and argument, constitute a direct, undeniable and lethal threat to Australia and its people, and that would be the ultimate nightmare not only for us but for other peoples in other nations. That, more than anything else, is the reason why we have taken the stance we have and it's the reason why we believe that Iraq should be effectively and comprehensively disarmed.
 Of course our alliance with the United States is also a factor, unapologetically so. America has given very strong leadership to the world on the issue of Iraq. Let us be honest, this issue would not be back before the Security Council now were it not for the United States. The Security Council would not have become re-energised at the task of disarming Iraq had it not been for the United States. Alliances are two-way processes and our alliance with the United States is no exception and Australians should always remember that no nation is more important to our long-term security than that of the United States.
Terrorist groups want weapons of mass destruction. Of that there can be little doubt. Australian intelligence agencies, including ONA, judge that Al Qaida has demonstrated the intention to acquire or develop chemical and biological weapons and an interest in radiological and nuclear weapons. This judgement reflects the intelligence community's professional assessment and is based on the full range of intelligence material available. But it is not just secret intelligence that leads to this assessment. Information in the public domain indicates that Al Qaida has made repeated attempts to acquire chemical, biological and nuclear materials and capabilities over almost a decade.
 Bin Laden has on numerous occasions made statements about the desirability of acquiring these types of weapons. In a January 1999 interview he described the acquisition of chemical and nuclear weapons as a 


Thank you very much Rob, Rosemary Craddock, my many Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I echo the gratitude expressed by Rob to all of you for joining this inaugural launch of the Enterprise Forum. It is a way of strengthening many areas of support for the Liberal party here in South Australia but it's also a vehicle through which men and women in the business community in South Australia in particular can engage in a process of communication and contribution to the activities of the party both at a State and a Federal level. And I also join Rob in thanking Rosemary and Graham and the South Australian Division organisation for the work they have put into putting the forum together.
South Australia is punching above its weight in the Federal Parliamentary Party. It's remarkable that we hold nine out of the 12 seats and it's an enormous tribute to the quality of all of the Federal Members from South Australia and none of them here today will argue with that proposition. But it is amazing and three seats in particular of Makin and of Adelaide and of Hindmarsh have been held by their respective members often against the tide and it's a tribute to their marginal seat skills and I record that very warmly.
The other area where South Australia's contribution is immense is in the Cabinet. There are four Cabinet Ministers from South Australia and I do want to say very feelingly that the counsel and support and advice and judgement that has been my lot to receive from Alexander Downer and Robert Hill, particularly over the past few weeks and months in relation to the international situations we've faced has been quite invaluable. When you get into the sort of situation we are at the moment you're talking to the Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister almost on an hourly basis and both of them have made a remarkable contribution and I want this Adelaide audience to know what an integral part they play along with Nick Minchin and Amanda Vanstone, and of course our Speaker, I mean he's above politics but he's here today and good to welcome him and the contribution all of my colleagues from South Australia make to the strength of the Government.
Australia faces, and indeed the world faces, a very difficult issue at present. I understand that there is a range of views on this issue within the Australian community. And the reason for that more than anything else is that in a way this is the first great international issue that the world has had to grapple with since international terrorism changed the lives of all of us in a way forever on the 11th of September 2001.   Most of us when we grew up we thought of war and invasion in terms of the army of one country rolling across the border of another. And you thought of defence in terms of responding to that kind of aggression. You never thought of it in terms of responding to or preventing the sort of domestic terror attack to which the Americans were subjected, and to which our friends in Indonesia were subjected on the 12th of October which sadly claimed the lives of so many Australians. So we are living in a different world where international terrorism operating in a borderless environment is the new menace and the new threat and we have to understand that and we have to devise ways of coming to terms with that. My argument to the Australian people about the need for Australia to be concerned about Iraq is a very simple proposition. If a country like Iraq is allowed to keep chemical and biological weapons, inevitably other rogue states will want to do the same thing. And as the number of rogue states possessing those weapons increases, the possibility of them falling into the hands of terrorist organisations multiplies. That in essence is the proposition. My critics say give me the proof necessary to satisfy a criminal court jury at the "Old Bailey" or whatever Australian equivalent you might wish to choose. If you wait for that kind of evidence it could well be too late. And that in essence was the point of the reference I made in my speech yesterday to Pearl Harbour.
 Now I'm not seeking to exaggerate or to over dramatise the situation, but I am seeking to communicate to my fellow Australians my very strong belief that because of the different environment in which we are now living we have to respond in a different way. We have to take action against Iraq, we must ensure that Iraq is disarmed. I would prefer overwhelmingly, we all would vehemently prefer that it happened in a peaceful fashion. But unfortunately the indications are that that is very unlikely. And one of the reasons that it's very unlikely is that I believe that some of the countries on the Security Council, and I single out in particular France, have played a spoiling role. They're not offering an alternative solution. Their solution is built on an outcome delivered by the very American military presence which is part of a policy they continually attack. Does anybody think for a moment that those weapons inspectors would be in Iraq had it not been for the American military build up? Nobody does. Hans Blix doesn't because he told me that. Kofi Annan doesn't, he said that publicly. Even the French Foreign Minister has acknowledged that if it hadn't been for the build up by the Americans, the inspectors wouldn't be in Iraq. And the few morsels of co-operation that have been dragged out of Iraq have been because of the American and by extension the British and Australian military presence.
Now can I pose the other rhetorical question? If the United Nations doesn't resolve to do anything about this, how long do the French and others believe that the American and British and Australian forces should remain in the Gulf region? Are they arguing that they should remain there indefinitely? Well that is plainly unrealistic. Can I pose another question, if they were all withdrawn, I mean I've been told by the Leader of the Opposition here that I should withdraw the Australian forces immediately. If the Americans were to withdraw their forces and the British were to withdraw their forces do you think that the weapons inspectors would continue to have the access they've had over the past few weeks? Do you think the progressive disarmament of Iraq would then proceed on the basis of a press statement from the weapons inspectors? What I say to the critics of the United States in particular, and by extension Australia, what is your alternative? The only disarmament that you say is occurring at the moment has been wrought out of Iraq because of what the Americans in particular have done and yet you're totally opposed to what the Americans are doing. So by the demonstration of what has happened no alternative has been presented.
Now this issue does present an enormous challenge for the Security Council of the United Nations. And I fear that if it doesn't rise to the occasion and the likelihood appears more remote by the day of agreement being reached for something effective to come out of the Security Council, then its credibility and influence in future could well be diminished.
Could I just say two other things about this very difficult issue? The first of those things relates to the fact that international terrorism has obscenely hid behind Islam, one of the great religions on the world. Whenever you respond to international terrorism you are accused of a generic attack on Islam. Nothing could be further from the truth. Our policy on Iraq is not anti-Islamic. And that is a view that is shared by the President of Indonesia, the largest Islamic country in the world. And I want to say to all of you that in the weeks ahead it could well be that some of our fellow Australians of an Islamic background could feel somewhat isolated. I want to say to them they shouldn't, they are part of the Australian community. And I invite, I ask all other Australians to reach out of them and to reassure them and to tell them that they are Australian before anything else and that they will always be a valued and important part of the Australian community. Our quarrel is with the behaviour of a particular country, our concern is that unless that behaviour is brought before the dock of world opinion and changed that that behaviour could spread to other nations and that could have potentially serious consequences for all, particularly of the Western liberal democratic societies of the world. And it's very important that we understand that, it's very important that we keep it in perspective.
 The other observation I'd like to make goes to the very heart of the emotional side of the debate that is occurring in Australia at the present time. And that is the humanitarian consideration. Whenever there is military conflict, there is casualties, whenever there is military conflict there is the likelihood, the near inevitability of some civilian casualties. And the very thought of armed conflict sends a shudder through all of us, it does me and I'm sure it does all of you. And that is why issues such as this are so difficult and so perplexing and so challenging.
But there's another side of the humanitarian debate and when I hear people condemning the Government's policy on humanitarian grounds I always say to them have you thought of the humanitarian consequences if the current regime is allowed to stay there? And although regime change is not our principle policy goal, our principle policy goal is the disarmament of Iraq. There is a very powerful argument on all of the available evidence that the suffering of the Iraqi people would be less if Saddam Hussein were removed than if he is left in power. I detailed some of the examples of the human rights abuses in Iraq yesterday at my address to the National Press Club and the person from whom I quoted, one of the most respected rapporteur on human rights to the United Nations. And he said that the human rights record of the regime in Iraq had few parallels in the years that had gone by since the end of World War II. So we're not dealing here with a 100 to nil balance when it comes to human rights considerations. When you put those considerations into the balance there's a very powerful argument that the human rights considerations are very much on the side of there being a change in authority in Baghdad.
I want all of you to know one other thing and that is that the support, the solidarity, that's not a word a Liberal Leader normally uses but I will use it on this occasion, the loyalty and the support and the solidarity and the understanding of my colleagues on this issue has been both remarkable and reassuring. No great issue like this produces a uniformly consistent internal response from a hundred or so independently minded men and women. But they have understood the significance of this issue, they've understood its significance to our alliance with the United States. And although that's not the dominate consideration it's always a very important consideration because in the long run the greatest security guarantee this country has is, apart from the industry and the resourcefulness of its own people, is our alliance with the United States. But my colleagues have understood all of these things and I want to publicly record my gratitude to them because it's very important on an issue like this that we do as a government and as a party speak with one voice.
And the final thing I would say to you is that although we are understandably preoccupied with this issue, it is not the only issue that is occupying my mind and I want in particular to assure you that we keep a very careful and weathered eye on the state of the Australian economy. The Australian economy is continuing to outperform just about every other economy in the OECD. We have two problems, one of them is internal and that is the drought and the other is external and that is the weakness, relatively speaking, of the world economy. The drought we hope may be in the early stages of breaking, I don't know, I keep my fingers crossed but the indications are that the el Nino weather pattern is beginning to change. The world economy remains very hesitant, and it was hesitant before the onset of the latest preoccupation with Iraq and there are some fundamental weaknesses in a number of areas of the world economy. But our own domestic situation remains very sound. We've generated one and a quarter million new jobs since we were elected. Those of you in business in this room know the benefits that have flowed from low interest rates. We've gone through the very difficult but necessary process of major taxation reform. But there are still a number of major economic reforms that need to be accomplished. We do need further industrial relations reform, we'll keep trying to get those reformed unfair dismissal laws through the Senate. We'll continue to press the Senate to bring in some sensible changes to our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme so that it can remain affordable years into the future because there'll be greater pressure on that system as our population slowly ages in the years ahead. There is still a very significant job of reform to be undertaken. We've begun the process of preparing the Budget to be brought down in May, we remain a Government that is committed to keeping the Budget in surplus. I'm very proud of the fact that we, by the end of this financial year, will have a debt to GDP ratio of just three per cent. And by way of comparison the OECD average is 49 per cent, the level in the United States is 47 per cent and in Japan is 76 per cent. And it's a measure of the success of our fiscal policy and because we run a tight fiscal policy we're able to have, with the growing economy, a still relatively low interest rate structure.
So there's a lot to be pleased about in relation to the Australian economy. Our flexible exchange rate helped us through the Asian economic downturn and a number of the other economic reforms also saw Australia during that period surprised just about everybody including I think a lot of Australians through the strength that it displayed.
So my friends, while inevitably we focus very heavily on international and security issues at the present time we have not taken our eye off the domestic political ball. We will not do so, because maintaining a strong economy and attending to necessary reform issues in areas like higher education remain very important objectives for the Government. We've been an energetic Government but we remain an enthusiastic and energetic government. The great challenge of governments when they've been in office for a number of years is renewal and recommitment. And there's plenty of reservoir of personal commitment and dedication to that process.
Can I again thank all of you for the support and loyalty that you've demonstrated by being here today, I do encourage you to get behind the Enterprise Forum, it's a very important, valuable long term initiative. I always keep a proper distance from these matters but can I just say that providing the [inaudible] of war for parties of the centre right in the Australian environment is a more difficult circumstance than a lot of people imagine. We don't have automatic flows of support from the union movement and in circumstances where increasing numbers of companies tend to take and on the one hand this and on the one hand that in terms of financial support which I note and understand we have a particular challenge and bodies like the Enterprise Forum are designed to do exactly that.
I very warmly thank you for your presence and I congratulate the party organisation where in South Australia for its initiative.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much, Trish. Could I first acknowledge the traditional owners of the land of which we meet, the Gaurna people, and thank you for that very gracious welcome to your land. Can I acknowledge the presence also of Major Brian Watters, Professor Ian Webster and my several parliamentary colleagues both the federal and state, particularly Trish Worth who's the local member. And Chris Gallus and Trish Draper and Grant Chapman and several of my state colleagues.
 I'm come here today to announce a contribution of $40 000 from the Federal Government as part of a partnership with others who are contributing towards a very important cause, and that is to better educate indigenous people about the dangers of abuse of alcohol. Abuse of alcohol is a problem in the entire Australian community, it's not just a problem in the indigenous community, it's a problem for a lot of Australians. But it does have particular challenges and particular difficulties in the indigenous community.
One of the interesting statistics, and we always have statistics whenever we have launches of this kind, one of the interesting statistics is that the level of alcohol or the incidents, that's a better way of describing it, of alcohol consumption in the indigenous community is actually lower than what it is in the general community. In other words there are, to use some of the old language, there are more tee-totallers in the aboriginal community than there are in the general community. Now, that's the good news, but the not so good news is that the incidents of too much drinking appears greater in the indigenous, well is greater in the indigenous community, there's no point in mincing words about it than in the broader community and that is the issue that all of us have to try and address.
 And the Alcohol Education and Rehabilitation Foundation, which has been funded as a result of an agreement that was reached between the Government and the Australian Democrats in connection with the taxation legislation, is giving consideration at present to the allocation of quite a lot of money to a number of projects around Australia, including projects which are designed to address the problem of alcohol abuse in indigenous communities. And what the Government is doing today with its contribution is to form a partnership with other organisations which are particularly designed, and your own organisation here in South Australia particularly designed, to assist in educating people in the indigenous communities about the terrible consequences that flow in personal terms, in community terms, in family terms, from the abuse of alcohol. Many people in our community have stories to tell about the abuse of alcohol and my colleague, Trish Worth, some little while ago released some materials which were designed to begin to get people to understand it. And today's announcement - and I believe also the further support that will be coming in this area from the foundation - will, I believe, make a contribution towards a better understanding of the problem.
I think we have to all recognise that when communities whether they're indigenous or other communities of Australians suffer the consequences of alcohol abuse, the whole sense of self- respect and the whole sense of mutual support and comfort one to the other, which is so important to sustain a community, breaks down. And I don't think there is any greater challenge for many indigenous communities around Australia than the problem of alcohol abuse. And it's a tragic thing, it destroys people's self-respect, it destroys their hope, it leads to physical abuse of friends and family members and the most appalling social consequences. And we all have to recognise it, we have to be honest about it, we have to recognise that there's a... it's a challenge for all Australians. But I'm here, particularly to say that we want to assist in relation to indigenous communities and I hope today's announcement to your organisation will make some difference.
 And I want to acknowledge the presence of Professor Webster who has done with his group so much to fight the problem of abuse of substances both licit and illicit. Today the focus is on alcohol. Alcohol we all recognise in moderation is something to be enjoyed, some people unfortunately can't consume it in moderation. And our goal today is to try and help those people and in doing that, make them happier and make the people around them happier and make their communities better and more constructive.
And can I take the opportunity of applauding the leadership being displayed in the indigenous communities in Australia by people such as Noel Pearson, who is honestly and courageously and more eloquently than any non-indigenous Australian could do speaking out about the terrible consequences that flow from the abuse of alcohol. And it's a plea I know that would be echoed in non-indigenous communities and homes where alcohol is a curse because it's abused. And anything that we can do today to address that problem and anything we can do through your wonderful organisation and with the assistance and the support of the Gaurna people, I think will be striking a real blow for a better life for indigenous people which is something together all of us dearly want.
So, I'm delighted to be here. I thank you for the very warm welcome. Again, I thank my colleagues for the support that they've provided. And I particularly again take the opportunity of thanking my good friend, Brian Watters, and Professor Webster for the tremendous leadership, but in different ways both of them are giving to the Australian community in the campaign to rid our society of the abuse of alcohol and the never-ending campaign against the terrible consequences of the use of illicit drugs in our community. Thank you.
[ends]


Chris McDiven, George and Vassy Souris, my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals, ladies and gentlemen. I am here today to declare my very enthusiastic support for the campaign of the Liberal Party and the National Party in New South Wales to wrest government from the Carr Government next Saturday on the 22nd of March. I do believe that New South Wales deserves a fresh start, a fresh approach. I do believe that the present New South Wales Government has become arrogant and complacent despite the protestations to the opposite. It does take the New South Wales electorate for granted. It does assume that it will cruise back into office, falsely pretending that the economic prosperity of New South Wales is due to their economic management when it's overwhelmingly due to the economic policies and the economic management of the Federal Coalition over the last seven years.
But there's a more powerful reason why I'm asking the people of New South Wales to vote for John Brogden and George Souris next Saturday. I believe that they have courageously set out an alternative policy platform. They are the ones that have campaigned on the issues; they are the two people who've identified the importance of education, of standards, of class sizes, of strengthening public education whilst maintaining the great tradition of always supporting the right of Australian parents to choose the education that they think is best suited for their children.
 John has brought tremendous energy and commitment and enthusiasm to this campaign. He's campaigned in a very dogged, determined, and impressive way. There are many things that I could say about the quality of his campaigning over the past few months, but one thing that stands out to me above all other things is that he's shown in this campaign that he's got a precious political commodity - he's got ticker. He's got the ticker and the courage to take the difficult as well as the easy decisions of government. A good government has got to do both. Sometimes they do things that have instantaneous appeal, sometimes they have to do things that don't have instantaneous appeal. And John has demonstrated in the policies that he's put forward that he is ready for the job, he is a person who will bring a fresh approach, he is a person who will bring great commitment and great integrity. And can I say that the Liberal and National parties have assembled a great array of candidates. The level of Coalition unity is unsurpassed in recent decades between the Liberal and National parties here in New South Wales. The cornerstone of our Federal success over the last seven years has been the rock solid unity not only within our own two parties but between our two parties. And here in New South Wales the Liberal and National parties have learnt the importance of that and they have come together in an unprecedented way and they are presenting a united front, a solid consolidated front to the people of New South Wales.
 There is a week today and in state elections in particular a lot can happen during the remaining week. I exhort all of you to get out there and continue campaigning as you have over recent weeks. You will have the total support of your Federal parliamentary colleagues. We are committed, all of us from all over Australia, to installing the first Coalition premier around the table at Premiers' conferences. It's a bit lonely at the moment, and I'd welcome the company, I'd welcome it very much.
Ladies and gentlemen, if a boy from Earlwood can become the Prime Minister of Australia, then why can't a boy from Balmain become the Liberal Premier of New South Wales? I think you like the idea, so do I, and if we work hard so will the majority of the people of New South Wales next Saturday. Will you welcome to the stage John and Lucy Brogden.
[Ends]


I move:
That this House:
 1. condemns Iraq's refusal, over more than 12 years, to abide by 17 resolutions of the United Nations Security Council regarding the threat it poses to international peace and security;
2. recognises:  (a)that Iraq's continued possession and pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, in defiance of its mandatory obligations under numerous resolutions of the United Nations Security Council, represents a real and unacceptable threat to international peace and security;  (b)that Iraq's behaviour weakens the global prohibitions on the spread of weapons of mass-destruction, with the potential to damage Australia's security; and  (c) that, as more rogue states acquire them, the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of terrorists multiplies, thereby presenting a real and direct threat to the security of Australia and the entire international community;
 3. abhors:  (a) Iraq's continued support for international terrorism; and  (b) the institutionalised widespread and grave abuse of the human rights of the Iraqi people over many years;
4. notes that United Nations Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations charter, in particular resolutions 678, 687 and 1441, provide clear authority for the use of force against Iraq for the purposes of disarming Iraq of weapons of mass destruction and restoring international peace and security to the region;
5. endorses the government's decision to commit Australian Defence Force elements in the region-
Yes, I will repeat it:  5.  endorses the government's decision to commit Australian Defence Force elements in the region to the international coalition of military forces prepared to enforce Iraq's compliance with its international obligations under successive resolutions of the United Nations Security Council, with a view to restoring international peace and security in the Middle East region;
6. expresses its unequivocal support for the Australian service men and women, and other personnel serving with the international coalition, our full confidence in them and the hope that all will return safely to their homes;
7. extends to the innocent people of Iraq its support and sympathy during the military action to disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction and the reconstruction period that will follow; and
8. notes that the government is committed to helping the Iraqi people, including through humanitarian assistance, to build a new Iraq at peace with itself and its neighbours.
This morning I announced that Australia had joined a coalition, led by the United States, which intends to disarm Iraq of its prohibited weapons of mass destruction.
 The government has now authorised our defence forces, which were predeployed to the gulf to acclimatise and contribute to the campaign to persuade Saddam Hussein into compliance, to take part in coalition operations. There is no more serious decision for any government than to commit its forces to military conflict abroad. Under our system, this decision lies with the executive of government, the cabinet. Nevertheless, it is appropriate that the parliament, at the first opportunity, have the chance to debate this motion. It is essential that the reason for that decision be made plain to the representatives of the people and that they have a full opportunity to debate them and to have their views recorded.
 In 1991, the world judged that the Iraqi regime was a dangerous aggressor. In the interests of world peace and regional security, the community of nations required Iraq to surrender its offensive arsenal, its chemical and biological weapons, and abandon its nuclear weapons program. Iraq agreed to comply. We have waited 12 years for it to give action to that commitment. On 8 November 2002, the United Nations Security Council passed resolution 1441-the 17th Security Council resolution on Iraq regarding the threat it poses to international peace and security. This resolution, which was adopted unanimously, gave Iraq a final opportunity to demonstrate immediate compliance with its disarmament obligations.
 Over the last four months, we have seen no evidence to suggest that Saddam Hussein is willing to comply with resolution 1441. He has offered up minor concessions but he has not demonstrated that he is willing to declare or destroy Iraq's prohibited weapons programs. The government believes very strongly that Iraq's continued defiance of the community of nations presents a challenge which must be addressed.
 It is inherently dangerous to allow a country such as Iraq to retain weapons of mass destruction, particularly in the light of its past aggressive behaviour. If the world community fails to disarm Iraq, we fear that other rogue states will be encouraged to believe that they too can have these most deadly of weapons and that the world will do nothing to stop them.
 As the possession of weapons of mass destruction spreads, so the danger of such weapons coming into the hands of terrorist groups will multiply. That is the ultimate nightmare which the world must take decisive and effective steps to prevent. Possession of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons by terrorists would constitute a direct, undeniable and lethal threat to Australia and its people. The government's principal objective is the disarmament of Iraq; however, should military action be required to achieve this, it is axiomatic that such action will result in the removal of Saddam Hussein's regime.
 Early this morning, President Bush telephoned me and formally requested Australia's support and participation in a coalition of nations who are prepared to enforce the Security Council's resolutions by all necessary means. This request was subsequently considered and agreed to by cabinet.
 Around midday today, Australian Eastern Standard Time, President Bush delivered an ultimatum to the Iraqi leadership: Saddam Hussein and his sons must leave Iraq within 48 hours or face military conflict. Nobody wants a military conflict. The world has tried other means for years but, so far, to no avail. We cannot walk away from the threat that Iraq's continued possession of weapons of mass destruction constitutes to its region and to the wider world.
 In the final analysis, the absolute conviction of the government is that disarming Iraq is necessary for the long-term security of the world and is therefore manifestly in the national interest of Australia. The events of the last four months, Iraq's history, and its 12 years of defiance have convinced the government that the only way to deal with this challenge is by force. Sadly, the government is not surprised that it should have come to this. Force has been the only language that Saddam Hussein's regime has ever understood.
 For 12 years, Saddam Hussein has forced his nation to endure stringent economic sanctions and pariah status rather than give up his weapons of mass destruction. The presence of weapons inspectors has hindered and irritated him but has never stopped his weapons programs. Even during the first four years of weapons inspections, when the inspectors perceived they were making real progress, Iraq continued to develop and successfully conceal biological weapons. Luckily, a series of defectors blew the whistle on some of Iraq's prohibited weapons programs, forcing the Iraqi regime to reveal one of the most sophisticated and expansive offensive biological programs in the world; but we cannot expect always to be so lucky. Inspectors were ordered out of Iraq before they could finish dismantling it. The available intelligence indicates that, since the departure of inspectors in 1998, Saddam has continued to work on his chemical and biological capabilities and has maintained his nuclear aspirations.
 Even under the threat of force he has only engaged reluctantly in token, piecemeal destruction of weapons and continues to deny the existence of weapons programs. Even with over 200,000 coalition troops massed at his borders he quibbles about how interviews are to be conducted with his scientists and how many of the reconnaissance aircraft supporting the inspectors can fly at any one time. After 12 years, he does not believe that the international community has the will to act. In that he has made a terrible error of judgement.
 For 12 years the international community has been trying to get him to relinquish his prohibited weapons programs, as required by the cease-fire which ended the Gulf War, and Australia has been an active participant in this process. During these 12 years, there has rarely been a time when Australian defence personnel have not been deployed to the Gulf-in 1990 to enforce sanctions; in 1991 for Operation Desert Storm; in 1998 to support Operation Desert Fox; and throughout an almost continuous presence with the multinational interdiction force. Now we join with the coalition in an attempt to bring this long-running conflict to an end once and for all.
 This will be difficult. Saddam Hussein is married to his weapons of mass destruction. He will never give them up willingly. Militarism and aggression are the foundations of his regime. If you doubt this, consider his actions against Iraqi Kurds, against the Shiite majority-particularly, the Marshland Arabs. Consider the estimated 400,000 combatants and civilians who lost their lives in the war that followed his invasion of Iran- the 100,000 killed when he invaded Kuwait. Since Saddam Hussein came to power in 1979, more than one million people have died in the internal conflicts and wars which he has generated-more than one million people, let me repeat, have died in the internal wars and conflicts which this man has generated.
 Intelligence analysis tells us that Saddam Hussein considers these weapons programs to be essential both for internal repression and to fulfil his regional ambitions. No doubt he looks to a time when the world will be distracted by other events and he can use his arsenal to bully and coerce his neighbours and to dominate the Middle East. Iraq's continued defiance represents a threat to the delicate balance which supports nonproliferation. It is no idle speculation that other countries in the region, perceiving this threat, might decide that their own security requires that they develop a significant chemical, biological or even possibly nuclear arsenal to deter attack from Iraq. Moreover, other rogue states would be tempted to ignore the international conventions on arms control, which Australia and others have so painstakingly built up over the last 30 years, and would feel that they could get away with developing similar weapons programs. This is proliferation. We know the lessons of history: the more nations that have these weapons, the more likely they are to be used. That is why we fear proliferation, and we are very concerned about the potential for the proliferation of these weapons in our own region.
 That these weapons may become commonplace in arsenals of sovereign states is frightening enough, but it would be a nightmare for the international community if they were to find their way into the hands of terrorists-and we have every reason to be concerned about the expansion and increasing sophistication of international terrorist networks. We know as a matter of fact that terrorist networks such as al-Qaeda want to obtain weapons of mass destruction. They are actively seeking them and they desire them because of their potency. With such weapons at their disposal, terrorists could target entire cities or regions. Their victims would not number in the hundreds or the thousands but potentially even more.
 Twelve years ago the community of nations determined that Iraq could not be permitted to develop and possess weapons of mass destruction. Today's security environment reinforces that judgment. Our alliance with the United States is unapologetically a factor in the decision that we have taken. The crucial, long-term value of the United States alliance should always be a factor in any major national security decision taken by Australia.
 America has given strong leadership to the world on the issue of Iraq. The Security Council would not have been re-energised, the United Nations would not have been re-energised, had it not been for the action of the United States returning the issue to the United Nations in September of last year. We have supported the American position on this issue because we share their concerns and we share their worries about the future if Iraq is left unattended to. Alliances are two-way processes and, where we are in agreement, we should not leave it to the United States to do all of the heavy lifting just because they are the world's superpower. To do so would undermine one of the most important relationships we have and, in an increasingly globalised and borderless world, the relationship between Australia and United States will become more rather than less important as the years go by.
 Armed conflict, as we all know, is a terrible thing. Our ultimate responsibility is, of course, for the security of the Australian people, but I am very conscious of the dangers that military action will pose for Iraq's civilian population. But, when you put human suffering into the balance on this issue, there is a very powerful case that human suffering in Iraq will, in fact, be greater if Saddam Hussein remains in power in that country. Perhaps it is enough to note that, in 1991, the Security Council thought it necessary to pass resolution 688, which demands that the Iraqi regime cease its repression of its own people. In April last year, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution condemning:  ... the systematic, widespread and extremely grave violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law by the Government of Iraq, resulting in an all-pervasive repression and oppression sustained by broad-based discrimination and widespread terror.  The regime's hallmarks are summary and arbitrary executions, the use of rape as a political tool, enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrest and detention, widespread and systematic torture and maintaining of decrees prescribing cruel and inhuman punishment as the penalty for offences. These points demonstrate that the short-term future for many, if not most, Iraqi civilians is neither secure nor peaceful, regardless of whether Iraq is subject to military action or not.
 The Australian government is deeply disappointed that the Security Council has been unable to maintain a unity of purpose on the issue of Iraq. The strong position taken last year, clearly articulated in resolution 1441, was that Iraq was being given one final chance to disarm-one final chance to show its immediate willingness to meet the terms of the cease-fire agreed in April 1991. The goal of 1441 was immediate and complete disarmament, not simply the return of weapons inspectors-that was merely an issue of process. A further resolution by the Security Council demonstrating that it was galvanised to take action might have-just might have-persuaded Saddam Hussein to take the steps necessary to achieve a peaceful solution to this conflict.
 The position articulated by those opposed to action is fundamentally flawed. They recognise that the threat of military action has been the only way to elicit a positive response from Iraq. Does anybody imagine that the weapons inspectors would have returned to Iraq had it not been for the American military build-up? Kofi Annan does not believe so. Hans Blix does not believe so. Even Dominique de Villepin, the French foreign minister, acknowledges that reality, as does his President. So the position articulated by those who have been so critical of the Americans and others is fundamentally flawed. They recognise that the threat of military action has been the only way to elicit a positive response from Iraq; yet they squander the leveraging power of a military force by clearly demonstrating they are never prepared to actually use it.
 This strategy not only is illogical but also ignores the practical reality: it is not possible to keep our forces in the gulf, on alert, indefinitely. And everyone knows that, if the forces were brought home, the weapons inspectors would quickly be expelled from Iraq.  The government does not accept that the only thing required to achieve complete and comprehensive disarmament is more time. If Iraq had cooperated actively and openly over the last four months, we would support a longer implementation timetable. This is not the case. The Iraqi regime have continued to lie and obfuscate, making only token gestures of cooperation.
 They have not given the slightest indication that they intend to fully disarm and abandon their prohibited weapons programs. We wanted the inspectors to do their job. But we have never accepted that they should have had to play the role of detective. They had neither the skills nor the powers to fulfil this role effectively. Their presence inhibited Saddam's weapons programs, but the presence of inspectors alone could never have delivered total and complete disarmament in the face of Iraqi defiance and duplicity. A peaceful path to disarmament could have been achieved only if the Iraqi regime had been truly committed to disarming and had worked in active cooperation with the inspection teams. Iraq had to demonstrate it wanted to disarm. It was always a question of attitude and not a question of time.
 We reject totally the argument put by France and by some other countries that the presence of inspectors will lead, over the passage of time, to disarmament. We cannot and will not ignore the experience of the last 12 years. We believe that the time has come to disarm Iraq, by force if necessary. We are participating in the US led coalition to achieve this objective.
 It is important to understand that the decision taken by the government is in accordance with the legal authority for military action found in previous resolutions of the Security Council. We supported, and would have preferred, a further Security Council resolution specifying the need for such action. We did so to maximise the diplomatic, moral and political pressure on Iraq, not because we considered a new resolution to be necessary for such action to be legitimate.
 Our legal advice, provided by the head of the Office of International Law in the Attorney-General's Department and the senior legal adviser to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, is unequivocal. The existing United Nations Security Council resolutions already provide for the use of force to disarm Iraq and restore international peace and security to the area. This legal advice is consistent with that provided to the British government by its Attorney-General.
 Security Council resolution 678, adopted in 1990, authorised the use of all necessary means not only to implement resolution 660, which demanded Iraq withdraw from Kuwait, but also to implement all subsequent relevant resolutions and to restore international peace and security in the area. Resolution 687, which provided the cease-fire terms for Iraq in April 1991, affirmed resolution 678. Security Council resolution 1441 confirms that Iraq has been and remains in material breach of its obligations, a point on which there is unanimous agreement, including by even the Leader of the Opposition.
 Iraq's past and continuing breaches of the cease-fire obligations negate the basis for the formal cease-fire. Iraq has by its conduct demonstrated that it did not and does not accept the terms of the cease-fire. Consequently, we have received legal advice that 'the cease-fire is not effective and the authorisation for the use of force in Security Council resolution 678 is reactivated'. It follows, so I am advised, that referring to the use of such force against Iraq as 'unilateral' is wrong. Any informed analysis of the Security Council resolutions leads to this conclusion.
 I note that the former Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade under the Keating government, Mr Michael Costello, has reached the same conclusion. The use of military force, according to Mr Michael Costello, is already authorised by the United Nations. This advice is not new. Our deployment of forces to the gulf in 1998, strongly supported by the then Leader of the Opposition, in support of Operation Desert Fox was undertaken on the same basis. The Clinton administration clearly understood and argued, as the Bush administration does now, that existing Security Council resolutions clearly allow for the use of military force.
 I table the legal advice provided by the Attorney-General's Department and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; the summary legal advice provided to the British government by its Attorney-General, Lord Goldsmith; and the transcript of an interview with Mr Michael Costello, former Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade under the Keating government.
 Australia and the other members of the coalition are therefore still acting under the authority of the United Nations Security Council resolutions. We continue to regard the United Nations as the most important framework the world has to achieve a secure and peaceful world and our commitment to the UN is perhaps personified by the 1,200 ADF personnel who are currently serving in the blue beret all around the world.
 The government remains extremely disappointed that the Security Council has been unable to demonstrate the necessary resolve to confront Iraq's continued defiance of the United Nations. We consider that it is critical for the United Nations to remain fully engaged on the issue of Iraq and to take responsibility for coordinating the humanitarian and reconstruction support which will be required once the military conflict has been resolved. Just as we believe action against Saddam Hussein's regime is in our nation's best interest, so too we believe it is clearly in our interest to help rebuild a stable and prosperous Iraq. To that end the government will make a significant contribution to that reconstruction effort.
 We hope that Iraq will be able to establish a government which has the support and reflects the will of its people. This is the only way to ensure that the wealth generated from the oil reserves, which belong to the people of Iraq, is directed to achieving their wellbeing and prosperity. Australia will do everything in its power to encourage the establishment of a representative government.
 The government also wants to reassure Australia's Islamic community that our actions in Iraq are not an attack on Islam, one of the world's great faiths. This reassurance has been given to, and accepted by, President Megawati of Indonesia, the leader of the world's largest Islamic country. I remind all Australians, regardless of their views on the conflict in Iraq, that our Islamic community, especially those people who have family or cultural ties to the Middle East, will especially need our compassion and our support over coming weeks and all Australians should ensure that this is offered.
 As I have said before, and in particular in my address on 4 February, it is crucial for the stability of the region to address the seemingly intractable Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Israel has no stauncher ally than Australia in the pursuit of its right to exist and the right to secure internationally recognised borders. Australia also strongly supports the establishment of a secure and independent state for the people of Palestine. Australia again urges Prime Minister Sharon and Chairman Arafat to embrace the road map to peace developed by the United States in close cooperation with Russia, the European Union and the United Nations. The Australian government is committed to do everything in its power to encourage and support the Israeli and Palestinian governments to negotiate a resolution to this bloody conflict, which has cost too many innocent lives and cast a shadow across the entire region.
 The engagement of our defence forces will be limited to the period of the conflict and to those elements already deployed-that is, the transport ship HMAS Kanimbla, which departed from Sydney on 23 January with approximately 350 personnel embarked, including Army detachments providing air defence and amphibious cargo transport craft; the Special Forces Task Group, including a Special Air Services squadron from Perth and special forces combat support elements, including specialist troops to deal with the threat of weapons of mass destruction drawn from the newly established Incident Response Regiment; CH-47 troop lift helicopters and a quick reaction force drawn from the Sydney based 4RAR Commando Unit; a squadron of 14 FA18 Hornet fighter aircraft, three C130 Hercules transport aircraft, as well as an Air Forward Command element responsible for coordinating air operations with coalition partners, and two P3 patrol aircraft currently in the Gulf supporting the war on terror; a Navy clearance diving team capable of locating, rendering safe and disposing of mines; and the HMAS Anzac and HMAS Darwin, which were already in the Middle East policing UN sanctions on Iraq.
 Although, as part of the coalition, Australian forces will be under the operational control of the Coalition Commander, they will remain under Australian national command at all times. Australian commanders are bound by Australian rules of engagement and separate Australian targeting directives. The government has been mindful to ensure that the ADF retains the capability to continue to service our current commitments, including our contribution to the UN force in East Timor, and to respond to any short notice contingencies that may arise.
 The deployment, although modest in terms of the size of the total coalition force, is a sizeable commitment for Australia. The 2,000 ADF personnel and maritime, land and air assets currently deployed to the Middle East are not a token contribution. Every one of our service men and women is precious to their families, their loved ones and to their nation. I want to say to the men and the women of our defence forces who are deployed with the coalition forces that I have the greatest confidence in your abilities and your judgement. You may be part of the Australian deployment or deployed while on exchange duties with our friends and allies. Your nation admires your courage and salutes your commitment to duty. You belong to the most professional armed forces in the world, and all of us are proud of your reputation. Your government and your military commanders have spared no effort and no expense to try and prepare you for the terrible reality of active service.
 I am under no illusion-your mission is a difficult one and inevitably involves great danger. All agree that the Iraqi regime is one of the most repressive and cruel in the world. It is in open defiance of the United Nations Security Council. No-one wants Saddam Hussein to keep and expand his arsenal of prohibited weapons. We believe passionately that your efforts are vital to ensure the long-term security of Australia and our world. The cause is just. The action is legitimate. We all pray that you and your coalition partners will make quick progress and that soon you will be home, safe and sound, reunited with those whom you love.
 I know that our defence personnel could not function without the support and the understanding provided by their loved ones, their families and their friends, and it will be, inevitably, a difficult time for those at home. Sometimes it can be more stressful for those who wait than for those who are in the thick of action. I ask that all Australians-regardless of whether they support our participation in the coalition-show their support for those who have been ordered to undertake this mission, give special thought to their loved ones and do your best to support and look after them. You have a right to protest, to dissent and to register your concern, but direct those protests to the government, to me, not to those who are overseas on our behalf.
 This decision has been taken by the government in the belief that it is in the long-term interests of this country. It has been taken against a background of a world environment changed forever by the events of 11 September. The world now faces new and previously unknown menaces. Old notions of aggression and responses to aggression do not necessarily fit our new circumstances. Yet one thing remains constant-the responsibility of governments to protect its citizens against possible future attacks, wherever they may come from. It is in that spirit, against that background and in that context that the government has taken the decision it has, and I commend the motion to the House.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much Wilson, to the Speaker, the Chairman of the National Capital Development Authority, Air Marshal Evans, Peter Lucas Smith, Mike Castles, the Commissioner of the Federal Police Mike Keelty, members of various emergency services organisations, ladies and gentlemen.
 I'm particularly honoured to be associated with this event. Australia has long needed a national memorial to mark the nation's respect for the enormous sacrifices that so many people in our emergency services make in the interests of our own personal safety and in the interests of our national well-being. It is especially appropriate that this unveiling ceremony, if I can put it that way, this announcement takes place only a short period of time after the Australian community living here in Canberra being particularly reminded of the ferocity of natural events, and has had the opportunity of seeing on full and such effective display the capacity of our emergency services. We were all greatly touched by what they did, we're all very grateful to them for what they did and it is very appropriate that all of us coming together as Australians, mark the sacrifices of those who've died in the service of our community. And at a time when people are... young Australians, young Australian men and women have their lives on the line in the service of the nation around the world we are particularly conscious of people who do things that involve a great personal risk to them for their fellow Australians.
 And today's an opportunity to announce the winner of this competition and to recommit the Government, of course, to the construction of the Memorial and to look forward to its opening. The National Emergency Services Memorial will honour both career personnel and volunteers. And when we think of Australian mateship, nothing better expresses it than the way in which people work together at a time of adversity. You all saw it here in the Canberra community quite magnificently and other communities have seen it over the years, not only in relation to bushfires and floods but also in relation to events and tragedies such as... some of them were remarked upon in the earlier speeches that involve significant loss of life through accident and disaster.
 And on every occasion there's a magnificent willingness on the part of Australians to come together - career people, as well as volunteers, the community generally - differences are forgotten, inhibitions fall away and people work together. You saw it in Canberra and you've seen it on so many other occasions. And it is a special expression of the special character of the Australian people that makes all of us feel especially proud. So, this Memorial is going to honour the contribution of both career people and also volunteers, it will honour especially those who've died making Australia a safer place and helping their fellow Australians. The Memorial will be located at the western edge of Kings Park, adjacent to the Rond Terraces and is scheduled for completion within the next 12 months. The Minister's already announced the three runners up in the national design competition.
 And I have great pleasure in announcing the winning design, and the winning design fulfils very much the requirements of the design brief to commemorate the contribution and sacrifice of emergency services personnel in a sensitive, yet very powerful way. A simple yet moving design that allows for visits to the Memorial to be both private and shared. And the winner - the design was submitted by ASPECT Melbourne Proprietary Limited and I ask Kirsten Bauer to come forward to accept the congratulations and the certificate.
 Congratulations to your company and I'd like you to say a few words.
[ends]


Good evening.
The Government has decided to commit Australian forces to action to disarm Iraq because we believe it is right, it is lawful and it's in Australia's national interest.
We are determined to join other countries to deprive Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction, its chemical and biological weapons, which even in minute quantities are capable of causing death and destruction on a mammoth scale.
 Iraq has been an aggressor in the past against its neighbours and even its own people. If Iraq is allowed to keep these weapons not only might she use them again but moreover other rogue countries will copy Iraq knowing that the world will do nothing to stop them.
 And the more countries that have these weapons - countries run by despotic regimes - the greater becomes the likelihood that these weapons will fall into the hands of terrorists. If that happens can anyone doubt that the terrorists will use them whatever the cost might be?
 The attacks on the 11th of September and in Bali showed that international terrorists have no regard for human life no matter what the nationality of their victims may be.
 Iraq has long supported international terrorism. Saddam Hussein pays $25,000 to each family of Palestinian suicide bombers who wreak such murderous havoc in Israel. He has sheltered and sponsored many terrorist groups.
 International terrorism knows no borders. We have learnt that to our cost. Australia and Australians anywhere in the world are as much targets as any other western country and its people.
 Therefore the possession of chemical, biological, or even worse still, nuclear weapons by a terrorist network would be a direct undeniable and lethal threat to Australia and its people.
That is the reason above all others why I passionately believe that action must be taken to disarm Iraq. Not only will it take dangerous weapons from that country but it will send a clear signal to other rogue states and terrorists groups like Al Qaeda which clearly want such weapons that the world is prepared to take a stand.
There's also another reason and that is our close security alliance with the United States. The Americans have helped us in the past and the United States is very important to Australia's long-term security.
 It is critical that we maintain the involvement of the United States in our own region where at present there are real concerns about the dangerous behaviour of North Korea.
The relationship between our two countries will grow more rather than less important as the years go by.
 A key element of our close friendship with the United States and indeed with the British is our full and intimate sharing of intelligence material.
In the difficult fight against the new menace of international terrorism there is nothing more crucial than timely and accurate intelligence. This is a priceless component of our relationship with our two very close allies.
 There is nothing comparable to be found in any other relationship - nothing more relevant indeed to the challenges of the contemporary world.
I know that some people are saying that what we have done makes it more likely that terrorists will attack Australia.
 Australia has been a terrorist target at least since the 11th of September 2001.
 Australia is a western country with western values. Nothing will or should change that. That is why we are a target.
Remember that bin Laden specifically targeted Australia because of our intervention to save the people of East Timor.
Does any Australian seriously suggest that if bin Laden's warning had come before the East Timor action we should have caved in and changed our policy. That will never be the Australian way.
We believe that so far from our action in Iraq increasing the terrorist threat it will, by stopping the spread of chemical and biological weapons, make it less likely that a devastating terrorist attack will be carried out against Australia.
 I want to assure all of you that the action we are taking is fully legal under international law. Back in the early 1990s resolutions were passed by the Security Council authorising military action against Iraq.
 That action was only suspended on condition that Iraq gave up its weapons of mass destruction. Clearly we all know this has not happened. As a result the authority to take military action under those earlier resolutions has revived.
 America's critics both here and abroad have been both opportunistic and inconsistent. They know and admit that weapons inspectors only returned to Iraq because of the pressure of the American military build-up. Yet they have persistently criticised American policy.
 Apparently they believe that a quarter of a million American, British and indeed Australian troops should stay in the desert doing nothing indefinitely. We all know that if the troops had been withdrawn Iraq would have immediately stopped its minimal co-operation with the inspectors.
 Another point I'd make to you very strongly is that we're not dealing here with a regime of ordinary brutality. There are many dictatorships in the world. But this is a dictatorship of a particularly horrific kind.
 His is an appalling regime: its torture, its use of rape as an instrument of intimidation, the cruelty to children to extract confessions from parents. It is a terrible catalogue of inflicting human misery on a people who deserve much better.
This week, the Times of London detailed the use of a human shredding machine as a vehicle for putting to death critics of Saddam Hussein. This is the man, this is the apparatus of terror we are dealing with.
The removal of Saddam Hussein will lift this immense burden of terror from the Iraqi people.
 Our argument is with Saddam Hussein's regime. It is certainly not with Islam.
Australians of an Arab background or of the Islamic faith are a treasured part of our community. Over the weeks ahead and beyond we should all extend to them the hand of Australian mateship.
To those in the community who may not agree with me, please vent your anger against me and towards the government. Remember that our forces are on duty in the Gulf in our name and doing their job in the best traditions of Australia's defence forces.
Can I say something that I know will find an echo from all of you whether or not you agree with the Government. And that is to say to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force in the Gulf - we admire you, we are thinking of you, we want all of you come to back home safe and sound. We care for and we anguish with your loved ones back here in Australia. Our prayers and our hopes are with all of you.
 We now live in a world made very different by the scourge of international terrorism.
 This has been a very difficult decision for the Government but a decision which is good for Australia's long term security and the cause of a safer world.
Good night.
[ends]


Thank you very much Peter, Ian Carson, my federal parliamentary colleagues, my state parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Liberals and my fellow Australians.
Thank you for the warmth of your welcome to this very important gathering of the Victorian division of the Liberal Party. I want to start my remarks by thanking all of you for the remarkably constant loyalty and support and energetic participation in our common cause that you have extended to me and to all of my federal parliamentary team over the last seven years. It has been, as Peter said, a seven-year period not only of remarkable achievement, but a seven-year period of remarkable unity and remarkable consistency. There are many iron laws of politics. There is no one iron law but one of the iron laws of politics I think stands above all others and that is unity of purpose, constancy of communication, and clarity of vision will always be attractive to the Australian people. And that essentially is what we have represented over the last seven years. But I address you at a time when different challenges confront our nation.
 We are involved in a military operation in Iraq. We are involved in a military operation in Iraq because our cause is just, because it is soundly based in international law, because it is in partnership with two nations in particular whose values and aspirations we share, whose policies like ours are for the ultimate benefit of the people of Iraq, and we're also involved because the campaign is an expression of the determination of like minded countries to confront the new realities in which we live. The world did change forever on the 11th of September 2001. That has become a clich‚ but in becoming a clich‚ does not rob it of its veracity. We confront in the 21st century challenges unlike the challenges we faced in the 20th century. The old notions of military aggression have given way to the new and infinitely more insidious menace of international terrorism in a globalised world.
The old idea was that you were attacked if the army of one country rolled across the border of another as the German army rolled across the Polish border in September of 1939, and as the armies of Europe rolled across each others' borders in 1914, and as North Korea rolled across the border of South Korea in 1950. Now we confront a different, more insidious, a new and more dangerous menace and that is the ultimate evil for the world of the forces of international terrorism coming into possession of chemical, biological, and even worse still nuclear weapons. And as we think of this conflict in which Australia is involved let us not forget the reasons why we have become involved. Let us not forget that we have joined the coalition because we believe that if Iraq is allowed to retain those weapons, other countries of equal mark when it comes to terror and authoritarianism and despotism will seek to do the same thing, and as possessions of those weapons multiply, so the likelihood of them falling into the hands of terrorists will escalate. And mark my words ladies and gentlemen, if terrorist organisations get hold of those weapons they will not hesitate to use them regardless of the human cost that they will inflict upon the victims of their terrorist attacks.
 We're also involved because the regime in Iraq has an almost unique record of horror and terrorism and intimidation. It has been associated with terrorist organisations in the past. It does pay US$25,000 to every family of a Palestinian suicide bomber who embarks upon a murderous suicide attack upon the people of Israel. Don't anybody suggest for a moment, don't anybody be allowed to suggest for a moment that there is no link between the regime of Saddam Hussein and terrorist behaviour. He has a long record of sponsoring terrorist attacks on neighbouring countries. So we should as we reflect upon this situation, we should remember the reasons why Australia has committed 2000 young men and women to military conflict in the Gulf. And our dominant thoughts are of course with our forces. I think all of us feel a great sense of pride and gratitude to those 2000 young men and women who are now on active service. In all the manifestations our remarkable Special Forces, and you will understand why we say very little about their activities. But I can say this - they are without parallel or peer when it comes to their bravery, their capacity, their professionalism, and indeed the respect that they have won not only for what they have done in the Gulf but also for what they have done in Afghanistan.
 We have the units of the Royal Australian Air Force, the squadron of Hornets who are involved in the air campaign. We have the personnel, the Naval personnel, HMAS Anzac provided naval cover for the British Royal Marines landing at the beginning of the war just a week ago today, the first occasion since the Korean War that guns of a Royal Australian Naval vessel have fired in anger. And on the humanitarian side I'm very proud to say that this morning the British vessel Sir Galahad was able to berth at the port of Umm Qasr and unload the first real humanitarian supplies of large quantities to go to the Iraqi people, and that berthing and that unloading took place at Berth Five which had been an area cleared by Royal Australian Naval diving bomb experts. So there's a very direct, practical link between the expertise of Australians in clearing mines from that port and the provisions of humanitarian supplies to the people of Iraq.
I think it is important as we survey what has occurred over the last week to take as I said yesterday something of a reality check and to confront those people who say what's happened, it's not over, it's been going nine or ten days, why isn't it completed, is this a reversal for the United States, is this a setback? Let me remind you of a few salient facts. The core campaign in Afghanistan against Al Qaeda and the Taliban took 37 days; the NATO bombing campaign on behalf of the people of Kosovo against Milosevic in Serbia directed mainly at Belgrade took 79 days; the Gulf war of 1991 took 41 days; and the Falklands war of 1982 waged by the British to recapture the Falklands from the Argentinians took 74 days. And yet nine days into this people are saying, the critics of America are asking the question why isn't it over. That is unrealistic. And you're dealing here not with a discrete limited campaign as 1991 was. 1991 was to expel the Iraqi invaders from Kuwait. It was not to liberate the entire nation of Iraq. So when you reflect upon those figures and you reflect upon the challenge of liberating an entire country you then reclaim some sense of proportion and some sense of perspective.
Another issue that I see creeping in in some of the commentary is just a suggestion of moral equivalence. Now let me state very emphatically there is no moral equivalence between the regime of Saddam Hussein and the motives and the aspirations and the values and the conduct in war of the coalition led by the United States.
This campaign has been characterised by a number of things. But the most dominant characteristic of this military campaign has been the unprecedented length to which the coalition forces have gone to minimise civilian casualties. I can't think of any military operation where that has been such a dominant consideration. Sadly and tragically no military operation can be conducted without the likelihood of some civilian causalities. I don't pretend otherwise, no honest man or woman can. But on this occasion, that has been a dominate motivation and I have no doubt that if more ruthless methods had been used, if indiscriminate bombing had been employed, maybe further gains might have been made over the past few days. But at a very great (inaudible) moral authorities of the nations that we hold so dear and most particularly our own. And I make no apology, and I don't believe the leaders of the United States or the United Kingdom would make any apology for the ethical way in which this military operations has been conducted. And our forces are fighting under our own rules of engagement, under a separate Australian national command. They are fighting according to the laws of war to which Australia has subscribed and to which I am very proud and to which we remain strongly committed.
Contrast this of course with the methods being employed by Saddam Hussein's regime. The placement, the deliberate placement, of military assets in civilian areas, inviting attack in the sure knowledge and the certain hope that there will be civilian casualties. The use of women and children as human shields, forcing children to fight against the threat of death of their families. The use of hospitals and other medical facilities as para military bases. Add all of that to 30 years of tyranny and torture and intimidation and a reign of domestic terror which has produced a regime with very few parallels since World War II and you have an idea of where the balance lies in the moral argument between the cause of which we are justly part and the cause against which we are fighting. It is always important on occasion such as this to argue the moral case, the argument of principle as well as to dwell on pragmatic considerations.
So ladies and gentlemen, as we gather here today let us primarily express our support for, our admiration towards and our affection for the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces. And let us also think particularly of their families here in Australia and try and begin to share the sense of anxiety that many of them will understandably feel. And to express the united hope that all of them will return to their families and to their homes in Australia safe and sound. And that they will return having successfully and victoriously completed a mission which is right, which is just and in the long term interests of our nation.
Much as our focus my friends has been on international events, we have not taken our eye off the domestic ball. We remain a government that recognises that we have responsibilities, to not only maintain the long term security of this country, internationally and from a defence perspective, but also to maintain its internal, domestic, economic and social strength.
The Australian economy, particularly due to Peter Costello's stewardship as Treasurer, continues to be the star performer of the OECD area. we've reclaimed our Triple A rating, lost if my memory serves me correctly way back in 1986 when somebody whose name escapes me once talked of a Banana Republic. Due in no small measure might I say to the fact that we now have an astonishingly low debt to GDP ratio. It's something like three per cent, the OECD average is 47, in the United States it's 45 or 46, and in Japan it's something like 76 or 80. Now nothing is more guaranteed to deliver a secure future to our children than to deliver them a nation free of debt.
In the years to come when they write the economic history of the last seven or eight years, I believe above everything else they will write that this Government paid off Australia's debts, debts run up by our predecessors, but nonetheless which if not paid off would have been a burden on future generations of Australians.
Ladies and gentlemen, our unemployment rate is markedly lower than what it was when this Government came to office. We've generate more than a million and a quarter new jobs over the last seven years. And that along with the higher real wages and the lower interest rates has meant that the Australian consumers capacity to spend has never been better. And it's one of the great drivers of our domestic economic strength. But our unemployment rate could be even lower. And we could consistently have a five in front of our unemployment rate for a number of years into the future, if only the Senate would pass some of the changes or our industrial relations laws. And if you've heard me talking in the past about getting our changes to the unfair dismissal laws through and you're getting a bit of tired (inaudible) can I say I'm sorry, but you're going to have keep hearing it because I'm going to keep talking about that and we're going to keep trying it and eventually we will get those laws through and will drive Australia's unemployment rate even lower.
Australia's health system has many faults. But like Winston Churchill's famous description of democracy, "it's infinitely better than any alternative." And when you look around the world I defy anybody in this room to nominate a health system which is fundamentally better and fairer and more available in an egalitarian fashion to all the citizens of the country than the ones that operate in Australia. I say this very deliberately because I think we collectively talk down our health system to our great detriment. And this is a criticism that's got to shared right across the political spectrum, at both a state and a federal level because the fundamental elements of our health system are based on principles of fairness and affordability and availability. This Government, despite the predictions of the Labor Party back in 1995, has preserved and strengthened the Medicare system. So I want to repeat the very strong and unequivocal commitment of my Government to the principles of universality contained in Medicare. That is the right of every Australian citizen, to free treatment in a public hospital, the right of every Australian citizen to receive the Medicare rebate in relation to GP consultations, and participation in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. They are the three great universal principles of Medicare, and they have been preserved and they've been enhanced in the time we have been in government. We have added things, we have made it affordable and possible for many millions more Australians to return to private health insurance. When we took office the participation rate was about 33 per cent, it is now some 45 per cent. And right at the moment Kay Patterson and I and other members of the Government are in discussion with the AMA and others about some further changes which will continue the process of expanding choice and enhancing affordability and access to Australia's health care system.
These changes will address some of the doctor shortages, particularly in rural and outer metropolitan areas. They are designed to address a trend where it has become more difficult for people to access bulk billing where on every principle they have a right to do so. And they are changes which I believe will further underpin and strengthen the positive elements of Australia's health system.
As I said a few moments ago, it's not a perfect system, it never will be, it never was and it's never possible to create a perfect health system. But compared with those of many other nations it is infidelity superior. And not only have we over the last seven years preserved the fundamental elements of our health system, we've strengthened Medicare and the changes which I hope to announce within a few weeks will be further steps along the path of further strengthening the health system, making it more attractive, more affordable and fairer and guaranteeing legitimate access to the system for all Australians.
Finally my friends can I return to the theme of my opening remarks. And that is that this seven year journey has been a period not only of remarkable achievement but it's been a period of great political unity and great political consistency. In comparison to our political opponents who have to be the most opportunistic bunch of federal politicians I've encountered in the last 29 years. They accuse me from time to time of being poll driven, for heaven's sake. If you look at the way that Simon Crean has bobbed and weaved around, not only on the issue of Iraq, but on so many other issues. He must read a different paper each morning with a different opinion poll. Ours has been a government of consistency and commitment through times of public support and also times of public reservation and public criticism. You can never assume that on every issue you take a stand on, the public is going to agree with you all of the time. That's impossible. And a government that is dominated by that consideration is a government destined not to do good things for the country it governs, but also to be fairly summarily dismissed from office.
 The Australian public is the most sophisticated electorate in the world. It understands when it's got a government that believes in something and it knows when its got an Opposition that believes in nothing. And that is the reality that confronts the Australian people at the present time. I ask of the Australian people always to make the judgements that they believe are in the best interests of our country. And I will always accept the judgements they make. And over the last seven years we have taken stands on issues because we believe that they are the right stands for the long term future of our country. That is why we persevered with economic reform, that is why we bought in gun controls laws, that is why we took action to free the people of East Timor, that is why we secured and protected our borders against illegal immigration, that is why, my friends, we have taken action with our friends and allies, the Americans and the British and others, to liberate the people of Iraq. But even more importantly than that, to make sure that in the medium to longer term this country was freer from and less likely to be the object of a devastating terrorist attack.
We are in Iraq because of the long term security of Australia. We are in Iraq because it is in the interests of the world to disarm a dictator who's shown in the past that he has no compunction about using chemical and using biological weapons. We are in Iraq because if he is allowed to get away with it, others will do the same and the likelihood of those weapons falling into the hands of terrorist will multiply as a consequence. That is the reason, that is the national interest reason and it's the moral case for our involvement in Iraq and I believe that a growing number of the Australian people are giving support to that policy because they know it is right and they know it matters for Australia's long term security.
[ends]


Thank you very much Doctor, my parliamentary colleagues Michael Johnson and Gary Hardgrave, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm very pleased to be part of this launch for two reasons. First and foremost, it is a cause, if I can use that perhaps older, more traditional expression, but I still think an expression that resonates well with Australians. It's a cause that deserves your very strong support, but it's also, as demonstrated by your presence, yet another example of an attitude that in a small way in the time I have been Prime Minister, I and the other members of my Government have tried to further build and develop in the Australian community, and that is the notion of a social coalition. A recognition that any complete civilised society, no matter how successful it is and has been, and there are a few societies in the world today that have been as successful and are as successful as Australia, but despite that there are within its midst challenges, a combination of challenges - affluent societies always have people who do not share in the affluence and need assistance. Democratic societies always have within their midst people who do not feel, and for reasons unrelated to their own conduct, not entirely part of the overall common wealth and they need to be reached out to and helped and included. And for different circumstances and in different ways, there are people in our community who need assistance because nature or circumstances did not give them in the full measure all of the faculties that the rest of us have.
And the way in which a civilised society tackles something like that is to recognise that there is a role, and we've always... we Australians have always identified this, there is a role for the Government. There are things that governments can do that nobody else can do. There are things that governments do that you all wish they didn't do. I recognise that. But there are also some things that governments aren't very good at, and my experience has been that the coal faced delivery of human compassion and looking after those in our society who need particular help, that kind of assistance is always best delivered by those who have the motivation and some kind of personal moral commitment to doing that kind of thing.
I have never thought, for example, that the most challenged people in our society - people who are really down on their luck, to use an old Australian expression in every sense of that expression - I've never thought organisations such as the Salvation Army can be bettered, and the Society of St Vincent de Paul can be bettered, in looking after those people. But there is within any civilised society always a group of people who want to give of their time and also, if they can afford it, of their financial resources to help worthy causes, to help those of our fellow Australians who need particular assistance. And I have tried to develop this idea that the best way of tackling society's challenges and areas of society that need help, is to try and get the Government, the motivated individuals and the business community together.
 And in a way the Foundation that we're launching today is an illustration of that. It brings together people who are experienced in helping deaf and hearing-impaired people in Australia. The skills that are required to interpret for a profoundly deaf person are just as great, if not greater, than the skills that interpreters of different language bring to their craft. And the dedication of the many people that have been associated with the various deaf societies around Australia, and in the case of Queensland for the last 100 years, they also are very committed people. And as the Chairman said, there is about 3,500 Queenslanders who are either deaf or have a significant hearing impairment. And the purpose of establishing this Foundation is to broaden the funding base and for particular important new initiatives.
For over 100 years the Deaf Society has committed itself to addressing the difficulties that people with a hearing impairment face in striving to live their lives as full and productive members of the Australian community. We all of us I guess at various stages look back and wonder whether in certain areas our society has gone forward, or in some areas may have regressed. I'm an optimist. I think in most areas Australian society is better, more caring, more progressive and more enlightened now than it was 50 years ago. That doesn't mean to say that there aren't some attitudes that have changed for the worse, and some worthy values that might have gone by the board. But I think one of the areas in which our society is so much better now is that we are far more able and willing and anxious to provide to people in our community who may have a hearing impairment and may have profound deafness, may be blind, may have some other kind of profound disability, to provide those people with a full opportunity of participating rather than being treated as people who unfortunately didn't have a full share of luck, and whilst should be looked after and supported, the idea of them participating in full in society is not something that we can really cope with. Now that... to some extent, it was a more prevalent attitude 50 years ago. What has happened over the last 50 years is I think we've continued to have the caring, but we've also developed a view that the best expression of that caring is to help people to participate in full measure in the things that everybody else does, and in that way they live more satisfying and more fulfilled lives.
So I think the Foundation that is being launched today with your very generous and evident participation is an expression of the social coalition that is so important and it's also a further expression of the more enlightened and warm-hearted, practical way in which people with disabilities of different kinds are assisted to play a full part in our society. I can't, of course, let the opportunity go by without reminding you that the Commonwealth Government does provide free hearing services for all young Australians up to the age of 21 years through Australian Hearing Services. About 30,000 Australian children were assisted last year in this way and the Government provides about $150 million a year to Australian Hearing Services to support all of its programs. That is not to say that there aren't other areas in which Governments can help, and you will not be surprised to hear that the active leaders of the Society have taken the opportunity over lunch of reminding me of one or two of those areas. And I understand that, and I respect them very much for their commitment and their energy and their zeal.
It is perhaps a truism for me to say something that we all know to be the case, that we are a very fortunate society. Australia is one of the wealthiest societies in the world. It is still, despite what some of the critics and cynics may say, one of the most egalitarian societies in the world. Some challenge that. There is some evidence that we're perhaps not as egalitarian as we used to be. I think what has perhaps happened in Australia is that the gap may have widened a little, not through those on the lower end of the socio-economic scale falling further down, but rather economic success has perhaps bulked up those in the upper reaches of those wealth projections. But we are still a very affluent, very egalitarian and a very fortunate society.
I don't need to remind you that we're living in a world at present which is challenged by a particularly difficult issue, and that of course is the military action being taken in Iraq, of which Australia is part, in which I believe very strongly and my Government believes very strongly, involves a commitment that is both just and properly based and in the medium and long-term national security interests of this country. But I don't seek to use this forum to dwell at length on that, but you might think it rather odd of me given the circumstances of the time if I didn't make at least some reference. And whatever people's views may be about that issue and about the Government's decision, and we are a great democracy and we respect the fact that there are a range of views on all great issues, I'm certain that whatever views people may hold, that all of our thoughts are united in an expression of hope that the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, performing so magnificently in our nation's name, will return home safely and soon to their homeland and to their families.
Ladies and gentlemen, the business community of Australia is asked to support many causes and that is understandable and that is legitimate. I think there is a very significant role for the business community in an affluent society to make a contribution to the good causes of that affluent society. I often hear people being critical of business. I think sometimes that criticism is unfair when it comes to generosity. I know a lot of men and women in business who are exceedingly generous, and they spread their benefaction very widely and very generously. My mantra, if I can put it that way, is not so much that business should give more, but rather that more businesses should give, that there are some wonderful examples of generosity and what I think we need to see is that generosity being repeated more frequently by their fellows in business.
But ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you on behalf of the Foundation for coming along today. I would like to indicate to you that the Commonwealth Government itself will contribute $50,000 to the Foundation's efforts. Can I also assure Mrs Rodda that I took on board something she raised with me over lunch, and I shall investigate that matter and put her in touch at least with Senator Vanstone who is responsible for those issues. But this is a good cause, in the best sense of that word. It's a good cause for your fellow Australians. It's a good cause within a nation which has had more than a good measure of fortune and luck over the years, and I hope that is something that will induce you to very favourably consider the proper entreaties and requests of this Foundation, which I have very great pleasure in launching.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Paul for those very warm and generous remarks of welcome. To my ministerial colleagues Danna Vale and Gary Hardgrave, other parliamentary colleagues, Digger James, Mr Burgess the State President of the RSL, Janet Holmes a Court, the Chairman of John Holland Constructions, Ben Humphreys who I'm delighted to see here - a former parliamentary colleague and friend of mine, ladies and gentlemen.
First can I say it's always terrific to come to a function organised by somebody who is so obviously enthusiastically and committed to and dedicated to what it's all about, and the leadership that Paul has given to his highly successful company, the enthusiasm that he has brought to the cause of providing high quality private health care and particularly for the veterans of Australia, is well known and he has demonstrated it again today.
Greenslopes is Australia's largest private hospital. Ramsay Health Care is the largest provider of private health care to Australia's veterans and one of the leading providers of private health care generally throughout the community. What you're participating in the opening of today is a remarkable facility. It's world class. It will set some new benchmarks for health care not only in Queensland, but around Australia. And it is a very impressive demonstration of the importance of having a vigorous private sector health care provider and private sector health care provision to stand along the universally available facilities of Medicare.
The strength of the Australian system is that we have both. We will slip behind other countries if we move away from the dual system. And what we have endeavoured to do as a Government, and it's demonstrated in a facility such as Greenslopes, we have endeavoured to provide and will continue to provide support for both systems. This hospital has 530 beds, a 24-hour emergency centre and a wide range of medical, surgical, psychiatric and other health services. It's Queensland's only private teaching and research hospital, and I want to join Mr Ramsay in paying tribute to the skill and the expertise of the doctors, the nurses and the other medical staff who work here. Without them, without the professional commitment and personal dedication of health professionals, a hospital would not provide the haven and the support and the atmosphere of caring and healing which is so important to a civilised community.
Greenslopes of course has had a very special relationship with the veterans' community. When it was first opened in 1942 it was a military hospital and after World War II it provided care for veterans. Since 1995 Greenslopes has offered services to general private patients, but through special arrangements with the Department of Veterans' Affairs, the hospital continues to care for eligible veterans and war widows. Now, I want to take the opportunity of reaffirming the Government's very strong commitment to the maintenance of those special arrangements for the caring of veterans, and we are at present in discussion with representatives of the medical profession regarding the continuation of those arrangements. They are special, they are unique to Australia and they are going to be maintained.
I also want to take this opportunity of reaffirming, as I said a moment ago, our very strong commitment as a Government to the maintenance of a duality within one, if I can put it that way, which is a special characteristic of the Australian health care system. We are absolutely committed to maintaining and strengthening the public health system, especially through the maintenance of Medicare. We will continue to provide resources for the three main elements of the public health system - access to free treatment as a public patient in a public hospital, payment of a Medicare rebate at 85 per cent of the scheduled fee for a visit to a GP, and maintenance of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. They are the three pillars of the universal Medicare system and they are going to be maintained fully by this Government.
 We're also very strongly committed to the maintenance of bulk billing, and we're currently also in discussion with the medical profession about particular measures designed to ensure the availability of it. And the measures that I will be announcing on behalf of the Government in the not too distant future will all be designed to strengthen the universal principles of Medicare and to ensure that it stands beside the very strong private health system.
 The private health insurance rebate, which Mr Ramsay mentioned, as well as the introduction of lifetime health cover, have led to a very significant increase in the membership of private health insurance funds in Australia. It's worth remembering that of the nine million Australians who benefit from private health insurance, that something in the order, a very significant number of them, indeed one million people on incomes of less than $20,000 a year have private health cover. It is worth remembering that it is a benefit, an incentive, a facility which is available for a wide range of people at all levels of income within the Australian community.
 The rebate contributes to a better balance between the public and private health care sectors. The rebate has undeniably taken the strain off the public hospital system. You see the evidence around you, the burgeoning of a strong private sector, must as a matter of elementary logic mean that the strain on the public system has been eased. In fact, in the year 2000/01 the admissions to public hospitals in Australia fell for the first time since the introduction of Medicare in 1983. Private hospital admissions have risen by 12 per cent since the introduction of the rebate and indeed since the introduction of that rebate, the number of privately insured episodes of care has increased by over 600,000 or 41 per cent. Now those figures are an illustration of the contribution that the policy of the 30 per cent rebate and the encouragement it provides for people to enter private health insurance, the contribution that has made to the strengthening of the private system and thereby taking the strain off the public system.
They each in a sense depend on the other. You have an imperfect health system if one of them begins to decline or erode, and that was happening until the introduction of the private health rebate and the commitment to lifetime health cover. I have taken a few moments, ladies and gentlemen, to talk about the interdependence of the two systems because we debate health policy in this country an enormous amount, and a lot of the exchanges that take place over health policy pass for serious debate, but they are not. Of course we don't have a perfect system and we have a lot of imperfections. The truth however is that compared with the health systems of nations that we would like to compare ourselves with, ours is superior.
 A person on average income is better protected by the health system in Australia than he or she is for example in the United States. And anybody who suggests that changes we have in mind to strengthen Medicare are going to take our health system down the American path, could not be more wrong. The American system is fundamentally different from ours and it will always remain so. And for all that its advocates may claim of the British national health system, I find few medical practitioners and even fewer patients who will argue with me, who have experienced both, that the British system is superior to Australia's. It plainly is not. And the genius, if I can put it, of the Australian system is the partnership between the public and the private components. And it's that partnership that is symbolised on the private side by the contribution that Ramsay Health Care makes and by this magnificent facility.
It is a wonderful environment, if you can say that of any hospital, you've achieved it. You've got a wonderful environment. You've got a caring staff. You've got 40 years of dedication to an ideal of the private sector providing in a caring fashion, health care for Australians. And I want to congratulate everybody associated with this project, and most particularly I want to congratulate Paul Ramsay for the leadership that he has given to the private health sector in Australia and indeed in other parts of the world. It is a particular pleasure to be here with so many representatives of the RSL, who in a broader sense represent the veterans whose special care is a particular responsibility of Greenslopes. The debt we owe to them is incalculable. It can never be repaid but it should often be remarked upon and repeated and referred to.
And in declaring Greenslopes officially open, I also have the privilege of naming two of the wings. The first, the John French wing, is as mentioned earlier, is named after Corporal John French. He was born in Toowoomba. He was the first Australian from Queensland to be awarded the Victoria Cross for action seen in World War II. He advanced against enemy machine guns and was killed in that in action at Milne Bay, Papua New Guinea on the 4th of September 1942. Jessie Vasey was born in Roma, the wife of Major General George Alan Vasey. The second wing is to be named after her. A war widow herself, Jessie Vasey made certain through her tireless efforts that Australian war widows were not neglected. She devoted the last 20 years of her life to establishing and building up the War Widows' Guild. And I have very great pleasure in firstly naming those two wings so appropriately honouring two people who are famous and well regarded within the veterans' community, particularly here in Queensland.
And before I conclude, I know ladies and gentlemen that I would express the views of all Australians in saying how proud we are of the magnificent efforts of our men and women on service in the Gulf at present, expressing our gratitude for their safety so far and expressing the hope and the prayer that that will continue until their task is completed. They follow a great tradition, so represented by many people here today. It's a tradition that brings enormous honour to this country and a tradition which is so generously and genuinely respected around the world.
I'm delighted to be here Paul. Thank you for the invitation. I wish everybody who works here and serves here and cares and heals here, the very best for the future and I have very great pleasure in declaring Greenslopes Hospital well and truly open, I shouldn't say for business, but for looking after Australians and anybody else who may come your way.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Teresa, Lyn, ladies and gentlemen.
As a Prime Minister, you have some interesting experiences and one of the more revealing and interesting experiences I have had is to go on to the floor of the American Senate and to meet the members of that chamber, and Theresa's reference to the large number of women in Federal Parliament now brought that experience to mind, and the astonishing experience of going onto the floor of the Senate in the United States is that you are hit by two things - the very small number of women in the Senate in both parties, there is a lot of publicity given to people like Senator Hillary Clinton from New York but she is very much the exception rather than the rule, there are vastly fewer women in the American Senate than there are certainly in our Senate or in our House of Representatives; and also relatively speaking the advanced age of the members of the Senate. Now I'm not criticising that, let me make that sure - I'm less critical, we all are, of advancing age each year. But to be confronted with a reality that we have achieved a great deal, and I'm very pleased to say as far as my party, the Liberal Party, is concerned, without the patronising use of quotas for the choice of people, but simply on the basis of merit, and we have come a very long way in having a more representative Parliament.
  And the purpose of course, if I can finish this little reference to the number of women in the legislature, the purpose of having more women is to ensure that they are more representative. I am not addicted to any particular percentage. In the fullness of time, if all the political parties retain, and all are a bit guilty sometimes of not doing this, retain open and merit based preselection systems, it is only a matter of time as society changes, that we do have a larger number of women in our Parliament. It is true that as far as the Liberal Party is concerned, 1996 was something of a watershed year for us. We saw a huge influx of women into the House of Representatives, including Theresa Gambaro and Ricky Johnston who is behind me - unfortunately she wasn't able to retain her seat, it was a miracle win in 1996 and it was a tough contest for her in '98 - but in fact I have frequently said that the Government's success in 1998 in rather more adverse political circumstances than we had in 2001 or 1996, was very heavily due to the quality of the women Liberal Members of Parliament who held marginal seats all around Australia. And they made an enormous difference because they brought to their representation a capacity to deal with a broader range of community issues than often men do, and I think it has been one of the lessons that all of us have learnt over the last few years - the capacity of women Members of Parliament to relate to a broader range of the community's concerns than is often the case with men.
Theresa has told me something about this group and I can say to you Lyn, I've been accused of enjoying being in front of a microphone and wanting to talk on endlessly, and I'll try and avoid that temptation. But balancing work and family responsibilities I find is one of those things into which so many conversations around Australia naturally wander. I've called it a barbecue stopper. In other words, it's an issue that people come to very naturally because at various stages it concerns all of us. Our society is now very different from what it was 50 years ago. I mean I often think of the circumstances of the three women who have most influenced my life - my mother, my wife and my daughter. My mother was born at the end of the 19th century. She was a highly intelligent woman but as so many of that generation did, she left school at the age of 14, and she stopped work when she married and never went back to work. My wife was a schoolteacher, a high school teacher, very well educated woman. Worked until our first child was born and then has not been in the paid workforce since then because of my career circumstances. But if they'd have been different, then she undoubtedly would have returned at least part time in her profession of teaching. And then of course my daughter, who is 28 and who is a qualified solicitor and works with a law firm in Sydney, her future and the balancing of work and family if she marries and has children, would be a wholly different consideration again. And that is really in a sense a snapshot of how society has changed.
One of the things that is interesting when you look at the statistics, and they're always important, although they're not the final word on the subject, is that the female workforce participation rate as far as fulltime work participation rate has virtually not changed very much at all in the last 40 years. The number of females in the workforce full-time, the percentage has not varied very much. And that may surprise you. But what has happened is that there has been a very, very dramatic change in the participation rate of females in the part-time workforce. And what I think is the most important thing when you're thinking about this whole question of balancing work and family, there are a couple of rules I think you have to follow. And the first and most important is to recognise, as Theresa said, that one size does not fit all and that the idea that the Government should decide well, this is what the women of Australia want and we're going to set out to provide it, I think is a very fundamental mistake. Years ago, there used to be some outdated stereotypes about the roles of men and women in our society, and they have of course changed completely. But in the process of observing that change, we don't want to make the mistake of replacing one stereotype with another stereotype which is completely inappropriate to the fact that we live in a very diverse society.
In examining some work and family policies recently, we had a little bit of work done about how the various percentages of different family arrangements, working arrangements, broke up. And we discovered that families, couples with children, dependent children, broke up into very interesting percentages. That for those that had both parents working full-time with dependent children, that represented only 17 per cent of the total workforce. Those where one parent was working full-time and the other parent was full-time out of the workforce, that represented about 22 per cent of the workforce. And those of what I call the one and a halfs, where one parent is working full-time and the other parent is working part-time, be it the husband or the wife or whatever the combination might be, that in fact was 27 per cent. And then of course you had percentages when you add them all together of where neither parent was in the workforce and there is still even in affluent Australia 2003, there are still too many circumstances where both parents are unemployed. And then of course you had a significant percentage of sole parents which comprise a growing cohort, but nonetheless certainly a significant cohort in society. But what I think those things demonstrated to me is that in developing work and family policies, there is no one simple answer.
 People say well you've got to have paid maternity leave. Well I think Lyn made a pretty good observation about that. For many people in this room, paid maternity leave would be completely irrelevant and in any event I am totally opposed to the situation where paid maternity leave is forced upon businesses, quite unacceptable. I think maternity leave is part of the mix but the idea that you solve all the problems of work and family, and you solve all the problems of a falling fertility rate by introducing 14 weeks paid maternity leave, is really quite intellectually insubstantial and really quite insulting to the commonsense experience of both men and women.
I think there are a number of areas of flexibility that you need. You need to have the most flexible workplace relations policies that you can possibly find. And one of the things that I'm most proud of is that over the last six or seven years we have been able to get away from some of the old stereotypes in workplace relations, particularly in small businesses. You all know, and most of you are in one way or another connected with small businesses, you all know that if you've got a good employee, the last thing you want to do is lose that employee and you will make the most flexible arrangements under the sun, you will turn yourself inside out to accommodate the needs of that person if that person is valuable to you as an employee. Now that's commonsense. You don't need to be told that by the Prime Minister or by the Government, it's something you know instinctively.
 And therefore the most important thing is to have flexible workplace relations. Why I was such an opponent of the old industrial relations system that we still have too much of in this country, was that a rigid awards system prevents people developing that kind of flexibility. I used to years ago when I was in Opposition quote the example of a textile factory in Marrickville in Sydney, that had a lot of female employees, many of them were from a migrant background, and they all wanted to rearrange their hours so they could meet their children at the local school gate and take them home. And they were quite happy to start a bit earlier. They were quite happy to work a bit later on some occasions and perhaps even work for an hour or something on Saturday morning. But because of the awards - they were so rigid then - that couldn't happen. And you had a disgruntled workforce, you had less well cared for children and minded children than should have been the case. Now those sorts of situations are less common now than they used to be 10 or 15 years ago, but they are still far too common. I think that is the first thing you need.
I think the second thing you need is to have taxation policies that recognise, as far as any Government can afford it, recognises that the different women and men are going to make different choices about how they organise their lives. I have been quite impressed with some work by an English academic called Catherine Hakim, who developed what was called a preference theory. And it focused particularly on the attitudes of women, but it's very relevant also to men. And she tended to divide women who wanted to have both work and family into three categories - what you call home-centred, in other words women who saw their main interest, in fact their overwhelming interest, in full-time or as far as possible, full-time care of children; another group who were what she called work-centred who saw their main driver in life as being their careers, although they nonetheless aspired to have families, to have children; and then a much larger group in the middle that she described as adaptive, who were really like most people, a combination of the two. And once again it's a theory that passes the commonsense or the pub test, that when you think about it is so logical, that we all know from our own experience with our friends and the people we encounter, that that more or less describes the range of attitudes. And what Governments need to do is to develop a set of policies that accommodate the three of those.
 It's not the Government's role to say well, you shall for a certain number of years be full-time out of the workforce to care for your children, because that is what we the Government have decided is good for you, is good for the children and is good for the nation. Equally, you don't want a Government saying - we've got to go flat out as soon as a child is born to get that child into childcare so their mother can get back into the workforce full-time. That is equally offensive and equally unacceptable. You have to develop a set of policies that try and accommodate that. Now, we've tried to do that. We haven't done it perfectly and we can still go a further distance, but we have made some changes to taxation policies which will allow and have over a period of time, I think particularly for people in the middle to lower income brackets, to exercise a little bit more choice as far as their work and family arrangements are concerned.
 And we will continue to work on those things and we will continue to try and develop those things even further because our society has changed very much from what it was when I left school in the middle of the 1950s and went out to work. It has changed very much from all the experiences that I had as a child and my parents would have had. But equally, it hasn't changed so much that people's main aspirations generally speaking, and one always generalises cautiously about these things, is still not the aspiration to have a family and to care for their families properly and to try, if that is their aspiration and it is so obviously the aspiration of the great bulk of the people of this gathering, to combine that with a successful business and professional career. And I think we have to build a society where you allow people to calibrate those arrangements in whatever way best suits those circumstances.
So I'm sometimes typecast as somebody who likes the white picket fence. If that means that I think that family life is very important, well I plead guilty to that. I think most of us would want to plead guilty to that. If it means that I think home ownership is a very important part of families' security and stability, and is also important to the material well being of a number of people in this room who are in the building or real estate industry, I'd be very happy to plead guilty to that as well. But I think we live in a society where the name of the game is adaptability and flexibility. We have a very strong economy at the present time and it's probably the best performing economy in the developed world, and most of the statistics will bear that out. And the main reason why it's doing so well, in my view, is that of all the capacities that Australians have, the capacity they have in greatest measure is the capacity to adapt to changing circumstances. Because we are a relatively classless society, we adapt far more readily than do the people of other countries. I had the experience recently of talking to the world boss of one of the largest banks, and he said that of all the people he wanted to employ most, he wanted to employ Australians he said because Australians adapt. He said that Americans and Englishmen have great skills, but he said because they think their way is the best way of doing it, they are not as adaptable as Australians are. He said, you Australians, he said, you understand what is the best way of doing it, but you also have a great capacity to adapt because you don't presume that yours is the only way of doing it. And I thought it was an interesting insight from somebody who has employed people from all around the world.
Now I think we have demonstrated that as a community. When you think of what our economy was like 20 years ago... I was out in Peter Dutton's electorate taking part in a little ceremony for a business that had been in existence for 20 years. And it was a building construction business and had been very, very successful - 70 employees now and sort of very, very high turnover in the millions. And over a 20 year period, and it hasn't been the easiest 20 year period although it's been very good for small business the last few years, but in the '80s with high interest rates, and I said that when you think what the Australian economy was like 20 years ago, we had high tariffs, we had a fixed exchange rate, we had a suffocatingly restrictive industrial relations system. We had all of those things.
 Now all of that has changed and we have adapted, and adapted very well. And nowhere has that change and capacity to adapt been more evident than in small business - 33, 35 per cent of small business proprietors are women. More significantly of course, in the last 10 years the volume of new entrants into small business, particularly in the areas of community service and the burgeoning areas like recreation and so forth, has been overwhelmingly amongst women. And it really goes back to one of the things I said about the capacities of women Members of Parliament, just as they have particular capacities, then so the same applies in relation to business.
Now I won't be as good as my word and be addicted to this microphone. I just leave you with some of those thoughts. I think the networking that you spoke of earlier Lyn and Theresa, is very important. I'm always sort of encouraged to find evidence of that and to find the practical interaction between women in business which is designed to help each other, but is also a recognition that we live in a society that enables women more than at any time in our history, to contribute and to be a total part of society. We all know that if you, in my lifetime if I think of the great events and the great changes, obviously the dramatic change in the role of women, the dramatic change for the better, is socially the biggest single transformation that has come over our society in my lifetime. And I think the expression through your network of the desire of women in business to interact with each other, to help each other, to learn from each other's experience, and through that to make a big contribution to society, I think it's very, very encouraging and very important. Small business is the heart of the Australian economy. I came from a small business background myself. My father was a small businessman and I have always had a special affection for people who start with nothing and build something up and get an enormous amount of personal pride out of it as well as contributing something to the economy. And it's happening increasingly now amongst women. I think that is a wholly desirable development and something that is very much in Australia's national interest.
 And thank you very much for having me.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Peter, Greg and Don and their families, Senator Brandis, the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.
It is true that when Peter raised with me the possibility of visiting his electorate and being associated with the celebrations of 20 years of a successful small business enterprise, that I did react very favourably to that because I have a very strong attachment to the importance and the role and the strength of small businesses in the Australian economy and in the Australian community. And when I think back to 1983 when this company was formed, and I think of the rather difficult times, especially at very high interest rates, through which your company passed, and I survey the progress that it has made, the way in which it has built its business from nothing to now employing some 70 people and injecting some millions of dollars annually into the local economy, having won for itself a very strong client base and having built a reputation for hard work and integrity and honouring one's business commitments, it is the kind of success story that any Prime Minister, particularly one of a free enterprise party and of a small business background himself, would want to be associated with.
I was at a gathering in Brisbane last night before returning to Sydney for the purpose of saying farewell to the men and women of HMAS Sydney that sailed for the Gulf this morning, I was at a gathering in Brisbane last night and I was talking to a person who is in building and construction in Brisbane, and he said to me - if you're not doing well in building and construction right now, you're not trying - and I thought, well you know, I was happy to say well that's because of the strong economy, isn't it, and all the other wonderful conditions that the Government has created. But I thought to myself - circumstances now might be pretty favourable, we do have very low interest rates, we have very low inflation, we have a strong economy. Although there is inevitably some subsidence as the first homeowner's grant returns to the level that it was prior to the first half of 2001 when we decided to sharply increase it for new dwellings, although things are quite strong at the moment, that hasn't always been the case over the last 20 years.
 The truth is that for the first half of that 20-year period, economic conditions in Australia were very up and down. There were some periods of great strength and there were also some periods of horrendously high interest rates. I think anybody running a small business who managed to survive the era of 18 or 19 or 20 per cent interest rates deserves, to borrow Don's reference, an Oscar for that achievement alone because how you run a small business and survive and pay interest rates of that order is very hard to fathom. Fortunately those days are behind us and whilst I will not be so foolish, even in the exuberance of an occasion such as this, to make any promises about the future level of interest rates, I can say that we are going through a period of great tranquility, let me put it that way, tranquility in the circumstances that normally affect the level of interest rates. And it is a great indicator of economic activity and it's a great indicator of calm economic conditions.
 The truth is that the Australian economy is now experiencing the longest, uninterrupted period of economic growth that it has had since the 1960s. In many ways, it's better than the 1960s because our economy is now less protected than it was in the 1960s. We don't now have high tariff walls. We have a floating exchange rate which has made our export industries very competitive and it has helped us trade through the worst of the Asian economic downturn. We have made some very major changes to our industrial relations system which has produced more flexibility at the workplace level. It's now five years since we undertook the very difficult process of reforming Australia's waterfront and as a result our waterfront now is a lot more efficient than it used to be, and therefore our exporters are able to get their product out of the country without unfair delay and undue interruption. We have made major changes to our tax system. I know that the process of that was difficult and perplexing for some people in small business, and I want to thank them for the understanding that they demonstrated towards it, but we do as a result have a better taxation system and that has added to our economic strength and our economic performance.
It's no exaggeration to say that the Australian economy has been a better performer amongst the developed economies of the world than just about any other country over the last five years, and that looks to be the case into the future. In the last seven years we have generated a million and a quarter new jobs, and if we could only get those wretched changes to the unfair dismissal laws through the Senate, we would have permanently in my view - well not permanently, but semi-permanently - have a five in front of our unemployment rate rather than it just being over six. So the message out of all of that is that yes, conditions are quite good for small business at the present time. They're not perfect. They could be made better if we could get a few more changes to our industrial relations laws through the Senate, and they always need to be subjected to the process of ongoing economic reform and change.
 Your own business has been successful because it has been built on the sound principles which endure through all periods of economic change, and that is that if you base it on hard work, a personal loyalty, valuing your staff as your best asset - no small business can be successful unless it has good staff, you can't have good staff unless you treat them well, and clearly this company has been exemplary in that regard, and that is the foundation for so much of the company's success.
 If I look back over the last 20 years of the Australian economy and somebody said to me - what is the single most important reason why the Australian economy is now doing so much better than it was 20 years ago? And I would say the single most important reason is that Australia and Australians have proved themselves to be very adaptable. Australians have many great characteristics, and one of our great characteristics is that we are immensely adaptable people. We are not people who refuse to change just because we've always done things in a particular way for a generation. We are more adaptable than the people of other countries. We demonstrate that in so many ways and not least in the area of economic activity and economic management. And the way in which we, as a community, have been able to adapt and the way in which the Australian business community has been able to adapt to all of the changes of the last 20 years - a floating exchange rate, workplace relations reform, taxation reform, the reduction of tariffs, the globalisation of the Australian economy, the alteration of our social structures in many areas - all of these things represent tremendous change. And the great thing is that Australians have adapted and that is the reason, more than anything else, why we're able to look the rest of the world in the face and say well, throw the worst of economic competition and the toughest at us, and we will be able to succeed and we will be able to do well. Because five years ago when that Asian economic downturn hit our region, a lot of people said Australia was going to be dragged under the water with all of those other countries. It didn't happen. And a lot of the markets we lost in Asia, we were able to find in North America and Europe, because we found we had a more flexible economy and we found that we were able to diversify and alter where our product went. And that betoken to me a very strong, adaptable people. And everybody is entitled to share in the credit for that. The investors, the employees, and indeed everybody responsible.
 So can I say to Don and to Greg and to their families, and very particularly to their workforce and to the loyal customers of this company, congratulations on a 20-year achievement. Congratulations on living out part of the Australian dream, and that is that you can start a business with nothing, and if you work hard and you provide a good service and you look after your customers and you look after your staff, you can build something pretty impressive, something that the community respects and something that you can be very proud of after a life's work. That's always been part of the Australian dream and I hope it always will be, and it's our job to make certain that it always will be.
Thank you.
[ends]


Your Excellency, the Minister for Defence, the Chief of the Defence Force, Admiral Ritchie, Leader of the Opposition, Commander van Balen, men and women of the ship's company of HMAS Sydney, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls. This is another very proud and important moment for the Royal Australian Navy and for the Australian Defence Force. Over the past few weeks elements of all three arms of the Australian armed forces have in a very distinguished, professional, effective and always honourable way done great service in the name of our nation in a just cause.
 And I want to take this opportunity at this gathering to record my deep admiration and appreciation to all of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force who have been on service in the Gulf region over recent weeks. They have won the admiration and the pride of all Australians, they have won the respect and the admiration of many around the world. As others have said, this vessel carries a very ancient and honourable name in the Royal Australian Navy and I know that what you will do over the weeks ahead will be the equal of what your forbeares have done in serving on a vessel carrying this very same name.
It is my hope that during your time and in the not too distant future the really hostile part of the war to disarm Iraq will have terminated. But that does not mean there will not be very important work following the formal cessation of hostilities, it does not mean that the flow of humanitarian assistance will not need escort support, it will not mean that we will be free form the possibility of attempts by dissident elements to keep the hostilities going. So the work that lies ahead of you is every bit as important as the work that has been carried out by your colleagues, the other men and women of the Australian Defence Force.
Let me say to the families who are here - we understand the mixture of pride and anxiety that you feel. We endeavour to share that. We will do everything we can while your loved ones are away to help you and to support you and to provide any assistance that you may ask for. It's a great defence family. We're all obligated and we're all anxious to do everything we can to make it as easy as possible for you.
I finally want to say to all of the men and women who are going - we admire you, we thank you, we respect you. You go forward in the name of your nation as part of a great military tradition which has always sought to uphold what is right, which has always sought to behave not only in a professional and effective fashion, but also in a totally honourable fashion completely consistent with the values of our great community.
 On behalf of all Australians I wish you luck and we all look forward to your safe and early return. Thank you.
[Ends]


Thank you very much Spencer; to the Leader of the State Opposition; to Bob Quinn the leader of the Queensland Parliamentary Liberal Party; Gary Hardgrave; Margaret May; any other State and Federal parliamentary colleagues that I haven't spotted on the way in; ladies and gentlemen.
 As always it's a great pleasure to be in the great city of Brisbane and to have the opportunity as part of what is obviously going to be a very successful partnership between the Queensland Parliamentary Press Gallery and the business community of Brisbane in sponsoring a State-based press forum. It comes, this gathering of course, at a hugely important and pivotal time for Australia given our involvement in the military campaign in Iraq. And not surprisingly I want to devote much of what I intend to say today to the war in Iraq, the background to it, the progress of it and some of the challenges that lie ahead of the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia, in particular, but the broader world community in dealing with the aftermath of what is a very important moment in the experience of the world in the period that has followed the end of the Cold War more than 10 years go.
In many respects what we are now witnessing is the working out of the first important challenge to the collective world community since the end of the Cold War in the late 1980s. And it is also in many respects the first test of how the world reacts to some of the new paradigms established by the onset of international terrorism and the possible interaction of international terrorism with the possession of weapons of mass destruction by rogue States. So it is an event that I believe will be seen historically as being of enormous significance as well as being of enormous immediate moment to those countries involved and not the least of course, indeed the most important of all, that is the people of Iraq.
 By any measure the military campaign has been remarkably successful, remarkably successful. That ought to be said very deliberately because in the early days of the operation when it wasn't over in two or three days we had this extraordinary parade of people who were prepared to question in the most fundamental way not only the wisdom of the operation having been undertaken, but the strategic and tactical capacity of people involved at a military level, particularly in the United States. It's now been going for a period of some, what, 20, 21 days. The 1991 Gulf War went for 42 days. The bombing stage of that campaign lasted 37 days. The campaign waged by the NATO countries in support, be it remembered, of the Islamic people of Kosovo against Orthodox Serbia, that campaign lasted for 79 days. And the core stage of the Afghanistan campaign lasted for 37 days.
 I know those figures sound very clinical, but we should remind ourselves in this age of sort of instant desire and passion for results and outcomes that it has been going for a remarkably short period of time. And we're not dealing here as we were in the first Gulf War in 1991 with the expulsion of the invading Iraqi forces from Kuwait, we're dealing here with the liberation of an entire country of 26 million people, believed to have at the beginning of the campaign standing military forces of about 350,000 to 375,000. So by any measure it's been a very impressive military campaign, and one hopes naturally, without venturing to put any kind of timeline on it, one naturally hopes in the interests of minimising suffering and saving lives of everybody involved, one hopes that it is concluded as soon as possible.
This campaign has been characterised by a number of things. Thinking particularly that I'm in a news and journalistic environment, two observations to make. Sadly it's been a reminder of the danger to journalists and others connected with the journalistic profession. The dangers that they undertake in reporting for the public a large military, and I know would share the thoughts of many in the journalistic community of the deaths of some of their colleagues in Iraq, and also in particular Paul Moran, the Australian freelance cameraman, who was the victim of a suicide bomber in the early stages of the campaign.
 It's also been, of course, the first experience of the embedding - I think that is the expression isn't it - the embedding of journalists in the military forces of the United States and the United Kingdom. It's an interesting innovation, if I could put it that way. Some people have criticised it, others see it as the inevitable consequence of the mass communication days in which we live.   I wouldn't be the first person to reflect that the course of the great conflicts of the last century could well have been altered, and could well have been much shorter if there had been journalists embedded in the armed forces of the participants. I doubt that public opinion in great democracies would have allowed, if they had known the full measure and impact of it, the horrendous loss of life that occurred in those tragic battles in World War I in particular, and also in relation to the German-Russian campaign in World War II. But it is a development that is an inevitable consequence of the evolution of immediate, instantaneous, mass communications.
It's also been a conflict in which an unprecedented endeavour has been taken to minimise civilian casualties and non-combatant casualties generally. How successful, it is hard to tell. But certainly for all the criticism and all the vivid depiction of civilian casualties not withstanding there have been unprecedented endeavours undertaken to minimise those casualties. And also the very conduct of the military campaign itself has been designed to minimise, to the maximum extent feasible, the loss of life on both sides. None of that of course can obscure the fact that war is horrible, it causes very large numbers of deaths and injury and maiming of an horrific kind. And nobody lightly commits the armed forces of one's country to such an activity. But of course whenever you are looking at the human suffering involved in a conflict of this kind you have to set against it the scale of human suffering that would certainly have continued in Iraq under such a dreadful regime. And one of the things that will become even more apparent as time goes by is the scale of human rights abuses that have occurred in that country. As the apparatus of intimidation and terror and fear is demolished people will speak spontaneously and volubly of the experience that they have suffered and the losses they have incurred. And that process has already begun, particularly in the southern parts of Iraq which have been liberated by the British forces.
I want to pay a very warm and very strong tribute to the extraordinary professionalism of the Australian forces that have been involved. Our commitment numerically is nowhere near as large as that of the United Kingdom and the United States but it is significant for a country of our size. And as is so often the case Australians are punching above their weight. The quality and professionalism and capacity of our Special Forces is widely known and respected and admired around the world. The contribution that they have made is necessarily circumscribed as far as detail is concerned. Their contribution, that of our Hornets, the naval contribution, the contribution of the naval diving clearance teams, all of it represents a very effective and impressive contribution. It is not a token contribution, it is a real contribution and it's one of which all Australians, whatever their views may be about the wisdom of the Government's decision to commit Australian forces, we can at least come together in admiration and respect at the what our forces have done, what they have achieved and I'm very happy to say that as I speak and I necessarily have to enter that caveat, they are all safe and sound. And it's a contribution that has added to the respect in which Australian Defence Forces are held and regarded around the world. And it's a very important reminder to the rest of the Australian community of the great professionalism of the men and women who are involved in the Armed Forces.
 It's always worthwhile at a time like this to remind ourselves of why we committed our military forces. We committed our military forces there because the Government very strongly believed that Iraq did have chemical and biological weapons and did have an aspiration for a nuclear capacity, and that if steps were not taken to disarm Iraq not only would that represent a potential threat, especially to neighbouring countries, but other rogue states would take the view legitimately that they could do the same as Iraq and escape the sanction of the rest of the world as they watched the world do nothing about Iraq. Add to that the dimension of international terrorists seeking to obtain possession of such weapons, and you have a very potent cocktail of misery and threat to the future of many countries, including our own. Well, that fundamentally is the reason that we became involved. Now, people can argue well, we should have just stepped back and let others do the heavy lifting - it's never really been the Australian way to step back and let others do the heavy lifting alone. Also, our relationship and our alliance with the United States was, and should always be, a factor in major national security decisions that are taken by this Government.
 We do live in a different world now than we lived in before the 11th September 2001. We do live in a world where international terrorism can in a random brutal ad hoc fashion claim the lives of Australians in different parts of the world as well as potentially being a threat in this country. And nobody should assume that you can, by calibrating your foreign policy responses, you can win immunity. One's reminded of the old description of feeding the crocodile most in the hope that it would eat you last. The reality is that as a Western nation, we are a target for terrorism. They have a collective detestation of Western nations because of a number of factors. Our open democratic lifestyle, a whole range of considerations flow from that. And if you look at the experience of different countries over the last few years, their citizens have been the victims of terrorism irrespective of foreign policy stances that they have taken. It's worth recalling that the most specific reference that bin Laden has ever made to Australia was to condemn our action in helping the people of East Timor to obtain their independence. And I would propose the wholly rhetorical question - if that warning had been give before we undertook our intervention in East Timor in 1999, do any of you seriously imagine that we should have altered the decision that we took then. Because you can never fashion the foreign policy of your country on the basis of threats, you can only hope to fashion the foreign policy on the basis of an appropriate measure of principle and also of course a hard headed assessment of our medium and longer term national interests.
 When the military operation is successfully completed - and I have no doubt that it will be very successfully completed - there will, of course, be the major challenge of the post-war or reconstruction phase. As far as Australian policy is concerned, we have no territorial ambitions of any kind on Iraq. We did not enter this operation to buy trade favour with the United States. We did not enter this operation in order to appropriate expropriate any of the assets of the Iraqi people. We entered this conflict for the reasons that I have outlined. And we will uphold those reasons and act according to those reasons in the months ahead in the post-war phase.
 Our aim, and I know it to be the aim of both the Americans and the British, is to return the Government of Iraq to the Iraqi people as soon as that is feasible. The oil of Iraq, if I can cut to the chase because it's the one asset of that country that's most frequently talked about, the oil of Iraq belongs to the people of Iraq and we won't be part of any policy that interferes with that. Inevitably, there will need to be an interim period. You can't when you've toppled a dictator, particularly one, whose established such an intricate and terrifying edifice of intimidation, you can't replace that an immediately and spontaneously functioning political administrative structure. You have to get together the building blocks of a new government process. And there has to be an interim period of administration by the power that is there as a result of the toppling of the regime and that is inevitably that of the military forces that are there, and there will be undeniably an interim period of a US-led administration. There's no practical alternative to that. It's really a matter of ordinary logic. But there will be, during that interim period, there will be as both the British Prime Minister and the American President have affirmed after their meeting in Northern Ireland, there will be a very significant important role for the United Nations during that interim period.
 The Australian Government thinks that the United Nations didn't do as well as it should have in the lead up to the outbreak of the war in Iraq. I think that the United Nations Security Council had a significant failure in not really living up its own rhetoric, that was due to a combination of explanations. It was in part due to the desire of some countries, and I think particularly of France, to use it as an opportunity to secure some kind of strategic diplomatic advantage against the United States in particular, but perhaps also against Britain as well. I still find it puzzling that a body that could have passed 17 resolutions over a period of 12 years requiring Iraq to disarm, couldn't summon the courage, if I could put it that way, to pass an 18th . But it didn't. As it turned out legally we didn't need an 18th resolution. There were already 17 that in different ways provided an adequate basis in international law for the action that was ultimately taken. It was always a non-legal reason, a broader international political reason that encouraged the United States and others on the Security Council to try and get another resolution. But having said that, I nonetheless remain a believer in supporting as much as one can the processes of the United Nations because it is the one body in the world that does bring all of the nations in the world together. But like all other bodies of that kind, it is the sum of its parts, and if the parts are not working together, as they clearly weren't for some of the reasons I've outlined in the lead up to the war in Iraq, then the whole does not behave very effectively. But it has a massive capacity in humanitarian areas, and I believe that there is a very significant, indeed vital role, for the United Nations to play during this interim period.
And it's very important to keep reminding ourselves that at the end of the day, we should keep this in mind all the while, at the end of the day it is returning the government of that country to the people of that country that should be the goal. And the process has already begun. I don't know how many of you may have seen some footage this morning, I forget whether it was on one of the Australian commercial channels or it was a direct feed from BBC, well I don't know, one watches so much at a time like this that you lose track of exactly what the source was. But it was of a British Army officer meeting a locally established council in one of the southern Iraqi cities and he was describing how, for the very first time, this local council had taken a decision in years. It was a simple decision, it was to reopen the schools. And to ask the teachers to come back and resume the process of educating the young people. Of course in the past most of the decisions were taken by Baath party officials. And you could see, even in that brief footage, you could see the sense of the occasion, you actually witnessed the beginning of the transfer of authority if I could put it that way. However fleeting the transfer of authority from the officer of the military power which had won the military conflict to some of the locals.
There will be an interim administration and it will be lead by General Jay Garner of the United State Forces. And there has been established what's called an Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Affairs. And that body has already established a headquarters in Kuwait and it will be progressively built as time goes by. At present Australia has five officers, five staff within that reconstruction office. We have an officer from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which is attached to the Chief of Staff's Office and will be working very closely with General Garner. We have an AusAID officer assisting the humanitarian relief issues. We have a Defence representative assisting with contingency planning for the post-conflict phase in Iraq.   We have an agricultural expert preparing the way for a larger Australian advisory team, providing analysis of key areas of Iraqi need in the agricultural sector. We have inevitably of course a macroeconomist from the Treasury advising on overall macroeconomic issues as a part of the process of re-establishing a viable Iraqi economy. A petroleum sector expert from the Department of Industry, Trade and Resources will join the body this weekend to help redevelop the Iraqi petroleum industry. And we're considering different ways of making post-conflict contributions to Iraq with a very clear eye to Iraq's long term future, but also to our own national interest in terms of peace and security and of commercial interests, and with a proper regard for our own commitment to the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.
I've taken a moment to mention some of the minutiae of our involvement to underline the fact that having made a military commitment, and having been one of only a very small number of countries to do so, we do take the view that we have a constructive role to play in the post-conflict situation. It's not an acquisitive role, but it is a role that will nonetheless keep an eagle eye to Australia's national interest and the people of this country would expect nothing less from their Government.
But to use that old expression winning the peace can be just as important, if not more important, than winning the war. And having made this commitment and having stared down a lot of international criticism and not a little domestic criticism, which is proper in a great democracy such as ours, the Government has every intention that Australia should play a very constructive role in the post-conflict period.
There are just but two other things I want to mention which go to the medium and longer term situation in the Middle East. It is very important that we not lose sight of the crucial significance of the long running and agonising conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians. I speak as the leader of a government that has always been an unashamed and unapologetic friend of the State of Israel and the maintenance of the integrity of the State of Israel behind secure, internationally accepted borders has been a cornerstone of the foreign policy of many governments in Australia. And that is unaltered. But side by side with that we recognise the right of the people of Palestine to have their own homeland. And the world has to redouble its efforts to bring about the settlement. There's something I guess symbolic about the fact that the British Prime Minister and the American President should have a meeting in Northern Ireland, because if you can get a measure of tranquility in Northern Ireland then anything is possible. I can't think in my lifetime of a more intractable, insanely tribal fight than that and yet it's taken a long time to get somewhere. But in the case of the conflict between the Palestinians and Israel we have to keep trying. It's a tragedy that Ehud Barak's courageous efforts three years ago were not met with a more positive response by the Palestinians. The suicide bombings have got to stop, maybe when the war in Iraq is over one incentive, that is the $25,000 that Saddam Hussein pays every family of a Palestinian suicide bomber, that incentive being removed, that might have some modest impact. A way must be found and the entire world has to work very hard to bring that about. I think there is a growing collective world pressure for that to occur and I'm encouraged by the fact that Yasser Arafat has appointed a Prime Minister to assume a greater responsibility for negotiating on behalf of his people. And we in Australia consistent with the statements of policy I've made, will want to do all we can at an international level to facilitate that process.
And the final thing I want to say is that it's very important that we do not allow any currency to be given to the view that what is being undertaken in Iraq is any way directed against Islam. I mentioned earlier that in 1999 the NATO countries undertook a campaign to help Islamic people of Kosovo. And at that particular time I vividly remember going to a Greek national day celebration in Sydney and I was booed by a section of the crowd because the gathering had spilled over into a pro-Serbian demonstration and there was a religious commonality between the people attending the Greek national celebrations and the people of Serbia and that is their common orthodox faith. And I reflected two days ago how ironic it was and on that occasion I was booed, we weren't involved in the military action, but we'd given public diplomatic support, and I was in effect being booed by people because we had supported the action being taken on behalf of the Muslims of Kosovo. And I said then, and I will say again now, to people who endeavour to depict what we are doing as anti-Islamic, that the decision we took then was without regard to the religion of the people involved, because of the conduct of people involved. And the same thing applies in relation to Iraq. Our quarrel is not with the Iraqi people, our quarrel is with a very evil and brutal regime, and the sense that it is any way some kind of activity against Islam or Islamic people is one that I totally reject. And I'm very pleased to say that it is a rejection accepted by the President of the largest Islamic country in the world - that's President Megawati of Indonesia. I went to Indonesia several weeks ago, as you know, after my visit to the United States and Britain to talk about amongst other things, Iraq, and to explain the basis of our policy. I was very pleased to note that although the President said she didn't agree with our assessment of what was needed, she fully accepted that in no way was it a campaign against Islam. And that it would be her endeavour amongst other Islamic countries to emphasize that point. Because Islam is one of the great religions of the world. At its heart it abhors violence and brutality in the same way that so many other great religions do and it would be a perversion of what Islam stands for if the view were put abroad with any great currency that the action we have taken is directed against that religion, and directed generically against the people who profess the Islamic faith.
Ladies and gentlemen, I said at the beginning that this has been a very significant decision for the Government, for Australia, a very significant involvement in a conflict that, of course, has not been without peril and danger and is still in no way free from further peril and further danger. But we have become involved for the reasons I have explained, which I think are in our medium and longer term national interest. And I'm encouraged by the signs that there is greater support for that view now within the Australian community. I respect the fact that many still disagree - that is right and proper in a democratic tradition, but I believe history will judge the decision to have been right. But more importantly, the world albeit through the agency of a limited number of countries has taken a stand against not only a regime that was evil and tyrannical in no ordinary way in itself, but also a regime which if it had been allowed to continue down the path it was going would in time by its example and also by its actual behaviour have represented a very significant threat.
 And it's on that basis that I rest very strongly and secure the case of Australia's commitment, and I conclude by again saluting the enormous professionalism and skill and courage of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, who have acquitted themselves so magnificently over past weeks.
[ends]
  QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION
  JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, thank you. As I'm making way over to where my colleagues are, I'd like to ask you the first question. If Saddam Hussein is captured, will you favour him being put on trial in Iraq and facing execution at the end of that trial, or should it be held outside of Iraq? And wouldn't it be more convenient for the coalition if Saddam Hussein perished during the current fighting?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, what I have said all along, Spencer, is that I want him brought to justice. I have never been particularly specific about how that should be dispensed. I don't think I need say anymore. Justice is infinite.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Patrick Condren from Channel Seven. In your speech you talked about one of the key reasons to go into Iraq was the potential for Saddam to have weapons of mass destruction, given that the invading forces haven't found any evidence of that doesn't that make a mockery of that particular reason?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, you don't really think they would have found iron-clad evidence in three weeks of the military operation? I mean, it doesn't surprise me at all. I mean, there weren't signposts on the road saying 'WMD 5 Ks ahead'. It doesn't work like that. We know that they have gone to great lengths to conceal it. I can only repeat what I've said before that we had plenty of intelligence very strongly suggesting the possession of these weapons. I don't think the real proof of it will be found until some time after the hostilities have been completed, we've had an opportunity of talking to scientists and others in an atmosphere where they feel free from reprisal and intimidation. I think until then you won't really see the evidence.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Cathy Border from Channel 10. You've already expressed dismay at the stunt that we saw yesterday with Greenpeace with the 'HMAS Sydney'. But does it show a far greater need for a security reassessment as well?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, the security of the waterways in Sydney Harbour are the responsibility of the New South Wales Police, in the same way that the security of the, you know, waterways here are the responsibility of the Queensland Police. I talked to, I had a brief chat with General Cosgrove this morning about the incident. I think it was a regrettable incident, I don't think, I think the danger that they posed to the lives of, and the good health of the police officers, was quite unacceptable, and I hope that the law takes it proper course, I'll say no more to that in relation to their behaviour. I do praise very much the calm way the sailors responded and they got about their business. We're a free open society. I think people, even if they behave in a stupid way, providing they don't endanger other people and they don't prevent other people going about their business, they've got a right to protest. I don't think the sailors felt threatened and I don't think they had any reason to feel threatened. I do think, though, that it was monumentally stupid behaviour because of the threat that it posed to the lives of the police. I mean if you want to behave in a stupid way and put your own live at risk, I suppose it's hard to stop you, but it's a bit unfair to drag policemen and women into as well.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Louise Willis from ABC Radio current affairs. You stated in your speech today that your preference is for a US-led interim administration and not only that it is your preference, that is what it will be. Have you sidelined the United Nations in that decision, or what role will the UN play in post-war Iraq?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, I haven't sidelined it, I'm just stating the obvious. When you have a regime toppled by the armies of other countries, there is only one effective authority in the immediate aftermath of that. And that effective authority are the armies of the United States and the United Kingdom, in particular. And there are no armies of the United Nations there. The intervention was properly based in law on previous resolutions of the United Nations, but they were not blue-helmeted forces, they fought under, fight under the flags of their countries in a coalition which has, although there are separate national commands for both the British and the Australians, the overall coalition operation of course is in United States hands. And I'm just stating the obvious that Saddam Hussein regime toppled, the occupying force is the military of the United States and the United Kingdom and follows from that that that is the immediate source of authority of power. There's no United Nations present there to do anything. So, that's the point I make. And from a practical point of view, you have to have an interim period but that doesn't mean to say that the United Nations can't be passed for that interim period; it doesn't mean to say you can't have special UN representatives working with the Americans; it doesn't mean that the United Nations doesn't have a major role in relation to humanitarian and other issues. I'm not sidelining the United Nations, I'm trying to state the reality.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Sam Strutt from The Australian Financial Review. When will the Federal Government decide Australia's exact involvement in a post-war Iraq? And will that definitely include military forces involved in a peacekeeping mission?
PRIME MINISTER:
I've said as far as military forces are concerned that we won't be making a contribution of a major peacekeeping force. We don't see a role for two or three thousand Australian troops being there for an indefinite period of time as part of a peacekeeping operation. Apart from anything else, we have a number of those challenges, in particular still East Timor, in our own region. We had a capacity to provide some special niche forces that made a very powerful impact, and we've done that. And when their task is completed, they will come back to Australia. As to all the other elements of Australia's involvement, you asked - have we defined them precisely? No, we haven't because the nature of the post-conflict stage has not been defined precisely by anybody at the present time. I mean, this doesn't happen very often and you have to build from the ground. And importantly, we are in on the ground floor with the office of reconstruction. We have people there, I've outlined some of them and there'll be more added as time goes by. We'll have a role that is commensurate with our capacity and our interests and certainly very commensurate with the fact that we have made a very major contribution to this operation.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Paul Osbourne from AAP. You talk about building from the ground up, to what extent do you have a moral obligation to stay on as leader to see the building of Iraq? And what do you see as the completion point for that? Do you see it as democratic elections in Iraq or some other point?
PRIME MINISTER:  You sound like the compere of The 7.30 Report. I've been asked that question before, no disrespect to Mr O'Brien, I've been asked that question before, I think you know my answer. What's the next question?
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Graham Lloyd from The Courier Mail. You opened your speech saying that this was the first challenge in the post-Cold War world. How has that challenge been met and how does the post-Cold War environment look? How deep are the friction in the old Europe, if you like, and the former eastern European countries coming into the mix? And what lessons do we draw from this in terms of challenges that may lay ahead in North Korea and in Iran and possibility in the future in this region?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, as always you have to think carefully before you jump to conclusions about the lessons that we draw. I believe very strongly that by having taken a stand against Iraq, the world is more likely to be able to peacefully handle North Korea. What has happened in a Iraq is a reminder that there is a point beyond which the world community, whoever might be the agents of the community and however limited their numbers from time to time might be, the world community won't continue to be pushed around. As far as North Korea is concerned, it is a very worrying threat, particularly to our region. We are still in the genuinely diplomatic phase of it. Remember Iraq was the end of a 12 year process, it's only a few months since North Korea confessed to having broken the agreement it made in 1994. I think there's quite a lesson in that. I think it's demonstrated a few myths about European solidarity, I, one does feel the concept of a common foreign policy to the European Union is a tad into the future, to say the least. I don't think you should ever lose sight of the fact that nationalism is still a very potent force in world community and that countries will, despite regional and collective associations, they will pursue their own nationalistic foreign policies. I think it's a reminder of the still great strength of the Atlantic association between the United States and the United Kingdom. Bear in mind that it was an alliance between a centre-right American President and a centre-left British Prime Minister - who in my view has displayed conspicuous political courage on this issue, I see him as a very strong Labour leader and I think he has shown very great courage within his own party. The point I was trying to make at the beginning of my speech was that when the Cold War ended the assumption was that we would, we emerged, as it obviously the case, with one superpower, and that's the United States and we would have a fairly uninterrupted period of relative tranquillity and peace. What of course has happened in the years that have gone by is that it's been characterised by two things - by the emergence in recent years of international terrorism and the potential proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of rogue states, and the two of those coming together which is the essence of our concern in relation to Iraq. And the other factor of course was the breakdown of regional tension and a breakdown of nation states that had been held together by the pressure of the Cold War. And of course the Yugoslavia was the most conspicuous example of that but that process had been in train elsewhere.
I think like all significant shifts in world events it will take a while for the processes to shake out. I do think that the relationship between the nations of Europe will be more circumspect. I don't think you'd want to overdo the, I'm not saying you personally, I don't think one should overdo the suggestion that's been made that in some way the British have been isolated in Europe. I don't think they have. If you actually look at it, numerically the number of European countries that have taken the American/British position is greater than the reserve, although three of the very prominent countries, namely Germany, France and Russia have been on the other side. I think it will take a while to rebuild some of those bridges. I think that's inevitable. You've got to be realistic. But there's that old saying, I think it was Palmerston, or it may not have been him but whoever it was said that you don't have permanent enemies, you only have permanent interests. And there are permanent interests in European countries working together, and of course there are permanent interests in Australia always working very closely with our most important strategic partner - the United States.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Scott Emerson with The Australian newspaper. Just a second last question and moving to domestic issues, Australia's attorney generals, including Daryl Williams, are meeting tomorrow. One of the issues on the agenda is double jeopardy laws. An issue of particular interest to Queenslanders given the Faye Kennedy case. They're looking at changes to the double jeopardy rule. Do you support a change to that centuries old law?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I do. I think you have to, I'm not in favour of totally throwing it out. I don't quite know how you express it, I'm a bit rusty on law, it's 25 years since I've practised it. But it does seem to me that this particular case is just horrific that a law such as that, I mean it's a simple test of justice, the demented, dogmatic adherence to something because it's been around for a long time and here is a social conservative speaking. I'm not in favour of changing things that work but I'm very much in favour of changing things that don't work and this rule doesn't work, it certainly hasn't in this case and I would be in favour of change, just exactly what form it takes and whether you have some principles of establishing exceptional circumstances and so forth in order to reopen, that's all got to be worked out.   But I'm personally in favour of change, yes.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, Chris O'Brien from ABC Radio. This is the final question so I'll cheat and make it a double bunger. Just quickly, would you encourage your Queensland Liberal colleagues to accelerate the process of reforming a coalition with the Nationals. And secondly your thoughts on the Qantas job cuts issue that's re-risen today?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in relation to the colleagues in Queensland, I would encourage them to work together as closely as possible. The actual form that the more effective cooperation should take is a matter for them to work out in detail. As you all know I'm a very strong coalitionist. I've had an experience in government of leading a Coalition that really has worked together extraordinarily well. I think of all of the Coalitions, we've had three fairly lengthy periods of Coalition government in Australia since World War II. We had the very long period led largely by Menzies, we then had the Fraser/Anthony period, and the current Government has been in power now almost as long as the Fraser Government was in power between 1975 and '83, and I can say the Coalition has worked remarkably well. And I pay particular tribute to John Anderson and the other members of the National Party for the contribution that they have made to it. I note that there's been an historic agreement reached between the Liberal Party and the National Party here in Queensland about three-cornered contests. That's something I very warmly welcome. Those who want a revival of the fortunes of the non-labor parties here in Queensland can only embrace that with great enthusiasm because it means we can focus on the common political enemy. So exactly what form, whether they form a coalition or not, and when and precisely how it comes about, that's a matter for Mr Quinn and Mr Springborg to work out between them and their respective party presidents in their discussions.
Now you asked me about the Qantas redundancies. Well I obviously regret it but I do recognise that the tourist industry in particular is going through a very hard time. The flu virus, the obvious reluctance of a lot of people to travel at the present time because of the activities in Iraq; the still reverberating impact on travel of the Ansett collapse, although that's not perhaps as strong now as it was a short period of time ago. I think there are some temporary factors in the downturn in the tourist industry and it's not uniform throughout the country. I was in Tasmania last week and in all the time I've been visiting that state in public life I've not come across a higher level of enthusiasm about the future of the Tasmanian economy, particularly with the tourist industry, than I did last week. So I understand. I regret the job reductions. I do understand though some of the challenges. And can I finally say that if you think Qantas is facing financial and other challenges, it is a rock solid guaranteed future airline of the upteenth degree compared with many of the other world airlines. And if you're looking around the world for a strong, solid, dependable, certainly going to survive airline, Qantas is your airline, in a much stronger position than many others. Now having said all of that I welcome competition. And I want to say that we do need a strong competitor for Qantas and I want to congratulate Virgin for the role that it played and I'd encourage, you know, a certain percentage of you to travel on Virgin, I'm precluded from patronising either, I have to remain neutral. So anyway, as I say I'm sorry but I think there are some understandable reasons.
Thank you.
[Ends]


Thank you Patrick for those kind words of introduction, Mr Richard Grellman the President and Chairman of Mission Australia, ladies and gentlemen.
About 11 years ago when I could do it with a relatively greater degree of anonymity than would now be the case, through the good offices of the Wesley Mission in Sydney, I spent a few hours with one of the very active youth workers of that fine organisation wandering around the streets of Sydney to try and get some understanding of the challenges faced by homeless people. And that experience brought home to me the accuracy of Patrick McClure's observation that homeless people should not be stereotyped, that they do come from a variety of different circumstances and a variety of very different backgrounds. And that homelessness is a condition that can strike an extraordinary range of people and can be the result of emotional, family, financial, psychological, substance abuse problems of an astonishing range and variety. And that the stereotyping is always well short of the mark and is always a great mistake.
I'm particularly pleased to be associated with this launch. Mission Australia's reputation goes before it in this area. It is one of the great welfare organisations of Australia. It's also an organisation that has moved with the times. The caption at the end of that video was 'the changing face of charity', and what Mission Australia has been able to do is to retain the great principles of practical Christianity and Christian charity, but blend them into a different world that we now live in, a world that produces surprising areas of need, but is also a world that has a greater capacity in an affluent country such as Australia, to deal with areas of challenge and areas of need.
 There is a paradox in the modern Australia. The very complexity of society and the strains and stresses that are put on people emotionally and are put on their family and other relationships, are greater now than they have ever been, and we're a more diverse society and a more complicated society. Yet on the other hand we have a capacity, because of our relative affluence to assist people in ways that we simply couldn't do before. And because of communications, we have a capacity to bring to the attention of people the plight of those in our midst that need our assistance. And Mission Australia has been a remarkable example of an organisation that has preserved the best of what we understand to be traditional Christian charity and has blended with that a contemporary understanding of the way in which it should be delivered and the contemporary needs of our society, and has done better than most in reaching out to the corporate sector to involve them in partnerships.
I have tried, as Patrick said, to foster the notion of a social coalition where the Government, the dedicated, committed individual or businessman or woman, as well as the great welfare organisations and corporate Australia, work together, each doing what they are best able to do and as a result producing a better network of support for those less fortunate in our community. Each year Mission Australia will assist 40,000 homeless Australians and as both the Chairman and Patrick McClure pointed out, the funds raised from this appeal if it realises its target of $1.5 million, will go a very long way towards providing practical help to so many more Australians.
 I am very pleased myself to be here and to announce that the Commonwealth Government will contribute $150,000 to this particular appeal, and that is assistance of course that comes on top of particular ongoing programmes which are available from the Federal Government particularly targeted at the area of homelessness. We've provided $3.7 million over three years for The National Homelessness Strategy to identify and tackle some of the root causes of homelessness; another $5 million for the Family Homelessness Prevention Pilot Schemes that involve a cooperation of Government community agencies to identify families at risk of homelessness and to provide some of the assistance needed to prevent it; $60 million for the Reconnect programme which is an early intervention programme for young people at risk of homelessness; and then more generically of course there is the Supported Accommodation Assistance Programme which involves the commitment of $832 million of a period of five years. And this particular amount represents an 18 per cent real increase in annual recurrent funding for the programme.
I do want to particularly thank Patrick McClure for his contribution to the development of contemporary welfare policy in this country. He did, as he indicated, chair the Government's reference group set up in 1999 to recommend how we might better encourage the transition of people from welfare to work, which still lies at the heart of tackling the challenges of individual self-esteem and the capacity of people to support not only themselves, but also to support their families. If we can provide more people with work, then the welfare challenge is very directly diminished. And Patrick did chair that reference group, and it brought forward a very significant number of very important recommendations designed particularly to help people get out of welfare and to get back into work.
 And I'm delighted that after a bit of negotiation and the odd nip and tuck here and there as happens in legislative bargaining with the Senate, this particular package of legislation suffered a far better fate than some of my other pieces of legislation, but I won't bore you with the details of those, I'll just focus on the Australians Working Together package. And it did pass the Senate in the last stages of the last sitting and I'm very pleased for that, and I think the cause of organisations such as Mission Australia will be benefited because it provides a large financial amount, it will introduce a whole series of new ideas and concepts, working credits, which meet the evident need of people to be able when they are in the process of transferring from welfare to work, if they get a little bit of work, to hang on to their benefits while they're assisted a bit further into the workforce. It provides for more intensive face to face assistance for people who have employment challenges and overall it will, I believe, provide a very powerful impetus and powerful momentum towards that challenging process of leaving welfare and getting back into work.
Now I think it's a very laudable objective. The group that Patrick chaired was representative of the best minds and the most dedicated hearts in the welfare sector in Australia. But they also brought to it a pragmatic understanding of how hard it is to raise a dollar and how hard it often is to get dollars out of Governments, and how very important it is that the dollars that are available are spent wisely and spent in a way that encourages the community through its Governments and through its individual and corporate manifestations, to give more and to maintain levels of contribution into the future.
There is a lot to be optimistic about on this front. We still have a long way to go. There are still far too many people in Australia who are not getting a share of the bounty of this country, through no fault of their own, to which they are entitled. And it's the responsibility of all of us, it's the responsibility of governments at every level, it's the responsibility of great organisations such as Mission Australia, it's the responsibility of the business community in an economic climate, may I be allowed to say, that has rarely been better in so many ways. The strength of the Australian economy is the envy of so many around the world, and all I ask is not so much that business gives more, but more businesses give, because there have always been a lot of businesses that have given a lot but the problem has sometimes been that the number that fall into that category is not quite as large as we would like. So it's really more businesses giving more so than business giving more because some of them have been wonderful friends and Mission Australia knows of many companies, great Australian companies.
 And one of the real buzzes I get now as Prime Minister is to go to event after event where you have a partnership between a major Australian company and one of the great welfare organisations, and together they do something to improve people's lives. That wasn't happening five years ago, let alone 10 or 20 years ago, or not quite to the same extent. I think that's real progress.
So ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy to formally launch this homeless appeal. It has the very strong and the very practical support of the Government. I urge the business community of Australia to support it very generously. It's a great cause led by a great organisation that practices the very best and the essence of Christian charity in our Australian community, and I very warmly commend it to you.
[ends]


Dr Ameer Ali, my Ministerial colleagues Philip Ruddock and Gary Hardgrave, Your Grace, the Reverend Professor James Haire, Mr Jeremy Jones the President of the Australian Executive Council of Jewry, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
For Janette and for me it's a real honour to be here tonight. It's an opportunity for me to say a few things very directly to the Islamic community of Australia. And it's also an opportunity for me to honour the work of the Federation since 1964 in representing and articulating the interests and the views of Muslim Australians.
The fact that this dinner takes place at a critical and difficult time, a time involving a debate about judgements made by the Government of Australia and the challenges facing the world, particularly in relation to the Middle East add special relevance. And I welcome the fact Mr President that you have spoken very directly of your concerns and have put very directly to me your views. Because that is the Australian way and I intend to use the time I have tonight to put my views with equal candour and equal directness in the same spirit of the Australian way. To do less would show disrespect to the place that you occupy in our community.
 This Congress draws Muslim leaders from all over Australia. And it provides a very important and essential forum. The President has reminded us that Muslim contact with Australia pre-dates European settlement. But it is the case that the great majority of Muslim Australians have made this country their home over the last 50 years. Many have done so fleeing persecution and oppression. And they have come to a country that not only embraces, but practices, the values of justice and harmony and peace and democracy. And I know that those values are as precious to Australian Muslims as they are to Australians of other ethnicities and descent.
 Australian Muslims come from many social and political and ethnic backgrounds. There is an astonishing variety in world Islam. Of course Australia has astonishing variety. And that is a variety of choice. We have decided to be a diverse country because we believe it adds strength and vitality and relevance to our nation in a world of rapid change.
But diversity of course need not be promoted at the expense of unity. A point I know that our Islamic communities hold to very strongly. Those who make Australia their home have also embraced our nation. And all Australians, regardless of their background, their ethnic, cultural, religious or social background, whether they were born in this country or came to this country by choice, should participate fully in the wider Australian community - and show a commitment to our nation, its values, its institutions and its laws, above all other commitments.
Our Muslim communities are continuing to develop their Australian identity. And who could possibility doubt that after having heard the wonderful singing of the choir tonight? And I thought as I listened to that singing that perhaps those who in the Australian community, that minority of people who peddle cruel stereotypes about Australian Muslims should be sent a video recording of the presentation of those school children.
 The bonds that Australian Muslims have built with their fellow Australians should not be at the expense of Islamic beliefs or ethnic heritage. The Australian Government is committed to ensuring that all Australians respect the freedom of religion and racial equality enshrined in our law and that the Muslims of Australia are able to express and to practise their religion and their beliefs without intimidation and without interference.
 And I want to take this opportunity of saying very directly to all of you that there is no place in Australia for racial and religious discrimination. There is no place in a tolerant, fair and decent Australia in which all Australian citizens are entitled to a fair go for stereotyping and scapegoating of any section of the Australian community.   I know that some have been subjected to that, I regret that, it does not represent the view of the overwhelming majority of Australians and it will be condemned by all decent, tolerant Australians.
Part of the expression - a very important part of the expression of religious tolerance and freedom in this country - is the right of every parent to determine the type of education and the value system in that education that should shape the upbringing of their children. My Government respects that very strongly. We have maintained an unwavering commitment to the strength of both government and independent schools in this country.
 And I'm sorry that we had to move the venue tonight from the Malek Fahd Islamic School. Because that school embodies in a very practical way the Government's commitment to the right of the Muslims of Australia to educate their children, subject to the proper curriculums that apply to all of our children within an Islamic environment. That school will receive about $6.6 million in recurrent funding from the Government this year and I understand that capital grants to the school have totalled some $900,000 since 1996.
The principles that govern Federal Government assistance to Islamic schools are exactly the same as the principles that govern Federal Government assistance to Christian and to Jewish schools. And that is the most practical possible expression of our determination to maintain and build a society which respects the people's right to practice their religion, to educate their children in the environment of their chosen religion. Last year I received a copy of the Muslim Schools' Charter. And I saw in it, and I was very pleased by it, the efforts of the Australian Council for Islamic Education in Schools in promoting harmony and encouraging exchange between Muslim children and others.
 As you know, diversity can only provide benefits when there is tolerance and there is mutual respect. And gatherings such as tonight and particularly a gathering such as this, held at this time, where different views about issues are expressed in a candid fashion, but within the framework of open political exchange which is a hallmark of Australian society are very important. And I want to take the opportunity of commending the Federation on the work that it has undertaken to promote harmony amongst all Australians. The recent booklet, Appreciating Islam, produced under the aegis of the Federation, is an excellent layman's guide to Muslim beliefs and practices.
 Mr Chairman, you rightly referred to the concern of the international community about international terrorism. Australia participated in the military action in Iraq because of our deep concern that if the possession of weapons of mass destruction by rogue states proliferated as a consequence, the possibility of them coming into the hands of terrorists would multiply with potentially lethal consequences for our own nation. Terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda detest the values of nations such as Australia. They detest the values that all of us in this room hold in common.
 The use of terror contradicts the basic philosophies and the essence of everything that Christianity, Judaism and Islam stand for. It is an affront to Muslims, not only in Australia but elsewhere in the world, to hear merchants of terror invoke the name of Islam to justify their perverted deeds. We in Australia, whether we are Christian or Jewish or Islamic or atheist, or whatever religion we may be, will never accept that organisations such as Al Qaeda or Jemaah Islamiah speak or act in any way on behalf of the Islamic world.
I know very much, and I record my deep appreciate for it, that Islamic communities in Australia shared in the outpouring of national grief at the deaths of 88 Australians in Bali six months ago tonight. You responded in a generous and spontaneous way in so many fashions. And that did not go unnoticed by your fellow Australians.
 My Chairman, this past week has been momentous for the people of Iraq and for the world. Let me say to you very directly and very sincerely that Australia was right to join the United States and the United Kingdom in the military campaign to remove Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq. We did so primarily to ensure the disarmament of Iraq. But we are glad that his loathsome regime has gone.   There will be many, many transitional challenges but of one thing we can be absolutely certain - the people of Iraq will have better, happier, and fuller lives without Saddam Hussein.
The great tragedy of Iraq is that its civilian population has suffered at the hands of a tyrant for decades. To have this man lauded by some as an Islamic hero is not only absurd but it is obscene. This is a man who, in an endeavour to increase his control over the oil wealth of the Middle East invaded his neighbours - Iran and Kuwait. This is the man who used terrible chemical weapons to murder the Kurdish people. This is a man who slaughtered tens of thousands of Iraqi Shi'a, persecuted and murdered their clerics and desecrated the holy shrines of Karbala and An Najaf.
 The collapse of Saddam Hussein is a victory for the people of Iraq. They are not a conquered people. They have not rallied to Saddam's cynical attempt to manipulate Islamic sentiment. When they tore down his statues and images and danced in the street for the sheer joy of freedom, the Iraqi people were sending the world a message - they were relieved indeed, delighted that he was gone and they wanted the world to know that.
I want to share with you a letter I received from an Iraqi who sought refuge in Australia seven years ago. Her husband was taken by Saddam Hussein's regime sixteen years ago. She never heard of him again. She tells me about her current life in Australia and I quote "this was not the life I lived in Iraq, but it's a life I appreciated and still appreciate when I think about the regime there. We lived rich and happy in Iraq, but lived in fear, not peace of mind. We were scared of executions, shotguns and chemical attacks. Despite being in Australia, we are still scared of speaking out loud and that's exactly how the people feel in Iraq. We are scared here of spies." And I add in parentheses here in Australia of spies. "I am scared for my children."
It saddens me deeply that even here, thousands of miles from Saddam's brutal regime, that some, indeed many in our Iraqi community still feel scared. I hope that the events of the past few days have lifted that enormous burden from our fellow Australians of the Iraqi community.
Tragically, my friends, there have been civilian casualties in this war. We mourn that, all of us do, and I express the fervent hope that in the interests of saving lives both military and non-combatant, that hostilities cease as soon as possible. The death of innocent people - especially children - should always shock and sadden us lest we lose our basic humanity. But as we read of civilian death and suffering in Iraq now, and we are touched by it and grieved for it, let us never forget the deaths and suffering of hundreds of thousands of Iraqis and others over the past twenty-five years.
Let us remember that the people of Basra, over the past few weeks, were at first reluctant to rebel against the regime's henchmen, even as British forces encircled the city because of their fear and their bitter recollection of the deaths of tens of thousands of their number in 1991 as Saddam Hussein exacted reprisals for their uprising at the end of the Gulf war. Let us also remember that if the now fallen Iraqi dictator had remained in power, torture, execution and rape would have continued as a routine instrument of state terror.
Let us also acknowledge that in this war unprecedented endeavours have been undertaken to minimise non-combatant casualties. Our own Australian forces have adhered to a strict code of conduct. All Australians should be proud of their bravery, professionalism and ethical conducted.
The war against Saddam Hussein is not, and never has been, an attack on Islam. It is an outrageous depiction of the motives and values of the United States, Britain and Australia for that to be suggested.
This nation has never engaged in conflict on the basis of religious or cultural difference. I was reflecting a short while ago that four years ago, at the height of the NATO countries action against Serbia on behalf of the Muslims of Kosovo - an action that Australia supported but did not contribute to - I attended a Greek National Day celebration in Sydney. A section of the crowd, small but vocal, booed me, nothing new about that, I often get booed, but on this occasion they booed me because they perceived that NATO's action was an attack on the Orthodox Christians of Serbia with whom the Greeks naturally felt a sense of religious commonality. But Australia supported the NATO action as being justifiable against an oppressive Serbian regime, which had clearly committed genocide against the Muslims of Kosovo. We did not base our position on a sympathy for one religion over another. And indeed it remains my very strong view as I expressed it then that the world took too long on that occasion to come to the aid of the Muslims of Kosovo. The same was true of our intervention in East Timor. Those decisions were based on a consideration of Australia's national interest, not some kind of expression of preference for one set of religious values over another.
Our closest neighbour, Indonesia, is largest Islamic country in the world. When I was in Jakarta a few weeks ago after visiting both the President of the United States and the British Prime Minister, I talked frankly to the President of Indonesia about Iraq. She made it very clear she didn't agree with our stance, but she made it equally clear that she did not see that our stance was any way conditioned by a feeling of being anti-Islam. Good neighbours recognise and respect each other's values and beliefs. Indonesia and Australia are very good neighbours. And the strength of that relationship, which is very important to me and to my government, has been demonstrated by the magnificent co-operation between our respective police forces following the Bali atrocity.
 We also intend to be a good friend of the Iraqi nation.   We have no territorial designs on Iraq, nor have the United States or the United Kingdom. I want to make that very clear. There will inevitably be a transitional authority, but we are committed to a transition to Iraqi rule as soon as practicable. We want the United Nations to be engaged, but equally it has to be recognised that the coalition nations have a special responsibility to support Iraq at this time. We have already provided $100 million of humanitarian aid. We'll offer administrative support in many areas, and not only in areas such as dry land farming, where Australia has obvious expertise, but that there are in fact many other areas.
Having engaged in the action to disarm Iraq, and thereby brought about the collapse of the Saddam Hussein regime, we will commit to playing a positive and significant role in the reconstruction effort.
 The rule of Saddam Hussein has bankrupted and exploited the Iraqi people. But that nation has great resources, great people and given the right opportunities a great future. It's a very special place as many of you know, the land between the Tigris and Euphrates is the birthplace of the written word, our calendar, and our numbering system. If Iraqis can find a way to live peacefully with one another and their neighbours, it has the capacity to be a powerhouse of development and culture for the region.
 Let me turn finally Mr President to the issue of trying to find and trying perhaps to seize this moment to accelerate the finding of a resolution of the seemingly intractable conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Australia has been and remains a staunch friend of Israel. I make no apology for saying that tonight. I've had a long association with the Jewish people of this country and I have a respect for the nation of Israel. But let me say to you Mr President that we also very strongly support the emergence of a viable independent Palestinian state. We recognise the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. And I personally grieve for the fact that the hopes that were entertained a few years ago, and I personally shared some of those hopes when in May of 2000 after visiting Gallipoli and participating in the Anzac Day celebrations I went to Israel to see the then Israeli Prime Minister and with his encouragement went to Ramallah to see Chairman Arafat and at that time the hopes were high for a peace settlement. And it's so sad that they have receded since. But we have to try again.
 And indeed the world's current focus on the region brings renewed vigour in a sense to the peace effort. And this opportunity must not be squandered. And it places responsibilities on the Israelis and it places responsibilities on the Palestinians. We urge both sides to embrace the road map developed by the United States after close consultation with Russia, the European Union and the United Nations. Each side needs to feel confident that the other genuinely seeks peace. I warmly welcome the decision of Chairman Arafat to appoint Mahmoud Abbas to the newly created position of Prime Minister. He must however be allowed an effective negotiating mandate, as otherwise the gesture of his appointment could be seen to be merely symbolic.
 It is crucial to the peace process that the murderous suicide bombings against Israel cease. And I again urge Ariel Sharon, the Prime Minister of Israel, to use the mandate of his re-election to respond positively to all opportunities to achieve a peace settlement. And I ask him to understand the view of the Palestinians that the expansion of Jewish settlements is provocative.
The Australian government will do everything it can to encourage both sides, to inch towards a settlement of this terrible and bloody conflict, which has caused anguish to the people of Israel and to the Palestinians and to many people who share the hope of a freer part of the world around the world.
Ladies and gentlemen, I know that this meeting takes place in a heavy time for the world and for our nation. Your President spoke very frankly of his concerns, and I've spoken very frankly to you of the Government's position in relation to those matters. But what is very evident from tonight's gathering is that whatever our views may be on Iraq and on other issues one bond unites us all. And that is a common commitment to this country, to its values, to its institutions, to its love of freedom, its hand of welcome, to people, its respect for religious difference and its determination to preserve the great fabric of unity of our Commonwealth. Can I say to the Muslims of Australia you are a precious part of our nation, you love this country as we love it, you contribute t this country, you are valuable to this country, you are respected by your fellow Australians and if there's one message I would like to leave with all of you and that is that there is no place in this country for bigotry and intolerance, for scapegoating and typecasting. It is fundamentally at odds with what this country stands for, and we will work with you to ensure its eradication from our community.
Thank you.
[ends]


**EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY**
(this is the prepared text)
Thank you for inviting me to join you here tonight to celebrate the 39th Annual Congress of the Australian Federation of Islamic Councils. I appreciate very much being given this opportunity to talk with you about those issues, both international and domestic, which are of concern to Australia's Muslim communities.
The Annual Congress draws Muslim leaders and the friends of our Muslim communities from all over Australia. It provides an essential forum for discussing issues and determining a way forward on matters of interest to Australian Muslims. I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Federation for its outstanding work in representing our nation's Muslim communities since its establishment in 1964. The tradition of hospitality among Islamic cultures is well known and I am honoured to be your guest at tonight's dinner.
While I know that the history of contact between Muslim peoples and Australia pre-dates European settlement, the vast majority of our Muslim community came to Australia during the last 50 years - many choosing Australia as a refuge from war and persecution, a safe haven.
Australia has become a haven for many because this is a nation which not only embraces but importantly practises the principles of equity, freedom, justice and harmony. I know that these values are precious to Australia's Muslims.
 Australian Muslims come from many social, political and ethnic backgrounds - the diversity is astounding. Islam has always recognised and valued diversity. It embraces so many races, so many cultures and so many ethnic groups.
 The government too recognises that diversity enriches. Australia's cultural, racial and ethnic diversity is a deliberate choice to ensure that our nation remains vital, ready to adapt to, and make the most of, the fast changing world.
But diversity does not need to be promoted at the expense of unity. A point I know our Islamic community well understands. Those who make Australia their home have also embraced our nation. All Australians, regardless of their ethnic or cultural background, regardless of their faith, should participate fully in the wider Australian community - and show a commitment to our nation, its egalitarian values, its democratic institutions and its laws, above all other commitments.
Our Muslim communities are continuing to develop their Australian identity so that they can interact fully with other Australians and enjoy all the benefits this nation can offer you and your families. But that bond with Australia does not have to be at the expense of Islamic beliefs or ethnic heritage.
 In return, the government is committed to ensuring that all Australians respect the freedom of religion and racial equality enshrined in our law and that Australian Muslims are able to express and practise their religious beliefs without intimidation or interference.
 Part of that expression - a very important part - is the right of every parent to determine the character and value system of the education that their children receive. To ensure that we respect this freedom, the government has sought to strengthen both government and independent schools.
 I am sorry that we had to move our venue for tonight from the Malek Fahd Islamic School. Because it embodies the Commonwealth government's commitment to ensuring that people can make choices about their children's education - particularly their religious and ethical education. The Malek Fahd Islamic School will receive some $6.6 million in recurrent funding from the government this year and I understand that Commonwealth capital grants to the school have totalled some $900,000 since 1996.
The principles of federal government assistance to independent schools apply in the same way to Islamic schools as they do to Christian or Jewish schools.
Late last year I received a copy of the Muslim Schools' Charter. I was very pleased to see the efforts of the Australian Council for Islamic Education in Schools in promoting harmony and encouraging Australian Muslim students to contribute positively to Australian society. Such a philosophy ensures that cultural and religious diversity enriches, rather than divides, the nation.
 As you know, diversity can only provide these benefits when there is tolerance and mutual respect. The vast majority of Australians respect people's religious and cultural differences. But it is very important, particularly at this difficult time, for the government to continue to work in partnership with Muslim community leaders to promote harmony and send the strong message that racism and divisive behaviour will not be tolerated in Australia.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the Federation on the work it has undertaken to achieve greater harmony and understanding between Australian Muslims and the broader Australian community.
 The booklet produced by the Federation, Appreciating Islam is an excellent layman's guide to Muslim beliefs and practices. A number of other projects currently under way, will seek to address concerns about the stereotyping and demonisation of Muslims.
 The world is rightly concerned about international terrorism. Australia participated in military action in Iraq because of our deep concern that if the possession of weapons of mass destruction proliferated amongst rogue states the possibility of them coming into the hands of terrorists would multiply with potentially lethal consequences for nations such as our own.
Terrorist groups such as al Qaida detest the values of nations such as Australia.
The use of terror contradicts the basic philosophies of Christianity Judaism and Islam. It is an afront to Muslims not only in Australia but elsewhere in the world when merchants of terror invoke the name of their religion to justify their perverted deeds.
 We in Australia will never accept that al Qaida or Jemaah Islamiyah speak or act on behalf of the Islamic world.
I know that Islamic communities in Australia shared in the outpouring of national grief at the deaths of 88 Australians in the Bali terrorist attack just six months ago. You responded with generous support to the Red Cross Bali Appeal.
 This past week has been momentous for the people of Iraq and for the world.
Australia was right to join the United States and Britain in the military campaign to remove Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq. We did so to ensure the disarmament of Iraq. That loathsome regime has now gone.
 There will be many transitional challenges but of this we can be absolutely certain - the people of Iraq will have happier, freer and more secure lives without Saddam Hussein.
The great tragedy of Iraq is that its civilian population has suffered at the hands of a tyrant for decades. To have this man lauded as an Islamic hero is not only absurd but obscene. This is the man who, in an effort to increase his control over the oil wealth of the Middle East invaded his neighbours - Iran and Kuwait. This is the man who used terrible chemical weapons against innocent Kurdish villagers. This is a man who slaughtered tens of thousands of Iraqi Shi'a, persecuted and murdered their clerics and desecrated their holy shrines at Karbala and An Najaf.
 The collapse of Saddam Hussein's regime is a victory for the people of Iraq. They are not a conquered people. They have not rallied to Saddam's cynical attempt to manipulate Islamic sentiment. When they tore down his statues and images, when they danced on the street for the sheer joy of freedom, the Iraqi people were sending the world a message - they want us to know that he is gone and they are glad to be rid of him.
 I want to share with you a letter I received from an Iraqi who sought refuge in Australia seven years ago. Her husband was taken by Saddam Hussein's regime sixteen years ago. She never heard of him again. She tells me about her current life in Australia and I quote "this was not the life I lived in Iraq, but it's a life I appreciated and still appreciate when I think about the regime there. We lived rich and happy in Iraq, but lived in fear, not peace of mind. We were scared of executions, shotguns and chemical attacks ... despite being in Australia, we are still scared of speaking out loud and that's exactly how the people feel in Iraq. We are scared here of spies. I am scared for my children."
It saddens me deeply that even here, thousands of miles from Saddam's brutal regime, our Iraqi community still feels scared. The removal of Saddam Hussein will lift this immense burden of terror from Iraqi people everywhere.
Tragically there have been civilian casualties in this war. We mourn that and I express the fervent hope that in the interests of saving lives both military and civilian, hostilities cease as soon as possible.
 The death of innocent people - especially children - should always shock and sadden us lest we lose our basic humanity. But as we read of civilian death and suffering in Iraq now, let us never forget the deaths and suffering of hundreds of thousands of Iraqis and others over the past twenty-five years under Saddam Hussein.
 Let us remember that the people of Basra were at first reluctant to rebel against the regime's henchmen even as British forces encircled the city because of their fear and bitter recollection of the deaths of tens of thousands of their number in 1991 as Saddam Hussein exacted reprisals for their uprising at the end of the first Gulf war.
Let us also remember that if the now fallen Iraqi dictator had remained in power torture, execution and rape would have continued as a routine instrument of State terror.
Let us also acknowledge that in this war unprecedented endeavours have been undertaken to minimise non-combatant casualties. Our own Australian forces have adhered to a strict code of conduct. All Australians should be proud of their bravery, professionalism and ethical behaviour.
The war against Saddam Hussein is not an attack on Islam. It is an outrageous depiction of the motives and values of the United States, Britain and Australia to suggest otherwise.
This nation has never engaged in conflict on the basis of religious or cultural difference. I was reflecting recently that four years ago, at the height of NATO's action in Kosovo - an action we supported but did not contribute to - I attended a Greek National Day celebration in Sydney. A section of the crowd, small but vocal, booed me because they perceived NATO's action to be an attack on the Orthodox Christians of Serbia with whom they shared a sense of religious commonality.
 Australia supported the NATO action as being justifiable against an oppressive Serbian regime which had clearly committed genocide against the Muslims of Kosovo. We did not base our position on a sympathy for one religion over another.
The same was true of our intervention in East Timor. These decisions were based on a consideration of Australia's national interest.   We don't choose conflict willingly but sometimes it is the only way of achieving peace and international security and stability.
Our closest neighbour, the Republic of Indonesia, has the world's largest Islamic population. When I visited Jakarta earlier this year I discussed the situation of Iraq with President Megawati. She didn't agree with our assessment of what was needed but she understood and fully accepted that our stance was in no way an attack on Islam.
Good neighbours recognise and respect each other's values and beliefs. Indonesia and Australia are good neighbours. The strength of the relationship has been clearly demonstrated by the close cooperation experienced during the investigation of the Bali attacks.
 We also intend to be a good friend of the Iraqi nation. The coalition forces have no desire to occupy Iraqi territory; I want to make that very clear. Inevitably there will be a transitional authority to ensure that the country can function and provide the basic necessities for its people and we will be part of that authority. But we are committed to a transition to Iraqi rule as soon as practicable.
We want the United Nations to be engaged, but equally we recognise that the coalition nations have a special responsibility to support Iraq at this time. The Australian government has already provided $100 million in humanitarian aid for Iraq. We will offer administrative support in areas where we believe our expertise is pertinent to the Iraqi environment. We can share our knowledge and experience in dry land farming for instance. There are however, other areas where Australian expertise will be offered and utilised.
Having engaged in the action to disarm Iraq, and thereby brought on the collapse of Saddam Hussein's despotic regime, we believe we must commit to playing a positive and significant role in the reconstruction effort.
The rule of Saddam Hussein has bankrupted and exploited the Iraqi people. But Iraq has enormous potential - both in terms of its human and natural resources. The challenge will be to unlock that potential. We believe that this is best achieved through a political structure which can represent all the peoples of Iraq and an open economy which will underpin Iraqi independence and prosperity.
 Iraq is a special place. The land between the Tigris and the Euphrates is the birthplace of the written word, our calendar, and our numbering system. If Iraqis can find a way to live peacefully with one another and their neighbours, it has the capacity to be a powerhouse of development and culture for the region.
 Fundamental to the peace and the stability of the region is a resolution to the seemingly intractable Israeli Palestinian conflict. Australia has been and remains a staunch friend of Israel. We also strongly support the creation of a viable independent Palestinian state.
 The world's current focus on the region brings renewed vigour to the peace effort. This opportunity must not be squandered. It places responsibilities on both the Israelis and the Palestinians. We urge both sides to embrace the proposed roadmap to peace which has been developed by the United States in close cooperation with Russia, the European Union and the United Nations.
Each side needs to feel confident that the other is serious about peace. The decision of Chairman Arafat to appoint Mahmoud Abbas to the newly created position of Prime Minister is welcome. He must however be allowed effective negotiating authority if his appointment is to become anything more than empty symbolism.
 It is crucial to the peace process that the murderous suicide bombings against Israel cease.
 I again urge Ariel Sharon to use the mandate of his re-election to respond positively to all opportunities to achieve a peace settlement. I ask him to understand why the Palestinians view the expansion of Jewish settlements as provocative.
The Australian government will do everything in its power to encourage and support the Israelis and Palestinians to negotiate a resolution to this bloody conflict, which has cost too many innocent lives and casts a shadow across the entire region.
 Equality, freedom, justice, civil rights, peace and harmony - these should be the inheritance that every nation strives to provide to future generations. Tonight we celebrate the contribution of Australia's Islamic communities to Australia's diverse, harmonious and vibrant society.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Mr Woods, to Mr Heinrich, Attorneys General, Chief Justices, Your Honours, very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
And amongst the distinguished guests, can I particularly welcome Cherie Booth QC from the United Kingdom, a very distinguished member of the British legal profession. And can I also take this opportunity very quickly and with some feeling to ask Cherie to convey to her husband, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, the profound respect and admiration that many Australians feel for the strength and courage of his leadership over recent weeks.
Ladies and gentlemen, the MC has already recalled that in 1965, the last time this conference was held in Australia, it was opened by my very distinguished predecessor Sir Robert Menzies. The world was a very different place in 1965 than what it is now, and when one makes statements like that, audiences often expect the utterer of the words to then go on and describe how things have deteriorated since. I think in the area of the governance of the Commonwealth and the rule of law, it's fair to say that things have advanced greatly since 1965. The rule of law is more widely respected in Commonwealth countries now I believe than it was then.
 We have seen perhaps over that period of time the most remarkable event of all, and that is the return to the Councils of the Commonwealth of a multi-racial democracy in South Africa. We have seen the adoption of principles, amongst others the Harare principle which have enshrined as a condition of continuing Commonwealth participation and membership, an observance of the basic principles of the rule of law. And the very reasons this conference takes place here is because of the unwillingness of the members of the legal profession to accept that while the current state of affairs obtains in Zimbabwe, that such a conference could be held there. And as Chairman in office until December of this year of the Commonwealth, I can only but lament the continuing violation of basic human rights, continued suspension in many respects of the rule of law in Zimbabwe, by a Government that holds office as a consequence of a rorted election, so found by an inquiry representing all sections of the Commonwealth.
As we gather here today, we naturally should reflect upon the heritage of the rule of law, so important to Australia. I welcome you here to the beautiful city of Melbourne, often voted as one of the most livable cities in the world. To those who have not come to Melbourne before, you will enjoy the experience. You will encounter in my view the most fiercely loyal, best instructed and most disciplined sporting audiences to be found anywhere in the world. In fact, if my research serves me correctly, and I always pay very careful attention to cricket research, the Melbourne Cricket Ground, with an attendance of over 90,000 for the fifth Test of the series against the West Indies in 1960/61 still boasts the very largest attendance at a Test Cricket match anywhere in the world. And of course its love of Australian Rules football is famous.
But as we gather here in Melbourne, we reflect upon the enormous debt that we owe to the fountainhead of the rule of law as we understand it, and that is the Common Law of England. We reflect upon the great bond that the law represents for the nations of the Commonwealth and we reflect upon the values that we hold in common as a result of that.
 It is impossible to address an audience anywhere at the present time without mentioning the dramatic and momentous events in Iraq. And as the last vestiges of the hated regime of Saddam Hussein comes to an end, our thoughts naturally turn to the rebuilding of that country. The course that country takes belongs to decisions of the people of Iraq. It is not the desire of the Australian Government, and I know it is not the desire of the Government of the United States or the Government of the United Kingdom, to impose a form of Government on Iraq unacceptable to the Iraqi people, whatever the critics may say to the contrary. And so it will rest with the Iraqi people over time to develop their system of governance.
 I observed at the weekend one leading foreign affairs commentator in The Australian newspaper speculating that perhaps Iraq could borrow from some of the Australian experience and look at the development of a Federal system of Government. The Commonwealth is composed of nations which are unitary in set up and also many very successful and very large federations, of which Australia is one. And perhaps there is some merit in that proposal, as the people of Iraq think about their future. When you reflect upon the strong Kurdish component in the north, the Shi'ite preponderance in the south, and the Sunni preponderance in the middle, perhaps there is some merit in a federal experiment in Iraq. I mention that with some trepidation, lest I be accused of endeavouring to impose some alien Australian solution on another country. But I mention it nonetheless because I think the experience of many countries in different parts of the world has been when you have strong ethnic and regional differences it is only a federal system of government that perhaps might provide the means of holding the nation together.
 We all have a particular responsibility for the future of that country. There are many millions of people around the world who rejoice in the departure of such a hated regime and Australia let me say will play her part and a very full part in the reconstruction of that nation and the emergence of an open and free Iraq to take its place amongst the councils of the nation.
Your conference will examine every gamut of the operation of the law. It will examine the changes that have occurred in the legal profession all around the Commonwealth and not least in Australia over past years. And there will be much debate ladies and gentlemen on the role of constitutions, the balance between the codification of law and the common law, and the extent to which the enshrining of fundamental rights in bills of rights is appropriate in our contemporary society. Without in anyway wishing to prejudice any of that debate let me say that after some 29 years of experience in public life in Australia one reaches some, albeit tentative conclusions and one of those is that for me my experience has been that the three great pillars of a democratic society, the three situations that prevail against all assaults on political freedom are the maintenance with all its flaws and it has many and is subject to so much criticism of a vigorous, robust, party political system typified by open free elections, and a parliamentary system that expresses the character of the people. The maintenance through all of this of a legal system exemplified by an incorruptible judiciary and of the many things of which our nation and I believe most of the nations of the Commonwealth can be immensely proud is that we have observed down through the decades the practice of an incorruptible judiciary. And the contribution made by that and the respect garnered as a consequence of that has worked very much to the credit of our nation. And finally and very importantly, and sometimes for we in the practice of politics frustratingly the existence of an open, robust, free and usually highly critical media. Those three great things underpin the Australian democratic experience and the Australian democratic practice as I have known it.
Can I in declaring this conference open express my great personal respect for the role of law in our society, or the rule of law. The profession has changed enormously over 38 years that have passed since this gathering last took place in Australia. Not least of course has been the very welcome feminisation of the profession. I've often reflected that I commenced my first year at the Sydney University Law School in 1957 there were but a handful of women in a year of some 160 men. Thirty-Five years later when my daughter entered her first year, the very same law school of the very same university, 52% of that first year was women. That is but one of the many changes which have occurred.
I wish you well, I thank you for honouring Australia in coming here. You will be made very welcome. It's a wonderful, open, generous society that will make you feel very much at home and I hope you have wonderful conference and I declare it officially open. Thank you.
[Ends]


Well thank you very much Tony, my other parliamentary colleagues, Helen Kroger the President of the Victorian division of the Liberal Party, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm especially pleased to be here today to address this business gathering, put together in the name of and in support of Tony Smith, the Member for Casey. Tony is one of three very talented younger new Federal Members that came into the Parliament from the state of Victoria at the last election. I have known Tony for a long time. He has political skills and political maturity and political judgement beyond his still very youthful years and appearance, and you are very fortunate, those of you who live in Casey and those of you who support the Member for Casey, you're very fortunate. And I'm an unhesitating admirer of him as one of the new generation of younger Federal Members of the Liberal Party that has come into the Parliament, and I'm very proud of the fact that at the last election we were able to bring in a group of men and women who had an enormous variety of skills.
 We had people like Tony who had had significant experience as a political adviser, we had somebody such as Greg Hunt who had experience in that capacity and also in international organisations, and by contrast to that we had somebody on the central coast of New South Wales who had run a business that gave you warnings of lightning and storms coming - not a bad qualification for politics, I might say. It's an indication of the breadth of the talent that the Liberal Party continues to attract federally, and it's very important that we go on encouraging people who have a range of talent. We want to get people who represent every different aspect and every different facet, and I'm therefore particularly delighted to be here to support Tony and to very warmly commend him to you.
It is, as he said, an extraordinary time in the history of our country and an extraordinary time in the history of the world. And not surprisingly I want to say something about what has occurred in Iraq. I want to remind all of you that it's only a few weeks ago when the decision taken by the Government and the decision taken by the Government of the United States and the Government of the United Kingdom, was subject to fierce vitriolic criticism by many, not only in this country but around the world. And as inevitably happens with these things, we went through the various phases. When the military campaign started, people expected unrealistically that it would be over in three or four days. And then when it wasn't, they started to say, what's gone wrong, forgetting that the Gulf War in 1991 lasted for 42 days; forgetting that the bombing of Serbia on behalf of the Muslims - let us remind ourselves the Muslims of Kosovo who had been subjected to terrible genocide by Serbia - that campaign lasted 79 days; and that the core military operation in Afghanistan to topple the Taliban had lasted 37 days.
So we went through the next phase then of what has gone wrong. And then you went through the, what you might call the armchair general phase, where you had all the retired former military leaders coming out and saying well look, if only they had done it this way and if only Rumsfeld had listened to his advice, then everything would have been alright. And then all of a sudden, it started to turn and all of a sudden it started to come to a fairly speedy conclusion. And people have now realised that the military operation did proceed essentially according to plan. It has demonstrated a lot of things, and I'm no military tactician, but I think what has occurred in this campaign will be the stuff of military academy and military studies for many years into the future. This is probably the first military operation in history where the really lethal effect of real-time intelligence has been demonstrated in a quite dramatic way and a quite dramatic fashion.
The contribution that Australia has made militarily is one of which all of us can be incredibly proud. It's a contribution that is not just tokenistic. The quality and fighting capacity of our men and women is widely admired by our coalition partners, and the contribution that they have all made in different ways - the Royal Australian Navy firing in anger and in action for the first time since the Korean War when it provided naval cover for the Royal Marines in the south of Iraq; the commitment of the squadron of Hornets, once again the first operation of that kind for 30 or 40 years; and the combination of different elements in combat - all of which add up to a very significant military contribution.
 And I don't want the military campaign to come to finality without the Australian public well and truly understanding the superb professionalism of what our men and women have done. And they have fought, not only bravely and professionally, but they have also fought very ethically. This is another point I want to make, and that is that unprecedented steps have been taken in this campaign to minimise, to the maximum extent it is ever possible, non-combatant casualties. You can never have a military operation without casualties, without combatant as well as non-combatant casualties. But the allies have gone out of their way to minimise them, and our own forces have operated according to our own rules of engagement and strictly in accordance with Australia's international obligations as a signatory to the various conventions that govern the laws of war.
 And it's worth reflecting that all of the doomsdaying scenarios that were predicted, not one of them has been realised. And I have begun to see some welcome stories, and one of them in the Sun Herald this morning by Andrew Bolt in which he listed all these fearful predictions that have been made. The first disaster prediction was of course that there would be a street by street, house by house battle in Baghdad a la Stalingrad. That didn't eventuate. The next one was that you would have hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of refugees, that did not eventuate. The next one was that the Iraqis would set fire to every one of the 1100 oil wells in that country, that didn't eventuate either. And, of course, they were going to fire scud missiles into Israel and thereby provoke the entry of Israel into the military conflict, that didn't eventuate either. And it really has been a very remarkable operation and proper credit has got to go to the planners of it and particularly, of course, to the leadership role played by the United States with enormous help from the British and from us.
I'm very proud of what this country has done. What we did was right, what we did was very direct and very courageous. And can I say to this, as a Liberal Party gathering, the thing that made me as proud as anything else about this whole exercise has been the way in which every single member of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party and National Party supported the Government's decision. Just a couple of months ago there was a lot of controversy in the Australian community and a lot of people around Australia were uneasy about the possibility of us becoming involved without the passage of the 18th Security Council resolution on Iraq. We took the decision we did, and to their enormous credit all of my colleagues loyally supported it. And being men and women with natural reactions, I'm sure some of them would have gone through some self doubt about it, but in the end they all supported it. And the impressive display of unity and commitment, and dare I use such a word at a Liberal Party gathering - solidarity - that was demonstrated was one of the best displays of political purpose that I've seen and experienced in public life. And it's a great demonstration of what a first-class team that we have in Canberra.
Now, there are going to be a lot of difficult days ahead and whenever you have the overthrow of a tyranny, you go through a degree of turmoil and a degree of chaos - but that will settle, and over time the people of Iraq will choose another form of Government. It will be up to them to decide the precise form it takes. I suggested this morning when I opened the Commonwealth Law Conference just at the Convention Centre here in Melbourne, that they might possibly give consideration as the columnist, Greg Sheridan, in The Australian opined at the weekend they might give consideration to having a federal system because Iraq is a country that originally was a bit of an artificial construct back in the 1920s and it does contain strong ethnic and denominational within the Islamic faith religious differences. There may well be a case for a federation with the Kurdish elements of the Sunni and Shi'a elements in different parts of the country, but that will be a matter for the Iraqi people to decide.
 And we will play a very important part in the process of helping the country in its reconstruction process. We will do it not only because we have international obligations to do so, but we'll do it because we are a nation that is willing to commit military forces but it is also willing to commit humanitarian relief.   And I want to say that relief... want to say how tremendously impressed I was that having decided only on Saturday morning after a discussion with Senator Hill - the Defence Minister - that we would send those medical supplies into the Baghdad hospitals, they had arrived by last night and there are more on the way. And that action of ours has sparked action by the other coalition partners to get additional medical assistance and supplies into the hospitals. So, we are not only in the business of waging effective military campaigns, but we're also in the business of acting as a humanitarian provider of assistance to people who need it.
 There are a lot of moments you remember in public life. All of us in this room, I guess, would have remembered the scenes of exhilaration in 1989 and 1990 as we saw country after country in eastern Europe throw off the yolk of Soviet imperialism and the world in eastern Europe changed. I remember those scenes as all of you do, but I'll always remember the scenes last week and the most fervent opponent of what the Government had done could not have been unmoved by the spontaneous exhilaration and expression of relief that was demonstrated by those people on the streets of Baghdad. And that in a way is what public life in the end is more about than anything else - to think that you can make an historic difference in the lives of people and that's what's been involved here and the decision that we took. Of course it had risks, of course it was criticised, but it was a necessary decision and a decision that had to be implemented regrettably without the involvement in a formal way of a further Security Council resolution.
Now, I haven't come here today to criticise the United Nations. The United Nations does have a complementary role to play in Iraq in the weeks and months ahead - an important role to play. But it stands to reason that the coalition forces will have to, in the interim period, represent the administrative authority. And over time, we want to see power transferred to the Iraqis in whatever form they choose. And I hope the process of them putting together an alternative government, an alternative government process, is not undertaken in undue haste because it is a country that if it gets it right on this occasion can have a wonderful future. It has huge resources of oil; it is potentially a very wealthy country; it has a well-educated population; it has a lot to draw on and if it gets the right kind of government and the government that sits well with the kind of people there, then I think it can have an absolutely magnificent future.
 There are a lot of wild assertions being made by people that this represents a completely new approach to the conduct of international affairs by the United States. I think some of those assertions are very wide of the mark, indeed. I think people who generalise too speedily from individual decisions taken by great powers, and there's only one great power in the world now and that is the United States, completely misunderstand the motives and make inaccurate predictions about the future.
We entered this military campaign because we believed that Iraq, and believe that Iraq, had weapons of mass destruction. We did not want to see a rogue state like Iraq keep those weapons. Not only would that be dangerous in its own right but we feared that if Iraq were able to keep those weapons other rogue states would think with the world unwilling to do anything, they could do likewise. And the more countries like that that have such weapons, the greater becomes the likelihood that those weapons would get into the hands of international terrorists. And that would represent a very direct and lethal threat to countries such as Australia.
In the process of course we have inevitably, and axiomatically, removed a loathsome regime. And I believe as a consequence the world is a little less likely to be subject to international terrorism in the future than might otherwise have been the case. I can't say that it won't happen, and I'm sure that if there is a terrorist incident at any time in the next two years, anywhere in the world, the perpetrators of it will say we've done this in retaliation for what the Americans did in Iraq. They will say that, I make that prediction now, whether that is a true description of their behaviour or not. And that is the kind of world in which we live. And the world has changed as a result of the 11th of September. We do face the twin challenges of international terrorism and rogue states having chemical and biological weapons. And if ever they come together in a fatal mix the consequences could quite horrific. And that in essence is what the conflict was all about. But now as it is reaching its very terminal phases we must turn our minds to the future, we must turn our minds to the reconstruction of Iraq. We must turn our minds to reassuring our friends in the region that this was not a war on Islam, nothing could be a more monstrous perversion of our motives and our values to suggest that it was a war on Islam. And I'm very happy to say that in the discussions I had with the President of the largest Islamic country in the world, President Megawati, a couple of months ago in Jakarta, although she disagreed with our approach she said I accept totally that it is not a war on Islam and that she undertook to do everything that she could to communicate that judgment to other Islamic countries. Indeed the evidence emerging so far is that the backlash, if I can put it that way, from quite a lot of Islamic countries in relation to this has been a little less, once again than the doomsayers had predicted.
So can I just say that it has been a very difficult and a very challenging period. It's not over yet. But it's a period that has reminded me, and I think reminded the Australian nation of the capacity of this country to do things and to do things well once a decision is taken. I want to pay tribute to Alexander Downer and Robert Hill, the two Ministers principally who advise me and work with me and continue to work with me in this issue.
I do want to record my respect for the leadership displayed by President Bush. It's easy to attack the President of the United States. The United States is the most powerful country in the world, they're an easy mark for all the critics and all the people who have grumbles. And I think he's shown a very strong commitment to a set of attitudes and to an outcome and he's given very impressive leadership. And can I also say as a fellow participant in a parliamentary system of government how much I admire the leadership of Tony Blair on this issue. I have been constrained to say in the past, and I'll say it again here, that he's demonstrated what a strong Labour leader can do in a challenging situation. And I think he faced different challenges from what I faced. He had to look behind him rather than in front of him because the conservative Opposition in Great Britain gave full support to the Blair Government's decision.
But having spent a few minutes inevitably talking about Iraq, I wouldn't want any of you to think that we regard that issue as the only challenge that the Government has. The domestic political challenges remain. And our commitment to the maintenance of strong economic growth, our commitment to bringing down another surplus Budget remains as strong as ever. We are in the process of finalising some announcements relating to policy in important areas such as health. And I'll be having something to say about this within the next few weeks. And I want to emphasis that what we will be announcing will be designed to strengthen the existing system. We made a commitment before we were elected that we were going to maintain Medicare. And we have done that and the announcements I will make in a few weeks will strengthen and not weaken the Medicare system. We also indicated that we would provide greater incentives for people to take out and retain private health insurance. When we came to office private health insurance was about 33 per cent of the population and heading south. And it got down to about 31 per cent before our measures began to bring about a change. And it now sits at about 45 per cent of the population and it has bought about some significant changes. It's led to a 12 per cent increase in private hospital utilisation. And it's resulted for the first time in 2000/2001, the very first time since the introduction of Medicare in 1983, it's resulted in a very small fall in the number of public hospital admissions. And when you take those two things together, who can seriously dispute the proposition that the private health insurance arrangements that we introduced have began to take some of the pressure of the public hospital system.
But we remain committed to a partnership with the states in relation to public hospitals, which traditionally the Federal Government has made a significant financial contribution towards supporting. And they of course are hospitals that are maintained and administered by state governments. But we also intend to maintain to the full the universal principles of Medicare. And they are the right of any person to have free treatment in a public hospital. The right of all Australians to receive the Medicare rebate in relation to consultations with a GP. And of course the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme that provides very important safeguards and safety nets for all Australians.
Now I've taken a moment to talk about this very important domestic issue because the essence of good government is to maintain a policy focus in not only international areas, but also areas of domestic policy.
And can I say in conclusion ladies and gentlemen that we have, in my, I hope, humble view been a quite successful Government. And we've been a successful Government because we have been a very good team. I'm very proud to say that you couldn't have a more effective Deputy Leader and Treasurer than I've had in Peter Costello over the last seven years. I've already paid tribute to the work that Alexander Downer and Robert Hill have done. I don't think an Australian Foreign Minister has paid a visit to Washington ever which has been the subject of more high level attention and engagement than the one recently conducted by Alexander Downer. Australia is a nation that is punching above its weight. It's punching above its weight because it's performing very strongly economically. It's punching above its weight because it's been able to balance its foreign relations so that it is not seen as exclusively preoccupied with the Asian Pacific region as appeared to be the case under the former government. But it is nonetheless displayed a sensitivity towards that relationship. I mean let me remind you that of all the nations in the region where it's fair to say that our relations have witnessed the largest single quantum advance has been our relationship with China. We have doubled our exports to China, we have just signed an enormous natural gas deal which will guarantee supplies of natural gas over a 25 year period to China. Now these things illustrate a flexible foreign policy and a capacity to not only maintain the strength and the closeness of our alliance with the United States and other countries such as the United Kingdom, but also to deepen and to broaden our relationships with the nations of our region. There is no greater furphy in describing Australia's foreign policy than to say that we have neglected our relationships with the region. Indeed in the time I've been Prime Minister I've had more one on one meetings with the just retired President of China Jiang Zemin than I have with any other world leader. And indeed the very first country I visited as a Prime Minister was Indonesia.
So as we look back on that seven year period we can see a very strong team, a willingness as Tony said to tackle difficult issues. And certainly a determination for this country to play a very important role in the affairs of the world.
And lastly can I thank you for being here. The Liberal Party always needs your support. We're very proud of the fact that the Liberal Party, unlike the Labor Party, is not an appendage or a wholly owned subsidiary of any one particular section of the community. But we do listen to the business community and on most major issues the decisions we take are designed to provide a better economic climate for business. And over the last seven years with low interest rates, low inflation, strong economic growth, a highly competitive exchange rate, and all of the other things that you've experienced, I think we have created a very strong business environment. But we don't take that for granted, we want to work at it, we need your help, we need your advice, and we need your involvement in that process. And can I finish where I began in commending Tony to you as an example of the newer, younger very well motivated highly committed and very able members that we have in the Federal Parliament. And when you see people like that you have no cause at all for concern about the future capacity and the future strength of our Federal Parliamentary team.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Catherine, my ministerial colleagues Richard Alston and Peter McGauran and Senator Stott Despoja of the Australian Democrats, Geoff Garrett, Robin Batterham, ladies and gentlemen.
I remember my chemistry teacher too from Leaving Certificate days. I don't think he would have recalled me perhaps as well as yours would have recalled yours. But I often reflect at gatherings such as this that one of the real experiences I've had as Prime Minister is to chair the Science and Innovation Council and it has bought me into very close contact with Australia's scientific community and I hope in a small way I've made a contribution towards promoting the cause of science and innovation in Australia and bringing about the day when our science stars will be as well known and as well lauded as our sporting stars. And CSIRO of course has a very important role to play in that. It's been said before and it's become something of a clich‚ CSIRO is one of those great Australian icons and deservedly so because it's demonstrated, as its current chairman just indicated, that extraordinary Australian capacity for adaptability and innovation.
We are entitled as a nation to reflect on our strength, as well as from time to time as we so often so a little too much I think on occasions bewail our weaknesses. And one of the great strengths of Australians, and it's been demonstrated again over recent weeks with our involvement in Iraq is the extraordinary capacity of Australians to a adapt and to innovate. We have a capacity to do that I believe beyond most other highly educated nations and in a sense a metaphor for that, in the science world for decades, has been CSIRO. And it's therefore no surprise to me that in response to the decision we took at the end of last year for the first time as a Government to identify some of these key priority areas in research that within very rapid order we see CSIRO producing its Flagship initiatives. And that is what today's launch is about and it is appropriate that it be held here and I want to thank BHP Billiton, the world headquarters of BHP Billiton, I want to thank Mr Goodyear for hosting this gathering because BHP Billiton has been a great partner of Australian science and Australian innovation in its various manifestations over the years.
I think as the Chief Executive waxed very eloquent with the shipping example, I think I was waiting for a reference to more bunkering facilities as the metaphor went on. But can I say that the energy that you have bought Geoff to the leadership of CSIRO and the way in which as an organisation it's refashioned itself and it has undertaken as Robin say that very important cultural change. All institutions have got to do that if they are to survive. And certainly in the world in which we now live. I think science is given a more important place in our community now than was the case a decade ago. But there's still a long way to go, a long long way to go. And we won't always at a government level get those things right, but we'll try and do so. But what is tremendously important is that once again CSIRO has responded, it's identified some Flagships and I congratulate it for that. I wish these initiatives well, I thank the science community, I thank CSIRO for the contribution it's making to the national wellbeing, and long may it continue to do so and I have great pleasure in joining you in launching this and continuing the nautical analogy.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mark, Foreign Minister, Attorney General, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
That was, Mark, a very gracious and a very generous introduction. I am particularly delighted to be here tonight for a number of reasons. First and foremost what the partners and the employees and the clients of Arnold Bloch Leibler celebrate tonight is 50 years of living out what I can loosely call the Australian dream. And that is the capacity of a small number of people to start an enterprise and build it from nothing and in a lifetime in the space of two generations which is 50 years to build a very impressive business and a very professional firm. And to build it at a time of enormous competition, at a time when the legal profession has transformed itself from what it was in the early 1950s.
So the most important thing to me about tonight is to marvel at and remark upon the capacity of people to start with nothing and in an impressively short period of time build it into a remarkably successful organisation.
I've known Mark Leibler, as he reminded you, for more than 20 years. I don't think in my life I've met a person with a keener intellect, a sharper sense of advocacy for the causes in which he believes. But also a great capacity to generously see another point of view. He reminded you of the fact that we have in common the many things, but one in particular that we served articles to a Jewish solicitor. Myer Rosenblum, whom he mentioned, I'm very happy to acknowledge remains one of the most remarkable people that I've met in my life. Not only did he have to spend three years trying to teach me the law, which was very trying, if I have any capacity to digest departmental briefs now it is due almost entirely to a lesson that I was taught by Myer back in 1960. Quite properly as a raw article clerk he would never be so foolish as to allow me to sign my own mail and I presented a letter to him that had a spelling mistake it in. And the letter came rather hastily out of his office and he reminded me that he was my master solicitor, he was not a proof reader. And it's a lesson that I have to say at the age of, whatever it was, 20 then, a lesson that impressed itself upon me and something that I've never forgotten. But he was a remarkable man, he taught me a lot about the law, he was also an astonishingly talented Australian representing his nation in sports as diverse as rugby union, hammer throwing and then Empire Games hurdles.
But you remember from your early days in your vocation, as Mark was recounting his experiences with Arnold Bloch, you remember the lessons that you were taught by your tutors at that time.
Mark has of course been very strongly identified and proudly identified with the causes that are dear to Australian Jews. And I have had a long association with the Jewish community of Australia, of which I am unapologetically very proud. And in that time I've found Mark a good counsellor, we haven't always agreed, we won't always agree in the future. But what I think we do agree and so many Australians, and not only those gathered here tonight, is our intense admiration for the contribution that the Jewish community has made to our nation and also our great admiration for the stoic way in which Israel has defended itself against constant attack and constant harassment.
Can I take this opportunity in the wake of the events that have occurred in Iraq to say as a great and staunch friend of Israel that we do have, I believe, the world has an historic opportunity to try and convert some of the events that have occurred in the Middle East to the achievement of some kind of lasting settlement.
A couple of weeks ago I met the former Prime Minister of Israel Ehud Barak when he visited Australia and I could only but reflect with sadness on the fact that some three years ago things seemed bright and the star of a peace settlement seemed to blaze quite brightly in the sky at that particular time. And I remember my personal experience of going to Ramallah at the behest of the Israel Government and accompanied by several people who are in this room tonight. And it looked as though the courage of that man Barak had bought us close to some kind of settlement. Sadly his courage was not reciprocated and the rest is well known, the suicide bombings, the mistrust and so forth. But we must try again, and the road map enunciated by the President of the United States and supported by the Russians and the European Union and the United Nations, and that road map must be persevered with. And it will require courage and leadership on both sides. And I welcome the fact that there has been a Prime Minister appointed by the Palestinian Council - the key test will be whether that person is given serious negotiating authority.
But all of us long for a settlement, all of us will defend always the right of Israel to exist without harassment behind secure, internationally recognised and defensible boundaries. But it's also a policy of my government to work towards the development of an independent Palestinian state. We must, all of us, take opportunities that are available to encourage the achievement of a just and lasting settlement, I think that is the prayer and the hope of so many people, not only here in Australia but around the world.
But can I say Mark that tonight must be a very proud occasion for you and it must be a very proud occasion for all of your partners because in just 50 years you have impressively built a very fine firm, a firm that boosts a rich variety of clients, a firm that has made its mark not only here in Melbourne but also throughout the entire Australian nation and within the legal profession. And you pass through a period of time where the legal profession has adjusted to change and you have adjusted with it. But you have maintained some of those fundamental principles that you learnt from your master solicitor of good client service, of honest advice, of industrious preparation of your arguments and meticulous attention to detail.
One of the things that I believe I learnt from 12 years of practice as a solicitor was some capacity to apply myself to the detail of arguments and the detail of intricate differences of view and intricate propositions. And I hope in some way that has served me well in my current pursuits.
Finally can I thank you Mark and through you your firm to the contribution that you have made to Australia. We are all more than anything else united by that great bond of affection for a very remarkable country. This nation of ours of just under 20 million people is a remarkable success story. It is a nation that has welcomed people from many lands, it is a nation that has the capacity to punch above its weight in so many areas. It's a nation which over the past few weeks through its armed forces acting in Iraq has again demonstrated the extraordinary ability and tenacity and toughness, but also the fundamental decency and civility of its people.
I'm very proud of the fact that just as our forces have performed magnificently in a military sense, so it was that within 36 hours of the government deciding on Saturday morning that we should send a consignment of medical supplies to assist the hospitals in Baghdad, those supplies should have arrived and should have been an inspiration for other countries to do likewise. The capacity of our forces to be peacekeepers and conciliators as well as soldiers, sailors and airmen is something of which our country should be proud.
But ladies and gentlemen, may I on your behalf congratulate the firm, thank it for its contribution to the legal profession in Australia, thank it for its contribution to living out the great Australian dream of starting with nothing and building in your lifetime something really worthwhile and something really enduring. While ever it is possible to do that in Australia it will be the Australia that all of known and love so very much.
Thank you.
[ends]


As Australians, both here in Canberra and elsewhere in our nation and around the world, gather to give thanks and to express their enduring gratitude to the more than 102,000 Australians who laid down their lives to defend this country, its values and our freedom. And as we also collectively honour the men and women who came back, who also put their lives on the line, we take pause for a moment to reflect upon the extraordinary hold that this great day, this great tradition borne on the 25th of April 1915 and which has shaped the character and the destiny of this country more than any other tradition or influence, we reflect upon the enormous hold it continues to have on our nation.
And I think as all of us marvel at the way in which the young of Australia in increasing numbers embrace the Anzac traditions. And we ask ourselves why is it that this great tradition has strengthened and cemented its hold on the affections and the emotions of the Australian people. It is not, as is rightly said on every Anzac Day, about the glorification of war. It is about the celebration of some wonderful values, of courage, of valour, of mateship, of decency, of a willingness as a nation to do the right thing, whatever the cost. And as today we rightly mourn the loss of so many young people we reflect upon their lives cut short, we give thanks to them and to all of those who came back, for what they did for us. And particularly on this day do we think of those young men and women on duty for the Australian Defence Forces in other parts of the world. And especially we give thanks for the safety of those who've recently taken part in the war in Iraq.
They went in our name in a just cause to do good things to liberate a people. They are part of a great tradition of honourable service by the Australian military forces. On this day rightly reflect upon what Anzac means to us. We reflect upon the values that it has instilled in all generations of Australians and I believe as a nation we collectively rejoice in the growing embrace of that great tradition. It's an honourable one of which every man and woman in this nation can be justly proud.
[ends]


Mr Speaker, the House will recall that on the 18 March this year it resolved to support the government';s decision to commit Australian Defence Force personnel to the international coalition to disarm Iraq.  The coalition undertook to enforce Iraq';s compliance with its obligations under successive resolutions of the United Nations Security Council, with a view to restoring peace and security to that area of the Middle East.
Mr Speaker, I am pleased to report that the coalition';s major combat operations in Iraq have been successfully concluded.
Australian military forces participated with just cause, in an action properly based in international law, which resulted in the liberation of an oppressed people.
Australia';s defence forces acquitted themselves with great distinction and professionalism.  They rightly won the admiration not only of the Australian people but also our allies.
I know that all Australians will join me in expressing our immense gratitude that no Australian casualties have so far been sustained.
I have been told by many senior members of the Australian Defence Force that the absence of casualties is due, in no small measure, to the predeployment of our forces some weeks before the military operation commenced.
This pre-positioning, added weight to the attempt to pressure Saddam Hussein into compliance and, more importantly, it gave our people the opportunity to prepare and acclimatise – enhancing their performance and their security in the event of conflict.
Not only was the victory achieved quickly but the doomsday predictions were not realised: the oil wells were not set on fire; there were not millions of refugees; the dams on the Tigris and the Euphrates were not breached to bring on catastrophic flooding; there was no long drawn-out bloody siege for Baghdad.  For all this we are extremely grateful.
The decisive victory of the American-led coalition reflects great credit on the strength and determination of President Bush';s leadership.  It also has immense implications, not least the momentum it has already begun to generate towards achieving a Middle East peace settlement.
President Bush and his administration are determined to all that they can to advance the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians.
The President made this very clear to me during our recent discussions in the United States.
Now that the major combat phase is over and efforts in Iraq rightly turn to humanitarian assistance, we have begun to bring home our defence personnel.
  This month we will be welcoming home the HMAS ANZAC AND DARWIN, the airmen and women and support crews deployed with the F/A-18 Hornet aircraft, the majority of the Special Air Service units, the Commando and Incident Response Regiment elements, the CH 47 Helicopter Detachment, and the Navy clearance diver team.
  Some military forces are still required to restore peace and security and assist in the rehabilitation of the Iraqi nation.
 Our military deployment will be limited given current commitments in our own region.  Many other nations have indicated a willingness to provide peacekeeping assistance in Iraq.  The government has made clear all along that Australia would not be in a position to provide peacekeeping forces in Iraq.  Our coalition partners clearly understood and accepted our position.
 However, the following ADF capabilities will either remain or be deployed to Iraq:  an Australian National Headquarters element; the HMAS SYDNEY; the HMAS KANIMBLA and a naval task group command element; an Army commando element for a brief period; two P-3C Orion maritime patrol aircraft and support; two C130 Hercules transport aircraft and support; an air traffic control element to support air operations at Baghdad International Airport; a security group for the new Australian Representational Mission in Baghdad; as well as civilian and military experts working on locating and eliminating WMD in Iraq.
Our commitment for this phase of the operation is currently in the order of 1,200 personnel.  For Australia, and the families of those involved, this remains a significant deployment.
It is our intention to ensure that the period of coalition control is kept to a minimum and that the responsibility for governing Iraq is taken up by an Interim Iraqi Authority as soon as practicable.  This will be the first step on the pathway to representative government.
  It is worth briefly recalling the history of events that led to our decision to participate in the coalition';s operations in Iraq.
The cease-fire of 1991, which concluded the first Gulf War, prohibited Iraq from maintaining any biological, chemical or nuclear weapons capability.
  For 12 years the United Nations sought to cajole and coerce Iraq into compliance. Saddam Hussein continued defiance of the United Nations Security Council resolutions, even in the face of a substantial military threat, demonstrated that the community of nations had come to a critical point in this long running conflict.  If Saddam Hussein was to be disarmed – we had to be prepared to resort to force.
I remind the House, and through it, the people of Australia, that the Security Council was unanimous in its view that Saddam Hussein had continued his weapons of mass destruction programmes, and that Iraq was, therefore, in material breach of its obligations under a long series of Security Council resolutions.
There has always been a fear that the more nations that possess these weapons, the more likely they will eventually be used.  This fear is compounded when they are in the hands of regimes that show a total disregard for common humanity and the rule of law, aggressive and belligerent regimes like that overseen by Saddam Hussein.
  But the greatest fear is that these weapons will find their way into the hands of terrorists.  The events of 11th September 2001 and the atrocity in Bali have clearly demonstrated that international terrorists have no regard for human life.  Terrorist organisations like Al Qaeda want these weapons.  And make no mistake – if they obtain them they will use them.
Through its actions in Iraq the coalition has sent a clear signal to other rogue states and terrorist groups alike - the world is prepared to take a stand.  We do not for one moment regret that decision.  It was right, it was lawful and it was in Australia';s national interest.
 The government is enormously proud of the magnificent job done by our forces.  They have rightly earned the praise of their coalition partners.
 Our forces performed superbly in accordance with their very fine reputation for professionalism and skill and courage.  I want, on behalf of the country, to record our deepest admiration, our respect and gratitude to all of them.  Most of all, I hope that the situation in Iraq can be stabilised relatively quickly and that all our forces will be home, safely and soon, with their families.  I am confident that these sentiments are shared by all Australians.  They have done this country proud.
I know that the desire to see them home, is felt most keenly by their families and friends.  I am grateful that I had the opportunity to meet some of the families over the last weeks.
 There is a special bond between the community and the armed forces which serve their nation';s interests.  When our forces are deployed to combat, we feel it all the more keenly.  At the heart of that bond is the recognition that military service carries a commitment to sacrifice.
When the I visited Qatar last week I let our people know that everyone in Australia is keen to welcome them home as soon as possible.  The nation will have an opportunity to show its heartfelt thanks in the near future.  All the men and women involved both in the war in Iraq, and the broader international coalition against terrorism, will be invited to march through the streets of Sydney and Perth.  I encourage all who are able, to gather and join in expressing our thanks for a successful operation and our unqualified pleasure at their safe homecoming.
In Qatar I had the pleasure of meeting Brigadier Maurie McNarn, the Commander of Australian National Headquarters in the Middle East.  I would like to congratulate Brigadier McNarn, on behalf of the nation, for commanding our forces so successfully.  While I know that his family will appreciate these sentiments, I also know that their attention will be overwhelmingly focussed on his homecoming, now just a few short days away.
The military campaign in Iraq was astonishingly speedy and effective.  It has been a remarkable campaign and a great tribute to the American military leadership.  Most importantly, every attempt was made by the coalition forces to ensure that civilian casualties were kept to an absolute minimum.  Our quarrel was with Saddam Hussein';s regime, not with the people of Iraq.
We did not only rely on technology, on the use of precision guided weapons, but also on strict targeting policies.  Policies which Saddam Hussein tried to take advantage of.  It is a cruel irony that the Iraqi leadership had less regard for the wellbeing of the Iraqi people than the coalition forces – how else can you explain the placement of artillery, military communications systems, munitions stores and the like in urban areas, in schools, in kindergartens, in hospitals.
It is a testament not only to our fighting men and women, but also to our Defence hierarchy, that when missions were aborted out of concern for the impact on civilians, such decisions were praised not admonished.
The government also wants to pay tribute to the contributions of the American, British, and other coalition forces.  They have behaved and conducted themselves with great honour and distinction.  The coalition has, I believe, set new standards of integrity and ethical behaviour in military conflict.  This new attitude reflects the reality that the modern military man or woman is as much a conciliator and a peacekeeper as he or she is a fighter.
The speed and effectiveness of the coalition campaign also reflects the lack of organised military operations by the Iraqi forces against the coalition.  Perhaps we should not have been surprised by this.  It was probably the first signal of the real feelings of the Iraqi people - they were not willing to sacrifice their lives to save a brutal despot.
  Saddam Hussein was not Iraq - once they could be sure that his regime was crumbling, we saw in the streets of Baghdad, in the streets of Basra, and hundreds of other towns all over Iraq expressions of joy – the sheer joy of freedom.
Of course for some that joy will be tempered by sadness.  Tragically, despite all the efforts of the coalition, there have been civilian casualties.  The death of innocent people – especially children – should always shock and sadden us lest we lose our basic humanity.  But when we consider the civilian death and suffering in Iraq now, and we are touched by it and grieve for it, we must not forget the deaths and suffering of millions of Iraqis over the past twenty-five years.
 Saddam Hussein and his regime stand accused of the most serious crimes against humanity.  Since Saddam Hussein came to power in 1979, torture and summary executions have been a routine mechanism of state control.
You would have all read the reports of the most diabolical and cruel punishments.  The coalition forces have only just begun the task of collecting specific and hard evidence of these terrible violations of human rights.  They have already uncovered considerable circumstantial evidence but the task of gathering proof will be time-consuming, difficult, frustrating and harrowing – especially for the families of the victims.
  Despite its dark past, Iraq now has a promising future.  But, as in the case of all beginnings, it is a period of enormous challenge.
Security is the most important immediate priority.  The people of Iraq cannot consider their future until their day-to-day security is assured.  They must be able to go to work, to go to school, to meet, to discuss issues freely.
  The coalition must also work to provide basic humanitarian support for the Iraqis.  Without secure food supplies, clean drinking water, functioning sewage systems, reliable electricity, transport and fuel there will be little opportunity for the Iraqi people to turn their attention to their political infrastructure
 It is critical that the world not believe that the current dilapidated state of Iraq';s infrastructure is entirely due to military conflict.  Even before the conflict started, Iraq';s infrastructure was severely degraded.  The telecommunications network required urgent attention.  Oil and gas infrastructure had deteriorated greatly.  Electricity generation was less than half its nominal capacity and, partly because of the poor state of the distribution system, power cuts were common.  Water supplies were increasingly vulnerable to contamination by raw sewage, and access to safe drinking water was a major concern.
These deficiencies stem from long-standing neglect.  It is salutary to consider that more Iraqi lives have been lost to dirty drinking water than to the recent conflict.
  Australia takes its rehabilitation responsibilities very seriously.  Our contribution – as in the conflict phase - will focus our limited resources in niche areas where we have expertise and where a concentrated effort can make a difference.  We have committed some $100 million in aid.  We have provided highly skilled personnel to contribute to key humanitarian planning and reconstruction efforts.
We are keen to play a strong role in rehabilitating Iraqi agriculture, an area where our experience of dry-land farming, salination and irrigation may prove useful to the Iraqi people.  Another focus of our humanitarian efforts will be in the water and sanitation sector.
 In addition to meeting these obligations, the coalition is working hard to rid Iraq of all weapons of mass destruction.  The hunt for these weapons will not be easy.  We know that in order to protect them from inspectors, the Iraqi regime broke them up and hid them in their disaggregated condition in different parts of the country.
We are starting to uncover the evidence.  We have found what appear to be mobile biological weapons production facilities, just like those described by Secretary of State Powell to the Security Council in February.
It is going to take considerable time and resources to complete the investigation and destruction of the regime';s weapons of mass destruction.  But at least we will no longer obstructed by a hostile regime.
  Australia has joined the United States and the United Kingdom as partners in the coalition transitional authority in Iraq.  The coalition';s aim is to create the circumstances in which the Iraqis will have the opportunity to establish a representative government of their choosing.  We are not in the business of imposing a particular model of democracy on the Iraqi people.
  The transitional phase will be enormously challenging.  Restoring political stability and promoting democracy in Iraq are daunting tasks.  Iraq has no history of representative democracy and is marked by significant religious and ethnic divides.  It will also take time and sustained effort to overcome the corrosive effects of Saddam Hussein';s dictatorship
But Iraq is a relatively modern and sophisticated country with good economic prospects.  Not just because of its oil resources but because its people are strong well skilled and have a strong entrepreneurial ethos.
While it is not for the coalition to dictate the form of Iraq';s new government, we will seek to establish a representative process so that Iraqis can, for the first time, choose their leaders via a process that respects democratic principles and respects Iraq';s religious and ethnic mix.  As a committed supporter of the Australian democratic system it should be no surprise that I have speculated that a federal model may be appropriate.  But again that is up to the Iraqi people to determine the best way to preserve Iraq';s territorial integrity and enhance the stability of immediate region.
The government considers that the United Nations could play a significant, practical, role in support of the transitional processes.
The United Nations is best placed to help mobilise and coordinate aid efforts, help transfer power to the Iraqis and consolidate international acceptance of the new regime.  But the Security Council will need to act much more constructively than it has to date if the United Nations is to have any meaningful role in rehabilitating Iraq.
My talks last week with President Bush underlined the deepening and strengthening relationship between our two nations.  The relationship between Australia and America has never been stronger.  This relationship is not forced or contrived.  We are allies because we are friends – close friends.  And that friendship is based above all else on a commonality of views.  We share a view of the world that values freedom and individual liberty.
 Both our nations recognise the threat posed to our communities by international terrorists.  We understand the dangers of leaving the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction unchecked.  Our long-standing security alliance with the United States provides a solid and reliable basis for us to cooperate on addressing these issues.
  The shared intelligence and the access to cutting edge defence and security technologies that the alliance facilitates are vital to ensuring Australia';s security, and will only become more important in the future.
  But neither nation seeks to promote this relationship at the expense of another.  The government will continue to develop and enhance relationships wherever and whenever we can see an advantage for Australia.  Our national interest is best served by a network of alliances and relationships.
I also wish to place on record my great respect for the strength of leadership displayed by the British Prime Minister, Tony Blair.  Australia';s relationship with the United Kingdom is not a relic of history.  It is rich and diverse.  It extends across so many generations, in so many areas, and has, of course, been reinforced by recent experience.
  Without the determination demonstrated by President Bush and his administration, without the dogged resolve of Mr Blair, Saddam Hussein';s intransigence would never have been addressed.
  The strengthening of these long-standing and important ties with America and Britain does not mean for a moment that Australia has diminished other important relationships.  Indeed, we have been very careful to ensure that our region understands our involvement in Iraq.
  Earlier this year I visited Indonesia to consult President Megawati on this and other matters.  Although Indonesia has taken a very different position on Iraq, the President did not want this issue to affect our close bilaterial relationship.
She specifically assured me that Indonesia would not view a military operation to oust Saddam Hussein as an attack on Islam.
Other friends and important regional partners actively supported the coalition';s operations – Japan, Korea, Singapore for example.  It is wrong to characterise our participation in Iraq as somehow out-of-step with our neighbours.
Mr Speaker, can I return to the question of Israel and the Palestinians.  As I have indicated, I drew great encouragement from President Bush';s clearly stated determination to work as hard as possible to achieve a peace settlement between Israelis and Palestinians.  Australia has been a staunch friend and ally of Israel for some 50 years, but we nonetheless recognise the imperative for an independent Palestinian state.
I know that this issue is also very close to the heart of Mr Blair.
I have assured both President Bush and Mr Blair that the Australian government will assist in any way it can to achieve a successful outcome for the new peace process.  It will not be easy but one thing should be clearly understood and give hope - there is a great determination on the part of the US administration and the United Kingdom to do everything possible to achieve that objective.  If ever there was a moment for the Israeli and Palestinian people to seize – this is it.
We hope that the Iraqis too will seize their moment.  The sooner we can get them involved in their own governance, in their administration, the better.  For only the Iraqi people are in a position to determine what is in their national interest.
This is the first time in my lifetime that the people of Iraq have a real and genuine opportunity to have a free, open and democratic society.  I would hope that I speak for everyone in this place, for every Australian, when we offer them our support and assistance in achieving this objective.
[ends]  


Defence Minister, Chief of the Defence Force, Chief of the Air Force, Chief Minister, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say on behalf of a very proud, a very grateful and a very relieved nation, we are so happy to see you back, we are so happy to see all of you again back in one piece, and we are so tremendously proud of what you have done in our name to the enormous credit of the Australian Defence Forces.
This is a great day for the Royal Australian Air Force. As the Air Marshall said, we welcome home some personnel who participated in the first fighter combat by the Royal Australian Air Force for 50 years. You did it with enormous skill, enormous pride and enormous professionalism, and it's no exaggeration to say that the fighting men and women of Australia, in this recent operation, have won not only the respect and the admiration of their fellow Australians, but also the respect and the admiration of the people and the leaders of your coalition partners.
I've just, as you know, had the opportunity of a visit to the United States and to Great Britain and on the way back I had the opportunity of meeting quite a large number of you in Doha. And can I say, without question that was the highlight of my 11 days overseas, to imbibe the sense of authentic Australian patriotism, to imbibe the sense of commitment, to imbibe the sense of satisfaction at a job well done, and also to be reminded that the great Australian sense of humour, the great Australian capacity to adapt, is alive and well amongst our fighting men and women.
Can I say to all of you who went, thank you for doing what your country asked of you. Thank you for upholding the best traditions of the Australian military forces. Thank you for not only being great war fighters, but also being great peacemakers and great conciliators, because the modern serviceman or woman must be not only a war fighter but also a conciliator and a peacemaker. And Australian servicemen and women have been able to do that. You went in our name in a just cause. You were properly sent to liberate an oppressed people, and with your coalition partners you did that job magnificently and in a way that will always be remembered by the rest of your fellow countrymen and women.
May I say to the families, many of whom I had the opportunity of meeting - the mums and dads, the husbands and wives, the sons and daughters, the sweethearts - all of them I've had the opportunity of meeting, many of them over the past few months - I have tried to understand the anxiety that you have felt, and we've tried in different ways to share that anxiety with you. Thank you for the support that you have given to your loved ones. You are part of a great Australian defence family, and the strength of that family has been of enormous importance to your loved ones while they have been overseas.
Today is one of those days where to be an Australian fills you with enormous pride. To be an Australian makes you think you are amongst the most privileged people in the world, and of course we are. It's a wonderful country because we are made up of wonderful people, and the best and the finest and the greatest of those went in our name to do good deeds, they did it well, thank God they did it safely, and we are so happy to have you all back amongst us.
Thank you.
[ends]


I am delighted to be able to be here today and to say in a very heartfelt way how delighted I am that all of you are back, the corporal X's broken leg notwithstanding, all of you are back safe and sound. And as a person who, more than anybody else in Australia, of course, accepts responsibility for the decision to deploy you, may I say that you represented your country and you discharged the mission on which you were sent in the best traditions of the Australian military forces.
 You were sent by a just cause to liberate an oppressed people and you carried that out quite magnificently and you carried it out in a way that has brought enormous credit and added lustre to the reputation of the fighting men and women of this country. The model of Australian serviceman or woman is not only a warfighter, he or she is also a peacemaker and a conciliator. And also in a very diverse way, a representative of the country in whose name he or she goes overseas.
We share very much with your families a sense of relief, a sense of gratitude and an enormous sense of satisfaction that you are back amongst us. You were back in pretty short order. I know some of you may feel responsible for finding those 50 or more Mig fighters at [inaudible] airport, some of you may feel you're entitled to a spotter's fee, perhaps if you see a very very large thing on the back of a trailer outsidearound Holsworthy, you might think the spotter's fee has in fact been claimed. But it was a remarkable operation, it was quick, it was efficient.
 Can I say it impressed the allies of Australia, I earned nothing but unstinting praise from allied leaders and allied service personnel on my recent visit overseas that which undoubtedly, the highlight was to visit many of you in Qatar to personally thank you of where you had been deployed. Deploying you early minimised the risk of casualties, deploying you early allowed you the opportunity to be ready, so that when the final decision was taken to commit Australian forces to combat, you were not only ready, but you had been prepared in ways that minimised the likelihood of you falling into harm's way.
Can I say on behalf of a grateful and proud nation, you were magnificent, you upheld the best traditions of the Australian military forces. You deserve the leave that is ahead of you. I hope you enjoy the times with your families and we are all eternally grateful that you're all back in one piece and to share your lives in the future with your loved ones, thank you.
[ends]


General Cosgrove, the Leader of the Opposition, my parliamentary colleagues, General Leahy and General Lewis, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I first and most importantly express my personal welcome and that of my wife Janette to all of the men and women who have touched Australian soil for the first time in most cases for at least four months after your deployment in Iraq. I saw many of you only 10 days or two weeks ago, and I had the opportunity when I visited you in the Gulf to share some of the intoxication and excitement and sense of achievement and sense of purpose that you so plainly exhibited.
No military operation is of course without the concern and the anxiety and the harrowing nights of waiting and wondering, particularly on behalf of those who are behind and who love those who are on the front line. And I know how relieved all of you are beyond measure that we didn't suffer any Australian casualties. And as the person who more than anybody else in Australia was responsible, or is to blame, whatever way you want to put it, who ultimately accepted the responsibility for the decision to deploy yourselves and to deploy an Australian force in this very important operation, can I try to begin to share in the sense of relief that the families must feel that you're all back safe and sound.
You went abroad in our name on a just cause, and you joined others in liberating an oppressed people. That is something of which you can always for the rest of your lives be immensely proud. And as the Prime Minister of Australia, can I say how immensely proud I am of the way in which you upheld the reputation of the fighting men and women of the Australian Defence Forces. You won the admiration of your nation. You also won the admiration of your coalition colleagues. You were not only great war fighters, but you were great peacemakers and you were great conciliators.
 And you have written another chapter in the very proud history of the Australian Defence Forces. It is a great military tradition, this tradition of ours. We don't seek to impose our will on others. We seek to do what we believe is right. And I have been privileged to be the Prime Minister at a time when we've had the chance to do that, and I simply want to say to all of you how incredibly proud I am, how impressed I am with your spirit, how admiring I am of the way in which your loved ones, many of whom we were able to see in different parts of Australia, the way you supported your men and women on the front, and have welcomed you home.
 Thank you for what you have done. You took the ultimate risk. You put your lives and your limbs on the line like none other, and I shall always remember that. I shall always be grateful. But even more important than that, your nation, which welcomes you home today, will always remember that and will always be very grateful to all of you.
Thank you from Australia.
[ends]


To my ministerial colleagues, Professor Sara, Professor Doherty, Emeritus Professor Frank Fenner, other very distinguished members of the Australian scientific community and other parliamentary colleagues.
 I've addressed over the years a number of scientific gatherings under different rubrics in the Great Hall. Tonight brings together those people who do the science and those people who use the science. And the great genius of the CRC concept has been to fuse those two disciplines, if I can put it that way, and make sure that the inventiveness of Australia's scientists is matched by the conversion of that inventiveness into a product and an outcome and a solution that is not only valuable in helping mankind, but is also commercially very profitable. And that's why in this Budget we're providing over $200 million for something like 71 CRCs. I was aware of the apprehension that people had about the cliff. The cliff was the focus of a number of representations that were made to me by a number of people in this room. And we endeavoured, in the Budget provision this year, to underscore the point that the commitment we have made to science is not a one-off short-lived one, but is part of a determined effort to elevate the role and the place and the centrality of science in the Australian community to the position that it does very richly deserve.
I've said on a number of occasions in the past that, apart from a reasonably halting experience with chemistry and the leaving certificate way back in the 1950s, my scientific endeavour and discipline has not been extensive. But one of the great experiences I've had as Prime Minister has been the opportunity to chair the Prime Minister's Science Innovation and Engineering Council and it's brought me into contact with some wonderful Australians and has brought home to me the enormous talent that this country has. It helped bring home to me the fact that in different ways it perhaps had not received the prominence that it deserved.
 And I recognise that there are still many things that need to be done. And I think in this context, without opening up a detailed discussion about it tonight because it's not the occasion, I think the challenge of reforming and strengthening Australia's tertiary education sector is one of the important debates that this country has to have within the next few months because the central role of universities and within them the central role of science in particular, will be so important to the future of Australia. It's a trite way of putting it, but I do want to see - and I say this as self avowed cricket tragic - I do want to see a time when Australia's scientists are as revered and as honoured within the Australian community as our highly successful sportsmen and women.
The CRC success story has been quite remarkable. They were started in 1990, and I give credit to the former government for its role in their inauguration in 1990. The CRC success stories include the development of contact lenses that don't need to be taken out each night; the first all-Australian satellite in 30 years; new techniques and technologies to improve the productivity of our mining industry; new tests to speed up the detection of toxic blue-green algae and manage outbreaks and new plant breeds that are more disease-resistant and higher yielding. They're just some of the examples of what CRC's have achieved and they point the way to achievements in the future.
It is an important and quite exciting time for science policy in Australia at the moment. We are now two years into the delivery of the $3 billion 


Thank you very much Marjorie for that very kind introduction. To the Honourable John Spellar a Minister in the Blair Government of the United Kingdom, your honours and my parliamentary colleagues, the Acting British High Commissioner, ladies and gentleman.
 Can I hasten to reassure you Marjorie that I didn't forget my sporting roots when I visited that baseball game because I was interviewed on the dedicated baseball channel and somehow or other this wonderful old photograph of Sir Don Bradman and Babe Ruth taken at Yankee Stadium in 1934 was flashed up on the screen and I passed over the opportunity to say that they'd been a comparison between relative performances in cricket and baseball and Bradman came out ahead of Babe Ruth. The other thing I passed up was trying to explain to an American baseballer the difference between Rugby Union and Rugby League because the interviewer made the mistake of calling the St George Illawarra Club, of which I'm patron, Australia's premier rugby club.
But ladies and gentleman, it's a particular pleasure for me to be a part of this special luncheon and to say a few things from a personal, and also from a perspective of being Prime Minister of Australia, of the links between Australia and Britain. It's an association all of us know is as old as European settlement in Australia. It's an association that has many aspects and many manifestations. It's an association which is very deeply steeped in history and whatever may be the future paths taken by our two countries, nothing will ever alter the fact that we share much in common, we share a history, we share a present, and albeit in a different manifestation, we will share a future.
 The contribution that Britain has made to Australia, the culture, the language, the law, the political system, the free press, all of those things, are the legacies that this country will always have. But it's very important to see our relationship in contemporary terms and it's very important to also see from an Australian perspective our relationship in the context of our associations with other countries. One of the notions about Australia's foreign relations that I've always found rather curious is the notion put around by many that somehow or other you have to choose between your geography and your history. I have never thought that that is something that should impel an Australian Prime Minister or an Australian Government or indeed the Australian nation. There is nothing incompatible with the close linkages that we have with nations such as Great Britain and the United States and our close proximity to, and our very close relations with, our neighbours and friends in the Asian Pacific region.
 I've often described Australia in foreign policy terms as occupying a unique intersection of history, geography and culture. We are a nation of western European origin, particularly but not only, of course, of Britain and Ireland and also a nation that has very close relationships with the United States but we are forever, of course, part of the Asian Pacific region. And we have growing and very close links with nations such as China, and Indonesia, and Japan, and Korea and many others in our part of the world. And it's always struck me and the sense has increased as the time has gone by that those who would seek to create an artificial tension between those linkages are doing Australia a great disservice. And nothing more reminded me of that than the desperate attempts of many because of Australia's decision, correctly, to join the United States and the United Kingdom in the coalition of the willing to bring freedom to the people of Iraq, the constant attempts to juxtapose that with our associations in the Asian Pacific region. Because the reality is that the majority of countries that expressed a strong view in our region on that issue in fact supported the stance taken by the coalition of the willing. Nations such as Japan, and Korea, and the Philippines, and Singapore - some didn't, that is acknowledged. But the point I simply make is that the idea put abroad by some that there is an automatic and irresistible tension between Australia aligning herself with the United States and the United Kingdom to liberate the people of Iraq, that that put us at odds with our friends in the Asian Pacific region, was not borne out by even the most cursory of examinations.
Our relationship with the United Kingdom, is as I say a very contemporary one, but one of the pleasing aspects of the way the relationship has changed is that over the years the flows have begun to even up. When I sort of had the, almost obligatory for a bloke of my age, working holiday in the UK in 1964 and John won't mind me pointing out that I spent two or three months trying to help the conservative government get re-elected - without any success I might say - because I helped a Conservative Party candidate who lost his seat in Harold Wilson's victory in 1964, but the flow seemed to be all in that direction. But over the last 20 or 30 years that has begun to turn around, and the constant flow now of young people from the UK on backpacking expeditions and the like to Australia has meant that the two flows have begun to even up.
 And that is a very important part of the relationship, because no longer is it simply in terms of Australians spending time in the UK and doing Europe and then coming home. It's now a situation where tens upon tens of thousands of young Britons come to this country and learn something of the huge success of Australia and the huge experience of living in the modern Australia. And that is contributing enormously to the links and the bonds between our two societies because nothing is more important than people to people links, and in the end they triumph over everything else.
You can have temporary political differences, you can have arguments between governments, but in the end if there is a strong network of bonds between individuals, between people and between families, that will mean everything else. But I suppose ladies and gentlemen that at the end of the day what binds nations together more than anything else is not history, not just people to people links, but the values that they have in common. And in the end, the values that Britain and Australia share, common values of a commitment to democracy, a commitment to the liberty of the individual, a commitment to the parliamentary process, a belief that in the conduct of international affairs there are right positions and wrong positions, and in the conduct of international affairs occasionally that nations have to take stands, unpopular though they may be, in order to do the right thing.
 I spent a good hour yesterday afternoon having a look at the final design plans for the Australian War Memorial, which is in the process of being erected in Hyde Park corner in London, and I hope to have the opportunity, along with the British Prime Minister and the Queen, to open that memorial around Remembrance Day on the 11th of November. And what that memorial reminds us of is the common sacrifice of Australians and people from Britain and the United Kingdom in the defence of liberty, and over a long period of time.
 And that of course was the same principle and the same common commitment that was in play only a few short weeks ago when together with our allies in the United States, we set about in a just cause to liberate the people of Iraq. And I saw on the television this morning Tony Blair meeting and addressing some of the British forces in Basra in southern Iraq, and he spoke of the campaign of the coalition having been a defining moment in this century. I agree with him because more than anything else I believe, apart from the contribution that is made to opening up liberty for the people of Iraq, it provides us with our best opportunity in a long time to achieve a lasting settlement in the ongoing and painful dispute between the state of Israel and the Palestinians. And as somebody who has never hidden his affection for the struggle of the people of Israel to survive against enormous hostility, I also lead a Government that is very strongly committed to an independent Palestinian state.
 I think one of the great legacies that will come out of the liberation of Iraq is a renewed determination by the President of the United States, by the British Prime Minister, by the European Union, by Russia and the United Nations, to implement the Middle East road map. That wouldn't have been possible if a stand had not been taken, because the removal of the former Iraqi regime has removed one of the threats to Israel. The removal of the former Iraqi regime has given particularly the United States President the opportunity to drive home to the Government of Israel, as well as to the Palestinians, the importance of both sides striving to achieve a lasting settlement. And you all know until that long-running and tragic dispute is ended on a basis which is fair and just to both sides, you will not have real peace and real harmony in that part of the world. And that would not have been possible, in my view, had the action not been taken by the coalition in Iraq. That is the latest example of Britain and Australia, along with our American friends, of having stood together and taken risks together in a just cause to liberate an oppressed people, and that is something of which both of our societies, both of our nations, should be immensely proud.
So ladies and gentlemen, I'm delighted to be here today. I believe in the links between our two countries. We will not always agree. We will violently disagree on certain issues. We will remain the fiercest of sporting rivals you could imagine. But that is the nature and the history and the culture of our countries, but in the end we share something that transcends all of that, and that is a common set of values. And those values are more important than any of the temporary vicissitudes and disagreement and experiences of life.
 It's great to be part of this important celebration and this important gathering. I wish the society well. I know it will prosper and I know the links between our two societies will remain strong and vibrant as the years go by.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much for that very warm welcome. To my friends and colleagues, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Morris Iemma representing the Premier of New South Wales, Laurie Ferguson representing the Leader of the Federal Opposition, John Caputo, John Brogden, the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, ladies and gentlemen.
 This is a very happy occasion. It's a happy occasion for two reasons. It's a happy occasion because it celebrates a very important and momentous day in Italian history, the establishment of the Italian republic in June of 1946. But it also, to me as the Australian Prime Minister, celebrates something even more important and closer to us and that is the wonderful contribution that has been made to our nation by people of Italian decent.
 And I want to say there's rarely been a time in the history of Australia when the prestige and the respect and the reputation that this country enjoys around the world has been higher. Our economic strength, our commitment to sound values in international relations, our determination to stand with other countries to liberate oppressed people. Take all of things together, Australia is very warmly regarded around the world at the present time. And one of the reasons, one of the main reasons why Australia is now so warmly regarded is that we made a decision as a nation some 50 years ago or more to open up our country to people from different parts of the world, to extend a hand of welcome to people from all around the world. And of all of the people that have come over that 50 to 60 year period to Australia, none has made a bigger contribution numerically and in other ways than have the Italians in Australia. I want to thank you all for that.
But it's also important to remember that it's a relationship that just doesn't belong in history. It's very important when you have close relations with countries and with people not only to think of the history of that relationship and the contribution the history has made to the modern reality, but it's also important to think of the contemporary face of the relationship. And modern Italy and modern Australia have an enormous amount to share. Italy may be in Europe, it may be sharing some of the policies of the European Union that occasionally Australia doesn't agree with, but that's beside the point. We have so many other things in common and the growing links on a person-to-person basis, the increased reciprocal efforts that both countries are making to delve into the future of that relationship gives me great heart.
I had the opportunity last year to pay an official visit to Italy and I was very warmly welcomed by my counterpart, Silvio Berlusconi. Doesn't matter what his politics are, he's Prime Minister of Italy and I will always pay him great courtesy. In fact, I found him a very engaging bloke to meet. So ladies and gentlemen, what drove home to me in that meeting with the Prime Minister of Italy is how much we share the dynamism of a modern contemporary relationship.
So we celebrate here today the friendship of our people. I, on behalf of all your other fellow Australians, thank the Italians of Australia for the contribution that you have made in so many fields to building the great success story of the modern Australia. I salute the closeness of the relationship between our two nations. It can only get better, it can only get stronger and our friendship can only get deeper.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mr President, my parliamentary colleagues, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. It is for me a great pleasure to again be at this Council dinner to take the opportunity it affords me to express the respect and support of the Government, and I believe of the entire Australian community, for the contribution made by your industry to Australia's overall natural wealth, and in particular to remark upon the willingness, as Barry said, of your industry to adjust and change with the changed circumstances of our contemporary society.
We no longer live in a world where the only thing that matters is sheer economic efficiency. We live in a world where economic efficiency is imperative, but we also live in a world in which environmental outcomes, in which fairness and decency to all of the citizens of this country and a regard for the longer term place of Australia in the world, are also very important considerations.
This dinner takes place at a time when the economic prospects of Australia remain very strong, and also at a time where for an accumulation of reasons, not only our economic performance, but other elements as well, that the reputation and the regard for Australia around the world has rarely been higher than it is at the present time. On any comparison, Australia's economic performance over the past few years has been very strong and the Australian economy remains one of the stand out economies of the developed world. Our GDP grew by 3.5 per cent in 2002, compared with 2.5 per cent in the United States and an average of 1.8 per cent across the OECD. This is a product of many years of reform and I have never been reluctant to say at gatherings such as this, that Governments of both sides of Australian politics have made a contribution to that reform process. Over the past few years, the contributions made by the Government that I'm privileged to lead, particularly in areas of industrial relations - so important to the mining industry - that those reforms have greatly increased the productivity of the Australian economy and as a consequence the competitiveness of your industry.
Over the past year there have been two very significant developments so far as our external interface with the economies of other nations are concerned, which represent in a sense a metaphor for Australia's economic future. The first of those is the decision and the determination of the Government to negotiate if possible a free trade agreement with the United States. We are committed to this enterprise because we believe that the United States will become more, rather than less important to Australia as the years go by. The sheer size of the United States economy, the fact that it will grow at a more rapid rate than the accumulated economies of the European Union over the next 50 years, by dint of a more efficient economy and a higher birth rate, inevitably leads me to the very strong belief that it is in Australia's long-term national interest to negotiate such an agreement if that proves to be possible. I wouldn't pretend for a moment that the challenges are going to be very great, and perhaps in the end too great. But I'm an optimist. I think it can be done and I'm heartened by the very strong commitment from the very highest level in the American administration to the negotiation of that agreement.
The other significant development, not only in real economic terms, but also symbolically, was the signing of the huge natural gas contract with the Guangdong province, which represents an income stream for the Australian industry of something like $25 billion over a period of 25 years. Australia won that contract because it was regarded as a reliable and competitive supplier. And it represents an important long-term economic linkage with a nation that will grow increasingly more important to Australia as the years go by.
 And those two commitments, those two in the case of the free trade agreement, a commitment in the case of the natural gas contract, a very solid achievement. They illustrate the capacity of this country in the kind of world in which we live, to negotiate long-term mutually beneficial arrangements with other parts of the world, which in turn may not share a common view of the future with each other. And the capacity of Australia to do that will very importantly underwrite our economic success in the years ahead.
Your industry continues to increase its contribution to Australia's national wealth, and despite uncertain global economic conditions, Australia remains at the forefront of global minerals extraction. In the past year, Australia's share of global project investment increased from 14 to 17 per cent, and minerals extraction continues to make a strong contribution to Australia's export earnings and economy. In 2002 the minerals industry contributed 5.5 per cent of Australia's GDP and $43.7 billion in exports, which was 29 per cent of all exports - by any measure, a very impressive and growing contribution.
There are two remaining specific things that I would like to canvass. The first of those is to pick up Barry Cusack's exhortation about further economic reform. The world in which we now live requires the process of economic reform to go on, otherwise nations are condemned to fall behind in the world competitive environment. If you look at the comparison between the performance of some of the European economies and the performance of a number of other economies including our own, the explanation can very readily be found in the unwillingness of some of those economies to undertake significant internal structural reform. We, as a Government, remain very strongly committed to the processes of economic reform. They are never easy, they are sometimes unpopular, but in the long term they produce very significant dividends. And in a number of areas, and not least in the area of industrial relations, further reform is needed and is essential to Australia's economic development.
The other issue I want to say something about is that of the greenhouse gas issue. We remain very strongly committed to achieving the greenhouse gas emission target set for Australia under the Kyoto Protocol. But having said that, can I say that we remain unwilling to adhere to the Kyoto Protocol in its present form because we do not believe that that would be in Australia's long-term interests. We are opposed to signing it in its present form because it would impose obligations on Australia which would not be imposed on countries against which we must directly compete. Australia is in an unusual position. It is a highly developed country which is a net exporter of energy. We do not, like countries such as Norway, have the benefit of the European Union bubble. We do not have the benefit of less developed countries in terms of the obligations under the Kyoto Protocol. And for us to sign the Protocol in its present form would, in the Government's continuing judgement, place unfair fetters on many industries, not least industries in your own sector.
 It remains possible, as the Government is doing, to achieve the emission targets set out under Kyoto and we are very full on in our commitment to achieve that. We've already committed nearly a billion dollars to provide incentives for industry and communities to reduce their greenhouse emissions and to encourage the development of low emission technologies. We are developing a climate change forward strategy, and details of that will be announced later this year. But we must, all of us, be realistic in this area. Fossil fuels will continue to underpin Australia's economy for many years into the future. Cheaper energy will continue to underpin our competitiveness. There is great scope to reduce greenhouse gases in the years ahead without undermining our competitiveness. For example, options such as coal gasification and ? can make a big impact, and at the same time protect our competitiveness. High energy industries will continue to improve their energy efficiency over time, and vehicles and households will become more efficient. And the Government should continue to work with industry to support these advances.
 There are many options to reduce greenhouse gases. Renewables will have a role and my Government has done more than most to promote them, and we will continue to support them as one part - but one part only - of the equation for reducing greenhouse gases. We are making greater progress than we are sometimes given credit for. We're reducing our greenhouse gas emissions by an average of 60 million tonnes a year for the first commitment period under Kyoto of 2008 to 2012. This good effort can and should go on. We have shown we can have less greenhouse gas and maintain economic growth by adopting sensible and balanced measures. But as it is presently cast, that does not in the Government's considered assessment, include adherence to the Kyoto Protocol. But it does involve adherence and aspiration towards the emission target set under the Protocol, and it remains the strong policy objective of this Government to meet those targets.
 Finally ladies and gentlemen, can I say how much again the Government has appreciated its cooperation and the cooperation it has received from your industry. We represent a Government that believes in capitalism, believes in free enterprise, believes in private sector incentives, believes in proper rewards through profits for risk taking and investment. That doesn't mean to say that we will agree with the business community or indeed with any sector of the business community, on every issue. But we will always endeavour to take proper account of the views put to us by business.
 And I want to say on a personal note how much I am sorry that Ian Macfarlane is not with us tonight, the Minister who interacts most with your industry. As you may know, he is recovering from some surgery and will be out of action for some six to eight weeks, and I know you will all wish him a speedy recovery.
 I finish by thanking all of you for the contribution that your industry has made over the years to the growth and the strength of the Australian economy. It is a tremendous experience to be part of one of the most vibrant, expansive and exciting times in Australian economic development. We've had many years now of economic growth and there is no reason, if we continue the processes of reform, if we continue to run budget surpluses, if we continue to have an open economy, and continue to believe in competitive forces, there is no reason why the economic growth and expansion that Australia has enjoyed over the past decade, will not continue. You industry plays a major role in that and with sensible policies and continued cooperation between the Government and your industry, there is every reason to believe that that process will go on.
Thank you.
  [ends]


Administrator, Lady Green, Simon Crean the Leader of the Opposition, your Excellencies, ladies and gentleman.
This occasion above all others is one to reflect upon the personal qualities of the person who has been Queen and sovereign of Australia and the United Kingdom and many other countries now for a period of more than 50 years.
It's a very different world now from what it was 50 years ago, when you think that in our own case Sir Robert Menzies was only, or Robert Menzies as he then was, was only four years in to his long period of 16 years in Government, and Winston Churchill was still the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. And you think of all of the changes, you think of the 10 Australian Prime Ministers and the periods they covered that have been in office since then and by a statistical quirk, the same number of British Prime Ministers during that period of time. And through all of that and whatever views people may legitimately have within a democratic society about the role of the monarchy in our community, the most remarkable thing has been the constancy of Her Majesty's commitment to her obligations, to her duties and to the responsibilities of her office.
There would be few people in the world as versed in an understanding of statecraft and would have a better knowledge of the events of the world and the various influences and fashions which have shaped the different times over which she has reigned. And during that time, of course, the Queen has had a particular association with Australia. She's visited our country on 13 occasions since she was crowned and on each of those occasions, although with a passage of time the responses have inevitably been different, they have nonetheless been extremely warm and extremely welcoming. The Queen's remarkable sense of humour has added to her great sense of commitment and her great sense of duty and she has been in every way an impeccable constitutional monarch. She has always respected the robust independence of the political arrangements of this country and the robustly independent view that Australia has taken regarding its place in the councils of the world.
So this is an occasion in which we can celebrate together, without arguing particular personal qualities of somebody who has been at the apex of our constitution over a period of 50 years and has in every sense of the word been faithful to her coronation oath of providing proper constitutional monarchical leadership, acting on the advice on all occasions of her ministers and being in every way a very committed, a very dedicated and a thoroughly worthy occupant of what is after all the second oldest institution in western civilisation.
 And on that occasion and in those circumstances, I join the Administrator in thanking her and congratulating her on what she has done and what she has achieved and we all wish her well for the years ahead.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you Defence Minister, CDF, General Leahy, Admiral Ritchie, Ric Smith the head of the Department of Defence, Brigadier McNarn, ladies and gentlemen.
We have, as Robert said, arranged a number of welcome homes and they have been very special, very happy occasions, not least because we're very happy that thus far Australia has not suffered any battle casualties, and that is a remarkable tribute to the people who commanded this operation. It's also a tribute to the value of predeployment. It's also a generic tribute to the fighting qualities of the fighting men and women of Australia.
We welcome here this morning a group of people who have operated on a smaller scale, but in a very important way. It includes of course Brigadier McNarn who was the Commander of the Australian forces, who along with a number of others has been away for a longer period of time. It involved a period of deployment with the American military in the United States, and then subsequently when the CentCom operation was shifted to Qatar, a period of duty there before the predeployment, and ultimately of course as Commander of the operation.
In the very memorable visit I had overseas a few weeks ago, the highlight of it was undoubtedly the opportunity to meet our men and women in the Middle East, to go to Qatar, to meet them where they had been based, to meet Brigadier McNarn, to imbibe the sense of distinctive Australian-ness that clearly pervaded the operation. To also experience their great pride in the very professional way in which they had done their work, carried out their duty and discharged their obligations. And I want to say again to all of you, and very particularly to Brigadier McNarn who ultimately was the man in the field that had to accept all of the responsibilities, can I say that your nation is very proud indeed of what you have done. You have done it so well, you have done it in such a classically Australian style.
 One of the things that did impress me when I was there was that despite the commonality of interest and the shared history and the, I guess, largely shared cultures of our nation and the United Kingdom and the United States, there was absolutely no doubt when I visited our forces, I was visiting distinctively Australian forces serving overseas as a proudly distinctive Australian unit. Part of a coalition operation, but always very Australian, and that was very important to me and I know it was very important to the men and women, and I know that amongst the group here none are happier than the wives and husbands and sweethearts and children, and mums and dads and others, to have them back and to have them back in one piece, and to have them all back is something we can all celebrate.
 So can I just also, because this little gathering brings together all of the commanding heights of Australia's defence structure - the Minister, the CDF, the Chief of the Navy, the Chief of the Army, and also the Chief of the Airforce Angus Houston - and it has been a great experience for the Airforce, the first time for decades of really active military participation in this kind of operation by the Royal Australian Airforce - Ric Smith the Secretary of the Department, can I for myself and I know for the rest of the Government thank all of you for the work you have done because the Government having taken the decision, the execution of it on an hourly basis from Canberra was your responsibility and you all did it magnificently, and I want to thank you all for that.
 But very particularly can I thank Brigadier McNarn and with some pleasure announce in the formal investiture that will take place at Government House on the 12th of June, but announce his promotion and elevation to, an award of the officer of the Order of Australia, an AO, in recognition of his wonderful service to the Australian Army, his leadership, his command skills in the Middle East, and the inspiration that I know he gave to the men and women who were under his command, and to his wife Richenda and his three children who are present here today and I know are delighted to have him back, you should very proud of him. He is a great Australian military leader. He has done you proud and he has done our country proud, and we're all delighted in different ways to claim him as our own today.
Thank you.
  [ends]


[tape begins] Brian Loughnane National Director, Rosemary Craddock, my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. As you can see the theme of our conference, of our convention, is protecting, secure and building Australia's future, and I want to address some remarks this morning to the elements, and in particularly one of them, that will together constitute the basis on which we achieve that goal.
The future of Australia is bound up very much with three conditions. It's bound up first and foremost with social stability, a contented, harmonious, united, open, decent Australian society in which the aspiring are allowed to achieve, the ambitious encouraged, and effort rewarded through proper incentives has always been our approach. But our approach has never been a devil take the hind most approach. We have never taken the view that if people fail through no fault of their own and stumble along life's way they should be left behind and ignored. One of the great egalitarian strengths of Australian society is that we have always recognised that as a community there is an immense national and social good in looking after the most vulnerable in our society.
 And of all the modern mantras that are repeated in criticism of Australia under this Government none is more inaccurate than the argument that under this Government the rich have got richer and the poor have got poorer. The reality is that through economic strength and progress and growth some people, some of the rich have got richer, more people have become affluent and that of itself is no bad thing, and we should never be a society that discourages that. But step by step, hand in hand with that we have seen the development of programmes which have strengthened and improved the position of people at the lower end of the income spectrum. And indeed as I indicated at the women's conference yesterday the Treasury's analysis of the first year impacts of the new tax system demonstrated that the greatest gains had been achieved for people at the lower end of the income scale. And the analysis of our family tax benefits indicate that the greatest proportionate benefits had gone to sole parent families and very low income families. I digress to talk about that because I do believe that when you are thinking of Australia the first thing we must always claim and we must always been keen to protect is our social stability. We are a stable united society because we're a fair and decent society and if we ever lose our fairness and decency to each other we become a less stable community. And of course part of that stability is that great Australian ideal of home ownership and its been a feature of this convention so far through the release of the Menzies Research Centre documents yesterday to refocus Australia on that great strength of ours of home ownership, not always within the reach of everybody, not necessarily mandated for everybody but certainly something to which every Australian family, as an instrument of family contentment and social stability, they should be able to aspire to.
The second element needed for Australia's future is economic strength, economic strength is the deliverer of so many other things. Economic strength underpins our international respect, economic strength enables us as a medium range power to project influence and to project an Australian view of the world that we would otherwise be unconvincing in doing if we were economically weaker.
 Much has been said about Australia's economic strength and rightly so. We are going through a period of remarkable economic growth, we have low inflation, we have budget surpluses, we have eliminated Labor's debt or largely reduced it, we have very low interest rates, we have a far more productive economy, we have made major economic strides in changing our taxation system and reforming our industrial relations system. But above and beyond that we must continue the process of economic reform. The worst thing any of us could do in the Government and the worst thing any of our supporters in the business community would encourage us to do would be to say well you've done enough, you've done a good job, let's now have a quiet life for the next few years. If that ever became the prevailing view inside the Government we would be seeing the beginning of the end of our political success. We now live in a world of a never-ending race of international competitiveness, whether we like it or not we have a globalised world economy, we can't get off it, we shouldn't want to get off it because its brought great benefits for the world and certainly great benefits for Australia. And what we have to do is to find new ways of reforming our economy domestically and new ways of forging international trading links which are going to underwrite Australia's economic future through to the middle of this century. And that is why the Free Trade Agreement with the United States is so enormously important. America will be more important to Australia in 50 years time than America even is to Australia today. The strength and influence of the United States in the world economy will grow, it will not diminish. The rate of population growth in the United States, the superior competitiveness and technology and productivity of the United States economy, particularly compared with the economies of many European countries, will mean that by the middle of this century we will have a situation where the economic output and capacity of the United States will equal, if not exceed, that of the combined output and capacity of the enlarged European Union.
 So anybody who suggests that by seeking to forge this great economic partnership with the United States we are locking ourselves into a declining relationship, a relationship of the 20th century rather than a relationship of the 21st century, could not be more fatally misreading the future destiny and the future opportunities of this country. But we can achieve those linkages with the United States without in any way denying ourselves the opportunities that we have already taken advantage of in the Asian region and the opportunities particularly with the growing economic power and strength of China that we have taken advantage of in that region already.
 I regard one of the great long term economic achievements of this country since we last met as a Federal Council last year to be the signing of the natural gas agreement with Guangdong province in China by the North-West Shelf Consortium. That agreement achieved after a unique, for Australia's experience, partnership between the Federal Government, the Government of Western Australia, the partners themselves and many others and in the end of course due very much to the commercial determination and acumen of the joint venture. That agreement had great symbolic significance, what that agreement said was that a nation such as Australia seen rightly so as a close friend and ally of the United States was nonetheless regarded as sufficiently stable and valuable and desirable a partner with the Chinese Government that that decision should be made in our favour. And I regard the achievement of that outcome as being not only of enormous benefit economically in a direct sense to the companies involved and to the Australian and especially the Western Australian economy but very much an achievement of symbolic significance. And it gives the lie to those who said, and remember it, it sounds a very weak joke now, that a Howard Government could never deal with Asia. It gave the lie to those who said that it was impossible to have a close relationship with the United States and have a close relationship with the nations of the Asian region. Nothing could be more infantile or absurd. We live in a world of aggregated but different relationships, we live in a world where very naturally Australia, a country of European origins, but in this part of the world, the Asian part of the world, but having very close linkages with North America, must inevitably find its destiny with a series of partners and friends rather than one single relationship. And close though our relationship with the United States is, important though it is, based on the common values that it is, it is not the only relationship that Australia needs or will have for her economic future.
And the final of the three elements on which Australia's future is built is of course that of national security. Since we last met the focus on national security in our affairs has increased, the tragedy of Bali, the war against Iraq, the continued fight against international terrorism, all of those things have come together to remind us that we do live in a different world, we live in a world where more emphasis on domestic security, more emphasis on defence spending, and more emphasis on the capacity of this country to make a contribution in great international coalition causes will be with us for many years into the future.
 The war against Iraq, or rather the war against the former Iraqi regime, the war to liberate the people of Iraq, now seems in the minds of many rather a distant memory, it all came and went rather more quickly than many expected. But it has had a profound effect, particularly on the Middle East and it carries very important lessons for the relationships that we have around the world and the relationships that we have also in our own region. Now I respect the fact that we had differences with some of the nations and friends of ours in the region. Clearly we had a different point of view on the war in Iraq from that of our close friend and neighbour Indonesia. But our differences were understood, they were clearly communicated in a frank way between President Megawati and myself back in February and there was always a determination on our part at a prime minister/president level and through our governments to ensure that those differences did not contaminate the broader elements of the relationship. And that relationship has come through the events in Iraq in a way that is very encouraging to me and I know is very encouraging to the Indonesian Government. And we ought to remind ourselves when we hear this mantra again from our critics, there were many nations in our region that supported the American led coalition in Iraq, Japan did, the Philippines did, Korea did and Singapore did. And to name those countries as examples illustrates the point that its altogether not only glib but completely wrong to say that we were out of step with the region.
 But the greatest significance of what has occurred is that the opportunities I believe it presents to perhaps achieve something that has eluded the world for several decades, and that is a lasting settlement between Israel and the Palestinians. I have never subscribed to the theory that the extreme, radical, uncontrolled Islamic fanaticism which must be as distasteful to an ordinary devout Islamic person as it is to me. I have never subscribed to that view, to the view that that attitude has its roots in the dispute between Israel and the Palestinians. But I have always recognised that if we could bring about a settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians that we would alter the climate, we would increase the reluctance of governments and peoples in the Middle East to be tolerant and accommodating towards terrorist behaviour. And I believe that the American led victory over Saddam Hussein has opened up an opportunity to achieve a settlement between Israel and the Palestinians that would never have been there before. The former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak courageously tried to achieve it several years ago, but in the end the Palestinian leader Yassar Arafat was not in my view equal to the task, and history will record the great courage of Barak in taking his country much further than in their hearts they wanted to go at the time.
But as a result of the American led victory in Iraq we now have the opportunity, suddenly opening up, to achieve a settlement. And we saw the remarkable meeting attended by President Bush in Jordan and attended by the new Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Habass and the Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, which I heard both of them utter things I thought I would never hear them say, I heard the Palestinian Leader acknowledge the centuries old suffering of the Jewish people, I heard the Israeli Prime Minister say that he believes something had to be done at least about the illegal Jewish settlements. To hear phrases like that and to see them together is to me the most remarkable and immediate dividend of the American led victory in Iraq. I've quoted on a couple of occasions before the phrase of the British author William Shorecross in his Harkness Lecture earlier this year when he said that the road to a Middle East peace settlement could well run through Baghdad. What he was saying was that removal of Saddam Hussein by removing a potential threat to Israel would create the circumstances where appropriate pressure, particularly by the Americans could be applied to all of the parties. And that is occurring, and of the many impressions that I took from my discussions with President Bush in the United States recently, discussions conducted in circumstances that allowed both of us to talk at length over many hours, the strongest single impression I took from those discussions was the absolute determination of President Bush to do everything he could to bring about a Middle East peace settlement. And just as those people who disbelieved his determination and strength of will and purpose over Iraq were wrong, equally anybody who disbelieves his strength of purpose and determination over achieving a settlement in the Middle East will be equally wrong.
Now I mention these things because they are important in a longer term sense to world stability and security. I think a settlement in the Middle East will further strengthen the international front against terrorism, it will further weaken the inclination of any who might be accommodating and more benign to terrorist groups and terrorist cells and terrorist activity. It will remove a raison d'etre for those who seek to recruit people to the terrorist cause, and all of that must be important to Australia. We have been a target of international terrorism for some time, fundamentally because we are a Western nation whose values and attitudes and way of life are unacceptable to the more fanatical within the world who would embrace the terrorist cause. We're not a target because of what we did in Iraq, we were a target long before that. And if you go back over the words of bin Laden, if you take account of some of the information that I released last week concerning the latest intelligence advice it's very clear that this country, because of who we are, and not what we have done, we have been a target for some time.
Ladies and gentlemen, necessarily some of the things I've said are sobering. But as well as being sobering the circumstances in which we now live are also times of great hope and times of great opportunity. We are as a nation socially stable, we are as a nation economically strong and we are as a nation a people who've continued to punch above their weight in world affairs. We've played a decisive and effective and a mightily appreciated role in an international coalition action, which has not only produced the dividend of which I've spoken in some length, but has also liberated an oppressed people. And can I say lest anybody remark upon the absence of my referring to it, that I remain of the view that there will be evidence ultimately emerging of the weapons of mass destruction to which we referred before the war started. There was no doctoring of intelligence advice by the government I lead, the advice was soberly and carefully based on the information that properly flows to the Australiana intelligence agencies by virtue of the very close intelligence links we have, particularly with the United States and the United Kingdom.
 So ladies and gentlemen, can I say in conclusion that the theme of this conference, the theme of protecting and securing and building our future is a theme to which this Government remains committed, we remain committed to a socially stable and fair Australian society, we remain committed to maintaining and further strengthening the economic power of this nation and we remain resolutely committed both domestically and internationally to Australia's defence and Australia's overall national security.
Thank you.
[ends] 


Mr President, with your permission could I just make one or two very brief comments about this issue. Membership and the way we attract new members and the way we govern ourselves as an organisation is just as important for us as it is for the Labor Party. And there's a great danger right at the moment because the Labor Party at a federal level is going through a bit of turmoil that we will smugly assume that we are attracting a lot of new members, that we don't need to examine furiously our internal structures. I think we do, and at the risk of sounding a little controversial on one subject in particular, I think I would be failing in my duty to the Party as Federal Leader and Prime Minister if I didn't raise some real concerns.
Firstly, on a very positive note, can I welcome the report. I think it's an excellent report and I think the fact that it has been commissioned is very sensible and I hope it is seriously kicked around by all of the divisions.
Can I also say that the idea of having a membership at large at a national level is a very good idea. In this day and age, there are a lot of people who want to belong to the Liberal Party and show their support by being part of the team, that they seek a certain amount of anonymity. Now some of us may think that's squeamish, but we have got to be a party for all seasons and for all supporters and if people are willing to support us in that more anonymous way and don't want to be involved with the regular routine, there's no reason why we shouldn't have it. I know that some of the divisions have it, I understand that it's worked quite well in the divisions that do have it, but I think if you had it at a national level, I think there's a lot to be said for it.
 But I think the real problem, and if we're frank with ourselves, is that we face the challenge of becoming a political party where a dwindling number of people are arguing with ever intensive fury over control of the diminishing membership base. Now if we're honest with ourselves, we know that in different forms that is the situation around the country and if we don't recognise that, and perhaps from the position of federal political strength at the moment, is precisely the time to recognise that and precisely the time to say it.
 I think factionalism is weakening and eroding the strength of this party and the respect of this party in the Australian community.   I think it is visiting far more havoc on the party at a state level - and that is self evident because we're out of office - than it is at a national level but that doesn't mean to say we're immune from it at a national level. I'm not so naive, and I've been around long enough to know that you're not going to abolish it but you can learn first of all to understand it exists; to understand its limitations; to recognise the disabling effect it can have on the task, the state organisations particularly face in attracting quality candidates to win marginal seats held by the Labor Party. We will not win back state office unless we find high-quality popular people to run in marginal seats held by the Party, including people who are not now members of the Liberal Party.
 And we need to have a capacity to mix. And I speak as somebody who was a member of the party organisation long before he became a member of the parliamentary party. I'm not suggesting for a moment that we won't continue to recruit a significant number of our future Members of Parliament from within the ranks of the organisation and from people who make a big contribution to the party organisation. I think that is always going to be the case. And the great bulk of those people, when they go into parliament, turn out to be excellent Members of Parliament and make a big contribution. But the fact is that if we are to win back state office from well entrenched state governments, you need people who've got local community appeal, irrespective of their previous association with the Party because as the years go by, incumbency becomes more important, it becomes more important where the ideological intensity of the debate is less significant. And that is particularly the case, it's the case with all politics now, but it's particularly the case at a state level. State politics is less ideological; it's more about the quality of service delivery and management than it is about ideological differences. So that means that more and more getting rid of incumbents is harder and harder and that's been demonstrated around the place.
So, I make those comments as a practical way of taking a step forward, and this will almost certainly fall on deaf ears, but I make it... you know, I've reached that stage in politics where I can afford... you know, one can afford occasionally to make appeals that fall on deaf ears. And what I'm about to suggest, I don't suggest for a moment it should have in any way retrospective effect, and I'm not suggesting for a moment that it is an observation on the behaviour on any individual person - I want to make that very clear. But the division from which I came until the mid 1980s had an unwritten rule and that is that if you were an incumbent state president, you did not seek pre-selection for parliamentary membership at any time while you were the state president. Now, you may think - well, that's a bit limiting. It's not actually. One of the things that we need in the party is to get people of independent action in positions of great authority who can become effective keepers of the ring and who can, in effect, when there are debilitating arguments about who should get the pre-selection for what seat - and there's nothing wrong with that because we are a competitive party, we believe in people aspiring to office. But if I look around Australia and I think to myself if we are to get the really best candidates in marginal seats held by Labor, at a state level especially, then we need to have a capacity for each division to say that person is the right person and to have some authority, subject always to the democratic process, to ensure that at least the system is open to a talented outsider. I mean, you do hear from time to time of people who would make excellent candidates, they make inquiries and [inaudible] the vacancy in that seat is going to so and so, it's already arranged. Now, you all know that can happen. We know that and we've got to be honest enough to face it. Now, you won't win back state government unless you break the closed shop of the pre-selection system - if I can use [inaudible].
So, I think one modest contribution to that could be that we might over time work towards an understanding that you get a president who becomes... he or she becomes the keeper of the ring and there's an understanding because it alters the whole dynamic if you have somebody at the apex of the organisation who is saying, look it's in the party's interest that both you groups get out of the way - and I don't use the expression group in any perjorative sense, I use it in a generic sense - both get out of the way and allow Mr so and so, who's the president of the xyz sporting club, and who's also run apex, and he's the local businessman, and he's a very respected figure, he's always voted Liberal and he's prepared to join but frankly he can't afford, for all sorts of other reasons, unless he has some kind of guarantee he can get up. Now it is in within the wit of men and women in the Liberal Party to make that work and still allow for the talented insiders, the talented people, like many people in this room who have parliamentary ambitions and I had them, I was never ashamed to make them known and its one of the reasons I never aspired to be the President of the Party in New South Wales and I felt that that system, I'm not saying that any particular virtue in it because it was a New South Wales system, but it seemed to me to have something that can commend itself.
 But we do have to tackle this, we have to recognise that we are seen increasingly as being a bit unwelcoming to people, we've got to have the flexibility to grab the right candidate at the right time for the relevant seat because it's getting harder and harder to attract people of talent. The personal abuse that is hurled at anybody in public office now, the scrutiny, the unfair allegations sometimes that are made against people who go into public life, is getting less and less attractive. And for you to get those talented outsiders, I think you need a bit more flexibility at the top and that is inevitably, perhaps it will fall on deaf ears, but this is a time to make these sorts of suggestions and I hope it might be considered.
[ends]


Thank you very much Peter for that very warm and generous introduction. To the Federal President, Shane Stone, my other parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals, and very importantly my fellow Australians. As I look back on what has happened to our nation over the last year since we met as a Federal Council the starkest event and the most searing experience that comes to my mind is of course the terrible pain inflicted upon our nation when 88 of our fellow Australians died at the hands of terrorists in an act of blind unforgivable hatred on the 12th of October last year.
 And as long as I live and long into the future I will never forget the experience of comforting those of our fellow Australians left bereaved and devastated and torn by the loss of loved ones. People we would ordinarily know in our daily lives. People whose only desire was to enjoy some fun with their mates at the end of the football season. People who were enjoying a well earned holiday after working hard and saving a bit left over, in other words, they were the people of the mainstream of our nation.
 Nobody had any right to take their lives in such a cruel and wanton way. And that foul deed, that terrible act, which brought the new horror of terrorism to Australia in a way that we would never have contemplated, together with the events of the 11th of September, have as Peter rightly said changed forever the world in which we live. And it changed the way in which we must not only respond but we must also anticipate in all of the policies that we develop.
We have had a great opportunity over the last weekend to reflect upon what we have achieved over the last seven and a quarter years. And it has been a period of massive achievement. It has been a period which has changed the way Australians see themselves, it has been a period that has given our nation a greater degree of self confidence. We have ended that long seemingly perpetual symposium on our self identity that seemed to occupy the 10 years between the middle of the 1980s and the defeat of the Keating Government in 1996.
We no longer naval gaze about what an Australian is. We no longer are mesmerised by the self appointed cultural dieticians who tell us that in some way they know better what an Australian ought to be than all of us who know what an Australian has always been and always will be.
The other great event which although it did not touch our lives in the way that Bali did, and through a great providential act did not involve any loss of Australian lives was of course our joining the United States and Great Britain as a Coalition of the Willing to remove Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq, to render that country incapable of inflicting through weapons of mass destruction the suffering it had inflicted on its own people and had threatened other neighbours with, to liberate a long oppressed people and to lay the ground work for the long sought after settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
It was a difficult decision, it was a unpopular decision, it was a lonely decision, but what made it a decision successfully implemented and carried forward was the extraordinary loyalty and commitment and strength of commitment and trust reposed in me and the members of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet by all of my parliamentary colleagues and the Liberal Party organisation.
I was never prouder of being Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia than the day the House of Representatives by a vote of 80 to 63, with two of our colleagues absent through ill health but having publicly said how they would vote, a full muster, a very difficult decision with the opinion polls pointing in the opposite direction, the newspapers very equivocal most of the nations of the world sneering at and trying to undermine what the United States was hoping to do, I was never more proud than I was on that occasion and I never felt greater contempt for the opportunism of the Australian Labor Party, particularly those on the so-called right wing of the Labor Party, particularly people who paraded themselves as supporters of the American alliance, but when the role call came where were they. They were voting with the fanatical anti American left of the Australian Labor Party and that will never be forgotten by us because in the end when it comes to things of this kind no matter what your loyalty to your Party is your loyalty to the Australian national interest is even greater.
Ladies and gentlemen we have had a very successful seven and a third years in office, but if we are to maintain office, if we are to continue the Liberal dominance of national politics in Australia, we must reflect only briefly on what we have achieved and we must always turn our attention to what we can achieve in the future.
This country is at a moment in its history of unparalleled world respect, unparalleled domestic economic strength with all the social stability and tranquillity, a place in our history that other generations would envy. That is something that we are entitled to be proud of but it is also something that places an enormous responsibility on this generation of political leaders.
And our single irrevocable aim in the years ahead must be to continue delivering policies which create three circumstances. The circumstances of social stability, which if a nation ever loses everything else becomes unattainable. The national unity and sense of common purpose of the Australian people. Our sense of obligation to each other and our sense of shared obligation to our children's future is the strongest thing that binds us together as Australians. If we ever lose that spark of egalitarianism, if we ever lose that spirit of mateship, if we ever lose that sense of looking after the person who through no fault of his or her own has fallen behind, if we ever lose those components of our social structure which make Australia the nation we readily identify and others readily identify then we will have failed future generations. And our first obligation is to maintain through fair and decent policies, the social stability of our country.
The second thing that underpins that future is of course economic strength. Due more than anybody else to the personal efforts as Peter Costello as Treasurer, the economic strength of this country underpins so much of what we have been able to achieve. Together as a Government and as a party organisation, we have made Australia an envy country in the international economic firmament. Our growth rates, our inflation rates, our low debt levels, the freeing of our labour markets, the competitiveness of our economy, the way in which we are forging new trade linkages with different parts of the world, the opportunity that negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States represents the huge actual as well as symbolic value of the signing of that giant natural gas deal with China last year against very intense competition. They are the achievements of a nation punching well and truly above her economic weight.
And the third of the trilogy of policies that will underpin the pursuit of our goals for the sort of future that we owe to our children, is of course national security in all of its manifestations. For many years into the future, perhaps indefinitely, this nation will need to devote a higher, indeed perhaps increasing proportion of its wealth towards defence and national security. We face no immediate military threat in the conventional sense, but terrorism is not a conventional mode of attack. I cannot guarantee to any Australian that we will not suffer a terrorist attack on the Australian mainland. But I can guarantee to all Australians that my Government will do all in its power to protect and secure this country against such an attack. I can guarantee to all Australians that we will do all in our power in association with our friends and our allies to root out the causes of terrorism, to attack terrorism at its sources, to continue the war against terrorism because it is a war that must be waged unceasingly and unrelentingly. If it all becomes too difficult, the terrorists will have won. And if anybody imagines that it is the Australia way to change our policy in issues in the hope of buying immunity from a future terrorist attack, let me disabuse them immediately of that notion. You do not buy immunity from terrorist attacks by changing your policies. Australia is a terrorist target not because of what we have done, but because of what we believe in and because of who we are. And if we ever lose sight of that fact, the terrorists will have won and not we Australians.
So my friends, maintaining and improving that stability, that social stability, that economic strength and that national security, together will build a kind of Australia I know all of us want as we go into the 21st century. And it will involve in all areas a willingness to undertake and embrace change and reform. One of the greatest challenges of statecraft is to balance the need for change and reform whilst preserving and protecting those attitudes and values and institutions that continue to be relevant and continue to work in a productive fashion for our country. There is much about Australia's past that continues to be relevant to our present and will be relevant into the future. But there are attitudes and there are practices that have needed to change. One of the reasons why Australia is a vastly stronger country economically is that our workforce, over the past 25 years, has become more adaptable. Talk to any managing director of a major employer of people from different parts of the world and he or she will tell you almost instinctively that the most sought after employees are Australians. And they are sought after because they are well educated, they are often well travelled, many of them have great language skills, but above all they are very adaptable.
As we move into the future, we will need further changes. And we continue to face on a day-to-day basis as a government the need for change and reform. We need the education reforms that were announced in the Budget that have been so well crafted by the Education Minister, Brendan Nelson. The tertiary education sector in Australia needs greater freedom and more resources. Those two things can only come from the education reforms that the Government has proposed. They need more money, Australian universities but no government, let us be frank, can provide all of the additional resources that are needed by Australia's universities in the future. Governments can provide some and that is why part of that package includes such a significant increase in the HECS funded places at Australian universities. But there is no reason why the Australian universities should not tap an ever-greater income stream from the private sector. And the essence of our policies are that the universities should be able to do both. We need of course, as part of pursuing our social stability; we need to maintain the great social security safety net, which has always been an accepted given in a fair society. The Australian people were told by our opponents in 1996 that if I became Prime Minister we would dismantle Medicare, that I would tear up the social security safety net, that I would alter the social compact in this country. More than seven years on, nothing of the kind has happened. This Government has preserved Medicare, it has strengthened Medicare. Additionally, what this Government has done is to take some of the load off the public component of healthcare provision in Australia by strengthening and expanding the private component.
 We believe in a partnership between the public and private sector to deliver superior health outcomes for all Australians. And whatever may be the deficiencies of the Australian health system - and there are deficiencies - it is far from perfect. It is an infinitely better system than of any comparable nation around the world. And if you are a battler, it's better you fall ill in Broadmeadows or Bankstown than you do in the Bronx or Brixton because you'll get superior medical care and you'll get it more rapidly.
 We have proposed a number of changes in the area of both education and health. The education changes will give new life and strength and opportunity not only to Australia's universities but to thousands upon thousands of more Australian students. They are generational reforms, they are overdue reforms and they are reforms that strike the right balance between public and private provisions. We face, like all other western nations, an ageing population. Our birth rate has fallen not as badly of those of others, but further than we would like. And I think we all know from our life's experience that there is no one simple easy way of reversing the fertility rate in an affluent western nation. And simplistic notions suggesting that one or other individual policy is going to bring about a very big change, mistates and completely misunderstands the complexity of the challenge and as the years go by we will need to have policies which maintain the affordability of things like the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and our national health arrangements. And unless we are willing to make measured, sensible, moderate changes as time goes by those policies with an increasingly aging population will become less and less affordable. And that is why in the Budget before last there was an intergenerational report produced by the Treasurer which sought to initiate, and it did, a public debate on this issue. And that is why we proposed some moderate changes to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, But those changes like so many other things remain deadlocked in the Australian Senate.
 And that brings me to say something about the role of the Senate in our parliamentary system and the way in which power is exercised by the Australian Senate at the present time. We all know from our learning of Australian history that the Senate was essentially given the powers it was given as a result of the federal compact between the various states of Australia at the time of Federation. The ideal was that it would be a state's house as well as a house of review. The reality is that long years ago the Federal Senate ceased to be the state's house and in more recent times its also dropped, certainly through the instrument of the Labor Party and the minor parties and has certainly also dropped the pretence of being a house of review. Tragically for Australia the Australian Senate is recent years, so far from being a state's house or a house of review has become a house of obstruction. As a result of the changes that were made in 1983 when the size of the parliament was increased, I might remind you against the determined vote of the Liberal Party, it is for practical purposes impossible for the Coalition in its own right to obtain a majority of the 76 members of the Federal Senate. Some people have suggested that the way of tackling the dilemma of a Senate which opportunistically blocks legislation that is important or necessary to our future, the way in which you respond to that is to do some kind of deal with the Australian Labor Party to alter the voting system for electing Senators and to make it harder thereby for minor parties to win seats in the Senate. I have to say that I am against that and I'm against it for one very simple reason, I think it's unfair and I think it's undemocratic. And I think the innate sense of fair play of most Australians would react to the big boys as they would describe them ganging up on the smaller parties. The truth is that in the less tribal Australian political state in which we now exist people want the option, whether we like it or not in a major party, of voting for smaller parties in the Senate. And if we look as though we are kicking against that choice instead of going on persuading them as to the unwisdom of that choice then I think deservedly we will suffer.
 The deadlock provisions of the Constitution in section 57 were inserted way back at the time of Federation. And they contemplated the holding of a joint sitting after a double dissolution in order to resolve deadlocks between the two Houses. The reality is that in a period of 102 years they have only been used to produce a joint sitting on one occasion and that was in 1974 after the double dissolution election half way through that never to be forgotten three years of the Whitlam Government. Only one occasion in 102 years, that has got to say something about the relative unworkability of those provisions in a practical sense of resolving deadlocks between the two Houses. And unless we are to accept that a non-government majority in the Senate represents, absent a double dissolution, a permanent veto on the aspirations mandated at earlier elections of the serving government, unless we are prepared to accept that then perhaps another way of addressing in a moderate, non-radical fashion and in a fashion that is respectful to the role of independents and minor parties some other approach has to be found in order to resolve deadlocks.
And not surprisingly when you look back through the history of constitutional examination you find some nuggets and I found a nugget back in 1959, it was a joint parliamentary committee on constitutional reform and it has impeccable bipartisan credentials. One member of it was the then Member for Werriwa, Edward Gough Whitlam, and the other was Sir Alec, or later to become Sir Alec Downer, that well known South Australian Liberal, the father of our present Foreign Minister, a former Minister in the Menzies Government and former Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. And what that committee essentially recommended was that the Constitution should be altered by referendum to provide that if legislation were rejected on a number of occasions by the Senate in the way described in section 57 now there could be a joint sitting of the two houses called without the necessity to hold a double dissolution. And that if the legislation were passed that joint sitting then it would become law. I think that could offer some years into the future a way of providing a more modern and contemporary and workable method of resolving differences between the two Houses. And it is the Government's intention to prepare and issue for public debate a discussion paper on such a proposal, we have not made a decision as yet to commit ourselves to the holding of a referendum, at this stage we have made decision to commit ourselves to the issuing of a discussion paper and the initiation through it of public debate. We have to find a way which is moderate and non-threatening and which respects the desire of the Australian people often to differentiate their vote between the House of Representatives and the Senate to resolve the deadlocks that we are facing. The proposition that every time a bill that is important to a government that in our case has been elected on three consecutive occasions, the proposition that the only way you, for years into the future, are going to solve that dilemma is by going to the expense of having often a premature double dissolution of Parliament, is I think increasingly unacceptable in the modern Australia in which we now operate. I know that constitutional referendums are notoriously difficult to get passed, we tried to break the nexus between the size of the House of Representatives in the Senate back in 1967, and that was overwhelmingly defeated, even though it had the support of both the Labor Party and the Liberal Party, and we all know the history of more recent constitutional referendums.
 But that doesn't absolve me or the Government of the responsibility of trying to find a way around this challenge. Conditions could exist for a double dissolution of the Parliament, in fact technically they exist now, although let me repeat my view that the current parliament ought, absence special circumstances, run its full term. No Prime Minister responsibly forswears his right to call an election if the circumstances are required, but I have the strongest possible view that the Australian people rightly visit electoral judgement on prime ministers and premiers who go expeditiously on an earlier occasion than they might to the polls without a proper reason based on public policy. But double dissolutions in the present circumstances would not produce as good an outcome in the Senate for us as would a half Senate held at the normal time towards the end of next year. And they are all the circumstances that I have to take into account. So I take this opportunity my friends of saying to you very frankly that we do need to look at whether the time has come to alter the deadlock provisions of the constitution. And if after that process of three months consultation we thought there was a reasonable prospect of community support the likelihood is that the Government would seek to run the referendum in conjunction with the next general election, whenever that occurs. Now let me repeat this is not a radical proposal. It is a moderate, practical, sensible, long ago thought of idea to resolve what in some circumstances is a legislative nut without the necessity of the constitutional hammer of an expensive and of course inappropriate double dissolution.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude my address by returning to a theme that I canvassed last night at the gala dinner. And that is the debt I owe to all of you as the collective soul, if I can put it that way, of our great party. What I have achieved in public life I owe more than anything else to my membership of the Liberal Party. The Liberal Party has been very kind to me, its been very generous, its been very forbearing, its been very forgiving on occasions. Its always been very decent and very loyal to me. I've always endeavoured in everything I've done to factor into my decisions the interests of the Liberal Party. And what is the most sustaining thing about the Liberal party is when you really need its loyalty and its support and its understanding you receive it. And I felt that a few months ago at the time of our decision on Iraq. I knew that there were people who entertained reservations, I knew there were people who worried, I knew there were people who'd go to branch meetings and they'd shake their heads and say I don't know about this, does he really think this is a right thing to do. I knew that and you know exactly what I'm referring to. But everybody stuck, everybody trusted me, everybody supported me, probably on occasions holding your breath and closing your eyes and crossing your fingers and all of those things. But that is part and parcel of the political covenant between a party leader and his party. And I want to say that I felt that in relation to Iraq more than I have any decision that I've taken in public life. And of course the apex of that expression of loyalty was the attitude of my parliamentary colleagues. And that means an enormous amount to me and I do wish on a more personal note to express my special gratitude to Peter Costello for the tremendous work that he's done as Treasurer, to the loyalty he's displayed to the party, to the things he believes in and to me. It has been a priceless asset in our journey over the past seven or more years and is something that I value very deeply. He has made an enormous contribution to public life in Australia and I have no doubt that he will make an even greater contribution to public life in the years ahead.
I do have a great team. I felt the value of that team through the enormous contribution of Alexander Downer and Robert Hill, the Ministers to whom I related from day-to-day during the difficult period of the Iraq war and their professionalism and my capacity to rely automatically on their judgment and their commonsense was tremendously sustaining.
My friends this Convention, above all other things, is an opportunity to do something that I did on that wonderful Saturday early in March 1996 and that was to commit myself to the service of the Australian people. Whilever we remember that holding office is something you do in trust for the people of Australia, whilever we remember that we are there to serve them and not ourselves, whilever we remember that the aspirations and hopes of the mainstream of the Australian people are really counted not by personalities or by factions or this or that belief but by what we do to improve the quality of their lives and by what we do to give them a sense of hope and a sense of security. And let us out of this convention renew our collective commitment to one thing and that is to the service of the Australian people in the years ahead. Thank you.
  [ends] 


Well thank you very much Trevor, Paul my parliamentary colleague, the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.
It is always a buzz to come on to a site and actually talk to people who are involved in building something, involved in bringing a project to fruition, and this is a fantastic example of that. And the bit of time I have had here this afternoon has been an opportunity to do that.
I want to congratulate the company. I want to congratulate the workforce, and particularly the workforce, because in the end these things only are achieved if people cooperate and you have highly skilled workers, and that is precisely what you've got here, at a time in Australia's economic history where we are really outperforming most other countries. It's an opportunity for me to say that the people who have made the greatest contribution to Australia's economic performance over the last 10 or 15 years have been the men and women of the Australian workforce because without their skill and adaptability and commitment, and sense of cooperation and purpose, we wouldn't have achieved it. So congratulations to all of you.
 The Federal Government has made a contribution to this through a loan and it is always nice to sort of visit the investments to see how they are going, and this particular investment is going extremely well.
It's a great company, Comalco, and as a mark of the cause we all have in common before anything else, I'd be delighted to hand an Australian flag to Trevor. I know you have put up a flagpole. I've seen this great flag fly in a few places recently, most particularly in Qatar when I visited the Australian Forces after their operation in Iraq where they did this country absolutely proud. And your safety record, I am delighted to say, is exactly the same as theirs, absolutely 100 per cent, and that speaks great volumes for the workforce and for the management of this company.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Well thank you very much for those very warm words of welcome Paul Neville, Liz Cunningham, Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.
This I think is my first visit to Gladstone as Prime Minister, it's certainly not my first visit. I was recalling back in the middle 1960's when a friend and I decided to go for a holiday at Heron Island, we came through Gladstone and were pointed in the direction of the Railway Hotel at Calliope where we spent the night on route to Heron Island. So it's great to visit, not the first time I've been back since then incidentally but we had a shadow Cabinet meeting here in 1995.
 But Paul Neville, your incredibly hard working local member spoke to me a few weeks ago about some of the development challenges that the city was having. I'm very conscious of course of many of the major projects in Gladstone and of course the Comalco project has been the subject of very significant financial support from the Federal Government and I promised Paul that when an opportunity arose I would spend a bit of time here and talk to local people in business and in local government and to him and to the leaders of the major companies to get a better idea of some of the challenges, but also many of the opportunities that are coming the way of this city. I'm very conscious and Paul keeps reminding me that something like 12 per cent of Australia's total export income in value passes through the port of Gladstone. And I'm very conscious of the capacity of this part of central Queensland to develop a speciality, particularly in light metals. And today by visiting Comalco and by talking to other people involved in current and potential investment I've had the opportunity of getting a better understanding of the circumstances in which you operate.
The mood I have encountered today is the mood of great hope and great optimism, there's a sense of buoyancy and there's a belief that a great deal can be achieved by the people and by the investors in the people and in the resources, not only of Gladstone but of the surrounding areas of Queensland. I'm very conscious that the best thing that any national government can do is to create a very strong and benign economic climate. In the end, low inflation, low interest rates, a competitive economy, a pro-investment policies, a sensible approach to the environment, and I'll return to that in a moment, they are the things that create above everything else the atmosphere for development and the atmosphere for jobs generation. We've just had some employment figures announced for the past month, and although I always enter the caution that you shouldn't place too reliance on one month's figures, the figures at six per cent unemployment were a little better than many of the commentators had predicted. But for the first time in 20 years Australia's unemployment rate is now slightly lower than that of the United States and given that in a number of areas the United States has an even freer labour market than Australia has at present, and I'd like to see Australia's labour market ever freer, particularly in the area of unfair dismissal laws for small business, it's quite a significant comparison that our unemployment rate should now have fallen slightly below that of the United States.
I think one of the things that impressed itself upon me today, especially when I visited the Comalco plant, was the overwhelming acceptance in the Australian community now that good environment policies are now mainstream pursuits. A healthy concern for the environment is on longer something at the periphery, it's not something that just fanatics are interested in, it is now something that everybody is interested in. And what we have tried to do in the seven or more years we've been in Government, we have tried to simultaneously persue the goal of a better environment but not sacrifice economic growth in the course of achieving that goal of a better environment. And that of course brings into consideration the question of the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. Now our policy is that we are opposed to ratifying the Kyoto Protocol in its present form because what the Kyoto Protocol would do would be to impose obligations and penalties on Australia that would not simultaneously be imposed upon countries that would compete with Australia for investment, particularly in areas such as alumina and other parts of the resource sector. So our policy, unlike that of our opponents at a national level who believe in ratifying Kyoto, not withstanding the penalties it would impose on Australia, our policy is that we will achieve the greenhouse gas emission targets set by Kyoto but we won't do it at the price of accepting a penalty for Australian industry, which would be the case if we signed the Kyoto Protocol. So unless and until that protocol removals the potential penalties that would be imposed on a country like Australia the Federal Government, present Federal Government will not ratify the treaty, but we will continue to try very hard to achieve the emission target set by Kyoto and we are within striking distance of achieving those and many of the greenhouse abatement measures that we have introduced over the past few years are going to bring that about.
The only other thing I'd like to mention very briefly ladies and gentlemen is the overall strength and respect in which our country is viewed around the world at the present time. Governments I guess, particularly Australian Governments, have responsibilities in three areas. We need to have a society which is stable, we need to have social stability, we believe that the best Australia is the Australia where people feel they get a fair go, where people feel that if they work hard and they take advantage of opportunities they get reward for that and also a society that looks after people who through no fault of their own have fallen behind. I think we also want a society that is economically strong because unless you have a strong economy there's not a lot you can do. And it's the strongly performing nations of the world that are respected around the world. And I've seen the esteem in which Australia is held rise as our economic strength has gone on year after year. And of course we need, particularly in these times of legitimately heightened concern about international terrorism we do need to have strong policies in the area of national security. I don't think I can recall a time in which Australia has been held in greater regard around the world. We are seen as a strong performer economically, we are seen as a country that can do things and undoubtedly the best demonstration of that in recent years was the stunning success of the Sydney Olympic Games which put our country on display to the rest of the world in a friendly open welcoming fashion that was a revelation to many, not to us but certainly to many people who'd not experienced Australian hospitality before. And I think the other thing that has worked very much to Australia's credit is that we have been willing to take a stand on issues that confront us in the 21st century, issues of terrorism, issues that go to the security not only of our region but of other parts of the world.
 It's a clich‚ now to say that we live in a globalised world environment, but as I've moved around here today I've had plenty of references to exchange rates, which are an expression of the impact of a globalised economy, not only on Australia but to the economy of this particular part of Australia and that's very understandable. The exchange rates as they vary affect people in different ways, some people like a higher dollar, some people like a lower dollar, my answer always is that the current level of the Australian dollar is about right. And I don't sort of vary from that no matter what the level might happen to be, in other words I don't comment on it. But it's an illustration that we do live in that globalised environment and therefore the rest of the world affects us now more than ever before, and the idea that we could roll ourselves up in a little ball and say look we're down here and we can close our eyes to what's happening the Middle East, close our eyes to what's happening in Europe or North America or China or Japan or Indonesia, if ever those days existed, and I think it's a long time since they seriously existed, they certainly don't exist now. And what affects the world, affects Australia and if Australia performs strongly and has a strong economy and is held in very high regard then that obviously is of enormous long term benefit to our country.
Finally ladies and gentlemen, can I say a word of very genuine commendation about your local Federal Member Paul Neville. Paul is a great agitator for the people of Hinkler, for the people of Gladstone, he's a person who is always up on his feet espousing the cause and the interests of central Queenslanders, he's always arguing the case for a better deal for Hinkler, sometimes he's successful, sometimes he deserves to be more successful, sometimes Ministers are just bloody unreasonable but overall can I tell you that he does a fantastic job as your local Federal Member and I'm very proud to count him as both a friend and a colleague and I'm delighted to be his guest here today and I wish all of you well and thank you very sincerely for your very generous and hospitable welcome.
[ends]


Thank you Lord Mayor, Administrator, General Cosgrove, Deputy Prime Minister, Defence Minister, Brigadier McNarn, ladies and gentlemen.
It is with enormous pride, on behalf of all of the people of Australia, that I welcome you back. I express the pride and the admiration of a grateful nation for the professional way in which you have represented the values and the interests of all of the Australian people, both in Afghanistan in the ongoing war against terror, and in Operation Falconer, the operation that liberated the people of Iraq from great oppression and also has delivered a more secure world, a world which I believe over the years will be more secure because of your great and brave deeds.
 You went abroad in a just cause to defend the values of this country. You went abroad with the united prayers and hopes of all of the Australian people, and I join the Lord Mayor in expressing thanks to God that our people returned from Iraq without suffering any casualties, although we do remember your comrade Andrew Russell who died in the service of the SAS in Afghanistan.
You went abroad as part of a great Australian military tradition, a tradition that has never sought to oppress people, a tradition which has never sought to impose the will of this country or the collective will of a group of countries of which Australia is part, on other people and other nations, but rather a tradition that seeks to defend what is good in the world, that seeks to uphold the values for which this nation stands and seeks to deliver freedom from tyranny, from terror and from oppression.
Can I say to all of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force - you have done our nation proud. You have represented the best in the Australian people and the Australian tradition. And I know that I speak for every mother and father, every wife, every son or daughter or brother or sister or lover or mate, in saying we're so glad to see you back, we're so glad to see you back in one piece. We wish you well.
 And can I on a very personal note express the great admiration of all of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force for the wonderful leadership of Brigadier Maurie McNarn to the operation in the Gulf. He joins a long line of great and effective and admired and professional Australian military commanders.
 To all of you - welcome home, thank you for what you have done for our nation, and thank you for demonstrating the best values of the Australian people.
  [ends]


Well thank you very much Rod, Ron Walker, ladies and gentlemen.
Melbourne will host the Commonwealth Games in the year 2006 and this will be the fourth occasion, starting with Sydney in 1938, Perth in 1962, Brisbane in 1982 and now Melbourne in 2006, that Australia will have been host for the Commonwealth Games. And I venture to say that there is no city in the world that has more dedicated, loyal and regularly attending sporting crowds than does the city of Melbourne. And the Melbourne Cricket Ground I've long regarded as Australia's premier sports arena and it's a city that has built an enviable record for its loyalty to and support the sporting events.
The Commonwealth Games brings together the various member counties of the Commonwealth every four years in between the Olympic Games and I'm delighted that Melbourne is once again to be host to a major international sporting event. And many people still remember, of course, the wonderful Olympic Games in Melbourne in 1956 - the first occasion that Australia hosted the Olympic Games. The Commonwealth Games are, of course, a partnership between different levels of Government and different parts of the community. The Commonwealth Government is already providing assistance in many ways, including, of course, in relation to security and other related matters, we provided a very large amount each year which provides direct assistance to elite sportsmen and women in Australia and that represents a very important adjunct to our Commonwealth Games effort.
The organising committee for the Commonwealth Games is, of course, led and directed by my friend Ron Walker, who has been a remarkable Australian and a very dedicated Victorian who's given a great deal back to his country and to his state in organising major events so many years on so many occasions. I keep out of these interstate arguments, he occasionally encourages a sporting event from one part of Australia to another. I'm neutral, it's like State of Origin. As long as the event comes to Australia I'm happy. I don't know whereabouts... I don't mind whereabouts in Australia it's going to be.
But Ron, thank you, good luck and I know that the energetic Minister and Carlton supporter, Rod Kemp, will continue to keep me very very well informed on what is happening in relation to the Commonwealth Games. But I have no doubt that under Ron's stewardship and with the natural enthusiasm of the people of Melbourne it will be a huge success.
And with that in mind, I thank you for coming. I know you'll support the event when it arrives and I have great pleasure in commencing the ticking of the countdown clock.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you Lord Mayor, Your Excellencies, Mr Premier, the Defence Minister, General Cosgrove, Chief of the Australian Defence Force, the Leader of the Opposition, service chiefs, Brigadier Maurie McNarn, the Australian National Commander from Operation Falconer, my fellow Australians.
This is a moment for the people of Perth, a city and indeed the capital of a state that has always bulked very importantly in the defence of Australia and has always contributed so magnificently to the military conflicts in which our nation has been involved. It is an opportunity representing all of the people of Australia to express our gratitude and our pride to the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces who have served this country so magnificently and so successfully, not only in the recent campaign in Iraq but also in the war against terrorism in Afghanistan.
It is with enormous pride as Prime Minister that I convey to all of you, all of you serving men and women and your loved ones the congratulations and the admiration of a very proud nation. We live in a world made very different by the scourge of terrorism. We live in a world that is very different from the one we knew as recently as five or ten years ago. But as in the past, Australians have responded to the challenge of changed world circumstances, so it is that this nation responded with our close friends and allies to the changed circumstances particularly following the tragic events in the United States on the 11th of September of which there was a brutal and painful reminder claiming the lives of so many Australians in Bali on the 12th of October 2002.
We reflect today on the deliverance of all of our men and women from the campaign in Iraq, for all of them to come home safe and sound is something for which we will always be deeply grateful. We remember the loss of Andrew Russell serving with the Special Air Service Regiment in Afghanistan. We pay tribute to all of the men and women who've put their lives on the line. Decisions are taken by those charged by the people of Australia with decisions and those decisions having been taken, it falls to the men and women gathered before us today to carry the burden and the danger and the risk of those decisions. That is why occasions such as this belong to the men and women who have marched so well and so magnificently.
 And can I say to all of you that you went abroad in our name to do the right thing for our nation and for the world. You defended and represented the values of Australia and not least the great military tradition of this country, which has never been to oppress people but always to defend what is right and just. Today belongs entirely to you. It is a day to salute you, it is a day to honour you and to thank you. And on behalf of all of the people of Australia, I do that very unconditionally and I know with the united support of all of the Australian people.
[ends]


Thank you Malcolm, Matt and Sue and Jack and Matilda and Harry Price. Thank you very much for the introduction Malcolm. You have at 9.20 in the morning all the swagger of a chief political correspondent from a Sydney based newspaper after last night's victory in what they call the greatest game of all. Others don't describe it in quite such lyrical terms.
I'm really very delighted to be associated with this launch and it's all being done in a very bipartisan fashion. I understand that the Member for Brand Kim Beazley is presiding over the launch in Western Australia. But fittingly this book is about the tribal passion of Australian football, it's about the passion of the author Matt Price for the Fremantle Dockers, it is about a team that entered the AFL for the first time in 1995 and a team that battled for many years, but I understand it is now lying fifth in the AFL competition and conspicuously ahead of other teams that I hear regularly about from quite a number of my Victorian Cabinet colleagues.
It takes a tragic to know a tragic, and I am something of a tragic of another game, our national game, and Matt is plainly a tragic of AFL and he is particularly affectionate towards the Fremantle Dockers. He does capture the tribal spirit in his book. One phrase, and I quote, "for all their uselessness and dearth of success, this frustrating football team had got under my skin", unquote. Now that's the cry from the heart of many a fan of a struggling football club, whether it's Australian Rules or rugby union or rugby league or soccer, and it does capture the essence of how literally millions of Australians feel every weekend wherever they may be around Australia.
I have had the great pleasure of attending one of the local derbies at Subiaco Oval. I did it last year. And there was a victory for the Dockers. It was a wonderful clash, and appropriately I attended it at the same weekend as I attended the annual conference of the Western Australian Liberal Party, and that's an organisation that knows something about local derbies as well. And I felt as though I was just transitioning from the political playing field to the football playing field. But this is a story that I know will resonate not only with people who follow Australian Rules, but also people who follow sport, and isn't that a very large number of us all around Australia? You can say all sorts of things about affections for football in this country. I think the one thing that has happened in the last 20 odd years is that we have become rather more national in our outlook. When I was a young fellow back in the late 40s and early 50s, if you lived in Sydney you sort of did grow up following either rugby league or rugby union, except for a very small number of people with nary an interest in or contact with Australian Rules. I think that has changed, and the fact that you can fill the Colonial Stadium in Melbourne with 55,000 people for a rugby union match against England, you can do the same thing in Subiaco Oval with a match against Ireland, I think it drives home the fact that this great national passion we have for sport is becoming a little bit more national in the other sense of the word.
 But Matt is a very entertaining writer. Like any serving politician in this building, some of his conclusions are ordinary, some of his conclusions are inspired. But above all, he writes well and there is something on the back, or near the back rather, no it's on the front actually, of this book written by Les Carlyon who I think has written about the finest book I've read in many years about a seminal event in the history of our country, and that is the book on Gallipoli, and he had this to say - "Matt Price writes with grace and economy and never looks to be trying too hard. He knows how to set up a punchline and how to walk away from it quickly. He also has a sense of fun, and certainly we'd all agree with this having read his writing, a sense of mischief." That is what Les says and I think it's right. I read the piece that Matt wrote in the Good Weekend I think it was, or was it the Australian Magazine, it matters not, but you know what I mean, last weekend about his relationship with Mick Malthouse and I thought it was a very nice piece. I thought it said it all.
 I commend this book to you. It's his first. He writes from somebody who loves Australian Rules football and has a great passion for the Fremantle Dockers, and good on him because he represents very much the spirit of the Australian sporting follower and I'm delighted to launch his book. And I didn't notice him until just now, but can I acknowledge the Leader of the Opposition of course, who is more intimately versed in the mores of Australian Rules football than I, by dint of his growing up in Melbourne. But it's great to be here. I wish the book well and good on you Matt. It's a monumental task to write a book and I hope it sells well. It deserves to.


Introduction
It is trite but nonetheless necessary to say that Australia';s foreign policy must always serve our national interest.
It does not exist in a vacuum.  It must be constantly crafted and adjusted to promote the values, the security, and the prosperity of the Australian people.
Our foreign policy should be pragmatic but it should also tell the world what we stand for and what we oppose.
Australia';s foreign policy must be a mixture of bilateralism, multilateralism and action in concert with other nations or groups of nations.
Australia was a foundation member of the United Nations.  There have been times – East Timor was a case in point – when the United Nations has acted promptly and effectively and in a way that served Australia';s national interest and the interests of the region.
By contrast the United Nations Security Council completely failed to meet the world';s need over Iraq.  That responsibility fell to the coalition of the willing, which included Australia.  American leadership on Iraq has made the Middle East as well as the world a safer place.
When I spoke to the Menzies Research Centre in August 2001, the focus of my address was the challenges presented by globalisation and the changing security environment.  I said then that the end of the cold war had fundamentally altered the global strategic environment with regional tensions and uncertainty replacing a world that had essentially been balanced between two competing super powers.
The next month, the terrible events of 11 September would demonstrate how uncertain the environment had become with the emergence of a new global terrorist threat.  A sense of vulnerability rocked even the most powerful of nations.
Today the most fundamental challenge facing Australia and the world at large - especially those like us who value openness, who value freedom – is how to protect our citizens and our society from a shadowy enemy, who is closed to negotiation, who has no fixed base and no transparent political structure.
The explosion in communication, in travel, in access to information that we call globalisation has allowed us to open up the nations of the world to each other in ways never before imagined.  It has stimulated a never-ending race for international competitiveness.  This is a challenge, but of the best kind because the rewards are increased prosperity, not just for Australia, but potentially for all nations, even the poorest.
But globalisation has also created opportunities for those who seek to destroy and debase our way of life – the global terrorists and the transnational criminals who capitalise on human misery, trading in people, drugs and weapons.
Their capacity for mobility allows them to find safe haven wherever governance is weak, wherever despotic regimes seek to co-opt their hatred or profit from their trade.
Too often we have seen rogue and failed states become the base from which terrorists and transnational criminals organise their operations, train their recruits and manage their finances.  If we want to be secure, we need to work with other nations to ensure collective stability.  And sometimes we will be called upon to take action.
The Australian Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer, co-hosted a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Pacific Island Forum in Sydney yesterday, to discuss how the region can help the Solomon Islands from sliding into chaos – help it regain the rule of law.  The Solomons are looking to their friends and allies for support – they know that if their state fails the road back to normalcy will be harder, more costly, not just financially but on the lives and wellbeing of its people.  We know that a failed state in our region, on our doorstep, will jeopardise our own security.  The best thing we can do is to take remedial action and take it now.
  What this means in terms of our long standing policy in relation to the Pacific is a theme I will take up later.  But I want to say at the outset, how pleased we are that our Pacific Island Forum colleagues have indicated their preparedness to work together to respond to the Solomons'; request for assistance.
  To make common cause for the peace and security of the Pacific, to build coalitions for action, is one of the most effective ways governments can counter the destructive forces of global terrorism and transnational crime.
In this ‘age of terrorism'; it is essential in our national interest that we further build and strengthen Australia';s links with all the major centres of global power and influence.
Achieving this will be greatly aided by the unique intersection of history, geography and culture occupied by Australia and of which I have spoken in the past.
Asia
 The security and prosperity of Asia will always be a crucial determinant of Australia';s security and prosperity.
The nations of Asia have the most direct influence on our strategic environment.  They are our largest export markets and the source of much of our investment and imports.
  And they matter to us because without mutual support and cooperation none of us will be able to address the real and current threat posed to the region by terrorists and rogue states.
 The government will always give maximum attention to keeping these relationships vibrant and strong.  This month, I visit Japan, Korea and the Philippines to hold talks with their respective leaders on regional trade and economic issues.  Counter terrorism responses and North Korea';s nuclear policies will be high on our agenda.  I hope too that soon I will have the opportunity to meet the new leaders of China.
Response to terrorism
The focus on national and international security in all our affairs has not only increased but will be with us indefinitely.  The tragedy of Bali, the war against Iraq, the continued fight against international terrorism, all remind us that we live in a different world.
  In the age of terrorism retreat and isolation will not deliver security and prosperity.  It is more essential than ever not only to engage our region but also the broader world community.  Our economic prosperity depends on opening ourselves up to the world, seeking where possible to integrate markets and forge new relationships.
  Moreover, it is part of our make-up, our national character, to look outwards.  Australians have always sought adventure overseas - sought literally to broaden their horizons through travel - and we have a proud tradition of welcoming those who travel to our own shore.
  Beginning with the Colombo Plan the large number of foreign students who have come to study at our schools and universities not only provided valuable export earnings but have fostered the development of strong people-to-people links.  Such personal relationships provide the foundation for enduring bilateral relations well into the future.
We must constantly balance Australia';s response to the new security environment with the imperative to seek continued economic liberalisation and openness.  Maintaining this balance will be a key challenge for every dimension of Australia';s foreign policy.
  We will of course continue to participate with our friends and allies in the war against terrorism because it would be wrong and dangerous to do otherwise.  Changing our policy, hoping to buy immunity from future attacks, fundamentally ignores the motivation which drives these terrorists.  Australia is a target for their blind hatred not because of what we have done, but because of what we believe in and because of who we are.
Since 11 September 2001, the government has significantly increased Australia';s collective capacity to protect our nation against terrorist attacks.  We have ensured that our defence forces have the necessary capabilities to respond effectively and quickly to the changing international security environment.  And we are building a strong focus on counter-terrorism into our bilateral and regional relationships.
  And even though we are not a major power, we are able to wield increasing influence.  Australia now enjoys unparalleled world respect in recognition of our sustained economic strength; our enviable social stability and our willingness to, where appropriate, take a stand.
  Iraq &amp; WMD
We joined a coalition with the United States and Great Britain to deal once and for all with the defiant regime of Saddam Hussein.  This was not an easy decision.  Committing the men and women of our defence force to combat overseas is the most serious decision a government can ever make.  But we were determined that Iraq would fulfil its obligations to the UN Security Council – even if this meant the use of force.
  Iraq';s weapons of mass destruction programmes and its belligerent and aggressive attacks on its neighbours and its own ethnic minorities have been of concern to Australia for more than a decade.  We have a proud history of working to combat the spread of these weapons.  The so-called Australia Group plays a pivotal and widely recognised part in international efforts to prevent the proliferation of chemical and biological weapons.
And it is timely to recall that the group was established in 1985 as an Australian initiative to try to prevent Iraq from acquiring the means for producing chemical weapons through commercial trade.
 Australia supported the US-led coalition which drove Saddam from Kuwait in 1991 and we have had an almost continuous military presence in the Gulf since 1990 to enforce UN sanctions against Iraq.
We know that Saddam Hussein had a WMD capability and we waited for 12 years for him to demonstrate to the UN that he had destroyed it.  In November 2002 the UN Security Council found him in material breach of his obligations – the vote was unanimous.  What followed was a dispute on the best way to resolve the issue, whether by direct military intervention or the continuation of sanctions and weapons inspectors.
  There was no dispute as to whether Iraq had WMD capabilities.  In Australia both the government and the Labor Opposition agreed that Iraq was in material breach of its UN obligations and that it possessed WMD.
As Saddam Hussein had expelled UN inspectors in 1998, recent information about his WMD capability was largely available via intelligence.  The assessment made by our intelligence agencies, mostly based on information they received by virtue of our close intelligence arrangements with the US and the UK, was that Iraq had a WMD capability and that there was no evidence that Saddam had given up what the former head of UNSCOM called his addiction to WMD.  The evidence, in fact, indicated that the regime was doing everything in its power to hide Iraq';s WMD capability.
This assessment was reflected in the government';s public statements.  The suggestion that the government requested Australia';s intelligence agencies to massage or overstate the evidence is wrong.
  The almost daily discovery of mass graves is a horrifying testament to the human rights nightmare under Saddam Hussein';s regime.  It has reinforced the immense moral and humanitarian dividend which has flowed from his removal.  It is estimated that some 300,000 bodies have been uncovered in the 150 mass grave sites found so far.
  Israeli-Palestinian conflict
The collapse of Saddam Hussein';s regime has opened up an opportunity to achieve a settlement between the Israeli and Palestinian people.  His demise has removed a potential threat to Israel and allowed for appropriate pressure to be applied to both parties to bring them to the negotiating table.
History is the enemy of optimism in the Middle East, but despite the continued violence, I am still hopeful.  President Bush made it clear to me when we met in Texas that he will do everything he can to bring about a peace settlement.  The world should not underestimate the sheer determination of this President to bring peace to the Middle East.
  To hear Ariel Sharon acknowledge that something must be done about the illegal Jewish settlements, to hear Mahmoud Abbas acknowledge the centuries of suffering of the Jewish people, and now to see serious discussion of a cease-fire by groups like Hamas – all of that gives me hope.
Peace in the Middle East is important not just for the peoples of that region but for the long-term stability and security of the world.  A settlement between Israelis and Palestinians will further strengthen the international front against terrorism.  It will address a sense of injustice which has fuelled anti western sentiment and provided a rallying point for those who seek to recruit people to the terrorist cause.
It will enable the people of Israel to enjoy an undeniable right – to live in peace behind secure and defensible borders.
Iraq and relations with Asia - Indonesia
We understand and respect the fact that some of the nations in our region disagreed with our policy on Iraq.  Clearly we had differences with our close friend and neighbour Indonesia.  But our differences were understood.  I made sure that our position was clearly communicated to President Megawati when I visited Indonesia in February.  Most importantly, the President acknowledged that our actions in Iraq in no way represented an attack on Islam.
We were both determined, as were our governments, that those differences should not be allowed to contaminate the broader elements of the relationship.  We need to be able to cooperate more closely than ever before if we are to counter the threat posed to our own region by Al Q';aida linked terrorist organisations, like Jemaah Islamiyah.
 A united, prosperous and stable Indonesia is good for Australia and good for the region.  Indonesia';s creation of a robust and functioning democratic system is crucial to achieving these goals.  Terrorism and Islamic extremism pose significant threats to Indonesia';s transition to democracy and to its fragile economy.
 The government is committed to working with Indonesia to deal with terrorism, offering cooperation and assistance with capacity-building.  But we would also urge Indonesia to press ahead with the domestic economic reforms that are the essential foundations for sustainable long-term growth and a prosperous society.
  I again thank the Indonesian government and its police force for the way they have responded to the 12 October terrorist attack in Bali.  It is a great comfort to this nation that these vicious criminals are being brought to justice and forced to confront the consequences of their actions.
But not just Indonesia
As important as Indonesia is, too often some commentators seek to view our relationship with Asia through an exclusively Indonesian prism.
Asia like the rest of the world is trying to come to terms with the threats posed by terrorism and rogue states, but the nature of the threat and the best way of responding varies – there is no uniform “Asian approach” to these or any other issues.
  There are many nations in our region that, like Australia, considered Saddam Hussein';s continued defiance of UN Security Council resolutions posed a threat to international security.  Nations like Japan, the Philippines, Singapore and South Korea all supported the actions of the American led coalition.
  It is disingenuous to claim that our participation in the US led coalition in Iraq will seriously impede our relations with Asia, as though there was a commonality of view on this issue across the whole geographic region.
 The US Alliance
Australia';s enduring links with the United States are crucial to this nation';s future.  America will grow more, not less, important to Australia as the years go by.  Our principled support for the US led action in Iraq made a deep impression and will not be readily forgotten by the United States.  Our relationship has never been stronger or closer.
The US is the unrivalled global power – both in terms of its military capacity, its economy and its cultural reach.  It matters and it matters to everybody.  We are lucky our relationship with the US is not only historic, but built on shared values – the values that underpin liberal democracies.
  Although we are distinctive societies our shared values create a commonality of interest and approach that allow the relationship to be open and transparent.
An alliance is about mutual obligation.  It is about shared interests.  It demands neither subservience nor dominance.  It can and does accommodate differences of view and at times differences of interest.  Because the relationship between the United States and Australia is built on respect, understanding and trust we are in a strong position to advocate Australia';s interests.
  The ANZUS alliance, strengthened by 50 years of cooperation, is fundamental to our national security.  Its commitment to consult and act against a common threat is a tangible protection of enormous value to the defence of Australia.  Without it, and the access to the intelligence and technology provided under the alliance, the taxpayers of this country would have had to make a considerably greater investment in defence and intelligence.
 ANZUS is an important sign of the US';s strategic commitment to the region.  It combines with the other security alliances and arrangements the US has forged throughout Asia, with Japan, Korea, the Philippines and Thailand, to form a strategic framework that helps keep the whole region stable.
  Australia too has an extensive network of bilateral defence relationships in South East Asia, North Asia and the South Pacific that complement US activities in the region.
  All these arrangements will be vital in responding to the security challenges which confront our region.
US FTA
This year we have the opportunity to achieve a milestone for Australia';s economic prosperity – a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.
This is the most significant bilateral trade negotiation Australia has ever undertaken.  The US economy is a global powerhouse, not just because of its size – which is phenomenal, but because it is dynamic and innovative.  As Stephen Roach, the chief economist at Morgan Stanley has noted, over the seven year period ending in 2001, the US economy accounted for fully 63 per cent of the cumulative increase in world GDP.  By way of comparison the European Union – a region of comparable size to the United States – accounted for only 8 per cent of the increase in world GDP over the same period.
 An FTA with the United States has the potential to return billions of dollars to our economy.
  Moreover, a comprehensive FTA will demonstrate the resolve of both Australia and the United States to liberalise our economic relations.  Concrete commitments to liberalisation, especially those made by an economy of the size and importance of the United States, should help to build momentum for global negotiations at the World Trade Organisation and to set benchmarks for outcomes for the Doha round of trade negotiations.
President Bush and I discussed the FTA at length during my recent visit to the United States.  I was delighted that the President has given the FTA a priority – stating publicly that the two negotiating teams should re-double their efforts and try to complete an agreement before the end of this year.
This is an ambitious timetable, but it is achievable.
If we succeed, it will be because the outcome of the FTA negotiations is in Australia';s national interest.  We will only accept an agreement if it delivers real long-term benefits to our economy.  Clearly progress in agriculture is essential if we are to reach agreement.
  Nor will the government compromise those objectives fundamental to Australia';s health care, education, consumer protection or cultural identity.  We will, however, be looking to use the FTA to encourage our businesses to undertake those structural reforms which will make us better able to compete, not just in the world';s largest and most dynamic economy, but globally.
The Pacific – Solomon Islands
As I indicated earlier, we are forging new arrangements to meet the challenges posed by the potential failure of nation states in the Pacific.  A number of our friends in the Pacific are experiencing economic collapse, corruption and lawlessness to a degree which threatens their very sovereignty.
  Development assistance has an important role to play in restoring stability to the South Pacific.  But aid can only ever be a part of the solution.  And we must use our aid programme to encourage and strengthen the framework for good governance in these nations.  They must achieve higher standards of governance.  The future of their peoples depends upon their willingness and their ability to do so.
Last month, I held discussions with Sir Allan Kemakeza, the Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands, about the ways in which Australia might assist his nation.  This was on our part a recognition of Australia';s responsibilities in the Pacific, a response to a humanitarian disaster in the making, and a way of ensuring Australia';s own security.
Prime Minister Kemakeza has asked us to help the Solomons and we have agreed.
Subject to a formal and legally proper request from the Solomon Island government Australia stands ready to provide the co-operative assistance they require.  We will do so in concert with New Zealand and the other nations of the Pacific Island Forum.
Such a coalition of interest and effort will be well placed to provide the necessary assistance, especially the substantial policing, law and justice and economic resources required.
But we must also ensure that the environment is stable and secure enough to implement reform – without security the Solomons cannot begin the task of rebuilding.
Restoring security to the Solomon Islands is essentially a policing task.  But any policing assistance must be provided with adequate protection and support.  In finalising the shape of an Australian contribution we must ensure the safety and security of all those who are involved.  This is likely to involve a substantial number of defence personnel and the precise mix of police and military personnel will be determined by the expert advice of the Chief of the Australian Defence Forces and the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police.
The Solomon Islands is a sovereign country.  Any action will be in response to a properly issued legal request from the government of the Solomon Islands, thereby ensuring that our assistance fully complies with the requirements of international law.
  We recognise that such an action represents a very significant change in the way we address our regional responsibilities and relationships.  But our friends and neighbours in the Pacific are looking to us for leadership and we will not fail them.
And the rest of the world, understandably, sees this as an area where Australia has particular responsibilities.
DPRK
Further from home, but no less important in terms of the potential impact on Australian interests, is the challenge of North Korea.  A security crisis on the Korean Peninsula would send shock-waves through a region which is the destination for some 40 per cent of our exports, and it would hit hard all of our top four trading partners - Japan, the United States, China and South Korea.
  North Korea';s recent admissions that it has a nuclear weapons programme, and the concern that it would transfer nuclear weapons, underscore the seriousness of this security challenge.
The leaders of North Korea are facing a fateful choice.  They can continue the tentative steps they have made towards constructive engagement with the rest of the world, towards a peaceful solution on a Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons, and towards a brighter future for its people.  Or they can choose the perilous path of confrontation and nuclear blackmail, sustaining their impoverished state through trafficking drugs and weapons, and further deepening their isolation from the rest of the world.
  A number of countries, including Australia, have an interest in ensuring that North Korea makes the right choice.  China, in particular, will have an important role to play in this process and it is encouraging that China has sought to make a constructive contribution to finding a peaceful solution.
All the nations of the region remain committed, despite the obstacles that need to be overcome, to seeking a peaceful outcome that will enhance their common security.
North Asia
Our interests in North Asia are economic as well as strategic.  While the United States is now Australia';s biggest two-way trading partner for goods and services, Japan is still our largest merchandise-trading partner.  It has been our largest export market for some time and is likely to remain so for the foreseeable future.
Our bilateral relationship with Japan generates substantial benefits to Australia but we are not complacent.  The government is constantly looking for ways to strengthen our ties.  We are advocating a trade and economic framework to support better market facilitation, and through setting strategic objectives, further stimulating the economic relationship.
We are seeking a similar bilateral agreement with China.
  The agreement between the North-West Shelf Consortium and the Chinese province of Guangdong last year was a major milestone in Australia';s economic relations with China.  That agreement was achieved through a unique, in Australian';s experience, partnership between the Federal Government, the Government of Western Australia and the consortium itself.
The agreement is not only significant commercially, bringing in 25 billion dollars over the next 25 years, but it also has great symbolic value.
It further demolishes the mantra that Australia';s relationship with the United States precludes us from developing close ties with our Asian neighbours.  It is clear that as well as the quality and price of the product, the Chinese also appreciate that Australia is a valuable and reliable economic partner.  For long-term contracts stretching across generations, Australia';s stability, in part derived from our security alliance with the United States, is a huge asset.
Conclusion
The potential benefits of globalisation are immense but we must also recognise that globalisation also offers a global platform for more destructive forces.  To harvest the benefits of globalisation and to protect ourselves from the reach of global terrorism we must maintain a strong network of partnerships and friendships in our region and beyond. Bilateral relationships built on mutual interests and which allow for the development of strong personal and community links will become more, not less important.
Taken together these relationships will enhance Australia';s capacity to respond to the changing security environment and encourage us to expand those trading links which, combined with a commitment to on-going domestic reform, underwrite Australia';s economic future.
Each relationship will be different and will have its own sensitivities and focus.  But we need to be able to ensure that we have the flexibility to join and build coalitions of mutual interest to address the security challenges facing our region and the world at large.
The government cannot guarantee that Australia will not be subject to terrorist attacks.  We cannot guarantee the safety of Australians who choose to live or travel abroad.  But what we can guarantee is that we will do everything in our power, in concert with our friends and our allies, to root out and destroy those who threaten our security.  What I can guarantee is that this nation will continue to take resolute action if and when our national interest dictates.
(ends)
QUESTIONS AND ANSWER SESSION
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, thank you very much for that.  I wonder if I could draw you out a bit on how you feel about the progress of East Timor
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think East Timor has a lot of advantages that other countries of that size and that stage of very modest development don';t have.  It has access to oil and gas revenues, and provided the taxation regimes imposed by the country are sensible and sensitive to investment, then it has a brighter future in that way than many other countries but that';s a very important proviso.  I think the security situation there is still difficult.  I think it needs a lot more help with its police infrastructure and we are providing it.  I don';t think the United Nations force is going to be withdrawn tomorrow.  I think it will be there for some time.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, good evening.  Jonathan Harley from the Lateline programme.  I was interested to hear your comments about North Korea, you know, the fateful choice that the leaders there face.  In today';s New York Times there';s a very concerning article talking about US intelligence, satellite intelligence, which identifies advanced nuclear testing sites in the north of Korea, and also suggestions that North Korea is developing miniature nuclear warheads to fit on its existing missiles.  The report goes on to say that friends and allies of the United States have been advised of that intelligence.  So I';d be interested to know has Australia received any of that intelligence advice?  And would that accelerate plans to block the spread of weapons of mass destruction from North Korea.  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I think I can best answer that by saying that I';ve seen a brief report of the New York Times report.  I saw it just before I left my office this evening.  We are having discussions with the United States arising out of a discussion I had with President Bush in Texas a few weeks ago about possible action that countries may take in relation to the subject you mentioned.  Perhaps I can best say that those discussions continue.  I don';t want to unduly heighten the drama.  Equally, however, it';s obvious that North Korea is a huge problem and we';re dealing with a country that does appear to be acting a little outside predictable conduct and… to say the least.  The role of China, as I said in my prepared text, is very important.  There';s no country in the world that probably has more influence, direct influence, on North Korea than China.  And I know that many countries will be encouraging China to exercise a very sobering influence on North Korea.  It';s not in China';s interests, it';s not in anybody interest, that North Korea go down the undesirable path that I pointed to.
QUESTION:
[Inaudible]  You didn';t mention in your presentation the importance of the European Union and dealing with the enlargement of the Union in political, economic and security terms as far as Australia is concerned.  And maybe using the relationship with Europe and France in the Pacific to help solve some of the problems in the Pacific.  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I didn';t make a conscious choice not to mention the European Union.  I';m just always aware of these sort of speeches that if you just feel you';ve got to mention sort of every part of the world, you end up sort of giving an even more episodic, potentially boring address, so you have to be very careful of that and, you know, perish the thought.  Look, I… I mean, I have a view about… I mean, I look at the European Union in two ways.  I look at it, you know, its historical contribution.  I mean, the fact that the countries that devoured so many, whose wars devoured so many young Australian lives, twice, the fact that we';ve now found a way apparently of that not happening again is a matter of immense, you know, importance to the history of the world when you think of the terrible bloodshed that';s happened because of wars between European countries.  Now, that';s the good part of it and I mean, for that alone we should be grateful for the European Union and treaty of Rome and everything that it has meant.  As far as its treatment of Australia is concerned, well, you know, I have a very strong view that the European Union';s trading policies have been very damaging to Australia, very unfair, they continue to be.  We';re meant to be grateful because in future the subsidies are going to not be linked to production but to something else, but the subsidies are not going to be lowered and it';s going to be some years before that change comes into operation.  So I remain a real agnostic as far as to say the least, if not an aetheist as far as my attitude towards, you know, the European approach to more open trade.  Look, I don';t discount the, you know, perhaps some discussion with the French regarding the Pacific.  I mean, plainly this is very much a Pacific Forum thing and that';s… I mean, we are keeping the United Nations informed and there';s been contact with the Secretary General of the Commonwealth because the Solomon Islands in Australia and New Zealand, and indeed many of the countries of the Pacific, are members of the Commonwealth.  So, we';re going the Pacific Forum route, not because we don';t want to involve ourselves with other countries but it is self-evidently the right international forum for us to work through and it is self-evidently the way in which we can disabuse any false notion that this is some kind of neo-colonial exercise by Australia.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Andrew Robinson, ancient mariner!  You may, of course, everybody understands, the Australian Defence Force has been very stretched in recent years for its many commitments which you outlined.  Would you give us your views as to whether you think, in the emerging world in which we';re moving in this century, whether our ADF - our Australian Defence Force - is adequate in its size and capabilities?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Andrew, I think I can best say this, that I think we will devote ever increasing resources to Defence for some years into the future.  And I think, can I just add, I think it';s important that the community understand that and I think the community does understand that.  But it';s also very important that they understand the reason for it.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Roslyn Strong, asking my question as a member of the national committee for UNIFEM, the United Nations development programme for women - and congratulations on the work that the country';s going to do in the Solomons - but it was notable at yesterday';s gathering that there did not appear to be much involvement of women.  And I note a policing force is one way of addressing the problems, but I wanted to ask your comment on whether or not there will be some opportunities for more involvement of women, along the lines of the United Nations resolutions regarding women, peace and security and the involvement already of women in the peace process in the Solomons has been constructive in a couple of ways.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, the meeting yesterday was not sort of meant to involve women or men, were just meant to involve the elected political leadership of the various countries.  I will, you know, and I frankly don';t, I mean I wasn';t at the meeting and… but I will ensure that what you have put to me is taken into account.
PRIME MINISTER:
Prime Minister, thank you for your talk.  I wonder if I could ask you if you have had or if you contemplate having any discussions with Sir Michael Somare about any possible additional Australian involvement along the Solomon's lines in Papua New Guinea?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the answer is no and it would – let me, if I may so, and I don';t mean this in any way aggressively, and I hope it doesn';t sound that way – but we are responding to a request from the Solomons.  We';ve had no request from Sir Michael Somare and I think, for a whole combination of reasons, any action by Australia of that kind absent such a request would be completely and understandably misunderstood.
QUESTION:
I';m encouraged by what you have to say about the region but, because we all know we live in this sort of arc of instability where all of the countries of the Pacific have problems.  It';s the nature of politics that foreign ministers, senior diplomats, even prime ministers were prefer to strut the stages of Paris and London and Washington than they would of Port Moresby or Suva or Dili.  Is there some method administratively or institutionally where you can institutionalise more focus on the region, having advanced a few projects from the region?  I';m conscious that there is absolutely no champions of the regional cause in the Cabinet and there is no focus.  At the moment we tend to be, seem to be more fire fighters than strategists in the region.  Would it be possible to sort of formulate a ministry or some other administrative arrangement that actually focused us more on the region than is currently the case?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Trevor you could do that.  The only problem with it, and I know exactly what you';re getting at, the only problem with it is that we generically talk about the region, but just as we shouldn';t generically talk about Asia and think that there';s some kind of one size fits all response to Asia, we have to say the same thing about the region.  There are… if you look at the Pacific Forum countries, some of them are quite stable, very stable, they';re tiny, some of them… and I think Fiji has done a great job in coming back from a very difficult situation and I think Qarase and the people around him deserve an enormous amount of praise and credit for what they have done, they';ve had a lot of help.  But gee they had the book thrown at them by the Commonwealth and the international community as far as the modalities of their return to constitution, I mean properly so, but perhaps other countries haven';t had the book thrown at them quite so vigorously.  In the end, you find yourself addressing the region in a whole variety of ways.  I mean, our relationship with PNG has a special character because of we were the metropolitan power and there';s a special affinity between the people of Papua New Guinea in Australia, there';s great affection in PNG for Australia, deep down, perhaps not at official levels, but deep down there is great affection.  And I still say to a lot people that the best sort of barometer of international opinion I';ve ever found in Australia was the opening ceremony at the 2000 Olympic Games.  If you just sat and listened to the reaction of the crowd to the various national teams, and I';ve never forgotten the very very warm and affectionate greeting that the PNG team received, and that was an expression of real affection from the Australian people towards that country.  Our relationship with Indonesia is crucial, very very different from our relationship with PNG and the countries of, such as the Solomon Islands that are nearby.  And, of course, obviously our relationship with the countries of North Asia, which I think has been one of the real success stories of the past few years, are different again.  I never dismiss suggestions about administrative rearrangements although I don';t want to start any hares runnning about a reshuffle.  I made the mistake of doing that at the National Press Gallery mid-Winter Ball.  But your suggestion is an interesting one, but I think it';s difficult to have a consistent, generic response to the region because the region itself is so very fragmented and so very different and you do need different approaches and a different style and a different way of dealing with the different countries.
QUESTION:
Could I just ask a final question on Australia / New Zealand relationships.  I mean, as you know, you';ve got a good personal relationship with Helen Clark, Australia and New Zealand are at distance on some strategic issues – New Zealand and United States is quite distant.  How do you see New Zealand fitting into any Australia / US free trade agreement?  I mean, I think you';ve said that you would speak for New Zealand';s interest.  But it seems that the United States in this present frame of mind isn';t particularly interested in New Zealand in that respect.  I mean, how do you see our relationship, vis-a -vie in New Zealand and New Zealand visibly to the US?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there is a difference in the defence relationship between New Zealand and the United States and the defence relationship between Australia and the United States.  New Zealand made a decision in the 1980';s under the leadership of David Longey, and it was not significantly reversed when there was a change of government, not significantly reversed, to pursue a less engaged approach.  Now, that';s New Zealand';s decision and New Zealand';s right.  One of the reasons why I think I have developed and maintained a good relationship with Helen Clark is that although we come from different sides of the political spectrum and neither of us from occasions is regarding entirely as sitting in the exact dead centre of our two parties.  Despite that, I do sort of think that one of the ways in keeping that very important relationship is not to give too much public advice about what are essentially domestic matters for the other country in the partnership.  We just do though have a different approach.  As far as the free trade agreement is concerned, we are negotiating one for Australia and that';s my preoccupation.  I';ve indicated that if there are ways in which out of that process we can assist New Zealand, we';d be very happy to do so, but there';s no conditionality involved in that, they have to be separate operations.  We do, for example, have separate interests.  I mean, clearly if New Zealand were ever to have a free trade agreement with the United States, dairy would… their dairy industry would bulk very large in anything that New Zealand would need, where as that is not necessarily the case with Australia.
[ends]


Thank you very much for that very warm welcome and I';m delighted to have this opportunity to open your conference, to welcome those who have come from other parts of Australia to Canberra, and to reaffirm my very strong personal interest in and support for ALSF, for the cause of liberalism on university and college campuses all around Australia, and in the process of that to hark back to something that I identify as being important about Liberal students way back in the middle 1980s when the Liberal Party was going through a very long period of opposition – and that is that fundamental to the political debate that goes on in this country is the battle of ideas. That unless a political party wins the battle of ideas, it cannot hope to either gain or retain office.
 And I found in the 1980s, as I found in the 1990s and I know you are contributing to in the 21st century, that Liberal students are at the forefront of the battle of ideas, and that there are certain constant attitudes and values that are important, and no matter whether you are in Government or in Opposition, you have to maintain them. And one of those is an issue that is very dear to your heart, and that is voluntary student unionism. And I';m pleased to report again that the Government has prepared and will reintroduce as part of its university reform package, legislation to bring voluntary student unionism to the campuses of Australia. The legislation will stipulate that membership of student associations is to be voluntary, and we';ll make it a condition of funding to higher education institutions that student unionism or the payment of money not related to a student';s course is not a condition of enrolment. This is a fundamental straightforward principle of freedom of association. I have never seen it otherwise. The Government I lead has never seen it otherwise, and we will continue to argue before the Parliament that this legislation be adopted.
 I take the opportunity of thanking all of you for the contribution that you have made to supporting the Federal Coalition Government over the last seven and a half years. We have now won three elections, but I remind all of you of the vagaries of politics. There is no such thing as an unbeatable Prime Minister or an unelectable opposition. If you reflect on Australian political history, you will learn that just over 40 years ago, Australia';s longest serving Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies in 1961 went very close to being defeated by the Labor opposition. And it';s a reminder, that election, when the Government of the day was returned with a majority of only one after the election of a Speaker, it';s a reminder that anybody who imagines that a party that has been in office for a number of years assumes some kind of infallibility and automatic entitlement to reelection, it';s a reminder of how wrong that approach can be. And one thing you will not get from this Government, and one thing that you will not get from me, is any sense of complacency. Winning the next election will be very hard. They get harder each one you have to fight. And it';s only a period of 16 months between now and the next Federal election, and we will need the assistance and support of people all over Australia if we are to retain Government.
One of the issues that is in front of us at the moment is of course reforms to the university sector and the reform package that Brendan Nelson has so ably articulated and put together. This is the most important opportunity that the university community of Australia, and extended from them the student and potential student body of Australia, has for many years to reform, to get more resources into the university sector, to open up opportunities for young Australians to further expand the horizons of Australian universities to the rest of the world. No Government can afford to provide out of the taxpayers' dollars all of the money that universities will need in the future. No Government can do that – whether it';s a Liberal Government or a Labor Government. We are now being treated to the fantasy, so to speak, from the Labor Party, from Mr Crean, that somehow or other you can provide all of these additional resources without imposing an additional burden on the taxpayer.
What we are seeking to do is to provide more resources to Australian universities through increased contributions from the taxpayer and also increased contributions over time from the private sector. We are not proposing to charge $150,000 for university courses. The way that charge glibly rolls off the tongue of our political opponents implies that if our reforms are passed, after they';re passed, every university student in Australia will have to pay $150,000 for a course. That is a complete and utter untruth. We in fact are going to increase by 25,000 the number of Commonwealth funded places in Australian universities. We are going to increase the number which are now available under the HECS scheme, a scheme introduced by the Labor Government in the 1980s and the introduction of which was supported by the Coalition in opposition because we thought it was a necessary reform. And I invite you to contrast the cooperative forward-looking attitude of the Liberal Party in opposition to the negative, destructive attitude of the Labor Party now in opposition.
 The reality is that we need greater flexibility for our universities. We should increase the number of HECS funded, Commonwealth funded places, and we';re going to do that. We';re going to do that to the tune of 25,000. We';re also going to double the number of full fee paying places that will be available to Australian students. And I find it amazing and an extraordinary piece of discrimination against Australian students, that the Opposition Leader can say as he did at the weekend, if he were Prime Minister he would prohibit full fee paying Australian students, but he wouldn';t prohibit full fee paying foreign students. I can';t for the life of me understand why it';s alright for a student from England or America or Japan or Indonesia to pay full fees for a place in an Australian university, yet it is wrong for a student from Sydney or Perth or Toowoomba or Ballarat to pay full fees for a place in an Australian university. I find that unacceptable discrimination against Australian students, and I have never been able to understand why it is that you should give a privilege to foreign students but you deny the same opportunity to Australian students.
 Our proposals offer the only effective path forward. The university sector needs more flexibility, it needs more resources, it needs more capacity to vary what it offers, and students need greater choice, including access to student loans. The only policy that offers that is the policy of the Coalition. The ideas that we have had from the Australian Labor Party so far indicate a mindset that is still very much determined by the attitudes of the 1980s and the 1990s, a preoccupation with discriminating against Australian students when it comes to full fee paying places, an unwillingness to recognise that different universities have different needs. And unless you provide universities with the flexibility, then of course they will inevitably be able to offer a lesser quality product to the students of Australia';s future.
This Government over the last seven and a half years has properly earned itself a reputation of being a Government that is very supportive of investment in our intellectual capital, very supportive of research – not only medical and scientific research, but research in all sectors of the Australian society. Our Backing Australia';s Ability program, which I announced at the beginning of 2001, has poured hundreds of millions of additional dollars into research, into the universities, in a collaborative effort between industry, universities and scientists and researchers. And overall it has begun to reverse some of the elements of the brain drain from Australia, and we have seen in recent years the return of many talented Australians to this country because they again see it as a nation that beckons and is welcoming to those people who are prepared to invest years of their intellectual capacity and their lives into valuable research for the good of humanity and for the furtherance of science.
In opening your conference, ladies and gentlemen, can I return to the theme that I mentioned at the beginning. And that is that politics in Australia now as always is about a battle of ideas. We have three great goals as a Government. We have the goal of providing national security. That is the first responsibility of any Government, particularly in the circumstances in which the world now finds itself. And there is not much doubt in the minds of the average Australian as to which side of politics is better able to guarantee and deliver national security in all its respects in the circumstances of 2003 and beyond.
 Our second great goal is to provide economic strength, and there is once again very little doubt that this country has outperformed most countries over the last seven or eight years economically. Australia is a stellar performer on the international stage and much of the deserved respect for Australia around the world now is a product of the economic strength which we have displayed over the past few years. The fall in unemployment, the continued high growth rates, the elimination of budget deficits, the energetic economic reform in the areas of industrial relations and taxation, a willingness to seek a free trade agreement with the most powerful country in the world, which if achieved will do more than any other single external thing to underwrite our economic future. All of these things speak of a Government which is determined always to be a reformist progressive Government in the management of our economy.
 And our third great goal of course is to deliver social stability. One of the proud boasts of Australia is that we are an egalitarian society and we, all of us, have a responsibility to ensure that it is kept that way. We all have a responsibility to try and ensure that Australians, wherever they may live, whatever their background may be, have equality of opportunity. We cannot guarantee equality of outcomes, but we can work to deliver equality of opportunity, and that has always been a very important part of the Liberal Party';s belief system. So they are our three great goals for the governance of this country – national security, economic strength and social stability. And if you look at the detail of our policies, you will see that all of them in one way or another relate to those three over-arching objectives.
 In the past few weeks, we have seen a little bit of activity from those on the other side of politics. I make no comment on who should be the leader of the Australian Labor Party. That is a matter for the Labor Party itself. I have always taken the view that comments made about things like that by the leader of the opposite party are inevitably seen as rather self-serving and therefore are properly discounted by the Australian public. But something did come to my attention this morning, and I';d like to leave you with this thought, and in the process of leaving you with this thought, leave to the Leader of the Opposition the two questions that I believe that he should answer. I noticed in an article in The Australian this morning written by Glenn Milne, suggesting that the proposition that negative gearing be taken away for investment properties in Australia was in fact understudied by the Labor Party';s equivalent of the expenditure review committee, and therefore on Friday when Mark Latham said that it was something that was being examined, he was in fact speaking the truth, and that therefore the rebuke that was delivered to him by the Opposition Leader immediately afterwards was undeserved. Just as you will have questions to me in a couple of moments, and I';ll be very happy to answer them, I';d like to leave two questions for Mr Crean to answer.
The first is – was the Labor Party';s expenditure review committee examining negative gearing? Was Mr Latham therefore telling the truth when he said what he did? And if that is the case, the second question is – is negative gearing still a policy option to the Australian Labor Party? Is it still on the table? And if it is, why did Mr Crean mislead the Australian public last Friday when he said in rebuking Mr Latham that negative gearing, the removal of negative gearing, was not a policy option for the Australian Labor Party? With those questions to the Leader of the Opposition, can I conclude my remarks.
 I thank all of you for the tremendous support that you have shown to the Liberal Party cause on campuses around Australia. I wish your conference well. I thank you for having me as your patron. And I have much pleasure in declaring this annual gathering of the ALSF open.
  QUESTION &amp; ANSWER SESSION
QUESTION:
I know that all of the campuses that are represented today have been working very very hard to sell the higher education reforms on campus. What do you think is the single most important message that we should be selling or we should be promoting to sell these reforms and also to help the Coalition in the next election?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think the most important message that you have to get across is that whatever oppositions might say the truth is that no government in the future will be able to afford to provide all of the additional resources that universities are going to need. And the idea that you can put more resources into universities, you can make courses cheaper without there being somebody who picks up the tab, without there being some cost down the track is just fairyland. And what we have to do is have a partnership. We all should remember that one of the things Australia does very well is mixing public and private contribution when it comes to the provision of important human services. We do it far better than most other countries.
 The HECS system is fundamentally a very fair sensible system. That';s why we supported it when we were in opposition. And the introduction of the HECS system was an acknowledgment by the then Labor government that the Whitlam fantasy of free university was in fact precisely that, a fantasy.  But we now have signs now from Jenny Macklin and Simon Crean of a return to the Whitlam fantasy. Now I think it is deceptive to pretend to people that you can not have contribution from both public and private sources. We are going to put billions of dollars more over future years into universities, we are going to increase by 25,000 the government funded places. And this idea that every university place is going to cost $150,000 which is what the Labor Party is trying to put around, I mean they use very slimy descriptions.  The reality is that they';re trying to implant in people';s minds that idea and they know that';s untrue because a person who now has a HECS supported place their equivalents plus 25,000 in the future, they';re going to have the same places, it';s just that we';re going to double the availability of fully funded places and we';re going to make them available for Australians as well as making them available for foreign students.  I mean I really find it quite unacceptable that if you';re a foreign student you can get a fully funded place in an Australian university but if you';re an Australian one you can';t and that basically is what the Labor Party is proposing.
Look university reform is never easy.  It';s always far more popular to go into the campus and say everything';s free or less costly, you won';t have to pay anything extra, nothing will be harder, you won';t have to compete any more, and there';ll be billions of extra dollars available from the taxpayer, we don';t know how it';s going to be paid for but somehow or other it will miraculously become available. It';s always easy to say that and the people over the next few months who will say that will get bigger cheers than those who argue commonsense. But in the end the Australian public is very sophisticated, the Australian public understands that no government can afford to provide all the resources that universities need in the future. Unless you have a contribution from private sources we';re not going to be able to meet the demands of universities years into the future.
QUESTION:
I';m often approached by members of the Country Liberal Party, I know this comes from the left field, about the possibility of a branch of the Liberal Party being established in the Northern Territory. I often say that it';s not the case and that I';m not some sort of secret agent sent to destroy the CLP however the rumours persist. I was wondering if you could comment on whether the Liberal Party has ever considered or will ever consider establishing a branch in the Northern Territory.
PRIME MINISTER:
  Well we don';t have any such proposal in front of us at the moment. I don';t mean by that that we are going to have something in front of us next week either. I';m not just using that to be in any way tricky, it';s just that we don';t. The approach of in effect having a blended product in the Northern Territory is one that has worked. Obviously if circumstances indicate it in future it might be appropriate to do it in a different way then clearly the party would consider doing so. But I think given the nature of the territory the current formation is the better way in current circumstances of maximising the non-Labor vote.
STUDENT:
I note that later in the week one of the topics for debate during the conference is the double jeopardy rule. I was just wondering if you could briefly outline your view on the abolition of the double jeopardy rule or the maintenance of the rule.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I think there are circumstances in which it can work an injustice. I have previously publicly supported a review and the possibility of its replacement with a set of provisions that will mean that in certain carefully defined circumstances it won';t apply.
  STUDENT:
It';s interesting to note that around half of the country';s universities were established post 1989 and the John Dawkins'; reforms, and a lot of those universities were regional universities. I';d like to know what the Nelson reforms are going to do and how they';re going to assist students in rural and regional communities.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the important thing to remember about the Nelson reforms is there';s a guarantee that in the transition no universities are going to be worse off. I mean it';s very important that that first be stated.  I think the second thing that has to be stated is that the greater flexibility that';s going to be available to universities will be of benefit to regional universities as much as they will be of benefit to the older universities. And thirdly and very importantly the more resources that are freed, both government and non-government resources, to go into universities are going to make a contribution to all of them, not just the established universities, the older ones, but also the regional universities as well.
QUESTION:
Just a question regarding an area that you spoke about as a priority of the government being national security.  With the recent boat people arrivals off the west coast of Australia the ALP have again stated their policy for a coastguard. How would that adversely effect the Australian defence forces, and why is it the case that the ALP continue with policy that obviously failed at the last election?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don';t know about….I can';t answer the second part of your question. But the first part of your question is that the idea of a coastguard is an idea which if implemented would do enormous damage to the Royal Australian Navy because what it involves is taking a large number of assets out of the Navy. Apart from anything else, I mean one of the consequences is that it could well mean that the personnel involved fell under union control because a coastguard could well be within the reach of the Maritime Union of Australia which I think all of you agree would be a very undesirable outcome.
 But the strongest criticisms of a coastguard have come from the Navy itself who say that in one of the most valuable things about the early years that a person has in the Navy is the training opportunities and if you take some of the assets that would be useful for that training away from the Navy and put them into a coastguard you would weaken the Navy.  You see you can';t have it both ways, you can';t have an additional asset without making additional resources available or taking the resources for that new asset away from something else that has them now and that of course is what the Labor Party is proposing. They';re not proposing to spend hundreds of millions of dollars more on acquiring new assets. They';re really shifting people from one part of our defence force into a coastguard, weakening the defence force in the process, and not adding in any way to our capacity to provide surveillance.
 Look it is quite remarkable, now let';s call this for what it is, it is quite remarkable how successful this country has been since late August of 2001, that';s almost two years, in deterring illegal immigration. It is quite remarkable given the size of our coastline and the nature of the challenge that we face. And I think it has been a quite remarkable achievement.
QUESTION:
I was wondering Prime Minister whether you thought there was a contradiction between Labor';s Opposition to an increase in the student contribution to university fees yet their commitment to compulsory up-front student union fees?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think there';s a contradiction there and I think also there';s a contradiction between what federal Labor is saying about our proposals and what state Labor has done in New South Wales. In some cases the last New South Wales budget increased TAFE fees by 250 to 300% and TAFE colleges are the places to which some 60% or more of people who leave school go in preference to a university.  And some how or other it is social justice to increase those fees by in many cases 250 to 300% yet it is an ideological and fairness outrage for us to propose that universities will have the freedom if they choose to increase fees by up to 30%.  There';s an enormous contradiction in relation to that. I think the whole idea of the, as I said earlier, the abolition of the right of people to pay full fees if you';re an Australian but it';s perfectly okay if you come from a foreign country. I think that';s a fundamental piece of discrimination against Australians.
QUESTION:
I have particular concerns about paid maternity leave, in particular the ACTU model that';s been put and the effects that that may have on job opportunities for young women. I was just wondering if you will protect us from that sort of scheme?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look, in a free society I think people will make their own choices as to how they organise their family life. My view is that the notion of paid maternity leave should be considered as part of future changes which effect the work/family balance. I have never said that I';m against paid maternity leave in principle and I';m not. I encourage employers where they are able to and can afford it to make paid maternity leave available and many of them do. I am against making it compulsory. That would be an unfair imposition on many small employers and there';s no way that a Liberal government will make it compulsory. I want to make that very clear.
I think it';s also the case that the benefits of paid maternity leave have been grossly exaggerated by many of its advocates. I mean I';ve read stories suggesting that it would have a dramatic impact on the fertility rate.  That';s just completely incorrect. The Unites States is one western country that does not have paid maternity leave but has a much higher fertility rate of 2.1 than many of the European countries, especially Scandinavian countries, which have paid maternity leave and have much lower fertility rates. You all appreciate that the decline in the fertility rate in this country is due to a whole combination of factors and the notion that 14 weeks paid maternity leave is going to bring about some kind of reversal in that is really….it only has to be stated for people to realise that it is an absurd proposition.
My very strong view in this whole area is that the role of the government is to provide men and women with choice so far as balancing their work and family responsibilities are concerned.  We do live in a different society now than a couple of generations ago, but it is still the case that men and women when they have children want choice. They don';t want to be told by the government that the best thing to do is to if you';re a mother is to race back into the workforce as soon as you possibly can, and nor do they want to be told by the government that the best thing to do is to stay at home indefinitely. They want to have a right to decide and increasingly the model is emerging of what I call the policeman and the part time sales assistant where 50% of couples with dependent children in Australia now have either one or one-and-a-half incomes. Only 17% of couples with dependent children have two full-time incomes and one of the things that you have to be very careful of in getting advice in areas like paid maternity leave is to make sure that the paradigm on which the advice is based is a paradigm that is represented of the majority of the Australian community and not representative of a limited section of the Australian community. Now what we have tried to do is to increase choice.  We have increased the family benefits, where families have a child under five we have effectively provided income splitting for single income families through the changes we';ve made to the child benefits, we have made child care not only more available but also more affordable, and we recognise that there is no one size that fits all in this area, that some families when they have children will want one parent to be out of the workforce indefinitely, others will want that parent to be out of the workforce for a while and then go back part time with the option perhaps when the children are much older going back full time, others will want both parents to be in the full time workforce all the time.
Now my job is to within the constraints of the budget have policies that allow the maximum number of Australian parents to exercise the maximum amount of choice. It';s not to say you should do this, or modern society requires that you behave in a particular fashion. Clearly a stable, united, caring families are the best environment to bring up children. Nothing alters that and the more that we pursue policies to make it easy for people to exercise their choices and one of the driving forces behind the view that I';ve had for a long time that we should have more flexible school hours is a belief that the current model which is an older model for a time that is not really quite as much with us as it used to be that does need review and I don';t think it';s beyond the width of state education authorities to find ways of providing more flexibility in school hours. What I';ve got in mind perhaps is that after school ends in the traditional sense you could have a bit more supervised sporting activity and that would make a contribution to the growing problem of teenage obesity. You could have some supervised homework so that the time that parents spend with their children at night is not bedevilled by arguments over homework.
  Now I mean they';re fairly elementary I think and basic and important propositions and these are issues that Australian parents are quite interested in because it effects the quality of their lives, it effects their relationship with their children and they';re the sort of things that I have in mind when I talk about more flexible school hours, and I think they are issues that should be debated.  And I notice from time to time that I get plenty of advice from the state premiers about how to run the country, and from time to time I give a bit of advice to state premiers about how I think they should discharge some of their responsibilities.
QUESTION:
Just a quick question, are you concerned about at rate and breadth of changes that you';re making both domestically and in foreign affairs is too fast for the Australian people?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I don';t. I recognise that there';s always a challenge if you are a reformist government. There is a tendency for some people to talk of reform fatigue. But Australians recognise that we live in a global community, they recognise that over the past couple of years unfortunately the world has changed, that we do live in an age of terrorism as I described it last week, and that people recognise that you don';t really have the option of marking time. But if you don';t keep reforming and changing you run the risk of falling behind. I think most Australians will go along with that. But I recognise that the advocacy challenge is there all the time to persuade people of the need for reform and change.
 [ends]


Thank you Sandra, Lisa, Bruce Campbell, Brian Parry, former Australians of the Year, and other achievers, ladies and gentlemen.  The decision taken by the Council before last year';s awards to broaden the scope, not only of the nomination process but also to introduce four categories and to give the Australian public far greater ownership of the nomination process has, I think, been a great success. And what it';s done has been to not only increase the knowledge of these awards but it';s also led to a lot more people making a contribution and as a consequence the awards and the process leading up to the decision and the work of those who are given the award has assumed a far greater meaning.
  All of us are very conscious and very proud of the fact that as each year goes by, whatever our views may be on political or social issues or international affairs, whatever football team we might barrack for or not barrack for, whatever our passions are in culture and sport, whatever our differences may be, I think we';re all very conscious that as each year goes by we are becoming more nationalistic and patriotic in the best sense of those expressions and we are becoming prouder of what this country is, what it has been, what it can be and what it does mean to be an Australian and part of that of course is to recognise that the Australian spirit comes in many forms. Since we launched the awards last year this country has been touched by some wonderful events, it';s also been touched by some terrible events.  We had the tragic loss of life in Bali where 88 Australians died in an act of unforgivable terrorism.  We';ve had the bushfires in Canberra which brought probably the highest level of urban devastation of bushfires for something like 50 years.  We';ve had many other tragedies, but we';ve had an enormous number of achievements.  In all of these things the Australian spirit has shone through, it certainly shone through in Bali, it shone through with the magnificent performance of Australia';s men and women in Iraq a few months ago.  Not only the spirit in terms of their strength and the capacity of Australians but the great Australian sense of humour.  And I was reminded of it in that sort of quirky way when I visited some of those troops in Doha in Qatar and those of you who know that region will know that it';s not very hilly, it';s extremely flat, and amongst the memorabilia I was given was a t-shirt and it had emblazoned on it “Mt Doha, Australian mountaineering club, 3 meters above sea level”.  It was a demonstration of that particular quirky sense of humour that Australians have.
But it';s also been a year, and it';s dramatised by the fact that we';re meeting here in Melbourne, which is hosting one of the most prestigious medical science conferences that can be held anywhere in the world.  And it drives home the fact that this country not only punches above its weight when it comes to sporting and other achievements, it punches above its weight when it comes to scientific achievements.  And here, right here in the city of Melbourne, a city alongside Boston and other cities is recognised around the world as being one of the great centres of medical research and medical science.  And that';s something that is part of the spirit of Australia, as is the (inaudible) of our men and women on the sporting field, those in our armed services, those in our voluntary organisations.
So ladies and gentlemen all of us, whatever our views are, wherever we come from, whatever our ancestry, whatever our feelings about what constitutes an Australian, we are all intensely proud of what this country is, what it can be and what its achieved and part of that is the performance of individual Australians, the simple humanity at a local level, the person who cares for a frail or dying relative or friend, somebody who devotes their life without fanfare or reward to helping intellectually and physically handicapped children, an elderly parent who cares for a middle aged handicapped child, carrying that increasing burden, all of those things are acts of individual heroism and great individual character and you all have an opportunity to participate in this process and I hope you all play a part and in that way you will further enhance our pride in and our understanding of this wonderful country of ours.
I want to thank Lisa and the members of the Council for the great work that they have done over the last year.  I want to join her in thanking the sponsors, you need sponsors always and thank you sponsors.  And I want to thank those former Australians of the Year who';ve come along today to share this occasion and to remind those who might one day be Australians of the Year of the great honour that they felt in receiving that award.
So ladies and gentlemen, thank you for having me and I have very great pleasure in declaring open the nominations for the four categories outlined by the chairman, I';m sure the nominations will be greater and even more varied than ever and I wish the process great good fortune.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Phillip, Mr Coulson, ladies and gentlemen.  In 1995 there were 140,000 apprentices in training in Australia.  This year there are 391,000 in apprenticeships or traineeships and of all the things that we have tried to do over the last few years in government nothing is more important to me than the opportunities that we have provided to that 70 per cent of young Australians in the main who leave school and who don';t go on to university.  We have an enormous amount of public focus on university education but quietly and steadily we have seen enormous improvements in the area that we mark today, and I congratulate VECCI on winning the open competitive tender to provide the shopfront services for apprenticeships in Victoria, they';ll be 17 locations, one of them in Mitcham, just around the corner, and they will provide advice to employers and they';ll provide assistance to apprentices and trainees to meet their needs and to fulfil their aspirations.  We need more people to go into training, we need more people to go into apprenticeships and we are providing the opportunities.  In the last Budget we provided an additional $219 million over a period of three years to go into the national traineeships arrangement which is a venture between the Commonwealth and the States.  And it involves a 12 per cent increase in Commonwealth funding and I hope that the states will be willing to match that because it';s important that this continue to be a collaboration and a partnership between the Commonwealth and the States.
We have expanded the opportunities for apprenticeships and traineeships, linking into the school experience and the school year and over the past seven years there has been a very significant expansion also in the number of people in traineeships in more mature age groups, there';s been a very significant rise in the number of people who have gone into apprenticeships and traineeships who are over 40.  So it';s not just expanding opportunities for people who are leaving school, important though that continues to be, but it';s also about giving opportunities for people to change their career direction in their more mature years.
  Australians of current generations are more likely to have several rather than just one career.  Years ago people habitually decided on a career when they left school, often they attached themselves to a particular employer and there they stayed for the rest of their working lives.  Now there is nothing wrong with that, if you';ve got the right employer and you got a career that you enjoy, and that';s what you want to do and there are still plenty of Australians who do that and I encourage Australians who I want to do that to continue to do so.  But it';s also very important that we understand that if we want to change career direction and we have the will to do so and we have the opportunity and there are training facilities available for that to occur then it should take place and the expansion of apprenticeships and traineeships is a way in which that can occur.
  So can I say that the capacity we have found to increase in partnership with VECCI and in partnership with state governments, a capacity we';ve found over the last seven years to increase the number of apprenticeships and traineeships from that figure of 140,000 to 391,000 is something that I think has been very important because economic strength and economic growth and economic development is not just about companies making profits and that';s very important, it';s not just about reducing the level of unemployment, it';s not just about reducing interest rates, all of those things are very important but even more importantly it';s about giving people fulfilling employment and jobs and opportunities and careers. And we want that at a university level, that';s important, we also want it at an apprenticeship and a traineeship level and perhaps as a society we focus too much on universities.  I saw some footage last night of people complaining about something that the University of Sydney was about to do, they were complaining about the possibility that the University of Sydney might increase some of its course charges by 30 per cent, I didn';t see those same people protesting at the fact that TAFE charges in New South Wales in some cases have been increased in the recent State Budget by 200 to 300 per cent, and that';s definitely happened and this 30 per cent is a possibility, I think it';s a demonstration that as a community we just focus sometimes a little disproportionably on university education and we don';t focus enough on apprenticeships and traineeships and how tremendously important they are, not only to the men and women here today but to the whole economy and the whole community.
Phil, great pleasure to be back in the electorate of Deakin, so very well and energetically represented by you in the national parliament.  I want to thank Mr and Mrs Starr and congratulate them on the birth of their third child and to say that this is a small business that';s grown, he was telling me about how he';s trying to break into the American market with this new device, he was explaining to me, and I';m impressed. I wish him well and it';s a very big market and what';s more it';s going to get bigger as the years go by, and that';s why we';re trying to negotiate a Free Trade Agreement with the Americans, there';s no market going to be more important to this country as the years go by than that of the huge and expanding United States economy.
But, thanks for having me, I wish all of the apprentices and trainees who are here every success.  I hope that you fulfil everything you want in relation to your own careers, I hope that you continue to have job satisfaction, it is important because we do spend a lot of time at work, no matter what work we do and it';s important that we enjoy it. It';s important that we find it fulfilling and it';s important that we have a good relationship with the people that we work with, whether they';re employed by them or we work with them or they work in answer to our advice and our instruction, but thank you all and again can I congratulate VECCI for winning the contract, I know it will provide a good service, it';s a very important partnership with the Government and I look forward to its expansion in the time ahead.
[ends]  


Madame President, First Gentlemen, Mr Vice President, Majority Leader, Your Excellency President Aquino, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
  Janette and I are delighted to be your guests and have the opportunity tonight of reaffirming a very long friendship between our two peoples. It';s a friendship that has been close for many years. We fought together for the liberation of the people of this country, and in more recent times Australia has greatly valued the support that your country extended to the coalition of the willing in the campaign to liberate the people of Iraq.
 I want to emphasise to all of you tonight the great value that Australia places on the people to people links between our two countries. More than 100,000 Australians owe their heritage to the Filipino Republic, and they are making an invaluable contribution to the contemporary Australian society which is drawn from so many peoples from so many parts of the world.
 We live, sadly but unavoidably, in an age of terrorism. And all of us must combine, particularly those in our own region, to work together as closely as possible to fight the scourge of terrorism, to address some of the basic causes of it and to remember that in the end terrorism opposes us not because of what we have done, but because of who we are and what we stand for. Extremists oppose free peoples. Extremists abhor open societies such as Australia and the Philippines, and we all do well on occasions such as this to remember the values of freedom and democracy that we have in common.
 Can I say on behalf of all of the Australian people that we wish you well, we admire the commitment to change and reform which is important to your future. I pledge on behalf of the Australian Government the continued cooperation of our agencies, our military, our police force, in working together to combat the common enemies that our two nations face.
Might I invite all of you to join in a toast to the very good health of the President, her husband, her family, and I';m delighted that so many of her family are here tonight, and to the continuing friendship and close cooperation of the people of Australia and the people of the Philippines. Cheers.
 [ends]  


Thank you very much Ambassador, Your Grace, the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Mr Cesar Virata the new landlord of the Embassy, and can I say how delighted I am to renew my acquaintance. He and I knew each other as fellow attendees of the Asian Development Bank when he was Finance Minister of the Government of the Philippines and I was the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia. We were equals then. He has now ended up as my landlord. That';s got to tell you something. But Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen, it';s a great pleasure that the opportunity to open these new Embassy premises comes during my visit to the Philippines.
 It';s an opportunity to emphasise how important is our relationship, to remind ourselves that it was in 1946 that the first Australian diplomatic representative through a consulate-general was opened here on behalf of Australia. And Australia and the Philippines have been close friends and close partners for a very long period of time. The opening of that consulate-general in 1946 followed of course the liberation of the Philippines during World War II. Subsequently we were associated together in the South East Asia Treaty Organisation. There have been strong links through the Colombo plan and many other regional associations. And today we are joined together by many personal links, with more than 100,000 Australian citizens owing their heritage to the Philippines. The common cause we make in the fight against terrorism and our common recognition of the need to address the challenges of poverty and alienation and deprivation, which are to be found in many parts of the world, and not least of course here in the Philippines and other parts of the region.
I have had the opportunity over the past 24 hours or more of very extensive discussions with the President of the Philippines. Those discussions have been very comprehensive. We have made some important announcements in relation to joint activity against terrorism. I believe that our economic association can be made stronger. I welcome the announcement made regarding a coal quota from Australia to the Philippines. We have established a joint panel to deal in future with difficulties that may arise, particularly in the area of agricultural exports, and I know that is an important issue for the people and the Government of the Philippines. And we';re also very conscious of the importance of such issues as distance learning in parts of the Philippines and we in Australia, because of our size, know quite a bit about distance learning, and we can turn some of that expertise I hope to the benefit and the assistance of the people of the Philippines.
Finally can I say a word about the circumstances under which the diplomatic representatives of Australia operate in different parts of the world at present. Terrorism brings a particular threat to diplomatic personnel and as Prime Minister I';m very conscious of that, and I want to take this opportunity of saying to all of the members of the Australian diplomatic staff – both Australians and locally engaged staff – that the Government does understand that and we admire very much the professional way in which you carry out your duties in challenging circumstances. We are very much alive to that and the Government will continue to do all it can to ensure that your job is made not only, as I know it is very rewarding, very productive, but also is conducted in the most secure circumstances that it can be. Diplomatic missions are inevitably in this age of terrorism a particular target. That fact has to bluntly faced and bluntly stated and that';s one of the reasons of course why we';re gathered here today in this particular building. But I did not want the opportunity to go by without addressing some of those remarks very directly to those employed by the Australian Embassy.
And can I thank you Ambassador for the wonderful arrangements that you have made, and your staff have made, for my visit. It has been excellent. It';s been a very productive visit.  I think it has added to the warm relationships between our two countries, and it';s therefore appropriate in that spirit that I conclude my remarks by declaring open these new premises. Long may they be a focal point for the further improvement of relations between our two countries.
 Thank you.
  [ends]  


Thank you Ambassador and thank you Mr Washington Sycip, Doris Ho the Chairman of the Asia Society, numerous Cabinet secretaries, diplomatic representatives, ladies and gentlemen.
It's very much a highlight of my visit to Manila and to the Philippines to have the opportunity of addressing the Asia Society and to share with you some of my thoughts on the regrettable challenge of our time and that is the challenge of terrorism and the need for like-minded free peoples to work together to tackle the challenge to our way of life represented by terrorism.
I do want to start however by emphasising the particular warmth of the bilateral relationship, and as is the case with close bilateral relationships there is always something new that one can learn.  I've learnt two things and that is that somebody who I first met in the Philippines,   namely Cesar Virata, I met the Finance Minister of the Philippines more than 20-years ago.  I was then the equivalent in the Australian Government which is Treasurer, he has ended up as the landlord for the Australian Embassy here in Manila and I've only ended up as Prime Minister.  But I do very much welcome renewing that acquaintanceship and I remember it with particular affection all those years ago when I first came to Manila.
The other thing that I've learnt is that the Australian Government funded the preparation and printing of the first ever English-Tagalog dictionary, which was in fact written by an Australian Father Leo English.  Now that is something else that I've learnt with very great interest.  Now none of that, of course, impinges directly on what I have to say to you today.  But it's those recollections that of course illustrate a very warm and very important relationship.  I had the chance earlier today to open the new Australian Embassy premises and to recall that we first had a Consulate Generalship here in 1946, we were partners in the South-East Asia treaty organisation, we were partners in the military conflict in Vietnam and we are now, of course, partners in the war against terror.  And can I say upfront how much   I appreciated as Prime Minister of Australia the forthright support given by the President and the Government and the Republic of the Philippines for the coalition of the willing in Iraq.  There is no shortage now, as there was then, of critics of my Government's decision, I remain as resolute now as I did then about the wisdom of what Australia did, the justification for what Australia did and I remain appreciative, as I expressed to your President yesterday of the very strong support that your country extended to the coalition of the willing.
But the greatest challenge we face in our region today is, of course, the challenge of terrorism and whilst inevitably my remarks will be directed towards the measures one takes in the shorter immediate term to deal with the threat of terrorism, you cannot talk about the challenge of terrorism without recognising the need to address the fundamental challenge of poverty and economic development.  And unless that is understood at the very beginning, all of us will find that our efforts to deal in a day-to-day sense with the challenge of terrorism will fall short of the mark and will be undermined.
And it is important that countries whose economic development is way behind that of others are given an opportunity to sell more of their product.  And I have this particularly in mind as I think of the struggle going on to make something meaningful out of the current DOHA round of the World Trade Organisations talks.  And I';d like to particularly commend to you, as I sometimes do in other contexts, the front page of the Asian Wall Street Journal which has a very very interesting bar chart which compares the level of subsidies of certain areas of the world in relation to farm product, and you can see something at the top which is described to the level of subsidy to the European Union, and you can';t see something at the bottom which of course is the minuscule subsidies that are provided by Australia to our farm products.  And the point I want to make is that one of the most valuable things that the developed world could do is to open up greater access to the developing countries.  I talk here, much and all as I would obviously from Australia';s point of view like to see those subsidies reduced or disappear, in terms of crying need the need of the developing countries is much greater and there';s nothing the developed world could do more that would be of value to those nations than to do something about the appallingly high level of farm subsidies that have existed for far too long for many of the developed countries.
But the challenge of terrorism is something that, the reality of it is something of which all of you are very conscious.  The people of the Philippines have suffered, your citizens have died and been maimed, and some very recently.  The citizens of Australia have died and been maimed in the terrible outrage in Bali last October.  And of course it is a challenge that all of us must face together, it';s a challenge that has to be tackled on two fronts, we do need to address issues of poverty and depravation and alienation, and I know that is very much in the mind of your government.  But we also of course through our co-operative measures between our agencies and between our governments, we also need to tackle the day to day security   and policing and other challenges which are part of the ongoing fight against terrorism.  We live in a globalised world community which has both its blessings as well as its curses.  The blessing of globalisation is that if the world follows the right trade and economic policy the benefits of globalisation can be made available to even the poorest nations and they can   have the prospect of lifting themselves out of their current poor state and condition.  One of the curses of globalisation is that it means that borders are inevitably more porous, communications are more rapid and the capacity of terrorists to fill the vacuums left by poor governance, failed states, poor policing methods and poor security methods generally, the opportunities for terrorists and other international criminal activities to take advantage   of those vacuums is all the more real.
The security and the prosperity of your country and the security and the prosperity of all of the countries of Asia will always be of enduring significance to Australia.  As a western nation in this part of the world with a strong historical association with North America, Australia inevitably has linkages with all parts of the world.  But none is more immediate to our destiny and our security and the linkages we have with the peoples of the Asia-Pacific region.  And that is something that I have emphasised in my discussions with the President of your country, and it';s something that I will emphasis in my discussions with the Prime Minister of Japan and the President of South Korea later this week.
Together Australia and the Philippines share of course the common democratic values.  And the first thing that we must understand about terrorism is that it is an attack upon countries like Australia, not because of what we have done but because of who we are.  Terrorists hate countries like Australia and the Philippines because we are open societies, there is a foolish notion abroad, there';s a foolish notion entertained by some people that if some how or other you wrap yourself into a tiny ball and you say absolutely nothing about terrorism and you never say anything that is the least bit offensive to the activities of terrorists somehow or other you will escape their wrath and somehow or other you will be spared of the impact of their terrorist activities.  The experience of the last few years disproves that proposition, and it is very much of a piece with the idea that if you feed the crocodile enough he will pay the privilege of eating you last. Because in the end it a way of life that terrorists despise and it';s a way of life that terrorists seek to bring undone.
I think all of us are painfully aware of the terrorist challenge in our region. The attacks in Bali last October, the attack in Davao earlier this year and many smaller attacks in the Philippines and in Indonesia show that the threats from Jemaah Islamiyah and other terrorist groups remains extremely high.  We have made some gains and I want on this front to express my appreciation in particular to the co-operation of the Indonesian Government in tracking down the people responsible for the outrage in Bali.  But in the process of making gains on that front the investigation reveals that Jemaah Islamiyah';s network is more extensive than first thought, and there';s still a great deal that we don';t know that JI and other groups are still likely to have capacity to mount further terrorist attacks.  That JI leaders such as Hambali and key bombers makers such as Dr Azahari are still at large.  And obviously the escape of the three terrorists yesterday here in Manila is a serious setback and it underlines for all of us the need to be vigilant and to strengthen our institutional capacity to deal effectively with terrorism.  We continue to receive reports of terrorists planning in the region, and I emphasise again the importance of improved co-operation and I';m pleased to note the extensive co-operation between the Australian Federal Police, and I acknowledge the presence of our police commissioner Mr Mick Keelty, and also the police and other security agencies of the   Philippines and of Indonesia and other countries in the region.
The ultimate success of our response to the terrorist threat will be measured by the degree to which our police and security agencies can effectively co-operate because it is at that working level where the great gains can be made, and the great dividends won.  Political agreement is   important to set the framework and to provide a guide and a lead, but it';s the working police and security level which is so important.  In March of this year we signed a bilateral agreement in relation to counter-terrorism with the Philippines, we have similar agreements with Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia and Fiji.  And Australia has also been active in cutting off flows of funds to terrorists and we jointly hosted with Indonesia a anti-terrorist financing conference in Bali last December. Australia acknowledges the heavy burden that the Philippines has had to carry in fighting terrorism, there';s been many bombing incidents in your country over a long period of time. And we';ve sought to work with you, to help where we can and we';re very proud that federal police officers, and five more of them arrived two days ago, have been able to help the Philippines in investigating the two Davao bombings earlier this year.
Yesterday, as you know, I announced a $5 million package of bilateral counter-terrorism assistance for the Philippines Government, and that package is going to focus on law enforcement, border control and port security capacity.  And it will help facilitate working level law enforcement and border control co-operation between officials in southern   Philippines and counterparts in the neighbouring regions.  We will give substance to the bilateral counter-terrorism MOU and it also reflects the importance that Australia attaches to working with the region to build counter-terrorism capacity.  And it will build on existing bilateral arrangements in areas of security and defence.  And to augment that yesterday we signed a memorandum of understanding between our respective police services and that will formalise and strengthen further police co-operation with the Philippines on both terrorism and also transnational crime.  At a region wide level Australia is working closely with the   Philippines in implementing APEC security trade in Asia Pacific region counter-terrorism initiates.  And these measures will help to secure the movement of goods and people in the region.
Of course the security of our region is also threatened by yet another challenge, and that is the challenge of North Korea.  And it will inevitably be, as it has been with your President, a focus of my discussions with the Prime Minister of Japan and the President of South Korea.  North Korea is in open breach of her obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty,   North Korea';s regime is something is an ideological relic from an earlier period, but it does not alter the potency of the threat, indeed it adds to the dimension of that threat.  It is important that we respond to the challenge of North Korea at two levels, we need to engage fully and energetically in patient diplomacy, but we also need to recognise the need for those nations most likely to influence the behaviour of North Korea, for those nations to speak in a firm and united fashion.
And yesterday the President reminded me of a speech he had made recently which identified the five countries most likely to influence North Korea, namely South Korea, Japan, Russia the United States and China.  And the need for all of those countries, particularly China, to be communicating a strong and consistent message to North Korea, and that message was that for her to remain in breach of those obligations and to continue to pursue the nuclear ambitions of which North Korea has spoken so frequently is something that in the end the rest of the world will find unacceptable.
This issue is, of course, very important to your country as it is to Australia. It is very much in our region and it is very much a challenge for all of the countries in this region in particular and the challenge is made all the more difficult by the reality that we are dealing with a regime that does not operate even for a country that has a more authoritarian approach to Government in a manner with which we are either comfortable or a manner to which we are either accustomed.  So it does represent, along with the challenge of terrorism, it does represent yet another ingredient that is creating a degree of instability and a degree of tension in our region.
Ladies and gentlemen, your society has for a long time been a wonderful forum, not only here in the Philippines but in different parts of the world to enable world leaders and others to engage in dialogue on international affairs and the challenges of our time.  The times that we live in now is quite extraordinary.  I don't think 10 or 20 years ago we would have contemplated that the biggest challenge of our time would be that of terrorism.  But I don't think that 10 or 20 years we would have contemplated also on the brighter side, many of the economic opportunities that are available to the world and are available to our societies.
Globalisation is often blamed for many things for which it is not responsible.  Globalisation is wrongly seen as the instrument by which the poorer nations of the world are left impoverished.  The reality is that the benefits of globalisation provided the barriers to more open trade are progressively dismantled, but the benefits of globalisation can become   available to all of the peoples of the world.  And if we look at the experience of the last 30 years, we find the economic history of the world replete with examples of countries that have benefited from opening up their economies, side by side with examples of countries that have not succeeded because they have either been denied the opportunity of selling their product to more closed, more prosperous societies or have turned their back on economic expansion and economic liberalisation.
Can I thank you for the opportunity of talking to you today and of sharing some of my thoughts with you about the challenges for our two societies. This visit of mine has been a chance to reaffirm at the highest political level in both countries the importance of the bilateral relationship, of the values that we share in common, and the future that together we can build for successive generations in both the Philippines and Australia.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr O'Mahony, Mr and Mrs Endo, Momoka, Professor Kawano, ladies and gentlemen. This is a really special moment. It's a moment to express our awe and respect for the wonders of medical science, to imagine that a little girl born potentially into a world of silence can be given the gift of hearing and to be able to lead a near as possible normal life as a result is something that always makes you stop and wonder about the great potential of what mankind can do.
It's also a wonderful occasion for Australian medical science. Professor Clark deserves all of the accolades that have been heaped upon him, the most recent by the Royal Society in London. It's also an occasion to congratulate the company Cochlear, a great Australian company. I'll be forgiven for saying for 19 years it operated in my electorate in Lane Cove in Sydney until the wicked redistribution commissioners took it away from us. But most importantly of all, we are here today to salute the skill of Professor Kawano, the surgeon, but very importantly to share the joy of Momoko's parents and Momoko at this wonderful gift that she has been given. It's something that touches all of us in a very special way. Making life happier for little children is about the most rewarding thing any of us can do. And we've seen the joy of these children today and what this implant means for Momoko is an even happier life.
 So can I say to Mrs and Mrs Endo how very pleased I am. Can I congratulate the company and in doing so take this opportunity on behalf of the Australian Government and I know the Australian people, of expressing my admiration for all the wonderful medical science of Australia. We punch above our weight with medical science. We always have and we always will. And it's people like Professor Clark backed at an entrepreneurial level by people like Mr O'Mahony and his company to have made it possible, and has allowed us to share for a moment the special occasion and the joy. To imagine that 50,000 lives have been changed forever for the better as a result of this marvellous device and the skill that is involved in it, is something that we should be very proud of.
I would like to invite Momoko and her mother and father to come on the stage because as well as remarking upon the occasion and presenting a plaque to Professor Kawano, which I'll do in a moment, the company has very kindly and very graciously donated some air tickets for the Endo family to come to Australia. And it will mean that Momoko will not only enjoy the sights, but also the sounds, of our wonderful country and sample the sun and the surf and all of the other native birdsongs that are peculiar to our country and will be a lasting memory of the link between her country and our country, which will mean so much to her as she grows to womanhood and plays her part in Japanese society in the years ahead.
[ends]  


  Thank you Mr Moderator, Mr Sugita, ladies and gentlemen. It is for me a special privilege to have the opportunity of participating in this symposium which is dedicated to the ongoing partnership and friendship between Australia and Japan.  It was that social commentator of an earlier century, Dr Johnson, who encouraged us to keep our friendships in good repair and the exhortations of the two speakers that have gone before me echo that sentiment.  And it is very important that a relationship such as that between Australia and Japan which has been so strong, has been so multi-faceted, and has continued to confound some of the cynics and the sceptics of all those years ago back in the 1950s, it is important at a time like this that we reflect on it and take whatever steps we can to ensure that it is not only kept in good repair but it is also strengthened and diversified in different ways years into the future.
I last visited Japan as Prime Minister just on two years ago in August 2001.  I didn';t know then and I daresay few people knew then that the world was about to change very dramatically. And over the past two years Australia and Japan, like all other Western societies have had to cope with a new menace, the menace of terrorism.  Our lives have been affected, our economies have been affected and the way in which we view each other and the way in which we relate to other nations in the world has also been affected.
As I prepare to talk to the Japanese Prime Minister later this afternoon, I will be conscious that the subject that will dominate our discussions more than anything else is the challenge of North Korea – a country whose political system is very different, not only from ours, but from just about any other political system in the world. The threat of North Korea is real, but like all threats it has to be dealt with in a careful and sober fashion through a combination of steady diplomacy, and those nations that can most influence the behaviour of North Korea – namely Japan, the United States, China, South Korea, and arguably also Russia – are speaking with a common voice, expressing a common view and a common exhortation to North Korea that her best interests lie in returning to the world community and to an acceptable mode of behaviour so far as nuclear weaponry is concerned.
  I want to take the opportunity of expressing my respect for the very active leadership role of the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Koizumi, in relation to North Korea.  I can well understand the sense of outrage and affront felt by so many people in Japan in relation to the abduction of your citizens in North Korea and the barefaced way in which that occurred and the lack of any serious remorse over such a long period of time.  It is an occasion right now for those countries such as Japan and Australia and the United States working as closely as we can with China, a nation that still ultimately can exert more influence over North Korea than any other nation, it is an occasion for all of us to work together in close partnership because the stability and the security of our region, not just the countries of North Asia, such as Japan, but also of the entire region of which we are together a part, the security of that region is involved in how the North Korean issue plays out.
  I want to take this opportunity of getting recommitting the Australian government and the Australian people to an ongoing and very close relationship with the government and the people of Japan.  Japan remains our best customer.  The partnership at an economic level between Japan and Australia which has flourished since the days in the middle 1950s when the then Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, Mr John McEwen, argued very strongly and very successfully for the negotiation of a trade agreement between, or a commercial agreement, between Australia and Japan, which laid the foundation of a relationship which continues to bulk very large in our own economic performance, and this is an occasion to pay tribute to people like McEwen and also to the many significant businessmen in Japan that have laid the foundation for decades of ongoing investment in our country and have seen the growth of an economic partnership of which Australians have ever reason to be very proud that the people of Japan must share equally in that pride.
  Japan';s economic size and economic strength remains a very significant component in the world economy.  It is too easy to forget the size and the strength of Japan';s economy compared with any others in the region.  Only China has the capacity and time to challenge it and the story economically of Japan will be very much the story economically of our region for the foreseeable future.  Japan will remain a very crucial economic partner for Australia.  Not only as an export destination, but also as second only to New Zealand as a participant in the tourist industry in our country.  Some 700,000 people from Japan come to our country each year.  The people to people links which are so important in nurturing relationships between two societies are very strong and importantly and encouragingly there is no section of the Australian population keener to learn about Japan than the younger component of our community.  And the extent to which Japanese as a language finds favour amongst young Australians is a testament to that.
I want to share with you understandably a few thoughts about Australia';s economic performance.  Over the past few years I am happy to report that Australia';s economy has grown more strongly than just about any other economy in the OECD area.  Since 1990, that';s thirteen years ago, we have had an annual economic growth rate of 3.3 per cent, and indeed over the last five or six years it has run at an even stronger rate than that.  And that of course has been in excess of most OECD countries including in particular the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and Germany.  It is important also to see the Australian story over that period of time of not just being a story of economic growth, it is also a story of a rounded economic and human performance.  I was reminded of this when some figures produced by the United Nations Development Programme under the title of its Annual Human Development Report drew attention to the fact, and this report measures not only GDP per capita but life expectancy and knowledge measured in turn by the adult literacy rate and educational enrolment.  On 1996 data Australia was ranked 15th in the world.  By the 1999 report we had moved to 7th position.  And this year';s report, which is based on the data for 2001, had Australia placed 4th of 175 countries behind only Norway, Iceland and Sweden.  That is but one measure but a very important measure that tells story that goes beyond straight economic performance.
  I would put Australia';s strong economic performance of the last few years down to a number of very significant factors.  Overall the most important has been the embracing of economic reforms, and let me say very readily by governments of both political persuasions in Australia.  The decisions taken by the former government to float the Australian dollar and implement the recommendations of the Campbell Enquiry to deregulate Australia';s financial system were very important reforms and they enjoyed the support of my party then in opposition.  Likewise the decision of the former government to lower Australia';s tariff structure through the then Prime Minister';s statement of 1991 was likewise a very important element in opening up the Australian economy and that particular decision also enjoyed the support of my party in opposition.
  Since 1996 we have added to those reforms by significant changes to our industrial relations system.  I am certain that a number of the more mature people in this audience will remember that there was a time when Australia was in some industries sometimes known as a country that had a lot of industrial disputes.  I am happy to say that that is something which by and large, with very few exceptions, has now been put years behind Australia.   In fact the most recent figures measuring industrial disputes in Australia will tell anybody who bothers to look at them that the level of industrial disputation is now at some of the lowest levels since figures began to be compiled before World War I.  We have seen a very significant change, especially in sections of the mining industry, in the burgeoning service sector, and even in those sectors of the Australian economy where the level of unionization is higher, there is a greater understanding between the workforce and management about the need for common cause to be made in the interests of the ongoing productivity and profitability of companies.
  One of the conspicuous features of the Australian economic performance of the last few years has been the extent to which we have been able to lift our levels of productivity.  I was asked at lunch why it was that consumer spending in Australia remains so strong.  I said that I thought that it was a combination of lower interest rates and higher real wages made possible through a combination of higher productivity and increases in the nominal level of wage payments.  Australian workers are better off in actual terms now than for some time and that of course is in turn feeding into a more benign industrial climate but is also in part a product of a more benign industrial climate brought about by very significant reforms in our industrial relations system.  That doesn';t mean to say that there aren';t pockets of resistance to the new dispensation but I think that it is very much the case that the old worries that used to follow some Australian companies around the world have long since been put behind them.
 We have also embarked upon a very committed programme of balancing our budgets, and in the time that the government has been in office we have recorded six successive budget surpluses.  And that represents a very significant achievement and something that I believe has fed into international expectations about the strengths of the Australian economy.  We have reduced our federal government debt to about 5 per cent of Gross Domestic Product.  That has had a valuable effect on interest rate expectations and it is also further underwritten positive perceptions of the Australian economy around the world.  I retain what might be regarded in some quarters as the rather old-fashioned view that it is both good economically and good from the point of view of expectations for governments to run balanced budgets and it is a view that is strongly endorsed at senior levels of the government that I lead.  I have to say that I, along with others, remain concerned at the growth in size of the budget deficit in the United States because of the impact of that that will have not only on the economy of that country but also upon expectations about future economic growth and future economic development.
 The other great reforms that we have undertaken of course have included taxation reform.  The introduction of a goods and services tax fixed at the level of 10 per cent.  We went to the 1998 election on the strength of that commitment and with some changes imposed upon us by a hostile upper house, it came into effect on 1 July 2000.  And much of the doomsday talk about the impact of the new taxation system failed to materialize.  By and large the cost impact appeared to be either about as predicted by our Treasury or indeed a little less and the economic system appears to have absorbed the change with apparently little disruption.  It has provided a valuable stimulus because of the removal of a lot of embedded of costs for the Australian manufacturing industry.  I think it is fair to say that the motor manufacturing industry is a good example of an industry that particularly benefited from the introduction of a 10 per cent goods and services tax replacing a very outdated 22 per cent wholesale sales tax.  Overall tax reform has come and gone leaving behind its benefits and not the trail of wreckage and misery and pestilence that was predicted by those who imposed its introduction.
  We have also embarked upon a programme of continuing privatization of government assets that ought no longer remain in government hands.  This process was started with our support by the former government whereby it sold the government';s interest in the Commonwealth Bank and its interest in the national air carrier, Qantas.  We have sold the government';s interest in just under 50 per cent of the national communications carrier, Telstra, and we have announced that we are satisfied with the adequacy of services to be provided in rural Australia where setting about the process of winning legislative approval, and that won';t be easy let me acknowledge given the state of the Senate, the upper house, legislative approval to sell our remaining interest in Telstra.
  Overall it is a story of strong economic change and strong economic reform.  I do think the most profound observation I could make on the process of economic reform that has been undertaken in Australia is that it has carried in its train, or produced in its wake, a very big cultural change in the attitude of the Australian workforce and also very particularly the attitude of business leaders.  The old notion that Australians that either workers or businessmen or women sought protection behind tariff barriers and a rather cloistered economy, those days are decades behind us.  I think the outward looking, innovative approach taken by business leaders in Australia, in so many fields, has played a very major part in the economic transformation of our country.  And I also believe that the flexibility and the adaptability of Australian workers both at home and around the world is increasingly and properly seen as one of the major components of economic strengths and the economic stability of Australia.  And nobody who has observed the social and economic experience of any country takes continued economic success for granted.
  And I recognize that in Australia, as is the case in Japan, the process of economic change and economic reform, is an ongoing process.  We are part of a globalised world economy and that is not going to change.  I am a great believer in globalization, I have seen it bring enormous benefits to those countries that have practiced an open approach to the management of their economies.  I have seen those countries who have tried to resist globablisation by closing down their economies or maintaining them as closed economies fall behind,  I have seen the benefits of globalisation fee through into Australia';s economic performance and I would hope particularly against the background of the still rather disappointing progress being made in achieving outcomes in the context of the Doha Trade Round, I would hope that the developed world in particular renews its commitment to making gains on a multilateral front so far as more open trade is concerned.
  There is no country in the world that practices pure free trade but it is the case that there are some rather conspicuous peaks in the levels of protection to be found around the world and most of them of course are to be found in areas that touch upon areas that touch upon agricultural output and agricultural product.  I mention that not only because I am the Prime Minister of a very lowly subsidized and highly efficient farm economy, but I also mention it because I am conscious of the gains to be won for developing countries if they can get access to the markets of more developed countries for their agricultural exports.  And it remains the case that the levels of protection particularly but not only in the European Union but also of course the levels of protection here in Japan and in the United States, but on a straight statistical comparison none are higher and more objectionable because of that than those of the European Union, that they do represent very significant barriers to the efforts of developing countries to sell their product and if gains can be won on that front then the world will be the richer for it and the benefits of globalization will be as apparent to those developing countries as they have become to countries such as Australia and Japan.
  Could I finish a note that I commenced my remarks with, and that is the changed character or the changed emphasis of the relationship between our two countries over the past two years.  I want to pay tribute to the great support that the Prime Minister of Japan gave to the coalition of the willing in the recent military operation in Iraq.  I am conscious because like any other democratically elected Prime Minister I keep an eye on public opinion.  I am conscious that the support extended by Mr Koizumi to the coalition of the willing was not universally popular in this country and it is precisely because of that that I believe it is all the more deserving of praise and deserving of support.  His government gave forthright leadership on that issue.  It continues to retain a commitment, a very strong commitment and a valuable commitment to the reconstruction of Iraq and his Prime Ministership has been conspicuous in leading Japan to a more confident and I believe properly assertive role in the affairs of this region and of the broader world community and I think he';s, if I may say so, achieved an admirable balance between his responsibilities domestically and I think the leadership role that Japan properly has and ought to have in the world.
Can I again thank all of you for supporting this symposium and to take the opportunity of saying again how valuable the relationship is to me personally.  I know it is valuable to all shades of political opinion in Australia and in saying what I have today I know I speak for all Australians in expressing our gratitude for what the relationship has meant to us since the late 1950s, what it continues to mean and what potential I know it has for years into the future.
  QUESTION &amp; ANSWER SESSION
QUESTION:
You talked about the success of reform, which is necessary for all countries in the ever-changing global conditions. But when it comes to reform, we often are faced with protestors and it is often said that the devils live in details. We have the problem. We understand the conception, the necessity of reform, but it is very difficult to implement and enforce it. What was your biggest challenge during your administration in achieving reform? How did you overcome? Could you give us a message for Japan.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I wouldn';t presume to tell another country how it should tackle the process of reform. I';ve learned enough over the years to be very wary of doing that, so I have a disclaimer right at the beginning – this is not a piece of gratuitous advice to any other country. My own experience has been that you can normally take the Australian people with you on a fundamental reform if that reform satisfies two essential tests. The first test is that you have to persuade people that it';s going to be good for Australia. That';s the first thing. Most people, despite what is cynically said by some, most people in my country are interested in the future of Australia. They do care about our standing in the world and they do care about what people think of us, and they do worry about the kind of society they';re going to leave for future generations. So if you can persuade them that it';s good for Australia, then they will go along with it, provided you can persuade them of something else – and that is that it';s got to pass the fundamental test of fairness.
 If you can';t persuade them that it';s fundamentally fair, as well as persuading them that it';s going to make Australia a stronger and better country, then I think you';re really struggling. And I have found that they are the two tests. And I';ve watched some other countries – I won';t name them – grappling with reform, and well I';ll name one of them. I think most of the reforms that were carried out by the Thatcher Government in the United Kingdom, for which I have great admiration, worked because they passed both of those tests. There was one towards the end of her term in office that didn';t seem to me to pass the second limb of those tests – namely the poll tax – and I think that was… didn';t seem to be fair, and therefore whatever may have been its other intrinsic merit, it sort of came apart. I have tried to apply those two tests to our reforms. There are a lot of people who felt they mightn';t be better off as a result of tax reform, but somehow or other they felt that it was probably good for the country that the old system outlived its usefulness, and we ought to have a go at a new system. Now that';s my experience in the Australian culture. I have no idea whether that is appropriate for other countries and I wouldn';t presume to say whether or not it is.
QUESTION:
I would like to ask a question with regard to North Korea – something you referred to in your speech as well. Before coming here I believe in the Philippines you received a proposal from President Macapagal-Arroyo for a summit meeting of the countries concerned. What is your response to that and what do you believe is the most appropriate framework for consultations in order to deal with this North Korean issue?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the proposal that was mentioned to me was one that was in a speech of the Philippines President, President Arroyo, a little while ago in which she proposed the possibility of the hosting of a regional meeting perhaps by Australia and the Philippines in relation to North Korea. I said that I had no objection to that in principle and in general terms was positive, but I did not want to see it cut across the initiative now underway and I do believe very strongly that we should keep a steady emphasis on the notion of trying to get a five power discussion – the two Koreas, Japan, the United States and China – and we shouldn';t at the moment, because I think that is a framework that will offer the best prospect of success, we shouldn';t at the moment get diverted by a focus on some other initiative, which although worthy in its own right, is one that we should perhaps come to if other proposals don';t work. I think very strongly we need an emphasis on that five country, five power approach, and I think that will be the best way given the current attitudes of different countries, that we can deal with the issue.
QUESTION:
As you mentioned in your remarks, we have very close economic relations between Japan and Australia. Especially for Japan – 59% of coal and 50% of iron ore and 43% of alumina and 51% of cotton and a large percentage of many resources that Japan imports come from Australia. And once these supplies stop, Japan will fail. So Australia is to such an extent a very important country for Japan. But I feel infuriated, well sorry to say this because this is a program organized by Nikkei, but Japanese television and newspapers do not really report about Australia at all. When some female students are killed, then that makes the headlines, but otherwise there are no reports about Australia, and I hope Nikkei will take the lead in reporting more about Australia. My question for you Mr Prime Minister – I wonder if there are many news reports in Australia about Japan. If the two countries fall into self complacency, that';s no good in the interests of our bilateral relations. We have got to do something about it, and I hope Nikkei will engage in some soul searching in this respect. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I would never want to stand between the media of the world and the inner self, and I am invite any introspection that anybody thinks should occur to take place. Does the Australian media report on Japan? Yes it does, I would say as a fairly voracious consumer of the Australian media, sometimes indigestibly, but I think Japan is quite widely covered, not only politically, not only in the context of our bilateral relationship, but given that our cultures are very different in many ways – our language and predominant religious affiliations and the like – I think Japan is quite well covered and it';s not just by Japanese-based Australian correspondents, but also more generally. And I think that';s a good thing. I think Japan is seen as an interesting country, if I can use that word in a very positive way, and you can';t always rely on these things but I saw some data about attitudes towards countries in the world and Japan was by and large very positively regarded amongst the Australians polled. So I think in that sense the man and woman in the street in Australia does know, does hear quite a bit about Japan and I think most of it is pretty positive.
QUESTION:
Don Woolford from AAP, part of the indigestible Australian press. As you said Prime Minister, Japan is Australia';s biggest customer of Australian goods and I don';t think anyone imagines that the full potential has been reached. But as you also referred to this fairly briefly, agriculture remains a great sore point, beef tariffs, our charges that Japan is hiding behind the European farm lobby and the Doha round and so on. So with that background, my question is can agriculture be permanently quarantined, put to one side in the wider trade interest, or could Australia ultimately, and it has already made this sort of threat in the Doha context, say right enough is enough, we don';t go further without significant movement on agriculture?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I';m not here to make threats to anybody. I';m here to argue the reasons for change and reform. As far as the Doha round is concerned, if it falls over through want of further progress on the agricultural front, and that is its greatest danger because that is where the high peaks of protection remain, industrial tariffs have seen enormous reductions. By and large, industrial tariffs have, while they haven';t totally disappeared, they have certainly come down quite dramatically over the last 20 years. But there are still quite high levels of protection in agriculture and we do need to make progress on that front. And my views on that are quite well known. I will continue to put them, but I';m ever an optimist. The bilateral relationship between our two countries has meant an enormous amount for Australia. That doesn';t mean that each of us can';t argue for change and reform that we regard as meritorious in its own right and also beneficial to our economies in the future. But if you';re looking at the aggregate context of the world trading environment, the greatest benefit of a big breakthrough on agriculture would be the benefits that would flow to the really low per capita income developing countries that have precious little other than agriculture to sell. And there have been plenty of measurements of this, but one of them I saw roughly said – and don';t hold me to the precise mathematics of this – roughly said that the elimination of developed country barriers against agricultural trade would be the equivalent of four or five times the value of official development assistance from the developed world to those developing countries. That';s the order of magnitude that you';re dealing with and that is what really is at stake.
QUESTION:
Over the years I have been aware that Australia has been working on this very difficult challenge of multicultural society and I pay full respect to your country for that. As Prime Minister you mentioned more recently there has been terrorism, the international tension, and 80 or so Australians lost their lives in the bombing attack in Bali for example. Now you did not refer to the future of multicultural society in your speech today. In this tense international situation Mr Prime Minister, is there any change in your government policy to seek multicultural society, or would you stick to that policy?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we maintain a constancy of policy as far as immigration is concerned. We';re running a larger immigration program now than we did in the early years of being in office. It continues to be completely non-discriminatory as far as race or religion or country of origin is concerned, and that will be the case I';m sure into the foreseeable future. I can';t see any likelihood of that being changed. We';re a nation that asks of people who come to Australia that they give their overriding commitment to Australia and its values and its institutions, but we don';t ask them to lose a place in their heart for the country in which they were born, wherever that might be. And people observing the cultures of the country of their birth, consistent with that overriding commitment that I mentioned earlier, is regarded as not only something that is acceptable but something to be encouraged. I think we';re a harmonious country. That doesn';t mean to say there aren';t bigots and prejudiced people in Australia like every other nation, but by and large Australia has been more successful than many in blending people together and I think as time goes by people feel a very comfortable identification with the distinctive Australian values and distinctive Australian attitudes which in turn have been influenced over the years and tempered by successive waves of migrants from different parts of the world. To give you an idea of the face of modern Australia, it may surprise many of you for me to tell you that the foreign language which is most widely spoken in Australia are the various dialects of Chinese. And there are far more people who speak the various dialects of Chinese in Australia now than speak Italian or Greek, simply because of the impact in more recent years of immigration. And at the last Federal election some 13 to 15 per cent of my own electorate in Sydney was of ethnic Chinese origin, and it gives you just some indication of the face of modern Australia, and particularly in that case, the face of modern Sydney.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Mr Muto, to you and your colleagues, it';s very gracious of you to host this breakfast to give me an opportunity to express my gratitude for the continuing strong interest of parliamentarians from the Diet in the relationship between our two countries.
In the time that I have been Prime Minister of Australia, I have had many meetings with prime ministers of Japan. The meeting I had last night with Koizumi was different from all of the others because it was dominated by security and issues relating to international terrorism, and also in particular the threat posed by North Korea. That does not mean for a moment that the economic and trading relationship is any less important. It is just that the character of the relationship has expanded to include a very significant dialogue on security issues.
I understand full well Japan';s concern about North Korea and the very legitimate anger amongst the Japanese people regarding the abduction of your citizens by the North Koreans – an inexcusable act by that country. Mr Koizumi and I discussed the matter in detail last night and our approach is very similar. We both believe that all of the major countries in the region, or who have interests or influence in the region, must be part of a discussion to bring about a settlement.
A brief word on some bilateral matters. We are delighted to be able to participate in the Expo, and we are very pleased that the signing of the framework agreement will lay the foundation of even closer economic relations in the future. I noticed your comments on agriculture. We have a saying in English – we must agree to disagree. I think it is important that we understand the impact of heavily subsidised agriculture on the developing countries of the world, and in the interests of the longer-term maintenance of the multilateral world trading system there does need to be progress made on the agricultural front. And of course Australia has legitimate national interests on the issue as well, which I have pursued with your Prime Minister.
Finally, can I again say how happy I am to be back in Tokyo and how much I value the relationship, both at a personal level with your Prime Minister and also between our two peoples.
[ends]  


Mr Imai, gentlemen. I want to thank you for your gracious hospitality because the interaction between the business leaders of Japan and the business leaders of Australia has always been a major and enduring part of the relationship between our two countries.
As I look at the list of companies represented around this table, I am conscious of the huge financial and commercial and economic commitment that has been made by Japanese business to Australia over a period of some 50 years or more. So many of them have become household names in Australia and are very much identified with the development of the Australian economy over past decades.
The signing of the new framework by Mr Koizumi and myself yesterday owes a lot to the energy of the Council. Without their encouragement, it may well be that this very important document would not have been given the emphasis that it was, and I want to thank both the Japanese and the Australian participants in the Council for all of the work they did to achieve the new framework. The Australian economy maintains a very strong level of economic growth and we are anxious to not only consolidate the business and economic links we have with Japan, but also to expand them, and that is why the framework is so very important and that is why it's very significant to the future of the economic partnership between our two countries.
It's always a great pleasure to come to Japan and on behalf of my wife and myself and the other members of my party, I want to thank you collectively for the contribution you have made to making our visit so memorable. We will always place huge significance on our relationship with Japan and this visit has been another opportunity to emphasise that.
Thank you.
[ends]


That was about the best introduction you can possibly get - that tune. But ladies and gentlemen, can I first of all acknowledge my four hosts this morning - Mr Kim Jae-chul the Chairman of KITA, and the representative Mr Kim Young-soo, Mr Kim Hyo-sung and Mr Choi Yang-So. And can I also acknowledge the presence of the Ambassador designate to Australia from the Republic of Korea, Ambassador Choi and Mr Colin Heseltine, the Ambassador of Australia in Korea.
I can't think of a more appropriate time for the Prime Minister of Australia to visit Korea than at present. Not only does this visit take place against the backdrop of a very tense and difficult situation between your country and North Korea, a situation which is not only of great importance to the people of the Republic of Korea - directly, significantly important to the people of the Republic of Korea - but it is also very important to all of the countries of the region of which we are part. And in the discussions that I had today with your President, I assured him that the government of Australia would work assiduously with the government of Korea, the government of the United States, the government of China and the government of all other interested nations, to bring about a peaceful solution. A steady, determined, effective diplomatic effort is needed. It is also essential that those of us who are of like mind communicate to North Korea the wholly legitimate view in terms of the international responsibility of nations, that turning away from nuclear ambitions by North Korea is the only result that can bring about a permanently peaceful and satisfactory solution to this very challenging issue.
But tonight I am conscious that I am addressing the representatives of a business community here in Korea that means a great deal to my country. Korea is one of Australia's most valued trading partners. Korea is amongst the top rank of countries on whom Australia's living standards through trade depends. The partnership between our two nations has been spectacularly successful. Yours is a country that has embraced the advantages of globalisation and through doing that played out a fine example to the rest of the world. I make many speeches in Australia about globalisation. I extol its virtues and whenever I do, I almost invariably quote Korea as an example of a country which has grabbed hold of the advantages of globalisation and through that, lifted in a quite short period of time and quite dramatically, the living standards of all its people.
This audience better than I would know the state and position of the Korean economy 30 to 40 years ago. You will now know that this nation is the 13th largest economy in the world. And in the OECD area in recent years, Korea's growth rate has been greater than any other member of that 24 nation group. And this is an illustration of the benefits of globalisation. Whenever the industrialised nations of the world gather to talk about economics and trade, there is always a gaggle of demonstrators who would seek to interrupt those meetings. There is always a group of people who say that globalisation impoverishes people. Korea is a living example of how globalisation has enriched people. Korea is an example of how a nation can in a short period of time transform itself from a poorly developed nation to a nation which is a strong competitor in the world, is an economic powerhouse in our own region, and for me as Prime Minister of Australia, a very much admired and gratefully received purchaser and trading partner of our goods and services.
 I have reminded a number of audiences today that the company POSCO that I will visit tomorrow is the largest single commercial customer that Australia has anywhere in the world, and that itself is a metaphor for the importance of the relationship between our two nations. But that is the present. What we are about of course is the future. We are about building even closer links between our two communities. The people to people links are very extensive, and I can say that in a very personal way because I doubt that there is a greater concentration of Australians of Korean descent than within my own constituency of Bennelong in the north-western suburbs of Sydney. Indeed, there is a Korean Chamber of Commerce in the suburb of Eastwood which is within my electorate. And the relationship and the linkages between Australians of Korean heritage and other Australians within my electorate is testament to the openness and the inclusiveness of modern Australia.
But as I look to the future, I think of course in an economic sense, I think the opportunities that will open up I believe for Australian suppliers of natural gas. I understand that your appetite, if I can put it that way, for natural gas will grow at the rate of some 10 to 12 million tonnes per annum. That's a lot of gas. We have a lot of gas, and very importantly we supply it on time according to price in circumstances of total stability, reliability and predictability. And just as when the Chinese authorities decided that in the interests of stability and reliability, the Guangdong contract should go to the north-west shelf consortium last year, so it is I hope that the contract or supply of natural gas already signed, I think two or three months ago, will be followed in the years ahead by many others.
 I'm also conscious that as we sit down to eat tonight, we may per chance be consuming beef. That is a subject that is of course not only close to Australian's stomachs, but also close to Australian hearts when it comes to export opportunities. And I simply remark that in the long run all of us will benefit from the further expansion and opening of trade and economic opportunities.
 This is the second occasion that I have visited your country as Prime Minister. I have valued the discussions that I have had today and the opportunity to renew the commitment of Australia and the Australian people to our very important bilateral relationship. On the 27th of July, we will together commemorate the armistice signed at Pammunjum in 1953 which ended the Korean War, an event that of course shaped and scarred the lives of many of your fellow citizens, a conflict where Australians and Koreans fought side by side in the defence of the liberty of your country. And in that recollection, I record my gratitude to the support that Korea extended to the coalition of the willing in Iraq, and the contribution that you have subsequently made to the reconstruction of that country. The ready contribution that you made to the Australian-led force in East Timor. These were the responses of a nation conscious of its own responsibilities and the equal of what responsibility in a world community requires of any country. And to we Australians, it was a demonstration of friendship from a country with whom we have developed a very close relationship.
May I conclude my remarks by inviting you to join in a toast to the economic and business relationship between our two countries, the development of ever wider and freer trade in the world in the long-term interests of all the people of our planet.
Thank you.
  [ends]  


Your Excellency President Roh of the Republic of Korea, Mrs Kwon, Ministers in the Korean Government, ladies and gentlemen.
It is for my wife and I and our party a great pleasure to be here in Seoul and to join you in this luncheon. Australia and Korea are close friends. We have a very deep economic relationship and we have much shared history, and a very important part of that shared history will be commemorated on the 27th of July when Australian veterans join the veterans of other countries in marking the 50th anniversary of the signing of the armistice in the Korean War.
Your Excellency, during our discussions this morning we devoted almost an hour to talking on the vexed and challenging issue of North Korea. We all want this matter settled peacefully. No country has a greater interest in the peaceful resolution of this issue than yours. Your Excellency, and Australia will work closely with you and other nations whose goal is the same.
We warmly welcome the significant involvement of China in acting as a party wanting to bring about a fair and peaceful resolution. It is necessary that the nations of the world maintain a steady diplomatic campaign to achieve the outcome we all want. But for that campaign to be successful, it is essential that the nations most directly involved speak with the same voice and show a united front and a united determination to achieve the right outcome.
Our relationship Mr President is very extensive when it comes to trade and commerce. Many Australians perhaps do not know that a Korean company, POSCO, is the largest single commercial customer that Australia has anywhere in the world, and we are very happy to see that custom get even bigger. All of us have an interest in a more open world trading system. You were kind enough Mr President to refer to Australia';s economic performance. Let me acknowledge the extraordinary economic performance of Korea, whose rate of growth is one of the fastest, if not the fastest, in the OECD area. Indeed, frequently in speeches Mr President in Australia, I quote Korea as an outstanding example of a country which has grabbed hold of the benefits of globalization and transformed her economy in the lifetime of many, if not most, people in this room.
Mr President, again my warm thanks to you and your wife for the welcome you have extended to Janette and myself. To have the opportunity to talk directly and openly with you at such a critical time in the history of your country and the region, has been very valuable. Let me assure you that we remain your firm friend, a very understanding partner and colleague, in addressing a most difficult issue.
 Ladies and gentlemen, could you join me in a toast to the health of his His Excellency the President of Korea, Mrs Kwon and the friendship of the people of Australia and the people of Korea.
  [ends]  


Thank you very much General, Leader of the Opposition, Colonel Frewen, Assistant Commissioner Ben McDevitt, Commissioner Mick Keelty of the Australian Federal Police, men and women of the Australian Defence Force and of the Australian Federal Police.
 I want on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people to thank you for your professional commitment that will take you to the Solomon Islands, to say that you have the very strong support and the total good wishes of the Australian community for what you are doing. We are responding to a very heartfelt request from a small country in our region that needs our help so that it doesn';t become a failed state and fall further into disorder and disorganisation, posing in time not only a threat to the safety and wellbeing of its own citizens, but potentially the whole region, which is so important to Australia.
Any mission like this involves an element of danger, but you have the great advantage of going superbly trained. You are going in sufficiently large numbers to deliver the maximum conditions of safety and security, and that is a very deliberate decision by the Government, on the advice of the defence forces and the Australian Federal Police. You go on the invitation and with the full legal security and guarantee of that invitation from the government of the Solomon Islands, and importantly you';re also going in company with men and women from other countries in the region. It is a regional exercise properly titled in pidgin ‘Operation Helpem Fren';, and that is very much what this is about. It is Australia being a good Pacific neighbour and helping a very small country that really does need help and has cried out for assistance, and we';re going to provide it, as we should. Not only is it good that we do that for the wellbeing of the people of the Solomon Islands, but it';s also important we do it for the long-term stability and security of our whole region. And in the end, that';s in Australia';s interests, which is the most important thing in my mind and I know in the minds of all of you.
The only other things I want to say is good luck, I hope to have you all back safe and sound as soon as possible. The ADF personnel obviously a bit earlier than the police because it is essentially a policing operation, but we need to be there in sufficient numbers from the ADF and the police to guarantee a secure and a speedy establishment of law and order. And to the families that will be left behind, you will be very much in our thoughts. We will endeavour, both through the defence forces and in other ways, to provide you with support and encouragement in the time that your loved ones are away, just as we did in relation to our recent deployment in Iraq. I think it is tremendously important when men and women go abroad in uniform in the name of Australia, that those they leave behind and their families are looked after. It';s all part of preserving morale and sending a message that what you';re doing is appreciated.
 So to all the men and women, good luck, godspeed, hope to see you soon. You';re going on a great mission with the total support of the Australian people. Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much, General Cosgrove; Mr Mick Keelty, the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police; Mr Ben McDevitt, who will be the Commander of the police contingent; Mr Nick Warner, who will be the special representative; my fellow prime ministers; the Australian Defence Minister; the Australian Leader of the Opposition; men and women of the Defence Forces and the police services of the Pacific.
  This is a unique gathering here of the military forces and the police of the Pacific nations in a city that has always been very much  part of the history of the defence of Australia and that is the city of Townsville.  It is an opportunity to say to the people of the Solomon Islands that we in the Pacific are your friends, we understand you need help, we understand that you want conditions of law and order and peace and hope for your people in the years ahead and you've reached out your hand and asked us for help and we have come together in a friendly Pacific way under the appropriate code name of 'Operation Helpem Fren' we've come together, all of us, to help you.
I want, on behalf of the Australian people, to wish all of you good luck and God speed.  Our thoughts and our support and our goodwill will be with you during your mission.  I know that you will do it professionally.  And you go into circumstances of inevitable risk and challenge knowing two very important things, that you have been superbly trained for this mission and that you have the goodwill and the support of the peoples of your countries.
  The Pacific is a special part of the world and we deal with things in a special way and it's a wonderful piece of symbolism as well as the reality of the unity of the countries of the Pacific that we are all together here and we have a contingent that is made up of elements of so many different countries and that adds to its strength and it adds to the impact that it is going to have.  And I believe the mission will not only be successfull for the Solomon Islands but very importantly it will send a signal to other countries in the region that help is available if it is sought, that we do have a desire to help all of the peoples of the Pacific to have conditions of law and order and hope and peace and stability for their future generations.
To the men and women in particular, if I may say so as Prime Minister of Australia, of the Australian Defence Force and the police and the protective services, I'm very proud of all of you, you've done this country such wonderful service in other theatres of danger and other theatres of operation and once again you fill Australian hearts with pride and respect and admiration for the professional way in which you carry out your work.  Good luck.  I hope to see you all back safe and sound and we'll do our level best to look after your families and loved ones while you are away because we know that they carry a special burden of loneliness and separation and we'll do our level best to make it a little easier.  Good luck and thank you for what you are doing for Australia.
[Ends]


Thank you very much, Mr Buchanan, Professor Bergin, ladies and gentlemen.  I was struck as I listened to the introduction by the reference that Mr Buchanan gave to the various overarching eras through which most of us have lived.  So when I think of my own life and my own experience of international conditions it's fair to say that I've essentially lived through three eras - the Cold War, of course starting after World War II and conditioned very much by the containment theories articulated by George Kennen and Dean Acheson and many others, an era that lasted until those extraordinary events of the late 1980s, which still probably resonate with me as the most exhilarating images that I have witnessed.  And then that relatively short and uncharted period between the end of the Cold War and September 2001, where the world grappled in many ways inadequately with trying to find a new compass to embrace the collapse of the old bipolar constants, menacing though they were, they had a predicability and they had a certain symmetry and they mandated certain responses of different countries.  And then, of course, it's been really the age of terror at which came in September of 2001 and we all have different experiences of it.
  I can't, of course, get out of my mind the fact that I physically met President George Bush for the first time on the 10th of September, 2001 at the White House.  And as I think back over the agenda for the discussions that day there wasn't anything on it that I could honestly now, even with the most, you know, liberal interpretation and recollection the passage of time gives you, suggest that we had focused, either of us, on what was about to overcome us.  So we do…and the point of all of that is that we do live in a very different world and it's a world that's going to be very different for us for a very long period of time and it's important that we all recognise that.
  And can I say as somebody who tries very hard every waking hour of every day to keep in touch with what the Australian people are thinking, can I say to you that the Australian people know that they are living in a different world and through whatever combination of the efforts of people at a political and agency level gathered here in this room through whatever combination, can I say that we have been successful in contributing to their recognition of that.  Obviously the power of communication of frightening images has done even more than any of our advocacy but the Australian people know the world is different and they are prepared, overwhelmingly, to accept the constraints and the disciplines and the changes but they do want a sense of proportion.  And my messages out of the fact that we do live in a very different world are really two-fold that, firstly, we have to, of course, have a sense of vigilance as a nation and as a free people around the world.  We also have to preserve a sense of proportion that we are less safe now and more vulnerable to attack than we were before September of 2001 and we've had some very painful reminders near to home in Bali just how vulnerable we and our diaspora, temporary though it may be, is around the world.
  But we also do need to preserve a sense of proportion and I was reminded of that need quite forcibly today as I watched the television bulletins tonight and I thought for a moment that the co-sponsor of this gathering had been the American Department of Homeland Security because of the conjunction of the publicity of that aviation travel warning and the proper exchanges that took place between our agencies and the American and the proper need to have the correction made.  But it all does remind us that we have to keep a sense of proportion because whether the threat is of a hijacking of an aircraft originating in Australia or the targeting of Australia through that means of terrorist attack, both of them of course, although they are different in character, very different, they are dramatically different both of them from what were our expectations before September of 2001.  But I think the other sense of proportion is to remind ourselves that even in this more vulnerable world in which we live there are degrees of vulnerability amongst nations and Australia does still remain amongst the safer of the world's societies but one that, because of our values and because of our way of life, is a very different situation from what obtained before September of 2001.
You've heard today in some detail, and I won't weary you with a recapitulation of it, but Australia's response to the new realities of the world has essentially been on four fronts.  We have put more resources into both defence and to the intelligence and security agencies.  There has been an enhanced level of internal domestic cooperation between the Commonwealth and the States and local government.  We have enacted more effective laws which have necessarily involved curtailment of some areas of individual freedom and license that previously existed but I think to a very acceptable and appropriate level and degree.  And, finally and very importantly, we have built new areas of cooperation internationally, especially at the agency level.  I think one of the real successes that Australia has achieved since September of 2001 has been the extent to which we have been able to build agency trust and cooperation, particularly in our own region.  And I think especially and gratefully of the work of the Australian Federal Police and their counterparts in Indonesia and in other parts of our region because those particular areas of cooperation have played a major role in the apparently successful pursuit of most of those responsible for the murder of 88 Australians in Bali on the 12th of October last year.
It is important that we emphasise, realistically I say this, the value of cooperation at an agency level.  It is the nature of international relations, particularly in our own region, that if you endeavour to achieve the outcome working down from the highest level of political agreement the outcome can be harder to achieve but if you attack the problem at an agency level it is remarkable how much can be achieved and how much that cooperation in turn contributes to greater political harmony and greater political outcomes.
  So can I say very firmly and very gratefully as Prime Minister that the value that's been added to the anticipatory capacity of this country, especially in the region, as well as the pursuit capacity of our and other agencies by that cooperation has been quite invaluable.  It goes without saying that in the war on terror nothing is more important than intelligence.  More resources into intelligence gathering and the role of intelligence in hopefully anticipating, however generic that anticipation may be, is absolutely central.  And, of course, crucial in that area is our very close intelligence relationship with the United States and the United Kingdom without, of course, in any way derogating from our developing intelligence relationships with other agencies.  But that is a well-established, very mature, very reciprocally reliable and confidential relationship and something that has been of enormous value to us already and I'm sure in the years ahead will be of even greater value.
  I won't be the first person at this conference to say so but intelligence, of course, is a very imprecise science and it's incredibly important that we preserve a sense of perspective about the role that intelligence can play.  This morning - and I do it fairly regularly for my sins - I listened to Radio National.   I heard a debate between Allan Behm and two of our friends on the table from respectively the United Kingdom and the United States debating many of the issues that are the subject of this conference.  And I thought they all, in their different ways, made that point very effectively that intelligence is vital, it is crucial, it can make the difference, literally, between life and death but it must be kept in perspective and it must be understood for what it is, that it is necessarily an imprecise science.
  And, of course, you'd be rather surprised if I didn't take the opportunity in this context of saying fairly briefly that in my view the lack of a sense of proportion in the media of the western world and not least in Australia, the United States and the United Kingdom about the debate concerning weapons of mass destruction and attempts to obtain uranium from Niger illustrates very starkly the need to keep a sense of proportion because those who have followed that debate at a professional level very closely - and there are many in this room tonight - will know that in terms of the totality of intelligence assessments that were available at the time the significance of that particular issue was quite minuscule when put against the accumulation of other intelligence that was coming to the Government.
Could I just make two or three other disconnected but I think very relative points in this whole debate.  I do agree very strongly with Mr Buchanan's analysis that we do have to tackle the sources of discontent on which terrorism feeds.  I'm not certain that the proof is quite as absolute as his remarks suggested, that all terrorism is borne out of deprivation and poverty because there's a fair bit of evidence that some of the ring leaders of international terrorism have had rather more privileged upbringings and circumstances than many but I do believe that they exploit conditions of poverty and deprivation and alienation.  And, of course, if I can return momentarily to Iraq, I think post the conflict in many respects the greatest dividend that has come has been the new hope for a settlement between Israel and the Palestinians.  And just as I think many people around the world underestimated the determination of George Bush to do what the American led coalition did in Iraq, I think there are probably still too many people who underestimate his absolute determination to bring about a settlement between Israel and the Palestinians.  And if that settlement, difficult though it may appear to be to achieve, if that settlement can be achieved then I think as a dividend and as a contribution to removing the feeding ground for the envy, which is a constant nourishment to terrorism, I think that particular dividend will be very, very great indeed and it goes without saying that the conditions which have been established now in the minds of the American electorate, in the minds of the Administration, in the minds of other Arab states, conditions that have been established or perhaps bringing about a settlement between Israel and the Palestinians would not have been possible without the success of the coalition of the willing in the military action in Iraq.
Can I finally say something about the arrangements within Australia and within our own Government for dealing with these issues.  One of the things I found of enormous co-lateral interest and value in the inevitably heavy contact I had with both the British Government and the American Administration in the lead-up to and during the war in Iraq subsequently and in the general context of the war against terror has been to compare the approaches of different governments, particularly whole of government or individual agency approaches, to the treatment of intelligence and other issues and the interaction between governments and agencies.
  And whilst I take on board what Mr Buchanan had to say about the level of, how shall I put it, the amount of disjunction between different agencies, it's inevitable in any democratic system, I have to say as I look at the arrangements as they exist in Australia and as they have been tested by the experience of the past year, I don't at this point see a need for any fundamental restructuring and that I think we have achieved, and perhaps it's inevitable in a country which is the size that we are, we have at a national level been able to achieve a fairly satisfactory whole of government approach and the degree of interaction between political government at the highest level in Australia and the various agencies, both security, defence and foreign affairs, through the operations of our national security committee of Cabinet, give me some reasonable assurance that we have been able, as best one can in a democratic parliamentary system, achieve a very effective whole of government approach to these issues.
Can I finally say to you that what encourages me greatly about this gathering tonight, looking at the guest list and looking around the room, is that it does bring together people with a contribution to make from both the Government and also the private sector and that's very encouraging and it's a reminder to me and I think it's a reminder to all of us that this is a community challenge, it's a community endeavour and that all of us, in different ways, recognise, as I said at the commencement of my remarks, that the world has changed forever as a result of those events in September of 2001, that it is not going to be a campaign easily won and it will be a campaign that will require the total support of the Australian community.  In our necessarily understated way I think Australians have made a pretty good start.  There is a mature acceptance that we're living in a more sober, different world.  They don't want hysterical overreaction.  They are prepared as pragmatic people to accept reasonable inconvenience, reasonable incursions on liberty and license that they might otherwise have not have accepted.  They do want a sense of proportion.  They do believe that this country's values are one of the reasons why it is under attack or is a vulnerable target and they are prepared to cooperate with their government and their fellow citizens to achieve the necessary outcomes but they do want to be told what it involves and they reserve that very healthy Australian cynicism which is part of the lifeblood of our democratic way of life to question propositions that don't pass the test of the man and woman in the street.  So I'm encouraged that our fellow Australians understand both the duration and the gravity of what is ahead of us.  And may I say, because many of them are here tonight and I say it very deliberately that as Prime Minister I am very encouraged by the quality of the advice that I receive from our intelligence agencies and from those who are responsible for advising us.  I feel for them on occasions.  So much is expected when something goes wrong, so much is demanded in retrospect when something goes wrong yet in the mass of material and information that crosses the desk of an intelligence agency in western society the magnitude of the task is very daunting.  And whilst we all hope that we can be spared a terrible attack in the future I think we can say that we do have men and women of great commitment to this country and of high professionalism engaged in providing us with intelligence and advice.  Thank you.
[Ends]
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
QUESTION:
My name's Counsellor Jo Ross from the Redland Shire Council and I'm here on behalf of local government.  I raised the question earlier on today… local government is a willing partner in the preparedness to respond after the event and we go a long way to achieving some very good results at that level, we are at the cold face, we are the closest to the level of government or arm of government to the people.  What we want to do… it's been raised that the ALGA conference last year, Mr Prime Minister, as getting the recognition of local government in the constitution and to become equal partners at the table when we're talking about these things.  We have the arms and legs to do the work for you, we want to join you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I've got to plead guilty.  I';ve got form on this.  I was responsible, although I think actually Peter Reith was even more responsible for leading a campaign to defeat the referendum proposition on this back in 1998.  It's pretty hard to change the constitution in this country.  As a, you know, conservative on a lot of issues that warms me.  But can I say on the subject of the seminar, subject of the conference, I'm very keen that local government do be involved.  I mean, necessarily so many of the things that you can contribute on can be governed by what responses we have from the states, but if there are different ways in which at a national level we can further involve local government, I'm very keen that that happen.  But I can't give you any promises about constitutional change in that area.  Now if you talk to me about Senate obstruction, that might be different.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Trevor Thomas, the Managing Editor of Australian Defence Business Review, but for tonight we won't have a media question if that's okay.  Look, today during the presentations there were questions from the floor about the perception of the Government's response to the emerging threats and a lot of the responses seem to built around counter-terrorism, and we heard from Miles Jordana who talked about the emergence of a broader national security foreign affairs type policy that more wound up for some of these umbrella issues.  Could you explain to us, you know, how did you see that?  You've said that we don't need a department of Homeland Security and personally I agree with that, but I still believe we need to have some form of expression of a national security overarching policy that sees counter-terrorism as a subset not necessarily as a driver.
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah, well look, I'd thought I'd given a lot of thought to this, particularly at the end of last year after the attack in Bali, and I went through all of the administrative arrangements we have, and whilst no prime minister is foolish enough to deny his future options in relation to administrative arrangements ever, I did come to the conclusion that we didn't need major change.  I'm against having a Department of Homeland Security in Australia, I don't think it is necessary.  And I mean, whilst it's not a place for me to comment in any detail on administrative arrangements of other countries, I'm not certain that the Department of Homeland Security in the United States has necessarily achieved all of the objectives or will achieve all of the objectives that have been laid out.  I think in our system in Australia the, if I may say so, the way in which our national security of Cabinet operates does at a whole of government level gives us a broader national security perspective than I think we've previously had because it functions rather more fully and effectively than previous manifestations, as I understand of those arrangements in earlier governments have certainly… I mean, my experiences by definition limited to previous coalition governments and only one of those, but my understanding is that it does operate in a formal sense and in a disciplined way more effectively.  And I think that, and particularly the interaction between our senior ministers and our senior agencies heads on a very regular basis and it is a body that does meet very regularly, has given us a whole of government perspective of national security in an integrated way.  I don't think in a parliamentary system you can ever have an approach that doesn't accommodate the fact that essentially decisions are made if the system is working well by ministers in either a full Cabinet or a truncated version of that which is necessarily the case with the national security committee and that those decisions are taken constantly on the advice of agencies in departmental heads.  So, I think much of what I understand you to be seeking is found in the way in which that body operates and I think it has given us a whole of government consistency on these issues that perhaps would have been lacking if we had had a different approach.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, I promise not to actually ask you about when you're going to retire and I've been asked to challenge you about a number of football team scores for the weekend.  My question is actually more of interest. I work for a computer science corporation which is an Australian company with a home based in the States.  And it's of particular interest to us, and specifically myself, my interest stems from our relationship and our very close relationship with our American allies.  Do you personally see a point or a delineation whereby our relationship with the States could actually be a detracting factor in the war against terrorism as opposed to leveraging the advantage?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, no I don't, but let me explain why.  Australia is a potential target because of who we are and what we stand for rather than what we've done. I don't think there's any compelling evidence that the feeding the crocodile last theory works when you're dealing with international terrorism.  I think eventually it gets down to a question of being a target because of who you are and what you believe in.  My view is that the terrorism of which Al Qaeda exemplifies is essentially based on a blind prejudice hostility to western civilisation and we could tear up the ANZUS Alliance and disavow our association with the United States if we were minded to.  I mean, I don't think many Australians are.  But even if we theoretically for answering this questions purposes were to do so, it wouldn't alter the fact that we are an open Liberal democratic society that believes in the equality of men and women and we're a society that believes essentially that people should be able to live their lives as they think fit subject to the normal constraints of the civil society.  I think that's the main reason why we are a target and I think the relationship with the United States, which is valuable in all sorts of other ways, is secondary.  Obviously, we are seen as a close ally, I'm very conscious of that when we took our decision in relation to Iraq. But I thought they're very good reasons and the same in relation to Afghanistan.  I think in the long run the United States will be more important to Australia's future, not less.  By the middle of this century the relative economic power of the United States will by greater than what it is now.  The way the population of the United States is going, the economic development of the United States, put all of those things together and compare them with Europe and the only country that will over a period of time in my view that will begin to match that growth and expansion is - of the United States, of course - is China.  And, of course, China is a country, as you will be aware, we have taken great pains to develop very close relationships with.  I think it's why you've given me the opportunity for a commercial on our foreign policy and I think one of the distinguishing features of our foreign policy over the last few years is that notwithstanding this very close relationship we have with the United States, we've seen a real burgeoning of our relationship with China and the both of those have been achieved without detriment to each of the individual relationships and that would go on being the case because we are all essentially pragmatic people and there's value in both of those relationships, very great value.  But that's the long answer but the short answer is, no, I don't.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, [inaudible] Institution of Engineers.  You referred to a whole of government approach and this year you've seen some very significant infrastructure policy, position papers, Green papers come out.  Two of them come to mind - the power [inaudible] of energy and market reform and also Auslink land transport reform.  Now, it's quite interesting that both of those had virtually on security dimensions to it.  Auslink lacked any dimension security whatsoever, power report had about half a page devoted to security issues.  How do you think that we can instil a more security, whole-of-government approach to major infrastructure policy decisions?
PRIME MINISTER:
That's a fair point.  You're quite right, neither of those documents sort of had a security component but I think, particularly in relation to energy policy, that was a document if I recall it accurately, if we're talking about the same thing, it was focused very much on marketing and distribution.  I don't think the absence of an energy…the absence of a security segment necessarily represented a failure of the whole-of-government approach.  I think the point you make about infrastructure is very valid and I think we probably do need to make further advances on that front and I think one of the great benefits of government private sector interaction on these issues will be that we can develop a lot more on the critical infrastructure front.
  [Ends]


  Well thank you very much Colin for those very generous and undeserved remarks, Kim Keogh, Ian Warner, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
As somebody who';s conscious that we are now more than half way between the last federal election and the next, I';m very warmed by the evident support for the Liberal Party here in Perth by the turn out at today';s luncheon.  It gives me an opportunity of saying very directly to all of you without any sense of equivocation that we need your help, we need your voting support, we need your financial support, we need your constant advocacy of our cause amongst your friends because one of the things that spending a lot of years in Australian politics that tells me is that you must always expect the unexpected.  When somebody the other day was kind enough to say something complimentary to me in a radio studio, it wasn';t actually on air it was actually off air, but it was a very generous remark, I said well when I hear people say things like that I look over my shoulder trying to spot the exocet missile that is coming to disturb the equilibrium.
  Politics in Australia is always unpredictable and in the 29 years that I';ve been in Federal Parliament I can only think of four elections in that 29 years when the result was something that you could call a landslide.  And normally elections in Australia are pretty close and it comes down at a national level to no more than two or three percentage points on a two party preferred basis.  So the message out of all of that is that you may believe we';re doing fairly well federally at the present time, the polls might say that, but can I assure you that can change, it can change rapidly, it can change almost overnight, and we will have a hard fight to win the next election because it gets that much harder the longer you';ve been in office, no matter how well you might govern, no matter how hard you try to address the issues that are of concern to the men and women of Australia it is the case that as time goes by people develop reasons for not liking you, and the longer it is between the time you first won office the more people are prone to forget the reasons why they voted you in and they voted the other crowd out.  They';re prone to forget and we';ll try and not allow them to do so, the fact that under the former government you paid 17 or 18 or 19 or 20 per cent interest rates, and how anybody endured running a small business or a farm during that interest rate regime is still completely beyond me.
  So we do have a hard fight ahead of us but in the 18 months or less between now and the next election I want to engage the Australian people in a dialogue about our goals under three broad headings.  And our goals for Australia are to give this country nation security, economic strength and social stability.  But they are goals that encapsulate all of the things for which the government stands, and they also encapsulate the things that Australians want for this country.  All of us want this nation to be secure, we want it to be well defended, we want it to have well resourced intelligence services, we want to it play its part in the affairs of the world, and we want it to carry out a leadership role in our own region.  And if you look at the international events of the last year you have seen the nation playing out all of those roles under the description of national security.  We have necessarily put more resources into defence and to intelligence services as a result of us now living in the age of terrorism.  After the 11 of September and closer to home the tragedy of Bali we';re all very conscious, we have to, as I said last night in Canberra, we have to keep a sense of perspective about the terrorist threat. We don';t want to lose our free and open way of life, but we must necessarily compromise some of the freedoms we might otherwise enjoy if we didn';t have any worry about terrorism in the broader national good.  But we';ve also got to remember that this country is amongst the safer of the world societies.  But that is not a guarantee that we won';t be the object of a terrorist attack.  And if we are in the future it will be because of who we are and what we believe in rather than what we have done.  Terrorists despise free countries, they despise nations that believe in the equality of men and women in a free and open society.  And they particularly despise the open and liberal character of the kind of society that Australia represents.
  Over the last year of course our position on the international stage is very much defined by the decision we took to join the coalition in removing the regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq.  There has been a veritable cacophony of criticism in the media not only of Australia, but of also other western countries about that decision and about the intelligence basis on that decision was based. Let me say to you that I have never doubted the correctness of the decision that the Australian Government took, I have never doubted the accuracy of the intelligence assessments that were presented to us at the time and I remain an absolutely uncompromising supporter of the coalition of the willing that removed Saddam Hussein because not only was it necessary to remove a threat to the stability of the region, but it also removed a regime which on a conservative estimate was responsible for the deaths of more than 300,000 Iraqis and most importantly of all one of the great dividends that has come out of the war in Iraq has been to open up the opportunity of a lasting settlement between Israel and the Palestinians.  And that would not have been possible if Saddam Hussein had not been removed.  His removal has created the condition';s precedent for the pressure now being exerted by the American President and others on both the leadership in Israel and also the leadership of the Palestinians.  And if we can a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians on terms and conditions that are fair and just to the people of Israel who have long faced assaults on their very existence, as well as the Palestinian people, we will have removed one of the festering sources of discontent exploited by terrorist organisations such as al-Qaeda and will have struck a very powerful blow for a world and for a Middle East that is less susceptible to terrorism.  And finally and most recently of course we';ve taken action very much closer to home, in our own patch in response to a request from the people of the Solomon Islands.  We cannot afford countries such as the Solomon Islands to become failed states, failed states become magnets for money launderers, international criminals and in some cases terrorists.  And if Australia is not prepared to take a leadership role in situations such as this no one else will.  And the welcome that has been extended to our police and to the military backup the police have is proof of the wisdom of the decision.  I can';t say that it';s free of danger, I can';t predict that things will continue to go as smoothly as they have to date, but all of the signs are very encouraging.
So what you have ladies and gentlemen is you have a picture of a country which is doing the right thing internationally.  We';re putting more resources into our own domestic security, but we';re playing our role in the world.  We are a nation that has a powerful interest in a peaceful and stable region in which we live.  But we';re also a nation that has long and honourable connections with other parts of the world, and we';re a country that has always through history done the right thing and been willing to stand up and stand beside long standing allies and long standing friends.  And those attitudes will continue to dictate the foreign policy and defence decisions of the government.  And I want to pay a particular tribute to the way in which Alexander Downer who over the last year has had particular responsibilities as Minister for Foreign Affairs for the way in which he';s carried out his duties in very very difficult circumstances.
The second of the great goals that I';ve talked about of course is something that';s very important to all of us in this room, and it';s very important to all Australians, and that is our economic strength.  There is no doubt that Australia is one of the stellar economic performers of the developed world.  Our growth rates have surpassed most of those of the OECD area over the last six or seven years.  And whilst the drought, and the fairly hesitant character of international economies, particularly the American economy have taken some of the steam out of the Australian economy the underlying reality is one of reassurance and one of strength.  And we have a strong economy because over a period of years reform decisions have been taken which have laid the groundwork for this country being more competitive internationally, and I';ve never been relucent to give credit to the former government for one or two of those decisions, decisions which when they implemented them we in Opposition supported and did not oppose.  The decision of the former government to float the Australian dollar was supported by the Opposition, the decision of the former government to reduce tariff protection was supported by the then Opposition.  By contrast just about every major economic change that this government has introduced since it came to power in 1996 has been opposed tooth and nail by the Labor Party in the Senate.  Tax reform, industrial relations reform, balancing the Budget, many other reforms and changes that are necessary for the long term strength and stability of the Australian economy have been opposed.  But we are performing well, we';re performing well because hard decisions were taken, we weathered the Asian economic downturn, we were able to shift our markets from the region to North America and to Europe, and we were able through a combination of economic capacity including a flexible exchange rate to work our way through the worst effects of that downturn.  The decision of the Government to undertake taxation reform was not popular in 1998 when we went to the election, and we went through periods of severe criticism and I know there were implementation difficulties and I know at various stages sections of the business community had legitimate complaints which they bought to the government regarding the impact of the fine detail of the changes.  But many of those, I hope most, have now been put behind us, those difficulties, and we';re now beginning to see the benefits of a reform difficult at the time but a reform that has delivered a better taxation system, has made us more competitive internationally, and very importantly has reassured us a country that you can change things, and you can change them for the better if you have a government which has the commitment and the willingness to go out and explain the value of and the necessity for those changes.
  Of all of the changes that we';ve implemented in the time that we have been in government I don';t think any have been more important than the changes we have made to this country a more flexible industrial relations system.  And I regret to say that here particularly in Western Australia changes that have been made since the election of the current state government have rather taken us backwards rather than forwards in the area of industrial relations.  Long before I became Prime Minister I argued long and hard that reforming Australia';s industrial relations system, creating a climate where wage deals were made overwhelmingly at an enterprise level and not on an industry wide level or not accordingly to the dictates of the centralised wage fixation system that such an approach to industrial relations was necessary to boost the competitive edge and the competitive position of the Australian economy.  And I think at a national level the changes that we have made and many of the changes made at a state level by former Coalition Governments have contributed to the greater competitiveness to the Australian economy.  And one of the proudest boosts that I have particularly when we get embroiled in debate in Parliament about the relative performances of a government I lead and the government led by Mr Keating and Mr Hawke before me is that real wages, the take home pay, the week to week financial position of average Australian families is much better under my government than it was under the two former governments.  And one of the reasons for that is we are a more productive society now, because of industrial relations reforms people can be paid higher wages because those higher wages are based on greater productivity.  And all of you know as business men and women that you can pay higher wages to your employees if those higher wages are based on greater output and more efficient gains on the productivity front.  And real wages have gone up under this government, it';s been one of our proud boosts, but those wage increases have not produced run away inflation, they have not produced interest rates, they';ve not produced recessions you had to have as was the case under former policies.
So there';s been many reforms that have been carried out, but the reform process is never over and if we are to maintain the forward momentum of the Australian economy we must continue to take bold reformists decisions, and one of the decisions that we have to be willing to embrace is if we can negotiate the right terms is a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  I believe that the importance of our association with the United States will grow stronger and greater as the years go by rather than lessen.  Anybody who imagines that our association with the United States is somehow something that will recede into less and less importance misreads the future economic strength, the population growth, the relative economic clout and of course the overwhelming strategic importance of the United States as the one superpower of the world.
   By the year 2050 the United States population and economic clout will be significantly greater than that of the nations of the European Union, even though the population of the United States and the expanded European Union will be approximately the same.  If you go back over the last six or seven years the great bulk of the increase in the GDP of the developed world has been contributed by the United States.  I don';t make these statements as some kind of peon of praise for the United States but rather to state the reality, and the reality is that if we can link ourselves to this enormous economic dynamo, if we can become part of the great expansion and growth of the most powerful economic unit the world has ever seen, that can only be of ongoing and growing importance and growing reinforcement of the economic strength, let alone the political and strategic stability of this country.  That';s why I';m in favour of trying to negotiate a Free Trade Agreement with the United States, and those rather narrow minded theorititions on the other side who argue that in some way by negotiating a Free Trade Agreement with the United States we are turning out back on the major trading partners we have in Asia completely misunderstand the importance of our association with the United States and its impact on the countries of Asia.  I throw back one specific argument to our critics on the issue of a Free Trade Agreement with the United States and that is the way in which we have developed our economic relationship with China over the last six or seven years, and no state of Australia would be more conscious of that than the state of Western Australia.  No state would be more conscious of the long term economic value as well as the strategist and economic symbolism of the natural gas deal that was struck last year between the consortium at the North West Shelf and Guandang province from China, an agreement that is not only going to deliver revenue and income over a 25 year period, but is also a very powerful signal from the most populous country in the world and the country whose economic growth in relative terms will be greater than any other country over the next 50 years, considering from where China started. The symbolism of that and the signal it sends is that that country wants to do business with an Australia that is economic efficient, politically stable, a reliable supplier and a nation that is capable of having deep engagement, not only with the United States but also the major powers of the Asian region.  So if we can negotiate a Free Trade Agreement which gives returns and gives benefits, particularly to our farm sector commensurate with the returns and benefits that must necessarily be given in any such agreement with our trading partners in the United States then it is overwhelmingly in the long term interests of this country.
And the final great goal that I have for this country is one that relates not to defence or not to economics, but relates to the kind of people we are and the values that we hold as a people.  One of the great things about Australia is that we are cohesive and we are stable, we are united, we are tolerant and we are caring of one another.  Sure we have our arguments, we have debates about things such as illegal immigration, we have debates about different welfare policies, but we remain one of the great egalitarian countries of the world and it';s the constant responsibility of the national government of this country to contribute policies and ideas that preserve that social stability.  Next week I will have the opportunity of going to the Cape York area of Australia to witness attempts made by some Aboriginal communities to come to terms with the terrible impact of substance, of alcohol abuse, of domestic violence, of the thuggery of men against women, something which is to be found in every part of Australian society but sadly in a disproportionate way in many indigenous communities. I had in Canberra a couple of weeks ago a meeting which in many respects was the most encouraging meeting I';ve had with indigenous leaders in the time that I';ve been Prime Minister.  We have in this country legitimate differences of view about what people call the symbolic elements of the debate about the relationship between the first Australians, and all other Australians.  And we';ll continue to have our own views on that, my views on some of those things such as treaties and apologies are well known, they';re very strongly held views on my part and they won';t be changing.  But putting all those things aside there are areas where agreement can be won, and importantly must be won for the long term future of those fellow Australians of ours because they are living in deplorable conditions, their communities are suffering the impact of years and years of social disintegration caused overwhelmingly by substance abuse.  And I hope to have the opportunity when I';m in the Cape York area to hear more of the attempts that are being undertaken by the Cape York council and others to deal with those challenges. So that is but one of the many things that challenges a national government to add to the sense of social stability and social unity that this country enjoys.
  Can I finally ladies and gentlemen say there';s one thing and I';m very conscious that this is a gathering of members and supporters of the Liberal Party, of people who I think it';s fair to say without any exaggeration wish the Liberal Party well and want to see the Liberal Party prosper at both a federal and a state level. Over the last seven and a half years when I';ve been Prime Minister I want to say that I';ve been very fortunate that I';ve enjoyed the support and the loyalty and the commitment of Liberals not only in my own Cabinet and members of the Federal Parliamentary Party and the Federal Cabinet here from Western Australia, but also from people all around this country.  And I';ve particularly value the advice that I';ve received from the business community of Perth.  Over the years I';ve received a lot of advice from the business community of Perth, some of it you know has not always been welcome but it';s always been I know strongly felt and I';ve appreciated it and its been of enormous value in shaping my views and particularly in many of the debates that we';ve had on issues such as native title and particularly things that effect the mining industry.  And I can';t of course let the opportunity go by and mention this almost as a footnote, I hope no person in the mining industry here in Western Australia or indeed anywhere in Australia overlook the fact that the alternative Prime Minister of this country intends to fund his higher education policy by imposing a $570 million taxation increase on the mining industry of this country by reducing the value by 10 per cent of the diesel fuel rebate which is being paid to miners under the policies of the current  government.  Ladies and gentlemen that is a footnote, an important footnote, let me say in a gathering such as this.
But the final chapter of my speech that I added that footnote to is to say that whatever I have been able to achieve in the past seven and a half years I have achieved because of the tremendous loyalty and support and understanding and commitment of members of the parliamentary Liberal Party and members and supporters of the Liberal Party all around the country and I want to take the opportunity of recording my gratitude to all of you for that because it has been a team effort and we';ll continue to succeed and we';ll win again if we can maintain the momentum of that team effort over the next 18 months.
[ends]  


Thank you very much, Colin, for those very kind words of introduction; Kim Keogh, the State President of the Western Australian Division; former Premiers; Sir Charles Court and Lady Court; Richard Court; my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues; ladies and gentlemen.  State conferences of our party are ideal venues and appropriate occasions to again restate to the Australian people the fundamental goals that the Government has for the future of our country and the future of our people.
 The Government I lead has three fundamental goals for Australia's future.  We seek to provide, first of all, for the national security of Australia and Australians and that is always the first responsibility and goal of any national government.  We also seek to build and further expand the economic strength and the economic growth capacity of our nation and its people because economic growth and economic strength is the foundation, the practical wherewithal, to deliver the social goals and the social aspirations we have.  Economic growth and economic strength is never an end in itself, rather it is a way by which we deliver the social aspirations and the social goals of our people.  And our third fundamental goal for the future of Australia and Australians is to maintain and further consolidate the great social stability and social cohesion of our nation.
 And today I want to say a few things particularly about social stability and the contribution especially of private home ownership to the social stability and the social fabric of our nation.  But before doing that just a few words on the issues of national security and economic strength.  As Colin said in the time that has gone by since we last met this country has been reminded brutally and tragically of the volatile world and the volatile region in which we live.  The tragedy of Bali reinforced the changes the world saw through the events of the 11th of September 2001.  Terrorism came to our doorstep, it claimed the lives of many of our young and has left a permanent imprint on the national psyche of our country.  It was a terrible reminder that no nation in the modern world can be impervious to the threat of terrorism, that no nation can count itself as completely and utterly isolated from the deprivations of terrorist behaviour.  It was a further reminder of the need to strengthen our own domestic responses to the threat of terrorism, a need to further invest in our intelligence agencies and our defence forces and a reminder of the need for further regional cooperation between the agencies of this country, which are charged with law enforcement, and the agencies of nations in our region.  And I take the opportunity, particularly in the presence of two of my close Western Australian colleagues, Daryl Williams, the Attorney General, and Chris Ellison, the Minister for Justice, who are particularly charged with the responsibilities in this area of saying how much Australia is in the debt of them and of those with whom they work for the close cooperation between the Australian Federal Police and the law enforcement agencies of Indonesia.
The fact, ladies and gentlemen, that we are now seeing people responsible for those foul crimes being tried in Indonesia is in no small measure due to the cooperation that was established in the early days after Bali, when Chris Ellison and Alexander Downer went to Jakarta and met the Indonesian President and we put in place arrangements.  And I also take the opportunity of saluting the role of the Indonesian police and the Indonesian investigative authorities.  We need to cooperate even more and ever closer with our regional neighbours through the agencies of both this country and of those countries.  In the years ahead, which will see the fight of terrorism go on until that fight is won, that cooperation will be essential.
We've also been reminded in recent weeks of our own leadership role in the Asia Pacific region.  We have responded to a request from the Government of the Solomon Islands to restore law and order in that country.  It's in Australia's interest that we do so.  We have sent a very large force to the Solomon Islands because it is in Australia's interest as well as the interests of the people of that small country that it not become a failed State.  Failed States become magnets for international criminals and money launderers and potentially international terrorists.  And we have a role above all others in this region because of our size and our relative strength to give leadership and that is what we have done.  The rest of the world expects us to do it, the people of the region expect us to do it and I believe the people of Australia support us in having undertaken that role.  And I wanted to salute the police and the Australian Defence Force personnel, as well as the police and defence force personnel of other countries who are undertaking that cooperative intervention, as Alexander Downer has called it, in the Solomon Islands.  It is a proper demonstration of being a good friend and a good neighbour to a small country that needs our help and a small country whose stability in the future will be important to the stability of our own region.
  I also take the opportunity of welcoming the apparent willingness of the Government of North Korea to participate in discussions about the nuclear capacity of that country into the future with South Korea, Japan, China, the United States and the Russian Federation.  This is a very welcome move.  If the reports this morning are correct it indicates a cautious victory for the steady diplomacy that has been undertaken by Australia and Japan and South Korea and the United States and I particularly welcome the involvement of China.  The key, in my view, to a successful, long-term resolution of the nuclear challenge represented by North Korea is the involvement of the Government of China because China, more than any other country, can exert long-term influence and long-term pressure on North Korea.
  Ladies and gentlemen, the economic strength of this country is, of course, fundamental to our place in the world.  Australia is respected around the world because Australia is seen as a strong economic performer.  Our economic growth, our economic performance gives us added credibility when we go to the tables of world gatherings and world meetings.  We speak with added authority because we are a successful economy.  We win added respect because we are a strong economic performer.  But that performance and that respect does not happen by accident.  We've undertaken some very unpopular decisions.  I've addressed this State Conference as Prime Minister in the teeth of national debate about tax reform, about industrial relations reform, about many other areas of economic reform.  And we've had to do it in the teeth of strong opposition from our political opponents.  As I look back over the last 20 years and I think of the economic reforms that have been carried out by different national governments I remember that when we were Opposition and the then Labor government came up with any sensible proposals for economic reform, our response was that we';d vote for them because they were in Australia';s interests.  When they proposed tariff reductions we could have run a ferocious fear campaign, we could have said that hundreds of thousands of Australians jobs would have been at risk, but instead of that we decided to back their proposals because we knew that they would be in the long term interests of this country.
  Contrast that with their attitude when we proposed taxation reform.  They fought it every inch of the way, they even thought they could slide their way through and pass the winning post at the last federal election on the basis of a wrongly perceived national revulsion at the introduction reform.  They lost the last federal election not because of the Tampa, they lost it because their opportunistic opposition to everything that we had done represented them to the Australian people as a worthless negative carping opposition. What is worse they are an opposition that has not learnt the value of economic growth and economic development.  And this a message that will resonant more powerfully in the state of Western Australia and probably in any other part of Australia because if ever a state has been built on growth and development and the power of this nation';s exports industries it';s been the state of Western Australia.  As I remarked last night, 11 per cent of the population and what a 150 per cent of the nation';s export income, or something in that order of magnitude.  A little exaggeration, just a little.  But it does tell the story, it tells the story of a state that is contributing enormously to this country';s growth and export income.  And what is the response of Simon Crean';s Labor Party to that? His response is to say I';m going to fund my higher education policy out of imposing a $576 million tax increase on the mining industry of Australia, I';m going to reduce the diesel fuel rebate for the mining fuel rebate by 10 per cent and that';s going to cost the mining industry oh only $576 million over a period of four years.  Well my reply to that Mr Crean is that you obviously don';t understand what generates the wealth of this country, you don';t understand the simple fact that unless you generate wealth you don';t have anything to help the people who need help. That the fundamental of good social policy is a sound thriving growing economy, unless you have a sound thriving growing economy you don';t have a capacity to look after those who are in need of assistance.
But today I want to dwell for a few moments on something that';s very important for who we are as Australians and how we think of ourselves as an Australian nation.  There';s a saying of a well known radio broadcaster in Australia who broadcasts out of Sydney and he has a programme every morning and he starts off by exhorting everybody to keep the dream alive.  Well part of keeping the dream alive in Australia is to own your own home and one of the proudest things that this country was able to aspire to and this country was able to acclaim in those great years of growth after World War II when hundreds of thousands of migrants came to this country initially from Europe, but then from many parts of the world and built a new Australia and a new and visionary Australia, one of the proudest things that we could talk about was that we had one of the highest levels if not the highest level of home ownership in the western world.  And we still have a very high level of home ownership, and home ownership now represents the greatest asset that most Australians have.  Ask yourself the question, what is your most valuable asset?  It';s the home you own.  In many cases, myself included, it';s about the only great asset that you have, and let';s face it, that';s the case for most of us, and do we mind it?  No, because we all recognise that it contributes to our sense of stability, our sense of security and our sense of wellbeing.  We have seen over the past few years, we have seen the value of our homes increase, and that';s a good thing, I mean let us keep a proper perspective, if you own our own home the fact that the value of it has increased is a great thing, I don';t find anybody coming up to me saying “John I';m cranky with you, my house is now worth more than it was when you were elected”.  Nobody says that to me, nobody.  Some say it should be worth even more but they don';t complain about it being more valuable than it once was.  And one of the reasons for that of course is that we have dramatically lower interest rates.  The average Australian is now paying $400 a month less than what he or she was paying to service the typical housing loan when we were elected.  $400 a month!  You';ll be hearing a bit more of that figure over the next 18 months I can assure you, because it';s a metaphor for the benefits of the Government';s economic policies.  And it';s a reminder that the contribution that Peter Costello in particular as Treasurer has made to the economic management of this country.
But I do recognise, having said all of that, that it';s great if you';ve got a house, it';s harder if you haven';t.  And there is a challenge in relation to the first homebuyer, it';s in effect a challenge created by the benefits of prosperity and affluence, in a sense we';ve become the victims of that successful economic policy of the last six or seven years because we have low interest rates, because we properly have a sensible capital gains tax approach in relation to the family home where it';s not subject to and never will be under the policies of any government I or any other Liberal will lead.  Because of that it does mean that we have a problem in relation to first home buyers and I think we have to get to the bottom of what that problem is.  It';s obviously due in no small measure to the land release policies of local and state authorities.  And now is not the time to pass judgement on that but to merely highlight many of the areas that have to be covered.
  I';ve got to say that in 2001 when we decided in the wake of a very bad quarter of economic growth at the end of 2000 that we had to give an injection to the housing industry and we decided to double the First Home Owners Grant for new homes, I can remember writing to all of the State Premiers, and at that time you had a newly installed Labor Government here in Western Australia, and you had I think Labor Governments in all but one of the other states of Australia.  And I said that we were going to double the First Home Owners Grant scheme for new homes as a way of giving an injection to the housing industry, and would they mind giving some kind of relief for stamp duty as a contribution by the states?  They said yes to our proposal, they said ‘no'; to any contribution by the state governments, and as a result, I mean they were clever doing that because the doubling of the home owners grant scheme revived the housing industry, and how.  I think of all the things that we';ve done in government nothing was a better reminder that every so often Keynes was right and a little bit of carefully targeted fiscal stimulation to an industry that can have a quick multiplier affect in the economy, it was a very very powerful reminder that those sort of nostrums still work.  But of course they did very well out of it, they got a whole lot of extra stamp duty because the housing industry came back, the value of homes rose, money poured in and everybody at state treasuries were very happy.  Well that';s one of the things that I would like this inquiry that Peter Costello';s formally announcing today, a Productivity Commission inquiry into some of the barriers for first home owners to look at.  We';re not having an inquiry into the value of your principal asset, I';m in favour of Australians having valuable homes because it gives them a sense of security and stability.  But I do want to see whether there are changes needed to make it easier for people to buy their first home because that is the challenge.
 So we';re going to have inquiry by the Productivity Commission, we';re asking it to report by the 31st of March 2004 and I';ll be asking the State Premiers and Chief Ministers to contribute to and co-operate with this inquiry because I would have thought helping people to buy their first home, knowing as we all do how important home ownership is to the social cohesion and social stability of our nation, I would have thought that';s something that would draw strong  bipartisan support and strong support across both Commonwealth and state governments.
Ladies and gentlemen just two other things on the theme of social stability.  Governments have great responsibilities to provide the right climate in which children are educated, cared for and grow up. And I take this opportunity again of reaffirming the absolute determination of the national government to maintain its Tough on Drugs strategy.
We will not alter or relent in any way in our belief that a three pronged strategy of educating people against the evils of illicit drugs, strong law enforcement and strong rehabilitation that a strategy based on that three pronged approach is a strategy that will work and it is a vastly superior strategy to the harm minimisation approach urged by those who basically say, well you can';t do anything essentially about it, you have to mitigate its consequences.
The reality is that we are making progress, we have seen a decline in the number of deaths from heroin overdoses. Our education programs are working, parents do talk more to their children and we have to keep reminding ourselves, as a Party that believes in individual responsibility, that in the end the people most responsible for the behaviour of children are their parents.
 We have to remind ourselves that there is a limit to how many areas of responsibility can be parcelled up and sent off to the school, or sent off to the State government, or sent off to the Federal government. I keep reading everyday, I saw something in one of the newspapers the other day about how we, you know, it was now the responsibility of governments or companies to do things about obesity. We do have responsibilities but so do parents.
 Parents have responsibilities - both mothers and fathers. Both of them together have responsibilities in all of these areas. So we';ll continue to have a tough on drugs strategy and we';ll also continue very strongly with policies that provide the maximum choice for parents as to where they educate their children.
I want to see a strong government education system and I also want to see a strong independent education system. I don';t see the two sectors in contest, I don';t see the two sectors as enemies, I see the two sectors as together contributing to the education of our children.
Can I finish my friends by thanking all of you for the tremendous support and loyalty that you have given to me and to the members of my government over the last 12 months. It';s been a very turbulent period in the life of the world. It';s been a time for difficult decisions by the government. It';s been a time for arguing some unpopular causes in the face of apparent overwhelming public opposition, but through all of that the most remarkable thing that I can reflect on, and I think particularly of the government';s decision to commit our military forces to combat in Iraq, I think of the magnificent understanding and loyalty that I received from my parliamentary colleagues and from members of the Liberal Party. I know that was a difficult decision and I know that some of you would have entertained doubts and concerns and might have questioned it and that is only natural in a Party that treasures the value of individual conscience and individual views, but in the end everybody delivered an enormous measure of trust and loyalty and support to me and to my senior colleagues on a very difficult issue. I was grateful for that.
 It made it easier for the government and it';s meant that the nation came behind the government';s decision in a far more impressive way than many would have expected and we are eternally grateful that thus far our forces have been spared any casualties and we hope that that continues, but that loyalty and that display of unity and commitment to a common cause, despite understandably of individual misgivings, is something that I am very grateful for and humbles me as Leader of the Liberal Party, and it is a reminder of the extraordinary generosity that all of you have displayed towards me in the time that I have been Prime Minister.
I am aware of it, I am grateful for it and I';ll never forget it.
Thank you.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much Rene for those very generous remarks, Doug Chipman, the Mayor, President of the Senate, Special Minister of State, my other parliamentary colleagues, both state and federal, my fellow Australians and fellow Liberals.
Again it is my pleasure to share this pre-State Council dinner with the Liberals of Tasmania, and to do it in a very beautiful part of your State, the part of your State that I haven't, well as far as Smithton is concerned, I haven't visited before.
Rene talked about Cape York being 5,000 kilometres from Smithton, it's also about 35 degrees from Smithton too.  But being a bloke who's used to travelling, not around Australia but also around the world that's a part of the territory.  I'll be saying a number of things about the domestic political scene tomorrow in my address to the State Council gathering.  But as I address this gala dinner tonight, I want to first of all to acknowledge very genuinely the wonderful job that I believe Rene and his team have done in extraordinarly difficult circumstances over the last year.
Opposition is awful, I never intend to go back to Opposition, I've made myself that very solemn promise. I had 13 years of it and I know the worst part of it is the first 12 months after the last election that you've lost and that is the 12-month period that the Tasmanian State Liberal Party has passed through.  And I sense that in that 12 months the opportunity of consolidation has been taken and that the Liberal Party in Tasmania is building respect by hard work.  Politics is about propounding an alternative.  Anybody who says to you that you can win an election campaign in the last few weeks with a flash public relations campaign doesn't understand what politics is about.  Politics more than anything is about communicating a sense of commitment and a sense of belief in a set of values, a set of principles and a set of policies.  And over the last year I believe that Rene and his team have begun that process.  It's not easy, he knows that and all the members of his team know that.  And we have this extraordinary situation in Australia at the present time where we have a Federal Liberal Government and we have eight Labor administrations at a state and territory level.  And contrary to popular belief, and I'm grateful for Rene in drawing attention to it, we don't have a big majority in the Federal Parliament.  And there only needs to be a swing of 1.9 per cent nationally for us to lose office.  And it is important that we win some seats in the House of Representatives here in Tasmania.  We have some great Senators from this State, but we don't have any members of the Lower House and governments are formed in the Lower House.  And there is a very special obligation on all of us to find the five people who can win House of Representatives seats in Tasmania, even if some of them haven't been members of the Liberal Party before they decide to nominate, if they are people who share the values and the philosophies of the party they are the people who should be endorsed because we cannot assume that the above-average performance nationally of the Liberal Party in New South Wales, Queensland and South Australia will continue at the next election.  And we must aim to win federal seats in those parts of Australia where we haven't performed as well in the past as I believe we can.
So that my friends is the charge that I give to the Tasmanian division, it's an important charge and it could well decide whether we hold federal office.  We may be ahead in the polls at the moment but the only guidance I take from opinion polls between elections is the general trend they indicate.  And when you're doing well it's a bit discomforting because you only know you can go in one direction and that's backwards.  So you've got to be realistic about opinion polls.  And winning federal elections for the fourth time is very hard, so we have a very big challenge here in Tasmania.
The other thought, an even more sobering thought, of course that I want to share with you - at the end of an extraordinarily traumatic week for Australia and an extraordinarily traumatic week for the region in which Australia is located.  Yesterday we saw the first person implicated, responsible for, directly involved in, the murder of 88 of our fellow Australians in Bali on the 12th of October last year found guilty and appropriately sentenced.  I didn't greet that, and I don't believe any Australians greeted that verdict with any sense of vengeance or vindictiveness.  Those who lost so much, those who lost loved ones in that terrible tragedy are entitled, and I hope they do, feel some sense of justice having been done.  And those who presumed to sit in judgement on the emotional reactions of Australians are required in my view to understand the very natural sense of justice that many of those people who were bereaved by the tragedy of Bali must inevitably feel.  And the events of a few days earlier remind us that we live in a very different world from the world in which we lived when I addressed the State Council meeting two years ago before the 11th of September 2001.  Because the world has changed, perhaps forever and we are living in a very different environment.  It's an environment that requires us as always to find a sense of balance.  We must accept the possibility that one day there might be a terrorist attack in Australia.  We must work very hard to prevent that occurring and very importantly we must work with our neighbours in the Asian Pacific region and collaborate as much as we can to build barriers against terrorism and to deny terrorism any kind of moral authority.
There was a wonderful phrase I recall from a speech, a recording of which I heard of Winston Churchill's during World War II when he spoke of how the citizens of an occupied country in Europe should react to their Nazi conquerors and he used the wonderful expression as follows: "That even in their fleeting hour of brutish triumphs, they should be treated as the moral outcasts of mankind".  And people, terrorists who murder and maim indiscriminately without justification and without proper cause are, in the words of that very evocative phrase, they are the moral outcasts of mankind.  Nothing can justify, no political grievance, no claim left unaddressed can justify the sort of cruel indiscriminate murder that occurred in Jakarta a few days ago, that occurred in Bali, that occurred in New York and Washington.  And it is the responsibility of all of us of goodwill whatever our religion may be, or if we have no religion, to work together and to make common cause.  Let me remind you that the great majority of the people who died in Jakarta last Tuesday and who were injured, were not western, they weren't Christian, they weren't Jewish, they were Muslim.  And when Jemaah Islamiah and when the spokesman for those fanatics who despoil the honourable name of Islam speak of avenging their Muslim brothers, they neglect to say that last Tuesday they didn't avenge their Muslim brothers, they killed their Muslim brothers.  And it's something that we should keep very much in mind.  And this is a time for Australia, more than ever before, to redouble our efforts to build an ever-closer relationship with Indonesia and with other countries in the region.  My first thought after feeling a natural sense of revulsion last Tuesday was to speak to the President of Indonesia, as I did, to offer her the condolence and sympathy of our country.  And we sent quite a number of our Australian Federal Police specialists to help in the investigation.  This is a battle that will go on for many years.  I wish I could offer you a different alternative, but candour requires me to say what I just have, that this will go on for some years.
But in process we have to keep that sense of balance.  We are by any standards an extraordinarily cohesive and stable and safe country.  The risks facing Australians are much greater than they were several years ago, but they are not as great as the risks facing some other countries.  We must accept some constraints that we might otherwise reject, but by the same token we cannot live our lives in perpetual alarm and fear.  We must get on with our lives, we must continue to enjoy the extraordinary economic prosperity of this country.  And you Australians who live in Tasmania must take advantage to the full of the reviving economic opportunities of this State.
In the 29 years that I've been in public life and been visiting Tasmania, I have not found such a sense of hope and optimism about this State's economic future than I find at present.  Let me say I think it's due a lot to the strong national economic mood.  I think it's due a lot to the fact that the policies of the Government I lead have brought record low interest rates, they have brought subsidies which have helped to boost the tourist industry, they've brought security and predictability to the forest industry through the signing of the regional forest agreements with the Government, the former Government some five years ago.  But I could go through a long list of things.  But whatever the reasons are, the good news is that opportunities abound.  The even better news could be that some of the impediments being imposed at a State level could be removed and the economic prosperity could be even greater.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finish by saying that the gathering here tonight and the enthusiasm that I have found is warming, it's encouraging.  Our party nationally is enjoying a very strong period, but all my political experiences taught me that those circumstances can change.  There's an unpredictability, there's a volatility, there's an uncertainty about national politics in our country that can always catch the unsuspecting complacent and self-satisfied participant by surprise.  I'm working day and night never to qualify for that description and I hope all of you are doing the same.  Holding national office at the present time is about the most serious responsibility that the Liberal Party has had since it was founded in 1944.  We live in very difficult and challenging times.
  Our political opponents at a national level are not, in my view, fit to govern.  They don't stand for any identifiable alternatives. When it comes to the conduct of our foreign policy, they behave out of automatic opportunism and opposition.  When it comes to domestic economic policy, they oppose for the sake of opposition.  When we were in Opposition and they put up a good idea we voted for it in the Senate.  Now that the situation is in reverse they vote against everything that we put up which involves any kind of serious reform.
So ladies and gentlemen, we have a lot to preserve and a lot will be lost and there'll be a great cost to our country if there were to be a change of Government at the end of next year.  And we have a special responsibility, all of us, to work to prevent that occurring.  And here in Tasmania that means winning some seats in the House of Representatives and that is the very special responsibility of all of you.
Thank you for the loyalty and support that you have unstintingly given to me over the last seven and a half years.  I could not have succeeded without your loyalty and support.  And what I have achieved is through the loyalty and the commitment and the dedication of all of the men and women of the Liberal Party of Australia all around our country and I'm deeply grateful to all of you.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen, Doug Chipman the President of the Tasmanian division, Rene Hidding, my Ministerial colleague Brendan Nelson, and fellow Liberals.  Again it is my pleasure to address this annual gathering of the Tasmanian State Council and to thank all of you for the unstinting support that you have given to my Government and to the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party over the last year.  And to record my appreciation of the contribution of my Liberal Senate colleagues from this state and of course to express the hope that after the next election they will be joined by some Liberal representatives in the House of Representatives from Tasmania.
Gatherings such as this are an opportunity for a party leader to articulate the goals that he or she might have for Australia';s wellbeing and for Australia';s future.  In the time that I have been Prime Minister over the last seven and a half years the Government has endeavoured to implement policies and to construct a vision of Australia';s future based upon three great goals.  And they are to provide our nation with the essential ingredient, and the first obligation that any government must provide and that is national security.  Secondly, to give our nation economic strength, that not only can it take its place in the world, but also through the generation of wealth care for those in our own midst who through no fault of their own are deserving of a helping hand and an extension of the great Australian tradition of mateship.  And finally, to provide our nation with a sense of social stability so that we may relate to one another as fellow Australians in a context of respect, of harmony, of tolerance and of inconclusiveness.  And they have been and remain our three great goals, national security, economic strength and a social stability. And I am very happy now and I';m very happy particularly over the time between now and the next election to have the performance of the government, the performance of the Liberal Party in national office, assessed against those three goals.  And to invite as I will the Australian people to assess the credentials of our political opponents, a group of people who have squandered seven and a half years in mindless, opportunistic, negative opposition, rather than endeavouring to build an alternative construct that will serve the future welfare of the Australian people.
And I look to the challenge of the next 15 to 18 months as I will argue to the Australian people that against those three criteria our credentials are strong and the offering of the alternative is weak to the extent of virtual non-existence.  There is no doubt that the challenge of national security is uppermost in the minds of all Australians.  We';ve had over the last year the terrible tragedy of Bali, we';ve had the ongoing war against terrorism and we have been reminded of both the proximity and the brutality of terrorism over the last week.  That bomb explosion in Jakarta was not, as the terrorists would claim, an act which avenged their Muslim brothers, rather it was a cruel act that killed their Muslim brothers.  And in the process they revealed the ultimate evil of terrorism, they revealed the fact that terrorism has no right to claim the imprimatur of any of the world';s great religions, and what those terrorists did then as they have done in the past that despoils the good name of Islam as it would the good name of any of the world';s great religions if that name were invoked to justify such barbarous behaviour.
It is a reminder my friends of the need for all of us to co-operate as closely as possible with our regional friends and neighbours.  And in the time that has gone by since the 11th of September 2001, and particularly since October of last year, we have worked very hard to strengthen the network of co-operation between the Australian Federal Police, the Australian intelligence agencies and their counterparts in Indonesia, in the Philippines, in Singapore and all of the other countries of our region.  The war against terrorism will not be ended early, it will not be ended without a combined effort of all nations and peoples of goodwill.  And whilst I can give no guarantee that terrorism will not occur on the Australian mainland, it will not occur in Australia, in any part of Australia, what I can promise you is that the Government will do all it can to minimise the possibility of terrorism coming to Australian shores.  And that involves not only co-operation with our friends in the region, it also involves as we have done a greater investment in our intelligence services.  Intelligence services will be at the very front line of the war against terrorism.  Timely, accurate, reliable intelligence is the essential ingredient to provide us with the best protection we can have against the likelihood of terrorist attacks and those in the community who seek to denigrate the efforts of the Government who give not only resources but also the necessarily legal authority to our intelligence agencies misunderstands the scale and the nature of the challenge of modern terrorism.
  In recent weeks the Australian Government has taken action to prevent the Solomon Islands becoming a failed state.  We';ve taken that action because the people of that country wanted us to help them and we owe it to them as friends and as a powerful neighbour to do so, but we';ve also taken that action because it is in Australia';s interests that we act.  We do not want a series of failed states in the Pacific, we do not want a series of failed states on our doorstop, failed states become magnets for terrorists, for money launderers and for international criminal behaviour.  That is why we have taken the actions that we have, with the involvement I';m pleased to say and strong support of our other neighbours in the Pacific.  And at the Pacific Forum meeting in Auckland next week we will have the opportunity as a group of Pacific Island countries, of Pacific nations to talk about what has occurred in the Solomons and to, for me on behalf of Australia, to make it plain that we accept the leadership role we have in the region and I believe that the decision taken by the Government will continue to enjoy the very strong support of the Australian people.  And let us not imagine that because it has gone well that it is an operation free of danger.  Any operation involving the dispatch of police and military forces carries an element of danger for those who are on active service, and as we think of the forces deployed in the name of Australia in different parts of the world, let us bear that in mind.  So ladies and gentlemen the first of our great goals, and that is of national security, is a goal that ought to be uppermost in the minds of all Australians and it is a goal where the credentials and the performance of the Government can be contrasted very favourably to the miserable offerings of our political opponents.
As I move to the second to the our great goals, and that is to build the economic strength of Australia, the performance of this country in this area is self-evident and it is all around us.  No country calling itself a western industrialised nation has performed better than Australia over the past six or seven years.  No country is held in higher regard than our own by virtue of its economic performance over that period.  Our growth rates have been greater than countries with which we normally make comparisons.  Our unemployment levels have fallen, our inflation rates are down, our interest rates are at 30 year lows, our levels of business investment are high, we have eliminated large amounts of government debt and we are seen around the world as a strong and growing economy which is an attractive place for foreign investment.  Now none of those things have been achieved by accident, they didn';t fall out of the sky, they are the product of a series of economic reforms, and over the past six or seven years they';ve been the product of economic reforms that have been carried out in the teeth of unrelenting obstruction and opposition from the Labor Party, the Australian Democrats in the main and the Australian Greens.  Every single important measure that we have endeavoured to implement to strength the Australian economy over recent years has been opposed by the Labor Party.  The Labor Party left us with a deficit of $10.5 billion in our first year of office, yet they tried to stop us implementing the measures that were needed in order to wipe out that deficit.  They opposed virtually all of the budget repair measures in Peter Costello';s first Budget in 1996.  Despite the mandate they had, we had rather, they opposed our sale of one-third of Telstra.  Despite the mandate we had, they opposed our reform to Australia';s industrial relations system.  Despite the mandate we obtained in 1998 when we went to the Australian people and said we';re telling you before the election that we';re going to change the taxation system, unlike 1993 when Paul Keating opposed Fightback yet didn';t tell the Australian people that if he were re-elected he would increase sales tax on just about every imaginable item, we laid it all out in painful detail and perhaps paid a political price to some degree in the process.  But I wanted in 1998 to be certain that I had the authority of the Australian people to implement tax reform, and we laid it out, we won that election, we lost some seats but we won the election and therefore we had a mandate, yet what happened?  The Australian Labor Party opposed the implementation of the GST, they opposed root and branch the fundamentals of taxation reform.  And so the process has gone on, they';re obstructing efforts to maintain the affordability of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, one of the great pieces of social welfare unpinning that this country has.  A scheme that will increasingly harvest at an affordable cost the benefits of progress in medical science for all Australians. But the wonder drugs of the future can only be made available as they come on stream, they can only be made available if we keep the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme within affordable bounds, and we are determined that that will happen because I believe that that scheme is one of the great pieces of social welfare egalitarianism that this country has devised.
Ladies and gentlemen, the economic comparison that you will hear about over the next 15 to 18 months is once again an economic comparison as with the national security comparison that illustrates the credentials of this Government and illustrates by comparison the miserable offerings of our political opponents.  You will hear much over the next 15 months of the fact that in August of 2003 the average monthly repayment on a housing loan throughout Australia is $450 lower than it was in March in 1996.  You will hear that since 1996 real wages in this country, that is wages after adjusting for inflation, have risen by 10.2 per cent in that seven year period, yet they rose by only 2.3 per cent in the entire 13 years of the Hawke/Keating Governments.  Now when you add those two things together no two statistics could better demonstrate the extent to which the Labor Party has been disqualified from claiming to be the friend of the average working man or woman in Australia because it is under the Liberals that the working people of Australia have done well, it was under Labor that they faced 17 per cent interest rates and heard their Prime Minister and Treasurer boast about how they had suppressed the growth in real wages.  And I say to my Labor opponents you';ll hear a lot about those two comparisons, you';ll hear a lot from me and my colleagues over the next 15 months about how when you were in Government you failed the very people you claim to be the protectors of. You failed the average working man and woman in Australia, you let their mortgage interest rates go through the roof and you suppressed their real wages because you ran an industrial relations policy that denied this country the productivity gains of a modern economy.  We have been able to preside over a non-inflationary increase in wages because we have implemented an industrial relations system which has led to a boost in productivity.  Any nation can afford higher wages, any nation can afford wage rises that run ahead of inflation provided those wage rises are underpinned by productivity improvements, and that is what we have been able to do because if you don';t have productivity improvements wage rises are purchased at the cost of higher unemployment.  And to quote the words of a former Labor Treasurer, the father of my current opponent, Frank Crean, when he was Treasurer in the Whitlam Government he said one man';s wage rise is another man';s job, given certain circumstances.  And that is right, and the lesson of the last seven years is that if you can have real wage gains, providing productivity is up, because not only have we had real wage gains based on higher productivity over the last seven years, but we';ve also had lower unemployment. Unemployment in March of 1996 was 8.2 per cent, now it is 6.2 per cent.  We have seen the creation of 1.1 million new jobs in Australia over the last seven and a half years.  But if you dig beneath the surface the story';s even better, in December of 1995 apprenticeships in Australia stood at 141,000.  I am now very proud to say, and I';m very happy to say in it on a platform with Brendan Nelson, the Minister for Education, that now apprenticeships and traineeships in Australia stand at 390,000.  Once again an illustration of the extent of which Labor Governments failed at what they have always claimed to be their historic constituents.
  So what did Labor deliver to the working men and women of Australia?  Horrendously high interest rates, a suppression of their real wage increases and a stagnation in the apprenticeships system of this country.  Not a bad trifecta for a party that is meant to represent the interests of the working people of Australia. Little wonder that many of Labor';s historic constituency now sees the Liberals as being their real friends, and they are right to do so because we have elevated the position of those people to a very prominent place in our social and economic policies.
But ladies and gentlemen those figures relate of course to the impact of our policies on individuals.  But taking a slightly broader canvas our deficit reduction policies means that compared with 1996 this nation is paying $5 a year less in interest on the money that it has had to borrow to cover the Labor deficits of the past, $5 billion less than in 1996.  And what that means of course, is that we';ve got $5 billion more to spend on health, on education, on roads to recovery, on personal income tax cuts, on defence, and on investment in our intelligence services.  All of which have enjoyed significant treatment and beneficial treatment under this Government.  So when you hear me talking about the value of reducing the deficit and running surpluses, when you hear Peter Costello talking about that, we';re not engaging in some mind numbing treasury jargon, we';re talking about real money, your money, and as a result of getting rid of the debts of the past we have $5 billion a year more to spend on things that you want us to spend money on, and that is on tax cuts and on productive investment in the nation';s infrastructure.
  And I mentioned health a moment ago, let me say just two things on the issue of health policy. We made an offer to fund the public hospital system of this country about two months ago.  Public hospitals in Australia are owned and operated and run and directed by State Governments.We don';t control them but we make an enormous financial contribution to their operation and indeed over the last five years of the Australian Health Care Agreement the Federal Government has actually contributed more to the operation of State public hospitals than has State Governments, we don';t mind that, but what we do mind is when we do that and when we make an offer for the next five years that involves a $10 billion increase, a 17 per cent in real terms, the State Premiers say oh that';s not enough, well I say to the State Premiers we are prepared to carry our share of the burden with public hospitals, but we want you to do the same.  We want you to match the increase that we are prepared to make, we';ve put our money on the table, it';s generous, it';s 17 per cent more than was the figure under the last agreement, $10 billion more in money terms and it represents a very appropriate and very generous commitment by the Federal Government to the operation of the hospital system which is a fundamental element of Medicare.
The other thing I would say about health is this.  Have a look at what Labor Party spokesmen say on the private health insurance rebate.  Remember that when this was put before the Parliament in 1998 the Labor Party voted against it. The Labor Party opposed 45 per cent of the Australian population who now belong to private health insurance funds from having a 30 per cent tax rebate, they voted against it in the Parliament, I don';t know whether the story is true but I read in the newspaper, so I guess it must be, that while, back in 1998 while the Labor Party in Federal Parliament was voting against the 30 per cent tax rebate certain members of the Labor Party from New South Wales were furiously lobbying independent Senators in the Senate to vote in favour of it so that they could have the cynical double. You could say we';re against it but it got through and gee you won';t be blamed for rejecting it.  I mean that is the ultimate pinnacle double.  Now I don';t know whether that story is true, but as I say I read about it, I read about it in the newspapers, so it may well be the case that occurred.  But that was 1998, fast forward to 2003 asked about the 30 per cent tax rebate the new Labor health spokesman says oh we';ve got to under review.  Asked to give a guarantee that it will continue the Opposition Leader says it';s under review.  When the Labor Party says something that they voted against in 1998 is under review if they get elected you can be pretty certain it';s a dead duck if they form government after the next election.  And the strength of Australia';s health system at the present time rests on a partnership, a partnership between public investment and private investment, and the secret of the fact that our health system, with all of its imperfections and it';s not perfect, it is an infinitely better and fairer and more affordable and more accessible health system than that offered by any comparable country.  If you';re a battler in Australia you';ve got a better opportunity of getting decent health care and treatment than in the United States, the United Kingdom or any nation in Europe or Asia.  And for all the weaknesses of our system we ought to be bear that very very much in mind.
So ladies and gentlemen they are some of the issues that I know will be in the minds of the Australian people as they look at the credentials of this government, not only in relation to national security but importantly in relation to economic management and in relation to matters of social stability.  And as we move towards the next election we will seek very happily and very readily to be assessed against our performance in relation to those three very important national goals.
  I want in the remaining moments to says something about the Government policies in relation Tasmania. I said last night that I find as I come to Tasmania that the sense of hope and optimism about the economy in this state is greater than it has been for a very long time, perhaps greater than at any time in the 29 years that I have been in Parliament.  However you measure it I don';t think there';s much doubt that there has been an improvement, and that is something that I very warmly welcome and I know that all Tasmanians very warmly welcome.  This state has been by (inaudible) its separation from the mainland and other factors has suffered some special economic disadvantage and that has been the subject of inquiries and it';s been the target of policies carried out by this Government over many years.  And I';m very proud of these special policies that we have introduced to try and address some of the disadvantage suffered by the Tasmanian economy.  And as I look at the growth in the tourist industry I think not only of the freight equalisation scheme but I think of the subsidy schemes that have been introduced to eliminate that disadvantage, and I think of the contribution that has been made by those schemes.  As I learn of the confidence and the sense of stability and security in the forestry industry, I think of the value of the regional forest agreement that was signed five years ago by myself and the former Premier Tony Rundle.  I want to pay tribute to the co-operation that I received from that government and from that Premier because that agreement has been the basis of the resource security that has been delivered and has been the basis of the fair balance that has been struck by our very strong conservation and environmental concerns, and equally the desire of this state and this nation to have a sustainable forest industry.  And we have achieved the double there. We';ve achieved a virtuous double of having cared for the environment and for the old growth forests but by the same token we have maintained a steady stream of investment into an industry that has generated jobs as well as attracting investment.  I';m also very conscious as I think of Tasmania';s needs of the fair and proper, some from other states might even say generous treatment, of Tasmania out of the proceeds of the first sale of Telstra, and the natural heritage trust and the policies that were put in place. But all of them totally justified in my view because of the particular problems that Tasmania has faced and the particular challenges that your state has faced.
I want to say that whilst this is not an occasion for the announcement of specific policies that time will come, but it remains the concern of the Government to make sure that particular disadvantages that Tasmania suffers continue to be recognised in Federal Government policies because the essence of national government and national economic leadership is to provide the engine room of national economic growth and that is good strong national economic policies and when you hear State Premiers strutting the national stage and saying gee the economy in my state is doing well, aren';t I good?  Just remember one verity of national political life, it';s the Federal Government that in the end pulls the economic levers and puts on and off the economic switches and quite properly when things don';t go so well the Federal Government gets the blame, and equally when things go well it';s a bit rich for some State Premiers to claim sectoral confined local guidance and influence.  But they do it from time to time and I understand why, but they will not understand my gently and politely reminding them that it';s been the policies of the Federal Government, the cuts in interest rates, the low inflation, the reduction in the budget deficit, the creation of surpluses, the modernisation of our industrial relations system, the competitiveness of our economy, the strong industry policy, they are the things that have generated the growth and the wealth throughout the length and breadth of this country over the last seven and a half years.
So friends can I again say how much I appreciate the support and the loyalty that you';ve shown towards me and to my colleagues. We';ve come a long way over the last seven and a half years, Australia is a stronger more open more confident more respected more powerful country than it was seven and a half years ago.  That';s been accomplished by a Government that';s been determined despite the unpopularity of many of the measures we';ve had to introduce, determination to stick to our guns, and to bring in policies for the long term benefit of the country.  But that could not have been achieved without your support, people are kind enough to compliment the government from time to time, let me say on behalf of all of my colleagues that it';s very much a team effort, without your loyalty and support at the grass roots we wouldn';t be there in the first place, we wouldn';t have been re-elected in 1998 and 2001 and we won';t have a hope of being re-elected next year.  The election next year will be very hard, people at the moment think we';re a mile in front, we';re not.  We only have a small majority, a loss of seven or eight seats will put us out of government, we';re overperforming as I said last night in a number of states and we need to make sure that we do a little better on other states such as Tasmania.  So the next election is going to be a big challenge, Labor can win, don';t think otherwise, they may not deserve to win, they may not properly in the eyes of many be seen as fit to govern, thaty doesn';t mean to say they can';t win.  And we';re going to have to work very very hard to ensure that we hold the treasury benches. And I know that in our effort that we';ll have the enthusiastic support of Liberals in Tasmania.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Mr president, my parliamentary colleagues, our guests from overseas, Mr and Mrs Bob Herbert, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I start my remarks tonight by endorsing what the president has said about Bob Herbert';s contribution to the leadership not only of the Australian Industry Group but his decades long advocacy of the cause of industry policy, reforms to economic policy and of course his speciality of industrial relations.  I feel a particular kinship when I talk about the speciality of industrial relations because in earlier years before I again became Opposition Leader and the Coalition was elected in 1996 there was no area of public policy that I focused on more heavily and I regard it as more central to the reform of the Australian economy than that of industrial relations.  And because we';re pausing for moment to recognise the contribution that an outstanding man has made to industry policy and economic development it is important to acknowledge that of all the things that have transformed the Australian economy over the last 10 years nothing has been more important than the changes that have been made in the area of industrial relations.  And nothing in my view is more important to preserve and to build on for the future than the area of industrial relations.  It is natural when one looks back on a period of seven years in office to think of some of the significant contributions, some of the metaphors for the success of policy, and two come very much to mind which are related to industrial relations, one of those concerns the remarkable improvement in the hourly crane lift rates on the Australian waterfront.  When they languished it somewhere in the order of 18 before the reforms of 1998 and now they have even surpassed the goal we set ourselves then of 25 to sit around 26.  And I think also of the increases in the real wages of Australian workers over the last seven years, a real increase of more than 10 per cent and that is a reflection of the improved industrial relations, it';s a reflection of the greater productivity of the Australian economy flowing from those improved industrial relations.  Because in the end good economic policy is never an end in itself, unless good economic policy delivers more jobs, higher incomes and greater material satisfaction to Australian workers it doesn';t deserve the name of good economic policy.
  So can I join others in expressing my respect for the work that Bob has done and in the process share with you just a few reflections about where the Australian economy sits at the presents.
Many speeches are made about the fact that our economy has grown more strongly that just about any economy in the western world and far more strongly than most over the last few years.  That hasn';t happened by accident, it';s happened because of an accumulation of economic changes and reforms, stretching back over a 15 to 20 year period.  Including important reforms made by the previous government which drew the very strong support of the Coalition parties in Opposition, and I think particularly of financial deregulation and the very significant dismantling of tariff protection which has helped make the Australian economy more competitive, more open and as a result contribute enormously to our economic growth.
In more recent years we';ve had the very important gains on the industrial relations front that I touched on.  And I think of your group';s support for those reforms.  I also think of the very strong and robust support involving in some areas the sacrificing of some immediate interests of your member companies for the process of taxation reform when it was launched by the Government in 1998.  We don';t think about it so much now because its become bedded down, but in 1998 the support of your organisation for taxation reform was very important, particularly in areas where trade offs between depreciation allowances and lower company tax rates needed to be made and where inevitably with these things there was some winners and there were losers. But your organisation rightly took the view that we should strive to have only one winner and that was the Australian economy and you took the view that taxation reform was in the long term interests of the Australian economy, and I take the opportunity tonight of recording my thanks to your group for the support you gave then to that very important reform and the support that you';ve continued to give to other reforms of the Government over the last seven years.
It is right that your president should have exhorted all of us to continue the process of reform.  To use what has become a clich‚ international competitiveness is a never ending race, you never reach the finish line, your only goal is to stay sufficiently far in front of your competitors.  And so it is with economic reform, we cannot afford reform fatigue in Australia, we';ve had a lot of it over the last 15 to 20 years, we will need even more over the years ahead if we are to maintain our current strong economic position.  And we will face some pressures in a number of areas which will make the fiscal challenge even greater.  I cannot see this country spending less on defence in the years immediately ahead of us.  I said yesterday and I would repeat tonight I can only see an incline over the years ahead in the expenditure that we must make available for defence.  The world in which we live is very different from what it was in 1996, and even then the Government saw the need when it came to office to quarantine defence from any of the cuts that were being applied elsewhere in order to eliminate the very large Budget deficit that we inherited, and so it will be in the future that defence will remain a very important priority.
The other very important challenge we face is of course the demographic one.  In common with all western countries our population is ageing.  The process is not as bad in Australia as in some but it is infinitely worse that we might have contemplating in the 1960';s and the 1970';s.  We need policies that will encourage greater workforce participation, particularly for the age cohort of 55 to 64 where the participation levels of Australians is significantly below that of other OECD countries.  We will also need to find further improved policies in the area of workplace and family balance.  The Government has done a great deal in that area but more is required because the right policies there will facilitate more easily proper workplace participation levels.  But the ageing of our population will impose strains on the cost of health serving, of pharmaceutical benefits serving, and therefore governments both now and in the future will need to take the right decisions in these areas consistent with fair policies in a social sense but also fiscal rigour.  We will need to maintain as a Government our reputation for running surplus budgets.  We don';t need to run large surpluses, but we do need to avoid the fiscal mistake of lapsing back into deficit.  One of the great boosts of this Government, and a good and proper boost, is the extent to which we have paid off government debt.  At just under five per cent Australia has one of the lowest national debt in the OECD and that five per cent figure contrasts with something in the order of an average of the OECD of around 45 to 50 per cent.
The two clouds hanging over the Australian economy at the present time are paradoxically a drought, which you don';t normally associate with a cloud, but also of course the hesitant character of the international economy.  We have maintained a remarkable economic performance and a remarkable growth rate, despite the hesitancy of the international economy.  And as the United States economic recovers, and if the tentative signs of that recovery are consolidated that will be important to Australia as it will be to other economies around the world.
In the months immediately ahead we have the very important challenge of the negotiation with the United States of a possible Free Trade Agreement.  I have to make it plain of course that we';ll only enter a Free Trade Agreement with the United States if there is a proper return for Australia.  There will need to be significant progress made in the area of agriculture in order to make it worthwhile for this country to sign.  But we are energetically committed to the objective, and I';m happy to the say that the President of the United States is likewise energetically committed to concluding the negotiations by the end of the year.  But many hard sessions of negotiation lie ahead of us before we can say that this very important goal has been achieved.  The important and the value to Australia of reaching such an agreement is immense, the United States will economically bulk larger in our future and the world';s future over the next 50 years then even it has over the past 50 years.  Those who imagine 15 or 20 year ago that the post-World War II economic dominance of the United States would begin to decline have been proved wrong, and the association economically and otherwise that we have with the United States will be more rather than less important to Australia over the next 50 years.
But none of this proper emphasis on our relationship with the United States in any way diminishes the fundamental and crucial importance of Australia';s economic and other links with the nations of the Asian Pacific region.  At the weekend after attending the Pacific Island Forum meeting in Auckland I will go to Beijing to meet for the first time the new President and the new Premier of the People';s Republic of China.  One of the great economic achievements of this country over the last few years has been the doubling of our exports to China.  The conclusion of the giant liquid natural gas deal with Guangdong province by the North-West Shelf Consortium last year, with considerable help and involvement of both governments was something of a landmark in the relationship between the two countries.  It was an investment by China in the stability, the predictability and the reliability of Australia as a long term partner and a long term supplier and a reliable friend for years into the future.  Our economic links with North Asia are strong and they are deep and they will be very important to the Australian economy as the years go by.  It must be the responsibility of any Australian prime minister and Australian government to take trading and economic opportunities where they arise.  You can never confine yourself to one region of the world, you must never focus on one part of the world to the exclusion of others.  And we have sought to live by that rule in the time that we have been in Government.  We';ll pursue a Free Trade Agreement with the United States and if that can be achieved it will be of remarkable value to our long term future.  But fully consistent with that we will continue to build the already strong economic relationships and links that we have with those nations in our immediate region.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I conclude by saying one thing on a more personal note, in the 29 years that I';ve been in Federal Parliament I';ve had a very close association with this group and its two predecessor groups, the Chamber of Manufacturers and the Metal Trades Industry Association.  We haven';t always agreed, we';ve sometimes argued on individual policy issues, we';ve sometimes wondered whether the direction of each other has been right.  But for the main we have been working together to achieve something that we jointly regard as absolutely important to the future of this country and that is the nurturing and the development of the wealth generating sector of the Australian economy.  We all believe in a fair and decent Australian society.  We all believe in a society where those who no fault of their own are entitled to the benefit of a helping hand and a social security safety net. But what I';ve always found of your organisation and its predecessors is that like myself we all know that you can only build an economy that has the capacity to do that if you encourage and support wealth generating industries. And its been the policies of the Government, they';ve been designed to promote that over the last seven years and I hope in the years ahead we';ll continue to work together to achieve that objective.
Thank you again for inviting me tonight, I appreciate very much the contribution that your group has made to the development of industry policy and I wish all of your members well and great prosperity for the next year.
Thank you.
[ends]


I move:
That this House:
1 endorses the government';s decision to deploy the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands;  2 expresses its support for the members of the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Defence Force, the Australian Protective Service, Australian Government officials, and personnel from Pacific Island nations who are deployed with the assistance mission; and  3 expresses its full confidence in the members of the assistance mission, and its hope for a successful mission and their safe return home.
   Mr Speaker, today I wish to report to the House on the Australian-led Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
I am pleased to note at the outset that the mission has received overwhelming support from the people of the Solomon Islands and that cooperation among the various force elements from the Pacific Islands Forum nations has been close and effective.
 It would, however, be premature to declare the problems solved.  The work of the mission has only just begun.  Risks remain and we know that the Solomon Islands will need the help and encouragement of its friends for some time to come.
  Solomons sought Australia';s help
The Solomon Islands faces many obstacles to its development.  It is geographically isolated and its small population base is fractured.
  Even beyond the damage caused by the ethnic tensions that erupted in 1998, corruption has strangled many of the institutions vital to good governance, and violence has become endemic.
The Solomon Islands Government has recognised that it is unable to address its problems or, indeed, govern effectively – they know that if they do not stop the slide into chaos their nation will collapse.   The Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands, Sir Allan Kemakeza wrote to me on 22 April providing a very frank assessment of the problems besetting the Solomon Islands and seeking our support.  On 5 June, we met in Canberra to discuss the situation.
Given the long-standing strong ties between our nations and our peoples, it is no surprise the Solomon Islands should turn to Australia for assistance.  Australia has provided support and aid to the Solomon Islands over many years.  Many Australians have lived and worked there, building a reservoir of personal connections and engagement.
In response to earlier problems, we were instrumental in facilitating and supporting the conclusion and implementation by the Solomon Islanders of the Townsville Peace Agreement in 2000 and the subsequent International Peace Monitoring team, which helped to end inter-ethnic conflict.
But it is clear that despite these efforts, the problems facing the Solomon Islands have grown more serious.  Criminal lawlessness has replaced ethnic tension.  And most critically, some of the main culprits are in the police force.  The country';s institutions have been greatly weakened and have, in some cases, turned against the people they are meant to serve.  This has contributed to a severe economic decline, which in turn exacerbates the climate of political and social instability.
Over the last six years, per capita GDP has been halved, falling below US$500 in 2002.  The Solomon Islands economy contracted by 14 per cent in 2000 and by another nine per cent in 2001.
Earlier this year, critical social welfare infrastructure had almost ceased to function.  There were no funds for vital medicines and hospital supplies.  Power generation was essentially crippled - unable to supply hospitals, schools or business.  Lack of power has also affected the water supply, already seriously degraded by poor maintenance.
Those employed by the Solomon Islands Government to provide vital services have not been paid for months at a time.  Many of them demonstrated great loyalty and compassion by continuing to work regardless of whether they were paid or not.
All the while a small group of criminals and militants have been looting the very future of the Solomons.  They have terrorised the community - brought the nation to the very brink of collapse - and done a grave disservice to the reputation of the Solomon Islanders as a good and generous people.
Innocent villages have been brutalised as rival criminal gangs jostle for control.  Over 1000 people have had to flee the Weathercoast to seek refuge in Honiara.  Sir Alfred Soaki, the former police commissioner and National Peace Councillor was assassinated in February this year.  Cabinet Minister Father Augustine Geve was killed in August last year.
Kidnapping, murder, rape and torture have gone unchecked.  Police are unable or unwilling to investigate many of these crimes.  There are too many examples of criminals evading arrest, charges or detention, protected by corrupt politicians, officials, police or prison guards.
  In our interests to help
It is vital that we do all that we can to arrest this downward spiral, which, if not addressed, could result in the total collapse of the Solomon Islands'; governance and sovereignty.
  The international community looks to Australia to play a leading role in the South Pacific.  Our leadership of the regional assistance mission to the Solomon Islands reflects both a national interest and an international expectation.
A failed state would not only devastate the lives of the peoples of the Solomons but could also pose a significant security risk for the whole region.  Failed states can all too easily become safe-havens for transnational criminals and even terrorists.  Poor governance and endemic corruption provide the conditions that support criminal activities.
  If Australia wants security, we need to do all that we can to ensure that our region, our neighbourhood, is stable – that governance is strong and the rule of law is just.
That is why we have joined with the other nations of our region to lend a helping hand.  Failure to act would have sent the wrong signal to those who are endeavouring to maintain stability in other parts of the Pacific.
  On 25 June, the Australian Government decided to undertake a regional assistance mission to the Solomon Islands provided there was a formal request, that necessary legislation was enacted to authorise the presence of external personnel, and that the initiative was supported by the Pacific Islands Forum.
This last requirement was met when the initiative was unanimously endorsed at the meeting of the Forum';s foreign ministers held in Sydney on 30 June.
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the important role played by the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon Alexander Downer, and his Department throughout these consultations.
On 4 July, the Solomon Islands Governor-General, Sir John Lapli, acting on the advice of Prime Minister Kemakaza';s Cabinet, wrote to me formally requesting the assistance package.
On 11 July, the parliament of the Solomon Islands supported a motion endorsing the programme of strengthened assistance.  On 17 July, it unanimously passed the enabling legislation giving powers and immunities to those police and military personnel engaged in the operation.
With all our conditions met, the Australian government agreed to deploy the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands on 22 July.  The code name for the operation captures our aims and our intentions – the meaning is as clear in English as in Pidgin - Helpem Fren.  The nations of the Pacific are coming together to reach out to a neighbour in need.
   In addition to the Australian component, New Zealand, Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Tonga, have contributed police and/or military personnel to the initiative.  And it is possible that other Forum members will also contribute personnel to the Australian-led mission.
I was delighted that the Prime Ministers of New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Tonga were able to join the Forum Chairman, Prime Minister Qarase of Fiji, myself and the Leader of the Opposition in Townsville on 24 July to farewell the police and troops leaving for Honiara.
  Assistance Mission
The assistance mission is at this stage essentially a police-led operation designed to reintroduce law and order, and get guns and other weapons out of communities.  Once the situation has stabilised, we can begin to implement the necessary governance and economic reforms and ensure that the Solomons has a firm foundation on which to build its future security and prosperity.
  Of primary importance will be the work we undertake with the people of the Solomons to rebuild the police force, judicial institutions, correctional services and the other essential machinery of government.
  Together we will work to stabilise the Solomons'; finances and ensure the delivery of basic government services.
The government has appointed Mr Nick Warner, a senior official from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, as Special Coordinator to oversee and direct the assistance mission.
The policing component, some of whom have been sworn in as members of the local police force, are ably led by Assistant Commissioner Ben McDevitt from the Australian Federal Police, now Deputy Commissioner of the Solomon Islands'; police force.  We expect the policing and guarding element to total some 325 officers, once the Pacific Island nations have confirmed their contribution.  Colonel John Frewen, from the ADF';s second battalion, is leading a military component of some 1,800 personnel who are providing valuable support to the police.
  The Australian contribution comprises approximately 1,500 defence personnel, 155 Federal police and 80 members of the Australian Protective Services as well as a small number of officials drawn from relevant government departments, including the Treasury, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Australian Agency for International Development, the Attorney-General';s Department and the Department of Finance and Administration.
 Mr Speaker, I want, on behalf of the Australian government and the Australian people, to record our respect and admiration for those currently serving with the mission in the Solomon Islands.  I wish to assure them that they carry the very strong support and the good wishes of the Australian community.
Our military and policing forces are held in high esteem internationally for their courage and for their professionalism – our nation is rightly proud of them.
  I have absolute confidence that they will behave with the appropriate restraint and proper respect for the attitudes and culture of the people of the Solomon Islands.
But we are also mindful that any mission involves an element of danger.  We take comfort from the knowledge that they are superbly trained, well led and have been welcomed by the people of the Solomons.  Our thoughts will be with them until they return, safe and sound.
I wish also to thank the families of those deployed.  We know that the greatest burden of anxiety and loneliness is carried by those who wait at home.  We will endeavour to provide them with support and encouragement while their loved ones are away.
As I have said, the mission is essentially a police operation.  The bulk of the military personnel are providing them with important logistical support.  There is an active force protection element.
  I do not expect that the combat element will need to remain in the Solomon Islands very long, although it is too early to put a precise timeframe on their departure.
The government hopes that there will be no need to resort to the use of force.  But we need to be confident that our police contingent is adequately protected and that our military personnel could protect themselves and innocent civilians should it be necessary to do so.  Recognising this, the parliament of the Solomon Islands has passed legislation to allow members of the assistance mission to use such force as is necessary to protect themselves, protect other persons or property, and to achieve the purposes of the mission.
Our immediate goal is to stop the violence so that the people of the Solomons can rebuild their lives and their institutions.  The message is clear and I believe it has been heard – the time for guns is over.  The people of the Solomons want the threat of illegal firearms permanently and unambiguously removed from their community.
Mr Speaker I am pleased to be able to report to the House that since 24 July around 1,000 weapons have been handed in to, or secured by, the assistance force.
 The Foreign Minister, with his New Zealand counterpart, the Hon Phil Goff, visited the Solomons at the end of July to gauge the progress of the assistance operation and discuss the next stages with Solomon Islands leaders.  He advises me that the mission has got off to a very good start.  Impressive progress has been made.
Ordinary people are feeling more confident about their future and that of their nation.  But there are still some major challenges ahead.  Beyond retrieving the large number of illegal weapons still outstanding, there is the enormous challenge of rebuilding the economy and healing the ethnic divisions which have factured the nation.
  Long term Commitment - to the Solomons
 Our commitment in the Solomon Islands signals an important change to Australia';s policy.
   Australia respects the sovereignty of its neighbours.  Direct intervention, even by a friendly multilateral force, should always be a last resort.
Over the past years, we have made every effort to assist the people of the Solomons manage their own affairs.  The descent into lawlessness over recent months finally became acute.  The Solomon Islanders and ourselves both recognised that criminal gangs and corrupt individuals had taken control of their future.  Their very existence as a community, as a nation, had been placed in peril.
In these circumstances we jointly concluded that intervention was not only appropriate, but necessary.
  Regardless of the means, the objective has remained consistent – to return control of their own affairs to the people of the Solomon Islands.
And it is indicative of the Pacific way, that so many countries have joined together to help the Solomons.  The multi-national force is not only symbolic of that special spirit of cooperation but also a demonstration of what is achievable when there is unity of purpose.
  We need to work with other nations to ensure collective stability and sometimes we will need to join or form coalitions that are able to respond to requests for direct assistance.  Common goals, shared information, mutual support and collective approaches are the most practical ways of securing our region.  It is the only way to counter the activities of organised criminal networks.
Mr Speaker, I believe that the Solomons mission is important, not just for the future of the Solomon Islands, but because it is sending a strong signal throughout our region that the island nations are not alone.  If it is required, help is at hand.
 Australia, for one, has clearly expressed a willingness to help all the nations of the Pacific so that their people can experience the benefits which a properly functioning system of law and order provides – so that they too can enjoy peace and stability and be able to look to the future with confidence.
The government envisages that Australia';s contribution to the Solomons assistance mission – Helpem Fren - will cost over $200 million this financial year.  The final cost will, of course, depend on the length and nature of the operation.  While we envisage that the military component will draw-down as soon as a secure environment is established, the Australian Federal Police, aid officials and economic advisers may be engaged for several years.  This will be costly, but it is a cost which I believe Australians would wish our country to bear.
It is also a burden which we will be looking to bear side-by-side with others in the international community.
  Long-term commitment - to the Region
The situation in the Solomon Islands is unique but a number of our friends in the Pacific are experiencing economic decline, growing corruption and lawlessness.  Development assistance has an important role to play in restoring stability to the Pacific.  But we now understand that aid can only ever be a part of the solution.  We must use our aid programme to encourage and strengthen good governance.  The future stability and prosperity of the South Pacific depends on achieving higher standards of governance.
We want our neighbours to know that Australia is willing to help – to do our fair share, in a careful, deliberate, cooperative and neighbourly way.  But they must also understand that this assistance cannot be a substitute for proper governance and careful stewardship of their own nations.
  Mr Speaker, we have made it plain – nations who look for our assistance, who receive our financial aid, must understand support is now conditional on working to overcome corruption.  Because unless corruption is rooted out and the institutions of good governance strengthened aid will make little difference.
The government recognises the special challenges confronting the island states of the Pacific.  Through the framework of the Pacific Islands Forum we have begun to discuss innovative and creative ways to respond to these challenges.  Increasingly, we are discussing the possibility of dealing with governance issues and institutional capacity building on a regional basis.
The Australian Government believes there may be some scope for pooling aspects of regional governance.
  Obviously this would have the greatest application where there are common needs, common interests and common benefits and where pooling can provide the necessary critical mass or economies of scale.
I look forward to exploring these possibilities during the Pacific Islands Forum meeting in Auckland at the end of this week.
With this regional assistance mission to the Solomon Islands, Australia has signalled it is willing, in a cooperative and collegiate way, to play a supportive, stabilising, and, if it is required, more interventionist role in the region.  We will not let our friends down.  We are committed to working with our fellow members of the Pacific Islands Forum to address the challenges of the region and to demonstrate what it means to be a good neighbour.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Cassie. I think you may have been the youngest MC I';ve met, but can I say you';re much more articulate than many of the MCs I have met. I think we would all agree with that.
I think all of us, and most particularly the people in this room, will be very conscious of the major impact on the lives of so many young Australians and their families of juvenile diabetes. And the opportunity that this gathering in the Great Hall of Parliament House affords the Foundation to draw the attention of the nation and the parliament to the challenge of juvenile diabetes is one that has been well taken and I congratulate all of those responsible for the organisation of this and I particularly acknowledge the contribution of my many parliamentary colleagues who are here today.
 Cassie has reminded us, the rest of the community, of the daily challenges of coping with juvenile diabetes, of the multiple injections of insulin every day, of the need to constantly monitor blood sugar levels by the pricking of their finger – in her case six times a day – and the need to constantly balance their insulin injections with their food intake. She has also reminded us, as is the case with so many of challenges of this kind, that its incidence can be so random and can often and in so many cases be quite unrelated to lifestyle and diet and related issues.
 The Government does understand how diabetes and its complications contribute to ill health, to disability and on some occasions premature death, and that is why the Government identified diabetes as one of the national health priority areas. This year the Government has allocated over $20 million through the National Health and Medical Research Council, specifically for types 1 and 2 diabetes research. The Government is also working in partnership with the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation on projects such as the establishment of a diabetes vaccine development centre to coordinate research efforts on juvenile diabetes. I have been informed that islet cell transplantation is an experimental treatment for diabetes that could replace the need for pancreas transplants in some sufferers by injecting cells that trigger the pancreas to begin producing insulin. And I understand that the Department of Health is assisting the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation in the development of a proposal to be considered by the Commonwealth and the States on this issue.
But can I say, beyond reminding each other of the contributions that governments and community support groups make to assisting people who have juvenile diabetes and diabetes generally, the value of a gathering such as this and the value of the involvement of Members of Parliament and others in the community in the national parliament is that it does bring home to the rest of the community the sorts of challenges that young people who have juvenile diabetes have to cope with and also the challenges of parents and others who care for them. And it also, I think, brings home another very important thing – that an illness such as this is something that occur to anybody. It can occur to the person next door, it can occur to the family next door, it can occur to you. And you can go through life experiencing in various generations a lifestyle that is free of illness of these types and then it will appear amongst somebody, and can appear in somebody very close to you. And that reinforces the need to simultaneously be sensitive and caring and supporting, but also the need to recognise that the best gift that we can give to young children and to young people who have juvenile diabetes is to ensure that to the maximum extent we can, that their lives are as uninterrupted by it and as unaffected by it, because although it is something that is challenging and although it does involve disadvantages that don';t afflict people who don';t have it, it doesn';t in any way prevent people living full and active lives.
I wasn';t being in any way, I hope, patronising or going through the normal compliments of a guest speaker, to say what I said about Cassie. But to hear the, and to witness the self-confidence and the articulation and so forth brought home to me that this is a young lady who despite having to do the things that she has to do, that hasn';t stopped her developing to the full and I think that is the strongest message that I will take out of this gathering today. Here is this lovely young girl having to do what she described, but she has got a poise and a self-confidence and she is a metaphor for the capacity of people, supported by those around them who love them most, to overcome and to get on with life and to cope with treatments that others in the community don';t have to cope with. And that to me is a very inspiring message.
I know that there has been some discussion recently, and I felt I should raise this matter because you may be interested in what I have to say about it, there has been some discussion in relation to the carer allowance. And you';ll all be aware that carers of children with juvenile diabetes are currently eligible for carer allowance if they meet an objective list of criteria regarding their child';s abilities. And these children will be reviewed at key development stages to assess eligibility for continued access to the allowance. And this recognises that the circumstances of a child under care may change and for example, some young children with diabetes need a higher level of care, but as they grow older are more able to manage their condition. In January of last year a special care needs criterion was added to allow streamlined access to carers' allowance if the condition of the child with juvenile diabetes significantly worsens. And the current review of the list of recognised disabilities provides an opportunity for juvenile diabetes and a range of other conditions to be considered for inclusion on the list. And I encourage therefore your organisation to provide information about the condition to the review team.
And I';d especially like to acknowledge the presence here today of Senator Kay Patterson, the Minister for Health, as well as my parliamentary colleague Trish Worth, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Health, as well as the Speaker of the House and many others of my parliamentary colleagues. But most especially in supporting and launching your activity today, can I pay tribute to the families, to the mothers and fathers and other loved ones and carers, and very particularly the wonderful spirit of the children and the sense of togetherness and the sense of being a family, looking after people who have a condition that many others don';t have, but more importantly than that, have the spirit and the determination to ensure that that condition doesn';t stop them living full, active, contributing and happy lives. And that';s the message I take out of today. It';s a very important message. It';s a very inspiring message. And it';s a message that the Government wants to contribute to its ongoing partnership with your foundation.
Thank you very much.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Mr MC, Air Marshall David and Mrs Gail Evans, Mr McDowell, the Defence Minister Robert Hill, Premier of South Australia, my other federal and state parliamentary colleagues, the British High Commissioner Alastair Goodlad, ladies and gentlemen, and very importantly the employees here in South Australia and elsewhere of BAE Systems.
In the 29 years that I have been a Member of Federal Parliament, I don';t think I have passed through a period anything like the last two or three years, perhaps even five years, which has had such an enormous focus on defence – not only the defence of Australia, but also the participation of personnel from the Australian Defence Force in various military operations. As I speak, we should remind ourselves that we still have just under 800 personnel in and around Iraq. We still have significant forces in East Timor. We have something in the order of 1,800 personnel in the Solomon Islands, and we have smaller groups in other parts of the world. In some respects, it';s a wider spread and a broader commitment than we have had at any time since the Vietnam War.
 So it does emphasise, as both the Premier and your Managing Director have, the high priority that this country is attaching to its defence forces and the high priority that it';s attaching to participation in the war against terrorism. Both the Premier and your Managing Director have detailed the very rich history of this company. It';s a pretty extraordinary story and it';s a reminder of the long continuity of an organisation which has been both in its earlier antecedents and now in its Australian manifestation, a great partner with the defence forces, not only of Australia but the defence forces of our allies and most particularly the defence forces of the United Kingdom.
Of course, it has a very special airforce hue about it and the (inaudible) of course remind us of the enormous contribution that the Royal Australian Airforce has made to the defence of Australia and the enormous contribution in partnership the personnel from the Royal Australian Airforce and the Royal Airforce made to the defence of liberty, particularly in World War II. And of course in the recent military operation in Iraq, the missions that the Royal Australian Airforce were involved in were the first of that kind since the Korean War and it brought to the Royal Australian Airforce a special sense of pride and involvement in an operation alongside their army and their navy colleagues.
I';m glad, might I say Mr Premier, that BAE Systems has decided to have its headquarters here in Adelaide. Now it';s pretty easy to say this in front of an audience such as this, and of course being a Prime Minister of the commonwealth of Australia, I don';t play any favourites as to where things go, and as you know as a Premier, we have these contests between different parts of Australia as to where headquarters may be located, and as far as I';m concerned, may the best offer be accepted and as far as contracts are concerned, we';ll try and award them and I know Robert Hill shares this view, on the basis of what is in the overall interests of Australia. But there has been cooperation and there has been partnership between the Commonwealth and your state, the state of South Australia, under governments of different persuasions, both federally and state. You were kind enough to mention the Mitsubishi commitment. Of course as we come up to January of next year, you and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and I will join in celebrating another thing that has involved a great partnership between the Commonwealth and South Australia and the Northern Territory, and that is the completion of the Darwin to Alice Springs railway. It was only first promised in 1910, but sometimes these things take a while to be completed.
But ladies and gentlemen, the other thing that I wanted to say today before officially opening this facility, this new headquarters, and paying my great respects to BAE Systems, is to say a couple of words about David Evans. David Evans has been an ornament to the Australian defence community for many, many years. A former chief of the Royal Australian Airforce, a person who in his ex-airforce days has continued to contribute massively to public debate on defence issues, he has remained a great servant of Australia. He has served of chairman of the National Capital Development Commission in the ACT. I know he has served in different capacities for BAE Systems for many years. His counsel has always been very welcome. His advice has always been sensible and balanced. His passion for sensible policy for the defence of Australia is well known and his enduring loyalty to the service traditions of the Royal Australian Airforce are well known, not only by current and serving members, but also former members of the Royal Australian Airforce. And his being here today with his wife is a reminder of the very, very strong connection with this company and all that he has done for this company and the cause of defence industries in Australia over long years.
And it';s against that background and in that context in declaring this building open, I have great pleasure in naming it ‘the David Evans building'; in recognition and in tribute to the enormous contribution that he has made and also the enormous contribution that he continues to make to matters relating to the defence of Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Rob for those very kind words of introduction and to you as the Leader of the State Liberal team here in South Australia, I know it';s always quite a challenge in the early months of Opposition, but I wish you well and congratulate you on the great job that you and your team are doing in providing an alternative here at the State level in South Australia.
I';ll have the opportunity over the weekend at the Liberal Party Conference of saying something of Rosemary';s contribution to the Party here in South Australia, but I can';t let the occasion of this very large business gathering go by without, on behalf of the Liberal Party around Australia, thanking her very warmly for the leadership she';s given to the Division over the last three years.
I also, of course, acknowledge the presence of many of my South Australian colleagues, Senator Robert Hill, the Defence Minister and Leader of the Government in the Senate, Senator Minchin, Senator Vanstone, Senator Ian Macdonald from Queensland and my other Federal and State parliamentary colleagues.
 Very importantly, ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you for supporting this lunch. I want to thank the sponsors and collectively to say to those of you who continue to support in a very visible way the Liberal Party cause here in South Australia, that it is in the best sense of the term an important investment in the future of this State and through it a very important investment in the future of our country.
I always remind audiences such as this that of course the Federal performance of the Liberal Party in South Australia over the last three years has been better than any other State in Australia and it';s a source of great pride to the South Australian Division. But of course we face sometime, I guess, around about a year or a bit or more, don';t any of the journalists read anything into that, from now we will face another electoral contest and that';s an electoral contest that should not be taken, the result of that should not be taken for granted.
 Elections are always very hard to win and the longer you';ve been in Government the harder it gets. People might say, look you';re a mile in front, and people keep saying to me the other mob are hopeless, and I tell you the Labor Party when it comes to a Federal contest is never hopeless. They';re always a very tough opponent and in the 29 years that I';ve been in Federal Parliament there has only been four elections during that period of time when you';ve really had landslide results. Most of them are determined by one or two or three percentage points of the two Party preferred vote, and we';ll face a very important and a very challenging contest when it comes along sometime in the next year or so. And therefore your support between now and at that time will continue to be absolutely crucial to our prospects of winning.
Of course one of the major battlegrounds will be the relative capacities of the two sides of politics to manage and lead the Australian economy. The economy is not everything but it is certainly very important to the continued wellbeing of the country and it';s very important to the business community of Australia, and I have no reluctance at all, of course, in saying that over the past seven and a half years we have set out to create, and I believe we have created, as good a business climate as this country has had since the end of World War II. I can';t think of a time except perhaps in the late 1960s when you could say that the fundamentals of the Australian economy are as strong as they are now. And in the 1960s one of the differences was that Australia was a far more cloistered and protected economy. We had high tariffs, we had a fixed exchange rate, we had a more regulated economy and we were a far more inward looking economy and a far more inward looking society. But over the past few years the economic performance of Australia has outstripped that of most industrialised countries.
The other day I heard a comparison contained in the latest edition of the Economist magazine which contained a summary poll of forecasts about growth amongst the industrialised countries, both this year 2003 and next year 2004, and in both of those years the poll of forecasts published in the Economist said that the growth in the Australian economy would exceed the growth in all other major industrialised economies, both in Europe, in Asia and in North America.
So the momentum continues. This hasn';t been flash-in-the-pan economic growth, this hasn‘t been economic growth built off the back of an unsustainable boom. What we have been able to achieve in Australia over the last few years are the conditions that can deliver continuously strong growth. Many of you who have been in business for a long time will recall the days when you';d have a few years of strong economic growth and then along would come the Treasury and say they had to administer a short, sharp shock in order to bring the economy under control and take some of the heat out of the economy. Well we don';t need any more Treasury short, sharp shocks anymore because we don';t have unsustainable booms in Australia anymore, we have a continued high level of economic growth which is coming off the back of very strong fundamentals and there are a few comparisons that I';ll be making quite regularly over the next year. And I';ll be making them with increasing intensity and fervour as we get closer to the time when the election is held, and they draw out for Australians, for voters, for your employees and for you, what a change of government has meant to this country over the last seven years.
 I can';t find a better starting point, of course, than interest rates. The difference in paying off the average Australian loan now as a result of the fall in interest rates is no less than $450 a month. Now that is $450 a month that the average borrower has additional in his or her pocket as a result of the much lower interest rates that obtain under this government.
The second comparison, and I always enjoy making this comparison because the Labor Party for years has said – oh it was the Party who was the friend of the Australian worker, that the working man and woman in Australia needed a Labor government to look after them. Well isn';t it odd that when you look at the thing that determines the prosperity of the average worker in this country, one of the things that does, is the level of his or her wages. Isn';t it interesting that since March of 1996 the real wages of Australians have increased by 10.2%, that';s since March of 1996 the real wages, that';s over and above inflation, but in comparison over 13 years of Labor government, between 1983 and 1986 wages rose in total by just 2.3% in real terms. So in those two measures, and you are talking here about the prosperity of Australians, and sometimes commentators say why do Australians borrow so much, why do they spend so much, why do they behave as though they have great economic prosperity, they do so because in reality they have. They are better off. If you';re paying less on your mortgage and you';re getting paid a higher wage and on top of that you have two other advantages that I';ll come to, you are better off. And in the end isn';t economic policy about improving the lives of the average Australian.
Good economic policy is not an end in itself. It is not some kind of arcane science where you strive to get 99 out of 100 and go away and feel self-satisfied and say aren';t I good. In the end good economic policy is only a means to an end and the end is to improve the prosperity and the security and the happiness of the Australian people. So we';ve cut their interest bills and we';ve increased their real wages and Australia';s unemployment rate has fallen from 8.2% in March of 1996 to 6.2% now, and we';ve generated almost 1.1 million new jobs over that period of time.
 And if the Labor Party and others hadn';t obstructed us in the Senate we would have been able to get rid of these stupid unfair dismissal laws that we still have and we would have generated tens upon thousands more jobs, particularly in small business and I can say to the small business men and women of Australia that we will continue to fight to secure the passage of further changes to those unfair dismissal laws.
And another comparison that you will be hearing a lot about from me over the next few months is in the area of apprentices. Now we hear a lot about the young men and women who leave school and go to university, but we should remember that 70% of young Australians when they leave school don';t go to universities – 70%. So what happens to them and their opportunities is just as important as what happens to those who leave school and go onto university and in December of 1995 just four months before the government was elected to office, the number of Australians in apprenticeships totalled only 141,000. Today I am very proud to say that more than 390,000 young Australians, not all young but mainly young, are in apprenticeships and traineeships. And this is one of the factors that explains that the decline in Australia';s youth unemployment rate has taken it to its lowest level, I believe, since August of 1990.
Now all of those things, interest rates, the level of wages, the availability of jobs, the fall in the unemployment rate, the availability of apprenticeships, all of those go directly to the job opportunities and the hopes and the aspirations of the mainstream of the Australian community. And we';ve been able to create that climate because we have observed the fundamentals of good economic management. We have repaid Labor';s enormous government debt, we have run budget surpluses. Government debt in this country is now down to about 5% of annual wealth generation, 5% of GDP, and to put that in comparison the average of the OECD area is about 50%, it';s 45% in the United States and it';s about 125% in Japan.
Now one of the reasons we have low interest rates in Australia is that we don';t have the government out there in the money markets competing against you in order to borrow money and whilever we run budget surpluses we';ll pay off more debt and we';ll continue in that way to exert downward pressure on interest rates.
 So, ladies and gentlemen, it is a story of strong economic performance, but it';s also a story of a government which has been willing to undertake bold economic change and reform.
 I can remember addressing gatherings similar to this at this very venue in 1998 and 1999 as we argued the cause of taxation reform. I can remember coming here and arguing the cause of industrial relations reform and I have argued the cause of other areas of economic reform over a long period of time and you don';t have a strong economy by sheer luck. You have a strong economy if you are willing, over a period of time, to undertake economic reform which is essential to our long-term future.
But because, my friends, a political contest is about alternatives and whenever you fix your gaze on a political contest which is going to happen sometime in the future, you are entitled to make comparisons, and because this is a business audience I should remind you that despite what the Labor Party might say about its pro business credentials. I mean it makes a lot of general speeches, I hear Mr Crean and I hear his new Shadow Treasurer saying – oh we';re pro competition, we';re pro the business sector, we';re pro investment, we';ll run a very responsible economic policy ((inaudible)turn the power off on me) but what …… I had a list of Labor tax slugs just when the power went off but ladies and gentlemen let me remind you that whatever the rhetoric may be, whatever the rhetoric may be about Labor';s pro business credentials, over the last four months the Labor Party has either committed itself to tax increases or opposed and blocked tax reductions that we have put forward that will over a four year period cost the Australian business sector about $1.1 billion.
I wonder how many people in this audience who are in the mining industry realise that as part of the funding of the Labor Party';s alternative higher education policy they are going to reduce the value of the diesel fuel rebate by 10% which will represent a slug on the mining industry of $467 million over four years.
It';s important that Australia is an effective part of the globalised economy and that means the relatively free flow of people and employees from one country to another is necessary and in order to ease the tax burden on some foreign resident employees who are temporarily in Australia, we put forward some taxation measures which would represent relief of about $180 million, and that has been blocked by the Australian Labor Party.
The Labor Party is also vowing, and in combination with the minor parties, will block some taxation measures worth $270 million which are designed to make Australian companies more internationally competitive. And they';ve also vowed to block , are in the process of blocking some measures relating to franked dividend rebates that will cost the business sector $210 million over a period of four years.
Now those things don';t receive an enormous amount of publicity, but you ought to be aware of them, you ought to understand that despite the rhetoric to the contrary the Labor Party remains a Party that resorts to a tax increase and a slug on the business community if it wants spare cash to finance some of its programs.
It may preach the doctrine of budget balancing and budget surpluses and sound economic management, but it really hasn';t fundamentally changed its spots and in many respects because Mr Crean relied on the left wing of the Labor Party to preserve his leadership a few months ago, in many respects you can see Labor Party economic policy being more enthralled to the left wing of the Labor Party than perhaps was the case on some earlier occasions.
So ladies and gentlemen although as I said at the beginning of my remarks the economy isn';t everything, although there was an American President who had hanging on the wall that well-known sign that said it';s the economy stupid, although the economy is not everything, it is the means by which as a community we not only generate wealth but also the means by which we are able to provide those less fortunate in the community with the assistance and the safety net to which they are properly entitled according to the values of a fair go and the ethos of an egalitarian Australian nation.
It is true as Rob said in his introduction that over the last year this country has faced some enormous security challenges and I wish I could say otherwise to you today but the reality is that we live in a world where those security challenges are going to go on for many years into the future. We';ve just passed through what can only be described as a terrible week on the international stage, the appalling attack on the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad and the dreadful suicide bomber attack on Israel, orchestrated by Hammas and its associates which must fill anybody in the world who is hoping for a peace settlement in the Middle East, with a sense of absolute desolation and absolute despair.
We have to understand that terrorists respect no hierarchy when it comes to their targets. Terrorists attack indiscriminately, they attack Americans, they attack Australians, they attack Indonesians and when the bomb went off outside the Marriott Hotel in Jakarta, they weren';t avenging their Muslim brothers as they sometimes say, they were in fact murdering their Muslim brothers, because all but two of the people who died at the Marriott Hotel blast were citizens of Indonesia.
 What I think that attack and the attack in Baghdad has driven home to many people is that the war against terrorism is a war that ought to embrace all peoples. It shouldn';t be seen in terms of the terrorists only targeting certain countries. It is true they hate western nations because they hate us not so much for what we have done, they hate us for who we are and what we stand for and the values that we hold dear. But in the process of carrying out what they are about they strike indiscriminately and when I was talking yesterday to the Indonesian Foreign Minister in Canberra, he made the remark to me that the attack in Jakarta outside the Marriott Hotel had provoked a very deep sense of anger and rage within the Indonesian community because it was seen as very much an attack upon ordinary people and ordinary citizens of that country and sadly it has brought home to Indonesia and brought home to all of us again that this is a campaign and this is a war in which all of us must be involved.
 But our capacity to do it effectively, our capacity to intervene so effectively as we have done in the Solomon Islands, our capacity as we did to participate in the campaign in Iraq, our capacity to contribute in Afghanistan and East Timor, all of those things go back to the fact that we have a strong economy.
Defence has consumed even more of our resources than in the past and it';s very likely to continue doing so in the future and fundamental to that is a strong economy and that is why we have placed such enormous emphasis on it and that is why we continue to regard it as being so much at the heart of the current strength of the Australian nation and our future.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I say again how much I appreciate the support that you all continue to give to our Party here in South Australia.
We have a huge fight ahead at a State level. I don';t like the fact that we have eight State Labor and Territory governments, it';s very lonely at Premiers'; conference meetings. I am glad I provide the food at the Lodge the night before and not the other way around but it is lonely and I want to do something about that, and I want to encourage all of you to support Rob and his colleagues here in South Australia and indeed all around the country.
Our next big fight though is a Federal fight and it will be tough, I am not saying that in a ritualistic sense. The first election is easier to win, the second one is easier to win than the third and the third is easier to win than the fourth. There haven';t been many governments in Australia that have won four elections in a row. You keep reading that we are a mile in front, we';re not, if we lose seven or eight seats we are out of government. You may not think that is reflected in political coverage but it is the reality.
 I was taught very early in political life always to sort of play cautiously and run scared and I believe that. It';s a good bit of advice and it';s a good bit of political doctrine. I';ve seen a few too many examples of people who complacently assume that they would be re-elected because of their undoubted and undiluted brilliance. Well, can I say that that is not a disease that I am going to catch, it';s not a mistaken belief I have or any of my colleagues have and we are all acutely aware that we have got to work like crazy between now and when the election is held sometime in some stage of the second half of next year to win the confidence of the Australian people.
 Here in South Australia that means hanging onto the nine seats that we now hold. 75% of the Federal seats in South Australia are held by the Liberal Party. We have got to work hard to do that and with your help we can make it.
Thanks.
  [ends]   


Thank you very much Rosemary, Rob Kerin, Alexander Downer, Bruce McDonald, my other federal and state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I start by congratulating Bob Randall on his election as your new President.  I look forward to working with him and other members of the south Australian Division in the lead up to the next election.
Can I also again as I did last night and at lunchtime yesterday, thank Rosemary Craddock for the tremendous contribution that she';s made as President of your Division over the past three years.  I';ve worked with her with ease.  Relations between the Executive and my office have been very close and smooth and I look forward to a continuation of that partnership with your new President.
Can I also say how very important it is to me that the federal and state parliamentary parties all over Australia work as closely as possible.  We';re rather lonely being the only Liberal government in Australia at the present time.  I don';t like those dinners at the Lodge with no Liberal friends the night before Premiers'; conferences meetings and I look forward to working with Rob and others around Australia to bring about that change.
My friends annual Party conferences are a great opportunity to talk in the broad about our goals for Australia.  And at Party conferences in Western Australia and Tasmania and now here in South Australia, I want to remind all of our supporters that the things we do and that the things that we stand for and the policies that we seek to implement are designed to achieve three great goals for our country.  And they are goals that I believe the main stream of the Australian community very strongly shares.  And those three great goals are national security, economic strength and social stability.
  National security is understandably very much in our minds.  We live in a different world from the world that the Coalition government inherited in 1996.  We live in an age of terrorism.  We live in a region which is threatened with the possible challenge of failed states where Australia must play a key leadership role.  And we also live in a world where it';s important to understand that the interests of Australia do not lie in having all of our associations and all our relationships in one part of the world.  Rather the interests of Australia lie very much in seeing this country as a citizen of the world.  A nation which in the words of the foreign minister is a significant, powerful, respected nation.  A nation which especially over the last few years has been able to punch above its weight.  A nation that is seen because of its strong economic performance and because it is willing to take a stand alongside friends.  A nation to be respected and worked with.
And one of the things that I take particular pride in observing is that in the time that we have been in government we have seen a further deepening of our already close relationship with the United States.  But that has been done without in any way prejudicing the maintenance and the further development of our very close relations with the nations of Asia.  Only last week I visited  Beijing and met for the first time the new President and the new Premier of China.  The leaders of the largest country in the world.  And the President of China will visit Australia before the end of the year undertaking a visit to this country on one of his first significant overseas tours.  It underscores the fact that our relationship with Beijing based on a pragmatic identification of things that we have in common whilst recognising that historically and politically and culturally we are very different societies.  But you can simultaneously build very close relations with our traditional allies such as the United States and also build ever closer relationships with the countries of Asia.  It is a period in which we are co-operating more closely than ever with the government of Indonesia in the common fight against terrorism.  And that fight will go on for a long time.  And that fight has already carried our armed forces to Afghanistan.  Its seen us lose 88 of our fellow Australians in Bali.  It sees us challenged to the ongoing response to barbarism and terrorist behaviour in Iraq.
And on the subject of Iraq just let me briefly place on record again my rejection of the allegations made in Canberra yesterday by a former officer of the ONA that in some way the government deliberately distorted and misrepresented the intelligence assessments that came to it.  All of the statements that we made about intelligence were consistent with the assessments that we had received from the agencies.  Mr Wilke would have had access to raw intelligence data and ONA assessments but I have  been informed by the Office of National Assessments the body from which he resigned, that he did not have access to some very important and very sensitive intelligence material concerning Iraq.  But that is not really the point.  He';s not produced any evidence to support his allegations that the government fabricated and distorted its Iraqi intelligence material.  The truth is that the government didn';t that.  I didn';t do it.  The Foreign Minister didn';t do it and the Defence Minister didn';t do it.  And can I while mentioning both of those gentlemen, both of my very senior colleagues Alexander Downer and Robert Hill, the two Ministers who more than anybody else in the Cabinet who shared with me the particular challenges of the past year. Alexander Downer is now short of being by a relatively short period of time Australia';s longest serving Foreign Minister.  And I want to record before his home audience of South Australia what a great job that he';s done as Foreign Minister during the whole time that the government has been in office.  He';s brought a sure hand, a deft touch and a great deal of sagatious advice to me in the discharge of what as the years have gone by has  become an even more important area of responsibility within the government.
  You can be assured that the government will continue to provide the resources that are needed by our Defence Forces.  I will visit the Australian Defence Forces in the Solomon Islands on Monday  to personally thank them for the fine job that they are doing.
   Alexander,s already been there with his New Zealand colleague Phil Goff. You can be certain that we will invest the resources that are needed by our intelligence services and you can be absolutely certain that we';ll continue to work very closely with our allies and friends both in the region and elsewhere in the ongoing fight against terrorism.
Of course the capacity of this nation to have an authoritative voice around the world is heavily influenced by our economic performance. No industrialised country has outperformed Australia over the last seven years and the latest forecast suggests both for this year and next year the Australian economy will grow at a faster rate than any of the other major industrialised societies.
That is something that we can be very proud of but of course a stellar national economic performance is not an end in itself. The great value of that strong economic performance is that it';s altered and improved the lives of our fellow Australians.
Now let me just touch very briefly on a few areas that indicate that. In March of 1996 interest rates on housing loans were much higher than they are now and the average Australian paying off a loan now is paying $450 a month less than what he or she was paying in March of 1996. Our memories are not so short that we forget the 17% and 18% interest rates that homebuyers used to pay under Mr Hawke and Mr Keating. The farmer';s of Australias memories are not so short that they will forget the bill rates of 21% and 22% and 23% that many of them had to pay when Mr Hawke and Mr Keating ran this country.
The policies that we have followed by reducing the budget deficit, by building surpluses, by repaying debt have contributed to the lower interest rate regime enjoyed by homebuyers and small business alike.
Wages in Australia now are higher than what they were when we came to office in 1996. And they are not higher because we have had an upsurge of inflation, higher wages have been built on higher productivity because we have rebalanced the incentives of our workplace relations system.
 In the 13 years that Mr Hawke and Mr Keating were in power the alleged friends of the workers, Mr Hawke a former President of the ACTU, the real wages of Australian workers in 13 years, that';s the increases after inflation rose by only 2.3% in 13 years, and yet in seven and a half years the real wages of Australian workers under my government have risen by 10.2%. In other words with lower interest rates and higher wages Australian workers are better off under the Liberals than they ever were under a Labor government. Now that';s an important ……
By that measure it';s the Liberal Party that has become he real friend of the working men and women of this country. It';s the Liberal Party that champions their interest. It';s the Liberal Party that gives them lower interest rates and higher wages, but we haven';t stopped at that we';ve also generated more jobs.
In the seven and a half years unemployment has fallen by 2% from 8.2% to 6.2%. We have generated about 1.1 million new jobs and we have driven youth unemployment down to a level that it wasn';t at since the middle of 1990. And on top of that I am particularly proud of the fact that we';ve addressed the needs of the 70% of young Australians who leave school and don';t go to university. We obviously should address the needs of those who do go to university but we should remember that 70% don';t and in December of 1995 there were 141,000 apprentices in Australia. The figure now for apprenticeships and traineeships is more that 390,000. In other words in that seven and a half year period we have more than doubled the number of Australians entering apprenticeships and traineeships.
Now this is delivering real benefits for the working people of this country, lower interest rates, higher wages, more jobs and better apprenticeship opportunities. That is a quartet of delivery that no Labor government, the Labor Party in 13 years double the time virtually that we have been in office, the Labor Party could not deliver those benefits.
So my friends when I talk about the economic performance of this country it';s not just about people at banking conferences saying that the Australian economy is doing well, it';s not just about the performance of the implicit price deflator and the GDP and all of those other complicated descriptions of our economic performance, but it';s the flesh and blood delivery of opportunities and benefits for the mainstream of the Australian people.
 Lower interest rates, more jobs, higher wages, more apprenticeships – now that is what we are on about. We are on about delivering the benefits of an enhanced and an improved economic performance. But we are also on about providing this country with a maintenance of its social stability. One of the great boasts of the Australian nation is that we are a fair and just and egalitarian society. We are not a society riven by class division and class pretension, we are a society that rewards effort and responsibility and merit, we are a society that wants to give every Australian who is prepared to have ago the opportunity of living out and achieving his or her dreams. But we are also a society that believes that alongside national security and economic strength part of the social contract, part of social stability is to have an eye towards things that are important about the sustainability of our future.
 That is why in the lead up to the 1996 election campaign we placed a great deal of emphasis on caring for the environment. The environment is no longer some kind of elite niche issue in Australian public life or Australian politics. It';s a mainstream political issue. Everybody is now an environmentalist, everybody worries about the sustainability of this ancient land of ours, everybody wants to preserve our natural resources and to sensibly husband and use them. Everybody worries about the challenge of water supply and salinity and the people of Adelaide in particular have reason to be concerned about this issue.
I am very proud of the Liberal Party';s record on the environment. I am very proud of the fact that out of the sale of the first one-third of Telstra we established the Natural Heritage Trust, the biggest single investment in the environmental future of this country undertaken by any national government.
 I am very proud of the way in which we have continued to support and nourish the landcare movement. I am very proud of the work that Robert Hill did and David Kemp has carried on as the Federal Environmental Minister. Last week in the Senate against the efforts of the Labor Party and the Greens and the Democrats, I repeat against the efforts of the Labor Party, the Greens and the Democrats, we were able to secure the passage of the new Heritage Act which is going to, amongst other things, establish a new measure called Essentially Australian, a new measure of natural heritage or national heritage sites on which such hallowed areas as Anzac Cove will be listed and it will provide a new benchmark if you like of those sites and those things around Australia that we are particularly proud of because they are essentially Australian. And it staggers me that the Labor Party and the Democrats and the Greens combined to try and defeat this measure and congratulations to David Kemp for securing the support of the four Independent Senators to pass this into law.
But ladies and gentlemen I want to say something about the Murray Darling. Water is a very precious resource that we almost use sustainably and we do have to balance the needs of the environment and development and governments at all levels have been grappling with the need to improve the way that we use our water. This issue is going to be very high on the agenda at the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Canberra next week.
My government has made a priority out of improving the health of our rivers and improving the economic efficiency of water usage. Since 1996 the government has committed more than $500 million in different ways to the restoration of the Murray Darling Basin and at the last election we committed to sweeping reforms of how we deal with issues such as property rights, allocation security, environmental sustainability and the operations of water markets, and this work is now very well advanced.
 At the forthcoming COAG meeting I am cautiously hopeful of securing a national agreement between all the governments of Australia on how we deal with water. It will improve water entitlement systems, markets and environmental allocations and lay the basis for dealing with these issues around Australia. And in developing the Federal Government';s response in this area can I pay a special tribute to the work of John Anderson, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Leader of the National Party. John';s personal dedication and commitment to this issue is a further illustration of the very close partnership between the Liberal Party and the National Party which has been the essence of our Coalition success over the last seven and a half years. A more decent individual and political contributor to Australian public life you couldn';t find, when you think of John Anderson he is one of the very fine contributors to our public life and a person for whom I have immense personal regard.
Ladies and gentlemen nowhere are these issues more important than in the Murray Darling Basin, one of the great food production systems in Australia. We may have done a lot in the past but we need as governments acting in the collective interests of all of the Australian people, we need to start taking some additional decisive steps now.
 That is why I will this weekend write to the relevant Premiers proposing that they agree to an initiative to allocate $500 million over and above what has been allocated in the past to start the task of restoring the Murray Darling Basin';s water system to sustainable extraction levels. This will be a $500 million initiative over a period of five years. The funding would be expected to flow in 2004 after the intergovernmental agreement is finalised. The Commonwealth will contribute as its share of that $500 million, $125 million and if agreement can be reached from the contributing States and Territories this $500 million will underpin many of the activities and the reforms that we will agree at COAG.
This will be a very important start. It obviously won';t be the last word but unless further work is undertaken then great environmental and other damage will be done and I know that initiatives and actions in this area will be very important to the people of Adelaide and very important to the State of South Australia.
 The exact amount of water to be saved will depend on the activities undertaken and where they are undertaken. Much work has already been done in this area and we must let the science and local community who know guide us in our work.
I sense that there is the opportunity, particularly at the meeting next, for a coming together hopefully across the political divide of all of the governments of Australia to understand and to grapple with and to propound solutions to one of the great challenges of our future and that is the sensible use and allocation of water.
We must recognise that when water rights that people have enjoyed for years are taken away or reduced those people are entitled to proper compensation. Water rights long enjoyed are property rights in the sense that we understand that term and the notion that we would allow those rights to be arbitrarily cancelled and taken away is something that I don';t accept. But I know how important the Murray Darling is to the people of Australia and that is why I will be proposing the commitment by all of the governments under the Murray Darling partnership of this $500 million with the money beginning to flow next year and it will lay the important ground work of the further reforms that are needed in this very important area.
Ladies and gentlemen I have said something of our goals and our aspirations, let me say something of the importance now of the role of the Liberal Party organisation.
 We are in the unusual situation of holding Federal office but being out of office in every State and every Territory. There is a widespread belief in the Australian community that at a national level we are in some senses unbeatable. Can I tell you with all the sincerity I can muster that couldn';t be more wrong. Every government is beatable, every Opposition is electable. There is no such thing as an unlosable or an unwinnable election. History is littered with examples at both a State and a Federal level of Prime Ministers and Premiers imagining that they couldn';t be beaten and pollsters and pundits and commentators saying that Opposition leaders are unelectable.
Most of the Federal elections that I have been involved in over the last 29 years have been close. A few of them have been landslides but not many. Most of them boil down to a few seats. If we lose seven or eight seats at the next Federal election we are out of office and at the present time we';ve overperformed, if I can put it that way, in South Australia pleasingly, in NSW, in Queensland, and we have underperformed badly in Tasmania where we don';t hold any lower House seats and to a lesser extent in Western Australia and Victoria.
So what we have to do is to understand how close the fight will be, ignore all these acres of newspaper columns saying that the Labor Party is unelectable. They are very electable. They';ll have more money than us to spend on the election campaign because the unions donate to them and increasingly companies are giving 50/50 to the major parties. So they';re ahead. The unions don';t give 50 per cent to us, I can assure you. They don';t give any to us. So the reality is that they will have a big war chest and we will have to counter that as best we can. Nowt I will need your help, my colleagues will need your help.
 We need to retain the unity that has been a hallmark of our government for the last seven and a half years. We need to identify the goals that we have. We need to remind people that on those measures of national security and economic strength and social stability, the Liberal Party';s performance and what the Liberal Party offers for the future is so much more superior. We have to remind people of the quality of our team. I don';t run a one man band. To the extent that I have achieved success over the last seven and a half years, I owe it to my colleagues both in the ministry, in the parliamentary party and in the party organisation. We are a government that will remain in touch with the Australian people. We won';t develop hubris. We won';t assume that we are complacently entitled to relection. We recognise that we have to work extremely hard to retain the trust and the support of the Australian people.
But we will have two very precious assets in that campaign. The first of those is that we will be able to point to the benefits that we have delivered to the Australian people over the last seven and a half years. We';ll be able to remind the Australian people that we haven';t shirked the hard decisions. We were prepared to take unpopular decisions to get rid of the $10.5 billion deficit Mr Beazley as Finance Minister left us. We were prepared to tackle reform of Australia';s industrial relations system. For years I had been lectured by the businessmen of Australia in boardrooms and at party gatherings about the need to do something about the disgrace of the Australian waterfront. And in 1998, led by the courage of Peter Reith who was then the Workplace Relations Minister, we took on the maritime unions of Australia, and we have changed forever the face and the productivity of the Australian waterfront. In 1998 the idea of moving, having a crane rate of 26 an hour on the Australian waterfront was regarded as unthinkable. It was languishing at about 17 or 18 per cent. We now have 26 to 27 movements an hour. That is a measure of how we have transformed that aspect of Australia';s industrial relations.
We were told you could never do anything about a taxation system and some people told me it was suicide to go to an election offering a new taxation system. And at various stages in the lead up to that election I thought they were probably right. And when Lynton Crosby rang me with that exit poll on the night of the election, I sort of thought well I knew they were right. But of course it turned out that we lived to fight another day and the Australian people, admittedly by a smaller margin than we might have hoped, were prepared to give us a go and they were prepared to allow us to implement it.
 We were told that you could never risk the sort of intervention that we undertook in East Timor, but we did it with the support and the respect of the world. We were told that you couldn';t reduce government debt as rapidly as we were able to do, and we were told that there so many other things that we couldn';t undertake. And we were told of course that we were going to destroy Medicare and I can remember when I was Leader of the Opposition in the lead-up to the election in 1996, giving an undertaking that we were going to preserve Medicare, and so we have. And right at the moment you have the extraordinary situation that the public hospital system of Australia, which is owned, operated, run and controlled by the state governments of Australia, the situation where over the last five years this government, the Federal Government, which does not control or operate or own or direct the public hospitals of Australia, we have contributed more and the states have contributed a declining amount to the maintenance of that hospital system. And right at the moment there is on the table on offer a funding increase of 17 per cent in real terms, a $10 billion funding increase from the Federal Government, and all that is needed is for the state governments to agree to match our funding increase, and then the new hospital agreement can be signed. And on top of that, we have been willing to introduce a 30 per cent health insurance rebate because we believe in private health insurance. We believe that health in Australia should be a partnership between the public sector and the private sector, and the stronger the private hospital system there is, the more load is taken off the public hospital system. Labor by contrast will axe the private health insurance rebate or at the very least, severely means test it, and that is why Mr Crean and their various spokesmen have systematically declined to give undertakings that if Labor is elected, the private health insurance rebate will remain untouched.
So we';re able to point to performance and when we ask people to re-elect us next year, we';re not indulging rhetoric, we';re actually pointing to achievement and a solid record of courageous reform. And the second great asset that I believe that we will take to the election is that we have a quality team. We have Ministers like Alexander and Robert and Amanda and Nick and many others around Australia who work together as a team. We have a strong parliamentary party. We have an enormous depth of talent in our ranks and we have a group of people who represent the broad stream of the Australian community. Unlike the Labor Party our parliamentary ranks are not filled with former trade union leaders and political staffers. Our ranks are filled with the representatives of the mainstream of the Australian community, and that is how I hope it will always remain.
Finally ladies and gentlemen, can I thank all of you for the great help that you have given me, the great loyalty you have displayed and the tremendous sense of sustained support and commitment which has made my job easier, made my job achievable. Together over the next year let';s keep it that way so that I might return after the next election, and to thank you for the tremendous support that you have given me.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mr Nick Warner, Assistant Commissioner, Ben McDevitt, ladies and gentlemen. I want to thankyou, where ever you come from, whether from Australia or New Zealand or Papua New Guinea or Tonga or Fiji, all of the countries of the Pacific that have contributed this mission which has brought already a great deal of stability and hope to the people of the Solomon Islands.
 We were invited here as friends by our friends in the Solomon Islands. I can say, speaking for the Australian community that the country is full of admiration for the work that you have done and I am sure that I speak for the communities of all the other contributing nations.
 It';s not easy to transplant yourself from your home environment. It';s not easy to win the confidence of the local people, and that is only done if you have an appropriate mix of authority and cooperation and friendship and from what I have been told and it';s evident from what I observe, that this particular force has been able to do that very effectively indeed.
 Although it has gone extremely well so far and has gone without too many undue incidents, I appreciate, as I';m sure you do, that it still continues to be a mission containing risks and dangers. I certainly don';t take things for granted and I know that you don';t, but I';m very confident that the leadership that you are receiving, both from Mr Warner, from the High Commissioner, from your Commanding Officer and from the Police Assistant Commissioner, Ben McDevitt. I know that you';re getting both the right kind of leadership, you';re being told what is involved you';re also, I think, understanding the very important mission that you';re undertaking because it';s very important for all of us in this part of the world to help each other.
 When your neighbour gets in trouble you should always be willing to help your neighbour in a friendly way and this a cooperative effort, it';s not just an Australian effort, it';s not just a New Zealand effort or a PNG effort, it is a cooperative effort of all of the nations of the Pacific. And I was at the Pacific Forum meeting in Auckland the week before last and there was overwhelming support from all of the countries represented at that gathering for the Regional Assistance Mission here in the Solomon Islands. So can I just say again, particularly of course as Australian Prime Minister, to all of my fellow Australians who are here, thank you very much for what you';re doing in the name of our country and the way in which you once again demonstrate the professionalism and the skill and the commitment of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force as well as the men and women of the Australian Federal Police.
May I also say with equal emphasis and an equally heart felt way, to our friends from other countries in the Pacific, thankyou for joining us, thankyou for the cooperation that has been achieved and most importantly thankyou for the contribution you are making to restoring the law and order of this community, of giving the people hope.
 I was certainly struck when I arrived with the obvious welcome and expression of, I suppose, collective thanks to me as Prime Minister of Australia for what has been done and I know that you';ve been experiencing that and all the messages I get are positive and once again all of you have brought enormous credit to your respective countries to the military forces and the police forces of those countries.
Good luck, you';ve done a great job and I know that that will go on.
 [ends]


  Well thank you very much to CMDR Brooker, ladies and gentlemen of the Australian Defence Force; of the Australian Public Service; of the Police; and every body else connected with this very important operation.
  Can I say that Australia is very proud and very impressed by the effectiveness, the professionalism and the demonstration effect of what has occurred here in the Solomon Islands over the past few weeks. I have to say as I drove along those streets, I thought to myself you don';t get cheered on the sidelines in Australia like that, and neither you should otherwise you';d get delusions of grandeur. It is very good it';s very encouraging, it';s very heart warming to know that the people of the Solomon Islands appreciate what the Pacific Intervention force has done, and we have worked with our friends, with  the  New Zealanders  and with the Fijians and with our friends from Papua New Guinea and Tonga and so forth and it';s been a combined effort and it's been an effort and an act of friendship extended to the people of the Solomon Islands at their  request and at their invitation.
 And to recognise that already a big difference is being made, to recognise that the people now feel that they can go out at night that they can let their children return to walking to school without being accompanied by their parents and once again they';re starting to enjoy ordinary living. That is a very important reward for all of us.  And most particularly for the men and women, many of whom are assembled here today which have been responsible for the intervention. And responsible for not only, might I say the hard edge of the intervention, the authority the law and order, the strengthening of the justice system but also very importantly the softer side of it.
 Because these interventions now really are two sided.  You have to be able to project authority and power where necessary, but you also need to be able to shake hands with the locals and become part of their community as best you can, and to extend the hand of friendship to them and Australians and our friends in the pacific do that very well. I must say that the way in which it's been done here, as it was in Timor, and has been in so many other places, brings enormous credit to the men and women in the Australian Defence Force. The way in which the police, the defence personnel  and the civilian personnel who will consolidate the change, if I could put it that way, after perhaps  we';ve wound down the military involvement and the police  presence is a little less. Making sure that good governance returns, making sure that money that';s …(audible)… raised from taxation is raised and is properly spent, all of those tasks mentioned are important.
  I met some officers from the Treasury and the Department of Finance. You can never escape Treasury and Finance in the Federal Government. But that';s fair enough, they are doing a very important job and they';re doing a very important job for the people of the Solomon Islands and also can I compliment all of those people involved with aid effort, with AusAID, and some of the volunteers and representatives of the non government organisations who are also here. It shows that the great variety of Australia';s helping hand, the great variety of the gesture of friendship.
 So, ladies and gentlemen, can I say it';s a great pleasure to be back on the Manoora. The Manoora has figured prominently in the activities of the Royal Australian Navy over past years. It';s a great ship and the Ship's Company and those associated with it have brought enormous credit to the Royal Australian Navy and enormous credit to the Australian Defence Forces. This is a great Australian led, but pacific operation, and to have the other countries involved and to know that we';re here at the expressed request and obviously with the good will of the people of the Solomon Islands is very important.
 My final word from your fellow countrymen and women in Australia is they';re very impressed, they';re very supportive and they admire greatly what you have done in our name - to do good in our neighbourhood.
Thank you
   [ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Nick Warner, Assistant Commissioner, Ben McDevitt, ladies and gentlemen. I want to thankyou, where ever you come from, whether from Australia or New Zealand or Papua New Guinea or Tonga or Fiji, all of the countries of the Pacific that have contributed this mission which has brought already a great deal of stability and hope to the people of the Solomon Islands.
 We were invited here as friends by our friends in the Solomon Islands. I can say, speaking for the Australian community that the country is full of admiration for the work that you have done and I am sure that I speak for the communities of all the other contributing nations.
 It';s not easy to transplant yourself from your home environment. It';s not easy to win the confidence of the local people, and that is only done if you have an appropriate mix of authority and cooperation and friendship and from what I have been told and it';s evident from what I observe, that this particular force has been able to do that very effectively indeed.
 Although it has gone extremely well so far and has gone without too many undue incidents, I appreciate, as I';m sure you do, that it still continues to be a mission containing risks and dangers. I certainly don';t take things for granted and I know that you don';t, but I';m very confident that the leadership that you are receiving, both from Mr Warner, from the High Commissioner, from your Commanding Officer and from the Police Assistant Commissioner, Ben McDevitt. I know that you';re getting both the right kind of leadership, you';re being told what is involved you';re also, I think, understanding the very important mission that you';re undertaking because it';s very important for all of us in this part of the world to help each other.
 When your neighbour gets in trouble you should always be willing to help your neighbour in a friendly way and this a cooperative effort, it';s not just an Australian effort, it';s not just a New Zealand effort or a PNG effort, it is a cooperative effort of all of the nations of the Pacific. And I was at the Pacific Forum meeting in Auckland the week before last and there was overwhelming support from all of the countries represented at that gathering for the Regional Assistance Mission here in the Solomon Islands. So can I just say again, particularly of course as Australian Prime Minister, to all of my fellow Australians who are here, thank you very much for what you';re doing in the name of our country and the way in which you once again demonstrate the professionalism and the skill and the commitment of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force as well as the men and women of the Australian Federal Police.
May I also say with equal emphasis and an equally heart felt way, to our friends from other countries in the Pacific, thankyou for joining us, thankyou for the cooperation that has been achieved and most importantly thankyou for the contribution you are making to restoring the law and order of this community, of giving the people hope.
 I was certainly struck when I arrived with the obvious welcome and expression of, I suppose, collective thanks to me as Prime Minister of Australia for what has been done and I know that you';ve been experiencing that and all the messages I get are positive and once again all of you have brought enormous credit to your respective countries to the military forces and the police forces of those countries.
Good luck, you';ve done a great job and I know that that will go on.
 [ends]


Thank you very much John, my Ministerial colleague Kevin Andrews, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I start by saying how timely it is that this seminar should have been organised, this symposium should have been organised and I want to say on behalf of the Commonwealth Government, which is one of the partners in the group of participants that has supported the symposium, how very enthusiastically we are committed to the aims and objectives and the goals of this symposium.
  On Monday of this week I was in a country where the proportion of the population under the age of 15 was 47 per cent.  That country was the Solomon Islands.  And as you know I was there in order to thank the Australian forces who have bought such peace and sense of law and order and security to that country along with our Pacific partners in a very short period of time.  But time and time again I was reminded of the relative youthfulness of the population and in my brief remarks at a luncheon I said that the aim of the intervention more than anything else was to bring a sense of hope to the 47 per cent of the population which was under the age of 15.  And as I repeated those percentages a few times it really drove home to me the different perspective that you must bring to policy making in a country such as Australia where in company with all other Western societies our population is ageing.  We have to keep a sense of proportion about it.  We are similar to countries such as most of the European countries, North America, and a number of the more advanced countries of Asia.  Having said that the problem is not quite as acute in Australia as it is in Japan, Italy, and some of the other European countries.  Along with other Western societies our fertility rate has steadily declined since the early 1970s.  It sits at I think 1.74 or 1.75, it';s about 2.1 from recollection in the United States, but it';s as low as 1.25 or 1.3 in a country such as Italy. And of course the fertility rates in quite a large number of the developing countries are dramatically higher than what they are in advanced Western societies.
And I want as a theme of what I';m going to say today to make two central observations.  The first of those is that we should preserve a sense of proportion and a sense of perspective in this, as we must of course in all policy areas.  And secondly and very importantly that the question of an ageless workforce is not primarily an issue of discrimination.  It is primarily an issue of investing in our country';s future.  To look at the notion of an ageless workforce in terms of anti-discrimination is I think to demean what is at stake and also to invest the debate with far too narrow a legalistic approach.
  As you all know changing Australia';s constitution is very difficult.  History is strewn with numerous examples of governments that have endeavoured to change our constitution and there are very few examples of successful proposals to change our constitution.  The relevance of that you might wonder, well the relevance is that one of the rare successful attempts to change our constitution was in 1977 when two out of four proposals put up by the then government enjoyed majority support.  One of them was to require that when a Senator died in office he or she should be replaced by somebody from the same party, which followed certain events in Queensland in the middle 1970s.  And the other was interesting to introduce a retirement age of 70 for federal judges.  Now that was 26 years ago and I wondered to myself as I was driving here today whether a proposal in today';s environment to impose any kind of age limit would enjoy the very strong support that that proposal enjoyed in the late 1970';s?  Now I say that, and I want to emphasise this so there is no misunderstanding amongst any of the reporters who may be here today, I';m not suggesting for a moment that I want to change the constitution to take that provision out, I want to make that very clear.  But I remind you of that development to illustrate how I think there has been a change in attitude in the space a generation.  And the most hopeful thing to me today is that many of the things that John McFarlane said in his introduction are now increasingly being taken as accepted and enjoying increasing levels of support.  There is I believe a growing belief in the community that the quality of somebody';s contribution to the workforce is measured only by individual ability, rather than age or any other categorisation.  And this is not as I repeat just in terms of the rather narrow legalistic approach of an anti-discrimination attitude, there is a growing realisation in our nation that as our population ages and because of advances in medical science people live longer and as the number of people entering the workforce as a proportion, entering the workforce for the first time dwindles and the inter-generational report produced by the Federal Treasury with last year';s Budget provided a much needed factual basis to contribute to the debate. There is a growing realisation in our nation, within the Government, within the business community, that we do need to husband the resource of the mature age worker to whatever limit the individual capacities of those workers will permit.
I';m sure that all of us can remember examples from history of extraordinary contributions made by people who would be beyond what is still regarded as the “sort of” retirement age in Australia at the present time, although some would dispute it and that is 65.  The most outstanding example to me of course was that the man who saved mankind more than anybody else from the surge of Nazism, Winston Churchill, became Prime Minister of Great Britain at the age of 66, and at that point embarked upon the most important and the most remarkable part of an extraordinary career.  We think of the two great architects of post-war Germany and France in Conrad Adenauer and Charles de Gaulle, both of whom were very mature aged workers in their particular fields when they assumed their office.
Now I think the, if I can put it like this, I think the moral debate and the common sense debate is being won.  Self-evidently older workers have attributes that younger workers have, and self-evidently younger workers have attributes that older workers don';t have. And equally self-evidently the common sense workforce is one that draws upon the resources of both the younger and the older.  The enthusiasm, the experimentation, the energy and the innovative skills of younger people, but self-evidently the experience and the maturity and the balance of older workers.
  Now in making sure that we address the national need, and the national need is to keep people in the workforce longer if they wish, and where possible to provide incentives for it, we must also recognise the other common sense reality, and that is that as well as the national need there is a personal need for millions of citizens to remain in the workforce longer, to derive the sense of career and professional satisfaction that inevitably derives from a continued participation in the workforce.  There are many things that governments can do, there are many things that business can do, and there are also some things that individuals can do. One of the great values of a gathering such as this is that it does challenge the companies and the professional firms of Australia to revisit policies that grew up in the 60s and 70s and 80s, the almost automatic practice of so many professional firms in Australia, of partners retiring at the age of 60, irrespective of their contributions.  The retirement of so many chief executives, the company policies that bring that about, all of those things need to be challenged and re-examined.  There are no legal requirements for those policies to be maintained, and there are dwindling common sense justifications for them to be maintained. And just as several years ago I invited the Government';s Business and Community Partnerships to examine ways in which we might encourage philanthropy in Australia and with great success because of a number of recommendations that came from that body, so I am going to ask that same body to examine policy recommendations that might be made to the Government that will bring about changes of attitude of the part of business to encourage and support them in their desire to maintain more mature workers on their payroll.
We have made a number of decisions, particularly in relation to the gradual alignment of the pension age for men and women, and also the changes we';ve made in relation to the vesting age to superannuation to recognise the need and the need to encourage people to remain in the workforce longer and they are contributions that governments can make and we have, of course, legislated to remove any age discrimination that exists in relation to the employment of Federal Government employees.  But I think it also necessary when we look at this issue to accept that not only must business change its attitude and government change its attitude, but we must also recognise that one of the areas of contribution must come from the mature aged workers themselves because it is a partnership and there does need to be an accommodation at the workplace between the needs of an individual business, the aspirations of the younger employees and also the desire of older employees to remain on the payroll.  And that will increasingly, for example, mean that if people wish to remain beyond what are now regarded as customary retirement ages, there must be a greater willingness to be involved in part-time and contract work and the corresponding flexibility in relation to remuneration arrangements.
This is not an area where any government can mandate a stereotype of behaviour.  The Government must provide leadership in conditioning community attitudes.  We must advocate the strong national economic need to retain mature aged workers working for as long as they wish and are able to do so.  We must articulate to the community generally the personal satisfaction and value they derive from it.  We must constantly remind ourselves, as John Macfarlane did, that in the age cohort of 55 to 64 the participation rate of Australians is only 50 per cent and when you think of the life expectancy of the coming generations, that is a very low figure.  Now it's our responsibility to articulate those things, it's our responsibility to advocate the case.  It is not our responsibility, and we certainly don't intend to do so, to mandate individual behaviour by particular firms and by particular companies.  Every situation will be different, but an important gain has been made when you can bring together an organisation such as CEDA, the Australian Seniors Association, many of Australia's best known financial institutions and the Commonwealth Government and for all of us to declare that the age of stereotypical attitudes towards when somebody should retire and that at the age when people were regarded as disposable in terms of their contribution to society once they reach a particular age, that those days are increasingly being put behind us.  And I am greatly encouraged and are greatly heartened by the enormous mood change that has occurred in the Australian community and not least within the Australian business community during that period of time.
But it's one thing, of course, for all of us to agree on that as a general objective, it's another thing of course for people to give effect to it in their individual workplaces. But my sense is that there is quite a cross sectional support within the Australian community.  My experience anecdotally, I have to emphasise, of talking to employers overwhelmingly is that if they become satisfied that it is no longer something which is fashionable or the accepted thing for people to retire at a particular age, they will very happily retain the services of their employees.
So ladies and gentlemen, I think it is therefore very much a question of the Government setting a mood, getting a lead in terms of the removal of any benchmark discriminatory legislation, of demonstrating in relation to its own work practices and its own employment practices, that it supports the retention of the mature workers.  And then encouraging individuals in different ways to make the arrangements that suit them and to suit their employers.
  But in my remarks at the beginning in calling for a sense of proportion and a sense of perspective, I wouldn't want anybody to imagine that in straight national economic terms this is something that we can afford to be complacent about.  I see no likelihood of a dramatic change in the fertility rate in Australia over the next generation.  There are some things that you can do at the margin to affect fertility rates, there are some things that governments can do, and we are endeavouring in different ways and have already done a number of things to address them, to increase the range of opportunities available to Australian employees to balance their work and their family responsibilities.  We can maintain, as we have, a steady but manageable and acceptable increase in the immigration rate, and I know there are many in the community who see a dramatic increase in the immigration rate as being the almost instant solution for the challenge of an ageing population.  Let me say that once again, I owe keeping a sense of proportion that it can make a contribution and that is why our policy is to have an immigration rate that is supported by our economic circumstances and one that meets the skill and other needs of the Australian community and one that is conducted on a completely non-discriminatory basis so far as race, ethnicity and country of origin is concerned.  But even if we were to treble or quadruple our immigration rate over the next decade or so, its impact by the middle of this century on the ageing process of the population would be relatively minimal.  So therefore the answer, although partly to be found in different ways of improving fertility, in different ways of increasing or sustaining or increasing immigration.  Overwhelmingly, the answer has to be found in increasing workforce participation rates and overwhelmingly, the obvious place to start regarding that is at the mature end of the workforce. It's economically less expensive because the education investment has already been made, it has enormous value in terms of personal satisfaction and at an individual enterprise level, it has the remarkable quality of representing a continuity of a contribution that somebody has made over a period of time.
And I think also, and finally on a note that's relevant to the title of my address, it does represent a remarkably good investment by the business community of Australia.  I think all of you as employers and certainly some years ago when I was an employer in the private sector sense of the word, I often reflected upon the fact that the most valuable asset that anybody in business had was a good employee.  And we all know that if you have a good employee, you'll move heaven and earth to retain the services of that individual.  And it is obviously in your interest and the interest of your business to retain that person for so long as he or she wishes to work for you.  So in that rather simple, but I think very evocative way, it does make good sense for business to invest in the maintenance of mature aged workers.  It will add enormously to the sense of self-esteem and worth, which all of us at different stages of our lives find important.  We all wish to remain relevant not only to our family and our friends and our community, but very importantly to our nation.  I think everybody at various stages in their lives as they face the prospect of retirement, begin to ponder how they might occupy themselves and whether the contribution that they've made in different ways will any longer be wanted.  And the prospect of people being allowed to work for a longer period of time and make that contribution will add enormously to the national measure of personal contentment and happiness.
And finally and very importantly, we need mature aged workers but we won't be able to sustain the rising cost of healthcare, the rising cost of maintaining a pharmaceutical benefit scheme that seeks to make available to all of our citizens at an affordable cost the benefits of medical science, and if you think they have exploded over the last 25 years, the explosion of the availability of medical science and the cures that will flow from that are going to explode in a much more dramatic way over the next generation.
All of these things are going to put an increasing burden on our national exchequer and unless we find ways of increasing the workforce participation rate, stresses and strains are inevitably going to develop and it seems that there is an overwhelming national interest case as well as an overwhelming business case and an overwhelming personal satisfaction case for us to embrace the notion of an ageless workforce.  It makes great commonsense and it's good for Australia and I can't think of a better combination of arguments to commend something to any gathering of my fellow countrymen and women.
  Thank you.
[ends]  


  Thank you very much Geoffrey for that very kind introduction. The Ambassador of the United States Tom Schieffer, Tony McAdam, Dame Elisabeth Murdoch, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
As I listened to Geoffrey Blainey';s marvellously constructed brief reminder of the history of this country and our crucial reliance on the American alliance at the moment of greatest challenge, I';m also of course reminded of his great prowess in writing about football and I';m conscious of course that his expertise is to write about Australian Rules Football. As somebody who shares with any Australians a deep passion for another code of football, rugby union, I often wonder what additional armoury the Australian Wallabies would have if the eloquent writing of Geoffrey Blainey extended across the football codes that are played around Australia.
But ladies and gentlemen, it';s a very great honour to be here today and to say something of the importance of the association, the friendship, the relationship, because it';s more than an alliance. An alliance has a certain legalistic connotation. But it';s a very deep friendship, a very rich historical relationship between Australia and the United States. I join others in paying tribute to the way in which that alliance, that friendship has been fostered and nurtured by the Australian American Association. Dr Johnson reminded us that we should keep our friendships in good repair. The Australian American dialogue held at this very hotel only a short while ago, and I';m told an outstanding success, is indeed an outcrop of the belief that you should keep your friendships in good repair. It owes its origins in part to a view expressed during his visit to Australia when he was the 41st President of the United States by George Bush in 1991, but he would be the last leader of the World War II generation to hold a senior political position in either country, and that we should not take the relationship for granted.
 We should not assume that the feelings so eloquently expressed by Geoffrey Blainey self-evidently and automatically commended themselves to all Australians simply because as the years go by, those who have a direct personal recollection and therefore personal resonance with those momentous events, are passed from us. And we need to nurture and develop the relationship, and we need to remind ourselves of its contemporary relevance. We need to remind ourselves that it is certainly a relationship steeped in history, but it';s also a relationship that is built upon common values. And relationships built on values are always stronger and more enduring than relationships built on a fleeting coincidence of economic or strategic interest.
 And as best I can recall it, when I had the enormous privilege of addressing a joint sitting of the United States Congress in June of last year, I said that the bonds between Australians and Americans were as deep as they were genuine because they were built on common values. The belief that the individual was more important than the state, the belief that strong families are the nation';s greatest asset, a belief that competitive capitalism is the ultimate foundation for wealth generation, and a belief that the worth of a person is determined by their inherent decency and commitment to effort, and not to their race or their colour or their social background.
So those are values and attitudes that Australians and Americans not only hold in common, but they practice in common. And they do at the end of the day represent the cement, more than anything else, that binds our two nations together. And it';s really been in pursuit of those attitudes and those values that Australians and Americans have fought side by side in every major military conflict from World War I onwards. And it is truly remarkable that over the years, whatever the circumstances and whatever the attitude of others, our two nations have found themselves together. And not out of some kneejerk, slavish automaticity on the part of Australia as the smaller of the two in the partnership, but more than anything else out of a deep respect and common commitment to the sorts of values that I tried to articulate in my address.
 The relationship between our two countries, as I said a moment ago, is not just based on history. It';s a relationship that has not only enormous contemporary relevance, but it is a relationship that from Australia';s point of view will have growing relevance and growing importance as the years go by. It was fashionable 15, perhaps even 10, but certainly 15 or 20 years ago for many people to forecast the decline of the United States. We read books having titles such as ‘The End of the American Century';. We read frequently how the internal imperfections in American society would cause it to gradually reduce in power and influence and gradually depart the scene as the most dominant power in the world. Of course, the experience of the last 10 years has seen those theories well and truly off, and as Tony said in his introduction the achievement, and it was an achievement, of the United States, particularly under the leadership of President Reagan, in bringing about the implosion and ultimate disappearance of the Soviet Union, and the liberation of tens of millions of people in eastern Europe from a tyranny that they never of course wanted and had endured for so many years since the end of World War II, represented a remarkable triumph and a remarkable tribute to the strength and the reach of American power and American influence.
The reality is that by the middle of the 21st century, America will proportionately be more powerful economically than she is today. As the years go by, the growth in the American economy on current trends will continue to outstrip that of most other countries in the world. The population growth in the United States will mean that by the middle of the century, population of that nation will be almost the same as the population even of the semi-enlarged European Union. And all of the indicators are, notwithstanding the current sluggishness in the United States economy, all of the indicators are that by the middle of this century the economic dominance that is now enjoyed will be greater rather than less.  All of this, of course, has an importance to Australia, not only because of the contribution that American economic influence and strength makes to the growth of the world and to the strength of our own economy given the importance of the United States as one of Australia';s major trading partners, but it also has a very deep relevance to the discussions now taking place regarding the possibility of a free trade agreement between Australia and the United States.  If that free trade agreement can be successfully negotiated, if both of our countries can reach agreement on terms and conditions that are seen as beneficial to both, sufficiently beneficial to both, than I believe from Australia';s point of view it will lay the foundation for the further strengthening and a further contribution to the stability and the security of our economic position in the decades ahead.
To be attached to, to be enmeshed with, to use an expression beloved of one of my predecessors as Prime Minister, indeed my predecessor but one, to be enmeshed with the United States'; economy, the largest in the world, will open up to Australia growth opportunities and other opportunities which can only add value to our own inherent national economic strength and provide growing opportunities for Australians.  Our commitment to negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States is something that can be accomplished and can be realised if the conditions are right without doing damage to the important relationships we have with other parts of the world, particularly with our friends and allies in the Asian Pacific regions.
  It has been one of the great myths of the foreign policy and trade policy debate in this country over recent years, that in some way a close relationship with the United States on both a strategic level and an economic level has hampered and hindered our capacity to develop close relationships with the nations of Asia.  It has been one of the great myths, but as time has gone by, as we have demonstrated a simultaneous capacity to draw ever closer to the United States on the basis of a proper partnership and shared values and attitudes has proved simultaneously possible to do that, but also to develop an even better relationship with China - the largest country in the world, a nation that will grow in importance not only to our country but to other countries in our region.
  Indeed, I see the simultaneous closeness of our relationship with the United States as being entirely compatible with the more friendly and close relationship we have with China because it has to be an objective of Australian foreign policy, it has to be in the interests of our region and the interest of the world that there be a productive and constructive relationship between China and the United States.  And it is very clear to me and it was driven home on my recent visit to Beijing that in relation to North Korea there is an effort being made, a very strong effort being made by the Government of China to bring about a sensible pragmatic response from the Government of North Korea.  The leadership in China, the new leadership in China I am sure seeks a productive, constructive and friendly relationship with the administration and the people of the United States.  It is in the long-term interests of China, as it is in the long-term interests of the United States that those countries where possible should have a common view of the world and should work together.  It is therefore self-evident that there is nothing incompatible between a close intimate relationship between Australia and the United States and the simultaneous development of a strong relationship between our nation and the people of China.  And I would have thought that in a number of areas, and not least of course the natural gas deal that was sealed last year, the Government has demonstrated that our unashamed close relationship with the United States, the unapologetic nature of our friendship with the American people has in no way diminished our capacity to develop productive relations with China and, indeed, with other nations in our region.
So ladies and gentlemen, the modern manifestation of the relationship is very much bound up from an economic and trade point of view with some of the things that I have just canvassed.  But, of course, on a strategic political level the modern manifestation of the relationship has been bound up very much with the common cause that the American and the Australian people have made together in the war against terrorism.  I was reminded of course in the introduction from Tony McAdam, that that photograph of President Bush and myself was taken at the naval dockyard on the morning of the 10th of September 2001.  And it was the first opportunity that the President and I had had to talk personally, although we';d spoken on several occasions over the phone.  That is only, how shall I put it, a piece of co-incidence but those pieces of co-incidence have a powerful symbolic reminder to the individuals that are involved in it.
But our commitment to fight beside the Americans in Afghanistan and in Iraq of course goes far beyond any personal symbolism seen by current political leaders because when people, when the defence forces of Australia go abroad, they go abroad in the name of the Australian people and the Australian nation, they don';t go abroad in the name of who might be the Prime Minister of the day. And our commitment to the war against terror, alongside the United States, is based upon our belief that terrorism represents a threat to this country, not because of what we have done but because of what we are and who we are and what we stand for.  And there is an obligation of self-preservation on all nations that share the sorts of values that we share with the people of the United States to make common cause in the war against terrorism.
You will all be aware of course that the decision taken by the Australian Government to join our American allies in the military operation in Iraq was not without controversy, and that controversy continues.  I don';t intend today to retraverse the arguments except to say that the decision we took then was in the Government';s very strong judgement right and nothing that has occurred since has in any way qualified or altered my view. Not only did our own forces perform with very great distinction and valour but of course as always they worked in close co-operation with our American and our British allies.
But I do want to say something very briefly about the debate that';s going on at the present time concerning the conditions in Iraq and the possible internationalisation of the effort to rebuild Iraq and deliver democracy to the Iraqi people.  The current call for a further involvement, or a deeper involvement by the United Nations is a call that as the Foreign Minister said Australia fully understands.  And Australia would support on proper conditions a deeper involvement by the United Nations and certainly we would support a wider contribution of stabilisation forces on the part of other nations.  And I want to echo again what Alexander Downer has had to say about that over the past few days. But in the process of doing that I do want to make the observation that there does appear to be something of a naive undercurrent from some to the effect that as soon as there is a greater involvement by the United Nations or indeed by other countries then the acts of terrorism that have taken place tragically in Iraq over recent weeks might subside.  I think that view is necessarily mistaken.  The acts of terrorism over the past few weeks in Iraq have tragically and sadly driven home the point that the sort of people that we are dealing with are not people who are particularly discriminatory in their targets.  Their objective is to deprive the people of Iraq of a democratic future. And if they need to kill United Nations personnel, if they need to kill Shiite leaders, if they need to kill the nationals of any accumulation of countries in order to achieve that objective they will.  And I think anybody who imagines that you will automatically purchase less terrorism through greater internationalisation could in fact be mistaken.  But having said that I do want to emphasise that Australia would very strongly support the involvement of more nations in Iraq.  It';s worth recalling and I don';t do it in order to revive the debate of earlier months, but it is worth recalling that Australia, along with the United States and the United Kingdom and a few other countries had wanted a continuous and further involvement of the United Nations in dealing with the challenge of Iraq for a very long period of time.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finish by saying this, that the relationship between Australia and the United States, the friendship, the warm heartedness, the inherent decency of the American people saved this country in its greatest hour of peril during World War II.  Australians have never forgotten that, and nor they should.  People and nations who forget their history are doomed of course to pay a very heavy price. That does not mean that our relationship is always uncritically conducted, it does not mean that we always agree, it does not mean that we aren';t fiercely independent in relation to our distinctive cultural identities, it does not mean that we are not passionate and competitive rivals on the sporting field, it does not mean that we won';t tenaciously try and take as many Oscars and Academy Awards as we possibly can, it does not mean that in so many other fields we won';t compete as passionately and vigorously as we can.  But in doing that we compete with a nation for which we have great admiration.  A nation that has contributed so much to what we take for granted as the modern world in which we live.  But a nation above everything else that shares with us common values, values of freedom, of individuality, of belief that hard work and personal effort does have its own reward and a belief that the worth of a person is to be found in the dignity of that person';s character and that person';s pursuit of truth and commitment to doing the right thing in life.
I';m very honoured to be part of this luncheon, to pay tribute to the relationship between our two countries, I hope in a small way I';ve done something to further strengthen it and I';ve done that because I think that is in Australia';s national interest.  We should remain close to the Americans because we have a common view of the world.  We';ve been shown by history to be have been vindicated by that relationship and it is in Australia';s long term interests, as it is the interests of the American people, to go on defending the values and the liberties and the things that we hold to be important.  Those are the reasons why we should remain close and those are the reasons why I believe we will remain close for years into the future.
Thank you.
[ends]


  The introductions are improving.  That was fantastic.  But Michael Caltabiano the President of the Queensland Liberal Party, my ministerial parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s always a great pleasure to be back in Brisbane and particularly this weekend as we have a meeting of our Federal Executive and the Queensland Liberal Party has its annual convention.
And all of these things are taking place at a time when we';ve been reminded very forcefully of the different world in which we live by the second anniversary of the terrorist attack in the United States, and also through the conviction of yet another person involved in the attack which claimed 88 lives of our fellow Australians in Bali.  We';re reminded of the very different world and the very different circumstances facing Australia now compared with a few years ago.  And those are very important issues and they are issues where the Government has taken an unambiguous, unconditional, clear, forthright stance as distinct from the rather hesitant stance taken by our political opponents.
But today I wanted to share a few thoughts with you about the other aspect of our stewardship of the country which is so important, and that is the issue of the management of our economy.  Yesterday we had an unemployment figure which frankly was better than I expected and better than most of the economists and most of the pundits had predicted.  It was the best unemployment number, the best monthly unemployment number, for more than 13 years.  You had to go back to March of 1990, just before the commencement of the recession we had to have, you have to go back to a time when Australia was grinding under high levels of interest, go back to a time when the Australian economy was beginning to slide into recession 13 years ago, to get a number as good as yesterday.
  I mention that and I dwell on it for a moment, not because I don';t recognise that one month';s unemployment figures does not make an economic success story, but what that remarkably good figure demonstrates more than anything else is that over a sustained period of time we have been able to make progress on the economic front, not by accident, not because we';ve been the beneficiaries of world economic circumstances, but because we ourselves here in Australia have undertaken the reforms and have responded to the challenges that have been necessary to strengthen the Australian economy.  Over the next few months, over the next year, not only because it will be the lead-up to a federal election, but because I believe it is always important to communicate to the Australian public the benefits of economic policy and the benefits of economic management, I and my colleagues will be taking the opportunity of reminding the Australian public, reminding the Australian people, of the benefits of and the dividends from the economic reforms and the economic management of the past few years.
I';ll be reminding the Australian people that the average borrower under a home mortgage now pays $450 a month less than he or she paid in March of 1996.  I';ll be reminding the Australian public that the unemployment rate at 5.8 per cent is not only the lowest in 13 years, but it contrasts with a figure of 8.2 per cent when we assumed government in March of 1996.  And in that period of time, we have created more than 1.2 million new jobs in Australia, and we';ve done that overwhelmingly because we have delivered over the last seven and a half years a more flexible and a more resilient Australian economy.
  We have delivered an economy which can bounce back from temporary adversity more rapidly and more effectively than used to be the case.  And when you remember that we are operating at the present time in circumstances of some adversity, Australia has just experienced and in many of the parts of the country is still in the grip, of a very severe drought, and we should remember that although there have been some welcome rains around the country, many of our fellow Australians in country areas are still experiencing conditions of drought.  And when you bear in mind the weakness relatively speaking of the world economy, when you remember that the United States economy has really been bumping along at the bottom for some time now, and although there are some tentative signs of recovery, the United States economy is facing a very large budget deficit and the impact of that on world economic activity can';t be discounted.
  So if you bear in mind a weak international sector from which we are not deriving a great deal of domestic economic stimulus and you also bear in mind the impact of the drought, it is all the more remarkable that our economy should be so resilient and it is all the more remarkable that we should be able to maintain such consistently good employment levels.  Because in the end, good economic policy is not an end in itself.  There is no virtue in having a good economic policy unless it delivers a human dividend, unless there is some social benefit or social bonus from good economic policy.  And the best social bonus of all is to provide people with jobs and expanding job opportunities, and also through low inflation and low interest rates, to ensure that their real incomes are rising as their jobs remain secure.
And so it is therefore relevant when we';re talking about comparisons for me to make the point that since March of 1996 when we were elected, the real wages – that';s our wage levels after inflation – of Australians have risen by 10.2 per cent, but in comparison over the previous 13 years they rose by only 2.3 per cent.  I mention that figure because it makes a very eloquent point, and the eloquent point is that the party that we replaced paraded itself as the friend of the average Australian worker, as the party that looked after the interests of the battler, as the party that could always guarantee lower unemployment and higher wages.  The truth is the opposite.
  But in the time that we have been in government, we have not only looked after the big picture of economic management, but we have also delivered lower interest rates, higher wages and more jobs to average Australians.  Because in the end, that is our responsibility.  We don';t exist to produce a glorious macro economy.  We exist to look after the living standards and the interests of the citizens of our country, and that is measured by the monthly mortgage payments they have, it';s measured by the wages they earn, it';s measured by not only the wages they earn, but of course also the security of the jobs that they have.  And it';s also measured by the opportunities for training and jobs of their children.
  And one of the other important comparisons that I make, and it';s perhaps not given the prominence that it deserves, is that in December of 1995 – that';s just four months before we came to office – the number of Australians in apprenticeships stood at only 141,000.  Today more than 390,000 Australians are undertaking apprenticeships and traineeships.  And this is one factor that helps to explain that whereas youth unemployment peaked at 34.5 per cent in June and July of 1992, that level now is by comparison 22.6 per cent – still too high, but dramatically lower than those peak levels of just over 10 years ago.
  And when you think of the number of people in apprenticeships and traineeships, you have to remember that something like 70 per cent of young men and women who leave school now do not go immediately on to university.  So many of them go into apprenticeships and traineeships.  And governments have a responsibility not only to provide opportunities for young people to go to universities, but they once again have the opportunity also if they so desire to go into apprenticeships and traineeships.  And once more, this is an area traditionally claimed as one of great concern by our Labor opponents.  But where over the last seven and a half years we have worked very hard to deliver benefits and opportunities for young Australians who aspire to a trade or apprenticeship future.
So ladies and gentlemen I mentioned some of those grass roots economic comparisons which are directly relevant to the living standards and opportunities of Australian families because in the long run that is what good economic management is all about, good economic management is not about the Prime Minister and the Treasurer being able to go around the world and say aren';t we doing well, that';s a bit of it, but the most important part of it is for us to be able to go around Australia and tell a story of having built a level of economic performance and delivered economic reforms that have materially and directly improved the living standards and opportunities of individual Australians and their families.  And as I said at the beginning this has not happened by accident, we have been willing over the last seven and a half years to undertake a lot of economic reforms.  And we';ve had to fight every inch of the way a hostile Senate, virtually every major reform that we have introduced – our Industrial Relations reforms, our taxation reforms, our budget reforms, the way in which we turned a deficit that we inherited at $10.5 billion a year into surpluses, which have enabled us to pay off so much of our national debt, and I';m able to look at those international debt comparisons and see that our debt to GDP ratio now is about five per cent, the OECD average is about 45 to 50, in Japan it';s 130 per cent and in the United States it';s something like 45 to 50 per cent.  And ours by comparison is five per cent of GDP.
  Now none of that has happened by accident, and in none of the things that we';ve had to pursue in order to achieve those goals have we had any assistance from our opponents in the Senate.  And good though yesterday';s figure is in relation to unemployment, good though it is to be able to say that we have generated 1.2 million new jobs, that we';ve got the rate down to 5.8 per cent and the best for 13 years, it could be even better if our opponents in the Senate got out of the way and let us pass into law changes that would make it easier for small business to take on new staff because it would relieve them of the ridiculous unfair dismissal laws that fetter them at the present time.
We have been trying now for seven and a half years and we have gone to three elections with a policy to do something about liberalising the unfair dismissal laws because we know as you know that small businesses faced with the possibility of expensive litigation if they let staff go who aren';t performing are not going to put the staff on the first place, it';s not worth the candle, it';s not worth the risk and as a result we';re probably robbing ourselves of another 50 to 80,000 additional jobs a year, particularly for young people.
  So we could have a permanently lower figure of unemployment in this country if Labor and the Democrats and the Greens got out of our way in the Senate and allowed us to pass those changes to the unfair dismissal laws, and allowed us to pass other laws which liberalise Australia';s industrial relations system.  We do have a better industrial relations system now than we had in 1996, and it';s helped deliver higher levels of productivity, it';s helped to make Australia more competitive. But we could go even further if those who are standing in the way of further progress, and further driving down our levels of unemployment would get out of the way. And I make that point with some vigour my friends because when we were in Opposition, and I remember that period very well, it went on for far too long and it';s the worst thing you can have in politics and I never intend to go back to it because being in Opposition can be very unproductive.  But it';s also an opportunity for you to match the national interest, Oppositions have responsibility, particularly at a federal level where there are two houses of Parliament, as well as governments, and one thing I';m happy to remind you of is that when we were in Opposition and our opponents in government put up a good idea, and they did and I';ve never been reluctant to acknowledge some of the good reforms that were carried out by former governments such as the floating of the dollar and the changes to the financial system and the reduction in levels of tariffs, but when they put up a good proposal we supported it, we supported it in the national interest. But by contrast virtually every single major reform – tax reform, IR reform and all the other things that I have mentioned, we have found it impossible to garner their support.
  I mention those things ladies and gentlemen to put into context the economic challenge that we have.  Our economy is doing well at the present time.  In many ways these are golden years for the Australian economy.  We';ve had a long period of economic growth; we';ve had very stable low inflation; we';ve had markedly lower interest rates; we have by courtesy of a flexible exchange rate a capacity to adjust to change international circumstances; we rode out the effects of the Asian economic downturn five or six years ago, better than many expected; we have been able to diversify our exports; we have been able to build ever stronger relationships with our major trading partners and we have been able to see a significant reduction in unemployment.  And one of the things that I believe can further add to and build the strength of the Australian economy as we go through the 21st century will be if we can negotiate a free trade agreement with the United States.  The negotiations on that free trade agreement will come to important moments within the next couple of months.  And I attach a lot of significance to that free trade agreement because America will grow more and not less important to Australia as the years go by.  The American economy, despite its current hesitancy, will grow more strongly over the next few decades.  The population growth in America will be stronger than in Europe or in Japan.  And the share of world GDP taken by the United States will rise rather than flat line or fall.  And when you put all of these things together, it makes overwhelming sense if we can link ourselves to that enormous economy.  But it will only happen in the terms and conditions on which we link ourselves are satisfactory to Australia.  And that must of necessity by definition, indeed, include significant concessions by the United States in relation to agriculture.
  But one of the things of which I am immensely proud as leader of this Government, and we will see an important symbolic demonstration of it next month, is the way in which we have been able to build our relationships with major countries in our region despite the evident closeness of our association with the United States, and I think particularly of China.  China is now Australia';s third best trading partner, our exports to China have trebled over the last six or seven years.  We signed our largest ever export deal with any country when we signed that natural gas deal which we won in the face of fierce competition last year.  And we';ve done that despite the fact that our critics said that by taking Australia even closer to the United States, we were prejudicing our capacity to build relationships with nations like China.  The reality, of course, is the reverse.  People understand the history of our association with the United States, they understand the commonality of our philosophy on many things, they understand the values that we share in common and it matters not as they build relationships between our country and theirs.  And next month, we will have in very close proximity, and I hope to be able to announce some of the details of it very soon, we will have visits not only from the President of the United States, but also in very close proximity the President of China – the leader of the most populous country in the world and a country which of course by dint of its size and its growth will over the next half century bulk even larger and more importantly in the future not only of the Asia Pacific region but also of the world.
So I can say to you today ladies and gentlemen we are living in some good economic times, but I don';t say that with any sense of complacency.  All my political life, I';ve been a person who';s never believed in over exuberance, never believed in taking things for granted.  We have to work hard continuously to maintain our competitive edge.  And at a political level, the Liberal Party, if I can be frankly partisan and you would think it strange if I weren';t, the Liberal Party can';t afford to be complacent or over confident.  There';s a mistaken assumption around the nation, particularly in political circles that somehow or other the Federal Government is, that it can';t be beaten, that we have no real contest.  Now I could spend a long time talking about the weaknesses of our political opponents, but that';s not going to prove anything other than that I';m really taking my eye off the main game and that is to extol the strengths and the qualities of the Government.
But I do want to say to you as supporters of the Queensland division, as supporters of our party in a state which has delivered so well to us federally over the last three elections, that our margin is not as great as people think.  We lose seven or eight seats and we';re out of Government.  All federal elections bar a few in my experience of 29 years are always close, you don';t have many landslides, most of them come down to a small margin of votes in a few seats.  And we as a party organisation and our supporters have not only got to keep that in mind, but we';ve got to understand the inherent capacity of the Australian electorate to harshly judge any sign of complacency, any sign of hubris, any indication that we are losing contact with our responsibilities to the men and women of our country.
  But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for the support that you are giving to our party, to our state division here in Queensland by your presence.  We';ll continue to do our best to govern in a way that delivers good business conditions for the men and women in business in Australia, low interest rates, low inflation, stable economic policies, balanced budgets, a willingness to undertake further courageous economic reforms.  But most importantly, discharging our responsibilities to the families of Australia to deliver to them stability in employment, rising real wages and job opportunities and training opportunities for their children.
  Thank you very much.
[ends]


Thank you very much Ian for those warm words of introduction, and I know I speak for everybody in saying how glad we are to have you back at full strength as a senior member of the federal government.
Michael Caltabiano, the State President; Shane Stone, the Federal President of the party; Lawrence Springborg, the Opposition Leader and leader of the National Party; Bob Quinn, State leader; my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues; ladies and gentlemen.
 It is a huge buzz to be back in Queensland addressing your State convention.  It's always great to come back, to have the opportunity of trying to summarise the challenges and the opportunities for the Federal Coalition and I echo in that context what Bob said about the importance of coalition. One of the fundamental reasons why we have won three elections and why we have been able to implement progressive policies to strengthen Australia is that we have maintained a very strong Federal coalition. It is an absolute bedrock requirement of success on our side of politics that where the opportunity of a coalition exists it be taken advantage of and implemented very effectively. And I can honestly say that in my Deputy Prime Minister and leader of the National Party John Anderson I have somebody who I totally trust, and indeed I've often remarked he's about the most intrinsically decent person that I've met in public life. So coalition is critical. Your possibilities of success at a State level lie in working together with your colleagues in the National Party. There is only one political enemy in Queensland, there is only one political enemy in Australia, and that is the Australian Labor Party.
When we came to office seven-and-a-half-years ago we set ourselves three great goals for Australia. We wanted to provide our nation with three fundamental things. We wanted to provide Australia with national security, we wanted to provide Australia with economic strength, and we wanted to give to the Australian people a continuing sense of social stability. And if we look back over the last seven-and-a-half years I believe that we have made giant strides towards implementing those goals.  We do live in difficult, changed, and in some circumstances frightening international conditions.  But we have to preserve a sense of perspective about it.  The war against terrorism that we've been reminded of with the anniversary of the attacks in America in September of 2001 only this week. The war against terrorism is likely to go on for a very long time. It will not easily be won. It is not that kind of struggle, it is not that kind of battle. And it will only be won through the united efforts of people who share a common love of freedom and a common understanding of what the root cause of terrorism is really all about.
 Terrorists hate us because of what we are and what we believe in, not because of what we have done. Terrorism seeks to diminish, humiliate and destroy free and open societies. Those who strive for freedom and openness and individual liberty are the enemies of terrorists around the world irrespective of their race and irrespective of their religion. In the past few months more Muslims have died at the hands of terrorists than have Christians or Jews, and they have died at the hands of terrorists because terrorism is as much the enemy of Islam, it is as much an obscenity in the eyes of Islam as it is in the eyes of any of the other great religions of the world. So in these difficult circumstances we must of course continue in cooperation with our allies and our neighbours in our part of the world the fight against terrorism. And in providing a sense of security we have expanded our commitment to defence, we have increased resources available to our intelligence agencies, and we have markedly increased the levels of cooperation with intelligence agencies and police agencies in our part of the world.
When I became Prime Minister I knew I faced with Peter Costello as Treasurer an enormous struggle because Mr Beazley and Mr Crean together, with their former mate Mr Keating had left us with a budget deficit of $10.5 billion.  I immediately faced an enormous task in cutting expenditure in order to get that budget under control.  But there is one area I put a circle around, and I said would not suffer any budget cuts and that was the area of Defence.  That decision has largely been forgotten now, and many at the time thought it was rather old fashioned even tokenistic.  I can remember some people saying, he is living in the past doing that.  That is no longer the issue. As times have demonstrated and developments have proved that wasn't the case at all.  Not only have we preserved defence from expenditure reductions, but we have massively increased our commitment to defence expenditure.  I will say again that I can only see an incline in the level of defence expenditure for this country as the years go by.
Our second great goal of course has been to give this country, in addition to a sense of national security has been to provide it with a strong economy, and even our fierce critics are reduced to acknowledging that over the last 7 1/2 years we have conducted economic policies that have delivered economic strength to Australia.  Their best excuse to say is it was all the good work of 15 or 20 years ago instead of acknowledging the fact that the budget reforms, the industrial relations reforms, the taxation reforms and all the other reforms that we have introduced over the last 7 1/2 years have made Australia a stellar economic performer around the world.  It has given to this country creditability and a respect and strength, which has enabled it to speak with a louder voice and punch in a higher weight division that might otherwise be the case, given the size of our population.
  When I look back over the last seven-and-a-half years, one thing I remember time and time again, is that at every turn, every time we wanted to reform the economy, every change we wanted to make to benefit Australia, the Australian Labour Party opposed it.  They opposed our budget cuts, they created the problem and they tried to stop us fixing it.  It is bad enough to leave an incoming Government with a huge deficit, it multiplies the political crime to then prevent them implementing the measures that are needed to sort out the mess.  That is what Labor did, at every turn Labor objected to what we did and in cooperation with the Democrats and the Greens and others with one notable exception in relation to the Democrats on the GST they used their numbers in order to prevent financial measures being introduced.  If it hadn't been also for the Democrats agreeing to a number of reforms in the area of industrial relations, we would not have made progress on that front either.
We have delivered very strong economic conditions in this country.  In many respects the Australian economy is stronger now than it has been at any time since World War II.  You would have to go back to the 1960s to find a period of such sustained economic strength and the strength that the 1960s was build on a rather insubstantial foundation.  It was built on a foundation of a highly protected economy of high tariff wars, a fixed exchange rate, a more inward looking, a less globalised attitude towards world economic affairs.  Now we are performing well and out competing most nations in a open globalised world environment.
These things haven't happened by accident, they have come about because of good policy.  Along the way we made some mistakes, along the way we have ruffled some feathers and we have probably offended some people and probably made a few decisions that even some people in this gathering today would have disagreed with.  The outcome has been wholly positive.  The outcome has meant that notwithstanding the drought, and let me take this opportunity particularly here in Queensland of saying to the rural people of our country, that although we have had very good rains and although the drought has begun to break in many areas, I know full well that the effect of the drought is still very severely felt in many areas of Australia.  I also understand that if there are not follow up rains we are going back into drought conditions.  We are almost you might say at the tilting point, so far as the breaking of the drought is concerned but it should not be assumed, that all our travails on the drought are behind us, particularly in relation to the livestock industry. The grains industry, seems to be heading towards a reasonably good outcome but in relation to the livestock industry it is still very different.  But despite the drought, despite the weakness of the world economy, the Australian economy has continued to perform very strongly.
 There are a few comparisons that I would like to make this morning.  They are what I call grassroots, bread and butter comparisons, but they illustrate the product of good economic policy.  You don't run the economy well in order to get some kind on PhD in economics or to get some kind of certificate from an international financial organisation.  That is not the point of it.  You try and run the economy well to provide the Australian people with jobs, to provide the Australian people with affordable housing, to provide the Australian people with investment opportunity, to provide the Australian people with hope that their children will be able to secure jobs.
In reality going back to my 3 goals, social stability is in part the product of economic strength.  The stronger your economy is the happier and more stable and cohesive your society is.  That is what it is all about.  It is not some kind of end in itself.  It is the means to the very important end of social stability and social cohesion.
  In 1996 the average homebuyer in Australia was paying $450 a month more than that person is paying now.  Just think of that, the average mortgage took $450 a month for service in 1996 compared with now.  In 1996 when we came to office the unemployment rate in Australia was 8.2%.  Last Thursday it came in at 5.8%.
In December of 1995 there were 141,000 apprentices in Australia.  Apprenticeships were really withering on the vine, there are now 390,000 apprenticeships and traineeships in Australia.  In the 7 1/2 years that we have been in Government, real wages in Australia have risen by 10.2%.  In the 13 years that Labor was in Government, real wages in Australia rose by 2.3% and what is worse, Hawke and Keating used to boast about how they had suppressed real wages as a contribution towards reducing unemployment.
Ladies and Gentleman, one of the great stories that that tells, is that the party that once paraded itself as the party of the Australian worker, delivered to the Australian worker, lower real wages than we have, higher interest rates, fewer apprenticeship opportunities for their children and fewer job opportunities for the entire Australian population.  Going from that level of the macro level as the experts say, this countries national debt on an annual basis is about 5% of all the wealth we produce a year, 5% of our gross domestic product.  The average of the OECD is about 45%.  In the United States it is closer to 48% or 50% and in Japan it is over 100%.  It gives you a dimension of the way in which we have restored the international financial strength and the international financial stability of our country.
I take you through these things because it is important after of 7 1/2 years that we do not lose sight of the scale of the achievements.  It is important that we don't take for granted that you can have those sort of economic conditions irrespective of what kind of policy is introduced.  You will be hearing those comparisons from me quite a lot over the next few months, over many months into the future.  There are going to be a lot of other people hearing those comparisons as well. . Some of my opponents heard those comparisons in Parliament on Thursday. And as I go around the country I will be talking about them because they are the visible dividends of the economic discipline of the last seven-and-a-half years and they have underpinned a nation which is internally cohesive and respected around the world. And we do strive for social stability. We strive to maintain the Australian tradition of an egalitarian society, of a society built on the great history of Australian mateship, of our capacity to absorb millions of people from different parts of the world.  coming in the circumstances that we determine, and coming to a nation that has always extended a friendly hand to the people who come to this country and are willing to embrace the Australian life and to make a contribution to this nation's future.  And let us particularly remember that there are within our nation some 280,000 people of Islamic background. And the overwhelming majority of them like the overwhelming majority of every other ethnic group are dedicated, decent Australian citizens who are trying to make a contribution to the future of this country. And at this time of international difficulty let us not lapse into any scapegoating or name calling. Let us understand that they are friends and fellow Australians in our midst and extend the hand of warm friendship to all of them.
Well that my friends is in a sense to borrow the words from the introduction, from the movie clip, that's the journey, that's where we've got to. But I want to share a few thoughts with you now about the next little while, the next year or so, and that is the challenge that we face.  There's a mistaken belief around the country that the Federal Government is unbeatable. There's a mistaken belief that there is a country mile between us and the Labor Party federally. There isn't. Bob Quinn talked about the scale of the challenge that he and Lawrence have. If we lose eight seats at the next Federal election we're gone, we're out of business, and the Labor Party is the government not only in the eight State and Territories, but also at a national level. The history of Federal elections has always been that the result is very close. In my 29 years I've only seen four emphatic results.  The two in the 1970s, Bob Hawke's win in 1983, and our victory in 1996. It's always close because that is the nature of the national political contest. And what I ask of all of you is to make certain that we hang on to every single seat that we have in Queensland, and if we can win more well that's terrific, it's an additional bonus. But if we lose eight we are out of office. Any Liberal anywhere in Australia who thinks that the next election is a walkover, who thinks that because the Labor Party is having some difficulties about its leadership that that's going to guarantee us victory, they're deluding themselves.  The Labor Party is a resilient, determined political machine. It never rests, it never tires of trying to drag down its political opponents, it never tires of trying to win back the support and the regard of the Australian people.  We have huge a fight and particularly here in Queensland because we've had magnificent results federally in Queensland since 1996. Really the historic achievement of the Liberal Party and the National Party in Queensland over the last three elections has been quite remarkable.  We have to keep that high level of representation because it will be essential to us holding on to Federal office.
  So I know that there's a been a lot of debate in the last few weeks and I guess it will go on for a while into the future about the Labor Party. I don't intend to say anything about the Labor Party leadership myself today. Essentially that is a matter for the Labor Party itself to work out. But can I put the proposition to you and may I put the proposition to the Australian people that in my view for what it is worth their problems are more about policy and belief than they are about leadership.  I think the great criticism that can be made of the Australian Labor Party is that they have wasted the last seven-and-a-half years. They have failed to develop an alternative set of policies to attract the Australian people. I saw Barry Jones on Sunrise this morning. It's always interesting to see Barry, he's always got some interesting views. And basically what he was saying was that the Labor Party's problem is a problem of working out what it stands for and what it believes in. And I think the criticism that can be made of it is that over the last seven-and-a-half years it's been too negative, and it hasn't used the time in opposition to develop alternatives. The Australian people will never vote for you if they don't know what you believe in and what you stand for.  And the greatest imperative of political leadership at a State or a Federal level is to communicate to the people what you believe in and what you stand for, and even if they don't agree with you they will respect you for the strength of your convictions and they'll get out and vote for you even if it may be against the grain of their own personal beliefs. And I think the fundamental weakness of our opponents has been that they've developed no policies and they've been too negative.
I mentioned a moment ago how negative they'd been about our reforms. I contrast that with the fact that when we were in opposition we often supported reforms that they brought in. If it hadn't have been for our support the Commonwealth Bank would never have been privatised, if it hadn't have been for our support Qantas would never have been privatised. When   Bob Hawke introduced tariff reforms towards the end of his prime ministership we supported him, we didn't oppose him although it might have been politically opportunistic to do so but in the long run we believed the reforms were necessary. When Keating tried to reform the tax system in the 1980s I supported him. I didn't oppose him. And in the end he was torpedoed not by the Liberal Party but by Bill Kelty and Bob Hawke. And we did that because we believed that what they were doing was correct. When they introduced the Higher Education charge, HECS, we supported that, we didn't oppose it.  We were in other words acting in the national interest even in opposition. Contrast that with them now. We could have 80,000 more jobs in small business. That's not my figure. It's the figure of the business community, if the Senate would get out of the way and pass those changes to the unfair dismissal laws for small business that we've been trying to get through for ages. But no, they believe in eternal negativism, and they have very great trouble taking a position on anything. I mean let me give you a wonderful contemporary example. Right at the moment we are trying to negotiate a free trade agreement with the United States. It's going to be very difficult and we won't be able to successfully negotiate it unless we get a significant concession on agriculture from the Americans. But if we can pull it off, if we can link our economy with the greatest economy, the strongest economy the world has ever seen and an economy that is going to grow in relative strength not decline in relative strength as we go through the 21st century, it has to be in the overwhelming interests of the Australian people and the Australian community. Now what has been the response of the Labor Party? When we first announced it they said they were opposed to it. Craig Emerson and Simon Crean, and Emerson was then the trade spokesman, he said we're against it, it violates our belief in the World Trade Organisation principles. So for months and months and months the position of the Australian Labor Party was that they were opposed to it. And we had the leadership dialogue between the Americans and the Australians in Melbourne a couple of weeks ago and it would appear that maybe perhaps conditionally depending upon there might have been a change.  And the Leader of the Opposition made a speech at that dialogue in which I am told that it sort of said well they have moved from a position of opposition to maybe neutral depending upon what the outcome is.  I mean that is, if I may say so, seriously, that is the problem more than anything else and far be it for me to give my opponents advice but in the end the Australian people take a very intelligent view of political behaviour. They work out whether a party believes in something, they work out whether a party stands for something, and they work out whether a political leader believes in anything or stands for anything and ultimately that does more to determine their vote than the individual personality or the attitude of the individual leader.
So ladies and gentlemen we have come a very long way together and I stress the fact that we have come a long way together over the last seven-and-a-half years. I would never have had the success that some people are nice enough to say that my government has had over the last seven-and-a-half years without a tremendous team, without a great group of Federal members not least here from the State of Queensland, without a great coalition with the National Party and without tremendous support from the party organisation.  I joined the Liberal Party in the second half of the 1950s. I joined it a couple of years after I left school and I left school in 1956, and I've been a member of the Liberal Party ever since. I believe in it, I owe it everything that I've achieved in public life and it's given me opportunities and support and I owe it a debt of gratitude that I can never repay. And I take this opportunity of saying to all of you members of the Liberal Party here in Queensland thank you very sincerely for the help you've given me, the loyalty that you've extended to me, the understanding that you have extended on occasions when I've undoubtedly done things that deep down you wondered about.  That is the covenant between a political leader and the members of his or her party where there's trust on both sides. I've always tried to do the right thing by the Liberal Party and in return you've always tried to do the right thing by me. I'm deeply grateful for that. It's a great experience to come back to this annual convention. I wish the division well, and Bob I wish you and Lawrence well in your challenges in the months ahead. John and I will be there to help you and there to help turn the State tide here in Queensland. But ladies and gentlemen, together we have a great struggle ahead to win that fourth election. It won't be easy and it will only happen if we all work concertedly together.  Thank you.
[Ends]  


Well thank you very much Mr Alexander. My ministerial colleague Chris Ellison, other parliamentary colleagues, the Commissioner of the Victorian Police, the Commissioner of the ACT Police, ladies and gentlemen.  I wanted to come tonight to be associated with this occasions for two reasons. To congratulate the Federation on the national cohesion that it';s demonstrated since it was formed. It';s not every day of the week that I';m invited to officiate at the opening of a building for a registered trade union and I';m rather touched by that. I really am.  It';s adding a new dimension to my life and I really relish the opportunity. But the other reason I wanted to be here tonight was to take this chance to speak on behalf of all Australians in expressing my respect, my admiration, and my continued support for the men and women of the various police forces of our nation. And there is no better place to do it than here in Canberra in the national capital at the opening of a building which brings together the various state and territory associations into a federation representing the men and women of the various police forces of Australia.
Police are the line between our quiet, orderly, happy and contented lives, and chaos and disaster and tragedy. And I am very genuine in saying that there are few things that upset me more than to learn and read and see on television of the death of a police officer in the course of duty. There is something particularly gripping for me and I know to many Australians that people who have their own families, who have their own lives and their own hopes, and those lives are taken away by the acts of criminals in our community. And it';s part of a democracy that there should be a lively debate about the balance to be struck between the powers of police and the individual liberties of the citizen and we have to keep that balance, and in trying to strike that balance we must always pay regard to the tremendous risks that police take and the tremendous responsibilities that they assume on behalf of the community in protecting us from crime.
The President, Mr Alexander, spoke of the growth of and the improvement in techniques available.  I have to agree with him that the advent of DNA is the most remarkable development in policing work in more than a century and all of you here today are even more aware of that reality than I am. In different ways the federal government has become more involved thorough things like CrimTrac and so forth in promoting a national response. And the way in which we were able across political boundaries to reach agreement on the establishment of the Australian Crime Commission and the cooperative approach which is being taken in relation to that.
 We will always see in Australia because of the history of the various associations and the history and the different cultures of the individual police forces we will always see separate state in particular identities. But increasingly we do have to address these issues as Australians on a national level. Crime does not respect international borders let alone state borders. Crime does not respect different localities, crime does not respect the sensitivities of individual jurisdictions and that applies in relation to state governments as much as it applies in relation to individual police forces. And therefore having a national perspective but having it in a way that tries to draw forth the cooperation of the Commonwealth government and the states is our goal.
 So ladies and gentlemen, I';m very happy to be here today. I want to thank you on behalf of a grateful nation for that you are here in a representative capacity of the members of the various police forces do to protect us and to preserve the Australian way of life which is so precious and so very dear to us. I';m delighted that we';ve made progress in relation to the memorial here in Canberra. It will be a very very fitting occasion when that is ready for opening to honour the more than 700, who the President said, men and women of the various police forces that have died in the service of our community.
  So in that spirit and recognising as I learnt this afternoon of the extraordinary generosity of your members who raised something I understand in the order of $130,000 to assist the relatives of those who died, of course it included so many people of the New York Police Department on the 11th of September. I know I am addressing a group of people who are not only generous and thoughtful in relation to their fellow Australians, but also police in other parts of the world who suffer in the defence of a civil society and in defence of law and order. I thank all of you for your contribution. And I have very great pleasure, I guess by removing the piece of cloth, in declaring this building open and I';m sure it will be the hive and the launching pad of much lobbying of the federal government and I';m sure that my colleagues will get very used to over the years the staff who will work here. Thank you again and I have great pleasure in declaring this building open.
[Ends]  


  [tape begins] Kevin Andrews, ladies and gentlemen.
 I was recollecting to Irene Gibbons on the way in that the last occasion that I addressed this gathering was five years ago when I had the opportunity of announcing a major expansion of the community aged care package of our aged care programmes under the title of Staying at Home.  And over the five years that have gone by, that has become an increasingly important component of the aged care policies of the Government.
This morning I want both conceptually and also in terms of detail, address some remarks to the Government';s approach to the enormous contributions that carers make to the stability of our community.  Social stability and social cohesion and caring for people is an integral part of Australian society.  It';s one of those things that ought properly cross the political divide and it ought properly be something which is embraced by all sections of the community.  Nobody knows better than this body, this gathering, of the enormous contribution that carers make, not only to the personal happiness and comfort and fulfilment of life of the many people they care for, but also of course the enormous economic contribution that carers make to our society.
I have to say to you that no government will ever have the capacity to fully compensate people for the totality of the economic relief that is provided by carers.  And those who provide the care will have a variety of views as to the level of recompense or level of compensation. What governments must endeavour to do is to provide a proper level of financial recognition and support for those who undertake the role and the responsibility of carers within our community.  Through partnerships with Carers Australia and the National Family Carers Voice, the Government is endeavouring to work to identify the needs of carers and their families and I particularly welcome this opportunity of meeting so many of you and addressing some remarks.
  I don';t want to spend too much time in reprising the various changes that have occurred over the past few years, but I would be doing the Government less than justice if I didn';t remind you of some of the enhancements that have occurred and some of the changes that have occurred in the seven and a half years that the Government has been in office.  For example, the carer allowance population has increased from approximately 100,000 in June of 1999 to nearly 300,000 in June of this year.  The number receiving carer payments has increased by over 200 per cent from June 1996 to June 2003, with expenditure on carer payment this current financial year of over $700 million.  And the Government spends approximately $1.5 billion per year in direct financial assistance to carers.  I mention these figures not to suggest for a moment that they are in any way excessive or inappropriate, but merely to underline the very significant increases that have occurred.  And we do, of course, live in a society where the requirements for carers and for direct community assistance to carers will continue to rise as the years go by.  The demographic profile of Australia is such that there will be increasing emphasis placed and increasing demands upon the budget to provide financial assistance to people who are caring, not only but especially for a growing section of the population which is ageing.
  Australia';s demography is no different in substance from the demography of most western nations.  We are an ageing population, we are enjoying better health in our later years.  But inevitably, there will be growing demands produced by that demographic trend.  It means that governments at all levels, particularly at a federal level, because the income support payment responsibilities of governments in our federal system fall upon the national government and not upon the state governments, there will be increasing needs in that area and increasingly governments will need to make decisions about the best expenditure of available dollars.
  In the 2002 Budget, the Government provided an additional $80 million over four years to provide a range of support to carers, including for carers of people with dementia, ageing carers of people with disabilities and the expansion of support services for all carers.  And these measures built on a substantial record of growing levels of health for carers.  For example, the Commonwealth funding for the National Respite for Carers Programme, which has risen five fold from $19 million in 1996 to almost $99 million in the current financial year.  And funding has also been provided for a national carers counselling programme being implemented through Carers Australia and the network of carer respite centres.  And I want to acknowledge the role of Carers Australia in [inaudible] the carer resource centres that are funded under the national respite for carers programme.
  Now I mentioned some of those things ladies and gentlemen, not to suggest for a moment that the task has been completed nor to ignore the representations that are made on behalf of carers in Australia to address other areas of need, but rather to put into proper perspective and a fair perspective some of the changes that have occurred and I hope to illustrate and underline the concern and the commitment and the respect that this Government pays and owes to those who undertake caring responsibilities in our community.  As many of you will know, the Government is undertaking an informal review of community care with a view to identifying strategies for a more integrated community care system.  The major priorities are ease of access, transparency for people needing help and continuity of care.  And I';m very pleased that Irene Gibbons, the chief executive officer of Carers Australia, is assisting this review.  And I';m also pleased to note that in the third Commonwealth State Territory Disability Agreement, the Commonwealth';s offering $2.8 billion to states and territories – an increase of almost $900 million over the last agreement and I';m pleased to note that most of the agreements have now been signed and that the increased funding has begun to flow.
One of the issues that I know is very important to carers and that is the question of an increasing demand for informal and family care and the ageing of the population leading to a need to help people to after a long period of caring for somebody to re-enter the workforce.  People returning to work following a period of care often need additional financial assistance.  And as part of welfare reform, some $39 million was reallocated to the transition to work programme in the budget of 2001/2002 to fund some 20,200 places over a period of three years from July of last year.  The transition to work programme provides vocational assistance to parents, carers and mature aged people who';ve been out of the workforce for at least two years.  And the Government has already made moves to provide workplace flexibility through the Workplace Relations Act enabling employees and employers to develop flexible arrangements, including phased retirement approaches to meet the needs of mature aged workers who have some caring responsibilities.  And in recognition of the additional care needs, I';ve asked that as part of the Community Business Partnership inquiry into increasing mature aged worker participation in the workforce that they consider recommendations to promote flexible workplaces to enable mature aged workers, who may also be carers, to continue to provide care while undertaking paid work.
I';m aware of the many representations that have been made to the Government on behalf of carers in the Australian community, that there continues to be some concern about the operation of the co-residential requirement so far as the payment of the carer payment is concerned.  It has been put to me and put to the Government that the present rules do on some occasions produce unfair outcomes.  And I want to inform the conference that the Government does have that particular issue under study and we are examining ways in which areas where it does operate unfairly might be addressed.  That will need to be done in a fashion that doesn';t result in an unstainable expansion of eligibility to the payment but will in future operate in a fashion where the particularly unfair cases of the care being provided but not under the same roof, the existing rules operate to the disadvantage of people who are providing that care.
 I';ve had, as no doubt you have had, a number of cases brought to your attention where it has worked unfairly and the Government is anxious to find over the months ahead a way of addressing that, which as I say, does not lead to an unstainable expansion but does deal with some of the more difficult cases.
Ladies and gentlemen, I said a few moments ago that one of the great challenges that Australia faced was the changing composition age wise of its population.  In common with all other societies, we are a nation that is slowly ageing.  Our fertility rate, although not as low as many European countries, such as Italy which has a rate of something like 1.25 per cent, ours is in the order of 1.75 per cent.  It is, along with the rates of most other countries, producing over a period of time an ageing population.  That, of course, has enormous implications for all levels of government, as well as enormous implications for our society as a whole.  It means on the one hand we have to find ways of increasing workforce participation, it means that we have to encourage older people to remain in the workforce longer, it means that we have to provide more flexible opportunities for both men and women who have family responsibilities to balance their work and their family responsibilities.  It also means inevitably that we have to have an eye, particularly at the Federal Government level because of our responsibility for income support payments, we have to have an eye for the maintenance of programmes which are essential to the health and the wellbeing of people as the years go by, but we have to maintain them in a way that makes them economically sustainable.  I think particularly of programmes such the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, something of an example to the rest of the world, one of the many examples of how Australia in these areas has actually been able to find a combination of public and private contributions to important human services which is better than the either purely private examples that often come out of countries such as the United States and the overly government run and overly interventionist approaches of many of the European countries.  The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is a wonderful scheme to provide for all the population access to essential, and in many cases life saving drugs. But it is also a scheme which is, if not maintained on, or put on a sustainable basis will, as time goes by, become increasingly less affordable for our community and therefore some of the drugs and some of the products that might be in future available under that scheme will come under future pressure.
I mention these things to try and share with you the balance that needs to be struck between on the one hand expanding benefits where there is justice in the case for the expansion of those benefits, yet on the other hand ensuring that universally available benefits and support mechanisms are kept on an effectively and economically sustainable basis.  We cannot achieve the expansion of necessary benefits into new areas or the enhancement of existing benefits where there is a need to enhance them while at the same time having an open ended approach to the availability of certain things for the entire community. In the end the limitations placed upon any government as to the availability of resources is going to dictate that some of those choices will need to be made.
While those things are not directly and narrowly relevant to the carer community, they are certainly relevant to all of us who must in different ways make a contribution to ensuring that as the demography of our country alters we can afford to provide appropriate support mechanisms and benefits for an ageing population.  We continue to ensure that the burden of financing those benefits does not fall too heavily through unacceptably high levels of taxation on the working age population and that we provide proper recognition for the hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of Australia who in different ways provide care, not only for their loved family members, but for others in the community.
They are, Madam President, some of the considerations that the Government brings to these issues. I know that your organisation has been in very constant dialogue and contact with members of the Government, with Kevin Andrews who is the Minister having particular responsibility with Amanda Vanstone and I know with my own office.  And I want to particularly in the context of the advocacy of carers interests, I want to say that National Family Carers voice has recently been established to provide the Government with advice on how we can better address family carer issues.  The National Family Carers voice will gather information about the nature, the location and the circumstances of family carers and will provide the Government with advice and options over the next two years for addressing the longer term needs of these very important people.  And finally in that context I want to warmly welcome Mrs Judy Brewer Fisher, the new chairman of the National Family Carers voice, as a carer she will bring a wealth of experience to the position and I';m very confident that through her leadership the National Family Carers voice will work with other organisations such as Carers Australia to make a practical and real difference in this area.
Ladies and gentlemen, in declaring this conference open I want to thank you for the opportunity of sharing some thoughts with you this morning, the Government does very sincerely respect and understand and admire the contribution of carers. I don';t say that in any sense of being patronising, I don';t say that in any sense of taking anything for granted, I mean it very genuinely. No government can ever repay to people who care for others the full measure of the contribution they make to the happiness of those people they care for, or the full measure of the contribution they make to taking the financial burden off the community, no government can do that, but it is important that the leader of government from time to time publicly thanks and recognises people for the contribution they make and also assures you that consistent with all of the other calls upon government and the responsibilities governments have that we will endeavour to do fairness and justice and over time where we can adjust benefits and adjust levels of support for carers within our community.  You are part of the great Australian experience, you make an enormous contribution to the essential fairness and decency and compassion of the australian community and that is something I acknowledge and I very warmly respect and welcome and I have very great pleasure in declaring your conference open.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Mrs Hyde, Mr Browning, your Grace, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a very memorable occasion.  It celebrates two very important things, it celebrates the remarkable success in a very short period of time of the Burgmann Anglican School, opened with a very small pupil base in 1999, it has fulfilled the expectation and the hopes of many, not least the Australian Government, that there was a place in the Australian community for the growth of new independent schools with a Christian base, but offering places at very affordable fees.  And long may the cause of that category of schools expand and extend, not only here in the ACT but throughout Australia.
The other important feature of this gathering is of course that it honours and celebrates a very important cultural, historical and people-to-people relationship and that is the relationship between Australia and Indonesia.  I want to congratulate the school on giving such pride of place to that relationship.  The more we can in so many different ways reach out to the people of Indonesia, count them as, treat them as and deal with them as our friends and our neighbours forever in this part of the world the better it will be for both countries and the better prospects there will be for harmony and stability in our region.
It is also very important that this cultural and language centre is being opened at an Anglican school because it provides an opportunity for Christianity and Islam to reach out to each other, for each of those religions to remind their respective adherents, that at their respective cores lies a commitment to peace, a commitment to the brotherhood of man and a rejection of violence and terrorism and hate and racial discrimination.  Those values are as important to the Islamic faith and to the people of Indonesia as they are important to the people of Christian faith and to the people of Australia.
It is very touching that in this part of Australia, on the border of the Australian Capital Territory, we should have established this wonderful metaphor for the desire and the intention and the determination of the people of Australia and the children of Australia to treat the Indonesian people as their friends and their neighbours.
I congratulate Mrs Nichols, I congratulate the school principal, I congratulate all associated with this project.  It';s a wonderful example to other school communities around Australia, I hope it will, as I declare it officially open, be a permanent reminder and a permanent inspiration to all children who are educated here in future of the ongoing importance of our relationship with Indonesia, but even more than that the need for tolerance and understanding and co-operation across religious and racial divides within our part of the world because our future stability will be forever tied up with the achievements of those goals and Burgmann Anglican School is making a mighty contribution to it.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much John, ladies and gentlemen. It's a great pleasure to share this very important occasion with the Business Council and to share with many of you some reminiscences on what has been achieved in this country and what has been done to lift the economic performance of Australia over the last 20 years.
It's an interesting conjunction that as well as this being the 20th anniversary of the formation of the Business Council, today is the 20th anniversary of the launching of Medicare, it was back in 1983 that Medicare was launched by the former government and the interesting conjunction is that it's a salutary reminder to all of us that there's never a disconnect between economic policy and social policy.  That economic policy is never an end in itself but unless it delivers better outcomes for people's lives, unless it generates more jobs, it gives people rising living standards, it gives them the greater sense of striving and aspiration then it's been a comparative failure because human contentment is the social dividend of good economic policy and there has always to be a link between those two.
It's been a very remarkable 20 years.  And when you think about it the five great economic reforms that have transformed the Australian economy have all occurred in the last 20 years.  Financial deregulation, first advocated by the Campbell Committee established by the former Coalition Government, to its credit implemented by the incoming Labor Government with very strong Coalition support in Opposition.  We floated the dollar, what in December of 1983?  Tariff reform introduced largely by the former government with Opposition support, I think a very courageous act by that government given its workforce associations, implemented in a series of steps through the 80s and early 90s.  And then of course the three major reforms that I think can be claimed by the current government, industrial relations reform, the hardest and most vigorously fought because of the strong ideological differences on that issue, the transformation of industrial relations in this country over the last 20 years has been quite amazing and those of you present in this room that, as John Schubert did and Arvi Parbo would have, Bob White and so many others would have attended meetings in the Cabinet room of the Old Parliament House which bought together the players as they were colloquially called of both business and the trade union movement and to think that those meetings don't take place anymore because the constellations of power and influence in our economy have altered so much over the last 20 years.  Industrial relations reform, taxation reform, and of course that's a reform that's never finished as the Business Council quite properly reminds me and I'm very conscious of that.  But at least we have made a major dent in the task of taxation reform through the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax and the [inaudible] changes that were put to the people in 1998.  And then of course very importantly, and we have been forcefully reminded of it with the Budget outcome announced by the Treasurer yesterday, fiscal consolidation.  When one thinks of the dept to GDP ratio of this country it's 3.9 per cent, the OECD average is 48.7 per cent and in countries such as Japan it's over 100 per cent.
  So it has been a very remarkable 20 years, and the five things that have transformed our economy have all occurred during that 20 year period and that is why what John said is so right, that you look back at Australia 20 years ago and you compare it with Australia today, it is a transformed country, it's a country which is far more open, we often compare, and I will in a moment in saying a couple of other things about the economy, but we often say that the Australian economy is now enjoying an experience like the golden years of the 1960s, in fact there was something superficial about this, or insubstantial let me say rather about those years because the Australian economy then was a far more protected economy than what it is now.  We not only had a controlled exchange rate, but we had very high tariff walls and of course exports in the 1960's only comprised eight per cent of the Australia economy.  By late 2000 it was 23 per cent.  Even as recently as 20 years ago, or 23 years ago in 1980 direct foreign investment abroad, in other words us investing in them, was only about 20 per cent of inward foreign investment. Yet would you believe that for a period in 2001 direct foreign investment abroad exceeded inward investment into Australia, which is another illustration of the way in which things have really changed.
I've mentioned the extraordinary transformation bought about by those economic reforms. We now have fewer than one in five private sector workers who belong to trade unions.  We've had 12 years of continuous economic growth, and that's the longest economic expansion since the 1960s.  A little while ago we recorded our lowest unemployment rate for 13 years, at 5.8 per cent. But probably the real nugget out of the last few years has been productivity improvements.  We've had a three per cent annual growth since the mid-1990's, and I never cease to talk about this statistic and you'll forgive me if you hear a lot more of me talking about it over the next nine to 12 months, but we've had a 12.2 per cent rise in real wages over the last seven and a half years, between 1983 and 1996, a random 13 years, there was a rise of only 2.3 per cent.  Now in the end, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, it's the dividend you give to people out of economic policy that really does matter.  And the dividend of higher real wages built on a non-inflationary base because we've had productivity improvements. If I were asked to single out the greatest achievement of the Australian economy over the last 20 years it's really that, our workplace culture has altered, there is a greater culture of co-operation by and large in the workplace now, and everybody made a contribution to that, of course industrial relations changes have made a huge contribution, the approach of management, the more cosmopolitan international approach of business in Australia, the more outward looking character of young Australians now, all of that has made an enormous contribution, I think the feminisation of the workforce has made a contribution to it, there are a whole range of things that have altered the culture of the Australian workplace and have therefore made a massive contribution to that, and in the end it's the greatest guarantee that we can have of continued economic growth and economic prosperity.
So having said all of those things I wouldn't for a moment want you to imagine that we're going to fall victim to the latter elements of scenario one, and that is abandon further economic reform and further economic challenges.  And can I say to the President, John Schubert, that I am most interested in these scenarios and I indicated to John and other members of the executive committee of the BCA at the recent dinner we had at the Lodge that I would like those scenarios to be presented to a Cabinet meeting later on this year because my colleagues and I would very much like to share the thinking of the BCA on these issues.  And I recognise they are not predictions, they are but scenarios but they are the sort of propositions that do provoke thought about the future of this country and if we are to consolidate the self-evident gains of the last 20 years we do need to embrace that kind of thinking and that kind of examination process.
The BCA itself has played a very big role in the economic debate over the last 20 years.  It played a particularly important role in shifting the attitudes of the business community on industrial relations.  When I was first a Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs in the middle to late 1970s, I had responsibility for what was then called the IAC, it was described by some manufacturers as the industry's assassination commission, it was often described by some trade union leaders by that same title or even worse and the attitude of different companies was sharply in variance, some believed that protection, a return to full scale protection was the only road ahead, others had a different attitude. I think the BCA has played an extraordinary productive role in changing not only the attitudes on tariff but very particularly the attitudes on industrial relations and of course in more recent times I'm very indebted to the constructive contribution that leading members of the BCA, some here, some not here, and the BCA itself took to taxation reform.  I think 10 years ago most people in this room would have wondered whether we would have ever got through the taxation changes that we ultimately did and can I say that we would not have got through the Parliament what we did get through the Parliament without the assistance in the end of a large part of the Australian Democrats, and I remain particularly indebted to the very constructive approach taken by that party's former leader Senator Lees.
But your organisation has played a very important role and you continue through your emphasis on some of the things that might not immediately be seen as overwhelmingly economic but are really at the core of our economic hopes and prospects for the future.  I think particularly of higher education reform, something that's very much on the agenda at the present time.  But we really badly need to get these higher education reforms through the Senate, I accept that our political opponents don't agree with our approach and they have a perfect right, as they will, to advocate an alternative approach.  My only plea to them is that please support the changes that we now propose and if you win the next election then you can change the system according to your own policy. But if we lose the momentum and we lose the opportunity that our current package of reforms provides of injecting some additional public money as well as additional private money into our universities then the sector is going to be very much the loser.
That of course brings me to an issue that has played on my mind quite a bit and will get somewhat more airplay next week when I release the discussion paper on Senate reform.  I hope to engage the community on a debate about the need to alter the deadlock provisions currently in the Australian Constitution.  We now have a system of voting and a method of choosing the Senate, which more or less guarantees that neither side of politics, that is neither the Labor Party nor the Coalition can ever in its own right control a majority in the Senate. Now there are some, and there's one here tonight, Andrew Bartlett, who would probably say that is an extremely good thing and I respect that fact and I respect the fact that in the Australian community now there is a desire to have a greater smaller party voice in the Upper House and I don't argue with that because that's the will of the Australian people then that will has to be respected, but would I would argue for is that we need to have a process for resolving differences over legislation that does not involve the rather cumbersome heavy handed approach of a double dissolution with no guarantee if there's a close result from that double dissolution that the deadlock itself can be resolved because if you go back over the last 20 years some of the reforms that were put through, particularly in the time that the former government was in office were only achieved because of the bipartisan support that was extended to that government by the then opposition. And there are a number of very important reforms that we're endeavouring to get through at present, those relating to the viability of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, we are all conscious of the ageing of the population, we're all conscious of the fact that in common with all other Western societies we will have fewer taxpayers and more and more dependents as years go by and two of the great challenges are to manage the cost burden of that, particularly in areas of health and pharmaceutical benefits and also to secure a greater participation of older people in the Australian workforce. And one of the things that I believe that we have to, as a community debate, as to whether we can achieve a better way through constitutional reform of resolving deadlocks between the two parliaments.
This country does not lack a very very large agenda of debate on major issues over the next five to 10 years.  We achieved historic reforms at the last COAG meeting in relation to water and it's laid the foundation of some major national changes that are going to tackle the challenge of that very precious resource.  We need as a country to make further progress on energy market reform to properly marshal for the benefit of this country the extraordinary energy reserves that we have and to further breakdown the wastefulness of state boundaries and duplicated regulatory regimes which do enormous damage to the proper utilisation of those resources.  We need to continue the momentum that's come out of the Backing Australia's Ability programme in the areas of research and innovation, part of that of course is tied up with the higher education reforms of which I've spoken earlier.
We need to continue the process of not only investing in university education but also promoting the skilling of the workforce in the non-university sectors.  And I'm especially proud of the fact that in December 1995 there were 140,000 apprentices in this country, yet there are now just under 400,000 apprentices and trainees. That represents a very significant expansion of that.
But ladies and gentlemen it's been a fascinating 20 year period.  As I look around this room there are people such as Arvi Parbo and Bob White who were there and a number of others, Eric Neal, and I'm sure I've left out many who were present at that first meeting which I think was held at the Regent Hotel just down the road and presided over by my predecessor but one Bob Hawke, and over that 20 year period I have engaged in various positions in discussion and debate with the Business Council.  I think the business community of this country has made an enormous contribution to what we have achieved over the last 20 years and the thing that cheers me most about the last 20 years is that it's been a demonstration that in the end competitive capitalism is better able to lift people's living standards and is better able to deliver good outcomes for the majority of people then any alternative economic system. It's perhaps no coincidence that during that 20 year period we also saw the final collapse of ideology built on the command economies through the collapse of the decaying East European controlled economies because if you look at the last 20 years you have seen an emphatic demonstration that competitive capitalism, so far from making the rich richer and the poor poorer, competitive capitalism has in fact been the force and the ideology, economically speaking, which has delivered the best outcomes because the growth economies of that period have been the economies that have increasingly embraced that and despite the apparent conflict between the political doctrines of China and its economic practices to watch the embracing year by year of more market oriented approaches and dare I say it more competitive capitalism by that economy is one of that great experiences of the modern world.
So ladies and gentlemen thank you very much for having me here tonight, I want to thank John Schubert for the leadership he's given to the Business Council over the last three years and Katie for her role as Chief Executive.  I know your incoming president well, I wish him well, I will continue to ensure that the members of my Government, both newly rearranged and continuing, will maintain the very close linkages that I know we've had over the last seven years.  We haven't always agreed on every single thing, and nor we should, but we do share common goals, we all believe in the security of this country, we all strive to give it economic strength and we're all very strongly committed to its social stability and if we can continue that partnership then I hope we can continue to leave it in an even better shape than we found it.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you Gary, Graham Quirk, Campbell Newman, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It's always a special experience to address a community gathering such as this to remark upon the extraordinary strength that our country derives from the volunteer efforts of so many unsung heroes within the Australian nation.
  The Government I lead has three broad goals for our country's future.  We wish to deliver to it national security in the proper sense of that expression. We wish to deliver economic strength and we also very importantly wish to deliver, or rather maintain, the social stability and the social cohesion of our country.  And it's really in that department, that third goal that my remarks are directed towards this morning.  Because what keeps a nation together, what is the national glue or the national cement at the end of the day is really the contribution of millions of individuals looking after their families, raising their children properly, accepting their responsibilities as parents and also the contribution that they make to their community.  And we often overlook that, we often have this tendency of when there's a problem of saying well the government, be it the local government, the state government, or the federal government, can fix it.  The reality is there are some problems governments can fix but there are a lot of problems no government, whatever its political complexion and whoever the Prime Minister or the Premier may be, is not able to fix.  And that is really where strong communities matter and if you can have people working together with the government doing what it does best, but staying out of the things that it does very badly and leaving it to individuals and very strong communities to do those things then you have a better nation.
We derive a great deal of pride as Australians from the magnificent success of the Olympic Games in Sydney in 2000.  To me, who was a regular attender at those games cheering on every Australian competitor I can find, to me the greatest demonstration that came out of those Olympic Games was the extraordinary contribution made by the volunteers.  And the thing that presented that friendly, open, happy, informal face to the world was of course the contribution of the volunteers.
 So your Community Awards, your Achievement Awards, Gary, which I'm announcing today for the year 2004 and I think I was actually here at the inauguration of them several years ago, they are meant to recognize the contribution of countless numbers of people in the Moreton community to the happiness and the betterment of the way of life of people who live in this community.  And I know that in your electorate, Gary, there is a special resonance in the fact that so many of the people of Moreton have come from different parts of the world.  Australia offers a welcome to people from any part of the world, we run an immigration policy which is based on the principle of non-discrimination, we choose people on the basis of the contribution they can make to our country, we ask of them as we ask of ourselves that we give our prime and absolute loyalty with Australia above every other country and every other attitude and point of view.  We don't ask them to forget the country of their birth, nobody should be asked to do that.  But we do, of course, ask that people having come to this country from all parts of the world that they are received into our community as equals.  The only requirement of a patriotic Australian is a total commitment to this country and that applies whether you were born here or whether you came from another country and you embrace it as your own.
  And can I take the opportunity of saying to all of you what a great federal member you have in Gary Hardgrave.  There's an old saying that if you want a job done, you ask the busy people to do it.  And we all know that's true in life.  So Gary's been very busy as Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, but I thought he was doing such a good job that I decided to give him some more work.  And I decided when I had that reshuffle at the beginning of the week that as well as retaining him as the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, I'd also make him Minister Assisting the Prime Minister.  And he said well what part of your job do I have to assist in and I said everything.  And you'll not only have to, sort of, do particular things but you don't know the half of it mate.  And so I'm going to have a bit of a talk to him next week, but he's done a very good job.  He's trusted and respected by the different communities that make up the modern Australia because he's straightforward, he treats people fairly, he asks of them that they make their contribution to Australia and he asks of the rest of us that we extend the hand of welcome and the hand of friendship.  And that's the basis of the modern Australian compact, each meeting... each part of the bargain meeting its obligation and Gary exemplifies that and I have enormous pleasure of not only in being here, but I have very great pleasure in launching the Moreton Australia Day Community Achievement Awards for 2004.  Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you Assistant Commissioner, my parliamentary colleague Kay Elson, ladies and gentlemen.
 I want first of all to thank the Police Citizens Club and the Queensland Police for the courtesy that they've extended to me today and allowing me to make this announcement on these premises.  And in the course of that to give me an opportunity albeit briefly of observing some of the activities of the Police Citizens Clubs, which now for decades have provided one of the  most effective antidotes against crime and one of the most effective ways in which young people can have their energy and enthusiasm and commitment channelled in the right direction.  And it is important at the outset that I acknowledge the enormous contribution that the police forces all around Australia, not only in Queensland but all around Australia contribute to the cause of good citizenship.
  Yesterday I had the opportunity of announcing here in Brisbane a major initiative in our Tough on Drugs campaign, which has now totalled the commitment of about $1 billion at a national level and is beginning for the first time in years to see a decline in heroin death rates, they've come down by some 600 on an annual basis between 1999 and 2001.  There are other encouraging signs on that front and I hope that trend can be continued.
  Back in the year 2000, we launched a four year programme to spend $226 million in funding all around Australia a series of projects that were designed to plug gaps in communities, provide individual organisations with money, to launch programmes that would strengthen both communities and strengthen families.
  And today I'm announcing a further 73 of those programmes that are going to attract funding of some $7 million.  And that includes four projects of particular interest to the people of Queensland.  The Families - Our Future, a programme sponsored by the Queensland Police Citizens Youth Welfare Association, will receive some $23,500 for family oriented recreation and educational activities.  The Mabel Park Power programme will receive $109,580 to provide practical assistance and personal support for young students who are pregnant or parenting to enable them to continue their education.  The breakthrough project in Redland Shire which involves a partnership between Boys Town, the Koori Elders and the Rock Christian Church, and they will receive $300,000 for integrated services focusing particularly on the needs of indigenous young people.  And there'll also be a grant of $133,000 to be made available for the Pathways to Leadership project and this project will provide training for potential leaders who have disabilities to assist other disabled people and their families to participate more fully in the community.
Now very deliberately we have tried with this programme to give a large number of organisations support, rather than provide all of the funds to one organisation, which then disperses it according to its judgment.  We've decided to fund a very large number of projects with amounts of money that assist them to build their activities in their communities.  I've always held a very strong view that the backbone of the social stability of this country is a strong sense of community.  And when you get parents and local organisations, such as the Police Citizens organisations, or local sporting clubs, local church organisations, other local community organisations working together and identifying difficulties and problems you can normally find ways of overcoming it.
  One of the things that we have found in the administration of this programme and the research that has come out of it, is the enormous value of early childhood intervention of identifying children and families that are risk from the very beginning.  And it is quite extraordinary what progress can be made if those families can be identified and helped at a very early stage.  And applying the doctrine of prevention being better than cure, I think all of  us know, and not least the men and women of our police forces know, that if you can do that at an early stage than you can ensure that young people don't embark upon antisocial behaviour, they don't lapse into crime and they don't begin to associate with criminal elements in the community.  And the more we can build our communities and the more we can support local organisations to achieve that the greater will be the success.
So, I'm delighted at the opportunity at this little gathering this morning to make this announcement and to again salute the contribution that the police of the country make to the well being of our society.  It's not an easy job being a policeman or a policewoman, but it's a very valuable job.  I admire the work that our police do and I couldn't be more pleased that the Police Citizens Association has made this venue available for this announcement.  And I think it's a very good programme and it's a programme that is making a very important contribution to the building of a stronger community and stronger and better family.  Thank you very much.
[ends]


Your Excellencies, Chief Justice, Yours Honours, may it please the court.
I am very conscious of the privilege extended to me by the court today in inviting me to address it. It';s been rare in the history, the 100-year history of the High Court that the serving Prime Minister in that capacity has been invited to address it.  I want to thank the court for that privilege and in doing so take the opportunity on behalf of a very grateful nation to record its gratitude to the 44 Justices of the High Court over 100 years who have collectively contributed so much to the vibrancy and the strength and the relevance of Australian democracy.
As a nation we probably too infrequently take pause to reflect upon our many democratic achievements. The fact that we formed a nation without strife or warfare, the fact that amongst other things we were the first to extend complete female suffrage, the fact that we join the company of fewer than 10 nations that have remained continuously democratic since the commencement of the 20th Century.  And I believe that we can add to that democratic lustre the establishment 100 years ago today of a Federal Supreme Court named the High Court of Australia which over that 100-year period has played an integral role in the development and the strengthening of Australian democracy.
As part of the ongoing political debate about our institutions there is frequent debate as to whether or not this nation should endeavour in some way to entrench formally in its law a bill of rights.  I belong to that group of Australians who is resolutely opposed to such a course of action. It is my view that this nation has three great pillars of its democratic life.  A vigorous parliamentary system, robustly Australian, responsible for the making of laws; a strong independent and incorruptible judiciary; and a free and sceptical media, free and sceptical often to the discomfort of us but nonetheless an important and integral part of our society.
 The High Court of Australia has made its great contribution to the strengthening of one of those three pillars. Any nation armed with these can preserve its democratic life against all adversity.
  The international reputation of the High Court of Australia both now and in the past is undisputed.  The great Lord Denning once remarked that its reputation over topped that of the House of Lords and the United States Justice Felix Frankfurter was equally lyrical.
Elected governments of which at a national level I lead at present and the court system of Australia are part of the democratic compact that makes up the nation of Australia.  They are both part of the whole but they are, under our doctrine of the separation of powers, very separate.  100 years ago today when the court met for its first time in this very historic Banco court here in Melbourne our sense of nationhood was both hesitant and embryonic.  There was even much discussion about the need or relevance of a high court, it was thought it would not have enough work to do, it was thought that the cost involved was prohibitive and unsustainable.  As we look back over that 100 year period we see not only a lively dynamic evolution of our nation, but also the role of the court.  Our sense of nationalism, our sense of identity as Australians above everything else is now not only profound but absolute.  And in that process of evolution the court itself has made an enormous contribution. Its skilful interpretation of the separation of powers ordained by the Constitution, the inevitable evolution of a significantly greater role for the national government, particularly in financial matters, and one recalls many of the landmark cases such as the engineers'; case and the uniform tax case.  But the court itself has undergone many changes, it';s not only been enlarged in size but of course its role vis-a-vis other courts, and particularly with the final abolition of appeals to the Privy Council in 1986 has been significant.  The establishment just over 25 years ago of the Federal Court of Australia has also altered the workload of the court and allowed it to focus, as had the changing in 1984 regarding leave to appeal on particular aspects and one might say the pinnacle of the interpretation of our law.
The decisions of the court have not and are not in their nature of a partisan political character.  It is integral to our system that that should not be the case. But I am very conscious that the many decisions of the court over the years have had profound influence on the political and national life of our country.  The decision during World War II in the uniformed tax case has had lasting significance in relation to the distribution of financial power within our nation. And since World War II, I believe four decisions of the court have stood out as having very profound and far reaching significance.  The bank nationalism case, of course had enormous political and other implications as well as constitutional ramifications.  The Communist Party dissolution case raised very important considerations and in the subsequent debate about the role of free speech and the attitudes of different sections of Australian society to it and had a profound influence on the political disposition of the nation.  The Tasmanian dams case in the early 1980s of course represented a very significant adoption and extension of the role of the external affairs power under our Constitution. And the Mabo decision of the early 1990s had enormous ramifications and had a very great and lasting influence on debates about the rights of indigenous people within our community and the role that they could play in the future development of our nation.
Each of these, Your Honours, have had a great effect on the public life and the political life of our nation.  I think we all recognise that we live in an intensely sceptical period in our history.  All institutions are subjected to scrutiny and criticism in a way in which was unthinkable 20 or 30 years ago and certainly quite unthinkable 100 years ago.  There will be ongoing debate about the role of the court in our society.  There will be superficial attempts to stereotype members of the court and I notice that you, Mr Chief Justice, have had some remarks to make about that.  I think those debates will come and go, but what will not go will be the central role and the central respect held by the High Court of Australia in the life of our nation.
 I greet this centenary with a sense of optimism, I think in the broad sweep of the last 100 years the court';s role has been profoundly beneficial and has made an enormous contribution to the strengthening of Australian democracy. I do not share the view of some that debate on certain issues has damaged or diminished the role of the court, I think quite the contrary, it';s strengthened it.
This is an opportunity which brings together rarely in our public life the executive, in the person personified by the sovereigns representative, the Governor General, the political life, as represented by myself and others, and of course the judiciary represented by Your Honours and the leaders of the benches and of the bar from all around our nation.  It';s an opportunity for all of us to reaffirm the essential covenant which underpins the Commonwealth of Australia, and that is a nation united in a commitment to the rule of law, a nation respecting the role of the courts, a nation encouraging a respect for the role of parliament and of the people who elect that parliament in the making of our laws.  We look back over the last 100 years, we thank the 44 Justices for what they have done, we congratulate the current occupants of the bench, we wish them well in the continuation of their very important and sacred trust on behalf of the people of Australia to preserve the rule of law, to continue to contribute to the remarkable success of the Australian Federal compact and in that they carry the good wishes on behalf of all of the Australian people and as Prime Minister I';m honoured to have the opportunity of conveying those good wishes on this very important occasion.
[ends]


  I move:
That this House:
(1) marks the first anniversary of the Bali tragedy by honouring those who lost their lives or were injured in the horrific terrorist attacks of 12 October 2002;
(2) offers its continuing support and compassion to all those who have been hurt by this terrible event, especially the bereaved and the injured;
(3) sends its heartfelt sympathy to the people and Government of Indonesia and the other nations whose citizens were killed or injured in the attacks;
(4) conveys its deep appreciation to those who volunteered to assist in the terrible aftermath of the attacks;
(5) expresses its gratitude to the Indonesian Government and authorities for their cooperation and support in bringing those who perpetrated this horrendous crime to justice;
(6) reiterates its condemnation of those who employ terror and indiscriminate violence against innocent people, and
(7) reaffirms Australia';s commitment to continue the fight against terrorism in our region and in the rest of the world.
Mr Speaker, 12 October 2002 is a day that will ever be remembered as a day on which evil struck with indiscriminate and indescribable savagery. Today, almost a year on from the terrible attack in Bali that claimed the lives of 88 Australian citizens and three people who had chosen to make this nation their permanent home, it is appropriate that this parliament pause for a moment and remember those who died, think about and express our compassion to those who were left bereaved and try and contemplate, as a national parliament, the significance of that event, both then and in a continuing sense, on the life of our nation.   Especially today, we think of those who lost their children—their sons or their daughters—we think of those who lost their husbands or their wives, their mothers or their fathers, their brothers or their sisters, their mates or other loved ones.
We are reminded, as we have been over the past two weeks, that this is the end of season for the football codes of our country with the exception of one. It is an occasion when so many young men and their friends go abroad to let off some steam and to celebrate the successful end in some cases, but generally the end of a football season. Forever there will be linked with the terrible deeds in Bali the loss of so many young sporting lives, people who were doing nothing more provocative and nothing worse than having a bit of fun in a holiday resort at the end of a hard season.
This has been a very hard year for those touched by the Bali tragedy. It has been a very hard year for the families of those who died. Their grief and their loss, and their sense of injustice and alienation will go on for years. It is our task and responsibility, as their fellow Australians and as a nation, to offer as much support and compassion in an ongoing sense as we can but to understand that grief, by its nature, is intensely private; no one person handles it the same as another. Each handles it in a different way; some more readily than others. It is our responsibility, as friends and fellow Australians, to do what we can to lighten their personal burden.
It has also been a hard year for the people of Bali because inevitably this terrorist attack inflicted enormous economic cost on the people of that lovely island. Of all of the reactions I have had from Australians over the last year about the attack in Bali, one very deep impression that has been left with me is the fact that no malice is felt towards the lovely people of Bali. Nobody feels any hatred for the people of Bali. They all feel that the people of Bali suffered along with the rest, as they did, and that they have paid a terrible price for the terrible and foul deeds of those who were responsible for this terrible crime.
The last year has also told us something about the Australian character, something about the Australian personality. It was a terrible event and it brought forth an outpouring of national mourning and grief, the like of which I have not seen in peacetime in this country. But it also demonstrated that nothing will break the Australian spirit. It demonstrated that we are a remarkable people, that we are tough and durable and resilient—indeed, I have said on many occasions, as tough as tungsten. But we are also a warm and embracing people, and the compassion that we displayed towards our fellow Australians, the instantaneous marshalling of all of the efforts of the agencies of this country that were required to bring the horribly injured out of Bali and back to Australia, was quite astonishing. We saw in the days and weeks that followed, and we will see it again over the coming weekend, a great coming together of national mourning and grief and a common expression of outrage, but also a common expression of compassion and love towards those of our fellow countrymen and countrywomen who have lost so much.
In the last year, we have had scores of touching, tearful and very emotional human stories of tremendous courage of people like Peter Hughes, Jason McCartney and the lady, whose name escapes me, who was only released from hospital for first time three days ago, having been in burns treatment for almost a year as a result of the burns that she suffered on that night. We can reflect with grief, anger, a sense of injustice and a proper sense of revulsion about what occurred, but we can also look back with a sense of pride on the resilience of the Australian nation and of the Australian character. We can thank the people of Australia for demonstrating their basic humanity. We can thank all of those who did so much. There are the men and women of the Australian Defence Force—those wonderful people who were there on the spot immediately it happened. There was the work of our consul in Bali, Ross Tysoe, who carried the immediate administrative load. There was the work of course of those who were involved in the gruesome task of identifying the victims, having to carry out their task according to the dictates of international law governing the identification of victims of mass attacks of this kind. There was the assistance they received from volunteers—Balinese schoolchildren, Mr Speaker—who made their time and effort available to help in this extraordinary endeavour.
We have present in the gallery, Mr Bambang Yudhoyono, the senior coordinating minister in the Indonesian government. On behalf of the people of Australia, I want to thank the response of the Indonesian government to this particular tragedy. The Indonesian government responded immediately. There was the work of the Indonesian police and the work of the Indonesian military. There was the willingness as a result of a meeting which was held within two days of the tragedy between the foreign minister, the Minister for Justice and the President of Indonesia that resulted in the unprecedented formation of a joint team of investigation. I want to pay a special tribute to the Australian Federal Police for their cooperation. Their forensic skills and their assistance were made available to their counterparts in Indonesia. Without the application and the commitment of the government and the people of Indonesia, those responsible for these terrible crimes would not have been brought to justice. I want to say to the senior representative of the Indonesian government present in the chamber today how much we are in your debt, how much the Australian people, especially the relatives of those who died, appreciate the commitment, dedication and application of your police force and your military in the ongoing determination to bring these criminals and these terrorists to justice.
I also wish, in that context, to pay a particular tribute to the foreign minister and the justice minister whose early seeking of a meeting with the Indonesian government led to the formation of that joint investigation. It is impossible on an occasion like this to remember and record gratitude to all of those who played a part in responding. I want to say that those who offered immediate comfort—those chaplains and others who offered comfort—to the people who lost their loved ones deserve our special thanks. I know that the Deputy Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition who accompanied me to Bali within a few days of the attack will know how important that assistance and that provision of support and comfort was to those people.
 As we reflect on what happened and as we join as a nation, both here and in Bali on Sunday—and again on the 16th of the month in the Great Hall where a commemoration service to mark the event will be held—we have to try and assess as best we can the impact of this event, because it will not quickly recede—indeed, it will never recede—from the memory and the consciousness of the Australian people. It will become one of those sad landmark events that, as the years go by, will be remembered as representative of international evil, international terrorism and international malice. But it will also be remembered, as other days which have represented tragedy in the history of our country and our people, as a day when Australians displayed remarkable courage, remarkable strength, remarkable compassion and remarkable affection to those who have been so badly injured and so badly hurt.
I think it has brought home to us for first time in the experience of many Australians a collective sense of national grief and mourning about a particular event. We have grown used to prolonged periods of peace, in the long years of freedom from world war, and the idea that the death of people other than in accidents or in relatively small numbers in different parts of the world is something that does not affect us. To lose 88 Australian citizens and three residents in one event so close to this country did give us a jolt. It did remind us of our essential vulnerability. I did remind us that nobody anywhere in the world is beyond the reach of terrorism. Terrorism is not anything that is calculated in the sense of whom it singles out. It is random as well as being barbaric. None of us are beyond the reach of it. This country is relatively safer than others but, as I have said repeatedly and I will say again, nobody in my position can responsibly purport to guarantee that this country will not be the subject of a terrorist attack, and indeed there are parts of the world in which travel for Australians remains difficult and dangerous.
Bali brought home to us a reassuring reminder of the great duality of the Australian character. It is strong and soft; it is tough and caring, all at the same time. We are neither just direct, laconic people with no touch of warmth and softness to our character any more than we are a people who are totally preoccupied with sentimentality. We are a remarkable, impressive combination of the two. I think that, more than anything else, that came through in the aftermath of the Bali attack. To me, it is a very warming reassurance of just how fine a people the Australian nation represents.
I think Bali has brought us closer to our neighbours. It has reminded all of us that we are together in this fight against terrorism, that terrorism is the enemy of Indonesia as much as it is the enemy of Australia. Terrorism has as one of its goals the undermining of the democratic Indonesian state. Terrorism has as its goal, through intimidation, the imposition on governments of radical, bigoted and intolerant notions of governance and religious belief.
Bali has also brought home to all of us the need to re-emphasise the virtues of tolerance and harmony within our own community. I had the opportunity last Saturday morning of opening some extensions to the Islamic School of Brisbane. Sadly, just two years ago, students from that school travelling in a bus were stoned by some rather foolish and ignorant people in the aftermath of the attack on the World Trade Centre in New York. This is an occasion for me as Prime Minister to say to Australians of Islamic descent: ‘Your place, your role and your rights as Australians are as important to me as the rights, the role and the place of Australians of other religious beliefs.'; This is a country which respects people';s religious difference. We also respect those who have no religious belief. We are a nation founded on the Judaeo-Christian ethic and instructed in many of our mores and habits, properly, by the Judaeo-Christian ethic, but we are a nation which is not blind to the values and virtues of other religions and other beliefs. When I visited that school, the reading may have been from the Koran but the accents of the children were the same as those you would find at Canterbury Boys High School—if I may borrow some examples—Scotch College or indeed Perth Modern School. It was a very vivid reminder to me of just how important common citizenship of this country really is. So this is a time to emphasise the virtues of tolerance and harmony among the Australian people.
The events in Bali reminded us that the war against terrorism must go on however long that period may be. At the very least, we owe it to those who died in Bali to never desist in our attempts, along with our allies, to destroy terrorism around the world. If we do not do that, we will have failed in one of our most basic duties to those people. We are reminded not only that terrorism is barbaric and random but also that over the last six months it is the case that more Muslims have died at the hands of terrorists than have Christians or Jews. That is a reminder of how abhorrent to the Islamic faith is terrorism—as it is abhorrent to Christianity and Judaism.
To those who died, we remember them. To those who lost so much, we try as best we can, and however inadequately, to feel for them and to continue to support them. As a nation we collectively acknowledge our vulnerability, but we resolutely determine to continue the fight against terrorism and to maintain the values of this country—the values of tolerance, openness and harmony, and of welcome to those who believe in the values and aspirations of this country. We were changed by Bali. We were not weakened; indeed, we were strengthened. But we have gone through an experience that will be forever part of the national consciousness. It is appropriate as we reflect on the terrible deeds of that night that we honour those who died, we renew our friendship with the people of Indonesia, especially the people of Bali, and we continue to express our love and compassion to those who lost their loved ones.
[ends]  


  Your Excellency Mr  Bambang Yudhoyono, the co-ordinating Minister for Security Affairs, Mr and Mrs Crean, the Australian Ambassador Mr David Ritchie, leaders of the Indonesian military and police, Commissioner Mick Keelty, the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a very important and very special part of this weekend commemoration of the tragic events of the 12th of October last year.  It provides us with an opportunity as a nation to especially honour through our awards structure people who made an amazing contribution and the contribution above the normal call of duty, not only in caring for the victims of the attack but also importantly in tracking down those responsible for this outrage which claimed so many lives, not only of Australians but of people from many countries.
In particular tonight we're going to honour three very senior Indonesian police officers whose skilled professionalism and expertise and dedication and willingness to co-operate at all times with the Australian Federal Police has resulted in the apprehension and now the sentencing of a significant number of people who were involved in this crime.  And can I say on behalf of the Australian people, and I know I speak for those who lost loved ones in that attack, that their sense of justice has been met by what the Indonesian police have been able to do.  And I would like in the presence of both the leader of the Indonesian police and the Australian Federal Police, in the presence of both of them to say how important has been the co-operation between the police forces of our two nations.  In the circumstances in which we now live and find ourselves co-operating between the police forces of our two nations is absolutely crucial and the way in which that has effectively occurred has been very, I think, heart warming to all of us who want to see this terrible tragedy produce the result that Australia and Indonesia come even closer together.  Out of the horror of it, if we can build an ever closer relationship than that will be of enormous benefit.
We also want to honour six locally engaged staff at the Australian consulate because the Australian consulate here in Bali bore the full brunt of the immediate response and the manner in which locally engaged staff joined that effort was just so impressive and I know that all of the consulate people and the Embassy people from Australia and I'm delighted to acknowledge the presence of Ian Kemis and Ric Smith who's now the Secretary of the Australian Defence Department and of course he was the Australian Ambassador in Jakarta at the time of the attack.
  Back in Australia the Governor General will announce the full list of Australians as well as some other foreign honorary recipients on the 17th of October.  And also tonight, not ever of course to forget the ANZAC connection, we're going to pay tribute to a very special woman from New Zealand who worked tirelessly in providing medical assistance to the first casualties at the Bali International Medical Centre and her skill and dedication saved many many lives and we are especially grateful for her contribution.
I just finally want to say to all of those who will receive awards tonight and many many more people from Bali and from Indonesia, thank you from the bottom of 19.5 million Australian hearts for all that you did to help the victims of this terrible attack and we will never forget it, the Australian people always remember people who worked beside them and helped them when they need help, they have very long and affectionate memories of that kind of friendship and that kind of contribution and tonight is a wonderful opportunity to honour those people.
Thank you.
[ends]   


  Well ladies and gentlemen it's been quite a momentous weekend in Australian sport, Matthew Hayden gets the highest test score in 126 years of Australian test cricket, the Wallabies win last night, and the Batesman's Bay Seahawks win this afternoon.
  I think it is a wonderful example of Australian exuberance, Australian love of sport, Australian mateship and the team spirit of our country that our indigenous national code flourishes here and it's been a great tribute to those who've organised it and tremendous tribute to those who played in these very challenging climactic conditions for any kind of football and I just want to say it's a great delight for Janette and I to be here and I know I speak for Simon and Carole Crean in saying that all of us understand the importance of gatherings like this in the wake of what has happened here and it's a demonstration to the world, it's a demonstration to our own people in Australia and it's a demonstration of friendship to the people of Bali and to the people of Indonesia.
  I just want to say to all the blokes who played good on you, you've really done our country proud.
[ends]  


  As we gather in these wonderful surroundings to mark that terrible event a year ago that inflicted such pain and suffering on people from many countries, our very first thoughts go to those who lost their loved ones on the 12th of October last year.  Yours is a loss that can never be recovered, but it is a loss with the passage of time and the support and the love of your fellow countrymen and women can be made perhaps a little easier to bear.
  As we look back over the last year, I think speaking as the Prime Minister of Australia, and I know that there are families of many countries here, we have learnt something about ourselves as people.  We have been reminded of some of the strengths that we have always had, but we';ve always been reminded of that wonderful duality of the Australian character and the Australian personality.  We have been reminded that we are a people who are both strong and soft.  We are a people who are both tough and caring and over the last year we have seen a national outpouring of support and grief to those who lost so much, the like of which most of us have not previously experienced.
  We';ve also learnt that we in this part of the world must make the common cause to fight the scourge of terrorism.  The events of the last year brought the people of Australia and the people of Indonesia closer together.  And I want on behalf of all of the Australians present to express my gratitude to the leaders and the people of Indonesia for the courtesies that they have extended not only in relation to today but for generally over the last the year.  We';ve also learnt to control our anger and direct it towards identifying and punishing and bringing to justice those who perpetrated this terrible deed.  And in all the time that has gone by we have  retained a great passion and a great affection for the lovely people of Bali who have suffered so much.
  And so my fellow Australians and those from many other nations who gather here today to mark the first anniversary of the attack on the 12th of October last year, can I say again to those who lost their loved ones, as I did a year ago, that there were 19 and a half million Australian hearts that had, in every one of those hearts a corner of affection and support for those who lost so much.  We haven';t forgotten you, we never will.  Australians will never forget the 12th of October 2003, but it has taught us a number of things about ourselves, it';s taught us about our strength and it';s taught us about the need to cooperate with others in the ongoing fight against the terrible deeds and the terrible hatreds that caused so much pain and so much misery a year ago today.
[ends]  


  Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson, Simon Crean the Leader of the Opposition, Neil Andrew the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Paul Calvert the President of the Senate, ladies and gentlemen.
As part of the commemoration of the first anniversary of the attack in Bali on the 12th of October last year, the Government felt it would be appropriate, as well as the observances that were held in Bali last weekend, to have a simple but we hope very meaningful memorial here in the national capital.  And we have decided on a small memorial plaque which simply records the names of the 91 Australian citizens and residents who died on the 12th of October 2002.
  We';ve chosen a part of the parliamentary precinct immediately adjacent to the House of Representatives, which symbolises in our own particular Australian way the centre of our national political life, and through this location and placement we hope as a nation in a symbolic way to honour those who died in these tragic circumstances.  But it is also by its very character a quiet secluded spot and it will provide an opportunity in the years ahead for people who visit this national capital, who may have lost loved ones, to quietly sit and reflect and remember in whatever way they choose or for other citizens of our country or indeed visitors from overseas, to read the names and to think of the terrible impact of this event on Australian life.
Ladies and gentlemen, I';m glad that so many family members and survivors were able to come to this simple ceremony this morning as a prelude to the memorial service in the Great Hall.  This will be an everlasting memorial in the centre of the national capital to those 91 Australian residents and citizens who died.  We will always remember them.  Australians who visit this capital will have an opportunity of particularly remembering them.
  What I intend to do now with my wife Janette is to lay a wreath on the memorial.  Then wreaths will be laid by Simon Crean and Mrs Crean, by the Speaker and the President.  And then after that I would invite all of you at your leisure, consistent with the fact that we have got to be inside in the not too distant future, to have a look at it and to contemplate in whatever way you choose.  But I hope this will be in the years ahead of some comfort to those who lost so much and a reminder that they will never be forgotten and will always have a place at the centre of the heart of the nation.  Thank you.
[ends]  


Last weekend in Bali in different ways and here all over Australia we marked the first anniversary of that terrible attack on the 12th of October 2002.  And today we come to our national capital, here in the national Parliament which embodies more than any other building the democratic way of our life of our nation and is a reminder of those values that unite Australians, those values of liberty and freedom and tolerance.
No words come any more to properly describe and express our sadness and our loss.  We have honoured our dead, we have looked upon their smiling faces, we have spoken their names.  But by this service today I hope we may seal forever in this national Parliament their place in the heart of the nation - they will never be forgotten.
Bali is now forever part of the Australian story.  It has become one of those places that have taught us hard and bitter lessons about the world in which we live.  But it has also told us again of that wonderful duality of the Australian character and personality, tough but caring, strong but compassionate.
  To the families and the survivors gathered here today can I simply express to all of you my admiration for your courage and your resilience over the past year.  It has been a tragic and difficult year for you.  You've had to rebuild your lives and re-imagine your futures.  Each has done it in a different way, some have drawn great strength from their faith, some have drawn strength from their family and their friends and their communities, some have drawn strength, many have, from a combination of all.  I think, for example, of that special bond between football clubs, Kingsley, Coogee, Forbes, Sturt and South Port.  A bond that crosses not only the football codes but also our vast continent.
Today is also an occasion to honour the wonderful people of Bali.  In the year that has gone by I've heard nothing but praise and love spoken of those people, and sorrow expressed about the fate that has befallen them.  It's also a time to honour those who responded on the 12th of October, the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, our consular services, and all the other wonderful volunteers that embody so much of the great Australian spirit.  And I know that I speak on behalf of all of the families here today in expressing very special thanks to the wonderful staff of Centrelink that have provided such magnificent support to them over the last year.  To all of those volunteers and the medical services in particular I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.  You held your nerve in dreadful circumstances and you got the job done.
But today is also an occasion to declare again our united abhorrence of terrorism.  To say that the Australian people will never be cowed, will never be weakened, will never be intimidated by those who despise us not because of what we have done, but because of who we are.  Threats of terrorism will never diminish the Australian character, they will never take away the values that unite Australians, they will never lead us into bigotry or intolerance, rather they will reinforce our commitment to those things that we cherish as part of the special Australian way of life.  Let us also remember that terrorism is the enemy of all faiths and all religions, it is as obscene in the eyes of a devout Muslim as it is in the eyes of a devout Christian, a devout Hindu or a devout Jew.
 Over the past year I have learnt a lot about what it is to be Australian.  Perhaps we were more vulnerable than we imagined, but certainly we were stronger than we thought.  I have seen people who describe themselves as ordinary behave with extraordinary courage and resilience and stamina and I am in awe of the strength of the Australian character. Over that time I've never been prouder or more humbled to serve this nation and its people.
  May all of those who died in Bali forever rest in peace.
[ends]  


Mr Speaker and Mr President of the Senate, today we welcome a man, we honour an office, we recommit to an alliance and we declare that, above all of those things, common values between nations unite nations and peoples more than individuals or institutions. The things that unite the Australian and American people are shared values: the belief that the individual is more important than the state, that strong families are a nation's greatest asset, that competitive free enterprise is the ultimate foundation of national wealth, and that the worth of a person is determined by that person's character and hard work, not by their religion or race or colour or creed or social background.
Our two nations-that is, the United States and Australia-have fought in defence of those values, beginning appropriately enough on 4 July 1918 in the Battle of Hamel, when on America's national day Australians and Americans first fought together but, I might note, under the command of an Australian, Sir John Monash. On subsequent occasions we have also fought in defence of our common values. I know that I speak for every Australian at this gathering today in saying that we will never forget the vital help extended to us in World War II in the Battle of the Coral Sea and on other occasions. That United States intervention stood between us and potential military conquest. It is something that the Australian people, whatever their different views may be on other issues, will never forget.
The President of the United States and I first met face-to-face on 10 September 2001. As we celebrated at the naval dockyard in Washington the shared partnership of the ANZUS alliance neither of us knew what lay ahead. The next day the world did change, and we saw arising out of those events the character and the strength and the leadership of the man we welcome today. George Bush, the 43rd President of the United States, rallied his own people and the people of the world in the fight against terrorism. He reminded us then, as we should be reminded today, that terrorists oppose nations such as the United States and Australia not because of what we have done but because of who we are and because of the values that we hold in common, and that terrorism-and we should remind ourselves of this again and again-is as much the enemy of Islam as it is the enemy of Judaism or Christianity.
This is a robust parliament. It has seen debates and divisions of view on issues. We had a divided view in this nation on the question of our participation in Iraq. Let me say on behalf of the government that we believe the right decision was taken; we believe Australia was right to join the United States. And I know that all Australians believe that the people of Iraq are better off without that loathsome dictator, Saddam Hussein.
I have spoken briefly of the past and the present, but we share an even greater future. The significance of America to Australia will grow as the years go by; it will not diminish. That is one of the driving forces behind our commitment to a free trade agreement. The contribution of the United States to regional stability and the partnership it will forge with our other friends in the region such as China and Japan will be increasingly important to our nation. For those and many other reasons-as a friend, as an individual and, very importantly, as a standard-bearer for the values that we hold in common-I have great pleasure, Mr Speaker and Mr President of the Senate, on behalf of the government, in welcoming George Bush, the 43rd President of the United States of America.
[ends]  


PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen.  This news conference will be by way of consecutive translation.  I will make a short opening statement, the President will make a short opening statement and then they'll be two questions.  Two from the Chinese media and then two from the Australian media.
The agreements which have just been signed demonstrate very clearly the breadth and the depth of the relationship between Australia and China.
I welcome very much again the historic nature of the President's visit to our country, the fact that he addressed our national Parliament and the fact that we have been able to witness the signing of so many agreements which further reinforce an already close relationship.
The talks we have just completed, one on one discussions between the President and myself, followed by discussions between senior ministers covered all the major aspects of our relationship and I can say very confidently that it is a strong relationship built on mutual respect for each other's traditions, a shared belief in working together in our region to promote stability and the peaceful resolution of difficult issues and a determination to build an even stronger trade and economic association.
When I became Prime Minister of Australia in March of 1996, one of the most important foreign policy goals I set myself was the development of a very strong and well based relationship with China which would grow to the mutual benefits of both of our nations as the years went by.  And whilst I would be the first to acknowledge that more work is always necessary, new initiatives must always be undertaken, I can say that we have made very solid progress indeed towards achieving that goal.
And finally, can I say in these opening remarks that we in Australia are very touched that the President should had chosen to visit our country so early in his term of office.  That of itself speaks volumes in our view for the esteem in which he holds the relationship between our two societies.
PRESIDENT HU:
Ladies and gentlemen, friends.  It was my great pleasure today to have this opportunity of meeting with friends with the press.
On my state visit in this country upon invitation I was able to enjoy a warm welcome and gracious hospitality from the Government and people of Australia.  So here I would like to take this occasion to express my most sincere thanks to the Australian Government and to people for that and I also wanted to take this opportunity to convey the best wishes of the Chinese people towards the people of Australia.
Just now I had in-depth exchange of views with the Prime Minister about China/Australia bilateral relations and regional and international questions of shared interests.  We reached broad mutual understanding about furthering the development of our all round co-operation.  The talks have been positive and productive.
We agreed that we need to maintain the momentum of the exchange of high level visits between the two countries and to build upon the existing mechanisms for bilateral dialogues and consultations so as to achieve greater political mutual trust and expanded common interests.
Both countries expressed their commitment to further developing the economic co-operation and trade between the two countries, in particular we would want to forge a long term and a stable co-operation partnership in areas of energy and resources development.
I had the pleasure of witnesses the signing of our trade and economic framework and a series of other co-operation documents between our two countries.  I think the signing of these documents has served to show that while continuing to pursue economic co-operation and trade we also need to expand our relations to diverse areas such as science and technology, education and culture, sanitary measures and the quarantine and defence areas etc.
We have also agreed to work to further substantiate our bilateral relations in line with the principles of mutual respect, equality, mutual benefit, seeking common ground while putting aside differences and common development and work together for healthy and stable development of China/Australia relations.
We have also expressed our shared commitment to stepping up our mutual consultations and co-operation in international affairs.  Over all I believe that my visit has achieved its purposes of furthering friendships, expanding common group, strengthening co-operation and seeking common prosperity.  I trust that with shared efforts of the two countries the China/Australia relationship of all round co-operation will see new progress.
As so now the Prime Minister and I will be happy to take up questions from two Chinese journalists and two Australian journalists.  I would like to invite the Prime Minister to speak first.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
I think it's China to Howard first.
JOURNALIST:
I represent the Xinhua news agency of China.  It's a simple question, recently China has successfully launched a manned spacecraft.  I want to know what is your comment on it?   Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Well, I think it's a remarkable tribute to China, a remarkable tribute to the sophistication of Chinese technology.  China becomes only the third country in history to do this and I am full of praise to the President and I know he will convey that praise to those responsible for such a remarkable achievement.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Mr Riley.
JOURNALIST:
Mr President, Mark Riley, the Sydney Morning Herald newspaper.  In your address to the Parliament today, you said you would like to see Australia take a constructive role in effecting the peaceful reunification of Taiwan with China.  What is it exactly you would like to see Australia do in that regard, and sir for that reunification to be effected, wouldn't that require first you to agree to release the Communist Party's monopoly grip on political power in Beijing to allow more representational democratic processes?
PRESIDENT HU:
The Taiwan question is one that has a direct bearing on the sovereignty, territorial integrity and to the national pride of the 1.3 billion Chinese people.  To resolve the Taiwan question and achieve the complete reunification of China is the common aspiration of the entire Chinese people, including our compatriots in Taiwan.  Our position on the question of Taiwan is peaceful reunification and one country, two systems.  We will exert our utmost to maintain peace in the Taiwan Strait and we will exert our utmost to strive for a peaceful resolution of the Taiwan question.  But we can never allow Taiwan to be independent because the Taiwan independence movement is a threat to the peace in the Taiwan Strait and to the reunification cause of the motherland, because such independence would never be accepted by any sovereign country or by the people of any sovereign country.  I believe that by adhering to the One China policy for a very long time now, Australia is in fact giving China valuable support in our effort to achieve national reunification.  We also express the hope to the Australian side that they will maintain high vigilance against the [inaudible] and the attempts by the Taiwan authorities to undermine peace in the Taiwan Strait and to undermine cross strait relations.  Thank you.
JOURNALIST:
I'm with the National People's Radio of China.  I have two questions for President Hu. This is your second time in Australia after 17 years.  What impressed you most on your first visit, and what impressed you most on this trip?  And secondly, we know you visited the Olympic Park in Sydney.  I would like to know what cooperation Beijing is planning with Australia to pursue the Olympic Games?
PRESIDENT HU:
To answer your question, I visited Australia back in 1986 and I was deeply impressed by the vast country Australia is and richly endowed resources, a highly developed economy and the fact that Australia has so many eminent people.  On that visit, I deeply felt that the prospects for China/Australia cooperation would be very broad.  After 17 years, I have come back to this country and in the past couple days I've stayed here, I saw first hand the new achievements the Australian people have made in the development of their nation.  I also felt on this trip that in the past ten years and more through the common efforts of our two countries, China/Australia relations have made much progress.  But at the same time, I believe that even more expensive areas are there for further economic cooperation and trade and exchanges in many other aspects.  I'm ready to work with the leaders of Australia so that we can jointly work for even greater success in our overall cooperation.  About the Olympics, first of I all I need to thank my host for supporting Beijing's bid for the 2008 games.  The preparations for a 2008 games in Beijing have now been in full swing.  Yesterday, I made a visit to the Olympic Park in Sydney.  I do feel that Australia has accumulated much useful experience through hosting the 2000 games, we need to learn from and draw upon such experience.  We also welcome the active participation by various Australian entities, in particular the Australian enterprises in the preparation process for the 2008 games.  Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Mr McMurtrie.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, what's your response to the President's suggestion that Australia should exercise high vigilance and its endeavours in the Taiwan Straits to protect peace?  And also, Mr President, we saw a massive gas deal signed today - the first stage of a project that could be worth up to $30 billion.  How much business are you prepared to send Australia's way and how committed are you personally to reaching a free trade deal, when might it be achieved?
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
On the first question which is directed to me.  We have a one China policy, we've had it for a long time.  I reaffirmed that today in my discussions with the President.  Against that background we would want to see a spirit of calm and peaceful dialogue pervade the whole area and that applies to the attitude of China, the attitude of Taiwan, the attitude of the United States.  I am very confident that with that approach this matter can over time be resolved in a commonsense and peaceful fashion.
 PRESIDENT HU:
About the question you raised, China and Australia have already signed a contract for the provision of LNG to Guangdong.  So one of the documents signed just now was about the participation by Chinese companies in the development of oil in the north west shelf.  I'm confident that this will even further broaden our prospect for energy and mineral resources cooperation in the future.  China has now become a member of the WTO and we are part of APEC.  We follow WTO rules and we live by our WTO commitments.  We will actively promote trade liberalisation and facilitation.  Thank you.
[ends]


Mr Speaker, Mr Senate President.  On behalf of the Government, and I know on behalf of all members, I extend to His Excellency, Hu Jintao, the President of the People's Republic of China, a very warm welcome to our national Parliament.  And I extend that welcome to his wife, Madame Liu, and to all the other members of the Chinese party.
It would be no exaggeration, Mr Speaker, to say that ten years ago an event such as this would have been seen as not only unlikely, but indeed highly improbable.  Equally, I would not have thought ten years ago that as Prime Minister of Australia I would have, as I did in 2002, as the leader of a western centre-right political party, to address the cadres of the central school of the Chinese communist party in Beijing.
 I think that says a number of things, Mr Speaker.  It says something of the way in which our world has changed.  It says something of the commonsense character of the relationship between Australia and China because that event in 2002 and this event today both occur without either of our two nations in any way abandoning their distinctive but different traditions.  I would characterise the relationship between Australia and China as being both mature and practical.  And also a relationship that is intensely built on growing people to people links.  We are different societies, we have different cultures, we have different traditions and we have different histories and no purpose is served in pretending otherwise.  But that has never blinded, might I say, successive Australian governments of both political persuasions from an endeavour to draw from the relationship those things that can be of great and enduring mutual benefit to our society.
  So in those senses, it is a very mature and practical relationship.  The people to people links are immensely important.  If I can describe it this way - the most widely spoken foreign language in Australia today is a dialect of Chinese.  Three per cent of the Australian population, no fewer than 550,000 claim Chinese ancestry.  Speaking personally, 13.3 per cent of my own electorate of Bennelong in Sydney claims Chinese ancestry.  There are 34,000 students, there are 34,000 students from China studying in Australia.
  Mr Speaker, China is now Australia's third largest trading partner.  Last year, the signing of the natural gas contract for the supply over 25 years of natural gas to the Guangdong province was a veritable landmark in the evolution of the economic relationship between our two nations.  Two way trade between Australia and China has trebled since 1996.  Let me take the opportunity today, Mr Speaker, of recording on behalf of the Government our appreciation for the constructive and practical and wholly positive approach that China has taken in helping in partnership with others to resolve the challenging issue of North Korea's nuclear capabilities.  No nation has more influence on North Korea than China and the resolution of that issue, which must necessarily involve other nations as well is very important to the stability and the peace of our region.
  Finally, Mr Speaker, it is self-evident that the relationship between Australia, the United States and China respectively on a two-way basis our relationship with the United States and then again our relationship with China will be extremely important to the stability of our region.  Our aim is to see calm and constructive dialogue between the United States and China on those issues which might potentially cause tension between them and it will be Australia's aim as a nation which has different, but nonetheless close relationships with both of those nations to promote that constructive and calm dialogue.
Mr President, you and your wife are greatly welcomed to our country.  We thank you for coming, we wish you well, we know that you will receive a warm reception from many people in this country who will demonstrate their affection for the important relations between our two peoples.
[ends]  


  Thank you High Commissioner.  To the many distinguished guests, welcome, but may I particularly acknowledge the presence of the Leader of the Australian Opposition Simon Crean, my ministerial colleagues, Mr Geoffrey Hoon the British Defence Secretary, and my good friend and former Prime Minister of Great Britain John Major.  I';m very honoured at the gathering and it is a wonderful opportunity to reflect for a few moments on the subject of Australians at war.
 In recent weeks, we have welcomed to Australia both the President of the United States and the President of China, both symbolising particular aspects of our relationship – in the case of President Bush, the deep and longstanding friendship across the Pacific with the United States; and with China, our manifest economic and political involvement in Asia.  But these associations never have and never will fully express Australia';s place in the world. The modern, independent, economically strong and self confident Australia does not readily succumb to pigeon holing by association.  I said recently that Australia will never define its place in any part of the world other than to behave as we are and that is as Australians.
  We have links with many but there is no nation in the world with which we share as much history, language, culture, patterns of humour and even sporting rivalry as Great Britain.  To Australians, the British heritage is immense.  Britain';s most enduring gift to Australia has been the institutions which have tooled our natural instinct for democracy – parliamentary government, the rule of law and the tradition of a free and, uncomfortably on occasion, sceptical media.
  Tomorrow, with Her Majesty the Queen and the British Prime Minister Tony Blair, I will unveil a memorial to those Australians who served with their British allies during the two great global conflicts of the last century.  And as we gather on the eve of that day 85 years ago, when finally and mercifully the guns fell silent on the Western front, our two nations, above all else, honour those who have given their lives in defence of the values and our way of life that we hold so dear.
  And at this time we should recall those moments when the very survival of liberty seemed in peril.  The ebb of history can never take from Great Britain that for more than 12 desperate months she stood virtually alone against the spreading darkness of Nazism, so that to use Winston Churchill';s evocative phrase “the long night of barbarism” would not descend upon even more nations.  And we Australians will always know that it is forever part of our story that we contributed willingly, importantly and fully to the final victory, and that we did so in virtually every theatre of conflict – in Asia and the Pacific, in North Africa, in the Middle East and in Europe, including in the skies over Britain where some of our sons were numbered amongst the few to whom so much was owed by so many.
Australians are not by nature a war-like people.  There is no tradition of conquest or imperial ambition.  We';ve had no history of bloody civil war, of winning our independence through armed insurrection or fortifying our borders against some constant military threat.  Indeed, there';s something revealing in the fact that only two statues of individuals are placed outside our national War Memorial in Canberra.  The Memorial contains relics, artwork and historical records that tell the story of Lone Pine, Beersheba, Villers Bretonneux, Kokoda and Tobruk, Kapiong, Long Tan and the hundreds of other places where Australians have performed some of the finest feats of arms in the history of warfare.  And yet it';s Simpson with his donkey who brought wounded from the firing lines at Gallipoli and Sir Edward ‘Weary'; Dunlop, the doctor whose dedication saved countless lives during a long and cruel captivity along the Burma-Thailand railway – both unarmed and unlikely warriors - that stand in bronze as symbols of the Australian military tradition and character.
Our first Victoria Cross – the first of 96 to be awarded to Australians – wasn';t earned in the dramatic capture of an enemy machine gun post, but by a man carrying a wounded comrade out of heavy fire to safety.  And Gallipoli itself, the ultimate symbol of our military tradition, was not a glorious victory but a bloody stalemate and then a forced withdrawal.
Despite Australia';s significant achievements on battlefields throughout the world, despite whole generations of our countrymen returning to us as hardened soldiers, a culture of militarism has never taken root.  What is firmly entrenched within Australian society, as within British society, is a deeply held belief in democratic principles, in the concept of personal freedom and most importantly, an understanding that in certain circumstances we have a responsibility to defend those values.   While acutely sensitive to our own neighbourhood, we have never taken an insular or exclusively regional view of our alliances and responses, but a perspective that is both global and values based.
If I might slightly refashion a well-known phrase of John Kennedy';s, Australians have never asked others to do for us what we have been unwilling to do for ourselves.  Most recently, the Australian Government demonstrated that approach in making our decisions on East Timor, Afghanistan and Iraq.
As part of the then British Empire, Australia automatically entered the 1914-1918 war with Britain';s declaration on the 4th of August 1914.  By November 1914 Australia had secured her first battle victory with the sinking of the Emden by HMAS Sydney near the Cocos Keeling Islands.  Australia entered the Great War so enthusiastically both because we believed our security and basic values to be under threat from a militaristic Imperial Germany, but also and importantly out of sheer loyalty to what was at that time seen as the Mother Country.  Australians of the day readily saw themselves as Australians and as British, indeed as Australian-Britons.
Many of those who served wearing the rising sun badge of the Australian Imperial Force were quite literally sons of Britain.  Twenty-two per cent of recruits who embarked for overseas were not native Australian born but drawn from the many hundreds of thousands of Anglo-Celtic immigrants who had flocked to our shores in the first decade of the new century.  Whatever their origin, Australians in 1914 felt themselves intrinsically a part of the then British Empire.  They were bound by emotion, economic links, through cultural and blood ties, and by an understanding that Australia';s security interests remained absolutely dependent on British supremacy, particularly on the seas.
A daily newspaper of August 1914 articulated community views when it stated, and I quote, ‘The British fleet is our all in all.  Its destruction means Australia';s destruction, the ruin of our trade and institutions, and the surrender of our liberties.  The British Empire is our family circle, and we cannot live outside it';.
Andrew Fisher, Australia';s Prime Minister in August 1914 famously declared that Australia was with Britain “to the last man and the last shilling”.
Participation in World War I was to both accelerate and sharpen Australia';s sense of separate national identity.  The landing on Gallipoli along with our New Zealand comrades, which gave birth to the Anzac spirit, became in the fullness of time the most defining event in our history.  Anzac Day remains more evocative of the Australian spirit than any other day in our calendar.  The emotional pull of Anzac has grown rather than diminished, particularly amongst the young.
When Alec Campbell – the last known survivor of the Gallipoli campaign anywhere in the world – died in Hobart in 2002, the outpouring of national sentiment was extraordinary.  We knew that we were sharing a moment in our history.  Such is the ownership of the Anzac legend now, instinctively felt by young Australians, that in their thousands they flock to Anzac Cove on the 25th of April seemingly as some patriotic rite of passage.  One of them to do so on Anzac Day 2003 was Alec Campbell';s great grand daughter, 16 year old Angie Claridge.
Australia seamlessly entered World War I as part of the British Empire.  By November 1918 Australians might still see themselves as British but the furnace of war had decisively tilted the balance.  Pride in battlefield successes, the magnitude of our losses, sometime dismay at British High Command decision making and some starkly different attitudes held by Australians and their British cousins in respect to class and discipline, helped entrench a feeling of separate identity.  That sense of separate identity led Billy Hughes to insist that Australia';s interests be represented independently from those of Great Britain at the Paris Peace Conference.  “I speak for 60,000 Australian war dead,” he declared.
 And we had earned that separate voice.  Australia in 1914 had a population of only four and a half million yet enlistment in the First AIF totalled over 416,000 men, 330,000 of them would embark for service abroad, of whom a staggering 60,000 would never see Australia again.  152,000 more would be wounded.  All in all, nearly 65 per cent of those who boarded transports for Gallipoli, the desert campaign or the Western Front would become casualties.  These are numbers difficult for modern minds to comprehend from the relative safety of life in this new century.  Set against our nation';s current population, it would be the equivalent of losing nearly 300,000 young men in just 4 years and seeing another three quarters of a million of them returned to us maimed and scarred.
Significantly, Australia remained entirely dependent on voluntary enlistment throughout the Great War.  Two referenda on conscription in 1916 and 1917 lost to the NO vote.  They caused great division within our community and were sadly infected by bitter sectarian debates.  Yet even in 1939 when a separate sense of Australian nationalism was far more robust, Robert Menzies was able to declare it his ‘melancholy duty'; to inform his fellow Australians that Great Britain had declared war upon Germany and that ‘as a result, Australia is also at war';.  In doing so, he was expressing the continuing fundamental importance of our links with the United Kingdom.
 World War II saw Australia directly threatened after the fall of Singapore.  The decisive involvement of the United States in our defence, during the battle of the Coral Sea and elsewhere, laid the basis of what became the Anzus Treaty which for more than 50 years has been the cornerstone of our security.  Over 30,000 Australians would die in the six years of war against Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan - many of whom will be honoured tomorrow, having served alongside British forces in North Africa and the Middle East, in Greece and Crete, in the Pacific, on the seas and in swirling air battles over Britain herself and continental Europe.
The two world wars exacted a terrible price from us – the full magnitude of that lost potential, of those unlived lives, can never be measured.  And yet, some of the most admirable aspects of Australia';s national character were, if not conceived, then more fully ingrained within us by the experience of those conflicts.  None more so than the concept of mateship - regarded as a particularly Australian virtue – a concept that encompasses unconditional acceptance, mutual and self respect, sharing whatever is available no matter how meagre, a concept based on trust and selflessness and absolute interdependence.  In combat, men did live and die by its creed.  ‘Sticking by your mates'; was sometimes the only reason for continuing when all else seemed hopeless.
 I was moved by an account written by Hugh Clarke, who, like thousands of other Australians and British servicemen, endured years of senseless cruelty as a prisoner of the Japanese after the fall of Singapore.  He recorded that he couldn';t remember a single Australian dying alone.  There was always someone being there to look after him in some way.  That expressed our mateship.
Contemporary Australia takes great pride in its egalitarian attitudes.  Mud and fear and enemy fire are no respecters of class, rank or parentage and from both wars, our returned men and women brought back to Australia a renewed conviction that an individual';s worth should be judged - not by those things - but by their own talent, courage and personal virtue.
  Two examples I quote.  Harry Murray enlisted in 1914, a little older than many recruits, he was nearly 30.  Prior to the war, he lived a simple life in rural Western Australia working as a ‘timbergetter';, to use the endearing expression of the day.  He landed at Gallipoli on the 25th of April as a private, a machine gunner.  Four years later, that same man returned to Australia as Lieutenant Colonel Murray, VC, DSO and bar, DCM, French Croix de Guerre and Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George.  He had commanded a Machine Gun Battalion in battle and had served as a specialist advisor to an American Corps.
Sir John Monash, Australia';s greatest General, equally defied then traditional attitudes to gain high rank.  Not even a professional soldier at the outbreak of the war – a civil engineer by profession, the son of East Prussian Jewish immigrants, he rose from Brigade command on Gallipoli to become Commander of all five Australian divisions, our air squadrons and artillery units – a force, as he proudly wrote back home, two and a half times the size of Wellington';s army at the Battle of Waterloo.  Had the war continued, many claim that his innovative tactics, planning and training techniques and remarkable record of success would have carried him far beyond even corps command.
Murray and Monash are two well known examples but the principle was repeated thousands of times as men of worth were recognised and rewarded, not on the basis of pre-defined social ranking but for their own achievements.  The self confidence of individuals and of the nation as a whole not surprisingly rose as a natural consequence of wartime success.  To illustrate - from the 27th of March 1918 when Australians first counterattacked the Germans'; last great offensive, to the end of their war seven months later, our five divisions played a sustained and crucial role.  By most accounts their battlefield successes were significantly out of proportion to their numbers.
That tradition of professionalism and achievement was carried through to the servicemen and women of the second war and remains a feature of our defence forces to this day, as recent events have proved.  One of the groups that will be honoured tomorrow are those Australian airmen who flew bombing raids over occupied Europe and Germany, suffering appalling casualty rates higher by far than in any other arm of the services.  A crew had only 40 per cent chance of surviving its tour of duty.  Despite the outstanding service by every squadron within Bomber Command, it was the RAAF';s 460 Squadron who sent more Lancasters on missions and dropped a greater tonnage of bombs than any other.  And on a personal note, there was a rear gunner with the 460 Squadron, Bryan O';Leary, whose son is my Press Secretary.
A case can be made that Australia';s post World War II economic boom and industrial expansion was based in part on the self confidence of that generation, coupled with the technical and people management skills developed in war service and importantly a determination, after all the horror and carnage, to make the most of the peace.  That peace – the peace amongst major nation states – has held for 60 years and indeed it is difficult to imagine a descent once again into global warfare.  Yet now in many ways, we';re confronted with a world made more complex by the breakdown of those traditional power balances, by asymmetrical threats, by terror perpetrated on a scale without historical precedent.  In facing such challenges, it is reassuring for Australia, to find ourselves once more in the company of old and trusted friends.  For although the character of the threat has changed from that of 1914 or 1939, the essential nature of the values that Australia and Great Britain still seek to defend has not.
The coming years will confront every society with challenges that none of us could have contemplated even three years ago.  Tonight, tomorrow';s ceremony and the Australia-United Kingdom Leadership Forum over coming days are all proof that our friendship and affinity remain deep and strong and that we are taking Dr Johnson';s advice to keep our friendships in good repair.  Australia will always play its part.  We will continue of course to determine our own future in our own independent way.  We have our own interests and our own aspirations which will continue to guide us.  But many of our values as a society are not unique to Australia alone.  In defending and promoting them, we share a common cause with others and with the United Kingdom in particular.  That is why we will be in the future, as we have attempted to be in the troubled times of the past of which I';ve spoken tonight, a staunch ally, a reliable partner and a true friend.
And may I conclude my remarks in expressing the admiration of all Australians to those wonderful men and women who represent the heroic generations that have gone before us and have given us the liberty, the peace of mind, the security and the wonderful privilege of being an Australian in the 21st century.  There are 28 representatives of that heroic, courageous generation with us.   They are very much in our thoughts and our hearts and as Prime Minister it is an immensely proud moment that I can welcome them here and to say on behalf of them that tomorrow we will honour their service, we will honour the service and the sacrifice of their mates in the best Australian tradition.
Thank you.
  [ends]


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen.
This splendid memorial is built and dedicated at a time far removed from the momentous events in human history it marks, far removed from the young lives it honours.  With each year, our living links with the two great global conflicts of the twentieth century gently fall away.  Few are left who remember that moment 85 years ago at this hour, on this day, when peace descended on a world still numbed by the magnitude of battlefield losses, and on an Australia changed forever by names such as Gallipoli, Lone Pine, Fromelles, Bullecourt and Pozieres.
So too, the march slows for the World War II generations of Australians roused to action by acts of brutality against innocent peace-loving people.  And yet there is a resonance to this memorial's message, inspiration in its example and a warning in its shadows that compels us to reach back across that void of time.  In doing so, in recognising the many thousands of Australians who served and fought and died alongside their British allies, we reaffirm the enduring hope of a world set free from hate.  In mourning our fallen, in numbers still difficult to comprehend, we also acknowledge the terrible power of those forces that would conspire against such a dream.
History's lesson is that evil will always dwell within the world - in the past represented by armies rolling across national borders, in this new century finding form in acts of indiscriminate terrorism inspired by distorted faith.  Such intent can be defeated by the willingness of decent men and women to put aside the comfort, safety and security of their own lives, to understand that militarism and totalitarianism and terror are creeping sicknesses that will inevitably spread if left unchallenged and unchecked, and by the willingness of nations to stand together in mutual defence of the common values which underpin the progression of man.
The young Australians we honour here comprehended those truths.  With personal courage, compassion and bound by an unshakeable belief in each other, they won for our nation the respect of the world and from their nation, a debt of gratitude which those who have followed them can never repay.  They are truths which have always bound together the peoples of Great Britain and Australia in deep and unique friendship.  Together we have endured great peril and confronted great menace.  History will always record that for 12 desperate months, Great Britain, with precious help from Australia and other Commonwealth allies, stood alone against the spreading darkness of Nazism.  We remained united in that struggle until final victory was won - Australian aircrews serving with great distinction beside their British comrades in perilous missions over Occupied Europe.
Whatever the future may hold for our two nations, we are tied for all time by our history, by shared language and law, but most important of all, by an enduring belief in human dignity and the democratic freedoms that should be the birthright of all.
The Australian War Memorial in London will speak of this belief.  It will join the thousands of other memorials in Australian towns and cities and settlements once called home by our soldiers, sailors, airmen and servicewomen, that are each imbued with the pride and grief of the communities they represent, each infused with the memory of service, of suffering and of sacrifice, each serving for generations to come as anchors holding them fast against the slow currents of complacency and forgotten loss, and each paying homage to those who, in the words of one of Australia's soldier-poets, lie at peace 'mingling with earth and dreams and God'.
I now have great pleasure in inviting Her Majesty to address the gathering.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Vivien, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  I particularly acknowledge the presence of the Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom Michael L'Estrange and the British High Commissioner to Australia Sir Alastair Goodlad.
  On a visit to the United Kingdom which has necessarily focussed on the history, the sentiment, the emotion and the passion of the relationship over the years in the defence of our common commitment to individual liberty and political freedom, this morning is an opportunity for me to touch upon some of the other links that are very important between Australia and the United Kingdom and in a broader context between Australia and Europe.
  The Government I lead in Australia has set itself three broad goals to benchmark achievement or lack of achievement in areas for which we're responsible.  We seek to provide our nation with both the sense of and the reality of national security, we seek to provide Australia with economic strength, and we seek as a consequence of success in those two areas, to provide social stability to the almost 20 million citizens of our country.  And it's on the second of those two areas that I want to spend a few moments this morning.
  The Australian economy is a great success story.  We have now enjoyed the longest unbroken economic boom that our country has had since the 1960s.  I would argue that it is more soundly based than the economic prosperity of the 1960s because unlike that time, it has not been protected by high tariff walls, we no longer have a fixed exchange rate, we long ago entered the era of financial deregulation, our tariff levels in just about all areas are next to negligible, and even in the areas of textile clothing and footwear and motor vehicles, they are in the process of coming down.  The economy is more open, we are more export reliant and we have been able to diversify the destination of our exports in a quite remarkable fashion.  So when you contrast the economic conditions of the 1960s, and there would be quite a number of people in this room who would recall that that was a time of very strong economic growth in Australia, but it was a period of strong economic growth built upon what proved to be somewhat insubstantial foundations.  And what we have tried to do, and let me as I always do acknowledge the contribution that the former Government made in a number of policy areas, particularly tariff reform and financial deregulation, which incidentally they did with our very strong support from Opposition, that the combination of those reform measures over the last 10 to 15 years has meant that we are a genuinely stronger, more open economy.
  We've had a very impressive record in reducing Government debt.  We now have a national debt to GDP ratio of a little under five per cent against an OECD average of about 47 per cent.  We have run a succession of budget surpluses and we have no intention of returning to a deficit financing and we have no intention of abandoning the strengths of fiscal policy.  One of the real differences in the management of economic policy in Australia over the last six or seven years has been that because we have run a very tight fiscal policy, because we have eliminated the budget deficits that were there when we were elected to office, we have been able thereby to take the load off monetary policy.  One of the great imbalances of the Australian economy for a long period of time, and particularly during the 80s and early part of the 90s, was that because we were running a weak, what I regarded as a weak fiscal policy, we had to rely far too heavily for far too long on interest rates that were far too high.  And those interest rates had a very debilitating effect, especially on small business and on our rural community.
We do have a floating exchange rate of course and we've had that since December of 1983.  Indeed the existence of a floating exchange rate was one of the reasons why Australia was able to ride out the consequences of the Asian economic downturn in 1997 and 1998.  We took a very heavy external adjustment on our exchange rate.  We were able to divert some of the exports that otherwise would have gone to the Asian Pacific region to elsewhere and surprisingly to many, including a lot of people in Australia, including I have to confess one or two people in the Government as well, we were able to ride out the adverse effects of that Asian economic downturn.
We have, as many of you will know, endeavoured to build a diverse economic relationship.  And I guess if there is one aggregate message I have tried to communicate to the British audiences I have addressed over the past few days is that the modern, self-confident, economically strong, independently minded Australia of the early part of the 21st century does not see its associations around the world in terms of choices.  We see it in aggregate terms.  We have, as everyone knows, a very close security alliance with the United States.  The ANZUS treaty remains the ultimate guarantor of Australia's security.  History reminds us that at a critical time during World War II, the intervention of the United States was decisive and any Australian who forgets that does a disservice to the history of our country and does a disservice to the generosity of the American people.  And I think that sort of observation might well be made by, if I may say so, in relation to the reaction of some people within the European Union towards the United States.  When you are the biggest bloke on the block, you inevitably attract an enormous amount of criticism, but perhaps the generosity of the contribution of that country to the defence and the liberation of many is too readily forgotten.
But not withstanding that, we have sought to build a very close association with the countries of our own region.  A couple of weeks ago, as you know, we had the great symbolic as well as in hard outcome terms, presence in Canberra of President Bush on one day and the next day President Hu Jintao of China.  And I count it as one of the real foreign policy successes of my Government over the last seven and a half years that we have built such a close relationship with the most populous country in the world whose appetite for economic growth builds almost daily, whose willingness to buy Australia's products, particularly in the resource area, is a source of very great benefit to our country.  And I think our exports to China have gone up two to three hundred per cent - I'm not quite sure of the precise figure over the last five to six years.  But having worked very hard on that relationship, and not just on China, because once again as so many of you will know, Japan still remains Australia's best individual customer, and the largest single private sector purchaser of Australian products is a Korean company.  So our links with North Asia are enormous and they remind audiences in Europe and they remind Australians that the future for our country lies not in making choices, but rather aggregating the opportunities that the world gives us.  And one of the opportunities we have is to further build our economic relationship with the United Kingdom.
This morning I do not need to enumerate the other links that we have with Great Britain, but in the economic area it does serve the debate to remind ourselves that Britain is only just pipped by the United States as the major foreign investor in Australia, that Great Britain is the second largest destination for direct foreign investment from Australia, that notwithstanding the unacceptably restrictive policies of the European Union when it comes to our exports in the agricultural area, we have been able to achieve a remarkable penetration, particularly of the British market, with one of our great export success products over the last few years, and that is Australian wine.  And just think what we could achieve if the mandarins of Brussels had a more accommodating view of the justice of our cause in that area.
But could I say ladies and gentlemen on that issue, it is important that the developed countries understand that if the breakdown at the Cancun meeting is maintained and the Doha round of World Trade Organisation negotiations turns into a total failure, that there are very serious long-term consequences.  And sooner or later, and we would argue sooner, the issue of high protective barriers and high export subsidies for agriculture, particularly given their debilitating effect on developing countries, that that issue does have to be faced.  Now that doesn't mean there can't, as the European Union will argue, as Pascal Lamy will argue very passionately on behalf of the European Union, it doesn't mean to say others shouldn't look to some of their restrictive practices.
  But if I from an Australian perspective can simply remind you that the level of subsidy to agriculture in Australia is four per cent of the annual wealth generated by that industry.  In the United States, it's 22 per cent.  The European Union figure is 35 per cent.  Now that's just a simple statement of the comparison and obviously it's something that remains on our trade agenda, but leaving for a moment that aside, if we as developed countries could reduce trade restrictions for agricultural export from developing countries, then the value of that would be many times greater than the value of the existing level of overseas aid provided by developed countries.  We frequently hear from many of the non-government organisations that what we should do is to increase the level of official development assistance to the poorer countries, and there is obviously a case for doing that, but we hear almost in the same breath a plea from some of those organisations that globalisation is an evil.  The reality is that the long-term growth of developing countries can only be delivered if they are given a share of globalisation.  Globalisation is not going to stop.  It's not going to go away.  It's a question of who is going to share in it.  And the case for opening up trade is really a case for making sure that those countries that are now locked out of the process of growth and development, are given a fairer go.
So ladies and gentlemen, I speak on behalf of the Government of a country which is, as I said, economically strong and very self-confident, but a country that also understands that it has to maintain the momentum of economic reform and economic change if we are to retain the benefits that we have achieved through that reform over the last 10 to 15 years.  The competition in the globalised economy of the 21st century is a never-ending race.  There is no finishing line.  It's really very much a question of remaining in front or at least equal with your competitors as the race goes on.  And we have sought to do that.  We have sought to do it by opening up our economy.  We have been able to sustain a much higher rate of economic growth and very low levels of inflation over the years because of the structural changes that have been made.
We believe very strongly in the World Trade Organisation process, but quite consistent with that we are willing in the Australian national interest to negotiate bilateral free trade agreements.  We signed one with Singapore some months ago and when I was in Bangkok for the APEC meeting only a few weeks ago, the Prime Minister of Thailand and I agreed on a free trade agreement between Australia and Thailand, and that agreement will be signed when the Prime Minister comes to Australia in the first half of next year.  Thailand is the fastest growing of the ASEAN economies and that particular agreement will be of very great benefit.  And as also you will know, we are negotiating with the United States for a free trade agreement.  It will be difficult and unless there is a significant contribution made on the agricultural front by the Americans, it will become very difficult.  But I continue to believe that we can achieve a positive outcome and there is a very strong political commitment from the top in the United States towards the successful conclusion of that.
But our economic relationship with the United Kingdom is not only tried and tested, but it's also very contemporary.  It's so important in a relationship between very old friends, as Britain and Australia are, not to see it in retrospective terms, not to see it just as the, in an economic sense, those long-standing patterns of investment, but to understand that in many of the high-tech areas, in many of the more contemporary areas of economic activity, the links between our two countries are growing.  It's important for us to see Britain as a valuable additional link to our relations with Europe and likewise Australia in British eyes as a link to their relations with Asia.  But I think it's also important not to push that comparison too far.  Australia has very longstanding links with a number of the countries of the European Union in our own right, just as the knowledge and understanding of many Asian countries by the United Kingdom is very extensive, and the economic and political links are very strong in their own right.
But in coming here at a time when we have had quite a focus on our relations with the United States and our relations with some of the very powerful countries of Asia, it does serve to remind our British friends and to remind the Australian public, and to remind the business communities of our two countries, that we do seek to aggregate our advantages around the world.  We do not seek to choose between different destinations for our exports.  We seek to take advantage of economic opportunity and economic advantage wherever it may arise.  And in that context I can see very great further opportunity between Australia and the United Kingdom in particular, but also Australia and the European Union in general.  And I have welcomed very much the opportunity of giving you some of my thoughts on that issue this morning.
  Thank you so much for listening.
   QUESTION &amp; ANSWER SESSION
QUESTION:
Mr Howard, thank you for those comments.  You spoke very movingly yesterday about the shared values between Australia and Britain at the dedication ceremony, and might I say by the way that every Australian in this room should make a point of visiting the Australian War Memorial at Hyde Park Corner.  It's a splendid and very moving monument.  This morning you also spoke of those shared values in relation to our economic relationship, and I very much share the views that you have given to us this morning on that.  I have concerns though that we don't necessarily share the same values with our other very large trading partner, the United States, possibly... certainly in economic terms, in terms of the World Trade Organisation for example, but possibly also in terms of American foreign policy.   And I wonder if you could perhaps talk, say something about your view of that, as to whether our relationship with Britain makes us stronger in our relationship with the United States and may help us to at least influence their values as well.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well my starting point may be a little different from yours.  I think there is a remarkable commonality in values between Australia, Britain and the United States.  Our cultures are a little more different than we sometimes admit and I think sometimes we can exaggerate the extent of the similarities between America and Australia.  Each country has its own nuances.  But as far as economics are concerned, I guess you're talking, and I may have misunderstood your question, I guess you were talking about the attitude of the United States towards restrictive trade policies and, I see you nodding your head.  I of course share the European and Asian reaction to the imposition of the steel tariffs.
 We were rather fortunate that there were some exemptions made in relation to the steel product coming out of Australia. We think there is an obligation on the United States to modernise its steel industry and many of the plants in the United States that sought the protection of that tariff are years behind the changes that have been made in places like Port Kembla and elsewhere in Australia to modernise our steel industry and we were rather aghast when we got into the detail of it at just how, primitive is the wrong word, but how lacking in progress so many of them were. But I have got to say though that the restrictive trade practices that we object to most as Australians are of course in the agricultural area and it would be hard to persuade me that the Americans are worse than the Europeans on that. I think the practices of the Europeans in that area are more restrictive and they are more damaging and they've had a more deleterious effect on Australia that the United States.
 In a sense the only country in the world that can take the Europeans on and force them to change their ways in this area is the United States. At the moment I don't see that occurring and one of the reasons I mentioned the Cancun meeting was that I am a little pessimistic about whether we are going to make progress in that area.
 I think Australia does have influence on the United States just as obviously Britain has and you should never underestimate the value of a very warm personal relationship between current leaders of countries. It does have an influence. In the longer term of course all countries look to their self-interest. My first responsibility is the Australian national interest. That normally and properly includes a stable open world trading environment and I think we have an interest as a major exporter in a more liberal trading environment. We are not big enough to run the protection thing. It's in our advantage to open it up and the stronger, the more Australia has opened up her economy the stronger we have become. But as to who is the bigger protector, I'm not sure that I would accept the view in areas that matter to us that it is the United States.
QUESTION:
We are encouraged to see Britain as part of Europe and Australia as part of the Asia Pacific, but doesn't recent events and this week in particular show that the cultural and psychological links between Britain and Australia are stronger and closer than ever?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they are. I mean I had never subscribed to this idea. We went through a period in recent years in Australia, some years ago, where it was almost as if we were being told we had to make a choice and I always regarded that as absolutely absurd and I said a few weeks ago that when I was asked about how I saw Australia's place in the world, I said that Australians would as far as I was concerned only ever deport themselves for what they were and that was Australians. We are not Asians, we are not Europeans, we are Australians and this idea that you have to sort of keep pigeon holing yourself is ludicrous and what the last few weeks, I hope in a symbolic way, have brought home to people is the truth of that proposition, that of course we have very close links with Asia. I mean it's our part of the world and I have worked very hard to build those links. But I haven't tried to build those links at the expense of links with Britain and Ireland which of course in a sentimental way are the two countries and historically the two countries that have had the biggest impact on Australia, but I mean we have very close links with nations such as Italy and Greece. We should never lose sight of the fact that about a million Australians are of Italian descent and just under that number of Greek descent.
 So this relationship with Britain and the rest of Europe is a very deep and strong one and I have never seen these things in terms of choices. I use the expression we should aggregate our advantages and our opportunities and I have found it entirely counter-productive to have seen my country go through a process of saying well in order to make yourself more welcome in one part of the world you had to be ruder to the other part of the world and you had to somehow or other cut umbilical cords and do all sorts of things. I mean that is all nonsense and nobody doubts that Australia will decide her future without reference to anybody else and I think we should get on with the business of building the links we have in all parts of the world and not naval gaze about which we should put first.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister it was pleasing during your speech that you touched on the subject of the economic tariff protections here in Europe. They remain a real barrier to Australian companies exporting in here. It is pleasing to see that the Australian Government is taking a number of initiatives to try and break that system down. However, the European Union is also characterised today as having a very heavy bureaucracy on business and also an enormous amount of regulation. In fact the regulations here seem to be increasing almost week by week and it seems that as tariff barriers could come down the regulatory barriers are increasing and I'm interested to know whether your government is taking some initiatives to influence the EU to reduce these burdens on business?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I'd have to say that it is an inevitable consequence of creating a supra-national bureaucracy that you get this occurring because bureaucracies of that kind have to do something to justify their existence and they generate new rules. I mean I think it is harmful but I mean it effects Australia in an external way but this obviously, and let me make it very clear, the question of Britain's association with Europe is a matter for Britain and I don't come here for a moment giving any advice about that or expressing any view. That is a matter for domestic debate in the United Kingdom and I follow that domestic debate with great interest but as somebody who is not part of it but merely an observer. But it does have an effect in all sorts of areas and I mentioned the wine industry earlier. We have had some unwelcome evidence already of the determination of the European Union to use all sorts of requirements strictly unrelated to the product to influence patterns of trade and there are suggestions in the wings that other regulations might be invoked.
 Well that will cause a very strong reaction from a major wine exporter such as Australia, but I think it's a function of supra-national organisations and bureaucracies and it's a challenge that they will face particularly with the expansion of the European Union. But as I said on several occasions that is really a matter for the participant countries. We will complain and do what we can where it affects us but not being a member of the European Union we don't have a capacity to alter it but we watch it with interest and we will just see what develops. But it is a law of political behaviour. You give regulation-making authority to a supra-national bureaucracy which is effectively accountable to nobody you get a lot of extra regulations.
  [ends]  


  Thank you very much Tony.  I thought those cauliflower ears were the cumulative result of your attempt to get on the Wallaby bench for Saturday night.  But to my colleague Tony Abbott the Minister for Health and Ageing, Chris Pearce, Fran Bailey, Tony Smith and Jason Wood, ladies and gentlemen.
Today is a very important day in the further evolution and strengthening of health policy for the benefit of all Australians.  MedicarePlus, through the new safety net, will give all Australians, and not just those on concession cards, peace of mind against the potentially crippling costs of major illnesses to themselves or their families.  MedicarePlus tackles head on the critical shortage of doctors and other health professionals in certain parts of Australia, which is the major reason why bulk billing rates are so low in particular areas of our nation.   And MedicarePlus also provides a big new incentive for doctors to bulk bill those who need that service most.
  This is the 20th year of the introduction of the Medicare system and the announcements that I make today represent a major strengthening of the Medicare system, they reaffirm the determination of the Government to not only maintain Medicare, but to make it better and stronger.  It';s worth recalling that since we were elected in 1996, we have increased public hospital and Medicare rebate funding by 17per cent in real terms, we have increased funding for pharmaceuticals by 64 per cent in real terms, and we';ve also spent about $2 billion on targeted rural and aged care services to promote and support access to healthcare in rural and remote areas.
And in announcing MedicarePlus today, I acknowledge and I want to pay particular tribute to the work undertaken by Tony Abbott in this area.  I acknowledge the fact that the Australian people have wanted further changes and a further strengthening of the system.  And Tony has done an outstanding job of going around the country, listening to the concerns of Australians, talking to the medical profession and talking to other people involved in the delivery of our health system.  Under MedicarePlus, the Government responds to those expressions of concern.  We committed $917 million to the Fairer Medicare package announced earlier this year.  Under MedicarePlus we are going to commit an additional $1.5 billion to the support of the health system, so that the total investment in MedicarePlus including the commitment under Fairer Medicare, is some $2.4 billion.
  I take the opportunity of reaffirming that the three pillars of Medicare remain – that is free treatment as a public patient in a public hospital; the payment of the Medicare rebate at 85per cent of the scheduled fee for a visit to a doctor outside the hospital; and affordable pharmaceuticals through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  I also reaffirm that the Coalition is committed to maintaining financial support for people to take out private health insurance.  Unlike our opponents, we don';t despise private health insurance – we believe in it and we encourage it.  And we are absolutely committed, without qualification, to the maintenance of the 30per cent tax rebate.  MedicarePlus strengthens and builds on the three pillars I have outlined and which have protected the Australian public well over the last 20 years.
  The Government remains very strongly committed to a high level of bulk billing as a key element of the Medicare system.  The levels of bulk billing vary enormously throughout Australia and clearly, and this is even acknowledged by the Labor dominated Senate inquiry which produced its report only a few weeks ago, that the main driver of levels of bulk billing is the supply of doctors.  Areas that have very high levels of bulk billing are found to have a large number of doctors.  Areas that have low levels of bulk billing generally have far fewer doctors.  No government, and this is acknowledged by the Labor Minister who introduced Medicare, can compel a particular level of bulk billing, but it can take measures, as I announced today, to increase the supply of doctors and other health professionals and also to provide additional incentives for doctors to bulk bill.
The Government, as a major new incentive for the provision of bulk billing services, we will provide an unconditional incentive for general practitioners to bulk bill visits by concession card holders and children under the age of 16.  Under MedicarePlus, the Government will provide general practitioners with an additional $5 payment for every bulk billed visit by a child under 16, irrespective of the financial circumstances of that child';s family – in other words, it is completely non income or means tested – or by any one of the seven million Australians covered by the Commonwealth Concession Card.  There will be no conditionality attached to that additional payment of $5.  The doctor will not be required to commit to a particular level of bulk billing.  For every bulk billed service for children under 16 and concession cardholders, there will be an additional payment unconditionally of $5.  Children and concession card holders currently account for some 62 per cent of all the services that are provided by general practitioners, and the new MedicarePlus payment of $5 will be made automatically to all GPs around Australia whenever they bulk bill children or concession card holders.  And it is worth noting that at present some 81 per cent of the services delivered in Australia by general practitioners to concession card holders are delivered either through bulk billing or with a copayment of less than $5.
  The initiative that I have just announced completely replaces the graduated incentives with conditions which were contained in the Fairer Medicare package.  As has been the case ever since the introduction of Medicare, doctors can choose to bulk bill any patient.  Under MedicarePlus, patients who aren';t bulk billed can choose to have their Medicare claim lodged electronically at a doctor';s surgery and their rebate paid to their bank account within a few days.  This provides a great deal more convenience for those who do not want to queue up, often during their lunch hour, at a Medicare office.
  Since the inception of Medicare, healthcare in Australia has changed dramatically.  GPs and specialists are diagnosing and treating more and more patients outside hospitals, and the range of medical services provided outside hospitals, such as blood tests, x-rays, tissue biopsies and radiotherapy, is increasing dramatically.  That is why MedicarePlus will strengthen Medicare by providing a comprehensive national Medicare safety net for all Australians, I stress for all Australians.
 Adding to the Medicare rebate, the MedicarePlus safety net will cover out of pocket costs for medical services provided outside a hospital. This safety net will provide a new level of protection against unexpected medical costs that may arise. The safety net will cover 80 per cent of the out of pocket cost for medical services outside hospital for all concession card holders and also for all families who receive at any time during a 12 month period Family Tax Benefit A once, in both cases, a $500 threshold per individual or family is reached.  This will cover alone 12 million Australians, including approximately four out of five families with a child.  In other words, four out of every five families with a child will have a safety net so that when you go over $500 in a year of out of pocket expenses, not only a GP, but also if you go to a specialist for a consultation prior to any surgery, if you have an x-ray, if you have a blood test, if you have a papsmear, if you have any of those procedures that attract the MBS benefit, once you go over the $500, and if your family at any time during the year is in receipt of Family Benefit A, you are reimbursed 80 per cent of the excess over $500.
And I think it is worth noting here that although, understandably, the bulkbilling debate has tended to focus on the services delivered by general practitioners, the reality is that for many people the real threat of major additional expense is when you find you may have to undertake a surgical procedure, you go off for blood tests, you go off for x-rays, you go off for a specialist attendance and the levels of bulkbilling of those services are very low.  For example, it';s only 58 per cent in relation to diagnostic imaging which includes x-rays and scans and so forth.  And this safety net is not only going to cover any out of pocket expenses that people might be left with in relation to GP consultation, but very importantly it is going to pick up the out of pocket expenses in relation to all of those other services.  Now this has been a gap in Medicare for a long time and the gap has got bigger because more and more of these services are being delivered out of hospital and that is why the introduction of this new safety net is going to make such a dramatic difference.  And it is going to provide all Australian families with a peace of mind that if they do run into a major illness it';s not going to send them broke, there';s going to be a safety net there to provide them with assistance.  Now the new safety net will also cover 80 per cent of the out of pocket costs for medical services outside hospital for all other Australians, that is the people whose, in the case of families, whose income is so high that they don';t attract the Family Tax Benefit A and also in relation to people who do not have children and not in a family situation whose expenses are $1,000 a year.  The threshold for them will be $1,000 for individual family and that will cover the remaining 8 million of the Australian population.
  So this is a totally comprehensive safety net and what it means is that people will have the peace of mind of knowing that there is a safety net there.  And, of course, coupled with our commitment to the maintenance of private health insurance support so that people can cover themselves in relation to hospitalisation.  For the first time I believe in the history of this country we will have a completely comprehensive pattern of protection and a completely comprehensive safety net.  Now the Medicare safety net builds on our previously announced safety net for concession card holders and, as I emphasised, it extends to cover all Australians.
  Now if I can turn for a moment to what I regard and what the Senate committee, dominated by our political opponents, acknowledged is probably the major reason why levels of bulkbilling are so low in parts of our nation and that is the shortage of doctors and other relevant health professionals. This is very important because of its impact on levels of bulkbilling and therefore affordable health care.  And today I';m very pleased to announce that MedicarePlus will support Australia';s most extensive effort ever to attract and retain our medical workforce.  MedicarePlus will ensure immediate and sustained growth in the number of doctors and nurses in the places that need the most such as outer metropolitan areas of our cities and in regional and rural Australia.  MedicarePlus will support the equivalent of about 1,500 more doctors and 1,600 practice nurses by the financial year 2006-2007.  And we';ll do this by significantly increasing the number of doctors, including overseas trained doctors and supervised junior doctors working in rural, regional and outer metropolitan areas of workforce shortage.  We';ll pay a rebate, and this is an important new measure for practice nurses working in general practices who provide immunisations and wound management.  We';ll re-train doctors who want to return to work after a break and we';ll provide payments and support to general practitioners who are delivering essential medical services in country areas.  This unprecedented commitment to increase our medical workforce will particularly assist people in outer metropolitan, regional and rural areas to access a doctor when they need one.  And these additional workforce measures are added to the workforce measures that were announced some months ago in the Fairer Medicare package.
  MedicarePlus will also provide another very important new initiative to improve access to doctors for older Australians.  It will fund, by the introduction of a new medical benefits item, more regular GP services and comprehensive medical assessments to residents of aged care homes.  The new initiative will enhance the healthcare of older Australians and provide reassurance to their families.  It will involve, as well as the introduction of a new medical benefits item, it will also involve the provision of financial assistance in consultation with the divisions of general practice to establish panels of doctors that will be available to provide assistance and look after residents of nursing homes and aged care facilities who do not have their own general practitioner.
  I should also confirm that the previously announced additional support for GPs treating veterans holding Gold or White Cards will continue, recognising veterans'; special healthcare needs and ensuring that they are treated at no cost.  And I';m pleased to say that currently there are 14,200 doctors around Australia who are participating in these new arrangements.
  Although we have been conservative in our estimates of how quickly these measures can be implemented, it is my intention to have them in place as quickly as possible.  In particular, I';m hopeful that the $5 bulk billing payment and the new rebate for practices nurses will commence from the 1st of February 2004, subject to necessary changes in computer software and associated administrative changes.
Today';s announcement ladies and gentlemen builds on the Government';s very significant investment in Australia';s healthcare system.  This $2.4 billion investment in MedicarePlus demonstrates our very strong commitment to an affordable, integrated, reassuring healthcare system. A healthcare system that recognises the fundamental obligation of the Government to publicly provide the sort of services available under Medicare augmented by the significant contribution of the private sector.  The Government is the only political grouping in Australia that believes unambiguously in both the public and private elements of healthcare in this country. We have always supported the rights of Australians to take out private health insurance and we have always been willing to give them a taxation incentive in order to do so.  But what we have demonstrated today is a willingness to provide, through the Medicare system, a safety net of unprecedented reassurance to the entire Australian community.  It is a safety net that will give peace of mind to Australian families.
  No ordinary Australian family wants a situation of enormous medical bills for a major illness for one of its members.  Few ordinary Australian families are able without some kind of additional assistance to cope with those expenses. And that is why the introduction of this safety net is so important and is such a tangible demonstration of our commitment to the strengthening of the Medicare system.
The fundamentals of Medicare are retained. The reach of Medicare is extended.  The reassurance of Medicare is greatly enlarged by the introduction of the safety net.  MedicarePlus provides more opportunities and incentives for bulk billing. It provides more convenient rebate claiming.  It provides a national safety net, it provides more doctors and nurses in areas of need and it provides more services and support for older Australians in aged care facilities.
 Now our intention is to introduce a ministerial determination as soon as possible, and that is I hope immediately, to enable the new $5 payment for bulk bill concession card holders and children so that that may commence early next year. And that can be done by a ministerial determination or a regulation, whatever if you might like to call it, and the Minister';s indicated that he';s ready to sign it as soon as I';ve finished speaking.  And in addition, importantly, when Parliament resumes we intend to immediately in the Senate amend the bill currently before the Senate to remove those elements of our previous package which we are not pursuing so as to enable the new national MedicarePlus safety net to be implemented.  So next week when Parliament sits we';ll immediately in the Senate take out of that legislation the things that we know we';re not going to get through, such as the so called swipe card arrangement and the provision for taking out private health insurance in relation to any excess of your doctor';s bill, they';re not going to get through, we acknowledge that.  But what can get through, and what should get through, and should get through before Christmas, before the Parliament rises, is the necessary changes to the law to bring in the new safety net and I';m asking the opposition parties in the Senate, I';m asking the Labor Party, I';m asking the Democrats, I';m asking the Greens, I';m asking the independents in the Senate to join the Government to pass this legislation before Parliament rises for Christmas.
 We';ve had a Senate inquiry, we';ve had months of debate, now is the time for the Parliament of Australia to enact this safety net and I simply pose the rhetorical question : how could anybody reasonably object to the introduction of a safety net that is going to protect every Australian and every Australian family? And I hope that the sense and the national need and the interests of the Australian people is recognised by those in the Senate who hold the numbers and that together we can give this additional peace of mind and additional reassurance to Australians before Christmas.
Ladies and gentlemen, MedicarePlus is a reaffirmation of the commitment I gave on behalf of the Coalition before we were elected to government, back in late 1995, that we would maintain and strengthen Medicare.  We remain absolutely committed to it, we have done that, MedicarePlus takes Medicare beyond the reach that it previous had because of the introduction of the safety net, it provides new incentives to strengthen and improve and lift the levels of bulk billing by the focus on areas of particular need for bulk billing.  In short it preserves the things that we value about Medicare and importantly it builds on them.  I commend MedicarePlus to all of the Australian people.
Thank you.  [ends]  


PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much, Gordon.  Mark Vaile, your Excellencies, John O';Neill, Rod McQueen, Ladies and Gentlemen. I think all of us know that at various stages in our lives in different situations, some very public, some very private we sort of pinch ourselves and say can this be real, can this be really happening. And I think collectively as a nation and particularly people who are followers of rugby, this week and indeed the whole of the time that the World Cup has been on since its opening on the 10th of October, is collectively just one of those moments. It';s hard to think of anything so far that has gone wrong. So far. But even if something were between now and the end to go wrong we would all have to celebrate this as one of those great sporting achievements and most importantly to me and, I know, to everybody in this audience we celebrate it as a wonderful occasion on which our country has been put lately on display to the rest of the world and it';s been a source of enormous pride to me as Prime Minister to see such a superbly organised World Cup and can I say to you, John, and through you to all of your colleagues in the Australian Rugby Union, what an absolutely fantastic job you have done for our country.
I was in England last week. Thanks very much for those, different kind of welcome, world in union and now some fire works. But in England last weekend, I lost count of the number of people who came up to me and spoke warmly of how well the World Cup had been organised. I had the opportunity of watching the last ten minutes of the game between England and Wales with Tony Blair in the kitchen at 10 Downing Street, as the Prime Minister of Great Britain and Northern Ireland he was doing a very good job of maintaining impartiality between England and Wales.
 And then I had the tremendous pleasure of the previous evening of ringing George to congratulate Australia on its quarterfinal victory and George very calmly said to me, “well, we look forward to welcoming you in the dressing room next Saturday night for a celebratory drink. And I thought, gee, that';s tremendous, and great confidence. And it has been an occasion where all the best things about Australia have been on display to the rest of the world – our hospitality, our warmth, our openness, our lack of pretention as a nation which makes it so easy to welcome in an uninhibited way people from all around the world. And also, of course, our fiercely competitive character which is a hallmark not only of Australian sportsmen and women, but also of Australians in business.
 But a competition like this isn';t made by those who organise it and isn';t made by a host country. It';s also made by those who come to our country and symbolically here tonight I know the British High Commissioner, the New Zealand High Commissioner and the Ambassador of France, the Diplomats representing the other three countries in the semifinals then and through them to all of the visitors from overseas who have together enjoyed this great occasion. I think the notion of combining the Australian passion for sport, the Australian commitment to sport, the great worldwide fraternity of rugby, the warmth and strength of which is one of which is the distinguishing characteristics of the game to combine those things together and the way in which the rugby club, the business rugby club has done – it doesn';t surprise me to hear from Rod that is has been so incredibly successful.
 And, of course, all of this is happening at a time when it';s fair to say that Australia has never been more self confident, it';s never had a stronger economy, it has never had a more outward looking view of the world than we do at the present time. We';re not a nation that will ever allow ourselves to be pigeonholed by associations. We';re a nation that sees itself as a full participant in the affairs not just of our region, important though it is to us, but also of the entire world. Rod was reflecting a few moments ago on the qualities that make up the Australian businessman or women. And one of the things that we Australians, if I may modestly say on behalf of all of the rest of you without too much fear of contradiction I hope – one of few things that I think we are very good at is being adaptable.
 We';ve never had the experience of thinking for a moment that we ran the world. We';ve recognised that we';ve had to punch above our weight. We only have a population of 20 million people. We are a nation with very strong European roots that is now cast in the region in which we live and we have learnt to combine the attributes or our past associations with the opportunities that present themselves in our region. And the way in which we';ve been able to draw on the talents, and the contributions, and the capacities of people of different ethnicities which contribute so richly to the modern Australia. All of those things have given us a special capacity to reach out.
 We are known as fiercely competitive sporting participants and we';re not ashamed of that, we';re very proud of it. But I think we';re also known as people who recognise the necessity to adapt, to get on with others, recognise the necessity that the world doesn';t owe us a living unless we';re prepared to go out there and fight for our market share, it';s not going to fall in our lap.   And in a way combining the enthusiasm of our sports participants, be it rugby, be it cricket, be it the Olympic sports, tennis, whatever sport you wish to name – combining that enthusiasm with our adaptability in business in a sense is what the organisation that Mark has and his colleagues in Austrade have been responsible for over the past few months is what it';s all about.
So tonight, is of course an opportunity in a very expected way to come together in this very exciting moment in Sydney';s history, in Australia';s history to look back on some weeks of enormous achievement the way in which most importantly of all our country has looked good because it has been good, because it';s welcomed people from all around the world. It';s played great sport, it';s played great rugby. And those people who have represented us have been an ornament to the sporting tradition of our country. So can I just finally say, to all of those, to you Mark and Rod, and everybody else who';s been associated with the Business Rugby Club. I hope much prosperity flows from it. You combine two things that are very important to Australia';s future that is playing sport and doing good at business. I think we';ve done both of them pretty well to date. I hope we continue to do well and I pray for a very dry and warm Saturday night.
Thank you.
 [ends]  


  Well thank you very much Mr Charlton and ladies and gentlemen.  I welcome this opportunity to participate in this conference so exquisitely timed in a week in which the delights of Sydney and the delights of Australia are fortuitously on maximum display to many parts of the world.
I speak, of course, as somebody who has lived most of his life in this city, but as naturally and foremost as Prime Minister of the entire country.  And I also speak as leader of a Government that has a very strong commitment to the capitalist economy, a strong commitment to ethical and competitive capitalism as being the best way of generating national wealth.  And within that broad description, of course, financial markets play a hugely important role.  The Economist magazine recently identified five dimensions to reshaping the financial markets over recent decades.  It spoke first of the fact that virtually everything about the markets has been influenced by the forces of technology, it said there';s been an unmistakable trend towards deregulation, but deregulation in turn has been accompanied by a liberalisation of rules governing participation in the markets.  But that liberalisation has led to a large amount of consolidation of market participants, and that finally consolidation has gone hand in hand with the process of globalisation.
  Australia has been in the forefront of the processes described by the Economist magazine.  And, as in quite a number of areas, this country has been able to punch above her weight.  Australia is one of the key centres in Asia for capital market activity and in terms of total market capitalisation, Australia lies only third behind Tokyo and Hong Kong.  An average daily turnover in Australian debt markets was more than $14 billion in the last completed financial year.
 As I';m sure all of you are aware, we established Axiss Australia in 1999 to boost Australia';s positioning as a global financial services centre.  And since then, more than 100 offshore financial service firms have either set up new businesses or expanded existing activities in Australia.  And Axiss has played an important role in raising Australia';s profile internationally and articulating Australia';s advantages as a centre for financial services.
You probably heard a little already of the general strength and reach of the Australian economy, but you will forgive me for reminding all of you that we have had 12 years of continuous annual growth and it';s the longest economic expansion that Australia has experienced since the 1960s.  I would argue it is a more soundly based expansion and that the strength of the Australian economy now is more soundly based than it was in the 1960s, golden though some of those years were for many people.  And the reason for that observation is that in the 1960s ours was a highly protected, very cloistered and inward looking economy.  We had a fixed exchange rate.  We had high tariff barriers.  There was still, within the Australian Federation, there was still some limitations on internal economic competition.  We had a fairly old-fashioned taxation system.  We relied almost entirely on a process of centralised wage fixation, and many of the forces of international competition that we now take for granted and happily engage in were completely absent.
But for the first time since 1968, Australia enjoys the concurrent combination of unemployment below 6% and inflation below 3%.  Our net Government debt to GDP ratio at just 3.9% is amongst the lowest in the world and it';s substantially below the OECD average of 48.7%.  And since 1996, almost 1.3 million new jobs have been created and the real wages of Australian workers, because of higher productivity, have risen by 12.2% yet our inflation levels, because of that higher productivity, have remained at very subdued levels.  So the picture that one can paint is a very bright picture, it';s a picture of continued economic strength and it';s a picture of a nation continuing to want to engage in further economic reform and wanting to involve itself more fully in world economic activity and world financial markets.
  In recent times we have introduced legislation to further, by changes to the tax system, internationalise the Australian economy.  And some of these reforms will simplify and better target the rules for Australian investors, including managed funds and superannuation funds, earning income overseas; to modernise Australia';s double taxation agreements with other countries; to ensure that Australian businesses operating offshore are subject to similar taxation as their locally based competitors and to encourage the establishment in Australia of regional headquarters of foreign groups and improve Australia';s attractiveness as a continuing base for our multinational companies.  Together these changes and reforms, although they have not received the same publicity and the same focus as other more broadly based economic reforms of recent years, provide a solid contribution to the further opening up of the Australian economy.  Unfortunately at present we have been unable to progress these reforms through the Australian Senate because the opposition parties have taken it upon themselves, particularly the Labor Party, to oppose these reforms in the name of rather cheap economic populism by alleging in some way that they are unfairly advantaging the big end of town to the detriment of the broader Australian community.  I might pass on from that comment with just but one further observation and that is that many of the reforms that, to their credit, were carried out by the former government in Australia were made possible by the fact that the then opposition parties in the Senate supported sensible economic reforms such as financial deregulation and tariff reform which were seen in the national interest.
The other area that I want to focus on very briefly this morning, Mr Chairman, is the question of international trade and Australia';s relations with the rest of the world as a major trading nation.  A nation such as Australia ultimately lives or dies economically according to our capacity to engage the rest of the world in trade.  We can never, of course, return to the days when we looked inward, largely ignored the rest of the world except those parts of the world that were desperate to buy our primary produce and imagine that that mentality could give us a secure economic future.  Over the last 30 or more years we have  become far more outward looking so far as our trading horizons are concerned.  Australia has diversified our trade performance and in fact it was our ability to switch some of our trade from the Asian region to North America and Europe which enabled this country to avoid the worst effects of the Asian economic downturn in 1997 and 1998.  And it is strongly arguable that if we had not been able to achieve that shift in those years we, like other countries in the region, would have been engulfed by the economic downturn which put an end to some of the unrealistic views which had developed about the fundamental strengths of some of the economies in our region.
Australia remains a nation which, of course, derives a lot of export income from the mining and other primary industries.  But, of course, it is no longer the case that we rely entirely on those industries and the growth in recent decades of the service sector, and also a very significant expansion in manufacturing exports, has given to Australia a very diversified trading base.  And this Government, over the last seven years, has consciously sought to diversify our trade as much as possible.  We remain very strongly committed to the multilateral negotiation process.  The ideal is to see a successful world trade round based on the Doha understandings.  And it is ideally speaking in Australia';s interest to see broad multilateral trading agreements liberalising and removing trade barriers that impede access for Australian goods and services to see those sorts of arrangements achieved.  But we have taken the view that consistent with that goal, and on the basis that bilateral trading agreements don';t compete with that goal, that it is in Australia';s interest to endeavour to negotiate bilateral free trade agreements and to put special emphasis on our trading associations with certain countries.  And that is why we are at present negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States.  If that can be achieved it will underwrite Australia';s economic future in a way that no other bilateral trading agreement can possibly do.  Self evidently, the United States'; economy will be more and not less important to Australia as time goes by.  The significance of the United States in the world economy will grow over the next 50 years, rather than as some predicted a decade or more ago, diminish.  And from Australia';s point of view, the opportunity to become linked through a bilateral free trade agreement with the largest and strongest economy in the world is an opportunity that we should pursue to the limit and not easily give up.  I cannot predict this morning whether that process of negotiation will be successful or not.  We will not sign a free trade agreement with the United States unless there are evident benefits in it for Australia.  Just the act of signing a free trade agreement with the biggest country in the world does not, of course, confer a benefit.  There needs to be clear gains, particularly in areas such as agriculture, for it to be worth the candle for Australia to sign.  But we are very strongly committed to it, both at a negotiation and political level and we will know over the course of, I guess, the next month or two whether that goal is going to be realised.
We have just completed successfully the negotiations of the Free Trade Agreement with Thailand.  Thailand is the fastest growing of the ASEAN economies with a population of 62 million.  That particular agreement is going to a very strong benefit to the Australian motor car industry, to the Australian wine industry and even to sections of the Australian dairy industry.  Some months ago we signed a Free Trade Agreement with Singapore.  And, of course, it is well known in Australia that in the last seven years we have increased our trade with China by something in the order of two to three hundred per cent.  China is one of our fastest growing markets, is now our third largest trading partner… I';m sorry, third largest export destination and is a nation that is very very important to Australia';s economic future.  The conclusion of the natural gas contract with the Guangdong Province last year and the prospect of even larger contracts in the area of natural gas, which became evident during the visit to Australia of President Hu Jintao last month, are evidence of the strength of the relationship that we have been able to develop with China.
I cite these things, Mr Chairman, to illustrate the reality of the world in which Australia lives.  I have never believed that it made any sense for Australia, with a population of 20 million people, having strong strategic links with the United States, having strong historical ties with Europe, but located in the Asian Pacific region, I';ve never thought it made any sense for Australia to behave as if our economic and political interest lay either heavily or exclusively with one part of the world.  Of course, our immediate political and economic and trade destiny is very much tied up with the Asian Pacific region, but the nature of the Australian economy, the sophistication of the Australian people, the diversity of our interests and the international character of our associations means that in all areas Australia is a nation which must seek associations and linkages with all parts of the world and that is what the Government has endeavoured to do.  And our pursuit of close relations with nations such as the United States have not in any way hampered our capacity to deal effectively with the nations of our region and to develop, as those countries develop, particularly but not only China, a trading association of very great mutual benefit.
Ladies and gentlemen, it';s always been a view of people in Australia that in the fullness of time this country would be as it now become a major financial centre in the Asian Pacific region. And, of course, the volume of financial activity generated in the city in the Sydney is… maybe higher than in other areas of the country, but it remains nonetheless the case that it';s a tribute to the financial community of the entire nation that that goal has been realised.  And I take this opportunity of congratulating those in the Australian financial community of the way in which this country';s perspective has been altered, the way in which this country';s reputation has been enhanced and the significantly increased role that this country is properly playing in the financial community of the world.
 I wish the conference well.  To those of you who are visiting Australia for purposes related to the Rugby World Cup, I hope you';ve had, and continue to have, an extremely enjoyable time.  We Australians pride ourselves in organising great cultural events of this character and this has been no exception and we hope for those of you who are visiting our country continue to enjoy yourselves and take away some very fond recollections of Australian hospitality, not to mention of course Australian sporting prowess.
Thank you.
[ends]  


  Well thank you very much, Joe.  Pat Farmer, Member for Macarthur, Bruce Baird, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. This is an important day for the tourist industry in Australian because what we are putting down is properly described as a medium to long term strategy for  tourism. It';s a White Paper plus, we had Medicare Plus earlier in the week and now we have a White Paper plus because it';s not just a White Paper, it';s also accompanied by a lot of the folding stuff as well because a White Paper without financial underpinning is nice, but the financial underpinning makes an enormous difference. And this is a plan involving a major new investment as well as a restructuring of key tourism bodies and one of the central aims of this strategy is to work very closely with people involved in the industry.
 We want to build on the magnificent success, not only of the Olympic games of 2000, but self evidently the magnificent success of the Rugby World Cup which is coming to we all hope to a magnificent climax on Saturday night. And it';s also very much and this is symbolised by where we are launching it in regional Australia, just regional Australia given the urban sprawl of Sydney. But nonetheless regional Australia and indeed the birth place of Australia';s first great wealth generating industry, that';s the agriculture industry and there';s a nice symmetry in that because a successful nation is a nation that exploits sensibly all of its wealth generating industries and just as agriculture in the past and continues to generate enormous wealth for Australia. So tourism in the past and even more so in the future has and will generate wealth for our country.
 The industry employs about 550,000 people, it generates $17 billion a year in export earnings and the vast majority of tourism businesses are small medium-sized businesses. And we therefore want to harness all of those businesses and we want to harness the great future potential of our industry and the people who work in it. And this why today I';m delighted to announce that we are going to invest an additional $235 million over five years to support the implementation of the key measures in the White Paper.
   It includes additional funding for international marketing amounting to $120 million over five years and this is a centrepiece of the new policy and in part recognises that tourism businesses have endured the adverse impact of a series of unprecedented events in the sense that they have all come together in a relatively short period of time.
The terrorist attacks first of the 11th of September 2001, then on the 12th of October closer and sadly much closer to home in Bali. The SARS epidemic and, of course, domestically having international ramifications, the impact of the Ansett collapse. But it also recognises what a incredibly competitive environment is represented by the international tourism industry and if we want to have our share of that action we';ve go to go out there and grab it and we';ve got to be willing as a Government to provide financial support and other promotional support.
Another key measure involves an increase of $46 million in funding for domestic tourism marketing, including marketing under the See Australia flagship and this is combined with an increasing funding for the tourism development programme of $19 million over four years.
 Domestic marketing and tourism development to support local projects are both central to fostering further growth and job opportunities in regional Australia.  And we';ve also recognised the industry';s need for more extensive and quality research and statistics, and we';re going to allocate an extra $21.5 million for this purpose.
But importantly ladies and gentlemen, these funding measures are combined with a strategic structuring of tourism bodies and a policy which is aimed at improved competitiveness and growth.  And under this restructure, a new central body to be called Tourism Australia will be formed by bringing together the Australian Tourist Commission, the Tourism Forecasting Council, the Bureau of Tourism Research and See Australia marketing.  And in addition, a new unit with Tourism Australia to be called Tourism Events Australia, that will focus on promoting Australia as a high quality business and events destination.
Despite the challenges that the industry faces, it remains one that overwhelmingly is made up of very self-reliant men and women who are willing to work very hard and have a go, and risk the challenges, typically in the Australian way.  And another aim of the restructuring is to further extend self-reliance in the industry so that the resources and the responses marshalled against future international shocks, can be better managed.  A further important component of this new direction involves implementation.  The Government looks forward to working closely with the industry on the implementation of this plan, and working together to make sure that everything that has been announced is delivered on time and as soon as possible, is very desirable.
Now in conclusion, I do want to thank a number of people, and first and foremost I want to thank my colleague Joe Hockey, whose indefatigable enthusiasm…[applause] your popularity [inaudible] Joe.  Joe has done a really magnificent job in fighting for a very significant increase in funding for the tourist industry.  You may read stories about how much money we';ve got.  It';s all a bit of a myth.  I mean that $7.5 billion has already been spent repaying debt.  It';s not sitting in the bank.  And Joe here has gone out and has fought very, very hard indeed to get extra money for the tourist industry.  So I do want to record my immense gratitude to the Minister for the work that he has undertaken.
I also want to thank the officials from the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources, and also those from the Tourist Commission who have worked very hard on this White Paper process.  And many Government Members and Senators, and not least of course Bruce Baird who has great experience and has had an enormous contribution over the years to the tourist industry, particularly but not only in New South Wales.  This is a great time to launch a new policy extolling and putting on display virtues of the Australian tourist industry.
  In the World Cup, all the best qualities of Australia have been bared for the world to see – our sporting prowess, our tenacious competitiveness, our openness and our friendliness as a people, the great natural beauty of our country, and the fact that we can organise major events in a superbly efficient way.  We were very proud of the organisation of the Olympic Games, and although the Rugby World Cup is on a slightly smaller scale, it is nonetheless the third largest international sporting event in the year in the world.  And we have been able to organise it with spectacular efficiency, and that demonstrates that what we have achieved in the past is only a harbinger of what we can achieve in the future.
The Government is right behind the industry.  We';re not only producing a White Paper, but we';re also putting money where the White Paper is, and together we can reap the enormous benefits that I know tourism in the future can bring to our nation.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Pat and ladies and gentlemen.  It's quite a pleasure for me to be back in the Macarthur electorate, to be at the very birthplace of the agricultural industry in Australia, this very historic part of a very historic area of Australia and to have the opportunity again as I did last year of saying how important it is for our community, either at a national level or at a local level, to acknowledge the contribution of people who day in and day out work in an unrewarded, unsung capacity to build a better and a happier community.
 Australia is the great volunteer nation of the world. It had something to do with the fact that we were a nation built with a small population over a vast area and unless we helped each other we didn't survive.  And out of that necessity has grown the great spirit of volunteerism in Australia. And of course the spirit of volunteerism is always best expressed when we face great challenges.  No country sees its citizens come together so spontaneously and seamlessly and effectively to deal with challenges or crisis as it does the Australian nation.
I've just come from Westmead hospital, children's hospital, where I launched Jason McCartney's book, "After Bali", which tells his story and his struggle and part of that story and part of that struggle for him and so many other people was the story of the help that he and many others received from the volunteers who assisted in the aftermath of that tragedy. And in your own community there are countless stories of people who have volunteered all of their lives to make it easier and happier and a little more hopeful for their fellow citizens.
So it is important at a time when we can reflect for a moment on many of the strengths that we have, as we come to the end of a remarkable sporting tournament, the Rugby World Cup, and we all hope that it will have the perfect finish on Saturday night, we all do, so you should all pray for a dry, hot night.  But as reflect upon the gifts that this country has, its security, its stability, its economic strength, the good fortune we've had compared with so many other nations, we should reflect upon the things that we have internally generated in order to deliver that security and that stability and that strength.  And sure we have great business men and women, we have great sports men and women, we have great doctors, we have great scientists, we have great business men, but most importantly of all we have a tremendous community spirit.  There are things that are done for nothing in Australia because people want to help their fellow country men and women that are never done in that spirit in other parts of the world.  And that is what enables us to achieve things that no other country can achieve.
So when Pat Farmer told me shortly after he was elected that he was going to inaugurate the   Order of Macarthur award I thought to myself two things.  Typical of the bloke whose instinct always is to recognise the contribution of others, and had a wonderful way to encapsulate the community gratitude for people who've come forward over the years to help.  So I really am very happy to be here today and before concluding my remarks I want to say to you in case you hadn't noticed, you really have a terrific bloke as your local member, he really  is.  He is truly indefatigable, he works hard, he runs hard, he argues hard, he cares very much for the people of this area and he's a wonderful representative and I'm very proud to call him a friend and call him a colleague.
  Ladies and gentlemen I congratulate the Macarthur community, I congratulate Pat and in advance all of those who will receive awards today, you epitomise better than anything the true Australian spirit of helping their mates, of working to build a better, a more secure and a more successful community. And long may that continue to be part of the spirit of our country.
[ends]  


Doctor, thank you very much for that introduction, Dr Kim Oates, Jason and Nerissa McCartney, ladies and gentlemen.  At various times in our lives we encounter people who in different circumstances, some well known, most not well known, who display remarkable courage, remarkable determination and survive not only in the body but also in spirit against extraordinary adversities and today we are present at the launch of a book written by a man, Jason McCartney, who has done exactly that.
We are a country that greatly honours and reveres our sporting heroes.  We're also, I'm pleased to say, a country that is increasingly recognising the heroes we have in other fields, particularly in the fields of medical research, medical achievement and medical science.  And can I commence my remarks in that vein by paying particular tribute to the work of Dr Kim Oates out here at Westmead Children's Hospitals and all of his ilk around Australia who commit their lives to the relief of suffering and also through him to pay tribute to the way in which medical people and medical researchers in this country have continued to punch above the collective weight of Australia.  It's one of the great Australian success stories, it's better known now and better recognised than it used to be but if you think we perform well given our population size on the international sporting field, it's also fair to say that we also perform well above our weight in the international medical arena in so many specialities and so many areas and today is very much an opportunity for me as Prime Minister to pay particular personal tribute to Dr Oates but also to all of those who, like him, are dedicated to the relief of the suffering, especially of children in our community.
Today in launching this book I am really privileged to pay tribute to Jason's incredible leadership and strength.  He faced death, he stared it down, he saw people die in the most horrible circumstances, he paid tribute to some of his great mates, he fought back, he returned to play a game for his beloved Kangaroos football team, and stirred the imagination and the spirit of all Australians in doing so.  I remember I had the privilege of speaking to him on the day of the return to his beloved game and I know many other people did and he was the source of enormous inspiration.
Australians will never forget what happened to those 88 Australians and three residents who called Australia home on the 12th of October and we'll be reminded forever, not only by the magnitude of that lose but we'll also be reminded of the wonderful stories of which Jason is an outstanding example of people who had to endure terrible pain, the shock and the trauma of the dreadful circumstances in which people died.  Jason fought back against that, he coped with his injuries in, if I can use an old fashioned word that can only describe, in a most manful of ways, and then he returned to Bali, he witnessed part of the trial, he returned again for the commemorative services, he's written this book, he went around Australia telling his own personal story of individual commitment and courage.  And in that way he's reminded us of the very best qualities of what it is to be an Australian.
We are a tough people, but we've also demonstrated, particularly over the last 12 months, that we are warm, sensitive and caring people.  And it's not a bad combination to be tough and soft at the same time.  Tough when you need to be tough, soft when common humanity requires you be so. And Jason has demonstrated those qualities in a very, very impressive way and I'm delighted that his wife Nerissa, who - they didn't marry so long ago, and I'm just delighted that both of them are here today, to think that he has dedicated so much of his time since that terrible event, to sharing the strength that any nation can derive from such an adversity and that is precisely what he's done because isn't it true that out of tragedy some sense of inspiration and it's important as a country that we look to the positive side of our character that came out of the Bali attack and Jason has been a metaphor for the positive side of our character that has come out it.
  And can I also, and I know I will be echoing very much what he feels himself, pay tribute to all of those doctors and nurses and other medical professionals who have worked in the burns units of hospitals all around Australia because the incredible work that they did and the incredible work they continue to do, not only here at Westmead but in Perth, in Darwin and all around Australia and the remarkable way in which this country's emergency services came together that day, got people out of Bali, got them to Darwin, then distributed them to the hospitals that could give them the best care immediately, that's a tremendous tribute and we as Australians can do that, if I may say, better than any other country because when there's a problem we drop any differences we might have and we can work together across the divide of other things in a way that no other country can and it was an inspiration for me as Prime Minister to see the way in which people did respond and of course very much an inspiration to me and other Australians, Jason, for the way in which you have personified the Australian character in the weeks and months that followed this tragedy.
So I am really honoured to have been asked to launch this book.  I congratulate Coles Myer on its great generosity, I thank Dr Oates again and Westmead hospital for providing the launch venue.  I wish the book well, I express again my admiration to you and Nerissa for the great example that you have sent to all Australians.  The nation that loves its sporting achievements should admire not only the sporting prowess of the great sports man or woman, but also their character in adversity and the total sportsman, the complete sportsman is the one that is not only a champion on the field but is also a champion in his or her own way and you've proved yourself in both and for that you have our admiration.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much for those most generous words of introduction Mr Chairman, to Catherine King, my parliamentary colleague Andrew Tink, the Member for Epping, and the Mayor of Ryde Councillor Edna Wilde, ladies and gentlemen.
I am very pleased indeed to be part of this 10th anniversary celebration of the Ryde Business Forum.  Ryde has a remarkable history, it's one of the areas of Sydney settled earliest in the history of New South Wales, and over the last decade or two it has become truly an important national business centre for certain categories of information technology, medical research and allied businesses.  And the notion of the high tech lifestyle location which has been one of the things that has promoted Ryde to the rest of the business community in Australia is something that the community has done extremely well.
Like most parts of Australia, Ryde depends very heavily on the growth and the strength and the activity of small and medium enterprises.  This morning I had the opportunity of opening some new premises for two companies that had decided to co-locate in North Ryde and to join the very large bands of similar companies which have chosen North Ryde as their home.  And it's not surprising because the amenity of the area, the support received from the local council, the interest of other businesses and the willingness of the community generally to provide support and welcome is one of the reasons why people choose Ryde as a place in which to do business.
But ladies and gentlemen, all businesses operate in an economic environment and I want to say a few words today about the economic environment in which businesses are operating in Australia at the present time.  We are now in the 12th unbroken year of economic growth.  Australia is now experiencing what I can without any fear of contradiction describe as the longest, unbroken period of economic growth since the late 1960's.  In many ways Australia is now enjoying the best economic period that our country has seen since the end of World War II.  The growth of the last 12 years is more soundly based and in many ways more meritorious than the long economic growth of the 1950's and 1960's.  Whilst I don't denigrate that period in any way, the truth is at that time the Australian economy was a far more protected species than it is now. We operated behind very high tariff walls, we had a fixed exchange rate, our trading base was essentially that of the farming and mining industries, we saw little future in the export of transport and manufactured goods or in services.  But so much of that of course has been transformed over the last 10 or 20 years.  We now have an economy which is operating in a competitive global environment. We have a floating exchange rate, we have taken advantage as a nation of the globalised character of the world in which we live, we have a highly competitive internal economy, we have very low to no tariff protection in most sectors of the economy and even in those areas where tariff protection remains, the prospects are that it will over time continue to fall.  We've also significantly and importantly diversified our trading base. We have continued to rely quite properly very heavily on our farmers and our miners and I'm very happy to say that coming out of one of the worst droughts we've had this century the prospects for our farmers, particularly in the wheat industry, now look a lot better than many of us would have dared to hope only a few months ago.  And our mining industry continues to be a very major export earner.  But there's more to it than farming and mining, we now of course have very strong performances in the areas of services.  And yesterday I had the opportunity of launching with Joe Hockey a $235 million injection over a period of five years into the tourist industry which is worth something like $17 billion a year in revenue to this country and employ something like 550,000 people. We're also a major exporter of education services and we are a growing exporter of medical services.  And we have been able as a nation to build linkages with different parts of the world, those of us who rather foolishly asserted that we were getting too close to the United States for the benefit of our place in the Asian Pacific region have surely been proved wrong by the way in which we have been able to build an ever closer trading relationship and political relationship with the Republic of China.  The signing of the natural gas contract last year, the fact that the visit by the Chinese President Hu Jintao a few weeks ago to Australia was the first of his major visits overseas since assuming that job, and carry with it the prospect of even larger export contracts in the areas of natural gas and other exports is a reminder of the fact that what this country has done in building its relationships with the United States and other countries has not been to the detriment of our association with the nations of the Asian Pacific region.
The Australian economy at the present time has that rare double that we've not had since 1968.  We have unemployment at below six per cent and we have inflation at below three per cent. We've reduced our government debt, we now have a government debt to GDP ratio of 3.9 per cent, which is astonishingly low by world standards, the average of the industrialised world is 48.7 per cent, Japan's government debt to GDP ratio is over 100 per cent and it's in the order of 45 per cent in the United States.  And one of the reasons that we have been able to enjoy historically low interest rates over the last 30 years is that we, historically low interest rates now and they're at the lowest for 30 years, is that we have been able to pay off our debt and that in turn has taken a very significant strain off the propensity for interest rates to rise.
So I describe all of these things ladies and gentlemen to make the point that economic conditions nationally in Australia are very strong. But the process of economic reform is something that is never finished. We have not arrived at this strong economic point as a nation by luck or by accident.  It is true as somebody said a moment ago, we do as a nation have to make our own luck, we are incredibly fortunate but we have over the last two decades set out to improve the competitive position of this country and set our in every sense of the word to make our own luck.  And the reforms that have been undertaken, some undertaken by the former government and supported by us from Opposition, such as the floating of the exchange rate and reductions in tariff levels, many other reforms carried out by this Government, I must say not with the quite same level of support from our opponents in Opposition, but nonetheless achieved, such as taxation reform, industrial relations reform, a further opening of the internal competitive processes of the Australian economy, all of those things together have combined to create a relatively positive and indeed very benign economic climate.  But we must continue the process of reform, we must continue the process of trying to grab for this country more and more opportunities.  I said yesterday when I launched the tourism policy that in a competitive world environment nobody was going to give Australia an un-worked for share of the market, we had to go out and grab our share of the market, we had to go out and grab all of the opportunities that were available. And one of the things that we are endeavouring to do in a very uncertain world trading environment as well as pushing ahead to try and achieve multilateral trade agreements which will result in reductions in trading barriers all around the world for everybody, we're also endeavouring to negotiate bilateral trading agreements that are of advantage to Australia.  Only a few weeks ago when I was in Thailand I was able to reach agreement with the Prime Minister of that country for a Free Trade Agreement between Australia and Thailand.  Thailand is the fastest growing of the ASEAN countries, it has a population of 62 million people, as a result of that Free Trade Agreement we will be able to supply a large number of motor vehicles and significantly greater quantities of Australian wine into the Thai market, as well as winning some important concessions for our dairy products.  It's a very valuable addition to the trading opportunities that Australia is going to have and it follows the Free Trade Agreement that we were able to negotiate with Singapore and sign with Singapore only a few months ago.
But the most important Free Trade Agreement that we are endeavouring to negotiate at the moment is a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  The United States is of course the largest and strongest economy in the world.  The United States is the biggest economy the history the world has ever seen.  The United States economy will grow more important to Australia over the next 50 years rather than less important.  20 years ago or even less people were rather foolishly writing books suggesting that it was the end of the American century and suggesting that in one way or another America was going to be replaced by the European Union or by Japan as the major economic power in the world.  And without in any way reflecting upon the contribution and their very important contribution of either of those two groupings, well a grouping in the case of the European Union, an individual country in the case of Japan, and they're both very, very important to Australia.  The course of the last 10 years has demonstrated those predictions to be wrong.  And it's therefore tremendously important to Australia's long term economic future that if we have the opportunity of enmeshing our economy with the economy of the United States then the benefits of the growth that each can get from the other will be of great significance and will result in a great strengthening of the Australian economy in the years ahead.
Now negotiating that Free Trade Agreement will not be easy, and I repeat here today what I've said on numerous occasions and that is that unless we can get a significant concession from the United States in the area of agriculture then it will not be worth our while to sign that agreement.  The negotiations are coming to a head, there is a very strong commitment at the political level in both countries for the agreement to be concluded, if that is at all possible, but as always with agreements of this kind unless there is significant mutual benefit than agreement is not finally reached. I mention that agreement to underline how important it is in a globalised economic environment for this country to be always seeking new opportunities and new chances to further strengthen the base of our economy and further diversify our economic opportunities.
But ladies and gentlemen, if I could return to an observation I made at the very beginning and that is that important though those gestures are and important though they are in laying the base, it is the underlying strength derived from the economic environment in which they operate of the hundreds of thousands of small and medium enterprises around Australia that really provide the real strength of the Australian economy. We have a healthy economy now because we have a healthy small business sector.  The grouping here today, the strength of the Ryde Business Forum, the strength of the various chambers of commerce that contribute to it, they all emphasise that small business in Australia in 2003 is very much alive and well.  It has enjoyed very, very good economic conditions.  But it has also contributed very much to its own success, but in the time that I've been Prime Minister, if I could single out of one group of people who I think have contributed as much if not more than any other group of people to the growth and the strength of the Australian economy, I would single out the men and women who comprise the small business community of Australia.  We pride ourselves and we think quite a bit about national pride right at the moment. We pride ourselves on many characteristics as Australians and one of the greatest characteristics we have as Australians is that we are very adaptable. We are people who see an opportunity, we adapt our performance, we adapt our response, we adapt our business, we adapt our organisation in order to take advantage of it. And in what I have witnessed as Prime Minister over now almost eight years is the way in which the small enterprises in particular of Australia have transformed themselves and have grabbed hold along with their employees of opportunities that have been presented. And the environment in which many of them operate is unrecognisable from what it was even ten years ago.
 They've been able to diversify and to adapt, and to change according to circumstances in a quite spectacular way. And because we are a relatively classless, a very egalitarian country, a country that does not behave according to rigid patterns of predictability that ethos has transmitted into a business community and one of the real, unreported reasons why we have been so successful economically over the past eight or ten years has been the way in which the men and women of the small business communities of Australia have been able to adapt. And as a result of that they have grabbed hold of the remarkable opportunities that this country has had. Opportunities that at various stages I think everybody wonders if we would continue to preserve, but opportunities we have nonetheless been able to take advantage of.
I just want to say one other thing, ladies and gentlemen, and you will understand my making a reference to it, today. And that is that we do in unfortunately, despite the remarkable economic conditions that this country has, we do live in a word environment now that in many respects is more frightening and more disturbing than we might have hoped it would be eight or ten years ago.  All of us will have been distressed by the unprovoked and unforgivable terrorist attacks in Turkey overnight. A lot will be said about them, there will be a lot of debate about the causes and the bases of terrorism.
 I can only make two observations and the first of those is that the idea that the civilised world retreats and cringes at the face of that kind of threat is totally unacceptable to me and I believe totally unacceptable to the overwhelming majority of the Australian people.
And can I simply say, that I've observed in the news bulletins this morning that there are, what 100-200,000 people demonstrating in the streets of London against the President of the United States. Now, like any other political figures he's used to criticism and he can take it and he can handle it - it goes with the territory. And I don't seek a particular intercession on his behalf in relation to criticism. But I find it bizarre, even obscene that you could have 200,000 people demonstrating against the democratically elected leader of the largest country in the world, instead of demonstrating against the atrocites that continue to claim the lives of innocent people.
  Can I also remind people who may see this issue in simplistic terms that any life lost in a terrorist attack is a tragedy and a blot on civilisation. But over the last nine months those who have carried out these attacks in the name of some perverted version of their religious belief have in fact claimed lives of people belonging to that religious believe in which they claim to have carried out these attacks, than they have the lives of people of other religions. To put it bluntly, more Muslims have died at the hands of terrorists over recent months than Christians or Jews, or Atheists, or Hindus, or Buddhists. And that is the ultimate obscenity, the ultimately unforgivably inexcusable character of what is done in the name of this modern terrorism.
It should be carried out in the name of some perverted view of the faith which does great violence to the principles of that faith, but process should kill more of the adherence of that religion than it does the adherence of other religions and it just reminds all of us if anybody thinks there is some kind of pattern, or rhyme or reason to this and that you will buy yourself immunity by feeding the crocodile in the pathetic hope that it might eat you last, you're wrong.
 This is very much an assault on the civilisation that we belong to. Terrorism attacks us for who we are, not for what we have done. As Tony Blair said last night, the Americans didn't attack al Qaeda, al Qaeda attacked the United States in September of 2001. And none of the 88 Australians who lost their lives in Bali had done anything to deserve that terrible fate any more than the innocent victims of these latest attacks.  It is not a happy note to end on, but it is unavoidable on occasion like this that that issue should be addressed.
Can I finally say, again, congratulations to the forum for everything that it's achieved and everything that it's done. And very finally, on a very up beat note, I think Edwin expressed all of our sentiments as he lifted his magnificent gold Wallabies scarf and I can only say to the whether man or who ever controls the weather up there - let us all pray for a warm, dry, evening tomorrow night.
Thank you.


QUESTION:
Prime Minister, how important is industrial relations reform and how is essential is it that is passes through the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well industrial relations reform is one of the reasons why our economy is doing a lot better now, we are a more open economy, we have a lower level of unionisation in the private sector, we now have a union membership level of a little below 20 per cent in the private sector, there are a lot more enterprised based agreements.  I find it very interesting that one of the apparent areas of conflict between the university sector and the Government in relation to education reform is the Government';s insistence that if you, as an academic employee want to have an individual workplace agreement you should have the right to have it.  I would have thought that was a given in Australia in 2003 and the idea that there should be any serious debate about that, and there may be other reasons which are causing the difficulties, but I would have thought any serious debate on that is strange in 2003.
  We could still go further, we could ultimately in one way or another get the recalcitrants in the Senate to agree to pass our unfair dismissal laws.  I think you could drive unemployment in Australia down even further if we were able to get the unfair dismissal changes through the Senate.  Independent assessments suggest that another 50 to 80,000 jobs would be created in small business if you could get rid of the current unfair dismissal laws which I know do intimidate a lot of small business operators.
So, there';s still a lot more to be done on that front but it think we have made a lot of progress.  My real worry on industrial relations is that some of the state governments are now retreating because industrial relations in Australia has always been a shared responsibility between the Federal Government and the States and some states are beginning to reintroduce the rigidities of the old awards system, Western Australia is a bad example of it, Victoria, New South Wales not quite so bad in some areas but still a worry, but that is a very big concern to me but federally I will continue, subject of course to the constraints that are imposed on us by the Senate.
QUESTION:
One of the things that is very important to our members, not only in New South Wales but around Australia, is the difficulty that in retail small business having against the large power of big business.  Would you be able to (inaudible) on the Government';s view for (inaudible) future?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I';m not surprised that Ron you should ask that question. This is one of the great sort of balancing acts that a free enterprise government faces. We want to see small entrepreneurs continue, we also want to have a trading and retailing regime that is good for the consumer.  And I can perhaps best reply to you by saying that we won';t do anything, I certainly won';t do anything, which is going to tilt the current playing field unfairly against the small operators.  Now I know there are some changes that many want, there';s a big debate going on about sections of the trade practices act and I';m not convinced that everything that is being put to us on behalf of small business is necessarily implemented going to produce a better climate.
  There';s no way any government can guarantee that there won';t be some abuses of market power in a free enterprise economy, we can';t protect every small business, and I';d be misleading you if I pretended that would do otherwise.  I understand how hard it is to run a service station, I understand how difficult it is to deal often with large oil companies, I';m aware of that, they';re often not the most benign people in the world with which to deal. On the other hand they live in a competitive environment like anybody else and we have to be realistic.
  A free enterprise government which we try to be is always told that it should interfere as little as possible, unless the interference might be of advantage to a particular business or a business sector, in which event interference is welcome and invited.  So we';ve got to try and strike that balance and I hope from the tenor of my remarks I';ve, as honestly as I can, conveyed to you a concern to preserve the small business sector that you represent without pretending that I can promise that all of your members are going to continue and recognising that we have to strike that balancing act between the two.
QUESTION:
Peter Cranston from the Australian Self-Medication Industry.  Mr Prime Minister, you mentioned the…
PRIME MINISTER:
Self-Medication?
QUESTION:
Yes.  You mentioned the Free Trade Agreements that are being looked at at the moment, how vulnerable is Australia';s PBS system?
PRIME MINISTER:
It';s not, the elements of the PBS system are not going to be traded away in those negotiations.  I in fact with my discussion with President Bush when he was here a few weeks ago suggested to him that America should introduce something like the PBS system in his country, I don';t think it';s going to happen.  But I think it would be very good for the consumers in the United States if it were to happen.  The pharmaceutical benefits system is a very good one, and I know there are a few manufacturers in this room, perhaps representatives, who may not agree with that quite so enthusiastically  as I do, and the Government is in the position of holding what when I was at school they used to call a monopsomy, in other words a buying monopoly, and we are in that position.  But it does guarantee that the average citizen in this country has access at an affordable price to lifesaving drugs and that';s something that';s very important to Australia, and I want to make it very clear we are not going to trade that wonderful facility away in the Free Trade negotiations, we';re not.  Now you can have debate about different things at the margin but we';re simply not going to trade that away and we';ve made that very clear to the Americans and in fairness to them they do understand that, there are obviously in the Free Trade discussions there';ll be some things that we will need to agree to that will be of advantage to the Americans in certain areas, that';s the nature of it, we can';t expect them to give us significant access to their agricultural market without them getting some things in return.  But I certainly don';t believe that what we would agree to give in return will damage the economic interests of this country, I think some of the things they';re requesting, I think in the long term will be of advantage because they could result in further opening up of the Australian economy. But the PBS in its essential character is just not on the list and is not up for grabs or not up negotiation.
 QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, Marie (inaudible) from ScienceTech Australia.  The Medicare reform package, it seems to be making very good progress in the Senate.  The new Health Minister has negotiated very well.  Can you just comment on the likelihood of the timeframe of the package and the situation between the Federal Government and the State Government with funding responsibilities and actual delivering of services and whether we can see some reform in the future so that the State Governments actually deliver what they should be delivering to the community.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well on the question of the Medicare changes, I think they have been well received by the community, how they end up being received in the Senate I guess we';ll find out next week.  There is only one item that';s to be voted on by the Senate, there';s only one thing that needs legislation and that is the proposal to introduce a new safety net and that safety net says that if you are a concession card holder and your expenses, your out of pocket expenses go over $500 in any year then you are reimbursed 80 per cent of the excess.  If you are not a concession card holder but you are in receipt of family tax benefits, in other words if you';re a family man or woman and the combined out of pocket expenses of yourself and your husband or wife and children, combined together, go over $500 then you get that same facility and that if you';re the rest of the community, a person whose kids are grown up or is earning more than $80 – 90 – 100,000 a year, are the limits depending on the number of children where family tax benefits cut out, the threshold for that is $1,000 and then you get the 80 per cent reimbursement.
Now this is the first time since Medicare was introduced, and indeed the first time ever that this country has the prospect of a universal safety net.  And what it does mean is that people will have peace of mind against the possibility that through no fault of their own they will hit a period in their life where they have a lot of unexpected expense either for themselves or their children or both which are going to cause them severe financial difficulty. Now we hope that the opposition parties in the Senate will support this measure. I find it very hard to believe how anybody could realistically vote against it unless their purpose is to make it difficult for our reforms to be implemented in the hope that that will make us more unpopular at the end of next year when the election is held and they might thereby gain a political advantage.  But if that is their reasoning then they are seeking to gain a political advantage at the expense of the welfare of the families in particular of Australia.
So, I hope it will get passed Marie, I can';t tell until we actually get there next week, there have been some encouraging comments made by a number of people but until we actually get there and we see the whites of their eyes, so to speak, I don';t really know exactly what is going to happen.
You ask about the Commonwealth and the States interface.  The problem with health, one of the problems with health is that there are some things that are the responsibility of the states, there are other things that are the responsibility of the Commonwealth.  Public hospitals are totally run and operated by State Governments.  Although the Federal Government contributes more money than the states do to the operation of State Government hospitals, we don';t have any say in their operation.  And I would like a situation where there was more cooperation.  We have in fact made some progress.  We have in fact under the new Health Care Agreements made a bit of progress in the area of cooperation between the Commonwealth and the States, but I think there is probably room for a lot more.  We have increased by 17 per cent in real terms, that';s over and above inflation, the promise we make to the states for the funding of their hospitals over the next five years, and I believe that the new MedicarePlus policy will provide a further underpinning of our responsibilities so far as health is concerned.
QUESTION:
Mr Prime Minister, Lyn (inaudible), Chartered Accountants and Financial Planners from Eastwood.  I have an interest in superannuation, which is a highly complex area to work in because of all the many changes with dates attached to them.  I';d like to know whether the Government plans an overview of the entire superannuation system.  For instance, I see there is a number of inequities where one can now (inaudible) in one';s superannuation on divorce or on one';s ongoing employer contributions, but one can';t split with one';s spouse superannuation on accumulated balances.  There are anomalies where employees'; contributions or employers'; support contributions can be claimed as tax deductions 100 per cent, but self-employed people have a scaled down deductibility for their contributions.  There are anomalies where people who have access to highly expensive advice can use their superannuation for estate planning purposes, to shift their balances to other parties without endangering their reasonable benefits limit, where the normal people don';t have access to this information.  I';d just like to know whether the Government plans a total overview of the superannuation.
PRIME MINISTER:
I can assure you that it';s one of those areas of policy that is, as it were, under continuous review.  I';m a little wary of the idea of having a sort of total Royal Commission type, once and for all, grand slam review because it would take years, given the contrary views that so many people hold on it.  Whenever you contemplate significant change to superannuation, there will always be some… that';s very big change, there will always be potential winners and also potential losers, unless of course the view is taken that you can find unlimited amounts of additional revenue from some other source in order to effect the changes.  We went to the last election with some relatively modest but important proposals in relation to co-contributions for low-income earners in relation to splitting spouse entitlements, and also in relation to a progressive reduction in the not very popular superannuation surcharge.  Now, we finally after a lot of backing and filling, we finally secured the support of the Senate to get, in an amended form, some of those measures through.
  And I think what I can assure you of is this – that we don';t regard the current system as in any way perfect.  It clearly isn';t, and it has been the subject of a lot of changes – some of which have been good, some of which have been not so good.  What I think you will know from your own experience is that one of the really big changes occurred in the late 80s when the revenue draw through purposes, the taxation… the fundamental taxation arrangements were changed.  It was explained at the time by the then Government as simply being a timing issue.  But what of course it did was to very significantly alter the basis of the taxation and add a very, very significant… with a very significant revenue impact, the basis of the taxation of superannuation.
  We want to keep superannuation attractive.  We believe in the notion that people should be given incentives to provide for their own retirement, and we will take opportunities to further reform the system.  I';m just hesitant about promising one all embracing, grand slam, Royal Commission type review.  It would take a long time and it would operate as an excuse for nothing to be done while that inquiry is underway.  Inevitably it would recommend some very major changes that would be the subject of enormous debate and contention in the community, but I';m not sure that at the end of the process you would necessarily end up with a better system because it is the case that unless you';ve got access to a lot of additional money – now some people might say, well you have, but there are a lot of claims on that additional money and it';s not quite as extensive as people think.
  That $7.5 billion that seems to have deposited itself in people';s minds as being the surplus from last year';s budget – that $7.5 billion has already been spent.  It has been used to repay Government debt.  And it';s ended up in the hands of bondholders who lent the money to earlier Governments to finance their profligate deficits.  And so we don';t have that $7.5 billion.  It';s gone.  Although every time I go around Australia, I keep running into people saying look, you';ve got $7.5 billion, can I possibly just have a couple of hundred thousand and you won';t notice it, they say.
  But look, I think there is a lot of legitimate concern about the way the system operates and we haven';t put it in a too hard basket.  We certainly haven';t.  And as opportunities arise, we will endeavour to try and improve it.
QUESTION:
I just might take this opportunity to ask the final question of the Prime Minister.  You mentioned how you managed to tackle the runaway interest rate inflation, which is probably worse than facing up to a Joe Rokocoko.  How do you plan on tackling someone like Jonny Wilkinson tomorrow night if you were the Australian coach?
PRIME MINISTER:
I really do like the game very much, but one of the things I have taught myself as Prime Minister is when I get these wonderful opportunities to hold forth on tactics, not to pretend that I';m an expert.  I saw the game last Saturday night, and it was the most… the first half was about the most exhilarating 40 minutes of rugby union that I have seen for years.  I think if it';s dry and warm, it will be very good.  That';s an entreaty to a power much greater than any I might have, to try and deliver the right conditions.  And there was once… I once read a book called ‘God is an Englishman';.  Well I don';t want him to be tomorrow night!
  QUESTION:
Maybe the Treasurer could find a little bit of that $7.5 billion just to put a roof over Stadium Australia for the night.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Doug, Bob Hawke, John Anderson, Daryl Williams, my other parliamentary colleagues past and present.  Doug, you mentioned the football.  Daffy Bowers, who I';m very happy to welcome here as a representative of the gallery that has spent so much time here, said to me as I walked in that he reckons the reason the Wallabies lost was that I didn';t barrack loudly enough.
  But can I say that it is a great pleasure to share these few moments with my colleague and vigorous adversary, but nonetheless a person who has made an immense contribution to our nation, Bob Hawke.  I agreed with just about everything Bob said.  The passage of time has not dimmed his capacity to stir, nor has it in any way dented the extraordinary generosity of his spirit when it comes to speaking of his opponents, not least of course his party colleagues.  But he is right when he says that the country has been well served by its political parties.
  We have a great capacity – it';s part of our nature, it';s an Australian trait to denigrate and to mock anything that smacks of an established pattern or a tradition – but deep down we have an intrinsic democratic spirit, and our political parties are the expression of that.  With all their faults, they';re incredibly important.  I think all of us though have to take a reality check that the membership base of all of our political parties is now becoming too narrow.  I mean we Liberals might like to think that at a certain level all of the problems in that department are on the other side, and the Labor Party particularly as it surveys its mastery of the state scene might think oh all the problems are on our side.  The reality is that political parties today, their base of membership is narrowing to an alarming degree and all political parties have to find a way of relating more comprehensively with grassroot support.
We live in an age where people don';t automatically join institutions.  People of my generation and Bob';s generation, which is roughly the same generation let me hastily say, we, you know, you automatically joined all sorts of things when you left school. People don';t do that anymore.  We';ve got to find a way of harnessing them, and this is as important to the Liberal Party and to the National Party, as it is to the Labor Party, but even more importantly than that, it';s very important to the body politic because if you end up with political parties being run by people whose whole existence has been political, and have had none of life';s experience, you';re going to get a very narrow view.  And I think it';s tremendously important that both sides of politics understand that.
Now as to these magnificent rooms, I love this old building.  It was my impression and perception from the time I was a child of what national politics was all about.  Now of course it was an appallingly overcrowded, decrepit building in which to work and there is no doubt that the new building is magnificent as far as the spaciousness and the amenities for our staff and Members generally are concerned.  I think the comparison, the old debating chamber in the House of Representatives was a country mile ahead of the debating chamber we now have.  There';s just something about the size.  But you could reach out and touch, literally, you could reach out and touch people.  And the intimacy and the interaction of the old chambers is something that I miss, and I spent what 14 of my 29 years in this building.  But there are all sorts of other things about this place that you remember.  I can';t but turn around there, but think of Alan Reid resting on the glass case and observing the comings and goings.  I think you could sense a coup coming a little easier here, than you could in the new Parliament House.
  The one party room that I haven';t, we haven';t sort of been to tonight was of course the Opposition party room, which I started in, left for seven and a half years, went back to, and remember mainly fondly – there was the odd occasion that I don';t remember quite so fondly.  I think the two most dramatic moments I had in that party room were… one was in 1975, in March of 1975 when the Liberal Party chose Malcolm Fraser to replace Billy Snedden as its leader – a decision that had very profound consequences on the political balance, the balance of that particular political year.  It did particularly displease one of Malcolm';s predecessors as leader of the Liberal Party, the then Member for Higgins who left the room and closed the door rather emphatically, and I';ve never quite forgotten that moment.  And then of course I suppose the most exciting or harebrained experience I had in that room was going in thinking I was going to be voted out as Deputy Leader and emerging as Leader.  But I mean they';re the sort of things that occasionally happen in political parties.  Not the most, I think with the fullness of time, not the most ordered, sensible way of becoming a leader of a political party, but they';re the things you learn after a passage of time.
But it';s a building that will always be very much a part of my recollections and memories of my political career.  I went into that Country Party room and remember that magnificent photograph after the 1972 election of all of the members of the Country Party, and being a smallish party, it had a great intimacy and warmth and fraternity amongst its membership of applauding I think it was the election of Frank O';Keefe on the final count as the Member for Upper Hunter in an election which didn';t go terribly well for the Coalition.  But this building has, as Bob said, seen so many of those dramatic events that have shaped our nation.  It was of course the building out of which Government and Opposition on occasions together worked during the darkest days of World War II.  It was the building that I think this very great hall saw the principal celebration that took place at the time of our 50th anniversary of our nation, which I think if recollection serves me correctly coincided exactly with the very untimely death of Ben Chifley, one of Australia';s – whatever his politics – greatly loved and respected Prime Ministers.
So it is a building that rekindles in all of us a memory of so much of our history.  It';s a building of course that was dominated for so long in a political sense by the founder of my party, and Australia';s longest serving Prime Minister, Robert Gordon Menzies.  So I am delighted to be part of this ceremony, to congratulate you Doug, and to say how warming it is that we are becoming so much more intensely interested in our history as a nation.
  One of the really pleasing things for all Australians over I think the last 10 to 15 years is the way in which we are grabbing hold of our history.  We';re realising that there is a richness and there is a warmth in the character of the people who played a major part in our history that is the equal and in many respects more enchanting and more endearing than that of any other country.  We are in that sense becoming less and less derivative and more and more a group of people who know that we have achieved a lot, who are comfortable with who we are and who we relate to, and treasure very much as the years go by what this country has contributed to the world and what it means to each one of us.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for having me.  It's a great honour to come back to this building as Prime Minister as to formally declare open the refurbished party rooms and to again thank the Old Parliament House Authority and you Doug for the magnificent leadership that you have given.
Thank you.
  [ends]


JOURNALIST:
.. delaying….
PRIME MINISTER:
Well our view is that this issue has been kicked around a lot and we think there';s been plenty of debate.  I don';t know how anybody could be against a safety net that';s not there now.  I mean you might argue that it could be even more generous, although it is very generous, but nobody could seriously argue that the safety net is going to make the situation worse, it can only make it better.  And I would have thought that from the point of view of Australian families who will be helped by this safety net it would have been better if the whole thing were wrapped up and passed into law before Christmas, because we';ve been talking about this issue now for eight or nine months.  And it';s not as if we';re trying to take something away, we';re putting something in, we';re adding something and I can';t for the life of me see how anybody could be against adding an additional protection for Australian families.  And if the Labor Party feels that things we are doing are inadequate then if they win the next election then they can add things to it.  But in the meantime, this dog in the manger politics, which is really what the Labor Party is about at the moment, is really very disappointing.
JOURNALIST:
Will it (inaudible) the Government';s timetable at all if it';s not…
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don';t know. I mean they say February but you';ve got no guarantees.  When we come back they might say we';re going to make it March or April, we need more information. I mean the Labor Party is already on record as saying it wants to string out the education debate until the election, maybe they want to do the same thing with this. I mean this is dog in the manger politics, this is not constructive because, let me make it very plain, if the Labor Party goes to the next election and wins then it will have a mandate to implement its policies and I would hope that the then Opposition would respect that mandate. But right at the moment we';re trying to do some things that are adding protections and they';re trying to hold those protections up. I think it';s very poor politics and very bad for the country that they have this very negative attitude.
JOURNALIST:
So would it effect their timing on the election next year?
PRIME MINISTER:
Their timing?
JOURNALIST:
Your timing.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, look, don';t get into another election, we';re having an election at the end of next year in the normal course.
Thank you.


George Gregan, gee, this is good, Eddie Jones, to all of the members of the Wallaby team, Peter Crittle, the President of the Australian Rugby Union, Simon Crean, Leader of the Opposition, Mr Speaker, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen.
This is an occasion for all of the representatives of the Australian people to pay tribute to one of the most magnificent sporting teams that this country has produced.  It's also an opportunity to pay tribute to the brilliant organising ability of the Australian Rugby Union, to John O'Neill and his staff and all of the others associated with the organisation of a tournament which has once again demonstrated the extraordinary capacity of this nation to work together to produce an outstanding sporting event.
I'd also like to acknowledge the presence here of the official representative of the victorious team, Alastair Goodlad, the British High Commissioner, although rumour has it that being a good Scotsman his real preferences lay elsewhere.
The Wallabies performed absolutely magnificently and any lover of rugby, indeed people who may have been recent converts to rugby, could have only been absolutely enthralled and captivated by the remarkable game on Saturday night.  To go into extra time and then on the very death knock to see a field goal decided finally in favour of England, and to see that was something that was so rich and enjoyable to all of us who love rugby, and I believe to many others around the country.
So in very genuinely congratulating the English team on a great victory, I want to say on behalf, I know of all Australians, that the Wallabies in every sense of the word did us proud.  That extraordinary game against New Zealand, the first half of that game against New Zealand, was the greatest rugby played by our team during the whole of the tournament and I think the greatest 40 minutes played by any team during the whole of the tournament.
Apart from paying tribute to the great captaincy of George Gregan, there is one other player that I'd like to single out and especially welcome here and to pay tribute to his great courage and on your behalf to wish him all the best for the future and that's Benny Darwin.  And I know that one of the more emotional moments of the whole tournament, and indeed the final on Saturday night, was when Ben presented the jerseys to the players before the match commenced and I know that we all wish him well for the future.
Can I just finally say that the coaching of Eddie Jones was quite remarkable.  And his quiet manner, his laconic style and he had quite a good line I thought when he was interviewed on Sunday and they showed a clip of him simply brushing past the victorious English coach and the interviewer said not much of an exchange there and Eddie said oh, I'm not a great hugger you know and I thought he put it well.  But he really did this country proud with his performance.
  Could I say that one of the things that really I think gripped all rugby followers was the way in which this game was embraced in those parts of Australia that had not been traditional rugby places and I think in a way the metaphor for that was the game at Launceston between Romania and Namibia where I think you know if you were born on the odd day of the month you barracked for one team, and the even the other, or if you lived on the odd side of the street or the even side of the street, whatever the division was.  But all over the country it was such an extraordinary tournament and again congratulations to the team, to Bob Tuckey, the Chairman of the ARU, and to Peter Crittle the President, and John O'Neill the CEO, you've demonstrated again all of you how good this country is at putting on great sporting events and that makes all of us very proud, but the proudest people of which we are tonight more than any of our magnificent team.
Congratulations George, to you and all of the boys and it's great to have so many of the wives and girlfriends here tonight, we welcome you, we salute you, we wish you well for the future and I invite Simon Crean, the Leader of the Opposition, to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Professor, parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I do very much welcome this opportunity on the eve of the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Abuja to address the Round Table and I thank it for the opportunity that this forum affords.
  My term as the first Chairman-in-Office of the Commonwealth will come to an end in Nigeria next week, and the responsibility will transfer to President Obasanjo of Nigeria.  The position does not, and nor should it, imply any authority, other than that mandated by meetings of the Commonwealth Heads of Government.  There are, however, very important responsibilities, the major one of which is to continue to advocate and propound the relevance and benefits of the Commonwealth and ensure that it remains relevant and credible in the 21st century.
  The Commonwealth, with all its inevitable shortcomings, remains in many ways a unique international institution.  The diversity of its membership is quite astounding and unlike many other groupings it does not exist to promote the interests of a particular region – members span the globe, they hail from both hemispheres and from all continents.  It embraces a multiplicity of religions, ethnicity and culture.  The richest and the poorest, some of the largest and indeed many of the smallest countries in the world belong to the Commonwealth.
What does draw and continue to keep us together is the history and the strength of our common democratic institutions.  Shared political values lie at the heart of our association.  When the Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Coolum in Australia in March of last year, we reaffirmed our commitment to those values – to democracy, to the rule of law, to good governance, to freedom of expression and the protection of human rights.  Protecting and advancing these values is central to our Commonwealth heritage and when we unite in pursuit of these values, the Commonwealth family has been able to achieve quite momentous change.
And as we reflect upon those successes, we recognise the enormous debt we owe to the fountainhead of the rule of law as we understand it, and that is the Common Law of England.  For the nations of the Commonwealth, that legal framework represents a great bond and we celebrate the values and institutions that we hold in common as a result.
The three great institutions that prevail against all assaults on political freedom are easily identified.  A vigorous, robust, party political system typified by open free elections and a parliamentary system that expresses the will and the character of the people.  The maintenance of a legal system exemplified by an incorruptible judiciary.  And finally, the existence of an open, free and usually highly critical media.  Shared understanding of the importance of these fundamental elements of democracy, and the common inheritance of the rule of law, form the basis of the Commonwealth';s ability to communicate and to reach consensus.
 The emphasis on reaching consensus through discussion and debate may, as it is, seem slow but it is effective.  It is a demonstration of the respect that we have for each other.  It ensures that the voice of even the smallest state is heard and their views considered.  This is especially important given that of the 54 states that form the Commonwealth 32 are small, only having populations of fewer than 1.5 million people.
 The commitment to Commonwealth values also has practical benefits.  Democratic values and good governance are essential prerequisites for peace, development and prosperity.  Too often we have seen political instability, corruption and maladministration wipe out hard won national and regional advances.  In this era of global terrorism, institutions which promote stability and prosperity are more important than ever.  We now know that there are those all too ready to take advantage of any break down in law and order.  Too often we have seen failed states become the base for terrorists and other transnational criminals.
The Commonwealth has played an important role in supporting and nurturing the institutions that underpin democracy – helping to build the skills and infrastructure necessary for good governance.  Australia sees this as one of the principal functions of the modern Commonwealth.  Effective state administration is necessary for the provision of public services, effective public expenditure management, efficient judiciaries and a determined effort against corruption – for what we might term the essential building blocks of development.
Australia and the other nations of the Pacific recognised this when, at the request of its government, we provided an assistance mission to the Solomon Islands.  Like many other Pacific nations, the Solomon Islands faces many obstacles to its development.  It is small and geographically isolated.  Given the long-standing strong ties between our nations and our peoples, it is no surprise that the Solomon Islands should turn to Australia for assistance.  Australia has provided support and aid to the Solomon Islands over many years.  Like so many Pacific nations, Australia and the Solomon Islands are members of the Commonwealth.  We therefore share an understanding of the benefits of democracy and the rule of law.
  Australia takes its responsibilities for development assistance in our region very seriously.  We know that aid plays a significant role in restoring stability. But aid can only ever be a part of the solution.  So like other members of the Commonwealth, we are looking to use our aid programme to encourage and strengthen the framework for good governance in the Pacific.  Developing nations must strive for the highest standards of governance. The future of their peoples depends upon their willingness and their ability to do so.
 The Commonwealth';s political role however, important though it is, is only part of its agenda.  We don';t just focus as a group of nations on political institutions.  We understand that hunger, homelessness and poverty inhibit democracy.  The theme for next week';s CHOGM meeting in Abuja – ‘Democracy and Development'; - reminds us that if we are to be successful in promoting democracy, we must also concentrate on development.  It is clear that the greatest antidote to the gaps between developing and developed nations is a freer trading system.  The facts are well known.  OECD countries spend US$1 billion a day on trade subsidies – six times more than they spend on aid to poor countries.
Trade and investment are of crucial importance in overcoming poverty.  The removal of barriers to exports and the elimination of the wealthy nations'; trade-distorting subsidies would do more than anything else to ensure the future of the people who live in developing countries.  I hope that the Commonwealth will send a strong message that the Doha round, the so-called ‘development round';, must live up to its name.  We must find a way to ensure that trade is fair as well as free.
  Australia is working on every available front to support trade liberalisation, especially in relation to agriculture.  We understand the importance of market access for developing countries.  In 2002, Australia abolished all tariffs and quotas for goods produced in those countries defined by the United Nations as being the least developed.  Fifteen of the countries which could benefit from this decision are members of the Commonwealth.  The Commonwealth is working to ensure that developing nations have a voice at international trade negotiations.  It provides technical assistance and training to help developing countries participate in the negotiations.  It is also working to build members'; capacity to implement more robust domestic trade policy so that they can better adjust to changes in the global trading environment.
Over the last two years, we have also sought to ensure that the Commonwealth';s own institutional structures and procedures are effective and efficient.  At Coolum, the leaders of the Commonwealth adopted the report of the High Level Review Group, which provides a blue-print for focusing the Commonwealth on its core objectives, streamlining bureaucratic arrangements and working more effectively with other international organisations and aid donors.
Part of my responsibility as Chairman-in-Office has been to work with the Secretary- General, Don McKinnon, to ensure that the necessary reforms are implemented.  Of course, national governments are ultimately responsible for their own democracy and development but the Commonwealth can pool resources and expertise that can be used to promote and support democratic understanding and administrative infrastructure.
Through the Secretary-General';s ‘good offices'; work the Commonwealth has, and will continue, to play an active role in resolving political problems and conflicts - informally, peacefully and efficiently.  The Commonwealth also provides invaluable advice and assistance on electoral processes and fearlessly monitors voting to ensure elections are both free and fair.
But most importantly, the Commonwealth has created a mechanism to take action when its principles are flouted.  At Coolum we clarified the conditions under which the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group will, in future, address serious or persistent violations of the Harare Principles on democracy.
  The Commonwealth has demonstrated that it is not only capable of identifying unacceptable behaviour but also of taking action, providing assistance and, when the problem has been addressed, readmitting the offenders back into the Commonwealth family.  It has in the past been willing to make strong and difficult decisions – and those actions have strengthened its standing and thereby its capacity to act.  It played a crucial role in dismantling apartheid in South Africa and more recently in the return of civilian government in Nigeria and the restoration of democracy in Fiji.  It has been successfully working with Pakistan to see a return to democracy in that country.  By maintaining its focus on democracy and human rights, it has made a real difference to the lives of citizens in many Commonwealth countries.
As we face the challenges of today, we should not forget the Commonwealth';s solid, indeed proud record of achievement in these areas.  Reflecting on those successes will, I hope, give us the courage of our convictions and ensure that we maintain a consistent approach to those who violate Commonwealth principles.
At the meeting in Abuja the Commonwealth will have to determine a course of action to respond to the continued flagrant disregard of its principles by the Government of Zimbabwe.  This will be a significant test of the Commonwealth';s relevance and credibility.  Australia has been a firm supporter of democratic freedoms and liberty in Zimbabwe from the time of its struggle towards independence and majority rule.  Australia is a long-standing friend of Zimbabwe.  We have great affection for its people and we are very concerned about what is currently occurring inside that country.
Conditions in Zimbabwe have continued to worsen both politically and economically.  Human rights are routinely violated as President Mugabe';s regime seeks to silence all opposition.  Freedom of expression is suppressed by violence.  Freedom of the press to report objectively or criticise the Government has been eliminated with restrictive regulations covering media operations.
Inflation is currently running at 455 per cent.  The cash economy has virtually halted due to an acute shortage of cash and foreign exchange.  Agricultural production has disintegrated – in 1998 Zimbabwe had over five million head of cattle, in 2003 there are only 250,000.  There is not enough fuel or spare parts to keep farm equipment operational and there are no funds to buy or import seed and fertiliser.  Some five and a half million people now require food aid.  The health care system is on its knees – hospitals are closing because they cannot feed patients, doctors and nurses are striking or simply leaving, drug treatments are unaffordable compounding the health problems created by malnutrition, poverty, and HIV/AIDs.
Australia has tried very hard to bring about change in Zimbabwe.  As Chairman-in-Office, I have regularly urged the Mugabe regime to return to Commonwealth principles – ironically those principles are known as the Harare Declaration, as they were drawn up in Zimbabwe';s capital in 1991.  But President Mugabe';s regime continues to encourage systematic harassment and torture of the opposition, electoral malpractice and corrupted legal processes.  It continues to resist the transparent, equitable and sustainable land reform programme its citizens so desperately need.
  The regime of President Mugabe is only in power because, through a campaign of violence and rorting, it stole the presidential elections in March 2002.  The Commonwealth Observer Group, led by General Abdulsalami Abubakar of Nigeria, monitored those elections.  It concluded that they were marred by a high level of politically motivated violence and that, I quote: “the conditions in Zimbabwe did not adequately allow for a free expression of will by the electors.”
As chairman in office, I joined with the previous and future chairmen, President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa and President Obasanjo of Nigeria, to form a committee – a troika – that was tasked by the Coolum CHOGM to respond to that report to which I have just referred.  Guided by the Commonwealth';s Harare and Millbrook principles, the troika determined the appropriate course of action was to suspend Zimbabwe from the Councils of the Commonwealth from March of 2002.  The continuation of this suspension was confirmed by the Secretary-General in March of this year, and will hold until the issue is considered by CHOGM in December in Nigeria.
In deciding on suspension the troika also expressed our determination to promote reconciliation in Zimbabwe between the main political parties.  We were very conscious of the parlous state of the Zimbabwean economy and considered reconciliation to be essential to address the issues of food shortages, economic recovery, the restoration of political stability, the rule of law and the conduct of future elections.  But President Mugabe has steadfastly refused to respond to the calls of Commonwealth leaders to rectify the problems or even to engage in any way with the Commonwealth';s Secretary General.
I think it is useful and indeed salutary to contrast this behaviour with that of Fiji or Pakistan.  In response to its suspension, Fiji cooperated fully with the Commonwealth .  It took the opportunity and the assistance offered.  Fiji now has a proper constitutional process and is once more a full Commonwealth member.  Pakistan is still suspended from the Commonwealth, but it has made significant progress, culminating in what Commonwealth electoral observers last year described as a ‘credible election';.  And once the outstanding constitutional issues are resolved we expect that Pakistan';s suspension from the Councils of the Commonwealth will, and indeed should, be lifted.
Zimbabwe';s record and response and attitude sadly is in direct contrast.  President Mugabe refuses even to acknowledge the legitimacy of Commonwealth concerns.  The Government of Zimbabwe remains in serious and persistent breach of the Commonwealth';s basic democratic principles.
 In advance of CHOGM let me reiterate Australia';s position - Zimbabwe must demonstrate a fundamental change in attitude and approach before it regains its place in the Commonwealth.  Re-admitting Zimbabwe without concrete progress towards meeting the Commonwealth';s benchmarks will not only undermine the organisation';s credibility, it is also plainly unfair to those countries that have taken the necessary steps to live up to Commonwealth values.  Even worse it will set a dangerous precedent for other errant states, inhibiting the potential of the Commonwealth to be an effective influence for democracy and the rule of law.
Australia, under successive governments of both political persuasions, has taken pride in being part of the global community of Commonwealth nations, and in their own ways, different prime ministers of this country have contributed to the activities, the affairs and the deliberations of the Commonwealth.  It is a forum for building bridges between the poorest and the most disadvantaged nations and developed countries and for encouraging democracy and good economic governance.  Its very name – the Commonwealth - reflects our shared commitment to a future where all our members are able alike to enjoy prosperity and contribute positively and constructively to world affairs.
The principles of the Commonwealth, enshrined in the Harare declarations of ten years ago, are universal principles which apply across every continent of the world, without qualification, and Australia wants to see the Commonwealth stand by those principles without qualification or equivocation.
 Professor, I thank you most warmly for the opportunity that you have given me this morning and I wish the deliberations of the Round Table every success.  Thank you.
QUESTION &amp; ANSWER SESSION
  QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Jane Drake-Brockman, one of the founding members of the Commonwealth Round Table.  You focused on the critical contribution that trade and investment liberalisation makes to poverty reduction and the efforts the Commonwealth has been making in trade policy capacity building, and I guess some of that';s paying some dividends.  We see the African countries increasingly engaged in WTO affairs, even the smaller, land-locked, least developed ones.  How do you see Commonwealth heads of government working together now to try and kickstart the stalled negotiations, and can we expect that the Commonwealth';s new focus on trade policy capacity building will continue?
PRIME MINISTER:
One has to always be realistic about what can be achieved, certainly in a short period of time in this area, but the Commonwealth is one of those gatherings of heads of government where there should be a remarkable commonality of interest and the purpose in seeing the removal of the trade distorting subsidies and a restoration of some momentum for a more successful Doha round.  Although our interests and those of some of other Commonwealth members on some economic and trade issues differ, they certainly don';t differ when it comes to trade access for agricultural exporters.  Clearly, Britain';s membership of the European Union represents an association by that country with a group of nations whose trade policies perhaps go in the other direction, but I';m also aware of the views of the British Government towards greater liberalisation in that area.  I would hope that the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting provides a real opportunity for a spectrum of nations, many poorly developed, some developing, some very well developed, to express a common view about the desirability of further progress.  But I think there are some encouraging signs, although the Cancun gathering was very disappointing and we do need to assemble all of the pressure that we can and the Commonwealth meeting does provide such an opportunity.  I hope we can get a strong statement out of the Commonwealth meeting about the need for addressing that issue that I alluded to in my speech, that the developed… the OECD countries spend six times more per day on their trade distorting subsidies than they do on overseas aid.
[ends]


Your Excellency President Obasanjo, [tape break] ladies and gentlemen.  First may I thank you Mr President for your very gracious invitation for Janette and for me to visit officially Nigeria as part of my attendance at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.  I recalled very well your visit to Canberra in February of last year and of course your very valuable participation in the CHOGM meeting held at Coolum at the beginning of last year.
It is an honour for me to be back in Abuja and to have had the opportunity a short while ago of discussing issues that were raised during our talks in Canberra last year and are very important to the bilateral relationship between our two countries.  We are very different countries in so many ways, Nigeria's population is in the order of 140 million, Australia's population this very week has reached 20 million.  Fifty per cent of your population is under the age of 20, so many of the challenges which you have are relevant to the great youthfulness of your population.  Yet we are, despite our differences, we are bound together by a common set of values and those values are important to the Commonwealth whose heads of government gather here in Abuja for our bi-annual meeting.
But the most important thing I wish to say to you Mr President is, in your own capital, in your own nation, to congratulate you personally in your enormous contribution to the restoration of democracy in Nigeria.  In the process you underwent very great personal stress and hardship, many of us are lucky to have lived in democratic circumstances all of our lives, and although we strive never to take it for granted, we simply don't have to endure the physical difficulty, deprivation of liberty and hardship that is the lot of those who have to struggle to achieve a restoration of democracy and your own personal experience is an inspiration to others who would work to restore and maintain democracy in their own countries.
Those democratic values that we hold in common and which underpin the institution of the Commonwealth we will remind ourselves of over coming days.  I'm delighted that our respective parliaments, that is the parliaments of Nigeria and Australia, have already established very close ties, some Australian Members of Parliament travelled to Nigeria last year and there is discussion of a reciprocal visit by Nigerian Members of Parliament to Australian some time next year.
I share your enthusiasm for the joint endeavours that may emerge in relation to mineral and resource development. We have much in common, Australia has much sophisticated expertise in this area and the opportunities that are before us are very significant indeed.
Tomorrow I will pass to you the responsibilities of Chairman-in-Office of the Commonwealth, a position created for the first time at the Coolum meeting and while it carries no authority beyond what it mandated to it by the members of the Commonwealth, it is a valuable focal point for dealing with Commonwealth issues between meetings of the Heads of Government.  Our Commonwealth family is very diverse, it has an extraordinary variety of cultures, of religions, of ethnicities, the member countries come from both hemispheres and from the four corners of the globe.  It does not have a formal constitutional structure, but it does have the most important international cement of all, and that is common values and a common history of institutions which have always worked to promote the freedom and liberty of individuals.
The hosting of this conference here in Nigeria is a testament to the high standing of Nigeria, not only in Africa but very importantly throughout the entire Commonwealth.  You sir are a leader of stature, a leader of courage, a person who has had to fight during his political life in a very literal sense for the things in which he believes.  And for that end out of great respect for your country may I say that Janette and I and all the other Australians who've come with me are very very pleased indeed to be here with you.
Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to joint me in a toast, firstly to the President and the people of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and also to the friendship of the people of Nigeria and the people of Australia.
[ends]   


Well thank you very much Annie for reminding everybody I entered politics in the last millennium.  But can I say to my parliamentary colleague Kay Patterson, to Aunty Silvia Scott, and thank you very much for your warm and gracious words of welcome, all the members of the Government's community business partnership group who represent large companies, smaller companies, welfare sector as well as people who have had a long philanthropic tradition all of their lives.
It is true, as Annie said, that back in 1999 we established the community business partnership.  I guess the first time that I publicly alluded to a concept that took form with the establishment of that group in 1999 was when I addressed a meeting of ACOSS just after the 1998 election and I'd been thinking for some considerable time that both in Australia and in other comparable countries we had spent an enormous amount of time, both at a political level and also as a community debating whether it was better for the public sector to do something to help people, or whether it was better for the private sector to do something. And we said that to expend an enormous amount of energy in a debate about exclusive roles, we had people saying the government has no business in this, or we had other people saying only the government can perform a function and the private sector has no role in it. And I came to the view that really that was a pretty futile debate, that if we were going to achieve the goals that we wanted to achieve as Australians, if we wanted to strengthen our economy, if we wanted to build further the great social stability which has been a hallmark of Australian society, we really had to recognise that there were some things along the way to achieving those goals that only the government could do, only the government can provide a social security safety net, only the government at a federal level can provide national leadership for certain things, only a national government has the capacity to co-ordinate national efforts.  But there are some things that governments are terrible at doing, and those things are best performed by others within the community.  And if those we can harness the government, the business sector, those who dedicate their lives to helping others and also well motivated philanthropic individuals, each recognising that they have a role, not competing with each other, not trying to prove a point, that it was really something for the government or something for the private sector, we might begin to find some solutions. And I developed the notion of a social coalition and I said something about that coalition when I addressed ACOSS back in December of 1998.  And out of that I formed a view and my colleagues in the Government formed a view with a lot of good advice from people who'd given a lot of their resources and given a lot of their time to helping the less fortunate in the community, we developed the idea of a community business partnership.  And we were talking about it at the board meeting this afternoon and the thing on which we all agreed was that the idea has really taken off over the last five years, we like to think that in a small way each of us has made a contribution to it, and over the last five years the idea of corporations forming partnerships with community groups, the idea of treble bottom line accounting, the idea that it was part of your responsibility of a successful corporate citizen to give something back into the community and to work together with others who achieve goals for Australia, those ideas have really taken root and I think it says something about the good shape of the heart of the Australian business community and it gets a lot of criticism from some ill-informed people on occasions, and on occasions some members of the business community deserve all the criticism they get, but generally speaking that is not the case.  I think it does say something for the good heart of that community that at a time when this country is going through great economic prosperity, when the profits share of Australian business is probably at its highest level at any time since Federation, that's a remarkable claim to make, but I think it is probably true if you analyse the statistics, or very nearly at the highest level it's been.  It is also coincided at a time when more than ever before the business community has got involved in partnership with organisations designed to build better lives and provide greater hope and provide greater opportunity.
So I see the last five years as being very much a journey along the path to living out in the area of building stronger communities, those ideals of mateship and of partnership between different sections of our community that is so much a hallmark of this society of ours.  We are very blessed to be Australians because we have opportunities and we have qualities and our egalitarian nature and our capacity to easily mix with each other and dissolve barriers more readily than many other societies has meant that we have been able to take to our activities the notion of community business partnerships in a quite special way.
So can I say to all of you who've been involved in this, to the business community, to all of the community groups, to all of those who are here tonight, many of you as finalists, many of you as participants, but all of you know I very much committed to the notion of Australian mateship which really is at the heart of the concept of community business partnerships.  Thank you for what you are doing to build an even more socially stable Australia and to build an even more generous Australian community.
Ladies and gentlemen, this year's awards have attracted 308 nominations, which is a 15 per cent increase over 2002.  And it's a demonstration of the work of the partnership and the leadership role that it's been displaying during that period of time has been very very successful.  And one of the things that we have been able to do with the advice of our business members and those who've contributed in response to requests is to make a number of quite important changes to the taxation legislation to encourage and make more easy the contributions of those and the investment of their resources by those who would want to help.  And I think it's also worth recalling in that context that in September the Government announced a new initiative based on the work of the partnership to enhance the ability of charities to use special events such as dinners to fundraise, I've found a very technical thing to mention at a gathering such as this, that those of you who have been involved in those activities, and I guess this includes just about all of you, will know that the previous rules represented in their technical operations quite a significant barrier to the full amplitude of fundraising by many charities.  At the 2002 awards presentation I spoke about a new partnership brokerage service and now fully operationally I would like to formally launch that service tonight.  And the service will match small to medium sized community organisations and businesses and encourage them to build strong partnerships.  The service will be operated by Our Community Pty Ltd an on-line gateway to 700,000 community groups and schools, in conjunction with the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Municipal Association of Victoria.
More recently the partnership has also been looking at something that is very important to Australia's future and that is how to improve the workforce participation of older or mature aged Australians. And a special committee has been formed to tackle this issue, made up of people from business peak bodies, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, National Seniors and Jobs Australia. And I expect to receive their recommendations next year.  And can I also finally announce that given the range of work the partnership is now undertaking, I've broadened the membership of it this year and I want to publicly welcome to the partnership Elaine Henry, the Chief Executive Officer of the Smith Family, Mr Rob Hunt, the Managing Director of the Bendigo Bank, and Dr David Morgan, the Managing Director of the Westpac Banking Corporation. Each of them will bring particular skills to an already highly talented and skilful board. And can I thank all of the members of the board for their tremendous contribution, can I thank all of you for the support you have given to the values and the objectives of community business partnerships, I am very quietly proud of what we have been able to achieve, I think we have helped to accelerate a very desirable change that perhaps was underway anyway in Australian society, I think we have in the process built partnerships that will of great value and partnerships that will contribute towards building a ever more stable and stronger Australian community.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Macdonald – Senator Macdonald the Minister for Fisheries and Forestry, Lionel Woodward the Director-General of Customs, Mr Collins the Regional Director, ladies and gentlemen.
The purpose of this little gathering this morning here in Sydney in this delightful spot in this wonderful Customs facility is to announce a major upgrading of Australia';s capacity to deal with illegal fishing operations within Australian waters and Australian territory.  As a Government and as a nation, we take matters of border security very importantly and very seriously.  Illegal fishing in the southern ocean is more than a fisheries'; issue.  It is really an attack upon Australia';s sovereignty.  And as a result of some recent experiences, and Senator Macdonald has highlighted some of those recent experiences, the Government has decided to enhance the existing patrol program with full-time armed patrols of the remote and ecologically sensitive southern ocean.
  This program will be year round and will be operated by the Australian Customs Service with support from other Government agencies including the Australian Defence Force.  With year round availability of a vessel, patrols will be able to be conducted in response to satellite, radar and other intelligence operations.  Specifically, the Australian Customs Service will lease an ice strengthened vessel which will carry a deck-mounted 0.50 calibre machine gun, an armed Customs boarding party and Australian fishery officers.
  The program will cost in the order of 40 to 50 million dollars a year over the next two years – the precise amount to be settled in the budget context.  A longer-term patrol program will be developed to take over at the end of a two-year period.  The program will provide the capacity to board vessels and use force if necessary and will help avoid the need to undertake long pursuits of illegal vessels in the future.  Australian laws will also be enhanced to provide an even greater deterrent to illegal fishing and the organisers of illegal fishing operations.  Penalties for illegal fishing, which the Government is currently legislating to increase to as much as $825,000, along with the greatly enhanced chance of protection and capture, should in future act as a much greater deterrent to illegal fishing operations in Australian waters.
Just as deterrence has worked very effectively, indeed remarkably, in relation to illegal immigration to this country, it will also be the case that the deterrent effect of this new capacity that I';m outlining this morning, and to which we are committing significant resources from the Commonwealth Government, will act as an effective deterrent to illegal fishing operations in our waters.  The waters in the southern ocean that were described by Senator Macdonald are a very important part of the extended national sovereignty of this country and it';s very important that we see illegal fishing operations precisely for what they are – not only an attempt to take something that does not belong to the people who are attempting to take it, but also very much as an attack upon Australia';s sovereignty.  And that is why we have decided to significantly upgrade our capacity to deal with that issue, to commit to the resources and to give to Customs and other agencies the additional wherewithal to deal with the problem on our behalf.
I would like before concluding to take this opportunity of thanking the Australian Customs Service.  Indeed the very first ministry that I had way back in 1976 included the then Australian Customs Service and I have followed their progress ever since and the contribution that they make to protecting this country, not only from the scourge of drugs in cooperation with the Australian Federal Police and the state police forces, but also their operations in so many other areas that are so important to the protection of this country and the protection of its borders.  And today';s announcement gives them an additional responsibility, but importantly it gives them the enhanced capacity to discharge that responsibility.
  Now I';d like also before concluding to thank Senator Macdonald for his constant advocacy of the need for these increased resources and the vigilant way in which he has committed himself to protecting the great fishing resources of this country which are a valuable part of our assets as a nation.  Thank you.
[ends]


  Thank you very much Dr Kemp, Tom Harley, Senator Lees, Roger Beale, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
The expression ‘distinctively Australian'; is an expression of quiet but determined pride that there is something very different, somewhat separate and something very special about Australia and Australians.  It';s a preferable expression to the one more commonly used of ‘typically Australian'; because perhaps for a purpose such as this, the expression ‘typically Australian'; tends to delineate and therefore exclude, whereas the expression ‘distinctively Australian'; in a very positive way says to the world that there are things about the character of this country and its people, there are things about the natural and built heritage of this country, and there are aspects of the way of life of this country that do mark it out in a quite positive and special way from all of the others.
And that is best I can express it what the new heritage regime is all about.  It is about establishing an opportunity for people from the community to express their views about those things from our past, whatever part of our heritage it may be – natural or built, concerning people, concerning events, concerning natural phenomena, or the interaction of all of those things – that ought to be recorded as forming part of our heritage as Australians.  It does represent a continuity from the work of the National Heritage Commission and I want firstly to pay tribute to the work of former Governments stretching back to 1974, ‘73 indeed, when the legislation was first passed.
  The natural heritage of this country is something that belongs to all of us, irrespective of our ethnic background – whether we';re indigenous Australians or European Australians, whether we were born here or have taken Australia as our nation.  And of course whatever our political or religious beliefs may be, we are all together in wishing to preserve and nurture and promote to the better understanding of future generations of Australians the very rich heritage of our people and our community.
As both Tom Harley and David Kemp have indicated to you, there will be a new National Heritage Council which will advise the Minister on the listing by that Council, listing by the Minister rather, of all of those things that through an accumulation of suggestions from the community or otherwise, form part of the Australian heritage.  And all Australians will be able to nominate sites or places that they would like to have on the national heritage list, and in the first instance they will be encouraged to nominate sites around three very particular themes.
  The first of those is the theme of a wide and ancient land, the second is building a nation, and thirdly the Australian spirit.  And the theme of a wide and ancient land refers to the unique role that the Australian environment plays in our sense of individual cultural identity.  This has particular resonance and significance for indigenous Australians, but it';s important for us all, in recognising where we have come from, our great adaptability and the ongoing evolution of the environments of Australia.  The theme of building the nation describes the development and defence of the so-called political and physical infrastructure that has built Australia as a nation.  A century after Federation, we should continue to celebrate our democratic institutions which have stood the test of more than 100 years and given us the freedom and independence that we tend all too often to take for granted.
  And under the theme of the Australian spirit, we want to recognise those places that have helped shape Australia';s character and defined our national identity.  One core value is our sense of mateship that has been revealed in the fellowship, selflessness and cooperative self-reliance evident in all times of adversity.  Not only has mateship been crucial in times of war and conflict, but it has also been essential in helping us to cope with great distances, isolation and often an unpredictable environment.  Another core value of the Australian spirit is that of a fair go, that does encapsulate our striving for fairness at the heart of our free and egalitarian community.
  And we';re going to be providing some further details in the months ahead as to how this programme will operate.  But being pragmatic and to ensure its success, we';ve committed funding of $52.6 million to the new national heritage system.  And the Heritage Council, as David has indicated, will advise the Minister.  And as he has also indicated, for the first time the legislation will provide real protection for those places that have been listed.
I want to announce today and take this opportunity to indicate that I intend to put forward to the National Heritage Council.  The first nomination for the list early next year – the Anzac experience at Gallipoli, of course, is recognised as the most defining event in Australia';s history that has provided so much in the years that have gone by since 1915, so much of the inspiration for our sense of independence, our sense of our place as a nation in the world, of our separate identity from others – those qualities that we like to believe lie at the heart of the Australian spirit and the Australian character.  And it seems to me that the Government entirely appropriate that the Anzac site at Gallipoli should represent the first nomination for inclusion on the National Heritage List.  And, although it';s not on Australian territory, anyone who has visited the place will know that once you go there you feel it is as Australian as the piece of land on which your home is built.  And it has a powerful and ongoing influence on the psyche, not only of older Australians, but as we so frequently now remark and rejoice in the fact that it also has a powerful and growing impact on the psyche of younger Australians who see visiting that place as being increasingly some kind of right of passage for them as young Australians.
I';m pleased to say that our desire to nominate this already has the enthusiastic backing and enthusiastic support of the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Helen Clark.  And accordingly, the Government has commenced discussions about improving the place in our nation';s premier heritage list.
  It is vital, in connection with the projects and the regime that we';re launching today, that we maintain those records which are part of our heritage.  In recognition of this, I announce that the Government will provide funding for the digital copying and recording of the Gallipoli correspondents of the famous war correspondent CEW Bean and his fellow reporters from the Gallipoli campaign.  These documents will thus become available on the internet and will include some 200 newspaper articles, images and interpretive pieces.  And I';d like to thank the CEW Bean Foundation, which has been involved in supporting this very important project.
And finally, ladies and gentlemen, can I remind you that meeting here at Chowder Bay Heritage Area, which containes one of the first buildings which has been restored by the Sydney Harbour Federation Trust.  The Sydney Harbour Federation Trust, which was supported by Federal Government contributions by about $115 million, will in the years ahead restore to the people of Australia seven important sites, including nearly 140 hectares of prime harbour foreshore land.  It is an example for the whole nation of co-operation between governments and citizens in preserving places of beauty and places which are of great importance to the heritage of our nation.
I want to conclude by thanking my colleague, David Kemp, and his predecessors for the enormous energy and commitment that they have both brought to this project.  By David, I';d like to thank those Senators, including Senator Reid, who supported the Government';s legislation and ensured that the way forward that';s been outlined today has become a reality.
  Wherever we come from, whatever we believe in, politically or otherwise, we all care very much about this nation and its future.  We all love the fact that we are Australians.  We all admire the contribution of our forebears.  We all want this to be a stable, prosperous, contented, unified community, part of that is having a framework of understanding and recalling and recording what has made us who we are today.  The new National Heritage Regime is part of that endeavour, I think it will be a very important part.  I thank you Tom for arranging this event today.  I thank you for your contribution in the past as Chairman of the Commission.  I wish the new regime well.  It will succeed because it will have the goodwill of all Australians.
  [ends]


Thank you very much, Assistant Commissioner Ben McDevitt, Nick Warner, Colonel Flowers, High Commissioner, ladies and gentleman. I come here to do a very simple but very important thing and that is on behalf of those Australians who are here today, on behalf of your fellow Australians to wish you a Merry Christmas.
I know that it's always hard to be separated from your family and other loved ones at this time of the year. Some of you have done it before, some of you are doing it for the first time. Whatever your situation is, I want you to know that your country is aware of the sacrifice you're making, aware of the separation from your families and is very appreciative of your efforts.
To our colleagues from other contributing countries can I convey similar sentiment. This has been a great cooperative, distinguished effort. It really has demonstrated the friendship amongst the countries of the Pacific and one of the reasons why the  RAMSI intervention has been so very successful is that it has been a joint effort. It's not just been an Australian effort, it's been an effort of Australia, and New Zealand and Fiji, and Tonga and Papua New Guinea and other contributing countries -Vanuatu and the list goes on. And that is terrific.
Another reason why it's been successful is that it's been integrated. We not only have people from the defence forces, we have people from the police, we have senior public servants in finance and treasury departments. We have people from the prison systems of Australia and other countries. We have people who are giving technical advice in so many areas. And it does represent a very concerted effort to bring about change for the benefit of the people of this country.
This is our patch, this is our part of the world in which the countries of the Pacific have a particular responsibility. If we're not willing to help our friends who need help, nobody else will. And it's the proper obligation, the proper intervention by Australia and other countries and it does properly carry the description, the code word, the code expression  of operation "Helpem Fren" - you don't need any translation to know what that means.  And it conveys in that one expression what it is all about, we're not trying to throw our weight around, we're trying to help. And we have brought law and order to the people of the Solomon Islands and they appreciate it.
 We've also engaged with them and talked to them and won their support and won their confidence and that is part of a modern military policing operation. You don't just need a show of force, you certainly do to indicate that you mean business but you also need to demonstrate a willingness to reach out and engage with people and if we can bring through the almost half a million people of this country a greater sense of security and safety and stability - it not only helps them but it sends a wonderful signal to people in other parts of the Pacific and a very strong warning to others in those other parts of the Pacific that would do evil to those countries that there are people who are willing to help.
 [inaudible] a great act of providence that we're very grateful to the fact that we haven't had any casualties and we want to keep it that way. And that is a great tribute to the professionalism of the men and women who have been involved in the operation. It's partly due to the fact that we intervened in sufficiently large numbers to send a very clear signal from day one that we weren't going to muck around and that those who would seek to oppose the intervention knew that they were opposing a force that they couldn't possibly overwhelm. There's a lot of work to be done, the first stage has been very successful, but what lies ahead is equally challenging. There's the consolidating of bringing to justice through the proper processes of the law those people who have been charged, to batten down the proceeds of economic recovery and that is why people from our various Federal Government departments advising in relation to economic reconstruction and economic reform are equally important parts of this intervention.
 All of you have an integral role to play - police, army, civilian advisers, prison system, justice system, it's all an integrated part. But I particularly before finishing want to pay tribute to the work of Nick Warner who has been the civilian overlord of this whole operation. He's done an absolutely fantastic job, he's worked to get the confidence of everybody.  Ben McDevitt who has been the senior Australian Police Officer and Assistant Commissioner, and Colonel Flowers, the commanding officer of the ADF contingent. To all of you and to Patrick Cole who took over as High Commissioner only a few months ago because of his great experience with matters affecting the Pacific has helped coordinate the operation from a diplomatic level.
You have every reason to be proud of what you have done for Australia, for New Zealand, for Tonga, for Fiji, for Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu and the list goes on. You have done a wonderful job. Thank you. Merry Christmas. I hope you have contact with your families through email and mobile phones and so forth. I know they'll miss you. We understand that. We're thinking of you. Your country is very grateful of what you've done - have a wonderful Christmas.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Air Commodore and my Federal Parliamentary colleague David Tollner.  Janette and I are very pleased to have the opportunity of meeting so many of the personnel here at Larrakeyah Barracks, to meet their families, and also to have the opportunity of talking to a large number of people who are involved in Northern Command and its various operations, particularly but not only Operation Relex, but also the very effective and integrated way in which so many of the three ADF services as well as Customs and Federal Police and the Department of Immigration are co-operating to provide such excellent protection and service to the Australia nation here in Darwin.  It';s a great weekend for Darwin and it';s a reminder to the rest of Australia of the proximity of Darwin to the countries in our near north. When I was onboard the Customs vessel a few moments ago, I was shown the map and pointed out to me just how vivid was the proximity between Ashmore Reef and Indonesian territory.  I';ve had the opportunity a few moments ago of talking to some of the ADF personnel that have been involved in recent boarding operations. I can only say to all of you who serve Australia in the defence forces, in Customs, in the police, that the Government is very grateful, the nation is in admiration of the professionalism and the commitment that all of you have, and we';re also I hope understanding of the challenges to families of service life and life in other operations that take mums and dads and husbands and wives away from their families.  And in different ways I hope that we are trying, in co-operation with the services, to make those separations easier and to improve the conditions for families in services and also in the police and Customs.
I don';t really want to say any more than that except to thank you again for having us, to express my great admiration for people who take risks that the rest of the community don';t take in the service and the defence of the country because people who serve in the Army and the Navy and the Air Force and people who serve in Customs and the police do take risks that other people don';t take, they are asked to do things that are more dangerous and life threatening than other people are asked and they therefore deserve a special mark of respect and a special place in our community.
Air Commodore and to you and your colleagues in the three services here at the Barracks, thank you very much for having us, I hope Darwin has a great weekend, I';m sure it will, it wouldn';t be Darwin if it didn';t, and I wish you well and I thank you very sincerely for the tremendous job that all of you are doing for Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well firstly could I acknowledge the Larrakeyah people, the traditional owners of this land, the Administrator, Premier, Chief Minister, David Lesar, Rick Allert, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a great moment in the history of Australia, it';s not just a great moment, important though it is in the history and the development of the Northern Territory, fulfilling an aspiration of course that you';ve heard so much about, born almost 100 years ago, but to the entire nation this is a reminder of Australia at its best.  What has been brought to fruition today reminds all of us that if we persist, if we work together, if we keep our gaze fixed on a goal, there is absolutely nothing that Australians working together cannot achieve.
It';s one of those moments that brings together both the history of this country, but also a very clear eyed understanding of our future.  The history over 100 years of the various attempts to build this railway have been very well documented and the debates of almost 100 years ago have been trawled through in minute detail by my two parliamentary colleagues and many others as they';ve come from Adelaide to us here in Darwin.  And it is steeped in history and in a way you can see it symbolically as conquering that last element of the tyranny of distance, as Geoffrey Blainey put it, that always afflicted Australia.  So it has got a lot to do with our history but it';s also got very much to do with our future, because one of the great hopes of this railway is that it will further cement the role and the place of Darwin as a great port and a great bridge and a great link with the associations, economic and otherwise, that Australia has with the nations of Asia and it is therefore in that way very much part of our future and very much bound up with the links between Australia and the nations of our region.
It is important, ladies and gentlemen, on an occasion such as this to pay tribute to so many who';ve done so much to bring this about. I share the compliment paid by Rick Allert to Barry Coulter for the enormous energy that he displayed, his persistence dealing with people, the same people often in both government and opposition, at a federal level.  I compliment the work of previous chief ministers of the Territory, and previous premiers of South Australia.  It was Dean Brown and Shane Stone who first came to me after I become Prime Minister to reinforce the joint support of the people of South Australia and the people of the Northern Territory for this project, and I compliment the current occupants of this two positions, Clare Martin and Mike Rann, on the persistence and commitment that both of them have displayed towards it.  And may I say that I';m quietly very proud of the fact that I lead the national government that ultimately gave the decisive financial support at a federal level that made the project possible.
But the most important people in building the railway were those who constructed it and those who conceived it, the private sector people who organised the finance, and I pay particular tribute to Malcolm Kinnaird and Rick Allert, the two businessmen with which I';ve had the most association in the course of putting the railway together, to David Lesar, but finally and most importantly to the men and women of the Territory and other parts of Australia who worked on the railway, who finished it ahead of time, who finished it efficiently and made it what it is and that is a great tribute to Australian engineering skill and a great tribute to the capacity of the Australian people to conquer any obstacle and clear any hurdle if we work together and commit our collective wills to those goals.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, this is a fantastic conclusion on what has been a remarkable few days.  It';s one of those occasions that you have in public life where it really all becomes something worthwhile.  We have together, proper credit has been given, and thanks has been extended, but together a lot of Australians plus a number of Americans and others from other countries have all worked together to produce an outcome that really makes us feel very good and making us recognise that there is more to life than just a straight statistical assessment of what the profit and loss might be at any given time, although we hope that as time goes by, the profit and loss is very attractive. I';m sure it will be. And if the advance bookings are any guide I';m sure it is going to be.
  But there was an investment of a lot of people in this project, there was an investment of a lot of dollars, taxpayer dollars, courtesy of the national government, the Territory Government and the State Government of South Australia, let me say given the proportionality, the contributions made by South Australia and the Northern Territory were very, very significant. And a great amount of commitment by the private sector and the businessmen and women who over a period of years have been exhorting this project and talking it up must feel a very great sense of satisfaction.
 The other great thing about this project is that it';s enabled us to put on display to our own countrymen and women and to the world, the great engineering proficiency of this country.  During the building of this, the shortness of time involved from the turning of that first sod that I remember very well, I was suffering from laryngitis, it was a combination of laryngitis and having cheered Australia to victory over the British and Ireland Lions a couple of days earlier in Sydney. No disrespect to you Alistair and welcome to you. You turned the tables two and a half years later.  But it';s been done in a record time and it';s an enormous tribute and I just want to pay a special tribute to the builders, the people whose great technical skill has had so much to do with it.
Finally, can I also pay tribute to somebody else and that';s, I hope I don';t embarrass her by doing this, my wife Janette because some of you may know that she was the daughter of a railway engineer. My late father in law was the chief civil engineer for the New South Wales railway and all my married life I';ve been told how important rail is, Tim Fischer, she was years ahead of you. She had a rails run, no pun intended,  but so really the secret of it all is that she kept saying to me you';ve got to support this railway (tape break) and as a result, we both, for a whole lot of reasons, are delighted to be with you tonight. I think it was one of the most far-sighted, sensible, long term decisions that my government has taken. I have never doubted the widsom of this decision, it was the right decision and years into the future people will say that the right decision was taken by the relevant people at the right time for the long term benefit of our country, and that is our job, creating long term good things for Australia and we';ve all been part of that and we should celebrate.
Thank you.
[ends]


The Australian of the Year Awards, always held on the eve of Australia Day, are a wonderful opportunity to celebrate the excellence and the achievement of the Australian nation.  We have the Australian of the Year, the Young Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian and the Local Hero, and people nominated to these awards are not nominated by governments, they are nominated by the Australian people.
 And the purpose of the Awards is to remind all of us of the incredible excellence of this country, to remind us that we are not only a vibrant democracy and a very diverse society, but also to remind us that we excel in so many fields.  And when you look back over past Australians of the Year, you find in the case of the current Australian of the Year, Fiona Stanley, a world expert on the challenges and the problems of early childhood, you find great military figures such as General Peter Cosgrove, you find great sportsmen and women, you find great artists, you find great humanitarians.  In other words, in every area of human endeavour Australians are to the forefront and I can't think of a more effectively symbolic way on the eve of Australia Day 2004 to remind us and to remind others of the achievements of this country, of its excellence and its superb qualities in so many fields.
 May I, in welcoming all of you to this great event outside Parliament House in the national capital, wish all of you a very happy Australia Day and join, I know, 20 million of my fellow Australians in rejoicing in the privilege of living in the best country in the world.
  [ends]


John and Julia Anderson, Lawrence and Linda Springborg, Bob and Madonna Quinn, my fellow Australians.  It is with a real sense of commitment and a real sense of expectation that John and I have come to be part of this very important campaign launch for the Coalition here in Queensland.
State elections, indeed federal elections, are about a number of things.  But most importantly of all, elections are about both sides of politics being held accountable for what they have done and what they have not done over the preceding three years.  We had a less than happy result three years ago in Queensland and in the time that has gone by since then, the two Coalition parties have laid the essential groundwork of creating themselves as a viable, acceptable, attractive alternative to the current Government.  They have set about building an effective, workable Coalition.
  The historic agreement about no three-cornered contests represents a high water mark of Coalition cooperation between the two parties here in Queensland.  They know that unity is appealing, they know that unity is essential, they know that enduring unity is the basis for good government.  And I want to congratulate both Lawrence and Bob, who have worked together in very close and professional harmony.  They have presented to the people of Queensland and they have presented through their party organisations to the people of Queensland, a determination to put difficulties of the past behind them.  And that is a very important element because they have used that three year period, and when we look and we bring them to account for what they have done over the last three years, they are able to point to three very productive years in building the basis of an alternative government.
  And when we look to the other side, I think what I can say, and I have thought about this quite a bit, but in a way the current Premier of Queensland Peter Beattie typifies that ‘heads I win, tails you lose'; approach to politics.  Whenever anything is good, Peter is responsible.  Whenever anything is bad, it';s somebody else – it can';t possibly be him.  Let me give you two examples.  Nobody can argue that the general state of the Queensland economy is good.  Of course it';s good.  But you know why it';s good?  It';s good because of the economic management of the Federal Government over the last seven and a half years, and no thanks to Labor federally or here in Queensland for the success of that economic management.  At every step of the way, federal and state Labor have tried to stop us implementing the economic reforms that have made Australia strong.  The Queensland Labor Party attacked and opposed taxation reform.  They joined their federal colleagues in opposing taxation reform.
  But my friends, there is no state in Australia that has benefited more as a state from the introduction of taxation reform than has the state of Queensland.  This year alone, Queensland will be the recipient of a windfall of an additional $343 million as a result of the GST.  In a five year period, ending in 2007, the Treasury of Queensland, courtesy of the GST that Peter Beattie opposed but rushed ahead of every other Premier to sign the inter-governmental agreement to make sure he got it, the Treasury of Queensland will be $1.8 billion over that five year period better off as a result of the introduction of taxation reform.
  We have in Australia at the present time what I can only describe as a golden economic double.  For the first time since 1968, an important year in the life of one very important person in this audience, we have inflation below three per cent and we have unemployment below six per cent.  It';s the first time in 35 years that we have that.  And that has been achieved thanks to the enormous contribution of Australian business and Australian workers who have played a massive part in the expansion and the development of the Australian economy.  But importantly for the state of Queensland and importantly for this election campaign, it has been achieved despite the worst efforts of Labor, federally and state, to block the tax reform, the industrial relations reform, the elimination of budget deficits, and all the other reforms that have been necessary to build a better economy in this country.
  As Bob pointed out it is the role of State governments to add value to national economic growth and productivity and here in Queensland that hasn';t happened. You never had budget deficits under former Coalition governments here in Queensland but now you';ve had, as Bob said, two in a row. So I would say to the Premier of this State who operates on the principle of heads I win tails you lose, the reality is that the economic strength of this State is due to the policies of the Federal government. And so far as the treatment of Queensland by this government, this national government, this Federal government is concerned no State has been more enriched from the GST than the State of Queensland.
 When he complains that he can';t do more for hospitals because of the Federal government ask where that $1.8 billion over five years is going. When he complains about waiting lists ask him about Queensland';s share over and above the GST revenue of the 17% real increase that the public hospital system of this country will enjoy from the Federal government over the next five years.
The reality is you can';t have it both ways. You can';t claim the credit for the good things for which you are not responsible and then blame others for the bad things for which you are responsible.
This is a tough election for the Coalition we know that but I feel that the heart of the Coalition here in Queensland in this State election is good and sound. We are working together. We know how hard it is but deep inside themselves I believe that the people of Queensland don';t regard the present situation as good for democracy or good for good government in this State. They do want the balance restored, they are finding the youthful leadership of Lawrence Springborg, the professional cooperation between Bob and Lawrence both of whom have had experience at a ministerial level in government, they are finding that increasingly appealing.
There is still two weeks to go there is much work to be done, there is gathering enthusiasm for the Coalition cause and ladies and gentlemen that spirit I ask you to welcome Lawrence Springborg the Leader of the Coalition here in Queensland.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Marjorie Turbayne, Your Excellencies and my fellow Australians.  Today we gather to rejoice in the incredible privilege we have of being Australians and belonging to this wonderful country.
  It';s an occasion that brings forth, quite properly in a robust democracy, debate about what constitutes a good Australian, debate about what Australian values are, debate about the things that we have done wrong as well as the things that we have done right as a nation and as a people.  And it';s fair to say, and this is part of our great strength, we';re never going to reach agreement on any of those things.  We';re going to agree on certain values, we';re going to debate and disagree on others.  And that is how it should be and that has always been the Australian way, and long may it remain as the Australian way.  You cannot be too prescriptive about what constitutes a national character.  You cannot legislate or regulate patriotism.  It grows out of the behaviour and the spirit of the people of this country.
  And last night when I had the very great privilege of announcing the four awards in the Australian of the Year Awards, I thought each of the individual recipients, in their different ways, contributed to part of the great Australian character.  When I congratulated Hugh Evans, the Young Australian of the Year, I like many others was inspired by his youthful idealism, and I thought to myself – if that kind of youthful idealism is alive in the heart of that young Australian, and if it in any way typifies his generation, then the future of this country is in very safe hands indeed.  When I congratulated Tehree Gordon, the Senior Australian of the Year, someone who dedicated her life to restoring and healing and caring, and who made it very plain that no Australian had a use by date, I thought of the immense ongoing contribution of older Australians in so many ways to the strength and the future of our nation.
  And then of course we were all touched by the incredibly painful and inspiring story of Donna Carson, a lady who endured the most terrible pain and injury at the hands of, and the consequence of a very wicked deed.  And her getting through that and rebuilding her life is an example of how tragedy and suffering can be overcome, and it represents yet another part of the national character and the national traits that constitute Australians.
And finally in the Australian of the Year in Steve Waugh, not only somebody admired because of his skill and capacity as a sportsman and representing a very important part of our national life, but also somebody whose laconic, direct character is so representative of much of what is Australian, and many Australians see in him something of themselves.
You always tell a story of a nation far better by the story of its citizens than by anything else, and in those four people, we have at least four great characteristics of the modern Australian.  We have youthful idealism, we have the ongoing care and commitment of older Australians, we have incredible courage and personal endurance in the face of pain and adversity, and we have skill and excellence not only on the sporting field, but in so many other areas.  That is not the limit of us, but it is an illustration of the richness of who we are in 2004.
May I finally on behalf of all of you thank and congratulate Marjorie Turbayne on the leadership she has displayed in bringing together this gathering.  It';s a wonderful setting and I think anybody who was at the presentation ceremony last night for the Australian of the Year Awards and the concert subsequently, saw Canberra and the national capital at its best.  It was a wonderful venue for that occasion and I think there are many people who think it might, and ought to, continue as the venue for that occasion years into the future.  Happy Australia Day to all of you.  It';s great to be amongst you.  Thank you.
[ends]


Your Excellency, Governor-General and Mrs Jeffery, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  This is the great cricketing day for Canberra.  The turnout I';m told is the best ever that we';ve had at Manuka Oval, and it';s a huge tribute to a number of people and to a number of things.
  It';s a great tribute of course to the fact that we have had a wonderful season of cricket against our Indian guests.  It really has been.  And can I say on behalf of all Australians how much we admire the spirit and skill with which the Indian team has played the game.  They have been a great credit to their country, both in their professionalism and in their demeanour.  And for those of us, it includes everybody in this room, who loves cricket, to see the strength and vibrancy of the game in India and to know that there will be that great contest between India and Pakistan coming up in the very near future, I think it';s a wonderful thing for the future of the game, and to you Sourav and to all of your colleagues, thank you for being such wonderful players and wonderful guests, and the spirit in which you have played the game.  Australians admire the contribution that you have made.
This is also of course an occasion where we welcome some of the greats of the past, and as well as the four irascible Invincibles that have been welcomed, can I also acknowledge in particular the presence of two other greats of the game who have given so much in Bob Simpson and Brian Booth, and I understand David Boon was lurking around somewhere, but not necessarily in this room – but if he is, I acknowledge him as well.  It';s always great on occasions like this to welcome great players from the past. To our sponsor and particularly the Canberra Investment Corporation and Ron Brieley, thank you for your generosity and your support, and to so many other sponsors that have made today possible.
  And finally can I say that the match does have a special resonance because Steve Waugh accepted my invitation to captain the team and he has brought together under his captaincy a team that I think fielded magnificently this morning, and I don';t think I have seen a finer catch than the one we witnessed, and full marks to the local boy for that.  So to everyone who has made it such a wonderful day for Canberra, and it is important that there be a special day and a special match and a special event for Canberra.
  But Steve, thank you for captaining the team.  I';m now going to invite you to come up to the stage and then I will invite Sourav shortly thereafter.  But as you know, Steve was chosen as Australian of the Year for 2004 and he couldn';t, for a reason that every single person in this room understands, he couldn';t physically be present to receive the award because he was playing cricket for New South Wales in Perth, and that is the one excuse that Australian of the Years have – the only one that you can possibly have.  So I thought it would be nice if the award that I would have presented to him, the trophy, that I would have presented to him on Monday night, if I could have the opportunity of presenting it to him and again congratulating him on the great honour of being Australian of the Year for 2004.  I think it';s rather nice that he ends up receiving it at a cricket function.  It really is very appropriate.
Well could I now ask Sourav Ganguly to come forward, and I';d like to make a small presentation to each of the captains.  To you Sourav, thank you very much again for what you have done for the game in the time you';ve spent here over the past few months.  And to Steve, thank you very, very much.  And I understand that Mark, whose birthday it is today – happy birthday to the Chief Executive of the ACT Cricket Association – I understand Mark is now going to conduct a little dialogue with you.
  But thank you very much for coming along.  Again, it has been a great day, and may there be many more of them.
  [ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, Councillor Nancarrow, Don Randall, my other parliamentary colleagues. It's a great pleasure to be here.
 It's certainly my first visit to this particular part of the Canning electorate, and it's an opportunity to do something that I tell school groups that visit me in Canberra - and they come on a regular basis when Parliament is sitting and they normally come straight after Question Time, and we have a photograph in the Prime Minister's courtyard and then I invite them into my office and they stand around the office and I explain the history of the Prime Ministerial desk and how it was used by many of my predecessors - by John Curtin during World War II and by Bob Menzies, and then I invite them to ask me questions. And almost unfailingly, the question they ask me most frequently is what's the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia. And I say the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity you have as part of the job to get on the road and to meet different groups within the Australian community, to listen to what they have to say - sometimes to agree with them, sometimes to disagree with them, sometimes to argue with them, but always be willing to communicate as effectively as possible in order to [break]. And the opportunity it gives me to move around the country, to listen to people, sometimes to be able to say things they like, sometimes to say things they don't like - but it's all part of the great democratic process.
 And this is the first day of a four day visit that I am paying to Western Australia. I come here regularly and the visit will take me to different areas including on Thursday to Kalgoorlie. And can I say what a marvellous, energetic, indefatigable federal representative you have in Don Randall. There is not much doubt, ladies and gentlemen, that Don does advocate the interests of his constituents. He knocks on doors and if they don't open, he keeps knocking. When they do open, he doesn't leave until he gets essentially what he wants. And Don is a great dogged representative of the people of this electorate and I think he understands how important the diverse needs of a community, which is a mixture of outer metropolitan and rural people, it is an electorate that needs that kind of personal attention.
Today is quite significant in Australia because it's the first day of the operation of many of the changes that we have made to improve the Medicare health system. From today, medical practitioners who bulk bill concession cardholders and children under the age of 16 will receive a five dollar increase in the rebate, which is paid by the Government. That particular measure did not require the approval of the Senate and in addition to that, and I mention this particularly in the context of welcoming Peter Wallace to this gathering - and Peter was the Rural Doctor of the Year throughout Australia for 2003 - a particular honour for this part of Western Australia.  And not only is the increase in the rebate operating with effect from today, but we're also bringing into effect a large number of measures that are designed to improve and assess the provision of medical practice in the rural and outer metropolitan areas of Australia, including the introduction of something that I know doctors and particularly the Rural Doctors Association of Australia have wanted for a very long time and that is large numbers of additional practice nurses with their own MBF schedule who will be able to take over much of the routine work of a medical practice and thereby enable doctors to be freer to focus on the sort of general practitioner services that all communities including rural communities need.  Much of the debate about the challenges to our health system revolves around the availability of general practitioners and part of the solution of that problem is to have more general practitioners in areas of shortage, but it's also to have practice nurses to free the general practitioners to do the things that they are really trained to do and that is to consult, to diagnose and to treat patients.
  So today is quite an important day in the development of the changes to the Medicare system and I hope that when Parliament resumes next week, the very first thing that the Senate will do will be to pass our new safety net health legislation which will provide a safety net for out of pocket expenses, not only in relation to GP consultations, but also in relation to all other out of hospital out of pocket expenses because as so many of you will know if you have an illness it is not only perhaps the out of pocket expense that might be involved in going to the GP, but if you have to have a specialist consultation where the bulkbilling rates are not particularly high you also incur out of pocket expenses and that safety net, which we can't put in to operation until it's approved by the Senate, that safety net is very important to addressing that issue.
Don mentioned, as did the Mayor mention, the importance in a community such as this of roads.  And I am very pleased to remind you that only two weeks ago, the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson announced that the Government would extend for another four years the highly effective 'Roads to Recovery' programme which has provided several hundred million a year over a period of four years to upgrade local roads.  And one of the good things about this programme is that the money is paid directly by the Federal Government to the local council.  You don't have to go through the state government, you don't have the additional layer of bureaucracy, it's a deal between the Federal Government and the local councils and the same thing is going to apply in relation to the extension.  And that extension of the 'Roads to Recovery' programme will mean that there will be the same amount of money over a four year period available, some two to three hundred million dollars a year over the next four years in order to continue to improve and upgrade the local roads and this is a very important project for outer metropolitan and rural areas and an extremely valuable and important project for local councils.
  And it's also the intention under the Auslink programme for the Government to provide additional funding for other of its road responsibilities and there'll be more said about that by the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer as we approach and as we reach the delivery of the budget in May of this year.  We understand that in a big country such as Australia roads are very important.  And we have certain responsibilities.  The Federal Government for the national highways, the State Governments have responsibilities for state highways.  We've had a responsibility for local roads and I'm very pleased at the investment that my Government has made through local councils in the maintenance and the development of local roads.  And, could I say, that Don has been persistent in his advocacy in relation to other road funding and I can assure you that his arguments will continue to be listened to very very carefully and very very attentively in relation to that.
There is one other matter that I wanted to briefly touch on and that is I'm aware of the support for and the interest in preserving the history of the railways of Western Australia.  Railways were very important to opening up all of the remoter parts of this country, but particularly in a state as large as Western Australia, there's no denying that in the era before road transport large tracks of Western Australia would not have been developed without access to rail transport and the contribution that the railways of Western Australia made to the development of this state and to the development of our entire nation is very important indeed.  And I'm aware of the efforts of the rail heritage foundation of Western Australia to complete the redevelopment of infrastructure at the Pinjarra Railway Yard south east of Perth.  Here we are and to construct in the same region, the Boddington Railway Station and Broadwalk.
  And I'm pleased to announce today that the Federal Government will commit $845, 000 to preserve the future generation, the part of Western Australia's rail history through the redevelopment of a number of facilities at Pinjarra and in the surrounding regions.  That will be on the understanding of matching contributions from the state government that I'm sure will be forthcoming and it's an earnest of our desire to support local projects of this kind and it's in very direct consequence of some very persistent and, might I say, very effective lobbying by your local member.
  The last thing I want to talk about is of general application to all of us as Australians.  As a Government, we have three broad goals for our country and we think they are goals that most Australians share.  We want the country to be strong and secure. The first responsibility of any Government is that of national security.  That includes not only very strong defence forces, but it also includes a very effective police force at both a federal and a state level.  And this morning I had the opportunity rather of having a detailed briefing from the Australian Federal Police in Perth about the ongoing success of our cooperation with the Indonesian National Police in tracking the operations of the terrorist organisation Jemaah Islamiyah in Indonesia.  I also had the opportunity of being briefed on the effectiveness of our activities against those who would seek to import drugs into this country.  It's an ongoing battle, that is fighting drugs, and it's not a battle that you could ever claim as being won.  We are having success.  We do have a zero tolerance approach to illicit drug use.  We don't believe that it's something that should be tolerated and we are uncompromising in our attitude towards the drug menace in this country. And we are seeing gains being made, we've invested a lot of money at a federal level, around $1 billion over the last few years in our Tough on Drugs strategy, we are now seeing for the first time, and it's been sustained over several years, a reduction in the heroin death rate.  Some of that is due to a shortage of supply, some of it is also due to the very effective law enforcement operations and also to many of the rehabilitation programmes that in co-operation with state governments we are very, very keen to promote and support.
So national security has a lot of dimensions, it has a defence dimension, it has the dimension of having strong and effective border protection policies and ensuring that people who choose to come here illegally are not allowed to do so, it also has policies which are very effective in fighting international drug cartels.
The second of our great objectives is of course to have a strong economy, a strong economy is the foundation of people being able to have happy and secure family life and I'm very happy to say as we move into 2004 that for the first time in 35 years this country has an unemployment rate below six per cent and inflation rate below three per cent. When I became Prime Minister of Australia our unemployment rate was 8.5 per cent, it's now 5.6 per cent.  Now it's not perfect, we'd like to see it even lower and it's not uniform throughout the country, there are still some areas of Australia that have higher unemployment that we would like.  But lower unemployment is the great human dividend of successful economic policy, economic policy is not just a mass of statistics, it's what you are able to produce by way of opportunities and initiatives and a better way of life for individual people.  So keeping the Australian economy very strong is very important.
Right at the moment we're locked and it's coming to quite a bit of a climax, we're locked in a negotiation with the United States administration about securing a Free Trade Agreement, I don't know what the outcome of that discussion is going to be.  I spoke yesterday morning for about an hour and a half with Mark Vaile, my Trade Minister, and I had further discussions last night and the negotiations are getting very much to the business end of the discussion. All I can say to you is that we will sign a Free Trade Agreement with the United States if there's enough in it for Australia, we're very hard headed and very pragmatic, if there's not enough in it for Australia we won't sign it, we're going to persist and in the long run there can't be enough in it unless there are significant concessions made by the United States in relation to agriculture.  But if we are able to secure a Free Trade Agreement with the United States it will be an enormous boost to our economy, the American economy is by far the biggest in the world, it's going to grow stronger in the years ahead.  And if we can on a satisfactory basis lock ourselves into a Free Trade Agreement with that economic powerhouse that can only be of long term benefit to this country. But it has to be on conditions that are very, very satisfactory to Australia and deliver real benefits. But we are getting very much to the climax in those discussions and if it can be achieved then it will be of great long term benefit to this country and we'll be able to achieve it in an environment that doesn't affect our trading relations with other parts of the world, including of course China and you as Western Australia would be aware because of the importance of the resource industry in this state how important China is to the long term economic strength and benefit of Australia.
And the final goal that we seek for this country is of course the goal of social stability. With all our problems, and we have them, all nations do, we are a remarkably cohesive and a remarkably stable and a very tolerant Australian community.  And all of us want to make a contribution towards the preservation of that and the foundation of social cohesion of course is strong family life and anything that any government or any local community can do to strengthen family life is something that it ought to do because the family remains without question the greatest source of education, of social development, of emotional security and emotional stability that you can find in any nation and a strong functioning united family remains the most effective social welfare system that anybody has devised and an infinitely more effective system than any government can devise. We need to provide our people with choice, we need to provide them with effective choice in relation to the education of their children, we need to all we can as local communities to build tolerance and acceptance of people from different ways of life.
  This country is very proud of its history, we're very proud of what we all understand to be the traditional Australia, we're also though very proud of the fact that since World War II in particular we have accepted into our midst millions of people from different parts of the world and above everything else they have overwhelmingly become wonderful Australians and have made a wonderful contribution to the development of our country and part of the social cohesion that we now have is to continue to preserve that great tolerance.
It's an incredible privilege to an Australian and it's an even greater privilege to be Prime Minister of this wonderful country and I never wake up in the morning without thinking how fortunate I am to have that privilege and resolve to do everything I can each day to try and better not only the country collectively, but also the opportunities and the lives of the 20 million individual Australians for which I feel a particular affinity and a particular obligation.
  Now to all of you of the Pinjarra and field district, thank you for having me, these are very important interactions between a Prime Minister and different groups of Australians around our country.  Finally and again can I commend to all of you the remarkable energy and efforts of your Federal Member Don Randall who does a great job for all of you and I am absolutely delighted to be with him and to have the opportunity of meeting you.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you Don, Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.  It is a pleasure to address some of the active and prominent citizens of Armadale here in Western Australia and to share a few moments with you, and I hope a few thoughts about some of the things that are important to communities all around Australia, both now and the years immediately ahead.
Australia is a very big country geographically and there is no state in Australia of course larger and more conscious of that geographic size than Western Australia.  Yet for all of that, we are paradoxically a people who tend to live in a fairly limited area of a very large country, and we have a very elaborate system of government.  We have a federal government, we have state governments, we have two territory governments, and we have local government.  And one of the things that I find the most challenging of all is to even establish in the minds of the public generally speaking an idea of who is responsible for what.
  Quite understandably, citizens say well I don';t mind who does it, as long as it gets done, and that is a perfectly legitimate thing to do.  I mean I can go for a walk down a street and I say hello, and they said “I';ve been waiting for you.  My gutter was blocked last night and you ought to do something about it.”  And then when there is a bit of crime, they will say “well what are you going to do about it Prime Minister?”.  And when something goes wrong with something that is the responsibility of another level of government, you often get asked.  Now I don';t think that is ever going to change quite dramatically, but we have to work our way through and try from time to time to just remind ourselves of who is primarily responsible for what.
  We talk a lot in our nation about rights and responsibilities.  One of the things that I have always found in the time I have been in national politics is that the different levels of government are never reluctant to assert their rights, but sometimes if something goes wrong, some levels of government will not accept the responsibility and say it really belongs to somebody else.  And I hear that, I have to say, quite a lot from certain state governments around Australia – in fact all of them – and when something goes wrong they say “oh look we want to do it, but Howard won';t give us enough money”.  So that really leads me to say that one of the things that we have worked very hard to do in the time that we have been in government is to create a situation where the states have an increased share of revenue.  Now I';ll bet a lot of people in this room don';t realise that every last dollar of that thing called the GST, over which we had such a debate a few years ago, every last dollar of that GST goes to the state government.  I don';t keep any of it and Mr Costello doesn';t keep any of it.  Every last dollar of it goes to the state government.
  And we have our responsibilities, states have theirs and local government has theirs.  But of course what we all have to do at the three levels of government is to try and work together in a very cooperative fashion, and I';m delighted that the Mayor mentioned the Roads to Recovery programme.  Now I think local roads in Australia were in a terrible state a few years ago.  I think some local roads are still in quite a deplorable state.  Now we have some responsibility historically for helping local government with local roads and that is why we';re going to extend the Roads to Recovery programme, and we';re very keen to do that.  And we';re also going to allocate some additional revenue, and the details of it will be progressively announced by the Deputy Prime Minister under what is called our new nationally integrated transport system called AusLink.
  Now they are our responsibilities and we';re going to try and do them, and we';re going to try and do them effectively.  I listened Mr Mayor to some of the things you said.  Don has told me about them.  Don is very good in passing on the requests of the people who he represents.  He is known by ministerial colleagues as somebody who will sort of haunt every ministerial office until he gets a positive answer, and he';s very, very good at pushing the case for his electorate and I';ve heard of some of these things before.  I won';t try and give a response on the run.  Some of them obviously fall into the area of responsibility of state governments, and we obviously would not be disposed to assist.  Others may fall into other categories and we understand how all of them are very important.
  And I was particularly interested in what you had to say about the tertiary education places.  One of the things we have to do with the new arrangements for university funding, and I know they were controversial and they were debated – I find one of the most interesting things in politics is comparing debates that go on in this country with debates that go on in other countries.  Mr Blair, the British Prime Minister, has just secured the passage of legislation through the British Parliament which establishes an education funding system which is very similar to the one that we have here in Australia.  And he in fact, as a Labor Prime Minister of Britain, quoted with approval the policy that we had introduced, which was opposed in Britain by our political – I';m a Liberal – our political allies, the Conservatives.  But here, just to sort of complete the confusion, it was opposed by his political allies here in Australia.  So you know if that doesn';t confuse people who try and draw international comparisons in relation to political parties, nothing will.
But I think it is important that the distribution of tertiary education places around Australia be done in a way that is fair to different parts of Australia.  We can no longer pretend that you can ever go back to the days of totally free tertiary education.  This country could never have afforded that in the longer-term and it really is necessary with something like tertiary education to establish a system where there is a fair contribution made by the taxpayer and there is a fair contribution made by the person who gets the benefit of the education after that person has left university and that person is earning a certain level of income.  And in the case of the new arrangements, you don';t start paying back your HECS debt until you earn at least $35,000 a year of income.
  I think those sort of issues have to be faced by any community, and particularly by a community as affluent as Australia, and a community also such as Australia where something in the order of 65 to 70 per cent of young men and women who leave school do not go onto university, but they go onto some other kind of education.  And we have to keep a sense of proportion and a sense of balance because everybody when they get into the workforce contributes, through paying their taxes, to the funding of things like universities and of course you have to pay some regard to the people who never aspire to and never enjoy and never benefit from a university education, the taxation burden that might fall on them.
Always in a country like Australia, one of the challenges which is so ongoing is who in the three levels of government is responsible for what.  But at the end of the day you as citizens of Australia are really far less interested in who is responsible for what, you are far more interested in whether it gets done and whether it is done by the federal government, state government or the local government, as long as it gets done you';re happy.
Australia at the present time is by any measure in a very strong economic position. We have for the first time in 35 years we have what I';ve described as the golden double, we have inflation below three per cent and we have unemployment below six per cent. When I became Prime Minister unemployment was 8.5 per cent, it is now 5.6 per cent. And that in a way is the important great human dividend of economic policy. That doesn';t mean to say there aren';t people who are disadvantaged, there are. No matter how strong an economy you have there are always people who fall through the cracks and it is the responsibility of government, particularly at a national level, with income support to provide assistance to people who need help. That of course means that if you are going to be in a position to help the people who are really needy you have to make sure that you don';t make provision and provide government resources to people who don';t need that assistance and that is part of the ongoing debate.
Can I say that the aim of my government in the time that we have been in office is to provide as strong a support as we can for local government. Local government, of course, is controlled by state governments. Local government units can be made or unmade overnight by state governments. We have no constitutional power or control over local government units. But in a number of areas both through general financial grants and also in relation to programs such as Roads to Recovery we have sought to establish a direct relationship with local governments. And one of the good things about the Roads to Recovery programme, as I am sure the Mayor and his colleagues will know, is that it is a program where there is a direct relationship between the federal government and local government. We don';t involve the state government, we deal directly with local government and we respond as much as we possibly can to the individual concerns and the individual whims of local government units.
The last thing I want to say to you my friends is that I am very proud indeed to be in Don Randall';s electorate again. Don is a great local member. He works very hard, he is one of those people who does attend to the grassroots, he does listen to what people have to say, he is very direct. If he thinks I am doing something wrong he tells me. If he thinks that the government is handling things very badly he gets up in the Party room and says so and he has been on his feet a few times over the years. I can assure you and I am quite sure for the remainder of this year and into the future he is going to be on his feet again, but he does have your interests at heart. He doesn';t have tickets on himself, he recognises that he is there to help you and you are not there to keep him in Parliament and that is the right attitude for a local member to have.
I am a great believer in responsive democracy. I think the idea that serving in Parliament is a noble thing to do is the right idea. I believe very strongly in our system of parliamentary democracy. It has got its critics and it is easy to take pot shots at people who are occupying elected office, but at the end of the day it is a better system than any alternative in operation around the world. And one of the things we should remember as Australians is that over the last 100 years you can count on the fingers of both hands and still have one or two over, the countries that have been continuously democratic during that 100 year period and Australia has been one of them.  And that is something that we ought to be very proud of.
 We pioneered many of the democratic things now taken for granted around the world and I think Australian democracy with all its imperfections and with all of the criticisms that are made of it and all of the cynicism that exists in the community about it, it is fundamentally a very good system. And in the end that interaction and inter﷓relationship between the public and the people they elect to Parliament be it national or at a state level or in the case of local government at a municipal or shire level, that relationship is very important. And if we lose it then we lose something that is very important to the Australian identity.
So can I say to you Mr Mayor, to the members of your Council and to the citizens of Armadale, thank you very much for having me.  Its a time that I am spending some four days on this visit in Western Australia and going to a number of areas in Perth and then to Kalgoorlie on Thursday.
 I always enjoy coming to Western Australia, it is great to be back in Don';s electorate and to have him as my host on this visit.
Thank you very much.
  [ends]


Well thank you very much Major Watters, Mr Mayor, Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police Mick Keelty, my two ministerial colleagues Julie Bishop and Chris Ellison, both of whom have a very direct responsibility in this area, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is not the first occasion over the last few years that Brian Watters and I have done this double act.  He is chairman of my drug committee and a very wonderful and effective chairman at that.  And it won't be the last time that we will do it because both of us have a very strong personal commitment to the philosophy behind the Tough on Drugs strategy that was introduced by the Government some years ago and has already involved the expenditure of an additional $1 billion or more of Federal Government money in fighting the scourge of drugs in our community.  And I'm very happy to welcome here today as well as the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and his regional commander in Western Australia, I'm very pleased to welcome officers of the Western Australian police because this is a co-operative effort and there is, I'm pleased to say, at most levels, not all levels and not on all issues, but there is at most levels very close co-operation between the state and federal authorities in fighting the scourge of drugs and the Australian community demands no less of their political leaders and that they co-operate to the maximum extent possible.
Today I'm announcing about $6.6 million to 89 community organisations across Australia as part of the community partnership initiative which is an element of the Tough of the Drugs strategy.  The Tough on Drugs strategy is really built on three pillars, law enforcement, rehabilitation, and education.  We have an uncompromising approach to people who are involved in drug trafficking, we seek, when people need assistance, and especially when they seek in out, we seek to improve the rehabilitation services that are available and finally and very importantly we seek to educate people against starting drug use in the first place.  And in the number of years that I've now been Prime Minister and involved in campaigning around Australia in favour of the Tough on Drugs strategy it has never ceased to amaze me how people can question the doctrine of zero tolerance towards commencement of drug taking in the first place or indeed dealing with the problem.  There are so many things that we take for granted that you must do, I mean we don't argue with the proposition and it's certainly not being argued with here in Western Australia right at the moment because it's in the news that children should go to school.  We don't sort of have a harm minimisation approach to school attendance, we have a zero tolerance approach to school attendance because we know that it is good for the child in the long run that that child go to school.  Well for the life of me I can't see why we shouldn't have a completely zero tolerance, uncompromising approach to illicit drug taking.  There is no safe level of marijuana use, there is no safe level of the use of any kind of illicit drugs and the clearer that message can be communicated the better and that is why of course the Government, amongst other things, has an uncompromising approach at a federal level towards any resort to heroin injecting rooms, and I'm not suggesting all of the states are considering doing that, some may be, some may be not, but at a Federal Government level we will do everything in our power to prevent states from doing that because we don't think in the long run it is in the best interests of the community.
Now we are making progress, I'm not declaring victory, it would be insane of anybody to declare victory, but we are making progress.  We have seen a significant decline in the number of heroin related deaths.  Now whenever I say this in public my critics always seek to explain it away, they say oh they're not growing their poppies, they're not doing this, they're not doing that, it's all something else, it's got to do with some other thing and when that all stops it's going to start again.  Well I hope they're wrong, I can't prove that they are wrong, what I can point to though is that since 1999 there has been a 67 per cent reduction in heroin related deaths for people aged between 15 and 55 years and you can't argue with that, it's got to mean something and even if not all of it is due to our initiatives some of it is due to what we've done and I therefore think that alone has been worth the billion dollars to mean, as Brian says, that those people are now spending their Christmas dinners with their parents or their children or their friends is reward enough for the contribution that's been made.
I think the law enforcement effort in this country has been magnificent and I want to congratulate of course the Australian Federal Police, but also their state counterparts, here in Western Australia and all around the country, and also of course Customs officers and Immigration and Chris Ellison as the Minister responsible for both the Federal Police and the Australian Customs Service, is here today.  And the evaluations that we have carried out indicate that three out of five parents in our education campaign thought that that literature that was derided at the time by our critics that we distributed encouraged parents to talk to their children more about drugs and actually gave them in many respects the lead in and the confidence to do so.  And we all know as parents that sometimes it's difficult to broach a subject and you've got to creep up on it or surprise them or whatever, but eventually when you directly engage your children on an issue there's a great sense of relief when you get a response and you think at long last you have made a contact.  Now we all go through as parents the challenges of raising our children through the more difficult years, and I can only say that I share all of the sense of concern and compassion that Brian feels and I encounter and we all do, people who through no fault of their own make that awful discovery that one of their children has a drug problem and it has to be most alarming experience I guess that any parent can have.
So this is a great programme, we are working with the states, we are very importantly, and that is the significance of today's announcement, we are very importantly working with local organisations and the whole purpose of the community partnerships programme is to fund small organisations to work with people and the local communities in different ways in tackling the problem, by providing young people with support, with information, with alternative strategies to prevent illicit drug use in their communities.  Of course a lot of our resources are going into the diversion initiatives that we operate in conjunction with the states, where in effect we say to somebody who's got a drug problem and for the first time has come into touch with the criminal justice system, we say to this person righto you've got a choice, you can either ignore the opportunity of going into a rehabilitation scheme and then run the risk of getting caught up with the criminal justice system and inevitably ending up in jail and your life being ruined, or alternatively you can go into a rehabilitation programme and if that works out okay let's forget about you having any kind of record or being regarded as in any way caught up with the law and you really (inaudible) it works in different ways and perhaps a bit unevenly about the country (inaudible) success, we have provided a lot more money, the states have provided obviously the infrastructure of the police and the courts and so forth and it's a good example and when Commonwealth and State Governments have worked together.
So I'm, in announcing these initiatives, I particularly draw attention to three of these projects, one of them is the Kurrawa Community project in Perth, the Young Men's Christian association in Perth, and the Wesley Mission in Perth, all of which provide programmes under the community partnerships and they're but a few of the 89 organisations that are going to receive funding.
So ladies and gentlemen, I again want to thank everybody who's been involved in this effort, I want to thank Brian and his committee, I want to thank the health professionals who've supported so very strongly, I want to thank the police at both at a national level and a state level and all of the Customs services, but very importantly I want to thank people who volunteer at a community level to tackle this problem, I think it is one of Australia's greater challenges and I believe when it comes to great challenges you've got to send strong, sharp, unambiguous messages.  There is no such thing as an accepted level of illicit drug use in my view and unless that is communicated very, very strongly to the Australian community, especially to younger people, I don't think we're going to tackle the problem.  The approach of zero tolerance might be derided but in the long run it does send a very strong message, and I think the results are there and if we persist with it we'll get further results.  We'll never totally eliminate the problem, you can never totally declare victory on something like this. But you can record a very significant improvement and we've had some improvements to date and I think if we continue to persist we can, as the years go by, we can record an even greater improvement and it will be one of the more important legacies that can be given to any community that a particular group of people having responsibility at a certain time were willing to persist with a strategy to tackle the scourge and producing very effective results.
So can I thank you again Mr Mayor for having us (inaudible) senior citizens centre here, thank you for your hospitality and I have great pleasure in launching these programmes and again to thank my friend and colleague Brian Watters for his counsel and advice on this very challenging and social issue.
[ends]


Thank you very much Stuart, to your wife and two daughters, to my parliamentary colleagues and to Danielle Blain, the President of the Western Australian division of the Liberal Party, ladies and gentlemen.
  It's a real pleasure for me to be here this morning to participate in the opening of this campaign office and to say how tremendously impressed I am and delighted I am that the Liberal Party has a candidate of Stuart's quality in the seat of Hasluck.
Without in any way reflecting on the varied backgrounds on people who offer themselves as candidates to the party and get elected to parliament, let me say that it's enormously important that we have candidates and Members of Parliament who've had some real life experience before they enter Parliament.  We want people who understand what it's like to run a small business, we want people who understand the challenges of family life, the successes and the joys as well as the challenges.  We want people who have a variety of sporting faiths and backgrounds, (inaudible) could have been a Wallaby, should have been a Wallaby. And I think it is in Stuart's case a wonderful metaphor for the cross-section of experience and life's challenges that we need in the Federal Parliament so that when they are required to take decisions on things that are important to the future of the country, we know that people bring a blended and not a sectional perspective because at the end of the day we want people who understand what it's like to work hard, to run business, to try and make a profit, to raise a family, to be involved in the community, to understand the interaction of business with the rest of the community and the rest of society.
One of the things that divides the Liberal Party profoundly from the Labor Party, and the division is now deeper and more obvious than ever before, is its understanding of small business.  So I want to say a couple of things about that today because it's very important in this seat, it's very important in Western Australia. The Labor Party has no understanding of what it's like to run a small business, if they had any understands what it's like to run a small business they wouldn't have adopted that absurd industrial relations policy at their national last weekend.  An industrial relations policy that is going to abolish Australian Workplace Agreements, an industrial relations policy that is going to compel any company that has a contract with the Federal Government to disclose the identity of its subcontractors, so presumably the unions can bully those subcontractors into complying with their requirements and their demands. They're going to burgle small business with a compulsory requirement that they make available part-time work to their employees in certain circumstances.  Now you wonder what the (inaudible) of somebody who understands small business to know how absurd it is, you might be able to do able to that if you were Westpac, or the Commonwealth Bank or the ABC, or the State Government, a large organisation.  But if you've only got two or three employees, to be told by the government you've got to make part time work available for one of them in certain circumstances is to completely misunderstand what is involved in running a small business.  So I make welcome somebody who will be very much a standard bearer of the concerns and interests of small business, not only in this electorate but throughout Perth and indeed as a future member of the federal parliamentary party.
So Stuart comes to this challenge with the right skills, the right background, the right identification, the right commitment and I'm sure the right values in relation to the things that count so far as our party is concerned.  This is not going to be an easy election, we'll be asking the Australian people for the fourth time to elect us.  We'll be saying to the Australian people that we have a record, a very strong record of achievement. We'll be reminding the Australian people that at the moment we have for the first time in 35 years ago inflation below three per cent and unemployment below six per cent.  We have generated, as Stuart said, something in the order of 1.2 million new jobs.  Our Government debt is 4.9 per cent of GDP, the OECD average is 47.  It's about 50 per cent in America and it's 130 per cent in Japan.  We have got rid of the Beazley deficits, we have reduced that debt, we have secured Australia's economy.  We've created a situation where the average homebuyer is paid $540 a month less on his or her mortgage than was the case when the Government was elected in 1996.
  So all of that represents solid achievement and we'll be asking the Australian people not to put that at risk when the election comes around.  But I don't take any political opponent for granted and I know it will be a challenge and we'll be reminding the Australian people not only of what we have achieved, but also of the fact that we are able to meet many of the challenges of the future.  That we understand that as our population ages we need to find policies that encourage people, amongst other things, to remain in the workforce longer.  That we need policies that maintain the sustainability of programmes such as the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme and our health system, which will face increasing demands and the years go by.  And the only way that this country can keep a sustainable health system is to have a mixed of both public and private contributions to that system.
I don't believe in a health system that is totally private, nor do I believe in a health system that is totally public.  I believe in a health system where each reinforces the other.  The introduction of the private health insurance rebate some five years ago has taken a big load off public hospitals.  It may not be perfect and there may be weaknesses but they would be in a more difficult position if we had not introduced that rebate and we had not seen a significant increase in the number of people taking out private health insurance.  And just as I believe in a health system in which both the public and private sectors make a contribution, I also believe in an education system where parents and not the Government have the right to choose where their children will be educated.  And I believe in an education system that respects the aspirations of low income people to exercise that choice.  There is no choice if the cost of that choice is out of the reach of the average citizen.  And those in the Labor Party and the teachers' union that would take funding away from certain private schools are really advocating the creation of an even more elite school system than the very thing that they condemn because there will always be some people in the community who can afford what ever fees might be charged, but the real choice is when you make the option affordable and within the reach of the average citizen.  And it is the truth and the reality that over the last few years the great growth in independent schools has not been in the high fee area, but it has been in the low fee community based schools where people are exercising a choice.  And none of this said in denigration of government schools.  What we want in this community is a reinforcement of the principle of choice.  We already have a needs based funding system for independent schools, not all of them are funded at the same level, some are funded at the minimal level.  But it has to be understood that every time a parent decides to take his or her children out of the government sector and put it into the private sector, it saves the taxpayer a large amount of money.  And it's therefore wrong in my view to adopt the view that the person who exercises that choice is entitled to no recompense at all from the community and from the taxpayer.  So what we need in these areas - in health and in education, we need contributions from both the public and the private sector.
So ladies and gentlemen, there will be many issues where we will have a very strong and a very good story to tell.  We'll have the opportunity to tell the story of how we have balanced Australia's international relations, where we have further deepened the important links we have with the United States, while at the same time built remarkably strong links with China.  And the symbolism you'll recall last year of, on successive days, the President of the United States and the President of China addressing the Federal Parliament and this is under the Government of a person who is described by predecessor as having no capacity at all to speak to the leaders of Asia.  The reality is that you can have good relations with the United States and also have very good relations with the countries of Asia, you just need a capacity and a willingness to call the Australian national interest where it falls.  I've had one principle guiding me in foreign policy and that is what is good for Australia.  I said when I was elected on March the 2nd 1996 that I would defend the interests of Australia at both home and abroad and that is the philosophy I've carried into effect.
But ladies and gentlemen, it is a warm morning and the welcome is warm.  My enthusiasm is warm, my excitement about the quality of the candidates as has been shown in this electorate is even warmer than all of the other things.  I think you have a cracker candidate in the seat of Hasluck.  And I just look forward very much coming back to this electorate to helping his campaign.  It'll be tough, he knows that, he's a realist, the small margin and it's going to be very tough.  But he'll make it, he's got the skills, he's got the personal skills, he's got the background, he's got real life experience and that is going to communicate itself to the people of Hasluck.  I wish you well.  Good luck and I hope to have you as a colleague after the next election.
Thank you.
[ends]


Commodore, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to say first of all thank you very much for having me on board HMAS Warramunga, it's an opportunity to personally thank you for the wonderful exercise in which you've just been involved which has been a very important part of protecting Australia's interests and protecting Australia's assets.  It wasn't an easy operation, it did involve risk, it involved a great deal of skill both in boarding and being involved in bringing the vessel back here to Fremantle.  It attracted, quite deservedly, a lot of very favourable publicity around Australia. Australians feel very strongly that people who want to illegally fish in our waters, who want to pillage our assets should be repelled and where appropriately apprehended and that is exactly what your ship's company did, I've been wanted to see one of these folded up helicopters for quite a long time and I got a very quick fire version of how easy it is to go down that rope, I won't endeavour to imitate it, I'll just take their word for it.
But it is an opportunity for me to directly, as I'm here in Western Australia, to say simply thank you. The country is in your debt, as always, the operation involved great co-operation between the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy, our fishery authorities, our Customs services and in different ways our Federal Police, and I acknowledge the presence of my parliamentary colleague Chris Ellison who's responsible for both Customs and Justice, and it is important in all of these exercises to have co-operation, we can't do it without the Navy, protecting our borders and our assets is a core naval responsibility, we need the involvement of Customs and the involvement of Fisheries and we need the involvement of the police and that is what you've done, it's the face of the responsibilities of a modern Navy that these sorts of things that you mightn't have contemplated a years ago, you've been involved and you are involved in, we are developing an increased Customs capacity to be involved in apprehension operations and over time that may result in a larger involvement by Customs but there'll always be in different ways a role for the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy and I simply say to all of you congratulations on looking after Australia's interests and thank you very much indeed for having me onboard your ship.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much, please sit down now children, it's very nice of you all to do that,  thank you. Leigh and Tiana, the principal, the district director, my parliamentary colleague Barry Haase, parents, teachers and the students of Boulder Primary School and of the eight or nine other schools, both government and independent, that are represented here today.
I'm very pleased to have the opportunity of saying just a few words to you and to thank you very much for having me at your school so early in the new school year.  I try as I travel around Australia as much as I possibly can to visit schools, to say hello, to share a few thoughts about the importance of education and to listen to what the young people of different schools have to say to me and their thoughts about the future of our wonderful country.  And I'm very aware as I talk to you here in Kalgoorlie at the Boulder Primary School of the big part that this part of Australia played in the history of our country, not only because of its fame in relation to gold, but also the very big part the people of Kalgoorlie and the surrounding districts played in the decision of Western Australia way back more than 100 years ago to enter the Commonwealth of Australia.  And it was the decision of many of your ancestors in this part of Australia that played a very important role in the coming together of the then colonies and the building of the Commonwealth of Australia.
The beginning of a school year is always an opportunity to say something about the importance of schooling. I was no different from any of you, I didn't race off to school on the very first occasion understanding that everything about it was going to be enticing and wonderful. But as time went by I learned the value of schooling. I went to a primary school, it wasn't called the Boulder Primary School, it was called the Earlwood Primary School in Sydney and then I went onto a school called Canterbury Boys High School. I can still remember my very early years at Earlwood Primary School, I can still remember quite a lot of the teachers I had there who worked very hard to help me and to educate me and to introduce me to the understanding of a lot of things that have been very valuable to me as I've gone through in life, to the understanding of history, the understanding of our language, but very importantly also the understanding of how we relate to one another.  And whenever I go to a school gathering I give one little story from my own experience at being at school that I've always remembered and I think it's very important to all of us, and that is that you tend to meet two types of people in life whether it's at school or in the workplace or in the community - there's the person who's always complaining and always grizzling about something and always finding fault with things, and then there's the person who always sees the best in people and is always optimistic and hopeful about the future. And you know what I found boys and girls is that invariably, without exception, the happiest people I've met in life are the people who think positively and think the best of people.  And you'll find as you go through school that even though some people may irritate you and you may not like them, there's always something about them that is good and if you try and seek out and think about the good thing about them, even when you're annoying you, you'll find as you get older that you end up a far happier person than if you focus on the bad things about them and the negative things about them because everybody has, or most people have in them a grain of good and very good intentions, a lot of people have more in them than others but everybody has a good side and if you think well of people and you seek our their good side rather than their bad side or their negative side you'll become, in my experience a much happier and a far more positive person.
The other thing, and the final thing I want to say to you about school is that teachers are a very important part of your life, the values of course that you find shape your life are particularly taken from your home. The role of teachers is important, teaching is a very important profession, it's very important to the future of this country, teachers work very hard in your interests and even though you may not like it on occasions, you may not think it's fair, you should always respect and listen to what they say because they have your interests at heart and if you listen to them and you take their advice that is going to be of great benefit to you.  I still remember with great affection several teachers I had at primary school, they had an influence on me, they taught me how to learn, they taught me many things that I found to be very valuable as I got older.  And the very last thing I want to say that remember that all of us are very privileged to live in a great country. Australia is a secure country, people respect each other despite their differences, their different backgrounds and their different cultures and we have to work hard to preserve that, we have a great history which we all should be proud of, this country should never feel that it doesn't have a rich history and a very positive history.  We've achieved a lot and we're respected around the world for what we have achieved.
  So keep those thoughts in mind, thank you very, very much indeed for having me. I wish the school well, I'm glad that a lot of parents are here today because good schools are always schools that are communities of students, of teachers and parents. And I always encourage parents to, the maximum extent possible, to participate in the activities and support the activities of their school.  So to all of you, have a great year, listen to your teachers, take their advice, and remember importantly find the good in everybody because not only is that good for the school, but it will make you a much happier person.
Thank you.
[ends]  


  E&amp;OE…………………………………………………………
Well, thank you very much Mr Chairman and can I first of all acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place, to my parliamentary colleague and friend Barry Haase the federal member for the largest electorate in the world, my other parliamentary colleagues Alan Eggleston and Matt Burnie and Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s a special pleasure to be back in Kalgoorlie and also to see for the first time this wonderful hall of fame and to say how very pleased I am that the Government decided to support it out of the federation fund and how important it is for us as a nation with a very diverse history to understand and to protect and promote a better appreciation of the different things that have contributed and the different activities that have contributed to the modern Australia.
I am, of course, here to officially open an art exhibition of the Ngaanyatjarra people, which brings their special insight into the impact of mining and exploration on their lifes experience and to their culture.  And to say how important as part of the understanding of the diversity of our country how important it is for all of us to appreciate the contribution of that understanding and that art to the solutions to modern day problems and modern day challenges.
   I hope the exhibition is very successful, clearly by your presence today there is very great local support and very great local interest.
It';s also an opportunity for me here in Kalgoorlie, in a city which is synonymous with the mining history of Australia, it is a metaphor for so much that mining has contributed to the Australian nation, to say how important is the mining industry to the future of this country.  We often have debates about what are new industries and old industries, we often have debates about what is the future of Australia.  And, obviously, the export future of Australia lies in many things and, obviously, the economic future of Australia lies in many things.  And that the rise in the significance of service industries has been one of the phenomena of recent economic developments in our country.  But nothing will replace the central role played by the mining industry in the wealth and the export capacity of Australia.
Australia';s mining industry is world class in efficiency.  It';s world class it its environmental respects and it';s world class, of course, in the contribution that it is making to the development of this country.  It has its critics, and many of them are unreasonable and I applaud the way in which the mining industry and the resource sector generally in this country has embraced the importance of sustainable development, has embraced the importance of environmental care and nurturing and how many of the great mining companies of Australia have been pioneers in partnerships with the indigenous people of Australia, recognising as we all must that economic empowerment and economic participation for the indigenous people of this country is crucial to their future.  All the theories in the world will not replace the value of employment, will not replace the value of sustainable economic opportunities and will not replace the value of the embracement of the indigenous people as part of our economic future.  And that is why my Government has placed such a great emphasis on what I call practical reconciliation, on giving all of the people of this country, irrespective of their background or their heritage, economic opportunity.  And the greatest measure of that, of course, is to give people employment.  And I';m very proud of the fact that unemployment in this country is now at a 22 year low.  And for the first time since 1968, we have an unemployment rate below six per cent and an inflation rate below three per cent, that';s the end of the economic statistics, but I';m very proud of that. I think it';s something of a golden double and I thought it was worth referring to here in Kalgoorlie in those terms.
  But ladies and gentlemen, today brings together all of the representatives of your community.  It brings together the indigenous people.  It brings together your political representatives.  It brings together the representatives of the mining industry.  It brings together the religious leaders who are so important to all of our communities.  It brings together representatives of the service sector.  It brings together, of course, the citizens of this very special part of Australia which has such a special character.  And I';m reminded, of course, of the crucial role that this city played more than 100 years ago in decisions taken about the formation of the Commonwealth of Australia.  And without the wisdom displayed on that occasion by the citizens of Kalgoorlie, the Commonwealth may not have been what it';s grown to be and it is a piece of the history of this part of Australia, as I prefer to primarily describe it, it is the history of this part of Australia which has played a crucial role.  And a lot of Australians know a bit about Kalgoorlie who';ve never visited it.  And I';m pleased that this is probably the third or fourth time I';ve been here, the third time Barry reminds me, he';d want me to do a fourth and a fifth probably in the next few months but we';ll see about that, that I';ve been here.
 But it';s great to be back.  I wish the art exhibition well.  I compliment the community on the sense of cohesion that is represented by this gathering and I';m very very pleased to survey the quality and the wisdom of the investment we made in supporting the hall of fame out of the federation fund.
I declare the exhibition open and thank you very much for having me.
  [ends]  


Thank you very much Senator Guy Barnett, to Michael Ferguson the Liberal candidate for Bass, to my other Senate and parliamentary colleagues, to the Mayor of Launceston, ladies and gentlemen.
As always, it';s a great pleasure to be back in this beautiful city and to be back in Tasmania, and hasn';t Tasmania been a great example of Australia';s economic vitality and economic strength over the past few years?  I am delighted, as somebody who has visited your state regularly in the almost 30 years have been in federal parliament, to observe the stronger economic conditions in Tasmania.  And that is due to a number of factors, but is due overwhelmingly to the national economic strength of the entire Australian nation.
  I found it very interesting over the years to gauge the reactions of state governments to various developments.  When the national economy is going badly, it';s all the fault of the federal government : when the national economy is going well and the state economy is going well, it';s due to the brilliance of the state economic policies.  The reality of course is that national economic management is the responsibility of the Federal Government and when the national economy is down, the Federal Government has got to cop the blame, and when the national economy is up, the Federal Government is entitled to say well it has been the result of our economic policies.  And I think that has been the outstanding achievement of the Government I have led for almost eight years.
  We had an unemployment figure yesterday of 5.7 per cent.  We now have what I call the golden double.  For the first time in 35 years, we have unemployment below 6 per cent and inflation below 3 per cent.  The unemployment rate in Tasmania is now 2.2 per cent lower I think than what it was two or three years ago.  The tourist industry is reviving.  The Regional Forest Agreements have brought balance and security and predicability to industry in this state.  The passenger subsidy that Senator Barnett referred to has been a massive shot in the arm for the tourist industry.  And I am delighted to say that there will be many benefits for Tasmania from the free trade agreement that we have negotiated with the United States.
  That free trade agreement will bring great long-term benefits to this country.  It';s the most important trade agreement that Australia has signed in more than a generation.  Sixty-six per cent of our agricultural exports to the United States will be immediately duty free.  There are benefits for our seafood industry through the removal of American tariffs.  There are benefits for our manufacturing and our mining and our service industries.  We have protected the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  We will continue to have a world class Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  Its security and continuity is not in question.  We have also guaranteed a proper measure of local content so that for years into the future, indeed for all time, so far as I am concerned, we will continue to hear Australian voices, Australian culture, Australian views and Australian residences on our television screens and in our movie theatres.
  And what we have been able to negotiate came about because of a once in a generation opportunity.  We would never again, if we had turned aside from that opportunity, we would never again have had the confluence of circumstances that have led to this free trade agreement being negotiated.  And I know from my discussion with President Bush last Sunday morning how committed he is to getting a free trade agreement through Congress.
  The American political system is different from ours.  The administration might sign a free trade agreement, but he';s got to have that agreement ratified by Congress before it can be given effect.  Whereas in Australia, the only changes that need to be ratified by the parliament are those that involve particular alterations to certain pieces of legislation.  And the biggest issue by far in national politics in the months ahead will be whether or not we can give full effect to the free trade agreement.  And this not something that we can put and take on, we can';t say well we';ll take 90 per cent of the advantages but we';ll reject these little things that we don';t like.
  We must either ratify the whole thing, or reject the whole thing. And I of course will be spending a great deal of time explaining to the Australian people on every occasion that I can that it is in the national interest that we ratify the whole agreement.  Why on earth would Australia give up the opportunity of linking itself with the strongest economy in the world?  Why would we pass up the opportunity of gaining benefits on many fronts?  We didn';t get all the benefits we wanted.  We didn';t get access for the sugar industry, but let me say even a modest amount of access to the sugar industry would not have gone anywhere near solving the problems of that industry.  We didn';t get all we wanted on beef, but we got a lot.  We got more upfront on dairy than many people expected, and as I mentioned earlier we gained some very significant benefits in other areas.
  Now I';ve spent a few moments talking about the free trade agreement because this is something that';s very much about Australia';s future. Australia is a country that needs as many trading opportunities and trading partners as we can lay our hands on.  Eighteen months ago we signed an enormous natural gas deal with China.  China has been a very fast growing market for Australia.  We have continued to maintain our great markets in Japan and Korea.  Australia is a country that will trade anywhere if there is advantage for this country.  I have a very simple philosophy when it comes to trade.  I will do what is in Australia';s national interest.  It';s as simple as that.  I';m not hidebound by some strict ideology or theory when it comes to trade.  I';m neither a multilateralist or a bilateralist.  I';m an Australian first Prime Minister who is prepared to put the national interest ahead of any other consideration.  That';s why we';ve negotiated the agreement and it to me beggars belief that anybody – that is the Federal Opposition, trade union movement or anybody else – could oppose a deal which is so clearly in the interests of this country.
  That of course is not the only issue that we have on our plate nationally at the present time.  We';re still trying to negotiate through the Senate, might I say strongly supported to date and I';m sure into the future, by all of the Tasmanian Liberal Senators, we';re still trying to negotiate through the Senate the introduction of a Medicare safety net.  Now we introduced some changes last year.  One of them was to increase the Medicare rebate for bulk billing of concession cardholders and children under 16.  That was done by regulation.  It didn';t need an act of parliament.  And the higher amount started to be paid to doctors on the 2nd of February, just a little over a week ago.  We';ve also introduced a lot of other measures that over time will bring more doctors, more practice nurses and more assistance into the medical practices in the regional and outer metropolitan areas of Australia.  That didn';t require any legislation either.
  But what does require legislation is the introduction of a Medicare safety net.  We are proposing for the first time to introduce a Medicare safety net.  This is a very simple safety net.  What it says is that if you are a concession cardholder or if you are a family in receipt of Family Tax Benefit A, and that is families with about three out of four children in Australia, then if your out of pocket out of hospital medical expenses exceed $500 in any one year, then you are reimbursed 80 per cent of that excess over $500.  If you are anybody else in the community that is not in that category, then the threshold is $1,000, not $500.
  Now out of pocket expenses can either be if you';re not bulk billed when you go to the GP, can be the difference between the Medicare rebate and what you pay the doctor, or if you go to a specialist out of hospital it can be the consultation fee, if you go to a radiologist, if you get a tissue biopsy, if you get a whole range of other services – diagnostic services – which are out of hospital, and the expenses you incur over and above the Medicare rebate.  So it doesn';t just cover the surplus from the doctor';s visit.  It covers all those others.  And we all know from our experience – you break your leg, you go the see the doctor, you go and get an x-ray, you go and see a specialist doctor, and it all mounts up.  And particularly in a family situation, you can pretty quickly get over that $500 in any one year.
  But I can';t for the life of me see why our opponents should be against this.  I mean I can accept that they have a slightly different philosophy on this whole issue than we do, and if they were elected to government, they';re entitled to bring in their policies.  But there is nothing inconsistent between this and what they are advocating.  It seems to me to be negative dog in the manger politics to say well because we';re not in government, we won';t let you bring in something that is beneficial to the Australian public.  So we';ll be pushing very hard because this is something that concerns people.  This is something that affects their daily capacity to fund their living expenses.  And I can';t for the life of me see why we can';t sink our political differences for the sake of Australian families and put this measure through.  So I am still saying to our opponents in the Senate – we understand our differences on certain issues, but passing a safety net would never compromise the capacity of some other government into the future bringing about further changes.  So for the sake once again of the interests of Australian families, we ought on this issue to sink our differences and to put the measure through.
But ladies and gentlemen, the last thing I want to say is that I';m delighted to be here with Michael, to congratulate him on being chosen by our party as the candidate for the seat of Bass.  I know something of his contribution as a teacher, as a Young Achiever of the Year, as a family man, as somebody who stands up for what he believes in.  He';s not afraid to express his views, he';s not going to bend in the face of criticism in relation to something he believes in very strongly, and I am very proud to have him as part of my team.  I wish him well and I assure him that he will have the total and strong support of his federal parliamentary colleagues.
 Thank you very much for having me back.  It';s great to see you.
[ends]


Thank you very much, Mr Jaensch, President of the Senate, Senator Colbeck, Vice Chancellor, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It's no secret that Australia is enjoying extremely good and robust economic conditions.
 But one of the important things about national economic strength is that the benefits of it must be shared as equally as possible around the nation. Some years ago, we observed the situation where the country was very strong nationally but not all parts of the country were enjoying the benefits of that economic strength. And we set about in a number ways trying to address that and one of the things we did and that was very much by courtesy of the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson, was to develop what was called the Sustainable Regions Programme to recognise that although there was general economic prosperity, some parts of the country weren't getting their fair share and that always runs against the Australian grain.
 We decided to, in a number of ways, to address regional inequality and the Sustainable Regions Programme, out of which the grant I'm about to announce will be funded with one element of that and I'm delighted to say that over the last year or two Tasmania in a very dramatic way begun to share more fully than in the past and indeed for a very long time the fruits of national economic prosperity.
 It's impossible for one part of Australia to be prosperous, unless the entire nation is prosperous or it's very difficult and therefore of course the revival of the Tasmanian economy in overwhelming measure has been due to the general health and strength of the Australian economy, which sees us for the first time, for example, since 1968 having an unemployment rate below 6% and inflation rate below 3% at the same time. It's a remarkable and very important double. There have been a number of special measures that have helped the tourism industry in Tasmania and some of them of course have come from the Commonwealth and some have come from the state and there has been heavy investment in many Tasmanian activities out of the Natural Heritage Trust and also the Networking the Nation programme which was funded out of  the partial sale of Telstra. All of these things have helped in a particular fashion.
 And I was delighted to hear from the Vice-Chancellor about the impact of the university package on this part of Tasmania and on Tasmania generally. We're very proud of that university package. It took a lot of hard negotiating to get it through the Senate, but it's necessary for the long-term strength of the tertiary education sector in our country. We need more resources for universities. We also need to give universities more flexibility so that they can adapt and adjust to the local needs of their local community and that is exactly what is going to occur here in this part of Tasmania and I'm so pleased that that programme has now been passed into law and it can have effect.
 So I'm very pleased to announce that the Commonwealth will contribute $577,500 for Skilling the Cradle Coast Community for the 21st Century. It's a programme that was outlined to you earlier and that you're very familiar with and the contribution from the Commonwealth will match the contribution from the State Government and from industry. As you know the project will promote science and technology related subjects in schools in the Cradle Coast region to address the current and future skills shortages in these areas throughout the region. This is a practical way of spending the taxpayers' dollar because we do need more scientists. We need more people who are technically proficient. We don't need more people going to some other disciplines. Perhaps, fewer people should go into those disciplines and more go into science and I've learnt as a layman in science matters, I was not educated in that stream myself but I've learnt a great deal over the last eight years as Chairman of the Prime Minister's Science Engineering and Technology Council which on a regular basis brings me into touch with leading scientists, researchers, industry people who understand the challenges of science. Leaders of the universities and some of our great science prize winners and we come together on a regular basis and talk about the future challenges of this country that can be addressed by science.
 The Vice Chancellor was telling me the extraordinary lift in the retention rate between years ten and twelve in the schools in this region. And something like what it was 57 to 75% over a very short period of time. Now, that is fantastic and they are the results and the reaction of a community that has a revived sense of hope and belief in its future and the good thing about this project and so many others is that it will bring responses and help to people here. It won't hold out the prospect though that you can advance if you go somewhere else. I mean, that has been the curse of Tasmania for too long, that you've had to go elsewhere to get the things that you ought to be able within reasonable measure to have available in your own community. There's always a limit to that because of the economies of size and scale, but it's only right that this part of the world have its own tertiary education identity and it's only right that we have a project that will encourage in the schools of this region a greater interest in science and hopefully lead to a greater number of science graduates and the contribution of that will (inaudible) to the future of this country.
 We meet in a building which is an example of the leading edge science capacity. A great export industry which has demonstrating the contribution that this country can make to the export capacity of Australia.
Now, I  know the product that comes from here is already duty free in the United States because you have 85% of the market. But let me take the opportunity as a final commercial to say how terrific the Free Trade Agreement is for Tasmania. The horticultural industries are getting a great tariff concessions, industrial products, and agriculture 66% of tariffs removed immediately another 9% to zero within a short period of time. Overall, enormous long range benefits for the future and when I was at the Festivale in Launceston and drinking some of the local wine I was reminded that although the wine industry does extremely well in the United States at the present time, in fact, the United States just went past Great Britain as our largest export destination for wine last year. Although, we do do very well in America at the present time, we'll do even better as a result of this Agreement because the tariff, it's only a small one, but any tariff is a nuisance if you're an exporter in that country - it's going to be phased out over a period of years. So that's unambiguously a good news story for the whole of Australia and not least Tasmania.
But I'm delighted to be associated with this product, I'm delighted to see that the Commonwealth is supporting it financially and I congratulate the industry people who've supported it. I congratulate the university for its leadership. For TAFE Tasmania and the Tasmanian Government for its role. I think it will do great things for this region.
Thank you very much.
 [ends]  


  Jackie Kelly the Federal Member for Lindsay and my Parliamentary Secretary, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It's great to be out here at Penrith.  It's great to be in the company of Jackie who is one of those dynamo federal representatives who seems to know everybody and everything in the area she represents, and has a very strong identification with her community.  As a parent, I can remember when my children were very heavily involved in junior sport.  They, like the last awardee, started playing soccer at the ages of six and seven and then progressed and they're now both in their 20s and they still play soccer from time to time.  And that great community association we had with the Greenwich Soccer Club in inner Sydney was one of the nicest periods of our family life because it brought us into contact with other mothers and fathers in exactly the same situation, and it built a great community spirit and it drove home to me the tremendous cement that holds together a sport as part of the Australian way of life, and that is its community base.
We all know how fond Australians are of sport, but it goes deeper than the sheer enjoyment of the game.  We might like whatever it may be.  It's also a way that brings us all together and it's something that dissolves barriers.  When you have sporting contests, whatever your differences are on other things, they are put aside and everybody is united.  And when this country is able to host great sporting events, as we did at the end of last year - the Rugby Union World Cup, and we do it with tremendous distinction as we did it in 2000 with the Olympic Games, it gives you an extra charge as an Australian.
So not surprisingly when we were giving thought to the sale of the ADI land, which was announced on the 22nd of January, as a result of a lot of representations that we received from Jackie Kelly in particular and also from a number of other people, we've decided and I'm very pleased to announce today that out of the entire development, as part of the contract that we signed with Lend Lease, there will be reserved a 100 hectare park and sporting precinct.  It will form part of the development.  The recreation park will include outdoor playing fields, a synthetic all weather field, tennis, netball and basketball courts, cycleways, walking trails, picnic and barbecue areas, and carparking.  And I'm told that the precinct to be reserved for those activities will in fact be larger than Centennial Park.  It will contribute to the amenities and the facilities of this area. It will respond to the vision that many people such as Jackie Kelly have had, of bringing additional facilities to the people of this part of western Sydney.
  And it's part of the contract that was signed by the Government with Lend Lease, and this will have to be constructed by the company as part of its contractual obligations.  So as part of this facility, we'll be ensuring that the people of this part of Sydney have this great facility which will provide so many opportunities for people with different sporting interests and different sporting pursuits.  It's not going to affect the planned regional park at St Mary's which will be managed by the New South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service.
  And can I say that nobody has fought harder for this than my colleague Jackie Kelly.  She has driven everybody mad, I can say in plain English, to get the best possible deal for the people of western Sydney.  She has driven my staff to distraction.  So much so that in the end, they just said yes, yes, yes in order to get her off their backs.  But the result is a magnificent victory for the people of western Sydney.  The result is not only the planned development of this huge area, including national park areas, but very importantly the dedication of 100 hectares towards major additional sporting facilities.  I think, and I know all of you will think, this is something that the people of western Sydney and the people of the Penrith district deserve, and I'm very delighted to announce this today and I want to pay tribute to Jackie.
  I also want to join her in congratulating people who in an unsung way keep sport going in this country.  The great names - the Andrew Gaze's, the Steve Waugh's, all of the great names  (inaudible) and deservedly so, they're great players.  But it's the people who we've honoured today who provide weekend in, weekend out the opportunity and the support for our young girls and boys to play the sports they like and to grow into fine citizens of our nation.  So can I say to all of them congratulations and thank you.
  I wish this community well.  I thank Jackie for asking me along today and I know that this sporting precinct will bring great benefits and great enjoyment to the people of western Sydney.  Thank you.
  [ends]  


  Well thank you very much Mr Mayor, my colleague and Liberal candidate for McMillan, Russell Broadbent, Senator Judith Troeth the Parliamentary Secretary and long-serving and very hard working Liberal Senator for Victoria, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a pleasure to be back again in this part of Victoria, in this part of Gippsland, principally but not only to urge you with all the conviction that I can muster to support Russell Broadbent later on in the year when an election comes along, but also as part of something that I have done all of the eight years that I have been Prime Minister of our country, and that is to on a constant basis visit different parts of Australia, listen to what people have to say at community gatherings, share with those community gatherings some of my thoughts and hopes and aspirations for the future of our country.  And I hope through that process to get a better understanding of what the people of our country continue to think about current (inaudible) and future possibilities.
I';m often asked, and it happened again at a 62 pupil school at Welshpool this morning, I';m often asked by groups of schoolchildren – what is the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia?  And I said the best thing about being Prime Minister of Australia is the opportunity it gives you, it gives one to meet different groups of Australians in different parts of our country.  And one never gets tired of doing that because there is always something new to understand.  There is always a local story which tells of a community which has responded to a challenge or a community that over time has changed or conditioned its attitude to something because of changing circumstances.
Australia at the present time is a strong country, a (inaudible) country and an optimistic country.  We are really enjoying as a nation the strongest economic conditions we';ve probably had since World War II.  We have very low unemployment nationally, we have very low inflation, we have paid off our debts, our interest rates are low, our real incomes have risen, and there is a justifiable sense nationally of economic stability and strength.  And we are seen around the world as a country that is strong and prosperous.  Now I recognise that it';s not shared evenly and there are some who are missing out and I never fail to acknowledge that as I go around the country and go to different communities.
  And I also recognise that this has not happened by accident.  One of the things that worries me at the present time is that there is an assumption that no matter what we do, that prosperity is going to continue.  Prosperity doesn';t happen by accident.  It happens because you work hard.  And unless you continue to work hard, unless you continue to apply the right policies at a government level, particularly at a national level, then prosperity can pretty quickly disappear.  But I also recognise that prosperity and economic success on its own, it';s not an end in itself.  It only is valuable if it produces a human dividend.  And when I look at the fact that our unemployment rate nationally is at a 22 year low, I feel that in a way that is the human dividend, because putting people in work and giving young people in particular the opportunity of a job, is one of the most sacred obligations of a national government, and I';m very conscious of that.
  I';m also very conscious that part and parcel of the prosperity that we have carries the obligation to make sure that the services that are needed for the present and for the future are provided.  This is not an occasion to go into a detailed discussion of the responsibilities of the different levels of government in our federation.  Suffice it to say that we accept our responsibilities in areas of aged care, of health.  I recognise that the aged care sector has some propositions to put to the Federal Government.  Some of those propositions have been put to me this morning and I';m aware of that, and they are issues that the Government will be addressing in the not too distant future.  We';ve undertaken some major changes to our health system.  We';re trying very hard to get a safety net, a new protection for Australian families, through the Senate at the present time.  But the Opposition and some of the other parties are against it.  We hope in the end they can be persuaded of the need to support it because it adds something to our present system.  It doesn';t take something away.  And when you';re adding something, I would have thought everybody should support it.  I can understand people opposing something when you';re taking something away, but I can';t for the life of me understand why you oppose something that will unambiguously make the situation better.
As I came in, I met a variety of people.  I met some dairy farmers, I met people in the aged care sector, I met people in small business.  We have just reached an agreement with the United States administration for a free trade agreement with that country.  That free trade agreement will be unambiguously good news for Australia.  If the President can get it through the Congress and if the necessary legislation is ratified by our parliament, the consummation of that free trade agreement will lock Australia into the biggest economy the world has ever seen.  America is the most powerful economic nation the world has ever seen and it will get stronger as the years go by, not weaker.  And it seems to me to be an important part of our future for us to share some of that strength, to have greater access to those markets.
  The fact that we didn';t get everything we want is not a good reason for throwing away all the good things we did get that we wanted.  It only makes sense to reject a free trade agreement with the United States if the impact of it actually weakens, rather than strengthens, our economy.  And there will be advantages for the dairy industry.  The quota will go up significantly.  There will be advantages for the beef industry.  Sixty-six per cent of agriculture will enter under the agreement duty free immediately, 97 per cent of our manufactured goods.  There will be a great expansion in relation to our service sector and as the years go by, that will be enormously important.  We';ve secured proper protection for Australian cultural identity in film and television, and very importantly we have protected our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  So that free trade agreement is unambiguously very good news for our country.
  I listened to what the Mayor had to say and I am very understanding of the sorts of issues that are confronting this part of south Gippsland.  I know that one issue that is always close to the heart of Mayors and of country and regional councils is that of roads, and I';m very pleased to say that the Government recently announced through the Deputy Prime Minister that we would be renewing for another period of four years, the highly successful Roads to Recovery programme whereby the Federal Government (inaudible) and funds the building and the repair and the construction of local roads.  And that programme, which I launched first about four years ago and has involved expenditure of  $1.2 billion has been very, very valuable.
  One thing I want all of you to be vigilant about, and that is that as fast as the Federal Government puts additional money into local roads, don';t allow any State Government in Australia to withdraw any of their funding, because what I want is a net addition.  Over the next four years, I want an extra $1.2 billion to go into local roads all around Australia (inaudible) around Australia, and I hope that that does not occur because local roads are very important.  And also what is very important to a local community such as this is the strength and viability of small business.
  Small business is the heart and soul of the economic life of not only regional cities and regional towns, but also the suburbs of our big metropolitan areas.  And the responsibility of a government is not to tell people how to run their businesses. Governments are hopeless at running businesses.  I don';t believe governments should try and run businesses.  I think what governments should try and do is to create the right economic circumstances so the men and women of this country can run their business at a profit.  That is why we need to have low interest rates, it';s why we need to have industrial relations laws that protect small business from union thuggery, it';s why we need to have an economic climate that encourages people to take risks and to invest for the future.
I don';t come here saying to you that everything in Australia is perfect – far from it.  We';re a great democracy and we have a lot of reasons to debate a lot of issues.  But I do say that economically we are going through a period of very strong growth.  It hasn';t been easily achieved and it can easily be set aside and put into reverse if we take the wrong path.  We are a nation that is increasingly conscious of the need for strong defences and for effective national security policies.  We';re also a nation that has very great social stability and we';re very keen, all of us, to keep it that way.
 But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for having me here this morning.  It';s always a pleasure to meet yet another community in regional Australia.  And you';ll understand, and indeed forgive me for ending where I began, and that is by extolling Russell';s credentials.  Many of you will know him very well from his previous service to this community, service that has continued while he has not been a Member of Parliament.  He does bring an understanding, through his own family business activities, of small business.  He does have a rich background of community service and I very, very warmly commend him to you as my standard bearer, my representative and the Liberal Party candidate in this neck of the woods come the next federal election.
But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for coming.  I wish all of you the very best of good fortune for the future.
 Thank you.
[ends]  



Thank you very much, Phil, and to my other parliamentary colleague, Bob Charles, ladies and gentlemen. Can I also thank the children for that wonderful rendition of our national anthem. Well done.
This is an opportunity for me to share a few thoughts with this community. I also want to make an important announcement a little later on that is directly relevant to some very important work that is being carried on here. But I do want upfront to say what a hard working federal representative you have in Phil Barresi.
 He';s very persistent, he gnaws away, he bothers, he hectors and eventually after twisting of arms, he extracts from my ministerial colleagues the sort of things that are important in a local way to this community.
To have good Government you need people in Government who are taking the right decisions that effect the whole country in our case. But you also need at a local level somebody whose got strong connections, whose got a strong personal commitment and brings a great deal of energy to the task and Phil Barresi is certainly somebody who';s done that in the almost eight years now that he';s been your Federal Member.
We do, as Phil said look at an Australia which in an economic sense is very strong. I';ve had in the time that I';ve been Prime Minister three broad goals for our country – I wanted to be a country that has national security, I want it well defended and particularly in the age of terrorism I want it properly protected against that modern scourge and modern threat.
I reflected on this about an hour or so ago when I had the great privilege of addressing the 1200 students at Ringwood Secondary College on the occasion today of the 50th anniversary of the founding of that school. And I thought back to what it was like in 1954 and some of the things and challenges that our country had and I reminded the students that then there were no computers or mobile phones or emails. But of course, we all thought we were going to be blown up if the Americans and Soviet Union threw nuclear bombs at each other. And we had a lot of other challenges. We didn';t think we had to grapple with the challenge of international terrorism striking indiscriminately and cruelly in different parts of the world. And it';s a reminder that in a passage of that period of time some things have gotten a lot better and some things have deteriorated, but that';s life.
   But what hasn';t deteriorated of course is the tremendous optimism and hope of the Australian people. One of endearing and enduring things about Australia is that';s it';s a constantly optimistic nation and it';s part of my responsibility to further bring out and promote that optimism. Not in any sense of false boosterism but because I believe that this country has so many reasons to be optimistic.  We do have a sense of national security. We';re also economically very strong and that';s really my second goal for Australia.
Phil mentioned the golden trifecta, this country really has at the moment its very best economic conditions since World War II. That';s not to say that there aren';t some people who are missing out and that';s not to say aren';t areas of our society where people feel neglected. That is not to say that there aren';t other things that Governments at all levels can do. But if you look at the overall health of our economy. If you look at our low levels of inflation, our very strong employment position for the first time in I can remember our unemployment rate has fallen below that of the United States and it';s the lowest that';s been for something like 22 years.
 And that is reflected right across the country. There are parts of Australia I visit now that were always behind the rest of the country a few years ago but they';re now enjoying that. So there is a lot of reason why we should feel optimistic about the strengths of our economy. The third reason that we should feel optimistic and hopeful about the future is that we are socially a very stable country. Everybody wants to come and live in Australia. They want to come and live in Australia because this is a stable, peaceful, tolerant harmonious country.
  And it';s something that we have and it';s very precious and it';s very important that we hang on to it. And it';s very important that everybody who comes to our country as an immigrant and comes in the appropriate way comes because they fit the criteria of our immigration or refugee policy that those people are treated decently. We';ve had an ongoing debate and quite probably in a democracy there are always echoes of it about the question of the circumstances in which people come to our country and I';ve stated the Government';s position very plainly on that, and I';ll go on stating it. And that is we welcome immigrants from all around the world without discrimination based on ethnicity or colour, or religion, or race, and we also take some 12,000 refugees from different parts of the world. We take people on the basis of proper orderly lawful selection and that is the only way that a nation such as Australia can continue to operate.
 But we are seen as socially stable, we have our problems and there have been some difficult problems emerge in Sydney recently, but overall this is an incredibly stable country and one of the reasons why we';re stable is that we';re a very egalitarian society. We';re not based on class division. We treat people on their merits, according to their intrinsic worth. When I had the enormous privilege of addressing the American Congress the year before last, the joint sitting of Congress, I said that we had many things in common with the United States, we have a few things that aren';t uncommon with the United States.  But naturally, being their guest, I stressed the things that we had in common.  And one of them was that we believed the quality of a person should be determined by that person';s character and contribution to his or her community and not according to their race or their religion or their social background.
Now that';s always been the Australian way and it';s something very important and it';s something that we';ve got to hang on to.  The part of the Australian way is also a very lively pride in what this country has achieved.  One of the reasons that this country has reason to be optimistic is that we';ve had our blemishes, we';ve made our mistakes and there are things that we all wish this country hadn';t done in the past and if we had our time over again we would have done them differently.  But overall, the ledger of Australian achievement is a very positive one and we should never lose sight of that fact and we should never feel apologetic about the contribution that this country has made in the time that it';s been in existence and the contribution that it';s made as a citizen of the world.
Putting all of that together, I am immensely optimistic about this country';s future. I can';t remember a time when it was treated with greater respect around the world.  We';re treated with a lot of respect for a number of reasons.  We';re treated with a lot of respect because of our economic strength.  We';ve been able to demonstrate we';ve probably got the fastest growing and the strongest economy in the western world over the last decade or so.  We';re treated with respect because we';re prepared to stand up for what we believe in, even though it may in the eyes of some be unpopular.  When we went into East Timor, we stood up for the people of that oppressed little country, it was risky and some people doubted the wisdom of it.  We took a controversial decision to be involved in Iraq, but I want to say that if I had my time over again, I would not have altered one iota what this country did on that occasion.  We';re also respected because we';re pretty good at running things in this country, we';re very good at running international events.  The people of Melbourne, particularly the older ones in this audience will remember the way in which our country was magnificently put on display in 1956 when we first hosted the Olympic Games and as the years have gone by, we haven';t lost the touch. And in 2000, the Olympic Games is a wonderful advertisement by the Australian people.  And I notice in his introduction, quite naturally, Bruce touched upon the great day of the end of September here in Melbourne.  But, of course, being a bloke who';s grown up following the game they play in heaven – Rugby Union – I can';t help but mention, of course, the magnificent Rugby World Cup.  And can I say it was fantastic to see the way in which, just as Australian Rules has spread to New South Wales and Queensland, the joy I experienced of going to the Telstra Dome – I think that';s what they call it now – the Telstra Dome to watch Australia play Ireland in that great match.  And once again, we were able to put on display to the rest of the world, not only our love of sport, but our capacity to organise things.  So if you think I';m pretty impressed with what this country has achieved and where it stands in the world and the esteem with which it is held around the world, we';ll you';re right because we have a lot as Australians to be incredibly proud of.
But one of the things we have to be very proud of, of course, is our capacity at a local community level to address problems and to address challenges and one of the things that I';ve endeavoured to do as Prime Minister is to encourage the notion of what I call a social coalition.  There are a lot of problems that can';t be solved by the Government alone.  Governments are very bad at some things; they';re very good at other things.  They';re very bad, in my view, at running businesses.  I wouldn';t have governments run anybody';s business, quite honestly.  When it comes to private enterprise, I think it';s a very very bad principle.  I won';t go into some of the unhappy experiences that have occurred over the years at a state level and, indeed, sometimes in the past at a federal level as well.  But there are other things governments are very good at and what we have to do is to build responses where you get the government doing the things it';s good at, you get the dedicated welfare organisation with government assistance doing the things that they are good at, you get dedicated individuals who have a sense of mission and philanthropy also involved and you marshal the business community.  And I was delighted to read the other day the results of a survey carried out by the Queensland University of Technology, which showed that the (inaudible) changes that I';ve brought in over the last three or four years and (inaudible) encouraging charitable donations have begun to yield fruit and that the charitable donations have increased significantly as a result of those changes.
One of the welfare challenges of our society, one of the social challenges is the challenge of families that become at a very early stage dysfunctional.  We';ve had a lot of debate about parental responsibility and parental performance.  Let me state my philosophy very simply – I think the family is the most precious unit, the most precious thing we have in our community.  There is nothing better than a loving, stable, united family and it provides the greatest measure of moral support, the greatest sense of fulfilment, the greatest reservoir that people can draw on in times of difficulty.
98 per cent of parents in Australia do the right thing and they don';t want any advice from any political figure about how to bring up their children, they know how to do it. What they want from the Government are a set of policies that enable them to exercise the choices that should reasonably be available.  They want to decide whether one or both parents work while their children are young, or whether one of them works full-time and one of them works part-time.  They want the right to decide what school they sent their children to.  They want the right to make other choices.  And the role of Government to facilitate that, to make that as far as we can afford to do so, to make that possible.  But having done that, to get out of the way and let them raise their own children according to their priorities and their own sense of values and their sense, not the Government sense, of what is right and what is wrong.
But there are some families that don';t make it, and there are some kids that are born into such dysfunctional circumstances that they don';t have any hope at all, and we know that.  And one of the things that we have tried to do under the Stronger Families and Communities programme that Jocelyn Newman and I launched here in Melbourne back in 2000, is to try and help intervene at an early stage, identify those families that are going to be at risk, that are going to be at risk, and provide them with some assistance.  Now over the last few years it has been operating under the title of Connections, which is an agency of UnitingCare, which is part of the Uniting Church - an agency that does an absolutely magnificent job in helping the less privileged in our community.  It has been operating a ‘working together'; programme which is designed to do exactly what I have described.  It';s an early intervention service.  It supports families, teachers and carers of pre school age children experiencing significant social and emotional difficulties which result in very challenging behaviour.
These are the families that governments should be particularly concerned about because they don';t really have a hope unless they are given some help.  Not the families that are working well.  We shouldn';t be interfering with them.  We should be giving them choices, but let them… they';re better than we are at looking after their kids.  But these others aren';t and they do need help.  They need some intervention.  So over the past couple of years this has been operating and I';m very happy to announce today that we';re going to provide another $800,000 in ongoing funding for the UnitingCare Connections.
  Now in 2002/2003, this programme helped 125 families, and it works with parents and early childhood centre staff to provide children with necessary consistency.  And the evaluation that I';m also releasing today, this blue document, shows how successful the programme has been to date.  It';s making a real difference.  For example, 82 per cent of the parents who use the service stated that they could manage their child';s behaviour better after attending the programme than they could before.  And the latest funding will allow the programme to expand to address higher demands by providing for an extra two workers, enabling the programme to be delivered to the entire city of Bayside.
  Now this is an excellent example in your community of how the Federal Government is working with community organisations in responding to those families that really are challenged and are finding it difficult.  And we have a lot of other policies that provide the choices for the generality of families.  But there are a small number and they';re all part of our community and they do need help.  And the best way of helping them is for the Government to help the volunteer welfare organisations that have a sense of commitment and compassion.  I mean I think the most wonderful welfare organisations you can possibly find are (inaudible) essentially that are attached to what we might call the traditional charities, the churches.  I mean there is nothing better than to help organisations like the Salvation Army and Anglicare and St Vincent de Paul and the Smith Family and those organisations.  They know what pain and hardship is all about and they do it out of a sense of Christian commitment, or commitment generally, mainly, but not exclusively Christian.
  And my philosophy has always been if you want a problem of an acute social order solved, get beside those organisations, find out what they';re doing, preferably fund them rather than set up some new, complicated bureaucratic network which would probably involve a couple of years of argument between the Commonwealth, State and Local Government before it gets off the ground.  That has been my experience.  Some of you may think it';s a harsh judgement, but I';ve had a bit of experience with that.  Because these organisations are there on the ground experiencing the problems and they often need more help and more resources.
Now that is very much my philosophy of how we all work together at a local level.  I';m about those things working at a local level, but I';m also very much about the country working effectively at a national level.  This country is strong, it';s united and it';s stable.  Now I don';t claim a monopoly of wisdom in solving problems.  I do my best.  I get things wrong on occasions.  I hope I get the majority of things right.  But at the end of each three years, you will make a decision about that.
  But can I say in this area you have a great local Member in Phillip Barresi.  I mean he';s had a small business background, he';s identified with the community.  He is Deakin in that sense, very much so.  So I not only wish him well.  I advocate him to you very passionately.  He';s a great bloke.  He';s worked very hard for you.  Get behind him and send him back to Canberra on that day later on in the year, whenever it might be.
  Thank you very much.
[ends]


Well good morning.  Mr Michael Phillips the Principal of Ringwood Secondary College, Mr Chris Young the President of the School Council, my parliamentary colleague Phil Barresi the Member for Deakin, students, ladies and gentlemen.
I count it a very special privilege to share for a few moments this very important birthday of this school, a school that has been no ordinary school within the Victorian public education system.  Not only do you celebrate 50 years, but you also celebrate a remarkable and distinctive contribution to the life of your district and also the contribution that the graduates of your school have made to Australian society.  It';s always interesting on occasions such as this to think about what things were like 50 years ago, to think how the world has changed.  But it';s also important to think of the 50 years that you will face which will canvass the most challenging and the most fruitful years of your life.  You will leave school in an Australian community that is strong and optimistic and confident.  You will leave school at a time when employment opportunities are greater than they have been for some time, but you will nonetheless have to work hard to take best advantage of those opportunities.
  Fifty years ago the opportunities for girls in our society were not as great as they are now.  That';s one of the big changes over the last 50 years.  Fifty years ago nobody had heard of, certainly most of us hadn';t heard of computers and nobody had heard of emails, and the idea of having a mobile phone was sort of, you know, absolutely not in contemplation.  Indeed 50 years ago not all homes in Australia had landlines.  Fifty years ago the world worried that the two power blocs, one led by the United States and the other led by the Soviet Union, were going to blow each other up with nuclear weapons.  That has changed somewhat with the disappearance of the Soviet Union.  And here';s something that';s very different – 50 years ago England had just beaten us in cricket and reclaimed the Ashes, which they were to hold on to in subsequent occasions, only to lose them back to Australia in the late 1950s.
The world is a very different place.  There is no point in arguing whether it';s better or worse.  I think it';s better because I think the opportunities for people now are greater than what they were 50 years ago.  And through that period of time there have been some constants.  There have been the importance to you of your families.  The values that your families teach you are the values that sustain you through your life.  The importance of your school community, the dedication of your teachers.  Teaching is a noble profession and one that should be greatly prized and respected within our community.  Something else that has happened over the last 50 years that';s very important is the way in which this country has been aware, become more aware of its cultural capacities and its cultural contributions.
  This school is renowned for its performing arts.  It is renowned for its understanding of those aspects of life that go to issues of culture and issues of artistic expression.  And over the last 50 years, Australia has certainly become more self-confident about its own individual identity and the capacity to express the Australian ways with Australian voices, the way we see ourselves and the way we relate to the rest of the world.  And your school in that sense, more than most, has been able to make a particular contribution.  I want simply to congratulate you on what you have achieved, to honour your teachers, to pay respect to the school community, and to thank all of you for the collective contribution the school has made to the life and work of this part of Melbourne and of Australia generally.
  But most importantly of all, may I wish the young students of this College every success and every fulfilment.  Don';t settle for second best.  Be optimistic.  Think the best of people because – and this is a little homily I give every school gathering I go to – and that is to say when I was at school the happiest people I found were those who thought the best of their schoolmates.  The miserable, most unhappy, downcast were those who were always grizzling and groaning about how terrible other people were.  There is a positive side to everybody.  I know you find that hard to imagine on some occasions.  And I have found it is a great rule of life that if you apply that you end up being a far happier individual.
  But you';ll leave school and enter a very positive but challenging world.  Make the best of your opportunities.  Treasure your school years.  Remember the advice of your teachers, even though you don';t on occasion like to take it.  And I wish all of you very good fortune in the years ahead and thank you very much for having me.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Jason, Bob Charles, Steven Hartney the candidate for Chisholm, and Paul Teiwes the candidate for Holt, Helen Kroger the State President of the Victorian Division, and Julian Sheezel the State Director, other colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
I have been a regular visitor to the electorate of La Trobe, not only as Prime Minister, but also in the years before that.  Bob Charles is a very good friend of mine.  Bob Charles has been a wonderful representative of this electorate ever since he won it back in 1990.  But Bob Charles has now passed the baton of Liberal representation to a new face, somebody who brings to his candidature a special experience in the Victoria Police Force.  And let me endorse immediately what Jason had to say about the importance of having a broader gene pool of politicians than people whose sole working experience has been a politician';s office or a union office.
  We run the risk in this country of so narrowing the base from which candidates are chosen, that our parliament of 20 years time will be full of people whose only experience has been in professional politics, and I think that will be a very, very bad thing indeed because you all know that running a trade union is just another branch of the Australian Labor Party.  It';s professional politics.  We want people who represent every section of the community.  We want businessmen and women, we want farmers, we want doctors, we want lawyers, we want teachers, we want police officers, we want people who have done I guess the most important job of all, and that has been full time raising children.  We want, in other words, a cross section of the Australian community.
  Jason knows the social challenges of this area.  Police officers know the drug problem, they know the difficulty of dysfunctional families causing, as their children grow to teenage, ill disciplined behaviour leading to crime, and all the social implications of that.  And he has been no passive cop on the beat, not that there is anything wrong with cops on the beat – in fact a lot of us think there should be more cops on the beat more often – but what he has demonstrated in his time in the Victorian Police Force is that for his age he has been quite a stellar performer.  And he has won recognition.  He has been, I understand, the youngest Senior Sergeant in the Victoria Police Force.  Now all of that points to a person who is dedicated, somebody who believes in his community and somebody who is used to the ideal of serving a community.  We want Members of Parliament who want to serve the community and not serve their own self-interest and their own career prospects.  And Jason falls square in the middle of that.
Now I say these things because when you know a long-serving, respected Member, and my friend Bob certainly falls into that category, people say – gee, Bob';s going, okay that';s a pity, we love Bob and he';s done a fantastic job.  But Bob would be the first to say we now get behind the new man, the new person we have chosen and make sure that he takes over and inherits Bob Charles'; mantle and becomes the representative for La Trobe.  La Trobe is a tough seat.  It';s always been close.  Just about everything is close in this part of Victoria politically.  They';re all tiny margins and we';ve all got to work very, very hard to make sure we hold onto them.
  But we have a good story to tell.  We have a very good story to tell nationally.  Our economy at the moment is performing better than at any time since World War II.  And that';s not a piece of hyperbole.  Our growth rate… we';ve had growth now for 10 years or more continuously.  We have unemployment below six per cent and inflation below three per cent – the first time those two have been together since 1968.  Our unemployment rate now is the lowest in more than 22 years.  Our interest rates are the lowest in a generation.
  We have more than doubled the number of apprenticeships and traineeships than what we inherited back in 1996, and real wages under this Government have grown by 13 per cent in eight years versus just under three per cent in 13 years of the former Government.  In other words, the party of the workers has given the workers lower wage rises than the party of the so-called bosses.  Of course we are a party for the entire Australian community and there is no economic statistic of which I am more proud than the fact that under this Government we';ve not only cut unemployment, but we';ve boosted people';s wages.  Now Mr Hawke and Mr Keating used to say that was impossible.  Their justification for cutting wages or suppressing wage rises was that it was needed in order to reduce unemployment.  Well somehow or other we have been able to run a more productive economy so that if you lift wages off the back of higher productivity, you don';t cause inflation, and that means you can simultaneously reduce unemployment and also boost people';s wages.
  We';ve cut our debt.  Our exports are very strong.  We';ve built a diverse set of trade relations.  I remember when we were campaigning in 1996, the then Prime Minister Mr Keating was running around and saying oh the leaders of Asia won';t deal with this fellow, he won';t get his foot in the door, they';ll turn him away.  That';s not what I found when I went to China on behalf of the North West Gas Consortium to be involved in the final discussions to the largest export contract that this country has ever won.  What I found was a leadership of the most populous country in the world that was very ready to do business with us.
  And we have been able to build an ever closer relationship with America without in any way compromising our close trading relationships with Asia.  And the symbolic evidence of that were those two days in October last year when historically an amazing double – President George Bush one day addressing a joint sitting of parliament, and President Hu Jintao of China the next day also addressing a joint sitting of parliament.  Now who would have imagined that was possible five years ago, let alone 10 years ago.  So it';s an illustration that we have been able to rebalance our relationships.  We have never been closer to our traditional allies and I';m very proud of that, but that closeness has not been achieved at the expense of preserving and further developing the very important relationships we have with the countries of our region.
 In very important areas such as education and health, we have been faithful to the commitments that we made in 1996.  One of the very important commitments I made as Opposition Leader in 1996 was that we would preserve Medicare.  People said we couldn';t be trusted with Medicare.  Well Dr Carmen Lawrence as Health Minister back in 1994 rejected the 10,000 signature petition that Bob Charles gathered together to get a Medicare office in this area, and I';m delighted to say that today the opening of that office has been announced, and that Narre Warren will have a Medicare office – the first of two to be opened in Victoria.
  We';ve restored private health insurance.  When we became Government, only 33 per cent of the population was in private health insurance, that had been deliberately run down by Labor because they don';t believe in private health insurance, they don';t. I mean, whatever they say, they don';t believe in private health insurance because whenever they get their hands on it, they reduce the subsidies, they make it less attractive, they run it down.  It got down to 31 per cent.  I mean, we introduced two things – we introduced a 30 per cent rebate and we introduced lifetime community ratings.  And that has resulted in the number of people in private health insurance rising to almost 45 per cent – the highest it';s been for many many years.  And that';s important, not only for the value private health insurance represents, but also because the more people there are in private health insurance, the less pressure there is on public hospitals.  And private hospitals have taken some of the load off public hospitals.
 Now what we need in this country is a combination of the two.  The best way to deliver human services is a partnership between the public and the private.  It';s no good leaving it all to the private sector because there';ll be a market failure because there';s not enough economic sustenance for certain activities, they';ll disappear.  But equally, don';t give it all to the Government.  Never give everything to the Government, no matter what the Government is, they are very very bad at managing things that require sort of fine tuned private sector judges because that is not the business of government.  I mean, just as governments shouldn';t run milkbars and coffee shops and hotels and liquor stores, they shouldn';t be left to having a monopoly on running other things. So, you need a partnership and that';s what we have in health.  And that importantly is what we have in education.
  I';ve always been a tremendous believer in the right of parents to choose where their children are educated.  I don';t want to be telling people where their children should be educated. I want to be providing people with a range of opportunities.  I want them to be able to choose between the Government schools and the private schools.  I want the private school options to be affordable.  You don';t offer people the choice of an independent school if the only school that';s available charges fees of $14,000 a year.  And what I';ve presided over is the expansion of a private school sector which offers low fee options to parents.  They';re the ones that have grown, not the ones they keep talking about.
  Every time the Labor Party talks about a private school they talk about Scotch or Wesley or King, well they';re nice schools, I';m not having a go at them but they are a typical of independent schools. They represent only a tiny proportion of the independent schools. Sixty-one per cent of the independent schools are catholic parish schools in the catholic systemic system.  And there';s a great swag on new low fee independent schools, the growing numbers of Australians are choosing for their children.  But the public sector also needs to be very strongly supported and I had the great privilege this morning of going to the 50th anniversary of Ringwood Secondary College, which is a fantastic school and it';s got a great reputation in Melbourne, particularly in the area of performing arts and to address that school assembly and to share some of my thoughts about what Australia might be in 50 years time and what it might have been 50 years ago, and we won';t go into that, it was a tremendous experience and a reminder of the diversity of our government education system and that it contains many very dedicated teachers and many outstanding schools.
  So we have got a great story to tell, but if we want to retain government, we want Jason to become the next member for La Trobe, we';ve got to work very very hard.  If I can speak passionately as the Liberal Leader as well as Prime Minister, winning seats like this for the fourth time in government is hard.  There';s always a tendency for people to go – oh well, they';ve been there for a while, they might be doing a good job, but you know see if there';s anything else around and we';ll have a look.  And there';s always a danger of that and we';ve got to guard against that.  We';ve got to remind people that you can';t take Australia';s prosperity for granted.
  I looked at my opponent the other day when he was addressing the Press Club and there was an air of assumed prosperity in everything he said.  He made remarks such as – in a country as wealthy as Australia we should be able to afford this; we are prosperous enough to afford that.  And I thought to myself – this bloke thinks it will go on regardless of what you do.  The reality is it won';t.  If you get a government that decides to put the unions back in charge of industrial relations, if you get a government that decides to go back into debt, you';ll push up interest rates.  If you get a government that decides to adopt anti-business policies, you';re going to slow economic growth. I mean, relatively speaking, business activity in Victoria is under greater strain than many other states because of the trade union industrial relations policies of the Bracks Government.  It was confirmed in a survey this morning of the Sensis organisation which indicated that although business conditions remain strong because the national economy is strong, Victoria is losing out.  Now as an Australian Prime Minister, I don';t play favourites with different parts of Australia.  But if I were a Victorian, I';d be cranky that my state was doing less well than other parts of Australia.  I';d want to know why my state wasn';t doing as well and I think it';s a question that will increasingly be asked.
  And then, of course, on the local level there';s another issue I occasionally here about and that';s called – what';s the name of that Freeway?  Scoresby, that';s right.  I every so often hear about Scoresby Freeway and I should hear about it because we signed a deal. I mean, the issue here is trust.  The issue here is trust.  We signed a deal and that deal was that we would build it without tolls, that it would be a freeway not a tollway.  John Anderson signed the agreement with Batchelor whoever he is or was, the Victorian Transport Minister and Bracks went to the last election, wrote letters to everybody saying you have my word, it will be built.  Now we know what that word was worth – nothing.  Now, that';s what we';re angry about and that';s what you have a right to be angry about.  I mean, if he just said before the last state election – look, we might want to make it a tollway, okay, people might have criticised that but we';d have known where we stood.  So that';s why we';re going to continue to persevere and we';re going to remain committed to putting money on the table to build it on the conditions of that memorandum of understanding.  And that is the local issue that is tremendously important and my Victorian colleagues right through this part of Melbourne have never stopped talking about it and I don';t blame them because it';s a very important issue.
 Well ladies and gentlemen, thank you very very much for coming along this afternoon.  I think he';s a great bloke and I want you to get behind him. I know Bob is working for him flat out. It';s going to be a tough fight, but if we all get behind Jason, well allow him the time and the opportunity to go out into the community and to expand the contacts that he already has.  I have no doubt on election night; he will be the next Liberal member for La Trobe. Thank you very much.
[ends]


Thank you very much Stephen, Ivan Deveson, David Edwards, ladies and gentlemen.
  I must say, I am certainly very conscious of and much respectful towards the firm of Allens Arthur Robinson and I have connections with it that might even surprise... my understanding is that before it was bought by the Commonwealth, Kirribilli House in fact belonged to the Allen family.  So I'm really delighted at the sponsorship and to have this opportunity of saying a few things about some of the challenges that face our country in the years ahead.
  CEDA provides a great opportunity for these sorts of things, you take them more seriously and in a more systematic fashion than some other organisations.  Good government requires many things, but probably one of the most important things that good government requires is that those in government have a clear step of national of goals.  In the time that I've been Prime Minister I've had three broad national goals.  The first of those, quite properly, is that of national security.  The second is that of economic strength and the third is social stability.  And in November of 2002, I had the opportunity of addressing CEDA in Sydney and laid out a number of strategic priorities for the Government and in company with this address I'm releasing something of a, on the website, something of a progress report on each of those strategic priorities.  And on one very critical issue facing this country, that of demographic change, in Sydney this morning the Treasurer released an update on his Inter-generational Report that was released with the 2002 Budget.  And he's also made some important announcements relating to superannuation arrangements which are designed in a very measured and positive way to encourage a very important goal and that is for greater workforce participation, particularly but not only amongst people of more mature years.
 This country has a very low level of workforce participation of people between the age of 55 and 64.  There are a lot of reasons for it, some of them relate to the operation of our superannuation arrangements and Peter has addressed these in a very important way with his statement.  But the central message that I want to bring today is one of genuine optimism about this country's long-term future, tempered by one very important note of caution.  With our economy more competitive and stronger than it has been for decades, we as a nation are better placed, I believe, than at anytime since World War II to embrace a new era of national achievement and one that is not only going to see this country very strong and secure, but also give to individual Australians and their families the opportunity of making the choices only they can sensibly make for themselves and their families, but also to enjoy continued material wellbeing and social cohesion.
My one note of caution is that this bright economic outlook can't be taken for granted.  I detect in the community a sense developing that continued economic prosperity is a given, it's not.  It's only going to maintained by consistent and discipline and sensible policies.  And too much of the current debate in Australia, in my view, takes it as a given that it will continue irrespective of the policies that might be applied by governments.
  A new era of national achievement depends very critically not only on continued hard work, but also by sensible decision making and that, of course, means sensible decision making at a government level, particularly but not only at the national level. Contrary to some views in the community, I believe that most successful governments do operate from a coherent set of philosophical principles.  The Government that I've led over the last eight years has pursued what I frequently call a distinctly Australian brand of liberalism.  It contains some elements of classical liberalism, but our party has also been the trustee of the mainstream conservative position in Australian politics and our priorities reflect a broad perspective that combines liberalisation in economic policy with what I call modern conservatism in social policy.
  Our governing ethos is grounded in the priorities and values and aspirations of the mainstream of the Australian people.  Our belief in self-reliance and individual responsibility means that we favour private initiative, competition and choice over government direction of resources and society. Our belief in national unity and social cohesion means that we embrace that deeply held Australian sense of fairness through a commitment to mutual obligation and support for those most in need.  Our belief in a private sphere separate and autonomous from the government means our bias is towards helping Australians achieve their own goals rather than prescribing collective ends through bureaucratic means.
  From the time that this Government was elected almost eight years ago, we began to put in place the building blocks that have and I hope will continue to deliver Australia's prosperity and security.  We firstly restored Australia's public finances.  We did face very large national debt and we faced successive deficits inherited in earlier years.  We've now repaid about two thirds of the $96 billion of debt that we inherited and Australia's national debt is just under four per cent of GDP compared with an industrial world average of 50 per cent.  Our disciplined fiscal policy has contributed in a big way to driving interest rates down, encouraging investment and it has also allowed us to focus on the longer term horizon.
Our second great building block, and one of which I am particularly proud, and something that has come back into contemporary political debate in a big way, is that of industrial relations reform.  We have led the way in simplifying the award system and our framework for agreements at the workplace level has provided greater flexibility for both employees and employers. And this greater labour market flexibility has flowed through to greater productivity.  And the really good news for Australian workers over recent years is that because of higher productivity, they have been able to enjoy higher real wages whilst observing a fall in unemployment.  A phenomenon that constantly escaped governments during the 1970s and 1980s.  And we now, of course, have an economy where fewer than one in five private sector workers belongs to a trade union.
 One of the other great building blocks put in place, of course, was taxation reform. The New Tax System introduced in July of 2000 not only provided the largest personal income tax cuts in our history, but replaced many inefficient indirect taxes with a broadly based Goods and Services Tax.  And something that was quite fundamental to that reform was that all of the proceeds of the Goods and Services Tax goes to the state governments of Australia to better fund the provision of public hospitals, government schools, police, transport and roads.
  Another building block for the future has been the Government's sensible approach to trade liberalisation.  We have continued to open up the Australian economy.  Our Free Trade Agreement with the United States, and those already concluded with Singapore and Thailand, have further advanced Australia's involvement with the international economy. And can I say on the subject of the Free Trade Agreement that I particularly welcome the presence here of Stephen Deady who was the lead trade negotiator at the adviser level during the trade negotiations in Washington and I want to thank him and to thank all of the others in his team who played such a magnificent job advancing the Australian national interest.
  On the subject of opening up the Australian economy, a number in this room will be aware that on past occasions I've always given credit to the former government for two things that it did, the floating of the Australian dollar and tariff reform.  Those two changes were very important elements of opening up the Australian economy.  And they received the very strong support at the time of the then opposition.  And it's against this backdrop that I have to say I find it perplexing, extraordinary indeed that the current Opposition is threatening to vote against the Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  And this Free Trade Agreement is a once in a generation opportunity to link Australia into the most powerful economy the world has ever seen - to use the language of the young - it's a no-brainer that we should become part of the future as far as our association with the United States is concerned.  I mean, let me for a Victorian audience in particular highlight the benefits of the FTA to the automotive industry.  It would remove all United States tariffs on automotive products, including the 25 per cent tariff on that great Australian icon, the ute.  And the potential gains in areas of government procurement, goods and services, are enormous.  Australian firms under the Agreement will in future be able to bid on United States Federal Government contracts that are worth about $200 billion a year - that's an opportunity now denied to us.  And to put this in perspective, that procurement market alone is bigger than the total size of the Victorian economy.
  So I do enter a very passionate plea in the national interest for the support when it comes to legislation in the Senate of all parties for the Free Trade Agreement.  It's one thing to oppose something that is against your philosophy, it is another thing to oppose something simply because the other bloke has put it up.  Our record of eight years of continuous economic growth does mean that if you look back for a moment, Australia is a more competitive and prosperous country as well as, I believe, a fairer one.
  Let me illustrate - the average Australian's standard of living has risen if you measure that by real GDP capita by 19 per cent over the last seven years.  For the first time in 35 years, that's since 1968, we have simultaneously unemployment below six per cent and inflation below three per cent.  Real wages of which I spoke earlier and that is the weekly human dividend, if I can put it that way, of productivity growth and good policy, they've gone up by 13 per cent since 1996, by comparison the rise was two per cent... 2.4 per cent during the previous 13 years.  We've got 1.3 million new jobs.  The average mortgage costs $500 a month less than it did almost eight years ago.  Tax cuts in 2000-03 together mean that somebody on male average weekly earnings is today about $2,500 better off in income tax terms.  And through our bitterly opposed but historic reforms to the Australian waterfront, led by the then industrial relations minister Peter Reith, productivity on the Australian waterfront - a notorious illustration of our failure to become truly competitive in a modern sense has risen by 75 per cent.  The average crane movements per hour in December 1995 were 15.9, they are now 27.8.  Our strength and fiscal position has meant that we've not neglected areas of proper social provision, real spending on healthcare's gone up 50 per cent and Federal Government funding for schools has gone up by 63 per cent.  We've lifted aged care funding by 50 per cent.  We've created 200,000 extra childcare places.  And whereas when we came to government there were only 141,000 people in apprenticeships, that figure is now 407,000.
  I mention these things because sometimes, after a period of years, the recollection is dimmed and we do need occasionally to have a scorecard of what good economic management has delivered to people because economic management... good economic management is not an end in itself unless it has a human dividend, unless it generates more jobs, or lifts people's incomes or makes their home mortgage more affordable then it really doesn't amount to very much.  And we have been able to do these things through a period of some difficulty - an Asian financial crisis, international terrorism, a US recession and a crippling drought.  But there is, as I said earlier, a presumption that economic growth will just go on, no matter what governments do.  That to me does smack of dangerous complacency.  Where we are today does reflect disciplined economic management and we certainly can't afford to go back to reregulated labour markets and more restrictive attitudes to international trade. And anything that smacks of an anti-business agenda will threaten the foundations of a safer, more prosperous and more socially cohesive society.  Strategic analysts sometimes say that security is like oxygen, you don't notice it until it begins to be lost.
  And, of course, in the last few years we've had to grapple in a very big way with issues of national security and counter terrorism that eight years ago we might not have thought to the same intensity would be required.  And in that context, the government and I'm sure the entire nation is very proud of the contribution that the Australian Defence Forces have made in so many theatres.  In Bougainville, Afghanistan, Iraq and the Solomon Islands.  Let me say quite upfront, unfashionable though it may be in some of the broadsheets, that I remain unrepentant about the decision the Government took in relation to the operation in Iraq.  I make no apology for what we did as part of that coalition and for all its current travails, Iraq because of the removal of Saddam Hussein has a much brighter future.  And those who decry the strategic purpose of the United States should ask themselves at least one question.  Do they believe for a moment that Libya would have decided to scrap its WMD capabilities without American resolve to ensure that these weapons did not fall into the wrong hands?
Can I also take the opportunity without prejudging in any way, the findings of the parliamentary committee which will report next week.  And I take the opportunity to express my strong support for the vital role played by Australia's intelligence agencies, particularly in this era of widespread unpredictability.  I just want to say that those who would seek to denigrate or reduce the role of our intelligence agencies need to reflect on the inevitable consequences if their views gathered great currency.  Intelligence is not a precise science, it never can be.  It always involves judgements, as I've said previously, if you wait for proof sufficient to satisfy an Old Bailey jury you end up with another Pearl Harbour.  And when I spoke to CEDA in November of last year of 2002, it was of course barely a month after the Bali atrocity, and a lot has been done in the time that has gone by since then to further fund our defence and our intelligence services.  And the Government is working in partnership with the business community to strengthen security arrangements, especially in areas such as transport security and critical infrastructure.  But there is more that we can do together and in that spirit I've asked the Attorney General to convene a Ministerial Forum with business leaders to further strengthen that partnership and that meeting will review our domestic capabilities and be an important step towards mitigating the dangers posed to the economy by terrorism.  We're also working very closely with our friends in the region to address problems before they become full-blown crises.  And I sight in particular the Regional Assistance Mission that's been so successful in the Solomon Islands and also the very heavy investment that we have made in strengthening the police and public service infrastructure of Papua New Guinea.
We have been able to make increased commitments to security and to defence because we have a healthy economy.  But to sustain domestic prosperity we can't stop the process of reform.  A major focus in recent times has been reform of Australia's domestic energy markets.  Last December the Commonwealth, the States and the Territories reached agreement on a national energy market reform plan and the reforms will see the establishment of a single national energy regulator, major improvements in arrangements for electricity transmission, the development of a national approach to energy access, enhanced user participation and an agreed national framework for distribution and retailing. We've always maintained a balanced approach to energy use, resource development and environmental protection.  One that emphasises effective environmental action over pure symbolism and this is important and this contrast is important in the area of climate change. Australia, despite the criticism it has copped, is a world leader when it comes to effective action on greenhouse gases and we are on track to meet an agreed international target for emissions.  But we continue to take the view that it is not in the Australian national interest to ratify the Kyoto protocol for a resource intensive country like ours, it would be a crippling blow to Australian jobs, investment and growth to sign up to a mechanism which does not by itself reduce emissions and does not involve major global emitters or other resource suppliers.
  If I could turn to two very important areas of domestic policy - higher education and schools.  Let me say that in recent months there has been no better example of the Government's willingness to tackle a difficult reform issue than the area of higher education reform.  This nation needs to put more money into its universities, but we can not afford for all of that money to come from the general government sector.  We have to find ways of leveraging a contribution from both private individuals, supported by the government to ensure that additional investment is made in our universities.  And that is why more than a year ago Brendan Nelson unveiled plans to do exactly that.  But I'm pleased to say that after a very long and difficult process, the Government's higher education package did get through Parliament - albeit with no support from the Opposition.  And under that policy there will be a more sustainable and flexible university funding system backed by about $2.6 billion in additional public funding for universities over the next five years and $11 billion over the next ten years.
  It's worth making the point to cut through some of the reporting that occurs in relation to the cost of university degrees.  It's been calculated that when all of the reforms are up and running and allowing for the decisions of individual universities to increase their HECS charges up to the permissible amount of 25 per cent, 72 per cent of the average cost of educating a person with his or her degree will still continue be borne by the taxpayers or from some other private sources.  And only 28 per cent will be borne through the HECS system by the individual student.  And bear in mind that repayment of HECS will not begin until somebody earns at least $35,000 a year.  We're providing additional resources to introduce workplace reforms within the universities and also very generous transitional funding to ensure that no institution is disadvantaged under the new funding arrangement.
I can not help but draw a contrast between the struggles of my British colleague, Tony Blair, whose politics are different from mine, but whose experiences on some issues are very similar, dragging his party towards a modern approach to the funding of higher education and contrasting that with the Australian Labor Party that's done everything to frustrate our reforms.  But in the interests of evenhanded treatment, let me inform you that disappointingly the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom opposed Tony Blair's reforms.
  The Government's approach to schools, education, has two basic goals.  One is to set national benchmarks relating to things such as literacy and numeracy.  And the other very important goal is to facilitate choice by supporting the right of parents to decide where their children are going to be educated.  Let me say with some feeling that our commitment to choice is not about favouring one system over the other.  Government schools in this country, as their name suggests, are owned and run by state governments, which in turn derives close to 50 per cent of all of their funding from the Commonwealth.  And the key point is that while Government schools educate 68 per cent of our children, Government schools receive 76 per cent of total government funding and that really is the only figure that counts in this funding argument.  It's no good separating our direct Commonwealth funding to government schools, that's always only ever been a top-up.  The thing that really matters is the aggregate of all government funding.  And on that basis, those who suggest that government schools have been disadvantaged don't understand the facts or don't wish to.  But I think many of them really still have the agenda of closing off government assistance to independent schools.
And the other point worth making is that the great growth in independent schools over the last eight to ten years has not been in those schools that are the popular targets of the envy breed of Australian politics, the better known GPS schools as we call them in Sydney, or private schools as they're called in different parts of the country, but rather the low fee independent schools that are burgeoned under the Government's new schools policy. I had the opportunity to visit such a school in western Sydney, in Penrith last Friday. The Penrith Anglican School. It opened for the first time in 1998 and in five and had half years it's gone from a zero enrolment to 950 with a waiting list of several hundred. The fees at that school are between $3,500 and $4,500 year. They are the schools that have grown, they are the schools that are the beneficiaries of our policies, and they are the schools that represent an expression of choice at some sacrifice by parents who send their children to those schools.
 Excellence in science and innovation is also critical if Australia is to maintain its high productivity growth and later this year we'll announce a new science and innovation package with further measures to boost our capacity to turn great ideas into Australian jobs and income. And many of you would be aware that in January the Deputy Prime Minister announced additional funding of  $2 billion for transport infrastructure, including an extension for another four years of the very successful Roads to Recovery and a strong national transport system is not only economically important, but in very isolated communities can literally be the difference between life and death.
Rural and regional Australia will, of course, be a major winner out of the Free Trade Agreement with the United States. Two thirds of all agricultural tariffs will be eliminated immediately and products, such as, beef, dairy, lamb, seafood, wine, peanuts and oranges will gain even better access.
 If I reflect upon the condition of rural and regional Australia, particularly its reliance on small business it seems to me that the greatest threat to the vitality of those small businesses does lie in the re-regulation of Australia's labour market. And the agenda of the Opposition to re-regulate industrial relations to roll back the hard won gains in workplace flexibility would have a particularly deleterious effect on small business and they would destroy not only jobs, but also competitiveness.
 The Opposition proposal to abolish workplace agreements, their simplistic approach to casual workers' entitlements made in the name of giving people security will actually increase Labor costs and reduce job opportunities and the latest proposal to compel firms that receive Government contracts to disclose the identity of subcontractors will open those firms up to union bullying and the more recent proposal to compel firms to provide the option of part time work irrespective of the firm's circumstances is particularly dangerous.
 That might be workable, although costly for large corporations. But totally unworkable for small firms and the result will be fewer jobs and not greater job security. We have in this country come a very long way as a result of a more flexible industrial relations system and there really must be no turning back of the clock in this area. More than anything else it is responsible for the greater productivity we have and the prospect of that being turned back will be a very serious threat to our future economic strength.
I mentioned at the beginning of my speech how important social stability was, not only as a national goal, but for the sense of wellbeing of the Australian community.  And it doesn't need me, or indeed anybody, to tell you that the bedrock of Australian society remains the stability and the strength of Australian families.  And a strong family life is without question the greatest source of emotional stability, individual education and social development.  It's not the role of governments to tell families how to organise their lives or to second-guess parents on what is best for their children's future.  Our role, the Government's role, is to help Australians facilitate their own goals and make their own choices, while recognising that some families need a bit more help than others.
  Responsible social policy, and this has been an area of great Australian achievement, is also about maintaining a funding balance between the public and the private sector.  Much and all as our health system is criticised from day to day, it is probably a better system than any that can be found in other parts of the world.  One of the reasons for that is that we have a balance between the government and the private sector in making provision.  Each reinforces the other.  If you left it entirely to the private sector, which essentially was the philosophy until fairly recently in the United States, it becomes unaffordable and out of the reach of ordinary people.  If you give it entirely to the government sector, many of the incentives that are needed are drained away.  And with all its imperfections, we have a reasonable balance between the two at the present time and I hope that that continues.  And this requirement is going to become even more acute as our population ages, and we need through both the contributions of the public sector and the private sector, to maintain such schemes that are essential to our economic and other futures, such as the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and aged care, to be sustained.
  As I mentioned earlier, we have promoted a wider debate on demographic change and I'm delighted that CEDA will be producing its findings on the Inter-generational Report next week.  And the Treasurer today announced further initiatives broadening the availability of superannuation, providing more choices in financing retirement income, and making superannuation more adaptable to changing workplace arrangements.
  Can I say finally that there is one other long-term challenge I think we do face as a country, and that is to make our Federation work better through a proper balance of rights and responsibilities.  I must say that in recent years I have become concerned by the evidence that state governments on some occasions are very keen to exercise their rights in the Federation, but reluctant often to accept their responsibilities.  Can I say from experience both as a treasurer and a prime minister, that for decades state premiers of both political persuasions demanded access to a growth tax to fund their responsibilities in areas of health, law and order, transport, and education.  And with the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax - let me remind you again the entire proceeds of which, every last dollar of which, goes to the states - we acted in a quite historic way to meet this demand.
This financial year the states and territories will receive $575 million more than they would have received under the previous revenue sharing arrangements.  By 2006, that figure will be $1.4 billion more and that figure will grow rapidly as the years go by.  It's interesting that the day after he was re-elected a few weeks ago, the Queensland Premier Mr Beattie made a very interesting remark - this is the day afterwards.  He said that courtesy of the GST, which he had opposed, he found enough money to fund a preparatory year for primary school education.  In other words, he acknowledged in a very significant and politically sensitive area, that the states now have the growth revenue source they have demanded for decades.
  Accordingly I think they should stop seeking even more money from the Commonwealth to pay for the services which, with proper management, can now be adequately funded through the resources at their own disposal.  One way I think the states could exercise greater responsibility and accountability is to have more open and transparent budget accounts.  At a Commonwealth level, we publish detailed forward estimates by function, including for health and education.  The states do not.  But it's time, I think, they followed the Commonwealth example.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have endeavoured today to share with you some of my thoughts about the state of the Australian economy and the Australian nation.  A forum such as this allows for a rather more reflective environment.  It is a bright future, it is an optimistic time.  I think the Australian economy now is better and stronger than it has been at any time since World War II.  It's better than it was in the 1950s and 60s because it's less protected.  It's standing on its own feet.  We don't have a fixed exchange rate, we don't have high tariffs, we don't have an overdependence on certain exports.  We have a growing capacity in the service industries in relation to exports, we've diversified our manufacturing exports, we still continue to be greatly enriched from our agriculture and mining exports.  And when one sees that wonderful wheat crop of 39 million tonnes, when one reflects upon the enormous dividends we will get from the development of our oil and gas reserves, we have an idea of the diversity and the strength of the Australian economy.
  I'm an optimist about our future and not surprisingly, I don't take it for granted.  We've got where we are today as a result I think of very sensible policy, and I've given proper credit where it's due to sensible changes introduced by former governments.  We've also got where we are today because Australians have changed and adapted.  Because we are an egalitarian people, because we're not hidebound by two rigid an adherence to preconceived notions of behaviour, we can adapt to change.  And I think the contribution that individual Australian workers have made to adapting to that change, in cooperation with their employers, is one of the principal reasons why we are in the position, the very strong position, that we are at the present time.
I thank you for the opportunity of addressing you.  I congratulate CEDA again on the contribution that it makes to thoughtful economic and social debate in our country.  Thank you.
[ends]  



Thank you very much, Bruce, Kate, Greg Hunt, the Federal Member for Flinders, my state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It';s great to be back at this racecourse again to address the supporters of Bruce who';ve been as he rightly says his himself in his modest understated style a very, very effective articulate, noisy, persistent, hectoring, annoying, but ultimately successful Member for the seat of Dunkley.
You need people like that representing areas such as this because they get results and they do represent the concerns and the interests of their voters. This is the fourth day that I';ve spent in Victoria on this occasion and I';ve visited a large number of electorates and I';ve had a very consistent message which I want to briefly share with you today. I';ve had since becoming Prime Minister, I';ve had three broad goals for our country – you need broad goals in Government and if you don';t have them you end up having no coherence or no consistency in the decisions that you take. The goals I have are to give this country a sense of national security, to provide economic strength and to ensure that we maintain our social stability and our social cohesion as a country.
Yesterday, Peter Costello unveiled some very important changes to superannuation arrangements, while those changes were very much about the longer term. Some people rather unreasonably said today, well what about this or that that';s going to affect me tomorrow? Government';s have a responsibility (inaudible) to do with things that affect you tomorrow but they also have a responsibility to plan for years ahead and in the case of the policies unveiled yesterday to address the fact that like all Western countries we are an ageing population. We';re not ageing as fast as some societies. But our fertility rate is lower than it should be, much lower than it should be, but you know we';ve got to do something about that and our fertility rate is lower than it should be, but it';s not as bad for example at 1.74 as fertility rate in Italy which 1.23 or in Spain which is about the same. But it';s worse than what it is in the United States.
 But the remedies that or the responses that we have for the challenge of an ageing population do not need to be as drastic and as radical here as they may be in other countries because we have sensibly managed our economy particularly over the last seven or right years and what was driven home to me this morning and I don';t how many of you heard Alan Greenspan being interviewed on AM and he made the rather remarkable statement during a testimony to a congressional committee, he made the rather remarkable statement that America';s ageing challenge was such that he thought the rate at which pensions would be indexed in the future in America would need to be reduced in order for the country to afford to pay pensions as the large cohorts of baby boomers retired from the workforce and became entitled. He went on to say that because we had a very large budget deficit, we';re going to have to take some of this drastic steps and I thought to myself, thank heavens Australia doesn';t have a large budget deficit. Thank heaven that our fiscal position is very strong and that when we talk about the future, we have a Treasurer, who because of his hard work over the last seven or eight years, is able to say to the more mature age people of the Australian community – we don';t have to cut your entitlements, in fact we are able to give you a different framework to encourage you to remain in the workforce longer.  And I thought, having heard what Alan Greenspan had to say, that it was an arresting comparison.
  I';m a great admirer of the United States on a lot of things, but I have to say I don';t admire the fact that they';ve gone into deficit.  I think countries that go into deficit build up problems for future generations.  And the great economic strength of this country, especially over the last eight years, has been that we have gone from deficits to surplus, we';ve repaid a large amount of our debt.  Our debt to GDP ratio now is less than five per cent.  The average of the industrialised world is 50 per cent.  We have one of the lowest debt to GDP ratios of any country in the world, developed or undeveloped.
  But we do have a very strong story to tell.  I think in many ways that economic conditions in Australia now are the best they have been since World War II.  You may think that is an exaggeration.  (inaudible) quite strong in the 1960s, but in the 1960s we ran a more cloistered, pampered, mollycoddled economy.  We had very high tariff levels, we had a fixed exchange rate, we didn';t live in a globalised environment, and we relied too heavily on one or two commodities so far as our exports were concerned.  Now all of that has changed.  For the first time since 1968, we have what I call the golden double.  We have inflation below three per cent and we have unemployment below six per cent.  You have to go back 35 years to find that.  Our unemployment level now is the lowest it has been for 22 years.
  I go around Australia, I';m beginning to find for the first time since I have been Prime Minister people complaining to me about labour shortages and not being able to get the staff that they need in particular areas.  And that is an indication that we have got very close, not completely – you never accept that you have full employment because you always have an obligation to find a job for the people who are generally trying – but I will never declare therefore on those social grounds, that this country has full employment.  But we are certainly in an era of much lower unemployment and a lower rate than most people would have believed possible.
  Now all of this has not happened by accident and if I had one impassioned plea, especially to an audience such as this, never lose sight of the fact that this economic prosperity cannot be taken for granted.  There is a growing tendency in the debate about Australia';s economy at the present time for people to assume that no matter what policies are applied, no matter who is running the show, the prosperity will just go on.   I listened to my opposite number in the Labor Party at the National Press Club last week and his speech was littered with expressions such as, “in a country as wealthy as Australia”, “with the prosperity we have”.  The assumption is while the economy';s okay they won';t do anything to muck it up and therefore (inaudible) find new ways of spending the proceeds of a strong economy.
Let me say to you my friends that the economy is where it is now not through good luck, it';s where it is now through hard work and sensible policy.  And if we abandon those sensible policies we can very quickly go backwards.  And there is no area that worries me more than the area of industrial relations.  I suppose of all the policy issues I';ve been associated with in public life, I';ve probably fought harder for industrial relations reform than just about anything else.  And one of the reasons why this country is doing so well, one of the reasons why I can boast as a Liberal Prime Minister that we';ve increased the wages of workers faster than they increased under Hawke and Keating is that through our industrial relation reforms, we';ve lifted the productivity of the Australian economy.  And businessmen and women know that you can pay higher wages affordably if the productivity of your workforce goes up.  What you can';t afford to do is pay higher wages if your productivity is not rising because that will only destroy your profits and lead to lower employment.
  Now we understood that when we came to office and that';s why we drove hard to change the industrial relations system.  And if we get a Labor Government, if we get a federal Labor Government on top of eight state and territory Labor governments, if we have nine Labor governments, if we have wall to wall Labor, you will have wall to wall, coast to coast union domination and that is what is happening. You see what is happening in Victoria.  I go around Australia and talk to businessmen and women everywhere and there';s no doubt that there is a concern in this state about the extent of union domination of the state Labor government – there is no doubt about that.  It is not just political rhetoric for me to make that claim and the same thing can be said of the relationship between the union movement and the State Government in Western Australia.  And whilst I';m no fan of the New South Wales or Queensland Governments, I have to say that the level of union domination in those two states is not as great as it is in Victoria and Western Australia.  And already the signs are developing that the economic performance of Victoria is falling a little behind the rest of the country.  Well, as the Prime Minister of Australia, I don';t play favourites with any part of the country.  As far as I';m concerned, as long as the investment is generated in Australia or comes to Australia I am happy.  If I were Victorian, I';d be very angry that there are things happening in this state that are causing my state to fall behind the rest of the country.
So the moral of all of that, and there';s always a moral in what one says on these subjects, the moral of all of that is that we can';t take our prosperity for granted.  We must guard against the developing view in the community that, well, this prosperity has happened by serendipity, that it';s just come along, it';s falling into our lap and no matter who you have in charge or what policy you apply it';s going to continue.  Can I assure you my friends it won';t.  It';s there by the hard work of the Australian workforce, the risk-taking of Australian businessmen and women and sensible national economic policies.  And the only way that we can do that, the only way we can keep that is to preserve that winning and successful combination.  Now we do that at a national level, we';ve also go to do it of course at a local level.  And there are a number of local issues, and I must say that I was tremendously impressed with the programme for getting mature workers back in connection with the labour market that Bruce took me to this morning.  It was an example of a programme that he essentially devised himself, he got the necessary support and the sense of purpose and the high morale and the optimism of those people, and I';ve met a lot of people in that situation over the years and the thing that came through to me was that they all had a sense of hope, they all had a great sense of optimism and they';re all the sort of people we desperately need in the workforce.  We need more people in the workforce as the years go by not fewer because our population is ageing, we want people to work a bit longer and we want people to get reconnected with the workforce, we want to bring them back, we don';t want to leave them out and Bruce has done a lot of individual work in order to put that programme together.
 Dunkley';s always been a tricky seat.  I can remember coming here in 1987 when we didn';t win it.  I can remember coming here in 1990 and 1993 when we didn';t win it.  And finally in 1996 we won it.  And Bruce increased his majority at the last election.  It';s going to be a tough fight as you';re going for your fourth term it';s always hard.  People start to think oh gee, you know, he might not be doing a bad job, but he';s been there a  while and we';ll sort of have a look, you know, who else is on offer, sort of thing.  Don';t, don';t.  It';s very very very important that we all get behind Bruce. He is an incredibly energetic local member.  He';s not only part of a successful government, but he';s also been an indefatigable worker before his local community.  And this is a community like so many in outer metropolitan Australia.  It';s got bits of great growth, it';s got areas where you have challenging social problems, you have areas of considerable affluence and it has areas which replicate what you might call middle suburban areas of our nation and you need somebody who';s sensitive to all of those different parts of the electorate.
  So I really am delighted to have him as a colleague, as a friend, he';s a great representative. (inaudible) all of your help.  We had a great struggle ahead of us, but it';s a great cause.  This country is more respected, more highly regarded, is more influential than it';s been at any time in the last three or four decades.  The rest of the world recognises that we';re strong, the rest of the world recognises that we are prepared to put ourselves on the line and support what we believe in and the rest of the world knows what a strong, (inaudible) we really are.
So, I think all of that adds up to a pretty good reason to re-elect the Government.  Whenever the time may come along, but you do that here, you do that here in Dunkley and giving all of your support to Bruce.  He deserves it, he';s a fantastic representative and I hope you re-elect him sometime towards the end of the year.
Thank you.
 QUESTION &amp; ANSWER SESSION
  QUESTIONER:
(inaudible) Scoresby …
PRIME MINISTER:
Well our position is that we signed a piece of paper, John Anderson did on behalf of the Federal Government, called a Memorandum of Understanding, and we intend to keep our word in that document and we';re going to maintain that position in the hope that enough pressure will develop to force the Victorian Government to honour its part of that agreement.  We can do a lot, but the public in the areas affected, particularly through exerting pressure on sitting State Labor Members, can do even more.  I met representatives of the Chamber of Commerce and business groups in Bruce';s office this morning to talk about this issue, and I had explained to me in some detail the very considerable additional costs that would be incurred by a lot of people who really wouldn';t be able to afford it, if it went ahead as a tollway.  And it was a very compelling case, and I said that we wouldn';t (inaudible) our position and we will from time to time continue to talk about it and think of different ways to highlight it, but in the end nothing persuades a government to changes its mind more than when its backbench comes along to it and says “you have a problem, you';d better do something about it”.  And I think what has to be done is that the State Members in the areas concerned have to be told how, and they are I know being told how angry the community is.  But the problem is the broken promise.  There are tollways all around Australia and I can';t be set as an issue of principle that you never have tollways, but this is not a tollway – this is a freeway.  And that was the deal.  And John Anderson signed it on behalf of the Government on that basis, and we damn well intend to stick to our part of the deal and we want the Bracks Government to reciprocate.
QUESTIONER:
(inaudible) I';d like to congratulate the Prime Minister for the extraordinary leadership in view of September 11.  Australia (inaudible) a more stronger international role of leadership is more visible around the world, and congratulations.
  QUESTIONER:
Could the Prime Minister tell me by how many he will win the next election.
PRIME MINISTER:
Who me?  Look, one will be enough, but it';s got to include him.  No, look I don';t know.  Can I seriously say it will be very hard.  I think the next election is really going to be very tough and the most important message I have to Liberal Party supporters is not to take it in any way for granted.  I think Victorians have experience of unexpected election outcomes.  I have learnt from that.  I mean I will be very, very attentive to people';s legitimate concerns.  The first job I ever had was working for my father serving petrol in an inner Sydney garage, and the very first thing he told me – I served some petrol, I wandered in and said “Dad, that';s the one, that man was a bit sort of difficult to deal with”.  And he said, “John”, he said, “no he wasn';t,” he said, “the customer is always right”.  And he was dead right and that';s the view that I broadly take with the Australian public.  I may disagree with them and I may do things that they may not like, and I have very strong reasons, but you never dismiss the views of the Australian public lightly.  You always listen to what they have to say, and there is an enormous amount of commonsense collectively held by the Australian public, and one of the reasons why I spend a great deal of time travelling around this country and listening to people is that I want to understand what they';re saying.  Now what they';re saying to us is – yes, we sense things aren';t too bad, but there are a few other things that we want attended to.  And if we';re able to do so, we will – not all of them.  But politics is a constant communication flow between the Government and the public, and I can certainly promise you I will be part of that flow as best I can.  I hope we can be sufficiently persuasive to win, but I don';t want anybody to imagine it';s going to be easy.
[ends]


Well, thank you John for those very generous words of welcome and I also want to acknowledge Chris McDiven, who has given tremendous leadership to the organisational side of the Party here in New South Wales.  And Scott Morrison and Bob Sutton and Paul Nicolaou who also... Scott is the State Director and Bob and Paul in the Millennium Forum for the tremendous work that they do.
 I start by thanking all of you for your attendance and your practical expression through that attendance, of support for the Liberal Party here in New South Wales and around Australia.  This is a very important year.  There will, at some time in the second half of this year, be a federal election.  Like all federal elections, it will be very hard for the incumbent government to win, particularly as it will be the fourth occasion that we'll be asking the Australian people to return us.  Now it is true, as Chris said, that we will go into that election from a position of unprecedentedly high representation in the national parliament, federally from the State of New South Wales.  And the task will be to hold all of those 21 seats that are currently in Liberal Party hands and the challenge will not only be to do that here but all around the country.  So perhaps in those parts of Australia such as Tasmania where we have no representation in the Lower House and Western Australia and Victoria where historically we're less well represented than we might otherwise be, hopefully we can gain some ground there.
I don't delude myself, it's going to be quite tough.  The longer you're in office the more capacity you have to antagonise people no matter how hard you try - that's life.  There's a certain amount of electoral wear and tear and we have to be aware of that.  We will face a Labor Party determined, after having been in Opposition for almost nine years, to deliver wall to wall, coast to coast Labor governments and I'll have something to say about the implications of that, particularly in the area of industrial relations in just a moment.
  But on the other hand, we do have a very good story to tell and we have a lot of things to offer for the future and I'll touch on a couple of those in a moment.  When I became Prime Minister, I essentially set myself three goals for this country.  I wanted it to be secure nationally, in other words to have strong defences and strong alliances and strong friends.  I wanted it to recover its economic strength.  And most importantly also, I wanted Australia to be a socially stable and socially cohesive country because all the good economic policies in the world are of little account unless they deliver a human dividend, unless they give people more choices and opportunities, unless they give them a greater sense of hope and a greater sense of stability and security.
  I don't think it can be denied that in the eight years we have been in office we have faced some unprecedented security challenges. In March of 1996, nobody had heard of the expression "the war on terrorism".  The name Al Qaeda was probably unknown except to a very select group of people in the intelligence community and the higher levels of government.  The notion of a terrorist attack on the most prosperous and powerful city in the world was unthinkable.  The notion that 88 of our own citizens would die in what was historically regarded as a lovable pleasure resort for generations of Australians was also unthinkable.  All of that has changed, but in the process this country has stood up for what it believed in and the most pleasing thing that I find about Australia at the present time is the very high reputation it enjoys around the world.
You go abroad as Prime Minister of Australia, now you go abroad as a country which is respected because of what it has achieved and is also respected because of what it has been willing to stand for often in very difficult circumstances.  And I don't think anybody thought in March of 1996 that Australia would lead the United Nations sanctioned intervention in East Timor to liberate the people of East Timor with whom some earlier generations of Australians in World War II had formed such close bonds in very difficult times.  On the national security front, we have a compelling story to tell of a country that has played its part and punched above its weight, been faithful to its allies, but more importantly been faithful to the long-term national interest of this country.  And let me say to you that I have no regrets about the Government's decision to join the Coalition of the Willing in Iraq.  I have no doubt that the world is a safer and better place as a result of that and it remains an irrefutable proposition that those who criticised our decision were in effect arguing for the retention of the Saddam Hussein regime.  So on the score of national security, this Government has responded to the challenges that Australia faced.  We are investing more in defence and our defence forces have behaved magnificently in the many missions that they have had.
  But in the area of economic strength, it's not an exaggeration to say that the Australian economy is now in better condition than it's been at any time since World War II.  It is true that it was in a strong condition in the 1950s and 60s, there were periods of long sustained economic growth during the Menzies years and so much of that came to an abrupt end in the early 1970s when the world fell into a bit of economic turmoil with the floating of the American dollar and the quadrupling of world oil prices and, of course, those international developments were compounded domestically under the Whitlam Government by the most inept economic policies this country's seen since World War II.
  But the difference between now and then is that now we are standing on our own feet.  In the 1960s, Australia was a protected economy.  We had high tariff walls, we had a fixed exchange rate, we had foreign exchange control, we had centralised wage fixation, we tended to look inwards rather than outwards, we depended over-heavily on certain commodity exports.  Now all of that has changed.  We are competing globally and when you think that for the first time since 1968 we have a combination of inflation below 3 per cent and unemployment below 6 per cent.  Our national debt is 4.9 per cent of GDP.  The average of the industrialised countries is 50 per cent of GDP.  It's over 100 per cent in Japan and it's something in the order of 45 or 50 per cent in the United States.  We are running a budget surplus.  Regrettably the Americans are not, they are running a budget deficit and that has consequences for the relationship between the exchange rate of our currency and the exchange rate of other currencies.  On every measure this country's economic performance over recent years has been amongst the best if not the best of the developed world.
 But none of that has happened by accident.  And there seems to be a dangerous complacency developing in the community, a complacency that our Labor opponents at a federal level will seek to exploit, that all of this will go on regardless, that it all happened accidentally and that really it's had nothing ever to do with the Government, it's not had much to do with the efforts of the Australian people, it's all sort of come as it were out of the ether and it will go on irrespective of what policies are followed and who's in charge.  Now nothing could be further from the truth and yet I detect in the statements of our opponents federally an attempt to implant into the minds of the Australian people that prosperity is guaranteed.  I hear these expressions such as, "a country as wealthy as Australia can afford...", "a nation as prosperous as Australia should be able to do...".  The important thing to understand is that prosperity gained through good policy and hard work can be quickly lost through bad policy and bad economic leadership.  And that more than anything is the threat that this country faces and the business community in particular faces if there is a change of Government at a federal level.  We will have a wall to wall Labor Australia if Labor federally wins at the end of the year.  We'll have no Liberal governments anywhere and can you imagine what the union movement will do to small business?  Can you imagine what will happen to the industrial relations laws of Australia if you nine Labor governments?  Not withstanding the fact that fewer than 20 per cent of private sector employees in Australia now belong to unions and unions are regarded as anachronistic by so many Australians particularly in the growth sectors of the Australian economy. And beneath the facade and the feel good politics of the past few weeks, the Labor Party has been ticking off a commitment to an industrial relations agenda which would abolish Australian Workplace Agreements, take the secondary boycott prohibitions out of the Trade Practices Act, require companies doing business with the Federal Government to disclose the identity of their sub-contractors so that those sub-contractors can be subjected to union consultations.  So they are some of the things that on the industrial relations front would become real threats to the prosperity and the stability of this country.
And when I talk about what we have achieved, I also want to say something about the Government's agenda for a number of our future challenges.  We have just negotiated with the United States a Free Trade Agreement.  This is the first occasion apart from the North America Free Trade Agreement involving Canada that the United States has negotiated a Free Trade Agreement with a developed country.  There are many tensions in negotiating a Free Trade Agreement between America and a developed country.  And I have no doubt that it's been negotiated because of the remarkable commitment of the Administration to the cause of the alliance between Australia and the United States, but also because there are long term economic benefits. And when I think back at some of the positive things that the former government did, and I've never been reluctant to give the former government credit to some of the positive things it did in relation to Australia's economy, such as the progressive reduction in the levels of tariff protection in the 1980s and the 1990s, I find it quite extraordinary that the Labor Party should be apparently opposed to the implementation of the Free Trade Agreement.  This Free Trade Agreement doesn't deliver everything we wanted, we would have liked more on beef, we would have wanted something on sugar, but we have secured 66 per cent duty free entry immediately in relation to agriculture, 97 per cent of our manufacturers will enter duty free, there'll be an immediate abolition of the 25 per cent tariff on that great Australian manufacturing icon the ute, there'll be enormous benefits for our service sector, we will have for the first time ever access to the US Federal Government procurement market which is worth over $200 billion a year, for the first time we'll be able to compete for that.  And in the process we have ensured that attempts by pharmaceutical companies in the United States to secure changes that might have undermined the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme in Australia were not successful and we've also negotiated appropriate protection for Australian culture, Australian voices and Australian history on our TV and our entertainment generally.  So overall it is a once-in-a-generation opportunity, the planets, so to speak, would never again be so aligned as they were when we were able to conclude the negotiations.  And if the national interests means anything in politics and if politics is something other than knee jerk opposition because it is put forward by the bloke on the other side then it's imperative that the necessary legislation to give effect to this Free Trade Agreement should go through our Parliament.
A couple of days ago the Treasurer here in Sydney released a number of changes, a discussion paper and a number of changes that begin the process of tackling a challenge that every Western country faces.  And that is the ageing of its population through a combination of thankfully people living longer and living healthier lives, and also though a declining fertility rate.  As in so many of these things Australia is neither at the worst end of the proposition or at the better end, we're somewhere in the middle.  Our fertility rate has not declined as much as Italy or Spain but it's declined more than that of the United States.  And we have to face this, now it may not be a very exciting subject right now because we all tend to worry about the next day, the next week, the next year, but governments are often accused of being indifferent about long term challenges, and what we have to do is prepare the nation for change.  We have to encourage a greater level of workforce participation, we have to make sure that people of more mature years who want to remain in the workforce have greater opportunities and greater incentives to do so.  We're not saying they have to, but what we're saying is that if you want to, some of the existing barriers should be removed and some of the incentives should be rebalanced.  Now this is very much about building for the future and if we don't well our children will face a more difficult and a less prosperous time.  They will face a heavier tax burden because as people live longer and there are fewer entering the workforce at the other end of the spectrum then inevitably costs are going to rise and the burden of taxation is going to fall more heavily on those who are in the workforce.  And I was listening the other morning to some testimony from Alan Greenspan who is the Chairman of the Federal Reserve system in the United States, probably the most powerful economic figure in the world.  And he was lamenting the burden on the American budget when the first cohort of baby boomers hits retirement age in the United States. And he was actually saying to his congressional people who were interrogating him, he was actually saying that America might have to contemplate reducing the generosity of the indexation of pensions in the United States because of the burden this change was going to represent and because of the size of the American budget deficit.  Now I'm not suggesting for a moment that that's going to happen because it's not his to decide, but the fact that it would be canvassed and contemplated told me a couple of things, it told me that every industrialised country had to address this issue, and that if you didn't address it you weren't concerned about the long term.  The other thing it told me was that how much better place Australia was.  We have in fact increased the generosity of the indexation factor for the pension since we've been in office, we don't have a budget deficit therefore the proposition that you would have to make it less generous in the future is something that has not even been contemplated let alone implemented.
 So ladies and gentlemen we do have a political movement over the months ahead, we have a very significant political challenge.  I enter it with a great deal of optimism, the greatest thing the Government has going for it in my view is that we have a great team.  Three of us, myself, Peter Costello and Alexander Downer have held our current position from the very beginning of government. I don't think this country has had a finer, more committed Treasurer than Peter Costello, I think he's done a wonderful job. I mean it is a source of enormous satisfaction to me and it should be to our supporters that we in the process of eight years of government have repaid about two-thirds of the debt that we inherited.  That year after year we are able to deliver strong growth, we haven't been able to do everything that people would have liked and I go around the country and I get a long list of people wanting more spending and less tax.  That's normal, it's unachievable at the same time but it's perfectly normal, we haven't been able to do that. But governments are elected to provide people with a sense of stability, a sense of security, a sense of hope, but most importantly a sense of creating a climate where they can make their decisions and live their lives according to their values and their priorities. The Australian people don't want their governments telling them how to live their lives, they do want their governments creating the circumstances where they can in security decide how they live their lives.  And that really is in a nutshell the philosophy that's governed so much of what we have been able to do.
 So my friends I want to do two things in conclusion, I want to thank you for the tremendous support that I know you've provided to the Party over the years, I hope in reasonable measure we have repaid your trust and your confidence.  We have enormous commitment to remaining in office, I personally have an enormous sense of commitment and dedication to the task ahead and so do all of my colleagues.  We think we have a very good story, we think we have a lot to say about the future, we do need your continued help and together we can go on to another victory at the end of the year.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Dr Nelson, Your Eminence, Brother Canavan, Monsignor Rayner, the Principals of the two schools, Casimir College and St Brigid';s, School Captains, Ladies and Gentleman.
Firstly, may I thank the school community for allowing us to come here to make this very important announcement.  It is always a wonderful experience as Prime Minister of this country to visit the various schools of our nation.  They are rich in variety, all of them have a common vitality and a common commitment to the future wellbeing of their students.  The most enduring principle that I have tried to bring to the education of the young in the schools of Australia in the time that I have been Prime Minister is the principle of choice.
As the very proud product of the New South Wales state education system and as a parent who sent, along with my wife, his children, to both government and non-government schools, I do believe very passionately in the principle of parental choice when it comes to education.
As a national Government we recognise that the day-to-day administration of the school system rests under our Constitution with the states.  The states, by and large, set the curricula, they work in cooperation not only with the principals of their own schools, but also with the National Catholic Education Commission and its various components and the remainder of the independent school sector.  But we do support very strongly, the principle of choice and there are more than 600,000 Australian children educated in the schools run within the Catholic systems and today';s announcement is very much about the rights and the interests of those children and of those schools.
  Today, I';m very pleased to announce that for the quadrennium commencing in 2005 through to 2008, after several months of negotiation with the National Catholic Education Commission, the Catholic systemic schools will enter the socio-economic status model, which has been the model adopted for the funding of other independent schools within Australia.  This will have a number of very important consequences.  Very importantly it will essentially unify the funding treatment of all non-government schools within Australia, according to the same set of principles.
  Specifically, for the schools within the systems it will mean an additional $362 million over the four-year period over and above what would have been available if the current deemed funding formula, whereby all schools within Catholic systems are funded according to a fixed percentage of the average cost of educating a child at a government school.
As was the case in the year 2000 when we adopted the SES model for other non-government schools, any school within the Catholic system which, through an application of the SES formula, might have received less funding, will have its current funding maintained and indexed according to the same formula that applies to other independent schools and it has been calculated that something in the order of 40% of the schools within the Catholic systems will receive additional support through the application of the SES formula.  And that of course produces the increase of some $362 million throughout the quadrennium for all of the schools within the Catholic systems.
Can I say that I welcome the very successful conclusion of the discussions conducted on behalf of the Government by Dr Nelson with His Eminence and representatives of the National Catholic Education Commission.  I think that it is important that as far as possible the same funding principles are applied to all schools within the non-government sector.
 None of us has an interest in argument or competition between different school sectors for the available government dollars.  We all believe in good schools for all Australians.  The Government passionately believes in freedom of choice.  Many in this room know far better than I, the struggle that the Catholic community of Australia had for more than a century to maintain a school system without any government financial support.  More enlightened days came some four decades ago and I am very proud of the contribution that my very distinguished predecessor made Sir Robert Menzies made to the great breakthrough that occurred in relation to government assistance for non-government schools.
It is very important to say to some in the community, I hope a very small minority that would seek to denigrate the principle of supporting parental freedom of choice.  But although only 68% of Australian children now attend government schools, those schools receive combined some 74% of the total amount of government funding which is available.  And that is an illustration of the fact that suggestions that government schools are being short changed to the benefit of non-government schools is without any foundation.
Can I say that we remain as a Government committed to many things in education.  We believe in excellence, we believe in high standards, we value the contribution of teachers whether it be in the public system or the non-government sector.  We also place a great emphasis on the importance of building school communities.  The best schools in Australia, whether they';re government schools or non-government schools are the schools where there is a partnership between the teachers, the students and the parents.  That was my experience as a parent, I';m sure that it is the experience of educators and parents alike who are gathered in this room.
We also will as a national Government, continue to maintain strong support for basic standards of literacy and numeracy.  They are very important to the future of our children.  I think that it is also important amidst much of the negative and pessimistic commentary that sometimes emanates in relation to the education system of this country.  But with its faults, and like any other education system it has its faults, but it is a system, which on world comparisons is a very good one.  Recent OECD comparisons in a number of the benchmark areas illustrates that Australian students at the age of 15 and 16 can be compared very favourably to the students at an equivalent age in other like countries.  Now that is something from which all of us can take a great deal of credit.
But today my friends is a very important day in the life of Catholic education in Australia.  Can I on behalf of the Government pay tribute to the people who over the years have kept the Catholic Education system going.  It is system that embraces, as I said earlier, some 600,000 young Australians.  They are educated like other Australians according to the curriculum laid down for Australian schools.  But importantly that education also reflects the spiritual and religious values which the parents of those children hold dear.  Now that is the right that every Australian parent has.  It is a right I';ve always supported, it is right I will always support because it is fundamental to the kind of society in which we live.
Ladies and Gentleman thank you again to the school for making its facilities available.  I wish its students well, particularly those in Year 12 as they travel all too rapidly, the remaining 7 or 8 months will disappear very, very rapidly to the HSC, but I do wish them well and I hope what they and their parents dream of for the future is in relation to every student of this school realised.  They are very precious, very important years, they have a lasting impact on the future lives of the students and I hope that the atmosphere of this school of this college is conducive to the very best of results and I do again thank the National Catholic Education Commission for the constructive way in which our discussions were carried out.  I would also like to congratulate my Minister Brendan Nelson, for the great energy that he has brought, not only to matters affecting primary and secondary education but of course at the end of the last year, tertiary education which is also so very important for the future of our nation.
Ladies and Gentleman, I thank you.
  [ends]


Well thank you very much Mr President, my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It is for a number of reasons that I'm delighted to be here tonight, first and foremost is to convey to your industry and those who work with you the very strong support of the Government and the very real appreciation by the Government on behalf of the Australian people of the contribution that your industry is making to the health and the welfare of the Australian community.
I thought as I came here tonight of the best way to articulate and explain the significance of your industry and those associated with you to the welfare of our country and indeed other similar societies. And I recalled some statistics rather hazily, but nonetheless the thrust is correct, which compared medical discoveries and advances in the old days of the command economies of what used to be called the Eastern Bloc, or Iron Curtain countries, where free enterprise in medicine and free enterprise in pharmaceuticals was essentially non-existent and the progress with those discoveries and those advances in other parts of the world.  And that was a very powerful reminder to me of the importance to medical science, not only of the scientists and the government support, they are crucial, and we can be forever proud of our medical scientists, they have always punched above their weight and the names of the famous Australian medical scientists are part of the honour roll of great Australians in our history.  You need them but you also need the entrepreneurial component of medical science and pharmaceutical advances.  And the discoveries that the president spoke of have been driven by a combination of all three, they've been driven by the great scientists, they've been driven by the contribution of academics, they've been driven by the entrepreneurial contribution and also I hope from time to time the support of the Government.
So can I say firstly to all of you how much the Government respects the contribution of your industry. Can I say that we continue to try hard to provide you with a benign, beckoning, I hope, supportive economic climate.  You'll forgive me reminding you of course that we had some national accounts figures today that showed that the Australian economy is back at four per cent annual growth and although some of you might quietly say to yourselves well it must be somebody else's company that he's referring to, the profit share of Australian enterprises is now at its highest level in Australia's history, at 25.7 per cent I think the figure is, the profit share has never been higher in Australia's history. And we are in a climate of very solid business investment, a climate of low inflation, of unemployment that's lower than it's been for 20 to 25 years.  Low interest rates, a nation that's coming out of drought and seeing a welcome recovery from a very low base in our rural exports.  So the message out of all of that is that we are trying as best we can to provide all Australian businesses with a very positive and helpful economic environment.
There has been much debate, both here in this building and more broadly in the community about issues that go directly to your industry. I endorse everything that the president said about the Free Trade Agreement, both your president and President Bush, because both of them were on the money when they said it was in the long term interests of both of our countries. This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to lock our economy in to the most powerful economy the world has ever seen.  In the language of the young it's a no brainer as far as Australia's future is concerned.  Your industry factored very prominently in the negotiations, I'm not giving any secrets away, I'm sure to say that there were some changes that the Americans wanted that we resisted because we thought they might in some way undermine the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which is a very important component of the social security safety net in this country.  But we are mindful of the desire for more transparency in the review process, and I think that very issue was discussed, with one of the very few elements of the Free Trade Agreement that was actually discussed when President Bush came here to this building in October of last year. I understand the desire for greater transparency, but equally we communicated to our American friends that they needed to understand the absolute commitment of the Australian Government to the maintenance of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  And I think the outcome has been a win-win for both of those propositions.  The Scheme remains untouched and unaffected in terms of its operation and the ultimate authority of the Minister and the role of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee, but there is quite properly as Mark Vaile has indicated and Tony Abbott has indicated mechanisms for review, subject to obviously to the final say of the Government through the Minister.
But this Free Trade Agreement is an opportunity that must not be lost to this country, it should not be frustrated and delayed anywhere in the political process in this country.  This is something that is for our future generations, as the years go by the advantages for our manufacturing industries and our service industries, and you are part of both, will be enormous.  And your president has already outlined the great advances that have been made by the industry here in Australia and the opportunities, if we are part of the linkage with the American economy are going to grow and expand as time goes by.  So I would only renew a plea that I have made already on numerous occasions and I'll make on many occasions in the future that this Agreement which will deliver so much in so many sectors of the Australian economy is something that ought to be embraced by the Australian community.
Can I also say something else about the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme?  It is very important to the health and the wellbeing and the peace of mind of so many Australians.  It is right that as new drugs become available that they are available courtesy of the scheme to all Australians.  Every Australian is entitled to an opportunity of good health and long life and it should not be something that is determined by a person's income.  And that is the philosophy behind the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  It's the philosophy behind the new safety net that we are struggling to get through the Senate at the present time, a safety net that will look after people's out of pocket expenses once they go above a certain level.  A proposition that I would have thought, once again to use the vernacular of the young, is a no-brainer, particularly for struggling families with a large number of children. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme needs to sustained, but its affordability also needs to be sustained and that is why from time to time adjustments in relation to the co-payment are needed.  And I can only again express the Government's dismay that attempts to secure passage in the Senate of modest adjustments in relation to the co-payment, which are going to sustain the viability over the longer term, because if in the end choices have to be made between sustainability and the provision of new drugs, and nobody wants to make that choice, but if that has to occur then the people of Australia are going to suffer.  You cannot maintain something such as the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme unless it is sustainable economically over the longer term.  And with an ageing population, it is inevitable that there is going to be greater strain on it.  The Inter-generational Reports that Peter Costello has released shout aloud a simple proposition and that is, in company with all other western societies, our population is ageing but it's ageing in a very healthy way.  And we all want it to be so, not only out of personal self interest, but for the sake of the entire community.  And that means we need things like the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, but you can only have them if they are affordable, otherwise you're going to place a crushing taxation burden, a rising taxation burden on future generations.
Now I speak with some feeling about this issue because this and related issues are very important to debate about the future of our society and your industry is very much part of that future, just as the last quarter of the 20th century saw incredible advance in information technology and related issues.  So many people believe the first quarter of the 21st century are going to see explosions in medical science, biotechnology and advances in that field that will dwarf the advances that have occurred in the same fields during the 20th century.
Now when I talk about the future, particular of how to care for and sustain an ageing population in a healthy lifestyle, I'm talking very much to you ladies and gentlemen as part of that future.  Yours is an industry that has, what, 30,000 employees and a turnover of something like $12 billion.  You have a very heavy investment in research and development and you have a very healthy export sector of something in the order or component of something in the order of $2.5 billion.  Many of you, of course, have links with your parent companies in other parts of the world.  But there is a local homegrown distinctive Australian character about pharmaceutical manufacturers.  I know because, more than most, because I think the headquarters of so many of them are located in my electorate of Bennelong in North Ryde.  I mean, I can sort of do a tour of Medicines Australia by starting early in the morning and finishing by about lunch time and I touch just about all of them.  So I've taken a keen interest in you for a very, very long time and I understand the frustrations on occasions you experience with a scheme and set of policies that you regard as ultra regulatory, on the other hand you must understand the centrality and the importance of those schemes to the health and the welfare of the Australian people.
You have played a very, very major part in the growth of an industry which makes a massive contribution to the wellbeing of the Australian community. I welcome the fact that this gathering brings together people with whom you work in partnership - the medical profession and so many others, and particularly of course the associations that you have with the Government.
  I conclude by thanking all of you for the contribution that you make.  I assure you of the ongoing support as has been evident by individual schemes over the years, which have been renewed by the Government, which have continued to encourage research and development and investment in your industry.  If ever there was an industry whose best years were ahead of them, it is yours.  Because I can only see as time goes by an even greater reliance on and a greater interest in and a greater desire to benefit from the contributions that can be made in medical science.  The developments that are going to occur, as I say, in the next 25 or 50 years will be quite extraordinary and they will dwarf things that we've experienced in our earlier years.  You will be part of that and I hope that the partnership between the Government of Australia and your industry will continue to grow closer as those years go by.
  Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Mr Mayor, Warren Entsch, my colleague and the Member for Leichhardt, Deputy Prime Minister, Ministers, Senators, ladies and gentlemen.
I';ve come here today with my colleagues, as I will go to Mackay later on this morning, to listen to the direct concerns of the industry.  We are willing to provide further assistance to the sugar industry.  We do recognise that largely, through no fault of its own, the industry is facing a very difficult time, largely because of the corruption of world markets by the heavy subsidies paid by many countries to their sugar producers.  The price of sugar is at a very low level, the returns are poor and the challenges are therefore enormous.
  So we come as friends, but we also come carrying the responsibility to spend taxpayers'; money wisely.  Therefore, the solutions we provide must pass the test of a wise expenditure of taxpayers'; money.  We understand that circumstances will differ in different parts of far north Queensland, as they do all along the Queensland coast and down into New South Wales.  But, overwhelmingly, the industry is afflicted with the same problems deriving from the corruption of world markets.
  I am acutely aware of the sense of disappointment the industry felt in relation to there not being anything on sugar in the United States Free Trade Agreement.  The Americans would not budge on that – simple as that.  We tried, we tried very hard, Mark Vaile tried very hard.  It was an issue that was made very clear to me in the final discussion I had with President Bush, that the strength of domestic opinion on that matter was such that the Americans were not prepared to concede and we had the difficult choice of scuttling the whole deal on the basis that we couldn';t get something on sugar and thereby denying other sectors, or accepting it on the terms that we have accepted, which will deliver major benefits to other sectors of the Australian economy.  And in doing so, I know that there is a keen sense of disappointment amongst all of you – I understand that.  And that is one of the reasons why I made it very clear the weekend the Free Trade Agreement was announced that we would endeavour to provide a sensible further assistance package.  We have already announced some income support measures.  I don';t want anybody to see them as being in a way part of the final package, but rather as an earnest… as an illustration of our goodwill and our understanding that some people are suffering particular hardship.
That really is all I wanted to say.  I don';t want to make long speeches.  I really want to hear from you because you';re the people that have got a challenge.  We feel for you.  We won';t be able to give the industry everything they';ve asked for, but we';ll try and be fair.  We';ll try and look to the future.  We don';t want to pointlessly expend money, we want to expend money in a way that will help people diversify and will help people restructure so they can operate more viably.  In some cases, people do have to be given enhanced assistance to re-establish outside the industry.  I say re-establish rather than exit because I want to look at it from a positive point of view.  I am prepared to say that the existing re-establishment grants are probably short of what is needed to provide a fair level of assistance and incentive and that';s one of the things that we';ll be looking at.
  We have had some preliminary discussion inside the Government.  We haven';t made any final decisions on how we will assist or to what degree.  We';ll do that after we have completed these discussions and some discussions in Mackay and some further discussions with people over the next little while.  We';ll come to a decision fairly soon.  I won';t commit myself to a date or a week – that';s silly.  But it will be as soon as reasonably possible.  We come in no sense as benign liquidators of the industry.  We come rather as good friends who are trying to provide some practical help, but also having regard to our responsibility to spend the money of the Australian taxpayer in a sensible way.
Thank you.
[discussion forum]
CLOSING REMARKS
Well, ladies and gentlemen, we have to go in a moment to get a plane to Mackay.
  This has been very valuable for me.  If I can pick up on that last comment, something';s either true or false.  It is true that your industry is in a very very difficult position, largely through no fault of your own.  I mean no industry is perfect, but the predicament you have is a result of world trading practices.
  I don';t think the European Union is going to change its farm policies in the foreseeable future.  I have no sense of hope or optimism about that and I don';t think the Americans are going to walk away from a high level of agricultural protection, nor do I believe the Japanese are going to do it.  And we have to, we have to deal with that reality.  I';m not pretending that. I mean, I';m a realist and that';s… I mean, I';ve been complaining about the European Union for the whole time I';ve been in politics.  The second ministerial job I had was Minister for Special Trade Negotiations in 1977 trying to get a better trade deal in Europe.  I didn';t do very well, but then neither have any of… essentially any of my successors.
  We will try and help you.  There';ll be some things that we won';t do that you';ve asked for today.  I have to be honest with you.  There are other things that we will very very seriously consider.  We want to help you get into alternatives to sugar.  There is a very strong message coming through today that alternatives are the things that people are looking for.  I';m conscious of the fact that you';ve got to survive so you can get into something – I';m conscious of that.  I';m also very conscious of the fact that some people do need help to re-establish elsewhere.
  I was struck by the comments about the inter-generational transfer issue.  That';s obviously something that does cause a lot of difficulty and that will be looked at as part of the overall approach.
 Could I just say that I am very conscious of the social implications of this and I';m acutely aware that at a time when the nation as a whole has probably not been stronger economically, people who are missing out, not because they';re lazy, but because they';ve been done in by bad world trading practices, feel a particular sense of grievance and disadvantage.  And I am most conscious of that.
  And can I finally say that the attitude taken by the industry, as expressed here today by one of your spokesmen and also by Mr Ballantyne on behalf of the canegrowers, that notwithstanding your own sense of disappointment, you supported the Government';s decision to enter into the Free Trade Agreement because you knew it was in Australia';s overall interests.  And that';s the kind of thing that is, I guess, illustrative of the kind of good people that are in this industry.  You';re putting Australia';s interest ahead of your own sense of disappointment and that has not gone unremarked or unnoticed as far as I';m concerned.  And I thank you very warmly for your sense of commitment to Australia';s long term national interest because it is in our interest to have that agreement and it will be of great benefit to many of your fellow Australians in other industries.
But thank you for having us.  We';re going to go off to Mackay now and listen to some more people and meet some more people.  But I wish you well.  I hope what we come up with will help and I';ll do my level best to get a fair balance between helping an industry that deserves help and a wise expenditure of taxpayers'; money.
[ends]


Thank you De-Anne, John Anderson, Warren Truss, Ian Macdonald, Ron Boswell, my fellow Australians.
I';ve come here today just to say a few words very simply to you.  We understand that your industry is in a very parlous state, largely through unfair trading practices and not through the inefficiency or the inadequacies of the industry.  I have to be honest and say and that I don';t see the great trading blocs of the world changing their more restrictive practices in relation to primary production, which is inflicting such pain on Australian farmers in many sectors.  And I know that it';s particularly hard at a time when the nation overall is doing so well economically, that you should be in a sector that is suffering.  I know the sense of disappointment you felt about being excluded from the Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  We decided in the end that because of the gains that were clearly to be had in other areas, that it would not have been in the interests of Australia overall to walk away from that Free Trade Agreement because we hadn';t got everything we wanted, and in the case of sugar, anything that we had asked for and negotiated hard to gain.
I said at the time the Free Trade Agreement was announced that we would provide additional assistance to the sugar industry over and above what has already been on the table, and I';ve come here today to repeat that commitment.  I announced last week in the Parliament that the Government had decided to provide some income support, not only for the value it will bring to the people who benefit from it, but as a demonstration of our good faith.  I don';t see that as being a major component of any rescue package, but it';s necessary support for some people who have no income at all and are in need of that kind of support.
  I understand from the discussions I';ve had already that there are a range of views as to what the Government might do.  We do intend to help you.  We, obviously, in the nature of things, will not be able to accede to every request that is put to us.  But we do genuinely want to help in a way that helps you build a better future, and where it is the decision of individual growers and their families, provide you with what I choose to call re-establishment assistance rather than exit assistance to provide a better future.
  I';m aware that there are many people who argue that there are alternative uses of cane and that there is very much a future beyond sugar.   I want to hear more about that.  That seems to be a common theme of many of the arguments that have been put to us.
  Can I say that I really do feel sorry for an industry that contains thousands of good hardworking Australians who, because of the world market conditions, have fallen on hard time.  And we want to help.  We want to direct that help in the most intelligent way.  But I also, of course, have an obligation as Prime Minister to see that taxpayers'; money is expended in a wise and sensible fashion and a fashion that is going to build greater productivity and greater hope for the future.
That is really all I want to say at this stage.  I really have come to listen, as have my colleagues.  I';ve brought with me my friend and my colleague and somebody who understands rural Australia extremely well, John Anderson the Deputy Prime Minister, and Warren Truss the Minister for Agriculture, and Ian Macdonald, one of our Senators from north Queensland and Ron Boswell, who many of you will have a passing acquaintance with I';m sure.
But ladies and gentlemen, it';s very nice to be here.  And can I express my thanks to Ashley and Madonna Stevens for the courtesy that they have extended in allowing us to come on to their property and to use this wonderful shed for this gathering.  And it really is a great experience to talk to my fellow Australians in far north Queensland, to hear what you';ve got to say.  I know you';re going through a hard time.  I';ll try and help.  I won';t be able to satisfy every expectation, but consistent with the other obligations I have, I will do my best.
 Thank you very much.
[discussion forum]
CLOSING REMARKS
Ladies and gentlemen, this has been for me a very educative process and I would have reckoned after almost 30 years in Parliament and eight years as Prime Minister, I knew a few things about different industries in the country, but I';ve learnt some things about the sugar industry today I didn';t previously understand.
  One of the speakers, I think the gentleman who is there, I think he';s outside at the moment, asked me about what our view was, our passion or our vision for rural Australia was.  As you know, I, unlike the Deputy Prime Minister, I grew up in a suburb of Sydney and my father was a small businessman, he owned a garage in Dulwich in the inner suburbs of Sydney and my first job was serving petrol when I was about 14 or 15.  I learnt a very simple lesson then that the customer was always right and I';ve sort of never forgotten it through life.
But the point of all that is that although I grew up in the suburbs of Sydney, I';ve always had a very deep respect for the contribution that rural Australia has made to our nation, not only its wealth, but also its spirit and its character.  And I';ve often said that I can';t imagine what Australia would be like if we ever lost the critical mass of our rural industries, not only for the economic loss that would be represented by that eventuality, but also for what you could loosely call the character or spiritual loss that the company would suffer.
Now not all of rural Australia at the moment is experiencing the same conditions.  Some parts of rural Australia are doing quite well, other parts are not doing well at all and your industry is one of them.  The best things that we can provide to the rural industries of Australia will always be the basically sound economic settings.  The greatest curse of a prosperous rural industry for Australia is something like high interest rates and bad industrial relations and  rampant unions that cause your, if you';re an exporter, your produce to rot on the wharfs while they settle their industrial dispute.  And our goal will always be to provide things like low interest rates and good industrial relations and a sound economy.
 I know that a lot of farmers at the present time in all industries are looking at the Australian dollar, and they look at it from day to day and from week to week.  I understand that, and I';m no clairvoyant when it comes to the future of the Australian dollar.  All I can say is that if we hadn';t have had a floating exchange rate a few years ago when the Asian economic crisis overwhelmed this country, we';d have been sucked into the black hole with all of those other countries.  And it was in fact the flexibility of our exchange rate that saved so many of our industries.
  There were a couple of specific points that were raised and I';ll try and recall them as quickly as I can.  There was something said about foreign aid.  I understand the feeling about foreign aid.  Can I just say in defence of it, and that may not be popular, but can I say a couple of things in its defence.  Firstly, somebody mentioned China.  China is becoming one of Australia';s best customers.  Our exports to China have more than doubled over the last five years.  Now, it doesn';t flow through sadly to your industry, but if you';re looking at the national interest, China is an incredibly valuable customer, and we';ve been able to get closer to our traditional allies while at the same time building a very close relationship with China.  Papua New Guinea was also mentioned.  I understand the point about sugar, but from our nation';s point of view, if Papua New Guinea falls over, and it';s in a very fragile state, that will have big implications for our country.  It';s in the interests of Australia to help Papua New Guinea and stop it falling over, just as it';s in the interests of Australia to help the Solomon Islands.
  But I haven';t come here particularly to talk about stopping Papua New Guinea falling over. You really want me stop your industry falling over, and I understand that.  I could almost sense the interjection coming.
 But ladies and gentlemen, I';ve been asked to look at aspects of national competition policy.  It doesn';t rate very highly in this audience.  I certainly get that impression very strongly.  It';s… in some areas, greater competition has benefited the whole country; greater competition in some aspects of finance, in some areas of financial provision that make some contribution towards lower interest rates; greater competition in some areas of communications have led to lower communications charges.  I understand the point being made and I';ll think about the arguments being put in relation to that ministerial directive.  I think there are arguments on both sides of that.  But the gentleman who raised it challenges me intellectually to satisfy myself that the current policy is correct and I';ll do that.  I';m never afraid to challenge some of the conventional wisdom in these things.
  I don';t come here as an ideologue.  I believe in good economic policy.  I believe the greatest thing my government has done for this nation is to give it a sound economy, to give it low interest rates and low debt and low inflation and much lower unemployment.  And I';ll never walk away from policies that deliver those things overall to the nation.  But within that, there has to be room to recognise that not every industry is sharing in equal the benefits of national prosperity.  I understand that.  And that really is what you';re saying to me today.  That okay John, the nation may be doing well, but what about us?  We';ve worked our guts out and we';re not getting a share of it.  And that is the sense that I get.
Now I';ll go away, I';ll talk to my colleagues.  Can I say what a great champion your industry has in De-Anne.  She really is a great fighter for your industry.  She really is.  She';s been the chairman… she';s worked with the sugar industry taskforce, and she';s been a great champion of the industry.  But look, enough.  I';d like to meet a few more of you before I go.  But we';ll go away and we';ll think about what you';ve said and we';ll come back with some responses.  You won';t like it all and you';ll say he should have done that and he should have done something else.  I understand that.  I say that now, but we';ll try and address it conscientiously.
And can I finally say that the lady who spoke of her four sons, and can I say that that was in a way the most touching and moving part because in the end good economic policy is not some kind of end in itself.  Unless it produces human contentment and happiness and a fair share for the people who work hard, then it';s not working.  And I';m very conscious of the human element and I';m painfully aware of the spectre of suicide in times of economic distress.  I do understand that and it';s for that more than anything else that we have an obligation to do our best.
Thank you for giving us a hearing.  I';ve enjoyed listening to what you';ve got to say and I';d like to meet some of you before I go back south.  And good luck to all of you and it';s a privilege to be in your company.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you Mr Bartholomeus, Reverend Semmier, my parliamentary colleagues Trish Draper, Chris Pyne and Joe Scalzi, Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.  It';s a beautiful Adelaide morning and it';s a great pleasure to be with you and to share a few moments in opening these new facilities, which are the product of wonderful work of Lutheran Aged Care here in South Australia.
  Let me say how much I admire, and the Government admires, the contribution that over the years church-based aged care facilities have made to the caring of the aged in Australia.  They have in so many ways been the example that has been followed by others, and I hope for years into the future, whenever we think in Australia of aged care facilities, we think automatically of the contribution that has been made by so many of the churches and other religiously connected organisations, to the care of the aged in Australia.
  In common with all other societies that are like Australia, we are an ageing country.  The demographics are unmistakable.  The number of people over the age of 65 will grow as the years go by and the proportion of people of working age will diminish.  This raises a number of challenges for governments well into the future.  One part of that challenge will of course be in the area of aged care facilities.  It is the philosophy of our Government that we should assist people to remain in their own homes as long as is possible, and indeed the great bulk of people are able to realise that goal.  We provide, through the community care packages, increased facilities to assist people to go on living for longer periods of time in their own homes.
  But we also recognise that there will come a point for many people where that is no longer either possible or as a matter of choice, desirable.  And therefore the other element is to provide the appropriate levels of support and the appropriate incentives for the maintenance of a network of aged care facilities, of retirement villages, of hostels and of nursing homes.  And there is no better environment in which to provide those facilities than an environment which is underpinned by the care and the compassion and the commitment through their common faith, of religious-based organisations.  And Lutheran homes are a wonderful example of that and I want to thank you again for the contribution that you have made over the years.
Quite rightly, your Chairman pointed to the Government';s examination of the Hogan Review into the pricing and other aspects of aged care homes.  It is an issue which is in front of the Government literally at the moment, and I can assure you that the recommendations of that committee and the importance that is placed by that committee on the maintenance of proper and reasonable levels of funding from the Commonwealth Government, will be examined very carefully.  We will not walk away from our responsibilities.  We regard the care of the aged, the proper looking after of people who have given so much to this country – as I look out on this audience, I think of a truly heroic generation, many of whom went through a depression and a world war, World War II, were part of the great post World War rebuilding of this country when we welcomed millions of people from other parts of the world and together all of us created the stable, harmonious, modern Australia – we owe your generation a great debt and we will not walk away from that responsibility.
We have of course, as a Government, responsibilities to many sectors of society.  I did an interview this morning and in the space of about 10 minutes on radio, I was asked when are you going to cut tax on this, that and the other, and I was of course asked when are you going to spend some more money, and of course you';ll keep the economy ticking over well and the budget in balance.  Now it';s really quite easy.  You just have to juggle a few balls in the air and it';s extremely easy.  But you understand what I am saying.  It is a juggling act.  We can never satisfy everybody completely all of the time.  We have to make judgements, we have to make choices, but I can assure you that we will conscientiously address the needs of the aged care sector.
Can I just finally say, if I may be permitted to do so at such a gathering as this, to speak of the personal qualities of your two federal representatives who are here today.  I understand that Trish used to work here.  In fact, you have had some very famous people who have worked here over the years.  And she brings to her parliamentary duties, because of her background in caring for people, a great understanding and also her commitment to our services.  And Chris Pyne, in whose electorate this home is located, I also commend to you, to all of you, his great energy and his great commitment and his concern to look after the interests of everybody in the community.  I';m not leaving you out Joe, but you know, they';re just my federal mates and I wanted to say something about them.  But I';m sure you will understand that.  He';s a hard working bloke too and I wouldn';t want anybody to forget that.
But ladies and gentlemen, it';s great to share such a lovely morning with you.  I started off this morning going for a walk along the Torrens River, and as you know I do a lot of walking everywhere in the world, and there isn';t a nicer part of Australia in which to go for a walk than that beautiful Torrens River.  I can see the Adelaide Oval out of the corner of my eye and that sort of keeps me very, very happy.  Very, very happy indeed.  But friends, thank you for having me.  I wish you well.  You are obviously in the very best of care.  And I have great pleasure in declaring these new facilities well and truly open, and long may you all live peacefully and happily in a supportive Christian environment in these wonderful facilities.
  Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Doctor, my parliamentary colleagues Kerry Bartlett and Steven Pringle, ladies and gentlemen.  Thank you for inviting me to participate in the launch of the Practice Nurse Initiative here in the Hawkesbury and under the auspices of the Hawkesbury Division of General Practice.
  We have made a lot of changes.  We hope all of them will prove to be beneficial to the Medicare system, which has underpinned healthcare in this country for more than 20 years.  The MedicarePlus package really has three or four elements – the increases in the rebates for bulkbilled services to children under 16 and cardholders; the very significant innovation with the introduction of a safety net for the very first time, which I believe will prove to be a very valuable additional piece of insurance, especially for Australian families; and very importantly and very relevantly to today';s announcement, a large number of workforce measures, all of which are designed to recognise that the biggest single challenge we have in relation to the provision of daily health services is of course the shortage of doctors and other professionals in certain parts of Australia.
  And the Hawkesbury is an area that has been designated as one of workforce shortage.  I for the life of me, having come through this area over the years, being somebody who has grown up in Sydney, I can';t for the life of me imagine why people wouldn';t want to come and live and work in such a nice part of Australia, but it is a fact that you do have workforce challenges.  And the purpose of the Practice Nurse Initiative in particular was to recognise first and foremost of course the great professionalism of practice nurses and for the very first time to introduce an MBS scheduled fee in relation to the work of practice nurses, and also secondarily, but very importantly, to see their work as augmenting and being in partnership with the work of general practitioners and thereby allowing general practitioners to focus on areas where their particular expertise was so necessary.
So part of our programme was to provide about 1,600 additional practice nurses and to give grants to practices and new rebates to carry out medical services such as immunisation and wound management.  And from March of this year, grants are available for practices in urban areas of workforce shortage to assist with employing a practice nurse, and that of course is where the Hawkesbury comes in.  And the majority of this area, and indeed the whole of this area, and the majority of the area represented by my colleague Kerry Bartlett in Federal Parliament, is defined as an outer urban area of workforce shortage.  And letters were sent to eligible GP practices in the Macquarie electorate about the initiative on the 1st of March 2004 and I';m delighted to acknowledge that the Hawkesbury Division of General Practice is hiring two full-time practice nurses to assist the local medical practices, and this is a direct result of the Practice Nurse Initiative and it will, as outlined by the Chairman of the Division, the Hawkesbury Division, it will provide a valuable additional service to the excellent services the GPs already provide.
  And MedicarePlus will extend the provision of practice nurses over a period of years and the full additional number of 1,600 will be in place by the year 2007.  And I think there is a total of about $140 million from now until 2007 that will be provided to support the Practice Nurse Initiative.
  We have, despite all of the criticisms that are from time to time made about health services in this country, there are deficiencies, there are always changes and improvements that can be made, but we do have by world standards excellent health services in Australia.  We have wonderful doctors, we have highly trained and very well skilled other health professionals and they all work in a very dedicated fashion.  I';m a great admirer of the medical profession.  I think it often comes in for unfair criticism.  I respect and admire the work of GPs.  They are integral not only to the delivery of high quality health services, but they';re also integral to the sense of community wellbeing and the cohesion of a local community.  And the contribution that a well-supported health service can make to the sense of security and wellbeing of a local community can never be overestimated.  So I';m very pleased that the Hawkesbury Division of General Practice, Dr Crampton, has been able to take advantage of this particular part of our initiative.
  We';re putting about $2.8 billion over a period of four years into the MedicarePlus initiative and we believe it will improve, it will provide additional choice, it will recognise the workforce shortage challenges, and very importantly with the new safety net which is at levels of $300 for families getting Family Tax Benefits and cardholders, and $700 for the rest of the community, and any out of pocket expenses over and above either of those thresholds to be reimbursed at 80 per cent, is a remarkably effective and I believe very generous new safety net and it will bring a lot of peace of mind to people.  But the whole concept of arrangements like that are not that they should be utilised by everybody all the time, but they provide through the insurance principle a safety net and a degree of security and degree of reassurance.
  So I';m delighted that we have been able to negotiate all of these initiatives through the Parliament and I want to congratulate Tony Abbott as the Health Minister for the work that he has done in this area, to congratulate the Hawkesbury Division of General Practice for its involvement.  I wish the two practice nurses well and I';m sure that they';ll make a very important contribution and it will be another way of further improving the health services in this part of our community.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Premier, your excellency and Mrs Landy, to Rod Kemp and Justin Madden, Lord Mayor, Ron Walker, the Chairman of the organising committee, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
What a beautiful morning here in Melbourne and it';s a great delight for me to participate in this very important event here in what is undeniably the sporting capital of Australia.  And the Commonwealth Games of Melbourne in 2006 will I';m sure join and add to the lustre of Australia';s reputation for staging successful international sporting events.  Of course Melbourne is sill remembered by people around the world for the wonderful hosting of the 1956 Olympic Games, in more recent years of course we';ve had the wonderful success of the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney, and most recently the magnificently organised and enjoyed Rugby World Cup which not only enthralled the more traditional rugby playing parts of Australia but many other parts of our nation.
But here in this beautiful Autumn setting can I say on behalf of the Federal Government that our support, and it';ll not just be rhetorical, it will be the flesh and blood of support and there';ll be something said further about that at an appropriate time next month by somebody who is a very strong supporter of the Commonwealth Games as well.
But ladies and gentlemen we are 100 per cent in our enthusiastic support, these are events that cross Commonwealth and State and party political lines, they are events that command the support and the attention and the affection of the whole community.  We are a great sports loving nation and Australians enjoy nothing better than working together to make sure that a sporting event is a great success.
The Commonwealth Games have the reputation of being the friendly games, they bring together the nations comprising a third of the world';s population and once again we';ll be able to put on display what a magnificently friendly country Australia is, what a very civil and hospitable city and livable city Melbourne is and I know that everybody connected with the Games will want to make them a very, very great success.
All Commonwealth Games have Mascots and I remember the Mascot from the Brisbane Games of 1982, and I can remember mascots from other Commonwealth Games that have been held since then and previously.  So ladies and gentlemen I have very, very great pleasure in formally announcing and launching the mascot for the Commonwealth Games of 2006, Karak.


Well thank you very much Larry, Elaine Henry, Patrick McClure, Professor Stanley, Professor Hayes, my other parliamentary colleague Ross Cameron, many other people who are gathered here today who have a very strong background in the issue that brings us together.  And it is appropriate that it is announced in the precinct of the Ashfield Infants'; home which has in different ways since 1870, has been looking after disadvantaged children and their parents.  And there is a neatness about that, that we are in a way returning to a place where this challenge was responded to in a different fashion, in a very different era, albeit with different approaches, but nonetheless with a sense of personal moral commitment to looking after disadvantaged people in the community.
What I am announcing today fuses together two approaches that I have certainly become, over the eight years I have been Prime Minister, a total convert to.  One of those is what Elaine said I talk about a lot, and that is the social coalition – the notion that you can';t leave it all to the Government, but the Government can';t vacate the field and leave it to welfare organisations.  And also recognising that there are a lot of decent, well committed individuals in the community, some with resources, some without resources, who want to be part of providing a solution, and there are a lot of people in the business community who are also prepared to help.  Now that';s the first notion of which I am a passionate advocate.
  And the other is the overwhelming case that has built through the years in favour of early intervention.  It is articulated very well by a lot of people in this audience.  I';ve never forgotten the riveting presentation that Fiona Stanley gave to the Prime Minister';s Science and Engineering Council two or three years ago, which was certainly instrumental in shaping my own thinking.  And I have talked to a lot of people in the peak welfare organisations of Australia who have spoken with equal conviction and passion about the importance of very early intervention.
  So the $365 million programme over the next four years which I announced today, is built very much on the twin concepts of the social coalition and early intervention.  It will be used principally – not exclusively, but principally – to support early intervention for children and families where there is a strong likelihood that those children would otherwise not grow up in a stable and caring environment.  And that is the overwhelming goal of this programme – in different ways to find a method of intervening in a helpful and non-judgmental fashion at a very early point, and help those families to achieve an environment and a sense of stability for their children that would not otherwise have been the case.  Now that is best I can express it the simple goal of this strategy.
And a major element will be the involvement through direct funding of the very well known and reputable welfare organisations of this country.  I am an unapologetic admirer of the contribution that those organisations make to our society.  I not only admire their sense of commitment and mission, and the use of the expression ‘mission'; is not meant to connote a preference for one of those organisations over the others, but their commitment and their mission, but also a recognition of their expertise.  And also an understanding that those organisations know the value of a dollar even better than the officials in the department of finance and administration.  They know how hard it is to raise money.  They know how carefully you must husband the resources that a sometimes unwilling and not overly generous public and business community is prepared to provide.
  The new programmes will build on the success that the Stronger Families and Communities Strategy that was pioneered by Senator Jocelyn Newman when she was the Minister in the area, and we';ve seen expenditure of about $226 million in that programme over the last four years.  And that strategy to date has funded about 660 community-based projects.  And the strategy has involved some innovative approaches to childcare, especially in the area of in-home childcare and the provision of childcare for people living in rural and outer suburban areas.  And a significant element of the additional funding that is being provided under the programme over the next four years relates to the expansion of the childcare component.
We';ve reviewed the operation of the strategy and as a result of that review, we have decided to concentrate it even more heavily in the area of early intervention.  And it';s going to provide an even more focused and intensive emphasis on that and it will be, as Elaine suggested, closely aligned with a national agenda for early childhood.  The theme of early intervention is apparent in the four funding categories that are going to be part of the strategy.  The first of those components is decribed as Communities for Children, and we';re going to commit $110 million and that is going to fund organisations, the organisations of which I have spoken, in 35 localities identified around Australia as being localities where there is clear evidence of disadvantage and clear evidence of need.  And each organisation is going to receive funding of up to $4 million over a period of four years.
  And I';m able to announce today the first seven of those local organisations and they are, and it will give you an idea of the spread of both the organisations, but also the localities – Anglicare Tasmania, which caters for the northern suburbs of Launceston in Tasmania; the YWCA NSW which caters for the Lismore area; Mission Australia, which caters for western Sydney; Kilmany Uniting Care, the Shire of East Gippsland, LifeLine and Coomera and the Gold Coast Hinterland of Queensland. The Smith Family, which is Girraween, Koondoola, Balga, Mirrabooka in Perth and United Care Wesley in Port Adelaide which covers the North Western part of Adelaide. Now, they are the first seven organisations and they are illustrative in the sort of organisations that we are going to directly fund because we believe they better than any other are capable. I don';t mean just them exclusively but organisations of that calibre are more capable of delivering at the appropriate level and in the appropriate way and with the appropriate sense of dispatch and urgency, the resources.
 We';ve chosen these organisations because they';re already highly active in these communities and there';ll be able to get amongst the relevant people as quickly as possible and roll out the services. I mean, for example, if I could just mention that Mission Australia will be given about $3 million to expand on services it';s been providing since 1970 in Sydney';s south western suburbs, including the Miller pre-school and the Liverpool Family Day Care Service. And this expansion is going to be modelled on the very successful Pathways to Prevention Programme which was covered in the video that you have just seen. The mission has targeted the South Western suburbs of Miller, Green Valley, Cartwright and Sadlier because they comprise a disadvantaged community with attendant socio-economic problems and through this problem Mission will aim to provide the best possible start in life for some 2,000 very needy children under the age of five.
 The second initiative is the Early Childhood Invest to Grow Initiative and this will provide about $70 million to non-government organisations to refine and roll out proven early intervention programmes in disadvantaged communities. And in addition it will support the continuation of the longitudinal study of Australian children which will provide a comprehensive and national picture of Australian children and support policy development of child related issues.
Five organisations are going to receive funding under this initiative. There';s the Australian Research Alliance for Children and Youth, which is headed up by Professor Stanley, Good Beginnings, Northern River';s Division of General Practice, the National Aboriginal Sports Corporation and National Indigenous Child and Family Resource Centre. Under the third initiative, called Local Answers, funding of $60 million will provided to smaller community based projects that focus on family and community capacity building.
And 12 projects till today receive news of funding under this initiative and, for example, there';ll be the Children and Education Research Centre at the University of Newcastle that will receive funds for the extension of its Support at Home for Early Language and Literary Project which provides early literacy intervention to young families and indigenous and remote communities.
The fourth major initiative is Choice and Flexibility in Childcare and this will provide $125 million to build on the in-home care programme, create more private and community long day care centres in rural and urban fringe communities and implement quality assurance systems. Ten in-home care services in New South Wales and Victoria offering 200 new places have been approved and will commence operation shortly and later this month the Government will release a further 1,000 places for new and existing service providers to a national application process.
 And the Infants'; Home here in Ashfield will receive 20 new in-home care places and this will enable families currently unable to access other childcare options. As always accompanies these announcements, there is a large and colourful media kit which explains in great deal all the virtues of the Government';s announcement that I haven';t been able to include in my presentation.
But can I say, ladies and gentlemen in conclusion, that I am very enthusiastic about this approach. I didn';t pretend when I became Prime Minister to have all of the answers in this area. I had a sneaking suspicion that if I listen to people who';d been working in the field for a long time I';d learn something. I also had a strong view that if I got some committed colleagues who were really very interested in it and can I say, Larry has been an enthusiastic person who';s brought a great deal of energy to this particular part of the Family and Community Services portfolio. But I also knew that the Government had to put dollars on the table. You can';t stand up and make fine speeches and then leave it up to somebody else to do. Inevitably, some people will say, well there should be more dollars. There should always be more dollars for every single thing that the Government ever does. But the programme I';ve announced today does represent not only a strong continuation, but a significant expansion in aggregate terms of our commitment. I think it is about as important a thing as a Government can be concerned about.
 Intervening early, saving young lives from years of unhappiness, of low motivation, of educational failure, of abuse, of inevitable resort to crime and anti-social behaviour is an important goal. And I believe that the programmes I';ve announced today, the organisations that we';ve announced we';re supporting today and the organisations we';ll support in the future – they have the skill, they have the motivation, they have the commitment, they have the mission to do something about it.
 We';re very strongly behind them, I';m delighted to be associated with this announcement and I thank everybody who has done so much to bring together and to make it possible today.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Dr Moyes, parliamentary colleagues, guests, ladies and gentlemen.  It's said truly that life is full of paradoxes and one of the great paradoxes of modern Australia is that at a time when generically speaking our economy is doing well, we nonetheless have within our society many areas of disadvantage, many pockets of poverty and many people who through a combination of circumstances are not enjoying the benefits of a very strong Australian nation.
So it's very appropriate that Family Makeovers, the appeal that I very strongly support and the Government very strongly supports, is being launched the very day after I launched the Commonwealth Government's programme of Stronger Families and Communities which is very directly based upon two simple propositions that I support very strongly.
  The first of those is that the earlier that can intervene in a child's life to protect it from adverse circumstances that is going to effect his or her upbringing, the better not only for that child's personal future and wellbeing but also for the wellbeing of society.  The costs of troubled children are measured greatest of all in the emotional disturbance they suffer, but they're also measured in the resort to crime, the endemic truancy and the general contribution that a troubled child and a dysfunctional family makes to a troubled and potentially dysfunctional community.  And the whole emphasis of the programme that I launched yesterday is to recognise that reality and to do what we can as a community working together, the Government, welfare organisations, individuals and business to intervene early and to reduce the levels of truancy, of abuse, of dysfunctionality in all its manifestations and the contributions that will make in the future is enormous.
The second principle on which it is based, this policy, is my very strong belief, often repeated, and I repeat it again today, that the organisations that are best able to deliver these services are in fact organisations like the Wesley Mission, they know the problem, they've had coalface experience, they know even better than the sternest bureaucrat in the Department of Finance and Administration how hard it is to raise money and therefore how prudent you have to be in the spending of your donors' dollars.
  So this programme that I launched yesterday brings together those two essential tenets, a belief if you like of my approach to particularly the area of dysfunctional families and children being born frankly into an environment where unless something is done they have no hope of growing up and leading the sort of lives that we hope to provide to our children and we hope that society generally can provide.  And I announced yesterday a number of organisations that will receive funding initially and there are many other programmes and the idea is that something like 35 areas of potential disadvantage have been selected and the proposition in relation to those 35 areas around Australia is that one of these great organisations will be funded to the tune of about $4 million over a period of four years to support and run programmes that are based on the concept of early intervention.
Now Wesley Mission of course in its current manifestation and previously as the Central Methodist Mission has of course, as Gordon said, have been providing help and service to underprivileged people in and around Sydney for more than 170 years and it's a remarkable contribution that it's made to Sydney and a remarkable contribution that it's made to the less privileged people within Australia's community. And I want to very strongly support the appeal that Dr Moyes has launched. I am very happy to say that the Commonwealth Government will itself contribute $200,000 to that particular appeal and that, of course, is without prejudice in anyway to any opportunities that the mission may have either in relation to this programme or indeed any other programme to bid for funds and resources that are available under the Stronger Families and Community service.
Can I also say, I'm conscious that I'm speaking at a luncheon organised by the Wesley Mission, that you are all aware that out of its predecessor it grew the Lifeline Service which today is Australia's premier telephone counselling service. A service that means that countless thousands of Australians over the years have been prevented through counselling from taking their own lives, have been reconnected to their families and generally have been able to live happy fulfilled lives and this great service continues to provide enormously to our city and it's been imitated around the world. It's my understanding that it was the very first telephone counselling service of its kind anywhere in the world and as a result of the leadership and the vision displayed by the late Alan Walker it has spread around the world. I am very much aware that in order to continue to expand and sustain the effective of operation, its telephone infrastructure is in need of significant refurbishment and upgrade and I'd like to indicate that the Commonwealth Government would be very keen to assist in relation to that process. But I'll be arranging for some officers from by both my office and my department to be in touch with Lifeline to discuss that because this service provides an indispensable link between the community and those who have lost, not only their sanity but also their reason for continued existence and a wealthy, fortunate, privileged society, which we are, has an obligation in very many different ways to try and assist that.
Can I just finally say that, I've long admired the work of Wesley Mission, as I do the work of great organisations as the Society of St Vincent de Paul and Anglicare, and the Salvation Army, and the Smith Family - all of those other great organisations who I unapologetically believe know more about helping the underprivileged and the marginalised in our society than anybody else could possible hope to know and I therefore believe very strongly, that the best was that we can help those underprivileged and marginalised people as a Government is to help those great organisations that fuse practical experience with a sense of mission, a sense of commitment born in the main, but not exclusively of course, by the great Judeao-Christian ethics that instruct and continue to influence our community.
On this eve of Easter luncheon, I especially feel privileged to be part of this launch. I wish it well. I hope you'll support it and I wish the Wesley Mission every success in its great Christian mission of caring for the underprivileged in our community.
Thank you.
  [ends]  


Bob Baldwin, ladies and gentlemen.
Bob said he wanted me to drop in at one of the local small businesses and say hello to a couple of people at a morning tea and I know he';s renowned for his understatements but this really takes the cake.
I am delighted to be back in the electorate of Paterson.  I want to associate myself very strongly with what Bob had to say about the importance of volunteers in our community and how very important it is for any nation and any community within a nation to recognise those people who have worked hard for their local communities, who have achieved much, but even more importantly, have given much to the betterment of their fellow citizens.
  And this morning is an opportunity for me to do that, to recognise the citizen of the year for Paterson, to recognise sporting achievement that';s always important in Australian culture and Australian life and also to recognise somebody who is outstanding as a young Australian.
Before moving to that, can I say very simply to all of you how impressed I am with the quality of the representation that Paterson has in the Federal Parliament in the person of Bob Baldwin.  Bob is a great fighter for the people he represents and could I just mention two projects in particular.  One of them is a project, the name of which I will never forget as long as my political career lasts and that is Bucketts Way.  Bob starting talking about Bucketts Way when he was first elected, he kept talking about it when he was out of Parliament and he continued talking about it when he came back and, you know, he reminded me of the truth of that old adage that some people can talk under wet cement and Bob is a very good example that and relation to that and Weakleys Drive, he has been a tremendous advocate for the people of this area.  He';s also worked very hard to represent to me and to Tony Abbott some of the needs of this community as far as health services are concerned and he';s spoken to me as recently as this morning when we visited a nursing home about the continuing needs.  And I';m very pleased that quite a number of the changes that were brought in with the MedicarePlus package, particularly relating to the employment of practice nurses and ways and means of getting more doctors as well as practice nurses into the system so that some of the areas of doctor shortages can be attended to.  And the introduction of the new safety net that will be so valuable to Australian families and will relieve them a lot of the concern that they have if they encounter an unexpected illness for any of their children.  All of those changes are very valuable and I can say that many of them were as a result of views very strongly put to me and to my Health Minister by a group of members including your own representative in Bob Baldwin.  So I speak in the warmest and most approving terms of the energy of his representation.
The only other thing I want to say is that gatherings like this remind me of the greatest strength that our nation has and that is the capacity of our people to work together irrespective of what our backgrounds may be, irrespective of what our political views may be, irrespective of how strongly we may feel about this or that issue.  The fact that we are a classless society, we are a society where people relate to each other on the basis of the worth of an individual, not that individual';s background and that individual';s attitude and the way in which we can surmount and pass over those artificial barriers or differences has always been one of the great strengths of the Australian community.
  We are as a nation living in very prosperous times, but that doesn';t mean that every single man and woman in Australia is enjoying the benefits of that and the aim of any decent society is to ensure as far as is possible the prosperity we enjoy and the strength we have as a nation is extended to all of our citizens.  And that in the very difficult international circumstances we face, we understand the huge privilege of living in a country such as Australia and the obligation we have as Australian citizens to defend and protect the values that all of us hold dear and to recognise that there are some around the world and regrettably even some, a small number in our own midst, that would behave in a way that might threaten that freedom and challenge those values.
But ladies and gentlemen, can I say to all of the volunteers and in different ways that';s just about everybody in this gathering today – thank you for the contribution that you';re making to this part of Australia.  It';s a part of Australia that I';m very familiar with.  As many of you know, I';ve holidayed not far from here for a long period of time.  I know it well and it';s always a great pleasure to come back.
But thank you for the contribution that you are making to such a united and cohesive community and it';s a great delight to be here with my friend and colleague Bob Baldwin and I finish by again commending him to you in the warmest possible terms.
Thank you.
[ends]  



  [tape starts] the announcement that have been made recently about the longer term future of the base, the importance of it and the activities that it undertakes, not only to the Australian Defence Force particularly, but not only again to the Airforce, but also to the community.  It is important with all of our military establishments around Australia that there be the closest possible cooperation and integration of the base activities and the base facilities with the local community, and I know that this has been the case with this base, as is the case with other military establishments around Australia.
I am conscious that this base is basically a training nerve centre, if I can put that way, of military air traffic controllers, and that military air traffic controllers comprise one of the elements of the Australian Defence Force that continue to be deployed in Iraq, they are undertaking… and I know there are a number from this base who have been involved, undertaking very important work in training Iraqis for the handover of the operation of Baghdad International Airport.  And I take this opportunity at this place, and given its connection with air traffic control operations, of expressing my admiration for the work that they are doing and the strong support they will continue to enjoy from the Government in carrying out that very important work.
  There has over recent years been a greater focus on the role of the defence forces in Australians'; lives for perhaps quite a while because of the deployments in East Timor, in Afghanistan, in Iraq and in the Solomon Islands, and I believe that all of those deployments, whatever may be the legitimate domestic political debates about them, all of those deployments have united the Australian community in admiration for the work that is done by the men and women of Australia who wear the uniforms of our three armed services.
  I do not know a time since I have been in public life when there has been greater esteem for the individual men and women who serve in our military forces, and that speaks well for the professionalism, it speaks well for the commitment and the dedication of the members of the ADF, and it also speaks well for the support that they receive from their families.  I';m very conscious of the strain that service life can from time to time place on family units, and we try at a Government level, and I know the Army, the Navy and the Airforce try very hard at a service level, to ensure that there is as close as possible support and as close as possible consideration of the concerns and the interests of family members, as well as the concerns and interests of the men and women who actually serve in uniform.
But it is a time when there has been a focus, but it';s a focus of national pride in what you do, it';s a focus for respect, respect for your courage and professionalism, and I take this brief but important opportunity here at East Sale to say thank you to all of you for what you have done, what you are doing, and what you represent in the best traditions of the armed services of the Commonwealth of Australia.  Thank you, I wish you well, and I appreciate very much the courtesy that you have extended to me this morning.
Thank you.
  [ends]  



Peter McGauran, the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity of sharing some very brief thoughts with you about issues of public health, issues of health care in Australia, and the importance of the partnership that exists in health care in Australia between the public health system and the various private contributions, which together produce a much better health system than we sometimes give ourselves credit for.
It';s no exaggeration to say that at both a state and a federal level, health policy and health issues are amongst the most hotly debated in our society.  And there is nothing wrong with that because health is fundamental to the happiness and wellbeing and the congeniality of our community and the enjoyment of our lives.  And whilst I would be the last person to pretend that Australia';s health system is perfect, I';d be the last person to decry legitimate debate about its future, I sometimes believe that in the flurry of public exchange that goes on, we overlook how much better our health system really is compared to the health systems of most other countries.
I have often said that if you are a battler, it';s better to get sick here in Broadmeadows than the Bronx or Brixton, because the health system of this country is infinitely better than the health systems of most countries with which we seek to make comparisons.  Now that doesn';t mean to say it';s perfect, and it doesn';t mean to say that we shouldn';t continue to argue and debate it, but I do sometimes and this is I suppose is as non-political as any politician in my position can ever get.  Sometimes when I see stories on evening television about waiting lists and so forth, no matter what state I';m in, no matter what party is in power at a state level, I just sort of close my eyes and I think I can remember, you know, the positions being reversed, where exactly the same things were being said in the past.  And I think to myself maybe this is all just a little bit mindless, because in the end we do have to work together as a community and we, as a national government and as a state government, to try and deliver good health outcomes.
  Now we do have a fundamentally very sound public hospital system.  We can talk about its shortcomings, and I';m sure there are… there';s a big debate going on in different parts of the country about that.  But we also have a very, very important contribution from the private sector.  I was saying to your guests at my table that on Friday when I was in the Hunter Valley in New South Wales, I opened the new Newcastle Private Hospital which is co-located with the John Hunter Hospital.  And now so often the pattern is the co-location of public and private hospitals.  And this private hospital is made possible by essentially the work of the largest private health insurance fund, the NIB, which began originally as a closed health fund for the steelworkers of BHP at Newcastle.  And because of the changed circumstances of that city, it of course has changed its character and become one of the six largest funds.  And this private hospital is the largest regional private hospital in New South Wales.
Now I mention that to underline the point that as so often is the case, we need each other.  There should not be a ferocious debate in this country between public and private. Just as the debate between public and private in relation to schools is self-defeating and destructive because we need both, because they are an expression of the fundamental right of choice that Australian parents have.  So we need both a public and private component of our health system.  And that is why my Government has been a very strong supporter of private health insurance.  We';ve put a lot of resources into it.  We';ve done that very deliberately because we think people should have the right to privately insure.  And because of the strength of private health insurance, we now have a lot more people using private hospitals, and no matter what statistics you might try and use – I don';t mean you, but what one might try and employ – in order to prove to the contrary, it is self-evident as a matter of ordinary logic, if you have more people using private hospitals, they must be taking the load off the public hospital system.  I mean it can';t be any other result.  They must be.  And a growing proportion of operations are being performed, particularly in relation to cancer procedures and many knee and hip replacements, are being performed in private hospitals.
  The point simply is you need both.  And they reinforce the strength of the other.  They should not be seen, and we should not promote the idea, that they are competitors.  They should work together.  And we in Australia have done a lot of things better than many other countries.  Now one of the things that we have done better than most other countries is that we have been able to have more effective public-private partnerships in the delivery of human services.  And the two areas that stand out starkly in my experience have been health and education.  There is far more cooperation between the public and private sectors and far more mutuality about the contributions they make in this country, than there are in countries with which we make proper comparisons.
 And if I have a message today to leave with you, it is that the strength of Australia';s health system is sometimes discounted.  We sometimes lapse too readily into a sense of despair and crisis about it.  And that is not a self-satisfied observation.  It';s a passionately-held belief.  But that doesn';t mean to say we shouldn';t as a community put more resources into it.  We at a federal level have just announced in the last couple of months a commitment of about $2.9 billion extra over a period of four years into Medicare.  Amongst other things, it';s designed to… well it';s not only designed, it does deliver higher rebates for the bulk billing of people who are holders of concession cards and for children under 16, and there is a higher loading for people in the regional and rural areas of Australia.  We';ve introduced a new Medicare safety net.  We have introduced a number of measures that are designed to bring onstream hundreds more doctors and practice nurses over the next few years, and for the very first time, and I acknowledge the contribution made by Senator Lees and others of the independent Senators, we';re going to extend the Medicare system to the allied health professionals in a number of areas.
  Now all of these things represent further enhancements and further improvements, and of course underpinning the health system of this country and underpinning the health system of Victoria is the fact that we have outstanding doctors and other health professionals.  It has often been said that this country punches above its weight in many fields.  In no field does it punch above its weight more effectively than in the area of medical research and medical science.  If you look at the recorded medical breakthroughs and the record of excellence in medical research achievement, the number of Australians is disproportionate to our population, and we have an outstanding record and we do have doctors and other health professionals that are not only the equal, but in my view surpass the skill of those in so many other countries.
 So we have a very, very valuable asset.  Now medical science has made enormous strides and that is both a virtue and a challenge.  It';s a wonderful thing because it is leading people to live longer lives and to live healthier lives, providing they make their own contribution to it by such fundamentally sensible things as a good diet and regular exercise and sensible behaviour in other respects.  But it also of course represents a very big challenge because modern equipment and modern research methods are very, very expensive.  Now I';m aware of that as Prime Minister, I';m sure that the Federal Treasurer is aware of that and the Health Minister is aware of that, but more importantly than us, people who are charged with the responsibility at a local level of raising resources are also aware of it.
  And one of the reasons that I was enthusiastic about participating in today';s lunch when Peter McGauran raised it with me was that I do believe very strongly that we should as far as possible, and to the extent that it makes medical and economic sense, we should as far as possible decentralise the delivery of our health services.  And the Cancer Centre that we are supporting at a federal level with a $10 million contribution and which the Victorian Government is supporting with a contribution of $11 million will deliver services to hundreds of people in the valley, the La Trobe valley, that will need those services, will obviate the need for them going to Melbourne.  It will as a consequence deliver better outcomes, they will make more sensible decisions about the type of treatment that they need, and they will be in closer proximity to their family members as they go through the very traumatic time in their lives of coping with cancer.  And it';s just another opportunity for us to witness the value of cooperation between federal and state governments and also the enlistment of the community.
So I very, very warmly commend this project to you.  I';m very happy to support it and I hope in a small way by being here, I know there will be a vigorous local campaign, raising money is never easy no matter what the cause is, but medical research is a great cause and we hope that the example of the contributions of $21 million from the two levels of government will encourage the local community to provide the extra $3.5 million.  But it will be a wonderful service and it will be a reminder of the community identity that will surround the centre.  We are all proud Australians, above everything else, but we also like a sense of close local identity to our particular communities.  And there are, as I go around Australia, there are scores of regional loyalties and regional affinities, and they';re very strong and they';re not just related to things like sporting loyalties and so forth, they';re very strong in so many ways.  And this, the La Trobe valley, has a deep sense of local affinity and local loyalty and therefore the facilities are needed to support that, facilities that the local community will take a very special interest in.
  So ladies and gentlemen, I wish the project well and I have been shown it, the map.  It looks very good, very impressive.  I hope you are successful in raising that $3.5 million and it will add mightily to the value of what I believe is fundamentally a very strong and stable health system in this country, and one that Australians should be very proud of, and most of all, be proud of the men and women, the health professionals, the doctors and the nurses and the administrators that deliver the services and look after our wellbeing.
Thank you.
[ends]  



Mr John Leper, Stewart McArthur the Member for Corangamite, Senator Tsebin Tchen, Senator for Victoria, staff of the Belmont, residents, ladies and gentlemen.  This is a wonderful facility.  I have visited many aged care facilities over the years in my various political capacities.  Some of them greet you by their very presence with a warmth and family congeniality, others not so much.  This is very much in the former category.  It is, to use that old clich‚, but it';s very relevant, it is a building that has the feeling of a home away from home, and that is very important.
I want to congratulate TLC and Mr Leper in particular for the example that has been set to others through the excellence of this facility and the other facilities that the organisation has established and run for quite a number of years.  Caring for an increasingly ageing community will be one of the great challenges for Australia over the next 50 years.  We are, in common with all other western societies, an ageing population and increasingly therefore the quality of care offered to older Australians, the options available through staying longer in their own homes if that is their choice and that is within their capacity, the sort of facilities that will be available to them when they leave their own homes, the connections they can maintain with their families and their communities, all of those things will be extremely important and society will require of all of us, particularly those of us in Government, and also those who are involved in the aged care sector, a comprehensive response.
  I am aware that there are additional needs for the aged care sector.  We have carried out a very searching examination of those needs through the courtesy of Professor Warren Hogan';s examination.  That report has been in the Government';s hands for some weeks and we will be announcing in the very, very near future a response.  It';s no secret to say that that response will involve, amongst other things, the provision of substantial additional resources out of the Federal Treasury for the aged care sector in Australia.  It is an important sector.  We want to get the balance right.  We want to keep faith with those who have contributed so much to the building of the modern Australia.
  You mentioned that one of your residents, Mr Grove, was going to march in the ANZAC Day march.  He is representative of a generation that has given so much to this country.  And by and large the segment of the Australian population now requiring moderate to intensive care in aged care facilities does represent the generation, some of whom went through both the Depression and World War II and most of whom in different ways lived or fought through World War II.  So we of other generations owe them a very special debt and part of that is to make sure that the aged care facilities provided for them are of the best possible quality and standard.
  We have asked, through the accreditation process, we have asked aged care facilities around Australia to meet certain standards.  I accept that for some, without in any way criticising their commitment to high quality care, that has required the commitment of additional resources and it has been difficult.  But in the long run, that can only be better for people who live and are cared for in these facilities.
  I was impressed, as Mr Leper explained the operation of Belmont to me, by the concept of mixed care, the idea of not having a clear demarcation between high and low care, and recognising that both from a caring point of a view, from the sense of community you get in the facility, and also the peace of mind of people who come into the facility, that concept of mixed care without that sharp division is something that is extremely positive and something very much to be welcomed.   This organisation has made a great contribution.  It has pioneered many approaches.  It has been a fine example of what can be done.  And in this area, as in so many other areas in providing human services, we need to have a partnership between the Government and the private sector, and certainly in the case of aged care, also many of the great welfare and religious organisations of Australia.  We are very good in Australia at getting cooperation and partnership between both these groups in our society.
  The Government can';t run aged care on its own.  I would hate to see every aged care facility run by the government.  That';s no disrespect to those who work very hard in the department, but it';s not really their (inaudible).  I wouldn';t like to see aged care left entirely to the private sector without some kind of government involvement and some kind of government supervision.  And where indeed would the aged care sector be without the sense of mission that is brought to it by so many of the great religious and other welfare organisations?
  But finally and most importantly, can I say a word for the staff and the administrative people who work in aged care homes.  Without them, and they do work well beyond the call of duty and far in excess of the remuneration that they receive, they work very very hard indeed, it';s hard work, but it is rewarding work when you have committed people.  And I just want to conclude my remarks before declaring this facility open, that I do appreciate and the community appreciates, what the nursing staff and the staff generally do in aged care facilities.  Overwhelmingly they are wonderful, warm hearted, dedicated, good Australians who do wonderful things for elderly Australians in our community and I very, very warmly thank them for it.
  And on that note, a very appropriate note of recognition, may I declare the Belmont open.  Can I congratulate Mr Leper on the work that he has done, the standard of care being offered, and may I wish all of the residents a long and happy life here.  Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Mr Mayor for those very warm words of welcome, Stewart McArthur the Federal Member for Corangamite, ladies and gentlemen.  It';s a great delight for me to be back in this part of Victoria, to be a guest of Stewart';s and so many of his constituents and so many representatives of the local Colac community and the surrounding district.
Visits such as this to regional centres of Australia are for me as Prime Minister an invaluable opportunity to keep in touch with and listen to the views of people who live outside the major population centres of our country.  We are, as you know, a very heavily urbanised nation, but so much of the productive wealth and the innovation of our country comes from regional and rural areas of Australia.  And without a proper understanding of their needs and without a proper understanding of the things that they regard as important, it is not possible to give effective government to Australia.
It';s fair to say that I speak to you at a time when the Australian economy, nationally speaking, generically speaking, has rarely been stronger.  I don';t believe the Australian economy has seen in national terms the sort of conditions that we';re now enjoying, at any time in our history since World War II.  We have very strong growth.  For the first time since 1968 inflation is below three per cent and unemployment is below six per cent.  The debt of $96 billion that we inherited in 1996 has been massively reduced so that Australia has probably the lowest, or close to the lowest debt levels of any national government in the industrialised world.  We have very low interest rates and we have very strong levels of business investment.  There will be many people in this room, particularly in small business and on the land, who remember what it was like to have interest rates of 17, 18, 19 per cent and bill rates of 21 or 22 per cent.  And all I can say is I don';t know how you survived those sort of interest rates, and God forbid that those sort of interest rates should ever return because the greatest (inaudible) of prosperity in regional Australia is in fact the economic conditions that produce high interest rates.
We as a nation find it hard to deal with corrupted world markets.  We are a small nation.  We can argue and fight and cajole and advocate it in world economic and trade forums, but in the end the large trading blocs of the world in areas like agriculture do what they will without a great deal of regard for countries such as Australia.  I';m very proud of the fact that we have one of the most efficient farm sectors in the world.  It is not a heavily subsidised sector, particularly compared with the farming sectors of the European Union, Japan and the United States.
  We have just completed a negotiation with the United States for a Free Trade Agreement.  We didn';t get everything we wanted, but we got a lot that is going to be beneficial for many parts of the Australian economy.  We did win some significant benefits for the dairy industry and the beef industry.  We';ve won significant gains for our manufacturing industries and for our service industries.  And I have not the slightest doubt that signing this Free Trade Agreement will lock the Australian economy into the fastest growing economy or the biggest economy the world has ever seen.  And it can only be to the benefit of Australia as the years go by that we have a connection, a very strong connection, a freer trade connection, with what is the largest economy in the world.  And the relevance of that connection is going to get stronger and more important for Australia as the years go by.  The relevance and importance of the United States to Australia, both from a defence point of view, a strategic point of view and an economic point of view, is going to get stronger as time goes by.
  That is not to say that our future lies only in a close partnership and alliance with the United States, but it is certainly the most important association that we have, and right at the moment it';s the worst time imaginable to be talking about putting a distance between ourselves and the United States.  The world faces a major threat in relation to international terrorism.  It';s a great cloud on the international horizon, and this is a time to stay close to our traditional friends.  It';s not a time to gratuitously pick fault with them.  And this is not a time to give in to the threats and intimidation of terrorist organisations.  Things are difficult in Iraq.  I know that our commitment to that military operation was criticised by many in Australia, but I believe that it was right and I believe that it is even more right that we stay there to finish the job.  It is not the Australian way… it has never been the Australian way to cut and run.  It has never been the Australian way to be intimidated by threats.  The people who want us out of Iraq are the people who want to deny to Iraq a free and democratic future, and it';s very important that we stand together with our friends and our allies against that intimidation.
But as I said a moment ago, we haven';t invested all of our international relationships just with the United States.  Over the last eight years we have built very important new markets in the Asia Pacific region.  We have preserved the value of the great Japanese market and the Korean market, especially for our mineral exports.  And in recent years, we have developed an extraordinarily close economic and trading partnership with China, the most populous country in the world.  And just 18 months ago we signed the largest trade deal this country has ever signed in its history with a province of China for the sale of natural gas.  And the potential of the Chinese market to this country is enormous, and it does give the lie to those who said it would not be possible to build an even closer relationship with the United States and also build a close relationship with the nations of Asia.  We can have both and we will have both.  We will have both of those relationships on terms that are positive and valuable for Australia and in terms that serve the Australian national interest.
The prosperity we have at the moment is no accident.  It';s a result of some difficult decisions being taken a few years ago to get our budget back into balance.  It';s a result of the reforms that we undertook to our taxation system and our industrial relations system.  Economic reform can have short-term difficulties, and can I say very directly to this gathering, I am aware of some of the challenges that the dairy industry has faced and I am aware that the deregulatory changes to the dairy industry of Australia have had an uneven impact.  Some sections of the dairy industry have done well out of it, others not so well.  Many sections of the dairy industry continue to be affected by the drought.  Many are worried, as I found out yesterday in the east Gippsland area, are worried about the potential threat of the withdrawal of water entitlements by State authorities in Victoria.
  I am very conscious of the concern that so many landowners legitimately have about the withdrawal of their water entitlements.  This is a very dry continent and one of the great national challenges of the future is to deal with that problem in a cooperative manner between the Commonwealth and the States.  State Governments control property rights, which includes not only land rights, land entitlement rather, but also water entitlements.  But we';re very conscious and we';re working very closely with the States to increase the flow of water into the Murray, but by the same token to respect the fact that if somebody has a property entitlement, that entitlement should not be taken away without proper compensation.
  Now these are issues that must be worked through in a fair and balanced fashion between local industries and governments at both a state and a federal level and we also as a nation must preserve the right balance between development and care for the environment.  The days are gone when concerns of the environment was a fringe radical issue.  Everybody cares about the environment now, some of the most passionate environmentalists I';ve met are primary producers, are farmers who care about the quality of the soil that produces their wealth, and they worry about the conservation of it and they worry about the preservation of scarce water resources.  We should not see an automatic conflict between those two concerns, we should see them working together to produce a more productive environment. But there are, as in all of these arguments, people who are at the periphery and at the extreme. The extreme position is not in Australia';s interest because it is anti-development.  The sensible environmental position is in Australia';s interests because it supports sustainability of our natural resources and supports the further development of our country.
 Ladies and gentlemen, we are a nation which like all other western nations is going through a very big demographic change. Our population is getting older, not getting older at the same rate as Japan and many of the countries of Europe, but certainly the demography of our nation has changed. And what is going to require a greater emphasis as time goes by on healthcare services, on aged care service and the Government is very conscience of that. That is why one of the things we did a few years ago was to provide more support for private health insurance because we regard that as very important in supporting not only private hospitals but also the choice that is involved and the capacity you have if you have your own private health insurance. I believe in a health system which has both a public component and a private component.  I don';t believe the two should argue with each other.
  I believe the two should complement each other and work together and one of the things we';ve done in recent months is to provide very significant strengthening to the Medicare system, our MedicarePlus package has provided extra payments to doctors for bulk billing, to cardholders and to children under 16.  We';ve introduced for the first time a Medicare safety net, which says that if you';re a family and your out of pocket expenses go over $300 a year the most families on modest to middle incomes you get 80 per cent of that back after it goes over $300 and for the rest you get 80 per cent back when it goes over $700 a year. So what that does is to provide a peace of mind, a security against unexpectedly large medical expenses and we';ve also for the first time introduced an entitlement for some of the allied health professionals such as physiotherapists and podiatrists for the treatment they provide. And in addition to that and very importantly to rural areas we are adopting measures that are going to get hundreds of more doctors and practice nurses into areas of workforce shortage.  I find as I go around Australia that people complain to me, if they have concerns, they complain to me most about the unavailability of doctors rather than issues relating to bulk billing.  But the two of them are related because you find as work around Australia that where there are low levels of bulk billing there';s a big shortage of doctors and where there are high levels of bulk billing you have not an oversupply of doctors but you have an adequate supply. And as so often is the case you have to find a solution that matches the market forces, you have to bring the supply of doctors up and as a result that will have an affect on the levels of bulk billing.
But our major changes to Medicare will further strengthen it. I had the opportunity to launch the Gippsland cancer centre appeal in Traralgon yesterday and this is an appeal to which the Victorian Government has contributed $11 million, we';ve contributed $10 million and the local community is being asked to contribute $3.5 million.  The point I made in my address yesterday is one I would like to make again today and that for all the weaknesses there obviously are in our health system, and all the improvements that we could obviously make and are making, you shouldn';t lose sight of the fact that compared to the health systems of so many other countries with which it is reasonable to make comparison, Australia has a very strong and very effective health system and it';s very important that we don';t lose sight of that and we don';t denigrate by the constant rather overly partisan debate on health, we don';t denigrate the extraordinary achievements and extraordinary contributions of our doctors and our other health professions.
 There are just two other things that I wanted to say, ladies and gentlemen: I wanted to commend to you in the strongest possible terms the work that Stewart McArthur does as your Federal Member. Stewart has been a colleague and friend of mine now for over 20 years. He came into the parliament in 1984 to succeed Tony Street as the Member for Corangamite. Stewart is a great believer in long term solutions to difficult issues. He';s never been a person who';s always taken the short cut and said do what';s instantaneously popular and forget about the year after next.  There';s a great temptation in politics to do that. Great sensation to think, well, the only thing that matters is to buy off the immediate area of discontent and hang the longer-term consequences.
 One of the reasons why Australia is now in a very strong economic position is that a whole group of people in and part of the government over the last eight years have not just taken the instantaneously popular position, we';ve argued very hard that this country needed some long term reform and we';ve faced a few difficult battles. Nobody thought as we went back a few years ago that reforming the tax system was easy.
 It wasn';t very popular, I can assure you. It was very unpopular in the short term. But now people come up to me and say, well I don';t know what all the debate what about. They';ve moved on and it';s made a contribution to the overall strength of the economy. That';s not to say that everybody agrees with it. But they recognise in the long run that it was a change that had to be undertaken and Stewart has been part of a group of people who have argued for those things.
 There is no stronger supporter of the need to do something about our industrial relations system. One of the things that I am very proud that my Government has been able to do is to reform the Australian waterfront. I can remember going around Australia when I was in Opposition and people would come to me and say, “if you blokes ever get back into Government, will you please do something about tackling the power of the maritime unions on the Australian waterfront” and we did that in 1998.  It was pretty difficult. There were a lot of people who criticised it. There were a lot of people who cut and run who shouldn';t have cut and run. We stuck to our guns and as a result we now have a productivity level in the Australian waterfront that was undreamt of 10 years ago.
 The hourly container rate ten years ago was something like 16 or 17 and we set ourselves what then seemed to be the unimaginable target of 25. It';s now, I think, 27.5 and all the stories that used to be told about the inefficiency of the Australian waterfront are now part of history. I used to go overseas and visit particularly nations in Asia and they';d say, “well, we like buying from Australia, we like doing business with Australia. But gee, we worry about those maritime unions, the wharfies, they get control of things.” There used to be a story told, an old lady was so much apart of the culture of this country that nothing happened if it happened if it had to go through the wharfs.
There was a dear old lady in Queensland who was warned about a cyclone coming to her town. She had to take care and she said to her son, don';t worry about it son. The wharfies won';t let it land. And it was systematic of the view that people took about the inefficiencies of the Australian waterfront and the point of all of that story is that Stewart McArthur was one of those people who';s argued very, very strongly all the time he';s been in politics that we had to look to the long term solutions. Now perhaps, it';s because he';s a farmer and he understands that it is about the long term. You are going to have a lot of short term bumps and it';s going to be very, very difficult and I think he';s done a sterling job as your representative and I';m very proud to call him a friend and a very close colleague.
And the final thing that I say to all of you is we are as a nation strong. We';re strong economically. We have a great sense of national unity. Our nation is warmly regarded and respected around the world. We';re seen as the country that stands up for what it believes in. We';re seen as a country that can run great international evens such as the Olympic Games, the Rugby World Cup and soon, here in Victoria, in Melbourne – the Commonwealth Games in 2006.
 The word around is that if you want a great sporting event run, get the Australians to do it. They';re better than anybody else and I think they are and I won';t get much argument about that in this particular gathering. But ladies and gentlemen, we';ve achieved all of these things not by accident. We';ve achieved it because over the years some difficult decisions have been taken. Governments have been willing to go out and argue the case for reform and we should assume that it will happen no matter who';s in charge. And you can';t take our future for granted, we can only preserve it as it is by continuing to follow the right policies. And if we experiment with policies of high interest rates, of going back into debt, of borrowing money that we may not be able to pay, we';ll very quickly lose the stability and the strength and the sense of purpose that we have. And it';s pretty, apart from that, I think it';s very important that Stewart be returned. He';s your local member and whenever you an opportunity to make a decision on that, that we get a good opportunity to continue.
 But ladies and gentlemen, it';s always a great pleasure to meet a group of Australians in their own community. I find it the most re-invigorating, refreshing, renewing part of the job that I have. I never tire of it, I greet it with great enthusiasm and thank you most warmly for receiving me this morning.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Senator Patterson, Fran Bailey, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Defence and the Federal Member for McEwen, Chris Pyne, Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Family and Community Services and Member Sturt in South Australia.
First of all, can I also extend my thanks to GATE enterprises for allowing us to make this very important announcement. All of you will know that for many years, what used to be called sheltered workshops, now called Business Services have been providing opportunities for participation and opportunities to contribute and opportunities for employment to disabled people around Australia. And all of us as members of parliament and as concerned members of the community and as family members have known as the valuable contribution these enterprises have made. And some years ago, very understandably the view developed that the next stage of development of these services should involve the movement towards the payment pro-rata award wages and a quality assurance approach that guarantees fair treatment and guarantees that in accordance with the great Australian tradition of a fair go people who were employed in these services did in fact receive and enjoy that fair go.
In the process of the transition to this new arrangement some challenges have emerged in relation to certainty of the business enterprises and some concerns have been raised that maybe in the process of moving to the very laudable objective of pro-rata award wages there may be some businesses that couldn't manage it in the specified time and as a result some people might have their employment opportunities put in jeopardy.
 When the Government considered this matter we resolved that we were not going to let that to happen and we've set out to design some policies and funding to underpin those policies, to guarantee that that doesn't happen. And that's what I'm announcing today and that is a package of just under $100 million, $99 million - just under $100 million, that over a period of four years that will produce the following very important consequences - it will guarantee that no person with a disability will lose their place as a result of the changes of recent years. And that is a very important guarantee because the methodology that we are adopting is to provide financial support to various business enterprises that need it so that they can meet the benchmarks and the targets along the way to providing pro-rata award wages.
 The important message out of this announcement is that because of the additional funding that will be made available, business enterprises will have more time to adjust but they won't be adjusting at the expense of lower remuneration to their employees and that is a very important consideration.
It will provide time and financial assistance to phase in wage increases and up to a four-year period if needed. The package will provide tailored practical business assistance to ensure that services remain viable in the longer term. Now, we are doing these things because we are very strongly committed to supporting people with a disability, we want them as actively involved in the community as possible. We want them in work, we want them contributing and we want them fairly paid for the work they do.
 Now, we recognise that in the process of doing that and in the process of adjusting to a new system many business enterprises will need additional Government funding and that's where the extra $100 million comes in. And I think this will lay to rest any concern people have had in this area, the family members of disabled people who think their loved ones might lose their jobs, the business enterprises that are doing a wonderful job in providing employment, worried that they won't be able to adjust in time. But equally we're keeping faith with the fair go goal in saying that everybody should operate under the principle in this country of a fair day's work for a fair day's pay or a fair day's pay for a fair day's work - which ever version of it you want.
Now that applies to all Australians. It's an old Australian saying that, but it's a very relevant Australian saying and it applies no matter where you are and it certainly applies in disability services. So I just want to take this opportunity of declaring our very strong continuous support for disability employment services. I've seen in the time I've been a Member of parliament the wonderful work that these services have provided in my own electorate. The sense of hope and opportunity they have provided for so many people and there is nothing like the motivation that you get from being gainfully employed and that applies just as much to a person with a disability as it does to anybody else and we have an obligation as a fortunate caring society to make sure that we look after them. Now, I believe that this funding package will do the trick. If it doesn't, well, we'll look at other things. But I believe it will do the trick and I believe it will fix the concerns that people have and it will guarantee and underwrite the assurance that I give.  But as a result of these poor measures people are not going to lose.
In conclusion, can I especially thank Chris Pyne and Kay Patterson. Both of them, Kay as Minister and Chris as the Parliamentary Secretary, having particular interest and concern in this area - they have been very informed and persistent advocates of the interests of the business services and of the people who are employed in them. And without their work and effort and advocacy today's announcement would not have come about because it takes the energy of the Minister and I welcome Mark Sullivan, the Secretary of the Department as well. All of them have worked so very well. I mean this is what a fortunate caring society should pre-occupy itself with as much as the other responsibilities of Government. I believe this will do the trick. I will follow it with very great interest and I finish by thanking GATE Enterprises for allowing us to use their premises.
 I wish all of the employees well and I hope that this represents a very significant further contribution to not only stabilising but expanding employment opportunities for disabled people in Australia.
  Thank you.
  [ends]  



General Cosgrove, Assistant Defence Minister Mal Brough, Wing Commander, ladies and gentlemen. It is of course, now Anzac Day back home and I think it';s just terrific that I';ve had the opportunity here tonight in Dohar to present these Active Service Medals to a representative group of defence personnel. I want to thank all of you on behalf of the Australian people for the fantastic job you continue to do in our interest and on our behalf and you are not forgotten. You are greatly revered and admired. There are 2,000 men and women serving in the Australian defence forces in different parts of the world. There is naturally and very understandably a special focus on what is occurring in and around Iraq and you are very much in the thoughts and the hearts of all of the Australian people. You do a great job. You bring us great honour. We wish you well and our thoughts and prayers stay very much with you and thank you very much. And I look forward to meeting as many of you as I can tonight over something that is very Australian - a barbecue.
Thank you.
   (ends)  



  Well thank you very much Commodore, Colonel, ladies and gentlemen. I';ve come to Iraq on Anzac Day very deliberately to express my personal thanks and admiration to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force for the work that they have done and they continue to do in very challenging circumstances. But it';s not only to them that I extend my thanks and the thanks of the Australian people. But also to many civilian people from Australia, starting of course, with the head of our representative office Neil Mules and all of the others who have worked as advisers to the Iraqi people, the treasury and other departmental officials, all of which have played a very major role. This is not only something that has a military dimension, importantly though that dimension is, and of ongoing significance. But rebuilding the country, advising on the infrastructure, helping to put in place a system of Government and a public service and a bureaucratic structure that will mean that there is enough sustenance for the political expression of democracy that we hope to emerge in this country is also very important.
 So I want to say to the men and women who have done that work, to you Neil who will become our Ambassador after the 30th of June and to all of the others who have worked with you, I express my thanks.  These things only happen and work effectively if there is a proper communication between the civilian and the military side of the exercise and in the words that have been spoken about the role of the military, I would not want those on the civilian side to think that in anyway the contribution that they are making is not also very, very deeply valued.
I just say again to all of you, this is a challenging time. What you are doing is for the future of the Iraqi people. It';s a just cause. The nation is united in its prayers and hopes for your well being and your safety and your continued contribution to building a better future for the Iraqi people. And how better and how appropriate I guess it is to express that sentiment on behalf of the Australian people on Anzac Day.
Could I conclude this brief speech by saying that the Government has decided and I';m announcing in Canberra as well as here in Baghdad that we will be, having obtained the necessary approvals from those on high that we';ll be issuing special medals: both a medal for service in Afghanistan and also a medal for service in Iraq to Australian military personnel who qualify and the arrangements for that are going to be set in train. We came to the conclusion that it was appropriate to have a separate medal for each campaign and I think that is the right decision and I believe it will be a decision that is widely welcomed by the relevant defence personnel.
  To all of you again. Thank you. You are doing a great job for Australia and your country is very, very proud indeed of what you are doing.
Thank you.  



Well thank you very much John Anderson, the Deputy Prime Minister, Mayor, Paul Neville, Jim Pederson, Mike Horan, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
The plan that I';ve come to Bundaberg to announce today on behalf of the Government is the culmination of a process that began a couple of months ago at the conclusion of the Free Trade negotiations with the United States when as John has indicated we were not able to gain additional sugar quota and I did say to him and to other colleagues the weekend that that became apparent that we had an obligation to respond to the particular challenges that your industry faces as a result of a set of circumstances largely beyond your control and certainly not of your own making and the plan that I announce day will offer hope. It is a realistic plan. It is generous in its scope but the generosity is based on long term realism and the proposition that reform and change is not only necessary, but unavoidable. In putting the plan together I';ve not only taken into account the views that were expressed to me and my colleagues when I went to Cairns and Mackay earlier this year, but also it follows very extensive discussion and consultation with the industry.
 They';ll be some who will not think it adequate. They';ll be some in other parts of the country that will think it is too generous. I think it strikes the right balance between the obligation we have to the Australian taxpayer to spend his or her money wisely but also a special obligation we have to a group of decent hardworking Australians who are doing in tough because of a profoundly corrupted world market and through circumstances beyond their control.
So this plan is about providing hope, sustainability and reform. It';s a partner ship between the industry and the Government and it will require leadership, unity and a strong commitment to reform. The plan will involve the provision to the sugar industry of assistance of $444 million. The programme is comprehensive and it reflects that the Australian Government has listened very closely to the industry';s concerns. We are prepared and willing to help it through its current crisis. We want to assure that the industry has a sustainable future.
 You will remember that in March of this year I announced income assistance for those growers and harvesters in most genuine need of help. That was a down payment on the Government';s commitment to assist the industry. I am now able to announce as part of the plan the following measures.
Firstly, we will provide a one-off sustainability grant to mills and growers. The grant will take into account the industry';s immediate difficulties and will sustain growers and millers through a transition phase as the industry moves towards reform. This sustainability grant will be paid in two instalments. In June this year and January of next year. It will cost about $146 million. This will give growers and millers a peace of mind and allow them to undertake business-planning advice and to take the right decisions about their future.
I intend inviting the State Governments of Australia to contribute towards the cost of this sustainability grant and I make it very plain that if they decline to contribute the Commonwealth Government will nonetheless make the entire amount available. So in no way is this announcement of a sustainability grant conditional on the State Governments coming to the party.  But if they want to they will be warmly received. To drive reform and restructuring in the industry, industry groups will be asked to sign up to a statement of intent on behalf of the industry signalling a commitment to undertake reform prior to t receiving the first instalment of the sustainability grant and payment of the second instalment will be dependent upon satisfactory progress with industry reform.
We decided after a lot consideration to settle on this sustainability grant in the knowledge and the belief that unless the industry were given a basis to continue for a period of time until they could properly assess their future there was no way that people could make rational, medium and longer term decisions about their future in the industry. And we hope that the scope and generosity of this sustainability grant will give to individuals in the industry a degree of security over a period of time so that they can take longer-term decisions.
Additional elements of the plan will provide incentives for the industry to improve its efficiency and to rationalise and restructure and to diversify into other end uses. You are aware at the present time that there are re-establishment payments of $45,000 in the Sugar Industry Reform Package that was announced in 2002. At previous meetings with the industry I';ve been told that this amount was not enough and a more generous re-establishment grant was needed for those people who chose for a variety of reasons to seek their opportunities elsewhere and I';m therefore pleased to announce today that in the first year there will be a one off re-establishment grant of up to $100,000 to be provided to eligible growers to help them leave the sugar industry or agriculture altogether if that is their judgement.
  Lesser amounts are provided for re-establishment grants in later years to help spur reform sooner rather than later.  To help people in the industry make decisions about their future, we are providing business planning assistance and this will allow them to fully assess their individual circumstances and situations and consider their future in the industry or to consider alternatives.  We are also increasing the capacity of existing financial counselling and family support services in sugar regions through funding for crisis counselling.  The Government, as an element of this plan, will also provide up to $75 million over three years for a competitive grants programme for regional and community projects across the sugar producing areas of Australia to assist the medium and longer term restructuring of the industry.
 This assistance will be aimed at improving the efficiency and the viability of the industry and the regions.  It will help provide for a range of initiatives, for example - further exploration of opportunities for diversification, value adding, co-generation and alternative products.  Once again, this is specifically in response to many representations which were made to me.
During my visit to north Queensland, or far north Queensland earlier this year, many people put strongly to me the difficulties under existing social security provisions of inter-generational transfers of properties.  And therefore, one of the elements of this plan is the adoption of what we described as an inter-generational transfer scheme.  This scheme recognises calls from both younger and older generations of canefarmers about the need to help to assist generational change and it will allow sugar farms to be more readily handed from one generation to the next during the current industry downturn.
  The Government will legislate to enable eligible growers a three year window of opportunity to gift their sugarcane properties to their children and apply for the aged pension without the existing restrictive gifting rules being applied and this will specifically address a need that was put to me very strongly and very cogently by many people during my visit to Cairns.
  This industry has asked for other assistance such as stamp duty holidays and changes to planning laws.  They are of course principally the responsibility of state and local governments and I propose writing to the Premiers of Queensland, New South Wales and Western Australia asking that in augmentation and in addition to what I';ve announced today, consideration be given by those governments through that provision.  Once again, I stress that what I';ve announced is in no way conditional on the state governments coming to the party.
A key part of delivering the reform programme will be an industry oversight group that will oversee progress on reforms and this group will develop a strategic industry vision and align regional plans with vision.  Regional advisory groups consisting of local sugar industry and community representatives will be responsible for identifying the local industry';s key challenges and the most appropriate solutions.  Through this industry and regional network the industry will be able to provide the leadership, the unity and the commitment to make the industry sustainable.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a large package but it is necessarily so.  A half-hearted response would not have been enough.  It is a combination of generous assessments in the short term to keep people going, but also a recognition that in the medium to longer term change and restructuring will be necessary.  Some people will want to leave the industry.  I hope the industry.  I hope the majority will find the opportunities of this package as such that they can see for themselves a brighter, more positive future in the industry.
 It';s not easy being in your industry at the present time.  I understand that.  It';s very hard.  You work long hours and you haven';t had any return, many of you to speak of for years.  And you';re being buffeted by a set of adverse world circumstances which are extremely unfair and extremely punitive.  The best way that we can respond to that, having failed at a bilateral level and a multilateral level to get a better trade deal for Australia';s sugar industry because simply there';s such an over supply and the world market is so badly corrupted, it';s impossible to break your way in to somebody else';s market where like circumstances are prevailing.  It';s therefore incumbent on the rest of the Australian community through the Government in a sensible but generous fashion to try and help you.
  Now this is a comprehensive package.  I believe it strikes the right balance.  It gives you that short term assurance so you can plan for the future.  It helps in a more generous way those people who have decided the best thing to do is to leave the industry.  It tackles full on the inter-generational transfer issue.  It encourages diversification and rationalisation at a regional level.  It also provides incentive and help for people to develop alternatives in a way that I think will be very constructive.
So I do warmly commend the package to you.  It does involve, as I say, an overall provision of $444 million and it is absolutely unconditional.  If the states want to add to it, that';s fantastic.  If they don';t, well we';ll still provide the $444 million - and I want to make that absolutely clear.  I care about this industry.  I was struck when I came to Cairns and Mackay earlier this year with the sense of despair that many of you had, but also a faith that if you put your case strongly there would be a fair and decent response from the Government.
  I hope you see this package as being that fair and decent response.  I commend it to you.  I hope it works.  It';s up to all of us to work together to make it work and in concluding can I thank in particular Warren Truss the Minister for Agriculture and all of his colleagues on the sugar taskforce for the contributions they';ve made.  And very particularly, my colleague and the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson who';s been side by side with me in putting this package together over the past three months.
  We come genuinely concerned about your industry and we commend this package to you. Thank you.
[ends]  



Well thank you very much Major Watters, Assistant Commissioner, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It';s very appropriate that today';s announcement is taking place at the Fortitude Valley Police Citizens Youth Club because the contribution of the police forces of Australia through the federal police and the police forces of the various states of Australia is fundamental to any success that we';ve had over the last few years in beginning to turn the tide on the drug challenge.  And I want to start my remarks by paying tribute to the work of the men and women of the various police forces all around Australia.  It';s not easy and these ladies and gentlemen deal with it at the coalface.  They see the consequences, they have to break news to families of incidents and tragedies that are the result of drug abuse and we can';t pay too warm a tribute to the work that the police do, not only here in Queensland, but all around Australia and I';m delighted that the Assistant Commissioner and a number of his colleagues are here today.
 Brian Watters and I have been doing this double act now for quite some time in different parts of Australia and neither of us has lost any enthusiasm.  And like Major Watters, I get encouragement when statistics come out, such as those that came out a couple of weeks ago in New South Wales.  We don';t say, oh the problem is solved and the tide has finally turned, that victory was within our grasp.  But what we can say is that the cynics who said a tough on drugs strategy had no hope of success could well be wrong because we are starting to see a turn around.  We do know, for example, that the number of people dying of heroin overdoses is continuing to fall.  Since 1999, there has been a 67 per cent drop in heroin related deaths of people aged between 15 and 55 years.  Now that';s not just one year, that';s over now a number of years and the indications are, and they';re backed by some of the anecdotal experience, that there is beginning to be something of a turn around.
 Now not all of it is due to the Tough of Drugs strategy, some of it is due to supply changes, some of it is due to changes in use of drugs, all of those things, but quite a bit of it is due to this concerted drive that we have led at a federal level now for a period of four or five years.  And the Tough on Drugs strategy has now (inaudible) about a billion dollars at a federal level invested.
  And we';ve always had as our objective three things.  We';ve had as an objective, of course, the law enforcement side of it, catching the criminals who traffic in human misery and no punishment, in my view, is beyond being appropriate as far as they';re concerned in terms of jail sentences and so forth.  And we are seeing more effective law enforcement, there are more resources, there';s great co-operation and whenever a major seizure takes places you see the federal police and customs and the state police working in unison, working together to make sure the right result is achieved.  So law enforcement';s the first thing.
  The second thing is rehabilitation.  We are not tough on drug users, we are tough on the habit, we are tough on the criminals but we do extend, through rehabilitation, a helping hand for those people who want to kick the habit and that helping hand is best expressed in many of the programmes that I';m announcing today and we';ve had as part of that helping hand, we';ve had the diversion programme which is run in co-operation with state governments where essentially the state governments provide the facilities that the police and the criminal justice system and we provide additional resources for rehabilitation and we basically say to people who begin to get caught up in the criminal justice system through drug use, you just pause a moment and make a decision #8211; do you want to go down that path and end up in jail and the life of crime and you';re going to end up with your life being a ruin?  Or are you going to do something about it, get a hold of yourself, go into rehabilitation?  And if you want to do that well we';ll give you help.  That';s the philosophy of the diversion system.  It operates a little bit differently in different states.  They';ve got a lot of co-operation between the state governments all around Australia and the Federal Government once again and here of course again the police services have played a very major role.
  And the third element of course is education.  I remember when we put that booklet around several years ago it was sneered at, you know, the cynics and so forth, the people who thought this whole idea of zero tolerance or tough on drugs, whatever description you want to use, I don';t mind, either message gets the point across, people said oh that';s a waste of money.  Actually, it';s turned out to be a real success and it gave many parents in Australia who had difficulty talking to their children about drugs because they couldn';t communicate all that well, it was a trigger point, it was an encouragement, it landed on the kitchen table #8211; oh it probably landed on the front doorstep #8211; but it was brought into the kitchen table and people started talking about it.  We actually conducted some research afterwards and it indicated there was a very large percentage of people, said as a result of that they started talking to their children about drugs in a way they hadn';t done so before and that is so very important and we also, I also note with interest, that the whole programme surrounding that booklet and the promotion of it actually won an award from the national advertising body as being the best public information campaign on a health related issue during the rest of the year in which it was released.  So from that  humble beginning, can I say to you Major that that was actually an extremely valuable booklet and it';s an indication that these public health programmes can work.  We';re actually very good in Australia at doing that and let me draw attention to another public health education programme some years ago under a federal government of a different political persuasion, so I';m being very even handed and that is the campaign that was conducted in relation to HIV Aids in the 1980';s, was extremely successful because we have a capacity in this country, I believe, to do those sorts of campaigns extremely well an we shouldn';t be shy of blowing our own trumpet as a nation at our success.
So that';s the philosophy behind all of this and I really am so pleased to see some tangible and hard to refute field evidence that the battle is slowly, ever so slowly being won.
 But what I';m announcing today is about $18 million in grants under the Tough on Drugs for community organisations.  And this is to provide treatment for rehabilitation and support for people affected by illicit drugs.  And since 1998, we';ve provided for these sorts of programmes over $123 million to 200 projects.  In Queensland, eight projects will receive funding. They include the Teen Challenges Drug Overdose Visitation Project, which is a collaborative initiative with the Queensland ambulance service, and this project will receive $210,000 and these funds will be used to provide support services for teenagers recovering from a drug overdose.
The We Help Ourselves new therapeutic residential programme on the Sunshine Coast will receive $1.3 million to attract women and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people into treatment.
And the Mirikai Youth Dual Diagnosis Support Programme on the Gold Coast will receive $223,000 to take, manage and provide treatment options to young people with substance abuse and mental health programmes.
What we do with this programmes is we treat expressions of interest and proposals from non-government organisations all designed to help people cope with the drug problem, to help them rehabilitate themselves and these are but three examples of the eight projects that will be funded here in Queensland and the total number of projects to be funded around Australia out of this $18 million will be $64.
 This is an on-going programme.  It started in 1998 for a period of four years, we';ve extended it for another four years and I';ll be extremely surprised if it doesn';t extended after that #8211; that';s not a budget promise, let me say, but  it';s still a while into the future.  But it is one of those things that we as a nation have to keep driving away.  You don';t get immediate returns, it';s very slow and for a long period of time people sneered at it and they said he';s wasting our money, you should basically give up and legalise everything, adopt a total harm minimisation approach.  I mean, it';s not that I suggested why people shouldn';t be helped, quite the reverse, I think people who have a drug problem have got to be helped.  But we persevered with this and I think we have got the balance right.
  We are still very effective in law enforcement.  We want to help people who want to help themselves, with a little bit of persuasion in relation to dangling the options in front of them at the appropriate and most awkward time in their life.  And finally and very importantly, we really want to give parents persuading their children not to start.  The strongest possible message that comes out of all of this is don';t start in the first place because if you don';t start drugs in the first place, you';ll never have a problem and you won';t have to make a choice between minimisation or being (inaudible) or going cold turkey, or any of that, you won';t have any of that challenge if you don';t start it in the first place and there';s nothing than deciding at a very young age that illicit drugs is not for them and if we can get more and more young people through their parents, if the schools doing the job of community organisations then we';ll be a much better country and there';s nothing more important to continue to fight against the scourge and the evil of drugs which inflicts so much misery on so many people.
And I want to thank Brian and the members of his council and again the police and the customs and everybody who plays a vital role very particularly and specially because of the nature of today';s announcement the non-government organisations play an incredibly important role in this crusade.  Thank you.
[ends]  



Well thank you very much Mr Director-General, Attorney-General, heads of other agencies, ladies and gentlemen.
 Before formally opening this centre, there a few observations I';d like to make because we are in ASIO, because we';re opening a National Threat Assessment centre that brings under the same roof for the first time, so to speak, the operations of a variety of our intelligence agencies to further focus and concentrate on a 24-hour basis our intelligence gathering effort.
I would like to say a few words about the importance of the agencies, not only ASIO but all the other agencies that are represented here today. I don';t believe there';s been a time since World War II when the intelligence agencies have been more important to the security of this country.
It is no accident that the personnel levels once the latest raft of decisions have been implemented will be higher than at anytime since the Cold War so far as the staff of ASIO is concerned. Timely and effective intelligence is the best weapon that this country has against the terrorist threat to Australia.
Our military forces are important, the activities of individual citizens are important, but timely and effective intelligence is far and away the best weapon against the potential terrorist threat to Australia. It is not easy being in an intelligence agency at the present time. There is an enormous public focus on the people who run them. There is an understandable demand in the community for early warnings, there';s a desire on the part of many, quite properly in the name of accountability to hold people responsible if they can if something goes array. And importantly also, there is a natural tension in a free society between the desire to have effective intelligence agencies and also the protection of the rights of the individual and achieving that balance is not always easy.
And amongst the things that the Government has done to strengthen the role of ASIO, in particular, but not only ASIO has been to augment the additional financial and other resources with changes to the law that allow ASIO in cooperation with other agencies both at a national and a state level to carry out their responsibilities. I think it';s important at a time like this to remind ourselves of the crucial role of intelligence but also to remember that important though is the role of intelligence, it is an input to the ultimate decision making process. Intelligence is not a decision making process in itself. It is something which informs and advises and supports and helps the Government of the day in making decisions of an important policy import.
The other introductory remark I';d like to make is that, I guess, because of circumstances I have in the time that I';ve been Prime Minister had more to do with intelligence, intelligence matters and intelligence agencies than many of my predecessors. I';ve also had the opportunity to observe the operation and the inter-relationship of intelligence agencies in other parts of the world, particularly amongst our closest intelligence partners, namely the United States and the United Kingdom. And although changes in arrangements should never be ruled out and I don';t in any way attempt to pre-empt the outcome of the Flood Inquiry which is now underway, I would like to make the observation that the level of cooperation between our agencies and the degree to which we have achieved both at a political and senior advisor level an effective whole-of-government approach to intelligence matters is superior in Australia in my view than in either of our intelligence partners.
  The silo-syndrome is less apparent in my view in Australian than it is in other parts of the world. I';m very pleased that so many heads and acting heads of intelligence agencies are here today. I want to take the opportunity of expressing my respect and admiration for their work to reaffirm the Government';s confidence in the work they do, our very strong confidence in the work they do. To recognise, of course, that it is part of the intelligence community that there is proper latitude for strong contestability. It is never part of the intelligence gathering and intelligence advice capacities of a sensible arrangement between the political arm of government and its official advisers that there be a relentless pursuit of totally uniform advice, proper contestability both within agencies and on occasions between agencies is part and parcel of a sensible arrangement.
There';s already been of course a very high level of co-operation between the various agencies on a 24 hour basis and the establishment of the NTAC is a further recognition that intelligence gathering and national security is a whole-of-government issue and of course the increased terrorist threat has increased the pressure for the most comprehensive responses imaginable.  The National Threat Assessment Centre will provide a practical way of accessing and integrating new sources of potentially relevant information from a range of Australian and overseas agencies and while Australia has always had an around the clock assessment capability the additional resourcing provided by the Government will now ensure that this maintained as a full time, dedicated capability.  The move to an ongoing 24 hours a day, seven days a week operating environment will ensure that the Government will receive the best possible assessments in the shortest possible time.  As I';ve already said the Government has significantly bolstered the resources of the Australian intelligence community and will continue to ensure that it is given all the support necessary to carry out its work.
 Today I announce an additional $232 million in funding for intelligence agencies, and I stress there will be further announcements on funding for Australia';s intelligence and national security capability in the Budget on Tuesday night.  To further boost ASIO';s national security capabilities the Government will provide in the forthcoming Budget additional funding of $131.4 million over four years, and this will compromise $127.2 million to increase staffing, enhance ASIO';s operational, analytical and technical capabilities and improve information technology systems.  $3 million over four years to further strengthen border control measures, and $1.2 million to enable ASIO to continue its counter-terrorism training and advice to South Pacific nations. The total increased funding committed to ASIO since the 11th of September 2001 is $332.2 million and this represents a doubling of funding committed to ASIO since that time.
ASIO';s current staff numbers of around 785 have reached already Cold War levels, by 2006/7 it is estimated that ASIO';s staff levels will have increased by nearly 80 per cent since September 2001.  And along with ASIO the Government will be providing additional funding of $100.6 million in this Budget to strengthen the counter-terrorism capabilities of ASIS, which will receive $45.6 million, enhance the Department of Defence';s intelligence operations and analytical capabilities, $47.4 million, and boost the co-ordination and technological capabilities of the Office of National Assessments to the tune of $7.6 million. I stress that this is not the end of the additional commitment, there will be further major enhancements in the broad intelligence and security area to be announced by the Treasurer in Tuesday';s Budget.
I';ve said privately and I repeat it publicly to all of the heads of the relevant agencies that the Government stands willing to provide the resources that are needed for them to do their job, to do their job in very difficult circumstances and to do a job that is critical to the long term security and safety of the entire Australian community.  I conclude again by thanking the Director-General of ASIO for the personal leadership that he';s given, quite outstanding personal leadership to ASIO, I';ve had a great deal of interaction with Mr Richardson in the time that I';ve been Prime Minister, I have the highest possible regard for the professional job that he does and I again take this opportunity to express my confidence in the other agencies, their leadership, the work they do, they are critical to our security, they are encouraged to be organisations, that if they need further resources and they can make a proper case then to do so, there';s always the caveat about making a proper case and that is as it should be but if the proper case exists then it can certainly be successfully made with the Government. I thank the media for its continuing interest in these matters, and I';m impressed with the gathering today, perhaps it is the novelty, perhaps it is something else, I';m not quite sure but I do thank you all and I have very great pleasure in declaring this centre open, it is an important additional element in the fight of our lives that we have as a nation against the surge of international terrorism and I know its work will be warmly supported by the Australian people.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Jim, my Jim Myers, Michael Gallagher and I understand we have in the audience Roy Fox who turned 100 in January and he's a life member of the Wamboin club.  It's an astonishing achievement, good on you Roy, shows what surf life saving does for you.
  Well ladies and gentlemen, I'm particularly pleased to be here and to have the opportunity of making a couple of announcements which I know are important and will be welcomed by the groups that that are gathered here today and who Central Coast surf live saving.  Before I do that I did wish to say that we pride ourselves as Australians on being a great volunteer society, we pride ourselves on being a community that holds together because we have lots of volunteer organisations.  And there are many that vie for the title of the most respected and iconic Australian volunteer organisation.  And I can say without fear of contradiction not only here but around the country, there is no organisation which over the years which has earned more respect and is more seen as indelible part of the Australian spirit and the Australian tradition of volunteer service than the surf life saving movement. And what it has done for Australia, the lives its saved, the enjoyment its bought to countless hundreds of thousands of young and middle ages and Australians of all ages and the role model it represents to young Australians, the opportunity it provides to young girls and boys, to not only experience the pleasure of life and the surf, but also through it to understand that society is about helping others, it's about providing a community service and in the process having a good time as well and doing it in a sensible fashion.  So I unreservedly salute the surf life saving movement of Australia. It's made an enormous contribution to our nation and it will years into the future.
Now I know that Jim has become recently an associate member and I also understand that Michael Gallagher is a member and a competitive rower and a surf life saver at Toowoon Bay surf life saving club, so our colleagues are quite well represented on the ground, or on the beach, whichever way you want to put it.
 But ladies and gentlemen, Jim mentioned the projects, particularly for beach education for schools that the Central Coast surf life saving had in mind, and I'm therefore pleased to announce, and this is very much might I say a product of Jim's representation, he's one of those local members that, to put it bluntly, he drives you mad until he gets an answer. And I guess for a local community that's not a bad qualification. But I'm very pleased to announce that surf life saving Central Coast will receive $138,200 over the next three years from the Government's stronger families and communities strategy and this is to provide programmes on beach education to schools on the Central Coast and this funding will help young people on the Central Coast to get involved in community life through volunteering, mentoring and building community leadership and initiative.  And these programmes I gather will reach about 10,000 Central Coast school children over the next three years. And I say that that particular overall programme was designed a few years with two thoughts in mind, to provide funding for early intervention where it was obvious that some children from almost the day they were born were not going to get much of a fair go in life because of the dysfunctional character of the family environment in which they were born. And also to provide small and medium sized grants to local community organisations that had projects that were going to be of longer term value to the local community and the beach education to schools programme which I know you run on the Central Coast falls very much into that category and therefore I'm delighted that we've been able to fund that to the tune that I've mentioned.  I'm also very pleased to announce that surf life saving Central Coast will receive just under $30,000 for its future leaders development programme and that will come from the Government's regional partnerships programme and this project will develop a leadership programme for young people, provide personal development skills and ensure the ongoing viability of volunteer beach rescue services on the Central Coast.  And I know that the clubs have put a great deal into that particular programme and once again it is about a great local organisation reaching out to younger people, very young boys and girls, providing them with encouragement and support and the appropriate role models and I think the more that Government's can help organisations that want to make a contribution the more they should.  I've always been somebody who think it's a better for a government to say to a local organisation what would you like to do and we can decide whether we can fund you, rather than a government coming into a local community and saying this is what we think you should do and we will provide the resources for it to be done in our way because all of you know the Central Coast better than any federal government department, no disrespect to them, maybe many of you work for federal government departments, I'm not knocking people that work for the government, I'm simply making the point that nobody knows the Central Coast like people who live there, any more than people know the outer suburbs of Brisbane or Melbourne better than the people who live there, and the people who live there and their expression through their local organisations know what the challenges of this area are. A couple of hours earlier today I launched a new national programme which for the first time enable the Federal Government to directly fund local community organisations that have particular crime prevention programmes that they think are going to work in their community.  That is the sort of programme that would be open to the surf life saving movement if it thought it had something that was of particular value to a community and the point once again is that we're saying to local organisations what do you believe is the best way of tackling a social ill or social shortcoming in your area and both of these programmes that I've announced, the funding of today, are about your movement reaching out, especially to the young of the community, and providing them with education in relation to beaches and schools and also encouraging them to get involved in volunteer efforts and mentoring and all the things that help to keep our society together. So both of those announcements are of course in addition to the grant of $2,500 that Senator Kemp recently provided from the sports leadership grant to boost leadership opportunities for women in the surf life saving Central Coast.  And I want to also congratulate surf life saving Central Coast for being named the 2004 New South Wales branch of the year of the recent surf life saving New South Wales awards of excellence for best practice management.
Jim has told me of your movement, of its success, of its outreach to the local community and I congratulate you, I pay tribute to the broader Australian movement of which you are very proudly a part, you have served our country well, you've looked after our young, you've looked after all of us so well over the years and as somebody who took his family to various beach holidays over a period of 20 years to places like Hawksnest, we got to know the local surf life saving people and we greatly admire the work they did and the peace of mind that they bring, particularly to parents with young children, is incalculable and I thank you for that and the resources I've announced today couldn't be going to be a better cause, (inaudible) use it wisely and could I just finish by saying Jim Lloyd does lobby very hard and he lobbies very effectively and he's a good bloke.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well, thank you very much Mr Smith, Gary Nairn, Andrew Constance, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a terrific place, I';ve just#8230; it';s fantastic.  I mean, no wonder there';s a waiting list.  I wouldn';t move out of here.  I mean, you';d be mad to.  It';s an absolutely terrific place and on a morning like this with the sun streaming in and meeting all of you lovely people, it';s a very very pleasant diversion from some of the noise and vigorous exchange of Canberra.  But it';s a great part of the New South Wales south coast this and it';s very nice of you to have me here.
  I spend quite a bit of my time, as I move around Australia, visiting different retirement villages, they come in all shapes and sizes.  Overwhelmingly, they provide very good care and this particular facility, of course, which has a wonderful component of independent living and the size of the units is terrific.  And Mr Smith said that they felt here at Banksia they were establishing something of a benchmark.  I think that';s right because the size of the quarters and the ambience is really very good.  But so it should be because your generation has contributed an enormous amount to our country.
  So many of you lived through the difficult days of World War II and some stretching it back, of course, to the difficult days of the great depression and then have witnessed this extraordinary transformation and change in Australia that';s occurred over the last 30 to 40 years, most of it pretty good, some aspects of it perhaps you';re not quite as in favour of.  But overwhelmingly the way our nation has changed and it';s got stronger and better and we';re such an open, confident, strong people.  And I';m filled with tremendous enthusiasm and optimism about the future of our country.  And whenever I pay visits to electorates like this, I always try and have as a component to visit a retirement village, but also visit a school so I have an opportunity of talking to people who are about to leave school and go into the workforce or go to university or go to TAFE college and to start their career and it is a source of great encouragement to me to have contact with the generation that';s given so much to make Australia what it is today and also the generation that will enjoy and inherit the legacy that earlier generations have given to them.
We had a bit to say about aged care facilities and support in the budget last Tuesday night, I';m not going to bore you with all the details of that, you want to have morning tea, you don';t want to hear a long speech from me.  But we do place a very high store on aged care facilities and providing a necessary level of support to them, along with all the other responsibilities such as defence and supporting families and looking after our intelligence agencies that we endeavour to do in federal budgets.
The Australian economy';s doing pretty well at the moment compared with most other countries and we';re pretty proud of that and we';re going to keep working hard to keep it that way because if you don';t have a strong economy you can';t afford to pay for anything.  It doesn';t come out of thin air, it doesn';t belong to us, it belongs to you, the resources that governments have, and you';ve got to manage the economy well to be in a position to provide for necessary areas in the Australian community.
The last thing I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen is that I have, of course#8230; I';m being accompanied by two of my parliamentary colleagues and Andrew, because he';s in the state parliament, I don';t see quite as much of, but I know he';s doing a very very good job as your new Member.  But Gary Nairn, who';s been the Federal Member for Eden Monaro since 1996, is a fantastic advocate of the electorate and I know he';s been a great advocate of changes and improvements in relation to aged care facilities in this electorate and I couldn';t commend him to you more strongly and more warmly.  He';s a great bloke and he works very very hard for this area.
But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for having me along.  I hope I can have the opportunity of meeting all of you over a cup of tea.  Thanks a lot.
[ends]  


Well, thank you very much for having me here today.  To the Principal and to my federal parliamentary colleague Gary Nairn and Andrew Constance the state member, ladies and gentlemen.
I visit a lot of schools.  This is one of the nicest ones I';ve been to for a while.  It';s nice and new and everybody seems very happy and I don';t wonder why with that beautiful view of the ocean as I came in and this lovely atmosphere and I understand that you moved from another part of Batemans Bay which didn';t quite have the same view as you have here.  But I think the nicest thing about this school is the attitude that you obviously had.  And, as I listened to your school song, I thought to myself if every Australian lived according to that song and took the advice of what was in that song, we';d be an even happier and better country than we are now because learning and caring and sharing and playing, we like#8230; Australians like to play, they like to play a lot of sport, perhaps more of them should play sport and not just watch it.  And I think it';s a very good idea that everybody gets plenty of exercise and physical activity of all ages, but working together as one big team and that';s what you';ve really got to make the country do #8211; work together as one big team.  We can argue about some things and that';s healthy in a free country, but we have to remember at the end of the day we are all Australians before we are anybody else.
  The other two things that I say when I visit schools is #8211; always take notice of what your teachers tell you.  I know you sometimes wonder whether everything they say is right but can I tell you it is, it really is, I can assure you your teachers are never wrong, I can assure you of that.  And as you get older you';ll realise that all the things they tried to tell you to do were very very important.
  Australia, as you know, is a very very big country but it';s a very fortunate country and as I go around visiting people, young people in schools #8211; I';ve just been to a retirement village and talk about older people many of whom who lived through World War II and the depression and all those years, and I think of the contribution that they made to the country that you are now going to grow up in and enjoy and get the benefits of.
And the last piece of personal advice I';d like to give you is the bit of advice that I give all school children, and I think it is worth listening to, and that is that the happiest people I have found as I';ve gone through life are the people who always try to find something good about people they meet.  You meet a lot of people and, you know, you think of the person sitting next to you and sometimes that person might annoy you #8211; I mean, that probably never happens in this school, there';s probably nobody that ever annoys anybody in this school.  But what you';ve got to try and do is find something good about people even when sometimes you find that a bit difficult.  And if you do look for and you find the good in somebody, you end up remarkably being a lot happier.  The happy people I';ve found in life are the people who always are positive and always try and find something good about everybody they meet even if they might be a big grumpy about that person.  And the really unhappy people in life are those that sort of always try and find fault in people.  They end up being so miserable and so unhappy and if you take the positive in somebody, even though it';s difficult on occasions, you will find to your great delight that you live a much happier life.
Thank you very much for having me here.  It';s a great privilege and I wish all of you well.  It';s obviously a very happy school and I hope that it continues to be so and I wish the parents and the teachers and all of the school community the best of good fortune in the future and if you keep learning and caring and sharing and playing together you';ll always be a very happy school and make a great contribution to Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]  


  Introduction
It is a great pleasure to join you today to deliver the 60th CD Kemp lecture.
 The Institute of Public Affairs, with which CD - 'Ref" - Kemp was so closely associated, has stimulated debate on the issues that matter, since its inception in 1943.  In so doing, the Institute has played a role in shaping, as well as articulating, our nation's values.
  Established during the Second World War, it should be no surprise that CD Kemp, as one of its prime movers, wanted the Institute to give emphasis to the promotion of democracy, freedom and the rule of law.
His key interest was to ensure that post-war Australia had a policy framework in place that balanced individual freedom with responsibility - a framework which could deliver both prosperity and social cohesion.  It, therefore, seems particularly appropriate that today, in his honour, I will be talking about the struggle for democracy in Iraq and Australia's role in helping that nation build a better future for its people.
In a special way his legacy has endured.  His sons, David and Rod, live out their father's values and beliefs.  In the process they contribute significantly to the strength of the current government.  They are the only two brothers to have simultaneously served in a Federal Ministry since Federation.
CD Kemp shared with two other very distinguished Victorians, R G Menzies and B A Santamaria, a passion for the 'navy blues'.  I am told, and I choose my words carefully on such crucial matters, that Carlton has now entered a rebuilding phase.  If that be the case, then CD, RG and BA would have all been mildly encouraged.
A contest
Iraq is caught in a complex and crucial contest of values and ideals.
It is a contest between the majority of Iraqis who want to establish a viable democracy and a violent and determined minority who want to install a new dictator or a Taliban-style regime in Iraq.  It is a contest of will - as the terrorists and insurgents try to use fear and intimidation to drive the forces that support the democratisation of Iraq - the coalition forces   out of Iraq.
Ultimately, it is a contest of conviction - whether the free world is prepared to protect and encourage democratic values.  Those values Australians cherish - tolerance, opportunity, security and respect for one's neighbours.
A wide range of contending forces in Iraq have demonstrated they are prepared to use violence, against both coalition forces and the Iraqi people,   to achieve their political objectives.  Their motivations and their ambitions are complex, sometimes rooted in the old divisions between Sunni and Shia or ethnic and tribal tensions.
  The jihadist terrorists - taking their inspiration from organisations like Al Qaeda   are driven by a bigoted and distorted ideology that is the complete antithesis of our own and, we should remember, the vast majority of Muslims.
But we also need to understand that this contest in Iraq represents a critical confrontation in the war against terror.  We recognise this and so do our enemies.
 Why we must stay
 I find it astonishing when people claim that Iraq is a diversion from the real war against terrorism.  The reality is that international terrorism has invested an enormous amount in breaking the will of the coalition in Iraq.
Not only are organisations associated with al Qaeda operating in Iraq but each and every turn of the Iraq struggle is interpreted by spokesmen for international terrorism as part of the ongoing campaign against the United States and her allies.
Whatever may have been the origins of the horrific attack in Madrid, al Qaeda and its associates opportunistically associated that attack with Spain's participation in the military operation in Iraq.
  The terrorists have recorded Spain's subsequent decision to withdraw from Iraq in the victory column against the West.
With that in mind it is incontestable that a failure of will in Iraq by the coalition would be seen as an enormous propaganda victory for international terrorism.  A victory with far reaching consequences.
Any weakening or retreat by the coalition in Iraq will not appease the terrorists.  Those who imagine that respite from future terrorist attacks can be purchased by withdrawing or temporising could not be more wrong.
International terrorism is an enemy of Australia because of who we are, not what we have done.
Australian withdrawal from Iraq would not buy immunity from terrorist attacks.  International terrorism treats weakness and retreat with contempt.  Countries, and their citizens, which have suffered terrorist attacks over recent years include those who have opposed as well as those who have supported coalition action in Iraq.
It will be a heavy blow to the terrorist cause if democracy and all that it offers is brought to the Iraqi people.  That is why the ferocious campaign of recent times to derail not only the transfer of power on 30th June but also the establishment of a democratic infrastructure for Iraq has been so determined.
The terrorists know that if democracy is installed in Iraq they have lost.
Iraq is the key to creating new hope for the people of the Middle East.
  It will be a great encouragement for them to see democracy take root in Iraq   to witness a more equal distribution of wealth and greater opportunity for ordinary people to live peaceful and independent lives.
It was very sobering during my recent meeting with William Shawcross, the well known commentator on international events, to be reminded that out of the seven regions of the world, the UN Development Programme found that the Middle East region had the least freedom of all - fewer civil liberties, fewer political rights and less free media.  Women's lives, in particular, are more restricted than anywhere else in the world.
 Sadly, the appalling abuse of Iraqi detainees in Abu Ghraib prison will have caused many in the region to question whether democracy will make a difference.  They need to see that difference in action - that the victims of abuse are not only able, but encouraged to speak out, seek redress and find justice.
We share their sense of outrage.  The Australian Government unreservedly condemns the abuse of prisoners of war.
  We remain profoundly shocked and disturbed by the terrible images of wanton acts of cruelty and degradation - behaviour which dehumanises all those involved.
  Australia expects the US and UK forces to observe the highest standards of discipline and conduct - just as we do of our own defence force personnel.  We therefore welcome the statements by President Bush and Prime Minister Blair that there will be a full investigation with those responsible being brought to account through an open and transparent process.
  It is important that these reprehensible actions of a few do not overshadow the careful, disciplined and courageous behaviour of the overwhelming majority of the coalition forces.  Their work in Iraq is too important.  Their professionalism is too admirable.  The stakes are too high.
We should reject the line that the moral basis of coalition action in Iraq has been destroyed by the unacceptable behaviour of some of its personnel.
Helping Iraq build a democratic future represents not only a challenge but also an important opportunity for the whole region.
  That is why, irrespective of views held as to the wisdom of the original campaign against Saddam Hussein, it is overwhelmingly in the interests of not only the coalition but the cause of freedom around the world that the forces opposed to democracy in Iraq are overcome.
 During my recent visit to Baghdad, I discussed the current situation with representatives of the Iraqi Governing Council.  They asserted strongly that the majority of Iraqi people want a democratic future.
  But I was also reminded that that future hangs in the balance.  Events are passing through a critical phase.  Iraq is poised between the establishment of a new democratic order and the resurgence of chaos and tyranny.
  There is a job to be done in Iraq.  And my view remains that Australia should be contributing to that effort - if anything it has been strengthened and reinforced by the experience of my recent visit.  I am more determined than ever that Australia should stay the distance and finish the tasks for which we have taken responsibility.
Why we went
We could spend a great deal of time revisiting the merits or otherwise of Australia's military commitment as part of the coalition of the willing.
  I do not intend to revisit in detail the events surrounding that decision.  But I would remind those who now want to rewrite history that disagreement then centred on how the international community should respond to Iraq's continued non-compliance with UN resolutions.  In the lead-up to coalition action, there was never any argument about the existence of Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction.
The government remains steadfast in our view that it was the right decision, taken in the long-term national interests of this country.  The firm stand taken by the coalition against Saddam Hussein has contributed already, in my view, to some very significant improvements both for Iraq and for global security.
  As a result of the coalition's action, Iraq is no longer ruled by a loathsome and homicidal dictator, and potentially hundreds of thousands of lives have been saved.
  Understandable anger at abuse and other wrong-doing by some coalition personnel should not result in our forgetting that, if the advice of last year's critics of coalition action had been taken, Saddam Hussein and his regime would still be brutalising Iraq.
Through its actions in Iraq the coalition has sent a clear signal to other rogue states and terrorist groups alike - the world is prepared to take a stand against actual and potential proliferators of weapons of mass destruction.
This has already had some resonance.  There is little doubt that the firm stand taken against Iraq has influenced countries such as Libya   which has now decided to give up its weapons of mass destruction.  I am not arguing that it was the sole motivating factor but I think it certainly conditioned the circumstances that resulted in Libya's change of heart.
  But regardless of the positions people might have held in relation to the coalition's actions against Saddam Hussein, it is time to recognise that the situation in Iraq has moved on.
Iraq, along with the caves of Afghanistan, the hills of Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province, and the haunts of Je ma'ah Islamiyah in South East Asia, is now the front-line in the global fight against terrorism.
  Violence and brutality, often against innocent civilians, are being used as a deliberate tactic in the on-going campaign to undermine Iraq's hopes of representative government and a free society.
If they succeed it will send out a very bad message not only through the Middle East but around the world.  It will dishearten those who struggle for democracy and give confidence to repressive regimes and terrorists everywhere.
Friends and allies
If we lose heart, if we abandon our friends, if we choose to give the wrong signal to the terrorists, that will not only make the world a less safe place but also damage the reputation of this country around the world.
  We must remember it is in times of adversity that the value of friendship is most keenly felt and it is in times of adversity and challenge that that friendship is tested.
  Our presence in Iraq is read as an important and valued demonstration of Australia's support for her allies - and in this regard not only the United States and the United Kingdom, who continue to carry the major share of the burden.  It is often forgotten that close friends and partners of Australia in the Asia Pacific region, such as Japan, Korea and the Philippines, are valued members of the coalition.
Our alliance with the United States was, unapologetically, a factor in the decision to join the coalition.  And it should be a factor in any consideration of our continued participation in the coalition.
For Australia, there is nothing comparable to be found in any other relationship - nothing more relevant indeed to the challenges of the contemporary world.
Our view on Iraq is not dictated by the United States.  It is determined by consideration of Australia's national interest. And that consideration has led us to the same conclusions as the Bush Administration:  a stable democratic Iraq is important for world security and stability.  Given the commonality of values and interests, that we have reached the same conclusions should come as no surprise.
Alliances are two-way processes and, where we are in agreement - where we recognise a commonality of interest   we should not leave it to the United States to do all the heavy lifting just because it is the world's superpower.  To do so would undermine the most important security relationship we have.
  We understand, as do our other allies, that the United States is the only nation that actually has the power to change the world for the better.  That is what they are trying to do in Iraq.
  Surely even the most passionate opponents of our involvement in the Iraq war, even the greatest sceptics about the American alliance, can see that right at the moment, when the threat posed by terrorism is so potent, we should be aligning ourselves strongly with countries like America and Britain, and other proven friends and allies.  In this context, the actuality of our presence in Iraq is very important.
Not symbolism
I felt very privileged to spend ANZAC day with the Australians currently serving in Iraq and to be able to convey to them, personally, the thanks and good wishes of the Australian community.  They are engaged in very important, dangerous work and our recognition and support are very important to them.
There was nothing symbolic about the attitude and demeanour of the men and women I met on ANZAC day- they take their role seriously and so does the government.
  Surely no thinking person could describe the crew of the HMAS Stuart, for instance, as merely symbols as they fished American personnel out of the water following the suicide attacks on Iraqi oil refineries last month.  I am sure the staff of the Australian diplomatic mission do not regard the detachment of ADF personnel assigned to their protection as symbolic.  To view the ADF presence as symbolic is not only factually inaccurate - it is insulting.
The current situation
Elements of danger  While in Baghdad, I also had the opportunity to talk to Ambassador Paul Bremer,   the Coalition Provisional Authority Administrator, and American field commanders about the reconstruction effort and the current security environment.
  The recent outbreak of violence has been very serious, but we do need to keep a sense of proportion.  We have to remember that while the situation has deteriorated in certain areas, it has improved and continues to improve in others.
The coalition is making progress in restoring order in those areas affected by violence.  This lawlessness is not indicative of a mass uprising.  Media reports of widespread loss of control across central and southern Iraq are, in fact, an exaggeration and misreading of a complex situation.
The north of the country remains relatively peaceful and most of the south is now reasonably stable.
But violence and brutality are a deliberate tactic in the campaign to undermine Iraq's hopes of representative government and a free society.
  And we must expect that the insurgent and terrorist groups, including foreign Islamic militants and jihadists, former regime elements, disaffected Sunni nationalists and political opportunists, will continue to use violence in a bid to disrupt the political transition and reconstruction.
  The fight against the insurgents and illegal militias is not easy.  They have shown complete contempt for Iraqi civilians.  They routinely launch their attacks from mosques, schools and markets using innocent people as cover - knowingly exposing them to danger.
  As so brutally demonstrated in Basra - a busload of children on their way to school are of no account, provided the target is hit.  Civilians are, in the dreadful language of terror the 'soft targets'.
Elements of hope  But despite these serious security challenges, significant progress has been made over the last year to rebuild that nation.
 The coalition has made steady progress in restoring basic services and infrastructure and reviving the Iraqi economy.
  Electricity, water, telephone and sanitation are gradually being restored to pre-war levels or above.  Peak power production is greater than it was before the war, as well as being much more equitably distributed.  Six major water treatment plants have been rehabilitated.
  More than 15,000 mobile telephones are sold each week - under Saddam Hussein mobile phones were outlawed.  Total telephone subscriptions have now passed the 1 million mark - 20 per cent higher than under Saddam Hussein's regime.
All the universities are open and 2,500 schools have been rehabilitated throughout the country.
  All 240 hospitals as well as 1,200 health clinics are operating.  More than 3 million Iraqi children under the age of five have been immunised against preventable disease.  Public health spending is now close to 60 times greater than under the Hussein regime - when it was virtually non existent.
  Some 255 municipal councils have been established since July 2003.
  The Central Criminal Court is operating.  And Iraq has a single unified currency for the first time in 15 years.
Crude oil production is already around pre-war levels.  The difference now is that the benefits flow directly to the Iraqi people.
  The Coalition has also invested in 18,000 reconstruction projects, providing thousands of jobs for local Iraqis as well as infrastructure for their future.
  Inflation is stable at around 20 per cent after the terrible hyperinflation experienced during Saddam Hussein's regime.  And real GDP is forecast to recover by 30 per cent in 2004.
Another very positive sign is the return of government ministries to Iraqi authority, including the Ministry of Agriculture, an area where Australia is making a significant contribution.
 Moreover, Iraq now has a growing and robust independent media, which is absolutely essential for the development and maintenance of a healthy democracy.
  Even the harshest critic of the coalition's activities would find it difficult to argue against the fact that, in large parts of Iraq, the situation is better than it was twelve months ago and measurably better than it was under Saddam Hussein.
  What is the outlook for Iraq
In April, the Iraqi Governing Council adopted a landmark Transitional Administrative Law, protecting the basic human rights of all Iraqis and laying out the roadmap for an elected Iraqi government.
After 35 years of ruthless oppression and misrule, Iraq will have free elections and a representative government.
The Iraqi Interim Government will be installed on 30th June.
  It will be replaced in January 2005 by an Iraqi Transitional Government with broader powers, which in turn will be replaced by a new Iraqi Government following a referendum on a constitution and fresh national elections scheduled for the end of 2005.
The Australian Government is pleased to note that the United Nations special envoy Lakhdar Brahimi is actively consulting a wide range of Iraqi groups to develop workable arrangements for the Interim Government.
  We also know that active debate is taking place in New York about a new UN Security Council resolution to express the international community's support for the new political arrangements.  In this context, we also strongly support the role of the United Nations in helping prepare elections for a transitional and then a permanent Iraqi administration.
In referring to this role for the United Nations, I note over the weekend calls by the Leader of the Opposition for the coalition to withdraw from Iraq and be replaced by, and I quote, "a UN force that has strong involvement of Arab states".
This suggestion ignores the facts.  The multinational force in Iraq, composed of over thirty countries led by the United States, is already fully sanctioned by the UN Security Council.  There are strong International precedents for this approach
It is quite unrealistic to suggest that this arrangement should now be replaced by a UN blue helmet operation.  Such an operation would depend on voluntary contributions, but there is no sign of the required willingness on the part of a wider range of countries, including Arab States, to contribute peacekeepers to a UN force.
  Nor is it at all certain that the Iraqis would welcome the presence of armed forces from neighbouring countries.
Even when the Iraq Interim Government is in control, there is still likely to be a pressing need for a continued coalition presence.  Iraq will continue to depend on coalition forces to provide security and respond to threats of violence and terrorism.
  As General Abizaid of US Central Command has acknowledged, it will take time to establish credible and capable Iraqi security forces.
  Progress is being made - close to 200,000 Iraqi security personnel are already on duty and recent polling indicates that the general public's confidence in the Iraqi security forces is increasing rapidly.  I am proud that Australia is assisting to build those forces.
 No one imagined that the task would be easy.  And perhaps the task is harder than we first thought.  In the euphoria that followed the toppling of Saddam Hussein, some hoped that Iraq's post-war transition could be accomplished relatively quickly.
  The reality is that the transition period has been, and will continue to be difficult, more difficult than we might have hoped.
 The next two months in Iraq will be critical both politically and militarily if the timetable for transition to democracy is to be achieved.  And it is likely that the violence will increase as extremists, the supporters of the old regime and political opportunists try desperately to disrupt the process.
A graphic example of such disruption occurred on Monday this week, when the President of the Iraqi Governing Council, Izzedine Salim, was assassinated.
Nevertheless, 30 June 2004 represents an important milestone on the road to Iraqis controlling their social, economic and political future.
What are Australia's objectives
Enhance security  One of Australia's key objectives in Iraq is to help achieve the stability needed to establish and support democratic institutions and processes.
  While the coalition forces currently provide the bulk of security, and will need to do so for some time, we know that this role will be assumed by a properly trained Iraqi military and police as soon as is practicable.
  That is why Australian Defence Force personnel are in Iraq helping to train Iraqi army and navy personnel.  That is why Australian Federal Police officers will be assisting to train Iraq's new police force.
  We also want to contribute to Iraq's economic rehabilitation.
We have focused our effort on areas where we have particular expertise - agriculture, economic management, governance capacity building, donor coordination and human rights investigations.
  Australian advisers are working directly with Iraqis to build their capacity to take responsibility for long-term agricultural policy planning and providing expertise in agricultural research.
  We have helped to re-establish the Ministry of Agriculture, set up a payments system for the 2003 harvest and used our experience to help Iraqi farmers bring in the bumper summer grains harvest.
 Australian experts have also been deployed to help rehabilitate water and sanitation services, emergency services, oil production, update Iraqi law - including economic and commercial law, assist in the preparation of a credible budget - the first in 30 years, and provide expertise for the criminal investigation into human rights abuses during Saddam Hussein's rule.
Our ADF Air Traffic Control Detachment has also played an important role in ensuring one of Iraq's essential infrastructure installations - the Baghdad airport   functions effectively.
This year's budget will ensure the continued funding of our involvement in Iraq until the middle of next year - 30th June 2005.  That doesn't mean we are going to leave on that date, or any specific date, but simply means that we are making prudent provision for being in Iraq for a while yet.
When can our forces leave Iraq?  The answer can only be - when the jobs assigned to respective force elements have been completed.
It is impossible to be more precise than that.  As each milestone along the path to a more democratic Iraq is passed, the time of coalition force withdrawal draws nearer.
Iraq is a test
When the government announced on 18th March last year that we had committed Australian Defence Force elements to the coalition of the willing, we made a commitment to the people of Iraq.  We undertook to help them build a new nation, one which would respect the rights of all its citizens, one that was at peace with itself and with its neighbours.
We also made a commitment to our long-term friends and allies to stand with them in the fight against proliferation and terrorism.
Iraq is an important test for the world's democracies, including Australia.  It is a test of values - whether the powerful call for freedom can overcome the destructive force of terror.
And ultimately, it is a test of character and leadership - whether we possess the necessary determination and resolve to meet our commitment to the Iraqi people or whether we will retreat in a pointless attempt at isolationism.
 I know Australia for its part can meet this test, because denying terrorists victories and playing our role in ensuring global stability is something that I believe the Australian people, whatever their politics, overwhelmingly want.
[ends]  



Deputy Prime Minister, Peter Costello, Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party, Chris McDiven, my parliamentary colleagues, friends.
I'll have an opportunity a little later in the evening to speak rather more personally of the people in whose debt I am for anything that I may have achieved over the last 30 years.  But I would like to thank you very warmly Peter for those very gracious and generous remarks and to say that nobody could have been the fortunate beneficiary in the office I have more than I have of the support and constancy of an intelligent, capable, sagacious and loyal deputy leader.
Tonight is a time to reflect for a few moments, but only for a few moments, on the past.  It's also an occasion to ponder those things that have brought us together and delivered the success that we may as a party have achieved and importantly to think of the future.
We have as a nation come a long way over the last eight and a half years.  I suppose in a political sense and conscious as I am of addressing a gathering of Liberals and Liberal supporters, our great achievement has been to get ourselves back into office after 13 very agonising and destructive years in opposition.  And I must say as Prime Minister and as leader of the federal parliamentary Liberal Party the things in which I draw the greatest sense of joy and satisfaction is the evident confident sense of hope, sense of self assurance and self belief both as individuals and collectively as a nation that we find that the Australia of 2004 really to be.
This country has put aside its sense of introspection and examination and its identity.  There is no longer that perpetual seminar about Australia's cultural identity.  We no longer agonise as to whether we're too close to the British, or too close to somebody else or whether we are  Asian enough or European enough or whether we're going in the right direction so far as our sense of purpose is concerned because we are undeniably and unapologetically 100 per cent Australian.
  As we go around the world we are constantly reminded of the sense of respect in which this nation is held.  It's undoubtedly due to our economic performance; it's also due to the way in which we have stood up for what we believed in, as we did in East Timor, as we did in relation to Iraq and the ongoing war against terrorism. And importantly, the way in which we represent ourselves as friendly, open and caring people and our great capacity to welcome, in great sporting events, the nations and competitors of the world.  So can I say that the greater sense of satisfaction and achievement that I have is to feel that in a small way having led a wonderful team of men and women, we have contributed to that sense of self assurance and self respect and very strong and unambiguous national identity.
On an occasion like tonight it is more about celebrating, not so much achievements and records of economic growth and so forth, important though they are, but rather to celebrate the values that bind us together as a great political movement.
 60 years ago in October of 1944 the Liberal Party of Australia was formed under the leadership of Robert Gordon Menzies.  And it has been in that period of its existence the most successful national political movement that this nation has seen.  And it's important that we reflect upon the things that brought our forebears, our political forebears together 60 years ago and still represent the ties that bind us and make us relevant to the modern Australia of 2004.  That belief in the importance of the individual, the belief that personal association is a matter of individual choice and not compulsion.  That belief that the family is the greatest institution society has ever known.  It is not only the great source of emotional stability and nourishment and the place where children are nurtured and taught the values of life, but it is also the greatest social welfare system that mankind has devised.
  That belief that free enterprise, a system of proper capitalism, a system in which people are encouraged to work hard, to earn more, to be properly rewarded and provided they pay their fair share of tax to aspire to achieve even more.  I believe in an aspirational society, I believe also in a society that cares for those who through no fault of their own fall by the wayside and need assistance.  We're also a society that sees itself capable of reaching out to the rest of the world and drawing to the shores of this country the most wonderful mixture of people from the four corners of the earth that have made the modern Australia such a remarkable example of racial and cultural tolerance all around the world.
And those values are as relevant today as they have been over the past 60 years.  Values as always are only useful if they are tested and adhered to under stress and strain.  And over the last eight and a half years the government that I have been privileged to lead has always performed best when it stood for the things that it really believed in.  When I think of some of those examples, I think of our determination to reform the Australian water front in 1998; I think of the onslaught that was launched against the Government for having the temerity to tackle something which for decades have been a scandal in terms of industrial relations; I think of our determination in successive budgets to get the fiscal affairs of this country under control;  I think of the long term pain to reform our taxation system; I think of the difficult, very difficult but crucial decision we took to join the United States, the United Kingdom and other nations in military action in Iraq; I think of our correct and internationally brave and very strongly supported decision to liberate the people of East Timor, to take a stand on behalf of a small fledgling nation that cried out for help.  All of those decisions represented in their different ways a determination by the Coalition Government to stand for the things that it believed in and it reminded me on every occasion that you always perform best as a government if you stand up for the things that you believe in.  And that playing out our values through practical policies represents the best way of keeping faith with our supporters and keeping faith with the people of Australia.
The job that we have done over the last eight and a half years has been a job that has strengthened and built and protected the nation that we love so much.  We are all aware of the extraordinary economic performance that this country has recorded over that period of time.  We're all aware of the extraordinary growth in employment, the record low interest rates, the very low rates of inflation, the very high levels of business investment and the fact that the corporate profit share at the present time is the highest since records of that sort of thing began to be taken.
But to me, the greatest achievement of all has been that sense of personal satisfaction and achievement which is the modern Australian nation, the Australian nation of 2004.  And our job of course is by no means completed.  As a great political movement, we must look for years of continued responsibility in office.  The next election represents an enormous challenge to everybody in this room and far beyond.  Elections become harder, not easier, to win as time goes by.  We may have a strong economy, we may have high employment, we may have a great story to tell, but the attention of the electorate must be directed towards the future and not to the past.
We must demonstrate the relevance of our policies in relation to the great challenges of the future.  We must not allow the Australian people to believe that economic growth and strength can be taken for granted.  It is not a fluke, it is not an accident.  It is the product of tough policies, it is the product of intelligent economic leadership, and it's the product of the right people taking the decision at the right time.  We have to respond, like all other modern western nations, to the challenge of demography, of an ageing population, of the need to provide greater incentives for people to remain in the workforce, of the need to recognise that we cannot put an intolerable burden on future generations.  We must continue the great work of Peter Costello's most recent Budget in continuing to balance the challenge, the modern challenge of work and family, of the desire of Australian parents in this age to do justice to both, to aspire to have careers, but also to aspire to bring up balanced, capable children and to have the emotional support and buttressing that only a happy family life can bring.
We need also, in my view, to recognise that one of the modern governance challenges of Australia is the increasingly dysfunctional character of our federal system, where the states of Australia for the first time in decades with access to a growth tax, a tax that for years they prayed to have, still find it within their capacity when they have an individual administrative failure to simply say it's because the Federal Government doesn't give us enough money.  The reality is that we do need to reassert the value of that system, but it has to be a system that asserts not only the rights of the individual units of the federation, but also the responsibility of the individual units of the federation.
  And finally and importantly, we must recognise that concern for the environment long since ceased to be in any way a peripheral issue in Australian politics.  Concern for the environment is a mainstream issue and in many ways the party or parties best equipped to respond to that reality are the Coalition parties.  You can have economic growth and care for the environment, you can have sustainable development, you can cut greenhouse gas emissions without signing the Kyoto Protocol with all of the ruinous consequences that that would have for many of Australia's great resource industries.  This country has a fragile environment.  It is a shock to many Australians living in 2004 to find that they now live in a country with water shortages.  And whilst tonight is not the occasion for a long dissertation on what might be the responses to that, it is an example of some of the modern environmental challenges that we have.
And my friends, our job is anything but done.  We have been given the enormous privilege of governing this country through a period of enormous challenge and change, but it has also been a period of enormous opportunity.  I am so glad that so many of my parliamentary colleagues, my ministerial colleagues as well as backbench colleagues, are here tonight because I want to say a very simple thank you to all of them.  I have been the recipient of extraordinary loyalty and constancy of support.  On occasions perhaps I haven't always deserved it, but whether I have or I haven't, I have received it.  You can't be a successful Prime Minister without a wonderful, loyal and hardworking parliamentary team and over the last eight and a half years I think it has been quite extraordinary the level of unity and constancy that the Government has enjoyed from our parliamentary ranks.
  We have been through difficult issues, we have been through all the stress and strain within the Coalition that issues such as native title imposed, the inevitable stress of keeping our Coalition and our colleagues together on important reforms such as taxation reform, the agonising that I know some individuals went through in relation to our decision to enter the campaign in Iraq.  But through all of those moments, the loyalty and the decency and the commitment of my parliamentary colleagues to our great cause was always uppermost in their minds.  They didn't sacrifice their principles just for the sake of toeing the party line.  They were prepared to put the broader interests of what was collectively believed to be the national interest ahead of their own personal dispositions and prejudices, and for that I take this opportunity of thanking them, so many of them here tonight.  Anything that might be attributed to an achievement in my name, especially over the last eight and a half years, is an achievement that I owe in very large measure to all of you.
  Over the months ahead, we need the support of all of you in this room.  Over the months ahead, we will face a great challenge.  Over the months ahead, we must remind the Australian people that economic management is not something that happens automatically.  We must remind the Australian people not only of the alternatives, but of the consequences of change.  If we can do that, we can have yet another opportunity of governing this country and of keeping faith with and giving effect to the values that moved the founder of our party, Robert Menzies, the values that have kept us together over the past 60 years, and the values that have helped shape the sense of hope and confidence and optimism which we all rejoice and enjoy as Australians in our great nation in 2004.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Ross, ladies and gentlemen.  It's great to be back in Parramatta, particularly because you have an absolutely fantastic Federal Member of Parliament in Ross Cameron.
   As a Sydney boy, I have no strangeness with Parramatta.  The area does represent a marvellous cross section of post World War II Australia.  It is an area that has grown and changed and developed enormously over the last 25 years.  And if a statistic can sum up a change, nothing sums up the change that has come across this part of Sydney over the last eight and a half years than Ross reminding all of you that in 1996 the unemployment rate was 13 per cent and now it has fallen to six per cent.  That is a fantastic achievement because what it reminds us all of is that economic progress and economic success is not an end in itself.  Unless it has a human dividend, unless at the end of the process you can point to the lives of people having been improved or strengthened or enriched, then economic policy has no meaning.  And the most important thing that I hope that we can point to in relation to our economic stewardship of Australia has been the human dividend that is involved.
   But not only is Parramatta an area that has changed and become far more vibrant over the last 25 years, it's of course an area that has on display the enormous choices and the enormous diversity of modern Australia.  I was welcomed by a large number of school students when I arrived this morning.  One of the things that this Government believes in very strongly is diversity and choice when it comes to education.  There is a lot of mythology about education funding.  There are a lot of people who falsely claim that my Government neglects the funding of government schools to the benefit of independent schools.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  There are 68 per cent of Australian children who are educated, as I was for the whole of my school career, in a government school, and yet those schools attract 76 per cent of funding at all levels.  Those who attack our policies wrongly compare direct Federal Government funding of government schools with direct Federal Government funding of independent schools, without acknowledging that every time the New South Wales Government spends a dollar on a public school in this state, 44 cents of that dollar has come from the Goods and Services Tax or from direct Commonwealth programmes.
   We support all schools.  We support, most importantly, the right of Australian parents to decide where their children will be educated, and our aim is to have high standards in all schools.  Our aim, as Brendan Nelson has demonstrated with his new policy of a $700 parental voucher to help those children who are assessed as having poor literacy and numeracy skills, our aim is to lift up the standards of all schools so that every child who leaves a school can aspire to do what their heart would want them to do, to choose the career that they want and to have an opportunity of a rewarding and fulfilling career.  So whether that child is educated in a government school, a Catholic school, an Islamic school, a Christian school, whatever school - it matters not.  What matters is the equality of opportunity that those children should be able to enjoy when they leave school.
   Now this nation over the last eight and a half years has undergone significant change.  Our economy is a lot stronger, our reputation around the world is higher, our friendliness and openness as a people has been marvellously on display through two great international sporting events - of course the now famous Sydney Olympic Games of the year 2000 and more recently the Rugby World Cup which was such an enormous success and which put Australia once again on display.  And I find as I go around the world, and I'll have an opportunity next week when I go to the United States and briefly to Europe, I'll find again what I found before as I've travelled as Prime Minister, that Australia is now seen very much as a nation that matters and as a nation that earns respect.  This is not only because of the strength of our economy.  It's also because we are a nation that is prepared to stand up for what we believe in, even though that cause may be unpopular, even though in the medium term it may not be attracting as much support as we would like.
   I have found in public life that there is not always a direct link between people supporting you and people agreeing with you.  In the end if you have a consistency, in the end if you continue to argue for and to fight for things that you believe in, even though they may go in and out of favour over time, and I can think of some issues that were very popular with the public a few years ago when I supported them, and then they became very unpopular, and now they're sort of halfway between.  That happens with a lot of issues.  But what matters in the end is that if you believe in something, you've got to be prepared to argue it and you've got to be prepared to support it.
   Now I believe in a lot of things in public life.  I believe in freedom of choice in education.  I believe in having a health system that is not dominated either by the private side or by the public side, a health system which brings together the best elements of both.  Now there's been a lot of debate about hospitals and health systems in Australia and that will go on, and that's properly part of the ongoing political debate.  But we do ourselves an enormous disservice as a country if we imagined that for all its weaknesses, this country doesn't have a health system which is infinitely better than those of most other countries.
   For all its faults, we do have a very good health system.  And we've set about strengthening Medicare.  We've begun to see the benefits of those changes.  We saw last week a significant increase, it's early days yet, in the levels of bulk billing.  We've maintained our very strong support for private health insurance.  We certainly won't be withdrawing that support because we need both.  And we've also provided for the first time a very valuable safety net, and that means that all of the families of Australia, if their out of hospital, out of pocket expenses go beyond a certain level, they'll get 80 per cent of the excess reimbursed to them so that the worry of the crippling cost of a major illness or a major accident on a family is going to be removed.  Now this is a very important strengthening of the Medicare system and it's very important for families, very very important indeed, because we all know as parents, particularly when our children are young, the worry of a sudden unexpected illness and the impact that can have not just on any expenses that you might have to pay to your GP if you don't have bulk billing, but if you've got to go and see a specialist, if you've got to get an x-ray, you've got to get a blood test - all of those things which are part and parcel of the treatment of an illness of your child or of yourself.  All of those things are going to be protected and supported by this new safety net, and I'm very proud of that as an extremely important innovation in our health system.
 Now these things are important and so of course are the benefits that were announced in the most recent Budget.  When you have a strong budget position, when you've paid off your country's debts - I mean Australia has the lowest, just about the lowest national debt ratio of any developed country in the world - what is left over from that ought to be returned, as we did in the last Budget, to Australian families.  And we ought to be providing taxation relief for people, particularly those people who work some overtime, who are going into higher taxation brackets under the present arrangements.
   There seems to be a strange notion in some circles that if you earn fifty to sixty thousand dollars a year, you've suddenly become a rich man or a rich woman.  I mean the average full time male wage in Australia for somebody who works full time is $51,000 and yet under the present income tax scales, which we are changing with effect from the 1st of July, if you get to $52,000 you start paying 42 cents in the dollar on your extra income.  Now that's madness.  It really is.  And it's destructive of incentive.  And those sort of rates cut in at much lower levels in Australia than they do in countries with which it's fair to make comparison.  And what we are trying to do is to, and what we will do as a result of this Budget, is to have a situation where somebody can go from an income of $21,600 a year through to an income of $63,000 a year without paying more than 30 cents in the dollar on any part of that income.  Now that is a very important taxation reform and it's designed to give people incentive, and it's designed to give people incentive in parts of Australia such as Parramatta, but of course as well all around the country.  Now those things are possible because the economic management of this country over the last eight and a half years has been successful.
 When I became Prime Minister, I set myself three broad goals.  I wanted this country to be secure.  I wanted it to have strong defences, to have strong alliances and steadfast friends on whom we could rely in times of need.  I wanted it to have economic strength.  I wanted it to have an economy of which we could be proud and would generate jobs and generate investment and create small businesses and keep interest rates down and return the benefits of that strong economy to families.  I also wanted Australia to be socially cohesive.  I wanted this country to be an example to the world of religious tolerance, of understanding and of diversity, under the umbrella of an overriding commitment to the fundamental values of Australia.
   I believe, as we look back over the last few years, we can say that those goals have been achieved.  We are a cohesive country.  We have citizens from 140 nations in the world that live in harmony.  We are Australians before we are anybody else.  We don't ask people born in other parts of the world to forget their homeland.  There is always a place in your heart for the country in which you were born, and that is only human.  And as somebody who is, I guess, a fourth generation Australian, I can understand how somebody born in another country in the world will always in the corner of their heart have a special feeling for that country, and nobody ever asks you to give that up.  All that is ever asked of all of us is to share together an overriding passion for this country, and that is what we have been able to do.
   We treat religious beliefs in this country on a basis of tolerance.  We are of course predominantly a society instructed by the Judeo-Christian ethic, but that does not alter in any way our total acceptance of people with different religious values.  And it's important for me again to affirm that at a time of international difficulty, that the people in this nation of Islamic faith are entitled to be treated like the rest of the community on the basis of total acceptance, of total tolerance and of total respect and of total dignity.  We are in so many of those things an example to the rest of the world.  I know I probably won't get any argument in an Australian audience, but we do it rather better than most and I think we have achieved a balance in relation to these things that perhaps may have been eluding us a few years ago, that we've certainly received, I think we have enjoyed that balance.
 The last thing I want to say is that many of the things I've spoken of today relate to what we have achieved and to where we are, but there is much to be done.  There is much to be done about the challenges of our environment.  There is much to be done about the importance of properly harnessing to the benefit of all of the Australian people, the great natural resources we have, particularly our energy resources.  And on both of those issues, I'll be having something more to say of significance in the weeks ahead.  But this country has extraordinary opportunities.  It is a remarkably blessed country, it's a remarkably fortunate country, but it's also a country that has made its own luck.  Every nation has an element of luck, but every nation has to make its own luck.  And Australians working together, Australians of all ages over the last decade or more have contributed to the building of a nation of which all of us can be immensely proud.
   And my last remark is about Ross Cameron.  I said at the beginning what a great privilege it was to be in his electorate and what a fantastic local Member he was.  I mean that because Ross is not only a good local Member in the sense of responding to the concerns of his constituents, but he's also somebody who can explain it very well.  There aren't many people in the parliamentary party who can express how he feels quite as well as Ross.  He can certainly, to use that old expression, charm the birds off the trees with his silver tongue.  I mean I've seen him some mornings on that... I don't know how many of you watch that Insiders programme on the ABC, but I suppose it's just the political junkies who do it and a few more, but you know I see him some mornings in that little segment where the politicians speak for 50 seconds.  I mean he'll give a little presentation and I'll turn around to my wife and I say gee I hadn't realised we were as good as that.  And he's just very, very effective.  And that's important because having somebody like that represent you in federal parliament makes a difference.  It's good to have somebody who is connected with the concerns, and Ross is, but it's doubly good to have somebody who is not only connected with the concerns and reflects the concerns, but also somebody who has that great gift of articulating and advocating how people feel and what people are concerned about.
   My friends, it's great to be alive in Australia in 2004.  It is a fantastic place.  It's great to have the privilege of seeing you for a few moments this morning, of thanking the contribution that all of you make to a local community.  The cement that holds Australia together is the volunteer spirit of all of the community organisations.  So many are represented here this morning.  Without the volunteers, without the local community groups, we would be a poorer society and a far less well endowed society.  I thank you for the contribution you make to our country and I thank you very warmly for having me as your guest this morning.


Thank you very much Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. I thank the National Press Club of Washington for the invitation and the opportunity it gives me to share some thoughts with you about not only a relationship that is very important and very dear to Australia, but also some of the challenges that that relationship faces. This is the fifth occasion that I have visited Washington, during the Bush presidency. It has been a period of great intensity for the relationship between Australia and the United States. As you all know it's a long association. It's an association above everything else that is built on common values, a relatively common view of the world. It is a relationship that has been reinforced over time in the face of common challenges and also common opportunities. I came here, on this occasion principally to advocate the merits for the United States, as well as for Australia, of the recently signed free trade agreement between our two countries. Ever respectful of Congressional and parliamentary processes I will simply say that I was greatly encouraged by the reception that I received when I visited many Congressmen and women and Senators yesterday afternoon. This agreement will bring great benefits not only for Australia but also for the United States. It creates the framework for an ever closer economic association between our two countries, in the decades ahead. In the globalised economic environment which will be with us for all time the relationship economically between Australia and the United States can in my view only grow closer, and thereby to the mutual benefit of both of our countries.
 But speaking as Prime Minister of Australia, and having remarked that I've visited Washington five times during the Bush presidency, it is also in the interests of perspective and balance worth my while saying that there is no world leader with whom I've had more individual discussions than the former President of China, Jiang Zemin. And one of the goals of our foreign policy has been to not only develop ever closer relationships with the United States and with those nations of Europe with which we have particularly strong associations, but also of course to solidify and further develop our very close economic and political associations with the nations of Asia. And I have never seen relationships between Australia and other nations in terms of making choices. A phrase that I often employ and would be well known to those in the Australian press party who are here today, it's never been a goal of our foreign policy to choose in any way between our history and our geography. Australia uniquely is a nation with European roots, with strong ties of history and values with the United States, but of course in the Asian Pacific region. And we see our future, very much as building on all of those associations and not seeing our goal as choosing one in preference to the other. I've also had the opportunity since being in the United States of opening what I hope will be a valuable dialogue in the first instance with the newly elected Governor of California, regarding the possible building of an energy partnership between our two countries. Australia has vast reserves of natural gas, America has some energy challenges, not least amongst those challenges of course, is the energy challenge in California. And just as we have been able to begin to build a very close energy relationship with China, adding to the very close relationship we've had in that area with both Korea and Japan over a number of years, so we see a very significant future in building an energy association between Australia and the United States. It is inevitable of course that my discussions with President Bush and other members of the Administration have focussed on Iraq.
 As the chairman said in his introduction, Australia contributed military forces to the combat phase of the operation in Iraq, and we've left forces there, and we intend to leave them there until the job assigned to them has been completed. I'm very strongly of the view that this is not the time for any weakening of the associations and the attitudes and the objectives that took certain countries to take the action they did in March of last year. The rights and wrongs of that action have been debated many times and they will years into the future. I don't intend to occupy my time today in overly canvassing the merits or otherwise, but except to reaffirm that there has been no change at all in the Australian Government's view of the wisdom of that action. But irrespective of what view one may have taken last year about the wisdom of the coalition's action, it seems to me very plain that there can be only one course of action, here now, in June of 2004. And as we approach the handover date to the Iraqi interim government, we are approaching one of the most crucial phases of this operation because it is essential, not only from the long term objectives of the United States and Australia, but more importantly the medium and longer term objective of the cause of democracy in the Arab world that Iraq be successful. We have the opportunity as the hand over to the interim government is about to take place to look to some of the positives, as well as acknowledging that the past two months have produced many negatives out of Iraq.
 It can't be denied of course, that the impact of the prisoner abuse issue, the impact of the upsurge of violence has naturally challenged the will and the resolve of many. And has put into question the stance that has been taken not only by my country, but also by the United States, Great Britain, and the other 34 members of the coalition of the willing that have a presence in Iraq. And it is worthwhile, particularly from an Australian perspective, as we are an Asian Pacific country to remind ourselves that the current coalition of the willing in Iraq does not just consist of the United States, and the United Kingdom, and Australia and some of the nations of Europe, that there is a very significant contribution from Japan, a contribution from Thailand, a contribution from the Philippines, and a contributions from other countries in that region. And sometimes that broader perspective of the presence in Iraq is lost sight of in the debate that goes on. I share the concern that people have understandably expressed about some of the events of the past two months, but the opportunity that we now have to build on the transfer to the interim government, the opportunity we now have to see for the first time since the operation was undertaken last year, Iraqis readily identified with their people, speaking on behalf of their country, speaking as representatives of, albeit an interim, Iraqi government, but nonetheless a government that is going to pave the way for the elections to be held at the beginning of next year.
 I believe that is an opportunity to see a new phase and to shift the emphasis of the perspective that the world brings to Iraq to a more positive vantage point.   We have to ask ourselves of course what is the alternative. And the answer to that is a very ready one. There is really, for our sakes, no alternative other than to make a success of what has been undertaken. Those who suggested more than a year ago that undertaking an operation against Iraq had absolutely nothing to do with the war against terrorism can scarcely be heard to mount that argument today. Because whatever may have been the connections between terrorism and Saddam Hussein in March of 2003, it can scarcely be doubted that international terrorism is currently investing an enormous amount in trying to frustrate the objectives of the coalition and more importantly the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people for a democratic future. A failure by the coalition in Iraq would represent a victory for international terrorism of absolutely monumental proportions and that is a reality that I believe has to be kept in mind even by the fiercest critics of the action taken by the coalition.
I believe of course that the challenge faced by the coalition is a challenge that will have a profound impact on the future development of relations between the states of the Middle East. If we can see democracy develop in Iraq it will I believe represent a very, very significant example for future activity and future response in that part of the world.
Having addressed those particular remarks to Iraq may I just put into context some of the debate that has occurred over the last year which has endeavoured to typify the action of countries such as the United States and Great Britain and Australia in terms of whether it represents some fundamental shift in how our nations relate to the rest of the world and some fundamental shift concerning our relationship with the United Nations. I think one the errors of the debate of the last year has tended to be to see attitudes to the United Nations too much in terms of black or white. Australia has had a long association with the United Nations. We regard ourselves as a member in good standing with that organisation. We're a nation that has contributed to the agencies of the United Nations since it was formed. The view of my Government towards the United Nations is that it remains still in broad terms a force for enormous good in the world and a body when properly supported, particularly by the permanent members, can still provide solutions to many international problems. The reality is that the United Nations on some occasions when faced with challenges has worked very effectively. I certainly recall how effectively the United Nations worked with the challenge of East Timor when Australia led the internationally and United Nations sanctioned intervention to help the tiny country of East Timor. But we all certainly remember the total failure of the United Nations to effectively address the challenges of the disintegrating former Yugoslavia and remember of course the failure of the United Nations to effectively intervene to prevent the genocide of Rwanda. And I think the point we have to remind ourselves of is that sometimes the challenges of the world can be addressed through the councils of the Security Council and the United Nations where there is sufficient unanimity of opinion. But on other occasions where that mechanism fails then those challenges have to be addressed by coalitions of the willing. And of course it has always struck me as odd and verging on the hypocritical that many of those who readily endorsed what I might loosely call the coalition of the willing that stood up for the Muslims of Kosovo against the Serbians only a few years ago were very ready to condemn a coalition of the willing that was ready to take action against Saddam Hussein. I see a lot of parallels in both of those instances and both of them represented action being taken by like minded countries to achieve a desirable goal in the face of the inability of the United Nations to muster sufficient unanimity of opinion to take the necessary action. And the point of that ladies and gentlemen simply is that we cannot see attitudes to the United Nations in terms of a choice, an either or, either you are for multi-lateral solutions through the United Nations, or you are in favour of pre-emptive action or coalitions of the willing. The fact is that on some occasions the multi-national approach will work and the mechanism to make it work should be preserved and supported and nurtured but equally on other occasions that mechanism is ineffective and will not work and coalitions of like-minded countries will have to take action.
Can I conclude my remarks ladies and gentlemen by returning to a theme I touched on at the beginning and that is that the very rich and very valued relationship between Australia and the United States has many facets. We often remind ourselves that we have fought together in every major military conflict over the last 100 years. And I never reluctant to remind a predominately American audience that on the first occasion that Australians and Americans fought together the operation was commanded by an Australian General. But most importantly of all, leaving aside those military associations and those economic associations, the thing that binds us together most is of course our shared view of the world and our shared sense of common values. We are societies that fundamentally see the value of people not in terms of their ethnicity, their social background, their religion, or their sense of social status but rather their personal character and their commitment to the ideals and common values of their country. We are nations that owe a great deal to our immigrant heritage and we are nations that are, I think, also united in our belief that an open free market approach to the management of an economy is the one that best meets the aspirations and the hopes of our citizens. So it is a relationship that I am very pleased to reaffirm in the strongest possible terms, it's a relationship that has meant much to Australia in the past, it's a relationship in my view that will deepen and get richer as the years go by, as I have endeavoured to explain it's a relationship that can be developed without of course in any way diminishing the other very important associations that both of our countries have.
Can I conclude by thanking the United States Government once again for the great hospitality that its extended to me and to my wife and to my party, I feel when I visit Washington I do come as a friend, I feel familiar and I thank the people of the United States for their warmth and for their hospitality.
Thank you.
[ends]


  **CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**
"The Australian Government and the resources sector:   Partners for the long haul"
  I always like to come to the West to experience the dynamism and optimism that is such a part of this great state.  And I'm particularly pleased to be here at the WA Chamber of Minerals and Energy which represents so many of Australia's great resource companies.
 Politicians should never overlook the companies and the individuals that generate the growth, the jobs, the investment, the exports and the taxes.  You and the rest of the 34,000 Australians employed by member companies of the Chamber provide the where-with-all for those of us in government to play some part in making Australia a great place to live, to work and to bring up our children.
Lately I have spent a bit of time reminding Australians that good economic management and higher living standards do not happen by accident.  They rely on disciplined, long-term decision-making in the national interest.  But they also require a fundamental recognition that private sector growth is essential for a strong economy and a decent society.
 One of the silliest lines of my political opponent is his claim that Australia's economic prosperity of recent years has lacked a social purpose.
 Without wealth creation we cannot begin to fund government programmes on things like health, education, welfare support or national security.  And anyone who takes economic prosperity for granted has not begun to understand the responsibilities of good government.
  To illustrate, in the last eight and a half years we have reduced national debt by $70 billion from the $96 billion inherited from Labor.  This has led to interest savings averaging $5.5 billion a year which, in turn, have been available for spending on things like health and education, and for tax relief.
Taking the long view
The Government I lead is unapologetically committed to making Australia's economic pie bigger.  We came to office determined to take a long view and to put in place some critical building blocks for Australia's future prosperity.
 If I had to nominate the Big Three, they are: (1) bringing the budget into surplus and slashing Labor's debt; (2) freeing up the industrial relations system to unleash greater productivity;  and (3) reforming the tax system through the GST and shifting the burden off direct taxation.
But there are still many things we need to get right if Australia is to continue to prosper.  Another building block is the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement and I'll be saying something shortly about the prospects for the FTA following my visit to the United States.
 For the first time since Federation, an Australian Government has sat down and developed a comprehensive plan to meet Australia's long-term land transport needs.  The AusLink package announced by the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson this week funds the critical road, rail and freight connection projects that will underpin Australia's future economic growth and development.
 In a few days time, I will be releasing an Energy White Paper that will set out a long-term policy framework for an efficient, sustainable and reliable energy industry.  This will build on the Government's sensible, balanced approach that promotes both energy resource development and protection of Australia's unique environment.
 Both of these things are examples not only of nation-building, but also of planning Australia's future for the next ten years and beyond.
Managing our precious water resources is one of the other great challenges we face in Australia - not least here in WA, the driest part of our sometimes heart-breakingly dry continent.  Water is one area where state parochialism cannot be allowed to stand in the way of sensible, national strategies to deal with the challenges of salinity, ocean outfalls and river system sustainability.
 As a nation, we need to look at fast-tracking innovative solutions to these problems and I intend to elevate discussion on water at the Council of Australian Governments meeting later this month.
 I know there are some people who believe that wealth creation and environmental protection are inevitably part of a zero-sum game.  Not only is this wrong, it gets this relationship completely backwards.  Good, sustainable environmental stewardship is made possible by a dynamic, resilient, innovative and competitive economy.  And this is something the Australian Government is determined to maintain.
We can never be complacent in a tough global market-place.  That's why, for example, the Government is preserving incentive in the tax system by cutting taxes and ensuring that 80 per cent of taxpayers pay no more than a 30 cents in the dollar on the extra money they earn.
 That's why we are strengthening our education and skills base with a focus on literacy and numeracy in schools, expanded apprenticeships and the modernisation of Australia's higher education sector.  I know that securing and retaining skilled workers is a big issue for WA's mining sector.
 Today I want to announce a new initiative for the mining industry as part of the Government's National Skills Shortages Strategy.  This initiative - at a cost of up to half a million dollars over the next two years -   will identify current and future skill needs for the mining industry; develop industry-led approaches to promoting careers in mining; and devise and implement strategies to attract both young and mature-aged workers into the industry.
We also have a shared objective of boosting student engagement in Maths and Science at all levels of education and I encourage the Chamber to continue working with Brendan Nelson on initiatives we can take together.
The Government's clear economic direction stands in contrast to a Labor Party in total confusion about the detail of its economic policy.  Labor wants you to believe that if it got into government it would spend more, tax less, have a bigger budget surplus and put money away in an intergenerational fund.
 If you're looking for a copy of the Magic Pudding to read to your kids, it's hard to go past the latest Latham-Crean edition - though I'm working to ensure it finds its way into the remainders section of your local bookshop before long.
 Ladies and Gentlemen, the resources sector is central to the long-term challenges we face as a country.  The people in this room know a thing or two about long-term thinking given the long lead times needed to earn a return on the huge investments required to develop Australia's natural resources.
In setting the long-term direction for the country, governments have a responsibility to keep the economy strong, to get the tax and regulatory regimes right, and to invest in the infrastructure that will allow Australia's resources sector to prosper in the decades ahead.
 In last month's budget, the Government announced additional tax incentives to encourage petroleum exploration in Australia's remote offshore areas. Australia has some 40 offshore basins that show signs of petroleum potential, but half remain unexplored due to the cost and high-risk nature of exploration in remote frontier areas.  These new incentives lower the cost of petroleum exploration in these areas.
The Chamber has worked closely with the Government on our Mineral Exploration Action Agenda.  This Action Agenda, along with the Mining Technology Services Action Agenda, shows how the minerals industry can work with governments, research agencies and education bodies to develop practical strategies for a sustainable and internationally competitive mining sector.
A prosperous resources sector relies on governments to invest in critical physical and intellectual infrastructure.  That's why AusLink's upgrading of Australia's land transport corridors is such a vital part of getting the big things right for industry.
 Last year, we announced additional funding of $61 million for Geoscience Australia, with $36 million in new funding for the oil exploration programme and $25 million for a seismic data acquisition programme for remote areas and for preservation of existing data.  Over the next four years, the Government will also spend $50 million on critical infrastructure security and $4 million was earmarked in this year's budget for protecting Australia's energy infrastructure from disruption.
  Energy White Paper
The Energy White Paper I'll be releasing in Canberra next Tuesday will guide the production and use of energy in Australia well into the 21st century.  Securing Australia's Energy Future will set out a range of policies to deliver the investments over coming decades that will ensure prosperity, security and environmental sustainability in our energy sector.
 This sector directly employs more than 120,000 Australians. Australia's low-cost, reliable supplies of energy support many hundreds of thousands more jobs and underpin our world competitive resource-processing industries.
 The Government's energy strategy will encourage further investment in the development of our energy resources.  But it will also recognise that environmental sustainability is not an optional extra.  Among other things, I will be outlining measures next week to ensure Australia is a world leader in energy technologies that lower Australia's greenhouse emissions while maintaining our economic prosperity.  In this - as in other policy areas - we are determined to avoid the easy path of simplistic, symbolic promises and to deliver practical results for Australia's long-term future.
Opportunities for future prosperity
As many of you know, I have just returned from the United States where I engaged in some very direct lobbying on behalf of Australia's commercial interests - broadly on the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement, and very specifically on Australia's interest in expanding LNG exports.
I return greatly encouraged by the chances of the Bush Administration securing congressional approval of the FTA.  This in turn will help to integrate our economy with the largest, most productive economy in the world.  The FTA will deliver considerable benefits to Western Australia in industries as diverse as wine and seafood, as well as to the resources sector.
Under the FTA, all metals and minerals will be immediately duty free.  The agreement also expands opportunities for mining services and technology companies, a number of which are based here in Perth.  Perhaps even more important for this audience are the dynamic gains from the agreement in the area of investment.  The FTA has helped to put Australia on the map of America's economic decision-makers as never before.  I urge you all to take advantage of this in the months and years ahead.
 While I was in the United States I also met with California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger to promote the proposal for an offshore terminal to permit Australian LNG to be supplied to Southern California.  I was accompanied in these representations by Don Argus, the Chairman of BHP Billiton, and senior executives of the company.
And I want to recognise today the larger Australian interests in this endeavour that formed part of the Chamber's delegation to the United States last year.
In its own right, California would rank as the world's fifth biggest economy . It is about three times the size of the Australian economy.  It has enormous energy needs and the Southern California project alone could be worth up to $15 billion with associated gas supply from fields off the Western Australian coast.
 Australia's pitch as an efficient, secure and reliable supplier of LNG was received very positively by Governor Schwarzenegger.  I also had a very good discussion on energy issues with President Bush.
  I am encouraged by the reaction of both leaders to the prospect of an expanded link between Australia's abundant gas reserves and America's energy needs.
 As the largest natural gas market in the world, the broad outlook for American LNG imports is very encouraging.  The US Energy Department projects that by 2020 Americans will consume over 60 per cent more natural gas than today.
 Of course, any proposal brings with it the inevitable planning, regulatory and environmental issues to be addressed.  But the strategic fit is striking.  Our political stability, our technological capacity and our proven record of on-time, on-budget delivery make us a natural partner for helping to satisfy the US's expanding energy needs.
And I want to assure you that the Australian Government will be doing all it can to further reinforce our credentials in the months and years ahead.
The Gorgon, Browse Basin and Sunrise fields have schedules that could readily meet the future LNG needs of the United States and other markets.  In coming months, NW Shelf Train 4 will come into production.  And I look forward to a 5th Train in the future.
New markets in the United States would complement our large and growing markets in North Asia.  And just as Australia's resources sector helped fuel industrial growth in Japan and South Korea over several decades, we are now developing a strategic resources partnership with China.
China has become our third largest trading partner and our second largest customer for mineral and energy commodities, after Japan.
 Australia's political stability, economic strength and record as a reliable, competitive resources supplier have given China the confidence to commit to long-term commercial relationships with Australian firms.
The Trade and Economic Framework Agreement signed at the time of President Hu Jintao's visit to Australia last October sets the course for the Australia-China commercial relationship for the next decade and beyond.  Under the Framework, we are undertaking a joint study into the feasibility and benefits of a free trade agreement between Australia and China.
  Encouragingly, Australia's Trade Minister Mark Vaile and his Chinese counterpart agreed last month to fast-track this study which is now scheduled to be completed in the first half of next year.
Again, I urge the companies represented here today to take advantage of this process and to ensure your commercial interests are at the table.  As was shown by Australia's successful bid to win the $25 billion LNG contract with Guangdong province - the biggest single trade deal in our history - I am personally committed to working hand in glove with industry to advance Australia's commercial interests in China.
Threats to future prosperity
The 2003 Resource Stocks World Investment Risk Survey ranked Australia number one in the world across a range of risk factors for energy and mineral investments.  Among our key strengths are Australia's political stability, certainty of tenure, relatively low levels of red tape, and flexible labour relations.
 These are strengths that underpin Western Australia's position as a global powerhouse in minerals and energy trade.  These are strengths we cannot afford to put at risk with policies that would damage Australia's credibility as an investment destination and resources supplier.
 At a time when the outlook for our resources sector has rarely been brighter, Federal Labor in some cases seems intent on harking back to a Whitlam era model of resources diplomacy - one more akin to a Rex Connor view of the world.
 Labor's so-called 'use it or lose it' policy displays a basic lack of understanding of the resources sector and its need for certainty.  Its resources spokesman Mr Fitzgibbon has made no secret of the fact that he would strip companies of their retention leases after five years.  He wants to second-guess commercial decision-making, failing to appreciate that Australia is part of a fiercely competitive global market-place with increasingly mobile investment dollars.
 Regional mining communities in the West would also be hit hard by Labor's plan to cut the diesel fuel rebate for the mining sector, imposing additional costs of nearly $500 million.
Another threat to Australia's mining and energy industries comes from Labor's agenda to re-regulate industrial relations.  A Federal Labor Government would abolish Australian Workplace Agreements (AWAs) that currently cover some 50 per cent of employees in the mining industry and more than 80 per cent of hard rock miners.
 These AWAs have clearly delivered higher pay and higher productivity in the resources sector and opposition to them stems from nothing more than blind ideology and union muscle.
  Labor's obsession with symbolism over an effective, balanced approach to resource development and environmental protection is another threat to WA's future prosperity.  We see this in their almost mystical belief that ratifying the Kyoto protocol will bring untold economic and environmental benefits to Australia.
Labor's policy will cost jobs and do great damage to many of Australia's competitive resources industries.  Australia will meet our Kyoto target.  We are well on track to do that without destroying jobs and imposing unnecessary costs on business.
We will continue to work towards a more effective global response to climate change, but that global response must include all the major emitters and until it does it is not in the interests of Australia to ratify the protocol.
 Kyoto is far from being a silver bullet when it comes to serious long-term planning for greenhouse emissions constraints.  We need to look beyond the symbolism of Kyoto.  The Australian Government's approach is not simply to sign bits of paper, but to invest in technologies that will significantly lower the cost of reducing greenhouse emissions.  And we want you - the resource companies, the technology companies, the wealth creators in this room - to be partners with Government in this technology-driven strategy.
Conclusion
Finally, I want to pay tribute to the Chamber for the work you do in local communities in Western Australia.  You take your responsibilities to the community very seriously - responsibilities to protect the environment, to promote education,   to provide safe and flexible workplaces, to improve the lives of indigenous Australians throughout WA.
My message to you today is simple.  Australia must remain at the forefront of global resources development.  And that means Western Australia - home of so much of Australia's natural wealth - must maintain and enhance its status as a minerals and energy powerhouse.  We are about working with you to deliver prosperity, security and environmental sustainability to your industries.
 As the Chamber's Bedrock 2004 report recently put it: 'The window of opportunity for Western Australia to provide the raw materials to underpin the global economy is clearly open.' The Australian Government is your partner for the long haul - determined to keep this window open and to open it even wider in the years to come.
 [ends]  


It's less than four years since the Government decided to establish the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI).
  With a certain youthful precocity, ASPI has injected new ideas and vigour into our national security debate.  I congratulate the Institute's Board and its outgoing Director Hugh White on their considerable achievements.
The Australian Government gave ASPI a clear mandate - to provide policy relevant research so as to better inform government decisions and public understanding of strategic and defence issues.
We felt that policy discussion in Australia on these matters was too thin and narrow.  We wanted a source of high quality, well balanced and carefully argued views from outside the government, believing that greater contestability of advice would contribute over time to improved debate and clearer public policy choices.
 It's not often that a government creates an independent policy research body.  It's the sort of action Sir Humphrey Appleby might have described as bordering on 'courageous'.
  In its own modest way, it was an act of faith.  A faith that says: free and open societies are strong precisely because issues are debated widely and forcefully.  Indeed one of the curiosities of 2004 has been the unwillingness of my political opponent to engage in detail expositions of his views and the alternatives he proposes to the Australian people. Such debate is nowhere more important than in the area of national security policy.
  A PIVOTAL TIME
September 11 recast our thinking about security threats in the twenty-first century.  Traditional concerns such as regional flashpoints and rogue states remain, but major power relations appear more benign.  Meanwhile, the twin dangers of terrorism and weapons proliferation have come into much sharper focus.  There is also much greater attention to transnational threats that flow less from state strength than from state weakness.
We are at a pivotal time in world affairs when to fall back on paradigms from the past underestimates the critical dangers we confront.
  In his acclaimed book, The Shield of Achilles, Phillip Bobbitt argues cogently that we are:  'at a moment of world affairs when the essential ideas that govern statecraft must change.  For five centuries it has taken the resources of a state to destroy another state: only states could muster the huge revenues, conscript the vast armies, and equip the divisions required to threaten the survival of other states.'
 This is no longer true, Bobbitt says, owing to advances in telecommunications, rapid computation, and weapons of mass destruction.  He goes on to claim that: 'The change in statecraft that will accompany these developments will be as profound as anything that the state has thus far undergone.'
Joseph Nye - an acknowledged critic of US action in Iraq - has made a similar point about the deep trends in world politics illuminated by September 11.  He describes the 'privatisation of war' as not only a major historical change, but one which could drastically alter civilisation itself.
I cite these two respected thinkers for a simple reason.  To demonstrate that the perils we face today do not spring from the imaginations of George W. Bush, Tony Blair or John Howard.  Nor are they the invention of some neo-conservative group in Washington.  This is the uncertain world we live in.
  A world of grave threats and, it must be said, terrible dilemmas for peace-loving nations.  A world that demands strategic focus, steadiness of purpose, clear thinking and flexibility in the use of Australia's instruments of national strategy.
  It is a world where governments must integrate foreign and domestic policies as never before.  One that demands unprecedented cooperation across defence, foreign affairs, domestic security and intelligence policies.
  The blurring of old boundaries compels us to see with new clarity the links between terrorism, weapons proliferation and other transnational criminal activity such as trafficking in drugs and people, and money laundering.  This is especially so in our neighbourhood, where instability, poor governance and rapid change have added to an environment of strategic uncertainty.
  For the foreseeable future, the major threats to Australia are more likely to come from terrorists and international criminals than from conventional military attack.
  In the war against terror, we face an enemy that is elusive; that has global reach; that is bound by neither rules nor morals.  Progress has been made degrading terrorist networks since September 11, but the attacks this year in Madrid and elsewhere remind us of the potent threat they pose.  Conventional explosives and civilian technologies are bad enough.  But the potential for terrorists to gain access to chemical, biological or nuclear weapons makes for truly horrendous prospects.
It is the Government's firm judgement, stated repeatedly, that the threat posed by Islamic extremists cannot be assuaged.  Their ideologies of hatred disdain the politics of accommodation and compromise.  If they see a wavering or retreating enemy, their response is to hit as hard as they can, and claim responsibility.  As the callous attacks in Bali showed, they are devoid of any sentiment of shared humanity.  These terrorists must be defeated.
The terrorist threat for a country like ours is real.
  Ironically, the reality of this threat comes from features of modern society that are otherwise positive and welcome.  Australia is, for instance, uniquely placed to reap the rewards of globalisation with strong and stable political institutions, a competitive economy and a diverse society.  But the very things that work in our favour - our freedom, our openness, our liberal democratic beliefs - leave Australians exposed to globalisation's dark and potentially destructive edge.
 The same forces that create opportunities for wealth creation and progress - the international flow of goods, money, people and ideas - also sustain potentially lethal security threats.
We know Australia is a terrorist target.  It has been since before September 11.
  Al Qaida, Jemaah Islamiyah and other terrorist organisations threaten Australia and Australian interests.  And while our region is home to a predominantly moderate and tolerant form of Islam, the Bali bombings showed that we are a target because of who we are and what we stand for.
  Sadly, this is unlikely to change.  And sadly too, geography does not equal immunity.
No country is free from risk.  Recent times have seen terrorist attacks in Spain, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Turkey and of course Iraq.  And the largest group of victims has been Muslims.
If globalisation means anything, it means that Australia must respond to what are global security challenges.  We must be actively engaged at this pivotal time in confronting the new and terrible threats of the twenty-first century.  We cannot wind back the clock or avert our gaze and hope the problems go away.
AN INTEGRATED, FLEXIBLE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY
ASPI's 2004 strategic review released last month stated correctly that Australia faces its most challenging and turbulent security outlook since the mid-1960s.  The Government is acting to meet this challenge with additional resources, strategic flexibility and unwavering resolve.
  Our integrated national security strategy combines strengthened defence and counter-terrorism capabilities, upgraded infrastructure and transport security, tightened border protection and enhanced international cooperation.
  Even before 11 September 2001, the Government identified the need to build a more flexible, interoperable and combat-ready defence force.  The rebalancing of the ADF that began with 2000 Defence White Paper will not fundamentally alter its size or structure but it will improve its capability by enhancing its fire-power, readiness and mobility.
  The Defence Capability Review completed last November identified some additional requirements to take account of unconventional threats and new regional responsibilities.  Additional investments have been made to strengthen the effectiveness and sustainability of the Army; to improve air defence protection to deploying forces; to enhance the lift capability for deployment; and to position the ADF to exploit current and emerging network-centric warfare advantages.
  Australia's counter-terrorism response has been swift, comprehensive and decisive.  Additional funding of over $3 billion has been committed since 2001 to ensure our arrangements are as robust as possible.  The Government's three-pronged approach is based on better laws, stronger terrorism-fighting agencies and enhanced international cooperation.
  The Government's new framework of counter-terrorism laws preserves precious liberties while recognising that human security is the foundation of what it means to be free.  We have enhanced the capacity of intelligence and law enforcement agencies to detect, investigate and prosecute terrorists and terrorist organisations.
Timely and efficient intelligence gathering is our primary weapon against the potential terrorist threat to Australia.  Our intelligence agencies are better resourced now than at any time since the Cold War.  ASIO's budget alone has doubled since September 2001, with expanded capabilities in investigations and analysis, border control, threat assessment, critical infrastructure protection and security assessment.  And last month I announced additional funding of over $100 million for the other key intelligence agencies - ASIS, DIO and ONA.
Our new strategic environment requires unprecedented coordination of domestic agencies and functions not traditionally associated with national security.  The political focal point of decision-making is the National Security Committee of Cabinet which I chair.  But the heightened terrorist threat has demanded enhanced policy and operational coordination across government.
  The Government is also working closely with other levels of government and the private sector on a national approach to transport security and the protection of critical infrastructure.  Next week, the Attorney-General will host an important business-government ministerial forum as part of an evolving framework for high level coordination.
  Strong border protection remains an essential component of an integrated national security strategy.  To protect the integrity of Australia's borders, the capacity of our border control agencies to monitor the movement of people and goods across Australia's borders has been significantly increased.
The final arm of national security is increased international engagement, especially in our region.  Clearly, no country can alone secure its interests.  Cooperation with other countries is essential.  High quality diplomatic representation is therefore an essential component of our national security structure.
Australia needs to use all available means to promote global and regional security.  We use the multilateral system to advance our national interests in key security areas.  But while Australia works with and through the United Nations where this is effective, we will not confine our interaction with particular institutional forms or processes as ends in themselves.  The only real test is whether Australian interests and values are being well and truly served.
  In my view, the debate last year over action in Iraq highlighted a common mistake of seeing attitudes to the United Nations too much in terms of black or white.  Australia is a constructive member of the UN, we have always contributed to UN agencies and in broad terms we see the UN as a force for good in the world.  When properly supported by member states, the UN can work very effectively on international problems.  We saw this in East Timor.
But we also know there are times - as shown by such cases as the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Kosovo - when the UN has failed to muster sufficient unanimity of opinion to take necessary action.  The fact is that on some occasions the multilateral approach will work and the mechanism to make it work should be nurtured and supported.  But equally on other occasions that mechanism is ineffective and coalitions of like-minded countries will be required to act.
 Our regional security response offers a good example of the Government's flexibility in its instruments of national strategy.  There are few more important tools at the present time than the network of nine bilateral counter-terrorism arrangements Australia has put in place with regional neighbours.  These underpin practical, operational-level cooperation between police, intelligence agencies, security authorities, customs and immigration services, defence forces, central banks and financial units.  We are working especially closely with Indonesia on strengthening its law enforcement capacity and upgrading its security infrastructure.
  The case of Australia's intervention in the Solomon Islands is another example of our strategic flexibility.  The crisis of a failing state on our doorstep demanded action.  This was clearly legal, being based on a formal request from the Solomon Islands government and endorsed by the relevant regional grouping.  But given that government's diplomatic recognition of Taiwan, there was virtually no prospect of a UN Security Council Resolution authorising the operation.  In the end, the outcome - not the process - was what mattered.  We responded effectively to a genuine threat to regional peace and security.
An uncertain and messy world will not tailor itself to phoney debates about whether multilateral, regional or bilateral policy instruments are inherently superior.  Advancing the security and welfare of the Australian people requires a preparedness to pursue strategies on all fronts when our interests are at stake.
IRAQ
Tonight I don't intend to revisit in detail the events surrounding our decision to joint the Coalition that ousted Saddam Hussein from power last year.  But I would remind those who now want to rewrite history that disagreement over the war centred on how the international community should respond to Iraq's continued non-compliance with UN resolutions and defiance of the UN's authority, not whether the regime had weapons of mass destruction.
  There was in fact a shared assessment by political parties on both sides of the debate that Iraq still maintained WMD programmes.  In an Australian context, I would simply draw your attention to a speech in October 2002 by Labor's foreign affairs spokesman Kevin Rudd where he said this:  'Saddam Hussein possesses weapons of mass destruction.  That is a matter of empirical fact.  If you don't believe the intelligence assessments, you simply read the most recent bulletin from the Federation of American Scientists, which lists Iraq among a number of states in possession of chemical, [and] biological weapons and with the capacity to develop a nuclear program.'
I remain convinced that getting rid of Saddam's odious regime was the right thing to do - right for the world's long-term security, right for Australia's national interest and right for the future of the Iraqi people, who deserve an opportunity for a life lived in hope under a democratic, lawful regime, rather than a life of hopelessness under a brutal tyranny.
Britain's Prime Minister Tony Blair put it well recently when he said that 'September 11 did not create the threat Saddam posed.  But it altered crucially the balance of risk as to whether to deal with it or simply to carry on, however imperfectly, trying to contain it.'  In reality, the crumbling sanctions regime put in place after the first Gulf War meant that the status quo was becoming less and less viable with each passing day.
  There is no doubt in my mind that Australia's involvement in the Iraq conflict was consistent with our interests and our values.  But whatever your view on the war - and I understand there are differing views in this room - winning the peace in Iraq is now vital.
  Today, the challenge is to support the Iraqi people themselves through their new, sovereign government after 30 June, in their efforts to build a stable, secure, democratic Iraq - a country at peace with itself and with its neighbours.  It is a noble cause - one in which Australia has both a strategic interest and a moral obligation.  And we remain in Iraq to do our work on the basis that it is what the Iraqi authorities want us to do.
It is imperative that we deny the forces of lawlessness and terror a critical victory they are looking for.  The international community needs to show that it is not prepared to indulge their apocalyptic dreams of jihad.
To give up on Iraq would be to create a haven for extremists; a sanctuary from which they can spread their ideology of totalitarianism and terror.  This alone makes it vital that Australian forces remain in Iraq until their task is completed.  In this tough work, our military forces deserve our admiration for their discipline, practical focus and patience.
A REPLY TO SOME CRITICS
There is a view that says Iraq is none of our business - a view which wants to pull up stumps at this critical hour, with all the implications that would entail.  As you know, my political opponent has pledged to withdraw Australia's contingent in Iraq (however he precisely defines that) by Christmas - to bring them back for the 'Defence of Australia'.
It is a policy that fails the test of Australia's national interest and international responsibilities.  It sends the worst possible signal, to the worst possible people, at the worst possible time.  It would undermine our relations with friends and allies.  And it seeks to appeal to a strain of isolationist sentiment that diminishes us as a nation.
  While sensitive to our own neighbourhood, Australia has never adopted an insular or exclusively regional view of our place in the world.  We must not start down that road now.
Australia has never been passive or indifferent through the great political and ideological struggles that have shaped of our modern world.  We weren't during the First World War.  We weren't during the Second World War.  We weren't during the Cold War.  We are not now, as we face new enemies of peace, freedom and democracy.
  In this light, I find aspects of the Labor Party's current posture curious to say the least.  A posture that acknowledges the threat from terrorists and tyrants, but reserves its most pointed attacks for our great democratic ally, itself the target of history's most evil terrorist act.  A posture that invokes the international community and the United Nations, but decries action to rid the world of a murderous dictator who defied 17 UN Security Council resolutions over 12 years.  A posture that moralises in the name of liberal internationalism, but is profoundly uncomfortable with the legitimate use of military power and which sneers at commitments beyond our shores as contrary to Australia's security interests.
   The Labor Party tells us that its foreign policy is based on three pillars - the US alliance, the United Nations and engagement with Asia.  But what does this mean in the case of Iraq - the defining foreign policy issue of the day?
At the very least, the United States would see a unilateral withdrawal by one of the original coalition partners as an unfriendly act.  The UN after the unanimous passage of Security Council Resolution 1546 is now intimately involved in supporting a democratic future for Iraq.  The resolution specifically requests member states to contribute military forces to Iraq.  Many of our friends in Asia (Japan, Korea, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines) have forces in Iraq helping to stabilise the country.  They obviously have no interest in seeing the coalition fail.
  And does anyone doubt for a moment that a failure of will in Iraq would give enormous comfort to Jemaah Islamiyah with all its reach in our own region?
Where we stand today, Iraq is not a diversion from the war on terror.  It is the front-line.  We must face this reality.  International terrorism has invested an enormous amount in breaking the will of the coalition.  And each and every turn of the Iraq struggle is interpreted by the terrorists as part of their campaign against the West and moderate Islam.
 Implicit in the Labor Party's stance is that if it's all right for Australia to pull out, then it's all right for the Americans and the British to go.  If that were to happen we would deliver an enormous victory to the terrorists and damn the Iraqi people to a future of mayhem and chaos.  This from a party which professes to believe in 'liberal internationalism'.
The Government also faces criticism from a different quarter.  To some exponents of realpolitik, all this talk about new threats in the twenty-first century is much exaggerated.  To this way of thinking, not that much changed on September 11.  We still live in a world where states and geography are trumps.  Where Iraq is seen - if I can echo a phrase of long ago - as a faraway country of which we know little.
  I respect the fact that people differ on what are tough strategic judgements.  I strongly believe, however, that a geographically cramped, value-free style of realism is dangerously complacent and contrary to Australia's interests at this critical hour.
The terrorists - including those who have flooded into Iraq - do not respect neat paradigms or state boundaries.  As we found to our horror on 12 October 2002 in Bali they target civilians in ways that are difficult to counter through conventional security doctrines.  Australia cannot purchase security by keeping its head down and leaving others to do all the heavy lifting.
  THE US ALLIANCE
Where these various criticisms come together is in urging that Australia distance itself from the United States.  Such a course offers neither enhanced security nor some false dividend of alleged independence.
  This Government has worked to strengthen our alliance relationship with the United States - a relationship founded on shared values, common interests and mutual benefits.  I believe in the US alliance because it is in our national interest and delivers enormous benefits to Australia.
Australia's ability to influence and work with the United States is vital to meeting the security challenges that we face today - above all terrorism and weapons proliferation.
No other country approaches the global power and influence of the United States.  This will not change any time soon.  Indeed, the United States is likely to become more important to Australia's future, not less.
Our alliance relationship ensures that Australia has privileged access to an unrivalled set of military and intelligence assets.  Defence technology and procurement cooperation under the alliance is essential to maintaining the qualitative edge of Australia's defence forces.  Along with our vital intelligence links, this is important not just to counter conventional military threats, but also to disrupt and destroy terrorist networks.
  Of course, the alliance is a two-way street.  The United States should not be expected to carry all the burden and to act alone.  Australia cannot proclaim itself an equal partner while looking to cherry-pick the alliance for its own narrow purposes.  In this context, I have made no secret of the fact that the alliance relationship was a factor in the Government's decision to join the US-led campaign in Iraq.
A debate over whether or not the American Government will deal with a future Australian Government - whatever its political complexion - misses the point entirely.  Of course it will.  But given the significance of Iraq to US national security at the present time, any decision by a coalition partner to withdraw troops before the job is completed will not surprisingly be seen as a less than friendly act.
What Mr Latham clearly misses is that September 11 led to a fundamental shift in US calculus about the risks it is prepared to accept to its national security.  It is important that Australians understand that this new era of American assertiveness is likely to endure whoever occupies the White House.
Of course, we can never claim to be a military equal.  The United States spends some 43% of global military spending, while Australia's share is less than 1%.  But increasing outlays on defence by this Government mean that we have more options at our disposal and greater capacity to contribute in a meaningful way to alliance coalitions.
  Inevitably we will have differing priorities at times, but we are able to communicate them in a way that keeps sight of our common objectives.  A capacity to speak openly and frankly with the United States at the highest levels is an asset no Australian leader should put at risk by intemperate, personal abuse.
Unfortunately, I believe the current leader of the Opposition has embarked on a course that would damage our alliance relationship.  I understand this is a serious charge, but I simply take Mr Latham's statements at face value.
The speeches where he attacks the Bush Administration, but offers no recognition of the great and noble purposes that have animated US foreign policy down the ages.  The narrowly-defined defence doctrine that would circle the wagons and deny Australia a capability to cooperate with allies beyond our shores.  The tired and deeply-flawed view that implies some inconsistency between a close alliance relationship and good relations in Asia.
I notice that Mr Latham's most recent recruit, Peter Garrett, had this to say last week, as commentators were reflecting on President Reagan's legacy:  '...I have always had a fundamental objection to the way American power has been projected in the past, particularly through Reagan.  And I obviously have those objections about the current administration as well ...'.
Now here we have a recent and clear statement from Mr Latham's hand picked prot‚g‚ about how power works in the international system.  If this view had been followed, Reagan's great achievements - the end of the Soviet empire, and the end of the decades long threat of mutual nuclear destruction - would never have come about.  Hundreds of millions of citizens in East Europe, now living in freedom, would still labour under brutal dictatorship.
When President Reagan challenged Mikhail Gorbachev to 'tear down this wall', he was referring not just to the physical barrier horribly snaking its way from the Wannsee to Brandenberg.  He was referring also to the barriers in men's minds that prevented an end to the Cold War thinking, barriers to a more comprehensive approach to how peace and security could be achieved and sustained.
In seeking that more effective approach to security, it is important to note how much common ground there is in the United States across the political divide.  For instance there is a great deal of overlap in the Democratic and Republic Party leaderships about how the United States should now behave in Iraq.  That fact reveals how far Mr Latham's position is from the views of both the President of the United States and his political opponent.
I notice, for instance, last Monday the Foreign Policy adviser to Senator Kerry, Mr James Rubin, had this to say about involvement in Iraq:  'John Kerry has been very clear that, regardless of what you think about how we got here, here we are.  And failure is not an option in Iraq.  And the prospect of success in Iraq will be improved by maintaining a substantial contribution from friends and allies, including Australia.'
At a time when close cooperation with Australia's major ally has never been more important, the position adopted by the Labor Party is strikingly at odds with the character our relationship has assumed over the years.  Downgrading the US alliance is not good for Australia.  Walking away from our friends when they need our support is not the kind of country we are.
Those who suggest that our close alliance comes at the expense of Australia's independence and self-reliance fail to understand the fundamentals of Australia's defence posture in our rapidly changing security environment.  The primary focus of the ADF remains the defence of Australia and supporting stability in our immediate region.  But to defend Australia's interests, there will be occasions when we choose to contribute niche capabilities to operations further afield.
  American military pre-eminence and a strong alliance relationship do not undermine our self-reliance.  Properly understood, they help to underpin it by enhancing our capacity to respond to a wider range of developments.
  ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
The ANZUS alliance is an essential pillar of peace, security and prosperity in our region.  A secure, stable and prosperous Asia is an abiding national interest of Australia.
  The Government's policies of active engagement with Asia reflect, and respect, the region's political, economic and cultural diversity.  This is the foundation of the Coalition's sense of what engagement invariably means in practice.  As the historian David Goldsworthy has stated: 'In case after case, episode after episode, it is the particularity of different Asian states and subregions that needs to be grasped if the character of Australian engagement is to be clearly understood.'
Appreciating Asia's diversity is central to the conduct of sensible, practical, sustainable Asian engagement.  This textured story resists all attempts to make it conform to some narrow, partisan agenda.  No Australian political party has a monopoly on engagement with Asia - however that might be defined.  And Australians have consistently shown a studied indifference to attempts to make Australia's relations with Asia a domestic political battleground for identity politics.
  Too often, simple bromides masquerading as grand strategy fail to take account of Asia's diversity.  So too they distort Australia's position as a Western country with a unique network of political, economic and people-to-people links with Asia.
  What is needed, above all, is a clear sense of how to advance Australia's prosperity and security in Asia with practical initiatives grounded in common interests.
  The Coalition Government builds on a tradition of constructive engagement with Asian neighbours.  Strengthening economic relations has been a special focus.
  A little more than a decade after the Pacific war, the Menzies Government forged the great and enduring economic partnership with Japan through the 1957 Commerce Agreement - over the opposition of many including the Labor Party led by Dr Evatt.  Japan remains our biggest export market and we are working to identify new areas of economic cooperation.
  More and more Australians are coming to see how the rise of China as a geo-political and economic power will have a profound impact on Australia's future.  With our scoping study on a free trade agreement, the Government has clearly signalled its interest in forging a strategic economic partnership with China based on far-reaching economic complementarities.
Our free trade agreements with Singapore and Thailand have demonstrated the Government's pragmatic interest in lowering trade barriers and deepening economic integration with Southeast Asia.   I look forward to welcoming Thailand's Prime Minister Thaksin to Australia in two weeks time to sign our agreement.  I hope to have the opportunity later this year to meet with ASEAN leaders to discuss further steps towards economic cooperation.
  The Government is also working to strengthen Australia's security links in the Asia-Pacific region.  We have an extensive network of defence relationships in Asia with counter-terrorism cooperation of particular and growing importance.
  Closer to home, Australia has entered a new phase in its strategic role in the Pacific - confident to lead, confident in what we offer, and confident we are seen as partners for progress.
There was a time not so long ago when sensitivities about alleged 'neo-colonialism' perhaps caused Australia to err on the side of passivity in our approach.  Those days are behind us as we work constructively with others to address the challenges faced by our immediate neighbourhood.
  This new Pacific partnership is based on our willingness to commit the resources needed for decisive action and our capacity to work with our Island neighbours to identify cooperative solutions to the region's problems.  Australia has a particular responsibility to help those countries struggling to secure the basic requirements of law and order.  In this context, the RAMSI mission in the Solomons serves an important demonstration - both to those who value peace and order and to those who might seek to undermine our efforts.
In December 2003, Australia and Papua New Guinea entered a new era of cooperation in which Australians will work side-by-side with PNG in the areas of policing, law and justice as well as on economic and public sector management.
  I do not wish to understate the enormous challenges faced by many states on our doorstep.  And I do not want to imply that we can simply transfer home grown solutions from Australia into completely different social, economic and political environments.  But through an integrated set of measures targeted at enhancing security and strengthening governance we are determined to play our part in helping to foster stability and a brighter future in the Pacific.
CONCLUSION
Australia has no option but to engage with, adapt to, and help to shape a constantly changing security environment.  The job of national security is never done.  It continues to demand large resources, strategic flexibility and great endurance.
In our region and around the world, Australia commands respect based on our military capability, our economic strength, our strong alliance relationships, our diplomatic engagement, and our willingness to take a stand.  Together, they make Australia an effective force, and a force for good.
There can be no retreat into splendid isolation or paradigms of the past.
  We cannot put a fence around our country or our region.  We cannot draw back to the illusion of Fortress Australia.  Nor can we take refuge in a brand of realism that offers little more than world-weary cynicism.
  Australians are determined to maintain one of the freest, most open, most tolerant countries in the world.  Though tested in recent times, we have come through with strength and resolve.
  We are a naturally optimistic and confident people.  Nothing will change that.
  We see this displayed each year when thousands of young Australians flock to the Gallipoli ceremony in Turkey.  This pilgrimage is now almost de rigueur for young Australians backpacking around Europe as they remember the sacrifice of earlier generations of Australians.
Today, faced with new threats in a new century, our history, our interests and our values have summoned us again to play a role on the global stage.  To play our part beside our allies in a long, tough struggle against intolerance, brutality and extremism.  To defend the civilised values that have made Australia the nation that it is.
So an Afghan woman can go to school.  So an Iraqi Kurd does not fear a knock at the door.  So Australian businessmen and businesswomen can expand their offices in Beijing and Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta.  And yes, so a young Australian backpacker can safely go overseas and have a look around.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Ita, to Garry and Doreen, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to say how much we all admire Garry and Doreen for taking two and a half years out of their lives to visit 600 towns and centres around Australia in the cause of raising funds for arthritis.  As Ita said, it affects three million Australians, and there are a number of common misapprehensions about arthritis.  One of them is that it's something that only affects older Australians.  The reality is that more than half of all sufferers from arthritis are aged between 25 and 65.
  There are many Australians who suffer from arthritis and their condition and their affliction goes undiagnosed.  They suffer in silence and all too frequently, they are forced as a result of their affliction into early retirement.  And it's all the more praiseworthy therefore that Garry and Doreen on their trike should commit themselves in such a wholehearted and absolutely magnificent way.  It's a reminder again of the great volunteer tradition of the Australian community.  They join a very distinguished group of Australians who have taken large segments of their own personal time at great personal inconvenience in a highly visible way to travel around Australia raising resources for a cause which is very important.
  I'm pleased to recall that over the last three years, the Government through the NHMRC has invested about $50 million into research into arthritis and we had an initiative in the 2002 Budget of $11.5 million under the Better Arthritis Care initiative to improve the care and management of arthritis, and of course through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme something in the order of $270 million a year is spent through the PBS on arthritis medicines.  But can I finally, and before I formally launch this, thank Arthritis Australia and particularly its President, Ita Buttrose, for the leadership and encouragement that that organisation gives, and the hope that they extend and they offer to the millions of Australians who are affected by arthritis.
  And I do take this opportunity again to send Garry and Doreen off with my very good wishes.  We wish them a happy and safe journey, and we look forward to welcoming them back here in two and a half years time, or whatever the time may be, and they're going to travel 55,000 kilometres around this country, and as I said at the beginning of my remarks, they're going to visit some 600 centres.  So I think they deserve our admiration, they deserve our thanks, and they are wonderful exemplars of that selfless volunteer Australian spirit that has been so important in building and holding our country together.  Well done, thank you, good luck, look forward to seeing you in two and a half years time.
[ends]



Well thank you Attorney General, ladies and gentlemen.
  I start by thanking so many of you for giving up time to come to Canberra to interact with ministers and senior advisers of the government about something which is of continuing significance not only to the Government and the people of Australia but also very specifically to the business community of our country.
  We all, of course, react to the new security environment and the threat of terrorism as individuals, we are all personally affronted by such obscene outrages as the beheading of a South Korean hostage in Iraq overnight.  We all have different experiences of interacting with or in some tangential way being affected by the terrorist attacks that have occurred in the United States and other parts of the world and, of course, many Australians were personally touched in different ways by the outrage that occurred in Bali on the 12th of October 2002.
  So all of us, whether we're in business or in government or serving the community in different ways, we are all affected as individuals and we all have an emotional response to the new an different environment in which we now live as a result of the onset of international terrorism.
  But, of course, above and beyond that, or separate from that rather, not above and beyond it, but separately from that, there is an economic and business dimension to the terrorist threat.  The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, as the Foreign Minister may have alluded to earlier, has recently put out a report on the economic impacts of terrorism and it quoted IMF estimates that the cost of the attack on the 11th of September was 0.75 per cent of American GDP or a sum equivalent to $75 billion US.
  So not only does the response to terrorism have a truly human dimension for all of us and requires us to contemplate the different environment in which we live as a result and how we relate to people within our community and how, of course, we as a nation relate to the rest of the world but it also has an important economic dimension.  Despite all of the warnings and despite the natural injunction of governments and police and military authorities to encourage people to take care, to exercise greater precautions than before, the overriding injunction, of course, in a free society such as our own is to encourage people to live their daily lives with as little interference and as little interruption as possible because it remains as true now as it was on the morning of the 12th of September 2001 wherever you may have been in the world that the terrorists win if they are able to sufficiently dislocate our natural, free and open way of life as to bring about a marked behavioural change.  But consistent with that, we must in different ways recognise that we are living in a different environment, an environment that does in the now relatively famous words of the campaign that requires us to be alert but to not be alarmed and might I say by way of passing observation that many of the jocular derisive critical references to that campaign when it was first launched have in the fullness of time have been demonstrated to have been totally wrong.  And for what it's worth, and I think it's worth something and I think it would be worth something in the eyes of the businessmen and women in this audience, that that particular campaign received the highest accolade of all in 2003 from the Australian Association of National Advertisers in relation to a public sector campaign.  And as we all understand whether we're in government or business the value of effective communication of a message.  And it does make a lot of sense that message and, as the Attorney General indicated this morning, we intend to revisit that campaign in an appropriate tailored way in the weeks and months ahead.
I hope out of today's gathering and particularly your interaction with the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Mick Keelty, and Dennis Richardson, the Director General of ASIO, the Secretary of the Attorney General's Department as well as of course my senior ministerial colleagues, I hope you will go away with a better understanding of what we are doing.  I also will be releasing to the public today and obviously to all of you as well a document entitled "Protecting Australia Against Terrorism", which brings together all of the policies and administrative arrangements that the government has put in place over the last two years or more to do with the international terrorism threat.
We, of course, as a nation are a target because of who we are and what we stand for and what we believe in and no matter how we deport ourselves on international relations issues from month to month or from year to year, nothing is going to alter the fact that because we are a free, open, liberal democracy, we are a potential target.  We all have to adjust to that reality.  We all have to understand that irrespective of whether you're a democracy or not and you're particularly vulnerable if we're a liberal democracy, but there have been plenty of citizens sadly of countries that are not liberal democracies that have died in terrorist attacks over the last two years.
The Government has committed $3.1 billion in additional funding to the various agencies to deal with the terrorist threat and the document that I've launched today will bring together details of that expenditure.  But to give you an idea of the dimension of how the Government is responding, let me just make one or two comparisons.  The resources of ASIO now are greater than at any time since the Cold War and that is a demonstration of the changes that have been made in...we've allocated $872 million for additional funds for intelligence capabilities, we've doubled the size of ASIO and ASIS, we've established a National Threat Assessment Centre in May and we have dramatically improved our levels of international co-operation.  And I want to take another opportunity of this gather to pay tribute to the extraordinary achievement of the Australian Federal Police in its co-operation with its counterparts in Indonesia in tracking down and bringing to justice the people who were responsible for murdering 88 of our fellow Australians in Bali on the 12th of October, it's a great tribute to the quietly effective and the immediate co-operation that our authorities were able to establish with those in Indonesia charged with that responsibility.  And I think one of the really big pluses that has occurred is the way in which despite nuanced differences that may occur at an official government or political level between Australia and some of our partners in the Asian Pacific region at an operational level let me assure you, and this is very important, particularly when you think of the challenges that are involved in establishing businesses and your employees travelling and interacting with people in neighbouring countries, the relationship that's been established between, say the Australian Federal Police and their counterparts in Indonesia, in Singapore, in Malaysia, in the Philippines and in other areas of the region, it's been one of the most conspicuous features of our anti-terrorism effort.  And in the end governments will have their differences, there will be varied positions taken in relation to official responses, but on the ground police co-operation and on the ground intelligence and security co-operation is absolutely essential.
  Our aim out of a gathering such as this is of course, I hope, communicate to you what we have done, to make the obvious point that there is a cost for all of us, there is cost for you involved in taking counter terrorism and security measures.  We now live in a world now where we're taking measures to improve security and to fight terrorism is a cost of doing business.  There is a cost on the Australian taxpayer and I've outlined some of the dimensions that have been involved in that.  And collectively, we do pay a heavy price in economic terms, but over all the price that we do pay in those economic terms has to be put against the extraordinarily high level of disruption and dislocation to our economy as well as to our way our life, let alone of course the cost in loss of life that might occur if a terrorist attack were to take place in this country.
Now I am frequently asked what I think the likelihood of a terrorist attack in Australia is and I say repeatedly, God forbid it should occur, but I can't give any guarantee that it won't happen in this country and any nation such as Australia that believes it's immune, in some way it's going to slip through the net, in some way is going to go by unnoticed is frankly deluding itself and I might also make the very obvious and I hope very relevant point that we're dealing with a group of people who do not reward weakness and equivocation with forgiveness and immunity.  Any sign of retreat or equivocation encourages greater pursuit and a renewed emphasis on punitive measures and attacks.  And we've seen that sadly demonstrated over the past few months, we saw it demonstrated in relation to the events in Spain and we will see it demonstrated, I'm sorry to say, in the months ahead.
It is a challenge to our society, it's a challenge that we haven't had before.  We must simultaneously not become obsessed with it, but equally take all the precautions that are necessary.  I want the business community of Australia to go on doing what it's done so magnificently over the last few years and that is take advantage of a great economic environment, if I may say so, to deliver some of the best economic outcomes and the highest levels of employment and might I note in passing the highest corporate profit share the Australian economy has had since those figures began to be recorded, I want that to go on.  There are a lot of threats to it but the one I'm dealing with today is strictly of the security and terrorist kind and I just want to emphasise a human stake in this and that is the greatest stake of all because  it's a challenge that we haven't had before but we also have a very significant economic stake and the focus of today's discussion is particularly on that, particularly to focus on the importance of critical infrastructure and amongst the investments the government has made is to commit $50 million to address critical infrastructure challenges and to work very closely with owners and operators of that critical infrastructure.
Ladies and gentlemen, I welcome all of you here.  I appreciate very much the investment of time and capacity that so many have made to come and I hope you will recognise through the attendance of so many of my senior colleagues and can I say that one of the most effective ways over the last two and a half years that we have been able to deal with the terrorism issue and related challenges on the national security front has been through the very regular meetings of the National Security Committee of Cabinet and the National Security Committee is comprised of myself and the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer and the Minister for Defence and Leader of the Government in the Senate, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Attorney General and meetings of that committee are regularly attended by the Secretary of my Department, the Secretary of the Department of Defence, the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Director General of the Office of National Assessments and the Director General of ASIO and the Chief of the Defence Force.
You can see from that group we bring together every relevant minister on an ongoing basis and every relevant departmental leader and it meets on a regular basis and one of the reasons why I believe that we have been able to provide a degree of coherent and co-ordinated leadership and response to the Australian people is that we've had the relevant people meeting together as a group on a regular basis and we have been able through that to, of course, communicate I think a clear whole of government message and to have, at so many of these meetings, to have advice on hand from the Commissioner of the Federal Police and from the Head of the ASIO and the Head of the Defence Force all in the one room at the same time does give us a whole of government perspective that, if I may say so, is not duplicated entirely in another country with which it is fair to make comparisons around the world.
  But enough from me ladies and gentlemen, I'll conclude by warmly thanking all of you for coming along.  I commend the interchange that I know will take place later in the morning and can I commend the publication to you and simply emphasis that together we have a big challenge, we have an economic as well as a human dimension and both of them deserve our attention and our focus.
Thank you very much.
[ends]  


JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you are heading to the funeral of Jim Bacon - do you have any comments?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, he served as Premier of Tasmania the entire time that I've been Prime Minister and we got on well, although we came from opposite sides of politics. He worked hard. He advocated the interests of his state and like most who knew him I was profoundly sorry of the circumstances of his premature death and I hope that today's gathering will be of some comfort to his family and very close friends, not only in Tasmania but in the broader Labor movement throughout Australia.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, are you going against the convention by posing in photos with the defence personnel?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, that is a ridiculous charge. The photograph in question is publicly available on the Defence website. All Members of Parliament from time to time get photographed with members of the military and my press secretary will show you some material put out by Labor politicians, including themselves, and I'm not criticising them for that.  There's nothing wrong or political about that and I haven't gone against any advice from General Cosgrove as was wrongly suggested in the Melbourne Age this morning. It is only a matter of commonsense that if you get photographed and if you use a picture that's been in a newspaper or on a defence website or on television there's absolutely nothing improper about that and I think the charge is political and ill placed.
   JOURNALIST:
Are you confident that the COAG meeting tomorrow will have a positive outcome on water?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I certainly hope it does. Tomorrow's meeting is a great challenge to cooperative federalism. The states have the power and they have therefore the responsibility in a very direct way, but they have to produce a national outcome. They have to come to tomorrow's meeting not as Queenslanders or New South Welshmen or Victorians, but as Australians striving to get an outcome that is in the overall interests of our nation. Not in the interests of their state alone, although I understand them sticking up for their states, but this is a national problem, it requires a national solution and it challenges the working of the cooperative federalist system to see if we can achieve that outcome.
JOURNALIST:
Is water the biggest test since federation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don't want to get that melodramatic, but it's a very big test. The federation has been with us for more than 100 years, it's very hard to start making those comparisons but it is certainly as big a test as I've seen in the eight and half years that I've been Prime Minister and the system is meant to work in a cooperative spirit and if the Premiers come as Queenslanders or New South Welshmen and as Victorians and not as Australians we won't get a good outcome.
 JOURNALIST:
Queensland doesn't think it's going to get a fair deal - what's your comment on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Queensland is the last state in Australia to think it's not getting a fair deal, it's doing better than most out of the GST. Although they're all doing extremely well out of that. Queensland will be treated fairly along with all other states.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, the first human embryo stem cell has apparently been created in a New South Wales lab - what would (inaudible) on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I support very much the law that was agreed upon at the Premier's conference in 2002 and I want that law observed. Thank you.
JOURNALIST:
Should Andrew Johns switch codes?
PRIME MINISTER:
That's a matter for him. As a follower of both codes, I would like to think that Joey has some playing years ahead of him. Whatever decision he makes, that's a matter for him. But he's a great player and I hope he's got a number of years ahead of him.


JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you are heading to the funeral of Jim Bacon - do you have any comments?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, he served as Premier of Tasmania the entire time that I've been Prime Minister and we got on well, although we came from opposite sides of politics. He worked hard. He advocated the interests of his state and like most who knew him I was profoundly sorry of the circumstances of his premature death and I hope that today's gathering will be of some comfort to his family and very close friends, not only in Tasmania but in the broader Labor movement throughout Australia.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, are you going against the convention by posing in photos with the defence personnel?
PRIME MINISTER:
No, that is a ridiculous charge. The photograph in question is publicly available on the Defence website. All Members of Parliament from time to time get photographed with members of the military and my press secretary will show you some material put out by Labor politicians, including themselves, and I'm not criticising them for that.  There's nothing wrong or political about that and I haven't gone against any advice from General Cosgrove as was wrongly suggested in the Melbourne Age this morning. It is only a matter of commonsense that if you get photographed and if you use a picture that's been in a newspaper or on a defence website or on television there's absolutely nothing improper about that and I think the charge is political and ill placed.
   JOURNALIST:
Are you confident that the COAG meeting tomorrow will have a positive outcome on water?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I certainly hope it does. Tomorrow's meeting is a great challenge to cooperative federalism. The states have the power and they have therefore the responsibility in a very direct way, but they have to produce a national outcome. They have to come to tomorrow's meeting not as Queenslanders or New South Welshmen or Victorians, but as Australians striving to get an outcome that is in the overall interests of our nation. Not in the interests of their state alone, although I understand them sticking up for their states, but this is a national problem, it requires a national solution and it challenges the working of the cooperative federalist system to see if we can achieve that outcome.
JOURNALIST:
Is water the biggest test since federation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I don't want to get that melodramatic, but it's a very big test. The federation has been with us for more than 100 years, it's very hard to start making those comparisons but it is certainly as big a test as I've seen in the eight and half years that I've been Prime Minister and the system is meant to work in a cooperative spirit and if the Premiers come as Queenslanders or New South Welshmen and as Victorians and not as Australians we won't get a good outcome.
 JOURNALIST:
Queensland doesn't think it's going to get a fair deal - what's your comment on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Queensland is the last state in Australia to think it's not getting a fair deal, it's doing better than most out of the GST. Although they're all doing extremely well out of that. Queensland will be treated fairly along with all other states.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, the first human embryo stem cell has apparently been created in a New South Wales lab - what would (inaudible) on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I support very much the law that was agreed upon at the Premier's conference in 2002 and I want that law observed. Thank you.
JOURNALIST:
Should Andrew Johns switch codes?
PRIME MINISTER:
That's a matter for him. As a follower of both codes, I would like to think that Joey has some playing years ahead of him. Whatever decision he makes, that's a matter for him. But he's a great player and I hope he's got a number of years ahead of him.


PRIME MINISTER:
 Well ladies and gentlemen, the Deputy Prime Minister and I are delighted to welcome you to a press conference appropriately which is being sprinkled with rain, because this has been a tremendous day for the future security of water supply in this country.  It's been a particularly good outcome for the primary producers of Australia.  We have reached agreement for a national water initiative and the agreement has been signed by all states except Western Australia and Tasmania.  The Tasmanian Government for reasons related to the death and funeral of the former Premier, was not represented at the meeting.  I'm disappointed Western Australia has not signed, but it seems to be a characteristic of Western Australia in recent years, that it takes a year or two to finally sign up to these agreements.  That was the case with the salinity agreement.  And I just want to make it very plain to the people of Western Australia that in any future announcements we make about water projects, Western Australia will get her fair share.  There can be no argument about that.
   But given that it was an agreement overwhelmingly about the Murray Darling, the fact that the other states have signed and the terms of the agreement are absolutely first class, it is historic.  It does mean that we can now see the flow of that $500 million towards fixing the Murray Darling.  And that is historic not only for the whole nation, but it's particularly beneficial for the people of South Australia.  But can I say that the person who deserves most of the credit for this agreement is beside me, and that's John Anderson.  Nobody has worked harder than John Anderson to bring about this agreement.  It would not have been possible without John's work, and I do want to pay tribute to him.  I want to thank the National Farmers' Federation and I acknowledge the presence of Peter Corish, the President of the National Farmers' Federation, for this agreement.
   The sticking points in the end boiled down to essentially the circumstances surrounding compensation in the event of withdrawal of water rights.  It has been agreed that the first three per cent, if there is a change in the science, and I think the aficionados all understand vaguely what I mean by that, the first three per cent is borne by the farmers.  Between three and six per cent, the proposition of the States was that it be a third the States, a third the Commonwealth, a third the farmers.  We were arguing for 50/50 and I offered in the end that we would pick up the share that would otherwise have been borne by the farmers, so that we bear two-thirds of that and the states one.  And then after six per cent, it's 50/50.  But that of course only applies after 2014.  The existing arrangements under the COAG agreement last year apply for the next 10 years.  But we're going to have titles, we're going to have tradeable water rights and entitlements - things that for years people have wanted.  And I think what this agreement does enshrine is the capacity of the governments of Australia working together in the national interest to reach sensible agreements.  It is a huge victory for commonsense.  It's long overdue.  It will be warmly welcomed by the people of South Australia.
   And might I also add that we reached agreement to seek some further advice and some working papers in relation to two important health issues.  One of those is workforce shortage, and the other related to the interaction of GPs and their possible co-location in public hospitals.  Overall, an excellent meeting and one that I say again would not have been possible without the leadership and the contribution of the Deputy Prime Minister, who more than any other person in this country has argued and advocated and fought the cause of water reform and water security for the people not only of rural Australia, but also the people of Australia generally.
 DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
 Thanks.  Two very, very important and significant agreements today, and I think a pretty rare sort of coming together of some otherwise disparate groups - bankers, farmers, conservationists, scientists, leaders generally - to basically sign on to what I think is probably now the world's best management framework for water.  I really believe it can be.  In the same way that our land title system has driven tremendous wealth creation and export performance in this country, I believe that this will do the same.  Can I make the point that I hear people arguing about which state wanted that amount of money and what have you.  All of that stuff can I tell you, and Peter Corish will confirm this, pales into insignificance beside the investment that this will drive in better production outcomes, in more jobs, and in better environmental outcomes, and that's been the great breakthrough - the recognition that secure property rights with decent pathways for returning over allocated systems to balance and what have you, is indeed the key to driving the better environmental outcomes that frankly the country has been wanting for 10 years.  Can I just say Prime Minister that I very much appreciate all that you have done in this regard, and I know people right across the nation would join me in that.  Can I say that there are a lot of other people who deserve a lot of credit and when I get the moment I might see if we can't throw a few drinks for a few people.
 JOURNALIST:
 (inaudible)
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Well I don't know what...
 JOURNALIST:
   (inaudible)
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Well because this was not a day to deal with individual state projects.
 JOURNALIST:
 (inaudible)
 PRIME MINISTER:
 But their time will come when individual projects are looked at.  And I want to say to the people of Western Australia that when the time comes for the Commonwealth to allocate money for individual projects, Western Australia will get her fair share.  But today was not the day...
 JOURNALIST:
 (inaudible)
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Hang on, hang on.  Today was not the day to address individual projects.  I mean you've got to remember that last year we reached in-principle agreement on the National Water Initiative and the Murray Darling Living Murray Initiative, and today was meant to bring that to fruition and to sign off on those agreements.  And it was never acceptable to me or to the Commonwealth that the signing of those agreements should be linked to decisions on a whole lot of other individual projects.  That was never on.  That was never in contemplation.  Now what I've said to the premiers is that if there are individual projects, and as part of the agreement we will seriously look at those projects.  I can't make any promises and we naturally reserve the right to initiate our own projects.  Nobody should imagine that projects in individual states are going to be driven by... solely by the decisions of state governments.  Sometimes the Commonwealth will reserve the right to initiate a project itself in an individual state, even though the state government may not support it, and that applies certainly in Western Australia and it certainly applies in other states as well.
 JOURNALIST:
 Do you anticipate before the election announcing further money for water projects, Prime Minister?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Oh look, I wouldn't want to start talking about anything to do with the election.
  JOURNALIST:
 I understand, Prime Minister that in your discussions with Premier Gallop, the discussions got fairly willing to the put that you were shouting at each other - was that your recollection?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 No, no. Look, I thought it was very foolish of him not to sign the agreement. I just don't understand. I mean one of the clauses in the agreement commits the Commonwealth to consider projects with the people who have signed the agreement. Now, by not signing it in a sense, you could argue he's given up some leverage but I'm going to obviously overlook that because I'm interested in a proper outcome for the people of Western Australia. But look, I just don't understand how a premier of a state can stand outside a national agreement such as this, an historic national agreement. It just seems to me to be quite petty and I don't quite know, I mean if it's tied up with some old-fashioned notion of vigorous states' rights I think it's missing point. I think it's missing the point in Western Australia. Western Australians have a sense of nationalism and as all Australian these days do and I just think it's rather petty and pathetic that he didn't sign up and bear in mind that he's taken two years to sign the national agreement on salinity and we actually gave Western Australia financially a better deal on salinity than most of the other states because it had a greater problem. I mean, this is an issue about the Murray Darling and it's a big national issue and we had to fix it but thankfully what the states have really, you know, were more directly concerned have signed.
  JOURNALIST:
 (inaudible)
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Yeah, of course.
 JOURNALIST:
 The Premiers are suggesting there would be....
 PRIME MINISTER:
 They can speculate about what I do. I mean, people do that everyday. Mark, I am declining to say anything about what I might be doing between now and whenever I decide the election is going to be held and I still haven't decided.
 DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
 And if I might so, Peter Corish will confirm every word of what I'm about to say - I'll repeat it. This was never about, what amounts to, in the overall scheme of things, relatively minor amounts of money for specific projects. The unlocking of investment here will come from the private sector. It's all about economic growth, it's all about the security to plan, to switch, to more sophisticated and technologically advanced methods of water usage to produce more with less water, more efficiently, more environmentally appropriately and so forth and where will most of that money come from? Not the taxpayer, it was never going to. This is about securing the private sector investment because that's what agriculture is about in Australia and so in that sense - please understand the significance of this breakthrough is that it establishes secure, decent, fair, reasonable pathways back to sustainability where there's over-allocation at the same time as it locks in investment certainty and it moves in a very, very important development that's been perhaps oversighted at this point in time. The breakthrough we've been waiting for since 1994 - an effective model for trading. So the water goes where it will drive the best possible investment, where it won't be wasted and where you'll get the best environmental outcomes. Those sorts of things are the nub of this. If we're going to reduce it to a row over a bit of money here and a bit of money there you can see precisely why the Prime Minister makes the point, it's the agreement you've got focus on. Now it does of course in addition to that unlock that money for the living Murray. But please understand that the key, this is the point the scientists and the conservationists have been making, the key to getting to sustainability as we now have all come to recognise is giving farmers who after all want to look after their natural resources the investment security to do it properly.
 JOURNALIST:
 How much money is available to individual projects?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 I don't want to start speculating about money being available for anything.
 DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
 Nothing like what is now available for farmers when they go to their banks and say, we can plan with certainty.
 JOURNALIST:
 Farmers have worn the brunt of the reduction so far - was there any discussion of how city dwellers could contribute to saving water and water shortages and are you concerned that Pitt Street farmers could control water via trading rights?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Well, John might want to answer that.
 DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER:
 Look, it does include an urban water component, quite an important one which will lay the framework for more efficient water usage in terms of what's available now, but also I think it sets out, if you like, the investment framework that will be needed for some of the things that I think our cities are going to have to do in the future and that includes recycling of water. It certainly includes, you know, collecting storm water and what have you and I think quite frankly we might as well bite the bullet. I think at some time or another it's going to mean some cities will have to tackle the environmental issues surrounding further storage, so certainly that is in there, Dennis, yes it is. All of us are involved in water in Australia. Everyone of us who eats, everyone of us who wears clothes, that has a roof over our head. Every single one of us but we also have uses in an urban sense. So it does involve urban water.
 PRIME MINISTER:
 One more question.
 JOURNALIST:
 Mr Howard, are you able to quantify or even estimate the cost to the Commonwealth of your involvement in that formula for the buying out of over-allocated water?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 No, I'm not but I don't think it will be huge because you are talking about, you're talking about a period after 2014 and you're talking about an extra contribution between three and six per cent. I am told that the average buy back is not likely to rise above about five per cent. In many cases it could be less. So I don't expect it will be large and I think it's a perfectly reasonable additional cost for the Commonwealth to take on behalf of Australia's farmers who mean so much to our nation as a means of resolving the only substantial point of difference between the Commonwealth and the States. But the amount involved is I am told is not likely to be huge.
  JOURNALIST:
 Speculators, Mr Anderson, are you concerned about speculators?
 JOURNALIST:
 ... just on the issue about the (inaudible) grandparents of raising their grandchildren, can you explain a bit about what this means...?
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Well, it's an issue that Mr Beattie's raised before - and I will make this the last because I think we better let you get out of the cold, I don't want anybody catching a chill at this important time of the year, it might put you... you know, I mean, you never know, you might want to go on holidays or go to the football - and, but the grandparent issue, the Premier has raised before, and I'm quite sympathetic to his point and what we agreed was that we get our relevant departments together and see where there might have been cracks through which people were falling and we're going to come back and talk about it further.  But I think he does make a valid point on this and we would like to help.  Thank you very much.


Well, thank you very much Michael, Rene Hidding, the leader of the Liberal Party in Tasmania, my Senate colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. The first thing I'd like to ask you is if I can take some of this beautiful rain back to the mainland, particularly back to Canberra and its environs which is going through one of the most parched times certainly in the thirty years that I have been going to Canberra.
 Ladies and gentlemen, it's a great delight to be back in Launceston, to be back campaigning in the electorate of Bass and I am campaigning - I do want Michael to be the next Member for Bass. There's no point in mincing words. This election, whenever it's going to be held and can I tell you - I don't know. Despite what the media says, I haven't sort of written it down on a bit of paper and locked it away in a draw at the Lodge. I really don't know. But the election cycle in this country is three years and everyone knows the last election was on the 10th of November 2001. So if you do your sums we are approaching that time when there ought to be an election and as always Bass is going to be a tight seat.
 I think you've chosen in Michael somebody who is different. Somebody who does understand the people he wants to represent. With his background in education, he brings an understanding of the importance of learning and education to the future of our country. And this next election will be more about the future than it is about the present or about the past. The present and the past are very important but it's the kind of future that we choose for our country and for our families that will most weigh on the minds of the Australian people where ever they are when they vote. And they'll be asking themselves - do they want the economy of this country in the future to be run by myself and Peter Costello or Mark Latham and Simon Crean? Do they want to turn back the clock on industrial relations and hand back authority to the trade union movement which was something of the Australia of some years ago? Do they want to put at risk the greater economic prosperity that we have achieved? Do they want to reduce the freedom of choice that my Government has brought to parents when it comes to choosing the education of their children? Because whenever you hear Jenny Macklin or the Labor Party talk about school funding it's code for reducing parental freedom of choice. My Government stands for the simple principle that parents have the right to decide where their children should be educated and governments should support parents in that choice, not frustrate parents in the exercise of that choice.
And I say that myself as a product of the government school education for which I am very grateful in New South Wales. There are a lot of those questions that people will be asking ourselves. But the most important thing that you can do in my view in public life is to identify the goals that you want for your country, state those goals, explain how you are going to achieve them and then maintain a persistence towards achieving those goals as the years go by. I know that the Australian people don't agree with everything that I have done. I know there are a lot of people who regularly disagree with every single thing I do. I understand that. I accept that. That's part of a democratic process. But at least those people know what I believe in. At least those people have an understanding of what I stand for. And I look at my opponent, I look at the alternative - the Australian Labor Party and it's very hard to work out exactly where the Labor Party stands. Take something like job security for people in the forest industry in Tasmania. On the one hand, you have Mr Latham saying to the workers, to the unions - don't worry I won't put your jobs at risk and he goes out of that room and he courts and recruits to the Labor Party a candidate in Kingsford-Smith and you all know who his name is, whose attitudes and policies and demeanor are the absolute opposite of the job security that he has talked about only the day earlier.
 I hear the Tasmanian Government saying how wonderful the regional forest agreement is, they're right. But that Regional Forest Agreement was negotiated by my Government with the Liberal Government of Tasmania led by Tony Rundle. And I think Mr Lennon and all the other members of the current Tasmanian Government for the endorsement of that agreement because that agreement is at the heart of the security that the industry now has, that agreement has delivered the balance between caring for the environment and also delivering job security for the people of the industry. Michael mentioned Medicare, there were some figures that came out today issued by the Health Minister Tony Abbott which indicated that in the few months that the Government's new safety net has been in operation some 415,000 Australians have become eligible for the support of the safety net.
  And let me just remind you, the safety net says - that if you are an individual or a family receiving Family Tax Benefit A and your out of hospital, out of pocket expenses are more than $300 a year then you get 80% of the excess back. Now that is a real safety net for Australia's families and for the rest of us the threshold is not $300 a year but $700 a year. Now, this is the first time that we've had a Medicare Safety Net in the 20 year experience of Medicare. Yet believe it or not the Labor Party has promised to take the safety net away if they are elected to government and that confuses me. I mean, I can't pretend to be a disinterested elector when it comes to assessing the policies of the Labor Party but if I were a disinterested elector, I would think to myself that's a bit confusing coming from a political party that says it's interested in looking after the less privileged in our community because the safety net says to an Australian family, once your out of pocket expenses that's if you can't get a bulkbilling doctor of if you go and consult a specialist or you go and have any other procedure that's out of hospital. Any of your out of pocket expenses when lumped together, once they go over $300 a year you get 80% of the excess over $300 back.
Now that's a pretty good deal. I think that gives to Australian families a lot of peace of mind and I for the life of me can't understand why a government that believes in a fair society, a government that believes in social justice, I don't know why a party would want to take all of that away. So they my friends are some of the issues that you'll be hearing from me and my colleagues about in the weeks ahead, in the months ahead or the weeks ahead, take your pick. You'll be hearing about those issues and many more from us.
But of course, underpinning all of this and underpinning the achievement of any goals that we may set for the future of our country are two things that are absolutely essential - you can't have generous social programmes, you can't fund increases in education, you can fund increased provision for roads, for the environment, indeed for all activities of society unless you have two things in place - you need to have a secure defended country and you need to have a strong growing economy.
 And the whole purpose of having a strong growing economy is to give the nation the wherewithal to do the things that people want. I have often been asked over the last eight and a half years - why was I worried about reducing the deficit? Why didn't you just continue with the deficit? I keep reading articles in the newspaper where people say debt is not too bad, debt is good, go back into debt. You know, what my answer to that is, my answer is very simple, that over the last eight and a half years we've repaid 70 out of the 96 billion dollars of debt that we inherited from the Keating-Labor Government and that on average has saved us five and a half billion dollars a year in interest payments, five and a half billion dollars a year and you know where that's gone? You've received it. You've received it through increased health spending, increased defence spending, increased education spending, lower taxes, increased road funding and so the list goes on. So cutting this deficit is not just some empty exercise. If you don't go into debt, you don't have interest payments. If you are in debt big time which we were in 1996 and you reduce that debt you have lower interest payments and if you have lower interest payments and we've had them in the tune of five and a half billion dollars a year then you've got the opportunity to do these other things and that is the human dividend of good economic management and right at the moment in 2004 we have two things that we haven't had since 1968 - we've got inflation below three per cent and we've got unemployment below six per cent.
And all parts of Australia have benefited from this. Tasmania's greater economic prosperity which is clearly evident is overwhelmingly due to the national economic prosperity of this country. It's simply not possible to have high unemployment around Australia but to have low unemployment in Tasmania. It's not possible to have high inflation in Australia on the mainland and to have low inflation in Tasmania. The economy moves like a river. The whole lot, the whole national economy moves and although there are policies that can be pursued at a state or regional level that can have an impact, fundamentally the prosperity that is now being enjoyed in this State is the product of the strong national economy which has been so clearly evident over the last eight and a half years and Tasmania contrary to what the Premier said yesterday, an extraordinary inaccurate statement issued by the new Tasmanian Premier yesterday. Tasmania has not been badly treated by this Government. As a result of the GST and let me remind you all of the GST revenue goes to states. Not one single dollar of the GST is retained by the Federal Government.
Tasmania is $450 million better off over the next five years as a result of the new GST arrangements than it would have been under the old arrangements. Tasmania is the only state in Australia where the increased Medicare rebate for bulkbilling for children under 16 and cardholders where the entire state has the increased rate of $7.50. If you live in Launceston or Hobart and you're in that category everybody gets the $7.50. If you live in Sydney or Melbourne the rate's only $5 and yet I hear this man saying that we have short changed Tasmania. He appears to have forgotten the impact of I think the very reasonable and defensible and proper investments that were made in a whole multitude of communications and other things as a result of the passage of the Telstra One and Telstra Two pieces of legislation through the Federal Senate. I think of all the provisions that were made to reduce the cost disability between Tasmania and the mainland. I think, as I mentioned earlier of the contribution that was made by the Regional Forest Agreement and that Regional Forest Agreement has underpinned the resurgence of the industry and has also underpinned the growth of the eco-tourism industry in this state. Now these are all policies that have been generated and supported by the Federal Government. As a national Government we have responsibilities for all parts of Australia. Tasmania has suffered disabilities in the past and there do continue to be disadvantages brought about by separations from the mainland. But so many of those have been addressed by the policies of my Government that this proposition that in some way Tasmania has been short changed is factually incorrect and absurd in the extreme.
  Ladies and gentlemen, we're here today to focus on one very important task ahead and that is to win Bass for the Liberal Party. To make sure that somebody, himself with a young family and he therefore understands the challenges of family life in Australia in 2004. Somebody who understands the value and the importance of education in framing and shaping the minds of the young. Somebody who knows the importance of a responsive and effective health system. Somebody who knows the way in which communities need each other. And individuals in a community need to support not only a network of family, but a network of friends and acquaintances within the community. To be responsive elected people to public office need to understand the communities that they seek to represent and they seek to serve. And Michael's already in 30 short but very action packed years has certainly demonstrated a great capacity for community service. To do what he's done in 30 years is pretty remarkable. To become the young achiever of the year, to get the department head of the mathematics department at a local high school, to go through university, to get married and have three children, do all of those things by the time you're 30 - that's pretty impressive. Pretty impressive indeed.
 Well, I didn't have three children when I was 30. I can tell you that and I certainly wasn't head of a mathematics department by the time I was 30. No, I think you've  done a very, very good job. But I think you've chosen a great candidate but it's going to be very, very hard. Winning marginal seats is always difficult. Incumbency confers great benefits no matter what side of politics you might be on.
 But I'm sure that if you all work hard, if you all recruit your friends. If you all support him financially. Support him with your finances as well as with your energy and your industry and your person to person advocacy. If you do all of that, we can have that very welcome sign on election night whenever it may be when they have that barometer on the television set and you look to see whether it's going to add a bit of blue or add a bit of red, you see it adding a little bit of blue to Bass and we can all be very cheerful and happy and we can all know it's been entirely due to the people in this room because you've all gone out of here and decided to work very hard. Do that. Dedicate yourselves to getting rid of Labor in Bass and getting Michael Ferguson elected as your Member.
Thank you.


Thank you very much Elaine Henry, Bill Gates, Steve Vamos, my ministerial colleague Daryl Williams, ladies and gentlemen.
I think it's fair to say that we're welcoming to the platform this morning the world's most prominent social coalitionist.  He's probably been called a few things in his time, as we all have.  But the notion of the social coalition, the idea that the social challenges of a nation can never be solved by individuals acting alone, they can't be solved by governments acting alone, great though they may be they can't be solved by great welfare organisations acting alone, and they can't be solved by business acting alone.  But when those four elements of our community come together and when they each in their own way contribute their special assets to the solution of a problem, societies can get some remarkable outcomes.  And this morning is an opportunity to celebrate here in Australia the great leadership and the great personal commitment Bill Gates has brought to, what I choose to call in an Australian context, the social coalition.
  It is undoubtedly the case that the most transforming human event of the last quarter of the 20th Century was of course the growth of information technology.  And we don't quite know what the great transforming events of the next 25 years may be, but we do know that the impact of and the growth of information technology, its availability to every facet of our being and existence, the new frontiers it's opening up for the disadvantaged, the extraordinary opportunities it's giving to older citizens in our community, its driving force behind the surge in productivity of the world economies - all of these things will have a huge impact on our lives.
  I was saying to Bill Gates in our... in the time we had together before this gathering, that we Australians pride ourselves on being very adaptable and very innovative.  Australians can adjust to circumstances.  We are great devourers of new technology.  We are people who can use new technology to very rapid and immediate advantage, and there would be so many stories in this room from people who could testify to that.  But what I think is remarkable about Unlimited Potential, what is remarkable about the contribution that Microsoft is making, is the personal commitment of Bill Gates, to use an Australian expression, to putting something back.  It's fair to say that he's been a moderately successful capitalist, and I congratulate him on that as somebody who is an unabashed fan of decent capitalism, somebody who believes that in the long run a market-based economy does produce the best outcomes, providing it operates within ethical rules and constraints, provided it has a fair number of people who having received the great fruits of capitalism, are then willing to return it to society.
I frequently say that it's not so much that business should give more to help the underprivileged, but rather that more businesses should give.  And Bill Gates is an exemplar to the capitalists of the world and the successful businessmen and women of the world, that having received the fruits of a free market competitive system, that we all have an obligation to return some of that benefit to the less fortunate in the world and the less fortunate within our own communities.  And his contributions, particularly his special interest in the travails and the challenges of that poor continent in Africa; his worldwide commitment to the extension of the benefits of information technology; the investment of Microsoft here in Australia in the five organisations - a mixture of an organisation in The Smith Family that is part and parcel of the reference to welfare organisations or charities or community sectors - however you might choose to describe them - and other organisations with names less well known, but with pursuits as noble and as fulfilling for those who are aided and benefited by their activities, as any other organisation in Australia.
So can I, on your behalf, thank Microsoft, thank its Managing Director here in Australia for the leadership and the contribution he makes, and very particularly to thank Bill Gates for the example he represents, the contribution that his drive and energy and genius has given to the growth of information technology and the fact that he is a living example, a practical example of putting something back, of returning something to not just his own community in the United States, but communities around the world.  I thank him.  I thank Microsoft.  I applaud their generosity and the support of the five organisations which are part of Unlimited Potential here in Australia.  I wish all of those organisations well, and I'm delighted to associate the Commonwealth Government of Australia with this project.
Thank you.
  [ends]  


Thank you very much, Peter, my many parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. When I was reflecting on what I might be saying this morning apart from the substance and the announcement, my colleague Rod Kemp, the Minister for Arts and Sport and some people have said to me that's the dream combination for a federal ministry. Rod said to me that just as twenty-four years ago the establishment of the Australian Institute of Sport represented an absolute watershed for the strength and the development of elite sport in Australia, so I hope that the launch of today's programme styled Building a Healthy, Active Australia will represent a watershed in the process of encouraging Australians, not only young Australians but Australians of all ages to indulge in more physical activity and to embrace a more healthy eating style and more healthy eating habits.
 Australia is a paradox when it comes to physical activity. There is nothing binds us together as a nation quite like our love of sport. Yet we have alarmingly high levels of obesity with one in four young Australians under the age of 18 suffering from it with increasing incidence of children not engaging in any organised sporting or physical activity out of school, with declining numbers of schools offering sporting opportunities. So the paradox of that sport loving nation becoming increasingly less mobile and increasingly more obese is something that today's launch is designed to challenge. And under the title of Building a Healthy, Active Australia this is a programme which is designed to take on in a very frontal way the challenge of obesity within our community.
One of Australia's foremost experts on the challenges of childhood and of the need for early intervention in relation to children who might over time become for a combination of reasons socially deprived and therefore a challenge for our community, Dr Fiona Stanley from Western Australia remarked to me some months ago that the bad thing about obesity in Australia, well the bad news about is that it's a problem that's come upon this country fairly rapidly, that it wasn't such a big challenge 10 or 20 years ago. She said that's the bad news. She said the good news is that because it's happened in a fairly short space of time it's not perhaps as ingrained and as immovable as might be the case with something that has been the product of decades of bad habits and that is certainly an observation and a comparison that I hope turns out to be correct.
 Today's programme that I launch involves an expenditure of $116 million over a period of four years. There are essentially four components to the programme. The first component of the programme is the provision of $90 million over four years to provide children with more opportunity for physical activity after school by linking approved outside school hours care services with sporting and community groups. The programme will be conducted under the auspices of the Australian Sports Commission and it will be available to all primary schools and to approved outside school hours care services and we project it will cover 150,000 children throughout Australia.
I want to acknowledge immediately the willingness of a number of major sporting bodies in Australia and I know they will be joined by others to assist in this programme. I was greatly encouraged several months ago when in Melbourne I met the Chief Executives of Cricket Australia, the Australian Football League and of Netball Australia and those three peak sporting bodies offered the support, the financial support as well as the participation of outstanding participants in their respective sports in this programme and I know that their enthusiasm is shared by other football codes which are stronger in other parts of Australia than Tasmania and Victoria and I know that once this programme is launched there'll be no shortage of people who will be willing to participate very, very strongly.
The second element in the programme is something I announced last week with Dr Brendan Nelson, the Federal Minister for Education and that is that as a condition of federal funding of schools and this is government schools, catholic schools and other independent schools there will be a requirement that those schools offer a minimum within their school curricula of two hours physical educational sporting activity each week. Now, many schools do that. Some don't. It might have been the norm thirty or forty years ago in government schools that happen and it certainly was if my experience in the government school system of New South Wales was any guide but it is no longer the case now and that is one of the changes that has contributed to the alarming challenge that we now face.
The third element of the programme is to provide $15 million for grants to community organisations such as Parents and Citizens or Parents and Friends groups to work with schools to encourage healthy eating, for example, through the development of healthy canteen menus and we have in mind small community grants of in order of $1500 or a few thousand dollars an organisation to encourage your local and P and C, your local organisation to develop healthy eating or healthy canteen menus. And these small community grants that can be made available to a large number of community organisations, the amount of money is not large, but the spread will be very extensive and that is what is important and it will encourage local community organisations to involve themselves very directly.
And the fourth element is the provision of $11 million for an information programme that will give parents, children and communities information and encouragement they need to not only adapt and adopt more healthy eating habits but also lifestyle changes that will produce better health outcomes over a longer period of time. I'm sure that all in this audience would agree with me that the people who have the primary responsibility for instilling habits of exercise, physical activity and good eating in their children are of course parents and if parents are not active no amount of government programming, no amount of Government information, no amount of fine examples from great sportsmen and women can encourage children to exercise and to eat properly. But governments can by their action and their leadership and by the policies they support, governments can reinforce the messages which are communicated by parents. And the aim of this programme is to bring about a cultural change in our community. I'm encouraged by the fact that over the past few months there has been more talk about the problem of obesity in Australia than at any time I can remember in the thirty years that I have been in public life and that is a good start. I mean, to actually get people talking about it and to get it communicated as a supported sanctioned idea and something to be striven for and a goal to be achieved through our media and through people talking about it. And to enlist the high profile sports men and women - the people like Robert de Castella and Mal Meninga and many others and I know others will come forward to involve themselves in this is first class.
Sportsmen and women are role models and if they take advantage of the example that they can be to the young of this country and they represent a good example through their behaviour and the things they say about the behaviour of our children in relation to such things as physical exercise they can make a very big impact. I do want to thank the contribution that Peter Bartels and the Australian Sports Commission and he and Mark Peters, the chief executive have worked very hard over recent weeks to put this initiative together and it will under their overall guidance and coordination that the programme will operate. But there are a number of other organisations that have contributed very generously to allow the Government to draw on the campaign materials that they have developed and I want to thank the Australian Fruit and Vegetable Coalition that has been working with the Western Australian Government and also I do want to thank the Australian Association of National Advertisers.
There's been a bit of a debate and I don't want to particularly labour it today because it does have a party political connotation and I would hope that the programme I'm launching today will have the total support of all political sources in Australia because I would have thought that the goals of this programme should be above party politics but there has been some discussion about the issue of advertising. I simply want to say that I am in favour of responsible advertising as I know the Australian Association of National Advertisers are in this area. I am a person who does believe in the concept of commercial freedom providing activity is sanctioned by the law and I do welcome the willingness of the Australian Association of National Advertisers to support and involve themselves and to be very enthusiastic about the campaign that we're launching today.
I just want to close by reminding you of two things - firstly, that this package I'm launching today builds on a number of other programmes that the Government has already initiated which are aiming to achieve the same goals and it includes for example what we call the Active Script Programme for doctors to write lifestyle prescriptions to encourage people to exercise rather than just taking pharmaceutical drugs and I can remember when this programme was launched several years ago there was some concerned expressed that in some way the Government was trying to prevent drugs being prescribed for people and to impose some rather arbitrary notions of improved lifestyle as a substitute for drugs, particularly in relation to people who have problems with cholesterol and the like.
  But with the passage of time the wisdom of that programme and the commonsense of that direction we were trying to follow has been recognised. And we've also provided $9 million through the National Health and Medical Research Council for obesity related research and also under Medicare we've provided a new preventative health check for indigenous adults at a cost of $12 million over five years and there is of course a particular dietary problem amongst indigenous Australians and a particular emphasis. But ladies and gentlemen, I am really enthusiastic about the initiative that we're launching today. It's built on commonsense notions and my experience has been that if you base an appeal to the Australian people on commonsense it is always supported. It is in everybody's interest that we exercise more and not just the young, older people should continue or resume the habit of exercise because exercise is not only something that is good for people's overall health but it's also something that is good for mental wellbeing.
 It is a fact as we all know that if you engage in physical activity it not only makes you feel healthier but it also improves the mental processes no end and I can't commend too strongly the benefits of regular exercise. I can't commend too strongly the desirability of instilling in the whole community but particularly the young because the habits develop when we are young stay with us forever. The habits of better eating, of combining a more active lifestyle with better eating habits and I believe that the programme that I've launched today will make a major contribution to it and it will involve the whole community. It will involve schools, it will involve sporting organisations, it will involve local P and C's, it will involve parents and it involve the support of the Government through the Australian Sports Commission and to all of those and particularly to my colleague Rod Kemp who's had ministerial responsibility for putting this programme together - I thank you very warmly and I commend the programme to all of the Australian people.


Thank you very much Sandra.  Lisa Curry-Kenny, the Chairman of the National Australia Day Council, my parliamentary colleagues, the holders of the existing awards, past recipients, ladies and gentlemen.
   I think I should start my remarks by saying what incredibly impressive young musical talent this country really has.  Those two performances this morning, appropriately enough at the Conservatorium of Music, have reminded us of the enormous reservoir and variety of talent that this wonderful country of ours has.  Can I start by saluting the contribution that Steve Waugh and Donna and Tehree and Hugh have made in their different ways over the last six or seven months and in what they're doing as wonderful ambassadors in so many different ways, of the great capacities and the great diversity of this country.
   Something that Steve said in his interview with Sandra struck me, when he said that it was very much about creating a country in which people could pursue their dreams and no matter what the adversity was, to come back and achieve what they want to do.  And that is the story of the lives of millions of Australians in different ways, and the four people who were chosen in January of this year, in their own particular ways, have done all of that.  Steve's sporting skills and the great leadership that he has given.  The inspiration that Donna represents of somebody who has been through unbelievable pain and suffering, and demonstrated an extraordinary level of courage and inspiration, and is therefore a source of hope and comfort for so many.  Tehree with her particular emphasis on something that is so important, and that is the capacity of the older generation of Australians, who have lived through so many periods in the history of this country, to give of their wisdom and their experience to the younger generations.  And then finally, and certainly not least important, the extraordinary energy and vitality and enthusiasm that Hugh has brought and the inspirational leadership that he has given to encourage some what 1,500 volunteers to be involved in the activities that he regards as important, and all of us recognise as being quite inspirational.  And he's a demonstration to all of us of just how important it is to recognise the constant capacity of the younger generation of this country to renew the Australian dream and to remind us that no one generation of Australians is better than the next, and that those who despair of the future of this country couldn't be more wrong and couldn't be more out of touch with the tremendous vitality and commitment of young Australians.
   So if we can have for 2005 four more Australians who will in time fill the shoes of those we've got here today and to demonstrate the sort of talents that they have demonstrated, then indeed we will be very fortunate.  But I know that will turn out to be the case because over the years these Awards have produced wonderful people.  I think the way in which the Awards are now organised, the fact that we have contributions from each of the states and we have four categories, they're all awarded at the same time, and because of the great success of having the awards in Canberra followed by the concert outside Parliament House and the great success of that, we're going to follow that again in 2005.
 Lisa, can I thank you and the members of your Council for the wonderful work that you do.  I think you've given great leadership to Warren and all the other staff members who work so tremendously hard, and to the people who sponsor the National Australia Day Awards.  They are a great coming together of this country, and it's an illustration... an opportunity rather, for all of us to salute people who in their different ways have contributed so much to make this, as Steve rightly called it, the greatest country in the world.  So I am in that spirit delighted to launch the search for the Australians of the Year 2005.  I again thank Steve and his fellow recipients for being here today.  I thank them all for the wonderful work that they are doing in spreading the message and living out the things that they believe in, that they have achieved.  And they make all of us as Australians feel immensely proud, and I know that in 2005 we'll find and choose people who will worthily fill their shoes and carry on that message.
 Thank you.


Well thank you very much Chris, Andrea, Jason, Steve, my existing parliamentary colleagues, both federal and state, and it's great to see a former colleague in Richard Alston here tonight, still playing out his great support and affection for the Liberal Party, ladies and gentlemen.
This has become an honoured annual tradition.  Three years ago, almost to the day, on the 14th of July, we fought and won a magnificent victory and it was, as Michael Ronaldson said, a wonderful team effort, it brought together all of the talents and all of the energy of the Victorian division of the Liberal Party and many parliamentary colleagues from around Australia.  We knew that if we held Aston we could truly claim that we were back in the game, we knew that if we lost Aston in that by-election it would have given enormous momentum to the Labor Party in July of 2001.  And we all knew that when we did hold onto Aston in a very impressive way that it represented an enormous set back to the ambition of the Labor Party to win the election in 2001.  Now we don't have an Aston by-election this year, we don't have any by-elections this year that I'm aware of, but we do have an enormous challenge, we'll be asking the Australian people for the fourth time in a row to vote us back into office and we may well think with economic conditions as strong as they are, with an opposition that is yet to tell the Australian people what it believes in and what it stands for, and I have faced now five leaders of the Australian Labor Party and I have to say that the current leader of the Australian Labor Party is the most policy deficit of all of the leaders of the Labor Party that I've faced.
 I think people knew what, and politics is in the end about competing visions for the future of our country, politics in the end is about a choice between one platform as opposed to another, and when I think of the various Labor Leaders I've faced, I think people knew what Bob Hawke stood for, you mightn't have agreed with it, but he carved out an identity and people knew that he had certain priorities and beliefs, I think many people knew what Paul Keating stood for, they didn't like it, but they knew what it was, I think Kim Beazley finally in the dying months of the last campaign finally established what he stood for and people decided that it wasn't tough and strong enough.  And we all knew that Simon Crean basically believed in restoring the power and authority of the trade union movement to run Australia and we didn't like that very much. Btu I've got to say I've not got the faintest idea of what the current Leader of the Opposition stands for, I don't know what their tax policy is, I don't know what their policy on families is, I haven't the faintest idea of what their policy on foreign affairs and defence is, except to cut and run at the worst possible time, giving the worst possible signal to the worst possible people in Iraq.  They claim that are better on health and education than what we are, yet the reality is they have not articulated an alternative policy on health and education.  There's a strong suspicion that if they win the election they'll have a long list of independent schools on the hit list, there is a suspicion, more than a suspicion, a commitment on their part to do away with the Medicare safety net which is one of the best pieces of strengthening of Medicare that this country has had for years.
  But having said I don't know what they stand for in all of these areas there is one thing that I do I think detect a stand for and it's been exposed today in a very graphic way by none other than Access Economics, which is a respected independent economic organisation that has done costings of Labor Party tax policy, not only for this election but the previous election, and Access Economics released today a report that is a damning indictment of the consequences of the Labor Party's industrial relations policies.  Of all of the things that I dread about a national Labor government in this country, and if Labor wins the next election you'll have nine Labor governments in Australia, just imagine nine of them, it'd be Labor everywhere, all across the country, state, federal and at a territorial level.  But one of the things I think we can be certain they will do is to bring back a union dominated industrial relations system.  They'll take away Australian workplace agreements, they'll take away the secondary boycott provisions in the Trade Practices Act, they will give effectively unrestricted union entry into workplaces, even where none of the workforce belongs to the union or wants to belong to the union, they'll destroy many of the pro-productivity measures that have been a feature of our industrial relations policy.  And the consequences of that identified not by me, not by the Treasury, but indeed by an independent economic organisation of great repute, Access Economics, an organisation that Labor itself says is expert enough to cost its own policies, and Access Economics has done a report for the Business Council of Australia and it has calculated the massive economic consequences of a re-regulation of the Australian labour market and for the first time in a long time we have some independent compelling evidence of the economic consequences if Labor's industrial relations policies are brought back.  Now I speak with some feeling about this issue because of all the policy things that I've been identified with in public life, especially over the last 15 or 20 years, none has been more important to me and to the future of Australia than the reform of our industrial relations system.  We have a stellar economy by world standards at the present time, and one of the major reasons we do is that we've changed the way we conduct industrial relations in this country.  When I had the privilege a few week ago in Washington of having an hour long discussion with Dr Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the American Federal Reserve system, we talked about the value of productivity improvements to a modern economy and he pointed out how impressed he was with the productivity improvements that had occurred in Australia over the last few years and they were due to two things, they were due to the way in which we adapted and used information technology as Australians in their great capacity to adapt to new technology and new circumstances can always do, and the other reason is that we changed our industrial relations system, and all of that will be at risk if we turn back the clock.  As somebody said today, I think it was Phil Barresi, he said very effectively at a gathering of small business people in his electorate, he said that something like 60 to 70 per cent of the membership of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party consisted of current or former trade union officials, yet the union membership in the private sector in Australia is now only 17 per cent. And it gives you an idea of the unrepresentative character, and it gives you an idea of the obsession that the Labor Party still has for the re-regulation of our labour markets.  So I urge you all to study reports of that Access Economics analysis of the economic consequences of turning back the clock so far as industrial relations are concerned.
  We have my friends come a long way in the last eight and a half years, this country's economy is the envy of the rest of the world, we do have the best economic conditions we've had since World War II, we have for the first time since 1968 inflation below three per cent and unemployment below six per cent.  We've repaid in the last eight and a half years $70 billion of that debt that we inherited that we weren't told about in March of 1996.  And that's not just an empty figure. Because we've repaid that debt it means that every year we have $5.5 billion more available to spend on education, on health, on roads, on defence, on taxation cuts, yes, and on baby bonuses from the 1st of July and all the other things that ought to represent the dividend of good economic management.  And economic management is never an end in itself, the purpose of running an economy well is to bring security and contentment and opportunity to the people of our nation.  I don't want the economy run well to get some kind of certificate from an international financial organisation, Peter Costello and I haven't sweated over the Australian economy in the past eight and a half years to get some kind of international applause. We've done it to produce a human benefit and that human benefit is all around us, and there are many things that I'm proud of in relation to our economic management, but in a way there's nothing I'm more proud of than the fact that we in the Liberal Party, we the party that believes in enterprise and business and personal effort and personal rewards and personal endeavour, yet we have been far more successful in rewarding the workers and the employees of Australia than have our political opponents. In the 13 years that Mr Hawke and Mr Keating were in power, real wages, that's your wages after inflation, rose by just on three per cent, in 13 years. And in the eight and a half years that we have been in Government real wages have risen by 13 per cent.  In other words, we have been better at remunerating the employees and the workers of Australia, unionists and non-unionists alike, than our political opponents.  And when you add to that the lowest interest rates in 30 years and the enormous improvements in employment and the buoyancy of the business outlook, and might I say to those who are here in business tonight the profit share of the Australian economy, that portion of our annual wealth going to corporate profits, is the highest its been since we began to record those figures through the Commonwealth statistician.
  So we have a good picture, we have a good story to tell, but it won't be enough to tell a good story of the past or to say good things about the present, we must also talk about the future.  We must talk about future obligations to achieve a balance between the development of this country and the environment.  And last week, last Friday in Canberra we struck an historic deal between a Federal Liberal Government and eight state and territory Labor Governments about water in this country, a most precious resource, a resource which is becoming increasingly scarce and we as a nation must confront that issue as Australians and not as Queenslanders or New South Welshman or as Victorians.  Rivers flow across state boundaries, the Great Artesian Basin lies beneath the boundaries of states, we have to find national solutions to a national challenge and we've begun to do that and a result of the decision taken last Friday, $500 million can begin to be spent on repairing the health of the River Murray and restoring the capacity of the Murray/Darling Basin to contribute to the agricultural wealth of this country.
  There are many other environmental challenges, we must recognise we have in our energy statement that this country's enormous natural advantages in areas such as coal and natural gas and to a lesser extent oil can best be exploited by investing rapidly in technologies that reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the use of those energy sources. But the choice in the future is not between traditional sources of energy and renewable sources, but between those energy sources that produce high emissions and those that produce low emissions. We must continue to confront the challenge of an ageing population, we're not as unfortunate in that sense and it's not happening as rapidly in Australia as it is in Japan and many countries in Europe, but we have in common with all industrialised societies that challenge, it needs a combination of policies, it demands that we utilise our older mature workers more effectively than we have in the past, we don't ask people to work until they drop, but we invite people to work for as long as we wish to, and if they are allowed to do so they will contribute to make a massive contribution to the future of our country.  We need to recognise, as the Government has, the need to have a sensible balance between the provision of strong health and pharmaceutical services and the importance of having them kept on an affordable basis. And it took political expediency and after 25 months of posturing for the Australian Labor Party to finally recognise, not for the best of reasons but for self-interested reasons, the need to support our measures in relation to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
We need to recognise as the years go by that internationally this nation's future does not lie exclusively with one part of the world.  Our great priority will always be our immediate region in the Asia Pacific, but Australia is a nation that has linkages and obligations and also opportunities all around the world. We are in every sense a citizen of the entire world and not just as our region.  And I count it as one of the great successes of this country's foreign relations over the last eight and a half years that we have simultaneously been able to build an ever closer relationship with the United States of America, yet at the same time to build a very close relationship with China.  And that achievement was symbolised last year in the national parliament when on successive days the House of Representatives and the Senate were addressed by the President of the United States, George Bush, and the President of China, Hu Jintao.  And there the entire Australian community could see symbolised the fusion of those interests, there was nothing incompatible between the two of them, there's nothing that stops a close relationship with the, results in a close relationship with the United States affecting our capacity to relate to the people of China. And so it will be in the future and we are a nation that has great and enduring links with different parts of the world that obviously because of our geographical proximity our first but not our exclusive interest must be in our own region.
Now they are some of the challenges and some of the opportunities that we have ahead of us.  But we only have this if we have good policy, good economic management doesn't happen by accident, it doesn't fall out of a tree, it has to be worked on, it can't be taken for granted and if you put the wrong people in charge with the wrong policies or a combination of the wrong policies and no policies you'll end up with a bad result. And there's a lot at stake later on in the year when the election is held, whenever later on in the year that may be, there is a lot at stake.  What is at stake is a maintenance of what we have come to enjoy over the last eight and a half years, what is at stake is the repute and the respect of this country around the world.  What is at stake is the capacity of this country to respond in an effective way to the immense challenges that we have.  And in many ways the fate of our government could rest in the hands of people in this room.  If we can hold all of our seats in Victoria, if we can reach out and win seats like McMillan and Chisholm and hold the ones we have now, we have the launching pad for a victory.
  So my friends, we have collectively a great responsibility, this wonderful party of ours which I've been proud to lead for so many years now has demonstrated again and again that it is the most representative party of the Australian people.  We're not owned by anybody, we're not owned by the business community, we're not owned by any one section of the community, we are a party for all Australians and for all the talents of all Australians.  And if we can, by our work and our effort and our policy projection, in the time ahead communicate that sense of passion and commitment to the future as much as of a telling of the story of the last eight and a half years then I believe we will be able to celebrate a victory on election night, but it will be hard, it will be tough and anybody who pretends otherwise is deluding themselves and does not understand the political history of this country. But I am greatly encouraged by the quality of my colleagues who hold seats and represent Victoria in the Senate. I want to pay tribute to all of them from Peter Costello, a magnificent deputy leader and a wonderful Treasurer who's done an absolutely fantastic job over eight and a half years, I pay tribute to all of them from Peter down.  But like Oliver, I want more, I want more Victorian lower house members, I want to hang onto all the Senators we've got, and if we can do that we can come back again here next year, all of us, with a few more MPs, with Chris returned and Bruce and Phil and Jason Wood taking over from the just re-married Bob Charles, and congratulations Bob, it was great to see he and Rosie exchange their vows, it was a wonderful ceremony and Janette and I were privileged to be there, he's been a great mate and a great stalwart for the Liberal Party.  If we can do that we can come back here and have a real celebration in a years time. Let's go to it, and let's win it.


Prime Minister, Ministers in the Government of Thailand, my fellow Ministers, Leader of the Opposition, parliamentary colleagues, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a parliamentary luncheon to welcome a visiting head of government with a real difference.  The visit by the Prime Minister, accompanied as he is by no fewer than nine ministers in his government, represent in terms of the number of ministers taking part in the visit, the largest ministerial delegation that any Australian government has received here in Canberra.  On behalf of all the Australians present Prime Minister, I want to thank you for the courtesy that you have paid to our country, the honour that you have paid, to bring so many of your senior colleagues with you.
  Today of course saw the signing of the Free Trade Agreement between Australia and Thailand.  This Free Trade Agreement represents a marvellous advance for both countries.  Like all free trade agreements, they are never concluded in the first place unless they contain benefits for both parties.  The benefits for Australia from the Free Trade agreement are strong equally.  Our markets will be increasingly open to the goods and services of Thailand.  Thailand is a fast growing, strong economy.  The relationship between Australia and Thailand trade wise is represented by a trade comprising just under $6 billion on an annual basis and this Free Trade Agreement, which the Prime Minister and I put the finishing touches to when we were at the APEC meeting in Bangkok last year, will add mightily to the trade between our two countries.
  For me it is another powerful reminder of how important is the region, the Asian Pacific region, and the economies of that region, to Australia's economic future.  It is the responsibility of all Australian governments to make certain that in a difficult world trading environment, we take advantage of bilateral trade agreements and opportunities when they present themselves.  In recent years Australia has been able to forge impressive economic partnerships with many of the different countries in our region and it gives me a very special pleasure to welcome the Prime Minister of Thailand to Australia on the occasion of our signing this most important agreement.
  And although the main item on the agenda today was the signing of the agreement, in another sense the most important agreement that was signed was in fact the one that provided for working visas for holiday makers between our two countries, because what that agreement has done is to symbolise the very close personal relations that exist between the people of our two countries.  It is also a source of great pleasure to me and to all of my Australian colleagues that Australia is now the preferred destination amongst Thai students who study overseas.  And what that means is the reality, and that is the people of Thailand studying in this country are not only most welcome, but they feel welcome and feel very comfortable as our guests.
  We have a close regional partnership with Thailand.  It has grown closer over the years and the Agreement that was signed today will bring us even closer in the years ahead.  We share similar perspectives.  We understand the importance of freer trade, of more dynamic economic growth.  We also understand the importance of our broader responsibilities.  Thailand is a partner with Australia in the hard process of helping Iraq to a democratic future and of rebuilding that country's institutions after 35 years of a brutal dictatorship.  We are also of course partners in the most dynamic economic region in the world - the Asian Pacific region.  As members of APEC and as close colleagues in so many other respects and as two nations that have developed strong people to people links, it is a very important relationship, a very warm and a very friendly one.
  The Free Trade Agreement that was signed today was very much the product of very hard and dedicated work from a number of people on both sides, and I take the opportunity of paying a special tribute on the Australian side to my colleague the Minister for Trade Mark Vaile, who has been very busy on free trade agreements over the past couple of years.  And his interaction with Ministers Adisai, Surakiart and Watana at various stages from Thailand, laid the groundwork for the final agreement that was concluded in October of last year.  I first visited Thailand long before I entered politics back in 1964.  I found then as a relatively impoverished traveller that they were warm and generous and open people, and Thais who have chosen to make Australia their home and become Australian citizens are making a wonderful contribution to this country and I am so delighted that that warm relationship between our two countries has been taken several stages further through the signing of the Free Trade Agreement and all the other co-lateral agreements.
  And to you Mr Prime Minister I pay a special tribute.  You have given to the leadership of your country great energy and dynamism.  You're a person who believes that the business culture and the entrepreneurial culture of a country is very important to its economic future.  You have a very clear and progressive and positive view of Thailand's place in the region.  You are willing to work in a practical way with many countries to secure agreements to the advantage of your people and you understand how important it is for the future of your country that as it grows in wealth, that that wealth be freely and fairly available to all of your citizens.  With a formula such as that, your country has a great future.  And it's a source of enormous pleasure to me that we can share some of that future with you and your people, and that together in the years ahead the people of Thailand and the people of Australia will tread a path and a journey together.  And I hope in some small way, leaders of the future of our two countries will look back on the signing of this agreement and this day as having made a significant contribution to a partnership and a friendship that will get better as the years go by, and is very important to me, as I know it is to you.
Mr Prime Minister, I thank you.  I wish you well.  Thank you for bringing so many of your colleagues with you.  And I now invite the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Mark Latham, to support my remarks.  Thank you.
[ends]



Thank you very much David for that very kind introduction, my ministerial and parliamentary colleague Joe Hockey the Minister for Small Business, David Koch, ladies and gentlemen.
 It's a real buzz for me to address this conference and to take the opportunity of not only saying a few things about the small business climate but also in conjunction with the release of our document today entitled 'Committed to Small Business' to highlight one or two significant announcements that have been contained in that document.  It's a buzz because there's probably no group in the community with which the philosophy of my political party is more instantaneously identified than the small business community.
I came from a small business family.  I've always thought about the best thing that you could do in this country was to open a small business and make a success of it and leave more behind to your family than you started with and I guess that is the driving force, the motivation, the raison d'etre of so many people in this room and we have tried very very hard in the eight and a half years that we have been in office to do everything we can to create that kind of climate.  I am sure that most people in this room think that the fundamental job of a government is to give them a decent economic climate and then get out of the way and we've tried to do that.  We haven't always been successful.  There are probably some in this room who think that we're still much in the way in certain areas and I hope one of the announcements I'll make in a moment will get us a little further out of the way to the satisfaction to a lot of people in this room.
I would take the opportunity of reminding you that the profit share for Australian corporations at the present time is the highest since records began to be kept and that is not just a bare statistic; it is a measure of some of the things at which David Murray spoke; it's a measure of the very strong productivity of the Australian economy; it's measure of one of the ingredients that stamp Australians out from people around the world and that is our extraordinary adaptability.  I remember once having a conversation with the head of one of the largest financial institutions in the world, he was an American and he said that the two groups of people he liked employing most were Australians and South Africans because he regarded them as incredibly adaptable people and he said the capacity of Australians to adapt to changed circumstances are quite remarkable.  And that is one of the keys to the success of the Australian economy over the last few years and particularly the small business sector of the Australian economy which has provided 62 per cent of the new jobs that have been generated over the last eight and a half years.  In other words, small, business has provided more than its fair share of additional jobs that have become available over that period of time.  One of the great reasons for that is that people, men and women in small business have demonstrated a remarkable capacity, a remarkable capacity to adapt to changed circumstances.  And, of course, when you drill down a little further into small business you get fascinating insights, you find the extraordinary internet usage in small business, you find the remarkable growth of home-based businesses within the Australian community.  And something like 30 to 40 per cent of those home-based businesses are now being commenced by women within the Australian community and the contribution that those businesses are making to the changing face of small business in the Australian community is, of course, quite remarkable.
We do have a strong economy and we have for the first time since 1968; we have inflation below 3 per cent; we have unemployment below 6 per cent; we have a national debt which is 3.9 per cent of GDP, against an OECD average of about 47 to 50 per cent.  And we've paid off about $70 billion of debt.  We're collecting more company tax off a lower company tax base or rate rather because the economy's performing better and it's a demonstration that if you have strong economic growth you take care of so many of the budget problems that countries face.  We had not so long ago a 36 per cent corporate tax rate, we've now got a 30 per cent.  We've halved capital gains tax for individuals and we've maintained through dividend imputation and also a number of other important taxation changes we've maintained a very strong climate for the operation of small business. I  know that a few years ago, and it may seem a distant recollection to many of you now, we introduced a new taxation system and there were a lot of challenges involved in that new taxation system for small business and it wasn't as easy for a lot of people in small business to adapt to the GST as it was for some of the larger corporations and even now some years from that event, I record my gratitude and admiration on behalf of the government for the way in which small business so manfully coped with the introduction of that new system, which I believe has put many small businesses in Australia on a far more transparent, sound basis and has greatly aided the efficient operation of those businesses.
Now there's always a debate within the community about the balance between prudent regulation and the freedom of the market to operate.  Regrettably, some regulation is necessary if a market based economy is to function smoothly.  The responsibility of a government is not to go too far, is not to overreact when some corporate excesses produce a public demand for change, but equally to recognise that unless that balance is kept a certain amount of public faith in the operation of the business sector will be lost.
  We announced, as you know, in the most recent budget that eligible small businesses would be able to report and pay their GST annually and this affected something like 740,000 very small businesses with small annual turnovers of up to $50,000 as well as non profit organisations with a turnover of up to $100,000.  And, as a result of this initiative, as I say, some three quarters of a million predominately home-based small businesses would only have to lodge their Business Activity Statement once a year and they'll be able to lodge it at the same time as their income tax returns.  There were a number of additional taxation measures announced in that same time, including the extension of several fringe benefits tax exemptions and new annual private use apportionment rules in relation to the GST and also there's recently been announced an Australian Taxation Office small business debt assistance initiative announced last week by the tax commissioner which allows for extended repayment periods and special treatment around the General Interest Charge.  But we do recognise that further steps need to be taken to reduce the compliance burden. And I know that many in small business have been concerned for a long time at the administrative burden associated with the operation of Australia's superannuation system.  And this burden, particularly the reporting requirements, is a major irritant to small businesses employing casual and itinerant workers, most notably in the restaurant and catering and horticultural industries. And the Government has therefore decided that with effect from the 1st of January next year we will remove the requirement for employers to report superannuation guarantee contributions to their employees and employers are currently required to provide quarterly reports to each employee about superannuation contributions made on their behalf.  Employees will continue to receive information on their superannuation contributions, at least annually from their superannuation funds, and for many employees contributions will also continued to be reported on pay slips.  Employers will still be required of course to make the superannuation guarantee payments on behalf of their employees, at least quarterly, but the reporting requirements which are often very irksome and burdensome to people with itinerant workforces and in the hospitality and entertainment industries those reporting requirements with effect from the 1st of January next year will be completely abolished.
You'll probably be aware that a couple of weeks ago the Treasurer made a number of announcements of the Government's response to the Dawson report on the Trade Practices Act. He spoke of the proposal to introduce amendments to section 46 - a much debated section, and a section that seems to encapsulate some of the legal tension, if I can put it like that, between small and large corporations. And the purpose of our amendments is to provide additional guidance to the courts in the consideration of predatory pricing cases. And I know that this area has been of particular concern to small business and the government is very strongly committed to this important improvement.  And we're also going to pursue amendments to section 46 to ensure that it applies to the anti-competitive leverage of market power by firms from one market to another.  Having introduced them, the Government remains committed to the unconscionable conduct provisions and will increase the transaction threshold for small businesses seeking protection under section 51 a-c from $3 million to $10 million.  And small businesses I think will be aware of also raised concerns over the approval process for those wanting to undertake collective bargaining negotiations in their dealings with larger businesses.  And the Government recently introduced important legislation to provide a speedier and simpler notification process to allow small businesses to get together and to negotiate collectively.  And this new notification, to be administrated by the ACCC whose chairman Graeme Samuel is with us tonight, will be a simple low cost and fast process compared with the existing authorisation procedures and will help further reduce the regulatory burden on small business.
As a further indication of our commitment to the small business sector having appropriate protection through the Trade Practices Act, the Government has decided to great a new position within the ACCC and that is a new position of deputy chairman with particular responsibility in relation to small business.  And while there's going to be consultation with the states and territories, as required by the legislation, it is intended that Mr John Martin, the longest serving ACCC commissioner and the commissioner with small business responsibilities, will be promoted to it.
There's one other issue of great significance that I want to dwell on in my remarks tonight and that is the issue of industrial relations.  Of all of the public policy issues with which I have been associated in public life, I've probably poured more passion into reforming Australia's industrial relations system than any other single issue. I've done that for a combination of reasons, I've done it because I believe very strongly a long time ago that this country needed to bring about an historic change in our labour relations if it were to fully realise its economic potential.  I believed for a long time as many others did that we had inherited an industrial relations system that produced lowest common denominator results, that we inherited an industrial relations system that may have been appropriate for the Australia of World War I, depression or even World War II days, but it was not an industrial relations system that was going to enable Australia to fully exploit the opportunities of a globalised economy.
  And so both in opposition and in government we have set about major changes to Australia's industrial relations system and of course one of the objectives I've had is the benefit that that change would bring to the small business sector, with a focus, a very strong focus on workplace agreements being the product of workplace negotiations, and producing outcomes which were to the mutual benefit of individual workplaces.  Our industrial relations system, especially over the last eight and a half years, has been transformed.  The introduction of Australian Workplace Agreements, the restoration of the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act, the simplification of the awards system, the greater encouragement in whatever form it might take to the development of workplace agreements and understandings, all of these has made a major contribution to the growth of productivity in the Australian economy.
  There are always some statistics of which any Prime Minister who has held the office as long as I have, or even for a shorter period of time, is immensely proud.  But there is no statistic of which I am prouder than the one that says that in the eight and a half years we have been in Government, real wages in the Australian community have risen by 14 per cent.  But in the previous thirteen and a half years, real wages rose by only 2.3 per cent. And that turns the story of the government of the political parties allegedly of business actually producing better outcomes for the employees of Australia than the government of the party allegedly for the employees.  And one of the reasons that we were able to do that is of course that we have produced much higher level of productivity, and the reason we have higher levels of productivity in Australia now is that we have a much better industrial relations system.
  And if I could be forgiven for a moment for being vaguely partisan, the thing I would grieve about most, if there were to be a change of government in this country whenever the federal election is held, would be that we would turn back the clock so far as industrial relations would be concerned.  I think that would be the biggest loss of all because we can't turn back that clock without doing great damage to our economy.  We have moved on from the old days.  We only have 17 or 18 per cent of our private sector workforce who now belong to a trade union, and it would be the height of economic stupidity to return our industrial relations system to the control of a movement that is now representing a dwindling number of people within the private sector, and that would not make any sense at all.
  Yet that is the choice that the country faces, it's the choice the small business sector faces, because the policy of our opponents and so strongly identified with a report presented by Access Economics last weekend, lists change after change - the abolition of workplace agreements, the taking out of the Trade Practices Act of the secondary boycott provisions, the increased opportunities for unwelcome union entry into workforces, the stipulation that corporations doing business with the Federal Government must disclose the identity of subcontractors.  Proviso after proviso that would return our industrial relations system to what it was a number of years ago.  The restoration of a lot of the power of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission, the restoration of the greater role of the awards system, and inevitably a decline in the primacy of workplace understandings and workplace agreements.  And however it is dressed up, it would represent a return to days that I had thought and I had hoped we had put behind us.
  So I do make a very strong pitch to this gathering tonight to keep in mind in your consideration of these things as Australians, as you do and will over the time ahead, not only to take into account what this Government has been able to achieve - and I don't pretend that some good things weren't done by our predecessor government in a number of economic areas, and when that government made good decisions in government such as the floating of the exchange rate and changes in tariff levels, we then in the Opposition were very pleased to support those changes - but what I do ask you to bear in mind is not only the things that we have achieved together over the last eight and a half years, but also the risk of a change, especially but not only in the area of industrial relations.
  Can I finish my remarks by saying again how much as Prime Minister I have appreciated and respected and admired the contribution that the small business community of Australia has made to the vitality and the growth and the strength of the Australian economy.  This country has a presence in the world now that it hasn't had in my lifetime.  This country is respected not only for its extraordinary economic strength and economic achievement, it's also respected for the willingness it has displayed on a number of occasions to take difficult but necessary positions and to stand for what it believes in.  I've learnt a number of things I hope in public life, and one of those things I have learnt is that it should never be assumed that people who support you necessarily agree with everything that you have done, but in the long run what is required is for a government and a country to give a climate which is conducive to hard work and risk taking and business enterprise, and also to produce an economic environment that encourages all of those things, but also a country that is willing to take a stand on issues that it regards as very important.
I thank all of you for the contribution that you have made to the evident strength and prosperity of the Australian economy.  I wish you well.  I hope your conference is an enormous success.  And I say again how much I enjoy, as somebody who has always believed very much in the small business ethic of Australia, how much I enjoy being with all of you tonight.
  Thank you.
[ends]



Well thank you very much Nick, Simon Birmingham, ladies and gentlemen.  It's great to be back in Adelaide.  I've just come from Sydney where I was overnight, and I'm looking forward to spending a few days here in Adelaide and I am particularly pleased to be here in the electorate of Hindmarsh, which has been so wonderfully represented in the national parliament over these past years by Christine Gallus, who I think has done an absolutely outstanding job.
  Just as in the Olympic Games you have events that have baton changes, so it is in politics you have events that involve a baton change.  And Christine is handing the baton, certainly the Liberal baton and I hope after the next election - whenever it may be held, so let's get that out of the way at the beginning, I haven't come here to announce that - I hope the baton in Hindmarsh will pass to the very young and enthusiastic and capable hands of Simon Birmingham, and I am delighted to be here to meet many of the people of the Hindmarsh community.  A lot of you I know well already because, as you know, this is certainly not the first time that I've come to this electorate.  And Nick is right.  I think the Adelaide Oval is the most beautiful cricket field in Australia, and indeed some people tell me Football Park just over there is not too bad either.  But the Adelaide Oval and the city of Adelaide is a wonderful part of Australia.
  But I'm also here to say a couple of things about issues that are important to the future of our country.  As I look around this room, I see represented all of those great organisations that make this country strong and fair, those great community organisations - the RSL, the Lions Clubs, the local church organisations, the welfare organisations that know more about what it is to be a battler in this country than any other section of the Australian community.  I see the sporting clubs represented.  Sport is the great national cement in this country.  It binds us all together whatever our sporting passions may be, and I have a number and so do you.  They bring us together in a wonderful way.
  Australia at the present time is enjoying an extraordinary period of economic growth and strength.  There is no doubt about that.  Our economy at the present time is the strongest it's been, certainly in my lifetime.  We are enjoying for the first time since 1968 unemployment which is below six per cent and inflation that is below three per cent. We've seen wages grow sustainably over the last eight and a half years.  We have interest rates at their lowest levels for a generation.  We have strong business prospects.  But importantly, and because we have repaid a lot of debt, we are able to afford to invest even more resources in things that are important to all local communities - in schools, in medical care, in roads and in other infrastructure.  I don't want to bore you with a lot of figures, but can I just leave you with one, and that is that as a result... yes, and we have a baby bonus as well.  And you know, there's plenty more too.
  But ladies and gentlemen, I give you one figure just to take away from this gathering.  You hear us talking a lot about debt, and we did have a big debt eight and a half years ago.  Our nation had a debt, the Commonwealth Government had a debt of about $96 billion, and that's now been reduced by about 70 of that 96, and as a result of reducing that debt - surprise, surprise - we have on average another $5.5 billion a year over.  And because we don't have a big debt, we can actually use that $5.5 billion.  We don't have to put it in the bank.  We can actually invest it for the benefit of the Australian people.  And every year that extra $5.5 billion could be spent on strengthening Medicare and providing a safety net, providing more money to state and to independent and Catholic schools to strengthen our education system, spend more on roads, spend more on defence, and very importantly for the people of South Australia, invest it in cleaning up the River Murray.  So don't let anybody ever convince you that paying off debt is a dry, arid, pointless exercise.  Just as you pay off the mortgage on your house, you've got the interest payments that you would otherwise have to meet, to spend on something else.  So it is that a nation that pays off its debt has got the money it otherwise would spend on interest, to invest in lower taxes, in spending on education, in spending on other things.
  Now I know as Prime Minister that there is no issue long-term that is more important to many people in South Australia than to get the River Murray flowing again, not only for the crucial importance it has for the water supply of this city, the quality of your drinking water, but also the tremendous importance it has from an environmental point of view.  And before the meeting in Canberra a couple of weeks ago, I made it very clear to all of the State Premiers and to indeed the whole nation that that meeting was a crucial test of whether cooperative federalism within our nation could work.  And it wasn't going to be an old style Premiers' conference where Premiers came long and said we'll sign on the dotted line if you give us another few hundred million.  We've already given the states another $9 billion over the next five years courtesy of the growth in revenues from the GST.  And what I asked the State Premiers and Chief Ministers to do at that meeting was to rise above any parochialism and to recognise we wanted an outcome that was for Australia - not an outcome for Queensland or for New South Wales or for Victoria or for South Australia, but an outcome for Australia.  And we did get a good outcome for Australia.  And that good outcome for Australia was also particularly good for South Australia because there's $500 million now which can be spent on cleaning up the River Murray and there are seven or eight icon projects that have been identified.
  And now that we've got agreement on the national water initiative, we are able to go ahead and have that money spent, and I think it's a great outcome and for the first time in a generation as a result of a national agreement, we are able to see the way ahead so far as the River Murray is concerned and to see the day when the water will flow more freely again, we'll see the day when supply and security is given to the people of Adelaide and to the people of South Australia.  It's nothing more than you deserve.  You deserve it and you've been delivered it, and I'm very proud that I had the privilege of being Prime Minister at the meeting that has delivered security for the water supply into the future for the people of South Australia and particularly for the people of Adelaide.
  Quite rightly, political leaders are required to talk about their future - the future of their country and the future goals that they have in mind for the people they seek to lead.  And I'm going to take the opportunity here in Adelaide tomorrow to say something about the goals and responsibilities that I see if the people of Australia are good enough to give the government I'm proud to lead a fourth term.  But you can have all the goals in the world, but unless you fulfil your responsibilities in two very important areas, you can't deliver those goals.  And those two important areas are the economic strength and growth of which I spoke earlier, and the other great goal is of course you must secure and defend the nation.  Economic strength, national security - they are the two underpinnings, they are the twin pillars on which any goals and hopes and aspirations for the future of this country may be based.
  We've come a long way in the last eight and a half years.  Australia is a proud and respected country.  It's always been a proud and respected country, and that comes from the character and the nature and the decency of the Australian people.  But over the last eight and a half years, people have seen the economic success, they've seen the capacity of this country to welcome visitors, to run great sporting events, to do them well with style and friendliness and efficiency.  They've seen our willingness to stand up and play our part in the world.  They've seen the way in which we led the liberation of the people of East Timor.  They've seen our willingness to participate in other international operations, even in the face of divided opinion and controversy within our own country.  One of the things I've learnt in the last eight and a half years is that in the end it's the strength and determination of the position you take, rather than the instantaneous popularity of it, that matters most.
  So underpinning everything is economic strength and national security and defence, and it remains the two major responsibilities that this Government has, because without them nothing else is possible.  And without having had them over the last eight and a half years, the low unemployment, the low inflation, the extra investment in Medicare, the extra investment in education, the extra investment in the environment, the extra investment in roads and other infrastructure, none of that would have been possible.
  We will be at some time asking the Australian people and the people of Hindmarsh, the people of South Australia, to make a judgement, and all elections involve judgements, they involve choices, they involve decisions about who has got the experience and who has been road tested and who has got the capacity to make difficult decisions in difficult circumstances.  They involve judgements about future goals and hopes and leadership.  They also involve judgements at a local level about whether you have candidates of application and of energy, and Simon I know is new to a lot of you, but I have heard a great deal about him and what I've heard about him is very good.  I've heard that he's made a great contribution to his community already, that he's had a number of positions of great responsibility and advocacy, and the very important quality that he does bring is a quality of energy and commitment.
  And I think parliament should be a mixture of all of the talents.  We have people of different backgrounds, of different ages.  We don't want everybody around the same age, coming from the same position.  We don't want a parliament full of people whose only life experience has been working in a trade union office or working in a very narrow political environment.  We want people who have had a variety of life's experiences.  Now I think Simon, at a relatively youthful age, fits that bill and I'm very proud to have him as my standard bearer, as the Liberal Party candidate here in Hindmarsh.  I think he will take the baton from Chris Gallus and get to the finish line, but it will be a tough race and I hope a lot of people here will give him as much support as you can.  But whatever your political judgements are, and in the end we're a great democracy and people will make their assessments and make their judgements, just remember that as part of a great local community, it is you more than anybody else that provides the national cement for our country.  I addressed a small business gathering last night in Sydney and unveiled a few policies for small business, and I made the comment that much and all as I was proud of what the Government had done for small business over the last eight and a half years, nobody had done more for small business during that time than the men and women in small business itself - the adaptability, the energy, the enthusiasm and the commitment of the men and women in the small business community.  And so it is with your community.
Thank you very much for coming.  Thank you very much for listening.  Give this bloke a good hearing.  I think he's got the goods and I think he'll make a first class Member for the electorate of Hindmarsh.
Thank you.
[ends]


Before this Government was elected, Australia was drifting far below its full potential.  Our economy had stopped generating enough jobs, businesses were struggling, interest rates were too high and our place in the world was slipping.
  Steadily, year by year - with clear goals, hard work and a sense of purpose - this country has been turned around.
  Living standards are now higher than ever.  Unemployment and inflation are at levels not seen in decades.  Government debt is down and interest rates are low.
  Australian families are receiving extra help with the costs of raising children.  We can afford to invest more in health, education, aged care and the environment.
  We've left behind a period of navel-gazing about our national identity.   Australia has lifted its head up again.
 This Government has kept Australia strong through an Asian economic downturn, security crises on our doorstep, an international recession and a global war on terror.
  Not everything is perfect.  Not everyone supports all we have done.
  But I have tried as prime minister to do the right thing by Australia.  And I believe that Australia is now getting the big things right.
  Today I want to talk about our goals and responsibilities in a fourth term if the Australian people were to entrust the Coalition with office once more.
  The Australian people will shortly face a choice about who is best equipped to deliver a secure nation, a strong and prosperous economy, a fair and decent society, a sustainable continent, and an enterprise culture.
National security and the defence of Australia is the first responsibility of government.  The shadow cast by the new security threats of the twenty-first century will not lift any time soon.  Australia must be prepared to use all means in our power to pursue our interests and defend our values against these threats.
Maintaining a strong, dynamic and growing economy is the other overriding responsibility of government.  Without economic strength we cannot hope to reach our other goals.  Disciplined financial management and a long-term approach to Australia's future economic challenges will continue to guide the Coalition in a fourth term.
Beyond these two responsibilities, today I want to reaffirm our faith in Australia as a fair and decent society - a society where all Australians have the opportunity to improve their lives.  We also commit ourselves to preserving Australia as a sustainable continent - a continent where our prosperity and development does not come at the expense of our environment.  And finally, Australia will only reach its full potential with an enterprise culture - a culture that encourages and rewards hard work, ambition and calculated risk-taking.
  If we get these big things right, Australians can look forward to a new era of opportunity and achievement.
  AN ENTERPRISE CULTURE
I want to begin very deliberately with the goal of Australia as an enterprise culture.
  The creative spirit of the individual is at the core of our political philosophy.  And having a go is central to the Australian way of life.
  An enterprise culture is what the Liberal Party is all about - a party at its best when it's giving people greater incentive to work hard and improve themselves.  At its best when it is batting for those enterprising Australians running our 1.2 million small businesses.  Businesses that employ around 3.3 million Australians and that create more than their fair share of new jobs.
  In many ways, this focus sets us apart from our political opponents.  Whereas many in the Labor Party see legislation or government programmes as synonymous with progress, for a Liberal nothing better symbolises Australia's economic and social health than the opening of a small business.
  That's why we put such store in a strong, flexible, dynamic economy.  That's why we've cut business tax and capital gains tax.  And why we see it as important that hard-working Australians prepared to have a go in business are not stifled by excessive interference from government.
  Earlier this week, I announced measures that will further reduce the paperwork burden on small business, extend information services and enhance the effectiveness of the Trade Practices Act.
  Building an enterprise culture in Australia is also about ensuring we can turn good Australian ideas into great products.  That's why we are investing $8.2 billion in the future of Australian science and innovation through Backing Australia's Ability.  And why we have earmarked $1 billion to assist about 1,700 small and medium-sized firms on research and development projects with high commercial potential.
I believe we can do more to create an enterprise culture in Australia by leveraging off information technology, changing work patterns, and the shift towards smaller, decentralised business models.
  More and more Australians are looking to work from home with the extra scope this gives them to care for their families.  Increasingly, women and mature-age Australians are at the cutting edge of this 'do it yourself' enterprise culture.
  These are people with drive and a good idea, who are keen to take a risk, and who want to be their own boss.  It might be a young woman wanting to use her accounting skills to do tax returns while looking after her children, or a couple wanting to set up a cleaning business from home.
  It also meshes with the 'seachange' phenomenon - as many Australians move to rural and coastal communities and look for new work options away from some of the stresses and strains of our big cities.
  The Liberal Party - the party of enterprise and of individual choice - has a responsibility to respond to these trends with initiatives to assist Australians wanting to work from home.
  Some 80 business incubators across Australia are already helping small business to become established and profitable and more than 1,500 home-based business operators recently attended seminars across Australia hosted by the Minister for Small Business and Tourism.
  We will be taking additional steps to significantly reduce the impediments to the creation of home-based businesses in a fourth term.
This is about finding positive ways to help Australians take greater control of their lives, and to put them in a stronger position to support themselves and their families.
  My political opponent also says he wants to be positive, but he has a rather different view of what this means for government, for business and for traditional notions of personal responsibility.
  We must never forget that greater regulation of our society invariably comes at a cost, and not just a cost to business.  A ban here; a government directive there.  While each piece of social engineering may in isolation seem inconsequential, before long an intrusive state has taken away precious freedoms - freedoms we have a hard time getting back.
Australian society is not something to be constantly moulded and prodded by hyperactive politicians.  A nanny state never creates an enterprise culture.
  Labor's re-regulation agenda - an agenda increasingly focused on areas of personal responsibility - is not simply anti-business.  It strikes at the heart of what it means to be a free and dynamic society.
It has taken years of economic reform to renew Australia's economic competitiveness.  Our adaptability to change has been a great strength in recent years - the thing that stood us in such good stead through the Asian financial crisis.  We have not reduced the reach of government in the economy only to see it spread ever deeper into other parts of our daily lives.
  A FAIR AND DECENT SOCIETY
My goal of a fair and decent society is a place where all Australians have the opportunity to improve their lives.  A society where our children get a good education, where Australians know that when they get sick or old they can get care, and if they fall on hard times they can get help.
 I've always believed that good economics is never an end in itself.  What matters is our sense of personal well-being which, in turn, is bound up with the well-being of those around us - our families, our communities, our fellow countrymen.  Our economic prosperity will be shallow and brittle without a fair society in which the avenues of opportunity are open to all.
  A fair and decent society is one that recognises the special role and responsibilities of families with children.  That's why we have delivered the largest ever package of support for Australians juggling work and family life, and we've done it without sending the budget into the red.
 With this package, total assistance to families will have increased by over $6 billion a year since 1996.  The base rate of family assistance has increased from less than $600 per child in January 1996 to almost $1,700 per child in July 2004, a real increase of over 100 per cent.
  Australians rightfully see high-quality health and education as synonymous with a fair and decent society.  This Government has delivered the single largest improvement to Medicare since its inception - including a Medicare safety net that cushions Australians against crippling out-of-hospital medical bills.
  While our health system is not perfect, I often say that you are better off falling sick in Brisbane, rather than in Birmingham or the Bronx.  We have struck a sensible balance - one that avoids the excessive government control of a system like that in the UK or one that lets too many people fall through the cracks like that in the US.
 Rising health care costs will continue to pose a challenge for governments around the world due to ageing populations, new and expensive technologies and rising public expectations.
  We need to shift our thinking in areas of preventative health with better screening and more regular check-ups.  We also need to intervene early to tackle problems such as obesity and substance abuse.  Finding solutions to, or ameliorating the impact of, diseases such as dementia, diabetes and various types of cancer present major health research challenges for the future.
To sustain and improve our health system, Australia has no option but to mobilise both public and private sector resources in the next decade.  That's why policies like the private health insurance rebate are so important.
  I believe a fair and decent society is one that offers people choice in areas like health and education, not one-size-fits-all government programmes.  Like most Australians, I believe in equality of opportunity - not equal outcomes.
  Just as patients have a right to choose between different health care providers, parents have a right to choose the type of education that best suits the needs of their children.
  I am proud of the fact that more than 300 new, independent schools have opened in Australia since we came to office, the bulk of which are low fee schools.  On average, every time a parent chooses to send their child to an independent school, they save Australian taxpayers at least $3000 per year per child.
  The notion that favouring choice is about favouring private over government schools is wrong.  Government schools educate 68 per cent of all students in Australia and receive 76 per cent of total schools funding.  Remember also that 44 cents out of every dollar of State government revenue comes from the Commonwealth in direct grants or from the GST.
 Over the next four years, my Government will increase funding for schools by more than $8 billion to $32 billion in total - with record funding for both government and non-government schools.  But we also know that more money alone does not automatically mean better education.
That's why in coming years we will continue to drive improvements in standards through our flagship literacy and numeracy programmes and set new benchmarks for information technology skills.  We are setting basic requirements for national consistency in things like school starting ages.
  And this year's budget provides specific funding for values, civics and citizenship education initiatives in our schools.  We will never build a nation of achievers if our children are denied a solid grounding in our democratic achievements as a nation.
Labor talks a lot about health and education.  But, as always, you should ignore the rhetoric and look at the detail (or lack of detail) in their policies.
  On health, Labor has yet to release its health policy and yet to guarantee that it will leave the private health insurance rebate untouched.  Labor says it will abolish the Medicare safety net which is currently benefiting some 415,000 Australians.  On education, Labor has failed to reveal its proposed formula for school funding and it won't tell Australian parents which schools it will target for cuts.
 Australia should have world-class health and education systems.  As a share of GDP, this Government is spending more than ever on health, aged care and education.  But to further improve services we need two things: a world-class economy and a balanced mix of private and public sector financing and delivery.
  A fair and decent society also demands a modern welfare system with a strong safety net and a spirit of 'mutual obligation'.  Australians doing it tough should feel they can rely on community support, but equally the community can expect that this support helps to build greater individual self-reliance.  This view - once considered heresy by some commentators - has now become mainstream in our social policy debate.
  Moving more Australians from welfare to work will continue to be a challenge for government in coming years.  Not simply because of the contribution this can make to our economy, but more importantly because of what it will mean to the well-being of the individuals concerned.
  We need to move even further away from old, bureaucratic approaches to employment services and towards more intensive support for job seekers - the path we have taken with the Job Network.
Australia's capacity for compassion can never be measured by the size of government.  The Government has made a special point of leveraging additional expertise and compassion through partnerships with our great, community sector welfare organisations.  Our unique Social Coalition approach recognises that nobody better understands the travails of disadvantaged Australians than organisations like St. Vincent de Paul and the Salvation Army.
  Our $1.2 billion Tough on Drugs strategy - combining health measures, education and law enforcement - has led to record drug seizures and a big drop in the heroin flow onto our streets.  The success of this strategy can be seen in the latest figures which show a drop of almost 70 per cent in the rate of deaths due to heroin overdose in Australia since 1999.
In my view, mutual obligation also requires that Australians who have done well in our society give something back.  I have spoken in the past of my goal of Australia as a nation of 'caring achievers'.  I believe we can do more to rekindle a sense of social obligation in our country.
  We need to carry the fight to scourges such as family breakdown, crime, drug abuse and social isolation by rebuilding a sense of local community.  I also think many relatively affluent Australians in our capital cities need a better appreciation of the special challenges faced by their fellow citizens in rural and remote locations.
Perhaps all of us have something to learn from that generation of Australians that came through the Great Depression and World War II and who still found time to be a great generation of 'joiners' in local clubs and voluntary associations.
  Many are rising to the challenge today.  Just over one-third of working age Australians do some form of voluntary work in any given year.  We need to give greater recognition to our volunteers and work to expand the volunteer circle in coming years.
A fair and decent society also relies on some common values that bind us together - respect for social rules, a degree of tolerance and openness towards differing beliefs, recognition of personal responsibility.
Australians tend to be suspicious of politicians who preach too much.
  Governments cannot legislate to enforce manners and morals; they cannot legislate mutual respect; they cannot legislate for long-term commitments over short-term gratification.
 But neither should political leaders shy away from identifying what they see as the good and the bad in social trends.  I admit to being rather ambivalent about some of the changes we see in contemporary society. The voyeurism that has become such a part of our media.  Trends towards a less restrained, less civil approach to personal dealings.
We have made great strides in terms of tolerance in some areas.  But our society also needs to remain vigilant against a culture of aggression - particularly among males.
 Earlier this year, we all mourned the tragic death of David Hookes. We can avoid sensitive legal questions and still express our dismay at how seemingly minor altercations are allowed to escalate into tragic endings. We see this also in episodes of road rage in our cities.  Recently too, Australians have witnessed the spectacle of some of our great sporting clubs forced to confront serious allegations of sexual misconduct.
  To the extent such behaviour is symptomatic of a larger problem - a coarsening of the culture - we all should reflect on what this means for Australian society.
  The point is not to suggest governments should come up with a laundry list of programmes to fix all manner of social ills.  Bigger government and bureaucratic hyperactivity are not the answer.
  Our enduring challenge in a fair and decent society is to reconcile a desire for personal freedom with the need for social belonging and order.  As in so many areas, we need to find a common-sense balance - a balance between individual self-interest and social responsibility; a balance between personal self-expression and personal self-restraint.
A SUSTAINABLE CONTINENT
I believe that each generation of Australians is obliged to leave our country in better shape than they found it.  To build our nation, but also to make Australia a truly sustainable continent - where future generations have increased opportunities and do not have to worry about the things we now take for granted.
 The term 'sustainability' has become something of a clich‚, but the critical point is that we need to integrate our thinking about the economy and the environment.  Just as our material prosperity is bound up with the state of our natural world, without economic growth we will never have the means to protect and restore our unique environment.
The Government has demonstrated its commitment to careful, sustainable development in the national interest.  Auslink - a comprehensive plan to meet our long-term land transport needs - funds the road, rail and freight connection projects that will underpin Australia's future growth.  The environmental return from redressing years of neglect of our rail network is a critical element of this package.
  Our energy White Paper offers a strategy that retains Australia's competitive advantage in energy but also takes action to address greenhouse emissions.  I look forward to Adelaide playing a part in initiatives like our $75 million Solar Cities trials - an opportunity to develop a smarter energy scenario for the future.
  In this and other areas, the key to making Australia a sustainable continent is smart development and the utilisation of cleaner technologies.
  The National Water Initiative agreement secured two weeks ago has shown that with good will and political commitment our slow-moving democracy can tackle issues of national importance.  Our plan to restore the Murray-Darling river system is especially good news for the people of South Australia.
The next challenge is a frontal assault on Australia's urban water problems.  Once again, cooperation between governments will be necessary.
  Major investments will be required to improve the availability and reliability of urban water supply for domestic and industrial use.  Desalination, recycling of treated effluents and better urban design are just some of the challenges that will require large resources and genuine commitment across our Federation.
  With the growth revenue from the GST, the States now have a capacity they long hankered for to plan for such long-term infrastructure demands.  The Commonwealth will play its part.
  A SECURE NATION
Australia today faces a very difficult and turbulent security environment.  Our responsibility to defend Australia demands that we shape this environment in a way that enhances our security and supports our values.  It is a job that demands large resources, decisive leadership and great endurance.
  The world changed on 11 September 2001.  And on 12 October 2002, the terrorists murdered innocent Australians close to home.  We have had to adjust our thinking to deal with terrorism and the new threats of the twenty-first century.  We've also had to take the fight to international criminals who traffic in drugs and people and who threaten our borders.
The terrorist threat for a country like ours is real.  With our friends and allies, Australia must meet this threat with focus and fortitude.
  I have always believed that Australia should have a first class defence force and that our forces deserve the best training, equipment and conditions we can give them.  When we came to office, I made sure that defence spending was quarantined, even as we acted to rein in spending and reduce Labor's debt.
  Not because I knew challenges like East Timor or the war on terror were around the corner.  Nor do I know precisely what security threats we will face in the next ten years.  But I do know that we have an obligation to be prepared.
No government has planned more or committed more resources for the defence of Australia.  Our Defence Capability Plan earmarks $50 billion over the next decade so the Australian Defence Force is better prepared and equipped to face the security challenges of the twenty-first century.
  In the wake of September 11, we have put in place a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy based on better laws, stronger terrorism-fighting agencies and enhanced international cooperation.
  The war on terror will be a long war.  I do not know where or when it will end.  I cannot guarantee Australia will never be attacked.  But I do know that we are on the right side - the side of peace, freedom, and tolerance.  And I know we must prevail.
Our history, our interests and our values demand that we join with friends and allies at this critical time.  In an uncertain world, Australia's alliance with the United States is a crucial asset no leader should put at risk.
  I believe in the US alliance because it is in our national interest and delivers enormous benefits to Australia.  It gives us vital intelligence and a military edge in the war on terror.
  Of course, this alliance is a two-way street.  The US should not be expected to act alone.  And Australia cannot cherry-pick the alliance for its own narrow purposes.  Australia's future security demands that we maintain our most important international relationship in good condition.
A STRONG AND PROSPEROUS ECONOMY
None of the things I have spoken about today - a secure nation, a fair and decent society, a sustainable continent, an enterprise culture - is possible without a strong and prosperous economy.  Economic strength is the necessary prerequisite for getting all the other big things right in Australia.
I've always believed that good economic management is about giving ordinary Australians the freedom and opportunity to live their lives as they wish.  It's about giving Australians peace of mind and confidence to plan for the future.
More than 1.3 million new jobs have been created since this Government came to office.  Around 40 per cent of these jobs have been generated in this term of government alone.  That's 523,000 new jobs since November 2001.
Real wages have risen by 14 per cent since March 1996, compared with a miserable 2.6 per cent increase over the entire 13 years when Labor was last in power.
  There are 20 per cent more small businesses in Australia compared with when we came to office.  Living standards have risen by over 20 per cent and household wealth is up by about two-thirds.
  Labor wants you to believe this is not genuine prosperity - not prosperity with a purpose.  Tell that to the hard working Australians now in jobs.  Or to the families who can now pay off their mortgages and plan for their children's future.
  We do not need lectures on economic management from the same crowd that gave Australia record interest rates, double-digit unemployment and 'the recession we had to have'.
 In 2004, Australia is better placed than ever to capture the economic opportunities of the twenty-first century.  But future prosperity is far from guaranteed.  We need to work hard to sustain and extend this era of economic growth and opportunity.
The last decade has seen Australia boost its productivity relative to the world's best for the first time in forty years.  But there is still a gap between Australia and the world's most productive economies.  Our goal should be to close this gap further in the next ten years.
  Further productivity improvements will demand continued reforms that free up economic activity, enhance labour market flexibility, strengthen competition, boost innovation and deepen our engagement with the international economy.
If we can sustain our overall growth rates of the last decade, we will be a $1 trillion economy in around seven years time.  If we slip back to the lower growth of the two decades before that, it will take Australia more than ten years to become a $1 trillion economy.
By 2015, the difference in national income would be about $135 billion a year in today's dollars.  That's a difference of an extra $12 billion a year for health and more than $8 billion for education on current spending patterns.  This is an example of the real difference good economic management can make to Australia's future.
The Government's free trade agreement with the United States will help to improve our productivity.  So will our tax cuts that ensure 80 per cent of Australian taxpayers pay no more than 30 cents in the dollar on the extra income they earn.
Australia is currently the sixth lowest taxing country in the OECD.  And under this Government, our debt is very low by world standards.  If Australia is to be a $1 trillion economy in seven years time, we must hang on to this advantage.
 The Government has highlighted the challenge to sustain our prosperity as our society ages.  This is very much a long-term challenge, but one which we cannot allow to sneak up on us.
  Two important facts need to be kept in mind.  First, Australia will have an increasing share of our population aged over 55 in the future.  And second, our labour force participation by mature-age workers is quite low by world standards.
  Many Australians do not want retirement to change their lives completely.  They find that the personal well-being and social networks offered by the world of work are not easily replaced in retirement.  By choosing to do some paid work they are helping themselves and helping their country.  We should reward this sentiment and help mature-age workers to stay in touch with the labour market.
  The skills and experience offered by mature-age Australians represent a considerable business asset.  They are less likely to be absent from work and they act as a steadying influence on younger workers.
This year's budget included initiatives to lift the capacity of people to undertake work, to improve work incentives, and to support the creation of more flexible work options.  We are targeting those industries where there are employment growth opportunities for mature-age workers.  And we will be announcing further practical steps to expand these opportunities in the near future.
Another challenge we face in the years ahead is in part a symptom of our success.  I'm talking here about the problem of skills shortages.
  As our economy has grown, many firms and households have struggled at times to find the skilled workers and tradespeople they need to run their businesses and support their every day needs.  We need to fix these problems for the sake of Australia's future prosperity.
This Government has reinvigorated vocational education and training in Australia, an area that was badly neglected by Labor.  This financial year we will spend more than $725 million on New Apprenticeships, continuing to drive skills and employment for young and mature-age Australians alike.
  Our National Skills Shortages Strategy is the next phase of this vital work.  In partnership with industry and local communities we are determined to address current and future skills needs and to assist the 70 per cent of students who do not go directly from school to university.
This is especially important in rural and regional Australia where addressing skills shortages can make a big difference to sustaining vibrant communities.
We need to do more to challenge the notion that traditional trades and areas of skilled employment - everything from plumbing to carpentry to hairdressing - are somehow inferior career choices compared to going to university.  Young Australians need to know that career paths in trades are no less worthy.  To sustain our prosperity and ensure it is widely shared, we need to give all our young people the opportunities they deserve.
I believe very strongly that utilising all the talents that exist in Australia is the key to our future economic and social well-being.
CONCLUSION
Australia has lifted its head up again.  And we're heading in the right direction.  But in our understated way, we tend to downplay our achievements.
  Though a young country, we are one of the world's oldest, continuous democracies.  Our economy is more competitive than ever and our voice is respected around the world.  We are a cohesive society without the divisions found in many countries.
Soon our democracy comes to a fork in the road and a new point of decision - one as important as any we have faced in decades.
The Australian people face a choice about who is best equipped to get the big things right - to deliver a strong and prosperous economy, a secure nation, a sustainable continent, a fair and decent society, and an enterprise culture.
A choice between a government with clear goals and detailed policies and an opposition that promises to spend more, tax less, have a bigger surplus and create an intergenerational fund, but won't tell us how that magic pudding will be cooked.
A choice between experienced and decisive leadership in the national interest and a brand of 'new politics' where things like advertising bans mask a failure to outline basic policies on tax, health and education.
 A choice between a party that rewards ambition and enterprise and that treats the Australian people like grown ups, and a party that sees a society that can't be trusted to make the right decisions.
 I am confident that, with the common-sense and practical wisdom they have always shown, the Australian people will choose the path that will maximise the opportunities of today, tomorrow and the next ten years.
[ends]


The Attorney General, Mr Kenyon, Senator Humphries, Ms Annette Ellis, Brendan Smyth, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I remark just how appropriate it was as I arrived here to hear the band of the Salvation Army playing and to have those inspiring words from Commissioner Strong because there is no organisation in our country that is quicker to the frontline of a disaster or a challenge than the wonderful men and women of the Salvation Army.
Today is an opportunity for us to express a collective national tribute to men and women who are an important part of the Australian story.  In fact an inseparable part of the Australian story.  If we think back over our own lifetimes we, if we've been alive long enough, we'll remember the trauma and disaster and debate and controversy of military commitments.  But we also remember very importantly great domestic human disasters, we think of such tragedies of the bushfires here in Canberra only last year, we think of the Granville train disaster in early 1977, the Thredbo disaster, the Ash Wednesday bushfires and so the list goes on.  And they're part of the Australian story, they're part of what we've experienced.  And the nature of our country, the size of it, the variability of the elements, they all combine to confront us from time to time and at the leading edge of our response have been a wonderful group of professional people and a wonderful group of volunteers and it is long overdue that we have decided to have a memorial to all of those people and that is what we come here today to open and in the process to thank all of our emergency services, the magnificent men and women of the police services of both the Commonwealth and the States, the SES, all of the ambulance services, the great fire fighting services, anybody who was around here at the beginning of course of last year will remember the extraordinary sacrifice and contribution of the men and women of the emergency and fire fighting and police services, indeed all of the services of the Australian Capital Territory plus invaluable assistance that came from interstate. And I have in the course of my own responsibilities had numerous opportunities to thank and to talk to and to try in a very inadequate way to comfort some of the victims of tragedies and I think an incident I had on Boxing Day two years ago best encapsulated, three years ago rather, the experience of and the spirit of the volunteers, there were some very, very bad bushfires ringing Sydney and I think I went out to a spot near Wallacia where the emergency headquarters were and I met a group of rural fire fighters who'd come from Victoria and this was 11 o'clock on Boxing Day and they indicated to me that they'd mustered and started leaving their homes the previous day, it was on Christmas Day they had left their homes and had set out on the journey to come and help their fellow Australians in another part of the country. And that in a way encapsulated the sort of spirit of these wonderful people.
  So can I in the name of all your fellow Australians thank you.  We pay tribute and remember the deaths of so many who have put their lives on the line out of an expression of the brotherly love of which the Commissioner spoke to eloquently and in opening this memorial we record our tribute to the spirit of mateship, the volunteer spirit, the co-operative spirit between people of different responsibilities and different parts of the country that always expresses itself so well at a time of personal trauma and local or national challenge.  We owe them a great debt, we are a greater nation and a stronger nation as a result and it's a great honour and privilege for me to have been asked, and I know I'll be assisted by representatives including the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Mike Keelty, to open the memorial. But it is with a real sense of gratitude and affection that I say thank you to these wonderful people, you do us proud and you serve our nation magnificently.
Thank you.
[ends]  



Well, thank you very much Eddie, Mr Premier Steve Bracks, Mr Cho and all of your other Toyota colleagues, my ministerial colleagues Nick Minchin and Ian Macfarlane, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
No economic and commercial and trade association has been more important to Australia over the last 50 or 60 years than the association that we have had with Japan and Japanese companies.  And commencing with that visionary commerce agreement that was put together by the then deputy prime minister of Australia John McEwen, a great Victorian who had a great commitment to Australian manufacturing industry as well as Australian rural industries back in 1957, there has been a long and fruitful partnership between our two nations and the business and commercial interests of our two nations.  And Toyota is a wonderful example of that relationship and through all the ups and downs of international trade and commerce there has been a constancy and a reliability about the association between Australia and Japan and that is symbolised by the continuing investment and commitment of Toyota to this country over the last 41 years.
  And I would like on behalf of all Australians, Mr President, to express my gratitude to Toyota for having been such a magnificent corporate citizen in Australia.  I really do want to express our gratitude for the contribution that your company has made to the motor industry in this country.  I can remember having a conversation with John Conomos a few months ago about the ups and downs of the motor vehicle industry in Australia and we reflected on some of the days when it wasn't doing as well as it's doing now when we seem to be cobbling together different plans, almost a plan a year, and we were trying in different ways to sustain an industry that, let alone thinking about exporting, was thinking about its very survival.  But now we appear for a combination of reasons to be living in a golden age of the motor manufacturing industry in this country.  The sales are at an all time high; the prosperity of companies like Toyota is remarkable and collectively the industry is making an enormous contribution to the strength and the vitality of the Australian economy.  And here in Melbourne, of course, which is very much the manufacturing home and the corporate home of the industry in Australia, the presence is very evident and very strong.  And, as the Premier remarked, it's hard to travel around Australia, let alone around Victoria, without being very conscious of the presence and the contribution of this great company.
There are just two other things that I want to say and that is that no company can succeed without the commitment of its corporate leaders and also, importantly, the contribution of its workforce.  And I want in opening these new corporate headquarters to pay tribute to the skill and the adaptability of Toyota's workforce and to the way in which the workforce of Australian manufacturing over the years has changed and adjusted according to changed circumstances.
  The world economy in which Australia now must trade and survive is very different from the world economy of 1963.  In 1963, we dwelt behind very high tariff barriers; we had a fixed exchange rate; we had very strong exchange controls; we were a far more cloistered and inward looking economy than we are now and in the years that have gone by great adjustment has been needed and I think the story of those years has been the story not only of corporate leadership in this country, but also the employees of those corporations changing with those changed circumstances.  And it is appropriate on an occasion like this to pay tribute to their contribution.
And the other thing I want to pay tribute to is the spirit of co-operation that's always existed between Toyota and the Government, not only of the Commonwealth but also of the various states.  Governments by and large should allow corporations to get on with their business.  But it is necessary in industries like the motor industry to have close co-operations because there is the importance of strong industry plans and the level of co-operation that I've experienced over the last eight and a half years as Prime Minister with the leadership of Toyota has been quite outstanding.  And I want to take this special opportunity of expressing my gratitude to the company for that and for all that it has contributed, long may it remain with its headquarters here in Melbourne, long may it contribute to the future strength and vitality of the Australian economy and may you take back to your colleagues, Mr President, our great thanks and our admiration for the contribution that you have made to the Australian people and to the Australian economy.
  And in that spirit, I have great pleasure in declaring these magnificent new corporate headquarters well and truly open for business.
Thank you.
[ends]



Well, thank you very much Councillor McDonald, Senator Mitch Fifield, Russell Broadbent, the Liberal Party candidate for the seat of McMillan, ladies and gentlemen.
 What a glorious green, I don't mean that in a political sense but in another sense, beautiful morning and beautiful atmosphere and it is a great delight to be back in Warragul.  I don't know that I've been here before.  I haven't as Prime Minister, but I have certainly been here in other guises and disguises over the years that I've been in Federal Parliament.
And as I listen to the very generous introduction and very interesting introduction from your Mayor something really struck me when she made a reference to the unemployment level of 3.3 per cent. That is a fantastic figure and it says more than I could possibly say of what economic management and trying to do the right thing by the Australian economy is all about.
 We often hear debates about surpluses and growth rates and price deflators and all these other complicated but very important economic descriptions but at the end of the day, the purpose of running the economy well and the reason why Prime Ministers and Treasurers, and I have in Peter Costello an absolutely outstanding Treasurer, the reason why you worry about the economy is that you want to get as many people as possible in work and to drive the unemployment rate down.  And I'm very proud of the fact that for the first time since 1968 we now have in this country, we have an unemployment rate around the nation which is below six per cent and an inflation rate which is below three per cent.  But of course here in Baw Baw it's even better - it's at 3.3 per cent, and that means that the worry so many parents have about their children getting work, the worry that people have in different small businesses about employment opportunities that they have largely been removed in areas such as this.  But it can easily slip back if you start doing the wrong thing.  So you will understand why I like to be forgiven for arguing that you need the right people in charge of the economy so that that 3.3 per cent remains very low and where it is for years into the future.
 This gathering, of course, as so many gatherings such as this I have the privilege of addressing all around Australia, takes place in a community centre.  In this case it is taking place in the precinct of a community church.  A church that brings together people to express on Sundays and on other days of the week involving the church's activity the common faith of those people in the Christian religion, not in a narrow exclusive sense but in a sense of reaching out with the values of the Christian religion to the entire community.  But whether it is a community church hall, whether it is an RSL hall and whether it is a YWCA hall or a hall of some other different character, one of the things that really reminds you that you are in Australia, in case you had any doubt, is the appearance and the ambience of community halls. They're all pretty much the same.  I go to a lot of them.  I think I've been to probably about 5,000 of them in the 30 odd years that I've been in politics and even though they have different coloured paint and sometimes the pitch of the roof is different, there is a warmth  and an ambience about them that is at once reassuring and at once very Australian.  And the reason for that is that they bring together people from all walks of life united by a common commitment to this country and also and frequently united by a common set of local goals that people want to achieve together.  And the great strength of the Australian nation is in fact what a community hall represents because it's the meeting place, whether it's to achieve a civic objective, whether it's to complain about something that the local council's doing or the state government or the federal government, whether it's to bring together people to express their faith, whether it brings people together to enjoy their experiences and to raise funds for the local sporting club, it's all about the focus of the community.
  And, as I look around this room, I have no doubt that I see people who represent not only my side of politics, but I guess a number of people who are probably a bit sceptical about me and think to themselves - I don't know about him, not sure I'll vote for him again, perhaps I won't ever vote for him.  But whatever it is, what is good about this country is that we have gatherings like this where people can exchange their point of view.
  And I can say a few things as to why you might give Russell Broadbent here, who's a very good bloke, your support when the election comes along.  I can tell you that he knows the area very well; he's been in small business in the area, as has his family; that he's been the representative of many parts of the McMillan electorate in the past, it's one of those electorates that goes like that and it gives both sides of politics peptic ulcers for most of the time that it's sort of held no matter who by and therefore it attracts, understandably, a great deal of interest.  And I can ask you to support him, not only because he'll be a hard working person on your behalf whether you vote for him or you don't vote for him, but I can ask you to support him because he belongs to a party that has given that 3.3 per cent unemployment rate; belongs to a party that has just been able, I hope with my fingers crossed, just been able to negotiate the best Free Trade Agreement that this country has ever negotiated and that is the Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  And there was news this morning on the radio that the American House of Representatives by a vote of 314 to a 109 - and that is that is the biggest vote the House of Representatives has ever given to a Free Trade Agreement between the United States and any other country - now that is a terrific outcome.  And the reasons why I'm supporting this Free Trade Agreement is not to bolster the American alliance - it's got nothing to do with that - it's got everything to do with the fact that it will be good for Australia because the American economy is the most powerful economy the world has ever seen.  And, as the years go by, the American economy will be more important to Australia, it won't be less important.  And to use the language of the young, it's a no brainer in my view for us to sign that agreement because it will bring benefits to Australia.  There were some worries about the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  Can I assure you there's nothing in that Free Trade Agreement that is going to make the price of drugs more expensive in this country.  That Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is right dead in the centre of our social security safety net.  And so far from the Free Trade Agreement affecting our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, when President Bush was in Australia last October and we discussed the Free Trade Agreement, I said to him that he ought to adopt our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme because it was so beneficial and so valuable to the people of Australia.  So it's fully protected and there's also full protection for local content on television and film so that the Australian stories and the Australian accents and the Australian way of expressing things can continue to be very prominently displayed and heard on film and television around Australia and around the world.
  And then of course on the other side, it does provide enormous and growing opportunities for all of our industries.  There is improved access for the dairy industry; there is improved access for the beef industry; there is no improved access for the sugar industry.  And I was disappointed about that, and that's one of the reasons why we provided support for the sugar industry and announced that support in Bundaberg in Queensland a couple of months ago.  But there's a great opening up of our manufacturing export opportunities.  I opened the new headquarters for Toyota in Melbourne, the city of Melbourne, a couple of nights ago and as a result of this Free Trade Agreement we can look forward to in fact exporting more cars to the Untied States.  I mean, that would have been undreamt of a few years ago, but our motor vehicle industry is flourishing.  And it's one of the products of the strong economy we've had at the present time.
  But another reason why I might gently and respectfully urge you to support Russell is that we've made a number of changes in relation to the Medicare system over the last few years.  Medicare is something that everybody strongly supports and we very strongly support it and our critics eight and a half years ago when we were elected said we were going to destroy it.  Well eight and a half years later, Medicare has not been destroyed, in fact it's stronger than ever.  And one of the things we introduced at the beginning of this year was the Medicare safety net and that Medicare safety net, and each day goes by more and more people become entitled to use it, that Medicare safety net means that if you have any out of hospital, out of pocket expenses and you're on...  you're a concession card holder or you're a family getting family tax benefit A, then once those expenses go over $300 a year you get back 80 per cent of the excess.  And if you're anybody else in the community, once it goes over $700 a year for you, you get back 80 per cent of the excess.  And what that means is that people are given a peace of mind if they suddenly have an unexpected illness which involves a lot of extra expense, not just a GP consultation but also going to see a specialist, going to get a blood test, going to see a radiologist, all of those sorts of things that we are familiar with, both in relation to ourselves and in relation to our families.
  And another reason why I make the gentle request on behalf of Russell, and I see quite a number of students here representing the different schools of the electorate, is that my Government is a very strong supporter of parental choice when it comes to education.  I'm very proud of the fact that I was educated in the state government education system in New South Wales.  I went to a selective government high school as did my wife and I received a very good education there and I think the public education system in this country is a terrific system.  But I also believe that people have a right if they want to go outside the public education system, whether to send their child to a catholic school or to another independent school, they have a right to some government support for that decision.  Because it's been calculated that every time a parent decides to send his or her child to an independent school, that decision on average saves the taxpayer about $3,000 a child per year.  Now it's as simple as that.  Every time, everyone of you parents in this room who've made a decision to send a child to an independent school on average you're relieving the taxpayer of $3,000 per child per year because even the most heavily supported independent schools are not supported to the extent that equals the cost of educating a child at a government school.  And, indeed, it's only the small number of schools that receive modest amounts of government support, but the great bulk of schools receive, who charge low fees, they receive increased amounts of government support, but even the most heavily supported, even the poorest of Catholic parish schools in Australia, which would receive about a 70 per cent total government subsidy, there's still a gap, which means that the ordinary taxpayer is relieved of that responsibility.
So this idea that in some way it's unfair to subsidise choice, that idea is quite wrong.  And I believe very passionately in choice and I'm very proud of the fact there's been a growth of independent schools in this country and most of them have been low fee schools, they haven't been schools charging $12,000, $15,000 and $18,000 a year, they've been schools that have been charging $3,000, $4,000 a year to give people choice.
 So ladies and gentlemen, that's another reason why you ought to vote for this fine friend of mine, Russell Broadbent.  He is a person who believes in choice and education.
And another and a final reason for this little presentation why I'd invite you to support him is that he's a great believer in small business.  Now, small business in the heart and soul of the Australian economy.  Small business has created more than 60 per cent of all the jobs that have been generated since we came to office and we could generate a lot more jobs in small business if we could get rid of these rather restrictive unfair dismissal laws, which make it hard for small business to let staff who aren't helping them go.  And if you think it's going to be expensive letting a poorly performing staff member go, well you don't employ him in the first place and that means those people are denied employment opportunities.  And it's been conservatively estimated that something like another 50,000 or 60,000 jobs a year could be created in this country if we had freer unfair dismissal laws.
So I put all of those things together and I ask you to consider the credentials of this fine candidate, who does understand the area, does have a very strong personal and family commitment to it.
  And finally, and speaking to all of you as my fellow Australians, I ask the very simple question - isn't it the case that this nation is stronger and prouder and more respected around the world than what it was eight or ten years ago?
We all have our personal goals and desires and we all have our personal reactions to policies that affect us.  Sometimes governments do things that are irritating.  Sometimes they fall short of our expectations.  But we also think of these things as Australians together and the question I ask most confidently, and I'm not the first leader to have posed that question - it was famously posed by Ronald Reagan when he sort re-election in 1984.  But having paid proper tribute to the source of it and therefore not been accused of plagiarism - I would never want that acquisition to be made about me, particularly involving American Presidents, I would never want that suggestion to be made - can I simply say very confidently with due respects to the author of that famous question, that isn't Australia a stronger and prouder and more successful country than it was?  I think the answer to that is yes and that's my final and, I suppose, most fundamental reason of all of asking you to support Russell.  It's going to be a tough fight for him.  I'm a political realist, but with your help and his energy we'll get him over the line.
Thank you very much.
[ends]  


It's a great pleasure to join you this evening and to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Australian Women's National League (AWNL).
  This gathering is particularly appropriate in a week when Liberal women have achieved yet another milestone.  For the first time in Australia's history, there are now three women in the Federal Cabinet - a milestone that has been achieved without the use of patronising quotas.
  The women in this room - especially from the Women's Section of the Victorian Division - are heirs to a tradition that has produced some great political warriors for the Liberal cause.
Established in 1904, the Australian Women's National League grew to become the largest and most effective women's political organisation in Australian history.  It pursued a tough-minded, liberal agenda aimed at economic prosperity and freedom of thought and action.  It participated in pre-selections on the non-Labor side of politics and at its peak during World War I the League registered some 500 branches with more than 50,000 members.
 And of course, it played an important role in the formation of the Liberal Party.   This year we also mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of our great party by Sir Robert Menzies.  So it is doubly appropriate that tonight we celebrate the contribution of generations of Liberal women to our party and to the making of modern Australia.
 Menzies was very conscious of the political power of the Australian Women's National League at the time he formed the Liberal Party in 1944.  He was forever indebted to the League's president Elizabeth ('May') Couchman for helping to convince her colleagues to merge their organisation into the new party.  And in turn, women gained a strong voice in the Liberal Party.
  A TRADITION OF LIBERAL ACHIEVEMENT
In later life, Menzies would often reflect on the unique spirit of those who helped him form the Liberal Party - not least the members of the Australian Women's National League.  It is worth reminding ourselves what led so many women to throw their support behind the Liberal Party in the 1940s and in later decades.
 The Liberal Party was created at a time when the political winds could hardly have been more unfavourable.  The momentum behind bigger, more intrusive government seemed almost unstoppable.  The Great Depression and World War II left many people - including much of the intelligencia - convinced that socialism offered the only path to prosperity and happiness.
 Into these headwinds came a remarkable group of Australians determined to resist Labor's collectivist social planning.  And women like Elizabeth Couchman, Ivy Wedgewood and Edith Haynes were in the front rank of the new Liberal Party based on their organisational and political skills.
The founding fathers and mothers of the Liberal Party did not oppose Labor's big government agenda simply on economic grounds.  They knew socialism was inefficient.  But, more importantly, they were determined to resist what they saw as a dull and sterile world-view that negated the dignity and worth of the individual.
 The men and women who formed the Liberal Party embodied a particular ideal of Australian society based on virtues of individual freedom, personal responsibility and social obligation.  These are virtues with a timeless place in the Australian Liberal inheritance.
 Menzies' great strength was his capacity to connect liberal philosophy with the experiences, concerns and ideals of people in their daily lives. In broadcasts such as 'The Forgotten People', his classic 1942 statement of Australian Liberalism, he articulated superbly the aspirations of men and women in Middle Australia for themselves, their families and their country.
 Menzies also had a very clear idea of good government when he led the Liberal Party out of the political wilderness in 1949.  The Menzies era is synonymous with rising living standards and expanded opportunities for the Australian people - years of full employment, low inflation, surging home ownership, increased education opportunities and large-scale immigration.
 For Australians who had endured years of depression and war, it was a time of new and bigger horizons; a time when they could plan with confidence and aspire to give their children an even brighter future.  In many ways, Menzies was ahead of his time in recognising the changing role of women in Australian society and in developing policies that appealed to women.
  Of course, our political opponents have made it their mission to tear down the great and enduring Menzies legacy.  We owe it to our past, our present and our future to reaffirm this tradition of Liberal achievement.
The growth rates achieved between 1949 and 1966 were the highest in Australia's history. Unemployment was consistently between 1 and 1.5 per cent.   I well recall casting my first vote at the December 1961 federal election when the Menzies government was almost thrown out of office because unemployment reached what was then the unthinkable level of 2.6 per cent.
  Australia also became one of the world's great home-owning democracies in the Menzies years.  In Melbourne, for example, between 1947 and 1961 home ownership rates rose from 50 per cent to 76 per cent.  For the first time, thousands of Australian workers whose traditional allegiance was to the Labor Party could afford to buy their own home.
The expansion of education was another significant part of Menzies era nation-building.  The Menzies Government's decision to grant state aid to religious schools in 1963 ended 100 years of discrimination against Australian Catholics.   In the process, the Liberal Party became, emphatically, a more inclusive movement.
Menzies was also the driving force behind the great post-war expansion of higher education in Australia.  Based on his clear vision of the role of universities in Australian society, his government paved the way for a massive transition from elite to mass higher education.  In later life Menzies continued to rate the development of Australia's university system as one of his proudest achievements, notwithstanding the counter-cultural backlash on campuses against much of his legacy.
 The Menzies era was a time of economic prosperity and social stability - two things that symbolise the Liberal inheritance to Australia.  But as Menzies well understood, Australian Liberalism is not a fixed ideology.
  It is a broad-based political philosophy that relates a core set of enduring values to the changing realities and challenges of Australian society.  And we face a continuing challenge to relate our Liberal inheritance to the hopes and aspirations of the Australian people.
  THE SOCIAL DIVIDEND OF ECONOMIC STRENGTH
My government has pursued its own distinctively Australian synthesis of economic liberalism and modern conservatism.  We have never lost sight of the fact that good economic management and sustained economic growth are not ends in themselves.  Economic prosperity is valued for its contribution to building a stable, fair and cohesive Australian society.
Our economic prosperity and social advancement rest on many of the same requirements.  Robust communities, cohesive families and responsible individuals are fundamental for building a strong economy.  And without a strong economy, a caring community is much harder to achieve.
There is never a disconnect between economic policy and social policy.  Good economic policy - generating growth, investment and jobs - is essential to sustaining a fair and decent society.
 Let me illustrate by highlighting in turn just some of the Government's economic and social policy achievements over the last eight and a half years.
 More than 1.3 million new jobs have been created since March 1996.
 We are spending 60 per cent more on employment services for disabled Australians than was the case when Labor left office.
 Real wages have risen by 14 per cent, while inflation has remained low and stable.
 We have indexed the old-age pension to the strong growth in average male wages rather than to the lower rate of the consumer price index.
 Labor's $96 billion debt has been cut by $70 billion with interest savings averaging $5.5 billion a year.
 We have doubled annual spending on health from $17 billion to $35 billion over our time in office.
 The number of strikes in Australia has fallen to a record low.
 We have created more than 256,000 extra child-care places since 1996.
 The profit share in Australia is at a record high.
 We are providing record support to carers in Australia, including through a five-fold increase in carer respite services.
Again, the point is a simple one.  A strong economy and a fair and decent society are bound up together.  Economic prosperity is the essential prerequisite for reaching all our other goals.
You might think this proposition would be relatively uncontroversial in our policy debate.  Indeed, it used to be before my political opponent Mr Latham discovered the magic of 'new politics' where you avoid serious debate on economic management and issues such as tax and industrial relations.
It's sometimes said that Mr Latham is a conviction politician.  I must say I find the evidence for this proposition to be rather thin.
When he was a Labor backbencher, Mr Latham used to extol the virtues of good economics and flexible markets as vehicles for improving peoples' lives.   He used to enthuse about new patterns of work, greater workplace flexibility and the demise of centralised industrial relations and big unions.
Not now.  Now he wants you to believe that disciplined economic management and a flexible economy are peripheral to the concerns of ordinary Australians; that good economic policy is disconnected from what happens to Australian society.
For example, Mr Latham wrings his hands about a decline in so-called 'social capital' in Australia, but his industrial relations agenda would destroy jobs critical to our social connectedness.
  The main source of social disadvantage in Australia still hinges around the ability to find and hold a job.  A job not only provides income.  It also provides a means of meeting people and developing close relationships with others.
We know that unemployment can tear people's lives apart.  We also know that children in jobless households are more likely to leave school early, become unemployed themselves, and wind up on welfare support.
  There is no surer way of destroying social capital in Australia than through job-destroying labour market regulation.
  If Labor gets into government, it will unwind our workplace reforms that have been so important to strong job growth and higher productivity in recent years.
Driven by the trade union movement, Labor plans to:    abolish Australian Workplace Agreements;   give unions new rights to enter workplaces;   place new burdens on employers that would impede the creation of part-time and casual jobs; and    discriminate in awarding government contracts against companies who don't toe the union line.
Labor continues to block the Government's reforms of unfair dismissal laws - laws that make firms less likely to hire marginal candidates or the long-term unemployed.
I need not remind you that, if elected, a Federal Labor Government would join eight other Labor Governments across Australia.  Labor would govern absolutely without let or hindrance.  There would be no checks and balances.  This would give the green light to a return to greater union domination of our industrial relations system.
  If we were to lose office, this is the policy loss I would grieve about most because our flexible workplace relations have underpinned Australia's productivity improvement, higher living standards and adaptability to change in the last decade.
Don't take my word for it.  Access Economics - the consultancy firm that regularly provides economic advice to Labor - exposed the threat to Australia's economy from Mr Latham's industrial relations policy earlier this month.  It said that: 'taken collectively ... the ALP workplace relations platform measures could reinforce one another in terms of their negative impacts on productivity, wages, on-costs and employment.'  As a result, it concluded, 'the compounding benefits of past reform which have delivered higher productivity growth, increasing real wages, and low unemployment could work in reverse'.
 Today, our economy is stronger and more competitive than ever.  The last eight and a half years have seen rising living standards, rising employment, low interest rates and low inflation.  This prosperity has in turn translated into rising expenditure on health, aged care, education and all the other things that are important to improving the lives of Australians.
If we want to build a better Australia, we simply do not have the lazy option of taking this prosperity for granted.
  MORE CHOICE AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIAN WOMEN
Precisely because Labor threatens our prosperity and the social dividend of that prosperity, it threatens the avenues of advancement for Australian women.
The Liberal Party and our political forebears have a very proud record, both in the area of women's representation and more broadly in the advancement of women in Australian society.
  Women from the Liberal Party's forebears were the first elected to the House of Representatives, and almost all the State parliaments.  The Liberal Party was the first political party in the country to make provision for equal numbers of men and women in some of its senior party positions, particularly in the Victorian Division.
It was a Liberal Government that introduced child endowment.  It was a Liberal Government that established the first national childcare office.  It was a Liberal Government that first recognised the rights of married pensioners in the tax system.  It was a Liberal Government that introduced many of the provisions for private health insurance that are so important for women.
We are a party that values choice and individuality among women.  We do not believe in advancing certain categories of women, or indeed, certain categories of men.  We want to mobilise the talents of all women in Australian society with policies that promote wider opportunity and wider choice.
Our work and family package in this year's budget was based on the view that the government's role is to help facilitate choice for Australian women and that there is no single solution for managing demands of work and family.
With this package, total assistance to families will have increased by over $6 billion a year since 1996.  The base rate of family assistance has increased from less than $600 per child in January 1996 to almost $1,700 per child in July 2004, a real increase of over 100 per cent.
  Our workplace relations policies also reflect our commitment to expanding choice and opportunities for women.  Increased labour force participation by women continues to be a major influence on our labour market.  For example, female part-time employment is increasing at an annual average rate of 3.5 per cent, more than twice the rate for the labour force as a whole.
We have made it easier for women to negotiate working arrangements that provide a better balance between work and family.  Women are now more likely than the average to be covered by a federal certified agreement that includes carer's leave or provisions for access to regular part-time work.  At the same time, the workplace relations safety net has been strengthened to encourage the full participation of women in the workforce on a full-time, part-time, casual or job-sharing basis.
  In a speech in Adelaide last week, I spoke about my Government's commitment to building an enterprise culture in Australia.  Women are at the leading edge of new work arrangements and options, leveraging off information technology and the shift towards smaller, decentralised business models.
  About one-third of Australia's 1.6 million small business operators are women.  Our existing Small Business Enterprise Culture programme supports skills development projects and mentoring services tailored to the needs of women.
  Many Australian women are looking for new options to work from home with the extra scope this gives them to achieve the right balance between work and family.  I used the example in my speech last week of a woman with accounting skills setting up a home-based business to do tax returns and the Government aims to take additional steps to assist Australians wanting to establish home-based businesses.
I also spoke in Adelaide about helping mature-age Australians stay in touch with the labour market in a world of rapid economic change.  The Coalition's Job Network is currently providing more than 100,000 mature age workers with targeted assistance to maximise their employment opportunities.  As a government, we are committed to meeting the challenge of an ageing society in a way that expands opportunities and choices for older Australians.
  This year's budget also included initiatives to deliver a more flexible and adaptable retirement system with significant benefits to Australian women.  As well as increasing the Government's superannuation co-contribution to assist low and middle income earners, we are providing people with more flexibility in using superannuation savings to purchase an income stream while continuing to do some work.
 This is all part of what I have termed 'getting the big things right' for Australians.  Keeping our eye on the ball with responsible economic management, but also looking over the horizon at our nation's long-term social challenges.
  CHALLENGES FOR OUR PARTY'S FUTURE
None of us - least of all political parties - can afford to be overly nostalgic about the past or too self-congratulatory about the present.  As Liberals, we need to face the challenges of the future.
  First, the immediate one - we need to mobilise for the coming political battle with Labor at the federal election when it is called.  As I've said to my colleagues in Canberra, the Government is in the fight of its life and only eight seats separate us from political oblivion.
  It will be difficult but we have a very good story to tell.  And all of us need to be out there telling it - in our communities, over the back fence and in our workplaces.  So I appeal to you all to turn your minds and your energies (and perhaps even your wallets) to what is required for victory.
The second challenge is equally great, if less immediate.  All political parties - the Liberal Party, the National Party, and the Labor Party - need to confront the fact that they are becoming too narrow.  Their base of membership has narrowed and they need to find ways of relating more comprehensively to community concerns.
By and large, people are not joining institutions anymore in the way they used to when I was growing up and entering adult life.  This is a challenge as much for churches, community and other voluntary groups as it is for political parties.
Political parties have to do a better job of attracting members and harnessing community support.  This is very important to our body politic because if you end up with political parties being dominated and run by people whose whole life has revolved around politics then you are going to get a narrow set of perspectives and a shallow reservoir of experience.
The Liberal Party is the natural party of Middle Australia and we need to nurture that.  That doesn't mean that we don't also attract high-profile candidates.  Unlike the Labor Party, we actually make our high-profile candidates go through local pre-selection processes.  But we do need to stay very much in tune with community sentiment and draw on wide community experience.
Finally, as Liberals we need to be conscious of our history and our intellectual inheritance as a tool in the battle of ideas.  Ultimately you need the courage of convictions in politics and on our side we have a rich intellectual tradition from both the classical liberal and conservative traditions.  As I've said many times, the Liberal Party is a broad church that draws on both these traditions.
 Australian Liberalism also has a great history going back to colonial politics, to the Federation years and up through Menzies and the great political battles of last century.  And without being overly sentimental, we should be proud of our history and draw on it to fight the political battles of today and tomorrow.
 CONCLUSION
The inheritance of Australian Liberalism is an important part of the broader history of Australia.  A prosperous economy and a fair and decent society are central to this inheritance.  And they have been central to what my government has sought to deliver to the Australian people.
A century ago - at the time the Australian Women's National League was formed - a new nation's yearning for prosperity and fairness was expressed in policies that largely set Australia apart from the world.  High industry protection, centralised industrial relations and the White Australia Policy betrayed a certain lack of ease about who we were and what we could be.
  Today, a very different Australia faces the challenges of the twenty-first century.  We are a strong, competitive economy no longer reliant on protection.  We are a tolerant, diverse society, confident about our place in the world.
  While we have made our mistakes as a country, this story of change and achievement is one all Australians can be proud of.  And the Liberal Party can be proud of its role in that story.
Historically, the Liberal Party has never been a party of individualistic libertarians.  With roots deep in the aspirations of Middle Australia, we have sought to strike a common sense balance between a healthy scepticism about what governments can achieve, and the Australian tradition of believing that there is a role for government beyond being simply a keeper of the ring.
A balance that understands the need for both a strong economy and a caring community.  A balance that supports a decent safety net, but also aims to build greater self-reliance and personal responsibility.
  A balance that, despite changing times, still embodies the values of those who founded the Liberal Party, including the members of the Australian Women's National League.
[ends]  



Well, thank you very much Bob, to Jason Wood, the Liberal Party candidate for La Trobe, ladies and gentlemen.
I am happy, I'm always happy, but I'm particularly happy this morning because a little while ago I received the news that the American Senate by a vote of 80 to 16 - that's by a vote of five to one - had followed the House of Representatives and endorsed the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement.
  But I'm happy about it because this Agreement is greatly in Australia's interest, it's in America's interests as well.  You only sign a Free Trade Agreement with another country if there are benefits for both sides.  But to get such an overwhelming vote in the House of Representatives and in the Senate and to know that - provided we can get the necessary legislation through our Senate - this Agreement, which will open up enormous opportunities for the Australian economy in the years ahead, that that is within our grasp does make me very happy indeed because this is about Australia's future.
  We as a government are very proud of what we have achieved over the last eight and a half years, but we are more interested in what we can achieve for Australia in the years ahead.  And this particular Agreement has always been about Australia's economic future because whatever you may think of the United States, whatever you may think of individual policies, of individual Presidents of the United States, nothing can alter the fact that it is the most powerful and biggest economy the world has ever seen and it will get bigger as the years go by and we would be foolish in the extreme to pass up an opportunity to link ourselves with the future growth of the American economy because as the American economy grows we grow too; as we get more business opportunities in America more jobs are generated in Australia.  And it's because of the benefits for Australians that I campaigned very hard and very long to achieve this Agreement.
  And I want to pay tribute to Mark Vaile, the Australian Trade Minister, who carried the burden over (inaudible) two years of negotiating this Agreement.  And may I say, I believe without any fear of exaggeration that this Agreement could only have been negotiated with the Americans by my Government.  It would not have been negotiated by a government having a different view and a different relationship with the United States.  And I can only express the hope that the Opposition in Australia will now put aside any partisan political point scoring on this issue; call it for Australia, Mr Latham, and pass the US Free Trade Agreement.
Ladies and gentlemen, I've known Bob Charles for a very long period of time and he has been a great representative for the people of La Trobe and I am very sorry that he's leaving the Parliament, but I wish him well.  I congratulate him on his recent remarriage, and I had the great privilege of attending that wonderful ceremony.  And I want to say that in his place my Party has chosen a wonderful hardworking representative in Jason.  Jason has already earned a very fine reputation in the Victoria Police Force.  He's not just been an ordinary police officer.  He's one particular recognition for the work that he's carried out as a member of the Victoria Police Force.  He is a person who knows this area, identifies with this area and works in this area and is committed to the people of La Trobe in every sense of the word.
 Increasingly, in politics now we want people whose overriding commitment is to work for the interests and for the benefit of the people that they represent.  Now whether you support the Liberal Party or support the Labor Party or some other party, I hope you will recognise the quality and personal commitment to an area.  And I would hope that people will see in Jason somebody who will worthily take the baton from Bob Charles and carry on the sort of local representation that he has given to the people of La Trobe over the past 13 or more years.  It hasn't been on occasions a politically easy area to represent, it's marginal territory.  That's the nature of Australian politics.  But he's done a great job and I know that Jason will carry on in an equally effective and an equally high quality way.
 This gathering this morning, of course, as so many of these gatherings do, brings together what is the local cement and therefore the national cement of the Australian nation.  It brings together in a hall, typical of halls throughout Australia, an RSL hall.  Yesterday morning, I was out in the electorate of Warragul in the electorate of McMillan and I attended a similar gathering in a community church hall and I made the observation there, as I do here this morning, that there's nothing so Australian as a community hall.  They often have different badges, this one's a RSL hall; the one yesterday morning was a community church hall; perhaps the one next week, if I go to a country area, will be a CWA hall; and then I'll come back to the city and I'll go to some other kind of hall.  But what they represent are gathering places of the Australian people.  They are places to which Australians come to interact with each other but very importantly, to join together to build a better community.  And we have a great spirit of volunteerism in this country.  We are a nation that can rise to the occasion when that is needed and because we are a classless society we can relate to each other far better at a time of adversity because we are not inhibited by feelings of class distinction and class difference.  And we come together because we have a common commitment and we make common cause.  And the greatest asset that this country has as a community is its ability to do that.
  And over the last eight and a half years, I've tried in different decisions that the Government has taken to foster that sense of community and that sense of connectedness and we've tried to do it as we tackle social problems.  Take an issue like drugs.  I'm very proud of the fact that in the time I've been Prime Minister the Federal Government has committed over $1 billion in additional support in our Tough on Drugs campaign and it has started to yield results.  When I started that campaign and I started talking about zero tolerance, I was derided, the experts, some of them, self appointed experts said - no that's ridiculous, it's old fashioned, we've somehow or other got to make an accommodation with illicit drug taking.  And I said, no I will never make an accommodation with illicit drug taking.
  And over the last few years, we have begun to see the benefits of that programme.  Since 1999, there has been a 70 per cent reduction in the number of deaths in Australia from overdosing with heroin, a 70 per cent reduction - something that people said years ago could not be achieved.  As a result of our public education campaign when we not only ran advertisements on television but we distributed literature to every household in Australia, we have seen a far greater incidence of parents talking to their children about drug problems.  And the advertising council of Australia regarded that campaign as being the best public education campaign of any in the year 2000.
  We have seen a very fruitful partnership between the Commonwealth and the State Governments to provide diversionary programmes for people who are coming into contact with the criminal justice system for the first time because of their resort to drugs.  And what, in effect, we're saying to people, when for the first time the law picks them up, we're saying to these people you've got a choice to make - you can either get caught up in the criminal justice system, inevitably end up in jail and have your life destroyed as a result, or alternatively, you can accept that you've got a problem, you can go into a treatment, rehabilitation or diversionary programme.  And that approach is also beginning to work.  And, of course, on top of that, we have put massive additional resources into working co-operatively with the state police forces around Australia to fight the drug barons, put them in jail and punish them as seriously and severely as the law would allow.
The point about that ladies and gentlemen, is that we can't run programmes like our Tough on Drugs programme without the co-operation of the community.  We can't do it alone.  The police can't do it alone and, indeed, local communities can't do it alone.  But if we work together in this co-operative fashion then we can yield great things for the benefit of our community.
The last thing I want to say to you is this ladies and gentlemen, that many years ago when he was President of the United States, Ronald Reagan asked a very apposite question when he was seeking re-election.  And he said, do you really think the United States is a better and stronger country now than what is was four years ago?  And he asked that question because he believed he knew what the answer was and the answer was, in his view, that it was.  And I think it's fair, with due acknowledgement to the late President of the United States, to ask the question - do you believe that Australia is a stronger country, a prouder country, a more respected country and a more influential country around the world than what it was eight and a half years ago and I believe that the answer to that is overwhelmingly yes.
  We are now seeing the strongest economic conditions this country's had since World War II.  We are seeing the benefits of that.  They're not just statistics.  We've now got an unemployment rate that's below six per cent and it's been there for almost a year; we've got an inflation rate below three per cent; we've got higher real wages; we've got lower interest rates; we've got more small business opportunity; we've got double the number of apprentices we had eight and a half years ago.  I mean, this is the great human dividend of good economic management.  When you hear me talking about the economy, I'm not sort of looking for some silver star or gold star, what I'm looking for is a human dividend.  I'm looking to a situation where we can say because of these good economic conditions, people have more opportunities.  That's why we do it.  We don't do it to have nice statistics, they don't mean anything to me.  But what does mean a lot to me is that the youth unemployment rate now is lower than it used to be; that there are 1.3 million more people in work now than there were eight and a half years ago - they're the things that matter to me, they're the only things that matter to me so far as economic management is concerned.
 And I would like, when the appropriate time comes, to have the opportunity of continuing that work on behalf of Australia.  I'd like Jason to be part of my team.  I'd like him to have the opportunity of continuing the great work of Bob Charles and I thank you very very warmly for being with me this morning.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you David for those warm words of welcome.  Nigel Scullion, Maisie Austin, the Leader of the Opposition, Shane Stone the Federal President of the Liberal Party, ladies and gentlemen.  It's great to be back in Darwin.  I've been, as you know, a very regular visitor to the Territory in all of the years that I've been in public life and not least the eight and a half years that I've been Prime Minister of Australia.
 I've come here this morning very specifically, very unapologetically and very deliberately to urge you and your fellow Territorians to return David Tollner as your Member for the seat of Solomon whenever the federal election is held.  David is a big hearted, hard working, enthusiastic representative of you in Canberra.  He is a person who argues your cause.  He's a person who represents the determined spirit of the Northern Territory.  He's somebody who has had plenty of experience of life, and we don't want people in Parliament who don't know what life is about.  We want people who have an understanding of the communities and the people that they represent.  And I'm asking you therefore to think generously of him and to give him your very strong support.
   But I'm also asking you to think of where the Territory is now, to think of where Australia is now.  And Ronald Reagan rather famously in 1984 asked the question of his fellow Americans - did they believe their country was better off than what it had been four years earlier.  And if I could borrow that question, I could ask you as my fellow Australians and ask all of my fellow Australians - do you really believe that this country is stronger, more respected, more trusted, more economically reliable and more protected and securely defended than what it was eight and a half years ago?  And I believe that the affirmative answer to that question lies at the heart of the decision that the Australian public will make in the time ahead.
   We have goals if we are re-elected, we have goals for Australia over the next 10 years.  I outlined some of them in a speech I made in Adelaide recently.  I want to see the enterprise culture of Australia grow even stronger.  I want to see an even better balance of sustainability between development of Australia and care for Australia's environment.  I also want to see even more steps taken to deliver a fair and decent society, a society that looks after those who through no fault of their own have fallen by the wayside, a society that gives greater opportunity for older Australians to remain in the workforce if they wish, a society that continues, as we have done, to strengthen our health system, most recently through the introduction of the Medicare safety net, which is daily looking after more and more Australian families. They are some of our goals, not only for the next three years but, indeed, for the next ten years.
   But you cannot achieve goals either as a nation or as an individual or as a community or indeed as a family unless you have some underpinnings.  And the two great underpinnings of the Australian nation's future are very simple but they're very basic - we must be a secure, defended nation and we must be an economically strong nation.  Without those two things we can't achieve any of these other goals.  Having a strong economy is not an end in itself.  It is a means to an end.  When I look back over the strength of the Australian economy over the last eight and a half years, I don't see it as some kind of economic statistic.  I think of the 1.3 million extra jobs that have been created.  I think of the fact that for the first time since 1968 our unemployment rate is below six per cent simultaneously with our inflation rate being below three per cent.  I think of the fact that over the last eight and a half years, real wages in this country have risen by 14 per cent.  Yet in the previous 13 years of Labor Government, it rose... they rose by only 2.9 per cent. I think of the fact that over the last eight and a half years because we have paid off $70 billion of the debt we inherited from our predecessors, we have $5.5 billion more each year to invest in the long-term future of the Australian people.
 We have $5.5 billion a year less on our interest bill and we all know that when we pay off the mortgage on the business or the house, we have more to spend on something else, and so it is with Australia. Because we have paid their debt off, we have $5.5 billion more on average each year to spend on roads, to spend on health services, on education, on defence, on better facilities for aged care, on taxation reductions, on superannuation relief - all of those things. We're returning those dividends to the Australian people.  And of course, over the last eight and a half years, and there would be no community in Australia more conscious of this than the people of Darwin, we have had to make unprecedented commitments to the defence of this country and to the fight against terrorism.  And four to five years ago the people of Darwin were right on the doorstep of that great operation that gave freedom, justly deserved freedom, to the people of East Timor and gave them a future, gave them an opportunity to realise their own dreams and their own aspirations, and the people of Darwin responded in so many ways quite magnificently to that.  And the health services of this wonderful city, the Royal Darwin Hospital, responded magnificently in the immediate aftermath of the terrible attack on the 12th of October 2002 that murdered 88 of our fellow Australians.
 So this city, more perhaps than other city in our country, understands the significance of security and defence and how along with the economic growth and the economic strength of Australia it is the underpinning of all the other goals that we hope to realise for ourselves. And of course, we have been busy over the last eight and a half years in providing much needed reforms for the Australian economy.  A few years ago we introduced a Goods and Services Tax and reformed our taxation system.  It wasn't instantaneously popular, it was a bit difficult, it drew a lot of criticism, but now that it's been with us for a number of years and it's bedded down, it's working well.  And one of the things that it's doing is that it's delivering more revenue to the states and territories.
   And I had a look at some figures on the way up to Darwin last night and those figures showed me that over the next five years the Northern Territory is going to $573 million better off as a result of the GST than it would have been if the old revenue sharing formula had been maintained and the GST had not been introduced.  And for a territory of fewer than 200,000 people, that is a very significant additional injection of money.  And that $573 million is available without strings, without conditions, unqualifiedly, for the current government of the Northern Territory to spend according to its own priorities.  Now that is the product of our reform and it's because the economy has grown so strongly we've collected more revenue.  And all of the revenue from the GST goes to the states, isn't it... and the territories, isn't it ironic?  They all just about voted against it, well all the Labor ones did, but they're very happy to reap the benefits.  But importantly, they should be made accountable for spending that money for the benefit of the people of the Northern Territory.
 So my friends, we do have a very good story to tell.  We have a story of strengthening and securing and defending this country over the last eight and a half years.  I never dreamt when I became Prime Minister in March of 1996 that one of my greatest responsibilities would be to lead this country in its participation in the war against international terrorism.  And lying at the heart of that responsibility is of course cooperation with our friends, not only in the United States and elsewhere, but also our friends in the immediate area to the north of us, with Indonesia and the other countries of Asia.  And one of the things that was said of me and my party and my colleagues when I became Prime Minister was that we wouldn't be able to get on with the leaders of Asia, that they wouldn't deal with us, they wouldn't treat with us.  Well, everybody knows that over the last eight and a half years that proved to be an absolutely empty and absurd argument.
   Side by side with building this very close, further building this very close association with the United States and our traditional allies, I and my colleagues have worked very hard to build a close relationship with the people of China and the Government of China.  And one of our great trade successes was the signing of that massive natural gas deal with the Guangdong Province, which will give us $25 billion of export income over the years ahead.  And despite the difficulties of East Timor, where we took a stand on behalf of an oppressed people, for which we should always be proud as a nation, we have been able to maintain and further develop our close relations with Indonesia.  And indeed in the wake of the terrible attack in Bali, the cooperation between the Australian Federal Police and the Indonesian Police was quite remarkable.
   So we do have a strong story to tell.  But as the former Speaker of the American House of Representatives Tip O'Neill once said - all politics is local.  And that, of course, brings me back to my colleague and friend David Tollner.  He has worked very hard for all of you, he's taken issues up with me and I want to come to one that he's taken up with me very recently and I have something to say about it.  But he's worked very hard in the interests of the people of the Territory.  He feels for your concerns and he represents your concerns with very great energy.  He does, as he said, sit on a very thin majority - I think it's 30 votes.  It doesn't get much thinner than that.  But that's the nature of Australian politics and we always, whatever our political persuasion is, we always have to live with those realities.
 But one of the issues that David has taken up with me is something that I gather, not only from him but particularly from him but also from many other people, really niggles with the people of Darwin, and that is the question of entry fees into the Kakadu National Park.  And it's my understanding that in relation to Territory national parks no such entry fees are charged.  I therefore want to announce this morning that not later than the 1st of January next year and earlier if we can, the Federal Government will abolish the entry fees for the Kakadu National Park.  What I intend to do is arrange for negotiations with the traditional owners and I want to assure them that there'll be no diminution of their revenue stream and we'll also explore with the tourist industry the feasibility of whether there should be any offset in relation to their operations.  But I want to say to the people, those fees will go and they will go not later than the 1st of January next year.  And that is an issue that's been the subject of argument and representation, indeed complaint, from David and Nigel and others to me and to my colleagues over recent weeks.
 The last thing that I want to say my friends is that I attend quite a few community gatherings around the country.  And what this community gathering represents in common with so many that I do attend to, is a coming together in one place of different strands of the Australian community.  We are meeting here in a club, in premises which are associated with the enormous contribution that the people of the Greek Orthodox community and the Greek Cypriot community have made to the growth and development of Darwin and the character and spirit of the Northern Territory over many generations.
   The Northern Territory is one of the most ethnically diverse and wonderfully cosmopolitan parts of Australia.  It's one of its tremendous strengths and it's one of the things that gives it a special zest and vitality, and as I honour in particular, because we are their guests and I thank them for it, the Greek community of the Northern Territory, I also pay tribute to the great capacity of the people of the Northern Territory of different backgrounds to work together.  You are building a special part of Australia in a very special country.  And community gatherings, which express the volunteer spirit of the Australian people and community gatherings that bring together our wonderfully diverse mixture as a modern Australian community, are a source of extraordinary inspiration and encouragement to me.
   I know, of course, of the particular contribution of the indigenous people of the Northern Territory to the community life of the Territory and of the special responsibilities and the special partnership that we have towards them and with them as we go forward as a community.  And they are things that I know that are very much in the minds of Terry Mills and his colleagues and also Nigel Scullion and David Tollner.  And I'm delighted to have the CLP candidate Maisie Austin on the platform, the CLP candidate for Lingiari.
 But thank you all for coming.  David Tollner is a good bloke.  He works hard for you.  He believes in you.  You work hard for him and believe in him and send him back to Canberra.


Thank you very much Mr Lionel Woodward, Mr Coleman, the head of the Brisbane Port Authority, my ministerial colleagues, and in particular the Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson and Chris Ellison and Philip Ruddock and Senator George Brandis, ladies and gentlemen.
This morning I want to make a major announcement of enhancements of security arrangements for the maritime industry in Australia, and in doing so I emphasise that security in our ports for our ships and our trading routes is an essential part of national security.  And this has been an area of priority for the Government and for industry, as we have worked together as part of an overall international effort to enhance maritime security.
  We should remind ourselves that 74 per cent of Australian exports and imports move by ship each year and that has a total value of $188 billion.  And I do want to acknowledge the hard work and the commitment of the maritime industry in achieving compliance with the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code by the 1st of July deadline.  A total of 244 maritime security plans covering the activities of about 400 maritime industry participants were developed and approved over the last six months, and as a result the Government believes that the maritime security arrangements concluded in Australia are amongst the best in the world, and the partnership between the Commonwealth Government and the State Governments and the industry has been, and it will continue to be, quite pivotal to our security.
Since the 11th of September 2001, the Federal Government has committed an additional amount, including what I will announce today, of $3.2 billion to enhance our national security arrangements.  That represents, in anybody's language, a massive, unavoidable and necessary investment in providing additional security.  And this includes more than $870 million in additional resources for intelligence capabilities, and as I think most people who reflect for a moment recognise, effective and timely intelligence is about the best weapon that we can have in the fight against international terrorism.  And I will be writing to the Premiers and to the Chief Ministers of the Territories about particular responsibilities of the States and Territories for maritime security in their jurisdictions.
What I announce today will represent new and enhanced initiatives costing some $102 million over four years, and the package I announce today includes an additional $48 million to enhance and increase the rate of container examinations of the Australian Customs Service customs container x-ray facilities located here in Brisbane, as well as in Sydney, Melbourne and Fremantle, and I might add for the benefit in particular of the Queenslanders who are present here this morning that the biggest increase in container examinations will in fact take place here in the port of Brisbane.  It will go from some 300 to 550.
  Secondly, I am announcing that we're going to spend a further $9.3 million to enable Customs to board more vessels at the first port of arrival in Australia, and this will include more random checks so that any ship entering any port can expect to be boarded.  We'll extend the Customs closed circuit television network to all 63 Customs proclaimed ports at a cost of over $17 million over the four year period.  There will be posting of specialist immigration officials to ports to assist with clearance of passengers and seafarers, and that will cost $12.3 million.  We'll introduce a maritime security identification card for maritime industry employees.  We'll provide additional resources to further strengthen intelligence collection and the provision of intelligence information within key ports, and we'll provide an additional $4.4 million to allow the Government's Transport Security Operations Centre to work 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
We've also, I should note, established a dedicated taskforce to examine the security of Australia's offshore oil and gas facilities and assets and consider Australian Government capabilities and protocols for interdicting ships and other vessels at sea.  We're undertaking already a detailed examination of security arrangements for transporting high consequence dangerous goods and this will build on the recent Council of Australian Government's work on ammonium nitrate, with the aim of restricting access to materials that could be misused by terrorists.  And we'll provide some limited additional powers for privately engaged maritime security guards to enable them to respond with appropriate authority to breaches of security within ports.
  At the same time, we're strengthening transport security in Australia and we're also working with our neighbours in the Asian Pacific region to improve their transport security.  And in particular, Australia is working with neighbouring governments to ensure that ships and aircraft entering Australia from the region comply fully with international security standards.  And as has been previously announced, Australia is planning to host a number of transport security experts within the region to help in building its capacity.  Agreement has been reached with the Philippines Government to enhance maritime security at selected key shipping ports, and as previously announced, and indeed the Minister for Justice attended the relevant ceremony in Jakarta, Australia is contributing $36.8 million to the establishment of a Jakarta centre for law enforcement cooperation, which was opened earlier this month.  And this international education and training institution will greatly increase the capacity of countries in our region to manage complex challenges in this era of international terrorism.
Ladies and gentlemen, today's announcement of measures strengthens the already very strong framework we've put in place in the Maritime Transport Security Act.  I would however like to emphasise in concluding my remarks that the most important asset that the Government has are really the men and women at the front line, the men and women who work in Customs, the men and women who work in the Australian Federal Police, and the men and women who work in our intelligence services.  The war or campaign or coordinated activity, whatever you want to call it, against international terrorism and the threats that it represents is likely to go on for many years and it will require a very united effort by all agencies within Australia.
  We have committed an enormous amount of additional money.  In a sense, I was thinking this morning when I was out walking, that there is really no limit to the amount of money that you can spend on activities dealing with international terrorism.  The sky is the limit.  You can always spend more.  And ultimately, the most valuable weapon you have is timely and high grade intelligence, the most valuable weapon you have is the commonsense and the ingenuity of the men and women of Australia who work in our agencies, and I want to pay tribute to the people of the Customs Service and the Federal Police and all of the other agencies that are so importantly engaged.  They are our greatest protection against the worst that terrorists and evil people might try do to our country, and it's important that their efforts be acknowledged, the work they have done to date, and it's important in announcing this very valuable strengthening of our resources that I do that.
And finally, can I thank in particular my ministerial colleagues.  It has fallen to me as Prime Minister to make the announcement, but the leadership of John Anderson as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Transport has overall given to this, and of course the ongoing contribution of the Attorney General and the Minister for Justice and Customs, Philip Ruddock and Senator Ellison, has been absolutely crucial.  They're a great security team and they've delivered a great package, and I'm delighted to announce it on their behalf and on behalf of the Government.
Thank you very much.



Well thank you very much Teresa, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I first of all thank the Southern Cross Catholic College for the hospitality that it is extending to all of us today, the opportunity for me to meet you and to exchange a few thoughts with people from all over the communities that make up the electorate of Petrie.
  Can I start by congratulating your local girl, Teresa Gambaro, on her recent promotion as Parliamentary Secretary.  I thought it was a very good appointment, and neither she nor I is going to argue with that, and I don't think many people in this room will either.  She has worked extremely hard and she has been a very effective local Member, and I think she will bring a particular touch to that responsibility that she has newly acquired.  And may I also take the opportunity in passing of saying this - that Teresa joins a growing list of women at high level in the Federal Government.  I should remind you that since Federation in 1901, there have only been nine women who have been full members of the Federal Cabinet, and three of those nine are in the current Federal Cabinet, so it's an indication... now I've never been a person who has believed in quotas, and not many women I know believe in special rules, and I'm making the point that that outcome, and there should be even more, has been based not on some kind of quota, but on the only principle that should govern it, and that is the merit principle.
We're meeting here today in a Catholic College, and it reminds me, and if I may start my remarks, it reminds me of the importance of choice in education.  Nothing is more important to the future of this country than a sound education system because it's something that endures year in and year out.  So I reminded a similar audience in Mal Brough's electorate this morning, I am proudly a product of the state education system in New South Wales.  I received a very good education system at Canterbury Boys High School and my wife went to Sydney Girls High and we're very much, both of us, part of the state education system in New South Wales.
  But as a parent, I exercised choice at a secondary level in relation to my children concerning their schooling.  And what I want as Prime Minister and what we have delivered and what we will continue to deliver if we continue to be the government of this country, we'll continue to deliver a high quality education system that involves the absolute principle of parental choice.  And may I say to those people, and there are many, but I hope a dwindling number, who attack the idea that we have Catholic and independent schools as well as having government schools, can I remind every one of them that when a parent makes a choice to send their child to a Catholic or independent school, they save the Australian taxpayer not less than $3,000 a year per child who is sent to an independent school.  And therefore this idea that in some way the state education system is being robbed of money because governments provide assistance for parents at Catholic and independent schools couldn't be further from the truth.
  Sixty-eight per cent of Australian school children attend Catholic and independent schools and those schools... I'm sorry, 68 per cent of Australian school children attend government schools, and those government schools attract 76 per cent of all government funding that goes to schools throughout Australia.  Now in all of these debates you're subjected to a barrage of statistics and a great pile of arguments, but just remember those two figures - every time a child goes to a non-government school, the taxpayer is saved on average $3,000 a child a year; 68 per cent of children go to government schools and those government schools attract 76 per cent of all government funding.
  So therefore this argument that there is something unfair or wrong and damaging to the government education system by having independent schools couldn't be further from the truth.  And I'm very proud of the fact that we have underwritten parental choice, that there are 300 more independent schools operating in Australia in the eight and a half years that I have been Prime Minister, and almost all of those independent schools are low fee schools.  They're not schools charging 14 and 15 thousand dollars a year.  They're schools that are charging $2500, $3000, $3500, $4000, $5000 a year in fees.  That is where the expansion of the independent school sector has occurred.  There is nothing elitist or privileged about those fee levels and indeed it's a cardinal principle of freedom of choice in this country that parents should have the right, and above the government, above anybody else, of deciding the nature and the quality of the education that their children should receive.
Teresa has been kind enough to speak earlier of the journey that we have travelled over the last eight and a half years and there were some, as she rightly said, there were many things that I would never have dreamt back in March of 1996 that I would encounter as Prime Minister.  I would never have dreamt that there would be an attack on the 11th of September 2001.  I would never have thought that it would have become necessary for us to intervene militarily in East Timor.  I would never have dreamt that there would be an attack that would claim the lives of 88 Australians in Bali in October of 2002.
  I don't think many people would have dreamt that side by side with building an ever closer relationship with the United States, which is so important to our security and economic future, that we would also build a wonderful economic partnership with China.  And I count it as one of the great achievements of the last eight and a half years that we've been able not only to develop that very close relationship with the United States and build on it, and it's so important and we shall never forget the role that the United States played in the defence of Australia in the dark days of World War II, but also side by side with that we've been able to build this association with China.  China is now our third largest export destination, and it's a country of growing significance to Australia, a country of more than a billion people with a very fast growing economy, and the natural gas contract we signed with China 18 months ago is just the beginning of what will grow to be one of the great economic relationships and partnerships that this country has.  And it's a reminder that a nation like Australia has to interact with all parts of the world.
  The Asian Pacific region is very important to us and we have special linkages with countries like China and Japan and Korea and Indonesia and Malaysia and Thailand.  We've just signed a Free Trade Agreement with Thailand, we signed one a few years ago with Singapore, and we have to work very hard in building and nurturing our relationship with Indonesia.  But we are not a country that's just locked in to the Asian Pacific region.  We are a nation of European origin and we share in common with Britain and Ireland in particular, but also many other countries of Europe such as Italy and Greece and the nations of eastern Europe, we share very very strong historical and ethnic ties.  And we'll always have that association, and people who say that those links are irrelevant to Australia's future don't understand how much the world has shrunk.  They don't understand that these days communications are such as to demolish to a very large extent the relevance that geography once held.  And no nation should ever be required to make a choice between its history and its geography.
  So we are a country that uniquely of European origin, we're here in our part of the world, the Asian Pacific part, we have great historic links with the nations of Europe, and of course we have a very strong history and strategic and security link with the people of north America.  And that puts Australia in a very special position, and it's a position I believe of great privilege and of great advantage.
  And I often do, as borrowing a question that Ronald Reagan asked of people in 1984, I will often say to audiences - do you believe Australia is a stronger, more respected, more economically sound, more secure country now than what it was eight and a half years ago?  And that is a relevant question to ask.  Now some people will say no, and I acknowledge that I have my many critics.  Nobody who goes into public life and becomes Prime Minister of this country wins the support of everybody.  You can't expect that.  And I respect the fact that in a great democracy such as Australia, there is a solid percentage of the Australian population that really can't stand the sight of me, and they don't agree with anything that I've done - virtually nothing that I've done.  They might agree with me when I barrack for the Wallabies, they might agree with me when I go and... when I cheered our Olympic athletes on in the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000, but even then they'd have some reservations about why I was there every day, and so they would carry on.  But that's as it should be in a democracy.
  But at the end of the day, one goes into public life to try and change things for the better.  At the end of the day, you have to take a stand.  There is no point in trying to be all things to all men.  You can't please everybody all of the time.  And what I have tried to do over the last eight and a half years is to provide this country with two great underpinnings.  I've wanted to provide it with economic security and I've wanted to provide it with national security, they're the two things, because you really can't do anything else.  If you don't have a secure, well defended country, you are constantly at risk, and if you don't have a strong, growing economy, there are so many other things that you can't achieve.
  Now we've paid off a lot of national debt since we've been the government.  In fact we've paid off about $70 billion.  And when I say that, some people say there he goes again.  He's obsessed with economic statistics.  He never stops talking about them.  But can I tell you why paying off that debt is important.  As a result of paying it off, we now as a nation pay on average $5.5 billion less a year in interest payments.  And do you know where those interest payments have gone?  They haven't gone into my pocket, they haven't gone into Peter Costello's pocket, they've actually gone into things, terrible things, like extra funding for roads, extra funding for Medicare, extra funding for education, extra funding for defence, extra funding for our intelligence services, and there has also been some extra funding for taxation relief and for family benefits and also for baby bonuses.  Now the point of that story is obvious - that there is a human dividend out of good economic policy.  I mean I'm not interested in getting a purple certificate from an international financial institution saying the Australian Prime Minister runs a good economy.  I mean I don't mind if people say that, but that's not the end of the... that's not the point of the exercise.  The point of running an economy well is to be in a position to provide a human dividend, and the human dividend is a greater investment in all of those things.  That's what it is.
And the other great human dividend is that more people are in work.  We now have for the first time since 1968, we have unemployment below six per cent and we have inflation below three per cent.  That's the first time we've had those... that golden double, I call it, since 1968.  So when people say to you oh look, he only ever talks about the economy - wrong, I don't only ever talk about the economy, but when I talk about the economy, I talk about the human side of it, what it means, and you can't divorce economic security from personal and family security.  Families are put under great strain.  We all know from our own experiences.  Even in the most united and happiest of households, you have your difficult periods and everybody has to, you know, make their own personal contribution, and having a successful family life and a happy marriage and bringing up children and everything, it's always a challenge, but it's the most rewarding thing that you can have in life - far, far better than any other experience that you can possibly have in life.  But we all know from that experience that when there are financial challenges, there are economic challenges, the personal relationship is always put under greater strain.  And if you can... I mean it's not the role of the government to tell parents how to raise their children.  That's the role of parents.  But it is the role and the obligation and the responsibility of government to create the right economic and social environment in which parents can be given a fair go and the right conditions to raise their children.
 So, my friends, there is a very big linkage between those two things and I think it is so important that we keep that in mind.  As I look around this room, I think of how many gatherings of this kind that I go to and I never tire of them because they are a refreshing experience of interaction with the Australian public, with my fellow Australians.  And this is the hall of a Catholic College.  Tomorrow I might go to an RSL hall, I might go to a Leagues Club hall or club room next week, I might go to an AFL one the following week or a soccer one the week after, and so the list goes on.  I was in South Australia a couple of weeks ago and I went to about three or four gatherings, all held at AFL football clubs in Adelaide.  But the bond that brings people from the Australian community together, that bond is the same all over the country, and one of the great strengths of this country is our sense of community and our sense of working together.  And because we are a relatively classless society, we come together very easily and when we've got a challenge, we rise to that challenge and we do it very effectively.  And it's one of the great and beautiful strengths that the Australian people have - this ease of interaction with one another.  And I just find the experience every time of once again meeting people from schools, from RSL clubs, from all the others - from sporting organisations, community organisations, people who are making a daily contribution, most of them on a volunteer basis, they are the great national cement that this country has.
  So, my friends, I'm delighted to be here.  I'm delighted to say what a magnificent local Member you have in Teresa Gambaro.  She is a wonderful, warm hearted, hard working person.  She is somebody who tells a great part of the Australian story - the daughter of immigrants, somebody who is proudly Australian but also affectionately Italian, somebody who is... and that's how it should be.  That's how it should be.  You should never ask anybody to forget the country that was first in their heart.  That is human.  I mean I feel that very much as a fifth generation Australian and I can equally respect that Australians whose forebears came here a little later can feel a special affection for another country.  But she's a great member of my team.  And people are kind enough to talk about the Howard Government, but it's not really just the Howard Government.  It's a team.  And we've been effective, I hope, over the last eight and a half years because we're a reasonably good team, and I've got a lot of terrific colleagues and I'm glad very much to have the opportunity of adding Teresa to the ranks as a Parliamentary Secretary.  She'll do a fantastic job and the electorate of Petrie willing, she'll continue to represent you after the next election.
Thank you very, very much for having me.
[ends]


Thank you very much Madam President, John Brogden the leader of the Liberal Party in New South Wales, Scott Morrison, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you again for the very warm welcome that you have extended to Janette and to me.  It's always great to come back to address a meeting of the State Council of the Liberal Party here in New South Wales, a State Council of which I have been a member for many years and a State Council that I have enthusiastically participated in in various positions over those many years.
  May I start my remarks this morning by expressing what I know to be the dismay and concern of millions of Australians about some of the developments in the legal system in Indonesia overnight.  Can I say that my remarks are made out of full respect for the judicial system in Indonesia and in full recognition of the enormous and untiring efforts that the Indonesian Government has made to bring to justice those responsible for murdering 88 Australians and 202 people in all, on the 12th of October 2002.  The court's decision does not have an immediate set of implications for those that have been convicted because it is an advisory opinion, but inevitably it will be pleaded in support of appeals that could well be brought.  And I want to say that my heart and the hearts of millions of Australians will go out to those families and survivors of those who died or were horribly wounded and injured in the attack, if they have to go through the trauma and the ordeal of giving evidence again.
  But let me make it very clear that every effort is being made by this government in cooperation with the authorities in Indonesia to ensure that the overwhelming desire of the people of both our countries, and that is that those responsible for these horrible deeds are appropriately punished according to the full rigour of Indonesian law.  It was a horrible crime.  It was committed with reckless indifference to the suffering not only of our Australians, but also of the citizens of other countries.  And the Australian people and the people of Indonesia will never forget the Bali atrocity.  I will continue to work, as will the Foreign Minister and other Ministers of my Government, with the Government of Indonesia to see that justice is done.  And I want to again record my appreciation to the Government of Indonesia, to the police authorities in Indonesia, and the magnificent way in which they cooperated with the Australian Federal Police.
  My friends, as the time goes by and we inevitably approach the forthcoming federal election, as always in the lead up to an election, we begin to focus on the choice that the Australian people will make.  And for a number of reasons, the choice that will be made at the next federal election will be both sharper and have a more enduring impact than perhaps choices on occasions in federal elections have represented in the past.  As we approach the election, we not only ask the Australian people to return the Liberal National Party Coalition Government because of what we have achieved over the last eight and a half years, we also ask to be returned because of what we can achieve on behalf of the Australian people in the years ahead.
  We don't just run in this election on our record, strong and proud and full of achievement that that record may be.  But we also run as the side of politics best able to interpret, understand and put into effect the aspirations and the hopes of the Australian people for the next 10 years and beyond.  This country needs not only a continuation of the prosperity and security and strength of the last eight and a half years, but it also needs to pioneer new territory in a number of areas.  We need to greatly expand even further the enterprise culture of this country.  We are a nation, we are a party, we are a people that believe in individual effort and individual enterprise, and the success of the last eight and a half years has seen the burgeoning of that individual enterprise.
  But as I look ahead to the next 10 years, in order to consolidate the ground we have won over the last eight and a half years and in order to win even further ground, we have to find new and different ways of further expanding the enterprise culture of our people and our country.  That is why, amongst other things, we have embraced the Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  That Free Trade Agreement has specific gains for many industries, including the dairy industry and the beef industry and the motor vehicle industry and the tuna industry and the wine industry, and so the list goes on, and for the first time Australian firms will have access to the giant United States Government procurement market, which is worth $US400 billion a year.  But even beyond that, the great opportunity, a once in a generation opportunity, that the US Free Trade Agreement opens up for us is to lock our economy into the most powerful economy the world has ever seen.  And those who cringe and falter and dither, as many in the Labor Party do at the prospect of signing this Agreement, have no vision, inspiration or optimism about the future of this country.
I cannot for the life of me understand why any self-respecting political party in this country would shrivel in fear at the prospect of linking our economy with the greatest economy, in terms of power and economic strength, that the world has ever seen.  If we don't sign up to this Agreement, if the Australian Parliament doesn't sign this agreement, I can guarantee you that there will be a veritable queue of countries in our region wanting to take our place.  They will wonder at the commonsense of the Australian people if we fail to embrace this Agreement because this is an agreement about our future, it is not about past, it is an agreement about our future, just as the Agreement I have signed with the Prime Minister of Thailand a couple of weeks ago, a smaller economy and more narrowly based, but nonetheless a very valuable Agreement.  And just as the great natural gas contract that we signed with the Guangdong Province in China 18 months ago was about our future, so the Free Trade Agreement is about our future, and those who ponder and worry about its wisdom have no understanding of the needs of our future and are locked in past prejudice and past attitudes and past behaviour.
But it is not only in the area, my friends, of expanding our enterprise culture that the Coalition offers more than our opponents, but in two other areas that I regard as central to the kind of future I want for Australia, and they are the areas of the sustainability of our continent and the further strengthening of the fairness and decency of Australia as a society.  It is well accepted now that care for the environment in Australia is no longer a peripheral or occasional political issue.  It is right in the middle of the concerns of all Australians, of all generations and of all political persuasions.  We do, as the old clich‚ says, hold in trust a country that we have borrowed from our children, and we all have a responsibility to ensure that there is a proper balance between caring for the environment and the economic development of this country.  And that is why over the last eight and a half years we have invested record amounts in the Natural Heritage Trust.  It is why a Coalition Government led the nation in tackling the problem of salinity.  It is why we continue to be a very active opponent of those nations around the world who would want to see an increase in commercial whaling.  It is why the government I lead gave leadership that led to the signing of the agreement dealing with the Murray Darling Basin and broke the deadlock between the various states of Australia a few weeks ago, and as a consequence of this some $500 million of expenditure on projects to resuscitate the Murray Darling will begin to be invested and spent very soon.
But as a country we face further environmental challenges.  We need to tackle the growing shortages of water.  We need to embrace attitudes and practices in that area that we mightn't have contemplated as recently as five or ten years ago, and we'll need to cooperate as a nation between the Commonwealth and the States, to achieve what has to be done there.  We need to see the environmental challenges not being an argument between old or traditional sources of energy such as coal, and new renewable sources of energy such as wind and solar, but rather a challenge to reduce the greenhouse gas emission effect of all sources of energy use.  And that was the basis of the energy paper that I released a few weeks ago.  But we can achieve that balance, we can continue to grow as a country while caring for our environment.  We can't, in the interests of our economic advantages, sign the Kyoto Protocol in its present form for the very simple reason that if we sign Kyoto, we would immediately confer an advantage on countries that compete for resource investment, countries such as China and Indonesia that do not have any penalties or obligations because of their developing status under the Kyoto Protocol.  And until such restrictions as that are altered, it is not in Australia's interests to sign that Protocol.
I also want the opportunity in government again after the next election to continue the many things that we have done to create Australia as a more fair and decent society.  I remember, as many of you do, back in 1996 when we were running for election against the Keating Government, they said that we were going to destroy Medicare, they said that we were going to destroy the social security safety net, they said that we would not be generous and supportive to Australian families.  And if you look back over the last eight and a half years, you see how wrong all of those predictions were.
Let me talk for a moment about Medicare.  Not only have all the predictions about destroying Medicare been wrong, but in fact over the last eight and a half years we have in fact taken a number of steps to strengthen the Medicare system in Australia.  And the most recent were the initiatives that Tony Abbott got through Parliament to introduce for the first time in Medicare a safety net, and interestingly enough it's the Labor Party that has pledged to abolish the safety net.  This is a safety net, ladies and gentlemen, which says that if you are a concessional cardholder or you as a family get Family Tax Benefit A, once your out of hospital, out of pocket expenses goes over $300 a year, you get 80 per cent of the excess reimbursed by Medicare, and for the rest of us it's $700 a year as a threshold.  Now that provides an unrivalled safety net.  It's something that has never been there before and it's something that potentially will advantage about 415,000 Australians a year, largely families on low to middle incomes.  And yet extraordinarily the Labor Party, the friends so they argue of Medicare, is going to gut one of the most important reforms that has been added to Medicare since its introduction more than 20 years ago.
  And then when you add to that their, what I can only describe as their equivocal, mealy-mouthed comments about private health insurance - they never quite bring themselves to say we will keep the private health insurance rebate exactly as it is.  They can't bring themselves to say that because they don't intend to do that.  That's the reason.  It's always like oh we'll keep a rebate, or we don't think we'll have a means test, or we won't do this or we won't do that. They never give an unconditional commitment that they're going to keep the private health insurance rebate exactly as it is.
  And then of course this week we had a remarkable contribution from the Leader of the Opposition, and it produced that wonderful headline in The Australian that said "it's society stupid", and what he was trying to say, although he backed away from it a few hours later, that we really should be debating society rather than debating the economy.  Well I'm very happy to debate society.  I talk about society every day.  I recognise that the values that are important to us as Australians - our respect for individual enterprise, our respect for the central role of the family, our belief that Australian parents should have the right to choose where they educate their children - that's my society, a society that respects appropriately the history of this country, a society that recognises the contributions that people of all ethnicities and backgrounds, and not least the indigenous people of Australia, have made to the modern Australia.  We talk about those things all day and every day because they're important to all of us, and they're not the property of one side of politics.
  But I also recognise that the society we are living in now is in no small measure a product of the economic strength that we have given it over the last eight and a half years.  And when I think of the 1.3 million jobs that have been created over that period of time, I think of the fact that real wages have risen by 13 per cent in the eight and a half years we've been in power versus 2.9 per cent in the thirteen and a half years that Labor was in office.  When I heard the Leader of the Opposition launching his women's policy, and he said he was going to have an equal pay unit.  Well that's terrific, because when they were last in government, the average wages of women rose by 0.5 per cent in 13 years.  Perhaps they could apply that equal pay unit retrospectively to make up for some of the failure that took place when they were last in government.
  The reality is that the wages of women in Australia have risen in real terms much faster under this Government than they did under the previous government.  And the expansion of childcare, the tremendous growth in the number of women starting their own businesses, the additional choice that we have given to both mothers and fathers in families in relation to the care and the upbringing of their children, they are all real advances and they're all part of society.  There is a link between the strength of the economy and society, and I'm always suspicious of somebody who says well we should talk about the economy less and something else more.  That says to me that... two things.  It says they're a little uncertain of their ability to manage the economy and they don't know a great deal about how to do it.
  So my friends, the choice that we face is a very important one.  It will determine not only the future of Australia domestically, but also the future of Australia internationally.  And it will also be different on this occasion because if Labor wins... and let us not pretend, let us not get carried away, that is a real possibility, no matter how strong the economy may be, no matter how justified we may think the case for the Coalition is, it will be a very tough fight.  But if Labor does win we will have, on my understanding for the first time since federation, we will have Labor governments in office at every level of government, both state, federal and territorial.  We will have wall to wall, coast to coast Labor without let or hindrance, without the checks and balances that are so important in any national political system.
  Now not only will that carry implications in so many areas, but in particular it will carry enormous implications in the area of industrial relations because it will represent a temptation too great to resist for the Australian trade union movement that still remains the master of the Australian Labor Party, indeed to a greater extent now than in the middle 1980s.  One of the great paradoxes of the link between industrial and political Labor in Australia is that in 1986 35 per cent of the private sector workforce in Australia belonged to a union.  Now the figure is 17.5 per cent - 18 years later it has fallen to 17.5 per cent - yet in that same time the number of members of the Federal Parliament representing the Labor Party, who are members of trade unions, has grown to a much higher level than what it was in the mid-1980s.
  So in terms of the membership and the influence on the parliamentary Labor Party, it is far more a trade union dominated party now than what it was in the mid-1980s, and therefore in the area of industrial relations, more so than anywhere else, you will have nine Labor governments all over Australia - they will re-regulate the labour market, they will take away Australian Workplace Agreements, they will take the secondary boycott protection out of the Trade Practices Act, they will remove the figure of 20 as a limit on the allowable matters that can be put by the Industrial Relations Commission into workers' awards, they will require companies signing contracts with the Federal Government to disclose the identity of their sub-contractors so those sub-contractors can enjoy a friendly call from the local union organiser, whether they want it or not.
  Imagine what that will mean to the already beleaguered building industry in certain parts of this country.  You will see a re-regulation of the labour market, and the tragedy of that will be most heavily borne not only by Australian business, but will also be borne by the workers of Australia because the remarkable thing, and something Labor never acknowledges, is that under us the employees of this country have never been better off because not only have we given them high levels of employment and reduced their interest rates but we've also, as I said earlier in my speech, presided over a significant increase in their real wages.
So of all the things of which I would grieve if there were a change of government, none is more serious, none represents a more lethal threat to the prosperity of this country, to the success and stability of the small business sector and to the business community generally, than the prospect of a reimposition of a centralised union dominated industrial relations system.  And if we have Labor everywhere, there will be nothing standing in the way of the trade union movement securing that outcome.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finally say on policy issues that not only have we much to be proud of in what we have achieved domestically over the last eight and a half years, but the reputation and standing of this country around the world has never been higher.  And in case anybody thinks for a moment that I am just reflecting on the regard in which Australia is clearly held in north America and in Europe and in countries like China and Japan and Korea, but today happens to be the first anniversary of the Australian led intervention to save the nation state of the Solomon Islands.
  And that intervention, the RAMSI intervention to which so many countries in the Pacific contributed under the name Operation Helpem Fren, which is obviously pidgin, it has been a wonderful success.  And we have demonstrated what a good friend and neighbour we are of the people in our region, and we have been received warmly in the Solomon Islands.  I have been there twice over the past year and it's wonderful to know that the efforts of this country in rescuing a country that was clearly falling into a state of being a failed state and the efforts we are making to help our friends in Papua New Guinea, the investment we are making, particularly in the region, to help fight the scourge of HIV AIDS, where we have a special responsibility as a wealthy nation to help - all of these things are part of the contribution that Australia is making to being a good international citizen.  And so can I say to our friends in the Solomon Islands that we are proud that the intervention has been so successful, we are delighted at the progress that it is being made, and we are particularly warmed by the fact that it was not a solo Australian effort.  It was an effort to which many countries in the Pacific Islands contributed and contributed very generously.
Can I lastly say that it's great, as I remarked at the beginning, to be back to address a meeting of the New South Wales State Council.  The Liberal Party in New South Wales at a federal level holds more seats than the party has held at any time in this state since the party was formed in 1944.  Now that's the good news.  The bad news is you've got to hold on to every one and win some more to make absolutely certain... to make absolutely certain that we get returned.  We do, as you all know, have a strong position in New South Wales and Queensland and South Australia, not quite so well in the other states.  We can't afford to lose more than eight seats and if we do, we're political history and all of the things of which I spoke will come about.  So we have ahead of us a tremendous fight.  But I'm encouraged by the strength of the New South Wales division.  Can I pay a very special tribute to the partnership of Chris McDiven and Scott Morrison.  I've been a member of the New South Wales division for a long time and I have to say, and I say this without any disrespect to anybody else, I haven't seen it in a healthier state organisationally, particularly as far as its federal focus is concerned, at any time, and I thank all of you for that.
  Let us continue our efforts, let us increase them, let us remember the responsibility we have.  We have come a long way, but we have a long way to go.  The political debate in Australia now is not about the past, it's about the future.  It's about who is better able to deliver that fair and decent society, that more enterprising culture and that sustainable continent.  And to deliver those goals and to achieve those goals, you need the underpinnings of two things.  You need a strong and growing economy and you need a secure and well defended nation, and there's only one side of politics that can deliver that.
  [ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Spence, Barry Haase the Federal Member for Kalgoorlie, ladies and gentlemen.  I am really delighted to be here.  I am delighted to share this 15th anniversary with Woodside of the first trans shipment of LNG to Japan, to thank the company and all of those who have worked with it for the extraordinary achievements of the last 50 years in the case of Woodside and the last 15 years in the case of LNG.  It has been a story of great progress, of safe reliable delivery and a remarkable contribution to the export income of Australia.
Keith was kind enough to mention my role in that historic agreement with the Chinese on the Guangdong Province and the supply over 25 years of LNG to China, a great and remarkable contract and one of course that joined the rather more longstanding arrangement with Japan and Korea, both of whom, and their companies and utilities, have proved to be remarkably friendly and good and reliable customers of the venture.  That particular agreement, concluded in August of 2002, was a wonderful message to the world of what Australians working together can achieve, because it was an effort between the company, the Western Australian Government, the Federal Government, previous Western Australian Governments - and I pay tribute to the contribution of Richard Court when he was Premier of Western Australia, as well as the current Western Australian Premier Dr Gallop - and also to wonderful diplomatic representation in Beijing.  And a tremendous effort was put into winning that contract.  It was a great team effort and it was Australia united working together against some very fierce competition.  I mean when you get, as you all know, this is a highly competitive business, there's a lot of natural gas and a lot of LNG around the world, there's a lot of demand for it.
  I've been trying to sell some of it to the Governator, to Governor Schwarzenegger.  I was in Los Angeles recently extolling the virtues of it to him, and they sent a delegation out and I don't, you know, in the end I don't mind in the end who ends up supplying it, I'm neutral on those subjects, as long as it comes from Australia.  But the reality is that California is going to need a lot of energy in the future.  They have quite an energy problem.  They have an over-regulated market and they have a lot of challenges in the future, and they're going to face quite a pressing need in the not too distant future, and I would like to see Australia as part of the solution to that problem.  And it just demonstrates again that you can have close relationships with the United States, without in any way diminishing your close relationships with our very loyal and longstanding customers in Japan and Korea and more recently in China, and it's a real delight as Prime Minister of this country to go to China and to Japan and Korea and to be told how much store they place on these longstanding arrangements they've had.
So in commemorating Woodside's 15 years of secure and reliable LNG supply, can I pay tribute to the company's safety record.  Safety is a very important issue in this industry.  Because of the product that you're dealing with, safety is self-evidently critical.  But the safety record of Australians in relation to this industry is second to none.  When the Californian delegation saw me in Sydney a few weeks ago, they remarked upon the safety standards and the safety quality of the industry here, and that's a very big tribute to all of you.  And since production began in 1989, I'm told that the North West Shelf venture has delivered more than 1,550 LNG cargoes to Japan without missing a single delivery.  And that reliability, which in my view that record of reliability was about the key issue in sealing the contract with the Chinese.  They wanted product, they wanted it from a stable country, and they wanted reliability of supply, and we were able to offer all of those things.  And that really has been the cornerstone of this company and its achievements and the capture of new markets.
  When first proposed in 1979, the scale of the North West Shelf venture investment... $9 billion had never been seen before in this state.  And the level of capital investment has now risen to $14.5 billion, with at least a further 5.8 needed by 2010.  So it really has helped transform not only the industry but the Pilbara, and I congratulate everybody involved.  I congratulate the company on its 50th anniversary.  I don't know whether your 50th anniversary is closer to Mick Jagger's, but we'll go away and consult diaries and sort of work that out.  And I also understand that today you've signed a sale and purchase agreement with (inaudible) power company.  And can I just say one other thing - that that is how very important it is to the Government, and I know that the company, for the early entry into force  of the International Unitisation Agreement, and that should be ratified and signed as soon as possible, and we're certainly continuing our efforts as a government to encourage the government of East Timor to do that.  We've been a very good friend to the people of East Timor.  The people of East Timor have no better friend than Australia, and we've been very fair and very generous since our other discussions with them about other issues, and as far as this agreement is concerned, it should be signed and entered into force, ratified as soon as possible, and that's very important for your company and very important for Australians.
  So ladies and gentlemen, congratulations to all of you for the contributions that you have made to Australia's growth and expansion and wealth and export capacity over the last 15 years, and particularly more generally over the last 50 years.  The best years for Woodside are ahead of us, I can assure you of that, because the potential if we continue to do things right, is absolutely unlimited.  I have great pleasure in unveiling this plaque and congratulating the company and its employees for what together you have achieved.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Chris Renwick, Barry Haase the Federal Member for Kalgoorlie, Dr David Smith, ladies and gentlemen.
It's great to be in Karratha to be reminded yet again by an on site inspection of the enormous and growing contribution of the mining industry and the resource sector to the wealth and the strength and the growth and the development of Australia.
The story of this part of Australia, the story of the north west and the story of the growth and expansion of the mining industry and the way in which it has really over the last 30 to 40 years greatly strengthened and diversified the Australian economy is one of the greatest parts of the Australian economic story since World War II.  And in the brief time I've been here this morning, I've had an opportunity in talking to people to be reminded of what all of that means to them, to taste and feel the sense of optimism that people have and you have every reason to be optimistic.  Because in this part of Australia you have a product and you have a capacity to extract and deliver on time in an economic and efficient way a product that is greatly in demand.  I've seen firsthand the interest of countries, particularly but not only in Asia in our resources, the iron ore exports, we really can't export enough to countries like China recently further a-field that by and large natural gas contract to China.
  I was recently in California talking to the Governator as they call Arnold Schwarzenegger over there and the Governator and his friends are potentially interested in buying LNG from Australia because the United States is going to place a very significant resource and energy challenge in the immediate years ahead.  And all of this adds up to the fact that if we play our cards right to use the colloquialism, this country has enormous growing and great opportunities in the resource sector.  The key to it, of course, they have good company, they have a well paid highly skilled workforce.  And I want to pay tribute to Rio Tinto for the contribution it's made as one of the great mining companies of the world and the contribution in various guises and Rio Tinto and CRA and the people that have led it over the last 30 years I know extremely well.
  And I must say that I applaud the advances that have been made in the industrial relations in the mining industry. It's resulted in an expanded output.  But just as important, in fact more importantly, it's resulted in higher wages and greater employment opportunities. And isn't that the golden double in any industry to be selling more, to be getting new customers, but to have a highly skilled and as well an increasingly well paid workforce.  And that in a sense is what good industrial relations and good economic policy is all about.  And this industry is a wonderful example of how you can achieve both of those things.  You can achieve a win win outcome for both the company and also for the employees and it fills me with a great deal of enthusiasm and it reinforces my passionate belief in the economic future of this country and my passionate belief that this country if it does sensible things and builds on its natural advantage and one of the great natural advantages that this country has is that we are well endowed by providence with great natural resources and we shouldn't be the least bit reluctant to use those to our national advantage, but use them in a way that is environmentally sensible, recognise the retrospective rights and interest of indigenous people in many of the resource sectors of Australia and also understand that it's a joint effort.  It's not just the billions of dollars that companies invest, but it's also the rights and interests and legitimate aspirations of workers. And they've got to be well paid and properly remunerated for their efforts.
  We do face in Australia a serious shortage of skilled tradesmen and women.  And I had the opportunity of meeting some of the apprentices and trainee apprentices here this morning and I can only say to them that they have opportunities ahead of them because of those shortages but perhaps their peers in an earlier generation may not have had.  But we as a nation face an increasing challenge in this area.
But overall, it's a source of tremendous hope and optimism to me and whenever I go to Asia in particular and talk to Korean and Japanese and Chinese leaders they talk with great affection about our product and they talk about the fact that we delivered on time, that we are reliable, we are a stable source of supply and if we continue that way then there's no reason why we shouldn't continue to have growing opportunities.
There are just two small announcements that I'd like to make.  When I was in Perth on the 11th of June I announced the national skills shortages mining initiative which is being led by the Minerals Council of Australia in conjunction with the Chamber of Minerals and Energy in Western Australia.  And that initiative was to identity current and future skills needs for the mining industry and to develop an industry led approach to promoting careers in mining and to devising and implementing strategies to attract young and mature aged workers into the industry.  And I'm delighted to announce that Dr David Smith who's with us today who's the managing director of Pilbara iron ore Rio Tinto group has agreed to be chairman of that working group. And other members drawn from the wide cross sections the mining industry, stakeholders and government representatives are being finalised.  Dr Smith brings a wide ranging experience as many of you know in the mining industry to the working group and he's a passionate advocate of learning and skills development and that is precisely what's needed.
Now my colleague and your Federal Member Barry Haase who badgers me frequently about issues that are important to his electorate, and I think you all know, Barry represents, geographically speaking, the largest electorate anywhere in the world. It's not only the largest electorate Australia but of course it's the largest electorate anywhere in the world and it's made up of many very different communities, each of which play a very important part in both the political and economic history of Australia. It's well known of each that if Kalgoorlie hadn't have voted in a particular direction in the referendum at the time of federation then Western Australia probably wouldn't have joined the Commonwealth at that particular time and it was said that because a large number of expatriate Victorians were working on the goldfields at Kalgoorlie that the city of Kalgoorlie, unlike many other parts of Western Australia, voted for federation.
  Anyway, Barry's been on my back about a lot of things to do with Kalgoorlie and today in response from that to his advocacy in particular I want to announce a commitment of half a million dollars to establish a Commonwealth Government mining careers bursary scheme and under this scheme we will provide bursaries to years 10, 11 and 12 high school students in Western Australia to study mathematics and science subjects as preparation for undertaking an undergraduate engineering degree, provide direct exposure to the mining industry for selected students through two fully funded four day excursions to Kalgoorlie, including mine visits, it will increase the awareness of the mining industry amongst high school students in general through ambassadorial activities of bursary holders within their school communities, and provide direct financial incentives for students to undertake the first year of a mining related undergraduate degree in Kalgoorlie at the Western Australian School of Mining, Curtin University of Technology.  And I'll be releasing a more expansive statement on that issue today.
 But they're just two very important, small in a national perspective, but in a local perspective very, very important because the thing that I am constantly reminded of about this fantastic country of ours is that when you go around it although we all have a lot in common, we interact with each other in a very direct and open fashion and there's a fundamental common decency and courtesy about all Australians no matter where I find them, even those that violently disagree with me, and I find plenty of them who violently disagree with me about all manner of subjects, such as what a great democracy is all about.  But having said that, it is a wonderful sum of many different parts, Australia, and you really do have to understand that people who live and work and bring up families and live out their lives in this part of Australia, they have a different experience, they have different needs and they have different interests and people for example who might grow up in the leafy suburbs of Sydney or Melbourne or indeed grow up in Western Victoria or grow up in green and very, very damp and wet and lush Tasmania, so it's a very, very different environment and it's a good reminder to me by coming to these different parts and can I just say again to all of you, to the Rio Tinto family, which has made such a fantastic contribution, not only to the mining industry but to Australia over 30 or 40 years and have been such a mainstay of this wonderful, extraordinary chapter of Australia's post-World War II economic development, thank you for what you have done, I wish the company well, I wish all who work with it well, I wish a continuation of that sharing of the (inaudible), I believe in companies making profits, I want them to pay their taxes, and I'm sure Rio Tinto does that, as all good corporate citizens do, and we always want people who work for companies to be very well paid because at the end of the day it's a joint effort, it's not just the shareholders, it's also the employees and I think the mining industry is a very good example of how that can be achieved and thank you and good luck to you all.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much for those kind words of welcome.  To the Chairman Mr Kiernan, your Honour, ladies and gentlemen.  I'd like to thank Anglicare here in Perth for giving me the opportunity of this as a venue to make a very important announcement of some major changes to the family law system which the Government has decided upon and in relation to which we hope to have a dialogue with the Australian community and many people who are touched by the operation of the family law system, over the weeks and months ahead.
Anglicare of course is no stranger, along with the other great welfare organisations of this country, with human disputes, with family breakdowns, with family tragedy, with family suffering and the struggles of individuals as they try to come terms with the difficult circumstances in which their lives often find them.  And families' separation is something that either directly or indirectly touches just about every Australian.  Even those who may not have been directly affected by it, they are very indirectly and very strongly affected by it in relation to the breakdown of marriages and relationships amongst their other family members and their friends.
  I've said on many occasions, and I'm certainly not the only public figure to say or believe this, but it's certainly something I've believed in all my life, and that is that ideally speaking, a child should be raised to adulthood by both a mother and a father and as a united, loving family, which is still the best emotional base for moulding citizenship and character.  It is also, I believe, the best social welfare system and the most efficient social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.  And not only does family unity and marriages remaining intact contribute enormously to human happiness and to the welfare of children brought into this world, but it also takes an extraordinarily heavy financial burden off the State.  And over the last few months we have been examining the House of Representatives report which was commissioned into the child custody system by me last year, and that report, that we have now examined in detail, and the announcements I make today and I release with my statement coming out of this press conference, both here and in Canberra, a framework statement which outlines in more detail the changes that we have in mind, and in I hope the not too distant future we will release for detailed discussion and response a discussion paper that will canvass the implementation of the changes to the system.
  The Government has come to the conclusion I guess that is shared by so many other people that the present family law system is too adversarial in character, it is very costly, crippling so, to many people.  But we've also formed the view that in the end you cannot develop a family law system which is fair and just that doesn't at the end of the day, if no other course of action is possible, provide for a clear determination and adjudication of people's legal rights.  And we have endeavoured with the proposals that I'm outlining today to strike a balance between a recognition of those two factors.  At the heart of the changes that I'm announcing today is an emphasis on early intervention and preventing the relationships of separated parents from severely deteriorating where conflict becomes permanently entrenched.
  The centrepiece of our reforms will be the establishment throughout Australia of 65 new family relationship centres.  And these centres will help separating parents resolve child custody disputes in a less adversarial manner outside of the formal court system by providing them with access to information, advice and free dispute resolution services.  The new centres, rather like the Government's Job Network, will be run by a community... by a network of community agencies.  They will provide practical assistance to help parents reach agreement in their custody arrangements, including help to develop parenting plans.  They will help couples establish positive post-separation relationships as early as possible, putting up front the principle of the best interests of their children.  The establishment of this network will of course be funded by the Government, and what we have in contemplation is that many existing organisations that already provide services of this kind will seek to tender, as it were, their services to be part of the family relationship centre.
  The underlying operation of the new system will require people to have access to family relationship centres and endeavour to resolve their disputes before they commence court proceedings.  We see these family relationship centres as being the initial shock absorber, if I can put it that way, of the disputation and the disagreement following a separation.  If a couple have decided to separate and they are in complete and total agreement regarding custody and related matters, then all that will be required is a brief attendance at a family relationship centre and the preparation of a parenting plan and then the proceedings can go on.  I do not imagine that the establishment of this new system will eliminate all acrimonious court procedures.  There will always be a certain number where the level of antagonism and the level of bitterness is such that no amount of dispute resolution and no amount of shock absorption through the establishment of the new system is going to prevent people ending up in court.  But I do believe, and we are encouraged on the basis of discussions we've had with many people to believe, that the establishment of this new system, once it is up and running, will significantly reduce the number of disputes that end up going to court.  I think that will have beneficial flow on effects, not only for the children but also for separating parents.
The new family relationship centres will not just be for separating parents.  They will provide information and referral to pre-marriage education services to give couples a sound start to marriage, and for families who have not separated but are experiencing relationship difficulties, the centres will provide information and referral services that can help to prevent family breakdown.  A key responsibility of the family relationship centres will be to help separated fathers to maintain a substantial role in their children's lives, and we do intend to further amend the Family Law Act to entrench, except in the most exceptional of circumstances, the legal right of both parents to have access to and enjoy the company of their children, irrespective of the formal custodial arrangements.
  The Government also intends to change the Family Law Act to make family law court cases involving children less adversarial, and as a result of these changes parents, as I mentioned earlier, will be required to attempt to resolve disputes through primary dispute resolution before being able to file any proceedings with a court.  An aim of dispute resolution will be completion of parenting plans.  Parenting plans will emphasise shared parental responsibility, the need for both parents to be involved in their children's lives, and the right of children to spend time with both parents regularly.  We've also recognised a growing belief that the present arrangements do not adequately respect and acknowledge the rights and roles of grandparents in many situations.  And many grandparents have responsibility for caring for their grandchildren when, for whatever reason, the parents of those children are not able to do so, and we intend to give greater recognition of the role of grandparents both in the law and in access to services.
  As a further element of reforms, and this has less relevance in Western Australia because of the particular and very effective arrangements that operate in this state, the Government is proposing to establish a combined registry for family law matters for the Family Court and the Magistrate's Court, and the new registry will help people navigate the court system without the need for a lawyer, it will provide information about the Family Law Courts and channel cases to the appropriate court.  Can I make an observation about the role of lawyers.  It's very easy for people to generically condemn the role of lawyers in family law disputes.  I have no doubt that the intervention at a very early point of legal advisers can sometimes entrench differences of view and can add to and multiply the points of difference and the points antagonism.  On the other hand, people in a society such as ours have a right, a fundamental right to good legal advice and it's not out of deference to a profession that I was once proud to be a practising member, but also I think a fair statement of the situation that a great bulk of lawyers in Australia bring to their responsibilities a sense of commitment and duty and it's too easy to blame every imagined ill of the family law system of the lawyers without recognising the human frailty across a whole range of people involved in the process is involved. But to the extent that the new system that we contemplate will provide this mandatory shock absorber in the first instance, I believe it will dramatically reduce the number of cases that end up acrimoniously before the courts and for that reason I am personally very strongly committed to it, it has involved very, very lengthy discussion and debate with my colleagues. Most of the recommendations of the House of Representatives committee have been adopted, we did not adopt the families tribunal proposal, we found that there were flaws in that proposal, we think what we have put forward strikes a right balance between recognising that if you have a system that adjudicates and makes decisions on legal rights, in the end that is best done by a court and you either have a court or you don't have a court and you do ultimately need to have a court, and I'm sorry I wasn't able to  (inaudible), I have been a total failure today, I would not be a good relationships counsellor, that is obvious.
But my friends, exactly, can I just say that we think we've struck the right balance, we provide a non-adversarial initial shock absorber and if that does not work effectively well ultimately people do have the right and the opportunity to go to court, but we believe that the number who will choose that as a final resort will be significantly reduced. In the course of their work the committee, the House of Representatives committee of course encountered many criticism of the child support agency.  And that doesn't surprise me, as a local Member of Parliament, probably the most vitriolic criticisms of government agencies that I've encountered from constituents, largely but not exclusively from men, is directed towards the child support agency. The child support agency of course represents a principle that we in Australia adopted for the first time back in the mid-1980s, it was adopted by the former government, I must say with our support from opposition because I thought it was a sound principle and I was certainly an advocate at the time for the principle that people should be required to meet their financial obligation as parents. There is no easy solution to the dilemma of the child support agency, except of course the total assumption by the general body of taxpayers of the responsibility of paying for the care of children and I don't think that's either a sound principle or something that a majority of the Australian people would support.  We have merely adopted the recommendation of the House of Representatives report to establish a taskforce to undertake a re-evaluation of the child support system to and report by March of 2005.
Can I say that the Government appreciates very much the important work of existing services that provide counselling and advice and help to both prepare people for marriage, to keep marriages together and to offer comfort and support and counselling after marriages break down.  And I guess the strongest illustration of our respect for that role is in fact the announcement I've made today.  I mean this represents probably the most dramatic illustration yet of this government's belief in of what I have called over the years the social coalition to tackle society's problems. I think the best bodies, the body best equip to provide the family relationships centres around Australia with appropriate government financial help, let me add, let me emphasise, are in fact the bodies that have already, through their own individual missions based on whatever set of principles they regard as important, already committed themselves to provide these sorts of services.  And that is why we have decided to base the family relationship centres network on the accumulation within the community of bodies that are already in a far more modest way providing these services and providing this help.  I know there have been some expressions of concern about government funding for the existing services, let me stress the existing services being provided, and as a recognition of that I'm also announcing today an immediate injection of a further $15 million into these agencies for help in providing, let me stress, the existing services and I wouldn't want anybody to imagine that I saw that $15 million as some kind of downpayment on the further services and  responsibilities that individual organisations might undertake as a result of these reforms.
Ladies and gentlemen, these reforms that I've outlined today, and they contained in more detail in the documents that I'm releasing to be followed up with a very detailed discussion paper about implementation, they do represent in my view, and I imagine in the view of everybody, very major changes to the family law system. They are a recognition that although there are very serious flaws in the present system, it is not a situation where we can simply pretend that be totally changing the system you will abolish all family disputes, there will still be very acrimonious breakdowns in marriages and relationships, there will be some entrenched conflicts that can be only be resolved in court and you have to have a proper system for that to be resolved. But if we can interpose between the point of breakdown and the ultimate horror of a heavily contested custody issue and all the expense and trauma and bitterness that's involved in that, if we can interpose what I have chosen to call this initial shock absorber I believe we can over time reduce the number of those more acrimonious cases and in the course of that I believe produce far better outcomes for children, far better outcomes for separating parents and I think far better outcomes for the community.  But I do stress that the family relationship centres will not only be available for people who have separated, they will also be available and the funding will support the provision of services for people who separation can be avoided if they get the right advice and the right encouragement and the right help and I think that is tremendously important.
We have a very strong commitment as a government, and I do personally, to the role of the family unit in our society.  It's not an old fashioned view to say that the family is the central and the most important unit in our society, it's as modern and contemporary view now as it's ever been because raising children in a stable, happy family environment is about the best thing we can do for our future and to the extent that the changes that I've announced today when they're implemented makes a contribution to more people, more children having the benefit of that, well I will regard that as a very significant achievement of the Government.
I again thank Anglicare for giving me this forum, this venue, I congratulate Anglicare on its wonderful work, I am very familiar with it and the Government in different ways has supported Anglicare and will continue to do so because it does along with the other great organisations such as the Salvation Army and St Vincent de Paul and the Wesley Institute and they do great and wonderful work for the less fortunate in our community, not least in the area of family support and I hope that those organisations and their family counselling arms will see the establishment of the family relationship centres as an opportunity to expand the reach of their services with appropriate government help and to make an even greater contribution to a happier Australian society.  Thank you.
[ends]  



  Thank you very much Stuart, Mrs Henry, Mr Mayor, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  What a magnificent town hall this is.  It really is absolutely fantastic.  And I'm delighted to be in the electorate of Hasluck and I am more than delighted to speak in support of the Liberal Party candidate for this electorate.  He brings to his path, Stuart Henry does, an unrivalled background in something that is very much the heart and soul of the Liberal Party's existence, and that is successful small business.  He has an understanding that the generation of wealth in our society is dependent upon a small business sector.  He has the experience of working in a competitive business environment and I certainly endorse everything that he says about the way in which over the last eight and a half years the Government has set about creating what I regard as the best economic conditions this country has probably had since World War II.
  There was a time in the 1960s when our growth rates were as strong as they are now, but back in those days we were a far more protected and cloistered economy.  We had very high tariff protection, we had a fixed exchange rate, we had exchange controls, the monetary (inaudible) pretended that they controlled interest rates, but of course anybody who understands a thing about the operation of monetary policy in that economy knows that in the end nobody can control interest rates.  They are a product of the forces of supply and demand.  But if you now fast forward to 2004, we have an entirely different environment.  We have a floating exchange rate, we have substantially dismantled our tariff protection, we have reformed our taxation system, we have changed our industrial relations system, and we are competing effectively and successfully as part of a globalised world economy.
  Stuart mentioned the number of the statistics that illustrate the strength of the Australian economy.  I came across another the other day.  In March of 1996 when the Government was elected, there were no fewer than 35 electorates in Australia which had double digit unemployment, unemployment of more than 10 per cent.  Now eight and a half years later, that number has fallen from 35 to four.  There are only four electorates in Australia that now have double digit unemployment.  And we have for the first time since 1968 the golden double of unemployment below six per cent and inflation below three per cent.
  We have, as Stuart said, paid off about $70 billion of national government debt.  And in case somebody thinks that is really a book entry, by paying it off we now have $5.5 billion on average each year additionally available - because of the reduced interest payments on the debt, we have about $5.5 billion additionally available to invest in health, in education, in roads, in defence, and also in family benefits and taxation relief.  So it has been a story of very great economic progress and it has not just been a strength of the domestic economy that's been a feature of that period of time, it's all been the way in which Australia has been able to project herself internationally on the international (inaudible).  I remember when we were first elected, people said critically that oh the Asian leaders won't deal with this crowd, they'll show him the door.  We have of course over the last eight and a half years proved those sorts of foolish predictions completely false.
  We have been able to build an ever closer economic and political relationship with the United States, and that has culminated in the negotiation of the Free Trade Agreement.  That Free Trade Agreement is a once in a generation opportunity for Australia to lock herself into the strongest economy the world has ever seen.  I cannot for the life of me understand how any political leader, caring about the national interest, could possibly hesitate about endorsing the Free Trade Agreement.  It contains increased access for our dairy industry, for our beef industry, for our motor car industry, for our horticultural industry, for our tuna industry, and even in a modest way for our wine industry.  It (inaudible) a large array of manufacturing tariffs currently imposed by the United States against Australian exports.  It will provide access to the giant United States government procurement market.  Australian firms for the first time will be able to bid for United States federal government contracts worth about $US200 billion a year, as well as be able to bid for state government contracts in the United States, in 41 Americans states that have now signed up, so the total government procurement market state and federal which is available for bidding by Australian firms if they can match other bids, is just under $US400 billion a year.
  We have secured an absolute protection of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.  Yes, some of the American drug companies did try and get in under the radar on that subject, but we didn't agree.  I knew the American drug companies wanted to bring about some changes and I made it very clear in the final stages of the negotiations that we weren't going to agree to that, because the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is very important to Australia.  And all we have agreed to is a review mechanism, the results of which cannot alter any decision made by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee or the Federal Government.  (inaudible) transparent examination of the merit of the argument of people who claim that they should have had their drug listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits list, and there's nothing wrong with that.  But this review mechanism has no deliberative capacity.  It can only express a view.  And Government and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee has no intention of undermining the operation of this highly successful system - a system incidentally which obviously, in order to remain sustainable as the years go by and our population ages, a system that has to be operated in an economical fashion.
  And when it comes to the other issue that has been raised about the Free Trade Agreement, that is the question of cultural independence and the preservation of the local content rules for TV and film and also reservations in relation to new media, I took a very close personal interest in both of those things in the final stages of the negotiation.  And the Free Trade Agreement preserves the existing local content rules.  It preserves them.  It doesn't diminish them.  It preserves them.  And it also makes it very clear that there has been some expansion of local content in relation to pay TV, and a number of submissions we made to the Americans there have been accepted.  And there have been appropriate reservations made about appropriate content concerning new media.  Nobody wants Australian voices and Australian stories to be muzzled or diminished in their place in film and television in this country, and that will not occur under the Free Trade Agreement.  But I can only say to my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition, as I've said before - it's time to call this for Australia and get behind this Agreement because it's a once in a generation opportunity to lock a very strong Australian economy into the growth and the expansion of the most powerful economy the world has ever seen.
  And we have been able to do that without in any way harming our capacity to further expand and develop our economic relationship with the countries of Asia.  I've just come from Karratha and Port Hedland.  I attended a little ceremony at Woodside yesterday that marked the 15th anniversary of the first LNG shipment from Woodside to Japan.  And as you know, I was involved as Prime Minister, along with (inaudible) Richard Court as the then Premier of Western Australia and the current Premier of Western Australia Dr Gallop, in supporting the consortium's successful bid for that giant LNG contract with the Guangdong Province in China.  (inaudible) this Government that couldn't do business with Asia, according to our critics, this Government that had taken Australia too close to America for our own comfort, has simultaneously been able to preside over a further deepening of our economic relationship with the economic giants of the Asian Pacific region.  Our links economically and politically with Japan and Korea have continued to grow and they are old and trusted and true economic and trade friends of Australia, and particularly trade friends of Western Australia.  But over the last eight and a half years, we've more than doubled our exports to China and China has grown in importance and it will continue to grow in importance to this country.  And the reason why we won that LNG contract, above everything else, was that the Chinese saw us as a stable, dependable, predictable, reliable, on time supplier.  And that, in the end, as you all know in business, counts more than just about anything else.
  We have a very good track record.  We do deliver on time.  We run very safe resource industries in this country.  I met a delegation from California who had been sent her by the Governator, I think he calls himself - Arnold Schwarzenegger.  And he sent this delegation over to Australia to talk, they came to Western Australia to talk about energy, and they remarked about not only the extraordinary economic success of our industries, but the tremendous safety record of the resource sector.  So we have a lot as a nation to be very proud about, and what we have achieved and we've built domestically a strong and vibrant economy and we've expanded our horizons internationally, and there's no reason why that progress can't go on.
  But we haven't just been about economic issues, and economic policy is never an end in itself.  We don't seek to run a good economy just so we can get some kind of triple star from an international accounting body.  We run a strong economy to produce a human dividend.  When I think back over the last eight and a half years, I think of the fact that we have that low unemployment rate.  We have 1.3 million more Australians in work now than in 1996.  I think about the fact that real wages have risen by 14 per cent over the last eight and a half years.  They rose by 2.9 per cent over the previous 13 years.  I think of the four electorates with double digit unemployment versus 35 eight and a half years.  I also think of the more than doubling of the number of people who are in apprenticeships or traineeships.  I think of the vastly lower interest rates.  And we all know that if people have secure employment and good wages and low interest rates and job opportunities for their children, that makes an enormous contribution to family stability and family happiness.  And this idea that you can have a disconnect in the economic health of the nation from the social health of the nation is unreal.
  But there are issues beyond both sorts of connections and this morning I released on behalf of the Government the outline of some major changes to the family court system in Australia.  And every Australian in different ways is touched by, whether directly or indirectly, by family or relationship breakdown, the impact it can often have of a very serious kind on young children and an impact that can last with them for the rest of their lives.  And I think most people regard the present system as too adversarial and too costly and increasingly unreceptive to the warmth and the interests of many people who are touched by these breakdowns.  And I outlined today a plan that will bring major changes to that system.  It will introduce a nationwide network of family relationship centres that will act as a first shock absorber when people's relationships break down.  And it's designed to further to cement the concept that the natural parents of children have, each of them, the mother and the father, have an inalienable right to be involved in the raising of their children, to have a say in their future.  It is not the occasion to go into the detail of it, but I mention it to make the point that this is a government that is not only interested in economics and the benefits that flow from good economic prospects, it is a government that is interested in the long term social health of our nation and a government that is interested in assisting people in a sensitive non intrusive way in addressing some of the problems that confront them during their life cycle.
Another issue that the Government is conscious of community concern about acts of crime.  And I know in a federation crime is overwhelmingly a state government responsibility.  We provide the states with ever growing amounts of money, and let me on that point just diverge for a moment because I occasionally read when I visit Western Australia comments from the Western Australian Government saying they want more money from the Federal Government.  Well can I say, they have received more money from the Federal Government, more than they would ever have received under previous arrangements.  I wonder how many people in this room know that every last dollar of the GST goes to the states.  We don't pocket a single dollar of the GST.  And when we introduced the new tax system 1999 and the whole idea was that we were going to give the proceeds of the GST to the states so they could spend it on schools and roads and hospitals and police and all those bread and butter issues that are so important to all of us, they'd been complaining for years that they didn't have access to a growth tax and that, it didn't matter what political colour the state governments were, I mean I have to say that Liberal Premiers of Western Australia over the years have given more eloquent speeches to me about the needs of the state to have access to a growth tax than any Labor Premier's ever had.  They did it in great style and with great affection and we miss it and that is why we introduced it.  And could I say that (inaudible) have a look at the federal budget papers to verify this, but over the next five years Western Australia will be $1.116 billion better off as a result of the GST than it would have been if the Keating Government's fanatical sharing arrangements had continued.  And that over that period of time, 45.1 per cent of all the revenue that Western Australian receives funds from the GST and Commonwealth Government grants, 45.1 per cent.  Almost half of the total revenue that the Western Australian Government has comes from the GST and Federal Government grants.  Now I'm not complaining about that, we intended it, it's our policy, but I'm pointing it out.  And, understandably, when the almost automatic catch cry of some state governments to say well look, you're a Federal Government, give us some more money.  That might have been valid when we didn't have a situation where states have access to a growth tax but now that we do have that, it's legitimate of me to point that out.
But could I refer to the issue of crime.  Now crime is fundamentally (inaudible) a responsibility of state governments.  And there are occasions when top up initiatives from the Federal Government are desirable.  One of those that I'm very proud of, of course, is our Tough on Drugs initiative and we've spent about $1 billion over a period of four or five years on that Tough on Drugs initiative and we work very productively with the state governments, with the state police and they do a great job with our federal police and our customs services.  Everybody hates drugs and everybody wants to put the drug barons out of business and behind bars, everybody wants to stop kids starting drugs in the first place and everybody wants to rehabilitate people who've got a drugs problem.  And there are three elements in that programme - education, law enforcement and rehabilitation.  And we've had real success.  The deaths from heroin overdoses have fallen by 70 per cent since the initiative was introduced, and I'm not saying all of it is due to that initiative, but it has certainly made a very big contribution.  And the diversion programmes whereby people who have first contact with the criminal justice system are given the opportunity of going into rehabilitation as an alternative punishment, that system is also working extremely well.
  And in addition, a top up measure on the 7th of May, I announced a new $20 million National Community Crimes Prevention programme to help Australian communities pursue effective, locally organised crime prevention initiatives.  Well not surprisingly, it's proved to be very popular and in response to the first grants round we've received 180 applications amounting to almost $40 million in funding requests.  And I'm very pleased to announce today the first of the community partnerships grant recipient, that is from the largest of the programmes funding stream and the grant I'm announcing today exemplifies the principles outlined and the successful applicant is the Hills Community Support Group represented here today by the Chief Executive Officer Miss Helen Dullard.  And this group will receive $331,000 for an innovative project to build positive skills and self-esteem in young people who are at risk of becoming involved in crime.  And today's project involves key supporters such as the Swan Chamber of Commerce, the WA police and the Midland Redevelopment Authority and this builds on other successful partnerships with Midland Brick which was recognised as a state winner in the Prime Minister's 2002 Award for Excellence in Community Business Partnerships.
  And Mr Mayor, I heard what you had to say.  I will think about what you had to say.  You sort of didn't leave me in any doubt as to what you wanted.  And can I say in relation to those chesterfields, there are a lot of reasons why Stuart Henry should receive your support.  When I was told about those chesterfields, I thought of another one and that is this, that the acquisition of those chesterfields created quite a stir because the design police of Parliament House, the people who were the masters of taste in Parliament House said that the chesterfields were inappropriate and that I should have had something else despite the fact that the chesterfields were cheaper than what I was meant to have.  But the (inaudible) significance of all of this is that the Leader of the Labor Party in the Senate promised that one of the first actions of an incoming Federal Labor Government would be to take the chesterfields out and to replace them with something more suitable.  I think that would be an affront to the people of Hasluck.  And I'm very grateful for that (inaudible) and reason why Stuart should receive your support.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is great to be here.  Some time before the end of the year we will make a decision on the future government of this country.  I don't take the outcome of that for granted.  The one thing I've learnt in my time in public life is that you never take the outcome of political contests for granted.  I'll be campaigning for my very life to win re-election and I certainly regard it as a very tough contest.  I think we can lay claim for having done a good job on the Australian economy.  I think we can lay claim for having responded effectively to the security and defence challenges that I never imagined in March of 1996 that I would face.  And a couple of weeks ago, I talked about some of the goals I've had for a fourth term, the goals of building an even more entrepreneurial culture, of balancing the development of the country, return to the environment and making sure that we had a fair and decent society through effective social policies.
But I reminded myself and the audience that the foundation of those things is really economic security and national security.  You can have all the goals in the world about education and health and all of those things, but unless you have a strong and growing economy, unless you have a secure and well defended nation those goals can't be realised and they are issues that I hope the Australian people will weigh in the balance and finally can I say in our political system a federal election is an accumulation of 150 individual contests in the electorates around Australia and I couldn't be more delighted with the quality of the Liberal Party standard bearer in this electorate.
 As I said earlier he brings the wealth of business experience. He brings a tremendous energy and you'd even forgive me for saying as I've said to other audiences he also plays the game they play in heaven which for a Sydney born man you'll forgive, is an added recommendation, but knows the area well, he knows the business climate in Western Australia. He knows what will happen if we end up with coast to coast, wall to wall Labor Governments after the next federal election because if we lose you won't have a Liberal Government anywhere in Australia. Now, no checks and balances, you'll have nine Labor Governments I think for the first time I think in our history since federation and you can imagine what rooky the unions of this country will make with that opportunity. They'll re-regulate the industrial relations system. You know what's happened here in Western Australia and you have nine Labor Governments right across Australia I think that would be the consequence.
 But ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for having me. Please give Stuart your very, very strong support. I think he'll make a wonderful representative and I think he'll make a great contribution to the parliamentary party in Canberra.
Thank you.


Well thank you Colin for those very warm words of welcome, State President Danielle Blain, former Premiers Sir Charles and Richard Court, my Federal ministerial colleagues and my other Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Liberals.
It is a great pleasure to be again addressing this State conference of the parties in Western Australia. It is always a delight to come to this State, it is always a reminder to me of the enormous energy and vibrancy of Western Australia and the people of this State and I have now had four days with you starting in Karratha and then going to Port Hedland and spending the last two or three days here in Perth. Western Australia as always is very important not only to the nation but also very important to us politically and this election will be no different in many respects and the importance of Western Australia to the outcome of the next Federal election will be arguably greater than on a number of earlier occasions. And before talking about some of the issues can I take this opportunity to thank all of my Western Australian parliamentary colleagues for the tremendous role that they have played as part of a great Federal parliamentary team.
In particular I would like to pay tribute to two of my colleagues from Western Australia who will not be recontesting the next election. I want to thank Daryl Williams who has served as a Minister from the time the government was elected in March of 1996. He served as Attorney-General and he brought to that post a fine legal mind and a high level of objectivity and integrity and more recently he grappled with the maze of the communications' portfolio, a portfolio where you don't really come into contact with people who have strong views about things, but rather is one of those portfolios where you have the opportunity of dealing with very detailed and sometimes archaic policy.  But Daryl you have been a great servant of the government and I warmly thank you for your contribution. And although she won't be affected directly if there is the normal pattern of the House of Representatives and a half Senate election Sue Knowles has indicated that she won't be recontesting and I do want to thank Sue. She has been a member of the Senate of from Western Australia and a great advocate for Western Australia, a tremendous worker in the Senate and somebody who has played a very very active role in the Party organisation before she entered Federal Parliament and has been a great and loyal Liberal and a very fine colleague. She did a wonderful job in organising that magnificent gathering in Stirling yesterday morning that had 700 people turn out at the great morning tea and I would warmly thank you Sue for the contribution that you have made to our great Party.
Although we have every reason as a government to be very proud of what we have achieved over the last eight and a half years and I and my colleagues will not be reluctant to talk about what we have achieved over the last eight and half years, this election when it takes place will be about Australia's future. It will not be about Australia's past. It will be about which of the two parties, which of the two leaders is better able to understand and interpret and represent the hopes and the aspirations of twenty million Australians as we move forward into the 21st century.
 It will be about which side of politics and which leader is better able to continue the two things that are fundamental to the realisation of the broader social and other goals that we have for our nation and that is a continuation of the extraordinary economic strengths that this country has had over the past decade and also a continuation of the respect in which Australia is held around the world, the strength that Australia has in the councils of the world and the security and the defendability of our nation.
We can have all the goals and dreams in the world but if we don't have those two underpinnings, if we don't have a strong economy and a secure well defended nation we cannot achieve and realise our other hopes and other dreams.
So as we look to the future and as we advocate to the Australian people our better capacity to guide Australia into the future we must keep in mind those two great underpinnings of our future hopes and aspirations. And as I think of the future of the Australian economy I think of ways in which we can make it even stronger. I think of ways in which we can further broaden its horizons, how we can win new markets, how we can win new jobs and win new investments. And that inevitably brings me to one of the great economic debates right at the moment and that is the fate of the trade agreement negotiated by my Government with the government of the United States. The hour, the moment of decision for my political opponent and for the Party he leads has arrived. He can dither and prevaricate no longer. He must make a decision. He must take the decision he should have taken in the national interest five months ago and if he wants some advice and I don't expect him to take it from me, I ask him to take a moment over this weekend and look at an ABC program. Now I don't always advise people to look at ABC programs and sometimes do but there was a great program last night. When I got back from a wonderful dinner that Danielle hosted I turned on Lateline and I saw the Queensland Premier being interviewed and if ever a person delivered from the Labor Party a powerful endorsement of the Free Trade Agreement, it was delivered by Peter Beattie. He simply said that if we pass up this opportunity it wouldn't come our way again, that the Free Trade Agreement would not cost jobs in manufacturing industries as Dougie Cameron argues, it will actually deliver jobs in manufacturing industries. He pointed out that the free trade agreement delivers benefits to the beef industry and the dairy industry and he made a point that I have made over and over again and that is that as a relatively small though a powerful economy Australia has everything to gain and nothing to lose be linking herself to the most powerful economy the world has every seen.  Anybody who has any glimpse of the future that we could have ourselves, and any understanding of the future we could have for ourselves, could do nothing other than to endorse the Free Trade Agreement.  And yet for five months the Leader of the Opposition has said he can't make a decision on it, he said that he has to wait until the Senate report, in other words we are told that the Labor Party must wait on the Senate and yet I read in the newspaper this morning, I hear over the radio this morning  that that is no longer so.  Mr Latham has said oh I can't make a firm decision until this bipartisan Senate committee reports and yet apparently when they had a telephone hook up yesterday what happened was that the recommendations that had been circulated by the chairman, the draft recommendations, did not recommend either way. In other words they did not recommend against the agreement, they did not recommend in favour of it.  Apparently the Government members on the committee quite rightly argued that the committee should recommend that the Senate approve the agreement. And astonishingly and what Mr Latham has said the Labor and Democrat members on the Senate said that they weren't going to accept that motion until after the Labor party's Caucus had met on Monday.  So in other words, for five months we have been told the Caucus waits on the Senate committee, we are now told that the Senate committee waits on the Caucus.  Well what this has done is to expose to the Australian public the pretence, the political alibi that Mr Latham has clung to over the last five months as a substitute for the courage he ought to assume to give his own party leadership on this issue, because this issue should have been settled five months ago, nothing has changed, the terms and conditions of the Agreement can't change, everybody knows that, the Labor Premiers all know that, the reappointed Labor spokesman on Defence knows that, everybody in this room knows that, and yet in a craven weak fashion the Leader of the Opposition has hid behind this political alibi of saying well I've got to wait until the Senate committee reports, and yet in reality the Senate committee won't report until the Labor members are told by Caucus what that report should be.  Now this is a total fraud and a huge pretence which has been now exposed and laid bare by the news that has come out of the Senate committee's deliberations.   And I can but ask you and through you the rhetorical question and that is that he handles issues like this in opposition imagine his incapability to handle difficult issues in government.
This Free Trade Agreement is not only good in reality, but it also symbolises alongside our capacity to negotiate close and enduring economic agreements with the nations of our region.  That this Government and this nation under this Government does have the capacity to build ever closer relationships not only with the United States, but also with the nations of Asia.  And all of the stories we were given, all of the warnings that were sent out before 1996 that Asian leaders wouldn't deal with this Government, that you couldn't get closer to America because you'd lose friends in Asia, all of that has been reduced to the total nonsense that it always was.  Not only have we maintained our close relationship with Japan and Korea, but of course we have built impressively and due in no small measure to the contribution of Richard Court when he was Premier of Western Australia and others in the Liberal Government, we have built this very important and growing and significant relationship with China.  All of this demonstrates very clearly that the pragmatic decisions that we have taken in relation to trade, there is one single goal and that is is the proposal good for Australia's future?  We have been able to cement our close relationship with the United States and also build an ever closer relationship with nations such as China. Of course as we go into the future this is what we will have to continue to do.  We all would hope that one day we will have a great multilateral breakthrough on trade.  We would all hope that one day the European Union would abandon its restrictive agricultural policies, we would hope that, but the evidence is not very strong that it will occur.  We would all hope that Japan and the United States might abandon some of the more restrictive policies they have in certain areas.  But until that day comes what we as a nation must do is to negotiate bilateral trade deals where we can achieve them and we've done so with Singapore, we've done so with Thailand, we did so 20 years ago with New Zealand and we are on the verge, if only the Labor Party will seize the national interest instead of dithering with its own political predicaments, we have the capacity to make this historic agreement, this once in a generation agreement with the United States of America.
But not only of course is our economic future bound up with an expansion of our trade opportunities, our economic future is also bound up with a continuation of that part of our economy which is underpinning our extraordinary growth over the last decade, and that is the significant rise in productivity due in no small measure to the deregulation of Australia's industrial relations system. And I'm very conscious whenever I come to Western Australia of the change in attitude of the business community towards doing business in this state, it's always great to do business in Western Australia, but it's much harder now because the Gallop Government has reimposed union control over state industrial relations and you know and we all know that if Labor wins the federal election absent a change of government at a state level the same thing will happen federally and I can't think of any policy of Federal Labor that would do more damage to the Australian economy that a restoration of trade union control over industrial relations.  There has been an historic shift in this country over the last decade, and there can be no turning back, our economy has changed forever as a result of industrial relations deregulation.  Our economy has forever, if that deregulation continues, become a more productive economy.  In 1986, 35 per cent of the Australian workforce employed in the private sector were members of the trade unions.  That figure is now 17.5 per cent.  And yet over the same period the proportion of membership of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party owing allegiance to trade union members has gone in the opposite direction. In other words, as fewer Australians have joined trade unions more members of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party has become beholden to them.  And the notion that you would hand back control of Australia's industrial relations system to a movement that now attracts only 17.5 per cent of private sector workers is absurd.  Yet that in reality is what would happen.  The centrality of awards in determining workplace conditions would be restored under a Federal Labor government.  Australian workplace agreements would be abolished, despite the fact that I was told in the Pilbara that 92 per cent of people employed in the resource sector were on individual contracts.  The right of union entry into workplaces would become even more extensive. The secondary boycott provisions in the Trade Practices Act, which I as a junior Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs way back in 1977 inserted into that Act against the fierce opposition of the then trade union leader Bob Hawke, that protection would be taken out of the Trade Practices Act.  Companies doing business with the federal Government would be required to disclose the identity of their sub-contractors, thus facilitating the odd pastoral call and caring call on those sub-contractors by the local union leader. And so the list my friends will go on.  And one of the interesting things about this is that the Labor Party of Australia from time to time seeks to compare itself with the British Labour Party. My opponent has frequently spoken of the third way, and he's spoken approvingly of some policies followed by Mr Blair which he claims are third way policies, although he doesn't say too much about that these days when it comes to reform of tertiary education or policies relating to Iraq, but in one important respect there'll be a further departure because one of the intelligent things that Mr Blair did when he became Prime Minister of Britain was to recognise that whatever the ideological views of the Labour Party in that country may have been, the industrial relations reforms brought in by the Thatcher Government had changed the face of Britain forever and had changed the face of Britain for better and that it would have not been in the national interest of that country to seek to reverse those reforms.  Yet it appears that the third way Mr Latham does not intend to adopt that attitude if he were to become Prime Minister of Australia.
So in making the decision, in looking at the choice, in asking the rhetorical questions which side of politics can better lead this country into the future, which set of policies will underpin the things that we need to deliver our hopes and our aspirations? And running a strong economy is never an end in itself, it is a means to an end, by paying back $70 billion of Labor's debt we've given ourselves $5.5 billion extra every year to invest in health and education and roads and all of the other things that we either have direct responsibility for or we share responsibility with the states.  And can I say one of the other things that we have done which we committed ourselves to do in our very early years in government, and that is to reform Commonwealth/State financial relations. It used to be a legitimate complaint of state premiers coming to premiers conferences that they did not have access to a growth tax.  And through the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax that position has now changed. And over the five years commencing with the beginning of this financial years the states cumulatively will be $9 billion better off in unconditional revenue payments as a result of the introduction of the GST then they would have been under the old per capita funding formula of the Keating Government that we inherited in March of 1996.  And every time you hear Dr Gallop say I'd love to do that but the Federal Government doesn't give me enough money, just remember that this year the Western Australian state will be some $200-300 million better off under that new funding formula, and over the five year period $1.16 billion. And also remember that no less than 45.1 per cent of the total Western Australian budget this financial year will be funded from Commonwealth payments and revenue from the GST.  45.1 per cent.  Now I believe in a fair go for the states, I campaigned for the GST, and one of the reasons I campaigned for the GST was I said I wanted to give the states access to a growth tax so that they could abolish certain state taxes and they would have a growing funding base to look after the important social services for which they have responsibility.  It appears in the case of Premiers such as Dr Gallop, they're very happy to have the extra revenue but they still want to the blame the Commonwealth whenever something goes wrong due to their own faulty administration.
My friends, as we get closer to the choice that the Australian people make we will have to focus on the relative capacities of the two sides, not only in relation to economic management, but also in relation to the management of our international affairs. This has been a difficult period of time in relation to national security, I would never have dreamt in March of 1996 that the Government I was about to lead would face the sort of challenges on that front that we've had. And over that period of eight and a half years we've had to cope with some unpredictably tragic events and some challenging assaults upon our national security. And it's important in the years ahead that the steadiness and the predictability that we have displayed over recent years is maintained. This is not an international environment in which to inject unpredictable leadership. It is not an international environment which to inject leadership that delivers policy changes during radio interviews. And I refer in particular to two of my opponent's most memorable contributions in that fashion.  The infamous troops home by Christmas commitment in relation to Iraq, and this extraordinary commitment to recommence the sea bed negotiations with East Timor if there were to be a change of government, breaking the most elementary principle of one nation dealing with another, I mean we negotiate as Australia, we don't negotiate as Liberal Australia or Labor Australia, we negotiate as Australia and it stands to reason that if the alternative Prime Minister of the day raises the possibility that the nation with whom we're negotiating might get a better deal if there were a change of government, that fatally undercuts the bona fides of the negotiations and our capacity to negotiate from the national interest. Now no political figure in Australia has done more to advance the cause of the people of East Timor than I have. After all it was the Government that I led with a Foreign Minister in Alexander Downer who of course stood up for the rights of that tiny country and proudly with the magnificent contribution of course of our Defence Forces we led the Interfet intervention. And we've already made significant concessions in the context of other negotiations with East Timor. We want to continue our current negotiations in good faith, and we will do that, that remains a desire. But this blundering, ridiculous, top of the head without thinking through intervention from Mr Latham is another illustration of his unreliability and his unpredictability when it comes to pursuing the national interest.
Let me simply say in relation to Iraq, that the publication of the Flood Report which made it perfectly clear beyond any serious argument that there had been no heavying of our intelligence services. Our intelligence services, although there were obviously flaws in the intelligence flow, our intelligence services had reached a conclusion based on the material in front of them that was more consistent with that material than the opposite conclusion, what that report has done is to totally repudiate this proposition that we took Australia into that military commitment based on a lie. That was never the case, that charge was always a lie in itself.  But whatever personal views are about the wisdom of that decision, the truth remains that we must in the proper Australian tradition stay in Iraq to finish the job. And the job is being slowly done. I'm pleased to say today Robert Hill has announced some changes in the composition of our deployment to Iraq and one of those changes is the consequence of our being able to hand over control of Baghdad International Airport to Iraqi air traffic controllers with affect from tomorrow, 1st of August.  We've also decided to extend by a further six months our commitment of trainers for the Iraqi Army and it's a very, very important commitment because if there is to be an enduring handover, an enduring stability in that country, the effective training of the Iraqi Army and the Iraqi police is absolutely fundamental and in this connection I cannot understand the logic and inconsistency in a Labor policy that says they want Iraq to have a democratic future and to run her own affairs without foreign involvement, yet would bring back the very trainers that are making such an important contribution to delivering that outcome.
My friends, let me finally say this, the next election is going to be very hard to win. I mean that. I'm not going through the ritual of saying that because it's the thing that a leader should say at a conference of the eve of an election. But we've been in power for eight and a half years, and that is whilst it's nothing like the 13 years we endured of Labor and of course it's only a little over a third of the 23 years that we were in office after 1949, inevitably memories dim, younger voters come onto the roll and we face a new and fresh challenges. And one of the great challenges we face is that many in the Australian electorate will take our current prosperity for granted, that we have gotten too used to it, we look around and we see that unemployment is the lowest it's been since 1981. For the first time since 1968 we have unemployment below six per cent and inflation below three per cent, and as I said at breakfast this morning that in 1996 when I became Prime Minister 35 federal electorates in Australia had unemployment in double digits, we now have only four electorates in Australia that has unemployment in double digits. And there is a danger that people will take all of that for granted, and they will say well, the economy sort of runs itself doesn't it? It's all due to international forces.  Maybe the other fellow won't muck it up. Maybe.  That's the danger, complacency and a sort of an easy assumption that economic prosperity has now become a given is one of the greatest threats that we face. Part of our task is to point out the weaknesses of the alternative. It's part of our task to remind the Australian people that the reimposition of industrial relations re-regulation will do permanent and lasting damage to our Australian economy.  The time to remind the Australian people of all those things, when Labor was last in office interest rates went to 17 per cent and unemployment to over 11 per cent.  And right here in Western Australia as well as arguing that case we have a challenge. The challenge of course is to hold all of the seats we now hold, but to carry the battle into a number of seats that are held by the Labor Party. I want to say how grateful I am to the Western Australian division for delivering such high quality candidates in all of the marginal seats that we are trying to wrest from the Australian Labor Party. I think it gives a tremendous opportunity and it gives us a flying start due to the quality of those candidates. And can I say to all of you, many I've known for a very long time, some only fairly recently, we've been through some great struggles in the past against the Labor Party.  We've gone in political terms both up and down. At a national level our Government is strong, it's united, it's a great team, it's not a one man band, it is a band of men and women, and in fact a record number of women in the Federal Cabinet since Federation, without the patronising imposition of quotas.  But it is a great and united team and if we work together and fight together against the common enemy we can win. But it will be a struggle.  In the past you have come so passionately and effectively to the aid of our common cause, and I know that you will so again.
Can I thank again Danielle Blain and Paul Everingham in particular for the tremendous leadership both of them have given to the party organisation here in Western Australia, they've been a constant source of encouragement and help to me and I think that if we continue how we're going we might see the contribution of Western Australia to the federal election outcome whenever it takes place as being, let me put it this way, highly significant.
Thank you very much.  


Thank you very much Monsignor Rayner, Your Eminence, Professor Tannock, Dr Nelson, ladies and gentlemen.  Today is a very important day in the ongoing contribution of the Catholic Church to education in Australia.  It is appropriate that this announcement and this gathering takes place on the site of St Benedict's on Broadway because in so doing, we link the future of the Church in education at the tertiary level, with its past in primary school education.
It is an historic parish.  It has very strong links with the early days of the Catholic Church's contribution to primary and secondary school education in Australia, and I'm delighted that I'm able to be part of a very important announcement and that is the establishment of a Sydney campus of the University of Notre Dame, which was established in Western Australia.  And in that context, I'm delighted to acknowledge the presence of Professor Peter Tannock, the Vice Chancellor of Notre Dame University, a person who has given much in all the involvement, not least his chairmanship of the National Catholic Education Commission, to the role and contribution of the Catholic Church through the education of Australians at all levels.
  The new campus is being established in association with the Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney.  It will begin enrolling students from 2006 and it will provide an opportunity for students on east coast of Australia to experience the quality of Catholic higher education services currently being delivered by the University of Notre Dame from the campuses in Fremantle, Western Australia.  The new campus will offer courses in law, medicine, business, nursing and education.  The medical school appropriately will operate in association with St Vincent's Hospital and other Catholic and public healthcare providers in Melbourne, Brisbane and importantly, in country areas of New South Wales and Victoria.  This will ensure that UNDA medical students will have the benefit of accessing clinical training places in regional and metropolitan areas from North Queensland to Victoria.  The medical school will enhance teaching hospital capacity and the delivery of health and medical services in south eastern Australia.
  As part of its support, the Commonwealth Government will allocate new Commonwealth funded priority places to the new campus, and they will include 60 nursing places and 80 teaching places in 2006, 60 places in medicine in 2007, and these new priority places reflect the Government's commitment to quality healthcare and education services, both now and into the future.  In addition, the Government will provide a capital contribution of $4 million to assist the University of Notre Dame to develop the campus, which will be located here where we speak.  Can I say in welcoming this new development and in pledging the support of the Commonwealth Government, both through its capital contribution and also the allocation of the priority places, how much I acknowledge the ongoing role of the Catholic Church in all levels of education in Australia.
  The Church has had a distinguished and expanding role in primary and secondary education for many years, and in acknowledging that role and also acknowledging this new development with the opening of a Sydney campus of the University of Notre Dame, we see a new expansion of the Church into tertiary level education.  It has been a fundamental principle and tenet of all of the policies that my Government has brought to education, to endorse the principle of diversity and freedom of choice.  We do not want a state or government or secular monopoly of education at any level - be it primary, secondary and tertiary.  It is the role of any responsible Commonwealth Government to provide to both the parents of Australia the means to exercise the freedom of choice in the education of their children, and also to provide to the young at a tertiary level in Australia, and also to their parents, the opportunity of exercising that same freedom of choice.  The association between the Church and teaching is of course as long as the Church's history, and this represents a very new and important and exciting chapter in the contribution of the Catholic Church in Australia to tertiary education.
I do in closing want to acknowledge the special personal dedication of Professor Tannock, the person who in the leadership he gave to the formation of the University of Notre Dame, overcame many barriers and responded to many challenges, and I am personally very delighted to welcome him here to Sydney, to say how very pleased I am that the Government has been able to support this project.  I wish it well.  It will be a fine example of the ongoing contribution of the Church to education in Australia, to provide further diversity and a further practical injection of places in very important disciplines, and I wish good fortune and good studies and future professional success to all who have the opportunity of studying here.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Peter, Senator Ian Macdonald, ladies and gentlemen.  It's tremendous to be back here in Townsville, it's a city I have got to know very well in the years that I've been in public life and as you know in the eight and a half years that I've been Prime Minister I've been a very frequent visitor to Townsville and to the electorate of Herbert.  My principal mission today of course is to attend the welcome home parade that's going to be held in Townsville at two o'clock this afternoon, and that is a wonderful opportunity for the people of Townsville and of North Queensland to give a heart felt Australian welcome home to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force that have done such tremendous work on our behalf in so many difficult areas.  It's just over a year since we sent the mission to the Solomon Islands, and what a wonderful success that has been.  There's been no loss of life, happily, we have restored law and order and we have given new hope to a tiny country that needed our help.  And that mission went there under the name of operation Helpem Fren, pidgin for I think we know what.  And it was a wonderful demonstration of co-operation between Australia and the other countries of the Pacific.
But while here in Townsville Peter said come around, I want you to meet one or two of my friends for morning tea. And so here we are, a very large gathering. And I do want to take this opportunity of saying what a tremendously dedicated, hardworking representative you have in the national parliament in Peter Lindsay.  He really is, he's a person who does, as the MC said, badger and hector and hassle on behalf of the interests of the people of Herbert and the people of Townsville.  And he's been part of my team since he was elected in 1996 and I believe very strongly that the people of this area will be very well served by Peter continuing as their Federal Parliamentary representative.
  Over the last eight and a half years this country has changed a lot, it's achieved a lot of things, but over the next few weeks or months as we debate the future government of Australia we'll be looking at our future rather than at our past.  And the purpose of great decision making moments such as elections is to ask questions about who is better and what attitudes are better to drive the country into the future.  And right at the moment the Parliament, which will resume tomorrow, has to take a decision on something that I think is very important to Australia's future and that is a once in a generation opportunity to have a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  And the reason that I believe in this is simply that it's good for Australia's future, it will lock the Australian economy into the growth of the biggest economy the world has ever seen.  Now it wasn't a perfect agreement and as people in North Queensland know it didn't include sugar, and it was partly and significantly because of that that the Government decided after lengthy discussions with the sugar industry to promote a sugar industry package that's worth some $444 million over a period of four or five years.  And ladies and gentlemen, that particular commitment was a recognition of the special significance and the special importance of the sugar industry to this part of Australia.  But the reason we support this Agreement is because that in so many areas it brings benefits and we won't have another opportunity and if we pass this one by other countries will shake their heads and say we would not have passed such an opportunity by, we would have grabbed it with both hands.  So I hope that the opposition parties when the necessary legislation is presented in the Parliament in the next little while, in the next couple of weeks, that they put aside any reservations they have, that they call it for Australia's future, because this is an Agreement that is very much about the future of this country.
We all have our dreams and our hopes and our aspirations about not only our personal futures but also the futures of our families. And they are of course the most important thing in the world to all of us.  But a nation is very much like that, a nation needs to have hopes and dreams and aspirations about the future.  A nation needs to be able to set itself goals, but in order to achieve those goals it has to make certain that the foundations on which those goals can be achieved are there.  And the two most important foundations that we need in this country, I believe to provide a strong future for Australia, are a continuation of our very strong and vibrant economic growth, and this country over the last eight and a half years has had remarkable economic growth.  I looked at some figures the other day which told me that in 1996 there were 35 federal electorates in Australia that had unemployment of 10 per cent or more, now the number of federal electorates in Australia that has unemployment of 10 per cent or more has fallen from 35 to just four, and it's my goal to get rid of those four as electorates with more than 10 per cent unemployment.  Our unemployment rate is the lowest its been since 1981 and the challenge now is to find enough skilled tradesman in many areas to satisfy the demands and the growth and the need for the Australian economy.  And the other thing that is important to achieving our goals and our aspirations is of course to have a secure, well defended country and that's why my Government has placed such a very strong emphasis on defence and national security.  It is why we have increased expenditure on defence. It's why when I first became Prime Minister in 1996 and we sat down to prepare our first budget and we faced a big deficit, I said there was one area that would not suffer any cut backs and that was the area of defence, it was the one area that was completely quarantined from any kind of expenditure reduction and over the years we have continued to make increased commitments to defence.  And that will continue to be the situation in this country for many years into the future because the kind of world we live in, the need for peacekeeping operations of the Solomon Islands type in our own region, the need from time to time to participate alongside our allies in the war against terror, as demonstrated in Afghanistan, and the other commitments such as in Iraq we have made demonstrates that the world is a more uncertain, a less predictable environment and a less predictable place that its been for a very long time. And for that reason there would need to be a continued emphasis on defence.
  So they're the two great underpinnings, and if we can continue into the future to gets those rights, to continue to run our economy well, and to have the nation secure and well defended, then we can hope to continue to invest more money in health and education and roads and all of the things that are important to our everyday lives and that is what the Government has been able to do over the last few years, we've reduced the debt we inherited by $70 billion and that means that every year we have $5.5 billion less interest to pay and we're able to use that $5.5 billion to invest in health and education and roads and all of those things and also to return it by way of taxation reductions and family payments.
QUESTION:
Are you going to adopt the old monetary system and go for new (inaudible) system like Lyndon LaRouche's proposed?
PRIME MINISTER:
Lyndon LaRouche?  No, I don't think I'll be adopting his policies.  But anyway I respect your view sir, I don't agree with it, but it's good that people can come along and express a contrary view.
I think the monetary policies that we have followed over the last eight or 10 years are pretty good because the results demonstrate that. We have now got without much argument the most powerful industrialised economy in terms of growth and vitality in the world.  Not as big as many other economies, but its performance over the last eight and a half years has been remarkable. But I don't look to the past, I look to the future and what is important is the underpinnings of which I've spoken and our capacity to deliver those things.
The last thing I want to say to you my friends is I'd like to go on meeting as many of you as possible. I address a lot of gatherings as I go around Australia, last week I spent four days on the other side of the country, I went to Karratha in the north-west of Western Australia and then I came down to Perth and I went to many gatherings such as this.  Some of them were in school hall, some of them were in community centres, some of them were in the open air, some of them were in RSL halls, but all of them had one thing in common, and that is that they brought together that great cross section of the Australian community, particularly those who represent so many of the great volunteer organisations of our nation and many of those people are here this morning, people who work day in and day out in an unsung, unpaid voluntary way to make Australia a happier and a better country. And one of the great strengths that we have in this country is that we are a people who can work together so easily for a common purpose.  And the volunteer spirit in this country is alive and strong and well and I would like as the Prime Minister of Australia to say how much I admire and I thank the volunteers of this country, the carers of this country.  The people who run the sporting clubs, the people who run the service clubs, the people who care for those in our community who are doing it tough and no matter how successful we have been economically there are people who are not sharing that, I know that, and I am not insensitive to their position.  And we have endeavoured, and we've been successful in doing so, in strengthening the social security safety net over the past few years.  But no government, no matter what its complexion is, no matter how much money it has, no matter how generous it might be can take the place of a compassionate local community in looking after people who need to be looked after. And there is nothing quite like the home grown charity and compassion and support and help and welfare and there are so many people in this gathering this morning who day in and day out see it as part of being a good citizen to deliver that help and I wouldn't want the opportunity to go by without acknowledging that, and without thanking all of you for the contribution that you have made because one of the great things about this country is that volunteer spirit.
So to all of you, thank you very much for coming, remember what a good bloke Peter Lindsay is, he really is a very good bloke and I very, very warmly commend him to you and all I can is that coming to a gathering like this, I find always very stimulating, there's nothing better about the job I have than the opportunity it gives me all the time in different environments all over this country to meet my fellow Australians, to say hello to them, to listen to their advice, to exchange a few words, on occasions of course to agree to disagree, which is part of a vibrant, strong democracy. I always find it refreshing and stimulating and this morning is no exception.
Thanks a lot.
[ends]  


Thank you very much.  Thank you Senator Barnett for your kind words of introduction, Jim Wallace and the other organisers of this very impressive gathering, a very large crowd filling the Great Hall on very short notice on something that obviously people feel very strongly about.
  I have a very simple view about the issue that is currently before the federal parliament, and that is to insert affirmatively into the Marriage Act the definition of marriage that we have always commonly understood in our society.  It expresses the fundamental Judeo-Christian view and that is that marriage is a lifelong union between a man and a woman to the exclusion of all others.  Although it expresses a Judeo-Christian view, it's fair to say two other things - that the exact language in fact comes from a very well known court case in the United Kingdom some time ago, but it is also an expression of marriage and the definition of marriage which is not exclusive to the Judeo-Christian ethic.  It is also a view of marriage which is entertained by many other religions around the world and also by many people who profess no religious faith at all.  And the reason why, above everything else, that I would like this definition put into the Marriage Act is that I believe that the Australian public wants a reaffirmation in the highest form, and that is through an act of the national parliament, of something that until fairly recently they've taken for granted.
  I believe very strongly in the role of the courts in our country and I believe very strongly in the role of the parliament.  And if there is to be a change in the understanding of marriage in this country, it is not something in my view, with all due respect to the judiciary, it is not something in my view that should happen bit by bit, judgement by judgement, through a judicial process.  Rather, if there is to be a change, it is a change which is to be legislated by an expression of will of the Australian people through the national parliament.  The traditional definition of the separation of powers in our community is that parliaments make the laws and the judiciary interpret the laws.  And if the law in this instance is to be remade, it can only and should only be remade by parliament.
  But of course I don't believe the law should be changed, but because there is a possibility - some argue very remote, I don't think it is as remote as all that - but bit by bit, an attempt will be made to redefine what we understand to be the concept of marriage in this country, we should legislatively pre-empt the possibility of that occurring by changing the law.  And the law change we propose or the law reaffirmation we propose is a very simple one, and is simply to put that definition into the Marriage Act.  And I for the life of me can't understand why it hasn't received speedy passage through both houses of parliament.  It should have been passed.  Now I can understand with complicated issues that you do need time, and in case anybody is in any doubt, that the brief legislative history was that we put a bill through the House of Representatives, I think without any serious opposition, which both put the definition into the Marriage Act and also put a prohibition on adoptions from overseas by same sex couples in Australia.
  Now there are some separate arguments on those two issues.  We obviously support both provisions and that's why we sponsored them.  And that omnibus bill after reaching the Senate was then sent off to a Senate Committee with a reporting date later in the year.  We took the view that there was no need for a Senate Committee to give advice on whether you wanted to put the definition of marriage into the Marriage Act.  If Senators can't make up their own minds about that, well a Senate Committee is not going to save them.  And I think quite frankly, it was a device to delay Senate consideration of both of those issues.  What we then did as a result of that was to reintroduce a separate bill in the House of Representatives simply dealing with the marriage issue.  In other words, we split the bill, and that went through the House of Representatives and when we sought to have it debated in the Senate, it was by a majority of the non-Government parties resolved that the majority of the Senate, comprising non-Government Senators, it was resolved that it would be denied a first reading.  So we're going to try again in this two week sitting to have that separate bill debated and voted on in the Senate.
And I don't see any reason why it can't be resolved.  You don't need a Senate inquiry on something like that.  It's not a complicated issue.  I think we all know what is involved.  I mean we're not... you know, it really is a bit of an insult to the public and to the maturity of the parliamentary process to say you  need a Senate Committee to talk about something like that.  I mean these things are instinctive issues.  You either support them or you don't support them, and I don't think it's appropriate to hide behind some kind of Committee process on an issue as straightforward as this.  So we will be pushing very hard in the Senate, where of course we don't control the numbers, to have the Marriage Act amendment voted on within the next couple of weeks.  Now why should we do that?  Well because it's a simple, straightforward issue, and it was my understanding that the major opposition party, the Labor Party, did not oppose it.  Well if they don't oppose it, they should vote for it.  It's as simple as that, and I'm asking my parliamentary colleagues in the Labor Party to do that, and I think there would be a lot of people in the Australian community who would be hoping that that would occur as well.  The other issue, well I'm not sure that it needs a Senate investigation either, but clearly we can deal with the two issues separately.  We remain very strongly committed to the other measure.
Now can I just say one or two things about the arguments that have been advanced against putting a definition in the Marriage Act.  It has been suggested that in some way it is an example of discrimination against gay and lesbian people in the Australian community.  I reject that, and the reason I reject it is the reason why I reject a lot of other criticisms that are made from time to time of people such as myself and others who express support for existing institutions, and that is that people often confuse concepts of endorsement and tolerance.  I respect the individual choices that people make about their own lives.  I don't seek in any way to discriminate against them.  I don't believe that homosexual people should be discriminated against in employment, and I supported the decriminalisation of homosexual conduct when that issue was debated in the national parliament some years ago, and I make no apology for having done that because I thought the law, the criminal law on that issue, had fallen way behind community opinion and there was a need to have a more sensible and a more tolerant law.
  But the problem with those who criticise measures such as the one now before the parliament is that they assume that because discrimination has been removed, then that is a case for going a step further and seeking to alter the character of institutions which have been fundamental to our society since it began.  I support marriage because I believe it provides stability in relationships, because it is a public expression of commitment, but it is also the environment in which children are best raised and nurtured and brought to full adulthood and enjoyment of life's opportunities.  Now, many marriages fail.  We all know that.  That doesn't of itself and should never of itself damn the institution or suggest that other relationships can have the same status as marriage.  And the flaw in the argument that what we are proposing is discriminatory is the simple proposition is that it doesn't seek to take away from others in the community any rights they now have.  Rather it seeks to reaffirm the pre-eminent place of marriage and the margin for marriage, if I can put it that way, that has always existed in our society.
  We all know from life's experience that longstanding institutions provide encouragement, they provide hope, they provide emotional support, and they also provide a practical way of helping people through life.  I have often said that a stable, functioning, united home and marriage is not only the best emotional environment in which to raise children, but it is also the best and most efficient social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.  So that is why I've had no hesitation in arguing the case and I've no hesitation in asking the parliament to make a decision on this issue in the next two weeks.  Now I don't know when and I promise you I haven't made any decision on when I will advise the holding of the election.  But I think it would be a great pity if this issue were left hanging in an election campaign.  If people who criticise me say oh well, it's just a political diversion, well I would say to them, although it is not, I would to say them well remove the diversion by putting the law through before the election starts, and that is... it's not a wedge, it's a genuine expression of view.
  And could I say to those who see it purely and simply in terms of a push by church people, and let me say I certainly express my gratitude to representatives of many of the churches and others in the community who have strongly supported what the Government is doing, but it goes broader than that.  There are many in the community who have no religious beliefs who believe very strongly in the core institution of marriage.  There are many in the community who believe in its bedrock value.  There are many in that category in the community who have the view that I hold, that all other things being equal, it is far better that children be raised in a married home with the benefit of both their mother and their father.  Now none of that is said disrespectfully of course of the tremendous efforts of the hundreds of thousands of sole parents in our community, most of whom were in marriages or relationships and regret to this day that those marriages and relationships no longer exist, and are doing a wonderful job in raising their children in difficult circumstances.  But the proposition that because marriage doesn't always work is a reason for walking away from its centrality in our society has always struck me as the equivalent of saying that because crime always occurs, you somehow or other weaken the prohibitions on the commission of serious crimes and somehow or other give up the fight against serious crime.
  So this is an opportunity, because it is not far fetched to imagine that if we don't change the law, there could in the future be some judicial experimentation.  That is not far fetched at all.  And I don't think this is something that should be decided by the judges.  If the law of this country is to change, it should be changed by the people's representatives and by nobody else, and that is why I think it is necessary for this piece of legislation to go through.  And there are instances of marriage unions contracted or solemnised overseas between other than a man and a woman that may seek recognition in this country, and I think it's very important that this country express a view, we express it simply, we express it calmly, we express it in terms of reaffirming something we had always taken for granted and something that we do so clearly owe to our Judeo-Christian heritage.
  So that is why I have put this piece of legislation up.  I strongly support it.  It's strongly supported by my colleagues and I believe it would be strongly supported on an individual basis across the political divide.  I'm sure it is.  So I'm therefore saying to my colleagues in the other political parties in the Senate, if we really want to use their arguments, divorce this issue from the political debate, let's put it through, let's vote in favour of it, let's put it into law within the next two weeks, and if we put it into law in the next two weeks, nobody can say it's being used as a wedge, nobody can say it's a diversion, everybody can say it's a united expression of the national parliament and therefore of the will of the Australian people, because I think the overwhelming majority of the Australian people support this change.  I think the overwhelming majority of the Australian people have always taken what we proposed for granted, and they would share our view that if that is the case, why not put it beyond argument so far as the law of this country is concerned.  They don't see it as discriminatory.  They see it as declaring their support and the parliament's support for a fundamental, bedrock institution of our society which has contributed massively to our stability and to our success, and it's a change that I believe in 2004 is important to be made to declare our view on such a central institution.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much John, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It's a real pleasure to be back again and to have the opportunity to address this annual dinner of the Australian Industry Group.  And as I was reflecting earlier this evening on what I might say, I thought relevantly I hope, of two events, each of which in a way is very significant to the circumstances in which we now find ourselves.  The first of those was the formation of the Australian Industry Group, and I had the honour of addressing the launch.  I think it was at the National Press Club and I think it took place about two or three days after the launch of the new taxation system policy back in 1998.  And I recalled, in relation to that gathering, two important things.  I remember the very strong and early support that your organisation, I think in its earlier manifestation or part of it as the MTIA, had given to the new taxation system, particularly the very important changes to the business taxation regime, and I also recalled back in 1998 at the launch of that group that unemployment in Australia was still hovering around 8 per cent.
  Well now, six years on, I don't hear much talk about the new taxation system.  I'm sure from time to time, you all hear and experience and express the odd grumble, but by and large it is now a reform that we've taken in our stride and put very much behind ourselves.  And I do want to say again how much I appreciated the very early and strong support that your organisation gave to the need for taxation reform.  And as I speak, of course I remark, and as you're all aware, unemployment in Australia has declined from that level of around 8 per cent to now be around 5.5 per cent, with the hope that it can go even lower.
  The other event I recall very vividly is a gathering I attended in New York in January of 2002, when the World Economic Forum was held symbolically and importantly in New York, only some five months after the attack on the World Trade Centre, and I attended a gathering of business leaders from both Australia and the United States, assembled by our country's outstanding Ambassador in the United States, Michael Thawley, to talk about the prospects of getting a Free Trade Agreement between Australia and the United States.  And at that time, the mood of the gathering was very positive about the long-range outcome and very convinced that it was important to the economic future and the relationship between our two countries.  The view was that it was something in the order of a six, eight or ten year journey, and it scarcely seems possible, even today, this week, that that journey should have lasted only a little over two and a half years.  And I do again in the context of that, thank the Australian Industry Group for the very strong support that it gave to the negotiation of the Free Trade Agreement because it will be an historic moment when the legislation is finally passed through the parliament, and it is my earnest hope that that will occur this week.  This Agreement is of great long-term significance to our country, to link ourselves, whatever the arguments may be about the dimension of the economic benefits, to link ourselves to the most powerful economy the world has ever seen and an economy that will grow even more significant as the years go by, is an enormous benefit to this country and will, as time goes by, be seen as a landmark in its economic growth and its economic progression.
  The relevance of unemployment of course is obvious.  We all hope to see further reductions in unemployment.  I recall reading a document a few days ago indicating that when my Government came to power, there were 35 federal electorates in Australia that had double digit unemployment.  That number has fallen to four.  And I do believe that the major reason why unemployment has fallen steadily over that period of time has been the greatly improved productivity of the Australian economy, the much greater flexibility of our workforce, the recognition by both business and employees together that the future of this country lies in engaging with the opportunities that a globalised world economy present to us.  Now I don't pretend that every challenge to the Australian economy is behind us and I don't pretend that there can't be legitimate argument about the pace and the rate of reform and different viewpoints from a political standpoint and otherwise, about the different weight that should be given to individual policy approaches.
  But I do believe that if you look at the experience and the history of the Australian economy over the last eight to ten years, it is incontrovertible that reforms to our industrial relations system lie very much behind our improvements in productivity.  We've seen, over the last few years, something in the order of a 23 per cent increase in the productivity of the average worker in the market sector.  We've seen on the waterfront, reforms that have resulted in a 75 per cent improvement in the crane rates at our major ports.  And I can certainly recall, in the long years of Opposition - and I remember those years, you always do - and also in some of the years earlier in Government, many businessmen and women telling me how important it was for one day a Government of this country to grasp the nettle about reform of our waterfront.  That also occurred in 1998 and I think the industrial relations history of this country should be indebted to the contribution that a very determined Industrial Relations Minister at the time, Peter Reith, made to leading the reform push on behalf of the Government for changes to our waterfront.  Over the last few years, industrial disputes have fallen very dramatically and we've seen importantly, and very pleasingly, we have seen a major increase in the real wages of workers.  Over the last eight and a half years, real wages have risen by about 14 per cent, and what I can fairly claim on behalf of the Government over that period of time, that we've not only delivered more jobs, we've not only delivered lower interest rates, but we have also delivered significant increases in real wages.
So it goes without saying perhaps that reforms to our industrial relations system have in many ways been at the heart of the economic prosperity that this country has enjoyed over recent years.  Your President indicated that I had a passion for the issue of industrial relations, and I guess of all of the policy issues in the economic area with which I have been connected and identified in the various positions I've held in public life, not only as Prime Minister, but also in earlier years in other positions, none has seemed to me to be more important than the need to reform and to maintain the reform of our industrial system, because deep down it's an expression of the modernisation and the embracing of the modern relevance of the Australian economy.  There may have been a time when it made sense, not only in a social, but also an industrial context, to have an award dominated system.  There may have been a time when a more centralised wage fixation system was right.  There may have been a time when that was needed in order to protect the rights of individuals.  But the experience of recent years has demonstrated that this country has gone ahead in leaps and bounds as a result of embracing higher productivity, and we would never have achieved the higher productivity of recent years without having a freer labour market.
  I had the opportunity a couple of weeks ago of visiting the Pilbara and of being reminded yet again of the enormous opportunities that lie in front of this country, not only in the manufacturing sector, but particularly being in the Pilbara, in the energy sector, in opening up the great markets in China, and to be told that something in the order of 92 per cent of workers employed in a particular area were on individual contracts and to know that all of them are under the federal law, and to know that if that law changes, the productivity of that sector of our economy will be under significant challenge.  And it's therefore self-evident that in the coming election campaign, whenever that may occur, industrial relations will and should be at the centre of the economic debate.
  In all the areas of economic policy, there is no greater divide between my Government and that of the Opposition than in the area of industrial relations.  We find it hard to accept that in a nation which has only 17.5 per cent of its private sector employees belonging to trade unions, that we should be contemplating a return to an industrial relations system that will essentially again be dominated by an awards system.  We find it hard to accept that the alternative government should advocate the removal of the secondary boycott provisions from the Trade Practices Act, the abolition of Australian Workplace Agreements, greater rights of entry for unions, a requirement that companies doing business with the Federal Government should disclose the identity of their subcontractors.  And I certainly hope it is not lost on those in business who are concerned about the industrial relations alternatives being offered at present that if there were to be a change of government at a federal level, there would be nine Labor governments, without let or hindrance or check or balance, throughout this country at a state and federal level, to introduce a significant change in Australia's industrial relations system.
Now I don't say these things out of mindless dogma.  Of course there are ideological differences between political parties, and so there should be.  It's part and parcel of a healthy democracy.  It's fair to say that in many areas of policy, there has been something of a convergence over the last 20 years in Australia, and that makes to me all the more puzzling the embrace by our political opponents of an industrial relations agenda which will take us back some 15 to 20 years in terms of the changes that are being proposed.  And I don't argue against these changes out of some kind of empty commitment to my own ideology, but I argue against them on the basis of the track record of our economy over the last eight and a half years.
  As John pointed out in his remarks, we have sustained economic growth.  For the first time since 1968, we have the double of unemployment below six per cent and inflation below three per cent.  The regard of the Australian economy around the world is very high.  We have a debt to GDP ratio of about 3.9 per cent.  When you compare that with the United States in the order of 50 per cent, Japan something over 100 per cent and the OECD average of about 47 per cent, it is a remarkable achievement.  And as your President quite rightly said in his introduction, there is a direct social and human dividend out of running a strong fiscal policy.  It is often said that I agree with a lot of things that are said and done by the United States Administration.  I want to make it very clear that there's one thing I very strongly disagree with about the United States Administration, and that is its persistence in running a very large budget deficit.  The Government's capacity over recent years to run budget surpluses and to use those surpluses to repay debt has returned a great dividend to the Australian people.  By paying back $70 billion of debt, we have annually about $5.5 billion to invest in education, in defence, in intelligence services, in taxation relief, in providing more incentives for retirement incomes, and generally in Australia's infrastructure future.  And I think in particular of the investment of some $11 billion over a number of years not only in Backing Australia's Ability, but also in the area of AusLink.
  I listened with interest to what your President had to say about the skills shortage which challenges Australia at the present time.  Despite the fact that we have seen something close to a tripling of the number of Australians in apprenticeships and traineeships over the last eight and a half years, it remains a serious problem that too few of those people are in the areas of traditional trades.  And I understand and accept the concern that has been expressed.  I find it everywhere.  I have over the past few weeks travelled quite a bit around Australia, which is my habit, and wherever I have been I have heard the same story, and it does represent a very significant challenge and one that the Government has begun to respond to in relation to its National Skills Strategy, but one that obviously needs, not only in the context of the upcoming election but more generally, no matter who is elected to govern this country for the next three years, it's an issue that deserves very serious attention.
  I think one of the problems in this area is a deep and unfortunate cultural prejudice against people going into traditional trades areas.  I think this country in some respects has become too obsessed with the relentless ideal of everybody who leaves school having to receive a university education.  I know it's dangerous in a sense for me to say that because those who are unkind might say that I'm seeking to denigrate the importance of giving people a tertiary education, but the reality is that we have in the process, I think over the last 20 or 30 years as a community, we have wrongly and unfortunately and to our great cost, we have devalued the importance of apprenticeships and devalued the importance of a trade skill and of course we've also underestimated the impact that it was going to have on the workforce that we need for the future.
  This country does face the problem of an ageing population and there are different ways that the Government has begun to respond, not only in the area of retirement incomes, but also in the area of ensuring that our health services are kept on a sustainable basis.  And part of the problem of course is to encourage greater workforce participation, and the answer to that challenge lies in a number of areas.  It lies in achieving a more effective balance between work and family responsibilities, and I think we have made significant progress along that front over the last few years.  But it also lies in recognising that the challenge of the future is going to be a shortage of trained and skilled people, particularly in areas of manufacturing and other areas, which are of great concern to your organisation.  So can I say to your President that I well and truly understand what you had to say about this issue, and it's one the Government is very conscious of and very responsive towards.
Can I just conclude on a note of very great optimism, and that is that over the years I have in different responsibilities and different positions, had a long association with your organisation and its predecessors, and I want to record my gratitude and my respect to it for the way in which it has sought to place the national interest up there with the legitimate interests of your members.   I haven't always agreed with you.  I can remember some very vigorous dinner conversations with many of your former members of your National Executive over industrial relations policies in the 1980s.  I've been understandably the butt of criticism and rebuke on occasions in relation to particular stances I've taken or my party has taken.  But I've always believed that your organisation has wanted a strong, prosperous and fair Australia, and I've always known that your organisation has accepted the need for change and adjustment.
  And many people say to me, what are the reasons behind our economic success of recent years?  And quite naturally I say one or two things about the success of the Government's policies.  But the other thing that I try invariably to mention is the fact that one of the great qualities that Australians have is that they are very adaptable people.  And the way in which your organisation has embraced a more global outlook, the way in which I know some years ago you made a decisive change in policy towards tariffs, the way in which you've recognised the need for a different approach in industrial relations, has been emblematic of the recognition that you've always had about the long-term importance of change and adjustment for the future.  That really is a metaphor for the success that this country has had over recent years.  We have adapted.  We've done it better than most because we're better at adapting than most.  Our relatively classless character as a nation enables us to change together and change for the better, and that really has been very much part and parcel of the Australian journey and the success of the Australian economy, and your group has played a very major part in it.  I thank you for it and I wish your members great prosperity and success for the future.
Thank you.
[ends]  


***CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***
 ***UNDER EMBARGO UNTIL 12.40PM***
  Introduction
I am delighted to have the opportunity to talk about Australia's close and cooperative relations with the other nations of our region.
  Events such as this Summit provide an opportunity to build understanding within our own community about the region we live in and how important it is to the future security and prosperity of the Australian people.  And I congratulate the Australian National University and Asialink for this, and their many other initiatives, to encourage greater contact and cooperation between Australia and her neighbours.
The excellent relations we enjoy in the region today owe much to the strong bonds and associations forged by what is often termed 'Track 2' diplomacy - the contact and discussions between individuals and non#8209;government institutions.
  Governments, of course, have a role to play in supporting and encouraging the development of these people-to-people links. We see government funding for institutions such as the International Centre for Excellence in Asia Pacific Studies and the Asia Pacific College of Diplomacy at the ANU as an important contribution.
  And today I am pleased to advise that the National Centre for Language Training, for which I announce government seed funding of $4.6 million, will be established by a consortium of universities and TAFE institutes across Australia.  Headed by NewSouth Global, a wholly owned subsidiary of the University of New South Wales, the Centre will help Australians, especially in business, to build the practical language skills and cultural knowledge that they need to engage more effectively in international markets.
 Vigorous, open debate about any government's foreign policy is crucial.  This is especially so in respect of Australia's links with the region, so vital to our long-term prosperity and security.
In that spirit, let me say that the great canard levelled at this government is that the deepening of our relations with the United States in recent years has come at the expense of closer engagement with Asia.
This charge proceeds on a false assumption - the false assumption that there is some inevitable zero-sum game where closer relations with the United States are inimical to improved relations in the region.
  It is wrong when one notes this government's success in forging a strategic economic relationship with China.  It ignores our trade agreements with Singapore and Thailand.
  It is misleading at a time when we have put relations with Indonesia on a more solid, cooperative and sustainable footing.  It is equally an error now when we have agreed on a scoping study for a free trade agreement (FTA) with Malaysia - the country long seen as the least receptive to Australia's closer engagement with the region.
  An Australia seen by both sides of politics in Washington as a close and trusted partner is an Australia with enhanced influence, not least in our region - whether the issue is the fight against terrorism in Southeast Asia, events on the Korean Peninsula, or longer term trends in regional power relations.
The relationships we forge with other nations and our position on specific issues should, and under my government always will, be determined by consideration of Australia's national interest - and in accordance with Australian values.
  And so it should be, because any disconnect between foreign policy and national values jeopardises the domestic community support that is absolutely crucial to achieving Australia's foreign policy objectives.
In my view, much Australian commentary about the region rests on a second false assumption - that there is some singular entity called 'Asia' which we should approach always and everywhere with the same level of intensity independent of Australia's interests.
The government's commitment to close engagement in Asia proceeds on the basis of mutual respect.  And a key part of this engagement has been our willingness to appreciate Asia's diversity.
  As I have said previously, simple bromides masquerading as grand strategy fail to take account of Asia's diversity.  So too they distort Australia's position as a Western country with a unique network of political, economic and people-to-people links with Asia.  I make no apology for the fact that we focus our engagement on those relationships and issues that matter most to Australia's interests.
In this context, I count it as one of the great successes of this country's foreign relations that we have simultaneously been able to strengthen our long-standing ties with the United States of America, yet at the same time continue to build a very close relationship with China.
  That achievement was symbolised last year in the national Parliament when on successive days the House Representatives and the Senate were addressed by the President of the United States and the President of China.
  I note Professor Tony Milner's observation that 'the more we engage in our region - the more we interact in commerce, education, tourism and diplomacy - the more we tend to recognise the characteristics that distinguish us in the region'.  He is also right to say that those differences do not inhibit us forming strong bonds with Asian nations.
In fact, I would argue those characteristics are valued and appreciated by many of our neighbours.
And just as we expect our neighbours to respect our values and our institutions, we have tried to develop a greater understanding of, and sensitivity to, the historic and cultural foundations of their societies.
  Our focus has been on the common interests between Australia and the countries of Asia, while acknowledging that there will be times when we have differences over particular issues.  This mature and practical approach to engagement continues to bear fruit.
Securing the region against terrorism
Nowhere has this been more obvious than the close cooperation which has developed on security issues, especially between Australia and the nations of Southeast Asia.
  International solidarity and close collaboration involving governments and regional and multilateral organisations are critical if the fight against terrorism is to be successful.  In this regard, Australia has been resolute in its commitment to strengthen multilateral and well as bilateral cooperation, for instance in APEC and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
 There are few more important tools at the present time than the network of nine bilateral counter-terrorism arrangements Australia has put in place with regional neighbours.  Focusing as they do on law enforcement, border control and port security, they are the foundation for practical operational#8209;level cooperation between police, intelligence agencies, security authorities, customs and immigration services, defence forces, central banks and financial units.
   Our strategic engagement has also been supported by an extensive network of bilateral security dialogues.  Over the last eight and half years we have expanded the network to include key regional partners #8209; Japan, Korea, Vietnam, the Philippines and India #8209; in addition to the long-standing arrangements with China and Indonesia.  And we look forward to arranging our first politico-military talks with Malaysia sometime this year.
   Australia has continued to work hard to strengthen its defence cooperation relationships with key regional partners in ASEAN.  And it is worth noting that our contribution to defence cooperation in Southeast Asia is second only to that provided by the United States.
 Australia has also recognised that helping countries develop their own capabilities to fight terrorism is as important as operational-level cooperation.
   In addition to capacity building packages for Indonesia and the Philippines, Australia is contributing $36.8 million to the Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation in Jakarta.  This international education and training institution will greatly increase the ability of our region to respond to the complex challenges posed by the operation of international terrorists in our region.
 But perhaps of even more immediate significance are the growing connections we have been able to forge with the region's police forces.  Australian Federal Police (AFP) officers are now posted in Bangkok, Chiang-Mai, Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, Manila, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Phnom Penh, Dili, Rangoon and Singapore.
   Ultimately, the success of the region's response to the terrorist threat will depend on the degree to which the region's police and security agencies can effectively cooperate.  Because it is at this working level where the greatest gains can be made, and the greatest dividends secured.
   Long-term regional stability
 Along with the challenge of terrorism, North Korea's nuclear posturing represents yet another ingredient which creates a degree of instability and tension in our region.
 Australia is responding at two levels #8209; we are engaging fully and energetically in patient diplomacy, but we have also urged those nations most likely to influence the behaviour of North Korea - South Korea, Japan, Russia, the United States and China - to speak in a firm and united fashion.
 We believe that China, in particular, has a crucial role to play in the process.  And we have been encouraged by China's constructive contribution to finding a peaceful solution, especially its pivotal role in hosting the Six Party talks.  Indeed, Mr Downer will be in Pyongyang next week urging the North Korean leadership to grasp this opportunity and reap the ensuing long-term social and economic benefits of cooperation.
  Australia also welcomes the increased effort by Japan, under Prime Minister Koizumi's leadership, to make a greater contribution to regional and international security.
 We greatly appreciate Japan's increased willingness to contribute peacekeeping operations - including in East Timor where Japanese and Australian personnel worked closely together.  And, more recently, Japan has made a significant contribution to coalition efforts to help the Iraqi people build a peaceful, democratic future for their nation.
   Following the commencement of a trilateral dialogue on security-related issues with Japan and the United States, I expect that Australia's security links with Japan will become even more important.
 Japan and Korea's forthright response to the events of 11th September and their firm support for coalition operations against Iraq are reminders of the close relations which a number of nations in our region have with the United States and our shared interest in ensuring continued American engagement.
   It must be understood that the ANZUS alliance does not isolate us from our neighbours, it adds to our value.  ANZUS combines with the other security alliances and the arrangements the US has forged throughout Asia #8209; not only with Japan and Korea, but also with Thailand and the Philippines #8209; to form a strategic framework that helps keep the whole region stable.
 It is self evident that the relationship between the United States and China will be extremely important to the stability of our region.  Our aim is to see calm and constructive dialogue between the United States and China.  The government recognises that, as a nation which has different but nonetheless close relationships with both countries, Australia is well placed to promote that constructive dialogue.
 Our relationship with the United States is well known and well understood.  But I have also worked very hard as Prime Minister to build an enduring relationship with China - a relationship that is mature, practical and substantial.
   At the ministerial level our political relationship is more vibrant than it has ever been.  Most members of the Australian Cabinet have visited China.  Similarly, almost all the members of China's Politburo Standing Committee have been to Australia.
  The government's approach to China has been based on three key elements:  maintaining high level contact, frank dialogue, and a shared commitment to constructive relations based on mutual respect.  That does not mean side-stepping issues where we differ - that would be inconsistent with our values and the very notion of mutual respect.  But it does mean that we agree to manage those issues in a mature and sensitive way.  Increasingly we are being recognised as a trusted partner not just by China but by the region as a whole.
 Economic Dividend
 This is in part because we share an ambition to increase the wealth and prosperity of the region and its people.
   Australia now has a strong and sophisticated economy.  And we are respected in the region for it.  It is only because the government ensured Australia's economic prosperity and strength that we could, along with Japan, commit some $3 billion dollars to all three regional IMF programmes in response to the East Asian financial crisis of 1997.
 Diverse as the economies of our region are, there is once again a growing appreciation of the importance of trade liberalisation and competition as drivers for dynamic economic growth.
   The government recognises that the best way to achieve open markets is through multilateral trade agreements.  Undoubtedly they provide the most comprehensive outcomes.  But in this uncertain and messy world it would be foolish to put all our eggs in one basket.  My doctrine has always been to look for opportunities that will deliver for Australia.  And if we can negotiate a bilateral deal that delivers tangible benefits now - we will go for it.
 Australia actively pursued free trade agreements with the countries of Southeast Asia - either collectively or bilaterally - long before we started negotiations with the United States.
 Through the hard work of the Trade Minister, Mark Vaile, and the Australian negotiators, we were able to finalise FTAs with Singapore and Thailand in 2002 and 2004 respectively.
   These agreements are indicative of Australia's increasing engagement with our Southeast Asian neighbours.  And the gains are not exclusively economic, because the resulting increased level of contact will inevitably encourage greater cross-cultural exchange and awareness.
 The momentum from these agreements is building.
 During her recent visit to Australia, the Malaysian trade minister, Rafidah Aziz, and Mr Vaile agreed that Australia and Malaysia should explore the possibility of an FTA.  We expect the scoping studies to be complete by the first quarter of 2005.
   I am very enthusiastic about an agreement with Malaysia.  It is our 10th largest trading partner and a Malaysia-Australia FTA would give Australian companies yet another excellent platform for sales and production in Southeast Asia.
 I am also pleased to accept an invitation to attend the ASEAN leaders' summit in Laos, in November to explore strengthening economic ties between the ten ASEAN members and the Closer Economic Relationship partners - Australia and New Zealand.
 Most of our neighbours are discussing or negotiating FTAs with one or more countries.  Australia's ability to finalise an FTA with United States has also strengthened our capacity and attractiveness when seeking to negotiate FTAs with countries in Asia.
   Moreover this is an opportunity most would envy.  It would be grossly irresponsible of the government not to be exploring how we can expand our trading relations with the world's largest and most dynamic economies.
 And that is why we are seeking to strengthen our bilateral trade relationships with two of the powerhouse economies of North Asia - Japan and China.
 Japan's economy, which again is showing signs of buoyancy, is still the second largest in the world, and will be for some time.  It is more than 50 per cent larger than the next largest economy, Germany, and is still three times the size of China's.
 Japan remains Australia's best customer.   It has been our largest export market for many years and is likely to remain so for the foreseeable future.  Our bilateral relationship with Japan has generated substantial benefits for Australia #8209; but we are not complacent.  The government is constantly looking for ways to strengthen our ties.
   The Trade and Economic Framework, signed during my visit to Japan in July 2003, commits both countries to work towards comprehensive bilateral trade and investment liberalisation.  A Joint Study to advance this objective is underway.
   Similarly, the government recently concluded a Trade and Economic Framework with China, which includes a commitment to undertake a detailed joint study into the feasibility and benefits of an Australia-China FTA.
   China has experienced remarkable economic development over the past twenty years - development that has seen it become one of the world's most dynamic economies and one of Australia's most important economic partners.
   Increased opportunities in China from its surging economy do not, however, mean diminished opportunities in Japan.  Trade and investment links between China and Japan themselves are growing strongly.  In fact, the growth in Japanese exports to China is helping fuel Japan's economic recovery.
 The Australian and Chinese economies strongly complement each other.  China is already our number one market for iron, steel and wool.  In 2002 with the signing of the $25 billion Guangdong LNG deal, we established a long-term energy partnership.
  That deal is in many ways symbolic of the standing Australia has in the region as a reliable, stable partner.  And the government is committed to continuing to promote Australia as a major energy provider, ready and able to help fuel the continued expansion of the Japanese and Chinese economies.
 Energy supply is also an area where we see potential for growth in our already very strong and dynamic economic relationship with South Korea.
 The strength and consistent quality of Australia's education industry is also widely recognised in our region.  In 2003, more than 190,000 Asian students were studying in Australian educational institutions.  Australia is also a leader in establishing joint education projects in#8209;country, with programmes already underway in China, Vietnam, and Indonesia.
   Last year, educational activities with our Asian neighbours generated some $4.4 billion income for the Australian economy.
 Opportunity
 But we are never complacent.  We are constantly assessing regional opportunities.  Increasingly, we are looking to our west and observing India's growing political and economic weight.  And India is looking east - seeking to forge stronger links with our region.
   Indications are that India is set to become one of Australia's most important regional and bilateral partners.
 Australia is already the third largest destination for Indian students seeking higher professional skills.  And new initiatives in educational exchange hold particular promise for strengthening not only commercial links but the people-to-people links which are so vital to growing the relationship.
 India and Australia enjoy similar democratic institutions, legal, financial and governmental structures.  We are both members of the Commonwealth of Nations and strong advocates of that organisation's democratic principles.  We share a common language and, of course, a passion for the great game of cricket.
 The Indian Ocean may divide us geographically but its strategic importance to Australia and the region as a whole is a very significant unifying factor in the relationship.
 Our common security interests, especially in relation to combating and responding to international terrorism and other transnational crime, led to last year's MOU on Counter Terrorism.  Not surprisingly both nations are very focused on the maritime security of the Indian Ocean.
 Our economies have strong complementarities.  India is already Australia's seventh largest merchandise export market and Australia is one of the top ten investors in India.
   As you can see, solid ground work has been laid.  And I am looking forward to seeing considerable benefit accrue to both nations, over the next decade, from the continued strengthening and growth of the bilateral relationship.
   Responsibility
 But being a part of the Asia Pacific is not simply about opportunity, it is also about responsibility.  Over the last eight and a half years, Australia has demonstrated its willingness to contribute - as with our response to the financial crisis of 1997 and our involvement in East Timor.
   I am also very proud of Australia's recent participation in the assistance mission to the Solomon Islands.  The RAMSI intervention to which so many countries in the Pacific contributed has been a wonderful success.  And we are particularly pleased by the fact that it was not a solo Australian effort. It was an effort to which many countries in the Pacific Islands contributed very generously.
 It worked precisely because the intervention was large enough to be taken seriously, both in the Solomons and the broader Pacific community.
   I believe Australia does have a special responsibility, as a wealthy nation, to help.  The Solomons intervention and the Enhanced Co-operation Programme in Papua New Guinea reflect a decisive change in both the tone and direction of Australian Government policy in the Pacific.  We now see ourselves as more active, more engaged, more willing to help, but reasonably seeking reforms and better governance as conditions of that assistance.
 The government's aid programme has played an integral role in Australia's efforts to promote regional development and stability.  In 2003-04 over 61% of Australia's official development assistance, more than $1.2 billion, was directed to countries in the Asia Pacific.
   I see our role as a friend and partner, helping our neighbours to build their own futures.  And that is why I am very pleased today to announce a significant expansion of the Australia Youth Ambassador for Development Programme.
   The government is committing an extra $24.5 million over the next fours years with funding for the programme essentially doubling by 2006.  Currently, there are 230 Youth Ambassadors on short-term assignment in developing countries throughout the Asia Pacific.  By 2006 there will be some 400 young Australians selected for overseas development assignments.
 Not only do these young people make a terrific contribution to the development of our region, but they are playing a really positive role in strengthening mutual understanding between Australia and our neighbours.
  And I know that our best and brightest have been attracted to this programme.  Last week in Samoa, I had the pleasure of meeting Amy Wells, a chemical engineer, who is currently assisting the Samoan Ministry of Works.  And one of the young officers from my own department, Simon Greenacre, is off to China next month to assist them on issues arising from WTO negotiations.
   Conclusion
 So again, I invite you to examine our record and see how this government is strategically building Australia's future in the Asia Pacific.  The government has always understood the imperative of close engagement with the region.  The relationships forged with the nations and peoples of the Asia Pacific are, and will always be, of great concern to the destiny and security of Australia.
   The strong bonds we have formed with the nations of Asia combine with Australia's great links with Europe and North America to put Australia in a very special position - a position I believe of great advantage in the twenty-first century.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Madam Mayor, the Deputy Premier, my parliamentary colleagues, Mr Uno the President of Hirotec, ladies and gentlemen.
This is my third, I suppose, appearance in relation to the activities in Elizabeth West and generally associated with the cause of manufacturing industry in South Australia this year.  And I've done that for a particular reason and I do it again today for a particular reason and that is that I admire the determined attempts that have been made by a number of governments, by a number of people and a number of companies to maintain and expand the energy and the activity of manufacturing industry in this state.
 I admire those attempts because there have been constant challenges, the most recent of those was, of course, the decision taken by Mitsubishi.  But because of a co-operative spirit, because of the co-operation that has existed between the Federal Government and the State Government, and I acknowledge that, and I reaffirm the determination of my Government to work with the elected Government of South Australia in the interests of industry and employment in South Australia and without regard to political differences because in the long run, the prosperity of this State depends very much on the maintenance and strengthening of its manufacturing base.  It faces the challenges of many parts of Australia of having to compete with investment.  It is not my role as Prime Minister to choose between investment in one part of the country against another.  I don't play favourites, I merely encourage investment in Australia and where I can, I provide government support where that is appropriate to investment decisions and investment activities.
  But there's no doubt that the economy of South Australia is stronger than it was ten years ago.  There's no doubt that South Australia has benefited from national economic prosperity, from the low inflation, the low interest rates, the high level of business investment and all of those things which have made the Australian economy so strong.  It has also benefited from individual programmes that have been sponsored by governments on both sides of the political divide in this State.  And I congratulate and I thank them for that contribution.
Today I'm very pleased to announce that the Hirotec corporation of Japan will establish a new and innovative manufacturing plant in north Adelaide.  Hirotec will be investing more than $70 million in a state of the art stamping and assembly plant to produce doors, bonnets and boot lids known in the business as vehicle closure components.  The components will be produced for General Motors Holden.  And in recognition of the importance of this project and its long term economic benefit to Australia, I announce that the Australian Government has granted Hirotec's venture Major Project Facilitation status and this status assists with the development of major projects through high levels of help, including by fast tracking necessary Government approval processes.
This plant will bring to South Australia's Hirotec international expertise in designing and manufacturing vehicle closures. Hirotec's expertise is evident in the fact that it currently manufactures over 90 per cent of vehicle closures for Mazda in Japan.
The plant will generate employment for 150 people during its construction phase and will employ 280 workers when it is operating at peak production.
I understand that Hirotec is also engaged in discussions with the City of Playford to establish vocational training linkages with the local TAFE college.
  The Hirotec announcement is a terrific shot in the arm for manufacturing here in Adelaide and generally in South Australia.  It is a reminder that if companies and employees and governments work together in reaction and response in a constructive way to the decisions of other companies to alter or phase down an operation then the slack can be taken up, the employment opportunities can be provided.  You will recall at the time of the Mitsubishi closure, I announced immediately that the Government would provide a $50 million adjustment assistance package designed to help with reemployment, with retraining and also alternative investment opportunities and there was also an assistance programme announced by the South Australian Government.  Now both of those decisions were designed to indicate a practical intention by both governments to help the people affected by the Mitsubishi decision to get on with their lives, to find alternative employment.  And that process is now under way and what is good about the Hirotec announcement is that here is a tangible alternative of new jobs, new investment, but it's new investment from an old friend and it's an old friend, Japanese investment has been so important to this country over the years, over the last 40 or 50 years this country would have been much poorer had it not been for the level of foreign investment from Japan.  Japanese investment is always welcome in Australia, it is reliable, it is valuable and it is part of the Australian manufacturing story in particular of the last 30 or 40 years.
 So I'm particularly pleased that Mr Uno is here today.  I thank him for his company's commitment.
  On behalf of those who will be employed by Hirotec in Adelaide, I thank him because this very practical demonstration of the ongoing appeal and viability for manufacturing investment in Adelaide is a good sign, it's an optimistic announcement and it's a day when we can look very optimistically and positively to the future.
 Thank you very much.
[ends]  


PRIME MINISTER:
Well ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for coming. Senator Lees and I are jointly announcing a Government initiative which is a commitment of $36 million to provide a support for programmes to help what we call biodiversity hotspots around Australia where there is a threat to habitat, threat to species around Australia. And Senator Lees has been advocating this programme with me for some time, and we had some lengthy discussions a little while ago and the Government has decided to allocate an additional sum of $36 million.  It is very much a result of the strong advocacy that Senator Lees undertook.  She is very committed to the preservation of our environment, she's very concerned about the biodiversity hotspots in this country.
Today we're announcing as part of that $36 million programme $1.5 million for farm land remediation in the Mount Lofty ranges area and that of course explains why we have come here today and chosen this beautiful location for this announcement.  This commitment by the Government of an additional $36 million of course comes on top of our long running and major commitments through the Natural Heritage Trust, the money that we're making available in co-operation with the states to tackle the problem of salinity around Australia.  I'm delighted of course to remind you, particularly as I'm in South Australia, that as a result of the historic agreement reached at the last Premiers Conference meeting, that $500 million which was the first instalment to get the Murray Darling Basin remediated and proper flows returning to the Murray River, that money will now begin to flow as a result of the Agreement that was reached. So this is another step along the path to further protect and restoration of our environment and I do want to pay particular tribute to Senator Lees who is a patient and sincere and balanced advocate of environmental causes in Australia and what I would like to do, particularly as this initiative is very much come at her urging and her advocacy, I would like her to say something about the whole programme and also something about the particular programme so far as it effects properties and activities in the Mount Lofty ranges.
SENATOR LEES:
Thank you Prime Minister. And if I could begin by saying thank you for this additional money.  The programme overall is a total value of $36 million and it will be spent on habitats that are endangered and in this case here habitats that have largely gone.  We only have in the Eastern Mount Lefty's some four per cent of the original vegetation left and gradually we have under existing programmes such as Landcare and money from the Natural Heritage Trust seen some trees going back but we now need to take it a lot further, we need now to get biodiversity back, old habitats back, original habitats back, with not 10 or a dozen or 15 species but 170 species which is what we used to be able to find if we went out into a patch of natural bush here in the Eastern Mount Lofty's.
So this is, for the Eastern Mount Lofty's, a chance for those farmers who have already been through the basics, who've done a lot of the ground work, who are prepared to put conversance and protection orders on their land, to now tender through the process to get additional support to help them on working farms to protect biodiversity.
In the bigger picture we envisage that this money will go to some pretty special places, probably in some fairly large chunks.  We've seen a lot of money have to go fairly thinly because of the need out there. But we're now looking at a fund that will be looking for the hotspots that are most at risk and not just putting in $1.5 million but maybe $3-4-5-6 million to save some areas once and for all.
So perhaps we can take some questions?
QUESTION:
(inaudible).
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I don't know whether all of the people Senator Lees is trying to attract would necessarily be attracted by a reference from me.  But let me very sincerely say that I think she's been a wonderful Senator for South Australia, she is genuinely committed to the environment, she's genuinely committed to a lot of causes that I support.  There would be many issues where she would very, very strongly disagree with me, I understand that, and I respect that. But I admire her as a person, she's a person of her word and she's a person who I think is a sincere representative of a very strong progressive but sensible environmental position.  And if that is what you support and you want good environmental policies, but you don't want the radically intolerant approach to the environment that is adopted by some of the Greens, then I would suggest you support Senator Lees.  But I say that with a heavy trepidation that a lot of people who might be disposed to support her would disagree with the idea that I should give her a reference, but I'd be a hypocrite if I didn't say what I've just said.  Look, I mean this is, politics is often a case of respecting difference in other people and I respect sincerity and consistency in people and I have certainly found that in Senator Lees and I hope she gets re-elected.
QUESTION:
Are there any other hotspots around the country that you can think of at the moment that the money will go to?
SENATOR LEES:
We are not in the position to actually announce any others.  There are a couple of others, a very long way down the track, to be ready to be announced. But we are looking at those areas where there are immediate threats, some of that is to the north of us, up in (inaudible) wetlands, some of it is actually in Queensland and Western Australia.  The money is not endless, we're going to have to spend it very, very carefully so we are also looking at the best results for the money that we've got. So we are not ready as yet unfortunately to announce any other things today.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, could I ask you about Mr Cameron, Ross Cameron? Do you think that he has endangered his standing in Western Sydney?
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't want to say anything further about a matter which is essentially private. He is a good, strong local member, the reference to a poll in the newspaper this morning is news to me, there has been no such poll. Beyond that I don't talk about people's private lives and I don't have any further comment to make, except to say that he will be our candidate, he has been a good hardworking local member, issues of a personal private nature are precisely that and they will not elicit or draw any comment from me.
QUESTION:
Do he has your full support then?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes.
QUESTION:
And there's no question that he will be a candidate?
PRIME MINISTER:
He will be our candidate.
QUESTION:
Have you had to explain to the Americans what Alexander Downer meant when he said Australia might not necessarily come to...
PRIME MINISTER:
I'll talk to you later about that issue, we're having a news conference on this.
   SENATOR LEES:
Any other biodiversity questions or questions about, this is after all also part of the Murray Darling Basin and for me in South Australia, as we looked around areas of need, there are obviously many of them, particularly out on the west coast. But also being part of the Murray Darling Basin and we are waiting on the State Government now to step in and really put protection, water protection, in this area, ... were to fully declare it.  We know there can no more dams but there has to be a reallocation of water so that we can see some more water flowing off this area, as it used to, and into the lower end of the Murray. So part of the reason for choosing this as the priority in South Australia was also because it's part of the Murray Darling Basin.
QUESTION:
One of the land holders was telling the Prime Minister that there is an issue, insurance coverage?
SENATOR LEES:
The same with a lot of community groups, a lot of community groups now are from local sporting clubs, through to groups such as Landcare, are struggling with the whole issue of insurance and some of them are slowly working it out, even midwives are struggling with insurance, it goes right across the board.
QUESTION:
Is that something that the Commonwealth needs to address further?
SENATOR LEES:
Well again it goes back to the Commonwealth and the States, there has been some addressing of the issue but I don't think it's sorted the problem out and that's something that we will need to discuss also, hopefully, at another time.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, could you comment on that?  You were the...
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I had a discussion about that a few moments ago and my understanding is that the immediate situation is containable, but there still could be a medium to longer term problem and I will examine that. There are obviously responsibilities at the state level in many of these areas, there could be a further role for the Commonwealth, as Senator Lees has said.  We have encouraged and achieved big changes to the tort laws which have produced the problem, but it's one of those ongoing things which is a sad product of a more highly litigious society that we now have and we do need to address it. It would be a terrible shame if the activity of small, volunteered community groups were impaired because of the burden of public liability insurance. But equally we have to work our way through these things and not make big ad hoc commitments that can't be met.
   QUESTION:
Is it an issue for the insurance companies?  Would you appeal to them to do...
PRIME MINISTER:
Well they could well have a role, but I would like, the issue having been raised with me, I would like to investigate it further without being specific about what our response would be.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, how important do you think the environmental vote will be in the upcoming election?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh I think very important, the environment is a big mainstream political issue, but it's a mainstream national issue. The big challenge that this country has is a sustainable future, to get a balance between the environment and its care and development. And part of that of course is water, the sustainability of our water resources - I see it as a very big issue and I'm very proud of what the Government has done in the area of the environment, we brought in the Natural Heritage Trust, we have the water initiative, what John Anderson has done there, the national initiative on salinity.  We will, although we for reasons I've explained, do not support at this stage signing the Kyoto protocol, we will meet our greenhouse gas emission target set by Kyoto. So we have a very strong record but we have to do more, everybody has to do more in relation to the environment, it's no longer the preserve of the fringe of Australian politics, it's dead in the centre of Australian politics and I've felt that for a very long time.
QUESTION:
Your Government has put a lot of store in making sure that people who can afford to have private health cover do so.  Should Mark Latham, who earns a (inaudible) money as Opposition Leader, be in hospital as a public patient?
PRIME MINISTER:
I do not choose to comment on that.
Thank you.
SENATOR LEES:
Thank you.  Thank you very much.
[ends]   


Thank you Bob, Rob Kerin, my ministerial colleagues, fellow Liberals.  It's a great pleasure for me to be back again at this annual gathering of the South Australian Division.  I read in the newspaper this morning that I was quoted as saying that I had a soft spot for South Australia.  Well that is certainly the case.  I am not a Johnny come lately visitor to South Australia.  In all the years that I have been in public life, in the various positions I have held - some of them prominent, some of them not so prominent - I have been a very regular visitor to this state, and I've come to love and understand some of the different characteristics of South Australia.  And one of the things that has struck me in recent years is that there is a sense of optimism and enthusiasm in South Australia at the present time, and that is overwhelmingly due, in my view, to the fact that for the first time in a generation South Australia is fully sharing the benefits of national economic prosperity, and it's national economic prosperity which has given South Australia the benefit.  If it hadn't been for the policies of the Federal Government followed over the past few years, then the prosperity that's being enjoyed here would not be nearly so evident.
  My friends, we have a big election fight ahead of us and I want to address some of the issues that will be prominent in that election fight.  But let me state one thing right upfront, and it will be central to what we say in the lead up to the election - this coming election is about the future, it is not about the past.  Let Labor fight the last war.  By contrast, we will talk about the future of our country.  Political parties that fight the last war are political parties that have no policies, no plans and no vision about the future of our country.  In 2004, the issues that will confront the Australian people in the choice they make will be different.  Not totally different, but substantially different than the issues they have faced in 1996, in 1998 and in 2001.  And there are a series of questions that we will ask the Australian people, and we will invite them to ask of themselves when they weigh how they are going to vote.
  We'll be asking them first and foremost which party is better able to deliver a strong economy, because a strong economy is the foundation of all the other things we hope to do.  The strong economy that we've had over the last few years has meant that we've had $5.5 billion extra a year in saved interest payments to spend on education and health and roads and defence and family benefits and tax cuts and in strengthening Medicare.  If we hadn't have paid off $70 billion debt, we wouldn't have had that $5.5 billion available.  You can have all the dreams and all the plans in the world - you can hope to further strengthen the health system, you can hope to have a sustainable environment, you can hope to further encourage the enterprise culture, but unless we have a strong economy, we can't deliver on those hopes and those aspirations.
  So the first question to ask is which party is better able to deliver a strong economy, and very specifically which party is better able to deliver low interest rates.  In many respects, this next election is about the two IR's and I'll refer to them in a moment - interest rates and industrial relations.  But low interest rates are something that is important to middle Australia.  We all remember the 17, 18, 19 per cent interest rates of the Keating and Hawke years.  Labor equals high interest rates because Labor always goes into deficit, Labor always spends more than it raises, and Labor eventually becomes economically irresponsible.  That is why the risk of Labor is the risk of higher interest rates.  Latham will deliver the high interest rates that Keating and Hawke delivered, because he will essentially follow the same economic policies.  And those of us who remember the late 1980s and the 1990s, and there would be many in this room, particularly primary producers who will remember the high mortgage and bill rates of those years, will ponder the consequences and the implications of a Labor victory.
Another question we could ask ourselves is simply this - which party is more likely to deliver close relations not only with the United States, but also with the nations of Asia?  When we campaigned in 1996, our opponents said that the Asian leaders would not deal with us.  They derided our talk of rebalancing our foreign policy.  The rest of course, as they say, is history.  Over the last eight and a half years, this country's relationship with the United States has grown ever closer and we've been able to conclude a Free Trade Agreement, a once in a generation opportunity that will deliver great benefits right across the industry sector.  Tuna fishermen in South Australia will be great and immediate beneficiaries.  Go to Port Lincoln and ask them what they think of the Free Trade Agreement.  It will be of enormous benefit.  Ask the manufacturers who will get benefits out of the Free Trade Agreement, the access to the huge American Government procurement market, worth at a federal and state level about US$400 billion a year.
  Only a Liberal Government could have negotiated a Free Trade Agreement.  Even this morning, the anti American rhetoric is still being uttered by the Trade Spokesman for the Labor Party, and in the face of the remarks made by the American Ambassador here in Adelaide yesterday, the Trade Spokesman for the Labor Party says that the Bush administration is in the pocket of the pharmaceutical companies.  Now this is the language of the alternative Trade Minister, the man who would be Trade Minister and would hope to seek the benefits (inaudible) of a Free Trade Agreement.  The first sign of criticism of what Labor has done and they fall back on their old knee-jerk, anti American rhetoric.  There's only one side of politics that can simultaneously build close relations with both the United States and with Asia.  And one of the great triumphs of our foreign policy over the last eight and a half years has been the fact that we have been able to develop not only that closer relationship with the United States, but a relationship with China of unparalleled dimensions.  China is now one of our great trading partners, and the opportunities for further development of trade with that country are virtually unlimited.  We are seen as reliable, dependable, our links with North America are a plus, they are not a minus, and the character and the nature of this country is seen as very attractive to China and to China's leadership.
 We might well ask the question - which party is better able, therefore, to give strength in issues of defence and national security?  When I became Prime Minister and we faced a $10 billion deficit, I said that there was only one area of expenditure that should be quarantined from the eye of the Expenditure Review Committee, and that was the area of defence because defence spending had been run down under former governments.  We hear a lot about the reputation of the newly reappointed Defence Spokesman from the Opposition.  The reality is of course that under the stewardship of a succession of Labor Defence Ministers, defence spending and defence morale had been run down, and anybody who has any understanding of what happened in that portfolio will know exactly what I'm talking about.
  Ironically, we might also ask the question - which party is more likely to deliver a strengthened Medicare?  Labor claims some kind of natural, uninterrupted ascendency on health policy, yet the only side of politics that is actually promising to weaken Medicare at the present time is the Labor Party, because the Labor Party is promising to take away the safety net that we introduced only a few months ago.  And what the safety net does is to say to any family that gets Family Tax Benefits or anybody who has got a Commonwealth Concession Card - if your out of pocket, out of hospital expenses are more than $300 a year, then 80 per cent of everything over the $300 is reimbursed to you from Medicare.  And if you don't come under either of those categories, then the threshold amount is $700 a year, and over and above that, 80 per cent of the surplus is rebated under Medicare.  Now this is a major addition to the protection provided by Medicare, yet ironically enough, because of the Labor Party's blind ideological obsession with one aspect of Medicare, it's going to abolish that safety net if it gets in.  And it still hasn't given an iron clad guarantee about the preservation of the private health insurance rebate.  It always falls short of guaranteeing in full the existing private health insurance rebate.  It talks about preserving a rebate.  It doesn't say it won't means test it.  It doesn't rule out limiting it to particular services.  Labor will take away a safety net which every week is delivering reassurance to tens of thousands of Australian families.
  And very importantly, we might also ask the question - which party is more likely to deliver parental choice in education?  Labor has a hit list of private schools.  Labor's hit list of private schools is the thin end of the wedge.  The teacher unions of this country have an ideological objection to Government assistance for independent schools.  And in the process of implementing that ideological obsession, they are running an envy campaign, seeking to represent to the Australian community that independent schools equal a few schools that charge large fees of in the order of 14 or 15 or 17 or 18 thousand dollars a year.  The reality is that they are a small minority of independent schools, and whether you have state aid or not, they will always exist.  The schools that have grown and the schools that should be concerned about Labor's objection to parental choice are the low fee schools in the independent sector.  In the time that we have been in Government, almost 300 new independent schools have opened up, and about 200 of those charge fees on average of $2,000 a year.  And what we are seeing under our new schools policy, and please remember that Labor voted against the legislation that has enabled those 300 schools to be opened up since we have been in Government.  Labor objected to our new schools policy because they object in their hearts to unlimited parental choice when it comes to education.  And I support government assistance for all parents who send their children to independent schools because I believe that parents, and parents alone, should decide the nature and the place for the education of their children.
  My friends, I said yesterday at the gathering in... a business gathering, that I didn't often quote anything that my predecessor said, but there is one thing that my predecessor did say that I agreed with, and that is that if you change the government, you change the country.  The country was changed when we were elected eight and a half years ago, and it's been changed for the better.  And we are entitled to ask that question that Ronald Reagan asked of the American people in 1984, when he asked of them - do you believe that our country is better off now than what it was four years ago?  And I can with great confidence ask that question of the Australian people - do you believe that Australia is better off, that Australia is stronger, Australia is more respected, Australia is more secure, than what it was eight and a half years ago?  And given the circumstances into which our world has fallen over that period of time, given the advent of international terrorism, given the events that have occurred in our own region, and given the challenges that we have had as a country in the last eight and a half years that we never dreamt of in 1996, it is still fair to expect a resounding yes to that question.  We have changed the country and we have changed it for the better.
When I became Prime Minister, there were 35 federal electorates in Australia that had double digit unemployment.  Now there are only four.  Over the last eight and a half years, real wages in this country have risen by 13 per cent.  They rose by a miserable 2.9 per cent in the period that Labor had been in government.  And so the list goes on - not only of economic statistics, but also of a measure of the self-confidence of this country, an inner belief that the Australian nation is a nation more widely respected and more widely admired around the world now than ever before because of its economic strength and because of its willingness to take a stance on difficult issues.  I said yesterday at the business address that there is a danger that Labor will represent to the Australian community that a change of government will mean very little, that we can have the strong economy and the strong national security and the strong foreign relations, and we can have a few adjustments at the margin to soften the edges and we can have a little bit more here and a little bit more there, and the rest of it will just go on in an uninterrupted fashion.  The reality of course is far from that.
If we change the government, we will change the direction of this country.  We will hand the control of the industrial relations back to the trade union movement.  It seems to me to be a grievous contradiction that at a time when only 17.5 per cent of workers in the private sector in this country belong to a union, the alternative Government wants to hand back 100 per cent control of industrial relations to the union movement.  And that is no exaggeration.  Labor would abolish Workplace Agreements, they will abolish the secondary boycott protections of the Trade Practices Act, they will restore the primacy of awards, they will give unions right of entry, even in places where there are no union members.  They will require of companies making contract with the Federal Government that they disclose the identity of their subcontractors.  They will hold a dagger to the throat of many of our great export industries by taking away, particularly from the mining industry, the capacity to make individual workplace contracts with their employees, which has been the foundation of the growth in productivity of so many of those industries over the last few years.  So Labor is an immense risk in the area of industrial relations.
  And the grim reality is that if they win federally, until there is a chance at a state level for a change in government, we will have coast to coast Labor Governments for the first time in this country's history.  They will govern without checks and balances, they will govern without any let or hindrance, and you can imagine the opportunity and the temptation that that will present to the union movement of this country to demand their ultimate reward for the tens of millions of dollars year after year they have poured into the coffers of the Australian Labor Party, and augmenting the rorting of the Australian taxpayer represented by the disgrace of Centenary House.  So there is a lot at stake, my friends, a lot at stake in this election.  There is a risk in electing Labor, and it's proper that that risk be pointed out.  There's a risk in industrial relations and there is a risk for middle Australia of higher interest rates.
Now I speak to you as somebody determined to ensure that the prosperity of this country for the last eight and a half years, the respect and the stability and the achievement and the cooperation that we have won with our friends in all parts of the world, is maintained and continued over the next three years.  I speak to you, very conscious of the importance of South Australia.  I spoke last night of the marginal seats we hold and the marginal seats we hope to win, and I spoke approvingly of the enormous contribution that all of you have made, not only my parliamentary colleagues and my Senate colleagues, but also all of you as members of the South Australian Division.  The Division has worked hard in preparation for this election and I'm greatly in the debt of Bob Randall and Graham Jaeschke and Rob Kerin and everybody else who have worked so very hard to maximise our chances.  We have great candidates and we have great sitting Members.  We have five seats that we could win the lot of them, or we could lose the lot of them, or we could win some of them and lose others.  And as I look down at some of the candidates, I look at Kym Richardson and Simon Birmingham right in front of me, I know that they are determined, and so is Trish Draper, to make sure that at least three of those five are won.  And I know that Trish Worth and the others are equally determined to ensure that that is going to happen.  David Fawcett is the fifth.  Of course he is the candidate in Wakefield.
  But it's going to be a very tough fight, but it will be about the future.  The Australian people want us to project our views and our values and our vision for the future of this country.  They are not interested in fighting the last war.  They are interested in knowing what we have in mind for their future.  And it's in that spirit that I thank you for your support.  It's in that spirit that I encourage you to redouble your efforts over the weeks and months ahead, so that when the starting gun goes, whenever that may be... that always gets a laugh, I don't know why, it always gets a laugh.  But whenever that starting gun goes, I know that you will be ready.  I thank you very much for your past loyalty and help, and I know that I can count on you in the weeks and the months ahead.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much, Dr Gordon Moyes, ladies and gentlemen and to Mr Ian Hunt, the Chairman, it's great to be back, it's great to have an opportunity again of just saying a few words and then later on Janette and I would like to meet as many of you as is as possible. Can I say first up that over the years there's been no organisation in Australia that has done more than has the Wesley Mission to reach out to the less privileged in our community, to demonstrate in a very practical Christian way the care that men and women who are in more fortunate circumstances have for those in less fortunate circumstances.
 The history of the Wesley Mission along of course with the other great organisations such as the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul and Anglicare and many other organisations, perhaps not as well know but all very intentioned and well motivated. The history of those organisations has really illustrated the concern that we as a lucky society demonstrate towards those in our midst who are not so fortunate.
 Wesley Mission of course has a wonderful reach. It provides aged care facilities, such as this wonderful facility that takes its name after the great and late Alan Walker who was the Director of the Central Methodist Mission for so many years and the founder for the first time anywhere in the world of the wonderful Lifeline organisation which I'm very pleased to say the Government provided very significant funding to earlier this year in the tune of about $10 million in order to refurbish the telephone network and often those telephone services, be it Lifeline or Kids Help Line which is run by the De La Salle brothers - they are often the difference between somebody taking their life and somebody finding a bit of hope in a reassuring conversation from a trained counsellor and it was always a wonderful initiative and it's an initiative that I was very proud that the Government was able and willing to support out of the last Budget. The Wesley Mission of course has provided wonderful counselling services for marriage preparation and for people who are having difficulty in their marriages. And I announced recently that the Government was going to make major changes to the Family Law Act and the family law system in order to try and provide an alternative to the costly court battles that often go on between parents after they separate regarding the custody of their children and we're going to establish for the first time what's called a family relationships network and that will involve the establishment of about 65 centres across Australia to which people who separate and who can't agree initially on custody matters will have to go before they can take any court action and we will be asking obviously on the basis of the Government providing adequate funding, we will be asking organisations like the Wesley Mission to tender for participation in this family relationships network and I know the Mission already provides excellent services in many parts of Sydney and the other organisations I've mentioned also provide those services in other parts of the country. Now, I mention that because it's a recent example of the way in which the Government working in partnership with the Wesley Mission and other organisations is providing a better network of support services for people who need them.
We are a fortunate community. We are by any standard a wealthy nation and it is therefore incumbent upon all of us, particularly those in Government to ensure that to the maximum extent we can, we give a helping hand and we give assistance to people who really need it. But always of course upon the basis that self help and self provision is always something that should be encouraged and should be respected and should be rewarded and if I may say so that lies behind an announcement I made at the weekend which may effect a number of people here and that is we're going to make the private health insurance taxation rebate more generous.
 Now, I know and you know that many people on very modest incomes all their lives have scrimped and save and done without other things in order to have private health insurance because they want the security of that when they get older and we think that self provision, that self sacrifice, caring for yourselves and taking the load off the rest of the community - we think that should receive better recognition and that is the reason why we have decided to provide a higher rebate for people 65 and over and higher again for people 70 and over and we think that is a proper recognition of the care and provision. More than a million Australians over the age of 65 have private health insurance. So we're not dealing with a minuscule number of people and hundreds of thousands of those people are on very modest incomes and we think that that provision should be rewarded.
But ladies and gentlemen the other thing and really I guess, the most important thing I want to say is that this is a wonderful facility and I know that you have had plans and Dr Moyes referred to them and I hope, and you're obviously very conscious of them and I think that is terrific and I can imagine that Chairman Hunt would be well abreast of all of the changes and all that is needed. We recognised earlier this year that there was a need to provide more resources for aged care and we've received a lot of representations on that subject, not least I might say from the Wesley Mission but indeed from aged care providers all around the country and we decided to include in the Budget a major additional provision, not only in relation to the running costs, but also in relation to capital.
 Now we as a community like every other community with which it is fair to make comparison are an ageing society. The proportion of people over 65 will grow as the years go by rather than diminish and that's a good thing because it's a reflection that people are living longer and living healthy lives longer and that is a good thing but it's also of course be a good thing if our fertility rate were higher and as Peter Costello rightly said in the Budget, we did try, I mean, his principle of one for each other and one for the country is not a bad principle and I know that there are many people who followed that but the point I simply want to say is that, as a society this big demographic change that we must grapple with and it means more resources for aged care, it means maintaining the affordability of health care and that includes helping both public hospitals and private health insurance.
It's not one or the other - it's both together. It's a partnership. A good health system is a partnership between the public system and the private system, not one trying to wrong foot the other and that's always been our philosophy. But it also means, of course, encouraging people who want to do so to remain in the workforce longer. I think people should continue in the workforce for as long as they want to and as long as they're making a contribution and age is irrelevant. The most powerful economist in the world and somebody who arguably has a greater influence on the economy than anybody else in the world is the chairman of the American Federal Reserve system, Dr Alan Greenspan and he's only 78.
 I mean, it does sort of make the point and I think it's a very relevant point. It's what you can deliver and how able you are, not your age. I mean some people's capacity to do things is diminished at a very early age sadly, others it goes on for a long time. So I simply make the proposition that we need to recognise in this changing demographic situation that people should be encouraged to remain in the workforce for as long as they want to and as long as they're able to make a contribution and the measure is the worth of the contribution. Not the age or station of the individual - it's as simple as that. And that is a cultural change that governments have to embrace and they have began to embrace it, but it's also a cultural change that many of the professions have to embrace. I think Ian would know from his own professional experience years and years ago it used to be accepted that some of the older partners would stay and then we went through a phase where everybody had to retire at a certain age and I think maybe now there's starting to be I hope something of a swing back and that's long overdue because it's a recognition of the quality of people and the resource that is available through mature age workers is enormous and it's a contribution that we should be willing to encourage.
But my friends, thank you very much for having Janette and I here. We know a lot about this facility, we know quite a number of you too who over the years we've had contact with in this area. Gordon was good enough to say that I regularly, despite my other duties come to the electorate and of course I do and I appreciate very, very much the contact I've had with Alan Walker Village and I appreciate very, very much the friendships that I've had with quite a number of you in this room over a very long period of time.
So thank you very much for having me and good luck, and we hope to say hello to as many of you as possible.
Thank you.


Well thank you very much Ken, Mr Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.  I've come here to announce that the Federal Government will contribute an additional sum of $748,000 to assist with the dredging of Tumbi Creek.  To come here and actually see the enormous (inaudible) and everything gives you an idea of just how needed and how desirable this dredging is.
  I mean people talk a lot about the environment.  My experience going around Australia is that the environment to most people is fixing local environmental problems, and fixing this is far more important to the people of this district than some distant idea that doesn't so much affect their daily lives.  And if we can get the creek properly dredged and the material environmentally disposed of in an environmentally sensible manner, which it will be, then boating, fishing, swimming and very importantly flood mitigation, because that is a very, very important issue.  Now this will bring to about $1.5 million the amount that the Federal Government has contributed, and I do of course congratulate and commend the Wyong Shire Council through the Mayor for the support and contribution that it has made.  I'm disappointed that the State Government has not put anything into it, and we'll continue to pursue the State Government to accept some responsibility.
  But do I... I make it very clear that Ken Ticehurst as you local Member has lobbied very hard for this.  He has been a constant advocate.  Ken is somebody who does fix onto local issues and local problems and try and advocate practical outcomes.  And this is a beautiful spot, the jewel in the crown, as the two fellows beside me say, and I won't argue with them or I might end up in the drink if I were to do that.  But I think this is a very important investment in the immediate environmental future of Tumbi Creek and this part of the world and it will make it even more enjoyable as an amenity, and I'm delighted to announce that on behalf of the Federal Government.  I think it's money well spent and I look forward to coming back here and seeing it after it's all done and going for a trip on it and savouring the delights of the dredged Tumbi Creek.  Thank you.
  [ends]  


Well Mr Ticehurst, Ken Ticehurst, the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen. I'm very pleased to be at this project and to have explained to me in a little more detail how the North Wyong GP hospital integration project, which is in effect trialling a new model of primary healthcare in this part of the Central Coast of New South Wales.  This outcome has been the result of intense negotiation between the local division of general practice, the New South Wales Government, the Commonwealth Government and the University of Newcastle. And I want to commend everybody that's been involved and I'm announcing today the recommitment of the Commonwealth Government with an additional funding contribution of $50,000 over and above the funding contribution that the Commonwealth Government has made in the past.
 Having had the operation of the centre explained to me, I'm quite excited that this is another example of how different models of healthcare are being trialled around Australia.  We do have a changed structure in the medical profession, there are more and more doctors who work part time.  The old perception of a full time overwhelmingly male GP working all hours of the day and night has changed.  The medical workforce in Australia has become increasingly feminised and we have to adopt, because of all of those changes, we have to adopt new models and approaches and I'm particularly struck by the on site involvement of the university and to have a research GP and to have this project providing primary healthcare research data and to have the university working closely with the medical practitioners and to be reassured that it's a project that will attract medical practitioners, not from the immediate catchment area but from elsewhere and therefore not affect the provision of GP services on the Central Coast, that's very important. That meets one of the objectives we've had in our strengthening Medicare policy of making sure that we address areas of doctor shortage, and there is a shortage of doctors on the Central Coast, and the measures that we introduced earlier this year, the practice nurses, the additional payments in relation to GP bulk billing consultations for certain categories of people, the workforce measures, all of those things are making a big contribution towards addressing the doctor shortage.  And this is another opportunity for me to reaffirm the very strong commitment that this Government has to the maintenance and the strengthening of Medicare. I'm very proud of the fact that in recent months we have introduced measures which have been designed to lift the level of bulk billing and the figures we had a few months ago indicated that that process had started. I'm also very proud of the introduction of the Medicare safety net, that Medicare safety net is a very important reassurance to people because it provides 80 per cent of the excess over the thresholds of $300 and $700 for out of pocket, out of hospital expenses and that takes an enormous load off people, particularly families who encounter unexpected illnesses with their children.  We are a government that's committed to a system where there is a place for both the public and the private component, we believe in both, we believe in a medical system that has Medicare underpinned and strengthened and we also have a strong contribution from the private sector as well and that's why we've introduced additional rewards for older people who have private health insurance because the stronger sector the greater the load is taken off the public hospital system.  The stronger Medicare, the greater the load is taken off the public hospital system.
 So I congratulate all of those associated with this project, particularly the medical practitioners and the university and it's a good example of co-operation between the Federal Government and State Government, I mean sometimes Federal and State Governments don't co-operate but on this occasion they have and that's very, very important and it's in everybody's interest that that happens.  The public is not interested in blame shifting, the public is interested in good outcomes and this will provide a very good outcome over time for people on the Central Coast. And could I say that Ken Ticehurst has been an indefatigable advocate and he approached Tony Abbott and exhorted Tony Abbott to get further involved in this and I thank both of them for their energy and for their commitment. And while I'm here I'd like to announce that the Commonwealth proposes to open a new Medicare office in Tuggerah.  We have carried out a survey of the needs of Medicare offices around Australia and it's based on the changing demographic profile of the Central Coast and the need to provide greater convenience, given the volume of customers and the offices give of course people even greater access to the Medicare facilities.  We expect that it could be opened within six months, depending on the availability of suitable premises and it will of course employ some additional staff to deliver the Medicare services.
   So my friends I wish the North Wyong GP hospital integration project well, I reaffirm the commitment of the Commonwealth of the additional funding over and above the existing commitment of some $50,000 and I especially thank Ken Ticehurst for his great energy and commitment to this project.
 Thank you.


Mr President of the Senate, my parliamentary colleagues, my fellow candidates whenever the election may be called, ladies and gentlemen. It is great to be back in Wrest Point, it's great to be back in Hobart and it's particularly pleasing to be able to address a gathering of men and women who are very much part of the small business community of Australia. The President of the Chamber of Commerce is absolutely right, he's right on the money when he says that the Liberal Party is very much about supporting small business throughout this country and this election will be very much about what is good for the future of small business.
The election campaign when it begins will be about the future of Australia, not about the past. It will be about which side of politics is better able to keep interest rates down in an uncertain international climate which is exerting upward pressure on interest rates.
 My opponent, the alternative Prime Minister of Australia claims as his great mentor Gough Whitlam, he is the Member for Werriwa as was Gough Whitlam. Now that is a very instructive association because the first Prime Minister of Australia who presided over overnight interest rates of more than 20% was Gough Whitlam.
 The era of high interest rates in Australia was first experienced during the Whitlam years and one of the instructive things about looking back over a little bit of political history in Australia is that under Labor governments without fail interest rates always go up, they went up under Whitlam, they went up under Hawke, they went up under Keating and they will go up under Latham and nothing is more inimical to the long term interests of the small business community of Australia - be they metropolitan or suburban businesses or rural businesses then the spectre of high interest rates and nothing has been more important to the sense of security and stability that so many Australians have felt over the last eight and a half years than the low interest rate environment that this Government's policies have produced.
 The President spoke of the importance of industrial relations and I suppose of all of the policy issues that I've been involved in in my political career, none I've argued more passionately about than the cause of industrial relations reform and it's perhaps been industrial relations reform as much as anything else that has helped deliver the prosperity of the last eight and a half years and by any measure the Australian economy over that period of time has performed remarkably well and I don't deny that State Government policies can have an influence to some degree on a local economic climate, but let's face it despite what state governments say, overwhelmingly it's the national government that determines the state of the economy throughout this country and the Tasmania economy is strong because the Australian economy is strong, that's the truth and the Australian economy is strong because of the policies that we have followed over the last eight and a half years and I can find quote after quote from Premier after Premier in difficult times for Australian saying, well, of course the economy is the fault of the Federal Government and that is right - the Federal Government is responsible for overwhelmingly for the state of the economy and I accept that responsibility and this is something that people should focus their minds on in the weeks ahead because you cannot take the economic prosperity of this country for granted and everything depends in the end on our economic capacity. We can have all the dreams in the world about more schools and more hospitals and more expenditure on defence and more this and more that, but if we don't run a strong economy we can't afford to do it and we've repaid $70 billion of debt left to us by Labor in 1996 and that has saved $5.5 billion in interest payments every year over the last few years and we have spent that on strengthening Medicare, we've spent that on investing more money in schools. We've spent that on more money for defence, we've invested more money in roads, we've invested more money in dare I say, call centres and a few other things that have been done in relation to particular needs of particular parts of Australia.
But overwhelmingly it's a story of a social dividend out of economic discipline. Economic discipline is pointless in its own right unless it has a human social dimension to it and the human social dimension of running the economy well is that we are able to invest in so many more things.
Now, I know from time to time that state governments say everything would be marvellous if only the Federal Government gave us more money. Well, the Federal Government funds the Tasmanian budget to the tune of about 60%. I mean, I don't know how much more in terms of Federal Government funding can be expected to be directed towards the coffers of this state and the truth of the matter is that the GST has given the states money they never dreamt of and over the years ahead and all of the GST revenue goes to the states, not a dollar of it goes to the Commonwealth Government. It may have been introduced as a result of Commonwealth Government initiative but the whole idea of the GST was to give the states access to a growth tax so that they could no longer complain that they didn't have enough money to provide for their government schools and their public hospitals and their police and their road responsibilities. Yet they still complain even though in the years ahead, the next four or five years they will be billions of dollars better off as a result of the GST - still they complain and I think it is important that that story be told.
 60% in the case of Tasmania of the budget is funded out of the GST and the Commonwealth Government specific purpose payments and I think it's important when you hear the bleatings of the local State Government here and I say that very deliberately that that fact be born in mind. This Government has been fair and generous to Tasmania and we will be fair and generous to Tasmania in the future. What delights me no end is that Tasmania is sharing in national economic prosperity but it is a direct result of the buoyancy of the national economy and without that buoyancy, without those low interest rates, without those industrial relations reforms the benefits that are now being enjoyed of an improved business climate in Tasmania simply wouldn't be there.
 Now it is a real threat - the area of industrial relations. If we lose the next election you will have Labor governments everywhere. I say coast to coast, I say in Tasmania, I say all over Australia because they will be everywhere. There'll be no anti-Labor governments anywhere in Australia until at least the next state election and then no guarantee depending on what happens. Now that represents an unrivalled opportunity, an historic opportunity in the most negative sense of that term for Labor and the trade union movement to implement their designs as fair as industrial relations are concerned and Australian Workplace Agreements will be abolished, the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act will disappear, companies entering into contractual arrangements with the Federal Government will be required to disclose the identity of their sub-contractors so that those sub-contractors can invite the friendly local union representative for afternoon tea to discuss their collective future and so the list goes on and if anybody imagines that industrial relations reform is some kind of ideological fantasy that's been irrelevant to Australia's economic development over the last few years let me give you one statistic - in the eight and a half years that we have been in government real wages in this country have risen by 14%. In the 13 years that Bob Hawke and Paul Keating were in Government real wages rose by a miserable 2.9%. In other words, the party that understands small business has done more for the workers of Australia than the party that is to represent the interests of the trade union movement. I mean, we have delivered for the workers of Australia in a way that our political opponents couldn't hope to achieve when they were in office and we've done that because we have run a very, very strong and very effective economic policy.
The last thing I want to say to you and I say this in a very partisan fashion and that is that this will be a very difficult election. There is a sense of desperation in the tactics that are now being employed by our opponents. They are going to say and claim anything in order to secure victory. They haven't told us what they stand for, they are wallowing in old debates and past differences yet the Australian people want from both sides of politics a view of vision and attitude about the future.
 This election is about the next ten years, it's not about the past three years or the past ten years - it's about which party can do the best for the people of Australia over the years ahead.
Now we have a track record. Even our opponents acknowledge that we have done a good job with the economy. When I became Prime Minister there were 35 federal electorates that had double digit unemployment or worse, now there are only four and that, perhaps more dramatically than anything else tells a story of an Australia economically recovered, an Australia economically respected, an Australia strong enough to withstand the ravages of the Asian economic downturn and the recessionary influences that followed the terrorist attack in 2001.
An Australia economy that is seen around the world now as an exemplar of what you can do and I finish on this note - that growth and that strength has been fueled by the energy and the capacity and the commitment of men and women all around our country who have responded to the new opportunities.
Governments can create opportunities but you need people willing to take the risks and invest their money to take advantage of those opportunities and you represent in the city of Hobart people that have done that and it's an experience that I want to continue with.
We need your help, we need not only your votes - we also need your resources and your advocacy and your enthusiasm because let's face it the other side of politics will pull out every stop to win. It won't be polite, it will be in deadly earnest, we do need your help, and we do need your advocacy, and I know and hope that we will receive it.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well Madam President, Rene Hidding, the leader of the Tasmanian Opposition, my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  Again it is my pleasure to address this annual meeting of the State Council of the Liberal Party in Tasmania. I start my address by expressing my gratitude to all of you for the support and loyalty that you've extended to me and to my federal parliamentary colleagues and to our national political movement over the last year.
It's been a momentous year in the history of Australia. It's been a year that has been a further reaffirmation of the strength and the durability of the Australian economy and the standing respect of our nation around the world, not least in our own region.  It has been a year in which an Australian-led Pacific Island intervention group have saved the people of the Solomon Islands from falling into chaos and bad government. It's a demonstration of the leadership role that this country is playing in our part of the world. I congratulate Rene Hidding on the excellent job that he's done in leading the Opposition here in Tasmania.  The skilful, patient way in which he has held the Labor Government of Tasmania to account in relation to the failed and shameful vice-regal appointment of recent times speak volumes for his political ability.
  Very soon the Australian people will face a choice, a choice about the future of this country, a choice about the government of this country for the next three years. This will be an election not about the past but about the future.  Let Mr Latham argue about the past, John Howard will tell the Australian people his plans for our collective future.  Our nation has over the last eight-and-a-half years acquired a strength, a self-confidence, a standing, a respect around the world that is a consequence of the government taking difficult but necessary decisions. Not only to strengthen our domestic economy, but also to pursue and support causes that are important to the long term security of our nation, our region and the world.  The next election will be a decision about who best can manage the Australian economy in the years ahead.  A Coalition Government of John Howard and Peter Costello and John Anderson, or a Labor Government of Mark Latham, Simon Crean and anybody else you care to name.  A Coalition Government that has delivered the strongest economy Australia has had since World War II.  An economy that is not strong by fluke or accident, but an economy which is strong because of determined and resolute decisions.  A strong economy characterised above all else by the lowest interest rates this country has had for more than a generation. And if there is one thing you can be certain of in political life in Australia, Labor always delivers higher interest rates.  Whitlam started it when overnight rates for the first time in our history went above 20 per cent, they went high under Keating, they went high under Hawke and they go will go up again, painfully up again, under a Latham Labor Government.  So nothing is a greater metaphor for our political success and our economic achievements over the last eight and a half years than the way in which we have saved Australian home buyers hundreds of dollars a month in interest payments.  Many in this audience will remember the painfully high housing interest rates of 17 per cent under Mr Keating and Mr Hawke.  Farmers and small business people will remember the bill rates of 20 and 21 per cent that they endured during the government of those two men.  The philosophy of a future Labor government will deliver the big spending budget deficits of past Labor governments. And inevitably in a climate of rising pressure on interest rates around the world those policies will deliver higher interest rates.  So on that issue alone there is no doubt what the choice will be. If you want lower interest rates you need a Coalition Government.  If we elect a Labor Government we are voting for higher interest rates, the track record is there, the policies have not changed, and the outcome will be precisely the same.
This election will also be a decision about who best to manage our national security and our defence.  When I became Prime Minister and I faced the reality of a budget deficit left to me by Mr Beazley and Mr Keating of $10 billion and an accumulated national debt of $96 billion, I said to my colleagues that one area and one area alone should be quarantined from expenditure cuts, and that was the area of defence.  Because I knew that defence had been neglected under Labor governments and I knew instinctively that this nation would need to invest greater sums in the defence of Australia.  And the time that has gone by since has not only vindicated that decision, but have added new challenges requiring even further investment in defence.  In March 1996 nobody foresaw the terrible events of September 2001.  Nobody foresaw what would occur in East Timor or the need for the intervention in the Solomon Islands or the need to commit additional resources to help in the stabilisation of Papua New Guinea.  Nobody foresaw the need to join in our national interests the coalition of the willing in Iraq.  All of those things have added to the importance of defence and national security.  The war against terrorism requires resolution and commitment.  The war against terrorism requires governments that don't equivocate and don't delude themselves that if in someway you are accommodating of terrorism you buy protection and immunity. Evil people do not respect weakness, they punish it even harder and that is the reality of dealing with international terrorism.  And there can be little doubt my friends that when it comes to national security and defence, Labor equivocates, the Coalition remains resolute.  Just as in the past on issues Labor has been weak and equivocal, so they will be weak and equivocal in the future. Isn't it strange that whenever we make an announcement about the further defence of Australia, as we did two days ago with the missiles, the Labor Party finds a reason to side with those who criticise the decision.  Whenever we have a difference of opinion the critics are always right and Australia is always wrong.  This proposition that in some way we offend our neighbours by legitimately arming ourselves is an absurd proposition, particularly when the armaments in question have been well and truly telegraphed in public several years earlier in the defence capability plan.  The reality is that there is an automaticity on the part of the Labor Party, they side with our critics, they never look at it first and foremost from a point of Australia's national interest.
It has been truly said ladies and gentlemen by one of my predecessors that if you change the government you change the country.  Australia changed the government of this country in 1996 and that has changed this country.  It's changed us for the better.  We now have the strongest economy by the standards of the industrialised world that you can find anywhere around the globe.  For the first time since 1968 we have the golden double of unemployment below six per cent and inflation below three per cent.  When I became Prime Minister there were 35 federal electorates in Australia that had unemployment levels of double digit or more, there are now only four.  In that period of time we've created 1.3 million new jobs.  In that period of time we've seen real wages rise by 13.8 per cent in eight and a half years. Yet in the previous 13.5 years they rose by only 2.9 per cent. Now isn't that interesting that the Coalition is the party that has delivered the greater gains to the workers of Australia.
It is the Coalition that is proving to be the better friend to the Australian worker. Just as it is the Coalition that is proving to be the better friend of Medicare than the Australian Labor Party. Who would have imagined that just a few months ago that the Labor Party with all its protestations of concern about Medicare and the health system would be the one party in Australia pledging to weaken Medicare because by promising to abolish the safety net introduced by the Coalition earlier this year the biggest single structural strengthening of Medicare we've had in 20 years Labor is actually promising to weaken Medicare and Labor is doing this because of its blind ideological views about aspects of Medicare. Labor does not believe in the safety net and by promising to abolish the safety net Labor will hurt hundreds of thousands of families in Australia to whom the safety net is a valuable welcome and increasingly important addition. As the months go by the 220,000 Australians that have already benefited from the safety net will grow, and grow, and grow.
So here you have the paradox that Labor is actually committed to weakening Medicare and just as we have proved to be the greater friend of the Australia worker over the last eight and a half years so we are proving to be the greater friend of Medicare and not just Medicare but also the health system generally.
Labor does not believe in private health provision. You look at the equivocal comments that my opponent makes about the private health insurance rebate. He can never quite bring himself to say - I guarantee it will stay in the same form. We are yet to know what the detail of his policies are. We still don't know what his tax policy, his economy policy is, his detailed health policy is, his detailed education policy. We do not know indeed what he stands for and one of the differences of him and his predecessors is that you had a reasonable idea of what he stood for.
 I didn't agree with Paul Keating of many things but I knew what he stood for. I didn't agree with Bob Hawke on a lot of things but I knew what he stood for and in end I sort of understood what Kim Beazley stood for. But I have no idea and nor do the Australian people of what Mr Latham stands for. People know what I believe in, they don't always agree with it - I understand and I accept that but that is the nature of political life and the nature of national leadership.
You are never elected to office to please everybody - it's a task impossible. You are elected to office to take difficult decisions in the long term interests of your country and you must endure in the process of taking those decisions the disapproval, the displeasure and the criticism of those who disagree with you, but in the long run your commitment and your solemn obligation is to take decisions that provide greater security, greater strength and greater reassurance to the Australia people and that has been the hallmark of the last eight and a half years and that will be the hallmark of the Government over the next three years.
There is my friends a notion that some have encouraged by our opponents, perhaps gullibly accepted by some commentators will make little difference but somehow or other the Australian economy is now going along of its own momentum, that it's on automatic pilot that it's not been driven by anybody, it's just happening and it doesn't know who is in the driver's seat, all will be the same - nothing could be further from the truth.
If we do change the Government we will change the country. We will change the country's direction, we will risk higher interest rates. We will also, because at least for a period of time, we will have Labor Governments without interruption, let or hindrance, check or balance all over Australia. For the first time I think in our history if a Labor Government is elected at the next Federal election we will have Labor governments everywhere. Now that will present to the trade union movement of Australia an unparalleled opportunity with coast to coast, island to continent Labor governments, the opportunity of turning back the clock on industrial relations. And that will be an historic tragedy for this country because industrial relations reform more than anything else has driven the productivity improvements of the last eight and a half years.
 Why is it that our real wages have gone up by 13 per cent but we haven't had an outbreak of inflation and interest rates have come down and employment has risen?  Because those real wages have been based on productivity improvements, and that is the only sure foundation to increase the wealth of Australian workers, is to (inaudible) higher productivity, pay them higher wages because they deserve a share of that higher productivity. It's a simple principle of the Australian fair go. And that's been a direct result of the industrial relations policies of the Coalition and yet Labor would turn all of that back.  At a time when only 17.5 per cent of the Australian workforce in the private sector belongs to a trade union the Labor movement would want to hand back 100 per cent control of industrial relations to a union dominated industrial relation system.  They will abolish Australian Workplace Agreements, they will breach the secondary boycott protections out of the Trade Practices Act. They will give unions greater rights of entry irrespective of the wishes of employees. They will require companies doing business with the Federal Government to disclose the identity of their sub-contractors.  They will expand again the number of items covered by the awards system so that once again the complicated, detail driven awards system dominates the negotiation of wages.  Enterprise bargaining will become a thing of the past with very costly consequences to the productivity of this country and to the operations of small business. The burgeoning small business community of Australia will once again be shackled with the over-regulation of an outdated, outmoded, unwanted, unproductive, unhelpful industrial relations system.  And all this in the name and an ideology which is gradually gathering dust in the history of Australia.  There may have been a role for a centralised wage fixation system in the past, but the modern competitive outward looking globally engaged Australian economy wants a return to that kind of system like the proverbial hole in the head.  Because we are an economy of the future, not an economy of the past. And just as this election is about the future of Australia so it is that we should have an industrial relations system which is about the future of Australia, not about our past.
So my friends, a change of government will change the country.  A change of government will not be some kind of benign adjustment at the margins, it will represent a significant change of direction.  It will risk higher interest rates, it will certainly bring a return to the industrial relations domination of the trade union movement. It will introduce uncertainty into our alliances, it will send an uncertain signal to many in our region.  And of course it will bring a return of many of the other desirable features of Labor governments.  The prosperity that our Government has delivered has been spread around the nation.  The Tasmanian economy now is stronger than it was eight and a half years ago because the Australian economy is stronger than it was eight and a half years ago.  We are all part of the whole, a national weakness pervades everywhere, a national strength spreads everywhere.  And that is precisely what has happened over the last eight and a half years.  We have of course a special challenge here in Tasmania. We need to wrest some House of Representative seats.  We need to get Michael Ferguson elected as the Member for Bass.  We need to pick up a further Senate seat, we need to try and wrest other House of Representatives seats from the Labor Party and I want to simply say to you that as in the past there will be on this occasion when the election comes, there will be a package specifically designed to address some of the particular needs of the State of Tasmania and the Tasmanian people.
But can I remind you that Tasmania has been, as a state, very well treated by the Coalition Government.  It's a fact not commonly understood, but 60.4 per cent of the total revenue available to the Government of Tasmania, 60.4 per cent of the total Tasmanian Budget comes from proceeds of the Goods and Services Tax and Commonwealth Government specific purpose payments.  No state enjoys a higher level of support and that level of support is significantly above the level of support enjoyed by other states from those sources.  And it tells a story of a tax system and of a Commonwealth Government that has been generous to the states.  It tells the story of a tax reform that was designed to enable the states of Australia to put more resources into public hospitals and public schools and the police and all the other basic services that states provide.  And it puts into very sharp relief the complaints and so forth of state premiers and not least the Premier of Tasmania who despite all of that financial support whenever something goes wrong is ready and willing to blame the Commonwealth Government. And all of these things when the time comes will be debated by the Australian public and by the people of Tasmania.  As you know in the years I've been Prime Minister and the years before that I've had a very long and close association with the states, I've been a regular visitor, I've tried to listen to your concerns, we haven't always agreed but mostly we have.  And I've understood there will always be particular challenges because of the size of the population and the remoteness and all of those issues and nobody is happier than I that in recent years because of our national economic strength, and it's flowed throughout this federation, because of that national economic strength the Tasmanian economy is enjoying more buoyant times.
 So when the time comes I ask all of you to work your hearts out for a Liberal victory.  There is a lot at stake, if we lose this election Australia will change. If we lose this election the economy will be weaker, interest rates will be higher, our defence and national security postures will be more equivocal.  If we are victorious we can take the Australian nation forward.  We can implement the plans we have for our nation's next decade, a decade that can see us build on the gains of the last eight and a half years, a decade that can see us further develop our economic relations and our strategic associations with the nations of the region.  A decade that will see the reinforcement of our important and critical alliance with the United States.  A decade that will see Australia's respect and repute around the world continue to grow.  So let us all together make sure that we shape that decade, let us make sure that the decade ahead of us is shaped by the Coalition in the way which the decade which has just passed has been shaped by the Coalition.  And in doing so continue to deliver great benefits to the people of Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]  



PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Minister, Acting CDF, ladies and gentlemen.  The Minister and I have called this news conference to announce the Government's decision that the Australian Army will be equipped with 12 new trooplift helicopters under a $1 billion project approved by the Government.  The Government has selected Australian Aerospace to supply the new MRH-90 aircraft to form an additional troop lift helicopter squadron, subject to satisfactory conclusion of negotiations.  This will bolster not only our trooplift capacity because of the state of the art technology associated with the new helicopters, but it will also release a squadron of Blackhawks and they will be shifted to Sydney to reinforce the ADF special forces under the arrangements that were announced some 18 months ago.  The new helicopters will be located at Townsville.  The first will be delivered in 2007 with all 12 aircraft expected to be delivered by 2008.
  It's been estimated that the new squadron will increase the Army's trooplift capability by more than one half.  And as I noted earlier, it will allow the relocation of a Blackhawk squadron elsewhere.  I want to invite Senator Hill to say something further about the project and then I understand, General Leahy, the Chief of the Army, will also provide some further information.
ROBERT HILL:
Thank you, Prime Minister.  I wanted to thank all of those involved within Defence in this selection process.  It has been a demanding and exhausting process, a very detailed evaluation of the capabilities on offer.  And the Government's very much appreciated the efforts of the project team and of the Services and others who contributed.  We are confident that the right choice has been made, particular emphasis upon the amphibious capabilities.  This is the state-of-the-art helicopter, a European helicopter, fly-by-wire system with a longer range, some 900 kilometre range, able to carry a larger number of troops - up to 20 in patrol order.  It has electronic folding blades, it has ditching capabilities, it has particular suitability for the amphibious role and therefore will complement the new amphibious ships that the Government is committed to purchase.  And for those of you who follow these things, you'll know that if you go back to the 2000 White Paper, the commitment was in phase two of this project to purchase an extra squadron of helicopters, particularly with an emphasis on the amphibious task.
 Australian Aerospace, we've already established a good partnership with them in relation to the production of the Tiger which is being produced, most of them are being assembled in Brisbane.  The project's going extraordinarily well and there'll be some areas of overlap between the two projects.  We're hoping the new helicopters will also be assembled in Brisbane and in the industry package that is to be negotiated, we'll look for a number of other enhanced... capability enhancements, particularly in relation to the strategic area.  For phase four of the project, which was the upgrading or replacement of the existing Black Hawk helicopters we'll continue in accordance with the original timetable, which was that the Government would make a decision on that in the 05-06 period.  We did consider the possibility of combining the two phases together but in the end were persuaded that each of these two helicopter types have particular strengths, characteristics that we require at this time.  The Army particularly sees the counter terrorism capabilities and the Black Hawk as important and yet the European helicopter was seen as ahead in the amphibious role.
  So we believe the best interests of the Defence Force and therefore the country is served at this stage by retaining the fleet of 35 Black Hawks whilst at the same time enhancing the capability of the Army by the purchase of these twelve new larger, in terms of troop carrying capability, helicopters that will really take us into the future.  It's a type that's in enormous demand, as those of you who follow these things will also know, I gather there's now about 370 firm orders from nine different countries for this new European helicopter.  Ours will be modelled on the German Army's variety, slight variances in them.  They are now being delivered, the first being delivered to the German Army and it's going through its full certification process now.
 So it very much is state-of-the art helicopter with considerable potential for further development as the years go by.  And with that, I think we'll ask General Leahy to briefly tell us how the Army will operate this helicopter.
GENERAL LEAHY:
Thank you Minister.  With that comprehensive rundown of the helicopter, I'm not sure there's much more I can say.  But I do know that perhaps we should make the Minister an honorary member of the Army Aviation corps.
  I'd like to stress that this helicopter acquisition will improve the ADF and Army's overall capability.  And I think I should stress the joint capability and the amphibious nature of the ADF.  It will enhance our troop capacity, as you've heard, and that would be both in the land but importantly in the maritime environment.  And as we plan and develop our capability to operate off our current and our planned troop lift ships the capabilities inherent in this helicopter will mean that we'll be much more developed and much more joint and a much more capable force.
 It will also enhance Army's capability as a hardened and networked Army.  We'll be able to provide government with a wide range of options for a whole range of contingencies from war fighting, peace operations, nation building and, as you've heard very clearly, in counter terrorism.
We are looking very clearly in the future and our amphibious capability and we see that the joint capabilities developed will enhance our ability to operate in the littoral environment.  You've heard some of the characteristics of the helicopter and if I could just stress again the enhancements to our overall troop with capacity will improve it by about 50 per cent.  This helicopter can carry 18 fully equipped troops, each troop will have a crashworthy seat.  It's got a very flexible equipment payload capacity because it has a rear ramp.  It will be equipped with electronic warfare self protection.  It can be then, with its singular capabilities, be very fully integrated into our combined arms team.  We see that it will operate seamlessly with the Armed Reconnaissance helicopter, the Abrams tank and with our infantry, with our armour and our artillery.  The helicopter has a digital cockpit configuration, it has moving maps and it has digital data link, again adding to its capacities as a combined arms team member.  It will improve our air mobile capacity in the 3rd  brigade and this helicopter will be located in Townsville.
  The Prime Minister's already spoken about the fact that we can now further consider the relocation of the counter terrorism squadron of Black Hawks, A squadron, to the Sydney area.  There they'll be able to fully train with and develop operational procedures with 4 RAR (Commando) and a Tactical Assault Group (East).  This will improve our capacity for the domestic act of the war against terror.
  I see that this is a very positive announcement for Army and the ADF. I'm very happy to be here and I guess we'll be able now to answer your questions.
JOURNALIST:
Geoff Barker, Australian Financial Review.  General, how will this acquisition help towards achieving the Army's ambition of, you know, rationalising its helicopter forces and having less different types of helicopters in service?
GENERAL LEAHY:
To introduce this helicopter we'll be withdrawing as part of the plan the current Iroquois.  So we'll be looking at the same numbers of fleets and, as the Minister has outlined, there's further consideration as part of phase four of Air 9000 to see where we might go and that will be quite properly done in due course.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Ian McPhedran from News Limited.  We don't see you at many of these defence contract announcements. Is it... your presence here got something to do with the election?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh, I think I've been at these before.  I don't come to all of them, but I happen to be in Canberra and I happen to participate as Chairman of the National Security Committee of Cabinet in the final decision.  So that's the reason I'm here. You can make other observations if you want to, but this is not the first it I've come to Russell in relation to announcements, it's not the first time I've been associated with acquisition announcements either. Not always.  But I keep a very keen interest in them, as the Minister knows.
JOURNALIST:
Mark Forbes from The Age.  Minister, did the Cabinet submission that went out on this recommend the MRH-90 or the Sikorsky?
ROBERT HILL:
We don't obviously detail... provide details of Cabinet submissions or Cabinet debate.  This is a decision of government and it's on the advice and with the support of the Defence Force, as you've heard from General Leahy, or if you want to hear it from others, the Acting Chief of the Defence Force can speak and so forth.
JOURNALIST:
Minister, Lincoln Wright from the Sunday Herald Sun.  Were you offended by comments last night by the President Bush's former terrorism adviser that Australia's contribution to Iraq is insignificant?
PRIME MINISTER:
Is that directed at me?
JOURNALIST:
Oh, either one.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I saw his...a large part of his interview last night. I thought he made an interesting comparison between the stances of opposing political parties to incumbent administration.  I don't want to go any further than that.  I'd rather not develop that theme that might be seen as political, here.  I'd be happy to talk about it somewhere else, not here because of the venue.  It'd be appropriate if you asked me and I'm very happy to talk outside but I'd rather not answer ultra political questions on this podium if you don't mind with the leadership of the Defence Force present - I don't think that's appropriate.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, Michelle Grattan of The Age.  You might want to move this one too, but...
PRIME MINISTER:
Sounds as though... if you're asking it Michelle, I think I'm almost certainly going to...
JOURNALIST:
It's not very hard at all.
  PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
You were around when approval was given for the Ranger uranium mine... much talk in those days of safeguards.  Could you give us a comment on the latest developments on that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well, I would have been around, yes, I think that came out of the Fox Inquiry, did it?  Is that right?
JOURNALIST:
Indeed.
PRIME MINISTER:
And well, we agree on that and I think the... it followed a very lengthy process. I think the only comment I make is that given the material that has come to light, the proper procedure has been followed and the right steps have been taken.
JOURNALIST:
General Leahy, I understand that the flyers, the aviators themselves favour the other option in this contract and were a bit concerned about the manning issue and about the manning issue generally of being (inaudible) comment on that on the shortages of air crew?
GENERAL LEAHY:
Oh, well, the first thing is - there are no shortages of air crew, we're well served by our air crew at the moment.  I wouldn't characterise that the flyers preferred one option over the other.  What I would say is that all competitors in this acquisition have been very competitive, it's been a very close run thing and we've seen from Army, from the project team, I think an enormously difficult task done very professionally and very well. We've got differing points of view.  I think the point is that we've got a good helicopter, we've got a good result and we can really do something with this capability.
JOURNALIST:
Minister, the... I think you've said that you hoped the MRH-90 would be assembled in Brisbane, have you any undertakings yet from Australian Aerospace as to assembly and what sort of employment there would be associated with the acquisition?
ROBERT HILL:
There's been a lot of work done on possible industry package.  We're looking at over $300 million worth of package.  But the detail will be part of the contract negotiation that is now to take place, because we are not just looking at a traditional offset type of arrangement.  We now search for opportunities to support our industry, investing into the global supply chain.  We think that that's the way of the future and there are a number of specialty niches in Australia and systems integration at the high-tech area, where our industry is poised to make real gains if it can get into further major contract opportunities.  So that will be part of the negotiation that we're still to have.  So there's been discussion on the various areas.  I mentioned the assembly in Brisbane because a workforce has already been trained and established there in relation to assembling the Tiger helicopter.  My advice is that they are doing extraordinarily well and it's also enabled us to get the work of assembling the smaller, commercial helicopter which has been sold into our region.  So it seems to me that having invested in that capability, it's a good idea to build it further so that we can become a real helicopter centre of excellence in this region.
QUESTION:
Minister, you mentioned it was the amphibious capabilities of this helicopter that basically won it the bid.  Clearly, now, it is likely with Air 9000 that this helicopter will replace all those in the existing fleet of the Navy.  In the long-term, are estimates of the total worth of these deals really closer to $5 billion than $1 billion?
HILL:
I don't know about that.  You've also got to... depends if you're also including whole-of-life support contracts... but it is true,the Sea Hawk I would expect to continue for a considerable period of time but the Sea King is coming up for review in the not too distant future.  So that project will obviously be looked at in the light of the decision that we've taken in this regard.  We still see value in integration wherever possible, but it's... a commonality of systems can be almost as important as commonality of types and we're getting commonality of systems here between the Tiger and this helicopter and there may be further opportunities as we go through these next acquisition projects.
QUESTION:
Minister, some analysts have critiqued that the Government relies too much on the military [inaudible] counter-terrorism response and it's only located two main areas.  What do you think about the argument of [inaudible]...people talk about police force playing a greater role?
HILL:
Well, the police forces do play a very significant role and have been significantly enhanced by this Government.  Furthermore, the coordination between the various agencies, whether it's Customs, police or military and others, State and Commonwealth, has also been significantly enhanced in the last couple of years.  But on the... there will always be a role that Defence can play that the others can't play in the same way and what we've done in that regard is double the counter-terrorist capability of the ADF.  We've built up the counter-terrorism capability in Sydney as well as on the west coast of Australia.  We've put in place the body to address issues associated with chemical, biological or radiological weapons.  We've significantly enhanced security around strategic assets.  We're spending a great deal more money on intelligence, which is the critically important start of effectively defeating terrorist threats.  So really we've upgraded across each of the areas of responsibility but also got them working much more closely together.
PRIME MINISTER:
That's the key, that you have to have a whole of governments, I mean all the governments have got to work together on counter-terrorism.  There's no way the Australian Federal Police can do their policing role without the cooperation of the State police because the State police have got a vast preponderance of numbers on the ground, but there's a clear role for each and there's a clear role for the military in certain circumstances.  And I would have thought that the coordination arrangements that we've established, particularly the group that's chaired by Andrew Metcalf, the Deputy Secretary of my Department, has worked quite effectively and the operations that we carried out a few months ago seem to bear that out.  I think the balances are right.
QUESTION:
Prime Minister, Gemma Daley from Bloomberg.  I'm just wondering if you think the election campaign makes any difference to the extent Australia is a terrorist target?
PRIME MINISTER:
Do I?  Well, I, like every other Australian, hope and pray that nothing happens. And I believe Australia is a potential terrorist target and has been for some time.  I don't want to really go beyond that because it's a difficult and sensitive issue and I don't want to be seen to be promoting a particular view.  It's too challenging an issue to be careless about.  I think the risk of a terrorist attack in Australia is obviously greater than it used to be.  I don't think it is as great as it is in other countries. But I can't rule it out. And I don't really want to express a view myself as to whether it is lessened or heightened, or it's heightened by the onset of an election campaign.  I'm not going to express a view on that, except to reassure the Australian public that every available step is being taken to protect the public and to reassure them that whilst no government can guarantee that an attack won't occur, we don't have any information which would justify a change in the alerts and we don't have any information that would justify my making any further cautionary or alarmist statements and I certainly don't intend to do so.  I mean, we all hope nothing happens.  We're working very hard to prevent it happening and I don't think it helps the country for me to say more than that.
[Ends]


Well, it's great to be back.
Can I just, while the media are here, can I just say one or two very brief things.  This is a very proud and also a very humbling moment for the Liberal Party of Australia.  It's almost 60 years to the day Menzies convened the Canberra Conference which adopted the name Liberal Party of Australia and two months later at the Albury Conference the Party was formally launched.  And there have been few victories in the 60 year history of the party which has been as meritorious as this one and everybody in this room has played a major role in it. And we are entitled to have a few moments, just a few moments, of quiet satisfaction - only a few moments and the satisfaction will be very quiet, because one thing that we have learned over the last eight and a half years is that unity and cohesion is critical to success, but also a sense that we are the servants of the Australian people.  There is no such thing as a natural party of government in this country.  No party is born to rule.  Political parties are given Australia's support on the basis of the strength of their policies, what they deliver in government, and the quality of the men and women of Australia who they bring into the National Parliament.  And we have been successful and we'll go on being successful if we continue to abide by those principles because once you start losing contact with the Australian people then you begin rightly to lose their respect and their support.
We won on the 9th of October because people believed in us, they believed in the team, they believed that we have done a good job for Australia, and they believed that we would go on doing a good job and they were not persuaded with the alternative.
  So with those thoughts about the sense of privilege and honour above everything else, can I particularly say to the new members who are joining us today, in 104 years of Federation there haven't been many people elected to the National Parliament.  To get elected to the National Parliament itself is an enormous honour and it's something that you should remember for the rest of your lives. And having been elected we hope to keep you, there are some people who have this habit of coming in and out!!  But all I can say is we like the look of all of you and we want to keep all of you here and add more to you.  But it is a great opportunity. I said at the Wentworth Hotel on the night of the election that this country stood on the brink of a new era of national achievement, I really mean that. The opportunities for this government in the next three years are truly exciting.  There's been a lot of comment about what we might do if we are fortunate enough to have a majority in our own right in the Senate.  The answer to that is very simple - we'll do what we promised the Australian people we'll do and that does mean reforming further Australia's industrial relations system. It does mean implementing other things which we have repeatedly taken to the Australian public.  But we won't be allowing that circumstance to go to our head. I can promise the Australian people and I know I speak on behalf of all of you, that we do not intend to use the mandate we have been given recklessly or arrogantly or wantonly or indiscriminately or carelessly, we're going to use it very carefully and very soberly and in a way that advances the welfare of the Australian people. That's what we're elected to, we're not elected for any self aggrandisement or gloating or personal triumphalism, we are elected to do good things for the Australian people. And if we go on doing that we may again win their favour at the next election.
But the moment you start campaigning for the next election is today, I'm a great believer in perpetual campaigning and we sit for three weeks before Christmas and we have a lot of legislation to present. But finally before I close the meeting to the media can I express my personal thanks to all of you for what you have done, can I particularly express my thanks to Peter Costello.  To all of the other members of the Leadership group and especially, and I'll say a couple of words to them in the privacy of the party meeting, to our new members. It's wonderful to see you all here, it's a great privilege, a great opportunity and a moment which we are entitled to savour, however soberly and carefully and privately and non-triumphally.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Ambassador, David Ritchie, your wife Janelle, the Deputy Head of Mission, Mr Peter Rowe, Mr Graeme Swift, the Senior Administrative officer.  I first, having acknowledged them, I would like to acknowledge the families of two of our Indonesian friends who tragically lost their lives on the 9th of September and that's the families of Mr Suryadi and Mr Sujarwo who were both killed.  And I'd also like to welcome two of the guards who've come especially out of hospital - Mr Sitampul and Mr Sudirman, and all of whom were members of the Embassy staff. And I do want on behalf of all of the Australian people to express my tremendous admiration to those of our friends amongst the Indonesian people who worked so hard and so loyally and in such a dedicated way for the Embassy here in Jakarta, to express our sorrow for those who've lost their lives and our love and sympathy to their families and our continued willingness to help in any way we can to help you through this very sad time and to extend our thanks that the injuries that many of you sustained are now healing and in most cases you will be back to good health, some unfortunately have lost the use of an eye or a limb, others still suffering very badly in hospital, and I want all of you to know that the concern of the Australian public from the Government and all the other members of the Australian public is ongoing.
Can I also take the opportunity of expressing my great admiration to David Ritchie, the Ambassador, for the remarkable courage and leadership that he displayed on that day. I spoke to him within three-quarters of an hour, or perhaps less, of the bomb going off and there was a true professional, serving his country in a very courageous and effective manner.  His concern was with the health and the safety of those for whom he had a responsibility - whether they were Embassy staff, locally engaged staff, Indonesian police, private security officers, gardeners, no matter who the person might be, the Ambassador's concern was with their welfare and the way in which he conducted himself reflected enormous credit on the professionalism, not only of David himself as an individual, but also the great professionalism of those people who work for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in the name of Australia.  And I do want to take this opportunity here on the soil of the Australian Embassy in Jakarta that has suffered this terrible attack to say on behalf of the Australian people how much we are in debt to our diplomats who serve the interests of our country overseas.  It's not an easy job, this particular incident on the 9th of September demonstrated that it can be an incredibly dangerous job, it can be a job that claims the lives of people in a wanton and indiscriminate fashion.  And to all of you who are employed in the name of Australia representing our interests overseas, can I express my thanks and my admiration, I salute your professionalism and I particularly salute the professionalism of the Ambassador of Australia in Indonesia, Mr David Ritchie.
I've come here today to attend tomorrow the inauguration of the recently elected President of Indonesia.  I'm doing it as an expression of personal goodwill towards Dr Bambang Yudhoyono and also as a mark of the great importance that I attach to the relationship between Australia and Indonesia.  We are two nations forever linked with each other by history, by geography, by a common interest, by a common commitment to fight and defeat the scourge of terrorism in our part of the world. And a desire to live in peace and harmony, to recognise that two nations with vastly different cultures and backgrounds, but shared values of peace and equality amongst men and women around the world can work together.  And the way in which the people of Indonesia have received the members of the Embassy staff on behalf of Australia, the way in which they have reached out to so many members of the Australian community who are living here in Indonesia, is an example of those very close relationships.  Tragedy and adversity is a terrible thing, but often it brings people together in a way that they mightn't expect. And so it will be with this terrible tragedy that there'll be opportunities to emphasise the things that we have in common, the future that we share.
So I therefore again thank our friends from Indonesia, I particularly thank and salute the families of  those who've lost so much, for their courage, for their friendship, for their loyalty, to their employment by Australia. I hope that everything that we can do to make your life a little easier will be done, that is our desire, and to those who continue to work for us we thank you for your courage and your commitment and your loyalty to us in every way that we can we will help you as you continue to help us.  And to all of my fellow Australians who are working here in Jakarta thank you again for the different things that you are doing in our name for our country, it is truly appreciated and greatly admired.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Ambassador, David Ritchie, your wife Janelle, the Deputy Head of Mission, Mr Peter Rowe, Mr Graeme Swift, the Senior Administrative officer.  I first, having acknowledged them, I would like to acknowledge the families of two of our Indonesian friends who tragically lost their lives on the 9th of September and that's the families of Mr Suryadi and Mr Sujarwo who were both killed.  And I'd also like to welcome two of the guards who've come especially out of hospital - Mr Sitampul and Mr Sudirman, and all of whom were members of the Embassy staff. And I do want on behalf of all of the Australian people to express my tremendous admiration to those of our friends amongst the Indonesian people who worked so hard and so loyally and in such a dedicated way for the Embassy here in Jakarta, to express our sorrow for those who've lost their lives and our love and sympathy to their families and our continued willingness to help in any way we can to help you through this very sad time and to extend our thanks that the injuries that many of you sustained are now healing and in most cases you will be back to good health, some unfortunately have lost the use of an eye or a limb, others still suffering very badly in hospital, and I want all of you to know that the concern of the Australian public from the Government and all the other members of the Australian public is ongoing.
Can I also take the opportunity of expressing my great admiration to David Ritchie, the Ambassador, for the remarkable courage and leadership that he displayed on that day. I spoke to him within three-quarters of an hour, or perhaps less, of the bomb going off and there was a true professional, serving his country in a very courageous and effective manner.  His concern was with the health and the safety of those for whom he had a responsibility - whether they were Embassy staff, locally engaged staff, Indonesian police, private security officers, gardeners, no matter who the person might be, the Ambassador's concern was with their welfare and the way in which he conducted himself reflected enormous credit on the professionalism, not only of David himself as an individual, but also the great professionalism of those people who work for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in the name of Australia.  And I do want to take this opportunity here on the soil of the Australian Embassy in Jakarta that has suffered this terrible attack to say on behalf of the Australian people how much we are in debt to our diplomats who serve the interests of our country overseas.  It's not an easy job, this particular incident on the 9th of September demonstrated that it can be an incredibly dangerous job, it can be a job that claims the lives of people in a wanton and indiscriminate fashion.  And to all of you who are employed in the name of Australia representing our interests overseas, can I express my thanks and my admiration, I salute your professionalism and I particularly salute the professionalism of the Ambassador of Australia in Indonesia, Mr David Ritchie.
I've come here today to attend tomorrow the inauguration of the recently elected President of Indonesia.  I'm doing it as an expression of personal goodwill towards Dr Bambang Yudhoyono and also as a mark of the great importance that I attach to the relationship between Australia and Indonesia.  We are two nations forever linked with each other by history, by geography, by a common interest, by a common commitment to fight and defeat the scourge of terrorism in our part of the world. And a desire to live in peace and harmony, to recognise that two nations with vastly different cultures and backgrounds, but shared values of peace and equality amongst men and women around the world can work together.  And the way in which the people of Indonesia have received the members of the Embassy staff on behalf of Australia, the way in which they have reached out to so many members of the Australian community who are living here in Indonesia, is an example of those very close relationships.  Tragedy and adversity is a terrible thing, but often it brings people together in a way that they mightn't expect. And so it will be with this terrible tragedy that there'll be opportunities to emphasise the things that we have in common, the future that we share.
So I therefore again thank our friends from Indonesia, I particularly thank and salute the families of  those who've lost so much, for their courage, for their friendship, for their loyalty, to their employment by Australia. I hope that everything that we can do to make your life a little easier will be done, that is our desire, and to those who continue to work for us we thank you for your courage and your commitment and your loyalty to us in every way that we can we will help you as you continue to help us.  And to all of my fellow Australians who are working here in Jakarta thank you again for the different things that you are doing in our name for our country, it is truly appreciated and greatly admired.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much. Councillor Montgomery, Jim Lloyd my ministerial colleague, ladies and gentlemen. It's a great pleasure to again have the opportunity of addressing the delegates to this conference and to formally close the conference, and in the process address a few thoughts to you not only about the significance of local government around Australia, but the shape of the future so far as the roles of government at different levels in this country are concerned.
 When I had the very welcome opportunity of speaking on election night about the result, I made the observation that I believe that Australia stood on the brink of a new era of very great achievement. And that was no idle piece of election night rhetoric, it was a statement of a very passionately held belief of mine that by reason of a set of circumstances this country does stand on the brink of a new era of tremendous achievement. And to realize that opportunity requires the marshalling of cooperation, not only between the governments collectively speaking and the people of this country, but also cooperation between the different levels of government.
The economy of this country is strong. The spirit of the Australian people is robust and positive, and the respect for this country around the world is impressive. Those three things do give us as a nation extraordinary opportunities. We are a nation that has the linkages; very profound linkages with our own region, very strong linkages with Europe, and very strong linkages, of course, with the most powerful economy and nation that  history has seen - the United States.
 Here in Australia our very strong economic conditions must not only be nurtured and further sustained and progressed by a maintenance of the momentum of economic change and reform. Economic reform is always a work in progress. It can never be said that the process of economic reform has been completed, and it will be one of the goals of the Government in its fourth term, which will be, in a formal parliamentary sense, inaugurated next week when the new parliament sits for the first time and the Government's plans will be outlined in the Governor General's speech, it will be the intention of the Government to maintain the momentum of economic change and economic reform. Not in a way that threatens the orderly development of the community, but in a way that says to the Australian people and to the rest of the world that we do not intend as a government or as a people to rest in any way on our economic laurels or our economic achievements. But also couched in a way that recognises that, despite the impressive national economic achievements, there are people, there are regions, there are groups within our society that are not experiencing all of the success and all of the bounty that the nation as a whole is experiencing, and it is always the task of government in a fair and compassionate way to do what it can to ensure that the benefits of economic growth and economic strength, the opportunities of it, are made available to as many people and as many groups as possible.
It's now eight and a half years since I had the immense privilege of becoming the Prime Minister of this country, and over that period of time of course one develops impressions about the attitudes of our people towards government, towards policy, and towards the different layers of government in this community. I think it's fair to say that over the period of eight and a half years I have been struck by the increasing nationalism of the Australian people. Australians increasingly demand national outcomes or outcomes that are important to the nation as a whole. They are increasingly conscious of the identity of the Australian nation, they are increasingly conscious of the need to dissolve barriers to the full realisation of our national identity. Simple things such as a common starting age for school children around Australia; barriers that impose disabilities on people who move from one part if the country to another. All of those things collectively suggest to me a growing sense of demanding of governments, whether it's the federal government, the state government, or local government, a state of affairs where if you move from one part of the country to another - and increasingly Australians do that - then, of course, you shouldn't be subject to any kind of penalty or any kind of disability.
I also believe, and this will be welcome to all of you, that there is a growing sense of local identity. I think side-by-side with this sense of national feeling and national identification and demanding national solutions, people are increasingly looking to the importance and the vitality of their local communities. Now I think those two sentiments of nationalism and localism are the dominant sentiments of the Australian people in the early part of the twenty-first century. That naturally suggests that the role of local government, so far from being a diminishing role, is a role of growing relevance and growing interest and growing importance to the Australian people.
 I don't seek thereby to impose a particular model about the shapes and the sizes of local government units, they will determined by local communities and state governments as they always have in the past. But at a general level I make the point that I don't find declining interest in local outcomes or the role and the behaviour of local government units, in fact I find an increased interest on the part of the community, including the young in our community, regarding their local amenities and regarding decisions that are made by local governments.
 There is of course a long history by reason of the legal and constitutional development of our country, a long history of the relationship between local government and state governments. And I know that you have debated issues relating to constitutional recognition, but it remains the case that for the foreseeable future the dominant legal control and legal influence on local government in this country will of course be exercised by state governments.  And the principle debates that you will need to have with other levels of government in Australia regarding your powers and responsibilities will remain debates with state governments.
But it is true as your president said that over the recent past there has been a growing relationship between the Federal Government and local government.  My philosophy and the philosophy of the Government is very much that we're not going to be hidebound by a particular model or a particular framework of relationship between another level of government, but rather as we demonstrated in the attitude we took to our programme of providing funding for local roads that if the better outcome, the more efficient outcome, the more economic outcome was to deal directly with local government and to bypass state governments we would be willing to do so.  That's not done out of any spite to state governments, rather done out of a recognition that often the greater efficiency is achieved by dealing directly with local government.  And many of you will be aware that not only has that been the experience in relation to local roads but it's also been the experience in relation to the Federal Government programmes concerning the Natural Heritage Trust and Federal Government programmes regarding the enormous problem of salinity.
And so let me say to you will it be approach of the Government in relation to the funding of some $2 billion that we're committing to the establishment of the National Water Trust, which is designed at a national level to deal in an appropriate way depending on the challenge in different areas of Australia with the great conservation challenge of our age as I see it and the Federal Government sees it and that is the issue of the availability of water.  Clearly, because of their control of so many involvement and so many of the water authorities around Australia, states have a critical and important role, but not an exclusive role to play in relation to projects affecting the supply and the availability of water. And I take this opportunity of making the observation that as we seek expressions of interest in concerning water projects and as we set about establishing the National Water Commission, which will be I hope a body jointly contributed to by the Federal Government and the state governments, but it's our intention, as I indicated in my letters to the Premiers of two weeks ago, that we intend to proceed quickly with the establishment of that body and we're in the process of nominating the Commonwealth representatives.  But as we seek expressions of interest those expressions of interest will not be restricted to expressions of interest from state governments so far as projects are concerned, but will also involve expressions of interest from local government and from individual industries and individual consortium and local groups.  And depending indeed on the size and the shape of projects, and I think particularly of that segment of our programme which is designed to encourage the wise use of water resources by local communities, I can see a very significant and very heavy involvement by local government.
I mention the water issue because it is the great conservation challenge of our age.  And I wouldn't want it to be thought that the Federal Government sees its partnership with government in relation to issues concerning water as simply as relationship between the federal government and state governments.  This is an area, particularly with some of the larger local government units, an area where I believe there is a very significant role to be played by local government.
Can I say that generally speaking we are very conscious as your president pointed out of the extraordinary diversity of the local government units that come together to compromise this conference.  And the differences between the small local government units of many of the city municipalities and the extraordinary challenges of rural shires which have been brought about by the tremendous social and economic change in country Australia and the enormous challenges of all of the droughts and other climate challenges that country Australia has experienced over recent years I know has imposed not only enormous pressures on the rate revenues but has also meant a growing social and community role thrust upon local government around Australia.  And this is a very good opportunity for those concerns to be brought to the attention of the Federal Government and particularly to the attention of Jim Lloyd who a few months ago, and I unhesitatingly reappointed him to the position after the election, has assumed responsibility for local government matters, as well as of course responsibility for road funding within the Federal Government.
  The decision of the Government to renew the Roads to Recovery programme was a recognition of a number of factors.  It was a recognition of the need for continued renewal of local roads, it was a recognition of the fact that particularly in country areas the impact of economic change, particularly the drought, had played havoc with many of the revenue streams of local councils. And also a recognition that by dealing directly with local government we could provide ongoing, efficient economic support for part of the basic infrastructure of this country.
  You will of course be aware that in the same vain the Deputy Prime Minister announced some months ago the commitment over a period of years of something in the order of $11.5 billion for the Auslink programme which is designed to bring about in a more integrated national fashion the provision of federal government support for not only road construction but also other support for different modes of transport within our community.  There were additions announced to that $11.5 billion programme during the course of the federal election campaign and those commitments of course will be fully honoured over the timeframe that was laid down when the announcements were made.  And all of those things together contribute to a very heavy investment by the Federal Government in the transport infrastructure, and not only roads but also the transport infrastructure more generally of our community.
One of the greatest challenges that faces the different levels of government in this country is of course the issue of cost shifting. I have to say to you that the community has no patience with cost shifting or buck passing between different levels of government. One of the phenomena of modern politics of course is that when prime ministers regularly use, as I do because I regard it as a very important method of communication, talkback radio.  I am constantly reminded that Australians are not the least bit interested so much in whose responsibility it is to solve a problem, rather they are interested in getting a problem solved.  And one of the greatest turn offs in a way to an aggrieved constituent or an aggrieved residents, wherever he or she may live, is to be told by the Prime Minister, by a Premier, or indeed may I say by a local mayor, well I wish I could do something about that but it's really the responsibility of somebody else, it's the responsibility of the state government or the federal government or it's the responsibility of the state government or the local government.  Now whatever our views may be and whatever our politics may be I think we should collectively recognise that we all have a responsibility to make the system that we have work better.  We may wish it were a different system, we might dream that if we were starting this country all over again, which we're not, we might design a different system of government. But we really have a responsibility to make the present system of government work as efficiently as possible and one of the ways in which we do that is to recognise that nothing is more destructive of the efficient working of the present system of government than for any level to engage in cost shifting, to recognise that if you do have a division of responsibilities and particular levels of government are given resources they have a responsibility to use those resources wisely to discharge their responsibilities.  Over the past few weeks we've had a great deal of debate, in general, about the different responsibilities of the Federal Government and the state governments. And that debate undoubtedly will go on for I guess many years into the future. But my reading of my mail from the Australian people and my interpretation of the mood of the Australian people is one of the growing impatience with buck passing and a growing desire to simple achieve a satisfactory outcome and a growing impatience with interminable of debates as to who is responsible for what and irrespective of what level of government delivers the outcome it's the outcome that matters and it's the right outcome that's important to all Australian citizens.
So my friends can I again say how much I have enjoyed coming to these conferences now over a number of years, to share a few thoughts with me not only about the health of the country but also about the relationships that exist between the Federal Government and local government. It's a clich‚ of course but it's nonetheless a true description to say that local government is that level of government which is closest to the Australian people.  I think the growing links between the Federal Government and local government are important, they are to be encouraged, the limitations of them are to be recognised, we're not going to have some kind of dramatic constitutional change overnight and the relationship on a legal and charter basis between local government and state government is going to remain.  But there are growing opportunities for direct co-operation between the Federal Government and local government, we have utilised those in the past and I've outlined to all of you today some areas where I believe they can be utilised in the future.
I want to pay tribute to the contribution that your president, Councillor Montgomery, has made to the workings of the Council of Australian Governments, a body that brings together on a periodic basis the Federal Government, the representatives of the state and territory governments and also through your president local government.  He's put the interests of local government in a very coherent and very effective fashion.  I thank you for coming to Canberra, I hope your conference has been effective and productive and I wish all of you well for the year ahead.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
  The world of the first Armistice Day in 1918 would be unrecognisable to us on this Armistice Day 2004.  Not only was a large part of the world reeling from the horrific slaughter of World War I, but those negative ideologies, those evil ideologies, Soviet Communism and Nazism, were yet to overwhelm large parts of the world and bring in their wake terrible suppression and great loss of life in World War II.  The world was yet to understand that in those precent words of Marshal Foch that the peace treaty of 1919 was not a peace treaty but rather an armistice for 20 years.
The world of 2004 in every respect is very different from the world of that first Armistice Day.  But what has not changed are the qualities of sacrifice and patriotism and independence of spirit that through that period of time has characterised the behaviour of more than 100,000 Australians who in different theatres of war have given their lives for the defence and the liberty of our nation.  And as we on Armistice Day 2004 and particularly the young of Australia who are seeing in the sacrifice of their fathers and grandfathers and great-grandfathers a wonderful Australian saga as we reflect upon those constant qualities.  We reflect also upon one of the great realities of life and that is the simple oft repeated expressions are always the most powerful and always the ones that carry the greatest meaning.  We say expressions of love on a daily basis to those nearest and dearest to us.  And in the simple expression "I love you" we say something profound about the relationships that are most important to us in our lives.
 And so as a nation on Remembrance Day 2004 we say very simply something that is very profound, we say to the more than 100,000 Australians who gave their lives for us and for the causes in which we have believed, we owe you a debt that can never be repaid.  You gave your lives so that we might live ours and live in an Australia that we want and an Australia moulded to our image and in an Australia that we all love.
[ends]  


Thank you very much John, Madam President Chris McDiven, Keith Queen, the President of the Blacktown Workers' Club, my parliamentary colleagues both Federal and State and my fellow Liberal and fellow Australians. This State Council meeting comes in the wake of one of the most remarkable election victories that the party has secured in the 60 years of its existence. It is an occasion as John said in which every member of the party around Australia is entitled to feel a very great sense of pride. Pride is something separate from hubris or triumphalism, pride is when you can look back with quite satisfaction on having achieved a result as a consequence of commitment and hard work over a long period of time. And there is no greater metaphor for the result on the 9th of October 2004 than the victory that Louise Markus secured here in Greenway.
 I've said in the past few days that one of the greatest errors that my opponent made over the last year, was to reintroduce into Australian politics the notion of class. This is a proudly egalitarian nation, it is nation that rewards people according to their character, their hard work and the commitment they make to their community and to their country, not according to their social background, their religion, their race or any pretensions they might have to an inherited place in society. And that has been if I might say my friends, one of the cornerstones of the success of the Liberal Party over recent years. We have set out to do what we are, and that is perform as a party that represents all sections of the Australian community. I can honestly say that in the 8 and half years that I have been Prime Minister, I have never felt beholden to a section of the Australian people, I have only felt an obligation to do my best for all of the Australian people. We are proudly a party that believes in private enterprise, we are a party that believes in the capitalist system, we believe that people have a right to make a profit out of their hard work and to enjoy the benefits of that, provided they pay their fair share of taxes. We are a party that seeks membership and support from every section of the Australian community, we will always seek to promote good business conditions but we will never see ourselves as a party that is owned by the business community of Australia or indeed any section of the business community of Australia, and that is how the overwhelming majority of Australians want it to be. Australians have a great sense of achievement, they are proud of what their country has done and they are proud that they live in a country that gives them the opportunity if they work hard to get ahead, and to provide for their families a bounty and a level and a standard of living that they themselves might not have had when they came into the world. And that's been the Australian story for generations, it's an Australian story that the Liberal Party must always understand, and it's an Australian story that the Liberal Party will forget in the future at its peril, because the great thing about this country is that if you do work hard, if you do make an effort you can achieve some reward for that and you can get ahead. And it doesn't matter where you were born, it doesn't matter who your father was or what he did, what matters is the contribution that you make to your society. And it doesn't matter what your name is, or where your ancestors may have come from, they may have been born here or may have been born in Italy or Indo-China or in the Middle East, it matters not. What matters is the contribution that you are willing to make to this country, and that is a philosophy that the Liberal Party has I believe, responded to and articulated more successfully over the past years than our political opponents have been able to do, but it is something we must continue to work at. We must understand that there is no natural party of government in this country and the public will throw us out when they believe that we have lost touch with their needs and their aspirations. We must not take for granted that because we have increased our margin in the last two elections, that the next election is in the bag. True it is that the Labor Party needs a significant swing but let me remind you, if Labor achieves in 2007 the swing it achieved in 1998 it would just get across the line and tip us out of office. So from the very beginning and that really is now, we must work and build towards the next election. The greatest responsibility for that of course lies upon the shoulders of the Government and the members of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, in coalition with out friends in the National Party.   On the 1st of July next year, as John said, we will have control of the Senate in our own right for the first time in 24 years. A Government of the day will have control of the Senate in its own right, although it's fair to say, because of the predisposition of the Democrats and others to support the Labor Party on most of their policies and for the Coalition, then in Opposition to support them when they proposed sensible economic reforms, the reality is, that Labor in office enjoyed de-facto control of the Senate, something that's been denied to us over the last 8 and half years. And that gives us both an opportunity and a responsibility, it gives us an opportunity to implement the changes that we have wanted to implement over the last 8 and a half years. And I make it very clear to the Australian people that we will honour the promises we have made in areas like industrial relations when we get control of the Senate on the 1st of July.
 There will be no retreating or shrinking or falling back, we have a mandate, it couldn't have been plainer that we wanted to make it even better for small business by reforming the absurd unfair dismissal laws that are putting a flaw as it were on the level of unemployment below which it can't go unless there is further significant change. And all the other industrial relations changes and indeed measures that we've proposed in the past to exert a greater level of discipline in government spending, they'll all also be back on the agenda. And so indeed will be proposals which are consistent with the philosophy that we have articulated and outlined over past years. But we do not see our control of the Senate on the 1st of July as some authorisation to embark upon a crazy radical program that is against the interests of the mainstream of the Australian community. But equally we do not intend to waste the opportunity that has fortuitously and unexpectedly come our way, to do that would be to let down the millions of people who voted for us and more importantly it would be to let down the future of this country, because we live in an age where you cannot stand still. This country is strong and prosperous and successful, it is respected around the world and the reason that it's strong and prosperous and successful and respected around the world is that we have achieved the right balance between reform and tradition, between preserving what is good about the history and the culture and the beliefs and the values of this country, but also recognising that in a globalised world which is changed beyond all recognition from what it was when the Liberal Party was formed 60 years ago. Unless we are prepared in the areas that require change and reform to do so, then we're going to fall behind. I think around the world and I look at those economies that have adjusted, those countries that have embraced globalisation, they are the countries whose living standards have lifted, they are the countries that are beginning to win the fight against poverty and disease. They are countries that are taking advantage of the almost limitless opportunities that a globalised, economic environment offers. And the art of good government in the 21st century, at a domestic level is to preserve a balance between preserving the great worth of a nation's past, of not getting rid of something simply because it's been there for a long time, but equally to recognise that where change is needed that change must be embraced, as we recognised with our taxation system four years ago, as we recognised just after the Government was elected to office that in order to deliver a safer society, through the terrible catalyst of the Port Arthur tragedy, that we should do what other nations have failed to do and that is embrace on a national level uniform and more stringent gun laws, to recognise that a country has that has a proliferating gun culture is a country which is a dangerous country and it's not a country that we want to build for the future of our children and our grandchildren.
We had a great victory on the 9th of October and nowhere more so than here in the State of New South Wales.  The number of Liberals in the State of New South Wales is a record in the history of the party. Our capacity since 1996 to penetrate and hold areas of this State, and none is more representative of what I'm saying than the western suburbs of Sydney, to penetrate and to hold areas of this state previously regarded as Labor Party heartland has helped to underwrite the success of the Government since 1996 and from those great moments in 1996 on election night when it became apparent that not only were we winning back marginal seats in regional Australia but we were going to capture the seat of Lindsay from Labor for the first time and so while we held those seats in 1998 and in 2001, Pat Farmer pushed the boundaries even further when he won the newly redistributed seat of Macarthur and of course in 2004 to see Louise win the seat of Greenway.  It represents an historic transformation in political allegiance. But it's important we understand why it happened, it happened because we identified with the needs and the aspirations of the people of this part of Australia.  As I said when I launched the Liberal Party's campaign for western Sydney a few weeks before the election, I said that the Coalition had done more for the workers of western Sydney than the Labor Party could ever dream of.  I reminded them we'd given them lower unemployment, lower interest rates, higher wages and lower taxation.  And while ever we continued to deliver on that program and while ever we continue to be a Government that is seen to represent Australia's interests overseas and nobody else's, then we'll continue to attract the support of people not only here in Western Sydney but also all around our great country.
I've spoken frequently since the election of the importance of a proper sense of humility and responsibility about the task that lies ahead of us.  We are elected for one thing and one thing alone, and that is to do good things for all of the Australian people.  We are not elected to live out some personal sense of aggrandisement and self-satisfaction.  We are not elected to tell the Australian people what to do or what they ought to believe.  We are elected to respond to their wishes and their hopes and where appropriate through passionate advocacy and leadership to put the case for necessary change and reform.  And it's been my experience after 30 years in politics that the Australian people will always embrace reform, even a major reform, if they can be satisfied of two things - if they can be satisfied that the reform is in the best interests of their country, and if they can be satisfied that the reform is fundamentally fair to all significant sections of our society.  And they are the two things that you judge a reform by, it's no good saying to the Australian people the time has come to turn things upside down because something we've been doing for the last 30 or 40 years is getting a bit old and boring and let's have something in its place.  If you want radical change in this country you have to tell the Australian people how it will make Australia better and you've got to reassure the Australian people that it's going to be fair to them and to different sections of the community.  And if you do that our experience has been that you can be successful.  That was the case with taxation reform, it's the case with other economic reforms that we've undertaken and that will be the test that we will apply to reform in the future.  Because the reform task is never done, you really have but two choices, you either continue reforming where necessary and pushing forward, or alternatively you start to go backwards.  I know it's tempting, people say gee things are going well, the economy's good, unemployment's at a 27-year low - 5.2 per cent last Thursday, could go even lower if the Senate got out of the way early next year.  Very tempting to say well let's just sort of sit back, don't do anything John, it's terrific at the moment, don't spoil a good story.  The only problem is the story starts to go off if you don't keep pushing forward.  And that is why come the 1st of July we'll be pushing sensibly and soberly, but nonetheless purposefully, in order to bring about change and reform.
And of course over the next three years we have the opportunity abroad to further consolidate the way in which we have rebuilt and rebalanced our foreign relations.  I heard a lot during the election campaign from the Labor Party about a thing called triangulation.  I can never quite work out what it was about, it sounded a very convoluted phrase but apparently it had something to do with avoiding all the major issues like the economy and national security and talking about something else.  Well can I say of that theory of politics, two things - it avoids the main responsibilities of government and it clearly doesn't work.  And I saw the major proponent of that policy, a man called Dick Morris, not to be confused with Grahame Morris, who many of you know, and Dick Morris, who's an American, said that really there's nothing modern governments could do about the economy, certainly not Australian governments, and that really there wasn't much point talking about the economy.  And that was before the election, I don't think he's going to be invited back to Australia in the near future.
But over the last eight and a half years we've done a little bit of triangulation of our own in relation to our foreign policy, we've rebalanced, we've recognised that the most immediate and important area for Australia is of course the Asia-Pacific region. But we've always recognised that this country has great historical and political ties with the nations of Europe and with the United States and North America.  And you never have to choose in your foreign policy between history and geography, it's a question of seeing Australia as maximising opportunities all around the world.  And no country has attracted more attention from me and from my Government in trade and political terms over the last eight and a half years than, for example, China.  And the way in which we have simultaneously taken our relations with the United States to a new plane and a new high, but at the same time have developed a very close economic partnership with China is an illustration of the capacity of this country to diversify and to reach out to different parts of the world.
 So we do commence this new term with a great sense not only of humility and a great sense of responsibility, but also a great sense of hope and a great sense of optimism.  We presented in the campaign an essentially optimistic view of the Australian people.  We took the view that the balance sheet of achievement of this country is an enormously positive one.  Yes, we have made great mistakes as all nations have done, but overwhelmingly we have become, and have been for so long, a nation of achievement, a nation of tolerance, a nation of welcome, a nation comprised of people from the four corners of the world, and a nation that has every reason to be proud of its history and the contribution it has made to the great fights for freedom and liberty that have overtaken the world at such terrible cost over the last 100 years.  So we approach the next three years with a tremendous sense of optimism and hope.
  And I can perhaps finish on a more personal note, personal in saying something about the quality of the people that the Liberal Party has sent to the Federal Parliament.  All around Australia, particularly here from New South Wales.  I do want to again thank Louise for the tremendous campaign that she ran here in the seat of Greenway, it was a great campaign and it was a campaign that brought a great morale boost and was a further vindication of the determination of this party to appeal to all sections of the Australian community. I welcome her, I welcome Malcolm Turnbull as the new Member for Wentworth, I want to place on record my thanks to John Tierney.  John as you know will be a Senator, John will still be a Senator until the 30th of June and in the nature of the party's processes he was unsuccessful in pre-selection and he'll be replaced by an equally meritorious person in Connie Ferravanti-Wells.  And I welcome her.  The point I'd simply seek to make is that despite any personal disappointment he himself may have felt there was no more energetic, tireless, indefatigable campaigner for us on the 9th of October than John and I thank him very warmly for that.  I naturally regret the defeat of Ross Cameron in Parramatta and I thank him for his contribution to the Party.  And going outside the Liberal Party, but still within the Coalition in New South Wales, I do want to record my sadness at the defeat of Larry Anthony in Richmond who has been a wonderful colleague, a very good Minister and was very much the victim of demographic change through no fault of his own that seat has been lost. But to all the other colleagues from New South Wales who fought such wonderful campaigns, who increased their majorities, I mean I'm looking at some of these majorities and I'm thinking well I might get them to come and do a fundraiser for me.  Peter Costello and I are looking at all of these majorities and are saying well, look I think we'll come and get them to do a fundraiser, so watch out Louise, yeah, get Bob Baldwin to come and do a fundraiser.  But you know, this is the real secret of our success, it's the quality of people and as I sat and listened to the maiden speeches of the new Members from all around Australia, it was just remarkable the diversity that they bring to the Parliament, they bring the experience that Louise does, that Malcolm does, that Andrew Robb, who many of you know so well who's now the Member for Goldstein in Victoria, you think of the experience that David Fawcett brings, I think he's the first test pilot that's ever gone in to Federal Parliament, Kim Richardson, the new Member for Kingston in South Australia brings a wealth of experience as a former police officer, as a football coach and a community leader.  And we have a research scientist from Western Australia, a Defence research scientist, these are the diversity that the Parliament has produced.  And for the first time in years we now have some members in the House of Representatives from the State of Tasmania.
  I finally want to express, as I have in the past, my great admiration, for the performance of the New South Wales Division of which I've been a member for more than 40 years. The New South Wales Division over the last few years under the leadership of Chris McDiven and Scott Morrison. I haven't seen a better campaign from the New South Wales Division in the time that I've been a member of the Party in federal elections.  And when you think of where the New South Wales Division's Liberal representation was after the 1993 election, I think we'd been reduced to what eight seats, Liberal seats in New South Wales which is an appalling number when you consider the size of the state and the opportunities and since then starting of course with that tremendous surge in 1996 and let's face it, if it hadn't of been for the way in which our vote held up in 1998 we may have gone perilously close, held up here in New South Wales, we may have gone perilously close to losing power on that occasion.  So I think this Division has been superbly run over the last few years, the resources, the organisational application, the support for the Federal Secretariat, the quality of the candidates, the willingness to deal with difficult issues, and there were one or two of those in one or two areas, one in particular, over the past few months, I think the way in which all of that was done and then to deliver that magnificent Senate vote and to deliver such high quality candidates I'm very, very grateful and I want to record my thanks to you Chris as the President, I think you've been a wonderful President of this Division, a really first class organisational leader.  Scott Morrison is leaving us to take up a position with the newly formed national tourist body.  Scott, you go with our gratitude, our good wishes, our thanks for a splendid job.  As the parliamentary beneficiary on two occasions of your organisational skills I cannot speak too highly of your abilities.  Being a state director, as Brian Loughnane said at the Federal Executive yesterday, is a pretty thankless job because if everything works well it's the Prime Minister or the parliamentary leader or whatever who's been responsible for all of that, and if everything goes wrong well of course you know if only headquarters had run it better thinks might have been better.  But Scott, I've never really had any occasion to test that theory with you because you've always been very successful.  But I think you've been a wonderful professional for the party and we owe a great deal for your organisational skills, I know we won't lose contact with you and we wish you well.
The last person I want to mention is the person who introduced me.  We have won a great federal victory here in New South Wales and all over the nation, and that is terrific.  And our focus of course will always be on important national issues.  But a great challenge lies ahead in New South Wales.  The Government in this state has lost fundamental credibility, the Government of this State is seen as failing in its responsibilities in the important areas of health and education and public transport.  The Government of this State needs fundamental change and the only change that can be effective is a political change and I want to say on behalf of my Federal parliamentary colleagues that we will do everything we can to bring about a change of government here in New South Wales at the next State election.  And to that end John we'll do everything we can to support you and your team in the mammoth task that lies ahead.  We need a huge swing, but huge swings sometimes do occur.  And certainly the ground is fertile, the opportunity is there, the anger is rising, and we all need to get behind John and his colleagues to bring about a change in New South Wales. So let us having won a great Federal victory, having won a great Federal victory let us all do what we can to replicate it here in New South Wales at the next State election.
Thank you very much and Merry Christmas, can I say that again, Merry Christmas, not seasons greetings, Merry Christmas.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mal, Colin Barnett, the Leader of the Liberal Party in Western Australia, Sue Knowles, Mike Keenan, fellow Liberals and particularly the Liberal Party candidates for the northern suburbs of Perth in the forthcoming state election.
Can I start because this is the first public gathering that I have addressed in Western Australia since the 9th of October.  Can I start by thanking the people of Western Australia for the wonderful level of support they gave to the Liberal Party on the 9th of October.  It was greater than I thought we might get, it was wonderful, it delivered us two additional seats. It emphatically gave us more than three quotas in our own right in the Senate and it was part of a wonderful nationwide result.
  But having said that and having expressed my gratitude to the people of Western Australia I'm really here today to ask the people of Western Australia to give that same measure of support to Colin Barnett and his team whenever the state election is called in Western Australia because it's pretty lonely, even when you've won four times, to have a Premiers Conference and you look around and you look at them all and they're all Labor. I mean it's very lonely. I mean I've been to a lot of Premiers Conference, I even remember one or two where the odd Liberal Premier would disagree with us too, but that's understandable, it's part of a vigorous federation.  But we really do have a very important challenge in front of us here in Western Australia and my presence here today is to ask you to support Colin, to support these four wonderful candidates in areas that are so crucial to our chances of victory and also to recognise that it is in this state's interests to have a change of government.
  Now it's pretty hard to get a change of government after only one term but it's been done before here in Western Australia, it was in fact done I think by Charlie Court when they tipped out the Tonkin Government after only one term in the early 1970s.  And the reason why I would put the case for a change is like that every other part of Australia, Western Australia is benefiting from the national economic strength of Australia and I warn you now that all of the strength of the Western Australian economy over the next few weeks will be attributed by the Premier of Western Australia to his excellent economic management, rather than to the national economic management.
  You see Labor Premiers tend to do this, if it goes bad of course it's all our fault, but if it goes good it's all due to their special selective economic policies.  The truth is that most parts of Australia are performing very well at the present time but that is due to the very strong economic fundamentals that have been put in place by the Government and maintained federally for the last eight and a half years.
  But Western Australia could be doing better.  It could be doing better as far as investment, it could be doing better as far as industrial relations policy is concerned. And I said on radio this morning in Perth that as I move around Australia, businessmen do say to me that the climate for investment in this state would be better if the state government didn't have such a union dominated industrial relations policy. Now this state, more than any other state in Australia, needs the flexibility that has come with the industrial relations policy of the Federal Government and the industrial relations policy of the previous Liberal National Party Government here in Western Australia.  And it's in that area in particular that I would make the case for the change very, very strongly because you need a complementarity between the federal law and the state law when it comes to industrial relations.  Now we have benefited enormously as a nation from the flexibility of our industrial relations policy over the last eight and a half years and Western Australia at a state level has benefited as well.  But over the last three to four years there has been a regression and I know from my experience of visiting the North West and the mining areas of Western Australia just how important the maintenance of individual contracts was to the productivity of the mining industry and how much they were apprehensive about a change of federal government before the 9th of October and equally how much they will welcome a change of government and a restoration of the greater flexibility at a state level that used to be the case here in Western Australia.
So my friends, I don't know precisely when the election is going to be, I don't suppose anybody does, but the natural political calendar tells me it's starting to get pretty close and you always seem to have state elections here in Western Australia in February, I mean you choose the hottest month on the calendar to have it, but I mean that's all part of the joy I suppose of campaigning.  Don't lose any of your enthusiasm, I haven't.  And I'm very happy to be here to support Colin, who I respect enormously, to advocate the cause of change, to ask the people of Western Australia to begin the process of restoring a bit of balance to the state governments of Australia.
 It's not healthy to have them all one side of politics, it's not enough to say well you've got a federal Coalition Government.  There are a lot of things the Federal Government can do but there are so many things that affect your daily lives that are exclusively the responsibility of state governments, the curriculum in the schools that your children attend, the public hospitals, the police services, three things that are absolutely vital to the quality of life that you have as you live here in Western Australia.  And it's the same all over the country, there is nothing second rate or unimportant about the quality of state governments, it's not enough to have a good federal government, you've got to have a very good state government because there are so many things that are affected by those daily decisions that are taken by state governments.  Now it's not easy, it's not easy to win after a party has been in power for only one term, there's a great tendency for people to say 'Oh give them a fair go', and there's nothing that has a greater resonance in Australia than saying 'Oh give the bloke a fair go'.
  But when you've taken a state away from a sensible industrial order, when you have clearly given to particularly the building unions of this state a status above the law which is not enjoyed by those unions in other parts of the country you have a reason to say well you've had a fair go and you haven't treated us fairly and it's time that we gave somebody else a go.
So my friends, the enthusiasm that you so clearly displayed for the Coalition Government federally, the wonderful surge of support that put Michael Keenan in, that wonderful new Member for Stirling and it's great to see him here today.  And made Stuart Henry the new Member for the seat of Hasluck, and of course gave Don Randall what we now regard as a safe seat, I mean Peter Costello and I want Don Randall to come and do fundraisers for us now in our electorate, he's done so well.  That enthusiasm, I want you to bottle up, keep nourished over the Christmas period and then let it loose again when the state election battle is resumed after the Christmas break because it's going to be tough, it is very important and it will be decided in areas such as this, it will be decided by the fate of these three men for example in front of me. If they can win, Colin can win, if they can't win it gets very, very difficult indeed. So my friends, I'm here today... how are you Colin, good to see you.  If these four blokes can win, I mean just wouldn't it be terrific?  If the four of them could win then it really does make the prospect of regaining the treasury benches in Perth a reality.
So my friends, thank you again for your support on the 9th of October, for your energy, your enthusiasm, your commitment to the Liberal Party cause.  Keep it going, give it to Colin, give it these four fellas and if you do so you can go to Easter with the double, you can then relax, for a while, I don't know any elections in mind next year, I can't assure you I've had enough for quite enough thank you and they come around all too often at a national level, after only three years.  You can all have a break at Easter but between now and then you've got to work very hard to get Colin over the line and to get these four fellas elected as your new state members.
Thank you very much.
 [ends]   


Thank you very much Colin for those very kind and generous words of welcome. Danielle Blaine, the President of the Western Australian division of the Liberal Party, Sir Charles and Richard Court, former Premiers of Western Australia, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues - and I think all of them will forgive me for particularly singling out two who were elected on the 9th of October, Michael Keenan and Stuart Henry, who of course epitomised our success. I do remember very vividly the lunch I addressed at this very establishment deep into the election campaign that culminated in our win on the 9th of October.
 I have to confess that I was surprised at the size of our victory. I thought we would win, but I didn't think we would win as well as we did, and frankly I didn't dream that we would get control of the Senate. And I do want to thank Liberals in Western Australia for the magnificent effort that was mounted in the lead-up to the election. Whenever I came to Western Australia I felt that the wind was behind us. I felt that we had a capacity to win seats from the Labor Party in this State and so it turned out to be the case that we won the seats of Stirling and Hasluck, and Don Randall turned Canning into a safe seat. Peter Costello and I are now going to get Don to come to our electorates to fundraisers for us instead of the other way around he's done so well. And can I record my tremendous gratitude to Danielle Blaine and Paul Everingham for the great job that they have done on the organisational side of things for the party in Western Australia. I haven't seen the party as well organised in this State for close to a decade as it has been under their leadership. And for what they delivered to the Federal parliamentary party and the Federal Coalition I record my very warm thanks.
I'm here today to say a few things about our agenda for our fourth term, but I'm also here to express my strong support for Colin Barnett and for the Coalition team in the forthcoming elections in Western Australia. It's rare of course that you tip a government out after it's been office for only one term, but it has happened before. It's happened before here in Western Australia, and the man who was responsible for doing it is with us today - Sir Charles Court. So there's a great inspirational, home grown example. And why do I believe that there ought to be a change of government in Western Australia? Well, first and foremost, I'm a Liberal and I always like to see Liberals in opposition go into government. But it's deeper than that, perhaps superficial, expression of party loyalty. I do believe that Western Australia could be doing even better than it's doing now as part of the enormous surge nationally in the Australian economy. The Western Australian economy is performing very strongly, but that is overwhelmingly because the national economy is doing well. Low inflation, stable fiscal policy, low interest rates, economic reform, particularly taxation reform - all of those things flow through to every part of the nation. And I predict now that over the weeks ahead the Premier of Western Australia will claim every single economic achievement of this State for his own.
 Well let me state here and now a counterclaim. Let me say that Western Australia along with Queensland and Tasmania and all other states of Australia have been the beneficiaries of the strong national economic leadership of the last eight and a half years. There's no area, of course, more important when looking at the performance of the current Western Australian Government than in the area of industrial relations. As many of you know, industrial relations reform has been one of my great policy missions for the last twenty years. I think the last time I addressed a gathering like this in the lead up to the Federal election I talked about the thing that I would grieve about most if we were to lose, and that is the prospect of a federal Labor government, operating in concert with eight state and territory Labor governments, rolling back the industrial relations reforms of the last eight and a half years. Well thankfully we didn't lose. We not only won but we now have in prospect, after the 1st of July next year, control of the Senate and the opportunity to implement many more industrial relations reforms and I'll come to that in the moment. But of all the things that the State Government here in Western Australia has done since it was elected in 2001, none has been more damaging than the way in which it has rolled the industrial relations reforms of the previous Court Government - the way in which it has allowed the union movement in this state to dominate the industrial scene, particularly in the building industry in a way that it duplicated, I think, only on occasions in Victoria. And there is no doubt in the exchanges I have with men and women in business all around the country that they see disincentives about investing in Western Australia, that they don't find in other parts of the nation.
 So there is a lot at stake, and state governments play a crucial role in shaping the daily lives of all people. True it is the national government determines the foreign policy, the national economic policy and the overall mood and climate of the nation, but those daily things, the quality of state education, the quality of public hospitals, the performance of the law and order agencies of the state - all of those things that affect your daily lives very directly, they are the responsibility of state governments and their quality is of very, very important concern. So my friends, I ask you to support Colin Barnett in the same generous way that you supported me. I ask you to get behind a very strong and determined party organisation. I mean all party organisations go through their difficulties, but there is a sense of direction, and a unity of purpose that I found in the lead-up to the Federal election here in Western Australia that was very warming and I know it will be available and will be directed towards bringing about a change of government here in Western Australia.
We are, or course, in the fortunate opportunity nationally of being at the beginning of a fourth term. A fourth term that sees a Labor Party demoralised by an unexpectedly large defeat, and therefore a Coalition invigorated with all the potential that an unexpectedly large victory has given us. But I sound the warning, as I do at every Liberal Party gathering around the nation, that this is not an opportunity for complacency or any kind of triumphalism. The tide of politics in Australia can change very rapidly. We live in a detribalised political environment. People's allegiances are no longer as fixed, and all those hundreds of thousands of people of traditional Labor backgrounds, that voted for us in 2001 and again in 2004, can just as easily return to the party of their father and mothers as they can to stay with us, and it's essential that we go on earning their support and earning their respect. And we have a number of goals ahead of us, and the first two are obvious  but nonetheless quite fundamental and the first is to maintain the strength and direction of our economic management.  The Australian economy is still very strong.  It is still growing and will continue to grow at historically high levels.  We have the lowest unemployment rate in something like 28 years, it's getting close to five per cent and it could have a four in front of it if only if I expect we will after the 1st of July get our unfair dismissal laws through the Senate and give a bit of breathing space to small business and give them the incentive and the opportunity to employ more people.
We face a number of challenges in managing our economy, there's always the haunting prospect in this country of drought and many areas of our countryside are still gripped by drought.  And we have some challenges on the export front because of the slump in the American dollar and the correspondingly high level of the Australian dollar.  But the fundamentals of our economy remain very strong, inflation is low, our budget is in an historically strong position and competition reform and other reforms have meant that our international competitiveness is better than it has been for many years.
The second and most obvious goal that we have to strive towards of course is to maintain our national security.  We live in an environment of international terrorism and we're going to have to confront that for many years into the future.  And it will mean our strong alliances with the United States must be maintained and further deepened.  But it also means that we have to build, continue to build rather, partnerships with our friends in the Asian Pacific region.  And I've had the opportunity in the two short months that have gone by since the election to renew many of my contacts with the leaders in the Asian area, the opportunity to get to know even better the newly elected President of Indonesia, the leader of the largest Islamic country in the world, a man who received 61 per cent of the popular vote in the first popular directly elected presidential election in that country, a man who brings very great promise of leadership and strength to his country.  And also the opportunity to talk in detail with both the President and the Premier of China about our growing relationship and Colin was right, that the relationship between Australia and China, particularly with the exports coming out of Western Australia, is quite fundamental to this nation's economic future.  And of all the things that we have achieved on the economic front on our region, none gives a greater lie to the charge that this Government could not deal with the leaders of Asia if it were elected and that was a charge made against us by our political opponents eight and a half years ago, none gives a greater lie to that proposition than to the extent to which we have deepened our relationship with China whilst at the same time taking our relationship with the United States to a level which is closer and more intimate than it has been I think at any time in the history of this country. And those two things together say to the world that this is a nation that has associations and linkages and therefore a future with different parts of the world, we are not a nation that should be totally preoccupied with the American alliance, we're not a nation that should be totally preoccupied with our historical roots in Europe, particularly with Britain and Ireland and we're not a nation that should be totally preoccupied with Asia. But we are a nation of the whole world, so to speak, and we have linkages and associations and therefore a future with all the parts of the world and not just one.
So those are the twin pillars of our future.  Our fundamental economic strength and also the strength that we must find in enduring alliances and associations to deliver national security to this country in an age of terrorism.  But on the domestic front there are a number of issues that will be very prominent during our fourth term.  We will have further industrial relations reform. We will present to the Parliament all of the legislation that has been blocked over recent years to further reform our industrial relations system.  And we also propose, consistent with the philosophy that we have articulated in that area, to propose other reforms that will deliver a better, freer and more open system.  We don't intend to embrace extremism in the area of industrial relations. People have a right in this country to join or not to join a trade union.  Providing the playing field is completely level and provided people are not coerced by the nature of their employment into joining a union organisation.  And Australian standards of fairness require that there always be some concept of a minimum wage in this country and the idea that we should go down a radical path of getting rid of that altogether is not something that I would embrace. But further industrial relations reform is needed and it will be delivered and if it is not delivered before the 30th of June it will delivered when we get the majority in the Senate after the 1st of July.  And it remains a commitment of the Government so far as further taxation reform is concerned that having provided for necessary expenditure in areas like defence and health and education and providing for a strong budget surplus, if there is room left we will embrace further taxation reform, particularly in the area of the levels of personal taxation.  We will not go back into deficit, we do not believe in embracing deficit spending, we believe that the economic and psychological value of keeping a budget strongly in surplus is one of the reasons why the economic reputation of this country around the world is so very strong.
  There are two particular other domestic challenges that we will need to deal with and deal with very comprehensively in our fourth term.  One of course relates to the challenge of the shortage of water in this very dry continent of ours.  We announced during the election that we would establish a national water trust, initially funded by an amount of $2 billion and out of that in collaboration with state governments, sometimes on our own, sometimes in collaboration with local government and private enterprise, we would fund individual projects designed to challenge the water shortages of this country.  Water conservation is the great environmental challenge of our age. It is more important than any other environmental or conservation challenge that this country has, or that this country is likely to face.  The solutions to it I suspect over the next 10 or 20 years might end up surprising many people who regard themselves as experts on the subject at the present time.  But it's an issue that grips every part of the country, I find people talking about it wherever I go - whether it's Sydney or Melbourne or Adelaide or Perth it's the same.  And the sort of things that we grew up with and took for granted that we could do because of the plentiful availability of water are no longer the case and it's brought home to people in the cities as often as people in the bush just how challenging the issue is.
And the final issue of domestic concern that we will need to address of course is the ageing of our population and most particularly the need to increase workforce participation.  We are an ageing population, not ageing perhaps as rapidly as the nations of Europe, our fertility rate is at about 1.75 per cent against an average in many European countries of about 1.2 to 1.3.  But it still lags behind the United States which is a little over two.  We are a population that needs to increase our workforce participation, it means we need to encourage people to remain in the workforce longer.  And we need to encourage the retention of older, mature workers, we need to understand that the participation rate of the age cohort between 55 and 64 in this country is significantly lower than is the case in many comparable societies.  We also need to recognise that some aspects of our social security system perhaps don't provide enough encouragement and incentives for people to move off welfare and back into work.  We have no desire to and we do not intend to force people who are genuinely unable to work to join the workforce.  We are a compassionate government and a compassionate society and one of the great things that this country has done in my view is to strike a good balance between too harsh an approach to social welfare and the paternalistic overgenerous approach of many European governments and we're going to continue to strike that balance, but consistent with that there is an opportunity for us I think to move people off welfare and back into the workforce and to do it in a compassionate and effective way. And all of these things are designed to increase participation because unless we can respond to the ageing process in our population, unless we come to terms with the fact that as the years go by, unless we change, there are going to be fewer and fewer people in the workforce generating the taxation revenue to support the growing number of people who are not in the workforce and that represents a very big challenge to a community such as ours and a very big challenge to our desire to see not only ourselves but our children and our grandchildren enjoy the standard of living and the opportunities that we currently enjoy here in Australia.
It is a wonderfully challenging and exciting time to have the privilege again of being Prime Minister of this country of ours.  It's an honour and one that should be embraced and understood for what it is and that is an opportunity to serve the Australian people for another term, to respond to their hopes and to their aspirations but always understanding that governments are there at the disposal of the Australian community.  Australians do not like triumphalism, they do like arrogance, they don't like it in their leaders, they don't like it in their sportsmen and women and they don't like it in their friends.  We are a nation and we are a society that treats people and accords respect to people on the basis of their character and on the basis of their contribution to our society.  It's been one of the great uniting features of our nation, it's been one of the things that distinguishes us from other societies around the world.
So can I say to all of you my friends again thank you for the support you gave me, the support you gave my colleagues.  There are many people in this room I know who gave very generously and very liberally to help us.  And we won't forget that, I'm very grateful for the quality of the people that you've sent from Western Australia to the Federal Parliament. We've got a great new crop if I can put it that way, they're a great cross section of men and women from different parts of Australia and that once again is a Liberal strength.  But as I said at the beginning in a detribalised political environment people can swing back and forth very sharply and we'll retain their support for so long as we do the job and for so long as we keep in touch.  And very finally, now that we have won national government, now that we've won the Federal election, I do encourage you to support the Liberal Party and the National Party here in Western Australia, it's quite lonely at Premiers' conferences, I mean it's not that I have anything personally against any of them but it's quite lonely.  And I'd like to have some Liberal colleagues and the first one who has any opportunity of winning is Colin and I do hope all of you will support him and support him very generously.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much John, Ambassador, Attorney General, Peter McGauran, John Brogden the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, can I thank you for those very generous remarks, my other parliamentary colleagues and particularly two very good friends of mine, Benjamin Chow and Hudson Chen, both of whom are wonderful Australians and great ornaments to the Chinese Australian Community.
Hudson ,it was very gracious of you to offer to put on this lunch. I'm very honoured that such an impressive gathering of your community should've come here today. I'd like to particularly acknowledge the presence of the Ambassador and the Consul-General. The People's Republic has sent a succession of fine representatives to Canberra but may I say none more impressive then the current Ambassador, Madam you do your country very great service and you come to Australia at a time when the relationship between Australia and China is growing in a remarkable fashion.
 We are countries that have different backgrounds, we're of a different population size, we have different political systems but we have a lot of things in-common. There are great people to people links, as I've said to successive Chinese Presidents the largest or the most widely spoken language in Australia other than English of course is a dialect of Chinese and that the various Mandarin and Cantonese and the other dialects have in recent years passed other languages to be the most widely spoken apart from English. Sydney boasts of course the largest Chinese community in Australia. My own electorate of Bennelong has an ethic Chinese enrolment of between 13 and 15 percent, which is very high by standards. But the most important thing is the way in which the relationship is growing across the board, it's a very strong business relationship. Over the past few years our exports to China have close to doubled. We are now negotiating whether we can sign a free trade agreement, whether that happens or not will not alter the fact that we have a close economic relationship. We have common interests in ensuring that peace and stability and tranquillity prevails across the Taiwan Straights and it remains of course the policy of my Government to follow a one China policy, which has been the policy of my Government for a number of years and we welcome the peaceful and calm resolution of all of those issues.
We seek friendship with the Chinese people but very particularly I want to take the opportunity today of expressing my admiration to the Chinese Australian Community for the contribution it has made to our nation over a very long period of time. You've brought to Australia the values of which John Brogden spoke. First and foremost your strong sense of family unity, your hard work, your thirst after education, your business acumen, your willingness whist preserving your own cultural identify to become part of the broader Australian community.
We are all of us Australian's before anything else but we respect as an Australian community the right of people to preserve their own particular cultural practices and identity and I can't think of a community in Australia that has more successfully combined loyalty to the goals of Australia, with the preservation of their own cultural identity. Everybody has a special place in their heart for the country in which they were born and that is certainly true of Chinese Australians as it is true of Australians of other ethnicities. This is a very cohesive country, we draw people from all around the world, we seem to do it more successfully then most because we respect people's differences but we also work together for the common benefit of our country, and I therefore say to all of you thank you for the contribution that you have made. I heard what John Brogden said about taxes. It won't surprise you if I say that this isn't the first lunch I've addressed where people have supported the idea of no tax and I think that you'll also understand that it is not a peculiarly Chinese Australian characteristic. I have in fact found people of non-Chinese background who actually don't like paying tax either. But we have to meet you half way, we do our best but the country is in good shape, our economy is strong, we have very low unemployment, we have very low interest rates but the most important thing we have is we have great self confidence as a community. We believe in ourselves, we all of us think that the Australian way of doing things is about the best way of doing things in the world and the Australian way of doing things is an amalgam of the contributions that different communities have made to the building of the modern Australia.
 Hudson ,you and many of your friends were very generous to me during the recent election campaign and I want to thank you for that. I want to say how much I welcome the participation of all communities in the political processes of Australia. Naturally I like them to participate on my side of politics but I respect people's right in a democracy to choose and to support the political party of their choice. The most important thing, the most important thing is that you participate and that you play a part to make this country an even more wonderful country in which to live. We are approaching Christmas, it's an occasion whatever your religious background may be, mine is Christian and it's a very important time of the year and it is a season in which all Australians come together to see their familles, to reflect upon the spiritual dimensions of our country and also to give thanks in whatever way we choose for the fact that we live in such a wonderful country. And I certainly want to say Merry Christmas to all of you, I know Chinese people have a special way of celebrating the New Year and your lucky, you see you have two New Years. You have ours and yours, it's pretty clever the way you do it, it's a bit like some of the Greeks I know, they have a couple of Easters. But to all of you, thank you very much for coming, and thank you for your wonderful support but most importantly of all, thank you for what you have done to build the modern Australia. The face of Sydney in particular would not be what it is without the contribution of the Chinese community, the vibrancy of Sydney would be less than what it is without the contribution of the Chinese community, the commerce and industry of the city would be less and I place great hope in the further development of the relationship between Australian and China. It teaches not only Australians but others something and that is that two countries with very different political systems, very different histories, very different cultures can build a strong future together if they focus on the things that they have in common rather then the things that they don't have in common. We have a lot to offer the People's Republic and the People's Republic has a lot to offer us. So I'm looking forward to going to China again next year, to go to the Baoa Economic Forum and then to go to Beijing to see President Hu Jintao who I saw recently in Santiago at the APEC meeting and also the Premier Wen Jiabao who I saw in Vientiane in Laos.
  So the relationship continues to build and what is interesting about the relationship between Australia and China is that we have built that relationship despite the fact that we have remained a very close ally and friend of the United States, because what in reality it means is that everybody wants a world in which nations cooperate. I want to see a close relationship between Australia and the United States. Not only is it in the interests of Australia but it's also in the interests of those two great nations. The future of the world lies very much in co-operation and the future of the world will be shaped in part by what China does because of her sheer size and the remarkable economic growth which is now taking place in that country. But you are here today as Australians of Chinese descent. Like all other Australians you share the bounty of this country, you contribute to it, you are entitled to its protection and you are of course like all of us obligated to promote its best interests. And the Chinese Australian community has always done that and I'm honoured to be your guest today, to you Hudson again my warm personal thanks, to Mr and Mrs Wong our wonderful hosts you are inaudible). Thank you all of you and I won't emulate John Brogden, I couldn't do it any better, can I just simply say thank you for what you have done for our country, our country, a Merry Christmas and very happy New Year to all of you.
 Thank you so much.
[ends]


Good afternoon ladies and gentleman, thank you for coming. This afternoon I just wanted to report on a briefing I had this morning from the Emergency Task Group and also to announce some additional items of assistance in response to this appalling human tragedy. I have no additional news in relation to Australian causalities beyond what was reported in the mid-morning news bulletins. I would again warn people to prepare themselves for the casualties being higher than those already indicated.  The reality is that there are still a large number of Australians unaccounted for and whilst some of the evidence is that the likely death toll will not reach the proportions of other countries that had large numbers of tourists particularly in Thailand, there is the real possibility that the death toll be higher.
 I should report that we currently have 5 Hercules and one Boeing 707 deployed in the affected areas in Indonesia and one of those Hercules aircraft has been made available by the Royal New Zealand Air Force and we thank New Zealand for that contribution. I can announce that an Antonov aircraft will arrive in Indonesia on Monday with 3 Iriquois helicopters.  There is a desperate need for uplift capacity and helicopters are badly needed.
 There are already a number of medical teams that are operating in the affected areas; there are two on the way to the Maldives and Sri Lanka, one will get off at the Maldives, the other will go on to Sri Lanka to be imbedded with the World Health organisation infectious diseases team. There are two civilian medical teams on route to the affected areas near Aceh and there was a medical assessment team that went in with the original flight to Phuket (or to Thailand) which is carrying out an assessment of the situation there.
I'd like to announce that we will offer a light field hospital which has about 90 beds to the Indonesian Government for use in the affected area and I'm also able to announce that HMAS Kanimbla will sail from Sydney tomorrow. It will take helicopters and engineers to assist in the reconstruction effort and it will of course go via Darwin and will then go on to Indonesia and its many faceted capacities mean that it will be available for any number of tasks and that will be a deployment of course which is likely to last for a period of time. We are examining options to dispatch additional resources as needed, particularly refrigeration devices to store bodies.  The grim reality of victim identification is again faced and the first requirement is in fact to arrest the process of decomposition of bodies because until that is done its very difficult for the task of identification to commence.
I want to repeat something that I said on radio this morning and that is that there is a major public health risk in people remaining in the affected areas unless it is absolutely essential to do so. And I would ask all Australians who have no particular reason to remain in Phuket, or indeed in any of the other affected areas to come home as soon as possible because the longer they remain, the greater is the public health risk and there is also the further consideration that the longer they remain, the more likely it is that some kind of checking process will be needed in relation to any carrying of diseases that might be involved when they return to Australia, and the longer they remain in the affected areas the more likely that kind of activity will be necessary. And I would also, not withstanding the fact that many people will think that they can visit the areas that have not been affected by this disaster, I would counsel Australians who are contemplating going to immediately adjoining areas, consider postponing those plans  because not only of the risk of disease but that risk of disease is not only present in the areas directly affected, but can also be in the areas that are not directly affected but immediately adjacent. The Chief Commonwealth Medical Officer will be issuing a formal statement regarding these issues later today, that is these issues relating to public health risks.
 Mr Hockey's announced arrangements in relation to assistance to families and the carrying of certain expenses by the Commonwealth Government - they're very similar although not identical to the arrangements that were put in place in relation to the Bali tragedy.
 Australia has already contributed, as you know, $35 million dollars in aid assistance.  We will be adding to that in an appropriate fashion and further announcements will be made about that. I want to conclude these brief remarks by thanking everybody who's worked so very hard from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Defence forces and Centrelink and our consular staff. Their effort I think has been I think quite magnificent, I believe that Australia has responded promptly and decently and effectively to this appalling human tragedy.
 We will need to do a lot more in the months ahead and I use the word months advisedly because there will be second wave effects of this tragedy particularly the challenges of public health which are overwhelming for many of the countries and many of the communities involved. Whilst we'll be rendering assistance wherever we can and wherever asked there will naturally, because of the proximity of the country, and also the scale of the loss of life and the public health challenge we'll be having a particular focus on helping the government and the people of Indonesia, where the loss of life has been quite appalling - as it has been in a number of other countries.
 I can only repeat that the thoughts and the prayers and the feelings of concern and an endeavour to share the sense of tragedy is felt very keenly through the government. This is a human tragedy of mammoth proportions - the  like of which I don't think any of us have seen in peace time before.  We as a nation, a human decent nation must do everything we can to help the very unfortunate people of our neighbouring countries.
  JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister a lot of the people who are I guess are staying in the region searching for loved ones....
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes I understand that, my concern is not directed to them, I can understand that. When I say I would like people to come home - unless they have a reason and obviously a reason is to search for a loved one. I fully understand that, but it would appear that there are people who may not be doing that, and who are staying, and it would just... hoping they'll come home.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister are you able to give any information or any assurances to the survivors who've lost people, Australians in these places, about the return or the repatriation of bodies to Australia. Will the Government help? There's been a bit of criticism that people have come home with assurances that the bodies will be brought back very quickly....
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there wouldn't have been any assurances given by Australian authorities. We have sadly been through this process before and it's going to be very difficult. You can't obtain the repatriation of the remains of a person from another country without the approval of that country. It is not within our power to decide when the body of an Australian who died overseas is returned to Australia.  That is in the hands of the local authorities and there are established international protocols and I know this is very stressful - it's very difficult and I can understand the agony of people, but unfortunately we are in the hands of the local authorities and the best thing we can do, which is what we are doing, and that is to supplement the victim identification resources of countries such as Thailand.  This is something that the  Thai Prime Minister mentioned to me when I spoke to him a few nights ago that they needed help, and we have sent several teams - combined Commonwealth and State police teams - but until the process of stabilising the decomposition of bodies is attended to, it becomes very, very difficult to identify and unfortunately the international protocols are such that visual identification is often not sufficient to obtain the release of a body.
JOURNALIST:
 Prime Minister given there are so many people who are still unaccounted for, so many Australians still unaccounted for in the region, is there is any estimate of what the Australian death toll may end up being?
PRIME MINISTER:
No I'm not going to engage in an estimate, no I am not. I'm simply saying that the community should prepare itself for there being a larger number than the 10 confirmed dead.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister your saying that the, you're talking about the disease (in audible) is presumably going to get worse as time goes on.  Is it also going to be a problem with food contamination, food born disease?
PRIME MINISTER:
Yes well that's one of the reasons why the disease spreads. There are three problems. There's impurity of water, there's contamination of food and there's poor sanitation. They are. I mean I'm a non-medical man, but my understanding is that they are the three principle causes of the carriage of diseases such as typhoid and cholera and other related diseases and measles I understand is a potential problem in some of these countries.
JOURNALIST:
Could you elaborate a bit more if you can on this coalition between the US, Australia, India and Japan and how that plans......
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the purpose of that is to ensure that there is coordination of the relief effort and there are a lot of people, a lot of countries and there are a lot of agencies who are all with the best of intentions wanting to help and it's simply a group of countries (and the identity of them in a sense is understandable) of the United States, Australia and India and Japan who will just coordinate, exchange information, pool their assessments of what is needed.  And obviously our contact with the Indonesian Government is more extensive perhaps than the contact the United States Government has with Indonesia. In turn Japan's contact with other countries might be more extensive than ours and the whole idea of course is to bring this together.   We're not trying do anything other than to ensure that there's not a duplication of effort because when something like this happens there is no standing international apparatus for dealing with it, and there's no substitute for dealing with it on a country by country basis because the needs of individual countries are going to vary. Some countries are more welcoming of outside help than others and we just need a way of ensuring that we coordinate the effort as effectively as possible.
JOURNALIST:
  (in audible) volunteers now we've almost got too many, what do you say to Australians who want to volunteer, feel they have skills to offer?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well we have a hotline, we have a registration system established for that and we want to utilise the volunteers. I'm in no position to make a judgement about individual skills. I have to rely on expert advice. I do again ask Australians who want to help to think first and foremost of making a cash contribution because that's something that can be sent to a country to buy locally things that are needed. Much better to make a cash contribution than to send goods or toys or particularly anything that perishes in time because there is a cost involved with transporting it and it perishes.  It's much better for people to make cash contributions, but volunteers are certainly requested. One of the advantages of establishing a field hospital is that it is a hub around which medical volunteers of course can operate and be involved.
JOURNALIST:
(in audible) Adam Dunning the peacekeeper killed in the Solomons, any particular tribute that Australia will make to him?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there's a full military police funeral at 1.30pm this afternoon.
JOURNALIST:
Between the field hospital and the Kanimbla, the Hercules, what numbers of military personnel might we soon have?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you're looking now at several hundred I think, I haven't done a count. I'll have a count done Greg but it's certainly a very significant number and as always the ADF has responded quite magnificently.
 JOURNALIST:
(inaudible) in relation to the tsunami early warning system?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think it is something that will need to be addressed. I think our first responsibility at the moment is to try and help in the wake of the disaster but Mr Downer had something to say about this the other day and I agree with what he said.
JOURNALIST:
Getting back to your earlier comments on the disease risks in South East Asia, I take it that there's also some significant risks to Australia of people coming back if they stay too long ..
PRIME MINISTER:
   I just understand on the basis of what the Commonwealth Health Officer said this morning - that there was an issue here, but he'll be saying something about it. Don't rely on anything too specific in relation to public health issues coming from me or indeed from any other person who's not qualified.  It's my understanding that the Commonwealth Health Officer will have something to say about this but it stands to reason that if you are in an area where there's been a breakdown of the availability of clean water, edible food, proper sanitation that the risk of you contracting the disease will grow the longer you stay and I obviously understand people who are searching for loved ones, that's why I said at the very beginning, unless you have a need to be there you should consider coming home.
JOURNALIST:
 (in audible) of evacuating people in mass numbers out of some of these countries and possibility...
PRIME MINISTER:
 No we have not received any approaches There could of course be consideration and there may well be and perhaps should be consideration given by the Governments of those countries to internal evacuation but that is a matter for the countries concerned. I mean we have to keep reminding ourselves that we are dealing with other countries and it's up to the Government of Indonesia to decide how this thing is handled and the Government of India and the Government of Sri Lanka and we have to respect the fact that they are in a better position then we are to decide what should be done. Our role should be a generous, available friend, a generous, available, ready, willing and able friend in a very difficult situation.
JOURNALSIT:
....Aceh. That is an area that was extremely tense over the last year or so. Was it difficult to get access?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well one of the complications of Aceh (in audible) because it's been an area of military conflict the penetration, if I can put it that way, of a non-government organisation and therefore the knowledge of the situation on the ground is a lot less and that is one of the complicating factors.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think this tragedy will bring Australia and Indonesia closer?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well Australia and Indonesia are already close and this is a terrible tragedy and our collective heart goes out to the people of Indonesia and we will do everything we can to help Indonesia through this tragic event.
JOURNALIST:
Have you spoken to President Bush and would you anticipate that like Australia, America might add some military assets to the operation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look, I don't have any need to speak to President Bush. He obviously takes decisions in relation to the American contribution.  My focus is on making sure that Australia's assistance is generous, it's appropriate and it's speedy and it's practical and I believe to date it has been. I think Australia's response is something in which the nation can be proud but we have to do more. We have the resources to do more, we have the assets and most importantly of all, we have a moral obligation to help these people that have been so tragically affected by this event.
Thank you.
[ends]


 Thank you very much Mr President.  I can confidently say that no natural disaster in my lifetime has moved and touched the people of my country as much as the disaster which has brought all of us together.  And this in brief intervention I know that I speak on behalf of the 20 million Australians in conveying to you in particular and to all of the other leaders who come from affected countries the condolences of my fellow country men and women.
The personal response of Australians to appeals in relation to this disaster has far exceeded their response to any previous domestic or international event.  Australia's response has been at three levels.  Because of our geographic proximity and our recent experience in disaster response we were able to get people on the ground very speedily, and I'm very proud that Australians were amongst the very first in relief efforts into Aceh and into other parts of the affected region.  And by the middle of January we will have something in the order of 1,000 personnel, military, humanitarian and otherwise assisting the affected countries.  We've already deployed six civilian medical teams to Sri Lanka, the Maldives and Indonesia.  And we're working very closely with the Royal Thai police on the difficult job of disaster victim identification, and I want to record my particular gratitude to the personnel of Commonwealth and State police from Australia and other disaster victim identification personnel from different countries and also of course the Royal Thai police.  It is difficult, meticulous, stressful work and the people concerned have our particular gratitude.
Secondly, we responded in an immediate sense with a contribution of $60 million Australian dollars for relief to Indonesia, Sri Lanka, other affected countries, including the Maldives, and money to the Australian Red Cross and other Australian non-government organisations.  But in addition to this I can report to this meeting that last night you Sir as President of the Republic of Indonesia and I reached an agreement whereby over the next five years Australia will provide $A1 billion  by way of bilateral assistance to Indonesia, $500 million of that will be in the form of grants and the other $500 million will be in the form of highly concessional loans.  This money, which will be overseen, the dispersal of which will be overseen by a joint commission headed by the President and myself, will be devoted to both short and long term relief in the reconstruction challenge that Indonesia faces.  It is a partnership between our two countries, it is a token I hope of the compassion and concern of the Australian people and a desire as a regional friend to work closely with the appalling challenges that the people of Indonesia have in the years ahead.  We approach this as equal partners, it will be over and above the aid we currently provide on an annual basis to the Republic of Indonesia and it would be devoted very much under the surveillance of the commission towards long term reconstruction.
Can I say finally Mr Chairman that this terrible human tragedy has brought us all closer together, it has reminded us of the fragility of our existence, it has reminded us of the imperative of goodwill and decency between people as well as between nations.  The hearts of 20 million Australians do go out to those who've lost and suffered so much.  I don't of course downplay the losses of my own country men and women, which although significant are dwarfed in numbers by the appalling losses of the people of Indonesia and the people of Sri Lanka and of India and of the Maldives and of Malaysia and of Thailand.  And can I say that in conclusion Mr President that the response of the people of Australia to their friends and neighbours in the region is the response of 20 million people who want to help, who want to come closer to the region and want to play a true partnership in rebuilding the lives and the futures of so many people that have been abruptly affected and altered forever.
Thank you.
[ends]  


The Address is also available as an audio file -  MP3 1.5MB
Good evening.
Tonight I want to report to you about Australia's response to the Asian tsunami disaster which has decimated the lives of so many people across the nations of our region.
More than 150,000 people have been killed, while millions more are injured or homeless.
Whole communities have been washed away.  And we are in a race against time to prevent further deaths from water-borne diseases such as cholera.
This has been one of the greatest natural disasters in modern history.
At this stage the final number of Australians who tragically, have been killed or injured remains unclear.  We are working as fast as possible with the identification of victims and to ascertain the whereabouts of those Australians originally reported as missing.
I know that the thoughts and prayers of you all are with those who have lost loved ones or endure the terrible agony of waiting for further news.
The response of the world community-and not least Australia-to this heartbreaking tragedy has been swift and generous.
Along with other governments, international agencies and non-government bodies, Australians are now playing a leading role in one of the biggest humanitarian aid operations since World War II.
I express the thanks of the nation to the many Australians working night and day to provide relief to victims.  I especially thank the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, officers of the Australian Federal Police and their State colleagues, medical workers, staff from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and many other Australian Government departments and agencies who have come together in a great national effort.
  This crisis has seen the Australian Public Service working at its dedicated and professional best.
  Thanks also are due to the large number of Australians working for non-government relief organisations, often as volunteers.
 The Government's initial response was to provide emergency aid of $60 million and to send medical relief teams and defence personnel into badly affected areas, particularly Indonesia but also the Maldives and Sri Lanka.
A tragedy of this magnitude, however, requires a long-term commitment of resources if shattered communities are to be rebuilt and survivors provided with some hope for the future.
The loss of life and destruction in Indonesia, our nearest neighbour, has been truly staggering. At least 110,000 people have lost their lives in Aceh alone.
The recovery challenge facing this developing country is immense.
The Government has therefore decided to commit $1 billion over five years in both grants and highly-concessional loans to assist the Government and people of Indonesia in the mammoth task of recovery and rebuilding.
This will be the largest individual aid package in Australia's history.
Under a plan to be called the Australia-Indonesia Partnership for Reconstruction and Development, this $1 billion amount will go directly to areas of need through programs that must be approved  by the Australian Government, in conjunction with the Government of Indonesia.
This process will ensure that resources go where they are most needed.
As well as being the right response to an immediate humanitarian crisis, this Partnership is an historic step in Australian-Indonesian relations.
Australians were the first foreigners on the ground in Indonesia after the disaster - a fact gratefully acknowledged by President Yudhoyono during our recent meeting in Jakarta. We will stay as long as we are needed.
Our nation will continue to help other affected countries. For example, Australian police officers are playing a leading role in identifying victims in Thailand and arrangements are in hand to send school teachers to the Maldives and scientific experts to help in repairing the damage to that country's coral reef system.
The spontaneous outpouring of generosity from individual Australians in the last two weeks should be a source of pride to us all. Well in excess of $100 million has been pledged by individuals and companies in a great expression of the decency and good heart of the people of our nation.
The events of last Boxing Day and their aftermath have brought tragic loss and grief to many Australians. We have all been touched in different ways.  Next Sunday, the 16th of January, will be a national day of mourning and reflection for the victims of the tsunami. I ask all Australians to mark this occasion in the way they think fit.
This catastrophe has brought the world closer together in a spirit of common humanity. It has been a brutal reminder of the force of nature but also of the inspiring capacity of mankind to ease the suffering of others in their hour of need.
Australia, in its distinctive practical way, will remain in the forefront of helping those who have lost and suffered so much.
 Good night.  


Imam, Mr Mehboob, my fellow Australians. The terrible disaster that has struck so many nations of the Indian Ocean region on Boxing Day has claimed the lives of more than 150,000 people, rendered millions homeless, destroyed property, and caused untold chaos. Amongst the dead are people of the Islamic faith, Christian faith, the Jewish religion, Hindus, Buddhists, people of other religions, and many people professing no faith at all. The common faith of so many people reminds us of a number of things. It reminds us of the destructive force of nature; the unpredictability of nature. It also reminds us that, just as in life, sometimes more so in death, people of different religions and different beliefs can suffer a common disaster.
The world has responded in a remarkable way. The world has responded in a generous fashion to those who have suffered and lost so much. Particularly has Australia responded to so many of the victims of this terrible disaster. We have - both as a government and as a people - we have reached out to the people of Indonesia, the people of Sri Lanka, of India, of Thailand, of Malaysia, of the Maldives, of all of the countries that have been so badly affected.
 You meet here today as part of your regular expression of your Islamic faith. You pray according to the values of the beliefs that you hold dear; values and beliefs that are respected and honoured within the Australian community. In different ways different people in the Australian community gather - those of the Islamic faith today, those of the Christian religion on Sunday, and those of other faiths on various occasions over the weekend. We come together in an act of mourning and reflection to express our sorrow and our sadness for those who have lost so much; to express our common belief in the humanity of people all around the world.
 On an occasion like this we are reminded of the things that unite us and not of the things that divide us, that the values of the great religions of the world have so much in common, and the decency of the people who profess those religions genuinely, they have so much in common. And we have seen, over the last three weeks we have seen people of goodwill, of all religions, and indeed of no religion at all, coming together in a great act of compassion. But also, as we remember the victims of the dreadful natural disaster of Boxing Day last year, let us also pause for a moment to think of those of our fellow Australians who have lost so much in the tragic bushfire in South Australia - again a terrible reminder of the brutal force of nature and the unexpected suffering that it can inflict upon mankind.
 This experience has touched the hearts of all Australians. In my lifetime I have not seen such a widespread generous response to a particular disaster, and it has come from all sections of the Australian community, but it is reaffirmation of the goodness and the decency and the great heart of the Australian people. It is a reminder to all of us, whatever our ethnic backgrounds may be, that as Australians we are united in a nation which stands for good values and doing the right thing to help the people of this world when they need help and when they are suffering.
 May I conclude by again expressing for myself, my wife, and all the members of my government, the great sorrow we feel, reaffirm that the practical gestures of support be extended to the people, not only of Indonesia, but the people of so many other countries. And out of this terrible disaster let us learn again that we have so much in common, and we should count our blessings that we live in this wonderful country, Australia, and that whatever differences we have, they are minor compared to the common humanity we all share in responding to the suffering of others.
Thank you.
[ends]


Swami, Mr Consul General, and my fellow Australians, I would like first of all to express my gratitude for this opportunity of sharing a few moments with you as this congregation, in common with gatherings of Australians all around the nation today, have come together in different ways according to different customs and beliefs, and different cultures, to pause to remember and reflect, upon the terrible devastation caused by the Asian tsunami of the 26th December 2004.
  So much has been said and written about this terrible natural catastrophe. It has brought unbelievable, unbearable grief  to so many people in our region; to the people of India, to the people of Sri Lanka to the people of Indonesia, to the people of the Maldives to the people of Thailand, of Myanmar, and so the list goes on.  And we think particularly as this Day of Mourning and Reflection draws to a close, we think particularly of those who have lost so much.  We also think though, of the wonderful response of mankind to this terrible disaster. We think of the way in which the response has dissolved barriers, that people have been helped irrespective of their religion, of their race, of their nationality, of their political beliefs, that we have seen over the last three weeks, a spontaneous coming forward of that great common humanity that we all share, and it is an occasion like this that serves to remind all of the peoples of the world of what they have in common, and of the things that they have in common, and that the things that unite them are always stronger and more important than the things that divide us.  We have seen over the past three weeks some scenes of unbelievable sadness and tragedy, but we have also been inspired by the response of the peoples of the world.  As Australians we can all be immensely proud of the response of our own nation.
 It has been a response not only of the government, but also a response of all of the people of Australia, and the contributions and the sharing, as best we can in our own ways, of the grief that so many have suffered is a demonstration to the world of the good heart and the decency and the humanity, that resides within Australia.  This is an occasion of course that reminds Australians of the Hindu faith in particular, and Australians whose ancestry is from India or Sri Lanka or many other parts of the sub- continent, but particularly at this gathering of India, of the bonds that there are between our two countries.  They are bonds of history and of language, they are bonds of sporting endeavour, they are bonds that are very real, and I was able as part of  an expression of those bonds, I was able to speak within two nights of the disaster to the Prime Minister of India.  He was one of the very first leaders of the affected nation that I spoke to, and he expressed to me his gratitude for the instantaneous character of the Australian response.
 And through our aid agencies and through the government and in so many different ways, we have endeavoured to help the people of all of the nations that have been affected.  The loss of life has been terrible in all, not least of course, the terrible loss of life in Indonesia, our nearest neighbour.  And this is an occasion when we pay respect to the beliefs of all nations and of all peoples, and today perhaps I could stretch back to include Friday because Friday is the traditional day of the week for Muslim religious observants, this day of Mourning and Reflection has enabled Australians of all different faiths and indeed and people who have no faith at all, to share in a moment of mourning and reflection.  But can I pay tribute to the contribution of your community to our nation. Can I pay tribute to the goodness of the values and beliefs of your religion.
 Today is the traditional day of the week of course of Christian religious observants, but it's an occasion when people of all different faiths come together, they remind themselves of the shared values, of caring for and showing compassion towards the suffering of our fellow human beings.  It is an occasion to pay tribute to the ongoing work of the men and women of the Australian defence forces, of our medical and paramedical workers, of all of the members of the Australian consular service and public service who have worked so wonderfully over the past three weeks in response to this terrible tragedy.  May I conclude again, by expressing for myself and all of the Australian nation, my great sympathy and condolences to any in this audience who have lost loved ones or friends in distant countries but counties that I know mean so much to you and are still very much in your hearts.  The world has passed through a very grim three weeks.  It's a terrible reminder of the brutal force of nature, but it's also been an opportunity to again be inspired by the that wonderful capacity of mankind to respond without discrimination and across the divides of race and religion and background, to relieve suffering and to offer a helping hand and  no nation has better exemplified any more, let me put it that way, because all nations have helped, none has exemplified it more than our own nation, and I thank you for what you have done.
And to all you, my fellow Australians, I thank you for your contribution and I wish you and your community every happiness and every success in this country in the years ahead, thank you. 


Well thank you Lisa, ladies and gentleman. I'd like to thank all of you for coming this morning, all of you for the tremendous contribution you each, in your different ways, have made to the wonderful nation that we have in Australia in 2005.  I've read some of the biographical detail of the various finalists in each category, and when you add it all together, it covers every conceivable aspect of human endeavour in this country.  It covers people who have excelled in professions, it covers people who care for newcomers to this country and extend the hand of welcome to them, it includes people who are working with men and women with disabilities, it includes people who have overcome tremendous personal challenges of their own, and it includes people who relieve the suffering not only of our fellow Australians, but the suffering of people all around the world who are in need of the special tender care, and help and affection of Australians.
  The four categories we now have, I think are terrific - Of course the Australian of the Year, the prime category's been there from the very beginning, but to have the Senior of Australia, to have the Young Australian of the Year, to have the Local Hero - to have these different categories which I think recognise the different ways in which various Australians in our community have contributed so I always enjoy these presentations.  I always enjoy more particularly though, the opportunity of meeting people who've become the finalists, and people who in their different ways have contributed to our country.
  We have discovered as a nation a lot about ourselves over the past few years.  We have discovered the enormous warmth and generosity of the Australian spirit; we've seen it on display in recent weeks. You as a group of people represent that sprit as well as any group we can find anywhere in Australia, and I congratulate you on being finalists, I thank you for the contribution you make to our nation, and its reputation and name around the world.  I wish all of you good fortune in whatever you may do in the years ahead, and finally I would like to thank Lisa and her committee for the wonderful work they do in organising I think this increasingly appropriate celebration of Australia Day, not only here in Canberra, and after the tremendous success of the concert last year and having the presentation ceremonies outside Parliament House, I thought we should continue to have it in Canberra year after year, as the national capital and the focal point of our Australia Day celebrations. I'm looking forward to tonight not only to the presentation ceremony, but I am also looking forward to everything else associated with Australia Day.  Thank you Lisa.  Congratulations to all of you.  It's lovely to have you for morning tea.
 [ends]  


Well thank you very much Mrs Turbayne, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I must confess that this is the first occasion in my life that I have conducted a citizenship ceremony and therefore, I'm harbouring a lot more nerves I suspect than may be harboured by any of the applicants for citizenship, so if I make any errors along the way you'll understand that perhaps, when I've conducted a few more, if I do, I might get a little better.  But it's a very special citizenship ceremony because it's being held in the national capital on Australia Day, and I would like on behalf of all of us here today who are now and even more so in a few moments time, are your fellow Australians.
  I would like to welcome, very warmly, and very openly, the men and women from different parts of the world, who've decided today to become Australian citizens.  This country has a long tradition of immigration, it owes so much of its existence and its success to successive waves of immigration from different parts of the world, and as I look at the source countries on the list of citizens, I am reminded once again of the perpetuation of that tradition. You've come from countries, from Europe, from the Middle East, from Asia, from near and far, from two countries in particular that have recently involved very important democratic exercises, two new citizens from the Ukraine which has reaffirmed its very strong commitment to democracy, and a number of new citizens from Iraq who will be holding their first election at the weekend.  But from wherever you've come, you are welcome.  I invite you to embrace, if you haven't already done so, all of the opportunities and institutions of this country - choose to join the political party of your choice, or choose not to join any political party if that is your choice, and to take whatever attitude you like towards the party's and the institutions of this country.   It is no requirement of Australian citizenship that you hold any particular point of view on any issue of the day.  The only ask of all of us is that we give our first commitment to Australia and as Marjorie rightly noted, that nobody asks people to ever expunge from the corner of their heart a special affection for the country in which they were born.  That is a natural human trait and it's not part of Australian citizenship and loyalty to Australia that you are asked to forget your heritage, or to forsake the things that you hold dear from the land of you birth so with those words can I say how delighted I am to have this opportunity in Australia's capital on Australia Day 2005 to conduct this citizenship ceremony and as a requirement of the Act I must now read the preamble to the Australian Citizenship Act of 1948:
 Australian citizenship represents formal membership of the community of the Commonwealth of Australia and Australian citizenship is a common bond involving reciprocal rights and obligations uniting all Australians while respecting their diversity, and people granted Australian citizenship enjoy these rights, and undertake to accept these obligations by pledging loyalty to Australia and its people, and by sharing their democratic beliefs and by respecting their rights and liberties,  and by upholding and obeying the laws of Australia.
I would now like to ask the candidates who have indicated that they wish to take the  pledge number one - that is the oath, to stand and I think the words of the oath are available to you, and if you'd like to stand and join me in making the oath which is Pledge number one.
 From this time forward under God and its people, whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and liberties I respect and whose laws I uphold and obey.
Thank you. I'd now like to invite those who are taking the affirmation that is Pledge number two, to stand and repeat the pledge after me.
 From this time forward I pledge my loyalty to Australia and its people, whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and liberties I respect and whose laws I will uphold and obey.
Thank you very much.  Well I'd like to formally congratulate and welcome those who have taken the oath and affirmation, and I know it's a choice and a decision that none of you will regret, it will enrich your lives, and it will enrich the life of this country.
I am now going to have the distinct pleasure of presenting each new citizen with his or her certificate of Australian citizenship, and I'll invite Sir David Smith to read the names and if they come forward and the system works, the certificate will match the new citizen.
 [ends] 


Thank you very much Marjorie, my fellow Australians. It's a great privilege again to say a few words on this wonderful day that we celebrate. It's an occasion to look back over the year and to contemplate what lies ahead but above all it is an occasion to celebrate something that we all have in common, and that is the enormous privilege of being Australian.
 And as we look back over what the country has been through during the past twelve months, we look at the respect and esteem in which it is held around the world. We have every reason to regard ourselves as being very privileged indeed to call ourselves Australian.  Privileges of course always carry responsibilities; they carry the responsibility of ensuring that we continue to work hard at doing those things that have won the respect and the admiration of others. We continue to understand that however privileged we may be, or successful we imagine our county has been, there are always imperfections and challenges and weaknesses and failures and mistakes, that must be addressed and remedied.
 This is also an occasion to think for a moment of those men and women who are serving in the name of our country overseas. We think particularly of our service personnel working in Iraq, in the Solomon Islands, working of course to bring humanitarian relief in a quite magnificent way to the people of Aceh and to other people who've been affected by the terrible tragedy that overtook Asia on Boxing Day. And I am sure that every Australian heart would've swelled with pride at the sight of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, being the first on the scene to provide relief to people who have been so badly devastated and suffered such tragedy and sadness as a result of that disaster.
 This is also an occasion to celebrate the great volunteer tradition of our country. Last night we named the Australians of the Year, not only the Australian of the Year Dr Fiona Wood, whose magnificent humanitarian work brought relief to the suffering of so many of our fellow Australians following the Bali devastation in October 2002, but others who have served the community as volunteers. And the volunteered tradition of this country is one of its proudest traditions, and it's a tradition that's so far from dying is a tradition which has expanded. We have more volunteers now then ever before and more and more Australians are seeing that the best way that they can repay the privilege of having lived in this country and having been brought up in this nation and benefited from this nation, is to give back to their local community. And all around our nation we can think of examples over the past year of those people who have given so much as volunteers in such a selfless fashion. It's a wonderful Australian tradition and it's something of which we should be very greatly proud.
 And finally of course we welcome this morning many new Australian citizens; people who've come from every part of the world and it's a reminder of our immigrant roots, it's a reminder of the enormous contribution that people from different parts of the world have made to the development of modern Australia. So as we celebrate this day, we count it a privilege to be Australians, we pay respect to the first Australians-the Indigenous people of this country and we look to their full enjoyment of the benefits and the bounty that Australia brings to all of its citizens. We give thanks to those who've volunteered and provided relief and help and comfort to those who've needed it over the last year. Most importantly of all, we celebrate the immense joy and privilege of sharing membership of the great Australian family.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Senior Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, High Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen. Today is a brief but very pleasing ceremony for me - a ceremony to confer upon the Senior Minister and Prime Minister from 1990 to 2004, the second Prime Minister of Singapore, Mr Goh Chok Tong, the Honorary Companionship in the Order of Australia.
Chok Tong and I first met each other at meetings of the Asian Development Bank when he was Finance Minister and I was Treasurer and years later we came together, he coming to the Prime Ministership of his country a few years before I came to the Prime Ministership of Australia. He has been a firm friend and ally of Australia all of his public life and I found in my dealings with him as Prime Minister of Australia that he was a ready and good friend and the ease of our communication, the strength of our friendship, was a metaphor for the closeness of the relationship that has existed between our two countries.
In the time that he was Prime Minister, the defence and intelligence co-operation between the two countries strengthened, we were able to conclude successfully negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement between Australia and Singapore. His views on the threat posed by terrorism to our region have been clear and unambiguous and absolutely correct and his understanding of the need for countries such as Singapore and Indonesia and Malaysia and Australia to work together to fight the threat of terrorism is absolutely correct and none of us should delude ourselves, he certainly does not, that if this threat is left unattended it ultimately will devour us and we will pay a very heavy price and spend years reproaching ourselves for not having acted earlier.
Can I finally say that he's a person who has found in Australia not only a country at a political level to have very close relations with, but also possessed of some marvellous facilities in a certain sport in which he excels greatly. As somebody who has come I suspect to golf a little later in life than he did I'm rather envious of his accomplishments in that particular sporting endeavour.
But ladies and gentlemen, it is with very great pleasure that I participate in this ceremony and to award this honorary degree, honorary order rather, you have an honorary degree, to a very thoughtful, strong, and for Australia, friendly leader and a great friend of the people of Australia.
[ends]  


[tape begins] so many thousands of allied servicemen who died, not only in the campaigns in World War II, but also in the Malayan emergency and indeed the first battle casualty from the Vietnam War is also, the remains are buried here in Kranji.
This year is the 60th anniversary of the victory in both the European and Pacific wars in 1945. As we gather here at Kranji this morning we particularly remember the 1100 Australians who are buried in this cemetery and the many thousands more whose names are commemorated on the roll of honour, perhaps of all of the dramatic events of World War II, none is more deeply in the Australian psyche than the fall of Singapore which resulted not only in the surrender of what was seen as an impregnable military base but also the going into captivity of some 15,000 Australians, many of whom died in prisoner of war camps and on the Burma-Thailand railway. So we especially remember the sacrifice of Australians, of New Zealanders, of British, of India, of Malayan and of all the other allies that fought alongside us in those very perilous and dangerous times for Australia.
As we gather at this war cemetery we do what we always do when we gather at any war cemetery where Australians are buried and that is to pay tribute to the more than 100,000 Australians who have died defending the values that we hold dear and died in the course of freedom. Today we especially remember Flight Lieutenant Paul Pardoel who died while serving in the Royal Air Force in Iraq just two days ago. And on behalf of the Government of Australia and the people of Australia I extend my sympathy to his wife, to his parents, to his parents-in-law, to his three young children, and all his other family and friends. And also we think of the relatives of the British service personnel who died in the same incident.
We owe a great debt of gratitude to those who gave their lives in the two great wars and other conflicts in defending Australia and defending the things that we hold dear. And this short but important ceremony this morning is a mark of that respect and it is also an acknowledgement of the history that Australia shares with the people of Singapore and it is appropriate that my first act on this visit to Singapore should be to honour the Australian war dead who are buried here and in so doing to mark the contemporary significance and closeness and centrality of the relationship between Australia and the people of Singapore.
Thank you.
[ends]


Mr Dick, your wife, Yolanda, High Commissioner and Dr Choo, the co-patron and one of the great alumni of Sydney University, ladies and gentlemen.  For Janette and myself it's a great pleasure to be back here in Singapore and it's a great pleasure to have this opportunity of speaking to so many people who are making a daily contribution to this very critical bilateral relationship between Australia and Singapore.
When I looked again this morning at the title of the address that I was to give, "Australia's relations with Asia," I thought to myself that really is something of a misnomer - for two reasons.  Firstly Australia's relations are with a large number of countries in the Asian region that make up the aggregate which is so frequently referred to as Asia.  But for an audience like this there's no need to give the reminder that the nations of the Asian region, indeed the nations of the South-east Asian region, are very different, they are very distinctive, they have their own characteristics, their own identities and they require in terms of our relationships with them an understanding on the part of Australia of the different challenges and the different issues that are involved.  And the second reason why it's something of a misnomer is that the very description, "Australia's relations with Asia" suggests somehow or other than it's an issue that is still being debated, that in some way people are saying do we really relate to Asia or not?  The reality of course is that a country such as Australia that has very close linkages by reason of a combination of geography, history, culture, strategic alignment, shared experience in both war in peace, a country such as Australia has very close relations with many parts of the world.
Our relationship with Singapore is a very good relationship, it's close, it's practical, it's open, this morning I met the Prime Minister and we spent most of our time talking about global issues - we talked about trade challenges, we talked about the outcome of the election in Iraq, we talked about the impact on regional perceptions and co-operation on the aftermath of the tsunami, we of course talked about a number of bilateral issues as well.  But it was a conversation between two people who felt completely at ease with each other and completely able to share confidences and attitudes about matters that affected the entire world.
In his introduction the president said, Mr John Dick, said that he wondered how I'd endured an electorate, perhaps it's the electorate enduring me, for a period of 30 years and through 13 elections, that's true, a lot has changed over that period of time.  And one of the things that has changed is that my electorate of Bennelong in Sydney at the last election enrolment included no less than 14 to 15 per cent of electors of an ethnic Chinese background which is an illustration of the way in which the character of Sydney has changed and the vibrancy that people of Chinese and other backgrounds and ethnicities from Asia has brought to our community.
Our relations with the various countries of Asia are defined as all relations between nation states are - they are defined by a combination of national self-interest, the sharing of the challenges of a region, but most importantly of all our common values and our common humanity.  A lot has been said about the way in which the world and the region, and Australia in particular, responded to the terrible Indian Ocean tragedy which hit the region on Boxing Day last year.  My most vivid impression that came from that, apart from the terrible tragedy that was visited upon so many, was the realisation of how much in common all of us have when faced with disaster and sorrow and sadness.  And the differences of race, differences of nationality and differences of religion dissolve into a common humanity and a common desire on the part of people of goodwill all around the world to respond in an effective and constructive way.
  Australia has embraced the largest single commitment of overseas aid in her history with the commitment of a $1 billion fund over a period of five years for Indonesia.  And it was done very deliberately and without any real demur by the Government of Australia because we saw a need, a great human need, and we also saw in providing that human need a way of expressing profoundly our partnership with and our friendship towards and a desire on the part of the Australian people to share the adversity of the people of Indonesia.  That fund will be jointly administered by a commission chaired by President Yudhoyono and myself and the day-to-day work of running it will be the responsibility of two Indonesian Ministers and two Australian Ministers.
But I wouldn't want to pass from a discussion of the response to the tsunami without acknowledging the great leadership displayed by the Prime Minister of Singapore and his response, the response of Prime Minister Lee, to the tsunami, his initiative in suggesting the convening of the conference chaired by President Yudhoyono in Jakarta that brought together not only regional leaders but the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the former Secretary of State in the United States, and many leaders from Europe, and many other leaders of major world organisations.  His initiative meant that the focus of the world could be on not only a regional response but a world response to this terrible catastrophe.
We live in a region which has both a lot of opportunities, a great number of success stories but also a number of challenges.  The challenge of international terrorism is well understood by the Government of Singapore.  The Government of Singapore and the Government of Australia work together very closely in the fight against international terrorism, which has touched both of our countries in different ways, and very tragically in our own case in Bali, and more recently the lives of Indonesians bravely working for the Australian Embassy in Jakarta were taken through the brutal acts of terrorists.   But it's also a region that has had some tremendous success stories - the advantages of countries embracing globalisation, and nowhere better found than in the Asian region.  If you look at nations like Korea and Thailand and indeed Singapore itself you can see the enormous advantages of countries over a period of time lifting themselves from lower standards of living to higher standards of living through embracing the benefits of globalisation. And when I hear people, as I did in the lead up to going to the Davos meeting, decrying globalisation, blaming economic openness and freer trade for all of the ills of the world I invite them to look at the success stories.  And the story of Singapore is the story of a country that has reached out, a very small country, a small population, no natural resources, and yet it has a living standard that is the envy of many countries around the world.  And this has been achieved because it believes in the advantages of economic growth, of investment, it understands as all of you understand that we live in a world where investors can pick and choose, and if you don't have a transparent legal system, if you don't have a strong economic framework, if you don't have welcoming foreign investment laws, then you will simply take your capital somewhere else. And this is a lesson that should be absorbed and understood by other nations that are struggling to attract foreign investment and to lift themselves from third world standards of existence.
The major subject in many respects on the agenda at the recent meeting in Davos was the challenge of poverty, particularly from Africa which brings together the saddest examples of poverty stricken nations. And I presumed to offer the view that there were two areas of responsibility - there was an area of responsibility on the part of the developed world, most particularly the United States and Europe, and also Japan because Japan's trading policies in certainly areas such as agriculture also impact on the underdeveloped world.  But there was a responsibility on the part of the developed world to remove, or at least begin to reduce, trade barriers that were locking out largely the agricultural exports of underdeveloped countries.  And that although direct foreign aid was of importance in helping underdeveloped countries it was nowhere near as valuable and nowhere near as productive than dissolving trade barriers and one can find myriad examples in the last few years of where opening up trade has done a lot more than direct overseas assistance in order to bring about an increase in living standards.  Now that was a responsibility that I think lies at the feet of the developed world, but I think the concomitant of that is to understand that electorates in nations such as Australia demand that their dollars be used in a sensible and prudent fashion.  And that if overseas aid is not applied where it is needed but is somehow or other lost in the transmission through all manner of behaviour, not always acceptable according to any reasonable standards, in other words if corruption occurs, then there's a loss of interest on the part of the electorate. And people in my position listen to what electorates say, leadership is a combination of listening and doing what people want you to do and also from time to time according to the need seeking to change and to mould and to fashion and to lead public opinion.  But I think there is a genuine desire on the part of nations such as Australia and nations such as Singapore and the developed countries of Europe and North America to do more to lift the nations that are in poverty out of that and I think the two messages that came out of that gathering to me were on the part of the developed world to get rid of trade barriers but also on the part of the countries themselves seeking the assistance to understand that unless their standards of governance are improved, unless there's more transparency then not only will foreign aid not be there but more seriously also investment will not be attracted.  And it's a message that's been well understood in nations in many parts of the world and it's a lesson that should be further understood by those that don't now understand it.
Australia of course has different economic and different political relationships with different parts of Asia.  With Singapore we have a close intelligence relationship, we have a close military relationship, we have a very strong education relationship.  The alumni of Australian universities in Singapore is legendary and many in this room would be testament to that.  And the presence of so many Australians involved in the education process in Singapore is evidence of a very close relationship on that front.  We recently signed a Free Trade Agreement, and that Free Trade Agreement is bringing additional benefits.  And I found in my discussion with the Prime Minister this morning that there were no major issues causing bilateral tension or bilateral difficulty. As we go further afield to other parts of Asia, we go to North Asia and we find that still Australia's largest single customer is Japan.  Now that is a relationship, the grounds of which or the groundwork was laid way back in 1957 when the then Deputy Prime Minister of Australia John McEwen courageously negotiated a commerce agreement with Japan. And negotiating a commerce agreement with Japan in 1957 by an Australian Deputy Prime Minister required a great deal of political courage, World War II was only 12 years distant, and he encountered a lot of criticism, he was attacked by the then Opposition, he was attacked understandably but nonetheless it made it difficult by many other sections of society. But he ploughed on and the fruits of that are to be seen in the fact that Japan remains our largest single customer and an extremely valuable economic partner and one that has stood the test of time and one that has the great respect and is seen as having enormous value by both sides of politics in Australia.  Our relationship with Korea, although a slightly shorter duration, is nonetheless an extremely valuable economic relationship and in terms of export destinations second only to that of Japan and indeed the largest single individual customer for Australian product is a Korean company.
In recent years of course the big change that's occurred in trade relations with this part of the world, indeed any part of the world, is the enormous change that's occurred in our relationship with China.  China's trade with Australia has grown almost exponentially and the signing two years ago of an agreement to supply over 25 years LNG to the Guangdong province in China represented an historic breakthrough and probably the harbinger of many more contracts of that kind over the years ahead.  China's economy is growing at a very rapid rate, China's appetite for raw materials is very great indeed, Australia's capacity to supply them is equally great, our reliability, our dependability, our predictability are all enormous assets that this country has, our country has, in dealing with such very valued customers.
On the 1st of January this year two Free Trade Agreements between Australia and other countries came into operation.  One of them was with the United States.  Australia is the first Western developed country to have signed a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.  And the value of that Free Trade Agreement will grow as the years go by and the greatest value will be the fact that Australia will have access to the enormous service sector of the American economy and enormous access to the equally large government procurement capacity of the United States Government and governments of the various states of the United States.  The Free Trade Agreement didn't include everything we wanted, free trade agreements never do.  But it is enormously valuable in its specifics and it's even more valuable in the long term access it will provide of which I've just spoken.  The other free trade agreement that we've entered into, which started on the 1st of January, is the Free Trade Agreement with Thailand, which provides very valuable access for motor vehicles, for Australian wine, for dairy products and represents an extremely valuable step forward in our relations with that country.  We agreed at the meeting in Vientiane in November to commence negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement between Australia and New Zealand and the countries of ASEAN.  Whatever the course of those negotiations might be we should bear in mind that the true value of Australia's relations with the countries of this region are to be found in the substance of our associations with individual countries rather than in the symbolism, if I could put it that way, or the architecture of the relationship.  And if you look at each of the individual relationships you find a very, very rich story, you find the story of relations that are based overwhelmingly on people-to-people links, but also based very heavily on economic interest and the expansion of freer and more open trade.
I commenced my remarks by saying that the description of an address of Australia's relations with Asia was something of a misnomer for the reasons that I've described.  Australia in my view is a country whose dominant interests in the years ahead will be found in this region.  This is our part of the world, this is the part of the world to which we most immediately relate, not only in a geographic sense but increasingly also in a strategic and economic sense.  But we'd be misunderstanding the character of the world in which we lived if we saw our relations exclusively in terms of the way in which we relate to the Asian region.  I used an expression very early in my Prime Ministership which drew a bit of comment and controversy at the time when I said that no nation should choose between its history and its geography in defining its relations with the rest of the world.  Australia by reason of its history and its culture has, and always will have, very strong links with nations in Europe, some more so than others.  We have unapologetically a strong and important relationship with the United States and so far from that relationship detracting from our engagement with Asia - it adds value to it.  And I've found many examples in my dealings with Asian leaders of that reality. But because we are seen as having a close relationship with the United States we are seen to bring to other relationships an understanding and a value that might not be otherwise there.
So my friends in concluding can I say I speak very comfortably with our relations with this nation of Asia, Singapore.  It's a case study of how two countries can get on very well together, can share confidences, can share experiences and contribute to the future of each. And I finally want to pay tribute to those Australians who live and work in Singapore and indeed in other parts of Asia.  Not only do you obviously do it for very proper reasons of self-satisfaction and self-interest, that is true and understood.  But you are in every way wonderful ambassadors of our country. I think  one of the reasons for Australia's high standing in the region, it's high standing in South-east Asia is that the men and women who've come from Australia in business, the men and women who represent us diplomatically and that was wonderfully on display in the aftermath of the tsunami, the magnificent work of people such as our Ambassador in Thailand, Bill Paterson, and our Ambassador in Indonesia.  All of that represents Australia on display to our part of the world, communicating to our neighbours that we are their friends, we don't always agree, we have our own way of doing things, we have our own distinct identity, but we come to the region with immense goodwill and above all else a commitment to a shared future.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Mr Speaker the earthquake in the ocean on the 26 December last off the coast of north-western Sumatra was the world's most severe in the last 40 years.  The tsunamis caused by this earthquake resulted in a humanitarian disaster of proportions unprecedented in our lifetimes.
The estimated death toll from the disaster is truly appalling, and it continues to grow: it is now put at more than 280 000 souls.  An exact death toll will never be known.
  Latest estimates indicate that Indonesia has lost more than 160,000 citizens, 120,000 deaths have already been confirmed.  Sri Lanka has lost over 31,000 citizens; India over 15,000; and Thailand over 5,000.  Other countries including the Maldives, Malaysia, Somalia and the Seychelles were also heavily affected.  The United Nations estimates that the tragedy displaced more than one million people and deprived five million people of basic services.
The breadth and the enormity of the tragedy was brought home to me personally when I visited Banda Aceh on 2 February, and I am sure that the member for Griffith who also visited that area would have experienced similar emotions.  To see first hand the manner in which the wave had simply obliterated whole communities was profoundly moving.
  I was also greatly moved by the unflagging humanitarian work being undertaken by the men and women of the Australian Defence Force (ADF) and civilian personnel from Australia who have been engaged in relief operations in Aceh: in the face of such appalling destruction and despair, their cooperation with their Indonesian colleagues particularly in the TNI has been outstanding.
Eighteen people from Australia - twelve citizens and six permanent residents - have been confirmed to have lost their lives.  We continue to hold grave concerns for nine more Australians.
At this difficult time, our thoughts are very much with the families and friends of those who were lost.
The Australian government moved quickly in its efforts to ease the suffering of the grieving Australian families.  The intensive efforts by people from many agencies, particularly the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade their colleagues from the Australian Federal Police and State Police forces, helped confirm the safety of over 14,300 Australians in the days and weeks after the disaster.  Staff from a number of government agencies also came together to assist in dealing with over 84,000 phone calls from Australians eager to ascertain the safety of their loved ones.
 Around 60 Australian consular and other officials have been deployed to the affected areas.  Our posts in Thailand, India, Malaysia, Indonesia and Sri Lanka have provided - and go on  providing - extensive and valued assistance to affected Australians.
 The National Day of Mourning and Reflection that Australia observed on 16 January provided an important outlet for us to grieve for those lost in the disaster.  The National Day was commemorated throughout our nation, with several hundred events held around the country.  I personally had the opportunity to attend services marking the occasion by three different faiths: Christian, Muslim and Hindu.
What was striking to me, and I am sure that I am not alone in this reaction, what was striking to me during these gatherings - and through the extraordinary response by Australian citizens to this terrible disaster - was the incredible way in which our common humanity shines through in times of adversity.  Differences of race, of nationality and religion pale beside loss and suffering of such magnitude.
I am intensely proud of the compassion, enthusiasm, and remarkable generosity with which Australians have gone about mobilising funds and efforts to assist those affected by the disaster.  Today, donations by Australian citizens and corporations stand at around a magnificent sum and there is no other word to describe it, of approximately $235 million from a nation of 20 million people Mr Speaker.
  Following the disaster the Australian Government immediately announced assistance of $10 million in the aid effort.  When the scale of the disaster became apparent we increased our contribution to $60 million.
 The Australian Government has now committed more than $1 billion, and considerable in-kind assistance, to relief efforts.  Australia's response to the disaster - both in public and private contributions - has been one of the most generous in the world.
  Following a meeting of the Paris Club of international creditors on 12 January, the government has also agreed to join other creditor countries in offering an immediate postponement of debt repayments for the governments of countries affected by the disaster.
Thanks to the efforts both of the Government and of Australian private citizens, we as a nation stand at the forefront of international efforts to respond to the crisis.
I'd like Mr Speaker to pay special tribute to the untiring efforts of the Australian Defence Force - in particular its medical teams but also the civilian medical personnel from both the Commonwealth and the States and I want to record my appreciation for the total cooperation of all state governments and relevant state agencies, it was a magnificent federal effort.  To federal and state police officers who continue to grapple with the trying task of victim identification, particularly in Thailand  and all others both those working for the government and employees and volunteers with welfare organisations who have contributed to the swift and compassionate response of the Australian nation and its people to this disaster.
The emergency high-level taskforce established by the government on Boxing Day worked tirelessly throughout the days that followed.  Their work and that of others such as the Ambassador and staff of the Australian Embassy in Thailand exemplified the Australian public service working at its dedicated and professional best.
 The focus of Australia's assistance has, of course, been Indonesia.  The scale of the disaster, particularly in Aceh and our determination to help a friend and neighbour in dire need required a major and unprecedented response.
 In Jakarta, on 5 January, President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and I agreed to form an Australia-Indonesia Partnership for Reconstruction and Development committing $1 billion Australian dollars over 5 years.  This will consist of $500 million in grants for short to medium term restorative projects and activities and $500 million in concessional loans for the reconstruction of major infrastructure.
Through a Joint Commission established under the Partnership, President Yudhoyono and I, together with our Ministers, will determine a series of priority projects and activities to rebuild devastated infrastructure and services, (including in health and sanitation) and to develop measures which might help Indonesia respond to such terrible disasters in the future.
This commitment, which will bring our total aid to Indonesia to $1.8 billion over 5 years, is in addition to the $33 million  that Australia has already committed toward the relief effort there, including $18 million for key UN agencies as well as funding through Australian, international and local Non-Government Organisations.
To date, around 800 tonnes of emergency aid has been provided to Aceh and North Sumatra provinces, including food, water, medical supplies and shelter equipment, principally with the assistance of the ADF and UN Joint Operations Centre partners.
Australia's relationship with Indonesia is very important.  This new Partnership will assist Indonesia in its recovery and is the largest single commitment of overseas aid in Australia's history.
  In discussions with President Yudhoyono who called me last week while I was visiting Aceh, he expressed again his gratitude for Australia's help and together we re-affirmed our determination to work together, not only in relation to the tsunami but also more generally and that affirmation Mr Speaker took place during a telephone conversation in one of the devastated areas of Banda Aceh in the full view and hearing not only of the Australian and Indonesian media but members of the Australian Defence, Members of TNI, to Senior Ministers of the Indonesia Government, the local Acting Governor Mr Speaker and the experience of that reaffirmation in those circumstances symbolise to me the profound significance of this event in the history of the relations between our two nations.
  The government Mr Speaker knows and we all know that Australia and Indonesia share a common future, and it is our resolve to build on the spirit of cooperation borne of the tragedy to improve our relationship.
The Government has also committed $10 million for relief in Sri Lanka, focusing on food aid, shelter, public health and delivering water and sanitation.  Australia's rapid commitment of a medical team with expertise in infectious diseases and public health helped to mitigate the devastating impacts of the tragedy, as did our early commitment of over 12 tonnes of medical equipment and supplies.  Direct Aid Program grants by the Australian High Commission in Colombo have also helped families affected by the disaster.
  Australia's assistance to the Maldives includes commitment of: teams of Australian marine experts to help assess the damage to the coral reef structure; primary and secondary teachers; engineers who will work with authorities in repairing schools damaged or destroyed; and medical personnel, particularly in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.
For the Seychelles, Australia will contribute $500,000 to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Flash Appeal to provide shelter for families and also be used to rebuild infrastructure and help with general economic recovery.
Australia has also been proud to work with the governments of other affected countries to respond to the disaster, including Thailand and Malaysia, I might indicate Mr Speaker in the telephone conversations I had with the Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of Thailand on the 27th December, each of them indicated that although specialist assistance would be welcome they did not require any overseas monetary assistance.  The cooperation between Australian and local authorities on highly sensitive issues such as victim identification has been outstanding.
In seeking to ensure a prompt and appropriate international response to the disaster, I attended an ASEAN Special Leaders' Summit on the tsunami that was hosted in Jakarta by President Yudhoyono on 5-6 January.  In Singapore last week I was able to congratulate Prime Minister Lee of that countryon proposing the initiative. It was a most timely, constructive and appropriate step to coordinate the disaster response between donors and affected countries.
Participants in this meeting agreed to mobilise urgently further resources to meet the emergency relief needs of victims.  Agreement was also reached to establish a regional early warning system such as a Regional Tsunami Early Warning Centre in the Indian Ocean and the Southeast Asia region.
  At a Ministerial Meeting on Tsunami Early Warning Arrangements held in Phuket on 28-29 January, a target of mid-2006 was set for implementation of core elements of the system.  In the lead-up to this date, Australia will continue to play a leading role in international efforts to develop an early warning system.
   Mr Speaker in extending my gratitude to various people, I wish to particularly include my colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs who along with the Federal Police Commission paid a very early visit to affected areas in Thailand and met many of the relatives of Australians who had died or were missing, the Minister for Defence and also the fairly newly appointed Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign the Honourable Member for Dunkley and I also want Mr Speaker to extend my thanks to the remarks and express support coming from the Opposition particularly, not only, from the Member for Griffith and also from the Leader of the Opposition and others.  This has been a tragedy that has touched all Australians irrespective of their politics, where they live, their religion or their attitude to the government or the opposition or indeed to anything else, its one of the dreadful tragedies that we hope will never be repeated in our lifetime, and at all.  Mr Speaker, the Australian Government and the Australian people have demonstrated in a most real and tangible way - through their actions, through their sincere sympathy, and through their active support - a generosity and a commitment to helping out our neighbours that is truly outstanding.  This is a marvellous reflection of who we are as a people; it is the true spirit of Australia and Australians.
In mourning with the families of those Australians lost in the disaster, Australia grieves together with our friends and neighbours in the region, in the wake of this terrible tragedy.
  We are committed to doing what we can to help those affected by this unprecedented disaster, and we will not cease in our efforts until the rebuilding and the healing is complete. I thank the House.
[ends]  


We welcome you here as a good friend - somebody who's always displayed a great sense of regional neighbourliness towards Australia, as the leader of a very strong economy, as a person who shares the commitment of all of us to advance the living standards of the countries of the region, who shares the goal of Australia that there should be a greater understanding between people of different religious faiths in the region.  And it's a very important goal of this government (and I know all of the people of Australia) that one of the ways of fighting the scourge of terrorism, not only in our part of the world but around the world, is to develop a greater understanding between the great religions and to understand the rich history and contribution of Islam to the nations that adhere to it, and how much our faiths have in common - something that we were powerfully reminded of at the time of the tsunami and of all the things that shone through at that time - was the common humanity of the worldwide response.   We were reminded of how, in a sense, trivial the differences are in a time of tragedy and a time of adversity.
   So in those words, and in that spirit your Majesty, I welcome you to Australia. I'm glad that you've been able to undertake the journey. I wish your countrymen and women great good fortune in the years to come.  And in accordance with the time honoured tradition of our parliamentary democracy in Australia, I would like to invite the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kim Beazley to support my remarks.  Thank you.
  [ends]


PRIME MINISTER CLARK:
Well good evening everyone. It is my pleasure once again to welcome Prime Minister John Howard and Mrs Janette Howard to Auckland and to New Zealand. John has been a very regular visitor to New Zealand as Australian Prime Minister. Indeed he tells me this is his eighth visit to New Zealand as Prime Minister, and we do appreciate, John, the personal interest which you take in the trans-Tasman relationship, which is so important to us. Australia and New Zealand prime ministers do meet regularly at many regional and international gatherings. But these annual talks give us a chance to focus directly on issues relevant to both of us as close neighbours and very long-standing friends. So in the talks today we've done just that, covering our economic, defence and other relationships, sharing ideas about how to boost productivity, savings, ideas on social security reform, and, of course, discussing developments around our region and further a field.
 Both our economies have enjoyed high growth in recent years with falling unemployment and rising living standards. In New Zealand we can take pride in now having the lowest unemployment in the OECD. And both our countries benefit from each other's success because of that very close economic relationship. Indeed our trade with each other has increased at a faster rate over the past ten years than the trade of either of our countries with the rest of the world. For New Zealand, Australia remains our largest market, taking just over one fifth of what we export. For Australia, New Zealand is actually the largest market for its elaborately transformed manufactures. And we are each other's largest tourism markets with 1.5 million visits by our peoples across the Tasman each year. The success of CER is obvious, and both governments want to build on it. There's a big work program for progressing the single economic market, and that was the focus of the discussions between Treasurer Peter Costello and our Minister for Finance, Michael Cullen, last week - focussing on competition policy, joint accounting standards, mutual recognition for securities offerings, and banking supervision.
 As well, we're pursuing, both jointly and in parallel, a range of very important trade initiatives in Asia. Australia's FTA with Thailand is now in force, ours takes effect from the 1st of July. Australia has a trade and economic framework agreement with China; we've started FTA negotiations with that large country. Both of us have been engaged with FTA studies with Malaysia, and together we've secured agreement with ASEAN for an FTA with our CER economies. In other developments in South East Asia, the forces of nature have led to our two defence forces working there very closely in recent weeks to provide immediate relief after the tsunami. There was a truly ANZAC effort in the medical facility in Banda Aceh, bringing much needed relief to the people there. And I also applaud, John, Australia's great generosity to the relief and reconstruction effort in Indonesia and the very positive impact that will have on that country's ability to recover from the tsunami affecting the coastline of Sumatra. Elsewhere in the region we continue to be very closely involved together in the regional mission in the Solomon Islands, and in stepping up our support for development and better governance in the South Pacific, and for more regional cooperation.
 Tomorrow John comes to Wellington for discussions with our Cabinet on many of these issues, but for now, let me simply repeat my welcome to both John and Janette Howard, and say to you, you are always very welcome visitors to Auckland and New Zealand. I now invite Prime Minister John Howard to say a few words. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER HOWARD:
Thank you very much Helen, Peter, ladies and gentlemen. It's a real delight to be back in New Zealand. This is the eighth occasion that I've visited your country in the time that I've been Prime Minister. I take the relationship between our two countries very seriously. It's an old relationship; it's a very close one. It's on that is not only steeped in history, but in more recent times it's been bound together evermore tightly by the close economic integration that has naturally taken place between Australia and New Zealand.
 We find ourselves in this part of the world with a lot in common with each other, but also a great deal in common with the challenges of our region. It is true, as Helen says, that we see each other very frequently. I think in the time that's gone by since the last election in Australia on the 9th of October, Helen and I have met up on three or four occasions, at various gatherings in our region, quite separately from the regular meetings that we have - one year in New Zealand, the next year in Australia. It is important that we do that. It is important that we do that. It's important that we work hard at the relationship because those natural relationships and old relationships are the ones that can, in a sense, be more readily strengthened and added to.
 We share a place in one of the most dynamic regions in the world - the economic growth in the Asia Pacific region has been quite phenomenal. The contribution that China, awakening from hundreds of years of economic somnolence, the contribution that China is making to world growth - and certainly it's having and impact on the Australian economy has been immense - but of course our economic relations with nations such as Japan and Korea, and some of the smaller ones of the region - Thailand, and Malaysia, and Singapore - are also immensely important.
 Helen mentioned our $1 billion program of assistance to tsunami ravaged Indonesia. That was not only an act and a response based on humanity, but it was also a recognition of the tremendous importance of the strength and the stability of the of the Indonesia nation. It is the largest Muslim nation in the world, and the success of Indonesia as a moderate Islamic country, a democratic moderate Islamic country, is enormously important in the fight against terrorism. Terrorism must be fought with adequate security and strong forces; it must also be fought by demonstrating to those who might otherwise be susceptible to terrorists, that there is a better, democratic, moderate, conciliatory alternative. And there is no country in the world, in a sense, where that battle is being more keenly fought than in Indonesia. Indonesia is the third largest democracy in the world, and it is sometimes not given enough credit for the enormous transition that has been undertaken in very difficult circumstance over the past few years.
 Now these are challenges that Australia and New Zealand together face. We've faced many challenges in the past; we'll face more in the future. But the genuine friendship and the reciprocity of economic interests, the commitment to playing a very positive role in our part of the world, remain absolutely undiminished. In the time that I've been Prime Minister I have worked very hard to make sure that our relationship remains on a sound footing, and the regular, open discussions that we have, the opportunity tomorrow of meeting the entire New Zealand Cabinet and also meeting the New Zealand Leader of the Opposition, and participating in a parliamentary luncheon, is a wonderful opportunity to demonstrate again the real friendship that the people of Australia have towards the people of New Zealand, and the high regard in which I hold the people of New Zealand, and the commitment I have to ever closer relations between out two peoples who's destiny is forever linked together. Thank you.
   [ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
Prime Minister, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Ministers, Chief Justice, Papal Nuncio, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman. Firstly, can I say Janette and I are most grateful to you Helen for the great hospitality that you and your husband and others have extended to us on what is my eighth visit officially to New Zealand as Prime Minister, and the fifth occasion that I've participated, with three different Prime Ministers, in the bi-annual visit. It is important that we do not take our close friendship for granted. It's important that we work on it; it's important that we emphasise those things that we have in common; and it's important that we work away at those areas that might cause irritation.
 It is a very long-standing, natural, and spontaneous relationship. It's a relationship, of course, that had it's most vivid expression almost 90 years ago on the beaches of Gallipoli, and it's a relationship that down through the years has seen our two nations continue to argue for and assert the values that bind us together - values that are important to both of our communities. The economic association is hugely important, and it gets stronger and better as each year goes by, and the opportunity I had last night in Auckland of meeting a large number of members of the business community from New Zealand was a reminder of just how closely integrated our two economies are at the present time, and how we share so very much in common. The opportunity I had this morning of talking to the members of the New Zealand cabinet about some of the challenges of social policy. It was a reminder that we, like New Zealand, have problems of an ageing population, of workforce participation, of finding the most appropriate way to speed the process of people moving out of welfare and into work, and doing it in a fashion that is fair and reasonable, not only to the individuals concerned, but also fair and reasonable to the general body of taxpayers.
 We, of course, being two nations with deep historical and ethnic links with Europe, having proud, vibrant indigenous populations, but being in the Asian Pacific region of the world, we share a great deal in common in meeting the challenges of our region. And, of course, in recent times we have worked together to bring relief to the suffering people of Indonesia and other parts of those nations affected by the tsunami, and I had the opportunity just three weeks ago to visit Aceh and to go the ANZAC hospital, as we have dubbed it - the general hospital in Banda Aceh - and to see Australians and New Zealanders working together again was a heart-warming reminder of the continuity of that association. And, of course, working together in a country that is so very important to Australia's future, and may I say very important to the future of the fight that we wage in common against international terrorism.
 There is no country, I suggest, that is as much in the target sights of international terrorism than is Indonesia. Indonesia is the largest Islamic country in the world. It is of moderate Islamic persuasion. It's recently adopted a very robust democratic form of government. It's the third largest democracy in the world, a fact often overlooked - particularly in Europe and North America - but something that it certainly not overlooked in this part of the world. If Indonesia succeeds then a long-term blow is delivered against the cause of terrorism. If Indonesia fails, the terrorism is able to point again to the failure of western institutions and western influences under the practice of modern Islam. And we all have a lot at stake in making Indonesia is a success, and I know that in that endeavour, and in providing that support, I know that Australia and New Zealand are working together very intently indeed.
 Can I say finally, Prime Minister, that, in the end, those people to people links that you speak of are very, very important: the 400,000 New Zealanders in Australian, the 60,000 or 70,000 Australians in New Zealand. Without doing any research, as I was sitting here thinking to myself how many state premiers of Australia has this country produced, and I can think offhand of three. I can think of Rann, Bjelke-Peterson, and Fahey just offhand, and there may in fact be more. It's a timely reminder of the tremendous exchanges that go on between our free nations, and we have a rich history. We have our vigorous areas of competition, which are well known and well loved by the citizens of both countries, and, of course importantly, we do share a long-standing belief in, and practice of, freedom. Australia and New Zealand are two of only a handful of countries - in fact you could count them on the fingers of both hands - that remain continuously democratic from the beginning of the 20th century, and that is a remarkable achievement of which we speak not often enough, and in the end the most important thing to our way of our way of life is of course the practice of democratic freedom, and we've seen over the last few months some wonderful examples of that in countries that haven't always had it, or perhaps never had it. We had our last election on the 9th of October. On the same day there was an election in Afghanistan which was the first democratic election I think that country had ever had, and for the first time the women of Afghanistan were able to vote. We've had a wonderful example of democracy in the Ukraine, where in a completely bloodless way a fraudulent vote was overturned by the pressure of domestic and international opinion, and a legitimate government installed. And that was I think a fantastic sight to watch. I think I haven't seen anything as terrific as that come out of that part of the world since the fall of the Berlin Wall and all those wonderful scenes we witnessed at the end of the 1980s.
 And then of course we saw the election in the Palestinian territories, and for the first time in years we have a real hope perhaps of getting a lasting settlement between the Palestinians and the Israelis because we now have somebody of good will and good purpose leading the Palestinians; somebody who believes in the right of Israel, or will accept, at least, the right of Israel to exist, and as well as providing a homeland for the Palestinians. And finally and very importantly, we saw those inspiring sights of Iraqis going to vote in the face of the most appalling intimidation, and I haven't seen a more inspiring democratic sight for years, and people holding aloft their fingers dipped in the identification ink that was needed. Now, when you think that in many countries that don't practice or take democracy for granted you don't get a turnout of 59 percent. The turnout of the last presidential election was less than 59 percent. The turnout in the elections for the European parliament was about 40 percent, and I think the turnout in the last British election was only about 59 or 60 percent, and they got a turnout of 59 percent in those appalling circumstances. It really tells us how fortunate we are that we've this precious thing called democratic freedom and we've kept it for all those years; we've practiced it, and it's the most valuable heritage we have, and it's one that we share to the full.
 And in that spirit can I thank you Prime Minister, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, and all of you for the very warm welcome that you've extended to me. I value the relationship between our two countries and I have worked hard in the almost 9 years that I've been Prime Minister to do everything I can to make it closer, better, and even stronger. Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Hugh. I 'd like to start by recalling that the Business Council, which I think emerged out of the economic summit - we don't have those anymore - but it did emerge out of the economic summit of 1983 and over that 22 year period I've had a close association in various guises with the activities of the Business Council and one of the things that the Government has tried to do in the 9 years - it was 9 years yesterday - that it's been in office, has been to maintain a very close link with the business community of Australia, and that is inevitably because this body, more than any other, represents the larger corporations and business enterprises of the country, a very close link because of our very strong belief in the importance of wealth creation and the contribution that all of you as leaders of your companies and enterprises make to the Australian economy.
  This little address of mine of course comes at a time when there is a little bit in the papers about the economy, and, as a result of the coming together of a number of figures and events yesterday, I suppose politicians and particularly prime ministers are always asking people to preserve a sense of perspective. And today is certainly no exception to that. As I was coming down on the plane, I was talking to my economic adviser, Peter Crone, who many of you know, and I sort of said, under the heading of keeping a sense of perspective I wrote down about six or seven things. And I wrote down inflation is low, interest rates are still at historically low levels, the Budget is strongly in surplus, unemployment is at a 30 year low, business investment is very strong, and profit share is close to a record and that most of the challenges that the Australian economy has at the present time are more challenges of success rather then challenges of failure and challenges of weakness.
 But having said that, as has always been the case, there are a lot of challenges ahead of the Australian economy and therefore a lot of challenges ahead of Government. I don't want examine the entrails of the figures that were released yesterday, you've no doubt done that and you can draw your own conclusions.  I don't think using the language of direct communication, I don't think anybody believes for a moment that the Australian economy has slowed to a point where we should contemplate any fundamental reversal of the very strong direction that it has enjoyed over the last few years.   I think the Australian economy will continue to grow very strongly, I think our employment levels will remain high, I believe business investment will remain strong and I believe that inflation, not only in Australia, but in most of the industrialised world will also remain at a very low level.
  But there are challenges and there are further reforms that I want to say something about those and I also want to say something about those in the context of an event, that you alluded to Hugh and that is that on the1st July, the Government in its own right for the first time for any government since the 30th June 1981 will have control of both houses of Parliament.  I have to say and it's no secret that I never contemplated that this would happen. The best that I thought the Coalition would win at the last election in the Senate was 37 seats, with an outside prospect of winning 38, the idea of winning 39 seats and to win 4 out of 6 Senate seats in Queensland was never in my contemplation. But of course it does prove the veracity of that wonderful advertising slogan of "Queensland beautiful one day, perfect the next". The contribution it made to my sense of wellbeing and my affection for the politics of Queensland, I mean an affection that there was in the distant past, I never felt quite to the same degree that I did on that night but it was an unexpected bonus and it has also given us an extraordinary opportunity, but extraordinary opportunities and unexpected bonuses in politics also carry with them the responsibility of using them wisely.
  The Australian electorate has an ambivalence towards governments having apparently absolute or untrammeled authority, they do have an ambivalence, there are a lot of people in the Australian community who deliberately vote for the party of their normal choice in the Lower House and then deliberately vote in the other direction in the Upper House. And you can see it. I watch it in my own electorate, there's normally a gap between the vote that you get, the primary vote you get in the House of Representatives and the primary vote cast for your Senate candidates. So there's nothing accidental about that, it's quite deliberate and it does carry with it a certain deliberation and it marks an attitude and a caste of mind.
  I think it's important for us and it's important for you to have that in mind and to understand that not everybody thinks that the Senate in the hands of minor parties, or deliberations of the Senate being determined by minor parties is a bad thing. I mean there are plenty of times that I have thought that, in fact most of the time I have thought that, but you'd expect me to think that because of who I am and the party that I lead.  But we do have this wonderful opportunity, the composition of the Senate is profoundly less left-wing than anybody expected, because not only are there 39 senators from the Liberal and National Party's but there is also a Senator from Family First, and I don't presume to speak for that party and I respect its complete independence. But the program that it campaigned on before the last election is significantly different from the campaign on which the Greens and the Australian Democrats campaigned on. So surprisingly the complexion of the Senate is profoundly less centre left and more centre right than what I expected in my wildest dreams would be the case.
Now that gives us a great opportunity and the challenges that we have is to balance the opportunity that it gives with the need to ensure that we are not seen or perceived, or in reality, go about in any way abusing the power and authority that's given us, because electorates, particularly Australian electorates, they don't like that. They don't like arrogant governments, they don't like governments that take their support for granted but I am very conscious that in the past when governments of my persuasion have had the capacity to do so, they have sometimes disappointed their supporters in their failure to implement the programs that they took to the Australian public.
 And one of the things that this control of the Senate will enable us to do, reasonably, is to implement so many of the things that in the past we've had blocked in the Senate. But it also enables us to go into some other areas, consistent with the philosophy that we've enunciated in the past, if not the detail, and bring about some other reforms that were not possible. Now Hugh, you have mentioned some of the things that are on the BCA's agenda, and as you know and as many around this room know there's probably no issue that I have had a greater policy commitment to in the time certainly since I ceased to be the Treasurer in the Fraser Government in March of 1983, and that's 22 years ago, there's no issue I've had more interest in and commitment to policy wise than reform of our industrial relations system.
 I think the Australian industrial relations system is a world away from what it was when Andrew and I were members of the former coalition government. There was a view then I think and it had a certain amount of bipartisan support, that one of the greatest things Australia had ever done was to build a system of conciliation and arbitration. Paul Kelly the political journalist in his book, "The End of Certainty", talked about it as being one of the pillars of the Australian settlement, along with protection and imperial preference and the White Australia policy and other things that have properly gone the way of out-dated nations through the passage of time and the march of history. But we for many years in this country clung to that as an ideal and there were many people who sat around this table as members of the Business Council in the early 1980s who argued passionately against any deregulation of the Australian labour market and argued very strongly that you would change the social fabric of this country if you took away the central role of the then Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and later the Industrial Relations Commission.
 And I think one of the really great reforms this government has carried out in the last nine years, despite the difficulties we've had in the Senate, and partly through the courtesy of support at the time from the then leader of Australian Democrats, Cheryl Kernot, we have been able to bring about very significant freeing of the labour market. And I was reflecting during and I gave voice to this during the last election campaign that if I wanted to encapsulate to the Australian public the economic success of the Government, it was to be able to say that over the last 9 years we have simultaneously seen real wages rise, yet unemployment fall, interest rates go lower and inflation remained constrained. And that is about the best gift that you can give to the working men and women of this country. To lift their wages, keep their interest rates low, give their children jobs and give them the economic security of stable inflationary expectations. Now one of the reasons that we've been able to see real wages go up is that labour the market is now based far more on productivity than was ever the case in earlier years, and all the bargains and compromises wrought out of the more corporate state approach didn't produce any of that.
 Now there are a lot of reasons why it's happened, it's not only the deregulation of the labour market, I think Australian business has changed beyond all recognition in its approach to work practices, Australian business is far more outward looking, export oriented, has a greater understanding of the need for modernisation in the work place than was the case 20 years ago, and one of the great, innate capacities of Australians has also shone through and that is our ability to adapt. And the world wide reputation of the adaptability of the Australian worker has been one of the reasons that we have succeed in doing it.
 But having said that I think we do need to go further and we have already as a Government given a lot of thought and we will continue that process over the next two or three weeks, to the sort of further changes we need to make to our industrial relations system. We need to make changes that obviously implement things like unfair dismissal changes that were part and parcel of the program we presented before and had knocked back and although the proposals are of more direct relevance to smaller enterprises, they are I think changes that will make an overall contribution, and there are other changes to the law that are probably well known to many of you who follow this debate closely, that we will obviously implement. But there are some further areas that we need to examine and we're examining the way in which the minimum wage is set.
 I have to say to you that I think it would be out of step with the Australian ethos to not have a minimum wage. People will argue in pure economic theory that you shouldn't have a minimum wage, and you can mount a very good intellectual case for that to which a lot of people might say yes, but there is such a thing as the Australian ethos, and there is such a thing as the perception in the Australian community of what is regarded as a fair go. And I think the perception of there being the idea that there is no minimum wage at all would in the eyes of a majority of Australians challenge part of the Australian ethos. I think there is general support amongst reasonable people for further significant changes, and I have been informed, by Hugh and others, with the views of the Business Council and we are going to give them an enormous amount of consideration.
 I suppose, you know, as Peter Costello said to Laurie Oakes when he compared some of the policies of some of us in relation to using the corporations power of industrial relation as Whitlamism, and Peter said to Laurie, 'you know how to hurt a man'. I think it's fair to say that some people say why is it that a party which has historically been built on support for the principles for federalism, why a party such as that, namely the Liberal Party, should look at the notion of having a more uniform industrial relations system throughout the country. I think there is a difference between a commitment to nationalism and a commitment to federalism. I'm a very strong nationalist in the sense that I think that the guiding principle should be to produce a system, whether it's an industrial relations system or indeed any other system, that best suits the national need. And my support for going further in that area is based on a belief that the Australian economy is far more national in character now than it's been in my lifetime. And the difference, once again going back 20, 25 years: the emergence over that period of time of national law and accounting firms, the integration of the operation of companies in different parts of the country, the way in which people think in national terms now as distinct from city-based or regional terms, has brought about a very profound difference. And I think that does call for a more nationalistic, more Australian-based approach to the solution of many of these problems, and it will be an interesting debate because we do have, as everybody knows, this strange juxtaposition of eight Labor state and territory governments and a Liberal-National Party Government at the federal level, and I can find, digging through the archives of many speeches by Labor premiers talking about - then-Labor premiers - talking about the virtues of national industrial relations system. I can remember Neville Wran making some very powerful speeches on that subject, and of course you can find numerous speeches made by Liberal Party and National Party identities, at the same time, railing against the infamy of such an approach. But it is part of a process, and just as your ways of doing business have changed over the last 20 years, so in an area like this I think we're going to have to change our attitudes. I don't think it is shaking the foundations of anything. I think it is just a recognition of the modern day realities of the economy and of the nature of the country in which we live.
There are other areas that you have alluded to Hugh, and I won't endeavor to touch on all of them but I do want to mention that in relation to our own reform agenda we see the process of moving people from welfare into work as being an important challenge. I think all of you know that we are very short of workers in this country. I feel almost strange saying that because most of my political life we have seen unemployment, in other words a surfeit of workers, as being one of the big challenges, but almost within the space of a few years that has turned around. We have a very dramatic shortage of skilled workers and it's one of the bigger challenges that we face, and I'm pleased to report to you that best applause line I had in the last federal election campaign, or the one that seemed to me to produce the most enthusiastic response, was the one when I said I would like an Australia in which a high grade technical qualification was as prized as a university degree, and it seemed to bring forth a very warm, even emotional response from audiences all around the country. It seemed to be saying to me, and it's been borne out not only by our research, but also by other discussions - even to be borne out very strongly by the discussion that I've had and, as many of you know, we are implementing a series of policy changes which are designed to improve the capacity of this country to produce more tradesmen and women, to boost the technical skills of our workforce, to provide new opportunities, and most importantly of all to elevate the status of being a skilled tradesman in this country.
 I think we made a mistake; I think we made a cultural error a generation ago in believing that the only fit and proper thing for our children to do was to go through to Year 12 and to go to university. I think that's a mistake. I think there are some people who are simply not cut out to do that, and we all made an error in promoting a view that everybody had to do that. But we need to place a greater emphasis on that. We do also need to recognise that there are too many people on the disability support pension, and in saying that I'm not talking about forcing back into the workforce people who are genuinely disabled and unable to work. Nothing could be further from the truth. The way in which that benefit has been administered, and the way in which some other benefits are administered provides a disincentive for people to re-enter the workforce, and it is one of the issues that is also engaging our attention, not as a cost reduction measure - we're not trying to save money - we're rather trying to shift people from welfare into work and through the belief that not only will that boost the available workforce, which is important, but it is also from the point of view of their own self esteem and their own wellbeing and their capacity to support members of their family, who are children, will be gravely enhanced.
Hugh, I know in a private session there will be some other things that you will delve into, and I'll be very happy to respond as directly as I can. It will be an interesting six months because it will be the cutting edge of what the Government is going to do on the reform agenda. Our electoral cycle is pretty short. You know, I look fondly at those four years terms that state governments have, although when I was in opposition I didn't think they were so flash. I've got to say that you have to get cracking fairly early in the three-year cycle, and this a very good time to be engaging with the Business Council.
The process of reform is ongoing, and you are quite right as a Business Council to be described as: 'Turn up the heat on Howard', 'Keep the Government's nose to the grindstone on Reform'. That is part of the job in a democratic process, and it's also part of that same democratic process for the Prime Minister occasionally to sort of check on his scorecard. So, coming down in the plane, Peter, who's done a fantastic job in helping me with some of these gatherings, pulled out a copy of the Australian - the Weekend Australian, April 6-7th 2002, which is just about three years ago - and it listed all of these things that had to be done to really get the country on its feet and going. The first one was a new job creation strategy that recognizes economic growth is not enough. I think it's a fair proposition and Peter and I worked out that since then we'd created 670,000 jobs. So we thought we'd done reasonably well on that score. And in the second one - and you don't think much about it now, because I think we may have done it - and that is a fresh blueprint for universities that arrests the decline in our intellectual resources. Now, I'm not suggesting that everything that has been done on universities, everything that ought to be done has been done - I'm sure it hasn't - but I think Brendan Nelson did a pretty remarkable job negotiating that package through the Senate at the end of 2003. So, I think we might have got 51 percent on that. And here is a very controversial one that I think is probably always going to be there - restructuring of the health system to keep universal access yet improve efficiency. Now, I think the universal access has been greatly enhanced and strengthened, and when I understandably hear Peter Costello and Nick Minchin complaining to me about how much money Tony Abbott has been able to spend on health I think we have done quite a bit about improving that.
A national population strategy that integrates fertility, integration and sustainability. Well I won't stray too directly into the fertility area, but can I say that barely a month after that was said Peter Costello produced the intergenerational report as part of the 2003 Budget, and I think of all the documents that have been produced by the Government over the last few years, none has been more integral in stimulating a national debate on a very important issue. I think three years ago we were beginning to talk about this issue, and I think over the last few years not only have we engaged in a very significant dialogue, but there are a number of major policy changes which have begun the process of doing something about that has gone on. Immigration, can I say the number of migrants we have taken has risen substantially since then, and it's no secret to say that at the Government right at the present time, in the lead up to the decision that it normally takes on the eve of the Budget, is looking at the possibility of a further significant increase in the skilled migrant intake, and there is very strong support, if that can be achieved, for that to be done. The next one was a revamp of retirement and superannuation policies. I think there have been some very significant changes made in that area, and I think the most spectacular, the most important, was the very important changes that were made to the co-contribution part of superannuation, which is of particular value to low and middle income earners who find it a lot harder than the rest of us do to accumulate their superannuation.
 And then a couple of ones that are very general economic policies that reinforce Australia as an open, competitive, and innovative nation. Well, we've had a few free trade agreements signed since then. I don't think in April of 2002, I don't think I thought that we would have a Free Trade Agreement with the United States coming into operation on the 1st of January 2005. In fact I can recall going to at a meeting in New York that Michael Thawley convened, and I think Hugh and a number of other people attended, in which one very prominent Australian businessman said it was going to be a 10-year process to bring about the sort of support for the negotiation of a free trade agreement.
And then of course, as one might expect, given generalities some of these propositions, the last one is a search for a unique synthesis of Australian commitments to equity and excellence. Well, I suppose that's something that we are in constant pursuit of and will endeavor to do so.
 Well, Hugh, they are my thoughts. Can I conclude by saying that, again, how much I enjoy interaction with the Business Council. I think it right that you challenge the Government on its reform credentials. I think it is right that we respond. We'll agree on some things and we'll disagree on others. The synthesis always that we have to achieve is economic progress, social stability, and political achievement. And I have a mild interest in political achievement, and I know you met somebody this morning, some of you for the first time, who's been a very important person in my life over the last few years, and that's the Liberal Party pollster. And we try from time to time to connect. He's a very good pollster, but then I leave the polling to him and he leaves the politics to me, and we get on famously. But can I just say thank you very much and I look forward to our round the table exchange in a few moments. Thank you.
[ends]  


Your Royal Highnesses, Mr President, Mrs Calvert, Mr Speaker and Mrs Hawker, Mr Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, and Ms Susie Annus, Your Excellencies, my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a special occasion.  It welcomes to the Great Hall of our Parliament of the nation two people who have become very much in the affections of the Australian people over the past two weeks.  They met of course in the special sparkle and romance of the Sydney Olympic Games.  That period of time that so many of us remember with great affection that brought hundreds of thousands of people to our shores, saw Australia on display as only Australia can be on display - open, friendly, informal, yet sophisticated, competing but always welcoming.
  And you, Sir, came to our country to enjoy that and of course you found something else as well.  And can we say overwhelmingly, Sir, we greatly approve of your choice.
Ladies and gentlemen, the marriage of Frederick and Mary has of course brought our two nations together in a way that they haven't been before.  And in coming to the Great Hall of the national Parliament we are reminded of our shared commitment to a democratic way of life. We are reminded of our shared commitment to values not only of democracy but of justice and of civil liberties.  Both of you, your Royal Highnesses, in your time with us have reminded our two nations of the common bond they have with the sea and the history of this country and the history of Denmark in different ways over the years have come together.
 Many thousands of young Australians in successive generations on their travels throughout Europe as part of almost their right of passage to adulthood have travelled to Denmark and received a very warm and generous welcome.  And I hope in a small way your journey with us over these past weeks and particularly in the case of your Royal Highness your return home to Hobart will be some repayment by Australians of that great generosity and welcome that has been extended to so many Australians over the years by the people of Denmark.
So we come here in this national Parliament to welcome you, to express the hope that you find great joy with the time amongst us, to reaffirm the friendship between our two countries, because in the end the shared values of nations and the links between the people of nations are more important than any other links. Yours has been a very popular visit.  Both of you have been received very warmly and that is because of your spontaneous warmth and generosity of spirit.  Your coming together is a reminder not only of the great sparkle of a great city, but also it is a reminder of the global nature of the world in which we live.  And the way in which circumstances can bring young people together and as a result through their shared lives through the future bring nations ever closer together.  And all of that is a very positive and a very wonderful thing.
So we're very happy to have both of you amongst us.  We welcome you warmly to the national Parliament.  We hope you enjoy the rest of your time in Australia and I invite the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kim Beazley, to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Chairman, Alec Brennan, the Managing Director of CSR, ladies and gentlemen.  I am especially pleased tonight to be invited to share some time with you and to convey a few thoughts on this very important celebration by one of Australia's oldest companies, a company that has made an incredibly diverse contribution to the development of Australia over many years, a company whose capacity to change and adapt according to changing economic circumstances is something of an example to other large organisations in our country.  This gathering tonight brings together people who are not only former employees, former chairmen of the company but also representatives of those facets of CSR's interaction with many industry sectors, the building industry, the resource sector, the food industry, the service industries and of course a reminder all the time of CSR's origins.
On a personal note, I am indebted to the company for having many many years ago employed my father as an apprentice fitter and turner at the Harwood Island Mill, his apprenticeship was interrupted when he volunteered for service in World War I and he completed his time after returning from the War just around the corner at Pyrmont.
  This is an occasion to honour the contribution that companies like CSR have made to the Australian economy and to defend the role of large organisations in the Australian capitalist system. The Australian economy has of course, over the last twenty years, become an open and competitive economy and in the process it has changed permanently for the better.  If I were asked to remark upon the distinguishing features of the Australian economy in the time that I have been Prime Minister, I would unhesitatingly say the most significant feature has been its extraordinary resilience and its capacity to adjust and its capacity to change and to weather unexpected storms.
  In 1997 when the Asian economic downturn afflicted so many countries in our own region, many people feared that Australia would go down with other nations. That we were able to weather that storm and able to weather it in a quite remarkable fashion, said a great deal for the benefit of the changes that have been undertaken, the deregulation of the financial system, the dismantling of protective tariffs, two decisions that were carried by the former government, I might say with the very strong and enthusiastic support of the then opposition and then in our time in government, very important labour market reform in 1996, the fiscal consolidation which we began in 1996 and which has essentially kept our budget in very strong surplus ever since and of course after 1997, the generational changing reforms to the Australian taxation system with the introduction of a goods and services tax in the year 2000.  I mention these things to perhaps put into context, some of the commentary about the Australian economy at the present time.
  A few weeks ago, all at once we had three or four economic announcements, we had an increase in interest rates of 25 basis points by the Reserve Bank, we had some quarterly growth figures that were a lot more subdued that we had come to expect, we had a very large current account deficit and then to remind ourselves as consumers that we had an increase in private health insurance premiums. There was something of an overreaction by many commentators. Perhaps we had got too used to all of the economic statistics being very positive. We had come to take for granted that each economic number would show the economy even stronger, unemployment even lower, approvals in various industry sectors inexorably rising.  The reality is that over a long period of time not all the numbers are of a champagne quality.
 But my message to you tonight is that the Australian economy remains fundamentally very strong and the reason it remains fundamentally very strong is that the basic pillars of a strong economy remain. Low inflation, still historically low interest rates, very strong business investment, thirty-year lows in unemployment and over the medium to longer term, an improving trade outlook particularly with the export sector. But that is not to deny that the process of change and reform is a process that has to be maintained persistently not only in the medium term but over a longer period of time.
  The current strength of the Australian economy is a consequence of a fairly consistent and repeated program of economic reform that's gone on now for a period of close to twenty years and the message out of that is that if we are to preserve the great strength and vitality that we currently enjoy here in Australia, we need to pursue vigorously and with commitment, further economic reforms. The Chairman drew attention to the fact that as from the 1st July this year, for the first time, certainly since this Government has been in office and the first time since 1981, the Government will command the majority in the Senate as well as in the House of Representatives.
  I would have to say to you in all candour it was an unexpected bonus coming out of the last election, I didn't really imagine that we were going to get a majority in the Senate, and having received that great bonus, the Government has no intention of wasting the opportunity it presents. That requires the right balance of boldness in reform but also a recognition that the authority of controlling both Houses of Parliament carries with it, an obligation to use that authority wisdom, wisely and in a manner that does not convey the impression of hubris or drunkenness with power. The Australian people over the years have shown themselves very shrewd judges of governments, they have shown themselves as having a great capacity to discriminate between a government that courageously carries out a mandate that it has, from a government that carelessly and indiscriminately uses the authority the power in office has given us.  That is the balance, that we intend as a government to strike, after the 1st July.  What we promised we would do in areas such as the further privatisation of Telstra, we will pursue.  We committed ourselves to further reforms in the area of industrial relations and my Government is currently giving very detailed consideration to further reforms to the Australian industrial relations system. I suppose that of all the policy issues that I have immersed myself in over the last twenty years I've probably devoted more time to industrial relations reform than any other reform, because I believe at the heart of the maintenance of continued productivity growth in this country is to consolidate the transition of the Australian economy from an economy governed by a centralised approach to industrialisation and wage fixation to one that is truly and fully enterprise based.
 We have come a significant way along that path over the last few years but there are further changes that are needed and in the process of making those changes we will undoubtedly be attacked by our political opponents and by many in the trade union movement with the catch cry that our industrial relations reforms are about cutting wages and reducing the living standards of Australian workers, nothing could be further from the truth.  No government in its right mind should ever have as a goal a reduction in the living standards of the Australian people.  No government in its right mind wants to cut the wages of workers, the aim of my government over the past nine years and one that we can proudly say that we have achieved has been to preside over an economy which has given significant real increases in the wages of Australian employees.
 I am very proud of the fact that in the time that we have been in office, real wages in this country have risen by over 13 per cent in real terms and when you add that to lower interest rates, reductions in the personal tax burden and enhancement in employment opportunities, we are able to point to a picture of a very considerable increase in the living standards of the Australian people and my reply therefore to those who would seek to brand our industrial relations reforms as an exercise in cutting wages and reducing living standards is to point to the record of the Government thus far and our solemn commitment to maintain that record in the years ahead.
 There's been a great deal of debate in recent weeks and quite properly so about the skills shortages in the Australian economy, and pressures that maybe emerging or bottlenecks that may be emerging in areas of infrastructure in our country. It's been apparent to me now for quite some time that the strength of the Australian economy and the growing demand for skilled labour has created very severe skill shortages in certain parts of the economy. And that is the reason why in the last election campaign I devoted a great deal of my policy launch speech and also many of the commitments we made to additional investments and changes which are designed to address over the medium to longer term those shortages. And those changes include in particular the creation for the first time of federally-funded Australian Technical Colleges in 24 centres around Australia, considerable improvements in the incentives for apprentices, the extension of the Youth Allowance to apprentices, as well as of course the university students and a number of other allowances and enhancements that will make it attractive for people to enter the traditional areas where the shortages are becoming more acute.
 We have seen a very significant increase in the number of apprenticeships and traineeships in the Australian economy over the last nine years, but there are still as many of you will know significant shortages in many of the traditional trades. I've said before that this is in part a consequence of unfortunate cultural attitudes that developed in this country a generation ago, when the value of a technical education appeared to be denigrated when compared with a university education. I found in the election campaign that no proposition received a warmer response than the one that said that I wanted an Australia in which a high grade technical qualification was as prized as a university degree and it's very important to solving the skills shortages that we have that that issue be addressed.
 Immigration will play a role. It's not possible if you are to meet the immediate demand in certain areas to achieve that by changes in skills training in this country which often take a number of years to bear fruit, and in the meantime a contribution can be made in the area of immigration. And that is why the Government is currently examining whether there are ways to increase the flow of skilled tradesman to Australia in those areas of particular shortage.
 Last Friday I announced the establishment of a task group, made up of the head of the Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics, Dr. Fisher, Mr Max Moore-Wilton who'll be well known to many of you, the former head of my Department and now Executive Chairman of Sydney Airport Corporation but somebody who has had a very extensive background in infrastructure, at both a Commonwealth and a State level and well-known infrastructure economist, Dr. Henry Ergas to look specifically at bottlenecks of a physical and regularity kind in Australia's infrastructure that maybe having an adverse affect on our export performance.
 I've asked this task group to report to me by no later than the 18th of May. They don't have a general remit to look at infrastructure but rather one to look at bottlenecks that may be having a particular impact on our export performance. And I hope as a result of that to have a clearer picture on what changes and responses that might be needed because to use a vernacular it would be a crying shame indeed at a time when this country is poised to reap the enormous benefits of our export capacity, particularly but not only in the resource sector if that were impeded by bottlenecks.
 The final thing I would like to say Mr Chairman is something about the housing industry. It's an industry which is very important to your company, it's an industry which has always been at the centre of economic activity in this country and always been not far from the centre of political debate in Australia. Home ownership is an article of faith, not only in the modern Australia but it's been an article of faith in this country in the years that have gone by particularly since World War II.
 Investment in housing is in many cases the only major investment that most Australians make. Investment in housing is not only an economic consideration but it's also an investment in family and social stability and social security. We have high levels of home ownership in this country because we believe very strongly that the aspiration that people should seek to own their own home and to provide security, as well as a roof over their head of their families, is a proper and reasonable, indeed noble aspiration for Australians to have.
 And through the years and my Government has been no exception, governments have always acted to ensure that home ownership remains within the reach of Australians on modest incomes. It is becoming somewhat harder, housing affordability is more challenging for many young people in the modern Australia. There are multiple reasons for that and tonight I don't intend to attempt to list all of them but clearly the incidence of taxes, particularly at the state level and particularly here in New South Wales act as a disincentive. The lack of supply or inadequate supply of land that works against home ownership and the undue complexity of many of the planning regulations which exist at a State and Local Government level also make a contribution.
 There are from time to time calls to alter the existing federal taxation treatment of housing; people argue that we should remove negative gearing. We have repeatedly resisted that call and I would say again tonight that I couldn't think of anything more counterproductive. If you are concerned about the level of rents in this city for example, I couldn't think of anything more calculated to discourage investment in housing of a cheaper variety at which is available for rental. And people have argued from time to time, perhaps not as loudly, for an alteration in the existing capital gains tax regime for housing, once again it's not an argument that's ever found any favour with me and I think unlikely to find favour with anybody in my Government.
 When you decide to apply particular taxation regimes to certain forms of investment, you not only take into account economic considerations but you also take into account social and family stability considerations. And governments in Australia over the years and mine has been no exception, have given a preference for home ownership because we believe that home ownership makes a very important contribution to the strength and stability of the way of life we have in Australia and the important role that all of us believe the family should have within our community.
 Can I conclude Mr Chairman by congratulating CSR, by thanking it for 150 years of contributing to the Australian nation, of contributing to its growth and development in just about all of the major industry sectors, of over that period of time of employing and training countless thousands of young Australians. Most importantly of all having the capacity to adapt and change according to changing circumstances.
 I'm often asked to explain the reason why the Australian economy has done so well in recent years and I suppose instinctively I like to point towards the policy decisions that this Government has made and the contribution that they've made to our economic strength. But I think the most emphatic reason why this country has done well and this country will continue to do well, is that Australians by world standards are remarkably adaptable people, and the capacity of Australian employers and employees in the face of dramatically changed world circumstances, facing the globalisation of the world economy, our capacity to adapt and change has been second to none. And the reason why Australian workers are sought after around the world, the reason why we have an enviable reputation as contributors and innovators, is that we do have a great capacity to adapt. And no company has better demonstrated that capacity to adapt than has your company. What it does now is so different from so many of the things that it did only a few years ago and that capacity to adapt has kept it in the game, has kept it up there as one of Australia's major companies and is a quality about which all of those who now work for CSR and all of those who've been associated with it in the past should be immensely proud.
 I thank the company for what it's done for our nation and I wish it well in the years ahead.
 [ends]


Frank, Shirley Lowy, other members of the Lowy family, Allan Gyngell, ladies and gentleman. This is for me both an honour as Prime Minister and a special pleasure as a friend of Frank and Shirley Lowy and their families of many years standing to be here tonight, later to talk about Australia's place in the world.  I am here at the moment to officially open this building of this wonderful institute, to pay tribute to Frank Lowy for everything that he has contributed as a wonderful Australian - to the modern Australia that we have.
 I've known Frank for a long period of time.  I have reached that stage in life where I don't refer to old friends - I refer to long standing friends - and Frank is a very long standing friend. Importantly Frank has never been a fair weather friend; you don't last in Australian politics 31 years without experiencing both the highs and the lows. And at all points of the political experience, Frank has been a friend of mine. He's been a person possessed of some wonderful qualities; one of which has been the soaring optimism and enthusiasm about the future of this country and the place that this country occupies in the world. He's also possessed of an extraordinarily open mind; somebody who has his strong views but is receptive to new ideas.
 And I remember when he came to me and said he wanted to invest a very large amount in the creation of this institute. I encouraged him and he talked extensively to me about his aims and his goals, the reach of the people that would comprise his board, the sort of subjects that it would deal with, his commitment to intellectual rigour and policy debate and all of that has come together.
 So I'm very honoured Frank, and personally delighted that you've given me the privilege of opening this building. It's a wonderful old building and it's housed many activities over the years and this is yet another dimension of what it's going to do. I don't know, somebody was telling me about the cricket field that use to be up the back.  I don't know whether that's going to be re-created but (inaudible) just at the moment Frank and can I say what a terrific job you are doing as the head of... I know you now call it the Australian Football Association.  As an old rugby man I'm still a bit hung up with this soccer description, but whatever it is, to me there last Saturday night with you and to feel the enthusiasm of the crowd in that game between Australia and Iraq was a wonderful experience and I think Frank it's another demonstration of your dedication to this country and what you've been willing to give back to a country that has been so enriched by your personal contribution.
 I wish the institute well. I'm sure that in the years ahead I would read a lot of things that it says. I'm sure that I will agree with some of it, I'm sure I'll disagree with others; that is the nature of an institute with proper intellectual rigour.  The important thing is that you are interested in Australia's place in the world and this institute is committed to a better understanding of that and that matters to me, and it matters to all other people who are dedicated to rigorous public debate for the future of our country.
 Frank thank you very much for what you've further done for Australia in endowing this institute.
   [ends]


Frank and Shirley Lowy, and other members of the Lowy family, Chief Justice, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
 Winston Churchill once said that: 'We make a living by what we get, but we make a life by what we give,' and The Lowy Institute for International Policy is testimony to the generosity of a man whose life is a compelling Australian story of hard work and global achievement.
Frank Lowy came to our shores in 1952.  Behind him lay a childhood darkened by the Holocaust and service in the fight for a new-born Israel.  But this young man's eyes were fixed firmly on the future, and Frank's journey from delicatessen owner in Sydney's west, to head of the world's largest retail property group, has made him an aspiring corporate legend.  Now, with a grand investment in ideas, he has added a new chapter on patriotism in a remarkable contribution to Australia in the world.
Others have written their own names into the larger narrative of Australia's global engagement in recent times. Last December, Lieutenant Colonel Georgeina Whelan was appointed Commanding Officer of the Australian Army's 1st Health Support Battalion.  Three weeks later, amidst the devastation caused by the Boxing Day tsunami, she was running the ANZAC Field Hospital in Aceh.  This terrible tragedy that claimed more than 200,000 lives in Indonesia alone, including those of hundreds of staff from the Banda Aceh public hospital.  Over eight weeks, Lieutenant Colonel Whelan's team treated some 3,600 patients, performing countless life-saving operations.  Her battalion has now returned to Holsworthy in south western Sydney, leaving a functioning medical facility in the hands of those who will provide long-term care.
When we think of Australia in the world, we should also think of the Australian Electoral Commission's Paul Dacey.  Paul is our representative on the international steering committee that oversaw Iraq's first ever democratic election at the end of January.  He and his colleagues are now working to strengthen Iraq's democratic processes in advance of voting on a constitution in October and for national elections in December. Tony McDonald is another Australian serving his country with distinction overseas.  Under our Enhanced Cooperation Programme, Tony is working with Treasury officials in Papua New Guinea to improve economic forecasting and budget processes; reforms crucial to that country's long-term development.
  Through their work, these dedicated Australians provide a window onto the breadth, complexity and practical focus of our global engagement in 2005.  They challenge us to think beyond old prisms to grasp the true reach and moral seriousness of Australia in today's world; our power and our purpose.
When I became Prime Minister nine years ago, I believed that this nation was defining its place in the world too narrowly.  My Government has rebalanced Australia's foreign policy to better reflect the unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic opportunity that our country represents.  Time has only strengthened my conviction that we do not face a choice between our history and our geography.
  History's legacy is a global outlook.  We are, overwhelmingly, a country of migrants and their descendents.  We are an open economy, dependent on global markets.  And we are a Western liberal democracy with a profound interest in the structures and ideas that govern the international system.
It is true that Australia's most immediate interests and responsibilities, will always be in our region.  But we have global interests that require strong relationships with all centres of power.
  This is clear from our economic interests.  Australia's largest trading partner, as a single entity, is the European Union.  Our largest investment partner is the United States.  Our largest export market and our fastest growing economic relationships are in Asia.  The Middle East is one of our most rapidly growing markets for advanced manufactures over recent years.
In a world more interconnected than ever before, the balanced alignment of Australia's global and regional engagement is a measure of our strategic maturity.
  My address tonight naturally focuses on relationships and issues that are fundamental to Australia's security and prosperity.  But I want to begin elsewhere, with what I regard as the true pillars of our standing abroad.
  The success of Australia's global engagement is shaped decisively by some core national assets - resilient yet adaptable individuals, stable yet responsive institutions, and enduring ideas and values that bind together our diverse yet cohesive society.
First, our people.  What has allowed Australia to produce the Frank Lowys, the Robert Mays, the Charlie Bells, along with so many lesser-known achievers like Georgeina Whelan, Paul Dacey and Tony McDonald?
  A social scientist might say the answer is over-determined - by explanations from bush ingenuity of old to the waves of immigration that have changed and enriched our society.  In any case, we come back to an elusive yet crucial factor - the character of our people.
Australians have a reputation for hard work, directness and adaptability that has helped them flourish internationally.  This theme of our people doing well and doing good in this age of globalisation is one that I know the Lowy Institute has explored in work on the Australian diaspora.
  Second, our institutions.  Though a young country, Australia is one of the world's oldest and continuing democracies.  We have adapted to our distinctive setting the great bulwarks of liberal democracy- a vigorous parliamentary system, a free market economy, the rule of law and impartial courts, a free press and a vibrant civil society.
The genius of these institutions lies in their capacity to preserve fine traditions, while meeting the challenge of great global change.  Reforms making our economy more resilient, flexible and open, have been vital to the quality of our international engagement.
  Economic reform, sustained growth, and strong budgets have seen Australia not just ride out global shocks, but respond decisively to crises abroad.
  Economic strength allowed Australia to be one of only two countries to contribute to all three IMF programmes in our region following the Asian financial crisis of 1997.  It meant we could lead in bringing security and self-determination to East Timor and also embark on a new era of engagement in the Pacific.  And it has seen Australia become the world's largest official donor in response to the Asian tsunami, with an initiative for Indonesia that is the largest single aid package in our history.
  Australia's machinery of government - especially our national security apparatus - has performed strongly in the face of such challenges.
  Third, Australia brings with its role in the world certain ideas and values.  Our place in the international system is informed by who we are, and by what we stand for.
Australia has a proud history of supporting political and economic freedom.  We believe that these freedoms produce a more stable and prosperous Australia, and that they also produce a more stable and prosperous world.
  We support freer trade and investment for the material benefit this can bring to ourselves and to others.  We support countries making the often difficult journey to democracy, conscious that they will choose the path that fits with their history and culture.  We seek cooperation with other nations based on the same values of mutual respect and tolerance that Australians strive to uphold at home.
For some, this emphasis on domestic foundations of our global engagement may appear a little unsophisticated; even unsettling.  Politicians drawing such links have long aroused suspicion from observers of democracies and their foreign policies.
  De Tocqueville famously described democracies as 'decidedly inferior' to other governments in their conduct of foreign relations, given their propensity to and I quote 'abandon a mature design for the gratification of a momentary passion'.  The likes of Harold Nicholson and George Kennan expressed similar sentiments and echoes are heard periodically in Australia.
 The responsibility of elected leaders is to serve the interests and promote the values of the people - as we see them and as best we can.  This does not mean adjusting to opinion polls, but it does mean that foreign policy can never be conducted over the heads of our people.
  In uncertain times, we should take heart from how democracies can find renewed power and purpose abroad from institutions and instincts at home.  This was, after all, a key thread of American grand strategy in winning the Cold War.
For my generation, the end of that long twilight struggle for freedom will always be a defining moment in world politics.  The fall of the Berlin Wall a little over 15 years ago gave new force to the spread of democracy and free markets, ushering in a period of hopefulness about our globalising world.
Unfortunately, this air of optimism also carried the seeds of creeping complacency.  With the fall of the Twin Towers on 11 September 2001, free and open societies entered a new age of vulnerability and threat.
We learned anew that the open society still has its enemies.  That even the most powerful of nations can be shaken by shadowy gangs whose destructive ends are fettered only by their grasp on the means of terror.  And that peace-loving peoples must sometimes act forcefully if freedom is to be secured.
Last year's 9/11 Commission Report found that evil was made easier on that sunny September morning by failure in policy, capabilities and management.  But, it noted, the 'most important failure was one of imagination'.  Where freedom's greatest enemies seek the world's deadliest technologies, we are obliged to guard against what once seemed unimaginable.
  From the murder of 88 Australians in Bali in October 2002 and the attack on our Jakarta Embassy last September, we know that the threat to our country is very real.  Australia's national security depends upon a collective response to this terrorist threat.  Strong links with our partners in Asia form a vital part of this response - a point I will return to in a moment.
  The war on terror is a different kind of war.  It is a war against loose networks, neither dependent on nation-state sponsors, nor responsive to conventional deterrents.
The terrorists must be fought on many fronts - of geography and in the tools we deploy.  There is no sharper weapon in this fight than high-grade intelligence, reinforcing the value we place on long-standing allies - the United States and the United Kingdom.
Australia's ability to project armed force will remain a key instrument in the war on terror.  The forces of barbarism have set themselves a mission - to break the will of those who seek peace and freedom.  This test is nowhere more important at this hour than in Iraq.
  Next month, the Australian Government will increase our troop deployment in Iraq.  We are sending a Task Group to Al-Muthanna province to provide security for Japanese personnel making a vital humanitarian contribution to rebuilding the province.  The force will also be involved in the further training of Iraqi security forces.
This was a difficult decision, but eight million brave Iraqi voters helped convince me it was the right one.
  Importantly, our deployment followed a formal request from Japan - a close friend and regional partner - underscoring how global and regional activism is interwoven as never before in today's world.
  Of course, the choice is ours.  We can choose to turn inward or we can lend a hand for freedom at a moment when the voices of democratic hope are being heard right across the Middle East - from Iraq to Saudi Arabia; from Lebanon to Egypt.
  Australia is a close friend and unapologetic supporter of democratic Israel.  We have long defended Israel's right to live in security and at peace in this troubled region.  We also believe that the emergence of a viable, democratic Palestinian state is crucial to lasting stability and justice in the Middle East.
When I am asked about our 'exit strategy' for Iraq or for the Solomons or for our other missions, I repeat, that we will leave when the job undertaken, has been completed.  We will not stay a moment longer than is necessary, and we will not leave a moment sooner than is sufficient.
Of course, terrorism is only one of the scourges that we face.
Australia is under no illusion that many of the security challenges in our globalised world are interrelated.  Just as we must destroy the agents of terror and the networks that trade in weapons, drugs and people, so we must drain the wells of misery and frustration that extremists and criminals seek to exploit.
  We should start by reaffirming the power of globalisation to lift the dead hand of poverty around the world.  Our development debate must recognise that trade barriers in the developed cost poor countries more than twice the amount of the official aid they receive.
  The greatest contribution nations can make to alleviate poverty is to slash trade barriers and conclude the Doha round of global trade negotiations at the earliest opportunity.
  We must break the back of these negotiations by December when WTO Ministers meet in Hong Kong.  With 70 per cent of the world's poor dependent on agriculture for their livelihood, deep cuts in farm protection and subsidies are essential if Doha is to live up to its promise as a 'development round'.
Some will say, 'well he would say that wouldn't he'.  It's true, Australia stands to benefit from freer trade, including in agriculture.  But we do argue the case having seen the benefits to our own economy from cutting tariffs and quotas over many years.
  Australia's economy today is among the most open in the developed world and the OECD estimates that our agricultural sector is second only to New Zealand in the low level of subsidies it receives.
   In many ways, the global trading system is at a crossroads.  We have now completed just one successful multilateral round in 25 years.
  Two of the last three WTO Meetings have failed and another failure would seriously damage this important organisation's credibility.
  Developing countries must also face up to their side of the bargain by tackling corruption, investing in their people's health and education, and pursuing policies of openness to trade and long-term investment.  Genuine poverty alleviation will only occur through sustained private-sector growth in an environment of better governance.
  The need for strong, effective and accountable states is a theme that emerges again and again in thinking about our global future.
  Despite all we know about the importance of non-state actors in the international system, the nation state remains the focus of legitimate action for order and justice in our world.
  September 11 returned the state to centre-stage for the oldest of reasons - the provision of security.  It also told us in no uncertain terms that weak and failing states can act as a breeding ground for disorder, chaos and misery - and, ultimately, security threats.
  The erosion of state capacity is related to almost every class of threat that we now face - from terrorism to transnational crime, civil wars, to infectious disease.
Realistically, there will always be much we don't know about creating self-sustaining institutions in someone else's country.  And there is no substitute for nations taking charge of their own destiny.
  Still, we must face the fact that containing state failure will be an enduring test of 21st century statecraft.
  All these global challenges, and many of the world's biggest strategic imponderables, are to be found in our part of the world.  History will have no bigger stadium this century than the Pacific Rim.
  Great power dynamics sit side by side with new transnational threats, the strongest of states together with some of the weakest; rapid globalisation alongside unique and ancient cultures, traditional concerns with sovereignty along with nascent regionalism and institution-building.
Asia is poised in coming decades to assume a weight in the world economy it last held more than five centuries ago.  It is also home to eight of the world's ten largest standing armies and after the Middle East, the world's three most volatile flashpoints - the Taiwan Strait, the Korean peninsula and Kashmir.
  Clearly, the stakes are large and will test the strategic maturity, restraint, and adaptability of all nations.
  Australia approaches our rapidly-changing region with clear assumptions and strategies - and with a sense of optimism. We recognise Asia's diversity - taking account of how differences in power, institutions and aspirations shape regional politics.  We seek to engage most substantially with those countries with which our primary strategic and economic interests reside.  We believe that what matters most for our regional engagement is the substance of relations between countries, more so than any formal architecture of diplomatic exchange.  We recognise that advancing our security and prosperity in the region requires a balance of principle and pragmatism.  And we adopt a flexible approach to this task - one that combines bilateral, regional and multilateral instruments and that elevates results over process.
This last point is worth exploring from a wider standpoint.  Australia recognises that there are cases where the United Nations can leverage effective cooperation for peace and security, as was demonstrated successfully in East Timor.  But we also know that there are times when this is not possible, as we saw in the Balkans. Australia supports multilateral arms control and non-proliferation regimes. We are, as I noted earlier, an active player in global efforts to reduce trade barriers.  We continue to work towards an effective global response to climate change - but one that does not unfairly compromise the competitiveness of Australian industry.
But just as Australia does not face a choice between our history and our geography, nor do we face a choice between multilateral institutions and alternative strategies to pursue our nation's interests.  Our counter-terrorism strategy in South-East Asia is an excellent example of Australia's mutually reinforcing global, regional and bilateral activism.  Australia has built a network of bilateral counter-terrorism arrangements with regional partners and allies.  Ten agreements stretching from Fiji across to India provide the means by which security agencies and police forces cooperate closely.  It is at this operational level where the greatest dividends in the fight against terrorism can be secured. At the regional level, Australia is engaged through the ASEAN Regional Forum, APEC and the Asia-Pacific Group on Money Laundering.  None of this work comes at the expense of action as part of a global counter-terrorism coalition, including through the United Nations.
 Simultaneously, Australia has moved to enhance our ability to influence and work with the United States in meeting this terrorist threat.   Our alliance with the United States has long been a pillar of Australia's security and the stability of our region.  In the age of terrorism, having privileged access to United States military and intelligence assets is vital to disrupt and destroy terrorist networks in South-East Asia.  From the moment of our election in 1996, as a deliberate act of policy, my Government intensified Australia's post-Cold War relationship with the United States.  Australia today has never been better placed to put our views to the United States - and have them heard - including on regional issues where we might not see eye to eye.  From where I sit, the claim that the war on terror has distracted US policy-makers from Asia is a hollow one.  In fact, we have seen the United States strengthen its regional alliances in recent years, while expanding cooperation with countries such as Singapore and India.  If anything, the larger trend is towards Washington engaging more purposefully with Asia.  This has led to a more balanced American worldview when compared with its understandably Eurocentric focus of last century.
Underlying strengths - including technological dynamism and demographic trends - mean that the United States will continue to be the world's dominant global power and economy.  And it will remain critical to continued growth and development in our region.  In this context, the Australia-US Free Trade Agreement has given our country a new platform for future prosperity.  Australia's capacity, simultaneously, to deepen relations with the United States and with countries in Asia is an important yardstick of our strategic maturity as a nation.  Compared with a decade ago, there is now a deeper appreciation of how close links with the United States are a plus and not a minus in forging stronger links in Asia.
Next month, I will visit Japan and China, highlighting the importance Australia places on strong relationships with these hinge powers in North-East Asia.  The Australia-Japan relationship continues to evolve in new directions off the back of our long and mutually beneficial economic relationship.  Australia has no greater friend in Asia than Japan - our largest export market for almost forty years and a strategic partner for regional peace and prosperity.   In July 2003, Prime Minister Koizumi and I signed a Trade and Economic Framework Agreement as the basis for defining the future course of our economic relationship.  Both sides have now completed our joint study under the Agreement and Australia seeks an ambitious outcome from this work.
Today, the three great Pacific democracies - the United States, Japan and Australia - are working more closely than ever on shared security challenges - especially terrorism and weapons proliferation.  Our Trilateral Security Dialogue has added a new dimension to the value all sides place on alliance relationships.  Within the framework of its alliance with the United States, Japan has taken on important out-of-area security responsibilities in recent years, including in East Timor, Afghanistan and Iraq.  This quiet revolution in Japan's external policy - one which Australia has long encouraged - is a welcome sign of a more confident Japan assuming its rightful place in the world and in our region.
  When we think about the future of Australia in the world, we inevitably think of a world where China will play a much larger role.  Australia's relations with China have bulked large during my time as Prime Minister.  China's rise is steadily reshaping our world.  In the last two years, China has accounted for a quarter of world growth and a similar share of growth in global trade.  In the next decade, it will likely overtake Germany to become the world's third largest economy after the United States and Japan.  Since my Government has been in office, Australia's trade with China has trebled - to the point where today it is our third largest trading partner.  With the completion of our joint feasibility study on a free trade agreement, we now have an opportunity to strengthen this relationship further into a true partnership for prosperity.  I hope to affirm this partnership when I meet Chinese leaders in Beijing next month.  But I also want to assert that China will remain a large and growing partner for Australia whether or not we negotiate a Free Trade Agreement.
Australia welcomes China's constructive approach to a range of security matters in recent years - from the war on terror, to the Korean peninsula, to maritime security in South-East Asia.  And in the context of our one-China policy, we continue to urge restraint and a peaceful resolution of issues across the Taiwan Straits.  Clearly, a large part of the burden of such restraint is borne by the relationship between China and the United States.  It would in my strong view be a mistake to embrace an overly pessimistic view of this relationship, pointing to unavoidable conflict.  Australia does not believe that there is anything inevitable about escalating strategic competition between China and the United States.  In recent years, both sides have shown themselves keen to cooperate on common interests and to handle inevitable differences in an atmosphere of mutual respect, a point stressed repeatedly by Condoleezza Rice during her recent visit to China.  Australia is encouraged by the constructive and realistic management of this vital relationship.  We see ourselves as having a role in continually identifying, and advocating to each, the shared strategic interests these great powers have in regional peace and prosperity.
Closer to home, the world's largest Muslim-majority nation is progressing through a democratic transition as profound as any we have witnessed in our lifetimes.  Australia has a huge stake in Indonesia consolidating its place as the world's third largest democracy and one of Asia's great democracies.  In my view, Indonesia has not received enough credit for the political reforms that have taken root in the face of far-reaching economic and security challenges.  The elections of last year reaffirmed the strength of moderate Islam in the face of terrorism and extremism.  Australia welcomes the steps taken by President Yudhoyono to give effect to his vision of a 'safe, just and prosperous' Indonesia.  We are particularly encouraged by the steps towards good governance as a means of underpinning sustained economic recovery and macroeconomic stability.  Australia today is working closely with Indonesia on its road to a strong, united and democratic future.  As we are at Indonesia's side at a time of natural disaster, so we stand ready to forge a closer partnership for our shared future.  And I know that I speak for Australia in saying that we look forward to welcoming President Yudhoyono to our country within the next few days.
 Australia's other relationships in South-East Asia display important underlying strengths.  Beyond counter-terrorism, Australia is working closely with our neighbours on shared security challenges.  Free trade agreements with Singapore and Thailand have added new momentum to our shared agenda of opening markets and spreading prosperity.  Australia and Malaysia have now completed scoping studies on a possible FTA in advance of Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi's visit to Australia next week - the first official visit by a Malaysian Prime Minister in more than 20 years.
  Australia's focus is on practical outcomes of relations between countries rather than just forms and processes.  We nonetheless recognise that debate over a more institutionalised expression of East Asia regionalism has intensified in recent years.  In my view, this region can only fulfil its promise in the 21st century with an open and inclusive architecture.  Australia has long approached our regional engagement from this standpoint.  And we will continue to do so when Australia hosts the Leaders of APEC in this city of Sydney in September 2007.
In our near neighbourhood, Australia has turned its power and purpose to the governance challenges faced by many states in the Pacific.  Our leading role in the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomons has helped to restore law and order.  In Papua New Guinea, our Enhanced Cooperation Programme is strengthening law enforcement and tackling corruption, assisting with economic and public sector reform, and improving border management and transport security.  Australia will soon have some 210 police and 64 officials in line positions within the PNG police force and public service.  Again, a note of realism is called for.  We should not underestimate the depth and the complexity of the problems faced by PNG and other Pacific states.  Progress will likely be uneven and will only be made if all parties accept ownership of solutions to institutional weakness.
  Ladies and Gentlemen, we have gathered tonight each to register in our own way a stake in a great entrepreneur's investment in Australia's future.  For the past nine years, my fellow Australians have invested in me the greatest privilege a democratic people can bestow.  They have been testing years with many events that no-one could foresee.  And they have contained moments that all will never forget.  But from days and times of uncertainty and trauma, Australia has emerged stronger and more deeply involved in our world.  If there is a paradox about Australia in the world today it is that this age of globalisation has magnified the power we draw from our assets at home.  We've also learned a thing or two from this era of interconnectedness.  We have learned that we need not tie ourselves in knots defining Australia's place in the world with some unyielding and rigid formula.  Challenges near and far demand a sense of balance and flexibility in our policy approach.  Just as the national interest is not static, nor should our global engagement be hostage to yesterday's conventional wisdom.  Just as our country prospered from the fresh eyes Frank Lowy brought to a world of opportunities, so each generation of Australians must look anew at the eternal pursuit of our country's security and prosperity.
We have learned that, if we make the right choices, Australians can shape our environment and our destiny, not simply be takers of trends set elsewhere.  We have learned that global engagement is demanding work requiring large resources, great stamina and reserves of patience.  And it can only be sustained through constant dialogue with the interests and instincts of the Australian people.  It is something that my office requires me to think about every day.  How to explain the need to work with friends and allies to help nourish democracy in places that seem so very far away.  How to make the case for open markets to workers worried about their jobs in a global economy.  How to tell a taxpayer that we must help build better institutions abroad even as our needs seem so pressing at home.
Of course, Australia will be engaged most intensively on challenges in our own region - cooperating with others to rip up terrorist networks in Asia; seizing opportunities for economic integration; and bringing a new intensity to state building in our neighbourhood.  But we have learned also that the old boundaries that shaped our thinking - between domestic and foreign policy; regionalism and globalism; realism and idealism - are fuzzier now.  This may prove disorienting for some.  But my sense is that Australia has found new clarity of purpose in these uncertain times.
  By getting things in order at home, we can be a more active partner abroad.  By meeting the challenges of globalisation, we can be an anchor of stability and prosperity in our region.  And by honouring our history, defining our interests and upholding our values, we can make this a better world - not just for us, but for all.
 My friends, can I conclude where I began and that is to pay tribute to Frank Lowy for the enormous contribution that over many years he and his family have made to this country, for the way in which he has grabbed the opportunities that Australia of the post-war years has given to so many who have chosen this as their nation.  And by his latest demonstration of his deep affection of Australia by the endowment of this institute.  I wish it well, I look forward to its contributions to the ongoing debate on international issues and I'm sure that in its work it will pay worthy tribute to the generosity and decency and love of Australia demonstrated by its founder.
Thank you.
 [ends]  


Thank you very much Peter for those very warm words of welcome. Helen Kroger, Robert Doyle, my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Liberals and fellow Australians.  Before I address some of the domestic political issues, I know that I speak for all Australians in expressing a very strong sense of understanding and compassion with Australia's Catholic community as his Holiness the Pope, in failing health, prepares to meet his maker.  This great man has not only been an inspiring leader to the one billion Catholics around the world, he's been a great example of Christian dedication to people of all Christian denominations and indeed of all faiths. He will also be remembered as a person who helped lead the fight for freedom which led to the fall of the Berlin Wall and the role that he played in bringing freedom to his native Poland will always be remembered by those of us, and that includes all of us who will forever remember the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of Soviet Imperialism, as being the great defining moment of post World War II politics.  So as we think of this wonderful man in his hour of trial, we think not only of his contribution to the world wide church and to Christianity but we think of his contribution to the world wide cause of freedom which has helped shaped the lives of all of us in the last sixty years.
  My friends this is, as Peter said, the first meeting of the Victorian division of the Party since our magnificent victory on the 9th October - a victory that I don't mind confessing exceeded my best expectations.  I keep reading that I am a very cautious man; yes I am, particularly when it comes to predicting the results of elections. I never allow myself too much enthusiasm.  I had butterflies in my stomach on the morning of the 9th October and I suppressed any enthusiasm I had.  I had a little flutter of excitement when one of my son's told me heard on the radio of some exit poll coming out of Tasmania at 3.30 in the afternoon (and having sort of been singed by exit polls in 1998 which told me that I was going to lose, I was not very interested in getting too excited) but as that wonderful evening unfolded, we were able to relax and to enjoy an astonishing victory.
  I can remember the sense of exhilaration as I watched the television screen and with the electorate office computer in the study at Kirribilli House as well, sort of comparing the numbers and we started to see this wonderful trend in Victoria and I think it was Michael Kroger who was on Channel Nine, he said I can declare that there has been an increase in the Liberal vote in every seat in Victoria. And that of course felt very good news for the Liberal party and extremely bad news for the Labor party.
   I join Peter in congratulating Helen and Julian and all of you on delivering such an outstanding result in Victoria.  We not only held our seats and increased our majorities but we gave ourselves a buffer for the future which is always a very valuable thing and the way in which seats like Aston and Casey and Flinders increased their majorities in a spectacular fashion.  The way in which, and I particularly welcome Jason Wood and Andrew Robb and welcome back Russell Broadbent,  the way in which, emphatically, Russell reclaimed the seat of McMillan to the Liberal Party added to a wonderful evening.  So can I, from the bottom of my heart, thank all of you not only for the victory in 2004 but for the support and loyalty that you have demonstrated over the nine years which I have had the enormous privilege of being Prime Minister of this wonderful country of ours.  And can I thank all my Victorian Federal Parliamentary colleagues, most especially my friend and colleague Peter Costello who has been the principal architect of the economic achievements of this government over the last nine years.
 This division has sent a wonderful team to Canberra over that nine year period and as we plan the reforms that are necessary to maintain the momentum of the Australian economy and the esteem and regard in which this country is held around the world.  Victorian members of the Federal government will play key roles in all of those processes. But having won a great victory and having, at this first State Council meeting, reflected on the particular achievements of the Victorian division, it is a question of getting on with the job. Six months have past since the last election.  Challenges are ahead of us now which perhaps were not quite as evident six months ago, although the fundamental road map remains and it's a road map of continuous reform. You don't have the option of marking time in managing the economy or managing a country. You either go forward or you go back and any government that thinks the reform of government has been completed, and says to itself well we did a lot in the first term, we did even more in the second term, we did a lot in the third term, we can now coast in the fourth term, is doomed to be a government which has only four terms in government.  And if we are to have a fifth, sixth and a seventh then the process of reform must go on.
 There are three areas of reform that I want to touch on today which are very important in the area of reform.  The first and most important of those is of course industrial relations.  Mr Beazley delivered a fascinating speech yesterday.  It was a speech that was meant to establish his credentials and his energy and his enthusiasm for economic reform and as I read through the speech I was waiting to find the little nuggets of reform that were going to indicate to me that he'd changed, that he was different from what he had been when he led the Opposition between 1996 and 2001.  But I was disappointed, although not surprised. I found a paragraph that said it all and that paragraph essentially said that there is no need for any further industrial relations reform; that it's a dated argument that belongs to the 1980's or the 1990's and what that means  is that at the first hurdle of reform, the Leader of the Opposition has fallen.  Anybody who argues that further industrial relations reform in Australia is unnecessary doesn't understand the first thing about this economy, doesn't understand the need for further reform in that area if we are to maintain productivity, if we are to continue to be competitive, if we are to consolidate the transformation of this economy from an economy where wages were fixed by the ancient process of conciliation and arbitration to an economy where wages are based upon the capacity of firm to pay the affordability of wage increases and the productivity of the workplace.
  And if anybody imagines that our reform agenda (and the details of that will become apparent in the weeks and months ahead), our reform agenda in industrial relations, our further reform agenda is about cutting real wages, I invite them to look at the last nine years.  I had no prouder boast in the last election campaign, than the boast that as Prime Minister of this country I had seen the real wages of Australian workers rise by 13 per cent in nine years, whereas under the former Government they had risen by less than three per cent over thirteen years. In other words, the Liberal and National parties;  the parties of small business, the parties of commitment to free market economics, have been better friends over the last nine years to the workers of  Australia than the Labor Party could have ever have dreamt to have been over the previous thirteen years.
  I say to our critics - and I noticed that the Trades Hall Council here in Victoria is labouring fairly unsuccessfully to organise a nationwide strike against our industrial relations reform -  I say to them, and I say to other critics of the government's policies, we are a party of high wages, we are a party who believes in rewarding the workers of Australia and it's not rhetoric, its reality.  We have done it.  I said when I opened the Liberal Party's campaign in Western Sydney in September of last year that we delivered a 'quadrella' to the workers of Western Sydney as we had to workers everywhere in Australia.  We delivered higher wages, higher employment, lower taxation and more opportunities for their children and lower interest rates.
  So ladies and gentleman, as we go into industrial relations reform, as we embrace more change in that area, it will not be based on any pursuit against the interests of Australian workers. Rather it will be designed to reinforce the strong commitment we have to the workers of Australia.
Another area of course that cries out for reform is the area of workforce participation.  We are now experiencing the lowest unemployment levels in 30 years.  They are a product of the economic success of this country.  They are a product of the balanced and surplus budgets of the last nine years.  They are a product of the industrial relations reform we've been able to get through the Senate during that period of time.  They're a product of taxation reform.  And coming together we have factors that have produced an economy that has given us the lowest unemployment rate in 30 years.  We now face not a surplus of workers, but a shortage of workers, and that is a big structural challenge for this country.  And it does mean that we need to address areas of workforce participation, that we have to remove the disincentives of work against people either remaining in the workforce if they're of mature age, re-entering the workforce after caring for somebody, if that if their wish, and generally removing disincentives in other areas.  We cannot afford as a nation to have people who can and want to be in the workforce, not in the workforce.  And we require therefore a raft of policies, touching upon the mature age, touching upon people who are on social service benefits at the present time, addressing the disincentives for single parents to re-enter the workforce.
  And let me say on that subject, it is not injustice or imposition on a sole parent to give that person the opportunity and the training and the skills and the encouragement to re-enter the workforce once their youngest child has reached the age of six.  And let me say to those people who are already suggesting that this is some kind of harsh and onerous policy. I'd invite them to have a look at the research that was delivered to the economic conference that took place in Melbourne this week and under the auspices of the Australian newspaper.  I ask them to have a look at a bit of research produced in a speech by Anne Harding of the NATSEM organisation; an organisation that in the past has delivered objective economic assessments and certainly hasn't echoed the political mantras of this government. And what that research conclusively demonstrated was the remarkable fairness of the taxation and welfare policies of this government over the last nine years.  What it demonstrated was that the lower income groups in this country had been protected.  What it demonstrated, as had been demonstrated in the past, that the family tax benefits system has delivered in proportionate terms more real gains to low income families than to any other section of the Australian community.
  And just as I cite our achievements on real wages, (to rebut the suggestion that our industrial relations agenda is about cutting wages) so I point to our achievements in the area of family tax benefits to rebut the claim that what we are talking about in the welfare to work agenda is some kind of attack on the living standards and the fair treatment of the low income people - particularly the sole parents of Australia.
  But there's another area where reform is needed and the initiative for this reform lies not only with the Federal Government but it also of course lies with the State Governments.  And that is to ensure that our federalism system works better than it does at the present time.  And what Peter was saying about the responsibilities of the states is absolutely right.  Over the five years from 2005/2006 (that's the coming financial year) the financial windfall to the state of Victoria from the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax is projected to be about $3.2 billion.  In other words Victoria over that five year period will be $3.2 billion better off than it would have been if the revenue sharing arrangements I inherited from Paul Keating as Prime Minister had been continued.  Now that is the basis of our argument that the states have the obligations they entered into when the GST was delivered to get rid of the state taxes to which Peter has referred. I have been, over a period of probably 20 years or more, attending Premiers' conferences either as a Treasurer or as a Prime Minister and for many years the constant cry of the State Premiers, and this came from State Premiers of both political persuasions.  It came as strongly from Charles Court and Joh Bjelke-Petersen as it did from Neville Wran and John Cain and from Bob Carr and Steve Bracks.  And what they said year after year was give the states a fair go, give the states access to a growth tax and they will then deliver in full the services in areas like public hospitals, police, public transport and government schools, which are their bread and butter responsibilities.
  And that of course, well responding to that, was the basis of a lot of our thinking when we introduced the Goods and Services Tax.  Goods and Services Tax did many great things.  But one of the greatest things it did was to give the states access to a growth tax and I thought when that was introduced that the Federal Government, having delivered on its side of the bargain, the states would do the same.  That not only would they wisely spend the additional revenue they had, but they would also meet their obligations to get rid of burdens from state taxes.  And over the weeks and months ahead the states of the Commonwealth of Australia face the challenge of whether they are going to fulfil their part of the bargain for federalism represented by the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax.
  They can no longer claim the alibi that they don't have enough money - they are rolling in money.  The states have received benefits from the GST far ahead of anything that was predicted either by us or by them and they have an obligation not only to deliver in full the services they owe to the people of Victoria and New South Wales and Queensland and so forth, but they also have an obligation my friends to deliver the removal of the taxation impost to which Peter referred in his speech.
We do, as all of you know, expect to enjoy the rather unexpected bonus of control of the Senate on the 1st of July.  It wasn't something that I expected, but I'm very happy.  I won't fail to be aware of it. I won't fail along with my colleagues to factor it in to all of our decision making. But it does give to us an opportunity to do some things that we never dreamt for a moment we'd be able to do.  It carries with it a great responsibility not to disappoint those who voted for a Liberal Government in the belief that one day things like unfair dismissal imposts on small business would be removed, that one day other changes that are necessary in order to further free the Australian economy could be achieved.
  And I make the simple promise to all of you that we will not let you down. We will not squander the mandate.  We will not dishonour the loyal support that Liberals have given to this Government over the last nine years by wasting the opportunity of control of the Senate.  But I make another promise to you - that we won't use that authority in a reckless and arrogant fashion.  The Australian people do not like either recklessness or arrogance in their governments.  They want governments to worry about them and their interests and not worry about their own interests and I promise that my Government will use its authority in the Senate from the 1st of July in a wise fashion.  We'll introduce what we said we would introduce.  We'll also introduce some things in a number of areas that we never thought we'd be able to do. But they'll be consistent with our philosophy and they will be respectful to the interests of the overwhelming majority of the Australian people.
The last thing I want to say to you my friends is something about Australia's place in the world.  Over the next week Australia will host two very important visits.  Tomorrow evening the President of Indonesia, President Yudhoyono, will arrive in Canberra and this, apart from a brief visit from President Wahid towards the end of his presidency several years ago, it will the first visit by an Indonesian President since President Suharto came here during the term of the Whitlam Government in the first half of the 1970s. It's a very important visit, it's being undertaken by a man who represents a new hope, a new inspiration for the people of Indonesia.  Indonesia has undergone a tremendous transformation.  It is now the third largest democracy in the world.  It doesn't get enough credit in my opinion, particularly in Europe, for what it has achieved over the last few years.  President Yudhoyono is the first directly elected president of his country.  He has already undertaken some very bold economic reforms.  We sometimes have to take a reality check when you talk about reform.  One of the things he's had to do is to cut the fuel subsidy for millions of Indonesians by 30 per cent.
 Now we talk about the toughness of economic reform, just imagine the political and economic challenge that's involved in a country with 220 million with a much lower living standard that we have, the challenge that's involved in reducing the fuel subsidy - which affects every single individual and every single family by something in the order of 30 per cent. He does represent a very important hope and a very significant hope for his country.
 His election was a triumph for moderate Islam over the forces of evil and extremism.  The terrorists want him to fail. The good, decent, moderate Islamic people want him to succeed.  And who can doubt where the interests of our country lie - they lie in forging a close friendship and a close partnership with this country.  We are different nations.  We'll always be different, but destiny has thrown us together in this part of the world and I believe there are new opportunities and there's new hope that we can work together in our common interests.
  And later this week of course we'll also welcome the Prime Minister of Malaysia and it will be the first visit to Australia for more than 20 years by a Malaysian Prime Minister and both of these visits demonstrate the importance of our region to the future of this country but it is also a reminder that in the world in which we now live we should never narrowly define the interests of Australia.  Our region is very important and it's our first area of our immediate responsibility, but the rest of the world is also important and this Government will never narrowly define Australia's foreign policy interests and we'll always see us as having interests of a broader and more global character.
My friends, thank you again for the tremendous support that you gave to me, to Peter and to all the other members of my parliamentary team.  I have been a very fortunate individual.  The greatest privilege that can come the way of any citizen of a country is to be given the sort of responsibility that I've had over the last nine years.  It's something that I've treasured, it's something that I've never taken for granted, but it's something that I would never have had had it not been for the loyalty and support of the Liberal Party.
  What I have achieved in public life I owe to the Liberal Party.  I owe it to that great collective of people around Australia which those sitting in this room, this hall, are part.  I've never lost sight of that, I never will, but I warmly thank you for the support you've given me.
Thank you.
[ends]  


President Bambang Yudhoyono, Madam Ani Yudhoyono, the Leader of the Opposition, my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. This Great Hall of the Australian Parliament has hosted many lunches for many friends and visitors to our country but none is more important than the luncheon we have today in honour of the President of the Republic of Indonesia.
 Today, the President and I met for the fifth occasion, personally, since the 30th October last year.  That is a reflection not only of the shared tragedy and adversity that has brought our two countries even closer together but it is also witness to our shared determination at a personal level to ensure that the relationship between our two countries grows closer and deeper as time goes by.
  Mr President we welcome you here in three capacities, we welcome you as the elected leader of the third largest democracy in the world.  We welcome you also as the leader of the largest Islamic nation in the world and we welcome you as a friend and neighbour leading a country, that by reason of destiny and geography, will be forever linked with Australia and the Australian people.
 We've heard a lot of talk recently and properly so, about the democratic successes of recent times.  Democracy around the world has had a good six months. We've seen the great 'Orange revolution' in the Ukraine, we've seen the cautious depth towards a settlement of the long running enmity between Israel and the people of the Palestinian state, we should not be too optimistic but we should be cautiously hopeful.  We have seen the beginnings of a possible Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon, we have seen the inspiring example of eight million Iraqis voting in defiance, against the most appalling intimidation.
  But of all the great democratic transformations of recent times, none has been more impressive than that of Indonesia and it is my very strong view and that of the Australian Government that Indonesia has not received enough credit for the remarkable embrace, so peacefully, of change to a democratic state.  To bring about that change in a nation of more than 200 million people is a remarkable achievement so therefore we honour today, the directly elected President of this great country, whose importance to Australia can only grow as time goes by.
  We are also conscious that we recognise him as the leader of a great Islamic nation, at a time when more than ever, it is essential to have inter-faith dialogue, the world presently mourns the death of a great figure of our age, Pope John Paul II, who led the Catholic Church for more than 26 years and amongst his many great achievements was the fact that he was the first Pope to enter a mosque, he understood the importance of inter-faith dialogue.  He understood as we have understood in recent months as we have been thrown together in adversity that at a time of challenge, our differences fall away. In the face of the appalling tsunami disaster, the hearts of 20 million Australians reached out to the people of Indonesia, without any regard to the differences in faith or background but in a common humanity and a common desire to help the suffering of those people.
  So we welcome you Sir at a time when understanding between the different faiths is so important, and I am very proud of the fact that one of the things that our Government was able to do was to inaugurate an inter-faith dialogue that brought together the leaders of the Christian denominations from Australia, Islamic leaders from Australia and join them in conference with their friends and colleagues of different faiths in Indonesia.
 We welcome you also of course as the leader of our nearest neighbour.  Geography has placed us together. Geography and destiny will mean that despite the differences we will inevitably have in the future and it never serves a productive relationship between two countries whose backgrounds are so different to pretend that we won't from time to time have a difference of emphasis, from time to time have arguments.
  But fundamentally the sense of goodwill and a shared future is very strong and I have in my associations with President Yudhoyono, a man of immense decency and immense vision for his own country.  I think it is difficult and challenging on occasions to be Prime Minister of Australia and I think some of the decisions that we take in this country to bring about economic and social change are burdensome and impose great political challenge but then I think for a moment about the sort of challenges that the President has faced in recent weeks in reducing by some 30 per cent, a fuel subsidy, that has been for the benefit of every Indonesian citizen over so many years, and the big task he faces in ensuring that his country becomes economically more attractive to the rest of the world and he is making great progress and can I say to all the businessmen and women gathered here today that it is important that we invest in Indonesia's future because of all the shared challenges that Indonesia has with Australia, none is greater than the challenge of terrorism, a successful moderate Islamic Indonesia.
 Led by a man of compassion and a man of vision such as President Yudhoyono, is about the most powerful weapon that we can have against zealotry and extremism in our part of the world. Extremism breeds on an absence of democracy, extremism can breed on injustice and to the extent that a moderate Islamic Indonesia prospers and grows and strengthens its bonds with its democratic friends and neighbours, so we are able to deny to the terrorists and the zealots success, and a future breeding and training ground for those who they might recruit to their perverted goals.
 I want to say to you Mr President on behalf of the relatives and friends of those 88 Australians who died in the Bali nightclub in 2002, I want to say two things. I want to say that they will never forget the way in which the Indonesian police cooperated with the Australian police and caught those responsible.  We are grateful that Indonesian justice was so effective and I also want to say on behalf of those people, many of whom heard your inspiring speech on behalf of the Indonesian Government at the gathering in Bali, a year after that tragedy, what a wonderful demonstration it was of your personal commitment to ensuring that terrorism was rooted out in your country and your personal commitment to joining Australia in fighting the scourge of terrorism in our region.
  Today Mr President we've had very productive discussions, you've reaffirmed your support for Australia's involvement in the wider architecture of the region.  We have both reaffirmed our determination to build ever closer bonds between our two nations but above everything else we have reaffirmed our common commitment to some values that we have, our commitment to democracy, our determination to fight terrorism, our determination to lift the living standards and the trade opportunities of this part of the world.  President you come as a true friend, you come to this country as a man I respect and like a great deal and I look forward to many, many gatherings of this kind in the future as we build even more the bond that brings our two countries together.  I therefore in welcoming you Mr President, hope that you and your wife and your Ministerial colleagues have a very enjoyable time in Australia and I would like the Leader of the Opposition Mr Kim Beazley to support my remarks. Thank you.
 [ends]  


Thank you very very much, my fellow Australians.  It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Wadeye. I've heard quite a bit about this community and I've learnt in the short time I've been here of the intense cooperation that is taking place and the wish of so many of the leaders of this community to work together to create new opportunities for the young of the area, and to challenge and conquer some of the problems that have affected this community over many many years.
  Before going on, I would like to acknowledge some of the elders and Council members I have met.  They're very well known to you.  They're here - Theodora and Leon, and Mathias, and Tobias, and of course Terry Bullimore; the Executive Director of the Council.
 I want to compliment the community on the way in which it has taken responsibility for its own future. In the end the best that any government can offer the indigenous Australians of our nation, is the opportunity to share in the bounty and the wealth that this country has and that means ensuring that their access to education is the same as other Australians;  their access to health services, their access to jobs, and of course their access to decent housing. But in order to bring that about, it's necessary for local communities in return to accept responsibility and the whole basis of the new approach, if I can put it that way, and it is a new approach, is for the Federal Government, the Territory Government and local communities to work together to address problems, and to bring about practical solutions, and I know what a tremendous success you've had with the new approach to schooling in Wadeye.
  I was just talking to a new teacher who has come here in the last few weeks.  She said it was necessary because of the expanding numbers of the school. Now that is the best possible news that you can have in any indigenous community anywhere in Australia, because unless children have the opportunity for education, unless they have the incentive to be educated, unless they have encouragement from their community - and that is what has happened here in Wadeye - then the likelihood of them sharing that bounty, sharing in the future of this country is greatly reduced.  I am overjoyed to learn of the success of this particular community; to hear of the increase in the numbers coming to school, all of that is first class news for the future of the community and it's first class news for the future of indigenous policy.
  Now I do want to thank the elders for the very warm welcome that they've given me. We had a talk and they each presented in different areas, some of their aspirations for the future and I had the Secretary of my Department and my senior advisers with me and we've come here largely to listen, as well as to meet all of you and I had the opportunity of meeting the trainees and apprentices of the pre-fab slab factory just a few minutes ago and to see the opportunities (small at the moment but hopefully they'll grow) that are being opened up in traditional areas of trade skills, and this country is very short of skilled tradesmen - we need more of them - particularly in the traditional areas.
 Finally, before I finish and join all of you, I have an announcement of one or two new initiatives that we hope will be of assistance to the community. I am announcing today a package of some $2.7 million dollars of practical assistance.  The first element will be $2 million dollars to establish a new broadband link to the community, and this will mean, this will mean importantly more reliable land based telephone services and new services like the internet and video conferencing.  This will further connect your community with the rest of the Territory and the rest of Australia. It's important in so many ways, in the provision of health services, long distance, and provision of education services, and the normal communication and business transactions, and of course keeping track of what's happening in the rest of the world and $234,000 for the school to help with the larger number of students now attending and this $234,000 will be devoted towards classroom IT equipment, a Councillor and a nutrition program.  A nutrition programme is always very important in all schools anywhere in the world and an emphasis on nutrition is absolutely critical.
  And finally, an amount of $546,000 over four years for intensive support playgroups to help young families across the community with early childhood, health problems of early childhood, and general parenting assessments. Now this is once again an example of the practical approach that we are taking. Obviously, an isolated community needs communications assistance and the broadband link will do that.
 Clearly a school that is experiencing, joyfully, an increase in its enrolment, it needs more help in coping with the larger number of children, and of course providing assistance for early childhood issues through supporting play groups is a very practical way in which we can help the parents of Wadeye to deal with the many problems that parents face particularly, but not only, the early years of childhood of their sons and daughters.
 So my fellow Australians, thank you very much for your very warm and courteous, and friendly reception that you have extended to me.  This is a community I can tell with a lot of spirit, it is a community that's  determined to grab hold in a responsible way of its own future and I am here to say that we recognise that, we applaud it, we admire it, and we are prepared in cooperation with the Northern Territory Government to work together with you to deliver a better future for the citizens of Wadeye, and greater opportunity for all of them, to share in the plenty and opportunities of this great country of ours. Thank you very much.  


PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Chief Minister, David Tollner the Federal Member for Solomon, Nigel, thank you very much for your very gracious welcome on behalf of the Larrakai people. I'd like to congratulate your community on the great strides forward that have occurred over the last six years and contribution that the cooperation between your community and the Territory Government has made to the advancement of the welfare of your people. This is, as Claire said, a very important day.  This is the first agreement of what I hope are many between the Commonwealth and the various States about the delivery in a more practical and effective way of assistance to indigenous Australians.
As the Chief Minister has said, 30 percent of the population of the Northern Territory consists of Indigenous Australians. And it's therefore appropriate that the first of the agreements be between the Commonwealth and the Government of the Northern Territory. This agreement is focused on what I believe Australians overwhelming want and that is cooperation between Governments, an absence of blame shifting and name calling and a determination to deliver practical improvements and practical outcomes for indigenous Australians.
I have a very strong belief that the greatest thing that we in Government can offer indigenous Australians is a share of the bounty of this country and a share of the success and the future of this country. And the only way in which that can happen is to focus effectively on delivering practical outcomes in areas so critical to all of us; health, education, employment and housing. They are four things that matter to all Australians - doesn't matter whether you're an indigenous Australian or you're another part of the Australian community - delivering those outcomes is very important.
This agreement has three schedules. One of them very importantly focuses on the issue of housing and there's a very pragmatic agreement being reached between the Federal Government and Government of the Northern Territory about the provision of housing - where there's... in return for financial adjustment there is a responsibility on the Northern Territory Government to provide it. Now that to me is a practical way of doing it - Northern Territory Government working with the communities and working in an overarching way with the Federal Government is better able to understand what's needed and what should be provided. Once again there's a focus on the practical. But what pleases me about this agreement is that we have been able to reach it speedily and I want to thank the Chief Minister for all her commitment. I want to thank Amanda Vanstone, my Indigenous Affairs Minister who's very committed to the policy of delivering practical outcomes and I want to thank the Head of my Department and the Head of the Northern Territory Chief Ministers Department for the energy they have put in to it.
 Governments notoriously take quite a while to negotiate things; not only internationally but internally and the fact that we have been able to negotiate this very quickly is a tribute to the commitment of people. And I think, importantly, it's a tribute to a new mood of a no- nonsense desire to deliver outcomes and to get results. The time for making long speeches about these things is finished and the time for actually delivering some practical outcomes on the ground has arrived. And today's ceremony is part of it and I look forward of course to going to the Wadeye community and to... I'll be making one or two announcements there that will be important, particularly in relation to the ongoing wonderful education story. It's one of the best indigenous stories in Australia, what's happening in that community and having access to education and using education and valuing education is so important to the future of every young Australian, whether they're indigenous or not. And the fact that we have been able to make some progress there, through a spirit of cooperation involving both Governments and the local community is terrific. I give the greatest credit to the local community because it's they who've assumed the responsibility at a local level and without that assumption of responsibility at a local level you're not going to get an outcome. So it's a good news day for the indigenous Australians in the Northern Territory and it's an example I hope other Governments emulate and I do thank you Chief Minister for a last minute re-arrangement of the programme to bring it forward a little bit to accommodate my need to do a few things and get back to Canberra at 7 o'clock tonight to meet the Malaysian Prime Minister. It's great to be here and again to you Nigel and your Larrakia people, thank you very warmly for such a gracious welcome.
Thank you.
 [ends]


Dr Abdullah Badawi, the Prime Minister of Malaysia, your ministerial colleagues, my ministerial colleagues, Leader of the Opposition, your Excellency, ladies and gentleman. It's with enormous pleasure that I welcome you Sir to this, your official visit to Australia as Malaysia's Prime Minister.
I think it's fair and open and direct to say at the outset that there's been no relationship between two countries in recent years, about whose health there has been more commentary than the relationship between Australia and Malaysia. It's been constantly under the microscope of the commentariat, it's been constantly the subject of conjecture, much of it negative as in the nature of commentary in open democratic societies.
And in reflecting on that in preparing for the Prime Minister's visit to Australia I began to think about the reality of that relationship and two things more than anything else hit me about the reality of the relationship. And the first of them is something with which so many Australians are very familiar and that is the fact that there is no country in the world, either in aggregate numbers or proportionately where the alumni of Australian universities bulks larger than in Malaysia. And this owes a great deal to those who devised one of the greatest pieces of wisdom in Australia's foreign policy, the Colombo Plan, all those years ago not long after World War II.
And something else that perhaps many Australians might not be as aware and that is that as we speak there are two military exercises taking place in our region involving the military personnel of Australia and Malaysia. The reality of course is that the defence relationship between Australia and Malaysia is closer than the defence relationship that this country has with any other nation in the immediate region.
Now those two propositions, or those two facts rather illustrate that underneath the commentary and the pre-occupation with difference there has been a solid super structure to a relationship that has endured over a long period of time. And those links and the people-to-people links between our two countries have always been very strong.
 The Prime Minister and I both agreed this morning that if a relationship matters to two countries, inevitably there are going to be some differences on some issues. But more importantly than that, a focus on those things that unite the common interests, or represent the common interest of our two countries should be uppermost in our thoughts. We are part of the region, we are forever together as friends and partners in this region, we have a very strong history, we have a history of helping each other in time of need and I handed the Prime Minister a copy of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's document, 'The History of the Relationship between Australia and Malaysia between 1961 and 1966'. A period of time that saw the emergence of Malaysia as a federation in very difficult circumstances, that saw Australia come to the assistance of Malaysia at the time of confrontation. We also recall of course the years earlier, the contribution that Australians made along with many others during the Malayan emergency of the 1950s.
So it is a very strong and rich relationship. It's one, of course, that's been given modern focus by the joint challenge of terrorism and the links that exist between our two countries at a military and intelligence level are very important responses to the contemporary challenge of terrorism. But there's another equally important response and that is the fact that Malaysia, as in the case of Indonesia, is an exemplar of moderate progressive Islam.  A moderate progressive Islam addressing the needs of people, understanding the proud place of Islamic nations in the world, is a very powerful and enduring response to the extremists and the zealots who would seek to play on the disadvantage perceived or otherwise of those who are unhappy with their circumstances in life.
Today our discussions have covered the possibility of developing a Free Trade Agreement.  And discussions will commence between Mark Vaile of behalf of Australia and Dr Rafidah on behalf of Malaysia.  Two people who know each other well and have traded on matters in their respective portfolios over many years.  Mark is no stranger to negotiating free trade agreements on behalf of Australia and his counterpart from Malaysia is, I think, probably the longest-serving trade minister of any nation of our region, perhaps in the world.  So I think they will be a good match for each other in those very, very important negotiations. And if they can't resolve it over the negotiating table their joint passion for golf will enable them to resolve it elsewhere.
Those free trade negotiations will build on an already very strong economic relationship, particularly in terms of the heavy Malaysian investment in Australia.  I would like to see, and I know the Malaysian Prime Minister would like to see, more Australian students studying in Malaysia, to offer some reciprocation, or perhaps to a greater degree, of the number Malaysian students who are studying in Australia.
And finally can I say that I'm announcing as part of this visit by the Prime Minister the establishment of an Australia-Malaysia Institute to be chaired by the eminent Australian lawyer Michael Abbott QC and this body will bring together younger political leaders, journalists, commentators, academic, businessmen and women who have an interest in a deeper study and reflection on the nature of the relationship between our two countries.
Prime Minister, you come to Australia, you come to Canberra as a friend.  You come as somebody who I've got to know very well over a number of years, a period of time as deputy prime minister of your country, and more recently as Prime Minister.  Your country is very important to Australia, we have shared a lot of history and I'm sure that we will share much more as the years go by.  We welcome you warmly as a friend, as the leader of a country that we value immensely and as the leader of a country that has a very important role to play in partnership with Australia as the years go by.  Prime Minister, I invite the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kim Beazley, to support my remarks,
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Chris. As I come to the end of a week which has taken me to many parts of Australia and has reminded me both in a very positive way, and also in a very sad way, of the many responsibilities that come the way of this country and of this country's Prime Minister.
 I feel quite encouraged, even inspired by the realisation that I'm ending the week involved in opening something that is very much about the future of this country. This is a wonderful story; it's the story of young, capable, forward looking, highly talented Australians who have demonstrated yet again that there is no field of human endeavor where Australians can't perform at a world class level. And the fact that all of this is happening right here in the middle of my electorate of Bennelong, in what I call the 'Silicone Valley of Australia', is just the icing on the cake.
 I do remember Chris's address to the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering and Innovation Council and as somebody who was educated in Law and in the Liberal Arts rather than in Science, one of the great fascinations of my time as Prime Minister has been the opportunity to chair that Council, which has brought me into contact with so many of the brightest and the best that this country has to offer. And I'd like to say again how important it is to me to hope that one day the great scientists of Australia will be as revered, not only in this country but around the world, as our great sports men and women. And I say that as a frequently described 'cricket tragic' and as somebody whose interest in various sporting activities is very well known.
 This centre will bring to Australia, to Sydney, to North Ryde a nerve center that will be at the forefront of research into new generation wireless technology. It will enable these very talented young Australians and if I may say so and I hope you don't misunderstand me, but it's not only the members of the Australian Cricket Team and the New South Police that look young these days, it's also our very eminent scientists and people with great technology. But this facility will keep Australia at the forefront. It will also mean that this company, Agere Systems, can look after a clientele which is 70 percent in the Asian Pacific Region. And one of the facets of this week for me has been and for all Australia has been a reminder of the importance of our links in this part of the world. The growth of the markets in the Asian Pacific Region, the capacity of this country to open up market opportunities in so many areas into our region, the sales opportunities and the reminder of the great human resources that Australia has.
 We of course now have a situation where the most widely spoken foreign language, if I can describe it perhaps a little inaccurately that way, in Australia is a combination of Mandarin and Cantonese; now more widely spoken as a foreign language than any other foreign language. It's a reminder of the great contribution that people from our region, especially but not only from China and other countries with an ethnic Chinese population is making to the growth, particularly of Sydney but also generally of Australia.
 So all of those things in a way come together and it's therefore a real pleasure to be associated with this ceremony. I wish Agere Systems well, I know it will succeed because it does bring together many of the brightest and the best that Australia has to offer. They're young, they have a real commitment to the growth and development of this country as a centre of technology and excellence, and as a Government we're determined to help them.
 Chris asked a rhetorical question; why did Agere Systems come to Australia? I can help you answer that by saying Chris that it came to Australia because this is a very strong and growing and well managed economy and I'm delighted to help provide that. I just filled that tiny bit in of the jigsaw puzzle, so nobody's left in any doubt as to why. And you do need a stable political and economic climate for IP. You need it for any business investment, particularly something that needs a guarantee of legal protection, a mature, stable, legal, economic and political system.
 Thank you very much for asking me, I wish the company well and I know that it will be a tremendous success story in the years ahead and I have very great pleasure therefore in declaring Agere Systems, North Ryde open for business.
[ends]


Thank you very much Tom, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to thank Tom and the Menzies Research Centre for inviting me here tonight, but more than that, for the contribution that the centre makes to the great battle of ideas.  In the end political parties are sustained more by ideas than anything else and the contribution of this centre to the constancy of Liberal ideas is absolutely crucial.  And it's also very fitting that I'm here in Melbourne to offer some reflections on Australian federalism, because it was in this city, as you all know, that our Federal Parliament sat for the first 26 years of the federated Australia.
  A little over 60 years ago, Robert Menzies spoke in those ringing terms of his about the 'magnificent journey' that he and the other founding fathers and mothers of the Liberal Party were embarking on.  And guiding this journey over that 60 years has been a philosophy of private enterprise and individual freedom, harnessed to building a strong, united, competitive and fair Australia.
  The Liberal Party, importantly amongst centre right parties around the world, is the custodian of two traditions - it's the custodian of the classical liberal tradition, it's also the custodian of the conservative tradition in Australian politics.  It continues the vision that Menzies had of a party that stands above sectional interests to represent the great mainstream of the Australian community.  We are a party both of courageous reform when that reform is needed. And also a party that defends and preserves the traditions of Australia that we all cherish.  And the Menzies Research Centre, by delivering ideas and policy options to the heart of Government, is uniquely placed to extend Australian Liberalism's historic contribution to what our founder called 'magnificent journey'.
  I'm very privileged to lead a Government committed to renewal from a position of strength.  And after nine years in government let me enthusiastically pick up what Tom said, and that is that we are more determined than ever to engage in the battle of ideas.  We know that if Australia is to prosper further through the 21st century we must continue along the path of vigorous reform.
 In addressing the condition of federalism in Australia let me make it clear at the outset that the federal structure of the Australian nation will remain.  The responsibility of all of us in government is to make the federal system work better for all the Australian people. If we had our time again, we might have organised ourselves differently, perhaps many of us have had those thoughts, I certainly have on numerous occasions, but they are only thoughts, thoughts can be beautiful but they are only thoughts and there's not much point in indulgencing ourselves in theorising.  And in that context there's been a little bit of commentary of late that my Government has discarded its political inheritance in a headlong rush towards centralism.  Ironically, this charge has arisen just as the Commonwealth is being urged, often by the same people who make the comments, to assume more and more responsibilities - especially in areas of economic and social infrastructure traditionally owned and run by the States.
Let me say at the outset that these fears of a new centralism rest on a complete misunderstanding of the Government's thinking and its reform direction.  Where we seek at present a change in the Federal-State balance, our goal is to expand individual choice, freedom and opportunity, not to expand the reach of the central government.  Let me illustrate in a policy area very close to my heart and close to the hearts of many in the audience, that is the issue of industrial relations.  The desire to have a more national system of industrial relations is driven by our wish that as many businesses and employees as possible have the freedom, the flexibility and the individual choice which is characteristic of the Government's philosophy in the area of workplace relations.  And this can only be achieved at present by removing the dead weight of Labor's highly-regulated State industrial relations systems.
In this area the goal is to free the individual, and not to trample on the States.  We have no desire at all to take over functions that are being properly discharged by the States and the Territories.  On the contrary, through the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax, the Government has delivered the most important federalist breakthrough since the Commonwealth took over income tax powers through the exercise of the defence power during World War II.  But nor will we shirk our responsibility to seek the best possible outcomes for the nation and to extend Australia's economic prosperity through this century.
I am, first and last, an Australian nationalist.  When I think about all this country is and everything it can become, I have very little time for vestiges of state parochialism.  This Government's approach to our Federation is quite simple.  Our ideal position is that the States should meet their responsibilities and we will meet ours.  And our first impulse is to seek state cooperation with States and Territories on national challenges where there is overlapping responsibility.  But I have never been one to genuflect uncritically at the altar of States' rights.  Our Federation should be about better lives for people, not quiet lives for governments.
Australian Liberalism has always been a highly optimistic creed.  It values freedom and initiative over compulsion and conformity.  And the golden thread of this inheritance is to trust the choices of the Australian people.  It is a philosophy that we bring to areas such as education, healthcare, workplace relations and helping parents find the right balance between work and family responsibilities.  It is a philosophy that has a timeless quality in a world of constant change.  And I believe that part of that change, especially in the last 10 to 20 years, has been the greater focus by the Australian people on ties to nation and to their local community, and less on traditional state loyalties.
  What I call the nationalisation of both our economy and our society can be seen very clearly over time.  When I was a young solicitor in Sydney in the early 1960s, our legal firms were confined exclusively to state capitals.  A Sydney law firm like the then Allen Allen and Hemsley, now of course Allens Arthur Robinson, would, for example, have Victorian agents for its business in Melbourne.  The very expression Victorian agents sounds quaint, even old fashioned in the world of the 21st century.  Today, of course, that is no longer the case and the same trend has occurred across all sectors of the Australian economy.  Think too of something really important and that is the nationalisation of our football codes.  Once upon a time, someone following the Victorian Football League would have been an oddity in Sydney or Brisbane.  Today, we all put in our footy tips for the AFL every Friday, in many codes in the case of prime ministers.  And who would have thought a few years ago that Melbourne would for a time hold the record for the largest Rugby crowd in Australian history?
In the vital area of education, the increased mobility of our population means that no fewer than 80,000 Australian students move from one State or Territory to another each year.  And against this backdrop of the nationalisation of our economy and our society there is understandable frustration, even anger, among the Australian people at what they see as the constant buck-passing in our federal system and a failure to achieve uniformity when that uniformity will deliver obvious benefits.
Too often we talk about cost-shifting.  All Australians hear is blame-shifting. As societies change and attitudes change, so there are inevitable pressures on political structures and parties to change as well.  I'm reminded especially of this when I think of our party's conversion to the cause of industrial relations reform.  For many years, the Liberal Party was more than comfortable with the old system of centralised wage fixing and arbitration.  I well recall Menzies praising the system's contribution to industrial peace and productivity in writings after his retirement.  Like many others, he saw any move towards workplace bargaining as leading inevitably to strikes and industrial dislocation.  This is not a view that many Liberals would hold today.  And nor is there any desire within the Australian community - in a more entrepreneurial and self-reliant nation - to turn back the clock to what we would now see as a highly illiberal industrial relations system.
Similarly, my own attitude towards our federal system has evolved over a life in politics.  Like other Liberals, I am a strong constitutionalist.  The dispersal of power that a federal system promotes, together with its potential, and I stress potential, to deliver services closer to peoples' needs, are threads of our political inheritance that I have always valued and greatly respected.  The trouble is that, in practice, there is often less to these arguments than meets the eye. For instance, the view that State governments have benign decentralist tendencies has always been something of a myth.  At various times, State Governments of both persuasions have found occasion to trample over local government decision-making.  Without passing judgement on particular cases, it does expose the selective indignation of the States when it comes to the virtues of decentralisation.  And a State education bureaucracy can appear pretty remote if you are a parent in Mount Isa or Kununurra struggling to make sense of your child's unintelligible report card.  This indifference to localism can apply to metropolitan areas as well.  In recent years in both New South Wales and Queensland, government schools wishing to expel students under a strict anti-drugs policy have been overruled by State bureaucracies, to the understandable chagrin of parents and teachers.
But Mr Chairman, the major source of discontent with Australia's federal system today must turn on the underwhelming performance of current State governments following the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax.  Those who argue that my Government has embraced centralism are suffering from a severe case of historical myopia.  Our decision five years ago to grant every last dollar of the GST to States and Territories was the greatest vote of confidence in the federal system in the Liberal Party's history.  For years, literally for years - first as Treasurer and then as Prime Minister - I sat across the table from Premiers of both political persuasions who pleaded for access to a growth tax.  These calls came as strongly from Charles Court and Joh Bjelke-Petersen and Jeff Kennett as they did from Neville Wran and John Cain and Steve Bracks.  They said, in affect: 'Give us a growth tax and we will leave you alone.  We will get on and deliver the services like public hospitals, public transport, police and government schools which are the core responsibilities of state governments.'  We delivered with the GST.  And it liberated the States from their dependence on inefficient financial taxes and from general revenue assistance grants provided by the Commonwealth.
No government in 60 years has given the States more fiscal autonomy to fulfil their constitutional responsibilities.  In March 2000, we calculated that States and Territories would benefit in the first eight years by $3.7 billion over and above the previous revenue sharing arrangements.  In fact, the latest estimates suggest that that benefit has climbed to almost $10 billion.  Over the next five years, States and Territories collectively will be $16 billion better off than they would have been under the arrangements that I inherited when I replaced Mr Keating as Prime Minister.  In that time, the windfall to Victoria alone will be approximately $3.2 billion.  All the Commonwealth asks now is that the States make a determined effort to meet their responsibilities and obligations.  Part of that bargain was to reduce the burden of state taxes.  Peter Costello has outlined a plan which would cut indirect taxes by $8.8 billion by 2009-2010 and still leave the States better off by around $7.5 billion.  This targets inefficient, nuisance taxes on business - especially a range of stamp duties. Abolishing these taxes will help Australian firms to compete in a tough, competitive world.  It is not centralism to want to cut taxes.  It is liberalism.
 Looking across our federal system, we do find areas where the Federation works well, areas where the case for rationalisation is strong, and areas where a more incremental approach is the best way to proceed.  Cooperation between the Commonwealth and the States on water reform is a good example of how the federal system can work for Australia's betterment.  While the States have a constitutional responsibility for water management, a national approach was needed to deal with what I have called the great conservation challenge of our age.  The greatest of Australian rivers, the Murray, flows from Queensland to South Australia.  What happens in one State directly affects irrigation and the environment downstream in another State.  Farmers need to have secure access to water - our scarcest resource - on a sustainable basis. The Commonwealth therefore led the development of the National Water Initiative and has now established the National Water Commission, with the cooperation, I'm pleased to say, of most State and Territory governments.
Only last week I signed a path breaking agreement with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory.  And it set out how together the Commonwealth Government and the Government of the Territory could better deliver services to Aboriginal Australians.  It included an arrangement by which the Territory would provide housing programmes on behalf of both governments.  We also agreed that we will continue to work together to ensure that indigenous families can have far greater choice in how they can lease Aboriginal land to have their own homes and to build their own businesses.  I hope that we can have similar agreements very soon with other States and Territories.
  These two examples, water and a limited area of indigenous policy, show that, with sufficient political commitment and goodwill, there is no intrinsic barrier to the Commonwealth and the States together tackling great national challenges.
  In other cases, however, I believe, that the existing structure of Federal-State responsibilities has run its course. Soon, my Government will unveil a new round of industrial relations reforms to bring Australia's workplace relations system finally into the 21st century.  Reform is vital if Australia is to further consolidate the transformation of its economy to one where wages are based on the capacity of firms to pay and on the productivity of individual workplaces.  We made very good progress towards a more flexible and competitive system with the passage of the Workplace Relations Act in 1996.  But, as many of you know, important reforms in areas such as unfair dismissals and improved flexibility in agreement making have been blocked repeatedly in the Senate.
  We've also seen Labor States gum up workplaces with regulation in recent years, often at the behest of the unions.  Independent contractors, the very epitome of the free enterprise system, have been under regular attack from unions and Labor Governments looking to place barriers on the freedom to contract and to place conditions on the use of independent contractors.  In last year's election campaign, the Government promised to protect the rights and the legal status of independent contractors.  And we are well advanced with plans to do so.
  But with the unexpected but welcome and favourable election outcome in the Senate, we are now in a position to drive the industrial relations reform process further in ways consistent with our philosophy.  I believe that a single set of national laws on industrial relations is an idea whose time has come.  It is the next logical step towards a workplace relations system that supports greater freedom, flexibility and individual choice.  Again, this is not about empowering Canberra.  It is about liberating workplaces from Colac to Cooktown.
 To further demonstrate that a uniform industrial relations system is no embrace of radical centralism, I remind you that the Kennett Government here in Victoria referred these powers some years ago and the Bracks Government has maintained this position.  And I'm pleased to note today in Sydney the Leader of the Parliamentary Liberal Party in New South Wales committed a further Coalition Government in that state to a referral of industrial relations powers to the Commonwealth in the event of a successful outcome at the next election. And let me emphasise that there is no evidence that this referral of powers in Victoria has disadvantaged the workers in this state.  And that experience exposes the rather hollow character of some of the scare campaigns engaged in in this area by our political opponents..
We have come a long way from the days when the Industrial Relations Club set the wages and conditions for workplaces around this country.  But in an age when our productivity must match that of global competitors, forcing Australian firms to comply with six different workplace relations systems is an anachronism that we can no longer afford.  The current system of overlapping federal and state awards is too complex, costly and inefficient.  Employers and employees frequently face a patchwork of regulation, having to accommodate overlapping state and federal regulations within the same workplace. And there are currently some 2,300 federal awards and over 1,700 state awards, and multiple state and federal awards can apply to same business.  Small businesses in particular struggle to cope with that complex system.  Our preference is for a single system to be agreed between the Commonwealth and the States - as was the case with Victoria's referral of power in 1996.  But, in the absence of referrals by the States, the Government will do what it reasonably can to move towards a more streamlined, unified and efficient system.  We are considering a package of reforms based on the corporations power that will bring roughly 85-90 per cent of employees into a national workplace relations system.
  I want to remind you, however, that those areas where the Commonwealth seeks to cover the field in our federal system will always be very rare.  In most cases, making our Federation work better will rely on an incremental approach.  Incremental reform usually gets a bad press, especially from editorial writers accustomed to dispensing advice in 800 words or less.  But incremental or piecemeal reform is in fact the kind of reform that liberals and conservatives invariably are most comfortable with.  Indeed, as Karl Popper taught us half a century ago, it is often the most rational approach - especially if the alternative is utopian social engineering.
Health and education are two areas where overlapping roles and responsibilities are built into our federal system. Despite problems that arise from time to time, I am not one who regularly denigrates our health and education systems.  They are among the best in the world.  And I had a vivid reminder here in Melbourne today in visiting that wonderful bionic ear centre of the sheer excellence and world class of the medical scientist that this country has produced.  Among comparable countries in our health system we rank highly: third for people's life expectancy; sixth for healthy life expectancy; and third in the OECD for overall health system effectiveness.  Our education system is also rising to the challenge.  According to the most recent data, Australian 15-year olds are performing well against benchmarks for reading, mathematics and science when compared with their counterparts elsewhere.
 There will always be great room for improvement and the Australian Government has a particular responsibility to promote choice and to ensure high national standards both areas.  But I am not persuaded by some of the options for radical reform that are often canvassed.  In particular, I am not persuaded that the effectiveness or efficiency of healthcare in Australia would be improved by the Commonwealth assuming responsibility for public hospitals.  Any possible gains would be outweighed by the disadvantages to local hospitals and their communities of management by a more distant health bureaucracy.  And it is unlikely that consensus could be achieved for the necessary overhaul of Commonwealth-State financial relations that would follow such a transform.
My Government has adopted a more targeted approach to finding practical options to improve the delivery of health services to Australians.  And last year, I commissioned a Task Force to prepare these options and its focus has been on examining pressures at the interface of the primary, acute, rehabilitative, aged and community care sectors and the obstacles to seamless care within our system.  And these options will help inform my discussions with State Premiers when we next meet at the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
We do need to look carefully at the respective roles and responsibilities of Commonwealth, State and Territory governments for health, aged and disability care.  We do so with only one intent: to make life easier for older people, those with disabilities and those who care for them.  We are also looking at ways to drive reform in a targeted fashion in the area of vocational and technical education.  Australia currently enjoys the lowest unemployment rate for 30 years.   And this has created skills shortages in parts of the economy and as a result in last year's election campaign we made far-reaching commitments to boost opportunities in traditional trades.  I've said many times before, and I repeat tonight, that this nation made a cultural error a generation ago when we embraced uncritically the notion that the highest path of success for a young person was to go to university.  This did a huge disservice to the 70 per cent of young people who do not go direct from school to university.  And it reflected an intellectual failure to understand the continuing needs of our economy.
The Commonwealth is intent on driving a cultural shift in the area of traditional trades with the creation for the first time of federally-funded Australian Technical Colleges in 24 centres around Australia.  Each college will be run independently in a way that promotes choice, flexibility and excellence.  Each will be linked with industry.  Teaching staff will offered performance pay and the option of signing Australian Workplace Agreements.  Greater award flexibility is also part of the solution to the problem of skills shortages.  Too often, rigid State-based awards create licensing bottlenecks in traditional trades.  In the housing and construction industry, for example, a person can be required to undertake three or four years training on apprentice wages without the option of more specific training over a shorter period.  Many State awards also include barriers to the increased up-take of school-based New Apprentices and part-time New Apprentices.  A single, unified and flexible system of industrial relations law will help to deliver a more market-oriented training system.  And while the States currently own and run the TAFE system, the Commonwealth provides approximately $2.1 billion in annual funding.   The Commonwealth will seek to further improve the national training system and to make it more responsive to the needs of industry by resuming the functions of the Australian National Training Authority in the middle of this year.  For some, this is yet another terrible incursion into States' rights.  In reality, it is the Federal Government stepping in where eight different state systems are failing to deliver what the nation needs.
  Mr Chairman, can I conclude with some broader reflections?  Australians are a non-ideological, pragmatic and empirical people.  They want governments to deliver outcomes and not make excuses.  They want governments that take responsibility, not states of denial.  Now and in the future, my Government stands ready to cooperate with States and Territories on Australia's great reform challenges.  And we will continue to err on the side of cooperation.   But while ever the States fail to meet their core responsibilities there will be inevitable tensions in our federal system.  With the GST, the States no longer have an alibi. There are times when tensions can arise within Australian liberalism's traditional commitment to limited government.  This Government recognises that dispersal of power is basic to our philosophy.  But so is leaning against an over-governed Australia - something that can become all too apparent in a federal system with eight Labor Governments.  We resolve this ultimately by pursuing policies that spread power, freedom and opportunity to the suburbs, workplaces, towns and farms right across our nation.  In the end, we approach the challenges of Australian federalism as we approach other challenges - not by walking away from our political inheritance, but by seeking to extend it.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Dr Moriarty, Professor Clark, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  I am not a stranger to this centre, I have followed this wonderful technology over many years and I'm especially delighted to have been asked to come here today to open this new centre. It enables me to do a number of things, it enables me I know on your behalf to salute the magnificent humanitarian contribution to our country and to many others of Professor Graeme Clark who really is one of the great national treasures of this country.  He is a person whose scientific skill and personal dedication over many years has brought unfathomable, to the rest of us unimaginable joy and pleasure to people who have benefited from this wonderful technology.
It is also an occasion for me to collectively salute, or salute the collective of the Australian medical science community.  We are very good at many things we Australians, and we're not reluctant to say it in appropriate terms on appropriate occasions.  One of the areas where we are exceptionally good is the area of medical science, this country has for years punched above its weight in the area of medical science.  When you look at our population and you count the groundbreaking contributions that have been made by Australians in the field of medical science, and of course the bionic technology for which Professor Clark and this centre, or this institute, is famous is but one, an important one, of those many examples.  Anything that brings joy to children is something that touches us all in a very special way.  And that of course is what this centre has done and what Professor Clark and his colleagues have done over a very long period of time and the opportunities that are now in front of them and the potential to transfer the science and the technology from the ear to the spinal cord is something of which I have to confess as very much a layman in the area of science, an enthusiastic layman, is something of which I was not particularly conscious until recently, to have that described to me and the possibilities that exist this morning was a real education.
It is true that I take a great interest in the workings of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Technology Council, I chair it regularly.  For somebody who was not educated in the sciences it's a new experience and something that I hope in my halting layman's way I can make a contribution.  But it's revealed further to me the wonderful array of talent that we have in this country, not only the more mature and experienced doyens such as Professor Clark but also the very young whose technological ability and scientific skill and sense of adventure in their research is a thing of which all of us can be proud.
Can I say how generous it was of Professor Clark to donate the entirety of the $300,000 of the Prime Minister's Science Prize to this new centre.  We had previously contributed some $700,000 but inspired very much by Professor Clark I am very pleased to announce today that the Federal Government will contribute an additional sum of $5 million to the new centre.  And of course separately from that the, I know the centre will of course be competing for support in relation to the normal research grants that are available.
But this is a great institution, this city without in any way of course denigrating the efforts of medical research in other parts of Australia, one of the very special things that Melbourne brings to our nation over the years has been a particular measure of community and philanthropic support for scientific and medical research and it's one of those great characteristics of the people of Melbourne and the business community of Melbourne, so many of whom are represented here today - their generosity and their willingness to contribute has been quite special and one of the things that marks the contribution of the city and the people of Melbourne to our national life.
I have enormous pleasure in declaring this new centre open, I wish it well, I know it will be successful because it's going to be run by a very dedicated team, it's going to be staffed by talented professionals and it's going to have a great humanitarian goal and that is the further relief of human suffering and if the first quarter of the 21st century in the fullness of time is marked by anything I would venture to suggest that the application of nanotechnology and related activities to the areas of medical science will probably be the thing that distinguishes that 25 or 30 years of the 21st century more than anything else and we as Australians should be very proud that we're in the forefront of it, we have the people, we have the commitment and we have the desire to play a major role and this centre will do it.  I have great pleasure in declaring it open, I wish Professor Clark well, I again thank him on behalf of his fellow Australians for what he has done for our nation and what his team has done, he has made us all very proud and I am especially delighted to be part of this special occasion.
Thank you.
[ends]  


My fellow Australians, there are many privileges come the way of a Prime Minister of this country but none over the past nine years has been greater for me than the opportunity to meet the men and women of the Australian Defence Force. To be warmed by them, to be encouraged by them, to be reassured by them. And so it was that early in February this year, when visiting the province of Aceh I had the opportunity of meeting some of the young men and women whose lives we honour today.
 To be reminded of just what wonderful people we have in our defence forces.  Everything about them was so beautifully Australian. They were direct, they were friendly, they were tough, they were courageous but they were also compassionate. They were doing something in our name for the poor people of Indonesia. They were doing good deeds in the name of Australia and that of course what is so heartbreaking about the event that we mark today.
 And as we gather to give thanks to their lives, as we gather so inadequately to offer words of consolation and hope to their loved ones, I thought of that day, I thought of a pilot on the C-130 going to Aceh and I said to him: "It's a great day for flying." He turned to me, he says: "Mate, everyday is a beautiful day for flying.'' And he smiled at me very warmly and benignly. And it summed up to me, the great love of service life that these young men and women, all of them, have.
 And as we reflect on their lives and we give thanks for them, I hope their loved ones can draw consolation from the fact that they died doing something that they wanted to do. They believed in it, they thrived on it, they did it well and they did us proud as they did it. And I also hope that as a nation, and we gather in this Great Hall of our National Parliament, we reflect on our national life.
 We might also take a resonant message from their lives. Sometimes people reflect negatively on modern life. The example of these young men and women is the most reassuring message and resonance that we can have, that the soul and the character of modern Australia is good and decent.
 They epitomised everything about our way of life that we believe in and we treasure, their commitment, their decency, their love, their compassion, their cheekiness, their cheerfulness, all of those things that are so beautifully Australian. And so as we gather in the shadow of the greatest national commemoration that we Australians mark, that is ANZAC Day, we give thanks to their lives. We offer our love, and our support, and our compassion to those that have been left behind. We thank them for what they have done in our name and we give thanks for their representation of the virtues and the values of the country we love so dearly, and the country they loved so dearly, and the country they died in the service of and in the service of all humanity.   


Thank you very much Mr Dixon, Minister of Commerce Bo, Vice Foreign Minister Yang, Vice Chairman Zhang, Vice Minister Yang, and Ambassador Fu Ying.  Dr Alan Thomas, the Australian Ambassador to China, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is the fifth visit that I have paid to China since I became Prime Minister in March of 1996.  It is the case that this has, in the context of relations between Australia and China, this visit has special historic resonance because last night a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between Australia and China which was the commencement process in negotiations between our two countries to see if we can conclude a Free Trade Agreement.  Australia enters those negotiations with great commitment and great enthusiasm.  We enter the negotiations seeing in China a nation which is very important, not only to Australia's future but also very important to the future of our region and indeed the future of the world.  China's rapid economic growth over the past 10 years is increasingly written about and remarked upon because it is a reality which has implications, I believe of a beneficial kind, not only for China herself but for the rest of the world.
  I don't intent to bore you with statistics about what has happened to the relationship between Australia and China economically over the past few years, except to remark in that in the past decade our exports to China have quadrupled.  And we all can recall different contributions that have been made to that remarkable economic growth.  At a political level in my experience as Prime Minister the foundation for the current very strong and positive nature of the relationship was in fact laid in a meeting that I had with the former President Jiang Zemin in the margins of the APEC meeting in Manila in 1996.  In fact when I first became Prime Minister our relationship went through some difficult times.  I don't of course accept any responsibility for that, I am simply locating it in the context of relations between our two nations.  But I set about and my Government and particularly my Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer, set about building the relationship.  And that meeting I had with the former President proceeded upon a very realistic basis and that was that our two nations were very different - we were different in population, we were difficult in culture, we were different in political structure and we looked at the world from different perspectives.  But we shared a number of things that we believe if properly addressed could build a very positive and strong relationship.  And in our discussions in Manila in 1996 we laid that groundwork and the groundwork simply meant that we would focus on those things that we could build together for the future, we would understand our differences, we would respect them, we would recognise that we would disagree on a number of strategic political issues and always would, but we would not allow those disagreements to contaminate the relationship, not only of the economic character but also the growing people to people links that exist between our two countries.
Whenever I address a gathering of people concerned about the relationship between Australia and China, I point out that in Australia after English the most widely spoken languages are of course the two Chinese dialects of Mandarin and Cantonese.  It is a measure of the investment that Australia now has in Australians of ethnic Chinese background. I can also say on a personal note that my own electorate of Bennelong has something like 13 to 15 per cent of its current enrolment of constituents who are of ethnic Chinese background and I can report favourably on those habits of theirs that I'm most interested in because I am still the Member for Bennelong.
But ladies and gentlemen, the point I make about the history of the contemporary relationship between Australia and China is that it is built upon a sensible foundation.  It is built upon a recognition that if you want to build an enduring association with a nation you should do it within a realistic framework.  You should not pretend that it has a character that it doesn't have.  You should not allow it to be dominated by differences and dominated by history, although it should be informed and instructed by history.  Rather it should be dominated by those areas of agreement and positive endeavour together that can take to the two countries forward.  And that's been the reason why at a political level our relationship has been productive. It's why with the cooperation of men and women of business from both countries our economic relationship has grown so remarkably.  And it's why we have now come to the point where Australia and China can try and achieve an even greater level of economic and commercial involvement and commitment to each other.  I have frequently said over the past few weeks that whether or not Australia and China can achieve a Free Trade Agreement will not alter the central reality that our relationship is already strong and that China is a remarkable export destination and has grown to the extent that I have described, nothing can alter that, the worst that could happen is that we will still be in the marvellous position we are at the present time.  But we from the Australian side are inherently optimistic. We believe that there is a lot more that we have to offer each other and we believe that the negotiations that we are about to embark on, and I want to record my immense gratitude to Mark Vaile, the Australian Trade Minister, and to his Chinese counterpart, for the contribution that both of them have made to the point that we have now reached.
So we are close, we are great trading partners and we will be even greater trading partners even without the Free Trade Agreement.  But if we can achieve it, it will be a model to the rest of the world of the capacity of two countries, so different in many respects, yet sharing not only in the region and particularly given the complementarity of our economies an economic future, it will be a wonderful example to others around the world.
My discussions of course have not only centred on commercial and economic issues - they have also centred on strategic and political issues which are of immense importance to Australia and immense importance to China.  Both countries share a commitment to a peaceful resolution of outstanding issues across the Taiwan Straits.  Australia has for many years supported a One China policy and I have reaffirmed my Government's commitment to that policy during my discussions with the President and the Premier.  We have also communicated our view, a very strong view, that differences should be resolved in a peaceful manner and I am reassured by the statements that have been made to me that that is the overwhelming desire of the Chinese leadership.  We appreciate very much indeed the role that China has played in  bringing North Korea to the negotiating table.  There is no country in the world that has a greater influence on North Korea than China.  There is no issue in our region which if mishandled by any of the participants has a greater potential to damage us all than the North Korean issue.  And we all share a responsibility to make a contribution towards a proper resolution of that, not least of course North Korea herself, and the more outlandish pretensions of North Korea in relation to nuclear capacity are of concern to all of the countries in the region and I am again immensely reassured by the commitment of China to a proper resolution of that issue.
In recent months of course Australia has demonstrated in different ways her very deep commitment to the affairs of the region.  The overwhelming and spontaneous response of the Australian public, as well as the Government's response, to the devastation of the Indian Ocean tsunami, particularly as it was visited upon the people of Indonesia, was a reminder of how we saw ourselves helping our neighbours, helping at home so to speak because we see the region as our home in a very practical fashion.  It follows from that of course that Australia sees herself naturally and properly being part of evolving regional political arrangements and political structures.  Not as a supplicant but as a contributing player to the evolvement and the development of the region.
Ladies and gentlemen, China has changed enormously over the past 10 years.  It has changed dramatically, even more dramatically over a longer period.  And let me here, as the current Prime Minister of Australia, having held that position now for more than nine years, acknowledge the contribution that my predecessors on both sides of Australian politics have made to the development of the relationship.  And I mention that very deliberately because it is a given of Australian politics, we will argue about the detail, we will argue about who is entitled to claim the bulk of the credit, but we won't do it today, we'll do all of that, but we will not argue about the reality that Australia and China have much to offer each other.  China's greatest contribution to Australia is of course the some 500,000 now almost Australians of ethnic Chinese descent, not all of them have come directly from mainland China, indeed many have come from other parts of the Chinese diaspora in our region, but they have all made a wonderful contribution to our country and one of the enduring strengths of the modern relationship is the ability of so many Australians of Chinese descent to relate to the bilateral contact between our two nations, it is a constant source of nourishment and renewal to all of us.
And very finally Mr Chairman can I pay a tribute to the two chambers, the two bodies that have brought this luncheon together.  The dynamism and the commitment of businessmen and women from both countries is so important to the development of the relationship.  I have forgotten, and I never will, it will be one of the more enduring recollections in the time that I've been Prime Minister, my association with the consortium and with (inaudible) and the Guangdong province and the Chinese Government in the negotiation of the LNG contract back in 2002.  It was a wonderful coming together of the commercial commitment of two countries and also the political leadership which made together as a group that contract a possibility and made through it an enormous contribution to the future development of the economies of the two countries and I'm cheered by the news that it is ahead of schedule and the deliveries, the first deliveries are likely to occur next year.  That is a reminder to my Chinese audience that we Australians are dependable, reliable, we do what we say we're going to do, we do it with a minimum of fuss, we do it with no interruption, we do it not only on time but occasionally ahead of time and I know that is a message that my fellow Australians would very much like me to convey to all of you very strongly.
So can I say our Chinese guests, to the Minister and to the Ambassador, to convey again to your colleagues in the government how much Janette and I have appreciated the hospitality that you have extended to us, it has been a short trip, I will be returning to China in a few days to take part in the Boao Forum and I will have something more detailed to say about the relationship between Australia and our involvement in the region.  But this last 24 hours in Beijing has achieved a lot, I hope that the negotiations will, when they're completed and they will be difficult, that will achieve even more.  I thank you very warmly, I am sure that the relationship between our two countries will go from strength to strength.
Thank you.  


Thank you very much Mr Ambassador, Mr Imai, distinguished members of the Japanese business community, it is a great pleasure for me and for my colleagues to be present at this important lunch.
In my discussion earlier today with the METI Minister I said that in relations between countries and economic matters old friends were the best friends. And commencing with the landmark Commerce Agreement that was signed between Australia and Japan as far back as 1957 this relationship of ours has been a strong, steady, loyal and consistent one.
In a major speech on Australian foreign policy which I delivered in Sydney only a few weeks ago, I said that Australia had no closer partner in the region than Japan.  I would extend that to say that Australia has no more loyal and valuable customer in the world than Japan.
Many of the members of the Japanese business community here today have themselves made very strong personal commitments to the relationship which have gone beyond their commercial interests and responsibilities.
Mr Imai has made not only a contribution as Chairman of the Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committee, but he has also agreed to become the Chairman of the Australian-Japan Year of Exchange in 2006 which seeks to further strengthen the ties between our two countries.
I'd also like to acknowledge the contribution of Mr Murofushi to the Australia-Japan Conference Series founded in 2001 and have done much to remind both countries of the ongoing strength and durability of the relationship.
Later today I will have a meeting with and then continue my discussions with the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Junichiro Koizumi.  Those discussions will not only cover the full extent of our trade and economic relationship, but also the close political and strategic partnership that Australia and Japan now enjoy.
And finally may I say ladies and gentlemen, as I look around the table I see the names of the companies whose leaders are here, I think of the Australian economy over the last 30 or 40 years because so many of these great Japanese enterprises have played a major role in the economic life of my country during my lifetime.
I thank you most warmly for joining me.
[ends]  


Chairman Jia Qinglin, Your Excellencies, my fellow Heads of Government, ladies and gentlemen. I am really delighted to be able to participate in this Forum.  I do so as the leader of a nation whose commitment to and involvement in this part of the world, the affairs, the hopes, the aspirations, and the future of the Asian region is unqualified.  Perhaps to illustrate that I should point out to you that I attend this Forum having just completed two very important bilateral visits to China and Japan.  When in Beijing I witnessed the signing of an agreement to commence negotiations for a bilateral Free Trade Agreement between Australia and China.  When in Tokyo we reached an understanding for a feasibility study into the possibility of a Free Trade Agreement between Australia and Japan.
  It also comes, this visit of mine, at the end of a period of very intense exchange and activity between Australia and the member nations of the Asian family.  We hosted recently a visit to Australia, the first in 20 years, by a Malaysian Prime Minister from the speaker, the Malaysian Prime Minister who has just so eloquently addressed you.  And a few days prior to that we hosted a visit from President Yudhoyono of Indonesia.  I mention these things to emphasise the naturalness of the association and the exchange between Australia and the nations of this region.
  It is common ground to this conference, ladies and gentlemen, that Asia has experienced extraordinary economic growth over the last decades, particularly over the last 10 years.  Australia herself has been a great beneficiary of Asia's economic strength and Asia's economic growth.  Japan has been Australia's best customer since 1969 and in the context of the answer given by the Prime Minister of Malaysia to the last question, can I point out that the foundations of that relationship between Australia and Japan were laid as far back as 1957 when a landmark Commerce Agreement was signed between the governments of Australia and Japan, only 12 years after the end of World War II.  And it indicated a far sightedness on the part of the leadership of those two nations.
Bilateral trade between Australia and China has quadrupled over the last 10 years.  And a Korean company, POSCO, remains the single best customer for Australians goods and services anywhere in the world.  I mention these things to emphasise the benefits that Australia has derived from the growth of the Asian economy.  But it's been a complementary process.  There has been, as you all know, a huge growth in demand for Australian resources.  And that will be the subject of a special session this afternoon.  But it has been a two-way process, imports accounted for 30 per cent of the Australian textile, clothing and footwear market in 1991, by 2001 that had grown to 53 per cent.  And can I also point out that Chinese clothing accounts for 73 per cent of all of Australian clothing imports.  So it has not been a one-way process and there has been great complementarity to the exchanges.
There is of course immense optimism amongst all of us, and no doubt it will pervade this conference, that the momentum of economic growth in the Asian region will continue.  And we have good reason to have that optimism.  But I think we should also, amidst that optimism, remind ourselves that the experience of the past suggests that it should not be taken for granted, that it has to be nurtured and worked upon in order to be guaranteed.  The Asian economic downturn of 1997 and 1998 was abrupt and brutal in its impact, and unfair in many respects in its impact on a number of the nations of the ASEAN region in particular.  But it was nonetheless a reminder to all of us of how external shocks of that kind can come along and disrupt the flow and the momentum of seemingly inevitable growth.  So drawing on that past experience, can I suggest to this Forum that there are some guiding principles which all of us need to adhere to to guarantee a continuation of the economic growth and prosperity that we regard as so important to the future of our peoples.
Firstly, I believe that the nations of the region must maintain strong and unwavering commitment to the principles of open trade and investment policies.  There is plenty of evidence from the IMF and elsewhere that the most successful nations of the past 30 or 40 years have been those that have pursued open trade and investment policies.  Those that have gone most quickly from being underdeveloped to rapidly developing countries have been those that have embraced open trade and investment policies.  China's own growth, the extraordinary five times increase in GDP over the last 25 years dates from the decision taken by the Chinese leadership in the late 1970s to embrace more open policies.  The same has been the case with India.  And the spread of Free Trade Agreements in which Australia has been an active participant is an illustration of the desirability of continuing to embrace open trade and investment policies.  Australia herself has signed Free Trade Agreements with Singapore and Thailand, we have commenced negotiations with China and also with Malaysia.  All of these measures of course are consistent with our World Trade Organisation obligations, provided free trade agreements on a bilateral basis are consistent with the principles of free world trade there is no inconsistency at all with the goals of the WTO.  And on the subject of the WTO, can I emphasise how important the gathering in Hong Kong will be later this year.  We have not had a genuine world trade round successful concluded for a quarter of a century. And the future of the Doha trade round hangs critically in the balance.  In the interests of the least developed countries of the world, who depend for 70 per cent of their income from exports from the agricultural sector, significant reductions in high agricultural tariffs, particularly from those areas of the world that maintain them at very high levels, will be necessary if a successful Doha round is to be completed.
Secondly, could I argue that there is a constant need for domestic economic reform within the individual member states of the Asian region.  This applies just as much to highly developed countries such as Australia as it does to less well developed countries.  And the reforms that different governments in Australia have undertaken over the last 20 years stood our country in remarkably good stead when the Asian economic downturn hit in 1997 and enabled us to go through that downturn with little apparent damage.
Thirdly, I think we should remind ourselves that despite all the multilateral cooperation that exists we still live in a world of nation states.  And in times of crisis, and this was no better illustrated at the time of the tragic tsunami a few months ago, it was the capacity of individual nation states to respond, and Australia included, Singapore and the United States, the three of us rendering particular and immediate assistance to our friends in Indonesia who were so heavily hit.  It is the capacity of nation states to act quickly and decisively that is still very important.  And this means that individual nation states should constantly look to the transparency of their governance arrangements, that world wide investment flows will always go to nations which have transparent legal and accounting systems, that have a transparent banking system, and have strong clear rules of governance that affect the business community.   And those rules can only be made and improved and altered and reformed by the actions of individual nation states.
Fourthly, we must remind ourselves for all our natural focus on the interaction of nations within this region that Asia should not become in any way inward looking.  That we live in a global economic environment, and that is our future forever, whether we live in Asia, Europe or in North America.  The United States will remain the most powerful economy in the world indefinitely.  And the linkages between this region and the rest of the world are many.  Once again let me illustrate by reference to my own country - Japan as I mentioned is our best customer, the European Union as an entity is our largest trading partner, the United States is our largest source of foreign investment, and we have recently signed, and it came into operation at the beginning of this year, a Free Trade Agreement with the United States.
Fifthly, let us also remind ourselves that threats of a non-economic kind and events of a non-economic kind can exact a fearful economic price.  The tsunami hit hard many of the economies of the Indian Ocean area.  The terrorist attacks that took place in Bali in 2002 had a terrible impact on the tourist industry of that lovely island.  And the constant threat of terrorism exists as a danger in a very disturbing and disruptive way of the continued economic progress of so many of our member countries.  And that of course reminds us of the need not only for the maximum cooperation amongst the nations of the region in a friendly, harmonious way of which the Malaysian Prime Minister spoke so eloquently.  But it also means continued cooperation and association with other nations from outside the region in the worldwide fight against the scourge of terrorism.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the first occasion that I've been able to attend this Forum.  I think the concept of this Forum is quite outstanding, it has deservedly grown in prestige and esteem in the few years that it's been in operation.  It's a chance for me at a very wide and prestigious forum to restate the unending commitment of my country to the prosperity of the region.  We are forever together in this part of the world.  We will forever need to work with each other, to respect each other, to help each other, to invest in each other's economies, to buy and exchange each other's goods and services. Australia has must to offer the region.  The region has much to offer my country.  Not least of course the resource of its people and one of the realities and one of the outstanding characteristics of modern Australia is the contribution that people from different parts of our region are making to the shaping of our national life.
My friends, I've enjoyed very much the privilege of being part of this Forum. I wish it well and I congratulate those who have conceived the idea of the Boao Forum only four or five years ago, they truly had the future of the region at heart.
Thank you.
  [ends]  


Ninety years ago, as dawn began to break, the first sons of a young nation assailed these shores. These young Australians, with their New Zealand comrades, had come to do their bit in a maelstrom not of their making.
 Over eight impossible months, they forged a legend whose grip on us grows tighter with each passing year. In the hills, ridges and gullies above us the Anzacs fought, died, dug in and hung on. Here they won a compelling place in the Australian story.  Today we remember the 50,000 Australians who served in the Gallipoli campaign. And the more than 26,000 who fell or were wounded here. We remember, too, the sons of New Zealand who died and suffered. And let us not forget the sons of Britain, France, India, Newfoundland and of course Turkey, who died in their countless thousands on this peninsula.
 Gallipoli began our involvement in a cataclysm that would cut down the youth not only of Australia but of many countries across the world. Nearly two thirds of the 330,000 Australians who served abroad in the Great War would become casualties.  Sixty thousand would never see Australia again. We remember today a century of Australian sacrifice, the more than 100,000 Australians who have died in war and for peace in our name. From Villers Bretonneux to Tobruk, Kokoda to Long Tan and Afghanistan.
 Those who fought here in places like Quinn's Post, Pope's Hill and the Nek changed forever the way we saw our world and ourselves. They bequeathed Australia a lasting sense of national identity. They sharpened our democratic temper and our questioning eye towards authority.  We used to say that the ranks of the original Anzacs were thinning with each passing year.  They are all gone now. Now what swells with each Anzac season is a hunger for their stories. Now we remember them not as old soldiers but as young Australians, often from the same suburbs, streets, districts and towns that we come from. Just as many of you have come here today with your brothers and your mates, so it was 90 years ago that the young of Australia surged forward to enlist along with their brothers and their mates.
 We imagine young men swimming amidst death and danger, anything to escape the heat, the fatigue, the flies and the lice. We think especially this morning of the families broken here and in other foreign fields. James and Janet Hallahan of Western Australia sent four sons to the Great War.  Three never came home. One of them, Wally, survived Gallipoli and the Western Front only to be killed in the final exchanges of November 1918.
History helps us to remember but the spirit of Anzac is greater than a debt to past deeds. It lives on in the valour and the sacrifice of young men and women that ennoble Australia in our time, in scrub in the Solomons, in the villages of Timor, in the deserts of Iraq and the coast of Nias. It lives on through a nation's easy familiarity, through Australians looking out for each other, through courage and compassion in the face of adversity.
And so we dedicate ourselves at this hour, at this place, not just to the memory of Anzac but to its eternal place in the Australian soul.  Soon we go to Lone Pine where the names of almost half of our Gallipoli casualties are recorded. One of them buried there is Noel Edwards of Bendigo, who took part in that charge against Turkish trenches.
 Before heading into 'No Mans Land', Noel shared a meal with his two mates-Gil Dyett and Curly Symons. Gil was severely wounded in the attack; Curly was to win a Victoria Cross; Noel fell at the place the Turks called the Ridge of Blood. After the war, Noel's mother Harriett penned some words that evoke the painful loss of life's promise.  That echo down the ages and remind us why we are here:
 How shall I miss him - when from overseas  The Anzacs come 'mid shouts of victory;  When eager voices answering smiles awake,   And hands press hands for old remembrance sake.  Full many a face will wear a mask of joy,  With heartstrings aching for the absent boy.
In our time-and for all time-we will remember them.  [ends]  


Commander George McGuire, Admiral Ritchie, my parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Australians. I'm here to today to express the great joy of Australia and the gratitude of all of the Australian people to the wonderful men and women of HMAS Kanimbla, for their outstanding job that they have done in our name-so let's all give them a big hand.
It's great to have you back and it's great to be able on this beautiful Sydney morning to say thank you for the magnificent way in which you have done for Australia, what Australia is very good at doing and that is helping others. And the great relief and assistance that you brought to the people of Indonesia, so tragically affected by the tsunami and then the subsequent earthquake is something that will long live in the recollection of all of your fellow Australians.
 You were of course touched by tragedy, the loss of nine of your mates in very sad circumstances, added to the magnificence of the work that you did. The way in which your commanding officer, Commander McGuire, let's have a very special hand for him, he's done a wonderful job. The way in which he blended, leadership, strength and compassion at a very difficult time is a tribute to the training he's received in the Royal Australian Navy and it is also a tribute the strength of his own leadership and to his character.
But to all of the ship's company, thank you from the bottom of my heart and I know from the rest of your fellow Australians for the wonderful job you've done, welcome home, spend the rest of the day with your family and loved ones, it's great to have you back, we love the job you've done and as Australians we're immensely proud of everything that you've done in our name.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Australian Families: Prosperity, Choice and Fairness
Thank you very much Tom, ladies and gentlemen. I appreciate you all coming along tonight. It's one of those more interesting days in political life, spending some time at the state funeral of the former Premier of Queensland and returning here to Sydney to participate in a formal presentation about an issue that's of enormous interest to me and of great significance to the policy formation of the Liberal Party. And I want to acknowledge at the beginning the contribution that the Menzies Research Centre has made to policy, thought and development. And Tom mentioned a number of the papers that the centre had produced and I remember particularly the very thought provoking paper on future directions of Indigenous Policies.
 But tonight I want to focus on what of course is the most important institution in our society and that is Australian family. And if you want to analyse the state of Australian families at the present time, it's quite impossible to do that without looking at the economic environment and framework in which they exist and if we go back a decade we find that unemployment is down from 8.4 per cent to a 28-year low of 5.1 per cent. We find that 10 million Australians are now in work, compared with 8 million ten years ago. Families are saving more than $500 a month in lower interest payments on today's average new mortgage of just over $200,000. Medicare is stronger, primarily due to the introduction of a safety net-which the Labor Party has pledged to abolish. Real household disposable incomes are on average up by 30 per cent, and average household wealth is more than 80 per cent above the level that is was a decade ago. Now they are the raw parameters, if I can put it in which Australian families go about their daily lives.
 According to the OECD, Australian workers enjoy either the highest or the second highest disposable income in the industrialised world-when you take into account after-tax income and benefits. And since 1996, their international ranking has improved or been maintained across eight different scenarios-low paid and high paid, single and married, with children and without children. Of course, aggregate statistics never tell the full story and that is why I particularly tonight I want to focus on how low and middle income families have fared under this Government. And in focusing on them I must acknowledged of course that all governments should aim to do better and no government can rest  while ever there are some Australian families unreasonably failing to share in the bounty that this country has to offer.
Next week's budget will include reforms to help more Australians on income support move into paid employment. Over the last decade, Australia has changed from a country with a shortage of jobs to one with a shortage of workers.  But despite that there are sill too many people of working age remaining on welfare in far too many jobless households.
  At a time of strong labour demand, we should be a country where all people with the capacity to work, and the desire to work, are able to work. Australia's social security safety net is strong and it's sustainable but it is just that.  Along with our skills agenda, welfare and industrial relations reform are vital to ensuring that more Australians find dignity, fulfilment and higher living standards from paid work. I've always believed that the Australian public will accept sensible reforms provided they are explained, provided they meet the test of fairness and provided they are in the national interest.
The reforms in the budget will embody this Government's distinctive blend of liberal economic policy and what I describe as modern conservatism in social policy. For the Liberal Party, economic freedom and individual enterprise are the wellsprings of a more prosperous, creative and self-reliant society-the engines of wealth creation that support jobs, better living standards and the high quality services that families rely on. We welcome a society where people are demanding greater freedom and choice than ever before. We believe in giving Australians more opportunities to start and run a small business. We mark with approval the fact that in Australia today almost twice as many people own shares directly as hold a membership in a trade union.
  At the same time, the Liberal Party has always been willing to temper the raw outcomes of market capitalism to support the institutions that stabilise our society and embody the values that Australians share. Part of what makes Australia a good and decent country is our willingness to tilt the playing field in favour of low and middle income families with dependent children.  This has been a defining philosophic commitment of mine for the past 20 years and not least in the area of taxation reform.
 It's also part of maintaining broad support for economic reform; ensuring it goes with and not against the grain of fairness which is such a part of the Australian ethos. A strong family is the single most important building block of our social stability.  I've said repeatedly in the past that a strong family is the greatest social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.
Family, neighbourhood and the voluntary sector are the pillars of what Edmund Burke famously called the 'little platoons' of society-the mediating institutions that are the object of our loyalties and our affections away from the reach of governments and markets.
Society entrusts families with the toughest and most important job of all-the physical, social and moral development of children.  For this reason alone, governments should first pay heed to that old dictum: 'Do no harm'. Stable, secure and loving families can never be created by governments.  But bad government can do much to undermine a family's capacity to perform its vital functions in society.
  Governments have a clear responsibility to help families struggling with the challenges of modern life.  Last year, we announced a major investment in early childhood programmes as part of the Stronger Families and Communities Strategy. Shortly, the Government will be detailing arrangements for Family Relationship Centres across Australia with a focus on helping separating couples avoid adversarial and costly court procedures.  The Centres will not just be for separating families.  They will also help couples access pre-marriage education and help families experiencing relationship difficulties.
The Government's broader role is to support families in the choices that they wish to make.  It is never the role of government to impose some preferred model of behaviour.  We are not in the business of telling people how to arrange their lives. The Liberal Party's philosophy is always to maximise choice. As I said in last year's election campaign, choice is the golden thread that tries to connect all of our policies-from the private health insurance rebate, to funding for schools, to workplace relations and to give families choice about the work and family arrangements they desire.
The day that I returned to the Liberal Party leadership in January 1995, I called for a 'new compact' for Australian families and one that took account of the constant juggling act between work and family responsibilities. From March of 1996, when we won office we set about developing and refining this compact in a way that targets the needs and the aspirations of low and middle income families. We recognise, as I'm sure you all do, the many key choices that families face over time-when to have children, how long a parent might stay at home with a young child, when a parent might return to paid work and also to manage the ongoing work-family balance. No one policy fits all and the diversity of families calls for a range of policies for a range of different situations.
  Rather than mandate preferred behaviour, our policies have sought to reflect the life experience of Australian families in the 21st century.  They have been designed, for example, to take particular account of the enormous growth of female participation in the part-time workforce. Families are very diverse.  Of the roughly 2.7 million Australian families with dependent children, we find that two adults working full-time comprised 17 per cent of those families.  In roughly 23 per cent of cases, one parent works full-time and the other is not working at all. And the single most common arrangement, which is 27 per cent, is where one parent, usually the father, works full-time and the other, the mother, works part-time. The remaining percentages, if you're interested in how you add up to 100, is of course comprised by sole parent families and regrettably jobless families.
The Government's workplace relations reforms, as well as promoting strong job growth and higher wages, have encouraged flexible working arrangements to assist parents to balance their work and their family responsibilities.
  Clearly, in the modern age, choice must include access to high quality and affordable child care.  Since we came to office, the Government has increased the number of child care places by 83 per cent.  Outside School Hours Care has risen by 275 per cent-from 72,000 to over 270,000.  We've also increased child care affordability by introducing Child Care Benefit and the 30 per cent Child Care Tax Rebate. Tonight, however, I want to focus especially on how the Government's Family Tax Benefit system has improved the living standards of low and middle income families. And the pattern that I will outline shows a quite remarkable increase in the level of assistance available to this section of the Australian community.
We began in 1997 with the Family Tax Initiative which delivered $2 billion in increased payments to both double and single income household.  In 2000, as part of taxation reform, the Government further increased family support by $2.5 billion a year, in addition to delivering large personal tax cuts.  The New Tax System also improved work incentives for low-income families. In 2000-01, the first year of the operation of the new system, families receiving Family Tax Benefits were on average about $1,000 a year better off than they had been under the previous system.
At the same time tax cuts, including in last year's budget-have ensured that over 80 per cent of taxpayers face a top marginal tax rate of 30 per cent or less. Last year's budget also delivered additional assistance for families worth more than $19 billion over five years.  The package included additional increases to Family Tax Benefits part A payments-including the $600 per year payments which the Labor Party in the recent election campaign claimed were 'not real'-as well as the relaxation of the FTB Part A and Part B income tests.
In addition, the Government has addressed the loss of income that families often suffer when a child is born-first through the baby bonus and now through the Maternity Payment which will rise to $4,000 per child in July of 2006
 Since coming to office the Government has increased total assistance to families by over $6 billion and the base rate of family assistance has increased from less than $600 a child in January 1996 to almost $1,700 a child-a real increase of over 100 per cent. This combination of tax relief and increased family tax benefits has delivered significant growth in disposable incomes to low and middle income earners. For example, a family on a single income of $35,000 with two dependent children, one under five and believe me there are many thousands of families surviving precisely on such an income, currently receive more than $10,000 a year in family tax benefits.  They pay no net tax until their income reaches $41,808.  Some dual income families with two children now enjoy the equivalent of a combined tax-free threshold of up to $43,000 a year.
  In other words, for many families all of the tax they would have paid is rebated by the Family Tax Benefit. And can I make the accounting but none of the less, also political point that although family tax benefits appear on the expenditure side of the budget, they are in reality tax relief.  If they were to appear on the revenue side of the budget, this would reduce the reported tax share by between 1 and 1.5 per cent of GDP.
I believe that the family tax benefit system has been an effective means of ensuring that a decade of economic prosperity has delivered broad-based increases in living standards and greater economic opportunities for low and middle income families. In fact my proudest boast in the last election campaign was at the opening of the Liberal Party's campaign in Western Sydney, when I said that the Liberal Party had been a better friend of the Australian worker than the Labor Party could ever have dreamt of being.  And I referred to the quadrella we had delivered of low unemployment, low interest rates, low inflation and rising real wages. I could have made it a quinella by including Family Tax Benefits.
It's worth referring briefly here to some research from the National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling (NATSEM), which shows that low income households have enjoyed the strongest growth in private incomes over the period from 1997-98 to 2004-05. And this research shows that the real disposable income of low-income families grew by an average of $87 a week-a rate of growth similar to that of middle-income families. And the other main conclusion from the NATSEM research is that our social welfare system is skewed very strongly in favour of low income families. Overall the bottom 60 per cent of households are all net gainers from the tax system and government programmes.
 In effect, the NATSEM research exposes nine years of Labor hypocrisy, distortion and misinformation about the treatment of low income earners in Australia. That research reveals that is was in the early 1990s, during the last recession, which noticeably saw a widening of the gap between rich and poor in this country. And if we analyse the response of the Labor Party in the last election campaign, we see that their tax and welfare policies would have gouged more than $800 a year out of the family budget of a three-child, single income family earning $30,000 a year from full-time work.
  Mr Chairman for many years this Government has argued that Australia can only maintain strong growth and sustained prosperity by increasing workforce participation and improving the productivity of the workers that we have.
  Welfare reform and further workplace relations reform are crucial to these tasks. We approach welfare reform with two straight-forward and I believe fair propositions. Firstly, the best form of family income comes from a job rather than a welfare payment.  And secondly, that people on income support who have the capacity to work should be required to seek work to their level of capacity. People with no capacity to work will not be affected by any measures that the Government may take.  A strong safety net will remain in place for those who cannot support themselves, as well as those with young children or significant carer responsibilities.
The reforms we have in mind are not about punishing welfare recipients or cutting the budget.  Indeed, our reforms will be a drain on the budget in the short to medium term. Our aim is to ensure that people on welfare support have incentives to move into work, have access to better services and can pursue work voluntarily, even if they are not obliged to do so. A steady job remains the best means of overcoming disadvantage in our society.  People in work are financially better off, they acquire skills and experience and they are more closely connected with their communities.
  The employment of a parent is not just important for family income, it is critical to the environment that children are brought up in.  Studies have repeatedly shown that children in jobless households are more likely to leave school early, become unemployed, have children at too young an age and come to depend on welfare themselves. And in introducing these reforms we will confront our opponents with a choice-whether to be constructive or to oppose this good-faith attempt by the Government to tackle the problem of jobless households in Australia.
The question I would pose to Mr Beazley is this: will Labor be the sort of party that 60 years ago produced a White Paper on full employment?  Or will it be the party it has been for the last nine years, what I would describe as a party of white flags? For example last year the deputy leader of the Labor Party, Jenny Macklin, was asked whether a casual job was preferable to no job and she replied and I quote: 'Well, I don't think that's the case, especially if you've got a family to feed.'
We see in such remarks a curious ambivalence about the economic and social value of paid employment in the modern Labor Party.  Is it any wonder that thousands of traditional supporters find it almost impossible to say what the Labor Party stands for? To create jobs for those on the margins of the workforce and to sustain the productivity growth in our economy, Australia also needs a new round of industrial relations reforms. This is an essential part of breaking the chains that have stopped us becoming a more fully employed society.
  The Government is determined to tip the balance in our industrial relations system in favour of those who want to get into the workforce. And might I interpellate here today that I was reminded and I mention it in the remarks that I made at the funeral I attended in Queensland at lunch time today, that although the now deceased Premier of Queensland and I had some celebrated differences of opinion about political tactics, the irony was that on many of the fundamental policy issues of the time, not least industrial relation reform, we shared common views. And in fact his efforts in taking on the Queensland power workers represented one of the landmark changes in public attitudes and the climate of public opinion, in that very important policy area.
 The reforms we'll make will further enshrine workplace bargaining as the key determinant of wages and conditions.  Still greater workforce flexibility will encourage small businesses, the engine-room of our country's wealth and job growth, to take on more staff. Unfortunately, in this area, we have again seen from the Labor Party the policy of waving the white flag.  In his only incursion into the policy debate since resuming the Labor leadership, Mr Beazley significantly fell at the first hurdle. In what was billed as his great reform speech to the Melbourne Institute  conference last month, he maintained in a quite remarkable statement and I quote: 'that the scope for productivity gains from the old reform agenda of deregulation, privatisation and industrial relations reform is largely exhausted'. I found this a remarkable admission.  Further workplace reform is vital to creating more jobs and to sustaining higher real wages at a time when Australia's unemployment rate is close to a thirty year low. Can I suggest with respect that it is Mr Beazley who is exhausted and not the cause of industrial relations reform.  He's the only leader of a major party in living memory to have acquired reform fatigue whilst still in Opposition.
Ladies and Gentlemen, can I conclude by sharing a few broader philosophical thoughts. There are few higher goals in public life than giving people greater control over their own lives.
 Through good economic management, generous support for families and policies that widen their horizons of choice, the Coalition as I have endeavoured to demonstrate tonight, has kept faith with low and middle income earners in Australia over the last nine years. They of course comprise the great bulk of the Australian community and any political party that loses contact with their interests does so at its peril. And we embark on further reforms in coming months mindful of the kind of leadership that the Australian people look for.
Australians want governments that get the big things right, they want a strong economy, a well defended country, good health and education services and a decent safety net, and then let people essentially get on with their own lives. This can prove uncomfortable for our opponents who always seem to have a preferred model of behaviour or a new cultural obsession.
  The Liberal Party has always trusted people to make the right choices for themselves. If you want to skimp and save to send your child to a school of your choice, then we will give you support. If you want to maintain your family's private health insurance, we'll give you a tax incentive. If you want the right not to belong to a trade union, we are on your side. I don't normally quote him but you will understand the context when I do. The late Manning Clark produced a powerful piece of historical mythology when he cast the Labor Party as the 'enlargers' of Australian horizons and our side of politics as the 'straighteners' of our national life. It was always a myth, but never more so than today.
We in the Liberal Party are the enlargers of choice and opportunity in Australian society.  We are the friends of freedom and initiative over compulsion and conformity.  And most importantly we are the party that respects the accumulated wisdom that resides in every Australian home. In this, I believe that history is very much on our side.
 Thank you.
 [ends]  


Your Excellency, Premier, Deputy Prime Minister, my colleagues and very particularly the members of the Bjelke-Petersen family. And can I, Flo, on my behalf and Janette's behalf extend to all of you our kind thoughts and condolences, as we gather in a place that is so very dear to you to honour your late husband and honour his contribution to Australia and to Queensland.
 I remember a couple of years ago we were having a debate in our party room about the impact of politics on ones life, and one of my colleagues really hit the nail on the head when he said that whatever our ambitions are, at the end of the day, we should all hope that when we die, we have one of our children holding one of our hands. And that is really a metaphor for reminding us that the most important thing in life is your family and the way in which that family moulds you and shapes you. And I have no doubt that the greatest legacy to the Bjelke-Petersen family today is the love that they received from the now deceased patriarch of that family.
 Joh was a remarkable political figure - there is certainly no argument about that. One of the things I found interesting and remarkable about him was that although he was of Danish extraction and born in New Zealand, he was quintessentially of the Australian bush. As John read out his great skills and his great adaptability; it was once again a description of the inherent capacity of people of the Australian bush to look after themselves and to be inventive and to be resourceful. One of the things that has given Australia her distinctive character of independence, is the fact that so many of our pioneers had to rely on their own skill and their hands and their inventiveness in order to survive. There is no doubt in the world that the contribution that Joh Bjelke-Petersen made to the development and the expansion of Queensland will be his greatest single political legacy.
 I've now been a member of the Federal Parliament since 1974 and in the various positions I've held I've travelled Australia extensively. And no part of Australia has changed more dramatically than has Queensland, particularly the southeast corner of Queensland. It has been transformed, as has the city of Brisbane, in a way quite differently from the transformation that has occurred in any other part of Australia. And whatever people may have said about him from time to time, both his political opponents and some of those who occasionally disagreed with him on his own side of politics, the reality nonetheless is that he made a massive contribution, a defining contribution, to the growth and the expansion of the state of Queensland.
 As Peter Beattie has mentioned, as John as mentioned, he was a great practitioner of competitive federalism. One of the first, in fact I think the first pieces of legislation I introduced into the Federal Parliament as Treasurer in 1978 was a bill to give effect to our promise in the 1977 election campaign to abolish federal estate duties. Now that was a direct product of the momentum set in train when probate duties at a state level were abolished in Queensland.
It's fair to say that on a broader scale Joh Bjelke-Petersen often spoke in an instinctive way for conservative Australia on social issues. He was a social conservative.  He believed in the wisdom of old institutions.  He once said to me and I think it may have been in the course of a discussion about the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax, or one of its forbears, he said John, the only good tax is a very old tax. It's an old saying but it epitomised an approach which said that the institutions and the practices with which you are familiar are the ones that you should continue to embrace. Now that didn't mean to say of course that he wouldn't embrace change, but he certainly had a great reverence for the traditions of this country and he expressed it in so many ways.
It is of course a fact that many of the great years of development in Queensland occurred under the stewardship of a Coalition Government led by Joh Bjelke-Petersen and partnered on the Liberal Party side by people such as the late Gordon Chalk. And that was a great partnership and it was a partnership that really I think laid the foundation for the contribution made on our side of politics to the development and growth of this State.
 It is of course well known in Australian political folklore and history that Joh and I fell out very strongly in 1987 and it would dishonest of me not to mention it. It would also be unrealistic and ungracious of me not to acknowledge that with a passage of time those differences dissolved and are seen perhaps not differently in an historical sense, but emotionally and personally are seen in a different light. And out of all of those things, political parties and political individuals are reminded of the habits of not bearing grudges and the habits of reconciliation and understanding that people are motivated by particular things at given periods of time. And as I look back over those years one of the ironies that strikes me is that on a number of these great debates and great issues of the last 20 years, and I think particularly of the issue of industrial relations reform and of course of the centrality of the role of the family in our society, Joh and I held views that were very, very similar.
 And I take this opportunity, I hope in not any particularly partisan sense but because it's part of the record, to pay tribute to his contribution to the cause of industrial relations reform in this country, something to which I have been passionately committed for most of my political life.
 My friends, my fellow Australians that great architect of St. Paul's Cathedral in London, Christopher Wren proclaimed when his work was finished; 'if you want my memorial, look around me', and I think that's appropriate. If you wanted Joe Bjelke-Petersen's memorial, look around you. This gathering is not held in a great cathedral, it's not held in the capital of the state, it's not held in the capital of the nation, it's held appropriately in his home town amongst his own people, with his family. It is a reminder that he has in the ultimate sense, come home to Kingaroy, that he is surrounded by the people he valued and loved most and he is in very familiar surroundings.
May I join others in repeating the prayer, may he rest in peace.
  [ends]


Prime Minister Khai, your Excellency, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Prime Minister, in welcoming you to this luncheon on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people, let me remark immediately that the fundamental reality of our relationship is that there are 200,000 Australians of Vietnamese heritage, there are 100,000 Australian tourists to Vietnam each year and there are 4,000 Vietnamese students studying in Australia.
 Those figures provide the relationship with a very rich people-to-people base, not available to other bilateral relationships that Australia enjoys. Australia is Vietnam's fourth largest export market and the two-way trade between our two countries in 2004 was valued at $3.7 billion Australian dollars. I mention these figures because I do not believe that the full extent of the relationship which they described is as well known and appreciated in the Australian community as it should be and certainly not as well appreciated within the Vietnamese community in Vietnam, as it should be.  Australians of Vietnamese descent have made an energetic and very valuable contribution to the modern Australia. They are fine citizens, greatly appreciated by their fellow Australians.
 Prime Minister our talks today have focused on the future on ways in which our economic association can be deepened and ways in which we can cooperate to respond to the common challenges of our region. Those challenges are terrorism, transnational crime, health challenges such as Avian Influenza and also people smuggling.
We are partners in APEC and in that respect I have offered on behalf of Australia and you have accepted help in relation to the organisation of the APEC meeting in 2006 and Australia would be willing to cooperate and provide assistance in anyway we can to make that meeting in your country a great success.
 I appreciate the remarks that you have made today about Australia's involvement in the East Asian community. Australia is an active and unrestrained regional participant, a country anxious to play its part in association with all the other nations of the region.
 And Prime Minister this gathering includes many people from business and from university life who have made in the past what I could call an early investment in the strengthening relationship between our two countries. We should not pretend of course that the approach of our two countries to the affairs... the approach of our two countries to the affairs of the world is always the same. Our political institutions are different.  However, as always in international relations, it's important to focus on those things that we have in common and we can constructively improve.
 And that takes me back to the commencement of my speech, the people-to-people links are so deep and so strong that there is every reason to believe that the relationship between our two countries will grow and broaden as the years go by.
 Prime Minister you are most welcome, this is your second visit as Prime Minister, your third visit in total and I hope that you are, as I believe you should be, warmly received by the Australian people.
 I now invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Kim Beazley to support my remarks.   


Well ladies and gentlemen can I thank Mark Baker, can I acknowledge my other parliamentary colleagues, Rene Hidding the leader of the Opposition in Tasmania, Senator Richard Colbeck, Senator Guy Barnett, Carol Humphries the State President of the Liberal Party and very importantly David Foster, world champion axeman and his wife Jan who of course are our hosts and owners of this magnificent venue.
 I am for a very special reason delighted to be back in northern Tasmania because on the 6th of October at the Albert Hall in Launceston, I gave an address to the Timber Communities of Tasmania in which I delivered an undertaking that we would handle the forestry issue in a way that would not destroy their communities and would not destroy their jobs. And this morning with the Premier of Tasmania in the Styx valley I signed the agreement and made the announcement that delivered in full on that promise I made to the working men and women of the Timber Communities of Tasmania.
There is no doubt that that decision played a material part in Mark Baker's magnificent victory in Braddon and also Michael Ferguson's equally magnificent victory in Bass. Because the people of Australia had displayed to them the reality that when it came to protecting the livelihoods of working men and women the Coalition Government was the real friend of the workers of Australia and not the Labor Party.
   And I made that decision because I have always believed that it is wrong to ask a small vulnerable section of the Australian community to carry the burden for a decision which the great majority of the community want. Everybody believes in caring for the environment of this country, everybody is at heart a conservationist, everybody believes in preserving to the maximum extent practicable our Old Growth Forests-nobody wants to destroy them. The idea that one side of politics wants to...probably not the right expression to use in a place like but I'll say it anyway, wants to take an axe to the forests-my friends, that has always been nonsense. But you have to achieve a balance and it is possible to care for the environment and also preserve jobs and to build confidence in the future of an industry.
And as a result of the agreement that I have reached with the Tasmanian Government, 87 per cent of the Tarkine has been locked up, 53 per cent of the Styx, more than a million hectares put into reserve. All of the commitments that we made in that area last October have been delivered. But importantly it has not been at the cost of the jobs of timber workers or the livelihoods of timer communities. And I'm very proud to have been part of an arrangement... an agreement to have spearheaded an agreement that delivers that balanced outcome-because balanced outcomes are deliverable in so many areas in Australia and it's always been the aim of my Government to try and achieve a balance. We are not a nation of extremists--we are a nation of reasonable men and women who want reasonable, sensible outcomes. We have a natural scepticism towards people who propose extremist solutions. And just as we are sceptical of people who have extreme political views, we should be sceptical of people who have extreme environmental views.
So for me this is a very symbolic and a very important visit. It signs and seals the agreement that gives total effect to the promises I made on behalf of my Government three days before the last election. It also brings me to the first time into the electorate of Braddon, once again held by a liberal colleague of mine. And I pay great tribute to the wisdom of the people of Braddon in electing Mark Baker as their member on the 9th of October last year. I don't say that out of any personal denigration of the person he replaced. I simply say it in positively extolling his hard work, his commitment to the people of this electorate that he's already demonstrated, and his willingness... Tip O'Neill who was for many years the Democratic Party Speaker of the House of Representatives coined a phrase that echoes for all of us, when he said that all politics was local-and particularly in provincial seats in regional seats around Australia, the quality and application of the local member is of tremendous importance. And Mark has demonstrated that in the seven short months that he has been your local member. His knowledge of the electorate, his willingness to argue and advocate causes that he spoke earlier of, a number of the things that he's done-he's impressed all of his colleagues with his quiet and energetic commitment to the people of Braddon. I also want to acknowledge the magnificent job that the two Senators, who are present here today are doing on behalf of the people of Tasmania and on behalf of the Liberal Party.
 My friends Australia remains strong and optimistic about her future. The Budget delivered by the Treasurer last Tuesday night was a Budget of a successful country, of a confident country, of a country that was willing to provide for its future, a county that had paid off more debt and was in a sounder physical position than any comparable western country anywhere in the world. We were able not only to provide for the long-term needs of an ageing population but we were also able to tackle some of the current welfare challenges. The unfortunate reality that whereas 10 years ago this country was short of jobs, it is now in 2005, short of workers. And we need in fact to find ways and means of increasing the workforce participation of people who are now not in the workforce.
 We were able to inject a little more incentive into the taxation system and if Mr Beazley gets out of the way, all Australians can have their tax cuts on the 1st of July 2005. We need a taxation system that is fair, we also need a taxation system that provides people with incentive and once again it's a question of achieving a balance. We have a progressive taxation system and that means that if your income is high, you pay a lot more tax and if your income is lower, you don't pay as much tax-that's what a progressive taxation system is all about and it stands therefore to reason that if tax is cut in dollar terms, somebody on a higher income gets a bigger tax cut because they're paying more tax in the first place-I mean it's as simple as that. I mean it's a matter of logic and this attempt by Mr Beazley to whip up old fashioned, class politics. I mean he's been blown out of the water by one of the most eminent trade union leaders in Australia-Bill Shorten, who runs the AWU. Bill Shorten wrote before the Budget that what had to happen was that we had to reduce the thresholds at which the top marginal tax rates applied and that's what we did. And then he said oh no I didn't mean that-I mean he did mean it because he said it and he wrote it down and I quoted it and he can't run away from it. But he's right because there are thousands upon thousands of skilled tradesmen in Australia who are earning wages that are pushing them into high tax brackets and they are as desirous of  taxation relief and having more incentive in the tax system as anybody else. And the rather, sort of convoluted attempt by Mr Beazley to construct an alternative-I mean the reality is that Governments propose tax changes.  If the Labor Party wins an election, the Labor Party can propose their taxation plans. But in the meantime they should get out of the way and let the Australian people have their tax relief.
But this country's greatest strength I believe is the regard and the repute in which it is held around the world. And Australia is respected and well regarded around the world because Australia is a strong country. Australia is a country that has clear, unambiguous positions on issues that are important on the international scene. The rest of the world knows where Australia stands, the rest of the world knows that Australia is an open democracy, the rest of the world knows that Australia will stand up for what is right, even though it may not be popular and that Australia will take a strong stand to help others who are in need. And we have demonstrated especially over the last few years in our own region, a willingness to stand up for those things that we believe are right, a willingness and a capacity because of our economic strength to come to the assistance of those countries in our region that are in need of assistance. And I have found in the times that I've travelled around the world in recent years, a growing awareness of this country, a realisation that it's a successful, strong, prosperous and progressive nation. And the principle reason for that is is not the people who maybe leading it at any particular time but the principle reason for that, of course is the quality of the Australian people. And the obligation of any Government of any Prime Minister is to so set the climate for this country, that the very best qualities of the Australian people will be encouraged. And they are qualities of fairness and decency, of hard work, of egalitarianism, of a willingness to have a go and adaptability and a capacity to adjust to circumstances as they change, and a growing pride in the history and the achievements of this country. And in recent times I've had no prouder experience than I did, when along with about 15,000 or 18,000 other Australians I participated in the 90th anniversary commemoration of the landing at Gallipoli, only last month. And to see the commitment and the passion and the interest of the young of Australia in that sad but long remembered chapter in Australian history, was to remind you that everything that we would want to be, part of the spirit of the younger generation of Australia is well and truly there. And that the young of Australia are proud of what this country has achieved, they want to know more about it and they have a burning commitment to do their part and to do their best to make this country an even stronger and a better nation and even more respected around the world.
 My friends there is a lot that we can be proud of as a Government and as a political movement. We have the lowest unemployment rate in this country now for 30 years, we've paid off our debts, we have low inflation, we have strong business investment, we have low interest rates. And at midday today we got some more Medicare figures, which indicated that there had been a further rise in the levels of bulk billing around Australia-a response to the policies that Tony Abbott introduced in the Medicare system last year. And no state has benefited more from those increases, than the state of Tasmania, where it's my understanding that the level of bulk billing since those changes has risen by something in the order of 10 percent, and that's the result of very deliberate policies on the part of the Government to recognise some particular difficulties that operated in the state of Tasmania.
My friends I'm very proud of my team in Canberra, I'm very proud of my Tasmanian colleagues, I'm delighted that the spirit and the strength of purpose and economic activity of Tasmania has lifted so much in recent years. In the 30 or more years that I've been in public life, I have not encountered as much optimism in Tasmania and so much confidence in the future as I have over recent years. And I know that it's always the want of State Governments to claim the credit for that-I mean when the national economy's doing badly, it's Howard's fault and when the national economy is doing well-well it's all the good work of the local State Governments. Well both of those propositions can't be right and without wanting to bag anybody in particular, let me modestly say, I hope nothing has been more important to Peter Costello and to me and to John Anderson over the last nine years, than to build and to strengthen the Australian economy. When we came to office we had a national debt of $96 billion dollars and Peter reported to the country last Tuesday night that that had fallen to $6 billion dollars. We had an unemployment rate of 8.5 percent, yesterday it's 5.1 percent, we had interest rates on housing mortgages of well over 10 percent, now they are at least three percentage points lower. In the 13 years that the former Government was in office, real wages rose by 1.2 percent, in the nine years that we've been in office, they've risen by 14.1 percent. I'm very proud of the fact that we have proved to be a better friend of the workers of Australia than have our political opponents.
 Now all of these things I suppose are just an aggregate of statistics but they translate into the reality that opportunities are greater, employment is more plentiful, business rewards are greater, comensurate with the effort that is put in. But that doesn't mean that we don't still have major problems, we are an ageing population, that's a common fate of all western countries and we must prepare for the ageing of the population. We must make sure that our health system, our pharmaceutical benefits system, those things are sustainable. We are a nation that is incredibly dry; we therefore must recognise that the great conservation challenge of the age is water. We're a country that must be able not only to defend itself but also to participate with our friends and allies in defending causes and the values that believe in, in different parts of the world. So nobody should imagine that the success of the last few years blinds me or any of the colleagues to the reality of the challenges we face, the deficiencies that still exist in public policy and the need to maintain the momentum of reform.
We announced a number of major reforms in the welfare system in the Budget on Tuesday night and before long I'll be outlining further reforms to Australia's industrial relations system-designed not to deny people the right to join a union, not to deny unions the right to collectively bargain on behalf of their members if that is the wish of their members, but to entrench greater flexibility in the system, to ensure that people have a right to choose, fully, the type of arrangement that governs the relationship they have with their employer-without the interference of third parties, unless that is their wish. And also to recognise that we are a national economy, we are not eight separate economies. The Tasmanian economy is dependent upon the economies of other parts of Australia, it is completely interlinked with the rest of Australia. And increasingly we must seek national solutions to many of the economic challenges that we have.
My friends finally could I thank you all for coming to give me an opportunity of meeting you, to show your support for Mark Baker, but most importantly of all, to remind me of the great importance throughout Australia of strong local communities. Strong local communities are the heart and soul of the country and as I've moved around here this afternoon, I've realised as I realise at all gatherings like this, wherever they are held, that the greatest strength this country has is the sense of voluntary commitment and the sense of local commitment to the future and the welfare of the Australian community. It's a great honour for me to be here this afternoon and thank you-all of you for coming along.
Thank you.  


Well Mr Premier, my federal parliamentary colleagues Eric Abetz and Michael Ferguson and Mark Baker, ladies and gentlemen.  This is a very historic moment for the timber industry, for the employees in that industry, for the investors in that industry and for the people of Tasmania, and indeed the people of Australia.
In signing the Agreement we have I believe that the Commonwealth and Tasmanian Governments have struck a true balance between the preservation of jobs and the provision of hope and a future for the timber communities of Tasmania and the environment of Australia.  I have always believed that it was possible to strike the balance and in signing this Agreement today I'm proud to say that I have delivered on the promise I made to the communities and the workers of the timber industry in Tasmania on the 6th of October in the Albert Hall in Launceston.  So I believe then as I still do that it is possible to have both and this beautiful vista that is behind us is a demonstration that you can have both.
  By delivering the one million hectare commitment, by meeting the other commitments, by now preserving 87 per cent of the Tarkine and 53 per cent of the Styx, the commitment to the phasing out of 1080, the clear felling commitments, the land clearing commitments, taking all of those things together we have achieved something for the future of the industry and importantly for the future of this beautiful part of the Australian environment.
I want to thank many people, I want to thank the Tasmanian Government, this has been a cooperative effort.  We have worked together.  I want to thank the officials of Forestry Tasmania and the officials of my own department and the officials of other departments in the Commonwealth.  This is an example of what Governments at a federal and state level can do if they're willing to work together and I thank the Premier for his spirited cooperation and commitment.
I want to thank the communities, I also want to thank the forestry division of the CFMEU for the very constructive attitude that it has adopted.  It cares for the job security of its members and that is something I will always respect in a trade union because job security of Australian working people is something that I care about very deeply and I'm very proud that the hallmark of this Agreement and the hallmark of my approach to this whole issue has been the preservation of the jobs of Australians and we have achieved that and I'm very pleased indeed that we've been able to achieve it hand in glove with achieving something permanent for the  environment of Australia.
So it is a great day for the environment, it's a great day for the workers of Tasmania and it's a great day for cooperative federalism.  We need to work together to solve problems, we don't always agree, Mr Lennon and I come from different political parties but that matters not when you're working to preserve the jobs of Australians and we have worked together in order to do that and I thank him and I congratulate him on the contribution that the Tasmanian Government has made to this great outcome.
[ends]
(Further details on these measures are available in the related Media Release.) 


Well thank you very much for those kind words of introduction.  Paul Lennon, the Premier of Tasmania, my Ministerial colleagues Ian Macdonald and Eric Abetz, Michael Ferguson, the Federal Member for Bass, Mark Baker, the Federal Members for Braddon, Rene Hidding, the Leader of the Opposition in Tasmania, Bryan Green, the Minister responsible for timber issues and related matters in the Tasmanian Government, Jill who has been kind enough to introduce me, Trevor Richardson and Barry Chipman of the Timber Communities, and Michael O'Connor of the forestry division of the CFMEU.
Jill is right, I will never forget that meeting in the Albert Hall on the 6th of October last year. I went for my regular morning walk this morning and I walked past the Albert Hall from the Grand Chancellor hotel.  It was quieter this morning than it had been on the 6th of October... but I thought of that meeting and I recalled the commitments that I made to the thousands of people who were gathered there, worrying about the future.  And the central commitment I made was based upon the belief I have long held that it is never fair to ask a small section of the Australian people to carry the burden and the cost of implementing something that the overwhelming majority of the rest of the community want.  And that was really what was at stake then, what has been at stake in the months that have gone by. Everybody wants to preserve our environment.  This idea that the extreme greens have a mortgage on concern and compassion for the forests or for the environment of this country has always been offensive to me.  And it ought to be offensive to all right thinking Australians.
  We all recognise the challenge of greenhouse gas emissions, we all recognise the need to do something about water which is the great conservation challenge of our age - we all recognise the need to have good environmental incomes.  But what I have always held to, my Government has held to, and I know all of you held to over the years, is the unshakable belief that in achieving the goals of a better environment we shouldn't throw on the scrapheap vulnerable, isolated, regional communities, their families and the people who owe their livelihoods whether as small businessmen or as employees owe their livelihoods to the activities of those communities.  And that is why I presented then a policy which had as its central goal the preservation of jobs and investment in the industry and the hope of more employment and more investment which security and continuity and stability and predictability could provide.
  I said then in the policy we released that we needed to sit down and discuss the matter with the Tasmanian Government.  The Tasmanian Government has always been central to a resolution of this issue.  Property rights are governed by state governments - federal governments play another role.  And it's always been necessary to have cooperation between the two levels of government to achieve a sensible outcome.  And I want to acknowledge the constructive way in which Paul Lennon and his Government have approached this issue.  Cooperative federalism has been seen on display in relation to this issue. We have seen governments sitting down and working through this issue.  I also want to acknowledge the constructive approach taken by Rene Hidding and his colleagues in the state opposition here in Tasmania.  I recall as I came here on Thursday night I had a lengthy discussion with Rene about the elements of the agreement, and he indicated the broad support, indeed the strong support of the state opposition here in Tasmania.  And that is important because it is necessary you know on certain central issues of great public moment that political differences be put aside.
 I will work with anybody of any political persuasion to preserve the jobs of working men and women in this country.  I will always work to preserve a good investment climate for small business.  I'm the son of a small businessman, I've always believed that the heart and soul of the future of this country is the capacity of people to start with nothing and by working their insides out to build something for their lives and leave it behind to their children.  And your communities are built on small businessmen and women's efforts.  And I felt last year that all of those efforts needed and deserved support.  It's taken us a number of months, I don't apologise for that, I don't mind that, the important thing is that as the months went by the jobs were still preserved - we were getting the detail right.  We have got the detail right and it's involved consultation with your communities.  And there'll be consultation into the future.  We don't end our consultation with your communities now that an agreement has been achieved.  And can I also say that the Premier and I have agreed that there'll be consultation with the farmers and graziers of this state regarding the implementation of those aspects of the agreement that affect land owners.  Consultation between governments and stakeholders is always necessary, not only to reach an agreement in the first instance but also to make sure that it is implemented in a sensitive and intelligent fashion.
I want to especially thank the contribution made by the forestry division of the CFMEU - by Michael O'Connor and his colleagues.  They brought to these negotiations one thing, and that is a concern to protect the interests of their members.  And that is the right of any trade union in this country, and I will always respect that.  I'm known not always to agree with the goals of the trade union movement in this country.  But where our goals are the same and were our goals are Australia's goals I will work with them, as I believe men and women of good will in the trade union movement will work with me.  Because when you are talking about the livelihoods of communities and the job prospects of the people of those communities and their children, and as I watched the presentation at the beginning of this meeting I was reminded that this is not only an industry with a very proud past, it's an industry that also has a great future. It's got people who've devoted their lives to it and they want their children hopefully to have the opportunity of carrying on what they have done.
So yesterday the Premier and I signed an agreement that was a great fillip for the forest industries.  It was certainly a huge win for the workers in the industry and in so many ways it was a triumph for Tasmania's future because I agree with the Premier, this does represent a way forward, a way to end, except in the minds of the irreconcilably acrimonious and never to be satisfied environmentalists, it does represent a way forward, it does strike a balance. When you are protecting up 90 per cent of the Tarkine, and you are doing the other things that the Premier outlined and I won't go over them again because they'll be very familiar to all of you in this gathering. When you are delivering incentives to the industry, when you are unveiling a package of $251 million dollars, contributed to by both Governments, you are talking about a watershed in the life the forest industry in Tasmania, but also the life of the forest industry all around Australia, cause I know this conference brings together not only many Tasmanians, but also communities from all around Australia and I am familiar with so many of them and many of my colleagues have spoken to me about the strength and the vibrancy of timber communities around Australia in Victoria, in the Eden Monaro area of New South Wales, of the northern rivers area of New South Wales, of Wester Australia, of the Gippsland area and so forth and you all gather here today, and I am delighted that it's occurred the day after the Premier and I have signed the agreement. We chose an appropriate place to do it and on display as we signed the Agreement, were some of the areas that are going to be protected and I am so very honoured to have been part of what believe, and I share the view of Paul Lennon on this - what I believe to be an historic way forward and one that in except in the minds of the unreasonable as I'd said, it does end the acrimony and the bitterness and does demonstrate to Australia, there can be a balance.
 My friends, my fellow Australians, this Agreement has come at the end of a very important week for our nation. It's always important, the week in which a Federal Budget is brought down. Without going into any of the detailed political debates that inevitably surround the Federal Budget, I think it can be said without argument, that this nation at the present time is experiencing a great level of national prosperity and that national prosperity is being shared all around the country. We have the lowest unemployment for thirty years, we have very low inflation, we have historically low interest rates, we have very high levels of business investment, we have a fiscal position which is the envy of the western world and in the Budget we were able to provide across the board taxation relief. But the important thing about the Budget, as is always the most important thing about the Budget, is what it says about the future. So what it said about the future was that despite our great strength and great prosperity, there were structural challenges that the Australian economy had that need to be faced, one of them of course is the ageing of our population and the need to make sure that our health and other related services consumed increasingly by people as they age, is maintained on a sustainable basis. The need to provide for the future by putting away some of the surpluses of today to meet the liabilities of tomorrow and that is what the Future Fund is all about. Just as we have tried to do with your community, and that is to plan for the future, to deliver to the future, so it is on a national level, that the Budget represented our attempt to do that. Can I, my friends, conclude by saying that I am very, very pleased to have had the opportunity of playing part in delivering security and piece of mind to a hard working group of Australian men and women - you deserve no less. As communities you have suffered unfair criticism and ridicule, you have been unfairly described as enemies of the environment when you are nothing of the kind. You have been expected by some in our community, including some in the political arena, to carry a disproportionately heavy burden, in order to achieve a national goal which gives many people a warm feeling without involving any measurable costs. Now that was an outcome that I never believed was fair and reasonable, much in all as I wanted the goals of so many people around Australia in relation to the environment realised. We have not allowed that to happen, we have delivered on a commitment that I made to the people of the timber industry, here in Tasmania on the 6th October last year and even more importantly, that we have done it in partnership with the State government. We have done it partnership across the political divide in Australia and we have done it with the good will and the cooperation of so many people in the community. That is an ideal Australian solution. If only we can solve all of our problems with that degree of cooperation and good will, the future can be even greater and more productive and encouraging than the present.
 My fellow Australians, thank you for inviting me here today.  I wish the timber communities of Australia great, good fortune.  I think you have a bright future ahead of you and that is overwhelmingly due to the fact that you are hard working, committed Australians wanting nothing more than a fair go and an opportunity to get on with your businesses and to get on with your lives and to leave something worthwhile and useful for your children and that is what you've endeavoured to do, thank you very much and good luck.
 [ends]  


Fran Bailey, the Minister for Small Business, Bob Stanton, President of COSBOA, Ron Boswell, the Leader of the National Party in the Senate, Tony Burke, the Shadow Minister for Small Business, ladies and gentlemen. I'd like to thank Mr Godfrey for his very warm words of introduction and I remember very vividly the meeting I had with him and his colleagues in Canberra back in 1999, and I certainly reflected with some satisfaction and, I suppose, sense of vindication towards the end of 2001, when the Ansett company collapsed, how right it had been of the Government to take that decision some two and a half years earlier. And, along with Mr Godfrey, I have no argument with Qantas. It is a great airline and a great flag carrier for Australia, but just think of what, particularly the domestic airline market would have been like in Australian now without the participation of Virgin Blue, and I thank that company for the contribution it's made to maintaining competition in that very important part of our economy.
This is, as your President has said, the fourth occasion during the last five years that I have attended this gathering, and I have done so for a number of reasons, but the most important of all is to demonstrate and to articulate as best I can the very strong commitment I personally have to small business within the Australian economy and the commitment I have to your organisation. We are now in the fourteenth year of the longest unbroken economic expansion that Australia has had at any time since World War II. Our economic conditions during this period of time are the best we've had since 1945. They're better than they were in the 1960s because in the 1960s we had a far more protected and cloistered economy. But the environment for your sector of the economy, the small business sector of the economy, is the one that I want to address a few remarks to tonight.
The most remarkable thing, of course, has been the sheer number of small businesses that have been created - not all of them have lasted, but that is the nature of the beast - over recent years. Some figures released by the Bureau of Statistics show that between February of 1997 and June of 2004 the number of home-based small businesses increased by 75 percent or more than 360,000. Now that is really an extraordinary figure, that in the space of 6 years the number of home-based small businesses rose by 360,000. There are now in Australia, of the figure quoted by your president, of the 1.3 there are now some 850,000 small businesses operating at or from home, and the Bureau found that by 2004 home-based businesses accounted for 67 percent, or a full two thirds of all small businesses - this proportion having risen from 58 percent in 1997.
 Now I mention this development to underline a number of things: underline the extraordinary growth of the small business sector, underline the extent to which the availability of all of the facilities of information technology have liberated the capacity of so many people to operate their businesses at or from their home, and also to make the point that home-based small businesses represent the new face of entrepreneurial Australia. That is not, of course, to denigrate the role of large corporations in out community, but rather to underline the great importance of the home-based, family-based small business. And this of course is a sector of the economy where the contribution of women in business is growing at an exponential rate, because, as it's rightly been observed, that somewhere between 30 to 40 percent of the small businesses that have been created during this period have been started by Australian women.
I made a commitment during the last election campaign that the Government would continue to do everything it could to further improve the environment for small business. We can make all the taxation decisions we like - and I'll come to that in a moment - we can make other decisions that have a direct impact on the regulatory environment in which small business operates, but nothing is more important than the generic economic climate in which small business operates. Nothing is more important to you than to have low, stable inflation rates, to have low interest rates, to have a consistent climate for business investment, and to have a sense in the community that the economy is heading in the right direction, that those who are responsible for the government of the country, and the government of the states in which you operate, have a sense of the needs of small business and have an understanding of what is required to maintain the momentum of the economy in which you operate.
 We are committed to maintaining a strong entrepreneurial culture, and I would argue very strongly that the Budget that was brought down last Tuesday night by the Treasurer contained within it a large number of changes which are very conducive to the environment in which you operate. The Budget has been, I suppose, best known already for the major changes that it has made in the personal income tax scales. Those changes were long overdue. It has long been the view of many people on both sides of politics in Australia that one of the great weaknesses of our taxation system was that our top rates of marginal taxation cut in at too low a level of income. Many of you will know, some will not know, that the top rate of income tax - and I'm talking in comparative Australian dollar terms - the top rate of income tax in the United States cuts in at $425,000. The top rate of income tax in Japan cuts in at AUD$275,000. The top rate of income tax income tax in Canada cuts in $120,000. The top rate of income tax in the United Kingdom cuts in at $87,000, but it is at 41 percent, a full 6-7 percentage points lower than what it is in Australia, and the top rate of income tax in New Zealand cuts in at $55,000, but it is also at a lower rate, namely 39 percent. Now I bore you with those figures to make the point that one of the great weaknesses of our system has been that our top rates have cut in at too low a rate.
 The argument has been advanced that if you cut top marginal tax rates you reward high income earners with more dollars than low and middle income earners. That is right, but there's an explanation for that, and that explanation is that high income earners are paying more tax before the cuts and they're also paying considerably more tax after the cuts. If you maintain that argument you never by definition do anything about cutting the thresholds at which high marginal rates of tax come in. I think those changes were long overdue, and I think the Government chose precisely the right time to do them, and if they hadn't been undertaken in this Budget with the strong revenue that we found we enjoyed before the Budget was finalised, then I don't believe that they would ever had been done notwithstanding claims to the contrary. So, the $21.7 billion of personal income tax cuts announced in last week's Budget built on the reductions that were made in last year's Budget. And could I also make the point in social terms the Government has devoted a great deal of effort and large financial resources over past budgets in strengthening the after-tax and transfer payment position of low and middle income families with young children, and if you examine the impact of those changes you find that over the last 8 or 9 years the position of low and middle income families with children in this country has been substantially improved and no rational, sustainable argument can be advanced that over the last 8 or 9 years have the rich in this country got richer at the expense of the poor and more lowly paid becoming poorer or less well paid. The reality is that some high income earners in this country have got richer, more people have been added to that list, but it has not occurred at the expense of low and middle income earners, and that it hasn't occurred at their expense has been a direct consequence of deliberate Government policies designed to support the position of low and middle income families.
Now in this Budget we have not only removed some of the disincentive in higher marginal tax rates, but we have also removed something that I know was very unpopular with small business and that is the superannuation surcharge. That surcharge was introduced in the 1996 Budget essentially in the eyes of the Government, as it then saw it, as an equity measure. Given that expenditure reductions were occurring in many other areas, the view was taken that higher income earners could make a contribution to curing the budget difficulties we then had, and that was the basis of the introduction of that surcharge, and I'm very pleased indeed that we will be in a position, I hope with the current Senate, and certainly with the future Senate after the 1st of July, of removing that impost with effect from the 1st of July. And that will reduce business costs very significantly, and it will be of particular benefit to many people in small business. And the decision to remove the 3 percent tariff applying to business inputs where no substitute goods are manufactured in Australia - once again a measure introduced in 1996 - it's removal with effect from the 1st of July will  reduce costs for affected businesses by about $1.3 billion.
Now these taxation measures, all of which are of benefit to small business, come on top of the small business initiatives announced during last years federal election campaign. The 25 percent Entrepreneurs Tax Discount will come into effect from the 1st of July this year, and it will deliver tax relief worth $1.2 billion to many small businesses, essentially those that are set up and operate from home. And, in addition, improved access to the Simplified Tax System will provide additional tax relief to many small businesses to the tune of $360 million.
 We also continue to pursue the abolition of a range of inefficient state and territory taxes, including many pernicious stamp duties, as part of the Intergovernmental Agreement signed between the Commonwealth and the states when the Goods and Services Tax was introduced. So taking all of those things together - the announcements made in the Budget, the implementation of the commitments made in the election campaign - all of them represent a significant reduction in the tax burden of particular reference to the small business sector.
 Now a number of you already, both Mr Godfrey and also your President, Mr Stanton, have mentioned the regulatory burden.  And I acknowledge first up that regulation remains a source of criticism by the small business sector of all levels of government.  And my Government will, at a national level, continue to work I hope in a constructive way with your organisation to continue to reduce the burden.  In last year's small business statement from the 1st of January this year the requirement for employers to provide regular reports to their employees on superannuation guarantee contributions was removed.  And this change to the reporting requirements meets some of the concerns that have been expressed about paperwork and compliance costs.  You may also recall the commitment we made to help get the Tax Office off the back of small business by changing the period in which the ATO can audit and adjust tax assessments.  And for businesses within the Simplified Tax System the previous four year period has been reduced to two, and this will not only significantly ease record keeping but it will give many small businesses greater piece of mind.  And the Government is also pressing ahead with the implementation of the $50 million regulation reduction incentive fund designed to ease the regulatory burden imposed by local councils on many small businesses.
But of all of the reforms of the future that are important to small business, none of course are more important than the changes that we are currently finalising in relation to the workplace relations system. You will be aware that at the time of the last election we undertook to implement many of the changes that we had tried to get through the Senate, not least of course the infamous unfair dismissal changes which we attempted on something like 39 or 40 occasions to get through the Senate that have been unsuccessful.  The Government as you know unexpectedly, and I don't mind admitting that, has found itself in a position where the majority of Senators after the 1st of July will come from the Liberal and National Parties.  We don't intend to use that majority in a capricious or punitive or triumphal fashion - rather we intended to use it in a sensible, productive fashion designed to give effect to changes that we have long championed in the area of workplace relations and also to give effect to some other changes that will further liberalise the system and make it easier for employers and employees to enter into Workplace Agreements.
So over the weeks ahead the Government will finalise and will announce the changes that we have in mind in this area.  Let me make it clear that these changes are not designed, as some have suggested, to reduce the wages of Australian workers.  Let me tell you, I have no interest in reducing the wages of Australian workers.  I believe in Australian workers being paid higher wages.  The foundation of the prosperity of our country is a fully employed, well paid, productive workforce and all of you in this room as small business employers will know that the best employees are the employees that you remunerate well, that the best workplace relations are those relations built on mutual respect and trust where you look after your good employees, you pay them well, you make sure you keep them by keeping their wages competitive and you ensure in return that their loyalty is maintained and their commitment to the success of your enterprise is seen as important to them as it is to you.
  But we do need to have an even more flexible industrial relations system.  And I see enormous advantages in having a system which has national application - not out of any blind commitment to a centralist view of how this country should be governed, but out of a recognition that even amongst small enterprises increasingly we operate in a national economic environment and it makes less and less sense to have essentially nine industrial relations systems, if you take into account the Australian territories, instead of one that increasingly sees Australia for what it is - and that is a single operating market.
I believe that there is room for further reform in the area of industrial relations.  I do not believe, as does my opposite number, the Leader of the Opposition, that the process of change and reform in the area of industrial relations has been completed.  I think there is still a significant distance to go.  It is not an exercise based on a desire to break trade unions, I have no objection to the proper role of trade unions in the Australian economy, people have a right to join a trade union, they have a right if they choose to have their interests represented by a trade union and a trade union has a right to negotiate on behalf of its members.  That right has to be exercised in parallel with the right of employees and employers to make employment arrangements comprehensibly covering their terms of employment, separate and apart from a trade union if that is the wish of the employers and the employees.  And particularly in the area of small business we need to recognise the essentially personal nature of the employment relationship that exists between individual employers and employees.
Well my friends, I want to say in conclusion that I have come here tonight again as I said at the commencement of my remarks to recommit my Government, only seven months since its re-election, to the continued importance and cause of the small business sector in the Australian economy.  These are great economic times, but they are not economic times that can be taken for granted.  The reform process has never been completed, or is never completed.  We still have in front of us major areas of economic challenge and reform, none is more important than further changes and improvements in the area of industrial relations. We also need, and I acknowledge in this context the presence of the Chairman of the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission, Mr Graeme Samuel, we also need to maintain the momentum of further building a more competitive Australian economy.  Competition has brought great benefits to the Australian economy.  Some people complain about competition, some people in business don't like competition, but if you really believe in the free enterprise system you will always place a very high premium on maintaining and expanding opportunity and expanding competition.
  Australia is living in a very conducive world economic environment.  We are fortunate that the demand for our resources, particularly from the nations of north Asia, is growing.  We are fortunate that the changes that our economy has enjoyed over the last 10 to 20 years have made us a country that is able to take advantage of the global environment in which we live.
  Last Tuesday my colleague the Treasurer brought down a Budget that would have been the envy of any finance minister anywhere in the world.  A Budget that displayed a net government debt of 0.7 per cent of GDP against an OECD average of about 47 per cent; a Budget that displayed a remarkably strong fiscal position; a Budget that reported the lowest level of unemployment in almost 30 years; a Budget that reinforced the low inflationary, low interest rate climate in which we are living; but also a Budget that recognised that as an ageing population we need to take steps to sustain services that are relevant to the ageing section of our population and that as a nation that is now short of workers rather than being short of jobs we needed to provide incentives, or as many people to re-enter the workforce as reasonably possible.
Small business has a major role to play in all of these things.  Small business, to use that old clich‚, has been, continues to be and will always be the engine room of the Australian economy.  It will always provide the greatest area of job growth.  It will always provide the great areas of innovation and change.  And it will always be the crucible in which the really competitive animal spirits of the Australian economy work best for the national interest. It's for those reasons that I remain a very strong devotee of small business and my Government will always do what it can to make the climate in which you operate as conducive as possible.
I thank you again for inviting me to be with you at this very important dinner to this very important small business summit.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Diego, and to the School Principal Sue Bremner, Mr Neil McDonald, the Acting School Principal, and to my friend and Parliamentary colleague Gary Hardgrave, but very importantly to the girls and boys of Calamvale Community College. Well this is a different school, and it's a very big school, a school that has challenged not only the people of Brisbane but also people interested in education in and around Australia to enable new and better ways [inaudible] to grow up and get a good education.
  I have had a little bit of the school shown to me, it's certainly very different from the Earlwood Primary School that I attended in the NSW education system in Sydney a few years ago. We didn't have pods, we had classes but I guess some of the things that I learnt there are very similar to the things that you are being taught. But I have noticed in the short time that I have been here something that is very special and something that you should be very proud of, and that is there is a great spirit of enthusiasm and cooperation. The teachers are friendly, the teachers are very engaged in what they are doing and they are very committed to the task of educating you.
 School years are so important, all of us go through school and occasionally wonder what it is all about. We occasionally feel that maybe it's a bit unfair that we have to go to school. You should not think that it is unusual to feel that way, it's a perfectly natural thing but as you get a bit older and you look back on the school years, you will have a great sense of appreciation for the opportunity that it has given you and your generation of Australians will leave school and enter the workforce at a time when there will be a growing demand for workers because our population is getting older at a more rapid rate than it used to and therefore the job opportunities that are going to be available are going to increase.
 I never make long speeches at these gatherings, I learnt when I was at school that long speeches at assemblies by visitors were not all that welcome but I have one piece of advice that I always give to school students no matter what age they are and that is I have found in life and I found it at school, and I found it later on, that the best people and the people who are the happiest people you meet in life are the people who always look for something positive in the character of the people they deal with.
 You have a lot of friends at school and sometimes individuals, people you meet at school, might make you mad on occasions and you might think that they are particularly unfriendly people. Can I assure you that in every person, there is a  lot of good and if you look for the good in the positive side of a person, you'll not only end up being good friends with them but you will also end up being happier in life than those people who always look for the negative in somebody and my advice to all of you is, to even the people you find hardest to look for something positive in them, you will find it and not only will you find that you like that person a lot more but you'll end up being a lot happier person as you go through life.
 And the last thing I'd say to you is always remember the contribution that teachers make to your lives. Teachers are very dedicated, professional people, it's not an easy job, they have a great influence on children and the knowledge they impart to you and the commitment they bring to that is something that you should always appreciate.
 Calamvale is being watched and from what I've heard and from what others have told me, and from what I have seen this morning, it's a very, very interesting, different and very positive way of educating children, it builds the friendship and the bonds between teachers and students over a longer period of time and in a way that perhaps that more traditional methods of instruction do not do and therefore the education authorities in Queensland and all of those associated with this community and not least the parents, a number of whom who are here today should be congratulated on the contribution that you are making.
 Can I thank you very warmly for having me as a guest of your school. I wish you every health and happiness in the years ahead, not only through your education but as you grow to adulthood and enter life and go into the workforce, have your own children, worry about their education, I hope that you always take with you through those years, a fond memory of the time that you have spent at this school. Thank you very much.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much Mr Clement Woon, the world president of Leica Geosystems, Mr Geoff Baldwin, my parliamentary colleagues, Bob Quinn and Bruce Flegg, Councillor Michael Caltabiano, ladies and gentlemen.
 I would like first of all to thank Leica Geosystems for the confidence that it has displayed in the Australian economy by deciding to locate its RD centre here in Brisbane.  The Australian economy as you all know is performing very strongly.  We've just delivered a Budget which would be the envy of most governments in the developed world.  But having said that we must be vigilant in different ways to ensure that the economic strength and prosperity we now enjoy is maintained.  And that involves an unceasing quest for new investment, for new and innovative products and the winning of fresh markets around the world.  It also involves challenging certain stereotypes about the character of the Australian economy.  One could be forgiven for believing that Australia's entire export performance rested upon the remarkable markets we are now benefiting from through the sale of our resources to countries in north Asia.  And there is no doubt that the strength of those markets has contributed mightily to the revenues and the income of our country.
But it would be a mistake to see our export performance entirely resting on that section of the economy.  And it would be a mistake to overlook the tremendous diversification built on the innovative and research skills of Australian workers that has occurred in other aspects of our resource market, of our export markets.  And that of course is where the contribution of this company comes in.  This company exports to 23 destinations out of Australia.  It exports products which are of particular relevance to the mining and construction industry.  They're high grade products, they result from investment in RD, they represent the cutting edge of the research capacity of Australians.  And they are therefore a wonderful, contemporary story of the diversified face of the modern Australian economy.
I'm often asked to what do I attribute the tremendous economic performance of Australia over the last few years.  And I always give pride of place to the capabilities and the diversification in the skills of the Australian workforce.  Australians are renowned for many things. When it comes to our workforce and our creators, the thing for which we are most renowned is our adaptability.  And the way in which the Australian workforce has changed and taken on new skills, recognised that we're living in a new world and understood that the rest of the world doesn't owe us a living, and we only have one if we're prepared to go out and win it and retain it and beat our competitors, the way in which the workers of Australia have been able to do that in recent years has been quite remarkable. And it's not only in the areas with which Australia is traditionally associated. It's also in these new cutting edge technological areas. Australia has a formidable reputation around the world in the mining industry and also in the construction industry. Not only are we great miners and great exporters of the extractive industries, but we are also - and Leica Geosystems is an example - we are building a formidable reputation in being able to provide the high quality technical equipment which is needed to maintain the mining industry not only here in Australia, which of course this company finds as its principal sales area, but also many countries around the world. The story over the last 18 months of the growth of this company here in Brisbane, the doubling of its workforce - a young workforce, a very talented diversified workforce - is very much the story of the growth and the expansion of the Australia economy over the last 10 or 15 years.
 To you Mr Woon, I welcome you from Switzerland. I know of your company's long association with Australia stretching back to the 1950s. Can I welcome you to a very confident outward-looking country, a country that is able to hold its own in an unprotected world trading environment. Australia has now one of the most open economies in the world. Our tariff barriers are next to negligible in most areas. We are a nation that seeks not only markets in the extractive industries and our traditional areas of strength - farm produce - but also in highly sophisticated technical equipment, the like of which your company is well known.
 You come to a vibrant city. I've often remarked that, in the more than 30 years I've been in public life in Australia, no part of our country has changed more dramatically than has the south-east corner of Queensland. The change in the city of Brisbane over that period of time has been remarkable. And it therefore offers to overseas investors a very congenial lifestyle. It offers the relaxed companionship of Australians, and it offers an area of Australia that encourages investment and encourages people to exercise their entrepreneurial skills, and I know that they are atmospherics that are appealing to any company. Can I take this opportunity - because yours is a company centred overseas - to again affirm the importance to Australia of foreign investment. This country's economic expansion in the 50 to 60 years that have gone by since the early growth after World War II has been due in no small measure to the steady flows of foreign investment.
 We live in a globalised world. We have changed forever from a country that sees itself as in any way inward looking economically. We are a country that sees its main chance as being to succeed and prosper in a globalised economy, and the successful countries of the present and the future will be those that are the most proficient in taking advantage of the opportunities that globalisation offer. So I have very great pleasure in congratulating Leica Geosystems. I thank the company for investing so much money and so much of its future here in Brisbane. You will be welcome always in Australia as very good corporate citizens and a company that is making a very important contribution to this country's future. In those circumstances, and with those sentiments, I have very great pleasure in declaring this centre open. Thank you
[ends]


Well Ross, my parliamentary colleagues Brett Mason and George Brandis, Senators for Queensland, Michael Caltabiano, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a real pleasure for me to be in the electorate of Bonner, to be associated with this young, enthusiastic, articulate new representative that the people of Bonner had the great sense to send to Canberra last October.  Now this is a community gathering and I know it brings together people who do all sorts of things to make this wonderful community stick together and work in a way that makes it a very liveable part of Australia. And I want to acknowledge first up that all of the wonderful service organisations, and as I moved around in the few moments before I came up here I met people from the Lions organisation, from Meals on Wheels and from other local organisations.  And this is a snapshot of what makes Australia tick. It's got people at different ages, at different backgrounds, belonging to different organisations, all of whom work harmoniously with each other to make our society a wonderful country and to make our nation the wonderful place it is in which to live.
Ross comes to Federal Parliament with tremendous energy and commitment.  And in the seven months that he's been a Member he's already impressed me and all of his colleagues with his tireless desire to win things for his electorate and his tireless commitment to the people that were good enough to elect him in October of last year.  And I want to say that it's the first Member that Bonner has had and I hope he remains its member for many, many years into the future.  I know that will be the intention of a lot of people in this room, maybe not everybody and we live in a democracy and governments are elected to govern for the people who voted against them as well for the people who voted for them.  And my message to you today is that this country is doing very well, this country is very widely respected around the world, the economy in this country is in as good a shape as it's been at any time since the end of World War II, we have the lowest unemployment in 30 years, we have a fiscal or budget position that is the envy of most other nations around the world, we've been able to bring in major tax reforms in the last Budget, we have kept faith with our commitments in relation to the health system, in relation to all of the other essential provisions that are needed to sustain not only a society built on incentive and effort, but also a society that recognises the importance of looking after the more vulnerable in our community.
We live in a world that is constantly challenging, not only for Australia but for the nations of our region.  And I don't need to remind you, and you know we brought in the excellent Baby Bonus in the Budget before last, and I can say there has been a welcome increase in the birth rate over the last two quarters and I don't know that it's going to necessarily going to be maintained but it's something to warmly welcome.  But we do live in a region which has not been without its challenges and without its difficulties and the one thing that I find as Prime Minister when I travel around our own region and travel around the world that this country has won for itself a new respect and a new standing because it's been willing to stick up for the things that it believes in.  International relations can be a very difficult issue.  We face at the moment as a country some difficult issues that involve the fate and the future of individuals.  And all of us hope that in the working out of those issues the right and fair and just and true thing is determined and determined in relation to the fate of those individuals.
This country was willing to take a stand in relation to the freeing of East Timor and it remains one of the great international achievements that we were willing to take a stand to help the people of East Timor and since then we have rebuilt in a magnificent way our relationship with the people of Indonesia.  We have been able to achieve not only a continuation of the very close relationship with the United States, but we've also been able to build a very strong relationship with the countries of north Asia and most particularly in recent years with China which has become one of Australia's strongest markets.  And it's demonstrated that those people who said that somehow or other you had to make a choice between being friendly with the United States and offending the nations of Asia, or being friendly with the nations of Asia and cold-shouldering the United States has demonstrated that those people were wrong.
But of course the most important responsibility that any government is to make sure that conditions at home are as good as they possibly can be.  And that does mean managing the economy well, it does mean keeping the country out of debt, it does mean reducing taxation when we can, it does mean having strong health services and a strong education system and also having a very strong defence force.  And all of those things have received great priority from this Government in the nine and a half years that we have now been in office, or a little over nine years rather that we have been in office.  And the last Budget presented by Peter Costello brought together so many of those achievements, Ross mentioned that when we came to office this country's government debt at a federal level was $96 billion.  We've repaid $90 billion of that $96 billion. And we now have a debt level which is the envy of other industrialised countries around the world.  But we've been able to do that whilst at the same time massively increasing expenditure on health, increasing in a very significant way the tax benefits that flow to low and middle income earners with children, and also injecting very large amounts of money into education, particularly providing the parents of Australia with the right to choose the school that educates their children.  It's a very strong Liberal Party principle that parents should decide where their children are educated, not governments and not teacher unions but parents should decide where their children are educated and upholding the freedom of choice, be it a government school, a Catholic parish school, a GPS school or some other kind of independent school we believe very strongly in the principle of parental choice and it's one that has been an increasing number of Australian parents exercise their undoubted right to choose the school that their children must be educated in.
But having said all of these things about what we have achieved, I wouldn't want anybody to imagine that I think the process of change and improvement and reform in this country is ever completed.  We face a number of quite daunting issues, we are like all other western countries, we are an ageing population and we make absolutely certain that we keep our health services and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, which is aligned to those health services, on a sound and affordable basis.  It means we must encourage people to remain in the workforce as long as they want to. It means we should provide incentive for people who are now out of the workforce to enter the workforce if they wish to and they're able to do so.  We also as a continent, and a very dry continent, face the greatest conservation challenge of our time and that is water. Water is a bigger conservation challenge than the preservation of the Tasmanian forests, even though that's an important issue.  But the great conservation challenge of our time is water and we are still as a country in the grip of severe drought and I'll be going to many of the worst drought affected areas of Australia on Friday in parts of Western New South Wales.  And it's very important that we as a community (interruption)... it's alright, nothing compared to Question Time.  But we really have to understand the challenge that this represents and I hope later in the week to say something about a couple of, indeed tomorrow, a number of water projects that are of particular relevance to the people of Queensland and I'll be making some announcements along with the Premier of Queensland because it is a joint effort in relation to those projects.
But my friends I don't want to make any longer speech.  Thank you very much for the support that you gave to Ross.  He won't let you down, he will deliver in spades on the investment that you made in him in October of last year and he will do it extremely well and he'll do it with great style and great enthusiasm.  I wish you well, thank you for your contribution to the Bonner community and thank you most importantly for the contribution that all of you make so magnificently to our wonderful country Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Peter, Santo Santoro, Lord Mayor, Bob Quinn, the leader of the Queensland Parliamentary Liberal Party, my other ministerial colleagues and Michael Caltabiano, the State President of the Division, ladies and gentleman. Can I first of all thank Santo and Peter for their very warm words and can  I say how impressed I have been and I know all of my colleagues have been with the tremendous fist that Peter has made of a very tricky portfolio in seven very short months. He's a younger member of the Ministry, we have a range of ages in the Ministry and he is one of the younger ones and I think he'll go a long way in politics and I thank him for his very important contribution.
He of course is emblematic of the contribution that the Queenslanders have made to the strength and the success of the Government I have had the privilege of leading over the last nine and a half years. But when I looked at the Federal results in Queensland in 2001 and I looked at them again in 2004, I thought, inevitably of that immortal slogan, "Beautiful one day and perfect the next," because it so effectively described my sense of, how should I put it, unexpected additional pleasure at the result that we managed to reap in Queensland. I never dreamt that we would win control of the Senate, I have to say that, I must confess that at four o'clock on the afternoon of the election when I was talking to my two sons who'd been out trying to persuade the electors of Bennelong to vote for me, I said to them, I thought in my most best moments, we'd probably win the House of Representatives, we might lose a seat or two and I thought the best we could do in the Senate was to win 37 seats. How wrong I was and how little faith I turned out to have in the great people of the great state of Queensland but can I say thank you ...
I do want to thank all of you for the support you gave to the Liberal and to the National Party because it was a team effort. I am a Coalitionist, the great success of the Federal Government has been the cooperation between the Liberal Party and the National Party. When those two parties work together, they succeed, and they win, and they stay in Government and it's been a view that I have held all of my political life.
Last Tuesday night Peter Costello delivered what many people have regarded as his best Budget. Some might say the first Budget he delivered for the Government in 1996 was his best because in 1996 we faced huge problems, we inherited a deficit of some $10.5 billion, the Federal Government owed the world, owed its creditors $96 billion, we had an unemployment rate of 8.5%, we had housing interest rates well over 10%, we had low levels of business confidence and we had an unreformed taxation system and we had a largely unreformed industrial relations system. Although, to its credit, the former Government had implemented a number of other valuable reforms such as tariff reform and financial deregulation which the then Opposition had been willing to support. So it was a different environment in 1996 and we had to take a lot of very unpopular decisions. One of those unpopular decisions was of course to introduce something that I know was never very popular at gatherings such as this and that was the superannuation surcharge and it was something that I received many comments about. Let me put it in a neutral way - over the years as time went by, and I will come to the fate of that in a moment. But it was in many respects, last Tuesday, it was a Budget that brought together and put on display what the Government has with, as always, the support and the effort of the Australian people and of the Australian workforce, put on display, what has been achieved with the Australian economy over almost ten years.
Now I would never pretend for a moment that Governments are the beginning and the end of economic success. The greatest reason why the Australian economy is performing well at the present moment is that the workforce and the business men and women of this country, have taken advantage far more, than most other groups of people, have taken advantage of the opportunities that the world has given this country over the last ten to twenty years.
 This country and its country men and women, have many virtues, none in my opinion is greater and more important than our capacity to change and adapt. And the way in which the workforce of this country, the way in which the entrepreneurs, the business men and women of this country, have changed and adapted to the new circumstances. It's turned ourselves from an inward looking economic culture where we automatically expected protection and a leg up before we started to compete, the way in which we have moved away from that over the last decade or more, has been quite remarkable.
  But of course Governments are responsible for setting the climate. Governments can influence, they can create, and they can alter expectations and what we have essentially tried to do over the last decade is to provide a climate which gives the maximum encouragement to people, decision makers in business and importantly, their employees to adapt and to exploit the new opportunities of a globalised economy. We are lucky, there's no doubt about that. Providence gave us vast resources of minerals, vast energy resources. We've also been given the fortune of occupying an island continent and we are very lucky that our history has not been marked by internal conflict and discourse. We are very fortunate but there are many fortunate nations that have squandered the fortune that providence has given them and I don't believe Australia has done that and what we have endeavoured to do as a Government is to allow the Australian people to take advantage of the good fortune that we have had.
We have seen ourselves first and foremost as having the responsibility to manage the Australian economy in a predictable fashion. People do not like unexpected shocks, they like to believe that they live in a country that provides a degree of certainty and predictability. We have sought to be good economic housekeepers, we believe in the value of paying off debts. We don't believe that the country should be over-geared. We do believe that if we practice prudent housekeeping with a national economy, it instils confidence in the rest of the community and that is why we are very proud of the fact. As Peter Costello could report last Tuesday night, we are very proud of the fact that we started with $96 billion of Federal Government debt and that has now come down to a mere $6 billion. We have a net debt to GDP ratio, if you can forgive the jaw breaking economic jargon, of 0.7% of GDP and that is undreamt of amongst most industrialised countries. We have a fiscal position that is the envy of any of our comparable nations. The Chancellor of the Exchequer in the United Kingdom doesn't have a budget surplus. The Secretary of the Treasury in the United States certainly doesn't have a budget surplus and the Finance Minister of the Japan doesn't have a budget surplus. Now it's not the only thing but it's an extremely good start and it's one of the things that has helped instil a sense of confidence. We have over the last ten years endeavoured to bring about a large number of additional reforms. We've been substantially but not totally successful. The changes in the taxation system overall, although in some respects they fell short of the mandate we received at the 1998 election and fell short of some of the things we wanted to do, merely because we couldn't get them through the Senate in their original form.
 Taxation reform has nonetheless overwhelmingly been a great step forward. Most importantly it has done something that I have wanted to do for a long time. Going back to the time when I was Treasurer in an earlier government and that is to give to the states of Australia, a guaranteed revenue base that grew with the economy. I can remember the earliest encounters I had with Premiers from both political sides and from all around Australia when they complained that Premiers merely got the pickings at the end of day. You know it was never true but that was their complaint and they used to say you know we want access to a growth tax. You've got the growth tax and you just decide each year you know you are going to give a few scraps out of the growth tax and that's not good enough because we have to fund public hospitals, government schools, police services and build state roads and that over time came to me to represent a fair argument and that is why we decided in 1998 when we announced the GST that we were going to give all of the GST to the states and it may come as a surprise even to some people in this room that every last dollar of the GST goes to the states of Australia because we believe they are entitled to have access to a growth tax and out that growth tax, they can fund their responsibilities for public schools and public hospitals and all of the other services that states are meant to provide.
Now there is of course a concomitant of that and that is if you have access to a growth tax, you can't then double up, you can't when you've got a shortfall in the Queensland hospital system or the New South Wales hospital system, turn around and say, well we could do even more if only Canberra would give us more money. The reality is that Canberra has given you more money and there is no State in Australia that has done better out of the GST than the great State of Queensland and can I say, I can tell from his body language every time I have a discussion with him, the Premier of Queensland knows that damn well and Queensland has done extremely well, it's done extremely well out of the GST. I don't object that, I support it, it's the end result of our policy but it carries with it a responsibility to discharge the obligations that under the power sharing arrangement of the Australian federation rest with the States.
 The Budget was able to report that we have the lowest level of unemployment in Australia in 30 years. In the space of something like 10 or 15 years, we have gone from a country that had a shortage of jobs to a country that has a shortage of workers-particularly skilled workers. And that was another feature of the Budget, its emphasis in fulfilment of the election campaign commitments I made for the Coalition, its commitment to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in boosting the skills capacity of this country, and in particular, the funding of the 24 Australian technical colleges -which are designed to restore the prestige of a technical qualification in this country.
 I frequently said that there was no remark I made in the last election campaign that drew more spontaneous support than when I said at the launch, just a few yards from here, few hundred yards from here in the City Hall in Brisbane, I said that I wanted an Australia in which a high quality technical qualification was as prized as a university degree. And I think we have made an error in this country of downgrading trade qualifications. For a generation or more we embrace the foolish notion that the only path to a successful career was for a person to go to year 12 and then go on to university - ignoring the fact that many people have neither the interest in or the adaptability to university, but if they're forced to go down that path, they ignore the prospects and the possibilities that lie through technical education.
The Budget was conspicuous for tackling some of the longer term problems that this country has. We are an ageing population, the ageing challenge is not as great in Australia as it is in Japan and some of the countries of southern Europe, but it is nonetheless there. And we've sought to challenge it in several ways. We've sought to encourage people to remain in the workforce longer, that will require a cultural change but it's a beginning. I noticed that many firms around Australia are now embarking upon positive programmes to recruit or retain older workers. The Government is doing the same thing and I think it's important that that cultural change continue because it's very relevant to our capacity to fully exploit the strengths of the Australian economy.
We've also embraced and this of course brings us very much to Peter Dutton's area of responsibility, a policy to encourage many people now on welfare to enter the workforce. Not as a means of punishing them, not as a means of saving money because it won't. Indeed for the first four years the training programmes, an additional investment in making people more ready for the workforce, will cost something in order of $2 billion over the next four years-so it hardly represents an exercise in cost cutting. But it's a recognition that welfare dependency is from a long term point of view, as a distinguished Aboriginal leader Noel Pearson has said, is poisonous to the development of communities and of the human personality. And people need and deserve the satisfaction and the value in self-esteem of being part of the employed workforce and that is the attitude that we will bring to these reforms.
We're not bringing the attitude of trying to punish people or deprive them but rather through a combination of incentives and changes in the rules - both in relation to the disability support pension and also those people who have sole parent or other payments of that kind to encourage them to enter the workforce. It's a very important initiative. It will be implemented in a consistent way and it will be implemented in a very sympathetic and a very understanding way.
 And finally ladies and gentleman the Budget was able to deliver very significant taxation relief. This county over the last 8 or 9 years has seen the introduction and the steady expansion of a system of Family Tax Benefits - which has resulted in a marked improvement in the financial position of low and middle income families in this county. One of the frequent mantras of the Labor Party, when they attack us, is to say that under Howard the rich have got richer, at the expense of the poor getting poorer. That statement is fundamentally wrong and it's been disproved by some recent research. It is true that over the last 10 years more people who might loosely be called as well off, as wealthy, however you want to describe it - more of those exist now then existed 10 years ago and there are... they're not only better off but there are more of them. There's no argument about that and that's no bad thing, because any fair capitalist society will always have a certain cohort of very high income and very successful people and we should never make the mistake of regarding that as a bad thing. But that has not occurred at the expense of people at the lower end of the income range or in the middle because it's been demonstrated by some recent research, by the organisation carrying the acronym NATSEM, a respected Canberra based economic modelling organisation. But largely because of the introduction of the Family Tax Benefit system, the position of low and middle income families has not only been maintained but has been significantly improved over the last 8 or 9 years.
 And so far from us building a society which has seen growing in equities, built on the suppression of the incomes of people at the lower end of the range, to benefit those at the end of the higher end of the range, that has manifestly not been the case. I mention that to, I suppose underline my astonishment at the petty populism which has been practiced by the Leader of the Opposition in relation to taxation relief in the Budget.
I believe that our top rates of marginal tax in this country cut in at too low a level of income. We have a progressive taxation system in Australia and I believe that there is still very strong support for maintaining a taxation system that has an element of progressivity in it, but it depends very much of course on where the levels are struck and at what points in the income scale you move from one level to another.
Let me give you some comparative figures. In the United States the top rate of income tax - and this allows for the imposition of state and city taxes and other imposts - totals about 43 cents in the dollar, and it applies at A$425,000 of income. In Japan it comes in at something in the order of A$275,000 of income, and the level is at about 46. In the United Kingdom it comes in at $87,000 and it's 41 percent, and in New Zealand it comes in it $55,000, and it's 39 percent. Ours of course is 47 percent, and it currently is legislated to come in at $80,000. Now if you put those figures and then you superimpose on that the changes that Peter announced last Tuesday that will end with the top rate of 47 coming in at $125,000. It represents two things. It represents a significant improvement over what the situation was only a year ago, and that is that it cut in at $60,000, and that was courtesy of the Labor Party and the Democrats in the Senate when they mutilated that part of our GST. You superimpose that. But it also demonstrates that it is hardly in international terms an unreasonable bonanza to the rich in this community. It is a recognition that successful people, whether they start with accumulated resources or not, and whatever field of endeavour they're working in in this country, will inevitably, unless you keep adjusting the thresholds for those rates, will inevitably keep pushing against those top rates. And when these changes have been implemented there will only be 3 percent of the Australian population, taxpayers, who will in fact be on the top marginal rate of 47 cents in the dollar.
Now you may know quite a few of them, and you may think everybody is, but I think it's always important that we preserve a sense of balance and perspective with these things, and the truth is that more than 80 per cent of individual taxpayers in Australia will be on a marginal tax rate of 30 per cent or less. Now that was one of the objectives of tax reform, and I'm delighted that it remains one of the achievements of taxation reforms.
We were, of course, also able to announce the total abolition of the superannuation surcharge, and I know that will be widely applauded. It always was raised with me when I came to Queensland, and other parts of Australia I might hasten to add as well. And of course many of the other reforms that are contained in the Budget, particularly the removal of the 3 per cent impost on certain imports will be widely welcomed by the business community. It was a good Budget for business; it was a good Budget for consumer confidence; it was a good Budget for putting incentive back into the taxation system; and it was a good Budget for long-term reform. But I want to conclude on this note: I wouldn't want anybody in this room to think that because I've spoken enthusiastically not only about the Budget, but also about the Government's economic programmes of the last ten years, I wouldn't want anybody to think that we regarded the reform process as completed. My opponent may believe, Mr Beazley may believe, that the lemon has been squeezed dry when it comes to industrial relations reform. He may believe that all of the changes that were needed in that area have now been completed. I do not.
 One of the opportunities that the unexpected numbers in the Senate presents us with is a capacity to go somewhat further in the area of industrial relation reform, not in a way that needlessly creates antagonism in the community, not in a way that denies people the right to belong to a trade union if they wish, or denies them the right to have their interests represented industrially by a trade union. That is their right, and it will never be the policy of this Government to deny people a choice. But we do need still more flexibility, and I think we need a more nationally consistent industrial relations system. Not because I have any interest in taking roles away from the states where they are being discharged efficiently and in the national interest, but because I believe that overwhelmingly we are living not only in a globalised economic environment, but we're also living in Australia in an increasingly nationalised economic environment, and it's important therefore that those areas of our economy where unnecessary barriers and duplication exist between the different states of the Commonwealth that they be removed.
We will, of course, be implementing the commitments we made about reforming the unfair dismissal laws. We will of course be making other changes that make it easier for people to enter into workplace agreements. We will not see industrial relations reform as a vehicle for reducing wages, and I want to finish on this note. No charge from our critics has been more absurd than the charge that it's part of the philosophy of the Government I lead to cut people's wages. I keep hearing it time and time again. The truth of course is that, in the 9 years or more that we have been in government, real wages in this country have risen by 14 percent. They rose by 1.2 percent in the 13 years that the previous government was in office. I mention those figures to make the stark comparison that at the end of the day the purpose of good economic policy is to produce higher living standards, more secure employment, and greater opportunities for the families, the children, of Australian working men and women. Good economic policy can have no other objective; it's not an end in itself. It's not a beautiful set of numbers that you can purr about at night. What really matters about good economic policy is the impact it has on the lives and the hopes of the great bulk of the Australian workforce, and I don't think any of us should ever lose sight of that fact. I don't. I think about it every day because they are the people who are most in need of our consideration, and when I opened the Liberal Party's campaign for seats we held in the western suburbs of Sydney last September I said that the proudest boast I could make was that we had been a better friend of the workers of Australia than the Labor Party had ever aspired to be in the time that it was in government.
 Now that will remain our objective, and I know that many of you as employers will know that it's your objective as well because the best employees you can ever have are the well paid, successful ones - the ones that contribute to their future and contribute also to your future. My friends, thank you for the support that I know so many of you have given to the Liberal Party here in Queensland over the years. I appreciate it very much. Queensland has been a wonderful source of support to the Federal Government over the last nine-and-a-half years, and I'm sure it will continue to be that way for years into the future.
 Thank you.  


Well thank you very much. The Premier of Queensland, Peter Beattie, the Mayor of the City of Gold Coast, Ron Clarke, my parliamentary colleagues Steven Ciobo, the Member for Moncrieff, and Margaret May, the Member for McPherson,  ladies and gentlemen. It is an exciting announcement, not only because it's announcing a Commonwealth contribution in partnership with the Government of Queensland of a project that will involve the largest ever attempted pressure reduction programme of the water supply of a water utility anywhere in Australia, and it is in that sense a first, but this is also an occasion for me to announce, as well as the project that will greatly assist the people of the City of the Gold Coast, but also to announce two other projects also in partnership with the Queensland Government - projects which are important to the water supply and water management needs of other parts of Queensland.
The first of those will involve a Federal Government contribution of $29 million towards the $86 million cost of the Mackay waste water recycling project, and also a smaller amount for a feasibility study, once again in partnership with the Queensland Government to tackle some of the ground water availability problems of Bundaberg. Now these three projects - one of them here on the Gold Coast, one of them far north in Mackay, and another not too far from here in Bundaberg - they all address in a very practical way the challenge that all governments in this country have in relation to water, which I have described as the great conservation challenge of our age. As we meet here, as we speak, large parts of Australia are gripped by a worsening drought, and tomorrow I will visit some of the worst drought affected areas of western New South Wales to find out first hand the suffering of so many of our fellow Australians, who through no fault of their own are in the grip  - in some cases the fourth year - of a drought that has denied them the opportunity to plant a winter crop.
  That reminds all of us, whether we live in the cities or in the country or in regional Australia, that we have a responsibility to work together and to solve these problems, and I particularly welcome the fact that this is a partnership between the three levels of government - a partnership between the Federal Government, the Queensland Government, and it delivers on a project that's very important to the Gold Coast City Council. And these three projects, particularly the Gold Coast one which will save 7 to 10 gigalitres per annum, it will be seek through pressure management to better conserve and utilise the water supply, and projects of this kind dotted around Australia over a number of years can make an enormous difference. And this has been funded out of a $2 billion National Water Trust that the Federal Government has established, and the aim of this Trust is to work with State governments, local government bodies, and in some cases private enterprise consortia, and in other cases on our own initiative, to fund projects which in an a practical way address the water conservation needs of this country.
Australia will never return to an age where we carelessly and wastefully wash the car in the backyard on a Sunday morning thinking that water was available in a never-ending supply. Those days are gone, and I think all of us have been forcefully reminded of that through the water restrictions of the major cities and, even far more painfully, the suffering of our fellow Australians in country areas of our nation. So I'm very pleased indeed to be associated with this project. I want to thank the authorities of the Gold Coast City Council, and I also want to thank the Premier of Queensland. Australians want their problems solved. They want their problems solved by governments working together. They don't quite mind in what combination, or who does what, as long as it gets done. Australians are very pragmatic people and this is an example of governments working together with a resolve to fix a problem, and I hope it is duplicated, replicated all around Australia over the years ahead.
Thank you very much.
[ends]  


For the benefit of the House, I wish to outline the Government's plans for a historic modernisation of Australia's workplace relations system.
In presenting these measures to the parliament, I place on record my thanks and those of the Government for the outstanding work of the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations, the honourable Member for Menzies, whose assiduous work in putting together the components of this package deserve the thanks of the Liberal and National parties and I am sure,/ as the measures are outlined, the overwhelming majority of the Australian people.
All members will know that the Australian economy has performed very strongly in recent years. Australians have enjoyed higher living standards from a combination of prudent economic management, strong jobs growth, higher real wages, low inflation and interest rates, lower taxes, increased family benefits and improved Government services.
While the Government is proud of this record, the reality is that Australia must press ahead with economic reform if we are to prosper in the 21st century. We on this side of the House do not believe that the reform tasks coming out of workplace relations have been completed. We have not developed reform fatigue on this side of the House. We do not believe that the lemon has been squeezed dry in industrial relations reform.  As in the past, our future living standards will rely largely on the productivity of our workers and their workplaces. This Government trusts the employers and employees of Australia to make the right decisions in their interests and in the interests of their nation.
The measures I am outlining today represent the next logical step towards a flexible, simple and fair system of workplace relations. Australia must take this step if we are to sustain our prosperity, remain competitive in the global economy and meet future challenges such as the ageing of our society.
The essence of these reforms is to further promote and facilitate the making of agreements at the workplace level. Only through this will the full potential for productivity gains in the Australian economy be realised.
The Government's reform proposals include:
 New arrangements for setting minimum wages and conditions;
  A more streamlined process for the making of workplace agreements, both individual and collective;
  Greater award simplification and a more focused role for the Australian Industrial Relations Commission;
  Major liberalisation of unfair dismissal laws, which have held back job growth in Australia; and, finally
  The goal of a national industrial relations system-one that reflects the competitive national character of the Australian economy in the year 2005.
Australia's continued prosperity hinges squarely on a flexible and dynamic labour market. It is the single most important determinant of our ability to secure future productivity gains from higher skills, new technology, competition and open trade.
Members will know that in 1996 the Government introduced significant reforms to free up Australia's labour market. These reforms simplified an overly prescriptive award based system and gave Australian employers and employees greater choice in negotiating working conditions. They have helped to sustain productivity growth and higher living standards over the last nine years.
Unfortunately, however, the Government was not able to persuade the Senate to go further with reforms that would have truly brought our workplace relations system into the 21st century.
That is why the Government is now asking the parliament again to consider a range of workplace relations reforms. This package embodies one of the great pieces of unfinished business in the structural transformation of the Australian economy.
Key principles
These reforms are based on principles that balance freedom and fairness and that have underpinned the Liberal and National parties' historic contribution to changing the culture of workplace relations in this country. They are principles that I and many others on this side of the House have sought to articulate over the last 20 years.
It is now 20 years since the historic Mudginberri dispute in the Northern Territory, which represented a determined attempt by the employers and employees in that industry, so vital to Australia's export future, to break free from the shackles of a centralised industrial relations system. It is 19 years since the famous Dollar Sweets case in which my distinguished colleague the Treasurer played such a significant role.  The last 20 years have seen many people advocate change and reform. We have within our grasp the opportunity, in a fair and balanced way, to give effect to further reforms that will consolidate the transformation of the industrial relations culture of this country away from the stultifying effect of the old centralised model.
The Government's aim is to give even greater freedom and flexibility to employers and employees to negotiate at the workplace level.
We want to encourage the further spread of workplace agreements-both collective and individual.
We will provide people with the choice of remaining under the existing award system or entering into workplace agreements.
We ensure that all Australians have the right to join-or not to join-a trade union.  And we preserve the right of workers to have a trade union negotiate in the workplace on their behalf if that is their wish.
Minimum wages and conditions
The Government remains committed to protecting workers with a fair and sustainable safety net of wages and conditions. A new body-the Australian Fair Pay Commission-will set a single adult minimum wage on a periodic basis. This will be guided by parameters to be set out in the legislation. It will also adjust minimum junior, training and disability wages, award classification wages and casual loadings.
Wage rates contained within awards will also be set by the Australian Fair Pay Commission. Award based classification wages will not fall below the level set after inclusion of any increase determined by the 2005 Safety Net Review, although they will be capable of upwards adjustment by the Fair Pay Commission. Award classification rates will not be reduced nor are we abolishing awards.
Australian workers can therefore be assured that this is not a wage cutting policy.  For the first time, the Government will introduce legislative minimum conditions to protect the rights of Australian workers. These conditions will be for annual leave, personal leave, parental leave and a maximum number of ordinary working hours.  Currently workplace agreements are assessed against a test which is unduly complex and which acts as a hindrance to agreement making. For this reason, the Government will introduce a new Australian fair pay and conditions standard.
This standard will be based on minimum wages, as set by the Australian Fair Pay Commission, and the guaranteed minimum conditions of employment as set out in the legislation. No worker can have his or her relevant award classification rate lowered.  This new standard will be the test for all agreements. It will make it easier for employers and their employees to compare any agreement against this new safety net of fair pay and conditions.
It will strike a sensible and fair balance between business certainty and safeguarding employee rights. It will provide the basis for continued job growth at a time when Australia must increase participation in the work force.
A simplified process for agreement making
The introduction of workplace agreements has given businesses and workers greater flexibility in negotiating working conditions. But to lock in low unemployment, higher productivity and higher wages, more needs to done to facilitate and streamline agreement making.
Currently the process is long and frustrating to employers and employees, preventing many from agreeing to their own arrangements at the workplace. The Australian Industrial Relations Commission at present must be involved in every collective agreement, even where the parties are in total agreement.
The Government is, therefore, determined to make it simpler to bargain at the workplace level. We will deliver a streamlined, simpler and less costly agreement making process so that all collective and individual agreements will now be approved on lodgment with the Office of the Employment Advocate.
Award protection and the role of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Since the award simplification process was introduced, progress has been made in reducing the complexity and overly prescriptive nature of awards. However, awards continue to be complex and difficult for workers and their employers to understand.
That is why further award simplification will be undertaken to ensure they provide a modern and simple safety net.
Matters that are already covered by other legislation-including jury service, notice of termination, long service leave and superannuation-should no longer be in awards.
To further reduce complexity and ensure greater focus at the workplace level, a review will be conducted of the existing awards and award classification structures.   The purpose of this review will be to rationalise these structures so they are relevant to a dynamic and flexible economy.
The review will be undertaken by a special task group which will be asked to complete its work within 12 months.
The role of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission will change to keep pace with the needs of the modern economy. Australia's current workplace relations system is still extensively based on an adversarial and outdated view of workplace relations. It is a product of a bygone era of crippling nationwide disputes and a small, inward looking economy.
In the future, the Australian Industrial Relations Commission's focus will be on its key responsibilities of resolving legitimate disputes and further simplification of awards.
Unfair dismissal laws
In 1993-a bare 12 years ago-the Keating Government introduced job destroying, unfair dismissal laws. These laws have held back employment. Rather than protect jobs, they have stopped jobs being created.
The Government will, therefore, legislate to exempt businesses with up to 100 employees from the unfair dismissal system. This will generate jobs in small and medium businesses, the engine room of the Australian economy.
In addition, for businesses with more than 100 employees, the probation period for new employees will be increased from three to six months and the relevant rules streamlined.
Workers will continue to be protected from unlawful termination, including dismissal on discriminatory grounds such as race and gender.
The Government will also proceed with stalled legislative measures which replace the myriad of complex and conflicting state laws with one system of unfair dismissal.
A national workplace relations system
Australia currently has six different workplace relations systems with thousands of different federal and state awards. This system of overlapping federal and state awards is complex, costly and highly inefficient.
The Government believes that a single set of national laws on workplace relations is an idea whose time has come. In an age when our productivity must match that of global competitors, forcing Australian firms to comply with six different workplace relations systems is an anachronism this nation can no longer afford.
The Government will work towards a unified national system in a cooperative manner with the states. Our preference is for a single system to be agreed between the Commonwealth and the states-as was the case when the Victorian coalition Government referred industrial relations power to the Commonwealth in 1996, a decision that has been reaffirmed by the Bracks Labor Government since it came to power.
At the June 2005 Council of Australian Governments meeting, other states will be invited to do what Victoria has done, and refer their powers on workplace relations to the Commonwealth. In the absence of referrals by the states, the Government will move towards a national system by relying on the corporations power in the Constitution.
A national system is the next logical step towards a workplace relations system that supports greater freedom, flexibility and individual choice. It is not about empowering Canberra, but liberating workplaces right across the nation.
Delivering on election commitments
The Government's program of workplace relations reform includes full implementation of our election commitments. The Government will:
 Protect the status of independent contractors and support the right of people to make a choice about their working arrangements;
  Ensure the rule of law is restored to the building and construction industry;
  Restore the exemption for small business from making redundancy payments;
  Establish the Australian Safety and Compensation Council to oversee implementation of national occupational health and safety standards and pursue a national approach to workers' compensation; and importantly
  Remove barriers to the take up of school-based apprenticeships and part-time apprenticeships.
The Government will continue to pursue other stalled legislative measures, as amended to reflect current policy. These include measures to:
 provide stronger laws in relation to industrial action, including secret ballots;
  provide a single right of entry regime; and
  discourage pattern bargaining.
The legislation necessary to put in place the framework for a new workplace relations system will be developed forthwith. The Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations will continue to consult on the detail of the legislation.
The Chicken Littles
There will be those who will say that these reforms are unnecessary. Some will argue that they represent an attack on the pay and conditions of the working men and women of Australia.
They will be wrong-just as wrong as those same voices were when they preached doom and gloom about the Government's workplace relations reforms in 1996.
Let me quote just one example of the Chicken Little mantra that was the stock-in-trade of the Australian Labor Party then, and that will doubtless become the barnyard cackle in coming months. Of the Chicken Littles, none was more shrill than that noted rooster, the member for Perth, now Labor's industrial relations spokesman. In October 1995, he said this:
'The Howard model ... is all about lower wages; it is about worse conditions; it is about a massive rise in industrial disputation; it is about the abolition of safety nets; and it is about pushing down or abolishing minimum standards.'
That was the Member for Perth 10 years ago. 'The sky was going to fall in', he said.
For the benefit of the House, and more importantly for the benefit of the Australian people, let us examine what actually happened over the last 10 years.
We have seen real wages grow by 14 per cent since March 1996, in contrast with the miserable 1.2 per cent growth over the entire 13 years of the previous Labor Government.
We have seen more than 1.6 million new jobs created so that today unemployment is near a 30-year low and more Australians are in work than ever before.
We have seen more Australians choosing the working arrangements that best suit their needs and their family responsibilities.
We have seen a dramatic fall in industrial disputation with the number of working days lost per 1,000 workers at the lowest levels in 90 years.
We have seen a steady growth in the living standards of the lowest paid members of the Australian work force, a point independently underscored by the National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling (NATSEM) when it found that the strongest growth in private incomes over the period from 1994-95 to 2002-03 was enjoyed by low-income households. That is the product of the policies of this Government over the last nine years.
So much for Labor's Chicken Little misinformation and mythology when it comes to workplace relations. They were wrong 10 years ago, they will be wrong again today in their responses to these measures.
Conclusion
Australia needs a workplace system geared to the present and the future, not to the past. Under this Government, that system will be one of high productivity, rising real wages, choice and flexibility.
Our society has changed. The world of work has changed. The aspirations of working men and women are high and rising. Our institutional structures must reflect these realities.
A single set of minimum wages, conditions, awards and agreements will provide the long overdue framework to drive future productivity growth, create jobs and increase further the living standards of the working men and women of our nation.
I said at the outset that this Government trusts employers and employees to make the right decisions in the workplace.
Mr Speaker, the era of the select few making decisions for the many in the industrial relations system is now over.
[ends]  


Thank you very much. To my good friend John Caputo, thank you for those very warm words of welcome. To the Italian Consul-General, to my fellow parliamentarians of both sides of politics, and I think they may forgive me for sending a particular welcome to Connie who has just joined us in the Federal Senate.
This day marks the 59th anniversary of the establishment of the Italian Republic in 1946, but for years now it has become the occasion on which the rest of your fellow Australians pay tribute and pay honour to the enormous contribution of Australians of Italian descent to the building of the modern Australia. And I'm here today to express on behalf, not of the Government, but I know of the nation, in a genuinely bipartisan way, the great affection we have for those of you who've contributed so much to our country. Many of you, of course, were born in Italy; many of you weren't. But whether you were born in Italy or were born in Australia of Italian parents, it has made no difference.
You have achieved that remarkable double of retaining in a corner of your heart an affection for, and a natural love of, the country of your heritage, but at the same time you have given so much to Australia. And as we look around we think of the contribution that Australians of Italian descent have made to our country in every field of human endeavour in Australia - whether it's business, it's politics, it is sport, it is music, it is cuisine, it is other forms of entertainment. Whatever the activity, you will find people with an Italian heritage there making a wonderful contribution. And when the rest of you fellow Australians think of the relationship between Australia and Italy, they do so with a smile on their face and with a great deal of warmth in their heart because that is the nature of the relationship - it's close, it's affectionate, and it's very genuine.
 The modern Italy, of course, has a very strong commercial and trade and economic relationship with the modern Australia. The greatest asset we have, the greatest link we have, is of course based upon the common values that we share. In the history of Italy today marks the celebration of Italian democracy, and, of course, as nations, Australia and Italy are united in our commitment to democracy. It hasn't been a bad year for democracy around the world. We've seen it break out in a number of places where we thought we mightn't have ever seen it. We saw that wonderful demonstration in the Ukraine of the people standing up and demanding democracy. We've seen it spread in the Middle East. We've seen the wonderful transformation to democratic ways in other parts of the world. But we Australians, and along with the people of Italy, are very committed to the values of democracy.
 But finally can I say, of all the bonds that we have, none of course is more important than the human bonds, the people-to-people bonds - the passion we have, that you have for your links with what is still to many of you, and understandably so, the old country. The rest of your Australian citizens understand that. We thank you for your massive contribution to the modern Australia. We thank you very much for what the Italian heritage has meant to the overall Australian heritage. It's been a wonderful contribution, and today all of us join in unconditionally celebrating it. I hope you have a wonderful day, and thank you for your contribution to our nation.
[ends]


Thank you very much Jackie, Leader of the Opposition, parliamentary colleagues, my other fellow Australians.  Can I first of all thank Matilda House for her traditional and informal and friendly welcome and pay tribute to the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which we gather.
As I reflected in the days leading up to this gathering as to what I might say I was conscious of a number of things.  I was conscious primarily of the great opportunity that Reconciliation Australia had given me and given other political figures in Australia to share the aspirations of this gathering and to contribute some thoughts on the reconciliation process.
  And I do want to thank Jackie and Mark and I want to pay tribute to them and the other people who have got this reconciliation workshop together.  And one of the things that is impressive about this gathering was a fact commented upon by Jackie in her introduction when she drew attention to the presence at this gathering of several generations of Aboriginal leaders, exemplified by Patrick Dodson and Noel Pearson, but to be found in the presence of many others who in different ways have made a contribution to the process of reconciliation.
  But in trying to encapsulate as I best I could the thoughts I had about reconciliation and being as I endeavour to be and as Jackie has certainly been in her introduction a realist about what can be achieved and what should be sought, I thought of an expression that I've used at many times during my prime ministership; it's not particularly original but it seems to me to fit many challenges that this country has and it certainly fits the challenges of reconciliation and that's my view that the things that unite as us Australians are greater and more enduring than the things that divide us.  And that can certainly be said about reconciliation.  There are differences, they've been well documented, they've been written about, some of them have, in the commentary, been quite literally done to death. But the things that unite us about reconciliation and where we all agree are far greater than the things on which we may disagree and the things that may divide us.
Reconciliation is about rights as well as responsibilities.  It is about symbols as well as practical achievement.  It is about the past as well as being about the present and the future.  But what can we agree on undeniably?  We can agree in the special status of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander as the first people of our nation.  We can recognise and acknowledge past injustices and I've frequently said in my time as Prime Minister that the treatment of indigenous Australians represents the most blemished chapter in the history of this country.
  We recognise that communal interest in and spiritual attachment to land is fundamental to indigenous culture.  We certainly celebrate and share, as did one of our young presenters this morning, the blossoming of indigenous art and dance and the way it gives unique expression to Australian culture.  We also believe that reconciliation should be about acknowledging those symbols we can all agree on.  But I think we have to recognise that if all we do is focus on symbols we will have failed.  If we focus simply on areas where we may not agree then we will have failed.  Recognition of symbols needs to go hand-in-hand with practical action. It must harness our shared commitment to overcoming community disadvantage, dismantle the barriers that hinder indigenous Australians from sharing in the bounty that this great country has to offer, and of which our other young contributor spoke so eloquently just a few moments ago.
The journey towards reconciliation will only be complete when indigenous Australians enjoy the same opportunities as other Australians.  And that frankly is going to take a very long time.  And I think Jackie was absolutely right when she said that we do ourselves harm if we impose unrealistic time limits on what can be achieved.
  I simply, along with I'm sure all of you, want an Australia where an Aboriginal child - whether born in a remote community or in one of our cities or in regional centres - can grow up and reach their full potential in life. I want that child to be loved and nurtured and morally guided, to be healthy, educated, optimistic, ambitious and to feel a full part of the Australian community.  Economic opportunity and prosperity and social stability and cohesion; these goals I sometimes talk about [are] as relevant to our first citizens and to that Aboriginal child.... as ... to the rest of our society.
I am a realist and the work of reconciliation will be the work of generations.  And it does require as Jackie again said a long term commitment.  But as well as being a realist I'm an optimist.  I'm an optimist for three reasons - that I believe in the human spirit and I believe in the potential of individuals and of families and of communities not only in indigenous Australia but all around our great country.  I'm an optimist because I believe very much in the courage shown by many indigenous leaders; individuals with the courage to challenge conventional thinking, to promote economic opportunity, wealth creation and self-reliance; to assert the view that individual responsibility on the part of indigenous Australians is as much a part of the reconciliation process as is the discharge of government responsibilities in the name of the rest of the Australian community. That progress is about the acceptance of responsibilities as well as the assertion of rights.
  And finally I'm an optimist because I believe in the essential decency, fairness and egalitarianism of the Australian people.  It is not always on perfect display and there are some that do that notion shame.  But fundamentally it is at the core of the way in which Australians live their lives.  And the reason why the notion of reconciliation, however inadequately and differently expressed, has survived and how a gathering as representative of people who care about the future of the indigenous people of Australia as this gathering - the reason why it has come together is I believe a reflection of that innate decency fairness and egalitarianism.
If I can speak very bluntly, I think part of the problem with some earlier approaches to reconciliation was that it let too many people, particularly in white Australia, off the hook.  It let them imagine that they could simply meet their responsibilities by symbolic expressions and gesture rather than accepting the need for an ongoing persistent rendition of practical,   on-the-ground measures to challenge the real areas of indigenous deprivation.
Can I also stress, and it's been symbolised in a number of things the Government has done recently, that many of the challenges of passive welfare, which is certainly one of the key problems faced by indigenous communities, is also a challenge of other parts of the Australian community.  Passive welfare is not just a problem for indigenous Australians.  It's a problem for Australia generally and it's important that it be said at a gathering such as this, lest when people such as the Prime Minister speak of it it is not mistakenly seen as some kind of singling out for a particular problem only affecting the indigenous people of this country.
Jackie Huggins has said that we have reached a new level of agreement in the reconciliation process on the 'fundamental need for change to be based on indigenous aspiration'.  And as somebody who believes devoutly and passionately in individual aspiration as a driving force for progress and a driving force for progress in all sections in the Australian community, I want to see greater progress in relation to land.
  We support very strongly the notion of indigenous Australians desiring to turn their land into wealth for the benefit of their families.  We recognise the cultural importance of communal ownership of land, and we are committed to protecting the rights of communal ownership and to ensure that indigenous land is preserved for future generations.
  And when I talk about land in this context let me make it clear that the Government does not seek to wind back or undermine native title or land rights.  Rather we want to add opportunities for families and communities to build economic independence and wealth through use of their communal land assets.  We want to find ways to help indigenous Australians secure, maximise and sustain economic benefits.  We want to make native title and communal land work better.  For most Australians home ownership is a means to build economic security and wealth for their families.  As this gathering will know this is not the case for most indigenous Australians. Only 32 per cent of households with indigenous residents owned or were buying their own home, compared with 70 per cent for the rest of the community.  Home ownership was just over eight per cent in very remote areas.
  And when I visited the Thamarurr regional council in April they told me that they wanted more appropriate land ownership and leasing arrangements.  They wanted public/private partnerships in building houses and the establishment of a private housing market in Wadeye.  They wanted community members to be able to purchase and develop their own real estate, and I agreed with that.  Those people are fortunate that they own their own land, but they are unfortunate given their inability to use its value for the benefits of families and communities.
Many others have expressed frustration that tangible and practical benefits have not flowed, as was expected from the granting of land rights.  And the National Indigenous Council has raised the need for further exploration of this issue and they are looking into this very issue themselves now.  And expression in support of these concepts has been given by Warren Mundine, a member of the council, Joseph Elu, the chair of the Indigenous Business Australia, and also John Daley, the new chairman of the Northern Land Council.  And as a result I've asked the Attorney General and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs to provide me with advice on how we can make existing arrangements deliver better housing and economic opportunities for indigenous Australians.
In the spirit of what I said at the beginning of my speech about the coming together both of the practical and the symbolic and of rights and responsibilities, you'll be aware of the emphasis that the Government has placed on Shared Responsibility Agreements.  And these agreements seek to achieve goals, they seek to achieve practical outcomes, they seek to recognise where measured gains can be made on the basis of a shared commitment; a commitment from the Government in the name of the community and a commitment from the indigenous people.  And we have now executed something in the order of over 50 of these Shared Responsibility Agreements.  They may have been seen by some as a very modest step forward in the first place, they may even have been seen and criticised by some as an imperfect solution to local problems.  But I think they encapsulate two very important concepts in tackling indigenous advantage.
  They encapsulate the notion of a grass roots response.  I don't want to be too critical about past structures and past approaches.  I accept they were embraced in a spirit of optimism and in a spirit of goodwill, but I think one of the lessons we can learn from the past two decades of indigenous policy is that the solutions that focus on local communities and grass root responses are infinitely more likely to succeed than those that are imposed from a distant perspective and from above.  And secondly and importantly, the Shared Responsibility Agreements encapsulate the notion of each part of the bargain, so to speak, discharging its responsibility.  Governments have enormous responsibilities, governments command the resources of the nation and for all that I will properly talk and for all that many of this gathering will properly talk of the need for individual and personal responsibility by indigenous people (and of the need for parents to assert their authority over their children in an appropriate way, the need for local communities to accept responsibility for behaviour), for all of that I wouldn't want any to imagine that I do not see the government of this country, the governments of this country having enormous ongoing responsibilities to commit adequate resources to the tackling of the fundamental health and education and employment problems that face indigenous people.  But Shared Responsibility Agreements at a local level express the notion of each part of the bargain, the indigenous community and the rest of the community discharging its responsibilities in order to achieve a satisfactory outcome.
Can I return before I conclude, Jackie, could I return to what I said at the beginning of my remarks that I'm delighted to have had the opportunity to come and address this gathering. I know many people in this room very well.  In the past we've had our differences of view.  In the past there has been a sense in which dialogue between the Government and many of the leaders of the indigenous community has dwindled to almost to a point of non-existence.
 I don't sense that today.  I sense there is a spirit of hope and optimism about what can be achieved.  I'm not going to talk about new dawns in reconciliation, we've had too many false dawns in the past and those approaches are always doomed to produce disappointment.  But I do sense in the contacts that I've had, not only with Reconciliation Australia but the National Indigenous Council chaired by Sue Gordon and many other contacts I've had over the past year or two, I sense that there are new and real opportunities for progress.  And they are opportunities based upon a recognition of the need to blend the symbolic with the practical and to mix rights and responsibilities.  To accept that we're not always going to agree and to use that old expression there's a lot of wisdom on occasions to agree to disagree and then to get on and achieve progress in the areas where progress can be achieved.
 I sense in the indigenous leadership of this country a recognition that the individual must assert a greater measure of personal responsibility if progress is to be made.  I applaud that, I agree with it and I endorse it.  But the concomitant of that is that the rest of the community must come half way.
  The rest of the community has to reach out and meet the proper and enduring aspirations of indigenous people.  To recognise, as I do and I believe the overwhelming majority of your fellow Australians do, that there is no section of our community which is more disadvantaged than the indigenous people of this country.  It's a disadvantage found in areas of health, of employment, of education opportunities and social acceptance and respect.  But although we have made progress in things such as school retention rates we still have a very long way to go in the area of educational opportunities.  And although we've made progress in many health areas the gap between indigenous health outcomes and the health outcomes of the rest of the community is quite unacceptable, indeed quite appalling.
  And that in recognising that a new spirit of responsibility is needed on an individual basis by indigenous communities and that passive welfare is a poison for indigenous communities, as it is for the rest of the Australian community, I say in the name of the Government that we will reach out.  We will meet the indigenous people of this country more than half way if necessary because at the end of the day we need together to achieve the very fine goals that have been articulated by Jackie.
Can I thank you again for inviting me.  Can I again pay tribute to the work of those who lead Reconciliation Australia.  I think it's a great organisation, it carries great responsibilities but I believe in the spirit of our time we should be optimistic about its goals.
  Thank you.
[ends]  


 Well thank you very much Richard, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I do apologise that a slightly longer than expected Cabinet meeting kept me from you. But it's quite a good day. We've sort of finally heard from the Tax Commissioner through a combination of deciphering everybody's press statements we'll be able to have the tax cuts with full effect from the 1st July and we're rather pleased about that.
 Can I say that I have valued very much the contact the Government has had with IFSA over the last nine and a quarter years? We've had some very close collaboration in relation to issues that bear upon the nation's savings. We have, I suppose, travelled the full path and back again when it comes to the superannuation surcharge. I know how warmly you welcomed its introduction in 1996. It was seen then as a regrettable necessity, given that we were trying to repair a fairly difficult fiscal situation and over the years we have tried in different fashions to attemper it and alter it but we decided in this year's Budget to go the whole hog and repeal it and I think that's a very desirable move and I think it will provide an additional boost to savings and to superannuation investment.
 Richard was good enough to mention a number of other changes that we have brought in. We're very proud of the co-contribution legislation. We took a long time to get it through in its initial form and in last year's Budget we introduced a major liberalisation and expansion of it. And if you look at the superannuation guarantee charge which was introduced by the former government, you look at the co-contributions, you now look at the repeals surcharge you start to see a pattern which stacks up to a significantly greater level of incentive and a number of measures which are providing for people's savings. Now I know that there are many further reforms that you would like made. I know that you would like to abolish all tax affecting superannuation. I have to regrettably inform you that I don't think we'll be able to manage that during our current term.
 But savings is a very important goal of the Government. Private savings we encourage by reducing high rates of marginal tax. I think the tax changes in the last Budget will not only be important to people for take home pay, but I think they will provide additional incentives for people in the middle and higher brackets to save. We did have very high, we had high marginal tax rates in this country and they were cutting in at very low levels. And the changes made in the last Budget represent a very significant assault on that distortion in our tax system and I'm very pleased that they're now going to come into full effect. I think that will have a beneficial impact on our savings.
 Of course we have contributed rather massively to national savings by running successive budget surpluses over a number of years and we'll be bringing down the legislation in the next few months to establish the Future Fund, which is going to ensure that we manage in a very sensible way the accumulated surpluses of the Commonwealth over the years ahead and the impact of that fund on our financial markets, on the equity markets is going to be quite significant and it's going to be a new and very important development in the management of fiscal policy and when you look at the debt to GDP ratio of this country and you see it what lying at 2.7 per cent or thereabouts and you think of the OECD average of 47 to 50 per cent it's a fairly remarkable achievement, even if I do say it myself. I think we have done rather well in reducing and eliminating very large deficits. We hear a lot about foreign debt. We do have a big foreign debt. Most of it is owed by the private sector and none of that foreign debt is being contributed to by this Government through public sector deficit funding. And I think it's very important when people talk about foreign debt as they want to do to bear that thing in mind.
 But you've been here a long time, and I've been running late and I don't want to keep you. But can I thank you and can I particularly compliment Richard on the leadership that he's demonstrated? Can I thank IFSA for the collaborative, cooperative approach it's taken to working with the Government? My office, I know Peter Crone and Arthur Sinodinos, who had quite a lot to do with you over the years, appreciate very much the practical input that you make. And can I say that if you look at the things that have happened, you've done rather well? Your advocacy has been strong and eloquent and well targeted and always in the public interest. And for that reason I'm pleased to say that quite a number of things that you have advocated, we in different ways have been able to accommodate. Now I appreciate that, but it speaks well of the leadership of your Association and speaks well of the goals that you have in mind for the Australian community.
Thank you very much.  


Mr Speaker, I am delighted to inform the House that the Australian hostage in Iraq Mr Douglas Wood is safe from his captors. Mr Wood was recovered a short while ago in Baghdad in a military operation that I'm told was conducted by Iraqi forces, in cooperation in a general way with force elements of the United States. He's now under the protection of the Australian Emergency Response Team in Baghdad. I understand that he is well. He's undergoing medical checks at the present time. I know that all Australians will be jubilant at this news. This man has suffered immensely and I want on behalf of all of the Parliament to pay tribute to the dignity and strength of his family. He comes from a deeply impressive family and the strength and resolve and courage that his brothers and the other members of his family have displayed, their understanding of the difficulty of this whole incident for all involved has been, I can only say, very deeply impressive.
 The cooperation between the Government and the members of his family I want to record I appreciate very much. That we, of course, have focussed very much on his wellbeing and returning him to his family. I don't at this stage, for operational reasons want to comment further on the circumstances of his recovery. I want to place on record the Government's great appreciation to the officers of the Government who have done such wonderful work. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has displayed superb professionalism throughout this whole incident. The work of Mr Nick Warner who has been the head of the Emergency Response Team has been quite exemplary and I want to pay a special tribute to Nick. He's an officer who's known to many of us and he's done great things for Australia, not only in Iraq, but also in the Solomon Islands. I want of course to thank the Special Forces and the other members of the Emergency Response Team that went to Iraq. Brigadier McCabe and all of the units in Iraq that have been associated with this.
 Can I also pay special tribute to the contribution of the Minister for Foreign Affairs who has had the day-to-day carriage of this on behalf of the Government and may I also thank the Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for Griffith for their understanding at every stage of the difficulties involved and the need for us to unite to save an Australian and this has brought out some of the best things in our people. I also place on record my appreciation for the efforts of the Australian Islamic community and of Sheik Al Hilaly. Many have people have tried, we are overwhelmed with relief, nothing compared of course with the relief that his family must now feel. Can I also say that at no stage has a ransom been paid, at no stage has the Government compromised its position in relation to our commitment to Iraq, the level of our force commitment and I want to reiterate our commitment to the stability and reconstruction of Iraq and to the Iraqi people who are daily, the victims of terrorism and crime.
 I did endeavour before making this statement to contact the Iraqi Prime Minister, I'll do so, I hope very shortly to express my thanks for the efforts of his forces and may I record again our thanks to our American friends for their constant support and availability and cooperation, it is a wonderful outcome for this man who suffered so much and it's a tribute to the work of our Iraqi and American friends that this has come about.
 [ends]   


Australia is a strong country, an optimistic country, a country respected around the world.  The characteristics and values that have made us strong - hard work, extraordinary adaptability, a fair go, pulling together when things get tough - have stood the test of time.
  In recent years, Australia has outperformed most economies in the world.  We're getting the big things right.
 Last week, Australia's unemployment rate fell to a 23 year low.  This Government's economic management has delivered a sustained improvement in our labour market not matched in more than two generations.  You have to go back to before the doubling of Australia's unemployment rate under the Whitlam Government to see anything comparable.  And then our economy was much more protected.
This economic performance is no fluke.  It is the result of clear priorities, careful policy development, a willingness to take hard decisions and the experience that comes from knowing what could knock us off course.
Looking over the horizon
The job now is to build on our solid foundations - to unlock new reserves of Australian energy and optimism for the challenges ahead.
I believe that Australians want a government that delivers a strong economy with good jobs, high wages and low interest rates.  I think they support our determined approach to national security in the face of the new threats of the twenty-first century.  Australian families welcome what we've done to help with the costs of raising children.
Australians don't want us to take risks with their future.  They don't want us to take our eye off the ball.  But they do want us to look over the horizon.
To renew our commitment to making Australia even better - to set a course so Australians can plan for progress in their daily lives over the next decade and beyond.
Throughout this year, the Government has released a series of initiatives to lock-in Australia's future economic prosperity - including detailed policy statements on demographic change, on science and innovation and on upgrading our land transport infrastructure.
  Today, I want to outline what the Government is doing to secure Australia's energy future well into the twenty-first century.  And to do this while meeting our obligation to pass on this vast land to future generations in good condition.
 This White Paper - entitled Securing Australia's Energy Future - will deliver sustainability, prosperity and security to the energy sector for the benefit of all Australians.
It recognises that Australia cannot afford to put at risk our existing energy advantage - to put at risk industries that directly employ 120,000 Australians and which earn more than $24 billion a year in export income.  It recognises that further development of Australia's energy resources is vital to our future prosperity.
It also modernises Australia's fuel excise system, takes steps to improve energy efficiency, and strengthens Australia's energy security position.
 Of course, the production and use of energy comes with a major environmental challenge.  The Government is determined to meet this challenge - domestically and internationally - with leading-edge, clean energy technology.
We are taking action to address greenhouse emissions and climate change, but we are determined to do it the smart way - a way that does not threaten our energy advantage and national prosperity.
This White Paper includes steps designed to make Australia a world leader in low emissions technologies.  A centerpiece of this strategy is the establishment of a Low Emission Technology Fund.  The Government will provide $500 million to this fund which in turn will leverage at least $1 billion in private sector investment to develop and demonstrate low emission technologies.
The Government will also invest $75 million in Solar Cities trials -  a far-sighted effort to demonstrate a new energy scenario.  Beyond the Low Emission Technology Fund and the Solar Cities trials, we will commit a further $134 million to support the commercial development of renewable energy technologies.
Australia can secure its energy needs, extend its economic prosperity, and meet our environmental obligations - as long as we have the right policy framework.
Maintaining Australia's Energy Advantage
Underpinning this framework is the assumption that Australia can, and should, continue to play a major role in supplying the domestic and world economies with low-cost energy.
  Developing Australia's abundant energy resources is a key to our future prosperity.  Australia is the world's fourth largest producer, and largest exporter, of coal.  We supply 8 per cent of world trade in liquefied natural gas.  Our known oil reserves are significant, but are projected to decline in the absence of new discoveries.  Our wind and solar resources are plentiful.
The energy advantage provided by our resources is something Australia must not throw away.  It is not in Australia's national interest to lock up and leave undeveloped our natural resources.  As an efficient global supplier, we need to be positioned to meet growing demand for energy while also moving to a low emissions future.
  Renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power will play a part in meeting growing energy demands.  But for the foreseeable future, coal, oil and gas will meet the bulk of Australia's energy needs.  It is for this reason that we must look at more environmentally responsible ways of developing all our natural resources.
  The choice is between low and high emissions outcomes - not between renewables and other energy sources.  We can have both of them.
Australia spends more than $50 billion on energy each year.  Demand for electricity in Australia is expected to increase by 50 per cent between now and 2020.  And demand for transport fuels is expected to grow by a similar amount in that time.  Substantial investment will be required over this period to meet Australia's energy needs with industry putting a figure of $37 billion on the future investment task.
 World demand for energy is expected be about two thirds above current levels by 2030.  Developing countries, mostly in Asia, will account for 60 per cent of that growth. Demand for natural gas will rise faster than for any other fuel, doubling by 2030.
  Trade in liquefied natural gas is likely to grow very strongly.  In two decades time, the United States - the largest natural gas market in the world - is expected to source around a quarter of its demand from LNG imports.
Already the world's second largest energy consumer, China will continue to grow in importance on world energy markets.  Chinese demand for gas is expected to double in the next decade.  China's continuing need to source oil and gas will make it a strategic buyer on world markets.
This Government has devoted unprecedented time and attention to Australia's resources diplomacy.  And we've had some big wins - most notably in August 2002 with the $25 billion deal to sell LNG to Guangdong province in China, the biggest single trade deal in Australia's history.
  Just as Australia's resources sector helped fuel industrial growth in Japan and South Korea over several decades, we are now developing a strategic resources partnership with China.  China is now our second largest customer for mineral and energy commodities, after Japan.
New markets in the United States would complement our large and growing markets in North Asia.  A little over a week ago, I met with California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger to lobby on behalf of the Australian LNG industry.  I also had very encouraging discussions with President Bush and Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan on the strategic fit between Australia - as a cost-effective energy supplier - and the United States with its large future energy demands.
 From the top down, the Government has worked closely with industry to ensure Australia's energy advantage is well understood.  But we know that ultimately it is the economic fundamentals that count.
Developing major gas fields - such as the North West Shelf and the Gorgon and Sunrise fields - requires substantial foreign investment and joint venture arrangements between many companies.  Competition for this investment is fierce, as is competition for markets.
Australia must have a policy framework that provides certainty for investors - certainty of title, certainty over the rules that will apply, and certainty that commercial decisions - not government fiat - will determine when and how investments proceed.  Requiring developments to quarantine resources for domestic use, or imposing strict 'use it or lose it' provisions do Australia's cause no good.
Australia also needs to maintain a tax system that supports further development of energy resources.  The Petroleum Resource Rent Tax plays a key role in allowing investors to earn good returns, while ensuring the Australian people are compensated for the use of public resources.
  In this year's budget, the Government moved to further increase the attractiveness of exploration in frontier areas by increasing the value of exploration deductions in designated areas from 100 per cent to 150 per cent.
 Continued energy market reform is a vital part of securing Australia's energy future.  Under the Australian Government's leadership, major reforms have now been agreed under the Council of Australian Governments process.  On 1 July, a single energy regulator - the Australian Energy Regulator - and a single rule-making and market development body - the Australian Energy Market Commission - will be established.
 Australians enjoy a high level of energy security.  Our abundant energy resources, access to imports (in the case of oil) and high quality infrastructure have ensured the reliable delivery of our energy needs.  Maintaining Australia's excellent record in this area is a high priority for the Government.
  While Australia's enormous reserves of coal and gas are sufficient to meet our needs for a long time into the future, a disruption like the Moomba gas fire is an important reminder that effective gas interconnections between state jurisdictions can minimise the impact of disruptions.
  This year's budget earmarked $4 million for protecting Australia's energy infrastructure from disruption and this White Paper outlines additional measures to strengthen our energy security.
Kyoto and beyond
Human induced climate change is one of the major challenges confronting the world this century.  The potential for climate change is real and addressing it will require changes to the way the world produces and uses energy.
Australia accounts for only 1.6 per cent of emissions and cannot change the course of climate change alone.  We are, however, making significant progress in separating economic growth from emission growth.  Between 1990 and 2002, the Australian economy grew by 47 per cent, while greenhouse emissions grew by only 1.3 per cent.  We can and will continue the drive towards a better emissions performance.
The Australian Government has already invested nearly $1 billion to fund a range of climate change measures across the energy, transport and agriculture sectors.
 We have played a positive role in seeking a global solution to climate change.  Currently Australia is one of the few nations on track to meet its target under the Kyoto agreement.  We will achieve this with a strong and growing economy.
  The Government's position on Kyoto is well known.  We will not ratify something that does not encompass the world's largest emitters.  Neither does the Kyoto protocol address the issue of investment and emissions moving from one nation to another with no overall global greenhouse benefit.
To give an example, Australia is in a strong position to meet Asia's burgeoning LNG demand.  But we face stiff competition from a number of countries such as Indonesia that do not face Kyoto constraints and that have gas resources with high levels of carbon dioxide.
If Australia is forced to impose a discriminatory impost on carbon emissions, it is likely that new LNG investments will go elsewhere - costing Australia economic growth, jobs and export income.
The global environment would be no better - indeed it would be worse - and Australia will have lost out.
The Australian Government is looking beyond the Kyoto Protocol towards a more effective long term response to climate change.  We will work actively in the international community to develop such a response.
  In the meantime, Australia accepts that substantial further effort is needed to prepare the economy for future emission constraints.  Future reductions in emissions will become much tougher - both as the world economy grows and as the easy options are taken up.  We have therefore developed a plan to lower the cost of a broader range of low emission options for the future.
This will ensure that Australia can move more quickly to lower greenhouse emissions as part of an effective long-term global response.
  To make this happen, the Government will drive investment of at least $1.5 billion in break-through low emission technologies with significant long-term greenhouse gas abatement potential.  The Government will provide $500 million to a Low Emission Technology Fund so as to leverage at least $1 billion in private sector investment.
  The Fund will support low emission technologies, including renewable energy technologies, that are able to reduce greenhouse emissions by at least 2 per cent at realistic rates of long-term take up.
  The Fund will support all technologies that have the potential to significantly lower Australian energy emissions in the longer term.  It will have particular focus on electricity generation technologies, and an eye to technologies that could underpin the future value of our substantial energy resources.
Solar cities
The Government will also provide $75 million for trials to test a visionary new energy scenario - where solar power, energy efficiency and market reforms combine to provide a sustainable energy future.
These Solar Cities trials will, for the first time, place a proper market value on the role solar energy can play in meeting peak demand and reducing the need for transmission and distribution investments.
  This is about doing things smarter with solar panels, better insulation, energy efficient appliances and smart meters that allow households to sell excess electricity back into the grid at peak times.
 The trials will be held in two or three urban centres.  They will require support from industry, state and local governments.  Centres in Adelaide and Sydney would be prime locations for trials.  The Australian Government encourages governments and industry to develop proposals to host the trials so that the best locations can be chosen.
Support for renewables
Renewable energy plays an important role in delivering low emission electricity.  Solar, wind, geothermal, and biomass all show great potential as sources of electricity.  But the high cost of renewable electricity options remains a barrier to their wider use.
  As well as being eligible for the Low Emission Fund, renewable energy sources will receive support of a further $100 million for research, development, demonstration and commercialisation.  The Government will also spend $34 million to improve wind forecasting and develop options to store electricity - targeting impediments to the uptake of solar and wind-based electricity.
Together, these measures represent a strong further commitment to the development of renewable energy as a source of low emission energy for the future.
 Mandatory Renewable Energy Target
The Government will retain and improve the existing Mandatory Renewable Energy Target (MRET) scheme.
  MRET will continue to play a significant role in supporting the renewable sector, and will underpin $2 billion in renewable energy investment in the period to 2010.
Expanding MRET would impose substantial new costs on the economy and would benefit too few technologies.  A better path is to directly promote the development and demonstration of a broader range of low emission technologies and tackle the impediments to the uptake of renewable energy.
  The Government's $500 million Low Emission Technology Fund, plus over $200 million in funding for renewable energy technologies, will prepare Australia to respond to potential long-term emissions constraints.  They maintain the nation's economic prosperity and place Australia at the cutting edge of low emission technologies.
Fuel excise reform
This White Paper overhauls the fuel excise system.  The Government's reforms will save business and households more than $1.5 billion between now and 2012-2013.  These reforms build on the alternative fuels excise arrangements announced last year and on the AusLink White Paper launched last week.
Tens of thousands of businesses and households will be better off.  Local and state governments will be big winners and I call on those governments to pass the benefits through via lower rates and state charges.  Industry compliance costs of the current regime will be greatly reduced with firms able to claim excise credits using their existing Business Activity Statement.
Regional Australia will be a major beneficiary with all business use of fuels on farms eligible for a full excise refund when the changes come in fully.
Mining, construction and quarrying will all have access to full excise refunds for fuels used off road.  The generous transition periods for bringing in excise on biofuels will provide time for the sector to establish its commercial credentials.
All fuel used by businesses off-road will become excise free on 1 July 2012.
No longer will firms have to make detailed calculations between eligible and non-eligible activities.  No longer will some businesses miss out, while others benefit from excise credits.
A half credit will be provided for all new activities starting on 1 July 2008 as a down-payment on the reforms.
Excise on fuels used in power generation will be lifted on 1 July 2006.  This will bring the treatment of diesel used in remote areas in line with the treatment of power generation in cities.  This should mean lower power prices for those living in regional Australia.
  The Government will also remove excise on burner fuels from 1 July 2006.  This will benefit as many as 90,000 Australian households.
From 1 July 2006 the excise paid on fuels used in heavy vehicles will be converted to a road user charge.  Existing urban and regional boundaries will be removed from that date.  And the excise relief provided through the road user charge will apply to all fuels, including petrol - benefiting the owners of as many as 54,000 heavy vehicles.
At the same time, the government is acting to improve urban air quality and the emission performance of the transport sector.
Urban air quality is a serious health issue, and greenhouse emissions from transport account for 14 per cent of Australia's total emissions.
We have created an environment in which the use of alternative transport fuels can grow. However recognising that petrol and diesel will continue to be the dominant transport fuels we will introduce stronger standards for fuels and vehicles to significantly improve environmental outcomes.
  Incentives are being provided to ensure the early introduction of cleaner diesel and petrol - well in advance of the mandated dates.
New vehicles standards are being introduced to substantially improve the emissions performance of vehicles and a new agreement has been struck with car manufacturers to improve the fuel consumption of vehicles being sold into the Australian market.  These new standards will facilitate the introduction of far more fuel efficient and cleaner vehicles in Australia.
Requiring Business to Do its Part
About 250 businesses in Australia use more than 0.5 petajoules of energy per year (enough to power 10,000 homes).  These businesses account for more than 60 per cent of total business energy use and should play their part in ensuring Australian energy is used wisely.
To ensure this happens, the Government will require that Australia's largest energy users undertake regular energy efficiency assessments.  Firms using more than 0.5 petajoules a year will be required to undertake mandatory energy efficiency assessments every five years and report publicly.  In this way, companies can demonstrate to investors and the community that they are using energy wisely.
  The Government will introduce a requirement that heavy vehicles meet one of five tests to show they are not a high polluter before they gain access to excise relief through the road user charge.  And firms receiving more than $3 million in excise credits will be required to manage their emissions through compulsory membership of the Greenhouse Challenge Programme.
Conclusion
My government does not take Australia's economic prosperity for granted.  We have worked hard to get the economy in the shape it is in today.
Australia is blessed with a wonderful resource base and reliable supplies of low cost energy.  The Government recognises that we have a responsibility to develop Australia's resources in an environmentally sustainable way.
  The initiatives I have announced today position Australia to deliver better global outcomes by showing leadership with technological innovation in emission reduction.  We are on track to achieve our Kyoto target.  The Government is now looking beyond 2012 and acting to lower the cost of meeting future greenhouse constraints.
  We understand that achieving the right balance in energy policy means pursuing economic growth and energy security while at the same time taking care of our environment.  This White Paper strikes that balance and secures our energy future for the benefit of all Australians.
[ends]


Your Excellency General Pervez Musharraf, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Mrs Sehba Musharraf, Leader of the Opposition, parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleman. Today marks a first in relations between Australia and Pakistan. This is the first occasion that we have been graced with a visit to our country by a Pakistani head of state, who of course is also head of government of that country. And I have a very special pleasure and a very deep feeling in welcoming President Musharraf to Australia. In saying on behalf of all of us how much we admire the exceptional personal courage that he has displayed in recent years.
It's easier to make brave rhetorical speeches about the values of freedom and democracy and the rights of man when you belong to a country with whatever other faults it may have has always had a long uninterrupted tradition of peaceful political exchange - however rumbustious it may get in a verbal sense on occasions. But to be the leader of a country and to survive two assassination attempts within a short period time, and to know that there are people within your country whose only goal is not only to remove your government, which you can understand in a democracy, but also to remove it with violence and with force and, if necessary, including your removal from this life. So I pay tribute to somebody who has come through the fire of violent challenge to his position, somebody who has played a major role in the fight against terrorism, somebody who has understood the need to confront and defeat the extremist elements within our society, and they are to be found in many societies that seek to visit death and terrorism on people around the world.
And also I salute somebody in President Musharraf who has led a transition of his country to a democratic state. Pakistan has not always been democratic, something that the President himself freely acknowledged that any reading of history would tell us. And I do not think enough credit has been given to Pakistan under President Musharraf's leadership for the transition that has occurred over recent years. And many of you will have heard me say in this very hall, this Great Hall of our Parliament, not so long ago when welcoming our friend President Yudhoyono of Indonesia that insufficient credit had been given to Indonesia for her great transition to democracy.  It can be said with equal force that insufficient credit has been given to Pakistan for her transition to democracy.  And these two great Islamic countries, both of whom's future as pillars and exemplars of moderate Islam, is so important to winning the battle of ideas against the extremist elements around the world.  The success of the democratic transition and democratic process in Pakistan is no less important to us and to many others as it has been in Indonesia.
The President also deserves our special praise and understanding for the contribution that he has made in bringing about an improvement in relations between India and Pakistan.  We all know from our reading of history the tragic circumstances in which India was partitioned in 1947.  And out of that partition came two nations; one of which Pakistan was again in 1971 to divide herself into Pakistan and Bangladesh.  And the experience of people living and leading those countries over those years has been very difficult.  And the vexing problem of Kashmir and all that has flowed from it has been with the leaders of India and Pakistan now ever since the partition in 1947.  Yet over the past little while due to the great efforts of President Musharraf and the great efforts of the Indian Prime Minister, Mr Singh, both of them deserve our credit and our praise because they have contributed in their different ways towards an improvement in their relations.  And I can say for reasons you will understand how wonderfully symbolic it was, as well as the reality it carried, that the latest stage of the rapprochement between India and Pakistan was sealed while the leaders of those two countries were watching a sporting encounter between India and Pakistan - in which Pakistan ultimately triumphed.  And of which the President has said much to me during our discussions over lunch.  And the third thing that I believe, and it really flows from the first, the President deserves credit, is the contribution he's made through the restoration of democracy for the readmission of Pakistan to the full Councils of the Commonwealth, from which Pakistan was suspended in 1999.  And I look forward to joining him at the next Commonwealth meeting in Malta.
Australia and Pakistan have many links of history and culture.  We have many values in common.  We share an inheritance to which both countries owe much to the British connection.  But we share most importantly in 2005 a common commitment to fight terrorism, and also a common commitment to see an improvement in the living standards of the less developed countries of the world, of which plainly Pakistan is one.  And the rich nations of the world, of which Australia is undeniably one, have obligations to the poor nations of the world.  We have obligations of aid, we have obligations of helping to spread democratic institutions, we have obligations of helping to spread the advantages and the values of education, we also have obligations of helping to spread in many countries the values and the benefits of good governance.  Aid not coupled by good governance can often be aid wasted and spoilt and aid given in those circumstances can cause disenchantment within the domestic populations of the countries that provide that aid.  We also have an obligation to pull down trade barriers and I've said on many occasions that removal of trade barriers, especially those barriers which unfairly impact on the agricultural exports of developing countries, can do more to assist those countries than the provision of increased overseas aid.  That is not to say that there is not a case for the latter, but the former will deliver more benefits.
Mr President, you and I have had, and I use a well worn diplomatic expression, but I really do mean it, we have had some very full and frank discussions, I've enjoyed the ease with which we have been able to share our views on our common values, our common history and the common challenges that we confront.  I'm very pleased that we're able to sign some Memoranda of Understanding, one in relation to agriculture which will provide some $6.6 million over four years for Pakistani agricultural industry, an MOU on counter-terrorism, and an MOU between the Australian Securities and Investment Corporation and its Pakistani counterpart to provide greater investor protection, because encouraging confidence amongst foreign investors is an imperative for all countries that seek to attract foreign investment to their shores.  And I'm also, in the context of the great importance we attach to educational institutions and connections, I'm very pleased to announce that Australia will provide 500 fully funded scholarships over the next five years for Pakistani students to study at Australian universities.  There has been no finer thing done by this country to enhance relations between Australia and the nations of our broader region than the Colombo plan established all those years ago, and the spirit of that plan in its many manifestations lives on and we continue to be very committed to the extension of educational links between our institutions and the people of our region.
Mr President, you are a very welcome visitor to our country.  I hope out of this visit we can build a lot.  I remarked to you earlier that Australia and Pakistan are countries that have a lot in common but haven't had a lot to do with each other in recent times.  We've got to something about that and I believe that this visit is a start and it's all the more likely to be a start because of the very real personal contribution at great risk that you have made to some things and some values and some outcomes that we hold dear and we hold in common. In that spirit you are very welcome and I invite Mr Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Ministers, Leader of the Opposition, your Excellencies, the Chief of the Defence Force, ladies and gentlemen. In this very busy final week of this parliamentary session it is in every way appropriate that we gather for a few moments, now several months  after the extraordinary response of Australia and its various agencies to the tsunami disaster, as a parliament and because of that on behalf of the Australian people, to extend our thanks to those many men and women of Australia who did so much to express the compassion, the concern, the desire to help, and the practical capacity to do so in the wake of the Boxing Day tsunami disaster.
And it is appropriate that as well as myself and the Leader of the Opposition in a parliamentary occasion, that we have on the platform, the two men representing the expression of that response at a practical level. The Chief of the Defence Force, General Peter Cosgrove, and Doctor Peter Shergold, the head of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, as well as the High Commissioners and Ambassadors of the countries most affected by the tsunami disaster.
The response to the tsunami was one of the proudest moments in Australia's post war experience as a nation. We responded speedily, we responded generously and we responded effectively. And the effectiveness of the response and the speed of the response was really the work of so many men and women who are gathered here today. And the principle purpose of this gathering is for me, and I know I'll be fully supported by the Leader of the Opposition, is to say on behalf of the Australian people, to the men and women of our public services, to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force-particularly to the men and women of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, of AusAid, to the Australian Federal Police, to those who took part in the very stressful victim identification process, particularly but not only in Thailand, to express again our sense of compassion and empathy with the men and women of HMAS Kanimbla, whose commanding officer, Commander George McGuire, is present here today, how much we still remember and think of and mourn the tragic deaths of those nine fine young Australians who died in the Sea King helicopter disaster on the 2nd of April.
I have many memories as Prime Minister of the days and weeks that followed the tsunami disaster. I was very proud when I was told by the President of Indonesia, the Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of Thailand that I was the first foreign leader to have been in touch with them in the wake of the disaster. And I will never forget visiting Aceh, and accompanied by Brigadier David Chalmers, who was the commander of Operation Sumatra Assist, to meet those being cared for, to imbibe the infectious enthusiasm and compassion of the Australians who were working in that Anzac field hospital, it was indeed a very heart-warming experience.
 As indeed was the extraordinary response of the Australian public. More than $300 million donated in corporate and personal donations. The generosity unsurpassed in the history of this country. And of course through the Government a $1 billion package of assistance over a number of years to the people of Indonesia. To be able to go to the Aid Conference convened by President Yudhoyono in Jakarta on the 6th of January, and to know that I was going there speaking on behalf of 20 million Australians in offering our assistance and our help was indeed an immense privilege.
 I would like to express to the Leader of the Opposition and through him to all of his colleagues, my appreciation of the totally bipartisan way in which the response of the Government and the people of Australia was organised, and I especially acknowledge the contribution of the Opposition in that respect.
 I do also want to single out two of my colleagues if I may-Alexander Downer and Robert Hill. Alexander Downer as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Robert Hill as the Minister for Defence carried much of the ministerial burden of our response. Alexander went very early to Thailand, he visited many of the victims and talked to those victims' families and talked to those who were involved in the victim identification process. And as Minister for Defence of course, Robert was directly responsible for the early contacts with the Indonesian Military and for the organisation of the ADF response.
Inevitably on occasion such as this one, by mentioning some inevitably leaves out others, but I do want to say to those, particularly of my colleagues, Alexander and Robert, thank you for the remarkable job that you have done.
Today I think could mark the last occasion at which Peter Cosgrove attends a public gathering, at least in this Great Hall, and he's attended many as Chief of the Army, and over the last three years as Chief of the Defence Force and I take this opportunity of thanking him very publicly for the role that he's performed as Chief of our Defence Forces and at no time could he have been prouder of the men and women who wear the uniform of Australia, than in the work that they so wonderfully did in Aceh, in the wake of the this disaster.
We demonstrated to the world a practical compassion at which Australia and Australians are unsurpassed. We demonstrated a willingness to help the regional friends in need, we demonstrated our deep generosity as a community and most importantly of all, we demonstrated to ourselves that when required Australians can rise to any occasion.
 I want to record to the head of my own Department who in a titular sense organised the public service response, how very grateful I was for the immediate sacrifice of any suggestion of recreation - Christmas or New Year leave -on the part of the men and women of the Australian Public Service-they were at their superb professional best, they wanted to do nothing other than to mobilise the Australian assistance and to work hard to help people who desperately needed our help.
So as we look back on those events, the recollection is tinged with the sadness, and the memory of the loss of more than 280,000 people in this terrible natural disaster, and a particular personal sense of grief for having lost nine magnificent young men and women in our Australian Defence Force. But it was, despite the sense of tragedy and grief; it was a proud moment in the history and experience of the Australian nation. We demonstrated a sprit, a heart, a sense of purpose, a sense of organisation, and a sense of efficiency at which we have every reason to be proud. And on behalf of the Australian people, can I say to all of the men and women who are gathered here today, and there's one person I know who I would particularly like to mention, Dr James Robertson who headed the victim identification operation from the AFP, he can't be here today but he's represented by Julian Slater, who was the AFPs joint Chief of Staff for the operation.
 All of you in different ways have done so much, all of you deserve our respect and our praise. You did it in the line of duty but you also did it out of a sense of concern and compassion for your fellow man and that's what makes what you did so magnificent and so memorable and it's so important that on behalf of the people of Australia, you are publicly and warmly and unconditionally thanked for what you have done in our name.
 I now invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Kim Beazley, to support my remarks.
[ends]


Thank you very much Wayne Osborn, Marilyn Darling, the chairman of the Gallery Andrew Sayers, chief patron, to Sir Arvi and Lady Parbo, and representatives and members of the Forrest and Clark families, Wim Boissevain, ladies and gentlemen.
First, can I say to Alcoa how incredibly generous this gift is to this gallery and on behalf of the gallery and the people of Australia I accept it very gratefully.  The Portrait Gallery has been a wonderful success, it was a great concept and so much of the energy behind its formation of course came from Marilyn Darling who's been a wonderful leader of the Gallery.  The professionalism of Andrew Sayers and the combination of those two has proved not only irresistible for many corporate supporters, but also the Government.  And I'm delighted that we committed ourselves to the construction of a permanent home for the Gallery and I know that under the eager surveillance of the chairman, Marilyn, the work on that gallery will go ahead with breakneck speed and if it doesn't I shall be reminded of it quite regularly, and that is reassuring.
Can I say that now is about an appropriate a time in Australia's history to receive a gift of the portraits of three great men of the Australian mining industry because the mining industry again is reminding all Australians of how integral it has been to the economic strength and success of this country over such a long period of time.  In the time that I have been in public life I haven't met a businessmen for whom I have developed a greater personal regard than Arvi Parbo.  Arvi represents to me and to many the epitome of a successful, dedicated, patriotic businessman of great integrity and his story is a wonderful story of post-war Australia, it's a wonderful story of an immigrant from war-torn eastern Europe coming to this country and rising to the greatest heights that corporate Australia could offer, and it's the story of somebody who along the way retained his great integrity and commitment to great corporate ideals.  I didn't have the privilege of knowing the other two subjects of the portraits - Sir James Forrest or Sir Lindesay Clark - nearly so well, in fact in the case of one of them hardly at all.  But their corporate contribution is legendary and the three of them together have contributed so much to the mining industry in this country, they have contributed so much to trailblazing new ways of conducting the activities of the industry and in the process have made a wonderful contribution to our country through the mining industry, and I do welcome very warmly Sir Arvi and his wife and the members of the Clark and Forrest families, as well as Mr Boissevain - one of the three great artists who have contributed these wonderful portraits.
This Gallery is, as two speakers have already said, a mirror of our country, it brings together so many wonderful portraits of the entire spectrum of Australian life over the centuries.  And the addition of these three portraits adds to a wonderful collection and can I say on behalf of the nation, on behalf of the Government, to Alcoa - thank you very much for your corporate generosity, it is a wonderful thing that we have so many companies in Australia that are willing to be so generous in their support and the three figures that are the subject of these portraits are not just people who have enriched Alcoa but they have enriched the corporate life and achievement of this nation and they are three wonderful and very fitting additions to the Gallery.  And I thank you and your company Mr Osborn most warmly.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you Andrew, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I am really delighted to be part of this little event, to congratulate Andrew and Mitch and the people who've contributed to the first edition of this publication - not only for the quality of their contributions but also for the concept of quite openly and unselfconsciously promoting greater debate about issues within our own party.  That to me is a mark of strength, it's not evidence of political ill-discipline. I think it's very important that that be said, because Andrew is absolutely correct that the debate about ideas and the power of debate about ideas is ultimately the most crucial influence in politics.
And I illustrate that by tracing my own and the experience of others in one of the defining political and economic debates of the last quarter of a century and that is on industrial relations. I would argue that a number of us from Opposition, and I hope not too hubristically would include myself in it, did more to influence the industrial relations debate, as much to influence it from Opposition as we have from Government.  We will argue for a long time as to just how significant the changes that were made by the Hawke and Keating Governments in the early 90s in this area were, I don't think they were as significant as many argued. But the debate at that time was driven by the Opposition and it was heavily influenced by the incessant debating of that issue.  And the history of industrial relations debate in the Liberal Party is a fascinating one.  In 1975, the Liberal and then National Country Parties went to an election with a policy that actually encouraged people to join trade unions, encouraged people to support centralised wage fixation and if you now re-read that policy you would find it unrecognisable from the statement I made on behalf of the Coalition parties to Parliament only a few weeks ago.  And that was not surprising because in 1967 or 1968 Sir Robert Menzies made a number of lectures, delivered a number of lectures in the United States, and I hope I don't do our great and revered founder an injustice in saying that the thrust of what he said on industrial relations was that we in Australia determine these matters through an independent industrial conciliation and arbitration commission because they were too important to be left to the workings of the market.  Now that of course is a world away from the view of the Government parties at the present time.
But the other thing that makes this publication welcome is that our party has always been the trustee or custodian in Australia of two strands of political philosophy - the classical Liberal strand and the conservative strand.  I describe, as you all know, you've heard me say it occasionally, I'll say it again, that broad church and I said on the way in to a couple of my colleagues that I thought flipping through these articles every pew was occupied with the different view points that have been expressed.  But I say that very seriously, and it's one of the enormous strengths of our party that we do represent those two traditions and I have quite deliberately described myself, and I am, I'm an economic liberal and I'm a social conservative, I have been for a very long time and I always will be.  Others of my colleagues are of different combinations of those two, but there is room in the Party for that range of views.  And it's all the more important that we provide that room and we work our way through issues and we debate them and we reach a collective view, respecting that along the way there is going to be differences of opinion, but in a mature fashion, and we have seen that process work in relation to this debate about immigration detention, we've seen it work. I regard what has occurred there as the fact of a mature, strong political party, not the act of a political party that is frightened of its shadow but rather a political party that is quite prepared to say that consistent with maintaining a very strong position on the regulation of the flows of people of this country there can be greater transparency and some changes, and to do it in a fairly open and unselfconscious fashion.
Now I think that is important, there will be other issues that will, the longer we remain in office, will confront us as a government.  The time that governments lose their relevance and the time they begin to lose the support of the public is when they give up on the battle of ideas and entirely embrace criticism of their opponents and self-adulation about their past achievements.  And the greatest challenge that any government has, the longer it remains in office, is intellectual renewal and intellectual renewal is produced by open debate, underpinned of course by cohesion and discipline, it's also underpinned and helped by a constant infusion of new and talented people into our parliamentary ranks.
And the greatest single process to that process that both of the major political parties face is that as party membership shrinks around the country, as you perhaps have fewer people joining political parties there's always a danger that the gene pool will become too shallow and we have been able to avoid that occurring in the Liberal Party and I am especially proud in looking at the occupational backgrounds of my colleagues who have joined us in 2001 and 2004 to look at the remarkable spread and if I may be forgiven one partisan broadside, contrast that with our political opponents. In fact, the Labor Party I faced from Opposition in 1974 was in fact a Labor Party that had a greater collection of people who experienced life's up and downs than the Labor Party of today.  After all Mick Young and Clyde Cameron had shorn a few sheep and they did know a little bit about it all and that is a far cry from the experience of articulating the cause of your mates on the shopfloor having been there with them and articulating them from the theoretical vantage point having gone straight from university into the union office. But enough of that unkindness, we should on a joyous occasion like this, not indulge such things.
But Andrew and Mitch and for all who write and think and conceptualise with you, thank you for the contribution that you make.  You never know there may be other contributions, but to borrow, no I won't borrow that phrase about thousands of flowers, although perhaps not inappropriate, but let a thousand ideas bloom and we'll see what happens but it's to the strength and the credit of the Liberal Party that it can quite happily have a publication like this, can invite debate and I want to thank you Andrew with your background and the contribution that you made as Federal Director and the contribution you made to the debate about industrial relations and your understanding of that issue, and to you Mitch, your professional experience, your working at a state political level and then at a federal level on Peter's staff and the contribution you've made, you understand the importance of disciplined argument and the development of ideas.  And I think it's a great publication and I thank you very warmly and I wish it well.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Senator Chris Ellison, Mick Keelty the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, other distinguished guests, representatives of the Ngunnawal people, the representatives of the State Police Services, Dr Peter Veenka, the Dunning family, former Police Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen. Events of the last five years have totally transformed both the demands and the expectations of the Australian community on the Australian Federal Police. In that five year period we've seen the threatening arrival of international terrorism, and we've seen the emergence of an ongoing need on the part of this country in cooperation with our friends in the Pacific Region to involve ourselves in the restoration of conditions of law and order and cooperation with the police services and governments of those countries.
It's been an extraordinary change in a short period of time. The AFP has been required to adjust them simply being the federal law enforcement body working in cooperation with state police services in dealing with trans-national crime and particularly issues relating to drug trafficking, to being a force that works in cooperation with the police forces of other countries to track down the murderers of Australian citizens, as they did so magnificently in Indonesia in the wake of the Bali attack, but also to work as they have done, and are continuing to do so magnificently in countries such as the Solomons-to provide the protection for ordinary life of which Chris Ellison spoke, and also to provide the assurance to would be foreign investors in those countries that they can make their investments and go about their lives without fear of murder or interruption, because unless you can create circumstances of local stability and you can offer people who might want to come and invest in your country or be involved in helping your country, protection from gangs and crime than you really have no hope of emerging as a viable society.
 So in that short period of time the Federal Police has had demands placed on it, which go beyond the demands I think, that have been placed on an organisation in terms of change that any that I've seen at a federal level. And I want to take this opportunity of congratulating and thanking the Federal Police Commissioner, Mick Keelty, to thank him and all of his colleagues for the fantastic, the professional way in which the AFP has responded to those demands.
 The Government as I think you are all aware has massively increased the financial resources available to the Australian Federal Police.  We've done that very deliberately and we've done that unapologetically because it's a far greater priority now than ever before. But we are well satisfied, may I say with the response-we are well satisfied indeed with the response, the reputation of the federal police has deservedly risen during that time. It was always high, but it's risen to greater heights during that time and I'm glad that there are representatives of the state and territory police forces here today because that cooperation is crucial-the on the ground, the first response to community crime is still overwhelmingly in this country, the remit of state and territory police services.  It will always be like that and it will therefore always be necessary for us to work in very close collaboration.
But it's really the overseas manifestation of the AFP that we are about today, and this training centre is a great concept and it will provide priceless preparation and training-not only for the men and women of the AFP but also the men and women of other police forces in our region. Regional cooperation is crucial, regional cooperation is the foundation now of the active partnership between Australia and countries in our own region. The stability of countries in our region is crucial to the stability of Australia, we are forever part of this region and as the largest and most powerful country, economically and politically in our region-in the immediate region, the Pacific, we have a responsibility beyond others to help a friend, to borrow the code name of the Solomon Islands operation. And that was a marvellous example of helping a friend, and I suspect that we will be helping other friends in the time ahead because we all have an interest in the stability of the region.
 As Chris Ellison has remarked, the death of Adam Dunning was a reminder of the price that sometimes that members of police forces and our military pay in advancing and protecting the interest of this country.
Now I, in welcoming this opportunity to address you, I want to thank the men and women of the Australian Federal Police for what they have done-especially over the last five years. I want to commend their continued efforts.  I want to commend them for their great Australian capacity and our visitors will forgive me for focussing on this but Australians do have a capacity to combine a law enforcement or military role in another country with forming a friendship with the locals which is second to none. And it's at the heart of the success of any overseas mission that you not only assert and project power and authority, but you also win hearts and minds and win friends. And perhaps by dint of our culture, our egalitarian spirit, whatever it is, we have a capacity to do that and that's what Ben McDevitt's men and women did in the Solomons, it's what people did in East Timor, it's what the Australian Military I know did in East Timor and are doing now in the Al Muthanna Province in southern Iraq-it's one of the things that separates us in a positive way.
 Now having said that, forgive our visitors for that little local plug, but I mean it very sincerely because it's a very important part of winning the battle.  You win the battle using the force that's needed but you also ultimately secure the victory by winning the respect and the affection of people you've been sent there to help. And I think the sort of training that you get in a centre like this-not only the training to arm you for the physical exposure and the surprise attempts at hostage taking and  the like, but also the advice and instruction in relation to the local sensitivities and interests of people.  I think all of that is overwhelmingly so important, not only to our military personnel but on this occasion particularly to our police.
 So can I thank you again and just say on behalf of the Australian Government, and I know on behalf of all Australians how much we admire and respect all the men and women who wear the uniform of police personnel in this country.  You are vital to our way of life, and you are vital to the protection of the wonderful circumstances in which Australians live.  And to the extent that we can project the values of Australian society in a positive, cooperative way to other parts of world, it is greatly to the credit of this country and in that sprit I have very great pleasure in declaring this centre open.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Theana, my parliamentary colleagues today Margaret Guilfoyle, ladies and gentlemen, a huge delight for Janette and for me to again be present at the opening of the Federal Council, traditionally was a meeting of the Federal Women's Committee and an address from the Party Leader. I do say against the background of the first Federal Council meeting since our re-election in October of last year and it is an opportunity for us to reflect upon the great political success that we have enjoyed but in the words of the injunction that appears in front of me, it's a question of getting on with the job. We can spend a few moments just reflecting, just a few about how good it was to win so comprehensively at the last election but the Australian people are looking forward and in that typical Australian directness, it's very much a question of what have you done for me today brother or sister and that fundamentally is what must be our job and our responsibility.
 I want to talk today for a few moments about the approach that the Liberal Party has always taken to the role of women in our society and not only but in particular the role that they have taken in relation to caring for families within our community. All of you are aware that we have always emphasised in the Liberal Party, the importance of individuality amongst both men and women in our society, we haven't endeavoured to impose a stereotype, we have rejected patronising quotas but we have the largest number of women in Federal Cabinet since Federation. We have increasing numbers of women now occupying safe Liberal seats as well as marginal Liberal seats. The old throw away line a few years ago, there are plenty of women candidates but they're only in marginal seats. Well let me say immediately that one of the reasons that we are still in office is that the women marginal seat holders, particularly 1998, proved the difference between victory and defeat so I would be the last person to decry the importance of a woman in a marginal seat and I am looking at a few of them here and all I'd say is that they were emblematic of our victory in 1996 and they were crucial to our survival in 1998 but I do want to take also the opportunity of making the point that we now have as well as the people such as Louise Markus who wonderfully won Greenway and Jackie Kelly who memorably won Lindsay and  retained it on many occasions and of course people like Trish Draper and people like Jo Gash and Kay Elson that have taken marginal seats and turned them into safe seats, so much so that over the next year or so, along with Danna Vale, over the next year or so Peter Costello and I are going to get them to come and do fundraisers for us in our electorates. But it is important though to make the point that as well as this phenomenon of the Liberal Party finding and promoting extremely high quality female candidates in marginal seats, we have also seen women pre-selected in safe Liberal Party seats and of course consistent in the Senate, though I must take this opportunity of publicly at this Council meeting of thanking Sue Knowles for her 21 years of service to the Liberal Party as a Senator from Western Australia.
 Of course it's not only at a Parliamentary level that we have seen through sheer talent and policies of equal opportunity, women emerge but we now have the largest number of women since Federation heading Government departments at a Federal level and this occurred after the last election, entirely on merit, the number of people who were appointed, the women who were appointed. So I say those things at the outset to try and paint a picture that because we are a party of individuals, we don't believe in quotas, there's nothing more patronising, than to say to somebody: "Well, we are going to give you this position because you are woman, because you come from a particular part of Australia or because you have a particular ethnic background." What we are trying to do is to create a society where talent has its own reward and of course the foundation of being able to succeed in the kind of society that Australia has, of course, is a level of economic independence and of all the many things that have happened to women over the last 40 or 50 years is that they have achieved a greater degree of economic independence and economic self sufficiency. In many cases they have achieved it with their husbands and their families, in many other cases they've achieved it despite relationships and we have seen progressively, a change in our society where the economic independence of women has progressed steadily. I am very proud of the fact that for example the unemployment rate amongst women in Australia is now 5.3% compared with a rate of 7.6% when the former Government left office.
 But despite all of the changes that have occurred in relation to the economic independence of women, it remains the fact and this is not said apologetically, it is said very objectively and admiringly that the principle role of caring for people in our society is still carried by women and that is likely to be the case for many years into the future, that is not to say that greater caring responsibilities should not be assumed by men. Once again that is something that must evolve, it is not something that a Government can mandate. It's not something that can be proscribed by a set of rules and one of the things that I have constantly aspired since being Prime Minister is my belief that the Government should not dictate the family stereotypes.
 The role of the Government and we've given expression to this with our policies particularly through the Family Tax Benefits, the role of the Government is to create a climate where individual families can make their own choices. It's instructive to remind ourselves on this score again that the largest single work-family combination of parents caring for children is what I call the "one-and-a-halves," where you have a full-time bread winner, normally, but not always the male, you have a part-time bread winner being the mother. They comprise something I think in the order of 27 to 28 per cent of couples with dependent children, you have something in the order of still 22 or 23 per cent where there is one bread winner only with the other parent at home full time and you have something in the order of 17 per cent where both parents are full time in the workforce and it's important particularly in the environment of Canberra where you have an above average incidence of two parents in the full-time workforce to remember that the nature of our society is more typically what I have I think called on a previous occasion when I addressed this gathering and I still think the metaphor is accurate, it's the police officer and the part-time sales assistant. That is far more likely to be a typical family arrangement, particularly after children have gone to school, than any other formation.
 Now you may wonder putting 27 and 22 or 23 together and 17 together, where are the rest? Well, of course, the rest are indeed, sadly, people where neither parent works or where they're sole parents and it's quite an astonishing statistic and that is why so much in the Budget was directed towards that particular group and I want to say something about the Welfare to the Work measures in the Budget because they were in no way designed to save money. In fact they will cost the Government a lot more over the next three or four years than if we had left things exactly as they were. They were designed overwhelmingly to encourage and to facilitate greater workforce participation after the child, being the youngest child being cared for by a sole parent or in some very low income parents, by the unemployed parent after that child reached the age of six, they were designed to facilitate that parent's return to the workforce.  Now overwhelmingly sole parents are women, not all of them but I think, and Kay will correct me, but I think it's still in the order of 70-odd per cent or thereabouts, are women and the reasons why we believe that a policy of encouraging their participation in the workforce on a part-time basis after their youngest child reaches the age of six, by definition therefore has started to go to school, is not to save money, it's also not totally to increase workforce participation, that is part of it. But it is also to recognise that from an individual's point of view, it's something that in more cases than not, can be beneficial. Many women who are sole parents have gone through very bruising marriage or relationship breakdowns. Their self esteem is often low and it's important to recognise from their own point of view, the socialising benefits of returning to the workforce in circumstances where they feel they can look after their children, do justice to them and also develop some friendships and some social connections of their own is tremendously important.
 So I want in these remarks, if I say nothing else, to give a dimension to that policy, beyond the dimension of just workforce participation, important though that is, I also believe very strongly that it is a policy which is designed to recognise that the great bulk of people who have become sole parents and I haven't met many sole parents in my life who are sole parents by design. It's one of the great myths of Australian society that people are sole parents by design, in fact, all the evidence is the opposite, the great bulk of them are people who, in the old language, and perhaps sometimes the old language is more suitable because it describes the facts, are deserted mothers. And those people deserve to have a framework from society which enables them not only to make a contribution, but also to, in many cases, recover their sense of dignity and self worth.
 We've often said that we don't want to dictate behaviour. We don't seek to pass judgements on particular family formations and we certainly don't. But that doesn't diminish the fact that we should always be ready to state the ideal, recognising that if the ideal can't be achieved then we've got to help people who haven't been able to achieve the ideal. And there is no doubt in my mind that the opportunity of growing up in a household where you have both the male role model of the father and the female role model of the mother in more cases than not must produce more stable, happy children. But because it does, we must never tire in our efforts to help those who do not have the privilege of growing up in that environment.
 And that reference to children who don't grow up in that kind of environment leads me onto two other very important areas of reform that bear upon the caring for families and affect the caring roles of both men and women. The first of those is the quite significant, and I think under-reported changes that the Government proposes to the Family Law Act through the creation of Family Relationship Centres. When these are up and running, they will represent the biggest change to the family law system in this country since 1975, with the introduction of the current Family Law Act. What they are designed to do above all else, is to provide a mechanism when families break up in the nature of a shock absorber for the inevitable bitterness and acrimony that so often arises and is played out to the detriment of the division of caring responsibilities for the children of the marriage or the relationship. In many cases, when a break occurs, people make sensible arrangements. They make sensible arrangements about the custody and access to children, they make sensible arrangements about the financial support for the children. But in many cases, they don't and they are fairly quickly sucked into extremely acrimonious and very, very expensive legal proceedings. It's a long time since I practiced law in Sydney, and when I did quite a few years ago, I did do some family law work, or matrimonial causes, as it used to be called, and it was very expensive. Even in the most easy and felicitous of circumstances and of course over the past 30 years that process has accelerated.
 And these Family Relationship Centres, and 65 of them will be established. And they won't be run by the Government. They will be run by organisations that have a career commitment to helping people whose relationships have broken down. We will follow the model of the Job Network. We will invite tenders from organisations that now provide these services, such as, for example, Anglicare or Centacare or the Wesley Mission. Not limiting them of course to organisations with a religious background, but overwhelmingly they are the organisations that are most active in this field and we will fund them. And they will provide not only a service when a relationship breaks down, but they will also provide services where a relationship is in danger of breaking down. And because of the very strong financial support that we're going to give them, I believe that they will make a very significant change to the operation of the family law system in Australia. We're going to change the law to make it mandatory for people to as it were, go through the process of dealing with the Relationship Centre before they begin to litigate. And that will, I believe, take out of the equation all but the most irreconcilable of differences about financial and caring arrangements for children.
The other very sensitive area of course is that of the Child Support Agency. All of my colleagues who are here today will say to me again and again and I'll agree with them that the most difficult cases we have in our electorate offices are often bound up with child custody.  I have a regular visit to my local electorate office in Gladesville and the most difficult cases, the ones where the people keep coming back and no matter what you say or what you do, you can't satisfy them. And I understand that because the hurt and the feeling of grievance is very deep. And they're strongly entrenched views of both sides of the debate. Many men feel the present system is loaded against them. Many women understandably feel that people have walked out on their responsibilities and their former husbands and father of their children neither care about their children or provide any money to support them.
 The truth of course is somewhere in the middle and I've very indebted to Kay Patterson and Professor Parkinson of Sydney University who have done a wonderful job in preparing along with a lot of colleagues, arising out of the Committee that was chaired by Kay Hull some 18 months ago. They've done a wonderful job of putting together this report and proposals for change. I am greatly encouraged at the response that I have had. I never thought it would possible in an area as difficult as this to get a response that was half likely to you know, be positive. But it does look as though we may be able to find our way through, and a way through that is fair to both custodial and non-custodial parents. But above all, represents a further commitment to ensuring that the welfare of the children is more important than the self interest and sense of retribution of the part of either of the parents. And I do want to congratulate Kay and her group, her reference group that have worked so very hard.
 Can I just bring my remarks together by returning to what I said at the outset and that is that the Liberal Party has always been a party which has always stressed individual choice. We don't seek to tell people how to organise their families. We are nonetheless not reluctant to extol the importance of a united two-parent family in our society where the role models of both men and women are available to young children. But we do recognise that although that is the ideal, many people through no fault of their own don't have it. And our responses and our assistance to those who don't have it should be non-judgemental, should be understanding and should also recognise that particularly women who suffer bruising marriage or relationship break-ups require understanding that involves not only financial dimensions, but also an understanding that the development of pathways back to social relationships and other friendships and work is a very important socialiser of us all; is a very, very important consideration.
I think in crafting the policies that were announced by Peter in the Budget in the area of Welfare to Work were not only addressing the issue of workforce participation. We are an ageing society and we do over a period of time need to develop policies that retain as many people as possible in the workforce, encourage them to work longer, help them to re-enter the workforce after they feel their family responsibilities allow that to occur, and in the case, particularly of sole parents, to provide them with both the incentive and the assistance to do so. And in that light, both those policies should be seen not as in any way punitive, but rather as recognising the benefits to individuals and society of greater workforce participation by that group.
Theana, could I conclude by thanking the women of the Liberal Party who from the very time our Party was founded have played on absolutely crucial role, have reminded us of the importance of choice, have reminded us of the importance of caring, not only for our own families, but for the broader family of the Australian community. I congratulate you and I thank all of my colleagues and on this occasion particularly, my female colleagues for the tremendous contribution that they have made to our electoral success and the reformist policies of the Government over the last nine and a quarter years. Thank you.
[ends]


Terry, thank you for those very warm and generous remarks, Alistair Walton, Shane Stone, Chris McDiven, the President-elect of the Party, my colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  Might I join Shane in thanking Goldman Sachs, JB Were for its generous sponsorship, it's not the first time, I hope it won't be the last.  But these sponsorships are very necessary and at a time when corporate friends in that way that matters most for a political party in a state of perpetual campaigning are sometimes hard to find, even in good political times let alone bad political times, the support that both of you gentlemen and your organisation has given to the Party in different ways is very welcome.
We gather at this Federal Council meeting with I guess a mixture of nostalgia and expectations.  The nostalgia is that we take the opportunity, because we do mark the 60th anniversary of the foundation of the Liberal Party of Australia by Sir Robert Menzies, we look back on these years, we enjoy legitimately the fact that Menzies brought to the Government of this country a sense of security and stability and wellbeing which really was a metaphor for Australia of the 1950s and the early 1960s.  He made people feel that this country was secure, that it was a good country, it was a decent country, it was a country that looked after people who needed help, it was a country that welcomed those new citizens from the four corners of the earth.  And I still find one of the most pleasurable things of being Prime Minister is to go to an event and to be embraced literally by a still very emotional Croatian, Estonian, Italian, Greek lady or gentlemen who says "Mr Menzies - he gave me a new life in this country".  And it's a wonderful legacy because it is a characteristic of that period of time.
So we have a lot to reflect on and think about as we gather, and we should be very proud of that legacy and also because we are a party that also honours the achievements of our state political leaders, we also pause for a moment to reflect for example on that extraordinary political career that was Henry Bolte's in Victoria - unexpectedly becoming the Premier of Victoria in 1955 and beginning some 27 years of unbroken Liberal Government in that State.  And Charles Court also was a very powerful Liberal Party figure of the history of our party.
But today also, and this conference is also an opportunity of projecting forward.  And inevitably this weekend, because it marks the weekend following the rising of the old Senate and when we meet again as a national Parliament the Senate will be transformed to a Senate where for the first time since June of 1981 the Coalition will have a majority, a majority of only one, which in anybody's language is a very slim majority.  We remember from 1961 we had a majority of one in the House of Representatives that had enabled us to govern for two years and then to increase it quite sharply at the 1963 election.  But this Senate majority, and it is a Senate majority, it's not Senate control, it's a Senate majority, it does afford us an opportunity to do things that I know you want us to do.  To do things that the Australian people elected us to do, and to do things that will be of long term benefit to our country.  But it is not something to indulge in some kind of self-satisfied fashion. The last thing that any political leader or party in this country should ever do is to assume that they have a licence from the Australian people to indulge in any kind of overzealous way their ideology or their enjoyment of power.  We govern in trust for the Australian people and we govern for all of them and they expect us to use our new found authority wisely and soberly and sensibly.  But they nonetheless expect us to use it decisively.  I will never want it said of a government I lead that it missed the opportunity of a majority in the Senate to do some things that we could never otherwise do without that majority.
Our biggest challenge is to maintain the momentum of economic strength.  Economic strength is a continuum, it's not something that comes in fits and starts.  You can't borrow it, use it and then put it away, it's something that you have to keep nourishing and providing stimulus for if it is to be maintained.  We've had 14 years of uninterrupted economic growth, and that is a product of 20 years or more of economic reform and change.  And I say 20 years because I have never disputed and I won't dispute it ever at a Federal Council meeting of the Liberal Party that there were a number of things the former government did which constituted economic reforms and were valuable to the economic strength we now have.  And I think in particular of financial deregulation and tariff reform.  Both of which incidentally enjoyed enthusiastic bipartisan support from the then Opposition.  But in recent years economic reform has of course come from our side of politics.  And if you look back over that period of almost a decade and you think back to five years to the struggle we had to implement taxation reform, who now talks about the GST other than in the context of the debate between the States and the Commonwealth about the division of the GST and the adequacy with which, or the inadequacy rather which with the States have used the GST to remove unwanted state taxes.  We talk of the extraordinary achievement that is due in such great measure to the work of Peter Costello as Treasurer of fiscal consolidation, of converting a debt at a national level of $96 billion into a situation where our debt to GDP level is 1.9 per cent - the OECD average is 47 and it's 45 in the United States and in the Euro-area it's over 50, and in Japan it is much higher.  Now that is an extraordinary achievement.  We think of the other reforms that the Government has carried out which has made a contribution which enabled us to go through the Asian economic downturn and also suffer barely a glitch in the wake of the events of September 2001.
But all of that is now in the past and you find with economic reform that things pretty rapidly get consigned to the past.  You labour for months, you have these huge reforms and you end in a state of intellectual exhaustion, it's all over and then basically the next morning the journalist or the businessman or the supporter says "well righto John, what's next?".  And it's true, it is "what is next?" And it is a never ending, you never reach the finish line, it keeps getting moved further ahead, it's very frustrating.  It's like one of those experiences you have and you dream and you're trying to reach something and you never get there.  Terribly frustrating.  Politics is a bit like that, but because that's the sort of thing that keeps you interested in it too because you think at the end of the day you will eventually grab hold of that finish line and declare victory but it never quite happens.
  So we are now very focused on what is ahead and maintaining economic momentum does require further reform and there's no area where that reform is more important than in the area of workplace relations.  And doing a little bit of research for the current debate on the workplace relations system I came across a very interesting quote in a speech that Tony Blair made to the trade union congress in 1997 - just after he had become Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.  And he was talking very directly about the decision he'd taken not to try and wind back any of Margaret Thatcher's industrial relations reforms and he had this to say, he said this, "Remember in everything we do that fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job".  Let me say that again, "fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job."  What that means is that you can have all of the elaborate protections for a worker, so-called protections, you can have all of the regulations, you can have all of the if, buts and maybes, but if you don't have a strong economy those regulations can't deliver that worker a job, or can't deliver that worker a promotion because you can't afford the promotion.  And the reason for our industrial relations reforms are to make sure that the economy is running even stronger so that not only do more workers have the chance of a job, but they have the chance of a better job.
That in essence is what it is all about - it's not some complicated ideology, it's not some kind of settling of accounts with the trade union movement.  I do have no quarrel of any kind with the right of the trade union movement in this country to organise, to recruit members, to bargain collectively or individually on behalf of people in the workplace and I recognise that there are still some industries in this country where the best industrial relations outcome is an outcome where the union is intimately and constructively and directly involved and I have no desire, and there is nothing in the law changes we propose that will prevent that happening.  We are not abolishing awards, we are not abolishing the right of people to join trade unions - we are protecting that right.  We are not abolishing minimum wages.  We are not doing any of the things for which we are attacked by our political opponents. But what we are doing is to borrow and slightly vary the words of Tony Blair, what we are trying to do is to give people not only the chance of a job but the chance of a better job.
  And there is no doubt in my mind that if you look around the world, the evidence is overwhelming that the countries that have freed their labour markets are the countries with lower levels of unemployment. There is a historic debate now beginning in Europe as a result of the rejection of the referendum in France and Holland. And that debate is very much about the corporatist model of running and economy or the more open market model of running an economy, exemplified by the Franco-German approach or the British approach. And nowhere is that difference sharper than in the area of the labour market. France and Germany and Spain have an unemployment level of 10 to 11 percent, but Britain, New Zealand, the United States and Australia have unemployment levels that are around half of that.
 And even after all of the reforms that we contemplate are passed into law, even after they've been passed into law, we will still have a more regulated labour market than either the United Kingdom or New Zealand. And it's a reminder therefore that this is not an exercise in extremism, it's a commonsense further step along the path to labour market reform and the sustaining of the strong economy that this country has had over the last twenty years. And if we don't take this opportunity now, it will be lost potentially forever. Because this is, we have a conjunction, a remarkable conjunction of circumstances. We have the numbers in the Upper House to pass the laws. We have a strong economy; we have a Labor Party which is mired in a view that really pre-dates some of the attitudes of the Hawke and Keating Government. I mean, Mr Beazley's position on industrial relations is even more old fashioned than that of Mr Hawke or Mr Keating. Now that's a remarkable thing for me to have to say, but it's true. It is.  And because at the last election, the Labor Party's policy on industrial relations was to throw out all of the reforms that we had been able to negotiate in 1996 and to negotiate through the Senate with the help of the then Democrats.
 So if you think that this is the most important area of economic reform for the next session, you are 100 per cent right because it is. And there is no issue more important to me, more important to my senior colleagues. I mean I've been engaged in this debate about industrial relations reform for more than 20 years. Peter Costello, you remember, made a fine reputation for himself along with Michael Kroger in that famous Dollar Sweets case. So he has been a very, very strong supporter. And I see Fred Stauder here. I mean it's worth recalling that we have a long legacy, this party, in relation to this issue. We are not new players on the field of workplace relations reform and that just underscores the fact that there is a very deep and unremitting commitment on the part of the Government to achieve these reforms. Because we believe very passionately that they will help maintain the momentum of economic change.
 They are, of course, not the only areas of reform. We announced in the Budget some major changes concerning Welfare to Work. Once again, designed to ensure that at a time when our population is ageing, we maximise to the greatest possible extent, the participation of people in the workforce. But they are also designed to have another benefit of which I spoke at the meeting of the Federal Women's Committee yesterday when the Federal Council began. And I made the observation that particularly for many women who have suffered the trauma of a marriage or relationship background, self esteem is often dented or weakened and the opportunity of returning to the workforce with the socialising benefits that that can have for many women who in particular, not only women, but overwhelmingly women; because it is still the statistical reality that the great bulk of sole parents in our community are to use the old language and perhaps more accurate language - they are deserted mothers. We sort of think you can't use those sort of expressions now because they are too judgemental. Perhaps they are, but they are often a little more descriptive of precisely what group of people we are talking about. And the people in that situation work, the opportunity of working, the opportunity of reacquiring skills or of keeping skills up is important to them financially, but it's also important to them from the point of the human personality and fulfilment and the socialising benefits of work. That is a very important reform.
 And while I'm talking social issues, can I also say that over the next year we will be rolling out and establishing the 65 Family Relationship Centres which represents the public face of our new approach to the administration of the Family Law Act. And these Relationship Centres will provide for the first time a shock absorber for people who are coming out of often acrimonious marriage breakdowns and haven't been able to agree on the custodial and financial arrangements for their children. And they will be required to have regard, have resort to this shock absorber before embarking upon often acrimonious and costly and very counterproductive and poisonous litigation.
 So we are very much a Party which after nine and a quarter years in Government has not run out of puff. A Government which is still full of ideas and full of views and commitments about future Government. And we're also full of a lot of talented people. Australian politics is suffering on both sides the phenomenon of it being sometimes difficult to get people of high quality, especially when you're struggling in opposition, high quality to come into Parliament. And the Labor Party is falling into the trap of having too shallow a gene pool from which they recruit their new members. And I made the comment the other day that even allowing for the trade union membership of Parliament from the Labor side which has been a common thread ever since Parliament was established at a Federal level, at least when I came into Parliament in 1974 there'd been a few people on the other side who'd shorn a few sheep. I mean Clyde Cameron and Mick Young had shorn a few sheep, and might I say a few people on our side. Ralph Hunt I remember famously showing me his shearing exploits at Gunnedah. I don't, I'm no judge anyway. But let me say, far be it for a boy from Earlwood to start talking about shearing sheep. But can I simply say this? That we do face a situation were more and more our opponents are comprised of former trade union officials and political apparatchiks with very little experience of life.
 There is a place for a proportion of trade union officials and apparatchiks. We've had some very good apparatchiks come into politics on both sides including our own of course. But the problem is a sense of balance and proportion and when I look at the occupational backgrounds of the intakes of 2001 and 2004 into the Federal Parliament we have a very rich diversity of talent and they're not all bulked up in one occupational area or one life experience area and that bodes extremely well for our future.
Can I finish by saying to all of our business observers who are here today that we appreciate very much indeed the support that the Party has received from the community at this Council meeting? We are very proud of the fact that we are a political party that is owned by nobody. We do represent all sections of the Australian community. The Liberal Party of Australia is the most broadly-based political party in Australia. I use the ecclesiastical metaphor of saying it's a broad church. It's a very broad church. It's got high, low and middle. And I won't try and put you in any particular pews but let me simply say that we enjoy very much and we value the contacts we have with the business community.
 We have tried to create a good business climate, not because it is an end in itself, but if you have a good business climate, you get people investing and you get Australians employed and you're providing opportunities for their children to go to university, get an apprenticeship, go into business or indeed do whatever they might want to do. But we do value your support. We will maintain that contact. We will not take that support for granted, but we hope to continue as a Government to provide the sort of climate that you've had over the last ten years and we can only do that if we can maintain the momentum of our economic reforms and our economic changes.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Mr President, my fellow Liberals and fellow Australians. In many ways the defining moment when I look back on it, of the last election campaign was the Saturday afternoon before the Sunday on which I announced the election campaign and I quite literally wandered around the gardens of the Lodge trying to crystallise in my own mind the central message through which I would define when I announced the election the character of the choice that the Australian people would make on the 9th of October. And as you know I resolved to confront the Australian people with a choice based on trust. Who did you better best trust to manage the economy, who did you better trust to keep the budget in surplus, who did you better trust to keep interest rates low and so forth. That I was able to define the choice in those terms and to present it with conviction and with creditability in those terms was in no small measure due to the magnificent work over the last nine and quarter years of the man who's just introduced me, Peter Costello.
Because it has been the strength of the Australian economy and so much credit is due to Peter for that, that has underpinned all of the choices that we have put to the Australian people since we were elected. And as we gather here this morning to bring to an end this Federal Council meeting, which has commemorated the 60th anniversary of the foundation of our party, it is important that we use the few moments available for this traditional leaders address, to really strip away all the excess comments and recognise what has been the bed-rock of this party's success over the last nine years. And that bed-rock in my view, my friends, has been overwhelmingly that we have cared for and nurtured the families of middle Australia. It is because we have strengthened the living standards of average Australian families-not that we have won some PhD in ideology or zealotry, but because we have cared for the needs and the aspirations of those millions of Australians whose aim in life is to earn a decent wage, to buy a home, if they want to, to start a business, to have children, to raise them, to educate those children and to pass on to them an even better start in life than they had. That has always been the great Australian dream, it always will be the great Australian dream, and if this party ever lose sight of that fact, this party will lose the faith and the trust and the support of the Australian people.
And when you look back over the last nine years, the record speaks for itself and the record tells us why we were successful on the ninth of the October. It wasn't an accident, it wasn't because-good though it was, the advertising campaign was excellent and it was, it was that fundamentally when they went into those polling booths on the 9th of October, the millions of people who comprise middle Australia said to themselves, this crowd have done a good job, they've looked after us, they've given us a chance, they've kept our mortgages low, they've given our children jobs and more apprenticeships and they've given us higher wages, and we don't really know what the other mob stands for, so we'll put them back-and that is in essence what occurred on the 9th of October. And when you look at it, it's not surprising they came to that conclusion, 14 percent real increase in wages over nine years, 1.6 million more jobs, the lowest interest rates in a generation, huge reductions in personal income tax, and that was why I was able to say, as you saw on the video last night, when I opened the Liberal Party's campaign in western Sydney, that this Government has been the best friend that the workers of Australia have ever had.
 And it's our responsibility, our mission, the aim or our policies to maintain that condition. Everything we stand for is posited on supporting and promoting the living standards and the security of families of Australia. And you do that in a variety of ways. You do it by good taxation policy, you do it by the policies of the family tax benefit, which over the last nine years have given far more to the low and middle income families of Australia than they have to the wealthy families of Australia. And one of the things of which I am immensely proud is that when these economic analysts to do their work and they look at what's happened to the various segments of the Australian population, they all conclude that yes the rich have got richer, but that happens in any successful society, and we should never decry it, because the basis of competitive capitalism is to have a society where people can, if they do it fairly and they pay their taxes, they should be able to accumulate and generate wealth, and I will never lead a political party that tries to play politics of envy against that sought of outcome.
And the more enduring message from that analysis is that the lower income section of the population has gained proportionately more from the policies of this Government, and on any comparison, on any basis, that is something of which all liberals should be immensely proud. So as we look ahead for the next year and the next several years, our message and our mission is very simple-we must maintain our concern for those millions of Australian families. We must understand that they trusted us with their future on the ninth of October and that is a solemn trust that all of us take very seriously.
 Over the last week I have to say, ladies and gentleman, that there has been an extraordinary amount of hype, almost hysteria generated about what is going to happen the 1st of July this year. I've read about absolute monarchies, I've read about elected dictatorships, I've read about all these descriptions which are saying that somehow or other the world is going to come to an end, democracy as we know it is going to collapse and unbridled, unprecedented power is going to fall into the hands of a power drunk autocrat. Now this is not surprising because a lot of it comes from people who were bitterly disappointed at the outcome of the election on the ninth of October last year. But let me seek for a moment to try and put into perspective what is going to happen on the 1st of July, or more particularly on the 9th August when the parliament meets after the winter break-I'll tell you what's going to happen, life is going to go on quite normally. There is not going to be a decimation of living standards there's not going to be a destruction of the democratic rights of the Australian people, there's not going to be an abusive power by this Government. What will happen on the 1st of July is not that this Government will gain unbridled power, no government in this country has unbridled power, no government in this country should have unbridled power. We are an accountable democracy, one of the great accountable democracies that mankind has seen. But what's going to happen on the 1st of July is that we're going to see the final consequence of the decision of the Australian people on the 9th of October last year, that's all. We're going to actually see in a sense the final votes in the election counted, that's all that's going to happen on the 1st of July, nothing more because we have this constitution that gives fixed terms to our Senators. But the decision was taken on the 9th of October, it's not going to be taken on the 30th of June and we will have a majority of one in the Senate. Our majority of one is a thin majority, but it' a majority and it's better than the condition that it's going to replace. But friends let us all and let the entire political community and the Australian community get a sense of perspective about what has happened. What's happened is that the Australian people took a decision, they decided to give us a majority in both Houses, and the person in terms of counting towards that majority, that gave us that majority, is one of ours, Russell Trood, the Queensland Liberal Senator, who's here today. The greatest piece of advertising I've ever heard, Queensland beautiful one day, perfect the next.
But friends what will happen is simply the ultimate working out of the decision of the Australian people. I think it's important that we get a sense of perspective-the Australian people voted for us in sufficient measure on the 9th of October to give us a majority in both Houses. Now there's a message in that for us and there's a message in that for the rest of the Australian community and for our political opponents. The message for us is to be, as I said at the opening of my acceptance speech at the Wentworth Hotel on election night that I was truly humbled by the extraordinary expression of confidence that the Australian people had displayed in the Coalition. And I was and I remain humbled by that. And if all of us remain humbled by that and remain conscious of the solemn trust we have, we won't let down the Australian people.
We will use the majority we have; we'll use it as I said yesterday soberly, wisely and sensibly. We won't use it capriciously or wantonly or indiscriminately, and I make that solemn promise on your behalf to all of the Australian people. But in giving us that majority the Australian people were not only trusting our past stewardship, but they were also placing confidence in our future administration. And what that  means is that they expect us to legislate for things that we believe in. they expect us to do the things we said we were going to do, and they will be let down and very disappointed if we don't do those things. It's not a complicated proposition, you enter into a covenant with the electorate of the time of the election, that if they support you, you will do certain things. And when I look ahead at some of the legislation that we'll be presenting can anybody doubt for a moment that industrial relations reform is something that we believe in, that we have been campaigning for, that we have been striving for and why have we been campaigning for it, not because we hate the trade unions of Australia, millions of trade unionists voted for this party and this Government at the last election. Not because we are embarked upon some ideological exercise just because many of us have campaigned for industrial relations reform for the last twenty years, of course we have. But that's not the reason we are going to legislate for changes, the reason that we are going to legislate for changes is that further reform of the industrial relations system will further enhance and support the opportunities and the living standards of those millions of Australian families of which I spoke in the early part of my speech. That is the only reason why we are changing the industrial relations system. We are not changing it to break the power of the unions, we don't wish to do that, we just simply want them to occupy a proper place on a level playing field.
 We are further reforming the industrial relations system because we believe those further reforms are needed to maintain the momentum of productivity growth in this country and we have higher living standards in Australia now because we have higher productivity and if we are to protect the current higher living standards and further build them we must win further productivity gains. And we live in a different world than the world we inherited in 1996, it is vastly more competitive than what it was even ten years ago and its dramatically different than what it was back in the 1970s and the 1980s and I spoke yesterday morning of that never ending search for the finish line in economic reform and its true, you have to keep going it's a never ending process, and if you stop and ref reflect and think for a moment the job's been done, if you adopt the mantra of Mr Beazley of saying its all been finished, I saw him again this morning saying oh the Australian Labor market has been deregulated, that's very interesting, let me give you some examples of how the Australian labour market and how the Australian work system has been deregulated according to Mr Beazley. He talks a lot about skills, and skills in industrial relations reform are directly linked because it is often the rigidity of the award system, it is often the approach taken by trade unions to training and skilling of the work force which is responsibility for many of the rigidities that we have.
 I mean as we speak, the CFMEU is still trying to resist the effective insertion of awards for skills based apprenticeships into the federal building award by seeking to have conditions imposed on those apprenticeships that would render them unworkable. But I ought to remind the Council that as we speak we have a situation in this country that a young Victorian student, who gets a hairdressing qualification to an academy in Victoria, cannot get a licence in NSW without first doing an apprenticeship through TAFE. A young person by contrast who has a hairdressing qualification from a training organisation in Victoria can't practice in NSW without completing a full apprenticeship but that same person can practice in London. Let me give you another example, I know of a brickie, I do, who recently migrated from New Zealand to Queensland after working in the trade over there for the last ten years. When he tried to get a job in Queensland, he was told that he would have to undergo a full TAFE course and seek licensing before he would be allowed to practice his trade.
 Now these things are reality in the Australia of 2005 and one of the reasons they are a reality in the Australia of 2005 is that we have a union and award dominated TAFE system operated at a state level. That we have awards in many parts of Australia, not all parts of Australia, and I do exempt some states of this criticism. We have an awards system that frowns upon school based apprenticeships and the reason they frown upon it is of course, many unions in this country regard school based apprenticeships as incompatible with their traditional notion of apprenticeships.  I mean it seems to me a monstrous anachronism for a nation, that is striving to remain competitive with the best and the brightest around the world, that the very question of whether you should have a school based apprenticeship, is a matter of debate before the industrial relations commission of this country.
 Surely that's something that the elected government's of this country decide ought to happen, and the very idea that you've got to argue for it, and establish a right for it before the industrial relations commission of this country, is an absurdity. So when I speak about our industrial relations agenda, when I speak about the commitment we have about improving the skills of the Australian workforce, when I talk about the desire to generate even more apprenticeships and our commitment to build those 24 Australian technical colleges, so that we can live in an Australia where a technical qualification is as prized a degree or certificate as a university degree, I am talking about further expanding the horizons and the opportunities of the working men and women of this country and their families.
 We will see over the weeks and months ahead, we will see an attempt by our political opponents, and the trade union movement of Australia, to typify and describe our workplace relations reforms as a lurch down the road of extremism. It is nothing of the kind. It is not an exercise in ideology gone mad, it is the next logical step to further reform of our workplace relations systems to further boost and maintain productivity and to provide additional opportunities for the working people of this country. We won't be abolishing awards despite what the union movement says, we won't be abolishing minimum wages, we won't be abolishing the Industrial Relations Commission, we won't be denying people the right of collective bargaining, we won't be preventing people from joining trade unions, we won't be tilting the balance against organised labour, we'll be tilting the balance in favour of the individual worker.
 These two issues of industrial relations reform and improving skills base of the workforce are intimately linked. Progress on one cannot be achieved without progress on the other. Progress together can build an even better and brighter world for the employees of tomorrow. And as we think about the changed nature of the Australian workplace and the challenges that are involved, let me remind you of a statistic that came out just a few weeks ago which tells a story and it tells a story of which every Liberal should be proud, and that is that according to the last ABS set of statistics, the number of self employed people in Australia now exceeds the number trade union members.  One point nine one million self employed people to 1.84 million members of a trade union. Now that speaks of an empowered small business community in Australia, it speaks of an Australian nation that has been transformed particularly over the last ten years. It speaks of an Australian nation that is optimistic and hopeful and creative and it speaks of a capacity for individual effort on behalf, on the part of our fellow Australians of which we should all be immensely proud.
 My friends, I've chosen today to speak very much of some of the immediate challenges and issues on the domestic political theme. It's not because other considerations are irrelevant but because it is important at a national gathering of our great party to remind ourselves of the ingredients of our past success and to draw strength from that success and also to establish signposts for the future. We have been successful because through a combination of hard work, great team work, good policies, and a resolute commitment to the fundamental values of our party we have kept faith with the mainstream of the Australian community. This is a nation that rejects extremism, this is a nation that has no truck for excessive zealotry in politics, this is a nation that believes in a fair balance but this is also a confident nation that recognises that we must change to continue to achieve and succeed in the world of the 21st century. We are as a world, vastly different from what we were a generation ago. Globalisation is here forever, anybody who imagines that the forces of globalisation can be turned around and avoided, is deluding themselves. The successful nations and the successful political parties within those nations are the nations and the parties that martial and implement the policies that harness to the best benefit of their nation, the products and the fruits of globalisation. And just as nations in Asia have prospered through embracing the opportunities of globalisation, while other nations have not prospered because they have tried to tilt against the forces of globalisation, so it will be with the policies that are applied in this country by this Government.
 The last decade has been a wonderful chapter in the history of this country. Its been a wonderful chapter in the history of our party and as I conclude, can I express my enormous gratitude as I did last night to all of you, for your tremendous loyalty and support, to Peter, to Robert, and Nick and to all the other members of the Cabinet and the Parliamentary party, and to Shane, and to Brian, and all of the others who've played over that ten year period - I think of Andrew Robb and Lynton Crosby, and Tony Staley as former National Directors and Party Presidents. Can I express to all of you my profound gratitude and can I also on a personal note again acknowledge the incredible debt that I owe Janette and my three wonderful children. The greatest thing you can do in life is to build an affectionate relationship with your family, it leaves everything else for dead, we all know that and I am incredibly fortunate that I've had by my side, somebody who has shared my zeal and enthusiasm and thirst for political debate and for political involvement. It has enabled me and sustained me through all the years that I have been in public life and I again thank you Janette for the wonderful partnership we've had and the wonderful support you've given me over all of these years.
 But as we depart from here, we may feel confident but not cocky or exuberant about our national political position, but let us remember that there are eight Governments elsewhere in Australia to be slain, there are eight State Government's to be tackled, for all of their weaknesses and their imperfections, for all of their complacency and smugness and for all that they have taken their electorates for granted. This is a national political party, it's a party that strives to win Government federally, but must always continue to strive to win Government at a state level and our great mission as an organisation over the next year is to lay the foundations for the battles that will come probably first in South Australia and Tasmania and then not too long after that, in the other parts of Australia and all of us are interdependent on the other's success. Our success is your success, your success is our success, and as a great national movement, let us leave this conference and this Council with those goals very much in our minds, thank you.
[ends]  


Twenty years ago this month, the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) torpedoed Paul Keating's plan for a broad-based consumption tax.   It would take another 15 years and a Coalition Government to secure this important economic reform for Australia.
The failed Tax Summit of July 1985 was not simply a defeat for a better taxation system.  With hindsight, it was the beginning of the end for a style of corporatist politics that bound Australia in an economic straight-jacket.
  The idea of the select few taking the big decisions and handing them down to the rest of the community is alluring for any nation's political class.
And until a few years ago, nowhere in our politics was this corporatist edifice more imposing, its ethos stronger or its sacred cows better nourished than in the field of industrial relations.
  Here was a realm where, the 'experts' agreed, only experts should dare to tread.  Only they understood the special qualities of our centralised wage-fixing system - the virtues of the closed shop; why 'comparative wage justice' was all that stood between order and industrial chaos; and why placing trade unions above the law was simply part of the Australian way.
By the early 1980s, some were prepared to prick these pretensions.  And none possessed a sharper eye or pen than Gerard Henderson.  His landmark Quadrant article on 'The industrial relations club' in 1983 stripped away layers of mythology from a system that was failing our country on the scales of prosperity, of fairness and (ultimately) of democracy.
It certainly struck a chord with me given my own experiences as Treasurer in the Fraser Government.
So tonight I am pleased to be back at The Sydney Institute to make the case for Australia embracing a flexible, simple and fair system of workplace relations.
  Australia's high living standards rely on the productivity of our workplaces.  And just as today's prosperity has been built by Australians working smarter in the last decade, so we must unleash a new burst of productivity growth to secure our future prosperity.
 The workplace relations reforms that I outlined to Parliament a little over six weeks ago are the next logical step on a path that has delivered higher wages, more jobs, low inflation, the lowest industrial disputes on record and the longest economic expansion in half a century - perhaps the longest since the gold rushes.
While these reforms are significant, they are not radical.  They are grounded not in ideology but in economic reality.  They aim to strengthen our economy but to do it the Australian way - by advancing prosperity and fairness together.
In recent days, we've heard sinister claims about what lies ahead.  Family living standards in free-fall.  'Dark satanic mills' across the land.  Australia to lose the Ashes.
Some people seem intent on giving hyperbole a bad name.
 It's time some facts got a look in - two facts in particular.
  First, no system of industrial regulation can protect jobs and support high wages if an economy is not strong and productive.
And second, standing still is always riskier for Australia than going the extra mile on economic reform.
  To go the extra mile on workplace reform is to appreciate that building a culture of enterprise in our workplaces is a never ending challenge, not a lemon that 'has been squeezed dry'.  It is to understand that a dynamic, job-rich economy is the foundation of a fair go in Australia.  And it is to recognise that, after nearly 105 years as a nation, one set of workplace laws is better than six.
 The rise of the 'enterprise worker'
The way Australia works has been reshaped in our lifetimes.  Economic reform, the opening up of the economy, higher education levels, changing consumer demands, new technology and modes of production - all have combined to transform the way we live our lives.
In the past, I have singled out the adaptability of the Australian people as our greatest asset in this age of globalisation.
  Tonight I want to be more specific and suggest that there is no more important economic development in Australia in the last two decades than the rise of the 'enterprise worker'.
 These Australians do not fit neatly into categories based on age or geography, occupation or industry, income level or formal qualification.
  They are white collar and blue collar.  They work each day in our factories, our small businesses, our great services companies, our farms and our mines.
Some choose to be trade unionists, many do not.  Most are traditional employees, while a growing number have embraced the independence and flexibility of working for themselves.
  This new breed of enterprise workers includes the knowledge workers who now make up roughly 40 per cent of our workforce.  They include the providers of personalised services, reshaping our society with little more than initiative, a mobile phone and a computer.  But they also include blue collar workers in industries that only a few years ago were written off as part of the 'old economy'.
They include the almost 2 million Australians working for themselves, often as independent contractors, franchisees or consultants.  More than a million Australians now run small businesses from home, often because they can better balance work and family responsibilities.
What unites our enterprise workers, and what has helped to lift Australia's economic performance, is an attitude of mind.
They recognise the economic logic and fairness of workplaces where initiative, performance and reward are linked together.
They understand the need for firms to strive for better ways of doing things; that each workplace has to meet competitive challenges in its own way.
They have a long-term focus, knowing that short-term gains without regard to productivity are illusory if the result is inflation and jobs at risk.
Most importantly, they grasp that high wages and good conditions in today's economy are bound up with the productivity and success of their workplace.
Those of us who have long made the case for freeing up the Australian labour market always felt that the most important change would be a cultural one.
Change the institutions and over time you change the culture from the remote, adversarial and legalistic way employment relations were handled in the past.
Give employers and employees a tangible stake in what happens at the workplace and you give them a shared incentive to improve its performance.  With this in mind, the Government's workplace relations reforms have three broad objectives.  First, they are designed to encourage the further spread of workplace agreements in order to lift productivity and hence the living standards of working Australians.
Second, they remove impediments to further job creation, especially in small and medium-sized businesses and especially for those Australians on the margins of the workforce.
 And third, they seek to provide Australia with what any modern, competitive nation needs in the 21st century - a single set of workplace relations laws.   Let me address each of these in turn.
Encouraging workplace agreements
Looking back from 2005, what was the great labour market reform debate of the 1980s all about?  In essence, it was about the impact on the Australian economy and on working people of a shift towards more decentralised bargaining arrangements.  We now know that the spread of workplace negotiations has helped to underpin an Australian economic renaissance.  Our relative prosperity is rising again, after decades of falling living standards compared with the rest of the industrialised world.  I have no prouder boast than that the real wages of Australian workers have risen by more than 14 per cent under this Government.  This has been affordable for the simple reason that productivity has risen strongly.
  Not only that, but we have avoided the sort of destructive wage-price spirals that often derailed past economic expansions under the old, centralised wage-fixing system.
  In today's economy, to be indifferent to the spread of workplace agreements is to be indifferent to the well-springs of national prosperity.  We know this because the link between workplace bargaining and higher productivity is strong and compelling.
Between the 1970s and the early 1990s, under the old system, Australia's labour productivity (GDP per hour worked) grew at about 1.2 per cent per annum.  In contrast, from the mid to the late 1990s, productivity growth accelerated to average about 3 per cent per annum.
If we had not had this additional productivity growth in the 1990s, Australian households would have been around $7,000 worse off on average by now.  This productivity surge was not part of some global phenomenon.  Australia was a world leader, outperforming even the much lauded productivity performance of the United States.
We know too that productivity growth has been highest in those sectors that have moved furthest in the direction of workplace agreements.  Sectors with more decentralised arrangements have done better than sectors that still rely heavily on the old award-based arrangements.
Research conducted for the Business Council has found that a 10 percentage point reduction in award reliance in an industry between 1990 and 2002 was associated with an increase in average annual productivity growth of 0.5 percentage points.
Other studies have shown that productivity levels in firms in which all employees are on enterprise agreements were almost 9 per cent higher than comparable firms where employees relied on awards.  We also know that those on workplace agreements receive higher wages.
  None of this should come as a surprise.  Workplace agreements allow parties to deal with circumstances and needs that are unique to that workplace and its employees.  Tailoring changes to employee and customer requirements, job redesign and work organisation changes, incorporating new technology, accommodation of work and family responsibilities - all these issues cannot be dealt with effectively above the workplace level.
A common error - one that my opponent Mr Beazley always makes - is to regard workplace reform as a one-off.  Have a few meetings of the industrial relations club, remove a few 1950s work practices, and the job is done.
He could not be more wrong.  The job is never done.  Despite a turnaround in productivity performance, we are still a long way shy of the world's most productive economies.  On recent estimates (2002, GDP per hour worked), our productivity level is about 83 per cent of that in the United States, which is only slightly above where we were in 1950.
In a global economy that increasingly values specialisation and flexibility, perseverance with workplace reform is essential if we are to narrow this productivity gap further and respond to challenges such as the rise of China and India as great economic powers.
  The centrality of productivity to success in a globalised economy was starkly illustrated by Martin Wolf of the Financial Times.  In his recent book, Why Globalization Works, he asked how workers in high income countries can compete with Chinese workers:
'It is true that, on average, a worker in Chinese manufacturing cost only $730 annually between 1995 and 1999, while a German worker cost $35,000, an American one $29,000 and a British one $24,000.  Is it then not perfectly evident that German, American and British wages will be driven down to Chinese levels?  It is not merely not obvious; it is untrue.
Chinese labour is cheap because it is unproductive.  If an American worker produces $81,000 of value added annually, a German worker $80,000 and a British worker $55,000 while a Chinese worker produces only $2,900 it is not at all difficult for the workers of the high income countries to compete, even if their wages are vastly higher.  The evidence on the relationship between productivity and wages is overwhelming.'
Australia is also on the cusp of a great demographic transition with the retirement of the baby boomers.  This will require evolutionary change where laws and institutions are regularly assessed against the needs of workplaces.
 What is important for ongoing productivity growth is a continuous process of cooperation and commitment to implementing change.  Encouraging the spread and improving the quality of workplace agreements is about sustaining productivity growth in an environment that encourages innovation, the acceptance of new technology and the development of worker skills.
  The Government's 1996 reforms made workplace agreements the focal point of our system, overcoming many deficiencies of the Keating-era changes which limited the spread of agreement-making.
 By reducing the scope for third parties to interfere in agreement making, it clarified where responsibility lay in this process.  By simplifying awards, it limited scope to regulate all aspects of the workplace.  And by ensuring that a broader range of agreements was available, with provision for the first time for agreements between individual employees and their employer, it made agreement-making more attractive and accessible.
Our 1996 reforms also made it easier for flexible, family-friendly practices to be introduced at the enterprise level.  About 83 per cent of federally certified agreements now contain at least one family-friendly provision such as carers' leave, part-time work or time-off in lieu.
But the 1996 Act was never intended to be the last word.
The making of workplace agreements is still more cumbersome than it should be.  There is still too much reliance on awards that are complex, detailed and prescriptive.  And awards, as the Melbourne Institute's Mark Wooden has noted, 'continue to be used in ways that undermine the need for enterprise bargaining'.
 We still have a system where the percentage of private sector workers covered by awards only (24.6 per cent) is higher than the share on registered collective agreements (22.6 per cent).
We still have a system where too few workplace agreements are comprehensive, rather than merely add-ons to awards.
  We still have a system where industry-level, pattern bargaining by unions imposes too many 'one size fits all' agreements.
And we still have a system where third parties of all stripes can insert themselves too easily into processes to the detriment of cooperation between employers and employees.
The system isn't exactly broke.  But it does need an overhaul.
That is why the Government is taking steps to encourage widespread agreement-making with maximum procedural simplicity.
Under our proposed reforms, all collective and individual agreements will now be approved on lodgement with the Office of the Employment Advocate.  We intend also to further streamline awards and matters under awards.  For too long, understanding our award system has required the mind of a medieval theologian, the patience of Job and a well fed industrial lawyer.
  The Government will remove several matters from awards that are covered by existing legislation.  To further simplify awards, a 12-month review will be conducted of the existing awards and award classification structures.
  We are not abolishing awards.  The option of an award - as opposed to a collective or individual workplace agreement - will still be available.  And award-based wages will rise in the future.
But the path to better jobs and higher wages is the path of workplace agreements.
A fair safety net for agreement-making will include a range of legislative requirements and safeguards for employees.  For the first time, minimum conditions to protect the rights of workers will be set in law.
As well as minimum wages, a new Fair Pay and Conditions Standard will include minimum standards for annual leave, personal and carers' leave, parental leave and maximum ordinary hours of 38 hours per week.
 This will be the test for all agreements.  It will make it easier for employers and their employees to compare any agreement against this new safety net.
And it demonstrates yet again that these are evolutionary, not radical, changes that maintain strong safeguards for workers.
Unfair dismissal laws and the setting of minimum wages
Removing obstacles to further job creation is the second objective of our workplace reforms.
We must remember that 'fairness at work starts with the chance of a job in the first place'.
  Those are not my words.  They are the words of Tony Blair, a social democrat with the courage to tell his country's Trades Union Congress in 1997 that rolling back the Thatcher reforms would hurt the most vulnerable sections of British society.
Any Australian Government that gives up on labour market reform gives up on what is not just an economic challenge, but a social imperative - namely, finding jobs for all of our fellow citizens who can and want to work.
The most reliable road out of poverty is a job.
The Australian job machine has performed very well over the last decade.
1.7 million new jobs since March 1996; 10 million Australians in work, more than ever before; unemployment at a 30 year low of five per cent with almost two consecutive years of unemployment at or below six per cent.
But I think we can do better.  I don't know what Mr Beazley, the Labor Party and the union movement think because they don't seem to talk about job creation anymore.
Our workplace relations reforms, together with the Welfare to Work measures in this year's budget, are designed to further increase workforce participation.  Compared with many developed countries, Australia still has a lower proportion of its working age population in employment.  A large number of Australians say that they would like to work more, or that they would be available to start work if jobs became available.
  And most critically, too many Australians - especially too many children - live in jobless households.
Governments - as distinct from trade union officials - have a particular responsibility to take account not just of the interests of the labour market insiders, but those of the outsiders as well.
  That is why we will end the Keating Government's failed experiment with job-destroying unfair dismissal laws.  Far from protecting jobs, these laws have stopped jobs being created.
Commonsense says that in deciding whether to hire a worker, employers will take into account the costs if that worker proves unsuitable.  They will want to minimise the risk of a speculative unfair dismissal claim, especially when hiring those on the margins of the workforce.
  Firms are concerned not just with the direct cost of defending an application or settlement, where that occurs, but costs in terms of time, paperwork and disruption to working relationships.  A survey by the Australian Industry Group this year found that of industrial relations issues of high or moderate importance to its membership, the highest number (89.1 per cent) nominated speculative unfair dismissal claims.
Without deep pockets or dedicated human resources departments, small and medium-sized businesses lack the capacity to cope with such claims.  In rare moments of candour, Kim Beazley, Stephen Smith, Tony Burke, Peter Beattie and Greg Combet have all acknowledged the problems that the current regime poses for small business.
 These laws have a chilling effect on job creation by adding extra uncertainty for firms wanting to employ staff.  Employers are more likely to rely on family and friends as a result.  Alternatively, existing workers may bear a burden by having to work longer or harder.
Firms are also likely to rely more heavily on temporary and casual staff.  Both the World Bank and the OECD have found that strict employment protection laws result in fewer permanent jobs being created.  Those who bear the burden tend to be the young, the low-skilled and the long-term unemployed.
I am not one who demonises the growth in casual employment in our society.  It reflects the contemporary needs of many employers and employees alike.
   But to those who bemoan this trend I say this: you of all people should be interested in getting rid of bad laws that hinder the creation of permanent jobs.   Either way you look at it, the cost of the existing unfair dismissal laws falls most heavily on firms and individuals who can least afford it.
To make it easier for businesses to hire people, the Government will exempt businesses with up to 100 employees from the unfair dismissal system.  To deter speculative claims on businesses with more than 100 employees, we are also increasing the probation period for new employees from three to six months - a change in line with international standards.
Again, this change needs to be put in perspective.  We are talking about laws that date back to 1993, not the tearing up of some ancient right enshrined in Magna Carta by the Barons at Runnymede.
There is no watering down of protection from unlawful termination.  Workers will continue to be protected from unlawful termination on grounds such as temporary absence from work due to illness or injury, family responsibilities, pregnancy, gender, race and union membership.
Australia's current economic strength also gives us an opportunity to establish a better way of setting minimum wages than the current adversarial, ambit-based procedure.
The Government supports the maintenance of a minimum wage, as well as increases in the rate at which that wage is set.  We recognise, however, that unsustainable minimum wage rises can destroy jobs and that there are better ways to support low-income earners without putting jobs at risk.
We should always remember that unemployment, rather than low wages, is the major cause of low incomes in Australia.  In fact, minimum-wage workers are not concentrated in low-income households.  A significant proportion live in households with relatively high incomes.
The new Australian Fair Pay Commission will be charged with striking the right balance between the needs of the low paid and the employment prospects of the low-skilled and unemployed.
  Our political and union opponents who claim that our goal is to hold down the minimum wage are suffering a severe case of historical amnesia.
  Since 1996, the federal minimum wage has risen in real terms by more than 12 per cent.  By contrast, it actually fell by more than 5 per cent between 1983 and 1996 under the holy trinity of Labor, the Accord and the Industrial Relations Commission.
One national system
Creating a simple, unified set of workplace laws is the third key element of the Government's reforms.  Six different industrial relations systems is an anachronism for a nation of 20 million people in a region that will be the world's economic centre of gravity in the 21st century.
Our overlapping systems reflect a time when businesses operated within State boundaries; when our politics were more concerned with walling Australia off from the world, rather than competing in it.
 State and Territory governments some time ago recognised the logic of national systems for taxation law, for corporate law and for financial institutions law.  It's time they recognised that a single system of workplace laws is in the national interest.  Six different systems mean different rules for everything from agreement-making to union entry rights to redundancy obligations.  The costs from duplication, inconsistency, complexity and uncertainty are borne by employers and employees alike.   Again, in their more rational moments, our political opponents recognise this.  A pride of past and present Labor leaders - including Neville Wran and Bob Carr here in New South Wales - have disparaged the 'rail gauge' problem in industrial relations.
  The same is true of the union movement.  Let me quote the AWU's Bill Shorten in 2002: 'It is ridiculous [that] there are more than 130 pieces of state and federal legislation pertaining to industrial law.  Long service leave is a good example of the illogical variation with 16 separate acts.'
  I agree; it is ridiculous and illogical.
There are approximately 4000 awards in Australia, more than 1700 of them in state jurisdictions.  At the moment, both federal and state awards may cover different categories of employees at the same workplace.  Businesses with workplaces in more than one state have to deal with a number of award and tribunal systems.
The complexity created by multiple awards and jurisdictions is not an issue that is relevant only to those on awards.  As many federal certified agreements need to be read together with relevant awards, it also affects those on workplace agreements.
Too much of what happens revolves around jurisdictional issues arising from multiple systems and not what matters in a particular workplace.
At any time and on any given issue, the responsible jurisdiction can depend on the location of employment, occupation of the employee, the industry they work in, the corporate structure of a business, whether the employer has been 'roped into' a federal award, if there is a relevant State award, or whether a business is a member of a relevant employer association.
What should be settled issues in the workplace all too often become the subject of elaborate games of 'forum shopping' where a union creates a paper dispute in order to gain from another system what they have been denied or refused in their traditional area of coverage.
  A small minority may win from these games.  But the cost to the nation and to constructive and cooperative relationships at the workplace is enormous.  Apart from the dead-weight on productivity, multiple industrial relations systems also involve direct costs for taxpayers.  With the exception of Victoria, each State maintains separate tribunals, registries and supporting bureaucracies.  The taxes they soak up would be better spent on hospitals, roads and schools.
The complexity and uncertainty of different systems is bad enough.  But the regulatory creep in our State systems has the capacity to strangle enterprise and productivity.
In recent years, a number of State Labor Governments, urged on by their trade union constituency, have enacted laws which 'deem' independent contractors to be employees (subject to award conditions and liable to union recruitment) notwithstanding that they have no such desire.  Under Section 106 of the New South Wales Industrial Relations Act, for example, the state tribunal has the power to review 'any contract whereby a person performs work in any industry'.  It can involve itself in disputes that in any other circumstances would be deemed commercial and non-industrial.  This has nothing to do with States' rights.  It has everything to do with union muscle and overweening state power.  And it is why as part of our reforms we will build a firewall around the rights of independent contractors.
Let me stress that I believe there is a case for competitive federalism in some areas of public policy.  But in an area like workplace relations which goes to the heart of our national competitiveness the case is weak and unconvincing.
To those who say that a national system could be hijacked by the Labor Party, I say this is not a time to be timid.  To trust employers and employees in the workplace is to trust the Australian people.
  If we look at the experience in New Zealand, we find that while 85 per cent of people originally opposed labour market reform, 18 months after the changes 73 per cent of employees were either 'very satisfied' or 'satisfied' with their working conditions and terms of employment.
The Australian people know that when a Government acts in the national interest the path of roll-back is a road to nowhere.
We all heard the wailing and gnashing of teeth when Mr Beazley declared that Australia 'could face a meltdown on 1 July'.  He wasn't talking about the Government's majority in the Senate taking effect a few days ago.
He was talking about what would happen on 1 July 2000 when the GST came into force.  If the Parliament passes our workplace reform legislation we can confidently predict three things.
  The sun will rise in the east.  Australian workers will be in high demand.  And Mr Beazley will fall back on clich‚s and stand for nothing.
Prosperity with fairness
Over the past nine years, the Liberal and National Parties have worked hard to restore Australia's prosperity and ensure that it is spread throughout the community.
Millions of Australians on low and middle incomes have helped the Coalition win four elections.  We have not let them down in the past.  We will not cut them adrift in the future.
 I've said what these reforms look to do.  Let me say what they do not do:
* they do not abolish awards or cut award wages
* they do not abolish the right to join a union
* they do not stop a worker having a union bargain for them
* they do not abolish a right to strike
* they do not abolish the Industrial Relations Commission, and
 * they do not give employers the right to treat their workers poorly.
After these reforms, Australia's labour market will still be more regulated than those in the UK and New Zealand now presided over by Tony Blair and Helen Clark, respectively.
 To those who say that the Government is intent on sacrificing fairness in the name of wealth creation, I say this is a false choice for Australia.
  A fair-go relies on a strong economy that creates jobs and avoids recession.  And a strong, productive economy means a strong, sustainable social safety net for our fellow citizens who struggle to make ends meet.
  One need only look at the unemployment rates piling up year after year in countries such as France and Germany to see that rhetoric about social solidarity can ring exceedingly hollow to those without a job.  And let me remind you that no trade union, no government legislation, and no industrial tribunal protected the 1 million Australians thrown into unemployment by Labor's Great Recession of the early 1990s.
This Government believes in continuing economic reform, but in the Australian way that advances prosperity and fairness together.
Australia's journey to becoming a more open, competitive country has yielded some important policy lessons.  These are lessons we in the Coalition have learned and applied in government.
  We've learned that fiscal policy works best when it keeps the budget in balance over the economic cycle.  We've learned that monetary policy works best when it focuses on low inflation.
We've learned that labour market policies work best when they focus on raising productivity and creating jobs.
And we've learned that the best way to help those on low incomes is through the tax-benefit system.
Questions of fairness in relation to income are best judged at the level of household or family income. And on this score, Australia has one of the most progressive tax-benefit systems in the world.
A comprehensive safety net provides substantial assistance to low paid Australians, depending on their particular personal needs and family responsibilities.
  In nine years, the Coalition has delivered significant growth in disposable incomes to low and middle income earners from a combination of tax relief and increased family tax benefits.
  The OECD calculates that the average Australian production worker's disposable income (after tax and benefits) is now the second highest in the developed world.  For many Australian families, all Commonwealth tax is effectively rebated by the Family Tax Benefit system.
A family on a single income of $35,000 with two dependent children (one under five) currently receives more than $10,000 per year in family tax benefits.  They pay no net tax until their income reaches $41,808.  Some dual income families with two children now enjoy the equivalent of a combined tax-free threshold of up to $43,000 a year.
  And the bottom 60 per cent of households in Australia are all net gainers from the tax-benefit system with the highest net gains going to the lowest income earners.
  This is as it should be.  But a fair society relies on a prosperous economy with productive workplaces.  And this requires going the extra mile on workplace reform.
 Conclusion
We are now in the 15th year of an economic expansion that has restored peoples' belief in our capacity to succeed in a tough, competitive world.
A few years ago, at the time of the Asian financial crisis, Australia was dubbed a 'miracle' economy.  Of course, this was flattering.  And, of course, this was wrong.
This era of prosperity is a great national achievement, but it has nothing to do with miracles.   It is a legacy of two decades of reform by governments from both sides of politics; reforms that have unleashed the enterprise and initiative of the Australian people.
  On a Saturday night last October, in another Sydney ballroom not far from here, I said that I believed this country to be on the threshold of 'a new era of great achievement'.
  We will forge this era only by unleashing a new burst of productivity growth that, in turn, will benefit of all in our society.
The Australian people have shown time and again that they will accept sensible, long-term reforms that are in the national interest and that safeguard working families.
Time and again, this Government has met the test of sustaining prosperity with fairness.
We will again with our workplace reforms - the next logical step for a country that believes, not in economic miracles, but in itself.
[ends]


Well, thank you very much Mr Ken Mellman for those very warm words of welcome and a very concise statement of common values that bind the parties which represent some 170 million voters around the world. We have 26 party leaders, chairmen or presidential candidates and around this room we have prime ministers, ministers, members of parliament, deputies, European parliamentarians, senior legislators, youth representatives, political advisers and, very importantly, a host of campaigning experts. And can I echo immediately the reference that Mr Mellman made to the importance of helping emerging parties.
 Grappling for the first time with the experience and opportunity of democracy in their campaign techniques. I believe that this is one of the best things that the IDU can give to newly emerging parties in countries that are transitioning from a more restrictive political approach, to a more open democratic one. If I may be permitted to use the expression, some of the old and more mature political parties represented around this table have a special obligation in relation to campaign techniques. Because, it's not possible to do anything in public life as we all know, or do it effectively and completely, without the opportunity of office.
 Successful campaign techniques can make all the difference, as we know from our experience, and I think we have a special obligation to our colleagues to assist. I think the parties of the centre-right; representing which in the Australian language we call both the liberal tradition, meaning a classical liberal tradition, to be distinguished from the North American usage of that particular expression, as well as the conservative traditions. Our parties of the centre-right have a lot to learn from each other. We do represent different political systems; we represent different experiences. Over the last little while we've had our share of great successes and we've had our share of disappointments.
 Here in the United States, in Greece, in Ghana, in Croatia and in Denmark, and may I also say Australia, we've had great political successes. There were some defeats, as our British friends can testify, and there were a couple of near misses. A few more votes in Taiwan and Canada, and I think Canada is going to have an early rematch - a return bout - to use the boxing nomenclature fairly soon. And we are, of course, looking forward to the opportunities of victories in Chile, in New Zealand, in Germany, in Norway, in Sri Lanka and Honduras. All of those countries will have elections quite soon, and in each case we look for success and victory on the part of the countries of the centre-right.
 I want to say in concluding my response to those very generous words of welcome from Ken Mellman, that I share fully the emphasis that he has placed on the responsibility we have in a practical sense to try and expand the boundaries of democratic freedoms and opportunities around the world. There is a lot of negativity about political institutions and political systems at the present time from commentators and from those that don't necessarily share our common philosophy. But I think it can safely be said that democracy, all in all, has had a remarkably good decade in the lead up to 2005. We've seen the remarkable events in the Ukraine. We've seen the courageous efforts of the Iraqi people to embrace democracy in the face of the most fearful and fearsome intimidation. We've seen the election of a new leadership in the Palestinian territories. We have seen the emergence of the people's will to a degree not previously seen in the Lebanon. And we have seen, in my view, the most remarkable democratic transition of all in recent years, and that is in Indonesia, which is now the third largest democracy in the world, and the transition that has occurred in that country is truly remarkable. And the future of the democratic ethos and the institutions of democratic Indonesia will not only be important to the 230 million people of that country (the largest Islamic nation in the world), and of course a near neighbour to my own country, Australia, but, very importantly, a nation that has a proper and significant role in her immediate region.
 So, there's a lot to be optimistic about when it comes to democracy and it ought to be remembered that many of these things and many of these developments have their genesis in the strong and determined stand taken by two people that Ken Mellman mentioned, Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan. Both of whom were instrumental in not only the formation of the IDU but, more importantly even that that, they were instrumental in bringing about the most significant long-term political event of my lifetime, and that has been the collapse of Soviet Imperialism and Soviet Communism. And the simple articulation of the fundamental importance of individual and political freedom by both Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher was the greatest contribution they gave to their respective countries, and the greatest contribution that together they gave to remaking the political landscape of the world in the 1980's.
 So it's with that legacy, which is as contemporary as the day, it is with that legacy and that heritage that we meet, and it's our responsibility to push the boundaries of freedom in our own particular philosophical vein as best we can.
 I particularly welcome the representatives from parties that have been newly admitted and at this meeting we're formally admitting nine parties to our political family. I congratulate them, I wish them well, and I can assure them that on behalf of my party, and I know all the other parties represented around the table, that we will do everything we can to help and nurture their opportunities in the years ahead.
 I'd now like to introduce the discussion topic that will be the theme that runs through the agenda today, and that is our global agenda for freedom. The time for contributions is limited to four minutes because of the sheer number of speakers, but we certainly want to hear from members how they are doing in their respective countries, because every party and nation can contribute to the building of a better world. I'd like to call upon the first contribution, and that is from Grenada. I call upon the Prime Minister, Mr Keith Mitchell.
 [ends]  


Your Excellencies, Mr. Secretary, Ladies and Gentlemen...Rupert, thank you very much for those extremely generous remarks. Might I say when speaking of citizens of the world, few people on the planet qualify so fulsomely for that description, than Rupert Murdoch. And the honoured place that the Murdoch family has occupied in the life and the affairs of my country over a long period of time is deeply respected and greatly appreciated. And, Rupert, through his life and his effort, particularly in recent decades, has exemplified all of the things that our two countries have in common, and has made an enormous contribution to cementing the good relations between the people of Australia and the people of the United States.
Mr. Secretary, I thank you very much for honouring Janette and myself with your attendance tonight. To the Color Party of United States Marines, which reminds us, as Rupert said, of the fact that since the battle of  Hamel in France in 1918 on the fourth of July, the forces of the United States and Australia have been engaged together in every significant conflict. That particular battle which lasted only 93 minutes and introduced new methods of combat into WWI - and, incidentally, the commanding officer on that occasion was an Australian, the great Sir John Monash - was the beginning of an association that has endured through the years, and I agree is stronger now than at any time in the history of relations between our two countries. And what makes it strong is what we stand for and what we believe in. And more than ever, in the history of the relationship between the two countries, it is important to assert the commonality of our values and our common commitment to the principles of freedom and openness, not only in our societies, but societies around the world.
Those who see the resurgence of terrorism as simply a manifestation of the divide between the rich and the poor, the outcry of the oppressed and the downtrodden, misunderstand the character of the challenge that our societies face. The terrorists' challenge is based upon a perverted and totally invalid depiction of a great world religion. It is not based on principle, it is not based on a legitimate desire for liberation or freedom, and in that sense it is the enemy of all of us.
 Fifty-four people so far have died as a result of the terrorist attacks in London. As The Australian newspaper poignantly pointed out last Saturday, one of those who died was an Australian citizen of Vietnamese origin. His parents came to Australia after the end of the Vietnam War and in difficult circumstances they made a life for themselves and for their young son Sam. He went to University; he became an IT specialist. He embraced the opportunities that his immigrant parents had given him by choosing Australia as a place in which to live. Isn't it symbolic and doesn't it tell us something, that he was the success story of a minority in a welcoming country. He died at the hands of the son of other immigrants who had gone to Great Britain as part of the great migration from India and Pakistan in the 1950's and 60's. That particular young man chose the path of murder and terrorism, and what it illustrates is that we are fighting an ideology. We're not simply dealing with an outburst of legitimate anger against economic deprivation and political punishment.
 I speak to you at a time when there is so much that we should be pleased about in the relationship between our two countries. I'm conscious that in this room tonight are many people who played a major part in securing the passage through the American Congress with record majorities of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement. I want to pay tribute to the work of my own Embassy, Australia's Embassy, our then Ambassador Michael Thawley, to the Chamber of Commerce, and so many of the Senators and Congressmen and women who worked so very hard in a great cause.
 I am very conscious of the fact that the majorities of the agreement secured are symbolic of, not only the expression of support for the substance of the agreement, but also of the character and quality and the importance of the relationship between our two societies.
 I believe that the relations between Australia and the United States will grow ever closer as the years go by. And that association and that friendship will grow without prejudice to the very important linkages that Australia has with different parts of the world. I set myself an objective in foreign policy when I became Prime Minister, and that was to rebalance our relations between different parts of the world.
 I take the view that Australia occupies a unique intersection of history and geography. We are a nation of essentially western European origin with very deep and abiding links with many countries in Europe particularly, but not only, Great Britain and Ireland. But we're a nation that is placed by geography and circumstance in the Asian-Pacific region. And the modern Australia has been greatly enriched by immigration from Asia. My own constituency in Sydney comprises some fifteen per cent of citizens of ethnic Chinese decent. But we're also a nation that has deep and abiding links for many, many reasons with the people of the United States. And I regard it as the role and responsibility of the Prime Minister of Australia to ensure that all of those linkages and all of those traditions are kept in good order, and none more importantly than, of course, our relationship with the United States.
The Free Trade Agreement represents an expression of optimism about the future of that relationship. Of course it didn't provide the two sides with everything they wanted, but what it has done and what the subsequent passage of the E-3 visa legislation, which I particularly want to express my thanks to the American Congress for, what it's done is to say to the rest of the world that there is a special character to this relationship. And as our economy and yours becomes more enmeshed as the years go by, particularly in the service sector, people will look back on the passage of this Free Trade Agreement and remark at what a remarkable, far-sighted contribution it's made to relations between the two countries.
But that Free Trade Agreement will only be fully exploited and fully developed if the economies of our two countries continue to grow, and if successive governments in Australia and the United States continue to rise to the challenge of economic reform. The Australian economy is now enjoying its fifteenth year of expansion. That hasn't happened by accident. It's happened because over the years governments of both political persuasions in Australia, and I have never been reluctant to give credit to former governments in Australia for some of the reforms carried out in the 1980's, because governments of both political persuasions in Australia have undertaken far-reaching and significant economic reforms. Tariff reform; getting the budget back into balance and surplus; which has been a hallmark of the work carried out by my government, particularly the contribution that my Treasurer, Peter Costello, has made to that process; labour market reform, and I will return to that again in a moment; fundamental taxation reform some five years ago; and, of course, importantly, financial deregulation carried out by the former government, but strongly supported by the then coalition opposition.
Now that has produced the strong economy that we have at the present time. And right at the moment the government is embarked upon a process of further reforming our industrial relations system. Of bringing about further needed flexibility in our labour markets. We've come a long way in the last eight or nine years in relation to that but I believe that we must go further. Some people are saying to me in Australia 'John, everything's going well...unemployment is at a 30 year low, the budget's in balance, real wages are high, interest rates are relatively low, inflation is under control...why do you want to do anything?  Why don't you just let the economy run itself?  Get out of the way. Don't bother anybody.  I know that's a very tempting thing...to be told that the economy is going so well that you don't need to do anything.  The reality is, of course, that it is an illusory strength, because the process of economic reform is like the runner who is pursuing an ever-receding finishing line. You never reach it. But if you don't keep running you don't try to reach it then others are going to go past you because they are going to keep their resolve to reach the ever-receding finishing line. And the reason why we have to undertake further reform is to guarantee that the prosperity that we now have and enjoy, will be there in five and ten years and twenty years time. And I know and I think we all know that when a country believes that the economic reform job has been finished that is the time that the economy of that country and the success and the strength and the commitment of that government begins to recede.
We need a more flexible labour markets so that in five years time we will have an unemployment rate that's even lower than the five percent of today, because the sort of world in which we live does produce the circumstances of that ever-receding finishing line.  Unless we continue to reform and we continue reform and we continue to change then we're going to lose the place that we now occupy in the world.  There's a tendency in our countries, as I'm sure there is in any country of similar comparison, to believe that they somehow or other completed the process of economic reform.  The truth, of course, is that we haven't.  And if you look around the world and you examine some of the different economies of the world, it's probably in the area of labour market composition and labour market change that you see some of the starkest comparisons.  There's quite a debate going on in Europe at the present time, in the wake of the rejection of the referendum by the French and Dutch publics and if you look at the rigid labour markets of Germany and France and Spain and you compare those labour markets with those of the United Kingdom, of New Zealand, of the United States and also of Australia where unemployment levels are half what they are in Germany and France and the reason overwhelmingly is that those countries haven't carried out the process of labour markets deregulation.  And if I may say one of the most important and cleverest and most valuable things the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Tony Blair, did when he became Prime Minister in 1997 was to tell the Trade Union congress of that country that the labour market reforms of the Thatcher government were right for Britain and they should be retained and that, as much as anything else, I believe, has contributed to the maintenance of the strengths of the British economy.  So I am very much for ongoing reform.  I lead a government that's committed to ongoing economic reform and a government that does not believe that you can ever imagine that that process has been completed.
I would like to say just two other things to you tonight and they're both related to one of the challenges that the developed and rich world has and that is to respond to the dreadful poverty and depravation particularly of large parts of Africa.  We've seen a lot in the margins and at the meeting of the G8 countries in Gleneagles.  We've seen a lot about the desire of many to close the gap between the rich and the poor.  Everybody of any common humanity will want to see that occur and to the extent that people argue that we should adopt policies to close that gap then I totally support them.  But in examining how you close that gap, I think it's a fallacy to imagine that the problem is simply solved by increasing the level of direct overseas aid from the wealthier countries to the poorer countries.  Strong, properly delivered aid programs will play a significant role in reducing disadvantage and poverty in the poorest countries of the world.  But I would argue there are two other things of even greater importance than direct overseas aid.  The first of those is the breaking down of trade barriers.  It is beyond argument that the value to developing countries of removing the most pernicious of the trade barriers maintained by developed countries would do infinitely more to help those countries than would increases in overseas aid.  In all the economic experience of the last forty or fifty years tells us that those countries that have enjoyed the most dramatic improvements in their living standards and their economic growth are those countries that have benefited from reductions and removals of trade barriers and trade restraints.
  I would argue very very strongly that one of the greatest contributions that the developed world can make towards reducing poverty is to address the implications and the impact of many trade barriers that shut out opportunities or retard opportunities for developing countries to export their produce particularly, but not only, in the area of agriculture.
The other issue, of course, is what is politely called the challenge of governance.  What they're really talking about, of course, is the prevalence of corruption and the belief, understandably, by the citizens of goodwill in countries such as the United States and Australia.  A belief that  unless something was done to improve governance, to reduce or eliminate corruption, then they're not particularly keen that they're hard earned dollars taking by governance in taxation are used to not assist the suffering of the poor and the deprived but rather the lifestyles of some of those who control the activities that go on inside those countries.  Yes, I agree with Sir Bob Geldolf and all of those who gathered in his wake and obviously touched the hearts of many, particularly the young, in all of our nations.  I agree with you that the world does have a moral obligation but is has to be a moral obligation that is delivered calmly and with a proper understanding that we can do a lot more than by addressing trade imperfections and we have every right to insist that standards of governance are properly delivered and that is a requirement and a demand legitimately made by those who elect us to government and those who see their taxes, and want to see their taxes properly used.
  And that of course leads inevitably to a point I want to make about the importance of the trade negotiations that are going on as part of the DOHA round.  There'll be a major meeting of ministers in Hong Kong at the end of this year and it is very important that we make progress in DOHA because if we don't, I think there'll be a significant collapse of confidence in the capacity of the world acting multilaterally to solve some of our most deep-seeded problems.  And I think the opportunities for this to occur at the present time are there and I hope that all of those who bring influence and the United States obviously, such leadership as can be given within the European Union at the present time, Japan, Australia as the leader of the Cairns Group and all the other countries that will go there.  We do have a particular responsibility because if we can get a breakthrough in relation to trade barriers affecting the least developed countries in the world, I do think that will make a greater contribution than perhaps anything else to achieving the goal of closing that gap.
Can I finally say to all of you how much Janette and I are happy to be back in Washington.  The bonds of friendship between Australia and the United States are very deep.  They are treasured bonds and because they are based on a common view of the way in which we should live our lives, a belief that the worth of somebody is based upon the contribution that he or she makes and the character of the person and not according to where they were born or what the colour of their skin is or what their religion is but simply on their intrinsic worth as an individual.  Values that tell us that strong, united, properly functioning families represent the greatest social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.  And a belief, a very strong belief, that the bases of national wealth is individual effort and individual capacity.  That competitive capitalism has still been and will always be the most effective engine for maintaining economic growth and economic strength.
Now with some variations of the margins, according to your political tastes, and those things do represent many of the common values that bind our two countries together.  Rupert Murdoch, in his introduction referred to the fact that I was in this city on the 11th September.  You'll remember that he and I had a meal the night before on the 10th September.  Having been here I was deeply touched by the impact of that event on the people of the United States and I've told my fellow Australians time and time again that if you want to understand the American view on terrorism, if you want to understand the way in  which it transformed attitudes in this country, you have to have really been there.  And I struck and touched by a sense of outrage and understandable horror with which those events were received in this country.  I think the war against terror will on for a long time and their will be many people along the way who will tell us that there is some clever way in solving it, that some how or other you say you're sorry for who  you are; that you imagine that  by curling yourself up into a little ball and going away into a corner nobody will notice you.  I think many experts in this area will tell you that there's one thing that a terrorist despises and will punish even more severely than they might punish other behaviour and that is weakness.  And those who imagine that you can bargain and covenant with terrorists and buy yourself immunity from future attack misunderstand the nature of the perverted minds with which we're dealing.
 Our two nations have been through many things together, we owe a lot to each other.  We're more than good friends, we have a deep and abiding alliance but most importantly we share a common view of the kind of society we want.  We want a society built on a pursuit of individual liberty and capacity.  We want a society where the most important social institution is the family and we want a society where in a sense there's nothing better than to start your life with nothing, to work hard to get a proper reward for your effort and to give your children a better start in life than you had.  That's always been very much part of the ethos of the United States and it's been very much a part of the ethos of the Australian people.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you very much for the honour that you have done me tonight.  I count it as one of the real achievements of the time that I've been Prime Minister of Australia.  In a small way I have made a contribution to an even deeper and richer understanding and an even stronger set of bonds between our people and our two very great countries.  I think the best of the relationship, good as though it's been in the past, lies in the future and the contribution that many people in this room have made to that relationship is one that I salute and one that I thank them for.
Janette and I warmly thank you for your hospitality, it's great to be back in Washington and I wish all of you great good fortune for the future.
  [ends]


Air Chief Marshal Houston, Lieutenant Colonel Noble, ladies and gentleman. Can I say how tremendously pleased I am to have been able to come and to say a few words of thank you for the job that you are doing on behalf of Australia. I had the opportunity in Darwin of saying farewell to many of you, the work you are doing here, the way in which you are building the good name and the good reputation of the Australian military forces, not only here in Iraq but around the world, is something that the entire country is very proud of. You are going about it in a typical Australian way - very professional, very dedicated, but in a fashion that is sensitive and sympathetic to the interests of the local people. Our mission in Iraq is to stabilise, secure and build so that the Iraqi people in the not too distant future can manage in entirely through their own efforts and through their own hands, manage the affairs of this country.
I saw the Iraqi Prime Minister in Baghdad earlier today and told him that Australia would continue to support the drive by Iraq towards establishing a secure and democratic state and the progress that's been made in this part of Iraq, which as you know is more stable than many other parts of the country, is a great tribute to you, it's a tribute to the coalition partners that you are working with, and it is important that part of your mission is to provide a secure environment for our Japanese friends and I know that is great appreciated by the Japanese Government and the Japanese people.
But importantly of all, I send to you a message of pride and gratitude and respect from your fellow Australians, you do us proud. We have never had a war-like military tradition we Australians, we only deploy military force in a right and a just cause and we do it in a way that is sympathetic to the concerns and interests of local people and I warmly thank all of you for that. I know the conditions aren't anything but challenging, it is quite hot, but I think the way in which you have set about it in your typically cheerful fashion is absolutely fantastic.  May I say that what you have been able to do here, which of course replicates what was done 6000 miles away in Lord's, I was able to see the Saturday, I always feel guilty about saying that to all of you men and women, but can I say that the Australian victory at Lord's was consistent with the resounding victory that the Task Group had here and I want to congratulate the team on that. Remember that when the Australian forces trained in Egypt in World War I, before going to Gallipoli, one of the memorable stories that came from that was that they played cricket in front of the pyramids and you are carrying on an absolutely wonderful Australian tradition.
I am very proud of you, I am very grateful, I thank you very very warmly for everything that you've done, your country men and women are very proud of you and we hope to have you home, all of you, safe and sound, with a mission well and truly accomplished. Now before I finish I would like to make a presentation and there is one of your number, and I think her name was Brooke Haxell and she was a member of the Nippers in the Mona Vale Surf Life Saving Club, and Brooke I'd like you to accept this on behalf of the Task Group, I think have a rough idea that you have a rough idea where it might have came from but it's just a small token of my appreciation and I have endorsed it "To AMTG, thank you for such a fantastic job." And I hope that you will give this a very significant pride of place and is a little token of our appreciation and I present this on behalf of the Government.
Again, thank you very much, you make me very proud and more importantly you make you fellow Australians very proud, you are doing an absolutely fantastic job in our name, thank you.
 [ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Ron Evans, Margaret Jackson, the Chairman of Qantas, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. And can I say commence my remarks by paying my respects to the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place.
 This gathering is historic for the game of Australian Football. It's very symbolic and it's also for me a moving occasion because the one great indigenous game of Australia recognises for the first time the massive contribution made by the indigenous people of Australia to the game of Australian Football.
We are known quite rightly as a sports loving nation. And as you all know I have many sporting passions myself and I'm therefore very honoured to have been asked to come today and to say a few words, and to support an occasion and an event which I think is very important in the sporting story and the sporting history of Australia. And in doing that, I want to pay very special tribute to the Australian Football League. I don't think it does an injustice or is unfair to any of the other great sports of our nation to say that the Australian Football League has probably done more than any other sporting organisation to further the cause of the complete involvement, and the complete acceptance and recognition of indigenous Australians in your sport.
There is something that Aussie Rules has done that perhaps other sports haven't done-although there've tried -quite so well. And the evidence will be unveiled in a little while when the Indigenous Team of the Century is announced. And as a sports fanatic myself there's always something fascinating and exciting about teams of the century-be it in Australian Rules, be it in Cricket, be it in any other sport. And everybody will have their views as to whether the selectors have got it right or got it badly wrong. But one thing that we will all agree on and that is enormous value to the unity of our own nation to have this massive involvement and respected involvement of Indigenous Australians in Australian Football.
From those days when Jo Johnson played for Fitzroy, just over a hundred years ago, we have seen a growing involvement of Indigenous Australians. But it's really been in the last few years that massive efforts have been made and those massive efforts have yielded great results. To have one in ten of the elite Australian footballers being indigenous is an enormous tribute, not only to the sport but also to the prowess and the athleticism of our indigenous fellow Australians.
And this has followed a very conscious effort, projects such as the Clontarf Project, which is designed to attract the participation and the involvement of young indigenous players in remote areas of Australia is an example that all sports in Australia can follow.
I don't want an occasion like this to single out too many people. But I do want to pay particular tribute to two. I want to pay tribute to Michael Long, who as you know at the end of last year decided to take a long walk to Canberra to come and talk to me about indigenous issues. As you know I do a bit of walking myself, not as long in one stretch that Michael did, but it was a wonderful demonstration of the man's spirit and the commitment he has to his people, but also the commitment he has to unity and cohesion of our nation. And I was delighted to receive him and to have a long talk about issues where I think we may be able to work together for the betterment of the indigenous people of Australia.
And of course in the contemporary playing scene, we have Adam Goodes, one of the two indigenous players that have won the Brownlow Medal. I mention those two as people very much of the contemporary scene, but without of course denigrating from the massive contribution of people like Polly Farmer-not only to the story of Australian Football but also the particular story of the contribution that indigenous Australians have made to the development of this wonderful game.
As I looked at that video I reflected not only on the enormous changes that have occurred to the involvement and acceptance and capacity of indigenous players in Australian Football, but the way in which football in this country, particularly the Australian version of football has spread on a truly national basis. The way in which when I grew up the divisions between the football codes were a lot more marked than what they are now, and the ready acceptance of Australian Football all over our nation now, is a tribute to the leadership of the game and is also a tribute to the players over the years, particularly in recent times.
But there is a special character about today. And that special character is that in a very symbolic fashion and a very genuine fashion, the Australian nation salutes not only our great indigenous game, Australian Rules, but particularly salutes the contribution of the first citizens of Australia to our only indigenous football code.
I congratulate the Australian Football League on this gathering. I thank the indigenous people of Australia for the contribution that they have made, not only to the enjoyment of Australian Rules Football, but the contribution that they have made over the years to the enjoyment of all sports by a nation that finds in sport, a national event that binds it together like nothing else.
I thank all of you and I wish the AFL and all who support it and all who play with it, great good fortune in the years ahead.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Councillor Treloar, Barry Wakelin, my colleague and the Federal Member for Grey, and my State Parliamentary colleagues, members of local councils, ladies and gentlemen. I'm very conscious that I'm today visiting an area and addressing a group of people who in recent months have suffered great tragedy and great loss and there are a number of people here today who have been directly, in a very painful way, affected by that loss. And I want to say on behalf of all of your fellow Australians that although some months have now passed since that terrible fire and the loss that you suffered, the natural thoughts and sympathy of Australians towards you remains very strong.
 Australians are a very generous people. We have a strong instinct of helping our own when they need assistance and we have a strong desire to gather around those of our own who are affected in times of trouble. And that of course was the case earlier this year. And I want to say on behalf of the Federal Government, and I certainly acknowledge the role and the contribution of the state government and local government, that we will continue to provide the assistance that we should in accordance with all of the arrangements we have with State Governments. And I don't want to go to any of the technicalities of that, this isn't the occasion, but simply to say disaster relief arrangements that are in place all over Australia involve, after a certain level of loss, a very significant financial contribution from the Federal Government, and that was available on this occasion as it has been on all other occasions. Could I also say what a magnificent job that Barry Wakelin did in keeping his Federal colleagues informed, and in representing to me and to so many others, the impact of the terrible tragedy on the Eyre Peninsular.
 This gathering, and indeed the response of your community, is a celebration of one of the great strengths of Australian society, and that is the volunteer spirit. People who observe Australians, and people who make commentary upon the Australian character, talk about how laconic and undemonstrative we can be. But what they sometimes overlook is that we have a practical compassion which is second to none of any communities around the world. And when people really need help, be it Australians or be it people in other countries who have suffered great loss, there is an enormous capacity on the part of the Australian people to respond and respond generously. And I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all of the magnificent community services that are represented here today. They really are the backbone of the survival of communities when they are touched by disaster and touched by tragedy. Firefighters are admired around Australia, whether it's here in South Australia, or in New South Wales, or Western Australia. All parts of our country, in different ways, have been affected. And their response is quite magnificent. And never forgetting of course the emergency services, the police, the ambulance services, the religious leaders and figures, the wonderful work of bodies such as the Salvation Army, the Country Women's Association and so the list goes on; all come together in a marvellous, spontaneous way to respond to disaster and respond to tragedy.
 And in the few moments that I've had already to talk to people, and after this short speech I want to meet as many of you as I can, I have been touched and impressed by the spirit of hope and optimism by people who lost so much earlier this year but are now looking in a bright and optimistic way to the future. Can I simply say that I admire the spirit of this community. I respect enormously its resilience. I understand its loss. And I pay great tribute to the men and women of this part of Australia, who have responded in such a wonderful, effective and resilient way to the great tragedy that overcame your community.
I said to a few people that driving towards this meeting this morning, I had seen, ironically enough, greener fields than I've seen in any part of Australia over the last six or nine months. It's amazing the recuperative capacity of nature. It is extraordinary how green it is compared with other parts of Australia, and yet ironically it comes only a few months after the devastation of the fires at the beginning of this year.
My friends thank you very much for having me. I wish this community well. I thank you for coming along in such numbers and allowing me an opportunity to say a few simple words of tribute to a community that has demonstrated a great backbone and has been an exemplar of the Australian spirit of resilience and recovery, which has been a characteristic of our nation and a characteristic of our people over so many years. I admire you and I pay tribute to you, and I thank you very warmly for having me in your home area and greeting me in that normal, friendly, open, Australian way.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mr Mayor, Barry Wakelin, his wife Tina, ladies and gentleman, it's a great pleasure to be back in Whyalla. I think I last came to this city as Prime Minister probably about five or six years ago and I have of course visited on many occasions in different disguises over the years, and what the Mayor was saying about the magnificent investment by OneSteel in the future of Whyalla and how reassuring that investment is - is really a metaphor for the way in which this city, has in many senses, has been an example to communities around Australia, as our economic needs, or our economic structure has changed. The way in which the city and the people of Whyalla have adjusted to the changed economic circumstances of Australia, and they have faced those changes in a positive fashion and as a result, the city looks forward to a very bright and stable and prosperous future.
 I am very happy of course to note along the way that the position the Federal Government took to support the construction of the Darwin to Alice Springs Railway, meant that a large number of additional jobs were created in and around, or maintained in and around Whyalla, and of course the production of steel needed in connection with that railway provided a very valuable boost to this city. The economy of Australia of course has changed a lot over the last 10 or 15 years, most of those changes have been for the better, but in the process of change it's always challenging and there is always a tendency for communities to say well I have had something in the past, I need to hang onto that, because it gave me assurance and it gave me confidence. The only difficulty with that attitude is that because the world circumstances have changed, it's never possible entirely to hang on to what was the case in the past, and what I think the people of Whyalla have done and I pay tribute to the community, I pay tribute to the companies, I pay tribute to the contribution that unions also have made to the changes that have meant that the city has altered the way it operates. It's maintained a strong manufacturing base that has diversified into service industries and of course as I move around here, I am conscious that this audience comprises people connected with rural industry with service industries, with manufacturing industry, of course it also comprises people who represent all the many community organisations that make a community, make a town, and make a nation strong and unified.
 I have just, as you know, come back a visit from a number of countries and the last port of call I had was to visit the Australian forces stationed at Al Muthanna in southern Iraq and leaving aside people's views about Iraq and let me say that everybody agrees that our men and women are doing a magnificent job. Just before coming here I dropped by at a sheep station in the Eyre Peninsula and one of those that was devastated by the fires earlier this year and I met the three shearers and one of them stopped for a moment and he said how were the boys in southern Iraq, he said I think they are doing and absolutely fantastic job. I think he spoke for all Australians in expressing our admiration for the outstanding work that the men and women of the Australian Defence Force do wherever they are sent anywhere in the world.
 But the strongest impression  I get when I go abroad, hopefully doing some good things for Australia, the strongest impression I get is that I am privileged to be Prime Minister of a country that is respected and admired around the world for a number of things. It is respected and admired around the world because it is regarded as a stable and peaceful democratic society. It is respected around the world because we have a very strong economy, our unemployment rate, along with the unemployment rates of Britain and the United States and New Zealand, are the envy of countries in Europe. You go to France and Germany, the unemployment rate is 10% or 11% which is double what it is here in Australia. We are respected because we've undertaken a lot of economic change and reform over the last 15 years and we've been able as a result of that to strengthen our economy and to diversify the character of our economy and diversify our export base.
 We are also respected around the world because we are a friendly open people. I had the opportunity when I was in London of having a talk over dinner with Sebastian Coe who (of long distance running fame) who is the Chairman of the successful bid by London to secure the Olympic Games for 2012. I mean you remember, it's almost been blotted from our recollection because the terrible terrorist attack on the London Underground occurred 24 hours after London had won that bid, but Sebastian had said to me that he was very grateful for the help that he'd been given in putting together the London bid from people connected with the Sydney Games in 2000. He said that one of the things he was determined to emulate at the London Games of 2012 was the wonderful use of volunteers which were in my mind as somebody who as you may have noticed, attended the Games fairly frequently to cheer for the wonderfully successful Australian athletes, the friendliness and the openness of those volunteers was one of the absolute highlights of those Games.
 So on all of those scores, Australia is now regarded as a nation respected, a nation listened to, a nation regarded as open and friendly, but also a nation  regarded as very confident in itself. You may have noticed the other night, when our Foreign Minister Alexander Downer was in Vientiane at that meeting of the East Asia Summit when they all had to sing, and I said to Alexander Downer when I spoke to him over the weekend, I said I will only go to that as Prime Minister to that meeting in Kuala Lumpur in December of this year on one condition, and that is I don't have to sing. I know my limits and I intend to stick to my day job and I have no false pretence, I have no false pretensions about any of my entertainment capacity.
 But Alexander was asked that question by one of the journalists from one of the countries and the journalist said to them, now Mr Downer that Australia is joining the East Asian Summit, 'do you feel an East Asian?' And he said, 'no', he said 'I feel an Australian', and I thought that is exactly what he should feel, that is exactly what he should always have felt. We went through a rather silly phase a few years ago in this country of wondering whether we were Asian or East Asian or South Asian, or European, or western or whatever and all the time we were something that people have always recognised, they have for decades, and that is that we are Australians, and we have some distinctive characteristics of our own which the rest of the world undeniably recognises and it's a great feeling to know that the characteristics of the nation you represent, are so widely admired and so widely respected.
Can I say my friends that this gathering is like many gatherings I have the privilege of addressing as I go around Australia. It's a gathering of people who have come together to make a community and to make a town and to provide that solid mass of identity and support that keeps the Australian nation going. We are a great volunteer society and without the volunteers we wouldn't achieve all the things we want to achieve. I've tried in the time that I've been Prime Minister to promote the notion of what I call the social coalition. When you hear the word coalition, you tend to think of it in political terms. I'm talking here not of it being in political terms, but being in social terms. There are a lot of things that we need to do in our community and we are a wealthy nation, we are a very lucky country, but there is still a lot of people in our midst who need help and no one section of the society can do it on its own. The Federal Government can't do everything on its own, the State Government can't, the Local Council can't, individual organisations, magnificent though they are, and I met some people in the short time I've been here from the St Vincent De Paul Society, a wonderful organisation that for decades has provided relief and support to the needy in our community. Those organisations can't do it on their own, but if we work together, if we provide the financial resources of the Government, if we provide the on the ground compassionate personal commitment of individuals, if we provide the wealth of experience that great welfare organisations have acquired over the years and if we tap the philanthropic spirit of individual Australians and individual business men an women, we can together as a coalition, we can tackle so many of these problems.
  I have noticed over the past few years, a growing incidence of how a business organisation, a welfare organisation and also involving often financial support from the Government, they'll come together to solve a problem, where as 20 years ago they tried to do it on their own and they saw themselves as working separately and apart and I think that notion of a social coalition is spreading because the reality is that the more I see of the Australian community, the more I believe that we really do all need each other, we can't achieve these things on our own and yours is a community that has done that and yours is a community that has demonstrated the great value of people sinking their differences and ignoring their different backgrounds in order to work together to achieve some common public and community aspirations.
 The last thing I want to say to you and I'd then like to resume my wander around the room to meet everybody, is to commend the magnificent job that Barry Wakelin does as your Federal Member. Barry has been your incredibly energetic member since 1993 which is only 20, what 12 years ago, and he's done an absolutely magnificent job - 20, I am sorry, its 12 years ago, you are only a young fella, I came in in 1974. So can I just say that Barry does a terrific job, this is a very big electorate, my electorate is 8 1/2 square miles or a bit less, its one of those pocket handkerchiefs sized electorates in metropolitan Sydney, very very small. Barry's is a very big electorate, it covers most of South Australia and it's not easy to represent an electorate that, you've got to understand the diverse needs of farmers, of heavy manufacturing industry, of the fishing industry, of small rural communities, and of small outer urban communities as well. He does a fantastic job and I very warmly commend to all of you the very great job he does on your behalf in Federal Parliament. It is great to be back in Whyalla, I congratulate again, the spirit of this town, has changed with the times, has secured its economic future, as a result and is recognised that the only that you can preserve prosperity is to take advantage of the opportunities in a changing world.
I'll finish on this note, people often say to me when I go abroad, why is it that the Australian economy has had 15 years of unbroken economic growth? Why is it that the Australian economy is so strong, what are the reasons and I say there are many reasons and I even presume quietly on occasions to give my Government a little bit of the credit for it too. But I said the main reason, overwhelmingly is that the individual Australian worker, and the individual Australian business man and woman has proven themselves to be remarkably adaptable. Australians are an incredibly adaptable people, we are not hidebound we are not people who are governed by too may pre-disposed attitudes because of our essentially classless society that we can adapt to changed circumstances.  I have watched the Australian economy and the Australian people over the last 20 years with fascination and I have seen them change their ways of work, I have seen them adapt and acquire, not only a capacity for, but a deep commitment to the hospitality and entertainment industry, something that a generation ago, Australians felt totally alien in being involved in, and we have changed and we have adapted and that's been one of our great strengths. So I would say that the adaptability of the individual Australian, more than anything else that has been responsible for the remarkable economic success of this nation of ours and it's been demonstrated here in Whyalla and I congratulate all of you for it, thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen. I start by congratulating the Public Service Commission on the innovation which is represented by these Ministerial Conversations. This is the first time in the almost 31 years, or more than 31 years, that I've been a member of parliament, nine and half years as Prime Minister and then previously in other ministerial capacities, and as Leader of the Opposition, that I've actually had the opportunity of addressing in a serious gathering the interaction between the political and advisory arms of the Government, and the opportunity to engage in this kind of discourse, and I think it is a wonderful innovation. And if it does lead to an even better understanding of the respective roles within the broad Government firmament of the political arm of government, and the advisory one, then that will be a great thing for the people of Australia.
I do start my remarks by genuinely paying tribute to the quality of the Australian Public Service. You may think well he would say that, wouldn't he? A natural diplomatic, rather meaningless thing to say at the commencement of an address, but one of things that I have been able to do, especially in the time that I've been Prime Minister, is to see something of the operation of the higher levels of bureaucracies in other parts of the word, particularly but not only in the United States, the United Kingdom and New Zealand. And whilst not for a moment suggesting that the quality of the Public Service in those three countries and others is inferior or poor, it is fair to say that the quality of the Public Service in this country is the equal of, or better than any, in my contact with them elsewhere in the world.
But that remark is also based upon some nine and half years of policy and administrative interaction with the Public Service in Australia, during a period of time where there has been major reform in a very significant number of areas. And I do want to record that my very strong belief, and I know it's a belief that is shared by the Secretary of my own Department, that the capacity of the Commonwealth Public Service to provide objective advice remains unimpaired, and strong, and contrary to some of the popular myths and legends that have developed over the years. Having said that of course it is pointless to pretend that the environment in which in the Commonwealth Public Service operates now is essentially the same as it was 30 years ago. One of the things that I did when I was coming home from overseas, in fact the flight from Abu Dhabi to Singapore, was to look again after a period of some 22 years at the Kennedy-Miller programme, the 'Dismissal', which is now being produced in DVD-I hadn't seen it for 22 years and I was reminded again what an outstanding depiction John Stanton delivered of one of my erstwhile predecessors as Prime Minister of Australia.  But what was brought home to me in that, even necessarily colourful and I think reasonably accurate depiction of the events was the changed environment in which I think the Public Service and the Government now interact with each other.
  Tenure of course is dramatically different than what it was 30 years ago. There is of course a sharply increased role for ministerial advisers. It's fair to say that the era of ministerial advisers began in earnest with the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972, and I don't pass any negative comment in that, I simply observe that as a matter of historical record, and has continued in different ways unabated.
 I know there are some in the Public Service who lament that development. My experience is that overwhelmingly though, the quality of ministerial advisers is high, and the proper protocols have been established in ministerial offices for respectful and professional interaction, between ministerial advisors and departments, then that works once again to the benefit of good outcomes.
Many of the ministerial advisors, and certainly the case with my own Chief of Staff, are of course former professional officers in Government Departments-that is not a pre-requisite but it is often a valuable addition, and often produces a smooth and professional understanding between the private office and the Department.
But like every section of the society in which we live the Public Service is now more accountable and it must operate more transparently. So of course the is and does, the political level of Government, the degree of media scrutiny of the political arm of Government has increased one hundred fold since I came to the Old Parliament House in May of 1974, and has even increased dramatically in the nine and a half years that I've been Prime Minister. But we're not going to turn back the clock on that and I don't argue that we should.  That is the world in which we now all live and we all must learn to work with it, to respond to it, and to ensure that it doesn't impede in any way our obligations and professional duties.
Public Service advice now is infinitely more contestable, not only within departments, within the Public Service and the Government itself, because there are now so many issues and polices that require a whole of government response. Public Service advice is now infinitely more accountable within the broader community. I was saying to Ken Henry a moment ago that when I delivered my first Budget as Treasurer in 1978, the Government of course had available to it the advice of the Department of Treasury, the Reserve Bank of Australia in putting together the Budget, and of course the Department of Finance. But in 1978 the alternative sources of commentary and advice were pretty minimal compared with what they are now. There was no Access Economics, there were not the plethora of independent economic units within banks and other financial institutions, essentially post Budget commentary came from the economic section of the old bank of New South Wales and from the last Harold Bell at the AMP. And of course that didn't represent the level of commentary and contestability that exists now.
 I think it is fair to say in defence, and I know they say they never need any defending, in the defence of the Treasury and the Reserve Bank, that my experience over the last nine and half years has been that the greater contestability and the greater volume of economic commentary in the community that we now have has not in any way diminished the professional accuracy of the advice tendered by those two bodies, in fact if one looks at the economic predictions that have been made in the main over the last nine and half years, the Treasury and the Reserve Bank, although with different degrees of emphasis on different occasions, I'm sure I should add have been extremely accurate and extremely professional.
 It is inevitable when one thinks of the interaction between the Public Service and the political arm of government, that in attitudes and to a degree in culture and certainly in day to day practice, departments will follow the lead of government at a political level. If ministers are cooperating, if Cabinet is working together effectively in pursuing policy change, then that will be reflected across the Public Service.
 The Government I've lead for the last nine and half years has endeavoured to run, I hope with a fair degree of success, and I believe I can claim a fair degree of success, has endeavoured to run a strong orthodox cabinet system. Indeed one of the findings that the Head of my Department has made in his interaction with colleagues, broadly within the Westminster Family, is that the Cabinet system in its orthodox accepted since, has survived and operated more fully in this country, perhaps in some other countries with which it is fair to make a comparison.
 The emphasis on the whole of government approach is of course quite critical in a number of areas that I will advert to in a moment. But in coming to that I'm reminded of something that I read in Robert Skidelsky's monumental biography of John Maynard Keynes, when he was describing Keynes' first experiences when he went to Washington in the earlier 1940's to begin those long negotiations that led to the formation of the World Bank and the IMF. He said he found in Washington two remarkable features of the way in which the government operated in that country. He found the silo effect and existence, whereby so many government agencies in Washington operated independently of each other and he also found the American penchant for going to lawyers immediately after any negotiation had taken place. I think it's fair to say that many people interacting with government in the United States might find that some of those two characteristics remain.
 But the point of referring to that anecdote is that over the past five or six years in particular, where there has been such a heavy emphasis on national security the imperative of a whole of government approach to challenging and solving problems has been with us every day. I would regard one of the very significant successes of this Government in terms of governance arrangements, to be the operation of the National Security Committee of Cabinet.
 The National Security Committee of Cabinet as you probably know comprises the sixth senior and most relevant Ministers Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Treasurer, Minister for Defence, Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Attorney General. And it is attended on a regular and normally hold a meeting basis by the Chief of the Defence Force, the Head of ONA, the Head of ASIO, the Secretary of my Department, the Secretary of Defence and the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
 And the National Security Committee of Cabinet has operated in that fashion in an unbroken way since the onset of the diplomacy that was needed and later the military intervention regarding East Timor - and that is a period now of almost six years. And it has represented in my experience the best and most productive example of how ministers and very senior advisors can operate on a basis of total confidence and professionalism to produce an outcome which is to the benefit of the Australian people. It is the most effective whole of government arrangement with which I've been associated as Prime Minister, and it has reminded me again and again of the value in a whole of government imperative, the value of arrangements that constantly bring together relevant senior ministers and their advisors.
As I look back over my experience in the last nine and half years I'm also reminded of the process whereby the enormous amount of work leading to the New Taxation System was brought together and that once again involved regular exchanges on a whole of meeting basis between ministers and senior public servants. And I think very relevantly the use extensively and indeed quite exhaustively, Powerpoint presentations to ministers in order to secure the myriad of individual and intricate decisions that were needed to put together that enormous exercise.
I think one of the reminders of the whole of government era in which we now operate was the formation after the last election of the Department of Human Services, and that was an arrangement that brought together all of the service delivery agencies of the Government under one Minister. And I believe it has already produced some excellent results and that investment I think has been well worthwhile. And finally while I'm on the question of talking about whole of government approaches, can I say that the process that has led to the development of the Energy White Paper, which was released some 18 months ago and I understand the white paper itself has recently drawn some very favourable comments from the International Energy Agency is again a reminder of the, not only that we live in this world of whole of government, but the quality of the output I think is beneficial to the interests of the public that we serve.
I've spent a little time talking contextually and talking generally about how I see the relations between the political arm of government and the public service because in a series such as this, some thought, particularly from somebody who's had the opportunity of observing it over a reasonable period of time I hope will be valuable.
 Turning to some of the particular tasks that we have in the fourth term of this Government. Clearly the two most important tasks that remain and will be undiminished during our fourth term are the emphasis on continued strong economic management, maintaining the fullest possible level of employment and economic growth, and also the very heavy emphasis on national security issues. The fight against terrorism and the national security response and the greater emphasis on the role of the security forces and the defence forces has become a characteristic of the first years of the 21st century. I'd like to say otherwise but I don't see that changing in the short term. And the continued emphasis on it is likely to be a challenge for ministers and advisers for many years into the future.
I think you'll be aware of the views I hold on the importance of economic management and maintaining balanced and indeed surplus budgets, and maintaining the momentum of economic change and reform. I have frequently in recent months characterised the challenge of economic reform in a globalised world as being akin to participating in a race, with an ever- receding finishing line. It's frustrating but the problem is that the other competitors will run past you if you don't continue striving to reach that ever-receding finishing line and I can't really describe it any better or any differently than that and I do think that the realities of the globalised world and the way in which approaches to economic policy have  by and large converged wherever you might be and I am reminded of that whenever I visit for example the United Kingdom and I speak to my counterpart in that country who leads as you know a centre left government but whose approach to for example university reform and change is similar to that of the present government and paradoxically his nominally centre-right opponents in that country have opposed those reforms but that is one of the ironies of modern politics. I think the request for further economic reform in a globalised world environment will stay with us forever.
 That necessarily leads me to what is one of the major, if not the major, economic reform challenges of this term of government and that is further workplace relations reform. The government has outlined some very significant changes in that area and we do see them as very important to purchasing further productivity gains and I am often asked constructively, in other cases not so constructively, why is it at a time of the lowest unemployment in thirty years, at a time of high economic growth, why is it that further labour market reform is necessary in this country?
 My response to that is that we are now essentially living off the fat of earlier economic reforms. It is true if you go back over the last ten, fifteen to twenty years, this country has undertaken some huge economic reforms. I can recall making some remarks in about 1980 or about 1981 looking at the reform agenda that lay ahead at that time we still had a highly regulated financial system, we still had very high tariffs, we certainly still had a highly centralised wage fixation system but at that particular time enjoyed bipartisan support in 1980 -81 it was not Coalition policy to change the centralised wage fixation system and of course we had the taxation system that was fundamentally altered with the tax reforms of 1998 so if you look back over that period of time, you can accumulate, you can count the number of very significant economic reforms that have taken place and I think the productivity we now have is certainly a product of the reforms that have gone on since then particularly in recent years of the strong fiscal position of our economy and the significant labour market reforms of 1996 and 1997 and of course the specific changes in relation to waterfront reform of 1998. But the point I simply make is that we are enjoying the benefits and the fruits of those changes now and the government's case, and I think it is a strong one, is that if we are to have in 5 or 10 year's time the same level of unemployment that we have now or perhaps even lower, then we do need to make further changes in that area and included in those changes is the implementation of a national system of industrial relations.
 The national character of our economy has become so emphatic over the last thirty years. I recalled that when I, for reasons of becoming a junior minister in the government, I resigned the partnership in a Sydney law firm that I then had in 1975 that it was still necessary in those days to engage interstate agents if you wanted to conduct legal work in different parts of the country. It hadn't been long before the company formed in NSW that wanted to carry on Victoria, had to register in Victoria as a foreign company and of course those were the days that pre-dated the formation of the very large national legal and accounting firms that is now a characteristic of doing professional business in this country.
 The point I simply make - I don't think it would be lost in an audience like this, is that in so many ways we are now emphatically and unalterably a single economic unit operating in a national way and we need a national industrial relations system to underpin those operations.
 Amongst the other goals that the government has for change and reform in this area include a number of very important social policy changes. There is a tendency with a huge emphasis on national security and economic policy, to see this government as exclusively focussed on those changes or changes in those areas to the exclusion of important social areas. But I would like to plead the case for the government's social reform agenda in a number of areas.
One of the quiet but very important changes that has occurred is in the area of indigenous policy with the abolition of ATSIC - perhaps it is fair to say that it wasn't so quiet, but quiet in the sense of comparison with some other changes and the development under the leadership and guidance of Peter Shergold of the whole of government approach to the delivery of services to indigenous Australians.  I think we are beginning to see a new era and a new approach but it will rely very heavily on a whole of government response and cooperation between departments as well as cooperation between relevant ministers and in that context I am pleased to announce today, that the government will provide additional funding of $6.4 million to improve employment opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait islanders in the Australian Public Service. We are as I say in the early stages of a major reform in the management of indigenous affairs and this requires in my view as many indigenous people as possible skilled in doing whole of government business and it is vital that indigenous Australians are among the highly skilled public servants who implement this important agenda.
 The numbers of indigenous staff at the senior levels have almost doubled over the last ten years but I think it is fair to say that in the last few years the growth has tended to plateau, and as a result a new measure of support and a new injection is needed. There are two other areas of social policy that do merit a mention.  One of those of course is the important raft of changes announced in the last budget involving welfare to work, they have perhaps not received as much commentary as at the time as I would have expected and that is not a bad thing and perhaps they are more broadly embraced and accepted than I expected but they do represent a very significant change, they are designed to address the intrinsic merit and value in people being in work rather than on welfare and that is overwhelmingly their objective. They are not punitive in character, they will in fact in the early years as Ken Henry and Ian Watt know, they will  cost and not save money. They are not cost cutting exercises, they are not punishment exercises, they are enlarging exercises and they are also designed in part to address the great demographic challenge that this country faces of an ageing population.
 Another area of social policy that I give a lot of importance to are the changes that the government has announced in the area of family law and the development of the family relationship centres. These represent in my experience the most concerted attempt by the government to try and provide an initial and more effective shock absorber to marriage or relationship breakdown, particularly where the custody and caring arrangements, the children are contested. When implemented they will represent the most significant changes to the family law system since the passage of the Family Law Act in 1975.  They do, like the Job Network, and many of the other approaches of the government to social policy which engaged those great social welfare organisations which have so much knowledge and understanding at the coalface and I believe as the next two years go by and the relationship centres are rolled out there will be a broader appreciation within the community of the value of those changes.
 And the final specific areas of policy that I'd like to touch upon to remind you of the importance of them to the government is of course possible changes in the area of communications and media policy. They are not strangers to political debate and they will continue to occupy a great deal of media space and a great deal of commentary in the weeks and months ahead. It's important they are not as important as some of the other things I've mentioned that if we are able to secure changes particularly in the area of communications in relation to the ownership of Telstra and it remains my strong view that we cannot indefinitely maintain what I still regard as the absurdity of the government, only just over half of the largest company in the country, that I think that change eventually is something that is very desirable.
 Before concluding, can I just mention three other matters very briefly, I apprehend in the community, particularly the business community, that there is a growing concern about the level of red tape emanating from government, at all three levels, now that is something that many of you will say, well they always complain about red tape and that is true.  Some of those complaints aren't justified, some of them are justified, many of them are the product of the strength and the activity of the economy, many of them are the product of the indiscretions and the venality of some; a small number which has brought discredit on the community generally but I do foreshadow the fact that it's an issue to which the government will be giving increasing attention as time goes by. The introduction of a Cabinet implementation unit which is designed in a systematic way to ensure that decisions once taken with great fanfare are not then forgotten and lose their lustre through lack of vigorous detailed implementation, so far has proved to be a valuable addition to my understanding of progress, and also that of Ministers and I think the initiative which has worked well, is one that is certainly here to stay.
 And finally can I say that I do place a lot of store and importance on the implementation of the many recommendations that flowed from the Uhrig Inquiry and investigation into governance arrangements inside the Commonwealth public service. As the character of the public service changes and its interaction with not only the political arm of government but also the business community changes, so it is important that we alter the governance arrangements to reflect those changed circumstances and can I conclude Commissioner where I began, in saying that not only is this an excellent innovation and not only is it an opportunity for me to share some thoughts and I hope to identify some goals but it is also an opportunity for me to thank all of you in the Senior Executive Service and through you, all of your colleagues in the Commonwealth Public Service for your professionalism and commitment and the contribution that you have collectively made to the strength of this country in 2005 and the respect with which it is held around the world. It has been an interesting journey for me, a journey which would not have been possible without the support, advice and counsel, not always taken - but always listened to - of the professional men and women of the Australian Public Service and I very warmly thank you for that commitment.
[ends]


My fellow Australians, every generation paints the past as a simpler, more certain, more innocent time. But let we who are heirs to the sacrifice of a great generation set aside that conceit today.
There was nothing simple about the lives of those who won a global war and turned the tide of history.
  Victory over the evils of Nazism, Fascism and militarism could not be certain through dark months of doubt.
  And innocence offered little to those who died so we could live in peace and freedom.  The Second World War was not just our gravest hour, when Australia was imperilled as never before.  It was the hour when, across oceans and continents, the flame of democratic liberty flickered violently and almost went out.
And so we come to this place of solemn remembrance to mark not just a great military victory 60 years ago, but the triumph of a great moral cause.
Fate had thrust a heavy responsibility on the World War II generation, whose childhood in the main had already been blighted by the ravages of the Great Depression.  Yet it was a responsibility they accepted with courage and without any illusions.
  What makes this generation so remarkable is that it knew what awaited them.  It knew what hell on earth could be.
  A war that was to have ended all wars had cut down the previous generation.  And yet, when duty demanded, the next generation risked all.
  Why?  Because they knew that if they didn't fight for the country they loved and all they held dear, all would be lost.
Not far from where I stand, the names of 40,000 Australians who died in the Second World War stretch across 50 metres of sandstone wall.  Their sacrifice, and that of thousands more whose lives were cut short, is a debt our country can never repay.   Today we honour, too, our many gallant allies and their great sacrifice in the struggle for freedom.
This was a war that broke all distinctions between battlefield and home front.  It surpassed all previous wars in lives lost, the majority of them civilian.  It gave us phrases like 'people's war' and 'total war'.
  Women would play an indispensable role in defence of freedom and of Australia.  To give but one example, virtually the entire communications network by which our soldiers, sailors and airmen relied in the Pacific was in the hands of Australian women.
  Like all wars, the Second World War had its share of blunders and cowardice, of greed and petty rivalry.  Controversies live on to this day.
 Yet let us never equivocate: this was a good and just war, fought not for conquest but for liberty.
  Freedom's torch was preserved not just here in Australia but in the Pacific and in Europe, this was a war of liberation which, in a real sense, liberated the people of our once bitter enemies.
  Australia was part of this struggle from the first day to the last.  A nation of seven million people in 1939, we put a million men and women in uniform.
Our prisoners of war came face to face with barbarity of a kind that younger generations can scarcely imagine.
  In a few weeks in 1942, more than 20,000 Australians passed into captivity only to endure years of forced labour, starvation and brutality at the hands of a cruel enemy.  Thousands never saw Australia again.
 When the forces of freedom rallied - in the Pacific, in the sands of Alamein and the skies over Europe - Australians helped to turn the tide.
 It was Australian soldiers on Papua who checked and turned back a Japanese army that til then had known only victory.  British Field Marshal Sir William Slim, later Governor-General of Australia, would write that:
  'Australian troops had at Milne Bay inflicted on the Japanese their first undoubted defeat on land.  Some of us may forget that.  Of all the allies, it was the Australians who first broke the invincibility of the Japanese Army.'
These sons of Australia kept liberty's flame alight just as surely as Churchill's defiant speeches or America's great arsenal.
In jungles close to home, a new generation became part of a tradition of courage, loyalty and mateship forged on a distant peninsula 90 years ago.
Patriotism, it's been said, 'is not a short and frenzied outburst of emotion but the tranquil and steady dedication of a lifetime'.
  After that great moment of jubilation 60 years ago, a generation of heroes put down the tools of war.  They became architects of the stable and prosperous modern Australia, which included reconciliation with former enemies.
To our veterans, we honour not just your sacrifice in war, but your lives of quiet and dedicated patriotism.
  Yours is a legacy that says freedom must be valued, defended, and, where necessary, fought for.  It reminds each generation that love of country is a noble impulse, calling us to high ideals and causes bigger than ourselves.  It reaffirms our faith in Australia and its future.
 In our time - and for all time - we will remember you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much John for that very welcoming and very thoughtful introduction and presentation of some of the views of the Australian Industry Group. It is now just under a year since I addressed the annual dinner of this group and as your President indicated much has happened to Australian industry and much has happened to the Australian economy over that period of 12 months. Most of that has been positive. Our economy has continued a very strong level of growth, we are now in our 14th year of continued expansion, we have the lowest level of unemployment in 29 years and we have continued to diversify our trade balances around the world and we have been able to achieve something quite remarkable in both political strategic terms as well as economic terms and that is an ever closer relationship with the United States of America whilst at the same time seeing an enormous expansion in our economic relationship with China.
 Something that John said in his introduction, when he touched upon the fact that today of course is the 60th anniversary of the end of World War II, reminded me of the importance of making political decisions for the future even though some of the contemporary pressures and some of the contemporary evidence might tilt in the opposite direction. I still regard it as one of the more courageous political acts of leadership that this country has seen since World War II, as the decision of the then Deputy Prime Minister of Australia John McEwen to argue for and lay the foundation of the Japan-Australia Commerce Agreement of 1957.  That wasn't very popular, there was a lot of strong political opposition, there was very strong opposition from some sections of the RSL, very understandable, and there was a widespread view in a lot of the Australian community that it was altogether too much too soon, a bare 12 years after the end of World War II. Yet looking back from the vantage point now of 48 years, who can doubt that that was the right thing for the long term future of Australia and it laid the foundation for what is still our most valuable economic association in terms of export destination and it is a reminder that economic decisions must be taken to build future strength and not just be seen in terms of reflecting current conditions and current expectations, and I will return to that in a moment when I say something about workplace relations reform.
 But I do, however, want to thank the AIG for its continued close and constructive relations with the Government. As John went through a number of the things that he had argued for and has seen successfully included in the last Budget and I think particularly the abolition of the 3 per cent tariff duty which I know was the cause and source of great anger within Australian industry for reasons which I fully understand. I also note his comments regarding taxation reform and no doubt along with many others, members of this organisation would have welcomed the final removal of the superannuation tax surcharge which I know was not the most desperately popular measure that this Government has ever introduced.
 But ladies and gentleman, I can say with some degree of confidence, that the last year has been a year of very strong achievement for the Australian economy. We did, as I know your own representations would have wanted, we did place a great deal of emphasis on technical training and technical education in the October election campaign of last year. There are many individual things at a micro-level that need to be done to make apprenticeships more attractive particularly in the areas of traditional trades. But most importantly of all, we need to bring about a change in the Australian mindset and I can report to you tonight that the best applause line that I had in the last election campaign was when I would say to audiences of great diversity, I want an Australia where a prized technical qualification is as valued as a university degree. I think we did as a nation go through a stage when we downgraded apprenticeships. When we thought that the only path to a satisfying, rewarding career was to go to university. Now I have made these remarks in the past and some people have suggested that I'm denigrating university education, nothing of the kind, but what I am doing is extolling high quality and flexible technical qualifications as the right training path and the right career path for many young Australian men and women and one of the great values of the Australian Technical Colleges and I thank the AIG for its great contribution to partnering so many other people in industry and education, in bidding for these colleges. One of the great virtues of these colleges will be to emphasise the importance and the prestige of trade qualifications. We do face a desperate shortage of skilled tradesmen. There has been a pleasing increase recently that your President referred to, but we still have a long way to go. Our recent migration changes will help, the emphasis that we are placing on technical education will help and I believe that this is an area where the Federal and State governments can cooperate very closely together and I will continue to welcome very warmly the input of your organisation to the development of further government policies and without commenting on the detail of the proposals that you have released today, they will receive from Brendan Nelson and my other ministerial colleagues very careful consideration indeed.
 I want to take this opportunity of assuring the members of your organisation representing as you do, so many thousands of Australian manufacturers, of the sensitivity that we feel towards the manufacturing sector as we set about negotiating the possible development of a free trade agreement with China. China is a great and valued and growing market for Australia, and I am aware that not every industry sector sees that trade relationship in exactly the same light and in all of these areas it is necessary for us to achieve a degree of balance and to be sensitive to the pace and the rate of change.
I have noted your comments about the level of the Australian Dollar, as is customary in these matters, I am unable to say anything about the future level of the Australian Dollar except to observe as both prime ministers and treasurers must necessarily do on all occasions that the current value is about right and I am quite sure that there would be many people in this room who might say, 'well he would say that wouldn't he?' but they wouldn't share that view. Can I just make one observation that I hope you will all understand and appreciate and that is that the current level of the Australian Dollar is in many respects of course a reflection of the current strength of the United States Dollar and the course of economic developments and the maintenance of growth in that country have a very direct impact on the level of our Dollar.
 When I launched the Australian Industry Group in August of 1998, following the merger of the old MTIA and the ACM, Australia's unemployment rate was 8 per cent. By August of last year when I addressed you here, Australia's unemployment rate had fallen to 5.7 per cent. A year on, our employment rate is 5 per cent and we are now witnessing the highest participation rate for at least 30 years, perhaps longer. So we not only have the lowest unemployment rate but the highest participation rate for at least 30 years or more.
 When you add that to the fundamental strength of the Australian economy, people are perfectly entitled and naturally do pose the question, why on earth do we need further economic reform? It's a question that has been posed to me, particularly in the context of our workplace relations reforms, by many people, some who are my political opponents and some who are my political supporters, and I want briefly tonight, to try and answer that question.
In other fora I have likened the economic challenge that this country faces as that of participant in a foot race with an ever-receding finishing line. It's incredibly frustrating because you can never really get there but you know you must keep trying as hard as possible because there are other competitors that will run past you if you don't keep trying and you don't keep lifting your performance. The economic strength that Australia has today is the product of earlier reforms. We are in 2005 living off the fat of earlier economic reforms, that is why I believe so passionately in further reforming Australia's workplace relations system and having reminded you of what the unemployment rate was in 1998 and how it has fallen steadily since then, I pose the rhetorical question, what will it be like in five years time at the annual dinner of the AIG, will it be about the same, will it be lower or will it be higher? And the answer to that question will very much be determined by whether this country has the commitment and the gumption to make further measured, not extreme, but measured, workplace relations reforms.
 You've had representatives from many countries at this gathering, let me point out very simply to you that when our legislation goes through and the changes have been implemented, we will still have a labour market more highly regulated than that of the United Kingdom and of New Zealand and if you ask for evidence and if you ask for the case in favour of further change in this area, look at the economic and employment experiences of countries such as France and Germany and Spain and compare them with the unemployment levels of the United Kingdom, the United States and New Zealand. Remember the words of the British Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair when he addressed the Trade Union Congress in 1998 and he said very accurately and very prophetically, that fairness in the workplace starts with a chance of a job.
At the end of the day no industrial relations system can prevent people being hurt when the economy weakens. In the early 1980s when we had a deep recession, we had a heavily regulated centralised wage fixation system. More so than it is now, more so than it was in the late 80s and early 90s, that didn't stop people getting hurt. Heavy regulation can't compel job creation, heavy regulation can't produce wage increases, it therefore invites the inevitable comment that the best industrial relations system is the industrial relations system that contributes to a strengthening of the economy. Because it is a strong economy which enables employers to pay their workers more, it's a strong economy which reduces unemployment. We have seen over the last decade the most sustained period of real wage growth in at least 30 or 40 years. In 9 « years we have seen a 14 per cent real increase in wages and that has been on top of the very significant reductions in unemployment and the reason that I am committed so strongly to workplace relations reform is not because it is something that I have believed in for 20 or 30 years, that's not the main reason, the main reason is that I believe that unless we undertake further reform, we will not maintain the gains of recent years.
 Economic reform produces benefits but in time those benefits expend themselves and further and new reform is needed if additional benefits are to be purchased in the future and that in essence is what this is all about. It's not about unfairly altering the balance in the workplace, I have no interest in tilting the playing field against the wage and salary earners of this country. In fact I am very proud of a lot of things that we have achieved over the last 9 « years, but nothing makes me prouder than the fact that last Friday week, the ABS released some figures which showed that the take-home pay or the living standards position of low and middle income earners had increased over the last 10 years or so at a faster rate than had the remunerative position of people in the higher income brackets. No government has an interest in hurting ordinary people, no government wants to hurt ordinary people and no government I lead will hurt ordinary people. What we will do is to contribute towards to the maintenance and the development of a workplace environment in this country where the productivity gains of the past are continued into the future. That 14 per cent real increase was only achieved because we are able to lift our productivity.
 Overwhelmingly because of past workplace relations reforms and that simply put, is why we need further reforms. They are balanced, they recognise the global environment in which we live, they preserve the freedom of association rights that are fundamental to both employers and employees. But they recognise as your President said that the best workplace relations environment is ultimately the environment in which most differences and disputes and issues are resolved at the workplace level. They also recognise and will continue to enshrine the reality as all of you as employers know and that is that the most valuable asset you have is a well qualified workforce dedicated to the joint endeavour in which you are engaged and the great success of the Australian economy over the last ten years has been due overwhelmingly to the quality and the adaptability of the working men and women of this country and without that extraordinary Australian capacity to adapt to a new environment, we would never have achieved what we have over that period of time. But we cannot stand still, we are in that race with that frustrating but nonetheless ever-receding finishing line and there are people trying to run past us and the most effective response to that is to continue with the process of reform.
 My friends, I have had a very long association with many people in this room, I take this opportunity again of thanking you for the great contribution that you make to the generation of wealth in Australia. Wealth generation remains fundamental to the future security of Australian families. There has been a lot of discussion recently about the balance of work and family and the importance of family time in the lives of all of us. We all know how valuable and treasured that is but we also know that financial security and financial advancement and economic security is an important ingredient in the enjoyment of a fulfilling family life. Your group has made a great contribution to the economic debate in this country particularly since its formation in 1998, I thank you for that. I thank in particular my colleague, the Minister responsible for your sector Ian Macfarlane and all my other colleagues from Cabinet who interact with you. Let me assure you that we will continue to have an open door, we'll listen to what you put to us, where it makes eminent sense we'll do it, where it doesn't, we'll politely decline to do so but you can be assured that we will remain a government whilst representing all of the Australian people and beholden to no one group in the Australian community, we'll nonetheless remain a government that is four square with you in the cause of private enterprise and wealth generation for the benefit of all the Australian people.
 Thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Mrs Thorton, ladies and gentlemen. Janette and I are very honoured to be part of this wonderful occasion which celebrates 60 years of extraordinary personal dedication and collective achievement. And I have to say that I was very touched by Mrs Thorton's speech. It was a wonderful encapsulation of a story of dedication in the face of great difficulty and great challenge. The Spastic Centre has been a wonderful Australian achievement. And I stress that it's been a wonderful Australian achievement because it pioneered a response based on collective family endeavour to great family challenge and great individual pain, and individual indignity. And the fact that in this area as in so many others, Australia was able to show the rest of world how it was done, is a particular source of pride to all of us tonight. As somebody who as you know grew up in Sydney the Spastic Centre was one of those organisations, one of those great organisations that from early childhood you understood to be a body that was about helping people who were less fortunate, and had disabilities and were challenged in a way that others in the community were not.
 And with all the advances of medical science, to be reminded tonight that once every 18 hours a child is born with cerebral palsy is an arresting statistic. We have seen most extraordinary advances and I predicted in the next 25 years of this century, the advances will double, even treble, but there will still be enormous challenges and I share the hope and the pray with Mrs Thorton that there will be that end point that we ultimately reach.
I do want to commend the centre on the concept of the foundation to show a lead around the world in research, particularly in the Asian Pacific area is tremendously important, not only for the centre and the cause of assisting people with cerebral palsy, and trying to understand better the causes, and in time responses to those causes is something not only very important for Australians, but also very, very important for people within our region because just as we as a community within Australia have a responsibility to help those who are deserving of it, so we as a nation have a responsibility to provide  a lead in our own region through research and all the other very laudable goals of the foundation.
We are very proud of our community instinct. We are a generous people. We are a people that respond to need and great causes within our community, and we demonstrated that very dramatically earlier this year with our response to the tsunami. It remains the pride of Australians that on a per capita basis our response was more generous than that of any country in the world. And it is an example, but the latest example of how generous we are as a people.
 Can I in launching the foundation wish it well, it will of course (in case there was any doubt about it) attract tax deductibility, and can I also say that as an additional source of support I'm very pleased to announce that the Commonwealth Government will contribute $500,000 to the foundation.
 It's a very big goal, the target that you've set yourselves, but having heard those stories of Neville Wran's intimidation and having heard Mrs Thorton deny it, I don't think you'll have too much trouble reaching that target. Thank you very much and I hope you have a wonderful night.
[ends]


Thank you very much Tim and my federal parliamentary colleagues, Louise Markus, Pat Farmer and Connie Fierravanti-Wells, ladies and gentlemen. I would like to start by thanking Tim and all the other members of the Advisory Group for their commitment to this very important investment, not so much investment of dollars but investment by the federal government in the priority of doing what it can at a grass roots level  to fight community crime.  In our government's setup of course, dealing with crime on a day to day grass roots level, is overwhelmingly the responsibility of the state government. But I haven't come here today to pass any judgement on that or to criticise it rather I have come here today in a positive frame of mind to announce eight  recipients of grants under our Greater Western Sydney Region Community Crime Prevention Programme  This is part of a wider programme of some $50 million committed by the Federal Government all over Australia to assist community organisations to fight crime in different ways, to prevent it and one or two of the programmes reflect that, in fact they all in different ways reflect that and in other ways to fight it more directly.
 Crime does undermine, and in some cases destroy the quality of life and it is a community responsibility and all people of goodwill, irrespective of where they come from are friends of the police and are friends of the government in the ongoing fight against crime and I want to start my remarks by expressing my admiration of the work of police forces all around Australia.  It's a miserable job on many occasions, it's a hard job, it's a thankless job and I believe the men and women of the police services of our nation, whether they are at state or federal level, deserve our unstinting support, respect and continued cooperation.
 What I am announcing here today is the first round of grants for the Greater Western Sydney region and as I indicated some $8 million of funding over a period of four years has been allocated to programmes in this part of Australia and that is part of an overall programme of some $50 million. This round attracted great interest from the Greater Western Sydney region and all applications were very carefully considered by the Advisory Group and that Advisory Group was chaired by Tim and I do want to thank Tim for his dedication. Tim is quite a figure on this issue; he's a bloke who understands it better than most, he is somebody who calls it as it is and he is therefore a friend of the communities of Western Sydney because he does understand and he does sympathise very much with the concerns and the aspirations of these communities and you will see as I announce each award, just how diverse the recipients are and it hasn't all been concentrated in one area.  There will be some familiar organisations, the names at least will be familiar to you, there will be some that are not so familiar but they all indicate the fact that we've got such a diverse group indicates the range of people who want to help and it also indicates the diversity of the community that we are here to assist and we are here to aid.
 But what I want to do is as they announce each one, I'd like the person to come forward and I am going to be helped very much aren't I to hand out a certificate to each of them and I am going to announce it, I am going to describe what it is, I'll invite the representative of the organisation to come forward and we'll have a photograph, I'll hand over the certificate and then I will go onto the next organisation.
 Now the first of six organisations that come from the community safety stream of the Programme, the first one to receive a grant is the Airds Bradbury Community Centre and their programme is entitled Bridging Disadvantage and Crime through Education. A $120,000 grant. And this is for a project in the Campbelltown Local Government areas to advance community cohesion, health and well-being through community skill based educational courses to strengthen individuals and families.  The courses will cover life and parenting skills, early childhood development, and employment.
Now the next one is to go to the Blacktown Migrant Resource Centre and this is for a Community Harmony and Crime Prevention with African Communities in Blacktown and it's a grant of $149,180. And this is a project to engage local Sudanese and other African communities with local human services and businesses in a collaborative manner to reduce the incidence of crime. And the project will work with these communities on addressing the growth in cases of offenders or victims of crime as well as broader safety fears.
 Now the next one goes to the Cumberland Women's Health Centre. The Cumberland Women's Health Centre. Yes let's hear it for the Cumberland Women's Health Centre. This is a grant of  $145,000 to work with various religious and community leaders across Western Sydney to reduce domestic violence in the community.  And this involves leaders in education and development of strategies that will enhance their capacity to respond to family violence and promote family harmony within their communities and congregations. Come forward.
Now the next is the Mount Druitt Ethnic Communities Agency and it's called Pacific Lets Talk project. $127,800 and a project to bridge the intergenerational divide between parents and young people, often seen as a causal factor of involvement in criminal and anti-social behaviour.  It's to be delivered in a camp setting, it will target young people aged 12-17 years and their parents and grandparents who happen to be caregivers.
Now the next grant goes to Salvation Army New South Wales under the title of Caf‚ Horizons Penrith. This is a grant of  $150,000 to provide life skills and vocational training to prevent or reduce youth crime and anti-social behaviour.  It's designed to engage disadvantaged young people aged 15 to 25, particularly those involved in drug abuse and/or crime, within Western Sydney.
 Now the next one goes to a well known organisation, Youth Off the Streets under the heading of  Leading Your Community project . A grant of $150,000 to address the incidence of youth crime, enhance community safety in the Airds area and it will provide leadership workshops and peer-to-peer learning, regular community consultation and volunteering opportunities for the wider community.
Now there are two grants from the Community Partnerships Stream and these, because of the nature of them, are in quantity, slightly larger. The first goes to Hillsong Emerge under the description of Greater Blacktown Community Partnership. And this is a grant of  $414,000 and is to engage and empower residents throughout the Blacktown area to address and implement crime prevention strategies through community enhancement. Activities with partner agencies will involve the Sudanese community in the Blacktown area and Indigenous youth in the Riverstone area to encourage residents to take personal responsibility for the maintenance and improvement of their homes, streets, parks and commercial areas with the goal of reducing vandalism, crime and fear of crime.
  And the last one and a very important one goes to the Royal Society for the Welfare of Mothers and Babies under the description of Mothering at a Distance. A grant of $447.00.  And this is a project to be conducted at correctional facilities in Silverwater, Emu Plains, South Windsor and Berrima which focuses on the needs of imprisoned mothers with children between 0 and 5 years with the aim, the very important aim, of breaking the cycle of inter-generational crime. And it will establish a self-sustaining education and support programme to address the needs of mothers and enhance their ability to provide proper parenting, reducing thus we hope, reduce the impact of separation due to them being in jail. I think it's a wonderful programme and I think it's worthy of the support and I invite the representative to come forward.
Well ladies and gentleman that finishes my contribution this morning, can I say again how grateful I am to such a diverse range of community organisations for applying for these grants and you can see from the diversity of the groups that are represented just how much of the money provided under these grants will really flow through to positive grassroots activities and all of these organisations will work in close collaboration with police, they work in close collaboration with government agencies and close collaboration with community organisations and I [inaudible] I wish them well having being present at the first announcement of the Greater Western Sydney Grants.  It re-affirms my faith in the original decision taken for the federal government to be a little more involved in a way that's cooperative, not in a way that is replacing in any way the role, of the important role of the state government because these are combined efforts, we've all got to work together to fight crime and I hope these community organisations with this assistance will be able to play their part and I wish them well and I again thank Tim very warmly and I thank our colleague Louise for organising today and having it out here, it is great to be back in her electorate, it is great to back in Blacktown and it's great to be part of the very important community effort in the western suburbs of Sydney.
 Thank you.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
 Well ladies and gentleman I would like to welcome all of you here for this very important meeting. I greet you of course as my fellow Australians, and this is a meeting of Australians to try and address an issue which if we can address it effectively, can be of enormous benefit to the future of our country. There is a terrorist challenge around the world; Australia is not immune from that, any Australian who imagines that we can escape terrorism on our own soil indefinitely is deluding themselves. Whilst the likelihood of a terrorist attack in Australia is less than in many other countries, it is nonetheless a possibility and I have never disguised the potential of a terrorist attack occurring on Australian soil.
 But in saying that we have to keep things in perspective; there are many things working in our favour that do not work in the favour of other countries. We have a long history of community cohesion and harmony, we are a country that normally resolves its political differences and disputes through vigorous argument and debate rather than violence and physical intimidation and that is a characteristic that I want to maintain and I know all of you do. It's very important that all sections of the Australian community work together in a spirit of goodwill and I approach this meeting and I know all of my colleagues do, in a spirit of total goodwill and friendship towards Australians of Islamic faith - I want to make that very clear. We are all Australians together, we all have the same obligations as Australians citizens and we all have the same rights as Australian citizens and it's very important that that be said.
 I think I owe it to you that there is concern in the Australian community and I know that you share that within the Islamic community there are some who do encourage violence and hatred, there are some who do give comfort and aid and encouragement and succour to terrorism and our responsibility is to work together to identify the causes of that to prevent the spread of it and to do everything we can to enlist the great mainstream of the Islamic community in Australia to fight the challenge of terrorism. There is a common thread to be found in acts of terrorism that have occurred around the world and that is that they are depicted in some perverted way as being done in the name of Islam. Now I know, and you all know that it is an obscenity on Islam to justify acts of terrorism and murder by reference to the Koran or by reference to the Islamic faith.
 It is inimical to the Islamic faith as it is to the Judeao-Christian ethic which has had such a pervasive, informative influence on our country. So I see today's meeting as very much about agreeing on some common principles that bind us all together and out of that, to try and identify some ways in which we can work together in the future. I would like a continuing dialogue. There are a number of people in our community who are a danger to all of us, not many but some, and we have an obligation to try and identify them, to neutralise them, to prevent them influencing others particularly the young, particularly the young, and in the process learn from the experience of working together effectively as Australians. But my starting point is that we come together as Australians with an overriding loyalty to the future of this country and to nothing else and that we will work together as Australians with that overriding loyalty to try and prevent problems that have occurred in other countries and I will finish on this note.
 I was as many of you know in Britain immediately after the attack on the 7th July and at the time of the abortive attack in London a couple of weeks later, and the most arresting thing for the British public was that the acts of the 7th July were apparently carried out by people who had been born in the United Kingdom and were British citizens, they weren't citizens of another country, and that brought a new reality as far as the British were concerned. Now I think the dimension of the problem in Britain is much much greater than it is in Australia but there are similarities and whilst we should keep perspective, we shouldn't kid ourselves that it can't happen here and our responsibility as Australians is to see that it doesn't or to do all that we can to see that it doesn't.
 So it is in that spirit that I greet you, I want this to be a candid meeting, I will be as frank with you as I have been in my introductory remarks, and I expect you to be frank in return, that is the Australian way that's the way we deal with these things, and if we conduct this as a meeting of Australians trying to find a solution to a common challenge, then I think we'll make some progress. If we see it in another light, then we are not going to make progress, that's how I come to it and I am sure that all of you ought to do the same. You know my colleagues, many of them are very very well known to you, infamously so, as they have said on some occasions but I am very glad to have their assistance, I am glad to have you, and I'd like to invite as I know he proposes to Doctor Ameer Ali, the President of the Australian Federation of Islamic Councils to say something on behalf of our guests. Dr Ali.
  DR AMEER ALI:
Thank you Prime Minister.  The Honourable Prime Minister, the Honourable Attorney-General, Honourable Minister Amanda Vanstone, Honourable Minister Cobb, members of the Government and the bureaucracy.  We thank you very much for this opportunity. I think this is a historic event.  I don't think in the history of this country no Prime Minister invited the Muslim community for open talks about the problems confronting the country and the community in particular.  So in that sense in the history of the Muslim community it's a milestone, this event.  It's a first of its kind and I hope this momentum created by this summit will continue in the future with many meetings.
The main focus of why we are here is to assist the office of the Government and also to seek assistance from the Government to the work that we are doing in order to keep away extremists views from damaging the society in which we live, the country which we cherish, so that every community in this country whether they are Muslims, Jews or Christians, Hindus or Buddhists can live harmoniously in peace and amity without inter-faith, inter-ethnic, inter-religious suspicion and intolerance.  So we are here to look at ways and means, how we can achieve that objective, whether we can put up some mechanism by which we can eradicate (inaudible) and eliminate from our group these extremists elements that are a potential threat to the peace loving people of this country.
We are also thinking at the end of the process whether we can have a mechanism by which we can continue the momentum that we create at this summit so that there can be a direct link between a reference group from the Muslim community and the Government so that we can provide the inputs as the need arises and as and when the need arises from the Government so that you can assist us and we assist you.
  And finally we expect a positive outcome from this summit so we can go out with the unified message that none of us here will tolerate any extremist element in our society or blatantly spreading hatred and violence.  There is no (inaudible) reservation in  condemning those efforts, all of us are united in that.  What is the problem or what we are doing to discuss is how we are going to achieve that in the course of our discussion.
I don't want to take much of the time because there is more time to discuss matters, and I also finally want to express the wishes by the Mufti who now in Cairo who couldn't attend this meeting he said he uses prayer and blessings so that a positive outcome will come out of this meeting and we can work together as one united Australian group.  We are Muslims but we are Australian Muslims, that identity must be preserved all the time.  We have our differences but there are quite a lot that we share in the values and (inaudible) of society which is in tune with the (inaudible) and values of the faith that you practice, there is no contradiction at all.  So we are a family here and we are no contradiction, we are no conflict, only because we are trying to look at the ways and means of achieving this objective hand in hand with the Government.
Thank you once again Prime Minister for giving us the opportunity and we hope that a lot can be achieved in the limited time of this (inaudible).
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you Dr Ali.  Mr Soliman.
MR YASSER SOLIMAN:
Thank you Prime Minister for calling this meeting and the opportunity for us to come together and share the responsibilities of this common fight against the threats that face us all.  Terrorism has threatened all parts of the world, including Australia and while we are not experts in counter-terrorism we certainly come here with an open heart and mind and willingness to be fully part of the fight against extremism and terrorism.  There are some radicals obviously and we acknowledge that amongst our people here in Australia.  There are not many.  Some of the young people do give them an ear and we need to challenge that very strongly.
There's obviously room for improvement in what we can do and what we should be doing.  And obviously being together we can all improve in terms of our effectiveness, government authorities, communities and the Muslim community especially can improve in being more effective and have a bigger impact.  We are an integral part of this nation and we are committed to this nation's security, its shared future that we are part of it, its values and we will do everything within our power as Muslim community, as part of the Australian community to make sure that we are all safe and have a positive shared future together.
This meeting's important, it's a reaffirmation of our commitment, an embrace between government and the Muslim community to work together against the threats that face this nation.  We are a vibrant community and we are concerned about being described only in the language of terrorism, we need and the Australian people need to understand we have much to offer, we are a fully productive community and we want to be fully integrated but for some sectors of the media and other people to only describe us or see us as being described in the language of terrorism and threat and security issues that is of a big concern to us and we need to position ourselves as partners with you as being fellow Australians and nothing less.
We have also been in some corners used to undermine multicultural policies and we do not accept this, we fully support the Australia multicultural policy, we see it as one of the most important elements in fighting against extremism and terrorism and we are fully behind the multicultural policies and thank you for being strong in those types of policies that give opportunity to everyone.  We share in the values and we come here with an open heart and an open mind and a willingness to cooperate in all ways in ways that make this community a safer, one of the safest places on earth.
Thank you Prime Minister.  Ministers, thank you.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well thank you very much gentlemen.  In closing the public opening of this gathering can I say again how very pleased I am that we have such a representative gathering of people.  You can never invite everybody to a meeting like this unless you hire a cricket field or whatever because everybody wants to come.  The important thing is this is a representative gathering of mainstream Muslim leaders.  I quite deliberately made a decision not to invite people who had expressed extremists views for the very simple reason that extremists always hijack gatherings.  Now that's my view and that's the basis on which we have proceeded and I think it will be a very productive gathering.  I'd like to invite the media to leave, there will be opportunities for you to hear from us and question us later but we'd now like to go into a more closed session.  But thank you very much for your support and patronage and interest.
[ends]


Thank you very much Madam Mayor Baker, David Fawcett, the Federal Member for Wakefield, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. This is not the first time that I have been to the city of Playford.  I did come here a number of times last year and I certainly hope that it won't be the last time I visit this particular part of Adelaide. I am of course very pleased to be in the electorate of David Fawcett - he's a new member of parliament, he's a terrific member of parliament and he's already in the short time that he has been your representative, made quite an impression on the parliament and on his parliamentary colleagues.
 I visit many parts of Australia and I do it very regularly and one of the most constantly stimulating things that I find in the job of Prime Minister is the opportunity as I move around this country to meet an astonishing variety of my fellow Australians in gatherings such as this and a gathering like this that brings together people who are in the local Council, people who are still at school, people who are teaching our children, people who are returned servicemen and women who've served our country, people who are in the various service organisations, Ministers and Priests of religion, volunteers who work so hard to keep our communities together and so the list goes on. People who give leadership and participate in a great national cement of Australia's sporting endeavour and I can spend quite a bit of time naming the various groups but collectively a gathering like this is a metaphor for the strength of our country.
  The greatest asset Australia has is our capacity because we relate to each other so readily and so easily, is our capacity to work together as a community to solve our various challenges and problems. And the reason why this is such a peaceful, harmonious, free country is that we are not a pretentious people.  We don't divide ourselves into classes or into different strata of society, that we treat each other according to their character and according to the contribution they make to the community and in that way we have built a unique community and unique society here in Australia.
 Like all areas of Australia the city of Playford has its own particular characteristics and its particular challenges. It does have a young population and it has struggled with high levels of unemployment in the past. And I am particularly pleased that the government has been able to nominate the city of Playford as the location for one of the 24 Australian technical colleges we committed ourselves to build and to create at the time of the last election.
 This country is desperately short of skilled tradesmen, this country is suffering like all other developed countries from a shortage of people who have undertaken the traditional trades skill. There are all sorts of reasons why that should be so. In a sense it's not the reason but rather the solution to the problem which is most important and in the election campaign I made a statement which I have to say to you drew more applause than just about any other statement I made in the whole campaign when I said that I wanted an Australia in which a trade qualification was as highly prized as a university degree and I mean that very genuinely.
I think we went through a period of time in this country where we went overboard about the need to get a university qualification. We said that unless you have a university degree, you weren't going to have a career. Now I would be the last person to denigrate a university degree and people who have the aspiration and the ability to go to university should be supported and encouraged and given the choice to do so. But we must never again denigrate the quality of skilled tradesmen and women in our community and we are now paying for the fact that [inaudible] we didn't give it enough prominence some years ago and it's everybody's fault, not just the fault the government.  It's the fault of parents who thought that unless little Johnny or Jilly went to university, they weren't going to get anywhere in life. Now the reality is of course that many of the people who didn't go to university and who became plumbers and so forth, they ended up making a lot more successes at their career than many of the people who went to university and that has certainly been my experience when I go to school re-unions the plumber has always got the latest Beemer  and I can assure you and basically what we are seeking to do is in different ways to encourage people back into the trades. It'll take time and it will take a lot of effort and building 24 technical colleges of itself is not going to solve the problem.
 We increased the migrant intake by 20,000 this year so that we could attract more skilled tradesmen. I have just come from a luncheon attended by a number of businessmen drawn from this area and all around this area and quite a number of them spoke of the difficulties in finding skilled tradesmen and women. And so therefore collectively we have to tackle that problem and one of the things we have sought to do is to build these technical colleges and to work in different ways with the state government, with the trade union movement, with everybody, to try and find a solution to the shortage of skilled tradesmen in our community.
 There are just two or three other things that I want to say to all of you and I think they are comments that are relevant and important to all Australians and to our country's future. We are a very fortunate country at present. We have a very strong economy, we have the lowest unemployment rate we've had, overall, it varies from area to area, the lowest unemployment rate we've had for more than 30 years. And the outlook for the country is good. Yesterday Australia's best known company declared the biggest profit that this country has ever seen. Now some people might say gee, that's too big a profit. I don't say that because when big companies are successful, the country can be successful, providing they all pay their share of tax. And I'm quite sure, I'm quite sure that particular company will pay its share of tax. Some of my colleagues had dinner with the Board of BHP Billiton last Thursday night and they were complaining about how much tax they were paying. And I said that's very, very good because when companies make profits, they pay tax.
 But we are fortunate, we do have a strong economy, but we must remember of course that there are many in our community who are missing out. And whilst as Prime Minister I'm very proud of this country's economic performance, I'm also very conscious that through no fault of their own, there's some in our community who are missing out. Even though our unemployment rate is very low, it's still too high. And there are some who, through a combination of reasons, are doing it very tough. And that is why I want to pay a particular tribute to those people who are here today representing the great welfare organisations in our community - Churches, organisations such as the Society of St Vincent DePaul, the Salvation Army. I know the RSL does an enormous amount of welfare work and so the list goes on. And it's the combined efforts of people in those organisations working with the Government and working with the local community through what I call the social coalition that provides the capacity to look after people who might be missing out on the good fortune and the success and the good luck of others.
The other point I wanted to touch on very briefly, and it's something that your mayor alluded to when she introduced me, and that is that we don't live in the safest of all worlds. A few weeks ago we marked the 60 years since the end of World War II. There are many people in this audience I know who are returned soldiers from World War II. And it was an opportunity for me on behalf of the nation and others in different ceremonies to express our enormous gratitude, not only to those men and women for what they did to defend our country and save it in World War II, but also the extraordinary demonstration of patriotism and commitment to Australia in the decades that have passed since the end of World War II.
 The challenges we face now, the challenges of terrorism are very different from what they were in World War II.  In World War II your enemy was the country that produced the army that rolled across the border, and you knew who your enemy was. It rolled across a border or it attacked you, or attacked another country. Now we are dealing with an entirely different enemy. It's a shadowy enemy. It's a borderless war. We don't actually know when it started, and you won't actually know when it finished. This country is not immune from the possibility of a terrorist attack, although I think the likelihood is less in Australia than in many other countries.
 And there are a number of things that we can do to make ourselves safer. We can try and make sure that every part of our community feels included and accepted and part of the great Australian family and the great Australian nation. Earlier this week I had a meeting with Leaders of the Islamic community in Australia. It's only three or four hundred thousand strong and the overwhelming majority of them are as concerned about, and as hostile towards terrorism, as every person in this audience.
 And in extending the hand of friendship to them, I reminded them as I must any other section of the community, that we all have responsibilities. We have responsibilities as Australian citizens and we have responsibilities if we believe that there are any within our community. And this applied particularly to the people that I spoke to earlier this week. If any in that community have tendencies towards supporting or encouraging or glorifying terrorism or any of their deeds, they have responsibility as Australian citizens to do what they can to counteract that.
 We are fortunate. We have great freedoms in Australia. We want to keep it that way. But we also have to understand that there are some around the world who despise us - not because of what we have done, but because of what we believe in and what we stand for. They despise democracy, they despise western society, they despise our values, they despise our tolerance of different religions and indeed of no religious belief at all. And we here in Australia have to strike a delicate balance between, on the one hand, not infringing the great freedoms that we have, but on the other hand, playing our part along with our allies and friends in fighting the challenge of terrorism around the world.
 Ladies and gentlemen can I finally say to all of you, thank you very, very much for coming. Thank you very much for the contribution that you have made to the Australian nation, and particularly to those people in all the various organisations in this community. I know the city of Playford has its own particular challenges and characteristics. You've achieved an enormous amount and I hope the technical college becomes a focus of great activity and makes a very major contribution in this part of Adelaide towards tackling this great problem the Australian nation has of a skills shortage.
Thank you all for coming along and in commending again David Fawcett to you as your Federal Member. I hope that both of us have an opportunity over the next little while to meet as many of you as possible. You've been very kind to come along and I thank you very, very much for the courtesy that you have extended to me by being here today.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Bob, Rob Kerin, John Burston, my Federal and State parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals.  Again I have the privilege of addressing this annual meeting and I take the opportunity of recording my thanks and I know yours to your retiring State President, Bob Randall, for the tremendous job that he has done in leading the Party organisation here in South Australia over the last two years.  I want also to record my very great appreciation to Bruce McDonald who has retired after long service as a Federal Vice President and in case anyone imagines that influence thereby slips from South Australia he has of course been replaced by Corey Bernady and I congratulate Corey on his election as Federal Vice President.
Ladies and Gentlemen I have said on many occasions in the past and I repeat it this morning that one of the strengths of the government has been the extraordinarily high quality of the parliamentary representation from South Australia. Robert Hill, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, Alexander Downer as Foreign Minister, Robert of course as Defence Minister as well, Nick Minchin as Finance Minister, Amanda Vanstone as Minister for Immigration and Indigenous Affairs. Added to that a star-studded cast of parliamentary secretaries and individual members all of whom who have made in their different ways a remarkable contribution. And at the last election eight out of eleven from South Australia, the best strike rate to use a cricketing expression, although perhaps we should avoid cricketing expressions this morning. Can I say a wonderful contingent of Federal members and senators from South Australia.
But as I address this annual meeting and I look back not only on the last year but also on the last nine and half years because our government is now in its tenth year I ask myself and I ask this gathering rhetorically why is it that this government has been successful over that period of time and why is it that the Labor Party federally has been such an abysmal failure and the answer can be found in a very simple comparison of the different attitudes that we in government have taken compared with the Labor Party in Opposition.
On every issue that we have faced in the nine and a half years that we have been in government we have taken a positive stand based on our assessment of the longer term interests of the Australian community. I think back to the days when we were first elected in 1996 we knew that we had an enormous problem with the budget that we had inherited. We inherited a $96 billion national debt. We had to make difficult decisions but we laid in that first budget that Peter Costello brought down, we laid the foundation of much of the future economic strengths of the country because we began with that budget to get the books back into balance and we began the long process of paying off the Labor Party's debt. We faced in our early months the need to achieve national gun control reform. We initiated major reform of the industrial relations system with Peter Reith's legislation and with the help of the then Australian Democrats we were able to secure a large part of that legislation passage through the Senate.
 We have over the time we've been in office inaugurated major changes to Australia's health system and I heard yesterday that bulk billing rates in rural areas of Australia have risen from thirty percent to sixty nine percent - thirty percent to sixty nine percent as a result of the changes that we have introduced. In recent years we have introduced fundamental changes to the Medicare system all of which have strengthened it and it has led to Tony Abbott's frequent refrain at question time in the House of Representatives, and that is that the Howard Government is the best friend that Medicare has ever had, and he says it often because it is true and you may notice that in recent months at a Federal level that issue has gone out of the newspapers. The reason it is not so prominent now is that the major reforms enacted over the last three years have begun to have a beneficial effect. The introduction of the Medicare safety net derided by the Labor Party but hugely successful. We have undertaken major education reforms. Brendan Nelson negotiated through the Senate major reforms to higher education and we are now in the process of inaugurating major welfare reform.
Now I haven't mentioned everything that the government has done and no doubt you can think of certain things we did that I haven't mentioned. But I have mentioned enough to give you an idea that on all of these fronts the government has taken a very positive attitude towards its responsibilities. And what has been the contrast. At every turn on all of the issues I have listed with the exception of national gun control laws, the Labor Party, led first by Beazley, then by Crean, then by Latham and now by Beazley again, the Labor Party has opposed every single reform, every single positive stance, every single new idea over the last nine and a half years that this government has generated for the long term benefit of this country. They have been the most negative beliefless Opposition or Party that this country has ever seen and the contrast could not be starker. And it is accelerated in the time almost a year now that has gone by since the election. And over that period of time the government has been responsible for pushing ahead with its reform agenda.
We are now engaged in a major debate about industrial relations reform. I spoke at length on industrial relations reform at the business luncheon yesterday. Let me just say to this audience that economic reform in this country and the challenge of economic reform is like participating in a race towards an ever receding finishing line. You have to keep going although you know in your heart you are never quite going to get there but if you don't keep running towards that ever receding line the other people in the race are going to run past you and our competitive position is going to be eroded.
And for those who say to you we don't need to reform industrial relations because we have low unemployment and high productivity and high real wages, let me say to you that those wonderful conditions are the product of the reforms of the last nine and a half years and in some areas the reforms that took place before that. And unless we undertake further reform in five or ten years time when this council meets you will not be able to look back on another decade or five or ten years of strong economic growth. You will lament the fact that the government at 2005 lost its nerve when it came to further reform. So I remain very committed to reform in that area.
Since the last election of course we have recommitted ourselves as we said we would do in the election. We have recommitted ourselves to the sale of the government's remaining share in Telstra. We are not doing that for the money, we are not doing it out of a sense of ideology, we're doing it because we believe in the long run governments are bad at owning companies and in the long if we are to have a very good telecommunications system in this country we must allow Telstra to operate freely and openly as any company of its size has the right to operate. And the other reason we are doing it is that it is fundamentally absurd for the government to be both the regulator and the regulated which essentially is the situation we have at the present time with the government owning a majority of shares in Telstra.
Since the last election we have also seen some of the largest personal income tax cuts in Australia's history. The last budget provided major income tax relief and when all of the reforms in the last budget had been implemented only three percent of Australian taxpayers will be paying the top marginal tax rate of forty seven cents in the dollar and that represents a remarkable piece of taxation change and taxation reform and it a space of three years the point, the level of income at which the top rate of income tax cuts in, will have been lifted from $60,000 to $125,000 a year. Now those two changes alone represent major and generous income tax relief.
 We have also seen on the foreign policy front and I pay tribute to Alexander Downer and Robert Hill in particular, both of them, for the work that they have undertaken on the nation's behalf in this area. We have seen major achievements. We have seen the signing of a climate change partnership between Asian and Pacific nations which validates the opposition this Government has always had to an unconditional endorsement of the Kyoto protocols. We have also seen a historic break through whereby Australia will be invited to attend the first meeting of the East Asia Summit in Kula Lumpar in December of this year. And that has happened side by side with a further deepening of our relations with the United States, the maintenance of very close relations with Japan our great traditional export friend and destination and also of course the remarkable burgeoning economic relationship with China.
Once again as I look back over the last year I contrast that positive agenda of the Government with the negative responses of the Australian Labor Party. At every point again we have been opposed. They had said no to the sale of Telstra. They had said no to our position on climate change. They voted against tax relief in the budget. They have opposed our industrial relations reforms. And once again as I look to the new resurrected Kim Beazley the third as Leader of the Labor Party, I ask myself, how is he different? I find that he's not. He was negative between 1996 and 1998. He was even more negative between 1998 and 2001 and he has continued to be negative between 2004 and 2005. People will say well it's the job of an Opposition to be negative. Yes it is to a point. But it is not the job of an Opposition to be negative when it's against the national interest to be negative.
 When we were in Opposition we didn't oppose everything the Labor Party put forward. We very strongly supported deregulation of the financial system. We had pioneered the idea when we'd been in government and when the Keating Government embraced it we supported it. We supported tariff reform. We supported the introduction of the Higher Education Charge. We supported the privatisation of the Commonwealth Bank. I even remember Mr Beazley ringing me on the night the budget was introduced containing a recommitment to the privatisation of the bank to make certain that we were still willing to support it because without our support in the Senate it would never have got through.
 Now I mention those four things to make the point that just because you are in Opposition you can't escape responsibility for acting in the national interests. You can't claim to be the alternative Prime Minister of Australia but behave as though you have no responsibility to look to Australia's national interest. And that is essentially the two bob each way, walk both sides of the street approach that the Australian Labor Party has taken. Now that may have been clever politics, it may have been something that served them well until the last election. But in the last election the Australian people, I believe in their wisdom, gave the Government a very slim majority in the Senate. And that is a majority that we are going to use very wisely. We're not going to use it wantonly or capriciously. And you may have noticed that one of the early decisions that was taken, and I thank the National Party for it's very constructive approach on this, was to maintain the Deputy Presidency of the Senate in the hands of the Labor Party in having been the convention that has grown up since 1983 that the major opposition party should retain that position. Now we could have used our numbers to achieve a different result but we didn't because we thought it was more conducive to the proper and fair and reasonable conduct of things in the Senate that we did otherwise.
My friends, I've taken a few moments this morning to run through some of the achievements of the Government but more particularly to highlight the fact that the success of this Government has been rooted as much as anything in the fact that it has been a Government willing to take positive forward looking decisions. In contrast to the sheer negativity of our opponents. And I can't think of one single new idea that the Labor Party has embraced in nine and a half years of opposition which has survived more than six months or beyond defeat at the election after the idea was embraced.
 When they first went into opposition they distanced themselves from the Hawke/Keating economic agenda. When we said we were going have tax reform they embraced a thing called rollback. We all remember rollback. Rollback you don't hear of anymore. When Mr Crean became the Leader they seemed to go in a somewhat different direction on a number of issues. It is best to skip over the Latham period. I will leave it to the Labor Party to talk about the Latham period of Opposition leadership. And now with Mr Beazley restored to the leadership of the Australian Labor Party he tells us that he's going to strangle Australian Workplace Agreements one month. The next month he says that he is going to keep Australian Workplace Agreements but make them work better. The only way you can make Australian Workplace Agreements work better is to make it easier for people to enter into them and that is exactly what our industrial relations reforms are. But I challenge you, I challenge the Labor Party to nominate one cause that it has consistently believed in for nine and a half years. You don't need to have to have the public agreeing with you on everything you do to win their support and win their respect. Some of the decisions the government has taken, some of the stances I have taken, I have known have not had majority support. But after thinking carefully I believe they were the right decisions and in the long run the public respects a government that stands up for what it believes in and goes out and argues the case even though it may be a majority opinion. But the contrast couldn't have been more stark and I have searched my recollection to try and think of one single idea or belief or principal apart from wanting to win office, that has survived the nine and a half years of Labor in opposition. And contrast that with our thirteen years in opposition when we in fact led the debate on industrial relations reform, where we were prepared to support the then Labor government when it put forward intelligent ideas.
 So my friends, the contrast could not be starker and finally in one absolutely crucial area, the contrast between the consistency and the positive start to the government versus the inconsistency and the incoherence of the Labor party. The contrast could not be starker in the fundamental area of national security. When Mr Crean led the Opposition, it's position on our decision to join the Coalition in Iraq was to say the least totally contradictory verging on the incoherent and in the time that Mr Beazley has been back in the leadership, his stance has been equally opportunistic. Iraq is a difficult challenge and whatever views people may have taken about our involvement in 2003, it is undeniably the case that the worse possible thing would be for the Coalition to prematurely pull out, that would condemn that country to chaos and it would condemn that country to control by terrorism and forces inimical to our interests, not only in the Middle East, but around the world. Yet that in essence is what the Labor party is talking about. Every time they open their mouths on Iraq, they demand a deadline for withdrawal, they don't think of the processes or of the consequences. The Iraqis are struggling to establish a democracy, it took more than a decade for Australia to write her Constitution. It took a revolution for the Untied States to write her Constitution, it took hundreds of years for the British to evolve their unique and wonderful constitutional system, yet the rest of the world has got the nerve to sneer at the fact that the Iraqis can't meet a deadline of a few weeks or a few months. I think it is remarkable what has been achieved in that country in the face of the terrible intimidation of terrorism and the terrible attacks to which they are subjected and I admire their courage and I wish them well and I believe they will write a constitution. And they will over time, if they have support and they're given time, they will be able to build a nation that will bring democratic values and democratic practices to the Middle East.  And that is the cause that we're committed to and we'll retain our presence there for so long as it is necessary to help the Iraqis bring that about.  And you won't build a credible Iraqi army or a credible Iraqi security force by prematurely withdrawing our training forces and those that are making the emergence of those defence and security forces possible.  And that precisely is the attitude of the Australian Labor Party on that issue.
My friends, can I conclude by doing as I did last night - to thank each and every one of you for the wonderful support and loyalty that you've given to my Government and to all of my colleagues over the last nine and a half years.  It's been very much a Liberal partnership.  I thank Rob Kerin and his team for their support and I commit myself and my colleagues to doing all we can to help Rob achieve success at the state election here in South Australia.  He does face a challenge, he knows that, we all know that.  But we also know that politics can be unpredictable.  Last week in Queensland there was a huge swing against the Beattie Government in Queensland - two by-elections, both won by the Liberal Party.  South Australia is enjoying good economic conditions, it does have a low unemployment rate, and it will, I believe, be able to because of that strength absorb the great bulk of the job losses that will result at General Motors Holden at Elizabeth, following yesterday's announcement by that company.  But those strong economic conditions are overwhelmingly due to the performance of the national government.  I work with elected governments at a state level, Labor or Liberal.  But let me make it clear when it comes to national economic management the overwhelming impact is from the Federal Government.  When things go poorly I can assure you we get all of the blame.  We things go well you get a slightly different tune, but the circumstances are the same.  If we're to blame for the bad things, we're entitled to some of the credit for the good things.  And let me say to all of the State Premiers of Australia - I will work with you cooperatively in the national interest because that is what the Australian public wants us to do.  But let us understand that the strength of the Australian economy is a direct result of the leadership of the Federal Government, it's a direct result of the economic and budget changes, all implemented in the face of ferocious opposition from the Australian Labor Party at a federal level. Not one major economic reform that my Government has brought down, that's produced the prosperity of 2005, had any support from the Labor Opposition.  They opposed tax reform, they opposed getting the budget back into balance and in surplus, they have opposed IR reform, they've opposed a whole raft of reforms.  So it is therefore proper of me to say to the Australian public yes we believe the economy is strong and we believe that the contribution of this Government has been enormous to that outcome.
My friends, thank you very much for your support.  I wish you all well.  I congratulate in advance whoever made the elected positions of authority in the South Australian division.  I love everybody and I do hope that the South Australian division has a very successful year, one that is just as successful as the 12 months that we are completing.
[ends]  


I like the MC's neighbours, they are very nice. Bruce, Danna, to my other parliamentary colleagues, the President of the Sutherland Shire, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman. It is great to be back here, I want to say thank you very, very warmly to Bruce for those very generous words of welcome and of introduction, and can I say how superbly the Shire has been served by its Federal representatives since 1996. Those of us who were focussed on election night on the 2nd March 1996, and I guess that includes just about everybody in this room, will remember great highlights of that night, and one of the great highlights of that night, of course, was when the news came through that the seat of Hughes had fallen to the Liberal Party with a swing of 12 per cent which was one of the quite extraordinary - one of the quite extraordinary victories and the fascinating things about the seat of Hughes was that in 1998 the majority was even higher despite the fact that 1998 was not an election where our vote was quite as strong as it had been 1996, but both Danna and Bruce have built these two seats into bastions of support and bastions of solidarity, if I can use a socialist expression, dear me, for the Liberal Party cause and I thank them both for the wonderful work that they do on behalf of the Government [inaudible] on behalf of the Government.
 The national anthem that was sung tonight by the choir of Inaburra School, it's the second time today I have heard the national anthem or joined in the singing of the national anthem by a school choir.  The other occasion was the choir of the Al-Faisal Islamic School in Auburn earlier today where I attended a function to lay the foundation stone for a school extension. It's interesting, the choir there stood in front of the Australian flag. The choir there sung it in a rich Australian accent and it sung the national anthem with the same sense of commitment and the same sense of enthusiasm about involvement in this country. I mentioned that anecdotally to make a point briefly, and that is to underline the great importance at a time when we are rightly concerned about the possible emergence of terrorist behaviour within our own community, and most specifically within sections of the Islamic community - to emphasise that the overwhelming membership of that community is as scared of terrorism and as enthusiastic in its repudiation of all that it represents, as is the rest of the Australian community and whilst supporting necessary measures to make sure that the terrorist threat does not become real within our own communities we must simultaneously reach out to all Australians, and to understand that the best way of combating the potential for terrorism in our community is a policy of working with, and not working separately from, the Islamic community of Australia.
This country is as the old saying goes, and it is an old saying now, a very lucky country. But another old saying tells us that we make our own luck and just as individuals we have made our own luck and there are a lot of people in this room tonight who have made their own luck because they have worked hard, they've taken a punt, they've taken a risk, they've been prepared to invest in their future and their family's future and they have been properly rewarded, so the same thing can be said about Australia.
 We are living at present in the strongest economic conditions this country has seen since the end of World War II. There was a time in the 50s and 60s when there was a lot of prosperity but I don't think it was as soundly based as it is now. In those days we had a very closed and protected economy, we had very high tariffs, we had a controlled exchange rate, we had foreign exchange controls, we had a highly regulated and centralised wage fixation system and we tended to be rather inward looking. But as the years have gone by and the world has changed forever economically, this country has now become a major exporter in areas that we didn't dream of in the past. We have become expert in the service industries. In the 1950s and 60s, young Australians, in many cases, felt it was beneath them to go into hospitality or recreation, they did. If you're a young person, if you were a person dining out in those days, you often avoided getting served by an Australian waiter because it was regarded as something that somehow or another Australians didn't do.
 But all that has changed and we now find that one of the strongest industries this country has is to be found in recreation and hospitality and the way in which young Australians enthusiastically embraced the service industries is a sheer delight to see and it underpins the enormous strength and it's just one illustration of the way in which this country has changed, and changed profoundly for the better. But the fact that we have such strong economic conditions now, should not be a reason why we make the terrible mistake of thinking that having got to this situation we should rest on our laurels and not embrace further reform so that in a few years time when there is a gathering like this again you won't look back and say why on earth didn't the government make the necessary changes to continue to deliver the economic strength and prosperity we used to have.
And let me illustrate my point by reference to a country, that when I became a junior minister in the Fraser Government in the middle 1970s, in 1976 when I first became a minister after the 1975 election, I was the very  junior Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs and at that time the country that was held up as the great exemplar, the one to follow, the economic model that the rest of the world should follow was the then Federal Republic of West Germany and people used to say to us, look the Germans have got it right. We used to have German ministers come out to Australia and they would tell us how it was done, they didn't do it in a patronising way, they were perfectly gracious people and they were very happy to visit our country and nothing that I say is in any way meant to denigrate the German people, but simply to illustrate a point. It's a parable about economic reform as they had gone through a period of enormous expansion and growth after the end of World War II and people wrote and talked about the German economic miracle and Germany's output and production and GDP growth, with an exchange rate strength and stability, was the envy of the rest of the world.
Now that was 1976, you fast-forward 29 years to 2005 and you find the Germany situation in the world now is very different - it's still a strong country, it's still got great potential and it is still one of the wealthiest countries in the world but it is no longer regarded as the example, and the reason why is that Germany made the mistake that I am determined Australia will not make, and that is having reached a position of great economic strength and having been seen in many respects as outperforming the rest of the world it did tend to sit back and say well we've made it and we don't need to make any further reform and Germany now has an unemployment level which in nominal terms is as high as it was during the Great Depression and when you think of the impact of the Great Depression on Germany, you understand the import of that, it's an unemployment rate of almost 11 per cent, it's the highest, I think, in western Europe. It has an over-regulated labour market and it's in need of very fundamental reform and the point I make again is that having reached that position of relative economic strength, it did tend to rest on its laurels and assume that virtue in a sense would have its own reward when it came to economic management and nothing more had to be done.
And that is something that Australia must resist the temptation to do, because right at the moment I have a lot of people saying to me John, the country's in great shape, you've paid off all of that debt, you've got the lowest unemployment level in 30 years, interest rates are low, you cut tax in the last Budget, this is as good, I have never had to work so hard but I've never made so much money, it's fantastic - go away, don't do anything, don't touch it, something might go wrong, please don't do any more, you've got it right. Now a lot of people say that to me, why are you talking about reform? I am talking about reform because I don't want Australia to make the same mistake as other countries have made and I have often in recent months used the metaphor to describe Australia's economic challenge of participating in a race towards an ever receding finishing line, and economic reform is a bit like that, you never get there, you think you are getting there, but then it keeps disappearing and the reason why you keep going is that there are other blokes in the race and if you don't keep going they will go past you and that is what will happen to Australia. We will begin to lose our position in that race if we don't undertake some further reform. And I make these comments very much in the context of the reforms we are now proposing to workplace relations, they are difficult, they attract criticism, not only from our political opponents from the trade union movement, there is some question in the wisdom of them in the sense of saying 'well everything is going alright at the moment, why do you need to do anymore?' I need to do more, we need to do more as a nation because economic performance is always relative and unless you keep going and you keep thrusting towards a goal, you are going to fall behind and those wonderful unemployment rates that we spoke of will only continue to be available to us if we continue to embrace the reform process.
I want to change our workplace relations system, not radically, not in an extreme way, we are not going to sweep away fundamental protection but we are going to do three very important things. We are going to get rid of the absurd encumbrance of the existing unfair dismissal laws on small and medium-sized businesses.
 And when you hear the unions and some in the Labor Party and some commentators talk about the unfair dismissal laws, you would think they were contained in the Magna Carta, that they go back to, you know that meeting between the barons and King John at Runnymede, in fact they were actually introduced by Baron Laurie Brereton in 1994, a bare 11 years ago and they haven't worked and you all know why they haven't worked - because if you can't let go of somebody who is an encumbrance to your business and making life difficult for your hard working employees, then you don't take somebody else on in the future through fear that you might end up with two of them, and that is fundamentally the problem.
And by getting rid of these laws we will actually generate jobs because we will remove the intimidatory effect and the fact that small firms can't afford to pay go-away money and I had a meeting of 25 businesses of small and medium size in Adelaide last week and 13 out of the 25 gave me their war stories of problems with unfair dismissal laws, so that is the first thing we want to do. The second thing we want to do is to alter the link between the award system and workplace agreements, we are not going to abolish the award system, the award system will continue to operate but we will have a simplified standard for entering into workplace agreements and much of the complexity of the existing system of entering into workplace agreements is going to be changed and therefore workplace agreements will become more popular. They won't become mandatory, people will still be able to have their union represent them through collective agreements if that is their wish, but equally if it is their wish, to have a workplace agreement, that wish will be respected.
 And the third thing we want to do is to establish a national system of industrial relations, Australia is a single economic unit, it may not have been the case 30 or 40 years ago. When I practiced law in Sydney, more than 30 years ago, it wasn't long since we had the practice, it sounds quaint now, that if you formed a company in NSW and it wanted to carry on business in Victoria, it had to register in Victoria as believe it or not, a foreign company. It's true and the registration procedure was virtually identical to the registration procedure if you wanted to register the company and to carry on business in New Zealand or in the United Kingdom. When I practiced law 30 years ago, there were no national legal firms - all of the firms were based essentially in the capital cities or the suburbs and the country towns of individual states. Now many of them still are but we've had the growth of national firms. Now I mention that from my own experience to make the point that we are overwhelmingly now living in one single national economic unit and the idea of having six or eight or nine separate industrial relations systems is plainly absurd and there are many other differences of that kind that we need to do away with. It may astonish many of you to know that somebody who obtained a hairdressing qualification in Western Australia can carry on his or her trade or occupation in London but they can't carry it on in Queensland without going through a further process of qualification, now that is astonishing, it is absurd that we have something of that kind now. One of the reasons why we have those differences is the existence of the union-driven state-based award system, because they dictate the circumstances under which in many cases, people will obtain qualifications.
So they are the three major changes that we have in mind - fixing the unfair dismissal, a burden on small and medium sized businesses, making it easier to go into workplace agreements and establishing a national system. Now people say to me, will you guarantee Prime Minister that every single worker in Australia will be better off under your system and I say well you know I think I have done a reasonable job but I can't guarantee the futures of 10 million people in the Australian workforce. But what I can do is as I have frequently done in Parliament and Bruce and Danna would have heard it, time without number, I can say that my guarantee is my record and if you look back over the last 9 « years, the thing that makes me most proud as Prime Minister when it comes to economic management, more than any other thing is that the average worker in this country has been better off under this Government than it ever was under the two previous Labor governments.
 We have presided over real wage rises of about 14 per cent, I don't want to bore you with statistics, versus about 2-3 per cent under the former government and they are not my figures, they are not Peter Costello's figures or Kevin Andrews' figures, they are the figures produced by the independent Commonwealth Government statistician. So my friends, we have come a long way, we have a lot to be proud of about this country's economic achievements, it is true that we are living in very strong economic circumstances and conditions but it will only stay that way if we are prepared to keep making changes and keep reforming our system so that we keep ahead of those people who are competing against us in the never-ending thrust towards that ever receding finishing line, because unless we continue to do that, we will go the way of others that have thought, having got to a certain point, resting on one's laurels is all that one needs to do.
Can I finally say to all of you that it is an occasion for the Liberal Party to feel proud of what it has achieved at a national level. It has been a strong government, it's been a very united government but it's also been a government not just of one person, I have never sought to run a one-person team, I have never seen myself as a one-man band, I have been supported by a number of outstanding and highly talented senior ministers. I pay particular tribute to the tremendous work that Peter Costello has done as the Deputy Leader and as the Treasurer. He has been in my view, the best treasurer that this country has produced and he deserves enormous credit for the tremendous work that he has done.
 I also want to pay great tribute to the solidarity, there is that word again, heavens above, the strength of the Coalition with the National Party - it's one of the great strengths of this Government and I have had in Tim Fischer and John Anderson, and now more recently in Mark Vaile, wonderful support from the leaders of the National Party and can I also say that Alexander Downer whose now been continuously along with Peter Costello, the only other Minister who has served in the same portfolio to which he was appointed in 1996, has done a really superb job representing the interests of this country overseas, he really has. The list could go on, Philip Ruddock who did such a great job in immigration and now as Attorney General, Tony Abbott as Health Minister - you notice how health although it remains a very big and difficult issue at a state level, at a federal level, many of the issues that were the subject of attack a few years ago, are a lot more muted in their treatment. And to Brendan Nelson who did a great job in negotiating the changes to higher education through the Parliament and so the list would go on and I won't go through all of them. I simply want to say that our success has been due to the team, our strength and our success has been due to the wonderful support that all of you have given us and I echo very much the warm appreciation and gratitude that Bruce has expressed. I know on behalf of all the members of the parliamentary party, I thank you very much for your support, I welcome your attendance tonight and I look forward to working with all of you to make sure that the strength of the Liberal Government and the strength of the Liberal Party at a national level is maintained unabated. Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you Rene, thank you Mr Anderson, thank you to my parliamentary colleagues, Richard Colbeck, Guy Barnett and John Watson, ladies and gentlemen. It is great to be back in Northern Tasmania. I have fond memories of Northern Tasmania from just under a year ago, but over the years I've been in Parliament, I've visited Northern Tasmania on numerous occasions. And Longford has a very special place in the history not only of Northern Tasmania but in the history of this state and therefore in the history of our country. It is true that when Parliament does not sit, one of the things I like to do is to travel around and get outside the major population centres. A few weeks ago I was in rural parts of South Australia, and last week and into the weekend I was in Adelaide. And today and tomorrow and part of Saturday I'm spending in various parts of Tasmania.
 It is a way of talking to people who represent the entire community. It's a way for me to absorb the views of people who don't live in the major population centres such as Sydney and Melbourne and in the National Capital Canberra. It's a way to say a few things about the Government's goals for the country and it's also a way of recognising the special problems and the special challenges of communities around Australia. Now I know that in recent days, Tasmania and not least Northern Tasmania has been heavily hit by some unexpected flooding. The old saying about it's either one thing or the other in Australia often applies. We are desperately short of rain in other parts of our country and you feel as though you'd like to bucket some of it up and take it to the drier parts of New South Wales and Queensland and other parts of the country. And can I say, the area around Canberra is as dry as I have seen it for a sustained period in the 31 years that I have been a member of parliament.
 But that is not the case of course in Tasmania. And I'm therefore, in connection with that, and understanding the particular problems of flooding and flood mitigation here in Tasmania, I'm very pleased to announce that the Federal Government will contribute an additional $685,000 for additional work on the Longford Levee under the Federal Government's Regional Flood Mitigation Programme. This funding is going to be matched by the Tasmanian Government and will be used to develop a levee system designed for a 100 year flood event. And the Longford Levee has already received $500,000 in funding under our programme since 2001 and the contribution I've just announced will bring the total Commonwealth Government commitment to the Longford Levee to $1,185m.
And when it's completed, the Longford Levee system will help significantly reduce future property damage and losses and minimise the disruption to businesses and employment. And can I make the point that the Government's decision was greatly influenced by the views put to us not only be Rene Hidding as Leader of the Opposition, but also by my Senate colleagues. But it is something that we will work with the Tasmanian Government to implement, because it's a basic facility, it's something that's very important to this community. And I'm very pleased to have the opportunity being here today myself to make this announcement and to recognise and to sympathise with the people of this district who are grappling with the problem of flooding and the long term need to invest in flood mitigation.
Rene was kind enough to speak of the strength and good times in which our country is living. And despite the fact that there are areas of challenge and despite the fact that not everybody has enjoyed the prosperity of the past few years, it is true to say that Australia is going through a very strong period of economic development. And every part of the country has enjoyed it. The strong national economy has flowed through to the various parts of Australia. In the time I've been in Federal Parliament, I don't think I've encountered such a sense of optimism here in Tasmania as I now encounter and that's a wonderful thing. And it is evidence that when the national economy goes ahead, when the country is well managed at a national level the benefits will flow through to every part of the country.
 And the strength of your tourist industry, the stability that we have now given to the forest products industry through the Regional Forest Agreement that I signed on behalf of the Commonwealth Government with the then Tasmanian Government back in 1997. The reaffirmation of that by me on behalf of the Commonwealth Government in the Federal Election campaign last year and then the conclusion of the long term agreement between the Commonwealth Government and the State Government that I signed a couple of months ago with the Tasmanian Premier. The support for that agreement from the Tasmanian Opposition and the commitment therefore of people of commonsense and who have an interest in the future of Tasmania to the stability of that industry is very important.
I will never myself be party to decisions that take away from small rural communities the job security of industries which are so important to the future of those communities. And those who sit in glorious isolation in other parts of the country and make declarations that their fellow Australians living far from them should carry the burden, financial and adjustment burden, of their fleeting indulgences and interests; which is really a description of the extreme green position is not a position I will ever support. If people want to embrace an extreme green position, let them invest their own jobs and their own future in that embrace and not oblige others in whom they have no interest or no concern to invest their jobs and their futures.
The other thing that I'd like to say my friends before finishing and having an opportunity of having a cup of tea and meeting you is that visiting a small community such as this reminds me of the tremendous importance all around Australia of community organisations. I've spoken a lot in the time I've been Prime Minister of what I call the social coalition.  I don't mean the coalition between the Liberal Party and the National Party, that's a political coalition and a very good one, and a very strong one. But I mean the social coalition between the Government and great welfare organisations, the business community and individuals. And what I've said very simply is this, there are some challenges in our community that no one section of our community acting on its own can solve and meet.
 There are some things the Government can't do on its own. We might have vast resources, we might have all the money that tax payers contribute so happily, so happily to the Government. We may have all of that but we can't solve all these problems on our own. We need the help of the community, we need the advice and the experience of the great organisations, the volunteer organisations. And I've found that when it comes to getting really good advice about how to deal with drug addiction, how to deal with poverty, how to deal with domestic violence, how to deal with violence against women in particular you need the advice and the understanding of people who are dealing with it at a coalface level. You need the advice of the welfare organisations.
 You also need to enlist the goodwill of public spirited individuals who believe, having got something out of life and having enjoyed the good things of Australia, they ought to be willing to put something back into the community. And we also need the philanthropic generosity of businessmen and women in our country. We have a lot of people in business who are very, very generous indeed. And we have tried over the years to make the tax laws a little easier to encourage them to be even more generous. And if you bring all of these people together and I certainly see it in the smaller communities where people work together. And it's one of the great assets that this country has. And I want to take the opportunity today because I know that there are representatives of many of the community organisations of Longford here today, I want to thank you for the contribution that you make to our community and to the strength and the stability of the entire Australian nation.
This country is very lucky. That's an old saying and it's a true saying. But we have made our own luck to a large degree because we've learnt the knack of working together and we've understood that a classless society where people are treated on the basis of their character and on the basis of the contribution that they make to the community is a society that works together. So I want to say to all of those people who are here representing those organisations a very big thank you for the contribution that you have made.
And finally in recognition that there are some school students here today, and they of course represent our future. Can I say to them and to their teachers what a wonderful job our education system does for our young. Whether it is public or private it matters not. We have a strong public education system in this country. I am the product myself of a public education system. All of my school years were spent in a Government school and I'm very grateful for the education that I received. I also believe very strongly in supporting the choice and the right of parents to send their children to the school they think is best according to their values and to their needs. And what we need in this country is not rivalry and envy between public and private schools but rather a recognition that they need to cooperate and a recognition that we should have choice.
 And in that context can I pay a particular tribute to the teachers, not only of Longford but to the teachers of Australia. It's a very demanding profession, it's a very rewarding profession in terms of professional experience. Perhaps not as rewarding financially as some others. I think its one where more and more perhaps we should be looking to pay teachers on the basis of performance and contribution. But that's another matter and I wont go into the detail of that. I simply want to say to all of you that teachers play a very, very important role. And I know the students here today when they leave school and go on in life, they'll look back and grow in their appreciation and gratitude to the contribution that teachers have made to their development as human beings and fine Australians.
I am delighted to be here today. I'm particularly pleased to be a guest of Rene Hidding, a person for whom I have great regard and a person who's working very hard in the interests of the people, not only of his own electorate, but for the people of the entire state of Tasmania. Thank you very much and I will enjoy meeting you and having a yarn to you in the minutes that are left. Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Carol.  It's with real enthusiasm and gratitude that I again address the annual meeting of the State Council of the Tasmanian Division of the Liberal Party.  By any measure the last 12 months have been a great year for the Liberal Party here in Tasmania.  We saw at the federal election of the 9th of October last year stunning victories in the two northern electorates of Bass and of Braddon and I express my admiration and my thanks to Michael Ferguson and to Mark Baker for the remarkable efforts they both chalked up in winning those two seats.
Those victories were possible because we chose the right candidates in the right places.  And that is a lesson for the Liberal Party all over Australia, whether at a national level or at a state level.  And can I say Rene that I am very impressed with the team that you are assembling for the state election.  I met many of them for the first time last night.  They represent a cross section of the Australian community.  They are people who have had some of life's experiences; they have not spent their entire existence counting numbers in some sub-faction of a narrow cave of a political party.  They have in fact acquainted themselves with the concerns and the needs of the people of Australia and of the people of this state. Can I take this opportunity of congratulating Ben Quin on his endorsement as the Liberal Party candidate for the federal seat of Lyons.
 We're not content with just Bass and Braddon; we would like to further extend our horizon.  And Ben you secured a significant swing last time and we look forward to helping you to secure the necessary further swing when the election is held in 2007. Might I take this opportunity of recording my great thanks to Carol Humphries for the remarkable work she has done as President of the Tasmanian Division over these years.  Thank you Carol for a wonderful job.  It's a pretty thankless job being the well-paid president of a division of the Liberal Party of Australia and there's a large competition for the job.  So I thank you Carol, you've brought energy and enthusiasm and very importantly of all you've brought very great commitment to the task. Can I thank my other federal colleagues, especially the senior Tasmanian Liberal Eric Abetz, the Special Minister of State, for his contribution to the Government, to Paul Calvert, the President of the Senate, and all of my other senatorial colleagues.  You have all formed a remarkably cohesive, effective and dedicated Tasmanian Liberal team.
As we look back on the last year and we ask ourselves why was it that the Government for a second election in a row was not only returned to office but also increased its majority? I said on election night on the 9th of October last year that one had to reach back to the 1960s, to the elections of 1963 and 1966, to find the previous instance where an incumbent government had on two successive occasions increased its majority.  Not only did we increase our majority in the House of Representatives, but we also, I have to confess, miraculously and beyond my expectations, won a narrow majority in the Senate.  Not control of the Senate - a narrow majority in the Senate.  A majority of one on a good day as the saying goes.  And we should keep that in mind, but we should not lose sight of the importance of that majority that the Australian people gave to us.  They didn't do it carelessly; they did it because for a combination of reasons in the right places at the right time they wanted to say to the Government you're doing a good job and provided you continue as you have in the past we continue to have confidence in you.  And we must always see that victory as being a decision by the Australian people to trust us for another three years.  And provided we see it as a privilege, provided we see it as a responsibility of discharging the trust of the Australian people, provided we have a proper sense of humility and modesty about the nature of the challenge and the nature of our capacity then I believe that we will continue to be successful.
This Government has brought economic security and national security and family security to the people of Australia.  And that is why overwhelmingly we have won four elections in a row.  The Australian economy now is stronger than it's been at any time since World War II.  Of that there is little doubt.  In a difficult international environment permeated by the contemporary and, I'm afraid it's been with us for a long time, the threat of terrorism, this Government is seen as strong and reliable; as having formed the necessary alliances with our friends and allies and also understanding the importance of embracing every section of the Australian community that wants to enhance the national unity of this country.
I want today to say something about the security that we have brought to Australian families.  And in talking about the security that we've brought to Australian families I look back to some of the commitments we made in 1996.  And one of the major commitments I made in 1996, before I became Prime Minister, was to alter the tax system to provide greater help to middle Australian families raising young children.  I made no apology for the fact that if I became Prime Minister I was going to alter the tax system to help Australian families, because I believe that strong functioning united Australian families are not only this country's greatest asset but they also represent the most efficient social welfare system that mankind has ever devised.  So I set out in 1996 and the Government set out in 1996 to introduce changes to the tax system that would benefit Australian families.  And over the nine and a half years that have gone by we have steadily changed the system to provide greater assistance, most particularly to low and middle income families who have dependant children.  We've done it openly, deliberately and we've done it in a targeted fashion so that those who need the assistance most get the most.  I don't apologise for that, it's a very sound principle.  If you believe in something and you've got the opportunity in government to achieve it, you set out to achieve it.  And over the past several weeks independent, irrefutable evidence has emerged of the extent of our success in changing the system to help the people we set out to help almost ten years ago.
A few weeks ago the Treasury released, I'm sorry the Bureau of Statistics released, the latest figures on disposable incomes in Australia and what those figures showed very interestingly was that low and middle income people in Australia had enjoyed faster increases and greater increases in disposable income than had the very well off in Australia. Both groups had gone up but the low and middle income people had gone up at a greater rate over the last nine or ten years than had the very well off in the Australian community. Evidence number one, or exhibit number one in the case for establishing that we have kept faith with the commitment we made to Australian families.
 But a few days ago the Federal Treasury released in its regular economic round-up an analysis of the impact of the family tax benefits payment system on Australian families. And what that demonstrated is that so great has been the assistance to Australian families that an estimated 38 percent of families received more in family tax benefits than they initially pay in income tax. And the story is even better for larger families. 59 per cent of families with three or more children aged under 16 pay, when you net out the family tax benefits and the tax initially paid, no tax in net terms.
 So the Australia of which I am proud to be Prime Minister is not an Australia that says to the wealthy you can pay no tax. It's an Australia that says to young struggling families if you qualify according to the income tax you are the group that pays no tax and that is something that in net terms that I am very proud of. Because you all know from your experience, we all know that the most difficult time is when your children are young, the costs are there. I mean it doesn't seem to get any cheaper as they get older I appreciate that but the cost is there, the school fees are there, the excursions are there, everything is there and unless you have a tax system that gives you help then you've got a tax system that really doesn't have a soul.  So I'm very proud of the family tax benefit system and when I hear the Labor Party darkly muttering about the churning effect of the family tax benefits system, I hear the Labor Party darkly muttering about middle class welfare, I hear the Labor Party not darkly muttering but in fact saying that, as Wayne Swan said in the last election campaign, that the $600 a year supplement to people with children was not real, didn't exist.  I mean you could tell that to the millions of mums of Australia who've received it last year and they're receiving it right now, they can tell Mr Swan they're getting it right now, right at the beginning of September, hundreds of thousands of them are receiving it now.  They will tell Mr Swan it's very real indeed.  And they will tell Mr Swan that it's extremely valuable.
  What the Treasury analysis showed was that Australia's system of tax payment benefits is tightly targeted and it aims to provide assistance to those most in need while keeping the cost affordable.  Our approach stands in very stark contrast to the Labor Party's attitude towards the family tax benefit system.  You don't really know whether they favour of it or they don't.  Mr Emerson wants to significantly tighten the means test of family benefits.  Let me to say to Dr Emerson, and he's meant to know something about economics, if you really want to save a lot of money so-called, from tightening family tax payments, you have to bring the income test right down so that it affects hundreds of thousands of what we would call ordinary middle Australian families.  The idea that you can fix a loophole here or there and save hundreds of millions of dollars is phoney, you can't do anything of the kind.  I've gone through these sort of exercises wearing my various disguises over the years and I can say to Dr Emerson, forget it.  If you really want to slash hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars off the cost of family tax benefits and redistribute the money somewhere else you're going to have to introduce an income test that severely affects middle Australian families.
  I've already talked about the disappearing $600 that strangely enough is turning up right now in the pockets of Australian families, and under Labor's election policy last year parents were punished by up to $2,000 a year if they chose to stay at home and look after their children.  And one of the features of the new family tax system that we have brought in over the last 10 years is that we have restored to a very significant extent the reality of choice for parents to decide when their children are very young whether they themselves will provide the full time care for their children as an alternative from them going into paid childcare.  I believe that this is something that should be a matter of parental choice; it's not the role of the Government to tell people how they should care for their young children, it's the role of the Government to provide Australian families with choice and we have been prepared to underwrite that choice by increasing the opportunities for families to remain single income families while their children are very young.  Equally we have provided very generous additional support for the cost of childcare, including the introduction of the 30 per cent tax rebate on net childcare expenses announced in the last Budget.
My friends, I mention these things because in the past couple of weeks we've heard these rumblings from the Labor Party about the family tax benefit system.  We've seen the odd smoke signal going out. There've been quite a lot of them.  They don't seem very coordinated, but smoke signals they are.  And they seem to be saying what a Labor government would do is cut out all of this middle class welfare and we'd sort of use some of that money to cut tax.  Well, that's a phoney proposition on a number of fronts.  The first front is that the family tax benefit system is what it is - it's a family tax benefit.  People can take the family tax benefit either as a fortnightly payment to the principle carer, usually the mother, or they can take it at the end of the year as a tax rebate.  They can take either choice; the net effect is the same.
  Most families, because for understandable reasons they need the money, take it as a fortnightly payment.  And one of the things that I don't think the Labor Party has thought about is that if they turn that system on its head it would have massive re-distributional effects between men and women, between mothers and fathers, overwhelmingly to the detriment of the women of Australia because in most cases the women are the principle carers of very young children, and that is a factor that perhaps the Labor Party has not kept in mind.
 I just want to say to you that one of the proudest achievements of this Government has been the family tax benefits system.  And whilst in its finer details you can always be making sure that it's operating as efficiently as possible, overwhelmingly it's been hugely beneficial, overwhelmingly has lifted the living standards of middle Australian families, and overwhelmingly it has delivered on the commitment that I made 10 years ago that I would change the tax system to provide greater help to Australian families and I'm very proud that we have done exactly that.
I just want to say my friends just two other things.  I had the opportunity last night of talking about the importance of ongoing economic reforms.  I know there's the tendency in some quarters, including in sections of the Liberal Party, for people to think that, look we've had all of this reform over the last 20 years, we've done very well, you've got unemployment down, inflation is down, interest rates are down, people have got jobs, business is confident, exports are booming, particularly in the resource sector, why don't we just go away for a holiday and let's have no more reform?  Why don't you just rest of your laurels?  If you have a good thing stick to it, just let it alone, don't touch it, it's going perfectly well.  Now that's very attractive and it's very complimentary but it's a recipe for this country's slowing slipping behind as the years ago by.
  Economic reform is a never ceasing challenge and the way to stay on top is to find the next opportunity to further reform the Australian economy, the way to stay on top is to make certain that the gains that have brought us where we are now are met by gains in the future, that will give us a new ascendancy in the future because in my now well-known metaphor it is like participating in a footrace towards an ever receding finishing line.  Frustrating, you never quite get there but if you stop running hard the other blokes in the race are going to go past you.  And I don't want the other blokes in the race to go past Australia.  I want Australia to keep out in front. I want the strength that we are seen to present now to be retained.
  If we want unemployment at five per cent or lower in five years time we've got to embrace workplace relations reform and other reforms.  If we want business investment to remain strong we've got to provide them with the incentive of continually modernising the industrial relations system.  So all of those things point towards further reform and further change; the task is never completed.  And the reward; we're strong now because of the benefits of reforms of the last 20 years, some of those reforms I acknowledge were carried out by the former government, I've never denied that.  The difference was that when they tried something sensible when they were in government we didn't block it in the Senate.  Every reform we've tried since we have been in government, every single serious reform without exception the Labor Party has tried to block in the Senate.  And that is why the importance of that tiny majority of one should be very, very much in their minds.
And finally can I say to all of you in expressing my gratitude for the support and loyalty that you've given to me over the last nine and a half years, and to all of my colleagues, how very important it is that that energy and that enthusiasm drives through to supporting Rene Hidding and supporting the State Liberal team. I don't like the fact that we have eight Labor Premiers and Chief Ministers.  I would like to see us win state governments.  I want to see State Government restored to the Liberal Party around Australia.  It's challenging, I understand that, and a couple of weeks ago a seemingly invincible Peter Beattie suffered two very severe by-election defeats in Queensland.  Politics is volatile and if you focus on presenting a strong alternative, all oppositions have got to be negative to a large extent, but they must also, of course, present positive alternatives.  And if you can provide to Rene the sort of loyalty and support I know you will, I can assure him that we at a federal level will do all we can to help, do all we can to give the Liberal Party a real good shot at winning government when the next Tasmanian state election is held.
My friends, my thanks, my deep gratitude are due to all of you for not only the loyalty of the last nine and a half years, but the tremendous support you gave in the election campaign just under a year ago.  I shall never forget no matter what comes my way in my political future, I shall never forget the first news coming through just after six o'clock, because you're an hour ahead of us, I know that, you're a long way in-front of us up there in Sydney and Canberra, coming an hour ahead of the results in the rest of Eastern Australia, to hear those wonderful swings that had been achieved in Bass and Braddon.  It gave to me and my group at Kirribilli House, anxiously peering over the computers, it gave us a sense of great exhilaration and great excitement and of course it was the harbinger of a wonderful, exhilarating and enjoyable evening.
Thank you Tasmanian Liberals for your tremendous contribution to our cause.
[ends]   


Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, Air Commodore Geoff Michael, Mr Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, Deanne Kelly, Minister for Veterans' Affairs, returned men and women, ladies and gentlemen.  Only a few short weeks ago we had a wonderful commemoration not only here in Canberra but around Australia to mark the 60th anniversary of the Japanese surrender in the Pacific War in 1945 and to pay homage and respect to those who gave their lives in World War II and those who fought to defend our country and to preserve its freedom and our values.
Today with a special focus, as Air Commodore Michael said, on those battles which involved a direct threat to the security and integrity of the Australian mainland we turn a special focus and a special gaze.  Printed on your programme are those very memorable words of Australia's war-time Prime Minister, John Curtin, when he said "...it is now work or fight as we have never worked or fought before... What the Battle of Britain required, so the Battle for Australia demands..."  Very direct, very evocative words, which even with the passage of more than 63 years is a reminder of the real peril that our country then faced. Those words were uttered on the 16th of February 1942, one day after the unimaginable had happened - the fall of Singapore, and three days before Darwin was bombed on the 19th of February 1942.  And for 20 months over 100 air raids took place on the Australian mainland from Exmouth to Townsville.  And it was on the 5th of September 1942, as part of the broader battle of Milne Bay, that the Japanese invasion beachhead was thrown back into the sea, thus inflicting for the first time a defeat on the Japanese Imperial Army.  And as those very memorable words of Sir William Slim in his memoirs it was the Australian forces who first inflicted that kind of reversal on the seemingly invincible Japanese army.
What is important and what is special and what is very relevant to all generations of Australians is that the particular battles and the particular phase of World War II that we mark today is the phase in which the Australian mainland and the very security and freedom and presence of our country was directly threatened.  And it was during that time that this country rallied and this country fought, in the words of Curtin, as never before.  And it was not only the fight of the million men and women in uniform, but it was also the fight of the six million civilians of Australia at that time who realised that their very future was at stake.
So this day, this week, importantly is an occasion about which we should know more if we understand the history of this country's contribution to the defence of liberty. We should know more about the Battle for Australia, not to know less about the other battles in which Australians were involved - on the Western Front and Gallipoli and North Africa and all the other theatres of war where Australians fought and so many of them died.  But because of its particular relevance to the direct threat to Australia, something we had never before and have never since faced.  It should have a special place in the understanding of this country's history and the understanding of its contribution to the defence of liberty around the world.  And so I pay, and I know on behalf of all of you, a special honour to those men and women who participated in the Battle for Australia, whether as members of the services or as civilians, all played a crucial role in repelling the attack.  All will remember with lasting gratitude the contribution made by our friends from the United States, particularly in the Battle of the Coral Sea that was so important to the defence of our country.  And so in this first week of September, which has become for a number of historical reasons the occasion to specially mark the Battle for Australia, we thank those who participated in it, we will never forget their contribution to what we now enjoy and we will always honour the fact that they fought for the Australia we now enjoy and the Australia we all love.
[ends]  


Thank you very, very much Nick.  To all of my colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I am truly delighted to have been asked to launch this publication.  And the most important reason why I'm delighted to be involved in this launch is that this is the latest piece of field evidence that when it comes to debating the great issues and the ideas that will shape Australia for decades into the future there's only one party in town, this town, that's involved in the debate of ideas.  And that is the most important thing, the most important thing of all about this publication and the other two publications - one that I launched and one that my colleague the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party, Peter Costello, launched.  And both of those publications along with this one address serious issues.  We are not afraid to debate ideas, we are not afraid to welcome a public contribution to a sensible debate.  It's the mark of a mature, successful, cohesive political party that it can welcome debate on ideas.  And if it's done in a respectful fashion, if it's done on the basis of merit and intellectual exchange it can only be to the good of our party and to the good of our society.
Appropriately enough just before I came here I took part in a very private and a very touching ceremony.  The Polish Ambassador came to see me and awarded me the Medal of Gdansk - the medal that's been struck to mark the 25th anniversary of the Solidarity movement.  Now solidarity is not a word that I normally allow to roll off my tongue with conservative alacrity.  Solidarity is a word that is more normally employed by those who march to a different political drumbeat than I do. But solidarity, of course, was the name that Lech Walesa gave to that great movement that did more than any other individual activity to bring about the collapse of communism in Poland and that of course played a major role in the collapse of communism around the world.  As I look back on the events of my political lifetime none has been more transforming and none more important than, of course, the fall of communism - something which changed the world and represented the greatest single triumph for liberty in my lifetime and in the lifetime I am sure of everybody in this room.
The Liberal Party is a broad church.  You sometimes have to get the builders in to put in the extra pew on both sides of the aisle to make sure that everybody is accommodated.  But it is a broad church and we should never as members of the Liberal Party of Australia lose sight of the fact that we are the trustees of two great political traditions.  We are, of course, the custodian of the classical liberal tradition within our society, Australian Liberals should revere the contribution of John Stuart Mill to political thought.  We are also the custodians of the conservative tradition in our community.  And if you look at the history of the Liberal Party it is at its best when it balances and blends those two traditions.  Mill and Burke are interwoven into the history and the practice and the experience of our political party.
  Nick has quite rightly said that we are a party that is committed to the role of the individual.  Our classic liberal tradition is manifest in our attitude to economic policy.  We see on display right at the moment... [bells ringing]... it's red it is?  A word we do not accept here.  Now can I possibly continue my speech without the presence of ... I think I can, yes I can continue my speech.  I think it is important to just take a moment to identify some of the things that we have done and we have stood for over the last few years to make my point.  If you look for evidence of the classic liberal tradition within our embrace and within our activity, we think, I think instinctively, of our commitment to labour market reform.  Labour market reform is not about transferring power from the States to the Commonwealth, labour market reform is about transferring power from institutions to individuals.  Because the essence of our drive for labour market reform is to create flexibility at the individual workplace level, to empower the individual with appropriate protection to make the bargain that he or she thinks is best for that person's individual circumstances and that person's family. I have often described myself, and I do so again this morning, as somebody who is an economic liberal and a social conservative.  I see no incompatibility between the two.  And some of the oddest pieces of political philosophy that I've listed to or read is that philosophy or attitude that says if you're an economic liberal you have to be a social libertarian.  Or if you are somebody who is conservative in social policy you have to have a conservative approach to economic policy.  My view is there is nothing incompatible with the blend of those two.  And from my own personal point of view I have always thought that that mix best suits both the needs and the temper of contemporary Australian society.  Contemporary Australian society understands that we do live in a world of change, they understand that globalism is with us forever, they may not like some aspects of it but they know they can't change it and they therefore want a government that delivers the benefits of globalisation and not one that foolishly pretends Canute-like it can hold back the tide.  They accept and they understand that.  But they also want within that change, sometimes that maelstrom of economic change, they want reassurance and they want to protect and defend those institutions that have given them a sense of security and a sense of purpose over the years.
And that of course where our conservative tradition comes in.  We carry the Burkean tradition of conservatism within our ranks.  We believe that if institutions have demonstrably failed they ought to be changed or reformed.  But we don't believe in getting rid of institutions just for the sake of change.  We need to be persuaded that they are failed institutions.  We shouldn't rise to the clarion call of radical change just for its own sake.
  It was Edmund Burke who famously said that "a state without the means of some change is without the means of its conservation".  Now that is an interesting way of expressing the blend and the mix that we must, of course in a contemporary Australian society, try and achieve.  I am sceptical of radical reform of our society.  In fact, I've been a profound opponent of radically changing the social context in which we live.  As Liberals we support and respect and promote the greatest institution in our society, and that is the family.  There is no institution that provides more emotional support and reassurance to the individual than the family.  There is no institution, incidentally, which is a more efficient deliverer of social welfare than a united, affectionate, functioning family.  It's the best social welfare policy that mankind has ever devised.
But we also see liberty in our community as bound up with a sense of order.  And we also as Liberals believe very much in a sense of individual and personal responsibility. And that is both a concomitant of personal liberty, but it is also an acknowledgement of the need that if we are to enjoy personal liberty we must have an ordered society.  And we believe very strongly in the concept of mutual obligation.  It's a concept that we have championed over the last 10 years and it's a concept that has won widespread support within the Australian community.  And it is a concept that expresses the essential balance we must achieve, the compassion of looking after people who need help but the reasonable expectation of a society built on individual achievement that having given people a fair go they will return the compliment by themselves having a go.  And that is really the philosophical basis of our ideal.  And our strong belief in personal responsibility of course leads to, or in fact flows from our deep commitment to the obligation we have to each other.
But another thing that, of course, has united all Liberals, and in that collective unity has separated ourselves from our political opponents, is our profound respect for and pride in the history of this country.  We may have a debate about the appropriate balance between the central government and the states, we may talk about centralism and federalism.  But there is one thing that Australians should never tire of talking about and should never tire of identifying themselves with, and that is the cause of Australian nationalism.  Some people say I'm a centralist - I've even heard one or two of my colleagues say that.  I am certainly not a stake-rightist, and I am not a centralist but I am an Australian nationalist.  And my national sentiment transcends any regional parochial or state sentiment that I might in the dim distant past have had.  I not only refuse to barrack for New South Wales in State of Origin rugby league matches out of respect for the marvellous generosity of the Queensland people at the federal election,  that is one of the reasons why I refuse to barrack against my good friends from Queensland, but of course another reason is much and all as I love the city in which I grew up I have never felt any personal identification with the State.  Perhaps that varies according to where you grew up.  But a sense of commitment to the unity and the wholeness of the Australia nation is something that I think is very important to Australian Liberals.
Unlike occasionally our political opponents, we don't share the Manning Clark view of history that the history of this country started in 1972.  We believe that this country has had a proud record of achievement.  And indeed it is interestingly expressed in the equivocation that governments sometimes have about how they mark great political events.  I can remember in the 1980s as a member of the Fraser Government we were starting the preparations to mark the Centenary of Federation.  And the label, the description we wanted to give to it was 'The Australian Achievement'.  And when were replaced by our political opponents in 1983 they got rid of that and I think they had the description of 'Australians Living Together'.  Now, I mean that's nice and you know I'm all in favour of that.  But it sort of said something to me, an equivocal view within that party about the history of this country.  Now this country of course has blemishes in its history and I've said before and I'd say it again today that the greatest blemish of all has been its treatment of the indigenous people.  But if you look at the balance sheet of this country's history of achievement, it is not impressive, it is heroic and it is something that every individual Australian should be immensely proud of.
Ladies and gentlemen, I think this publication will make a huge contribution to the debate on ideas.  I welcome it as I do the other two publications.  I congratulate Santo for his indefatigable work in bringing this together and all others who have contributed to it.  And can I again say to you that we do occupy as the Liberal Party of Australia a special position amongst centre-right parties around the world.  We are a party that must care for both of those traditions.  We should never see it as our role as Australian Liberals to see the triumph of one of those traditions to the unfair detriment and certainly not the obliteration of the other.  Our success has been to recognise that each has a rich contribution to make and when we blend them in the right way we are not only at our most compassionate and also most effective, but we are also at our most politically acceptable.  The average Australian, that overworked expression for which there is really no proper or valid alternative, the average Australian is a mixture of a lot of things - he believes very much in the traditions of this country; he or she believes this country has been very successful; he or she doesn't think this country has much to be ashamed of; he or she believes that this country is well regarded around the world.  But he also believes that individuals should be given a fair go, that if they're down on their luck as he would describe it they should be helped, but having been helped they should then get on with their lives and not expect the rest of the community to keep on assisting them.  He or she believes in traditional institutions, like the family and the traditional view of the family, but he or she doesn't want to persecute people who might have an alternative view.  He or she is a very tolerant individual, but also a person who believes that when we face a common threat we need to be a united, cohesive people.  And finally and very importantly the average Australian believes in a classless society. The average Australian believes that a person's worth should be determined by a person's character and hardwork and not their religion, their race, their social background or their class.
Now that's not the most perfect definition of what an Australian believes in and what an Australian stands for but after some, collectively at various stages with the odd interruption here or there of some 14 years of leading the Liberal Party of Australia which is the custodian of this unique blend, that's my assessment humbly and respectfully of what I think the average Australian cares for and what matters to that person.  And they want a government that responds to and expresses those values.  And they are, they are in some respects universal values but they also contain a number of unique Australian values and I think they're very good values and it's our job to understand those values, constantly keep them in mind and respond and I think in the great debate of ideas this document will make a huge contribution as will the other two and I thank the authors of it and I congratulate all of my colleagues for the willingness to engage in a debate of ideas.
And I finish on this note - it's not a mark of fragmentation, it's a mark of cohesion and strength and maturity and success that we can engage in this debate of ideas and thus be an example to other political parties in Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mick. To Your Excellency, Parliamentary Secretary, Heads of Departments, our guests, ladies and gentlemen. I feel very privileged to have this opportunity to pay tribute to those who served Australia so courageously and so bravely just a year ago in our Embassy in Jakarta. And in doing that, record on behalf of the Government, our great debt of gratitude to the men and women of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the men and women of all the other Departments that serve in missions overseas.
It's a different world we now live in. It was, as the Secretary said, the first occasion that there'd been an attack on Australians and Australian missions abroad.  And that was a remarkable event and a very sad event in itself. I've never forgotten the resolve and steadiness of David Ritchie, our Ambassador, when I spoke to him only a short while after the attack took place. Despite the obvious personal danger in which he and so many of his fellow officers had been exposed to, in a thoroughly professional and robust manner he was describing what had happened, he was describing the reaction of the staff and he was giving his assessment of the casualties and the injuries that had been done to so many employed by Australia at the Embassy.
 This is also an occasion very particularly to record our tremendous sense of gratitude and our great sadness towards those Indonesian Nationals who died protecting our Embassy. There were ten Indonesians killed in this attack and they were employees and helpers of our cause in Jakarta. I had the opportunity shortly after the attack of visiting the mission and meeting some of those who'd been left bereaved and some of those who were still coping with some of the terrible injuries.
 And I do, Your Excellency, want to convey through you to the Government and the people of Indonesia, our continuing sense of loss and our continuing debt to those people who lost their lives serving the interests of Australia. It's an occasion to reaffirm the importance, not only of the fight against terrorism, but to reaffirm the importance of links between Australia and Indonesia. Australia and Indonesia are tied forever by circumstances of geography, strategic challenge, the place we occupy in the world, the important, very important role of Indonesia as the largest Islamic country in the world. The bonds that have grown over the last year, particularly since the election of President Yudhoyono are very important to me and all members of the Government, are very important to the future of our two countries and our shared destiny in this part of the world.
But most importantly today's an occasion for me to say thank you to the men and women of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Defence personnel and all others whose professional lives have taken on in many senses, more threatening and dangerous dimensions in this age of terrorism. And I wouldn't want any of you gathered here today to think for a moment that the Government is not very grateful for your professionalism, very grateful for the way in which your colleagues in Jakarta just a year ago today demonstrated the highest professional standards of the Australian foreign service. You did the right thing by your country, by your profession, and by yourselves. And in honouring those who risked their lives, in recalling with sadness the Indonesians who died helping us, I express to all of you the gratitude of not only myself and my Government, but I know all of the people of Australia.
It is a sad occasion. It's an occasion to reaffirm the importance of your mission. Your commitment to the professional service of Australians abroad is something that grows in significance with each passing year.
I thank you all and again I record my sadness and my condolences to the people of Indonesia on their very sad loss.
[ends]  


Thank you very much madam president, Mr Michael Andrews of Citigroup, His Excellency Dennis Richardson, the Australian Ambassador to the United States, ladies and gentlemen.   It's a great pleasure for Janette and for me to be back in this wonderful city of New York and particularly coming as our visit does at the time of the fourth anniversary of the attack on Washington and New York, I again express on behalf of the people of Australia our sense of closeness and kinship with the people of the United States, particularly in the wake of the terrible suffering of the people of many parts of this wonderful country in the wake of Hurricane Katrina.
 New York is a wonderfully vibrant, free and open city and no perverted ideology will ever cower the people of New York or take from them their sense of openness and involvement in the affairs of the world.
The values of the Asia Society, an organisation that has been at the forefront of promoting an understanding of the diversity of the Asian-Pacific region will I'm sure find a greater relevance as the years of the 21st century go by. And the values of this society have a very easy resonance with the remarks that I want to make today. And I start in addressing the attitude of Australia towards the Asian Pacific area, by saying at the very outset that American's global leadership, and Australia's relationship with the United States, play very importantly into our outlook and our priorities for the region.
We believe that strong global leadership by the United States is crucial to Asia's future stability and prosperity. The United States is not only a great global power, indeed the world's only superpower, but America is importantly for the context of my remarks today,
a great Pacific power and has so often been the case in the past, it fulfils its regional role most powerfully when it provides global leadership. As the Asia Pacific region changes dramatically in the decades ahead, some priorities will however remain constant.  We believe that a strong United States presence in the Asia Pacific will remain quite vital for stability and security.  And America's alliance relationships, including with Australia, will be the anchors for the United States presence in the region.
One of the hallmarks of Australia's policy in the past decade has been our capacity, simultaneously, to deepen relations with the United States, whilst expanding our relations with many nations in the Asian Pacific region. In our view and I say this unconditionally, close links with the United States are a plus - not a minus - in forging closer Australian involvement in the Asian Pacific area.
I've said before that history will have no larger stadium this century than the Asia Pacific rim.
Asia is poised in coming decades to assume a weight in the world economy it last held more than 500 years ago.  It is also home to eight of the world's largest standing armies and after the Middle East, three of the most volatile flashpoints in the world - the Korean peninsula, the Taiwan Strait and Kashmir.
  The stakes are large and will test the strategic maturity, restraint and adaptability of all nations. Australia approaches our rapidly changing region with clear assumptions and strategies, and importantly a sense of optimism. We recognise the great diversity of Asia - taking account of how differences in power, institutions and aspirations will shape regional politics.
   We seek to engage most substantially with those countries with which our primary strategic and economic interests lie. We believe that what matters most for our regional engagement is the substance of relations between countries, more so than the formal architecture of any diplomatic exchange. We recognise that advancing our security and prosperity in the region requires a balance of principle and pragmatism.  And we adopt a flexible approach to this task - one that combines bilateral, regional and multilateral instruments and that importantly elevates results over process and form. This outlet-look serves Australia well in a region of very rapid change, and in a world of increasing interconnectedness, and in an age of great uncertainty.  It has seen Australia deepen her regional engagement and discharge our global responsibilities while keeping faith with our history, our interests and importantly our values.
Rather than try to touch on every aspect of Australia's regional outlook, I'd like to focus my remarks on one strand - and that is our belief that regional engagement relies principally on the substance of relations between countries, more so than on either lofty statements or grand institutional designs. The truth of this proposition was brought home very forcibly to me at the start of this year in the wake of the terrible Boxing Day tsunami.
  This epic human tragedy underlined how, especially in times of crisis, people look inevitably to nation-states for resources and for action. And while not belittling in anyway the role of international organisations and non-government organisations, nothing can or will replace national governments as the legitimate sources of order and justice in world politics. Worthy sentiments are important.  Inclusive processes are important.  But it is what nations actually do, and do quickly in times of stress that in many ways is the true test of good international citizenship.
 Australia was able to offer swift and significant help to Asian countries, particularly Indonesia, affected by the tsunami, and we remain the world's largest official donor in response to this disaster.  Our emergency services personnel worked side-by-side with their regional counterparts on the task of dealing with the immediate consequences of that disaster.  Through their generosity, the Australian people demonstrated the genuine compassion and connectedness they felt for the region.
 The Australian Government's $1 billion, Australian dollar package of assistance and loans for Indonesian reconstruction - the largest aid package in our history, was a singular demonstration of our commitment to stand by our near neighbour in its time of greatest need and greatest domestic peril.  It's sometimes said, and I think it's probably true, that no two close neighbours are more dissimilar than Indonesia and Australia.  Yet our two countries are forever linked by geography and by destiny - a point I made frequently to a man I would call my good friend, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono on the many occasions that we have met since he became President of that very big and important country.
 As this audience probably appreciates better than most, the world has an enormous stake in encouraging the development of a secure, prosperous and democratic Indonesia.  In the age of terrorism, it is about the most powerful weapon we can have against Islamic extremism in our part of the world. The success of Indonesia is crucial to the ongoing fight against terrorism in our region.
 The world's largest Muslim nation and the world's third largest democracy, Indonesia deserves more credit than it has been given for the political reforms that have taken root in recent years. It's a failing sometimes of mature democracies to forget how long it took their forebears to fashion the secure democracy we now openly enjoy and tend to take for granted.
It is important that the international community, not least the United States, continue to help Indonesia in its efforts to strengthen democratic institutions, to attract foreign investment, to maintain the pace of economic reform and to enhance her security.
 Like many other countries we welcome the recent Aceh peace agreement, a significant achievement and a sign of how with goodwill and a spirit of compromise all Indonesians can look forward to a better and more peaceful future.
Of course, Indonesia faces huge challenges and its destiny is largely in its own hands. But Australia - with resources, friendship and importantly sticking power - is determined to help our neighbour achieve its ambition to be a just, safe and prosperous country.
 In our immediate neighbourhood, Australia has entered a new phase of activism in the Pacific. This again is underpinned by a willingness to commit significant resources and to work cooperatively on practical problems where a positive impact can be achieved. For many fragile tiny states, and this applies particularly to the Pacific Islands, poor governance, crime and corruption pose a real threat to both economic development and to regional security. In an expansion of our large aid programme to Papua New Guinea, Australian police and officials are being deployed to help improve law and order, economic management, border controls and transport security. The Australian-led Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands has made substantial progress in restoring stability, law and order. This operation underlines the point that a messy and uncertain world will not always tailor itself to a particular institutional response.
Australia's intervention in the Solomon Islands was based on a formal request from its government.  And given that government's diplomatic recognition of Taiwan, there was virtually no prospect of a United Nations Security Council Resolution authorising the operation. What mattered however, and the true test of our engagement, was not the formal process but the outcome.  This was a regional response to a fragile state and it was our responsibility as a Pacific power to take the lead.
 No relationship of substance in Asia has been more important over the years to Australia than our relationship with Japan.  And let me at this point take the opportunity of doing publicly what I did privately last night over the telephone, and that is to congratulate the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Koizumi on his remarkable victory. He's a person I admire enormously, he showed great political courage, he demonstrated an understanding of his people and very importantly he was prepared to take political risks to maintain the momentum of economic reform. And that is very important to not only Japan, but it is also very important to the whole of our region.
 And despite changes in relativities in economic power, Japan remains the world's second largest economy and Asia's largest economy by a substantial margin.  It has been the largest export destination for Australia for about 40 years and is likely remain so for many years in to the future. The partnership between Australia and Japan has continued to evolve off the back of a quiet revolution in Japanese foreign policy. This has been demonstrated by Japan's contribution to operations in East Timor, its role in the six-party talks on North Korea and in the three-way dialogue with Australia and the United States on security issues. And importantly, Japan is also making a significant contribution to coalition efforts to help the Iraqi people build a secure, democratic future.
  Australia currently has troops stationed in Iraq's Al Muthanna province helping to maintain security for Japanese personnel undertaking reconstruction work, that itself is the latest demonstration of our strong commitment to cooperating with Japan on security challenges.
Australia is also a strong supporter of Japan taking a permanent seat at the table of any expanded United Nations Security Council.  We see this as an important reflection, both of Asia's economic and strategic weight in the 21st century and also an additional element of future regional stability.
Australia's relationship with China further illustrates what can be achieved when countries focus on the substance of common interests. The rise of China is reshaping Asia and the world.  It has grown by around 9 per cent a year for more than 25 years.  In the next decade, China will likely surpass Germany to become the third largest economy after the United States and Japan. It is already the world's second largest holder of foreign exchange reserves, second largest consumer of energy and the third largest importer of oil. Australia's trade with China has quadrupled in the last decade and China is now our second largest merchandise trading partner.  We are keen to expand this economic partnership even further.  Australia is only the second developed country to begin negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement with China. But again, let me stress, that innovations in institutional architecture must be kept in perspective.
  Australia's economic engagement with China is shaped most powerfully by underlying economic complementarities and business relationships.  In other words, China will remain a large and growing economic partner for Australia whether or not we conclude a formal Free Trade Agreement. As China assumes a greater strategic and economic weight in Asia in the 21st century, it will inevitably place some strain on the international system.  But to see China's rise in zero-sum terms is overly pessimistic, intellectually misguided and potentially dangerous.  It is also a negation of what the West has been urging on China now for decades.
  China's progress is good for China and good for the world.  Its economic liberalisation and integration into the world economy has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty.  Its growth in recent years has helped us sustain the expansion of the global economy and of world trade. In roughly a decade, China has moved from having import barriers comparable to those of high income countries in the 1950s to tariff levels close to today's developed country average.  And according to Morgan Stanley, American consumers in the last decade have saved more than $600 billion due to cheaper imports from China.
 Australia's strong relationship with China is not just based on economic opportunity.  We seek to build on shared goals, and not become obsessed by those things that make us different.  By widening the circle of substance, we are better able to deal openly and honestly with issues where we might disagree. An excellent example of the fruits of this approach in a regional setting is the recently announced Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate. This important development currently includes Australia, the United States, China, Japan, India and South Korea. Together these nations account for roughly half the world's greenhouse gas emissions. With a strategy centred on technology cooperation, for the first time, key developing and developed countries in the region are working together to address the challenges of climate change, energy security and air pollution.
 This partnership exemplifies how countries in the region can work together on common challenges through open, market-oriented institutions. It is in keeping with a pattern of regional cooperation that Australia has long supported on economic and trade issues through APEC.  We've also seen the inclusion of security issues on APEC's agenda in the post-September 11 world with major initiatives on counter-terrorism and travel security.  This is part of a natural evolution and one the Australian Government will build on as we prepare to host APEC, in Sydney, in the year 2007.
  APEC has served us well as the pre-eminent regional institution and Australia remains strongly committed to ensuring that it remains responsive to emerging regional challenges. Australia also looks forward to participating in the East Asia Summit, to be held in Kuala Lumpur in December.  This gathering will bring together leaders from ten ASEAN countries as well as those from China, Japan, South Korea, India, Australia and New Zealand. Again, we believe that such institutions work best when they are open, market-oriented and inclusive in character, focusing on key regional priorities.
  In the coming weeks and months leadership by us and others, notably the European Union, will be especially important in the lead up to the World Trade Organisation meeting in Hong Kong in December. At Hong Kong, the world has a chance to break the back of global trade negotiations. We need a successful Hong Kong meeting if we are to complete the Doha Round in 2006. All countries - in the Americas, in Europe and in Asia, share an obligation to live up to the promise of making this a development round.  The world's richest countries must show leadership but so must developing countries, such as China, India and Brazil. They also have obligations to fulfil if we are to maintain the World Trade Organisation as a positive force for global development and poverty reduction.
 Nations share a particular responsibility to rise to the occasion on cutting barriers to agricultural trade. I declare a national self interest, but I also point to the enormous advantages to developing countries of reductions in agricultural protection.  I know that President Bush wants to progress on agriculture and I've also welcomed the recent call by the British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, for an end to agricultural subsidies by the year 2010. This week world leaders are gathering here in New York to amongst other things, commit again to making further progress on global poverty reduction. Can I say with some feeling that this discussion on aid sometimes obscures the fact that trade barriers in the developed world cost poor countries more than twice the amount of the official development aid they receive.
 The experience of Asia is proof positive that market-oriented globalisation is the best poverty reduction strategy that mankind has developed.  According to the World Bank, the proportion of the East Asian population living on less than a dollar a day fell from 56 per cent in 1981 to 16 per cent in 2001. This is, as Martin Wolf of the Financial Times has pointed out, is the biggest and fastest reduction in extreme poverty in world history.  And that was the result of market oriented globalisation. And it's a point that should not be lost, particularly on those who gather here in New York this week. Without a doubt, the greatest contribution nations can make to alleviate poverty is to conclude the Doha Round and further reduce trade barriers at the earliest opportunity.
 My friends may I conclude by again thanking the Asia Society for the opportunity of addressing you. I do applaud the contribution that this organisation has made towards the cause of a greater understanding of the diversity and the complexity of the region we collectively, but I think sometimes simplistically call Asia. It's an area of the world of course that will assume an even greater significance and greater role as the 21st century unfolds. It's a part of the world with which my own country is by reason of history and of geography and by increasing cultural interaction permanently connected. It's an area of the world from which we derive a wonderful economic and human nourishment, and it's an area of the world where the opportunities for growth and development are unlimited. And it's an area of the world that contains many of the potential, strategic challenges and danger spots that are likely to occupy the time and attention of the nations of America and Europe in the decades ahead. And the contribution that your organisation makes to an understanding of this world is immense, and I thank you for the opportunity of sharing some remarks with you.
Thank you.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, as one of the original 51 countries to sign the UN Charter, Australia has had a long and active involvement in the United Nations.  In this, the 60th anniversary year of the UN, Australia can look back on a strong record of involvement in a multitude of UN-sponsored processes and active membership of the organisation.  We have supplied personnel for peacekeeping operations around the world since 1947, and have been at the forefront of efforts to reform the operations of this organisation.
We should not think that the United Nations can solve all the world's problems, nor that it should attempt to do so.  And the type of multilateralism embodied in organisations such as the UN can only be but one element of a comprehensive foreign policy. The nation state remains the focus of legitimate action for order and justice in our world.  As nation states, our collective challenge and responsibility is to identify those things that the UN can do and ensure that it is fully equipped to do them.
It is a grim but inescapable fact that our world lives under the shadow of global terrorism.  I have this week signed the Nuclear Terrorism Convention on behalf of Australia.   We support the counter terrorism outcomes of this Summit, including the momentum to conclude the Comprehensive Terrorism Convention.  More however, could have been achieved.  And there has been understandable disappointment and criticism at the lack of language on disarmament and non proliferation, particularly given the risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to terrorists. The Summit has seen much discussion about aid levels and I was pleased to announce earlier this week my Government's goal to double its overseas aid allocation from 2004 levels to about $4 billion by 2010.
But we should not merely be focusing on the quantum of such aid, important though it is.  What is just as important, if not more so, is the effectiveness of aid. Genuine and sustained poverty alleviation will only occur in an environment of good governance, private sector growth and respect for private property ownership.  With aid comes a reciprocal responsibility on recipient governments to tackle corruption, strengthen governance and promote institutional reform.
These will remain key objectives of Australia's aid programme, not least as it rises to meet the challenges posed by HIV/AIDS, and the re-emerging threat of avian influenza, which will require global political leadership in which Australia will play its part. There has been strong emphasis in recent days on the fact that trade barriers in the developed world cost poor countries more than twice the amount of the official aid they receive.  There could in truth be no better gift to the developing world than lower trade barriers and an end to subsidies.  I warmly welcome President Bush's pledge and challenge to us all on Wednesday that the United States is ready to eliminate all tariffs, subsidies and other barriers to the free flow of goods and services if other nations are willing to do the same.
We must also recognise the high cost of ignoring fragile states.  Responding to their challenges requires a new way of acting which recognises the links between security and economic development.  Australia's leadership of the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands speaks for our experience in this area, which we look forward to sharing.  In this context, Australia welcomes the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, and I'm pleased to announce a contribution of $3 million over 3 years to its new Standing Fund. On human rights and the rule of law, leaders' endorsement of the concept of a 'Responsibility to Protect' is a significant step forward.   But we are concerned at the limited outcome on the Human Rights Council.  Australia supports a strong Council that is capable of responding to serious human rights abuses effectively and with credibility.  Member states must work assiduously during this session to inject substance into the agreed negotiations on the Council's modalities.
We welcome the resolve to strengthen the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and will make our own additional contribution to its operations. I was also pleased to announce here this week a contribution from Australia of $10m to the Democracy Fund.  History has shown that the most stable and prosperous nations over time have responsive political institutions as their common link.
We could have hoped for more progress on management reforms for the organisation, particularly in light of the findings of the Volcker inquiry and we support the ongoing need for reform.  We remain hopeful that a formula for Security Council expansion that will better reflect today's geopolitical realities, including through the permanent membership of Japan, can be worked out.
In summary we welcome the outcomes document as a reasonable balance of issues overall.  The challenge for the United Nations now is to re-define its authority and responsibility in the global environment in which we find ourselves.  Australia, as always, will be an active player in these deliberations.
I thank you.
[ends]   


Thank you very much Michael.  Jenny Macklin, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm delighted to have this opportunity of contributing to the AFR conference on Skilling Australia and I compliment the AFR on the priority it is attaching to this very important issue.
I've been asked in opening the conference to focus on what, to use an old clich‚, is called the 'big picture'.  For most of my public life, the big picture, economically speaking, has been about Australia's capacity to generate good jobs.  So it is significant in itself that we are here today discussing not a shortage of high-wage jobs but rather a shortage of skilled workers.  The Australian economy is now in the 15th year of the longest economic expansion in half a century, perhaps the longest since the gold rushes of the 19th Century.  And in the last year alone some 400,000 new jobs were created - that's the largest number of jobs created in a 12-month period in Australia's recorded history.  That brings to more than 1.7 million the number of new jobs created since this Government came to office. Our unemployment rate is now at a 30-year low and, despite high oil prices, inflation is still well contained.  Long-term unemployment pleasingly is about a quarter of what it was during the early 1990s.  More working age Australians are in employment than ever before.  And the participation rate is now at a record high of 64.8 per cent.  And average real wages have risen by almost 15 per cent since March of 1996.
  We live, as never before, in a workers' market.  Put this together with a highly competitive global economy and the fact that Australia has largely dismantled the protective wall that once surrounded it and what emerges is a picture of unparalleled economic strength.  One is therefore tempted to say that only in Australia could an environment of very strong demand for high-skilled, high-wage jobs be considered by some as a crisis.  That says something about the disposition for pessimism amongst many of our commentators on public affairs.
But having said that and tried to put the issue into perspective, I do not wish for a moment to underestimate the problem relating to skills.  Many industries in Australia do suffer skills shortages and if they are left to worsen they could strangle future economic growth.  In some areas we do clearly have a skills mismatch.  And we face a major public policy challenge to make our skills development institutions more flexible and responsive to the needs of Australians of all ages - the old as much as the young.  But it is a challenge, it's not a crisis, and we should approach it as such.  It is incidentally a challenge of the kind that any Australian Prime Minister of the last 30 years would have happily traded for the problems of prolonged recession, double-digit unemployment, stubbornly high inflation and natural disasters.
Skilling Australia to ensure that the growing demand for skilled labour can be met is a challenge for the entire community - for governments at all levels, for business and for workers and those who represent them, and for Australian educators and for parents. It is, Mr Chairman, as much a cultural challenge as an economic one.  As a community, we must re-think some of the received wisdom about economic and social success in contemporary Australia.  We need to give all Australians - young and old - greater choice and opportunities to gain and update their skills.  And we must clear away obstacles to skills development, not just in our training system, but also in our system of workplace regulation.  It is now nearly half a century since Peter Drucker first coined the term the 'knowledge worker'.  In my view, the prism through which we have tended to view knowledge workers has been far too narrow.  Knowledge is not just the stuff of people in white coats or white collars.  It is to be found just as much on the construction site, on the factory floor, at the mine, and on the farm as at the office.
Skilling Australia is about mobilising knowledge, not just in the classroom, the lecture hall or the laboratory, but in every single Australian workplace.  It is about unleashing the talent and potential of our enterprise workers in every field of endeavour.
  As the nature of work changes, we need structures that are flexible and responsive so that our industries and our people can adapt to new challenges.  Few people expect or want the same job for the entirety of their working life.  They want to be able to respond to change and access education and training opportunities throughout their working lives.  They also want their skills to be portable.  Barriers and inconsistencies that make it difficult for workers to respond to new opportunities are no longer affordable or acceptable.
  My remarks this morning will focus on three aspects of the nation's skills challenge.  The first relates to our schools.  The second concerns a generational failure to see trades as a successful career path.  And the third is our need to tackle specific impediments to skills development that exist both in our national training system and in the regulation of our labour market.
The foundation of any national skills effort must be in ensuring that all of our children get the best possible start at school.  The Commonwealth continues to fund both government and non-government schools at record levels.  But we know that school funding is only part of the story.  Getting the basics right in our schools is more important than ever.  Ensuring that all Australian students are able to read, write and count sounds very simple.  But when it comes to equipping young Australians with the skills they need for the future we cannot underestimate its importance.  That is why, for the first time, the Government is making common national testing in specific areas a condition of Commonwealth schools funding.   For example, by 2008 all Australian students will have their literacy and numeracy assessed at years three, five, seven and nine.  Ensuring Australian parents are given useful information on which to base informed choices about their children's schooling has been another priority of this Government.  Parents want clear and honest assessments of how their child is progressing at school.  Under the new Schools Assistance Act, school report cards will be written in plain English and parents will be informed of their child's performance against national standards and relative to the child's peer group in school.
 The second element of the national skills challenge has been a particular concern of mine over many years and that is our failure as a society to value careers in trades.  Too often, Australians have been persuaded that our prosperity is reliant on white-collar workers sitting at a computer and on shoe-horning more and more young people into university courses.  Too often, young Australians have been persuaded that university is the best indeed the only path to success only to find that they were undertaking subjects that failed to capture either their interest or their imagination.  A 20 per cent dropout rate in the first year of university tells us something is going wrong.  We have failed to recognise that our traditional trades are vital to increased productivity and growth, although it is certainly true that the manner in which these trades are plied has often been transformed by information technology.  Think, just as one example, of the skills required of today's auto mechanic.
It is now very clear that we were wrong to abolish the network of technical schools that provided a path of opportunity for many young people into the workforce.  As a nation, we need to redress the bad decisions that were made in the past.  Trade skills, new and traditional, are as valuable to our nation's continued economic development as many university qualifications.  This year's Federal Budget included the biggest ever single injection of funds for vocational education and training by an Australian Government with the specific purpose of elevating the status of trades.  This included the extension of Youth Allowance, Austudy and ABSTUDY to full-time apprentices, tax exempt $500 payments at the end of first and second year for eligible apprentices, and the extension of the Living Away from Home Allowance to eligible third-year apprentices.
A flagship commitment of the Government is to establish 25 Australian Technical Colleges in skills shortage areas.  We have already announced 17 of these colleges and we are determined that the first of them will be up and running next year.  The colleges will address specialised training in localised skills shortages, but will also offer at least four trades including engineering, automotive, construction, electrical and commercial cookery.  In addition to trade skills, year 11 and 12 students will also study English, science, maths, IT skills, employability skills and small business skills.  It may well be the case, for example, that vocational education is a better route to setting up a small business than a degree in business administration.  That is why many skilled workers now move rapidly from being an employee to being self-employed contractors or establishing a family businesses.  The aspirations of skilled tradespeople to run their own show may afford a much firmer underpinning to an entrepreneurial culture than the halls of the academy.
Let me be clear.  I do not in any way denigrate university education.  But I do believe that too many schoolchildren, and their parents, have been persuaded - quite wrongly - that university is the only path to success.  Rather than measure our education success solely by year 12 retention rates, a better test is the success of young adults in making the transition from school to employment.  It may be a quite sensible career decision for a young person to leave school for an apprenticeship at the end of year 10 rather than stay reluctantly at school believing that the only appropriate decision is to head to university.  It is better still to provide opportunities for employment training and work experience at school, rather than force all students into academic subjects which capture neither their interest or their enthusiasm.  The decision on whether to go to technical college or university, to study a trade or a university discipline, should be one for the student.  It should be a matter of individual choice and reflect the abilities and the interests of the student.
  Part of the problem is that governments have made the acquisition and the licensing of trade skills far too hard.  The agencies of government, sometimes warring across jurisdictional boundaries, have too often sought to protect bureaucratic turf rather than the interests of the trainee or the nation.  Let me cite just a few examples of this.  A person can be working legally and competently as a qualified carpenter in one state but if they want to work in New South Wales, they have to get a licence from the New South Wales Department of Fair Trading.  This may mean that they have to do another formal assessment and incur additional costs. In Western Australia, a single licence is required to operate as a plumber and a gasfitter.  Despite there being an agreement at the national level on the competencies needed to work in both areas, in other states two separate licences are required.  A young person who has achieved a hairdressing qualification from a private training organisation here in Victoria can carry on that trade in London, yet they are required to complete a full apprenticeship before they can do so in any other Australian state.  And one case I've been informed of was of an electrician from the United Kingdom, he was judged competent by Trades Recognition Australia, he brought all his family out to Australia only to find that he could not obtain a licence in the state in which he settled.
It is still the case that Queensland is the only State to have fully embraced school-based trade apprenticeships, to have fully embraced school-based trade apprenticeships.  New South Wales and Tasmania do not provide school-based apprenticeships, while in other states the opportunities are severely limited.  Existing training arrangements do not always encourage flexibility.  In most States, if a person leaves a four-year apprenticeship after two years, they get no recognition for the training they have done.  If they started again there would be no automatic recognition of their prior learning. With a view to addressing some of these issues that currently bedevil our vocational education system I elevated this issue at the June meeting of the Council of Australian Governments.   I want to work cooperatively with the States and Territories to ensure that our federal system delivers in the best interests of the nation.  We will have failed, I think abysmally, if by the time COAG meets early next year we do not see progress in six key areas.  One, ensuring that there is full mutual recognition of skills qualifications across Australia. In the year 2005 if we are interested seriously about the issue of skilling Australia we should as a people demand no less of our eight elected governments at a state level and of the national government.  Secondly, making progression in apprenticeships based on competency and assessment of skills acquired, rather than of the time served.  Three, enabling workers to have prior learning recognised so that they don't have to spend time unnecessarily studying what they already know.  Fourthly, giving workers the opportunity to gain intermediate or specialised trade qualifications on their way to full apprenticeships.   Fifthly, ensuring maximum flexibility in training for employers and apprentices. And finally, providing for more efficient recognition of qualifications gained overseas.  This will require cooperation across different levels of government.  We need to ensure that governments are putting their energies into fighting for the best outcomes for the trainee, industry and the country - and not fighting to safeguard their bureaucratic territory.
 Almost half, Mr Chairman, of the $10.1 billion that the Commonwealth will provide for vocational education and training over the next four years will go to States and Territories under the new national training agreement.  Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory have now signed this agreement.  The other three jurisdictions should do so promptly. Our investment will only pay full dividends with further reform to improve the quality and flexibility of Australia's vocational education and training system.  Again, money alone is not the answer.  We need to get the structures right.  To this end, the new training agreement provides for, one, full implementation of user-choice arrangements; two, moving towards a nationally consistent pricing policy for training and a nationally consistent policy on fees; three, workplace relations reforms, including offering Australian Workplace Agreements to TAFE teachers; fourthly, specific targets for mature age, disabled and indigenous training places; and finally, greater transparency in reporting and public accountability. To complement these longer term structural reforms, the Government has also, as you know, increased the skilled stream of the 2005-2006 migration programme for the eighth successive year.  This will provide for up to 20,000 additional places for skilled migrants.
 Some of the issues which currently pose barriers to a flexible, responsive national training system do not sit within the training system but cut across a number of areas including regulation and licensing of occupations and industrial relations systems.  Our current workplace relations system still restricts access to apprenticeships and traineeships.  The impediments to apprenticeships in the award system are not in the main due to specific award provisions.  Rather they are due to the lack of appropriate wage provisions in the awards. Gaps in state awards, in particular, have meant that access to part-time and school-based traineeships and apprenticeships is largely precluded.  Despite state governments agreeing in 1999, six years ago, that labour market regulations should not impede training arrangements, a recent study has shown that, with the exception of Queensland, almost no state awards allow flexible approaches to apprenticeships.  In the federal system, the Australian Industrial Relations Commission approved a model clause for part-time and school-based apprenticeships in 2000.  But since then only 22 federal awards have been varied and most of them on a restricted basis.  Unfortunately, the trade union movement continues to obstruct the use of part-time and school-based apprenticeships.  The building industry award, for example, was only recently updated to include a modified version of the relevant apprenticeships clause.  This took three years, with the union consistently opposing any move to insert the clause.  This is a symptom of a system which no longer meets Australia's needs in the 21st Century.  The tangle of regulations that governs apprenticeships also highlights the need for a single, unified system of workplace relations across Australia.
  As part of our workplace relations reforms, the Government will take steps to ensure that employment of apprentices and trainees ceases to be impeded by inadequate industrial relations arrangements.  I can specifically announce today that the Government will, in its forthcoming legislation, require the Australian Fair Pay Commission to establish minimum training wages for all types of apprenticeships, including where there are currently gaps in state or federal award coverage.  Awards will also be simplified so that any provisions that currently restrict the range of apprenticeships will be removed.  Many of the relevant awards do not include appropriate minimum wages.  To enable students to undertake school-based apprenticeships or traineeships, the new workplace relations legislation will establish such wages.  These wages rates will be set at the levels that currently apply under federal awards.  The Fair Pay Commission will eventually take over the responsibility for updating and adjusting these minimum wages.  And I will issue a separate statement detailing the proposal on these matters at the end of this address.
Mr Chairman, in recent months I've spoken often about the challenge of economic reform in Australia being akin to participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line.  Tackling our nation's skills shortage is crucial to Australia staying up with the pack in this never-ending economic race.   It is a challenge which requires both the incentives and the efficiency of the market and a clear understanding of the public good which only governments can provide.  It means drawing on the best traditions in education, while making them responsive to the challenges of the 21st Century. It challenges all of us to open pathways for our young, but also importantly to give older citizens opportunities to make a fresh start in our ever-changing economic world.  And sometimes it demands a national view to overcome the sectional interests and parochialism that stills finds its way into our politics.
I congratulate the Australian Financial Review on its initiative in organising this conference.  It's of high significance and high importance to the economic future of this country.  It has the enthusiastic support of the Commonwealth Government. I hope it is successful and I hope what comes out of this meeting adds to the store of knowledge and understanding in this extremely important area.
Thank you.
 [ends]  


Thank you very much Chris for those very generous words of introduction, Tony Smith, Mitch Fifield, Mr Speaker, Senator Julian McGauran, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  This is the fourth occasion that I've had the pleasure of coming to this dinner which apart from doing very good and practical things for the Liberal Party in this part of Melbourne, honours a magnificent by-election victory on Bastille Day, the 14th of July 2001.  And as somebody who follows that football code that's played in heaven, rugby union, it was also the night that Australian magnificently defeated the British Lions at Telstra Stadium.  And can I say that the sense of enthusiasm and hope that Chris' victory on that occasion gave to the Coalition, remember the middle of 2001?  Things weren't looking all that flash and people were starting to say that we might lose, and people were starting to entertain some doubts, although we had begun a significant recovery through a couple of decisions we took earlier in the year and through the way in which the Federal Budget of that year had been put together.  But that was a challenging by-election and the quality of Chris as a candidate, the enthusiasm and energy of all of those who got behind him was quite awe-inspiring and there is no doubt when the political history of that period is written it will properly be recorded that the tide really began to turn back in favour of the Government on the 14th of July 2001.  And I thank Chris and I thank all of the Liberal Party members in his electorate and here in Victoria for the tremendous effort that they gave.  And in extending that thanks to Chris, I extend to Tony and to Mitch and to David and to Julian and to all my other federal and state colleagues who are here my thanks, my gratitude for the wonderful contribution that the Victorian Division made to our election victory on the 9th of October last year.  The margins that are now represented by Liberal majorities here in Victoria are the best we've had in probably a decade and every seat in Victoria recorded a significant increase in the Liberal Party vote.  And that is a tremendous tribute to the work of Helen Kroger and Julian Sheezel and Julian is here tonight and I acknowledge with gratitude the tremendous work that everybody did to produce that outstanding result.
Chris quite rightly spoke in his introduction of the fact that we are a team, and I attribute the success of the Government over the last nine and a half years to the fact that we have been a strong and united and very purposeful team.  We know from our sporting analogies, from our football and cricketing and other analogies, how tremendously important it is that we have team work and we have coordination.  And that has been one of the enormous strengths of this Government - the teamwork between the Liberal Party and the National Party.  We may occasionally have our differences, but at the end of the day the unity between those two parties has been fundamental to our success.  The unity amongst the members of the Government, the fact that I've been the fortunate beneficiary of tremendous colleagues, and none of course better than the contribution that Peter Costello as Treasurer and Deputy Leader of the Party over the last nine and a half years has made to the strength and to the performance of the Government.  But I extend those thanks to all of my other senior colleagues because together we have been a very effective team and together we have produced some outcomes for the Australian people and I was reminded of these outcomes as I put together some remarks for a conference on skills that I attended this morning in Melbourne organised by the Australian Financial Review.  And in my remarks I told the audience that our unemployment rate now is the lowest it has been for 30 years.  The participation rate, that is the number of people who want a job, who want to be involved in the labour market, is at a record high of just under 65 per cent.  That the number of people who are long-term unemployed is about a third of what it was in the recession of the 1990s.  That over the last nine and a half years we have seen real wages rise by just under 15 per cent.  Together all of those things tell us one very important reality - and that is that more than ever before in the economic history of this country we now live in a workers' market.  In other words, the conditions and the opportunities for people wanting work, wanting to change their job, wanting to improve their opportunities in their present job, those opportunities are now arguably better than they have been at any time in this country's history.
Now I know that a lot of people will say that is terrific and the Government has done a fantastic job and we're all getting the benefit of it and isn't that great?  Why doesn't therefore the Government just go away for a while, go over into a corner and don't bother us any more with any talk about reform?  You've got unemployment down, you've created this situation where it's a workers' market, why don't you now just leave us all alone, go away, don't talk about reform any more, don't upset people with any suggestions about further change and further improvements, just leave it where it is and it'll tick over and it'll go on forever like a well-timed clock?  Now that's very tempting, it's very enticing, but of course it would be the most foolhardy thing that this Government could possible do.  I constantly, in speeches I make around Australia, I employ the metaphor of somebody who is participating in a foot-race towards an ever receding finishing line to describe the nature of economic reform in Australia at the present moment.  We know that we will never reach perfection, no country ever does, no government ever does.  But we have to keep moving towards that ever receding finishing line because if we don't the other participants in the foot-race are going to catch up with us and going to go past us.  And if you think I've just invented that metaphor for the purpose of arguing my case for further economic reform in Australia at the present time, can I just refer very briefly to the experience of a country that's been a bit in the news politically over the last few days and that's Germany.  When I became a junior minister in the Fraser Government in the middle-1970s, the country that was held up as the example to be followed when it came to economic management, the exemplar of economic discipline and performance and achievement, was the then Federal Republic of West Germany.  And German ministers used to travel around the world effectively giving lectures about the German economic miracle, and it had been a German economic miracle - out of the ashes of defeat and devastation in 1945, Germany in the space of 30 years had rebuilt herself and become arguably, or certainly the strongest economic power in Europe and an example to be envied.  And people said America's in decline, Britain of course, this is long before Margaret Thatcher came along, was practically written off, some people were calling her the 'sick man of Europe', and so the list went on. And people said if you really want a demonstration of how to do it, have a look at West Germany.  That was true then and the Germans had come a long way.  But they then made a crucial error, having reached that pinnacle they made the mistake that I said a moment ago we shouldn't make - they thought well we've done all we need to do, we should now sit back, no more economic reform, we can just relax, we can take advantage of what we've previously done and things will just go on in a very enticing and attractive fashion. The reality is that that didn't occur, and now some 28 to 30 years later because Germany did not embrace further economic reform that country now faces major economic challenges.  Unemployment there is just under 11 per cent, the total number of people unemployed in Germany now is almost the same as it was in the early 1930s at the height of the Great Depression.  And the other difficult thing is that having for so long neglected the need for economic reform and having assumed that it was no longer needed, it is now incredibly difficult for that country to embrace economic reform.  And the ambiguity of the election outcome in that country is a powerful demonstration of the conflict that is felt in that country about the need or the desirability for further economic reform.  Now some of you may think that's an unreasonable analogy, can I say it's not.  It's a classic reminder that you can never take the maintenance of economic prosperity for granted and the more successful you are as a country the greater the imperative to go on striving for even greater success.  And that is why, despite having built over the last 10 years the strongest economic conditions we've had since World War II, having seen those great improvements being seen around the world as an example of a strong, low inflation, low debt, low taxation, low interest rate economy, a nation that is very attractive to business investment, a nation that is properly taking advantage of our vast natural resources, having come all of that distance, it is important that we keep going.
  Now last week the Parliament passed the legislation finally to privatise Telstra.  Now I know that the majority of the Australia people when they are asked in isolation "do you favour the sale of Telstra?" I know the majority of people have said no to that.  We've argued for it, we've been quite transparent, we went to the people at the last election and we said if conditions, telecommunications conditions in the bush are up to scratch we'll go ahead with the sale of Telstra.  We haven't deceived the Australian people, we've never pretended that we didn't believe in the privatisation of Telstra.  We believed in the privatisation of Telstra not because we wanted the money, not because we're interested in a distress or a fire-sale, and there won't be one, but because in the long run it is fundamentally absurd, it's uncompetitive, it's unrealistic and it's unfair to the private shareholders to have the second largest company in Australia half-owned by the Government.  And it creates a fundamental conflict of interest - a government can't be both a regulator and an owner.  And I believe that now that we have got the legislation and ultimately when all the shares in Telstra are sold, then we will have the conditions for a far more competitive and a far more efficient and therefore far more beneficial to the consumer, telecommunications market in Australia.
  But undoubtedly the biggest exercise in economic reform for the remainder of this year is the passage of the Government's industrial relations legislation.  And it is precisely because we are living in a workers' market like none other in the history of this country and that the conditions are so beneficial for employees in Australia at the present time, it's precisely because of that that I believe and the Government believes that we must press ahead with these changes because these changes are going to underwrite a maintenance of the workers' market in Australia.  The best way to guarantee that those conditions will continue is to embrace further reform.  And these reforms are not designed to cut the living standards of Australian workers, they are designed to maintain and improve the living standards of Australia's workers.  Why would a Government that has presided over an unprecedented increase in the living standards of Australian workers want to embark upon policies that would work in the opposite direction?  I'm frequently asked by the Labor Party in relation to these changes, they say "will you guarantee that no single person out of the 10 million Australian workers will be worse off as a result of our changes?"  And my reply to those sort of questions is to say that our guarantee is our record.  And if you look at our record we have been a Government that has delivered for the workers of Australia infinitely better outcomes than the outcomes that were delivered for the workers of Australia by either the Hawke or the Keating Governments.  It's the Coalition Government that has delivered the high real wage increases.  It's a Coalition Government that's delivered lower interest rates.  It's a Coalition Government that has delivered lower unemployment.  It's a Coalition Government that has delivered lower taxation.  By every measure the conditions for Australian workers at the present time are better than they have been at any time since the end of World War II.  And the sole purpose of our changes is to introduce flexibilities and changes and alterations in our workplace relations culture so that as the economy continues to alter and the nature of work in this country continues to alter, we can have rules and systems in our workplace culture that accommodate those changes and result in businesses being able to operate more efficiently and their workers being employed more profitably and with higher levels of remuneration.  And all of you in this audience who are employers know that your greatest asset is your workforce.  No employer in his or her right mind will do anything to alienate or antagonise their best workers.  When you get a good employee you hang on to him or her like grim death because they're very important to the profitability of your business. And the changes that we propose are really very straight forward.  We're going to get rid of this absurd unfair dismissal law for firms employing fewer than 100 people. And in case you hear any trade union spokesman or Labor Party critics saying that this is some ancient protection that Australian workers have always had, let me remind you that the law we're going to get rid of was only introduced in 1994.  It wasn't introduced in the Magna Carta way back in the 13th Century, it was 1994 it was introduced.  That's the first thing we're going to do.
  The second thing we're going to do is to make it easier to enter into workplace agreements.  We're not going to make them compulsory, if people still want to be covered by an award, if they still want the opportunity of a collective agreement then the opportunities will be there.  We're not going to prevent people belonging to unions, we're not going to prevent unions bargaining on behalf of workers.  But we are going to make it easier, subject of course to minimum guaranteed conditions, we are going to make it easier for people to enter into workplace agreements because we believe that agreements fashioned to suit the circumstances of individual workplaces are agreements that are more likely to produce a more productive, profitable workplace and therefore a more highly paid workforce. And finally, and very importantly, we're going to create in this country a single national system of workplace relations.  We are not six separate economies, we are one single economy.  And the regional differences now are far less than they were 10 years ago and infinitely less than they were 30 years ago.  I often recall the fact that when I first practiced law in Sydney in the early 1960s, it had only been two or three years since the introduction of the uniform companies legislation and under that legislation we finally escaped the absurdity that if you incorporated a company in New South Wales and you wanted to carry on business in Victoria you had to register it in Victoria, would you believe, as a foreign company?  And that was actually what it was called and all of the law firms then were city-based firms, you had Melbourne firms and you had Sydney firms and you had Brisbane firms.  And if you wanted to have business done on your behalf in Melbourne and you were a Sydney firm you had to appoint what was quaintly called a 'Melbourne agent'.  Now it all sounds very quaint but it was only a little over a generation ago.  And I recall that from my own personal experience as an illustration of this country has changed, and we therefore need to have a single national system.  And we need to sweep away the barriers that still exist that penalise people who get a trade qualification and I had an example brought to my attention in connection with the speech this morning that somebody who gets a hairdressing qualification from a private training college here in Victoria can carry on as a hairdresser in London but can't do so in many of the other states of Australia without getting a further qualification, often involving a significant delay and further training.  Now I could list you a half a dozen further examples of those sorts of ridiculous institutional barriers that still exist.  Now to his great credit when Jeff Kennett was Premier of Victoria he decided that we should have a national system and he handed over the industrial relations powers to the Commonwealth.  Now we're not interested in a power grab, we're not interested in centralisation of power, we're interested in ratifying and underpinning the fact that this country is a single, even economic unit.  And we should remove the impedients for the doing of business across state borders to the extent that they continue to exist.
Now you may notice ladies and gentlemen that I haven't said anything about a certain publication.  And I don't intend to recommend the book, I don't intend to give any kind of review or commentary.  I simply want to make two very important points about all of this.  And the first is that Mr Latham was not only a product of the Australian Labor Party, he was chosen by the Australian Labor Party in full knowledge of his beliefs and the person he was to become the Prime Minister of Australia.  Now I think it's important that that be said because there's an attempt being made by our political opponents to separate themselves, and I don't get into commentary on individual allegations except to say that of course so many of them are plainly wrong and plainly absurd.  But the point I make is that the character of this person was known to his colleagues when they chose him, they knew he was viscerally anti-American, they knew that his stock-in-trade was personal abuse, they knew of his desire to regenerate a class division of this country, his schools policy was a throwback to a level of class division that this country in a sense never really had and certainly never wanted to have.  Now I simply make the observation that he was chosen by his colleagues in full knowledge of what he believed in and what kind of person he was.
  And the second point I would like to make, and this is a point made in defence of all people who go into public life, you would imagine after the diatribes of the last few days that there was nothing honourable, there was nothing respectable, there was nothing decent about public life, political life.  There is, there's a lot.  The overwhelming majority of the men and women I have met in politics from both sides, from both sides, have been people who've gone into Parliament wanting to serve their country or serve their state and to make a contribution and to try and achieve change and to make a difference, it's beneficial.  Now I think it's very important that something be said on behalf of the profession of politics because public service remains a decent calling and it remains something that I hope will continue to attract a wide range of people.  Our Party, the Liberal Party, has been far more successful than the Labor Party in attracting a range of people with different talents.  More and more the Labor Party is sending into Federal Parliament now people whose sole background has been in the trade union movement or working on a political staff - nothing wrong with that but you need a mix of people, you need people that have got a range of all of the talents and that is one of the great strengths that the Liberal Party has.  I look at the people who came in at the last election - you've got defence scientists, you've got policemen, you've got funeral directors, you've got lawyers, you've got academics, you've got doctors. Now that's to name seven or eight by profession of the people who joined us at the last election.  You go through the Labor Party list and you've a trade union official, you've got an official from another trade union, you've got somebody else from Gough Whitlam's staff, you've got this, that and the other.  And so the list goes on.  And it's a very, very limited gene pool and it's one of the greatest strengths that we have.
  But I simply wanted to conclude my remarks by saying that public life in this country is overwhelmingly honourable, it's made up of people on both sides who care about the future of Australia, they don't always get it right, we don't always get it right any more than our opponents do.  But I think it is totally wrong to embrace as the former alternative Prime Minster of Australia embraced this utterly and despicably cynical view of public life and political practice in this country.  I think he's done not only an enormous disservice to his own party but an enormous disservice to all people who care about quality of life, public life in this country.
My friends, can I again thank you very warmly for the help and the loyalty and the support that you've given to Chris and to Tony and to all the other members, to Jason Wood who wonderfully took over the seat of La Trobe from Bob Charles, to Mitch Fifield, and to everybody else.  And to all of the candidates at a State level I wish you all, I don't like eight State Labor governments around the country, I'd like to get rid of all of them if we could.  But you've got to start somewhere and I'll do everything I can to assist the Liberal Party here in Victoria at the next State election.  But my friends, thank you for your support.  Chris, magnificent job over the last four years, magnificent job over the last year as Parliamentary Secretary to Peter Costello.  Keep it up and thanks everybody for coming.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Patrick, Richard Grellman, the Chairman of Mission Australia, my parliamentary colleagues, Charles thank you for your very generous words of welcome, ladies and gentleman. It is a particular privilege to be here today to open this new centre and to have the opportunity of paying tribute to the remarkable work of Mission Australia for the over a hundred years of service to the people of Sydney under different names in different guises but always driven by a strong sense of Christian mission to do the right thing by the less privileged in our society.
 I pay a particular tribute to the personal contribution that Patrick McClure has made to the direction of Mission Australia.  He's been a remarkable CEO.  He exemplifies the capacity of the great welfare organisations in Australia to change as needed with the times, but also to remain steadfast to certain principles.  And the underlying driving force behind Mission Australia as indeed behind all of its earlier manifestations, was that very strong sense of Christian mission and Patrick exemplifies that and he also exemplifies the greater willingness of so many in the community, particularly at a time when the country is in an overall sense enjoying good circumstances, to work together to help the less fortunate in our community and the presence here today of many of the major corporate supporters of the Mission is testament to that.
 Because I have tried in the time that I've been Prime Minister to build a better social coalition, recognising that the government acting on its own is never able to do the job. Governments bring resources, governments bring funds, governments can bring about policy changes, but governments never have the expertise at the coalface to deliver the best solutions and the best support and equally great organisations working on their own don't have the resources or the capacity to do it all. Individuals working on their own don't either, business organisations with the best intentions in the world, working on their own can't do it.  And what is really needed is to pool our respective capacities and that is what the social coalition is all about and that is what Mission Australia has demonstrated over the years and this Centre combines the very best of the old traditions of Mission Australia, its sense of concern and mission with a modern recognition of the facilities that are needed to give people the opportunity to recover their self esteem. As I watched that video, what came through so very strongly to me was that one consistent theme of self esteem.
 We all know from life's experiences that self esteem is the beginning of achievement and until you have self belief and self esteem, no matter what your situation may be, you're not going to achieve your goals in life and that sense of self esteem that was so obvious in that video is I am sure very much the goal and the objective of this Centre, its varied services, its care for the homeless amongst Sydney's men, its care for low income people in a city whose inner city dwellings once seen as the cheaper form of accommodation now because of changed economic developments are a lot more expensive. I think that is a very sensitive recognition of the realities of Sydney in 2005 and the particular youth services also. So I do, in acknowledging the tremendous work of Mission Australia, I want to pay particular tribute to the way in which it's been able to combine its ancient tradition of caring for those who need caring with a modern recognition that contemporary facilities responding to the contemporary circumstances and needs of Sydney 2005 are needed.
 As Patrick acknowledged in many different ways Mission Australia has received financial support from the federal government, some direct support of $250,000 in relation to this centre and of course participation in the many programmes of the federal government running into hundreds of millions of dollars overall, along with the other great organisations of our nation.
 We can never do enough to help the less fortunate in our community and in a sense because everything is relative; the more affluent we may appear at a national level, the greater is the sense of alienation of being left out by those who are not doing so well and therefore the role and the contribution of Mission Australia, and its leadership and its voluntary workforce as well as its professional workforce is of enormous value in our community.
 So I want to say to you Richard Grellman and to Patrick McClure and all others who work at Mission Australia, as well as those who've led it before and I see some of them in the audience, can I say thank you on behalf of your fellow Australians for your continued sense of mission and commitment to the less fortunate in our community.
 I thank the business community of Australia, they often are taken for granted but people say to me do I think business should give more to welfare causes and I say, not so much that business should give more but more businesses should give and by definition, those who are here today are the generous ones and the ones, and I see many well known philanthropic faces of Sydney in the audience today, they are the ones who deserve our thanks and our recognition and our acknowledgement, there are many others who could follow their example and we naturally exhort them to do so.
 But to Richard and Patrick, congratulations, I wish you well in your continued, dedicated mission to the homeless and the less fortunate of the city of Sydney, that you are doing wonderful work and you will continue to have the support of my government and I know all men and women of goodwill in public life around Australia and I have very great pleasure in declaring the Centre open. Thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Mr Russell Balding, the Managing Director of the ABC, Tim Collard, thank you very much for that very generous traditional welcome, my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Can I pick up the theme that the Chairman just addressed. And that is the great importance of this new centre here in Western Australia, in East Perth, as a demonstration that although the Australian Broadcasting Corporation is in every sense of the word a great national institution and its responsibility is very much to the totality of the Australian population, it is important that it does have the capacity to provide local perspectives, it does have the capacity to emphasise the great variety, not only geographically, but in other respects, that is represented by the modern Australian. And I congratulate the ABC Management and the ABC Board on the investment that has been made in this centre.
 I've had but one opportunity this morning with Liam Bartlett to sample the new studios. They're magnificent, they're very spacious. The focus of the interview was just as intense might I say. Nobody was seduced by the pleasant surroundings, and that is the nature of the enterprise in which we are embarked. All of us have our connections with the ABC. This is an opportunity for me to reaffirm the very strong commitment of the Government to public broadcasting. That's often been debated, it's often been questioned and no doubt it will be in the future.
It seems to be a characteristic of public life in this country that there is a certain creative tension between the Government of the day and the ABC. Let me say that the ABC over the years, the 80 years of its existence has made a great and ongoing contribution to the development of the Australian personality and the explanation of Australia to Australians. And more recently, the explanation of Australia to the world, particularly our part of the world.
My first experiences with the ABC were of course of ABC Radio. Of news broadcasts, of cricket broadcasts, of Parliamentary broadcasts. And through the years, the contribution the ABC's made to an understanding of Australian sport, the contribution it's made to music, its support spawning of the Symphony Orchestras and of course the ongoing contribution it makes to an analysis of public affairs and political debate in this country is well known. And that contribution is ongoing. Sometimes and properly so, controversial. But absolutely indispensable. We do need diverse media. We need the diversity of which the Chairman spoke. We also need diversity of ownership; we need diversity between public and private.
 I'm often asked to comment on the things that Australians do well. I believe we do a lot of things better than most other countries. One of the things we do well in this country is that we balance the public and private provision of ongoing human services better than most. We do that in health, we do it in education and may I say in this context we do it very well in the media. The balance between the provision by the public broadcaster, the competition that that provides, the competition that exists between the commercial providers and the competition amongst all of them is one of the underlying strengths of the media in this country.
 In the 31 years that I've been in public life I've found an enormous change, not only in the nature of media coverage of public affairs but also the intensity of it. When I think of the relatively sparse media coverage, relatively speaking only not in absolute terms, of political events in the early 1970s compared with the 24 hour intensity of it today, I think of the contribution that the ABC has made through the innovation of new current affairs programmes. Most recently of course, Insiders. I think of the contribution that news radio has made to an ongoing coverage of news and events as well as of course the ongoing role of Parliamentary broadcasts. So in every way the ABC has played a very, very important role.
Can I take this opportunity of thanking the Board of the ABC and thanking you Donald as Chairman of the ABC for the contribution and the public spirited way in which you have all made that contribution. And I know today is the last Board meeting of Leith Boully. I'd like to thank her for her contribution as a member of the ABC Board over the last five years.
But most importantly at a gathering such as this, it's important to acknowledge the role and the contribution of the staff of the ABC. Like any great organisation there are people who have been loyal servants and followers and employees of the ABC all of their working lives. There are some who have come and gone and returned, there are some that have come and gone and perhaps lamented that they have gone. But in so many different ways the ABC has left a mark on all of them.
I'd like to congratulate you Eoin on winning the latest opinion poll and I know that you'll follow the next series of ratings with great interest. But your own experience is a demonstration of the lasting mark that the ABC as a great broadcaster leaves on people.
 Ladies and gentlemen, I wish ABC Perth and the ABC in Western Australia great good fortune. I thank it very warmly for its distinctive contribution to Western Australian life, its distinctive contribution to interpreting to Australians in Western Australia the nuances, the differences, the variety of attitudes in this State as part of its role as a great national broadcaster. And in responding to the Chairman's invitation, I have great pleasure in declaring this centre officially open. Long may it be a great demonstration to the people of Western Australia of the contribution of the ABC to Australian national life. Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Mr Langoulant, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to thank the Chamber for so generously and quickly responding to the opportunity for me while I'm in Western Australia and I know the great interest of Western Australians in industrial relations reform.  I wanted to say something particular today about the changes to our existing unfair dismissal laws.  And I do that against the background of recognising, as I know all of you do, that the proposition that in 2005, or indeed at any time in our economic history, that we can legislate job security is an idea without any merit.  And I'm sure that I don't need to remind an audience such as this that the only guarantor of a good reliable job is a buoyant labour market.  And the best, indeed the only guarantor of a buoyant labour market is a strong, growing and productive economy.  And any workplace relations system is only as good as the contribution that it makes to Australia's economic strength.  And all the regulations in the world won't preserve somebody's job or won't prevent somebody's wages falling if the economy is weak.  And we only have to go back to the experiences of the early-1980s and the early-1990s when we had an infinitely greater level of labour market regulation than we have now to recognise the truth of that proposition.
Unfair dismissal laws, which are the particular focus of my remarks today, cannot magically preserve good jobs.  And high productivity is the key to the generation and the protection of good jobs.  And whatever their intended purpose, unfair dismissal laws have acted in a very significant way to slow the entrepreneurial pulse of the economy.  And to make many of our firms, particularly smaller ones, less competitive and to directly impede the creation of jobs.  And too often these laws have trapped small entrepreneurs in a legal minefield and they have added complexity and financial burden to what should be a straight forward business decision, namely whether or not to take on an extra worker.  And as we all know the most important right a worker has is the right to a job in the first place.  And research by the OECD and the World Bank demonstrates a direct correlation between high degrees of market regulation and unemployment levels.  The case studies of Germany and France on the one hand, both of which have highly regulated labour markets and very high levels of unemployment - Germany's is now almost 11 per cent, in nominal terms as high as it was during the Great Depression, and France's is not much better - compare that with the labour market experience of Great Britain which has an unemployment rate half that of Germany's or France and of course a significantly less heavily regulated labour market and also of course with the labour markets of the United States.  Our own unemployment level now, at five per cent, could be lower if we had a less regulated labour market.  Although it is now, as you know, less regulated than it used to be. So there's really no better example of the law of unintended consequences in action than the laws that work against workers and employers in the name of protecting people against unfair dismissals.
Economic reality says that employers need hardworking, honest staff to operate their businesses.  And the most valuable asset of any business is good staff.  I'm saying very regularly around Australia in support of our labour market changes that perhaps as never before in 2005 we live in Australia in a workers' market.  Unemployment is at a 30 year low, real wages have risen by almost 15 per cent in the last nine and a half years, and the onset of the process of ageing of the population and the beginning of the retirement of baby boomers out of the labour market means that we're not going to see a serious regression from that situation.  Indeed the challenge of the future will be to find enough workers, not only in the skilled areas but also increasingly in unskilled areas.  And I make particular reference to this to put into context the general debate that is going on at present about the need for protection of workers and the need for the existing industrial relations laws.  Because economic reality  says that  demand for Australian workers will only grow in the longer term and in short the future of the Australian workforce has never been brighter than what it is at the present time. None of this suggests of course that there will be any support or warrant given to unscrupulous behaviour by a small minority of employers, just as there are some of those, in equal measure, there have always been some unscrupulous employees. But your experience will be and my experience going around the country has always been that the vast majority of employers do the right thing by their workforce.
  In understanding and in explaining the reasons why we seek to change the unfair dismissal laws can I do two things?  Can I remind you of some of the history of these laws and can I give you a snapshot of some of the war stories that have come out of workplaces in relation to their operation?  As I've said on a number of occasions in the past in seeking to change the unfair dismissal laws, we're not challenging some ancient right that was put in the Magna Carta by the Barons of Runnymede in the 13th Century.  It's very important to remember that the present laws were not the product of some great deliberative process or any sudden upsurge in the ranks of bad employers in Australia.  They date back only to my predecessor Mr Keating as Prime Minister in 1994 and the handy work of then Industrial Relations Minister, Mr Laurie Brereton.  They were a product of both a political payback and a policy failure.  You will remember that in the early 90s we had almost a million people out of work and that Australia's unemployment rate had risen to 10.9 per cent in the year before the federal unfair dismissal laws were introduced.  In other words these laws were introduced at a time of very high unemployment in this country.  They were a very belated and wrong-headed response to that high level of unemployment, but they were also, let me remind you, and I'll be reminding the Australian public of this, they were also pay-back, and a secret pay-back at that, to the union movement for its support of the Keating Government in the 1993 election campaign.  It's worth remembering that the Keating Government ratified the relevant Convention of the International Labour Organisation in February 1993, on the eve of the 1993 election.  This was an abuse of the external affairs power, undertaken during an election campaign and without any consultation with State and Territory Governments.  And Australian employers and the public did not learn of the Government's action until after the 1993 election.  And it was Jennie George, the then ACTU Vice President, who said, and I quote, "... we won the election in March and this bill is a payback for the commitments that were made by the Government in the course of that election campaign", unquote.  So we have a set of laws that were not put there until 1994, they were put there as a result of a secret arrangement made during an election campaign in the caretaker period and they were not based in any way on any kind of deliberative process.
Now as you know in the time we've been in office, and certainly until the last election, we have tried on many occasions to change the existing unfair dismissal laws.  We made some changes with the help of the Australian Democrats in 1996 and 1997.  But our attempts to bring about really substantial change have on 40 occasions been rejected by the Senate.  And as a result we faced a likelihood of that being repeated had it not been for the result of the federal election, and in particular the Coalition winning four out of six Senate seats in Queensland which give us, as Peter Costello has put it so very well, a bare majority of one on a good day.  So much for those people who say that we have "brutal and untrammelled " control of the Senate.  But we do have an opportunity because of that outcome to bring about these changes.  And of course in doing these changes we are going to challenge a culture of complaint and litigation which has developed to the point where some firms will go to any lengths to avoid hiring extra staff.
For a disgruntled employee, the downside from lodging a claim is minimal.  For a business, the time and cost of defending a claim, even one without merit, is substantial.  It is not unusual for businesses to face costs of over $20,000 in defending a case of unfair dismissal all the way to arbitration.  And for many it is much easier to settle the matter for a few thousand dollars with some 'go away money'.  And in this sense formal applications are only the tip of the iceberg as they refer only to claims where litigation has commenced.  In cases that do go to arbitration, and many of you will have experienced this, there is a tendency for procedural issues to be elevated above the substantial reasons behind the dismissal.  And rather than focus on the merit of the case, industrial tribunals fall back on whether or not complex and varied procedures - such as multiple warnings - have been followed.  The end result is this culture of complaint and litigation that loads extra costs and uncertainty onto those who society relies on to create wealth and jobs by taking risks with their own livelihoods.
  Let me give you some, just a few of those war stories.  In February of this year, the Australian Industrial Relations Commission ruled that an intoxicated employee should be reemployed despite having committed acts of physical and verbal sexual harassment.  The relevant incidents occurred in the street of a country town after staff had arrived for the next day's work and as they were walking to their employer-funded accommodation.  In its wisdom, the Commission ruled that the dismissal was unfair because the sexual harassment, quote, "was essentially private, in circumstances that did not allow an extended right of supervision over the private activities of the employee", end of quote.  In other words, it was claimed, the employer was not in a position of supervision over the employee.  The trouble is that sexual harassment laws give employers no such out, leaving them exposed to a situation of double jeopardy.  We have reached an absurd point when getting rid of a staff member whose conduct could make an employer guilty under sexual harassment laws can leave the employer in breach of unfair dismissal laws.
In another case a few years ago, a male employee was dismissed for sexually harassing a female fellow employee at a training course.  The woman was subjected to obscene language and aggressive behaviour to the point where she was forced to seek assistance from hotel management.  Having previously been warned about threatening and offensive behaviour, the man was dismissed.  Again, in its wisdom, the Industrial Relations Commission found this to be harsh and unjust.  The relevant Commissioner claimed that the male employee was not guilty of sexual harassment because the words he used were ones of general abuse and because he allegedly believed the female, it's true, he allegedly believed the female employee not to be in her room.  The Commissioner ordered reinstatement despite the obvious unease expressed by the woman about working with the man.
In another case, four employees who were in charge of operating heavy and dangerous machinery were dismissed for repeatedly breaking a company's no-alcohol policy during work hours.  Despite the company following what the Commission described as 'copybook' processes when terminating the employees, reinstatement was ordered.
As these cases demonstrate, the losers are not simply the employers.  The losers are also the hard-working fellow employees who do the right thing.  They can suffer most from the actions of an angry and disruptive employee, either directly or indirectly if they are forced to pick up the slack at work.  Under these laws, even when an employer wins, more often than not they lose.  For example, a small car dealership in Victoria employing 24 people was forced to lay off staff after losing the franchise for one of the makes of the vehicles it sold. A staff member who was responsible for selling the particular brand of cars was made redundant with the employer observing all the correct procedures.  Despite this, the former employee initiated an unfair dismissal case seeking compensation.  This was rejected by the Commission following an arbitration hearing which involved additional time and expense for a business under considerable financial pressure.  The employer won, but not before incurring costs of $13,500.
  Especially pernicious, of course, is the all-too-common occurrence of employers deciding that they have little option but to pay 'go away money' as a way of extracting themselves from a vexatious claim.  And last year, the proprietor of a small manufacturing company in Victoria wrote to the Government about his experience with the current laws.  An employee had been dismissed for serious misconduct including the falsification of timesheets, stealing company property, bullying other employees, constantly being late for work and abusing the proprietor's wife.  Despite appearing completely justified in the dismissal, the business owner was told by his lawyers that as he had not made the dismissal process 'watertight' it would be far less expensive to settle with the employee.  As well as the time the expense of the legal representation, the business owner found it necessary to pay $5,000 to the sacked employee.  Not surprisingly he says that he will never hire an extra employee again.
These are not isolated cases.  Surveys of business attitudes on speculative unfair dismissal claims have been too numerous and their findings too consistent to be ignored.  A recent survey of around 900 businesses by ABL Limited found that two in three businesses had paid out, or knew of businesses that had paid out, 'go away money'.  Thirsty-seven per cent said that 'go away money' occurs regularly and another 30 per cent said that it occurs occasionally.
  Because of all of these circumstances, which would be very familiar to many of you in this room, the Government has decided to exempt businesses with up to 100 employees from the current laws.  This recognises the practical reality that it's often at 100 that firms acquire a human resources or personnel capacity.  One hundred is the upper limit of the definition of a small business, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics.  Exempting businesses from regulatory obligations based on the number of employees is a very well accepted one.  Australian Governments, for example, have never required Equal Employment Opportunity reporting by businesses employing fewer than 100 staff.  Redundancy and tax laws are other areas where obligations vary according to the size of  business.  And far be it from me to frequently resort to references from the former Government, but let me remind you that the ILO Convention ratified by the Keating Government in secret in 1993 itself envisages exemptions for businesses of a certain size.
   In moving to change the current regime, the Government also has a clear message for employers who might think, mistakenly, that they will have extra latitude to treat their workers badly.  Our message is that such employers have no place in a modern, productive Australian economy.  We will maintain a strong framework of protection against unlawful termination, which should be distinguished of course from unfair dismissals, on grounds such as trade union membership, family responsibilities, pregnancy, temporary absence from work due to illness or injury, religion, gender and so on.  It will still be unlawful to discriminate  or sack an employee in any business for these reasons.
And I will announce separately and at the end of this speech a proposal to provide expanded assistance for people who have legitimate claims for unlawful termination under a scheme to be administered by the Office of Workplace Services, and in addition we will also conduct an education campaign similar to some of the campaigns conducted when the GST was announced to advise employers of their rights and obligations both in relation to the unfair dismissal changes and also the maintenance of the unlawful termination proposals.
 I want to leave you, in relation to unfair dismissals, with a wonderful quote that I found in a newspaper article.  And it was the reaction of a small businessman to the stance being taken by our political opponents on the issue of unfair dismissal laws.  And I quote, it's as follows, and these words will have a lot of resonance with many of you - "having taken all the risks, small business employers bitterly resent being depicted as monsters who dismiss an employee on a whim.  While a minority may be unpleasant characters, the majority would be insane to treat employees badly, nor do they.  However if an employee regularly arrives late, is rude to customers, does sloppy work, puts their fingers in the till, or is simply unpleasant to work with, then an employer should have the right to terminate their employment - without endless counselling, letter writing and other warnings culminating in absurd and excessive payouts beyond traditional severance entitlements." End of quote.  This is I think the voice of economic reality that the opponents of unfair dismissal laws, including of course the Labor Party, have not wanted to hear. They are the words of someone who sees a political party lacking all empathy for those trying to make a living in business.  They just happen to be the words of a former Minister in the Hawke Labor Government, they are the words of Barry Cohen, who used to run, before he entered Parliament, an extremely successful clothing business.  He is one of a rare breed, indeed a species close to extinction, in fact I think he was one of the last members of a Labor Caucus to have any real first-hand experience in running a small business.
I've chosen today, ladies and gentlemen, and I thank the Chamber for the opportunity to do so, to say something specifically about the changes we proposed for the unfair dismissal laws.  But before I conclude my remarks, and I would invite you to put any questions you might want to to me, can I just remind you of the overall context of these   changes.  The changes we propose to the industrial relations laws are significant.  They are not however extreme, they are not radical.  They will still leave Australia with a more highly regulated labour market than either New Zealand or the United Kingdom.  They have three main elements - I've described the changes we propose in relation to unfair dismissal laws, the second important element is that we will be replacing the existing 'no disadvantage' test with a new Australian standard test which will make agreement making far easier and less complicated and a lot simpler than it is at present.  And will in essence remove the, I think, overemphatic link between the awards system and agreement making.  We will not of course be abolishing the awards system, the awards system will still be available for a large section of the Australian workplace.  But it will become easier to enter into workplace agreements.  And importantly also we are introducing, because we're going to legislate to use the corporations power, we are introducing a national system.  Now I know there are some who have reservations about that.  I respect those reservations but I think they are misplaced.  In the long run the best guarantee that a future government of a less friendly attitude towards business might be minded to use national power under the constitution to institute an anti-business industrial relations system.  The best guarantee that that won't occur is in fact to institute on a national basis a better industrial relations system, see it working efficiently and with benefit to the community, and thus make it politically impossible for a future government to reverse that process.  And if you think that is unrealistic let me remind you of the experience of the Blair Labour Government in the United Kingdom.  One of the first things that Mr Blair did when he became Prime Minister was to make it to clear that because the industrial relations changes of the Thatcher Government had been so successful and had clearly worked to the benefit of the British economy he had absolutely no intention of reversing those laws.  And in a very famous speech to the trade union congress in London in 1997 he used the phrase that I used in my speech when he said "fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job", and that he made it clear to the trade union movement then that he had no intention because of the successful of the Thatcher Government laws of reversing that process.
We as a country have come a long way in the last 20 years. I have never been reluctant to give credit to the former government for some of the reforms that it carried out - such as deregulating the financial system and reducing tariffs.  And I would remind you that we in Opposition supported those decisions, we did not try to obstruct them because we believed that they were in the interests of the economy.  When you add those reforms to the reforms that we have carried out over the last nine and a half years, you've had almost 20 years of change and reform.  And that 20 years of change and reform have produced the economic strength we now have.  There are a lot of people who are saying to me well that's fantastic John, you've done a great job with the economy, unemployment is down, the economy is booming, we're doing well, why don't you just stop all this reform business and let us enjoy the benefits of it?  Unfortunately of course as many of you will understand immediately that is the path to going backwards. Iit's a backward process.  I often invoke the example of West Germany as it then was in the 1970s when I first became a junior Minister in the Fraser Government, everybody said the economic model to be followed was the Federal Republic of West Germany.  They had this fantastic economy, their productivity was high, they were exporting their heads off and they were out competing the rest of the world.  And that was the case in the 1970s, it's no longer the case.  And the reason was that they made the mistake that we don't intend to make - they rested on their oars, they thought they'd reformed enough, they didn't think any further reforms were necessary and as a result you now see the economy of a now reunified Germany much weaker, relatively speaking, than what it was in the 1970s.  And that in essence is the mistake we must not make. We have got a lot of benefit out of reform, we need further reform and nothing is more likely to purchase an additional burst of productivity in this country than further industrial relations reform.
Now I imagine that there are many people in this audience who are thinking to themselves well I agree with that and I'm all in favour of it. He needs to go out and tell other people that.  Now of course I know that, I do that, but I need your assistance.  This is not a debate that is easily won.  It's easy to stir up emotion, I've tried today to counter with some of the examples I've given, some of the absurd fear campaigns that have been run in relation to our changes concerning unfair dismissal laws.  I've found in the last 10 years as Prime Minister talking to small business the thing that recurs again and again is the absurdity of these unfair dismissal laws and how they actually hurt the good staff, they discourage small firms from taking on more people and they are a prime example of where overregulation has worked to the detriment of both business and also employees.
But ladies and gentlemen, I again want to thank the Chamber for inviting me, allowing me at such short notice to come along.  I thank you for coming along.  I thank the Chamber for its continued support of the cause of sensible, economic reform and I'd be very happy to answer any questions you want to put to me.
Thank you.
QUESTION:
Stephen Brook, Water Corporation Prime Minister.  Two questions if I may. The first is you've articulated very clearly what's wrong with the existing unfair dismissal laws. And what the (inaudible) has been is why you don't fix them and then apply them equally to all employers large and small irrespective of whether they have an H.R. department? The second question I'd ask. Say I'm an employer of less than 100 staff and I dismiss one of those employees and the remaining staff have their secret ballot and decide to go on strike over what they consider to be an unfair dismissal, how does that dispute get resolved?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in relation to the first question, we have chosen to have a cut off point of 100 for the reasons that I have explained. I know there are some large employers who don't agree with that. I have to say that we think, taking all things into account, 100 is the right point. Firms do in practise have a greater HR and personnel capacity concerning -once they get to a certain level. And we do think there is a qualitative difference between the capacity of smaller and medium sized firms to handle these laws, and those of larger firms. We will be making a change in relation to the probationary period for new employees and the application of unfair dismissal laws for larger firms. Firms of over 100 after the new laws come into operation the probationary period for a new employee will be lifted from three months to six months and we are looking at some ways in which the procedures in relation to unfair dismissal laws for the larger firms may in fact be handled. Now you ask me what would happen in relation to the case of a firm where the employees have a secret ballot and want to go on strike because they think somebody has been unlawfully, unfairly rather, dismissed. There's nothing in the unfair dismissal procedures to address that issue. That is not an issue relating to unfair dismissal, that's an issue relating to the right, depending on the circumstances of the industrial arrangement at that particular establishment, the right of people to go on strike. If you're arguing that somebody is exposed to that possibility, well they are, providing of course the strike action is lawful. If its not lawful then there could be consequences on the other side flowing from that. But that is obviously a calculation that an employer has to take into account. But my very strong view would be that if the changes are made, overwhelmingly when people are let go because of the unsatisfactory nature of their performance, then the possibility of the rest of the workforce getting together and voting in a secret ballot to go on strike is very, very slight indeed. And I can't emphasise enough that all of my mail on this says that the people who grumble almost as much as the small employers about the current unfair dismissal laws are the conscientious staff, who's morale is affected by the behaviour of a bad employee. And you all know, that if you have a workplace of a small number of people, of ten or fifteen people, you only need one person who has a destructive attitude towards their future and the future of their workmates to create a very unpleasant climate. I mean that was certainly my experience years ago before I went into politics. Its been my experience of talking to people since. And I think the likelihood of what you've specified happening is very remote indeed.
QUESTION :
Bob Phelps Prime Minister, from (inaudible). You might need our company. We're exterminators. The question I'd ask...
PRIME MINISTER:
Don't look at me.
QUESTION:
No I was thinking about election time actually. The question I ask, I haven't read it properly at the present moment, but this $4000 that you're putting up. Now what happens in the instance that the employer actually does win the case? Does the employee still get the $4000? And does the employer get some compensation?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the $4000 would only be made available subject to a very strict, and bear in mind this is about, this is for unlawful terminations. This is where you sack somebody on the grounds of their race or their gender or because they're pregnant or because they belong to a union. Now that's quite separate from unfair dismissals. And it only applies to them and the way it would work is you'd have to first of all get a certificate from the commission that you had a proper case, in other words it wasn't vexatious and then you could get up to $4000. Then you'd have available the services of somebody you'd choose from a panel of lawyers, and then if you lost the case, the question of whether costs would be awarded against you and so forth would depend on the decision of the court. It's not something that we would, I mean that would be a matter for the court to decide. So that acts as a further break on vexatious - now this is designed to respond to I think is quite a legitimate issue raised by some that okay, we accept that the unfair dismissal laws are going to be changed, we think that's good. But if you do get a genuine case of unlawful termination and somebody has no resources to say well you can take your employer to court, the reality is that many people simply can't afford to do that. And this also would be subject to a fairly strict means test. So it wont be available to everybody.
QUESTION:
We're listening to the unions reacting very strongly to the programme you're putting forward and the claim of mistruths and lies on both sides. Are we going to get a definite response from the Government in terms of the this programme going ahead without a lot of striking and reaction that's going to be detrimental to the business world?
PRIME MINISTER:
I wouldn't like to predict how the unions will ultimately prosecute their opposition to what we're doing. The experience to date has been that they have tried to argue and advertise and advocate rather than to embark on industrial disputation and I think we all hope that that will continue, although I can't rule out the possibility of some industrial action. There is talk of a national day of protest in the middle of November. If it's just that and it doesn't extend into prolonged industrial action then that would be welcome. The Government will be introducing the detailed legislation at the end of October. It's a very big re-writing exercise because the legislation is based on the corporation's power overwhelmingly and not on the conciliation and arbitration power and that requires a very substantial rewriting of the Workplace Relations Act. And we have to take care to ensure that its constitutionally appropriate and properly uses that power and when the legislation is brought down, obviously there will be time for it to be debated in both Houses. And the hope would be, subject to the approval of both houses, to see the legislation passed before Christmas. And it would come into operation in the first half of next year. I don't think the distortions of what we're proposing to do are going to disappear once the legislation appears. As well as introducing the legislation when I've mentioned, its also our hope to be able to release what could be described as a very detailed explanatory memorandum about how the legislation operates and perhaps release that a little in advance of the introduction of the legislation, although depending on how the preparation of the bill goes, I can't be certain of that. The legislation has taken a while to get ready and some people are critical of that. Can I just say that it was never possible to prepare legislation like this in secret. You have to announce the outline of what you're going to do and then you take some time to get the legislation ready and we've had a lot of people working on it, and we have to get it right. Because if there are things that are in it that are wrong, we wont get any quarter from our political or industrial opponents. My guess is that once the legislation is enacted, and people realise that its not directed against workers and its not designed to bring about wholesale sackings of people, it's not designed to prevent people balancing work and family, it will not leave people worse off, in fact has the potential to leave people who work very hard even better off. I think once that happens in about a year's time people will look back on the trade union campaign and scratch their heads and say what was all that about. And realise how dishonest it was to run such a campaign. Its easy in a situation like this to frighten people with the negative. Its much harder to reassure people with the positive. It's the experience of legislation like this that matters. I've never forgotten the experience we had with the GST. And that first weekend when it was introduced and I wandered around Macquarie Shopping Centre in my electorate in Sydney and wondered, you know, what sort of reaction I was going to get, and sort of - well to start with people were fairly indifferent to it, which is good. Its nice for people to be indifferent to you on some occasions. And I was very, very reassured by that. And then of course as time went by, as you know, a lot of people looked back and said well, you know, that wasn't as bad as we expected. Now this is not as big a structural change to our society as the GST. I mean it is not extreme. It's significant. It will be very pro-productivity. It will make a big positive difference over time. But its easy to run a fear campaign about it, and until you've really had the experience of people working under it and knowing that its not going to hurt them, its going to be easy to maintain that campaign, no matter what we say and no matter what is in the legislation.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Matt for that very warm introduction. Danielle Blain, the State President of the Western Australian Division of the Liberal Party, my Parliamentary colleagues, Sir Charles and Richard Court, former Premiers of Western Australia, ladies and gentlemen.  As always it's a real pleasure to be back in Perth. As always, it's a reminder when I visit this tremendous city, it's a reminder of the distinctive vibrancy of Perth, of Western Australia and the very special contribution that the industries and the people of Western Australia continue to make to the growing and spreading strength of the Australian economy. We are living in a remarkable time. The Australian economy now is the best and the strongest it's been since the end of World War Two. We may have had boom times in the 1960s. I was reading something in the Financial Review this morning that mentioned that in 1958/59 we had growth of 7% in the Australian economy. That of course, as some of you will remember was followed in 1961 by a credit squeeze which resulted in a near recession and also resulted almost in the defeat of the Menzies Government at the 1961 election when it survived mythically on those Communist Party preferences in Jim Killen's seat in Moreton. But I won't go into all the detail of that. I simply make the point that our economy then was growing quite strongly. But in a way it was a sheltered growth and it was a sheltered economic existence in the 1950s and the 1960s. We had very high tariff walls. We had a controlled exchange rate, indeed a fixed exchange rate. And every so often we would have a devaluation crisis. They're relics of the history books now. We had exchange controls. We had an even more centralised wage fixing system than we now have. And of course we hadn't even begun to think of the need for taxation reform or for deregulating the Australian financial system.
If you fast forward to 2005 our growth has now entered its 15th uninterrupted year. And that is an extraordinarily long period of time. It's steady and reliable. The last quarterly national account figures showed that the basis of growth in that quarter was high quality because it came off the back of very strong business investment. And we are succeeding courtesy of the extraordinary opportunities that the resource sector has and of which so many of you are very familiar. We are succeeding in rebalancing our economy as the housing sector in some parts of the country, not so much in Western Australia, recedes a little, it is being replaced by the extraordinary growth in our exports especially but not only to China. So we do have a remarkable economic picture. We have unemployment at a 30 year low. We have a record in the participation rate at 64.8%. The participation rate is the economist's description for the number of people wanting work, the number of people who are theoretically part of the labour market who are actually wanting a job and it's the highest ever. And that's a real mark of the strength of the economy because if the participation rate now were what it was say 10 or 15 years ago when people thought it was too hard to get a job because the economy was flat on its back,back in the early 1990s, people found it very hard then to think of even getting a job. If we had a participation rate now like it was then, our unemployment rate, which is at a 30 year low, would even be much lower than it is now. So all of that adds up to a very strong economic picture, an economic picture that is not without challenge and I'll come to that in a moment in relation to some of the international factors that we ought to be concerned about.
 Now many people would think with a scene like that with strong business investment, very strong export prospects, very low unemployment, a very high participation rate, a great amount of consumer confidence despite the high price of petrol, one would think many would argue indeed that that is precisely the time that a Government should go away and forget about doing anything more. Can I argue to you today and many of you may have heard me say this before, but that in my view is precisely the wrong prescription for where we are the present time. And the message I want to leave with you today, and there's really only one message I want to leave with you today is that the Government remains very firmly committed to the ongoing economic reform agenda. We do not think for a moment that our task has been completed. One of the reasons why, in fact the overwhelming reason why the Australian economy now is as strong and that strength is as broadly based as it is, is that we have had in this country some 10 to 20 years of economic reform and economic change. And in its wake we have created a new Australia from an economic standpoint. It's a more adaptive, adaptable; it's a more flexible; it's an economically more aggressive country, it's more innovative and it's a country that as a result is held in even higher regard now than it has been held in the past because of that great economic success. We've had a wave of reform.
 Some of those reforms were carried out by our Labor predecessors and I have never been reluctant to give them credit for that. The great difference of course is that when they tried to reform something and it made sense we supported them, we didn't oppose them. I have to report to you that over the last nine and a half years I can't think of one single major economic reform that we've tried to carry out that the Labor Party has supported. When the Labor Party decided to deregulate the financial system, following the recommendations of the Campbell Committee that I'd established as Treasurer, we supported them. When they floated the dollar, we supported that. When they decided to reduce tariffs which is such an important move for the rural community and also for mining industry, both industries of which are tremendously important to Western Australians, we supported them.
 By contrast, in the nine and a half years we've been in office, every single major reform, tax reform, industrial relations reform, our attempts to sensibly deal with Government ownership of Telstra, getting the budget back into surplus, other reforms, the Labor Party has opposed them every inch of the way. For a while that worked to the extent that they could make life more difficult for us. But now as a result of the last election - we don't have control of the Senate- to use Peter Costello's very amusing and very apt phrase, we have a majority of one on a good day. And I think that is a reasonable description of just where we are in relation to the Senate. But a majority of one on a good day, providing you pick your day, is enough. And can I report to you that we've already seen the benefits of that in three crucial areas. We would never have got the taxation changes affecting the point at which the top rate of income tax comes in,from the 1st of July next year at $125,000. Only two years ago it was $60,000. We would never have got that through if we hadn't had a majority in the Senate. That would have been blocked as earlier attempts to do things like that were blocked. We would never have got the legislation establishing the building industry authority through the Senate and I know that is very important to many people in the construction industry here in Western Australia. We would never have got that through if we hadn't have got a majority in the Senate and of course, we would never finally have got the sale of Telstra legislation through the Senate.   So I think all of those things are important. And they are a reminder; they are a sample of what can be achieved as a result of these changed circumstances. And I want to confirm to you today that the Government remains committed to an economic reform agenda. And the opportunity that the numbers in the Senate give us mean that the prospect of implementing that agenda are much brighter than they were a year ago.
 In speeches I make around the country I describe the challenge of economic reform as being akin to participating in a footrace towards an ever receding finishing line. You know in your heart you can't ever get there because it keeps disappearing, but you keep running hard because if you don't, the two blokes on either side of you are going to run past you and they're going to go after that ever receding line. And economic competitiveness is a bit like that. We have plenty of competitors around the world. We shouldn't imagine that we are the only supplier of energy. We shouldn't imagine that Australia is the only country that has large reserves of natural gas. I know from the experience I had and I know Richard Court had the same experience, when we began to negotiate with the Chinese about signing that wonderful natural gas contract that we concluded three years ago that we faced very strong competition. And the world out there is fairly harsh and competitive and unrelenting. And we're now part of a global economic environment. There's no turning back, there's really no point in debating it because it's with us forever. And we have to compete and we have to do well. And therefore we have to keep our own economy highly tuned and highly competitive.
The other metaphor or perhaps analogy I use is to reflect upon the state of the German economy at the present time. I mean no unkindness to the country or to the German people, but we have to learn from the experience of others. When I became a junior Minister in the Fraser Government in the 1970s the country that was held up as the exemplar of economic reform and performance was the then Federal Republic of West Germany.  And it had done wondrous things. It came out of the ruination of World War Two and within the space of thirty years had built the strongest economy in Europe. The Bundesbank Bank as a central bank was the envy of other central banks. Germany could export, outperform any country in exports. And people flocked to Bonn as it then was, to find out how it was done. Sadly for Germany, the reform process stopped in the 1970s and now some thirty years later, or a little less than thirty years later, the country's economy is seen as stagnating with unemployment at about 11% and in nominal terms as high as it was during the great depression. Now why did that come about? That came about because Germany downed tools on the economic reform challenge. Just when they had, in a sense, had it licked, they decided that was the time to stop.
 Now there's a lesson in that for Australia. And there are plenty of people around who are saying reform has gone far enough. We're all tired of it; we don't want to do any more. Our opponents are like that. They're against industrial relations reform, they were against tax reform. I don't know what the attitude of the Australian Labor Party is on for example, uranium mining. They still, I think, have this three mines policy. Martin Ferguson their spokesman on one area of it is in favour of it. Some of the unions are in favour of it. The Australian Workers Union's in favour of it, but Dougie Cameron from the Manufacturing Union, he has a very different view about it. So one way or another I guess a policy will emerge. But the point I stress, and I stress with some fervour, is that it is precisely when the economy is doing well, it is precisely when we appear to be in a strong position that we have to redouble our commitment to reform. And that is why we remain very, very strongly committed to the programme of industrial relations reform that I outlined in May and I've spent some time talking about over the past few days since I've been in Western Australia.
And that reform really has three key elements. The first of those is to break the too close link that now exists between the awards system and workplace agreements. With a simplified new standard to replace the existing no disadvantage test, it will be easier to make workplace agreements. We won't be removing the opportunities for collective agreements. We won't be denying people the right to be represented by unions. We won't be denying people the opportunities to be covered by the awards system. But we will be providing a much simpler, easier facility for employers and employees to enter into workplace agreements.
 The second element is to dramatically simplify the laws relating to unfair dismissals. Those laws which were only brought in in 1994 as a result of a secret election  deal between the ACTU and the then Keating Government. Those laws, so far from protecting people, have actually destroyed jobs. And the war stories of small and medium sized businesses of dealing with the unfair dismissal laws are legion. And they have created a climate where go away money is freely paid rather than to allow firms of small and medium size to get tangled up for days, weeks, even months in protracted hearings and litigation regarding vexatious claims.
The third element is to create a national system and that is to use the corporation's power of the Constitution to create a single national system to respond to the reality that Australia is a national economy. When I practiced law in Sydney in the early 1960s,and I often use this to describe the way in which our country has changed,we had only a year or two emerged from the situation that if you incorporated a company in New South Wales and you wanted to carry on business in Western Australia or Victoria you had to register it as a foreign company in Victoria or Western Australia. Now that provokes laughter now. But I tell you what, it was a reality then. And I tell you what else was a reality - that the procedure that you had to adopt, the registration procedure to get it registered in Victoria or Western Australia was virtually identical to the procedure you had to adopt to get it registered in the United Kingdom or in Canada. It was a measure of how the Australian States then saw themselves in so many ways as separate economic units. We didn't have great national firms. I'd better not start naming any of them. I might get into trouble. But some of them are extremely well known to a gathering like this. You had a firm that was; well I will name one. I mean for example, you had a firm called Allen, Allen and Hemsley in Sydney. Its now Allens, Arthur, Robinson. And if you wanted a law firm to carry out your business in another State you had to engage them as an agent to carry it out. Now all of that has changed. We have in so many ways become a national economy. That doesn't mean to say that we don't retain distinctive characteristics and we don't retain distinctive needs. But there is a national character about our economy now. And I think that requires a national industrial relations system.
This is not going to be easy this reform process but I believe it's a fight worth having because it's a cause that will deliver a more productive Australia. We need a new round of productivity improvement in this country. We are in a sense living off the back of earlier economic reforms. And we therefore have to make sure that we lay the  basis of further change and further reform in the future. And industrial relations reform is a crucial part of that.
Can I before I conclude just say a couple of things about the challenges coming from around the globe. The most important and difficult of those of course is that of fuel prices. I wish I could say otherwise but we are going to be stuck with higher petrol prices for quite a long time. They may not remain quite as high as they are now because to some degree the current spike has been caused by the expectation effects coming off Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. It's not just the refining capacity that has been knocked out in the Gulf of Mexico. But it's also the expectations that people have had about the consequences of that. The reality is that the demand for oil is much greater now than what it was expected to be as recently as two or three years ago. Part of that is due to wholly benign positive reasons. And that is the world economy is growing more strongly than was thought then. The Chinese economy in particular has grown in a spectacular way, and no country has been a greater beneficiary of that, or will continue to be a greater beneficiary of that than our own country. So it's not something that we would see with this disdain or dread or concern. In a sense, it's valuable for Australia.
 The other factor of course is that the Japanese economy is also beginning to gather a lot of strength and I think one of the best political events in recent weeks was the re-election of Mr Koizumi as the Prime Minister of Japan. He's a courageous economic reformer and I think his election victory, which I welcome very strongly on both a national interest and a personal basis, I think that victory will embolden him not only to press ahead with post office privatisation, but also to press ahead with other economic reform. And that is valuable and important for Australia as well because we should never forget in thinking about China, we should never forget the fact that Japan still remains Australia's single best export destination, a position that Japan has occupied for so long and something that we should always keep very much in mind.
But I think we do face the reality of higher petrol prices and there's no easy fix to this. Anybody who imagines that it's easily fixed by fiddling with the excise level is wrong. If you wanted to make a serious impact on the excise, you'd have to take ten cents off it. And that would cost at least $3b a year. It's of no comfort to the Australian motorist for me to say it, but apart from the United States, petrol in this country is cheaper than it is in any country with which we'd want to make a comparison. It's about double. It's about $2, this is translated into Aussie dollars per litre, not English pounds per imperial gallon. It's $2.30 approximately in Britain. About $2.11 in France, about $2.19 or something in Germany and it's about $1.39 or 45 in Japan. Only in the United States is it cheaper.
Now as I say, none of that is of any comfort, but I don't think it serves the purpose of sensible discussion of this issue for me to pretend that there's some easy gimmicky solution as some have done. There isn't. There are things you can do at the margin. We decided not to go ahead with the minor increase in excise at the beginning of next year in order to fund some investment by the oil companies in certain pro-environmental activities. And we've, I think, begun a sensible discussion in alliance with the oil companies about the use of bio-fuels. But neither of those two things represents anything of a silver bullet and we have to understand that it's one of these things that we'll have to deal with and grapple with very significantly over an extended period of time.
Now that represents the most difficult challenge internationally. Of course domestically, once again Western Australia has rescued the rest of the country courtesy of the wheat crop of course. Western Australia again, perhaps courtesy of the climate. I wont be so crass as to emphasise that point, but I think you'd want to say, and Barry Court reminded me yesterday that once again Western Australia has come to the rescue of the whole country with a wonderful contribution to our wheat crop. But we still do suffer in some parts of the country severely from the effects of the drought. And although there are very promising signs that we are recovering, its still something that's going to leave its mark.
But overall my friends, it's a very positive outlook. It's an outlook that I like to believe the Government's policies over the last nine and half years have contributed to, but the greatest contribution I believe has been made by the way in which the business community of this country, and the way in which the workers of this country have adapted to the new and challenging economic environment. This country has changed very significantly over that period of time. There are a lot of things that haven't changed because they didn't need to change. They were going very well. And I've always been somebody who believes that those things that work well you should hang on to and it's those things that aren't working well that you should seek to change. And we have changed an enormous number of things. The way in which we work, the way in which we relate to each other in the workplace, the way in which we compete around the world. But the lesson we must learn from that, the lesson we must learn from others is that the reform task is never finished. It's always essential to keep running towards that ever receding finishing line. Its annoying, it's frustrating, you wish it were otherwise, but once you let up, several people will run past you. And then you're left to contemplate the missed opportunity of your lack of resolve and your lack of commitment.
Can I conclude my remarks by thanking the Liberal Party in Western Australia for the wonderful result that it delivered. And its now almost a year ago since I addressed a gathering here. I think it was probably the first gathering in this Convention Centre on the eve of the 2004 election. It was an election that delivered a result, the magnitude of which I had not expected. And it was an election that delivered a magnificent result here in Western Australia. Federally in Western Australia we did the second best of any State. On a two party preferred basis only Queensland delivered a better outcome for the Coalition than Western Australia. We were able to win two extra seats in the House of Representatives, the seats of Stirling and Hasluck and I visited both of them over the past two days. And I was out in Stirling this morning addressing a community gathering of almost 1200 people that had been assembled through invitation in a random fashion in the space of a short period of time.
 And to see the enthusiasm of those two members, Stuart Henry in Hasluck, and Michael Keenan in Stirling, and added to the tremendous efforts and enthusiasm of all the other Members and Senators from Western Australia, the Division has done great things for the Federal Government. And Danielle, to you and to Paul I express my particular thanks for the tremendous work. And Matt, can I say that I look forward to working very closely with you. It's pretty lonely at those dinners at the Lodge on the eve of Premier's conferences when you're surrounded by 8 Labor Premiers and Chief Ministers. And I look forward to having some Liberal mates and I will work very hard with all of the State Parties to do everything we can to bring about that situation. Because the idea that we should exist in any kind of indefinite sense with this imbalance is something I'm not happy with and I know that Liberals all around Australia are unhappy with.  But to all of you, thank you for the support that you've given to the Liberal Party over the years and the support that you continue to give to our great cause.
[ends]


Thank you very much Ian. Danielle Blain, Matt Birney, my Ministerial and other Parliamentary Colleagues, fellow Liberals. And can I in extending a particular welcome to my Federal Parliamentary Colleagues acknowledge that in a short period of time, a matter of two or three weeks, we Liberals will celebrate a very significant event, and that's the 25th Anniversary of the election of Charles Wilson Tuckey to the Federal Parliament.  I think we should record our gratitude for quiet understated service. But Wilson thank you for your great capacity to represent the rural people of this country. There are arguably left in Australia only three truly rural electorates in the sense that the electorates are not dominated by rural hub cities, but rather by a collection of what can truly be called still country towns. The electorate of Maranoa in Queensland, the electorate of Gwydir in New South Wales and the electorate of O'Connor in Western Australia. And Wilson, you represent those rural interests. You do it with vigour and you do it with conviction and the party owes you a great debt of gratitude for a quarter of a century of service to the people of your electorate.
My friends, it is always a great pleasure to address a State Conference of the Liberal Party in Western Australia and I do so at a time when the Liberal Party's stocks Federally are strong. But it's important that we see our good fortune and our strength at a national level in true perspective. We Australians have always been exceptionally good at pulling together and dealing with adversity. In times of war, in times of natural disaster, in times of economic downturn, we always find great reserves of resilience and of courage and determination.
Today may I put it to you our great challenge is to summon up those same characteristics at a time of great economic prosperity. Can I put it to you that the politics of prosperity are no less challenging than the politics of adversity. And the biggest challenge of all is to avoid the pitfall of complacency. Complacency is the giant killer of Australian politics, particularly when it comes to economic management.  And as soon as any Government decides that it can put its feet up, that the hard work has been done, that the economy will look after itself, that no more reform is needed, that Government has signed its own death warrant.
We are now almost a year on from a memorable electoral victory on the 9th of October last year. And the question I posed to the Australian people at the beginning of that election campaign I think almost eleven and a half months ago is just as relevant today as it was then. And that question was a very simple proposition and it's again a very simple proposition. When you look at the two sides of politics, who do you really trust to get the big things right? Who do you really trust to take the difficult but necessary decisions to keep Australia safe and to secure our future economic prosperity?
 This week I convened a special meeting of State Premiers and Chief Ministers to discuss issues of national security, to achieve a balance between our traditional liberties and the new threatening terrorist environment in which sadly we now live and we are condemned to live for a number of years into the future. What was required was a careful balancing of those interests. We needed to go further than the current law had taken us, but we had to avoid the pitfalls of going too far. We were determined to get the balance right and I believe that we achieved the right balance.
 Just as we achieved the right balance in relation to national security we have a supreme responsibility to take the bold decisions that are needed in relation to our economic future, and all the more so because the portents are good. All the more so because the opportunities are great and nowhere in Australia is that more apparent than here in Western Australia with its enormous ongoing contribution to the export wealth of our nation. This imperative demands not only stable, united, cohesive, thoughtful Government, but it also requires a willingness to take bold decisions in the longer term national interest so that we can prepare ourselves for the challenges of coming decades. To secure higher living standards in an evermore competitive world, to reap the benefits of Asia's economic reawakening. To ensure that our people have the skills they need in the 21st Century workforce. To maintain a competitive tax system while investing adequately in our physical and our social infrastructure. To ensure that Australians continue to have access to world class health and education systems as well as a strong and effective social security safety net. And to reform our welfare system and to build a culture of greater individual responsibility and self reliance.
 And my friends, having come so far as we have over the last nine and a half years, history will judge us very harshly if we now lapse into complacency. If we now believe that enough has been done, if we now embrace the politics of reform fatigue, as has the Labor Party. As somebody rightly said a few weeks ago after reading a speech that Mr Beazley had given to an economic conference in Melbourne that the Opposition Leader had to be the first example of the leader of a major political party in Australia who had acquired reform fatigue while still being in opposition.
And of these future building blocks none is more important than the ongoing need for further workplace relations reform. We are seeing year by year a major cultural shift taking place in the Australian workforce with the rise of what I have described as the enterprise worker.  The attitude of Australia and Australians towards work has been transformed over the past two decades. The reputation for adaptability, the reputation for innovation, the reputation for industry of Australian workers is now widely recognised around the world.  And more and more Australians are now eager to shape their own destiny at work, whether as paid employees or in the expanding world of self employment. A short while ago, the Australian Bureau of Statistics released what I regard as an historic statistic, particularly for people who belong to the Liberal Party. And it recorded that there are now more people who are self employed in Australia at 1.9 million than there are who belong to trade unions at 1.8 million. We now have more than 1 million Australians who run their own businesses from home and a growing proportion of those self employed people running their own businesses from home are of course women who find in the opportunities of the modern world, the more flexible environment in which we live, a greater capacity to combine work and family responsibilities.
 And what is so striking about the self employed figure and what is so striking about many other figures is that we truly live in what I have described as a workers' market. And that workers' market, a workers' market like we have never had before in the history of this country, has been created by the coalition. It has not been created by the self styled worker's party, the Australian Labor Party. And just as I was able to declare when opening the Liberal Party's campaign for the election last year for the seats we held and hoped to win in Western Sydney, that we had brought a quadrella of benefits to the people of Western Sydney, of lower interest rates, lower taxation, more jobs and greater job security. So I can say that this government can claim proudly that it is the Government that has created a workers' market like never before. Because not only is our unemployment at a 30 year low, but our real wages have risen by just under 15% over the last nine and a half years. And this is the record of a government which stands accused by the Labor Party of wanting to destroy the living standards of the working men and women of this country. I say again and repeatedly and I say it defiantly, look at our record. The working men and women of this country have had no better friend than the government that I've been proud to lead over the last nine and a half years.
But not only is our unemployment at a 30 year low, not only have we created 1.7 million more jobs since we were elected, not only have we in the last year generated 400,000 jobs, which is the largest number of jobs ever generated in a 12 month period since the records began to be kept, but in addition to that the participation rate now stands at 64.8% at a record high. In other words, so confident are people of their job opportunities now, a greater percentage than ever before are looking for work. All of this indicates that we are indeed living in a workers' market. Not a cause for complacency, but a cause for reflection and stock taking in the face of the fear campaign being run by the Australian Labor Party and the trade union movement in response to our proposals for workplace relations reform. I ask the rhetorical question, why would a Government proud of that record of concern and service to the working men and women of Australia, why would that Government set about embracing policies designed to undermine their living standards and to cut their working conditions? It is a preposterous argument. I've often been asked to give guarantees. The best guarantee I can give is the guarantee of my record in helping the working men and women of Australia over the last nine and a half years.
Australian workers are in very high demand. And the trend is even more favourable as the share of new entrants into the labour market falls with the ageing of our population. Working Australians should seize this opportunity and not be influenced by the fear campaign of our opponents. Our 1996 reforms; not as far as we would have wanted to go, but certainly more than the Labor Party would have supported, have demonstrated the benefits for people in negotiating workplace arrangements. There is nothing radical or extreme in what we are proposing. It is a measured and significant improvement on the reforms that were introduced in 1996. And Australian workers should take advantage of the greater choice and flexibility offered by our workplace reforms, because they will be negotiating from a position of strength, not from a position of weakness, backed by a strong set of safeguards protected by law.
So when we look at the political scene now we see one side of politics, that occupied by the coalition, laying the foundation of Australia's future economic strength. We see a Federal Labor Party confused and divided and lacking in leadership. Labor still, after nine and a half years, has no clear coherent message to communicate to the Australian people. Let me take a few examples. Let me take an example very important to all of us and that is the example of education. In the last nine and a half years, this Government at a federal level has been the champion of choice in education and we have done more to expand parental choice in this country than any previous Federal Government. We are spending record amounts on both government and non-government schools. Approximately 31% of all Australian school children are now educated in independent schools. And importantly the expansion in independent schools has not been at the top end of the market, has not been in those schools which are the traditional targets of the envy politics of the Labor Party, rather they have been in low fee, outer suburban independent schools where the expansion has been significant and where the choice has been made available to working parents who want that choice, who want a school that caters for their particular values and their particular priorities.  We have been the champion of choice.
 We've not only been the champion of choice between government and non-government schools, we've also been the champion of choice within the government sector. A strong government school sector is imperative to the future education standards of this country. I am proud, as somebody who was fully educated in my school education at a government school, I'm very proud of the contribution that government education has made to the development of Australians through the generations.
Now we have a very proud record of choice, but in recent days I've heard Mr Beazley extolling the virtues of choice in education. Yet where was his passion for choice when he led the Labor Party in 2001 and embraced the politics of envy in attacking independent schools? Every time they got up in Parliament and sneered at people who went to Kings School or Scots, or Melbourne Grammar, they were not just sneering at those schools, they were sneering at the whole independent school sector. And they were in fact denigrating the choice that parents make in relation to their education needs of their children. Mr Beazley now seeks to reinvent himself as somebody who believes in choice, yet in reality on not only the occasion of the 2001 election but again in 2004 where the Labor Party developed their hit list of schools, which they have still not disavowed. I listened in vain for Mr Beazley to tell us, when he spoke at the education conference in Sydney a few days ago, for him to disavow the hit list. Its still there. It's there because the ideology of the teacher unions of this country still dictate the education policies of the Australian Labor Party.
Now Madam President. Old habits die hard don't they? Do we also for this you know, reformed leader can we have a look at the issue of taxation? It's fascinating. Remember a few months ago, Mr Beazley opposed the tax cuts contained in the budget and the only reason those tax cuts became law was because the Coalition had won a majority in the Senate at the last election and that majority came into effect on the 1st of July. He trotted out his usual soak-the-rich rhetoric. He was opposed to changes - we were going to lift the point at which the top rate of tax came into operation at $125,000. He was still mired in this belief that somehow or other people earning 60, 70, 80 thousand dollars a year were rich. I wonder when was the last time he visited the mining areas of Western Australia, the last time he talked to a police sergeant in Western Sydney doing some overtime? I wonder how out of touch he really is when he imagines that those levels of income and remuneration represent riches. One minute he's criticising tax cuts as too generous to people on higher income and yet in recent days he's been calling for tax cuts for people on the top rate.
And he was at it again yesterday and in the process he was demonstrating his ignorance of economics. He was calling for a further tax cut off the back of the bigger than expected surplus we had in the last financial year, without realising or acknowledging that that bigger than expected surplus was a one off slippage of expenditure and not the result of increased revenue. And the most elementary understanding of the budget would tell you that you can't finance an ongoing tax cut out of a one off expenditure slippage. So we've had a demonstration very clearly in comparing the two parties that the proposition that I put to the Australian people at the beginning of the election campaign last year is as valid today almost a year on as it was when I put that proposition.
 We unexpectedly won a majority in the Senate. I've said to party gatherings all around Australia that when I entered the election campaign a year ago, my fervent hope was that we would be returned with an adequate majority in the House of Representatives, and we might, with great good fortune, win one or two more seats in the Senate. I must say that I fantasised a little bit about a slightly better result after attending a certain meeting at the Albert Hall in Launceston where I literally embraced some Australians who'd come to the conclusion that the party that ever since its foundation more than a hundred years ago had said it was for the workers, was no longer a party for the Australian worker.
 That environmental policy that the Labor Party took to the last election must represent the most cynical betrayal of the interests of working class Australians that any political party has ever presented. It was a calculated, cynical attempt to buy Green preferences on the mainland of Australia and to hell with the impact on the job security of the struggling families of rural Tasmania. And that was the Labor Party at work. That was cynical Labor at work, driven and dominated by the inner metropolitan elites, without any regard at all for the hardworking people of rural and regional communities.
 But my best hopes were exceeded. The best hopes of so many of us were exceeded on election day and we secured a very narrow majority, on a good day as Peter Costello calls it, a very narrow majority in the Senate. Now that gives us enormous opportunity. It also gives us an enormous responsibility. It gives us the opportunity to do things we would otherwise be stopped from doing. It gives us the opportunity to fulfil promises we have made repeatedly over the last nine and a half years, such as the sale of the remaining share of the government in Telstra.  We've already achieved three major pieces of legislation we would never have been able to achieve without a majority in the Senate. Telstra legislation, the tax cuts and very importantly for many industries here in Western Australia, the passage of the building and construction industry authority legislation that will bring a sense of law and order to an industry that has been wracked by rorts and improper behaviour over many years. Legislation Labor would never have supported and we would never in a month of Sundays been able to get through the Senate.
So we do have an enormous responsibility but we have to use it wisely and calmly and soberly and sensibly. The Australian people don't want extreme measures. But they want a Government that is strong and determined and clear in communicating what it stands for. The Australian people respond to consistency. They don't like extremism, they have contempt for weakness and indecision and rightly so. And we must keep those political messages in mind, those political realities. We must remember as I said at the beginning of my speech that complacency is the giant killer of Australian politics. We have come a long way, we have achieved a lot, we have a lot to be proud of. But there's a lot more to be done. And if we imagine that we can rest on our oars, we can say the job is finished, that it's all getting a bit too hard, the Australian people will be entitled to look around for an alternative. And they will and they'll do it very deliberately and they'll do it very effectively. You must always keep working hard and running hard to retain the trust and the confidence of the Australian people.
Can I conclude my remarks by thanking all of you. I want to thank Danielle Blain and Paul Everingham in particular for the wonderful leadership of the organisation that they have given over the last twelve months here in Western Australia. It was a truly magnificent effort here in Western Australia. To win two additional seats, to see increases in majorities such as Don Randall's wonderful achievement in Canning, to see the emphatic Senate result. Yes, give Don a clap. And to go to Michael Keenan's little morning tea gathering yesterday of 1100 people, and to Stuart Henry's wonderful victory in Hasluck. It was a truly fantastic result. And I want to thank all of you for the role that you've played. I want to thank all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues from Western Australia. We have achieved an enormous amount, but we still have a lot of work to do.
And I want to extend the hand of cooperation and friendship to my State colleague Matt Birney and to all of the members of his Parliamentary Party. We are one indivisible Liberal Party. When we work together we succeed. Sure we have separate State and Federal manifestations and clearly there's separate sets of policies on a whole range of issues. But in the end, we have one indivisible goal and that indivisible goal is the election of Liberal Governments, and by definition the expulsion of Labor Government's where they hold office. And they hold office in too many places in Australia at the present time, far too many places. And we all have to work together and work together very strongly to bring about a change.
My friends, thank you very much for your loyalty, your support and you hard work. You delivered to us a wonderful Federal victory and it is now our responsibility to discharge the great responsibilities that you and the Australian people gave us just on a year ago today.
Thank you.
  [ends]


Thank you very much for that introduction.  My Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  What a fantastic day for Australian science.  What an absolutely fantastic day.  Whatever the scientific equivalent is of the ticker-tape reception that was given to the Sydney Swans should be extended in their home city to Professor Barry Marshall and Dr Robin Warren.  I may, as a self-confessed cricket and other sports tragic but I'll just settle for cricket, have said in the past that I looked to the day when the exploits of Australian scientists will be as revered and remarked about as the exploits of our sports men and women. I guess in the nature of popular culture that is hard in literal terms to achieve, but in symbolic terms and clearly at a gathering like this we should take immense pride in the fact that once again two very distinguished Australians for the first time since 1996 have joined the ranks of Nobel Prize winners.  I understand that Professor Barry Marshall is flying in from Western Australia and he will be here a little later this evening.  And that will be a wonderful opportunity for his peers in the scientific community of Australia and more generally here in the Great Hall of the National Parliament on the day that the announcement has been made for him to be in a very genuine sense honoured by people who have shared his commitment and his dedication to his work and also the extraordinary contribution of his collaborator Dr Robin Warren.  And to see the media coverage of it this morning, competing sadly with some tragic events, and to witness the coverage through the day filled I know all of you, as it did me, with a great sense of pride at what has been achieved.
These awards which have now been going in their current form for five years, and the predecessor being the Australia Prize, are an attempt by the Government to emphasise in a symbolic way as well as in a practical way the extraordinary contribution of science to this country and to honour the great capacity of Australian scientists to perform and to contribute to humanity.  And the various recipients over the time that I have been Prime Minister have come from a wide range, people who have been involved in all different branches of science.  And tonight's prizes will be no exception.
  I am particularly pleased that again we have two recipients of the prizes for primary and secondary school teaching.  It is so important to encourage and to reward the teachers of science in our community because they hold the key to the future.  I've had the opportunity on earlier occasions to recall the great experience, and I do it again tonight, that I've had as a person who is not greatly skilled in the sciences but rather had what might pass as a liberal arts education, the great stimulus, intellectually and otherwise that I've had from chairing the Prime Minister's Science Council - something I've done with great pleasure over a period of nine-and-a-half years.  And the recipient of the Prime Minister's Science Prize tonight will join that Council as a member for 12 months and not only has that been of enormous stimulus and have been a great eye opener for me and my senior colleagues, but the contributions of people at the gathering and the gathering surrounding that meeting have played a very significant role in Government decisions.  I think of the contribution it made to the Backing Australia's Ability announcements which laid out a programme of financial commitment at the beginning of year 2001.  I think more recently of the discussions I had in the lead up to the last Federal Budget about establishing the Air Link, a very pragmatic thing between Australia and Antarctica which we were able to bring forward and announce in the Budget and it directly, as a result of a very passionate case put at a meeting earlier this year of the Science Council.  It's been a wonderful opportunity for the Government to interact with the science community and I hope in a tangible way build a stronger and closer partnership.
But tonight very much is a night for exuberance and celebration because we've had worldwide recognition of the quality that we know has always been there, it doesn't come very often but given the size of Australia it comes in relative terms perhaps more frequently to this country, and deservedly so, than to many others.  May I thank all of you in your different ways for the contribution that you have made to humanity through the sciences.  Can I thank the teachers amongst you, can I thank the healers amongst you, can I thank the inquiring minds amongst you.  That is not the limit of the categories, but those three come to me very instinctively as being demonstrations of the importance of science to our being and to our future.
  Can I also take the opportunity of particularly thanking my Minister responsible for science, Brendan Nelson, who brings to the portfolio of education, science and training enormous energy, enormous commitment, zeal.  And I like ministers who have zeal, providing it's in the right direction and he has lots of zeal in the right direction and he is a very committed proponent for and advocate of the cause of science.  But ladies and gentlemen, may I again thank all of you, I welcome you to this great gathering and just say how absolutely incredibly fantastic it is that it should be held on the night of the day of the announcement of the Nobel Prize winners, these two wonderful Australians, these two wonderful people from Perth - Barry Marshall and Robin Warren.  And we'll look forward in a short while to welcoming Barry and honouring him for his wonderful contribution.
But thank you my fellow Australians for the wonderful contribution you make through your endeavours to our nation and to our collective future.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Mr Baker. Your Excellency, the Governor of South Australia, Mr Mike Rann, the Premier. The Federal Minister for Transport and Regional Services Warren Truss, my other Federal Ministerial Colleagues. Rob Kerin, the Leader of the South Australian Opposition, the Lord Mayor, ladies and gentlemen. This by any definition is a wonderful day for Adelaide and a wonderful day for South Australia. This magnificent new terminal, spacious, airy, giving the impression of openness and light which is so typical of the welcome that people receive when they come to any part of Australia is a magnificent new gateway for people who first arrive in this country from anywhere else in the world and for people who leave here to go overseas.
I know its taken a long time and as I listened to the Chairman talk about the setbacks that were received, particularly in that month in September which I, and I don't think millions of Australians will ever forget, particularly the two events coming together of the tragic attacks in the United States followed by the collapse of Ansett a few days later. And they have represented enormous challenges to all people involved in airport construction, all people involved in the aviation industry. It's not an easy time for the aviation industry around the world. I'm very conscious as I'm sure they are of the impact of international oil prices on the price of fuel and of the many other challenges that they face. And that makes all the more meritorious this achievement by the Adelaide Airport Corporation; a $270m investment, a facility that can handle what, 27 different types of aircraft including the new A380. It will be for decades into the future a magnificent, modern facility welcoming people to Australia and welcoming them most particularly to South Australia.
The distinctive contribution of South Australian industry including its famous wine industry, the great strength of the service sector here in Adelaide and in South Australia and the ongoing contribution of the motor manufacturing industry to the economy of this state and of course all three to the economy of Australia is something that will underpin for years into the future, the prosperity of this state and the prosperity of this city.
 It is important that every major population and commercial centre of Australia have up to date, state of the art international airport facilities. It has never been satisfactory that any part of Australia and any State of Australia feels that in some way it doesn't have the same opportunities and the same facilities in relation to people arriving and people departing. And that's why this project was so important. I know that's why it has received over the years the strong support of Governments of both political persuasions here in South Australia and why it's received the very strong support of the Federal Government.
Can I take this opportunity of congratulating the Corporation on the way in which the project was completed on time and in budget and in extending those congratulations I also extend my congratulations to the workforce of the various contractors and all of those associated with the construction. It does require a team effort. There was no industrial disputation. That's a credit to both the Corporation and the contractors and also, very particularly to the workforce. It's increasingly and overwhelmingly now the Australian way to complete these things on time and on budget. And it produces an outcome that brings enormous benefits to everybody.
Can I say on behalf of the Federal Government and I know on behalf of the industry all around Australia, congratulations to the Corporations, congratulations to Adelaide and to the people of South Australia. It is a very important event. It's a wonderful facility and I think it will add enormous value to the economy of South Australia. It will add enormous value to the cultural and other life of South Australia. It will strengthen its links with the rest of the world and that is at it should be. And I am delighted to be part of this very important ceremony for the Adelaide and South Australian community.
 Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Richard, Fiona Wood Australian of Year, Mr Chairman, our guests from overseas, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say Richard in direct response that the Government does recognise the contribution that the franchise community has made to the Australian economy and we do very much respect the values on which your organisation has been founded and the motivation behind the efforts of your members. The contribution that many in this gathering have made, the contribution that franchise people have generally made to the Australian economy has been an integral part of the success story of the Australian economy over the last decade. I have frequently employed the expression, 'the enterprise worker' - a modern description of the reality of the Australian workplace.
 Old descriptions such as 'white collar' and 'blue collar', even 'knowledge worker' are no longer adequate to properly encapsulate a growing number of people, some of whom own their own businesses either as franchisees or otherwise, but many of whom remain employees but see their future as tied up with the future of the business for which they work. They understand better than people in earlier generations did, that the old 'them and us' mentality of the Australian workplace is gone forever and that it is working together for our future which is the dominant consideration, and working in an environment where the success of the enterprise is indistinguishable from your own personal success, whether you own and operate the enterprise or whether you work for the enterprise.
  It's not surprising therefore that a few weeks ago a statistic came out which says a lot about what has happened to Australia over the last decade or more and that statistic said that there are now more Australians who are self employed as owner-managers at 1.91 million than there are members of a registered trade union.
 Now I do not say that in denigration of trade union memberships. There has never been anything in my philosophy which denies or disputes or argues against the right of people to organise themselves into trade unions, or to belong to trade unions, or to have trade unions fairly and legitimately represent them in pursuit of their workplace goals. But we are a nation transformed; we are more entrepreneurial, we are a nation that understands the value of the enterprise worker, whether that worker is an employee or an owner, he or she represents the Australia, not only of today, but the Australia of the future. I agree with what your Chairman said; the world's best practice in franchising can be found here in Australia - the transformation has been remarkable.
 Franchising was virtually unknown in this country until the 1970s and driven at first by major corporations such as McDonalds and KFC and pizza, and perhaps exemplified by nobody more so than the late Charlie Bell who rose to become the head of McDonalds before cancer tragically took away his life at the all too early age of 44. But the example of people like Charlie Bell is replicated a hundred fold or more in this gathering and what all of you have done is to recognise what your Chairman said, and that is you don't want governments telling you what to do, you want governments both out of your pocket and out of your way, and if you are given the right environment and the right climate, you can build businesses and you can generate jobs.
 And that of course brings me to a document that I released yesterday and you may have read about or heard about, and that is a document that explains in great detail, the government's proposals for workplace relations reform. And I have a very simple message to all Australians about industrial relations reform and that is that it is a strong economy which provides job security, higher wages, and better conditions, nothing else. All the regulation in the world won't save a job or increase a wage or improve a condition if the economy is performing poorly and therefore the true, indeed the only test, of the worth of a nation's workplace relations system is the contribution that system makes to the strength and the productivity of our economy.
 Many of your would remember the early 1990s.  I look around the room - quite a few of you would, quite a few of you wouldn't, in terms of business experience that is, and that is a commentary on the great variety and the age structure of the franchising community in Australia. But in the early 1990s we had a deep recession, we a million people out of work, real wages in many sectors of the economy were in free fall, job security was a myth. The reality of course was that it was a myth because the economy was on its knees. Interestingly in the early 1990s we had all the rules and all the protections and all the regulations under sun, even more than we have now and fewer than we will have in the future.
 But those regulations and those rules didn't stop the economy; in fact they helped contribute to the economy going into free fall and my point is very obvious and very simple that in the end it's the strength of the economy and the contribution that a workplace relations system makes to the strength of the economy that provides job security, higher wages and better conditions. You cannot regulate for job security and higher wages and better conditions if the economy is weak. If a firm has gone broke, nothing can save your job, the contribution that the rules and regulations make to preventing the circumstances for the firm going broke are the things that really matter.
 Can I say, specifically in relation to the franchise sector, that the changes that we are proposing and will be contained in legislation to be introduced in a few weeks time will provide an even simpler agreement making process - we'll retain the multiple business agreements, something used extensively in franchise operations and for someone opening up a new franchise, agreement-making will be simpler because there will be a greater range of agreement types. You can have an employer or union greenfields agreement, you can negotiate an AWA or a collective agreement with employees once they have been employed in the new business. Under the new arrangements it will no longer be necessary to have a full bench hearing of the Industrial Relations Commission to achieve some of the things you had to in the past, and the whole process of agreement-making will be simpler.
 Can I finally say to all of you that the contribution that your industry makes to the economy of this country is impressive not only for its size and its scope but it is also impressive for the extraordinary growth that has occurred over the last decade? Over the last ten years, there has been an increase for example from 39,000 to 50,000 in the number of franchise businesses. On one estimate the franchise sector now contributes 10 per cent of Australia's GDP and provides employment to approximately 600,000 Australians. It has produced some remarkable men and women.  It is a sector of the Australian economy which is essentially unregulated and individually driven. It can start on the kitchen table or around the barbeque.  It's welcomed a growing number of women as people who have begun franchises; indeed some 30 per cent or more of all new small businesses, operated and opened in Australia are now operated and opened by women with a growing number of them operated from home.
 All of this speaks of an economy transformed by flexibility. Whenever I address audiences about Australia's economic future these days, I employ the metaphor of participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line. The responsibility and process of economic reform can be an immensely frustrating one.  You never get there. It is like participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line; you are driven to keep going, not by imagining that you are ever really going to get to that finishing line but because there are other people participating in the foot race and that if you slow up they're going to go past you and they are going to gain the competitive edge and I think probably more than any audience in Australia, this gathering this morning will understand that. But that is why we need as a nation to continue to pursue economic change, economic betterment and economic reform.
  There are people who say to me, John why do you keep talking about further reform. You've had a whole lot of reform over the last ten years.  There was reform before that, that you supported.  Why don't you just have a holiday, have a rest, we're all doing well, go away, leave us alone and we'll just keep running on the strength of the reform that we've had to date. That my friends, my fellow Australians, is a recipe for this country losing its economic momentum. You know from your own businesses you either go forward or you go back.  The idea that you can run on the spot, maintain your market share without ever increasing an evermore competitive effort is an illusion and if this nation ever settles for that illusion, this nation will have lost the economic drive and the capacity to be flexible and to change which has been the engine room of our success over the last ten to twenty years.
 So can I say to all of you, thank you very much for coming to Canberra, thank you very very much, but most importantly of all, thank you very much for the contribution that you have made to the strength of the Australian economy over the last ten years and the strength of that economy is not something that exists in some kind antiseptic isolation.
  A strong economy means good conditions, it means decent wages, it means good profit, it means tax collections which fund things like health and education and defence which is so important to our economic and social wellbeing, but most importantly can I thank all of you for the contribution that you have made to the enterprise culture which has transformed this country over the past few decades and has given it the respect of which earlier people spoke and has stamped the Australian brand as a brand to be respected and to be followed and in some parts of the world to be admired.
 As business men and women you have played an integral role in that and I very warmly thank you. I am very pleased to declare this conference open, I wish it well and I'll continue to work and my Ministers will continue to work very closely with your organisation in the years ahead.
 Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Colonel Short.  To my colleague Senator Robert Hill, the Minister for Defence, General Peter Leahy, the Chief of the Army, Brigadier Cantwell, the administrator, David Tollner and my other parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Australians.
I am very pleased indeed that I was able to come today and share this very important family day with all of you and to take the opportunity of wishing you well when you go in various detachments over the weeks ahead.  You go to Al Muthanna Province in Iraq to undertake very important work on behalf of and as part of the coalition forces in Al Muthanna Province.
It is symbolic and also very important in a real sense that today of course is the day that the people of Iraq vote whether they support or oppose a new constitution.  And it is a reminder that the presence of Australian and other forces in Iraq is part of a process of giving to the people of that strife-torn country the opportunity of something that we take for granted, and that is the right to determine our own future.  There is something quite inspiring to me, and I know to many around in the world, in the fact that people have to risk their lives in order to cast a vote.  Something that Australians find very hard to contemplate and very hard to understand.
I had the opportunity to pay a brief visit in July to your comrades, your fellow taskgroup members who are currently in Al Muthanna Province.  Their spirits were high, their behaviour and their attitude was proudly Australian.  They have done what Australians do better than any other fighting force in the world, and that is not only be good soldiers but also be good friends to the people of the country where they are serving.  No military task is without danger, you all understand that.  But this is a task for which you have been superbly trained and prepared.  And the safety thus far of all members of the taskgroup who are in Al Muthanna Province now is a tribute to the skill of all of the men and women in that group, its leaders and also the great training that they received and you have received in preparation for that task.
I do have a special word for the families - the wives, the husbands, the children, the loved ones and other friends of those who will be going over the weeks ahead.  I know, we all know, that the next six months will be periods of anxiety, we will do everything we can from the top down as part of the defence family to help you handle those periods of separation.  Fortunately modern communications brings you into more rapid and immediate contact with those who are serving overseas than used to be the case.  But I would not want any wife, any child, any husband, any lover, any brother or sister or parent who is present here today to think for a moment that we are not very conscious of the particular burden that you carry and the great importance of looking after you while your loved ones are away.
Can I finally say to all of the men and women who will be going, that as Prime Minister I am very conscious that in the end decisions are taken by the Government that I head that you can put you in harms way.  We hope and we believe that you have been well prepared.  The training that you have received superbly equips you for the task.  We believe you have all the equipment you need and if we're wrong in that assumption we know that you will let us know, and let us know very quickly and very directly.  But I am very conscious of the task that you're undertaking.  The Australian military forces always distinguish themselves, we have a very fine tradition in this country, when it comes to our military, we have never sought to impose our views on others, we've only sought to help others.  And that is what you will be doing as you go to the Al Muthanna Province in Iraq, you are providing a stable environment, particularly for our Japanese allies in that part of Iraq  As your predecessors have done you will become the friends of the local people, not the occupiers or the enemy.
I wish you Godspeed, good luck and above all a very safe return home in six months time.  I am very grateful for your professionalism, your nation is very proud of you.  I know your loved ones will think of you constantly and I look forward to joining you when you return home.  Indeed I thank you very much.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Michael. To Senator Connie Fierravanti-Wells, Joanna Gash, the wonderful Member for Gilmore, wonderful Member for Gilmore, heavens above her majority at the last election was so big, I'm going to get her to come and do a fundraiser in Bennelong before the next election. The Lord Mayor of Wollongong, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am truly delighted to be back in Wollongong and I am especially delighted to be associated with the return of a Liberal Senate office to Wollongong. Australian politics is full of stereotypes and they get things wrong. I mean there's a story frequently told about Canberra. It looks like Killara and votes like Cessnock. And they have these stereotypes, we really have to move away from them because the political world in Australia now is very different from what it was 10 years ago and it's certainly very different from what it was 25 years ago.
   And what that means is that there is no part of Australia that any side of politics can take for granted.  There's no part of Australia that is impossible for either side of politics to draw support from.  And what that means is that political parties, and this applies as much to my Party, the Liberal Party, as it does to the Labor Party, that we have to see ourselves always as representatives of the entire community.  And I see having a Liberal Senate office in Wollongong, as Michael Baume did, as a perfectly natural thing.  And one of Connie's predecessors in the Senate John Tierney had a Senate office in Newcastle.  And people said "oh, isn't that strange", it's not strange because the world is changing.  And whilst the heritage of this city will always be tied up proudly with the steel industry and manufacturing, the modern Wollongong is now a very diversified, varied, exciting and innovative path of a very diversified, exciting and innovative Illawara region.
  I opened this morning a light aeronautics hub, for want of a better expression, which will be supported by a regional partnerships grant from the Federal Government of some $300,000.  And what that will do is bring new industry and combined with the enormous strength of the university activity in this city and the magnificent diversification into other commercial areas, we are now dealing with a part of Australia, a part of New South Wales, which is very different from what it was 10 or 20 years ago.  And nowhere is it of course more different than in the story we can tell of employment.
  You'll forgive me reaching into my pocket for a piece of paper because I wrote down the employment figures for this area, and they're very instructive because there has been a lot of discussion about things to do with workplaces and employment in recent weeks.  I just ought to tell you that the unemployment rate in the electorate of Throsby in March 1996 was 12 per cent - it's now 6.5 per cent.  In Cunningham it was 11 per cent - and it is now 6.7 per cent.  Now both of those figures, whilst they are huge improvements on what they were almost 10 years ago, both of those figures are still too high and both of this figures are a little above the national average.
Now I won't come to Wollongong, I won't come to a gathering like this, without saying something about the Government's plans in the area of workplace relations reform.  Some people have said to me "John, the economy is running well, unemployment is five per cent around the country, the budget's in a strong position, our exports are good, business is good, interest rates are low, you've had a tax cut in the last budget, why on earth do you want do any more?  Why don't you just sort of leave us alone?  Why don't you just leave the economy to look after itself?  Why do you keep talking about all of this reform business?  Why do you want to change the workplace relations system?"
  Now that's a fair question and some people would pose that question.  I answer it by saying very simply that the prosperity we now enjoy in Australia is a product of the reforms and the productivity improvements of earlier years.  And if we make the mistake of resting on our laurels, of going to sleep on the reform task, we're going to find in five or 10 years that we're starting to run out of steam, that we're starting to find that we have an economy which is no longer being sustained by productivity improvements because the reforms that brought about those earlier improvements have now run their course.
  And it might be difficult, it might even be in the eyes of some unpopular.  But there is no point in being in government unless you are prepared to embrace and maintain a continuous process of economic reform.  Because the economy of Australia in some respects is like a successful company, not in all respects, and there are things that governments have a moral obligation to do, and I'll come to that in a moment because there's been a bit of discussion about morality and ethics in the context of workplace relations reform, but it is a bit like running a company, you all know from your own experience that you really only have two choices - you go forward or you go back.
  The idea that you can run on the spot and maintain a nice, simple equilibrium, that there'll always be customers knocking on the door, that none of your competitors will be trying to take them away from you, that you'll always have a guaranteed market share.  That of course is never the case and you have to keep striving to maintain the market position you have.  And some of you may have heard me use it before, and I apologise for saying it again, but it makes the point that I talk about the economic challenge of Australia being like participating in a race towards an ever receding finishing line.  You never get there but you know that if you stop running the other blokes in the race are going to surge past you.  And they are our international competitors.  And we live in a very competitive world, we're doing very well at the moment, we're selling a lot of resources to countries like Japan and China and Korea, our sales to China have absolutely burgeoned in recent years and there are opportunities in a large number of areas.
  But let me say to you that we can't take that for granted, we have great reserves of natural gas in Australia but so do a lot of other countries and it is in many respects still a buyers market in a lot of the resource areas. And we have to fight all the time to maintain our market share.  And if we take things for granted we're going to fall behind. And that really is why we believe a further round of industrial relations reform is necessary.  They're not small reforms, they're big reforms, but they're fair reforms and they're reforms that are going to lay the basis of higher productivity and therefore more jobs and higher wages in the future.
  People follow me around Australia from time to time and they hold up placards and they say "don't cut my wages, John, leave my wages alone".  Well I haven't left their wages alone, I've in fact presided over the biggest real wage increase on a sustainable basis that this country has had since World War II.  I mean I happen to believe in high wages.  And no employer with any common sense does other than believe in high wages.  The best employee is a well paid employee, the best employees are the great asset... the good employees are the greatest asset that any employer has.
  We live in a worker's market like never before.  We have a shortage of workers; we don't have an oversupply of workers.  We have a chronic shortage of workers in many of the areas of skills.  And you all know, and many of you would have experienced it as employers, that we have great problems in trying to find some skilled tradesmen and women in many of the particular disciplines.
  But over the last nine and a half years, real wages in this country have gone up by just under 15 per cent.  Under the government of my predecessors - over 13 years they went up by two per cent.  So who has been the wage suppressor?  Who has been the side of politics that has been interested in real wage growth?  Why would anybody in my position want to see the wages of Australian workers suppressed?  I want to see them go on increasing.  But they can only go on increasing if those increases are based on productivity, because if companies pay wage rises they can't afford, what happens is they end up sacking staff to afford the wages of the staff they keep.  It's as simple as that.  And the only way that you can sustainably increase wages is to have a more productive workplace.  And part of having a more productive workplace is not only of course to have a full order book and to be an efficiently run company, but also to have a workplace relations system where people are working together for the common cause and you can best get that if you have a workplace relations system that allows as far as possible employers and employees to negotiate their arrangements at a workplace level.
  By all means negotiate them according to some defined safeguards and protections.  I don't believe, as many in the United States believe in, in getting rid of minimum wages; that's wrong, that will create an underclass in this country and I will never support that.  But I do believe that we have to make it easier for workplace agreements to be struck and I think we also have to recognise the reality that some small firms find the existing unfair dismissal laws actively discouraging them from taking on new staff. And until those laws are changed that represents a very significant break on the hiring aspirations of many of the small and medium sized firms in this country.
Now my friends, I want to say in relation, finally, to this reform that it is part of a number of things that this Government has sought to do in the nine and a half years that's been in office.  And all of those things are meant to build a culture in this country, a culture of enterprise, a culture of where people aspire to improve themselves and a culture of choice and a culture of opportunity.
  I think Michael mentioned earlier the issue of education.  He's right - I am the product of the New South Wales state education system and I'm very pleased and grateful for the high quality education that the public system gave to me in Sydney.  And what we've tried to do is to build up both systems.  I don't want an Australia where the public education system progressively loses ground and we have tried, with our own funding decisions, although public education is overwhelmingly the responsibility of the States, we have tried to support that goal.
  But we do believe in giving parents a choice in relation to the education of their children.  And this country has an unrivalled combination of public and private contribution towards education. I find when I have discussions with leaders in other countries they are amazed at the choice that is available to Australian parents.  They are amazed that people have an opportunity, at relatively modest cost, to send their children to independent schools if that is their choice.  And it's all part of the desire of this government to expand the horizons of choice and the horizons of hope of the Australian community.
  Over the last nine and a half years this country has changed.  I believe it's changed for the better.  I don't pretend that everything the Government has done has been right.  I don't pretend and I don't delude myself that everything the Government has done has been popular.  But I do know this - that the regard in which Australia is held around the world is greater now than it has been at any time in the last 30 or 40 years.  We are seen as having a strong economy, but more importantly we're also seen as a country that stands up for what it believes in.  A country that is prepared to say to the rest of the world: "This is what Australia believes in and this is the basis on which we are going to deal with one another".
  I've not forgotten a very interesting answer that Alexander Downer gave at a news conference in, I think it was Manila, or maybe it was in Thailand, a couple of months ago when it was decided that there'd be a meeting of countries to form the East Asian Summit in Kuala Lumpur in December and that Australia would be invited to participate in that meeting.  And one of the journalists got up and said: "Mr. Downer, now that Australia is invited to attend that meeting, do you now feel that Australia is truly Asian"?  And Alexander Downer, very sensibly and very effectively said: "No, I just think it feels Australian."
  And what I think he was saying then and saying very powerfully was that this country is no longer engaged in some kind of navel gazing exercise about our identity as to whether we're European or we're too pro-American or too associated with the British or too this or that or whether we're part of Asia or whatever.  We went through a silly period 10 or 15 years ago with all that introspective naval gazing; we're not doing that any more.  What we're doing is we're recognising that this country is what it's always been - distinctive and different.  You don't mistake an Australian when you meet him or her around the world. And the Australian brand in so many areas is now stronger and more defined and more distinctive and more respected and more regarded than it has certainly been at any stage in my lifetime.  And this city, this region of Australia, is a microcosm of the modern Australia.  It's made up of people from the rich tributary of post-World War II European migration that has done so much to strengthen and shape the modern Australia.  But it also contains some of the oldest traditions of Australia and it is also is an area which is embracing through its university side, through the wonderful medical facilities at the local hospitals; it is embracing all the best that the modern world can give.
So to all of you thank you very much. If I may end on a slightly partisan note - thank you very, very much for the support that you have given to Connie and she of course is a native of Wollongong.  And to see her parents at the opening of the office today - both of her parents of course immigrated to Australia from Italy after World War II and that is so representative of so many people in this area.  And Connie of course represents, and this is where I get slightly partisan let me warn you, Connie does represent a wonderful facet of the people that have come into my team after the last election.
  They're such a diverse lot.  We have Connie with her background in the law and her background in the Illawara.  We have a couple of police officers, we have an air force test pilot, we have a research defence scientist, we have a funeral director - it's true, we're trying to sort of focus him on other things - we have a medical practitioner, we have a farmer, and a couple of accountants, and a farmer's wife, we have a university professor, we have a couple of school teachers and we have number of people who very successfully run small businesses, and we have one who has been very successful in financial circles, having run a merchant bank rather successfully - well several merchant banks I think and probably taken a few over in the process. But the point of all of that is... and one of the policemen is also a very successful coach of Australian Rules football in South Australia -  so we have a great variety of people.
  Now the reason I say that is, and when I look across and this is where I get really partisan. I'm sorry, I look across at my opponents and I see that they do seem to have a narrow background.  And you don't have to take my word for it.  The current National President of the Labor Party, the irrepressible Barry Jones, and he was at his irrepressible best this morning when he said that "compare Beazley's shadow ministry - 16 apparatchiks, 10 union officials, four others."  Now this is the punch line -  "...with Hawke's 1983 Ministry of four solicitors, four academic teachers, four retailers, three union officials and two farmers, with one each; barrister, medical practitioner, clergymen, policeman, economist, chartered accountant, industrial advocate, research officer, engine driver and shearer".  Now I think there's a bit of exaggeration there about Hawkey's frontbench, but I won't get churlish after all of these years.
  I do want to make the point - and this goes back to what I said at the very beginning - and that is political parties, to be successful these days, have to represent the entire community.  I have never accepted the idea that the Liberal Party represents the big end of town.  The Liberal Party cares about business, the Liberal Party believes that people have got a right to make decent profits and to be very successful providing they pay their taxes - that's very important - very, very important, because their taxes help pay for the hospitals and the schools and the army and the police which we all need and we all rely on at various stages.
  But we are a party that has never been owned by the business community and we'll always be a party that tries to represent everybody.  And that's why I'm proud to be in Wollongong and I'm proud to have a Wollongong based Liberal Senator and I'm proud of the diversity of all of the members of my parliamentary party and Connie is a magnificent demonstration of that diversity.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you to the Australian Davos Connection for this opportunity to speak today on the nation's infrastructure challenge.
Your invitation led me to reflect on the enormous distance this country has travelled towards a sensible appreciation of the role of government (and of its limits).
It's estimated that as late as the 1920s governments owned approximately half the total fixed capital of Australia (excluding land).  Surviving into the inter-war years were a multitude of small state enterprises - from coal mines and brick works, to butchers' shops and tobacconists.
This legacy led W.K. Hancock, in his classic short history of Australia published 75 years ago, to describe a society which had 'come to look upon the state as a vast public utility'.
Over time, the tide would turn.  One of the underestimated achievements of the Menzies years was to steer Australia decisively away from the cul-de-sac of industry nationalisation.  We avoided the nationalised nightmares that so characterised Britain's economic decline until the Thatcher reforms.
 And yet only about thirty years ago some of Australia's potentially biggest infrastructure decisions appeared to rest on little more than the statist dreams of a Rex Connor.
  There are still those who associate the demise of Connorism with the passing of a certain style of visionary government and the triumph of the bean-counters.  In truth, it should be seen as a hard-won victory for good government in a more economically literate society - the triumph of the grown-ups.
  A stronger appreciation of the power and potential of markets in areas once considered the natural and exclusive domain of government has been central to Australia's economic turnaround in the late twentieth century.
Remembering this helps us to think clearly about Australia's infrastructure challenge in 2005, to place this debate on solid foundations and to see it in a longer term perspective.
  There are, I know, different views about the dimensions of Australia's infrastructure challenge.  But there is also broad agreement on many points.
 No-one disputes that Australia's progress depends critically on our economic and social infrastructure.
No-one disputes that we need infrastructure policies which will extend our strong economic performance well into the future.
No-one disputes that we must increase our infrastructure investment if our national productivity, and hence our future living standards, are to rise further.
And no-one disputes that better coordination across different levels of government is an important part of getting the right environment for that investment.
Do we face a national infrastructure 'crisis', as some have asserted?
 Nothing that I have seen as Prime Minister leads me to conclude that the answer to that question is yes.  Nor, I might add, was this the view of State and Territory leaders when we discussed this issue at the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) meeting in June.
Put simply, I am yet to be convinced that there is a shortage of funds for infrastructure investment in Australia.
Before embracing the language of 'crisis' - the line of least resistance for vested interests, parliamentary oppositions and the more excitable sections of the media - governments need clear evidence of a problem and that properly-regulated market institutions are unable to solve it.
 We know that, as a rule, Australian governments are quite good at spending money.  But we also know when it comes to infrastructure that it is not enough to simply spend more.
  It is the government's role as regulator - not owner - of physical infrastructure that enables us to ensure quality, price and competition standards are adequate.
We need to make sure that investors are in a position to make quality investment decisions, and that users can gain access to infrastructure on reasonable terms.
Appropriate pricing remains a critical component of any strategy to develop long-term sustainable infrastructure solutions, especially where the private sector is to play a significant role.
 And we must overcome regulatory problems that may encumber infrastructure investment, especially infrastructure used by Australia's export industries.
Commonwealth role and priorities
 The key to Australia meeting the infrastructure challenges of today and tomorrow is an economic climate conducive to investment.
This will demand continued low inflation and low interest rates and the maintenance of a strong fiscal position.  It will also involve further structural reform to improve the efficiency of our markets.
In recent years, reforms including privatisation, contracting out of service provision to the private sector and the development of more competitive markets under National Competition Policy have led to a significant shift in the relative roles of the public and private sectors.
Governments have moved away from the ownership of physical infrastructure.  The private sector is now actively involved in the provision of roads, electricity generation capacity, natural gas reticulation facilities and telecommunications infrastructure.
  This does not diminish the importance of government funding and provision of physical infrastructure to support a strong economy and a fair society.  The Commonwealth has a particular role to engineer a quantum improvement in the level or standard of infrastructure, or to encourage development that would otherwise not occur.
  We will, in some areas, set a genuinely national framework for future investment, as is the case for example with the National Water Initiative and last year's Energy White Paper.
We are also committed to developing a consistent national system for regulating Australia's major ports and other export-related infrastructure.  Industries that compete internationally deserve a world-class regulatory framework, with simple tests and time limits on decision-making.
 In some cases, we will use our leverage to drive wider structural reform of the economy.  A good example is our determination to further reform industrial practices in the building and construction industry through a new National Code of Practice which applies to federally-funded capital projects.
  But it is important to recognise the need for an effective partnership across jurisdictions when it comes to Australia's infrastructure.
Much of the responsibility for infrastructure provision lies with State and Territory governments, local government and the private sector.  As the Government's National Commission of Audit in 1996 noted, the Commonwealth accounted for only about one quarter of the stock of public infrastructure.
We're all aware of the limits of central planning and the varied infrastructure needs across this vast continent.  I do not believe that Canberra should set itself up as the principal arbiter of infrastructure decisions from suburban Melbourne to remote mining communities in Western Australia.
The Commonwealth's role is about ensuring the market works by getting the regulatory framework right, providing information, and removing impediments to investment in infrastructure, and only getting involved in funding the physical infrastructure where there is a clear need for a national perspective.
Roads
In the case of roads, for example, our involvement recognises that there is a national interest in road development that goes beyond local considerations and that the benefits of major arterial road development often accrue beyond the boundaries of individual states.
  In June last year, after extensive consultation with States, Territories, local government and the private sector, we announced AusLink - the most significant change since Federation in the way we tackle the national transport task.
While the $12.7 billion we have committed to fund AusLink over five years is no trifling amount, it is the new approach to planning that I believe is the most significant aspect of this initiative.
Under the principle of shared responsibility with the States and Territories, AusLink will make available funding for road, rail and technology-based projects.  Collaborative planning will help us identify the best way of meeting the likely transport needs of each major corridor.
  While AusLink offers a more effective approach to addressing the land transport task, some States are yet to commit to bilateral funding agreements.  The time for delay and parochial politics on AusLink is passed and I urge all States to sign up in the national interest.
 Water
 Few dispute that water is this country's largest conservation challenge or one of our largest infrastructure challenges.  As such, the Commonwealth has made a significant investment in more efficient and sustainable water management.
  We led the development of the National Water Initiative, a blueprint for water reform over the next decade and beyond.  Full implementation will result in a national framework for managing surface and groundwater resources for both rural and urban use.
  We are investing $2 billion in water infrastructure and better practices in the stewardship of our water resources through the Australian Government Water Fund.
  The largest component of the Fund, the Water Smart Australia programme administered by the National Water Commission, will invest $1.6 billion to accelerate the development and uptake of smart technologies and practices in water use across Australia, including investment in water infrastructure.
Solving Australia's water problem is one of the great national challenges of our time, demanding coordinated action and large resources.  And I do not pretend that Australian governments have yet done all that is necessary to secure this resource for our future prosperity and quality of life.
 Telecommunications
In telecommunications, the Government is addressing the needs of all Australians to have access to the best-possible telecommunications services, while implementing our long-promised commitment to free our largest company from public ownership.
The full sale of Telstra will liberate the company from the shackles of government ownership.  It will remove our conflict of interest as both owner and regulator.  And it will diversify the Government's investments.
We recognise that it may be uneconomic for a private company to provide telecommunications services to some locations.  That is why we recently committed $1 billion to ensure that rural and regional telecommunications services are delivered on a competitive and technologically-neutral basis.
The creation of the $2 billion Communications Fund will also support the government's response to future reviews of telecommunications.  Earnings from the Fund will be available to respond to market failure in the provision of additional telecommunications services in regional, rural and remote areas.
State responsibilities
 These are just some examples of the Australian Government's infrastructure investment.  Yet the provision of key economic and social infrastructure in our Federation, such as roads, rail, public transport, housing and schools remains largely a State responsibility.
It is important that the States take this responsibility seriously as poor investment decisions or under-investment can adversely affect Australia's overall economic growth and living standards.
Tax reform has played a significant role in improving the capacity of the States to invest in infrastructure.  Over the next five years, the States are projected to receive a further $207 billion in GST revenue, money that they can spend according to their own responsibilities and budgetary priorities.
I am pleased that a number of States have announced significant infrastructure investments in their 2005-06 Budgets.  Plans for around $20 billion in infrastructure spending this financial year include key areas of transport and power generation.
But again the challenge is to increase the quality of governance, not just the quantum of investment.
The role of the private sector
Economic reform has opened up significant opportunities for the private sector to take a leading role in investing in and developing infrastructure facilities.
The private sector has been able to achieve significant cost savings, introduce new investment, and bring a sharper customer and commercial focus to infrastructure businesses.
The private sector is often better positioned to manage the risks associated with financing, constructing and operating economic infrastructure.  Private sector involvement allows governments to focus on delivering core services or capability.
To ensure that tax considerations do not drive particular financing structures for infrastructure investment, the Government recently introduced changes to the provisions relating to tax-exempt asset financing.
  The most important change will remove the punitive impact of section 51AD of the Tax Act, which has long been cited as an impediment to the efficient structuring of public-private partnerships (PPPs).
A heated debate on the role of PPPs has arisen in recent weeks, especially due to the controversy over Sydney's Cross City Tunnel.  I remain strongly in support of PPPs, provided private financial interests are not unreasonably preferred at the expense of the public and taxpayers.
Indeed, I can announce that Cabinet has decided to further explore the scope for public-private partnerships at the Commonwealth level beginning with the budget process in 2006-07.
  In future, we have asked that when departments or agencies are seeking funding for new investments, or advising Cabinet of new spending funded from existing appropriations, they should consider the full range of financing and ownership options, including PPPs.
Particular attention should be given to opportunities with potential for long-term contracts involving asset-based procurement with a whole-of-life cost in excess of $100 million.
In cases where there is good reason to believe that a PPP-type arrangement may offer better value for money over traditional financing and ownership options, this option must be considered and Cabinet given a detailed explanation where it is rejected.
 PPPs can help governments to harness the innovation, financing and marketing skills of the private sector.  Of course, any large project involves some degree of risk and governments have an obligation to make sure the risks are balanced appropriately between the public and private sectors.
National reform priorities
I mentioned at the outset that there is a diversity of views about whether our existing infrastructure is adequate.
  The Exports and Infrastructure Taskforce which I established earlier this year highlighted some underlying weaknesses that must be addressed to prevent future bottlenecks developing.  Following the June COAG meeting, Commonwealth and State officials are now developing proposals to implement a number of the Taskforce recommendations.
 In a particularly useful development, all governments - Federal, State and Territory - agreed to deliver comprehensive infrastructure reports to COAG every five years.  Ideally, they will provide a basis for assessing the condition of existing infrastructure, emerging bottlenecks and the investment challenges associated with particular sectors.
On the basis of discussions, I am confident that the first comprehensive set of reports will be completed by the end of next year.
We also agreed on the need for a consistent national approach to regulating Australia's major ports and other export-related infrastructure.  This will be undertaken as part of the broader Review of National Competition Policy which COAG will consider in early 2006.
The Commonwealth is strongly committed to initiating a new set of productivity-enhancing reforms to build on the successes of National Competition Policy.  This agenda will focus primarily on infrastructure reforms, particularly in the transport and energy sectors, and infrastructure regulation, as well as reducing red tape confronting business.
The Australian Government is also determined to reduce the general burden of regulation on business.  Last week, Peter Costello and I announced a new Taskforce to identify practical options for alleviating this compliance burden.
  It will focus on areas that are predominantly the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government, but also identify key areas in which the regulatory burden arises from overlaps with State and Territory legislation.
Along with other reforms, not least to our workplace relations laws, this will strengthen the performance of the Australian economy, increase market confidence and enhance the climate for continued investment in Australia, including in the infrastructure sector.
 Conclusion
Meeting the infrastructure challenge is not just about spending money - it's about getting the policy framework right and removing impediments to investment.
There are different views about Australia's future infrastructure needs.  That is hardly surprising in an economy now in the 15th year of economic expansion.  In fact, it would be strange if this was not a topic of lively debate.
But there is also significant agreement, especially about the need for continued structural reform to deliver the right price signals and to ensure that our regulatory regimes are not unnecessarily burdensome.
A commitment to ongoing reform - in a stable, self-confident and entrepreneurial society - remains this nation's permanent challenge if we are to secure the productivity growth on which our future prosperity will rest.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Jane. Isn't it wonderful to meet somebody with unconditional enthusiasm, and that is really what Jane radiates and thank you very much for the opportunity. Can I start by saying how much I am pleased... how pleased I am to be at the Red Cross Headquarters here in Melbourne. The Government of course respects a large number of great community organisations, and we don't of course, and shouldn't play favourites, but the Red Cross has an unrivalled level of respect.
 I might mention that when we decided to, as a Government, make a contribution to the relief of the people who suffered from the hurricane in the United States; we gave the donation to the American Red Cross. And when we decided to provide assistance to the poor people of Pakistan who continue to suffer so much from the earthquake, we gave those resources from... to the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. It is a wonderful organisation that I hope continues to prosper and do wonderful work for the people of the world.
The Australian political scene has many sayings. One of them is: "Will it pass the pub test?"  - if you're thinking of a new policy or a new idea and that's an Australianism. And what it basically says, will it stack up in ordinary, direct analysis. Well put another way, will it pass the test of common sense. And what struck me about this book - which I think is a wonderful concept - was that every single proposition in it would pass the "pub test". Every single proposition in it did represent what we would call Australian common sense. And as I looked through it I nodded my head at every one of them. I looked at the references to water savings. I looked at the, I mean the most obvious of all, of how little effort it is to smile.  And people who spend their life meeting others - and that includes people in public life - the most important thing to do when you meet somebody who might be a little sort of nervous of whatever is to engage them, is the broadest possible smile. Sometimes there have been antecedent circumstances that make that a little more difficult than on other occasions but on most occasions it is the complete reverse.
   I looked at the suggestion, I forget the number, about eating with your children from a very, very early age - most profound common sense piece of advice if you acquire the habit of eating as a family together from the very beginning, you grow to love it and you never break it, and it's always a source of support and stimulation. The pro-environmental measures, the not regularly using the stand-by on your television, the light bulbs, all of those things they all just produce that nod of the head and I think that's what makes the book so practical.
 It is true that we live in a society which is less connected, we have all these paradoxes, we are nationally better off than ever before, but we have more urban loneliness, we have more people living on their own, we have people living longer on their own ... and living longer. Those people, many of them elderly, they need the simple gestures, many of which are in this book. Yet despite all of those causes for concern there are causes for hope and optimism. There is a renewed interest in individual good deeds. The attitude of companies is very different, well there are more that are willing to participate now than perhaps before.
 Tonight I'll be taking part in the annual gathering or dinner of the Government's Community Business Partnerships which seek to bring great community organisations and companies together in philanthropic work. They are now an accepted part of the corporate calendar of so many companies now, a lot different from what it was, even five or ten years ago. Still a lot of companies don't participate, more should, but they're a growing number.
So there are sources of hope and optimism as well as sources of concern. But this little book and I was encouraged by a number of people, and I do of course as I was saying to Jane earlier, I recall a couple of conversations I had with Gordon Brown, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer was very heavily involved in it and a couple of... many of the meetings we've had an he encouraged me and many others. But most importantly I was encouraged to do it by going through the book. It seemed to me to be not only a marvellous example of passing the pub test on every recommendation, a marvellous example of commonsense but just a simple expression of humanity and helping each other in a very non ideological way. You couldn't take exception... it's... I've never been one to favour too much political correctness as many of you know. But it's sort of neutral on all of that, it's just plain commonsense of how to help people and try to make other people's lives happier and better. I hope it succeeds and I am absolutely delighted to launch it.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Indira, Kay Patterson - my Ministerial colleague and Minister for Family and Community Services and to all of the members of the Prime Minister's business and community partnership that are here tonight.  Could I say to Joy Murphy, thank you very much for that very gracious welcome to country. The spirit of these partnerships is a recognition of a reality that we are all very familiar with and that is, that no one section of Australian society acting on its own can solve the nation's major social challenges. Governments might have a lot of resources and they might have a lot of legal authority but they invariably lack the coal faced understanding of the human challenges of social deprivation and social inequality.
 Great welfare organisations in Australia is renowned for them - have wonderful coalface experience, they have a wonderful commitment driven by a dedication to helping the less privileged in our community, but  they frequently and very understandably lack resources.
 Australia is replete with public spirited individuals and many of them are here tonight and many of them over the years have been wonderful examples of generous support for worthy causes in our society. But they alone can't respond to all of society's challenges. So what we seek to do through this wonderful expression of what I've now called for the best part of seven or eight years, the 'social coalition' - I normally use coalition in another context but a 'social coalition' seeks to recognise that working together, different sections of our society can solve a lot of society's problems.
 And the really good thing about this partnership is that it really has in a fairly short period of time, made a difference. When you look at the raw data, when you look at the facts, there has been a remarkable improvement in the willingness of Australians to give and to support worthy causes.
 I think we were all reminded of that at the beginning of this year with the amazing response to the Asian tsunami from Australians. We in fact on a per capita basis were by far the most generous country in the world, by far. In nominal terms we were only just behind the United States in the generosity of our support.  Now that's an amazing commentary on the generosity of Australians, an amazing commentary.
 Now I, as many of you know, have frequently said at gatherings such as this that not so much do I ask business to give more because many businesses already give an enormous amount, but I ask more businesses to give and the figures indicate that. Recent research that was commissioned for the partnership estimated that the value of Australian philanthropy in 2004 was over $11 billion.
 Business giving has more than doubled since 2000/2001 with more than 525,000 businesses, that's 67% of all businesses giving $3.2 billion in money, goods and services during 2003/4. The value of individual giving has grown by 88% since 1997 to some $5.7 billion in 2004 and more than 87% of adult Australians donated an average of $424 - yes $424 precisely, in the year to January 2005.
 Now that is enough of the statistics but I think those statistics are worth talking about because they tell a story of greater generosity which is worth telling and they give the lie to those in the community who constantly say two things - they say the rich have got richer and the poor have got poorer and the more affluent we become as a society, the more indifferent we are to the less privileged within our midst. Both of those propositions are profoundly wrong and inaccurate and disproved by facts and unless those assertions so blindly (inaudible) made are challenged and refuted with fact and reality, they will become accepted wisdom within our community.
 Now I haven't come here tonight to engage in reciprocal self praise and to say how wonderful you all are and expect you to say how wonderful the government is. I mean it is, it is quite good, but be that as it may, that is not the purpose of tonight.  But surely the purpose of tonight, apart from honouring the people who have really worked together, is to state a reality and that is that yes we are a fortunate, wealthy, affluent country but we have not by and large forgotten the less fortunate in our midst. And that is not to say that we don't have a lot more to do - that is not to say that there are not still huge pockets of underprivileged in Australia.
 We have made some progress with health and other matters that are important to the indigenous in our midst but indigenous Australians still remain as a group, the most underprivileged in our society and in continued need of practical assistance. There are still far too many people who are suffering in all sorts of ways from deprivation and under privilege in our society. But I think the message out of those figures and the message out of the community partnerships, the willingness with which so many people in corporations have thrown themselves into the work in partnerships; I think the message out of that is there are a lot more Australians who care than are sometimes given credit for.
 Now tonight is an occasion to honour people who've involved themselves in the work of the partnership. I do want to thank Kay Patterson for the tremendous work that she has done as the Minister responsible. This has been a great exercise and Kay does deserve a round of applause.
 And I do want to pay tribute to the fellow members, my fellow members of the business and community partnership, so many of them are here tonight and I want to thank them in different ways for all the help that they have given. I think it has been a very successful exercise, it's now become an established part of the government's network of community support but most importantly it has demonstrated to the community the generosity and the decency of corporate Australia and it has also demonstrated the capacity of so many organisations and so many groups in this community to join together in achieving things.
 We have a great way in Australia of doing things like this because we are not a society burdened by layers and divisions to the extent that other societies are. I remarked to the Victorian Chief Police Commissioner this morning, I took the opportunity of visiting the Operational Centre for the counter-terrorism exercise that we're conducting at the moment and we both agreed that it had gone so well. And I said that one of the reasons why things like that which involve different groups in Australian society working together closely, why it goes so well, is that because of our egalitarian character and the way in which we relate to each other without too much regard for position or privilege.  It's because of that, that we can achieve things that other societies can't or perhaps can't achieve to the same degree.
 And I think what we have done with community partnerships is a wonderful example of that.  I think it's something of a role model for others.  I am certainly very proud of it and I want tonight on behalf of the Government, to thank all of you for the contribution that you have made and you are celebrating a great Australian characteristic and that is when you are doing well yourself, you ought to lend a helping hand to those who aren't and I think you've demonstrated that very well and you deserve a pat on the back for doing so, thank you for your support.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much Jason for those very generous words of welcome. To Mr Tony Sheumack, the Headmaster of the school, other staff members, parents and most importantly of all, students. I'm really delighted to spend a few moments with you today to thank you for the warmth and the courtesy of the welcome that you have extended to me.
 I have the opportunity in my job of visiting many schools around Australia. And it's always refreshing to be entertained by some of the musical items, to hear a story about some of the values that are important to our society and we heard this morning, we saw this morning from the video a reminder that in the past we have not always distinguished ourselves in the way in which we have treated people of a different colour. And it is a reminder in our world that barriers of colour and race and nationality should always be understood, for some of the very negative effects they have, not only on the human personality, but also on the way in which we live our lives and the way in which our countries interact with each other.
 I'm often reminded of one of the more infamous remarks that came out of World War II when the then Russian leader, Joseph Stalin, who although he was an ally of Australia and Britain and America at the time against Nazi Germany, he had a record of brutality and murder and genocide and suppression that in the eyes of many historians was close in its resemblance to that of Adolf Hitler. And he was told that the Pope was critical of something that he was doing, I think to an ethnic minority in the Soviet Union because the ethnic minorities of that country were brutally put down and many of them murdered during World War II, and both before and after the war. And his cynical, dismissive reply was the Pope, how many divisions does he have? And what he was really saying was that if you didn't have under your command divisions and armies, you were of no account. Of course the Pope and the spiritual force that the Pope and his successors represented proved to be more powerful than any of the divisions that were commanded by the Soviet leader at that time. And in the fullness of time that particular Pope's successor was to play a major role as a native of Poland in bringing about the end of the Soviet empire and the restoration of freedom including freedom of religion for the people, not only of his native and beloved Poland, but also of other people in Eastern Europe. And it's a reminder to all of us that the force of values and the spiritual force in our lives, and our community is always in the end infinitely more important and powerful than anything else. That is not to say that from time to time countries do not need to resort to military force to defend themselves and to promote values and to right wrongs and to correct injustices. But it does mean in the end that the force of values and the things of the spirit are stronger than anything else.
  Today of course is an opportunity for me again to pay tribute to the hundreds of independent schools around Australia. We have a wonderfully diverse education system in this country. We have government schools, we have independent schools of different kinds and the important thing in all of it is that Australian parents should retain the right to choose the type of education they want for their sons and daughters.
  And this school, the Beaconhills Christian College, is an expression of the choice of the growing number of parents who want their children educated and advised and counselled within a values system that reflects their choice, but consistent on all occasions with the curriculum and the general goals of the education system of this State and of this country. And that is how it should be. We should not have a single uniform system of education. We should of course have common goals and common standards, but within those common goals and standards we should allow parental choice. And the fact that hundreds of parents have chosen this school at some cost to themselves financially, although fortunately because of the growth of independent schools and the range of funding support that is now available, growing number of parents of average income and means, are able to exercise the choice of sending their children to independent schools.
 I say that not in criticism of the government school system. I am myself a product of a total government school education in New South Wales and I am greatly in debt to that government education system for the quality of the education that I received. The important thing is that parents should have a choice. And your parents, the parents here today, and many before you and many after you have had that choice, and you have decided to exercise it. And I commend the school. I congratulate it on its extraordinary progress. It's growing with the years, to, I know, year 12. It has two campuses and your Headmaster explained to me a little while ago the numbers that he expects to have enrolled when the school reaches its full development. And it's remarkable that this campus has only been in operation since 2003. And one of things I would like to do is to announce, or confirm, because the school has already been advised of this, that the Commonwealth Government has decided in accordance with the procedures we have for allocating capital support for independent schools, we have provided, decided to provide a grant of $750,000 to the Beaconhills Christian College at this campus for use in relation to not only general learning areas, but associated staff work rooms, offices, store rooms, four science laboratories and science preparation and store areas. This grant will add to the financial support by way of capital grants that the Government has already provided and it will of course be in addition to the recurrent funding which defray I understand, something over half the cost, the operating costs of this school.
 So can I say to all of you thank you for the courtesy that you have extended to me. Can I say to all of the students as I say to any student body I address anywhere in Australia, value the counsel and instruction of your teachers. Teaching is a most noble and valuable profession. The instruction and teaching of young Australians is so critical to this nation's future. We rely increasingly on teachers. We rely on teachers to do more now than we expected them to do a generation ago - it is just the nature of society. Parents do their best, many of them do more than their best. They share in a magnificent way the responsibilities of running a school community as well as their own lives and raising their own children. But it is a day in which to pay special tribute to the role of teachers within our communities. And can I finally say again to you Jason thank you for such a warm welcome. Can I commend my friend and colleague Jason to you, he's only been with us in parliament for a little over a year. He brings great enthusiasm, great dedication and most importantly of all he's very committed to the people of his electorate and he will pester and nag and counsel and hector and everything until he gets his way in relation to the interests of the people of La Trobe, and that is how it should be.
  To all of you thank you and good luck in the years ahead. And I hope all of you who leave this school, leave with a sense of pride and satisfaction, with a sense of achievement and as you go about your ways, to university, to technical college, or straight into a job, whatever it may be, you take with you for the rest of your lives the values and the perspectives that you have learnt at this school. And if you do that you won't go far wrong.
 Thank you.
 [ends]


Well thank you very, very much I think that rendition would go very well at a World Cup, absolutely. Michael Crouch, Peter Charlton, Mark Johnson, ladies and gentlemen. It's a tremendous pleasure to be here tonight to be part of this APEC Business Forum. As we throw our minds forward, not only to the hosting of APEC in Australia in 2007, but more immediately to the APEC meeting to be held in Korea in November of this year.
 I will be attending, when I go to that meeting on behalf of Australia, I will be attending my 10th APEC leaders' meeting. And as I look back over that decade I'm reminded of a number of realities that are important, not only about APEC, but are also important about the economic and geopolitical environment in which we all live.
There was, as many of you will know, a spasm of thought at the end of the Cold War which basically said that now global politics was all about economics.  The notion that the big security dilemmas were behind us, after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the implosion of Soviet communism, was a very alluring and seductive concept. The reality, banal as it may be, is that global politics is still mostly about politics.
  We have been reminded in the last decade that open markets rest very much on political order.  We have been reminded of the importance of governance - broadly defined - whether it be dealing with a regional financial crisis - as overcame the region in 1997, combating the threat of global terrorism, or generally making sure that our institutions - domestic and international - are equipped for the challenges of the 21st Century.
The global economic challenge Australia faces can never be divorced from the political challenges.  That's just one of the reasons why APEC is such an important forum for Australia and for the Asia-Pacific region as a whole.
The great value of a gathering such as APEC, particularly for Australia, is that it joins like no other forum those countries and those parts of the world that are so important to our security, and so important to our economic future. And like all gatherings of that kind, dreary and formulaic as some of the procedures may be, it gives unrivalled opportunities for bilateral discussions. And I've not forgotten that the Manila APEC meeting of 1996 - the very first I attended on behalf of Australia, was the occasion for one of the most important bilateral meetings I've had in the entire time that I have been Prime Minister. And that was a bilateral meeting with the then President of China Jiang Zemin. It came after a period of several months in which there had been some - how shall I put it, challenges, to the relationship between Australia and China - arising out of some misunderstandings during the earlier months of that year. And that meeting provided me and the then President, with an opportunity to put on a realistic footing a relationship which is arguably moved further, and of greater benefit than any other bilateral relationship Australia has with the member countries of APEC. I don't say it's the most important. I don't seek to apportion priorities of importance, I simply make the point that the movement towards a beneficial relationship has been greater in the case of that relationship.
And that discussion was able to lay what remains the foundation of the relationship between Australia and China - a relationship that is built on seeking out areas of agreement, rather than dwelling on areas of disagreement and irritation.  A basis which acknowledges the profound differences between Australia and China, our different political traditions, our different styles of government, our different attitude to many of the world's great issues, but nonetheless a relationship that recognised that if we did build on those things that bound us together, we could create a relationship of growing value to both countries. And now some nine years on from that meeting, taking place within the forum of APEC, I'm able to say to you that that relationship has come along way.
 Indeed the whole APEC area has come along way. It's fashionable of course to say well APEC hasn't realised all of the goals that were set when it was established - and that is true, but it would wrong and unfair to discount the progress that has been made. Since 1989 average applied tariffs across APEC members have fallen from about 16 per cent to just over 6 per cent; almost half of all tariff lines are now less than 5 per cent.
In dollar terms, trade in goods and services between APEC economies has more than tripled since APEC was established. The results in terms of economic well-being are very clear.  Real GDP across the APEC region grew by 46 per cent between 1989 and 2003, while per capita GDP grew by 26 per cent.
As well as setting and affirming the Bogor goals for regional trade and investment liberalisation, APEC leaders in past meetings, as undoubtedly they will do at the coming meeting in Korea, focus their attention on the multilateral trade system, and well that meeting may because a very important moment of truth is approaching for the multilateral trade system.
 We are now only 53 days away from the beginning of the Hong Kong WTO Ministerial Conference.  This week the Deputy Prime Minister and the Trade Minister, Mark Vaile, has been back in Geneva as Australia plays its traditional role of trying to get the world's rich economies in particular to more closely match their rhetoric on trade and economic development.
I have to say that I am profoundly disappointed about the most recent developments in Geneva, especially in the talks on agriculture. I know that Australian Prime Ministers begin to sound like a scratchy record on the issue of agricultural trade. And I, of course, for the benefit of any guest from other countries tonight declare Australia's obvious interest in a more open trading system for agriculture. But there is a high issue at stake. In a year when there has been a focus like none for some years, indeed a celebrity focus on the issue of poverty, it is worth making again the point that trade liberalisation will do more, much more to lift the poor of the world out of their current condition, than will levels of direct overseas aid. And the greatest contribution that the wealthy countries of the world can still make to the developing countries, particularly the most impoverished of them, would be to remove their trade barriers.
  I was very pleased that last week the United States made a major contribution to the negotiations by offering to cut its most trade distorting farm subsidies by 60 per cent and outlining its ambitious vision of eliminating all agricultural barriers within 15 years. That represents the furthest that the United States has gone on this issue ever. It was foreshadowed by President Bush in his address to the United Nations General Assembly in September, and has been reaffirmed with that specificity in the past few days.
 Thus far the European Union has failed to take a similarly courageous step.  And without a breakthrough on agriculture, the success of the Round remains in serious doubt. We do need more decisive action on that front. And I have to say on behalf of Australia's farmers, that I can well respect and sympathise with their sense of frustration when the level of subsidy as a percentage of annual production to Australian farmers is about 4 or 5 per cent measured against levels of the 20s and 30s and even higher amongst the major agricultural countries, such as the United States and the European Union and Japan, which of course are the countries where significant movement on this issue is needed.
As I mentioned earlier Australia will host APEC in 2007. And it will be another opportunity for this country to put on display to the rest of the world the extraordinary strength and growth of its economy over the last decade. But that is a growth that we have sought to achieve in partnership with so many of the other members of APEC. And without the partnerships that we've had with countries such as Japan, and Korea, and China, and of course the United States, and also the ongoing and valuable trade linkages with our friends in New Zealand, and not to forget the Free Trade Agreement with Singapore, the very beneficial Free Trade Agreement with Thailand, the negotiations now going on with Malaysia for a Free Trade Agreement with that country. All of the countries I've mentioned of course belong to APEC. And it reinforces the huge importance of that grouping.
 It will also be a grouping where I believe there will be a valuable focus again at the coming meeting, a valuable opportunity to reaffirm our joint commitment to continuing the fight against the scourge of terrorism, which has scarred and touched APEC countries and claimed the lives of many citizens of APEC countries, including of course many Australians.
It will also on this occasion be an opportunity to focus very heavily on the capacity of APEC countries to work together to effectively deal with any threat from bird flu and any possibility of the development of any pandemic. And I believe that the meeting will focus very significantly on this issue, and it will provide an opportunity for a number of countries - including Australia and the United States, to promote the greatest possible level of cooperation between the member countries of the region, in order to work together in partnership to deal with any potential threat of this public health kind.
The last year of course has seen enormous personal tragedy strike many countries within the APEC region. And it's not possible to look back over the last year, since the last APEC meeting in Santiago, without feeling a particular level of compassion towards our friends in Indonesia and in Malaysia and in Thailand who were so badly affected, particularly in the case of Indonesia with the tsunami.
But of course as so often happens in tragedies of that kind, it brought forth a level of generosity from the people of Australia and the people of many other countries in the region, it was perhaps unmatched in the experience of just about any of us in this room. And it served in that great tragedy to bring even closer together the people of Australia and the people of Indonesia. And that relationship is a so important and enduring relationship, and so critical to the longer term future of both of our countries.
So whilst it is fair to say that the overwhelming motivation for the formation of APEC was to bring forth the best combination of economic growth, and economic activity from the member countries. And to achieve that through striving towards free and open trade goals, defined as the Bogor goals, it is also fair to say that APEC has brought the member countries of that grouping closer together in so many ways. It is undeniably the most important international meeting with which Australia is associated. And the fashion in which it has brought together men and women in business in all of the member countries serves to underline that point.
This country as you know is now enjoying its 15th year of unbroken economic growth. And we are living through a period of economic strength and prosperity, the like of which I don't think we have seen on such a sound basis at any time since World War II. It is not without challenge, high world fuel prices being the principal amongst those challenges. But the growth and the expansion of the Australian economy has been based essentially on two things. It's been based on some 15 to 20 years of fairly continuous economic reform. The latest example of which are the proposals of the Government to reform our industrial relations systems, proposals which in their legislative form will go before the Australian Parliament when it next convenes in just over a week's time. But that growth and that expansion has also been based very much upon the internationalisation, and the growth in trade, of the Australian economy. And nowhere has that been more dramatic, and nowhere has it been more important to Australia than within the APEC area and amongst the APEC countries. And that's the measure of the importance that I place on APEC. It's a measure of the importance that I place on the support that members of the APEC Business Forum give to APEC and the contribution that all of you make.
  Can I conclude my remarks by thanking the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, its Secretary Michael L'Estrange, its Deputy Secretary Doug Chester for hosting this forum and hosting tonight's dinner. And could I also especially thank my APEC Business representatives Mark Johnson, Peter Charlton and Michael Crouch for the wonderful contribution each of them has made to representing Australia's interests in that forum over many years. You have done a wonderful job for our country and I thank you most warmly.
[ends]


Steve and Lynette Waugh, Rodger and Beverley Waugh, other members of the Waugh family, ladies and gentlemen. When Steve retired as captain of Australia and retired from Test cricket, there was a wave of emotion and celebration and expression of gratitude that even for a sports-loving nation such as Australia was quite rare and something that left no doubt a great impression on Steve and his family and also many others in the community. And I wondered at the time, and I've had occasion as I've read through this book, to think again why was it that Steve evoked within the Australian community such feelings and such attitudes.
It was of course as all of these things are a combination. There was a recognition of the remarkable achievements of the way in which he had led, what many would argue as the greatest cricket team Australia has had - I won't attempt to adjudicate on that issue, I simply make the observation that his leadership lifted Australian cricket and strengthened Australian cricket in a quite special way. And he, as have predecessor and following captains made an enormous contribution as the captain of the Australian cricket team. I think that was part of it. I think another element of it was that Steve's life and his participation in cricket and his playing of cricket marked him as a person of extraordinary application and resilience.
 As the book recounts and so many of us remember following his remarkable cricketing career, he did suffer a lot of disappointment. There were occasions when he suffered severe reversals. He had to change his technique. He had to draw on greater reserves of concentration and resilience. The special thing was that he was able to do so and he was able to fight his way back.
I think another feature of the reason for such public affection and esteem for Steve was that he had genuine love of the game - not just when he was participating and when he was participating successfully, but he has an enormous respect for the traditions of the game. And he had an enormous respect for the particular tradition of Australian cricket - it wasn't just cricket but it was cricket as played and as loved and as embraced by Australians. And nothing epitomised that affection more than of course his great love for the baggy green and insistence on wearing what must be the most tattered, soiled, battered but certainly well revered baggy green in all of the recorded history of Australian cricket. And not surprisingly it appears on the dustcover of this remarkable book.
And I think the fourth thing that people respected in Steve and liked about him was that despite his extraordinary success and despite all of the accolades that came his way, he was to use that quintessential Australian expression, he was a great family man. And that's illustrated here today, surrounded by his wife and children, and I was very touched as many of you will be by the extract from the book which appears at the front, when he says of all my achievements nothing matches the feeling of returning home to my family and the sight of you guys running up the hallway trying to be the first to jump into my arms. Any of us know that that still is more important than any success that might come our way, and Steve said it for all of us, whatever our pursuits, callings, backgrounds and preoccupations may be.
 There are some wonderful human touches and some wonderful reminders of the character of the man. I was particularly struck as having as a young boy gone through precisely the same experience as the reference to his mother picking up the ringing phone on Saturday morning and saying, 'oh what a shame I'll tell the boys', meaning that the game had been washed out because it was too wet to play. I was struck by his great discipline and foresight when he committed that $15,000 he received from the first three-year loyalty contract from PBL to the block of land on which he subsequently built his family home.
I've been privileged over the years to witness some great sporting events. I don't think any was greater, for not only the skill that he displayed, but also the timing and the emotion and the sense of personal involvement of over 40,000 people than his wonderful century achieved the last over, the last ball of the final Test against England in January of 2003. It was a wonderful day and I know that as I've gone around talking to people since, it must really have been 80,000 present rather than 41,000 because in different ways everybody claimed to be part of that. And doesn't that always happen with great sporting events in our country that you find over the years that there were in fact more people claiming to have been there than in reality were there, and that is a measure of the importance of the event.
 Steve Waugh has been a wonderful ambassador for the game. His commitment to helping the less privileged in our community, the work he's done with the series of trusts on the subcontinent, the reverence in which his name is spoken, with which his name is spoken on the subcontinent is a tribute to all of that.
 He loves writing and that is obvious from reading his book. And to have some of his manuscripts on display, it's hard going doing it by long hand but he joins a lot of honoured company, one of the greatest recent biographies of Winston Churchill by Roy Jenkins was written long hand and it's an honoured custom amongst many people.
I also want finally to say that Steve in his 12 months as Australian of the Year, wonderfully represented not only the career that he had given to Australia, but also he represented the aspirations of our community in so many ways. I'm delighted to launch this biography... this autobiography, I'm sure it will do well, it's a good read. It's not only a good read for cricket lovers, but it's also a good read for people who wish to either receive insights into the success of somebody who grew up in a close family environment, somebody who wasn't born with all of the comforts of life, certainly not, but he was born into a family that cared for him. He married his childhood sweetheart, they have a wonderful family and the gathering here today is testimony to not only the affection in which Steve Waugh is held by his immediate family, but also the regard in which he is held by the Australian community.
With no offence to any other sports in this country, there is something very special about being the captain of the Australian cricket team. It is the pinnacle of sporting esteem in Australia and Steve Waugh held that position with enormous success and enormous application and distinction. I thank him again for that and I wish him, his family and this book every success for the future, and have great pleasure launching it.
 Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much for those warm words of welcome.  Father Pat, General Peter Cosgrove and Mrs Lyn Cosgrove, Peter Dutton, my Minister for Workforce Participation, Senator Santo Santoro, Mr Bob Quinn, the Leader of the State Parliamentary Liberal Party, other distinguished guests, former governor Leneen Ford of Queensland, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to, by my presence here tonight, express my profound respect, not only for the volunteers of Rosies, but also the hundreds of thousands of volunteers in so many organisations around Australia who for no reward, for no notoriety, for nothing other than the satisfaction of trying to bring some light into darkened lives for the contribution that they make to relieving misery and relieving suffering in our community.  We are, as the late Donald Horne famously said, the lucky country.  And Australia, by all sorts of measures, is a very strong, prosperous, successful country.  But no matter how strong or successful or prosperous any country or any society is, there will always be some, for whatever combination of circumstances, who fall between the cracks.  Some through their own neglect and carelessness and indifference and lack of personal responsibility, others through no fault of their own, born into tragic circumstances and condemned from the time of their birth to live a very unhappy and very troubled life.  And what is so wonderful about an organisation such as Rosies is that it is non-judgemental.  We all have our views, we all have our values, we all quite properly require of different people in the community that they not only enjoy the privileges of living in Australia but also accept the responsibilities.  But that ought never to blind us to the need to extend a helping hand in a non-judgemental fashion to people who through no fault of their own have for a combination of reasons got into very difficult and self-defeating circumstances.
And can I relate very much to something that Father Pat said in talking about how often the sense of alienation and loneliness and separation brings about people taking their own lives. In all the experiences I've had as a Member of Federal Parliament and all the experiences I've had as a Minister, as a Prime Minister, in a personal sense, none in a way is more difficult than listening to parents who have lost their children through suicide, of listening to people trying understandably to say to me, as they would to anybody, that if only they could have done something that was different, if only they had behaved differently, if only they have reacted differently, perhaps their son or their daughter might be with them.  And it is the ultimate price that is paid, it is the ultimate human cost and I think what Father said about the outreach of Rosies and what he said about the welcoming arms of this organisation to people in all sorts of different circumstances, and as a nation that really is amongst the top flight of nations that believes in and practices private home ownership, homelessness put against that reality is something that we should all in different ways do what we can to relieve and never totally remove but certainly to mitigate in our community.
I want to pay tribute to this wonderful organisation.  Many of my Brisbane and Queensland friends have told me what a great organisation it is.  I have the opportunity, as Father Pat reminded me a short while ago, of meeting him briefly in East Timor several years ago.  And the spiritual dimension that he brings to his work, the reminder that what does underpin everything that this wonderful organisation does is a deep commitment to Christian charity.  If I can use an expression that I think we all understand, some draw back from using it these days through fear of sounding too politically incorrect, but I don't because I think the spiritual dimension behind this wonderful organisation is what keeps it together, and part of that spiritual dimension is to bring a sense of compassion and charity to people who need assistance, based on respect for their individuality and their right to speak for themselves and to ask for things with a sense of dignity and a proper sense of entitlement as part of our modern community.
So can I simply say how very pleased I am to be here.  Part of the life of the Prime Minister is to try and convey to the hundreds of thousands of volunteers that keep our nation going and keep the country together because volunteers really comprise part of the great national cement of Australia.  I was delighted to hear Father Pat talk about the cooperative effort between this organisation, the Government and the business community.
 I have spoken, in the years that I've been Prime Minister, of the desirability of building a social coalition in this country. Governments can never do what organisations like Rosies do.  Governments can never assemble that very strong commitment which is evident amongst the 400 volunteers here in Queensland that do the good work of an organisation like Rosies.  Governments can provide resources, governments can provide a lot of assistance, they can encourage and they can extol people to do things.  But nothing replaces the coalface compassion of volunteers who really care about what they're doing for individuals.  And if only we can bring together the resources of the Government, the personal commitment of the volunteers and the individuals, the generosity of so many people in the business community and the public spirit of individual Australians, there really is no problem in this country that can't be overcome.  And we are making progress, we are becoming a more generous society. There were many people who said at the beginning of the year, after the extraordinary response to the tsunami appeal which showed the depth of generosity of this country, there were many people who said that we would suffer from donation fatigue.  The truth I think has been somewhat different.
And I'm very pleased to note that the value of individual giving in this country has grown by 88 per cent since 1997 and that the number of hours donated by volunteers has risen 16 per cent since 2000, with 41 per cent of Australians in different ways volunteering, I know it sounds very statistical but it's an arresting statistic, 836 million hours of their own time.  Now I say this because there are occasions when all of us in different ways, some more than others might lapse into saying because we are an affluent country we're becoming more selfish and we're becoming more indifferent to the less fortunate in our community. There's a lot of evidence, and a great deal is assembled here tonight, to suggest the opposite is the case.
  May I say to all of you thank you for what you are doing in different ways to help people who need help.  I congratulate Father Pat and his wonderful army of volunteers for the tremendous work that they do to help people in different situations, without judgement, caring only to provide them with a shoulder to cry on and some kind of encouragement and a sense of hope, a sense of purpose and a greater sense of self-esteem.  At the end of the day there is no feeling that is more important than self-esteem and homeless people are almost by definition desperately short of self-esteem. To the extent that an organisation like this provides that - I congratulate it and I thank it.  And I wish the appeal well, I wish tonight's fundraising efforts well and I'm very pleased to say that the Commonwealth Government will contribute some $30,000 to the proceeds of this evening's fundraising appeal.
Thank you very much for having me and good luck to you all.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Michael for those warm words of introduction. To you my fellow Australians and fellow Liberals, it is a great delight to be back again in Queensland. I'm growing fonder of the place every year. This is the third visit in the last three weeks. But why wouldn't you after the magnificent result was delivered here a year ago at the last election by the Liberal and National Parties. And in congratulating my good friend and former flatmate, Warwick Parer and I shared a flat together for a long time, so he better not get out of line, there are few things I know about him that nobody else does, and vice versa, I might say.
I'm delighted to congratulate Warwick and thank him for again undertaking to do good things for the Liberal Party, good things for Queensland and good things for Australia in public service. And I'm also very delighted to have my friend and colleague Bruce Scott, the President of the Queensland Division of the National Party with us today. I am as you know a devoted Coalitionist. The Liberal and National Parties when they work together, win together.
 The years of greatest success for the Liberal and National Parties in Australia have been the years when they have worked together. And we must never forget that we have but one common political enemy, and that is the Australian Labor Party and all of those who might fellow travel with the Australian Labor Party.
 But I do want at this convention to record my immense gratitude to the Queensland Division for the wonderful result you delivered just over a year ago. To particularly congratulate three of your number who joined us for the first time. To congratulate Andrew Laming in Bowman, Ross Vasta in Bonner and Russell Trood who was elected to the Senate. And it will never be forgotten that the victory of Russell Trood and Barnaby Joyce together gave us, along with the two re-elected members, senators, gave us four out of six seats, and it gave real substance to that immortal advertising slogan of 'Queensland beautiful one day, perfect the next'.
We won the last election not only here in Queensland but throughout Australia for two reasons. We won because the people of Australia trusted us to properly manage the Australian economy and they also trusted us on national security. They were the dominate issues of that election campaign. And a year on, they remain the dominate issues in national political life. Management of the Australian economy, ensuring that the economic strength that's given us a 30-year low in unemployment, that's given us a 15 per cent increase in real wages, the lowest interest rates in more than 30 years, taxation relief, the repayment of the $96 billion of Labor debt that we inherited in 1996, management of the Australian economy still lies at the key of the future prosperity of this country.
 Right at the moment the Parliament is debating major changes to our workplace relations reforms. Those changes are big but they are fair. These changes are needed to guarantee the continuation of the economic strength that we have enjoyed over the last nine-and-a-half years. There's always a temptation when you are doing well to sit back and oh we've done enough. Let's not risk doing anymore, it's going well, everybody's got a job, taxes are coming down, interest rates are low, wages are strong, the country's paid off its debt, just quietly sit down and do nothing more. That's very tempting and it's in essence what we are being urged to do by our political opponents and some others. But it would be a recipe for future decline.
 If this Government were to do that it would be righteously condemned. In five or ten years time when the relatively strong position that Australia now has in the world will have fallen down, when the gains that we have made over the last decade would have dissipated. And rightly the Liberal Party convention of five or ten years time, both here in Queensland and around Australia would be entitled to say, why on earth didn't the Howard Government keep going with economic reform? I've used the metaphor before and I use it again, that economic reform is a bit like participating in a race towards an ever receding finishing line. You never quite get there, you never get to a point when you say I've crossed the finishing line. But you've got to keep going because if you don't, the other blokes in the race are going to run past you. And those other blokes in the race are our competitors around the world. We live in a globalised world economy, we can't go back on that, whether we like aspects of it or not, it is with us for all time. And what we have to do is out-compete the world. And that means that we must continue with the process of economic reform.
 People have attacked our workplace relations reforms. They say they are not fair. Let me quote you a Labour Prime Minister, Tony Blair, a successful Labour leader, he might be having one or two domestic problems at the moment but he's been the Prime Minister of Great Britain since 1997 and I have my differences with him of course, because he's a Labour Prime Minister, but I respect some of the courage that he's displayed on international issues. And when he spoke to the Trade Union Congress in 1997 - just after being elected, he said that he was going to keep the labour market reforms of the Thatcher years. And he said that fairness in the workplace starts with a chance of a job. And he spoke a truth. And he spoke a truth that the unemployed of Australia understand. And one of the great philosophical weaknesses of the union and Labor Party attack on our workplace relations reforms is that they never factor in the interest of the unemployed. They never talk about an industrial relations system that is directed towards maintaining and even improving our current low level of unemployment.
In reality the only guarantee of job security and high real wages in this country is a strong economy. Not the industrial relations system. The language of an industrial relations system will not guarantee somebody job security or higher wages if the economy goes into decline. In the early 1990s when we had Mr Keating's recession that we had to have, when a million Australians were out of work, when real wages were in freefall in many parts of the economy, we had a more regulated labour market than we have now. We had massive theoretical protections for workers. But theoretical protections are no good if the economy is in decline. If a firm is not making profits it can't employ people. You can have all the laws in the world protecting the people you are meant to employ when you're doing well, but if you're not doing well you can't employ people, you have to let them go. And no industrial relations system can stop that happening.
 And therefore you have to ask yourself a simple question when you look at our industrial relations reforms, will they strengthen the economy? Will they make the economy more productive? Will they encourage the making of more bargains at a workplace level? Because that is the foundation of greater productivity. And that is the real test if our industrial relations reforms. Will they or will they not strengthen the economy? If they will strengthen the economy they'll be good for jobs and they'll be good for high wages. And overwhelmingly these reforms will lift productivity and strengthen the economy. And particularly will they strengthen the small business sector of the Australian economy. And I don't think there is a state in Australia which is more critically dependent on small and medium size businesses than the State of Queensland.
 The very structure of the Queensland economy, the decentralised nature of the State means that overwhelmingly the driver of economic activity, the creator of jobs in Queensland is the small and medium size sector. And these reforms very particularly will aid small and medium business. At long last we will get the monkey of the unfair absurd, unfair dismissal laws off the back of small business. Those laws were meant to protect jobs, they have in fact destroyed jobs. They have intimidated small businessmen and women from taking on more staff because of the complexities involved when you have to let somebody go for the sake of your business and for the sake of the their fellow employees.
They are not some God given right from Magna Carta, as the Labor Party and the unions would have you believe. They were in fact only introduced in 1994 as a result of a secret deal made between the trade union movement and the then Prime Minister, Mr Keating. And in the 11 years that they have been in existence they have in fact retarded job growth in the small business sector, and their removal will not hurt workers, their removal will aid workers and create job opportunities.
My friends, the events of the past two weeks, indeed of the past few days have underlined the need for continued vigilance on issues of national security and terrorism. The fight against terrorism around the world, and very particularly here in Australia, will be long and hard. I can't stand before you today and say that in such and such a time we can say that the fight against terrorism has been successfully concluded. What I can say to you is that it is a new challenge to our society. It's a new challenge to liberal societies embracing traditional western values. It is not a conventional enemy. When you think of terrorism you don't think of armies rolling across boarders. You don't think of formal declarations of war or of ambassadors being recalled, you don't think of any of that. You are dealing with an unpredictable, shadowy, totally indecent, obscene enemy, an enemy that in the last few years has claimed the lives of more Muslims around the world than any other identifiable religious group.
 I mention that very deliberately because we do need to understand the juxtaposition of Islam to the terrorist threat. Terrorism is repugnant to the values of Islam, as it is repugnant to the values of Christianity and Judaism, indeed to the values of all the other great religions of the word. And anything that I say or anything that is said about the need to resist and fight terrorism should not be seen as, in any way, an attack upon people of the Muslim faith or of Islamic identification.
 Islamic Australians are as much a part of our community as any other section of Australian society. We should say that, we should practice that and we should mean that. But equally we must understand that the common thread that runs through terrorism, be the potential of it here in Australia, be it in Indonesia, be it in Iraq, be it in Jordan, be it in Britain, be it in America, be it anywhere, the common thread that runs through it is a perverted, fanatical form of Islam - which cannot deride justification from the proper tenets of that religion, but nonetheless is the common cement or justification used by those who seek to recruit people to the terrorist cause.
Now that puts obligations on us. It puts obligations on us as a community to reach out to our fellow Australians who are law abiding Muslims and say to them, you are our friends, you are part of this fight, terrorism is much an enemy of yours as it is of ours, that's our obligation. It is also an obligation on the Islamic community to understand the perverted attempts of some within its ranks to recruit people to the terrorist cause. So there's, as in so many other aspects of society, there are rights and there are also responsibilities. And as I've said before over the past few days, I say again to my fellow Australians who are Muslims, there is nothing in the new laws that we have introduced, there is nothing in the activities of the Australian law enforcement authorities over the past few days that represent in anyway a generalised attack on the Islamic community. There is no singling out. There is no scapegoating, what they are doing is simply dealing with alleged breaches of Australian law. And all Australians are equal before the law. We all have the same rights and we also have the same responsibilities. And it is our responsibility to see that that is practiced. It is the responsibilities particularly of the leaders of the Islamic community to ensure as best they can, with our cooperation, that those within their midst who might seek to pervert the minds particularly of the young, to a distorted obscene form of Islam are identified and dealt with as best they can.
 But the events of the past two weeks, and I don't for reasons I am sure you will understand, want to dwell on them because we believe very, very much in this nation in that age old presumption of innocence. People are entitled to their day in court and these matters in the end will be decided in the time honoured Australian tradition before properly constituted courts of law.
 But I want to assure you and I want to assure my fellow Australians that this Government will never shrink from taking those actions that are needed to defend the Australian community, that the actions that we have taken over the past few weeks to change the laws of the country to provide additional protection for the Australian community are totally justified.   We are living in a different era. I wish the era did not require us to change the laws in the way that we have but we were living at a time when those laws were not necessary. But the reality is that we are dealing with a different and a new challenge and it is one that I know the Australian people will respond to and respond to in a strong but fair fashion because the characteristic of the Australian people on these issues is always to identify legitimately the national interest but equally to see that that national interest is pursued firmly, but in a way that is fair and just to all of our citizens.
My friends next week I will go to Korea to attend the annual meeting of the APEC countries. A gathering of the leaders of the Asian Pacific nations, that part of the world where increasingly our economic, as well as a large part of our political, focus is to be found.   This morning I had the opportunity of a lengthy discussion with President Bush to talk about a number of the issues amongst other things that are going to be discussed at that APEC meeting. And high on that list was our joint concern to try and win some progress in the current World Trade Organisation negotiations. The outlook at present is not bright. The Americans have made, I think, a significantly more generous offer in relation to agriculture than had previously been the case. But disappointingly the European response to date has not matched the initiative of the United States and it remains Australia's very strong view, not only because of our legitimate national interest in freer and more open access for our agricultural exports, but also because we believe a more open trading system in agriculture will be of enormous benefit to the least developed countries in the world.
An open trading system, a removal of the restrictive barriers of the European Union and the other countries that impose restrictive agricultural policies and that includes Japan and the United States, the removal of those barriers would do far more by a factor of perhaps three or four than the current levels of aid to those countries.
Trade is more valuable to the poor countries of the world than aid because trade opens up economic opportunities. Trade generates jobs, it encourages business investment, it allows the developing countries of the world to participate more fully in the benefits of a globalised world economy.   We also agreed that as much joint action to meet any future challenge of avian flu in our region would also be something high on our agenda and just the week before last Australia hosted here in Brisbane a meeting of all the senior medical officials of the APEC countries. And in many ways Australia has already provided a significant lead in this area and it will continue to do so.
 Both of us have also looked forward to the first meeting of the Asian Pacific Partnership for Clean Energy and Development that will meet in Australia early in January and this body brings together some of the major economies of the world. It recognises, in a way that the Kyoto Protocol does not recognise, the legitimate interests of countries like Australia who are developed countries and net exporters of energy and who would be greatly harmed if this country were to accede to the Kyoto Protocol, which is the policy of the Australian Labor Party. But I don't think it is the policy of the Queensland Labor Government for the most obvious of reasons, because this is a great exporting State, this is a State that derides enormous wealth and also sees the generation of a large number of jobs in the energy sector.
We are completely committed to the goals of Kyoto, the goals that see a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. We are never going to assent to a protocol that would see Australian jobs exported to other countries that were not bound by the same Kyoto rules that this country would be bound by if we were to accede. And I might make the point again that this country will on present trends meet the greenhouse gas emission target that was laid out in the Kyoto discussions of some years ago.
The energy partnership that involves Australia, the United States, Japan, China, Indonesia and a number of other countries, India as well, that represents a pragmatic achievable approach to the issue of greenhouse gas emissions without the liabilities of signing the Kyoto Protocol.
My friends I want to conclude on a personal note. On a personal note that expresses my gratitude firstly to all of my parliamentary colleagues here in the State of Queensland that expresses my admiration for the contribution they make as ministers, as parliamentary secretaries and as senators and members.   Queensland has never had a stronger Liberal Party contingent in the national parliament. Not only stronger in numbers which is undoubtedly the case but also stronger in quality and it is always a source of immense pride to me when I think back over the last nine-and-a-half years to think of the tremendous resurgence of Liberal support here in Queensland in 1996 and the way in which in one way or another we seem to keep, apart from a few setbacks in 1998, we seem to keep adding to it as the years went by.
 We added to it in 2001, we reclaimed Dickson and of course we reclaimed Ryan and we added to it again in 2004 when we won Bowman and we magnificently won Bonner and of course we won a majority in the Senate courtesy of that magnificent result. So it is always a source of tremendous pride and can I say to Michael Caltabiano, the retiring State President, that I congratulate him and his colleagues on the wonderful victory under the leadership of Bob Quinn that was won in those two by-elections.
 I believe there has been a change in the atmosphere of Queensland State politics. I believe that there is new hope and heart for the Coalition parties here in Queensland. You have worked out in your particular Queensland style, of which I am not unfamiliar, you have worked out a partnership, an alliance and a way of handling things and I think it is on the money. It really is and I think there is a change. Those two by-election results which recorded wonderful swings and to you Michael you gave up a position in the Council, you took on a big challenge and I think it was great result and a great credit to you and to Bob and to all of your friends in the now State Parliamentary Party in Queensland, that you were able to achieve the results.  One of the things that warmed me when I watched the television pictures the night of the by-election before the results were known, I spotted Ron Boswell and Bruce Scott handing out how-to-vote cards and that is how it should be, that we should work together. We only have one enemy politically and that is the Australian Labor Party and we should never forget it. Although Bob Brown and the Australian Democrats try fairly hard to get into the picture on occasions.
But the last year has seen the Government continue to do the things that it was elected to do, seen the Government continue to manage the economy, seen the Government preside over an extraordinary growth in jobs, something like 1.6 to 1.7 million jobs now created since we were elected and we have seen interest rates remain low. We were able to afford significant tax cuts in the last Budget which were opposed by Mr Beazley, I mean he sort of had his explanations and he had his charts and he had his convoluted language but at the end of the day he voted against the tax cuts and they ultimately went through because they realised in the end after 30 June with our majority of one in the Senate there was really no alternative.
Of course, we have continued to provide the leadership that is necessary to be provided in the face of the new and difficult terrorist challenge that we face.  My friends I want to thank you again for the tremendous loyalty and support that you have extended to me and to the Federal government.  I want to renew my commitment to governing for all Australians, particularly in relation to economic management and issues of national security.  We may have been in office for nine-and-a-half years but we have not tired of the challenge. We have not got lazy on the job. We have not begun to suffer reform fatigue. We still have very big and determined and energetic plans for the future prosperity of this great nation of ours.
Thank you.
[ends]
**Note: Indonesia is not a member of the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate.  


Thank you very much Bob, the Federal Member for Paterson, Bob Baldwin, Mr Mayor, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  And very particularly the students, not only of this educational centre, but of other schools in the Hunter Valley.
 It's a delight to be back in Paterson on this beautiful November day.  I know the area well and I am reminded of many happy holidays spent in this part of the world.  And I'm here today to involve myself in a wonderful exercise that Bob has undertaken in the time that he's been the Federal Member for Paterson.  And that is to honour the citizens, young and old and middle aged, of this district and to thank them in your name and in the name of their fellow Australians for the contribution they make to the working of our society.
 Australia, as we all know, is a wonderful place in which to live.  And all of us must do everything we can to keep it that way into the future.  What makes it such a wonderful place in which to live is the contribution without reward, without acknowledgement on many occasions, and certainly without the expectation other than the personal satisfaction of doing something for the community or doing something that makes somebody else's life a little happier and a little more enjoyable.  It's the contribution of hundreds of thousands of Australians every year to community work, to welfare work, to charitable work, to work without reward.  And that more than anything else does keep us together as a nation.
 When we debate Australia's economic strengths, when we debate our social harmony, when we think of the impressive respect in which Australia is held around the world, we tend all too often to think of the economic statistics without acknowledging the human contribution.  And today is about acknowledging a human contribution, acknowledging the contribution of the citizens of the Hunter, of the Paterson electorate to the wellbeing of this part of Australia.  And in making that acknowledgment we are entitled as Australians to feel a great sense of pride about our country.  We have our differences.  We have our political differences.  We have even, I've noticed, some differences of sporting allegiance on occasion when it comes to sport within Australia.  But we are entitled, all of us as Australians, to feel a sense of pride that this country is seen around the world as not only a very successful nation economically but it's also seen as a nation that is prepared to make its contribution to the suffering of others.
 Yesterday afternoon I had the opportunity of talking on the phone to the President of Pakistan, General Musharraf, and I will be visiting Pakistan within the next two weeks in between my visit to the APEC meeting in Korea and the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Malta.  And General Musharraf had rung me to talk about a donors' conference that is being organised in Islamabad to maintain the momentum of international support for the victims of the terrible earthquake in his country.  And he was able to thank me for the fact that we had despatched, and they have arrived in Pakistan overnight, a group of some 120 Army medical personnel who will spend three months in one of the more remote parts affected by the earthquake, providing important ongoing medical treatment to those people who have been left homeless and so cruelly and grievously injured by that earthquake.  Pakistan is a long way from Australia.  We have something in common with Pakistan, we have a common love of certain sports.  But importantly this is an example of the outreach of Australia and the capacity of Australia, because of our good fortune and our strength, the capacity of Australia to help.  And of course, none of you will forget the generosity the Australian people displayed towards the people of Indonesia and other countries affected by the tsunami almost a year ago.  And on a per capita basis the Australian response was more generous than the response of any other country in the world.
Now I say that with some emphasis and some pride because there are some in our community who run around saying that we have become heartless because we have become economically successful.  Nothing could be more contradictory.  Economic success underwrites a capacity to be more generous if the spirit is there and the willingness is there.  And the Government and the people of Australia demonstrated the capacity and the willingness earlier this year and we continue to do so.  But at a local level it's the capacity and the willingness of the people of Paterson that I come here today to pay tribute to.  To thank all of you for the contribution you make to the great society we are building in this country.
 And I also, of course, want to pay tribute to my colleague and friend, Bob Baldwin, who is an absolutely indefatigable worker for the people of Paterson, he really is.  Bob is terrific.  Yeah, let's hear it for Bob.  Whenever there's been something that has affected people particularly in the Hunter, and we had it tragically and recently in relation to the second attack in Bali, we had an instance of it of families caught up in the tragedy in London on the 7th of July, Bob was there doing everything he could 24 hours a day.  And let me also acknowledge the contribution of other Members of Parliament in the Hunter Valley who did likewise because on occasions like that political differences are of no account, it is question of working together as Australians to help each other.  And I'm very proud to call Bob a friend and colleague and I'm delighted to be in his electorate.  I thank you for coming along and I compliment Bob very, very warmly on the awards of Citizen of the Year and I look forward to meeting the participants and the winners and personally congratulating and thanking them for the contribution they make to our community.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Morgan, Dr Silberberg, my parliamentary colleague Alan Cadman, Ivan Petch, the Mayor of Ryde, an old friend Bill Kirby-Jones and other very familiar faces in this industry, welcome to the electorate of Bennelong. It's great that you have decided to establish your regional headquarters here in my electorate and I am more than happy to be on hand to officially open these premises to launch YouthBuild and very particularly, especially on a day when there is a focus on industrial relations changes, to make a few comments about the role of the Housing Industry Association and the role of the home building industry in the Australian economy. It goes without saying that I have had a very long association with this industry association. It goes back to the time when I was Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs and then Treasurer in the former Coalition Government. It was a relationship which I tried to keep in good repair during the years that the Coalition was in Opposition, I remember with gratitude the support that the Housing Industry Association gave in 1993 to the industrial relations policies of the Coalition at the time, a level of support which unfairly and dishonourably brought forth a level of punitive behaviour and discrimination from the re-elected Government in 1993 which did not reflect very well in the democratic process.
 It is true that the housing industry has played a critical role in the economic expansion that has taken place in this country over the last 15 years. I well remember the early months of 2001 when as a result of some of the transitional effects of the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax, the home building industry went into a very significant decline and due in very significant measures to the representations that were made to me by Ron and the other members of the Housing Industry Association executive, we decided in the wake of the very bad national account figures for the December quarter of 2000, as a temporary measure to double the first homeowners grant from $7000 to $14,000. I think that demonstrated two things, it demonstrated the ongoing significance of the housing industry as an economic driver in the Australian economy, it also demonstrated an interesting piece of economic advocacy if you like that John Maynard Keynes is not completely dead when it comes to the decisions that governments take in order to respond to economic difficulties. That measure worked in a relatively short period of time, there was a recovery in the home building industry and over time, the grant has returned to its previous level.
 I know from time to time that people suggest that it should, on an ongoing basis be higher and the Government continues to receive those recommendations but we think the current level is appropriate, we certainly believe very strongly in having as part of the armoury of policies for home ownership in this country, we do believe very strongly in a first homeowners grant. It is important at a gathering like this for me to reaffirm the centrality of private home ownership as part of the makeup of modern Australia. This country has one of the highest home ownership levels in the world. There may on occasions be one or two countries whose home ownership goes a little higher but we are right up there with the top rank and at various periods during the 1960s and 70s, if my memory serves me correctly the State of Victoria did in fact have the highest levels of home ownership of any identified political jurisdiction anywhere in the world and those home ownership levels are important for social and family stability. Buying a home, investing in a home is the major investment that most people make in their lifetime. For most Australians, owning their home is far and away the greatest asset that people have and in many cases it is the only substantial asset that people have and it is as true now as it was a generation ago that the desire to buy a home and to raise a family and it goes right to the heart of the stability and the future of our society.
 There are challenges for younger people in buying their first home especially but not only in the city of Sydney. There is no easy solution to that. Some of them I believe lie with more adventurous land release policies and rather more realistic development policies to be adopted by State and Federal Governments. We do not believe that the solution lies in altering the existing taxation arrangements in relation to negative gearing or the capital gains tax exemption. They are issues that have been looked at. They were tried briefly in the 1980s when the former government phased out for a period of time negative gearing and the result of course was that there was a very significant shortage of investment in investment properties. There was a very sharp escalation in rentals charged in metropolitan Sydney and perversely a measure that was designed as some kind of measure of social equity and social justice ended up via the increased rents - in fact hurting the most vulnerable people in the community.
If I could move to two other things. The first of those of course is the Government's workplace relations proposals which have passed the House of Representatives - are now before a Senate committee and will be debated by the Senate when it reconvenes in just under two weeks time. These proposals more than anything else will be of enormous benefit to small and medium size businesses. And it is therefore appropriate that I say something about them to an audience which overwhelmingly is of an industry that is made up of small to medium size entrepreneurs. I know there are some large companies that are members of HIA but quintessentially this is a small business industry. It's an industry of risktakers. It's an industry of hard workers. It's an industry of independent contractors. It's an industry of men and women who believe in the small business ethic. And these proposals will provide a better future for small business. And because of that, these changes will over time generate more jobs. They will over time make a big contribution to maintaining our economic growth and economic momentum.
We run the risk in this country of resting on our economic laurels. We run the risk of saying that because we have done so well over the last 10 or 15 years we don't need to embrace any more reform, we can sit back, we can enjoy life, we can avoid taking any further difficult or challenging decisions. That ladies and gentlemen is a recipe for the economic progress of today, stalling tomorrow and going eventually into reverse. No country can afford to stand still on economic reform. No country can complacently assume that because we've done difficult things in the past and reached a certain level of activity that we can then stop, down tools and assume the future will look after itself. You can't do that with your businesses and this Government and no government of Australia can do that with the economy of Australia.
In my view once these changes have been implemented - if that is the will of Parliament - and I believe it will be the will of Parliament, it is my view that after they have been implemented for a period of time most Australians will look back on the criticism and the objections and the observations that have been made about them, with a sense of bewilderment. The sky will not fall in. Weekend barbeques will not be abolished. Parents will still be able to spend Christmas Day with their children and importantly the greater flexibility that the new system brings in will boost industries such as the housing industry and will lead to very significant further job generation in small business.
 I say this next or make this next observation, not in denigration of the trade union movement but rather to say something about the face of modern Australia. There are now more small business units in this country than there are paid up members of trade unions. Now that says something about the nature of modern Australia. I understand that the HIA in New South Wales has enjoyed since 2001 something like a 69 per cent increase in its membership, which is an extraordinary achievement and it's a reminder - and a lot of that growth I gather has occurred in regional New South Wales - and that is a reminder of the continued life and energy of the small business ethic in the Australian community.
I wouldn't want you to forget that part and parcel of the industrial relations programme that we took to the last election was the introduction of special independent contractor legislation to further reinforce the status of people who are contractors as small business operators, and to make it even more difficult for legislators and others in the future to somehow or other deem them to be in an employer-employee relationship with either their head contractors or in some circumstances, the people that work for them. As well as declaring these premises open, I know this is the launch of the YouthBuild Foundation, a Foundation promoted by the Housing Industry Association, a promotion that hopes to further encourage apprenticeships, particularly apprenticeships that involve a link between the apprenticeship and the apprentice's school. We have seen an increase in school-based apprenticeships around Australia. Unfortunately the progress has been slower in New South Wales, because an essentially award tainted approach to apprenticeships in this State and the prejudice against school-based apprenticeships has meant that their growth in New South Wales has been a lot more limited. It is right, as the Executive Director Ron Silberberg said, that the Government has put an enormous amount of emphasis into trying to boost apprenticeships and technical education.
 I'm very hopeful that at the next meeting of Commonwealth and State Governments in February that we will be able to sign off on an arrangement that will remove, over a short period of time, the remaining barriers for people who have obtained technical qualifications in one part of Australia to carry on their trade in another. It still remains to me an absurdity in 2005 when in theory we are meant to have finally got rid of the barriers that exist in relation to say doctors and lawyers qualified in one part of the country practicing in another. That somebody who qualifies as an electrician in one part of Australia can be required to go through some kind of trade qualification or course or clear some barrier or hurdle in another part of the country that a hairdresser who qualifies in Western Australia can carry on his or her occupation in London without further lead or hindrance, but can't carry on that occupation in New South Wales or Queensland without going through some further hoop. I mean that sort of thing is ridiculous. It only has to be stated to most Australians for them to shake their heads in disbelief that it could be the case. But it is the case and I am very hopeful that coming out of the process that was set in train at the last Premiers' conference that we can reach some real agreement at the February meeting to put that kind of stupidity behind us.
 We have put a lot of extra emphasis on getting skilled migrants. We continue to look to ways to make that work better. We are investing very heavily in 25 Commonwealth Technical Colleges around the country to demonstrate to Australians the premium we place on a high grade technical education. And I've frequently said when I've spoken about this subject that the line that I used in the last election campaign that got the most applause in most parts of the country was when I said I wanted an Australia where a high grade technical qualification was as prized as a university degree. And it is a shift in emphasis and a shift in esteem and prestige which is very important to our country's future.
 So ladies and gentlemen, I am really very pleased to be part of this ceremony today, to thank the Housing Industry Association for the contribution it's made to the Australian economy over the years. To thank it for the contribution it's making to apprenticeships, particularly through YouthBuild, the contribution it's making to school-based apprenticeships, and to assure you, not only through our industrial relations reforms, which are a very, very important part of building the economic strength of Australia in the future. But in many other ways, we will remain a good friend and a good partner of the Housing Industry Association. Our goals are the same. We want viable small businesses, we want strong levels of home ownership, we want to protect the independence of people in your industry and we want to encourage the maximum number of young Australians to take out apprenticeships and in time themselves become the independent contractors, which are the backbone of the Housing Industry Association.
 I have great pleasure in declaring this building open and I wish you well and thank you for inviting me.
[ends]


Thank you very much Nick, Gordon and Beverley Moyes, the members of the Moyes family, a number of my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I am very pleased indeed to be a small part of an evening honouring somebody who has been the epitome of an effective Christian leader in Australia's largest city for more than thirty years. The example of Gordon Moyes, the combination of a very deep Christian faith worked through in a practical, commonsense, and as circumstances have required it, hard-headed fashion but always having as its goal, the spreading of the Christian message and the doing of good things to those in need.
I can think of the extraordinary contribution, as somebody who's grown up and lived most of his life in Sydney, I can think of the extraordinary contribution firstly at the Central Methodist Mission and in more recent times, the Wesley Mission to the life and work of this city and beyond. And in the time that Dr Moyes has been the Superintendent of the Wesley Mission, it has grown enormously. It now cares for and supports more than 220,000 Australians each year from more than 400 different programmes. And what I particularly salute is the way in which Dr Moyes has led the Wesley Mission to an understanding of the need for the church, in its various outreaches to the community to change and adapt whilst retaining a deep connection with the fundamentals of the Christian religion. The way in which the Wesley Mission was prepared to involve itself in the development of the Job Network which replaced the old Commonwealth Employment Service, the way in which the Wesley Mission was willing to be involved in work-for-the-dole programmes, the way in which the Wesley Mission, in so many facets, involved itself in what I have called the social coalition in our community - where governments and welfare organisations, generous business men and women and passionate, devoted individuals work together to challenge life's social problems.
 The very first week after I was sworn in as Prime Minister I convened a meeting in the temporary office I had in the then Chifley Square Building to deal with the issue of youth homelessness. It was, I think, the first meeting I had with a community group in the time of my Prime Ministership. And I invited Gordon Moyes to join that gathering and from then on he has played a central role in advising the Government in relation to the interaction of social programmes and Government responsibilities. He's remained an adviser to the Government in so many different ways. He's been a counsellor to many members of the Government and he's been a person who's been willing to express his views in an objective way about the nature and character of Government programmes.
His work on the Community and Business Partnerships - which has brought together some of the most successful and affluent businessmen in this country with people who've given their lives to Christian service and service - not necessarily always Christian service, but service for the community. That organisation has played a very significant role in helping to shape a different approach to giving and philanthropy in our community.
 And I remember at the beginning of this year when the Australian community gave so generously to the tsunami appeal - something of which we should always be as a nation very proud, on a per capita basis we were far and away the most generous nation in the world in response to that huge human disaster. And when we wallow sometimes in self-criticism we should remember that. And I remember at the time wondering to myself, would we suffer a form of donation fatigue having given so much as a community - and I was very pleased to be assured by many people, including Dr Moyes that so far from that experience, exhausting the generosity of the Australian people, it provided an example that we have continued to emulate in different ways. We do give more now than we used to. We are more philanthropic than we used to be. But we still fall a long way short of what we would all like to be in terms of our individual and community generosity.
 I am truly honoured to be here tonight. I want to pay tribute to Gordon and to his wife for their 27 years of leadership. It's not an easy task to run an organisation. To keep it on the straight and narrow path, to keep it solvent, to preside over an enormous expansion and also in the process to live through the cultural and other changes, and attitudinal changes that have come the way of this country over that period of time. And Gordon has done it. He's remained true and steadfast and stoic to the fundamentals of our Christian faith. But he's also somebody who has constantly renewed the message and has constantly related to the circumstances of the time in a way that has maintained his position of authority and respect in the community.
I know that the Mission will establish a Gordon Moyes Scholarship Foundation. And that Foundation will finance scholarships for meritorious students to study at the Wesley Institute in a number of areas. And I want, as a mark of the Government's respect and admiration for the work that Gordon has done, I'd like to announce that we the Federal Government will contribute some $20,000 to the Foundation. It will be a regular and practical reminder of the enormous contribution that Gordon has made. He will not, of course, disappear. He will not become invisible. Nobody who chairs Parliamentary committees can ever be invisible. But he'll continue to work and advise governments of both political persuasions as properly has been his disposition and his character.
 Can I say on behalf of all of your fellow Australians, Gordon, thank you for 27 years of faithful achieving and dedicated service to the people of Australia and most particularly to the people of Sydney. Thank you.
[ends]  


Mr Chairman Leong, ladies and gentlemen. It is again to have the opportunity of briefly addressing this CEO's gathering on the eve of the APEC meeting in Busan Korea. I want for a few moments this morning to talk about some of the shared responsibilities not only of leaders but also of company executives and corporations generally in responding to the challenge of the, not only the challenge of the reality but also the threats of natural disasters. In recent years we have seen the need to not only look at the challenge of terrorism from an economic perspective as well as a personal and national security perspective.
 But we've also; due in no small measure to the devastating effect of the Boxing Day tsunami, we've had cause to look at the impact of natural disasters, not only on the lives of individuals who are either taken or devastated by those natural disasters, but also on communities generally. It is therefore appropriate that one of the major issues that this year's APEC Leaders Meeting must focus on is the threat of an influenza pandemic. This is a prime agenda item and it is an issue that will require from leaders a collaborative, transparent and open response. The most important observation that I can make about the way in which economies and therefore leaders of those economies respond to the threat of natural disasters is to call for information sharing, openness, acknowledgement of challenges within individual countries and a desire on the part of all countries to share information and to collaborate.
 We can learn a great deal from the response of the world, and speaking as the Prime Minister of Australia, from the response of my country and others, particularly to the Boxing Day tsunami which claimed so many lives just on 12 months ago. As you know, the response of many nations around the world was one of overwhelming generosity and speed in the despatch of necessary assets and resources to help afflicted communities. I am particularly proud of the response of my own country; both at an official level with a $1 billion aid package to be administered under a special partnership presided over by the President of Indonesia and myself, but also the giving by individuals of some $350 million Australian dollars. Added together, it represented an extraordinary response of generosity by a nation of 20 million people. In expressing my pride in that response, I don't in any way of course denigrate the contribution of so many others to that enormous human disaster. And in recent weeks we've had need to address the human devastation of the earthquake in and around Kashmir and I was reminded in a telephone conversation with the President of Pakistan only last Sunday of the ongoing scale and challenge of that particular disaster and indeed a donors conference is taking place as we speak in Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan.
At the Leaders Meeting tomorrow, appropriate responses to the pandemic will be, potential pandemic rather, will be high on the agenda. Australia will be announcing a very significant initiative herself in order to add to the responses of a number of countries in the region and I know it's an issue that would be very much in the minds of both the President, President Roh of the host country Korea, but also of President Bush of the United States. I am sure I don't need to remind you that the economic consequences the impact of a pandemic on the economies of all of the nations of the APEC region could be potentially quite devastating. And once again, it is not only the human dimension of natural disasters that we must come to terms with but also the significant economic developments. It was important to learn from the response of the world to the tsunami that much and all as magnificent work was done by the great relief agencies of the United Nations and other international bodies. It was nonetheless a reminder to all of us that we still live in a world of nation states and it was the capacity particularly of the military forces with their emergency services, to respond very quickly to the immediate aftermath of the tsunami that made such a great difference. In the case of Australia it was possible for us to have military assets in the province of Aceh within a matter of a few days. And indeed, the response, the military assets from the United States and other countries was equally swift and equally effective.
 And once again we have seen in Pakistan the capacity of the military forces of that country and the assets of other nation states which can be deployed by definition, all that much more rapidly than those of international organisations. They have made a very significant difference, and there is a message in that for any response that we might make to an influenza pandemic. The important thing to emphasise is the national preparedness of individual member states. And the importance of putting aside any sense of national pride or self consciousness about any outbreak in individual countries; a willingness on the part of individual countries not only to confront those outbreaks but also to acknowledge that they have occurred and where it is appropriate and where it is necessary to call for assistance. The last thing that any nation can afford to do, not only in its own interests, but in the interests of fellow members of the world community, is to in any way hide or cover up the onset of the signs of an outbreak of something that could turn into a pandemic.
Before concluding my remarks Mr Chairman, I would be remiss if I didn't address a few comments to some of the direct economic challenges that face this APEC meeting. I've mentioned the importance of the response of member countries to any possible pandemic. An even more important item on the agenda for leaders this afternoon and tomorrow will be what we say about the very fraught condition of the current negotiations towards concluding the Doha trade round. It's not being melodramatic to say that unless there is a very significant shift in the attitude of countries, we are not going to have a successful Doha trade round.
 We have seen in the past several weeks a very extensive offer in relation to agricultural protection made by the United States. The size and the scope of that offer has exceeded the expectations of many and has surprised the regular critics of the United States on world trade issues. That offer calls for in my view a commensurate response from other countries which are major participants in the area of agricultural protection. I think of course of the European Union in particular. I think also of Japan and of others that have high levels of agricultural protection. I declare of course a national interest of Australia in these matters, but the case for making progress in this area is not a case based on the national interest of Australia - important though that always is, it is a case based upon the importance of opening up world markets for some of the least developed countries in the world community.
 It has long been my view that trade is infinitely more important to the cause of lifting people out of poverty than is direct assistance by governments, wealthier governments to less wealthy countries. I don't denigrate the importance of aid and I don't in any way do other than applaud the way in which many countries around the world including my own have pledged increase direct foreign aid over the years ahead. But speaking in Korea I am reminded of what a remarkable example this country represents of the benefits of globalisation. When one thinks of the relative position of the Korean economy in the 1960s, one can barely find a more remarkable example of a country that has invested in the future by embracing a reform agenda and pinning it's hopes and it's future on a more open world trading environment.
In introducing me Mr Riley was kind enough to talk about the strength of the motor vehicle industry in Australia. There- by hangs an important story about the linkages between economic reform and future economic outcomes. One of the reasons and I don't for a moment argue the only reason, but one of the reasons why the motor manufacturing industry in Australia is enjoying, and the motor car industry generally is enjoying unprecedented success is the substantial reform of the Australian taxation system that took place five years ago. Prior to the changes that were involved in that reform the motor car industry in Australia was burdened with a 22% wholesale sales tax. Taxation reform replaced that 22% wholesale sales tax with a 10% goods and services tax in circumstances where all business inputs were of course rebateable, and as a result the taxation burden on the motor car industry was significantly eased and that itself made an enormous contribution to the gathering strength of that industry.
At the time taxation reform in Australia was very strongly attacked. It was seen as too risky. It was argued to be unnecessary. The superficial knee-jerk reaction was that it would involve the imposition of a new tax and the critics paid little regard to the longer term economic benefits. If I can be permitted a brief final indulgence of referring to another domestic Australian reform issue at the present time, and that is industrial relations reform, might I draw an instant parallel between the two. It also is being widely attacked as unnecessary. We are being told that everything is going well, that we've had 15 years of almost unprecedented economic growth and why on earth would any government in its right mind embrace further economic reform. The reason why the government I lead has embraced that further workplace relations reform is that economies are never static. And unless the reform is an ongoing process the prosperity, stability and the bright outlook of today is replaced by a more uncertain cloudy outlook tomorrow. And a future generation of Australians will not thank the present Australian Government if it fails the test of maintaining the process of economic reform. The changes that we are now embracing, they are politically challenging but they are economically necessary and they will pay enormous long term job and income security benefits for the entire Australian workforce. And if we look around the world we can see example after example of countries that have put off reforms of this character, only to condemn their populations to unemployment levels of 10 and 11%, compared with nations that have embraced them and are enjoying not only more buoyant economic conditions but also significantly lower levels of unemployment with all the attendant social benefits that people being gainfully employed brings to any society. And the message to that particularly in parts of Europe can hardly be lost on any audience at the preset time.
   Mr Chairman can I thank all of the CEOs for their continued participation in this very important forum. The underpinning to the leaders meetings of the business community of the member states is very important. It's a valuable adjunct and one that I know is not only valuable to APEC collectively but I know very valuable on an individual basis to the individual leaders who attend this meeting. I thank you very warmly and I wish the rest of the CEO summit every success.
 Thank you.
[ends]   



   Thank you very much High Commissioner, Ministers, members of the Pakistani National Assembly, ladies and gentlemen.  It is a great pleasure to speak to you just for a few moments to underline the great importance of the many aspects of the relationship between our two countries.  And very particularly because I will in a moment be unveiling a plaque to mark the decision of Clough Engineering, a very well-known Australian company based in Perth in Western Australia, to establish an office in Karachi and also an office in Islamabad.  And what that decision does and what the relevance of that to our gathering tonight reminds us of is how critical is the commercial nature of our relationship to the future between the two countries.
Australia and Pakistan have a lot of history, a lot of culture, and a lot of something else called sport in common.  We are two countries that have a lot in common, but we don't have as much to do with each other as should be the case.  And the future lies very much in developing the economic and commercial linkages.  And I've been greatly impressed today in the discussions I've had with the President, the Prime Minister, and all of the senior Ministers in the Government of Pakistan, I've been greatly impressed with the strong commitment that the Government of your country has to economic growth and economic development.  This is not a time for nations to sit on the fence when it comes to economic liberalisation and the embrace of globalisation.  Countries that temporise and back and fill when it comes to attracting foreign investment are the countries that unfortunately will condemn their citizens to low or even lower standards of living into the future.  If you look at the history of the economies of the world, particularly in the Asian Pacific area and the north Asian area, there can be no argument that those countries that have embraced policies of attracting foreign investment, that have taken the view that being part of globalisation is really the only option available in the modern world, they are the countries whose standards of living have increased and improved.  And that is why it is critical to the future of our two countries together that we focus very heavily on encouraging trade and investment.  For our part we encourage Australian companies to invest in Pakistan.  Australians bring, as Clough Engineering demonstrates only so well, Australian companies bring great expertise in many areas.  And not least in engineering, mining and agriculture, three areas which are vital to the future growth and the future development opportunities of Pakistan.
So I am particularly pleased to be associated with a decision of a very esteemed  and successful Australian company, Clough Engineering, run I suspect in an indirect way still by a very wonderful Australian businessman, certainly founded by it, Harold Clough, who I've known for many years and who epitomises successful Australian businessmen possessed of great commitment to good commercial values and integrity, but somebody who has shown great leadership in his own area.  And I would say to our Pakistani friends who are here tonight that the association with the company will be an association that you will not regret.
I've had a splendid opportunity today in talking to the Government leadership of this country to renew the commitment of Australia to building a stronger and closer relationship with Pakistan.  We follow the fortunes of this country, placed as it is in the forefront of the war against terrorism with great interest, great sympathy, great understanding and above all great respect for the extraordinary courage that has been displayed.
We do have many bonds of the past. I was reminded of one of them tonight when a very esteemed former foreign minister of this country reminded me that he had fought with the Rats of Tobruk, the Australian 9th Division, during World War II and it's a reminder of some of those tremendously important historical links.  But you can't live on history and nostalgia, you have to build a future and the future is very, very much in partnership in economic growth, development and investment.
  So it's in that spirit that I am very happy to respond to the High Commissioner's invitation to say a few words, perhaps more than a few words but you know what happens when you get a politician in front of a microphone, it becomes an irresistible combination of two forces.  But I do congratulate Clough Engineering, I thank it for the contribution it's made to the Australian economy, I'm sure it'll make a great contribution to the economies of the various provinces of Pakistan in which it'll be active and I have great pleasure in declaring open the plaque and unveiling it and wishing the company well and thanking all of you for joining us tonight.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Prime Minister for those very generous words of welcome,  Ministers in the Government of the Republic of Pakistan, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  I can't share any thoughts about your country and my country without saying at the very beginning how touched all Australians were by the tragedy of the recent earthquake, a humanitarian disaster of enormous proportions. I will have an opportunity tomorrow of seeing some of the areas affected and visiting the Australian Defence Force medical team, which has been in one of the areas close to the epicentre of the earthquake for the past few days and it is our intention that it remain there for a period of at least three months.  And I will also have the opportunity tomorrow to announce some additional direct assistance from the Government and the people of Australia to the people of Pakistan.
I've been told by both the Prime Minister and President Musharraf how this tragic (tape break) helped bring your country together.  It is so often the case that a tragedy, a calamity, brings out the very best instincts of cooperation and goodwill across normal divides within a community. And tragedy though this has been, if one of its legacies is even more sense of national will and purpose that itself will be a very good thing.
This year has marked a change in the pace of the relationship between our two countries.  As we've reminded each other and the President and I reminded each other today at lunch we do have a lot of history and culture and language and sport in common.  But it's a relationship that we have perhaps rather than for granted on both sides.  And this year special effort has been put into the relationship, the visit of President Musharraf to Australia was a great success and he left a very positive impression on those he met and I was very keen to reciprocate that visit and to come here and I'm very pleased to have been able to do so.  And out of our discussions today there is a new commitment to the trade and commercial aspect of the relationship.  May I say that the commitment of your Government, Prime Minister, to openness, transparency and freedom in investment and economic policies is one that I applaud.  I said earlier this evening that in a globalised world there is no room for fence-sitters when it comes to whether or not you believe in openness and the free flow of capital and investment around the world.  The countries that have embraced globalisation are the countries that have succeeded.  The countries that have turned their back on globalisation or pretended that they can have a bit of globalisation and also a little bit of old fashioned central planning have been the countries that have not been so successful.  And millions of people around the world have been lifted out of poverty through investment and economic liberalisation.  And this is a message I hope was transmitted out of the recent APEC meeting to those charged with responsibility for trying to bring a successful conclusion to the Doha trade negotiations.  Removing agriculture barriers for example would do more for some of the poorest countries in the world than a doubling or a trebling of foreign aid.  Trade is better than aid.  Aid is important, aid is necessary, aid is valuable, and aid can be targeted.  I don't want to be heard to suggest that there isn't a significant role for it.  But trade is infinitely more important and the contribution it can make to the relief of poverty is very, very much greater.
Can I take this opportunity of expressing my respect and admiration for the leadership of your President and your Government and indeed the people of this country in the fight against terrorism.  You are at the very frontline, by reason of your history and also your geography you at the very frontline of the fight against terrorism.  And the stance taken in the face of very considerable personal risk and all of those things associated with personal security by your President and by the members of your Government is something that I greatly admire and greatly respect.  Let me say as a Christian that it's very important that we send a message in the name of all of the great religions of the world that terrorism is unacceptable.  Terrorism is as unacceptable to Islam as it is to Christianity and Judaism and it is very important that all of us play a role in denouncing the way in which the terrorists seek to justify their deeds in the name of a great religion.  It is something that is obscene and it is something that should be repudiated by all men and women of goodwill.
Nothing is more important, Mr Prime Minister, in the successful prosecution of the war against terrorism than the strength, the stability and the success of moderate Islamic countries such as your own.  I think of Indonesia, our nearest neighbour, I think of Pakistan, the two most populous Islamic countries in the world.  And their success, their stability, their strength will be to the detriment of terrorism and the detriment of those who seek to wrongly invoke the name of Islam to justify their evil.  It's important that those countries that have Islamic minorities treat those minorities fairly and properly.  Our own country has a very small Islamic population, 400,000 out of a population of 20 million.  They are overwhelming of course loyal, committed Australians.  They are entitled to have from their fellow Australians respect and understanding and inclusion in our way of life and they will receive it.  Likewise, of course, all of us, including Islamic leaders, have a responsibility to advocate and argue against the evils of terrorism within our communities and where it might arise amongst our people.
Can I conclude, Mr Prime Minister, by saying how much I respect the way in which the seemingly, and I'm sure in the eyes of many Pakistanis and Indians, the intractable issue of Kashmir has been handled.  I observed at the press conference this morning that I learnt in my study of constitutional law at Sydney University way back in the late 1950s about the circumstances that created the dispute over Kashmir.  I think the way in which the leaders of both the countries have endeavoured to resolve this issue in recent times, the way in which the heat has been taken out it, a very difficult issue that evokes very, very strong passions is something that redounds to the credit of all of your countries, both of your countries and all of its leadership.
And on a lighter note, you suggested earlier Prime Minister that the team might be brought here this evening.  Now that would have very, very disruptive and it may well have diverted their focus.  That suggestion may not have come from an English source, did it?  But can I say that the passion that your country has for the great game that I have a very great love for is something that is well understood in Australia.  We have not forgotten, and never will, the wonderful Pakistani teams that have come to Australia.  We don't forget your wonderful World Cup victory in Melbourne before some 90,000 people in 1992.  We don't forget the wonderful sporting rivalries between our two countries and we look forward to those rivalries continuing for years into the future.  It is indeed a wonderful common experience and one that we are very happy to be reminded on.
I thank you most warmly on behalf of my party.
[ends]  


Well ladies and gentlemen, I would like to declare this meeting of the IDU executive open.  I welcome everybody to Malta.  I express, on your behalf, our gratitude to our friends in the Nationalist Party of Malta for hosting us on this occasion.  There are many reasons why we should see significance in a meeting in Malta.  Malta may be a small country population wise but it's a country that has a long democratic tradition and it's a country which certainly within the Commonwealth family has been noted for very vigorous parliamentary elections and very close electoral contests and we can learn a lot from the Maltese experience.
I would particularly like to welcome the Secretary General of the International Section of the Maltese Nationalist Party who will say a few words of welcome to us in a moment.  I would like to also welcome to his first executive meeting Eirik Moen of Norway, the incoming executive director of the International Democrat Union, and to welcome Jan Petersen, a deputy chairman of the organisation, a former very distinguished foreign minister of Norway and somebody who's made a very significant contribution to discussion of particularly foreign policy issues within the centre-right party grouping.
I think it is appropriate at the beginning of this meeting that we resolve, I'm sure without dissent, to send a message of congratulations to Angela Merkel, the new Chancellor of Germany. We wish her well, we have followed the contest in German politics with absorption and interest over the past few weeks.  It's a challenging task but she has got off to a very active beginning and we do wish her well and we look forward to naturally the implementation of policies which broadly reflect the values and the philosophies and the principles that bind this particular organisation together.
We'll try to move rapidly through the agenda, as is my want at these meetings because often the greatest value of these gatherings are the bilateral exchanges that we can have after the formal part of the meeting has been completed.  But can I say again to our Maltese hosts thank you for your gracious hospitality.  I saw your Prime Minister this morning and we were talking about longevity of the Nationalist Party in Malta and he reminded me that but for I think a 22 month break between late 1996 and early 1998 it's been a period of something like 20 to 25 yeas and of course as an Australian Prime Minister I'm particularly touched to be in Malta again because on a proportionate basis Australia, a proportionate basis, Australia by far has the largest Maltese diaspora anywhere in the world.  It's calculated that after World War II something close to 30 per cent of the population of Malta over a period of years emigrated to Australia and it's very difficult, my High Commissioner tells me, to travel around this beautiful country without coming across somebody who's got a relative, a cousin, a girlfriend, a boyfriend or whatever in Australia and that's something that we very greatly value because the Maltese have made a wonderful contribution to our country and we're very grateful for that contribution.
[ends]


Well thank you very much High Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I might say, without much fear of contradiction, many of my fellow Australians.  As I listened to the beautiful rendition of Australia's national anthem and the phrase 'for those who've come across the seas' I thought to myself no group in proportionate terms has given expression to that part of our national anthem more than the people of Malta.  And it is well known, I'm sure to every person in this room, that in proportionate terms the Maltese diaspora is greater in Australia than in any part of the world.  And for that we Australians are very, very grateful.  And I am delighted to be in your beautiful country, it is not the first time I've been here, it is the first time I've been here as Prime Minister.  But it is a while since I've been in Malta, too long.  Janette and I remember the beauty of this island, the special character of its architecture and the friendliness and charm of its people from the time we were last here, once again for a Commonwealth meeting, that being a Commonwealth Finance Ministers meeting when I was Treasurer of Australia way back in 1979.
Australia and Malta have had a deep and close friendship for 100 years.  It was greatly intensified of course after World War II but Maltese migration to Australia started long before World War II and the courage and commitment and comradeship of the people of Malta left an indelible impression during World War II and the years afterwards, not only on the peoples of the then free Europe, which was very small indeed, but also on many people around the world.  And we come gathering in Malta, the Commonwealth, a very large organisation, an organisation that represents a large chunk of the world's population, nations very, very different in size, in political outlook, in religion, in racial composition, in attitudes to current issues, but bound together by a number of things and the most important of which is a very strong historical commitment to parliamentary democracy and the rule of law.  And the way in which Australia and Malta have stood together in defence of those principles, in different ways over the years, is to the everlasting credit of the citizens of both countries.
Of course it was a great experience this morning on my early morning walk, which is my want in the capital city of any country I visit, as I walked through the streets of Malta I looked at the signs and all those Australian names came rolling to me, you know, Galea and Attard and so the list went on.  And I felt so much at home and the friendly waves of many people when they spotted the green tracksuit top with an Australian sporting insignia on it, rugby league on this occasion, not a widely played sport in Malta I have to acknowledge, but as you know we have qualified for the Soccer World Cup and- now there's a widely known game in Malta.  And it is the sporting lingua franca of the world, soccer, and at long last we have qualified for the World Cup and it's of enormous credit to us and to those who run that game.
But ladies and gentlemen, I simply want to express to all of you the deep affection that Australians have for the people of this wonderful country.  We are very grateful for all the people that you have sent to our nation, some calculations put it some 400,000, other calculations a bit lower, others a bit higher, but who cares?  There's a lot of you.  And you are wonderful Australian citizens in every walk of life, in politics, in business, in sport, very famously in many sports, wherever it is you can find Australians of Maltese descent being wonderful citizens, wonderful people and making a wonderful contribution. And the warmth of the friendship between our two countries is evident, the relaxed nature of the welcome I've received, the friendship, every second, not every second person just about every person telling me of their cousin or their brother or their niece or their uncle or their girlfriend or whatever who maybe somewhere in Sydney and in some cases two or three in different parts of the country, it's a reminder of a very special link because it's a link of people.  You can have trade links, you can have political links, you can have strategic links but nothing beats having the personal links of people-to-people relations and we have it in spades and we Australians are very fortunate and we thank you for the Maltese contribution to the modern Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Michael, the Prime Minister of Malta, President Obasanjo, Tony Blair, the Prime Minister of Great Britain, others ministers, ladies and gentlemen.  Can I start, like Mr Blair and the Prime Minister of Malta, in recording my sadness at George Best's death.  He was a remarkable sportsman.  To see some of the footage last night on Sky News, his magical ball control and although my first football love is rugby I have followed and played soccer at various stages of my life and to see somebody with that sort of ball control was just absolute magic.  And on another personal note can I also pay tribute to that great West Indian cricketer Brian Lara who overnight in Adelaide passed Alan Border's record as the greatest run-getter in test cricket history.  And I pay unstinting tribute with certain heaviness of Australian heart, but nonetheless very generously to that great West Indian.  Of course that's the total number of runs scored in test matches, they play a lot more now.  If you actually look at averages you know that one person is still a mile in front of everybody.  So, you know, we keep the sense of perspective about all of this.
  But I'm here today to, above everything else, extol to you the virtues of what I, as somebody who's grown up in Sydney, very happily describe as the sporting capital of Australia, and that is the city of Melbourne.  The people of Melbourne are the most loyal sports spectators anywhere in the world.  The Melbourne Cricket Ground is a wonderful arena, the seats are regularly filled to capacity in following Australian rules and Boxing Day tests.  And wonderfully in 1956 the Olympic Games and in 2006 the Commonwealth Games.  And it will be the fourth occasion, Sydney in 1938, Perth in 1962, Brisbane in 1988 and Melbourne in 2006, that Australia will have the privilege of hosting the Commonwealth Games.  And I do pay tribute to Ron Walker.  Ron's a remarkably energetic, he's indefatigable in his persistence and his energy and his enthusiasm for the cause.  And I am very, very pleased to acknowledge the presence of two Australian athletes, Tatiana Grigorieva and Michael Rogers, both of whom we look forward to gracing the victory dais with great style and great skill at the Games in March.
I invite all of you to come and passionately support it.  Can I congratulate Tony Blair on London's victory in the Olympic Games of 2012?  And it was a victory that I was delighted to see the city of London win and I think the city of London will do it in very great style.  I remember congratulating him when I was in England just after the Games had been won by London and I said it very publicly and very fulsomely and I said that I hoped that was the last time that year I'd be congratulating Mr Blair on any sporting event, but sadly a few weeks later I had to congratulate him on a victory in the Ashes. But that being the nature of the come and go of sport, I want to endorse everything that President Obasanjo and Tony Blair and the Prime Minister of Malta have said about the way in which sport does bring out the best in people. It sometimes, occasionally  brings out the worst in the odd spectator but overwhelmingly it does bring out great things and I'm not surprised to hear the reaction, the positive social reaction already in parts of London to the news that the games have been won.  And it is teaching us to worry more about physical fitness, about obesity, about maintaining a fit and healthy lifestyle all through your life.
  And in that context I'd like to announce that the Australian Government will be investing in a new $10 million sports outreach programme aimed predominately at Commonwealth countries.  And this programme will focus on increasing physical activity participation at junior levels and providing advice on basic coaching education and club administrative procedures.  The programme is also designed to offer an effective vehicle for addressing broader community issues such as HIV/AIDS awareness, non-communicable diseases such as diabetes, youth leadership and personal development. The programme will run from July 2006 to July 2011 and will supersede discrete Australian Government sports development programmes in the Pacific, Africa and Caribbean which are due to cease under present arrangements in June of next year.  Of the new $10 million allocation, each year $1 million will be earmarked for the Pacific and $1 million for Commonwealth countries in other regions.
  We are a sports loving nation, we're very proud to host the Commonwealth Games, we've been very proud to welcome the world to the Olympic Games in Melbourne and Sydney, in '56 and 2000, the hugely successful Rugby World Cup in 2003.  And can I say on behalf of all Australians that Melbourne will greet you with warmth, with enthusiasm, the Games will be a huge success and it will be a wonderful endorsement of the way in which sport binds the Commonwealth as well as the nations of the world together.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Peter, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentleman. As you know this is not the first occasion that I have addressed this annual gathering of ACCI. I would like to thank the association for its constructive interface with the Government over the last year, for the spread of its representation of business throughout Australia and its very keen commitment to the cause of economic reform and economic change to the benefit of all Australians. Although this country faces a number of economic challenges, not least of course the impact on the Australian consumer of high fuel prices, it is fair to say that we continue to enjoy very strong economic conditions.
We've had 15 years of continuous economic growth and the growth in GDP per head over that period of time shows us that we've done better than the United States and the OECD particularly over the past decade. We've seen 1.7 million new jobs generated in the last 10 years. The labour force participation rate is the most buoyant since those statistics were collected. The unemployment rate is down to near a 30-year low and the disposable incomes of Australian households have on average increased by 21 per cent over the last 10 years. And it's important to note in relation to household incomes that significantly the greater increases have been in the low and middle income areas of the Australian community. And although it is true that the, to use the colloquialism, the rich have got richer, it is not true to say that at the same time the poor have got poorer. In fact, though the deliberate social welfare policies of this Government, the Family Tax Benefits system, the maintenance of the social welfare infrastructure of Australia has meant that the lower income sections of the Australian community have proportionately gained more in a number of areas and according to a number of measures.
 Now our preoccupation, of course, over the past few weeks has been on the cause, has been in the cause of workplace relations reform. And I want tonight to put those reforms into a proper context. The debate runs the danger of descending into an argument about detail and minutiae rather than a debate about the overall impact of changes of this kind.
 We are strongly committed to these reforms because we believe that they will maintain the momentum of greater productivity in the Australian economy. Productivity is the holy grail of economic performance. It's productivity improvements which can deliver together the twin outcomes of real wage gains and low unemployment. It's very easy to have real wage gains for a large section of the Australian community if you are willing to pay the price of higher unemployment. It's much harder to have real wage gains for the community and at the same time maintain low levels of unemployment. And one of the things that this country has been able to do over the last decade has been to achieve the twin outcomes of high real wage achievements and also very low levels of unemployment. But to a very large extent what we have achieved in recent years has been the fruit of earlier economic reform. And a number of you in the past have probably been... used, or heard me use the metaphor of somebody participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line to describe the character of economic reform. You never quite get there and never ever get there but if you don't keep running towards that ever receding finishing line all the other participants in the race are going to go past you.
 When I was Pakistan recently I was provided with another useful metaphor by the Prime Minister of Pakistan to describe the challenge of economic reform. And he simply made the very pithy comment that if you stop walking on a treadmill you fall over. It was a reasonable description of what happens to a country if it stops the process of economic reform. We believe that these workplace relations reforms will deliver higher productivity. They will maintain the momentum of economic change and economic reform. They are reforms to which your association has constructively contributed. They're reforms that have been badly misrepresented but it is in the nature of major economic reform that in the initial stages of those reforms, it being easier to make the negative case rather than the positive case, a certain level of community unease and community disquiet is a consequence.
 I believe that when these reforms are implemented and I'm very pleased to inform this gathering that a short while ago at a meeting of the joint government parties, approval was given to a number of amendments that will be introduced in the committee stages of the legislation in the Senate. They are amendments, which in part have been canvassed in the media in some respects, but I can inform you that they do not in anyway alter the fundamentals of the legislation. And those fundamentals of the legislation which are the creation of a single national workplace relations system, the changes in relation to the unfair dismissal laws, the changes that will place a greater emphasis on bargaining at the workplace through the simplification of the process of making workplace agreements, and the establishment of the Fair Pay Commission, that none of those fundamentals of the bill have in any way been altered by the amendments that will be proposed by the Government.
They, in the language that I've used on a number of occasions, they will better express the goals of the Government in a number of areas and remove ambiguities that inevitably occur in the preparation of a bill of this magnitude and this size. And when as I hope the legislation is passed by the Parliament before we rise next week for the Christmas recess, we will then see its implementation over a period of months and I confidently predict that in a years time people will look back on many of the misrepresentations of recent weeks and recent months, realising that the sky has not fallen in and the world has not come to an end and not every employer in Australia is a cruel, avaricious person, they'll look back and realise that so much of the misrepresentation of the legislation has been what it is in reality a quite outrageous distortion of what the Government is attempting to do.
 But in saying that, I don't make any apology for the fact, and I see it as a virtue, that this legislation does bring about significant change. The change, whilst big, is fair. The changes are designed to maintain the economic growth and economic reform momentum of the last 15 to 20 years in Australia. The reform process is never finished. When countries imagine that the reform process has been completed, when governments do, then that is the time for electorates to well and truly question whether those governments continue to enjoy the support that they'd previously had.
 We don't really have an alternative as a nation in an age of globalisation. We either succeed or we fall behind. We don't have the luxury of marking time. We must choose either to go forward or to go back. And one of the more ludicrous propositions that has been put around about the workplace relations reforms is that they are designed in some way to reduce the wages of Australians to the wage levels of people in China and other parts of Asia.
And I thought the ACCI's own paper released earlier this week entitled 'The Economic Case for Workplace Relations Reform', put it very well when it had this to say about that absurd proposition, and I quote, "The assertion that Australia is trying to compete with Asia particularly China by lowering wages is ridiculous. We cannot and should not try and compete with Asia on wages, instead we can and should compete by having higher productivity," end of quote. And that precisely is what this legislation is all about.
It is not about creating a low wage Australia, what Prime Minister in his right mind would want to do that? What government in its right mind after overseeing in nine- and-a-half years, a 15 per cent real increase in the wages of Australians, what Prime Minister or government in right mind would want to create a low-wage Australia, but what we do want to create is an Australia built in the years ahead on higher productivity because given the character of the economy in which we live, the world in which we live, that is the only path forward. And people ask for evidence of whether our workplace relations reforms will deliver the outcomes claimed of them, I think the best evidence is to look around the world at the relative performance of those countries that have allowed their labour markets to ossify, look at France, look at Germany, look at Spain, compare their unemployment levels and the economic challenges those countries face with the employment rather, levels, of countries such as the United Kingdom, the United States, New Zealand and indeed Australia.
 Last week in Malta at the CHOGM meeting I saw amongst other Prime Ministers, the current Labor Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and he of course is a very instructive person on this whole issue, he inherited the workplace relations reforms of the Thatcher period and he resolved when he became Prime Minister not to change those reforms because he knew they were essential to Britain's long-term economic position. And those of us, and there are many in Australia who retain a considerable affection for that country will recall the dismal decline of the British economy in the 1970s, will remember the winter of discontent in the late 1970s when labour relations reached an absolute nadir in the United Kingdom and the reforms carried out by the Thatcher Government brought about an enormous change in that country and to his credit, Mr Blair when he became Prime Minister, said that he was going to keep the changes. He made a famous speech to the Trade Union Congress when he said, and I've often quoted this in Parliament and forgive, I say to those who've heard it before, forgive me for the repetition but it is a very good quote and that is why I repeat it. He said, 'fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job', and I think it's a very telling comment to those who seek to criticise aspects of our legislation and who believe that salvation is to be found in a more regulated labour market. I believe that these changes will give us a new burst of productivity, they will lead to still lower unemployment, and they are changes that so far from denting the high living standards of Australians, will lead to further rises in those living standards over the years ahead.
Can I conclude an address to an organisation that believes [inaudible] in the principles of competitive and democratic capitalism, but I don't think we as people who believe in democratic competitive capitalism, should ever apologise for that belief that we should never be cowered by those who want to vilify the capitalist and entrepreneurial spirit and seek to tarnish the importance of risk-taking for profit in our society with talk of exploitation. I am reminded of that very great American book, The Spirit of Democratic Capitalism by an American theologian Michael Novak where I think he laid out with brilliant clarity, the moral case for democratic capitalism over any alternative that mankind has ever devised. He pointed out in his book that the great moral virtue of democratic capitalism is that it alone is the system geared to outcomes and results. It is one of the great twists of humanity's progress that the capitalist system, which has made the least claims about individual motives of virtue, has delivered over centuries, the greatest results for human welfare. And it's done that by unleashing the creative energies of people through the spirit of liberty, development, self improvement, risk, experiment and adventure and it's that spirit which we believe brings about the greatest benefits for society and those that are deliberately setting out in the debate on workplace relations to smear and to taint the spirit of risk-taking in business that leads directly to jobs and wealth creation need to be challenged and challenged head on and held to account for their erroneous views.
 Ladies and gentleman can I conclude my remarks tonight in thanking the organisation for its tremendous contribution to economic debate over many years, can I take the opportunity of extending my very warm personal thanks to Kevin Andrews, my Minister for Workplace Relations who has laboured with great skill and great diligence, in relation to some very, very complex legislation. I do not run a one-man band as a government and one of the great advantages I have as Prime Minister is that I am supported by a large number of extremely able Ministers and in respect of workplace relations, I am profoundly indebted to Kevin's commitment and Kevin's dedication and stewardship of this legislation. It's not been easy and we still have to see it finally pass through the Upper House but I am hopeful, being a cautious bloke, I don't put it any more strongly than that. But I remain hopeful, I remain positive, and if we do ultimately achieve that outcome so much of the credit will be due to Kevin, but ladies and gentleman, thank you very much for having me along. I wish the ACCI well over the next 12 months, there's much reform ahead, once the workplace relations legislation has been passed and bedded down, there are further reforms and no doubt ACCI will forcefully remind me in detail at what those are in the months ahead.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much John Gallop, Shivnarine Chanderpaul, the Captain of the West Indies Team, Justin Langer, the Captain of the Prime Minister's XI, ladies and gentlemen. I would like to simply say on behalf of everybody how delighted I am to be once again associated with this wonderful sporting event in Canberra. And can I compliment the ACT Cricket Association for all that it has done in collaboration with Cricket Australia to make this once again a terrific sporting event. And can I also indicate in the spirit of ACT Cricket Association's contribution to the game, a wonderful gesture on behalf of the Association.
 You may have noticed that I visited Pakistan recently and tried to play cricket with some young Pakistanis on a makeshift pitch high in Kashmir, right at the site where some 160 men and women of the Australian Defence Force are doing terrific things in the name of this country to help the people who've suffered so much from that tragic earthquake. The cricket equipment of the local team was a little underpowered and the Cricket Association has put together a lovely package of two or three bats, a box of balls and I've been assured by the Secretary of my Department that he's spoken to the Chief of the Australian Defence Force Air Chief Marshall Angus Houston and those balls and bats will be on their way shortly. And the next time one of the Black Hawks goes up from Islamabad to Dhanni they'll hand over this new equipment.  So that the next time a visiting Prime Minister goes there, he might perform a little better.
The other thing I want to do is to thank both of the Captains for being here, to say to Shivnarine, it's always a delight to have our friends from the West Indies in Australia. They have played a brand of cricket over the years. My first recollection was of the 1951 tour. My most vivid recollection of West Indies tours of course was of the magnificent series in 1960-61. But every year that you've come, you've been wonderful competitors and you're always incredibly welcome. And the friendship of the Australian cricket fraternity to the people and the players of the West Indies is quite unconditional and very genuine. Thank you very much for your sportsmanship and contribution.
And Justin, I want to thank you very much for the wonderful score that your team has achieved. It's an impressive total and can I say to you thank you very much for agreeing to Captain the Prime Minister's XI on this occasion. Let me pay tribute to the incredible skill and professionalism you have brought to your cricket. And can I also remark on the character you bring to your participation in the game.  We often talk rather loosely about role models amongst sportsmen and women. You are a wonderful example of a fine role model to younger players. You're not only a wonderful player, but you're a wonderful person and your character and your behaviour is an example to the young and an example to the not so young. Thank you very much for the contribution you make to Australian cricket.
And I conclude by also thanking the sponsors, particularly Ron Brierley and all the other people who, over the years, have kicked in and made this an ever improving and ever more enthusiastically supported event. And I would like to add a word of encouragement to any consideration that Cricket Australia might give to a major cricketing event, a really major cricketing event in Canberra to mark the centenary of the capital of Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]


Your Excellency Recep Erdo#287;an, Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey, and Madam Erdo#287;an, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia to host this lunch in honour of the first ever visit to Australia by a Prime Minister of Turkey. The bonds between Australia and Turkey have a special and very personal character. They are based very much on that traumatic event in 1915 and out of which grew, over the years, a great bond of affection and respect which is honoured with increasing passion and emotion by the young of both of our countries. And anyone who has experienced the annual pilgrimage that so many Australians undertake to the Gallipoli Peninsular and receive the warmth and generous hospitality of the people of Turkey will understand the unique character of the relationship between our two countries.
 Our two nations have also been drawn together on a personal basis by the fact that somewhere between one hundred and 150,000 Australians have a Turkish heritage. And I understand Your Excellency had the opportunity yesterday of visiting many Australians of Turkish descent in Melbourne. But of course our relationship is very much about the current world and the future world and it's a world in which Turkey occupies a very special place by reason of geography and culture and a capacity to make a unique contribution to the ever expanding embrace of the European Union.
 Turkey as we all know, is uniquely placed between Asia and Europe. It is currently applying to be a member of the European Union and Australia wishes Turkey well in her application to join the European Union.
I also take this opportunity to mark with great respect the strong stand that the people of Turkey have taken against terrorism. Terrorism has touched Turkey as it has so many other nations. Turkey is a steadfast opponent of terrorism. Turkey has contributed generously and significantly to the Coalition efforts in Afghanistan and in other areas is an ally of Australia in the fight against terrorism. Some 450 Turkish soldiers are currently in Afghanistan and at one stage, they numbered some 3000.
 The links between Australia and Turkey are based therefore not only on those emotional ties of history of such a special character. But we do, as two modern progressive nations believing in the democratic ideals which is so important to the modern world, we do stand and work together in the fight against terrorism. And in our discussions this morning, the Prime Minister and I agreed how important it was to expand the horizons of understanding between not only the great religions of the world such as Islam and Christianity and Judaism, but also to broaden it from a dialogue into what he has described so eloquently as an alliance of civilisations. To understand that the future of the world, the future security of the world, and the future success in our joint fight against terrorism will be based very much upon a greater understanding of what not only the religions of the world, but the civilisations of the world have in common.
This morning we signed a witnessed Memoranda of Understanding in areas of holiday maker visas and agriculture. And I was very pleased to announce the first Turkish recipients under Australia's Endeavour Scholarship Programme. It is important to understand the primacy of person to person, people to people links between nations. And we must give a modern expression to our long standing personal relationship by increasing the opportunities for the young of the two countries to visit and study respectively in the other country. Trade and economic links need to be emphasised and expanded. I think we both agreed that at present levels they can only be described as modest. That too is changing, and the success that companies such as Austral Ships have recently had in selling ferries and other craft to Turkey is but one example. And others of course are to be found in the resources sector.
Mr Prime Minister I appreciate very, very much your gesture in returning the visit that I paid to your country in April of this year. It was mentioned to you this morning that one of the most famous eating places here in Canberra, and one that arguably is the repository of more political secrets than perhaps any building outside this building in Canberra, is of course the famous Ottoman Restaurant. And it brings a touch of not only Turkish cuisine, but also Turkish hospitality to so many people who visit it and take advantage of it.
Mr Prime Minister we welcome you and your wife very warmly to Australia. We thank you for the democratic leadership that you have brought to your country. We thank you for the contribution that you have made, often in very difficult circumstances of some intimidation, even persecution in reaching high political office. You are no stranger to adversity in political life in a way that few Australian politicians might understand and none have experienced in the political life of Australia.
 We have much in common. We come from different cultural backgrounds, but the common fight against terrorism, our common investment in democratic values have brought us together. I welcome you and your wife and your Ministers most warmly, and I invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Kim Beazley to support my remarks.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Secretary, to my Ministerial colleagues, Robert Hill and Deanne Kelly, Chief Marshal Houston the Chief of the Army, Navy and Airforce, the Deputy Defence Force Chief, ladies and gentlemen. We launch this defence update at the end of 2005. And it's appropriate to look back on this year and to remind ourselves by reference to the various things that the Australian Defence Force has done over 2005, of the extraordinarily expanded role that it has assumed within the broad national security response of this country.
 I personally had the opportunity of visiting our forces in many of the areas where they have been deployed. It's been a year of very intense activity, and a very successful intervention along with our Pacific partners in the Solomon Islands has been consolidated, and the fruits of that intervention are now being seen in the improved governance in that very small country.
 The highly trained and skilled forces that are deployed in both Iraq and Afghanistan do us enormous credit and of course on a humanitarian level, the troops and medical personnel in particular, who went to Aceh in the wake of the tsunami, and most recently those who went to Kashmir to assist in the wake of the appalling earthquake. Both of those deployments have brought enormous credit to our defence force. And of course it's been a year that's been tinged with a great deal of sorrow, the loss of nine defence force personnel with the Sea King disaster, and the loss of Warrant Officer Nary in a tragic accident in the Middle East is a reminder of the daily assumption of risk on our behalf that the men and women of the defence forces of Australia, take.
 And I want in commencing my remarks and in introducing the Minister, I want to on behalf of the Australian people to record our continuing gratitude and esteem to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force for the remarkable job they do, the risks they take, the commitment they make which is above and beyond the commitment of any other section of the Australian community.
This defence update - the detail of which I will leave to my ministerial colleague, does not represent a major department, departure rather from the White Paper. But it does more sharply recognise in the circumstances of 2005, the need to provide additional fire power, additional capacity to the army.
 It does recognise the need for a country such as Australia to examine the lift options that are available to it - given the distance that we are from so many potential areas of activity. It does recognise the special responsibilities that we have in the Pacific area. It also recognises that as well as having a partnership role within our own region, we do have, by dint of the values we share in common with many nations around the world, we do have responsibilities on occasions beyond our own immediate region.
 And all of the decisions that we have taken are designed to reinforce the capacity, on this occasion, particularly of the Army - but that is said without prejudice to obligations to strengthen the capacity of the other two branches of the ADF in the future - particularly to reinforce the capacity of the Army to do the things that it has been called upon to do in the past, and is likely to be called upon to do in extended forms, and varied forms in the future.
This will not come without additional cost. It's perhaps rather both, how shall I put it, coincidental as well as symbolic that I'm making this announcement - the Minister and I are making this announcement - the same day that the Treasurer releases the mid-year financial and economic overview which gives the state of the nation's books. I have to say on behalf of the Government that we will need to commit ever-increasing amounts to the defence in the years ahead. Defence does not come cheaply, it should not come cheaply. We cannot send men and women into danger without giving them the best available equipment and giving them the best possible opportunities to defend themselves when danger confronts them. And that remains a very strong commitment and belief of the Government.
 I do want these announcements to be seen as consistent with what was laid out in the White Paper, but a recognition in the circumstances of 2005, those principles need to be given some sharper precision and sharper definition. There is an emphasis as I said on strengthening and hardening the Army. It's an emphasis that we believe is consonant with our interests as a country and very much directed towards serving the goals, not only of defence of Australia but also recognising our particular responsibilities within our region, our special responsibilities within the Pacific Region, and also the need to have a capacity as circumstance dictates to play a role in coalition operations as we have in Iraq and Afghanistan and may be required in some other circumstances in the future to do so.
I want in introducing the Minister to thank him and the Secretary of the Department, and also the Service Chiefs and the CDF for the intense work that has led to the preparation of this document. It did of course go before a number of meetings of the National Security Committee of Cabinet. A committee of Cabinet that has been especially active over the last six or seven years and a committee of Cabinet which brings together all of the senior Ministers in the Government and the Heads of the relevant agencies, as well as the CDF and perhaps as never before in the governance structure of this country, enables us to focus the minds and the concentration of all of the people in relevant authority in a whole of government fashion, which I think in a range of issues has produced very, very good outcomes and outcomes that reflect the input of different sections of the Government and have as far as it is possible avoided the interagency interaction - let me put it gently - that has sometimes bedevilled decision making in some of these areas in the past.
 So I have very great pleasure in introducing Senator Hill, and I want to thank you Robert for your own personal commitment to this and the great skill and diligence that you've brought to the preparation of this document. Senator Hill.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Foreign Minister. Ministers, ladies and gentlemen, can I join my colleague Alexander Downer and also my colleagues Ian MacFarlane and Senator Ian Campbell in welcoming all of you to this inaugural meeting of the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate.
 It is a very exciting meeting. It's a very important meeting but its greatest virtue is that it's a practical meeting. And the purpose of this meeting is to ensure that we address issues of climate change in a way that is consistent with economic growth and poverty reduction. It's the very strong view of the Australian Government that we view those three objectives as ones that should be achieved in harmony and in partnership, and they should not be goals that are in a state of perpetual antagonism as we try and establish and embrace policies that are for the benefit of our societies and for the world in general.
I'm sure that all of you are very conscious of the reality that represented around the table at this meeting are nations that, near as done, given a point or two, represent half of the world's energy consumption, half of the world's global greenhouse gas emissions, almost half of the world's population and almost exactly half of the world's gross domestic product. Just six countries, different countries in many respects, but countries united by a common commitment to achieve a practical realisation of not only successfully addressing the challenge of climate change, but also ensuring that we maintain the momentum of economic growth because it is only through economic growth and the continued benefits of globalisation that we can achieve poverty reduction.  The idea that poverty reduction can be achieved in isolation from economic growth is unrealistic. The idea that economic growth can continue to be maintained at an acceptable level without addressing issues of climate change in a practical fashion is also unrealistic and equally the idea that we can address climate change matters successfully at the expense of economic growth, is not only unrealistic but it also unacceptable to the population of Australia which I represent, but I'm sure unacceptable to the populations of all the other countries that are represented around this table.
The Partnership recognises that there is no quick fix to the challenges of global climate change; that long term commitments and significant investments are needed to tackle the sustainable generation and use of energy. And that the acceleration of technology-especially low emissions technology, collaboration between governments, business and researchers to innovate and implement practical, achievable, economically sustainable solutions to climate change is the way forward.
 I am, as the Foreign Minister also indicated, very pleased to welcome today the presence of the President of the Asian Development Bank, Mr Kuroda, because the involvement of international institutions is an important part of the process of addressing climate change matters.
 The countries represented around this table have already invested many billions of dollars to addressing climate change matters. The Australian Government has been no exception. We have devoted $1.8 billion Australian dollars to addressing climate change in a manner that strongly reflects the common vision of this Partnership. For example, $500 million has already been allocated to demonstrating low-emission technologies with the private sector contributing an additional $1 billion, over $200 million towards a renewable energy development initiative, developing of solar city trials and addressing market impediments to the uptake of renewable energy technologies.
 Today I wish to announce that Australia will build further on this strong commitment and invest an additional $100 million over five years to support clean development projects, capacity building activities and our ongoing role in the Partnership. And in recognition of the significant commitment to the development of renewable energy resources announced in our 2004 energy statement, 25 per cent of this additional $100 million will be specifically earmarked for renewable projects. Of course renewable projects will be able to compete on an equal footing for a share of the remaining $75 million of the additional contribution that Australia will make.
The Partnership that we are participating in today has the overwhelming support and co-operation of governments and I am very pleased, and this is integral to the success of what we are committed to, to have such a strong business delegation without an active partnership with the business community we are not going to achieve our goals without recognising that governments and business have a joint investment in the successful future resolution of climate change issues we will achieve our goals. The Asia-Pacific Partnership member countries, their industries and their research communities share common visions for new technology development and deployment across traditional and renewable energy sectors and technologies in the areas of clean coal, liquified natural gas, solar, wind and other renewable sources are examples of this.
The Partnership will work together to identify and address barriers to the deployment of technologies that will enhance our potential to achieve our key Partnership objectives. Experience has taught us that setting arbitrary targets does not result in achievable, practical solutions to global climate change and in this connection it's interesting to note that the British Prime Minister and his G8 colleagues recognise that cuts in greenhouse gas emissions can only be achieved through technological co-operation and the involvement of large and fast growing economies, especially the United States, China and India. I could not have expressed it better myself. And that serves to underline from countries, I suppose, very heavily identified with the Kyoto process of which the Partnership is not a competitor, but more and augmenter; an additional activity to, that they recognise the great importance of the large, and in the case of China, India and the United States, fast growing economies, not only of the world but of our region.
 I can indicate to you today ladies and gentlemen that the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics will later today release a report showing that with concerted and comprehensive effort the adoption and diffusion of cleaner technologies does have the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in partner countries by almost 20 per cent below what would otherwise be the case by the year 2050. The spillover to the rest of the world could lead to a global cumulative reduction in emissions of some 13 per cent below what would otherwise occur over the same period. If this were to be borne out, such a result would be significant given that global energy consumption is expected to grow from nine billion tonnes of oil equivalent in 2001 to about 21 billion tonnes of oil equivalent in 2050. On this basis the adoption of new technologies are therefore a credible and essential part of any suite of measures needed to address global emissions growth.
 In concluding my remarks and welcoming all of you to Australia, to Sydney, to the inaugural meeting of this Partnership, I do trust and I know that it will be the decision of this meeting to schedule another gathering at an appropriate time in an appropriate place in the year 2007. I return to the theme of my opening remarks, the responsibility we have is to recognise the enduring compatibility of addressing climate change issues, poverty reduction and economic growth in tandem. We should not make the mistake as many have made of imagining that a choice has to be made between economic growth and greenhouse gas emission reduction. That is a choice that our societies will not make. Our societies require of us that we find solutions to these issues that maintain the momentum of economic growth.
 We have seen in many of the countries represented around this table, tens of millions of people lifted from poverty in the lifetime of all of us as a result of economic growth. And the astonishing success of poverty reduction policies based on economic growth in member countries of the Partnership will be apparent to all of you.  So our populations, our electorates require of us to see the enduring compatibility of these three goals, not to see them as rivals and inevitably the focus that this Partnership will have on clean technology, on technology as a significant contributor to the solution to the climate change challenges that will become more apparent as the years go by. We have a responsibility to current and future generations to maintain that compatibility and I regard the Partnership as playing a fundamentally important role in realising that goal and I am personally delighted to host here in Sydney the representatives of our friends and partners in the Asia-Pacific region. This is very much a landmark meeting and a meeting that as time goes by will be seen as having embraced, on behalf of the participating countries, the realistic achievement of the goals that I have outlined. I thank you and I wish your Ministerial deliberations well and I look forward to seeing a number of you later on during today.
 Thank you very much.
 [ends]  


A sense of balance: The Australian Achievement in 2006
  Thank you very much Mr Randall. Tomorrow, with a simple yet eloquent pledge, about 14,000 people from more than 70 countries of origin will become Australian citizens.  This Australia Day celebration of citizenship embodies a profound truth and a simple irony.
  The truth is that people come to this country because they want to be Australians.  The irony is that no institution or code lays down a test of Australianness. Such is the nature of our free society.
  It would however be a crushing mistake to downplay the hopes and the expectations of our national family. We expect all who come here to make an overriding commitment to Australia, its laws and its democratic values. We expect them to master the common language of English and we will help them to do so.
  We want them to learn about our history and heritage.  And we expect each unique individual who joins our national journey to enrich it with their loyalty and their patriotism.
Australia is a magnet for people from all corners of the globe not because of what it might become, but because of what it has become.  It harvests the hopes and dreams of mankind because of the quality of life it offers the ordinary citizen - lives of opportunity and belonging; of growth and of balance.
This achievement is higher, rarer and more precious than we commonly suppose.   Not so long ago, the Economist Intelligence Unit released a ranking of life in major cities around the world.  It found that of the 12 most liveable cities on earth, five of them are here in Australia.
Of the top dozen, almost half in one country, this country with only a third of one per cent of the world's population. This remarkable achievement went largely unnoticed in our public debate.  Yet it evokes what, to my mind, is the secret of Australia's greatness - our sense of balance.
  Today I want to locate this nation's sense of balance at the centre of the modern Australian achievement and to explore its character.  The balance in our economic life between the public and the private, the balance in our national identity between unity and diversity, the balance between history and geography in our global strategy, and the balance in our politics between rights and democratic responsibility.
 Balance is as crucial to a well-ordered society as it is to a full human life. It should not be mistaken for taking the middle road or splitting the difference.  Nor does it imply a state that is static or a nation at rest.
  Quite the opposite.  A sense of balance is the handmaiden of national growth and renewal.  It helps us to respond creatively to an uncertain world with a sense of proportion.
  Keeping our balance means we reform and evolve so as to remain a prosperous, secure and united nation.  It also means we retain those cherished values, beliefs and customs that have served us so well in the past.
The great struggle of Australia's first century of nationhood was to reconcile a market economy with a fair and decent society.  At the start of the 21st century, we have found a healthier balance in our political economy between public and private - one in keeping with the times and the contemporary character of the Australian people.
  We encourage individual achievement and self-reliance without sacrificing the common good.  We value our independence and chafe against bureaucracies that deny us choice and the capacity to shape our daily lives.  Yet we are determined not to let go of the Australian ethos of a fair go for all.
The permanent challenge for Australia is to avoid the extremes of big, overbearing government on the one hand and laissez-faire indifference on the other.
There is much in American society which I admire, but I have long held the view that the absence of an effective safety net in that country means that too many needy citizens fall by the wayside.  That is not the path that Australia will tread. Nor do we want the burdens of nanny state paternalism that now weigh down many economies in Europe.
After more than two decades of reform, our economic performance is better than in the past and better than in most comparable countries. Fifteen years ago, Australia's income per capita had fallen to 19th in the developed world.  Today it's recovered to be about the 8th highest. Total household disposable income has grown in real terms by more than a third over the last decade.  Over the same period, real private sector wealth per capita has more than doubled.
Broader measures of our national well-being are even more striking.  Australia is now 3rd out of 177 countries on the United Nations' Human Development Index which takes account of achievement in education enrolment, adult literacy levels, per capita GDP and life expectancy. And it's not just statistics that tell the story of Australia's economic renaissance.  A report released last year on Australian Social Attitudes found that Australians are much more confident in the economy than they were a decade ago.  Eighty per cent of people surveyed said that they were now proud of Australia's economic achievements.
 Strong economic management has given Australia a government-generically speaking, in comparative terms which is lean but not mean.  As a share of GDP, and this is a statistic worth repeating and emphasising in the context of current debate about the balance of revenue and expenditure. As a share of GDP, this country now has the second lowest level of general government outlays in the OECD, at 36 per cent; slightly lower even than in the United States and Japan and significantly lower than the average in Europe.
The elimination of net government debt by this Government compares with average government debt across the OECD of approximately 50 per cent of GDP. Yet the real genius and achievement of modern Australia is an ability to clear new hurdles of reform without leaving behind the most vulnerable members in our society.
  Work done at the OECD has shown that the distribution of social benefits in Australia is so progressive - and the level of taxes paid by the poor is so low - that this nation redistributes more to the poorest 20 per cent of the population than virtually any other developed country.
 This Government has reinforced Australia's safety net, but we also believe in the principle of mutual obligation. By this I mean not only that individuals ought to do something in return for the support they receive from society, but also that in order for society and the government to help people in need, they need to be willing to do something to help themselves. Far from undermining social protection, policies that promote responsible behaviour and self-reliance are essential pillars of a compassionate Australia.
We strike the right balance between state support and personal responsibility in the provision of human services.  Our health and education institutions are far from perfect.  But by global standards their quality is high and they are well-resourced.  In the years ahead, we must continue with reforms that make our hospitals and schools respond to the needs of individuals and not those of bureaucracies.
The great test of our policy balance in coming decades will be our ability to reconcile inexorable demographic change with demands of Australians for even greater choice in education, health, family support and work opportunities.
  This will only be done by staying the course with reforms to the way we work and to our welfare arrangements. The first of the baby boomers are now turning 60.  This milestone roughly coincides with the beginning of an expected decline in Australia's labour force participation rate over coming decades.
Today, there are roughly five working age Australians for every Australian over 65.  In two generations that figure will have fallen to about 2.5.  To sustain our prosperity in the face of this trend we must ensure that young Australians have skills for a lifetime. And we must reward them when they work.
  The social attitudes report that I mentioned a moment ago also had something to say about what ordinary Australians think of the Australian Achievement.  It found that, compared with a decade ago, fewer Australians are ashamed of this nation's past. I welcome this corrective in our national sense of self.  It restores a better balance between pride in our past and recognition of past wrongs.
  Australians have not lost sight of the mistakes and injustices of our past, especially in the treatment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the first Australians.
We know there is further to go on the road to Reconciliation with indigenous Australia. As I've said before, as a Government we are willing to meet the Indigenous people more than half way on this road.
  By sharing responsibility, governments and communities can help indigenous Australians build better lives, free from welfare dependency and based on solid economic foundations. If sometimes slow, progress is being made based on indigenous and non-indigenous Australians working side-by-side. With the 40th anniversary of the historic 1967 referendum approaching next year, our aim should be to deepen this legacy.
At the Centenary of Federation five years ago, I said that Australia's crowning achievement, borne of its egalitarian tradition, was its social cohesion. I still believe that. No country has absorbed as many people from as many nations and as many cultures as Australia and done it so well.  The strength of a culturally diverse community, united by an overriding and unifying commitment to Australia, is one of our greatest achievements and one of our great national assets.
Some have questioned my optimism, especially in the wake of the violence in Sydney earlier this summer. These events brought shame on all involved.  Australians, whatever their background, deserve to be treated with tolerance and with respect.
Racial intolerance is incompatible with the kind of society we are and want to be.  Within limits, all Australians have the right to express their culture and beliefs and to participate freely in our national life.  And all Australians have a civic responsibility to support the basic structures and values of Australian society which guarantee us our freedom and equality. The criminal behaviour of last December should be met with the full force of the law. And I do not believe it calls for either national self-flagellation or moral panic.
Our response should reflect this nation's unswerving commitment to racial equality, that coupled with an absolute determination to ensure that all sections of the Australian community are fully integrated into the mainstream of our national life. And that involves a willingness on the part of the collective Australian nation to achieve that and an acceptance by all sections of the Australian community that that outcome should be achieved.
 On these bedrock principles rest both rights and responsibilities that apply to all Australians.
 In the 21st century, maintaining our social cohesion will remain the highest test of the Australian achievement.  It demands the best Australian ideals of tolerance and decency, as well as the best Australian traditions of realism and of balance.
Australia's ethnic diversity is one of the enduring strengths of our nation.  Yet our celebration of diversity must not be at the expense of the common values that bind us together as one people - respect for the freedom and dignity of the individual, a commitment to the rule of law, the equality of men and women and a spirit of egalitarianism that embraces tolerance, fair play and compassion for those in need.   Nor should it be at the expense of ongoing pride in what are commonly regarded as the values, traditions and accomplishments of the old Australia. A sense of shared values is our social cement.  Without it we risk becoming a society governed by coercion rather than consent.  That is not an Australia any of us would want to live in.
Again, our goal must be to strive for a balance in questions of national identity and cultural diversity.  And for the most part I think we achieve it. We've drawn back from being too obsessed with diversity to a point where Australians are now better able to appreciate the enduring values of the national character that we proudly celebrate and preserve. We've moved on from a time when multiculturalism, in the words of the historian Gregory Melleuish, came to be associated with 'the transformation of Australia from a bad old Australia that was xenophobic, racist and monocultural to a good new Australia that is culturally diverse, tolerant and exciting'.  Such a view was always a distortion and a caricature.
Most nations experience some level of cultural diversity while also having a dominant cultural pattern running through them.  In Australia's case, that dominant pattern comprises Judeo-Christian ethics, the progressive spirit of the Enlightenment and the institutions and values of British political culture.  Its democratic and egalitarian temper also bears the imprint of distinct Irish and non-conformist traditions.
 Of course, each wave of new settlers to Australia influences our culture and character, helping to forge new attitudes and traditions.  From our art and literature to our scholarship and diplomacy, greater cultural diversity has changed how we see ourselves and how we view the world.  It has contributed to our more enterprising and entrepreneurial society.  We should have faith in what we have achieved and what we have become.
Quite apart from a strong focus on Australian values, I believe the time has also come for root and branch renewal of the teaching of Australian history in our schools, both in terms of the numbers learning and the way it is taught.  For many years, it's been the case that fewer than one-in-four senior secondary students in Australia take a history subject.  And only a fraction of this study relates to Australian history.  Real concerns also surround the teaching of Australian history in lower secondary and primary schools. Too often history has fallen victim in an ever more crowded curriculum to subjects deemed more 'relevant' to today.  Too often, it is taught without any sense of structured narrative, replaced by a fragmented stew of 'themes' and 'issues'.  And too often, history, along with other subjects in the humanities, has succumbed to a postmodern culture of relativism where any objective record of achievement is questioned or repudiated.
  Part of preparing young Australians to be informed and active citizens is to teach them the central currents of our nation's development.  The subject matter should include indigenous history as part of the whole national inheritance.  It should also cover the great and enduring heritage of Western civilisation, those nations that became the major tributaries of European settlement and in turn a sense of the original ways in which Australians from diverse backgrounds have created our own distinct history.  It is impossible, for example, to understand the history of this country without an understanding of the evolution of parliamentary democracy or the ideas that galvanised the Enlightenment.
In the end, young people are at risk of being disinherited from their community if that community lacks the courage and confidence to teach its history.  This applies as much to the children of seventh generation Australians or indigenous children as it does to those of recent migrants, young Australian Muslims, or any other category one might want to mention. When it comes to being an Australian there is no hierarchy of descent.   Whether our ancestors were here thousands of years ago, whether they came on the First Fleet, in the 19th century, or whether we or our ancestors are amongst the millions of Australians who have come to our shores since the Second World War, we are all equally Australians - one no better than the other.
   So tomorrow let us indeed celebrate our diversity.  But we should also affirm the sentiment that propelled our nation to Federation 105 years ago - one People, One Destiny.
Australia's standing in the world has never been higher.  We are seen as a fair-minded and generous country.  We are seen as a country that stands up for what it believes in.  We are respected for who we are, for the quality of our ideas and for the unique perspective we bring to our region and to the world. The divisive, phoney debate about national identity and what it means for our influence in the world has been finally laid to rest. Australia is a liberal democracy with global political and economic interests and a proud history of defending freedom against its enemies.  We do not have to smother or apologise for our place in the Western political tradition in order to build our relationships in Asia or in any other part of the world.
To grasp what I mean when I say that Australia occupies a unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic circumstance is quite simple.  Simply look at what we do.  Last December, Australia was at the centre of the inaugural East Asia Summit in Kuala Lumpur, a symbol not just of our geographic proximity or trade links with Asia but of the values and relationships we bring to regional engagement.   Two weeks ago, we convened the first meeting of the Asia Pacific Partnership on Climate Change in Sydney, illustrating our capacity to build regional coalitions and to lead on issues of global significance. In a couple of months time, Melbourne will host the Commonwealth Games - an event that combines our history, our passion for sport and Australia's unrivalled capacity to stage major events in a friendly and sophisticated environment.  In August, the Trade Minister will host a meeting of the Cairns Group, marking two decades of Australia's crusade to free up world agricultural trade.  And in November, Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the Group of 20 nations will gather in Australia as the Treasurer leads efforts to update and strengthen the world's financial architecture.
The Government's commitment to capture and harness the opportunities of globalisation for the betterment of all our people is a major driver of our international strategy.  In the 21st century, for the first time in history, we are witnessing the emergence of a global middle class.  Of all the deep trends in global politics, few will match this one. Previously, the vast bulk of the world's middle class citizens lived in the industrialised countries - in the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan and Australia.  This is no longer the case. It's estimated that India and China combined could easily produce middle classes of 400 to 800 million people over the next two generations - roughly the size of the current middle-class populations of the United States, Western Europe and Japan combined. Based on what we know about the relationship between income growth, health standards, political participation and environmental stewardship, the growth of this global middle class represents an enormously positive development for the world and for Australia.  It also illuminates the historic nature of the Australian achievement as a global pioneer of good government and human development.
Of course, our world is also fragmented and in conflict.  This is the fifth year that we have lived under the shadow of global terrorism and nothing suggests that shadow is lifting any time soon.  Terrorism remains the defining element in Australia's security environment. Australians and Australian interests continue to be a terrorist target, both abroad and at home.   This tests our sense of balance no less than our resolve. We know what our enemies think and what they are capable of.  They hate our freedoms and our way of life.  They despise our democratic values.  They have nothing but contempt for a diverse society which practises tolerance and respect. Australia must continue to work with friends and allies in the fight against global terrorism.  And in 2006, living with the threat of terrorism also means recognising that national security begins at home.
Our social cohesion and national unity is pivotal in enabling Australia to contribute effectively to the international effort to combat terrorism, and to safeguard Australia domestically. This Government will do what is necessary to protect the Australian community, but we will do it in a way that does not diminish us as a community or as a nation. This means finding the right balance between the legitimate interests of the community on the one hand and individual civil rights on the other.  And inevitably this will be a matter for passionate debate.
 Some Australians have argued in recent times that the balance has moved too far.  They want to shift it in the other direction, principally through a Bill of Rights.  I believe this would be a big mistake for our democracy.   A Bill of Rights would not materially increase the freedoms of Australian citizens.  It will not make us more united, indeed I believe it would lessen our ability to manage and to resolve conflict in a free society.  It would also take us further away from the type of civic culture we need to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow. No matter how skilfully crafted, a Bill of Rights always embodies the potential for misinterpretation, unintended consequences or accidental exclusion.  History is replete with examples of where grand charters and lyric phrases have failed to protect the basic rights and freedoms of a nation's citizens.
  The strength and vitality of Australian democracy rests on three great institutional pillars: our parliament with its tradition of robust debate; the rule of law upheld by an independent and admirably incorruptible judiciary; and a free and sceptical press of the sort that we politicians simply adore. I've called this trilogy in the past the real title deeds of our democracy, a political inheritance that has given us a record of stability and cohesion that is the envy of the world. I have never been persuaded by those who claim that the road to good government is via taking more and more decisions out of the hands of the people's elected representatives. It bypasses my comprehension that people should devote their life and their energy to securing a place in one of the Parliaments of the nation and then spend much of their time suggesting that decisions should be passed by that Parliament to unelected individuals or unelected bodies. In our parliamentary democracy, politicians are elected to make decisions on behalf of the community.  They are elected by the people and, ultimately, they are answerable to the people for the decisions they make. To draw these decisions away from the legislature and the executive and to invest them in the hands of the judiciary would irrevocably change our democracy.  And it would hamper our ability to respond to changes in a way that reflects the realities we now face.
 And incidentally, does anyone seriously contend that we can improve the education of our children, raise our national productivity, or better care for older Australians by further entrenching the language and culture of rights in our public discourse? Together, responsive democratic institutions and an active civil society provide more effective protection for the rights of Australian citizens than any charter of rights could hope to achieve.
Let me again cite the Australian Social Attitudes report on the state of our civil society.  Contrary to the pessimism of some commentators, it found that Australians are not losing trust in each other.  The voluntary sector - the lifeblood of active Australian citizenship - remains strong and healthy with 86 per cent of respondents belonging to at least one voluntary association. Australians have lost none of their volunteer spirit or the democratic temper for which they are renowned.  Our ability to poke fun at those in positions of power is undiminished.  We cannot abide pretentiousness in our public officials and we laugh at those who take themselves too seriously.
  Warts and all, I believe in our unique democracy because I believe passionately in the virtue of politics.  The political philosopher Bernard Crick put it well when he said 'The moral consensus of a free state is not something mysteriously prior to or above politics: it is the activity (the civilising activity) of politics itself.'  With all its compromises, parochialism and imperfections, this place of mere politics works as the great balancing wheel of our national life.
Australia is one of only a handful of nations to have carried the torch of democracy through a turbulent 20th century.  We began that century the first nation ever to come into being following a people's vote on a democratic constitution.  We ended it staging the most successful Olympic Games of all time.
So far in this new century, we've made a good start.  Our economy is strong.  Our society is cohesive.  Our nation is respected around the world.  Our democracy is robust.   If there is a lesson I've drawn from the last almost ten years as Prime Minister it is that Australia's greatness is not found in its Gross Domestic Product, the size of its defence budget or its international standing - important though all of these things are.  It is found in the good and decent and generous character of the Australian people.  Tomorrow, let us renew our faith in the Australian achievement.  We have great cause for optimism, if we keep our balance.
Thank you.  


Well Pat (Farmer), Janette and I are delighted to have all of you again. This is the fourth 'Prime Minister's Five' gathering; it's great to welcome and thank the sponsors Deutsche Bank for their continuing sponsorship and the five additional sponsors, we do need your help, it's generous and I never take the support of the business community for things like this for granted. There's a lot of competition for the corporate philanthropic dollar, if I can put it that way, enormous competition, and the fact that you have chosen this is gratefully acknowledged, it really is.
 To the mentors of course who include Pat, who is modest not to mention his own contribution, they include wonderful illustrious names in Australian marathon and middle distance running. It's terrific to have the quality of the mentors with us again today. If we all think of the fact that the long distance trials are on at the weekend and the decision is made on Monday, it's a little bit like a Cabinet reshuffle. Although everybody is telling me that there's a fair consensus of opinion as to who might be chosen, we will look with interest and we will keep our fingers crossed that there is a very full representation from the five.
 I was talking a few moments ago to Steve (Moneghetti) about the route for the marathon at the Commonwealth Games and he was describing to me where it was going to go and the point at which in the approach you would get onto the bridge and have a beautiful view down to the Melbourne Cricket Ground. There will be thousands and thousands of people who will be there and the exhilaration that you would feel if you were an Australian leading that race would be quite remarkable. Steve said he hopes that one of the five is that person and then he will take over from there and sort of run the last bit. I think he might have, if it does come to that, I think he might have a bit of competition, but it does illustrate the great personal emotion that we will feel as Australians towards the Commonwealth Games and particularly in Melbourne, which is such a wonderful sports-supporting city. I mean they are; it's remarkable the patronage that sport receives from the people of Melbourne and the Commonwealth Games are going to be a great event.
 Finally, can I congratulate you Pat for your energy in getting this together, it's a very nice concept and it's worked well. I hope that it's given encouragement and support to some of Australia's youngest athletes and to all of you, to the five of you, can I thank you for your tremendous discipline and commitment. It's so hard to get to the top in sport and it's very, very competitive. Anybody who sees it just in terms of the glory for those who finally break through and get all sorts of rewards, ignores the sacrifice that people have got to make from a very early age and the sacrifice of their families. It's nice that quite a few mothers and fathers are here, I think that is terrific. When you've got a champion sportsman or woman in your family, it's a total effort, it's not just the individual; it's early morning training, it's this that and the other, it's diet, it's encouragement, it's picking them up and putting them together when they don't win or don't win easily enough; we all experience it. To have the mums and dads here, and children and husbands and wives is tremendously important. Good luck, we will follow you with very keen interest. We are all looking forward to the Games and we hope that all of the names here are represented. And Pat, again, to you mate, thanks very much you've done a great job.
 [ends]  


Thank you very much Attorney General. The Honourable Michael Black, the Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Australia, the Chief Justice of the Family Court, the Chief Federal Magistrate, my many Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, other honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen. May I commence my remarks by paying a very special tribute to the memory of Roma Mitchell. She was an outstanding Australian, she was a very distinguished citizen of this state, rising to the office of Governor of South Australia, and she was, in so many ways, a great role model for women, particularly professional women. I often tell the story that when I started at the Sydney University Law School in 1957, there were what some 12 to 15 women out of a commencement year of 220. 35 years later when my daughter commenced law at that same law school, 52% of the first year were women. Roma Mitchell must share a great deal of the credit for the wonderful leadership that she displayed.
 An occasion like this, in a formal sense, brings together a very rare thing, and that is a common gathering of representatives of the executive, the legislature and the judiciary. In the nature of our system of Government they are meant to keep, certainly in the case of the judiciary, a respectable difference during their working days and hours at least, from representatives of the executive and the legislature. So it is appropriate to say something about our system of Government. To pay tribute to the inheritance of the common law of England, which has still been, and remains, and always will be the great shaping force of the legal system in Australia. To acknowledge of course the special fashioning and moulding and shaping of that common law within a particular Australian environment and most particularly of course as the Federal Court demonstrates, the importance of a federal structure of Government as distinct from the unitary system of Government which prevailed in the United Kingdom.
It's also, of course, an occasion for me on behalf of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, and I know the Governments of all of the Australian states to pay a tribute to the legal profession. The legal profession on occasions, like all other great professions in our country takes a battering from the media, takes a battering from the community for its perceived shortcomings. And that is inevitable in an increasingly accountable community in which we all live. But it is important to record, on an occasion such as this, the extraordinary record of good conduct and incorruptibility of the Australian judiciary. If you look back over the years, not only of the Australian Federation but before that you can find of the many common consistent thread that have run to our democracy, you can find this remarkable example of judicial impeccability and incorruptibility.
 In the context of a naturally ongoing debate in our community about whether or not we should have a bill of rights and I'm one of those who's profoundly and irrevocably opposed to such a thing, let me say that I often remark that the three great bulwarks of democracy in Australia are a robust parliamentary system and an independent and incorruptible judiciary and a free media which we politicians simply adore every day of our lives. But it is important to acknowledge that contribution to the stability of our country and for all the criticism on occasions which is levelled at the legal profession and particularly at the judiciary, let me on behalf of the Government and the people say that I admire and thank on behalf of the Government and the people the contribution that the judges of this country have made, do make and will continue to make in the years ahead to the stability of our very civil and orderly society.
 And I want to say to you Chief Justice that the three courts that are embraced in this building are in the history of Australia, quite young courts. I think, from quick recollection, all of them received their legislative form within the 32 years that I have been a Member of the Federal Parliament. In fact one of the very first debates I took part in as a new Member of Parliament was the debate on the Family Law Act in 1975. And it was an exhilarating experience because it was a free vote. And I remember teaming up with a very conservative member of the Australian Labor Party on the issue and a very conservative member of the then National Country Party of Australia to express our views on the debate. And of course, the Federal Court itself, if I recall, was very much an initiative of Bob Ellicott when he was the Attorney General in the Fraser Government and most recently of course, the Federal Magistrates Court, an initiative of Darryl Williams. And the contribution that all of them have made has been a remarkable contribution.
But we'll only continue to have high quality courts in this country if we continue to attract men and women of high quality and sound legal background to fill the positions on those courts. And in remarking on that, let me say that we should never lose sight of the fact that most people who accept judicial appointment make very significant financial sacrifices in order to do so. And it's very important in the years ahead that Governments at both a Commonwealth and a State level bear that in mind when addressing attitudes and decisions related to their position in the community.
 This is a very important day for Adelaide. It's a beautiful building. I think the judicious use of, appropriate use of wood in the various courtrooms creates a wonderful atmosphere. All of you have every reason to be proud of it and I know the people of Adelaide will see it as a wonderful addition to the architecture of this beautiful city. I thank you very much for the honour of inviting me to declare the Roma Mitchell Commonwealth Law Courts of Adelaide open, which I am very happy indeed to do.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Ian. To Kevin Andrews, the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and Dr. Sharman Stone the newly appointed Minister for Workforce Participation, ladies and gentlemen I particularly thank all of you for coming along this morning to be part of the Sydney launch of a series of breakfasts which are being held around our country over the weeks and months ahead designed to bring home in, I hope, a very constructive way to the employers and other interested people in our community the challenge we face in the whole area of obtaining an adequate supply of people to work for our businesses and our enterprises in the years ahead.
 We tend to look at these things as we look at all aspects of life in terms of the good news and the bad news; let me start with the bad news. The bad news is that we are all getting older and that is undeniable. As a population Australia is ageing and we are living longer, we're living longer in a healthy fashion, and we are therefore facing a very significant demographic challenge. The good news is that most other countries, not all, but most other countries are in an even worse position than we are.
 If you think Australia's demographic challenge is huge, have a look at the challenge facing Japan and Italy, to take two countries. I think it will be in a couple of years time that the birth and death rates in Japan, actually the lines will cross for the first time in that country's history and the fertility rate in Italy is, I think, somewhere at 1.2, or 1.21 which is amongst one of the lowest in Europe. On the other hand, of course the United States, because of a different mixture of age and composition of the population is in a slightly stronger position, where the fertility rate in that country is about 2.1. Ours is at 1.75, and I am pleased to report that as a result I am sure of some very generous Government initiatives over the past couple of years, there has been a small increase in the fertility rate within Australia and long may that continue to be the case; increasingly and progressively.
 But the other good news is that we have in place a welfare social security structure that acts neither in the case of many of the European countries as an encumbrance to greater workplace and workforce flexibility. Or in the case of the United States where I believe there is an inadequate social security safety net, we in our occasional genius as a country over the years, and I don't just mean over the last 10 years I mean over a very long period of time, we have somehow or another found the balance. We have a social welfare system that does look after the genuinely needy, but it is a social welfare system that also increasingly, and this is part of the emphasis of recent Government policy, increasingly encourages people to choose workforce participation over welfare. But if you do need welfare support then it is a decent social security safety net.
 Our situation is based on a number of quite favourable circumstances, but despite all of that we do face a huge challenge and the Government's response has been across a range of areas. You have heard this morning from Kevin Andrews about the Welfare-To-Work policies which begin to take effect this year, you have heard a great deal about the industrial relations changes which will add to the flexibility that we need within our workforce.
 But the biggest change of all that is needed, and the process has begun, and once again we have demonstrated as a community a great adaptability and this is one of the great assets that Australia has, but the change has begun and Peter Hendy put his finger on it when he said we needed to bring about a cultural change within our community, not only within our businesses but also within our community and this is an area where the cultural change needs to come fairly rapidly. It is not so long ago that there was a premium placed within Governments of both political persuasions and I can remember it as a member of an earlier Coalition Government in the late 1970's and it was certainly the case of the Government that we replaced, that the premium was still on developing and implementing policies that encouraged and facilitated early retirement. It is only in the last 10 years or even less that we have begun to change that and we have begun to discover this great and growing potential resource of older and mature age workers.
 The big challenge for Australia, this is where our figures compare very badly with other countries, is to do something about the workforce participation rate of the age cohort of between 55 and 64. Far too many of those people leave the workforce far too early. Now I don't have any objections at all of course to workforce participation beyond the age of 65, don't for a moment suggest that I am singling out the age cohort of 55 to 64, but statistically if you accept that there is still a tradition, if we really want to talk in these terms, of a retirement age of 65, we have a very low participation rate in that 10 year period. And if we can, at the very, very least, and Kevin Andrews talked about it when he mentioned the experience of a large financial institution offering everybody part-time work after the age of 55, we have to accelerate the process of that cultural change.
Now Governments can legislate, Governments can change the rules, whilst I don't believe obviously in any kind of age discrimination, any kind of discrimination in the workforce on any basis at all, legislation itself is not necessarily, and not always and often the wrong response. It is bringing about a cultural change within workplaces and it is a cultural change in which governments must participate, it is a cultural change where governments must demonstrate by example.
 But we do have, as a starting point in responding to this challenge, we do have enormous advantages. I spoke of the fact that we have a balanced social security system and I also spoke of the fact that although our population has begun to age it is not aging as rapidly as the populations of many other countries. The other great advantage that this country has that because I believe it still retains an essentially classless egalitarian character; we have a great capacity to adapt.
 I have never forgotten the conversation I had with the worldwide chief executive of one of the largest financial institutions in the world when he told me that the people he wanted to employ most were Australians. He was an American who had spent 20 years living in England. I said 'why is that' and he said 'because of all the employees in the world, Australians are the most adaptable'. I thought that was an important an impressive compliment to our country and it is something that will be an enormous aid to us to us as we go about this process. There needs to be adaptability on both sides. When I exhort firms to retain more older workers I also exhort the older workers to accept that as their employer retains them, they must accept perhaps a changed role within the organisation for which they work.  They must increasingly accept the command structure perhaps, or a management structure, where the person to whom they report is a lot younger than he or she used to be. They must accept the greater incidence of course of part-time work. They must accept a rearranged remunerations structure. All of those things are their part of the bargain; are the contribution that they make to the changing workforce.
 Of course Kevin and Peter have spoken very importantly of the need for change in relation to workforce participation by people with disabilities. This is an area where I believe our society has come in a quite magnificent way; a very considerable distance from what it was even 10 or 20 years ago. The realisation that there are many people in the community who can make a massive contribution to society and a massive contribution to firms as well as, of course, as to an enhancement to their own lives and their own enjoyment of life beyond earlier expectations. Part of the Welfare-To-Work process is a process that seeks to involve in a positive and a constructive way, people with varying forms of disabilities and the personal reward as well as the economic reward from change and improvement and participation in this area is very significant.
 Now this is a challenge that involves the whole community and our response to it has got to be a response based on bringing out the best in people's human instincts. As we were chatting over the table a few moments ago, Mark Bethwaite said to me that he thought that the greatest contribution of successive changes to workplace relations laws over the years in Australia is that they have required and encouraged and brought about a situation where employers and employees communicate more directly with each other and that of course has been a very significant cultural change.
 We once had Workplace Relations laws that were based upon a number of principles which are of course no longer with us. There was an assumption that most companies were; most people worked in very large establishments, that the majority of people in the workforce were men. There was a very rigid command structure; that people tended to take instruction as to how they worked in large groups. All of that, when you think back over the years, all of that as changed. I know from your own experiences that there would be a myriad of different workplaces represented here, some large, some small, some in manufacturing, some in services, a whole variety of different formations.
 At its core that most important thing that you as employers do is communicate directly with the people who work for you. Unless you do that well you are not going to have a good business and you are not going to have happy employees and all the changes in the law under the sun are not going to amount to very much unless you understand the importance of that communication.
 Ladies and gentlemen, Australia has come a very, very long way economically in the last 10 to 20 years. We are a strong country, we have great prosperity, we have low unemployment, we have high real wages, we have high productivity, we have an engaged, committed, innovative workforce. Despite all of that we do face this looming demographic challenge and it is a challenge that we need to respond to in a range of areas and these breakfasts are very much about engaging the workforces and the workplaces of Australia in meeting that challenge.
 I conclude by particularly thanking my two ministers, Kevin Andrews and Sharman Stone for their commitment to this very, very important task. Finally and importantly, I thank all of you for coming along this morning. I encourage you to be part of this great national effort to ensure that the prosperity that we have is not only retained but built upon by the engagement of an ever wider number of Australians in workforce participation.
[Ends]  


Thank you very much Rob Lucas, Rob Kerin the leader of the South Australian Opposition, my state parliamentary colleagues, candidates, ladies and gentlemen. I've come here to express my strong support for the Liberal Party and for Rob Kerin in this campaign for the South Australian election on the 18th of March.
Let me say at the outset that there is, to use a well-worn mantra which is true of Australian politics, there is no such thing as either an unwinnable election or an unlosable election. Once an election starts the whole background in which politics is operated begins to change and especially in these days in state election campaigns the opportunities for both parties will wax and wane during the course of the campaign. I want the Liberals here in South Australia to know that they have my very strong support and of all of my Federal parliamentary colleagues, not just in South Australian, but throughout the country.
 Can I make just two brief but pertinent observations about the economic debate in this South Australian election campaign. I have learnt over long years in public life that there's a certain predictability about the reaction of state governments to good and bad economic times. When the economic times are good, the strength of the economy is due to the particular brilliance and consummate economic policies of the individual State Government. When the reverse is the case, it is all the fault of the Federal Government. Well let me declare that neither of those propositions is completely true, but the reality is that the state of the national economy is overwhelmingly the responsibility of the Federal Government and if the Australian economy were now in recession I would have to take responsibility for that along with Peter Costello and my other colleagues and I am quite sure that every Labor Premier and I guess if there were Premiers of another political persuasion around the country, they'd all be saying the same thing. And that is fair enough. Politics is about ultimately being accountable and I'll be accountable for the bad things I've done and from time to time I hope modestly claim some credit for some good things that have been done.
 But let me say that the Australian economy now is fundamentally very sound and it's fundamentally very sound because it has been well managed for the last 10 years by the Federal Coalition in Canberra. Some of the things that have made it well managed were in fact passionately opposed by Labor Premiers; the GST for example. The Labor Party fought that tooth and nail and yet South Australia is $400-$500 million better off as a result of the introduction of the GST than it would have been through a continuation of the old revenue sharing arrangements. I saw a pamphlet that Mr Rann released last week talking about blaming federal taxes, saying they were too high and boasting about all the additional expenditure of the State Labor Government here in South Australia. Well can I say to Mr Rann that that additional expenditure was made possible by the flow, the ever-increasing flow of Federal Government revenue to South Australia via the GST and the GST has been a boon to the states. It's given them a guaranteed source of revenue for the essential services, the police, the hospitals, the government schools. And without that flow of revenue South Australia's economic position would have been much weaker. Can I say to all South Australians the low inflation, the low interest rates, the low unemployment are all as a result of national economic policies.
 I hear Mr Rann talking about the contract won by the Australian Submarine Corporation. Now I am very pleased for the employees of that company, but can I remind South Australians that that was a decision of the Federal Government. It was a decision that was, might I say, quite properly urged upon the Federal Government by senior Ministers in my Government from this state. And can I say that in terms of influence, the state of South Australia has never exercised the influence, not improper, entirely proper on the merits inside a national government, anywhere near the influence that it now exercises by courtesy until very recently of having Robert Hill, of course, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, now replaced by Nick Minchin, also from South Australia; Alexander Downer, that magnificent long serving Foreign Minister and Amanda Vanstone and all the other people that have worked so magnificently. But that decision was taken by the Federal Government and that decision was essentially because the merits of the bid that were made.
Now of course state and federal governments work together and it's my job as a Liberal Prime Minister to work with state Labor government's while they're in power. But it's also my responsibility as the national leader of the Liberal Party to point out some political realities. Now true it is that the fundamentals are determined by the Federal Government, but state governments can have a significant influence on the relative rate of economic development. And state government policies can result in differential performances within an overall situation of the economy being strong. And that I am sure is quite properly an argument that will be put forward by the Opposition here just as in other states such as in New South Wales, it can be argued that if certain decisions taken by a state Labor government there had not been taken, then on top of the national economic strength of the economy, that state would be doing better. And so is the case in relation to South Australia and the proposition that the current Government could have done more to build on the fundamental economic strength delivered by the Federal Government is an argument that I know will be very prominent during the course of this campaign.
 Ladies and gentlemen, I'm here to express my support for Rob Kerin, to express my support for the Liberal Party in this election campaign. It will be tough, it will be hard, we all understand that. But let me remind you as we enter this campaign there is no such thing as an unwinnable, or indeed on the other side, an unlosable election. Interesting things happen in election campaigns and I hope that in a small way, my presence here today may be of assistance to the Liberal Party. I want it to win. I'll support it and I wish it well. Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Strong. To Mr Roger Corbett, the Managing Director of Woolworths, my other fellow Australians gathered in the atrium of this absolutely magnificent building located in an area of Australia's largest city which represents in so many ways as an area, and the group of people who live there, the very future of our country as well as they very future of the city of Sydney.
Mr Corbett has been very kind in some of the things he said about me and the Government I lead and I thank him very warmly and sincerely for those remarks. The last ten years have been a very important time in Australia's life and development and a very important time in the life and development of this wonderful company.  But I want to say that the people to whom the greatest debt is owed for whatever may have been achieved over the last ten years is in fact the men and women of this country who together have contributed in their remarkable fashion to the country's growth and prosperity. And just as the strength of a company and in your case the strength of Woolworths rests on your personal contribution and effort and the job satisfaction that you receive for working for this company, so it is that the strength of Australia is due overwhelmingly to the capacity and the adaptability of the employees of this country.
I speak to many foreign business leaders and time and time again they say to me that the greatest asset Australia has is the adaptability of its workforce. And those of you who've worked for this company for a longer period of time than others will know how much it's changed. You'll know how it has responded to the changed lifestyle of Australians. We've come a long way from the days when weekends were not occasions for shopping. We've come a long way from the time when your mother, when you came home from school, sent you down to the shops to buy things for her. And supermarkets and shopping malls have become part and parcel of our lives. We want things to be available as near as possible to 24 hours a day, seven days a week and we don't want to pay anymore for them if we buy them at 3 o'clock on Monday morning than if we buy them at 10 o'clock on Tuesday morning. In other words, we need a retail environment in this country which is ready and available for the different circumstances in which we live.
 And the great success of Woolworths has been its capacity to adapt to that changing environment, to understand that the world has changed. It hasn't got worse, it's changed. And in so many ways it's got a great deal better. It is important that companies like Woolworths do well and make good profits because if they make good profits they not only satisfy their shareholders, but most importantly they can provide an ever growing number of secure, well paid jobs for the people who work for them.
 One of the great advantages of this new building is that I guess it will bring many of you much closer to the places where you live and that cutting travelling times between home and work is a way of contributing to that very elusive but very important balance between a family life and work life. We work to support ourselves and to support our families. We also work for personal career and job satisfaction. There is nothing more important in life than your family and your relationships. There is nothing more important than being able to put a roof over your head, to pay off your home, to have a secure job, to raise your children and to live a happy and fulfilled family life. It's still the great Australian dream and it's a great Australian dream that should be within the reach of everybody.
 As I look around at this vast gathering, I see the face of modern Australia. It's culturally diverse, it's enthusiastic, it's committed, it's part of a great team effort. And success that anybody achieves in life, if they're really honest about it, is achieved in cooperation with other people. Woolworths has a great employment record, it does cater for the understandable desire of people to be able to balance their work and their family life. It's also a company that is increasingly recognising the value of older workers. Incredibly as it may seem, this country will grow shorter of workers as the years go by. I predict that the days of people worrying about unemployment are really drifting behind us, that what we have to worry about is having enough workers for the jobs that are going to be available. And we have to find untapped reservoirs of workers and many enlightened companies are seeing the value of older workers. In order to fully utilise older workers in our community there will need to be a continuing process of change and adjustment. The most important thing is to treat every single employee of a company as somebody who has the same aspirations as you as a manager may have. They have a family, they have a career, they want to get ahead, they want their work to be recognised, they want it to be well paid and they want to be fairly treated. That is the ideal of workplace relations that I see for the future and the best firms are the firms where people work together in that common cause. I know that is a philosophy that is practiced in this company and this magnificent building, the light, the whole ambience of it tells me that this has been constructed by a company that believes that the interests of the employees of the company are crucial to the long term benefit and profitability.
So my fellow Australians, I am delighted to be part of this gathering. I thank you, all of you, for the contribution that you have made to the strength of our country. I thank all of those who weren't born in this country for coming here and making a contribution to Australia. We are an open, tolerant country. We are the least discriminatory country in the world in my view. We welcome people from the four corners of the earth. The only thing we ask of them is that when they come here they become Australians before anything else. That is something that they do and they do it magnificently.
So to all of you my fellow Australians and as employees of Woolworths I wish you well. I hope the dreams you have for yourselves and your families in the years ahead are fully realised. I congratulate Roger Corbett and James Strong and the other members of the Board for the leadership that they have given to this company and for the enormous contribution that all of you together have made to the strength and the prosperity and the identity of your wonderful company and I have great pleasure in declaring this building officially open.
Thank you.
 [ends]


Your Excellency, the Chief of the Defence Force, General Leahy, General Hindmarsh, Colonel McMahon, my Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Can I both for the Government and I know for all of the people of Australia express my thanks to the men of the SAS who have served with such tremendous courage and commitment in Afghanistan during this rotation.
 I did, as you know, have the opportunity of meeting a lot of you where you were deployed in Afghanistan in November. As well as being tremendously stimulated by and encouraged and enthused by the extraordinary professional commitment, on the way in I learnt an even a newer and greater respect for the flying skills of those men of the Air Force who operate the C130s going through that rather challenging terrain.
But the job that you are doing on behalf of Australia is a very important job. It is a dangerous job and none of us pretends for a moment that it isn't and on an occasion such as this we think particularly of Andrew Russell and David Nary who in different circumstances lost their lives and I want to say to all of you that I am, as Prime Minister, very conscious that Governments take decisions to send forces overseas, but the burden and the risk and the courage required to give effect to those decisions is carried by the men and women of the Australian Defence Force.
 The SAS have an enviable international reputation. There are no better Special Forces anywhere in the world and I think in a gathering like this, one might even go a touch further than that. Your reputation, your ability, your courage, your skill has the admiration of all of the Australian people. The struggle against terrorism in which this country is engaged is not going to end soon. It will go on for some time. It will require a great deal of persistence. There will be times when people will wonder whether it is worth the effort. But let me say to you that it is worth the effort because the sort of way of life that we are opposing is a way of life that would never win any acceptance in our country, it's a way of life which is completely anathema to everything that this country stands for.
So in thanking all of you for your courage and your professionalism, in congratulating your commanding officers and in calling to mind the great tradition of this regiment, may I also send a special word of thanks to the families. The wives and sweethearts, the children, the parents, the brothers and sisters and the friends. We do in different ways everything we can while you are away to look after them and there's no greater reward of course than to see you return home safely. I know this has been a particularly happy time for the families of the men who came back in January and I hope that you make the very best of it.
From the bottom of my heart, thank you for what you have done for Australia. We are immensely proud of all of you. You are a wonderful demonstration of the Australian spirit.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Mark, thank you very much for those extremely generous remarks. To all of my fellow Liberals and members of the National Party, collectively my fellow Australians. I welcome you to this wonderful historic event in the experience of our two parties and in the life of our nation. Can I commence my remarks by expressing gratitude, and I will come later in my remarks to individuals, but I would like to express my gratitude to the Australian people for the support that they have given to the Government, the support that they have given to my colleagues and the trust that they have invested in us over the last 10 years. I have said frequently in the past few days that there is no greater privilege that can come the way of any person than to be Prime Minister of Australia. I am very conscious of that trust. I am very conscious of the responsibility. I expressed those sentiments on the night of the 2nd of March 1996 and that feeling has never left me. And I say to my fellow Australians that I am deeply conscious of the trust that you have put in us and I am deeply grateful and I know all of my colleagues are deeply grateful for the privilege that has come our way. We have tried not to abuse it and we will try in the future never to abuse it because public life is the ultimate in terms of serving a nation and serving a community.
Politics is an honourable profession. In the end the good things that are done for nation can only be done through the political process.  We rightly honour all of those who in different ways commit their lives and sacrifice their lives to the service of their fellow countrymen and women. But the service of politics is a very noble pursuit and we are all extremely privileged to have been part of it.  And as we gather tonight brightly marking this event, marking it with some reflections, marking it with gratitude and giving praise where praise is due I think it is reasonable to try and reflect on the last 10 years and to try and to work out in our own minds why it is that we have stayed in office, for what is by the standards of this country, quite a long period of time. I think there are two basic reasons why we have achieved that success. I think the first of those reasons is, that all of our actions over the last 10 years have essentially been taken against the background of belief in certain principles and belief in certain values. There has been a consistency about what we have done, and that is very important in politics. Because if you are not consistent you disappoint and confuse, if you are consistent you reassure and encourage. I had occasion and I don't normally quote myself, but I had occasion in drawing together these remarks tonight at looking at what I said on the 30 of January 1995 when I was once again given the enormous honour of being made leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party. And I said this, 'that I have always believed in an Australia built on reward for individual effort, with a special place for honour for small business as the engine room of our economy. I have always believed in a safety net for those amongst us who don't make it. I have always believed in the family as the stabilising and cohering unit of our society. And I believe very passionately in an Australia drawn from the four corners of the world, but united together behind a common set of Australian values and they are the attitudes and they are the values that will instruct and guide my leadership of the Liberal Party from this day on.'
And we together as a team, we of the great partnership as Mark called it have I believe been faithful and consistent to those principles? And as I look back over the last 10 years, I think of some of the examples of that success. I think of the wonderful statistic that told me a few months ago that there are now more self-employed people in Australia than there are trade unionists. That is a symbol, a symbol of the kind of society we have built in Australia over the last 10 years. Not a society that despises trade unions, not a society that denies the men and women of Australia the right to join a trade union, but rather a society that has given greater encouragement and opportunity for men and particularly for women, because 30 per cent or more of the new businesses commenced from homes these days are commenced by women. We have created that kind of society that has brought that forth. When I think of the things that we have endeavoured to do for families, there are many things that we have done, but none has been more spectacularly successful and more important than the family tax benefit system that we have brought in. It fulfilled the commitment that Peter Costello and I made in the 1996 election campaign that we would alter the balance in the taxation system, greatly more in favour of families who had the responsibility of raising children. And if you look back over those changes, the economic position of families with children has dramatically improved over the last 10 years. In the context of the ongoing debate in this country about taxation, about taxation reform about taxation change, let me make one thing abundantly clear. This Government believes that the existing family tax benefits system has been hugely advantageous to the families of Australia and it has no intention of making any changes to that system.
When I think of the safety net that I said we were committed to  I think of the enormous changes that we have made to strengthen the Medicare system. The fact that we have provided an additional underpinning to the old age pension, 25 per cent of male average weekly earnings as well as the half yearly indexation. I mention that because one of the charges made against us by our opponents 10 years ago was that we would rip up the safety net, that we would tax and axe to Medicare. It is true that in my past and it is all carefully documented because I said it in public, I was a critic of Medicare and I formed the view 10 and a half to 11 years ago that the Australian people had said to me, well John we note what you say, but we want you to know what we believe. And we believe that Medicare fundamentally is a good system. It might have flaws, you might be able to make it better and we have made it better because we've given massive support to private health insurance and we now have in this country a real balance between the provision publicly and privately of assistance in the area of health. So we have preserved that safety net.
 And the remarks I made about an Australia drawn from the four corners of the earth but united behind a common set of Australian values has a particular resonance in the context of some of the debate of recent months. We have steadfastly maintained a non-discriminatory immigration policy. We have drawn people from every corner of the earth and we'll continue to do that because this country has been enriched and expanded very greatly as a result of migration.   Migration has steadily risen and it's risen with the support and the consent of the Australian people because fundamentally the Australian people now believe that the immigration programme is under control. And when you get your immigration programme under control you build public confidence and public acceptance. And we ask of all of our new citizens, we ask indeed of all Australians, a very simple thing. And that is that we all unite behind a common set of Australian values. And those values are well understood. They're values of fairness, of mateship, of equality between men and women, of Parliamentary democracy, of the rule of law, of the opportunity to start a business with absolutely nothing and work your heart out and be a success and pass the proceeds of that life's work onto your children. That is what Australia has always been about. And the millions of migrants who've come to this country from around the world, from Europe, from the Middle East and from Asia have been part of that great Australian experience. They've been examplars of the Australian ethic and the Australian way of life. No country in the world has more successfully absorbed people from other lands than has Australia and in the process we have enriched our lives and in the process we have maintained a culture and a way of life that is recognisable all around the world.
My friends, the second reason why I believe that we have had some success is that we have recognised that good government, successful government is a combination of two things. It's a combination of good policy and good politics. If we had not reformed the taxation system, if we had not tackled the scandal of the Australian waterfront in 1998, if Peter Costello's first budget had not tackled the dreadful inheritance of debt that was ours in March of 1996, if we had no decided to give independent control of monetary policy to the Reserve Bank of Australia, if we had not reformed the labour exchange system or the employment services of this country we would have been thrown out of office years ago. The Australian people would have grown tired of a Government -,very quickly they would have grown tired of a Government that talked a lot and did nothing. And what the experience of the last ten years has taught me, and I hope has taught all of us is that you are elected to do things that need to be done. You are elected to reform what needs to be reformed. You are elected to change what needs to be changed. But you are also elected to understand that the Australian people want you to keep listening to them.  And more than anything else in my daily life as Prime Minister over the last ten years, I have endeavoured to maintain a perpetual conversation with the Australian people and that's where the good politics comes in. Just as we needed all of those reforms to win, we also needed a political sensitivity on occasions to win. And if we had not, for example, in the first half of 2001 recognised that there was unhappiness and discontent in sections of the Australian community about aspects of our policies and taken remedial action, we may well have faced defeat at the election at the end of that year.  So it is very much a combination of good politics, of good politics and also good policy.  I want to say my friends that the other thing that the last ten years has taught me about government and taught all of us about government is that it does involve a capacity to respond to unexpected and substantial change. I never dreamt, and I don't think anybody in this room dreamt that when we were elected in March of 1996 that the greatest threat we would face in our ten years as a nation was the threat of terrorism. When I sat down to talk to George Bush for the very first time on the 10th  September 2001 I had no idea, he had no idea that the world was to change forever the following day. And the capacity of this country and the capacity of this Government to respond to that challenge has been one of our greatest achievements. And when we came into office, I am pleased to say that we began to lay the framework for what we would ultimately have to do, because despite all the budget difficulties we faced in the budget of 1996, we put a circle around defence expenditure and said it would not carry any burden of the expenditure restraint that was needed. And in the years that have gone by since then, we have responded to those national security challenges. And I have to say that of all the experiences I have had as Prime Minister in meeting people both here and around the world, none of them have been more inspiring than the experiences of meeting, and mixing with and thanking, and I hope in a small way encouraging the men and women of the Australian defence forces who have so ably and proudly and bravely represented the values and interests of this country in so many parts of the world.
This of course has been a great team effort. Tonight is not a night for just John Howard. People have been kind enough to say nice things about me, but it is a night to celebrate and to mark a great team effort. I want to say that we would not have achieved our success without the strong and close and trusting coalition between our two parties. The very proposition that we could have tried to govern in any way except in partnership was never something that I contemplated. I try, as everybody in this room does, to be a reasonable student of Australian history and I have to say that I do not believe that our two parties could have achieved anywhere near the success we've achieved over the last ten years other than in Coalition. I say to you Mark, thank you for your friendship, for your loyalty, for your support and for your sagacity as Australia's Trade Minister. Tim Fischer and John Anderson, two very different characters, two very different personalities, two wonderful friends, two wonderful Deputy Prime Ministers. Two people who faced, in their rural constituencies the particular and at times bewildering challenge of One Nation, so apparently simplistic and absurd, yet on occasion striking a chord with many of our fellow Australians who didn't have a racist bone in their body. And they responded to that in a quite remarkable fashion. So I say three cheers for the Coalition. I say the Coalition has served us well all through the years, and the Coalition must always be the aim and the commitment of both of our parties.
I turn to my own party, and of course he is a major figure in the Government. I express to Peter Costello my great thanks, my profound admiration and my respect for the tremendous job that he's done as Treasurer. He has been the principle architect of the Government's economic policies. He's carried the argument, the advocacy and the explanation of those policies with enormous energy, on occasion when it's needed, great wit and great pugnacity, particularly on the floor of the House of Representatives. Peter Thank you for a wonderful job. And I also turn to a former leader of our Party Alexander Downer. The debt we owe to Alexander is two fold. We owe firstly to Alexander an expression of gratitude for the grace and dignity with which early in 1995 he facilitated a change in the leadership of the Party which he judged was in the Party's interests. He put party before self. He's always been a child, and I use that in the same way as I'd use it of myself, a child of the Liberal Party, somebody brought up in the values and the traditions of our Party and he put it first and I am deeply grateful to him for having done that and all of us are. And I'm also very grateful for the wonderful job that he's done as Foreign Minister. Ten years both he and Peter have held their respective portfolios and done them with tremendous distinction and ability. Might I also mention two other of my senior colleagues, Robert Hill, who has just announced his retirement as Defence Minster and his pending retirement from the Senate. Robert was the longest serving leader of the Coalition Parties in the Senate. He was a wonderful Defence Minister. He brought to the discussions of the senior levels of the Government on occasions a different perspective from mine and from others but a perspective that is as much a part of the tradition of the Liberal Party as any other perspective.
 You've heard me say it before and I say it again. It's important that it be said on a night like this. We are a broad church. We are a Party which is the trustee of two traditions in the Australian polity, the classical liberal tradition and the conservative tradition. We are not exclusively a classical liberal party and we are not exclusively a conservative party. We are a combination of the two. That is our special inheritance and it is our special trust and we must always work very hard to preserve it.
 One other colleague who has been with us from the very beginning and has been through the fire in two portfolios I do want to mention tonight because he's made a special contribution and that is Philip Ruddock, first as Immigration Minister and now as Attorney General. Can I also join Chris McDiven in saluting the fact that on the 6th of March Amanda Vanstone will become the longest serving female Cabinet Minister since Federation. And isn't it interesting that the parties without quotas, the parties that choose and promote people on merit and not on gender not only have in Amanda the longest serving Cabinet Minister since Federation, but in Dame Margaret Guilfoyle and Jocelyn Newman, the second and third longest serving female Cabinet Ministers since Federation.
I can't let tonight go by without expressing my gratitude to Andrew Robb, who was the Campaign Director in that wonderful victory in 1996. To Lynton Crosby who was the organisational architect of our victories in 1998 and 2001 and to Brian Loughnane, who has so ably led the organisation since taking over and took us through our wonderful victory in 2004. Tony Staley and Shane Stone, the two Federal Presidents that I have had so much to do with in the time that I have been Prime Minister, and of course I welcome Chris McGiven as Federal President of the Party in consequence of Shane Stone's retirement.
I owe a special thanks also to my staff. Being the staff of a Prime Minister is no easy job and over the years I've had wonderful staff. I want to particularly acknowledge the presence here tonight of two long standing former staffers of mine who worked with me through some of the barren years of Opposition, namely Barbara Williams and Grahame Morris. I never forget Grahame Morris on the night of the 1996 election, probably told a few of  this story before but we were biting our fingernails and waiting for the first results to come through and we had the electorate office computer and we were in a large bedroom in the Intercontinental Hotel and I think Tony Staley and Nick Minchin and others may have been with us. Anyway, we finally saw some figures go up on the electorate office computer and I think it was the subdivision of Portland East in Macquarie. And the bloke from the Electoral Commission said now that's interesting, it's showing a swing of 16% in favour of the Coalition. And I sort of broke out in all sorts of delirious delight and Grahame Morris said hang on mate, there's only 83 people enrolled at that polling booth. Now as it sort of happened, although it was only 83 it proved to be a very accurate sample. But anyway, I certainly remember that night and I want to thank both of those people in particular for the wonderful work they did.
To my present staff I can't express too much to gratitude to Arthur Sinodinos and Tony Nutt and Tony O'Leary, the head of the Press Office and all the other members. Many of you know them. They're wonderful people, they keep me out of trouble, they give me great advice, they bring that blend of good policy and good politics and in the case of one of them, a passable attempt of interpreting the moods of the Australian Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery. They're a very important part of the democratic institutions of this country. But you sometimes need a bit of help in understanding them.
 There is one other person I would like to mention. He's not here tonight. I think he may be at the gathering tomorrow night but as a night like this is one where you look back and think of your early and formative years in politics, there's one person who I first met when I joined the Liberal Party who I don't mind saying has had more influence on my understanding of politics and the way I've tried to practice it over the years and that's the former Senate Leader Sir John Carrick, who I regard as my political mentor, somebody who explained to me some of the great historic shifts that were underway in Australian politics in the 1950s, in the 1960s. The need for the Liberal Party in those days to diversify its vote and to break down some of the class and religious divides that had allocated in a rather random fashion, the votes of the Australian people between the Liberal Party and the Labor Party.
And that brings me to the group of people who I owe the greatest debt to in a political sense and that is the real legends of the last ten years. The real legends of the last ten years ladies and gentlemen are, in a sense, none of the ones that I've mentioned. The real legends of the last ten years have been the marginal seat holders of the Coalition parties. When I look back, particularly to the 1998 election, where we were literally saved because of the circumstances of that election, we were saved by the quality of our marginal seat holders. I want to say to all of them here tonight, indeed to all of my colleagues, thank you very much for your understanding, for your loyalty, for the solidarity that you have displayed towards me, the discipline you've demonstrated, the willingness to accept decisions that we have taken, though on occasions you may not have liked. I think the discipline and the cohesion, not only of the Cabinet but also of the entire Parliamentary Party, has been exemplary and I do express my gratitude to you.
And finally, on a personal note can I express as best I can my simple thanks and heartfelt gratitude to my family. To my three wonderful children, Melanie, Tim and Richard and to Melanie's husband Rowan who we've been wonderfully blessed to have as part of our family over the last two years, I want to say thank you to you for the great support you've given us. Richard can't be here tonight, he's in the United States, but I'll ring him up at about half past five tomorrow morning and give him a detailed account of tonight because he's rather interested in politics. But they have been a wonderful source of support and love and inspiration to me and I can't say too much of the affection I feel towards them. And finally to Janette, who over the years has not only been my wife and life's companion and a source of great emotional support and love, but she's also been a wonderful guide. Janette is a person who is deeply committed to the future of this country. She provides to me an understanding and a point of view that sometimes, I find the views a little different from mine, but that's how it should be. I always listen and I do, as I should, take proper notice. But can I say to you Janette, I could not have achieved what I have achieved in public life without you. You have been the great supporter and stabiliser and adviser and counsellor over all of these years and I do thank you very warmly for it.
I end my remarks at this dinner in going back to what I said at the beginning. And the beginning of course was the 2nd of March 1996 and that is of all the emotions we felt on that night, the most important emotion was that of humility. To be a Member of Parliament is a huge privilege, to be able to form a Government is a huge privilege and for an individual to be Prime Minister of Australia is an unbelievable privilege. But it's a privilege I am pleased to share with all of my colleagues. They've all been part of it. It's their night tonight. They are owed as much praise and gratitude as might possibly come my way.
Can I say to all of you that the Australian people expect of us a commitment, they expect of us dedication. They trust us, they believe in us, but we begin to falter, if we begin to presume on their trust and their understanding, if we lose contact with their ordinary needs and their ordinary aspirations, they will surely and rightly and justifiably turn against us. I believe very strongly that the Australian people rarely get their electoral judgements wrong. We mightn't like some of their judgements. When we look back over the last 30 or 40 years they've been right on just about every occasion, if not every occasion. We must keep that in mind. They are wonderful supporters and they're very trusting if we're doing a good job, but they can be harsh judges and dismissive of us or indeed  any other group of politicians if we fall short of their legitimate expectation.
So to all of you, thank you for tonight. I thank our financial supporters who have stuck with us through thick and thin, I thank our branch members, our organisation. It's been a wonderful journey over the last ten years, but as Benjamin Disraeli famously once said 'finality is not a word owed to politics.' There is never an end. It's a bit like that ever receding finishing line that I often speak of. Tomorrow is another day, tomorrow is a day to rededicate ourselves to the ongoing service of the Australian people.
Thank you.


First of all, I congratulate and thank The Australian and Melbourne University Press for this book. I believe that it will make a very important contribution to debate about the last ten years and understanding of what has motivated the Government and what has motivated me. It is a wonderful example of The Australian newspaper in association with University Press playing out its role as the third of the three great pillars of the Australian democracy of which I speak. As you know I am an unrepentant opponent of a bill of rights. I believe very strongly in a parliamentary system. I still shake my head in disbelief when I read and hear of how many great issues that we debate in Parliament here in Australia are resolved by successive court decisions in the United States. We have just gone through, in our national Parliament, the exercise of a free and open vote on RU486. Although not directly a debate on abortion, nonetheless a debate which brought into play people's attitudes to abortion. Those debates, in a definitive way, do not occur in the United States Congress because those matters are resolved by the courts. And I do not want to see, with great respect and I have great respect for the judiciary of this country - it's had a remarkable record of incorruptibility- I don't want to see that occur in Australia.
 But the third of the three great pillars is of course a free and sceptical media. No politician is honest if he says that he always enjoys the freedom and the scepticism but it's indispensable to the functioning of our democracy. And can I say something about The Australian's contribution to national political debate. It has made, as a newspaper, a remarkable contribution. I think Michael's analysis of so many things about the way in which the media has developed is absolutely correct. I think back over the ten years that this Government has been in office and I think of the positions taken by The Australian newspaper. The Australian newspaper has been a broadly supportive, generously so, of the Government's economic reform agenda. A strong supporter, consistently, ever since many of us started talking about industrial relations reform, of industrial relations reform. It's only criticism of the Government is that it might not have gone far enough. I think it has. I think the Government's got the balance absolutely right Michael, I want to make that clear. To all of you out there who might be reporting these remarks, The Australian is a strong, but on occasions not uncritical supporter of taxation reform. The Australian of course, on the other hand, was of all the newspapers in Australia the most passionately consistent supporter of an Australian Republic, a position which brought it into conflict not with the Government, because the Government allowed a free vote on that issue, but certainly brought it into conflict with the elected head of the Government, myself. But The Australian waged a very passionate campaign.
It was a very strong supporter of our participation in the military operations in Iraq and I welcome very much the editorial it wrote last week in the wake of the publication of the hitherto unknown tapes that were captured in Iraq. On the other hand, as Michael points out, it's been a fierce, how shall I say, a fierce commentator on proceedings before the Cole Royal Commission, commentary which I follow on a daily basis with very great interest. And it has been critical, although supportive generally of our border protection policies, highly critical of aspects of the implementation, so indeed in relation to the implementation of our policies on asylum seekers.
So all of that adds up, if I may say so, and I hope with no offence to any other media representatives here today it all adds up to a newspaper that takes the national political debate very seriously, a newspaper that always engages my interest and a newspaper that sees it's role not only to report the economic news and the straight political news in terms of the contest between the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister, but also the broader debates about the culture of our country. So it's not surprising therefore that The Australian decided to produce this book and I marvel at the speed with which it has been produced. A couple of the contributors have complained to me in no uncertain terms that I spoilt their Christmas holidays and that they were under the whip from the editor to have the publication finished in time.
We do of course, we in politics and you in the media, have an ever closer interactive relationship. I think of that wonderful photograph that's appeared in many publications, of a press conference between John Curtin and the media in the 1940s when it was said that he talked very confidentially about the progress of the war. It's a wonderful old photograph and he's actually sitting in the very desk that I now use and I managed to rescue from the Old Parliament House some years ago, having been the original custom built desk for Prime Minister Bruce in 1927. And I think how far we've progressed. I think of the Menzies retirement press conference in 1966. I think of the changes, the enormous influence of radio current affairs programmes in the 1980s when programmes like AM and PM and in the case of AM still have extraordinary influence and sway. I think of course of that great Australian phenomenon, the rise and the influence of talkback radio. I've often been surprised in discussions with leaders of the opposition in the United Kingdom, and I've had this discussion with a number of them over the past few years, when I say well what about talkback radio as an influence on political discourse? In that country it is virtually non-existent. And because of the, I guess, the large metropolitan concentrations in Australia and plus the huge reach of the ABC across the whole country, radio as a method of communication has been quite remarkable.
It's all the more important therefore for the print media to respond to these challenges, to interact with them themselves, which they do, and to improve the quality, which certainly has been a goal of The Australian in every way that they can. I thought the media was a big part of my life when I became Prime Minister. I had no idea what a big part of my life it would be over the last ten years. If it was all pervasive and omnipresent in 1996, it is doubly or trebly so in 2006. We do live in a 24 hour news cycle, 7 days a week. Such is the character of the media and the presence of the media that vacuums occur a lot more rapidly than they used to. There was a time where if you had if you had an initiative a week you'd done very well and you'd provided enough for the media. You now need virtually an initiative a day. The journalists refrain, O'Leary keeps coming into my office and saying anything new, which is hardly surprising and entirely proper. But all of that means that there's a great interaction between us.
I have read this book. I think it's a very balanced book. I, like any other person who is the subject of detailed analysis, I am always interested in people's views of me and of my Government. But I think it's a very professional job and I hope that it receives wide readership and generates interest. What struck me about the book was not the predictable areas of focus such as our economic policy, our foreign policy, the political contest, but some of the other chapters. Can I say that I thought Paul Kelly's analysis of the style of the Government was thoughtful and accurate and I think it reflected some of the things that we have tried to do, particularly the restoration of Cabinet as being the authentic, disciplined, orthodox decision making body. We do have more, I guess, presidential Prime Ministers than we used to have, simply because of the media and the way in which our society is organised. And one of the things, I think I've said this recently, that I find that I'm asked to have a view and to comment on things that perhaps 20 years ago a Prime Minister wouldn't have been asked to have a view on or comment on and as a result, there's more focus on the person who is the head of the government. But we have tried to restore the central decision making role of the government and I am especially proud of the success we have had compared with other countries in establishing more effective, whole of government responses to challenges that the country has. And the best example of that of course is the National Security Committee of Cabinet, which has met very frequently and operated extremely effectively in responding to the enormous challenges that this country faces in the area of terrorism and associated issues. And Paul's chapter I think brings that out very well.
I was particularly interested in two other chapters, not because I was less interested in the others but because they came at things from a slightly different perspective. I'm thinking of Imray's analysis of the Australian idiom and my passing attempts to embrace it and the analysis he brings of the different methods of language and communication in Australia. I thought it was an interesting and atypical chapter. And of course I don't know how she found the time to do it given her forensic focus on another issue, but Carolyn Ovington's analysis of South Park conservatives was not only interesting but perceptive. It is true and this really relates back to the picket fence. And this is the point I tried to make in the interview I had with Tony Wright from the Bulletin this week that the Y Generation is different, profoundly different from the younger, baby boomer generation. I don't think any of us have a complete fix on why that is so. I think there is, in a sense, a natural reaction as every generation of the young, through the ages, there has been some kind of reaction against the attitudes of their parents. But it is true that families and relationships bulk very large in their lives and anybody who imagines for a moment that somehow or other the Y Generation had grown beyond the notion of the emotional security that a family brings them has really no fundamental understanding of the nature of the Australian people.
We have been successful beyond my expectations on a number of occasions on getting a fair share of support from that section of the Australian community. We haven't sought to garner it by embracing every new contemporary, trendy cause that may have been around because that it to stereotype and to misunderstand the character of the aged cohort with which we are dealing.
 So can I say to Nick and to Michael and to Robert, the publisher and to Melbourne University Press, I wish this enterprise well. It has been of course an extraordinary journey over the last ten years. It's a journey that I have travelled with many people in this room. The nature of Australian politics and the nature of the relationship between a Prime Minister and the Press Gallery is one of, on occasions, caution, scepticism and wariness. But it's an important relationship and I hope that in that time, I have practiced what I preached, and that is that the media do have a right to assert vigorously and without compromise, their views. No democratic process is complete without a free and sceptical media. I will differ with media coverage. I'll have my arguments with those who write about and talk about this Government. But where I do have differences, I have endeavoured to express them openly and very directly in a public manner, rather than to use other methods of registering my complaints and concerns and I will continue. Perhaps one or two occasions in the past couple of weeks, demonstrated my views on certain issues where they have been very different from one of my co-hosts today. But such is the character of political debate. I believe in a free media, but a free media must accept in the nature of the expression it will come under criticism and it will be made accountable. We live in an age of accountability. We are all more and more accountable than we've ever been in the past and anybody who thinks they can turn back the clock on accountability is deluding themselves. That applies to Prime Ministers, that applies to political correspondents and it applies to Editors. It applies to all of us.
I think the Howard Factor is making a contribution to serious, informed political debate. I am grateful for the publication of the book. I wish it well. I think it's a fair account of the subjects that its covered in the main and I thank you very much for inviting me here today and I launch it, I wish it well and I hope it returns some dividend to its publisher.
Thank you.
  [ends]  


I think that it is about 10 years, almost to the minute, that we were officially able to claim victory in the Wentworth Hotel in Sydney on the 2nd of March 1996. Peter, I thank you very warmly for your introduction, I thank you very warmly for your kind words and can I say of all the people to whom I owe so much in the parliamentary party and in the political community in Australia, there is nobody I owe more to than you for the great contribution you have made to the success of the last 10 years, I thank you very much.
 As you rightly said it has been a team effort. This is not just a night of celebrations - there I said the word - this is not just a night for celebration for John Howard; it is also a night for all of us to reflect with some pride, with humility always, but with a sense of real justification and satisfaction. And as I think of the contribution that you have made Peter, as the principal architect of the successful economic policies, of the contribution that has been made by so many of my colleagues over the last 10 years, I think of the importance, the centrality of the strong Coalition between the Liberal and National Parties to our success. This is a Liberal Party dinner, but the last 10 years have belonged very much to that coalition between the Liberal and National Party.
 There is no other way for the parties to relate to each other than to be in coalition. Any who entertain the idea that we would be better off running on our own should forget it because they haven't read Australian political history. Apart from a brief period between 1996 and 1998 the Liberal Party could never have governed in its own right and I have got to tell you that the concept of leading a minority government has never been something that I have particularly warmed to. So can I say how very important it is on a night like this to reaffirm the importance of the Coalition, for me to thank Mark Vaile and John Anderson and Tim Fischer and all of my other National Party colleagues over the years for the work that they have done.
 Tonight is also a night for me to say a special word of thanks to the New South Wales division. It is the division of which I have been a member since 1958. It is a division where I first meet representatives of a remarkable generation of Australians. They were, in the main, people who had returned from active service in World War II and had joined a new, still fledgling party led by the then Robert Gordon Menzies, or RG Menzies, they used initials a lot more in those days. You were RG Menzies, JB Chifley, AA Calwell and so forth. And that party contained a group of people whose values had been forged during some of the difficult years of the Great Depression and they had risked their lives, and all too many had lost them defending our freedom in World War II. It was a party of people who were determined to build a greater and better Australia after World War II. I meet a number of people there who influenced me and shaped my political views and many of them are here tonight but one I want to mention in particular, I owe more to him in terms of being a political mentor than anybody else I have known in my political life and I am talking of that great treasure of the New South Wales division of the Liberal Party, John Leslie Carrick.
Some people have accused me of perpetual campaigning, that as soon as one election has finished I start on the next one and it is true, I do. It is a lesson that John Carrick taught me and that immortal phrase whenever he addressed a campaign gathering that 'you can't fatten the pig on market day' and it is a reminder to all of us that if you leave the campaigning to the day before the election it is pretty hard to win and you have got be on the job from the close of polling on one election and never cease until the polling booths close the following time, and then start all over again, that is essentially why it is perpetual. But to John and to all the other people of which he is emblematic I owe so much. They taught me a lot about politics, they taught me to understand the importance of carrying on a conversation with the Australian public. They taught me to understand the importance of perpetual contact with the Australian public, to understand that the commonsense of the Australian people is immense. The Australian people rarely get their political decisions wrong. We look back over the years, let's face it, even when we haven't liked it, the Australian people have been right in the decisions that they have taken. So as we gather tonight, I want to express my deep thanks to Liberals all around Australia. Because we are here in Sydney, I want to congratulate the New South Wales division on the extraordinary contribution that it has made to our federal position over the last 10 years. In terms of the number of seats we hold as a percentage of the number of seats in New South Wales, the Liberal Party is stronger now in the Federal Parliament than it has been at any time since it was created in 1944.
 You think of all of the new people that have come into the Parliament, not only for New South Wales but from around Australia over the last 10 years. It encourages us to be optimistic because we have been able to renew, and we have been able to renew with people who represent all the talents of the Australian community. We don't draw most of our new members from the trade union movement, or from political staff, much in all as we have benefited from drawing quite a number of our people from political staff and they have an important contribution to make. But if we are to remain relevant as a political party, it is essential that we continue to attract people who have done something outside politics with their lives before they seek to run for parliament. It is important that we have people, who understand small business, it is important that we have people who have a professional background and it is important  who've been in some of the great teaching professions. In other words, we need a broad cross-section of the Australian community. One of our great federal strengths has been that we have been able to do that over the last 10 years. Can I say, as I did last night a special word of thanks to all, of course, of our Federal parliamentary members, but a special word of thanks to our marginal seat holders. Those of you who have been deeply involved in the organisation here in New South Wales for a long time will remember the depths of despair to which we fell after the 1993 election when the Liberal representation from New South Wales was to say the least, pathetic - the Liberal representation in the Federal Parliament. And as a result of the energy of the organisation, the energy of people like Bill Heffernan as the State President, we set about attracting candidates who have now become household names in Australian politics. People like Bob Baldwin, Kerry Bartlett, and Jo Gash and Jackie Kelly, and so the list goes on. People who were in 1996 to be the spearhead of our victory and to lay the foundation, not only for that victory but also by reason of their campaign skills in 1998, which let's face it, was a very difficult election for the Coalition. To use that famous phrase of Sir Humphrey's, 'we were courageous.' We went to an election promising a new tax, that was very courageous. And the tremendous campaigning skills of those people, not only in New South Wales, but all around Australia meant that we were able to hold on, so I pay a special tribute to the marginal seat holders of the Federal Coalition. In the end, they are the people that have sustained us and kept us in office and a great many of them are here tonight.
 To the organisation and everybody who has worked and to all of you here tonight who have over the years helped us financially; I have been asked a few questions about the nature of these gatherings and I said we want to mark the occasion and if, along the way, we can raise a few bob then I don't mind that happening either, I don't mind how many bobs there are that we raise along the way, but I do very sincerely thank people who support the Liberal Party financially. It is not always easy to do so. It is not easy to do so. We have had a few spectacular examples in the last few months, in the last few years, of people who have vilified under parliamentary privilege by our political opponents. Why? Because they have had the temerity to support the Liberal Party, and for that to be publicly known.
It is easy if you belong to a trade union, because you dissolve into the anonymity of a group donation and there is no individual opprobrium in any way that attaches to you. So I want to take this opportunity and there are many people here tonight who have stuck by our party through thick and thin, I know them well and I am deeply grateful for the support that they have given us. It is bit easier now, we are doing well, it wasn't so easy 10 years ago, or 15 years ago, it was awful and you risked often discrimination and persecution. I remember what happened to the Housing Industry Association after the 1993 election because they strongly supported our industrial relations policy the Labor Government of Mr Keating refused to talk to them for a couple of years simply because they had publicly supported us. So let me take this opportunity of thanking all of those people who have stuck to us for their generosity and their commitment to our political cause.
 My friends, tonight is a night to reflect on the past, but it is also a night to look forward to the future. I want to spend a few moments to talk about some of the challenges that face our nation in the years ahead. There are five of them in my view.
The first of course is our national security and global engagement because all Australians have a right to live and work and raise their families in a secure nation. Australia faces large strategic challenges over coming decades, from global terrorism to the threat of weapons proliferation to the gradual rebalancing of global power that is likely to accompany the rise of China and India. At the same time, we live in a world where the most serious threats to Australia come from state weakness rather than from state strength because the problem of weak and failing states lies at the core of our global engagement.
More optimistically, in my Australia Day address a few weeks ago I made the point that one of the most important global developments in the 21st Century is the emergence for the first time of a truly global middle-class, one that increasingly will be concentrated in the developing world. Next week, I will make my second visit to India as Prime Minister, a recognition of that country's emergence not only as a major Asian power and global power but at the degree to which a rising Indian middle class now numbered at between 250 and 300 million is part of a larger trend. As a country we in Australia need to explore and take advantage of the policy interface between Australia and a rising global middle class.
 The second challenge is to maintain the process of economic modernisation and reform in this country. Australia's spent a great deal of the 20th Century in gradual, relative economic decline. The experience of the last decade stands in stark contrast to the point that Australia is now seen as an exemplar of the benefits of sustained economic growth. Since the mid-1980s a number of Australian industries have made productivity gains relative to the world's best practice. The number of industries with productivity levels above that of their United States counterparts, for example, has improved greatly over this period. We know, for example, that Australia's mining sector is amongst the most productive in the world and more productive than that of the United States. Developments in China, India and elsewhere appear to be generating a further shift in Australia's comparative advantage in favour of resources. Australia's financial services sector has been another of the great success stories of the last 20 years because Australia has gone from being a regulated, cosseted financial system to now having world-class financial arrangements and world-leading finance houses.
The third challenge is to ensure that government services meet the needs of a changing society and an ageing population. Australia is well-placed to respond to intergenerational pressures because the strength of our fiscal position is so obvious and we have a targeted, and properly so, social security safety net. The great challenge is to get the best out of Australia's social infrastructure, health, aged care and other community services, which account for a sizeable and growing share of our national wealth and are keys to our future living standards. This inevitably will test the mettle and maturity of our federal system. We need to be able to work across the federation to identify national solutions to national problems. The most recent COAG meeting showed that with determination and goodwill on all sides, this can be done. The Australian people rightly expect their political leaders at all levels of government to cooperate in the best interests of the nation. And can I say on that point that over the years as I have interacted with the Australian people in so many ways one of many strong messages have come through to me and one of them is that they are tired, they are sick and tired of buck-passing and blame-shifting between the Federal Government and State Governments. Whenever I say to them 'something is a state issue, or a this or that issue' their response to me is Prime Minister, or John, or sometimes something else, their response to me is very simple. You're the Prime Minister, you fix it. In other words they want outcomes, they want solutions. They don't want buck passing between different levels of Government.
 The fourth of our great national challenges is to ensure that our use of natural resources is placed on a sustainable basis for future generations. We do live, as the saying goes, in a very fragile continent. We have a responsibility to use our natural assets and resources wisely to achieve prosperity and security and sustainability in energy. And to surmount what I regard as our greatest conservation challenge, and that is our nation's water use.
And the fifth challenge is in some ways our greatest. And that is to maintain our great national unity, our social cohesion and above all our egalitarian spirit. I am proud of what this Government has done to modernise our social welfare system and to support the weak and vulnerable in our society. And we run the risk of not talking about this enough because our great economic strength has given us the capacity to do this. We need to find innovative ways to break the vicious cycles of poor parenting, low levels of education, unemployment and health problems that can afflict some individuals and communities. And we need to reinforce the virtuous cycles of caring families, strong learning environments, good jobs and healthy lifestyles that allow others to succeed in a competitive world. We need to find ways of restoring order to zones of chaos in some homes and communities, zones of chaos that can wreck young Australian lives.
 The whole point of this Government's idea of a social coalition in welfare policy is that Government will play its role, but individuals and families and businesses also have responsibilities to fulfil if Australia is to truly tackle disadvantage in our community. This is an acute challenge which many indigenous communities face. But it is in no way confined to indigenous communities. The indigenous leader Noel Pearson has made the point powerfully that people living in welfare dependent communities are poor and alienated regardless of their colour or their location. The major economic reforms of the last two decades and the immense economic strength that has resulted have in some ways opened up these deeper social policy questions to become the new frontier of policy development and innovation.
 I've taken a moment to talk about those great national challenges because if gatherings such as this are to have meaning, they should not just be a justifiable reflection on past success and past achievement. They should be an opportunity for us to focus again on what is our great responsibility and that is, to serve the interests of all of the Australian people. And tonight, as was last night, is an opportunity to rededicate ourselves to the service of all of the Australian people. And can I, on that note, say that I am delighted that Peter Debnam is here tonight as the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition because he has a task ahead of him. It's a big task, he has a big mountain to climb, but he's made a very, very good start. And can I say that the people of New South Wales Peter, they want a change of government. I think they're aching for a change of government.
 And there's a great responsibility on you and a great responsibility on the party organisation here in New South Wales to get the best candidates, even if some of them aren't now members of the Liberal Party. You need men and women capable of winning seats from the Labor Party. You ought to choose them on the basis of the contribution they can make and their capacity to win the seats, not on the basis of their past affiliations with any section or group of the Liberal Party at the present. It's a great opportunity and I hope the message I convey by that is understood by all of those who should understand it.
Let me finish on a personal note and that is that everything that I have achieved in public life has been due overwhelmingly to the support that I have received from my family. From my wonderful wife Janette, whose advice I unerringly accept. On many occasions I have been invited in a very polite way to do things that sort of run the risk of me making a fool of myself, and there's always an injunction saying 'don't you dare do that' and like any other Australian man I take that advice and I don't do it. But to Janette, you've been a wonderful source of counsel and comfort and advice and I can't express too fully the affection I feel for you and the gratitude I owe to you for everything you've done.
I've got two of my three children here tonight, Melanie and her wonderful husband Rowan, and Tim, and I spoke to my younger son Richard in the United States this morning and we reminisced a bit about that night ten years ago. But to have your family with you, and one of my brothers Stan and his wife are here with a lot of my close friends, some from school and some from university and some from more recent years. It's a nice feeling on an occasion like this to have people around you. But tonight is a night for all of us. It's a night for me to say again to all of my colleagues, to Mark and Peter especially and all the other colleagues who are here tonight, and to thank again Alexander Downer who is not here tonight for the wonderful contribution he made 11 years ago in putting the interests of the party ahead of his own. And to everyone else, to the party organisation, to you Geoff, who has taken over as State President, I thank you very warmly. The strength of this organisation here in New South Wales is clear and evident. But I want to say in that context what a great job Paul Nicolau does in relation to the Millennium Forum.  Paul has, in my opinion, a long career ahead of him in the cause of the Liberal Party if that is his decision. I wish him well. He's a great Liberal and he's done wonderful things for this organisation and I appreciate the friendship and support that he's extended to me.
But to all of you, thank you, enjoy yourselves. It's been a wonderful ten years, but it was Disraeli who said that finality is not a word known to politics. There is more work to be done tomorrow. We return to it. We rededicate ourselves to one thing, not our own self-aggrandisement but we rededicate ourselves to the service of all of the Australian people.
 Thank you.   


Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Mr Kamal Nath, the Minister for Commerce and Industry, Charles Goode, Chairman of ANZ and Woodside, Dr J J Irani, Mr Vishnu R Dusad, Mr Chugh and Mr Poddar and Mr Aggarwal, Associated Chambers of Commerce, High Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen.
Could I tell Mr Nath that yes, I do, I suppose have ten fingers on trade matters. I found back in the late 1970s when as a rather fledgling Minister I started dealing with the member countries of the then European Common Market and unless you exercised every part of your brain and your anatomy in grappling with them you would not get very far and nothing has changed over the last 28 years. The European Union, on matters relating to agriculture, which is important, not only to Australia but also to India, remains as obdurate and as obstinate and as uncooperative as ever.
Ladies and gentlemen, I first visited New Delhi in 1964. I was not then a Member of Parliament, it was in fact ten years before I became a Member of Parliament. I'd just qualified as a lawyer and I was embarking on that traditional Australian thing of going away for a year or two and centring myself in London and doing Europe.  But I decided that before going to Europe I would travel through Asia and one of the countries I chose to go to was India. I didn't stay long enough here but I've not forgotten that experience and one of the things I did when I was here was I wandered into the Supreme Court and I sat in on a constitutional case. It was an argument between the central government in New Delhi and the States and I felt very much at home, because that sort of thing occurs constitutionally in other respects in Australia. And it reminded me of just how many things we had in common. The proceedings were conducted in English. At one stage, one of the counsel for the States argued on the basis of a couple of decisions of the High Court of Australia, cases that I was still vaguely familiar with from my time at the law school because I'd never really gone on to develop a large constitutional practice after I left the law school, and I did feel very much at home.
 And in a way, well that was a metaphor for the relationship between Australia and India at the time. There is a lot of history and there is a lot of tradition to it. It was nice if you sort of understood all that part of it. We spoke the English language; we had the common historical association with Great Britain and the Commonwealth and all of those sorts of things. But in 1964 it was a pretty dormant relationship in other respects apart from sport. We didn't trade as much as we do now, our foreign policies were at that time, I think it's honest enough to say, about as far apart as you could possibly get. India was then determinedly a non-aligned country in terms of foreign policy. That was its right. I don't offer any criticism; I simply make it as an observation. And really, in all the years that have gone by, it's only in the last decade or more that that has begun to change and change very profoundly.
Essentially we still have those historical ties. Thankfully we still have the common bonds of language because it does make it so much easier and English is so much the language of international business and commerce and that is enormously to the advantage of both of our countries.
India's economic progress in the last decade or so has been nothing short of spectacular and it's commanding the attention of every country in the world. If I could just of course put in a bit of a plug for my own country if any of you might think that's necessary, there are a lot of statistics spouted about the Australian economy and it has done very well. One that came to my notice by courtesy of my Treasurer Peter Costello - a few days ago he made the observation that in population size, Australia is number 53 in the world, but our economy is the 14th largest which is a reasonable illustration of the strength and the sophistication and the virility of the Australian economy.
Our sporting links are, of course, legendary and I want to say something very briefly about those in a moment amongst a number of small announcements I have to make. But before I come to that, the best way I can perhaps describe the significance of where India is in the world today and therefore the great significance of the relationship between our two countries is that in so many ways, India is approaching a special rendezvous with her destiny.   India was always destined to be the power that she is rapidly becoming. India was always destined because of her size, the basic strength of her institutions, the diversity of her cultural and religious makeup, yet bound by a common commitment to the future of the country and also her capacity to interact and change as the world has changed. I feel that Australia is part of that advance by India towards that very special destiny.
Now this hasn't happened by accident. The economic changes that have been undertaken started way back in the 1990s when the Indian economy began to open up and its leaders began to recognise that we had moved into a world of globalisation. There has been a lot of debate about globalisation, but it's pretty obvious I think to most people now that globalisation is something that's rather like the weather. It's here and it's not going to go away and people who think that we can reverse globalisation, that we can stop the spinning of the wheel of globalisation and get off are completely deluding themselves. And what we have to do is take advantage of globalisation and those countries in Asia that began to take advantage of globalisation earlier in time than others are those countries that have done extremely well. And beginning in the early 1990s, India began to open her economy and the results of course have been put on display by the earlier speakers and I won't repeat the figures.
But I do want to touch very briefly on the point that was made at the beginning and the size of India's middle class because India's middle class is really about the most significant thing that's so far come along in the 21st Century and that is the rapid emergence of a global middle class. For the first time in the history of the world, the middle class's epicentre is going to be in Asia and not in Europe and North America. Through all of human history until now, you spoke of a middle class and you talked of Europe, you talked of North America, you talked of Australasia and tiny pockets in South America and Asia and even tinier pockets in Africa. But now and increasingly as the years go by, the two countries that will comprise a middle class that will match, and in time surpass that of Europe and the United States are of course India and China. And the significance of that, not only for this part of the world, but the significance of that for a country like Australia is enormous, the significance of that for the countries of Europe and North America is also enormous. And India of course will play a growing and ever influential role and that of course is why the relationship between our two countries is of such enormous significance.
Our relationship of course is not only an economic one; it is also a strategic one. We both share a common endeavour in resisting and fighting terrorism. We may have different perspectives about countries such as Iraq; we can barely have a different perspective about a country such as Afghanistan, a country very near to India, a country with which India shares so much, a country which is struggling to embrace democracy. And as the Minister said, as the sixth oldest continually functioning democracy in the world, Australia interacting with numerically the biggest democracy in the world, we both have a common interest in the success of the democratic embrace that is within the achievement of Afghanistan.
 As a country which is friendly to both India and Pakistan, I welcome very warmly the improved relations that have occurred between the two countries in recent years regarding the vexed issue of Kashmir. I don't intend for a moment that the dispute is settled. Knowing something of the history of it and the complexity of it and the intensity of feeling on both sides I can only say that the improvement in the climate is remarkable, the gesture of India towards Pakistan in the wake of the tragic earthquake last year was an earnest of your country's goodwill and your country's good intentions.
 Australia seeks in every way a partnership with India where we can work together for peace and stability in the region. I welcome the growing defence links between our two countries. Our military traditions are not entirely dissimilar. They have some many common origins and in particular I welcome the fact that this afternoon after my meeting with the Prime Minister there will be a Memorandum of Understanding signed on defence cooperation. And this will be a formal expression of our mutual interest in working together more closely in defence matters.
India will be an observer at the Proliferation Security Initiative exercise in Darwin, Australia next moth. I welcome that fact and I hope, in time, India may see the wisdom of becoming a member of the Proliferation Security Initiative. I welcome the attendance of India at the inaugural meeting in Sydney on the 12th of January this year on the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate, which brings together India and China and Japan and Australia and the United States and Korea, a group of countries all committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, but not necessarily all seeing that the complete realisation of that goal can be achieved through the Kyoto approach.
 Our bilateral trade, of course, has grown enormously. Our two-way trade in goods and services totalled $9.4 billion last year. India is now Australia's sixth largest merchandise export market, and as an export destination has grown faster than any of our other top 30 export markets over the past five years.
  Energy of course plays a critical role in our economic relationship and I know in your minds will be the agreement signed between the United States and India only three days ago regarding the nuclear industry. This will be an issue to be discussed between myself and the Indian Prime Minister later today and I will be interested to hear more about that arrangement and I will be interested to hear the views that the Prime Minister may wish to put to me in relation to it.
Australia supplies 25 per cent of India's gold market, and Australian coal is used in more than 50 per cent of the steel that is produced in India. And with the large global increase in demand for energy, the international market for some resources - such as LNG - is extremely tight and I am encouraged that people from both India and Australia are working on these issues and I note that the leader of the Australian delegation Mr Charles Goode of Woodside is with us today and his knowledge of those matters is very, very impressive indeed.
The establishment of the Australia-India Joint Working Group on Energy and Minerals will be an important vehicle to address these issues. I am very pleased that this afternoon I will witness, with the Prime Minister, the signing of an Australia-India Trade and Economic Framework Agreement and this will provide an important basis for the facilitation and the future development of the trade and economic relationship and it will encourage closer strategic cooperation in many of the key economic sectors.  As you know Mr Chairman, I have brought with me on this visit, or I have been accompanied, let me put it that way, on this visit by a very representative and senior group of Australian businessmen, that of course, represent the hope of the future so far as economic cooperation between India and Australia is concerned. There is only so much that governments can do unless businessmen and women from both countries make the appropriate decisions and give the appropriate business leadership, nothing is going to be achieved. But it is of course the role of governments to do everything they can to facilitate business development.
As I said a moment ago, the relationship is not just an economic one; its people-to-people contacts and cooperation across diverse aspects represent a very significant element of this relationship and developing contacts in education and in science is of critical importance. I should note that right at the moment, Professor Ian Frazer is currently visiting India and he is the current Australian of the Year and he is highlighting on his visit Australian expertise in medical research.  Professor Frazer has developed a vaccine against cervical cancer and this extraordinary achievement will benefit millions of women around the world, not least in developing countries.
And against this background, let me announce that the Australian Government will allocate $25 million over the next five years to support bilateral research collaboration through the Strategic Research Fund and Exchange Scholarships.
I am also delighted to announce that we are signing a Biotechnology Memorandum of Understanding which will foster research cooperation in a field with significant potential
Australia is also becoming an increasingly favoured destination for Indian students.  Over 25,000 students studying in Australia in 2005, mainly postgraduate study by coursework, India is as mentioned earlier, now our second largest market for students.  The numbers of Indian students coming to Australia has grown by about 35 per cent in the three-year period from 2002 to 2005.
  India is now our second fastest growing inbound tourism market, and we expect that process to accelerate. And to facilitate this growth, I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government will allow Indian citizens to access our tourist e-visa scheme, with implementation to occur later this year.
   With the rapid expansion of tourism and education links between our two countries, I am pleased that I will be witnessing this afternoon the signing of the bilateral air services agreement to which reference was made a few moments ago.   This will allow an Indian carrier into the Australia-India aviation market either operating its own aircraft services or in cooperation with an Australian carrier under code share arrangements.  It will provide greater commercial flexibility for airlines to undertake their operations and provide better services for passengers.
 It can only assist the understanding between the peoples of our two countries when we have Australian TV stars featuring in Indian films, as was the case with the movie Salaam Namaste, which many of you have obviously seen and can pronounce the title better than I just did.   Mr Chairman, the Indian entertainment industry is accessing Australia's expertise in film production and services - and featuring Australian cities in its movies, which must now be very, very familiar to many Indian movie-goers.
  And of course the Minister mentioned the Commonwealth Games which will start in Melbourne next week to be followed four years later by the Commonwealth Games here in New Delhi. And that great coming together of the young men and women of the Commonwealth is an event which is a reminder of the size and diversity of that organisation.
I mentioned as other speakers inevitably do whenever there is a gathering of Australians and Indians the common link we have through sport and most particularly, cricket. It goes without saying that of all of the figures in that great game that graced the playing fields of Australia or India or England or indeed anywhere else, none acquired greater fame that Donald George Bradman. And that name still embodies a very special magic and it was truly remarked to me some years ago by another Indian Prime Minister that the best known Australian names in India are undoubtedly Bradman and Border and perhaps in more recent years the name of Steve Waugh could well be added to those two names. And equally from Australia's point of view there is no better known Indian name than that of Sachin Tendulkar.
But Bradman of course is universally recognised as the greatest player the game has produced and I'm therefore very proud to announce that the Australian Government will contribute $1 million in sponsorship towards the Bradman Exhibition tour of India. This will be a unique display of Bradman memorabilia - a display which is unparalleled in the cricketing world.   The exhibition is being assembled specifically for the Indian public, so that as many people as possible in this cricket loving country will have the opportunity to see it first hand.  The Exhibition will travel to New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata later this year.
Ladies and gentlemen, my objective today has been to try and put into proper context the relationship between our two countries. It is a relationship built on shared values, it's a relationship bound together by a common commitment to democracy, it's a relationship made easy by a common language, it's a relationship which is enriched and enthused by our common participation in a number of sports that we all love.
But it's also a relationship which is built on a hard-headed assessment of our respective interests. We can benefit from a closer economic relationship. India has many assets that are of great benefit to Australia. It has superbly educated, intelligent people, not only in IT but in many fields of human endeavour. Australia likewise has high quality, well-educated scientists and doctors and lawyers and accountants. We have very high standards of corporate governance. We understand the importance of the sanctity of private property and business dealings and both of our countries and most particularly the business communities of our two societies recognise that in a globalised world, investment goes to where the better return exists and the security of your investment is most likely guaranteed. And both of our societies place an enormous premium therefore on high standards of corporate governance and the security of a mature legal system.
Circumstances have brought us together. We have an opportunity in the early part of the 21st Century to build that relationship and to build it in a partnership which brings together the areas of our economy which complement each other.
I was last in India five years ago. The Minister rightly remarked that this country has changed enormously in that five-year period, and so indeed has the relationship. On behalf of all of the Australians present, I know I speak for them in saying to our Indian hosts thank you very much and to you in particular Minister for having us here. I hope that this visit, in a significant way, makes a contribution to bringing our two countries ever closer together.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very, very much. Mr Menon, High Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to be here in the commercial and business capital of India to have an opportunity of sharing, for a few moments with you, the reasons why I believe that the links, commercial and otherwise, between our two societies stand on the threshold of greater depth and greater expansion in the years ahead. I want to particularly acknowledge the presence here today of all of the businessmen who have come from Australia at the time of my visit. I think it is important in relations between Australia and countries such as India to emphasise the fact that in the end, it is arrangements and investments and deals made at a business level in the private sector that determine the generation of wealth and determine the strength of trade and economic relations.
 The role of government in our society in Australia is to help facilitate, create the right economic climate and then get out of the way and allow those who risk their money and who make the decisions to get on with what they do best. And I am pleased to report to our Indian guests that the health of the Australia economy is something of which all Australians can be particularly proud. We are now in the fifteenth year of uninterrupted economic growth. We've had over the past few years an enviable series of economic statistics. We've seen our inflation remain at a very low level, we've seen our interest rates at historically low levels, we've seen unemployment fall to a 30-year low. At the end of this financial year the national Government will have no net debt, and when one looks at the averages of, I don't mind you applauding that, please go ahead. If you look at the average of the OECD which is somewhere in the order of 48 to 50 percent, that is a remarkable performance.
 Can I also say that one of the statistics of which I am especially proud is the fact that over the past ten to fifteen years, the number of self employed people has grown exponentially. People increasingly in Australia are starting their own businesses, women as well as men, particularly operating businesses from home. Both men and women are starting businesses and taking risks and investing and that is a response to a very strong economic climate. So that is the strength and the optimism of the country with which you, our Indian guests, will deal not only now but in the years ahead.
Australia, of course, has a population of only 20 million people. I can also give you another statistic. We are 53rd in population size of the countries of the world but our economy is the 14th largest and that is evidence of the way in which we have been able to punch and trade above our weight around the world. Australia, of course, in the past few years has derived enormous benefit from our trade links with other nations in the Asia Pacific region. Japan remains Australia's best customer. China has risen very sharply, particularly as a purchaser of our gas and coal and iron ore and Korea has also been a very welcome and a very strong purchaser of much of our energy product.
 India historically has had a very close relationship with Australia but it has been a relationship built more on history and commonality of culture and language and institutions rather than on the strength of the economic links. But that has begun to change, and change very significantly in recent years. Of the 30 major export destinations from Australia, the growth in Australia's exports to India has been greater than any of the other 29. So the pace with which our relationship has begun to pick up in recent years in worth noting. I have included in this delegation representatives of the education sector and I welcome in particular the Vice Chancellor of Melbourne University. And I mention that to make the point that India is now our second largest source of overseas students, and Australia, I understand, is the number 3 destination choice of Indian students going abroad after the United States and the United Kingdom. And given the background in relation to the links with those two countries, that is a remarkable achievement.
 Now all of that is good, and all of that is extremely pleasing, but as I've learnt from 10 years in my present job, you only have to talk about the past for a cynical journalist, or a commentator, or indeed quite properly a citizen of the country to say 'well that's all very well John, but what about the future?' And it's about the future that we're concerned about today.
The most remarkable thing about India of course is that India is a major contributor, indeed a pivotal partner, in the emergence of this remarkable economic development of the 21st Century and that is a truly global middle class. When I was much younger, when you learnt about the economics of the world, you learnt about the structure of society around the world. You associated the middle class with the nations of Europe and North America with just small fragments from Asia, and Africa and South America and of course Australasia. That of course has now all changed.
India has a middle class of what 200, 250 million, China the same. In ten years time, the middle classes of India, China and Japan together will equal or exceed those of North America and Europe. I say that as a flat statement of fact. I am neither applauding it nor condemning it because we are all part of this planet, we're all part of the globe and we all must share it and live in harmony. But it does mean that the centre of gravity of economic activity is profoundly shifting to this part of the world and right at the centre of that is India. And from my point of view, as Prime Minister of Australia, I want Australia to remain very much at the centre of it. And that means maintaining not only our very strong relations, traditional relations with our existing big trading partners and I pay tribute to the contribution that Japan and Korea and China and many others have made to the current strength of the Australian economy, but I also want to see that Australia is very much a part of that global middle class and is a participant and a partner and a friend of India. We have a lot going for us in the relationship. The barrier of language is not there and the common institutions and the relatively common legal systems are of enormous advantage. And the diversity of the business delegation that has come on this visit is, I hope, a message to the business community of India that we in Australia are serious. We're serious at a government level; we're also very serious at a commercial level. And we are keen as a government to do everything that we can to promote that relationship.
  At a political level our two countries are talking more, perhaps, than ever before. There was a time, let's be frank about it, many decades ago in the relationship between Australia and India where our political views were very divergent. At the time of the Cold War, India had a profoundly non-aligned policy. I don't condemn it, I simply mark it as a fact of history, whereas Australia was profoundly part of a Western alliance and it remains so proudly today. But as time has gone by, the Cold War has ended. The old divide between the United States and the Soviet Union is something of history.
 We have new challenges which have brought Australia and India together. We have the challenge of terrorism in our part of the world. It's a challenge that Australia has responded to through our involvement in Afghanistan and also in Iraq. It's a challenge that generates quite legitimately, political debate around the world and not least here in India. But all of us have a stake in fighting terrorism. Terrorism is the enemy of democracy, it is the enemy of free people and there is no country that has more proudly defended and practiced democracy than India. I said last night at the State Dinner given to me by the Prime Minister that when India became independent in 1947 there were plenty of cynics who said it wouldn't last. And in the 1960s, one well known journalist from one of the English newspapers rather boldly predicted that the election of 1967 would be the last democratic election to be held in India.
 Now he and many of the other cynics were proved wrong. And when you think of the troubled birth of this country, the terrible tragedy that accompanied the partition of India, it is a remarkable tribute to the resilience of the people of this country and their commitment to democracy. It is a commitment that has been more sorely tested for the current generation of Indians than it has been tested for the current generation of Australians. We've taken it as our natural existence and something that we really just take for granted as we get up in the morning. India has not been so fortunate and it makes the continuing embrace of democracy in this country all the more meritorious.
So my friends, there is every reason for us to be optimistic about our shared future. India's economic strength coming off the base of very courageous economic reforms, many of them initiated by the current Prime Minister of India when he was Finance Minister in the early 1990s. India's economy has been liberalised, it's more welcoming to foreign investment, it has reduced its tariffs, it has floated its exchange rate, it's done all of those things that countries must do if they are to take advantage of the globalised economy in which we all operate. And anybody who understands the economics of the 21st Century knows that we can not go back.
 We are forever a globalised, economic environment and the countries that will succeed are those countries that can take advantage of that globalised environment. They can compete effectively, can find market opportunities, can appreciate that exploiting the opportunities of globalisation is something that is done across all of the industry sectors. And many of the best demonstrations of Indian expertise of course have been in the service sector and of the contribution of Indians to the information technology industry. I come to this city, I'm reminded of the extraordinary contribution of India to film and other aspects of entertainment, not only here in this country but around the world and there's been a very, very special link between India and Australia in relation to that. And I'll have the opportunity later today of meeting some of the Indian actors and actresses that have been a very, very important part of that process.
So I do speak as an optimistic proponent of the cause of closer relations between our two countries. And of course there are, as the Consul indicated and as Mr Menon indicated, the very important sporting links. Not only the links in the great game of cricket, but of course links in other sports where Australians and Indians regularly compete against each other and I have to say that I am absolutely delighted that that great Australian cricketer and former captain Steve Waugh is with us today. I would like to acknowledge Steve's presence as somebody who has brought enormous pleasure to Australians and has been an absolute role model to Australians and cricketers around the world with his commitment not only to the game, but to the cause of relieving suffering in this country.
My friends, I am delighted to be here. I thank all of you to your personal commitment to the cause of closer relations between Australia and India. This is a very exciting time to be involved in the Australian-Indian partnership. You cannot but feel that this country is experiencing a quantum leap in terms of its economic activity, its outlook on the rest of the world, its commitment to solving the challenges of the world in the early part of the 21st Century. And I am delighted as Prime Minister of Australia to be here with my fellow countrymen in the business community offering our partnership, our commitment and our shared endeavour to build a better world including a better relationship between Australia and India.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Munnan, Mr Charles Goode the leader of the Australian delegation, the High Commissioners from Australia and from India, and can I also acknowledge the presence of Warwick Smith from Macquarie Bank and Macquarie Bank is the very generous sponsor of this luncheon.
This is the concluding public opportunity I have, apart from the very important visit to the Pace Academy after lunch to say a few things about the relationship between Australia and India. Let me start by saying that I am very conscious in this, my first visit to Chennai, to South India, that this was the part of your country that took the full brunt of the impact of the tragic tsunami a little over a year ago and the loss of some eight to nine thousand souls in this part of the country would have brought tremendous grief to many people in South India.
Can I also say that in a symbolic sense, and this will lead to very practical things, Australia has recognised in another gesture, the importance of this part of the world and this part of India by my announcement a little while ago that we will establish an Australian Consulate General here in Chennai and the person appointed to this post will fulfil the roles, not only of Consul General, but also looking after the interests of Austrade.
 The presence at this luncheon and indeed over the past few days of such a representative and high level group of Australian businessmen, is a very powerful earnest of their belief, as well as my own, that we are on the cusp of something really big in the relationship between the two countries. There are plenty of manifestations that India is increasingly seen around the world as a country, not only with a wonderful and magical and alluring past, but in so many ways a country with an enormous future.
 And in addressing the relationship between our two countries I think it is important that we don't give it a status that it doesn't have and equally we don't sell it short. And I believe it is very important when we are talking about relations between two societies that we recognise both the similarities and the differences. I have seen in my political career in Australia, unreal expectations, built up about relationships between two countries, that we're going to have a special relationship with this country, that we're going to have a special relationship with another country and before very long, we sort of have about ten countries with whom we have so-called special relationships and of course, that only has to be stated to be seen for the absurdity that it is.
When you look at India and Australia there are overwhelming illustrations of the similarities that we have. We have a lot of common historical associations through the Commonwealth and our associations with the institutions that both of our countries inherited from the United Kingdom. We have, in the use of the English language, great similarities. We have similar institutions, we have a similar approach in broad terms to corporate governance which is so important in commerce and business and I think we have an increasingly similar approach to the challenges of the 21st Century.
 It wasn't always the case. There was a time some decades ago when India's view of the world where it sought the path, and I offer of course no criticism, I simply record it as a fact, followed the path of profound non-alignment, whereas Australia was equally profoundly part of the Western political system and neither country makes, nor should make, an apology for having adopted that policy in the past. That is changing. We know longer have a divide, the old divide between East and West, between groups of countries that align themselves with the United States and those that align themselves with the now dissolved and disintegrated Soviet Union. That world is different. We now find common cause in different political contexts. We find common cause against terrorism and I am particularly conscious of that today as I've had the opportunity of extending on behalf of the Australian people and the Australian Government to the Indian Prime Minister our condolences on the tragic bombings that took part in Benaras late yesterday afternoon.
 So we do live in a very different world to the one we had 30 or 40 years ago and I think that has led to Australia and India following rather more similar political paths than might have been the case in those times. But overwhelmingly of course, the big change that's occurred in the last 20 years is the huge economic renaissance of India, pioneered in many ways when he was Finance Minister by the current Prime Minister Mr Singh in the early 90s: the opening up of the Indian economy, the welcoming of foreign investment, the reduction of many of the levels of tariff protection and the more beckoning reach out towards the globalised world in which we now live.
And if I can bring that to the early years of the 21st Century, what I believe we have best going for us as two countries now is that both of us understand that we live in a globalised economy. And a globalised economy from which nobody should either seek to escape or should want to escape. Because the history of the last 20 or 30 years has shown us that those countries, and this is particularly the case in the Asia Pacific region, that those countries that embrace globalisation are the countries that prosper. Those countries that seek solace and continuity in the old ways of protection and isolation and insularity are the countries whose economies continue to stagnate. And there are many spectacular examples of that that can be found in this part of the world. So what India and Australia now have very much in common is a fairly similar view of the world in which we live.
 It's a world in which trade barriers ought to be a thing of the past although they are not and both of us have experienced frustrations in relation to the latest series of World Trade Organisation negotiations and although we do still have a slightly different emphasis as to what might be achieved out of those negotiations, there is nonetheless a common view that the particularly high protective barriers still imposed in many areas by the European Union, by the United States and in some areas by Japan are representing very, very significant barriers to the sort of trade liberalisation that we should enjoy and would be of enormous benefit to both of our communities as well as to the communities of the least developed countries in the world.
I have found in the time that I have been in India on this visit, which is my second as Prime Minister, a sense of excitement about the opportunities that are in front of this country. The capacity over the last several years of India to attract investments from around the world, the expanding investment interest of many Australian companies in India and reciprocally the determination of many Indian companies to invest in Australia encourages me enormously. But as always, as many people have pointed out, it's the people-to-people links that matter the most in relations between our societies and in this area there is enormous scope for optimism and encouragement. Australia is now the third most preferred destination for Indian students wishing to study abroad. And what is important about that is not only that to be number three behind the United States and Great Britain is no mean achievement in itself but it's the pace of growth in the interest that really matters. And it is also the case that there are more postgraduate students coming to Australia from India than from any country in the world.
 It is also the case that we have seen a spectacular increase in the number of tourists coming to Australia from India, still in aggregate numbers much smaller than visitors from say New Zealand or China, or Japan, but once again it is the rate of growth to change that is coming over that pattern, which is so important and which is so significant for the future.
To come to South India and to understand the importance of this part of India in the commercial life of your country has been for me a great experience. To be reminded of the diversity of this country, the cultural and racial diversity, the religious diversity, all of those things are an experience. And they are the reminders of some of the things where Australia and India are different. The most obvious difference of course, was alluded to by an earlier speaker, of course, is the size and also the demography of the two countries. And India is a very young country. Australia, by comparison, although not a very old country, is a country that has an ageing population. Not ageing as rapidly as Japan or Italy or Spain, but rather more rapidly that the United States and certainly a great deal more rapidly than India. Now this has enormous implications for a lot of things.
 It has enormous implications, I have to acknowledge, for future competition on certain playing fields, but let me also say it has enormous implications for the contribution that your country will continue to make to the service industries of the world. And I have been very careful to make sure that there's been included in the delegation that came from Australia not only representatives of the mining and manufacturing industries but also representatives of the tertiary sector and including in particular the university sector.
 And this morning I witnessed the signing of memoranda of understanding involving the Madras Institute of Technology which has worldwide acclaim as a source of instruction in so many areas of technology and the University of Queensland. (* Queensland University of Technology). And this is once again an earnest of our determination to have links that are not just in areas of straight commerce, but are also in areas of education.
 Can I finally say Mr Chairman, to all of you ladies and gentlemen, that it is important also to understand what Government's can do and also what Government's should not try to do when it comes to relations between countries. Governments, and I speak from an Australian perspective, and I doubt very much if it would be any different in India. Governments in Australia have been notoriously bad at running businesses. They have been notoriously delinquent when it comes to involvement in commercial enterprises and they've always been better when they have understood that their true role is to set an economic framework and to leave it to the men and women in business and commerce to make commercial decisions and make investment decisions.
Now I appreciate that different countries have different cultures, but I suspect that the fundamental view that I've just articulated is probably shared by most of the Indian ladies and gentlemen in the room. I think that is another area where perhaps the similarities between our two societies certainly over time will become even greater.
  I see Australia's projection, economically and trade wise to the rest of the world as being very much a partnership between the Government and the business community of Australia but a partnership that recognises what our role is as a Government and a partnership that recognises what the role of the business community is. And in the end, governments always do best when they worry about the domestic economic framework and leave the business decisions to those whose dollars are at stake and those whose accountability to their boards and their shareholders are very direct, unlike the responsibility of governments.
 I want to say to all of my Indian hosts who are here today that Australia has great goodwill towards your country. We admire what it has achieved. We are enthusiastic about what it will achieve in the future. There is little doubt, and this is a theme that I've emphasised a lot in the past few days, there is little doubt that the most significant socio-economic development of the 21st Century is that the centre of gravity of the world's middle class has shifted from Europe and North America to Asia. For the first time in the history of mankind we have a global middle class and that global middle class will predominantly, as the years go by, be made up of people from India and China and Japan. It used to be made up almost entirely of people from Europe, North America with a smattering from Australasia and parts of Asia and Africa. And that is neither a good thing nor a bad thing. It's just a reality. And what that means is that the opportunities for us, the opportunities for you are enormous.
Middle classes of 400-800 million people are, to say the least, potentially voracious consumers of both goods and services and the opportunity that that represents to a country like Australia is self evident. And of course, most importantly, the opportunities it represents to your countries, to the lifting of the living standards of your people and the capacity of a middle class of 200 or 300 million people to reach out and to meet the aspirations of the remaining 700 or 800 millions of your people are also enormous.
 So it's a very exciting time to be involved in trying to further and deepen the relations between our two countries. I wish the business communities of the two societies well. I thank my Australian colleagues who have made the journey to India. I am sure it has been worthwhile and I warmly thank the Chamber for its great hospitality.
   Thank you.
[ends]


  Thank you very much. To Professor Ananth, Professor Peter Coaldrake, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. Before I address some remarks to the subject matter of my visit to this world famous institute, can I, on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people express my shock and sympathy to the Government and the people of India in relation to the terrorist bomb attacks overnight in Benares. The loss of life and the injuries inflicted on so many hundreds of people will be a source of great concern and in many cases, grief, to Indian families. And it reminds all of us of the modern day threat of terrorism. And it reminds all of us of the need to work together in a harmonious, cooperative fashion, wherever we are in the world, to fight the scourge of terrorism. And I have already sent a message to the Indian Prime Minister expressing my concern and that of my fellow Australians at this latest outrage.
The Madras Institute of Technology is certainly one of the premier educational institutions in India and has world acclaim as a centre of technology and the Memorandum of Understanding that will be signed in a few moments is a further earnest of the growing cooperation between Australia and India and most particularly, cooperation in areas of technology, most specifically, information technology.
 It builds on an existing level of cooperation. There are some 18 Indian IT corporations operating in Australia. And it further builds on the very strong educational links between our two countries. India sends more postgraduate students to Australia than any other country in the world and Australia is now nudging the United Kingdom and is, as the second largest destination, or most favoured destination of all Indian students, and number three, behind the United States and the United Kingdom. And the significant thing is that the rate of growth of the student flow from India to Australia is quite remarkable and there is no reason why that should not continue. The easy association between our two countries, the growing commercial links, the greatly enhanced political dialogue, the extraordinary growth of the Indian economy, all of these things bode well for an increase in the flow of students coming to India.
It is very important to acknowledge as I do that Indian students and researchers are reaching in areas such as satellite technology, vaccine technology and information technology in a way that is setting an example to the rest of the world. I'll be delighted in a little while to meet Ms Maria Srinivasan who is the Endeavour Asia Scholar from Madras and she will take up here scholarship in the social sciences in Australia later this year.
Australia of course has a very strong heritage herself in scientific research and I take this opportunity of reminding my Indian friends of that this morning lest it be thought that this is in any way one-way traffic. We have seen nine Australians that won Nobel Prizes in sciences, and for a nation of 20 million people, that is no mean achievement. Most recently Professor Barry Marshall and Dr Robin Warren won the 2005 Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine. And right at the moment, the current Australian of the Year Professor Ian Frazer of Queensland who has developed a vaccine to prevent and treat cervical cancer is visiting India.
 I announced two days ago the establishment of a strategic research fund for exchange scholarships worth some $25 million and also on the same day a biotechnology memorandum of understanding between our two countries. Now this visit of mine has given me an opportunity to emphasise to the Government and the people of India the commitment of Australia to be a partner for India, along with many other countries in the extraordinary economic and social journey that your country is now travelling. The potential that India has to grab a significant and constructive role in the future of the world and not only the future of this region is without limit and I have been deeply impressed as have all members of a very senior business delegation travelling with me, we've been deeply impressed at the progress made by India, the determination of the people of India to play that very constructive and cooperative role in the future of the region and the future of the world.
Australia's own links with India are well known and often spoken of. They are links of language, of history, of shared institutions, of shared sporting endeavour and shared sporting competition. And as a further token of the Australian Government's commitment to build on the relationship I want to announce this morning that Australia will establish an Australian Consulate General here in Chennai and the person appointed to this post will perform the roles of both Consul General and Austrade Trade Commissioner for South India. This consulate will substantially enhance the services provided by the Australian Government to increasing numbers of Australian visitors, particularly in business, to South India. And this post is emblematic of the growing commitment of Australia not only to India generally, but most particularly, to South India.
 Can I express my thanks to the students of the Institute for your warm welcome this morning. Politicians visiting institutes and universities in Australia are often, how shall I put it, colourful occasions and I can only to say to all of you that I welcome very much the warmth of your welcome. I commend this Institute for its excellence, I commend it for what it has produced, who it has produced and I hope the MOUs that are signed this morning will add further to the academic exchanges between our two countries. We are very proud of the quality of Australian tertiary institutions and Professor Peter Coaldrake from Queensland will be signing one of the MOUs and amongst the travelling parties are other senior academics within Australia from other universities and I am especially delighted that this morning, this visit brings together some of the great educational institutions of our two countries.
I wish the Madras Institute of Technology well. I know it will play a major role in the unfolding story of the remarkable contribution of modern India to the 21st Century. Thank you.
[ends]  


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, the Premier of New South Wales, Chief Justice of Australia, Chief Justice of New South Wales, the Leader of the Federal Opposition, the Lord Mayor of Sydney, visiting Prime Ministers, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
 This I understand and I was reminded by the Secretary General of the Commonwealth, Don McKinnon, whose presence I also acknowledge, this I understand is the first occasion in which Commonwealth Day has been observed by Her Majesty outside of the United Kingdom. And we here in Australia, and particularly those of us who come from Sydney, are very proud indeed that this should be the city in which that observance takes place.
 Ma'am around you you will see a wide cross-section of the Commonwealth community. This gathering brings together people who are committed to the values and the ideals of the Commonwealth, it brings also many people in Sydney and around Australia who are committed to the service of their fellow country men and women. It brings the captains and leaders of youth groups, it brings leaders of the many volunteer and emergency services which are so important in the Australian community so Ma'am as you meet us you will meet a very wide cross-section of the modern Australian community.
At the church service at St Andrew's this morning we were reminded of the deep variety and richness of the Commonwealth. I just had my own personal experience of having visited the most populist Commonwealth country, India, over the past few days and it is a vivid reminder to me of the great breadth of this wonderful organisation of which you are the head and its deep commitment to the sharing of the values of multi-racial harmony of different religions, all united with a commitment to not only the advancement of the people of the Commonwealth, but the cause of democracy throughout the world.
Ma'am, we welcome you to Admiralty House, your home in Sydney, we welcome you to the community that is gathered, we wish you well and I now invite you to meet your guests. Thank you very much.
 [ends]  


Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, the Premier of Victoria, the Chief Justice of Australia, the Chief Justice of Victoria, Secretary General of the Commonwealth, Lord Mayor of Melbourne, visiting Heads of Government, ladies and gentlemen. This Royal Exhibition building has a special place, both as an iconic establishment and also in the history of our nation. It was here Ma'am that your grandfather presided over the launching of what has become one of the great success stories of the last 100 years around the world-namely the Commonwealth of Australia.
 And we as Australians celebrate with pride the astonishing achievement of our nation in so many areas of activity, over the more than 100 years that have passed since that great day back in 1901. It was also in a more local way a wonderful reflection of the energy, the enthusiasm and the sense of hope that gripped late 19 Century Victoria and Melbourne. Marvellous Melbourne was the apt description that was given to that spirit of enthusiasm and hope in the late Victorian period.
 And I am confident that over the next two or three weeks, the world and Australia will be reminded that the passage of more than a hundred years has not dimmed the spirit of Melbournians, back in those days. That they will display that same sense of warmth and hope and energy and enthusiasm as they embrace and support this wonderful Commonwealth sporting festival.
There are of course very special links between Melbourne and sport in this country. Many claim it to be the sporting capital of Australia, and that is not surprising, not surprising indeed Ma'am. It does of course boast the most famous sporting venue in our country, the MCG or the 'G', which will be the home for the Commonwealth Games. And Ma'am you would be aware of course of the special significance that Flemington Race Course, the holding of the greatest horse race and many argue the great sporting event of the Australian calendar. And then last, but by no means least let me say, Melbourne is the birth place and the continuing spiritual home of Australian Football; the only indigenous football code played in this country.
Ma'am it is in that spirit and against that background that on behalf of everybody here, I welcome you to this great Exhibition Building. I welcome you to Melbourne. I welcome you as a guest of Australia to launch the Melbourne Commonwealth Games of 2006. Your presence as always gives a special lustre to a gathering and that is certainly no exception with the Commonwealth Games. And can I also welcome the Duke of Edinburgh and your son The Earl of Wessex, Prince Edward the Patron of the Commonwealth Games.
And may I extend that welcome to the many thousands of people who've come to Australia as guests of our country, to participate and to follow their teams. And the many Heads of Government, and Minister's in Government's of the Commonwealth that are also here. And as Australia's Prime Minister I especially welcome the presence of so many illustrious sporting champions of Australia from past Olympic and Commonwealth Games. They have a special place in our memory and they have a special place here today.
 Sport as we all know is a great bond, not only that unites Australians, it's also a bond between the nations of the Commonwealth. And it's not only the sports that are being played at these Games that excite the interest of members of the Commonwealth, there's one sport in particular that has the affections of more than a few of us here today, and over the last week we've seen in a contest between England and India, and also in a very hard fought and exciting contest between Australia and South Africa, we've seen the wonderful contests in that particular sport.
 And finally ladies and gentlemen, I do want to take this opportunity to both thank and congratulate, firstly the organising committee of the Commonwealth Games under the Chairmanship of the indefatigable Mr Ron Walker for an absolutely marvellous job that that committee has done in organising these Games. And can I also pay tribute to the work and the support, the investment and the commitment of the Government of Victoria led by the Premier Mr Steve Bracks. The cooperation between the Commonwealth Government and the Victorian Government has been exemplarily in the lead up to these Games. And we have known and we have recognised that this is an occasion where we are all Australians together, working to make these Games a success, knowing that the true measurement of the success of these Games will be when all of our visitors depart and they go away, not so much counting their medal tallies but rather reflecting on the warmth of the reception that they have received from their Australian hosts and taking away in their hearts very fond recollections-not only of the city of Melbourne, but of all of the Australian people.
 I now invite the Premier of Victoria to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Tony, my ministerial colleagues, ladies and gentlemen participating from both countries. I'm delighted that we have renewed the initiative that was taken in London in November of 2003 and brought together this dialogue.
 Can I continue a theme that the British Prime Minister developed and that was in relation to the importance to the three issues that we are talking about this morning, and that is the growing significance of China and India. Let me put it this way, for the first time in the history of the world since the industrial revolution the centre of gravity of the middle class of the world has shifted from a combination of western Europe, North America and Australasia. And by 2010, even earlier, the centre of gravity is very much in China and India. By 2010-2015 there'll be something in the order of 400 to 800 million people who could be broadly described as middle class in both of those countries.
 Now this is an historic shift, the full dimensions of which I don't believe the world and I don't believe our two societies have yet fully grasped. Now it has enormous implications, politically and strategically, and it will mould and influence the foreign policy of Australia, and indeed the foreign policy of the United States as you are seeing recent evidence of, with the initiatives taken flowing out of President Bush's visit to India and also of course the policy of the United Kingdom and the other member countries of the European Union. And of course it has very direct relevance to energy security and, of course, climate change issues. And I'd like to make the point very early that I do hope that none of our discussions sets up the Asia-Pacific Partnership for energy and development, which was inaugurated in Sydney in January, sets that up in opposition to Kyoto.
 Now it is true that through good and understandable reasons the United Kingdom and Australia have adopted different approaches to Kyoto. I mean you only have to understand the character of our economies, the experience in relation to energy issues in Europe, compare those with Australia to understand why there are differences. But they are differences that should not be a problem. We in Australia, and I know I speak for our colleagues in the Partnership, do not see Kyoto and the Partnership as being in any way antagonistic to each other. Clearly a country such as Australia, with its extraordinary supplies of fossil fuels, being the largest coal exporter in world and having large reservoirs of LNG and other energy, clearly Australia is a country that is not going to lightly walk away from the sensible exploitation of fossil fuels and the use of fossil fuels in a way that increasingly will not contribute to greenhouse gas emissions.
And very much the focus of our approach, and we will do this through the emphasis of the Partnership, is on making certain that we get the technology underway which reduces the greenhouse polluting impact of fossil fuels. And we hope that that will be a major focus of the partnership.
But we certainly see and this echoes a point that Tony made, we certainly see the provision of secure supplies of energy to energy-hungry, middle class expanding economies of India and China as being of enormous long-term importance - not only to the growth and development of those two economies, because that growth and development is both remarkable and certainly in my view irreversible - it's also important to their security, but it's also important to the security and the stability of the region. And how various countries respond to this, including of course Australia and the United Kingdom, will be enormously important.
 Can I just finish my necessarily and appropriately brief introductory remarks by saying that in relation to the movement of human capital, I share the optimistic view of, I guess most people in this room do, of globalisation. I'm instructed by the fact that the successful countries, those that have converted most rapidly and most spectacularly over the last 40 years from being closed, backward, deprived economies, are those that have embraced globalisation. Those that are still very heavily mired in those difficulties are those that have turned their back on globalisation. And globalisation of course inevitably carries with it the free movement of people of talent and ability.
 And we now have an Australian diaspora of over a million, which for a nation of 20 million, is a very high percentage.  That is no bad thing. I do not share the view sometimes expressed in my country that isn't that terrible, why can't we bring them all home? Now there are a variety of reasons and some of them will say it has got all to do with taxation, others used to say it had all to do with the fact that you couldn't have dual citizenship. Well we changed the dual citizenship thing a few years ago after quite an intense debate in Australia and we're always looking at ways of examining taxation matters.
 But can I say that having a diaspora, given the history and the disposition of this country for its young as well as its not so young to go abroad to get experience and sometimes to make their fortune, you're always going to have a diaspora and I think that is a good thing. And my answer to those people who worry about the diaspora, the Australian diaspora is to say well you sometimes complain when you hear a non-Australian accent speaking for a company in Australia, you ought to understand that there are a lot of Australian accents speaking in other countries for the businesses of those enterprises, and that is the globalised world. And I think we have to teach our young and our talented to be adaptable, not to be parochial and I think we've been very successful at it. So I would make a very, very strong plea in any discussion about the human capital aspect of globalisation for us all to embrace the notion of the mobility of talent around the world, it's part of globalisation and Australia can be both a contributor to and a beneficiary of that process.
Can I finish on a personal note in saying I'm delighted that Tony Blair is here in Canberra. I'm delighted that our first engagement is this dialogue and I want to thank everybody from both Great Britain and Australia who've agreed to participate and we look forward to your questions and comments.
 Thank you.
[ends]


The Right Honourable Tony Blair, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mrs Cherie Blair, the Leader of the Opposition, Ministerial colleagues, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. We have already had the opportunity I think, most of us, to hear an absolutely marvellous address from our guest today in the Parliament. With passion and clarity, he outlined a vision about the shared values, not only of Great Britain and Australia but also the shared values of democratic, freedom loving people around the world.
 And it falls to me in these very brief remarks today to say to you again Prime Minister how welcome you and your wife are in Australia and to remind this audience that the relationship between Australia and Great Britain is not just a relationship steeped in history and sentiment and shared institutions and shared experiences; important and powerful though those may be. And it's not a relationship that is just steeped in the famed sporting rivalry of the old animosities on the playing fields and the sporting fields that are well known to all Australians.  But importantly it is also a very modern relationship. It's a relationship that has moved beyond the economic setbacks that were represented by the entry of the United Kingdom into the then Common Market in the 1970s, although we continue to rail, as I'm pleased to hear the Prime Minister does, against many of these perfidies of the agricultural policies of the European Union, let me say. But it's a relationship that in its modern context is deeply embedded in the shared economic opportunities of our two societies.
The United Kingdom is still the second largest source of foreign investment in Australia. Australia is a major source of foreign investment into the United Kingdom. Some Australian exports have been able to penetrate the impenetrable and that is the customs barriers of the European Union. I think particularly of the extraordinary success of the Australian wine industry where I am very proud to say that when I first lived in the United Kingdom in the middle 1960s, finding a bottle of good Australian wine then was quite a feat. But now of course Australian wine has even surpassed French wine in sales. Isn't that a good thing for Australia?
So I mention those things Mr Prime Minister to, I hope, make a wider point and that is that this is a relationship of all the facets. It's a relationship built on a common heritage, it's a relationship built on shared institutions, shared experiences in the defence of liberty in the past. It's a relationship that brings our two countries together in confronting the threat of modern terrorism and on a bilateral basis, it is a relationship which is very well based in the economic needs of the two countries. And then finally and most importantly, it is a relationship based overwhelmingly on people-to-people links. Time does not permit me to enumerate them, but the family, community and other links of that kind between Australia and the United Kingdom are of course the deepest and the closest that this country has with any other society.
 And can I again say Prime Minister, you are here as friends, you are here as an admired guest. We appreciate your personal contribution to the causes we hold in common and I invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Kim Beazley, to support my remarks.
  [ends]


Mr Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure, both on a personal basis and I know on behalf of all of the people of Australia whatever their political convictions, to welcome to this parliament the Prime Minister of Great Britain.
Let us take the occasion to say unconditionally and without any reservation at all, how much this nation of Australia owes to its British inheritance. Whatever debates we may have in the future about the constitutional arrangements in this country, nothing can erase the debt we owe to our British legacy and inheritance. Nothing can alter the fact that the great institutions of this country are institutions that we have derived from the British Isles - fashioned, tempered, altered and moulded to our own Australian purposes - but nonetheless that golden thread of association with parliamentary democracy developed according to the Westminster tradition, the rule of law and the nature of our political discourse. And for all the differences that may have emerged over the years, nothing can alter the fact that the political cultures of our two countries still have many, many things in common.
And as we reflect on that inheritance and as we Australians pay full tribute to the British for what they gifted through that inheritance to this country, let us always remember the things that we have shared together in the past. Our two countries have stood together in defence of common values and universal truths and liberties, often at very great cost. History will never forget that in 12 desperate months in 1940 Great Britain, aided by Australia and a number of other Commonwealth countries, stood alone without other assistance, against the spread of Nazi tyranny. And in the immortal words of the greatest figure of the 20th Century, Winston Churchill, it was indeed not just the finest hour of the people of the British Isles but it was the finest hour of a broader family that have stared down a foul and monstrous tyranny.
Mr Speaker, our guest today brings to his great office and to the leadership of a great country, great personal qualities. I did not know Tony Blair when I was elected Prime Minister of Australia any more than I believe he knew me when he was elected Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. And of course, it's a matter of public record that we come from divergent sides of the political debate in our two countries. But that has not altered in any way the capacity of the two of us to work for the benefit of our peoples.  My job as Prime Minister of Australia is to represent the interests of my country and to interact with the leaders of other countries to the best of my ability. And in Tony Blair I have found a man of courage, of moral purpose, of high intelligence, of a capacity to articulate with great clarity the challenges of the contemporary world.
I have found him on a personal basis, likeable, great company and a person who shares an avid interest in this country and the future of this country.   I think it is fair to say that nobody in the aftermath of the 11th of September 2001 better articulated the reality that that was an attack not just on the people of the United States, but also upon the values and the people of a common family of nations of which we are a part around the world.
And I pay tribute unconditionally to the strength of Tony Blair's conviction to the fight against terrorism. Australian and British forces are serving together against an insurgency and against terrorism, bravely and courageously, in both Afghanistan and Iraq. We stand shoulder to shoulder as governments, and I pay tribute to the service and, sadly, in a number of cases on the part of the British, the sacrifice of our forces. Let us take this opportunity to record across the political divide - and I know that will be shared by the Leader of the Opposition - our enduring respect for the courage and commitment of the fighting men and women of both Australia and Great Britain.
Tony Blair is no stranger to Australia, he's no stranger to Australians and his friendships with many are well known. It's recorded that his great friend the Anglican priest Peter Thomson said that and I quote, 'The thing you have to understand about Tony Blair is that he is an Australian.' Perhaps, in that spirit, I could say, 'Well where the hell have you been?' Winston Churchill, when he addressed a joint sitting of the United States Congress, famously remarked that if his father had been American and his mother British, instead of the other way round, he might have got there on his own.
 Well perhaps Tony, if you had literally been an Australian, I am sure that you would have got here on your own and I am sure that you would have made a magnificent contribution. But you have served your great country, your great country, with enormous commitment and distinction. I am delighted, as a self-confessed supporter unconditionally, of the relationship between Australia and Great Britain, I am delighted to welcome you here today. You come as a friend, you come as an esteemed international statesman, the leader of a great country to which my country owes so much. And on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I welcome you.
[ends]  


Thanks Phil. That was very, very generous of you. Lord Mayors, I know there are a number here, my good friend Bob Baldwin, I noticed he was called honorary rather than honourable a moment ago. Honorary normally means, Bob, you don't get paid, so perhaps we can save a few bob for the cause and not pay you any more salary. But to Commissioner Les Strong, the Territorial Commander of the Salvation Army, I understand Sharon Grierson, the Member for Newcastle is also here, ladies and gentlemen. I simply want to say that I am really delighted to be with you today. I'm delighted to support the Salvation Army appeal not only here in the Hunter, but also throughout Australia. The is no organisation in this country or around the world that is a greater example of old fashioned, straight forward humanity than the Salvation Army. It's an organisation that I learnt as a child growing up in the suburbs of Sydney; it's an organisation that looks after people who need assistance. I was fortunate enough not to be in that category but I knew a lot of people who were and the way in which the Salvation Army reached out to people that no other organisation bothered with has been with me ever since.
When I first became Prime Minister one of the very first things I did was to get together a group of people to look at the issue of youth homelessness. Now I don't pretend that we've solved that problem. I suppose no society ever completely solves a problem like that, what you might do is ameliorate the problem. And I made as chairman of that group a Salvation Army officer, Captain David Eldridge from Melbourne who had a wonderful record of community service and caring for people. He did a great job. And for the whole of the time that I've been Prime Minister I have been greatly aided and assisted by people from the Salvation Army who are not just there to give me counsel and advice, and heaven knows like anybody else I'm always in need of a bit of spiritual and other advice, but I've had somebody there who's been able to give practical advice.
 I had Major Brian Watters, as many of you know, from the Salvation Army, as chairman of the Australian council on drugs. And as a result of the advice from him and many of his committees, I believe we have made, at a Government level, through the injection of a lot of money and through a lot of cooperation with state governments across political divides, we have been able to make a difference in that area. We've been able to see the death rates, the heroin overdoes, significantly decline over the past few years and we've begun to get together programmes of diversion when people look as though they're going to get in trouble with the law because of drug abuse, we're confronting them with the choice; you either face the possibility of getting caught up in the criminal justice system by going to jail, or alternatively you go into a course of rehabilitation and treatment. Take your pick. And by confronting people with that kind of choice at a critical stage in their life, it can make quite a difference. Now the Salvation Army's input into those sort of policies through Brian Watters has been immense.
 Now I mention those two personal examples to illustrate a broader point and that is the intense practicality of the Salvation Army. It is at core and at heart a traditional orthodox Christian organisation and is never ashamed to proclaim its values and its faith. It's also an organisation that puts those values and that faith into action. It's a very practical organisation. It's an organisation that, in so many ways, helps people in a non-judgemental fashion. (inaudible) to establish a linkage with a person is to assist them in a non-judgemental way and that's what the Salvation Army does. It's not the only organisation; there are many other wonderful organisations in our community. I don't seek to say it's the only one, but it's an organisation that is always there. Not surprisingly it was one of the first organisations helping out in Innisfail, an organisation that's always helped people who've been caught up committing crime and in jail and helping some of the, what we use in the old language, the down and outs in our community in a way that perhaps other organisations, or very few, were willing or able to do.
So it's been a friend of everybody's, the Salvation Army. It's been a friend of Australians in peace time and as any returned serviceman in this audience will know, it's been a friend of Australians in war time. It's been a friend of battered wives and mothers; it's been a friend of people who in every different way have been down on their luck.
 So I'm very proud of my association on a personal basis and also through the Government with the Salvation Army. It's been an organisation that's involved itself very heavily in the welfare programmes of this Government over the last 10 years where we've tried to involve the welfare sector not only in helping people, but also giving us advice as to how we can better help people. Governments are very good at some things; they're very good at writing cheques although most of you think they don't write enough. Perhaps some of you think that you contribute too much to their capacity to write cheques, but whatever the case may be, they're good at some things, but they're not very good at others and when it comes to helping people who need help, there's no better organisation than one like the Salvation Army or the Wesley Mission or the Society of St Vincent de Paul. You can name very quickly a number of great organisations that are all in that category. So my esteem for the Army is unlimited. I think it's a great organisation that's done wonderful things for this country, it's done wonderful things for individuals. It's given comfort and hope and it's reduced loneliness in a way that very few organisations can do.
The other reason why I'm delighted to be here today is that I have had a long association with the Hunter District, with Newcastle. I have come here on many occasions. I admire the spirit of this city. It's changed enormously, I don't say that in a judgemental sense, it's always been a great city and it's always been a great area. It's just that it had to face an enormous amount of change and a lot of that change occurred in the early years of the Government with the closure of the steel works and the inevitable process of adjustment. And that is, while it's not a distant memory, it's something that the city and the area has taken in its stride. And one of the reasons it took it in its stride was that there was a willingness for people to cooperate across the normal divides and I remember putting together a task group that involved people from business, people from the trade unions, people from the churches, all of whom were willing to help to work together to help in different ways. And it indicated the great spirit of the city and the way in which it has moved on to another phase of its existence. And that is an enormous tribute to the spirit of the people. It's an enormous tribute to the backbone of Novocastrians, it's an enormous tribute to the great Australian capacity to change and adapt. We have many great qualities as a nation and as a people we have many great qualities, but no quality is greater than our capacity to adapt when there is a need for change, but in the process of adapting, holding on to that essential Australian ethos. And that essential Australian ethos of mateship and of helping people who've always been, who've always needed help is of course very much part of the spirit of this city and also very much part of the ethos of the Salvation Army.
So I wish this appeal well. The Federal Government, I'm happy to announce, will contribute a quarter of a million dollars to the Salvation Army national appeal. Of course, as a help as indicated, all donations, no matter what size, anything over $2 is fully tax deductible and it will always remain so, so please give and support this appeal generously.
The Salvation Army of course is a participant in many of the welfare programmes, the Joblink and many of the other programmes; to help people with drug problems and all these sorts of other problems; the Federal Government funds. And their record, their work is exemplary and its work that I admire and I praise very much.
So for those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, it's great to be back in Newcastle, it's great to be back in the Hunter. I like this area very much. You'll forgive me for saying what a great job Bob Baldwin is doing, my recently appointed Parliamentary Secretary and Member for Paterson. But this is an occasion to pay tribute not only to Bob, but also to respect the contribution of other members of Parliament of different political persuasions that represent this area. Because at a gathering like this we're not into party politics, we're in to helping the community, we're into supporting and honouring one of the great practical Christian organisations of our time and that is the Salvation Army.
 I wish them well, I wish the appeal well and I know that you will all support it very, very generously. Thank you.
[ends]  


Your Excellency, Mr Wen Jiabao the Premier of China, your ministerial colleagues, my ministerial colleagues, the Leader of the Opposition, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
 It is with great warmth and enthusiasm that I welcome you here today, Mr Premier, as a further token of the remarkable way in which relations between our two countries has developed over the last decade. We began our day, as you will recall, walking very early in the morning as is my customary wont and I was delighted that you joined me on that walk and we chose to traverse the R.G. Menzies Walk; a walk around the lake in Canberra named after Australia's longest serving Prime Minister. And as I pointed out to you the photograph and the biographical details of Robert Gordon Menzies as Prime Minister of Australia, I thought to myself of the remarkable changes that have taken place in our two countries since his retirement in 1966 and the remarkable changes of course that have taken place in attitudes amongst the political leadership of either political persuasion in this country towards China.
 And I had cause to reflect, as I did in our discussion today, that of all the important relationships that Australia has, and we have many and it is not my purpose today to engage the rather pointless exercise of trying to prioritise relationships, we do have a very important relationship with China. But I think it is accurate to say that of all the important relationships Australia has with other countries, none has undergone a greater transformation over the last decade or more as has our relationship with China. And that development is grounded in a number of things. It is grounded in commonsense; it is grounded in realism of both the opportunities of our relationship, but also the limitations of it. It is also grounded in a frank recognition of the differences that exist historically, culturally and politically between our two countries.
 And the fact that we have both, particularly over recent years, but I suspect for a long time in different ways, we have both recognised that we are fundamentally different in so many ways, but that in an ironic sense, has enabled us to build rather more effectively on the things that we have in common and the strengths that we can derive from the relationship.
 Australia of course is the sixth most continuous democracy in history and therefore our political system is very different from that of China's. But the growth and development of China is truly historic. And as I said in a speech I gave in New York at the time of the General Assembly gathering last September I believe that the economic expansion and the outward development of China is not only good for China, it is also very good for the world. And it follows from that, that we welcome China's growth and China's development. We see it in a positive light. We do not see any merit at all in any policy of containment towards China; rather we see it very much in the interests of this country, the interests of our region and indeed the interests of the world to be an active partner in that long journey that China has begun to undertake towards realising her full potential.
 Of course the growth of Australia's economic relationship with China has been truly astounding. There are many figures that can be individually a metaphor for this but perhaps none is better than to say that our exports to China have quadrupled in the last decade. Now that has been largely, but not entirely driven by the remarkable expansion in the resource sector. China's growing demand for energy to underpin and guarantee her economic growth and development demands satisfaction. And Australia, providentially, has the resources to assist that process.
 But it would be wrong to see the economic relationship between Australia and China exclusively in terms of resource development, important though that is. Shortly before this lunch I gathered together some of the business leaders of our country who have very heavy investments and involvement in China and it covered the whole gamut of our trading capacity. We had, of course, leaders of resource companies, we also had vice chancellors of universities, managing partners of large legal firms, of insurance companies; and it was a reminder that this is a very broad relationship.
 China is Australia's largest source of students. It is the second largest source of migrants. It is the most rapidly growing, or one of the most rapidly growing rather, sources of tourism and its estimated by some that the number of Chinese tourists coming to Australia by the year 2010 will exceed the number coming from Japan.
Now all of those things illustrate the breadth of the relationship. It's also a relationship built very much upon people-to-people links. I've often told Chinese leaders that the combination of Cantonese and Mandarin now represents the most widely spoken foreign language in this country, that Chinese, ethnic Chinese people bulk very large in many parts of metropolitan Australia and most particularly in Sydney.
 There's a growing appetite for Chinese culture and an understanding of both the culture and the language of this remarkable country. I'm very pleased to note that a partnership between Asialink, the University of Melbourne and the Chinese Government will see the establishment of the Confucius Institute in Melbourne in the near future. And this will enable a greater understanding of, and a greater appreciation of, the Chinese language and Chinese culture.
China is asserting her legitimate interest as a significant power; now the third most powerful economy in the world. And in the process of asserting, those legitimate interests, of course, carry as part of the international community and a leading player in the international community, the responsibilities of that authority and that position. And amongst the many things that the Premier and I discussed earlier today were the challenges faced by the major powers; the permanent members, perhaps more accurately described, of the United Nations, by the nuclear issues concerning Iran.
 And we agreed how very important it was to try and solve this problem through the processes of the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency. And that can best indeed, perhaps only be achieved, if there is unity of purpose between and amongst the five members, permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
We in Australia recognise very much the positive contribution that China, as the nation having potentially the greatest influence on North Korea, the role that China has played in encouraging a sensible resolution of that challenge. We are still a long way from a solution and we continue to encourage China to exercise her undoubted influence on North Korea, an influence that exceeds that of any other country. Not only in our region but potentially around the world, of course, the relationship between China and the United States is crucial. As all of you will know, Australia has never played down or in any sense apologised for the closeness of our relationship with the United States. That relationship is deep; it's based on history and shared values and it's arguably stronger now than ever before.
 But the strength and the depth of that relationship in no way affects or will it affect the capacity of Australia to interact with and form a close and lasting partnership and friendship with China. I take the optimistic view, not only in our region but also around the world of relations between the United States and China. I do not subscribe to the school to which some belong of an inevitable breakdown leading to potential conflict. I rather take the view that commonsense will prevail not only in relation to Taiwan but in relation to the wider interests of those two societies. The history of recent times suggests that there is a greater realisation of the need for that on all sides and it remains as part of our continuing commitment to the One China Policy, which I had the opportunity of reaffirming today in my discussions with the Premier, it remains our very strong exhortation to all concerned that we should maintain the lowest possible temperatures in relation to matters across the Taiwan Strait.
 Mr Premier you come here as a leader of the largest nation numerically in the world, you come here as a leader of a nation with which Australians have not only a growing interest but a growing fascination. There is much that we can build together, we do have differences and our willingness over the years to frankly recognise those differences and not pretend otherwise and to not engage in phoney embraces of common attitudes and common values that simply don't exist, has been, I believe, the secret of the success of the relationship. In my personal experience I have not forgotten a meeting I had with the former President of China Jiang Zemin in the margins of the first APEC meeting that I attended in Manila in 1996 that took place in the wake of a rather difficult period in the relationship between Australia and China. At that meeting both of us identified the need to focus on those things where we could find common ground and whilst in no way retreating from our respective positions in relation to other issues, not to allow those differences to contaminate the broader relationship and that has been the approach that the Government and I believe the people in the business community of Australia have taken over the years.
 Our relationship with China is broad, it's growing; the presence here today of so many business leaders is testament to the strength of the economic relationship. But as all relationships will tell us, it's those deeper people-to-people links that are very important. They are substantial they are growing and they are respectful on both sides so far as Australia and China are concerned. To you sir, as somebody who's had a very successful interesting and remarkable political career in your own country; any student of recent Chinese political history will read your resume, if I might put it that way, with great admiration and great appreciation. Your personality, your engaged commitment to the cause of better relations between our two countries is something that I very deeply appreciate.
 We welcome you here for what you are as an individual leader but also for what you represent as a leader of a remarkable nation which is destined to play an even greater role in the affairs of the world and a nation with which Australia seeks to build an ever-closer and more effective and more permanent partnership. I now have great pleasure in inviting the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Kim Beazley to support my remarks. Thank you.
  [ends]


Jan Peter Balkenende, the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of The Netherlands, other members of your party, Prime Minister, your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.  It is with very special pleasure that on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I welcome you Prime Minister to this, your first visit to Australia and the first visit since 1997 of a Prime Minister of The Netherlands. You do so, of course, at a time when we mark the 400th anniversary of the first documented landing by Dutch people, of Europeans on the Australian mainland. And on Thursday, you and I will both be in Fremantle in Western Australia where we will see off the replica of the Duyfken on its journey around the Australian coastline. And it will be a very timely reminder for all of us of the historic links between the people of The Netherlands and the people of Australia.
 Because of the very seamless integration of people from The Netherlands into Australian society it sometimes comes as a surprise for Australians to be told that more than 300,000 people from The Netherlands are part of the Australian community. And indeed, in what still remains the most powerful period of migration to Australia, and that is the migration that occurred in the aftermath of World War II largely from Europe, the Dutch of course featured very prominently indeed. And the influence of people from The Netherlands on Australian business, Australian culture and Australian politics and Australian sport has been very strong and very evident.
 But it would be wrong to see the relationship simply in sentimental and historical terms. It is a very modern, contemporary relationship in a number of ways. The Netherlands is the fourth largest source of foreign investment in Australia and that is quite a remarkable figure, when you consider that the first three of that four rather naturally select themselves; the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan; given the economic patterns, and historical patterns of our country. But for a nation of only 16 million people, for The Netherlands to be the fourth largest source of foreign investment in this country speaks of a relationship and an attitude and an ease of commercial exchange and discourse which speaks well for the relationship between the two countries.
 Our relationship is also contemporary because we are partners in some of the modern world's great challenges. We are soon to be military partners in Afghanistan and a Provincial Reconstruction Team numbering some 200 Australians will join some 2000 troops from The Netherlands in the Uruzgan Province in Afghanistan and I know that both of us, in our discussions this morning, Prime Minister, understood the opportunities of this partnership and also understood the challenges because the struggle to defend the implanting of democracy in Afghanistan will go on for some time. The enemy there is not easily overcome and it will require a lot of patience, a lot of application and I know the skill of which the men and women of both of our countries are capable, to achieve the outcome that we want.
Our presence together in Afghanistan is an expression of the wider challenge for liberal democratic societies such as Australia and The Netherlands, of terrorism. Domestically terrorism touches both of our communities. As part of Europe, The Netherlands lives under the threat of a terrorist attack and we here in Australia do not regard ourselves as immune from the possibility of a terrorist attack on our own soil and of course we remember very vividly those who died in Bali in 2002 and again last year.
Fighting terrorism involves concert and action on a number of fronts. It involves the application of military assets as is taking place in Afghanistan and in Iraq, and it also involves the gathering of the best possible intelligence. And on the other side it involves constant effort by liberal democratic societies to embrace all elements of our communities, to never behave in a way that shuts out a section of our community and to always understand that the best ultimate guarantee against terrorism is to acquire and maintain the affections and the loyalty of all sections of our domestic populations.
As a nation of only 16 million people with a significant minority population, The Netherlands is no stranger to these challenges any more than is Australia. But both of us, Prime Minister, believe that the best weapon in fighting these challenges is the weapon of open liberal democracy. And Australia and The Netherlands are amongst countries around the world that adhere very strongly to those values. You, of course, at a period of time in your not too distant history lost that liberty as a result of foreign conquests. We here in Australia have been fortunate enough not to have gone through that experience.
 We've had the opportunity, Prime Minister, to talk today about another contemporary challenge and that is climate change. I think one of the things that our discussions did was to remind each of us that the presumed gap between those countries that have adhered to the Kyoto Protocol, of which The Netherlands is one, and those countries that haven't, of which Australia is one, is not as wide as some would represent. I think we both agree that until the world's climate change arrangements include the two largest polluters, if I can put it that way, in the world, and that's the United States and China; in other words, until countries such as the United States and China become part of the solution we are not going to make the progress that we would all want. We all want to see a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. We all agree the world needs that. We see the Asia Pacific Partnership in relation to climate change as a complement to the Kyoto Protocol, we do not see it as some kind of rival approach or rival avenue.
 They are amongst some of the contemporary challenges that confront our two societies. Separated by many thousands of miles in different parts of the world, but two societies that have a very rich history, in the case of your country, a nation that has contributed very significantly to the development and the formation of ours.
In that spirit Prime Minister I welcome you very warmly. I know that you have a great affection for Grands Prix and you were able to indulge the passions of what we call, if you'll forgive the colloquialism, a petrol-head here in Australia; that you were able to indulge that passion in Melbourne over the weekend and I know that you enjoyed it immensely and of course we're very proud of the capacity of our city of Melbourne to put on those sorts of events and they did our nation proud only a few weeks ago with the magnificent hosting of the Commonwealth Games.
But Prime Minister, you are very welcome to this country, any Prime Minister of your country is. We wish you well and I now invite the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, Senator Evans to support my remarks.
[ends]


Thank you very much Ian and can I say to Kym that that bat still has a pride of place in the corner of my study at Kirribilli House. Danielle Blain, Julie Bishop, Ian Campbell, Chris Ellison, my other federal parliamentary colleagues. Paul Omodei, the Leader of the Opposition in Western Australia. Two former Premiers of this great State, Sir Charles Court and Richard Court, my fellow Australians.
 It is always a great pleasure for me to come to Perth and tonight is a real treat and I want to thank the Liberals of Western Australia and the people of Western Australia for honouring the achievements of the team, and I call it very much a team over the last 10 years.
It is important as Ian says to mark occasions such as this. You need to get the right balance between paying proper regard to the achievement of being in office for 10 years, winning four elections. It takes a lot of elections to chalk up 10 years in Australia. We have only got three-year terms. Tony Blair sort of marvels, I was talking to him the other day when he was in Canberra, and he sort of marvels in an ironic sort of way of the idea that we only have three-year terms.
 It is an important occasion to mark. But it is also equally import to remember one simple thing about Australian political life and that is that the Australian public have an unerring capacity to spot humbug and hubris. It has a great capacity to level, it has a great capacity to remind all of us in public office that we are there to serve the Australian people and not to indulge our own egos or to engage in unnecessary triumphalism.
 As I look back over the last 10 years there are a lot of things that I can say about what has happened and the Government has done many things in many fields. It has encountered many challenges, it has overcome many problems, it has failed to overcome some and it is obviously like any other Government left a number of things undone that it should have done, or might have done better.
 There are I think three things that stand out over that 10-year period. Firstly, of course has been the remarkable economic strength of our country and I won't deluge you with a lot of statistics but to simply make the point that according to every economic indicator this country is stronger, it's more competitive, it's more productive, it's more durable and it is more respected economically around the world than it has been at any time in its history.
We had great economic years in the 50s and in the 60s, but in those days the Australian economy was relatively sheltered and (inaudible). We had a fixed exchange rate, we had rigid foreign exchange controls, we had very high tariff walls, we had a narrow inward-looking economy and it was the circumstance of history, the ruin inflicted by World War II on Europe and the underdevelopment in Asia that gave to the Australian economy a place of strength and relatively competitiveness. That began to unravel in the 1970s and it has taken 15 to 20 years of reform and I am never reluctant to give the former Government some credit in one or two areas where it undertook necessary reforms, which we incidentally supported very strongly from Opposition. But it has taken 15 or 20 years of reform to give the Australian economy the wonderful years that it has now enjoyed. And can I say in no state of Australia is this better illustrated than of course in the State of Western Australia. There is a statistic I am often reminded of when I come to Western Australia, I think it runs something like this. We've only got 11 per cent of the population, but we provide about 32 per cent of the nation's export income. I hope I got those percentages in balance. But it certainly is a wonderful example of the way that this part of Australia has taken advantage in a sensible way of the great endowments that providence has given our country.
The second great thing that stands out over the last 10 years is the way in which this nation is regarded around the world. We've had more people, more world leaders wanting to come to this country over the last few years than I think over the previous 20. And it is from every corner of the world. In the last week we have had the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Tony Blair, a reminder of the country to which we owe so much, measured by our institution our political practises, our civic culture and many of the values that we hold dear. We've had the Premier of China, a nation that is bulking larger and larger in Australia's economic and political experience. And we have had the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, who I will join tomorrow in Fremantle.
   Around the world we are seen as a country that has not only achieved and succeeded and been strong and effective, but we have also been a country that has stood up for the things that it holds dear and the values that it believes in and is not afraid to take a stance and even amongst those countries that haven't agreed with everything Australia has done, this country is regarded with great respect and is seen as an achieving nation and a nation that has punched well and truly above her weight. And in earning that respect and in having the regard of so many countries around the world one thing that we have been able to achieve is that we have been able to balance the realities of not only the area of the world in which we live, but we haven't allowed ourselves to do that at the expense of our traditional relationships. When I became Prime Minister I had no desire to reduce our interaction with the nations of Asia and I think it is fair to say that 10 years on, nobody can fairly say that my Government has in anyway ignored the importance of our relationship with Asia. But I held the very deep belief that we never had to chose between our history and our geography as a nation and that building close relations with Indonesia, with China, with India, with Japan, with Korea and all the other nations of the Asian region need not be at the expense of our relationships with our traditional friends and I counted as a great foreign policy achievement of this Government that our relationship with the United States has never been closer and has never been as intimate as it is at the present time. But equally, and at the same time, we have been able to build a remarkably close and effective relationship with China and it is a demonstration that this is a nation that truly is a citizen of the world and is able to interact with different nations and different cultures.
Finally the thing that comes through to me very strongly and I experience it everywhere I go in Australia, I experienced it in the week or so that we spent in Melbourne at the Commonwealth Games and I experience it in every part of this country, is the remarkable self-confidence and self-belief which possesses Australia in the early years of the 21st Century.
We have always been a fairly cocky, self-confident people and isn't that good thing. We have never bent the knee to anybody and nor will we ever do so in the future, but there is an underlying strong self-belief and self-confidence about Australia in 2006, the like of which I haven't seen and experienced before. It is a combination and a product of what we have achieved, but it is also a realisation that fundamental traditional Australian values have always been there. We went through a rather silly stage in our history 10 or 15 years ago of conducting a perpetual seminar about our identity.
We asked ourselves were we Asian, were we European, were we half-British, were we half-Australian, were we too pro-American, were we too something else and finally I think we have realised what has always been true, that we have always been Australian, there is no doubt as to what an Australian is. He or she is instantly recognisable around the world and those self-appointed cultural dieticians who, a few years ago, told us that we somehow or another fundamentally change our identity in order to get on with the rest of the world and achieve have been proved abysmally wrong and completely ignorant of the nature and history of this country.
They're the three things that stand out to me. There are a couple of other things that we have achieved and a couple of other messages I would like to leave with you as fellow Liberals and supporters of the Liberal Party. Chris Ellison spoke earlier of our (inaudible) and of the contribution that the great philosophers had made to Liberal thought and how that had influenced our Party. But one of the things that we have managed to do over the last 10 years, and I hope all of us continue to do it and we should remind ourselves of it. And that is that the Liberal Party of Australia is a unique animal amongst centre-right parties around the world.
The Liberal Party of Australia is the custodian of two traditions in Australian politics. It is the custodian of the classic liberal tradition, but it is also the custodian of the conservative tradition in Australian politics. You have frequently heard me use the expression 'the broad church.' We are a broad church. We do have within our ranks people who would describe themselves as small 'L' liberals and we have people who would describe themselves as being more conservative. I am a small 'L' liberal on some issues, I am a conservative on others. I have frequently described myself unapologetically as being a social conservative and an economic liberal. Some would describe themselves as both socially conservative and economically conservative, although I think the second rung of that is a more dwindling group, but nonetheless some would regard themselves as both social and economic liberals.
The point I make is that there is room in our party for all of those strands of thought. We should never allow ourselves to lapse into the process of trying to make a choice and the process of trying to define the Liberal Party of Australia according to one or other of those particular descriptions.
You can look at our history; you can look at the abolition of the White Australia Policy in 1967 under the Holt Government as a demonstration of the great liberal tradition of this country. You can look at our determination over the years to stand up for individual rights, to provide full freedom of choice in the education of children, a very important policy commitment for which the Menzies Government was responsible in the 1960s as a demonstration of our classical liberal tradition. You can equally look at our strong defence of the traditional institutions of our society, our defence of the rule of law, the central importance we place on the family as the most caring and strengthening unit within our society as an example of our conservative tradition.
The point I simply make my friends is that we are a party of both traditions and we will continue to survive and prosper if we respect both of those traditions in our party and that no section of the party ever thinks for a moment that there should be a fight to the finish to determine which philosophy and which strand really represents the true liberalism of the Liberal Party of Australia.
 Another observation can I make that is very important to all of us and that is the reform process. One of the reasons we are still in office is that we didn't shirk reform. It would have been so easy after the 1996 election to think, well we have a majority of 44, we'll be in power for a long time, we don't have to do very much, we will just dispense a bit of largess at the right time and we'll get re-elected and I can remember having a dinner at The Lodge in 1998 with a group that had been elected in 1996 and many of them are still there, some of them lost their seats, they we miracles victors in a sense in 1996, they lost their seats in 1998. And I said at the time that the approach to the 1998 election had to be utterly different to the 1996 election. That in 1996 the people wanted to get rid of the Keating Government, they were aching for an alternative and we presented a respectable alternative and they voted for us in droves. But in 1998 we would be just another Government and we would have to have a new platform, a new reason, a new validation to seek their support. Well that is the reason why we embraced the GST and taxation reform and it worked in 1998. And again in 2004 there were particular reasons, they were different from 2001 and after the 2004 election there was another moment where we thought to ourselves will we embrace still further reform or will we rest on our laurels, will we assume that a Labor Party that tried Beazley, then tried Crean, then tried Latham, then went back to Beazley, that a Labor Party like that was not going to offer any serious opposition.
But instead of being complacent on the policy front we decided to embrace further reform and so in 2004, 2005 rather, we embarked upon the process of industrial relations reform. And it is true, as Ian Campbell alluded to, that economic reform is like competing in a race towards an ever receding finishing line. You never get there but if you don't keep running for that ever receding finishing line the bloke who is running in the race with you is going to go past you and you are going to fall behind and your nation's competitiveness is going to be affected. So one of the other messages I have for the future is that this Party must always be the party of reform. We must always be willing to embrace further change, we must always have a capacity to embrace new propositions and to advocate new causes and new reasons to modernise and change this country for the better. Once we lose the enthusiasm and the stomach for the reform cause, we begin to enter the terminal phases of our time in office.
 Can I on a more personal note say to all of you how fortunate I have been to have been the beneficiary of such sustained loyalty and cohesion within the parliamentary party over the past 10 years. It has been an incredibly united Government. It has been a wonderful Coalition. I am a strong coalitionist. I know that relations between our two parties vary a bit around the nation and I know that there are some different views held in different parts about it. But at a Federal level, the Coalition has been a remarkable success and I do pay tribute to the three National Party leaders who have served with me as Deputy Prime Ministers over the last 10 years, in Tim Fischer, John Anderson and Mark Vaile. But can I, I have been the leader of a team, it is called the Howard Government but it has been very much a Government of men and women who have worked together as a team and it is always invidious on occasions like this to try and single people out, but I must pay a special tribute to two men who have served with me in the same portfolios over the last 10 years. And that is Peter Costello and Alexander Downer.
 Peter has been a wonderful Treasurer and the principal architect of the economic policies of the Government. Alexander has been an extraordinarily successful and capable Foreign Minister. Somebody who did a great thing for the Party early in 1995 when he facilitated a change of leadership in a way that brought the Party together and laid the foundation for our victory just over a year later.
Can I turn to all of you in the Liberal Party in Western Australia. The last election, measured by the two-party preferred vote, Western Australia was our second best state after Queensland. We won two seats from the Labor Party and we can win some more at the next election if we continue to chose the calibre of candidates that we chose at the last election and were successful in winning seats from Labor. The party organisation here performed magnificently and I do pay tribute to you, Danielle, for the wonderful leadership you gave as President and the then State Director Paul Everingham and the general support that I received from the organisation. It was always a delight to come to Western Australia in 2004. Everything was organised, people were enthusiastic, there was a sense that things were going to happen and that things were going to turn very, very well for the Liberal Party and that is precisely how it turned out. And to my cabinet colleagues from Western Australia, in Julie Bishop who has done a wonderful job already in the short time that she has been Education Minister, to Ian Campbell who is a wonderfully articulate spokesman on the environment and he gave you a few statistics.
 Let me give you a statistic that he used in a cabinet discussion we had last week with Tony Blair and it drives home the reason why you won't solve the problem of global warming until you get the largest polluters in the world, namely China and the United States within the embrace of the global solution. He said that if all greenhouse gas emissions in Australia were to stop tomorrow, it would only take 10 months of additional greenhouse gas emissions from China following the cessation of them in Australia to cancel out completely the value of there being no more greenhouse gas emissions in this country. And it is a measure of the dimension of the problem that we face in tackling that issue.
But to all of you my friends can I say that the journey of the last 10 years has been a wonderful experience. It has been a privilege every single day of my life to be Prime Minister of this country. It is the greatest privilege any man or woman can have to be the Prime Minister of this wonderful country and all of you have helped in different ways, to our donors, and so many of them are here tonight, you have been generous, very generous, very, very supportive. I encourage you, of course, not to lose the habit. And I express my very great gratitude. To the branch members, to my parliamentary colleagues and to everybody who believes in and passionately fights for and advocates the Liberal cause. You have shared the journey of the last 10 years. And in conclusion can I express my gratitude to somebody who has helped me more than anybody else in my political life and that is my wife Janette, whose support and that of my three great, wonderful children have made it all possible.
It has been a good 10 years. We have achieved a lot for our country. We are privileged to have had the opportunity, but we have a lot left to be done and I want to go on working with you and giving my all and I know all of my colleagues want to give their all in continued service of all of the Australian people. Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much colleague Costello.
 Mr President, Peter Costello, my other parliamentary colleagues, my fellow Australians.  And I start my joining Peter in extending my thanks and congratulations to Helen Kroger who has been a wonderful servant of the Liberal Party here in Victoria and of course continues as a federal Vice-President of the Party.  I thank you Helen for the wonderful co-operation with the federal organisation and the federal parliamentary party.  And in extending my thanks to you can I also welcome and congratulate Russell Hannon on his election as President of the Victorian Division.
The links between the parliamentary party and the organisation are incredibly important.  A parliamentary party cannot win an election on its own.  The history books at both a state and federal level, particularly at a state level are full of parliamentary parties in, recent  years, that imagine they could win without having a respectful, fruitful co-operation with the party organisation.  We each have roles in the Liberal Party covenant.  There is an understanding that the parliamentary party has the ultimate say when it comes to policy.  There is an understanding on behalf of the parliamentarians that in organisational matters the organisation exercises the ultimate authority.  And it is when the two work in respectful partnership that we get the best results.  And that has been my experience in the last ten years where I have been able to work in a professional partnership with the party organisation at a national level and in the various state divisions.
And as you assume your office Russell, I wish you and the division well.  And I record again my great sense of gratitude to the men and women of the Victorian division who over the last ten years and long years before have been such loyal supporters of the federal parliamentary party.  Without you we cannot achieve anything.  And any congratulation that may be due to the parliamentary party for having been in office now for a decade is something that should be shared with all of the rank and file of the party organisation.
It is as Peter said exactly this weekend, eighteen months since we were re- elected on the 9th October 2004.  It goes with incredible speed.  Four years is pretty dismal when you are in opposition.  Four years of course seems quite different if you happen to be in government.  Whatever we might think of that the reality is that we have three year terms at a federal level and that's not going to change at any time in the immediate future.   And we do face over the next eighteen months to two years around Australia, an enormous challenge electorally.  We have an election in Victoria at the end of this year.  There will be an election in Queensland sometime in the next twelve months.  There's an election fixed in New South Wales in March of 2007.  And there will of course be a federal election if the normal cycle is fulfilled and there is no reason why it shouldn't towards the end of next year.
  And that does place an enormous pressure and strain on the party organisation.  But it is a cause that all of us have found over the years really worth fighting for.  Not only because of the -at a national level- the miserable, directionless alternative that is offered.  A federal Opposition that can't make up its mind on anything that goes directly to the heart of the national interest but also because of the things that we have achieved at a national level.  And when we were re-elected eighteen months ago we were essentially re-elected for two reasons.  We were re-elected because we were overwhelmingly trusted to keep the economy strong and to provide the security and sense of direction and the sense of re-assurance that Australians and their families wanted as they planned the future.  We were trusted to keep interest rates low.  We were trusted to keep unemployment low.  We were trusted to keep on paying off Labor's debt and isn't it a wonderful thing that by the end of this financial year this nation will have no net national debt. That is a remarkable achievement.  And I pay a special tribute to you Peter for the stewardship that you have given as the Treasurer, and therefore as the principal architect of the economic policies of this government.
  That particular economic statistic is really a metaphor and the most powerful metaphor of all for what we have achieved over the last ten years and it has given people a sense of security. Wherever I go in Australia the reaction is the same that fundamentally people feel that the government has got on with the job, that we have kept our eye on the ball that we've focussed on the things that concern them and not the things that might fascinate us.
We are not preoccupied with internalising disputes. We are not preoccupied with introspection. We are preoccupied with the everyday needs of our fellow Australians. And there is a message in that. While ever we are like that we will go on succeeding but once we turn away from that we will begin to decline. And so it is that we were re elected to keep the economy strong. We were also re-elected to protect the national security and the defence interests of this country. And those two things have stood like two giant pillars above everything else that we have done not only over the last eighteen months but over the last ten years, because fundamentally Australians want a government that will provide them with economic security and provide them with a sense of national security so that they can get on with their lives, they can raise their families, they can educate them, they can pay off their mortgages, they can get ahead, they can start a business and they can make some money and they can be contributing members of this great Australian community of ours.
That's what they want. They don't want the government at every point in their lives telling them what to do but they do want a government that will guarantee the basic things that are important to them, that sense of personal and family security and that sense of national security. And as part of providing people with security we have obligations at both the national level and at a state level to provide resources to the great public services for education and for health and all of the things that are involved in making sure that we educate the young. We provide them with opportunities as they go through life and we also look after the resources and provide the resources that are needed to care for those in our community who are ill, either physically or mentally. And these are shared responsibilities.
 Defence is the total responsibility of the national government and there some things that are the total responsibility of state governments. But there are a number of things and health and education are two examples of where the responsibility is shared and the only way that we deliver the outcome that the Australian people want is each level of government contributing what it ought to contribute.
Australians are not particularly fussed as to who delivers the service as long as the service gets delivered and I find once again as I go around the country whether it is in Victoria or far North Queensland or Western Australia, whenever something is raised about who ought to be doing what at a particular level of government, the reaction of the average Australian is I don't care who delivers it as long as it gets delivered, and then they quickly add you're the Prime Minister fix it for me. That's a fairly human sort of reaction and can I tell you it's not only human but it's uniform. Wherever you go it is still the same attitude. They are not particularly fussed about the philosophy of all of this they want a good outcome and last week we demonstrated our commitment to that process in the vital area of mental health.
Many recent surveys have indicated and educated us to the challenges in this area. We are talking about it a lot more because we should, because it is a huge health issue. And the Commonwealth announced that it would commit over the next five years additional resources of $1.8 billion in areas where the Commonwealth clearly has direct responsibility. And I made it clear when I made the announcement that that $1.8 billion would be allocated irrespective of what the state governments did. It was an unconditional commitment. We weren't saying well we'll put this money on the table provided the states put in an equivalent amount on the table, but I expect the states to match that $1.8 billion and I expect them to do it particularly in areas of supported accommodation.
 More than forty years ago this country I think a little hastily but it's now history and we can't turn back the clock, I think we embarked upon a policy of deinstitutionalisation in the area of mental health without having a plan for what you were going to do with the people who were no longer cared for in those institutions. They were meant to go into some kind of step down half way form of accommodation that provided more sensitive and effective accommodation and the adequate level of services, but that somehow or other never happened. And now we are paying the price for it as a community where an astonishing percentage of the gaol population in this country suffers from mental illnesses and where there is a cycle of people being picked up and cared for almost in refuge accommodation, not taking their medication, some of them lapsing back into anti-social behaviour on the streets and ending up in the prison system.
 Now something has got to be done about this and we have indicated unconditionally that we will play our part. We will carry our share of the burden and I am calling on every State Premier in Australia to respond to what we have done and to match the financial commitment of the Commonwealth and to discharge their responsibilities under the shared arrangement in this crucial area.
But ladies and gentlemen that was a few days ago. This morning I want to announce a very important initiative relating to the health workforce of this country and it is an initiative that has particular relevance to the people of Victoria. What I am announcing this morning is that the Commonwealth in response to the report of the Productivity Commission on Australia's Health Workforce, that the Commonwealth will commit an additional $250 million over the four years to train more doctors and nurses in Australia.
I make this announcement today prior to the next meeting of governments- of COAG in July so that the recipient universities can gear up to offer these places as soon as possible.
Specifically the Commonwealth will fund an additional 400 medical school places a year. Of these 400, 120 places will go to Deakin University in Victoria, 40 places for a new Gippsland Branch at Monash University Medical School in Victoria and the remaining 240 places will be distributed among the states and territories including Victoria.
Now I think you can work out from that that Victoria will receive more medical places for the very simple reason that it has a significantly lower number of medical students per head of population at present than the rest of the country and this is a policy, this is a response, this is a gesture from the government to redress that imbalance. And I am asking the states and the territories to match the Commonwealth's contribution by guaranteeing clinical placements for all Commonwealth-funded students in medicine and nursing and investing in additional vocational and technical education places in areas including enrolled nursing, care assistance and aboriginal health workers.
Ladies and gentlemen the Commonwealth will also provide one off capital grants and this commitment is subject to matching funding from the Victorian Government of up to $18 million for Deakin University Medical School and $5 million for Monash University Medical School, Gippsland Branch.
In the vital area of nursing the Commonwealth will fund an additional one thousand higher education nursing places a year commencing in 2007 and the Commonwealth will also increase its contribution to the cost of nurse clinical training from approximately $690 to $1,000 a year per full time student to help ensure nurses are better prepared for work.  I emphasise that the announcements that I have made this morning are in addition to the health workforce measures that were announced as part of the mental health package on the 5th April.
  We will continue to work with the states and territories on other reforms to Australia's health workforce including appropriate medical specialist opportunities in the public and private sector, registration arrangements for health professionals.  Accreditation of health education and training and ensuring the health workforce continues to develop to meet the changing needs of the Australian community.
Can I in concluding this announcement acknowledge the advocacy of my federal parliamentary colleagues from Victoria led by the Treasurer and amongst them Stewart Macarthur, the Member for Corangamite and many others were very active in agitating for redressing the imbalance that has existed for a long time in relation to the allocation of university places in different parts of Australia.
It is important in the wake of an announcement like that and in the wake of the announcement that has been made during the course of this week on mental health, to remind ourselves lest we think this is a government only concerned with keeping the economy strong and keeping the nation strong and secure, important though those priorities are, we are also a government that is interested in reform in areas such as health and education.  And if you look back over the last ten years this government's track record of reform in areas of health and education has been quite remarkable.  Look at the university reforms that were negotiated through federal parliament a few years ago by Brendan Nelson.  Think of the significant changes that have been made to the health system.  Tony Abbott is fond of saying that the Howard government is the best friend that Medicare has ever had.  It's true.  We have reinforced the virtues of Medicare.  We have restored strength and respectability to private health insurance despite the criticisms that are often made of that system.  The reality is that forty-five percent of Australians have voted with their dollars to retain private health insurance.  And we have also in an unflinching fashion over the last ten years maintained our strong commitment, not only to the present level but to the expansion, if that is the wish of Australian parents, of the independent school sector.
I noticed during the week that there is some kind of belated electorally dictated repentance by the Labor Party in relation to hit lists on independent schools.  Ladies and gentlemen, don't trust them.  Don't believe it.  They don't believe it themselves.  They are still, because of their association with the education unions in Australia that are viscerally opposed to the independent school sector, they still remain at heart a people who are not true believers to use some language they employ themselves, they are not true believes in a dual system of education.
  We have always stood unconditionally and unflinchingly for the principle of parental choice in education.  When they talked about it in 2001 and they started trotting out their stories about Kings and Scotch and Wesley and Xavier and they started to run the politics of envy because they feel comfortable talking the politics of envy.  They believe in the politics of envy.  And scratch the surface of any Labor Party gathering and the politics of envy will simply ooze out.  Because that is their whole being.  And nothing is going to alter that.  We are the party of equality of opportunity.  We are the party that says it is the right of the parents above everybody else, to decide how their children are to be educated.  And I am very proud and I know all my colleagues are very proud that over the last ten years we have expanded the opportunity of choice and the possibility of choice to hundreds of thousands of Australian parents who would have been economically denied that choice but for our policies.  And they will always remember that it was the Coalition, the Liberal Party of Australia, that made that possible.
  So my friends we have been a great reforming government in the great social areas of health and education.  Of course we need a strong economy.  Of course we need strong defences.  And we need security against those who would try and pull down our way of life.  But we are also a government that is intent on preserving the health of the nation and is determined to provide opportunities and expanding opportunities of that in areas of education and training.
Can I just say one final thing to you my friends, that the last ten and a bit years has been a great opportunity for all of us to serve the Australian people.  We have been successful but far more important than our own partisan political success, our nation has been the beneficiary.  This country is stronger in so many ways than it was ten years ago.  We are more respected around the world.  We are treated more seriously around the world.  We have simultaneously taken our relationship with the United States to a greater level of involvement and intimacy than ever in our history and yet we have developed a constructive, mature, beneficial relationship with China and are building and developing an ever closer relationship with India.
In other words it has been possible despite what was said ten years ago by our critics.  It has been possible to re-embrace the traditional alliances that are so important to this country but at the same time develop the new associations that are equally important to our future.  And symbolism is sometimes important in politics. And there was a moment in 2003 when on successive days the parliament of the nation was addressed by the President of the United States and the following day by the President of China. And that sent a powerful message that our alliance with the United States so important to our security in the past and so important to our national interest in the future. We are in alliance with the Americans because it is in our interests to be so. We are not doing it out of some kind of blind ideology but we also need consistently with that to build and develop our relations in our own way and on our own terms with the nations of Asia. And so it was the next day the President of the most populous country in the world, a country that is now taking four times more exports from Australia than it was in 1996, so it was that he addressed the Parliament on behalf of that huge and important nation.
Fast forward to a week and a half ago and within the space of a week we had a visit from the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom whose eloquent exposition of the cause of freedom and the values at stake in the worldwide fight against terrorism delivered a powerful message to his fraternal colleagues on the other side of our Parliament as much as it did to us and to the rest of the Australian community. And a a few days later he was followed by the visit to Canberra and to Western Australia and New South Wales of the Chinese Premier Wen Jiaboa. A reminder again of that important duality that you can build trust and strong relationships with the nations of Asia without in anyway apologising for and retreating from those traditional associations which are so keenly and dearly held by millions of Australians.
The idea that somehow or other you had to walk away from your history to embrace a modern day geography in the area of international relations was always a flawed doctrine. Whenever I heard it articulated by my predecessor I thought it flew in the face of the common sense of the Australian people and over the last 10 years we have demonstrated how utterly false and ridiculous that proposition has been.
 Again my friends to all of my parliamentary colleagues in Victoria and you have a wonderful federal parliamentary team in Victoria. I thank you, I wish you well, Robert I wish you well in your quest for office as the year goes on. All of my parliamentary colleagues will do everything they can to help bring about a change of government. We have too many Labor governments in Australia, far too many and our next opportunity, unless there is something unexpected in Queensland, our next opportunity, you can always count on there being something unexpected in politics. Our next opportunity is here in Victoria. We wish you well, again my warm thanks for your great support and loyalty over the last ten years. Thank you.


**CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**
Taxation: Keeping faith with Australian families
I am delighted to be back at the Menzies Research Centre, an organisation with a unique place in the Liberal family.
  It was at the Menzies Research Centre, prior to the 1996 election, where I began a series of speeches setting out the principles, values and policy direction which the Liberal and National Parties would follow in government.
 Tonight, I want to revisit the signature commitment which I, on behalf of the Coalition, made to the Australian people more than a decade ago - to put the needs of families at the centre of the national policy agenda.
  We pledged:
 to restore to Australian families a sense of confidence and optimism about their country's future;    to bring within the reach of more families the prospect of good jobs, home ownership and rising living standards; and    to open up new avenues of choice for families, especially those on modest incomes.
We also made a solemn commitment about how we would govern.
  We knew that Australian families were fed up with Paul Keating's humbug and hyperbole.  They'd grown tired of governments that over-promised and under-delivered.  They were frustrated with political leadership that seemed to care only for the boutique interests of the few while ignoring the everyday concerns of the many.
  I therefore pledged to run a government where the views of the powerful, the organised and the politically articulate would not dominate at the expense of the unorganised mainstream of Australian society.
While some commentators drew parallels with Menzies' eloquent paean to the Forgotten People in 1942, I'd be the last person here to put it in that league.  Yet it was a commitment made with the Menzies legacy very much in mind.
  Menzies knew that the Liberal Party would never survive as a sectional party, an elitist party or a party of privilege.  He knew that to win and hold government, and to fully serve the Australian people, it had to attract votes from a broad cross-section of the Australian community, including those on modest incomes; Australians who saw in us their best hope for a better life, for themselves and their families.
This sentiment, these values are as relevant to Australian Liberalism today as they have ever been, not least in the context of debate over taxation.
Robust debate is the lifeblood of democracy.  Governments, however, have a singular responsibility to filter the endless stream of demands on tax through a wide policy lens.
  That lens, through 30 years of public life dealing with public finance, has ranged over how we think about fiscal policy, the level and mix of tax, constant pressures for higher spending, reform of Commonwealth-State financial relations and, more recently, the intergenerational pressures which Australia must face.
The Coalition's reforms to Australia's fiscal architecture on all these fronts have been crucial to our strong economic performance over the last decade, as I will touch on in a moment.
  But if there is a lesson I have drawn from tax debates over three decades it is that elaborate models and reformist rhetoric count for very little without a concerted focus on the financial pressures that Australian families confront.
A healthy set of books is a necessary condition of good government.  It is not, however, a sufficient condition for a good society.  And a taxation system that fails to recognise the costs of raising children - that adopts an antiseptic, economically neutral view of the responsibility carried by Australian parents - is a taxation system without a social vision.
 My Government places the low and middle income families of Australia squarely in the foreground of our policy lens.  We make no apologies for that.
That is how we said we would govern.  That is how we have governed.  That is how we will continue to govern.
To keep faith with Australian families, to provide them with greater choice as to how they live their lives, has been our guiding principle.
   Modern government is about facing up to the challenge of a globalised economy.  But it is also about supporting those institutions which provide reassurance and support when society is undergoing great change.
  And strengthening the family - helping them with the costs of raising children - is the best way any government can reinforce social cohesion and stability in a changing world.
Repairing Australia's economic foundations
Of course, fine words about families amount to little more than rhetorical eye-wash if a government fails to get Australia's economic fundamentals right.
  That is why in 1996 the Coalition set about repairing Australia's economic foundations by slashing Labor's $10 billion budget deficit and $90 billion debt and by restoring integrity to Commonwealth finances.
A National Commission of Audit identified all assets and liabilities of the Commonwealth.  With the Charter of Budget Honesty, we established a new framework for fiscal policy based on principles of sound economic management and transparent reporting.
  Most importantly, the Government took some tough decisions on government spending, achieving a surplus ahead of schedule during our first term.  And we put in place what are recognised today as world best practice frameworks for fiscal and monetary policy.
We were determined to draw a line under Labor's record of boom-bust fiscal follies.  And to formally make sure that no Labor Treasurer could ever again boast of having the Reserve Bank in his or her pocket.
Stable fiscal and monetary policies have underpinned a decade of strong growth in what is now the longest continuous economic expansion in Australia's history.
  The Secretary of the Treasury, Ken Henry, has observed that the small range of movement over the past decade in both monetary policy and the government budget balance would have come as quite a surprise to anyone familiar with the experience of the preceding two decades.
  As a Treasurer in the 1970s and early 1980s, I can certainly attest to this.  And I again want to record my deep appreciation to Peter Costello for his decade of wise economic stewardship.
 A medium term fiscal strategy to maintain budget balance, on average, over the course of the economic cycle has yielded substantial benefits in terms of credibility and sustainability.  The Government's underlying cash balance has been in surplus for eight out of 10 years, cumulating to an estimated $59 billion.
  Our debt reduction strategy has yielded an annual saving in interest payments of more than $8 billion in 2006-07.  This discipline has allowed us to expand provision of public services and to provide tax relief while still reducing debt.
Successive budget surpluses and asset sales will have contributed roughly equally to the elimination of Commonwealth net debt this year, in obvious contrast to the positions of most OECD countries.
Strong surpluses during periods of growth have helped to take pressure off interest rates and encourage private investment.  They remain necessary if the economic growth, job creation and rising living standards that Australians have enjoyed through the last decade are to continue.
Sustained surpluses are also critical if Australia is to meet the future fiscal and economic challenges associated with demographic change.  Like most developed countries, Australia faces a pronounced ageing of its population.
The Intergenerational Report in May 2002 highlighted the need for Australia to act early to reduce the potential for longer term age-related and health funding increases and to provide for them.
 With the Future Fund, the Government has adopted a forward-looking strategy to address looming pressures.  It will free up resources in the future when fiscal pressures associated with health and ageing are expected to emerge.
Consistent with Liberal philosophy, budget surpluses have been achieved without increasing the overall tax burden.  The Australian Government's overall tax share has fallen as a proportion of GDP from 23.1 per cent in 1996-97 to an estimated 21.0 per cent in 2005-06.
We have the eighth lowest tax to GDP ratio in the OECD.  Consistent with responsible budget management, we must aim to do even better.
Consistent with Liberal philosophy, the Government cut personal income taxes in 2000, 2003, 2004 and 2005, with further tax cuts legislated to take effect on 1 July this year.  As a result, more than 80 per cent of taxpayers face a marginal rate of 30 per cent or less.
  Someone on average earnings today is paying about $3,000 less in annual income tax than under the old income tax scales.
Company tax has been cut from 36 per cent to 30 per cent.  Capital gains tax for individuals has been halved.
We have ensured that Australia, amongst developed countries, has one of the lowest overall average tax burdens on families.  Between 1999-2000 and 2004-05, the so-called tax wedge on workers' incomes - the gap between labour costs and take home pay - fell across all eight different family scenarios as analysed by the OECD.
The $21.7 billion worth of tax cuts announced in last year's budget went a long way towards making our tax system more internationally competitive.  Whereas about 14 per cent of taxpayers faced the top marginal rate in 2002-03, only 3 per cent will do so from next financial year.
With the increase in the relevant threshold to $125,000 from 1 July, Australia has moved from the bottom third to the top half of OECD member countries on the level of income where the top rate applies.
  With the GST, this Government acted to address the two biggest structural imbalances in Australia's tax system - an over-reliance on taxation of income relative to consumption and the lack of an adequate tax base for State and Territory service provision.
The GST paved the way for the abolition of no less than 10 inefficient taxes, giving Australia one of the most streamlined indirect tax systems in the world.  The States have now received almost six years of GST revenue, with cumulative gains in 2008-09 likely to exceed initial predictions by $7.4 billion.
 As Peter Costello has said, it is impossible to talk sensibly about tax in isolation from the spending side of the ledger.
  We now have quite low government spending compared with other countries in the industrialised world - lower even than the United States and Japan.
If you told the average American policy analyst that a country could offer universal health coverage, a comprehensive public education system, introduce a national value-added tax and still keep the size of government below US levels, he or she would be nothing short of astonished.
Earlier this year, I described government in Australia as lean but not mean.  Our people seem to like it that way.
A limited and prudent state, yes.  A nanny state, definitely not.  But Australians have always believed in something more than Adam Smith's nightwatchman state.
  And in an age when civilised nations are engaged in a global struggle against terrorism, when comprehensive health and school systems are every citizen's birthright and when that citizen is living more than twice as long as one born when The Wealth of Nations was published, I dare say Adam Smith would not be surprised.
The Government's consistent position has been that, having met legitimate spending responsibilities in national security, health and other services and having kept the budget in healthy surplus, taxpayers deserve tax relief.  It is, after all, their money.
  A Liberal Government would not be a liberal government if it believed anything less.
Real relief and genuine choice for families
While this larger picture might not excite today's news cycle, it is an essential backdrop to a balanced debate on taxation.  More importantly, it constitutes the wide policy lens which has allowed the Government to provide real relief and genuine choice for Australian families.
It has always been part of the Liberal tradition to expand the horizons of choice for Australians - in health and education, at work and at home.  Liberals instinctively believe that the task of modern government is to enable individuals and families to exercise maximum choice, not to tell them how to structure their lives.
This Government has been especially keen to give families with children greater freedom to choose how they balance work and family responsibilities, including through additional support for those families who desire to have one parent - usually the mother - at home full time with children in their early years.
  Beginning with the Family Tax Initiative in 1996, we have increased total assistance to families by more than $6 billion a year - with the scales tipped strongly in favour of low and middle income families.
  The maximum rate of Family Tax Benefit assistance for a child under 13 has risen from about $2,420 to $4,200 a year in the last decade.
A New Tax System collapsed 12 family and childcare payments into three, with the benefits of tax reform slanted heavily in favour of families.
  In 2004, we introduced Australia's largest ever family package - an additional $19 billion to help with the costs of raising children.  Withdrawal rates on family payments have been progressively reduced to improve the rewards from working - especially for families where a second earner is in part-time or casual work or where a woman is returning to work after the birth of a child.
With the Family Tax Benefit system, the Government said to Australian families: we recognise your diverse needs and desires; we know that women in particular face difficult decisions about work and family.  Most importantly, we believe that governments should accommodate the choices of society, not the other way around.
The numbers suggest a fairly stable pattern among Australian families with dependants.  In 19 per cent of cases, both parents work full-time.  A higher percentage - 21 per cent of families - rely on a single breadwinner, with one parent caring for children at home.  And for some time now, the most common arrangement - today 28 per cent of families - sees one parent (usually the father) working full-time and the other (usually the mother) working part-time.
Diverse families and different arrangements, but the same principle of choice.
As well as helping parents negotiate the big decisions about work and family, FTB also offers choice as to how what is, in reality, a targeted tax cut is received.
  Language is important here.  Those who seek to denigrate what we've done constantly refer to Family Tax Benefits as 'middle-class welfare'.  They are nothing of the kind.  They are tax relief for a universal reality - that it costs money to raise children.
At a time when there is general dismay at our relatively low fertility rate, what possible public policy justification can there be for affording precisely the same tax treatment to a couple without children on $80,000, compared with a couple with two children on the same income?
A little acknowledged fact is that families can receive the Family Tax Benefit in one of three ways.  They can, as most do, choose a fortnightly payment to the principal carer (normally the mother).  They can receive a tax rebate on their annual tax return.  Or they can have fortnightly PAYG deductions adjusted to take account of the benefit.
The fact that most people choose for family budget reasons to take it as a fortnightly payment does not alter its character.
Under the Family Tax Benefit system, according to Treasury analysis, almost 40 per cent of all families this financial year will receive more in cash benefits than they pay in personal income tax.  In addition, FTB has meant that working families on lower incomes have experienced greater proportional increases in disposable income than those in higher income groups.
  Let me cite three examples of how the Government's policies have helped to improve the financial position of low and middle income families.
  The real disposable income of a sole parent on 67 per cent of Average Weekly Earnings (ordinary time, for full-time employees) has risen from $34,088 in 1996-97 to an estimated $40,749 in 2006-07.  With FTB, their real net tax threshold - the point at which they begin paying tax in net terms - has risen from an annual income of $34,502 in 1996-97 to $44,951 in 2006-07.
A single income couple on average earnings with two children (aged 3 and 8) has seen their real disposable income rise from $38,070 in 1996-97 to an estimated $49,213 in 2006-07.  Their real net tax threshold next financial year will also be $44,951, up from $33,931 in 1996-97.
Or take the most common case where one spouse works full-time and the other works part-time.  For a dual income couple with two children where one spouse is on average earnings and the other on a third of average earnings, real disposable income has risen from $49,170 in 1996-97 to $61,286.  And next financial year, that couple will pay no net tax on the first $47,891 they earn.
 Of course, the Labor Party has exhibited only unremitting hostility to the Family Tax Benefit system.  It has become a very small-minded political outfit, almost resentful when the Coalition looks after low and middle income families better than they do.
Time and again, Labor has signalled its intention to take the axe to FTB.  At the last election, its family tax plan would have left some of the least affluent people in Australian society worse off, including single mothers and large, single income families on modest incomes.
Last November, the architect of this vicious policy and now ALP Treasury spokesman, Wayne Swan, said that Family Tax Benefits for what he terms 'high income single income families' should be 'rolled into a reformed tax system'.  In January, Labor's Family and Community Services spokesman, Senator Chris Evans, complained that the Government 'has been gradually and quietly pushing up the value of family benefits'.  And that 'there has been no real debate on the implications of this'.
You don't have to be a Bletchley Park code breaker to see where they are going!  Labor wants to undermine the Family Tax Benefit system.
The thin edge of the wedge is its proposed family income test of $250,000 on Family Tax Benefit Part B.
  This benefit largely supports couples who choose to have one parent remain at home to care for children.  It is designed to compensate single income families for the fact that they have access to just one tax-free threshold, while dual income families benefit from two thresholds and the lower rates of taxation applicable to incomes under a progressive tax system.
The bulk of recipients (nearly three quarters) are on incomes below $50,000 a year.  With FTB B, a family on a single income of $35,000 with two dependent children (one under five) currently receives more than $10,000 per year in family tax benefits.
Once a means tested threshold applies to FTB B, there is nothing to stop that threshold being whittled down.  And the fact that Labor's means test saves a paltry $6 million a year can mean only one thing.
In government, Labor would have a much tighter income test which would affect tens of thousands of single income Australian families who could by no stretch of the imagination be described as rich.  To illustrate: a family income test of $125,000 per annum would yield savings of less than $100 million.
 The Labor Party is also hopelessly confused.  It rails against so-called effective marginal tax rates.  Yet in relation to FTB B, it proposes an extension of them.
There is much hypocrisy on this issue.  The effective marginal tax rate of which we are speaking could only ever be totally eliminated through either the abolition of the Family Tax Benefit system, or the removal of all income tests on benefits under that system which could only be achieved at significant extra cost.
The Family Tax Benefit system symbolises the great philosophical divide in Australian politics between a Labor Party which thinks government should direct peoples' behaviour and a Coalition which sees its role as letting families make up their own minds.
 Whether it is FTB or funding for independent schools or support for private health insurance, Labor's old ideological agenda can never be killed off.
So that when it comes to choice: Don't trust them.  Don't believe them.  Because they don't believe in it themselves.
Now let me turn to a commonly heard complaint about the tax-transfer system - that the Government is engaged in nothing more than a giant 'churning' exercise, taking peoples' money with one hand and handing it back to them with the other.
Income tax raises revenue according to an individual's capacity to pay, while the family payments system is focused on need, assisting families according to their income and number of dependents.  Some so-called churning is the inescapable result of a tax-transfer system where both policy instruments do their respective jobs.
Australia operates what is regarded as the most targeted social security system in the OECD, and probably in the world.  Research by Peter Whiteford at the OECD has shown that we also have the lowest churn of any developed country.
  As the Whiteford research points out, many of the supposed solutions to churning favoured by the Government's critics would likely have adverse distributional consequences for low and middle income households.  And because income taxes represent a relatively small component of churning for the bottom 40 per cent of households, they would be unlikely to solve alleged incentive problems.
  Again, I don't want to imply that more cannot be done to improve incentives in the tax-transfer system.  But critics can't have it both ways - simultaneously railing about effective marginal tax rates and against middle-class welfare.
Let me make a final point.  If the anti-churn advocates get their way, and the Family Tax Benefit system is dismantled in favour of tax cuts for individual taxpayers, the people who will suffer most will be Australian women.
  One of the distinguishing features of FTB is that it is paid to the principal carer - overwhelmingly the mother.  If simply rolled into a reformed income tax system, the bulk of individual tax cuts would go to men, financed by the withdrawal of direct fortnightly payments to women.
 What our critics are really advocating is redistribution from women to men.
Conclusion
When this Government came to office, Australia's economy was struggling to create jobs and to raise living standards.  Today, it is almost impossible to pick up a broadsheet newspaper without reading a social commentator fretting about the consequences of too much affluence.
Faced with a choice, I know my preference.  And I think I know what Australian families prefer too.
But I also know that we would not have survived as a government if we had not worked hard to spread the benefits of prosperity across the community.
  Our record shows that we have been exactly the government we said we would be - a distinctively Australian synthesis of economic liberalism and modern social conservatism.  A government that appreciates the virtues of markets, but also the values of family, community and country.
As I told the Menzies Research Centre in June 1995, I have never seen economic liberalism as an end in itself or a stand-alone political credo.  Sound money, responsible budgets and efficient markets are nothing more than the mechanisms to support resilient families, cohesive communities and a stronger Australia.
 A country, as Edmund Burke observed, 'is not a thing of mere physical locality'.  Nor is it just individuals in a market place.  A country is also connected by a hidden chain of social obligations.
 By keeping faith with Australian families - their interests, aspirations, hopes and values - we have kept faith with Australia at its best.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much Bob for those very, very generous words of introduction  Warwick and Kathi Parer, Lawrence Springborg the Leader of the Parliamentary National Party and Leader of the Opposition, the Lord Mayor of Brisbane Campbell Newman, my many Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues and can I particularly acknowledge the presence of my old friend and Liberal stalwart Robert Mathers and fellow Liberals.
  Tonight I want to say something about what we as a team have achieved over the last 10 years.  And it has been a team effort and that's something that I will come to in a moment.  But given what has happened today I think it is appropriate at the commencement of my remarks I say something very briefly about the unfolding situation in the Solomon Islands, particularly as we have dispatched and indeed as we speak some of the first of the ADF reinforcements will be landing in Honiara.  What has happened is a reminder of the instability of the region in which we live.  It's a reminder that we live in a part of the world that carries with it the constant threat of failed states, and as a stable united prosperous nation in the region we know it is in our interest as well as the interest of the region that we prevent states from failing because failed states become the breeding grounds for all sorts of ideologies and attitudes and developments which can pose a threat to the stability of the whole region.  We should remember that there are countries other than countries that are geographically part of the region which have an interest in involving themselves and gathering allies and partners in the region, not necessarily with the longer term interest of the region at heart.
And it is also the reality that the rest of the world looks to Australia to shoulder the lion's share of the burden of providing support and stability not only for the people of the Solomon Islands but also for other small nations which may find themselves in the same situation.  The Regional Assistance Mission RAMSI to the Solomon Islands in 2003 was very successful.  It was a partnership led by Australia but it did involve the contribution of other countries, of New Zealand, of Papua New Guinea, of Fiji, of Tonga and also contributions from some of the other very tiny states of the region.  And it was remarkably successful.  And these developments of recent days are a reminder that these sorts of commitments are long-term commitments.  You can never sometimes put an end date on them and I am determined and all the members of the Government are determined that the good work that was done three years ago will not be undone by indifference in the face of what has happened over the past few days and we, by sending the forces we have, and by indicating a willingness to send more if they are needed, both military personnel and police, we are determined to send a message to those who would  upset the democratic process in the Solomon Islands and upset the stability that we have brought to this country and through it, I believe,  to the region send a very solid message to those people that they will not succeed. And I know that all Australians will wish the men and women of the defence forces and the men and women of the Australian Federal Police and the state police forces that are going to the Solomon Islands the best of good fortune and I know that they will be very much in the thoughts and concerns of all Australians as they go about their work.  Work of this kind is never free from risk. No military operation is an operation that doesn't carry the risk of physical injury or even death and we should always bear that in mind when we send young men and women abroad in our name and on our behalf.
Ladies and gentlemen, tonight is an occasion to look back on the last 10 years. It's an occasion not just to celebrate as some people have been kind to remark tonight celebrate what I may have achieved over that period of time. But it is first and foremost an occasion to celebrate the remarkable success of a Coalition between the Liberal and National parties because at the core of our success has been the unity and the teamwork of our two parties.  I've been a member of the Federal Parliament for 32 years.  I was a member of an earlier Coalition Government that was a strong united Coalition.  But this Coalition has been, in my view, even stronger and more united and in thinking of the people to which I owe a great debt of gratitude I must start by singling out the contribution of the three National Party leaders who've served as Deputy Prime Minister over the last 10 years, of Tim Fischer, of John Anderson and currently as Mark Vaile.  At every turn, they have been good friends, they have been supportive Deputy Prime Ministers and they have wonderfully energetic representatives of their own constituency in the interests of their party.  The genius of our coalition has been based on a mutual respect, an understanding that although we are separate parties we are united in a determination to serve the interests of all the Australian community and at a political level united in our determination to make sure that the Labor Party remains in opposition as long as we humanly can achieve that wonderful goal.
As I look back on the last 10 years, and I try and distil as best I can what has been the reason why we have won four elections, and I think more than anything else it has been a determination to govern for the entire country and not govern for sectional or elite interests.  One of the great strengths of the Liberal Party is that it is not a sectional party.  There are many men and women from the business community of Brisbane here tonight and the Liberal Party and the National Party are unashamedly  parties that believe in business. We believe in profits. We in believe in enterprise. We believe in competition and we believe in a market economy. But we are not parties, the Liberal Party is not a party that is in any sense a branch office of the business community. We are not owned by any section of the Australian community. We are a party that proudly counts within its ranks, men and women from all walks of Australian life and one of the ingredients of our success is that we have governed as we said we would for the mainstream of the Australian community. I don't want to spend tonight in my brief remarks regaling you with a whole list of statistics. There is a long and proud record of economic achievement. Undeniably, this country is a wealthier, more prosperous, more stable, more united, more cohesive, more optimistic country now than what it was 10 years ago. Undeniably Australia is a more respected country around the world than what it was 10 years ago, not only because of what we have achieved economically but also because we have been willing when it has mattered, to stand up and be counted and it will always be the determination of this Government to do precisely that.
I think one of the other reasons why we have been successful is that we have understood that good government is the art of the right combination of good policy and good politics. I often have a saying for my colleagues and that is this, 'that it's better to be 90 per cent pure in government, than 130 per cent pure in opposition' and there's a moral in that and that is that political life is a combination of the two. You must understand the desire of the Australian community to appreciate the reasons why reform and policy change is necessary.
We have been a party of reform, we are still a party of reform and this afternoon as I was thinking of the remarks that I was going to make tonight I lighted upon the front cover of the Economist magazine for this week and it came up with a headline 'Another great week for Europe: paralysis in Italy, surrender in France.' Now I say this with great affection for the people of those two countries. Let me assure you Santo, with great affection, great affection for the people that vote for those countries. But there is a legend in this and it was such a compelling front cover that I had to share that lesson with you and what the article, in what is one of the most respected journals in the world, was basically saying is that both of those countries are in some state of political and economic gridlock because for too long, governments of both the left and the right have put off necessary reforms. France has surrendered, the French Government has surrendered to those in the street who are opposing, what by the standards of Margaret Thatcher, the standards of the former National Government in New Zealand and certainly the standards of this Government are very mild industrial relations reforms indeed and the moral of all of this is simply that in a globalised world in which we now live, no nation can afford to turn its face against necessary reforms and many of you have heard me say in the past that economic reform is rather like participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line. You know that you will never get there, but you also know that if you don't keep running towards that finishing line, the other blokes in the race are going to run past you.
We are now competing in a race with a world that is being transformed almost every year of our existence. In 10 or 15 years time or perhaps earlier, for the first time since the Industrial Revolution, the epicentre of the world's middle-class will not be located in Europe and North America, it will be located much closer to home in India and China. By the time those years go by there will be somewhere between 400 and 800 million middle-class consumers in those two countries and that reality is transforming the way in which nations in our region react to each other, it's transforming the dynamic in which industries operate, not only in those countries, but also in our country.
This carries great opportunities and great benefits for Australia, we have resources, both of those nations need those resources, they need them in great abundance and they need them on time, and they need them safely delivered and we are good at all of those things. But it also carries the obligation of this country to compete and to understand that just as we sell to other countries, those countries themselves will want to sell to us and it means that our industries have to adjust and to make changes. Because if we don't do that, if we don't undertake the necessary reforms, then we are going to lose the competitive edge that we now have. Some people said to me last year when we were bringing in the industrial relations reforms, they said to me, 'John, why are you doing this? The economy is stong, the budget is in balance, you've got a healthy majority, you've just won an election, why don't you just take it easy and have a breather and leave it all alone, let it look after itself?' That of course would have been a recipe for ultimate failure, because you can never rest in the reform process, you must always keep going and the reason why we persevered with the industrial relations reforms and the reason why we stuck to our guns in relation to those reforms was that we need to find new avenues for productivity and new competitiveness, that we are in 2006, living off the reforms of earlier years. We need in these years to deliver the reforms for people in later years to live off and that is the process that goes on and on. And in a globalised world where no nation can seal itself off from competition from around the world, that is why constant reform and constant change, where it's appropriate, is something that we have to undertake.
 So my friends we are entitled, for a moment, to reflect with gratitude on what has been done over the last 10 years. We should always remind ourselves that we have been successful politically because we have avoided the errors of hubris, we have avoided the belief that somehow or other we were elected because we were a superior group of men or women. We were elected in 1996 because the Australian people desperately wanted a change of government, the Australian people were aching for a decent alternative to the Labor Government in the mid-1990s. We presented ourselves in many cases as an unknown group of men and women. I was identified with a number of causes and things in which I believed and believed passionately. We put together a strong alternative plan and the Australian people invested a great deal of trust in us. But we will lose that trust just as strongly as we enjoyed it in 1996, if we lose touch with the needs and the aspirations of the overwhelming majority of the mainstream of the Australian community, it's the families of the suburbs of our cities, it's the families of our regional towns, it's the country folk who are struggling with the adversities of drought and the distorted world markets which make rural life so difficult. It's their interests and the interests of the mainstream that they represent which must be our constant concern and our constant mission to respond to.
 I mentioned a few moments ago the debt that I owe to the three National Party leaders that I have served with as Deputy Prime Minister and I do also tonight want to say thank you to all the members of the Party organisation, and I think particularly of the tremendous contribution that the Queensland organisation of the two parties has made to our success. We had no better result, anywhere in Australia in October 2004 than we had in the great State of Queensland. The election, of course, of our fourth Coalition Senator from Queensland in Russell Trood was a wonderful achievement and to have people in other states say how on earth did you get four elected in Queensland and I said well it just shows what good judges of character and government the people of Queensland are. And some of my rugby league friends say to me, I suppose John when it comes to the State of Origin you barrack for New South Wales and I said no, I said, after how kind the people of Queensland were to me at the last election I'd never dream of barracking against the Maroons.
 But it has been a wonderful contribution. The campaign that was waged under Bob Tucker's stewardship as President in 1996, the wonderful campaigns that have been run since and can I say what a fantastic job I think Geoffrey Green is doing as the State Director of the Liberal Party here in Queensland and how really delighted, how really delighted I am that my old friend from the days in Kingston, Warwick Parer, is President of the Party and the partnership he has forged with Bruce Scott, is very important to the political future of the Coalition here in Queensland. To all of my wonderful Queensland parliamentary colleagues, Ian Macfarlane who is the senior ranking Queenslander, my other ministers and all of my senators and members. It has been a great team effort, and I do as I have on other occasions particularly mention, in a broader Cabinet context, the wonderful contribution of Peter Costello as Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and somebody who I believe has been the best Treasurer that Australia has had. And may I also pay a particular tribute to the wonderful work that Alexander Downer has done. Alexander and Peter, apart from myself, are the only other members of the team that have been in the same positions as they were appointed to back in March of 1996.
It has been a great 10 years, it has been a great 10 years politically for the Liberal Party and the National Party at a federal level. We are entitled to point to a strong economy, the lowest unemployment in more than 30 years, but above all of that, I think we can point to a sense of optimism and self belief that I find stronger and deeper and more enduring as I move around this country than at any time in the 32 years that I have been in public life. My mission in politics and particularly my mission as Prime Minister has been to identify with the hopes and the aspirations of the average Australian. There is no finer human being on earth than the average Australian, a person who brings together a combination of character traits of independence, of resilience, of compassion, of judging a person on his or her worth and somebody who is prepared to extend a helping hand to somebody who genuinely needs it and you find within the average Australian a distillation of those qualities I do not think that you can find anywhere else in the world.
 For me, every day of having been Prime Minister of this great country has been an immense privilege. It is the greatest privilege that any person can possibly have and can I say to all of you for the wonderful support and loyalty that you have extended to me over the last 10 years, I extend my great thanks and finally and very importantly because she is here tonight, can I say to you Janette again thank you very, very much for all the support and help and advice and counsel and wisdom that you've extended over these last 10 years.
And finally, it has been a great team effort and tonight is a wonderful occasion here in Brisbane to reflect as we are entitled to do but very importantly as we go from this gathering tonight re-dedicate ourselves to the service of all of the Australian people according to the principles of our two great Coalition parties. Thank you.
 [ends]


Your Excellency, the Administrator of the Commonwealth and Sir Nicholas Shehadie, Mr Paul Lennon the Premier of Tasmania and Mrs Lennon, Mr Barry Jones, the Mayor of Tasman, my fellow Australians.
 We gather in shadows of great suffering and take today one more step along a difficult path.
No words can adequately express the unspeakable horror, the profound sorrow and the justified outrage unleashed from this place 10 years ago.  We were all touched by a day that tore a community apart and pierced our nation's heart.
The pain of 35 lives cut short is no less sharp 10 years on.  Knowing that today a girl would be a woman, a father perhaps a grandfather, or a cherished friendship even closer.
 Today our nation's thoughts and prayers are with all of those who bear the scars of that Sunday in April of 1996, the families and friends of those who died; the injured, especially those whose physical pain continues; and all whose mind and spirit remain burdened.
The evil that happened here darkened our nation's spirit like few other events in my memory.  We mourned with those who mourned and we ached with those who ached.
  The people who lost so much 10 years ago were engaged in the simple pleasures and solemn duties of Australian life.  They were families relaxing in afternoon sunshine.  They were older Australians taking a well-earned holiday after a lifetime of work and citizenship and family.  They were workers making this outpost of inauspicious beginnings such an important part of our nation's heritage.
  What happened here 10 years ago mocked so much of what we thought about Australia, that somehow or other things like this could not happen in Australia.
That we were something different and something special and something better in a world so scarred by inhumanity.  It affronted the very essence of what makes us human - the faith and the trust that we have in each other.
The poet Margaret Scott, a Nubeena resident until her death last August, spoke poignantly of the tormented legacy of those events when she said: 'Our trust of people was gone.  We had to deal with our fears of other people, with fears of going out and having a meal in a restaurant, or fears of walking down the street.  Nobody and nothing was normal any more'.
Ten years on, the anguish and the torment for many has not ended.  And sadly for some, it never will.
  My friends, my fellow Australians, it is a measure of this community's spirit, Australia's spirit and the human spirit that we gather today not just in sorrow. And not just to look back.
  In honouring the victims, we also come to honour a new story written in the poetry of courage and compassion.  A story of kindness and solidarity, of resilience and recovery, where humanity steps forward and a community fights back.
This story began that very day with countless acts of bravery and selflessness by emergency workers and police, by local staff and by ordinary citizens.
  To their names - many unwritten and unheralded - we add all who worked tirelessly to aid the injured and to comfort the grieving - the doctors and nurses, the priests and counsellors, the families and friends, the carers and the total strangers who gave something back to their fellow man through the long nightmare that followed.  Something more than they knew.
We recall that not a single life was lost during the rescue operation and among those brought into hospital.
  We remember the outpouring of sympathy across our nation and around the world from a tragedy that touched so many communities here and overseas.
 So many acts of human kindness - big and small - flowed from this tragedy.  As big as the doctors and nurses of Launceston arriving to relieve exhausted medical crews in Hobart.  As small as the simple messages of support - many from children - from places near and far.
 In finding light from the darkness, we need look no further than The Alannah and Madeline Foundation - born of tragic circumstances yet now providing vital support to children who are victims of violent crime or sudden family loss.
Today, we also return to honour the strength and the courage of the local Tasman community.  The years that followed took a punishing toll on individuals and families, on farms and businesses.  For so long your struggle was not to rebuild and recover, but simply to survive.
  You never lost faith and you never gave up.  Against all odds, and with enormous grit, this community pulled itself together and found new strength.
Port Arthur has risen again to be a vibrant hub of Tasmania's economic and social life, with this historic site reclaiming its place as one of our great heritage attractions.
  Those who worked towards the opening of the Memorial Garden some six years ago deserve our special praise today.
  Memorials are important.  We need places where people can come to reflect, to grieve, to honour those we have lost and, hopefully, to find peace.
  It does take a special brand of courage to say to the world: this evil happened; it happened here.  It sends a message of faith and defiance, that no act of violence can define this place or defeat the power of humanity and compassion.
For Australia, my friends, that day was also a test of our commonsense and of our moral sense.  United in grief, our people responded with calm resolution and steady purpose.  Hard as it was to confront, we could not escape that this was not an accident, not an act of nature or an act of God.
  All tragedies demand much of us and this one demanded more.
 The fact that our society showed its revulsion for these deeds through our courts and our law was itself a show of strength.  And by coming together to make the means of such violence less accessible, Australians displayed an unshakeable determination to bequeath a future to this country's children where the chances of such evil happening again are hopefully diminished.
Of course, our obligation to the future does not end there.  Nor can our duty to the countless victims end in congratulating ourselves for being no more than civilised human beings.
The struggle to build a society where violence is repudiated and where people can go about their daily lives in peace and security goes on.  It always will.
  Today, though, our duty is to honour all that was lost a decade ago.  And also to honour what brave, determined people - many of them here for this ceremony - have struggled to rediscover ever since - their faith in humanity itself.
A few moments ago, we said the Lord's Prayer and Jesus concluded the Sermon from which it is drawn with a parable of a man building a house upon a rock to withstand the storms that would beat against us.
In looking forward, let us give thanks for that great truth that faith in the human spirit, and our faith in each other, does not rest on the shifting sands that gave way that brutal hour ten years ago.
 Instead it offers all who hold such faith a foundation for the storms and trials of life and a base, even in the darkest times, from which to trust and to love.
My fellow Australians, I conclude by saying on your behalf, to all of those who are gathered here today and shared in different ways the pain and the anguish of that terrible event 10 years ago.  You have been in our thoughts in different ways over that decade, you continue to be in our thoughts and out of the darkness of that time we have learnt some things about ourselves.  We have learnt our strengths, we have learnt our capacity to work together to try and prevent such things happening again.  But above all, we have learnt how resilient the human spirit is and how determined the Australian nation can be to confront and overcome evil.
[ends]  


Thank you. Thank you very much, Lydia Scuglia, the President of the Eastwood Chamber of Commerce, my Parliamentary colleague and friend Andrew Tink, the mayors of Ryde and Hunters Hill, the local police patrol commander, ladies and gentlemen. I am very pleased indeed that the organising skills of the Eastwood Chamber of Commerce enabled the availability that I had on the eve of the Budget, it meant that I was able to come today and to share some thoughts with all of you about the state of the Australian economy. And nowhere better and nowhere more appropriate to do it, of course, than at a gathering of what is a representative group of the small and, in some cases, not so small, businesses of which the electorate of Bennelong boasts many.
 And in a sense the engine room of the Australian economy remains, as it always has been, and that is the small business sector. When small and medium sized businesses in Australia are doing well, then the entire Australian economy is doing well. And today of course I'm able to say that Australia is in the 15th year of the longest unbroken period of economic expansion our country has experienced since the end of World War Two. It's been a remarkable period of economic growth. It's an economic period which is built very, very much on some strong fundamentals of the Australian economy, the type of which we haven't experienced in our previous economic history.
 My outlook for the economy is one of continued optimism and continued confidence about the future. As always there are some clouds on the horizon but almost all of the clouds there are on the horizon, and they're not very large clouds, are clouds that have been formed by forces elsewhere and over which no Australian Government, irrespective of it's political stripe, has a great deal of direct control.
 I think it's fair to say that we are strong now because of changes and reforms that have been undertaken over the previous 15 or 20 years. Now there's a lesson in that, and the lesson very simply is that the prosperity of today is a product of the reforms of yesterday and it follows from that rather logically that if we are to have continued prosperity into the future, we must continue to carry out economic reforms today.
And that of course brings me to one or two or the issues that are economically topical at the present time and the first of those that I would mention are of course the Government's industrial relations changes. Now these changes were long overdue. They will produce in the Government's strong view, higher levels of employment, greater flexibility especially for small and medium sized businesses and will add very much to the strength of the Australian economy over the years ahead. I've made this comment in a couple of speeches I've made elsewhere in Australia over the past few weeks, but there was front page of the well known international economic magazine called The Economist a couple of weeks ago and it was talking about the outcome of the election in Italy which produced almost a stalemate, and a very, what I might call, narrow change of Government from one side of politics to the other. And also the extraordinary situation in France where because of riots in the streets the government of that country, which is of a centre right disposition, had decided to retreat on some very long overdue labour market reforms. And I thought there was a lesson in that front page for Australia and the lesson was that there is really no alternative but to maintain a continuous process of economic reform. And the reason why economic reform has become so hard in France and in many other parts of Europe is that they haven't carried any of it out for the last 10 or 20 years. And once you lose the habit of reform, the people have no stomach for it. And one of the reasons why we have to keep reforming and changing our economy and improving it is that if we fall into the complacent belief that we no longer need to do any more economic reforms then we're going to be very sadly mistaken, we're going to lose momentum and we're going to find it very hard to pick up the cudgels of reform in the years ahead.
And for those who may in the community say that our industrial relations reforms are unnecessary, for those who may say why don't you just rest on your laurels? The economy is going well, unemployment is low, inflation is low, business profitability is good, the budget is in surplus, all of those things are right. But the reason why those things are right is that in earlier times, in earlier years governments have undertaken economic reform and if we're going to keep it that way, we have to keep the process of economic reform going. And if ever there was a good time to have industrial relations reform in Australia, it's now because we are operating in a workers' market like never before. The demand for high quality employees is stronger than it's been at any time I can remember in the 30 odd years that I have been in public life. Therefore it's in an atmosphere like that when it's very good to carry out the sort of reforms that we have undertaken.
 One of them of course is the long overdue removal of those unfair dismissal laws, which I know from my experience over the past 10 years as Prime Minister, whenever I mention their existence to a small business gathering, I would get a collective groan. Because all of you in different ways have experienced over the last 10 years the way in which the previous unfair dismissal laws actively discouraged you from taking on more staff because you knew if you recruited an unsatisfactory person, it became a veritable nightmare to do anything about it. And that has been a reality of small business in Australia for many years and the changes that we have announced should be seen in that context.
Now it's not possible of course to talk about the Australian economy at the present time without acknowledging the painful impact on consumers and business alike of high petrol prices. And it's of no reassurance to any of you to say well don't worry, our petrol prices and amongst the lowest in the world. They're the fourth lowest in the world. Whenever I say that to anybody they say yes, what is your next explanation and that is of course of no earthly comfort to anybody because everything is relative. And the only thing that matters is the price of petrol in Australia now compared with the price of petrol in Australia a year ago. They're not very interested in the price of petrol in Australia now compared with the price of petrol in Britain now or Japan now or Germany now, three countries where, let me hasten to assure you, the price of petrol is much, much higher than what it is in Australia. But this is a challenge to the Australian economy.
 It's a challenge that is not going to disappear I'm sorry to say in a hurry. It is the product of a worldwide excess of demand over the supply of crude oil, there's been an underinvestment in refinery capacity around the world, there's been an enormous surge in demand from a growing China and I saw a summary this morning of the International Monetary Fund's outlook for the world economy and it was predicting that the American economy was going to grow very strongly at, what, 3.5 percent. The Australian economy was going to grow very, very strongly and the Chinese economy also was going to grow very strongly, yes, at a rate of about 9.5 percent over the year ahead. And the economic growth that's occurring in China, and now there is the beginning of a replication of that economic growth starting in India, is something that is having an enormous impact because of the size of the Chinese economy. And just take this little thought away with you today, and that is that by the year 2015 for the first time in the history of the world since the industrial revolution, the centre of gravity, if I can put it like that, of the world's middle class, will not be in Europe or North America, it will be shared between China and Asia and China and Japan. And this represents an enormous change in the world economic outlook.  It presents great opportunities for Australia because of Australia's very strong trading links already with North Asia and the great capacity we have to increase those trading links.
Now I therefore have a very optimistic view about the Australian economy. I believe that we will continue to grow at a very strong rate because we've got the fundamentals right. We are a more open economy, we're a more competitive economy, we have quite low levels of inflation and as a result, notwithstanding the small adjustment to interest rates put in by the Reserve Bank, we still have historically very low levels of interest in this country. We have undertaken a lot of economic reforms, we have paid off all of our net Government debt and we have, in the words of the IMF, an enviably prudent fiscal position. In other words, we've got our budget well and truly into surplus and we certainly intend to keep it that way.
But the one great precondition in my opinion, to continue economic growth as the years go by, will be a determination by whatever the government of Australia may be, to continue the process of economic reform. And if I'd been addressing this gathering 20 years ago, or perhaps, let's go back 25 years, let's go back to 1981. If you could take the Australian economy back to 1981, we had a fixed exchange rate, we hadn't floated the dollar, we had foreign exchange controls, we had very high tariff walls, we had a completely antiquated taxation system and we hadn't begun, in any semblance or shape, the process of reforming our industrial relations system. We were still in many ways, operating not as a national economy, but we were still, in some areas, operating as a grouping of perhaps five or six regional economies. And if you go back over that 25 year period from say 1980-81 through to where we are now, you can see the enormous reforms that have been undertaken. The floating of the dollar, the dismantling of exchange controls, all the industrial relations reform, taxation reform, some years ago, the liberalisation of the tariff regime; some of those reforms were carried out by the former Government with my very strong support and others of course have been carried out by the present Government and continue to be carried out by the present Government.
So this economy and this country has changed a great deal over the last 25 years. Not everybody has found that comfortable, that unfortunately is always the case. But the general level of prosperity and hope and optimism in Australia at the present time is quite remarkable. And I travel around Australia a great deal as you probably observe from the news coverage of what I do, and I have not found a greater sense of hope and optimism economically in this country at any time in my public life than I have found over the last couple of years. And even in those parts of Australia that for many years were missing out on economic progress and economic growth, and I think particularly of parts of Tasmania and I think particularly of parts of South Australia, they have enjoyed the benefits in the last few years of national economic growth, the like of which they haven't had before.
So Madam President, my message is a very optimistic one and I do want to say to all of you, and I'm very anxious to take your questions and receive any advice that you want to give me about any aspect of anything, I'm a great believer in getting advice from as many people as possible, I do want to say to you that I meant very much what I had to say about the importance of the small business sector in the Australian community. And this gathering does bring so many of those people together and represent so many of those interests. And when the small business sector of the economy is doing well, the entire economy is doing well. And if you look at the profile of employment, the additional jobs that can get created in our community are in the small business sector. And large businesses are often focussed on downsizing and rationalisation; small businesses are focussing on experimentation, innovation and having a go, and in the process taking on more people and giving more people opportunities. And that is what has happened in Australia over the last few years and that is what I hope continues to happen in Australia over the years ahead, provided we continue as a nation, as a community to have the courage to maintain the momentum and the pace and the application of economic reform.
Thank you very much.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Daniel, Mr Premier, Mr Ian Macfarlane, John Brumby, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say that it is very important at a time when there is so much media and public focus on the contribution made by the mining industry and the resource sector to the Australian economy, that we take every opportunity at a Government level of reaffirm the importance of the manufacturing industry to the future employment prospects of Australians and also the future economic development and growth of this country.
 Manufacturing has always been at the heart of the Australian economic experience, and it must remain at the heart of our economic experience and our economic outlook. I do not believe in an Australia with a steadily diminishing contribution from manufacturing industry to the nation's future and the nation's wealth. And its that context that has influenced the decisions that I'm about to announce on behalf of the Federal Government, and can I say that the announcements I make have been developed in very close discussion and collaboration with Ford Australia and with the Victorian Government. And I want to thank the Premier, I want to thank my own Minister Ian Macfarlane and the Victorian Minister John Brumby. It's important on issues of this kind that affect the livelihoods of Australians all over the country that people, particularly the Government level, work together. The public of Australia want governments to work together to deliver good solutions for their future and that is what we have endeavoured to do.
And its part of our long term commitment to manufacturing industry in Australia that we secure an efficient, globally competitive and technologically advanced motor manufacturing industry. And the Ford Motor Company, as has already been said, has been an important contributor for about 80 years to Australian manufacturing industry. And the operations of Ford Australia are especially important to the Victorian economy and to the people of Victoria. Ford has a total workforce of more than 6,000 and thousands more are dependent on a healthy and a very strong, vibrant Ford Australia for their financial security.
I therefore announce that the Commonwealth Government will make available to Ford Australia $52.5 million of financial assistance which will allow Ford Australia to undertake two very exciting new projects which have been alluded to. Firstly, the E8 Project, which will involve the design, engineering and manufacture of the next generation Falcon and Territory vehicles in Geelong and Broadmeadows and $12.5 million for the design and engineering in Victoria of a light commercial vehicle architecture that will have a variety of body styles and configurations with the truck to be manufactured overseas and marketed in more than 80 countries under the Ford Motor Company brands.
I noted the reference made a moment ago to the importance of the Indian market. It's relevant to remind ourselves that by the year 2015, for the first time since the Industrial Revolution, the centre of gravity of the world's middle class will have shifted from Europe and North America to Asia. The populations of China and India together will be supplying some 400 to 800 million consumers at a middle class level of consuming capacity. And this represents an historic shift in the economic dynamic of the world and it's of tremendous importance and also opens up enormous opportunities for Australia. I mean the opportunities that this opens up to a clever, technologically proficient manufacturing industry in Australia is absolutely unlimited, and that's very much one of the reasons why we are enthusiastic about our involvement in the project and are to provide support.
 The Government will provide an immediate grant of $32.5 million consisting of $12.5 million for the T6 Design and Development Project and $20 million for the E8 Falcon Replacement Project. And a further grant of $20 million will be made in 2012 for the E8 Project. These Projects themselves will create approximately 273 new jobs and will reinforce Ford's manufacturing operations in Australia. Significantly, the RD centre that Ford Australia will construct to support the T6 Project will represent a critical step in positioning Ford Australia for the global market. These projects will allow Ford Australia to become a leading centre for automotive design and engineering in our region and will build on the success that Australia has already demonstrated in this field.
In concluding, can I say that the Ford Motor Company, through its leadership and with the cooperation of a dedicated, professional workforce, has made an enormous contribution to the economy of Victoria and has made an enormous contribution to manufacturing industry in Australia. We continue to welcome that contribution and what I've announced today on behalf of the Commonwealth Government I hope is an earnest not only of our desire to see a continuation of Ford's involvement in the economy of Australia but our ongoing commitment to the crucial importance of manufacturing industry to the economic future of our nation.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Madam Secretary, ladies and gentlemen, from myself, my wife and son and all the other Australian guests present, can I thank you for those very gracious remarks and to say how delighted we are to again enjoy the wonderful hospitality of the Administration, the people of the United States and particularly here in Washington.
You spoke of the depth of the relationship and you spoke of shared sacrifice. And of course it was, I think, on the 4th of July 1917 when Australian and United States forces first fought together at the Battle of Hamel as a very famous battle where a very speedy success was achieved, and that began a shared partnership in military conflict that has to this day been unbroken because every major conflict our two countries have been engaged together.
Important though that is, the relationship of values and the deep commitment to democracy and freedom and openness of society is even more important. And the thing that binds us together most of all is that continuity of belief in a society built on respect for people's character and worth, not on their race or their class or their social standing. And I think they are the things that more than anything bind our two societies together.
We do have a deep love of competitive sport in Australia. We think we're reasonably good at it in certain pursuits. Some sports, of course, we find it hard to find any competition with the Americans in such as cricket, but there are, of course, other sports where the rivalry is intense and the Secretary of State was explaining to me how she spent some time with our famous swimmer Ian Thorpe at the Commonwealth Games and that, of course, is a reminder of the things that we do share in common in the sporting arena.
Can I on a more personal note, pay a tribute to you, Madam Secretary, for the wonderful leadership that you have given to the foreign policy of the United States in the time that you have been in your position. The projection of American power and purpose remains very, very important to all the nations of the world. Australia is one of those countries which is in the forefront of those who urge greater rather than lesser United States involvement in the affairs of the world. The involvement of your country in our own region is critical to its stability and the energy and the intellect that you have brought to the position and the example that you represent in so many ways is a source of enormous admiration in my country and a source of very great respect around the world.
Thank you very much for the courtesy that you have extended to me and to the members of my delegation in providing this wonderful lunch, and I want to say how deeply valuable it is to me on a personal basis and on behalf of the people of Australia this relationship between our two societies which is something very precious and something very special and something to which so many on both sides are very deeply committed.
I would like to invite you all to raise a glass and to toast the history of the friendship, the current strength of the friendship and the future prospect of the friendships of the people of Australia and the people of the United States. To the people of the Australia and the people of the United States.
[ends]


Mr. President and Mrs. Bush, ladies and gentlemen. For the Australians present, can I say to you and your charming wife, we are greatly honoured by the wonderful courtesy and hospitality that you've extended to us, not only tonight, but in the days before on this visit of ours to Washington. You've spoken of the friendship between our two countries. It is a friendship rooted not only in history, but it's a friendship and partnership rooted very firmly in common values.
I share your sense of optimism, Mr. President, about the future. The world will need America just as much in the future as the world has needed America in the past, and as the world needs America at the present. Those foolish enough to suggest that America should have a lesser role in the affairs of the world should pause and think whether they really mean what they say, because a world without a dedicated, involved America will be a lesser world, a less safe world, a more precarious world.
And if I have a single message for the people of your great country, and that is that the world continues to need America, and the world will be a better place for the involvement and the commitment of the people of the United States of America in the years that lie ahead.
I value very much the friendship between our two countries. I value very much the personal friendship I have with you, Mr. President. You're a staunch friend, you're a faithful ally, you're a strong leader, you have articulated the interests of your country and of the free world at a time of unique and different challenge. And for that I thank you and pay tribute to you.
Janette and I warmly reciprocate the kind things that you've said about us.   We greatly value those things and we thank you most warmly for your very gracious hospitality.
Can I ask you to join me in a toast-to the enduring friendship of the people of Australia and the people of the United States.
[ends]


Mr. President and Mrs. Bush, Mr. Vice President and Mrs. Cheney, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say to you, Mr. President, for myself and my wife, and I know all of the Australians present here today, how much we welcome and appreciate the warmth and generosity of the hospitality and welcome that you have extended to us.
It is possible, Mr. President, to count on the fingers of our two hands the number of nations that have remained continuously democratic over the last 100 years. And two of those nations are of course the United States of America and the Commonwealth of Australia. Our common history, our common commitment to liberty, and to democracy, has been an important bond that has united the people of America and the people of Australia.
But it's also been our shared values that have been an important constant in that relationship. A belief that the worth of a person is defined not by his or her race, or religion, or nationality, but rather the worth of that person's character, and his or her commitment to the common future of the nation of which he is a part; a belief that the greatest force for good within any society is stable families, because it's families that bring out the best in people and provide them with the greatest source of emotional support and sustenance; and also, a belief that economic future and economic liberty is best defined by competitive capitalism and the working out of market forces, provided our societies provide an understanding of the need to protect those who, through no fault of their own, may need assistance.
And they are many of the values that have defined both of our societies, and they are some of the values that have brought our two societies together.
You rightly recall Mr. President that the fighting men of our two countries first joined together on the 4th of July, 1918, at the Battle of Hamel, in World War I. And in every significant conflict since, Americans and Australians have fought together in pursuit of our common goals and our common objectives. And I pay tribute, in particular, to the way in which the United States of America came to the assistance of Australia in the dark days of the Pacific War in World War II. And successive generations of Australians will never forget the vital assistance that the United States extended to our country in our hour of need, in the darkest days of World War II.
And it is important on an occasion like this to recall not only our history, but also to repeat our common resolve about the future. I will recall our meeting here at the White House on the 10th of September, 2001. It was the first time that we had met as President of the United States and Prime Minister of Australia. And in our discussions, contrary to what the critics of our two societies say, we were not speaking evil of other people in the world, we were not condemning other religions, we were not condemning other countries. We were expressing hope about a more peaceful world, a world in which Christian and Muslim would work together, a world in which the nations as a world would unite in harmony and peace.
And the following day, of course, the world changed forever. And so much of the common effort of our two societies since has been directed to the fight on terrorism. It will be, as you've said, Mr. President, a long and difficult fight. Progress is being made, but much lies ahead. And Janette and I are very conscious of the great sacrifice in lives of the men and women of your country. And we pay tribute to them, and we share the mourning and the grief of their loved ones here in the United States.
But our cause is a just cause. Terrorism respects no value system; terrorism does not respect the tenets of the great religions of the world; terrorism is based on evil, intolerance and bigotry. And no free societies, such as Australia and the United States, can ever buckle under to bigotry and intolerance.
Mr. President, I come here as the elected leader of a nation of 20 million people; a nation that shares so much in common with your country; a nation that will shoulder her responsibilities in the Pacific region; a nation which historically has interacted not only with the people of our own region, but the people of your country and the people of Europe.
I thank you again Mr. President for your personal friendship. I admire the leadership and the courage and the commitment that you have brought to your responsibilities and to your office. You have reasserted with strength and clarity the great values of the United States. You have presented a firm leadership to the free world against terrorism. The world needs an involved, committed, concerned United States years into the future. The world needs a President of the United States who has a clear-eyed view of the dangers of terrorism, and the courage and the determination, however difficult the path may be, to see the task through to its conclusion. And in you, sir, the American people and the world have found such a leader and such an individual.
I salute your courage and your commitment, your personal decency and your personal leadership of this great democracy, of this great country. And I thank you very warmly for all the Australians present for the grace and dignity and genuineness of your welcome.
Thank you.
[ends]


Mr Speaker, Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition and Honourable Members of both Houses of the Canadian Parliament. Can I first say how deeply honoured I am at the privilege of addressing this Joint Sitting of the two Houses of the Parliament of Canada. I'm told that the only previous occasion on which an Australian prime Minister spoke to such a sitting was in 1944 when one of my Labor predecessors, John Curtin, on a visit to North America during the war, was extended that great honour and privilege. And I do want to therefore say I regard it as a great personal honour, and also a great honour to my country, Australia.
As your Prime Minister has said, the ties of history and of common practice between Australia and Canada are very great indeed. Both of our nations owe much to those nations of Europe that gave institutions and values and formation to our societies, to Great Britain, to France, to Ireland and to other nations of Europe. Both of us of course are nations of immigrants, not only from Europe and the Middle East, but in the case of both of our countries, in more recent years, from Asia. Indeed the constituency or riding that I represent in Sydney has an ethnic Chinese enrolment of between 10 and 15 percent. And the contribution being made to the modern vibrancy of Australia by immigration from Asia has been one of the many things that have meant that Australia is a confident, outward looking nation in the 21st century.
We are, as the Prime Minister said, kindred nations. We're both in a sense children of the enlightenment, that period of rational inquiry, progress and modernity, which burst out of Europe, but indeed found some of its more fertile acceptance in the nations of the new world.
We share many values, we share the Westminster tradition of parliamentary democracy. We are both federations, Canada coming together in 1867 and Australia in 1901. We have shared many sacrifices in war. We remember the sacrifice of Australians and Canadians, particularly in those terrible battles of World War I at Passchendaele and elsewhere. And in World War II it will ever be to the credit of Canada and Australia and Great Britain and a small band of countries, that they stood together alone against the tyranny and horror of Nazi Germany for one whole year when all appeared to be lost. Of course during World War II many thousands of Australian airmen trained in Canada, one of them is an uncle of mine from Petersham, Sydney. He fell in love with and married a girl from Calgary and it is a link that is replicated in thousands of Australian families.
 Since then of course we have fought together in the Korea, in the Middle East, in East Timor and now together, in response to the new and dangerous threat of terrorism, in Afghanistan. And I pay tribute to the enormous contribution of the Canadian nation to the effort in Afghanistan and I mourn the loss and the sadness of Canadian families in recent days. We of course are nations that have a lot of history in common. And perhaps if I can characterise our relationship I would put it this way; we have much in common but not as much to do with each other as we should. We've even followed different sporting paths. For reasons that have always escaped my comprehension and understanding, Canadians never embraced cricket, and ice hockey is not widely played in Australia. And on that subject can I congratulate the Edmonton Oilers on reaching the semi-finals. I wish them well as they do battle with those other teams from south of the border.
 But the fact that perhaps we haven't had as much to do with each other as we should've is a function of geography, as the Prime Minister mentioned. But I think, Honourable Members, that the challenges of the world in the first bit of the 21st century are really going to change that. Because many of those challenges I believe, if they are to be effectively responded to, will bring Canada and Australia together as never before in common purpose.
Globalisation presents to the world the most enormous opportunities and those countries that pulled down their trade barriers and opened their economies, and embraced globalisation are the economies that will thrive and succeed. And in that context let Canada and Australia work together to do what we can, as likeminded nations on the subject, to bring about a successful conclusion of the Doha Trade Round because Australia and Canada have interests in common at Doha. Not only have we legitimate national interests in common, but we have a legitimate interest in seeing barriers broken down so that the poorer nations of the world, that rely so heavily on rural exports, can gain access to markets that are closed to them at present.
 There has, in the context of Doha, been a very generous offer made by the United States, one that went beyond many expectations of that country. And that offer must be reciprocated and if it's not reciprocated then the prospects of a breakthrough in agricultural trade will be lost because the possibility of obtaining another authorisation from the American Congress for a new trade mandate is very, very dim indeed. We only have a matter of weeks to bring about a successful momentum in relation to Doha. And greater pressure must be applied to the Europeans and to other countries such as Japan and Brazil and India that are not seeing the opportunities that can be embraced in this latest negotiation.
Another area where I believe, because of our common interests, that Canada and Australia can work together is in the area of climate change. Australia as you know did not join Kyoto, not because we are opposed to cutting greenhouse gas emissions, indeed we committed ourselves to reach the target set for Australia by Kyoto and we believe that we will achieve that target. But we do not believe that the greenhouse gas challenge and the environmental challenges that Kyoto was meant to address can indeed be accomplished or overcome rather, unless there is a full involvement of the major polluting nations of the world, the United States, China and India. And it's because of that that Australia has become part of the Asia Pacific Partnership for Clean Development and Energy, a partnership that brings together the United States, and Japan and Indonesia and China and Korea. It's a partnership that seeks not only to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but to blend together the drive towards that and economic development.
 In the energy area which is of course allied to climate change, Canada and Australia have much in common. We are the holders of the largest uranium reserves in the world and both of us must work together in relation to the recently proposed global nuclear energy partnership which seeks laudably to control proliferation, but we must as the holders of these vast uranium reserves, ensure that that particular partnership does not work against the interests of countries such as Canada and Australia.
Honourable Members for the first time in history the centre of gravity of the world's middle class is shifting from Europe and North America to Asia, in a sense, from the Atlantic to the Pacific. In a few years time there will be four to eight hundred million middle-class people in China and India. It represents an historic shift in the experience of the world and will have a profound and lasting impact on the economic growth and economic development of the world. We as two outward looking nations should not fear this in anyway. And in fact this development presents unique opportunities to both of our nations, opportunities that our outward looking societies, if we fully embrace it, can bring great benefit to our citizens. And this change and this development uniquely I believe suits the type of societies that Australia and Canada represent.
And these Mr Speaker are some of the opportunities of the early years of the 21st century. They're opportunities that nations such as Canada and Australia that are built on an approach through individual liberty and freedom, and an approach to society that sees the worth of a person, not according to that persons race or nationality or religion, or social background, but according to that person's character and commitment to the wellbeing of his and her fellow citizens. It presents to our two nations, imbued with those principles, opportunities that together I believe our two countries can embrace. They are the opportunities of the early years of the 21st century, but inevitably there are the brutal challenges of the early years of the 21st century.
And none of course is greater than the threat of terrorism. This new menace that knows no borders, that knows no morality, that knows no rationality, and defies in terms of ordinary behaviour, predictability. Terrorists oppose us not because what we have done, they oppose us because of who we are and what we believe in. And terrorism will not be defeated by nuancing our foreign policy, terrorism will not be defeated by rolling ourselves in to a small ball and going in to a corner and imagining that somehow or other we will escape notice.
My own country, according to all of our intelligence advice, was in fact a target for terrorism, even before the 11th of September 2001. And the greatest loss of Australian lives in a terrorist attack at Bali in 2002, in fact, occurred before the coalition military operation in Iraq. Terrorism will only be defeated by a combination of strong intelligence, military action where appropriate and importantly the spread of democracy particularly amongst Islamic countries. And in that last context, no nation is more important than Australia's nearest neighbour and most populist Muslim country in the world, Indonesia. Indonesia in the last eight years has undergone a remarkable transition. A transition that draws less comment and less respect than perhaps it deserves. In eight years it's gone from a military dictatorship to the third largest democracy in the world.
 And what is at stake with countries, particularly like Indonesia and also Pakistan, which is also under moderate Islamic leadership, what is at stake there is fundamental to whether we succeed or fail in the fight against terrorism because if democratic modern Islam can succeed in the Islamic world, that will act as a powerful and enduring antidote to the menace of terrorism in those societies.
So in dealing with terrorism, of course we need strong and timely intelligence and I note with pride the decades of close collaboration between the intelligence services of Australia and the intelligence services of Canada. But it needs a combination of strong intelligence, military resolve and the spread of democracy. And none of us should imagine that we are immune from domestic terrorist attacks. We had a timely wake up call in Australia in the last months of 2005 when some 22 Australians were charged with certain terrorist offences and quite a large number of those were people who had been born in Australia and had grown up in our country. And just as the people of Great Britain were shocked by the backgrounds and the experiences of those responsible for the London attacks of July 2005, so many Australians have found it difficult to believe that something like that could happen in their country.
Whilst I am on the subject of terrorism can I say something about Iraq. I know that in relation to Iraq, Australia and Canada took different paths, and it's not my point here today to dwell on that. I simply want to applaud the bravery and courage of the eight million people of Iraq who defied terrorism and physical intimidation to cast their ballots on three occasions in a democratic election. We in Canada and Australia who are used to voting in tranquil circumstances, whatever the passion of political rhetoric might be, should take pause to salute such an extraordinary act of courage and bravery.
Can I, Mr Speaker, in conclusion say something about the role of the United States in the affairs of the world. Australia as you know is an unapologetic friend and ally of the United States. We don't always agree, we haven't in the past, we don't now on certain issues and we won't in the future but I have always taken the view and the majority of my fellow countrymen are the same, that the United States has been a remarkable power for good in the world. And that the decency and hope that the power and purpose of the United States represents to the world is something that we should deeply appreciate.
The values for which the United States stands are the values for which Canada and Australia stands. They are values of spreading democracy, of individual liberty, of a society where free enterprise is the principle economic driver, but also a society where the less fortunate should be protected by a decent social security safety net. And they are values that I know that members on both sides of this House, as indeed on both sides of the Houses of the Australian Parliament share in common. And I would have for those around the world who would want to see a reduced American role in the affairs of our globe, I have some quiet advice and that is be careful in what you wish for because a retreating America will leave a more vulnerable world. It will leave a world more exposed to terrorism and it will leave a more fragile and indeed dangerous world.
 Mr Speaker, Honourable Members, as I said at the commencement of my remarks, you have done me a great honour. To be invited to address the Parliament of a great nation such as Canada, a nation with which we have shared so much in the past and values we hold so much in common is for me, a veteran of 32 years of membership of the Australian Parliament, a tremendous honour.
 To you, Mr Prime Minister, I know that I will not be departing in anyway from the bipartisan traditions of being a guest in your country, in wishing you well in the early months of your prime ministership. I remember the early months of my prime ministership in 1996 and I know that there will be some on this side of the House who may not wish an emulation of the period of time that I have been in Government, but whatever....but can I say Prime Minister you have brought to your office great vigour, great vitality, a commitment to do some new and different things in Canada. You lead a minority government, an interesting experience I'm sure, but one that thankfully I haven't had to cope with, I don't think I could. But I do wish you well but very importantly through you I bring to this Parliament the good wishes not only of the Parliament of Australia, but also the people of Australia. We do believe in the same things, we Australians and Canadians. We are people that do share so much common history and common experience. And in the new challenges and opportunities of the 21st Century I believe that with that shared history and shared experience there is more indeed that we can do in the future not only for the betterment of the people of Australia and the people of Canada, but for the betterment of all the peoples of the world.
 Thank you indeed.
   [ends]


Thank you Dr Brady, Professor Carey, ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen.
The college does me a great honour in asking me to say a few words this morning and then I hope expose myself to as much questioning as you choose.
  I don't think I need to remind an audience such as this of the extraordinarily close links between Australia and Ireland.  Any cursory reading of Australian history will tell you that the impact of the Irish on the Australian character, the impact of the Irish on Australian politics has been remarkable.  A very significant proportion of Australian prime ministers probably more than one third, would claim some connection through heritage with Ireland and the temper and pace of Australian politics does owe a great deal to our Irish heritage of which most Australians are not only aware but very proud indeed.  And to have the opportunity of coming to this college which has brought forth such a wide range of people in so many walks of Irish and international life is a pleasure indeed.
But it is important, important though it is to honour and reflect upon the history of the relationship between Ireland and Australia, and to acknowledge with appropriate sentiment of nostalgia the importance of it, we do live of course in the first part of the twenty-first century and the relationship between Australia and Ireland must be seen in contemporary modern terms.  It should be seen in the context of the challenges that face the world in the twenty-first century.  It should be seen in the context I believe, of two things of more importance than any others.  The first of which of course is to take full advantage of the extraordinary benefits that I believe globalisation is offering the world.  There do remain of course some people who argue that in some way the forces of globalisation can be reversed or can be significantly mitigated in a protectionist way to the advantage of different parts of the world or to individual countries.  I would imagine that those of you who have studied this issue more closely would see the folly of that particular course of action.
Globalisation has brought extraordinary opportunities and benefits especially to those countries in the world that have taken advantage of it.  And indeed the economic story of Ireland over the last twenty years has been the story of a country which in economic terms has reached out, has modernised, has focused on her strengths rather than lamenting the poor hand that economic history may have handed her on earlier occasions.
  Of course in the part of the world in which Australia is located geographically globalisation, the benefits of globalisation are quite compelling.  For the first time since the industrial revolution we are witnessing the shifting of the centre of gravity of the world's middle class from western Europe and north America to the giant nations of Japan and China by probably no more than a generation and a half ahead of us, there will be four to eight hundred million middle class people in Japan and China and the extraordinary impact and the growth of that and the affect it has on the economic dynamics of the world is quite remarkable.  And this is a reality and something to be both confronted and I believe taken sensibly advantage of not only by countries such as Australia, but countries around the world.  I do not believe and I don't think any sensible study can suggest otherwise that the force of the globalisation or anything other than absolutely unstoppable (inaudible) forces that should be mobilised to the benefit of the advantage of all countries and I often think of where nations like Korea, many of the other nations of Asia like Thailand, where countries like that would be if they had not embraced globalisation.  I think of the extraordinary way in which the Indian economy is now being transformed.   A country which until the early 1990s tended to shut its face against the forces of globalisation and international trade and tended to seek refuge in a highly regulated, protectionist economy.  One only has to visit India now to be overwhelmed by the pace at which the country is economically modernising and reaching out to the rest of the world and the way in which both India and China alongside Japan are taking advantage of course of world globalisation is quite stunning.
 The second great issue of course that the world faces is how to come to terms with terrorism fuelled by fanatical radical Islam.  There is no simple one size fits all response to terrorism but I do think there are unavoidably three ways in which it has to be dealt with.  Appropriate military action in certain circumstances is something that is part of dealing with terrorism.  Sometimes that's controversial and it continues to be controversial in relation to action taken especially in certain parts of the world.  High grade intelligence is in my view the strongest, still the strongest weapon against terrorism but most importantly also, very importantly, also is the spread of democracy especially in those parts of the world that haven't been touched by democracy in the past.  And again I think of countries near to Australia.  I often think that the future political experiences of leaders like President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and President Musharraf of Pakistan both of them both moderate Islamic leaders.  Each of them leading countries which are grappling internally with terrorism.  The future success of those two leaders will in many senses tell us whether the campaign against terrorism inside Islamic countries is going to succeed or it's going to fail.  Because in the end unless the example of moderate Islam is seen to succeed and does in fact succeed then unless that happens the capacity of terrorists to recruit new people to their cause of radical Jihad will be very greatly strengthened.
I think the fight against terrorism will be a long one.  There will be many people in our societies who will from time to time throw up their arms in horror and say well may be it's all our fault in the end and may be if only we'd adopted different approaches and different attitudes it would not have started.  That of course would be fatal and completely dishonest misreading of history.  Terrorism of the type that we saw manifested in the United States in 2001 of course has been taken place in many parts of the Islam world long before it was launched against the United States.  It's the type that saw eighty-eight Australians killed in Bali in 2002 along with some dozens of citizens of other countries and some two hundred Indonesians.  That type of terrorism has been at work in other parts of the Islamic world years before it took place in Bali.  So those who in some way think that in the understandable frustration and the difficulty of fighting with terrorism, fighting terrorism, imagine that perhaps in the end it is all the fault of those against whom the terrorism is directed would be completely misreading history and completely misunderstanding the character of the threat that is faced.
Dr Brady, I don't want to say anymore than that.  So there's two reflections of mine on some of the challenges and the opportunities that face our society not only Irish society but of course also Australian society, and we are all part of a globalised world which has brought us all together as never before in the history of  mankind.  And again can I say how privileged I am to have been here and can I compliment this university's Australian Studies Centre.  Can I say how very important it is to an understanding of not only relations between our two countries but an understanding of some of the issues of which I have spoken and I am very happy to announce that the Australian Government will contribute a sum of AUS$1.5 million towards the Cameron Chair of Australian Studies to maintain in the years ahead not only the study of my country but also a study of some of the issues of which I've spoken.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Presiding Officers, Taoiseach, Honourable Members.  Can I say to you Sir how much I appreciate that very warm welcome and how very conscious I am of the honour that is being conferred on me but more importantly on my country; the opportunity I am given to address this meeting of the Irish Parliament.
As a lover of the parliamentary system and an admirer of what it enables us to do in the cut and thrust of the parliamentary debate, it is a very special privilege to address the parliament of any nation, but particularly to address the elected representatives of the people of Ireland.
  There are precious links between Australia and Ireland.  They are links about which volumes have been written over the years by both the Irish and the Australians.  The Irish have had an immense impact on our national character, on our politics and in many respects the way in which we view the world.  The most famous chronicler of the Irish in Australia, Patrick O'Farrell once wrote "that the Irish in Australia is an impossible subject, too vast, too various, too complex and certainly too elusive".  I won't therefore attempt to do what he said was impossible but I must in passing make a few observations about the indelible and everlasting legacy that the Irish people have bequeathed to my country.
That includes much of our sentimentality. It includes a significant part of our prized larrikin spirit and it certainly includes a directness and candour in our personal dealings with one another.  The Irish have also contributed enormously to our love of language and literature. The way in which Irish authors and poets have instructed us in the wonders of our language is something that is deeply understood and affectionately regarded in Australia.
The Irish in Australia have also demonstrated incredible resilience.  Those that were directly from Ireland and those of Irish decent were not always treated as fairly as they are and have been in the modern Australia.  For almost a hundred years the catholic community of Australia, which during the period from 1860 - 1960 was overwhelmingly of Irish stock, was forced to maintain completely from within their own resources an independent education system without any government assistance because of a decision taken by the various colonial governments in the 19 century to introduce the system that was described as free, compulsory and secular.  And it wasn't until the 1960s that assistance began to be given.  And the resilience of that community in maintaining their own education system from often very meagre resources stands to the testament to the determination and the resilience of those people.
Australia today sees an Irish nation fully understanding the balance and the nature of its history and I acknowledge very warmly, the decision of your government to mark the 1916 Easter Rising with a military parade this year.  Just as I acknowledge the government's decision to honour both thousands of Irishmen who fell in the terrible battles of the Somme in 1916 and in Gallipoli.  And of course they fell in their thousands alongside sons of Australia who fell in their thousands during those terrible battles.
I applaud the progress being made in relation to the long hard road to a fair and just settlement in Northern Ireland.  Australia has been an active helper.  We're certainly an interested spectator and we greatly admire the cooperative efforts between successive Prime Minister's of Great Britain and Taoiseach's of Ireland. And we hope that there is an end to the long and often bloody road towards a fair settlement in Northern Ireland. But it is important as I've done on a number of occasions since I've spoken in Dublin, it is important to remind ourselves that the relationship between our two countries, much in all as we feel a sense of nostalgia and we're sentimental about it, and we feel warm about and we break in to laughter about it, it's very important that we not just see it as a relationship nurtured by history and sentiment. It is a contemporary people to people relationship, and one of the wonderful things about it is the way in which the young of Australia visit Ireland and the young of Ireland visit Australia in growing numbers-something that didn't happen a generation ago and something that I know both governments applaud. Significant that Ireland is the third most frequent user of the young visitor visa programme in Australia.
 Both of our countries of course are enjoying very significant economic success. And I take this opportunity Honourable Members to applaud the extraordinary economic performance of Ireland over the past two decades. The way in which this country through a combination of innovative polices, hard work and imagination, have lifted their economy from great difficulty to a situation where it is the fastest growing economy in the European Union. It has enviable low levels of unemployment and it boast a modern high tech economy. It can boast exports in areas that would have been unthinkable only a few years ago. And it has gone in a very short period of time from being an economy that was sometimes however unfairly pitied by its friends to an economy which is the envy of like nations around the world, and in marked contrast to many of the other economies of the European Union and indeed economies around the world.
Australia of course is no stranger to economic growth and expansion herself. And you would be surprised if I came here as Prime Minister of Australia without sharing with you something of our economic achievements and economic success. We are now in the 15th successive year of economic expansion. And Australia is enjoying the strongest period of economic growth, at anytime since the end of the Second World War. And it's an economic growth that is more soundly based than it has been in the past. We have levels of economic growth in the 1960s that may have approached what we now enjoy. But in the 1960s the Australian economy was a closed inward looking protected economy. We had a fixed exchanged rate, we had high tariff walls, we had an even more highly regulated labour market, we were in everyway an inward looking economy, and in many respects a inward looking nation.
So much of that has changed and because of successive reforms, let me give credit to predecessor governments to mine in relation to some of those reforms. We have brought about major changes, we have now totally eliminated our government debt and we have the lowest levels of unemployment for something like 30 years....for some 30 years. And this, my friends is a product of continuous economic reform. And there's a lesson in this, not only for Australia, but dare I say it, there's a lesson in this for both of us. Because there is in the modern globalised world no turning back to economic isolation and economic protection.
We live forever in a world transformed by communication and globalisation. And countries that have taken advantage of those developments are countries that should never turn back-and that means not only Australia-it means Ireland and it means all the countries that see themselves as modern progressive economies.
All of us must embrace more reform. All of us must explore new boundaries of openness. I frequently employ in Australia the metaphor to describe economic competition in the world, the metaphor of participating in a foot race towards an receding finishing line; you never get there, you keep trying, but you can't slow down because if you do the other participants in the race are going to go past you. And that is the nature of economic competition in the modern world.
This of course inevitably brings me in a spirit of candour to the current Doha Trade Round. Let me say in that spirit that the world must not allow this Trade Round to fail. If it were to fail the developing world will feel cheated, they will feel that the more developed privileged parts of the world have ignored their interests. And most importantly of all, if the Doha Trade Round fails on this occasion, it will in my view be many years before an American administration, again receives from Congress, the amplitude of the trade negotiating mandate that the Bush Administration has and which has led the Americans to make a very generous offer in relation to the phasing out of export subsidies.
 In saying all of these things I do of course fully respect and understand the differences between Australia and Ireland on this issue. I understand the importance of the common agricultural policy to the Irish people and to the policies of successive Irish governments. I also understand that unless some progress is made in relation to agricultural reform and agricultural subsidies, it would be very difficult indeed for satisfactory progress to be made in the current Doha Trade Round.
We live in a world of course that confronts the scourge and the challenge of terrorism. And in the fight against terrorism, Ireland and Australia are united. None of us, no matter where we live, no matter what attitude we take on individual, political and foreign affairs issues, can regard ourselves as being immune from terrorism. Irish citizens died in the World Trade Centre, Australian citizens have died in various places as a result of terrorist attack-and most memorably of all, sadly in the Bali attack of October 2002 which claimed some 88 young Australians, who were doing nothing more than celebrating as most Australians do at the end of a long football season in various codes, celebrating the joy of mateship and the joy of being together in a holiday place that was familiar and friendly and beckoning and welcoming to them. And that is the nature, the indiscriminate, lethal, cruel nature of modern terrorism. And we all have a responsibility to meet it, we all have a responsibility to fight it-and there's no single solution-but it will need a combination of superb high quality intelligence, a strong military response where that is appropriate and justified, and very importantly of all a spread of democracy-especially within the Islamic world.
And in that context it's important to recognise the role and the place of moderate Islamic leaders because they can be a role model to those within their own countries, who are fighting against the intolerance of extreme Islam. And I think especially of President Yudhoyono of Indonesia, Australia's nearest neighbour, the moderate Islamic leader of the largest Islamic country in the world. A man who now leads a country that in a few short years has transformed itself from a military dictatorship to the third largest democracy in the world. And I think sometimes the rest of the world doesn't fully respect and understand the extraordinary transformation that has been achieved in that country.
And it is important that leaders such as that succeed because not only are they democratic, but their example of being successfully democratic can act as a powerful antidote to those within their own societies that would seek to play upon the prejudices of people who seek comfort and resort in extreme manifestations of Islam.
We do of course as countries, have our differences, not only in relation to trade areas, I know that in relation to the military operation in Iraq there were difference frankly acknowledged between Australia and Ireland and Australia and other countries. And it's not my point or my purpose to debate those differences today. But it would be I think a grievous error on my part if in a democratically elected chamber I did not take the opportunity of saluting the bravery and courage, as I know you all will of the Iraqi people on three occasions, voting in circumstances of most fearful, physical intimidation. And I believe that the formation of an all party government in that country does represent something of a watershed, certainly in the time that has gone by since March of 2003 and does offer hope of a better more secure future for the people of Iraq.
Sir I began in saying something of the great ties of history, and culture, and sentiment between the people of Australia and the people of Ireland. When I arrived in this country I felt in so many ways at home-not in a tawdry sentimental sense, but in a sense of feeling comfortable and welcome. The ease of discourse I've had with the people of this capital of yours in the few days I've been here have confirmed all of the prejudices I brought here about the nature of the relationship between our two countries.
 Ireland has been an enormous tributary of the modern Australian nation. It has given us gifts and it's reminded us about the resonances we have with our history and our past. I believe that not only is it a relationship that is deeply steeped in sentiment and nostalgia and history, but it's a relationship that enable us, all these miles apart to talk with candour and frankness about contemporary challenges. Good friends are the friends you can speak to and speak to directly and with candour and frankness knowing that that will not disturb the warmth of your relationship.
May I again say, and may in conclude on this note that I am very conscious of the great  honour that you have paid to me, more importantly, the complement that you have extended to Australia. Australia will always retain a deep affection for Ireland and the Irish people, and will always be grateful for what this wonderful nation, wonderful people have vouchsafed to the people of Australia.
 Thank you.
   [ends]  


My fellow Australians. I particularly want to welcome here today Todd Russell, Brant Webb, Lauren Kielmann, the daughter of the late Larry Knight, Larry Knight's mother Pearl and the Mayor of West Tamar, Barry Easther. We gather in this Great Hall of the Parliament of Australia as a united nation to pay tribute to people who were involved in a remarkable Australian achievement, an event which has touched the hearts and brought forth the inspiration of millions of Australians and indeed had an enormous impact around the world.
What we saw in the rescue of Brant and Todd was the Australian character at its very best. We saw all of the things that we pride ourselves on as distinctively Australian characteristics at work. We saw guts, we saw resilience, we saw courage, we saw strength and we saw enormous endurance.
We thought through those difficult days not only of the men, but we felt as the news came through, a profound sense of sympathy and condolence towards the family of Larry Knight, and I particularly honour here the presence of Larry's mother and Larry's daughter.
Their forbearance and their wonderful gesture to Todd and Brant to delay the funeral of their loved son and father was Australian mateship and it's very, very best. Through the difficult days the love and the endurance of Todd and Brant's families and then ultimately their joy and ecstasy when the news came through that their sons and husbands and fathers were alive, was something that we all tried, in different ways, to share. I don't think of the many images I will take forever from this amazing Australian saga, I don't think anything will quite exceed the sense of joyous motherly relief on the face of Todd's mother when the news came through that her son was alive.
We can't of course on an occasion like this, do justice to the other real heroes of this event, and that is the men who rescued them. The way in which they risked their lives day after day, knowing all the peril and all the difficulty of a rescue in a mine, knowing the dangers of further falls and further explosions, knowing from their long history in the industry of what might occur, their courage was absolutely outstanding. And the responsibility they carried and the responsibility carried by the mine management and Matthew Gill who every day had to give a report knowing that he carried the ultimately responsibility for the rescue. Through all of it, they displayed a tremendous professional skill, but above all enormous courage, and it was a wonderful demonstration of Australian mateship.
And I want, in that vein, to pay tribute to the fellow members of the miners of Brant and Todd, the members of the Australian Workers Union who were there in their numbers to give strength and support and solidarity to their mates and their fellow union members. And that was a very important part of the great community effort that was mounted.
 But not only was there great support given by the rescuers, by their fellow workers and their fellow mates, but the wonderful response of the community. I think that had as great an impact on your fellow Australians around the country as much as anything else. Because what we saw on display in that community was everything that was good about the Australia that we love and the Australia we want to preserve and the   Australia we want to make better because these dramatic events reminded us of the basics of life.
 They reminded us of the importance of family. As I watched the video of Brant and Todd's interview on 60 Minutes after I got back from overseas, the many things they said, the comments that really hit home to me were the remarks they made about their families. As Todd spoke of writing messages to Carolyn on his overalls and on his arms, of how he wanted to communicate to his wife and children, his love for them, and how if it didn't go well he'd watch over his young boys...he played football and he made sure that he made a good job of playing his football. It was a reminder to me as a father that at the end of the day that no matter what else you do in life, having a close bond with your children and caring for them, is the most important thing. And in those simple words I think those two men resonated with the parents, and particularly the fathers of Australia, in a way that I don't think two men have ever quite been able to do.
I think these events also reminded us of the tremendous importance of mateship, as is broadly defined in our community. We sometime fling it around rather carelessly. But on an occasion like this it was on full display. Everybody was working together, differences of occupation and background, religious and political belief were put aside. A whole community was united in its determination to achieve a result and they did it and did it magnificently. We're reminded of course of the strength of that local community and represented here today by Barry Easther, who gave tremendous leadership as the Mayor of West Tamar.
And can I finally say in relation to the reminder of life basics that the event also reminded us of the importance of faith. Now we all varying degrees of faith, some do and some don't, some have it to varying degrees, but there was tremendous community leadership given by the churches of Beaconsfield on this occasion - great leadership - and I pay tribute to them and I know that so many of them are represented here today.
So the whole event brought together, as a reminder, those basics of our life and how important all of them are to us. And in a way brought out what I've always seen as the great duality of the Australian character. We can be as tough as tungsten, and as durable as anybody, and nobody has been tougher, and nobody has been more durable than these two men. It is an amazing achievement. It is an achievement beyond the beliefs of so many of us so long ago, let's face that. I know there are many in this gathering that never gave up hope, and God bless them for not having given up that hope, and they have had their wonderful reward as a consequence.
But it was an extraordinary act of bravery and strength and will and determination, the like of which this nation has not often seen and indeed something that preserves the honour that I hope is being transmitted by this gathering here today. But the event also brought out that other aspect of the Australian character, and that is our warmth and our softness and our compassion. We saw in the response of the community, we saw in the open candid remarks of Brant and Todd in their interview, that combined with their strength and their manliness and their toughness, is an enormous depth of compassion and softness towards those they love most and those who mean most to them in their lives. And they together summarise so much of what we believe about ourselves, about our character, about what the climate of this country means to us.
 So my fellow Australians I say to our two guests of honour and their families, particularly to their wives, Carolyn, Rachel, to all of their families and again I say to Pearl and Lauren, we are so admiring of your courage in coming here today. We are so admiring of the way in which you bore your own grief, but shared the joy and the exhilaration of the community in the deliverance of Brant and Todd.
Brant and Todd my last word is to both you, you have done us proud, you've exhibited the greatness and the strength of the Australian character, we admire you, we thank God for your being rescued from that mine and wish you and your loved ones many years of happiness and fulfilment in the years ahead. And I now invite Kim Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, to support my remarks.
 [ends]  


Thank you very much Mr Peter Coates, your excellencies, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Can I say at the outset how encouraging and refreshing it was both from Mr Lynch and also from the video and also from Peter Coates to hear some positive stories about the development of relations and the progress being made by the indigenous community of Australia. Over the past few weeks we have very understandably and for very good reason, had a vigorous debate and discussion about some of the enormous challenges within the indigenous community. And that debate tells us that a number of things haven't been done that should have been done and some changes, especially in the law and order area, are fundamentally necessary. But that should not remain with us as the dominant picture of the indigenous story in this country. Great progress has been made and there are many good news stories in that community, not least in its relations with the mining industry of this country. I applaud the contribution that the mining industry is making and the priority the mining industry is placing on that issue.
 Can I also applaud the commitment made by Mr Coates to the importance, the overriding importance, of safety in the mining industry as an ongoing responsibility of Government and endorse wholeheartedly his injunction to all those who participate in public debate not to engage in cheap scare campaigns on this issue.
 I might share with you an exchange I had some 18 months ago with a visiting delegation sent to Australia by Governor Schwarzenegger of California, following a visit I paid to him on the way to Washington 18 months ago in the context of discussions with the Government of that state about the possible sale of natural gas to California; a rich market indeed could be sprung. And this delegation of course visited all the mining areas of Australia and in the discussion I had with them in Sydney they paid tribute to the mining industry and singled out the reputation of the Australian mining industry in the area of safety as something which had the envy and the high regard of the mining industry in the United States.
 Now ladies and gentlemen it's natural that tonight I want to say something about the extraordinary role of the mining industry in Australia's economic development and Australia's economic history at the present time. We are living in a truly remarkable phase of economic and resource development history. We are not only, as a nation, enjoying remarkably strong economic conditions, the lowest unemployment in 30 years, very stable levels of inflation, very strong business investment, a very stable and predictable economic climate and a climate that has given levels of assurance and predictability that the Australian business community has not enjoyed for many years.
  But we're also the fortunate beneficiary of one of the great transfers of economic power that the world has witnessed, certainly the greatest transfer of economic power the world has witnessed since the Industrial Revolution. We are at present witnessing the shifting of the centre of gravity of the world's middle classes from the United States and North America to the nations of north Asia. In a few short years the middle class of India and China will comprise between 400 and 800 million people. That represents an astonishing change. It doesn't mean that the power and strength of a country like the United States is going to fundamentally alter. And it won't alter the fact that there will continue to be considerable and enduring economic strength in the nations of western Europe. But what it does mean is the inevitable rise of the purchasing power of the middle class, especially of China and India. And the opportunities that that presents to Australia as a reliable and dependable supplier of resources is truly historic. And it's incumbent on all of us, those in the mining industry, those in government and those involved in the associated industries to the mining industry, to both understand the nature of this opportunity, to carefully husband the resources that we have available and to make sure that we retain our reputation for dependability and reliability.
 I was, as many of you know, at the final stages involved as directly as one should be as the head of government of a free enterprise country, in the negotiations regarding the sale of natural gas to the Guangdong Province in China some three years ago. And it was very apparent to me in those negotiations that at a very early stage the authorities in China had decided that if other things were equal, and I think you all know what that is, if other things were equal, they really wanted to place their orders with Australia. Because they saw in Australia a country that could deliver the product reliably, on time, safely and an environment where the foundations of a long term partnership could be laid. And this opportunity that we have I know your industry is taking advantage of in an appropriately aggressive fashion.  But like all market opportunities, it should never be taken for granted and the high standards of dependability and reliability that we have developed over past years has got to be maintained.
  And the Government itself has got to do its job and to play its part and Peter Coates has reminded me of a way in which it could do its job, in his view, even better in relation to the taxation laws of the country. And I won't seek to dwell on that or to respond to that tonight, but I do acknowledge again the importance of this country maintaining the strong macro-economic environment that it has at the present time. And I do acknowledge also the importance of the ongoing reform process to the economy of Australia. We are in the process of bedding down some very significant changes to workplace relations laws. Those workplace relations laws will add to our productivity. They will provide more flexibility not only in the mining industry, but in other industries of Australia. But like all reforms, they can be the subject of misrepresentation and fear campaigns and be the object of opportunist, inaccurate descriptions.
  But the process of economic reform must be maintained. If there's a simple story that comes out of the Australian experience of the last 15 or 20 years it is that we have gone through a remarkable period of economic reform and economic change. And it has won not only the interest, but also the respect of countries around the world. And one of the opportunities of visiting other countries is to be reinforced in the belief that the maintenance of ongoing economic reform not only consolidates our participation in the globalised world economy but also wins considerable respect and admiration in other parts of the country.
  Now, it's not only of course in the area of workplace relations that continued change and reform is needed. I think all of us recognise that one of the challenges Australia faces at the present time is the skills shortage. It's not a crisis. We lapse too frequently in this country into the use of the word crisis. It's a serious challenge. We do have big shortages of skilled tradesmen and women in many areas of the economy and there needs to be a continued emphasis on different ways of responding to that challenge.
  I think many of you will recall that, at the time of the last federal election, I announced on behalf of the Government if it were re-elected a commitment to the construction of 25 Australian Technical Colleges, which would not only lift the profile and the esteem of skilled trades around Australia but make a long, on-going contribution to meeting the skills shortage. And I'm very pleased tonight, especially in the context of this gathering of the Australian mining industry, to announce the 22nd of the 25 Australian Technical Colleges that will operate around Australia. This one will be located in the Pilbara. It's taken a bit of negotiation to get everybody together but it will be a consortium led by the Chamber of Minerals and Energy of Western Australia. It will include the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association and the Pilbara Industries Community Council, comprising BHP Billiton Iron Ore, Pilbara Iron Ore; that's Rio Tinto Limited, and Woodside Energy Limited; will run the Pilbara Australian Technical College. And the consortium has the strong support from local industry groups including include Newcrest, Fortescue, Worley, SKM, Ngarda Civil and Mining Pty Ltd. It will have campuses in Karratha, Port Hedland, Roebourne and Onslow and it will open its doors in February of 2007.
 The purpose of these technical colleges, which will augment the existing structures providing technical training in Australia will be, amongst other things, to lift the esteem and prestige of technical training and to achieve something that I have always wanted, or I have for many years wanted, in Australia, and that is a situation where a high grade technical qualification is as prized a possession as a university degree.
  Can I, in the vein of the need for ongoing reform, finally say something to you of the issue that Peter Coates touched on in his speech a few moments ago and that is the need to have a comprehensive debate about all stages in relation to the nuclear fuel cycle and the relevance of that to Australia. We are, as you know, the possessors of probably the largest reserves of uranium in the world. Australia has been greatly gifted by providence with her natural resources and uranium of course is one of them. For many years, people in this country regarded any reopening of debate on nuclear power, particularly in the wake of the Chernobyl and Three Mile Island accidents in the early to mid 1980s as being something that was to be handled not only with extreme care, but indeed with total disdain and disinterest.
 But a number of things have, I believe, come together to bring about a change in the attitude of many Australians towards this issue. There is, of course, a passage of time since those accidents and the realisation that with superior technologies, the likelihood of them occurring again has been greatly diminished. There's been, of course, the growing realisation that nuclear energy is cleaner and greener than just about any other form of (inaudible) energy. There's also been the recognition that with the growth of countries such as India and China, there is a growing potential demand for our natural resources. We have signed a Uranium Export Agreement with China which is of course subject to the export safeguards that were established almost a quarter of a century ago in the wake of the Ranger Inquiry conducted by Mr Justice Fox.
  And I was very directly asked by the Indian Prime Minister, when I visited that country in March of this year, whether Australians would be willing to sell uranium to that country. And my response was that the current Australian Government policy, which says that we cannot sell uranium, or won't sell uranium to countries that don't adhere to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, would not allow that to occur. We did undertake, as we have subsequently done, to very carefully examine the agreement made between Australia, between America rather, and India in relation to the supply to India of nuclear fuel.
 All of these things I believe, and the growing realisation that in relation to uranium exports there is something fundamentally hypocritical in saying 'well it's too dangerous to use uranium in Australia because of the consequences, but we're very happy to profit from the sale of it so other countries that use it can grapple with the dangers that we find unacceptable'. For all of these reasons the Government has come to the view that a proper expert inquiry into all aspects of nuclear power, whether it's desirable and economic that we have the possibility of uranium enrichment. We have a very well settled policy, the current Government does, of course, in relation to uranium mining and uranium export, but all aspects of the fuel cycle should be examined in this inquiry. I think it is, as Peter Coates said, a debate that we need to have.  It will of course be attended by a lot of the usual fear campaign. I noted, Peter, that one of the possible sites was Port Stephens. You have a house there. I was a little surprised that a place very near to Port Stephens, namely Hawks Nest, that I holidayed at for some 20 years, was not of course mentioned. But I must have known something because I never got around to buying anything at Hawks Nest.
 But can I say this will be a debate that will attract the usual fear campaign. I thought the Australia Institute's effort in publishing all of those potential sites was sort of a down payment and instalment on that, but I want to make it clear that the Government intends to persevere with the inquiry and I hope to say something in more detail about the nature and scope of this inquiry. We intend to persevere with it, irrespective of the reaction of that kind that may arise in the future.
 And can I also make the point, and this is particular information to some of those who've written about this subject in the Australian media, that the idea of having an inquiry in relation to the nuclear industry is not something that was plucked out of the air by me during the last few weeks with malign political intent in relation to those who sit opposite me in the Federal Parliament. But as Ian Macfarlane will know, it's something that both he and Brendan Nelson, the former Minister for Education and Science, began raising with me, and putting the desirability of it to me, some months ago. I think it is an important debate. I think it's a debate that will test the capacity of this country to maturally examine issues related to our long term energy future, and of course our long term capacity to control greenhouse gas emissions and make the necessary environmental investment that I know and you know we must make in our future and the future of our planet.
 Can I conclude my remarks, as I have done on the other occasions on which I have been given the privilege of addressing this gathering, can I thank the mining industry of Australia not only for its regular payment of tax instalments and the very large numbers of Australians that it employs. Can I also thank it for being to the rest of the world, an example of efficiency, an example of safety, an industry that does take its social responsibilities seriously and an industry that understands the changing nature of the world environment in which Australia is operating and an industry which is making a mighty contribution to the Australian economic achievement of  the early part of the 21st Century.
  Thank you.
  [ends]


Thank you for that fantastic welcome. To Tony Campolongo, the Club President, my other parliamentary colleagues, Councillor Oliveri, who got a wonderful round of applause - doing well, that's a good reception, I do a good line in noisy receptions, and that's pretty good - to my fellow Australians. It's a wonderful experience for me, somebody of course who grew up in another part of Sydney, but has always called Sydney his original home, it's a great experience to come here to the Marconi Club -which is very much part of the story of post-World War II Australia. And as I moved around the tables tonight it was reminder to me of the incredible contribution that post-World War II migration from Italy has made to the shaping of the modern Australia.
I say that of course without in any way downplaying the contribution of people who've come from other countries. But this is an Italian club, it is the Marconi Club and I think we ought to say that. And the contribution that Australians of Italian heritage have made to our country is remarkable. And they've made a bit of an impact on my Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party-Santoro, Gambaro, Vasta, Ciobo, Barresi, Corey Bernardi and Connie Fierravanti-Wells-now that's not bad for the people who are in our Party. But the contribution that so many of you made, and of course in the early years of that great migration, when it wasn't so easy, it was tough going and the process of winning acceptance, and the process of integrating and assimilating in to the Australian community was not always easy. And with the passage of time and the coming of the good years, those times are sometimes forgotten.
 But the value of clubs like Marconi, which brought people together, enabled Australian-Italians to mix with each other and preserve the culture and the habits of the old country, but also through the club they became a great contributing part of the Australian community. And of course in no part of Australian life, certainly on the playing fields, did clubs such as Marconi contribute in a greater degree than they did in relation to soccer. And of course the way in which the flame was kept burning, the torch was carried in relation to that particular code of football, through the many lean years - I mean it's flavour of the month at the present time, everybody is talking about the World Cup - it wasn't always flavour of the month, but it was always played, very, very extensively at a district level and it's clubs like Marconi that sort of kept that going.
So I want, first and foremost, tonight to pay a special tribute to those people of Italian descent who have contributed massively to the building of the phenomenon which is modern Australia. And the modern Australia is a phenomenon. We're only 20 million people, but gee in so many areas we punch above our weight. We punch above our weight on the sporting field. We punch above our weight in things far removed from the sporting field like medical research, and of course very importantly we are punching above our weight so far as our economy is concerned.
 We've now had 15 years of unbroken economic growth. Yesterday we recorded for the first time since 1976 an unemployment rate that was below five per cent, and that is a fantastic result. And the reason we have that low unemployment, and in the end the greatest single measure of whether an economy is doing well is whether it is able to provide all of its citizens who want to work with a job. And when you get unemployment down to 4.9 per cent you really are reaching a situation of virtually full employment. And there are many parts of Australia where not only have we reached a point of full employment, but we've gone beyond it, and we're starting to see significant shortages of labour - particularly in areas of skilled tradesman. But I don't want to get in to the complications of that tonight. But the point I want to make is that this is a country which is living through economic times the like of which it hasn't had since World War II. There was a time when the Australian economy in the 1960s was growing very strongly, but it was a lot more cloistered and protected than it is now. It relied on tariff laws, it relied on controls, it relied on subsidies, it relied on bounties, but now it's an open, less regulated economy where people are competing and they're winning their share of world markets, and we're not only doing it in areas like mining where we have some natural advantages, but we're also doing it in service industries and we're also exporting a lot more manufactured goods than we sometimes realise. So it's a wonderful story.
 And people say to me what is the reason, what is the explanation for it? I like them occasionally to give the Government one or two ticks for some of things that we done, but the fundamental reason why this country has done well over the last 10 or 15 years is through the capacity and the skills of the business men and women and the workers of this country. We are a very innovative people, we're a very adaptive people. I remember once talking to the international boss of one of the largest financial institutions in the world, and he was an American who'd worked for 20 years in Europe, and I said to him you've employed people from all over world, which group of people do you like employing the most, and not surprisingly - because I'm telling you the story - he said the people I like to employ most are Australians, he said. And I said why's that? And he said because they're so adaptable. He said Australians can adapt to changed circumstances and different challenges in a way that no other people in the world can. He said you are all used to travelling, you don't live in one part of your community and stay in your country all your lives, you travel around, you get to know people in other parts of the world because you are a small country, population wise, but a big country area wise, you speak a language which is the international language now and you are able to connect and adapt and change in a way that no other country in the world, no country men and women can do. And I thought about, I thought it was a very interesting compliment to our country. And when you think about it, it makes a lot of sense. We are a people who do adapt and we have adapted a lot over the last 20 years because our economy has changed. We don't all work in large concentrations, we have fewer really large companies employing most of the people, we have a lot more small and medium sized companies employing people. We have an incredibly growing number of small businesses, a very large number of them are businesses operated from home. And in the last 10 years there's been an explosion of home centred, home operated businesses, especially started by the women of this country - some 30 to 40 per cent of those home operated businesses over the last 10 years have been started by women.
 And last year for the first time, and I don't say this critically in any way of people who belong to a trade union, it's part of the country to have unions and people have a perfect right to belong to them, but for the first time in our history the number of self-employed people in this country exceeded the number of people who belong to trade unions, and that was an interesting observation on the character of our society. And of course in this part of Australia, here in western Sydney, it really is the home of the aspiring small business operator. A man or woman who starts his or her own business with nothing and works 24 hours a day, so it feels, seven days a week to build that business into something, and in this room there are hundreds of you who've done that. You came, many of you, to this country with absolutely nothing and even worse than absolutely nothing, you owed a lot of money when you came here. But you worked your [inaudible] cases out, you've made wonderful things of your life and you've raised families, and you've created a community and you've given to our country, and you've made this country of ours feel very proud of your contribution, and you've made this country of ours be seen as an exemplar around the world of a nation that can bring together people from different parts of the world. And the other reason why this is a phenomenon of a country, is that we have demonstrated that you can bring people of different backgrounds together and unite them under one flag and one set of values and one core commitment to the future of a nation without in any way asking them to take out of a little corner of the heart, the recall and the affection for the country of their birth and the country of their home culture. Nobody asks people to do that. You who were born in Italy or of Italian descent will always have a particular affection for that country and that is something that we understand and we respect.
 But over and above all of those things, what this country has been able to do is to bring people together in a fashion that I don't think any country has been able to do in modern times, and it's a great example to the rest of the world. So we do have a lot to be proud of. We have a lot to see in our achievement, particularly in the years that have gone by since World War II, but we can never take these things for granted. We are where we are because of all of that hard work of which Pat spoke. We are where we are because of the essentially egalitarian nature of this country, where we treat people with respect according to their character and their values and what they put in to the community, not according to their social status or their racial background or their religious beliefs. We treat people on their merits and according to their worth, and we have to work hard to keep it that way. We have to work hard to preserve that commonsense of fairness and those common values that keep us together as a community. And we have to understand that on occasions we've got to stand up in other parts of the world for what we think is right.
Right at the moment, for a relatively small country, we have armed forces in many different parts of the world. We're doing that because it's the right thing to do, it's the right thing to help a country like East Timor, a tiny country of a million people. And many of the citizens of that country in the dark days of World War II, when Australia faced difficulties with the Japanese, looked after our Australian forces in East Timor and protected many of them from captivity by the Japanese and we remember that. And in a sense we repay our debt of an earlier generation but for having done what we've done.
 And we are standing up alongside our allies and friends in Afghanistan and Iraq to oppose terrorism. And we are making a contribution to stabilising a tiny country called the Solomon Islands in the Pacific. Now these are big responsibilities, but they are responsibilities that a country with the strength and the unity and the wealth of Australia can do. So when I look out at this gathering I feel a great sense of pride at what you all represent, that vital section of Australia, particularly built on post-World War II migration, something that wonderfully enriched us. And I think of this part of Sydney of which your representatives like Pat Farmer and Louise Markus and Marise Payne and Connie and Alan Cadman are so very, very proud. And they have every reason to be proud because you've seen the unemployment rates fall dramatically over the last 10 years. You've seen the growth of businesses. You've seen the growth of regional sporting pride. You've seen the great growth of population. You've seen the population, the demographic centre of Sydney shift ever more westward. And you have won for yourself a particular socioeconomic place on the map of Australia. And there's nothing that people want in this part of the world that they can't achieve and they can't have for themselves.
So my friends, my fellow Australians can I say to all of you thank you very much for the welcome that you have given me tonight, I'm very touched by the warmth, the spontaneity and the genuine character of the welcome.
I want to pay a great tribute to Pat Farmer. Pat is a remarkable bloke. He's unusual, he's a bit of a one-off. I don't mean that unkindly, I mean that generously actually - he really is. He appeals to people in all different sections of society. And the reason that he does that is that he's very genuine. He belongs to my team, he's one of mine, he's a Liberal bloke and you know he's proud of that and so he should be, it's a very good brand. But sometimes you hear in politics when people get elected they say, well you know I've been elected to govern for the people who voted for me as well as the people who voted against me. And you in the case of some people when they say that you don't sort of quite believe it, you think somehow or other they're only going to look after the people who voted for them. But Pat is the genuine article. He looks after people irrespective of whether they vote for him and that is what a Member of Parliament should do. And there are a lot of very genuine Members of Parliament on both sides who do that and Pat is a wonderful example of that.
 And he took on a pretty tough fight when he ran for us in 2001, but he touched a community in a very special way. And it was a combination of his personality, his wonderful sporting background, his genuine sense of community service, that he'd come from Catherine Field, that he was in every sense a local bloke, and on top of that I think he's the genuine nature of his character, communicated itself to all of you and touched you in a very special way. So Pat, I'm very proud of the way in which you argue for the people of western Sydney. Where you say to me in the Party Room and you say to your colleagues in the Party Room, anything that's good enough for another part of Australia has got to be good enough for the people of western Sydney. And you're not going to take a backward step, you're not going to put up with a situation where the people in this part of the world don't get a fair crack of the whip and don't get their fair share of what is being done and what is being handed around.
My friends I simply conclude by saying, as I always do, at what is essentially a wonderful community gathering. There are many privileges that come my way as Prime Minister of Australia. It's the greatest privilege that anybody could possibly have to be Prime Minister of this country and I feel that sense of privilege every day of my life, every morning I wake up. And there is no greater part of that privilege than the opportunity, as I get so frequently and I have again tonight, to meet people, to meet a different group of people, to briefly share their experiences and to share the common joy all of us have in that even greater privilege of being Australians and living in the greatest country of the world.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Mr Prime Minister, visiting Ministers from Singapore, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. It's with real pleasure and enthusiasm that I welcome His Excellency, the Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Hsien Loong, on his very first visit to this country as Prime Minister. But he is no stranger to Australia, having visited here on numerous occasions in other capacities in the past.
 Of the many very close and important relationships that Australia has in the Asia-Pacific region, none is closer and in many senses of the word, more immediate, than the relationship we have with Singapore. The name Singapore, of course, is very deeply etched in the Australian recollection and in Australian history. And all Australians remember the pivotal moments that surrounded the fall of Singapore in 1942, the fact that some 1800 Australians died in defence of Singapore, many of them being buried in the Kranji War Cemetery in Singapore.
 Singapore is a country that shares a common strategic outlook with Australia. Both of us believe in open markets. Both of us believe in freer trade. Both of us believe in the success of the Doha trade round as something that is important to meeting the legitimate demands and the legitimate aspirations of the developing countries of the world. And both Australia and Singapore believe very strongly in the continued involvement and commitment of the United States in the affairs of our region. And in that connection I welcome very much remarks in support of that proposition that the Prime Minister has made in recent months.
I want on behalf of the Australian Government to acknowledge the assistance and the advocacy of Singapore on behalf of Australia in respect of our membership of the East Asian Summit. Along with a number of other countries, including Indonesia, Singapore argued for a broadening of this group recognising that the inclusion of both Australia and New Zealand would give it a standing and a substance that it would lack without the inclusion of our two countries.   Three years ago we concluded a Free Trade Agreement with Singapore. And that Free Trade Agreement of course has successfully encouraged a growth in our trade over the time that has gone by. The relationship between Australia and Singapore for decades has been nurtured by the people-to-people links. Some 100,000 Singaporeans have graduated from Australian universities and a number of the Ministers in the current Cabinet of the Republic of Singapore are to be numbered amongst that important educational cohort. And we often have cause on occasions such as this to reflect on the wonderful contribution that the visionary Colombo Plan has made to the development of links between Australia and Singapore, Australia and Malaysia, Australia and other countries within the ASEAN area.
Singapore has had a remarkable history, born in an independent sense in very difficult circumstances, the product of sudden and abrupt changes of political alignment in the region. When it was formed in 1965 the prospects were regarded by many people as bleak indeed, yet through sheer determination, hard work, a realisation that its greatest asset, indeed in some senses, its only asset, was the individual capacity and energy of its people. The country has become something of an exemplar of what can be achieved by dint of hard work and individual effort and a belief in the virtues of competitive capitalism.
So I welcome you, Mr Prime Minister, very warmly on a personal basis as well as on behalf of the Government. I've had the privilege of working with you now over a period of time since you assumed the Prime Ministership of your country. I have found you a forthright interlocutor, somebody who speaks clearly for his country, someone who recognises as I do that even in close relationships there can be differences of opinion on sensitive issues, but I have found in you a Prime Minister with whom we can talk through those differences without them leading to a broader contamination of a relationship which is important.
 We are thrown together both by history and geography. We have a shared commitment in the fight against terrorism and I acknowledge the close, professional, relationship between our security agencies. Our agencies greatly admire the skill and professionalism of their counterparts in Singapore and the relationship could not be closer.
We do share as I said at the beginning of my remarks a common strategic view about our region, it's a view that will keep us together in the future, it's an attitude which I know will result over time in the development of other common policies and most importantly of all our two countries share vital people-to-people links and values that bind us together against many common enemies and common challenges.
Prime Minister, you are warmly welcome in our country as are your Ministers. We look forward to seeing you again and I have very great pleasure in inviting the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Kim Beazley, to support my remarks.
Thank you.
[ends]   


Well thank you very much Louise. Senator Connie Fierravanti-Wells, other distinguished guests, the members of the Board of the Blacktown Workers Club, my fellow Australians. This is the second visit that I've paid to the Blacktown Workers Club in the last 18 months and for many reasons I am delighted to be here. And no reason is more important to me than to visit the electorate of my wonderful colleague and friend Louise Markus, who really has been an incredibly energetic and faithful representative of the people of Blacktown and the people of Greenway in the time that she has been in the national parliament.
 Whatever our politics may be, we can all recognise a man or a woman who is dedicated to the service of the community that they are elected to represent. And Louise brought to the Federal Parliament particular skills. Her previous career in social work had brought her in to touch with the community; had reminded her that not everybody has it easy; had reminded her that many people, through no fault of their own, get a rather raw deal in life and they need a bit of help and they need some understanding. And that to make a community work, you need a mixture of entrepreneurs and risk takers as well as carers, as well as parents who do the right thing 24 hours a day by their children; and dedicated community organisations like the Blacktown Workers Club, that as well as providing a congenial gathering place for the men and women of the district, also provide very generously to the needy causes of the local community.
 And when I think of a community-minded, community-based Member of Parliament, I can think of no better example than Louise Markus and I thank her very warmly for the tremendous work she's done.
Today of course brings me again to the western suburbs of Sydney. I grew up in Sydney. As you all know, I grew up in Earlwood and I was educated at Earlwood Public School and then Canterbury Boys High School. So that was a bit further in. The inner south-west or inner west or whatever you like to call it. But I've always had in my political career, an affinity for the people of western Sydney. I've seen it as a part of Australia, not just as a part of Sydney, but as a part of Australia that brings together so many of the tributaries of the modern Australian reality and existence. It brings people from the four corners of the world who've become Australians. They want to retain in their heart a special affection for the countries in which they were born, but by coming to this country and being integrated into our society, they have become greatly valued and contributing members of the Australian community.
It's also an area which is full of aspiration. The aspiration of thousands of Australian parents for the future of their children, the belief and the reality that it is still possible in this country, indeed it's desirable in this country. And many practice it out in their lives to start with nothing and to build a life and to build a small business or to build a career as an employee, to raise a family, to care for them, to buy a home, to pay it off and become great contributing members of society. We must always have in our country a state of affairs where people aspire to do better. The ambition to do better for yourself, whatever you may be doing, whether it's working for a firm or running your own business, the aspiration to do better and to improve your lot in life is a powerful motivator and driver of community behaviour and individual contribution.
 And that is why the Government I have led is trying to build, and I believe we've been especially successful in western Sydney in building an aspirational society, where people get higher wages, they pay lower taxes, they pay lower interest rates, they see their children getting jobs and they see the job opportunities available in the community grow. And I thought that figure that Louise mentioned a moment ago, the unemployment rate in this area according to last month's figures was down to four and a half per cent which is a 30 year low. That's a phenomenal thing to be able to say of a part of Sydney that some years ago carried an above the national average level of unemployment.
 Now all of those things are possible in the Australia of today, all of those things are possible in the western Sydney of today because, first and foremost, the people of this area work hard and do their fair share of the heavy lifting and community building. Whenever I'm asked, when I go around Australia, who's responsible for the prosperity of Australia in 2006, I unhesitatingly say the men and women of Australia. Because it's the workers of Australia, whether you're working in your own business, or you're working for somebody else, it's the workers of Australia that have built the prosperity of this country and I will never forget that.
 And one of the other reasons why we're a prosperous country now is that over the years Governments on both sides of politics have taken decisions that might have been a little unpopular at the beginning, but have been for the long term benefit of the country. And so it is that the prosperity we have today is the product of yesterday's reforms, and the prosperity we hope to have in even greater measure tomorrow will be the product of today's reforms. And that is why a Government can never go to sleep at the wheel when it comes to reform and change. If we ever get to a situation where we say to the Australian people: the job is done, nothing else needs to be changed, everything is perfect, everything's hunky-dory, just take it easy, have a good time, that is a recipe for decline. It's not a recipe for further prosperity and further growth and further wealth.
 And that is why everything we do, whether it's in relation to taxation change, superannuation changes, very big beneficial changes coming on that front from the 1st July next year, the changes to workplace relations, they're all designed to build a stronger, better Australia in the future, make us more competitive, more prosperous, more able to compete with the rest of the world. And in the end, the greatest guarantee of a job and a real wage increase in this country is a strong economy. Because if you don't have a strong economy, you can have all the rules and regulations to protect workers under the sun, but it won't protect them from the sack if their firm is going broke. No firm can employ people unless it makes money and has profits and no industrial relations system can give a company profit if the economy is not strong.  So in everything we do, we have to have reforms and changes that build a stronger, more productive economy. And that's the reason why we are making the changes we are making, it's the reason why we have made changes in the past.
 My remarks have been to date about issues that directly effect us here in western Sydney and directly effect the Australian economy. But I can't, on a day like this after the appalling terrorist attack in India, let that go by without saying on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia how appalled and devastated I am by the magnitude of that terrorist attack. And it is a reminder, because it has occurred in India, it's a reminder that no country is immune from the possibility of terrorist attacks. I was in that very city, the financial centre of India, only a few months ago. And the Indian economy is undergoing a great change. India is the largest democracy in the world. Despite all the cynics who said it wouldn't work, India has been a fully functioning democracy for virtually all of the years that have gone by since she achieved independence from Great Britain in 1947.
 And this terrorist attack is an attack on the democratic way of life. It's just as much an attack on the democratic way of life in India as the attacks in New York and Washington were on the democratic way of life in the United States. And I send my sympathy, my support, my compassion, my expression of concern to the Indian people and to the Indian Government.
 And in doing that, I remind all of my fellow Australians that we can never be complacent about the terrorist threat within our own midst. It's not as bad as it is in most other countries. We don't have active terrorist cells in the way that many countries around the world do. But we cannot afford to assume that it will never happen in this country, and that is why, consistent with our long tradition of respect for individual liberties and through our openness and our democratic way of life, it's imperative that we have the strong measures, we have the additional investment in police and ASIO and security that is necessary.
 And it's also why we have responsibility to argue and educate people against expressions of extremism within our own midst. And it's important that we reach out to every community in Australia and reassure them that those who share our democratic way of life are as much a part of our Australian community as any other. That those who preach hatred and intolerance and the exclusivity of one religion or faith against another are people who are not talking and acting in the interests of our country.
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure for me to be here in Blacktown. I want to thank everybody here who represents a community organisation for the wonderful contribution you make to the vibrancy of this community and the vibrancy of the Australian community. Australia is a nation, a great nation of volunteers. We have more volunteers and we have a greater instinct for volunteering and working together than just about any country in the world. The great Australian tradition of mateship is really built on helping each other and built on the notion that you work together and you overcome a common threat. It's not just something that is obviously very much to the fore in wartime, when you must rely on the courage of one another to survive. It's also something that is so evident when we have great natural disasters and we have challenges we must as a nation respond to. So can I say to all of you who represent the wonderful volunteer organisations of this community, thank you.
 Most particularly, and I finish on this note, can I express my admiration for the spirit of the people of western Sydney. The way in which they have grabbed hold of and embraced the ideal of aspiring to build better lives for themselves, their children and their community. It is the essence of modern Australia and it's something that's sustained and nourished this community as it has many other communities around our great nation. Thank you very much.
[ends]  


Well thank you very much Brigadier, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, the Chief of the Defence Force, the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, and the men and women of the Australian Federal Police, and the various state police forces that have contributed so magnificently. I simply want to say to all of you on behalf of your fellow Australians how very proud we are of the way in which you have carried out your task here in East Timor over the last two months.
 This was a more hazardous and more strategically dangerous mission than many people wrote it to be. And the uncertainty that surrounded the early days of the operation required not only superb military, and in time policing skills, but also required a combination of things that Australians do so well. We're very good at, in a sensible, prudent way, projecting military power and capability, but we also understand that the essence of a successful military operation is winning the respect and the understanding and the support of the civilian population. And just as I have been, on other occasions, I've been mightily impressed in the time that I have spent here today in being reminded of the great efforts that all of you have undertaken to win the affection and the support, the hearts and minds they call it, of the people of East Timor.
This is a tiny country. There's a long historic bond between the fighting men of Australia in World War II and the people of East Timor and there's a shared sense of affection that has never been forgotten by the successive generations of Australians. And what you've done over the past two months is greatly to your credit. We are all immensely proud of you, we are all greatly in your debt and you brought hope to one million people who don't have the sort of life that we have in Australia, but aspire to have that kind of life and that kind of freedom.
I'd like to pay a particular tribute to the chief commanding officers of the operation. I want to congratulate Brigadier Mick Slater, who I met before, who's been a very, and continues to be, a very distinguished officer who's done a wonderful job in leading the ADF contingent. And I pay a great tribute to you, Mick, for your skill. And can I say, I know a lot of you come from Townsville, I was talking to your local member Peter Lindsay this morning and he asked me to say hello to all the people from Townsville here.
 Can I also single out Commander Steve Lancaster. I know there have been some Air Force games played with his name, but I want to congratulate him and the men and women of the police services, the AFP and the state police services. You have really been an integral part of this operation. As the time goes by the role and the importance of police will only grow and once again you've brought that special Australian ability to mix authority with understanding and compassion. That's one of the things that does make us as a people, as a nation different, and it's one of the reasons that we do these kind of operations rather more successfully than many others.
 I know that the men and women of the Royal Australian Air Force, will be delighted to know that that F-111 that took off from Amberley and lost a wheel earlier today, has successfully completed, after it had dumped all its fuel, has successfully completed a wheels up landing back at Amberley with no scratches, a few sparks, some sensational footage for the TV networks tonight, but we're all relieved that that has happened and we are all very, very  proud of the professionalism and skill of the pilots of the Royal Australian Air Force.
I know that you're missing your wives and sweethearts and children and parents and brothers and mates and friends, and that's not easy. We don't intend to be here forever, and in time there'll be a rebalancing and a scaling down of the operation, but I have been greatly heartened indeed inspired by the enthusiasm that all of you have brought, in the things that you said to me today; all of you brought to this operation.
 You are Australia's finest and you make us all feel very proud and on behalf of a grateful nation and a nation that admires the military forces and the police services of our country a great deal, I say thank you for what you've done for the people of East Timor. I say thank you for the credit that you have brought to the name of Australia and the credit that you have brought to your respective services.
 Thank you very much.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much John, ladies and gentleman. I'm delighted to be back at CEDA, and I hope in the remarks I have to make today which are a serious attempt to analyse some of the challenges facing us in the area of water and energy - I can contribute to the reputation of this organisation for thoughtful, considered discussion of issues of long-term national challenge.
 I thought I might start by referring to an observation made by the world's most successful, retired, university dropout, Bill Gates. And he said that most of us over-estimated change in the next two years, but under-estimated it over a period of a decade.
 I think that's probably relevant to the issues I want to address today, because water and energy do represent great challenges and also great opportunities for this country and it's easy to state the goal of meeting the challenge and optimising the opportunity, but in order to achieve it, I think we have to jump to the three keys which unlock the solutions to those two challenges.
 The first, Australia's proven adaptability and whenever I talk about our country and the men and women who make up our country, the adaptability of the Australian work force is the first thing that I mention. And we often sell short the great capacity of this country to adapt to challenges.
 Secondly, we have a willingness to embrace difficult reforms and new technologies, and we do on occasions, despite what is often said of us, we do have a capacity to address rational debate and discussion in audiences like this. And I think these are three attributes that we will bring to our discussion of these two important issues. I think we all agree that reliable, low-cost energy makes our lives easier, underpins the competitiveness of our industries, generates investment and jobs, and provides a major source of export income.
 To illustrate, in 2006/7 our energy exports will grow to about $45 billion and that's more than three times what we earned last year from meat, grains, and wool combined. Australia can and should supply the domestic and world economies with low-cost energy.
 That was a key message of our white paper two years ago, and it's a message I re-affirm today. And making the most of our great comparative advantage in energy is not just in Australia's interests, but it also will contribute to the global economic welfare as well. Man's constant hunger for energy and all that this involves will profoundly shape geo-politics this century; perhaps more so than it did last century.
 Energy security is assuming a strategic significance, once reserved for territorial security and the global environmental challenges from energy production and use are amongst our most pressing. The IEAE estimates that global energy demand will grow by more than 50% between 2003 and 2030. Most of this growth will come from countries like China and India.
 Assume for a moment that over the next two and a half decades China and India follow the same development path as South Korea. I mention South Korea because it is a wonderful illustration of a country that threw off a backward looking approach to economic management and embraced the benefits of globalisation. But if that same growth occurs in India and China, by 2030, those two countries alone will consume at least three times as much primary energy as does the United States at present.
And on the strength of this the respected Financial Times columnist Martin Wolf wrote recently, and I quote: 'anybody who thinks that it will be easy to reduce global energy consumption is simply dreaming'.
As an efficient, reliable supplier of energy, Australia has a massive opportunity to increase its share of global energy trade.  And with the right policies, we have the makings of an energy superpower.
Australia consumes about a third of the energy it produces, and we export the balance.  We are one of only a few net exporters of energy in the developed world.  And our relative proximity to these huge and growing markets in Asia and is an obvious asset.
We are the world's largest coal exporter and we account for about 30 per cent of world trade in that commodity.  We have significant reserves of natural gas and, on industry estimates, could be the world's second largest LNG exporter by 2015.
  Our gas reserves are particularly important given the adaptability of this fuel in stationary energy markets and as a potential alternative to petroleum in transport applications.  Likewise our deposits of coal, both black and brown, offer great potential for conversion to transport fuels such as diesel and hydrogen.
While known oil reserves are declining, Australia remains relatively unexplored, particularly for petroleum in frontier offshore areas.  Encouraging further exploration must be a high priority for the Government.
We hold close to 40 per cent of the world's low-cost uranium reserves.  Our national interest in the resurgent global debate about nuclear power is a subject I will return to in a moment.
We also have extensive renewable energy resources.  Hydro, wind and solar represent a small but growing part of our energy mix and other potential sources such as hot dry rocks are yet to be tapped.
In all of this, let's not forget our man-made assets: political stability; a growing economy; a quality workforce; reliable infrastructure; a competitive tax regime; transparent regulation; and now, importantly, new workplace laws that greater reward companies and workers for their energy and enterprise.
With world class assets at home, and enormous opportunity abroad, come domestic as well as global responsibilities including environmental stewardship. Energy is the single largest contributor to global emissions of greenhouse gases. Meeting the challenge of climate change will require changes to the way the world produces and uses energy. We are committed to an effective response to this challenge, but let us underline the word effective. And to meet our three goals of prosperity, security and sustainability, we need an energy policy framework that is pragmatic, rational, as well as being flexible. We must build Australia's energy advantage based on proven strengths. We must avoid putting all of the eggs in one basket. And we must invest in leading edge clean energy technology while being pragmatic about what technologies help reach our goals.
 What are Australia's proven strengths, beyond natural assets?  In the words of one global energy analyst who met government officials recently, Australia has two big things going for it: stability and rationality.
  In some sense, this is an unremarkable statement.  Survey after survey ranks Australia number one in the world for low sovereign risk on energy investments.
  But it was the intangible quality which this international expert sought to emphasise - the ability to have a rational discussion about energy issues with political decision-makers.  Australia stood out, in his view, not just against countries with well-known problems of governance and instability but against some of the most developed nations in Europe and North America.
To a CEDA audience, rational analysis and debate may not sound like a big hurdle to clear.  Yet it underpins sensible energy policy at every turn.
It is what has seen Australia reform its energy markets to make them more efficient.  The IEA has lauded Australia as 'one of the pioneers in energy sector microeconomic reform'.  Reforms for example in the electricity sector alone are expected to add $7 billion to our national GDP over the period 2005 to 2010.
  Abundant resources, extensive infrastructure and good access to world markets underpin a high level of energy security in our country. But in such a large and sparsely populated country, this cannot be taken for granted. Global concerns about energy security have risen sharply due to the very sharp rise in oil prices.  Though of little, indeed speaking as somebody who monitors public reaction on a daily basis, indeed of no comfort to the long suffering Australian motorist, high fuel prices in Australia are a direct result of strong global demand, limited production and refining capacity and geo-political concerns especially, and I say especially, in the light of the recent upsurge in conflict in the Middle East, and Nigeria. Domestic fuel prices, believe it or not, do remain amongst the lowest in the developed world, due again, believe it or not, to relatively low fuel taxes in Australia.
 I noted earlier the Government's commitment to oil exploration and we continue to examine what further can be done, knowing that offshore frontier exploration is a high cost, high risk undertaking. Measures are in place to increase the commercial viability of alterative transport fuels based on our objective of ensuring secure supplies at competitive prices.
 Last September, I reaffirmed the Government's commitment to restore confidence in the bio-fuels industry and substantial new investments in that industry are now underway. Again, the watch-words must be pragmatism, rationality and flexibility.  The White Paper recognised that a diversity of energy supplies helps to ensure reliability of supply and promotes competition between energy types.
  This underpins government support for a commercially-viable bio-fuels industry and for renewable fuel alternatives.
 The Government's third objective - energy sustainability - also calls for a pragmatism, rationality and flexibility.
Australia must change the way we produce and use energy because of the challenge presented by greenhouse gas emissions.
The Energy White Paper outlined a suite of measures aimed at lowering the cost of a broad range of low-emission technologies.  The flagship is our $500 million Low Emission Technology Demonstration Fund designed to leverage large-scale demonstration of clean fossil and renewable technologies.
  The Fund has received 30 applications seeking government funding of $2.6 billion in support of a potential $13 billion of investment.  They cover innovative technologies for post combustion capture of CO2, coal gasification, brown coal dewatering, solar thermal and photovoltaics, geothermal and biomass.
  An expert panel will report shortly on the successful projects.
 If we are to reconcile our economic opportunity with environmental responsibility, Australia must aspire to be a world leader in clean coal technology.  And the COAG meeting in Canberra last Friday agreed that this must become a long-term national priority to which all the governments of Australia will return.   And with the release of the White Paper, I announced a $75 million investment in Solar City trials in urban centres across Australia. And I hope to announce the first trials very shortly.
Renewables will play an increasing role in Australia's energy mix.  But pragmatism, rationality and flexibility also call for realistic expectations about this role for the foreseeable future.
  The cost of delivering low-emission electricity from renewables remains very high with difficulties surrounding base load power demands.  Coal, oil and gas will continue to meet the bulk of Australia's energy needs.
If we look globally, the same picture emerges.  The IEA expects coal, oil and gas to account for about 83 per cent of the forecast increase in primary, global,  energy demand over the period from 2003 to 2030.  If one accepts these projections, that would mean an increase in the share of global energy demand accounted for by fossil fuels.
Such figures should serve as a reality check for those who argue that Australia should have signed on to Kyoto Protocol.
Australia remains determined to pursue an effective global response on climate change that encompasses the world's major emitters and avoids distortions that might lead to the international transfer of economic activity and emissions with no environmental benefits.
Unfortunately, Kyoto did not meet that test.
The results are striking.  Global greenhouse emissions are projected to grow by 40 per cent by 2012 within the Kyoto framework.  In the absence of Kyoto, they would have grown by 41 per cent.
   A central flaw of Kyoto is its reliance on a distinction between developed and developing countries which makes little sense when translated into global emissions.
  Let me illustrate. Australia contributes  1.4 per cent of global CO2 emissions.  If we stopped overnight emitting all carbon dioxide in this country, it would take all of 10 months for the growth in China's emissions alone to eclipse or completely cancel out the global reduction caused by Australia ending all activities producing greenhouse gas emissions.
 Today's ABARE report reinforces that moving ahead of the global community and achieving deeper emission cuts in Australia will impose significant costs on our country and ABARE finds that those costs would be a 10 per cent fall in GDP, a 20 per cent fall in real wages and a carbon price equivalent to a doubling of petrol prices in Australia and for good measure, yield no greater environmental benefits.
The other fundamental flaw of Kyoto, due to its limited application of binding targets, is that it can lead to distortions in economic activity without any environmental benefit.  A good way to think about this is through the prism of Australia's historic $25 billion LNG deal with China.
Resource development supporting this deal has the effect of increasing Australia's greenhouse emissions by about 1 million tonnes.  A Kyoto constraint could well have priced Australia out of a contract whose net effect is to lower China's prospective greenhouse emissions by some 7 million tonnes.  Australia therefore would have lost out and, at best, the environment would have been  no better off.  Where is the rationality in that?
In my view, the problems being experienced in the European Union's Emission Trading Scheme also vindicate the Government's decision not to introduce a similar arrangement in the absence of an effective global regime. The EU scheme is beset with complexity and competing national interests.  The first trading period saw an allocation of permits by governments designed more to protect industries than to reduce emissions.  This has led to wild fluctuations and then a collapse in the price of traded carbon.  And it seems likely that the new round of trading will suffer the same fate. I raise this issue because there are other political forces in Australia at both a federal and state level who are proposing a similar scheme for Australia. Global debate on greenhouse strategies has now moved beyond Kyoto and Australia is very much at the centre of it.
  An Australian has been selected to co-chair a new UN dialogue on post-Kyoto arrangements.  And we are at the heart of another global initiative, exemplified by the launch this year in Sydney of the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate.  The picture that emerges therefore is of a Government positioning Australia to contribute to an effective global response to climate change, both domestically and internationally.  And it is in this context that I believe Australia must also engage in a rational debate about nuclear energy.
There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that nuclear power has an important role to play in stabilising atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide.  This, along with energy security concerns, has led to a revival of interest in nuclear power. Nuclear energy currently accounts for 16 per cent of global electricity generation.  Most operating nuclear power plants are in Western Europe and North America, but most new plants under construction are in Asia.   China and India are both undertaking major nuclear energy expansions, while Japan and Korea have also committed to increasing reliance on nuclear energy.  The United States continues to be the world's largest producer and consumer of nuclear energy.  And in Europe, countries such as the United Kingdom, Sweden and Switzerland are now re-evaluating plans to phase out nuclear power. At the same time, engineers from a ten-nation consortium are developing the so-called fourth-generation plants designed to be safer, more affordable, more efficient and more proliferation-resistant nuclear energy systems.
 A growing number of environmentalists now recognise that nuclear energy has significant environmental advantages.  Greenpeace founders James Lovelock and Patrick Moore are among those urging a re-examination of the case for nuclear power.   Nuclear power emits virtually no greenhouse gases.  The International Atomic Energy Agency states that the complete nuclear power chain, from uranium mining to waste disposal, and including reactor and facility construction, emits only 2-6 grams of carbon per kilowatt-hour.  This is about the same as wind and solar power, and two orders of magnitude below coal, oil and even gas.
Of course, commercial factors remain critical to the future prospects of nuclear power.  High oil prices mean that in some cases nuclear energy automatically has become more competitive for base load power generation. Australia cannot absent herself from global developments surrounding nuclear energy.  We are part of the nuclear fuel cycle, whether we like it or not. With close to 40 per cent of the world's known low-cost uranium deposits, for Australia to bury her head in the sand on nuclear energy is akin to Saudi Arabia turning her back on global oil developments.
 Uranium is already Australia's second largest energy export in terms of energy content and it plays a major role in decreasing the greenhouse intensity of other nations.  Japan's 54 nuclear power stations alone save the equivalent of Australia's total greenhouse emissions, facilitated by our exports of uranium. Australian uranium is exported under stringent safeguard arrangements to ensure it is used for exclusively peaceful purposes and is fully accounted for through the nuclear fuel cycle.
  The taskforce I announced last month will conduct a comprehensive, science-based review into uranium mining, processing and the long-term contribution of nuclear energy in Australia.  I believe that the opposition expressed to this Inquiry both at political and other levels is hypocritical, irrational and weak. It is hypocritical because it says that while Australia will not use uranium, we are very happy to sell it to other countries and let them deal with the consequences.   It is irrational because it falls back on nothing more than simple slogans and gesture politics when confronted with a serious issue.  As Greenpeace founder Patrick Moore has said, those who would shut down debate on nuclear energy have 'abandoned science in favour of sensationalism'. And it is weak because it responds to immediate and potentially transient public reaction, rather than the facts and the longer term challenges that this country must face.
The real question is whether Australia should fully consider our interests and responsibilities in the global nuclear energy debate or whether we succumb to a dogma of denial.  If Australia does not engage in this debate, if we sacrifice rational discussion on the altar of anti-nuclear theology and political opportunism, we will pay a price.  Maybe not today or tomorrow, but in 10, 15, or 20 years Australia will surely pay a price.
Ladies and gentlemen, as with energy, access to water is fundamental to a prosperous, secure and sustainable Australia.   We are the driest inhabited continent on earth.  Our rainfall and our rivers are the most variable in the world.  Drought has a tormenting place in our art, our literature and our song, as well as being a daily heartbreak for so many of our fellow Australians today and in years gone by. Rational water management has eluded Australia for far too long.
  Now, I believe with the National Water Initiative, we are starting to turn this around. For the first time, all Australian governments have committed to a national blueprint for water reform.  In support of this the $2 billion Australian Government Water Fund is delivering practical water projects to improve water efficiency and environmental outcomes. Funding of more than $400 million has been approved supporting more than $1 billion of investment in water conservation projects.
   The Commonwealth has also taken the lead in helping to restore the Murray-Darling river system to better health with an additional investment of $500 million in this year's Budget, the Commonwealth Government delivered the single biggest commitment ever made to our most important river system.
We must, however, maintain a sense of urgency about water reform.  There is still too much reform slippage in some areas.  There is still too much blame-shifting between governments.  And there is still too little truly innovative thinking about Australia's large-scale water challenges.
Let me identify the six "basics" of the initiative where this sense of urgency needs to be focused.  All governments need to do one, improve approaches to water pricing; two, ensure that water entitlements are secure and tradeable; three, facilitate permanent interstate water trading; four, ensure scientifically-based and transparent water planning; five, improve water resource accounting; and finally integrate management of environmental water. I especially urge New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia to move quickly towards effective water trading arrangements.
 Water reform can only be a collaborative effort, but the Commonwealth Government has a particular duty to put the national interest first.  And against this background, last Friday at the COAG Meeting, I asked that the states and territories bring forward more ambitious water infrastructure projects for joint funding with support from the Commonwealth Government Water Fund.   What I am really talking about here is a small number of large projects of state and national significance.  The Government's Water Fund is not designed to provide a small subsidy to every worthy piece of water infrastructure. This will not be a scheme where everyone gets a prize. And I have asked directly that state and territory leaders look at this issue with a larger, national perspective in mind. And I will be writing to all the Premiers and Chief Ministers shortly setting out what I regard to be minimum criteria for projects that can deliver a genuinely transformative impact on water management.
Allied to this, I believe we need nothing short of a revolution in thinking about Australia's urban water challenges.  Two assumptions have dominated water infrastructure in our cities.  The first is that water should only be used once.  The second is that storm water should be carried away to rivers and oceans as quickly as possible. Neither assumption is suited to a world in which we should judge water by its quality and not by its history.  Compared with desalination, for example, water recycling and capturing storm water have much more to recommend them as strategies for solving Australia's urban water challenges.
 The simple fact is that there is little or no reason why our large cities should be gripped permanently by water crises. My Parliamentary Secretary, Malcolm Turnbull who I gather is here today, made the point rather forcefully to this audience last month.  He reminded you that if ancient Rome's 11 aqueducts 2000 years ago could deliver a billion litres of water to its million inhabitants every day; before powerful pumps, pressurised pipes, recycling systems or any of our modern technology, how can we seriously tolerate major water constraints in our great cities?
Our goal should be nothing less than to drought-proof our large coastal cities.  Having a city on permanent water restrictions makes about as much sense as having a city on permanent power restrictions.  We would not tolerate it with electricity and we should not tolerate it with water. Part of the solution is better pricing, but the real issue is better management and adequate investment in water infrastructure.  In many cases, water restrictions, which are held out as designed to protect and preserve a scarce resource, have got more to do with protecting the cash flows and dividends of government-owned water utilities.
 Again, I want to stress to the states and territories that my default setting is towards a cooperative approach to urban water challenges.  But the Commonwealth is not interested in the sort of cooperation where the Australian taxpayer just writes a cheque.  If  Commonwealth funding is sought, we will need to be satisfied that the urban water plans which we are asked to support are the right ones.
Ladies and gentlemen, can I finish by reminding you that hunger for energy and thirst for water go to the very foundations of our civilisation.  And every generation can be judged by the balance between what it uses up and what it leaves behind.  But as the economist Robert Solow reminds us, the obligation to leave future generations the ability to be at least as well off as we are does not imply an obligation to leave them the world exactly as we found it.  What matters is the whole range of resources, knowledge and technology we leave behind to fulfil the needs of humanity.
This legacy is as much about the quality of our institutions and ideas.  And that's what I mean when I talked about national flexibility and the importance of those crimson threads that run through modern, successful Australia: our proven adaptability; our willingness to embrace difficult reforms and new technology; and our commitment to rational debate and discussion. They are what led the IEA last year to describe Australia as a 'model for other countries' in electricity reform.  They are what saw The Economist magazine single out Australia a couple of years ago as taking 'the top prize for sensible water management'. And more than anything, these resources will help us lock-in and leverage our national strength for the great challenges that lie ahead.
  May I again thank CEDA for the forum it's given me today to give you some of my thinking of these issues. Over my years in public life, not only as Prime Minister, but in the various other positions that I occupied prior to 1996, CEDA has been a wonderful forum for discussion and serious consideration of long term national challenges. There can be few of those challenges more important than of energy and water, and I thank you very warmly for the opportunity you've given me today.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Gary, to the mayor's of the Snowy of Cooma and Bombala, to all of the other distinguished guests that are here, I'm delighted to be back in Cooma. This is a city which is, I suppose over the long years, best known to me as a place I visited and travelled through on the way to the snow fields, at a time when I did something more than just walk everyday. But it's great to be back and it's especially good to be here in the electorate of Eden-Monaro with my friend and colleague Gary Nairn. Gary is a wonderful local member. This is an extraordinarily diverse electorate. It stretches, of course, from the outskirts of Canberra right down to the border. It includes the famous, large parts of the famous Snowy area and if the redistribution plan goes through, it will include all of it and it includes some coastal areas and of course a lot of other very diverse areas. And Gary brings to it a great energy and a great enthusiasm. And Gary is as, you know, somebody who travels around his electorate on a regular basis, and he does listen and he does communicate.
He did mention in his introductory remarks the events leading up to the Commonwealth Government's decision to reverse its position on the privatisation of the Snowy. I acknowledge that that was something on which the Federal Government made a mistake. When the New South Wales and Victorian Governments decided to privatise we decided to go along with it because our stake was only 13 per cent and I'm not going to turn around and say it was their decision and it was their fault. Of course they took a decision ahead of us, but we went along with it; when you go along with something and you decide that that decision was a wrong decision there's no point in trying to blame somebody else and I don't. We made a mistake but we did listen to what people had to say, we changed our decision and I gather most people in this area are very happy that we did change our decision.
The point of mentioning that, my friends, is that nobody, in a more persistent, effective way, have pointed out to me the mistake of the original decision more effectively than did your local member Gary Nairn. He didn't headline hunt, he didn't grandstand, he didn't break ranks, he is part of the Government and he knows that that carries with it certain responsibilities, but he put his case, and he put it very effectively and in the end he put it very decisively. So that decision, a mistake originally, a mistake repaired, is now behind us. And I want to say to all of you how committed I am to the prosperity and the success of regional areas of Australia, such as this part of New South Wales. I was looking at some employment figures on the way down in the plane and I noticed that this area of Australia now has an unemployment rate which averages about three per cent. And that is a remarkable improvement on what it was 10, 15 or even 20 years ago, and it's an indication of the general prosperity of the area.
 But I'm also very conscious that drought affects large parts of Australia. And once again I was looking at some figures on the plane coming down here and over the last five years the Commonwealth Government has laid out about a billion dollars in drought assistance to the various areas of Australia that have been affected by drought and more than half of that has been allocated to areas in the State of New South Wales. And I want to announce this morning that we are extending, extending until the end of year, and that will take us through the winter and spring, to see what happens with the weather, extending the Exceptional Circumstances arrangements that have been available to people affected in this part of New South Wales.
 What that will do is it will enable those people who continue to be affected by drought to get the assistance, the income support assistance and the other assistance that is available under the Exceptional Circumstances arrangements, be able to get through the rest of the winter and the spring and then we'll make another assessment of the situation as we get towards the end of the year. It is a difficult time and it's always hard when there's a broad level of national prosperity, it's always that much harder for people, who through no fault of their own, not because they're not trying, not because they're not working hard, but through no fault of their own are missing out. And drought has been an enormous problem for this country now for many years. And Gary mentioned a moment ago that the speech I made in Sydney on Monday about energy and water, and I was talking particularly about the challenges of water restrictions in urban areas but of course it's a problem that has a different and even more menacing dimension in rural areas of Australia where it affects very directly on a daily basis the livelihood of so many hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians.
So I can promise people in drought affected areas of the Monaro, I can promise people in drought affected areas all over Australia, that this Government is very conscious of and will continue to respond in a generous and effective fashion to the impact that drought is having on our nation. And in the process we must as a community think in a more imaginative way than we have in the past, and we do need a revolution in our thinking about the water challenge. We need major projects cooperatively entered into by the Commonwealth and the state governments to tackle water problems. We need to change our thinking in relation to the run-off of storm water in our cities. We need to change our thinking about recycling of water and we need of course to push ahead very strongly with the water trading system that the states and the Commonwealth agreed on some two or three years ago, a scheme pioneered by the former Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson, that recognises that water is the precious asset, it's a valuable commodity and it needs to be treated as such. We need to conserve it and nurture it a lot more than we do and we need to understand that over the longer term an effective nationwide trading system in relation to water is an imperative to solving our problems and our challenges.
  I just want to say two other things to you this morning and that is that I've made some remarks about issues that are very important and immediate local concern to all of you but I can't address any gathering of Australians without mentioning the very challenging and difficult international circumstances in which the world finds itself. The conflict in the Middle East, the immediate cause of which was the totally provocative action of Hezbollah in crossing the Israeli border and capturing Israeli soldiers and going into Israel's territory, it's a conflict that has caught up many thousands of citizens of other countries, not least some citizens of Australia. And my Government, along with other Governments, is doing everything it can to help people escape the conflict, people who have been caught there, either visiting relatives, in some cases of course people have chosen to live in that country rather that in Australia, but we're doing everything we can in cooperation with other countries in order to assist those people to leave Lebanon and to comeback to Australia.
   But looking to the longer term, we are never going to have a solution to that problem until everybody who has an influence or a stake in the Middle East, unconditionally accepts two things. Firstly there must be an unconditional acceptance of the right of Israel to exist and have secure defensible borders and be free from constant attack and constant attacks by terrorists. That's the first condition, and the second condition, there has to be an unconditional acceptance of the creation of an independent Palestinian state which gives to the Palestinians the homeland that they have sought for so many years. And until, on all sides and all around the world, there's an unconditional acceptance of those two principles, we're never going to have a solution to the problem. And the sad thing is that there is not an unconditional acceptance of those things in the Middle East; why else would we have the, year after year, the terrorist attacks into Israel? Why else would we have until fairly recently a reluctance on many in that part of the world to accept a need for the creation of an independent Palestinian state? But they are the two conditions. We often hear in these things that you've got to talk about the long term and not the short term. The long term solution can only be reached and achieved on that particular basis.
And also can I say that yesterday I had the opportunity of briefly visiting East Timor to meet the newly installed Prime Minister and also the President, and very importantly to say thank you to the 2500 Australian Defence Force personnel and police who've collectively done an absolutely fantastic job in restoring order to the streets of Dili and restoring a sense of calm and a greater level of security to the people of East Timor. And I think we should give them a great deal of applause because nobody does this work better than Australians because our forces have that rare gift of combining military authority with human understanding; that people have got to get on with each other. And to see the Australian troops and the Australian police interacting with the children on the streets of Dili and to see them interacting with the local people, not pushing them around, asserting their authority which they must, but doing it in a way that makes every Australian feel very proud. That country that has a particular place in the hearts of many Australians especially of World War II generation, the generation who remember the risks that the people of East Timor took during some of the more difficult times during World War II to help Australian soldiers. That country is one that we do have a particular responsibility for.
But like any nation, like any individual, it's got to learn to stand on its own feet. And I said to the Prime Minister that whilst we're there for the long haul, we're there to help in the long run, East Timor has got to grab her own destiny. And she has by dint of the revenues from the Timor Straight oil and gas field, she has greater endowments and greater opportunities than many other people, many other countries of that size have.
Very finally my friends could I take the opportunity because this is a great community gathering, to pay tribute to the volunteer spirit of the Australian community. We are a great volunteer people. The number of volunteers in this country continues to rise. The level of philanthropy in Australia continues to increase. Don't believe the stories that as we become wealthier we've become meaner; the figures actually disprove that. But the reality is that as Australians have become wealthier, we have become more philanthropic. And there is a spirit in this country, a willingness to reach out and a willingness to help people and a greater intention on the part of the Australian community all around our country for groups to come together to assist and to challenge community problems and to provide community solutions. And this part of Australia, of course, which perhaps more than any other part of Australia trail blazed the nation building through migration that occurred in Australia after World War II, has been an example of building a community through different groups coming together, behind a common goal, and that is to build a united cohesive and tolerant Australian nation.
So I'm very happy to be here in Cooma, the centre of the Snowy. I'm delighted to again commend to you Gary Nairn, whose been a wonderful member, a great friend, a great colleague, a fine Minister, but most importantly to you, somebody who understands you, listens to you, speaks up for you and tells me what you think.
 Thank you.
   [ends]  


PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you very much Fran, that's very nice and your job prospects are very good. To Fran, Peter O'Brien, Kevin McDonald, my colleague Peter Debnam, the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, to Barry O'Farrell, the Deputy Leader, Andrew Fraser the spokesman on small business, many good friends in the small business community of Sydney and Australia, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to be here tonight, I want to say a few things about the topic of the day and I am talking here in the context of small business and that is the Workchoices reforms. But before turning to that I would want to respond to Fran's invitation to launch and officially comment upon a report that she has compiled, her Department has compiled, it is called 'Encouraging Enterprise' and it brings together in a very readable form many of the things that have happened to small business not only over the last few years but over the last 10 or 20 years. It is a reminder of how conditions for small business in this country have improved, the report for example tells us that a world survey by the World Bank says that Australia is the second easiest country in the world in which to start a business, in other words, the regulatory and bureaucratic barriers are lower in this country than in any other country bar one. It is also the third easiest in the world in which to obtain finance. Now I think the response of all of you would be, 'why aren't we the best in the world in which to start a business?' and 'why are we the best in the world to obtain finance?' In the spirit of the competition of which Grant and Kevin spoke that has to be an objective of the Government.
 The last Budget contained a lot of very important further changes for small business. Taxes to small business were cut by some $440 million and we simplified the tax affairs of more than a million businesses. The simplified tax system turnover was lifted from a million to two million. The incorporation fee on new businesses has been cut in half and I can list a great deal more individual changes that have been made and many small business men and women will benefit enormously from the superannuation changes that were foreshadowed in the Budget and come into operation on the 1st of July next year. They are truly historic changes to superannuation, the ending of taxes on superannuation benefits for people over the age of 60.
 Despite all of those things and they are all very important, nothing can match the benefit for small business than the economic form and the economic climate in which business operates and in the end it is all about the health of the economy. To borrow that famous campaign injunction of Bill Clinton, we should it on the wall, not saying 'it's the economy stupid', but rather 'it is the impact on the economy stupid' and that is what I want to come to in a moment in relation to industrial relations. But the general health of the economy as has been pointed out is quite remarkable. We are now in the 15th year of unbroken economic expansion. It's in reality something of an experiment; we haven't previously had 15 years in our history since Federation of unbroken economic growth. We had some good periods in the 1950s and into the 60s, but that was broken by the credit squeeze of 1961 and that began and then we resumed the steady period growth, but by the early 1970s inflation was starting to become a problem and then of course the whole world changed very dramatically in the early years of the 1970s. So it is a very remarkable period in which we are living. I have never been unwilling to give the former Labor Government some credit for some of the decisions it took. Its deregulation of the financial system and the removal of high levels of tariffs, they were decisions incidentally that we in opposition supported. And, of course, the willingness of an earlier Labor Government to put good policy ahead of opportunism makes it all the more perplexing the attitude of the current Opposition to many of the reforms of the Government that has been in power for the last 10 years.
But going back to that injunction on the wall, the question I have got to ask you and all of us have got to ask as we debate the historic changes to our workplace relations system that came into operation on the 27th of March this year. The real test of the quality of those laws is not some debate about an individual clause, or some debate about an individual procedure. The real test is the impact they have on the Australian economy. Will they make the economy better and stronger in the future, or will they make the Australian economy weaker in the future? Because in the end it is the strength of the economy that determines whether companies make profits and if companies don't make profits they can't employ as many people as they would like. You can have all the regulation in the world, you can have all the protection for employees in the world guaranteed by legislation, but if the economy falls over people lose their jobs, firms don't make money and retrenchments occur. We had a very heavily regulated labour market in Australia in the early 1990s and that did not stop us having one million people out of work, it did not stop the unemployment rate going to almost 11 per cent, it did not stop the sense of anguish and despair that many small businesses felt all around Australia and very particularly in parts of Victoria, and South Australia, and Tasmania which were so heavily hit by the recession of those years and it all brings us back to the point, it is the impact on the economy of an industrial relations policy that determines whether it is a success or a failure because it is a strong economy that employs people and it is a strong economy that is the guarantor of high real wages and low unemployment. And there is no statistic that I am prouder of than the fact that over the last 10 years real wages in this country have gone up by 16.8 per cent. Under the previous government, in 13 years they went up by 1.3 per cent. In other words, the workers have done better out of the Liberal Party than they can ever dream of doing out of the Labor Party. That is a statistic that I am very proud of.
I am also very proud of the Workchoices legislation. I see it in a very positive light and I ask those in the community who support the Workchoices legislation to advocate and to prosecute the case of the benefits of these changes. No section of the community will benefit more than the small business community. The abolition of the unfair dismissal laws for firms employing fewer than 100 people represents the culmination of a legitimate campaign by small businesses around Australia since the introduction of the old unfair dismissal laws in 1994. I can remember over the years between 1994 and 2006 going to countless gatherings of men and women involved in small business and whenever I committed the Coalition to the abolition of those unfair dismissal laws for business the response was unambiguous and emphatic. Small business wanted those laws to go. They wanted those laws to go, not to make it easier to get rid of good staff, but to make it easier to employ more good staff. And that fundamentally is the reason why we have changed those laws.
And I'm fascinated as I look at the three months that have gone by since the new laws were introduced - they were introduced on the 27th of March - and I'm reminded that the National Secretary of the Australian Workers Union, Bill Shorten, said that the new laws were and I quote: 'A green light for mass sackings,' unquote. The Leader of the Opposition said that the laws would make it easy to dismiss 11 million Australians. Now it may be only three months since the laws have been introduced but the field evidence contradicts absolutely the predictions that have been made by Mr Shorten and Mr Beazley. In the three-and-a-half months that have gone by since the laws were introduced employment has actually risen in Australia by more than 100,000, some mass sackings, some green light. We now have unemployment at 4.9 per cent, which is a 30-year low. Now I'm not guaranteeing that it's going to remain at exactly 4.9 per cent, it'll bounce around a little. But fundamentally there is no evidence that we live in a labour market or we live under a set of laws that are going to bring about or encourage mass sackings.
 All of you, as men and women involved in small business, know that we now live in an employees' market like never before. As I go around Australia, what people say to me about employing staff, is they can't get enough good people. They say there are shortages, not only in skilled people, but also with unskilled people, and no employer in his or her right mind, in those circumstances, would envisage letting go good staff. And the fundamental principle of those changes is that if you provide unreasonable penalties in relation to employment termination, you produce higher and not lower unemployment. And that has been the experience of Australia and it's been the experience of countries around the world that have persevered with the sort of rigid labour market polices to which our opponents are committed.
 Workchoices introduces a national uniform industrial relations system. It recognises that we are now a national economy and I best explain this by saying that when I first started practising law in Sydney in the early 1960s, if you had a client who had a business in New South Wales and he wanted to carry on business in Victoria, he had to go through a process called registering his company in Victoria as a foreign company. Sounds strange, but that...I know it draws laughter from all the people who were too young to go through that experience but it's true and I can remember doing that on a number occasions. And the registration procedure that you went through was virtually identical to the registration procedure you had to go to if you were going to register the same company in the United Kingdom, to carry on business in the United Kingdom as a foreign company. Law firms in those days were all city-based, you didn't have national law firms, you didn't have national accounting firms, the service sector of the Australian economy - which has grown the strongest over the last 30 to 40 years - was very city-centric. You worked for a Sydney law firm, a Sydney accounting firm, you didn't work for a national one and that experience was replicated throughout the economy. I mention that semi-personal anecdote to make a point that we have become, in so many ways, a national economy, the likes of which we wouldn't have dreamt of 30 or 40 years ago. And we need a national set of laws, of national uniformity to respond to those national circumstances.
 But overwhelmingly the reason why we need these new laws is really the point that was touched on by Kevin McDonald in his introduction. And that is that the competition race in which we are involved is unending. Because we live in a globalised world economy we can never take for granted that our place in that economy is assured. We can never guarantee that the position we now have, we retain. It might have been possible in a different period when we lived behind a high protective tariff wall, we had a fixed exchange rate and we had certain natural endowments and national advantages that other countries didn't have. But all those things are gone. And overnight our comparative competitive position can be challenged and can be altered. And each government that gives up on the cause of reform is a government that has no plans for the future. And I know that in any big reform there are challenges. But I believe in these workplace reforms because they will be good for the future of the Australian economy. And something that's good for the future of the Australian economy means more jobs and higher wages for Australian employees. And that is the fundamental essence of our commitment to these new laws.
And I therefore regard the commitment of my political opponents at a federal level to rollback these laws, as a reversion to the politics of the 1960s and 1970s. To go back to a labour market, which would be dominated by the trade union movement, to go back to a labour market, which is based upon the principle that no man or women has enough gumption to negotiate a contract in his or her own interests if they want to do so, to go back to a labour market where you would throw out potentially up to one million Australian Workplace Agreements - because that's the number we're likely to have at the time of the next Federal election. Australian Workplace Agreements in industries such as the mining industry, which is so important to the wealth that we are generating, which is fuelling the strength of our economy at the present time, is to turn your back on Australia's economic future. And there was a time when I thought we had a consensus in this country on the agreed goals of economic reform and the economic future of Australia. We certainly do not have any agreement in relation to Workchoices.
So I assert the positive benefits of this change. I don't see the debate on Workchoices in the context of responding to criticisms made by our opponents, although we do that on the merits and on the detail. I'm for these laws because they will improve the Australian economy. They will give small business the flexibility to take on more staff. They will give us a uniform national system. They'll give to both employers and employees - subject to proper guarantees and protections - greater flexibility and simplicity in concluding their own workplace arrangements. And just as other countries that have freed their labour markets have enjoyed the benefits, so will Australia.
This country is prosperous, it's been greatly endowed by providence with natural resources beyond the comprehension of most and if we can only convert our natural advantages to our benefit, if we have the right, if we have the right economic settings. And just as this Government is prepared to seriously examine an issue such as nuclear power, because a proper exploitation of our energy resources is important to our future, so it is prepared to embark upon further economic reform. Good success and good economic management in the future belongs to countries and to governments of countries which are prepared to push ahead with reform.
It'll be easy for me to say, 'well look how terrific the economy is. We've got low unemployment, we have got a terrific Budget surplus, we've just cut taxation, everybody thinks Australia's a wonderful country, it is booming, I don't need to do anymore. I can rest on my laurels, I can put aside any further difficult and challenging decisions.' Once a Prime Minister or once any political leader, gets to that stage, he or she should give the game away, he or she should recognise that the zest for economic reform and economic change has gone. Well I want to tell you ladies and gentlemen that the Government I lead remains energetic, it remains committed, it remains enthusiastic about further reform to further strengthen the Australian economy. I know and you know that the prosperity we now have is the product of the economic reforms of earlier years. And you and I equally know that the prosperity of future generations will be the product of the reforms that this generation is courageous enough to carry out. And that's why we're committed to Workchoices. That's why we believe it'll be great for small business and that's why I'm delighted to talk to you tonight.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Mr Mayor, my parliamentary colleagues, Guy Barnett, Michael Ferguson and I know Guy has hosted today's gathering and John Watson and  Stephen Parry and Richard Colbeck, the Speaker of the Tasmanian Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.
 It's true that not everyday it's possible for a Prime Minister to visit every small community in this country, although in the years I've been Prime Minister I've chalked up a few visits to a lot of small communities.
 But this is no ordinary small community, this is a remarkable community. And what makes it remarkable is that in the events that followed the collapse in the 25th of April of this year, the Beaconsfield community has displayed to the whole nation and indeed around the world, the true spirit of Australia. And that is the capacity of Australians, of all walks of life, of different views on different issues, to work together for a common goal.
 And the thing that inspired me, and I can say inspired millions of your fellow Australians, was the way in which every part of this wonderful community came together; the Mayor, the union, the mine, the community leaders, the wonderful leadership given by religious leaders; the way in which everybody worked together to bring about a result. And I can't speak too highly of that and when we welcomed so many of you to the reception in the Great Hall of Parliament House a few weeks ago, the common feeling of all of us was of admiration for the way in which Australians work together to achieve our great objectives.
I particularly, of course, acknowledge here today the presence of Todd and Brant and Jacqui Knight. We think in sadness of Larry's death, we remember his contribution to this community, we pay tribute to the stoicism of all of the families. In the case of the Russell and Webb families, the culmination was the exhilaration of their rescue, in the case of Larry's family, it was the sadness of his parting. And nothing touched the rest of the community quite like the gesture of the Knight family in deferring his funeral until the rescue of his two mates from the mine. It's something that really said it all and had a deep impression on the Australian community.
A lot has been said about this event and a lot will be said about it, and rightly so, and there's not a great deal more that I can say on behalf of the nation other than to again pay tribute to all of the community. And I pay tribute to you Mr Mayor, you were the voice of middle Beaconsfield, if I can put it that way. You were the man who spoke for the local community. And to Matthew Gill, I pay tribute to you. You had the ultimate responsibility for the whole exercise, and it wasn't easy, and you did it with calm and you did it with flair. I pay tribute to the contribution, to the whole effort of the Australian Workers' Union. They displayed mateship towards their members, their fellow workers and they deserve praise for that.
 And I've already mentioned the wonderful contribution of the church leaders. I don't think we'll ever quite forget the image of that wonderful bell in the Uniting Church and all of these things just really touched us in special way. It was the simple commitment of people to bring about a result that touched people.
Now Mr Mayor you did mention the $8 million fund that we established and I'm pleased to announce today the first grant out of that fund, and it will be a grant of $4.873 million to the mine. And the assistance will support the mine, the miners and their families over the next few months, to support care and maintenance activities while the inquiries being conducted under the aegis of the Tasmanian Government are underway. And subject to the outcome of those inquiries and in the event that the mine may be allowed to reopen later this year, the assistance will also allow the mine to undertake a number of critical investment activities over the next 12 months to help secure its longer term future.
And I know it is the desire of the great bulk of the people in this community that the mine go on, that it not be lost to the community and not be lost to the economy of this local district. Because we all know that communities need to be sustained by economic activity and it's always been important to the economy of this part of Australia, this mine, and if we can help in a sensible way to keep it going then we are more than happy to do so. And that is the first amount, a very large amount, I think about 60 per cent, the $8 million fund. There are a number of other projects and they're being assessed, and announcements will be made shortly in relation to them.
I think you're also aware that we established a $1 million scholarship fund to establish the Larry Knight equity scholarship at the University of Tasmania in order to provide a scholarship on a yearly basis for somebody in mine management. And I was talking to Jacqui earlier and the terms and conditions of that have been discussed by the family with the Dean and they're satisfactory, and I think that is a very practical way and a way that I know people in the mining community would want to remember Larry. It's a way of saluting the importance of mining and mine management to the economy of this region and also to the economy of Australia.
 And finally I did indicate that at the time I made those announcements that we would examine the tax deductibility of the fund established by the Australian Workers' Union and I'm pleased to say the tax deductibility has been granted and it's also the intentions, as I also foreshadowed at that time, of the Commonwealth Government to make a contribution to that fund in recognition of the role, not only of the union, but also of the work that it has done to assist people associated with the exercise.
So finally my friends, I can only say that Australia is proud of all of you. Australia is saddened that Larry lost his life and we grieve with his family. We pay special tribute to the astonishing stoicism and the astonishing endurance and feat of Todd and Brant, they've become renowned not only around the country but around the world for what they achieved. We admire the faith of their families. I enjoyed Todd's mother's scones as I said at the reception that I would, and the images of that period of time will live with the rest of the country for many years.
 But it's an achievement that belongs to all of you. You all played a role, you are a wonderful community and you put on display better than I have seen in many years, you put on display all those wonderful Australian characteristics, of strength, of compassion, of working together, of forgetting differences, of putting aside different attitudes towards this, that and the other, you are all Australians working together to get these blokes out and that's what really matters and that's what moved us and touched us in such an impressive way.
Thank you.
  [ends]


Thank you very much Geoff, Peter Debnam the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, my many Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals. It's always a pleasure for me to come and address the New South Wales State Council of the Liberal Party. I have been a member of this Division now since the late 1950s and much of what I know about politics I learnt in my early years as a member of the New South Wales Division. Many of the challenges that we faced in those days, although in number and composition were different from the challenges we face today, the principles that must be brought to bear in meeting those challenges have not changed over that 50 year period. And that is a consistent commitment to principle, cohesive response in public to political challenges, and most importantly of all, providing the people of Australia and the people of New South Wales with a vision about the future as much as properly articulating and debating the achievements of the past.
It's impossible of course to address any public gathering in Australia at the present time without saying something about the tragic events that are unfolding in the Middle East. We could spend a long time debating the detail of it, but as with so many conflicts of this kind, two absolutely fundamental propositions come through. And until the international community and every part of the international community accepts those two principles and acts on them, and acts to bring about the conditions that those principles point to, there will never be peace in the Middle East.
And the first of those two principles is the absolute and unconditional right of Israel to exist as a sovereign state without fear of constant terrorism and constant invasion behind secure, internationally recognised and defensible boundaries. And the second great principle is the need for the emergence of an independent, sovereign Palestinian state.  It is worth reminding the Australian public that those two principles have been part of the Liberal Party's policy on this issue, for almost twenty years.  It's not something we've just adopted, we have always, or for many years rather, we have advocated a two-state solution.  The Palestinian people do have rights, they do have a legitimate aspiration to sovereignty, and they must be supported by the international community in achieving that.  But it has to be said that the current outbreak of hostilities has been the direct result of the provocative action of Hezbollah, which is a terrorist organisation, a terrorist organisation crossing the Israeli border and committing acts of aggression against Israel.
  Now I know that there are many thousands of my fellow Australians of Lebanese background who are anguished and in a state of distress and concern about their loved ones in Lebanon.  That is natural and it should be said, and it should be fully understood and fully respected by all Australians, and we are doing as a Government all we can to help evacuate from Lebanon, Australians who wish to come home.  The situation of course is chaotic, it's fluid, it's changing on almost an hourly basis.  But I can say, and the Foreign Minister Mr Downer at a news conference later this morning in Adelaide, will have something further to say about this.  I can say for example yesterday, there were in fact, more berths available on the ships that had been chartered by the Australian Government, than there were people wanting to fill those berths.  So much so, that we were able to offer assistance to a number of Swedish citizens, and it will be the intention of the Australian Government in future days if any spaces are available, they will be provided to citizens of other countries.  And I take this opportunity, of publicly recording my thanks to the Governments of Great Britain and Greece for the assistance that they have provided to Australian citizens wanting to leave Lebanon.
 But I do have to with the greatest of goodwill towards some spokesmen for the Lebanese community in Australia , I do have to reject the criticism that's been made of the Foreign Minister and of the Australian Embassy in Beirut.  I think the Australian ambassador in Beirut has performed extremely well.  But in saying that, I do want to make it clear that I understand fully the anguish that Australians of a Lebanese background must feel in the present circumstances.  Their grief, their concern, and their anguish is totally and completely understandable.
  My friends, I want to take a few moments if I can to talk about our workplace relations reforms.  I want to talk about them in the context of the enormous contribution they will make to guaranteeing a continuation of the 15 years of economic prosperity and economic expansion that Australia has experienced.  And what is at stake here is a very simple thing, and it is whether we entrench the next great reform that is needed to further strengthen the Australian economy.  Today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms.  Tomorrow's prosperity will be, and can only be the product of today's reforms.  That is what is at stake in relation to these laws, and the promise of the Opposition leader Mr Beazley to roll back these laws, and more specifically to tear up our commitment to Australian workplace agreements, will do enormous damage to the Australian economy.
  And I said in China and I will repeat it here in Sydney, his promise to tear up AWA's is a dagger at the throat of the Australian mining industry.  There is no sector of the Australian economy that is making a greater contribution to our current prosperity than the Australian mining industry.  Even the Labor Party admits that, in fact they say that's the only reason why the economy is doing well, which of course is nonsense.  But it remains the fact that the mining industry is the source of enormous wealth for Australia now, and it will be the source of enormous wealth for Australia into the future.  And the mining industry, particularly in Western Australia is very heavily dependent on Australian workplace agreements.  They will go under a Labor Government. There will be almost a million of them by the end of next year when the election is due.  And if we put one million Australian workplace agreements on the chopping block, there will be chaos not only in the mining industry, but in other sections of the Australian economy and we will be putting at risk the higher living standards, the higher wages, the better conditions, the incentive arrangements that are often part and parcel of AWA's, and for which people have properly negotiated and achieved.
  And if the Labor Party does win the election, and don't let anybody imagine that that is a far distant prospect.  The Labor Party is always competitive at a federal level.  If the Labor Party were to win the next election, all of our industrial relations reforms would be killed off.  Because Mr Beazley's industrial relations policy is even more pro-union than was Mr Keating's.  The Beazley industrial relations policy would hand back control of Australia's industrial relations laws to the unions of this country and we all know how eager Mr Combet is to resume control of the Australian economy.  We all know, because he said so, and he can't wait to get his hands back on the levers of Australia's industrial relations system.  Because the commitment Mr Beazley has made for the absolute primacy of collective bargaining means that unions will be able under a Beazley government, to inject themselves into every single Australian workplace whether invited or not.  Now I have no objection, I never have and I never will, have any objection to a union being involved in a workplace or negotiating on behalf of workers where that is the wish of the workers in that workplace.  Nobody can have a legitimate objective to that.  But what I do object to is the absurdity of a proposition that at a time when less than 20 per cent of the Australian workforce in the private sector chooses to belong to a trade union, we contemplate the introduction under a future Labor government of changes to the law that will allow unions to inject themselves into 100 per cent of Australian workplaces.  And that is what is at stake, and those are the sort of issues we must carry to the Australian people on workplace relations over the months ahead.
  Because we have seen over the last three and half months since the laws were introduced, a ludicrous, dishonest, and completely unprincipled fear campaign, designed to create the impression that through the introduction of the laws, the job security of 11 million Australians was at risk.  Bill Shorten the National Secretary of the Australian Workers' Union said that the new laws represented a green light for mass sackings.  Mr Beazley has said that the jobs of 11 million Australians are vulnerable as a result of the new laws.  It's funny about those two predictions, because the statistics, even though it's early days, and  we can't guarantee that the current level of unemployment will remain exactly where it is; the statistics in the early months of operating the new laws, suggest otherwise.  Over the last three and half months, we've seen 102,000 more jobs created in Australia, a 102,000.  Some green light, some mass sackings.  So at 4.9 per cent, our unemployment is at a 30 year low.  The truth is and every man and woman in this audience that runs a small business knows it , the truth is that getting rid of those old unfair dismissal laws will result in the creation of thousands of new jobs in the Australian economy. Those old laws frighten people out of taking a chance on more staff.  We've now created a situation where people will take a chance and employ some more people and if some of it doesn't work out, well those that have been employed and stay, will be the winners.  And that is the natural order of things in business, and every international study of repute will show, that the countries that have rigid laws in this area, designed to protect people, actually end up creating higher levels of unemployment.  And I have not the slightest doubt that as time goes by, the wisdom of abolishing those unfair dismissal laws will be validated, and validated in a very emphatic fashion.
 I've probably used this analogy before, or this metaphor on many occasions, but I will use it again because it does encapsulate that of what is at stake, and that is that economic management and running an economy is very much like being involved in a foot race towards an ever-receding finishing line.  You never quite get there, you can never feel that you've done everything that you'd like to do or you need to do, but you know that if you stop trying, you are going to fall behind, because there are always some other energetic participants in the race, that will go past you.  And the idea that is articulated by the Opposition Leader, that somehow or other we don't need any more economic reforms, the idea that we can turn back the clock on industrial relations, we can turn back the clock on university reforms, we can turn back the clock on health reforms and still somehow or other, have the fabulous prosperity and good economic conditions that this country enjoys at the present time is a grand exercise in national delusion.  We do enjoy a very strong economy, we are the envy of the world. We are where we are now as a result of two things; the hard work and the imagination, and the adaptability of the men and women of Australia, whether they are employers or employees, and we are a wonderfully adaptable group of people, we Australians.  So the first prize has to be given to the men and women of Australia, because of what they have done over the last 15 years.  And the other reason we are where we are now is that as a nation we have had the courage to undertake difficult economic reforms, and if we stop now, we will condemn to future generations, a lower standard of living that this generation enjoys.  And the greatest obligation that the current generation of political leaders in Australia has is to pass on to a future generation, the opportunity for a higher standard of living, or at least the maintenance of the prosperity that we now have.  And we can only do that if we persevere with reforms. And workplace relations reforms and other reforms are all about locking in, for future generations, the prosperity we now have.  We'll be subjected to fear campaigns, our policies will be misrepresented. Our policies will be derided and attacked by our political opponents.
  But know this my friends, in the end, the winner in the political debate and the political argument, is always that side of politics that has the courage to articulate and argue for what is good for the future of this country.  And when political parties retreat to the past when political parties invoke fear campaigns to aid a retreat to the past, those political parties are found out by the Australian public.  These reforms like all of our other economic reforms, are designed to guarantee a stronger, more prosperous, Australian community.  We have levels of economic achievement and success that were undreamt of 20 years ago. But I would like to dream, and all of you would like to dream, that that can go on, and that we can make it even better.  But you can only do that if you take the actions in government to entrench prosperity.  Prosperity doesn't fall in your lap, it has to be worked for, it has to be earned and unless we are prepared to do that, and we are prepared to do that, we'll fail a future generation of Australians.  And I will not have that said of me or any members of my Government.  And I know that you will not have it said of the Liberals of Australia, the Liberals of New South Wales in 2006.
  Before I finish, can I say how delighted I am to share the platform with Peter Debnam.  We are moving towards a state election in New South Wales, and gee we need a change of government in this state.  There is a mood for change in New South Wales; of that there is no doubt.  But we face an enormous challenge.  The swing we needed is gigantic, the number of seats required to be taken from Labor is a very significant number indeed, but the quality of the candidates chosen thus far is very high and I want to say on behalf of all of my federal parliamentary colleagues to you Peter, we will do everything we can to get rid of the Labor government of New South Wales, and to install a Coalition Government under your leadership.  Thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Stewart, Bev McArthur, the Mayor, ladies and gentleman.  I am delighted to be back in Stewart's electorate. I am starting this week of visiting various parts of Victoria and Western Australia, here in beautiful Corangamite.  And I am doubly delighted to be supporting Stewart who's been a friend and a colleague of mine since he entered federal parliament way back in 1983.  Stewart has achieved two things in my view in the time that he has been in parliament.  He's been, as so many people are, a very effective local member.  He's talked about the ring road funding which would never have been made available but for his persistent advocacy.  He's talked about the funding that was provided for the purchase of that iconic painting, which is so important that it remain in the art gallery in Geelong.  But as well as that, Stewart, over the 23 years he's been in parliament, has held consistently to a policy line which is designed to promote, in a consistent, coherent way, constant improvements in public policy.
 It's not much good going into parliament, important though it is to represent an area effectively, to merely see your career as only advocating the interests of your constituents. That's your first responsibility, but the other responsibility you have is to try, through policy argument and advocacy over a period of time, bring about a change for the better in public policy.  And Stewart is one of those people who has been consistent, he's not somebody who's gone from being an economic interventionist, to somebody who adopts a hands off, market-based approach to the running of the economy.  Stewart has always believed in lower taxation, smaller government, the recognition of the reality that in the end, no government can intervene and divert the power and direction of a market.  He's believed very strongly of course, all his political life, in the cause of lower tariffs. That's not a debate we have in Australia so much now, but it was a debate that raged a lot more in the 1980s and through the 1990s and Stewart was always on the side of the exporters, he was always on the side of the producers and he was a very passionate advocate of that cause.  But he's also very importantly, for a debate that we are having at the present time, Stewart was a very strong advocate of having a freer labour market, he was a very strong advocate of industrial relations reform.  He recognised in advance of many others in our party in the 1980s, how important it was to provide an industrial relations framework where individual employers and employees could as far as possible and subject to guaranteed minimum conditions, make agreements at the workplace level that suited their own personal interests.
  He was a strong advocate of protecting our exporters against union thuggery, that's why he supported the secondary boycott provisions of the Trade Practices Act. He was a very strong advocate of taking centralised wage fixation out of Australia.  And as a result he's been associated with me and my other colleagues both in Opposition before 96 and since we've been in government, in the cause of further industrial relations reform, and has therefore played, as a member of the parliamentary party, a major role in putting together a policy that will help entrench the prosperity that we now have.  It is true that our economy is very strong, it's never been stronger.  We have a 30-year low in unemployment, 4.9 percent.  We have consistently strong budget surpluses.  We've just brought down a Budget which significantly reduces taxation and provides, from the 1st July next year, for a major reform of our superannuation system.  We are regarded around the world as a stellar performer when it comes to economic management.
  But we must remember that the prosperity we now have today is a product of the reforms of yesterday. And if in 10 or 20 years time we are to be able as a community to boast a continuation of our economic strength, we must embrace more reforms because tomorrow's prosperity will not be the product of yesterday's reforms, they will be the product of today's reforms.  And that's why we are pressing ahead with things like workplace relations reform, a reform that will get rid of that absurd provision we used to have in relation to unfair dismissals which made it so very difficult for many small businesses to take on more staff through fear that they would have to pay 'go away' money of $20,000 or $30,000 or $40,000 for somebody who was not making a contribution to the welfare of the firm or the other employees.  And there would be many men and women in this audience that they or their families or their friends would have experienced that, and it was the bane of many small businesses, well that's gone now.  And all of the prophesies that we've heard from the Labor Party and from many in the union movement about how the world was going to come to an end, the sky was going to fall in as a result of the introduction of these laws, they're going to be proved wrong.
  But reform is never an easy thing to argue for, but can I say to you my friends that if we are in 10 years time, to still have the prosperity of today and even better, we must undertake further reforms. We can't rest on our laurels, we can't say we've done enough and give it up and say well look, you know, we've done terrifically, interest rates are low, inflation's low, the budget's strong, taxes are down, unemployment's down, profits are up, prosperity is here, it will go on forever, let's all take a holiday, let's all rest on our laurels and do nothing more. That, my friends, is a recipe for some people in 10 years time gathering in this hall and saying why on earth didn't McArthur and Howard keep up the campaign for further reform? Why did they get tired, why did they get lazy on the job? Well I want to tell you the Government has no intention of getting lazy or tired on the job when it comes to economic reform.
  My responsibility as Prime Minister, the responsibility of all the Ministers, the responsibility of the entire parliamentary team is to make sure that everything that we have achieved economically is not only maintained but it is added to as the years go by, and we can only do that, we can only entrench and strengthen the economy further if we're willing to undertake further reforms such as industrial relations reform. And it think it is very important that we see these changes in the context of providing a stronger, better, more competitive future.
 Could I just say one other thing, because I do want the opportunity of meeting all of you and I don't really want to give you a long speech, but can I say that we are living in a very unhappy world at the present time. It's impossible for us to be other than distressed at what is happening in the Middle East. The loss of life, not only the loss of civilian life, but also the loss of military life in the conflict between Israel and Hezbollah is, I know, distressing to people all around the world.
But we do, as a community have an obligation to try and understand the root causes of this conflict. And I am quite unapologetic in saying that the root cause lies with the unwillingness of many countries and organisations in the Middle East to accept the legitimate right of Israel to go on existing in a peaceful fashion. Every country in the world has a right to exist in peace, it has a right to independence free of constant bombardment and harassment and terrorist attacks. And this latest conflict is a direct result of a Hezbollah incursion into Israel, it is a direct result of the unwillingness of Syria, of Iran, of Hezbollah, and also of the Hamas organisation in the Palestinian territories to accept the right of Israel to exist.
And also, can I say to you that we will never have lasting settlement in that part of the world until there's an unconditional acceptance of Israel's right to exist, and there's also an unconditional acceptance of the need for an independent Palestinian state. Palestinians are entitled to have their homeland, and it's been the policy of the Australian Government for many years, not only of course to continue to support unconditionally Israel's right to exist, but also the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for a homeland of their own.
It's very, very easy when a conflict like this starts, for people understandably to say whatever the rights and wrongs are, the conflict must cease. I would like it to cease immediately, but there will be no lasting peace while there is an unwillingness on the part of organisations like Hezbollah to accept Israel's right to exist. Israel doesn't want more territory, Israel wants the right to live in peace in their own territory. And what Israel has done on this occasion is, in my judgement, an act of self defence.
Can I finally say that I am very pleased that as people have come back from the Middle East there have been expressions of gratitude for what the Australian Government has done to get them out. I think some of the comments made last week by certain community leaders were totally unfair and totally unjustified and completely over the top in their criticism of what the Australian Government was doing. It's a war zone. And when you're living in a war zone, when you're trying to extract people from a war zone it's very dangerous. To my knowledge there's been no loss of life or serious injury directly attributable to any alleged slowness on the part of Australian Government officials to get people out.
 And I want to pay tribute to the wonderful job that the Australian Ambassador in Beirut, Mrs Sachs, has done in an incredibly difficult situation. The people that they helped are now back in Australia. We have got to remember that our consular people are still there, risking their lives in the interests of looking after people who are in another country.
But ladies and gentlemen, it's great to be back in Corangamite. I've spoken about one or two fairly sober subjects this morning. The Government is often a very sober thing, but it's also a very happy thing as well. And it is a source of enormous pleasure and pride I know to Stewart and to me and to all of our colleagues that over the last 10 years we have done some very good things for the Australian people. We have lifted the spirits of the Australian people. We are a more confident, outward looking, prosperous country. We are regarded around the world as a successful example of how a modern, tolerant society can build.
 And contrary to what the critics say the rich have not got richer at the expense of the poor getting poorer. And if you look at all of the analysis, I read some absurd stuff in the Melbourne Age the other day suggesting that the gap was growing. If you look at the figures it's not. The reality is that the lower income cohorts have also enjoyed very significant increases in their standard of living.
Now of course in a competitive, capitalist society, rich people do get richer and there's nothing wrong with that providing it's not at the expense of the poor getting poorer. And if you look at the studies, you look at the analysis, you look at the statistics, that has not happened in this country. And what we have been able to do with our tax and welfare policies is to provide a fairer go for some of the lower income groups in the Australian community.
 And the greatest thing you can do to lift people out of poverty is to give them a job. It's the greatest poverty buster known to man giving somebody a job and we have seen such a significant reduction in unemployment. We've seen it go down to this figure of 4.9 percent. Now it might bounce around a little bit, but it's an extraordinarily low figure. And the participation rate, that's the percentage of the workforce trying to get a job, is at a record high. And that shows people are confident, they're trying to get work, and it shows that our policies that provide people with an incentive to look for work rather than to remain on the dole, are working.
So there's a lot to be pleased about, there's a lot to be positive about. The most positive thing of all, of course, is to be an Australian and to have the people of Corangamite represented by the magnificent Stewart McArthur. Thank you very much.
[ends]


Thank you very much Jackie, Mick Dodson, Mark Leibler, Chip Goodyear, ladies and gentlemen. Before going to the substance of my remarks, I would like to thank Joy, once again, for her very gracious and warm welcome and to pay my respects to the Wurundjeri people, the traditional owners of the land on which we gather. It was as always a very friendly and very generous welcome, and I thank you for that.
Can I pay a special tribute to Mark Leibler and Jackie Huggins for persevering with the arrangements for today and working very patiently and toiling gallantly and successfully to bring this about. This is a complex issue and I want to respond very directly to Mick's comments because there was great truth and wisdom in what he said. And there's no point in pretending when you're talking about a subject such as this. There are many areas where I'm afraid Mick and I would disagree, and there's no point in us pretending otherwise. And I've disagreed on some of these things with other indigenous leaders over time. But what I think fills us with, to use the two words that Mick used in relation to this gathering, fill us with hope and possibility, is the fact that there are many areas where we do agree.
 And I think what is encouraging about the reconciliation process to which I recommit the Government, quite unconditionally, is that we are moving towards a greater understanding of the need to work together in those areas where we can agree. There will remain in the Australian community legitimate debate about such matters as constitutional arrangements, the symbolism - and I don't discount the importance of symbolism, never have, it's a question of getting a balance between practical outcomes and symbolism. But there are many areas where we can really make, together, an enormous difference. And can I by courtesy of the place card that we were all given, can I just quote some words that are repeated there, that I said at the gathering in May of last year, when I said that 'the journey towards reconciliation will only be complete when indigenous Australians enjoy the same opportunities as other Australians'. Now I believe that and I think that is the centre-pole of the tent - if I can put it that way - around which our efforts must be directed. And I particularly welcome here today the presence of so many representatives of the business community - and I thank you Chip for your generosity and that of BHP Billiton - and I pay tribute to the ANZ Bank, to BHP Billiton, Canberra Investment Corporation, Centrelink, that's a familiar name, Melbourne City Council, Oxfam, the South Australian Department of Administrative and Information Services and the Yarnteen Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Corporation. And could I also especially welcome here today the representatives of the major sports of Australia, or a number of them, because the role of sport in bringing indigenous and other Australians together is quite fundamental. Sport is so much at the centre of our lives and some of the most inspiring role models within the indigenous community, and there's very conspicuous...one of those here today in the presence of Michael Long. Their inspiration to young indigenous people remains very, very important as part of the process.
 I think all of us are aware that reconciliation is not going to come as a result of eloquent rhetoric or high-level communiqu‚s.  It will come through indigenous and other Australians taking millions of small steps in the right direction. I think it's important if we're realistic to understand that. I think all of us have probably seen some of the television images in the past few days of Australians coming back from the Middle East and despite what some of their misguided leaders back here may have said, they have all expressed profound gratitude at what was done to bring them home. And you can almost hear them collectively saying, this is the greatest country in the world, and aren't we pleased to be back to it.
Now there's a relevance in that to this gathering. It is the greatest country in the world. But in the area of indigenous opportunity and advantage we still do have a very long way to go if we're to live up to the highest ideals and aspirations of that deeply held belief that we have. And today I want to particularly focus on the issue of education, and because I believe it lies at the heart of bridging that gulf between indigenous Australians and the rest of the community.
 And although structures are important, and I acknowledge that, I don't want us to spend undue amounts of time debating structures and process to the detriment of results and outcomes. We do need to focus on the practical application that delivers results on the ground.  And at my speech last year I spoke of a number of things. I spoke of a combination of the symbolic and the practical; of the need to balance rights and responsibilities; of governments, communities, families and individuals all sharing responsibility; and as Mick rightly reminded me, a preparedness on the part of my Government to go more than half way in achieving progress.
 It is important, as Mal Brough, my new Indigenous Affairs Minister has emphasised, we must remember that real economic and social progress in indigenous communities - as is the case in any community - can only be built on a foundation of law and order. And to pretend otherwise is to defy reality.
 Mick has quite rightly called on us to invest more - I won't directly respond to that - but I will gently put on record, ever so gently, that real spending on indigenous-specific programmes has gone-up by almost 50 per cent, that's real terms after inflation over the last decade. And in the last Budget we committed another $500 million to indigenous-specific programmes and Mal has put another $130 million on the table in the fight against family violence and child abuse.
 But we do have a duty to ensure that existing resources are well spent and that more resources will make a difference. I do particularly want to focus on how we do things more effectively in one particular area and that's education. Not because I think education is some magic mono-causal solution for indigenous disadvantage. Educational advancement clearly demands advancement in other areas such as health and housing, employment and community safety. But because I do believe rather passionately that education offers the proven avenue of lasting hope for young indigenous Australians.
 Because education, formal or informal, has been the passport to progress in every culture since the dawn of time.  And in 21st Century Australia, it opens doors to economic independence, to health and happiness and for laying foundations for wise choices and larger horizons in later life. It's not only a path to individual advancement, but it's also a path to social equity. We all know that the major cause of poverty in Australia is joblessness and we also know that the major reason for weaker employment outcomes for indigenous Australians, compared with the rest of the community, is education. And of the countless statistics that dramatise our nations challenge to lift the life opportunity of indigenous Australians, two in particular stand out to me. The first is the one that Mick focussed on, and that is the 17-year average life expectancy gap between indigenous and other Australians. I mean that is the statistic we should all be constantly reminded of and it's a statistic that we should all strive towards removing.
 But the other, to my mind, is the one that Jackie mentioned, and that is the share of Australia's indigenous population that's 14 years or younger. It's almost 40 per cent, 39.3 to be precise, and it compares with 20.4 per cent of the non-indigenous population, that is 14 years or under. In other words, it's virtually doubled. Now that says lots of things. And although that second statistic is not unrelated to the first, it's a better measure of the enormous opportunity, as well as the enormous challenge we have in our midst. And it underlines yet again the importance of education. And we do need to foster a generation of indigenous Australians who recognise and reap the benefits of a good education and pass those values on to their children and grandchildren.
I have in many contexts used an expression in the past, and I use it again today, that I want to see an Australia of all the talents. A country that nurtures, develops and rewards the human creativity within every individual - irrespective of their race, their colour or their background and an Australia where every child has the chance to make the most of their potential. I share Mick's frustration at the underreporting of the good news stories and the focus on the bad. Horror stories do make headlines, while the countless small triumphs of self-discipline, hard work and community responsibility that shine a torch for others to follow, goes sadly unreported.
   Quitsysha Frith, a 16-year old student from the Northern Territory, at one time faced what too many of her contemporaries in indigenous Australia confront - a bleak and aimless future because she dropped out of school. But to her credit she went back to school, she worked every day, she completed Year 12 and was awarded the Northern Territory Remote Indigenous Student of the Year.  She's now making the most of her talents studying a Bachelor of Visual Arts with the aim of being a pioneer in indigenous contemporary art.
Now this is not a government achievement.  It's her personal achievement.  And it is part of a larger story of educational progress, albeit one with which none of us can be in any way content. But it is worth saying that 40 per cent of indigenous students progress to Year 12 in 2004. And that compares with 29 per cent in 1996 - an improvement, a big improvement - but still a long way to go particularly when you bear in mind that the figure for the rest of community is double that, close to 80 per cent.
 The number of indigenous students in vocational and technical education has almost doubled in the last 10 years, from 32,315 to 62,726. Now they're just figures but they're important figures and you don't hear them very much because there's a sense that we're marking time or even going backwards in some of these areas, and that's not the case.  And the proportion of indigenous adults aged between 25 and 64 with a vocational or higher education qualification has never been higher. And the proportion with a certificate or diploma has also risen significantly.
Now a lot more needs to be done but we are making some progress in that very important area of greater school retention and more going on to tertiary education. And when we look at what happens to those who graduate, show a couple of interesting comparisons. The most recent figures show that the full-time employment rate for indigenous graduates was 80.1 per cent, which is in fact slightly higher than what it is for non-indigenous graduates, at 78.6 per cent. And also interestingly average starting salaries for indigenous bachelor level graduates were also higher than for other graduates. Once again, a small snapshot, not something in which we should be in any way complacent.
 But I do think these things need to be said, lest people lose what they should never lose, and that is some kind of sense of hope and optimism, that we can make progress. So there is some good news and we ought to understand that, but it ought to, very particularly inspire us to do even better and try even harder. And that, of course, is where the contribution of so many companies represented in this room today is very important. And the partnerships involving companies, governments and individuals has made an enormous contribution. Because local communities working to support safe and healthy learning environments, with dedicated principles and teachers doing their best, is the environment for lifting the educational horizons of all Australians and in particular indigenous Australians.
It means of course that parents and carers must make sure that their children go to school every day, well fed and ready to learn.  And it also means that there has to be a determined attempt by governments at all levels to ensure that that happens. But whilst the Commonwealth Government does not own or run schools, I can tell you that each of the five bilateral agreements that I've signed with State and Territory leaders has specific education priorities, such as early childhood education, school retention rates, improving literary and numeracy and improving vocational training and employment opportunities.
 Let me tell you that between 2005 and 2008, the Commonwealth will provide $2.1 billion for indigenous-specific assistance to preschools, schools and tertiary providers. And many of the more than 150 Shared Responsibility Agreements that we have entered into include specific education strategies. At Warruwi in the Northern Territory, for example, the community has asked that training and employment of indigenous education workers be provided with parents, local businesses and community elders all contributing to the building of a stronger learning environment at the school.
The Government has also entered into a direct partnership with the Tiwi Land Council and the local community with $10 million going towards building a secondary boarding college on the Tiwi Islands. Many individual schools are themselves doing innovative things to improve education outcomes. The range of activities in remote locations can be quite astounding. Healthy eating programmes, skills education, outreach courses, farming initiatives, linkages with TAFE, and preschool sessions for parents and carers for children as young as two. These sessions all recognise that the education challenge for indigenous children begins well before school.
  Earlier this month, Commonwealth and State Education Ministers agreed on a plan which will eventually see every indigenous child gain access to two years of early childhood education before their first year of formal schooling, which is a very significant step forward. But all these plans and all this early childhood support under the sun will count for nothing unless children actually go to school. And in the Northern Territory almost 28 per cent of school aged indigenous children are not even enrolled. We do need better data and that's one of the reasons why the COAG meeting earlier this month I sought agreement from the Premiers and Chief Ministers that all jurisdictions will now report on school enrolment and attendance levels and we're going to establish a national truancy unit to monitor, analyse and report on truancy data.
We all know that the level of achievement in the early years of schooling has major implications for retention and achievement in later years. And we all know that achievement in literacy and numeracy in primary schools is a key determinant of whether children stay on in the secondary environment.  And the lack of literacy and numeracy, which is a problem in the entire Australian community - it is more acute in many indigenous communities but we shouldn't kid ourselves that it isn't a problem in large sections of the Australian community - has a big impact on employment prospects, as well as, of course, depressing people's self-esteem and initiative. And the National Indigenous English Literacy and Numeracy Strategy aims at nothing less than indigenous children reaching comparable levels of literacy and numeracy to the rest of the Australian community. And as always we must value and encourage our teachers, because encouraging our teachers, as well as, of course, encouraging our local communities, is the foundation of a very successful approach to education.
 I do want to pay particular tribute to the contribution of the corporate sector, to the privately-run Aboriginal Employment Strategy, where banks such as the Commonwealth and ANZ are showing what can be done through traineeships for indigenous high school students. Fifteen-year-old indigenous children in places like Moree, and Tamworth and Dubbo in New South Wales are working one day a week in a local bank, developing skills and earning income with the prospect of a full-time job at the end of a traineeship. St Joseph's College in Sydney's Hunters Hill, a well-known nursery of not only academic achievement, but rugby union football, also provides a model for those who think that obligations of this kind are for governments alone. The College's highly successful Indigenous Scholarships Program brings students from centres such as Walgett, Cobar and Taree to the school community, supporting the boys and their families with financial and other resources. This year there are no fewer than 41 indigenous students at the College and that's an important critical mass in a school community to ensure mutual support and to lessen possible feelings of isolation and loneliness.
As an election commitment in 2004, the Government undertook to further encourage that kind of outreach and under our Indigenous Youth Leadership Program, administered by the Foundation for Young Australians, 23 indigenous students are just starting at some of Australia's secondary schools with a further 26 selected to start at the beginning of next year. It's a good start, but in a country as prosperous as ours, I'm sure there is more that the best of our government and non-government schools can do to support talented indigenous students. And the National Indigenous Council has specifically nominated the importance of children in remote communities having access to boarding schools.
 Can I conclude ladies and gentlemen by returning to what I said at the beginning of my remarks and what Mick said at the beginning of his remarks and that is that this is an occasion of hope and optimism. We shouldn't pretend that we've suddenly solved all the problems, we've dissolved all the differences and I certainly don't romance with the notion that everything that the Government says on this subject has the unanimous support of leaders of the indigenous community. And there remains, quite legitimately in a robust democracy such as our own Mick, the room for very legitimate differences, faithfully and conscientiously held as to how to deal with these problems.
But I do think what a gathering like this has done is to remind us that some of the things that we aspire for we do have in common. We do what to remove indigenous disadvantage, we do recognise unconditionally that as a group indigenous Australians are still the most disadvantaged group within Australian society. We do think that the path forward is to be found in removing the causes of disadvantage and nothing is more important to that than the removing the disadvantages of indigenous people in the area of education.
We can argue about symbols, we can debate treaties, we can talk about constitutional change and as the months, indeed the years go by, and we do that, and it's part of the process, we must not lose sight of the opportunity to work together to make progress in areas where we can. And I think the contribution that Reconciliation Australia has made is to be applauded. I think it's an organisation that does bring together men and women of goodwill. It is built on the belief that if we find areas of common agreement and we cooperate to achieve in relation to those, we'll make a lasting contribution to the kind of society we want, the Australia where true reconciliation is achieved, because indigenous Australians have the same opportunities and the same of life's fulfilment as the rest of us.
I congratulate Reconciliation Australia, I thank its leaders for the opportunity it' s given me and on behalf of the Government I renew our commitment to the goals and the hopes and the aspirations of reconciliation.
Thank you.
   [ends]


Thank you very much Jason. General MacLachlan, Mr David Moffat, my fellow Australians. I think it's great that we have gatherings like this in what General MacLachlan described as a fair dinkum old RSL hall because this is a community hall par excellence. It's small, it's crowded, it's filled with memorabilia and we feel somehow or other a connection with our past and our history in being here.
 And can I take this opportunity, because it is in a traditional RSL hall to say publicly something I said privately yesterday morning to Mr Kerry Stokes when I knew, before it was made public, that he was the person who contributed more than a million dollars to make certain that that Victoria Cross, won at Lone Pine, remained in Australia. And it was an act of great generosity, and on behalf of the Australian people as well as the Australian Government, I extend my thanks to Mr Stokes. I think it's great. It is an example that there are people in our community who do very well and are fortunate and become wealthy, that they use some of their money very wisely in the national interest for a genuinely philanthropic person, and I think it is a wonderful example and full marks to Kerry Stokes for his great generosity.
But this morning I want the opportunity of meeting you. I take this opportunity of paying tribute to all the great community organisations of the electorate of La Trobe. Of course this is an RSL Sub-Branch hall. The RSL does great welfare work as well as keeping alive the traditions of the men and women who fought for Australia. I want to also acknowledge the presence of so many other people who worked hard to keep our community together. It is a prosperous country, we are enjoying good economic times, but there are always people in our midst who are missing out. And I guess the more fortunate most of us are, the harder it is for those in our midst who aren't fortunate. And therefore the assistance of local welfare organisations, of churches, of other community organisations is all the more essential.
 I'm pleased I heard some people saying about the right to work, well the right to work seems fairly alive in Australia at the moment because we have the lowest unemployment rate for 30 years and we've created about 110,000 jobs in the last three months. But I'll pass on from that, and I might say something to the media about that later, because this is a community gathering, and I acknowledge that not everybody here agrees with everything that I say or everything that I do and that's fair enough in a great democracy.
 But I do want to pay tribute, whatever your politics are, I do want to pay tribute to the energy of Jason Wood. Jason knows a thing or two about tough assignments and hard work, given his previous career in the Victoria Police. He knows something about the modern, contemporary threat of terrorism and he has brought to the Federal Parliament in the short period of 18 months that he's been there, he's brought to the Federal Parliament an understanding of those things. And more than that, as demonstrated by the emphasis he placed on what has been done in relation to local projects here in recent times, he's brought an enormous amount of commitment and effective representation on behalf of the people of La Trobe.
 This is a very diverse electorate. I'm quite familiar with many parts of it. Bob Charles used to bring me here on many occasions. I saw Bob in Chicago a few months ago and he's well and he sends his regards to all of his former constituents. But this is an electorate that has got a lot of the small business ethos and activity of this part of Melbourne. It's got areas that place a very high premium on environmental issues. It's got sections which have all the challenges of growth and of providing services for families, it's a very conscious of the importance of home ownership and the aspiration of so many Australians to buy and to pay off and to own their own home and in other words it is something of a microcosm of middle Australia and it needs somebody who is of  middle Australia here to understand it and Jason certainly fits that build. He is a very plain speaking person and he is somebody who does in so many ways, give you powerful representation.
I guess the only other thing that I want to say is to echo, I'm sure, the feelings of millions of Australians that, as we have watched our television screens and we have seen our fellow Australians come back from mainly Lebanon, and despite some rather foolish things that were said last week by some of their self-appointed, and I underline self-appointed spokesmen or leaders, about the Government not doing enough. The thing that struck me and again I saw it this morning was the overwhelming sense of relief and gratitude people had about being back in Australia and their experience was a vivid reminder to them of how fortunate we are to be Australian and it is only when we, some of our fellow citizens are touched by something like that and put in danger that we are again reminded how blessed we are in this country and therefore what a particular obligation we have to make sure we keep it that way, make sure we keep it fair and tolerant, make sure we keep it secure and make sure that we keep it prosperous, and also make sure that Australia stands up for what it believes in around the world.
Sometimes it is easy in these international disputes to duck for cover and the easy thing is to say 'oh well I'm sort of on the one hand this and on the one hand that.' Life is, really, never quite like that and you really do have to have a view. I have a view in relation to what is going on in the Middle East, I don't think we will ever have a lasting peace in the Middle East until we embrace two things. The first thing is that every part of the Arab world has to accept Israel's right to exist behind secure defensible boundaries. The idea that you can regularly argue, as some have, that Israel should be wiped off the face of the earth and to expect that nothing is given in response to that kind of thing is quite ludicrous. The other thing we have to recognise is that the people of the Palestinian Territories also have a right to a national home and what is called the 'Two-State Solution'. That is, you preserve and defend Israel's right to exist and by the same token and at the same time you work to establish an independent Palestinian State. Now that has been the policy of the Australian Government now for many years, it is the policy of many others and unless there is a total embrace of that by everybody, sadly we may end this current conflict and it may settle down for a while but it will come back again because the root cause of the problem has not been tackled. It has not been addressed. Now that may sound a simple solution and in a way the solution to many complex problems is simple. But the hard thing is persuading enough people to embrace that concept.
But enough of that. I am here to meet all of you, it is very nice of you to share this day with me and can I just say again I am delighted to be here, I wish this Club well, this Sub-Branch well, I wish the community of La Trobe well and again can I say what a fantastic bloke you have in Jason Wood representing you in the national parliament.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Terry.  You are very gracious and over-generous and I do appreciate your very kind remarks and can I start my address today by paying tribute, a very warm tribute, to the extraordinary support and persistent loyalty and faith that Terry has displayed in the Liberal Party here in Western Australia through good times and bad, our Party has had no dearer friend than you, and thank you very much.
 I would like to acknowledge Peter Middleton, the Chairman of The 500 Club, Danielle Blain, the President of the Western Australian Division of the Liberal Party and somebody who's brought great leadership skills to the organisation of the Party, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, both state and federal, Paul Omodei, the leader of the Opposition in Western Australia, and my good friend, and the former Premier of Western Australia, Richard Court.
 It is an important moment, the 20th anniversary of the foundation of The 500 Club, and I thank all its members for the wonderful contribution you have made to the cause of the Liberal and National parties in this state.  I understand your separate constitution, that is entirely a matter for you, your commitment to our cause has never been in doubt and I especially acknowledge the destination of the proceeds of this gathering, a great cause.  Federal, marginal seats here in Western Australia, because at a federal level these elections come around with maddening frequency. We have three year terms federally, you have four terms at a state level.  I suppose, it depends a bit, three and four year terms, whether you are in government or opposition. Oppositions seem to like three year terms, I have found on balance, governments prefer four year terms.  But, anyway, whatever it is we have three year terms, we are now past the half way mark in this current term of government, the Government's fourth term.  Elections get harder each time. Winning a fifth term whatever you may think about the strength of the economy, whatever you may feel about the inadequacy of our political opponents, winning a fifth election is going to be very hard. And the electoral statistics tell us a couple of things.  They tell us we have an amazingly high number of Coalition seats in New South Wales and Queensland.  It's a miracle that in both of those states at the last election we actually added to the number of seats we held.  And we did very well in Western Australia. I think we can do even better in Western Australia at the next federal election, and I will be talking to your President and your State Director about the prospects of winning more marginal seats here in Western Australia, and that makes the contribution from today's lunch so incredibly important and special.
 We do of course meet today, in what is the boom state of Australia, the boom state of Australia.  And let me get it out of the way straight away, I know you have only 11 per cent of the population, but you are not only providing 29 per cent of the export income of the nation, you are carrying the whole lot of us on your back.  I understand that very well, and I pay tribute to the drive and the entrepreneurial spirit of the people of Western Australia and the remarkable contribution that the prosperity of this state is making to the wealth of the nation.
  Our economy is strong, it will remain strong, it will continue to grow, we will continue to keep the Budget in surplus.  We'll continue to encourage business investment, and we will continue to have an economy which is the envy of the rest of the world.  That shouldn't blind us, of course, to the reality that, that economy can experience sudden jolts and shocks; we had one yesterday.  We had a larger than expected inflation rate. It gave new meaning to that old song about yes I have no bananas. It's a reminder, I mean, in fact, that is the problem, we had no bananas for a long time, and that caused a spike in the inflation rate. That spike, of course, is going to go, it will pass through, and it's not likely to come again any time soon.  But the other cause of the high inflation rate is high fuel prices. I have to say to you in all candour that they are not going to come down in the near future, the world is stuck with high petrol prices for some time.  Those high prices are due to high crude oil prices, which in turn is due to the veracious demand of China, and of course the growing demand of India, the impact of low investment in refining capacity over the years, and the large number of political challenges in places like the Middle East and Nigeria.
 But it's very important that we understand the context of that figure yesterday, to understand the particular reasons that brought it about, and to understand that it underscores, in turn, the absolute essentiality of keeping in charge of the economy of this country, people who have a track record on prudent economic management.  It's precisely because our economy can be buffeted from time to time by these shocks, that we need on all other occasions very strong and steady economic management. And that will remain the cornerstone of our approach and it will remain the principal difference between our claim to continuing government of this country, and the claims of our political opponents.  Because we've seen in recent days an example of the relative priorities of our opponents.  It is apparently believed by the Labor Party, and particularly by its leader Mr Beazley, that it's some sign of great economic credibility to finally summon the courage to challenge the absurd three mines policy of the Australian Labor Party; a policy that says that there's good uranium and bad uranium.  The bad uranium, or rather the good uranium is in the mines that are already in operation, the bad uranium is all the other uranium in Australia.  It's a 19th or 20th Century policy at best, and I said when I heard the announcement about the possible, policy change, that the Labor Party was merely limping towards basic commonsense in this particular area of energy policy.
 Because if there's one thing that this country must do, in the world in which we now live, and that is to explore and sensibly exploit all of the energy capacity and strength that providence has given us.  At a time when the world demands increased energy, and at a time when this country is uniquely placed to not only contribute to that, but to influence the way in which the world consumes energy, any policy other than a policy that puts everything on the table, including an examination of the nuclear power option, any policy that does other than that is a policy that totally and completely fails Australia's national interest.
 I don't of course need to tell a Western Australian audience how important our resource sector is, and I don't need to remind anybody in this room of the extraordinary partnership that our country has forged trade wise with the nations of north Asia.  If I reflect on the achievements of the Government over the last 10 years, I don't count any achievement more important than our simultaneous capacity to have forged the closest relationship that Australia has ever had with United States at the same time as claiming a very strong and growing relationship with the Republic of China, with Beijing.  Because that relationship is very important to Australia's economic future, and it's a relationship that is not only based on Australia's self-interest in supplying something that China wants.  But it's also based on a recognition on the party of China of the pivotal importance of Australia as a close ally of the United States.  And contrary to what some of the sceptics have said, it's our very closeness to the United States which is one of the assets that we bring to our relationship with China.  And it's very obvious to me in my contact with the Chinese leadership that our closeness to the United States adds value to our relationship with China.
  I can't of course talk about the resource sector in Western Australia without saying something about what has been a life-long policy cause of mine, and that is the cause of industrial relations reform.  We have finally got through the national parliament, a set of changes to our workplace laws, that lay the basis for the future prosperity of this country.  We are prosperous today, we have strong growth, we are doing well today because of yesterday's policy changes.  It's a truism that today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms and so it is that tomorrow's prosperity, can only be a product of today's reforms.  And that is why we are persevering with industrial relations reforms, because we know that if we stopped the reform process, that if we weary and get tired of change and reform, then our competitors are going to overtake us.
  Those of you involved in the mining industry here in Western Australia, know the transformation that Australian Workplace Agreements have brought about.  You understand better than probably any other industry sector in Australia, the enormous value of being able to make workplace agreements at an enterprise level to suit the circumstances of individual employers and their employees. And you know better than any, the enormous damage that will be done to the mining industry here in Western Australia and all over the nation, if it is no longer possible to have Australian Workplace Agreements.  And understand that if there is a change of government federally, that will be the consequence and don't believe that all of the existing Australian Workplace Agreements are going to be allowed to remain in place.  It's already being made very clear by union leaders here in Western Australia that only good or acceptable Australian Workplace Agreements, will be allowed to remain in place.  So it won't just be a question of allowing the existing ones to work themselves out and there would be no new ones allowed in the future.  There will also be a ruler run over the existing ones to see if, according to some self-imposed standard of theirs, those understandings and those arrangements, are acceptable.
 So when I speak of the importance of the reforms that we have brought in, and these reforms are designed to lock in our prosperity for the future, we must understand the nature of the campaign that is being waged against them.  A campaign that seeks to encourage Australians to believe that these laws will represent a green light for mass sackings. That's what Bill Shorten, the National Secretary of the Australian Workers' Union said.  We have seen in the past few days, as a result of the work of the Office of Workplace Services, that just about every individual featuring in the ACTU advertisement about the villainy of these laws, that the arguments that they have used in that advertisement, have only been half of the story.  And when the full story is told, none of the evil attributed to these laws has in fact taken place.  The truth, of course, is that in the three and a half months that have gone by since the laws were introduced, we've seen an increase of 102,000 in the total number of people in work in this country, and although these figures of 4.9 to 5.0 per cent unemployment are going to bounce around a little, the reality is that for some time, we have had 30-year lows in unemployment, and there is no reason why those statistics should not continue.  And there is no evidence, and there is no basis for the claim, that these new laws have made people more vulnerable.  The truth is that the removal of the unfair dismissal laws of the Keating Government affecting firms with fewer than 100 people delivers on an oft-repeated promise of the Coalition, and will be seen universally in the small business community of Australia as an incentive, not to sack people, but an incentive to take on more staff, knowing that if some of them don't work out, they can be let go without $20,000 or $30,000 or even more go-away money in order to avoid an expensive day or two in court.
 So these laws are unconditionally good laws, designed to lock in the economic future of our country and they are part and parcel of our commitment to continue the process of economic reform.  Winning government is not only about pointing to a strong record in government, and also demonstrating the weakness and inadequacies of one's opponents, but it is also about projecting an agenda for the future.  Of being able to say to people, we do have a plan and a strategy to maintain the future prosperity of this country, and part of that strategy is workplace relations reform.  Another part of that strategy of course is to make sure that we exploit in a sensible manner and to the full, the enormous resource and energy endowments of this nation.  And of course, part of that strategy is to maintain the remarkable improvements in industrial relations, particularly in certain industry sectors that we have enjoyed. And no industry sector has a particular Western Australian resonance, I suppose I could put it that way, than the building and construction industry, which has contributed here in this state, more than its fair share of interest and attraction.  And I came across some very interesting statistics this morning when I was giving some thought to the remarks that I would address to you today, and they relate to the levels of industrial disputation.  Of course over the last 10 years, we have seen a great decline in industrial disputes and strikes throughout Australia.  And despite all the predictions that were made, that the workforce wouldn't cooperate with a Coalition Government, that there would be widespread mayhem and industrial disputation, the reverse has proved to be the case.  And one of the reasons of course, is that real wages based on real productivity gains have risen by 16.8 per cent in the 10 and half years that we have been in power.
 But can I tell you that in the building and construction industry, in the March quarter of 2006, the number of days lost through industrial disputation was 5.7 per thousand employees.  And that represents an 86 per cent decline, an 86 per cent decline, on the number of days lost per thousand employees, compared with the March quarter of just a year ago, and that is 2005.  And I would be immodest enough to put it to you, that that may have had something to do with the introduction of the new legislation dealing with the building and construction industry.  It may have had something to do with the determination of this Government to end lawlessness in that industry, it may have had something to do with the fact that having fortuitously won a majority of one in the Senate on a good day, and that is about the best that you can describe the size of our majority, and  I am indebted to Peter Costello for that very humorous description of our position; I think it is due to the fact that having won that majority we were able to get that building and construction industry legislation through.  So I think it is worth making the point that legislation of that kind can bring about a change in attitude and a change in behaviour.
 My friends, this country has in my lifetime, not experienced greater prosperity.  Prosperity of the early part of the 21st Century, is more soundly based than the prosperity we had, great though it was, in the 1950s and the 1960s.  Because in those days our economy was heavily protected, we had high tariff barriers, we had a fixed exchange rate, we had centralised wage fixation, we depended on a narrow range of export industries, great though they were, for our prosperity, it was a great country then, it's still a great country.  But the prosperity today is a prosperity that we have earned in a more competitive environment. It's a prosperity built on industries that don't have tariff protection, and it's a prosperity that is built upon the hard work, and the entrepreneurial spirit of growing numbers of Australians.  But it's a prosperity that can easily go, and as I mentioned at the beginning of my speech, sudden shocks and jolts can come along unexpectedly and can disturb the economic progress of the country unless the fundamental (inaudible) of economic management remain well and truly in place. And just as we were able in 1997 to work through and not be affected by the Asian economic downturn, because our fundamentals were strong, and just as in the wake of the terrorist attacks in 2001, the Australian economy remained virtually unaffected by the worldwide economic disturbances following those events, so it will be that the strength of the economic settings that we have in this country, will ensure that things like yesterday's news do not cause any lasting damage of any kind to the Australian economy.
  Can I again thank all members of The 500 Club for the tremendous support that you've given to our cause over the last 20 years.  We have much to do, we need to win a federal election, we need, here in Western Australia, to win a state election.  That's a joint cause, it's a joint challenge, and one to which I remain very strongly committed.  I thank all of you for your past help, and I look forward to much cooperation and joint endeavour in the time ahead.  Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Michael, Chris Ellison, the Minister for Justice and Customs, Paul Omodei, the Leader of the Opposition in Western Australia, my many State and Federal Parliamentary colleagues, and particularly Sue Knowles, my former parliamentary colleague and the MC at today's gathering. It's true, this gathering seems to get bigger each year. And can I say one of the fundamental reasons for that is that you have an incredibly energetic, dynamic, new, young Federal Member in Michael. And the people of Stirling made a very good choice when they elected Michael to represent this very diverse and growing electorate in the national Parliament.
 And as I look around the room I know that I am speaking not only with people who share with some passion Michael's political view of life, and mine, but I also know that I'm looking at people who as well are in different ways representatives of this community. And I do want to start my remarks by expressing my thanks and admiration to all of the people of this community who volunteer their time to make the lives of their fellow Australians a little happier and a little better.
 Australia is a great nation of volunteers. It is true, as Michael said, that we live in very prosperous and fortunate times. I don't think Australia economically has been stronger than it is at the present time. But that should never blind us of the fact that there are still people, even in the best of times, who miss out through no fault of their own. And it should always be the part of a generous, benevolent community that those people be cared for.
 And we can have legitimate debate about public policy, we can argue in our Parliament and between political parties as to what is the best way to help people, but nothing can replace the priceless commitment of volunteer organisations, wonderful group like the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul and all the other wonderful groups that work so very, very hard to make life a little easier for the less fortunate in the community.
 And at a community gathering like this we should give thanks to the volunteer spirit of the Australian community and remember that it is very much part of the kind of society that we believe in, the kind of fair go society that's always been part of Australia, and the kind of society that I know all of us are very, very strongly committed to.
 Coming to Western Australia, as I do frequently, reminds me again, and again, of the extraordinary energy and prosperity of this State. The resource industry is at the very forefront of Australia's economic growth and it will continue to be the case for many years into the future. The world needs Australia's resources. The world needs Australia's coal, it needs Australia's iron ore, it needs Australia's natural gas and in the fullness of time I believe it will need growing amounts of Australia's uranium. And it's important that we have a mature debate in this country about energy.
 We, at the moment, are experiencing the patent consequences of high oil prices and they're feeding into the local price of petrol, not only here in Australia, but all around the world. We had a bad inflation figure yesterday, no point in mincing words about it, it was a bad figure because petrol prices are rising and the price of bananas went up by 250 per cent. It actually would be funny it weren't serious, I assure you. It's a reminder of the vagaries of economic statistics. The interesting thing about petrol and bananas is that their prices, both of them, have gone up through forces, and because of forces that no government can control.
 I haven't met a political leader who can stop a cyclone. I can't and I don't think my opponent can either. And there's no political leader around the world who's been able to bring down the price of oil. And I'm afraid that the world community is going to be stuck with high oil prices and therefore high petrol prices for some time. And the events in the Middle East are making it even more unpredictable, and the forces of supply even more unstable. Now it's something I'm afraid, in all candour, that the world, including Australia, is going to have to live with for some time.
 The problem with bananas and that associated price spike, that's going to pass through the system and whilst those things come along periodically, they're not things that remain. But the fact that you have those things, and they can cause what happened yesterday, is a reminder of how important the management of the economy over which the Australian Government can exercise control, is so very important: why it's important to have policies that encourage people to invest in resource industries, why you need a government to balance the Budget and pay off debt, why you need a government that keeps sensible control of spending so it's got room to provide taxation relief. Yesterday's figures remind us of the importance, more than ever, of strong and sensible economic management.
 When I come to Western Australia I also understand the importance of making sure that our industry are as competitive as possible. We're having a debate at the present times about changes to industrial relations law. We've made those changes not to attack Australian workers, in fact we've better friend of Australian workers than anybody, their wages have gone up at a greater rate under us than under any former government. We've made those changes to make certain that in the future the prosperity we now have continues.
 We are prosperous now because of reforms made on previous occasions. Today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms. Tomorrow's prosperity will therefore be a product of today's reforms. And unless you keep that process going you're not going to maintain the prosperity and the good living standards we now enjoy. And as I go around I sometimes see people who talk about the right to work. The right to work is alive and well in Australia at the moment; in fact more people are exercising the right to work in Australia than ever before. We have the lowest unemployment rate in 30 years and we have fewer industrial disputes than we've ever had. In fact the number of people who want to work in Australia is at a record high and over the last few months, since our new laws came into operation, more than 100,000 people have been added to the workforce - doesn't seem to me that the new laws were a green light for mass sackings - as some of our opponents have suggested.
No nation can stand still, no nation can ever say 'well we've done enough, we don't have to make anymore difficult decisions and we can just assume that prosperity will continue [inaudible]. The world is never quite like that. And the reason that we are where we are now is because in earlier year's difficult decisions, progressive decisions were taken.  And if we are to maintain our prosperity, if we are to lock in our prosperity, if we are to have the strength to deal with temporary setbacks, like yesterday's inflation number, we need to continue this process of economic change and economic performance.
 And along the way we can also afford, in so many different ways, to look after the less fortunate in our community, and this Government has done that. And one of the things that I'm very proud of is that despite the fact that people constantly say, wrongly, that the rich have got richer and the poor have got poorer, the statistics suggest otherwise. It is true that the rich have got richer because that happens in any competitive capitalist society. But it's not true that that's happened at the expense of the poor. Indeed if you look at the figures you show that the 40 per cent of the Australian, I'm sorry, 60 per cent of Australia's population has had their living standards lifted through the taxes and the transfer payments of the top-earning 40 per cent. And if you look at every income group in Australia you can find evidence that their financial position has improved over the last 10 years. And I think it's important on occasions such as this that that be said because deep down it's very wrong and it's a misinterpretation of everything that's happened over the last few years to represent to the Australian community, the rich have got richer and at the expense of the poor getting poorer.
 The last thing that I do want to say is to return to the contribution that Michael is making to the national Parliament. I think one of the greatest strengths of the Government is that we continue to elect people from a great variety of backgrounds. There's a dangerous tendency in politics now for more and more people coming in with a very narrow experience of life - and that's not a good thing. And one of the distinguishing features of the Coalition over the last few elections is that we've brought in a variety of people with different skills and different talents into the Parliament. Michael comes in with a background of having worked for politicians, but he also comes in with a background of having worked with his family property business, and with a very strong academic background and that represents an important contribution to the Parliament.
Stuart Henry who was elected in the nearby electorate of Hasluck, comes in with a very strong small business background and having lead an industry association in this State. And as we move around the rest of Australia at the last election, we brought in some doctors, we brought in some lawyers, we brought in a couple of policemen, we brought in a general director and so the list goes in. We brought in a social worker from the western suburbs of Sydney in Louise Markus who has worked at the coalface  of helping the less fortunate in our community.
 The point I make my friends is very obvious, that we need a parliament of all the talents. We need a government that represents a great cross-section of the Australian community. The Liberal Party is not some kind of exclusive club that chooses from a narrow gene pool, rather it inspires to get people from all around the community. And we have all the evidence of that and we have a growing diversity as far as the ethnic background of our Parliament is concerned. I think we now in the national Parliament, the Liberal Party has something in the order of six, seven or eight members of Italian heritage, including one of our new ministers.
 Now I mention these things to make a point, and that is that the Liberal Party has never been owned by one section of the Australian community. The Liberal Party has a great empathy with business, I believe in business, I believe in companies making profits, providing they pay their taxes in full, to the last cent.
 I also believe, I believe in competition, I believe that people ought to aspire to be better off as they go through life than they were when they started, that's a natural human emotion. But that doesn't mean to say that we're owned by anybody, we're beholden to anybody. We all know who owns our political opponents, but it cannot be said that anybody owns us.  And I think that we choose people with the energy and enthusiasm of Michael to represent the people of Stirling is a good illustration of that.
 Now, ladies and gentlemen, can I again say you made a wonderful choice in getting behind Michael, he's a great energetic member. To all of you who wonderfully represent the people and the community of this electorate, I say thank you and pay tribute to your efforts. And let's continue to give reality to our belief that this is the best country in the world in which to live and that means making it even more prosperous and even more respected around the world. It also means making sure those who, through no fault of their own, fall through the cracks get a helping hand and are made to feel part and parcel of the great Australian dream.
Thank you.
   [ends]  


Well thank you very much Madam Mayor, Stuart Henry, my other Federal parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. And can I especially express my thanks for that very warm, traditional welcome, and acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which this gathering takes place.
This is not the first time that I've met your Mayor. She and some of her Councillors were in Canberra a few months ago and we had some very pleasant discussions about the challenges of the City of Gosnells and also about the extraordinary opportunities of this rapidly growing part of Australia. She transmitted to me on that occasion a sense of enthusiasm and hope about the future of the City of Gosnells and certainly about the wider community in which this Local Council is placed.
And that is the note that I would like to strike this morning and that is a note of hope and optimism, not only about the future of this community and the hope and optimism that I feel for the State of Western Australia, but the sense of hope and optimism I feel about the future of our country. We are living in very challenging times internationally. I don't think I can recall a time in recent years where there have been so many individual challenges, some of them related, some of them unrelated, confronting us on the international stage. And perhaps, at a time like this, we inevitably fall back on our strengths and we look to the things that are going to enable Australia to continue to be a strong, prosperous and tolerant country.
We are experiencing very strong economic times. I've never found the Western Australian economy stronger than it is at the present time and the unemployment rate here has got a three in front of it, and it's a long time since that's been the case. And the resource sector, which is so important to the nation's overall prosperity, is making a mighty contribution to the growth of this State. Of course growth in a state imposes a lot of stresses and strains on local councils. I'm aware of that, and that's one of the reasons why, in the last Budget, we not only maintained the Roads to Recovery Program, which is so valuable to local councils, but we also made an additional injection of some hundreds of millions of dollars into that Program, which is a Program where money is paid directly by the Federal Government, there's none taken out by the state government by way of a handling fee or commission along the way. It goes straight to the local council and the local council uses it to built local roads. And I mention that because I do want all of you, particularly those involved with the facilities and infrastructure of the local community, to know that I am very well aware of the way in which rapid growth in some parts of Australia imposes particular responsibilities on local councils and local communities.
Now if we look at this rather uncertain world, the strength of our economic management, the strength of our economy is a fundamental. And it's very important that we never take that economic prosperity for granted, and it's important that we always understand the need, from time to time, to make changes and to enact reform to maintain prosperity and to maintain growth. Today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms. Tomorrow's prosperity can only be the product of today's reforms. And those who romance in the idea that once you've reached a certain level of economic activity you can go to sleep and rest on your laurels and not do anything more, are doomed to live through a decline in economic circumstances.
 So one of the things that helps Australia in this uncertain world is our great economic strength. Another thing that is of enormous value to us is that we are a tolerant and open society. We have welcomed to our shores people from the four corners of the earth. We ask of them one fundamental thing, and that is they put loyalty and commitment to Australia above loyalty and commitment to any other country. It doesn't matter where they come from, whether they come from the United Kingdom, from Ireland, from Greece, or from Lebanon, or from South America, or from Malaysia, or China, or anywhere, or Africa, it doesn't matter. One thing we ask above everything else is that they place loyalty and commitment to the values and the institutions and the customs and the traditions of this country above everything else. We don't ask them to forget their homeland. If somebody's been born in another country, it's likely to they day they die that they will retain some special place in their heart for the country in which they were born. But the great success of this country's migration program has been the way in which we have been able to absorb people on those two conditions. We ask of all of them, Australia first, second and third, but recognising that there's always a particular place in your heart for the country in which you were born, and we continue to do that.
 It's very interesting that the surveys that have been carried out over the past few years about attitudes to migration, they actually show that there's more support for reasonable levels of immigration to Australia now than there was five or ten years ago. I think one of the reasons for that is they believe the immigration program, although its larger than it was a few years ago, is under control, and that we are deciding who comes to this country. We're deciding to have a greater emphasis on skilled migration. We want people who will make an immediate contribution and through this country enable all people to feel that the immigration program is now being run in a well and truly effective fashion.
 But that unity and cohesion of our nation is a very important asset because we are seen around the world as a success. I meet a lot of world leaders and Australia is regarded as one of the stellar performers. We've got a strong economy, we've got a tolerant society, we know where we stand on issues.  We're prepared to pull our weight as needed; we're prepared to stand up for what we think is right, even though on occasions it may be a little bit unpopular. But we will nonetheless be willing to do that. And if we continue to maintain that economic strength, we continue to maintain that united and cohesive society, then those are extremely valuable assets.
And the third thing that we have to continue to do as a nation is to remember that in this sea of prosperity that so many are experiencing at the moment, we shouldn't forget that there are some people, who through no fault of their own, are not enjoying the prosperity of the rest of the nation. They are doing it tough. They are falling between the cracks. There are still 700,000 children in Australia who live in jobless households. It's lower than what it was a few years ago. It's down from about 900,000 but it's still far too many and in ways, the more prosperous the whole nation is, the harder it is if you're not part of that prosperity because you feel the gap and you are conscious about it.
 And that's why, on an occasion like this, which is a community gathering, I would like to pay tribute to all the community organisations. I pay tribute to the welfare organisations. The work of the welfare arms and the activities of the local churches, whatever their denomination might be, they are often at the forefront of caring for the less fortunate within our community. And all the other volunteer organisations, they are part of the cement and the spirit that keeps this country together. So to all of the organisations that help the less fortunate, our fellow Australians. I say thank you today.
And my last message is to say to you what a very good choice you made in October of 2004 in sending Stuart Henry to Canberra as your Federal representative. I thought that was a very good choice indeed because he brought to Canberra extraordinary experience. He has a successful background in the small business community and as someone like myself who is a great believer in the contribution of small business to the competitive capitalism in Australia, he does bring a special understanding of what it's like to run a business, to employ people. You know, the only way that you continue to keep unemployment low in this country is to keep small business profitable, because it's the small and medium sized businesses that provide the employment growth in this country. They're the ones that take on the extra three, or four, or five, or ten people and take a risk in the future expansion of a business and involve the recruitment of more people. And Stuart brings, with great energy and great understanding, a very special commitment to developing policies in relation to that.
 So Stuart, thank you very much for that contribution and congratulations to the people of the electorate of Hasluck who had the great good sense in October of 2004 to elect Stuart Henry as your Federal Member. It's nice to be amongst you again, and to you Madam Mayor, it was nice to see you in Canberra. It was nice to meet all of your colleagues. You gave me quite a spiel. It was very, very well put together. She's a great champion of this area. And I said then that I would come and visit the City of Gosnells. You and Stuart both put the weights on me, and here I am, and I look forward to meeting all of you and thank you very much for the contribution you're making to our wonderful country. Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Stuart, I think being captain and playing for the West Australian Rugby Union team, playing that game that they play here, and I think it's absolutely fantastic.  As I once, in a moment of exuberance, said at a gathering for him in the last election campaign: could have been, should have been a Wallaby and it ended up in one of his campaign brochures.  Can I say, Stuart and my old friend Barry McKinnon, my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, Danielle Blain, the State President of the Liberal Party, and can I also acknowledge the presence of an old and valued friend of mine, Sir Arvi Parbo, nobody understands and knows more about the mining industry in this country than Arvi Parbo and it's great to have you with us Arvi.
 And, you know, let me sort of pay my due tributes right at the beginning, yes, Western Australia does have only 11 per cent of the nation's population, and you do contribute, what about 35 per cent of the nation's export in income. I understand that and I pay tribute to it and the entrepreneurial spirit and flair of this state, which has always been there, is really more in evidence and making a greater contribution to the nation's wellbeing than ever before.
 And in a way I felt, as Stuart was introducing me, that I was the preacher and he was the person reading the lesson because he really did give me my text for today when he quoted from something I said yesterday, when I made the remark that today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms, and the prosperity we all want for tomorrow can only be achieved if we are determined to undertake further reform and further changes today. And it's a very important lesson because, the one challenge we have as a country now is not to allow the prosperity we are enjoying to become the instrument of future decline, and future deterioration because there is a big danger that we take our prosperity for granted.
Our prosperity is the product of the huge endowment of natural resources, that's a very big part of it, but it's not the only part of it. It's a product of a lot of reforms that were carried out over the last 20 years. And I have never, incidentally, been reluctant to give the former government some credit for some of the reforms it carried out. In fact some of the reforms carried out in areas like financial deregulation, we supported, and we in fact first proposed when we were in government, and current cuts, they were important reforms. I do of course make the observation that one of the differences between the attitude that we then took in Opposition to those reforms, which was to support them, is in sharp contrast to the attitude being taken by the same Labor Party now that it is in Opposition because all of the reforms that we have tried to carry out, they have tried to frustrate and oppose. They left us with a big budget deficit and then tried to stop us getting it back into surplus. They opposed taxation reform, they've opposed industrial relations reform, they've opposed the privatisation of Telstra, even though they privatised the Commonwealth Bank and Qantas, and so the list goes on.
But the point I make is that the prosperity we now have, sure is a product of our resources and the great endowment of them, it is a product of earlier reform, but it's also very importantly a product of the contribution that individual Australians have made over the last 10 or 20 years. One of the great qualities that Australians have is that they are very adaptable.  Perhaps it's because we don't have any class structure in this country. But because we are an egalitarian society we can work with each other and we can cooperate to achieve a common objective, far more readily than many other societies with which we normally make comparison.
 But we must understand that the prosperity we now have will slip through our fingers if we give up on reform and give up on change. I know it's hard when you're doing well to say to people well we've got to keep making change. A lot of people say to me, John, you've got a terrific economy, unemployment is down, the country is doing well, particularly Western Australia, why do you keep talking about change and reform? The reason I do is that I know, and I'm sure many of you know and fully realise that if we are to keep it as it is, then we have a special responsibility to undertake the further reforms and the further changes that are needed. And that is why we pressed ahead with workplace relations reform. It would've been easy after the last election to have said, oh well look, we'll just tinker at the edges, we'll make a few little changes and pretend that we've reformed it further. But I knew and my colleagues knew that that would have been intellectually dishonest and it would have been betraying of the country's economic future.
 And I have no doubt that those industrial relations changes will over the years ahead lay the further foundations of another round of productivity increases, another round of prosperity. And I know as Stuart rightly said, that if the mining industry in Australia, and particularly here in Western Australia, loses, where something like 43 per cent of the employment arrangements in the mining industry in Western Australia are built on AWAs, if those AWA's are taken away, then that will do enormous damage to the mining industry in this country because, and in this state, because it is those sort of arrangements that allow us to practise the flexibility that we are so capable of delivering.  And the whole idea of our industrial relations changes is not to attack unions, it is not to mandate AWAs in every situation, but to give people the right to make the employment arrangements that best suit them and best suit their enterprise.
 Now in some cases that will involve a union collective agreement, in other cases it will involve a collective agreement that doesn't involve a union, in still further cases it will involve Australian Workplace Agreements. It has been estimated that by the next election there will be more than $1 million Australians employed on Australian Workplace Agreements.  And the thought of saying to those people, well your employment arrangements, if there is a change of Government, are thrown into doubt and thrown into conjecture, will be to create particularly, but not only in the resource industry, an enormous amount of chaos and an enormous amount of confusion.
Now today's gathering I know is something, a gathering that has been convened under the auspices of Stuart's campaign committee. It is unashamedly, therefore, a luncheon in support of the Liberal member and the Liberal candidate for Hasluck.  And I want to say that you have in Stuart a very special member. You have somebody who has brought to the parliament an understanding of small business, he has brought to the parliament understanding of an industry, we need people like that. It is very important that the party that identifies with the cause of small business has within its ranks a reasonable number of people who have actually had hands on experience in small business.  But Hasluck of course is not an easy seat for us to hold, it is the seventh most marginal seat in the country and we have to work very, very, hard to make sure that Stuart is returned at the election.
 And the next election, can I promise you, is not going to be an easy one for us to win. I know there is a bit of a feeling, oh it is a pushover, it is not, please believe me. It is going to be very difficult. We will be asking the Australian people to return the Government for a fifth term and in anybody's language that is a significant challenge.  And although the economy is strong and I expect it will be strong at the time of the election, I would expect unemployment still to be quite low, I won't hang my hat on a particular figure, but I think we will still have very strong economic conditions. But once again as years go by people start taking it for-granted.  I spoke to somebody a moment ago who said he had three children and they've never known any Government, or any Prime Minister other than my Government or the time that I have been Prime Minister. Now, I mean they must be, you know, I guess, quite young and obviously taking a very early interest in politics as well, which is very encouraging.
I guess the point of all of that piece of frivolity is that after a while you, people do take things for-granted and it is very easy therefore an Opposition to say, well look, you know it wouldn't be very different under us, we'll keep the prosperity going, we'll keep the unions in check and all of that sort of thing.
 The reality of course is that the longer you are in office, the greater becomes the challenge. And that is why your support at gatherings like this in marginal seats like Hasluck are so overwhelmingly important.
 The last thing that I want to say is that in all that we say and do about our governance of Australia, we should always put it in the context of our optimism about, and our hope about, the future of this country. If I could, in a phrase, describe the change that has come over Australia in the last 10 years, I would best do it by saying that this is a country that is filled with hope and positive thoughts about itself. It is something I find, as I move around the country, people are enthusiastic, people are no longer faulting and apologetic about what this country stands for.  Sure, there are a lot of people who hate everything that my party and our party represent, and there are plenty of people who would love to see the back of me, I understand that. I have no illusions that there are people barracking for the other side. But even many of those who are barracking for the other side, they do recognise the fundamental strength of this economy.
 I noticed the other day, I suppose a stream of consciousness from Wayne Swan the Shadow Treasurer when somebody was reported in last weekend's Australian, with some observations about the impact of minimum wage increases on levels of unemployment in Australia. Wayne Swan was debunking what this fellow was saying and he said, what he has got to understand is that we have a boom economy, we're doing extremely well, our economy is very strong and our unemployment is at a 30 year low.  I thought gee, he's the Labor Party's Shadow Treasurer. Now I can assure Wayne Swan that that particular remark will end up in an election pamphlet. It certainly will. It might even end up in one of Stuart Henry's election pamphlets here in Hasluck.
 But the point I want to make is that people do have a sense of well-being about our country and I can certainly say, as somebody who's had the privilege of representing Australia abroad on lots of occasions over the last few years that the regard in which this country is held, and the belief that we are a strong country, we do punch above our weight, we do have a very virile economy and we're also a nation that's prepared to take a stand on difficult issues even though they may not be popular all of the time. It is something that has marked us out as a nation very much of the early years of the 21st Century.
 So ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank all of you for coming along to support this great bloke. He's a terrific Member and he's made a great contribution, but it's not going to be easy, it's a pretty tough seat and he needs all of your help and I hope there's lot of it over the next 15 or 16 months.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Julie for those very generous words of introduction. Danielle Blain, the wonderful President of the Western Australian Division of the Liberal Party, Paul Omodei, the Leader of the Opposition in Western Australia, with whom earlier this morning I had a very lengthy discussion about how we could work together to bring about a change in the political climate here in Western Australia. Paul and you will have my goodwill, and my cooperation, and my energy to help you in that task. And I know that I speak for all of my parliamentary colleagues in the Federal Parliament from Western Australia in saying that.
 We do meet here in Western Australia, here in Perth, this is I think the 11th conference I've attended as Prime Minister of this country. We meet at a time of remarkable prosperity, not only throughout the nation, but especially here in Western Australia. But we also meet under the shadow of great challenges. Here in Western Australia the impact of the drought is hitting very hard indeed on many of the hard pressed farmers of this State. And when I arrived here I had the opportunity of meeting the rural committee of the Western Australian Liberal Party to hear first hand some of the difficulties faced by Western Australian farmers. And I took on board some of the very valuable suggestions they made to me about how in a responsible way we might more effectively respond to the challenge of drought. It is a reminder that this is a dry continent and it's a reminder that some of the greatest challenges Australia faces in the 21st Century, are not man-made, they are the consequence of the vagaries of nature and we must do everything we can to respond to them sensibly.
We, of course, also meet under the shadow of a very worrying conflict in the Middle East, I want to say something about that conflict. I want to repeat what I and the Foreign Minister have said on a number of occasions over the past week, and that is that there will not be a lasting solution to the conflict in the Middle East until two things happen.
The first of those is that there must be an unconditional acceptance throughout the entire Arab world, without exception, of Israel's right to exist in peace and stability behind secure internationally recognised boundaries. The entire Arab world, not parts of it, not the majority of it, but all of it, including Hezbollah, including Iran, including Syria and including Hamas, must give up forever the idea that the Israelis can be driven from their land into the sea because that will never happen, and that has to said and said very firmly.
 The second condition is that there has to be an equally unconditional acceptance, including on the part of the Israelis, of the need and the justice in the establishment of an independent Palestinian state. There has to be a two-state solution. The Palestinians are entitled to a national home, they are entitled to an independent state, and until those two conditions are met there will never be a lasting settlement, there will never be lasting peace in the Middle East.
Like everybody else I am appalled at the loss of life which is occurring at the present time. And despite some of the unreasoned and very ill-judged comments of some self-appointed leaders of community groups in Australia, the Australian Government, and particularly the mission in Beirut, has worked overtime to safely bring thousands of Australians out of that country. It has probably been the biggest mass movement of Australians overseas in our history, something in the order of four to five thousand Australians have been brought out. And it's worth pointing out that the berths available exceeded by a factor of more than two to one, the number of people of wanting to come out. And I pay tribute to our diplomatic staff and particularly to the Ambassador in Beirut and her very hardworking people.
  But like everybody else I am appalled at the loss of life. And if there is to be a ceasefire, and we all of course would like to see that occur, it will not be an effective or a lasting ceasefire unless there is the insertion into Lebanon of a large international stabilisation force, in sufficient numbers to be effective, and large enough to amongst other things bring about the complete disarming of Hezbollah. Because unless that occurs, and Hezbollah is a terrorist organisation - let's not mince words - it's a terrorist organisation. It's not some kind of inspirational national liberation organisation, it's a terrorist organisation, and unless part of the mandate of the stabilisation force is the reassertion of the authority of the democratic Government of Lebanon, and the disarmament of Hezbollah, any ceasefire will be short-lived, transitory and completely illusory. So yes, like every other human being, I deplore the death and destruction, like every other human being, I want to see peace restored. But if it's to be lasting and effective in the first instance, it's got to involve a big enough force to be strong, it's got to be a big enough force to disarm Hezbollah and a lasting peace can only be based upon an unconditional acceptance by everybody of the two-state solution.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's impossible to come, as I do on a very frequent basis, to Western Australia without being imbued with that sense of enthusiasm, and energy, and hope and optimism, which has always been a feature of this State. But I find it in greater abundance now than I think I've ever found it in the 32 years that I've been in public life. And as I do on every occasion I address a gathering in Western Australia, I pay tribute to the disproportionate share of the national burden, which is carried by this State, and the enormous contribution 11 per cent of the population makes to the earning of our export incomes, and I acknowledge that. Can I also say that as the Federal Leader, and looking as I do, because we are now a little over half-way towards the next election, I want to underscore the extraordinary importance of Western Australian to the federal battle that is looming by the end of next year.
 There is no state that will suffer more from the election of a Beazley-Labor government than Western Australia. But let me support that assertion by pointing out that the impact of the industrial relations capitulation of Mr Beazley to the trade union movement will be more cruelly felt in Western Australian than in any other part of the nation. His determination to destroy AWAs, his willingness to be told what to do by the building unions of this country, his opposition to the building and construction industry authority, his therefore complicit view that not upholding law and order in the building industry is acceptable, all of those things are poison to the economic future and economic progress of Western Australia. No part of our nation has benefited more from Australian Workplace Agreements than Western Australia. In the mining industry in Western Australia 43 per cent of people employed in the mining industry are on Australian Workplace Agreements. And if you think that all that is going to happen is that if a Labor government is elected, then the existing AWAs are going to be allowed to run out, and there'll be no more new ones, then please think again, because Kevin Reynolds has already told Mr Beazley and told all of us that if Labor is to win then the union movement will have a look at all of the AWAs in existence and only allow those that are fit and proper to continue. Well I'm not, you know, terribly excited about his assessment of what is a fit and proper AWA.
What this means is that the direction of the Western Australian economy, as well as the direction of the Australian economy, will be fundamentally affected and retarded if there is a rollback of our workplace relations reform. I've said repeatedly that today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms, and tomorrow's prosperity can only be purchased and secured by today's reforms. And that is why our commitment to industrial relations reform, the changes that were made and came into effect on the 27th of March are so important. Because unless we continue that process of reform, the prosperity we now enjoy and take for granted will gradually wind down  and begin to go in reverse. And there's always a danger when things are going well for people to think there's no need of any further reform. To say well everything is wonderful, unemployment is low, investment is high, our mining industry is going gangbusters, why should we worry about further reform? It is precisely when things are going well that you have to lay the groundwork for the next round of economic change and economic reform. And I promise you my friends that if we give up the reform process, and the nation will be giving up the reform process if it elects a Beazley-Labor government, the prosperity that we now have will over time dissipate and we'll look back on a period of missed opportunity with very great regret.
 The mining industry, the whole energy outlook in Australia is of course fundamental to understanding our economy and understanding the economy of this State. And if we are serious about our economic future we must be willing to debate all aspects of Australia's energy potential. We have been blessed by providence with extraordinary reserves of energy in this country. We're the largest coal exporter, we're a massive exporter of iron ore, we have the largest deposits of uranium of any country in the world, we have very large supplies of natural gas. We are in that sense the energy envy of the entire world. And we do have the capacity, if we do it right and we do it well, to become an energy superpower. But it won't happen automatically and it will only happen if we use and exploit our resources in an intelligent way. And it will only happen if we are courageous enough to look at all of the options, including the nuclear option. We're courageous enough to look at whether it's desirable to enrich uranium in this country, whether it's desirable and economically sensible to have nuclear power stations. All of these things have got to be looked at. And we have been willing to say that, and you all know it's right that we examine those things. And yet what do we have from our political opponent? We have Mr Beazley cloaking respectability as an economic reformer, because he wants to debate at the national conference of the Labor Party, a policy that was anachronistic and out of date 23 years ago when it was introduced.
 The no-new mines policy of the Labor Party is build on the ludicrous notion that there's good uranium and bad uranium. The good uranium that has absolutely no deleterious effects on anybody, and is as pure as the driven snow, is the uranium you find in the three mines that are now operating - that's special - that really is you-beaut, fair dinkum, nice uranium. But the really nasty, bad, never to be touched, awful, horrible, un-Australian uranium, is everywhere else, including Western Australia. Now a policy more internally inconsistent and ludicrous, I couldn't image. And it was adopted, what 23 years ago as a miserable compromise. The Premier of this State is still very much in favour of it. The Premier of Western Australia thinks that the uranium in his State is dirty and horrible. Yet the uranium in other states is pure and nice and something to be used and exploited. It is a very, very odd policy, adopted as a miserable compromise at a Labor Party national conference almost a generation ago. And yet we are now being invited to believe that the Labor Party is hurtling into the 21st Century energy debate by willing to, be seen being willing to re-examine it.
Now of course they will change that policy at the next national conference - I can't imagine that they would do otherwise - however it contributes nought in terms of facing the reality of a proper debate about Australia's energy. And we must as a nation, if we are to take full and sensible and responsible advantage of the great energy endowments that we have, we must debate all of the options which the Government has been willing to do.
Can I finally my friends say something about my wonderful team in the Federal Parliamentary party, and particularly here from Western Australia. This is the first conference I have addressed since we marked - I won't say celebrated, that is far too exultant a word - since we marked the 10 years in office of the Government. And I said back in March, and particularly at the wonderful dinner that was organised here in Perth, I said that the secret of our success was that it was a team effort - and I repeat that. We have a great team, it's not a one-man band and it can never be a one-man band and it won't be because the value of a strong team is very, very evident. And I want to pay tribute to the strength of the team here from Western Australia. The Cabinet Ministers, the three Ministers, the Parliamentary Secretaries and so on, I want to pay tribute to all of them because of the great contribution that they have made to the workings of the Government. And to all of my colleagues here in Western Australia, and last election you delivered in spades, you held on to all the marginals and you won two more, and I visited over the past couple of days, Hasluck and Stirling, and I've seen the tremendous work that Stuart Henry and Michael Keenan have carried out in both of those seats since they were elected. I want to pay tribute, think Michael is challenging the record held by Mal Brough and Bob Baldwin of the largest attendance at a morning tea that I've been to - Mal's in Queensland and Bob is in the Hunter Valley in New South Wales - he had something like 1092, well that's the figure he gave me, it looked a pretty big crowd and it was a tremendous thing and Stuart of course has brought all those wonderful skills he learnt on the rugby field to his representation of the electorate of Hasluck.
 But being somebody who is ever ambitious, I'd like to give the Division a goal, I'd like to give the Division a goal - as well as retaining all of the seats we now hold in Western Australia - of capturing Cowan and Swan at the next election. And I know that you will bend all of our energies to do that. But Danielle, you and Mark have brought great professionalism to the work and the leadership of the Division. I could not have been more grateful at the time of the last election for the professional help I received from the West Australian Division. The Federal campaign here ran like clockwork and it delivered in spades and it's important. The next election will be a very hard election, please believe me. Anybody in this room who has the complacent assumption that we're going to automatically win, Federal Labor is a pushover, please put that out of your mind. Federal elections in this country, except when there's a huge shift in sentiment, are always very close. Federal Labor is always highly competitive and the next election will be no different.
So my friends again can I thank all of you for the support and the loyalty and the commitment that you have displayed. Western Australia is making a mighty contribution to the nation and the Western Australian Liberal Party is making a mighty contribution to our national political success. I thank all of you, I wish you well, it's always great to be back in Perth.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much General Cosgrove, to Pat Purcell, the Queensland Minister for Emergency Services, Bob Katter, the Federal Member for Kennedy, my good friend Ron Boswell, Senator for Queensland and leader of the National Party, the mayor's of Johnstone Shire, Atherton, Cairns, Mareeba, Cardwell, Herberton and Eacham and especially and particularly to the Mayor of Johnstone Shire, Ian*, you have been so much the centre-point of this wonderful effort.
 Ladies and gentlemen I share the pride that General Cosgrove has expressed in the way in which everybody pulled together in that great Australian tradition, in adversity. Differences were put aside, the Federal Government, the State Government, the Local Government, we all pitched in and everybody worked together to help this wonderful community that'd been flattened by this cyclone. I came here two days, I think, after the cyclone hit and I was amazed at the damage. I was impressed even then at the stoicism and determination of the people.
 And what's been great is that you've actually seen something of a role model for how different levels of government should work together. We've had some well published examples of other countries where, in the face of a natural disaster, different levels of government haven't worked together very well. They have on this occasion. Political differences have been utterly irrelevant, the goal has been to get the community back on its feet. And I think it's worked, there's still a long way to go and I don't pretend there isn't still a certain amount of heartache, I don't pretend that everything's been done perfectly, but I think it's been done in a spirit of commitment and true Australian mateship.
We are wonderful people, all the time of course, we Australians, but we are particularly wonderful when it comes to working together in tackling adversity, and I think it's been truly magnificent. I do want to pay, on your behalf, a tribute to General Peter Cosgrove for the wonderful work that he's done. I noticed he, you know, he couldn't express that sort of reservation about his state having been beaten in the State of Origin. I don't barrack for any state in the State of Origin, I love youse all. I may come from Sydney, but I got to tell you that the people of Queensland have always been so kind to me, I could never barrack against the Maroons, I can tell you that. I could never do that, not in a month of Sundays could I do that, and I got to tell you I went into their dressing room after the match in Melbourne and gee were they happy chappies, they were very, very keen indeed.
But to all of you North Queenslanders, but more importantly my fellow Australians, this is one of those occasions when I just want to say a collective thank you and to pay a collective tribute.
 I do want to say something special, though, about the Queensland Police and the emergency service people. When there's a disaster the police and the emergency services and the ambulance officers, they're the people who are picking up often the bits and the pieces, and they're the only people who are there on the spot right at the beginning and I pay a lot of tribute to them. The small business field officers that we sent, and I think those grants, business grants for small business were a very quick and speedy red tape-less way of getting money back into community. There's only one way you can get a community going again and that is to get small business doing a bit and people spending money and the money starting to circulate in the community. And as soon as you get doing that you're cooking with gas again. And so to those people, and the Far North Queensland Area Consultative Committee, I'd especially like to thank them also for their contribution.
But the local organisations, the churches, the CWA, and all the other wonderful people, the individual acts of generosity, the families that started feeding people out of their own resources before any emergency service arrived, all of those things; it's just a wonderful demonstration of the open-hearted spirit of the Australian people.
The Commonwealth Government has tried to help, I think we're sort of about $237 million and still counting, I think the total contribution that the Commonwealth Government has made in different ways to this effort. But every cent of it's been well spent. There's an old saying about assistance and help beginning at home, and that's exactly the philosophy that we brought to this. We are a wealthy country and when some adversity strikes our fellow citizens, we have the capacity to help them. And that was the view that I took in relation to Innisfail and it's the view I would take about any other community who through no fault of its own got flattened. And that is what happened, you deserved help, you got it, and you got it in a cooperative spirit between all levels government and it's to the great credit of everybody associated with this effort that it has worked out well. We'll follow your progress closely, this won't be the last time I visit Innisfail, I'll comeback again. I've been here before on a number of occasions and I'll come back again. I wish you all well and thank you for what you've done and thank you for what you've shown the rest of the country that the true Australian spirit is all about.
 Thanks.
   * Neil
[ends] 


  Peter and Margaret Lindsay, General Power, my parliamentary colleagues Ian Macdonald and Sandy Macdonald, the Councillors of the Townsville City Council and my fellow Australians. I am delighted, of course, to be back here in Townsville I am, as Peter says, a regular visitor to this amazing city.
It is true that just on two weeks ago, while I was in East Timor I was able to see many of the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces who are based in Townsville but now on service in East Timor, and personally thank and congratulate Brigadier Mick Slater, a well-known identity and resident of Townsville who is doing a superb job, along with the other members of the units that are serving in East Timor. Not only have they restored order, but they have won the affection and respect of the local people and that twin achievement is one of the distinctive characters of Australian defence personnel who are serving overseas.
Can I say that I am particularly pleased to be here this morning, I know the significance of these Barracks, not only for the history of the association of the Australian Defence Force with the garrison city of Townsville but also to the residents of Townsville. I should tell you, and it's probably no surprise to any of you that your Member Peter Lindsay has been prodigious in being indefatigable in his advocacy of an outcome and a path forward for the Barracks that we, in the Government, hope will win wide support and wide participation in the community.
As you know, last year Defence conducted the most extensive community consultation process ever and site studies to help develop options for the future use of the Jezzine Barracks. And following those consultations and strong representation from the Federal Member, the Government has decided to gift the majority of the Jezzine Barracks, and let me give you the details - that's some 87 per cent - to the Townsville City Council for community use and heritage protection.
The Government is going to establish a community trust to oversee the provision of funding for the development of the site in accordance with the wishes of the community and the Heritage Listing requirements. This trust will be established by the Defence Department, but once established, it will operate independently of the Commonwealth Government. Trustees will include a broad cross-section of the local community with Government, military, heritage and indigenous representatives.
 The Commonwealth Government will make a grant of $10 million to the Trust on condition that the Townsville City Council matches this contribution and I understand there's a rough prospect of that, a rough prospect. And that will provide a very generous start to the fund. And in addition, the Commonwealth will provide a further $10 million to the fund subject to the Queensland Government matching that additional contribution, and I can't imagine how they could possibly refuse. I hope so. On the basis that there's $10 million from the Townsville City Council, we will certainly put in $10 million and we'll put in another $10 million if that is matched by the Queensland Government and we are hopeful that that will be the case.
 Defence will retain Jezzine House as the residence of the senior military commander in Townsville and the 31st Royal Queensland Regiment Precinct to house a relocated Army history museum. And this reflected the wishes of the community as illustrated by the survey.
Before transferring the land, the Defence Department will spend about $4 million relocating the museum, repairing the forward area and P1 huts and undertaking remediation of contamination and sub-division works. The Federal Government is also allocating $5.8 million to provide refurbished facilities for the 11th Brigade at Lavarack Barracks when they relocate from Jezzine Barracks. And this is a further demonstration of Defence's commitment to retaining an Army Reserve capability in north Queensland.
So in summary, the land, the great bulk of the land apart from the reservations that I've spoken of for the residence and the museum, will be gifted by the Commonwealth Government to the Townsville City Council. We'll establish a trust, which once it is up and running is independent of the Commonwealth, to manage funding and investment. We'll match the anticipated $10 million from the Townsville City Council with $10 million of our own, and if the $10 million is forthcoming from the Queensland Government, which I certainly hope it will be, then there will be another $10 million. That is a total of $20 million from the Commonwealth. We'll pay the costs of remediation, we'll pay the cost of relocating to Lavarack Barracks, so overall it is a wonderful outcome for the people of Townsville.
We got the impression from the consultations that went on that there was a little bit of resistance to certain types of commercial development. I think you will get the impression from the announcement I've made that that has been taken into account in the decision that we have taken. Decisions like this are hugely important to the whole amenity and the ambiance of a community like Townsville. I thought this morning, as I was out walking along the esplanade there as I normally do when I come to Townsville, and I normally stay at Jupiters, and the addition of this land as part of the public amenity of Townsville, land from Jezzine Barracks will really allow an imaginative development for the entire community of this wonderful asset. And for future generations it is a great decision.
 I do want to thank the Defence Department that patiently carried out the discussions, I want to thank Sandy Macdonald, the Parliamentary Secretary who has worked very, very hard to reconcile all the competing interests that inevitably arise in these situations. And very importantly, I do want to congratulate Peter Lindsay on his energy and commitment to this project. He's had it in his sights for a very, very long time and he's been very persistent on your behalf. I think we do have a good outcome. It's an outcome that looks after the people of Townsville, it's an outcome that will in perpetuity, respect the military tradition of this garrison city, and it's an outcome that balances the different elements of life here in this wonderful city in north Queensland.
Can I just finally say to all of you that over the past couple of weeks I've been travelling around Australia quite a bit. I was in Western Australia for three-and-a-half days last week. That State, of course, is booming because of the resources boom, but you come to Townsville and you experience that same sense of vibrancy. It comes from different sources, from different wealth springs, but it's nonetheless there. It's a very confident, optimistic, hopeful city and it's got a lot to be confident and optimistic and hopeful about and I hope the decision that I have announced today, when fully implemented, and I'm sure it will be, when fully implemented, it will go a long way to providing for future generations of residents the sort of amenity and enjoyment of the good things of life to which they're undeniably entitled. Thank you.
[ends]


  Thank you very much Steven. My other Federal Parliamentary colleague Margaret May. To Bob Quinn, the Leader of the Queensland Liberal Party, Ron Clarke, the Mayor of the City of the Gold Coast, Mr Wallas, the Headmaster of All Saints Anglican College and my fellow Australians. It's great to be back at this school. I recall some years ago coming here and opening the international section of All Saints and I have watched the school go from strength to strength.
And being on these school premises, let me say immediately to you Headmaster and to all of those associated with this school who've been kind enough to make this magnificent centre available to us for this gathering this afternoon how very committed I am, and my Government is, to the principle of unconditional choice when it comes to the right of parents to decide where they will educate their children.
As somebody who is the grateful beneficiary, and I was a grateful beneficiary of the fine public education system in New South Wales, I very strongly support an education system where both streams are strong, both streams are competitive and where parents have the right to choose desirably between outstanding Government schools and outstanding independent schools. And it will always be the policy of any Government I lead to maintain that very strong choice.
The Gold Coast is, of course, a special part of Australia. I'm spending most of this week in Queensland. I started in Innisfail yesterday morning and saw the incredible transformation of that town from the devastation I witnessed two days after the cyclone. The transformation has been truly remarkable and it is a reminder of the great Australian spirit, it's a reminder that when Australians combine to tackle a common problem, our great spirit of national mateship comes out in a quite spectacular fashion. And then to Townsville last night and this morning and now to the Gold Coast this afternoon.
 And in being here, I want to commend to you and I know it's probably a view that's widely supported in this audience and well beyond, commend to you the tremendous work that my two colleagues do on your behalf, Steven Ciobo and Margaret May. Each of them brings different and special talents to the Federal Parliament. Each of them is anxious and persistent in the cause and the interests of the city of the Gold Coast. Each of them understands the growth demands of this part of Australia. Each of them understands the population mix, the need to have facilities for a maturing population, but also the need to maintain the particular attractions of this area of Australia as one of the great tourist attractions, not only of our nation but of the world. And also the wonderful home it has become to a variety of growing and burgeoning service industries, not least in the university and entertainment sector. They understand the challenge of growth and the challenge of success and the challenge of opportunity in the Gold Coast and both of them represent those concerns and those interests very effectively.
As Steven said in his very generous introduction, a gathering like this is an opportunity for us in Government life and public life to pay tribute to the tens of thousands of Australians who in an unsung, often unremarked and regretfully on occasions unacknowledged way, make life a little easier and a little happier for those less fortunate. We are living in Australia in very good economic conditions. We are a wealthy, fortunate, happy, successful nation by any measure, But there are nonetheless within our midst, some people who, through no fault of their own, are missing out. And in a sense, the greater the collective wealth and success, the harder it is to live with adversity and the challenge of falling between the cracks would sometimes occur. And therefore I have a special word of gratitude and thanks to those in the audience who work in so many different ways, through the churches, through service organisations and just in their daily lives to make things a little better for their less fortunate fellow Australians.
It's no exaggeration to say that our country has an esteem and a respect around the world that we haven't enjoyed for a long time. We were always well regarded and I am not so immodest, I am not so absurd or presumptuous to suggest that the reputation of a nation rests upon the performance of an individual government or an individual prime minister. There are strengths and there are decencies about the Australian nation and the Australian character which will proclaim themselves to the world, no matter who happens to be the prime minister or who happens to be in government.
 But I have had the opportunity as Prime Minister to travel on behalf of the nation to do my best to represent the interests of this country abroad over the last 10 years. And it is apparent that we are regarded with increasing respect. Our economic strength is widely admired and respected; the willingness of Australia to stand up for what it thinks is right when it is sometimes unpopular to do so. The extraordinary capacity of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, the great duality of personality, if I can put it that way. They are not only great war fighters when that is necessary but they are also wonderful peace makers and reconcilers. And to see them as I did only a couple of weeks ago in East Timor walking amongst the civilian population of that country, being welcomed not as some kind of group of intruders or invaders or bogeymen, but rather as people who had come to offer comfort and security and hope and friendship to the people of that country. They are qualities that make all of us feel proud. They were the qualities exhibited by their forebears in the ADF, some of whom were kind enough to welcome me here this afternoon and they are qualities that are being carried on in a quite remarkable fashion at the present time.
But we are regarded also for our great performances in areas such as medical science. The capacity of this country to punch above its weight when it comes to scientific research, particularly in the medical area, is something by which this nation is widely known and widely understood. It's easy to get a little lyrical about the good things that this country has going for it. Its economic strength, its international reputation, its very low levels of unemployment and its great economic prosperity.
 But like any nation at any time in her history it is important to understand that Australia faces challenges and the greatest challenge we have is to understand that if we are to maintain what we have, we cannot stand still. Today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's change in innovation and reform and if we are to have prosperity tomorrow, if we are to have continued progress tomorrow, we must be willing to undertake the changes that are needed to bring about the continuation of that prosperity and that strength.
 And we do as a country face challenges above and beyond those that are needed to be met in order to maintain our economic prosperity we face in common with the rest of the world the modern phenomenon of high energy prices. Everybody is worried about the price of petrol. All around Australia people are worried about it and I can understand why; it's burning a hole in everybody's pocket. And it's burning a hole in everybody's pocket in Europe, I've got to tell you, an even bigger hole. Those of you who have been recently to Europe, and many of you probably have, will know that the price of petrol in those countries is bigger. The only compensation I suppose they have is that the countries are smaller; they don't have to drive as far. But the prices are horrific, even by our standards. They're burning a hole in people's pockets in North America and all around the world.
 And we have to, as a nation, understand that this is a challenge that is going to be with us for quite some time. And it's incumbent upon us to look at all of our energy alternatives. It may not be very popular to talk about looking at such things as enriching uranium, or whether or not this country should have nuclear power stations, I think we have to be courageous enough to examine those issues. Twenty years ago, if I'd have been Prime Minister, of course I wasn't twenty years ago, if I'd have been standing here. Was this platform here twenty years ago? Not quite? I see, well anyway you get my meaning. Twenty years ago I mightn't have said to you that nuclear energy, nuclear power should be an option that we should examine for Australia, but I think we have to in the new environment in which we live.
 I'm not saying it's economical tomorrow, what I'm saying is that in a world that is growing short of energy because, amongst other things, of the enormous economic growth of China and India which is placing incredible demands on the available energy sources and therefore driving up the price of everything including petrol and natural gas and coal. And there are great advantages for Australia in that because we are the largest exporter of coal in the world. We have enormous reserves of natural gas and we also have 40 per cent of the world's proven uranium reserves. Now in those circumstances it would be folly indeed for this country not to examine those options and not to look at all of the things that might be possible.
 And the other great challenge of course we have, and I know this will have been on the minds particularly of Queenslanders over the past few days is that we are a very dry continent. It's hard to get your head around it when you've been in Innisfail and the only complaints you get is that it has rained just about every day since the Cyclone, and that has impeded the cleanup. And it was a magnificent Far North Queensland day yesterday and everybody said you've brought the good weather with you Prime Minister, when most of my time when I am in Canberra, or elsewhere in the southern part of the nation, bringing good weather with you is to bring a downpour with you. But we are a country that faces enormous challenges in relation to the conservation of our water supply, and the availability of the water that we have and we need. And in those circumstances it is one of those issues that has to be faced. It has to be dealt with and it will involve some very difficult processes of adjustment for the whole community. We can't go back to the days when we could just assume that whatever water we wanted, at virtually no cost, was available on demand. And I don't pretend to have every single answer to that issue but I do know that the answers are going to involve over time a process of change and a process of adjustment and a process of accepting things that we might a few years ago have thought unacceptable, indeed totally unimaginable.
And finally of course we need to have as the years go by, have policies and responses that adjust to the very welcome fact that as a nation we are living longer and we are living healthier lives for longer periods of time and that is something that is a source of great pleasure to the community but it is also in itself something that throws up particular challenges regarding the funding of aged care facilities, the funding of health services and the arrangements within communities to ensure that there is a fair and equitable distribution of the burden of those funding arrangements under different generations.
 It's very good of course to note that unlike most countries we appear to be reversing the decline in our fertility rate and some of the policies that the Government brought in, in not the last Budget, but the Budget before, and the Budget before that, seem to have been having some modest success. And I think that's very good because we need more Australian children, we need a higher birth rate in order in slow the ageing of the population and also to reverse the trend that became apparent in this nation really up until two or three years ago. And it seems that we are having rather more success on that front, which is a very welcome thing, than other comparable countries. And whatever the cause is, sorry, whatever it is, I think I got that badly wrong. Whatever it is, I think I know what it is, but whatever the cause of what it is, I just want more of it. That process should go on and even though at All Saints in years to come we'll need to have an even bigger hall.
 But my friends, it's a huge privilege, a privilege beyond description and beyond comprehension and understanding to be Prime Minister of this country and there is no greater part of that job and that responsibility than the opportunity it affords to me to travel around and to meet large numbers of Australians in our different communities. To talk to them, to hear their views, to receive their advice, to try and answer their questions, but most importantly to communicate as best I can with them the feelings I have and the hopes I have for our future. Thank you very much.
[ends]  


Well ladies and gentlemen I have come here this morning with my colleague Mal Brough, the member for Longman and the Minister for Family, Indigenous and Community Services to announce that the Glass House Mountains are to become the 32nd listing on the National Heritage List of Australia. And this is a recognition of the extraordinary character of these mountains, first, of course, located by Cook in his historic voyage to the east coast of Australia. They're believed to have been formed some 24 to 27 million years ago and many people have, for a very long time, seen them as having geological qualities which mark them out from other formations of this kind, not only here in Australia, but around the world. And these mountains have been a wonderful attraction for people, it is a wonderful tourist asset for the area, but most importantly, it is a wonderful geological species which deserves the recognition it is now being accorded.
 The Glass House Mountains, of course, have been the inspiration for the works of many Australian poets, including Judith Wright and others and they've been the focus of attention and wonder for the whole period of European settlement and, of course, they have special significance for indigenous communities in this area and indigenous peoples generally. And I know that while there may be debate in sections of the indigenous community about the relative importance and role, there is no doubt that the Glass House Mountains are seen by all Australians as one of the great wonders of this country and this sort of recognition is entirely appropriate and I know will be very widely welcomed.
I would like to thank many people, including, but not only, Mr and Mrs Hodge who I have just meet, for the way in which they have campaigned for this listing over a long period of time and I would also like to thank Mal Brough, the local member who lives not too far from here, and I can well understand why, for his energy and commitment to bringing about today's announcement. It is one of the ways in which we recognise our natural wonders as well as, of course, man-made achievements.
 So I have very great pleasure in saying, number 32 on that list is the Glass House Mountains and I am sure it is an announcement which will be very widely applauded.
Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very much Giam, to John Azarias and to everybody, to Michael and Shanny Crouch, many of my parliamentary colleagues and lots of friends and lots of very philanthropic people, as I look around this room, from every table I see very generous, beaming, familiar faces.
I just wanted to make a few brief remarks about the coalition. I don't mean the Liberal Party and the National Party. I mean the social coalition which is a theme which I think is very much in evidence tonight.
It is something that I have talked about in the 10 years that I have been Prime Minister and this is this idea that if you want something done, what you should try and do is mobilise, first of all the coalface experts, the people who understand the problem and know how to solve it and have the experienced, on-the-ground capacity to do so; that is the first part of the coalition.
 The second part of the coalition is to persuade the Government to provide its meagre resources to assist. The third part of the coalition is to get people who may not necessarily be experts on the ground, but have a great deal of public spirited commitment to helping people who are less fortunate than themselves, or in need of something. The final thing of course is that you mobilise the support of the business community to provide the sinews of war, financial support and so on.
I think it is a notion that has gathered a great deal of additional support over recent years and one of the pieces of conventional wisdom that I always see challenged at gatherings like this is the notion that, yes we live in a very prosperous period and we are by world standards a very successful, wealthy, high living standard country and I am very happy for people to say that and because it is true, but the corollary so often is from the cynics that yes we have become wealthier but we've become meaner, we've become less sensitive to good causes. Actually the field evidence is completely the contrary. Hand in hand with the burgeoning wealth and prosperity of Australia over the last decade or more has been a growth in corporate philanthropy and it is evident here tonight.
But of course what we are supporting tonight is a unique Australian institution. You wouldn't get anything else like the Royal Flying Doctor Service anywhere else in the world. You wouldn't get anything like the School of the Air. They are two things that are in the minds of all of us who grew up in Australia and obviously others who've come to our country to make such a fantastic contribution. They are things that are so quintessentially Australian and as a child I thought of the Royal Flying Doctor Service, I read the stories of the Reverend John Flynn, and Janet McDonald reminded me of his wonderful expression, 'the mantle of safety' that he wanted to put across the sparse areas of Australia and the notion as we look back on it now, it seems so simple, and so compelling, and so predictable, but of course in the days in which he put it together, it was the early days of aviation in Australia.
It was a pioneering concept and I think the idea that brought it all about was a suggestion that was made to him from an Australian soldier at the front in World War I who wrote to him with the suggestion and it all came together and it has received some wonderful support over the years from absolutely fantastic people and that is really what we are here tonight to further and to promote.
 The other thing that it tells us is another story about ourselves and that is the incredible capacity to improvise and the incredible capacity of Australians to find a pragmatic, resourceful solution to a problem.
 We pride ourselves on certain national characteristics and one of them of course is that we are very creative because we were forced through circumstance through  the distance and the physical isolation to think of ways of tackling problems that other countries simply didn't have to because everybody, particularly in Europe, lived cheek by jowl, and one of the reasons why the records suggest that we had an incredibly large number of inventions in the 19th century for our size is precisely because were thrown back on our resources in an isolated community.
So when you support the Royal Flying Doctor Service you are not only supporting a wonderful cause that cares for the medical emergencies of people in the remote parts of our country on a 24 hour-a-day, seven day-a-week, 365 days-of-the-year basis. You are also supporting something that is an Australian icon. I know that expression is used far too much and most of the occasions when it is used it inappropriate, but it is appropriate to call the Royal Flying Doctor Service an Australian icon and I want to congratulate Deloitte for the generosity, of supporting this out of its foundation, it is a wonderful example of corporate philanthropy.
Can I congratulate a very good and longstanding friend of mine in Michael Crouch. Michael and I have known each other for many, many years and he's a person who has made an extraordinary contribution to this city. He has run and expanded a wonderful manufacturing business and in the changing economic environment of this country, with less tariff protection and a greater reliance on exports to continue to succeed in small to medium size manufacturing, it would be no easy task and most of the manufacturers, or many manufacturers, I won't say most, that I speak to over the years have sort of lamented the chance in circumstances for manufacturing because of different attitudes to things like protection. Michael has seen so much of this as being a challenge. He has always found time to help good causes in so many ways and your Chairmanship of the Friends is a great example of that.
The Federal Government, if I can be forgiven, just a very, very brief gentle commercial, the Federal Government does, of course provide $21 million a year in ongoing recurrent funding. My Treasury-inspired minute - the Treasury sort of always reminds you of these things when they give you briefing, these and the implication being, 'well that is quite a lot Prime Minister, I hope you are not proposing to make it any higher are you?' But you know, God bless them, you have got to have somebody who bells the cat on profligate ministers otherwise we wouldn't have that very, very handsome surplus that we have, which of course means that we can run a better managed and better balanced monetary policy. Now I won't get into that detail, but I just thought that I would throw that in along the way.
But that really is all that I wanted to say, it is a terrific cause, the Royal Flying Doctor Service, it does an invaluable service, it also is a very rewarding satisfying totally Australian cause. You can't think of it in the context of any other country. You think of that wonderful man, John Flynn whose service to the people of outback Australia is etched not only in the experience of the Presbyterian Church, but also in the wonderful work that he did for so many people and I have visited on a couple of occasions a memorial to him in parts of central Australia and it really is a wonderful and inspiring story and the Royal Flying Doctor Service is a wonderful monument to his energy and his vision and it's a cause well worth even more support, thank you.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much. Mr Leon Davis, Chairman of Westpac, Dr David Morgan, the Chief Executive Officer, the directors of the bank, ladies and gentlemen. As a modest, but nonetheless faithful and long-standing customer of the bank, I am delighted to be given the privilege of opening this magnificent new building that will concentrate so many of the administrative and other activities of the bank in one place. It will bring a modern congenial environment to the employees of the bank and it is a further demonstration of the extraordinary success of this financial institution in the contemporary, deregulated, prosperous environment of the early years of the 21st Century.
This bank, of course, is Australia's oldest in so many ways. It's been a witness to some famous events in Australian history. Its Jerilderie branch was, of course, held up by the Kelly Gang, and importantly in a political financial context, the Old Bank of New South Wales played an historic role in the fight against bank nationalisation in the late 1940s. And it was written, and I'm sure it must be roughly correct, that when that case was finally battled out before the judicial committee of the Privy Council, council for the private banks, I think led by the late Sir Garfield Barwick, addressed the board as it was called for some days, only exceeded by Dr Evatt, who appeared for the Commonwealth and who addressed them for an even longer period of time.
 But that was a seminal moment in the history of banking in this country because if nationalisation had proceeded, the course of financial regulation and experience would have been altered forever. On a personal note again, I recall as Treasurer being informed by Bob White, who was then the Managing Director of the old Bank of New South Wales, of the new name. I'd rather foolishly romanced in the idea that maybe you could call it The Wales or maybe you could somehow or rather preserve a connection as a lot of customers at that time did. And this Westpac seemed to me at first a strange break from the past, but look how extraordinarily successful it's been.
And it encapsulated, of course, in its broader iteration, the notion of the Western-Pacific economic area, and of course that's so much where our future has been. We think of, well the future as looked at from the vantage point of 1982, we think of the enormous involvement this country now has in the whole Asia Pacific region. So the people who devised that name showed great foresight and great wisdom in choosing something that was not only new and different, but also distinctive and very perspicacious.
I want to take the opportunity of applauding the contribution that Westpac makes to the acceptance by major corporations of social responsibility and a commitment to partnerships in providing assistance to the less fortunate in our community. Hand in hand with greater wealth over the last 10 or 15 years has come a greater sense of social obligation by a growing number of corporations. It is not true that as we have got wealthier we have become meaner. The critics say that but the reality defies it. The level of philanthropy has expanded, the level of personal giving has expanded and although the rich have got richer, which always happens in a competitive capitalist society that we all believe in, it is not true that they have got richer at the expense of the poor getter poorer because living standards for different cohorts have risen. Not always proportionately, but they have risen.
So it is important to pay tribute to Westpac's contribution. It's not realistic for me, opening a bank in this thriving financial centre of Australia, without of course saying one or two words about economic conditions. They've been in the news a bit this week, and I don't know how many learned writers have said in various forms that we must always keep a sense of perspective about events. And I think it is important that we keep a sense of perspective about the economic strength and the economic health of our nation in 2006.
 It is true, as I saw a very esteemed columnist write this week, and I have to be very careful in referring to esteemed columnists because some people have got into trouble doing that in recent days, but one esteemed columnist did write that we should not romance the idea that at a time of economic prosperity we should expect all news to be good news. And that is true, we can't. Nobody pretends, certainly least of all the Prime Minister, that increases in interest rates, particularly affecting home borrowers, represent good news as broadly defined, they certainly don't. But they do represent in this particular case the reality of a situation and a decision made by a central bank which I believe, and led by a governor who I think has done an outstanding job over the last decade, a central bank that has brought great continuity and great stability to economic development over the past decade.
We do have a very strong economy. Some have described it as a miracle economy, however exuberant that expression maybe, certainly measured by comparison with other nations, it clearly is a very strongly performing economy, and the wealth and the strength is very broadly based. And that I might remind you has been endorsed this week by two statements. One by the Reserve Bank statement accompanying the interest rate announcement, which certified to the ongoing strength, indeed even attributed much of the explanation for the decision to that strength, and also the frequent country report issued by the OECD, which pointed to the very considerable strengths of the Australian economy.
I think it's important for those who analyse monetary policy in Australia at the present time to remember something that is occasionally forgotten, and that is in these days of very strong fiscal surpluses, and very strong fiscal policy where there is no net debt, a remarkable achievement, monetary policy is carrying far less of the burden of economic adjustment and economic management than used to be the case. There was a time I think when the conduct of monetary policy was described as a swing instrument, in other words suggesting that it played a far more dominant role than perhaps it ought. And the fact that we do have very strong fiscal surpluses, and the fact that those surpluses are more transparent than use to be the case, then I think that points to a greater equilibrium between the different aspects of economic policy and means that less weight must necessarily be carried by monetary policy.
 And what matters and what gives people confidence in economic management is consistent predicable management over a period of time. That is what the Government has tried to do, it's what the Government will continue to do, it is what the Reserve Bank in my view has done over the past decade. And it's a decade in which we have all enjoyed enormous prosperity, it's a decade that has seen the full follow through, if you like, of the benefits of financial deregulation.
 When Westpac was formed we had still a very heavily regulated economy. We still had controlled interest rates, we still had a crawling peg arrangement for fixing the exchange rate and we still had heavy exchange controls. And all of that has gone, and as I have frequently said, credit is due to both sides of politics in Australia for those changes having been made.
So ladies and gentlemen this is an important occasion for the bank, it's an important reaffirmation of the contribution that this great institution has made to the common wealth, and I like that expression, of the Australian people. And can I say to Leon and to David, that the leadership that they give to this institution has been fully repaid in the confidence and respect in which it is held, and the quiet satisfaction of one of its more modest and occasionally conspicuous depositors. I have very great pleasure in declaring Westpac House open.
Thank you.
  [ends]


The purpose of this Statement is to inform the House of the Government's decision to send to Afghanistan an additional 150 troops of the ADF to reinforce the Reconstruction Task Force and to provide enhanced force protection.  The Statement will also provide the Parliament with the Government's latest assessment of the security situation in Afghanistan and the challenges facing the Karzai Government and the Coalition.
The Afghan people are working to achieve stability, peace and democracy, after many years of violence and extremism.  For Afghanistan, the path to security will be long and hard, with many challenges lying ahead.  But Afghanistan will not have to face these challenges alone.  Australia, along with many others in the international community, is there to assist the Afghan people.
 We have already witnessed what happens when the global community turns its back on extremism.  Afghanistan was neglected for too long, condemning the Afghan people to decades of war and poverty.  But the world is now much more aware of the dangers of ignoring extremism and fundamentalism.  The stability of Afghanistan has wider implications for global security and it is for this reason that the Australian Government is committed to ensuring that Afghanistan achieves long term peace.
  Afghanistan's social indicators remain sobering.  At 46 years, Afghan life expectancy is one of the world's lowest, and at least 20 years lower than that of all Afghanistan's neighbours.  One in five children still die before the age of five, and the country has some of the world's lowest literacy rates.  In addition, 3.4 million Afghans remain outside their country and there is much room for improvement in the country's human rights situation.
Afghanistan is still one of the world's poorest countries.  Decades of war destroyed much of the country's infrastructure and severely disrupted economic activity, including in agriculture.  Criminal and terrorist activity continues to hamper economic growth, and the expansion of the drug trade remains of very deep concern.  Sustained economic growth will be required to make a significant dent in the country's chronic poverty.
These problems are complex and will not be solved quickly.  But Australia cannot and will not abandon Afghanistan.  We need to remain committed to supporting this fledgling democracy.
Through our aid programme we are working with Afghans, international organisations including the United Nations, and our other international partners to support Afghanistan's transition from conflict to stability, peace and democracy.
  At the London Conference in January 2006 the Government committed $55 million in development assistance to Afghanistan through to 2007.  This is part of a commitment of up to $150 million over the next five years.  These funds will go towards improving security, rebuilding institutions, protecting human rights, especially for women and girls, and improving the delivery of essential services to ordinary Afghans.  It builds on the $110 million we have disbursed since 2001 to assist in reconstruction and development.
Our efforts, and those of our coalition partners, are bearing fruit.  Afghans have embraced democracy and open, democratic institutions are developing.  Afghanistan now has a democratic constitution and a democratically elected president and parliament.  The country's first parliamentary elections in 30 years were held in September 2005.  6.4 million Afghans, representing over 50 per cent of registered voters, turned out to elect representatives to the Lower House, and the 34 provincial councils.
  In an encouraging sign for the inclusiveness of Afghanistan's burgeoning civil society, women featured prominently in these elections.  68 women were elected to the Lower House, taking 27 per cent of available seats.  121 women were elected to provincial councils, representing almost 30 per cent of available seats at this level.
 The Afghan Government has made education of women and girls a priority in an effort to overcome the legacy of the Taliban.  With the entry of women into Afghanistan's parliament and provincial councils, Afghans now have an additional opportunity to address the injustices of the past.
  Just as democracy is becoming more deeply rooted in Afghanistan, economic recovery is providing new economic opportunities.  Real GDP is expected to grow by almost 12 per cent in 2006.  This builds on strong growth rates over the past few years, even if from a low base.
The ordinary people of Afghanistan are benefiting directly from these developments.  Since the fall of the Taliban in 2001 a UNICEF immunisation programme has vaccinated over 2.3 million children under the age of five against polio, almost eradicating that disease.
  The indicators of progress in Afghanistan are promising, but significant challenges remain.  Afghan society is still predominantly rural in character and the country's democratic institutions, though developing, remain fragile.  And the struggle against extremists continues.
 The level of violence has increased in Afghanistan in recent months as the Taliban and other terrorist groups, including Al Qaida, seek to chip away at the credibility of the Afghan government and prevent reconstruction taking place.  Security beyond Kabul, particularly in the east and south, is the worst since the Taliban fell.  Suicide bombings have increased.
Australia, as the House will know, made a significant contribution to Coalition operations in Afghanistan following the terrorist attacks on New York in Washington in September 2001.  With the completion of that particular task, our forces returned home, with the thanks of all Australians.  It is worth noting in light of the negative and opportunistic comments now being made by some in the Opposition that at the time that decision was made the then Leader of the Opposition, Mr Crean, warmly welcomed the Government's decision, arguing that it was a vindication of his call for Australia to fight terrorism closer to home, in our region, in Australia.  They were the words of the then Leader of the Opposition, welcoming the Government's decision to bring home our forces then, and it gives the lie to the opportunistic comment emanating, as is apparent from his interjection, from the Member for Griffith at this time.
 Following a reassessment of the security situation in Afghanistan by the Coalition in 2005, the Government decided to again send troops to Afghanistan.  We now have about 200 personnel serving in the Special Forces Task Group in Afghanistan.  This Task Group is providing reconnaissance, surveillance and other specialised capabilities to the Coalition's operations against Al Qaida and the Taliban, who continue to threaten Afghanistan's fragile stability.  In dangerous circumstances, the Special Forces have, as always, done a magnificent job.
Two ADF Chinook helicopters and about 110 personnel are also currently operating in Afghanistan.  This capability provides aero-medical evacuation, air mobility and logistic support to Australian troops and Coalition partners.  As I announced in May, the Chinooks will continue to operate in Afghanistan until April 2007 providing vital airlift support.
But the struggle against the Taliban and its fundamentalist allies is far from over.  The international community, including Australia, continues to have a crucial role to play in assisting the Afghan government meet its security challenges.  The security challenge is twofold:  first to provide a secure environment to allow Afghans to rebuild their society free from violence and extremism;  and secondly to strengthen Afghanistan's institutions so that they can provide a stronger framework for democratisation, religious tolerance and economic growth.
 Of course, the two elements are linked.   Removal of the immediate dangers facing the Afghan people is essential, but so too is ensuring that Afghanistan has the infrastructure and institutions to support its democratically elected government and dealing with those who may attempt to threaten Afghanistan's democracy and security in the future.  It is because of this that the Australian Government has committed an ADF Reconstruction Task Force to support the Netherlands led Provincial Reconstruction Team.  The ADF will work with the Netherlands as part of Phase III of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force expansion into southern Afghanistan.
  This Reconstruction Task Force will work in Oruzgan Province, in southern Afghanistan, on reconstruction and community based projects with the aim of building the long-term viability of Afghan communities.  The Task Force will undertake construction projects, provide project management skills, and deliver trade training for the local population.  These activities will ensure that the benefits of the deployment continue long after our personnel have returned.
The Reconstruction Task Force will be in Afghanistan at the invitation of the Government of Afghanistan.  It will work in Oruzgan for a period of two years.
  The Reconstruction Task Force will perform a vital role in what is a dangerous environment.  The Government is aware of the risks faced by the Australian Defence Force in Afghanistan and is committed to ensuring that the Reconstruction Task Force is fully equipped and resourced to conduct this highly important task.
 After careful consideration, the Government has decided to increase the size of the Reconstruction Task Force from 240 personnel to 270.  This will enhance the security, robustness and flexibility of the Task Force.
 The Government has also decided that the Reconstruction Task Force deployment will include an infantry company group of about 120 personnel to provide enhanced force protection.  After six months, the security situation in Oruzgan will be reviewed and the Task Force structure will be reconsidered in the light of that review.
The additional deployments will bring the total Reconstruction Task Force strength to approx 400.
 The Reconstruction Task Force will be made up of a number of elements - command, security and protection, engineering, administrative support and tactical intelligence services.  The force will be equipped with a number of Bushmaster Infantry Mobility Vehicles and a number of Australian Light Armoured Vehicles (ASLAVs).  The Reconstruction Task Force will be drawn primarily from the 1st Brigade in Darwin and will be under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Mick Ryan.
The Australian Task Force will have its own headquarters and will operate under the national command of Australia's Joint Task Force in the Middle East Area of Operations.  ADF units and personnel deployed in Afghanistan remain under Australian national command.
The Reconstruction Task Force will work closely with the Netherlands and other NATO partners.  The Government is very pleased with Dutch planning and preparations and very impressed with the military capability of the Dutch forces that are being deployed to Afghanistan.  We are very confident that we will be able to work closely with them.
Advance elements of the Reconstruction Task Force will start to deploy into Afghanistan during this August to commence preparation of base facilities and logistic support infrastructure.  These elements will be followed by the majority of the Reconstruction Task Force deploying in September with the final elements expected to deploy in November of this year.
  Afghanistan remains a dangerous place, and any military operation conducted there carries significant risks.  The possibility of ADF casualties cannot be discounted.  I ask all Australians to support the members of the Australian Defence Force who are serving their country by helping to create an environment of security and stability in Afghanistan.  I understand that this is a difficult time for them and their families and I ask all of you to keep these brave and dedicated men and women in your thoughts and prayers.


  PRIME MINISTER:
Ladies and gentlemen, I would first of all like to thank the partners of the Mosman Practice for allowing us in on this beautiful Sunday morning in the wonderful electorate of Warringah to use their premises to launch this very exciting new opportunity which demonstrates that the Coalition is the best friend that Medicare has ever had.
 I think everybody is aware that the lunch hour is often consumed in queuing in a Medicare office to get a Medicare rebate. We all get rather frustrated with the form filling that's required in relation to getting your Medicare rebate. And what we're announcing this morning is that next year there will be a scheme whereby people can effectively, by producing and swiping their Medicare and credit cards, they can effectively pay their bill and set in train a process whereby within 24 hours their bank account will be credited with their Medicare rebate. It's literally a case of swipe and you're off. And that in one go will mean that 80,000 Australians a day, many of them will not have to queue at Medicare offices to get their refunds.
 I want to thank people from, first and foremost of course my two colleagues Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey who have worked together to devise the scheme and I'm going to ask Joe, who is an expert on these things to explain it. I'd like to thank the Australian Medical Association. Mukesh Haikerwal, the President of the AMA is here today and I welcome him. I welcome representatives of the Rural Doctors Association, and I want to thank the medical profession for its cooperation. I know that the banks, and there's a representative of one of the banks here today who I think is going to help us with the demonstration, and they are all part and parcel of a process of making it even easier for people to be involved in the Medicare system.
Medicare is a system that is well entrenched in the Australian community. It's a system that is overwhelmingly supported by Australians of all age groups. We now have bulk billing levels which are higher than they have been for many years and as a result of the Government's bulk billing incentives for doctors, bulk billing levels have risen for nine consecutive quarters and they're arriving at 75 per cent in the March quarter of 2006. There was a time only a couple of years ago when alarm was being expressed about the decline in the bulk billing rates. But as a result of the incentives the Government has introduced that trend has been dramatically reversed all over the country and it's now back to a level of 75 per cent. And that is a very high bulk billing rate in anybody's language.  In some parts of the country of course it is over 95 per cent.
All of these things flow from the Government's very strong commitment to Medicare and what I'm announcing today, and it will come into operation next year, there will be a tender process. And Mr Hockey will have something to say about that. But this will simply mean that you will no longer have to queue up to get a Medicare refund, you no longer have to wait to get a cheque through the post. You can do it all in the doctor's surgery. One swipe and you're off and that essentially is what is going to happen. And I think it is, in the electronic IT age, it is a much needed and very desired, in the eyes of some perhaps, even a long overdue change and step forward.
And I am very proud to have the opportunity with my two colleagues to announce it and I'd like to invite the Ministers to have something to say about the detail. They're the experts on it, and I'll hand over to them.
MINISTER ABBOTT:
Well ladies and gentlemen it's a pleasure to be here with the Prime Minister and with my friend Joe Hockey, the Minister for Human Services. Thanks to Dr Malcolm Parmenter for opening up your practice to us this morning. Thanks to Mukesh Haikerwal for representing the AMA here this morning. Dr Michael Kidd, representing the Royal Australian College of General Practice, and Kate Carnell from the Australian Divisions of General Practice.
 The fact that we have the three leaders of general practice here with us today shows how important this measure is, and I really think it's about trying to bring the practice of medicine fully into the 21st Century. For as long as anyone can remember, Australian doctors, including Australian GPs, have been at the cutting edge clinically. It's important that we are at the cutting edge administratively, and that's why I see this as such a significant thing.
I have to say that almost my first scripted speech as Minister for Health was about health IT. I gave that speech, from memory, back in October of 2003. Progress since then has not been as fast as I would like, but I have to say, once Joe Hockey started taking over this, things went much quicker Joe. So it's great to have a Minister who's been able to keep his eye on particular ball, rather than a Minister who's been distracted by many other very important things.
I think this new swipe and go system is going to be great for patients. I also think it's going to be good for doctors, because as doctors often tell me, if you are bulk billing you have to wait up to two weeks to get your money. This means that they will get their money within 24 hours, just as patients will get their money within 24 hours without the need to queue up at a Medicare office.
So I think this is all good news. This is all good news. It's good for patients, it's good for doctors, and I think it sends the right signal to the general public about the increasing sophistication of our health system generally. And I'm delighted to welcome the Minister most responsible for it, Joe Hockey to the podium.
MINISTER HOCKEY:
Thanks mate. Prime Minister and special guests, this is a very important announcement. It completely changes the way Medicare can be claimed. In rural areas patients have to wait an average 79 days to get their money back from Medicare. In metropolitan areas, it's an average of about 24 days to get their money back from Medicare. The average cost to the patient of going into a Medicare office is about $10 and that doesn't include the cost of tolls, or the rising cost of fuel or anything else like that. So this makes a significant difference to individuals and to families.
 As the Prime Minister said, 80,000 people every day queue up in a Medicare office, this represents the end of that system, even though there will still be a choice for people in that regard. What it means is that, as we'll see with the display, a patient simply pays for the transaction if it is a patient-pay transaction. If it's a bulk bill transaction all they do is hand over their Medicare card. The Medicare card is swiped in the EFTPOS device, all is done. Doctors will be rebated within 24 hours. Currently doctors are rebated up to 14 days for bulk bill claims. So this means a massive boost to doctors and doctors' practices, where they don't have to muck around with cash flow problems, collecting forms, and a few of the staff will tell you a bit more about that afterwards.
For patients, it means they get the money, if they use their EFTPOS card, they get the money in their account straight away. So they pay for the transaction if they are going to pay. They swipe their Medicare card and then they swipe their EFTPOS card, the money goes straight into their bank account, don't need to go to a Medicare Office at all.
 We believe it will also provide us with a great opportunity in providing improved service levels for families, but also help to reduce fraud, and it is a very secure system. The EFTPOS system deals with billions of dollars each day and millions of transactions each day. The privacy of the individual will be absolute. We will certainly make sure that all the encryption codes are there, that's why this program will be delivered within the next 12 months. We want to make sure the encryptions are right, the privacy protections are right, and that the system will work from day one.
It will be an open system in so far as all the banks that want to participate can participate. The average cost to Medicare and to the taxpayer of processing a claim across the counter is $3.50 per transaction. So with this, we expect the cost to the taxpayer will be a matter of cents. So there will be a significant saving to taxpayers as well.
The next obvious question is what happens to the Medicare offices? The Medicare offices already have a significantly expanded role. In the last 12 months we've rolled out family services to more than 200 Medicare offices, so people can now go into their Medicare office to claim their Family Tax Benefit, their Childcare Benefit, the Baby Bonus and a range of other services. The Medicare offices will, once they haven't got that load of people coming in to claim their Medicare back. The Medicare offices will start to focus on aged pensions and a range of other services, face to face services to families and a range of other people to help to make sure that their interaction with the Government is much smoother.
 The Medicare offices will also be a key point for registration for the new access card which will launch in 2008. So they will have plenty of work to keep them busy, but at the same time all the opportunities to claim Medicare will be there for customers. The existing 23 channels, plus this new EFTPOS channel, which I think will be a tremendous success.
[ends]  


I wish to provide the House with the Government's assessment of some key energy challenges and to announce a number of measures to assist hard-pressed motorists to better cope with very high petrol prices.
  Before turning to these issues, it is important to note the broader economic context.  Australia's economy continues to perform very strongly relative to other countries and in historical terms.  This was amply demonstrated last Thursday by the fall in unemployment to 4.8 per cent, the lowest level recorded since August 1976.
The OECD said in its economic survey two weeks ago that Australia is one of a handful of developed economies to have averaged 3 per cent annual growth since the start of the millennium - a performance that is forecast to continue in 2006 and 2007.
  The OECD found that living standards in Australia have now surpassed those in all the major industrialised nations, with the exception of the United States.  With a strong economy, Australians can plan for the future with hope, optimism and confidence.
This statement comes against a backdrop of high world oil prices, and in turn high petrol prices.  There is a degree of irony in the fact that Australia is a major beneficiary of the single most important structural cause of high world oil prices - namely the re-emergence of China as a global economic powerhouse.
Australia is more fortunate than other developed nations all of which endure the pain of high fuel prices without benefiting nearly as much as Australia from China's rapid economic growth.
Last month I outlined the enormous opportunity this country has to build its global energy advantage in the 21st century if we think and act boldly.  I stressed the need to maintain policy flexibility at a time of growing international concern about energy security.
Despite our substantial energy assets, most Australians feel the impact of soaring global energy demand not via a better job, a larger pay packet or a bigger share portfolio.  They feel it at the petrol bowser.
Today I am announcing a series of practical steps that will give Australians cheaper fuel options, further develop our energy resources and help to underpin the nation's long-term energy security.  This total expenditure on these measures will be $1.576 billion over the next eight years.
 In the last two years, world oil prices have risen to historically high levels.  Australian families and businesses are hurting from the rise in domestic petrol prices of about 40 per cent over that period.
There remains a spectrum of opinion on future oil price trends.  Based on new production and refining capacity that will come on stream, the International Energy Agency expects some easing of high oil prices over the next few years.  Even so, the best guess of the futures market is that prices will remain at or above US$75 a barrel through the first half of next year.
Many factors have contributed to high world oil prices.  Geopolitical instability, especially in the Middle East, is one factor feeding heightened energy security concerns.  The major cause, however, is to be found in market fundamentals.
   On the demand side, China's rapid industrialisation combined with a pick-up in demand from India and a period of synchronised global growth has prompted a rapid increase in oil demand.  On the supply side, an extended period of under-investment in global exploration and refinery infrastructure has limited the capacity of the industry to respond quickly to the surge in world demand.
One-off events, such as Hurricane Katrina and the shut down of North America's largest oil field in Alaska, have added to supply constraints in recent times.
Since oil is a globally traded product and Australia is a net importer of oil, there is no escaping the surge in oil prices.  Changes in Australian petrol prices closely track changes in the world price of oil, notwithstanding the claims by many to the contrary.
 The facts speak for themselves.  In the last 12 months, the world oil price has risen by 16.8 per cent.  The price of unleaded petrol in Australia has risen by 15.7 per cent.
  The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) has powers to protect consumers from unlawful anti-competitive conduct and unlawful market practices through the provisions of the Trade Practices Act.
 The ACCC monitors the daily average retail prices of unleaded petrol, diesel and automotive LPG at roughly 3,600 sites across Australia.  Last week the Treasurer announced that the ACCC would extend its monitoring of fuel prices to include E10.
 Petrol retailers who engage in price fixing are breaking the law and the ACCC has the power to take action against them.
Last year penalties of over $20 million were imposed on petrol retailers in two cases as a result of action taken by the ACCC.  A further case is currently before the courts.
However, all price movements are not necessarily price fixing.  ACCC monitoring of petrol prices shows that regular weekly price cycles occur in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth.  In most of these cities prices overwhelmingly tend to peak on Thursdays and trough on Tuesdays.
The weekly price peak on a Thursday occurs whether or not there is a public holiday in that week.  Evidence from ACCC price monitoring over a six month period shows that the price variations that occurred before public holidays were in some cases below average and in some cases above the average.
The simple, if unpalatable, truth is that the Government's capacity to alleviate the impact of high petrol prices on consumers is necessarily limited.
  And going beyond carefully-considered measures consistent with our long-term national interest would be irresponsible.
Let me illustrate.  A petrol excise cut that would deliver a 10 cent per litre reduction in the petrol price would blow a hole of about $2.5 billion or more in the budget surplus and reduce our capacity to meet spending priorities in areas such as national security and health or to provide further tax relief.
 Given the volatility of oil prices, the benefit to the motorist of such an excise cut could be easily and quickly devoured.
As the House would know, excise is a volumetric tax so that Commonwealth revenue collections do not rise in line with higher petrol prices.  It is true that GST collections - all of which go to the states and territories - will have risen, but even here there will have been a substitution effect at work.
Revenue from the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax is higher due to increased oil prices.  However, this tax is also a deductible business expense.
Though of no comfort, but I stress this,  to Australian motorists, petrol prices in this country are relatively low by international standards - the 4th lowest in the OECD according to the International Energy Agency.
If we look around the world, for example, the price of unleaded petrol in France is currently 58 per cent above what it is in Australia.  In Germany, it is 67 per cent higher.  And in the United Kingdom the price of unleaded petrol equivalent to more than A$2.30 per litre is about 70 per cent higher.
The lower price in Australia largely reflects relatively low fuel taxes and steps the Government has taken to help keep petrol prices down.
For example, when the GST was introduced, the level of excise on petrol and diesel was cut by 6.7 cents per litre.  In March 2001, the Government reduced fuel excise by a further 1.5 cents per litre and abolished half-yearly indexation.
  This decision froze the rate of excise removing an ongoing source of price pressure.  If we had not taken this decision, the excise on petrol products would be about 8« cents per litre higher than it is today.
Looking to the long term, the Energy White Paper that I released in June 2004 established a balanced framework for supporting alternative transport fuels.
Measures announced include significant ongoing excise concessions, a $1000 grant for new Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) vehicles from 1 July 2011 and a $37.6 million capital fund to support new biofuels production capacity.
Alternative fuels such as LPG and ethanol are currently excise free.  The gradual introduction of excise between 2011 and 2015 will result in a transport fuel tax regime that is both efficient and fiscally responsible.  In ten years time and beyond, the excise rate on alternative fuels will still be at least 50 per cent lower compared with other fuels with a similar energy content.
Australia has access to potentially large sources of alternative fuels and a diversity of energy supplies helps to ensure reliability, security and competition.  Working with market forces at a time of high oil prices to encourage investment in alternative fuels is simply commonsense.
Today I am announcing new measures to further accelerate investment in alternative fuels and to provide Australian motorists with more and cheaper fuel options.
Our largest alternative transport fuel is LPG.  Australia has the capacity to produce substantial amounts of LPG given our natural gas and oil reserves.  It is a product which has been in the market place for some time and is a familiar source of alternative fuel for consumers.
  LPG is readily available through 3,200 service stations in Australia.  Nearly half of them are in regional or rural areas.
It is usually much cheaper than regular unleaded petrol and diesel due to a range of factors, including concessional tax treatment.  The average LPG retail price across Australian capital cities in July was 40 per cent of the price of unleaded petrol.
   To capitalise on Australia's LPG resources, the Government has decided to bring forward the previously-announced rebate for the purchase of new LPG vehicles for private use.  As of today, we will contribute $1,000 to the purchase cost of a new factory-fitted LPG powered vehicle.
  In addition, the Government will provide a grant of $2,000 to the cost of converting vehicles to LPG for private use.
 In the past, it has typically taken consumers up to two years to pay off the additional costs associated with purchasing or converting to an LPG vehicle.  The new LPG rebates are expected to cut this pay-back period significantly.
 While savings will depend on fuel consumption and driving habits, the Australian LPG Association estimates that, on average, the fuel bill for a six cylinder vehicle travelling 15,000 kilometres a year would be cut by $27 a week, or more than $1,400 a year, following the conversion.
With these savings and the $2,000 rebate, it would take only four months for the motorist to recoup the net cost of a $2,500 conversion.
The West Australian Government is currently providing a subsidy of $1000 on the purchase of new LPG vehicles or for LPG conversions.  I encourage other states and territories to follow the lead of the Commonwealth and WA Governments in encouraging Australians to explore this cheaper fuel alternative.
I am also pleased that the board of the peak industry body - LPG Australia - has established a taskforce to address future needs of consumers and the industry.  The Government will be working with the industry to provide advice to consumers on issues such as the suitability of vehicles to be converted.
 Australian motorists will need to weigh up the costs and benefits of taking up the incentives which I am announcing today.  The Government will ensure that consumers have all the relevant information they need to make the right decisions.
 The estimated cost of the LPG incentives is $677.1 million over the eight year life of the programme.  Taking into account revenue forgone, the total cost is more than $1.3 billion over eight years.
Ethanol blends can also make an important contribution to meeting Australia's transport fuel needs.
  The Government has spent $55 million to date in production grants to effectively offset the excise on ethanol production in Australia.  We have already implemented a range of measures to help companies achieve a target of at least 350 mega litres of biofuel production in Australia by 2010.
  Substantial new investments are now underway.  While there were 70 service stations selling ethanol in Australia in June last year, today the figure is about 260.  BP plans to increase ethanol sales 100-fold over the next two years.  Caltex plans to double the number of ethanol retail sites by the end of this year.  And Woolworths is set to enter the market next year with 50 sites.
 The Government recognises that lack of access to distribution infrastructure remains one of the barriers to the uptake of ethanol.  To address this, I announce today additional expenditure of $17.2 million over three years to reduce the infrastructure cost to retailers of installing new pumps or converting existing pumps to E10 blends and to encourage sales of E10.
  The Government will allocate up to $20,000 to the cost of converting retail petrol stations to supply E10.  Up to $10,000 will be provided after the conversion is complete and an additional $10,000 after an ethanol blend sales target is reached.
  The additional grant on reaching a sales target will provide a clear incentive for retailers to discount the price of E10 fuel.  Recipients of grants from the ethanol distribution programme will be expected to sell ethanol blends at a discount and to display the price of ethanol blends alongside price information for other petroleum products.
Because this Government believes in consumer choice we are not persuaded to mandate the use of ethanol.  We will, however, continue to explore practical measures that effectively mandate the availability of cheaper ethanol-blended fuels for Australian motorists.
 This Government has worked hard to restore confidence in ethanol after the disgraceful campaign waged by the Labor Party against this industry.
Labor spent the better part of a year trying to discredit ethanol, criticising the Government's support for ethanol production in Australia, even targeting an individual company and its owner.
The Labor Party deliberately set out to scare Australian motorists off using ethanol-blended fuels.  The former Opposition Leader, the member for Hotham, talked about motorists, 'having their engines wrecked by ethanol fuel'.
It really pains me to say that even the Member for Batman was up to his neck in Labor's campaign to destroy consumer confidence in ethanol.
And this is what he had to say on 17 September 2003: '... we (the Labor Party) have still failed to see any demonstrated advantages in the subsidisation of the local ethanol industry.  The facts speak for themselves he said.  Up to one-third of the 10 million cars in Australia will not operate satisfactorily on petrol containing 10 per cent ethanol.'
That was wrong then and it is wrong now.  Ninety per cent of cars on the road in Australia can confidently run on E10, including all new cars.
Ethanol has a future in this country because of only one side of politics and that is the Coalition.
High oil and petrol prices do have an acute impact on regional and remote communities that rely on diesel for power generation as well as transport.
  The Government's Renewable Remote Power Generation Programme is designed to encourage the replacement of diesel generators with renewable energy sources for power generation and water pumping.
  In a good example of the success of this programme, Bremer Bay, a small community on the south coast of Western Australia, is now being supplied by a wind-diesel system with the wind turbine providing on average 40 per cent of the town's electricity.  Diesel consumption has been cut by up to 340,000 litres a year, which equates to almost $480,000 a year at today's fuel prices.
Today I announce that the Government will spend an additional $123.5 million over four years to extend and expand this programme.  For the first time, funding will be made available for energy efficiency projects to reduce demand and for industry support activities that encourage the uptake of renewable energy technologies in these areas.
 Encouraging further oil exploration in Australia is a very high priority for the Government.
  Two thirds of the world's oil reserves are concentrated in the Middle East.  And the role played by the Middle East in world oil production is set to grow in coming decades.  Australia must explore oil, I am sorry, all avenues to reduce its future dependence on Middle Eastern oil.
 While known oil reserves are declining, much of Australia has been explored only at a shallow level and large areas of remote frontier provinces remain under explored.  Current exploration activity is largely 'brownfields' exploration rather than the higher risk,'greenfields' exploration that is aimed at identifying new resource provinces.
  Australia has some 40 offshore basins that display signs of oil potential and half of them remain unexplored.  Encouraging further exploration could see the discovery and development of resources the size of those in Bass Strait.
In a high-cost, high-risk field, where global investment competition is fierce, governments have an important role to play in providing good geo-science information.  Identifying and assessing Australia's resources is the first step in developing them.
To this end, the Government will expand Geoscience Australia's current programme of seismic acquisition, data enhancement and access.  At a cost of an additional $76.4 million over the next five years, this expanded programme will focus on new frontier offshore areas to be chosen in consultation with the industry.
  The Government will also commit an extra $59 million over five years to identify potential on-shore energy sources such as petroleum and geothermal energy.  Using the latest geophysical imaging and mapping techniques, this information will help attract companies to explore in new areas by enhancing the chances of discovery and reducing the risks to investors.
To secure Australia's energy future in the face of high oil prices, the Government will continue to examine a range of additional fuel and energy technology options.
 We are keen to explore how Australia might contribute to the development of more fuel-efficient vehicles including hybrid vehicles tailored to our market and to export opportunities.
Our abundant coal and gas reserves also provide the basis for meeting future transport fuel needs should commercial circumstances and technology dictate their feasibility.
I therefore ask the Minister for Industry, Tourism and Resources, The Honourable Ian Macfarlane, to bring forward to Cabinet a proposal for a dedicated fund to position Australia as a leader in gas-to-liquids and coal-to-liquids research.
  This is consistent with the approach we have adopted with the Low Emissions Technology Development Fund.  Unlike the Labor Party, this Government is determined to build Australia's energy advantage through leading-edge technology, not sacrifice jobs, the jobs of Australian workers and Australian exports through premature carbon taxes that would only cripple Australia's coal and gas industries.
This is a difficult time for Australians faced with high petrol prices, and it is only appropriate that the benefits which accrue to Australia from our substantial resource base flow beyond a narrow part of our society.
Even so, we should not lose sight of the positive outlook for Australia as a major global energy supplier.  Our natural resources and man-made assets are the envy of most other countries in the world, and the principles laid out in the nation's energy goals of prosperity, security and sustainability.  The measures I have outlined today will make a practical contribution to further developing and utilising Australia's energy advantage for the benefit of all of the Australian people.   


Thank you very much Julie. Ladies and gentlemen, I want to express my pleasure that so many of you have come. This is a very broad group, it's a very talented group and I'm sure this is a group that believes very strongly in the quality teaching and understanding of Australian history.
The Government's purpose is, as the Minister said, very, very plain, and that is that we do want to bring about a renaissance of both interest in and understanding of Australian history and that must involve a greater focus on the disciplined teaching and understanding of history in Australian schools. My assessment is that it varies enormously around the country. Some parts of Australia, the school curriculum has a welcome emphasis, in other parts I don't believe it does. I want to make it very clear that we are not seeking some kind of official version of Australian history. We're not seeking some kind of nostalgic return to a particular version of Australian history, although I do not believe, and the Government does not believe, that you can have any sensible understanding, and therefore any sensible debate, about different opinions of Australian history unless you have some narrative and method in the comprehension and understanding of history. How we can just teach issues and study moods and fashions in history rather than comprehend and teach the narrative, have a narrative, has always escaped me.
 I don't think you can have a proper teaching and comprehension of Australian history, of course, without having a proper understanding of indigenous history and the contribution of the indigenous experience to Australia's development and the Australian story. Equally I don't believe that you can have a proper understanding of Australian history without some understanding of those movements and attitudes and values and traditions of other countries that had an influence on the formation of Australia. And obviously we need an understanding of those institutions we inherited from the British and the other European influences on Australia. We need to understand the influence of religion in the formation of attitudes and development in Australia. We obviously have to see Australia as heavily influenced by the western intellectual position, the Enlightenment and all that's associated with it. And I think we also have to appreciate the impact on Australia of the various economic developments and the changes in economic history, the influence of the industrial revolution and various broad economic theories that have shaped the modern Australia.
Now I don't think that amounts for a moment to any kind of authorised version of Australian history. I think it amounts to, in the Government's view, a commonsense belief that we do need to understand all of those things to have a proper understanding of what did occur and what influences have shaped the modern day Australia.
I want to thank all of you, and I want to thank the Minister for her energy and I really am very, very pleased indeed that we have such a wide range of people here today and I think that indicates that there's a lot of interest in this subject. There are some things that strike, that have a bit of a resonance when you say something about them. Some things Prime Ministers say don't have any resonance at all, but occasionally you say things that have a bit of a resonance and there is a bit of a feeling that we ought to know more.
 No I know Julie, and I don't want to give The Australian newspaper a free plug, but I know Julie in her speech last night quoted that article by Roy Eccleston about the experience of his daughter in having been taught in the American school system and been taught a little bit about some of the formative events in American history. And whilst I don't necessarily suggest we pick that up root and branch and transplant it, obviously we have our own way of doing it, but I thought it made a good point. It's not to...to have a knowledge of some of the key things that shape the modern Australia is not to automatically endorse everything that took place in Australia in the years that have preceded the year in which we live, nor is it to indicate a particular view.
 But I don't know how we can intelligently argue our different points of view about what the modern Australia is or what the future Australia should be without having a proper, orthodox understanding. Orthodox in the sense of properly instructed and according to some kind of coherent narrative. Unless we have that, I don't think we can have a proper understanding of our present.
And finally can I say that, as an earnest I hope of the great commitment that the Government has to this, I intend to establish a Prime Minister's prize for Australian history. It will be awarded annually and it will be worth $100,000 to the recipient. I will be providing some more details of the criteria but broadly speaking it will be for a substantial written work, could include a film or a documentary as well. I will invite a panel of eminent historians, separate and apart from the Government, to assess submissions to this and it will be awarded on an annual basis. And I think it will just be another earnest of the importance that this Government does attach, and I think it is something that will attract, not only the interests of obviously people who are involved in the teaching and comprehension of history but also the broader community.
 We do need to demonstrate in different ways the seriousness of our commitment. I do want the teaching of history to be a stand-alone subject in our school system. And can I say, to express the bipartisan character of this gathering, I do welcome Bob Carr's presence if I may be permitted to do so.  I know, from my previous discussions with him, the interest he has in Australia and history generally and I know that he made a significant contribution to the cause when he was Premier of New South Wales.
 And I would like to see the total cooperation and involvement of the State Governments in this exercise. It is not a partisan political exercise. It is designed to give the young of Australia a better understanding than the products of our education system of the last 10 or 20 years plainly have of Australian and indeed world history, and I hope this group will make a contribution.
 That is enough from me. I will hand over to the Minister. And thank you again all of you for being such willing participants in what I hope will be a great exercise. Thank you.
  [ends]  


Your Excellency the Governor General and Mrs Jeffery, the New Zealand High Commissioner, other diplomatic representatives, veterans of the Vietnam War and my other fellow Australians.  The year 2006 marks the anniversaries of two great battles in Australian military history; marks 90 years since the Battle of Fromelles in France in 1916, and 40 years since the Battle of Long Tan in Vietnam. And although those two battles are separated in time by 50 years and separated by thousands of miles from where they took place, they are bound together in the history of this country, and in the consciousness of who we are, by the common characteristics of Australians that were on display at those two battles, those characteristics of courage, of initiative, of individual fortitude, and of mateship.  The Battle of Long Tan was, of course, the first great engagement of the Vietnam War and recorded the greatest loss of Australian lives in any individual battle.  Those who served in Vietnam, and I am delighted that so many of them have been able to make the journey to Canberra for this very important commemoration,  those who served in Vietnam are indelibly and permanently part of the great Australian Anzac tradition.
 The Vietnam War was the longest military engagement in which Australia took part, it lasted 11 years, from 1962 to 1973.  Like all wars it had its differences from others, it was a war fought essentially by ambush and patrol, it was a war that placed an enormous psychological strain on those who participated, and we are very conscious of the lingering impact of that psychological strain.  And on this occasion, we also remember the bravery, not only of our allies such as New Zealand and the United States, but also the bravery of the men of the army of the old Republic of South Vietnam, who fought so very bravely alongside our men.  We saw 59,000 Australians, of which 15,000 were national servicemen, take part in that war.  And as we remember them, and we particularly remember with sadness the 500 who gave their lives, let me say to all of you that have come here for these series of events, let me say on behalf of a grateful nation, a nation which perhaps indeed, certainly was not as grateful and as respectful as it should have been 40 years ago, let me say to all of you as you leave Canberra and you go to your homes all around our country, that your nation honours you, your nation respects you, and your nation thanks you for your courage and your commitment and the way in which you did your duty as asked of you by your nation, and the way in which you upheld the finest traditions of military service of which Australians are so proud.
  Your fellow Australians admire you, and we thank you for your sacrifice and your contribution.
  [ends]


Well thank you very much Chris for those very generous words of introduction, I particularly acknowledge a number of my very valued Cabinet colleagues here, especially the Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, who really has done a remarkable job over ten-and-a-half years in representing the interests of this nation overseas. We've only had three people in the whole time we've been in government that have remained in the positions to which they were appointed after we won the election in March of 1996, myself of course, last time I checked, and Alexander Downer who's done a superb job and Peter Costello, to whom so much is owed for the stewardship and the guardianship of our economic fortunes over that period of time. And to my many other parliamentary colleagues who are here, and Nick Minchin, of course the keeper of the purse, the Finance Minister, the Leader of the Government in the Senate and to all of my other colleagues, and I know a number from interstate are in town for the State Conference, I acknowledge you and I thank you, and I thank the State Division. And can I say what a wonderful start Iain Evans has made as the new Leader of the Opposition here in South Australia. I think...yes let's give him a round of applause, it's not easy being in opposition, not easy being an opposition leader, I remember it well and have no desire to return to it, no intention of returning to it but Ian good luck, and I wish you well in the campaign to bring about a change of government here in South Australia at the time the next election takes place.
In introducing me Chris was kind of enough to talk about the state of the Australian economy. And everything he said was absolutely correct. The Australian economy is very strong. We are now in the 16th year of economic expansion, 16 consecutive years of economic growth. There's not been a period in our history where we've had such continuous and consistent economic expansion. There was a time in the 1960s when conditions were very good, but in a lot of respects the Australian economy then was not as robust and competitive as it is now. It was heavily protected, we had high tariffs, we had a heavily regulated financial system, we had a highly centralised wage fixation system and we were enjoying the opportunity that history had given us of those sort of economic protections. Now, of course, we live in a very globalised economic environment and the fact that the Australian economy is growing strongly in that environment is a matter of very great satisfaction - not only to the Government - but more importantly to the principal beneficiaries of economic prosperity, and that of course is the men and women of Australia.
And the best thing of all is that Australians, as Chris said, who want a job have got a job. And it is a proud boast of ours that we have been a better friend of the Australian worker than the Labor Party ever was. Wages have gone up, unemployment has gone down, interest rates have gone down, taxes have gone down, business investment has boomed, we've got rid of the budget deficit, we've paid off our debt and as the OECD said a couple of months ago when reporting on Australia, that we have the highest living standards on an individual basis in the world, apart from the United States. And of course our society is a more equal society than the United States because we have always wisely in my view had a more generous and a more effective social security safety net than have the Americans.
So having said all of that you might well ask, well what next? What next really, and this is the key question that the Australian people will need to address over the next 12 to 15 months and that key question very simply is, which side of politics in Australia is better able to maintain and prolong the prosperity of the last 15 years? Because the prosperity we now have, today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms and yesterday's changes. And if we are to maintain that prosperity, to build on it, to grow it, make it even stronger, we need to continue to embrace economic change and reform. And the question people must ask is will the Labor Party be better than us at encouraging business investment? Will the Labor Party be better than us at further reducing unemployment? Will the Labor Party be better than us at providing further increases in real wages based on productivity? And will the Labor Party be better than us at keeping interest rates down? And I think that last one would send a chill through many people in this room and many people in the Australian community because at a time when the economy is strong, and there are some inflationary pressures in business, and some inflationary pressures in the Australian economy, it is the last time in the world to go back to the high interest rate specialists of the Australian Labor Party.
 So the big challenge is a very fundamental and a very simple one. That is which side of politics is better able to maintain the prosperity and to stretch that 15 or 16 years out to 20 or 25 years? And there's no reason why we can't do that if we are willing to undertake continuous reform. And it's that belief that drove us to bring in the WorkChoices legislation, the biggest single reform of this term in office. WorkChoices came in on the 27th of March and there were two predictions made by our opponents. And the field evidence to date is not going too well for them. The first prediction they made was that it would be a charter for mass sackings - that's what Bill Shorten, the great hope, new hope of the Australian Labor Party, the national secretary of the Australian Workers Union. Bill Shorten said this was a charter for mass sackings. Since WorkChoices came in we've seen 159,000 new jobs created in Australia. It's probably been the best three-month period for new job creation in the last 10 years. The other prediction that was made was that wages were going to be driven down, now of course all the statistics indicate that, certainly in the early months, that has not occurred. And as your President said in his opening remarks, the real wage performance of this Government far outstrips that of the former government. And the reason is that we now have a less regulated industrial relations system. And if you have a less regulated industrial relations system you build employment arrangements that suit the circumstances of individual firms, and that makes sense. Mr Beazley says that he will get rid of Australian Workplace Agreements. There are hundreds of thousands of those agreements. And here in South Australia, the Roxby Downs uranium mine, most people there are employed on AWAs. In the resource industry in Western Australia, close to 50 per cent of people in the resource industries are on AWAs. And if AWAs are abolished that will do enormous damage to the resource industry in Australia.
 And why would you want to cripple, why would you want to put a dead weight on the back of the most successful industry sector that this country has at the present time? Now that's a simple question that I pose to the Leader of the Opposition, who has his ideological objection to Australian Workplace Agreements. I don't have an ideological objection to collective agreements, I don't have an ideological objection to people belonging to unions and if they want their union to negotiate for them, I have no problem with that. Well why should Mr Beazley have a problem with people negotiating directly with their employers, without the intervention of a union? Because fewer than 20 per cent of Australian workers in the private sector now belong to unions, that's their choice, they've voted with their feet. Who's the ideologue, who's the fanatic, who's the extremist? It's not me, I'm in favour of choice, he's against choice, I don't mind if people belong to a union, they can get a union bloke to negotiate for them, terrific, that's fine. Why therefore should the boot not be on the other foot? Why shouldn't Mr Beazley acknowledge that if somebody doesn't want to negotiate through a union, he or she should not have to, because the bottom line is the unions want to get back in control of the country, and Greg Combet said that in an unguarded moment, I think he may even had been here in South Australia, he made that observation in an unguarded moment. He said, you know, wouldn't it be good if we were running the country again. The truth is that if Labor wins the unions will be injecting themselves back into every workplace agreement they can get their hands on, even if they're not wanted and in fact they're repudiated by the workers in those individual industries.
So we do as a country have every reason to be proud of what we have achieved over the last 10 or 15 years. And the prosperity we now have is the product of reforms, and I've always given them credit for it, the former Labor government enacted a number of very sensible economic reforms, and they had our support. When they deregulated the financial system, we didn't oppose it, we supported it, because it had come out of the Campbell Inquiry which I'd established as Treasurer. When they reduced tariffs we didn't run a fear campaign amongst Australian workers because we knew it was in the long term interests of the country that that happen. But every economic reform we have tried to implement they've opposed. We inherited a huge budget deficit, not only did they give us a deficit, but than they tried to block every move we took to get rid of it. And when we brought in tax reform, they opposed that. And they opposed our industrial relations reform. They've opposed the privatisation of Telstra. They have opposed root and branch every single, sensible economic reform that this Government has endeavoured to bring about, and of course we only ever bring about sensible economic reforms.
 So let me say that not only did they neglect other reforms when they were in government, but I think to their very great discredit, they have opposed sensible reforms in opposition. So these are choices that the community has. In a democracy there's always a choice. And people can vote a government in, they can vote it out, and I will be telling the Australian people a lot over the next 15 to 18 months of that choice, of asking that rhetorical question. Who do you think will better maintain the prosperity we now have? Do you really think the high interest rate specialists that gave us 17 per cent and 21 per cent can do a better job of maintaining the prosperity we now have? Or do you think we'll do a better job? Now that is something that ultimately the Australian people will resolve.
Could I just say something before I conclude about a non-economic matter, because the world and life is not just about economics, although it is moderately important to the existence and being of us all. But I want to say about history, not political history but history generally. I believe very passionately that Australians increasingly know less and less about the history of this country that they should and I think that is sad. And it's my very strong view that the parents of Australia think that's sad. And the reason that we have embarked upon an exercise in bringing back a proper disciplined teaching of Australian history, and all the things that contributed to the modern Australia in our schools, is not throughout because of some ideology. I don't want some authorised version of Australian history. There'll always be debate about the meaning of particular events, there'll always be debate about the influence of movements, the influence of different philosophies and different political and religious beliefs on the development of nations, but a country that doesn't understand fully where it came from and what it experienced is a country that can't properly understand the present and respond effectively to the future. And I looked through some of the notes that were prepared for the 'history summit', and some of the commentary on the teaching of Australian history in South Australian schools, and I found that there was no detailed curriculum requirement, and no particular timetable allocation for Australian history. I found that history in South Australia is taught primarily through 'Society and Environment', this means there is no set approach for the teaching of history topics. I learnt that in senior years, listen to this, 'students critically analyse continuities and discontinuities over time and reflect upon the power relationships which shape and are shaped by these' - a very interesting version, sort of, of teaching history.
All I want to say is that we want a change. We believe very strongly that there is no structured narrative to the teaching of history in most Australian schools around Australia. There are exceptions, I have to say that the curriculum in New South Wales is more rigorous and a lot more effective and comprehensive than it is in many other states. I don't mean to give offence to anybody, but I really feel very strongly about it. I think we have taught history as some kind of fragmented stew of moods and events, rather than some kind of proper narrative. I don't believe that history is simply taught by the rote learning of dates, but you can't have an understanding of events and movements unless you have some sense of the order and sequence in which things occurred and the cause and effect over a period of time of developments in our own nation.
And in talking about teaching Australian history I don't just mean teaching the history of Australia since European settlement. Of course we must have an understanding of indigenous history, we must also have an understanding of the history of those societies that shaped Australia, more than any other; we must of course have an understanding of British history because the institutions we inherited from Britain have been very important to our society; we must have an understanding of the history of the countries in our own region; we should have an understanding of the history of the United States, which is so very important to Australia because of its size and influence. In other words we've got to have some understanding of the history of countries and movements that have influenced our nation. But most importantly of all we have to have an understanding and a pride in what this country has achieved. I mean how many Australians now know that this country was in the forefront of giving women the vote around the world. This country was years ahead of countries in Europe in giving women the vote. That our Federation is, given that it was in 1901 and for all of the mistakes that we have made as a nation, and we've made many, and for all of the difficulties of the federal system in this country, it is an infinitely more useable and effective federal model than the models that operate in many other federations.
 And if you go back and trawl back through the history of this country there are many great Australian democratic firsts of which we can be enormously proud. And the sad thing is that I don't think many people know it. And in a sense that the metaphor for my frustration I heard on the PM program a couple of months ago, and a young women who on all other criteria was highly successful and highly intelligent, and she was asked by the interviewer what the date of Federation was, and she didn't know it, what year did the ANZAC legend arise and the Gallipoli landing take place, and she didn't know that. And she was asked who the first Prime Minister of Australia was, and she didn't know that. Now I'm not saying that if you just know all of those things that's enough, you've got to be willing to embrace it, understand the impact of the depression on this country, the importance of post-war migration, the influence of other movements divisive and uniting in the history of Australia. But I think we have failed our young and our not so young because the muddled thinking about history in our education system has been around for a very long time, and it'll be like trying to turn around an ocean liner. But it's an enterprise that we ought to undertake and I hope that the State Governments will join us. And I was delighted that Bob Carr, a former Labor premier of New South Wales, and a person who believes passionately, as I do, in the proper teaching of history in our schools. I was delighted that he was part of the 'history summit'. And I can't for the life of me understand why Kim Beazley regards what we are trying to do as an elite preoccupation, that's how he described it. Well it might be alright for him to regard it as an elite preoccupation, but the parents of Australia regard it as part of the bread and butter of their children having a decent education, just as they regard literacy and numeracy as part of that.
My friends, thank you very much to the support that you're giving to the South Australian Division. I'm delighted to be back again and the occasion being presided over by Michael Pratt and to all of you, thank you, very, very much and as our thoughts wander to football at the weekend, I know you'll all join me as a lover of the game they play in heaven, in wishing the Wallabies the very best in their match in New Zealand.
 Thank you very much.
 [ends]


Mr President it's great to be back here in Adelaide again, Iain Evans, the leader of the state parliamentary party, Alexander Downer, the long-serving and outstanding Foreign Minister of Australia, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues and fellow Liberals. I want first of all to thank all of you for the great support that you have continued to give the federal Coalition over the last year.  The support of the rank and file of the party is so fundamental to our success, but the other specifically important ingredient of our success, which is relevant to a South Australian audience, is the remarkable contribution that South Australian Members and Senators have made to the strength of my Government over the last 10 years.  Without any fear of contradiction, South Australians have had a greater influence on my government than any government since Federation. And the contribution of Robert Hill, of Alexander Downer, of Amanda Vanstone, of Nick Minchin and all the other members of the ministry, outer and inner, and parliamentary Members and Senators generally, has been quite extraordinary.  And it has been a golden period of South Australian influence and South Australian places around the table in Canberra, and I thank the party for sending such talented men and women to Canberra.  I thank the Division for, in percentage terms, the best federal representation of any state in the Commonwealth, and I especially thank the Division for providing us with candidates who won highly marginal seats at the last federal election and I think particularly of Kym Richardson and David Fawcett, both of whom hold their seats by wafer thin majorities, but because of their energy and their talent, they will, I believe, hold those seats at the next election.  But it's a great South Australian story, a great South Australian federal story, and one of which all of you should be immensely proud.
 The most fundamental responsibility of any national government, when it comes to domestic policy is to provide Australian families with a sense of security, because the security of the family and the sense of wellbeing and security that middle-Australian families have is a measure of the success of national policy. And this morning, I want to talk briefly about two issues that go to the heart of family security.  The first of those is the security of having a job, and as your President said, the unemployment level in Australia at the present time is at a 30 year low.  We all know that political communication is very much about two things; it's about having the right policy and the right achievement to communicate, but also communicating it in a simple and direct manner, and there is no greater metaphor for the Government's economic success than the fact that our unemployment is at a 30 year low.  We have over the last three months recorded a rise in the number of people in work in Australia of 159,000, that is the largest three monthly increase in the whole 10 years that the Government has been in office.  And as I travel around Australia, the complaint I have, the talk I hear from business men and women, is not about the fact that they've got too many employees, and they want to let people go, their complaint is they don't have enough employees and they have great difficulty getting the right people to fill the jobs they have available.
 Now I stress these things, because you will remember when we introduced our workplace relations changes, changes that are fundamental to securing the future prosperity of Australia, let me leave you in no doubt of the importance that I attach, and the Government attaches to these industrial relations changes.  Today's prosperity is the product of yesterday's reforms, tomorrow's prosperity can only be there, if we continue the reform process today.  And fundamental to that reform process, is the WorkChoices legislation. And we were told by Mr Beazley, we were told by Mr Shorten of the Australian Workers' Union that when we introduced WorkChoices it would be a charter for mass sackings.  We were told that 11 million Australian employees were vulnerable. Nothing could have been further from the truth.  Not only are they not vulnerable, because the real guarantee of job security is national economic prosperity, with159,000 more Australians have joined their ranks amongst the employed people of this country. And this is an employees market like never before in Australia's economic experience.  And Australians have job security, the like of which they haven't had before because of the economic prosperity of this country. And the real measure of a workplace relations system is the contribution it makes to the enduring and future prosperity of the country.
 In the early 1990's a million Australians were out of work, real wages were in free fall, yet we had the most highly regulated labour market imaginable.  We had rules and restrictions and guarantees and protections and charters of worker's rights, they were of no avail because the economy was sick.  And the point I simply make is that all the rules in the world will not protect a job if the economy is sick, and the ultimate measure of job security is the capacity of the economy to deliver jobs, and WorkChoices will deliver more jobs into the future.  WorkChoices will provide more flexibility, WorkChoices will encourage the great export industries of Australia.  Mr Beazley says that if he becomes Prime Minister he will get rid of Australian Workplace Agreements.  By the time of the next election there could be close to one million Australians employed under Australian Workplace Agreements.  Many of them in the resource sector which is the most profitable sector of the Australian economy at the present time.  Mr Beazley says I will have some transitional arrangements, the trade union movement says no you won't.  The head of the trade union movement in Western Australia, the most resource rich state in the country, has said very flatly that when Labor wins, he says, and this is the language he uses, we'll run a ruler over all of the AWA's and we will accept those we like, and we'll throw out those we don't like.  Now let me sound a warning, if Mr Beazley becomes Prime Minister of this country, every Australian worker under an AWA will have far less job security and could well have his or her employment conditions torn up by a Beazley Labor Government.
  So if you are looking at the most important, or one of the most important ingredients of family security in this country, and that is the opportunity and the right to have a job if you want one, this government has delivered in spades over the last decade, we have seen unemployment go from 8.5 per cent to 4.8 per cent.  We have seen, as your President says, youth unemployment, dramatically reduce.  We see a situation where the pressure is to find more people to fill the available job. We have turned the supply/demand equation of employment in this country on its head. There are now more jobs chasing fewer workers instead of the sense of despair that existed before, when it was the other way around.
 The other matter that goes so very much to family security is having a home of your own.  Home ownership is very much at the heart of the Australian identity and the Australian dream.  I believe in an Australia where every family that wants to buy a home is able to do so, and like all of you, I am concerned about the increasing unaffordability of housing for first home-buyers.  It's alright once you get on the bottom rung of the ladder, who does that remind you of?   Dear me, I'd almost forgotten.  But I will use the metaphor nonetheless, it's alright if you get on the bottom rung of the ladder, but increasingly that rung is a little higher, it's getting higher and higher every year and we've got to ask ourselves why is it so?  And when you drill down, you find yes, the level of interest rates is important and if you are worried about home ownership, please please don't hand the economy back into the hands of those high interest rate specialists, the Australian Labor Party who gave us 17 per cent housing interest rates, and 21 per cent small business rates, and 23 per cent bill rates for farmers, please that's the first commandment, don't hand it back to the high interest rate specialists.  But when you drill down a bit further you find some very interesting things, you find that over the last 20 years, according to a recent study released by the Treasurer, and the study was carried out by the IPA, the real cost of the housing and land package in this country has doubled, the real cost has doubled over the last 20 years.  You find that although things like airfares, communication expenses, and many other things in real terms have declined over the last 20 years, the cost of buying a home has doubled.  Now why is that so?  It is overwhelmingly so because the cost of land has doubled over that period of time.  The cost of building a house itself has not altered dramatically differently from the rate of inflation, but fundamentally the cost of land is the problem.  And let me make it very clear, that until state governments around Australia, and they are all Labor, we know to our regret and pain and grief that they are all Labor, until state governments around Australia start releasing more land and stop using the development process as a method of raising revenue, we are going to continue to have a problem with the affordability of housing.
  Now I don't suggest that interest rates are irrelevant, not for a moment, and we need to keep in office a government that has demonstrated a capacity to keep interest rates much lower than their opponent, and that's the Coalition.  But if we are to have a proper debate about the cost of housing, state governments have got to face the need to release more land, and that applies to every single state government around this country.  And they've also got to stop using the development process as a method of raising revenue.  So my friends, let me return to what I said a moment ago, and that is that security for the family, and that sense of secure, predictable wellbeing which is so important to a stable and happy family life in this country, depends very heavily on those two things. It depends very heavily on job security and job opportunities, of rising real wages, of increasing employment opportunities, and it also depends very heavily on being able to afford to buy a home of your own. And having interest rates at a low level are important to that, but even more important is to make sure that the ordinary economics of supply and demand are in better balance than they are at the present time.
 We need state governments that will have more realistic policies towards land release, we need state governments that will stop using the development process as a way of raising revenue, and until those things are properly addressed, we are going to continue to have this difficulty with the affordability of housing. And I do worry about that.  I worry about the affordability of housing for young Australians. It's alright for those of riper years, but it's not good for younger people, and it's very important we give attention to this issue, and it's very important that we have an honest debate, and an honest discussion about the fundamental causes of the problem.
 Let me finish with just one other remark, and that is that these issues of family security are very, very, much domestic issues, but let us not lose sight of the fact that national security is an even greater responsibility of government. And we have been reminded in the past two weeks with the events that occurred in London, we have been reminded of how difficult the struggle against terrorism is and will be, years into the future.  There is no simple answer, there will be no quick end to the war against terrorism. Our opponents in the war against terrorism are not only fanatical, but they are also very tenacious, and as some disappear, or are annihilated or whatever the case may be, others come forward to take their place.  And I know there will be people who will get a certain sense of fatigue about it, I turned on my television set this morning and I saw some executives of British airlines complaining about the restrictions at Heathrow Airport as if it was the fault of the British Government that those restrictions were brought in. Those restrictions were brought in to protect the travelling public.  But it's an indication of how, long term, how challenging this struggle is going to be, but it is essential that we hold our nerve on these issues, it is essential that we recognise the long term nature of this and to recognise that we are dealing with an enemy like no enemy before.  This is not a war that involves armies rolling across borders or declarations, or ultimata running out, this is a war where you are dealing with a sinister opponent, you are dealing with borders that are seamless, you are dealing with a guerrilla campaign of unprecedented menace, and of unprecedented threat.  And we need the full armoury of strong domestic laws, we need strong alliances, we need a continuing military commitment in those parts of the world where striking at the heart of terrorism is so very important.
  So finally my friends, I thank you again for your support, I wish under Iain's leadership, the state parliamentary party, the very best of good fortune. I look forward to hearing from the South Australian Premier as to what he intends to do about land releases, of what he intends to do about making a contribution towards solving this problem as I do look forward to hearing from all the other Labor premiers around Australia.  And very, very finally in relation to state governments, I look forward to hearing from all of the state governments of Australia as to what they intend to do about returning the teaching of Australian history to the centre of our curriculum, because I think the time is long overdue when we need to have the teaching of the history of this country as a stand-alone subject in the curricula of all schools.  We are proud of what this country has achieved, it has made mistakes, it has blemishes in its past, it's got things, but overwhelmingly the story of the Australian achievement is an impressive story and one of which all Australians should be proud, and why on earth we have stopped teaching our young about it, absolutely defies belief.  Thank you.
 [ends]


Well thank you very much Ken, my other Parliamentary colleagues, Jim Lloyd, the Member for Robertson and Minister for Territories, Local Government and Roads, Chris Hartcher, the State Member, Bob Graham the Mayor, ladies and gentlemen. This is the third occasion in the company of Mr Ticehurst that I have visited this Club and it seems to get bigger and better and more friendly every time I come. But can I join Ken in congratulating the choir of the Lakes Grammar School - one of the new Anglican schools on the Central Coast - for that lovely rendition of the national anthem and the contribution that you are making to providing choice and diversity when it comes to the education of the young in this country.
 The Government I lead has always stood very, very strongly for choice and diversity when it comes to education, and we believe in an education system where there are good public schools and there are good independent schools and people can make the choice that they think is suitable for the education of their children.
This part of Australia of course is growing and growing very, very rapidly, and like all areas of Australia that have experienced, and continued to experience growth, it does put some stresses and strains on infrastructure. And one of the problems of the Central Coast of Australia, in common with many other parts of our country, is of course the problem of the shortage of water. And the announcement I made this morning of the $2.6 million Federal Government contribution to the Porters Creek Wetlands Project, which is designed to harvest stormwater, to improve the environmental flows of the area of Porters Creek, we are contributing $2.6 million. The Wyong Council came to us with a project. We thought it was a good project and we decided to augment it. And it's going to benefit the area to the tune of about 5.4 gigalitres, and that is a significant contribution to challenging the water problems of this area, where the Mayor told me the dam's down to what 14.9 per cent capacity this morning. We need in this country a lot more recycling of water. We need to have more aggressive policies to capture stormwater and we need to understand that there is no one-size-fits-all silver bullet solution to the problem of water supply. It needs to be tackled according to the needs and the capacities of individual areas. And this is a very important, practical, grassroots, on-the-ground way of tackling some of the water difficulties and the water shortages on the Central Coast of New South Wales.
Now as I talk to you this morning, I talk against the background of an Australian nation that has every reason to feel positive and optimistic about not only its present, but also about its future. We have a 30-year low in unemployment, it's now down to 4.8 per cent, and we haven't had levels like that for over a generation. And as I move around Australia and I visit all parts of the country, and I talk to people in large businesses and small businesses and in local communities, the universal refrain that they have is not about letting staff go, it's all about how to find the staff to fill the jobs that they have available. We are living in an employees' market like never before in my lifetime. And although our conditions in Australia economically were very strong in the 1960s, in many respects they're stronger now because our economy is more self-sustaining, it's more competitive, it can stand on its own feet and in that way be a great deal more effective. And we can look forward to the future with a great deal of hope and a great deal of optimism.
But that doesn't mean to say that we don't have challenges. And I know that one of the biggest bug-bears of the situation at the present time is the high price of petrol. And we Australians love our motorcars, we drive a lot, it's a big country, we drive all over the place. We not only drive from the Central Coast up to Newcastle or beyond, but down to Sydney and inland, we love driving. And nothing is going to stop us driving, so therefore we all feel the impact of high petrol prices. And I know that, I hear it everywhere I go, I wish I could wave a magic wand and get them down, but you won't do that until the price of oil - which is set by world demand - falls.  It goes up and down a bit and I was looking at all the prices as I was coming up...driving up through the North Shore area of Sydney and up onto the Freeway and the prices, you know, they vary a bit, they're a little lower, because what, it's Wednesday, and they seem to go up a bit later in the week, and I follow all of that, and the ACCC follows all of that, and we might see it come down, we might see it go up. But fundamentally, until there is a big turnaround in the world demand for oil, it's not going to back to the levels of 75 and 80 and 90 cents a litre that was the situation a few years ago.
I think when I first came to this club in November of 2001 - which was on Melbourne Cup Day - it was on Melbourne Cup Day in 2001 and the place was agog. I think people were more interested screen than they were in me but I was quite prepared to take a back seat on Melbourne Cup Day. I think the price of petrol then probably would have been sort of about 85 or 90 cents a litre, and it does seem, perhaps even lower, it does seem a long time ago.
Now we're not going to go back to those days, but we might go lower than where we are now maybe some time I hope in the not-too-distant future. But one of the things we ought to remember as Australians about this, and it's not of much comfort to the motorist - but I think it's a point worth making - that one of the major reasons why petrol is very dear now is the huge demand that is being made by China as she grows and gets stronger, and a much bigger economy, the huge demand that China is making on the world supplies of energy. Now the relevance of that is that Australia is one of the few countries that is getting a big benefit out of China's increased demand for energy, because a lot of the things that we have, like iron ore, and like coal, and like gas, are the things that China desperately needs to fuel her economic expansion.
So one of the ironies of all of this is, yes, petrol prices are going up and we don't like that, but one of the reasons is China's economic expansion and Australia is a great beneficiary of China's economic expansion.
I guess the other thing I'd like to say about petrol is that there are things that the Government can do at the margin, and one of the things that we are doing at the margin is providing people with an incentive if they wanted to convert their cars to LPG. And we announced at the beginning of last week a subsidy, $1000 for a new car if it's got an LPG capacity, and $2000 to convert an existing car to LPG. And you put one of these tanks in the boot - they take up a bit of room - but they also save a bit of money.
 And one of the things I learnt, and I went out to one of these LPG places out in Granville with our good friend and colleague Pat Farmer, he used to, before he went into Parliament, he used to fit LPG tanks to cars and he knows all about the business. And one of the interesting things that I learnt out there was that the older the car, the cheaper the retrofit. And I thought that was very interesting because people had been running around since I made the announcement, saying oh, this subsidy is only for the better-off people who can afford it. And I was told that if you had a really old car it would normally cost only about $2000 - that's even a bit less for the fit - and if the subsidy's $2000 it means that you might recover virtually all, if not all of the costs of the refit. And when you take into account the savings - because although LPG is not quite as fuel efficient as petrol - it's much cheaper as you all know when you go past those service stations, and there are about 3200 service stations around Australia that sell LPG, it's quite a good deal.
So whilst nothing compulsory about it, it is nonetheless a very valuable, practical way of helping people get through some of these difficulties and some of these challenges of very high oil prices and which are causing these very high petrol prices.
 The final thing that I do want to say to all of you is how very important the maintenance of a strong health system is for this country. And we need a health system that balances the strong Government safety net of Medicare, and Medicare is something that Australians love almost as much as a motorcar. Australians are very fond of Medicare, they want to keep it and they want see it strengthen. And that's what my Government has done over the years. And part of the safety net under Medicare is of course the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. And yesterday Tony Abbott announced that a wonderful drug Herceptin, which treats breast cancer, has been placed on the PBS list with effect from the 1st of October, and it will reduce to an affordable level the availability of that wonderful drug which will be of benefit to up to 2000 people around Australia in the years ahead. It will cost $400 million, but when it comes to a drug of that nature, this country can afford that and this country should afford that. And the time that was taken to decide the list that was not related to cost, it was related to being completely satisfied of the medical and helpful qualities of this drug through the process that involves the experts. And I mention this drug and I mention the decision announced by Mr Abbott to remind all of you of the great importance of the safety nets that we have in place in this country.
I'm very proud of the fact that Australia has managed to strike the right balance when it comes to social security between the sometimes harshness and indifference of the American approach, and on the other hand, the sometimes unaffordable paternalistic approach of some of the European countries. And we seem to have got the balance right. We have a safety net where it is really needed. And when it comes to life-prolonging or life-saving drugs, every Australian -irrespective of his or her economic circumstances - is entitled to the same level of treatment and the same level of assistance. That has always been the Australian way and that's the principle on which Medicare is built. It's the principle on which the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is built and that's why we remain as a Government very strongly committed to that scheme and very strongly committed to safety nets when it comes to our health system.
Now I don't really want to say anymore, long speeches are not the order of the day at these gatherings, there'll be many people here who keep the local community going, who are volunteers in so many ways and I want to thank you, all of you, for your wonderful contribution to our country. And the very last thing I'll say is what a wonderful bloke Ken Ticehurst is as your local member. He really is. That old saying given to us by a fly-spray manufacturer of, 'when you're on a good thing, stick to it' and he's a wonderful example of that and he's stuck to you, you stick to him, he's a good bloke, he was, you know complaining about he wanted this money that I announced this morning, he's always on my back chasing things and that's what a good local member in a thriving community is all about. His blood's worth bottling.  


PRIME MINISTER:
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. I'm here with my friend and colleague Ken Ticehurst the Member for Dobell, and I acknowledge Councillor Bob Graham, the Mayor and other distinguished guests, to announce a contribution by the Federal Government of $2.6 million towards the $16 million harvesting project of stormwater for the benefit of the Porters Creek Wetlands by the Wyong Shire Council.
 This will be the eighth project in New South Wales funded by the Federal Government under a component of its $2 billion national water fund. This is a project put to the Federal Government with Ken's very enthusiastic backing in order to harvest stormwater and bring it into this dam, to make sure that the natural rhythm and cycles of the wetlands were not disturbed. It will be environmentally beneficial for that reason, and it will also make a contribution towards tackling the chronic water shortage problems of the Central Coast of New South Wales.
It was only a few months ago that the Federal Government announced out of the same fund the contribution of another $6 million for another project on the Central Coast. It is designed to tackle the water shortage problems of this part of Australia. This $2 billion fund is designed to provide practical targeted assistance to individual projects all around the country.
 Many people think that there is a big bang, or silver bullet solution to the water problems of Australia. There isn't really. The way you fix water problems is to look at the challenges of individual communities and address them in a practical, cooperative way. And we had a request from the local council, and we've provided $2.6 million and it's something like 5.4 gigalitres of water will be saved as a result of this project; now that's making a big contribution. And every area is different, the river systems are different, the wetlands are different and a different solution is involved in each area.
For my own part, I believe generally speaking, that recycling is essential. I said that in the wake of the debate in Queensland and I repeat it here today, that recycling of water in many parts of Australia, using different approaches, but operating on the principle that a lot of water can be recycled, that we should harvest stormwater, that they represent the practical ways of tackling the water shortage problem.
 I hope that this project is successful. I am sure it will be. It has the, not only the blessing of the Federal Government, but courtesy of the energy of Ken Ticehurst the local member, it's got 2.6 million federal dollars as part of it and I hope that will make a contribution. It's a beautiful day to be on the Central Coast and nice to see you all. Any questions?
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, should the question of recycling be put to people here as it was in Toowoomba?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh I don't think so. I think everybody will support this project.
JOURNALIST:
What about incentives?
 PRIME MINISTER:
Well $2.6 million is a very big incentive.
JOURNALIST:
There's been a lot of talk about water tanks and how more people should have them, that would make a big difference. Could the Federal Government offer....
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I suppose the Federal Government, you know, how long is a piece of string? I think the question you've got to ask yourself is the Federal Government, given that water supply is overwhelmingly regulated by states and local governments, are we making a fair and reasonable contribution. When you look at the size of the water fund, the answer is overwhelmingly yes.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, will the Government be watching this project to see how it might be used in other areas?
PRIME MINISTER:
Oh I think the national water fund, the part of the Government that looks after this; yes. To give you an example, I was in Western Australia a few months ago and I, on the shores of the Indian Ocean, we dedicated or contributed about the same amount of money to a project run by the Cottesloe City Council, and it was for renewing some aquifers and capturing some stormwater. About the same amount of money, similar principle. The local council worked out a practical way of saving water, came to us, we had a look at it and we gave them money. Now that is the approach we have. We don't try and impose a one size fits all solution because the country's very big and it's very different. But there are some consistencies and one of those consistencies, of course, is the value of recycled water.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, do you have a position on mobile desalination plants, could that funding support its use?
PRIME MINISTER:
I've heard about those, yes. Well that's a decision of the local council. I'm not offering any criticism of that. The local council's made a decision to do that. I do think one of the advantages of recycling is it doesn't have the same, potentially, negative effect on the environment.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mark, the Mayor, thank you for you very kind words of welcome to this beautiful part of Australia, my other Parliamentary colleagues, both State and Federal, ladies and gentlemen.
My first remarks to you are about the quality and energy of your local Federal Member Mark Baker. He listed a number of things that have occurred. He was too modest to say that most of them, in relation to benefits of particular value to this area have occurred in the relatively short time that he has been the Federal Member for the seat of Braddon. We all remember the particular circumstances of his election at the end of 2004 where the people of this electorate, along with the people of Bass voted very strongly for the Coalition because the Coalition was committed to the jobs that were necessary to sustain the prosperity of local industry and local people.
I'm amused as I move around Australia, and I see this sign that says "Your Rights at Work." The most important right that anybody has is to work, not at work. And in the time that we have been in Government, we have seen a spectacular fall in the level of unemployment in this country. Over the last three months we have seen the biggest three-monthly rise in employment in the 10 years that this Government has been in office. And when you think of that, and pause for a moment, and set it against the propaganda that came from the Labor Party and the unions about the allegedly devastating effect of the Workchoices legislation, and that propaganda still goes on. We were told that this was a charter for mass sackings. We were told by Mr Shorten and Mr Beazley this would usher in an era of mass sackings. It's done nothing of the kind. It has in fact delivered over the last three months the biggest quarterly increase in employment - 159,000 throughout Australia - in the 10 years that this Government has been in office.
And in this part of the world, in the electorate of Braddon the unemployment rate has fallen, as Mark said, from around 11 per cent in 1996 to the current level of six to six-and-a-half per cent. And I frequently borrow the words of the British Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair, when shortly after being made Prime Minister of Great Britain in 1997 he addressed the Trade Union Congress and he said fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job. And the greatest right anybody has in the workplace is to have a job. And policies that give people jobs are the real key to fairness and justice in the workplace.
  Mark is right. Australia is enjoying an era of great prosperity and the prosperity of Tasmania is overwhelmingly a product of the prosperity of the nation. I know state governments always claim the credit for economic success and when something goes wrong, well it's all the fault of the Federal Government. Now I understand that. I have been in politics for 32 years. I know how that sort of operates, and I can understand it. But let's not kid ourselves. The great drivers of national prosperity and I have to say that in the 32 years I have been in politics, I have never seen better economic conditions than I now see in Tasmania. And I am so grateful and so pleased and it's such a good thing that the whole country is enjoying this prosperity and the contribution that the strong economic policies have made have been very much part of it.
Now I do want to talk about two things in particular. I want to talk about the decision that was taken by the Vestas company in relation to its future operations because I know it's been a subject of interest and concern. And I am pleased at the remarks that have been made this morning, very positive remarks by the company's leadership about future opportunities. And I can make it very plain that we, at a Federal Government level, Mark has been working very closely with my office and with the Federal Minister for Industry Ian Macfarlane to see what assistance we can provide to ensure that there is a continuation of employment opportunities for the 65 people who are employed by that company.
It's also important to note that the principal reasons given at the news conference this morning for the company's decision which was taken by head office in Denmark are not related to the MRET scheme, but rather are a product of worldwide demand and cost issues. And simultaneously with the decision taken in relation to the operation here in northern Tasmania, another decision has been taken for the closure of one of the company's plants in Scotland, so it's hard to argue that this decision is a one-off, related to the Government's policies in relation to renewable energy.
 But the important thing is that your local Member Mark Baker is working with my office and with the Federal Minister for Industry to see what assistance can be given to ensure that the opportunities that are available for a continuity of employment for the 65 Australians employed are fully investigated. And I would like to see cooperation between the Federal Government, the State Government and the local community, and not some sort of point scoring exercise between the two levels of government. And I am sure that if that happens then the opportunities that might be available, ultimately commercial decisions are involved when companies expand or companies contract, no government can guarantee the maintenance of the commercial operations of every single company in this country, and any prime minister, or opposition leader, or candidate or member who gets up and asserts that if only he had an opportunity he would keep every company going at the same level of operation and nobody would ever be affected by commercial decisions, don't take any notice of anybody who says that because there's not a man or woman alive who can deliver on such an absurd commitment.
The key thing is that we have for some time been working cooperatively with the company. Your local Member has been working with my office and with the Federal Industry Minister in order to make sure that what assistance can be properly provided is provided.
The only other thing that I do want to say ladies and gentlemen is that over the next year or 18 months there will be a lot of debate about the future management of this country. There will be a lot of claims made on the support and the affections of the Australian people from both sides of politics. We are living in an era which is characterised by a couple of things. It's an era of great economic prosperity. We saw the astonishing profit earned by BHP Billiton, the largest corporate profit in Australia's history. And before people, and I know there won't be any in this room, but there are some in the community who start taking pot-shots at the fact that BHP Billiton made $13 billion. Let me remind them that they paid almost $4 billion of that in taxation. And that $4 billion has helped to fund tax cuts for the entire community itself, but provide investment in roads, it will help to pay, in some small way, for the $10 billion extra that this Government is going to spend on increasing the size of the Australian Army over the next 11 years.  Two battalions do not come cheap, they never did, they didn't come cheap in the past, and they are not going to come cheap in the future.  But it's a very necessary investment in the security of this country.  Because challenges to our security and maintaining our economy prosperity are the two big, national political issues, and political responsibilities that this country faces.  We do live in an unsettled region, there are failing states in our region.  We've seen it in the Solomon Islands, we've seen it in East Timor, we may see it in Papua New Guinea, and this country must be able to shoulder the burden more than any other country in the world of providing assistance in our part of the world.
  And that's why we are increasing the size of the Army, it's also why I announced in Sydney this morning before I came here, an increase of 422 personnel in the overseas Deployment Group of the Australian Federal Police.  Because with many of these operations, there are two phases, you send in the Army that provide the immediate stabilisation and when that's occurred you need to provide police on the ground to do the routine policing tasks, and we as a nation will need to invest more as the years go by in defence, and in providing the other security back-up that's so needed to meet our responsibilities, particularly, but not only, in the region.
  And the other challenge of course, the other aspect of the debate in Australia over the next 18 months will be, which side of politics is better able to maintain economic prosperity.  We are a prosperous country; there is no reason why the benefits of the resources boom should not continue for some time.  We don't like high petrol prices; they are painful for many people in the Australian community.  Ironically, one of the major of causes of high petrol prices, in fact the major cause of high petrol prices, is the huge demand for fuel coming out of the booming Chinese economy.  Demand is running ahead of supply and the price has gone up, that's why petrol is dear, it's the main reason, there are other reasons at the margin, but that's the main reason.  And most of the demand is being driven by the extraordinary economic growth of China.
  Yet [inaudible] for us is we are paying those higher petrol prices, but we are benefiting enormously from China's economic expansion.  Many other countries around are paying the higher petrol prices, but they are not benefiting from China's economic expansion.  Petrol is about what $2.40 or $2.50 in Britain, it's about 50-60 per cent dearer in Germany and France than what it is in Australia except that I know that's of absolutely no comfort, or no reassurance to people in Australia who are paying the very high prices that we are at the present time.  But let us remember that we do benefit more than most from the economic growth in the country which is the principal cause of those petrol prices being higher.
 Now I have no doubt that there will be an enormous amount of debate about interest rates over the next 12 months and I hear that Mr Beazley is making a speech in which he's attacking the high interest rate policies of the Keating Government. Well the last time I checked, Mr Beazley was a member of the Keating Government, he was in fact Mr Keating's Deputy Prime Minister. He was, as it were, a co-conspirator in sending Australian interest rates to levels of 17 and 21 per cent, that Mark mentioned in his speech. And those people, when they were in Government, were the high interest rate specialists of this country. And many of you in businesses will remember the astronomically high small business and farming interest rates in the late 1980s and the early 1990s. So let's have no lectures about interest rates from the Leader of the Opposition who was Deputy Prime Minister in Mr Keating's Government.
Ladies and gentlemen, this country is experiencing an extraordinary chapter in its economic history and although I am very proud of the economic reforms that have made a contribution to that, the introduction of a new taxation system, the new workplace relations system that I believe is fundamentally important to maintaining our current prosperity, today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms. Tomorrow's prosperity can only be a product of today's reforms.
And when people say to me, well look, you've done enough, you've fixed the tax system, you've done this, you've done that. Don't do any more, have a rest, take a holiday, leave the economy to look after itself. That is a recipe for this country running out of steam. And once governments think that they've done enough, once governments think they can rest on their laurels, that is when they begin to lose a grip on things.
 And I can promise you that this Government will never rest on its oars. We need, as a nation, to continue the process and the challenge of economic reform. And that's why we've changed the workplace relations system because a workplace relations system based on getting workers and employers (inaudible) at an enterprise level is a workplace relations system that will generate more jobs and greater prosperity and higher levels of productivity.
So my friends, we have introduced policies that have been of enormous benefit, but the greatest contribution to the prosperity of this country over the last decade has been the hard work of the men and women of this country, the adaptability of Australian workers, the adaptability of Australian businessmen and women, the way in which this country has changed. You're now investing in different industries than you did here in northern Tasmania 20 years ago. You're adopting practices and attitudes that were not thought of 20 years ago, and the adaptability of this country, and its capacity to change, has, more than anything, contributed to the great economic prosperity that we now enjoy.
 It's nice to be back here. Mark is a wonderful representative and the people of Braddon made a very wise choice in October of 2004 to send him the Canberra and I will do everything I can to help him remain as your local Member. You should do likewise because he's a very good investment, a very good choice. Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Dale.  Will Hodgman, the Leader of the Opposition Tasmania, Senator Eric Abetz, my other federal and state parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It's a huge pleasure again to be back at the annual gathering of the Liberal family here in Tasmania. And I greet you with a very strong measure of gratitude for the great support that Liberals in Tasmania have given to me and to all of my federal parliamentary colleagues over the last 12 months.
  We have a task ahead of us and that task is not only to defend the House of Representative seats we hold in Tasmania, but to add to them. And I am delighted that already the party has endorsed Ben Quinn in the seat of Lyons, he did a wonderful job in more than halving Mr Adams majority at the last election, and I look forward enthusiastically to helping him and the other candidates yet to be chosen in Franklin and Denison.  And to my two parliamentary colleagues in northern Tasmania, Michael Ferguson and Mark Baker, who won historic victories, which gave us such early heart on election night in 2004, thank you for the great job that you are doing in the name of the Liberal Party and in the name of the policies of this government.
 Yesterday I announced here in Hobart, the decision of the Government to proceed with a sale of a portion of its 51 per cent shareholding in Telstra. And in doing that I gave effect to a promise that we have made on four occasions to the Australian people.  I am amazed that Mr Beazley is attacking me for keeping my promises.
  In 1996 we said we would sell one third of Telstra and we did, by 1998 it was our policy to sell the Government's remaining share in Telstra but it was not until last year that we secured parliamentary approval to do that.  How on earth, therefore, can I be criticised for keeping faith with the Australian people.  Some people may disagree with me on the sale of Telstra, but nobody can say that I didn't promise to do it.  Nobody can say that the Government misled the Australian people, nobody can say that the Government didn't campaign to end the absurd conflict of interest, in the Government being not only the regulator, but also the majority shareholder.
  Governments are bad at running businesses, ladies and gentlemen, governments have no business running major corporations.  Governments are there to govern in the public interest. They are not there to run companies and it is in the long term interests of the Australian people that this giant corporation be fully privatised, and I do not apologise for that, I do not take a back step on that.  I told the Australian people that I would do it, and what I did yesterday was a fulfilment of a promise that I made to the Australian people, and the Australian public voted for us at the last election in the full knowledge that that was our commitment.
 Mr Beazley not only attacked me for keeping my promises, he says, oh, the price is not high enough.  Well I might remind Mr Beazley that when the market price was a lot higher, he voted to stop the sale.  So if he thinks the price is too low, will he now apologise to the Australian people for blocking the sale in the Senate in 1998 and 1999.  The problem with Mr Beazley is that he is against everything but for nothing.  That's his problem, he is the great Doctor No of Australian politics.  He never supports anything. I mean, let us go through the long list.
  He left us with $10 billion black hole, and together with his co-conspirator Mr Keating, who he now wants to blame exclusively for the 17 per cent interest rates that we had when they were in Government, he left us with that.  Not only did he leave us with that, he also tried to stop us passing the measures to get rid of the deficit and to repay the debt.  So he was responsible for the problem, and then he opposed our attempts to fix the problem.
 When we tried to introduce tax reform, he opposed that and said he would roll it back.  Well that promise sort of disappeared in convoluted confusion in the middle of the 2001 election campaign.  He opposed our attempts to reform the tax system, he opposed Work for the Dole, he opposed the reforms on the Australian waterfront which have lifted the crane rates per hour from 17 or 18 to an unheard of 27 or 28 and made the Australian ports that were once the laughing stock of the Australian community... and the famous story told about a lady who lived in Winton in Queensland, and she was told that a hurricane was coming, and she said, oh, I'm not worried the wharfies won't let it land.  Of course it was a reminder of the mindset.  Now that mindset was broken in 1998 but did Mr Beazley join that?  No, he didn't join that.
  And so it's gone on, and I was amazed of course, two days ago when I, yesterday rather, when I announced an increase in the size of the overseas component of the Australian Federal Police, 422, the largest injection of personnel into the Australian Federal Police since that remarkably effective organisation was formed in 1979, and Mr Beazley even attacked that.  He said, oh, you will take police from the state forces.
  Let me say to Mr Beazley, there are 2000 people right at this moment wanting to join the Australian Federal Police, and in any event, if a man or a woman in a state police force wants to advance their career opportunities by trying to transfer to the Federal Police, what's wrong with that?  I mean, is he against that?  The problem with this man is that he has a mindset of opposition, he has a mindset of negativity.  If John Howard is in favour of it, he's got to be against it, he's got to rummage around for a reason, instead of recognising as he should have, that increasing the size of the Federal Police, like increasing the size of the army, is necessary in Australia's national interest.  And just occasionally, Opposition leaders might do themselves some good by agreeing with the Government because no matter how prejudiced you may be, the reality is that nobody in Australian public life has a monopoly on good decisions or a monopoly on wisdom.  And I do think the Australian people want a positive view, and an optimistic view about our future because this country has an enormous amount to be optimistic about, and hopeful about.
 On my way in I saw a familiar sign.  It said, your rights at work.  I am interested in people's rights at work and I thought about that sign, I looked at it and I thought, your rights at work.  Well the first right at work, is actually to be at work, is to have a job. As Tony Blair famously said, as Tony Blair, a very successful and courageous Labour leader, I don't say that about many of them, but I mean it about him, he's courageous, and he's been successful because he's carried out some necessary reforms. And the most sensible thing Tony Blair did when he became Prime Minister of Great Britain was to realise that the industrial relations reforms of the Thatcher Government were good for Britain.  And although they had gone against the trade union grain, it wasn't in that nation's interests to get rid of them.  So he addressed the trade union congress in 1997, that's the equivalent of the ACTU in Britain, and he said famously, fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job.
 And that is as true in this country as it is in any other country.  And on that test, this has been the fairest government Australia has had in 30 years.  This has been the government that's delivered more rights for people both in work and at work, of any government in 30 years.  So I say to the workers of Australia, your rights at work are safer under a Coalition Government than they would be under a Labor government, and I've got the evidence to back up the statement.  Unemployment now is at a 30 year low.
Since our industrial relations legislation was introduced, employment has risen by 159,000, and that's the biggest quarterly rise in employment since the Government came to power, 159,000.  Mr Beazley and Mr Shorten said there were going to be mass sackings, instead there has been mass hirings.
  That's how we have treated people's rights at work, and to be in work.  And in the 10 and a half years that I have been Prime Minister, real wages for Australian workers have risen by 16.8 per cent, 16.8 per cent.  I ask the rhetorical question, how much did they rise under Labor in 13 years?  1.3 per cent, not many rights at work then, not many at all.  Not too many rights at work for the million Australians who lost their jobs when Mr Beazley was the Employment Minister, not too many rights for those million people.  All the legislation in the world will not save your job if the economy is badly run.  And the greatest guarantee of job security in this country, is a strong, prosperous, growing economy, and the greatest thing that we have done for the workers of this country is to deliver them, a strong and growing, and prosperous economy, so that they can enjoy, not only the right to work, but they can enjoy a good and rising wage, and a proper return on their efforts and their productivity while they have been at work.
 But by all means, I say to my opponents on this issue, show your banners, display your slogans, talk about rights at work because I can out debate and point to the performance of this Government on that issue with anybody the Labor party likes to deliver in parliament. Because we have done better by the workers of Australia than the Labor party could ever dream of doing.
  My friends, the question that will be asked repeatedly over the next 12 or 18 months as we move to the election next year will be which side of politics is better able to sustain and expand the prosperity that we now have, and which side of politics is better able to look after and secure the defence of this county and our vital interests in our region and around the world?
  And the Government over the last 10 and a half years has demonstrated again and again its superior credentials in those two areas.  And over the last week we have seen in the decisions the Government has taken, a continued determination to push ahead with economic reform, our determination to go ahead with the full privatisation of Telstra is an example of that.
  You do have to take decisions that are sometimes criticised and are sometimes seen as difficult.  You do have to maintain the momentum, you do have to hold your nerve and maintain your will, and in the end the Australian public will support a government that is determined to implement its agenda.  But in our two announcements, and particularly the announcement to expand the size of the Australian Army, we have again invested not only enormous resources, but enormous confidence and faith in the capacity of this country to play a significant part not only in our region but around the world.
 I have been saying for some time that Australia needs a bigger army and I was delighted to make that announcement on Thursday.  Because I believe that by building two additional army battalions, we will add to the capacity of Australia to shoulder her share of the burden in the Pacific region, and where appropriate, contribute to coalition operations particularly against terrorism in other parts of the world.  We do live in an unstable region.  We have seen in East Timor and the Solomon Islands, some years ago in Fiji, and potentially in Papua New Guinea, we have seen the actuality and the possibility of instability and turbulence. And the rest of the world rightly says to Australia, you are the biggest and wealthiest and most capable country in the region, we would like you to carry the greater share of the burden, and I accept that, and I think most Australians do.  Just as we expect other countries to shoulder their share of the burden in other parts of the world.
 And I hope that the countries of Europe finally come up to the crease in relation to the stabilisation force in the Middle East. There's a lot of talk always, I hope it is met by the troop commitments that are needed.  You need a force of 15,000 to effectively bring about stability in that part of the world, and unless that is forthcoming, then I do not hold optimistic hopes for how things will work out.
 But the decision we took last week, which will over a period of 10 or 11 years, cost at least $10 billion, will give Australia for the first time, since the 1970s, eight army battalions.  One of the new battalions will be located in South East Queensland, and another near Adelaide. And it will give to the Australian forces, particularly the army, a far great capacity and a far greater depth, and it needs it, and it's a decision that I know the Australian people will very strongly support.
  And coupled with our commitment to strengthen the Australian Federal Police, it's a demonstration of our determination to match our economic strength and our words with a capacity where necessary, to provide both soldiers and police to bring about stability. And we need both because there often comes a point after a military intervention when you need police because the tasks are essentially policing tasks rather than military tasks.
  And our men and women in both the ADF and the Australian Federal Police have done an absolutely wonderful job in our name over the past few years.  So ladies and gentlemen, those three decisions, the increase in the size of the army, the increase in the size of the federal police and the announcement regarding the privatisation of Telstra, all in the space of three days, are really a metaphor, in a sense, of what this government is all about.  It's about getting on with your job, it's about taking sometimes difficult decisions, it's about making long-term investments and commitments for the long-term benefit of this country.
  When you think about it, one day after the other, a bigger army, a stronger federal police, privatisation of Telstra.  These are the decisions of a government that remains very, very aware of, and alert to, the responsibilities we have to all of the Australian people.  The response of the Opposition has been a mish-mash of negativity and confused rhetoric and criticism, not a spontaneous and genuine reaction against the background of Australia's national interest.  So the last three days has seen your government looking after your long-term interests, your government doing things that are good for Australia in the long-term, doing things that strengthen us in the region, doing things that strengthen our economy, and demonstrating again that we are a government for the long-term, we are a government for the enduring interests of all of the Australian people.
 [ends]


Thank you David, Madam Mayor, my parliamentary colleagues, Senator Alan Ferguson and Senator Corey Bernardi, other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. It's great to be back in the electorate of Wakefield and can I say immediately what a very good choice you made at the last election to send David Fawcett to Canberra. You might say "well he would say that wouldn't he?" because he's one of my mob, but he's more than just one of my mob, he is a very genuine, sincere, committed representative. And you meet a lot of representatives, and most of them come in with the very best of intentions, and they try to do a good job. And there are genuine men and women in Parliament on both sides of politics, let me make that clear, but there's something about David, there's a quiet sincerity and an attention to detail which really has, in a short space of time, had a great impact on me and a great impact on all of his colleagues. And I am therefore especially pleased to be in his electorate.
I want to say to all of you who are gathered here this afternoon, who may be involved in different volunteer activities within our community, that you are owed a very big thank you by your fellow Australians. We are a great volunteer society, we Australians. Maybe it had something to do with the fact that we were in the early days of European settlement, we were left to our own devices, in isolation, and we had to rely on the volunteer efforts of others to keep us going. And from that early beginning we've handed down a tradition of volunteering. We really are wonderful volunteers and it so important, no matter how prosperous our society is, it is tremendously important that we acknowledge the role of those in our society who day in, day out, year in, year out, do nothing other than serve their fellow citizens and try and give some help to those, who through no fault of their own, have fallen between the cracks.
It is true that this country is going through a period of great prosperity. We're now in the 15th year of unbroken economic expansion.  But I wouldn't want any of you to think that the only thing that this Government is interested in is the economic growth and the economic expansion of the nation. Because important though that is and important though it is to our future that we continue to have a strong economy, there are a lot of non-economic issues that the Government has focussed on very, very heavily and very emphatically.
 We have in the time that we have been in office, we have tried to address some of the social challenges that our society has. We all believe very strongly in the importance of strong, united families. I've often said that not only do strong families provide individuals with a moral compass and a secure emotional environment, but strong and united families are also the most effective welfare system that mankind has ever devised. And when families fall apart and relationships break up, there's not only an enormous emotional cost but there's an enormous economic cost.
 And whilst no Prime Minister, however much he or she may wish it were otherwise, can ever keep all relationships intact or keep all families together, what I think we can do is to try and find better ways than we've had in the past of helping people whose relationships do break apart, helping them to solve their differences in a more amicable fashion.
 And one of the initiatives that we've recently launched, involves some changes to the Family Law Act and the introduction of Family Relationship Centres. And there are 65 of them being opened around the country. And the idea is that people who can't, when they break up and they've got children, they can't immediately agree on how all of those matters should be managed, they will be invited and expected, before they go to court, to visit these Family Relationship Centres and to get some advice and to see if they can't begin to sort out their problems in a less expensive and a less litigious way. Because the process of going to acrimonious litigation in a divorce court is ruinous financially and very destructive emotionally. And these relationship centres, that have now been operating for a while, they're opening around the country, and the early indications are that they are beginning to provide people in these difficult and sad situations with some help that was not previously available.
 Now I mention that, not because it's the only initiative in the social welfare field that we have introduced, but it is one of the most recent, and it's an indication that good government is not just about making sure that unemployment is low, making sure that people are investing in business and providing a strong business and economic climate; that good government is also about tackling some of the more difficult, social problems that our society has.
 And of course in an area like drugs, about seven or eight years ago I felt the Federal Government had to do more in the fight against drugs. And I've set aside, up to a billion dollars over a period of years, for a 'Tough on Drugs' campaign. And it has three elements. The first element is an uncompromising zero tolerance attack on people who traffic in drugs and a zero tolerance approach to drug use in our community. I never embraced the trendy notion that there was a level to which you could happily agree that people should take drugs and all you had to do was embrace this odd notion of harm minimisation. It's always seemed to me, to be a contradiction in terms, if something is harmful you ought to try avoid it altogether, you don't just sort of settle for 50 per cent harm or 75 per cent harm, you actually try and avoid it altogether.
 And for a period of time I was derided. I can remember having some arguments with, even some of my own state colleagues in various parts of Australia, who said that we should legalise marijuana, we should adopt a more progressive approach. People said get with it John, you're out of date, you're old fashioned. Now it's very interesting with the passage of time and more understanding of the impact of marijuana use on the mind and the link between suicide and marijuana, the link between depression and marijuana use, there is now a much more realistic approach to drug use and a much more solid support for the zero tolerance approach.
 So the first thing was to have that zero tolerance approach. The second was to recognise that behind any good drug policy, lay education. And that if people were advised very early in life in particular, or even later in life if it were necessary, that the impact of drugs on the system, and the impact of drugs on people's lives, then a lot would be gained; and the third thing was to recognise that we didn't have enough rehabilitation services in the community. There were many people who are struggling with a drug problem but there weren't enough skilled counsellors and others to help them beat the habit.
 And as a result of that we have seen some progress. I am not saying all of this progress is due to everything the Government has done but we have seen some progress. We have seen a sharp decline in the number of deaths from heroin overdoses. We have even seen a pleasing decline in the level of youth suicide. In the late 1990s Australia had one of the highest youth suicide rates in rural areas, particularly amongst young men, of any country in the world. Now there has been a turnaround in that and I think it's a very welcome turnaround.   So they're a couple of the things in the non-economic area, in case any of you think that the only thing my Government is interested in is keeping unemployment low but that's very important, keeping inflation low and having a strong economy because those things are tremendously important.   And one of the things that is very important in Australia at the present time is that we don't have enough skilled tradesmen. We are desperately short of qualified tradesmen. I was in Elizabeth this morning at the Holden plant and they have just had an enormous new investment and they are releasing one of their new models, the new Statesman and the new Calais today, and I shook hands with a young man and I said "what do you do?" And he said "I am an apprentice electrician." And I said "mate, your blood is worth bottling because we really do badly need apprentice electricians." We need apprentice carpenters, apprentice plumbers and we need apprenticeships in all of these traditional areas. And I want to build an Australian society where having a high grade technical qualification is as prized as a university degree.   And for too long in Australia we had this silly notion that the only pathway to a successful career was to go to university. Now I think going to university is a wonderful privilege and I want all Australians who want to go to university and are able to do so to have that opportunity. I went to university and it was of great assistance to me. But there are many who don't and the great majority of people who leave school don't go to university and for a generation or more we denigrated the value of technical training and we have moved away in our education system from recognising that there were many people who didn't want to go to university, they wanted to become tradesmen, they wanted to be electricians or carpenters and plumbers. And of course, you don't do too badly, particularly if you have your own business. I mean, you know, I know a lot of plumbers who do quite well and I know a lot of carpenters who've become small businessman and so forth, there's nothing wrong with that. And I think we need to change our attitudes. We are beginning to.
 There's a very important event here in this local community. The Australian Technical College that my colleague David campaigned for so vigorously and won for this part of Adelaide, it is having its first public information night. And I know a lot of local businessmen and women have worked very, very hard to support it. And I know one of them, and I met him on the way in, Mr Kevin Weekes has agreed to take some 30 apprentices coming out of this Australia Technical College. We're building 25 of them around Australia and 23 have been announced already. And their idea is to lift the status of apprenticeships, to lift the status of technical qualifications and trade qualifications to the sort of level that we need, because we do desperately need more skilled men and women in trades. Whenever I visit business establishments, whether they're big or small around Australia, people don't complain to me about problems with their staff, they only complain to me that they can't get enough people, they can't get enough skilled people. And that is a shortfall that we have to address.
I guess the only other thing that I would like to say ladies and gentlemen, and then I will keep quiet and come around and meet as many of you as possible, and that is this; I think one of the big mistakes that we have made over the past few years, probably more than a few years, it's about 20 or 30 years, in our education system is that we have stopped teaching people in a proper fashion about the history of this country. Now you can criticise as a lot of people do, the Americans. And I don't always agree with them and there are aspects of American life that are not my cup of tea, but you have got to give it to them, they are unashamedly proud of the history of their country and they're unashamedly willing to see that their children get a proper narrative of that history when they go to school.
 And that is why the Federal Government has said that it is determined to restore the place and the role of the teaching of the history in this county in all of the schools in Australia. Not a particular version of history, I mean people will always debate history. I heard on the radio this morning as many of you did that there's some historian bloke in England who's saying it was really the Royal Navy and not the Royal Air Force that won the Battle of Britain. Now I don't think he'll win that argument, no disrespect to the Royal Navy, but I think he's battling to win that argument. But the point simply is that people are always trying to have a different version of history. But you can't even begin, if I could take that as an example, unless you knew when the Battle of Britain occurred, unless you knew where it fell and how critical it was in the course of World War II and how pivotal it was in stopping the German onslaught in World War II, you wouldn't even begin to understand what the debate was all about. And that's the whole point of having a chronological, narrative version of history.
I mean for the last generation we've taught issues when it comes to history. We say 'oh let's have a debate about race, let's have a debate and this or that, the environment, or gender balance, or power balances.' Whatever they sometimes mean, I don't know. But the point I simply make, is that unless you have some idea of the sequence in which things, events took place, then you don't really have a proper understanding of what a debate is about. So no, I am not trying to impose an authorised version of history, I can assure you of that, but I do want people to have a proper understanding of some basic events, the order in which they occurred and the broad historical context in which those events occurred.
So I've mentioned those things ladies and gentlemen to make the point that I lead a Government that is not just interested in economics, important though that is. But I am very proud of the economic strength of this country, I am very proud of the fact that we now have the lowest unemployment level in 30 years. We paid off our debt, we are in a very strong and a very, very prosperous position. We've got to work hard to keep it that way.
And I am delighted to have the opportunity of talking to so many of you and to thank again the volunteers of Wakefield for their contribution to our society. And finally again to commend to you David, who's been a wonderful representative and I hope he continues to be so. Thank you very much.
[ends]


Thank you very much Mr Chairman, the Deputy Premier of South Australia Mr Kevin Foley, Senator Nick Minchin, the Minister for Finance and Leader of the Government in the Senate, David Fawcett the Federal Member for Wakefield, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  It was one of my predecessors Ben Chifley, who famously remarked she's a beauty when the first Holden ran off the assembly line way back in 1948, and since then Holden has been one of those iconic parts of Australian life. And it is important on an occasion such as this, when we mark an extraordinary act of faith by General Motors in the future of motor manufacturing in Australia and a great commitment to manufacturing industry, it's important to reflect for a moment on how far we have travelled in that more than 50 years since Ben Chifley proclaimed she's a beauty.  I think she's a beauty as well and so is she, and I think we can truly say that, as the Deputy Premier remarked, that the great thing about the Australian motor industry now, and it's been the case for many years, but I think more so now because of the severity of competition and the global environment in which we will forever either sink or swim, it is important to note that Australian motor cars are selling, not only here but abroad, because of the quality and excellence of the product.
  And what that modern day reality underlines, is a reality about our country, and that is it's remarkable adaptability. And if I am asked what are some of reasons for the extraordinary run of 15 years of uninterrupted economic growth that our nation continues to enjoy, one that must be put right at the top of the list of a number of explanations, is the capacity of the men and women in the Australian workforce to adapt to change, and also the adaptability of management to adapt to change and the willingness of investors, to back change and to take a risk.  I certainly remember very well my first ministerial portfolio which was Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, a job to which I was appointed late in 1975 as a very raw recruit into the Fraser Government. And I had administrative responsibility for what was then called the Industries Assistance Commission, and therefore administratively (inaudible) of responsibility for the formal or regulatory side of the application of the then, very complicated tariff regime that this country had.  And the level of protection that was then extended to the Australian motor manufacturing industry in the mistaken belief, and I say this with the benefit of hindsight because at that particular time both sides of politics virtually vied with each other to demonstrate who was in favour of the higher level of protection. It's an indication of just how far we have moved. And now of course we see an industry transformed, we see an industry that has prospered in a more open, global, competitive environment.  We see an industry that has got the benefits of generic, economic change and reform. There is little doubt that through the introduction of the new tax system some years ago, with the removal of the old wholesale sales tax, of what 22 per cent, on the motor car industry and its replacement with a GST and the ability to claim input tax credits, that the motor manufacturing industry in this country was greatly benefited by that particular change and added to some of the competitiveness that it now has.  Of course the industry does face enormous challenges, particularly through high fuel prices. And high fuel prices are throwing out a challenge to all motor manufacturers around the world and Australia along with every other developed country is groaning under the weight of high fuel prices that are caused by the high price of crude oil.  And the way in which the nation, the way in which individual companies respond to that, and I am delighted with the Managing Director's reaffirmation of the commitment of General Motors Holden to providing the LPG alternative, and the subsidy recently announced by me on behalf of the Government will provide people who wish to, with the option, of either converting an existing car to LPG or assistance if they buy a car that has that facility already installed.
  Now none of these things are going to bring the price of petrol down, what they are going to do is to provide some kind of assistance at the margins. And it's important that governments, not only here in Australia but around the world, endeavour to do that.  But I would like to do before formally dedicating this building and remarking how impressive the investment of what $533 million here in Adelaide is, is to restate the commitment of my Government to manufacturing industry in this country.  I know that in effect, in the modern world, and because of what Australia is enjoying at the present time, energy is chic, so to speak.  But, all we hear about often is the export of energy from this country and I applaud that, and we had the announcement of a wonderful $13 billion profit by BHP Billiton of which I am pleased to note about $4 billion will go to the Federal Treasury in tax. And that is good, because that will help to pay for all sorts of things.  And we should remember that when company's make big profits and they are doing the right thing and paying their taxes, which they should be, then the nation as a whole benefits. And some of that $4 billion will help to pay for the two additional battalions that I announced last week, that the Australian Army is going to have, or the 422 additional federal police. But the point I want to make is that we should not lose sight at a time when there is so much focus on the importance of coal and iron-ore and LNG and other exports from this country, and a focus inevitably on where ultimately our uranium industry will go, and I know the uranium industry is very important to South Australia because of the Roxby Downs mine, we shouldn't lose sight of the fact that this company here employs 8000 Australians. We shouldn't lose sight of how important it is for us to maintain a manufacturing capacity and the successive policies of my Government have been dedicated to that end.  And this is no more so of course than we find in the motor manufacturing industry. And I want the company, I want the workforce, I want the investors and I want the management to know that our Government does, and working I am pleased to say, in cooperation here with the South Australian Government, and we have worked cooperatively with the South Australian Government, and I take the opportunity of recording.
  When there have been challenges with other companies, we've worked together to help, to make sure that the pain of adjustment and restructuring has not been too difficult for the workforce and we've worked together to provide additional incentives for companies to manufacture, not only in Australia, but here in South Australia.  Manufacturing has always been very much at the heart of the employment base here in Elizabeth, and very much at the heart of the employment base here in South Australia. And I believe that there will be a continuing future for manufacturing in this country.  It's a future that will change its form as the years go by, it's a future that will rely increasingly on innovation, it is a future that will rely forever, on having a decent share of the export market.  We are a nation of only 20 million people and no matter how hard we work, and we work hard, no matter how smart we work, and we do work in a smart fashion, it will always be necessary for us to reach out and find a place in a wider market. And the whole world is our market now, and GMH's story, and our capacity to export and the wonderful new Statesman model that we see being released today will of course sell very heavily in the domestic market, and the export version, the Calais, that new vehicle, will I believe, maintain the reputation and the competitive edge of this country.
 So, I congratulate the company, I thank the whole company for its faith in Australia, I congratulate the workforce.  I just had the opportunity of walking through the assembly process and the efficiency, the fact that that huge conversion was completed without stopping any of the production process, and the pride the men I spoke to took in talking about how every process is done in 76 seconds, and how they get 300 or so done in every shift, and how there is a determination to maintain and improve that.  It shows a company that has good employee relations, and they are always the most successful company, it shows an attitude of mind, and it shows the adaptability and the commitment of the Australian workforce which has been so important to the success of the Australian economy over the last 10 to15 years.
So Mr Chairman, Mr Managing Director, I have very great pleasure in declaring, is it dedicated, or solemnised, or blessed, that's all three, this wonderful new plant, and I thank everybody who has contributed to it, and I wish everybody well for a maintenance of that great icon of Australian manufacturing, the Holden motor car and everything that that entails.
  Thank you so much.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Kym for those very kind and generous words of introduction, to my other parliamentary colleagues who are here today, Senator Grant Chapman and Senator Cory Bernardi, to the Principal, Jenny Sommer, of the Wirreanda High School, thank you very much for making the premises of the school available for this gathering, and I'm so very pleased that there are representatives of all of the schools of this district gathered here today because I am a very, very strong believer in diversity in education. I am a fortunate beneficiary of the public education system of New South Wales and I owe the public education system of New South Wales a great deal for the education that it gave me. But I also believe that it is the inalienable right of the parents of Australia to choose the type of education that best suits their children in their judgement. And what we need in this country are strong, good, growing, successful government schools and strong, good, growing, successful independent schools. We should aspire to uplift all of them and not perpetuate any of the rivalries of the past which I hope have been long since buried.
 But I do thank the school very warmly and I pay tribute to the public education system of this state for the job that it is doing in educating the young men and women of South Australia into the future.
 I'm delighted that you've chosen to honour Meals on Wheels. It's one of those great volunteer organisations that helps hold our nation together. We are a great volunteer nation. I've often wondered why it is that we have this instinct for volunteerism beyond that of many other countries. Maybe it was because in the early days of European settlement we were so isolated in such a vast country that we had to, in fending for ourselves, rely heavily on each other. And we developed that instinct for caring for each other and for responding together in times of great crisis.
And when, I use the word mateship, and I do use it a lot, and I think it's one of those proud unapologetic Australian words that we should never tire of using. We shouldn't typecast it in some kind of narrow male sense, we should see it certainly in that sense, and there's nothing wrong about that, and we shouldn't apologise about that, but we should also see it in the sense of working together to challenge a common, and to meet, common adversity and a common threat. And when I went to Innisfail in Far North Queensland a few months ago in the wake of the cyclone, and I talked to the people a couple of days after the cyclone, and did what I could and in cooperation with the State Premier and others to help people, and to reassure them that they would have assistance from the Government, I felt a great sense of mateship because everybody was working together. The differences of any petty local rivalries had all dissolved and everybody was willing to work together. And we Australians can do that better than most other countries, and I think one of the reasons we do it is that we've always had that instinct for helping each other, particularly in times of great adversity.
Now Kym was kind enough to talk about the prosperity of this country and what contribution I may have made to that and of course governments, you know, don't like to hide their light under a bushel when it comes to a little bit of success that may have come along. I'm certainly very proud of the fact that over the last 10 or 15 years this country has enjoyed a long period of economic growth and economic expansion. We do have the lowest unemployment now for about 30 years and we've seen growing wages and we've seen, generally speaking, very good economic conditions. And the challenge that my Government has, the challenge the whole community has is to keep that going. But we should never lose sight of the fact that no matter how well we may be doing as a nation, and no matter how well the majority of people maybe doing, there are still some in our midst who through no fault of their own have fallen between the cracks and they do need help. And that is where volunteer organisations are so tremendously important.
And amidst all of this prosperity we should not lose sight of our mission, as a nation, to assist those who are less fortunate. And we should not lose sight of the social challenges that we have as a country. And there are a number of things that my Government has focussed on that I think are very important to the social fabric of Australia. About seven or eight years ago I became very concerned that we weren't, at a national level, doing enough about the challenge of illicit drugs and I decided that the Federal Government should commit hundreds of millions of dollars, over and above that being committed by state governments, to fight the scourge of drugs. And I built the tough on drugs campaign around three things. Firstly, an uncompromising attack on people who peddle drugs, because they are, to use that earthy express, they are the scum of the earth, people who peddle drugs and traffic in the misery of their fellow human beings. That's the first thing. The second thing is to build it around the importance of educating people about the dangers of engaging in drug abuse and the use of drugs and starting drugs, in other words to communicate a zero tolerance message towards the use of drugs in the first place. And finally, we built it around a programme of trying to assist people who were hooked on drugs to break the habit. And I found as I went around the country, and I listened on talkback radio everywhere I went, people ringing up in despair and saying my daughter has had an heroin addiction for a number of years, she wants to get off it but there aren't enough rehabilitation services, there aren't enough services around the country where she can go to and get some help. So over the years we've poured more resources into that and I'm very happy to say, largely with the cooperation of state Governments across political lines of division and it's been very successful. The problem is still with us but I think we're making some progress. We're beginning to see a significant fall in the number of heroin related deaths. There's been a very significant decline in those over the years.
 We're also seeing a great recognition of the link between marijuana abuse and depression and suicide and mental illness. For a long time the more trendy in our communities said there was no such linkage. I can remember seven years ago when I started on this, people ridiculing me, including some people in my own party saying, he's out of date, he's old fashioned, he's locked in 1950s, he's behind a white picket fence and he doesn't understand what the real world is all about. Well I may have been thumping the table in a way that people might have thumped the table on other occasions but I think that as time has gone by people have understood the link between depression and mental illness. And mental illness is now regarded as one of the great challenges of health in our modern society. And the link between current levels of mental illness and depression and marijuana abuse has now been established beyond argument. And I think there's a greater recognition of that, and it's reinforced the zero tolerance message that I believe we must communicate throughout the entire community.
So that's an important thing that we have to continue, amidst all of the prosperity we have, we can't lose sight of these social-ills that will gnaw away at the fabric of our community. And the other issue that we've tried to tackle in recent years is to find a better way of helping people when their families break-up, they have divorce, or their relationships breakdown. And we've introduced the notion of Family Relationship Centres and 65 of them are being established throughout Australia, whereby people who break-up, if they can't agree on arrangements for custody and support of their children before they can go to court and have a wasteful, you know, argument and bitter argument in court which squanders thousands of dollars to the benefit only of the legal system, and I've got nothing against the legal system, I was a lawyer myself once, I think they're a great lot, I've got nothing against them, but the reality, let me say that immediately, but reality is that these breakdowns, if they end up in court, they're bitter, they're acrimonious, they're expensive and they can leave permanent scars on people and we have to find a better way of helping people. And these relationship centres which are in effect being contracted out by the Government to be run by organisations, community organisations, church organisations that have an expertise in helping people at the coal face, to tackle their problems and to try and reach an amicable settlement, I hope that it will provide as the years ago a better way of dealing with the bitterness that inevitably flows from the breakdown of families and the breakdown of relationships because no matter how good we maybe doing economically, we'll always have some of these social challenges. And we have an obligation, hand in hand with keeping the economy running well, we also have an obligation to see that we can help people who need assistance, at particularly difficult times in their lives.
 There's one other great passion of mine that, and I have a lot of passions, but I won't talk about cricket today because that will take me far too long, but there's one other great passion of mine that I want to say something about, and that is the importance of teaching our young a lot more, in a more rigorous fashion, about the history of this country. I believe, very, very strongly that we have over the years not adequately taught people the history of Australia. Now when I talk about the history of Australia I don't have in mind a particular version of Australian history and anybody who thinks that I am trying to hand down the John Howard version of Australian history, forget it, there's no such thing.  But what I am trying to argue for is that unless we have a proper understanding of the narrative and the Australian story. Unless we understand the contribution that so many different tributaries have made to the great river of the modern Australia, unless we understand those things, we can't properly appreciate where we are in Australian society, where we are in the world at the present time. And I think over the years we have, with varying degrees around the country, the rigorous and proper teaching of history has been neglected.  And I heard an interview on the radio a few weeks ago which seemed to me to be a metaphor. An otherwise very intelligent sounding young woman was asked if she could name the date of federation, and she couldn't, if she could name the first Prime Minister of Australia and she couldn't, if she could name the date of the Gallipoli landing and she couldn't.  And some of you may say, well that's just rote learning.  I think it's more than that, I think you need to have some understanding of the narrative, the sequence of events.  Of course you can debate very, very passionately, the meaning of particular events, and we'll always have arguments about who was responsible for what.  And I mentioned at a gathering similar to this yesterday afternoon, that I'd heard on the radio yesterday morning that some historian in England was now arguing that it wasn't the Royal Air Force that saved Britain in the battle for Britain, it was Royal Navy, and whilst I don't want know want to get into that argument, but I just mention it as an illustration of just how you can have arguments about history, but you can't really make sense of those arguments unless you have in the case of that particular dispute, you have an understanding of the place for the battle for Britain in returning points of World War II and you understand the historical sequence of all of these events. So ladies and gentlemen, I thought that as I was at a school I would take the liberty of expressing the great passion that I have for an understanding of the history of this country.  When you talk about the history of this country, you've got to talk about the bad things as well as the good things, and like any other nation we've made our share of mistakes and we exhibited intolerance and we've made errors. We didn't treat indigenous people well and we have to in an understanding of our history, understand the contribution of indigenous history and the indigenous people to the development and the psychology and the identity of this country.  But I do think we need to re-embrace everything that this country has meant to people over a long period of time and I think an understanding of Australian history is enormously important.
  There is just two other things that I want to say to you, and that is as I move around Australia and I talk to a lot of people, I get a lot of advice, I get criticism, I get occasionally, you know, the odd pat on the back, but overwhelmingly what I find the most engaging about moving around Australia and meeting on a daily basis, hundreds, indeed thousands of Australians, is that people do have a sense optimism and a sense of hope about this country's future. But in expressing that sense of optimism and hope, there are two great challenges that we face of a natural resources kind. And one of those is the great problem of the growing shortage of water, and the other of course is the impact of the world wide shortage of energy, and the great opportunities this opens up for Australia.
 We are as a nation, a very thirsty, dry, continent and for generations we wasted water, we assumed that it was a limitless resource, that would always be free, and that we could always use it.  And now of course we are all suffering all over the country a very rude awakening that that is no longer the case, and in different ways we all have to try and do our bit.  Some people mistakenly believe that the solution to the water problem in this country is a big bang project.  People come up come up to me and say John what you've got to do is to build one giant pipe line from up there in the northern part of Australia where there is an enormous amount of water, and you've got to pipe it down and you've got to have spurs going out, one going out to Adelaide, one going out to Sydney, one going out to Melbourne and so on. Now it sounds terrific and they say if only you do that, spend all the billions you've got, spend it on that and it will solve the problem. Now I know that that is a well intentioned view, but of course when you analyse the problem and the nature of Australia and you recognise where the water is, and where the water should be, and why where the water should be is so dry and short of water, you realise that that big bang solution is not quite the answer.   And what we need is a whole lot of what I might call little bang solutions all around the country. And I did one of those out at Tea Tree Gully this morning. I announced that the Federal Government in cooperation with the State Government and the three local councils I think, three of the local councils in that area; and this is a programme that a number of my colleagues had been pushing very hard on me, and we committed ourselves to it in theory at the time of the last election. And what it will do is to capture stormwater, and it will capture about 17 gigalitres of stormwater that would otherwise go out into the Spencer Gulf and bring it back and cleanse it through the wetlands and then it would be put into the water system of northern Adelaide.
 Now that project, along with another project that we're funding; and you put all of the money in together it's going to cost the State Government, the Federal Government and the local governments and the private sector organisations combined about $115 million, which is quite a lot of money. But it will give a very much needed boost to the water system of northern Adelaide. And the point I make is that we need a whole lot of those all over Australia, and if as communities we can combine to make those things work all over Australia, it will be tremendous.   And the other issue of course is energy. We all hate the high petrol prices that we have at the present time. I think the whole country, wherever I go, people talk to me about high petrol prices and I understand the impact they're having on a lot of families. Now I can't stand here honestly and look you in the eye and say I can bring the price of petrol down by 20 cents and keep it down. I can't, because the price of petrol is dictated by the price of crude oil. And when the price of crude oil falls, the petrol price will come down and when the price of crude oil goes up, the petrol price will go up.
There are some things we can do at the margin. We can help people convert their cars to LPG, and the latest report I had from Ausindustry hotline this morning, and I get one every morning, indicates that there are thousands of people who are making inquiries and many thousand are already doing that. And they're the sort of things that we can do at the margin. But one of the things we should remember about fuel at the present time is that one of the major reasons why petrol is so dear, in fact the major reason why petrol is so dear, is that the demand for fuel around the world is running ahead of the supply. And as all of you who studied economics, as a matter of commonsense, you would all know that when demand exceeds supply, the price of the commodity rises. And the main cause of the excess demand is the extraordinary economic growth of China. And the point I'd want to make out of that is that unlike most other countries, Australia is benefiting greatly from the economic growth of China because we have a lot of resources that China wants to buy. And although we don't like the high petrol prices that are coming out of that excess demand from China, we are unlike a lot of countries, we are benefiting very greatly from that.   And I think one of the things as a nation we have to do because providence has given us enormous reserves of energy, we have this vast uranium reserve and I think...I am a great believer in examining all the options in relation to uranium, I think we should sensibly look at whether we should enrich it, and whether eventually this country might examine the desirability or otherwise of having nuclear power. I don't think we can shut our minds to that because it's a cleaner energy source than many of the energy sources we have at the present time. And I think we, as a nation, should be mature enough to have a sensible debate about this.   And I think its fascinating to see some of the leading environmentalists, including one of the founders of Greenpeace actually arguing that we should look as a community and as a world at the possibility of using nuclear power as one of the ways of tackling our energy problem.
But anyway, that's long enough for me. Finally, can I say what a terrific bloke I think you have in your local Member Kym Richardson. Can I say to all you of; yes let's give him a round of applause. Kym joined us in 2004 and he's been an absolutely indefatigable worker for this area. He's badgered me about all sorts of things. This Australian Technical College, and I went and had a look at it, let's give the Technical College a bit of a clap too. Kym took me out to show me the site on the way here, it was a little bit of a diversion, but he took me over there to see the site, and can I say there has been no more energetic advocate of an individual project anywhere around Australia than has Kym Richardson been in relation to that particular college and a whole lot of other things that are very important to this area and this part of Adelaide.
He's a great representative, as you might expect, he's one of my mob and naturally I very warmly commend him to, but you know I mean it, you know, he really is a genuine article. He's sincere, he's committed, he's hardworking and he'll help anybody who seeks their assistance and I hope you continue to help him in the way that is most practical in Australian politics and Australian public life. But my friends, my fellow Australians, thank you very, very much for coming along this morning, I hope to meet as many of you as possible. This is a wonderful country and it's great for me to have the opportunity of talking to so many of you, and particularly and finally, to the young who are here, I hope those of you who are doing your final exams at the end of this year, I wish you well and everything you hope for yourselves in relation to technical or university education or any other career you want, and I can promise you I'll continue to do everything I can to maintain an economy that gives you maximum available opportunity to get the job you want when you leave school because that's the foundation of so much stability and happiness in later life.
 Thank you very much.
[ends]   


Thank you very much David for your kind words of introduction, Mr Neville Roach, the Consul General for India, the Deputy High Commissioner for India, ladies and gentlemen.  The first time I met my counterpart, the current Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh, was in December 2004 at a gathering in Vientiane in Laos to mark the 30th anniversary of the formation of ASEAN, a gathering to which Australia and New Zealand, as well as the ASEAN Plus Three participating countries had been invited.  And in his very incisive, reflective way, the Prime Minister said to me, Australia and India are two countries that have so much in common, but so little to do with each other. And it did in a sense encapsulate the paradox of our relationship, and I thought after that discussion of my own understanding and knowledge of India. I had in fact, long before entering public life on the pilgrimage that so many Australians of my generation made to Europe after leaving university, and spending a year there wandering around Europe, and normally from a base in London, I did in fact pass through India a spent a week or so travelling in a limited part of the country. And I can remember, for want of a better thing to do, and I didn't stay there very long, wandering into a sitting of the Indian Supreme Court which was debating a constitutional challenge by the Indian states against some outrageous intrusion in their rights by an overweening federal government and; sound familiar?  And I recall, and I've forgotten the name of the case, I recall a case from the High Court of Australia being quoted in the course of the discussion and it was a reminder to me of those great links of law and language that have always brought us together. And of course as I've already been outed for my passion for the lovely game of cricket, we had that in common, we had the shared experience of fighting together in fighting in two wars in common, we had a lot of history and a lot of culture and a lot of language and a very strong common commitment to democracy. But somehow or other there was no sense of connection in the relationship.
I recall going to India as Prime Minister in 2000 and I was graciously welcomed. It was very friendly, it was very hospitable and the conversation turned almost immediately to a discussion of cricket and history. And they are very important things and they should remain a precious part of our relationship.  But there is now something very different and something rather more to the relationship than just history, a common language and cricket.  There is a real sense of excitement and a sense of anticipation about the relationship that our two countries have. And this was brought home to me very vividly during my visit to India with a business delegation in March of this year, and Neville Roach accompanied me on that visit.  And there are occasions in a reasonably lengthy period of a Prime Ministership when you can look back on particular visits to particular countries where you feel there has been a quantum shift in the relationship. I certainly had that experience after a visit I paid to Beijing in 1997, once again accompanied by a business delegation. And it followed a time when our relationship with China had gone through a rather bumpy period, after the change of government in Australia in 1996. And although the circumstances leading up to my visit to India didn't include any particular bumpiness, there was nonetheless a sense on that visit, that so much had changed, that the dynamism that was now very apparent in the Indian economy had begun to filter through in a very big way to the relationship with China.
  The rise of India, of course, is one of the great phenomenons of the early part of the 21st Century. We are living through this extraordinary transformation in the centre of gravity of the world's middle class, away from it's overwhelming concentration in Europe and North America, to a situation where it will be predominantly, not exclusively, concentrated in the nations of Asia.  There are now 200 million middle-class citizens, with all that that connotes with their purchasing power and economic impact, in India, an equal and growing number in China.  And those two nations together, are so very important, not only to the world, but they are remarkably important to Australia. And it's worth noting the irony of something that we all feel the pain of at the present time, and that is high petrol prices.  High petrol prices caused by high crude oil prices are there because of more than anything else, because of the rise, economically, of China, and also increasingly of India.  And the growing demand of those two countries on the world supplies of fuel, have created, to a significant extent, the very high prices that we now groan under.  Yet ironically Australia is a greater beneficiary of the rise economically of those two countries than most other developed countries.  And although that doesn't represent any kind of balm or excuse, or explanation, or any kind of salve towards unhappy consumers of highly priced petrol, it is worth understanding the total context in which some of these economic developments are occurring.
  The statistics which describe India's growth are well-known to an audience such as this, the fourth largest now in purchasing power parity terms amongst the world's economies.  Its national income will double every 30 years. It has a young population, and it has a real prospect, unlike China, of growing rich before it grows old, which is a very significant observation to make in relation to the comparison of those two countries.  I believe that our relations with India on a diplomatic and foreign policy level are made easier by there no longer being an east/west divide in the old cold war terms.  I say this without in any way being disrespectful of India's continued adherence to the Non-Aligned Movement.  But in the days when you had a bipolar world, you had a Soviet bloc and you had an American bloc, the studied neutrality of India in foreign policy terms, did represent some kind of restraint on the warmth and the depths of the relationship that existed between our two countries.  The opportunities, of course, to build the relationship are legion.  Like most of you in this room, I guess, there are occasions when one reads a book that has a more than immediate impression, and one such of those that I have read recently is that well-known tract, Tom Friedman's book on The World is Flat; Tom Friedman the New York Time's columnist.  And it's a wonderful encapsulation of the realities and the opportunities of the global environment in which we live.  And it drew out very graphically to me some of the enormous advantages that India has as she enters this 21st Century and all the economic opportunities that it presents.
 The early and extensive and astute investment made by India in education, particularly technical education, something that can carry a lesson for 21st Century Australia as well as other countries around the world. And that investment made very early, and I was given a wonderful example of it when I visited the Madras Technical Institute which is one of the most respected of those institutions around the world. But what opens up in the relationship is not just a relationship based on the exports of our resources, it is also a relationship that is based upon a much broader base of economic exchange, a relationship that will build very heavily of course on the IT needs of both of our countries. A relationship that is importantly strengthened by the people to people links that we now have.
 About 11 to 12 per cent of Australia's migration programme is now made up of citizens from India. It is the third largest source of migration to Australia and the second largest source of overseas students. And all of the indications are that that is something that will grow and strengthen as the years go by.
So can I say to the business council and to all of you, this is a moment in the relationship and the history of our two countries where, if we all in our different ways grab hold of it, it can have enduring importance. And it's a relationship because of those common links of history and of language and of sport and of commitment to democracy; it's because of those things that it ought to be an easier relationship to fully develop and fully exploit in the best sense of that word.
 And in doing that, we should never diminish in any way the admiration that we should have for the way in which the Indian people have embraced and held hold of democracy. It is a quite remarkable thing and there were so many cynics around in 1947 who said that the embrace of democracy in India would not work. And at various stages democracy in that country has been challenged and it was temporarily suspended, but only for a relatively short period of time, and the natural democratic instincts of the Indian people came to the fore again.  And it is the most astonishing achievement, this huge nation, clearly the largest democracy in the world, has been so incredibly successful.
 And of course sadly, and in recent times, India has shared this other modern day horror of which Australians have experienced to date in other parts of the world, and that is the attacks and the depravations of terrorism. And the steadfast response of the Indian people to the attack in Mumbai only two short months ago is a reminder that that is another modern day reality, a horrible one that India shares with us.
But can I make what I think is the central observation that should be made about the opportunities that the relationship now presents to us and the way in which India has become such a power in the world and the nation that everybody is watching very attentively and very carefully; and that is what brought it about. And in many respects, although the democracy was there, the stable system of Government was there, the language was there, the educational system was there, the fact is that until the early 1990s, India was an overregulated, inward looking, heavily subsidised, heavily protected and heavily regulated economy. And it was the reforms, particularly the opening up of India to foreign investment when the current Prime Minister was Finance Minister in the early 1990s, which laid the ground work for the modern growth and prosperity of India.
And it's yet another and perhaps the most compelling illustration that I can point to of the fact that we are forever, and irreversibly, part of a globalised world economy, and there is no future for nations in retreating back to protection and trade barriers. And although their removal will and reduction will always be heavily contested and will always be the subject of fierce economic debate within the borders of individual nations, lesson after lesson is there to be found of countries opening up their economies and prospering as a consequence in direct denial of the criticism of those policies. And if India had not opened up under Manmohan Singh in the early 1990s she would not be in the strong and growing economic position in which she finds herself.
And you won't be surprised if I draw some kind of contemporary Australian parallel from that. The truth is that today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms. And that is true of India, it's true of Australia, although our starting points were different and our per capita living standards are still a long way apart and we shouldn't pretend otherwise. But the truth is that the prosperity that our country now has is a product of reforms that have been carried out over a period of time. As many in this audience will know, I have never been reluctant to deny that some of those reforms were carried out with our support by our political opponents when they were in office.
 But there is a lesson generically to be learnt from this that unless you keep going with the process of reform, you'll begin to slip behind. India has come a long way, she has a long way to go before, in per capita living standards, it is anywhere near what we are fortunate to enjoy. But overwhelmingly if you look at the history of that country those reforms, the opening up to foreign investment, the removal of many of the tariff barriers, the welcoming approach that India took to the world, all those things have been fundamental to the achievement of what is now a remarkable and fascinating economic story in India.
I am personally very committed to the relationship and I know the Prime Minister of India is and I know that both sides of India politics are very strongly committed to it. It's added value, of course, is that it comes on top of those bonds of history and sport which many Australians, through different experiences have enjoyed and will continue to enjoy in the future.
 I wish the council well, I thank all of you for the support that you are giving to it and I believe that when, in the fullness of time, the history of this period of Australia's life is written, in 50 years time or whatever; and I hope it is written in a proper, orthodox fashion with a proper historical narrative and it's not a fragmented stew of moods and issues, can I say that the relationship that we have with those two giant countries of China and India and the way in which they have progressed and the way in the which the relative fortunes of those two countries have played out each against the other and each independently, will represent the most fascinating chapters, I believe, of the history of this period.
 I wish the people of India well. There is great goodwill towards them amongst the people of Australia and the cause of Australian-Indian relations can only have been enhanced by gatherings such as this. Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very, very much Bruce for those of words of introduction, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, my Coalition colleague and friend Mark Vaile.  Lawrence Springborg, the leader of the Opposition here in Queensland, the Lord Mayor of Brisbane, Campbell Newman, my fellow Australians.  Can I say as I sat and listened to Bruce and listened to him clinically analyse the failings of the health system here in Queensland, I thought to myself, it's not a bad combination handing over the management of this State to a farmer and a doctor.
 Like no other group of Australians, farmers understand adversity, they know how to overcome it, and they go on when others give up.  Doctors understand like no other group, issues of life and death in our community.  So I commend very warmly for those and many other reasons the leadership team of the Coalition here in Queensland. As I reflect, on the state of Queensland politics, I think of the state of our nation.  I think of the fact that we have a 30-year low in unemployment, we've had eight successive Federal budget surpluses.  We have interest rates which are  close to half of what they were 15 years ago.  And now in our 16th successive year of economic expansion we have a growth rate of around three per cent and we have paid off $96 billion of Labor debt.  So the state of the nation is strong and healthy and optimistic.  And the relevance of all of that is of course that the bounty of those economic good times is being shared, properly as it should be, around the different parts of Australia.  And there is no state in Australia that has done better out of taxation reform and the GST than the State of Queensland.  It still astonishes many Queenslanders I speak to, to be told that close to 50 per cent, indeed some 46 to 47 per cent of all the revenue in one way or another, that flows into the Queensland Budget comes from the Federal Government.  And the point I make about all of this is not that Queenslanders aren't entitled to it, they are entitled to every last dollar of that money, but they are entitled to see it spent more wisely than it has been over the last ten years.
 And they are also entitled to a better quality of service, and in no area are they more entitled to that better quality of service, than in the area of health.  I would say to the Premier of Queensland Mr Beattie, Mr Beattie there are no alibis in your failings in health.  You can't and you shouldn't blame the Federal Government.  You can't and you shouldn't blame the medical profession, you only have yourself to blame.  You've had the money, you've had the resources, you've had the power, you've had the years to fix it, and it hasn't been.  And over the past ten years all the great reforms have come from the federal level. You used to complain about bulk billing.  Well we've done dramatic changes in that area, we haven't talked about it, we haven't put out a plan for bulk billing we've actually fixed the decline in bulk billing.  We introduced a Medicare safety net, it was opposed by Mr Beattie's federal colleagues.  It's still their policy to rip up the Medicare safety net.  We've introduced with our $1.9 billion commitment in the area of mental health, we've introduced a long term programme.  It's started, the money is beginning to be spent in that area, and we await a full matching of that expenditure by the various state governments around Australia.
 I mention these things my friends to make the very simple and very relevant point that I hope all Queenslanders will ponder over the next few days and that is if you have a strong national economy, if you have an economy performing better than it has at any time since the end of World War II, if you have a Federal Government to stave off our national debt, if you have the lowest unemployment level in 30 years, if you have tax reform that has provided untold additional billions of dollars to the states of Australia. If you have a Federal Government that has met all of its responsibilities in the health area, it really produces one very obvious fact and that is that the weaknesses and failures of the health system, and if there is anything that state governments have got to be ultimately responsible for, and accountable for, is the basic infrastructure of the public hospital system of the state.
 To say that a state government is not totally responsible for the public hospital system of the state is to say that the Federal Government is not responsible, ultimately for the defence of the country.  We may have a fragmented federation, we may have blurred areas of responsibilities, but at the end of the day governments have got to be accountable for their failures in areas which are clearly and overwhelmingly their areas of responsibility.  And please, and I say this to my fellow Australians who live in Queensland, please don't encourage Mr Beattie to do it all again by returning him.  Please bear in mind that elections are meant to be about accountability, they are meant to be about the public looking at what you have done, and making a judgement as to whether you are worthy of being returned, and in this vital area of health alone, this Government has clearly failed the people of Queensland.
 Mark and I have come here today to support Lawrence and Bruce, we have come here today to support the Liberal and National parties here in Queensland, united in a State Coalition.  We come as leaders of the most successful federal Coalition Government this country has seen.  It's been a united cohesive, effective Coalition Government, and I am sure under the leadership of Lawrence and Bruce, the Coalition can give to the people of Queensland, united, cohesive, effective Coalition Government.
 Lawrence Springborg is a true Queenslander, he's a man of the land, he's a person who's given his all to public life in this State, and as well as with his family, running his farm and raising his family.  On this Father's Day, I can say he is the epitome of a Queensland father with his children here, and he knows that the most important thing you do in life, is to look after your family.  And I know that if he is elected Premier of Queensland next Saturday, he will care for his State with the same passion and commitment with which he cares for his family.  Would you welcome Lawrence Spring, the Leader of the Opposition in Queensland.
[ends]


  Ambassador and Mrs McCallum, ladies and gentlemen, we gather here this morning on the 5th anniversary of the terrorist attack on the United States and indeed on the entire world that values individual liberty and freedom on the 11th of September 2001. We gather both in remembrance and reaffirmation. We remember those from many nations, including Australia who lost 10 citizens in the World Trade Centre and was, several years later, to suffer even greater losses in the terrorist attacks in Bali, but also the other nations who lost citizens on that fateful morning.
 It reminds us, of course, that although the attack took place on American soil and was designed deliberately and calculatedly to do great damage to the people of the United States, it was an attack on values that the entire world holds in common. And that is why, in gathering here this morning, we do so not only in remembrance of those who lost their lives, we honour those who risked their lives, and in some cases lost their lives trying to rescue those in both the Pentagon and the World Trade Centre.
  But we also gather to reaffirm our commitment both as friends and allies of the people of the United States but also as citizens of the world, to maintain the fight against terrorism.  Terrorism is the enemy of all people of goodwill. It is the enemy of all of the great religions of the world; it is a blasphemy on Islam for the name of Islam to be invoked to justify terrorism. It is also the enemy of all the value systems that are important to Australia and the United States.
 And speaking here, I know on behalf of all of my fellow Australians, and I know also on behalf of all of you, we think particularly of the losses and suffering of the people of the United States on the 11th of September 2001. And all of us, I know in our different ways and our different approaches, rededicate ourselves to maintain the values that are universal values of individual liberty and dignity, of freedom of association, of freedom of religion and freedom of thought. And in reaffirming our commitment to maintain the fight against terrorism, we do so in the belief that those universal values will in the end, because they represent the truth of mankind's existence, they will in the end triumph.
[ends]  


PRIME MINISTER:
 Well Harry, Minister, ladies and gentlemen, this is a brief doorstop to thank Harry Kewell, who is well known to all of you and all sports lovers in Australia, for becoming the third of what we hope to be a large number of prominent Australians, he joins Kieran Perkins and Cathy Freeman who indicated their availability as ambassadors in this campaign we have against the challenge of obesity.  Obesity is a huge problem in western societies and other societies as well, it's a big problem in Australia.  Let's not muck about, it's due to the fact that people don't exercise enough and it's also due to bad and lazy diets. Our lifestyles have changed, kids don't walk to school enough, they drive around too much, they watch too much television, they play too many video games instead of being out playing sport and any kind of physical activity, and therefore I think the idea of recruiting prominent Australians, not least our famous sports men and women, and none in the recent context of the Socceroos of our tremendous performance in the World Cup and the great resurgence of the world game in Australia, none is better known and more respected and liked by a large section of the Australian population than Harry Kewell. And we are delighted that he is with us and we congratulate him and the contribution of his team mates to what was some inspiring performances which really warmed the hearts not only of traditional followers of soccer, but also others whose grasp of the game was a lot more fulfilled as a result of watching that.  But he is here today and we thank him, and I will get Tony Abbott, who is no slouch when it comes to physical exercise, you know anybody who gets a boxing Blue at Oxford is not too bad when it comes...you can't be too obese, and I think he's in good shape. And can I simply say that it's great to have you Harry and thank you for helping, it's very good of you and I'll say, I'll get my mate Abbott to say something, and then we'll invite Harry to say something, but thank you very much for joining the campaign.
 TONY ABBOTT:
 Thanks very much Prime Minister and thanks very much Harry. Let me just say to everyone that it was quite remarkable to walk through this Parliament with Harry Kewell as your companion because people stared, people stopped, people smiled, all the sorts of things that don't normally happen in this place.  Harry, you've transformed a lot of people's days by being here for this occasion.  Look, I think all of us have dreams, and for many people a sporting hero is the embodiment of those dreams and I guess the message today is that all of us can realise some of those dreams and Harry's message which he'll deliver himself in a moment is that all of us can be active, all of us can be healthy, we can't all play for Australia, but we can all do something to stay active and healthy.  And we are very lucky to have a public spirited Australian like Harry Kewell here to support our Healthy Active Ambassadors programme. I am delighted that he is joining Cathy Freeman and Kieran Perkins, I am confident there will be many more, but Harry what's your message to the kids of Australia.
 HARRY KEWELL:
 I think my message is plain and simple. Obviously when I first heard about this project, usually when I do get told about things like this, I um and ah a lot, because obviously there are things that I have to do, but obviously when I was told about this, I jumped at the chance. And I'd like to thank you and the Prime Minister, obviously, for actually involving me in this, because I want to put something back into Australia and obviously it starts with the kids.  And when they are young they need to be out there playing sports.  I know when I was young, I was out there every day playing sports and it was phenomenal and hopefully I can just show them that if you do go outside and play sports and live a healthy life, you can have a great life, and that's why I am here, and that's what I am supporting.
 MINISTER ABBOTT:
 Thanks mate.
 PRIME MINISTER:
 Good on you mate, well done.
 MINISTER ABBOTT:
 Well done.
 JOURNALIST:
 Harry, congratulations first of all on the appointment of Healthy Active Ambassador.  You know yourself it hasn't been your most active year on the field, can you give us an update on your own fitness and your injuries?
 HARRY KEWELL:
  I am over here at the moment obviously sorting out my injuries, so I don't know anything at the moment until probably Friday.
 TONY ABBOTT:
 It is quite interesting that Harry chose to get the injuries sorted out in Australia (inaudible) and our sports medicine capacity that Harry could come back to Australia for this.
 JOURNALIST:
 Harry do you ever eat junk food?
  HARRY KEWELL:
  I think everyone does, you know what I mean, I am no exception but I only probably have it once a blue moon, once a blue moon. I can't afford to have it really.
 [ends]  


  Thank you very much David, Mrs Margo Lowy, the Mayor, my parliamentary colleagues Kay Hull and Ian Armstrong and very importantly, indeed most importantly, I acknowledge the presence of veterans of World War II, of the war in Korea and in Vietnam because today more than anything else is a salute to that remarkable band of men who did so much for all of us in the darker days of World War II. And anybody who has any recall of World War II will remember that extraordinary remark of Winston Churchill's that never in the field of human conflict  was so much owed by so many to so few. And the men gathered here today, the returned airmen gathered here today, are part of that great tradition that was honoured in that evocative and forever remembered phrase.
Can I also say on behalf of all of you how much we are in the debt of David Lowy, his wife and all of the others who poured so much energy and enthusiasm into this aviation museum. We are, all of us, very proud of the aviation history of this country. We remember its critical role in war, but we also remember the way in which, in a vast country, we know how important civil aviation and anything to do with aviation has been to the history and the navigation and the opening up of the vast expanses of Australia.
 And there is something very evocative about a gathering in a regional country town on a beautiful Saturday morning, in which we principally pay tribute to the heritage of the airmen of Australia, but we also in the process acknowledge the great importance of aviation generally, especially to rural communities.
And this runway, which has been a joint project of the local council and of the Federal Government, and I pay great tribute to the Mayor and the citizens of Temora; I apologise on behalf of myself and my 24 predecessors as Prime Minister of Australia that it's taken so long for one of us to get here, but I do pay tribute to the local community for the energy that it has poured into this project.
It's wonderful to see so many people here and it is a reminder of that great community cement, the great volunteer Australian spirit that keeps so many of our communities together. Life in rural Australia and country Australia is never easy and I listened very carefully Mr Mayor to what you had to say about the weather challenges of this district. And the concerns of this district have been forcefully communicated to me by Kay Hull and others over a long period of time and so they should, because those of us who live in the cities often don't fully appreciate the vagaries and the heartache and the heartbreak of country life.
But today is an occasion to, above everything else, to honour the service of a wonderful band of men who showed exemplary courage when it was needed and did enormous credit and brought great honour to their country, but even more importantly played a crucial role in turning back an horrific threat to our way of life.
But it's also for me an opportunity, on your behalf, to give thanks to David and to his wife, who are in relation to this museum, wonderful exemplars of the generosity and public spirit and commitment to Australia of a wonderful family, the Lowy family, that has contributed so much in so many different ways to our nation.  David's wonderful infectious enthusiasm for flying is obvious and I was fascinated with the story of how he learnt to love it so much from his boyhood experiences at Dover Heights. And it is very nice that his mother and father are both with him today.
But to you David and to your wife Margo and to everybody else who's been associated with this museum, I want to thank you for the contribution that you have made to commemorating the deeds of a wonderful band of men and also bringing special vitality and activity to a wonderful country community.
So it is in that spirit and with that respect in mind that I not only thank you but I have great pleasure in declaring open this new runway. Long may it serve the interests of the people of Temora and surrounding districts and long may this museum bring great joy, good remembrances, but above all, serve as a wonderful memorial to a group of men to which all of us owe so much.
Thank you.
[ends]


One of the challenges I will address today in a speech on skilling the workforce is the need to improve the basic skills of those now in the workforce. The high demand for skilled workers in Australia is the product of a booming economy now in its 16th year of growth.
Job growth is strong, unemployment is low and labour force participation is at an all-time high. In a strong economy, skills shortages sometimes emerge as part of the normal working of the labour market.
 It should be remembered that many Australians aged between 25 and 64 did not finish high school, leaving them, in some cases, without good literacy and numeracy skills.
These are now basic requirements in most jobs.
In the past, education and training institutions focused overwhelmingly on new entrants to the workforce.  We must redesign our approach to help close the gap between the skills-rich and the skills-poor within the current workforce.
More flexible and responsive training services will be crucial in up-skilling our workforce.
This is especially the case for small and medium-sized enterprises which often face great difficulty in restructuring work arrangements to allow their employees to learn and earn at the same time.
[ends]


** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**
Thank you for inviting me to again open this conference on a very important and complex issue.
As with most important, complex issues it is worth starting with a note of humility.  When it comes to skilling Australia, no politician, bureaucratic flow chart or phalanx of PhDs can match the wisdom embodied in essentially uncoordinated decisions in homes, learning institutions and workplaces.
A more skilled Australia requires a genuine, 'bottom-up' partnership across governments, businesses, education and training providers and individuals.
  This goes to a point I've made in other contexts - that truly successful nations thrive not on the fixed plans but on well-governed flexibility.
The future growth of any given occupation is difficult to predict with any certainty.  A wide range of variables can change the mix of jobs in an economy over time.
Twenty years ago, no one foresaw the way the Internet would transform the world of work.  Few if anyone had heard of bio-technology or nano-technology.  Twenty years ago, Australia's resources sector was seen by some very intelligent people as a millstone of ever declining terms of trade.
  The high demand for skilled workers in Australia is the flip-side of an economy now in the 16th year of economic growth.
  Job growth is strong. The unemployment rate has fallen to a thirty-year low and labour force participation is at an all-time high.
 The fact that competition for good workers is high is not a bad thing.  As Ian Macfarlane said last month: 'Economies are meant to operate somewhere around the zone of full capacity, not permanently below it.'
 Nor should we overlook the skills pay-off from more people in jobs.  From so-called 'soft' skills like teamwork and loyalty through to more technical, on-the-job training, actual experience in the workplace matters.
In a vibrant, growing economy, some level of skills shortages is part of the normal functioning of the labour market.  As pressures emerge, people re-skill and respond to wage signals in order to adapt to changes in labour demand.
Much of the recent tightness in the labour market is associated with the commodity boom.  The impact is geographically concentrated in Western Australia and Queensland, resulting in strong employment growth in the resource-related sectors of mining, utilities and transport.
A large increase in labour supply and contained wage growth suggests that the economy is adjusting well.  Its resilience and flexibility have been enhanced by structural reforms and sound macroeconomic management over the last decade.
At a micro level, governments also have a role in matching workers with jobs.  The Australian Government's recently-announced pilot programme to assist job seekers looking to relocate to where job growth is strong is just the latest example of our flexible and responsive labour market policy.
  This policy framework has allowed the economy to run at a very high level of capacity utilisation.  Which makes Mr Beazley's backward-looking workplace relations policy all the more irresponsible - a policy that would return Australia to the days of industry-wide, union-dominated, pattern bargaining.
A fluid, dynamic labour market is one of Australia's greatest economic assets.
The contrast with previous episodes of commodity boom-related labour market tightness is stark.  For example, in the mid-1970s demand pressures in some sectors led to a surge in wages and inflation across the whole economy.
 Greater diversity in wage growth across sectors is a key difference between now and then.  Higher relative wages in sectors experiencing skills shortages act as an increased incentive for individuals to develop highly demanded skills.
If all wages were to go up by similar amounts (as in the days of centralised wage fixing), this incentive would disappear.
  Australia's continued prosperity depends on resources, workers and skills being able to flow between sectors and firms.  I don't for a moment dispute the fact that many businesses are having difficulty obtaining suitable staff.
  Nor do I have any qualms in saying that the nation's education and training institutions need further far-reaching reform.  Australia does face a number of major skills challenges which I will speak to shortly.
  All I ask is that you not mistake boiler-plate rhetoric about a skills crisis (mixed with crude partisanship and ignorance of economic reality) with anything approaching actual policy insight.
  To illustrate what I mean, let me take up the issue of skilled migration, and in particular 457 visas.
These temporary work visas ensure that Australian industry can access skills not readily available in a very tight labour market.  Independent research shows that the average salary of those on temporary work visas is high ($65,000) and that they are helping to pass on skills to working Australians.
 Far from undermining jobs, these targeted visas help to maintain them.  They are part of an immigration programme structured to meet the skills needs of a strong and growing Australian economy.
Apart from bad economics, there is more than a whiff of hypocrisy on this issue from the labour movement.
   Among the biggest users of 457 visas are State and Territory Labor Governments, with the largest single user being the NSW Health Department.  State governments are intimately involved in the relevant Regional Certifying bodies.
Even the trade union movement is in on the act.  The likes of the National Union of Workers and the Finance Sector Union have used these visas to recruit brother-workers from the US and the UK.
  Still, you have to admire the chutzpah of Federal Labor given their scorecard last time in government read something like this:
 a decline in real wages;   a recession in the early 1990s that decimated lower skilled jobs;   a massive fall in apprenticeship training; and    a migration programme that put maximum pressure on the low skilled and had more to do with party branch stacking than the skills needs of the nation.
  To appreciate Australia's skills challenge, not just today but in the long term, we need to explore the larger structural trends transforming the world of work.
Australia's labour market has changed dramatically over time, with more women in the workforce, changes in industry structure and the need for much greater workplace flexibility.
  I've spoken before about the rise of the enterprise worker as the symbol of a more entrepreneurial culture.  From greater self-employment and independent contracting to the blurring of traditional lines between management and labour, we have seen the emergence of a new breed of worker-entrepreneur.
Demand for more flexible work and training arrangements is coming from employers and employees alike.
  Employers are demanding a higher level of skills, a broader range of skills and more frequent updating of skills.  We see this in the changing occupational structure of the labour market with growing numbers of people working in managerial and other professional positions.
A tight labour market means employers must tap a wider and more diverse pool of labour.  To attract and retain skilled labour, education and training must be a part of core business.
Employers are demanding greater choice and competition among training providers.  They want training to be delivered when and where it is needed, whether in a classroom or in the workplace itself.
  Workers want to be able to respond to change and access training opportunities throughout their working lives.  An education and training system predicated on a world where someone was educated until young adult-hood and then entered a job lasting roughly 40 years has become basically obsolete.
Younger Australians in particular no longer expect or want a job for life.  They want portable skills that let them move between jobs and locations.
  All this points to why we need a more flexible and responsive education and training system - where the users are the drivers of the system.
  Demographic trends, economic globalisation and technological change reinforce this imperative.
The retirement of the baby boomers will continue to put downward pressure on the number of participants in our labour market.
  The Australian workforce will continue to grow but at a much slower rate.  The Productivity Commission projects that whereas our working-age population grew on average by about 175,000 people every year from 2000 to 2005, this will fall to 138,000 in 2010 and an average of about 57,000 a year between 2020 and 2030.
 In some industries, the number of workers aged 45 and over is already high and growing.  The workforce of tomorrow will be more diverse with more older workers, more parents, more people with disabilities and more people wanting to work part-time.
  To keep Australia strong and prosperous, there is no alternative but to further increase workforce participation and productivity.  Our workplace relations and welfare to work measures are essential to this goal.
Demand for a more skilled workforce is also being driven by globalisation.  The most recent era of globalisation - marked by the information technology (IT) revolution and the re-emergence of China and increasingly India as global economic powers - has been of enormous benefit to Australia.  At the same time, heightened competition throws up many challenges for our economy.
Further technological advances can be expected to raise demand for skilled workers.  Computers have come to perform more and more routine tasks and there is little reason to believe that technological change will abate.
Some of the more fanciful predictions about the disappearance of lower skilled jobs have clearly not materialised.  Nor is there reason to believe they will in the future.  Even so, the evidence that technological change favours more skilled workers, especially those with analytical, problem-solving and communication skills, is compelling.
 To compete and prosper in the decades to come, Australia will require a more skilled workforce whose members are adaptable throughout their careers to changing product and skills demands.
 Progress in the last decade gives us a strong platform on which to build a more skilled nation.
Participation in education and training has never been higher.  Expenditure (public and private) is above the OECD average overall and in the primary, secondary, post-secondary technical and tertiary sectors.  At $15.5 billion this financial year, Australian Government spending on education and training is up 42 per cent in real terms on a decade ago.
The proportion of 15 to 19 year olds studying full-time rose from 63.9 per cent in 1995 to 67.4 per cent last year.  Among 20 to 24 year olds, the relative increase in those studying full-time is even greater, rising from 15.2 per cent in 1995 to 24.9 per cent in 2005.
Australia ranks above the OECD average across all age groups on tertiary education attainment.  Almost 718,000 Australian students were in higher education in 2005, nearly 30 per cent more than in 1995.  A more diverse and innovative higher education sector is now emerging from the shadow of past uniformity.
  A record 1.6 million Australians are undertaking vocational and technical education (VTE) this year.  More than 400,000 apprentices are in training - roughly 3.5 times the disastrous low point reached in 1993 when Mr Beazley was Minister for Employment, Education and Training.
Commencements in trades and related occupations continue to grow at a rate ahead of employment growth.
  The Australian Government's $2.5 billion investment in vocational and technical education this financial year amounts to a real increase of 85 per cent on a decade ago.  Of the $10.8 billion committed over the next four years, states and territories will receive more than $5 billion.  Employer incentives account for another $2.5 billion.
We are leveraging this investment to address what we see as the structural weaknesses in the training sector.
Our 25 Australian Technical Colleges (23 of which have been announced) have helped to restore the place of traditional trades in our national consciousness after a long period in which a trade training was deemed second-class.
  With prodding, a number of state governments are finally rethinking their failure to provide young people with opportunities in the trades.  We continue to press states to live up to undertakings to remove barriers to school-based apprenticeships.
A key aim of our funding agreement with the states is a more dynamic and responsive TAFE sector with increased competition, greater industry leadership and more performance-based employment arrangements.
We also believe states should free up governance arrangements so that TAFE Directors have greater independence and flexibility in responding to training demands.
 The Commonwealth is continuing to drive system-wide reform through the Council of Australian Governments.  Our priorities include full mutual recognition of skills qualifications across Australia and ensuring that progress towards an apprenticeship is based on competency and not time served.
After more than a hundred years, we finally have a national workplace relations system.  It's past time we had a national framework that lets someone work anywhere in Australia with their trade qualification.
As part of a broader National Reform Agenda, COAG has begun an ambitious Human Capital work programme.  This is based on the recognition that a healthy, skilled and motivated population is critical to national prosperity.  As a first step, specific proposals in early childhood development, diabetes and literacy and numeracy in schools are being developed.
Beyond this, I'd like to mention three areas where I believe more effort and more reform is needed.
First, we need to improve the basic skills of our workforce.
  About 3.5 million Australians aged between 25 and 64 are without Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.  This largely reflects lower education participation by young Australians two and three decades ago and previous migration programmes which placed much less emphasis on skills.
Many adults lack essential literacy and numeracy skills.  The most valuable information technology (in this or any age) is still the ability to read, write and count.
  The days when functional levels of literacy and numeracy were not essential for just about every job are fast disappearing.  They are now basic requirements in jobs which require the ability to operate computers and digital technology.
  Traditionally, our education and training institutions have focused on new entrants to the labour market.  In the 21st century, we must redesign them to also close the gap between the skills-rich and the skills-poor in the adult workforce.
The good news is that participation by older workers in education and training in Australia is currently very high by international standards (in fact, five times higher than the OECD average for 40 to 49 year olds).  And in the last ten years the number of 45 to 64 year olds studying for a qualification has doubled.
 A particular challenge is to reach groups with high need but low demand.  For those without fond memories of school, the idea of going back into a classroom can be extremely daunting.  Just as technological change is a challenge to many lower skilled Australians, we must explore how we can use technology to make adult learning more individualised and rewarding.
More flexible and responsive training services will be crucial in up-skilling our workforce.  This is especially the case for small and medium-sized enterprises which often face great difficulty in restructuring work arrangements to allow their employees to learn and earn at the same time.
 The higher educational attainment of younger generations of Australians provides some comfort about the longer term trend on basic skills.  But only some.  Our skills benchmarks should be the best, not the past.
Too many younger Australians are still not making successful transitions from school to work or further education and training.
The need for schools to put greater emphasis on so-called 'employability skills' has been a particular theme of groups such as the Business Council and the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.  I encourage all state and territory governments to explore how they might take these ideas forward.
A second major skills challenge is to raise apprenticeship completion rates.  Despite strong progress on commencements, we still lose too many apprentices before they complete their trade qualification.
Again, a crucial reason is simply the strength of the economy.  When an unskilled labourer can earn up to three times the income of a first year apprentice, it will always be difficult to convince many people to slog through four years on a modest apprenticeship wage.
 Part of the problem arises from the historical influence of the award structure which has tended to compress wage relativities.  Even today, short of self-employment, the economic return from completion of a four year apprenticeship is modest.  A wage premium of about 13 per cent on average compared with a worker who has failed to complete Year 12 is far below an equivalent tertiary degree premium of more than 40 per cent.
 Long-term incentives for skill development demand a flexible and dynamic labour market, which in turn highlights the folly of those who would return Australia to a more centralised and regulated system.
Last year, the Government introduced a $1,000 tax-free Commonwealth Trade Learning Scholarship with a payment of $500 to Australian Apprentices after the first year and another $500 at the end of the second.  And we continue to look at steps we can take to make staying in apprenticeships more attractive.
Apprenticeships also need to be made more attractive to mature age workers, many of whom may have worked within an industry for some time and already have many of the relevant skills required in a particular trade.
With many tradespeople approaching retirement age, employers must do their bit to ensure that the specific needs of these workers are catered for.  Again, our training system needs to give credit for experience on the job and provide shortened programmes suitable for experienced workers.
  The third skills challenge we face is to increase the opportunities for people to obtain higher level skills.  In particular, a strong skills base in science, engineering and technology is crucial to the foundations of Australia's competitiveness.
The Government's recent Audit of Science, Engineering and Technology Skills identified a number of challenges not just for governments, but for schools, universities, industries and the broader community.
As part of a larger science and innovation agenda, Julie Bishop has identified the critical need to improve the quality of science education in Australia.  A mapping exercise is currently examining what initiatives are working and where the gaps are.
Longer-term, the Government recognises a growing demand for engineering graduates in Australia beyond the immediate pressures generated by the resources boom.  In July, we announced an additional 510 new Commonwealth-supported engineering places with a further 216 places allocated to other science fields.
In this ever more competitive global economy, Australia's science, engineering and technology skills need to match the best in the world.
 I have endeavoured today to place some of the headlines about a skills crisis in a context of economic strength and economic change.
  Skilling Australia is a complex issue with many dimensions not least those related to our federal structure.  It's more than wrong to cast it as amenable to a quick government fix.  It's intellectually arrogant.
One of the 20th century's most acute economists, Joseph Schumpeter, got to the nub more than 60 years ago when he described capitalism as 'by nature a form or method of economic change [that] not only never is but never can be stationary'.
In our dynamic, flexible, capitalist economy, a degree of humility about predicting the future should not be dismissed lightly.  Far from being an obstacle to good policy-making on an issue like skills, it amounts to a precondition.
  Governments, businesses, training providers and individuals, all must pitch in if we are to build a more skilled Australia.
While it does not end there, the responsibility of the Australian Government certainly begins with getting the big things right - keeping our economy strong, maintaining the pace of reform, and offering all who strive to better themselves the opportunity to reach their full potential.
  It may not make tomorrow's headline in the Financial Review.  But on this score, I believe Australia today has few equals.
[ends]


Well thank you Luke.  In my ten-and-a-half years as Prime Minister I don't think I have had such a moving introduction, and that speech of Luke's is a wonderful and eloquent metaphor for this wonderful organisation and to the marvellous work of Ron and Judith Barr and everything that is associated with Insearch.  I first met Ron some years ago and in the nature of things in my position many organisations are brought to my attention and many people are introduced and there was something about the way he presented what he was doing, the sheer simplicity of what was involved and the little video we've just seen demonstrated that very powerfully, that the simple displays of affection and of reassurance, and of constancy, and of trust for people who have been denied those normal human experiences has said it all.  And all of you are here tonight to mark 21 years of this organisation, it's had its ups and downs.  I am very pleased that a couple of years ago the Commonwealth Government committed itself to some funding and I think that's a very good investment and I think it's an investment the Government will want to continue for many years into the future.
 Youth Insearch is a source of hope, it's a reminder that although we do as Bert said in his introduction, although we do have in our modern life, scourges that may not have existed several generations ago, we are making some progress, our youth suicide is still too high, but it's lower than it was six or eight years ago.  We are making some progress in reducing the heroin death rate with our campaigns against drugs and we are doing it because we have found over the last few years a slightly different approach, I choose to call it a coalition, not in the political sense of the word, but a coalition between the Government, inspired individuals like the Barrs, wonderful organisations that have done good work through the decades and very public spirited and philanthropic business men and women, and there are many of them here tonight and I want to thank the business men and women of Australia who supported Youth Insearch and in a broader context, supported other organisations who are doing so much to help people have the opportunity that this extraordinarily lucky country, very fortunate, wealthy country has for so many of us, but for some who are missing out, we have a particular obligation.  And it is precisely because this country is so fortunate that we owe it to the future of our society and its strength and its cohesion to help organisations such as Youth Insearch.
  I pay tribute to two Australians who devoted all these years to putting together broken lives, the joy they must experience to look back on the 27,000 that have gone through the programme, the 2000 that have gone through this year, the wonderful I am sure satisfaction and enjoyment they must receive from seeing lives put together.  And I had the experience tonight of sitting next to, and she won't mind my mentioning her, Missy Wright, who was telling me how enthusiastically she was about to complete Year 11 at Macquarie High School and then go on to Year 12, and she was absolutely confident and I am sure she has every reason to be confident that she would get the university entry score that was necessary to give her the opportunity of doing the course that she wanted to do either at Newcastle University or at Charles Sturt University.  And the enthusiasm with which she communicated to me her sense of optimism and her sense of hope about what she intended to achieve, was I think a wonderful testament to the great success of this organisation.
  So ladies and gentlemen, I simply want to on your behalf pay tribute to Youth Insearch, I want to speak in high praise of Ron and Judith Barr, I want to speak in high praise of all of those that have worked in it, and I also want to speak in high praise of all of you who have come along to support this wonderful organisation.  And we as fortunate citizens of a wonderfully prosperous country can all do even more to help add to the number of the 27,000 that have gone through this wonderful organisation and are able to have, with luck, a tenth of the good fortune that most of us have had in our life.  I wish the organisation well and Janette and I delighted to support it in any way we can, thank you.
 [ends]


Subjects: Families.
  According to the latest official statistics there were 265,031 births last year - the highest number for more than a generation.  Australia's fertility rate now is much higher than that of most countries in Europe and higher than it has been here since 1971.
   There is no doubt that continuous economic growth and stability has given parents more confidence to plan for and have children. Australia has many measures which help parents when they have children including the baby bonus, family tax benefits, and generous childcare support.
   On this latter issue a new report from the OECD shows that Australia provides higher cash benefits to families for childcare than other comparable countries.  Fee support is available to 98 per cent of Australian parents.
   In fact the OECD found the Australian Government provides about 60 cents in every dollar spent on child care and early childhood services.  In Britain, the United States and Canada, parents pay the major share and governments provide about 30 cents in the dollar of the cost of these services.
   And it is worth noting that the OECD report did not take into account the newly introduced tax rebate for childcare expenses worth up to $4000 a year for each child. This new report shows that Australia is on par with or well ahead of most other developed countries when it comes to the generosity of cash benefits to parents to help with their childcare costs.
   [ends] 


Thank you very much Mr Harvey, Mark Johnson, Peter Abigail, the other members of the board of ASPI, ladies and gentlemen. Let me start by congratulating the Australian Strategic Policy Institute for its initiative in bringing together this two-day conference. When the Institute was conceived a number of years ago its very aim, or the aim of the Government was to create the kind of approach the Institute has brought to an examination of Australia's strategic challenges and the number of...and range of people that you have assembled to take part in this conference certainly vindicates the Government's faith, both in the concept and also the people who are now giving leadership to the Institute.
 I've been invited to share some thoughts about our security agenda. And I can start by stating the very obvious and that is that the core of Australia's security agenda is quite straightforward.  It is to protect and defend our people, and our interests, and our way of life. In practice, Australia has a history of seeing its own security as intertwined with the security of others and with the forces that shape the global system.
  The belief that the protection of our continent and citizens starts well beyond our shores has formed an essentially unbroken line in Australian strategic thinking - from the sacrifices on the Western Front 90 years ago to our commitments today in places like Iraq and Afghanistan. Geography alone has never determined our strategic horizons. Australia's basic security interests have remained remarkably stable over time.  Beyond the primary one of territorial integrity, they have involved a global power balance, favourable to our interests and to those of our allies; secure sea and air lanes as sinews of peace and prosperity; and a framework of international norms conducive to individual freedom, economic development and liberal democracy.
 Throughout our history, these goals have given direction and purpose to Australia's security agenda, against foes of various stripes and in very different strategic contexts.  Beyond the core responsibility of the defence of Australia, the Australian Defence Force has two equally important responsibilities. One is the capacity to act regionally in the interests of peace and stability.  This has been a fundamental part of Australia's security agenda in recent years, exemplified by interventions in East Timor, Bougainville and the Solomon Islands. The change some years ago heralded a more assertive strategic posture after a long period of what I might describe as benign abstinence by successive Australian governments.
 The other responsibility is the ongoing need to join in coalition operations in different parts of the world when Australia's national interests are at stake. Like other nations, Australia has had to navigate new and diverse security challenges in the last decade - especially in the five years since the 11th of September 2001. The threat of terrorism has transformed the global security agenda.  Because the nature of the threat is new and different, so it has demanded new and different attitudes about steps we must take to keep Australia secure.
A complex and overlapping set of global, regional and domestic security issues has been the hallmark of a more turbulent security environment - at least compared with what John Lewis Gaddis called the 'long peace' of the Cold War. It is an environment where attempts to shoe-horn Australia's national security agenda into a form of geographic determinism are even less relevant than in the past.
  A defining feature of Australia's security environment is the growing link between global and regional security challenges.  We observe this on a daily basis - in combating terrorism and transnational crime, countering weapons proliferation, supporting fragile states or responding to economic, environmental and energy security challenges. With the shift in economic and increasingly geo-political weight towards Asia, this intersection of global and regional security challenges will only become more crowded.  And demands for Australia to engage in a clear-sighted, highly-integrated and well-resourced strategy of global and regional activism will only intensify.
 A direct attack on Australia by a conventional state entity, while it can't be ruled out entirely, appears a remote possibility for the foreseeable future. The most immediate security threats to Australia in 2006 come from the interlocking networks of terror, arms proliferation and fundamentalist ideology. The struggle against Islamist terrorism and violent extremism will be a generational one.  While its crucible is in the Middle East, it is a struggle that has already recast the global security environment in deep and lasting ways. The best answer to terror and extremism is to help people, especially in the Muslim world, who are struggling for security, opportunity and hope.  When free societies fail to support others striving for what we have, we do not simply fail them. We fail ourselves.
For Australia, Iraq and Afghanistan are both vital battlegrounds in the fight against terrorism.  Australia's engagement in these theatres - and in the Middle East more generally - is important in protecting our interests and keeping Australia secure. Australian forces are in southern Iraq helping to secure the foundations of a viable, democratic future.  The handing back of Al Muthanna province to Iraqi security forces in July this year was due in no small measure to the courage and hard work of the Australian Defence Force.
  In Afghanistan, more than 500 Australian troops are helping that country meet its difficult security challenges. These are both dangerous missions and the path to security in Iraq and Afghanistan will be long and hard. The level of insurgent and sectarian violence in Iraq remains very high and the Iraqi Government faces many difficult challenges to secure the country's democratic transition and development.
   In Afghanistan, the level of violence, including suicide bombings, has increased significantly in recent months as the Taliban and other terrorist groups seek to destroy the credibility of the Afghan Government. The international community must continue to support these fledgling democracies because the implications of failure for the global security environment are enormous.
Amongst the lessons of the 11th of September was the danger of a turning a blind eye to states wracked by extremism, fundamentalism and chaos. The aftermath of the war in Lebanon also demands that all nations refocus on the two essential conditions for any lasting peace in the Middle East.
The first is that there must be an unconditional acceptance throughout the entire Arab world, without exception, of Israel's right to exist in peace and security behind internationally recognised borders.  The entire Arab world - including Syria, Hezbollah and Hamas, and in addition Iran - must give up forever the idea that the Israelis can be driven into the sea.
The second condition is that there has to be an equally unconditional acceptance, including on the part of Israel, of the need for a just settlement with the Palestinian people through the establishment of a viable and independent Palestinian state. Until those two conditions are met, the legitimate hopes for peace and security in the Middle East will remain unrealised and the running sore of the Palestinian issue used vociferously as a recruiting weapon by extremists.
 Cooperation among nation states is still the best defence against terrorism. Together with our active role in global and regional institutions, Australia has forged a network of 12 bilateral counter-terrorism agreements - stretching from Afghanistan to Fiji.  Working with partners in South East Asia to help reduce the risk of terrorism is an abiding priority. Like other liberal democracies, we have also taken steps to better secure the home front against terrorism.
Good intelligence is still the best protection against terrorism.  In the case of terrorism, protection is not only better than cure.  There is no cure from a successful terrorist attack - only mitigation of pain and suffering. All our actions are based on the premise that Australia will remain a terrorist target in the years to come.  We can expect that Al Qaeda and its fellow travellers, especially in South East Asia, will be persistent and adaptable, probing our security processes for any weakness.
Countering the proliferation of weapons also demands an integrated mix of global and regional activism.  With practical measures such as the Proliferation Security Initiative, we are helping to disrupt trade in weapons, materials and technologies while also working to reinforce multilateral export controls and safeguards. Australia is heavily engaged in supporting international efforts to address the nuclear brinkmanship of Iran and North Korea.
Iran's behaviour - in defiance of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1696 -needs to be met with resolve by the international community. While Australia is committed to finding a diplomatic solution, the UN needs to act quickly and decisively to ensure its own credibility. The challenge of helping weak and fragile states achieve security and development is related to almost every threat we face in this globalised security environment. Again, contributions in Iraq and Afghanistan reflect Australia's appreciation that our interests and responsibilities are both global and regional.
  Australia has a particular responsibility to assist vulnerable states in our region that confront challenges of law and order, corruption and weak governance. In East Timor and in a number of island states in the Pacific, we have been prepared to act in a robust, hands-on way. Though not without tensions at times, on the whole, our strong engagement is welcomed by neighbouring peoples.
Australia will continue to shoulder the lion's share of external assistance to some states. At the same time, we are under no illusions that their ultimate destiny lies in their own hands. This perspective underpins the work of the Australian Defence Force, as well as Australian police, diplomats, aid workers and others drawn from various Australian Government agencies working on the ground.
Clearly Australia's most immediate interests and responsibilities lie in Asia and the Pacific, for reasons of geography but also given the region's growing power and importance. Strength through cooperation will remain central to how Australia pursues its regional security interests. With a balance of principle and pragmatism, we seek to engage most substantially with those countries with which our primary strategic and economic interests reside.
 Australia's alliance relationship with the United States - an alliance of both interests and values - remains a cornerstone of our security. For the foreseeable future, no other country in the world will have the spread of interests or strategic reach of the United States. Steps taken to strengthen our alliance in the last decade reflect Australia's view that none of the security challenges we face can be met without American power and American purpose.
Australia has also encouraged Japan to play a greater security role regionally and globally.  This year's Trilateral Strategic Dialogue between Japan, Australia and the United States has added a new dimension to our relationship. As well as working with Japanese forces in Iraq, Australia has continued to support Japan taking a permanent seat on an expanded UN Security Council - as recognition of a more confident country assuming its rightful place, not only in the region, but in the world.
The Australian Government as you know has also raised significantly our level of strategic engagement with both China and India. China is determined to reclaim its place in the global system and should be further encouraged to play a constructive role in the region, including as a crucial partner in efforts to halt North Korea's nuclear ambitions. Australia seeks a strong partnership with China by building on our shared interests while dealing openly and honestly on issues where we might disagree.
By any standard, India is emerging as a major regional and global power. With among the world's largest armed forces, the largest navy in the Indian Ocean and a nuclear weapons capability, it will exert greater influence on our security environment. Australia's relationship with Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim nation and now its third largest democracy, is in the centre of Australia's security agenda in South East Asia, not least in the fight against terrorism.
The transformation of Indonesia after decades of authoritarianism is a remarkable political achievement, too little remarked and acknowledged in many part of the world. As a neighbour and friend, Australia will continue to place the highest priority on supporting the efforts of President Yudhoyono to strengthen its democratic processes and economic development.
Today's complex and interrelated security challenges have placed new demands on Australia's resources and security capabilities. The Government's long-term commitment to a 3 per cent real growth per year in defence spending will see Australia's defence budget rise to about $26 billion by 2015-16.  This will ensure a more combat focused, better equipped and more operationally ready defence force. The Government's recent decision to increase the size of the Army by two battalions is designed to meet future regional and global security challenges. Recent events in East Timor and the Solomon Islands have again shown the sorts of demands which our regional security environment places on Australia.
  The expansion of the Army will enable our troops to better sustain operations and to rotate forces so as to be better prepared for future requirements. It will ensure our soldiers are better supported and, when they get home, better rested and prepared to meet future challenges. This increase in the size of the Army is in addition to the enhanced land force capability announced last year as part of the Hardened and Networked Army initiative. It reflects this Government's fundamental reassertion of the strategic importance of the Army - and indeed of the individual soldier - in Australia's strategic culture.
 The Australian Government has also invested heavily in our broader defence capability for the years ahead. This year's Budget provided for enhanced heavy airlift capacity and planned investments will fund vital projects such as new air combat capability, Air Warfare Destroyers and Abrams tanks, the first of which were delivered last week. Australia must maintain a high level of operational capacity, not just with our military but also with our policing capacity.  The recent decision to increase the International Deployment Group of the Australian Federal Police by some 400 personnel will provide extra capacity to undertake stability operations and to respond at a moments notice to emerging law and order issues.
Beyond peace enforcement, Australia's leadership role also extends to helping our friends and neighbours in times of natural disaster and humanitarian crisis. This is an area where the courage, resilience and compassion of Australian forces have shone through in recent years - especially in the wake of the 2004 Asian Tsunami and last year's devastating earthquake in Pakistan.
In the 21st Century ladies and gentlemen, national security begins at home in more ways than one. Not least, it begins with a strong and growing economy so that we can afford to address the whole gamut of our security challenges. Australia's sustained prosperity - an economy now in the 16th year of economic growth - has provided the essential capacity to expand the resources we devote to national security, when and where they are needed.
In addition to greater defence spending, since the 11th of September 2001 we have committed over $8.3 billion to improving a wide range of domestic security capabilities, including intelligence, law enforcement, border security and protection of transport and other infrastructure. Funding for our domestic intelligence service - the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation - has increased substantially to the point where it is now better resourced than at any time since the height of the Cold War.
 The Commonwealth Government continues to work with state and territory governments across Australia to ensure that counter-terrorism laws strike the right balance between protecting individual rights and freedoms, and the right of the community to be safe from a terrorist attack. The recent aviation bomb plot in Great Britain has reminded all of us of the need for vigilance and to constantly evaluate our security procedures. Like all Western liberal democracies, we need to provide security without compromising our values and our way of life, but also remembering that the greatest human right of all is the right to live.
When people talk about civil liberties, they sometimes forget that action taken to protect the citizen against physical violence and attack is a blow in favour, and not a blow against, civil liberties. The battle against Islamist extremism in Australia will only be won with a strong combination of accurate intelligence, effective law enforcement and, crucially, a commitment to certain shared values across the whole of our society. Liberal democracies around the world are having to face challenges at the point where questions of citizenship, immigration, culture and national security intersect - what the British writer David Goodhart has labelled 'security-and-identity issues'.
  The maintenance of social cohesion in Australia is both our greatest national achievement and our greatest national challenge for the future. We rightly celebrate our cultural diversity - but this must never be at the expense of the greater importance we attach to the common values that bind us together as one people.
In the end, what links the different strands of Australia's security agenda is not how we see others but how we see ourselves. Today's globalised security environment, while it may have shaken some old prisms and paradigms, has also brought into sharper focus enduring interests and values that have served Australia well in the past. In the teeth of battle, in the cause of peace and in face of human suffering, a distinctly Australian blend of realism and idealism has come into its own.
The Government is under no illusions that there are those who want to harm our country and its people. We do not underestimate the strategic challenges that confront us and the tests we will likely face in the future. So while I am confident that our security agenda will become no less complex and crowded than it is in 2006, I am also very confident that Australia can prevail and prosper.
 Thank you.
[ends]


Well thank you very, very much David Smorgon. To Campbell Rose, to my colleague Rod Kemp, the Federal Minister for Sport, Nicola Roxon, the Federal Member for Gellibrand, the Mayor of the City of Maribyrnong, my fellow Australians. This is a wonderful afternoon for the West of Melbourne, it's a wonderful afternoon for the Western Bulldogs, and it is a reminder of how much can be achieved by different groups in the Australian community getting together and setting their mind on achieving a goal and an objective. And when, just on two years ago the Government decided to contribute $8 million to the redevelopment of the Whitten Oval, we did so in the belief, we did so in the belief ladies and gentlemen that it would not only bring new life and new facilities to a great football club, but it would also be a hub of community activity and community facilities.
And those responsible for the project have been true to their word and to their commitment and when this redevelopment is finally completed, it will not only of course be a magnificent new home for the Western Bulldogs, it will not only gather in their thousands the young people of the West of Melbourne to learn Australian Rules Football, but it will also provide facilities for other sports and for other physical activities. And also, such as a childcare centre, provide a general amenity for the district.
 It's an area made up of people from many countries but bound together by a love of sport, by a love of Australia and by a belief that sporting clubs can act as a great community cement. They can achieve things, and as your President has already said, the Bulldogs have had a great season. Scott West came second in the Brownlow Medal, and congratulations to Scott. And the spirit of the Club has shone out through the season and I know that the spirit that is evident here today will act as an enormous boost to the Club's fortunes and to the Club's activities in the future.
 Let me simply say that this has been a team effort. Of course the Federal Government has kicked in some $8 million, but the State Government has played its part and made a contribution. The local council has also cooperated magnificently. And very importantly, the Forever Foundation which has brought together the efforts and the contributions of individual donors and supporters of the club has raised more than $5 million already, which really is a truly magnificent effort. Now I said a few moments ago that it's never too late for people who haven't contributed to that Foundation to do so, but so far the efforts and the contributions have been magnificent.
So I am delighted to be here today. I congratulate the Bulldogs, I congratulate the successful tenderer. I understand it's a local company that employs some hundreds of people in Melbourne's West. And isn't that appropriate and isn't that fitting that the activity that will be involved in the construction of the childcare hub will involve workers and investment in this part of Melbourne.
But to all of you, my friends, good luck to the Western Bulldogs. It's a club with a great tradition. This is a great Oval. It might be a little tired and old at the present time, but its spirit is very constant and very strong and when the redevelopment is finally completed there will be thousands of people in this part of Australia who will be extremely proud of this facility and very happy to enjoy it and to use it, and to celebrate that great community spirit that binds us together as Australians.
Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Graham Duff, Premiers, Leader of the Opposition Kim Beazley, the Governor of Victoria and the Lord Mayor of Melbourne and my fellow Australians.  This is without doubt, the greatest sporting meal on the Australian calendar, there is nothing quite like the North Melbourne Grand Final breakfast, I have been coming to it in various guises for a long time now, it seems to get bigger and better each year, and it is a remarkable coming together, not only of the AFL fraternity of this country, but also in a very real sense the sporting fraternity of this country, and I always find at these breakfasts, my mind doing a little bit of a stocktake of the year in sport for Australia.  Because Grand Final day, whether it's here in Melbourne or Sydney, always reminds us of how sport binds us together whatever our differences might be on other issues. And I look back over the year and it is certainly a fantastic 12 months to look back on.  The way, in which the various football codes have spread, I prefer to call it the 'Australianisation' of football, I've never been very keen on nationalisation, but be that as it is, the Australianisation of football has been quite remarkable, and everyone knows, of course, of the extraordinary situation today and tomorrow in relation to the teams that are participating.
 But it's also been a wonderful year in a lot of other sports.  Very recently our women's basketball team, the Opals, brought enormous pride to Australia in winning in Brazil, and I think they deserve a great round of applause.  And of course, that other code of football which is so widely played, especially by the young all around the country, the Socceroos brought tremendous pride and put that game well and truly on the map, and there have been, yes let's give them a round of applause.
 And we look back on other quite remarkable sporting performances, and it all serves to remind us of how important our sport is to our national psyche as Australians.  And I remarked to James Sutherland on the way in, this is the time of the year when one sporting activity seems to dissolve into another, and of course many of us are conscious of another titanic sporting struggle which will I suppose reach its apex on Boxing Day at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, without doubt the greatest sporting arena in Australia, and of course the great Ashes clash between Australia and England.  I mean all of these things we celebrate as Australians, and in a way this breakfast gives us an opportunity to reflect on them and to remark to ourselves and to each other of what a wonderful inheritance we have this great sporting tradition of our country.  It's been a wonderful year for the AFL, it's gone from strength to strength, the vitality of the competition, the way in which it has spread around the nation, the way in which it has attracted fans from parts of Australia that a generation ago would not have heard of the game, let alone wanted to watch it or be in any way associated with it, and that is an extraordinary tribute to the game's leaders and administrators, and I know I speak for all of you in wishing Ron Evans well in his health struggle at the present.  He's a great bloke, he's a very good Australian and he's a wonderful gentleman, we wish him well.
  I simply conclude by paying tribute to all of those who've made AFL such a loved game throughout our country, the courage of those who decided to take it national years ago, the commitment of the players, the skill of the coaches, and above all the incredible enthusiasm of the fans.  There is no city in Australia that has a greater tradition of watching and supporting sport than the city of Melbourne, it's an enormous tribute, Grand Final day to the people of Melbourne, and to the people of Victoria, it will be a wonderful day, and like all other Australians I look forward to watching the game, thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Paddy McGuinness, Chief Justice, Justices, Your Eminence, Your Grace, my Parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen.  I'm finally succumbing to Peter Garrett's advice and its great to embrace an evening of culture and poetry and all of that after overdosing on my Philistine sporting pursuits over the weekend in almost the four corners of the Earth, from one side of the country to the other.
  But it really is an enormous pleasure for Janette and me to celebrate this great event of a great literary journal which has fought the good fight in the best sense of that expression over half a century because it is true that over the last 50 years Quadrant has upheld, often as a lonely counterpoint to stultifying orthodoxies and dangerous utopia's, the best of the Western cultural tradition.
  It has helped many of us to navigate the battle of ideas, while staying true to its calling as an outlet for essays and poetry of the highest quality.  Indeed, it's no exaggeration to say that Quadrant has been Australia's home to all that is worth preserving in that Western cultural tradition.
Tonight, we recognise the debt that intellectual life in Australia owes to Quadrant, and to the people importantly who have sustained Quadrant's free spirit over that 50 years.
As has already been remarked by both Paddy and Peter, Quadrant has always attracted a very diverse group of people to its circle.  People of different backgrounds, different faiths as well as those of no faith, people with different party political sympathies, but all united by a commitment to intellectual freedom and liberal democracy.
This diversity was nowhere more apparent than among the people who launched Quadrant in 1956, and this has already been alluded to, in the shadow of the Soviet suppression of the Hungarian uprising.
And I join others in paying tribute to three individuals:- Quadrant's founder and long-time publisher Richard Krygier; its first editor James McAuley and the first Chairman of the Australian Committee for Cultural Freedom, Sir John Latham.  Each in their own way was critical to Quadrant's birth and its subsequent development.
   Richard Krygier, the Jewish immigrant from Poland whose experiences of both Nazism and Communism bred a passionate grasp of what was at stake in the great ideological contest of our time.
  James McAuley, the poet and Catholic convert who edited Quadrant in its early years and who saw with great clarity the need for a cultural journal in Australia that stood apart from the canons of conformity of the left.
John Latham, the former Chief Justice and politician; the avowed humanist and rationalist whose involvement added prestige and stature to the Quadrant project.
I want also to recognise all of those who worked, often for very little money or no money, to produce some 430 issues of Quadrant down the years.  Like most small magazines, Quadrant has invariably led a hand-to-mouth existence and been very much a labour of love for many committed people.
  It's important on an occasion like this we remember not just the big ideological struggles but also the individuals who took up the cause of cultural freedom and the defence of liberal democracy against its enemies.
With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of Soviet communism, it became all too easy to pretend that the outcome of the Cold War was an inevitable result of large-scale, impersonal forces that ultimately left totalitarianism exhausted and democratic capitalism triumphant.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  This was a struggle fought by individuals on behalf of the individual spirit.
And Quadrant holds an honoured place in Australian history for the stance it took for democratic freedom and a pluralist society and in opposition to collectivist ideologies that so many saw as the inevitable wave of the future.
It's worth recalling just a few of the philo-communism that was once quite common in Australia in the 1950's and 60's.  For example, Manning Clark's book Meeting Soviet Man where he likened the ideals of Vladimir Lenin to those of Jesus Christ.  John Burton, the former head of the External Affairs Department, arguing that Mao's China provided a model for the 'transformation' of Australia.  All those who did not simply oppose Australia's commitment in Vietnam, but who actively supported the other side and fed the delusion that Ho Chi Minh was some sort of Jeffersonian Democrat intent on spreading liberty in Asia.
   To quote George Orwell: 'One has to belong to the intelligentsia to believe things like that: no ordinary man could be such a fool'.  There is a view that the pro-communist left in Australia in decades past was no more than a bunch of na‹ve idealists, rather than what they were - ideological barrackers for regimes of oppression opposed to Australia and its interests.
In taking on the Communist left and their fellow-travellers, people like Richard Krygier, James McAuley, Peter Coleman, Bob Santamaria, Heinz Arndt and Frank Knopfelmacher were not only right in practice, they were right in principle and part of a noble and moral cause.
The influence of the pro-communist left in Australian cultural circles did wane over time, after Hungary and Kruschev's secret speech in 1956 and further still after the brutal suppression of the Prague Spring in 1968.  In the 1960's and 70's, it largely gave way to a New Left counter culture, where once again Quadrant served as a beacon of free and sceptical thought against fashionable leftist views on social, foreign policy and economic issues.
In the eyes of the New Left, the Cold War became a struggle defined by 'moral equivalence', where the Soviet bloc and the American-led West were equally to blame, each possessing their own dominating ideologies.  It became the height of intellectual sophistication to believe that people in the West were no less oppressed than people under the yoke of communist dictatorship.
In time, the world would luckily see the emergence of three remarkable individuals whose moral clarity punctured such nonsense.  Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher and Pope John Paul II.
Reagan, the man who gave America back her confidence and optimism in the wake of a decade of setbacks and who began to talk openly and candidly about an 'evil empire' - the sort of talk that sends diplomats the world over into panicked meltdown.
Thatcher, the Iron Lady who as well as anyone grasped and articulated the essential connection of personal, political and economic freedom.
Pope John Paul II - a man of enormous courage and dignity whose words of faith and hope inspired millions behind the Iron Curtain to dream again of a Europe whole and free.
All of us here tonight owe a particular debt of gratitude to these three towering figures of the late 20th Century.
Beyond this defining ideological struggle, Quadrant has also been at the centre of various controversies and causes in Australia, often prepared to publish things that others would not touch, often taking stands which others shied away from taking.
According to Peter Coleman, it was the Whitlam Government that inspired Quadrant to go from a bi-monthly to 10 issues a year and based on some of the policies around at the time, I'm not surprised.  I do want to pay a special tribute to Peter as Quadrant's longest serving editor.
Current editor Paddy McGuinness also deserves our special praise for the way he has carried on the Quadrant tradition of fine scholarship with a sceptical, questioning eye for cant, hypocrisy and moral vanity.
 Of the causes that Quadrant has taken up that are close to my heart none is more important than the role it has played as counterforce to the black armband view of Australian history.  Until recent times, it had become almost de riueur in intellectual circles to regard Australian history as little more than a litany of sexism, racism and class warfare.
  Again, it would take the brave voices of a few individuals to take a stand against the orthodoxies of the day.  And again Quadrant has been an outpost of lively non-conformity in its willingness to defend both Geoffrey Blainey and Keith Windschuttle against the posses of political correctness.
Nowhere I suggest, have the fangs of the left so visibly been on display as they were in a campaign based on character assassination and intellectual dishonesty through their efforts to trash the name and reputation of that great Australian historian Geoffrey Blainey.
Despite a more diverse and lively intellectual environment in Australia compared with past decades, we should not underestimate the degree to which the soft-left still holds sway, even dominance, especially in Australia's universities, by virtue of its long march through the institutions.
Quadrant has always been a principled defender of what I might call a 'traditionalist' view of a good education and in opposition to the more fashionable, progressive views that have held sway in schools and universities.   Earlier this year I called for a root and branch renewal of Australian history in our schools, with a restoration of narrative instead of what I labelled the 'fragmented stew of themes and issues'.
 Armed with clear evidence of the decline of Australian history in our schools, the Government has made a start in our quest to ensure that the nation's history is an essential component of every Australian child's education, no longer an afterthought or an optional extra.
  This is about ensuring children are actually taught their national inheritance, a nation like all others with its share of failures and mistakes, but one that has emerged at the start of this millennium as one of the most successful societies on earth.
Few debates are as vital as those over education, whether it be in upholding basic standards on literacy and numeracy, promoting diversity and choice or challenging the incomprehensible sludge that can find its way into some curriculum material.  That is why the Government will continue to be very tough on states and territories that fail to live up to their obligations for high standards in our schools.
Having spoken earlier about Quadrant's role in the defining global struggle of the second half of the 20th Century, let me say just a few words about the global struggle we now face at the start of the 21st Century.
Today, free and open societies face a new tyranny, the tyranny of Islamist terrorism.  One with at least a family resemblance to the great struggles against forces of totalitarianism in the past.  A Czech writer once wrote with great prescience that: 'You can't build utopia without terror, and before long terror is all that's left'.
  And just as past struggles called for clear and unambiguous statements of belief and purpose, so we must again make very clear what is at stake.  Let me say what I have said many times before.  This is not a struggle against Islam.  It is a struggle against a perverted interpretation of Islam.  As we see on a daily basis, it is the terrorists and suicide bombers who eagerly set out to spread terror and to kill innocent Muslim civilians.  Countries with their sons and daughters serving in Iraq and Afghanistan today would like nothing more than to see them complete their job and return home.
To those who want to portray the West as anti-Muslim, I would say that it was not the Arab League who went to war in the 1990's on behalf of Muslim minorities in the Balkans.  It was the governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and their NATO allies.  Let me also remind people who now talk as if Iraq was some kink of pro-Islamic tranquillity before 2003 that the person who's probably killed more Muslims in history than anyone else is Saddam Hussein.
There are, as Owen Harries, an honoured guest tonight properly reminds us, people who legitimately opposed the original action to oust Saddam Hussein, but it remains, to borrow a phrase, an inconvenient truth that if some countries such as the United States, if countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia simply abandon the people of Iraq this would be an enormous victory for the forces of terror and extremism around the world.
The fact is that we are part of a global campaign for the very ideals that some people wistfully dreamed were unchallengeable after the Cold War.  No less than in that long, twilight struggle, this too will be a generational struggle for ideals of democratic freedom and liberty under the law.
I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity and paying me the honour of joining this celebration of this remarkable magazine.  Its free and sceptical spirit has contributed enormously to intellectual and political debate in this country.  It has displayed in relation to each of the great philosophical challenges that have come along through their domestic manifestations here in Australia in my lifetime a tenacity towards principle, a consistency in advocating basic values and beliefs, and a broad mindedness and an eclectic gathering of people from different backgrounds that does this magazine and the values that unite it great credit indeed.
I wish it well, I thank it for its contribution to Australia.  But even more importantly than that I thank it for its contribution to the universal values of liberal democracy and truth and the spirit of the individual that is so important to all of us.   Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Peter. Andrew Stoner, the Leader of the National Party in New South Wales, my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues. Can I start by saying to you Peter that you have not only my good wishes but my strong support and the active participation and help of all of my Federal Parliamentary colleagues in New South Wales and around the country in achieving your goals on the 24th of March next year.
As Prime Minister I travel the country a great deal and I can say to this audience here in Sydney that of all the State Governments around Australia, none is more frequently criticised and none is regarded as more incompetent than the Government of New South Wales. And I do believe very strongly that a change of Government in this state is not only on the merits something that ought to occur, but something that would be of enormous long-term benefit to the people of this state.
It's not often in national politics that we get agreement between the Government and the Opposition on one of the central issues of political debate. But we do at the present time. There's common agreement between myself and Mr Beazley, between the Coalition Government and the Labor Opposition about one thing, and that is that this country, as a nation, is living in very prosperous times. I've noticed in recent months, whenever spokesmen for the Labor Party get talking about the economy, they start by acknowledging that we really are in very prosperous circumstances as a nation. And that is true, there's no debate about that. The difference of course is that they then go on to say well yes we're very prosperous but it was all due to the things that we did more than 10 years ago, and it's also due to the fact that we're living off the back of a mining boom.
Now it is true that we are enjoying the massive benefits of the mining industry, coming principally, but not only out of Western Australia and parts of Queensland. But overwhelmingly this country is enjoying at a national level, great prosperity. It does vary a little around the country and clearly Western Australia and Queensland are outperforming the other states. And plainly there are changes that can be made at a state level that can have an impact on levels of economic performance in individual states.
But overwhelmingly we are living in the best economic times as a nation that we've had since World War II. It's more broadly based and it's more soundly rooted in the fundamentals of the economy than at any time in my living memory. We did have strong growth in the late 1960s, but that strong growth was behind very high tariff walls. We had a highly centralised wage fixing system, we had a fixed exchange rate, we were a very protected and cloistered economy. We are now a much more open, competitive, globalised economy and we're an economy that understands that we must export and compete in order to survive. And the transformation in the last 10 years has been truly remarkable. We're all familiar with the fact that we have the lowest unemployment in more than 30 years, that we have strong levels of business investment, and we are very conscious of course of the fact that we have run successive Federal Budget surpluses now for many years.
 But there are a number of, sort of, what I would call economic nuggets that we're not perhaps as aware of as we should be. For example, in the June quarter of this year there were only 3.1 working days lost per 1000 employees in this country, and that's the lowest quarterly level of industrial disputes ever recorded by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. And the change in the building and construction industry, which is very important to the economic strength of this country, has been even more remarkable. The number of working days lost per thousand employees in that industry declined from 32.8 in the June quarter last year to only 7.6 in the June quarter of this year. And that's a combination of the impact of the building and construction industry legislation as well as our workplace legislation more generally.
Another perhaps misunderstood, or not properly understood fact about the strength of the economy is that more people in Australia want to get a job now than ever before. Since the beginning of last year, what's called the participation rate, that's the percentage of the total labour market who want to get a job, has been above 64 per cent and it's never been like that over the past 30 years except on two previous occasions.  And another nugget, another reminder of the depth of our economic strength is that the latest OECD survey of Australia reported that average incomes in this country per capita GDP is now greater than that in any of the G7 countries, that's the wealthiest and strongest economies, with the exception of the United States.
  And that same organisation, the OECD records that our net debt as a nation fell from a peak of 26.5 per cent of our national wealth in the mid 1990s to zero in 2005. And if you think that that's a good performance, let me remind you that the average level of general government net debt in the OECD is 46.5 per cent.  Ours is zero and the average is 46.5 per cent across the OECD.  I mention these figures my friends to underline the scale of the economic change and the extent to which we are fire-proofing this economy against the inevitable challenges that will come, sometimes from overseas and sometimes from domestic sources.  Now there might be some in the audience who think, well that's all very well but they're averages and there are people who have fallen behind as a result.  The reassuring thing on that front is that if you look over the last 10 years, the ratio of incomes earned by the highest against those earned by the lowest has not expanded.  In fact there has been a tiny contraction which indicates that the argument that the rich have got richer and the poor have got poorer is not valid in relation to Australia over the last 10 years.
Now I make these points to simply clear the decks for the more important and very simple issue I want to put to you and that is that I am invited to talk about securing our future, about building our future, and I will be saying a lot about our future over the next 12 months because at the end of that period, the Australian people will make a judgement about their political future. And they'll be asked whether or not the Government deserves to be returned or whether they think a change of government is desirable.  And my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition says that he is a great believer in national building, well I don't argue with nation building, I think it's a very laudable goal.  I would have thought the most valuable way in which we can build our nation, given where we are at the moment, and given that we all agree across the political divide, that we are a very prosperous country, I think the best way that we can build our nation is to keep and expand the prosperity we now have. And I will be saying to the Australian people again and again in different forums, albeit using slightly different language but nonetheless saying essentially the same thing, and that is you have to make a choice as to which side of politics you think is better able to maintain the prosperity we both agree exists.
 And that is my central thesis to you and to the Australian people.  Do you really think we are going to better maintain the prosperity we now have which is a product of 10 to 15 years of economic reform by turning your back on economic reform, or do you think we are likely to better maintain it by continuing a process of economic reform?  It's a trite thing to say but it's nonetheless true, that today's prosperity is the product of yesterday's reforms, just as tomorrow's prosperity will be the product of today's reforms. And the metaphor for the difference between our two parties on this issue is of course the central issue of industrial relations and I don't walk away from industrial relations reform being central to Australia's economic prosperity.  If anybody in the Labor Party imagines that I am going to walk away from this as an issue or water down my continuing commitment to the value that industrial relations reform brings to this country then they are sadly mistaken.  We've now had six months of WorkChoices. We were told the sky was going to fall in, we were told that wages would be driven down, we were told that there would be mass sackings, we were told there would be endless industrial disputes.  After six months, we have 175,000 more jobs in the Australian community, we have, as I have recorded, the lowest level of industrial disputes the country has seen since the statistics were recorded, and we have clear evidence that real wages in this country have continued to grow.  And I have every reason to believe that there will be a broad maintenance of that trend over the next six to 12 months.  Now I am not saying all of that is due to WorkChoices, but what I am saying is that the Armageddon that we were told would occur as a result of our industrial relations changes simply hasn't come about. And I think there is growing evidence that the greater flexibility for small business, particularly through the removal of the job-destroying unfair dismissal laws, has played a significant part in the job growth that's occurred over that six month period.
 Now in the face of all of that, it is clearly inconsistent with the maintenance of our prosperity for either side of politics to promise to reverse those reforms. In the past few days there are has been signed and lodged with the relevant office the one millionth Australian Workplace Agreement signed in this country since they were introduced some years ago. And it is very likely that by the time of the next election there will be close to one million Australian Workplace Agreements in existence and it defies commonsense as well as economic logic, for Mr Beazley to promise that he will get rid of all those agreements.
 Australian Workplace Agreements underpin the very sector of the economy which he says is largely responsible for our prosperity, and that is the mining industry. Take Australian Workplace Agreements away from the mining industry in Western Australia and you cripple much of the productivity and the flexibility that has given that industry such a golden opportunity to be utilised on behalf of all of the Australian people.
 So you can see why I regard attitudes on this particular reform as being a metaphor for the capacity of our side of politics to maintain the prosperity that this country now has. We were told by the Opposition after the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax that it was going to roll it back. They predicted doom and gloom, they predicted that there would chaos and confusion when that was introduced, it is now a distant memory and has become part of the economic framework and it has made a contribution to the economic strength that this country is enjoying.
There are my friends many things that will feature in the national political debate over the next 12 months. But none will be more important than the answer to that very simple question, and that is which side of politics will better be equipped, will be better equipped rather, to maintain the prosperity that we undoubtedly have? We are fortunate but we have made our own luck. We've worked harder and better and more flexibly as a people over the last 10 or 20 years than we probably have at anytime in our history. Australia has changed. We have embraced new attitudes and new industries, and both the business community and the employees of this country deserve praise for working together to achieve it.
 But we cannot take that prosperity for granted if we go idle on reform, if we imagined that we've solved all our problems and we don't maintain the momentum of reform then we're going to start going backwards. You've heard me say it before but I'll say it again, economic reform is a bit like competing in a never-ending race towards a receding finishing line, you never get there, but if you stop running hard the blokes beside you are going to past you and you're going to fall behind in the race. And that is the sort of situation we face in Australia at the moment. If we don't keep reforming and changing then we're going to start going backwards. And I'll be putting to the Australian people in clear and no uncertain terms over the next 12 months that that is choice that face. Who is better able to maintain the prosperity we undeniably have? There's no argument that we have that prosperity, the argument is who is better able to maintain it? And if you use the commitment of this Government over the last 10 years to the cause of economic reform then I think the answer is a very compelling one.
Can I simply conclude by thanking all of you for coming along today. Many of you have been loyal and consistent and generous supporters of the New South Wales Division of the Liberal Party over many years. You've been very generous to us federally and I ask you to be very generous to us state-wise because we do have a task ahead of us. I don't like this Government having....this country having eight state and territory Labor governments. And I would like to see that change, I'll do everything I can to help Peter bring about that change here in New South Wales and I commit myself and my federal colleagues to achieving that great goal. Thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Jane Halton, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen and I particularly welcome the presence of so many doctors and psychologists and psychiatrists and other health professionals who've come along to be involved in this further announcement of the Government's commitment to not only expanding the range of services and assistance for treating mental illness in our community, but also, as Jane Halton has said, generally investing further resources in health care for the benefit of the entire community.
  I think all of you, perhaps you more so than any other group in the Australian community, would have argued long and hard and believed deep down that we needed as a country to put more resources into treating mental illness and in April of this year I announced on behalf of the Commonwealth that we would invest an additional $1.9 billion in a range of health care initiatives particularly designed to address what would seem legitimately in the community as gaps in our response to the challenge of mental disorders.  That is part of a cooperative approach between the Commonwealth and state and territory governments towards tackling issues of mental health. There have been responses to our announcement in varying degrees from the states but it's not my purpose today to analyse that, I'll leave that to others.
  I simply want today to touch on two of the very significant elements of that package and in doing so I'm sure again with an audience like this I don't need to issue a reminder of the dimension of the problem, the reality that the recent statistics indicate that in any six-month period, some 500,000 young people and teenagers, children and teenagers will encounter some kind of mental disorder. I think those sort of statistics drive home the challenge and they also drive home the fact that all age groups are affected by mental disorders. The notion that it is overwhelming amongst the elderly in our community is completely misguided and quite erroneous and it's something that afflicts all sections of the community and that is why we need a more diverse response.
  The two measures that I particularly want to just touch on, and I'm going to leave it to Chris Pyne, and can I say what an incredibly energetic disposition Chris Pyne has brought to this. I know that Amanda Gordon and others who have interacted with him in the time that he has been in this job, he really has brought great energy and determination and he has certainly played a very significant role in the lead up to the announcement that I made on behalf of the Commonwealth Government in April of this year.
  The two initiatives that we are launching today are very significant components, the first of them which involves an expenditure of some $538 million over the next five years means that from the first of November this year, that's the beginning of next month, there will be a significant enlargement of Medicare rebate availability for a range of services to treat mental disorders.  It'll provide better access to psychiatrists, psychologists and general practitioners through the Medicare Benefits Schedule.  Now this does represent a very significant breakthrough and it will mean that a lot of consultations which are so material to treating people's mental disorders which previously were not eligible for Medicare rebates will become eligible for Medicare rebates. And it does represent one of the really significant, necessary changes and reforms that could only be enacted by the Federal Government.
  The second is that we will be committing some $51.7 million over five years to target areas of need by funding organisations such as divisions of general practice and Aboriginal medical services to establish and run mental health clinical services in rural and remote communities.  Now these are two of the initiatives in the $1.9 billion dollar program and we'll be releasing details of further initiatives as we move through this Mental Health Week.
 And of course I take this opportunity in saying that whilst the major boost in clinical services is critical, our health package also includes a range of non-clinical services to help people and their families manage their day-to-day living, such as an additional 650 new respite care places, 900 personal mentors and helpers, living skills programmes to help people to cook and shop and other important social skills, and programmes to help young people with mental illnesses stay in school. Those last-mentioned programmes are absolutely critical, because if the onset or the presence from a very early age of a mental illness is not appropriately dealt with, then the despair is, as it were, self-compounded if the child drops out of school. And it makes the task of recovery and treatment that much more difficult.
I just want to emphasise before concluding that what I think these measures, particularly those relating to the expansion of the Medicare rebate system, what I think these measures will do is to emphasise the team approach to the treatment of mental illness in this country. I don't want to sound, how shall I put it, self-serving in making this remark to this audience, but this country does have high-quality health professionals and we do need to remove some of the barriers which have existed through the restrictions in relation to the Medicare rebate system, and some of the other barriers that have prevented you and your colleagues from providing the kind of services that are needed.
We have certainly, as a community, become a lot more mature and a lot more commonsense in talking about mental illness. We often lament the deteriorations in social discourse that have occurred in this country over the last generation. We too infrequently remark on the improvements in social discourse that have taken place and one of the improvements is a greater willingness to talk, particularly, but not only by men, about challenges of this kind.
 And I think the emphasis that Mental Health Week will bring to the community, talking about the problem of mental illness and a recognition of the causes of it, a frank assessment, but I hope an objective assessment of the impact of allegedly socially harmless drugs over the years. I think the impact of the abuse of those drugs is part of it, but it's not the only part of it, there are a lot of other dimensions to it, and all that can be done to contribute to a better understanding of the problem as well as the dollars of the Commonwealth Government; I know they're always an important component of these discussions and understandably so because they are the resources of the Australian people and they should be directed towards tackling the problems of the Australian people.
 I want again to record my thanks to Tony Abbott and to Chris Pyne and also to the former Health Minister Kay Patterson, who I know is here today and has taken an enormous interest in this issue. I want to thank all of them for the contribution that they've made, but most importantly I thank all of you for the support that you are offering by your presence. This is something of, if not a new beginning, it is a breakout from some of the past restrictions. I hesitate to invoke the language of new beginnings because that can be a little overdone. But I do think by enlarging the Medicare rebate system to embrace things that are really part and parcel of a doctor treating a patient for a mental disorder and some consultations in group therapies and the like, I think to include them in the Medicare rebate schedule, and can I make the point that all of these services become eligible for the operation of that wonderful innovation to Medicare introduced by the Government and that is the Medicare Safety Net. And I do want to emphasise that point lest anybody be concerned about the potential burden of gap fees and the like. They won't be a burden because of the wonderful operation of the Medicare Safety Net.
Thank you very, very much and I hope that these announcements will maintain the momentum of growing government, at both levels, as well as, community interest in the treatment of mental disorders. Thank you.
[ends]


From the 1st of November next, there will be a major expansion in the Medicare rebate system to help in the treatment of mental illnesses.
As from the beginning of next month, Medicare rebates will be available to patients whose GP provides early intervention, assessment and management in relation to mental disorders.
Under the new rules, people referred to mental health professionals by their GP for individual and group therapy sessions and patients seeing psychiatrists for the first time will also be eligible for Medicare rebates.
To be launched later today, this new plan is a major reshaping of the way we provide treatment for mental health problems in Australia.
 This expansion of Medicare will cost $538 million over five years. It is part of the Commonwealth's new $1.9 billion commitment to improving the treatment of mental illness in our country.
Today commences Mental Health Week - a time to remember that mental illness can strike all age groups. In any six-month period more than 500,000 children and teenagers will experience some kind of mental illness.
Australian health professionals are amongst the best in the world. The major enhancement of Medicare that I will announce later today will assist them to do even more in helping their fellow Australians with a mental disorder.  


  Thank you Margaret for those wonderful, inspiring and very nostalgic words. To Helen Coonan and all of my parliamentary colleagues and supporters and members, ladies and gentlemen, this is an occasion for quiet but intense pride on the part of the Liberal Party.  It is a remarkable and indeed unremarked reality that despite all the talk that has emanated from our political opponents about equal rights, about quotas, about reverse discrimination and all the other excuses that have been used, always in a fairly patronising fashion, it is a very remarkable thing that when you actually analyse the record, the true trail-blazers, the true achievers in relation to respecting the equal capacity and the equal commitment of women serving in public life, the true trail-blazers have been the members of the Liberal Party.
  Our proudest boast, and in that boast the women of the Liberal Party have spoken with the loudest voice, our proudest boast is that we've done it without rules and quotas.  We've done it on merit, we'll always do it on merit, the numbers won't always be equal, perhaps they will never be equal.  Perhaps at some time the number of women will exceed the number of men, whatever may be the ultimate working out of all of this, if we do truly believe in the equality of individuals, if we truly do believe in both the aspirations of both men and women who aspire to make a contribution, then we will never embrace quotas, we will never patronise one half of the population with such approaches.
 To have seven out of 10, that's a majority you never get in an election, to have seven out of 10 of the Cabinet Ministers this country has seen is a great tribute to the Party.  I certainly owe and enormous debt of gratitude in so many ways to the women who've been part of my Government for contributions that they have made, the fact that we now have a record number of women in Cabinet.  But we didn't, I didn't arrive at that number as some kind of token.  There are three women in the Cabinet because they all deserve to be there by virtue of the quality of their contribution. And they hold diverse portfolios, they hold portfolios that deal with what you might loosely call human services, in the case of eduction, in the case of immigration Amanda is dealing with one of the most challenging and complicated areas of public policy that we can have in Australia at the beginning of the 21st Century. And of course when I knew I had to find somebody to deal with all of the media moguls I thought Helen's charm would outstrip any of my male colleagues.
   Now that is a very politically incorrect remark to make, I am renowned for being politically incorrect and there are some ironies about all of this.  One of the ironies is, of course, that the party that's squawked the loudest about giving women a fair go, has fallen a long way behind the party that has just recognised individual talent and that's the difference between us and Labor.  And of course you know who would have thought amongst my many critics, that that bloke who rejoiced in the white picket fence and who was, sort of, stereotyped as having a particularly traditional view about the respective roles of women and men in our society, we would end up having so many female members of a Cabinet and so many female members of his parliamentary party.
It just goes to show that life is completely full of irony, but it also goes to show that we should never, in dealing with issues of this kind, we should never fall for the propaganda, we should never fall for the rhetoric, we should look behind it.  It always astonishes me when I hear men or women of the Left, and you know who I'm talking about, men and women of the Left talking about the contribution that women over the last few decades have made to the shaping of public policy, to leadership, to the influences on society and the way in which society has changed.  They never seem to include those women who don't fit their particular stereotype.  They never seem to mention women like Margaret Thatcher who's probably been in sheer political terms, the most influential woman that the western world has seen in the last 40 or 50 years.  The reason they don't mention her, of course, is that she somehow or other doesn't fit the pattern, and it shows the narrowness and the prejudice that lies behind the approach of many of our political opponents to these issues.
  But tonight is not the occasion for attacking the other side, let's be charitable, tonight is an occasion for positively extolling the Liberal way of providing equal opportunity for equal talent.  It's an occasion for me to express my gratitude to all of the women who have contributed to the success of our party, yes, let's give them a round of applause, and as Margaret reminded us, the party was built from its very inception on the contribution of women.  And in fact written into the constitution of the Victorian division, as Margaret will know, is provision for, express provision for women, something perhaps not written in, to quite the same, quite the same extent, the state divisions and the rest of the party.  Through all those years as circumstances change, it is inevitable more and more women entered parliament.  The Liberal Party held fast to its view that merit alone would be the determinant of whether or not people received political preferment in ministries and in the parliamentary party.
I am deeply grateful for the contribution that women have made to our political success in four elections over the last 10 years.  The contribution women have made, not only as marginal seat holders or as Senators, but of course now the reality that people used to rather, under their voice say, a few years ago, of course, they only choose women to run for marginal seats or to run for the Senate, they never give them safe seats in the House of Representatives. Well that little piece of cynicism and that little piece of criticism has been amply disproved in recent times. And the contribution that women, along with men of course, have made to the holding of marginal seats and the retention of government over the last 10 years is the stuff with which the success and the jubilation of the Liberal Party particularly this year, has made.  To you Helen who today in a way is a metaphor for the contribution that women have made to our party and to our Government, you've piloted through the Senate a most difficult and complicated piece of legislation, you've had the odd bit of trouble with the odd Senator along the way, you've handled that with great flair. I don't think any of the women have given you any difficulty along the way, I think one or two of the blokes may have, but you've handled it with very, very great skill.
Most importantly tonight is an occasion to honour the 10 women who over the years, the seven Liberal and three Labor women who have been members of the Cabinet, but particularly for us as Liberals to take a quiet, understated, but nonetheless deep pride in the fact that we have done it more comprehensively, we've done it on merit, we've it without patronizing 50 per cent of the population, and it the process of doing that we have demonstrated that one of the fundamental values of our party is that is we recognise individual aspiration and individual talent without regard to class or race or gender or social background, but merely on the basis of merit and that is something in which all of us as Liberals should be immensely proud.  Thank you.
  [ends]


The purpose of this statement is to announce new investments by the Australian Government towards a more skilled and dynamic workforce.
Australia's labour market is the strongest in generations.  Unemployment is at a 30-year low.  Workforce participation is at an all-time high.  More than 10 million Australians are in jobs, working to build a better life for themselves and their families.
This economic strength is the dividend of policies geared to preserving Australia's prosperity.  As the OECD has pointed out, far from relying on luck, Australia has 'made its own luck' in recent years by virtue of structural reforms and macroeconomic policies that have bolstered our economy's resilience.
  In this parliament, the Coalition has set about further increasing workforce participation and productivity - through reforms to workplace relations, reforms to welfare arrangements, superannuation reform and, after tax cuts in 2004, more tax cuts in 2005 and 2006.  All the while we have continued to run strong budget surpluses.
We know that tomorrow's prosperity is not assured.  We know it must be earned through further reform of our economy.  And we know it rests crucially on harnessing the skills and talents of the Australian people.
This financial year, the Government is investing more than $2.5 billion in vocational and technical education - a real increase of 85 per cent on a decade ago.  More than 403,000 Australian Apprentices are in training this year, up from 154,800 in 1996.
  With our investment in 25 Australian Technical Colleges, the Government has said quite emphatically that the days when a trade or vocational qualification was deemed 'second-class' in our society are over.
Young Australians have more opportunities than ever before to do what they want to do, and be what they want to be.
To compete and prosper in the decades to come, Australia will require a more skilled workforce whose members are adaptable throughout their careers to changing product and skills demands.
Today I announce Skills for the Future - new investments totalling $837 million over five years to help build a more highly skilled and responsive workforce to support Australia's long-term economic growth.
The primary focus of this package is on raising the skills of Australia's adult workforce.  Skills for the Future also carries a clear message about the importance of upgrading skills over the course of an individual's working life.
It responds to demands from employers for a higher level of skills, a broader range of skills and more frequent updating of skills.  It helps more Australians wanting to take up a trade apprenticeship in mid-career, as well as assisting apprentices to acquire the necessary skills to run their own businesses.  And it makes a substantial new investment in Australia's future engineering skills.
Earlier this year, I joined state and territory leaders in launching a new National Reform Agenda which includes a focus on Human Capital.  An agreed priority was to 'increase the proportion of adults who have the skills and qualifications needed to enjoy active and productive working lives'.
Today's investment is by far the largest contribution so far to this agenda.  I call on state and territory leaders to make concrete their commitment to a more skilled Australian workforce.
An educated and skilled labour force is increasingly in tight supply the world over.  With Australia enjoying the longest economic expansion in its history, it is not surprising that demand for skilled workers is very high - especially in parts of the economy benefiting from strong commodity prices.
In conjunction with today's announcements, I am also releasing analysis by the Treasury and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet that puts some of the more breathless commentary about a skills 'crisis' into proper perspective.
The paper makes the essential point that some level of skills shortages is part of the normal functioning of a healthy and dynamic labour market.  As pressures emerge, people re-skill and respond to wage signals in order to adapt to changes in labour demand.
The economy is adjusting well to demands of the commodity boom, with a large increase in labour supply and contained wage growth.  The Government's policy framework has allowed the economy to run at a high level of capacity utilisation without igniting high inflation.
The contrast with previous episodes of commodity boom-related labour market tightness is very stark.  For example, in the mid-1970s demand pressures in some sectors led to a surge in wages and inflation across the whole economy.
Greater diversity in wage growth across the economy is a key difference between now and then.  Higher relative wages in sectors experiencing skills shortages act as an increased incentive for individuals to develop highly demanded skills.
If all wages were to go up by similar amounts (as in the days of centralised wage fixing) this incentive would disappear.
  This illustrates just one way in which the Government's reforms to workplace relations are helping to preserve our prosperity.  And it demonstrates further why the Leader of Opposition's policies - which would bring back the worst excesses of industry-wide, union-dominated, pattern bargaining - are bad for Australia's future economic growth.
  Not only would Labor's approach inflict great damage on our mining and resources industries.  It would be a hammer blow to Australian farmers and firms in the manufacturing and services sectors which are not experiencing boom conditions.
A time of high prices for minerals and resources is precisely the worst time to be contemplating a lurch back to failed policies of the past.
 A dynamic, flexible labour market is one of Australia's greatest economic assets.  Jeopardise that and you jeopardise the very foundations of future prosperity.
While it is clear that claims about a skills crisis are exaggerated, Australia does face real skills challenges arising from an ageing population, rapid technological change and an increasingly competitive global economy.
  The retirement of the baby boomers will continue to put downward pressure on the number of participants in our labour market.  Demand for a more skilled workforce is being driven by globalisation and technological change.  These twin forces pose a particular challenge to many lower skilled Australians.
Building a more skilled Australia requires a flexible partnership across the community involving all levels of government, business, education and training providers and individuals.
Information is necessarily dispersed.  And a range of variables can change the mix of jobs in an economy over time.
  Skilling Australia must be a shared responsibility.
State and territory governments have particular responsibilities in the area of vocational and technical education.  As the owners and operators of TAFE, they must ensure that Australia's public sector training providers become more flexible and responsive to the needs of employers and individuals.
State Labor Governments must stop jacking up TAFE fees.
Business too has to bear its share of the responsibility for improving the skills of Australia's workforce.  The oft-heard claim that people are the greatest asset of a company should be more than an employer slogan.  Training and skills development must be a part of core business.
 The Government also recognises the importance of both individual choice and individual responsibility when it comes to skilling decisions.  Increasingly, workers want to be able to respond to change and access training opportunities throughout their working lives.
An education and training system predicated on a world where someone was educated until young adulthood and then entered a job lasting roughly 40 years has become basically obsolete in the 21st Century.
Recognising the need for our education and training institutions to become more flexible and responsive to individual needs, today's announcement includes a large investment in individuals.
Work Skills Vouchers
One of the biggest skills challenges we face as a nation is to improve the basic skills of our workforce.  Almost a third of Australians aged between 25 and 64 are without Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.
  Many adults fall short of functional levels of literacy and numeracy which are now essential for just about all jobs, and certainly all jobs that involve the operation of computers and digital technology.
This problem largely reflects lower education participation by young Australians two and three decades ago and previous migration programmes which placed much less emphasis on skills.
Because many Australians left school or arrived in Australia without the levels of English literacy and numeracy necessary to gain qualifications, they miss out on the opportunity to move into more skilled jobs.  This leaves them vulnerable to economic change and Australia misses out on their full potential.
Today's announcement gives many Australians an opportunity for a new start at obtaining skills.  In some cases, a second chance.
Improvements in basic skills will assist people already in employment to move into higher positions and help those who are looking for work to find jobs.
From 1 January 2007, the Government will invest $408 million over five years to support people aged 25 years and over who do not have Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.
Each year, up to 30,000 vouchers valued at up to $3,000 will be made available to individuals in this group.  In priority order, vouchers will be allocated to:
 Unskilled workers wishing to acquire qualifications;
 Income support recipients, such as parents and carers returning to the workforce, who will face active job search requirements in the next two years;
 Unemployed job seekers in receipt of income support and participating in the Job Network who are undertaking active job search; and
 People not in the labour force, either voluntarily or because of carer responsibilities, who intend to seek work after achieving their qualification.
Courses for which the vouchers can be used in TAFEs and private or community colleges will be all accredited literacy/numeracy and basic education courses and all vocational Certificate II courses.
These Work Skills vouchers represent a major investment in closing the gap between the skills-rich and the skills-poor in our community.
  A symbol of the Government's commitment to individual advancement and economic opportunity, they are as much a symbol of our commitment to social cohesion and national unity.
 As well as offering Australians new opportunities, these vouchers will deliver more resources into Australia's education and training institutions, while presenting them with new challenges.
A particular challenge is to cater to the needs of people without fond memories of school.  To make the idea of accredited training more attractive to individuals with high needs, education and training providers will need to find ways to make adult learning more individualised and rewarding.
The Government's policy objectives are very clear.  We want the users of our education and training system to be the drivers of the system.  And we want greater competition in the training market.
 Business too has a responsibility to develop strategies to accommodate workers looking to take up these vouchers.  Small businesses in particular may face challenges in restructuring work arrangements and employer groups will need to provide their members with advice and examples of best practice.
More support for apprentices
This Government continues to make a major investment in Australia's apprenticeship system - a system which languished under a Labor Party obsessed with the singular virtues of a university education.
The Government believes more Australians should be given the opportunity to upgrade their skills through a traditional trade apprenticeship, especially workers in mid-career.
For many people, making the switch to a trade carries a real financial penalty.  It can be especially hard for men and women in the workforce with family responsibilities.
  The Government will therefore invest an additional $307 million over five years in new financial incentives to support mid-career workers undertaking a traditional trade apprenticeship.
  From 1 July 2007, these incentives will be available each year for up to 10,000 people aged 30 and over who are starting an apprenticeship at the Certificate III or Certificate IV level in an occupation in high demand.  Those 30 and over already undertaking an apprenticeship in these occupations in July 2007 will also be eligible.
The amount payable by the Government will be $150 a week (or $7,800 a year) in the first year and $100 a week (or $5,200 a year) in the second year.  As an apprentice becomes more skilled in the second year their award wage will increase.  Therefore, the wage subsidy can be reduced.
 This initiative will more than double the number of people undertaking apprenticeships midway through their career.
The incentive will take one of two forms - either paid to an employer or paid direct to the apprentice.
Currently, under some industrial arrangements, if an existing worker becomes an apprentice their employer is required to maintain their existing wage.  In other circumstances, employers may have to pay an adult apprenticeship rate where the worker is 21 or more.
Such arrangements create a disincentive for employers to allow their workers to take up an apprenticeship or to engage older apprentices.  And in these cases, the new mid-career incentive will be paid to employers to subsidise wage costs.
In other cases, when a worker becomes an apprentice their income can drop to the junior apprenticeship rate.  In this situation, the new incentive will be paid directly to the apprentice to boost their income.
With the emergence of a more self-reliant and entrepreneurial culture over the last decade, more Australians are keen to start their own business off the back of a traditional trade apprenticeship.  For example, more than 50 per cent of all construction trades people are self-employed.  Employers are also seeking a broader skills base among qualified tradespeople.
   To assist Australia's new breed of worker-entrepreneur, I announce today a new Business Skills Voucher for Apprentices to be available from 1 January 2007.
About 6,300 apprentices each year will receive vouchers of up to $500 to contribute towards the costs of accredited business skills training, at a total cost of $12.3 million over five years.
 Apprentices who are undertaking an apprenticeship in a traditional trade will be eligible to apply for the voucher any time from the end of their second year until two years after completion.
The vouchers can be used in TAFEs and private or community colleges and will be separate to any business skills training provided as part of an apprenticeship.  This is an important new investment in the enterprise workers of tomorrow.
 Engineering places and higher technical skills
A strong skills base in science, engineering and technology is crucial to the foundations of national competitiveness.  Qualified scientists and engineers are essential to research and development, innovation and productivity growth.
The increased globalisation of science and technology (not least with the rise of China and India as economic and technology powers) presents both challenges and opportunities for Australia.  This has been a particular theme of my discussions with scientists and academics under the auspices of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council in the last 12 months.
 In July, the Government released the first ever Audit of Science, Engineering and Technology Skills in Australia.  It found that our skills base in this area is substantial relative to overall employment, with about 13.5 per cent of employed Australians holding relevant qualifications.  While this compares reasonably well with many OECD countries, we must not be complacent.
Increasingly, Australia faces a global market for talent.  We need to work hard to train and retain our science, engineering and technology workers.
The skills audit found that Australia potentially faces a declining number of engineers available to meet industry needs due to demographic trends.  Engineers Australia has also highlighted that a large proportion of current engineers who graduated in the 1960s and 1970s will retire over the next 10 years.
Against this backdrop, the Government believes there is a strong need to increase Australia's investment in engineering skills.
  Today I announce that the Government will invest $56 million over four years to fund an extra 500 Commonwealth-supported engineering places at university from 2008.  These places are in addition to the 510 new engineering places commencing from 2007 which were announced by the Minister for Education, Science and Training on 24 July this year.
The Minister will work with universities on how the places will be allocated between universities.  Universities will be free to utilise the places in particular areas of engineering which are in demand.
This is consistent with a broad approach to skills development given the degree to which Australians with professional, associate professional and trade-level engineering qualifications are widely employed across the economy.
More generally, Australia needs to increase the opportunities for people to obtain higher level skills through vocational and technical education.
Today I announce additional employer incentives worth $54.4 million over five years so that more Australians will be supported in their workplaces to undertake Diploma and Advanced Diploma level qualifications.
The Australian Apprenticeships Incentive Programme will be extended from January 2007 in three ways to support training at the Diploma and Advanced Diploma level.
  First, we will remove the rule which prevents workers with prior qualifications at a Certificate III and IV level from receiving benefits.  Second, we will open the programme to an employer's existing workforce, not just new employees.  And third, in consultation with industry, we will increase the range of eligible higher level qualifications in engineering, complementing the provision of more engineering places at university.
Up to 24,800 people will benefit from the new incentives over five years.  Employers will receive incentive payments of $1,500 for each employee commencing a Diploma or Advanced Diploma programme and $2,500 when they complete.
Employer incentives could be paid for employment-based training or, where this is not available, for institution-based training.
  The Australian Government has now committed more than $2.5 billion to employer incentives for vocational and technical education over the next four years.  Equally, we expect industry to live up to its responsibility to invest in the technical skills our economy will need in the future.
Conclusion
 I do not in any way underestimate the challenges many businesses have in obtaining suitable staff today.  We live in a workers' market in Australia to a degree unmatched in my time in politics.
One has to go back to before the doubling of unemployment in the Whitlam years to find anything comparable.  With Australia having largely dismantled the protective wall that once surrounded it, what emerges is a picture of unparalleled economic strength.
Now the challenge is to build on that strength by maintaining our economic flexibility while investing in a more skilled and motivated workforce.  Today's announcement demonstrates this Government's commitment to a National Reform Agenda that will further increase workforce participation and productivity.
Amidst the windy rhetoric from the Opposition, it illustrates yet again that only the Coalition has the ideas, the ambition and the determination to preserve and extend Australia's prosperity.


The drought is having a terrible impact on farming communities across Australia and has serious implications for the whole nation, not just rural and regional areas.
   While the economy is still very strong, all members of my Government are acutely aware of the impact of the drought at a personal, family, business and community level.
  I am very concerned about the drought and want to assure all those affected that they are not alone. Your fellow Australians, through the Federal Government, stand with you, shoulder to shoulder.
  The Government has already distributed more than $1.2 billion on drought assistance since 2001 and we'll continue to do all we can to help Australia's farmers through this difficult period.
 If they need more assistance, they will get it.  As areas remain in drought, the exceptional circumstances assistance will be extended.  If there are areas not yet drought declared but should be, then the Government will accelerate the process.
  This week the Government will be looking at whether there should be any changes to our drought assistance.  If it can be responsibly enhanced, then that will happen.
  The Australian bush is part of our history and looms large in our psyche.  There is an obligation on us all, to do all we can to assist those being affected by this very severe drought.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Mal, Deputy Chairman of the Partnership, my other Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I regard a gathering like this, I regard indeed the growing success of the Community Business Partnership as a rebuke to cynicism and I say that very deliberately because there's a view, a perceived view rather, in cynical parts of our nation, that as we have enjoyed long years of economic success and prosperity, as we now survey a situation where almost the 'Holy Grail' of public policy in this country and that is to have near to full employment has just about been reached.  As we do all of that, hand in hand with that national prosperity and success, there has been a growth in individual selfishness and indifference, and that's why I regard tonight and I regard the great success of the partnership as being an emphatic rebuke to that cynicism, an emphatic rebuke to the view that a society cannot be simultaneously successful and caring, and that in essence is what the Community Business Partnerships have set out to propagate, and they have been mightily successful in doing so.
We have come a long way since 1999 and I want to thank all of those who've served on the Partnership, most of them are here tonight, and to all of those in the business community who have been so generous, not only with their dollars, but more importantly even than their dollars, they have been generous with their leadership and their personal commitment. And I believe that one of the reasons that this Partnership has been such a great success is that of the many characteristics we Australians have, one of them is our great adaptability. And the manner in which the attitude of people in a short space of time has changed generally to philanthropy, and more specifically to partnerships between organisations in the not-for-profit sector, the welfare sector, the community sector, whatever generic you care to use, the way in which attitudes have altered, and in a few short years it has become almost part of the competition, to see how deep the involvement of the different companies around Australia can be in these partnerships.
And in the process I think the eyes of many in the community sector have been opened, because if some of them are frank, they might have thought five or ten years ago that it really wasn't going to work and that many businessmen and women would only be interested in the partnerships, for what they, in their rather cynical views, and their cynicism in community organisations as much as in other parts of society to what they might get out of it.
 But I think as time has gone by, all of that has altered and people have begun to see the value to the country, as Mal said, of these partnerships, and we've begun to see a huge change in attitudes. And in a sense the greatest demonstration of that was the remarkable response to the tsunami at the beginning of 2005 and even more importantly the fact that as a nation we didn't suffer a form of charitable fatigue after that huge response.  There were many people at the time who said, having given so much money to the tsunami that all of the local community organisations that people regularly supported, they were going to suffer.
  Indeed the advice I have indicates that that certainly did not prove to be the case, and in fact the habit of giving tended to be reinforced by that remarkable response to that particular event.  I bore you with just two or three statistics, that we now as a nation give about $11 billion a year in money, goods, and services, to non-profit organisations.  Giving by business has more than doubled since 2000-2001, and about 525,000 businesses gave $3.3 billion in money, goods and services in the years 2003-2004.  And remarkably in giving by individuals, 41 per cent of all adult Australians volunteered between January 2004 and 2005, and that represented an estimated 836 million hours or an average of 132 hours per year per volunteer.  Now that's an extraordinary testament to the civic mindedness and the generosity of the Australian community.
 So tonight I join Mal and I want to thank him for not only the work that he is doing as Deputy Chairman of the Partnership, but also for the remarkable energy that he's brought to his diverse responsibilities in family and community services and also the great leadership that he's giving in the very difficult area of indigenous affairs.
 And on that score, can I say that this year, I'm sorry, from next year, I'm very pleased to announce that we will have an award which recognises the significant corporate sector contribution to indigenous communities or services. And that award, to be given, for the first time next year will be entitled the Special Award for Impact on an Indigenous Community. And I think all of us understand the particularly complex challenge that is represented by us as a nation trying to find the most effective and enduring way of sharing to the full the success and the bounty of this country with the first Australians.
There is a lot of debate about this issue. Nobody can claim ownership of the best solution. But what I can say to our fellow Australians who are indigenous, that there is an overwhelming desire on the part of your fellow Australians to ensure that you share to the full of the bounty and the success and all that this country has to offer. And I hope in a small way the inclusion of this Award and our Partnership Awards next year will bring an even greater focus.
So finally, welcome to all of you. I thank everybody in the Partnership, I thank all of those in the Department of Family and Community Services and Indigenous Affairs that have worked, not only to put this night together, but have worked so hard to keep the Partnership, to support it. And to all of those finalists, and ultimately to the winners, thank you for your enthusiasm, thank you for your participation, and you're making a great contribution to our country and you're participating in something that we can take great pride in, and that is, that we are repudiating and rebuking cynicism in our community and we are demonstrating that it is possible for the nation to be simultaneously successful, prosperous and also caring about its fellow citizens.
 Thank you.
 [ends]  


Mr Speaker, Mr President, Mr Beazley, the Leader of the Opposition, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Janette and I are delighted to have this reception to express our great pride and admiration to the Opals on their wonderful achievement. And I also particularly acknowledge the presence of Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, the Chief of the Defence Force because the Opals are sponsored by Defence and they play under the very meritorious title of Defencejobs Opals. The feat the Opals had in winning against Russia in Brazil is a remarkable tribute to Lauren Jackson and she has with us today Tully Bevilaqua, Hollie Grima, Emily McInerny and Erin Philips.  The other members of the team, as a token of the skill and esteem of Australian women basketballers, are scattered around Europe playing in different competitions. And I think what is remarkable about this victory is not only the achievement in itself, but what it has done for a sport which is growing in popularity, and we try in the national parliament to do honour to teams that win world championships in the name of Australia.  It happens from time to time, and when it does happen, I think it is appropriate that the team be invited here to the national parliament so we can pay tribute to them.
 My real engagement with this team, I think occurred at the Commonwealth Games in Melbourne when I witnessed their unbelievably exciting victory and the enthusiasm and the vibrancy of the team members and the joy that they brought to the crowd was absolutely terrific.  So in expressing my admiration, I recall their track record of winning bronze in the world championship in 2002 and 1998 and of course back in 1994 the Opals were placed fourth, but the fact that we made it through the entire tournament undefeated is a great testament to the team.
Although she is not here today, I do want to congratulate Penny Taylor on being voted the most valuable player of the tournament, one place ahead of her team-mate Lauren Jackson.  And I do want to recognise the critical role that the Opals staff played in supporting the team, and in particular I congratulate the coach, Jan Stirling, who is with us.  Coaches are always very, very important, indeed they are crucial not only for the skill they bring, but also for the morale-boosting that they provide.  So in congratulating you Lauren and your team members, you've brought great pride to Australia, you've bought great distinction to women's basketball and the country is very pleased, and very, indeed, honoured. We here in the national parliament congratulate you on your success. And I know that you will be working very hard towards success at the Beijing Olympic Games which, of course, are now getting very close. It's the next big opportunity that the Opals will have to show the world that we deserve the number one title.  Congratulations and welcome to the national parliament, you have the warm admiration and the great support of all of us.  Thank you very much.   


Thank you very much to Peter and Lynne Cosgrove and Philip and David and Stephen, to Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston the Chief of the Australian Defence Force, Rick Smith, the Secretary of the Defence Department, ladies and gentlemen.  It is an enormous pleasure and a special moment for me to be asked to officially launch the autobiography of a man for whom I developed, over a period of years, an immense respect and great personal regard.  There is no doubt in the world as we've just been told, that Peter Cosgrove wrote every word of this book.  The man comes through in all of it in that lucid, informative, direct fashion of this quintessential Australian character.
  I said when Peter Cosgrove retired as Chief of the Defence Force, in a speech in Parliament, that he had become the best known military figure in Australia since Field Marshal Blamey and he came on the scene in circumstances that had been unexpected at the time, but he came on the scene when there was growing respect for and regard for Australia's Defence Forces. And I found it interesting in December of 2005 that the Brisbane-based political scientist Clive Bean published a survey of 4000 people nationwide and showed that 82 per cent of Australians had confidence in the Defence Forces and of the 12 institutions surveyed, the Defence Forces had come out on top.  Now there are a number of reasons for that and I know that Peter Cosgrove would be the first to say that it was overwhelmingly due to the collective effort of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force and I would agree with him.  But it's also fair to say that one of the reasons that public esteem for the Defence Forces rose between that last survey and the one previously conducted in 1995, when the figure was 68 per cent, and you know we are always interested in these comparative figures as you know, was the great contribution that Peter Cosgrove made in communicating in a very personable and a very effective way with the Australian public of his duties and his obligations, first as the Commander of the INTERFET Force in East Timor, then as Chief of the Army and then as Chief of the Defence Force.
  As I say, it is written in the style of the man and when I read the chapters on Vietnam for example, I was struck by three things.  I was struck by his very direct descriptions on the basics of Army life.  I was impressed by his vigorous defence of those men who served in Vietnam against the charge that they were not really taking part in a real war, a charge that was unfortunately made against them by some. And you can virtually, through reading these pages, live through the sense of relief and growth that he felt in having at long last been able to put into practice what he'd been taught in his training and his first real experience in combat of leading a platoon in Vietnam and you could feel with him that sense of relief and change and achievement that became so very apparent.
  There is no doubt, of course, that Peter Cosgrove's finest hour was the successful INTERFET intervention in East Timor.  This was, after all, Australia's largest military involvement by far since Vietnam. And it is easy now with the distance of time to feel as though there was never any real challenge and that it was all inevitably going to happen as it ultimately did.  Of course that was never the case and the fact that it proved to be a superbly successful intervention was greatly to the credit of General Cosgrove and, of course, greatly to the credit again of the superb training that our young officers received. And I drew something of a comparison between Peter Cosgrove writing of his experiences as a young Platoon Commander in Vietnam and the description he gave of an incident on the 21st of September 1999 when the cool conduct of a young officer prevented an incident that could easily have deteriorated into disaster involving some 500 of the militia that were, under the arrangement that General Cosgrove had negotiated with General Syahnakri of the Indonesian armed forces, were to leave East Timor. That particular incident is an illustration, is really a metaphor, for the sort of Army that did Australia with such pride in East Timor in 1999.
  But the wonderful leadership he gave and also the great leadership of General Mark Kelly who is here today, and who became also a very familiar face on Australian television in interpreting the behaviour and the deeds in a very positive way to the Australian people during those times.  It was a superbly successful operation, it was an operation that had the overwhelming support of the Australian people and it's an operation which reflected the best qualities in the modern Australian Defence Force, a mixture of military skill and commonsense and compassion and an understanding that winning the hearts and minds of people in those situations is just as important as maintaining the peace and winning the military conflict.
 I have two particular reminiscences of my interaction with Peter Cosgrove that say a great deal about the man and a great deal about his place in Australian history and the bonds between him and the Australian military forces.  One, a very sombre recollection and one a more humorous, light-hearted one.  The sombre one first.  On the eve of Australia's military action in Iraq I well remember, in fact I will never forget, an hour I spent with General Cosgrove and the then Head of the Defence Intelligence Organisation Frank Lewincamp. And the purpose of the meeting was for them to spell out to me, in no uncertain terms, in as complete detail as possible, of what would be involved in our miliary operation. And armed with satellite imaging and graphs and other material they sat in my office, the two of them, and just explained to me in great detail as best they could based on their experience and the intelligence available what might confront our forces. And quite literally after I had completed that discussion I took a deep breath and felt to myself; well I am in no doubt and I have been left in no doubt as to the nature of the challenge and the task and the danger to which a decision, that for which I was, more than anybody else, personally responsible; the danger to which these young men and women were to be exposed. And to me that was the Commander in all of our forces doing the right thing by me and just as importantly doing the right thing by the troops that he commanded. And he could go away from that meeting satisfied that he had laid out in stark detail to the person who'd made the decision to put the lives of the men and women in danger, exactly what was involved and that was his duty, that was his job and he did it with great skill, he did it very directly, he did it unconditionally and I greatly respected him for it.
  The other incident, rather more light-heartedly, occurred when General Cosgrove and I participated as onlookers in the Governor General presenting the American Unit Citation to the SAS at a special gathering at Campbell Barracks in Western Australia. And after the ceremony was over and I was, we were at the reception, a very exuberant reception, and I was mixing with a number of the members of the SAS who were making it very, very plain to me that they were not the least bit concerned about any jobs that I had in mind for them and were in fact making it very clear that they were getting rather tired of sitting around doing nothing and when was the next operation going to be brought before them. And General Cosgrove came over and said to me and to all of them, I hope these chicken stranglers aren't trying to inveigle you into sending them somewhere into the future Prime Minister and it was a reminder of two things.  It was a reminder of the wonderful enthusiasm of those men, but it was also a reminder of the casual and marvellous interaction that the General had with all of those who served under his command.
Can I just say in conclusion that I greatly enjoyed my interaction with General Cosgrove in the various positions he held. I liked him as a bloke, he was very direct, he was forthright, he was professional, he had a wonderful relationship with the men and women that he commanded and his interaction with the other senior members of the military was a token of both his style and also the quality of him as a person.  We also shared a few sporting moments together.  We have joint affection for, of course, our great national game cricket, and also for the game they play in heaven, and we've been to a few Wallaby dressing rooms, most of them, but not all of them, very enjoyable and very successful.  And of course as a measure of his commitment to the Australia nation, Peter Cosgrove and I found our paths crossing again in the aftermath of Cyclone Larry. And how a person who has had the sort of busy military and public career he had would nonetheless summon the enthusiasm and the commitment to do that is once again a measure of the man and as Lynne quite rightly remarked to me one Sunday morning when I spoke to her about this appointment she said you can't keep a good man down and that was as good a description as a I can think of to describe his willingness to undertake that task.
I salute Peter Cosgrove's contribution to Australia.  He has served us well, he has served us faithfully, he's been a wonderful soldier, he's been a great leader.  He has endeared himself to the Australian community and, of course, as always, and most importantly, can I say as a tribute to Lynne and to the three boys that the affection that he evidently and clearly and openly has for his family and his close friends is there all the time. They have been an enormous area of sustenance for him through his long public life. I hope that the friendship and association that we have developed will continue into the future and in that vein I have very, very much pleasure in launching this book.  I'm sure it will sell well, it's very, very readable and it is a mark of the man who wrote it.  Thank you.


We're all affected in some way by climate change.
  We must respond on a number of fronts.  There is no one single solution that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions over the years ahead.
A major part of the Government's policy on climate change is to accelerate the development of new technologies which reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the use of fossil fuels.
This is very important to Australia.  Our country is the largest coal exporter in the world.  We have an abundance of fossil fuels.  It is therefore in our interests to find ways in which these fuels can be used with lower emissions.
The Government has established a special $500 million fund to be used in partnership with companies and state governments to invest in new technologies designed to produce cleaner fossil energy and also renewable energy.
Starting this week, the Government will announce the first projects to be supported out of this fund.  The total Commonwealth investment in these projects will be at least $230 million.  The total investment to be leveraged will be close to $2 billion.  They will be located in three different states.
There will be support for exciting new technologies, including those designed to ensure that the use of our abundant fossil fuel reserves will in the future occur in a cleaner, greener fashion, thus reducing the process of climate change.
This new expenditure by the Federal Government is part of our $2 billion commitment to a range of initiatives designed to reduce climate change.
  [ends]


Well thank you very much John, to Trevor and Margaret and Anthony Smith, thank you very much for the hospitality that you've extended to us.  Mark and I, madam mayor and your fellows from the various shires, have come here today essentially to listen.  You are probably aware of the announcements that we have made over the past week or so and I'd be very happy to answer any questions on those and to hear of other matters that you think might be looked at.  But essentially this is a time when we've come to do a minimum of talking and a maximum of listening.  I do want to assure you that the Government and the whole country cares about you, wants to help you through this terrible drought.  The nation is wealthy enough to afford to help its farmers through this terrible drought, and that is the essential message I bring to you.  We are a fortunate, prosperous, wealthy nation in aggregate, there are parts of the nation that, through no fault of their own, are missing out on that and the farm sector is one. The Australian farm sector is one of the least protected and subsidised in the world and I won't regale you with the comparative figures, you are probably as well aware of them as I am, and it is therefore very important at a time like this, that the Government and the community be ready to help.
  I do think it's a sign of the seriousness of the drought that country communities are pulling together as never before. I had some remarks made to me about that a moment ago, about how different components of a country town are pulling together because they see this as a common threat and a common challenge, and I'd like to think that the whole nation is very much behind you.  We cannot afford to lose our farm sector, we cannot see it fall below a critical mass. I've said that on many occasions in Canberra, and I repeat it here this morning.  I am very committed to the maintenance of a viable farm sector.  I do not believe that the country would survive the loss of that, and the nation would change its character permanently. Now, they're words, and we have to try and match those words with reasonable action.  No government can do everything that people would like and not every suggestion that's put to the Government is sensible of implementation.  But many of them are and I do hope that out of our gathering today, we'll have an opportunity of hearing what you've got to say and taking on board some further suggestions about how we might respond.
 John mentioned the issue of the water bills that you're continuing to get minus the water from the New South Wales Government. Needless to say we think that's quite outrageous. There was a well publicised case of Mr Pat Kennedy who got $100,000 in interest rate subsidies from the Federal Government and $75,000 of that was whisked away to pay for the state water bills and he's still, of course, waiting on the water allocation. Now we all know that there has to be fundamental changes in water policy, but we certainly don't think it's a fair crack of the whip to have a situation where there is no allocation but you've still got to pay for it.  That doesn't pass any kind of pub test in the bush or in the city and I think we'll be needing to put as much pressure on the State Government as we possibly can in order to bring about some amelioration of that.
  But I wanted to emphasise very quickly, and I'll finish on this, that one of our aims has been to liberalise the Exceptional Circumstances proposal so that not only do we have more rationality in relation to the areas, that we've removed the distinction that was made previously between different forms of agriculture so that all productive activities are included. And by extending the period to 18 months and also I hope in the future, making decisions about extensions of Exceptional Circumstances well in advance of the expiry of the current declaration, that those three actions combined, will remove some of the concern legitimately felt in the nation about the operation of the EC system.
  But my friends, my fellow Australians, we are here to assure you of our support, to assure you of our commitment to help the farm sector through this terrible drought and to listen to ideas and proposals and criticisms and observations that any of you would like to make to us.  Thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very much. Les Carlyon, ladies and gentlemen. We all know that Les Carlyon is a great and beautiful writer, but this book, which I have read from cover to cover, is a masterpiece. I believe it will be seen in time as an epic work of Australian history. His beautiful style shines through in all of the chapters in the book.
 We know as Australians what profound an influence the Great War had on the shaping of this nation. The Lost Boys was the subtitle employed by one paper over the weekend to capture the scale of the losses that a very young nation suffered and in every detail, Les has done this traumatic and lasting story justice. As with Gallipoli, he has traced through the narrative of the battles, he's traced the personal stories of scores of Australians. He's put the attitude of the nation to the war in context. We supported it, we believed it was justified and on any objective test it was justified in Australia's interests. But the scale of the losses was too great for such a small and young country and on two occasions, the nation rejected conscription.
The remarkable thing about the Great War is that even 90 years on, it is still possible to feel anger when reading the graphic accounts of the pitiless slaughter in so many of the battles, and in that sense, it is a great anti-war work, as well as the other descriptions that can possibly be given to it.
The book brings out, of course, the underlying paradox of our remembrance as a nation of those events. We remember, of course, Gallipoli, and rightly so because that was the first great encounter and did define our country in an indelible way. We remember Pozieres and Fromelles, the futility and tragedy of the loss of life in those two battles, and collectively the allies remember the Somme and Passchendaele.
 Yet in relative terms, and certainly so far as Australia is concerned, the feats achieved in 1918 at Villers-Bretonneux, Mont St Quentin, the Hindenburg Line, where Australians undeniably carried a disproportionate share of the burden, are by comparison not as remarked and as remembered.
The book is balanced and objective. He appropriately honours, because it's the truth, the extraordinary role played by the Australian Imperial Force and its shouldering of a disproportionate burden and the huge role that it played in the ultimate victory in 1918. But he is generous to others. He's generous to the French for the role they played in 1918 in the second Marne battle which he described as the tipping point, if there were one.
 He's generous to the Canadians and particularly their senior General Currie who he ranks alongside Monash as being one of the outstanding, if not the outstanding two Generals of World War I. And he's also appropriately generous to the British Midland Regiment for the role that it played in the final stages of the battle for Peronne.
 I found fascinating the historical contextualising of so many stories and the one that sticks mostly in my mind is the heart-wrenching story of the doctor who treated the Sarajevo assassin Princip as he was dying in what became Poland. And the doctor was Jewish and 25 years later he was to return to that very place in a Nazi concentration camp.
 The detail is extraordinary down to a detailed examination in the different texture of the mud in the Somme compared to the mud in Passchendaele. He goes in some detail into some of the more fascinating personal rivalries and I found his description of the attempts of Bean and Murdoch to torpedo Monash's appointment as Commander of the Australian Corps quite fascinating.
Some of the personal exchanges are extraordinary. I was struck by his account of Haig's interview with Australian journalists after the Battle of Villers-Bretonneux where the focus of Haig's interview was the need for the Australian Government to authorise the introduction of the death penalty as a method of discipline.
 How does he treat the individuals? I think he's very objective, warts and all in relation to Monash, but undeniably he emerges as our greatest figure of that war at a senior level and probably still the greatest field commander of World War I. The reputations of Haking and Gough remain justifiably very dim. He's fair to Haig, rather more balanced than some have been.
 Ludendorff emerges in a very unflattering light. Lloyd George, about which so much has been written, I must say comes from Les' account in a rather more unflattering way. He was continually unhappy with his Generals yet he did nothing about it, and it's a reminder to all of us that at the end of the day, it's political leaders who make declarations of war and commit military forces and in the end, they have to accept overall responsibility.
 As to our own inimitable Billy Hughes, he got him right I think. He's got all the good stories about Billy Hughes and a few more, particularly the one of him lounging on the grass after the Battle of Villers-Bretonneux looking some of the Australians up in his own particular style.
It is a wonderful book. I found it intensely absorbing. We all know what a wonderful writer Les is, and he's really quite excelled himself. And I couldn't commend the reading of the book to you more enthusiastically.
 That terrible conflict had a lasting impact on our nation. It permeated our society for generations and still does so. For so long after it, it was very hard for people who had been involved to speak of it. And perhaps only it's been in the last 20 years that we have begun to put it into a greater context and to understand the scale of the sacrifice of our own country, the character of our people who came through and no Australian can read this book without feeling a sense of great respect and admiration for the fighting men of this country. And that is the finest description that I can give of a masterpiece by a wonderful Australian writer.
Thank you.
[ends]


The Fair Pay Commission has lifted the minimum wage by more than $27 a week and has destroyed the last of Labor's arguments against the Government's WorkChoices legislation.
 And now the real reason Mr Beazley maintains that he would tear up the legislation is there for all to see. It is because the unions have told him to.
Labor's opposition to WorkChoices can't be out of concern for the unemployed. Since WorkChoices came in in March, 205,000 new jobs have been created.
 Yet Mr Beazley said there would be mass sackings. On the contrary, there have been mass hirings.
Labor's opposition can't be out of concern for workers' wages. Under WorkChoices, real wages have continued to rise unlike the Labor years when they fell.
 Last week's minimum wage increase put the final nail in the coffin for Labor's argument that the aim of WorkChoices was to cut wages.
 And Labor's opposition to WorkChoices can't be out of concern for industrial harmony. Since WorkChoices came in, industrial disputes in Australia have hit their lowest on record.
 No, Labor's opposition to WorkChoices has been all about doing the bidding of the unions.
Earlier on, Mr Beazley said that he would keep Australian Workplace Agreements in a modified form. The unions noisily complained, and Mr Beazley obligingly caved in and now promises to totally ban AWAs.
For 25 years I have campaigned for workplace reform. That campaign has always been about freedom and flexibility, not cutting the wages of Australians.
The only real reason Labor has to oppose WorkChoices is to support a restoration of the monopoly bargaining power of the trade union movement. That may be in the interests of union bosses, but it is plainly not in the interests of Australian workers.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Alexander, Ian Macfarlane, Geoff Garrett, the Chief Executive of CSIRO, your excellencies representing our five partner countries in AP6, ladies and gentlemen. The first and indeed probably the most important thing to say about AP6 is that together it represents approximately 50 per cent of global energy use, emissions, GDP and world population. So it's not a bad practical foundation for a collaborative approach that will produce a lot of practical outcomes.
 There is a lot of debate about climate change, you'd have to be sort of on another planet to pretend otherwise, and there will continue to be a lot of talk, and there'll be a lot of rhetoric and there will be a lot of well-meaning injunctions to people to sign things and to negotiate things. But side by side with all of that meritorious endeavour, there needs to be practical applications of technology. And although there is debate about how you approach climate change, and that's legitimate, and none of us should be mesmerised by any one particular theory, I don't think there's any doubt that in order to make progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions we need to make progress in cleaning up the use of fossil fuels.
And I think the other thing we ought to remember as Australians, if I may be permitted in the presence of our guests to sound a little inward looking for a moment, I think we ought to bear in mind that two interrelated factors, the one I've just mentioned, and that is to make progress we have to reduce emissions from fossil fuel use. And the other thing to bear in mind is that there's probably no developed country in the world that depends more on fossil fuel use for its wealth generation and its power generation than does Australia. And we have to be very careful, we Australians, as we move forward, that we don't end up imposing a disproportionate share of the burden of adjustment on our own country.
 Now that is a legitimate plea from the Prime Minister of Australia but it's not in any way discordant with the goals and objectives of this Partnership because what makes me enthusiastic about this Partnership is that it's about practical achievement, not talk. If we'd have sat down at the beginning in January and said we can't do anything until we agree on a bit of paper, until we agree on some targets or some sanctions or some penalties, nothing would've happened. Instead of that we set about trying to build, through a series of task forces some action plans, and in a remarkably short period of time; and Alexander is absolutely right; it's only taken nine months, and we now have and I'm launching today, Australian contributions of $60 million out of the $100 million we committed at the beginning of this exercise nine months ago, and that's going to fund 42 projects covering all of the activities of the task groups. The two in the areas for which Australia is particularly responsible are magnificently displayed outside and both of them are immensely practical. What could be more practical in the climate, dare I say, of the current debate, what could be more practical than to find a way of capturing carbon emissions from existing power stations, separating them out and burying the carbon? What could be more practical than that? And that is exactly what $8 million out of the $60 million which is being contributed to this particular development of CSIRO, that magnificent Australian organisation, and it comes out of its flagship climate change program.
 And the other $5 million is for the projects that are particularly relevant to Australia, which is, of course, going to help the Solar Systems projects. Solar Systems were the partner that we, along with the Victorian Government, funded last week in that major announcement made by the Minister and Treasurer and the Victorian Government. And the development we're funding is an application of that technology which we hope will be exported and used enthusiastically in both China and South Korea.
Now this is the essence of what this Partnership is about. By all means let us continue the process of discussion, and I've made it clear that Australia will be part of future discussions which are designed to get total international agreement involving all of the major polluters, involving all the nations of the world and if we can do that you can then start talking about an effective world-wide emissions trading system. But that's going to take a lot of time. But in the meantime we are getting on with the job of practical investment in technologies which are going to, in a sensible way, bring about a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. And that magnificent combustion capture technology, which is displayed outside, has the potential to capture between 85 and 95 per cent of the CO2 content of the emissions from a basic coal-based power station. And they can, of course, be retrofitted, it's a prototype, and what the CSIRO will be doing, I understand, is going around applying this, plugging it into power stations, testing the consequences and that will lay the foundation, the research coming out of that, will lay the foundations for the custom building of these capture technologies for the needs of individual power stations.
Now that is my necessarily inadequate technological understanding, I do not claim to be a scientist on this matter, on these matters, but I'm furiously learning and trying very, very hard to understand some of these concepts. But it's a very commonsense concept that we should focus on practical responses. And one of the practical responses is to make it possible for us to go on using fossil fuel in a way that generates fewer CO2 emissions. There could be no argument about that. There's no debate about that. That makes commonsense that we do it. But in the process we have to as a nation, and as a world, understand there is a cost involved in this process. And, you know, a little bit of this debate over the past few weeks has given the impression that all you've got to do is put a signature on a bit of paper, and hey presto, the world stops getting warm. It's not quite as simple as that, I wish it were, it's not, and we have to find practical ways of addressing these issues. And one of these practical ways is the sort of technology that's been demonstrated out there. But internationally, what is magnificent about the Partnership is that it brings together the commitment of half of the world's population, half of the world's GDP, the countries that contribute 50 per cent of the emissions and 50 per cent of the world's global energy use. Now we've actually agreed in nine months on a practical plan of action. Now that beats all the debate. And I'm not objecting the debate and I'm all in favour of debate, it's the stuff of international engagement and the stuff of democracy. But while that debate goes on, isn't it incredibly sensible and important that we invest in technology because there can be no argument.
 And may I remind you that when the Government released its White Paper on energy more than two years ago, we pointed Australia down this path. We said the future lay in developing better technology to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions coming out of the use of fossil fuel. And that was more than two years ago. There's nothing that's, sort of, suddenly come in the last 24 hours on that and of course last week the Minister, with the Treasurer, made a major announcement and earlier this week he made some major announcements in his native state of Queensland.
So there is a lot happening on this front but I particularly welcome again the representatives of our friends in the Partnership and I'll be meeting the heads of all of their governments, with the exception of India, at the APEC Meeting in Vietnam later this month and I'm quite sure that the issue of climate change will come up at that meeting. But the Partnership is a vivid reminder of the value of practical responses to practical challenges and it's in that spirit and with that enthusiasm I launch it. I know that Australia's contribution of $100 million towards projects under the Partnership is the first, and I know that that contribution will be followed very rapidly by contributions from other countries that are part of the Partnership, so that together we can fund these very exciting projects that I'm announcing today. Thank you very much.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Mal for those very kind words of welcome, Warwick Parer, my friend the President of the Queensland Division, Geoffrey Green the State Director, my parliamentary colleagues from both the Liberal and National parties, my fellow Australians.  It is as always great to be back in Brisbane and great to be back in the great state of Queensland.  Mal and I occasionally go together to watch State of Origin Rugby League games and lots of people come along and say I suppose you're barracking for New South Wales and I say certainly not.  I said after how generous the people of Queensland were to me at the last federal election I'll never barrack against Queensland again in my life.
  I do want to thank all of my Liberal and National Party Colleagues from Queensland and all of the members of the two coalition parties for the wonderful support and loyalty that you have all extended to me and to the members of my government.  We do hold an extraordinarily high proportion of the seats here in Queensland and the challenge ahead of us to retain the seats we now hold and hopefully extend even further is very great indeed and we meet at a time when we're about a year approximately from the election and the next 12 months is something that will focus our minds and our energies and our efforts on ensuring that we retain government.  I want to thank not only my parliamentary colleagues but also thank the members of the party, the men and women who've worked so hard.  Especially do I thank Warwick Parer and Geoffrey Green.  It's not easy being a state president or a state director.  There are lot of pressures, there are a lot of demands and both of them have displayed superb loyalty and superb professionalism so far as all the contacts that I've had with them and I thank them very, very warmly.
  It is as Mal said, a time of great prosperity for the Australian nation and the real question to be asked of the Australian people over the next year is a very simple one and that is which side of politics is better able to consolidate and expand the prosperity that Australia now enjoys.  It's been instructive that over the last week in Melbourne there's a conference jointly organised by the Australian Newspaper and the Melbourne Institute of Economic Affairs which is focused on the broad concept of managing the boom, managing the prosperity we now have.  Isn't it interesting, 10 years ago the conference would have been about searching for prosperity, about how to gain prosperity, how to have prosperity but now when you have an economic conference of this type anywhere in Australia, the given is that the prosperity is there and the debate is about how you manage and how you prolong that prosperity and over the next year I will be saying a lot about the differences between the capacity of the coalition and the capacity of the Labor Party to manage and expand and develop and consolidate the prosperity we now have and be asking the Australian people do they want to elect as an alternative government to this country a group of people who over the last 10 years have opposed every single change this government has made to create the prosperity we now take for granted because all of the things that we have done of any consequence over the last 12 months have been opposed by the Australian Labor Party.
  They opposed getting the budget back into surplus having left it in deficit and I ask a simple question of the farmers here today.  This government has been able to respond generously and promptly to the travail of the drought which is gripping so much of our nation.  Just imagine how much more argumentative would be the decisions if our budget was billions of dollars in deficit and we weren't able to write out the cheques   to help our struggling farmers limp through this dreadful drought and then be in a position to launch themselves when ultimately as it always does eventually, I know it's hard to believe, rain again.
 We have so much now which is a product of the efforts and the reforms of the last 10 years, but we should never lose sight of the fact that every single major reform has been opposed by Mr Beazley, and the most recent of course has been his opposition to our workplace relations reforms.  Remember when they were introduced in March of this year, chicken- little like he said the sky is going to fall in.  He said that there would be mass sackings; instead there've been mass hiring's.  We have seen 205,000 more jobs created in Australia over the seven months that have passed since the introduction of Workchoices.  He said there would be industrial disputation; in fact the most recent figures on strikes tell us that in the last three months we have recorded the lowest level of industrial disputes since records began to be kept on this in 1913 before the outbreak of World War One.
  Finally of course he said that our policy was designed to drive down real wages.  He knows a lot about driving down real wages, he spent 13 years doing it when he was a member of the Hawke and Keating government.  The reverse has proved to be the case.  Real wages have continued to grow in Australia.  In the week before last the Fair Pay Commission, so insultingly described as the low pay commission by the Australian Labor Party, produced its first minimum wage adjustment and what that minimum wage adjustment did was drive the final nail in the coffin so far as Labor's attack on this legislation was concerned.
  It reflected the capacity of this country to afford a decent increase in the minimum wage for the low paid in the Australian community, and no doubt the decision of the Fair Pay Commission was greeted with gloom and doom in ACTU headquarters and gloom and doom in ALP headquarters because it robbed them of an argument they desperately hoped and prayed they might have in order to attack and assail our legislation.
 This legislation helps to lay the ground work for maintaining our future prosperity.  Today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms.  Tomorrow's prosperity can only be achieved if we reform today and that is why we set about changing the industrial relations system.  Mr Beazley says that if he becomes Prime Minister, he will tear up the legislation; he's going to tear up what might be close to one million Australian Workplace Agreements.  Imagine the chaos, particularly in the mining and resource industries which are so important to the wealth and prosperity of Australia if close to a million Australian Workplace Agreements are dismantled by a future Labor government.  The chaos, the dislocation, the penalties that will be imposed on Australians who have entered into those agreements will be unimaginable.  But this is akin to the rollback of the Goods and Services Tax.  In 2000 Mr Beazley told his caucus that he would surf to victory on a wave of discontent against the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax.  He always is negative, he's never positive.  He never tells us what he believes in, he always tells us what he's opposed to and his record is one of constant opposition to all of the things that have been necessary to deliver the prosperity which is now the starting point for economic debate about Australia's future.
My friends, one of the qualities that has always helped define Australia and one of the great attributes that Australians over the years have brought to the development of good public policy is a sense of balance.  We are a nation that does achieve on most important issues a sense of balance and a sense of sensible accommodation.  For example, we have achieved probably better than any other country a sense of balance in relation to the roles of the public and the private sectors in both health and education and I know that our health system has it's flaws, not least in the area of public hospitals here in Queensland, but compared with the health systems of many other countries we have achieved a greater sense of balance.  We recognise that there's a role for the public sector and there's a role for private sector.  We support private hospitals, we support private health insurance as well as recognising the ongoing role of public hospitals in providing high quality services around our country to our citizens.  The same thing applies with education.  We probably have a better mix of public and private education, both delivering high quality outcomes than any comparable country in the world and we should be proud of that mix,of that balance.  We endorse the right of parents to choose where they will be educated, but we also believe and I do very strongly, that it's essential that we maintain a high quality public education system that is available relatively speaking without cost to all Australian children if they so choose.
  Once again, there is a sense of balance and the same thing applies in relation to our social security safety net.  We have avoided the harshness of the American system where people can be left without any kind of support when they go off unemployment benefits and it's one of the explanations why the prison population in that country is much higher relatively speaking than it is in Australia or other comparable countries, yet on the other hand we have avoided the paternalism of the European welfare system that provides incentives to people to stay endlessly on welfare, is overregulated and cosseted towards employment laws and as a result has a much higher unemployment rates than either the United States or Australia or New Zealand.
Once again we have a sense of balance, we find the mid point and we are as a nation, as a people, we avoid the ideological extremes of debate.  The point I want to make to you this morning is that just as we have brought a sense of balance to things like education and social security and health, something must bring a sense of balance to this debate going on in the community about global warming and climate change.  We need a sense of balance in relation to this debate.  The climate is changing, we do need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, we'd be foolish to pretend as a nation or as a people and we haven't done so to date that nothing is going to change in the future but we must avoid the danger of going overboard in the other direction.  We must reject panicky, knee jerk reactions that run the risk of hurting our prosperity.
  We must always remember and no audience in Australia will remember it better than a Queensland audience, we must remember the great contribution that gas and coal and other fossil fuels are making to the prosperity of this country.  One of the reasons Australia is doing so well at the moment is that providence has given us these vast natural resources; they are the envy of so many people around the world.  They are fuelling the huge economic, the historic economic expansion of China and of course they have fuelled the economic growth and expansion of both Japan and Korea for many decades.  We have the largest reserves of uranium in a single location in the world, we are the largest coal exporter in the world and we have vast reserves of natural gas and we have an enormous natural advantage in these industries.
 The point I make is that it would be a colossal act of self injury for this country to be panicked into changes in response to climate variation that unfairly disadvantaged our great resource industries, robbed those industries of investment and trade opportunities and resulted in the unemployment of many thousands of Australians.  What we need to do as this debate continues is to preserve that sense of balance.  We can't, and haven't put our head in the sand and pretended that the problem isn't there, but we must avoid being mesmerised by individual reports, there will be many of them and as time goes by some of the contents of those reports will be seen as accurate, and some as not so accurate and all the time we have to remember that Australia is different from Europe, it is different from America, it is different from Asia.
  In many respects the whole debate surrounding the Kyoto protocol has been driven out of Europe rather than out of countries whose economic circumstances are similar to our own and we have to be very careful to keep those things in mind as we go forward and we must make sure that the adjustment that inevitably will have to be undertaken does not occur in a way that puts us at a competitive disadvantage to the rest of the world.  We must be certain that any additional costs borne by our resource industries are also borne by competitor resource industries in other countries, otherwise we're going to lose the competitive advantage that we now have and that is the reason why we never ratified the existing Kyoto protocol, although unlike most other countries in the developed world, we are going to meet or nearly meet the target set under the Kyoto protocol for Australia's greenhouse gas emissions.
The other point that I want to make to you this morning in relation to climate change is that any balanced approach has got to look at all of the options.  We've got to look as we have been doing now for a number of years, and the week before last Ian Macfarlane announced major projects which have been some months in development in relation to the clean coal technologies and the week before Peter Costello and Ian Macfarlane announced the largest solar energy project yet in the world and we announced those projects in fulfilment of commitments we made some two and a half to three years ago.  But in looking at responses to climate change and recognising the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as the years go by we need to have all of the options on the table and one of the options that's got to be on the table is nuclear power.  I believe that the world's attitude towards nuclear power is changing.  I believe that Australian attitudes towards nuclear power are changing.  Nuclear power is potentially the cleanest and the greenest of them all and we would be foolish from a national interest point of view with our vast reserves of uranium to say that we are not going to consider nuclear power, not even going to look at it, we're going to say no to it before the debate even starts, and yet that is that is the attitude of the Australian Labor Party with one notable exception, Martin Ferguson, a man who does understand the needs and the aspirations of what used to be the working class supporters of his party.
  So my friends we need to have clean coal technology on the table, we need to have renewables, we also need to have nuclear power.  But most importantly we need a response to this challenge that cares for Australia's national interests and preserves the great competitive advantage we have.  Wouldn't it be an extraordinary national paradox if this country having achieved great prosperity in no small measure due to the resources that providence has given us were then to be knee jerked into a response to global warming that crippled the very industries that gave us that prosperity.  That would be an extraordinary national paradox and I can promise you that while ever I am Prime Minister of this country I am not going to allow that to occur.
  So my friends as I said at the beginning of my remarks, we have an enormous struggle ahead of us.  I don't want anybody in this room to imagine that the next election will be easy.  I ask all of you to utterly disbelieve those polls that say 70 per cent of the people to predict that the Government is going to be returned.  It's going to be very tough.  The Labor party is always competitive federally.  We'll be shooting for our fifth election victory and we will face in the lead up to the election campaign at least six, perhaps eight, I don't know depending on the outcome of state elections in New South Wales and Victoria, we'll face six incumbent state and territory Labor governments with all the extra man power that that means, with all the resources available to state governments to attack the national government.  We will need a great effort, we will need an extraordinary amount of enthusiasm from our rank and file and I know that will happen.   We will also need may I say and I say it very bluntly and I say it very unapologetically, we will need total co-operation between the Liberal and National parties.  I am a coalitionist.  I am a Liberal first, second and third but I am a great believer in the coalition.  The coalition has brought stability and prosperity to Australia, the coalition I now lead is the most united stable coalition that this country has had and we've had three great coalitions federally since the end of World War Two and together our two parties have achieved so much.
  I know we have our historic differences and I understand the variations that occur around Australia from one state to another, but for me at a federal level the unity of the coalition, the cohesion the collation brings is fundamental to our victory and in the end we have only one enemy in politics and that's the Australian Labor Party.  We have achieved so much over the last ten years and we have not in the process betrayed the interests of the more vulnerable in the Australian community.  Despite all of the predications that were made when they said the income gap would broaden, would widen while we were in government the truth is that yes the rich have got richer and that does happen in a prosperous society, but they haven't got richer at the expense of the poor getting poorer, indeed at that very conference I mentioned a moment ago there was analysis demonstrating that people in the middle had benefited most from taxation and family benefit policies of this government.  We have so much to be proud of but that is in the past.  Politics is always about the future, the next election will in part be determined by the public's assessment of what we have done over the last 10 years, but it will be even more determined by the public's assessment of which side of politics is better able to preserve the security and the stability and the prosperity that we now enjoy.  I have no doubt that is the coalition and that together our two parties can win and win again for the benefit of the future of the Australian people.  Thank you.
 [Ends]


The serious water situation in the Murray-Darling Basin requires a collaborative response from both Federal and state governments.
This prolonged drought is having a terrible impact on farming communities across Australia especially in the Murray-Darling Basin, and has inevitable consequences for city dwellers.
I've therefore called a meeting in Canberra next Tuesday to which I've invited the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, and their water ministers, to discuss what action can be taken to provide the best possible outcome at this very difficult time.
We cannot make it rain but it's important that we all work together to help water users.
We need to co-operate in developing contingencies for both town and rural water supplies.
Although water storage and allocations are managed differently among the states, it's saying the obvious to observe that rivers flow without regard to state borders.
Several years ago the Commonwealth and the states joined together to launch the National Water Initiative.
 Not only do we need to accelerate progress with that agreement, especially in relation to water trading, but the same spirit of co-operation which brought about that Initiative must occur in response to the chronic water shortages caused by the ongoing dry conditions.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Robert. Mr Ian Harrison, ladies and gentlemen. I thank Robert for his quiet introduction and I want to say how very happy I am to be associated with this 20th anniversary of the great Australian Made logo. And in being here amongst other things pay tribute to the remarkable contribution that Robert himself has made to Australian industry. For many years he was the largest employer, private sector employer in South Australia. He's been a stunningly successful manufacturer; he's been a fearless and indefatigable proponent of Australian industry and somebody who's never taken a backwards step in promoting the interests of Australian manufacturing and the interests of Australian industry.
 This logo has been incredibly successful. An approval rating of 98 per cent is something we mere politicians can only drool about. Heavens about, 98 per cent. I mean that is just unbelievable. But I think it does tell us a number of things. It tells us first and foremost simplicity and ready identification with symbols that are regarded as authentically Australian is a winning combination. There is a yearning within our community, qualified from time to time by price, to buy Australian and I think people all things being equal will always want to buy Australian. But if all things aren't equal then sometimes and often indeed they won't.
 It is true that Australia's profile around the world has been transformed over the last decade or more. Certainly our profile in the United States as demonstrated by the stunning and I hope permanent shift in allegiance amongst American wine consumers several years ago towards Australian wine and away from European, particularly French wine. And you can trace, in different parts of the world, the way in which a readily identified, high quality Australian product has been so successful.
 Now I am aware that in a globalised world, there is a constant tension just below the surface between the embrace of the benefits of globalisation against a desire to ensure that there is an adequate market share retained for the Australian product. It is a tension, and it's never finally resolved, because there will always be some who believe that globalisation has been allowed to go a little too far and there will be others who believe that as a consequence, Australian manufacturing in particular is not getting a fair go. I don't have a ready answer to the resolution of that tension, except to say that in the context of things such as the negotiation of a Free Trade Agreement with China, this Government will not sell out of the interests of Australian manufacturing, any more than we are going to settle for an arrangement that doesn't in some way recognise the legitimate claims of Australian agriculture.
 China of course is an amazing market for Australia. One of the big differences I find in my discussions with American political leaders from the President down and American businessmen is their different emphasis towards China. They see China very much as being a threat to jobs. Some sections of Australia see Chinese imports as a threat to jobs. The great bulk of Australians see China as a remarkable market, which is fuelling much of the current wealth and prosperity that this country is enjoying.
 It is a reminder that in all of these things a sense of balance is important. We must preserve a manufacturing base in this country and that will involve our manufacturing industry always being as competitive as possible, always needing high grade policy such as a better taxation system, a better industrial relations system, the continued operation of course of a floating exchange rate, which has allowed our industries to adjust. I know that on occasions the level of the dollar has been more acceptable to manufacturers than it has been on other occasions, but that is the nature of a floating exchange rate.
 But it can't be denied that the prosperity of our export industries, both manufacturing and service; and we should not see the Australian Made logo exclusively, and I know Robert doesn't in terms of just manufacturing. Its participation and involvement in the G'Day LA program, which has burgeoned as a way of exporting all that Australia stands for and it's successful in is an illustration of that.
But it is a long period since this logo was first launched by the Hawke Government way back in 1986, and it was launched, if I recall, with very strong bipartisan support then because I was the Leader of the Opposition, first time around, and I certainly remember the support that we gave it. And I can remember when the late Phillip Lynch was a member of the Fraser Government and the Minister responsible for manufacturing industry that he was a very powerful advocate of the concept of this logo.
I've heard what Robert and Ian Harrison have had to say about the status of the logo and what you have in mind, and I, in the time honoured language take all of that on board and we'll give it very, very careful consideration.
 But this country is enjoying remarkable economic growth and prosperity at the present time. It is true, as I remarked yesterday, that there are variations in the level of economic activity according to where you are in the country. But overall it remains the case that we are still in the 16th year of economic expansion and it's a duration of economic expansion the like of which we have not experienced at any time in our history.  And in order to consolidate that prosperity we need a contribution from all sectors of industry. We do not want to romance about a future that is only built on mining, any more than we were right to romance about a future years ago that was riding perennially on the sheep's back. We need contributions from mining, from agriculture, from our manufacturing industries and from our service industries as well.
 And the service sector has grown in importance in the last generation and we are now good at doing things and world class at doing things which would have been unrecognisable as identified with Australia a generation or more ago. And I think of the way in the attitudes of our young have changed towards working in the hospitality industry.
 All of these things are bound up with a successful export performance and the Australian Made brand is not only important domestically but it is hugely important overseas. And I thought Robert put all of that well. But I thank all of you for the contribution that you have made to the strength and the performance of Australian industry over the years. I congratulate those responsible for this logo, I wish them a happy birthday and I will bear in mind everything you've said Robert. Thank you very much.
[ends]  


Thank you very much Louise for that kind introduction. Peter Costello, the Deputy Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party and Federal Treasurer, Russell Hannan, the President of the Victorian Division, former premiers and leaders of the Victorian Liberal Party, my fellow Australians. I am truly delighted to be here today to lend my full personal support, and that of all members of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party, to Ted Baillieu's campaign to win government from the Labor Party here in Victoria.
It's a tough fight but it can be done. In the short time that Ted has been leader he's brought new vigour and energy to the Liberal Party in Victoria. He's talked about the future because this election is about the future and not about the past. He's laid out a plan to get Victoria moving in the right direction, he's identified some of the major challenges of this great state and he is presenting a strong viable alternative to the Bracks Government.
 Steve Bracks is like all Labor Premiers, he's all claim and no responsibility. Whenever anything goes right in Victoria, it's all due to his wonderful leadership. Whenever anything goes wrong, oh well that's the fault of the Federal Government. He points to a lower unemployment rate in Victoria than was the case 10 years ago. He points to strength in the Victorian economy. Let me tell you ladies and gentlemen, the name of the Victorian responsible for the economic strength of this state is not Bracks, it's Costello. The truth, of course, is that the national government is responsible for the overall health of the economy. It is both entitled to claim credit and must also accept responsibility, and that is how Ted Baillieu will govern. He will properly claim the credit for the good things he does and he will accept responsibility when things don't go so well.
 There is much debate in the Australian community now about the level of interest rates. Let me tell you there's only one government in this country that consistently runs budget surpluses and that is the Commonwealth Government. And one of the factors that is exerting upward pressure on interest rates, is the fact that so many state Labor Governments have now fallen into budget deficits. And if you include, as you honestly should, the capital expenditure of the state of Victoria, this state is now in budget deficit. And given the extraordinary bonanza that all of the states have received from the Goods and Services Tax, an additional $400 million windfall for the state of Victoria over the last two years, there is no excuse, there is no complaint that can be sheeted home to the Commonwealth Government. That budget deficit in Victoria, including capital expenditure, is all the work of Steve Bracks.
There is no greater conservation or environmental challenge that Australia faces than that of water. It's an issue that is important to us nationally and it's important to all of the states. And we do need to find and identify a national solution because the river systems of our nation pay no regard to state boundaries. The Great Artesian Basin lies under many states of our nation and I want to congratulate Ted Baillieu for the way in which he has identified, in a practical fashion, some of the measures that are needed to tackle the water shortages and the water problems of the state of Victoria. He's committed himself to the construction of the first dam in some 23 years in this state, he's identified the need for water recycling, he's identified the need to share the water of this state between urban and country communities. In other words he's committed himself to a practical plan to tackle the water challenges of Victoria just as he's committed himself to practical plans to tackle those ongoing fundamental responsibilities of state governments in the areas of schools and health and public transport.
This is a great state, it's a state that has led the nation in so many areas, in so many ways, over the years. It deserves better than it's had over the last seven years. It deserves better than a Premier and a government that has been happy to hitch its star to the performance of the national economy. But of course whenever heavy responsibility comes its way, it ducks for cover and says that is all the fault and all the responsibility of Canberra.
 I am proud to be associated with Ted's campaign, I commit myself and all of my colleagues to work hard to secure his election and to work in total cooperation and harmony with him in government. Ladies and gentlemen, it is my great pleasure to invite you to welcome to the stage the leader of the Victorian Liberals, Ted Baillieu.
[ends]


Thank you very much Michael for that very generous introduction, your Excellencies, the Ambassadors of the United States and Indonesia, my ministerial colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to thank the Business Council for again giving me the opportunity of addressing its annual dinner, to share some thoughts with you about the state of the economy, the business outlook, and the important ongoing relationship between the Government and the major business organisations of this country and in particular the Business Council.
  And I say, Michael, there was much in your speech with which I very readily identified.  I was fascinated to note that you have discovered focus groups.  I must take some account of that and pay some regard to myself.  But what really excited me about your reference, and I say this very seriously, was that you indicated that they were suggesting that there was a willingness on the part of the Australian community to embrace some more difficult change in the long-term national interest and perhaps therefore a little less short-termism than perhaps have been the case in the past.  And I do think that you are right on the money in saying that, that there is a sense of optimistic opportunity, if I can put it that way, abroad in the Australian community at  the present time.  There is a feeling because of whatever combination of circumstances our economic fortune and economic success of recent years gives us an opportunity to chance our arm for further longer term reforms.  And I do want to thank the Business Council for the great support it has given to two of the major reforms that we have undertaken over the last 10 years and you mentioned both of them in your remarks and that is taxation reform and workplace relations reform.
 By far the most difficult in an immediate political sense, and I say with the latest tranche, if I can use that expression, of workplace relations reforms.  I think the experience of those changes has confounded some of the critics.  The continued strong growth in employment, the even lower level of industrial disputes, and the continued strong growth in wages, I hastily say, based on productivity and therefore lacking any inflationary impact of any (inaudible).  I think those things, ladies and gentlemen, have confounded many of the critics although having said that if the Business Council ever feels minded to rerun in an up to date amended form some of those quite magnificent advertisements that have been shown on the screen tonight the Government will not be in any way critical.  Because there is a major, you may have noticed this, there is quite a major television advertising campaign being run by other, I hesitate to call them stakeholders, in the process of industrial relations reform.
  But the reform process as both of us acknowledge is never complete and the Business Council has a role of polite harassment of all governments to make sure that they continue that process of reform.  It is an old clich‚ but today's prosperity is the product of yesterday's reform and tomorrow's prosperity can only be delivered by today's reform.
  We face some different problems in 2006 than we faced in 1996.  In 1996 I doubt if you spoke about reform but anybody would have uttered the water.  Yet without any argument water is the great conservation environmental challenge of our age.  It is not unrelated to climate change, a subject to which I will return in a moment, but in its immediate impact it resonates more directly and more urgently with the Australian people than any other aspect of the environmental debate.  I share Michael Chaney's view that market base solutions to water trading are fundamental to water policy rather are quite fundamental to dealing with the issue in an effective fashion.  And the good thing that came out of the meeting last Tuesday in Canberra was a recommitment by the States to a commencement of an interstate water trading system by the 1st of January 2007.
  I fear, and I hope I don't sound in any way partisan in saying this, but it nonetheless ought to be observed, I fear that the cause of international trade reform may have been somewhat damaged by the outcome of the congressional election in the United States with the election of a significant number of protectionist democrats and whilst the republicans in the American Congress were not total paragons of free and open international trade, and I have to say no group of legislators ever are no matter what country they may be in including in Australia.  I think there is nonetheless a somewhat more protectionist hue to the new American Congress than the old American Congress.
As I speak to you tonight I think it is fair to say that the Australian economy remains fundamentally very strong.  We do have what I hope is still regarded as the best claim of all that can be made and that is the lowest unemployment rate in more than 30 years.  In the end the cumulative result of good economic policy ought to be the maintenance of as many Australians as possible in work of a well remunerated secure kind.  And if that can be regarded in a mixed economic social sense as being the proper measure of the quality of economic policy I feel well pleased at the state of the Australian economy at present.  Business confidence remains very strong although there are some areas of caution and perhaps less than total optimism particularly here in New South Wales.  And consumers, I think it's fair to say, still remain fairly optimistic.
  I do want to pick up one other thing that Michael said in his remarks and that is about the importance of the social dividend of good economic policy.  One of the things that we have strived to do over the last 10 years in social policy is to strike a balance between the rather more insensitive aspects of a (inaudible) fair approach to the outcomes for individuals of the operation of the market system and on the other hand a rather paternalistic interventionist approach so typical of many countries in Europe.  And I think over the last 10 years the maintenance of a strong social security safety net sometimes in its features and aspects criticised by some writers and some people who don't think our feet have been kept too firmly to the free enterprise fire, I think the result of that has been that we have had a sense of cohesion and a belief that there has been a reasonably fair sharing of the dividends of strong economic activity and strong economic growth over the past 10 years.  Striking that balance is always difficult because there are cost in terms of lost incentives but there are gains in terms of greater social cohesion and social stability.
Having said all of those things I think there are a number of challenges emerging to economic management over the next year or two which are worth spending a moment on.  I think economic policy in Australia is entering a rather more difficult phase that has been the case over the past few years.  We have a drought which is daily causing misery and concern to many of our fellow Australians and casting a rather pessimistic pool not only over rural Australia but over the entire country.
We have the ongoing impact of fluctuating fuel prices and although a random prediction that I made and was suitably chastised for immediately after I made it that petrol might fall to $1.15 in the near term, it is fair to say that although the price has come down we still nonetheless live in a world of volatile fuel prices with all the impacts that has for our cost of living and inflation.
We have the I won't call it a phenomenon because we have probably had it before but perhaps not in such an acute form we do have the challenge of varied rates of economic growth in different parts of the country most starkly illustrated of course by the differentials between Western Australia and New South Wales.  And we also have the emergence of, or the re-emergence rather, of something that had disappeared over the last 10 years and that is of State budget deficits.  We used to have an expression, well a long time ago when I was treasurer of the public sector borrowing requirement which embraced the deficits, and most of them were in deficit and the commonwealth budget was certainly in deficit then, the deficits of all governments and that was an aggregate expression which described the accumulation and the demand being made by governments on money markets to fund deficits.  And we do, and the Treasurer has spoken of this even more sharply than I am tonight, we do have the re-emergence of budget deficits at a State level that do have implications for monetary policy and it puts an even greater obligation on us at a Commonwealth level to maintain a very healthy surplus which we intend to do in the Commonwealth Budget in the coming year.
 So all of those things represent some of the challenges that the Government faces and some of the challenges of economic management.  And it is very important that the dialogue that we have been able to have over the last 10 years, and it is something that I have appreciated and I know all of my senior ministers have appreciated that the dialogue continues because the intricacies and the complexity of economic management, I suspect, will grow over the next 12 months rather than diminish.
  I do want to say something about the related issues of climate change and energy security.  And I very deliberately link the two of them because you can't think of the reaction of relevant countries to climate change without understanding the importance to them of energy security. And some of the heightened concern about climate change issues in recent months - indeed in recent years - are very directly related to energy security. And we need to understand some fundamentals about the two of them, put bluntly, there is no way that a country is going to embrace climate change measures or responses to the growth of greenhouse gas emissions, which in anyway imperial the energy security of that country. And this is particularly so of countries such as China and India, countries which are for the first time in four or five hundred years reclaiming, particularly in the case of china, reclaiming their position in the world economy, enjoying extraordinarily rapid economic growth - economic growth which is very largely fuelled and supported and facilitated by cheap suppliers of energy from countries such as Australia, but also from their own and from other sources - and to expect a country like china to embrace change in relation to the climate, which in some way imperials the energy security, just at a time when it is beginning to enjoy the fruits of economic growth and remarkable rates of economic growth, is to expect the unachievable and the unrealistic.
I think it is important to keep the challenge of climate change in perspective. I share your President's view that it is happening and although I have been accused and continue to be accused of being somewhat of sceptic on the issue, the truth is I'm not that sceptical, I think the weight of scientific evidence suggests that there are significant and damaging growths in the levels of greenhouse gas emissions and that unless we lay the foundation over the years immediately ahead of us to deal with the problem, future generations will face significant penalties and will have cause to criticise our failure to do something substantial in response.
The debate of course is about the intensity and the pace of the damage being done by climate change and there will continue to be very intense debate about that. We've made it very clear that we won't ratify the Kyoto agreement - we took that decision some years ago because we feared that ratifying that agreement in the form in which it then and still largely exists, could have damaged the comparative advantage this country enjoyed as a result of our abundance of fossil fuels and the importance of that abundance to Australia's export and general performance - and nothing has happened to alter that fact. In the meantime, however, we have committed ourselves to achieve the target of 108 that was given to us at the Kyoto meeting in 1997 and we are on track to achieve, or as near as dam it, achieve that outcome within the time stipulated.
I think it's very obvious, both from what Michael Chanay said, and from what others have said in recent weeks, that we do need to find, call it what you may, a new Kyoto. We do need, as a world community, to try and find a new global solution and that global solution must include all of the major emitters. And we have to understand some of the fundamentals that drove the original Kyoto. The original Kyoto was largely fashioned, I don't say this critically, I hope I say it objectively, it was largely fashioned to accommodate the environmental goals and position of European countries. It was built with not sufficient regard to the position of a country such as Australia, a highly developed country which was a net exporter of energy, and therefore I think the formation of AP6, which includes in aggregate, almost 50 per cent of the world's emitters, also close to 50 per cent of the world's population and also close to 50 per cent of the world's GDP, that particular grouping can provide an extremely sure foundation for the development of a new international covenant or new international understanding on this issue.
It is imperative from our point of view that as we look at such issues as an emissions trading system that we fashion here in Australia, and see fashioned globally, a trading system that protects the natural advantages that this country has. This country does have enormous natural advantages of our resource industries, not only coal and gas, but importantly uranium as well. And let me say that, something I've said on a number of occasion in recent weeks, and that is that there is no one single solution to the global challenge. We need to maintain the profitability that our great abundance of fossil fuels has given us, we need to accelerate the development of clean coal technologies, and the like, that were identified two and a half years ago in the Energy White Paper, we need to recognise that at the purifier, but not as a contributor to base power load generation, renewables, such as solar and wind can make a valuable contribution and we also need to recognise the capacity, particularly as we develop clean coal technologies with the inevitable consequences they have for pricing, we need to examine and keep on the table the nuclear option. It is some years off but in a couple of weeks time Dr Ziggy Switkowski 's committee will report and it, will I hope make available in a very objective fashion, the analysis of nuclear power, both in terms of safety availability, supply and the economic of it in the whole climate change equation.
I've indicated in the past that I do not intend to preside over policy changes in this area that are going to rob Australia of her competitive advantage in the industries that are so important to us and I repeat that commitment tonight. I do welcome the contribution that the Business Council has made and many other people in the business community have made to tackling this issue. Many of you will know that over the past few weeks the Government has reiterated its broad approach and later this week I will meet some significant business figures, some of them are in the room tonight, who are involved in the resource sector to discuss aspects of the Government's response to the climate change challenge.
 I want to indicate to you tonight that the Government will establish a joint government business task group to examine in some detail the form that an emissions trading system, both here in Australia and globally, might take in the years ahead. I think it is important to involve the business community in an analysis of this issue because decisions taken by the Government in this area will have lasting ramifications for Australia's business community. I think we all recognise that we have to examine in the time ahead how we might devise an emissions trading system which properly cares for and accommodates the legitimate interests, and therefore maintains, the competitive advantage that this country enjoys in the industries that are familiar to you.
We do not want a new Kyoto that damages Australia. We need a new Kyoto that includes Australia but includes Australia on a basis which is appropriate to our interests and our needs. So therefore I indicate to you tonight that we will be establishing, in discussion with the Business Council of Australia and other business groups and individual business leaders, a joint government business task group that will examine, against the background of our clearly identified national interests and priorities, what form an emissions trading system, both here in Australia and globally, might take to make a lasting contribution to a response to the greenhouse gas challenge, but in a way that does not do disproportionate or unfair damage to the Australian economy and the industries which have been so enormously important to the generation of our wealth and the development of our living standards over the last 10 or 20 years.
Can I conclude ladies and gentlemen by again thanking all of you for the contribution that you have made as men and women in business to the great economic success of Australia over the last 15 to 20 years. I deliberately say 15 to 20 years because, as a lot of you will know, I have never been reluctant to acknowledge the reform efforts of the former government in a number of important areas. What's been achieved over the last 15 or 20 years and the prosperity we now enjoy is the cumulative affect of a series of reforms carried out by both sides of politics. We do have our partisan differences and we're a little bit disappointed that some of the bipartisanship we extended in opposition in areas such as financial deregulation and tariff reform, which were the two areas where I believe the former government deserves significant credit, have not been reciprocated in areas such as taxation reform and industrial relations reform - I can't for the life of me understand why we didn't get support in relation to industrial reform - but perhaps in the years ahead I'll sort of understand more appropriately.
 But can I say that the experience of the last 10 to 20 years has been certainly the most rewarding one can imagine in public life because we have seen the great transformation of this economy, and in the process we have seen an uplift in the sense of enthusiasm and optimism of the Australian people. There is a sense of achievement and a sense of a capacity to concur future challenges that I don't think was present in Australian society 25 years ago. Now the men and women in this room, in so many different ways, have played a huge role in bringing that about. The wealth and success of this country is largely the product of the efforts of its employers and employees and all of you are entitled to a proper share of the credit for what this country has achieved, but quite properly, you are entitled to continue, as I know you will, to require of this Government and any future government of Australia a constant commitment to pursuing that ever receding finishing line in a sure and a certain acknowledge that if we relent, those with whom we might compete will sail past us and the consequences of that, for the living standards of future generations of Australians, will be very significant indeed.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Australia will use this week's APEC meeting in Vietnam to pursue climate change and energy security issues.
  APEC is the ideal forum to discuss these matters.  It includes energy-rich countries like Australia and Canada as well as energy-hungry nations such as China and Japan.
  Moreover, five of the six member countries of the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate, that's AP6, are in APEC - namely Australia, the United States, China, Japan and Korea.
We cannot divorce climate change from energy security.  No country, developed or developing, will agree to climate change measures which imperil its energy security.
  Much of the Kyoto framework reflects a European mindset.  Europe's contribution is important, but it is crucial that our own region's perspective be reflected in any climate change discussions and decisions.
  Progress in areas such as clean coal technology have been part of Australia's response to greenhouse gas emissions for some years.
 Advances in these areas are of vital importance to both China and Japan.  Japan has recently told the Nairobi conference on climate change that the world must move on from Kyoto, a view shared by Australia.
  These will be amongst a number of matters I will raise with the President of China and the Prime Minister of Japan when I have bilateral discussions with each of them at the APEC meeting in Hanoi.
[ends]


Thank you very much Alan, Mr Rupert Murdoch, Gough Whitlam and Malcolm Fraser, former prime ministers of Australia, Robert McCallum and Dennis Richardson, the current serving ambassadors between our two nations, the Premier of New South Wales, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kim Beazley, ladies and gentlemen. It's a great privilege to be here tonight, and to share briefly in this very important occasion, which honours a man and also honours a friendship between nations.
 Rupert Murdoch is a remarkable product of a remarkable family and I don't know that anybody can better epitomise, in a sense, the great bonds, and links and shared experiences between our two countries than can Rupert Murdoch. The great Australian family, the Murdochs, has contributed so much, not only to the media, but in so many different ways to the life and the experience of this country. It's a contribution of course that reaches back over many decades. I had the experience last week of reading in full, Les Carlyon's latest epic book on the involvement of the Australian Military Forces on the Western Front in World War I. And the contribution made both of course in the reporting from Gallipoli, and generally of Rupert Murdoch's father, is a reminder of the very long experienced links between this family and our nation. And I think it is appropriate that tonight this dinner is held in honour of Rupert Murdoch.
 But it's also held in honour of an association that means so much to all of us. And let me say a word of congratulations to Gavin Brown and the University of Sydney on being awarded the location for the Study Centre, which we, the Commonwealth Government, have supported with $25 million of taxpayers money and I know will also be very generously supported by corporate Australia and corporate United States.
  We were told of course by Dr Johnson that we should always keep our friendships in good repair and tonight is a small contribution in the scale of history, I suppose, but nonetheless a very representative occasion of keeping the friendship between Australia and the United States in good repair. It should not be taken for granted, we should never assume that there's an automaticity of affection between our two nations, deep and lasting though we think the bonds maybe. We must always work on it, we must be frank about its strengths and we must be cognisant of its weaknesses.
 It's a relationship that is long lived, and Rupert's already reminded us that beginning with the Battle of Hamel on the 4th of July 1918, Australians and Americans have fought together in every major conflict since. It's a relationship that's rooted in common values, the values of respect for an individual without regard to his or her race, or colour, or social background, but respecting only a person's character and personal worth and contribution to his or her society. It's a relationship that's also built on great mutual respect, it's a relationship which is also steeped in a shared culture and love of the arts, and most, but of course conspicuously, not all sports - Australians having abysmally failed to educate our American's in the wonders of that game we are about to revel in commencing next week in Brisbane.
 It is also ladies and gentlemen a relationship that is profoundly bipartisan. I think of the contributions of two predecessors of mine, John Curtin and Robert Menzies. It was under the leadership of John Curtin in World War II in the darkest hours of World War II after the fall of Singapore that this country turned unapologetically and determinedly to the United States for assistance. And I echo with all the being I can muster the reminder of Rupert Murdoch that we Australians should never forget the debt we owe to the United States of America for the assistance that was then given. And the leadership of Curtin during those war time years did so much to not only bring the two nations together but provide encouragement and cohesion to our own nation.
  And when Robert Gordon Menzies became Prime Minister in 1949 he set about through the agency of his then External Affairs Minister Percy Spender to bring about the ANZUS Treaty signed in 1951. And it was in fact to celebrate the 50th year of the ANZUS Treaty that I met for the first time the current President of the United States George Bush at the Naval Dockyard in Washington on the 10th of September 2001.
 But under the leadership of both Curtin and Menzies, lasting steps were made to bring our two nations together and it was of course the ANZUS Treaty, signed during the Prime Ministership of Menzies which was invoked by this country in response to the terrorist attacks on the United States on the 11th of September 2001.
 So it is a relationship which is deeply steeped in history. It's most enduring quality is that it is founded on common values and common concepts about the dignity of man and the importance of individual liberty. It's a relationship of course that brings the two nations together in circumstances that are not always free from controversy and I of course would not be doing my current duty as Prime Minister proper deference if I didn't say one or two words about the issue on the minds of most people in which Australia and America are involved together and that is our involvement in Iraq.
 Rupert Murdoch was right when he said our involvement in Iraq was never popular. If I may say so, I think it's about the most poll defiant thing that I have done in the whole of my Prime Ministership and it remains something that is quite unpopular in the Australian and United States communities.
  But let me just say a few words about the current situation. I owe it to a gathering such as this to do so. There has been a lot of commentary in recent weeks about possible changes in American strategy, particularly after the congressional elections in the United States. I want to say that I believe that the essential goal will remain undiminished and that is that the Iraqi people can, we hope, in time take charge of their own affairs.
  Like others, I look forward to seeing the results of the commission established under the leadership of James Baker and Lee Hamilton. My sense is that some people who think the solution lies in the speediest exit possible from Iraq might be surprised at what emerges. We need, in my view, to remember what is at stake here, not only for Iraq and the Middle East, but also for American power and American prestige in the world. We also need to remember that good friends stick by each other in the difficult as well as the good times.
  A precipitate coalition withdrawal that leaves Iraq at the mercy of the terrorists would do enormous damage to the reputation, the prestige and the influence of the United States.  Nobody should pretend otherwise and all the talk about new directions and tactical shifts cannot disguise this fact.  If the coalition leaves Iraq in circumstances seen as defeat, the ramifications of that throughout the Middle East will be enormous.  It will embolden the terrorists and extremists not only there, but also in our own region, especially in neighbouring Indonesia.
   By all means let us talk to countries such as Syria and Iran, but let us do so with a realistic mindset about the motivation and the behaviour of those countries.  Far more importantly my friends and not withstanding the difficulties and the setbacks of recent times, let us again intensify our efforts towards a sustainable and just solution to the Palestinian issue.  Wherever one goes in the Muslim world and whenever one talks to moderate Islamic leaders such as Yudhoyono and Musharraf who are so vital to the struggle against Islamic extremism, there is a legitimate desire for a lasting settlement to this issue.  Any settlement must of course be fundamentally based on a secure Israel behind internationally accepted borders and free at last from the constant harassment that it has endured for decades.  Second, it must establish a viable and independent state for the Palestinian people.  But above all of this, let us remember where Australia's long term national interest lies.  A weaker America, a withdrawn America, would significantly change the power dynamics in our own region to the detriment of Australia.  A strong and engaged America is essential to dealing with all our regional security challenges, not least the nuclear brinkmanship of North Korea.  In a recent speech I listed the basic goals of Australian foreign policy that have remained remarkably stable and effective in our relatively short history as a nation state.
 Beyond the primary one of territorial integrity, the first goal I identified was a global power balance, favourable to Australia and our allies.  This is not rhetoric, it is at the core of Australia's national interests.  For all its faults and flaws, America remains a powerful and irreplaceable force for good in the world, and for the way of life and values that we all hold so dear.  What happens to American power and prestige in the 21st century is not some abstract topic that we can all discuss over dinner or in a lecture hall as if it has no bearing on Australia's political and economic future, and especially on our national security.  Equally, while anti Americanism seemingly finds a ready outlet in every age, we should not pretend for a moment that it is cost free.  For some, a bit of armchair anti Americanism may be nothing more than a mild indulgence, but let me say to those who so indulge themselves something I said in Chicago earlier this year, be careful what you wish for.
 We should never forget that no more powerful nation than the United States has emerged in mankind's history extolling the universal values of personal liberty and political democracy.  Tonight is dedicated to those aspirations and those values.  The bonds between our two countries are deep, they are genuine and in so many personal instances, totally spontaneous.  We have a great shared history but we must continue as Dr Johnson exhorted us to do, to keep our friendship in good repair.  Tonight the Australian American Association honours a man in Rupert Murdoch who has done great things and great deeds to keep that friendship in good repair and in the establishment of the study centre at Sydney University we will be able to make a further and lasting contribution to a full and proper understanding of that great country the United States and in the process reinforce those bonds and that friendship which is so very important to all of us.
   Thank you.
 [ends]


Thank you very, very much Mr Price for those words of introduction. I would also like to acknowledge Dr Vu Tien Loc the Chairman of the APEC CEO Summit, ladies and gentlemen.
First may I say that it's a great pleasure for me and for all the other Australians here, either as delegates to the CEO Summit or as part of my travelling party to be in Hanoi. I want to congratulate the Vietnamese Government, I want to congratulate the business community of Vietnam for the preparations that have been made for this the largest gathering of this kind by far ever staged in Vietnam. It does have historic significance for this country and it is an important further milestone along the path of bringing the people of this country and the people of the region, not least my own country, where there are almost 200,000 Australians of Vietnamese descent bringing our two societies together. I hope that all of the members of the various delegations will go away from Hanoi with warm and very affectionate views of both this lovely city and also the friendship of the Vietnamese people.
We gather at this APEC Summit, of course, all of us, I think, very conscious of two historic and permanent shifts in the world's economic order that are under way. The first of those is that the centre of gravity of the world's middle class is shifting permanently to Asia. Not since the industrial revolution has the centre of gravity of the world's middle class inexorably shifted in such a direction. By the year 2010 or 2015 at the latest there will be between 400-800 million middle class citizens in the nations of Asia and for the first time since the industrial revolution it will be possible to say to that the centre of gravity of the world's middle class has shifted from Europe and North America to Asia.
The second inexorable and permanent, in my view, economic shift that is occurring is that the most dynamic region in the world is, and will remain, the Asia Pacific region. The region that is so far as economic leaders are concerned represented by the APEC gathering. And that is the reason why Australia has from the very beginning put an enormous investment of time and effort politically and diplomatically and economically in APEC and why I take this opportunity of reaffirming my country's very strong commitment to APEC as the principal vehicle for regional cooperation at an economic level.
These meetings provide not only a remarkable opportunity to share experiences and test policies economically but also a remarkable opportunity for bilateral political exchange and dealing with some of the world and the region's particular political challenges.
I put it to you that, and I would hope this is an incontestable proposition, but I always think it's a good idea to repeat incontestable propositions unless they lose that particular character. I put it to you that the great success of this region has been its investment in openness and innovation. That it's a good idea to do a little stocktake at a meeting like this and to trace the experience of those countries that have embraced innovation and have embraced openness and globalisation and compare that experience with those countries that have set their face against it. And also trace the experience of countries that went down the path of globalisation and innovation earlier compared with those countries that took rather longer to realise that innovation and globalisation and economic openness remain the unavoidable glide paths to economic growth and the lifting of living standards.
It's popular of course to be in receipt of admonitions from leaders of pop culture, if I can put it that way, and others to do more to lift the world's poor out of their current state. Some of those commentators are not so ready to acknowledge the extraordinarily large number, the millions of people in this region and in other parts of the Asian region that have been lifted from poverty over the last 25 years as a result of the application of the principles of innovation and globalisation.
The success story of countries such as China in particular, but increasingly of course India and other member countries of the Asia-Pacific region. The success story of those countries in lifting their populations out of poverty through economic growth is often lost sight of. Understandably the world still, and rightly so, agonises about the apparent inability of the countries of Africa to seize the tools of better governance and economic optimism to bring about the same changes within their nations but it cannot be denied that the success of so many nations in this region in lifting their populations out of poverty has been truly remarkable and is more deserving of comment and praise than is often the case.
I think it is therefore important that a meeting like this to reaffirm our belief that we should stick to the winning formula, we should therefore do two things in the area of international trade. As a group the APEC countries should reassert their belief and confidence in the importance of the current Doha Round being conducted under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation. It doesn't look very optimistic at the present time because there remains a gulf despite what I regard as relatively generous offer from the United States, there still remains a significant gap between the position of the United States, the European Union and some other major participants in the international trade negotiations but we should take the opportunity at this APEC gathering to reassert the importance of the Doha Round and reassert our belief that achieving progress on the multilateral front is a goal that all of us should maintain and should strive to achieve.
The other thing I believe we should do is to recommit ourselves to the Bogor goals of free trade within the developed countries by 2010 and within the developing countries by 2020.Now we haven't got there. You would have to be a supreme optimist to say that we would absolutely achieve the first of those objectives by 2010 but we have made a lot of progress and I think it is always important in these things to preserve a sense of balance and a sense of perspective and we ought to note the progress that has been made, the sharply lower trade barriers that exist between the member countries of APEC and recommit ourselves to achieving an even closer outcome in relation to those goals.
In introducing me Mr Price was kind enough to talk about Australia's own economic experience. My country is now in its sixteenth year of unbroken economic growth and it's probably the longest period of continuous economic expansion that Australia has had in her history. We did have quite strong levels of economic growth in the 1960s but in those days we were a far more protected economy. We had a controlled exchange rate, we had high tariffs, we had a centralised wage fixing system that said that you should be paid the same irrespective of output which was a nice idea in theory but in practice it did have a stultifying effect on Australia's capacity to grow and to compete.
In 2006 we are a vastly different country. We have very few tariffs to speak of. We of course have a floating exchange rate, we have a much freer labour market, we have a very strong budget surplus and we have engaged a number of very important innovations in economic policy. And one of those which is not very often remarked about, either in Australia or elsewhere, is that I think we are the first and perhaps only developed country in the world to have totally privatised our labour exchange system. Something that we did not long after the Government came to office in 1996.
So we have had a great deal of success and I would say undeniably that this is the product of policies of openness and policies of innovation and Australia's continued economic growth will rest very heavily on a maintenance of those policies.
 We have, of course, been blessed by providence with remarkable energy resources and I want to say before I conclude something about a contemporary issue and a contemporary challenge for all of our countries and that is in the interlocking areas of climate change and energy security. And these two issues do have to be talked about together because they are really the flipsides of the same coin. No country that is seeking to expand and lift its living standards is going to forsake the availability of cheap resources and cheap supplies of energy. And equally no country is going to imperil its energy security as part of the process of reducing the negative effects of climate change.
Like many people I am not necessarily convinced that everything that is said about climate change is right. I retain some degree of scepticism about some of the things that are said in a frenetic manner about climate change. I am nonetheless of the view that the accumulation of sensible scientific opinion suggests that the level of greenhouse gas emissions is potentially dangerous and even if at a minimum we adopt the insurance principle it's important that the world do something about it.
One of the great advantages of APEC is that it brings together five of the six member countries of AP6 which is some five countries, the United States, Australia, Korea, China and Japan, with India being the only other member of AP6 which is not a member of APEC. And this particular grouping of countries which coincidentally comprises about 50 per cent of the world's GDP, about 50 per cent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions and about 50 per cent of the world's population also coincidentally brings together some energy-hungry countries such as China and India and also some energy-rich countries such as Australia and Canada.
 In order to move our own country's policies forward on issues of climate change and energy security, I have recently announced a task group comprising both the Government and the Australian business community to examine in broad detail the size and structure, or the nature rather and structure of what a world emissions trading system might look like.
 Australia has not signed the or ratified the Kyoto Protocol and we won't be ratifying the Kyoto Protocol for the reasons we have stated for a number of years. Not only is that Protocol not comprehensive enough in its application to the world's major emitters but potentially carried with it penalties and disadvantages for Australia, particularly in relation to our unique endowment of energy. We as a matter of principle would support involvement on a global basis in a emissions trading system and one of the purposes of this task group in Australia is to examine the structure and the nature of what a global emissions trading system might take and also in the meantime the additional steps our own country will take consistent with the development of a global emissions trading system.
I might mention that although Australia has not and will not ratify the Kyoto Protocol the emissions target set by Kyoto for Australia will either be met or as we say 'near as damn it' be met and that target of 108 between the designated years of 2008 and 2012 and whilst we for good national interest reasons have not embraced ratification, we have nonetheless committed ourselves to achieve the target which has been set and I am very optimistic that we will in fact do that.
Part of our process in relation to climate change is to have an open-minded approach to nuclear power. I believe that public opinion in Australia has shifted very markedly on nuclear power and I see the response of our country and indeed the response of the world in relation to the challenge of climate change as involving not one single response but a response that acknowledges the importance of such developments and innovations as clean coal technology and Australia has invested very heavily in that and will invest even more in that and I hope in partnership with other countries in the region. But also in acknowledging that renewables, although they can never take the place of fossil fuels and potentially nuclear power in relation to base load power generation, that they can play a part. So we see all aspects of generation. Fossil fuels, which we see the world still being very heavily dependent on decades into the future, nuclear power and renewables all playing a very significant role.
So ladies and gentlemen let me finish by saying again that we are part of both geographically and economically part of a permanent and historic shift in two areas. The way in which the centre of gravity of the world's middle class has shifted to Asia, the extraordinary contribution being made to that process by China and now increasingly India and of course our own region which brings together what is still the most powerful economy in the world and in my view likely to remain for the foreseeable future, the United States, and the other great economies of this region.
This is the most dynamic, fastest growing, vital economic region of the world and I hope that the opportunity of this meeting taking place here in Hanoi is of lasting value to the people of this country that I wish well on behalf of my Government and all of the Australian people.
Thank you.
  [ends]


The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is world-class and the envy of other countries. It gives all Australians a wide range of essential medicines at affordable prices.
Last year the Government paid more than $6 billion in PBS subsidies on 600 medicines, filling the gap between the standard co-payment outlaid by patients and the actual cost of the medicines.
The PBS is a very important part of the social security safety net that makes Australia better placed to protect the vulnerable in the community.
However, the Government has been paying too much for many medicines where there are other brands available for lower prices.
Even a good scheme can be made better and that is what the Government will do with the PBS.
In the next few years, the Government will change the PBS to provide more value for money while ensuring new and expensive medicines remain available to patients.
Importantly, the fundamentals of the PBS remain untouched. One of the main differences will be that the price the Government pays for the medicine will better reflect the market price.
The changes will save taxpayers more than $3 billion over the next 10 years helping ensure the PBS remains economically sustainable into the future.
Patients will continue to meet only the standard co-payments. There will be no change in the numbers or range of medicines available to patients.
Another benefit is that there is less likelihood that in the future medicines will be withdrawn from the PBS or that additional patient charges will be added.
This is another example of the how the Government's responsible economic management can provide better services to taxpayers.
Good economic policies mean nothing if the benefits are not passed on to families and individuals. These changes will make the PBS an even stronger system, meaning patients, pharmacists, doctors and the taxpayer will be better off.
[ends] 


Thank you very much for that welcome, to Mr Hoang Trung Hai, the Minister for Industry, Mr Graham Kraehe the Chairman of BlueScope Steel, Mr Kirby Adams its Managing Director and Mr Andrew Heycott, the President of Blue Scope Steel Vietnam, ladies and gentlemen.
Both symbolically and also in substance, today's opening and the investment that it represents does send a message about the modern and future relationship between Australia and Vietnam.  Our two countries are forever linked in the fastest growing area of the world economy.  In the next five to ten years the centre of gravity of the world's middle class will finally and permanently shift from Europe and North America to Asia and Australia and Vietnam and the investment that BlueScope represents are part of that decisive and changed future.
The countries that will do best in that new environment are those that embrace open trading policies and create encouraging and consistent rules of business operation for all foreign investors.  I congratulate Vietnam on her accession to the World Trade Organisation and also on the skilful way in which the Government and its country has hosted the recently concluded APEC meeting in Hanoi.
BlueScope Steel is a great Australian company that has been successful not only domestically but in many parts of the Asian Pacific region and this latest investment in Vietnam which is the largest single investment made by any Australian enterprise in this country is a tribute to its leadership under Graham Kraehe and Kirby Adams and all the other local leaders who've made a very significant commercial mark here in Vietnam.
And on occasions like this we should never lose sight of the reinforcing value of the people-to-people links between societies.  There are almost 200,000 Australians of Vietnamese heritage and there are now something in the order of 5,700 Vietnamese students studying in Australia.  Australia is a growing place of study for increasing numbers of Vietnamese young men and women.
  I congratulate BlueScope Steel on its commitment, its enterprise and its investment.  I thank all of the officials of the Vietnamese Government and I also congratulate the Australian mission here in Ho Chi Minh City, its Consul-General and the Australian Ambassador in Hanoi for the cooperative way in which they are their personnel have assisted all Australian investors in this country.
  It's a happy occasion, I hope it is seen as sign of the friendship between our two peoples.  I hope the company does well, I hope it makes lots of money, pays as it will its taxes, repatriates money back to Australia and employs lots of Vietnamese people and in that spirit I have great pleasure in declaring the BlueScope Steel investment here in Vietnam well and truly open for business.
  Thank you.
[ends]


  Thank you very much honoured guests, Sid, it's a great pleasure for me and for Janette to come to this dinner tonight, at the end of our visit to Vietnam, the first visit that I have paid to this country in any capacity and the first visit to Vietnam by a serving Prime Minister since 1994. I'm particularly conscious that the host organisation for tonight's dinner is Asialink, because it was to this organisation that I went as a hopeful Opposition Leader, some 12 years ago almost in 1995, to deliver an address on the future foreign policy of the Coalition if it were to be elected to office in the election which we knew would occur early in 1996. I must say that I went to that meeting with a fair amount of baggage in some foreign policy circles. I was regarded by somebody...I was regarded as somebody who wouldn't comfortably deal with the countries of the region, and that was a view not only expressed as you might imagine, and naturally by my political opponents, but also by some learned commentators, self-appointed and otherwise.
 But I did and I remember the address very well. And I remember the courtesy that was extended to me. And I've kept a particular regard for Asialink ever since. And it has been an organisation that in a very bipartisan, or non-partisan I think is the right way of putting it, way endeavoured to build relations between Australia and the nations of Asia. And these 'Conversations' are but the latest manifestation of that commitment. And as I think back over the last 10-and-a-half years, and I think of the context in which these 'Conversations' have taken place, there have been some truly astonishing changes in our region. I think in many respects, still the most remarkable change that has occurred in our region has been the wonderful transformation to democracy by Indonesia - the largest Islamic nation in the world, Australia's nearest neighbour, a country which is now the third largest democracy in the world and a country whose leader is viewed properly with enormous respect and regard, not only in the region, but around the world.
But, of course, that transformation in Indonesia is not the only, by any means, transformation. The country which is our host at the present time has continued to change and develop, to impress and to leave its mark on the region. I hadn't been to Vietnam before and that was my loss. I have been impressed with the generosity of spirit of the people, their entrepreneurial attitude. As someone with my political leanings, it's wonderful to see the embrace of small and medium-sized enterprises and the belief that they are very much part of the future of this country.
And this afternoon I had the quite moving experience of addressing the graduation ceremony, just across the road, of RMIT Vietnam. And to hear that magnificent young man who got the special award, give such an eloquent address about his hopes for the future of this country and his commitment to learning and the dedication he brings to opportunities he's been given, made me feel that there are many things that from time to time Australia and her institutions get truly right. And the commitment of that wonderful Melbourne institution, Australian institution, RMIT in this country, is certainly one of them.
Australia's relations with Vietnam have of course gone through a number of iterations - and we're all aware of that - and I was especially reminded of them earlier today and it's important to understand the process of change, and friendship and reconciliation that has occurred over the last 30 or 40 years. To know that the two countries now see themselves as sharing a future in a very positive, cooperative fashion in our region, to recognise that we still, of course, have our different political systems - and one of the things I have learnt over the last 10 years, or perhaps one of the things I have continued to believe was correct over the last 10-and-a-half years is that there's never any point, if you want to build a strong relationship with another society, there's never any point in pretending that certain differences don't exist because what you are in effect saying is that you don't take the relationship seriously enough and you pretend that somehow or rather you can ignore the differences, and in the end, you are seen as not really interested in the relationship. There are differences and we understand that. There are deep political and cultural differences. But there are common bonds, a shared membership of the fastest growing economic region in the world. The most amazing transformation is occurring, the centre of gravity of the word's middle class is shifting to this part of the world and it will remain here for the foreseeable future.
 The extraordinary growth of China, to which I'll return in a moment, and the continued path towards the same goal of India, means that in a few short years we'll have middle class populations of between four and eight hundred million people in this part of the world. And for the first time since the industrial revolution, that will rival the dominance of the world's middle class by Europe and North America.
The bilateral relationship between Vietnam and Australia is part of that. Today as you know I opened the, or launched, I think it's been open for a while, but I was delighted to be associated with it, the BlueScope Steel investment here in Vietnam, near Ho Chi Minh City, which is the largest single investment in this country by an Australian enterprise. Our bilateral trade was over $5 billion in 2005-06, that's a 33 per cent increase over the previous year. Our people-to-people links, so fundamental to any bilateral relationship, are very significant. I've spoken about RMIT. In addition, we have 5700 Vietnamese students in Australia, there are some 7000 Vietnamese students associated with Australian-linked institutions in this country and most importantly of all there are almost 200,000 Vietnamese or Australians of Vietnamese heritage.
 And as I walked on my regular early morning foray around one of the lakes in Hanoi, and negotiated a path between the local citizenry who were doing their morning exercises, I think two or three of those 200,000 either, having returned to Vietnam or perhaps paying a visit here, were there because they recognised me and we exchanged some pleasantries and they spoke warmly of the time that they had spent in Australia.
  So it's a very good relationship and the Government of this country did itself proud with the hosting of the APEC gathering, a most important event in the history of Vietnam over the last 30 years. APEC, of course, is the most important forum of which Australia is a participant and I agree very much with what Sidney Myer had to say about APEC. It is the premier organisation - the others are important - but could I also say when talking about regional architecture and talking about regional fora, we shouldn't get too hung up about the organisations - in the end it's the shared objectives and it's the bilateral relationships that are the most important.
I was very interested in what Sid Myer had to say in his report of the 'Conversations' about negotiating sometimes between the conflicting interests of the big powers. I do think that he made a very valid point about Australia's capacity to do that. One of the extraordinary things about the last 10-and-a-half years is that Australia has simultaneously built a very close, pragmatic, productive, and I believe enduring relationship with China, yet at the same time has become even closer to the United States. And that experience challenges one of the more absurd propositions often put around that there is a sort of a plus and a minus in relationships with countries, particularly large countries in the region. And that if you get too close to one, you pay a price in your relations with the other. Our experience, in respect of China and the United States, could not be more different. I think what it does demonstrate is that Australia is seen, properly, as a country which has both a presence and a significance in the region, it has a respect because of its great economic strength, it also has a regard because of its good faith dealings with a variety of nations, it brings assets and qualities to the region not brought by other countries but it is also, I believe, respectful of large power realities.
 It's also seen a loyal country. Now that may sound a very old fashioned expression to use, but all nations respect a certain consistency and loyalty. I think of my country's association when I use that expression - not automatically with the United States as some of you may think I do, now of course we are a close and unapologetic friend of the United States, and I've seen it as my responsibility as Prime Minister to further build on that because I think it is in our nation's interest to be close to the United States, and I think it's in the interests of every country in this region to have good relations with the United States because it is still a nation of immense power and goodwill, and will remain so and, in my view, is likely to remain the most powerful economically and military for an indefinite period into the future. But I think of our very close relationship with Japan, a relationship that was built, initially, in the years immediately following World War II when the prospects of that occurring were seen as rather dismal and it required a certain amount of political courage by, in particular, the then trade minister and deputy prime minister, John McEwen, in signing the commerce agreement that we will mark 50 years of next year. And it remains a very significant relationship for our country that we have kept that close relationship and we have, over the last 10 years, not withstanding that relationship and also the very close relationship with the United States, built a very productive relationship with China.
I think all this tells you that in the end what really matters is the substance of a bilateral relationship that you have with a nation. And if you can bring some quality, some assets, some goodwill and some good faith to that relationship then the other relationships that you have are not going to work against it.
I don't think we should ever see a foreign policy as being something that perpetually requires you to make choices between different countries. You have to, from time to time, make choices about the values that are important to your own society. But this is a region, and we're talking about our region, of enormous variety. And I thought the reference that was made to the significance of cultural and religious difference is important. In the last few years we've had talk about inter-faith dialogue in a manner that you never heard of 10 years ago and that, of course, has been a, plainly been a product of the concern that people have felt after the rise of terrorism and the need to separate out from our attitudes towards Islam, our natural hostility towards those who pervert that great religion for their own obscene purposes. And to the extent that we can, whatever our faith, or if we have no faith, work to a better understanding of Islam and it's positive contribution, and to recognise the need to guard against some knee-jerk criticism of a particular faith because of the way in which some people dishonour it, we will be all the better.
Australia is a nation that, for many years now and for an indefinite period into the future, will always see its immediate interests and concerns as being tied up with the Asian-Pacific region. Our trade, our strategic responses, a significant part of our investment, they are very much bound up with this part of the world. And the emphasis that Asialink has placed on our links with the societies of Asia, has played a very, very important role in my country's understanding of that reality. But we're also a nation, as I have been at pains to point out on occasions over the last decade, we're also a nation that has links with different parts of the world. And one of the advantages I suppose of being Australia is that we do bring to this region those linkages with Europe, by reason of history and culture and political system, and of course our very close links with North America. And it does, so far from being a liability, it does enable us to add value to the relationship we have with this region.
 But it is not possible for anybody to travel around this region, as I do frequently - next week I will be paying a short bilateral visit to Malaysia and then in December attending the East Asia Summit in Cebu in the Philippines. It is not possible to do that now without being struck daily, in all the encounters one has, with the extensive links that Australia now has with the countries in our region. And they're represented here tonight, the commercial links, the wonderful work done by our foreign service, and Austrade and of course increasingly the people-to-people links. I tell the story, well it's not a story, it's a fact, that when I meet many Asian leaders, that 15 per cent of the electors enrolled in the division of Bennelong, which I represent in the national parliament, are of Chinese ethnicity. Sydney of course is now the home to a very significant Chinese population, it's not the only Asian population in Sydney, but it's certainly the largest. And combination of Mandarin and Cantonese is now the most, if you can combine them, is now the most widely spoken foreign language in Australia - and that's a little fact, a little vignette, that's probably known to a lot of you but when you tell that to an Asian leader or even more so to a European leader they're perfectly astonished. And it's just an illustration of the way in which we are naturally and comfortably and permanently part of this region and see our future in it. But I think we have done it in a way that has not altered our own sense of who we are, and our particular characteristics, and what we bring to our region and what we bring to the world.
 So can I finish by saying two things, probably repeating two things but I think it's important to finish with this emphasis: that the journey, the bilateral journey that Australia and Vietnam have travelled, over the last few decades, has been an important one, it's been a very positive one and I have certainly been greatly struck in the few days I've been here by the very evident desire of the people of Vietnam to be friends with the people of Australia. And that's important, it's important to me as Prime Minister of Australia and I know it's important to many Australians as well.
And finally can I again congratulate you, Sidney, and your great organisation for what you have done over many years to foster a better understanding of relations between our two nations. And Australia has, I believe, done a very good job of reaching out to the region, of seeing herself involved in the affairs and the future of the region, and sharing the hopes and aspirations of the hundreds of millions of people that comprise the Asian-Pacific region, of which we will be forever be a part and I know a very active and willing participant.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Vice-Chancellor, the President, members of the academic staff, candidates for graduation, ladies and gentlemen. It is a special privilege for me to be here today in this beautiful Opera House to participate during my first ever visit to Vietnam in a graduation ceremony which more than anything I can imagine symbolises the future between our two countries, Australia and Vietnam. The opportunity it gives me to praise the work of RMIT and through that praise to emphasise the critical significance of education links between our two countries and between Australia and other countries in the region is very important indeed.
Decades ago Australia reached out to the countries of Asia through something called the Colombo Plan, which was an opportunity for young students in Asia to study in Australia. And in the 10 years that I have been Prime Minister, and the many visits that I've undertaken to different countries in the region, the constantly recurring theme is the extent to which the alumni of Australian universities dotted around the region, tell me a story about relations between our country and the rest of the region.
In this case RMIT in four short years has gone from a mere handful of students to an extremely large number and I was told by the Vice-Chancellor that the growth over the last year was no less than 70 per cent. There are now of course some five to six thousand Vietnamese students studying in Australia and I don't need to tell an audience such as this of the large and very welcome, and very positive, community of almost 200,000 of Australians with a Vietnamese heritage.
I was particularly pleased to be told of the great focus, I know it's not an exclusive focus, but it's a particular focus, of the university on business and business related degrees. The future of this country, indeed the future of so many developing countries in the Asia Pacific region around the world, lies in its willingness to embrace the opportunities that a globalised world economy offers. Vietnam has enjoyed over the last 10 years average economic growth of about seven per cent per annum, and that is remarkable. In the time that I've been here, both in Hanoi and here in Ho Chi Minh City, I have been impressed with the entrepreneurial flair and spirit, the commitment of people to the role of small and medium sized enterprises because we do live in a globalised world, it is with us now forever. And those countries that can adapt and play a part in it and take advantage of the opportunities that are available, are the countries that will continue to enjoy very rapid growth rates.
That reality was expressed again and again in the meeting that I've just participated in, as one of the 21 APEC economic leaders, hosted so well by the President of Vietnam in Hanoi. There is now a strong acceptance and realisation of the particular importance, not only of foreign investment in developing countries, but also the indigenous contribution of small and medium enterprises. Like all graduation ceremonies, whether they take place here in Ho Chi Minh City, or in Australia, they are always tinged with a great deal of family pride and sense of personal achievement. I join the Vice-Chancellor in extending my congratulations to all of these wonderful young students who represent in a very direct sense the hope and the future of this country. A future that we hope is peaceful and prosperous, and a future that we in Australia sees Vietnam playing a full and growing role in the affairs and the activities of the region.
And can I say as Australia's Prime Minister, how very proud I am, as an Australian, as well as as Prime Minister, that a great Australian institution, RMIT, has played such a significant role in reaching out and providing an opportunity for so many young people to take advantage of the educational support that this great institution offers.
I want to take this opportunity of thanking the donors and the financial supporters of the university as well. It has a very rich tradition in Australia and it is a tradition which has been carried world wide, and particularly here in Vietnam. So to all of the students, to their families, their mothers and fathers and other loved ones who are here today to witness this very important event, remember this moment, it's a very important one, you have every reason to be very proud of what you have achieved and on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people I wish you good health and great prosperity, and great success as you play your very active role in the Vietnam of the future.
 Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Leigh, Your Grace, the Archbishop of Sydney, Bishops, retired Archbishop Harry Goodhew, ladies and gentlemen.  Something in Leigh's introduction earlier tonight caught, with great approval, my attention when he said ANGLICARE had a good head and also a good heart.  Now being, as all of us tend to be when we occupy political positions, particularly positions of some authority as Prime Minister, we tend to be a little self-obsessed about how we conduct ourselves, I thought to myself what a perfectly fine description of what the Government has set out to do over the last 10 years.  And I thought heavens above, this man, you know, has a real future and I thought it was a very, very good description not only of what an organisation such as ANGLICARE should seek to do but also, partisan politics aside, what a government should seek to do.  No government in the modern world can govern without a good head. The days when governments could spend as if money were going out of fashion are long gone. We live in what's called by the sometimes criticised econocrats, we live in a relentlessly globalised world and if governments don't run their affairs correctly and if nations don't run their affairs correctly, international financial markets exact their vengeance and that is felt in the living standards of the public and is felt very directly by all of the people.
  And it's also the case that electorates these days are a lot more attuned and far more cynical, and properly so, about governments or oppositions for that matter who promise the earth.  And it's also the case, of course, that governments, must, as well as governing with a good head, they must govern with a good heart. And there is a great deal more to what governments do in the modern world and that's certainly been my experience over the last 10 years, a great deal more than simply worrying about balancing the budget and making sure that taxation is not too high and making sure that, economically, the country is in very good shape.  And what I have tried to do, and what the Government has tried to do over the last 10 years, is to achieve a blend of a good head and a good heart, and I hope not immodestly we can point to some things that have been very successful in delivering on the commitment to have a good heart.
  We are all, as a community, properly and I hope consistently concerned about the less fortunate in our midst.  It's become almost a clich‚ to say that we are living in very prosperous times, we are.  Nationally this country is doing very well. We have the lowest unemployment in 30 years, we have a very strong budget position, we still have relatively low interest rates, we have very strong, optimistic businesses, we are in the middle of the longest, sustained period of economic growth in the nation's history and we are the recipients of, from providence, of great mineral resources, which are bringing great wealth to our country.  But amidst, in the middle of all of that, and no organisation would be more conscious of it than ANGLICARE, in the middle of all of that there are still many in our midst who through no fault of their own, sometimes individual fault makes a contribution, but overwhelmingly there is still within our community a core of people who have seen prosperity pass them by.
  And I know a couple of days ago Mission Australia put out an analysis of the unemployed in our community and it made the rather arresting finding that something in the order of 40 to 50 per cent of the hard core unemployed in our community are aged between 18 and 26, and that particular group I know is a concern of ANGLICARE and I know that you have a particular program based around Parramatta that seeks to deal with the problem of youth homelessness. And what the Mission Australia analysis found, and I am sure ANGLICARE would make the same finding and indeed all of the great welfare organisations in our community would all reach the same conclusion, that for many people the inability to find a job is really the end product of a life that has been severely deprived emotionally, a life that has been lived without the sort of affection that most of us have been fortunate enough to have and has involved in it's wake, it's involved homelessness often, but not always abuse, and all of the things that come together in the daily experience of your counsellors and of your outreach.  One of the ways in which we have endeavoured to translate the good head into the good heart is, of course, to recognise that it's not enough to have a strong economy because there will be some people who through a combination of the circumstances I mentioned simply don't benefit from the strong economy.
  We have tried to build what I call a social coalition.  Now this is a concept or a doctrine, a political doctrine, that I started enunciating some years ago and what it seeks to do is to involve organisations like ANGLICARE and the Salvation Army and the Society of St Vincent de Paul to involve them in the policy making process of the delivery of welfare services, not because I believe that they are the only repositories of good advice in relation to those things, but because I believe that their experience has given them an understanding and a capacity to give good policy advice.  And in time through things like the Job Network and the Family Relationship Centres, the latter of which represents one of the most fundamental changes to the way in which our family law system works in this country since the introduction of the current Family Law Act in 1975;  what it seeks to do is to blend the financial resources of governments, both Commonwealth and state, the personal commitment of motivated, dedicated individuals and the daily life's experience of organisations such as ANGLICARE. And in many cases, to actually outsource, if I can use that rather dry economic expression, outsource to these organisations, the actual job and responsibility of finding work for people. In the case of the Family Relationship Centres providing the initial shock absorber when a marriage or relationship has broken down and the parents of children have been unable to reach agreement on future arrangements for their custody and their welfare.
  And under the new provisions of this law, it is a requirement that people go through the Family Relationship Centre process and are obliged to be involved in, and counselled by the programs of those relationship centres before they can litigate any differences they have. And we believe, over time, this will, of course, not abolish divorce or break-down of relationships or marriages, but it will over time, we believe, lead to fewer acrimonious court cases involving custody and the division of assets.  Now the development of this system like the development of the Job Network, would not have been possible without a philosophy which said that looking after the less fortunate in our community is no longer defined by the Government simply writing the cheques and independent, wonderful organisations operating at the coal face to provide support and counselling and emergency assistance.  Both of those functions will still go on, and do still go on because the Government continues to write the cheques and the organisations continue to provide this wonderful support.
  But I think what we have done in so many areas over the past few years has been to bring those two activities together. And I have certainly found as Prime Minister and successive ministers of social security or family and community services as we now call it, successive ministers have over the years worked constantly and closely with organisations such as ANGLICARE in the development of policy and the implementation of policy. And I can well remember that within a couple of weeks of becoming Prime Minister back in 1996, one of the very first meetings I had was with a group of people including a representative of the Anglican church, a representative of the Catholic Church and also a representative of the Salvation Army to nut out a program to tackle as best we could and as best we saw it at that time, the daunting and continuing problem of youth homelessness. Now we haven't solved that problem, collectively we continue to tackle it and ANGLICARE has done wonderful work in this department, but progress has been made.
 Another field where the Government and the great organisations that care for the less fortunate, have worked together is the campaign against drugs.  About six or eight years ago, the Government decided that at a Commonwealth level we had to do more to fight drug abuse in our community.  I adopted at that time, in the eyes of some, the rather unpopular view that there had to be an uncompromising attitude towards illicit drugs. I did not at that time and I still don't adhere to the wisdom I think which is less conventional now than it was six or eight years ago, that somehow or other harm minimisation was an adequate response to drug abuse and that there probably might not have been too much harm in the use of what were rather euphemistically called recreational drugs.   Now it's interesting how community attitudes on recreational drugs, particularly marijuana have changed over the last six to eight years and those people who back in the late 1990's sought to draw a sharp distinction between marijuana and heroin and obviously there are differences, but those differences are far less frequently drawn attention to now because there is a widely accepted view in the community that marijuana use has contributed mightily to the appallingly high level of mental illness within our community.
 Now once again in this area, the Government in shaping its policies was greatly aided by the advice and counsel of the voluntary welfare sector, particularly those associated with the Christian churches. And for many years Major Brian Watters, somebody who I know will be familiar to many of you in this room, chaired my national advisory committee on drug abuse, and I am very happy to say that we have seen a significant decline in the number of deaths from heroin.  We have seen the beginnings of a decline in marijuana use and we have seen within the community a greater recognition of the dimension and the nature of the problem. And whilst I don't put it all down to the social coalition I do believe that it is part of the explanation for some of the improvements that have taken place because the government and the organisations, the churches and other organisations that do such good work in this area have not just talked to each other, they have actually treated each other as partners in a community-wide response to social problems. And I think the community has benefited enormously from that partnership, from that coalition and I therefore, my friends, see this very much as being the working out of the good head and the good heart.  You do need in the modern world to have a good head in running a nation.  You can't be profligate, you do have to put something away for a rainy day, you do have to balance the books, I know it sounds dull and dreary and unexciting but gee it's fundamentally important, not only to a government but to all of us in our lives. And we, of course, all of us with a commitment to Christian social justice must have a good heart to those less fortunate within our community.
I'm delighted to be here tonight. I have long admired the work of ANGLICARE, it's one of the great Christian organisations in the Australian community.  It takes its place alongside another, quite a number of others that all have a very honoured role in caring for the less fortunate and demonstrating the humanity and the care and the compassion of the Christian message. And I know that your organisation is particularly celebrating tonight the 150th anniversary of its formation and I know that you have a particular project in relation to homeless young people in Parramatta and the western suburbs of Sydney and I'm very happy to indicate that the Government will support that particular project with a contribution of $100,000 and I do hope that you in the course of your work through the year, you are very successful.
  But finally can I say that I'm often asked why is it that Australia has been so successful over the last 10 years and my very genuine response is that it's been the hard work and the commitment of the men and women, the whole 20 million of them, of our nation over that period of time and right at the top of that list I do put the people, so many of them in this room, who work out of a sense of Christian conviction and faith, work very hard to help their fellow Australians, those less fortunate, those who through no fault of their own have fallen through the cracks and haven't had quite the same experiences and happiness in life that most of us had. And I take this opportunity as well as for Janette and me, in wishing you all a merry Christmas, of thanking all of you in ANGLICARE and the wider Anglican community here in Sydney for the tremendous things that you have done for your fellow Australians and the contribution that all of you have made to the strength and the decency and the compassion of the modern Australian community.  Thank you.
[ends]


Thank you very much Marcus, Professor Barter, Justice Santow, the Chancellor of Sydney University, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  I should tell you Marcus that when you offered to join me on that morning walk, you actually contributed to a marked reduction in my stress level, because the program that I had been listening to on the radio was being highly critical of the Government's foreign policy and I was delighted to turn the interviewer off and engage you in discussion. And I've been told on early morning walks you should avoid listening to anything controversial, it's very hard for somebody in my position although I have found over the last six months or so, and I tend to listen to Radio National when I go walking, that I am mixing the political reports of Radio National with Classic FM and I must say the latter is getting increasingly more attractive.
I am very pleased to be here tonight to express my personal, and the Government's support for the Heart Research Institute specifically and to say how fascinated I was like all Australians should be with the analysis with our I suppose heart health challenge here in Australia that came from Professor Barter to understand the progress that's been made and also to recognise the areas where further advances have to be achieved.
 I am also looking forward to meeting and honouring some of the young scientists who are contributing so much and demonstrating to our country their commitment and their dedication.  It's something of an old clich‚ to say that this country punches above her weight and that is the case in many fields, it's certainly the case in many sporting fields, but it is also markedly the case in medical research.  And if you look over the years at the Nobel Laureates in the medical fields that are Australians, and you think of the magnificent contribution by so many Australians in the field of medical research, we can justifiably say that this country has punched very much above her weight in that area.  One of the challenges we've had of course is making sure that the Australian diaspora in the area of medical research doesn't grow too large, and that was one of the concerns behind the introduction, amongst other things of the Australian fellowships some years ago and a number of the other measures that have been introduced by the Government as part of its commitment to medical research.
 We shouldn't despair of some Australian diaspora, it's part of living in a globalised world, it's part of sharing the excellence that this country produces, it's part of enjoying the excellence of medical scientists from other parts of the world, but we do need to ensure that we have a proper balance, and that those who want to return to Australia feel it sufficiently enticing and attractive to do so.  Marcus has been kind enough to talk about the Government's financial commitment to medical research and particularly the announcement made in the last Budget for the Heart Research Institute.  I am particularly pleased to be able to say that by the year 2009 the Government will have increased by four times its annual investment in NHMRC grants for health and medical research since 1999.  And I know we've enjoyed good economic times and surpluses have been strong and tax receipts have been good because business has done well but as you all know there are competing demands on the available taxpayers' dollar, and I have regarded it as an absolute long-term priority of the Government that we invest very heavily in medical research.
 I want in reflecting on that to express a puzzlement about what appears to me to be something of a paradox in Australian society about matters relating to health.  One of the things that can be said about Australia, apart from the fact that we produce outstanding medical scientists, and despite all of the criticism that is levelled against us, we do have a fundamentally very good health system.  It's got a lot of weaknesses and you can criticise aspects of it, but I frequently say when I talk about Australia's health system, that if you are a battler it's better to get ill in Bankstown than in Brixton or The Bronx because the quality of health care in this country in our public hospital system in the fundamentals of Medicare which is now accepted as a permanent and enduring part of Australia's health system.  We do do very well in comparison with the rest of the world.  One of the things we are very good at is responding to what I might loosely call public health campaigns.  It does truly astonish me whenever I go overseas to realise how far, notwithstanding the concern that Professor Barter legitimately expressed about the incidence of smoking amongst young women, it astonishes me at how much further down the track we are of eliminating excessive or indeed smoking by a significant number of our population compared with most other nations, particularly our neighbours in the Asian region and many countries in Europe, and particularly compared with southern and eastern Europe where levels of smoking are still alarmingly high.
 We've responded to that campaign very well, there's been a mixture of government fiat, starting years ago in the 1970s with the removal of television and radio advertisements for cigarettes up to some of the more recent prohibitions.  Now you can debate at the margin and as a reformed smoker of many years myself, I still have some I have to confess, I won't say lingering sympathy for, but sort of understanding that it is becoming a very persecuted habit, but it's in terms of public health, it's a justified persecution but it really is quite remarkable how far we've come down the path. But I also think it's very remarkable how far we have come down the path and how effective and early we were into the field in relation to public education concerning HIV-AIDS aids.  And I know there has been debate over the years that we might have regressed a little, but when you think of the audacity of the campaign that was launched in the middle 1980s by the previous government and supported by the then opposition which very directly in a very frontal fashion, dealt with a major public health issue and I think Australia demonstrated a capacity to other countries to deal in a very direct fashion.  I think we are entitled to say to ourselves we are very good.  I also think of one of the earliest warnings that Michael Wooldridge, the first Health Minister I had after the 1996 election when he came to a Cabinet meeting and said 'do you all realise that this country now has 'Third World' immunisation rates?'  And we set about in once again, through a combination of carrots and sticks including a requirement that you couldn't have access to certain family benefits unless the basic immunisation of your children had been carried out.  And within a fairly short period of time, we had lifted those immunisation rates from the 50s up to the late 80s and into the early 90s.
  So we have had very considerable success in those public health campaigns, yet we appear to be struggling as a nation with the challenge of obesity, something that's come upon us with alarming speed and something that is affecting all age groups.  Now the reasons for it I think are obvious - the lack of exercise, bad diet, for many people are clearly and plainly, and I don't need to tell a room full of experts that they are overwhelmingly the reasons.  Yet, despite our understanding of that, and despite the clear and obvious explanation, we don't appear, as a country, to have responded as effectively and as willingly to the challenges that those two things represent to our health.  And I suppose what I am doing in expressing that puzzlement is also to express the hope that the discipline and enthusiasm if I can put it that way and support and recognition that we extended to our public health campaigns in areas such as immunisation, smoking and HIV-AIDS will spill over in time to our campaign in relation to obesity.
 Could I make the observation that the Government can do a lot, but I do hope the community doesn't see obesity as a problem that can simply be solved by government regulation.  I am not attracted to heavy handed prohibitions on advertising, I am not.  I think that rather misses the point that a certain degree of individual responsibility and individual self-discipline and particularly an assumption again of parental responsibility and parental surveillance of the activities of children, what they eat, how much exercise they get, the balance between playing sport and other physical activity, and time spent in front of the television set and on computer games.  I know as a parent of course my children have long since reached adulthood, these things are never easy to achieve a balance in, but I think it would be a mistake if the whole public debate about obesity revolved around the Government being required to pass this or that new law or bring down this or that additional regulation, I think they are part of it, but fundamentally I believe that obesity lies, the response to it does lie very much in changing lifestyle, just as it has become a total change in the way you relate to each other.  I think of dinner parties 30 years ago that I attended where rooms were still full of smoke and compare that with dinner parties that we all attend now where people go out of a room if they still smoke.  That kind of change in the lifetime of just about everybody and not everybody, but most people in this room - if we can do that in relation to something like smoking, there's no reason why we can't do it in relation to something like obesity.
  A very interesting observation was made to me by Professor Fiona Stanley at a meeting of my science and technology council a few months ago, and she said the alarming thing about obesity is that it has come upon the Australian population in a very short period of time, that's the bad news.  The good news is that because it's only been with for a short period of time, if we tackle it in the right fashion, there's no reason why we can't overcome it within a relatively short period of time as well.  That is a good challenge to all of us, it's a challenge that can only be met through a combination of government responses and an assumption of personal and particularly parental responsibility and guidance in relation to the aspects of behaviour by children.  So ladies and gentlemen, can I say again thank you for having me tonight.  I'd like to join Professor Barter in paying tribute Marcus Blackmore, he's a very philanthropic bloke, he's not only doing great work as the Chairman of the Heart Research Institute, but in so many other fields of endeavour, he joins a very significant list of Australian business men and women, who yes they have been successful and they have done well and they've done well because they've been able and entrepreneurial, but they have been willing to give something back to their community and tonight is a demonstration of his commitment and your commitment to tackling Australia's number one killer, of re-dedicating ourselves to good public health outcomes and I think it's a wonderful cause and very importantly honouring those young scientists who really are the hope of the side and the key to longevity for so many of us for years into the future.  Thank you very much.
 [ends]


Thank you very much Bishop David Walker, Brother Tony Whelan, Mr Kevin Turner the Principal of the school, my friend and colleague Andrew Tink, Mr Adam Kirk, the President of the Parents and Friends Association, boys and girls and parents and other members of the school community.  In a week that has taken me from Vietnam back to Australia and here to Epping, in the heart of my electorate, it is a reminder to me of what is really important in the life of an elected member of parliament and that is doing good things for the people of his electorate and I am very pleased to be at your school this morning to officially open if you...it looks pretty open to me at the present time, but officially sort of officiate this magnificent shade structure.
 But also more importantly than that to pay tribute to the stoicism and the contribution of the Catholic education system of Australia, through the generations to the nurturing and education and the caring for of the young of our community.  Many of you will of course know or have learnt from your parents or grandparents when there was a time when maintaining the Catholic education system in this country fell entirely on the shoulders of Catholic parents when no assistance at all was available from governments.  Thankfully those days are decades behind us and we now totally and unconditionally embrace, and I assert it again to all of you today the fundamental principle of freedom of choice in education.  It's an important Australian right that parents choose the type of education they think is good for their children, and having done that, it's the responsibility of governments and parent communities and teacher organisations to make sure that together that our children get the best possible education.  Be it in a government school, and it was my privilege to be educated in the government sector in New South Wales and I always am in debt to the quality of education I received be it in the Catholic system or other Catholic schools or in other independent schools and I don't think there is a country in the world that more effectively exercises freedom of parental choice who does it better than Australia does and I am constantly amazed in my discussions with leaders of other countries that I think are very much the same as Australia, to realise that the level of freedom of choice and the level of government support in those countries is nowhere near as high as it is in Australia.
 But to the local school community and a word to the girls and boys here, you are very lucky to go to this school, you have wonderful teachers, you have a dedicated parent community and it is a lovely locality in which to live and in which to grow up.  I hope that this little shade structure provides you with plenty of protection, it will.  The summer has started early, it's started very hot and I think it's a very, very practical thing for the school community to have asked for.  It is the only project that the school community asked to be funded under our Investing In Our Schools program, and that program is sort of salami-sliced into bits and one of them is for little projects under $75,000 and this is one of them.  There are bigger projects in other areas and Brother Whelan was kind enough to describe all the other ways in which the Government helps.  But this is a gesture; this is a mark of our concern for the daily needs of local school communities.  And can I finish by declaring it officially open and say how delighted I am to see so many parents here today because the strength of any school community as my wife and I found when our children were growing up and going to school, is very dependent upon parent involvement and where parent involvement is strong, the school is strong and where parent involvement and parent choice is strong, the children receive the right education according to the values and standards of their parents, and that is how it should be.  And in that spirit I say thank you for having me and I declare the shade structure open and long may this school continue to provide a wonderful education according to the values and traditions of the Catholic Church and to raise young Australians to make a wonderful contribution to our nation.  Thank you.
 [ends]


Your Excellency, Mrs Marlena Jeffery, Brendan Nelson, the Defence Minister, Robert McClelland, the Shadow Minister for Defence representing the Leader of the Opposition, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston and Mrs Liz Houston, General Peter Leahy and Mrs Lee Leahy, officers, NCOs, ladies and gentlemen and very importantly our two very brave and gallant servicemen who have just been given those well deserved gallantry awards. And I would like to associate myself with the warm remarks of the Governor-General regarding the magnificent contribution of both of those men to our military effort in Afghanistan.
 An occasion like this for me is an opportunity on behalf of the Government, and as the person ultimately responsible for sending Australian men and women overseas and putting them in danger, to say to them and to their family and other loved ones, how very conscious I am, every day, of the risks involved in military service on behalf of our country.
 Serving in Afghanistan is a very challenging task. There is no easy end to that conflict. Afghanistan has demonstrated over the centuries a remarkable inhospitality to the rest of the world, and whether they've been Australians, Americans, or British, or Soviet, or whatever, it's a very nasty place and not much is yielded without a tremendous fight. And that makes the achievement of the Australian task group, the achievement of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force all the more remarkable.
And I do on behalf of the Government and the Australian people express to all of you my admiration, my gratitude. I am very conscious of what is involved. I want to say to the loved ones that we feel for you. We pay a special tribute to the wives and the husbands and the children and the mothers and fathers and brothers and sweethearts for what they go through when those nearest and dearest to them are overseas and I don't want that opportunity to go by without saying that.
I read a few months ago a report of a survey that had been conducted by a Queensland university about the attitude of Australians towards different institutions and it showed that in a period of 11 years from 1995 to 2006, the one major Australian institution that had enjoyed a significant rise in popularity and public esteem was the Australian Defence Force. And that didn't surprise me because I have found in the time I've been Prime Minister that the quality of the men and women, the quality of the leadership of the Australian Defence Force has been quite remarkable.
 Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen do appear to be able to combine military skill and gallantry with a sensitivity towards the local populations with whom they interact and that is just so enormously important in modern warfare. You have to win, to use that clich‚, you have to win the hearts and minds as well as winning the battle and Australians do that better than anybody else. I know I won't get any argument about that this morning, but I really do mean it. We do do it better than anybody else and that is a great tribute to our military tradition. But it's also a tribute to the leaders of our military and I pay tribute to a number of them who are here today, of course, the CDF and the Chief of the Army.
But to all of you, thank you. You have the admiration and respect and the gratitude of the Australian people. The work you are doing is hard. It will go on for some time. There's no immediate end in sight to the struggle in Afghanistan because we are dealing with a new type of enemy. The old battles were when armies crossed borders and declared war, this is a shadowy conflict of an entirely different kind. It requires an entirely different and a new skill, but once again Australians are demonstrating themselves as very adequate to the task.
So for myself and I know all the members of my Government, and I know my colleague Brendan Nelson, the Defence Minister, I express our great gratitude, our great respect and our very good wishes for all of you and your loved ones for Christmas and in the time ahead.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


Later today, the report of Mr Terence Cole into the activities of AWB Limited will be tabled in Parliament. Until then I will not comment upon the contents of that report.
I can, however, without making such comment, emphatically dismiss the major claim about the report already being made by the Labor Party.
Mr Beazley says that the terms of reference for the inquiry were rorted so as to protect me and my ministers from any adverse findings. That allegation is totally false.
This was demonstrated as far back as the third of February 2006 when Mr Cole himself said that if during the course of his investigation it appeared that any officer of the Commonwealth, and that includes a minister, had broken the law, he would seek an extension of his terms of reference.
 No such extension was sought by Mr Cole.
Nothing could have been clearer. I, along with Mr Downer and Mr Vaile, appeared before the inquiry answering questions under oath. We hid nothing. The inquiry has been both open and transparent.
No other government in the world has established such a thorough investigation into the way in which the Oil for Food Program in Iraq was manipulated for the personal gain of the regime of the brutal dictator Saddam Hussein.
 For more than a year now, Mr Beazley, Mr Rudd and others in the Labor Party have alleged dishonesty, conspiracy and negligence by members of the Government regarding AWB Limited.
 Once the contents of the report of the Cole inquiry are available, Australians can judge for themselves the worth or otherwise of these allegations.
[ends]


  Thank you very much Kos for those very, very kind words of introduction, to my many Ministerial and other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I'm delighted to be here tonight and it's an opportunity for me to do a number of things. First and foremost to reaffirm the Government's ongoing commitment to the cause and the future of community pharmacy in Australia. As you know, I've always been a devotee of small business. I came from a small business background myself and from the time I was a child I identified pharmacies, the local chemist shop, whatever you might call it, as being a quintessential demonstration of what a small business was all about. The people who you regarded as nice, friendly men and women that you could turn to for a bit of advice and seemed to be part and parcel of the stability of the suburb in which you grew up were invariably pharmacists. The local pharmacy or chemist shop was one of those places where your mother sent you to get things and you felt always very welcome and you imagined that it was part of the solidity and the predictability of the environment in which you grew up.  As the years go by the character of marketing changes, the relationship between customers and retailers will change and it's often very hard to preserve that kind of atmosphere, but I think community pharmacists have done it better than most in the Australian community.
 Now why is this so? I think the main reason why it is so is that they offer a great personal service to their customers and in the end the quality of personal service and the impression created by that service has the most lasting impact on people. I think another reason why its been such and the attitude of the community towards pharmacists has endured in such an effective fashion is that this has been another area where Australia has been most successful in combining the public and the private sectors in order to produce a very good community outcome. When I think of Australia by comparison with other countries, when I think of Australia's social security system compared with America's which on occasions can be a little harsh and unforgiving, and compared with Europe's that can on manyoccasions be over interventionist and for too paternalistic and therefore economically wasteful, you can find Australia somewhere in the middle combining the best elements of requiring people to stand on their own two feet, but also recognising there are occasions when the community must share the cost burden of ensuring that everybody has access to a vital service.
We've done a lot better at combining the public and private sector components in delivering services and community pharmacy has been right at the centre of that and when you think of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme which is the principle interaction of the government with pharmacists you see playing out once again that balance and that blend and that mix. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme wouldn't work if you didn't have pharmacists and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme wouldn't work if you didn't have a federal government ensuring that vital drugs and medicines are available at accessible cost to all of the Australian community. And I well remember when President Bush came to Australia in 2002, sorry 2003, and when we had our bilateral discussion in my office just around the corner, we got onto the free trade agreement that was then being negotiated and many of you will remember that the PBS was seen by some at the time as being under threat from the free trade agreement. The reality was and still is that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme will never be under threat from the free trade agreement between Australia and the United States.
And he quite properly as the President of the United States, he put the views of some of the large American pharmaceutical companies to me, I wouldn't have expected anything less and I then by way of response explained exactly how our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme worked and it made a deep impression on him and I suggested that he might consider introducing such a scheme in the United States and I rather got the impression at the end of the discussion that the way they did it over there was far too firmly set in cement to make it remotely possible that any such scheme would be introduced. But the truth is that there's a real genius about that Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. It's the best of its kind in the world and I don't want it changed in any of its fundamentals and I do take this opportunity of thanking the Guild for the very constructive way in which it has negotiated with the Government over the past number of months to bring about the new arrangement that was announced by Tony Abbott only a few days ago.  It is to use that clich‚ a win-win arrangement. It guarantees the viability of the scheme, it guarantees the position of pharmacists, it ensures over time where price reductions ought to occur then the public gets the benefit of those price reductions. And most importantly of all, it enables all of us to say to the Australian people, irrespective of your income or your station in life, you will have access to essential medicines and life saving drugs. And that is a huge thing to be able to say. And every day virtually new drugs become available that provide the opportunity to prolong people's lives, to give them protection against life threatening illnesses in the future and generally to improve their enjoyment of life. It is a very important boast for a country to be able to make that we have a system that means that you don't have to be a wealthy person in order to have the same access to these drugs as the next man or next woman. And I think that is a hugely important thing to be able to talk about.
  And may I take the opportunity here of thanking Tony Abbott very, very much for his negotiations, his patience, his commitment, and can I say his great dedication to the cause of pharmacists around Australia. Tony has his own negotiating style. It's unmistakable, it's distinctive and it's very effective. And without him and the assistance I know he received at all stages from Jane Halton, the Secretary of his Department, it wouldn't have been possible to bring about the very, very successful conclusion of those negotiations. And when you add that to the negotiation of the fourth Community Pharmacy Agreement and also the cooperation I know that's been involved between pharmacists and the Government in relation to the new Access Card and the commitment that you are all making to Project Stop, which is a wide ranging infrastructure and skill base system which is designed to tackle some of the social challenges in this area and also the generally cooperative approach that your industry has taken to the health challenges of our nation.
We all have an interest in spreading the use and the availability and the affordability of life saving and life enhancing drugs and medicines. But we also, if I can put in a plug for this, have an interest in making sure that we bring about lifestyle changes without the aid of medicines and drugs. We have an increasing debate in our community about obesity and it is a challenge. And clearly the broader health community, doctors and pharmacists, have a role in fighting that growing challenge of obesity. But as a community we can't expect drugs and the Government to do all the job in fighting obesity. We have to invoke our own reserves of self discipline and particularly parents, to ensure that the bad habits that have led to greater obesity in the Australian community are reduced, and where possible, eliminated. And I made the observation at a Heart Research Institute Dinner in Sydney on Friday night that those in the community who thought that the solution to this issue lay in greater government regulation were going to be disappointed by me and by my Government because I would hope as believers in market responses and free enterprise we placed a greater premium and a greater store on individual effort and individual self discipline in relation to lifestyle habits.
So ladies and gentlemen, pharmacy is right at the centre, right at the heart of small business in the Australian community. You are all entrepreneurs and we have taken a number of decisions over the years to make sure that you continue in a viable, identifiable, discreet independent community of small business men and women. I think our suburbs and our country towns would be socially poorer if they didn't have a local pharmacist and once you start in many of these smaller population centres, losing a critical mass of small businesses, then you begin to lose much of the spirit and the heart and soul of the local community.  So I'm here as friend and supporter of pharmacy. I have been so in the last ten and a half years that I have been Prime Minister. I have had a very close association with the leadership of the Guild. As Kos said, its always been easy to talk to you, you have always been quite clear as to what you've wanted. You're pretty good lobbyists, I have to say that, I pay tribute. I have dealt with a lot of industry groups over the years, you get your point across very well and those of you who comprise the community should feel well satisfied that your elected representatives have worked very, very hard in your interests.
  But the important thing is that together, in relation to the Community Pharmacy Agreement and also in relation to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, we have achieved outcomes that are good for Australia. And my philosophy is very simple. I will work with any group to achieve an outcome that advances the social infrastructure and social stability of this country. And community pharmacies are part of the stable, cohesive Australia that I grew up in, that I know and I want to make sure that that continues.  Thank you.  [Ends]  


Thank you very much Colin, Rod Kemp, the Minister for Sport, David Gallop, former rugby league greats, current rugby league greats, Craddock Morton, ladies and gentlemen. We all know how much sport binds Australians together and I think it's entirely appropriate that, as rugby league contemplates its centenary year in 2008, it is entirely appropriate that we come here at the National Museum to kick-off that event. And we'll have the opportunity from now and through 2008 to celebrate the extraordinary achievements of rugby league and to reminisce about the journey over that 100 year period.
Rugby league like every other sport has gone through many variations over that period of time, but the essential character of the game has not changed. I suppose the secret of the survival of any sport is to retain its essential character to provide a bit of continuity, but at the same time to adapt and change.
When I first started listening to rugby league games on ABC radio in Sydney in the late 1940s and the early 1950s, one of the very first names I did start to hear was Rayner, and names like Rayner and Pidding and Churchill and Cowie and Graves, they were some of the names that I heard so much of in those days. And of course then it was, what, the J.J. Giltinan Shield - now that of course has gone through many iterations. And the contemplation then that you would have a rugby league grand final played in Sydney between the Brisbane Broncos and the Melbourne Storm was of course beyond the comprehension of anybody following rugby league in Sydney, just as anybody following rugby league in Brisbane, which had of course its own competition, as it were completely sealed away from what was going on in Sydney. Now that of course is the most compelling change that's occurred.
 And can I just say what a wonderful year Darren Lockyer has had and can I pay tribute to him. I think anybody who has the honour of captaining Australia in a sport has a special place in our affections and Darren's had a great year. He had a great State of Origin, I shared some of the effervescence in the Queensland dressing room after that victory in Melbourne - which is another reminder of the way the game's gone national - and of course his great performance in the grand final and his great victory, his golden point, his golden try on Saturday night. And what Saturday night also reminded us of is that one of the dimensions of rugby league is its international dimension.  Once again when I first started following the highlight of the year was a Test match at the Sydney Cricket Ground between Australia and Great Britain, if the Poms were touring Australia at that time, then it sort of become a bit less competitive and the State of Origin has dominated us as well as the grand final, but of course in more recent years it's a good reminder that the Tri-Nations still contributes.
But I salute the contribution that rugby league has made to Australia's national identity. It's a tough game. As Ken said it started as the working man's game. It's become every man's game now. It still retains that working class character and that's part of its heart and soul and I hope it always does. But it's also a game that has reached out to the entire community. It's had it ups and downs, the great divide of some years ago with Super League and the more traditional rugby league caused great consternation to many fans, but that has been solved, just as the great divide in cricket in the 1970s was solved, and both games have emerged stronger and better then ever.
 And I'm delighted to have been invited, and very honoured to have been invited to come here today to launch this logo, to congratulate rugby league on everything that it's done for Australia, to compliment it on the way in which it's brought city and country together, it's brought people from different parts of the nation together, it's loved in the Pacific Islands - you go to Papua New Guinea and you are astounded by the number of blue and maroon jumpers that are worn at the time of State of Origins - it's almost as if that country is part and parcel of eastern Australia at the time of State of Origin games. So it does have a reach in our region and I compliment it for that.
 And to you Colin and all your other colleagues, David Gallop who's done a wonderful job and Geoff Carr, the administrators of game, it's never easy being administrators because if something goes wrong it's your fault and if something succeeds, well of course it has to be due to somebody else's brilliance. But let me say, I think the people who run rugby league do a terrific job and I congratulate them. And most of all I congratulate our players and it's great to see some of the representatives of the greatest club of all here today, and we look forward to those glory days ahead just as much we reflect on the glory days of the past and that's what a centenary is about. I have great pleasure in launching the logo and I wish the game - the self-styled 'greatest game of all' - the greatest of success and good fortune in the future.
 Thank you.
 [ends]


  Thank you very much Wee Keat Chan, Zain Yusuf, Your Excellencies the High Commissioners of Australia and Malaysia, Ministers in the Government of the Federation of Malaysia, ladies and gentlemen.
The Prime Minister of Malaysia and I had a bilateral meeting this morning which extended for a little over and hour and towards the end of the meeting I remarked to him that the bilateral relationship must be in very good shape because we had spent far more time during our meeting talking about the problems of other countries than we had talking about the problems of our two countries or the problems between us. And he agreed and I think that exchange is a metaphor for the fact that normality has been restored at the senior levels of government to the relationship between our two countries.
 It has always been a close association. Everybody in this room will know of the extraordinary contribution, the educational links have made to the bilateral relationship. To the best of my calculations, taking into account population proportion, there are more graduates per head of Australian universities in Malaysia than in any country in the world. And that is a wonderful legacy of a visionary decision taken decades ago by the then Australian Government to offer educational opportunities.
 It has matured, of course, over the years into a deeply embedded two way understanding which shares the culture and the hopes and the aspirations of the peoples of the two societies. Our societies have a great deal in common, but we also have significant differences and they are differences that are valuable in today's perplexing and challenging world. And sometimes when you look at a relationship between two countries, you tend to focus only on the things that you have in common, as if, if you have any differences, then somehow or other that represents a problem.
In the case of Malaysia and Australia, both the things we have in common and the things we don't are great advantages in living in the world that faces us in the first quarter of the 21st Century. This region, in common with the rest of the world, of course, faces the challenge of terrorism and the fact that the two countries bring two of the great world's faiths to their understanding of each other is, in my judgement, a huge advantage. And I mentioned to the Prime Minister that interfaith dialogue between people of the Christian and Muslim tradition should be an important part of the relationship between our two countries as it is between Australia and Indonesia.
Of course, to businessmen and women in this room, you will all be familiar with some of the, how shall I put it, the institutional familiarity of doing business in each other's country. The common language of English, the common law concept of the rule of law, similar rules of corporate governance. Malaysia, of course, had the great wisdom to choose a land titles system named after that great river in South Australia. And, of course, in so many ways, the corporate governance of the two countries is very much alike. And that makes doing business easy compared with doing business in countries where corporate governance systems are very different, or in some cases, almost non-existent. And I know from my discussions with businessmen in Australia how much they appreciate doing business in countries that have a roughly comparable approach to corporate governance.
 We are at present negotiating towards a Free Trade Agreement. We haven't finished those negotiations and I don't pretend that they are going to be finished tomorrow, but we are making good progress. We need, as in all of these things, an appropriate amount of give and take on both sides, especially in relation to services. Australia sees very strongly the value of a Free Trade Agreement that covers the whole field. Free Trade Agreements that have too many carve outs are a contradiction in terms.
 We live in a very globalised and therefore very different world than was the case a few decades ago. And the value of foreign direct investment in all countries is important. The days when countries could afford to pick and choose a fair bit about foreign investment are gone. Foreign investment will go where it is welcome. Foreign investment will go without hesitation to where it will get a decent return. And any nation hoping to grow and further develop, whether it be Australia, be it Malaysia, cannot afford to pick and choose too much about foreign investment.
 Malaysia has enjoyed very strong economic growth over the last few years. It was one of those countries, in my view, unfairly hurt by the economic downturn of 1997 and 1998. It didn't deserve any more than I thought Indonesia deserved to suffer as much as it did as a result of that downturn. Fortunately Australia, because of a number of changes that have been made, and most particularly because of the extraordinary endowments in a time of economic turmoil, of a flexible, floating exchange rate, was able to weather the storm in relation to that downturn. But in a few short years, Malaysia has, I believe, staged a significant economic recovery from the negative impact of that event in 1997 and 1998. And as far as our own bilateral trade is concerned, the flows are growing very strongly and something in the order of nine or ten per cent increase during the last year.
I would say to our Malaysian friends here today that you are dealing with a country whose economic growth, Australia's, remains very strong. We are now in the 16th year of our longest economic expansion in the last 100 years. There were periods during the 1950s and 1960s when Australia's economic growth was as fast as it has been over the last few years. But in those days, our economy was a far more inward looking, highly protected beast than it is today. We then had very high tariffs, we had a fixed exchange rate, we had rigid foreign exchange control regulations. We had a highly centralised wage fixation system and we had an arthritic and antiquated taxation system.
Now if you fast forward to today, all of those things have changed. We have a floating exchange rate, we no longer have foreign exchange controls, we've carried out major restructuring of our taxation system in 2000, and in two stages we have undertaken a major overhaul of our industrial relations system. First in 1996 and more recently in 2005. And as a result, we have a vastly different industrial relations system than obtained in those days.
Now I mention these things not to engage in any sort of overseas boosterism, but rather to project to you a picture of an economy which is flexible and strong and extremely willing and able to form partnerships with other economies and the companies of other economies in this highly competitive, globalised world.
 We live in a region which is fast becoming the beneficiary of probably the most historic shift of resources and human wealth since the industrial revolution. By about the year 2015, the centre of gravity of the world's middle class will have shifted from Europe and North America to Asia. I don't say that in any denigration of the Europeans and the Americans, but simply in recognition that with the rise of China, the coming of India, the growth of countries such as Malaysia; a couple of weeks ago the Malaysian Prime Minister and I were both in Hanoi and experienced some of the vitality and the growth that's occurring in Vietnam; the strong economy of Thailand, the recovering economy of Indonesia, the always strong economies of Japan and Korea, you add all of that together and you find, inescapably, that Australia and Malaysia are in that part of the world where the centre of gravity is inexorably shifting.
Now that carries with it enormous opportunities but it also carries with it a number of risks and a number of warnings. The risks and the warnings are, of course, that those who open their economies, those that reduce trade barriers, those that see globalisation in an entirely positive light, are those economies which are going to be the most successful. And those who think that for however short a period of time some kind of return to protectionism or discrimination in trading activities is not the way to go, then they are doomed to fail and doomed to be disappointed.
We had a meeting of the G20 in Melbourne a couple of weeks ago, chaired by our Treasurer Peter Costello, and as always seems to happen at these meetings, there was some violent demonstrations. And it always passes understanding as far as I'm concerned, that people would demonstrate against a group of ministers and central bankers who are debating the advantages of economic growth and economic reform. Because for all that is said about poverty, for all the calls we get from a variety of sources to put poverty behind us, the experience of the world over the last 20 years has been that taking advantage of globalisation and opening up economies and removing trade barriers has done more to lift, literally hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, than all the individual aid endowments - worthy though they are - of individual countries. It remains the case that if the developed world reduced significantly its trade barriers in the area of agriculture, that would do more to reduce poverty in the least developed countries of the world than a doubling of direct overseas development assistance.
 And that is why, and I'll finish on this note, that is why in the view of Australia, and I know also in the view of Malaysia, achieving success in the current Doha Round of trade negotiations is so fundamentally important. Australia and Malaysia are both members of the Cairns Group of countries, which for 20 years or more have been pushing for a far better world understanding in relation to trade, particularly trade affecting agriculture.
Now Australia is an agricultural producer and I, of course, will yield to no one in promoting the national interests of the Australian economy and the constituent elements of that economy. But I argue for a success in the Doha Round as well, and in human terms even more importantly, for what it would mean for the least developed countries of the world. And I do hope that in the limited amount of time that is available in the next six months because by the middle of next year the trade negotiating authority given by the American Congress to the American President will lapse, and whether the new Congress will give a Republican President another trade negotiating authority, I am extremely sceptical of, then we only have a few months, a limited window of opportunity. And for the sake of the least developed countries in the world I hope all of the trading groups around our globe will put their shoulder to the wheel to try and bring about a successful conclusion of the Doha Round.
My friends I wish your conference well. I am delighted to be in Kuala Lumpur. I've always believed in the fundamental strength of the relationship between our two countries. The strength at a people-to-people level, at a business level, at an educational level, has always been there and I am delighted that at a political level our two countries, although we don't agree on everything and that's perfectly normal, are working together in close harmony and close collaboration. As members of APEC and in a couple of weeks time the Prime Minister of Malaysia and I will attend the East Asia Summit at Cebu in the Philippines, and all of these contacts are sending a message to our two communities that the relationship is deep and it's strong and it's very important to both sides.
 Thank you.
   [ends]


Mental illness is one of the nation's most pressing health challenges and one that my Government is tackling head on.
With more and more Australians now likely to be touched either personally or through family and friends by a mental health problem, it is important that we remove the stigma of mental illness and treat it openly and honestly.
For too long, the treatment of mental illness has been too low on the list of health priorities.
That is why in April, I announced a commitment of $1.9 billion to provide more primary health and clinical services to treat mental illness, new programs to help sufferers better manage day to day life and get back into work or finish school; an increase in the mental health workforce, new non-clinical and respite services and more community awareness programs.
While this funding was unconditional in the sense that we would make the commitment irrespective of the response of the states, I did call on the states and territories back in April, collectively, to match the Commonwealth package in their areas of responsibility such as supported accommodation, hospital care and emergency and crisis services.
Unfortunately, while there have been some positive announcements, the states and territories are yet to match the Commonwealth's commitment. To date, as a group they have contributed less than 60 per cent of the Commonwealth's contribution in new money terms.
Individually, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory have committed no new funds since the Commonwealth announcement. The South Australian Government has put forward 35 per cent of its expected pro rata contribution, Queensland about half, New South Wales and the ACT about 70 per cent and Victoria about 80 per cent.
If we are to meet the challenge of mental illness as a nation, the states and territories must be prepared to shoulder their responsibilities with commitments of new money matching the Commonwealth.
We cannot afford a half-hearted response to this major health challenge.


Thank you very much Michael, Warren Truss, my parliamentary colleague, the Minister for Trade, ladies and gentlemen. I'd like to thank all of you very much for the commitment of time that you've made to come to the earlier forum and also to tonight's dinner. As I look around the room and I glance at the guest list, it's a very representative gathering of the Australian business community and I am greatly heartened by that because APEC in Sydney in 2007, in many respects, will be the most significant international gathering of an economic kind that this country has ever had. And it is important that we make the best of it as Australians, and it's also important we place it properly in the context of the way in which our relations with the Asia-Pacific economic region are emerging.
APEC in its years of existence has gone through, not so much various iterations, but it's gone in and out of popularity with some of the member countries - particularly some of the larger ones - and I'm very happy to say that I came away from the meeting in Hanoi with a very strong belief of several things. The first and most important was a reaffirmed American commitment to APEC as being the major point of interaction between the United States and the countries of the Asia-Pacific region. I mention that because there has been some debate in the United States about whether the East Asia Summit or some other relationship with the countries of ASEAN might become the most important forum through which the United States interacted with nations of the region. But President Bush made it very plain, both in the Leaders' Retreats and also in the private discussions he had with me, and no doubt with other leaders, how much the Americans regarded APEC as being the major forum. Now that's important for the most obvious of all reasons, and that is the continuing significance and relevance of America as the major economic power in the region and indeed in the world.
The other encouraging thing to me was a greater willingness of the leaders of the economies of the 21 countries involved in APEC, to focus on some of those areas where the region could bring some particular value. And one of those of course was the interrelated subject of which I've spoken a great deal in recent times, of climate change and energy security. It's no accident of course that the AP6 association, which brings together five of the six members who are APEC countries, the only one which is a member of AP6 that's not in APEC is India, and of course at some time in the not too distant future the member countries of APEC will have to address the question of membership and that inevitably will involve some consideration of the position of India. But much of the discussion at the Leaders' Retreat did revolve around climate changes issues. And one of the enormous advantages of APEC gatherings is that although they are formally meetings of economic leaders, they do afford a tremendous opportunity for leaders to, and on a bilateral basis, to interact with each other, concerning some of the more pressing political and strategic issues of the time.
But as I look ahead to APEC in Sydney, and it's going to be in September, which is less than 12 months, it does provide all of us with the most obvious of opportunities to put our country on display. The reputation of Australia, given her economic performance over the last 10 or 15 years, and the energy and representation of the Australian business community in the different member countries of APEC, means to me that the visitors we will receive and the business battalions or groupings they will bring with them will arrive here with a great deal of enthusiasm and a great deal of interest in what our country has to offer.
  I was tremendously impressed in so many of the bilateral discussions I had with the consciousness of Prime Ministers and Presidents and other leaders of the huge involvement of Australian business in the region. Michael mentioned some of the statistics and they are very impressive. And a gathering like APEC is again a colossal reminder to me as Prime Minister of Australia of just how crucial those major markets, such as Japan, and China and Korea are to, not only the Australian resource sector - although that bulks very large - but also to the business community more generally.
I was very touched, and I think that is the right word, by one of the experiences I had in Ho Chi Minh City, or Saigon take your pick as to what you might call it.  It was a graduation ceremony of RMIT International which is the only independent foreign university in Vietnam and I may not have the figures literally correct but I am sure I've got the proportions right in the space of three years, the students enrolled in that university have gone from something like 40 or 50 to two-and-a-half or three thousand and to learn of the courses being offered, the tremendous focus on business and commercial skills, the absolute focus on instruction being in English and the sense of commitment of those students and the Vietnamese middle class to a future aided and facilitated by an Australian educational institution was a great reminder of the opportunities that are available to not only to our resource sector, but also of course our service sector, and we are all very familiar of the opportunities that are there and I was greatly I suppose educated and illuminated by the fact that Vietnam, a country which has come a long way in a relatively short period of time, was very warmly embracing the involvement of this Australian educational institution.
 I mention that to acknowledge the breadth of the opportunities that we will have in the years ahead in this region and in getting together the consultative groups here in Australia, I have been very keen to make sure that all of the sectors are represented - the mining industry, manufacturing, educational, legal and other professional services, they are all very comprehensibly represented.
 I am as you know somebody who believes very strongly that Australia's international relations should not be narrowly focussed.  I've always seen the Asia-Pacific region as being the prime area of interaction both economically and politically, but never without, never with prejudice to the relations we hold with other parts of the world and that remains my position today.  But certainly APEC is a forceful reminder to me of the enormous value of the relationship we have and the enormous opportunities that are presented to our country in the years ahead through our interaction with these increasingly wealthy nations of our region and I never lose the opportunity of reminding, particularly business audiences that I speak to, that we are experiencing at the present time, an historic shift where the centre of gravity of the world's middle-class will permanently shift from Europe and North America to the nations of Asia, and it's an historic change, the biggest change in many respects, that's occurred of that character since the Industrial Revolution, and the good news that Australia is very close to that new centre of gravity and it's something that we can enjoy and relate to our great advantage without in any way lessening the important commercial and other links we have with other parts of the world.
 So that's the attitude of mind I bring to not only the current relationship, but also the opportunities, the relationship offers to all of us in the years ahead and the focus in Sydney in 2007 is a very promising and optimistic one.  We'll be talking a great deal about the issues we discussed in Hanoi, I mentioned to the smaller ABAC grouping earlier that we will be obviously focusing a great deal on matters relating to climate change and energy security which is of increasing relevance and importance to all of us and there is a great desire on the part of the Australian Government in cooperation with the business community of our country to make sure that we get these things right.
So that's why I am greatly heartened by the attendance here, I am greatly encouraged by the enthusiasm and commitment of the Australian business community, it's a marvellous opportunity to further reinforce our place in this part of the world and to re-affirm how much we have in common with the nations of APEC as we go forward in economic partnership.  So ladies and gentlemen, again my warm thanks, I look forward to seeing a lot of you over the months ahead.  I want to thank my colleagues Alexander Downer and Warren Truss for their contributions to your work.  Mark Johnson who is chairing ABAC grouping for Australia, I promised him that one of the things we would do in Sydney was to improve some of the ambience of the dialogue between the economic leaders and the various business groupings and I think we'll be able to give effect to that, but to all of you thank you very much for coming and I think we are going to have a great and important gathering in Sydney in September of next year and I want all of you to be very much part of it.  Thank you.
 [ends]


In all of our policies we seek a sense of balance.
  In health, we strongly fund, through the Government, the Medicare system and that is balanced by private incentives for health insurance. In education, we support both government and independent schools. In social security, we achieve a sense of balance by avoiding, on the one hand the harshness of the American approach and also the over indulgent, nanny-state approach, of many European countries.
It's crucial that in the important area of climate change we achieve the same sense of balance. We must play our part in responding to the challenge of growing greenhouse gas emissions, but we must do it in a way that does not damage the industries such as the coal industry and uranium, which have given us a competitive advantage.
The Task Group I announced yesterday brings together industry and government people to give us the way forward in relation to a global emissions trading system that will respond to the greenhouse gas challenge, but in a way that does not hurt Australia's competitive position. In this way, once again, we in Australia can achieve that sense of balance which is so important in many areas of public policy.  


PRIME MINISTER:
Well ladies and gentlemen, can I just say that I have come here today just to do two things; firstly to say to all of the people whose livelihoods and properties and future have been under threat, and continue under threat, that the rest of the nation is feeling for you at this very difficult time. You are not alone. And also to express my personal admiration to the men and women of the Country Fire Authority and also the men and women of other rural fire services and volunteer organisations; the Victoria Police, the local ambulance and everybody else who comes together at a time like this in such a spontaneous way.
I have been in touch with Mr Bracks and the Commonwealth will make any further assistance that is reasonably required by Victoria available. I am very proud of the work that the Army is doing in providing bulldozers and diesel capacity for the CFA. This is one of these occasions when people just come together and work until they drop.
It's going to be a long, hot summer, to use an old clich‚. These fires have started very early, and that has been confirmed at the briefing that I have been given. And I hope to go a little along the track and see a bit more of it and then after visiting here, I am going on to Tasmania, to the east coast of Tasmania to visit some of the communities that have been very badly affected.
 But I am just in awe of what the men and women of the CFA have done. It's been going on for a long time and predictions are that it will go along for a while yet. And the remarkable thing is that the whole episode has been free of serious injury or loss of life and it is amazing how few properties have been damaged and lost. And that is a tribute to the, I suppose, the bush (inaudible) of the average Australian, but also an enormous tribute to the men and women of the Country Fire Authority. Sophie Mirabella, your local member, has kept my office regularly informed over the past few weeks of what has happened, so I have been very much abreast of it and I just want to say to the local community there are 20 million Australians who are thinking of you and we hope you get through it okay.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you had to drive through a lot of smoke to get here...
PRIME MINISTER:
Yeah.
JOURNALIST:
You couldn't land where you wanted to...
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
 JOURNALIST:
What were your impressions of the scale of this?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well it's difficult, and I mean what is concerning about this, it started very early and because everything is so dry and there's so little moisture that the potential for it to go on and to spread is very real. Now I am in the hands of experts and I will be going up closer to have a look at it and I listened to what they say and just again, they're fantastic people and we're very lucky to have them. Their blood is more than worth bottling.
JOURNALIST:
Eric Abetz has said that Tasmania's bushfire crisis might not have been so severe had state forests been logged. Do you agree with that and is that something Victoria needs to consider?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well look, I'll talk to Tasmania when I get to Tasmania.
JOURNALIST:
What do you (inaudible) sense of the mood here today?
   PRIME MINISTER:
Look the mood is one of incredible optimism and everybody is working together. I mean you walk in, and you've got the local police, you've got the local citizenry, you've got somebody who came up to me and said his vineyard was saved by the efforts of everybody, you've got all the volunteers. I mean this is Australia at its very best and it really makes you feel very humble to be part of it. Thank you.
[ends]  


Thank you very much General Leahy, ladies and gentlemen. I am here to announce these new initiatives, but before I do so it's an opportunity, because I'm at Victoria Barracks and I am in the presence of many senior officers of the ADF and it's on the eve of Christmas, to say on behalf of the Australian community how much it admires the work of the men and women of the ADF. There was a survey carried out by a university group in Queensland recently into the attitudes of the community towards the different institutions in our society, and it was very significant that over the last 10 years the level of esteem for the ADF had risen more sharply than that of any other institution in the Australian community. And that is, in my opinion, well deserved. Not only have the men women of the ADF been doing great things in different parts of the world, but the sense of pride in the professionalism and the performance of our soldiers, sailors and airmen has never been higher in the Australian community and that reflects well on the leadership of the ADF and it reflects well on the professionalism of all ranks. Of course it is not a career that does not entail enormous risk and sometimes the tragic loss of life, and the loss of Trooper Porter and also of Captain Bingley in the helicopter accident off Fiji is a reminder of that.
 But the purpose of my being here today specifically is to announce that over the next 10 years the Government will commit an additional $1 billion to boost recruitment into the ADF and retention of people who have joined the ADF. This is the first instalment. There will be further measures to boost recruitment and retention to be announced in 2007. It's a double-edged sword having the lowest unemployment in 30 years. It's a terrific thing. It's never been easier in more then a generation to get a job in Australia than it is at the present time, but that has an impact on the ADF. It means it's harder to get people and when you've got them it's harder to keep them. And these measures are designed to meet some of the concerns that have emerged from a review commissioned by the Defence Minister and the announcements I make today fall into three broad categories.
 The first of those is to streamline the recruitment process, effectively to cut it from, in normal circumstances, from 30 weeks down to six weeks. The details are being made available in a supplementary document that the Defence Department is releasing to the media with this news conference. But the measures there will total about $371 million. It'll reduce the average processing times from 30 to six weeks for most applicants, it will also revise recruit entry standards to better reflect the contemporary Australian community. Now let me stress immediately, as General Leahy has done, this will not involve the relaxation of necessary requirements of physical performance, but it will realistically recognise that some indiscretion in the past should not be a permanent bar. It should also recognise that certain health conditions that previously were regarded as being disqualifying factors for the recruitment into the defence forces, can be effectively controlled in service life and there's no reason why you shouldn't recruit those people.
 The second of the measures is to introduce, as foreshadowed by Dr Nelson, a military gap year scheme that will provide an opportunity every year for up to a thousand 17 to 24-year-olds who've finished year 12 in the last two years, there won't be too many of them in the upper end of that bracket but most of them will be in the bottom end of the bracket, to experience military training and lifestyle for a year. This is designed to appeal to a group of people who may, after they've tested it, like service life, but in the absence of having a gap year opportunity of 12 months, be reluctant to commit themselves. Now to those who have always had their heart set on a military career, it may appear to be an easy option, but I think you need a combination of people who've always had their heart set on a military career and also some people who, if given the proper introduction in the proper circumstances, will grow to like it and then to make a permanent choice.
   The third and very important element is the introduction of retention bonuses and allowances totalling $226 million over the next seven years for personnel in critical positions and with key skill sets.  I won't go into all of the details but can I give some of the examples. There will be retention bonuses of up to $25,000 for selected Navy and Army employment and rank groups who hold high-value skills and experience. An initial one year retention bonus of $10,000 followed by completion bonuses of $30,000 for three years additional service for military ranks critical to Army workforce growth.  And there will also be a special earmarking of $100 million for a review of Navy seagoing and submarine service allowances subject to independent Defence Force Remuneration Tribunal considerations. Now that last mentioned one is not the only one but it does address a particularly critical recruitment and retention problem that the Navy faces.
 Now, they in summary ladies and gentlemen, are the measures. There will be more details made available in the document that I'll be putting out and Defence will be releasing.  But can I finish my remarks by saying that first and foremost the announcements I make today are part of a series of announcements the Government will be making to boost recruitment and retention.  It's not easy, we have a target of something in the order of 6,500 a year and we have to reduce the current separation rate from 11 per cent down to 10 per cent. That means we need to keep an additional 500 people every year. If we can achieve that, and if we can lift our recruitment rate, we can achieve the targets that we've set ourselves.  We've set a target for the ADF of 57,000 by 2016. It's currently 51,000 so in an era of very low unemployment it is a very big task and it's a task that will, in my opinion, require constant attention and this will therefore be one of a series of initiatives that the Government will need to take over the years ahead to make sure that we reach all of our targets.
 And finally can I say that I had the opportunity two days ago of visiting the bushfire areas in Victoria and in Tasmania to thank all of the fire-fighters and also again to see the ADF at work.  General Leahy spoke of the magnificent work they are doing overseas. They also do magnificent work here in Australia in augmenting and helping our civilian emergency services. And the contribution they're making to the fire effort particularly in Victoria, and there is no sign, sadly, that that is going to abate in the very near future and we can only hope that this rain is not only here in Sydney but is spreading elsewhere in our country; but I do record my thanks and admiration to the ADF as well as the emergency fire services for the great job they've done.
 Finally, can I thank you General Leahy for hosting this gathering here. It's always nice to be at Victoria Barracks and I wish you and all of your colleagues in the Army and all the members of the ADF, Admiral and Air Marshal, good wishes for Christmas and again my warm thanks to everybody in the Australian military who do such a wonderful job for the reputation and the defence of our country.  Thank you.
 [ends]  


PRIME MINISTER:
Well ladies and gentlemen I'd like to first of all thank Baptist Homes and Ms Heinrich and John Church for allowing us to come to this facility in my electorate of Bennelong. I have been here before. It's a wonderful example of an aged care facility and I have brought along a younger and more handsome member of the Government in Tony Abbott. And we have a little announcement to make and then we're going to move around and meet you and have a cup to tea and wish you all a very merry Christmas.
 But I am very happy to announce two very important measures that the Government is adopting to help people who suffer from osteoporosis, which is a bone brittle disease which does affect a lot of people as the years go by. And we have decided to do two things; we are going to put Alendronate, which is a wonderful drug for treating osteoporosis on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, so it will be fully subsidised in accordance with the rules of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. And the other thing we are going to do, we're going to provide that for anybody over the age of 70 whose doctor thinks they may be at risk, they can have a bone density test on Medicare. And those two measures together will put Australia, so I am told, in the forefront of the treatment of this enfeebling disease around the world.
So the drug, the very fine drug Alendronate, I think I have pronounced it correctly, but Mr Abbott will correct me if I haven't. It will go on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme list and then in addition to that, if your doctor thinks and you're over 70, and your doctor thinks you may be at risk, he can have the bone density test. That will be covered by Medicare and if you are below a certain level then you become eligible for the drug. And that will covered by the PBS.
  So it does, together, represent a very significant advance in the treatment. It will cost about $255 million over a period of four years but there is always a cost involved. But it's a cost the community is very happy to bear because these are important changes that will make life more enjoyable for people who suffer from this disease. And it does represent a very, very big step forward and I'm delighted to have Tony with me. Tony has lobbied and advocated and he didn't, on this occasion he didn't need to twist the arm very, very much, because once we were satisfied it stacked up in accordance with the PBS requirements, we were very, very pleased.
 But I am very happy to make that announcement this morning. Tony may want to add something to what I have said. But can I just finally say to all the wonderful people here, have a wonderful Christmas and this is a great facility. I have visited it on numerous occasions over the years.
 I know of the wonderful work of Baptist Homes, and I know of the wonderful work of, I think it was John's father Fred, who was such a driving force and founding father, if I can put it, of Baptist homes here in New South Wales and around Australia. And I occasionally encountered him when I tried to practice law about 30 or more years ago, but he's made a wonderful contribution, the family has, and to Baptist Homes generally. And June Heinrich of course is one of the pillars of the aged care industry movement. I prefer movement, industry sounds a little too vulgar for such a compassionate pursuit.
So to all of you, thank you, God bless, and merry Christmas and look forward to seeing you all during the year. But Tony my good and younger friend may want to have something to say. Tony.
MINISTER ABBOTT:
Well thanks very much PM and it's very good of you to have a political colleague into your political parish like this. John, thanks for welcoming me into your electorate. Look I feel very excited about this because as the Health Minister, all sorts of people come up to you all the time with very good ideas and often you can't do what they want you to do straight away. But we have a good system in place and invariably over time, our system does accommodate nearly every self evidently sensible idea that is put forward.
Plainly it does make sense to pursue the principle that prevention is better than cure. Plainly it did make sense to put Alendronate onto the PBS for people at risk of a fracture, before a fracture has actually taken place. It plainly made sense, and I am delighted that our system has now accommodated that a couple of years after Osteoporosis Australia started campaigning for it.
 So to Judy Stenmark and to Professor Phillip Cambrook from Osteoporosis Australia, I think this would be quite a professionally satisfying day for you and I am delighted that the Government has in this way been able to deliver this additional service to older Australians who very much need it.
So great day for older people and I think, if I may say so, more good news from the Howard Government.
 Thank you.
[ends]  


Ladies and gentlemen, Janette and I would really like to thank all of you for taking the trouble to join us tonight to celebrate Australia regaining The Ashes. I hope you all have a drink on that and you all enjoy that immensely, but there is another reason as well and that is to welcome you all to this worldwide gathering of Advance and I am particularly delighted to welcome Ken Allen in many ways is the inspiration for this wonderful thing, to Brad Orgill and to Elena Douglas and to everybody else who has come back to Sydney for the conference.  The concept of Advance is really quite superb.  What it does is to challenge in the most emphatic way, that rather silly notion that in some way Australia is diminished by some of the brightest and the best of our country going overseas and making an enormous contribution to the societies and the economies of other parts of the world. And your coming here and the breadth of talent and achievement and success that is represented by the group that's gathered here is I think something that sends a very strong message to our fellow country men and women that in the globalised world in which we now live forever, it is enormously to Australia's advantage that we have a talented, energetic, achieving, highly successful diaspora.
  That's an enormous global investment made by this country, it's an enormous asset because it brings with it an understanding of the countries with which we interact, and it brings with it a sophisticated involvement of Australia in the modern world and it's also a reminder that Australia, proud though it is to be known around the world by sports men and women, by its entertainers, by people who are part of popular culture, it is also a country that is also a high performer in business, a high performer in science, a high performer in areas of research and this gathering to say to the nation, and particularly to those who occasionally lament the so-called 'brain drain' to say to them that this is a country of all the talents in all parts of the world.  And that's something that as Prime Minister I am very proud of and I know that Australians are very proud of it indeed.  Ken it's great to have you and the other members of the board here.  I know how hard you worked when you were in New York as Consul-General doing wonderful things representing our country in that fantastic city, what wonderful things you did to get Advance going and the fruits of that endeavour is here on the lawns of Kirribilli House to get this extraordinary number of people here, although Sydney is not a bad place at this time of the year - Kirribilli House is not a bad place at this time of the year either I have to confess and it is particularly tonight.
  Anyway it's great to have you all here, Janette and I welcome you, we wish you well and I will invite Ken Allen to say a few words.  Thank you very much.
 [ends]  


Subjects:  Education policy.
E&amp;OE  ...............................
Well thank you very much Theresa for that very nice introduction.  To Mr Michael Quinlan the Principal of James Ruse, to Matthew Rudd the President of the SRC, to my Parliamentary colleague, the Federal Member for Parramatta, other very distinguished guests, teachers of the school, parents and members of the student body.  It is for me a special privilege to come for the first time I think in my life and certainly the first time in my public life and certainly as prime minister to this very distinguished and highly regarded school.
Over the last few weeks as all Australia has reflected upon the remarkable success of the Olympic Games.  Remarkable not only for the great achievements of the athletes who represented Australia.  Remarkable not only for the smooth organisation.  Remarkable not only for the very high levels of attendance.  Remarkable not only for the incredible enthusiasm generated not only here in Sydney, but around Australia.  But also most of all and for me most importantly of all remarkable because it put on display to the rest of the world all that is good and meritorious and worthy about our country.  Not only our efficiency and our capability, but also our friendliness and our capacity because we are essentially an egalitarian nation as well as a nation that strives to achieve our capacity to make a great international event work like that in a smooth and harmonious fashion.  And there can be little doubt that the whole event has done our country proud.  It has demonstrated to the rest of the world what a friendly, open, decent people we always suspected we really were.  But it's nice to feel that we've had an event that drives home the point to the rest of the world.
And in the wake of all of that there's been a lot of debate hasn't there about what does it all mean for the future?  How do we garner and harness this tremendous surge of legitimate pride in what Australia represents and what Australia really is?  How do we convert the, the emotional momentum of the Olympic Games to the greater national good?  There have been plenty of theories, plenty of ideas about what we ought to do.  And I've thought about this a lot as prime minister.  I've shared the sense of pride as an Australian.  I've shared the sense of excitement.  I've felt a great sense of satisfaction that the rest of the world could see us in such a positive light.  And I've thought to myself, if there's one thing that came through from the Games very strongly and that is that we are a country that believes in striving for the very best in sport.  Sport's a very important part of the national cement of this country. It's part of our psyche.  It's one of the things that helps define this country as being special and distinctive.  We're not the only country that loves sport, but we seem to love it in a particular way and there seems to be an accessibility to sport for people in this country that is denied even in countries such as the United States and other countries with which we normally make comparisons.  And as I think about what is the great legacy of the Games that can best be converted to our national advantage as Australians and I would think the very thing that we strive to achieve in sport we should strive to achieve in every aspect of our lives and that's striving for excellence.
Now you may not think that is a particularly original text if I can put it that way for a speech by the prime minister at James Ruse which sort of has that as its school motto. But I think it is very relevant to the sort of things that face this country.  We should never as a society lose sight of the fact that one of the great qualities of Australia is that we are an egalitarian society, we do believe in that great colloquialism in a 'fair go' for everybody.  But there's nothing inconsistent with a fair go for everybody and striving for excellence.  And if we can take out of the Olympic Games a renewed commitment to achieving every element of excellence we can in every part of our endeavour as Australians.  If we can see the pursuit of excellence as school or in university.  If we can see the pursuit of excellence in business life.  If we can see the pursuit of excellence in cultural life.  If we can see the pursuit of excellence in public life.  In all aspects of life with the same degree of concentrated, focused commitment as we displayed as a sporting nation at the Olympic Games then we will be putting down a far greater legacy of long-term benefits for Australia than I can possibly think of.
This school has every reason to be particularly proud of what it represents.  It is by common acclaim amongst the very front rank of secondary schools, government or independent anywhere in Australia.  It repeatedly outperforms most if not all in higher school certificate results here in New South Wales.  And it must rank in the history of illustrious government schools of Australia, very much amongst the very greatest, such as Fort Street and Perth Modern and Melbourne High and many other government schools around our country that over the years have made such a massive contribution to the educational life.   And it's no accident this school does so well.  It is firmly committed to the selective principle.  And there's nothing wrong with that.  And I am very pleased indeed that the New South Wales' education system under successive governments has preserved the notion of having selective high schools within the public education system. That is not in any way to confront those who do not get to selective high schools with any concept of elitism.  Rather it is to recognise that if we are to get the best out of our young people and if we are to give them the best then an element of selectivity within the education system is necessary.
There are many things we need to make the education system good.  We need to provide choice, not only between systems of education, but within systems.  We need strong parental support.  We need to provide an underpinning and a safety net for those who struggle more than others.  We need to have a focus on basic standards of literacy and numeracy.  We need to pursue and honour excellence as your school constantly does.  And very importantly we need to honour the teaching profession as playing an incredibly important role in moulding the future of this country.
Whenever I address school gatherings and I have opportunities from time to time -school gatherings like this, smaller gatherings, larger gatherings, younger, older children, all sorts of different schools in different parts of Australia - I think of two things constantly, I think of the choice that is available within the education system of Australia and that's a very important component of a fully developed education system, but I also think of the dedication of teachers.  It is harder to be a teacher now than it was forty or fifty years ago because the pastoral responsibilities that are thrown on teachers now are much greater than what they were forty or fifty years ago.  And therefore I think the burden that is carried by teachers now is infinitely greater.  There will always be within our community debate about what emphasis and in what area should be placed on different aspects of education.
But I hope that there will always remain a strong consensus across the board that any country that seeks to achieve excellence must within its education system and certainly at a primary and secondary level adopt the sort of principles of pursuit of excellence and selectivity that James Ruse has adopted.  It's been no accident that this school has done so well and won so many laurels and tributes deservedly so, because it's based its practice upon some very sound principles.  It's worked within the education system of New South Wales, but it has also developed a culture and ethos all of its own.  And as somebody who's visited many schools over the years, that distinctive culture and ethos is very apparent.  You are obviously a school that treats every student as an individual.  
The Principal spoke of the collaborative decision making process that is involved between students, staff and parents.  You are a school that has a nice mixture of tradition and modernity and isn't that about the right balance that we ought to have?  We should never be hidebound by tradition, we should never be slaves to tradition, but we should never pretend that our past doesn't in some areas validly and honestly instruct us about present and our future.  But you have also embraced the challenges of a modern, globalised world in which we live.  The emphasis of your curriculum, the way in which you have properly this morning honoured Olympiads in knowledge and academic achievement, that is a recognition of the real world in which Australia and all of you live.  And of course as I move around you are a marvellous representation of the mixed ethnic position of Australia in the year 2001.  And you are a reminder to all of us of the tremendous nourishment that Australia has derived over the years through successive waves of immigration from different parts of the world.
Now all of it, in a sense, comes together in a school like this.  The recognition of excellence, the right balance of tradition and modernity.  A collaborative approach between the students, the teachers and always of course the parents.  I think all of those things speak well of what you have achieved here and it is no wonder that so many speak so well of this school and so many seek to be part of this school community. 
So ladies and gentlemen if I may conclude where I began and that is that if the Olympic games had the impact on us that we all know in our hearts it did, if we are seeking a permanent legacy or a permanent monument let that legacy and let that monument be the constant pursuit of excellence in all aspects of our lives.  Thank you.
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I'm happy again to address the National Press Club on some of the great challenges that face our nation in 2007.  Last year I spoke about the great sense of balance in public life and public policy which have been a hallmark of the Australian achievement.  Today I want to address in a very direct and detailed fashion one of the great challenges of our time and that is water security.  
Before doing so let me, of course, remind you that whatever policies we may have, in areas as specific as water security, ultimately, for their effective implementation, they depend upon the continuing strength and growth of the Australian economy. And there is no greater single challenge in face of this government and of others in public life, than demonstrating a capacity to maintain the enormous prosperity of this nation at the beginning of 2007.  
Our lowest unemployment rate in more than a generation, a higher level of business investment, a very pleasing reminder that inflationary pressures are tending downward rather than in the other direction; none of these things have occurred by accident.  They are not some kind of automatic God given right, they are only achieved by the implementation of the right policies in the right fashion based on experience and a capacity to take the decisions necessary to maintain the prosperity of our country.  Water has always been at the very heart of the existence of the Australian nation.  
It influenced the life and the activity of the first Australians.  It determined that the British settlement would occur at Port Jackson rather than at Botany Bay, and the great Federation drought of 1892 through to the early part of the next century inspired Dorothea Mackellar to pen those immortal words about droughts and flooding rains.  As we grew and prospered as a nation after World War II, we placed heavy demands on our water resources, but that was a time when we invested heavily in infrastructure.  
We built the great Snowy Mountains Scheme, we invested heavily in dams and other ways of ensuring that our water resources were there and were available. But by the time of the 1980s, policies began to change.  Governments became reluctant, for a combination, in some cases of misguided implementation of environmental policies, became reluctant to invest in the construction of water conservation infrastructure, particularly dams. And that, of course, created understandable concern about the availability of water to look after us in the years ahead.  
In the last decade or so, we've begun to turn this around.  Billions of dollars both at the state and a federal level have been set aside for projects individual projects.  Our own $2 billion Water Fund is leveraging major investments in every state. And through the Living Murray Initiative, we are on the way to restoring six iconic environmental sites in our greatest river system.  And with the National Water Initiative, a long-term framework is finally in place to increase the efficiency of water use, to service the needs of communities, and to return our river and groundwater systems to environmental health.
Despite this, the current trajectory of water use and management in Australia is not sustainable.  In a protracted drought, and with the prospect of long-term climate change, we need radical and permanent change.  I regard myself as a climate change realist.  That means looking at the evidence as it emerges and responding with policies that preserve Australia's competitiveness and play to her strengths.
There does appear to have been a contraction to the south in the weather systems which traditionally brought southern Australia its winter and spring rains.  Our rainfall has always been highly variable.  The deviation around average rainfall is enormous.  And it seems to be getting bigger.
We need, so to speak, to make every drop count, on our farms, in our factories and in our homes.  Our water management systems must be geared not to a world of steady averages that rarely materialise, but to the variability that has been part of Australia's climate since time immemorial.
Water solutions will vary from place to place.  The truth is, as I said last July, we have the capacity to drought-proof our large cities.  What is needed is more investment, sensible pricing and an end to state governments using water utilities as cash cows.  Our water scarcity problems are bigger in rural Australia given the drought and unsustainable water use in many places.
Against this backdrop, I announce today a $10 billion, 10 point plan on a national scale to improve water efficiency and to address the over-allocation of water in rural Australia, particularly in the Murray-Darling Basin.  
The plan has the following quite specific elements.  Number one, a nationwide investment in Australia's irrigation infrastructure to line and pipe major delivery channels.  Number two, a nationwide programme to improve on-farm irrigation technology and metering.  Number three and very importantly, the sharing of water savings on a 50/50 basis between irrigators and the Commonwealth leading to greater water security and increased environmental flows.
Number four, addressing once and for all, water over-allocation in the Murray-Darling Basin.  Fifth, a new set of governance arrangements for the Basin.  Number six, a sustainable cap on surface and groundwater use in the Basin.  Number seven, major engineering works at key sites in the Murray-Darling Basin such as the Barmah Choke and Menindee Lakes.
Number eight, expanding the role of the Bureau of Meteorology to provide the water data necessary for good decision-making by governments and industry.  Number nine, a taskforce to explore future land and water development in Northern Australia and finally, completion of the restoration of the Great Artesian Basin.
This 10 point plan opens a new chapter of national water management in Australia.  It is a large but prudent investment, especially given the importance to Australia of the Murray-Darling Basin, and the scale of the water crisis that confronts it.
 The Basin accounts for the vast bulk of irrigated agricultural production in Australia and roughly 85 per cent of our irrigation water use.  It has a population of two million people, and another one million people in South Australia are heavily dependent on the system for their water.
The last five years have been the driest in the Basin since records began.  As a result, the operation of the River Murray remains, in the words of the Commission, on a 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Louise. Can I start by thanking and acknowledging the Ngunnawal people and that wonderful dance presentation. It was, as always, very inspiring, very enjoyable and really struck a wonderful note for the commencement of this citizenship ceremony. I acknowledge also Lisa Curry-Kenny, the Chairman of the National Australia Day Council, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, the defence chiefs and my fellow Australians. It's great to be here at Regatta Point again and I start by saying to our more then 100 applicants, nominees, candidates, whatever you call them for Australian Citizenship, how very deeply honoured we are that you have chosen Australia to be your national family for the rest of your life because becoming a citizen is joining the national family. And as always the people who are becoming citizens today are drawn from the four corners of the earth, and that is how we like it to be, that is how it's been for a very long time and that is how it will be for years and years into the future.
You may be drawn from the four corners of the earth but you are united by a common love of this country of ours and you are united by a common commitment to its traditions, its values, its triumphs as well as an acknowledgement of its failures, its successes as well as its mistakes. We have had over the last few months quite a debate about what is loosely called Australian values, and I think it would be rather odd if I didn't say something very briefly about that issue on this Australia Day in 2007.
As is rightfully the tradition of a great democracy, there is no one absolutely immovable, unalterable, set in stone set of values. People will have different views about what are the values of this country. But I do think there are some things that most of us hold very dear and hold to be the essence of what it is to be an Australian. I think we all embrace and hold very strongly to the fact that this is a great democracy. Australia is one of only a handful of countries, you could count them on the fingers of your two hands, that remained continuously democratic through the entirety of the 20th Century, and that was a remarkable achievement. 
It was one of the counties that earlier in time gave full voting rights to women, although it lagged sadly in some parts of the country, I stress some, in giving voting rights to the first Australians, the Indigenous people. We are a nation that holds very strongly to the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary. We believe very strongly in a free press. There are some of us on occasions who feel a little uncomfortable about the way in which certain ways in which that freedom is expressed, but we wouldn't have it otherwise because it is fundamental to our democratic way of life. We believe very passionately in the equality of men and women. It is something that Australia strives very hard to practice and it's something that Australia believes in very strongly. Many of us express this in different ways but we do believe in the notion of the fair go, the idea of equality of opportunity. We believe very deeply that a person's worth is determined by their character and by the effort they put in to being a good citizen, not according to their social class, or their background, or their religion, or their race, or their colour or their creed.
I think most of us have a fundamental pride in what Australia has achieved. We can debate our history, as we should, but fundamentally the verdict of history is that Australia has been a remarkable success and we have built in this country a great nation, an outward looking nation, a very generous nation and a nation that holds tenaciously to the view that we should play our part as a good international citizen.
And finally I think most Australians think it's very important that we embrace as our common method of communication with each other a single language, and that is the English language, because citizenship and interaction with each other is impossible unless we can effectively communicate with one another. I say all of those things in acknowledging that the people who will become Australian citizens today come from a diversity of backgrounds. And I say to all of you that in asking you, as we all do, and knowing that you willingly accept the responsibility to do so, to become part of the Australian family, we don't ask you to forget your homeland. We recognise that from now until the day you die you will have a special place in your heart for the country in which you were born. That is only human, it is only natural and it would be mean-spirited of your new country to expect you ever to lose a particular affection and a special place in your heart for the country in which you were born.
In that spirit can I say I welcome all of you to the great Australian family. It's a wonderful nation, it's the greatest on the earth, we think we're pretty good and we are. We've made our share of mistakes, we haven't always treated some of our citizens as well as we should have, and I think particularly of the earlier treatment of the Indigenous people of Australia, but we are in every sense of the word a generous people and we are so very grateful that you have decided to become part of our great Australian family. Thank you.  
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Louise. Can I start by thanking and acknowledging the Ngunnawal people and that wonderful dance presentation. It was, as always, very inspiring, very enjoyable and really struck a wonderful note for the commencement of this citizenship ceremony. I acknowledge also Lisa Curry-Kenny, the Chairman of the National Australia Day Council, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, the defence chiefs and my fellow Australians. It's great to be here at Regatta Point again and I start by saying to our more then 100 applicants, nominees, candidates, whatever you call them for Australian Citizenship, how very deeply honoured we are that you have chosen Australia to be your national family for the rest of your life because becoming a citizen is joining the national family. And as always the people who are becoming citizens today are drawn from the four corners of the earth, and that is how we like it to be, that is how it's been for a very long time and that is how it will be for years and years into the future.
You may be drawn from the four corners of the earth but you are united by a common love of this country of ours and you are united by a common commitment to its traditions, its values, its triumphs as well as an acknowledgement of its failures, its successes as well as its mistakes. We have had over the last few months quite a debate about what is loosely called Australian values, and I think it would be rather odd if I didn't say something very briefly about that issue on this Australia Day in 2007.
As is rightfully the tradition of a great democracy, there is no one absolutely immovable, unalterable, set in stone set of values. People will have different views about what are the values of this country. But I do think there are some things that most of us hold very dear and hold to be the essence of what it is to be an Australian. I think we all embrace and hold very strongly to the fact that this is a great democracy. Australia is one of only a handful of countries, you could count them on the fingers of your two hands, that remained continuously democratic through the entirety of the 20th Century, and that was a remarkable achievement. 
It was one of the counties that earlier in time gave full voting rights to women, although it lagged sadly in some parts of the country, I stress some, in giving voting rights to the first Australians, the Indigenous people. We are a nation that holds very strongly to the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary. We believe very strongly in a free press. There are some of us on occasions who feel a little uncomfortable about the way in which certain ways in which that freedom is expressed, but we wouldn't have it otherwise because it is fundamental to our democratic way of life. We believe very passionately in the equality of men and women. It is something that Australia strives very hard to practice and it's something that Australia believes in very strongly. Many of us express this in different ways but we do believe in the notion of the fair go, the idea of equality of opportunity. We believe very deeply that a person's worth is determined by their character and by the effort they put in to being a good citizen, not according to their social class, or their background, or their religion, or their race, or their colour or their creed.
I think most of us have a fundamental pride in what Australia has achieved. We can debate our history, as we should, but fundamentally the verdict of history is that Australia has been a remarkable success and we have built in this country a great nation, an outward looking nation, a very generous nation and a nation that holds tenaciously to the view that we should play our part as a good international citizen.
And finally I think most Australians think it's very important that we embrace as our common method of communication with each other a single language, and that is the English language, because citizenship and interaction with each other is impossible unless we can effectively communicate with one another. I say all of those things in acknowledging that the people who will become Australian citizens today come from a diversity of backgrounds. And I say to all of you that in asking you, as we all do, and knowing that you willingly accept the responsibility to do so, to become part of the Australian family, we don't ask you to forget your homeland. We recognise that from now until the day you die you will have a special place in your heart for the country in which you were born. That is only human, it is only natural and it would be mean-spirited of your new country to expect you ever to lose a particular affection and a special place in your heart for the country in which you were born.
In that spirit can I say I welcome all of you to the great Australian family. It's a wonderful nation, it's the greatest on the earth, we think we're pretty good and we are. We've made our share of mistakes, we haven't always treated some of our citizens as well as we should have, and I think particularly of the earlier treatment of the Indigenous people of Australia, but we are in every sense of the word a generous people and we are so very grateful that you have decided to become part of our great Australian family. Thank you.  
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.0Mb - 123secs)
There has been very strong and positive reaction to the Government's historic $10 billion plan to fix the great challenge of water security in Australia. 
And the reason for this positive response, which has come from amongst others, many environmentalists, irrigators and farm organisations, is that the plan tackles head on, in a comprehensive, properly funded way, the two great challenges we have in the area of water use in agricultural Australia. 
The first of these is the massive loss of water through evaporation, seepage and other happenings. It's estimated that up to 30 per cent of water in the irrigation systems of Australia is lost or wasted in this fashion. 
The other great problem that the plan tackles is that of the over allocation of water. This has been ignored for years and can only be tackled through additional funding and a determination to have a sensible sharing of the burdens of adjustment. 
So by tackling both of these fundamental problems the Government has put on the table a long range, well funded plan that will provide a lasting solution.
It will not, of course, work unless there are new governance arrangements and that is why we seek a referral of powers from the relevant states and territories to the Commonwealth to manage, overall, the Murray Darling Basin system. I'll write very shortly to the Premiers and Chief Ministers with my plans in this area. 
This bold, visionary attempt by the Commonwealth to fix one of Australia's great conservation challenges has won widespread support in the Australian community and I earnestly hope that I can have the full cooperation of Premiers and Chief Ministers to solve once and for all, over time, a great national challenge.
[ends]  
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.0Mb - 123secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.88Mb - 122secs)
There has been very strong and positive reaction to the Government's historic $10 billion plan to fix the great challenge of water security in Australia. 
And the reason for this positive response, which has come from amongst others, many environmentalists, irrigators and farm organisations, is that the plan tackles head on, in a comprehensive, properly funded way, the two great challenges we have in the area of water use in agricultural Australia. 
The first of these is the massive loss of water through evaporation, seepage and other happenings. It's estimated that up to 30 per cent of water in the irrigation systems of Australia is lost or wasted in this fashion. 
The other great problem that the plan tackles is that of the over allocation of water. This has been ignored for years and can only be tackled through additional funding and a determination to have a sensible sharing of the burdens of adjustment. 
So by tackling both of these fundamental problems the Government has put on the table a long range, well funded plan that will provide a lasting solution.
It will not, of course, work unless there are new governance arrangements and that is why we seek a referral of powers from the relevant states and territories to the Commonwealth to manage, overall, the Murray Darling Basin system. I'll write very shortly to the Premiers and Chief Ministers with my plans in this area. 
This bold, visionary attempt by the Commonwealth to fix one of Australia's great conservation challenges has won widespread support in the Australian community and I earnestly hope that I can have the full cooperation of Premiers and Chief Ministers to solve once and for all, over time, a great national challenge.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.88Mb - 122secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.06Mb - 135secs)
There are many views about the impact of global warming - some conservative, some more alarmist - but there can be no argument that greenhouses gases are having an adverse impact on the earth's environment. 
I am a climate change realist. Australia contributes very little to overall global emissions, but like all other countries we have a responsibility to play our part in tackling the problem. 
We are already doing this through practical, sensible measures such as our multi-million dollar investments in clean coal technology, solar power and other renewable energy sources, carbon-burying programs and projects. 
All of my government's many initiatives to tackle global warming and its symptoms are sensitive to the nature of our industries, our major-power sources and our natural abundance of fossil fuels. We are not going to sell out the many thousands of workers in the mining and power-generation industries by hastily agreeing to proposals that unfairly disadvantage Australia. 
We must have a measured, sensible approach to climate change that includes clean coal technology, the possibility of nuclear power and the use of renewable energy sources recognising always that solar and wind energy cannot maintain power stations. 
Market mechanisms, including carbon pricing will be integral to any long term response to climate change. The joint business government taskforce met last week to continue work on the design and nature of a workable emissions trading system. The taskforce will this week release a discussion paper outlining a set of issues regarding the development and implementation of a workable global emissions trading scheme and the role Australia can play. 
There is undeniable evidence that our climate is changing but the answer is not knee-jerk responses that harm the national interest. The Government will continue to put forward practical and sensible measures to tackle climate change. 
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.06Mb - 135secs)


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.0Mb - 135secs)
There are many views about the impact of global warming - some conservative, some more alarmist - but there can be no argument that greenhouses gases are having an adverse impact on the earth's environment. 
I am a climate change realist. Australia contributes very little to overall global emissions, but like all other countries we have a responsibility to play our part in tackling the problem. 
We are already doing this through practical, sensible measures such as our multi-million dollar investments in clean coal technology, solar power and other renewable energy sources, carbon-burying programs and projects. 
All of my government's many initiatives to tackle global warming and its symptoms are sensitive to the nature of our industries, our major-power sources and our natural abundance of fossil fuels. We are not going to sell out the many thousands of workers in the mining and power-generation industries by hastily agreeing to proposals that unfairly disadvantage Australia. 
We must have a measured, sensible approach to climate change that includes clean coal technology, the possibility of nuclear power and the use of renewable energy sources recognising always that solar and wind energy cannot maintain power stations. 
Market mechanisms, including carbon pricing will be integral to any long term response to climate change. The joint business government taskforce met last week to continue work on the design and nature of a workable emissions trading system. The taskforce will this week release a discussion paper outlining a set of issues regarding the development and implementation of a workable global emissions trading scheme and the role Australia can play. 
There is undeniable evidence that our climate is changing but the answer is not knee-jerk responses that harm the national interest. The Government will continue to put forward practical and sensible measures to tackle climate change. 
[ends]
  Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.0Mb - 135secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Sandy, Kevin Donnelly, Julie Bishop, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to accept the invitation to launch this book, both because I've greatly respected the author as an individual and I've greatly admired his persistent campaign for high basic standards in Australia's education system. For too long, the education debate has focussed exclusively on inputs and quality, on money spent on student-teacher ratios and the like. And this was the territory staked out and defended fiercely by education producer groups, by the state education bureaucracies, curriculum designers and the teacher unions. Now, as a government, we will yield to nobody in defending our record so far as the provision of resources to education is concerned. But the point that Kevin has made and the point I make today has been, and continues to be, to open up the education debate and to focus it more squarely onto quality. And our great challenge as a nation is to improve the quality of Australia's education system. 
The high ground of school reform in Australia centres on three key areas. Greater choice and accountability, higher standards and greater national consistency. And when you have 80,000 school students a year moving from one part of the country to the other, to use the language of the young, the need for nationally consistent curricula is indeed a no brainer; and those three things are the foundations of a quality education system. 
And it's into this realm of education quality that Kevin Donnelly's work - and Dumbing Down is the latest example - has been a beacon of commonsense, exposing many of the fads and politically-correct fashions that have found their way into Australian schools. 
Kevin Donnelly's book makes a very big point about the danger of so-called 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Sandy, Kevin Donnelly, Julie Bishop, my other parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to accept the invitation to launch this book, both because I've greatly respected the author as an individual and I've greatly admired his persistent campaign for high basic standards in Australia's education system. For too long, the education debate has focussed exclusively on inputs and quality, on money spent on student-teacher ratios and the like. And this was the territory staked out and defended fiercely by education producer groups, by the state education bureaucracies, curriculum designers and the teacher unions. Now, as a government, we will yield to nobody in defending our record so far as the provision of resources to education is concerned. But the point that Kevin has made and the point I make today has been, and continues to be, to open up the education debate and to focus it more squarely onto quality. And our great challenge as a nation is to improve the quality of Australia's education system. 
The high ground of school reform in Australia centres on three key areas. Greater choice and accountability, higher standards and greater national consistency. And when you have 80,000 school students a year moving from one part of the country to the other, to use the language of the young, the need for nationally consistent curricula is indeed a no brainer; and those three things are the foundations of a quality education system. 
And it's into this realm of education quality that Kevin Donnelly's work - and Dumbing Down is the latest example - has been a beacon of commonsense, exposing many of the fads and politically-correct fashions that have found their way into Australian schools. 
Kevin Donnelly's book makes a very big point about the danger of so-called 


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Mark for those very, very warm words of introduction to you and your wife Wendy, to Andrew and Cathy Stoner, to the Mayor and his wife to you Madam Chairman, and good wishes in the upcoming battle to all the other guests and supporters of our great cause, it's a great pleasure to be here, it's an enormous privilege for me to visit for the first time as Prime Minister, Mark Vaile's electorate. 
I have been to Port Macquarie before perhaps not over the last 10 years, but I certainly have been here on many occasions in other guises less well recognised and less pursued by people waiving friendly placards than was today. But the other reason why I am particularly delighted to be here and to be at this lunch is that it gives me the opportunity as Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia, to declare again how very important the coalition between our two great parties is to the future of this country. I am first and foremost a Liberal, as Mark is first and foremost a National. But we are together, committed to the maintenance of a strong coalition between our two parties. And as leader of the Government over the last almost 11 years, I have been extremely fortunate to have had three outstanding leaders of the National Party and three outstanding Deputy Prime Ministers in Tim Fischer, in John Anderson and now in Mark Vaile. Each of them has brought a special quality to that job, it's not an easy job when you have a coalition in government, it's always harder when you are the leader of the smaller group numerically within the Coalition, but Mark has always put as John and Tim did, the interests of the unity of the Government and the interests of the country ahead of any particular sectional interests, and I've always tried to understand the importance within a coalition of both sides having a place in the sun and both sides having a reasonable seat at the table. And I want to say how deeply I am in Mark's debt for the loyalty that the National Party has shown to the Coalition and the wonderful partnership that we have been able to forge in the time that he has been Deputy Prime Minister. He is a wonderful colleague and friend, he was an outstanding Minister for Trade, he led the negotiations for the Free Trade Agreement with the United States and as the years roll by and the benefits of that Free Trade Agreement become more apparent, the people will look back on it and say who was the minister responsible for that was your own local member Mark Vaile. 
It's also an opportunity for me to wish Andrew Stoner the very best of good luck and the closeness of the Coalition federally is mirrored at a state level. The New South Wales Government is the most criticised and despised state government anywhere in the country. I know state governments pretty well, I deal with them on a daily basis, and I've got to say that as I move around the country there's no state government that's subject to more criticism on a regular basis, than the New South Wales Government. And we will do all we can at a federal level to assist Peter and assist Andrew to bring about a change of government in this state, heaven knows it desperately needs it. I noticed that there is a little slogan here, it's more than a slogan here, it's more than a slogan, it's a statement of what is important about the future of this country. Now it's true that Bill Clinton had a slogan saying it's the economy stupid, and it's true that notwithstanding that injunction, that the economy is not everything. The human condition and non-economic things are very important in our lives. But it is also a reality that if you don't have a strong economy there are a lot of things that you can't achieve. There's been a lot of debate over the last few weeks about the National Plan for Water Security that I announced on the 25th of January and we've had all sorts of statements from certain Premiers and the Premier of South Australia and the Premier of Victoria, and the Premier of Queensland and they've been running around giving me all sorts of advice and they've given me some interventions from the leader of the Federal Opposition and some of his colleagues. And what they seem to overlook is that the investment under this plan is an additional $10 billion and if you didn't have a strong economy, we wouldn't be able to afford it. They seem to take it for granted that the money is always there, but the money is only there because of the decisions Mark and I and our colleagues have taken over the last 10 years to get the Budget out of deficit and back in surplus. Peter Costello made the point in parliament yesterday that when we came into office there was $96 billion debt and the debt-servicing burden of that $96 billion was almost the $10 billion, the annual debt-servicing burden was almost the $10 billion that we are making available for this water plan. And the point of that, my friends, is that unless you've got a strong economy, you can't afford to invest in infrastructure projects, you can't afford to provide the changes that we have provided over the last three years that have led to the highest bulk-billing rates for GP's in this country is verified by the figures that came out at 12 noon today; the highest bulk-billing rates we've had for years. We now have nationally a bulk-billing rate of 77 per cent and for children under 16 it's about 84 per cent. Now those rates were falling and we decided several years ago that we'd make some changes, we'd provide more incentives for GP's to bulk bill. If we'd had been in deficit we couldn't have afforded it any more than we could have afforded to invest $10.5 billion dollars or invest the $9 to $10 billion that the establishment of two new infantry battalion is going to cost over the next few years. Yet whenever you hear from the Labor Party there's never any acknowledgement that it's strong economic management that makes the funding of these things possible. They are happy to give you advice about what to do with the money, they are happy to deal that there ought to be more for their Labor mates in different parts of the country, but if you look back at their record, at every turn they tried to stop us making the economic changes that have given us the wherewithal to afford these important investments for Australia's future. 
When we came into government we had that $96 billion of government debt and we set about getting rid of the deficit and at every turn the Labor Party opposed us. They not only left us with a huge debit they tried to stop us paying it off. And now they've got the nerve to tell us what to do with the money that we've saved through our policies. And that is essentially the hypocrites they are when it comes to economic management. I mean they opposed us cutting expenditure in 1996, they voted against the first round of workplace relations reform, they bitterly opposed the reforms to the Australian waterfront that have made this country a lot more productive and our exporters given a much fairer go. They oppose root and branch taxation reform, they oppose the second round of industrial relations reform, they ridiculed, initially, the policy in relation to Australian Technical Colleges. At every turn they are tried to stop us getting the country back into shape, and yet they've got the nerve to just take it for granted that the money will be there for anything that they might want to do. And the other thing that the new leader of the Opposition is doing is trying to create the impression that there's not much difference between us and them when it comes to economic management. 
Well I want to tell you ladies and gentlemen, there is a huge difference, the huge difference is that we've got the runs on the on board and they are made up of a large number of highly inexperienced people. The Australian economy does not run on autopilot. There is a view being put around by Mr Rudd that really, the current economic condition will continue irrespective of who is in office. Well don't believe that, it won't. They opposed everything virtually that we have done to get the economy in the good shape it is now. Why would you expect that if they got into office they wouldn't revert to type and start embracing the policies that would put us back in the situation that we inherited 11 years ago. We are living in a time now where economic management is more challenging than ever before. It's when you've had a number of years of success that the real challenge is to have the right policies to keep that prosperity going. And you won't keep Australia's prosperity going but getting rid of our industrial relations system that we've fought hard to bring about. You won't keep prosperity going if you bring back the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws for small business. You won't keep the prosperity of this country going if you hand back the control of the industrial relations system to the trade union movement. And you won't maintain the prosperity of this country if you go back to the sort of policies that produced year after year of Budget deficits and $96 billion of government debt. 
And I wanted to make the point to you, my friends, that there's nothing fortuitous or guaranteed about economic prosperity. That old saying of, was it, Arnold Palmer or Gary Player that the harder I....the more I practice the luckier I get. If I can adapt that to politics and not golf - because I don't seem to get luckier even if I do practice - but if I could adopt it to politics what it really means is that the harder you work at good policy, the better the outcome, and that economic management is not some kind of automatic autopilot thing. It's the product of years and years of committed hard work and this is not a time to contemplate handing the Australian economy over to people who are inexperienced. 
Yesterday we had the lowest unemployment figure in this country for 32 years. I mean it is a magnificent figure of 4.5 per cent and there's something at the back of my mind that tells me that when we introduced WorkChoices in March of last year, the Labor Party and the union movement said that there would be mass sackings. They said that there would mass industrial disputes, they said that wages would be driven into the ground. The exact opposite has happened. We now have the lowest unemployment rate in 32 years, we've seen more than 200,000 jobs created since WorkChoices was introduced, we have the lowest number of industrial disputes since records began to be kept before World War I and we have real wages continuing to rise and they're now 17.9 per cent higher than what they were way back in 1996. Every single prediction they made about the world coming to end and the sky falling in has turned out to be wrong. Yet they if they win power at the next Federal Election will take us back to the industrial relations regime of earlier days, where, as Greg Combet rightly said, it wouldn't be a bad idea if the union movement started running the country again. 
Now I don't want that to happen and that won't keep our economy strong and that won't maintain our prosperity. And we have, as a political movement, our two parties, we have a big fight ahead of us. The longer you are in office, the more prone people are to say, oh well, it sort of runs itself doesn't it? It doesn't run itself, I can assure you. It takes hard work, 365 days of the year to keep the Australian economy running effectively. It takes some imaginative policies to tackle things like the shortage of skilled tradesmen and women, something that we're tackling with these Australian Technical Colleges. They were derided by the Labor Party when they were first announced, they've now sort of gone a bit soft, they don't quite know and they're going to somehow or other hand them back to the states, heavens above, under Labor Governments, it's different under a Coalition Government, I wouldn't find that an appealing prospect at all. 
But we do have in front of us a big struggle, but we have a lot going for us. We have the success of the last 10 years, we have a united coalition, we have the lowest unemployment rate in 32 years, we have high levels of confidence, we have a moderating and very low level of inflation, we have Australia seen around the world as an attractive place in which to invest and also a place that's prepared to stand up for what it believes is right when it comes to issues of international relations. And importantly, because of our economic management, we have the wherewithal to tackle long term infrastructure problems that this country has and it takes me back to the water plan I announced just under a month ago. 
This represents the biggest single commitment to solving the water infrastructure problems of Australia represented by the Murray-Darling Basin ever put forward by any government at any level in this country. You won't solve the problem of the Murray-Darling Basin if you maintain the current governance arrangements. There's a built in recipe for dispute. The states compete with each other and you need a national framework. The rivers of Australia do not respect state boundaries, nor does the Great Artesian Basin that lies under a number of states and territories of Australia. It's different with a local dam, it's different with a city water supply, but when you're dealing with a river system that straddles a number of states, it is unworkable to leave it with a governance structure that just represents the lowest common denominator. 
There was a voluntary agreement in the early 1990s to introduce caps in the Murray-Darling Basin. For 12 years those caps have been ignored by Queensland and the ACT and they've been frequently violated by New South Wales. You can't fix the problem of the Murray-Darling Basin unless you fix the problem of over allocation. And you can't address the issue of over allocation unless you are willing to pay proper levels of compensation. You can't just take back entitlements from people without compensating them in a reasonable way. Now we are willing to do that. Part of our plan is to allocate $3 billion for structural adjustment so that we can address the issue of over allocation. No state government has promised to do that and the behaviour of the New South Wales Labor Government in the Namoi Valley has been an example of their unwillingness to fairly compensate until they are absolutely dragged screaming to the reality of it, to address the issue of properly compensating people and providing proper structural adjustment. 
And this is an example of a Commonwealth Government, out of that $10 billion, putting $3 billion onto the table and saying to the states, you created the problem but we are prepared not only to fix it, but we're also prepared to bear the full cost of fixing it. And I just simply say to those Premiers around the country who are picking and choosing, and complaining and criticising, and I read an article in one of the papers this morning that said that I didn't get any agreement yesterday because the Premiers wanted to inflict a little bit of political pain on me. This is above inflicting political pain on your political opponents. The Australian public will have no patience with people playing politics on something as important as this. I am a Liberal, they're all Labor, I understand all of that, but the people of Australia voted for the state governments of this country to cooperate with the Federal Government they voted for. And they will no truck or harbour with state governments around this country saying we're going to use this as a opportunity to inflict a bit of political pain on John Howard. Don't worry about me, I've had political pain inflicted on me for 32 years and you know I'm quite capable of handling it. Forget about me they should think of the people who elected them to office and the Australian people are screaming out for the governments of this country to come to the party and fix the water issue. And we've given them a plan, we've given them the money, we're asking now for their support. And the Australian people will have little patience with governments who use this as an opportunity to score political points against their political opponents. 
My friends it's been great to be in your electorate. I can't endorse strongly enough what Andrew had to say about Mark and about Wendy, they've been great friends to Janette and to me over the years and most particularly in the time that Mark has been Deputy Prime Minister. We've come a long way as a coalition, and we've come a long way as a nation over the last 11 years, but we still have much more to do, we still have more challenges, we have a national prosperity to secure, we have to sensibly tackle the issue of climate change - not by knee jerk reactions that are going to destroy the jobs of coal miners and put at risk some of the great resource industries of this country - and I'm both enthusiastic, and energetic, as well as optimistic about the task ahead of us. But let me finish where I began and that is that essential to all of that is the unity of our two parties, the great coalition between the Liberal Party and the National Party, which has been the corner stone of the cohesion and the success of this Government over the last 11 years. And Mark and I together are committed to ensuring that that continues. 
Thank you. 
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Mark for those very, very warm words of introduction to you and your wife Wendy, to Andrew and Cathy Stoner, to the Mayor and his wife to you Madam Chairman, and good wishes in the upcoming battle to all the other guests and supporters of our great cause, it's a great pleasure to be here, it's an enormous privilege for me to visit for the first time as Prime Minister, Mark Vaile's electorate. 
I have been to Port Macquarie before perhaps not over the last 10 years, but I certainly have been here on many occasions in other guises less well recognised and less pursued by people waiving friendly placards than was today. But the other reason why I am particularly delighted to be here and to be at this lunch is that it gives me the opportunity as Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia, to declare again how very important the coalition between our two great parties is to the future of this country. I am first and foremost a Liberal, as Mark is first and foremost a National. But we are together, committed to the maintenance of a strong coalition between our two parties. And as leader of the Government over the last almost 11 years, I have been extremely fortunate to have had three outstanding leaders of the National Party and three outstanding Deputy Prime Ministers in Tim Fischer, in John Anderson and now in Mark Vaile. Each of them has brought a special quality to that job, it's not an easy job when you have a coalition in government, it's always harder when you are the leader of the smaller group numerically within the Coalition, but Mark has always put as John and Tim did, the interests of the unity of the Government and the interests of the country ahead of any particular sectional interests, and I've always tried to understand the importance within a coalition of both sides having a place in the sun and both sides having a reasonable seat at the table. And I want to say how deeply I am in Mark's debt for the loyalty that the National Party has shown to the Coalition and the wonderful partnership that we have been able to forge in the time that he has been Deputy Prime Minister. He is a wonderful colleague and friend, he was an outstanding Minister for Trade, he led the negotiations for the Free Trade Agreement with the United States and as the years roll by and the benefits of that Free Trade Agreement become more apparent, the people will look back on it and say who was the minister responsible for that was your own local member Mark Vaile. 
It's also an opportunity for me to wish Andrew Stoner the very best of good luck and the closeness of the Coalition federally is mirrored at a state level. The New South Wales Government is the most criticised and despised state government anywhere in the country. I know state governments pretty well, I deal with them on a daily basis, and I've got to say that as I move around the country there's no state government that's subject to more criticism on a regular basis, than the New South Wales Government. And we will do all we can at a federal level to assist Peter and assist Andrew to bring about a change of government in this state, heaven knows it desperately needs it. I noticed that there is a little slogan here, it's more than a slogan here, it's more than a slogan, it's a statement of what is important about the future of this country. Now it's true that Bill Clinton had a slogan saying it's the economy stupid, and it's true that notwithstanding that injunction, that the economy is not everything. The human condition and non-economic things are very important in our lives. But it is also a reality that if you don't have a strong economy there are a lot of things that you can't achieve. There's been a lot of debate over the last few weeks about the National Plan for Water Security that I announced on the 25th of January and we've had all sorts of statements from certain Premiers and the Premier of South Australia and the Premier of Victoria, and the Premier of Queensland and they've been running around giving me all sorts of advice and they've given me some interventions from the leader of the Federal Opposition and some of his colleagues. And what they seem to overlook is that the investment under this plan is an additional $10 billion and if you didn't have a strong economy, we wouldn't be able to afford it. They seem to take it for granted that the money is always there, but the money is only there because of the decisions Mark and I and our colleagues have taken over the last 10 years to get the Budget out of deficit and back in surplus. Peter Costello made the point in parliament yesterday that when we came into office there was $96 billion debt and the debt-servicing burden of that $96 billion was almost the $10 billion, the annual debt-servicing burden was almost the $10 billion that we are making available for this water plan. And the point of that, my friends, is that unless you've got a strong economy, you can't afford to invest in infrastructure projects, you can't afford to provide the changes that we have provided over the last three years that have led to the highest bulk-billing rates for GP's in this country is verified by the figures that came out at 12 noon today; the highest bulk-billing rates we've had for years. We now have nationally a bulk-billing rate of 77 per cent and for children under 16 it's about 84 per cent. Now those rates were falling and we decided several years ago that we'd make some changes, we'd provide more incentives for GP's to bulk bill. If we'd had been in deficit we couldn't have afforded it any more than we could have afforded to invest $10.5 billion dollars or invest the $9 to $10 billion that the establishment of two new infantry battalion is going to cost over the next few years. Yet whenever you hear from the Labor Party there's never any acknowledgement that it's strong economic management that makes the funding of these things possible. They are happy to give you advice about what to do with the money, they are happy to deal that there ought to be more for their Labor mates in different parts of the country, but if you look back at their record, at every turn they tried to stop us making the economic changes that have given us the wherewithal to afford these important investments for Australia's future. 
When we came into government we had that $96 billion of government debt and we set about getting rid of the deficit and at every turn the Labor Party opposed us. They not only left us with a huge debit they tried to stop us paying it off. And now they've got the nerve to tell us what to do with the money that we've saved through our policies. And that is essentially the hypocrites they are when it comes to economic management. I mean they opposed us cutting expenditure in 1996, they voted against the first round of workplace relations reform, they bitterly opposed the reforms to the Australian waterfront that have made this country a lot more productive and our exporters given a much fairer go. They oppose root and branch taxation reform, they oppose the second round of industrial relations reform, they ridiculed, initially, the policy in relation to Australian Technical Colleges. At every turn they are tried to stop us getting the country back into shape, and yet they've got the nerve to just take it for granted that the money will be there for anything that they might want to do. And the other thing that the new leader of the Opposition is doing is trying to create the impression that there's not much difference between us and them when it comes to economic management. 
Well I want to tell you ladies and gentlemen, there is a huge difference, the huge difference is that we've got the runs on the on board and they are made up of a large number of highly inexperienced people. The Australian economy does not run on autopilot. There is a view being put around by Mr Rudd that really, the current economic condition will continue irrespective of who is in office. Well don't believe that, it won't. They opposed everything virtually that we have done to get the economy in the good shape it is now. Why would you expect that if they got into office they wouldn't revert to type and start embracing the policies that would put us back in the situation that we inherited 11 years ago. We are living in a time now where economic management is more challenging than ever before. It's when you've had a number of years of success that the real challenge is to have the right policies to keep that prosperity going. And you won't keep Australia's prosperity going but getting rid of our industrial relations system that we've fought hard to bring about. You won't keep prosperity going if you bring back the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws for small business. You won't keep the prosperity of this country going if you hand back the control of the industrial relations system to the trade union movement. And you won't maintain the prosperity of this country if you go back to the sort of policies that produced year after year of Budget deficits and $96 billion of government debt. 
And I wanted to make the point to you, my friends, that there's nothing fortuitous or guaranteed about economic prosperity. That old saying of, was it, Arnold Palmer or Gary Player that the harder I....the more I practice the luckier I get. If I can adapt that to politics and not golf - because I don't seem to get luckier even if I do practice - but if I could adopt it to politics what it really means is that the harder you work at good policy, the better the outcome, and that economic management is not some kind of automatic autopilot thing. It's the product of years and years of committed hard work and this is not a time to contemplate handing the Australian economy over to people who are inexperienced. 
Yesterday we had the lowest unemployment figure in this country for 32 years. I mean it is a magnificent figure of 4.5 per cent and there's something at the back of my mind that tells me that when we introduced WorkChoices in March of last year, the Labor Party and the union movement said that there would be mass sackings. They said that there would mass industrial disputes, they said that wages would be driven into the ground. The exact opposite has happened. We now have the lowest unemployment rate in 32 years, we've seen more than 200,000 jobs created since WorkChoices was introduced, we have the lowest number of industrial disputes since records began to be kept before World War I and we have real wages continuing to rise and they're now 17.9 per cent higher than what they were way back in 1996. Every single prediction they made about the world coming to end and the sky falling in has turned out to be wrong. Yet they if they win power at the next Federal Election will take us back to the industrial relations regime of earlier days, where, as Greg Combet rightly said, it wouldn't be a bad idea if the union movement started running the country again. 
Now I don't want that to happen and that won't keep our economy strong and that won't maintain our prosperity. And we have, as a political movement, our two parties, we have a big fight ahead of us. The longer you are in office, the more prone people are to say, oh well, it sort of runs itself doesn't it? It doesn't run itself, I can assure you. It takes hard work, 365 days of the year to keep the Australian economy running effectively. It takes some imaginative policies to tackle things like the shortage of skilled tradesmen and women, something that we're tackling with these Australian Technical Colleges. They were derided by the Labor Party when they were first announced, they've now sort of gone a bit soft, they don't quite know and they're going to somehow or other hand them back to the states, heavens above, under Labor Governments, it's different under a Coalition Government, I wouldn't find that an appealing prospect at all. 
But we do have in front of us a big struggle, but we have a lot going for us. We have the success of the last 10 years, we have a united coalition, we have the lowest unemployment rate in 32 years, we have high levels of confidence, we have a moderating and very low level of inflation, we have Australia seen around the world as an attractive place in which to invest and also a place that's prepared to stand up for what it believes is right when it comes to issues of international relations. And importantly, because of our economic management, we have the wherewithal to tackle long term infrastructure problems that this country has and it takes me back to the water plan I announced just under a month ago. 
This represents the biggest single commitment to solving the water infrastructure problems of Australia represented by the Murray-Darling Basin ever put forward by any government at any level in this country. You won't solve the problem of the Murray-Darling Basin if you maintain the current governance arrangements. There's a built in recipe for dispute. The states compete with each other and you need a national framework. The rivers of Australia do not respect state boundaries, nor does the Great Artesian Basin that lies under a number of states and territories of Australia. It's different with a local dam, it's different with a city water supply, but when you're dealing with a river system that straddles a number of states, it is unworkable to leave it with a governance structure that just represents the lowest common denominator. 
There was a voluntary agreement in the early 1990s to introduce caps in the Murray-Darling Basin. For 12 years those caps have been ignored by Queensland and the ACT and they've been frequently violated by New South Wales. You can't fix the problem of the Murray-Darling Basin unless you fix the problem of over allocation. And you can't address the issue of over allocation unless you are willing to pay proper levels of compensation. You can't just take back entitlements from people without compensating them in a reasonable way. Now we are willing to do that. Part of our plan is to allocate $3 billion for structural adjustment so that we can address the issue of over allocation. No state government has promised to do that and the behaviour of the New South Wales Labor Government in the Namoi Valley has been an example of their unwillingness to fairly compensate until they are absolutely dragged screaming to the reality of it, to address the issue of properly compensating people and providing proper structural adjustment. 
And this is an example of a Commonwealth Government, out of that $10 billion, putting $3 billion onto the table and saying to the states, you created the problem but we are prepared not only to fix it, but we're also prepared to bear the full cost of fixing it. And I just simply say to those Premiers around the country who are picking and choosing, and complaining and criticising, and I read an article in one of the papers this morning that said that I didn't get any agreement yesterday because the Premiers wanted to inflict a little bit of political pain on me. This is above inflicting political pain on your political opponents. The Australian public will have no patience with people playing politics on something as important as this. I am a Liberal, they're all Labor, I understand all of that, but the people of Australia voted for the state governments of this country to cooperate with the Federal Government they voted for. And they will no truck or harbour with state governments around this country saying we're going to use this as a opportunity to inflict a bit of political pain on John Howard. Don't worry about me, I've had political pain inflicted on me for 32 years and you know I'm quite capable of handling it. Forget about me they should think of the people who elected them to office and the Australian people are screaming out for the governments of this country to come to the party and fix the water issue. And we've given them a plan, we've given them the money, we're asking now for their support. And the Australian people will have little patience with governments who use this as an opportunity to score political points against their political opponents. 
My friends it's been great to be in your electorate. I can't endorse strongly enough what Andrew had to say about Mark and about Wendy, they've been great friends to Janette and to me over the years and most particularly in the time that Mark has been Deputy Prime Minister. We've come a long way as a coalition, and we've come a long way as a nation over the last 11 years, but we still have much more to do, we still have more challenges, we have a national prosperity to secure, we have to sensibly tackle the issue of climate change - not by knee jerk reactions that are going to destroy the jobs of coal miners and put at risk some of the great resource industries of this country - and I'm both enthusiastic, and energetic, as well as optimistic about the task ahead of us. But let me finish where I began and that is that essential to all of that is the unity of our two parties, the great coalition between the Liberal Party and the National Party, which has been the corner stone of the cohesion and the success of this Government over the last 11 years. And Mark and I together are committed to ensuring that that continues. 
Thank you. 
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Louise. My Ministerial colleague Santo Santoro, Sister Josita [inaudible], ladies and gentlemen, my fellow Australians is a better way of describing it. Can I say how very happy I am to be here again in Louise's electorate of Greenway, to be at this wonderful aged care facility and to acknowledge two things. To acknowledge the enormous contribution made by various orders and various sections of the Catholic Church in Australia over the years to the care of the aged. The Catholic Church has a wonderful record of caring for Australians at every stage of their life, not least of course in their older years. And I pay tribute, I pay an unconditional tribute to the contribution of the Catholic Church to the care of the aged within our community. 
Can I also pay a tribute because this facility has a special flavour and character about it. Can I pay a special tribute to the wonderful contribution that people from Poland have made to the building of the modern Australia. They really are wonderful citizens, you've brought a resolute, defiant, enlivening spirit to our nation and we are very grateful for it. I look around this gathering, and you belong to a generation that came from a tragic part of Europe and you experienced things that those of us who've spent all of our lives living in this blessed country of Australia didn't. And we are all the more grateful and all the more admiring as a consequence of the contribution that you have made to our nation. 
Today I've come with my Ministerial colleague Santo Santoro, who's done a wonderful job as Minister for Ageing in the time that he's had the portfolio, to announce a further contribution of $1.5 billion to aged care in this country. Let me put this in context, the simple fact is that over the next 20 years, as the baby boomers, as they're called, go into retirement, we will see the number of people over the age of 70 double. Simple statistic. It's a good thing. We're all living longer, we're all living healthier, longer lives and that is to be encouraged and appreciated. But it does of course mean that we need to put additional resources and we also have to recognise that there are two areas where those additional resources must go into. We must increase the financial commitment as a community we make to residential aged care facilities such as this, to give the providers in facilities such as this the wherewithal in a combination of ways to better care for the growing number of people in the older section of the population. 
We must also recognise that people naturally want to remain in their own homes as long as possible, and one of the emphases in this package is on providing more community care places for people who want to stay in their homes longer. But it means logically the longer you stay in your own home with care being brought in, that when you do finally feel the need to go into an aged care facility, you are perhaps needing more help, more intensive care than might have been the case if you had gone in several years earlier. 
And this package endeavours to meet both of those needs. We're making it a total cost of $1.46 billion. We're putting about $410 million over five years into an additional 7200 community care places. They're the places where people go into homes and look after people, provide them with care, so they can remain in their own home longer. We're going to increase by $490 million the commitment over five years into high care residential need because as people come in perhaps needing more care because they've been able to stay in their own home longer, the cost of caring for them is necessarily higher, and therefore you have to put more resources into that. 
We're not going to increase accommodation payments for any existing residents. I want to make that very clear. We will be providing, according to need, for new residents in stages some increase in the residential charges and a commensurate increase in the matching payments coming from the Government. But importantly no increases for people already there, or here, or wherever and only for those new residents and whatever the payment you are committed to when you go in as a new resident, that's what you keep for the time that you are in the home. We're not intending to introduce accommodation bonds, I want to make that very clear. 
We're also going to see that we have a better matching of the funding for the care. We have this thing that goes under the, romances under the title I think that call it an aged care funding instalment. It sounds very, very bureaucratic but, yes, yes don't give me acronyms Santo please. Don't give me any acronyms. But what basically we're going to do is we're going to put another $390 million into this device and it's really a way of providing additional help to residential facilities where a lot of people need high care. And we're going to add to the money we already provide for that but we're going to add in the area where people need high care because that essentially is what people want. 
We're also going to introduce a fairer income tested care fee so that self-funded retirees in the same financial position are treated identically to pensioners. We're not going to reduce the support for pensioners, but we're going to recognise that you should get support according to your financial position, irrespective of whether you are a pensioner or a self-funded retiree. And if they're in the same financial position, they should get the same help and that's going to cost about $90 million. And then we're going to provide some more help for disadvantaged older people and people in remote areas, including indigenous people and homeless people and that is going to cost another $42 million. 
And very importantly, there are a number of aged care facilities that used to be run by state governments and are now run privately. And for a combination of historical reasons, the amount of subsidy they receive from the Federal Government was lower than the subsidy they gave to other homes, and we're going to remove that anomaly and at the cost of $25 million we're going to pay them the same amount. 
There are a few other things relating to administration and regulation and so forth that are going to cost a few million dollars. Everything always costs a few million dollars. But the important thing is, it's about $1.5 billion, roughly four to five hundred million of that is going into the aged care packages, that is providing more help for people to be cared for, intensively cared for in their own homes, and about a billion dollars going directly into the residential care sector. 
Now this, for the benefit of those who follow this debate very, very closely, this is the final response, or certainly the second and largely final response to the Hogan Review of Aged Care Accommodation, and that led back in 2004 to the injection of more than $2 billion into the sector, and this represents the next stage. 
So it is a very big investment, made possible by the fact that we have a strong economy and a strong budget surplus. I mean we build up surpluses, and you've got to do good things with them. And you can't spend money on aged care, you can't spend money on defence, you can't spend money on anything if you don't have it. And fortunately we have it because we've got a strong economy that's been well managed and we're going to commit this extra $1.5 billion into aged care. 
So I will leave it at that. I do want to again thank Holy Family for allowing me to come here, Sister, thank you very, very much. And I deeply appreciate the courtesy and hospitality that you've extended to me and to my colleagues Louise and Santo. And may I just say again what a wonderful job Santo is doing. He toils and works hard and he badgers his colleagues, his Prime Minister for more money and he's been very successful and he's done a great job and I am very happy to be with him here today but God bless you all, thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Louise. My Ministerial colleague Santo Santoro, Sister Josita [inaudible], ladies and gentlemen, my fellow Australians is a better way of describing it. Can I say how very happy I am to be here again in Louise's electorate of Greenway, to be at this wonderful aged care facility and to acknowledge two things. To acknowledge the enormous contribution made by various orders and various sections of the Catholic Church in Australia over the years to the care of the aged. The Catholic Church has a wonderful record of caring for Australians at every stage of their life, not least of course in their older years. And I pay tribute, I pay an unconditional tribute to the contribution of the Catholic Church to the care of the aged within our community. 
Can I also pay a tribute because this facility has a special flavour and character about it. Can I pay a special tribute to the wonderful contribution that people from Poland have made to the building of the modern Australia. They really are wonderful citizens, you've brought a resolute, defiant, enlivening spirit to our nation and we are very grateful for it. I look around this gathering, and you belong to a generation that came from a tragic part of Europe and you experienced things that those of us who've spent all of our lives living in this blessed country of Australia didn't. And we are all the more grateful and all the more admiring as a consequence of the contribution that you have made to our nation. 
Today I've come with my Ministerial colleague Santo Santoro, who's done a wonderful job as Minister for Ageing in the time that he's had the portfolio, to announce a further contribution of $1.5 billion to aged care in this country. Let me put this in context, the simple fact is that over the next 20 years, as the baby boomers, as they're called, go into retirement, we will see the number of people over the age of 70 double. Simple statistic. It's a good thing. We're all living longer, we're all living healthier, longer lives and that is to be encouraged and appreciated. But it does of course mean that we need to put additional resources and we also have to recognise that there are two areas where those additional resources must go into. We must increase the financial commitment as a community we make to residential aged care facilities such as this, to give the providers in facilities such as this the wherewithal in a combination of ways to better care for the growing number of people in the older section of the population. 
We must also recognise that people naturally want to remain in their own homes as long as possible, and one of the emphases in this package is on providing more community care places for people who want to stay in their homes longer. But it means logically the longer you stay in your own home with care being brought in, that when you do finally feel the need to go into an aged care facility, you are perhaps needing more help, more intensive care than might have been the case if you had gone in several years earlier. 
And this package endeavours to meet both of those needs. We're making it a total cost of $1.46 billion. We're putting about $410 million over five years into an additional 7200 community care places. They're the places where people go into homes and look after people, provide them with care, so they can remain in their own home longer. We're going to increase by $490 million the commitment over five years into high care residential need because as people come in perhaps needing more care because they've been able to stay in their own home longer, the cost of caring for them is necessarily higher, and therefore you have to put more resources into that. 
We're not going to increase accommodation payments for any existing residents. I want to make that very clear. We will be providing, according to need, for new residents in stages some increase in the residential charges and a commensurate increase in the matching payments coming from the Government. But importantly no increases for people already there, or here, or wherever and only for those new residents and whatever the payment you are committed to when you go in as a new resident, that's what you keep for the time that you are in the home. We're not intending to introduce accommodation bonds, I want to make that very clear. 
We're also going to see that we have a better matching of the funding for the care. We have this thing that goes under the, romances under the title I think that call it an aged care funding instalment. It sounds very, very bureaucratic but, yes, yes don't give me acronyms Santo please. Don't give me any acronyms. But what basically we're going to do is we're going to put another $390 million into this device and it's really a way of providing additional help to residential facilities where a lot of people need high care. And we're going to add to the money we already provide for that but we're going to add in the area where people need high care because that essentially is what people want. 
We're also going to introduce a fairer income tested care fee so that self-funded retirees in the same financial position are treated identically to pensioners. We're not going to reduce the support for pensioners, but we're going to recognise that you should get support according to your financial position, irrespective of whether you are a pensioner or a self-funded retiree. And if they're in the same financial position, they should get the same help and that's going to cost about $90 million. And then we're going to provide some more help for disadvantaged older people and people in remote areas, including indigenous people and homeless people and that is going to cost another $42 million. 
And very importantly, there are a number of aged care facilities that used to be run by state governments and are now run privately. And for a combination of historical reasons, the amount of subsidy they receive from the Federal Government was lower than the subsidy they gave to other homes, and we're going to remove that anomaly and at the cost of $25 million we're going to pay them the same amount. 
There are a few other things relating to administration and regulation and so forth that are going to cost a few million dollars. Everything always costs a few million dollars. But the important thing is, it's about $1.5 billion, roughly four to five hundred million of that is going into the aged care packages, that is providing more help for people to be cared for, intensively cared for in their own homes, and about a billion dollars going directly into the residential care sector. 
Now this, for the benefit of those who follow this debate very, very closely, this is the final response, or certainly the second and largely final response to the Hogan Review of Aged Care Accommodation, and that led back in 2004 to the injection of more than $2 billion into the sector, and this represents the next stage. 
So it is a very big investment, made possible by the fact that we have a strong economy and a strong budget surplus. I mean we build up surpluses, and you've got to do good things with them. And you can't spend money on aged care, you can't spend money on defence, you can't spend money on anything if you don't have it. And fortunately we have it because we've got a strong economy that's been well managed and we're going to commit this extra $1.5 billion into aged care. 
So I will leave it at that. I do want to again thank Holy Family for allowing me to come here, Sister, thank you very, very much. And I deeply appreciate the courtesy and hospitality that you've extended to me and to my colleagues Louise and Santo. And may I just say again what a wonderful job Santo is doing. He toils and works hard and he badgers his colleagues, his Prime Minister for more money and he's been very successful and he's done a great job and I am very happy to be with him here today but God bless you all, thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 1.7Mb - 110secs)
  Economic prosperity is no accident. 
It is the result of careful planning, strong policies and experience. 
It is not by sheer economic good luck that my Government can spend $10 billion to secure Australia's water system or $1.5 billion on the aged care reforms I announced yesterday. 
Australia is debt free and the Budget is in surplus. Yet when we came to office, Australia was spending $8.5 billion a year just to cover the interest on government debt. 
Now when our soldiers need new equipment we can afford it. We can provide extra funding for schools, we can spend billions of dollars on the health and welfare of the nation and we have been able to cut taxes. 
None of this could have happened without the right economic policy settings. The country does not run on autopilot. 
We have enjoyed years of unbroken prosperity, the result of good economic management, an ambitious reform agenda and balanced social policies. 
Australians have become accustomed to a strong economy and so they should. The main priority of every government should be a strong economy. It is the foundation stone of good government. 
Australia's prosperity will be put at grave risk if Labor gains office. Labor has already promised to end workplace reform and there are disturbing signs knee-jerk responses to climate change could damage the mining and energy sectors. 
Moreover, we should never forget that over the last 10 years, Labor has opposed all of our major attempts to pay off debt, bring the Budget into surplus and reform the economy. Only the Coalition has the experience and track record to maintain Australia's prosperity. 
[ends]  Listen to this speech (MP3 - 1.7Mb - 110secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.66Mb - 108secs)
Economic prosperity is no accident. 
It is the result of careful planning, strong policies and experience. 
It is not by sheer economic good luck that my Government can spend $10 billion to secure Australia's water system or $1.5 billion on the aged care reforms I announced yesterday. 
Australia is debt free and the Budget is in surplus. Yet when we came to office, Australia was spending $8.5 billion a year just to cover the interest on government debt. 
Now when our soldiers need new equipment we can afford it. We can provide extra funding for schools, we can spend billions of dollars on the health and welfare of the nation and we have been able to cut taxes. 
None of this could have happened without the right economic policy settings. The country does not run on autopilot. 
We have enjoyed years of unbroken prosperity, the result of good economic management, an ambitious reform agenda and balanced social policies. 
Australians have become accustomed to a strong economy and so they should. The main priority of every government should be a strong economy. It is the foundation stone of good government. 
Australia's prosperity will be put at grave risk if Labor gains office. Labor has already promised to end workplace reform and there are disturbing signs knee-jerk responses to climate change could damage the mining and energy sectors. 
Moreover, we should never forget that over the last 10 years, Labor has opposed all of our major attempts to pay off debt, bring the Budget into surplus and reform the economy. Only the Coalition has the experience and track record to maintain Australia's prosperity. 
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.66Mb - 108secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Michael. My colleague Julie Bishop, who is the Federal Minister for Education and of course a Western Australian and in the Federal Parliament, Principal, Deputy Principal, school captains Luke and Lauren, my fellow Australians both young and old. Way back in the 1950s I went to a school in Sydney not unlike Balcatta. I am a product of the public government education system of New South Wales and I am very, very grateful and I have remained so all my life for the education that that system gave me. 
I left school in the middle of the 1950s, I know before just about everybody in this room was born, I am sorry about that. But it's an interesting thing to draw some parallels between the world that I faced in the middle 1950s and the world that those of you who will leave school at the end of this year and in the next few years will face in the early part of the 21st Century. 
Your school motto is 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.08Mb - 136secs)
Paying off Labor's $96 billion debt and my Government's careful management of the economy has enabled the Commonwealth to massively increase education funding in Australia. 
Funding for government schools has risen in every Budget with an estimated increase of 118 per cent since 1996, even though enrolments in government schools during that time have risen by only 1 per cent. From 2005 to 2008, the Government will provide about $33 billion dollars for all schools. 
The Government's Investing in Our Schools Program, introduced two years ago, has been a very helpful addition to the Commonwealth's overall education funding. 
This scheme gives local communities a say in what they think is important for their schools. It provides funds for small scale projects like new playgrounds, toilet-block upgrades, classroom enhancements and up-to-date computer labs. 
The program is a practical way of responding to infrastructure backlogs in both government and less-well-off non-government schools; and so far more than 7500 schools have received funding. 
Later today, I will announce a new round of funding for the Investing in Our Schools Program - an additional $181 million for important projects identified by school communities. 
Of this new money, $127 million will be for government schools and $54 million for the non-government sector. This will take the overall Commonwealth expenditure on this program to almost $1.2 billion. 
This is money that would not have been available without the careful management of the economy. With the right policy settings and Budget priorities, the Federal Government has been able to provide billions more for the nation's schools. 
Only the Liberal-National Coalition has the economic management experience to ensure that Australia's schools continue to be well-funded and well resourced. 
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.08Mb - 136secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Michael. My colleague Julie Bishop, who is the Federal Minister for Education and of course a Western Australian and in the Federal Parliament, Principal, Deputy Principal, school captains Luke and Lauren, my fellow Australians both young and old. Way back in the 1950s I went to a school in Sydney not unlike Balcatta. I am a product of the public government education system of New South Wales and I am very, very grateful and I have remained so all my life for the education that that system gave me. 
I left school in the middle of the 1950s, I know before just about everybody in this room was born, I am sorry about that. But it's an interesting thing to draw some parallels between the world that I faced in the middle 1950s and the world that those of you who will leave school at the end of this year and in the next few years will face in the early part of the 21st Century. 
Your school motto is 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Steve, Paul Omodei, Danielle Blain, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, over the last 10 years I've accumulated in my mind a lot of relevant statistics, but I think the one that resonates with me more than any was the statistic that came out about 18 months ago which showed that the number of self employed people for the first time ever had passed the number of trade unionists in Australia.  Now, I don't say that in denigration of trade unionists, I say it in praise of small business and Steve the first small businessman that I knew was my father and he owned, as many people know, he owned a petrol service station in the inner suburbs of Sydney and the first job I had would have been the subject of a complaint to the Office of Workplace Services if, in terms of the remuneration I received, if that law had been in operation in the early 1950s. But I grew up believing   in small business, I grew up believing that the best thing you could do in life economically was to start something with your own resources and work very hard and make it better and pass it on to your children and that is exactly what my father did and I'll ever be grateful for the fact that he started with absolutely nothing because he was the eldest of nine children, he worked very hard and built up a business and it meant that the four sons that he and my mother had were able all to do extremely well and have great good fortune in life. And it really angers me when people denigrate from time to time the contribution of small business and they are very happy to peddle stories around about the unreasonable small business boss and, of course, from time to time just as there are bad employees there are some bad employers and the importance of our workplace relations laws is that they achieve   a balance so that the bad employer is caught and equally you have an employment environment where somebody is plainly a negative influence on a firm it's possible for that person to be let go in reasonable circumstances in a way it wasn't before.  
Now, I have a very simple message for all of you and I deliver it with I hope the greatest of humility and that is that we are very proud of the good economic environment that's been created over the last 10 years.  You want stability, you want as little regulation as possible, you want taxes to be even lower, you want good industrial relations laws and you want a fair set of rules so small business can operate. Of the many things that we've done for small business I think by far the most important is the economic stability that we have delivered. If you can have predictability, if you can remember as part of the distant experience of being in small business interest rates of 21 and 22 per cent which as I look around the room I guess many of you laboured under in the late 1980s and the early 1990s.  If you can have a set of industrial relations laws that allows for termination of people   who are clearly a negative influence on a firm, but equally create a situation that if people are dismissed for illegal reasons and they're clearly defined in the legislation then the weight of the law will come upon those people and there's no doubt in my mind that if there is a change of government at the end of this year, whenever the federal election is held, the first thing in the gun sights of the new government will be the repeal of our industrial relations laws and whatever the soft selling you're now getting from Julia Gillard about talking to small business, the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws will return and they will re-establish an industrial relations system that's dominated by the union movement.  
This is very important to Western Australia, it's even more important to Western Australia than any other part of the country because the percentage of Australian Workplace Agreements in Western Australia is something like four times what it is in other parts of the country.  There's something in the order of 200,000 I think people employed in Western Australia under Australian Workplace Agreements and this is not only important in the mining industry which is such a crucial and pivotal part of the Western Australian economy, it is also enormously important in other sections of the business community and I regard the passage of those WorkChoices laws as being one of the really fundamental achievements of this government.  We did have tariff reform under the former government and I've never been reluctant to give them credit for that and that was important for a great exporting state and   we did have financial deregulation which we pioneered in government with the Campbell Report but that was put into effect by the former government and they had our support in relation to that but the one great thing, well the two great things they were unable to do was reform the tax system and reform our workplace relations system and the changes first made by Peter Reith in 1996, the massive changes to the waterfront in 1998 which lifted the crane rate from something like 17 an hour to 27 which was predicted at the time to be absolutely impossible to achieve, plus WorkChoices that came into operation just under a year ago have been of enormous benefit to this country.
Now we have the lowest unemployment rate for 32 years and it's lowest of all here in Western Australia.  Now some of that is undoubtedly due to the mining industry boom and the contribution of the resource sector and there's no doubt that Western Australia's economy is moving ahead more strongly than the economy of any other part of the country, but the mining industry doesn't explain why you have unemployment rates of three and four per cent in the Sutherland Shire in Sydney, Cronulla Beach is a long way from the Pilbara and it really doesn't explain that.  It doesn't explain the very low unemployment rates in many other parts of the country.  So it's a bit of a fiction to say that we have low unemployment because of the resources boom, the resources boom has made a contribution, but the general health and strength of the economy and the growth of the service sector has also played a major   part and to think that we have an unemployment rate nationally of 4.5 per cent and that is against the situation where in the last six months we've had a participation rate which has been the highest on record.  We also have the lowest number of industrial disputes since figures began to be kept the year before World War I broke out, they first started to be kept in 1913 and we now have the lowest and this is spectacular in the construction industry and you know how important and how frequently reported upon the construction industry is in Western Australia. The dramatic drop in the space of a year, and that's the result not only of WorkChoices, but even more particularly the introduction of the legislation to establish an independent building construction industry authority which flowed out of the first report of the former Mr Justice Cole. He carried out an inquiry into the building industry.   It took a lot of courage but the legislation was introduced and that legislation would go if there were a change of government. 
Now I spell these things out starkly because there are some fundamental choices and what is at stake in this area is where the big changes would take place to the detriment of small business if there were a change of Government. 
Can I just say two other things because I would like to take a couple of questions and then have the opportunity of meeting you. The first thing I want to say is how delighted I am that you've got a candidate of the profile of Steve to run in this electorate. I mean I am a great believer of getting men and women into Parliament who have had flesh and blood life's experience. You have got to have people who've actually run something or achieved something. This bloke has run a company, he's also I know done an enormous amount for Australian Rules football in this area and that is terrific. I said to Danielle 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Steve, Paul Omodei, Danielle Blain, my federal and state parliamentary colleagues, over the last 10 years I've accumulated in my mind a lot of relevant statistics, but I think the one that resonates with me more than any was the statistic that came out about 18 months ago which showed that the number of self employed people for the first time ever had passed the number of trade unionists in Australia.  Now, I don't say that in denigration of trade unionists, I say it in praise of small business and Steve the first small businessman that I knew was my father and he owned, as many people know, he owned a petrol service station in the inner suburbs of Sydney and the first job I had would have been the subject of a complaint to the Office of Workplace Services if, in terms of the remuneration I received, if that law had been in operation in the early 1950s. But I grew up believing   in small business, I grew up believing that the best thing you could do in life economically was to start something with your own resources and work very hard and make it better and pass it on to your children and that is exactly what my father did and I'll ever be grateful for the fact that he started with absolutely nothing because he was the eldest of nine children, he worked very hard and built up a business and it meant that the four sons that he and my mother had were able all to do extremely well and have great good fortune in life. And it really angers me when people denigrate from time to time the contribution of small business and they are very happy to peddle stories around about the unreasonable small business boss and, of course, from time to time just as there are bad employees there are some bad employers and the importance of our workplace relations laws is that they achieve   a balance so that the bad employer is caught and equally you have an employment environment where somebody is plainly a negative influence on a firm it's possible for that person to be let go in reasonable circumstances in a way it wasn't before.  
Now, I have a very simple message for all of you and I deliver it with I hope the greatest of humility and that is that we are very proud of the good economic environment that's been created over the last 10 years.  You want stability, you want as little regulation as possible, you want taxes to be even lower, you want good industrial relations laws and you want a fair set of rules so small business can operate. Of the many things that we've done for small business I think by far the most important is the economic stability that we have delivered. If you can have predictability, if you can remember as part of the distant experience of being in small business interest rates of 21 and 22 per cent which as I look around the room I guess many of you laboured under in the late 1980s and the early 1990s.  If you can have a set of industrial relations laws that allows for termination of people   who are clearly a negative influence on a firm, but equally create a situation that if people are dismissed for illegal reasons and they're clearly defined in the legislation then the weight of the law will come upon those people and there's no doubt in my mind that if there is a change of government at the end of this year, whenever the federal election is held, the first thing in the gun sights of the new government will be the repeal of our industrial relations laws and whatever the soft selling you're now getting from Julia Gillard about talking to small business, the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws will return and they will re-establish an industrial relations system that's dominated by the union movement.  
This is very important to Western Australia, it's even more important to Western Australia than any other part of the country because the percentage of Australian Workplace Agreements in Western Australia is something like four times what it is in other parts of the country.  There's something in the order of 200,000 I think people employed in Western Australia under Australian Workplace Agreements and this is not only important in the mining industry which is such a crucial and pivotal part of the Western Australian economy, it is also enormously important in other sections of the business community and I regard the passage of those WorkChoices laws as being one of the really fundamental achievements of this government.  We did have tariff reform under the former government and I've never been reluctant to give them credit for that and that was important for a great exporting state and   we did have financial deregulation which we pioneered in government with the Campbell Report but that was put into effect by the former government and they had our support in relation to that but the one great thing, well the two great things they were unable to do was reform the tax system and reform our workplace relations system and the changes first made by Peter Reith in 1996, the massive changes to the waterfront in 1998 which lifted the crane rate from something like 17 an hour to 27 which was predicted at the time to be absolutely impossible to achieve, plus WorkChoices that came into operation just under a year ago have been of enormous benefit to this country.
Now we have the lowest unemployment rate for 32 years and it's lowest of all here in Western Australia.  Now some of that is undoubtedly due to the mining industry boom and the contribution of the resource sector and there's no doubt that Western Australia's economy is moving ahead more strongly than the economy of any other part of the country, but the mining industry doesn't explain why you have unemployment rates of three and four per cent in the Sutherland Shire in Sydney, Cronulla Beach is a long way from the Pilbara and it really doesn't explain that.  It doesn't explain the very low unemployment rates in many other parts of the country.  So it's a bit of a fiction to say that we have low unemployment because of the resources boom, the resources boom has made a contribution, but the general health and strength of the economy and the growth of the service sector has also played a major   part and to think that we have an unemployment rate nationally of 4.5 per cent and that is against the situation where in the last six months we've had a participation rate which has been the highest on record.  We also have the lowest number of industrial disputes since figures began to be kept the year before World War I broke out, they first started to be kept in 1913 and we now have the lowest and this is spectacular in the construction industry and you know how important and how frequently reported upon the construction industry is in Western Australia. The dramatic drop in the space of a year, and that's the result not only of WorkChoices, but even more particularly the introduction of the legislation to establish an independent building construction industry authority which flowed out of the first report of the former Mr Justice Cole. He carried out an inquiry into the building industry.   It took a lot of courage but the legislation was introduced and that legislation would go if there were a change of government. 
Now I spell these things out starkly because there are some fundamental choices and what is at stake in this area is where the big changes would take place to the detriment of small business if there were a change of Government. 
Can I just say two other things because I would like to take a couple of questions and then have the opportunity of meeting you. The first thing I want to say is how delighted I am that you've got a candidate of the profile of Steve to run in this electorate. I mean I am a great believer of getting men and women into Parliament who have had flesh and blood life's experience. You have got to have people who've actually run something or achieved something. This bloke has run a company, he's also I know done an enormous amount for Australian Rules football in this area and that is terrific. I said to Danielle 


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.1Mb - 135secs)
Paying off Labor's $96 billion debt and my Government's careful management of the economy has enabled the Commonwealth to massively increase education funding in Australia. 
Funding for government schools has risen in every Budget with an estimated increase of 118 per cent since 1996, even though enrolments in government schools during that time have risen by only 1 per cent. From 2005 to 2008, the Government will provide about $33 billion dollars for all schools. 
The Government's Investing in Our Schools Program, introduced two years ago, has been a very helpful addition to the Commonwealth's overall education funding. 
This scheme gives local communities a say in what they think is important for their schools. It provides funds for small scale projects like new playgrounds, toilet-block upgrades, classroom enhancements and up-to-date computer labs. 
The program is a practical way of responding to infrastructure backlogs in both government and less-well-off non-government schools; and so far more than 7500 schools have received funding. 
Later today, I will announce a new round of funding for the Investing in Our Schools Program - an additional $181 million for important projects identified by school communities. 
Of this new money, $127 million will be for government schools and $54 million for the non-government sector. This will take the overall Commonwealth expenditure on this program to almost $1.2 billion. 
This is money that would not have been available without the careful management of the economy. With the right policy settings and Budget priorities, the Federal Government has been able to provide billions more for the nation's schools. 
Only the Liberal-National Coalition has the economic management experience to ensure that Australia's schools continue to be well-funded and well resourced. 
[ends]  Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.1Mb - 135secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Stuart for your warm words of introduction. Councillor Pat Morris, the Mayor of Gosnells, Marie Taylor; thank you very much for that very warm and generous welcome, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is nice to be back in Gosnells and it's also very nice to be associated with an event which focuses on the local history of a particular part of Australia. History, particularly Australian history is a bit of a preoccupation of mine. I think we've fallen into bad habits about Australian history over the last generation. I think we've lost the art, to a very large extent, of telling the Australian story as a narrative and as a story of achievement as well as of course a story that contains its blemishes and its negative aspects. But it is true as the old saying goes that how can we possibly properly chart the future of this country unless we have a true understanding of where we have come from. 
And that is why at a national level I have been pushing very hard to have restored to the school curricula at the various state education department levels the teaching of Australian history with a proper sense of perspective and a proper narrative. Part of understanding the national story is to understand the local story and I am delighted that there is a focus, as demonstrated by the posters that are here, the displays that are here, there is a focus on the 100 years of the history of this part of Australia.
We are a wonderfully homogenous people. We, for all of the differences we have and the enormous distances that is represented by the Australian continent, there is a remarkable consistency and a pleasing similarity in outlook and attitude and mood of Australians as I find as I move around the country day after day, week after week and meet different groups in different parts of our nation. But for all of that wonderful harmony and consistency, there are shades and subtleties and differences and they're nice and they ought to be preserved and they ought to be remembered. And part of what this city is doing is, particularly in its centenary year, is recalling what Gosnells was like 100 years ago with what parts of Western Australia, this part of Perth were like 100 years ago and the story of the experience of this community over the last 100 years. 
Because that is part of the Australian story and the Australian story is an extraordinary one, particularly when you think that you can count on the fingers of your two hands and still have a few left over, the number of countries that have been continuously democratic for the last 100 years and Australia is one of them. It's one of the things that we don't talk about enough. It's one of those things that Australians are not, many Australians aren't even conscious of. And that although, as I acknowledge we have made our share of mistakes and we have our blemishes like any other country, we also have a very inspiring and a very positive story to tell. 
So I am delighted to be associated in a small way, and my Government, and the Mayor was kind enough to acknowledge the contribution of $275,000 out of the Community Partnerships Program. Stuart lobbied very hard on behalf of the community in order to secure that grant for the opening of the Treetop walk. I've had an opportunity of sampling it, and the Mayor has told me in no uncertain terms, left me in no doubt, as to the world respect and acclaim, particularly for the way in which it's been designed to assist people with disabilities. And I think that's a wonderful earnest of the generosity and the decency of this local community.
There are just two other things that I want to say. It is undeniably the case that we here in Australia and most particularly in Western Australia, are going through very strong economic conditions. We have the lowest unemployment for more than 30 years and this state is literally booming. But we must also remember that amidst all of that there are still people who miss out and part of the responsibility and the obligation of a local community is to extend a helping hand to them. Local communities can do it with a lot of effort and a lot of grit and a lot of volunteers but they do need assistance from governments at both the state and the federal level. And we do need to approach so many of these things in a spirit of partnership and cooperation. And on a micro level here in Gosnells we're doing it with this wonderful Treetop walk. I know the local council is investing quite a bit in it, and the Federal Government has made its contribution and that's all been brought together by the very good offices of your local member.
And that's really the last thing I want to say. And I do want to say what a wonderfully energetic, hardworking local representative you have in Stuart. He's represented you in the national Parliament since 2004. He does care about the community, he constantly beats a track to the doors of Ministers and to the door of the Prime Minister. He doesn't get everything he wants although he gets a big percentage of what he wants. But he operates on the ambit claim principle that you ask for a lot for your community, perhaps more than you expect to get, and he does very well. But he's a very good local representative and I would like to very warmly commend him to you and say how very happy I am to be here again. 
I have been here on several occasions and I have met representatives of this wonderful city in Canberra. And it really is of enormous pleasure and it's been very nice to walk along that walk and to meet so many of you. And I hope to have the opportunity of saying hello to quite a few of you when the formalities have completed. But thank you very, very much for having me, and I think I have to pull a string with the Mayor and the local member. But ladies and gentlemen thank you very much. It's nice to be with you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Stuart for your warm words of introduction. Councillor Pat Morris, the Mayor of Gosnells, Marie Taylor; thank you very much for that very warm and generous welcome, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is nice to be back in Gosnells and it's also very nice to be associated with an event which focuses on the local history of a particular part of Australia. History, particularly Australian history is a bit of a preoccupation of mine. I think we've fallen into bad habits about Australian history over the last generation. I think we've lost the art, to a very large extent, of telling the Australian story as a narrative and as a story of achievement as well as of course a story that contains its blemishes and its negative aspects. But it is true as the old saying goes that how can we possibly properly chart the future of this country unless we have a true understanding of where we have come from. 
And that is why at a national level I have been pushing very hard to have restored to the school curricula at the various state education department levels the teaching of Australian history with a proper sense of perspective and a proper narrative. Part of understanding the national story is to understand the local story and I am delighted that there is a focus, as demonstrated by the posters that are here, the displays that are here, there is a focus on the 100 years of the history of this part of Australia.
We are a wonderfully homogenous people. We, for all of the differences we have and the enormous distances that is represented by the Australian continent, there is a remarkable consistency and a pleasing similarity in outlook and attitude and mood of Australians as I find as I move around the country day after day, week after week and meet different groups in different parts of our nation. But for all of that wonderful harmony and consistency, there are shades and subtleties and differences and they're nice and they ought to be preserved and they ought to be remembered. And part of what this city is doing is, particularly in its centenary year, is recalling what Gosnells was like 100 years ago with what parts of Western Australia, this part of Perth were like 100 years ago and the story of the experience of this community over the last 100 years. 
Because that is part of the Australian story and the Australian story is an extraordinary one, particularly when you think that you can count on the fingers of your two hands and still have a few left over, the number of countries that have been continuously democratic for the last 100 years and Australia is one of them. It's one of the things that we don't talk about enough. It's one of those things that Australians are not, many Australians aren't even conscious of. And that although, as I acknowledge we have made our share of mistakes and we have our blemishes like any other country, we also have a very inspiring and a very positive story to tell. 
So I am delighted to be associated in a small way, and my Government, and the Mayor was kind enough to acknowledge the contribution of $275,000 out of the Community Partnerships Program. Stuart lobbied very hard on behalf of the community in order to secure that grant for the opening of the Treetop walk. I've had an opportunity of sampling it, and the Mayor has told me in no uncertain terms, left me in no doubt, as to the world respect and acclaim, particularly for the way in which it's been designed to assist people with disabilities. And I think that's a wonderful earnest of the generosity and the decency of this local community.
There are just two other things that I want to say. It is undeniably the case that we here in Australia and most particularly in Western Australia, are going through very strong economic conditions. We have the lowest unemployment for more than 30 years and this state is literally booming. But we must also remember that amidst all of that there are still people who miss out and part of the responsibility and the obligation of a local community is to extend a helping hand to them. Local communities can do it with a lot of effort and a lot of grit and a lot of volunteers but they do need assistance from governments at both the state and the federal level. And we do need to approach so many of these things in a spirit of partnership and cooperation. And on a micro level here in Gosnells we're doing it with this wonderful Treetop walk. I know the local council is investing quite a bit in it, and the Federal Government has made its contribution and that's all been brought together by the very good offices of your local member.
And that's really the last thing I want to say. And I do want to say what a wonderfully energetic, hardworking local representative you have in Stuart. He's represented you in the national Parliament since 2004. He does care about the community, he constantly beats a track to the doors of Ministers and to the door of the Prime Minister. He doesn't get everything he wants although he gets a big percentage of what he wants. But he operates on the ambit claim principle that you ask for a lot for your community, perhaps more than you expect to get, and he does very well. But he's a very good local representative and I would like to very warmly commend him to you and say how very happy I am to be here again. 
I have been here on several occasions and I have met representatives of this wonderful city in Canberra. And it really is of enormous pleasure and it's been very nice to walk along that walk and to meet so many of you. And I hope to have the opportunity of saying hello to quite a few of you when the formalities have completed. But thank you very, very much for having me, and I think I have to pull a string with the Mayor and the local member. But ladies and gentlemen thank you very much. It's nice to be with you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Luke, Mr Neil Smith, Senator David Johnston, my fellow Australians.  I am very happy indeed to be at this community gathering, to look around at this wonderful roll up of people and when I look around I think of the great volunteer community spirit and community effort that holds our nation together.  Earlier this morning I was down at Scarborough Beach honouring the contribution, I wished I could have been having a swim actually, but I had to, sort of, remain in my suit for subsequent events, but honouring the contribution of the surf lifesaving movement to our nation.  If there is anything that's as Australian as the gum tree, it is the Surf Life Saving movement. It's one of those organisations that brings together all the enthusiasm, the love of the outdoors, sport, volunteer community effort and also a commitment to one's fellow Australians. And I look around this room and I am reminded of the many community organisations, I am reminded of the community contribution made by the churches of our nation and I thank our host for the contribution that they make not only to the spiritual wellbeing of Australia but also to looking after the less fortunate in our community. 
I am actually here amongst other things to say a word or two in praise of the man who has just been good enough to introduce me.  Luke is a person who represents the ideal of service, as well.  He served in the Australian Federal Police, he served in the Australian Defence Forces, he has a very deep community involvement. He has raised or is in the process of raising a family, he in other words is very much part of the mainstream of this community. And it's a community of volunteers, it's a community which is steeped in the great Australian tradition of helping one another to build a better community. And this country, as it enters the early stages of the 21st Century, has an enormous amount to be pleased about. We are admired around the world, we are admired because of what we have achieved and we are also admired because of who we are. We are a freedom loving country. You can count on the fingers of both hands the number of nations in the world that have remained continuously democratic over the last 100 years.  Surf Life Saving in Australia is 100 years old this year.  During that 100 years Australia has been one of only, arguably, six or seven countries that have been continuously democratic through the whole of that period.  We don't think about that very much, we take it for granted, we don't talk about it enough but we really should.  When I hear people bagging Australia I get annoyed, I get very annoyed and I think of the fact that we've been a beacon of freedom and hope (inaudible) people around the world; that we attract people from the four corners of the world, why?  Because they want to live in Australia and adopt Australians ways, that's why they wanted to come to this country.  
We've got good people from everywhere, this is a country that runs a non-discriminatory immigration policy. All we ask of people who come to this country is that they give their first and top love to this country's values and its aspiration.  We don't ask people who come from another land to lose a place in their heart for the country in which they were born, that is only human and to expect that of anybody is to be unfair and unreasonable. I think most people who come to this country want it the way I describe it.  They come here because they want to be an Australian they don't come here to remain somebody else.  But they would like to keep an affection and a connection with their own culture and that's exactly as it should be and that has been the great success of this country.  So we are a nation that ought to be very proud not only of what we have achieved, but we ought to be very proud of who we are. And when you go around the world as I do a lot, we are seen as energetic, we are seen as people who love sport and we are seen as people who will have a go, we are seen as people who stick by their friends even when the going gets tough because that's what friendship and mateship is all about.  And we are also a group of people who are remarkably self-reliant and resilient. And we are also a nation that has a great sense of balance, we don't go over the top.  We often have debates in other countries about whether something should be run by the government or whether it should be entirely run by the private sector and in Australia we seem to get the thing pretty well balanced.  Those things that the Government ought to do, we let the Government do and those things that private citizens and business ought to do, we let private citizens and business do. And in some areas like health and education we have a mix of the two and we get the balance right and that's where I think we are better anybody else and I can safely say that here because I am not going to get anybody to disagree.  
You grope in this political life to find something to say that everybody supports. Sometimes it gets a bit difficult I can assure you, you know, once or twice, a few years it gets a bit difficult (inaudible).  But my friends we do have that sense of balance. I mean, in education, and I was reminded of as I came in here this morning, I met children from public schools, government schools and I met children from independents schools. That represents the freedom of choice that this country is good at and the balance that this country is good at.  I went to a government school, my whole education was at a government school in Sydney; government schools in Sydney and I am (inaudible) and I am forever grateful to the New South Wales education system for the experience I had there.  I believe that parents should have the right to choose the school their children go to.  I think it's a fundamental, sacred right of Australian parents. If they want to send their children to a government school that's good, if they want to send their children to an independent school, that is equally good.  So we have a sense of balance and we support both of them.  We make sure we underpin it with a strong public education system, but we make sure we have a balance, we provide well for all the (inaudible) schools.  
It's the same with our health system, we have a system called Medicare which I think works very well; very, very well indeed. I tell you what if you're battling, don't get sick in any country other than Australia. It really is a better country with its health system than any that I can think of.  I often look at the comparison between Europe and America, I mean there is a lot of things about America I admire, there's a lot of things about America I don't admire and I don't admire the fact that they seem to have a pretty mean social security safety net. People fall through the cracks and they have too many people in jail, they have large prison populations.  I think part of that is due to the fact that their social security system is not as good as it should be but then on the other hand, some countries in Europe have a social security system that encourages people to believe that the state owes them a living from cradle to grave and I think that's equally bad, equally bad. Because people who get locked into welfare and welfare-dependency all of their lives, they have no initiative to get out and look after themselves and they pass it down from generation to generation to generation.  
Now the genius of this country is the sense of balance that it has been able to achieve and balance is a very good thing.  It sort of, you know, keeps you out of trouble in all sorts of circumstances, having a sense of balance and it can be very useful in certain sports and it can also be very, very useful in politics and we are people who look for balance, we don't like fanatics in this country.  When people come along with some fanatical solution I always, sort of, go like this and say to myself I better be careful of what this bloke's talking about because we don't like fanaticism in Australia. But we do like a sense of balance and that is one of the great things about our nation. And what keeps our community together is that we have the Government doing things that it can do well, we have the volunteer organisations doing the things that it can do well and we have the business community playing a very major role. And one of the programs that I'm very, very proud of, that I've been particularly interested in and responsible for over the last 10 years, was the Federal Government's Tough on Drugs Strategy. And I took the view about... back 1997 that the Federal Government had to do more about fighting the scourge of drugs in our community. And we have to provide more money to our law enforcement agencies, both the federal police and the state police, who do a wonderful job in catching people who traffic in misery and death, for their fellow citizens. The full force of the law should be brought to bear on them. And we also had to do more to educate people against the horrors of drug taking and drug abuse and we also had to provide more rehabilitation and help for people who wanted to break the habit but couldn't find the support services to help them do so. So we've invested well over $1 billion in that program over the past years and we're actually seeing some results. We've actually seen a significant decline in the number of deaths from heroin overdoses. And the other fascinating thing is that we have seen a turnaround in the attitude of the public towards the use marijuana. I can remember in 1998 I said that we should have a zero tolerance attitude towards marijuana and I was derided. Even some people in my own political party said he's an old fuddy-duddy, he doesn't understand. The community understands and a survey indicated that the young of this country increasingly understand that marijuana abuse....marijuana use, not abuse, use, use, leads to depression, schizophrenia, to all sorts of disabling conditions and often extreme violence, and ultimately death and a great deal of sorrow amongst families.
Now I mention these thing because once again in that program we have a sense of balance. We balance the community concern, we marshal the commitment of the law enforcement agencies, we work very closely with the state governments. Didn't matter what political persuasion the state government was, we reached agreement, we have this diversionary program where somebody as a result of drug taking had their first contact with the law, the court, the system actually said well look make you've got a choice, you either take a rehabilitation course or we'll put you towards the jail, slammer, whatever euphemism you want to use for it and that program has worked extremely well. And I just think it's another example of the great sense of balance that this country has been able to achieve and I'm fascinated to see that over a period of time the community's attitude towards marijuana use and so forth that has altered and altered for the good. But when I'm talking about drugs, and I'll finish talking about it on this point, we still have a long way to go. The challenge represented by ice and by amphetamines is the new drug challenge and the new drug scourge. And I think it's a campaign that we should never tire of waging. You only stop the fight, you only exit the field when you've won it and we are still a long way from that but I think we are making progress.
The last thing I want to say to you my friends is that we have a lot of debate in this country, some of it gets a little complicated, important though it is, we have a lot of debate about economic policy. And economic policy is very important because it's what keeps the nation going, it provides the taxes that people and companies pay which gives the Government the wherewithal to provide the services that we all want. But we've got to have some kind of human individual measurement of good economic policy and the best one that I can think of, and the best measure of whether the policy is working or not, is how successful we are in providing jobs to all of the people who want them. And right at the moment we have the lowest unemployment rate in this country for 32 years. 32 years; and yesterday I had a look at some figures....no the day before yesterday, I had a look at some figures about the long term unemployed. Now these are people who have been out of work for one, two, three sometimes four years and what the information I looked at showed was that the long term unemployment level in Australia, now, is the lowest it has been since separate figures for long term unemployed began to be compiled and published in the 1980s. And last year the number of long term unemployed people in Australia declined by no less than 24.7 per cent. It was almost a one quarter reduction, and what that means is that we are really eating in to the hardcore of unemployed in this country. I think that's wonderful because in the end there's no better measure, you can have all the fancy speeches, and graphs and statistics and so forth but good economic policy is not an end in itself, it's only a good thing if it produces a good result and if it produces the good result of everybody who wants a job being able to get one, I think we're making progress. And indeed Western Australia is remarkable, it's an amazing place (inaudible) carrying the rest of the country, I understand all of that and, you know, this is the fourth day of my current visit to Perth and I know exactly how you all feel, and you've got right to feel that way because you are making a massive contribution to our national welfare. And, of course, since I've been here the amazing (inaudible) I have about employment is that people kind of can't find enough people to employ. And, I mean, in a way it's a problem for some businesses, but gee, it's a great problem for a nation to have and it is infinitely better then the reverse where you can't find enough jobs for the people who want them.
So if you think that's a plug for the good economic policies of the Howard Government, you're right. It's is a plug for the good economic policies of the Howard Government, I think I've got some right to put in that plug because in the end that is what it's all about, it's providing some jobs, and hope, and family security and family stability for people. Now jobs aren't everything, money isn't everything, I accept all of that. Life is more than just economics but it's very hard, particularly for families, if the sense of job insecurity is there all the time and it can be so corrosive of the unity, and the stability and the affection within a family. So that's why I think that link and that dividend is so absolutely wonderful.
I've said enough, my friends it's great to be here, I do, of course, very warmly commend Luke to you, he's a very fine man, he brings a lot of experience, he brings a lot of commitment and he brings a lot of understanding of this community and I think he'll make a wonderful political parliamentary representative for you, if that is something that you are inclined to support. I'll just put it in a very gentle and polite way such as that and, I know, a bipartisan community gathering, but he really is a first class person. I warmly commend him to you and I thank you very, very much for coming along.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Luke, Mr Neil Smith, Senator David Johnston, my fellow Australians.  I am very happy indeed to be at this community gathering, to look around at this wonderful roll up of people and when I look around I think of the great volunteer community spirit and community effort that holds our nation together.  Earlier this morning I was down at Scarborough Beach honouring the contribution, I wished I could have been having a swim actually, but I had to, sort of, remain in my suit for subsequent events, but honouring the contribution of the surf lifesaving movement to our nation.  If there is anything that's as Australian as the gum tree, it is the Surf Life Saving movement. It's one of those organisations that brings together all the enthusiasm, the love of the outdoors, sport, volunteer community effort and also a commitment to one's fellow Australians. And I look around this room and I am reminded of the many community organisations, I am reminded of the community contribution made by the churches of our nation and I thank our host for the contribution that they make not only to the spiritual wellbeing of Australia but also to looking after the less fortunate in our community. 
I am actually here amongst other things to say a word or two in praise of the man who has just been good enough to introduce me.  Luke is a person who represents the ideal of service, as well.  He served in the Australian Federal Police, he served in the Australian Defence Forces, he has a very deep community involvement. He has raised or is in the process of raising a family, he in other words is very much part of the mainstream of this community. And it's a community of volunteers, it's a community which is steeped in the great Australian tradition of helping one another to build a better community. And this country, as it enters the early stages of the 21st Century, has an enormous amount to be pleased about. We are admired around the world, we are admired because of what we have achieved and we are also admired because of who we are. We are a freedom loving country. You can count on the fingers of both hands the number of nations in the world that have remained continuously democratic over the last 100 years.  Surf Life Saving in Australia is 100 years old this year.  During that 100 years Australia has been one of only, arguably, six or seven countries that have been continuously democratic through the whole of that period.  We don't think about that very much, we take it for granted, we don't talk about it enough but we really should.  When I hear people bagging Australia I get annoyed, I get very annoyed and I think of the fact that we've been a beacon of freedom and hope (inaudible) people around the world; that we attract people from the four corners of the world, why?  Because they want to live in Australia and adopt Australians ways, that's why they wanted to come to this country.  
We've got good people from everywhere, this is a country that runs a non-discriminatory immigration policy. All we ask of people who come to this country is that they give their first and top love to this country's values and its aspiration.  We don't ask people who come from another land to lose a place in their heart for the country in which they were born, that is only human and to expect that of anybody is to be unfair and unreasonable. I think most people who come to this country want it the way I describe it.  They come here because they want to be an Australian they don't come here to remain somebody else.  But they would like to keep an affection and a connection with their own culture and that's exactly as it should be and that has been the great success of this country.  So we are a nation that ought to be very proud not only of what we have achieved, but we ought to be very proud of who we are. And when you go around the world as I do a lot, we are seen as energetic, we are seen as people who love sport and we are seen as people who will have a go, we are seen as people who stick by their friends even when the going gets tough because that's what friendship and mateship is all about.  And we are also a group of people who are remarkably self-reliant and resilient. And we are also a nation that has a great sense of balance, we don't go over the top.  We often have debates in other countries about whether something should be run by the government or whether it should be entirely run by the private sector and in Australia we seem to get the thing pretty well balanced.  Those things that the Government ought to do, we let the Government do and those things that private citizens and business ought to do, we let private citizens and business do. And in some areas like health and education we have a mix of the two and we get the balance right and that's where I think we are better anybody else and I can safely say that here because I am not going to get anybody to disagree.  
You grope in this political life to find something to say that everybody supports. Sometimes it gets a bit difficult I can assure you, you know, once or twice, a few years it gets a bit difficult (inaudible).  But my friends we do have that sense of balance. I mean, in education, and I was reminded of as I came in here this morning, I met children from public schools, government schools and I met children from independents schools. That represents the freedom of choice that this country is good at and the balance that this country is good at.  I went to a government school, my whole education was at a government school in Sydney; government schools in Sydney and I am (inaudible) and I am forever grateful to the New South Wales education system for the experience I had there.  I believe that parents should have the right to choose the school their children go to.  I think it's a fundamental, sacred right of Australian parents. If they want to send their children to a government school that's good, if they want to send their children to an independent school, that is equally good.  So we have a sense of balance and we support both of them.  We make sure we underpin it with a strong public education system, but we make sure we have a balance, we provide well for all the (inaudible) schools.  
It's the same with our health system, we have a system called Medicare which I think works very well; very, very well indeed. I tell you what if you're battling, don't get sick in any country other than Australia. It really is a better country with its health system than any that I can think of.  I often look at the comparison between Europe and America, I mean there is a lot of things about America I admire, there's a lot of things about America I don't admire and I don't admire the fact that they seem to have a pretty mean social security safety net. People fall through the cracks and they have too many people in jail, they have large prison populations.  I think part of that is due to the fact that their social security system is not as good as it should be but then on the other hand, some countries in Europe have a social security system that encourages people to believe that the state owes them a living from cradle to grave and I think that's equally bad, equally bad. Because people who get locked into welfare and welfare-dependency all of their lives, they have no initiative to get out and look after themselves and they pass it down from generation to generation to generation.  
Now the genius of this country is the sense of balance that it has been able to achieve and balance is a very good thing.  It sort of, you know, keeps you out of trouble in all sorts of circumstances, having a sense of balance and it can be very useful in certain sports and it can also be very, very useful in politics and we are people who look for balance, we don't like fanatics in this country.  When people come along with some fanatical solution I always, sort of, go like this and say to myself I better be careful of what this bloke's talking about because we don't like fanaticism in Australia. But we do like a sense of balance and that is one of the great things about our nation. And what keeps our community together is that we have the Government doing things that it can do well, we have the volunteer organisations doing the things that it can do well and we have the business community playing a very major role. And one of the programs that I'm very, very proud of, that I've been particularly interested in and responsible for over the last 10 years, was the Federal Government's Tough on Drugs Strategy. And I took the view about... back 1997 that the Federal Government had to do more about fighting the scourge of drugs in our community. And we have to provide more money to our law enforcement agencies, both the federal police and the state police, who do a wonderful job in catching people who traffic in misery and death, for their fellow citizens. The full force of the law should be brought to bear on them. And we also had to do more to educate people against the horrors of drug taking and drug abuse and we also had to provide more rehabilitation and help for people who wanted to break the habit but couldn't find the support services to help them do so. So we've invested well over $1 billion in that program over the past years and we're actually seeing some results. We've actually seen a significant decline in the number of deaths from heroin overdoses. And the other fascinating thing is that we have seen a turnaround in the attitude of the public towards the use marijuana. I can remember in 1998 I said that we should have a zero tolerance attitude towards marijuana and I was derided. Even some people in my own political party said he's an old fuddy-duddy, he doesn't understand. The community understands and a survey indicated that the young of this country increasingly understand that marijuana abuse....marijuana use, not abuse, use, use, leads to depression, schizophrenia, to all sorts of disabling conditions and often extreme violence, and ultimately death and a great deal of sorrow amongst families.
Now I mention these thing because once again in that program we have a sense of balance. We balance the community concern, we marshal the commitment of the law enforcement agencies, we work very closely with the state governments. Didn't matter what political persuasion the state government was, we reached agreement, we have this diversionary program where somebody as a result of drug taking had their first contact with the law, the court, the system actually said well look make you've got a choice, you either take a rehabilitation course or we'll put you towards the jail, slammer, whatever euphemism you want to use for it and that program has worked extremely well. And I just think it's another example of the great sense of balance that this country has been able to achieve and I'm fascinated to see that over a period of time the community's attitude towards marijuana use and so forth that has altered and altered for the good. But when I'm talking about drugs, and I'll finish talking about it on this point, we still have a long way to go. The challenge represented by ice and by amphetamines is the new drug challenge and the new drug scourge. And I think it's a campaign that we should never tire of waging. You only stop the fight, you only exit the field when you've won it and we are still a long way from that but I think we are making progress.
The last thing I want to say to you my friends is that we have a lot of debate in this country, some of it gets a little complicated, important though it is, we have a lot of debate about economic policy. And economic policy is very important because it's what keeps the nation going, it provides the taxes that people and companies pay which gives the Government the wherewithal to provide the services that we all want. But we've got to have some kind of human individual measurement of good economic policy and the best one that I can think of, and the best measure of whether the policy is working or not, is how successful we are in providing jobs to all of the people who want them. And right at the moment we have the lowest unemployment rate in this country for 32 years. 32 years; and yesterday I had a look at some figures....no the day before yesterday, I had a look at some figures about the long term unemployed. Now these are people who have been out of work for one, two, three sometimes four years and what the information I looked at showed was that the long term unemployment level in Australia, now, is the lowest it has been since separate figures for long term unemployed began to be compiled and published in the 1980s. And last year the number of long term unemployed people in Australia declined by no less than 24.7 per cent. It was almost a one quarter reduction, and what that means is that we are really eating in to the hardcore of unemployed in this country. I think that's wonderful because in the end there's no better measure, you can have all the fancy speeches, and graphs and statistics and so forth but good economic policy is not an end in itself, it's only a good thing if it produces a good result and if it produces the good result of everybody who wants a job being able to get one, I think we're making progress. And indeed Western Australia is remarkable, it's an amazing place (inaudible) carrying the rest of the country, I understand all of that and, you know, this is the fourth day of my current visit to Perth and I know exactly how you all feel, and you've got right to feel that way because you are making a massive contribution to our national welfare. And, of course, since I've been here the amazing (inaudible) I have about employment is that people kind of can't find enough people to employ. And, I mean, in a way it's a problem for some businesses, but gee, it's a great problem for a nation to have and it is infinitely better then the reverse where you can't find enough jobs for the people who want them.
So if you think that's a plug for the good economic policies of the Howard Government, you're right. It's is a plug for the good economic policies of the Howard Government, I think I've got some right to put in that plug because in the end that is what it's all about, it's providing some jobs, and hope, and family security and family stability for people. Now jobs aren't everything, money isn't everything, I accept all of that. Life is more than just economics but it's very hard, particularly for families, if the sense of job insecurity is there all the time and it can be so corrosive of the unity, and the stability and the affection within a family. So that's why I think that link and that dividend is so absolutely wonderful.
I've said enough, my friends it's great to be here, I do, of course, very warmly commend Luke to you, he's a very fine man, he brings a lot of experience, he brings a lot of commitment and he brings a lot of understanding of this community and I think he'll make a wonderful political parliamentary representative for you, if that is something that you are inclined to support. I'll just put it in a very gentle and polite way such as that and, I know, a bipartisan community gathering, but he really is a first class person. I warmly commend him to you and I thank you very, very much for coming along.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Geoff, my parliamentary colleagues both State and Federal, Bruce Baird the Federal Member for Cook where this gathering takes place and can I say it's always great to be back in the Shire.  It's a great place federally it's a totally sound place and after the 24th of March it is going to be an even sounder place at a state level. 
My fellow Australians, the people of New South Wales want a change at the next election.  It is our task over the next four weeks to match the aspirations of the people of this state.  We can do it, you can do it, you can bring about a change of government.  The swing needed may be great but can I tell you the mood for change is deep and immense and passionate. There has to be something wrong with a Premier who is no longer proud of his own party. I am very happy to stand in front of that name that says Liberal, and I always will.  I will never walk away from own party, and I will always be accountable directly for the things that my party has done under my stewardship and when I have been a member of that decision-making process. But friends we have a task ahead of us, but it is a task that can be accomplished. 
Mr Iemma keeps pleading excuses; he says that New South Wales, whose economy is lagging behind the economies of other states despite the strong economic management at a national level over the last 10 years, Mr Iemma says New South Wales has been held back by interest rates.  I can remember when New South Wales was held back by interest rates a few years ago when they were 17 per cent and 21 per cent for business under his mate Mr Keating. It's funny about this, it really is.  He says New South Wales is being held back by the interest rates by why aren't the other states being held back?  Because you don't have different interest rates in New South Wales.  I've just been to Western Australia, I spent four days there and I can promise you Western Australia is not being held back by interest rates.  Queensland's not being held back by interest rates. Victoria's not being held back by interest rates.  In other words what is happening here is despite the best ever economic management since World War II at a federal level, the New South Wales Government has dropped the ball and by its own individual decisions, all its own work, it has put a break on economic growth, jobs growth and economic development in this state.  
Now ladies and gentlemen, it is in our hands and within our capacity, with our enthusiasm and our commitment over the weeks ahead.  I've been in politics a long time and I can promise you the people of New South Wales want a change.  There is an unarguable feeling in the community of this state that the current government is incompetent.  There's no argument about that and our task is to convert that feeling with our enthusiasm and our commitment.  And can I say on behalf of all of my federal colleagues that I will do everything I can and work as hard as I can over the next four weeks to help Peter and Andrew who are great Coalition partners, and the strength of the Coalition here in New South Wales is one of the ingredients of success, just as the strength of the Coalition federally has been one of our enduring successes and hallmarks over the last decade. 
I will do everything I can and I know all of my federal colleagues will do the same to bring about a change of government and the election that a Debnam-Stoner government to govern New South Wales, to get New South Wales back in front, to fix things in New South Wales and in that spirit, my friends, my fellow Australians, I invite you to welcome Peter and Deborah and Peter's leadership team.   


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Geoff, my parliamentary colleagues both State and Federal, Bruce Baird the Federal Member for Cook where this gathering takes place and can I say it's always great to be back in the Shire.  It's a great place federally it's a totally sound place and after the 24th of March it is going to be an even sounder place at a state level. 
My fellow Australians, the people of New South Wales want a change at the next election.  It is our task over the next four weeks to match the aspirations of the people of this state.  We can do it, you can do it, you can bring about a change of government.  The swing needed may be great but can I tell you the mood for change is deep and immense and passionate. There has to be something wrong with a Premier who is no longer proud of his own party. I am very happy to stand in front of that name that says Liberal, and I always will.  I will never walk away from own party, and I will always be accountable directly for the things that my party has done under my stewardship and when I have been a member of that decision-making process. But friends we have a task ahead of us, but it is a task that can be accomplished. 
Mr Iemma keeps pleading excuses; he says that New South Wales, whose economy is lagging behind the economies of other states despite the strong economic management at a national level over the last 10 years, Mr Iemma says New South Wales has been held back by interest rates.  I can remember when New South Wales was held back by interest rates a few years ago when they were 17 per cent and 21 per cent for business under his mate Mr Keating. It's funny about this, it really is.  He says New South Wales is being held back by the interest rates by why aren't the other states being held back?  Because you don't have different interest rates in New South Wales.  I've just been to Western Australia, I spent four days there and I can promise you Western Australia is not being held back by interest rates.  Queensland's not being held back by interest rates. Victoria's not being held back by interest rates.  In other words what is happening here is despite the best ever economic management since World War II at a federal level, the New South Wales Government has dropped the ball and by its own individual decisions, all its own work, it has put a break on economic growth, jobs growth and economic development in this state.  
Now ladies and gentlemen, it is in our hands and within our capacity, with our enthusiasm and our commitment over the weeks ahead.  I've been in politics a long time and I can promise you the people of New South Wales want a change.  There is an unarguable feeling in the community of this state that the current government is incompetent.  There's no argument about that and our task is to convert that feeling with our enthusiasm and our commitment.  And can I say on behalf of all of my federal colleagues that I will do everything I can and work as hard as I can over the next four weeks to help Peter and Andrew who are great Coalition partners, and the strength of the Coalition here in New South Wales is one of the ingredients of success, just as the strength of the Coalition federally has been one of our enduring successes and hallmarks over the last decade. 
I will do everything I can and I know all of my federal colleagues will do the same to bring about a change of government and the election that a Debnam-Stoner government to govern New South Wales, to get New South Wales back in front, to fix things in New South Wales and in that spirit, my friends, my fellow Australians, I invite you to welcome Peter and Deborah and Peter's leadership team.   


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.4Mb - 150secs)
The trillion dollar Australian economy has been growing and improving for more than a decade, due in no small measure to my Government's careful economic management.
We have delivered surplus Budgets, paid off Labor's $96 billion debt and introduced major reforms to keep the economy strong.
A strong economy means that we can afford to cut taxes, to spend billions of dollars on major national projects like rescuing the Murray-Darling Basin and to provide benefits for families and importantly, create jobs; and this has meant that unemployment is now at a 32 year low.
While my Government's reforms have delivered much of the prosperity we now enjoy, we cannot become complacent. We must maintain the momentum of economic reform in order to ensure that the economy continues to grow.
The Labor Party has falsely claimed that the Australian economy can effectively run on auto pilot, that in some way it's all due to forces beyond the control or influence of governments and as a result they have no blueprint to ensure future economic prosperity for Australia.
They would have people believe that on economic management there is really no difference between the Liberal-National Coalition and the Labor Party.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  From taxation reform to the waterfront and to the workplace, Labor has said no to every major reform put forward by this government. 
Labor's workplace alternative would bring back the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws for small business.  One million Australian Workplace Agreements would be at threat if the Labor Party comes to office.  My visit to Western Australia last week reminded me that more than 200,000 employees of that state are employed under AWAs. The prosperity and stable future of many of those would be put at risk by Labor's commitment, driven by union influence, to get rid of Australian Workplace Agreements.
Labor might try to sneak by on the economy with bland generalisations that there is really no difference between the two sides of politics, but the facts tell us otherwise.  Labor fought the reforms of the past 10 years which have given us much of the prosperity we now enjoy and Labor in government would undo much of the good work of the past decade and put our prosperity at risk.  
[ends]
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2.4Mb - 150secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.34Mb - 153secs)
The trillion dollar Australian economy has been growing and improving for more than a decade, due in no small measure to my Government's careful economic management.
We have delivered surplus Budgets, paid off Labor's $96 billion debt and introduced major reforms to keep the economy strong.
A strong economy means that we can afford to cut taxes, to spend billions of dollars on major national projects like rescuing the Murray-Darling Basin and to provide benefits for families and importantly, create jobs; and this has meant that unemployment is now at a 32 year low.
While my Government's reforms have delivered much of the prosperity we now enjoy, we cannot become complacent. We must maintain the momentum of economic reform in order to ensure that the economy continues to grow.
The Labor Party has falsely claimed that the Australian economy can effectively run on auto pilot, that in some way it's all due to forces beyond the control or influence of governments and as a result they have no blueprint to ensure future economic prosperity for Australia.
They would have people believe that on economic management there is really no difference between the Liberal-National Coalition and the Labor Party.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  From taxation reform to the waterfront and to the workplace, Labor has said no to every major reform put forward by this government. 
Labor's workplace alternative would bring back the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws for small business.  One million Australian Workplace Agreements would be at threat if the Labor Party comes to office.  My visit to Western Australia last week reminded me that more than 200,000 employees of that state are employed under AWAs. The prosperity and stable future of many of those would be put at risk by Labor's commitment, driven by union influence, to get rid of Australian Workplace Agreements.
Labor might try to sneak by on the economy with bland generalisations that there is really no difference between the two sides of politics, but the facts tell us otherwise.  Labor fought the reforms of the past 10 years which have given us much of the prosperity we now enjoy and Labor in government would undo much of the good work of the past decade and put our prosperity at risk.  
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.34Mb - 153secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Tom, Julian Leeser, Rob Allan, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen - and my I wish happy birthday to Tom and to thank you very much for the wonderful work you have done in chairing the Menzies Research Institute. And I'm delighted to have this opportunity again to address the Institute on areas of long term important to the political debate in this country. 
Robert Menzies brought to politics a deceptively simple view of government.  He was especially fond of Lord Acton's aphorism that 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Tom, Julian Leeser, Rob Allan, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen - and my I wish happy birthday to Tom and to thank you very much for the wonderful work you have done in chairing the Menzies Research Institute. And I'm delighted to have this opportunity again to address the Institute on areas of long term important to the political debate in this country. 
Robert Menzies brought to politics a deceptively simple view of government.  He was especially fond of Lord Acton's aphorism that 


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2Mb - 125secs)
Good morning. 
My Government's $10 billion plan to tackle national water security will reduce evaporation and wastage of water in Australia's irrigation systems, particularly in the Murray-Darling Basin.
Old, leaky irrigation channels will be piped and lined, drip systems will be installed on farms and the problem of over-allocation will be tackled. This should save more than 3000 gigalitres of water a year.
It is a carefully considered, well-crafted proposal that addresses the major problem of water security in Australia. 
It is a balanced response to the serious problem of water scarcity in rural and regional areas.
By contrast, knee-jerk responses to the problem have the potential to dramatically undermine the farm sector and the many thousands of people it supports.
Recently, a senior Labor figure, Mr Bill Shorten, has proposed that cotton and rice growing in Australia be replaced by less thirsty crops like hemp. Such a plan would have a devastating impact on regional towns and cities in many parts of our country.
With workers in the coal and uranium industries already under threat from some of the more radical plans to tackle climate change coming from people such as Mr Peter Garrett, Australia cannot afford to embrace more radical proposals - just ask the people of Leeton in rural New South Wales who rely on the rice industry.
This country needs balanced, economically viable agriculture. We need a balance in our farm production with perennial crops and annuals like rice and cotton.
My government will never countenance a ban on these important crops.
What is needed to save water is proper pricing policies, a fair water trading system and the investment of billions of dollars to fix irrigation and over-allocation.
[ends]
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 2Mb - 125secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.92Mb - 125secs)
Good morning. 
My Government's $10 billion plan to tackle national water security will reduce evaporation and wastage of water in Australia's irrigation systems, particularly in the Murray-Darling Basin.
Old, leaky irrigation channels will be piped and lined, drip systems will be installed on farms and the problem of over-allocation will be tackled. This should save more than 3000 gigalitres of water a year.
It is a carefully considered, well-crafted proposal that addresses the major problem of water security in Australia. 
It is a balanced response to the serious problem of water scarcity in rural and regional areas.
By contrast, knee-jerk responses to the problem have the potential to dramatically undermine the farm sector and the many thousands of people it supports.
Recently, a senior Labor figure, Mr Bill Shorten, has proposed that cotton and rice growing in Australia be replaced by less thirsty crops like hemp. Such a plan would have a devastating impact on regional towns and cities in many parts of our country.
With workers in the coal and uranium industries already under threat from some of the more radical plans to tackle climate change coming from people such as Mr Peter Garrett, Australia cannot afford to embrace more radical proposals - just ask the people of Leeton in rural New South Wales who rely on the rice industry.
This country needs balanced, economically viable agriculture. We need a balance in our farm production with perennial crops and annuals like rice and cotton.
My government will never countenance a ban on these important crops.
What is needed to save water is proper pricing policies, a fair water trading system and the investment of billions of dollars to fix irrigation and over-allocation.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.92Mb - 125secs)


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 1.8Mb - 112secs)
One of the most important responsibilities of the Commonwealth Government is to provide infrastructure for the future growth and development of our nation.
Yesterday I opened the new Hume Highway Albury Wodonga bypass, which at a cost of $518 million, is the largest infrastructure investment of that kind in regional Australia for many years.
There is, of course, the $10 billion Commonwealth plan to mix the Murray-Darling Basin system and provide long term water security for our nation. We continue to invest increased sums in road construction around the nation, particularly in areas of high population growth.
Later this week there will be announcements made which will greatly enhance the access of Australians to broadband services. These are but some of the infrastructure investments that the Commonwealth is making. They are important to our economic growth and to our future. They are made possible, and they are affordable, because of the strong economic management of the Government over the last 11 years.
If we were still in debt, if we still owed $96 billion, if we were still running budget deficits rather than surpluses we would not be able to afford expenditure of this kind without putting our future economic viability of risk.
The fact that we can do these things is a constant reminder that if the economy is managed well, we can plan for the future with great hope and great optimism.
[ends]
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 1.8Mb - 112secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.71Mb - 112secs)
One of the most important responsibilities of the Commonwealth Government is to provide infrastructure for the future growth and development of our nation.
Yesterday I opened the new Hume Highway Albury Wodonga bypass, which at a cost of $518 million, is the largest infrastructure investment of that kind in regional Australia for many years.
There is, of course, the $10 billion Commonwealth plan to mix the Murray-Darling Basin system and provide long term water security for our nation. We continue to invest increased sums in road construction around the nation, particularly in areas of high population growth.
Later this week there will be announcements made which will greatly enhance the access of Australians to broadband services. These are but some of the infrastructure investments that the Commonwealth is making. They are important to our economic growth and to our future. They are made possible, and they are affordable, because of the strong economic management of the Government over the last 11 years.
If we were still in debt, if we still owed $96 billion, if we were still running budget deficits rather than surpluses we would not be able to afford expenditure of this kind without putting our future economic viability of risk.
The fact that we can do these things is a constant reminder that if the economy is managed well, we can plan for the future with great hope and great optimism.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.71Mb - 112secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Gus, you're very kind, very kind indeed.  Could I, on a necessarily sombre note join Peter Thompson and David Murray in extending to my good friend, the Ambassador for the Republic of Indonesia my condolences on the significant loss of Indonesian lives and the tragedy of the loss of some Australian lives, I think inevitably, as a result of what happened in the accident in Yogyakarta.  It seems Mr Ambassador that our countries have been united in a wave of tragedies. The Bali attack, both the first and second one, the terrible Indonesian / Asian tsunami which exacted such an enormous toll on the citizens of your country and now this latest event. But it brought our two countries closer together and I know that there are so many positive and joyous aspects of our relationship that are very, very important to me and very important to our entire nation.
Your Excellency, the Governor of Victoria, other very distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  I want to thank the Global Foundation for asking me to deliver some reflections tonight on the essence of your discussions over the last couple of days.  There was one phrase in particular that jumped out at me from the documentation that was produced and that is the growing awareness in Australia that we can now get big things done as a nation and I think that did encapsulate the reality and it also captured the sentiment that so many of us now have about our country.  And it is a sentiment that I wholeheartedly endorse and we certainly confront some formidable challenges of an economic, of a security and of an environmental and social kind.
And yet we possess a rare moment of opportunity to forge an even greater era of national development, an era of greater prosperity and greater opportunity. And inevitably I ask myself, what are the things that we need to do in order to translate that opportunity into reality?   They're simple yet they're profound.  Firstly, we need to keep our economy strong because however many speeches we may make that contain phrases saying life is about more than the economy, the reality is that a strong economy gives us a capacity to do so many things.  The second thing is that we need to engage both globally and regionally.  It's inevitable we have an emphasis on our region and I'll say more about that a little later, but we should never lose sight of the fact that historically and culturally, we are very much a citizen of the world and the shaping of this nation owes much to our inheritance of western civilisation and the impact and the enlightenment and the Judaeo/Christian ethic on the formation of our country.   And thirdly I think we need to maintain and reinforce our social cohesion at home; and each of these three objectives is bound up with the other two.  They are self-reinforcing goals, part of a potentially virtuous circle of national progress.
In a speech last week to the Menzies Research Centre I talked about Australia becoming the best country in the world to live, to work, to start a business and to raise a family, and this relies on unlocking the talent and the potential in every home, in every neighbourhood, every place of learning and every workplace.  It does require bold and energetic government.  But it also requires a measure of humility because getting this balance right is the essential art of modern government.  Why do I say this you might ask?  I say it because our future is open-ended, rather than a fixed, pre-determined destination.  It relies as much on the local and the particular as it does on the bold, grand design.
The American writer Virginia Postrel makes this point in her stimulating book, The Future and its Enemies.  She writes and I quote, how the very nature of progress dictates an inherently open, and imperfect, future.  The future will be as grand and as particular as we are.  Our progress as a nation is not something that can be engineered top-down by Australia Inc. or by technocratic design.  It will arise, albeit imperfectly, from the creativity, dispersed knowledge and diverse choices of individual Australians.  Those who crave predictability will be invariably disappointed.  That's why the key to truly successful societies is what I've called in the past well-governed flexibility.  
Above all, it is a well-governed flexibility that has seen Australia reclaim her place in the top rank of OECD countries, where our living standard now exceeds all G-7 countries except the United States.  It fits with our philosophy of government which is to create the conditions for the Australian people to pursue their own dreams and aspirations for a better future.  It's why we believe that a strong economy is the foundation for achieving all our other goals.  In the last 10 years, Australia's economy has experienced sustained growth, with low inflation, historically low interest rates, and a decline of unemployment to its lowest level for more than three decades and a couple of weeks ago I was reminded of just how significant that had been when I was provided with some figures which told me that the long term unemployed in Australia, that's the people who've been out of work for a year or two a three or four, had actually fallen by 24.7 per cent over the last year which indicates that the strong labour market is really eating into the lean meat, if I can put it that way, of our long term unemployed.
It will not surprise you for me to claim - and I think with some justification - that the Government's disciplined economic strategy built on returning the budget to surplus and paying off government debt has in turn opened up new opportunities to get big things done.  Our $10 billion water security plan is a prime example of this.  It's the direct result of sustained growth and strong budget position.  That sort of investment simply would not have been possible 20 years ago, certainly 10 years ago and perhaps not even five years ago.  I remain, incidentally, as I speak here in Melbourne, hopeful, confidently hopeful, the Commonwealth can secure Victoria's agreement to putting in place a truly national approach to managing the Murray-Darling Basin, so crucial to the water security of our country bearing in mind that 70 per cent of the water consumed in Australia is consumed by agriculture and bearing in mind my very strong belief that the great conservation challenge of our age is water security because we can in our generation do something about it which will be realised within the lifetime of the generations around at the present time.  
Of course, we can only afford to make these investments if our economy is strong. Today's reforms I've often said are the foundation for tomorrow's prosperity and economic management as I've also often said in the past is something like participating in a never ending race - you never quite reach the finishing line but daren't stop running hard because somebody will go past you in today's globalised world.  So therefore, reforms such as WorkChoices, Welfare to Work and successive rounds of tax cuts are essential pillars of our future prosperity.  With David Murray present, it would be remiss of me not to mention the Future Fund, another very important plank laying aside today's surpluses for tomorrow's rainy day to use an expression, although it's a bit ironic to use such an expression in the present environment, but it belongs in the Australian idiom to another situation.  
The passage through the parliament last week of generational reforms to superannuation is a further part of a reform agenda which is geared to demographic change, and in accordance with the charter of budget honesty, the Treasurer will this year be releasing the next intergenerational report which is a valuable document to understanding the sort of influences that are going to shape the demands on governments at all levels in the years ahead. A few weeks ago I announced a number of measures in the aged care area to recognise the ongoing, indeed increasing, responsibility we have in that area given the aging of our population.  
But a number of these polices the Government's already implemented to support future economic growth in the face of demographic change are beginning to bear fruit.  We do have already a significantly improved labour force participation, particularly but not only from older workers and we have begun to address in quite a comprehensive way and a lot more rapidly than I thought possible a few years ago the fact that the participation rate in the age cohort of 55 to 64 is alarmingly low in this country compared with the experience of many other countries.  And a strong economy and targeted Government assistance for families, including but not only the maternity payment, have supported a lift, albeit early and tentative, in the birth rate in recent times.
Can I say this illustrates perfectly why getting big things done for the nation can never be totally divorced from the immediate concerns of individuals and families.  By analogy, getting our policies right at home is central to Australia projecting confidently in the world.  And might I say when think of getting big things done in the realm of foreign policy, I can't think of a more compelling illustration of how that has been achieved over the last 10 years than the fact that simultaneously over that period of time this country has developed an even closer relationship with the United States whilst also developing a very strong, constructive and close partnership with China.  In fact if one wanted to shorthand the foreign policy successes of the last 10 years one would say China and the United States, or the United States and China, not competing with each other as is the common but mistaken view, but rather given our position in relation to the two countries, complementing each other and my experience has been and it grows over time that China does not see our closeness to the United States as a negative, rather China sees our closeness to the United States as a profound positive.
If anything, the age of globalisation has magnified the power that Australia derives from assets at home.  Australia's global engagement rests on core national assets; resilient yet adaptable individuals, stable yet responsive institutions, and enduring ideas and values that bind together our diverse yet cohesive society.  We must further develop and play to these strengths if we are to shape our own destiny and not just be a taker of trends set elsewhere.  Australians sometimes downplay our influence on international events, perhaps out of a kind of national self-deprecation.  Australia can and does make a difference on the world stage and we should be confident in doing so and we should reflect on those areas where we have got the balance better than most other countries.  I often think that in areas of education and social welfare, Australia has achieved a better balance between the contributions of the public and private sectors when either on one hand the rather too laissez faire attitude of the United States, which does allow people to slip too frequently through the social security cracks and compounds social tensions and problems, and on the other hand the rather too paternalistic interventionist approach of many countries in Europe.  I don't think there is a better blend between the public and private systems in the area of education than you can find in Australia and I think the same observation can be made with all its imperfections about Australia's health system.
Gus Nossal talked about the importance of our links to the nations of Asia and I said 11 years ago when I became Prime Minister that naturally our foreign policy priorities had to be in our region.  We would pursue an Asia first policy but not an Asia only policy and undoubtedly the rise of Asia - in both economic and political terms - is redrawing the contours of global power.  Asia in coming decades to assume a weight in the global economy that it last held 500 years ago.  The transformation over a period of roughly half a century is quite breathtaking.  By 2030, Asia's share of world GDP is projected to grow to about 48 per cent, compared with just 20 per cent in 1980.  Asia is at the epicentre of a defining trend of our age - the emergence for the first time in history of a truly global middle class.
There are now roughly 400 million middle class citizens in China and India alone.  The World Bank estimates that by 2030 the middle class in the developing world will exceed 1.2 billion which is roughly 15 per cent of the world's population.  The population of more than 30 developing countries is expected to be 40 per cent or more rich and middle class, creating rapidly growing markets for goods and services of particular relevance to countries such as Australia.  This historic development will also exert enormous influence over the course of national and global politics as people demand greater political participation, greater certainty over property rights, better standards of health care and education and stronger environmental stewardship.
One of our great assets in engaging with this process is an outward-looking, hard working and entrepreneurial Australian Diaspora.  At any one time, there are up to one million Australians outside Australia, in all corners of the world.
It's true that increasingly we are living in an increasingly globalised labour market and that competition for global talent is intense.  We in Australia must work hard to attract and retain our share of the best and brightest.  However, I am the last person who gets alarmed by talk about a 


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this audio message (MP3 - 1.3Mb - 80secs)
  I extend my sympathy to the families and friends of those who have died or been injured as a result of Cyclone George in Western Australia.  This cyclone has caused great damage to communities in the far north of the State and the Federal Government is ready to provide reasonable additional help.  
I have just spoken to the West Australian Premier, Mr Carpenter, and offered additional assistance of that normally available under National Disaster Relief Arrangements.
Given the devastation already caused and the potential for further devastation, the Federal Government will provide extra help for people who are seriously injured or whose main place of residence has been destroyed or rendered uninhabitable.
Under these special arrangements the Government will provide $1,000 per adult and $400 per child to help with the immediate impact of the cyclone.  This assistance will come on top of the usual financial help provided by the Commonwealth under natural disaster arrangements.  
Already the Australian Defence Force has offered help if it is required and the Government has also activated a natural disaster response plan which places many government agencies and departments on standby to help if requested by the Government of Western Australia.
Listen to this audio message (MP3 - 1.3Mb - 80secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.74Mb - 113secs)
Good morning.  Last Wednesday, the national accounts - that's the quarterly snapshot of how our economy is going - turned out to be much stronger than most people expected.  Above all they showed the Australian economy has demonstrated enormous resilience in the face of the very severe drought we're now experiencing.  
The fundamentals of our economy remain extremely strong.  Inflation has come down and the economy continues to grow and create real jobs.  Unemployment remains at a 32 year low and Australian workers enjoy increasing real wages supported by higher productivity. 
This strong performance is a remarkable achievement in the face of a one-in-a-100-year drought and a tribute to the Government's economic management and the commitment of all Australians to our economic growth and development.
Another benefit of responsible economic management is the scope it leaves for the Government to spend money on important infrastructure to help maintain the prosperity we now enjoy years into the future.  For example, this week I announced a program to improve access to broadband services, particularly for Australian families and small businesses.  It is one of many infrastructure investments that will be needed to help secure and promote our future economic growth.  
These projects are made possible, and they are affordable, because of the success of the Government in running the economy over the past 11 years.  The fact that we can undertake these projects is a reminder that if the economy is managed well, we can plan for the future with great hope and much optimism.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.74Mb - 113secs)


E&amp;OE...
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 1.8Mb - 115secs)
  Good morning.  Last Wednesday, the national accounts - that's the quarterly snapshot of how our economy is going - turned out to be much stronger than most people expected.  Above all they showed the Australian economy has demonstrated enormous resilience in the face of the very severe drought we're now experiencing.  
The fundamentals of our economy remain extremely strong.  Inflation has come down and the economy continues to grow and create real jobs.  Unemployment remains at a 32 year low and Australian workers enjoy increasing real wages supported by higher productivity. 
This strong performance is a remarkable achievement in the face of a one-in-a-100-year drought and a tribute to the Government's economic management and the commitment of all Australians to our economic growth and development.
Another benefit of responsible economic management is the scope it leaves for the Government to spend money on important infrastructure to help maintain the prosperity we now enjoy years into the future.  For example, this week I announced a program to improve access to broadband services, particularly for Australian families and small businesses.  It is one of many infrastructure investments that will be needed to help secure and promote our future economic growth.  
These projects are made possible, and they are affordable, because of the success of the Government in running the economy over the past 11 years.  The fact that we can undertake these projects is a reminder that if the economy is managed well, we can plan for the future with great hope and much optimism.
[ends]
Listen to this speech (MP3 - 1.8Mb - 115secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.42Mb - 93secs)
The most heart warming benefit to come from the strong jobs market we now have is the way it has reduced the number of long term unemployed, that's people out of work for 12 months or more.  
Between January 2006 and January 2007, the level of long term unemployed in Australia fell by a staggering 24.7 per cent.  It's now at its lowest point since such numbers began to be measured 21 years ago.
This dramatically illustrates how the buoyant labour market is giving new hope and fresh opportunity for those in the community who in the past have found it the hardest to get a job.  
Australia's unemployment rate is now at a 32 year low.  At 4.5 per cent in 2007 compared with a figure with eight in front of it 11 years ago when my government was elected.  
For almost 30 years Australia experienced the depressing situation of too many workers chasing too few jobs.  Now the position is almost the exact reverse, of too few workers available for many of the jobs in our community.
To have any meaning at all, good economic management must have a human dividend.  No human dividend could be greater than the chance of a job.
[Ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.42Mb - 93secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Vice Minister, Ambassadors, successful participants in the Endeavour Scholarship Program and their very happy parents, family and friends. Today's ceremony underlines the very close educational links between our two societies. Education is important to Japan's future and education is important to Australia's future and the cooperation in so many areas of education activity years into the future that will be promoted by the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding is an illustration of just how much our two societies value a high quality education, not only for our young, but also people who in middle age wish to acquire new skills and new understandings. 
Many years ago, just after World War II, Australia set about, through its Colombo Plan to lay the foundations of linking our nation with the other nations of Asia through education and that program in a sense has its modern manifestation in the Australia scholarship program which is worth some $1.5 billion and the Endeavour Program, and there are Japanese recipients of that that I will present today, is an element of that scholarship program which is designed to extend to the nations of our region, the opportunity of studying in Australia, the opportunity to sample the world class universities and other educational institutes of our nation. But most importantly, it extends the hand of friendship to the people of our region. 
Japan is our seventh largest source of overseas students. We value that very greatly. The teaching of your country's language in Australia is widespread and eagerly sought after by so many students at our schools and our universities. So I am particularly pleased, as is my wife, to be here today and I acknowledge the presence of the Vice Minister whose late father I worked with very closely when he was Prime Minister of Japan during the time that I have been Prime Minister of Australia.  This visit of mine to Japan is an opportunity to reaffirm the very deep friendship we feel for the people of Japan and this morning the particular value we place on the educational links between our two societies. 
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.61Mb - 105secs)
There is no better way the Government can support the community than by helping the jobless find work.  The Government's policy have helped reduce unemployment to a thirty-two year low and importantly slashed the long-term jobless rate -  and that's a fantastic social dividend from the Coalition's economic policies.  
The Government's Welfare to Work reforms are another example of how we are fostering a work culture in Australia.  While it's early days, there are encouraging signs that Welfare to Work, coupled with a strong economy, is helping more people find jobs.  
This year's financial forecast for income support payments have been reduced by about $500 million as a result of more people finding jobs, but even more importantly, thousands of people reliant on welfare are now earning more and enjoying the benefits of employment. 
Single parents are also embracing the new work culture.  With many single parents on income support required to find part-time work from July of this year under the new Welfare to Work program, some 9,000 have already voluntarily returned to the workforce. 
I cannot commend these parents enough.  They have voluntarily embraced the Government's work-over-welfare attitude and are reaping the many benefits of having a job.  
Welfare to Work, of course, relies on a prospering economy with a strong labour market.  Through good economic management, the Government has helped create a booming job market enabling thousands of Australians to move off welfare.  This is something we can all be proud of. 
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.61Mb - 105secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well CDF, Colonel Rawlins, ladies and gentlemen I've come here to do a very simple thing and that is to say on behalf of all Australians whatever their views are on different issues that they admire very much the dedicated job that you are doing here in Iraq.  Personally, can I say I am so impressed with the way in which Australian soldiers all around the world and particularly here in Iraq have been able to balance a capacity to throw a military punch with an ability to help the local people realise their future hopes and aspirations. Our mission here in Iraq is to create a situation where the Iraqis can look after themselves.  
No nation wants foreign soldiers on its soil indefinitely.  No nation wants to be in a foreign country indefinitely, but we have a job to do, we have a job to create a situation where the Iraqis can grab hold of a reasonably democratic future and our mission is to create the situation where we see in the future an Iraq that can provide its own security; can provide its own governance infrastructure and the way in which you ladies and gentlemen are doing that, the way in which you are relating to the locals, winning their confidence, demonstrating that Australia has a particular brand.  I mean there is an Australian brand here in Iraq which is different from the brand of any other coalition nation.  I don't say that critically of our friends the United States and Britain and the coalition partners, but as we all know there is an Australian way of doing things.  We think, just quietly, it's the best way of doing things and I think you are demonstrating that very, very effectively.  
I wanted to say as the head of the Government, as the person who in the end was responsible for sending you here, and in the process perhaps making life uncomfortable, life is even dangerous on occasions for you.  I do greatly respect the professionalism of the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces and I respect not only their military skill which is world renowned, but I also respect the capacity you have to win the confidence of people, because it's a brand which is respected, and it's a brand that is very distinctive, and it's a brand that is composed of goodwill and a decency and a respect for the customs of others, but it's also a brand that where necessary carries a wallop and you need the two.  
My fellow Australians you do it better than any others and I am very proud of you and the nation respects you enormously and I wanted to say that to you personally.  We are doing our best to look after your families and your loved ones back home, and if there is anything extra you need, please tell me.  I always do that when I come to these places, and I mean, I think my good friend the Treasurer sometimes blanches when I go on these operations because he can see the defence budget getting bigger but if it needs to get bigger it will get bigger because there is nothing more important than making sure that the men and women we send abroad in our name are given all the support that they reasonably require and I don't want to say anymore except again, thank you.  I want to get around and meet as many of you as I possibly can, but I respect you, I respect your commanding officers and you are doing a great job in the name of our country and you have my gratitude for that.  Thank you. 
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.00Mb - 131secs)
All Australians are appalled by the barbaric actions of the Zimbabwean Government in violently suppressing the activities of their political opponents.
The Australian ambassador in Zimbabwe has paid daily visits to the Opposition Leader Morgan Tsvangirai and other leaders in hospital after their beatings by Zimbabwean Government authorities.
For years Australia and other western countries have regularly called for change in Zimbabwe to prevent that country's slide into chaos and despair.
The Mugabe Government's disastrous policies have crippled a once thriving economy. Zimbabweans are enduring hyperinflation nearing 1800 per cent; over 80 per cent of the population is unemployed and living below the poverty line; and Zimbabweans have the lowest life expectancy of any country in the world.
Australia calls on the Government of Zimbabwe to respect the rule of law and the civil and political rights of its citizens; to cease its violations of international law and to return Zimbabwe to the fold of civilised nations.
Australia has imposed progressively strengthened travel bans and financial sanctions against members of the Government of Zimbabwe since 2002. We'll also be working with other concerned countries to place greater pressure on the Zimbabwean leadership including by allowing the situation to be considered by the United Nations and its Human Rights Council.
One of the major reasons why Robert Mugabe has remained in power and presided over the terrible destruction of his country is that neighbouring countries, particularly South Africa, have failed to exert the pressure they could have brought to bear to influence Zimbabwe.
The reality is that only the leaders of these African countries enjoy the historic leverage to sway Mugabe. Nothing short of his peaceful departure from office can offer hope to this tragic country.
The world community led by the governments in southern Africa should set about achieving this objective.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.00Mb - 131secs)


E&amp;OE...
I appreciate Peter Abigail and ASPI giving me the opportunity to address this distinguished group on the situation today in Iraq and the broader security implications.
In one sense, this quiet corner of Parliament House is a long way from conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.  In another sense, it helps bring into focus much of what is at stake.   
A hallmark of our free society is the ability to debate issues forcefully and to resolve inevitable differences peacefully.  Our enemies in Iraq and Afghanistan see this as a sign of weakness.  We know it is our greatest strength.
This place is where political differences are aired and resolved in policy.  I am well aware of the sharp political differences that exist in Australia today over Iraq, differences that have existed since the Government's initial decision to commit forces four years ago.
I am not asking Australians to discount the enormous difficulties in Iraq or to change their views about the original decision.  I am asking them to consider the situation we now face and the stakes involved.
What Iraq and her people now need is time, not a timetable.  They seek our patience, not political positioning.  They require our resolve, not our retreat.
This place also reminds us that our democratic processes, liberty and prosperity rest on a foundation of order and security.  Without security, democratic politics and economic development are impossible.
That's why the first duty of government is to protect and defend the nation's security, its people, its borders, its interests and its values.
Sometimes that involves tough decisions which place Australian men and women in danger - no less today than in earlier times of war.
And notwithstanding our strong economy, a near record stockmarket and low unemployment, this is a time of war.  
The long war against violent Islamic extremism goes on.  It is a very different kind of war - a war without borders and with no clear frontlines; a war fought as much by our ideas and values as by our armies.
Terrorist cells are active today in between 30 and 40 countries plotting action based on a warped interpretation of Islam.  Attacks have been planned in Australia.
Nor should we forget the essential lessons of 11 September 2001 - that failed states can quickly become havens and projecting grounds for global terror; and that terrorists can turn our openness and technological achievements against us to devastating strategic effect.
Globalisation is far from a universal solvent for ideologies of hate or old wounds - real and perceived. 
The West faces a major disjunction today between political fragmentation and economic globalisation; between abundant opportunities created by liberal, democratic societies and reactionary forces bent on crippling them; between the relative comfort and normalcy of so many Western lives in 2007 and the risks and sacrifices of those striving to bring peace and stability to troubled lands.
There are about 3,300 Australian Defence Force personnel on operations overseas or undertaking security tasks in our maritime protection zone.  They advance our nation's interests and ideals with great courage.  
I regard them as our finest patriots and our finest internationalists.  
Roughly 2000 Australians are part of operations today in Afghanistan and Iraq.
In Afghanistan, our largest contingent - the Reconstruction Task Force in Oruzgan Province which I visited last week - is working in partnership with the Dutch on the reconstruction and improvement of infrastructure.  It has made excellent progress rebuilding schools, roads and bridges and training the local population to ensure the benefits remain into the future.
Afghanistan is a highly dangerous theatre of war with 2006 the most violent year since the country was liberated.  We can expect a revived Taliban to launch further waves of attack this year.  
As winter in Afghanistan gives way to spring, coalition forces are again on the offensive to ensure that Afghanistan will never again be a safe-haven for terrorism - and to help the Afghan people surmount the many problems they face in building a secure, stable and democratic future.
This will take time and effort.  I assured President Karzai when I met him that Australia remains committed to this task.
Last week, I also visited Australian troops in Iraq.  I spoke with their commanding officers and men and women of all ranks; I spoke with Prime Minister Maliki; and I spoke with General Petraeus, the new US commander of the Multinational Force in Iraq.
It's just over four years since I announced the commitment of Australian forces to the US-led military operation in Iraq.  This was one of the most difficult and contentious decisions this government has taken.
I share the concern and distress of all Australians about the continued violence and suffering in Iraq - and their frustration that it is sometimes hard to see progress.
Clearly there have been setbacks and mistakes on the way to Iraq taking full charge of its own affairs.  The loss of life and injuries sustained by both Iraqis and coalition forces is tragic.
But I would hope even critics of our involvement in the original action recognise the need to honour our obligations to the Iraqis and to help them towards a more stable future.
Every time ordinary Iraqis are given the chance they say the same thing in overwhelming numbers: We want peace, stability and democracy.
I did come away from my visit to Iraq with a sense of cautious hope - about the new security plan and about the Iraqi government's willingness to face the big challenges ahead.  
Above all, I came away convinced that the Iraqi people want the same things we look for in our own lives - safety for their families, a chance to earn a living and a say in how they are governed. 
In March 2003 I was very clear about the reasons for taking decisive action against Saddam Hussein.  I simply remind people of the strategic realities we faced.
That Saddam's regime was a real and growing threat to the stability of the Middle East.  Containment was breaking down.
That Saddam had form, both as an aggressor against his neighbours and as a tyrannic ruler of his own people.  And that his non-compliance with 17 UN Security Council resolutions over a period of 12 years was weakening the credibility of the United Nations.
That virtually all governments (including opponents of the war such as France and Germany) as well as the now Leader of the Opposition agreed that Saddam had chemical and biological weapons and had designs on developing nuclear weapons.  Mr Rudd said that Saddam's possession of weapons of mass destruction was 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.67Mb - 109secs)
Good morning.
Climate change is a major issue facing both Australia and the world.
It is an issue that must be tackled in a measured and practical way.
While Australia contributes very little to global emissions we have a responsibility to tackle the problem none-the-less.
Talkfests, debates and purely symbolic gestures won't remove a gram of greenhouse gas from the atmosphere. My Government is investing in tangible projects that will deliver major cuts to Australia's emissions. 
The Government has announced seed-funding for more than $3 billion worth of projects that will help significantly cut the amount of climate-changing carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere.
These include a $750 million clean coal power station in Victoria's La Trobe Valley, an $841 million carbon burying project in Western Australia, the world's largest solar power station near Mildura and a $445 million methane-based power plant in Queensland. 
We have also announced other practical measures like the phasing out of incandescent light bulbs for more energy efficient globes. Australia was the first country to do this and is now being followed by many others around the world.
These are all practical and sensible measures to deal with the problem of climate change, not dangerous knee-jerk responses to the issue which could damage our economy, reduce our competitive advantage and, most importantly, cost jobs. 
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.67Mb - 109secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.90Mb - 124secs)
Workplace reform is helping to maintain Australia's economic prosperity.
Tomorrow marks a year since the introduction of WorkChoices. In that time, 263,000 jobs have been created and real wages - that's your pay packet after inflation - have risen by 1.5 per cent.
There are now fewer industrial disputes than ever before with less than 15 days lost per thousand employees in the past 12 months.
When Labor was last in Government real wages went backwards and, on average, there were 13 times as many working days lost to industrial disputes.
If Labor wins the next federal election and the workplace reforms are reversed, it will take us back to the bad days of industrial strife and stagnant jobs growth.
It would be the first time in a generation that a major economic reform had been reversed in Australia.
It would send a signal to the world that we had downed tools on economic reform; that the task of maintaining prosperity was too hard. No-one wants to invest in a country going backwards.
Another important benefit of my Government's workplace reforms has been the impact on inflation through the decentralisation of wage fixing.
WorkChoices has delivered many benefits to the economy without putting pressure on wages.
The Reserve Bank says that in a centralised system, higher wages in one part of the economy flow through to another. This adds extra costs to the production of goods and services, leading to higher prices, thus putting pressure on interest rates.
The Governor of the Bank, Glenn Stevens says this no longer happens because business is able to make agreements at the workplace. He recently argued the behaviour of aggregate wages has been quite well contained given the pressures on the economy.
WorkChoices is helping to ensure that all Australians continue to share in the nation's prosperity.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.90Mb - 124secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.82Mb - 119secs)
Australian motorists will know that since the start of the year petrol prices have been rising.
From a low point of about $1.10 a litre in January, the average Australian petrol price has risen to about $1.24 a litre in the past few weeks.
The increase in petrol prices overwhelmingly reflects a rise in the international price of crude oil - the base product from which petrol is made.
The price of crude oil has risen from a low of $US 51 a barrel in January to $US 64 a barrel last week.
This increase is due in large part to concerns over Iran's nuclear weapons ambitions and her seizure of British naval personnel. Iran is home to a large percentage of the world's crude oil reserves.
The Treasurer, Peter Costello, has asked the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to undertake monitoring of petrol prices over the Easter period. 
As was shown in January of this year, ACCC monitoring of petrol prices is ongoing, rigorous and effective in identifying disparities between movements in Australian and international petrol prices.
As well as monitoring, my Government has taken other steps to keep the price of petrol down. Some years ago we cut petrol taxes and provided big incentives to convert cars to gas.
These tax cuts have shaved about 16 cents a litre off the price of fuel and the $2000 gas conversion rebate introduced last year has resulted in more than 25,000 cars switching to LPG.
Through tax cuts, incentives and monitoring, my Government is working hard to limit the impact of rising fuel prices on household budgets. 
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.82Mb - 119secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.90Mb - 124secs)
More than 4.4 million trees are cut down around the world every day and over a year, an area twice the size of Tasmania is cleared of forests. 
This is having a marked impact on global warming. Almost 20 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions come from clearing forests - that's more than all the world's emissions from transport combined. 
My Government has decided to tackle this problem head on. We will provide $200 million to kickstart a global fund to support forest planting and sustainable forest management and limit the destruction of remaining forests. 
If the world can halve the rate of global deforestation we could reduce greenhouse gas emissions by three billion tonnes a year - more than five times Australia's total annual emissions. 
Under this program we will invite like-minded countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, Brazil, New Zealand, Japan and Indonesia to join the initiative. 
It will be particularly helpful in changing forest management in many of our neighbouring countries including the Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu.
It comes on top of practical action within Australia to reduce emissions - including seed funding for more than $3 billion worth of climate change projects - and our adds to our reputation as a world leader in sustainable forest management. 
The Global Initiative on Forests and Climate is another example of my Government's practical action to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions. 
This action helps to cut greenhouse gas emissions but does not hurt the Australian economy. 
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.90Mb - 124secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.82Mb - 119secs)
Australian motorists will know that since the start of the year petrol prices have been rising.
From a low point of about $1.10 a litre in January, the average Australian petrol price has risen to about $1.24 a litre in the past few weeks.
The increase in petrol prices overwhelmingly reflects a rise in the international price of crude oil - the base product from which petrol is made.
The price of crude oil has risen from a low of $US 51 a barrel in January to $US 64 a barrel last week.
This increase is due in large part to concerns over Iran's nuclear weapons ambitions and her seizure of British naval personnel. Iran is home to a large percentage of the world's crude oil reserves.
The Treasurer, Peter Costello, has asked the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to undertake monitoring of petrol prices over the Easter period. 
As was shown in January of this year, ACCC monitoring of petrol prices is ongoing, rigorous and effective in identifying disparities between movements in Australian and international petrol prices.
As well as monitoring, my Government has taken other steps to keep the price of petrol down. Some years ago we cut petrol taxes and provided big incentives to convert cars to gas.
These tax cuts have shaved about 16 cents a litre off the price of fuel and the $2000 gas conversion rebate introduced last year has resulted in more than 25,000 cars switching to LPG.
Through tax cuts, incentives and monitoring, my Government is working hard to limit the impact of rising fuel prices on household budgets. 
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.82Mb - 119secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much for that kind introduction. I wish I'd known about all of your science background before our conversation. I sort of spent about half an hour lecturing him about the science of nuclear power and he just sort of nodded sagely and said yes. And I thought, 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.00Mb - secs)
Thank you very much Mr Calvert, Professor Gibson, to Lady Mary Fairfax and the other very generous benefactors over the years.  I am very, very pleased indeed to be here.  I, like everybody else was very touched by the two stories that we've heard this morning and as somebody who as you know has over the years has had a lot of hearing problems himself and had a number of operations but fortunately my hearing deficiency was one that could be attended to with conventional hearing aids.  I can only begin to imagine the sense of despair of a parent.  
I've had a talk to Soraya and her mum and dad and she's a very alert girl, she responds, she's no different to my eyes and hears than any other little girl who's just turned one.  But the story was moving, the story was inspirational and there's no better way I guess of saying a big thank you to the Centre but also honouring the contribution of two very energetic Australians who in their different ways have brought this about. 
I've had the privilege 
over the years of meeting both of them.  I knew Paul Trainer very well, he used to live in Hunters Hill and he used to turn up on occasions at various functions I went to and we became quite good friends and I was aware not only of his great skill as a businessman but his personal dedication to cochlear implants and as Prime Minister over the last 10 years and previously I've certainly met Professor Clark who is one of those quite unforgettable people.  Somebody who embodies the capacity of Australia in medical research to always punch above her weight and that is what this country has done.  I think it's also an occasion to remark that the system of screening for deafness in newborn children in New South Wales is the best in the country.  It is followed by more or less by two other states and one the things that I'm encouraging Tony Abbott to do and I will do my bit as well, is to encourage the other states of Australia to embrace the approach that's been operating here in New South Wales. I am independently very much aware of how effective it is and I've had some representations from Bruce Shepherd and from many other people to do what I can to make sure that it spreads around world, spreads around Australia and indeed around the world.   This isn't an occasion to sort of reel off figures about the Federal Government's contribution to the hearing services and also to the CRCs rather it's an occasion for me to remark that we normally do things best in this country in areas such as health, in remedial responses to particular ailments people have, we normally do them best where there is cooperation between the Federal Government, the State Government.   People who are affected either as parents and of course this morning as well as meeting Soraya, I also had the opportunity of meeting a gentleman who believed that he could... he had his Cochlear implant at the age of 70 and he was intending amongst other things to return to RSL meetings and he told me how he was standing for Vice President and I wished him luck in the election and I think with his enthusiasm and energy, he will be very successful.  But it's wonderful to understand that an invention such as this can help people at both ends of life's spectrum and we've had of course from Professor Brand-Miller we've had a story of somebody and I thank her very much for remaining in the workforce and the contribution she has thereby made.
But it's a wonderful reminder of the capacity of medical science not only to save lives but also to enrich them despite a natural defect at every point.  At zero, at 45 and at 70 and that is not a bad capacity, it's not a bad thing. 
So, thank you very much for asking me to come here.  It's wonderful to see, the old Gladesville Hospital being put to such tremendous use, it's a rambling adequate facility, now very beautifully refurbished and that of course is and this is my final expression of thanks, that of course very much due also to the wonderful generosity of philanthropic Australians and many of them are here today, Mary in particular, but many others I see, some quite familiar faces that I find I see at lots of gatherings around Sydney where the hand is in the private pocket in order to help a good cause.  It is an occasion as well as honouring our scientists and rejoicing in the miracle of hearing being given to people, it's also an occasion to thank those who can afford to help but do help.  They are a special group and they deserve our gratitude and our thanks and in that spirit I have very great pleasure in declaring the refurbished Sydney Cochlear Centre open, or re-established and long may it be the joy of which Mrs Wyndham spoke.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.00Mb - secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr Calvert, Professor Gibson, to Lady Mary Fairfax and the other very generous benefactors over the years.  I am very, very pleased indeed to be here.  I, like everybody else was very touched by the two stories that we've heard this morning and as somebody who as you know has over the years has had a lot of hearing problems himself and had a number of operations but fortunately my hearing deficiency was one that could be attended to with conventional hearing aids.  I can only begin to imagine the sense of despair of a parent.  I've had a talk to Soraya and her mum and dad and she's a very alert girl, she responds, she's no different to my eyes and hears than any other little girl who's just turned one.  But the story was moving, the story was inspirational and there's no better way I guess of saying a big thank you to the Centre but also honouring the contribution of two very energetic Australians who in their different ways have brought this about. 
I've had the privilege over the years of meeting both of them.  I knew Paul Trainer very well, he used to live in Hunters Hill and he used to turn up on occasions at various functions I went to and we became quite good friends and I was aware not only of his great skill as a businessman but his personal dedication to cochlear implants and as Prime Minister over the last 10 years and previously I've certainly met Professor Clark who is one of those quite unforgettable people.  Somebody who embodies the capacity of Australia in medical research to always punch above her weight and that is what this country has done.  I think it's also an occasion to remark that the system of screening for deafness in newborn children in New South Wales is the best in the country.  It is followed by more or less by two other states and one the things that I'm encouraging Tony Abbott to do and I will do my bit as well, is to encourage the other states of Australia to embrace the approach that's been operating here in New South Wales. I am independently very much aware of how effective it is and I've had some representations from Bruce Shepherd and from many other people to do what I can to make sure that it spreads around world, spreads around Australia and indeed around the world.   This isn't an occasion to sort of reel off figures about the Federal Government's contribution to the hearing services and also to the CRCs rather it's an occasion for me to remark that we normally do things best in this country in areas such as health, in remedial responses to particular ailments people have, we normally do them best where there is cooperation between the Federal Government, the State Government.   People who are affected either as parents and of course this morning as well as meeting Soraya, I also had the opportunity of meeting a gentleman who believed that he could... he had his Cochlear implant at the age of 70 and he was intending amongst other things to return to RSL meetings and he told me how he was standing for Vice President and I wished him luck in the election and I think with his enthusiasm and energy, he will be very successful.  But it's wonderful to understand that an invention such as this can help people at both ends of life's spectrum and we've had of course from Professor Brand-Miller we've had a story of somebody and I thank her very much for remaining in the workforce and the contribution she has thereby made.
But it's a wonderful reminder of the capacity of medical science not only to save lives but also to enrich them despite a natural defect at every point.  At zero, at 45 and at 70 and that is not a bad capacity, it's not a bad thing. 
So, thank you very much for asking me to come here.  It's wonderful to see, the old Gladesville Hospital being put to such tremendous use, it's a rambling adequate facility, now very beautifully refurbished and that of course is and this is my final expression of thanks, that of course very much due also to the wonderful generosity of philanthropic Australians and many of them are here today, Mary in particular, but many others I see, some quite familiar faces that I find I see at lots of gatherings around Sydney where the hand is in the private pocket in order to help a good cause.  It is an occasion as well as honouring our scientists and rejoicing in the miracle of hearing being given to people, it's also an occasion to thank those who can afford to help but do help.  They are a special group and they deserve our gratitude and our thanks and in that spirit I have very great pleasure in declaring the refurbished Sydney Cochlear Centre open, or re-established and long may it be the joy of which Mrs Wyndham spoke.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.32Mb - 86secs)
Good morning,
A few days ago, the Deputy Prime Minister announced an extension of the highly successful Black Spots road funding program with a new injection of $345 million.
This is money that will be spent removing dangerous, and sometimes deadly, locations on Australian roads.
The Government has already spent more than $400 million on this program eliminating thousands of dangerous locations across the country.
 It is estimated by about this time next year that some 130 lives will have been saved as a result of the Black Spots program.
About half the Black Spots funding is spent in regional areas because of the high level of accidents on country roads.
The Federal Government has been able to make this kind of important investment because we have managed the economy carefully and effectively.
 With many Australians heading out on the roads over the Easter break, it is important that all motorists exercise great care.
Please take regular breaks and stop and rest if you're tired. Enjoy the Easter holiday and let's all arrive home safely.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.32Mb - 86secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.79Mb - 117secs)
Managing the economy well is not an end in itself.  Strong economic growth is never a virtue in its own right.
All the reforms of the past decade; balancing the Budget, paying off Labor's $96 billion debt, generational tax reform, industrial relations and waterfront reform and so forth have only been justified because of the immense human dividend they have helped deliver.
The true value of getting the economy right is the human dividend it produces. The biggest dividend of all for people to come out of the past 10 years of careful economic management has been the huge fall in unemployment. It is now at a 32 year low.
The human value of having a job, the sense of self worth and esteem it brings is incalculable.
There is also a lasting human dividend to be found in the massive additional investment the Government has made in health and education over the past 10 years.  Spending on Medicare, medical research and hospitals alone has risen 139 per cent on the levels of a decade ago. 
Defence spending is almost 40 per cent higher in real terms than it was in 1996. Moreover, the heavy financial commitment now being made to deliver water security and tackle climate change issues would not have been possible without the skilful economic stewardship of recent times.
Economic management is sometimes debated in abstract, even academic terms. This should never happen. We should never believe that good economic management is an end in itself.  
It is, in reality, a means to an end and that end is satisfying the human needs of the people of Australia.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.79Mb - 117secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.58Mb - 103secs)
Good Morning,
Yesterday's unemployment figures were a great result for families, jobseekers, business and the economy as a whole.
Unemployment has fallen to 4.5 per cent - that's a 32 year low -  and that's the greatest human dividend of all delivered by 10 years of very strong and effective economic management. 
In the 12 months since the introduction of the Government's WorkChoices workplace reforms more than 276,000 new jobs have been created. Yet Labor and the unions predicted mass sackings and wholesale job cuts.
It is now clear that after a year of the workplace reforms it is reasonable to assert that one of the contributions to this spectacular growth in employment has been the removal of the unfair dismissal provisions under the WorkChoices legislation.
There is little doubt that there is a greater incentive for small business to take on new staff now that the threat of unfair dismissal action has been removed.
Another often unremarked feature of the employment market since WorkChoices has been the increase in full-time work. 96 per cent of the new jobs created have been full-time compared with 61 and 56 per cent in the previous two years.
The true value of getting the economy right is the human dividend it produces and the biggest dividend of all has been the huge fall in unemployment. 
That's an outcome we can call be proud of.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.58Mb - 103secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.12Mb - 139secs)
One of the distinguishing features of the Australian achievement has been our almost uncanny ability to find a sense of balance on major public policy issues.
Ours is not a nation of strident ideology or extremes.  We embrace both public and private approaches to health policies where other countries emphasise one to the detriment of the other.
In education Australia has settled policies of choice between government and independent schools.
Our strong social security safety net coupled with the policy of mutual obligation means that we avoid the laissez faire harshness of the American welfare system as well as the nanny state mentality of many European countries.
It is critical that this balanced approach be applied to the vital issue of climate change.
We must avoid extreme overreaction which hurts our economy and destroys jobs.
Australia must neither ignore the dangers of global warming nor hastily apply ill-considered measures which do enduring damage.
That is why the Government is investing more than $3 billion in practical climate change policies.  The phasing out of incandescent light bulbs, investing in clean coal technology and promoting reafforestation are all very practical ways of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
We can be sure of their benefits.  They are real.  They can be measured.  They won't harm our economy.  
It is why the Australian Government is working in collaboration with the business community, particularly energy and resource companies, to develop a sensible and balanced approach to emissions trading.
By contrast we will not commit to targets with unknown consequences - such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 per cent by the year 2020.
Such a step would put many Australian jobs at risk and cause great injury to the Australian economy.
Unlike Labor and the Greens, the Liberal and National parties will always put economic prosperity and jobs ahead of ideology and targets with unknown consequences.
That is the way to preserve a sensible balance with climate change policy.  That's the approach that has served Australia so well in other policy areas.
It is the right way forward with climate change.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.12Mb - 139secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Bob, Cynthia, Michael Gallacher, Craig Baumann, Greg Piper, two newly elected members of the New South Wales Parliament, one Liberal, one independent, my fellow Australians. There are a lot of characteristics about Bob Baldwin and they're all admirable, and one that, you know, has struck me a lot over the years, he's a very competitive bloke. I came to a gathering, I think it was here, wasn't it? No Beresfield, a couple of years ago and there were about 1400 people there and I made the mistake in the Party Room a few months later of saying that the second largest gathering I'd been to, organised by one of my local members, had been Bob Baldwin's gathering at Beresfield, but I said it had been exceeded by Mal Brough, who's one of my Queensland colleagues, for a gathering that he organised on the Sunshine Coast of 1500. So Bob muttering under this breath as he walked out the Party Room, he says, I'll beat Brough, don't you worry. So here we are, we have 2000 people here in the Hunter, well done Bob Baldwin. 
On the way over here from a wonderful visit to the men and women of the RAAF Base at Williamtown; and amongst the people I met were part of the contingent of 75 personnel who are going to operate the radar service out of Kandahar, which is a remarkable contribution by a small number of highly qualified Australians to the allied operation (inaudible) in this country; On the way over I was thinking to myself, what are some of the great characteristics of the Australian people that mark them out from the people of other countries? We think of our egalitarian spirit, we think of our willingness to treat people according to what they contribute and who they are, rather than the school they went to, or the colour of their skin, or what their name is or what their religion might be. There are many particular characteristics of Australians that we know and we're very proud of. And one characteristic that we sometimes don't think about as much as we should is that Australians have a great capacity to achieve a sense of proportion and a sense of balance about great and important public policy issues. We are not a nation of extremes, we're not people who overreact, we're not people who suddenly take u-turns on the way we handle our affairs; we're people who have a great capacity to get the balance of things right. 
I think of our health system. Now our health system has got a lot of flaws, I know that, and it could always be made better, but one of the reasons that I think we have to...one of the things we have to bear in mind, is for all its flaws, our health system is a lot better than the health system of most other countries. And one of the reasons for that is that we have a sense of balance. We don't say the health system should be run entirely by the Government or by the public sector, and we don't think it should be run entirely by the private sector, and be completely in private hands. We have a good sense of balance. We have Medicare - which we all like and the Government has strongly supported and added to - but we also have a very strong private health system. We subsidise the cost of private health insurance, we subsidise and maintain private hospitals as well as public hospitals; in other words, we get the balance right, we don't go one way or the other.
Same thing applies with our schools. Here we are meeting in an independent school, started only a few years ago, apparently it's flourished with the support of the parents and also generous government support in this part of the Hunter. But in saying that we respect the central role of public schools, of government schools in our education system. We have a good mix, we support both, we don't say to people as some of the teacher unions do, that you give all your funding to government schools and you give no funding to independent schools, we support both. In fact, about 67 per cent of Australian children go to government schools and they get 75 per cent of all government funding. And some of you may have seen that advertisement, that dishonest advertisement on television that has me arriving...allegedly me, arriving at a government school, and the children are out there waving the Australian flags, and instead of arriving and getting out and greeting them, my car keeps going. And the story out of all of that is that that terrible John Howard, he doesn't care about government schools. Well I care a lot about government schools, I was totally educated in the government school system of New South Wales and I'm very grateful to the public education system for what it provided for me. But the point I make is that we are not rejecting one in favour of the other. We respect the right of parents to choose where they send their children. In other words, we achieve that very good sense of balance. We support government schools and we support independent schools as well. 
And another thing that we do very well in this country is that we achieve the right balance when it comes to our social security system. We are not like the Americans, and I like the Americans on a lot of things and I admire the contribution America makes to the leadership of the western world, but I think America's welfare system is sometimes a bit too harsh and I don't think the safety net is good enough. And what we manage to do in this country is that we provide a good social security system, but by the same token we require people to give something back in return. We don't say to somebody you can be on welfare for life. We say if you're going to be on welfare you've got to give something back. I'm not talking here about retired people, I'm talking here about people of working age and that's why we support programs like work for the dole. But on the other hand, unlike a lot of European countries, we don't have a some kind of nanny state approach to people and adopting the attitude that no matter what their circumstances are, the state owes them a living. We expect people who are able to do so to look after themselves and pay for themselves, reserving our welfare dollars for those people who are in genuine need of assistance, and heaven knows, there are plenty in our community, even in a very prosperous era in our nation's life that are in need of assistance.
Now you might think to yourself, what's he getting at? He's talked about balance and he's talked about balance in the education system, balance in the health system, balance in the social security system, he must be getting at something. Well he is getting at something and he's getting at something that's very directly related to the coal industry which is so very important in the Hunter Valley. And what he's getting at is simply this, that we have a huge debate going on at the present time about climate change. Climate change is obviously an issue that everybody in the Australian community wants to address. But above all, what I am pleading for in relation to climate change, is that we achieve a sense of balance, that we don't make the mistake of overreacting; we don't make the mistake of adopting policies that will impose unreasonable economic burdens on this country, we don't adopt policies that will do damage to the coal industry of this country, we don't listen to those people who say that maybe the coal industry has got too big and maybe the time is to curb it, or to limit its expansion. We don't forget the fact that there are thousands of families in the Hunter, in Queensland, in other parts of New South Wales and other parts of the nation that depend very heavily on the coal industry. We don't listen to people like Senator Brown and Peter Garrett who say there've got to be limits on the coal industry. What we do is say to ourselves, and we say to the rest of the world, that we are prepared to play our part in reducing the growth of greenhouse gas emissions, but it's got to be done in a practical balanced way. It's got to be done in a way that doesn't do disproportionate damage to the Australian economy, it's got to be done against the recognition that Australia's contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is only 1.6 per cent of the world total every year and let me give you a description that really does explain it more than anything else. And that is that if we close down every industry in Australia tomorrow that contributed to the growth of greenhouse gas emissions, it would take exactly nine months of activity in China to equal all of the greenhouse gas emissions that no long occurred in Australia because we had closed down our industries. Now that describes to you the scale of what is involved, and what I want in relation to climate change is for this country to play its part, I want us to embrace practical things. I want us to do what we're doing in relation to light bulbs. I want there to be more water tanks, I want there to be more solar panels, I want to us encourage countries in our region to stop tearing down their forests and start planting trees again. I want to have clean coal technology. I want us to be open minded about embracing nuclear power because if we do embrace clean coal technology nuclear power will become more economically feasible and we mustn't be so foolish as to close our minds against the possible use of nuclear power years into the future. In other words, I want us to bring that age old Australian commonsense, that age old Australian capacity of balance to the debate about climate change. I want us to be part of the solution. I want us to provide leadership where we can but I do not want this country's future damaged by overreaction. 
I want us in other words to do what Australians always do. They look at something, they think about it, they separate the wheat from the chaff, they don't take any notice of the fanatics and they think to themselves this is a problem and we've got to do something about it and we've got to play our part but we're not going to damage the economy and we're not going to destroy the jobs of Australians. And I think it's very important on this issue that we do keep a sense of balance because we have a wonderful economy at the present time; hasn't happened by accident. It's taken a lot of hard work and the hard work, of course, has been the hard work of the men and women of this country, and also along the way some very good policy decisions, some of which weren't popular when they were introduced, but the benefit of them has been demonstrated with the passage of time.
We haven't had such low unemployment for 32 years. You have to go back to the middle 1970s to get unemployment as low as it is now and the last year, wonderfully, we've seen the number of people who are on long term unemployed lists, in other words, people who'd been out of work for a year or more, the number of those has fallen by 25 per cent in the last year. It's the biggest yearly fall in the long term unemployed since we began to keep separate statistics for that section of our population. Now that's got to tell you something. It's got to tell you that this is a wonderful market for jobs seekers, the like of which we haven't seen. 
There is a contribution, a big contribution being made to that by the resources boom, but that's not the only explanation. It goes wider and deeper than that. It means we have a competitiveness in our economy which has been delivered by a series of reforms over a long period of time and we shouldn't take that for granted. It's not on autopilot. It's something that's only been achieved by a lot of hard work by both the people of Australia and by the Government of Australia. 
So we shouldn't imagine that we can embrace targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions when we don't know what they mean. We should be very careful that the measures we take are sensible measures that are not going to destroy jobs, and Bob is right, speaking here in the Hunter region of New South Wales and of Australia, Bob is right to think solicitously and carefully about the future of the coal industry. It's very important to the Hunter and it's very important to the families of this region.
My friends, could I finish in a sense where Bob began and that is to talk about his arm twisting proclivities and to talk about his great capacity to campaign hard for the people of Paterson and for the people of this electorate. And it is true that there's probably nobody in the Parliament, certainly on our side and I am sure on the other side, that places as great a premium on getting road funding for his area than does Bob Baldwin. He's constantly campaigning and as a result of his constant campaigning I have got a couple of announcements that I want to make.
As you know, for 20 years Janette and myself and our three children used to holiday at Hawks Nest. We're very familiar with this area. It always amused the political commentators that I would holiday at Hawks Nest but it is a wonderful spot and my children still speak with enormous affection and we always, Janette and I, always remember the sense of excitement that surged in the back seat as we turned off that little turnoff after Karuah as we turned off to the right to go off to Hawks Nest and to Tea Gardens.  So not just in recognition of that, although it does tickle me very much to think of that when I mention what I am about to mention, but as a result of strenuous representations that have been made by Mr Baldwin I am very pleased to announce this afternoon that the Government will contribute $10 million towards the construction of what they call a grade separated, or 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Dr Switkowski, Dr Ian Smith, my ministerial colleagues, Julie Bishop, Senator Minchin and Mr Ian Macfarlane, my many other state and federal parliamentary colleagues, Dr Julio De Vido, the lead Minister from Argentina and the many other members of his delegation. And I call it a delegation because this is quite a celebration of cooperation between our two countries. Not only is this a project that demonstrates the capacity of the public and private sectors in Australia to combine in a very balanced way, to bring about a result which is overwhelmingly for the public good, but it is also an illustration of great cooperation between our two countries. And I understand that this particular project is Argentina's largest single scientific export and we really are...really very pleased indeed to be part of this process. 
It's just on 49 years ago that that most distinguished of my predecessors as Prime Minister of Australia, Robert Gordon Menzies, came and opened the HIFAR reactor back in 1958. And in the 49 years that have passed since then the debate about the role of nuclear energy, not only in our society, but in the world, has gone through various iterations. The attitude towards nuclear energy and everything associated with it back in 1958 was seen through the prism of what we used to call the Cold War and the world was a very, very different place. And I don't intend, you'll be relieved to know, to take you through the various iterations or entertain you with any projections about the future, except to say that whatever iterations and whatever changes may have occurred, and whatever combination of views are now held, there's no doubt in my mind that nuclear energy, nuclear science will bulk ever larger in the lifestyles, and in the experience and the challenges that the nations of the world, not least our own have.
This is a wonderful day for Australian science. It is a triumph of the belief, by not only scientists, but also those who believe in the central role of science in the Australian community, triumphs of their beliefs over the cynicism of others who tend to see science as some remote, unrelated ephemeral thing that doesn't directly affect the lives of our nation...the lives of our people and of our nation. As a self confessed sports lover and cricket tragic, let me simply say that I often have the opportunity in addressing gatherings such as this, to say that I do look very much to the day when the achievements of Australian science and Australian scientists are as celebrated and as revered as the achievements of the sports men and women of this country. And today is an opportunity to pay tribute to the men and women of science in Australia, not only to the nuclear scientists, but all of those associated with it. Because what we have in this facility is a nuclear medicine facility which is the equal of any that the rest of the world has produced. It takes its place along side the European Union facility, essentially a French effort, and one in the United States. Now that is not bad, if I can put it that way, for a nation of 20 million people. It's not bad for the wonderful band of nuclear scientists in this country that have kept faith over the years in the contribution that science can make.
This facility will relieve human suffering. It will be of direct, often life saving benefit, to countless thousands of our fellow countrymen and women. It will also be a remarkable demonstration to the world of the expertise and the cutting edge capacity of the Australian nation. When you think about the future of Australia you must include in that vision of the future, world class scientific capacity. And the Lucas Heights facility, this OPAL facility, is a metaphor for the contribution that Australian science can make to the future of our country. At $359 million, plus continued operating, and refurbishing and so forth costs, it is a very significant investment. But can I say, and I know these remarks would be echoed by all of my ministers who are present, that it is worth every dollar of the investment that has been made and more because if a nation is unwilling to make a capital investment in projects of this nature, then it's really not interested in our future. 
Can I finally say before inviting Dr Switkowski, Dr Smith and Julie Bishop to come and help me unveil the plaque, and officially declare the facility open, can I take this opportunity of expressing my appreciation to all of the employees, in each and every capacity of this facility and this establishment, who have been associated with this project. I could tell as I moved around this morning that every single person had an enormous sense of pride and a great feeling of ownership in what had been achieved. It wasn't just Dr Switkowski, and Dr Smith, Dr Cameron, they had every reason to feel particularly proud, but it was everybody else. And people said to me, did you enjoy that? Wasn't that terrific? Isn't it a fantastic facility? Now you don't get that kind of feeling and that kind of enthusiasm without good leadership from the organisation and the involvement of everybody in such an enthusiastic way is precisely why when we apply ourselves to it, we Australians can do it better than anybody else in the world. And the spirit of partnership and cooperation has been terrific.
So ladies and gentlemen if I could invite Dr Switkowski, Dr Smith and the Minister to join me I will have great pleasure in pulling aside the curtain and thereby declaring open this magnificent facility. Long may it contribute to the assistance of humanity both here and in other nations of the world. Thank you.  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.48Mb - 96secs)
Good Morning,  
Yesterday I announced the findings of a report on the water shortages in the Murray- Darling Basin as a result of the drought and, regrettably, the outlook for Australia's food bowl is very grim.  
Such is the extent of the water shortages that without significant rainfall in the next six to eight weeks, there will be no water available for irrigation at the start of the water year on the 1st July.  
What water there is in the storages will be needed to provide a critical minimum supply for towns and communities within the Murray-Darling system.   
This is without precedent and is potentially devastating for primary industries that rely on irrigation such as grapes, stone fruits and dairy.  
I hope and pray that there will be significant rain but we must prepare for the high likelihood that we will not get enough falls to prevent a zero irrigation allocation. 
The Government has already provided more than $1.4 billion in drought assistance to farmers through the Exceptional Circumstances program and this funding will continue. It is available to all irrigators in the Murray-Darling Basin.  
The Commonwealth Government is examining other ways of providing assistance to people affected by this difficult situation.   
Our experts are also meeting to put in place plans to ensure Basin communities have a critical minimum water supply.   
This is a very difficult situation, but the Federal Government will stand by irrigators in the Murray-Darling Basin.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.48Mb - 96secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much John. Jan, I am delighted to see your wife. Christopher Pyne, the Minister for Ageing, but also as Parliamentary Secretary and Assistant Minister in his earlier manifestation played a very significant role in assisting me in relation to the anti-drugs policy. And can I say how delighted I am to see Brian Watters and his wife here today. Brian of course was the chairman of the Council and did a wonderful job before he was called to international duties in the fight against drugs.
I am here today and I want to thank the Salvation Army for allowing us to use this centre as a place to launch it and to say how delighted I was before speaking to you to meet a number of people who are being assisted by the program, to hear their stories and to know that the path back can be a highly successful one although an arduous and difficult one which requires the support of family and friends but also the wonderful services of organisations such as the Salvation Army. A part of our society for which I have unbounded admiration and respect. 
I am here today to announce an additional $150 million to add to the investment of $1.3 billion now over a number of years, stretching back to 1997 to increase the tempo of the fight against drugs in our community. I am proudly a zero tolerance man when it comes to drug abuse. I make no bones about that. I have never made any bones about it. It was an unpopular cause a few years ago. I was told that I was out of touch because I had a zero tolerance approach to the use of marijuana. As time has gone by there has been a greater realisation of the fatal link between marijuana abuse and many kinds of mental illness. 
But I wouldn't want anybody to think that there has been a disproportionate emphasis on law enforcement in our program, indeed of the $1.3 billion that has been spent over the last few years some 60 to 65 per cent has gone into prevention and rehabilitation with some 35 to 40 per cent into law enforcement. You need three elements; you need to help people to rehabilitate, you need to educate people against the dangers of drugs in the first place and you need uncompromising law enforcement to catch the people who would traffic in the misery and unhappiness and death of others. 
And once again those three elements are in the package I am announcing today. We're putting over $100 million for new drug rehabilitation services and further support for those in the drug and alcohol sector who are fighting the scourge of drug and alcohol abuse. And this includes an amount of $23 million particularly targeted to programs which are dealing with this dreadful new phenomenon that is commonly called Ice; a new drug which has devastating behavioral consequences. Some of the stories of the way in which people have been terrorised and the way in which those who are addicted to Ice lose all semblance of control and lapse into violent, uncontrolled often homicidal rage.  And it is a frightening drug and we need a special emphasis, and so we're going to put $103 million into, not only strengthening the additional rehabilitation services, which means that organisations will be able to get more money to do the things they are now doing so well and to do them better, but we're also going to have an additional emphasis in tackling the modern scourge of Ice.
The second element will be some $9 million to improve the drug prevention education for young Australians and provide the right information to parents. We found when we circulated a booklet a few years ago, and there was a lot of cynicism about this; people said 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.23Mb - 80secs)
Later today, under the title Australia Rising, I will deliver the first of a series of speeches I'll make over coming months which will set out a wide ranging Coalition agenda for the future.
Today's speech will focus, amongst other things, on the kind of world that we will all face, by say the year 2020. In developing policies for the future it's critical to understand the circumstances which those policies must address.
On the world scene for example, the human face of globalisation will be increasingly Asian and middle class - as our region becomes the epicentre of history's first truly global middle class.
On the domestic front, the challenges of an ageing population will be even more acute by the year 2020.
Of even greater consequence, will be the need to maintain and enhance the capacity of the Australian economy to succeed and prosper in a fiercely competitive world.
None of these challenges can be met, let alone overcome, if Australia is so foolish as to reverse any of the major economic reforms of the past 20 years, which have been so important in building the strength of our economy.  Yet that is what Labor has promised to do. 
Reversing WorkChoices will damage the Australian economy. It will weaken our capacity to compete and it will destroy jobs.
Mr Rudd has made his work choice. He has put union power ahead of workers' jobs.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.23Mb - 80secs)


E&amp;OE...
AUSTRALIA RISING
Thank you very much Spencer, to Jeff Seeney, the Leader of the Opposition in Queensland, Bruce Flegg, the leader of the parliamentary Liberal Party in Queensland, my old friend Warwick Parer, or good friend of long standing, Warwick Parer the President of the Queensland division, ladies and gentlemen. I'm delighted to be back in Brisbane, to have this opportunity to address the Queensland Press Club. Queensland, of course, is a big part of the Australian success story in the early 21st Century.  Perhaps the closest analogy is California's hold on the American imagination last century - the magnetic pull of a better life; a place where dreams are realised and trends emerge that alter a nation's temper.  
My speech today is about the future of our nation.  It looks ahead to an Australia rising to the challenges of the next decade and beyond - to an Australia within reach.
This is the first of a series of speeches I'll make in coming months on a wide-ranging future agenda, an agenda that includes further strengthening our economy, education reform, new social policy challenges, climate change and Australia's APEC agenda for later this year. Next month's Budget will outline a forward-looking strategy to further build Australia's prosperity.  Consistent with the last 11 years, the Government's core objective, in the Budget, will be to keep the economy strong and the nation secure so that Australians can plan for the future with great confidence.
I want to begin my speech today by sketching the sort of world Australians are likely to be living in a decade or more from now. For argument's sake let's say by the year 2020, when most of today's children will be young adults. Liberal democracies, like ours, will continue to flourish, yet their purpose, patience and resolve will continue to be tested.  For a country like Australia, there will be no holiday from history or from the long struggle against terrorism. The fight is a different type of war against a different type of enemy.  Our interests and our ideals demand that we stay engaged in the world and in the global battle of ideas.  
Australia's defence forces must be combat ready and well-resourced and our alliances close and strong in 2020.  We will continue to carry a heavy burden for order and stability in this part of the world.  Indeed one of the most far-reaching national security decisions my Government has taken was to end a posture of benign neglect in the Pacific and there will be no going back from that commitment. 
In 2020, policy makers will still be grappling with the great disjunction of our age - and that is between a globalised economic order and a fragmented political one.  Australia has a profound interest in a stable, cooperative and market-oriented global system underpinned by stable, cooperative and market-oriented nation states. And no-one should pretend that the nation state is going anywhere.  People will continue to express their demands for security, economic wellbeing and identity primarily through national politics.  And the duty of political leaders will still be protecting and advancing the national interest. It will be a world where economic and geopolitical power is more evenly distributed; perhaps more so than at any time since America's rise in the late 19th Century.  The human face of globalisation in 2020 will be increasingly Asian and middle class - as our region becomes the epicentre of history's first truly global middle class. It will be a world of intense competition for markets and for global talent.  Australia must work hard to earn our place in a fiercely competitive global economy.  We must ensure Australia retains and attracts our share of the best and brightest - the researchers, the scientists, the innovators and risk takers who'll generate the ideas for a rising Australia.
Australia's workforce will continue to face challenges from demographic change, from technological change and from globalisation.  The Treasurer's Intergenerational Report earlier this month showed that we have made progress in meeting the challenge of an ageing society. Nonetheless, many families are confronting these pressures directly with the rise, for example, of the so-called sandwich generation.  More and more baby boomer women in particular carry heavy responsibilities around caring for ageing parents and for children still at home, while also holding down a job in the paid workforce. 
All of this points to the need for governments to become even more nimble and responsive to individual needs in the next decade.  The old rigid welfare state models have become increasingly obsolete. It also underlines the need to maintain a strong economy.  Despite the challenges we face, there's no reason why Australia should not be even more prosperous by the year 2020. But it means becoming even more competitive through economic reform.  It means keeping the size of government and our tax burden down on workers and risk takers.  It means keeping downward pressure on inflation and interest rates through budget discipline and a flexible workplace system.  It means creating the conditions for growth so business will continue to invest and create jobs.  It means ensuring that our schools, our tech colleges and our universities are institutions of excellence.  And it means investing in our people so they have the skills required in the 21st Century.  
In the late 20th Century, indeed at the very end of it, the great genius of our democracy was the ability we found to reform Australia's economy while not leaving behind those who felt threatened by economic change.  A rising tide that lifts all boats is our abiding national challenge - a calling for our time and for all time. I spoke about this last year at the National Press Club in Canberra.  I talked about the best kept secret of the Australian achievement - and that was our national sense of balance.  This sense of balance is the handmaiden of national growth and renewal.  It means that we respond creatively to an uncertain world with a sense of proportion. And you might ask, what helps us keep our balance?  To me, it's really no secret.  It's economic growth, leavened always by Australian commonsense.
Just as we face a global battle of ideas so there is a battle of ideas going on here at home over Australia's future.  One side - we in the Coalition - aims to build on what's been achieved over the last decade, to build on policies that have helped sustain the longest economic expansion in our modern history, created two million new jobs, slashed unemployment to a 32 year low, cut welfare dependency and given more Australians a direct stake in the economy. The other side wants to tear down this achievement.  It wants to go back to government by a few mates for a few mates - where favoured groups get a special say in our workplaces, in education policy, in environment policy and in welfare policy.  Where the national interest gets squeezed out in favour of noisy sectional interests and where the quiet voices of those who work hard, pay their taxes, take risks and contribute to their communities get drowned out.   
It's critical that Australia not slip back to the ways of the past.  It's especially critical that there be no roll-back of the reforms that have kept our economy growing through a turbulent decade. Any step back will see Australia fall behind in the global economy, reducing our capacity to create jobs, to innovate, to care for the sick and the aged and to help those who need a leg up in today's competitive world. This is not simply an economic argument.  It lies at the heart of our quest for a better society.  Ultimately, it is a moral argument that bears on what I call the human dividend of economic growth.  It's a moral argument because of what growth means for a fair and decent society.  The American economist Benjamin Friedman argues this point at length in his book The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth.  Broadly distributed economic growth, he notes, provides benefits far beyond the material, supporting political and social stability, fostering tolerance and enhancing opportunity.  It's crucial not just to meeting our economic challenges but to meeting our social and environmental challenges as well.
Ladies and Gentlemen, priorities do matter in politics.  My Government's number one priority is strong growth, greater prosperity and wider opportunity.  An Australia rising to new heights while preserving our great traditions of a fair go and pulling together in times of adversity, an Australia where people have more choice in their daily lives and a strong sense of social cohesion.  I've never understood or accepted the argument of those who say that one detracts from the other.  By raising families, by employing other Australians, by giving back to their community, Australians show every day how the two of them go together.
I want Australia in 2020 to still be the best country in the world in which to live, to work, to start a business and to raise a family. As a Government, we've made thousands of decisions in the last 11 years that impact directly on the lives of Australians.  No doubt we've made our share of mistakes - all governments do. But we have never lost sight of the big things that affect people's lives - their jobs, the wellbeing of their families, decent health care, genuine choice in education and a good social security safety net.  We've never lost sight of the human dividend from a strong and growing economy. We've also never lost sight of the need to strike a balance between different interests and different objectives.  That's not the same as always seeking consensus and always looking to please.  It often calls for hard choices, for example, putting the budget back into surplus, reforming the tax system and the welfare system and abolishing laws that protect a few jobs but destroy many, many more. 
Hard choices imply trade-offs.  When these are ignored, when ideology takes over, that's when costly mistakes are made.  It's when unintended consequences multiply.  Why do I dwell on this?  Because in part my political opponent pretends to have discovered a different brand of politics - a politics without hard choices, without trade-offs and without unintended consequences - a politics of gestures and good intentions and little else. He argues that in this world Australians face one overriding moral challenge, and that is climate change.  I'll talk more about this challenge in a moment, but let me say where I stand on priorities, on decision-making and on the moral challenge of our time. 
Climate change is a serious policy challenge and a major priority of my Government.  At the same time, we know that independent action by Australia will not materially affect our climate.  No-one - not the IPCC, not Sir Nicholas Stern, not even Al Gore - makes this argument.  Australia emits fewer greenhouse gases in a year than the United States and China emit in a month.  Do we need to lower carbon emissions over time?  Of course we do. But to say that climate change is the overwhelming moral challenge for this generation of Australians is misguided at best and misleading at worst. It de-legitimises other challenges over which we do have significant and immediate control.  Other challenges with moral dimensions just as real and pressing as those that surround climate change. It also obscures the need for balance in government decision-making.  It feeds ideological demands for knee-jerk policy reactions that would destroy jobs and the living standards of ordinary Australians.  
To me, the moral challenge of our time is not vastly different from the challenge earlier generations faced.  It is to build a prosperous, secure and fair Australia - a confident nation at ease with the world and with itself.  It's to give every generation of Australians the chance of social mobility.  That's why jobs and economic growth are so important.
A generation ago, this challenge revolved squarely around reversing the then decline of our economy.  And this has been the work of both sides of politics in government.  Unfortunately, it hasn't been the work of both sides of politics in opposition.  Looking back, broad consensus surrounded the need for five great structural reforms to give Australia a shot at prosperity in the 21st Century.  They were financial deregulation, tariff reform, privatisation, tax reform and workplace relations reform. And I've always paid credit to the former Labor government for its reforms in the area of financial deregulation and tariffs.  The Coalition in Government has gone much further with tax reform, privatisation and workplace reform making our economy more strong, flexible and competitive. And where the Coalition supported all of the big reforms undertaken by the Hawke and Keating government's, the Labor Party, regrettably in opposition, has fought every major reform we have taken to strengthen our economy, they fought getting the budget back into balance, they fought waterfront reform, they fought tax reform, they fought workplace relations reform, they fought the privatisation of business agencies, even though they had supported a similar policy in relation to both Qantas and the Commonwealth Bank when they were in government. And what that means of course is that in 12, in 11 years rather of opposition, Labor in 11 years has still not developed a coherent alternative plan to keep the Australian economy strong, which is the fundamental responsibility of both sides of politics in 2007. It's totally indulged in the negative and on the eve of its national conference in an election year, is still bereft of a credible, forward economic agenda.
Labor has opposed our policies for macroeconomic stability and disciplined financial management.  By balancing the budget, paying off government debt, establishing the Future Fund and confronting the challenge of an ageing society, we have laid the foundations for a new era of growth, prosperity and opportunity. But the job is not done.  While Australia has lifted her game, so have our competitors.  And we must stay on the course of economic reform, including workplace reform. Australia's workplaces, as I'm sure this audience knows only too well, represent the arteries of our economy.  Clog them up with more and more regulation and you slow our economic pulse.  WorkChoices is not just about more jobs and higher wages, compelling as that case is, its importance extends to the broader macro-economy.  
We all know that Queensland is doing well, and it's doing well in part from high commodity prices in the mining sector.  In the past, under centralised wage fixing, a terms-of-trade boost like this would have triggered a wages break-out across the entire economy and sections of industry, particularly manufacturing, would have been decimated. This time that has not happened because relative wages have reflected industry fundamentals and because overall wages growth has been well-behaved.  This is an historic achievement for modern Australia in a time of prosperity.  Quite simply, it never happened under the old centralised, union-dominated, industrial relations system. And it's meant that inflation has been contained which in turn has limited upward pressure on interest rates.  It's meant the Reserve Bank hasn't had to slam on the economic brakes.  It's meant that Australia can continue to grow, now for the 16th year in a row.
Crucially, in this context, the union dominated industrial relations system that Mr Rudd has promised to give us will bring back the worst features of centralised wage fixation.  Higher wages paid in very profitable sectors of the economy will flow through the system to other industries which can't afford them with adverse economic consequences including job losses. There's also a microeconomic case for WorkChoices that often gets overlooked in the debate.  Flexibility at the workplace creates an environment that encourages innovation, the acceptance of new technology and the development of worker skills.  Without genuine flexibility the underlying dynamism of our economy ebbs away, the spirit of entrepreneurship - especially in small business - is crushed and Keynes' famous animal spirits become very tame and timid beasts indeed.
A rising Australia desperately needs that entrepreneurial spirit.  It needs the enterprise workers in our mines, our factories and our service firms who've transformed our workforce and its aspirations. Mr Rudd has made his work choice.  He's put union power ahead of workers' jobs. The risk takers in our economy need to know that they will not have Julia Gillard, and Greg Combet and Sharan Burrow looking over their shoulder every time they employ a person or restructure their firm.  Not to mention Simon Crean, Martin Ferguson, Jenny George and Bill Shorten. Mr Rudd cannot have it both ways.  He can't go on about productivity while proposing to hand over power to people who've never taken a business risk in their lives.
Labor's real agenda isn't productivity.  It's power - and for that it's prepared to undertake the first major reversal of economic reform in Australia in 25 years. Continued economic reform remains a vital part of the National Reform Agenda being pursued by Commonwealth and State Governments together.  At the COAG meeting earlier this month we agreed to take forward reforms that will deliver more competitive energy markets, better transport infrastructure and less red tape. But stripped of the rhetoric, all levels of government in our federation must live up to their responsibility. In the end this is the only long term answer. The only sustainable federalism is a federalism based on the acceptance of individual responsibility by the various components in the Federation. 
My opponent claims he will end the blame game in the Federation.  What he's really saying is that all criticism of state and territory governments - all of which happen to be Labor - is off limits.  He talks about saving money by getting rid of duplication.  Yet many of his actions point to more overlap and duplication.  A large slab of his so-called 


E&amp;OE...
It has undoubtedly been one of the most warming experiences of the Australian nation, particularly of those generations who fought in the wars in which this country has been involved to see over the last 10 or 20 years a resurgence of affection for and observance of ANZAC Day. The extraordinary scenes of thousands of young Australians going to Gallipoli Peninsula on ANZAC Day, the growing numbers of young people attending ANZAC Day services sends a very powerful message of reassurance to all generations of Australians that this most special of all Australian days will always be at the centre of our national life. 
And as we search for a meaning and an explanation for this great affection, it lies not only in the enormous debt that can never be repaid, but those of us who are fortunate enough to live in Australia in 2007 owe to the more than 100,000 of our fellow Australians who gave their lives in all the wars in which this nation has been involved and on this day we particularly remember the extraordinary sacrifice that they made; so many of them, so very, very young. And one of the most moving experiences anyone can have is to visit the war cemeteries of Gallipoli, of northern France, of Singapore, of the Middle East and all around the world where the heroic deeds of Australians are honoured and remembered.
But in addition to our sense of gratitude and that sense of owing a debt that can never be repaid, there is another reason why ANZAC Day will always be at the centre of the affections and the observance of what it means to be an Australian. And that is the values that the ANZAC tradition represent in our national life. Those values of courage, of mateship, of irreverence and larrikinism where that was appropriate; of sterling discipline and tenacious commitment when that was appropriate and a willingness to risk all for the defence of the country we love and the people we love.  And it is the values of ANZAC Day as well as the sense of gratitude and remembrance that make it a special day in our national life. And as the years go by, so far from the tradition and the legend of ANZAC diminishing, it will occupy an evermore hallowed place in the recollection and the observance of this country.
Now on this day we simply, all of us who owe so much to those who did and in many cases 100,000 fold gave their all, we say our thank you. We will never forget them. May they always rest in peace.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
I thought I'd had my morning walk already but... Mr Leon Kempler, Mr Hugh Morgan, and Mr Solomon Lew, ladies and gentlemen. And I thank you Solly for those very kind words of introduction, they were very generous and very, very, touching. This is not the first time that I have addressed this Chamber of Commerce, and I do so in the spirit of unwavering commitment to the bilateral relationship between Australia and the State of Israel. There are important economic dimensions to that relationship, and the contribution that the Chamber has made to building the strength of that bilateral economic relationship has been very important and I remember my visit to Israel in 2000 as Prime Minister at the height of the hopes that were then entertained about a settlement with the Palestinians, unfortunately those hopes were to be dashed, not through a lack of resolve and commitment on behalf of the then Prime Minister of Ehud Barak, but rather the intransigence of the Chairman of the Palestinian Council, but I do remember that visit very well, and I was accompanied by quite a number of members of the Chamber who are here today. And the Government will continue to do all it can to expand and diversify that economic relationship, but the bilateral relationship between our two societies is deeper and broader than the economic one. It is a relationship founded on common values, of the freedom and dignity of the individual, a robust commitment to democracy, and a determination to stand together against the forces of terrorism, and the forces in the Middle East that are determined to deny Israel the right to exist free from attack and molestation, and I take this opportunity of re-committing my Government to, not only a strong pursuit of a settlement in the Middle East based on the two-state solution, but also an unwavering determination to support diplomatically, not only through the United Nations, but in other ways, a proper protection of the legitimate rights of the State and the people of Israel.
Israel's courageous defence of her territorial integrity since the formation of that state back in 1948 has won the admiration of millions of people around the world, and millions of people in Australia. We respect and recognise the legitimate aspirations of the people of Palestine to also achieve statehood and independence, but it must be on the basis of proper respect and regard for the rights of people of Israel, and the undoubted right of those people and those state to exist within secure, internationally recognised, and thoroughly defensible boundaries. One would have to be a supreme optimist to believe that such an outcome is likely to be achieved in the near future. But optimism is infinitely preferable to pessimism when it comes to the Middle East, and I want to make it very clear before this gathering, that my Government remains determined to persevere with our commitment to the people of Iraq, our determination to stay a good participant in the coalition until such time as the people of Iraq, through their own security forces, are able to provide reasonably for their own security future. The alternative, and that is an outcome that would represent a perceived defeat for the United States and for the coalition in Iraq, would represent a devastating blow to the hopes of a stable future for the Middle East. It would embolden the Iranians, it would unsettle and destabilise the more moderate elements amongst the Arab states in the region, and it would represent a monumental victory for the cause of international terrorism. The idea that a coalition or American defeat n Iraq would be anything other than the most enormous boost to terrorism, not only in the Middle East, but around the world, the idea that it would be anything other than that, is very, very unsoundly based.
Now it remains very much in Australia's national interests, as well as in the interests of the cause that we hold in common with other democratic nations around the world, the fight against terrorism, that the coalition's mission in Iraq, difficult though it is, be persevered with. And to those who criticise our position, I pose a simple question, if it is legitimate and right to deny the terrorists a victory in Afghanistan, why isn't it legitimate and right to deny the terrorists a victory in Iraq?
It seems to me to be a very simple equation, but ladies and gentlemen, I have come here at your invitation to say something as I have about the personal commitment I have to the relationship between Australia and the State of Israel, and also of course to take the opportunity to pay tribute to the extraordinary commitment over generations that the Jewish community has made to the life and shaping of our nation, and it seems entirely appropriate that I should address this gathering the day after Anzac Day, because Australia has had no greater Jewish son than John Monash, and his extraordinary leadership skills rated quite rightly by Les Carlyon in his wonderful work on The Great War released only a few months ago, rated along with the Canadian General Arthur Currie as being the greatest Field Commander of World War I, a man that demonstrated extraordinary leadership skills, he is a metaphor in so many ways for the contribution that the Jewish community has made to the Australian nation.
I also want to say something about the state of Australia, something about the mood, and the sense of hope and optimism that people feel about our country. I thank Solomon Lew for the remarks he made about what has happened in Australia over the last eleven years. We are enjoying the longest unbroken, economic expansion in our history, these are the best of times for the Australian economy but they are also times that cannot be taken for granted. We don't have prosperity by accident, the prosperity we now have does not rest entirely as some would allege on the resources boom. It is wrong to suggest that only the resources boom has given us our economic prosperity, it is of course as Don Argus in his classic capacity for understatement once said to me, ‘now is a good time to be in mining', it certainly is a very, very good time to be in mining, but there is a bit more to it than that. If you look back over the last 15 years, you see major decisions as having been taken that have strengthened the underpinnings of the Australian economy.
If we could take ourselves and those in the room who are able to do it back to a period say around about 1980, we would have looked at the Australian economy and we would have said what this Australian economy needs to do is to undertake major reform in five areas. We need to deregulate our financial system, we need to do something about our high tariffs, which are not really creating a competitive environment, we need to reform our taxation system, we need to get the government out of business enterprises because governments are lousy when it comes to running businesses and finally and very importantly we need to do something about our arthritic industrial relations system.
Now they were the five great reforms that any objective observer of the Australian economy in 1980 would have said needed to be undertaken. And now 27 years later, just over a quarter of a century later, we have in fact achieved all of those major reforms and can I put it to you that it is achieving those five major reforms, more than anything else, more than the mining boom, more than anything else which is responsible for the current strength of the Australian economy where it's possible to say we have a 32-year low in unemployment. Over the last year the number of long term unemployed in Australia, that is people who have been out of work for more than 12 months has actually declined by something close to 25 per cent. And that is the real human dividend of a strong economy when people who have been struggling for years to get a job and have found it very hard finally can get a job in a very buoyant labour market.
And the importance of the commitment that has been made to reform in those areas is demonstrated by the very strong economy that we have, and as I have always done, I acknowledge that some of those reforms were carried out by the former Labor Government. And I make the point that when they proposed those reforms, they had the strong support of the Liberal and National Parties in opposition and those reforms have been built on over the last 11 years. I have to say, however, that at every turn we have been opposed by the Australian Labor Party in opposition. But I have always argued in public life that it is not only governments and it's not only political parties in government that have responsibilities for good public policy, it's also oppositions that have responsibility for good public policy. You can't expect to have credibility as a political movement if you in effect say to the Australian public ‘well don't take any notice of what I do in Opposition. I am entitled to behave as irresponsibly and as opposed to the national interest as I can while I am in opposition but once I get in government it's an entirely different matter.' You are on display and you are accountable for what you do both in opposition as well as in government.
But we have been able to reform our economy because we've moved in those five areas. But right now, one of those major changes, that is reforming our workplace relations system, is under very significant threat. If we roll back; or let me put it more precisely and very directly and unapologetically to you, if a future Labor government rolls back the workplace relations reforms that my Government has enacted under the title of WorkChoices, that will represent the first time in a generation that this country has reversed a major economic reform. And that spells bad news for the Australian economy on two accounts. It says to the Australian people that governments have lost their stomach for major reform and it also says to the rest of the world that this country is no longer committed to further economic reform in the future. Because the reality is that today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms, and tomorrow's prosperity can only be based on today's reforms.
So what is at stake in relation to our industrial relations changes? And I won't weary you with the details except to make the observation that what is being proposed is a scuttling of Australian Workplace Agreements. Ironically the very resources boom that our opponents say is the foundation of our current wealth, a proposition that I dispute, but even if you accept it for the purposes of discussion, our opponents are proposing to pull away one of the central underpinnings of that resources boom, and that is the widespread use of Australian Workplace Agreements in the mining industry, especially in Western Australia but also in other parts of the country. But the cost in terms of the international reputation of this country as being a nation that is prepared to undertake important economic reforms would be very significant.
And I thought of this yesterday when my press secretary told me that I had been asked to contribute a piece as Prime Minister of Australia to a British magazine which is doing an edition assessing the legacy and the contribution of Tony Blair to British life and to international life. I like Tony Blair. He may belong to the British Labour Party and he may therefore have different views than I do on a number of issues, but I have respected Tony Blair's commitment to the international fight against terrorism, his willingness to confront where required his own party in order to argue for what he believes is in the interests of the United Kingdom. And I have also admired Tony Blair's recognition of the historic changes that have occurred in the British economy and in British society.
And undoubtedly the most seminal moment in the early years of Tony Blair's prime ministership was when he stood before the Trade Union Congress, which is the equivalent in Britain of our ACTU and said that fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job. And he went on to say that the industrial relations reforms that had been carried out by Margaret Thatcher's Government, which transformed the British economy from the sick economy of Europe to arguably Europe's strongest economy in 2007 that it was essential he told the Trade Union Congress that those reforms be kept in place. Because although they had been opposed by the labour movement in opposition, they were reforms that were essential to the long term prosperity of the British economy. I make no further comment on comparisons that one might seek to draw between different leaders of labour parties around the world.
Finally my friends, can I say to all of you that when you talk about the strength of an economy and when you talk about economic achievement, you should never look at it in isolation from the impact it has on people. Good economic policy, a budget in surplus, good monetary policy, low inflation, hopefully continued low interest rates; none of those things are ends in themselves. They are only means to an end. They are means to achieving what I have described as a great human dividend. And the greatest human dividend I have always believed is the dignity of work that a strong economy gives to as many as possible of its citizens. And of all the human dividends that have been achieved over the last 11 years, none has been more important than the success we have had in Australia in bringing down our level of unemployment.
Employment, a worthwhile job, provides men and women with a sense of worth and a sense of dignity and there can be nothing more soul destroying and destructive of the human spirit, especially in an apparently prosperous community which ours undoubtedly is, than the feeling that somehow or other you are missing out. And I regard that human dividend as being, after all, what good economic policy and good economic management is all about.
I leave you with the thought that whatever we have achieved over the last 11 years has more than anything been due to the spirit and hard work of the men and women of our country. People are kind enough to say things about government policy and that government policy is important. But I think what we have seen in this country over the last decade is the unleashing of an entrepreneurial spirit, a commitment to the future, a belief in self and a belief in this nation, the like of which we've not had in such measure certainly in my lifetime. Australia has always been a highly regarded nation but over the last decade or more our economic performance, our willingness to stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies and friends often in the face of great unpopularity, fighting terrorism and working to achieve just outcomes has won this country enormous respect and admiration.
I want to thank the Chamber for its contribution to the civic life of Australia. I want to thank the Chamber for the contribution it makes to that precious bilateral relationship between Australia and Israel, and I want to thank all of you very warmly for honouring me in inviting me to attend and address today's luncheon. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.44Mb - 94secs)
Good morning,
In the next few days, we'll witness the ritualistic phoney war of a Labor Party national conference.
As in the past, the Labor leader will make a great play of staring down his critics from the left.  
It would be comical if it wasn't such an insult to the intelligence of the Australian people.
The real test for Mr Rudd is to lay out in detail his agenda to keep our economy strong.
During 11 years in Opposition, the Labor Party has not developed a coherent alternative economic policy.  In 11 years, it has not developed a credible tax policy. 
Mr Rudd, moreover,  has no way of explaining to the Australian people the economic consequences of his policy to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent.  He admits he not carried out any analysis of the impact this policy would have on jobs or investment in our country.
In the past 11 years, Labor has failed to come to grips with the transformation of modern Australia.
Only 15 per cent of the private sector workforce belongs to a union, yet Labor wants to take Australia back to a union-dominated bargaining system in our workplaces.
Now is the time for Mr Rudd to tell Sharan Burrow and the union movement that rolling back economic reform is bad for Australia; that fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job; and that Australia cannot afford the first major reversal of economic reform in a generation.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.44Mb - 94secs)


E&amp;OE... Mr President David Kemp and can I join Peter Costello in paying tribute to Russell Hannan for the wonderful work he did as a steward and as a leader of the Victorian division in very difficult circumstances, we are profoundly in your debt Russell for the contribution that you have made to our great cause. I also want to express my personal delight that David Kemp, who has given so much over such a long period of time has become unanimously the President of this division of the Liberal Party. I know and admire David, he served a former Liberal Prime Minister with great commitment, he worked in the organisation through difficult years, and he served as a fine minister in my Government, and I thank him for his further commitment to our great cause in a very difficult year.
I also thank Peter Costello, the architect more than anybody else of the great economic prosperity that Australia has at the present time, for the wonderful contribution he has made as Treasurer, as Deputy Leader, as part of a Prime Ministerial-Treasurer partnership without parallel in the political history of Australia.
Last Monday, my fellow Australians, I delivered a speech in Brisbane, which is the first of a series I'll be delivering over the weeks and months ahead, detailing the Coalition's forward agenda for our nation. Under the theme of ‘Australia Rising', that speech and the others will address those things that will be particularly important to the Australia that we might face by the year 2020. I have chosen the year 2020 because it is a period of time where the children of today will be young adults. It's a period of time ahead, but not so unrealistically ahead that current generations of Australians cannot relate to it. And to understand what the policies needed for that time period are we need to understand the character of the nation and the world in which we will live in 2020. We need to understand that although we've made progress, we will still face the problem of an ageing population. We need to understand that externally, we live in a world where the epicentre has shifted to an even greater extent, to the Asian region, that the emergence, for the first time since the industrial revolution of a truly world middle-class in our part of the world, and we will face in 2020, as we face today the imperative of skilful economic management in a world with a fundamental conflict between economic globalisation, yet political fragmentation.
Political parties, be it the Liberal Party or the Labor Party or indeed any other party are judged not only by what they plan for the future, but also by what they have done in the past. And this applies to political parties, whether they are in government or opposition, you can't pretend to be a serious political party, by adopting the approach that it doesn't matter what we do in opposition, it's what we do in government that is the only thing that matters. Yesterday, before he made his speech, I said that the greatest challenge my opponent faced was to outline a clear and coherent plan, a credible plan to keep the Australian economy strong and prosperous into the future. I listened, I listened very intently to everything he had to say, every single thing he had to say, and I listened in vain, and the Australian people listened in vain for that coherent alternative, credible, economic plan as to how he, if he became Prime Minister, might keep Australia strong into the future. And when it didn't come across I said to myself, why on earth wouldn't he, at this of all conferences, outline his plan for the future, to the Australian people, how a Rudd government would keep the economy strong, and I came to the conclusion that maybe, maybe he has realised to his great embarrassment, the fundamental dilemma in which the Labor Party now finds itself. You see, it wants the Australian people to take good economic management and the prosperous times we may have as a political campaign given, in other words he runs around Australia and says ‘now look we are responsible economic managers, we believe in keeping budgets in balance, we believe in strong fiscal policy, we believe in low interest rates, we believe that the future of Australia can have as its starting point, the strength of today'.
Yet he's deep and abiding problem is that he opposed the creation of the strength of today. His deep and abiding problem is that at every turn he opposed this government building today's prosperity; he opposed getting the Budget back into surplus; he opposed paying off $96 billion of debt; he opposed the privatisation of Telstra which helped pay off that $96 billion of government debt; he opposed the reform of the waterfront in 1998; he opposed the, along with his colleagues, the recent industrial relations reforms of 1996; he opposed taxation reform; and he opposed the latest round of industrial relations reform.
In other words, as Peter put it so humorously and so effectively, he wants to have it both ways. He wants to be excused of his follies of the past as a member of an opposition that has been the most negative in recent Australian history but take as his starting point, the very strengths of the Australian economy which the effort of the Australian people, encouraged by the policies that we have produced has helped bring about. Can I say to you my friends that political parties have responsibilities in opposition as well as in government, and when we were in opposition, we supported those sensible economic reforms that the Hawke and Keating governments introduced. We supported the deregulation of the financial system, that after all had been a policy I developed when I was Treasurer, we supported the removal of tariff protection that was having a stultifying effect on the competitive efforts of the Australian economy and we in fact gave more support to the rather tepid efforts at taxation reform that were undertaken when the Labor Party was in government. So, it's not surprising that in opposition, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Rudd and his colleagues find it difficult to articulate an alternative economic plan, because they know in their hearts the very prosperity we have now, which is the foundation for what we might plan for in the future, was opposed every inch of the way by the Australian Labor Party.
They cannot have it both ways, they can't claim the current strong economy as a bipartisan given, when they have opposed every major reform effort of the last decade. Now as I listened to that speech yesterday, I kept hearing this expression, Mr Howard is out of touch, and I thought dear oh me. I thought dear oh me, that is a withering assault, I've never heard that allegation made by one political leader against another in my life, I thought dear what a novel proposition, and then I said to myself, am I really out of touch, maybe I am, and I looked around said to some of my staff am I out of touch? And they reassured me I wasn't of course, no you are not you are not the least bit out of touch. And I thought more seriously, I thought to myself, is it really out of touch to have a 32-year low in unemployment? Is it really out of touch to have seen long-term unemployment in this country decline by almost a quarter in the last year? Is it really out of touch to be Prime Minister of a country where housing interest rates are now 8 per cent and not 17 per cent or 21 per cent for small business, or 23 per cent for those poor struggling farmers on their bill rates in the late 1980s and early 1990s? Is it out of touch to have paid off $96 billion of the nation's debt and is it out of touch to have pulled off the foreign policy double of the decade, having built ever-closer relationships with the United States, whilst building a deep and productive friendship and partnership with China for all of that means for our future and for the future of our region. And finally, I asked myself the rhetorical question, is it really out of touch to have put the jobs of northern Tasmanian timber workers ahead of blind ideology as I did I 2004 and let me take that opportunity of saying directly to the coal miners of this country, that in developing policies to deal with climate change, my Government will never put ideology and blind populism ahead of the jobs of Australian workers.
But as I listened to that speech I saw a slogan, you know they, I hadn't you know, I had seen that before actually, I have seen political leaders have you know a statement on front of their podium like ‘keeping interest rates low', and let me make the point again in case anybody thinks I don't remain attracted to the notion, I can guarantee you something about interest rates, and Peter Costello can guarantee you something about interest rates, they will always be much lower under the Coalition than under Labor. But what the slogan said was fresh ideas, new thought, new visions, fresh hope, new ideas, and I thought well, we'll all listen for them. They didn't come, but then I am out of touch, may be I wasn't listening properly. Then I thought to myself, funny about that slogan, this conference is all about fresh ideas, yet the two things that are dominating the conference, are what? Uranium mining, and industrial relations, and if ever there were two issues where the Labor Party is bereft of fresh ideas and new hope and new inspiration, it's uranium mining and industrial relations.
In the area of industrial relations and they are debating it as I speak to you. The Labor Party is mired in old-fashioned thinking, the Labor Party has delivered a policy that will return control of industrial relations in this country to the union bosses, they have put union power ahead of workers' jobs; they promised to destroy a policy which has seen over the last year 263,000 new jobs created, 90 per cent of which are full time, a policy which has seen a continued rise in real wages so that in the 11 years of the Howard Government, real wages in this country have risen by 19.7 per cent, yet in the 13 years of Labor, they actually declined by 1.7 per cent, and we now have the lowest level of industrial disputes in Australia, since a year before the outbreak of The Great War since 1913, you have to go back to 1913 to find a level of industrial disputation in our nation that is lower than what it is now, and Labor would destroy all of that in the name of ideology, in the name of bowing before their union masters, and if you think that is mere rhetoric, let me remind you that 70 per cent of the Labor Party frontbench is made up of former union officials. There's a long honour roll of them, that goes one after the other. You've got Martin Ferguson, you've Simon Crean, you've got Jennie George, and you are going to soon have Bill Shorten, and you will soon of course despite any protestations to the contrary, you are going to have Greg Combet.
But they are the well-known ones. The not so well-known ones of course comprise the rest of the frontbench and they all have had various positions in the union movement. I don't denigrate the role of trade unionists in our society, I don't for a moment gainsay the situation where a reasonable number of them are members of parliament, but when you have only 15 per cent of the private sector workforce now belonging to a trade union, there is something hopelessly, dare I say it, out of touch. Where the political party has 70 per cent, I mean 15 equals 70, dear oh me.
So, the industrial relations mantra of the Labor Party is mired in the past, this week we had unveiled Fair Work Australia, which is a new all-embracing completely unconstitutional body, I mean one of the things I do remember from my constitutional law lectures back in 1957 was that you can't have a federal body which exercises both judicial and non-judicial power, and for a trade union-dominated party, I am surprised that they have forgotten the relevance of the Boilermakers case, which was precisely the case that decided that particular issue. So, Labor would return industrial relations in this country to the control of the union bosses, and it would represent a triumph of union power over the jobs of workers, and the rights and interests of workers. Everything that Peter Costello said about the evils of centralised wage-fixation would be brought back. The affordable high wages in the mining industry would flow relentlessly through the economy, and they would lead to a fall in profitability, thus a fall in employment, and with the human consequences of that involved in the rest of the economy. And of course, the worst commitment of all that Labor has made is to bring back the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws for small business. Small business is breathing fresh air like it's never breathed before over the last year, because of the removal of the unfair dismissal laws. Every many and woman in this audience that's in small business, and there are hundreds of you, because that's the nature of our great party, know just how crippling those old unfair dismissal laws were. The way in which they discouraged people from taking on new staff through fear that if something didn't work out, you couldn't let them go without being told by some official, some industrial relations official that you had to pay them $30,000 or $40,000 go away money, so that you could get on with running your business. And $30,000 or $40,000 is often the difference between a pittance and a reasonable living for many of the small business men and women of Australia, and that's the sort of misery that this Labor opposition would visit on small business again.
So my friends, there's nothing fresh, although there is plenty of ideology about the commitment of Labor to bring back the old ways in the area of industrial relations with enormous consequences for our economy, and for the levels of employment. And the other issue my friends that the Labor Party is debating today is the issue of uranium mining, now we all know what the result is going to be, I mean I said the way they talk about debates at these ALP Conferences is a little bit how they talk about, used to talk about rather, elections in the old communist Russia, you know, they use to line up and cast their ballots, and they say surprise surprise, Nikita Khrushchev got re-elected. I mean let me tell you, Mr Rudd will win the debate, of course he will, they can't do anything else. They'll deliver him a victory on uranium mining. But in the modern world it's all irrelevant. We resolved this more than 25 years ago. Margaret Guilfoyle down there and I were part of a Government that established something called the Ranger Inquiry, and it was presided over Mr Justice Fox. And what did he find? He found that we ought to export uranium from....mine and export uranium in Australia from any where, provided it was done under proper safeguards and he laid down what the safeguards should be, and that's how the law and the operation has been in this country for the last 25 years, except, of course, that state Labor governments have never cooperated in fully implementing that policy. And what the Labor Party today will go through, and they'll go through all the charade, in the end, there'll be a triumphant victory for the leader of the Labor Party in getting them to embrace a policy that we embraced between 25 and 30 years ago. And then they will have the nerve to go out say this is a fresh idea.
The reality ladies and gentlemen is that the two issues that dominate the agenda at this ALP Conference are issues that communicate to the world that the Labor Party is still fighting the battles of yesteryear or mired in the ideology of yesteryear. And what they have to say about the future of our nation in areas like this is absolutely zero. We resolved the issue of uranium mining more than 25 years ago. And uranium mining and the associated issue of nuclear power is once again deservedly front and centre of debate, not only here, but around the world in relation to the important issue of climate change. I believe that this nation, along with others, must take steps to deal with the challenge of greenhouse gas emissions. Whatever our range of views may be about the scale of the challenge, and the intensity of the threat, it is prudent and sensible and good public policy in the right thing for Australia to be part of the process. And we have to tackle this problem on every available front, and we must tackle it free of ideology, and we must tackle it based on science and based on good healthy Australian commonsense. We have to understand the nature of our economy. Our economy is virtually unique; a low population, a very high standard of living, vast amounts of fossil fuel and other resources and a huge largely uninhabited continent. Now there aren't many other countries in the world that can answer that description. And the last thing that we should do, and this is meant in no way disrespectfully to our friends in Europe, we shouldn't adopt the European solution for an Australian problem.
We need to examine every option. We need to embrace clean coal technology. The cheapest source of electricity generation in this country is obviously coal, it's very cheap, it's very plentiful, it's very available but it's also very dirty in its combustion. And if you are to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions you must progressively find an alternative to what you can loosely call the current use of coal. And that inevitably brings you into clean coal technology, and as you do that, you must accept that the cost of generating electricity is going to go up because using clean coal is dearer than using existing coal. And as you use the dearer coal something else becomes more economic, and something that's even cleaner than clean coal, and that, of course, is nuclear power. And the advice I have, not from a pollster, or from anybody in the business community, but by somebody no less then the Chief Scientist of Australia, is that there are only two sources of power generation that can sustain the power plants that we need, the base load power plants that we need in this country, and that is fossil fuel or nuclear power. And inevitably part of the solution, part of the solution, must be to admit of the use in years to come of nuclear power in this country. And that is why I'm announcing today a strategy for the future development of uranium mining and nuclear power in Australia because I believe it to be our responsibility if we are serious about tackling the problem of climate change to embrace and promote clean coal technology, to put the nuclear option on the table, to acknowledge and promote the use of renewables where they can make a contribution. Wind and solar power can make a contribution and they deserve appropriate levels of encouragement and support, but you cannot run power stations on wind or solar power. You can only run them on fossil fuels or on nuclear power. Now that is the stark reality that we must face and if we are really serious about, years into the future, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, we must acknowledge at least the contribution that in time nuclear power can make to that. And I'm not talking here about something that's revolutionary and untried. Fifteen per cent of the world's electricity is already generated by nuclear power. France generates 80 per cent of her electricity by nuclear power. California, 27 per cent of her electricity is generated by nuclear power. And although it is some years into the future, it's not economic now, of course it's not, because it's still very economic to continue with current coal use, but if we're serious we can't do that indefinitely. So we really then have to move on from that to clean coal, and that's dearer and that makes uranium produced nuclear power more attractive and more economic. And that is why if we're fair dinkum about this climate change debate, we have to open our minds to the use of nuclear power. Yet the Labor Party today will solemnly go through this old fashioned, meaningless ritual of repealing their three mine policy, something that we dealt with more than a generation ago, and say they are a party of fresh ideas, yet they will set their faces forever against embracing nuclear power and pretend, when they know in their hearts, it's an invalid proposition that you can somehow run power stations into the future....in the future on fossil fuel or solar power.
So ladies and gentlemen we need to take action now to prepare the way for the contribution that nuclear power will make to challenging the problem of greenhouse gas emissions. And it's very important that we plan now so that as the introduction of clean coal technology creates pressures for cheaper and cleaner alternatives we are ready to provide them. And we need to take some immediate action to remove unnecessary constraints impeding the expansion of uranium mining, and to make a firm commitment to Australia's participation in the Generation IV advanced nuclear reactor research program. There's a great scare campaign always conducted by some when you talk about nuclear power, the reality is that the modern generation for nuclear power plants are very safe, safer indeed than many alternative sources of power generation. So ladies and gentlemen if we are serious about tackling, in the longer term, the challenge of climate change, and we all are and we all must be because it will affect all of us, we must be honest enough and courageous enough to put all of the options on the table.
And could I just say one other thing about climate change, and that is this. It's not a question of choosing between the planet and the economy, it's a question of choosing between solutions to climate change that will destroy the economy and destroy jobs, and solutions to climate change that will promote economic growth and preserve jobs. Placing a target, or embracing a target on greenhouse gas emissions, imposing a cap on greenhouse gas emissions, to which this country commits itself, will be one of the momentous economic decisions that any country can take. It will affect every part of the economy as we move towards it. And in those circumstances we should not embrace a target unless and until we know what the consequences of embracing that target will be. We should not as Labor has done pluck a target developed by the Europeans for European circumstances and not for Australians circumstances out of the air and say, we're going to commit to that. And the other night Mr Swan on television was asked about his 60 per cent target, and he was asked whether he knew what the consequences were, and he says no I don't. I mean how on earth can you claim to be the alternative treasurer of this country when you cannot tell the Australian people what the economic consequences of your climate change target might be. It is the height of political and economic irresponsibility. We at the moment are awaiting, and I'll get it next month, the recommendations of a task group involving the Government and the business sector in both resources and energy about the development of an emissions trading system in this country. We have to be part of that, but we've got to do it in a way that protects Australia's competitive position. We've got to do it in a modern way that takes account of technology and future developments and we've got to do it in a way that is compatible with developments in other parts of the world. And I simply make this commitment to the Australian people; that if my Government embraces a target in this area it will be a target that will protect the economic strength and maintain the full employment world in which Australia now inhabits.
My friends we face a great struggle. I've always been very candid with members of the Liberal Party about the nature of our political struggle. This is not a time for any kind of complacency. We are behind at present, of course we are, we all read the polls and we all understand that. But we've behind before and we've won and in the end what will ultimately vindicate this party and its stance, is that more than any other political party in Australia, it does represent the cross section of the Australian people. We are owned by nobody. As I look around this vast crowd I don't say well they must be the 30 per cent that come from this part of industry, over there's the small business 40 per cent and down there is Collins Street with their 25 per cent or whatever, we're not like that. We welcome people from all sections of the community, we are proud of our commitment to creating good conditions for business to flourish in Australia. I plead guilty to being pro-business and pro-private enterprise because that is what growth and employment in Australia is all about. Without profitable firms and strong companies you don't have full employment. How could we have ever got to 4.5 per cent unemployment in this country if we haven't had had risk takers, the business men and women of this country that are prepared to invest and employ people. But at the end of the day we decide what policies we implement. Unlike the Labor Party, we're not told by an outside force what our policies should be. At the end of the year we will face an electoral contest with the Australian Labor Party and if the Australian Labor Party wins it will be first time since Federation that Labor has been in power at every level of government in this country. I asked you at the beginning of my speech to think of Australia in 2020, that's 13 years into the future, I asked you to think of an Australia at the end of the year with wall to wall Labor governments. Labor governing without lead or hinderance, without check or balance, at every level of government in this country, and in the full knowledge that when it comes to things that affect our lives, they will be told what to do by their union masters. They will not only be told what to do by their union masters, but a large number of the ministers of that government will in fact be recruits from the ranks of the union bosses. Now that is the kind of challenge we face and the implications of that for governance in this country, the absence of the checks and balances that are so important in any democratic society, or on it's own to be a cause of concern and an added impetus and an added way in which we recommit to the great cause, a cause to re-elect a government that has kept faith with the promise that I made at the Wentworth Hotel in Sydney on the 2nd of March 1996, that we would govern for those who voted against us as well as governing for those that voted for us. That is why we have driven unemployment to a 32 year low, that is why I am proud to say that our tax and welfare policies have resulted in a redistribution of support to the lower end of the income earning brackets of this country; that is why I'm able to say that survey after survey does not reveal that the gap between the rich and poor has widened, the reality is that the rich have got richer, but the poor in our community have become less poor because of the policies of this Government. And the greatest thing that we have done for the less well off in this nation is to give them a chance of a job. And a Labour leader that I do admire very much, Tony Blair, had something to say about this after he became Prime Minister of Great Britain. He said that fairness in the workplace starts with the chance of a job. And that is a mantra and that's a statement of the obvious that the leader of the Australian Labor Party could well take to heart because unlike Mr Blair who had the courage to tell the trade union movement before he became Prime Minister that it had to abandon its opposition to the industrial relations reforms of the former Conservative government, Mr Rudd has lacked the courage to tell his union masters that his party should do the same. The comparison could not be starker. Ladies and gentlemen, I thank the members of the Victorian Division for their magnificent loyalty and support over the years. Our cause is just, our record is something of which we should be proud, the challenge is immense but the duty we owe to the Australian people is to win so that the success of the last year and the prosperity that we now enjoy, which is a sure foundation for further growth and further prosperity can be assured. Thank you.


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.52Mb - 99secs)
It is often said that political parties are judged not only on what they have done in the past but also what they plan for the future. 
My Government is proud of its record of strong economic management. 
Keeping the Budget in balance has allowed us to provide for defence and national security, health, education, roads and the environment and lay out a $10 billion national plan for water security.
 The Australian public has now been waiting 11 years to hear how the Labor Party proposes to keep the $1 trillion Australian economy strong and prosperous into the future. 
They are still waiting. 
The Labor Party conference over the weekend provided a perfect platform for the Opposition leader to outline a clear and credible plan to maintain the prosperity that Australia has enjoyed for 16 years in a row.  
Economic growth is not a given. It requires careful, responsible stewardship and the willingness to take the tough decisions now to ensure that growth continues for the next generation of Australian families. 
Instead of an economic blueprint, the Labor Party spent the weekend working out the best way to turn back the clock and reassert union influence in the workplace, even though just 15 per cent of the private sector workforce now belongs to a union.  
With no debate at all, the Opposition leader caved in, handing the union bosses everything they wanted.   
The only subject up for discussion was uranium mining, an issue that the Liberal Party debated and resolved its position on a generation ago.  
Time has moved on. The Labor Party must catch-up and outline a 21st Century plan to secure Australia's economic future.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.52Mb - 99secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well ladies and gentlemen, Mr Macfarlane and I are delighted to be here at Goodrich and I would like to thank John Dwyer and all the team at Goodrich for allowing us to launch this very important industry statement here and to give me an opportunity of meeting the workforce and to learn something of the high precision absolutely critical work that is carried out here, which is very important to Australia's defence effort. And the last 10 minutes have been very illuminating for me in having explained the highly precise and very, very important work that is carried out which is so important to maintaining our Hornets, the FA-18s and also, in time, very important in relation to the Joint Strike Fighter Project which is going to be the cornerstone years into the future of Australia's air defence system. 
And the purpose of this announcement is to outline to you a $1.4 billion extra commitment, all extra new dollars over the next 10 years to assist Australian industry. And this policy has been put together by the Minister after a year of consulting large and small firms within the broad spectrum of manufacturing and other industry in this country. It is important that we remind ourselves on a regular basis that Australia's economic miracle and Australia's export strength is not just built on mining. Mining is important, but it's not the only pebble on the beach. The other very important elements of Australia's industrial performance lie in the manufacturing and service sectors of the economy, not, of course, to forget agriculture. And the whole theme of this policy is to further the process of global integration and to take advantage of the markets that are available for Australian manufacturing around the world. 
The major initiatives comprise a new $254 million Global Opportunities Program that will help Australian firms win work in global supply chains and major projects. A niche contribution of $11 million over two years to pursue some export opportunities under the Australia/United States Free Trade Agreement.  A very important decision to extend the eligibility of the 175 per cent premium R&amp;D concession to ensure that multi-nationals undertake more research and development in Australia. And that will better link our innovation base with the global economy. It's a realistic decision recognising the global character of the economy in which we're now involved and also recognising the size of the Australian economy. We're also going to expand the export, finance and insurance corporation. We're going to invest $351 million in the Australian Industry Productivity Centres, a new $90 million Commercial Ready Plus program and $14 million over two years to extend the Building Entrepreneurship in Small Business program and $54 million to support innovation in the food processing industry through grants to pursue innovation projects.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Australian economy is performing very well indeed at the present time. We have a 32 year low in unemployment. We have strong outlooks for growth in many areas of the economy but it's important that we reinforce the commitment of this country to the central role of manufacturing industry. And this program is designed to do that. It's designed to make us integrate more readily into the global economy. It's designed to build on the skills of the Australian workforce and most importantly it's designed to maintain Australia's competitive edge around the world. There are many policies that contribute to that and this particular package; and I congratulate the Minister and his Department on the work they have done to put it together, will make a major contribution to that. And I have great pleasure in launching this industry statement which will in my view contribute very significantly to the strengthening of manufacturing in Australia.
Now I'd be happy, with assistance on highly technical subjects, to answer any questions on this or indeed on any other subject of political comment in Australia at the present time. Any questions?
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, how appropriate is it that you're launching this here today in that I understand this company recently had to lay off 30 workers because it lost out on a contract to China?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think that just reinforces the point. You need to give Australian industry more help to more effectively compete. So I think it's entirely appropriate that we should do that.
JOURNALIST:
Do you acknowledge then that companies like this are missing out on work....
PRIME MINISTER:
Well what I acknowledge is that you can always provide companies with more help and that is exactly what this is doing, consistent with recognising that we do live in a competitive world environment and companies have to largely stand on their own feet. But if we can make sure that barriers to strong competition are removed, then we ought to do so and that's what this program is designed to do.
JOURNALIST:
What do you think, Prime Minister, of Julia Gillard's warning to business that it will be injured if it continues to support your IR laws?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that sounds like a threat to me. When you say that it's a rough and tumble body contact sport, Australian politics, and that's what she effectively said, and when you talk about companies getting injured, that sounds to me like Julia Gillard, who'd be Deputy Prime Minister in a Labor Government saying to business if you speak out in support of Coalition policies and we win we'll bash you up.  I mean, that is essentially is what she is saying and that's no mean threat because if Labor wins this election there'll be Labor governments everywhere and there will no safe havens for people and the Labor Party's done this before.  The Housing Industry Association in 1993 campaigned in favour of the Coalition and for two years after Mr Keating's re-election nobody in the government spoke to them. They were told that this was a payback for having supported the Coalition.  Now that's no way to run a country, it's no way to conduct policy. Business is entitled individually or collectively to express their views. The unions have got a right to express their views, I'm not threatening any retribution to the trade union movement because it's spending tens of millions of dollars and there won't be any retribution from me against the trade union movement.  The trade union movement has got a right to exist, they've got a right to express their view, they've got a right to spend the money they levy from their members in campaigning against the Government.  That's their right.  I don't like it, but it's their right and I don't think the Deputy Leader of the Labor Party should be engaging in bully boy tactics and threatening business with retribution if they express their views on our policies.
JOURNALIST:
Do you expect that business will now launch an advertising campaign?
PRIME MINISTER:
I have no idea what business will do.  That's a matter for them, it's not my money, it's their money.  But I have made the point before that I hope that people who believe in the industrial relations reforms that have created 270,000 new jobs over the last year, those who want to keep the current policy will fight to keep the current policy.
JOURNALIST:
Isn't that similar to the Government's and some business lobby group's line though that Labor is elected all of a sudden there'll be wholesale sackings.  I mean, we had solid and strong jobs growth of which you government is rightly proud in the lead up to WorkChoices, the time leading up to WorkChoices.  If it reverts to a pre WorkChoices system, why would jobs necessarily suffer?  The other conditions remain.
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I have no doubt Joe that if you get rid of the unfair dismissal provisions that are now in the law, the rate of growth and employment in small business will slow and it may even go into reverse and I think that would be bad for the economy.  If you get rid of AWAs that will very bad for the mining industry and our friends in the Labor Party keep telling us that the mining industry is the underpinning strength of the economy.  Well why would you take away the preferred industrial arrangement that operates in the mining industry, unless, of course, you are doing what you are being told by others.
JOURNALIST:
Couldn't common law contracts easily fill the role...
PRIME MINISTER:
No, no because the common law contracts start on the assumption that all the rigidity of the award system must be there and then you put things on top of that, so they don't enable the flexibly that is available under AWAs.  I mean, that's been debated before but Julia Gillard has made it crystal clear to the mining industry that whatever they say, whatever the Western Australian Premier says, she's determined to get rid of AWAs.  Well I think the community should understand that and should understand the impact it's going to have on the Australian economy.  
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, can you tell us how much money is the Government, as opposed to the Liberal Party, spending on advertising WorkChoices?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think there was something in the order of, from recollection, I don't have the figure in my pocket, at the time it was introduced on the information campaign, and bear in mind that when you introduce a major change to the law it's perfectly legitimate to expend public money, we don't make any apology for that, I think it was somewhere in the order of $40 million.  
JOURNALIST:
Since then has there been...
PRIME MINISTER:
I don't, I'm not sure that there's been a lot spent since then, I'd have to check, I mean, don't take that as absolutely solid. I'd have to check that but I'm not aware of any major advertising as distinct from the routine operation of the information services of the various agencies in that area.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, why is Australian government spending on research and development lagging behind a lot of other countries in the OECD?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well in the public sector, our investment does not lag.  I think if you look at the aggregate of public and private it may be less than others but in the public sector we do very well.  Any questions, other questions?
JOURNALIST:  
Apparently two men...
PRIME MINISTER:
Would you mind speaking up, I'm a bit deaf.
JOURNALIST:
Just wondering, two men have apparently have been charged with terrorism offences in Melbourne this morning.  I was just wondering if you knew anything in regards to that?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I couldn't possibly comment on a police matter.  You know that, I can't comment on that, that's a matter for the police and a matter for the authorities and I couldn't possibly offer a view except to say that the law should take its course and people are entitled to a presumption of innocence.  Thank you.
MINISTER MACFARLANE:
I just wanted to back up what the Prime Minister said and answer the question about China.  There are areas where Australian industry is more than competitive with China, in fact one of them is just out the back here in a test unit for the generators on the auxiliary motors on the Airbuses.  That unit was up in China and they couldn't get it to operate and test those generators properly.  It's now down here, here in Sydney, here at this business and it is testing and repairing the auxiliary units from all over Asia which are being run on Airbuses.  So there are some things we do here better than anyone else, including the Chinese.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Vice Chancellor, my federal parliamentary colleague Mark Baker, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen and most particularly the future doctors of Australia. It's great to see so many young, enthusiastic faces involved in rural medicine. And I thank you very much Vice Chancellor for your remarks about the initiatives that have led to such a growth in the capacity of the university sector here in Tasmania. I have often said that one of the things that our country does well, and this is a general comment that has applied through the years, one of the things that our country does very well is get a good balance between the public and the private sector contributions to challenging and dealing with problems. In many countries there is a perennial argument as to whether everything should be done by the Government or everything should be done by the private sector. But one of the genius things about Australia is that rather than try and resolve that one way or another, we have said why don't we seek contributions from both and why don't we achieve a balance? And that is on display at this wonderful centre. You have the public hospital, you have the private hospital, you have the partnership involving the university and you have an involvement of the Federal Government as well, of course, in relation to many of the obligations of health services, the involvement of the state government as well. And we have achieved that balance and I think that's a wonderful thing.
But the most uplifting thing to me today is the opportunity to meet so many young medical students, to hear their enthusiasm about the opportunity of learning something about rural and regional medicine. It's not just a question of young people who have grown up in this or indeed any other regional area of Australia being able to come back and do their training and their early practice years in the place where they grew up, but it also is an opportunity, as one of the students said to me, an opportunity to understand that there are features of rural medicine and there are rural health challenges that don't exist in other parts of the country. And we all know, for example, and this will bring me into the purpose of my announcement, we all know that there has been a terrible drought across most of Australia and Tasmania has not escaped it. 
Many Australians who come from the mainland tend to always have this fixed view about ever-green, ever-wet, sometimes, Tasmania and it's completely wrong. And it's a complete misconception of the way in which the drought has affected this part of Australia. And, of course, in its wake the drought has brought terrible mental health challenges for farmers and for people involved in remoter parts of the country. And the stories are legion of the way in which farmers and people on the land have felt totally overcome and totally destroyed and overwhelmed by the endless days of dry and the endless horizon getting dustier and dustier and the opportunity of ever planting a crop again seeming to disappear, and that has brought enormous challenges.
So that really does bring me to the purpose of my announcement today and let me say that last year the Federal Government felt that more resources had to be put into tackling mental health problems around Australia and I announced a commitment of $1.9 billion in April of last year. And progressively; and that's for the whole country and it covers a whole lot of things including the introduction of Medicare items for treating mental illness, a first, long overdue, should have been done years ago, but now it has been done it's been very rapidly utilised and clearly there is a need for it and it's a need that is now more widely talked about and widely recognised. 
But one of the components of that program was an initiative of $51 million for mental health services in rural and remote areas and today I am announcing here in Burnie a grant of $1 million for additional mental health services in the north west region of Tasmania reaching from Devonport to King Island and along the West Coast. And General Practice North West, led, I think, by Doctor Nick Barnes is going to preside over that and it will provide these new mental health services.  There will be additional mental health workers based at Burnie and they'll provide a mental health outreach service throughout north west Tasmania including in Devonport.  It will include allied health and mental health nursing professionals such as psychologists, social workers or mental health nurses.  North west, north coast Tasmania as I mentioned earlier has suffered from the drought and they've experienced record low rainfall in the 12 months ending March of this year and the link that I've already mentioned between drought and increased depression and mental illness will be very much in the forefront of a lot of the work that this new service will do.  
These new services will help farmers as well as rural communities who are under increasing stress from the drought.  Can I say that this announcement I'm making today is the very first of a whole series of announcements under this subset of the major program and there'll be a number of announcements made all around the country by the Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Ageing, Senator Mason, but this is the very first of them in that program.  It's an additional provision of a million dollars for mental health services in the north west region of Tasmania and it will be operated by Dr Barnes and his colleagues.  I know they'll do it well and it will add to the array of medical services that are available in this part of Tasmania.  But can I conclude by congratulating all of those associated with the medical services that are now being provided here in Burnie and to express again my pleasure at the success that is apparently being achieved in providing a first rate training for young medical students who aspire to serve their profession in rural medicine.  It's a need in this country, it's a desperate need.  It's become harder and harder to use the vernacular to get doctors to go bush and to go to the country and the contribution that, what the university is doing and what this centre is doing to meeting that problem is quite inspiring and it encourages me greatly. I want to thank the university and I want to thank everybody associated with this centre and the collaboration that it represents between the public sector and the private sector, that balance, that commonsense Australian balance which characterises our response to so many of these things. My final comment is to wish the young men and women who are here as medical students today every good fortune in your profession and the contribution that I know you will make to Australian society in the years ahead.  Thank you. 
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...
To you Ricky and the other members of the team, on behalf of a very proud and grateful cricket-loving nation, thank you and congratulations for a remarkable performance, which capped a remarkable regaining of the Ashes only a few weeks earlier.
It was a stunning performance.  I want to say to Ricky that performances like this are not achieved without great leadership, and your leadership of the team, in the West Indies, your leadership of the team over recent series, coupled with an amazingly consistent, personal performance with the bat, which has left your many admirers filled with admiration for the quality of your batting.  So to you, in particular, I offer my congratulations. 
I want to mention three other people, I know it's odious but it is deserving.  I think we have to pay a very special tribute to that lanky bloke from Narromine, that wonderful Glenn McGrath who really has been an ornament to Australian cricket for many years.  He is the greatest fast bowler of his generation, and many would say he ranks with the very greatest that the game has seen.  But, your consistency Glenn, your capacity to fight back and your all-round sportsmanship over the years has been fantastic, and I wish you, and Janette joins me, in wishing you and Jane and your family, every best of happiness in the years ahead and we thank you very warmly for the wonderful contribution you have made to Australian cricket. 
Anybody who looks back on that last match, that victory against Sri Lanka, they won't forget that magnificent performance by Adam Gilchrist, it was an astonishing innings that 149 and to Adam congratulations on that. The sight of  you straining every last muscle to take that caught behind to add yet another wicket to Glenn's haul was very, very inspirational and I am delighted that Glenn was able to salvage that stump he took on the first occasion and get it back on the second occasion. 
Finally, can I say to John Buchanan who has been a wonderful coach to the team over the years, it's not an easy job, very challenging one, as he will understand.  John, thank you for your service to Australian cricket, and thank you for your service to Australian sport. I wish you well. 
To all the other members of the team, we are so proud of you, we are very grateful for the performance that you put in, you behaved like true professionals, but most of all you've warmed the cockles of the hearts of those who see cricket as the greatest game that the world has ever seen, and a game at which Australia are unsurpassed as world champions. 
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Michael, Senator John Watson, Mr Will Hodgman the Leader of the Opposition, the Mayor of the City of Launceston, pupils of the Christian School, ladies and gentlemen.  It's great to be back in Launceston.I hope you will forgive me.  I left Launceston last night in order to amongst other things welcome back Tasmania's most famous son, Ricky Ponting along with all of the members of the Australia Cricket Team in Sydney this morning and to convey the admiration of the people of Australia for the wonderful job they'd done in winning for a third time the cricket World Cup.  
But I am delighted to stop for a moment to listen to that wonderful sound of rain falling on the roof and I hope it's a sound that is heard all around the parched areas of Australia.  It is a tentative sign that the drought may be breaking, but we have a long way to go and the truth is that if we don't get drenching rain in the Murray-Darling Basin over the next few weeks the irrigators in what is still the food bowl or our nation are going to face a very, very difficult task.  I'm here today to continue a pattern that I have followed in the 11 years that I have been Prime Minister, and that is going around the country and meeting a cross section of the local community in every part of Australia that I visit.  Every community is different, every community has its own challenges, every community has its own needs and before I go to some general comments about national issues can I say that one of the needs that the city of Launceston has and I know you might find it hard to believe because we've been going through a very severe drought, but one of the very big needs that the city of Launceston has is to have adequate flood protection levies and the existing flood protection levies are badly in need of repair or replacement and detailed assessments have revealed that the levies would almost certainly fail in the event of a major flood.  
I mean, it's seems a bit ridiculous to be talking about a major flood when in the same breath we're praying for rain to break the worst drought in 100 years but that is the extraordinary thing about the weather in our country, it can change very dramatically.  But it's estimated that if we did have a major flood it would inflict up to a $110 million of damages in creating a flood scenario not unlike that experienced in New Orleans.  So what I'm announcing today is that the Commonwealth Government will contribute $13 million towards the Launceston flood protection levy.  The State Government and the Launceston City Council will contribute like amounts bringing the total to $39 million and this will protect 640 homes and almost 80 commercial properties as well as other vital infrastructure and services so the scheme will more than pay for itself in the estimated savings to be made and by funding this work the Australian Government will provide Invermay residents with security and peace of mind, but will also safeguard Launceston's major infrastructure, cultural institutions and several vital transport arteries.  It is a partnership between the Commonwealth Government, the State Government and the local council and that is what is should happen with projects of this kind and I am delighted to join the Tasmanian Government and to join the Launceston City Council in this project. 
My friends,  in coming here today the first and most important thing I want to say to you is to commend Michael Ferguson as a wonderful and energetic member for the electorate of Bass in the national parliament.  Michael has only been one of us in federal parliament for a little over two years but he's made an impression.  He's sincere, he works hard, he's thoughtful, he argues doggedly for the interests of his constituents but he's also a loyal member of the team and from my perspective and from the Government's perspective, you can't ask for anything more than that and from your perspective as local constituents and gathered here today is a cross section of the community and I don't expect all of you to agree with everything that I say or that everything I've done over the last 11 years, that would be an absolute miracle if that were to be the case.  But what I think, I hope you might agree with me is that you need increasingly to have in your parliaments people who identify with local communities and see their role as arguing for the cause and the interests of their local community while also recognising that the electorate of Bass, like any other electorate, is part of the nation. And the nation's strength is reflected in the strength of the local community and it is true that Australia is going through very, very prosperous economic times. The good thing, as Michael said, is that we are witnessing a wonderful human dividend out of those strong economic times. It's important when we think about such things as economic growth and budgets and economies and surpluses, not to think of them as ends in themselves. It's not much good having a strong economy unless it translates into improved lives for individuals. 
And one of the great things about the last few years is that we have seen the dignity of work returned to record numbers of Australians. We have a 32 year low in unemployment. I had a look at some figures from my Department yesterday and they showed that over the last year there has been a reduction of 22 per cent in the number of people who are classified as long term unemployed. And a long term unemployed person is someone who has been out of work for more than a year. And this is the lowest level right now of long term unemployed that Australia has had since we began to separately keep statistics for the long term unemployed. Now that is, to me, a heart warming human dividend, because we all know and those who have lived through more difficult employment times than we experience at the present moment will know that there is nothing more demoralising than to be out of work. There is nothing more unsettling to face the prospect of unemployment. 
And I am very happy as I look around this gathering and I see a sea of very young faces. I am very pleased to know that the labour market the young of Australia will move into when they leave school now is infinitely more buoyant and stronger and more beckoning than it was in the 1970s, 1980s and the early 1990s. Now that is a wonderful thing. That is a human dividend for the young. And we belong all of us to different generations, and as we move into the older generations we not only reflect on our own contribution to Australia but we also worry about the kind of Australia the young will inherit, and we have an obligation to make sure they inherit an Australia that gives them the opportunity of work. We need them to inherit an Australia that is stable and secure domestically. We need them to inherit an Australia that achieves a proper balance between care for the environment and the preservation and improvement of our economy. 
And that of course is something that always resonates here in Tasmania where the debate which has gone on over long years about the forest industry and about what is the right balance I thought had been resolved a couple of years ago. I mean I felt we struck a deal which got the right balance between preserving the environment on the one hand, but also protecting the jobs, particularly of isolated timber communities scattered throughout this island state and indeed scattered around other parts of Australia. 
And it is important just as we have balance in our personal lives between work and family life we have balance between; if we're a student at school balance between studying hard and playing sport, or otherwise entertaining yourself. We also need to have balance in public policy. We need to have a balance between looking after old growth forests and preserving the jobs of people in timber communities. And if you don't have that balance then a lot of people will suffer. And if you belong to a community that depends very heavily on a particular activity, and that activity is curtailed or destroyed and you have no immediate prospect of getting another job in another industry its pretty grim. And you don't like being told by people in another part of Australia, who don't experience some of those challenges, how you should organise your affairs and how you should lead your life.
Right at the moment we are having an ongoing debate and it will go on for years about climate change. There is no doubt in my mind that the climate is changing. There is little doubt that greenhouse gas emissions are making a contribution and we all have a responsibility here in Australia, and around the world, to make our contribution to it. But we have to make certain that we make a balanced contribution. We must make certain that in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Australia we do so in a manner that doesn't inflict disproportionate damage on our economy or destroy our jobs. And we should remember that Australia is different from most countries, very different from Europe, where a lot of the talk about climate change comes from. We are a country which is large in area, small in population, very rich in fossil fuel resources, almost unique around the world in that composition. And therefore solutions that appeal to countries that have a vastly different structure from what Australia has do not necessarily appeal to, or do not necessarily work in Australia. And we need as a community, as we move to deal with that problem, to do it in a methodical way that balances the need to make our contribution with the need to preserve a...the natural advantages that this country has. And we must be open minded enough, as we examine an issue like climate change, to look at all of the possibilities. We must be open minded enough to examine the contribution that nuclear power might make to solving our problems years into the future. We have to acknowledge the contribution that solar and wind power can make, but recognise that you can't run power stations on solar and wind power, you can't, you can only run them on fossil fuels or ultimately perhaps on nuclear power. So it's a very big, it's a very important debate, it's a debate that I would like to see the entire Australian community involved in, but we have to be involved in it in a balanced and mature fashion. And if we're going to commit ourselves to targets, we've got to make sure what those targets mean, we've got to make sure that if you are moving towards a target, what the cost will be, what the implication for jobs will be, what the outcome is going to be. But it is a debate that this community and communities around the world are going to be engaged in for years and years into the future. 
The last thing I want to say to you ladies and gentlemen is that next Tuesday night Peter Costello will bring down his 12th Budget. I'll disappoint you and say I can't tell you what is in it. We've had close to our final discussions about what might go in it. But I can say this, that it'll be a budget that will be looking forward, it'll be looking forward years into the future, it'll be a budget that will reflect our determination to keep interest rates in this country as low as possible, to reflect our determination to maintain a strong surplus and to build for the future. The strength of today's economy is a product of yesterday's reforms and the strength of tomorrow's economy will be a product of the reforms that we have the courage to undertake today.
My friends thank you very much for coming along this afternoon. I thank the choir of the school for its wonderful musical contributions, and that terrific band as well, and finally can I return to what I said at the beginning, you have in Michael Ferguson a first class federal member, a bloke who's worth supporting, a fellow who's worked very hard for your local community and a man I hope you'll think of towards the end of this year when you have an opportunity to give practical effect to the view that you might have of Michael Ferguson, your wonderful local member. Thank you.
[ends]   


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.39Mb - 90secs)
Good morning,
Scouts make an important contribution to Australian society by instilling positive social values in our young people and assisting many others in our community.
With about 60,000 Scouts across the country, and more than 2 million people who have been part of Australian scouting in the last 100 years, the Scouts have become the largest youth development organisation in the nation. 
To mark the centenary of scouting in Australia and to further assist urban communities deal with the current severe water shortages the Commonwealth Government has decided to provide almost $18 million to Scouts Australia for the installation of rainwater tanks across the nation.  
This funding will help the scouts generate significant water savings and is another example of the Government's practical approach to Australia's water crisis.
Through a number of water programs, the Government is helping to conserve and better manage water at a grass roots level.
The Government's highly successful community water grants program - a $200 million component of the $2 billion water fund - has already funded projects that have saved 27,000 megalitres of water. That's about the average annual water use of 100,000 households.
The third funding round of the community water grants program has just been announced and I encourage all communities with good water saving plans to apply.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.39Mb - 90secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.57Mb - 103secs)
Australia has a proud and unrivalled history of peacekeeping around the world.
Since becoming the first nation to deploy peacekeepers some 60 years ago in Indonesia, Australia has been making an invaluable contribution towards restoring order and maintaining calm in trouble spots throughout the world.   
From Cambodia to Somalia, more than 30,000 Australians have served in the field as peacekeepers. We have commanded six multinational operations and joined with the United Nations and other regional partners in missions to restore and maintain stability.  
Today, peacekeeping remains an important role for the Australian Defence Force and the Australian Federal Police. 
Members of the ADF, the AFP and civilians are today serving our country with distinction as members of important peacekeeping missions around the world, most notably in East Timor and the Solomon Islands.
All Australians benefit from this important work. Our peacekeepers promote and restore security and this in turn helps economies to grow and democracy to flourish.   
In recognition of this important work I am pleased to announce today that a site for an Australian Peacekeeping Memorial has been identified on Anzac Parade in Canberra.   
The memorial will commemorate the proud tradition of service and sacrifice of Australia's peacekeepers.  The Government is contributing an initial grant of $200,000 to construction of the memorial and the Australian Peacekeeping Memorial committee will continue raising funds and embark on the process of choosing a design.
It will be a fitting acknowledgement of the professionalism and dedication of past and present peacekeepers and the families and loved ones who have  always supported them.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.57Mb - 103secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr Tulley, my colleague Senator Gary Humphries, Alex and Courtney, the two school captains, students, staff and parents, it is a real pleasure for me to spend a few moments at this school, a very large school, obviously a very well respected school and in the short time I've been here I've seen something of the diversity of the education that is offered. I'm greatly encouraged by the fact that this is a school that offers school based apprenticeships because it's very important as we look forward, we understand the critical need to have more apprentices in this country and the importance of elevating technical education to a higher level of respect and esteem in our country.
I also want to take this opportunity, because this is a school within the Catholic education system of the ACT, to pay tribute to the extraordinary strength and at times stoicism of the Catholic education system over the years in this country. And this is a school that instructs students, and leads them to adulthood within the values of the Catholic Church, and they are proudly taught within the school and they are values very widely respected in the broader community. 
As I look around this room and particularly to the groups of older students one thinks of many school gatherings that I've been to as Prime Minister. I went to one last weekend which celebrated 50 years of Epping Boys' High School, which is my electorate in Sydney, and one of the things that warmed me, and I was reminded of it when the hands went up a few moments ago, was when I met one of the prefects, I asked him what he wanted to do and he said I want to be a science teacher and I want to come back and teach at Epping Boys' High, which said to me that he'd had a great experience. And we would all hope those of us interested in education that the thing that students most wanted....would want to do is to identify like that with their own school. Now I'm not suggesting that all of you should aspire to be science teachers and come back and teach at St Xavier's. But my point is that if you feel part of a school community and you feel that it is enriching your life, it's something you want to retain a connection with for the rest of your life.
But as I look particularly at the older students, I think of the world that they will enter when they leave, some at the end of this year, some at the end of next year. It'll be a world fortunately that provides greater employment opportunities than at any time over the last 30 to 35 years, and that is terrific thing. When I left school, quite a number of years ago, employment opportunities were then very good, and then we went through a bit of a dip, and now they've come back and come back very strongly. And the opportunities that are available, and I encourage you all to take advantage of opportunities as you leave school, they can be university opportunities, they can be opportunities in technical education, but whatever they may be, grab hold of them, and do them and take advantage of them now because it's always a lot harder to return to some kind of disciple learning later in your life.
I guess there are just two other things I'd like to say to you and that is the importance in your lives of teachers. Parents and teachers, obviously parents come well before teachers, much in all as we respect teachers, parents and teachers are the people who are the most important, formative and guiding influences in your lives. You may not always recognise that, particularly in relation to your teachers and occasionally in relation to your parents, but the guidance and care that teachers display towards their students is something that you should value very greatly and I suspect you'll value even more greatly when you leave this school. And teaching is a really wonderful profession and I suspect that teaching as profession is required to shoulder even greater burdens now than perhaps it was required to shoulder many years ago.
And the last thing that I want to say to you is to echo something that your Principal said in his introductory remarks when he spoke about respect and kindness towards each other. It's something that I say almost every time I address a school gathering, and that is that no matter how you may from time to time think poorly of some of your classmates, and be aggravated by their behaviour, try ever so hard to see something positive in everybody that you relate to. I found when I was in younger life and I've found it in later years that the people who are the happiest, and the best adjusted, and the most contented people on earth are the people who always look for and find something positive, even in the most aggravating person they might come across. And we all occasionally come across people who we find a little aggravating. So the next time that happens to you try and think of something that is really good about that person, and there always is something good about somebody, even though on the surface they may appear a little aggravating. And the great thing about that I found is that it ends up making you a lot happier than you might otherwise be and the happiest people I've found in life are the people who've had a positive view about the character of everybody they relate to.
I want to thank you for the opportunity of coming here today. It's an opportunity to experience a school that is a cross section of the community of Canberra. It's obviously as I said a very popular school, it's a school that's expanded, it's a school that has a good spirit, it's obviously very well led and it is a school that very importantly is not just teaching you to be people who can have a career, and earn a living, and raise a family, which is, of course, very, very important, it is also teaching you about the values of life, it's teaching you about honesty and good ethics, it's teaching you about courtesy and respect and tolerance and it's teaching you to be in every rounded way, very good members of the Australian community. And I pay tribute on behalf of the Government, I pay tribute to the quality of the education that you are receiving here, it will fit you in every way for your future lives. I wish all of you very good fortune for the years ahead. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Pat for that wonderfully generous introduction.  To Barry O'Farrell the Leader of the New South Wales Opposition, my Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  When Pat started employing the racing metaphors, both horse racing and foot racing, I was reminded of the metaphor or, I think it's a metaphor that I constantly use in relation to economic reform. And that metaphor is it's like participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line.  You never get there, you've always got to do more, but you know that if you slow down or worse still you stop, you're not going to win the race because there'll be other people who will surge past you and that metaphor has been followed very much by the Government over the last 11 years.  
I think the best two Budgets this Government has brought down was the first Budget in 1996 which because it had to take a lot of very, very difficult decisions laid the foundation for later Budgets and then, of course, the Budget that was bought down on Tuesday night.  It's interesting that in his reply to the Budget last night, the Leader of the Opposition offered no criticism of the Budget, not one item in the Budget did he criticise, an interesting commentary, an acknowledgement perhaps that there wasn't a lot in the document that could be criticised.  Everyone knows that Australia is living in very prosperous circumstances and I'll come in a moment to this canard that's been put around that the only reason Australia is prosperous at the moment is because we have a mining boom in Western Australia and Queensland.  But we are doing well by any measure and I won't bore you with all the statistics but the two statistics of which I'm proudest because they illustrate more than anything else the great human dividend out of good economic policy, is that we do have a 33 year, almost now, low in unemployment and the figure yesterday of 4.4 per cent unemployment was unimaginable even 12 or 18 months ago and within that there's an even greater statistic and that is that the level of long term unemployment, and that is people who've been out of work for more than a year, is at its lowest level since statistics of that character began to be kept and it's actually fallen by 22 per cent in the last year.  
Now just think of that for a moment.  These are the people who probably are of families that lost their jobs in the 1970s and fell into a culture of never being in work and it is an amazing thing that you can have a fall of that magnitude in that group of people and these are people who find it very, very hard to get work and I know we all recognise that you need a combination of incentives and other policies to make sure that people try hard to find work and we sometimes think there are some in the community that don't try hard enough, but there are some in the community who no matter how hard they try they just haven't had the background or they haven't had the skills, they haven't had the motivation that we've been given because of our more fortunate circumstances. And I'm really, as an exercise in what is the ultimate purpose of good economic management and that is to deliver a great human dividend,  I think those two statistics above anything else make me feel immensely proud of what we have done over the last 11 years.  I mean, this is something that a Labor government that is meant to represent the battlers of this country would not have been able to do and can I say with some feeling that if Labor returns to government at the end of this year and let me tell you very frankly at a Liberal Party gathering, that is a distinct possibility. I wouldn't want anybody to leave this lunch imagining that the next election is a foregone conclusion, it is not.  One of the things Labor will do which will reverse what I've just been speaking of is to bring back these ridiculous unfair dismissal laws which have been such a terrible burden for small business. 
I believe, I cannot prove, but I believe, maybe in a few years time we'll be able to prove it when all the statistics do their retrospective and all the research is done, but I believe although I cannot prove that one of the major reasons why unemployment has accelerated its downward descent over the last year is that freed of the burden and the tyranny of unfair dismissal laws, small business has taken on record numbers of new people knowing that if it doesn't work out in the case of an individual that person can be let go without the threat of being told by the Industrial Relations Commission in effect you better pay them $30 or $40,000 go away money and get back to running your business which of course was the experience of just so many people under those former laws.  You'll hear a lot of debate not only in Parliament itself but in the media about what will be the issues at the election and there will be many issues as there always are at elections but the one that will dwarf all other issues is a very simple proposition and that is which side of politics is more likely to maintain and guarantee the future delivery of the economic prosperity that we now have and we'll be resting very much of our case to the Australian people on that proposition.  We'll not only be talking about what we have done over the last 11 years, but not excessively, we'll also be having something to say about the sort of things that were contained in Peter Costello's Budget and I think the greatest quality of that Budget was that it took the prosperity we now have and dealt with it in two ways. 
When you have a prosperous economy the current generation expects some dividend from that prosperity and certainly we delivered a dividend.  We delivered a dividend to the generality of the community through tax relief and we delivered a dividend to particular sections of the community that we felt needed attending to and particularly to retired people and also particularly to Australian families.  But we also very wisely, in my opinion, laid aside a portion of today's prosperity in order to secure tomorrow's prosperity and amongst the initiatives of which I'm particularly proud is the provisions for education.  There's a funny argument that goes around in political circles sometimes, it goes roughly like this; that really the Liberal and National parties are not particularly interested in education, that that really is an issue that the Labor Party is interested in and the Liberal Party tends to preoccupy itself with other things. And I was thinking about that odd notion the other day and I reflected back over the last few decades about some of the great educational movements in Australia.  Many people would argue that the foundation of the modern university system in this country was in fact laid down when Menzies was Prime Minister of this country and he implemented the recommendations of the Murray Commission way back in the 1950s which established a major federal role for university funding in this country and laid the ground work of much of the strength of the university sector.  
And I also recall, of course, that the great breakthrough which brought justice to non-government, particularly Catholic schools in this country was at the instance of the Menzies Government again where a century of discrimination against people who chose to educate their children according to the embrace of their faith was ended with the introduction of direct government assistance to independent schools and there's not a political party in Australia that is now game to argue otherwise although beneath the surface it is still the passion of the teacher unions in this country which have so much influence on the Labor Party to end government assistance to independent schools.  And, of course, in more recent times the reforms that were introduced by Brendan Nelson when he was Education Minister, piloted through a very hostile Senate which gave the university sector greater flexibility and opened up new streams of revenue coming into those universities.  Now that is not to say that there weren't some reforms carried out by the former government which we were able to support.  We actually supported the introduction of the HECS system which ended the absurdity of the Whitlam Government's proposition that you could have free tertiary education.  No country can afford completely free tertiary education, and it was always a fraud on the Australian public for the Whitlam Government, to pretend that that could be the case.  So when the Labor Party in the 1980s came along with the HECS proposal, we supported it as we did other sensible propositions that the Labor Party put forward in government.  So on Tuesday night when Peter Costello announced the Higher Education Endowment Fund, of which the $5 billion contribution is only a beginning, nobody should imagine that that fund will remain with only $5 billion if we continue to accumulate surpluses and to run the economy well, it will be added to as time goes by.  It will provide and ever-increasing stream of revenue into Australia's universities to invest in capital works and research facilities.  So when Peter announced that measure and all the other measures he was following a long line of Liberal reformers and a long line and tradition of Liberal commitment to higher education in this country. 
I noticed last night that my opponent, the Leader of the Opposition ran an advertisement on television, it was a very interesting tactic to run a paid advertisement the night you give your reply.  Now it's an interesting tactic, and I'll say no more than that but he's arguing that he's a fiscal conservative.  Now what he's really saying is that he wants the world to believe that he's a responsible economic manager.  Now you normally don't have to advertise that fact, if in reality you are a responsible economic manager, and this morning I tried on radio, in my regular interview with Neil Mitchell at 3AW Melbourne I tried to analyse the proposition that the Labor Party and its current leader are responsible economic managers, are fiscal conservatives.  And I thought of the 1996 Budget. Now in 1996 we inherited a $96 billion debit, we had an annual Budget deficit of $10.5 billion and we had to do some fairly unpopular things in 1996.  Not everything we did then was the least bit popular, but by taking those measures we started to get the Budget in control and it meant in a couple of years we were starting to yield surpluses rather than deficits. And the point I wanted to make was that over the last 11 years I cannot think of a major fiscally conservative economically responsible thing we have done that the Labor Party did not oppose. They opposed getting the Budget back into surplus, they opposed, therefore paying off the $96 billion debt and much of the repayment of that was due to the proceeds of the privatisation of government assets such as Telstra, not all of it but quite a bit of it, they opposed that.  They opposed Peter Reith's industrial relations reforms which for the first time introduced Australian Workplace Agreements.  They kept opposing in the Senate, in fact on forty occasions they voted in the Senate against our proposals and this is when we didn't have the numbers in the Senate, to repeal the unfair dismissal laws. They opposed our reforms of the waterfront, which are now being dramatised, I don't know how accurately I must get hold of the tapes and have a look.  But they are being dramatised on the ABC at the present time, they opposed all of that.  We used to have a crane rate of 17 an hour in our ports and we were told that was world's best practice by the Maritime Union of Australia and you couldn't do any better and it's now 27 or 28 an hour and that really is getting close to world's best practice.  They opposed tax reform, they opposed the second round of industrial relations reform and they've continued to oppose a number of other less important, but nonetheless significant economic reforms.  And I guess employing the old adage that it's not what somebody says it's what somebody does that demonstrates the character and the real nature of whether or not they hold to a particular code and a particular attitude in relation to economic management.  
But ladies and gentlemen, the Budget was the Budget of a government that has presided over and contributed by its own policies towards a very, very strong economy.  Our opponents say it's all due to the mining boom, they either say it's due to the mining boom or it's due to the rest of the world and in a sense they tie the two together.  My opponent said last night that it's all been fuelled by China and to some extent India, well I place very great importance on our trade association with India, but if he really did understand the composition of Australia's trade he would understand that if our economy is fuelled a lot by our export performance then the three countries that deserve a special mention are, of course, China, Japan and Korea which represent our three best customers in the Asian Pacific region.  India is an important customer, but it's no where near in the same league as far as Australia is concerned with Korea, that's only a minor detail, but you know I would just like to remind the public occasionally that the Leader of the Opposition is not too flash when it comes to economic detail, only a minor point I know, but you know.  You see I actually read what he says and I listen very carefully what he says and that was a little mistake but we've made a careful note of it and it will turn up again, but...I can assure you. 
But, my friends, this argument is put around a lot and this argument is that it's all due to the resources boom.  Now we have had a fantastic resources boom.  As Don Argus, the Chairman of BHP Billiton, in his classically understated way says it's a great time, John, to be in resources, and it certainly is a great time to be in resources and thank goodness for the resources boom.  But, let me tell you that it's a bit of a myth that that's the only reason we are doing well.  Those unemployment figures yesterday, 70 per cent of the new jobs in those figures yesterday were generated in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.  In fact there was a net fall, tiny net fall in the number of jobs generated in Western Australia.  Let me also tell you that the proposition that all of the revenues that we are collecting, additional revenues we're collecting, are due to much much greater profits in the mining sector,  but that is also a bit of a myth.  Now the profits are good and the miners should pay their share of tax, every last dollar of it like everybody else.  You can't run a good economy unless people pay their taxes, pay their taxes in full and pay them on time, not a penny more, but also not a penny less.  But actually when you look at the statistics the major reason why we have done so well revenue wise over the last few years is the fall in unemployment and the fact that there are more people in work and there are more people who are earning higher incomes and the boom in PAYE tax payments and those associated otherwise with individual tax payments has been very significant.  Let me give you a very interesting statistic.  I know you can't hypothecate these things but it rather does make the point that the Budget surplus that we're predicting that we'll have is almost exactly equivalent to the interest savings on the deficit that we used to pay and by not having a deficit we save $8.5 billion a year. And the other figure that's very interesting is that if we had the unemployment rate that we had in 1996 which was 8.5 per cent instead of an unemployment rate of 4.4 per cent we'd probably be outlaying about another $4 billion in unemployment payments or, and correspondingly not collecting any taxation on the wages that those people would have otherwise earned and therefore paid tax on. And when you add those two figures together you get almost exactly the sizes of surplus which is projected for the forthcoming year.  
Now, I know the accountants and economists amongst you will say well you can't really do that, it's all sort of mixed in and it is all mixed in and I acknowledge that I'm not expounding a perfect economic theory and my economics teacher at Canterbury Boys' High if he was still alive would think heavens above, I thought I taught him better than that but the truth is that it does in a metaphorical way illustrate that by taking the country out of deficit and putting it back into surplus we have given ourselves the capacity to do so many things that we weren't able to do before and that has been very much the story at the heart of this government's performance.  
The final thing I want to say to you is about industrial relations.  We have carried out a lot of major economic reforms in this country.  None has been more important than the changes we've made to industrial relations because just as today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms then tomorrow's prosperity will be a product of today's reforms and it will be a terrible shame for the economic future of Australia if these industrial relations reforms are rolled back and it will be the first time in a generation that major economic reforms carried out in Australia have been reversed.   I've frequently said that if you took yourself back to 1980, and I know there are some in this room and I'm looking at two of them right at the moment at this table, two of the younger members of the audience that they probably weren't studying Budget form or indeed any other form very, very closely then and there'll be some in this room in the same situation, but if you went back then to the beginning of the 1980s you would say that there were five things that this country had to address, five reforms we had to address to get it in shape for the 21st century.  We had to de-regulate our financial system.  We had to do something about our very, very high levels of tariff protection which had produced a lot of inefficient industries behind a high tariff wall.  We had to do something about getting the government out of running businesses that it's appallingly bad at running, in other words privatising Government industries.  We had to do something about our old fashioned, arthritic taxation system and we also had finally to do something about our industrial relations system.
Well the good thing about this country is that over the last 27 years we have actually addressed all of those five major areas of reform and I never mind acknowledging that a couple of them were addressed by the former Labor government and in Opposition we strongly supported them.  We didn't try and frustrate the de-regulation of the financial system, it in fact came out of the recommendations of the Campbell Inquiry which I'd established as Treasurer. And we certainly didn't run a fear campaign about tariff cuts which we could easily have done because running a fear campaign on something like tariff cuts in blue collar areas of the country would have been a very easy political proposition but we accepted the argument that in the long run this country had to become more competitive and more outward looking.  Now by contrast, our opponents have opposed tax reform, they're opposed privatisation and they've opposed industrial relations reform.  But that is not the point of the narrative.  The point of the narrative is that those five great reforms have been enacted and that's one of the reasons why we're doing as well as we are and wouldn't it be a tragedy if one of those were reversed and that is industrial relations reform.
And today a lot of the news surrounds the announced resignation of Tony Blair, the British Prime Minister. Now Tony Blair is the Labour Prime Minister of Great Britain and I'm the Liberal Prime Minister of Australia and we're on the opposite sides of the political fence.  That hasn't stopped me having a very warm regard for some of the attitudes that he's taken and I have greatly admired the enormous courage that Tony Blair has displayed in joining the fight internationally against the scourge of terrorism and if people ask me what will be his greatest legacy I believe his greatest legacy will be the courage he displayed in relation to that issue and against very fearful odds within his own political party and we who follow politics very closely know that one of the hardest things to do is to confront the mainstream of your own party on an issue where you feel differently than it feels. But what Tony Blair was willing to do when he became leader of the British Labour Party was to tell the British Labor Party that if it were to fit itself for government it had to break the union domination of that party.  He told the British Labour Party when he became its leader in 1994 that it had to embrace and accept the industrial relations changes carried out by Margaret Thatcher and those industrial relations changes had transformed Britain.  I remember Britain in the 1960s and most particularly in the 1970s.  I lived there in the 60s, I visited it in the 1970s and it was a country with a great history of which I was very fond but was nonetheless in terminal decline economically and Margaret Thatcher turned that around and to his credit Blair was able to say well there are certain reforms that we have to keep.  Now if you think I'm referring to the failure of another Labor leader to confront his party and tell them that it has to rid itself of union control and union domination you'll be absolutely correct and I can't think of a more appropriate day to draw that analogy and to make that comparison.  
Friends, I conclude by thanking all of you for coming along today.  We have come a long way economically, the country has come a long way economically over the last 10 to 15 years.  We've had great reforms, we can't afford to reverse any of them and what's more we have to embrace still more reforms into the future.  I thank you for your support, I ask for it to be sustained even increased manyfold over the weeks and months ahead because we do face a great fight, a great crusade to preserve not only the political gains of the last 10 years but also the great economic gains for our country.  Thank you.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Australia Rising to the Education Challenge
Thank you very much Greg. I should start by, how shall I put it, calling you to account for not having finished reporting to the gathering the exchange we had about the Chaser. You did say it's your ABC and I said certainly not after last night's episode of Bastard Boys. But to Greg Lindsay and the Centre for Independent Studies, I want to thank you very warmly for offering me this opportunity to deliver the second in a series of speeches under the theme of 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.14Mb - 140secs)
Later today I will outline the Government's agenda for the future in education when delivering the second in a series of speeches with the theme 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Tim and Laura, the Principal Mr Poole, the Deputy Principal and other teachers, the District Director, parents and students of Denistone East Public School.  This is not the first time that I've visited this school although I don't know that many of you who are sitting particularly near the front were at this school when I last visited but it's a school with a wonderful reputation and as I sat and listened to Tim and Laura talk about the diversity of what the school excels in, as well as the diversity of the background of the pupils who attend the school, I understood why it has such a good reputation.  He started by warming my heart and talking about his love of cricket, but he then went on to talk about the academic standards of the school.  He went on to talk about its commitment to music and when both of them had finished I had the impression of a school that was providing a rounded education in every respect for the children who passed through it.
This is the beginning of Education Week here in New South Wales which is an opportunity for all of us to mark the importance of education in our lives.  When I was your age I attended Earlwood Public School.  Earlwood is over near Canterbury, it's not all that far from here although a bit of a drive and in many ways although it was a few years ago, the sort of school I attended was not all that different from the school that you are now at.  And a lot of the things that we learnt there then, the importance of being polite to each other, the importance of being kind to each other and the importance of listening to other people's points of view are things that I know that young boys and girls are taught here at Denistone East.  I'd also like to say a word about your teachers.  After your parents, the teachers you listen to and take notice of I hope at this school are about the most important people in your lives because what you learn from your teachers are things that you remember. And I still remember things that my teachers in primary school told me about how to treat other people and how to deal with difficulties and setbacks and I've not forgotten those lessons. And I want to say to all of you as I speak to you this morning how very important it is to understand the commitment of your teachers.  It's a very noble profession, a very important profession in shaping the lives of young Australians.
I also appreciate the simple commitment and loyalty to Australia and its values which is contained in your school pledge.  We are unbelievably lucky to live in Australia.  Those of us, and many of you I know who follow things on the news will know how unhappy many other countries are and we are really incredibly blessed and lucky to live in this beautiful country.  So I want to say to all of you that you are a great tribute to the quality of public education here in Denistone East and more broadly in New South Wales, throughout Australia.  I was delighted to learn when I came here this morning, I didn't know it before, that your Principal Mr Poole and I both attended the same high school, Canterbury Boys' High School although he attended the school some years after I did, some years, we won't go into how many, but both of us benefited from the education that we received at that very, very wonderful high school.
But you boys and girls of Denistone East, thank you very much for having me.  Always remember your school days and to the parents who are so important to a school community and many of them are here this morning and, of course, the swimming pool that this school rejoices in; it's not usual for primary schools to have swimming pools and Mr Poole reminded me this morning that this swimming pool was built from the proceeds of a bottle drive 40 years ago as something of a memorial to a young boy who'd been at this school who'd sadly drowned and that is a reminder that this school has a rich tradition of parent and community activity. And it's something that is a characteristic and a mark of this part of Sydney and something for which all of you should be proud.
Thank you very much for having me, it's very nice of you to come along to this special assembly.  I want to thank Tim and Laura for their very eloquent speeches.  I can see that debating and public speaking is certainly a characteristic and to Mrs Monardo   and the members of the P&amp;C who do such wonderful work I want to thank you for having me and before I finish I would like to present Tim and Laura with a flag.  It's an Australian flag, it's not a different flag, but it's an Australian flag and it's a little bit special because when Parliament sits, in fact all the time, there are four Australian flags in the House of Representatives Chamber of the Federal Parliament, one in each corner of the Chamber and every few months those flags are replaced by new ones and what happens is those that have hung in the Parliament are then given to Members of the Parliament from both sides and this Member of Parliament has been given one of those and what I've chosen to do is to give it to the two captains of your school.  It's the same flag that is up there but it's a special one because it's one that has been hung and has been displayed in the Federal Parliament and it's a special gift from me to Denistone East Public School in Education Week and I would like to invite Tim and Laura to accept it behalf of the school.  Thank you very much.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much.  To the Defence Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Rudd, General Hindmarsh, Colonel Smethurst, ladies and gentlemen. I have come here this morning for myself and for the Government to express my great admiration for all of the men and women who are going to Afghanistan, to wish them well, to say that they go with our very best wishes and prayers for a successful mission and a safe return home. 
Afghanistan is a dangerous place and I would be less than honest with you as the person ultimately responsible for committing Australian forces to that country, if I didn't say so. The situation has got difficult. There is renewed activity by the Taliban and to say otherwise is deluding you. On the other hand, of course, you go superbly trained, you join an operation task group that is providing valuable support for our reconstruction team and you go to an area where there is very close cooperation with our allies. 
To those loved ones, wives and husbands, girlfriends, boyfriends, fathers, mothers, sons and daughters who are left behind I can say to you that we will do everything we can collectively through the defence force and through the Government to provide you with comfort and assurance whilst your loved ones are in Afghanistan. 
It is a very important mission. If terrorism wins in Afghanistan, that will be bad for our part of the world as well as bad for the people of that country. It's not easy, of course, in a time of general peace and prosperity to say to a group of men and women we would like you in our name to go to a very difficult theatre of operation and a potentially dangerous one and that is why I admire you so much and why the Australian people admires you so much. 
You go with the comfort and assurance that the esteem in which the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces are held at the moment has never been higher. At a time of great cynicism in the community about many institutions there is one group of Australians in relation to which there is no cynicism and that is those who put their lives on the line when asked to do so to defend our interests and that, I hope, is of some comfort and legitimate pride to you and also to those who love you most.
So to all of you who are going, and I had the opportunity only a few weeks ago to visit a number of your colleagues in Afghanistan, I wish you well. You go with my prayers and that of a very grateful and a very proud country. Thank you. 
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.44Mb - 94secs)
What has Labor got to hide about its taxation plans if it wins government?
Why won't Mr Rudd and Mr Swan release a personal income tax policy before the election?
Good taxation policy is fundamental to good economic management. 
For the fifth Budget in a row the Government has cut income tax.
From the first of July next, four out of five Australian tax payers will pay no more than 30 per cent taxation on any part of their income
Yet Labor's Shadow Treasurer is silent on his Party's future plans.
Does he intend to reverse some of the Government's reforms?
When it comes to economic management, Labor's record has been bad in both government and in opposition.
In 1996 Labor left the nation with a huge budget deficit and a national debt of $96 billion.
Worse than that, in opposition Mr Rudd and his Labor Party colleagues recklessly opposed all of the Government's major reforms to put the Australian economy in the good shape that it is today.
They opposed putting the Budget into surplus.  They opposed steps to pay off our debt.  They opposed taxation reform.  They opposed freeing small business from the job destroying unfair dismissal laws.
They now say they are good economic managers.  Yet their behaviour has been the complete opposite.
Actions always speak louder than words.  It's what Labor has done - both in government and in opposition - that matters.
Labor cannot be trusted on economic management.  If you change the government you change economic policy and it would be a change for the worse.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.44Mb - 94secs)


E&amp;OE...
Good evening.
Good taxation policy is fundamental to good economic policy.
This government has cut income taxes in the last five Budgets, delivering almost $70 billion in cuts in the last two years alone.
The most recent tax cut will deliver an extra $21 a week to those earning $30,000 a year.
Meanwhile, Labor says it does not intend to release a tax policy.
Labor tries to pretend it will simply continue the government's good work, and that people should trust them to run the economy.
Labor's record dispels this myth. 
It left $96 billion in debt, and voted against all major measures to pay it off.  Our economic management has restored prosperity and reduced unemployment to its lowest level in more than three decades.
If a government changes, economic policy also changes.
And in Australia's case in 2007 that would definitely be a change for the worse.  


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Kerry, and to my other two parliamentary colleagues, John Cobb and Alan Cadman, to the Deputy Mayor, my fellow Australians. It's very nice to have a morning tea at one of the most well known sporting locations anywhere in Australia and I do want to take the opportunity of just mentioning in passing that several years ago the Federal Government contributed some $10 million towards the strengthening and upgrading and expansion of the Mount Panorama circuit, and it has certainly been one of those iconic locations in the sporting life and experience of our nation. 
It's a huge pleasure to be in Bathurst today. It's a great pleasure to share a platform with my friend and colleague Kerry Bartlett, who as you know has been the very energetic representative for the seat of Macquarie over the last 11 years. It's an opportunity for me to commend him to you as somebody who will work hard for you, will never let you down, will always agonise and worry about local issues that are important to his community. I meet a lot of local members in my time, some of them are good, most of them are dedicated and some of them are absolutely superb - and Kerry certainly falls into that last category. He is a superb representative. Yes he does deserve applause.
He comes as somebody new, at a federal level, to the area of Bathurst and in saying that I do not speak critically in any way of the current Federal Member for this area or for the work that he has done for the district. I praise him for that and I say to you that Kerry will do just as well, indeed, being a member of the Government, he will be able to bring certain things and certain attitudes to the electorate which are very special. But I don't come here in any way to engage in partisan criticism of the current member. I come here to say a few words of encouragement to all of you, to remark upon what a wonderful country we have. This country is living through the most remarkable economic times that it's had since the end of World War II. We have a 32 year low in unemployment. If you are in any way influenced by the sense of hope and optimism that people have about their own personal circumstances you might be interested to know that consumer confidence is also at a 32 year high. We've paid off an enormous national debt of $96 billion over the last 11 years and we are able to, because of that economic strength, to do many things that we simply wouldn't be able to do if we were in debt as a country.
One of the things that we're able to announce in the Budget, and I'm very proud we're able to announce, was the establishment of a dental school at the Charles Sturt University. And the establishment of this dental school was the result of very, very strong lobbying, not only by the university but also very strong lobbying by Kerry Bartlett and other Members of Parliament representing the central west of New South Wales.
I want to say something about the importance of road links between the metropolitan area of Sydney and the central west of New South Wales. As you may know we've previously committed $100 million to the Great Western Highway as a road of national importance and the corridor strategy for Sydney to Dubbo is currently being finalised; and we believe very strongly in ensuring that the long term needs underpinning economic growth in this part of New South Wales are considered. The Sydney to Dubbo corridor strategy will identify the long term requirements for this corridor including addressing the limitations of the current route. And as a result the Commonwealth Government today is offering $10 million on condition it is matched by the New South Wales Government, for a planning and engineering study including a detailed environmental investigation for an expressway standard connection over the Blue Mountains of New South Wales. 
There are already strong proposals for a Bells Line Expressway which will be investigated under this study. And while this study would normally be, excuse me, a responsibility of the New South Wales Government we are willing to work in partnership with them to ensure the best outcome for the people of New South Wales, particularly those in the central west. And we recognise much work has already been done on this project, but we strongly believe in working with the state government for the longer term, and I do hope that the government will work with us, and I urge the state government to recognise the need and begin planning for improved access from the M4 to the base of the Blue Mountains as part of the state transport network. And $10 million will be available from the next round of Auslink due to begin in 2009.
Could I also say that although this part of New South Wales has received some relief from the drought, I stress some, over recent weeks, the drought still continues to affect New South Wales in a very savage way and also many other parts of Australia. And we can only quite literally, and without, I say this without any hint of irony, we must all continue to pray for rain because we need a lot more rain in the next few weeks if we are to avoid very, very severe outcomes in relation to allocations to irrigators out of the Murray-Darling Basin from the 1st of July in the middle of this year. 
In different ways the Commonwealth Government has helped drought affected farmers, we've maintained our commitment to Exceptional Circumstances which of course covers vast areas of New South Wales and amongst the wonderful work that is done to help people affected by the drought, is the wonderful work of the Country Women's Association. And what the Country Women's Association does is to provide small but precious grants of money to needy families, assessed by them as only they can do because their in tough with local people and local circumstances, and to date we've provided $4 million for emergency grants to families and community organisations. But because of the ongoing challenge of the drought, I announce today that we're going to provide a further $8 million to the Country Women's Association to distribute emergency grants to families and community organisations in drought affected areas. And I take this opportunity of praising the Country Women's Association as being one of those great enduring, iconic, special Australian organisations that do wonderful work for local communities and epitomise the local community spirit of so many Australians.
Finally can I say what an extraordinary joy it is to me to come to a gathering which represents all the elements of a local community and represents all the age groups of a local community. The large attendance here today of schools students, coming from all the schools, we have a great variety of schools in our part of the world. In Australia we believe in an education system underpinned by a very high quality public education system, but also an education system that, yes we'll give a clap to a very strong education system. I am a product of the public education system of New South Wales and I'm very grateful for the quality of the education that I received in it. But we also believe very strongly in the right of parents to choose where they educate their children and it's long been the philosophy and policy of my Government to support the right of parental choice. And if parents want to send their children to a Catholic school, to the school of another Christian denomination, to any other kind of independent school then they are deserving of a large measure of Government support in relation to that choice; and that has been the philosophy of our Government to provide choice. We want to help all schools, we don't want rivalry and competition, we want all schools to be of high quality and great excellence and the last Budget contained an enormous additional commitment to education, most particularly, of course, to the university and technical education sector and I'm delighted that I'm going to meet some apprentices later because we do need an Australian nation where a technical qualification is as prized as a university degree. We made a big mistake in Australia a few years ago, not a few years about 30 or 40 years ago, when for some reason we allowed individual technical schools to fall into disuse. State governments stopped having dedicated technical schools and we're all lumped into comprehensive schools and the funny idea developed that everybody had to go to university. Now that is a funny idea, it's not a right idea. A lot of people should go to university but a lot of people want to become trades men and women, and they should be encouraged to do so, and they should be encouraged as is rightly the case to believe that is just as good as going to university, just as important as going to university. And that's why in the Budget we provided a lot more money for building additional Australian Technical Colleges and also we've provided resources to give more help to apprentices. 
I know a lot of apprentices sort of feel the financial pinch in the first few years because you can often go out and get an unskilled job at a higher wage. But can I say to aspiring apprentices and actual apprentices in this audience, I know it might be difficult the first couple of years, but once you've got your trade qualifications you will end up doing far better and you will get a much higher income, you can even start your own business if you have that apprenticeship qualification. And I therefore encourage you in so many different ways to persevere with your apprenticeships. And I say to the young people here today who are still undecided about their careers, and I remember at the beginning of the last year of my time at high school in Sydney, at Canterbury Boys High School, I was not certain about what I was going to do when I left school and I understand people still contemplating. Those who are disposed to go into a trade, go into it because you won't be sorry, you'll find it rewarding, you'll also find it very well paid because this nation is desperately short of skilled tradesmen. Every advanced western country is short of skilled tradesmen and they will be at a premium as the years go by. So it's a decision you won't regret.
I have talked long enough. It's a great pleasure to be here. As a Sydney boy of course I from a very early age I holidayed in the Blue Mountains and I am very familiar with Bathurst and Lithgow and Oberon and Blayney and all these wonderful areas. And Kerry has had me on the mountains on many occasions and I'll be delighted to come back here. Bathurst is a very historical place, of course, it's the birth place of one of my predecessors, the very well known and well loved Ben Chifley, and it's therefore part of the political folklore of the this country. And we honour that and we honour the place that Bathurst has in the history of the development of New South Wales and then Australia. But ladies and gentlemen it's a great delight to be here. I wish you all well. I thank all the community groups for their contribution to the stability and cohesion of our wonderful country and I finish where I began in very warmly commending my friend and colleague, and I hope your representative in the National Parliament, Kerry Bartlett. Thank you.   


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Kerry for those very generous and warm words of welcome, John Cobb, the Member for Parkes and Assistant Minister for the Environment and Water Resources, Alan Cadman the Federal Member for Mitchell, Ian Armstrong, John Matthews, Mr Deputy Mayor, ladies and gentlemen.  It's a great privilege and opportunity for me to be here today, not only to visit Bathurst which is an historic part of New South Wales and of Australia but also to commend to all of you Kerry Bartlett.  Kerry Bartlett has been one of my colleagues for 11 years.  He was a 96'er, he came into Parliament in 1996 when the government won the election and ended 13 years of Labor Government. So has a very special place in my heart, all of those people that were elected in 1996 and the other thing I should share with you is that on the night of the 2nd March 1996 when I was sitting rather nervously in a hotel room in the Intercontinental with a couple of my colleagues and my friends and we had somebody from the electoral office with a computer which was going to pick up the very first result from a polling booth that was posted.  I think the first result came from a polling booth in Portland which, it was?   And it showed a 16 per cent swing to the Liberal Party and I got very excited and my good friend and then adviser, and still good friend and adviser Grahame Morris said don't get too excited mate, there is only 80 votes at that booth.  But, I always sort of associated Kerry a bit with that because it's not too far from here.  But ladies and gentlemen, Kerry has been an outstanding Member of Parliament. Bathurst is newly added to his domain, it's still represented of course by the Independent, and I respect the contribution that he has made as a local member, but that will change at the next election, and the people of Bathurst have to decide whether they want Kerry Bartlett or a Labor member. They don't have any option realistically.  And when it comes as being credentialed as a good local member in a regional seat, Kerry already has a lot of runs on the board.  He's been a wonderful representative of Macquarie, a diverse seat, composed up until now essentially of the Blue Mountains and the Hawkesbury River area, two quite different communities although not that far apart geographically. And I found in the 11 years that he's been a Member of Parliament, he has been assiduous, he worries, he agonises about the interests of the people he represents and he pushes very hard as he did with the dentistry school for the Charles Sturt University, as he has in relation to the $10 million commitment in relation to the Bells Line of road, as he has in relation to many other things which have come the way of his electorate.  Now that is the kind of local member people want. He is a genuinely dedicated and committed local citizen and it's very important that we choose people who are prepared to go into bat for their local communities.  He's also been, of course, a member of the Government's team and he currently herds them altogether for divisions and other things and make sure that they turn up to keep the Government in power when there are divisions taken.  We'll face at the end of this year a very important election and the nation, a very important choice.  It is undeniably the case that Australia is living in very prosperous times.  We have a 32-year low in unemployment, we have a 32-year high in consumer confidence.  We've seen in the last year a reduction of 22 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much. First of all, may I pay tribute to the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which we gather and thank Matilda House for her customary warm and enthusiastic welcome. And Joyce, can I say, you've stolen the show. My fellow Australians, and I acknowledge particularly the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Mal Brough, the Leader of the Opposition and to Jackie Huggins and Mark Leibler, who have done such outstanding work in being the co-chairman of Reconciliation Australia in organising today's event.
Today Australia remembers one of the finest and fairest days in our history.  The 1967 referendum has carried its own mythology down the years, portrayed variously as extending citizenship rights or the right to vote for indigenous Australians.   The truth, as we know, is a little more prosaic.  Aboriginal Australians were to be counted in the census and the Commonwealth given formal power to make laws for indigenous Australians.  To discount the power of myth is, however, to miss the larger meaning of this historic moment 40 years ago.  Myth-making has always been part of how a country becomes a nation.  And if it spurs a nation on to a better one, well so much the better.
On the 27th of May 1967, Australians said in a loud and collective voice that indigenous Australians deserved a fair go; that the first Australians should not be second-class citizens in their own country.  This was the most resoundingly successful referendum ever in Australia.  We recall today the bipartisan spirit in which it was carried.  More importantly, we remember this as a campaign of grassroots democracy, a peoples' campaign in which indigenous and other Australians worked side by side. 
Today, our nation honours the patriots who pricked our national conscience 40 years ago.  We particularly honour those here from the Federal Council for the Advancement of Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders, as well as friends and colleagues who have since passed on. We pay tribute to all who took up the cause; gathering signatures, raising awareness, persuading politicians and challenging prejudice.  
The 1967 referendum was a landmark in the shaping indigenous identity.  It also helped bring many remarkable individuals like Charlie Perkins and Faith Bandler to national prominence.   In a way, Neville Bonner's public life began that day.  Legend has it that my dear old departed friend was helping a Liberal distribute how-to-vote cards, advocating a Yes vote, when a Labor man told him he should be handing out ALP material, also advocating a Yes vote.  Never one to be pigeon-holed, Neville promptly joined the Liberal Party.
The last thing that a Charlie Perkins, a Faith Bandler or a Neville Bonner would want is for today to be just a national pat on the back.   Too many of the hopes expressed so resoundingly and genuinely 40 years ago remain unrealised.  As Prime Minister I'm very conscious of that.  
This is a moment to reflect on the wider meaning of what Australians were trying to say in 1967, including about indigenous rights. I recognise the importance of rights to indigenous aspiration.  I recognise the special status of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders as our first peoples with 60,000 years of history, the starting point for our nation's history which every Australian child should learn.   I recognise too the spiritual importance of connectedness to country and of indigenous languages.  And with others I celebrate the way indigenous culture is now so central to Australia's cultural expression to the world.
But in recognising all this, I come back to what I think the Australian people were trying to get at 40 years ago.  The right of an Aboriginal Australian to live on remote communal land and to speak an indigenous language is no right at all if it is accompanied by grinding poverty, overcrowding, poor health, community violence and alienation from mainstream Australian society.  Reconciliation has little meaning in a narrative of separateness from that society.   We've spent a lot of time these past decades analysing the causes of indigenous failure.  In a way, that's been part of the problem.  We should have spent more time thinking long and hard about the causes of indigenous success.
This single question; what does indigenous success look like must be our starting point.  It's at the heart of what we as a government are trying to achieve in areas like housing, health, employment, business development and education. Part of our collective frustration is that there is so much common ground on what indigenous success looks like. 
We can all agree, I think, that it means a healthy child born into a loving family.  It means a young boy or girl at school and ready to learn.  It means a safe community.  It means a young man or woman discovering a sense of self in a culture of responsibility, enriched by his or her indigenous heritage.   It means indigenous Australians enjoying the same opportunities as other Australians.  It must never mean reconciling ourselves to lower expectations for 30 or 20 or 10 per cent of indigenous people.
This vision can only be realised in a culture of shared responsibility.  Sometimes this will demand more from government; more listening, more responsiveness on the ground and, where it can make a difference, more resources. And I simply note that real spending on indigenous-specific programmes has increased by 42 per cent since this Government came to office, and will reach a record $3.5 billion in the coming financial year.
But for indigenous success to shine through sometimes, frankly, it demands less from government and more from indigenous civil society; from the little platoons between the individual and the state. Like the family, the school community, the elders, the voluntary sector and indigenous leadership.  Only then will we be able to genuinely marry the best of government intentions and resources with the wisdom of local knowledge. 
I come from a political tradition that values such knowledge; that values independence and personal responsibility, as well as freedom, equality and civic duty.  It's here that the spirit of 1967 carries so many lessons for Australians today. As Jackie Huggins has said, the movement for change in 1967 didn't start just because a government wanted it to.  It started because enough of the Australian people wanted it.
Under the umbrella of Reconciliation Australia, this same spirit is inspiring more and more of our people and companies to the cause of Reconciliation; a very Australian, bottom-up, do it yourself Reconciliation.   Not in a way that absolves government of its responsibilities.  But in a positive way that affirms this as a cause that begins with people. 
I sometimes wish our country had its own Alexis de Tocqueville, the great French chronicler of 19th Century American democracy.  He or she would have reminded us long ago that a great democracy doesn't rest on laws or political proclamations or government targets.   It rests most solidly on what he called 


E&amp;OE...
First may I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people, the traditional owners of the land on which this great tribute to Australian democracy is built. Janette and I welcome you very warmly to this special luncheon to honour in particular those men and women, indigenous and other Australians, who set such an example and trail blazed in so many ways more than 40 years ago to achieve what remains the most remarkable event in Australia's constitutional history since the establishment of the Constitution itself in 1901 and that is the carriage of a referendum with an affirmative vote of more than 90 per cent. 
Of course what was remarkable about that day and that event was that there was another referendum question posed, now largely forgotten in the recollections of that day, and that referendum question was designed to break what is called the nexus in the Australian Constitution, and that is the provision that says that as nearly as practicable the size of the House of Representatives shall be double the size of the Senate. That particular proposition also enjoyed bipartisan support between the Coalition Government on the one hand, and the Labor Party Opposition on the other hand, yet it went down with an absolutely thundering no vote; which is a reminder that the Australian people are very discerning and they're very acute as to what they're asked to vote for and what they choose to support and what they choose to reject. 
My personal memory of that day is different from that of many in this room, but I nonetheless did participate as a hard working member of my Party, and I can still recall wandering around the polling booths of the then Federal Electorate of Parkes, which comprised suburbs like Earlwood and Canterbury and Campsie in the suburbs of Sydney, with the then Federal Member, later to become Federal Attorney General Tom Hughes. And I still remember the unusual experience on polling day of standing beside members who I knew well from the Australian Labor Party in that area and handing out the same how to vote cards advocating the same outcome. And it was one of those, you might say, election nights when both the Liberal Party and the Labor Party were profoundly happy with the outcome. And it's a measure and a reminder of the bipartisan spirit that did pervade that particular occasion. 
But I think of all of the people that we honour today, those who were the real trail blazers, those who championed the cause, those who mobilised the public opinion, those who galvanised the nation's conscience and brought a sense of passion and a sense of commitment to bringing about a very just outcome. I hope that all of you found this morning's event, as I did, a profoundly moving one. It was a very moving event. And I want to congratulate Reconciliation Australia and most particularly Jackie and Mark and everybody else connected with Reconciliation Australia for achieving a wonderful balance of reminiscence, nostalgia, intelligent sober reflection, a sense on occasion of disappointment; which is appropriate because not everything that was hoped in May of 1967 has been achieved, far from it. But also a renewed determination to fully achieve and realise the goals and the aspirations that all of the Australian people had 40 years ago. 
To me in so many ways the highlight of the morning was the inspiring story of Doctor Kelvin Kong, a wonderful story of success and of achievement. And I think it is very important whilst not in any way avoiding the grim elements of the hard march towards greater fairness and better outcomes for indigenous Australians, I think it is important on occasions more frequently to emphasise what does constitute indigenous success. 
We haven't come as far as we would have liked and those who criticise that are entitled on the facts to do so. But we have come a lot further than we would have come if men and women of great goodwill and great commitment 40 years ago had not set out to do what was achieved then. And I therefore want to conclude my brief remarks at this luncheon with a sense of optimism and a sense of hope. 
A lot was overcome 40 years ago. As a nation I think we surprised ourselves with the resounding nature of that victory. Today has been an opportunity for all of those who are still with us to be honoured and we do that unreservedly and unconditionally. It is also an opportunity here in the Parliament of the nation to thank those people, to honour what they have done, to resolve to do better in the future, but most importantly of all, on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people, I extend to all of those who played such a pivotal role in that great event, one of the finest and fairest days in Australia's history, our sense of gratitude and respect for what they have done for all of us.
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to support my remarks.
  [ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.84Mb - 120secs)
The Australian economy is in robust health. Australians have every reason to believe that our economy will remain strong for years into the future provided it is well managed. 
There is however one dark cloud on our economic horizon. That dark cloud is the potential mismanagement of Australia's response to climate change. 
If we don't get this response right then the economic consequences will be severe. 
If we overreact the economy will be damaged and jobs lost. Equally we must maintain a strong response so that Australia can play her part in the world wide effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
It is fundamental to any response both here and elsewhere that a price be set for carbon emissions. This is best done through the market mechanism of an emissions trading system. That is why last December I established a Joint Government-Business Task Group to advise on the form an emissions trading system might take in Australia. 
That report will be received by the Government this week. The decisions to be taken on this issue will be the most crucial economic decisions facing Australia in the next decade. 
It is essential that we strike the right balance. Skilled and careful economic management is required. 
Whilst the issue itself is environmental, the character of the decisions to be taken are overwhelmingly economic.
If Australia is to adopt an emissions trading system, it must be one compatible with the special economic circumstances of this nation including our huge endowment of fossil fuels. It must be one that does not disadvantage us within the world trading system. 
This issue must be managed in a way that preserves our economic strengths and advantages.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.84Mb - 120secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Julie and Theana, thank you for your very warm welcome.  This is but the latest of the occasions that I have had the opportunity of opening your conference at the beginning of our Federal Council meeting, and I want to echo very strongly what you said in your own address and that is the philosophy of our party about the role of women or indeed the role of men in society has been all about choice. And the party has for many, many years recognised the central role of women both in the organisation and increasingly in the Federal Parliament.  We have never embraced the patronising approach of quotas; we have never reserved particular seats or places on a Senate ticket for women, rather we have sought over the years through the logical process of the Party organisation making rational decisions to see women emerge in increasing numbers and that has been the case.  It happens to be the Liberal Party and the Coalition in government that has produced a Cabinet with the largest number of women in Australia's history; happens to be the Liberal Party that has produced the longest serving female Cabinet Minister in Australia's history and, of course, Senator Coonan is for the first time a member of the Leadership Group of a party in government.  
Now these are facts, they are indisputable, they are incontrovertible but they don't connote a belief by the Liberal Party that there are quintessentially women's issues.  All issues are of concern to women.  There are some issues in politics where women bring special perspectives that we men recognise and respect.  But, fundamentally, the view of a woman on defence and foreign affairs is as important as the view of a woman on child care or health policy and equally, might I say, the view of a man on the responsibilities and challenges of raising children is as relevant and as responsible as the views of a woman.  Now having stated those markers to, as it were, define where I am coming from, can I thank all of the female members of the Liberal Party for their outstanding support and loyally towards me and to my parliamentary colleagues and the contribution over the years that they have made to the strength and the vitality of the Liberal Party organisation. I have a great story to tell about the way in which the opportunities for both men and women throughout Australia have been enhanced over the last 11 years.  I think one of the things that warms me as much as anything has been the extraordinary growth in the number of women starting their small businesses.  Of the small businesses that are opened each year, growing numbers, now somewhere between 30 to 40 per cent, of small businesses in Australia are now opened by women and it connotes an expanding role and expanding set of opportunities for women in our society. 
Women have shared very, very dramatically, of course, in the explosion in employment over the last year.  Average weekly earnings for women have increased by six per cent in the last year to March.  The number of new female jobs increased by 134,000 or 2.9 per cent in the last year to April; the same exactly as the increase in the number of jobs for men.  And, of course, the changes and improvements to Family Tax Benefits have been of enormous benefit for both men and women.  It is a society where there are expanding opportunities and expanding choices available to women and the remarks that Theana made about the choices for women in relation to their family responsibilities are ones that I have always held to very tenaciously and all of the policies that have defined my approach to the responsibilities of men and women towards their children and mothers and fathers towards their children, have been defined by the philosophy of choice.  And the decision to be a full-time parent at home when your children are young is a noble choice exercised freely by, overwhelmingly, but not always by women and a choice that should be totally respected. But equally it is not the role of the Government to tell parents how to organise the care of their children.  It is the role of the Government as far as possible to make the exercise of all of the choices men and women would want possible and that is what we have done with our Family Tax Benefit policies. It is infinitely easier now for a low and middle-income family to have a parent at home than used to be the case if that is their choice.  Equally, the changes we have made to Family Tax Benefits, the easing of the taper in relation to the withdrawal of welfare benefits in the operation of the tax system and indeed the most recent tax changes announced by Peter Costello, which will come into operation on the 1st July, will be of particular benefit for women in the workforce. The great bulk of women in the workforce with dependent children work part-time and the proportion that benefit from those tax changes, where the point at which the 30 per cent tax rate comes into operation is increased from $25,000 to $30,000, will deliver in proportionate terms far greater benefits to women with dependent women in the workforce than to men with dependent children in the workforce because the great bulk of women with dependent children who are in the workforce are in fact working part-time and it is an aspect of those tax changes that will become more apparent after they come into operation.  But all of us today are part of the world community whether we are men or women or whether we have family responsibilities, have children or don't have children and one of the issues that the world community is confronted with at the present time is the issue of climate change, and you'd be disappointed if I didn't say something about the taskforce report that was handed to me yesterday and will be made available to the media at 10.30am this morning with a release time of 11.30 this morning. And this taskforce report, which was compiled by the Secretary of my department, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Water Resources and the Secretary of the Department of Industry as well as senior business leaders including Margaret Jackson, the Chairman of Qantas, the Managing Director of Xstrata, which is one of the largest coal exporters in Australia, a representative of BHP Billiton, a representative of, representatives of other energy companies; represents the most intellectually rigorous analysis of the climate change issue every undertaken in this country. 
Now there's been a lot of talk about the alleged inactivity of this government on the issue of climate change, I want to deal with that fairly directly in my remarks, but could I say in relation to the report I was given yesterday, this is the Australian version of what ought to be done because Australia is atypical amongst developed countries.  We are a nation with a small population, a very high standard of living and very large natural resources.  I won't inflict too many figures on you but let me give you one.  Of all of the OECD countries, that's the developed countries in the world of which Australia is obviously one, the percentage of the exports from all of those countries which is accounted for by the resources sector, that's coal and iron ore and gas and uranium and the like, is just 8 per cent.  The proportion accounted for by manufacturing goods is 62 per cent.  In the case of Australia the proportion accounted for by resources instead of being one that reflects the OECD average of 8 per cent is in fact 37 per cent and the proportion of manufacturing is just 16 per cent.  Now that's not to say that resources are good and manufacturing is bad, they're both very good, but the point is our situation is very different from the situation of many other countries with which we normally make comparisons, particularly but not only the countries of Europe and that is why it is essential if we are to do things in this area which we are going to do and do very significantly and very comprehensively, we have to do them in a way that cares for the character and the nature of the Australian economy and cares for and protects the natural advantages that providence has given us.
Now we have taken a period of some six months, and I would say only six months, to put together this incredibly comprehensive report and as a result of doing that we will come to the debate and the advocacy of what is in this report with a broadly based understanding of what is needed.  We do need to have an emissions trading system in this country, we do need, obviously as a corollary of that, to establish a longer term target for greenhouse gas emissions, but that target has to be the product of careful analysis and thought so that we know what it means before we embrace it instead of embracing a target first and then trying to work out what it means. That is, to use the language we all understand, putting the cart before the horse. And this analysis which brings industry with us; and in the end the large companies, resource companies that contribute enormously to greenhouse gas emission in this country, some 49 to 50 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions in Australia comes from what are called stationary sources, that's essentially power stations.  So therefore you have to make absolutely certain that those who are involved in the generation of those both understand and support what we're going to do and we've taken care to ensure that that is the case by the very sensible approach of including them in the analysis.  
I can't think of an occasion in the past where you've had such a lock step approach between the most senior advisers to the Government and the very representatives of most of the sectors of our economy that are going to be affected.  But, of course, in the end all of us are going to be affected.  We can't curb greenhouse gas emissions over the years ahead without paying higher prices for electricity and anybody in the next 12 months, five years, 10 years who tries to tell you otherwise is deluding you, there will be a cost.  But the question is to make certain that that is a manageable cost, that it is no greater than we need to pay but equally is...involves an acceptance of a sufficient cost to bring about a change in human behaviour because if there is no appreciable cost there'll be no change in human behaviour and there'll be no reduction in the greenhouse gas emissions contributing to continued global warming; that is a matter of commonsense and a matter of logic.  
What this tells me, and what I think it will tell the Australian people is that the decisions we take on a target for greenhouse gas emissions, the decisions we take on all the other accompanying elements of an intelligent climate change policy will be the biggest and most important economic decisions we'll take in the next decade and if we get them wrong, or they are taken by people who don't understand how to run an economy, and you know who I am thinking about, there will be enormous damage done to our economic future. 
This is a hugely burdensome and responsible decision. If we get this wrong, if we embrace a target that will do crippling damage to our economy, if we embrace a target that will increase electricity prices more than they should go up, then we will do enormous damage to Australian households and to the broad economy. So there is a lot at stake. That is why we have taken time, that is why we have got everybody involved. I mean we've been listening to lectures from the Labor Party over the last six months about when are you going to do something. Having approached our task in this methodical way, we are well placed in the debate in the weeks and months ahead to tell the Australian people that we actually understand what needs to be done. We're properly informed about what needs to be done and we'll do it in a way that achieves the goal we want of reducing greenhouse gas emissions over time, but not doing it in a fashion that causes unreasonable and undue harm to the Australian economy.
Could I just say one other thing about this issue before I formally open your conference, and that is that hand in glove with what we've been doing in relation to the report I've talked about is the undeniable fact that over the past few years this Government has done a lot more in the area of greenhouse gas policy than it often receives any credit for. I indicated in the Parliament that our programs and policies, for example, have brought forth or supported investments in renewables of some $3.5 billion over the last 10 years. And in 1999 we established a Renewable Remote Power Generation Program and we've added to that and we're now investing about $328 million in that. We've, of course, doubled the rebate for solar panels in homes. In 2004 I announced the Solar Cities series of trials. The first of those was announced in Adelaide in August of 2006 and in Townsville in September of 2006; Blacktown in November of 2006 and Alice Springs in April of 2007. 
In October of last year we put $75 million into a large scale solar concentrator in north west Victoria under our Low Emissions Technology Development Initiative and that represents, along with the accompanying investments, the largest solar demonstration investment anywhere in the world. And on the 1st of November we committed $14.5 million to solar energy projects under the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate. And the Government has also provided industry grants of close to $30 million for geothermal energy projects and we also announced a broad industry framework for geothermal activity.
I mention some of these things to underline the point that over the years the Government has made very significant investments to bring forth activity and financial commitments by companies in this area. It's a very important issue, it's a very important debate. I did an interview this morning just before I came here for a country radio network with Charles Wooley who many of you will know from 60 Minutes and he's got a wonderful understanding of life in regional Australia. And he was asking me that, you know, in effect, well if the world is about to come to an end, why do you worry about the economy? And you know, if was a fairly logical sort of question to ask me. He said, you know, there will be no economy to worry about if the world is about to come to an end because he says a lot of scientists are saying the world is about to come to an end. And my response was, well I think you know, as in all of these things, my lifetime's commonsense, I hope, has told me that on so many of these issues you have the people who say the world is about to come to an end, which of course it is not, and then you have the other people who say that in 50 years time people will look back on this period with astonishment and say why on earth did those silly fools in 2007 get all in a tizz about climate change because it hasn't really happened. And I said to Charles, I said I thought like just about everything else belonging to the sort of rational western liberal tradition, the truth was somewhere in the middle. And the truth is somewhere in the middle and our approach is somewhere in the middle of those two extremes. Neither of them is logical, neither of them is right, but you do have to recognise that mankind is making a damaging contribution to greenhouse gas emissions. It is affecting the climate, we do have a responsibility to act, but we have a responsibility to act in a measured, responsible fashion that preserves the gains we have whilst making an extraordinary, our own contribution, rather, to solving the problem.
I wish you well. I thank you again very warmly for your contribution to our great cause. I salute the contribution of the women within my Parliamentary Party and preselections for the Senate have yielded a growing number of them in recent months and they will add to the ranks of those who are already there and I appreciate their contribution and I wish you well. I will no doubt see all of you over the next couple of days. Thanks a lot.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Madam President, my fellow Australians. It is an enormous privilege as Federal Parliamentary Leader and Prime Minister to again address this gathering of the Federal Council of the greatest political party that Australia has ever seen, and a political party to which I personally owe so much, and a political party that has extended to me the most extraordinary privilege that could come the way of any man or woman in this country and that is to be Prime Minister of Australia. 
We have understandably spent a great deal of time at this Council talking about the achievements of the past decade but it's important, as well as doing that, that we throw forward to the next decade because it's my passionate view that good though the last 10 years have been, Australia's greatest years lie ahead of us. We are a nation richly blessed by providence with remarkable supplies of resources, a wonderful civic-minded population and a degree of social cohesion and unity which is the envy of the world. Why else do people in their tens of thousands seek to come from the four corners of the earth to live in our country? We are nation that has shown the maturity and foresight to tackle the problems of the years ahead, the Inter-Generational Report first released some five years ago identified the great challenge of the ageing of the population, and the update of that report released before the last Budget, although it still reminded us in a very sober way of the challenges that lie ahead, was also a wonderful report card on the progress that had been made and how in the five years that it passed between the first and second Inter-Generational Report, the economic reforms implemented by the Government meant that the challenge in the years ahead, although still daunting, was not quite as daunting as might otherwise have been the case.
The most recent Budget was the most visionary in the area of higher education for probably 50 years because it laid especially through the Higher Education Endowment Fund and the $5 billion down-payment into that Fund, it laid a framework for further reform and further investment in that area, as well as continuing the process of reform and change in the area of technical education.
We are enjoying the enormous fruits of a resources boom. There is one great difference though between the two sides of politics on the resources boom, one side of politics, the Labor Party, has predicted that it is about to come to an end, or indeed has already come to an end, and is doing its level best to accelerate the process of bringing it to an end through its industrial relations policy. The other side of politics, our side of politics, sees no reason why the resources boom, if the right policies are applied, and we understand that competitive advantage is only maintained by high commitment to domestic reforms, that there is no reason why that resources boom cannot continue for many years into the future. 
Our future therefore is one of great hope and great optimism. We'll need to maintain our constant resistance against, and our constant determination to fight, the forces of global terrorism. Terrorism is an enemy the like of which the world has not faced before. The war against terror is not like a conventional war, we're not trying to return an invading army from whence it came, we're dealing with a deadly enemy that operates in a borderless world without any regard for such basic instincts as self-survival. The war against terrorism is taxing the patience of many in the western world but we have to maintain our commitment, our resilience, our determination and our willingness to fight an enemy knowing that that fight will go on for many years into the future. And can I say to all of you that resisting terrorism in one part of the world is as important as resisting terrorism in another. If it's important to Australia that terrorism be defeated in Afghanistan, it is equally important to Australia that terrorism should be defeated in Iraq. A defeat for the coalition in either of those places would represent a huge setback for the cause of the west, an enormous propaganda victory for terrorism, a revitalisation of organisations such as Jemaah Islamiah in Indonesia and the Philippines and therefore represent a direct threat to the general security of Australia.
In recent months there has been very intense debate on the issue of climate change and last Friday I released the report of a task group, uniquely joining together the five most senior bureaucrats in the Federal Government and leaders of industry, a report which analysed the circumstances in which an emissions trading system might be introduced in Australia. And I want to spend a few moments this morning talking about that issue and indicating the Government's immediate response to that report released on Friday. Let me say by way of background that this is an issue that requires a balanced application of commonsense, it requires a measured but determined response, it requires a response that recognises that in the vernacular the world is not going to come to an end tomorrow because of climate change, and we shouldn't imagine for a moment that that is the case, but equally we would be foolish indeed to ignore the accumulated scientific evidence that mankind's behaviour has contributed to the process of global warming. Australia, it should be remembered, is one of the few countries in the world that is actually on track to achieve the emissions target set by the Kyoto Protocol, unlike many of those in other parts of the world that spend a great deal of time lecturing Australia in increasingly moralistic terms about our failures in this area.
And this is quite a remarkable achievement given that our economy is set to grow by 90 per cent and our population by a third over the Kyoto period, and that's from 1990 to 2012. But now we must plan for the world beyond the end of the Kyoto period. The world beyond when the current target that Australia will meet is no longer relevant. And today I therefore announce a number of things by way of response to the report released on Friday.
I announce specifically that Australia will move towards a domestic emissions trading system, that's a cap and trade system beginning no later than 2012. 
Secondly, we will as a nation set a long term aspirational goal for reducing carbon emissions but we need to access very carefully with detailed economic modelling the impact any target will have on Australia's economy and Australian families, this target will be set next year 2008. 
Thirdly, the scheme will be national in scope and as comprehensive as practicable, designed to take account of global developments and to preserve the competitiveness of our trade exposed emissions intensive industries.
Fourthly, Australia should not pay higher energy costs than necessary to achieve emissions reductions, in other words, governments need to let the market sort out the most efficient means of lowering emissions with all low emissions technologies on the table and that of necessity must include nuclear power. 
Australia will continue to lead internationally on climate change, globally and in the Asia-Pacific region. Not in a way that lectures and moralises, but in a way that builds support for global action to tackle this enormous global challenge.
And I very much want to highlight the important fact that our aim is to ensure that firms which undertake additional abatement between now and the start of emissions trading will not be disadvantaged. And this will provide additional confidence to companies already doing an enormous amount to cut their emissions. 
This will be a world-class emissions trading system, more comprehensive, more rigorously grounded in economics and with better governance than anything in Europe. Implementing an emissions trading scheme and setting a long-term goal for reducing emissions will be the most momentous economic decisions Australia will take in the next decade. This emissions trading system must be built to last. It needs to last not five or 10 years, it needs to last the whole of the 21st Century if Australia is to meet our global responsibilities and further build our economic prosperity. This is a great economic challenge for Australia as well as a great environmental challenge. Significantly reducing emissions will mean higher costs for businesses and households, there is no escaping that and anyone who pretends to do otherwise is not a serious participant in this hugely important public policy debate. It will change the entire cost structure of our economy, we must get this right, if we get this wrong it will do enormous damage to our economy, to jobs and to the economic wellbeing of ordinary Australians, especially low-income households. The question I pose to the Australian people, quite directly, is this, who do you trust to take these vital decisions about our future? Who do you trust to strike the right balance so our firms and families can plan for the future with confidence? A Government that has given Australia 11 unbroken years of prosperity, that has brought our economy back from high interest rates, high debt and high unemployment, a proven team of economic decision makers that have been tested and have performed for more than a decade or a party that has been missing in action on every key economic decision over that period? A party whose policy approach is steeped in recklessness and symbolism rather than reality and substance? 
Yet again my friends, Labor has not done the hard policy work on this issue. Labor says it will reduce Australia's emissions by 60 per cent by 2050 but it won't tell you what the impact will be because it hasn't done the analysis. Peter Garrett, who would be in charge of all of this if Labor were to win office, wants a 20 per cent reduction in emissions from 1990 levels by 2020. He said it explicitly, indeed that's his starting point, because he said it could be 20, 25 or even 30 per cent. Peter Garrett and Kevin Rudd have absolutely no idea what the consequences of these numbers are. A 20 per cent reduction from 1990 levels would do enormous damage to our economy and to Australian living standards. To meet such a target the Emissions Trading Taskforce, that's a group of people whose report I released on Friday, concluded that it would require and I quote, 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.54Mb - 101secs)
Later today I'll meet the Premier of Victoria Mr Bracks for important talks on the future of one of Australia's most critical resources, the Murray-Darling Basin.
In January I announced the Government's $10 billion National Plan for Water Security, outlining a once-in-a-generation opportunity to change forever the management of the nation's biggest river system.
Under the plan, the Commonwealth will take responsibility for key water management functions in the Murray-Darling Basin.
A referral of powers to enable the Commonwealth to manage water in the Murray-Darling Basin is the only way to ensure decisions are taken in the national interest. It also provides certainty for all parties.
Mr Bracks and I will be trying to resolve the remaining issues today. My Government has taken a patient and constructive approach to resolving the concerns of the Victorian Government.
We're not asking anything of the Victorian Government that has not already been agreed to by all other state and territory governments. The Parliamentary leaders of the Oppositions in all states and territories offered their unanimous support for the initiative at a meeting in Sydney during the weekend.
It should be remembered that the $10 billion water plan does not involve one dollar in extra funding from the state governments.
I'll be asking Mr Bracks to sign up to the plan quickly so that this critical resource can be properly managed.
It's time to act to protect the Murray-Darling Basin and to provide certainty for those farmers and rural and regional communities who rely so heavily on its sustainability.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.54Mb - 101secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.64Mb - 107secs)
Good morning. 
The economy continues its longest expansion on record with the latest national accounts showing annual growth of 3.8 per cent.  That's much higher than most other industrialised economies and it's at a time when we have the worst drought in 100 years.  
Australia's economic fundamentals are in great shape.  Real wages - that's your pay packet after inflation - have increased more than 20 per cent since 1996.
Exports are growing; inflation remains low; business and consumer confidence is high; and unemployment is falling. 
The jobless rate fell from 4.4 per cent to 4.2 per cent yesterday - that's the lowest figure since November 1974.  It's the 13th consecutive month that unemployment has been below five per cent.  These are the great human dividends of 11 years of prudent economic management. 
They are also an endorsement of the Government's workplace reforms and an important reminder that any movement away from Australian workplace agreements, back to collective bargaining with unions pushing wage claims across the whole economy, could undermine the current prosperity. 
The removal of the unfair dismissal laws has encouraged small business to take on more staff - that's one of the big reasons why unemployment has fallen. 
Labor, sadly, would put a stop to all of this by bringing back the unfair dismissal burden for small business, if it were elected to office. 
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.64Mb - 107secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.52Mb - 99secs)
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission already monitors the price of fuel at about 70 per cent of service stations around Australia every day. 
The Commission already has the power to obtain search warrants, seize documents and seek fines of up to $10 million from companies involved in anti-competitive practices. 
The Government has offered to provide the ACCC with any new powers it needs to ensure that Australian motorists get a fair go at the bowser. Any request for extra powers will be granted. 
While petrol prices in Australia follow the Singapore price of fuel, there has been evidence in recent weeks that price falls in Singapore have not been quickly passed on to Australian motorists. 
This failure to lower the price in line with the Singapore benchmark is not acceptable to either the Government or the public. 
Australians by and large accept that international settings and market forces will govern the price of petrol but they will not tolerate being taken for a ride by anyone. 
The proposal by the leader of the Opposition, Mr Rudd, to create a petrol commissioner is a piece of bureaucratic window-dressing. It will have no impact on the price of petrol at the bowser. 
The Government will have further discussions this week with the Chairman of the ACCC, Mr Graeme Samuel, on the issue of extra powers for the Commission. 
Fuel prices have a significant affect on family budgets and the Government will do all it can to ensure that the impact of petrol prices on all Australians is kept to a minimum.   
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.52Mb - 99secs)


E&amp;OE...
Good Morning,
The Government's overriding economic goal over the past 11 years has been to ensure that low-income people get a fair share of our national prosperity. New figures show that our policies have been doing just that.
The latest Australian Bureau of Statistics figures reveal that the Government's tax and welfare systems are redistributing our wealth in favour of low income earners.
It shows that only the top 40 per cent of Australian households are paying net tax after the value of all government benefits are counted. 
That means average households receive more in government benefits than they pay in tax.
When I announced the Family Tax Initiative policy just prior to the 1996 election, I had in mind a tax system that would give low-income families a fairer share of our nation's wealth, and we have kept faith with that promise.
This has not been a rich man's government; this has been a government for the battlers of this country.  
It is a government that will continue to ensure our prosperity is shared throughout the community.
Our economy is performing strongly and the Government's policies are ensuring that our prosperity is being shared. A Rudd Labor Government would put all of that at risk.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.21Mb - 79secs)
Good Morning,
The Government's overriding economic goal over the past 11 years has been to ensure that low-income people get a fair share of our national prosperity. New figures show that our policies have been doing just that.
The latest Australian Bureau of Statistics figures reveal that the Government's tax and welfare systems are redistributing our wealth in favour of low income earners.
It shows that only the top 40 per cent of Australian households are paying net tax after the value of all government benefits are counted. 
That means average households receive more in government benefits than they pay in tax.
When I announced the Family Tax Initiative policy just prior to the 1996 election, I had in mind a tax system that would give low-income families a fairer share of our nation's wealth, and we have kept faith with that promise.
This has not been a rich man's government; this has been a government for the battlers of this country.  
It is a government that will continue to ensure our prosperity is shared throughout the community.
Our economy is performing strongly and the Government's policies are ensuring that our prosperity is being shared. A Rudd Labor Government would put all of that at risk.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.21Mb - 79secs)


E&amp;OE...
(excerpt from the Prime Minister's address to the 52nd Federal Council of the Liberal Party of Australia)
Australia will move towards a domestic emissions trading system beginning no later than 2012 but we need to assess very carefully with detailed economic modelling the impact any target will have.
Labor says it will reduce Australia's emissions by 60 per cent by 2050 but it won't tell you what the impact will be because it hasn't done the analysis.  Peter Garrett wants a 20 per cent reduction in emissions from 1990 levels by 2020.
The Emissions Trading Taskforce concluded that it would require and I quote, 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.74Mb - 114secs)
High speed internet or broadband is a key business, education and community driver. It opens up new opportunities in households, workplaces, small businesses, libraries, schools and universities.
The Government has already invested close to $4 billion to provide broadband and other critical telecommunications services to regional and outer metropolitan Australia.
This has helped keep the price of high-speed internet access down with Australians benefiting from some of lowest priced ADSL broadband and best (per megabit) value in the world.
The next chapter in the nation's broadband story will be unveiled later today when my Government announces an innovative plan to provide access to fast broadband for 99 per cent of the Australian population.
The plan will deliver a state-of-the-art broadband network, with coverage for rural and regional areas at metropolitan-comparable prices.
One of the important features of our plan is that it caters for future developments, providing scope for faster speeds when new technologies come on line.
It is clear consumers are looking to access broadband at a price they can afford and using a technology that adapts to their individual and changing needs.
My Government's broadband blueprint follows comprehensive negotiations with industry that started last year involving Communications Minister Helen Coonan.  
Unlike Labor's cobbled-together plan, my Government's roll-out will be delivered without recklessly spending the $2 billion regional communications fund or raiding the superannuation of our defence and police personnel.
Importantly, it will help keep our economy strong by investing in infrastructure for the future.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.74Mb - 114secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well ladies and gentlemen I am delighted to be joined this morning by the Defence Minister, the CDF, the Chief of the Navy and the Chief of the Army in order to announce a very significant acquisition decision by the Government of two major defence projects which will enormously enhance the capacity of the Royal Australian Navy. These two particular decisions have been the subject of exhaustive, and I underline that word exhaustive, examinations within the defence process. They have been subject to the most rigorous financial analysis and have also been the subject of very robust and vigorous internal debate within the Defence Department and within the Royal Australian Navy; and involving, of course, not only the Chief of the Navy but the CDF and all the other senior defence advisers to the Government. And it was also, let me say, the subject of a very extensive discussion within the National Security Committee of Cabinet yesterday. And therefore I can say as Prime Minister, and others will speak for themselves, that these two decisions have been taken with eyes wide open and by the Government in full possession of advice and all of the facts. And we are satisfied that the process has worked and that the new procedures that have been established in relation to decision making have been very effective.
Now it's no secret that the two projects involve first of all two large amphibious ships which will be delivered by Tenix and they will cost approximately $3 billion. They are a Navantia design. They will greatly enhance Australia's ability to send forces in strength when required, particularly in our own region, but not, of course, restricted to our own region and will, of course, include a capacity to send forces and men and women and materials in relation to disaster relief efforts. They will be able to land over 1,000 personnel, along with their vehicles, the new M1 Abrams tanks, artilleries and supplies and using integrated helicopters and watercraft. 
Approximately one quarter of the construction will take place in Australia and that will provide about 600 jobs. The superstructure will be constructed and the majority of the fit out will be completed in Melbourne with an estimated value of about $500 million. The majority of the combat system design and integration work will take place in Adelaide and the value of that work will be up to about $100 million. So this particular acquisition will, in my view, particularly enhance our capacity to provide a flexible response to incidents in our region. I stress it's not limited to enhancing capacity in our region, but that is, in my view and the Government's view, a very likely requirement of any amphibious capacity over the next 10 to 20 years and unless this country does have that capacity to act flexibly and effectively within our own region, the investment would not be justified.
The second and even more significant investment, of course, in terms of money, is in Air Warfare Destroyers and the Government has decided to purchase the Navantia designed F100 and that's been selected as the next generation Air Warfare Destroyer for the Royal Australian Navy. There will be three ships delivered under this project. They will be delivered in 2014, 2016 and 2017; the aggregate cost will be in the order of $8 billion. This does represent a massive lift in the Royal Australian Navy's air warfare capability. These vessels will be able to perform the full spectrum of joint maritime operations including area air defence and escort duties, including, importantly, for the amphibious ships. 
They will be equipped with the Aegis Combat System, which is the most capable air combat system in the world and fully interoperable with forces of the United States. Should the Government so decide at a later date, they can be equipped with the SM3 Missile to conduct ballistic missile defence. The existing design is already in service with the Spanish Navy and that has the effect of reducing costs and some of the scheduled risks. They will be assembled in Adelaide by an alliance between ASC, the Defence Materiel Organisation and Raytheon and Australian industry will provide around 55 per cent of content; and employing around 3,000 Australians across the country. 
Now these two projects together involve an investment over a number of years of $11 billion. They are very significant decisions for the future combat capability of the Royal Australian Navy. They represent a very long term investment in the future defence capability of this country and the Government, after a very exhaustive examination both within defence and at a ministerial level, is satisfied that the right decisions have been taken. And I think it's fair to say that there's a sense of great optimism and a very positive view about the future capability of the Royal Australian Navy as a result of these two decisions. 
I want to thank everybody involved in the decision making process. The Minister for his passionate and detailed presentation, the contribution of the Defence Materiel Organisation, the rigorous assessment that went on inside Defence, all of my colleagues both Ministerial, service and public service who participated in the discussion yesterday. It was one of the best discussions in which I have been involved for some time in relation to the purchase of defence equipment. They are difficult decisions, there is always debate about the competing merits and that is why you have a rigorous process and I think the new process we have has proved to be very effective and very rigorous and I am very satisfied with the decision. I am enthusiastic about the announcement. 
It's another great day for the defence forces of this country and it's an opportunity for me to say again on behalf of the Government and the Australian people how much we admire their ongoing contribution to the welfare of this country and this decision will enhance our capability for years into the future, particularly but not only in our part of the world. I am happy to answer any questions. If they get too technical I will call this impressive phalanx of people to my right to assist me in dealing with them.
JOURNALIST:
Most people would think the navy chief would have the best idea on what to purchase. Why didn't you listen to him?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well the navy chief participated in the discussion yesterday. Knowing him as I do, he's a very robust individual and he's quite capable of expressing his view in very blunt language to you as well as to other people. So if he wants to say anything during the course of this discussion he can.
JOURNALIST:
The costs seem to have been somewhat greater than the published estimates. It's $3 billion extra. Is this a realisation that these are going to cost a whole lot more than anyone thought?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well I think it's fair to say that as time goes by the cost of most items of defence equipment do tend to grow. That seems to be a natural part of the process and we're satisfied that the costs of which we based on decision are accurate. We're also, more importantly, we're satisfied that we're getting good value for me. But defence equipment is very, very expensive and thank heavens we have a budget position that enables us to afford to buy them.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, could we please put the Admiral on the spot and have him explain to us...
PRIME MINISTER:
Well you can ask the Admiral a question, I'm sure he'd be happy to answer.  
JOURNALIST:
Basically how he feels as a sailor, how happy he is with the ship that is coming rather than the larger American vessel?
VICE ADMIRAL SHALDERS:
As the Prime Minister said, I'm very optimistic about the decisions that have been taken here.  There is a balance, of course, and the Government looked at all the balancing features, cost, capability, schedule and technical risk.  As the Prime Minister has said and as I've been involved throughout the process there's been very robust debate.  We are now a very well informed customer in terms of what we're getting here. The Navy is very excited, very optimistic about both of these decisions.  This will change the face of the Navy for the next 30 plus years.  In 2050 we'll be looking back on these decisions and in 2050 I'm very confident that we'll look back and say that was the right decision at the time.
JOURNALIST:
You're not annoyed that the Government didn't listen to you?
VICE ADMIRAL SHALDERS: 
I had every opportunity to put my case, no I'm not annoyed.  It was a very robust process.
JOURNALIST:
Do you now personally support the decision Admiral?
VICE ADMIRAL SHALDERS:
Absolutely.
JOURNALIST:
Admiral, there was some talk that the ships may be altered slightly to perhaps carry an extra helicopter or something.  Is that something that you will still be seeking to do?
VICE ADMIRAL SHALDERS:
That will be subject to the contract negotiations.  There are some minor changes to the F100.  At this stage not a change which would allow the carriage of another helicopter.
PRIME MINISTER:
Ok?  The Minister wants to say something.
MINISTER NELSON:
Prime Minister, this is a great day for the Australian Defence Force and you Prime Minister have thanked the service chiefs and others for what's being delivered here today.  $11 billion in five new ships for the Royal Australian Navy which will shape our defence force and our Navy in particular for the next 40 years. But I think it's got to be said that we thank you for putting this country in a position where we can confidently afford to do this.  We also need to recognise that this government has placed defence and security of its nation ahead of all other priorities.  
It also ought to be, the point ought to be made, Max, in relation to costs, what's happened here is that as a result of reforms which this government undertook four years ago we're now in a position with a rigorous process before signing off on contracts of knowing exactly what we're getting into.  We are very confident in terms of capability, schedule and price in terms of what's going to be delivered here and no Australian would forget that when in government the Labor Party gave us the Collins Class submarines with all of the problems that were not anticipated, a billion dollars of taxpayers money had to be spent over the subsequent seven or eight years getting them up to what is now world class standard.  We go into these projects today with our eyes wide open.  Yes, they're technologically advanced, yes they're on the edge but under no circumstances as a nation are we going to be risk averse.  It's very important that Australians also appreciate that these amphibious ships escorted by the three Air Warfare Destroyers in our region will ensure that we're able to undertake the security, stabilisation, maritime border protection, peace keeping and humanitarian and disaster relief priorities which lie before our nation for the foreseeable future.  
The 48 missile cells on this ship, the Aegis Combat System on the Air Warfare Destroyer, that and many other things make it fully interoperable with our key ally the United States of America and I can assure you that the Australianisation of the Spanish F100 with larger engines, with sonar buoys, a whole variety of other capabilities will well and truly deliver the capability that the Government set for itself in the White Paper and in the subsequent updates.  The amphibious ships, by the way, and the Air Warfare Destroyers between them, as the Prime Minister has said, an $11 billion investment in total.  That's about $4.5 billion specifically to be spent in Australia.  
It represents a bonanza for Australian contractors. More than 1000 contractors with 3,500 new jobs throughout this country will benefit from this, not only in South Australia and Victoria, but, for example, there will be between the two projects at least $300 million in work in New South Wales.  There will also be at least another $350 million of work in the state of Queensland, close to $75 million work up for grabs in southern Tasmania and $300 million in the state of Western Australia.  This is a very important project for our defence capability, for our economic security and the confidence that Australians, especially in South Australia and Victoria, can have in their employment opportunities for the future and I would also like to personally thank and place on record my admiration and thanks to not only Steven Gumley from the Defence Materiel Organisation, but Warren King who served this country extremely well throughout his life, particularly in Navy, but in managing this project has done an extraordinary job.  The alliance contracting that we've undertaken with the ASC and with Raytheon has been superb and I look forward very much to getting the contracts, the signature and thank all of the others that have been involved.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard, can I ask you a question on something else?
PRIME MINISTER:
I'll talk to you all later, I don't think we should take other things here.  Anything else?  
JOURNALIST:
Was there any price reduction for getting two Navantia ships?
PRIME MINISTER:
No.
JOURNALIST:
And also, was there, sorry.
PRIME MINISTER:
I've answered the question have I?
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister, you and the Minister talked about being confident about what we're getting into.  How much was the decision not to go for the on-paper US Air Warfare Destroyer, yet to be built, a fear of getting into too much risk with a ship that's unproven?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well that was part of it.  With these sorts of decisions they're never overwhelmingly driven by one consideration, there's always a series of considerations and it's fair to say that in the end we were persuasively satisfied on what had been presented both by the Minister and in discussion with our other advisers,  we were satisfied that given our best assessment of our need and given all the other considerations what we decided in relation to the Air Warfare Destroyers was the right decision. Bear in mind that when you're talking about interoperability with, interoperability with our allies, and that is always very, very important, the significance of the Aegis Combat System should not be downplayed and the commonality of that system is hugely important according to the assessments of everybody who made a contribution to this debate.  But, Tim, it's a balance of things, there's no one issue. I mean, obviously the fact that the alternative, I choose my words very carefully, the alternative did involve, in front of us, did involve some I suppose, imprecision and a period of further time to be satisfied that it would come up to what it was represented as being able to do, I think that was a factor but it wasn't the only factor. I mean, the decision we've taken in relation to the Air Warfare Destroyers is based on a belief that the vessel we've chosen best meets the aggregate needs of the Royal Australian Navy in current and reasonably foreseeable future circumstances. And that I think is the right judgement to bring.  I mean, obviously you have to pay some regard to cost but cost was not a principle driver.  Ok, one more, yes Brendan?
JOURNALIST:
Will the Spanish destroyer need to be modified comprehensively to take the heavier missiles involved in an anti-ballistic missile system.
PRIME MINISTER:
I wouldn't have imagined so, but I may be corrected on that.  No, I'm right.  Ok, thanks.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Julie, ladies and gentlemen.  I am quite delighted that all of you have joined me for the presentation of the inaugural Prime Minister's Prize for Australian history. 
I announced this prize at the National History Summit in August of last year and it's designed to recognise an outstanding piece of work published, produced or broadcast between the 20th September 2004 and 31st December 2006, and which contributes significantly to an understanding of Australian history.  
I'll be making the announcement a little later, but firstly I want to congratulate the four short-listed nominees who are all here today.  David Branagan for T.W. Edgeworth David: A Life.  Les Carlyon for The Great War.  Peter Cochrane for Colonial Ambition: Foundations of Australian Democracy and Josephine Flood for The Original Australians: Story of the Aboriginal People.
The quality of the short-list, drawn from a total of 130 nominations for 151 works, underlined immediately for me, the value of this award and I do want to thank the eminent Advisory Committee - Geoffrey Blainey, Greg Melleuish, Jackie Huggins, Tom Frame and Lisa Paul for their time in assessing the nominations and providing me with a short-list of works.
It's no secret that I see this prize as part of a larger project aimed at fostering curiosity, understanding and excitement about Australian History, both in our schools and in the wider Australian community.   It is a project that bears directly on our national life.  No liberal democracy and no government should be indifferent to the state of historical knowledge in our society.
All our public debates have a history.  All reflect the social, economic and political forces that have brought Australia to this point over a long period of time.
The very essence of active citizenship in a democracy rests on a sense of a common national journey.  Without a shared knowledge of the national story, we risk hollowing out the very foundations of citizenship based on feelings of nationhood.
Ironically enough it was the great philosopher of liberal individualism, John Stuart Mill, who articulated in his own time the power and importance of national history to feelings of nationhood.
Such feelings, he noted, can be generated by various causes - religion, language, race and geography among them.  But, he argued, the strongest of all is 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.62Mb - 108secs)
Implementing the Federal Government's plan to stamp out sexual and other abuse of defenceless Aboriginal children in the Northern Territory will take time, but the Government has already started.
Yesterday, the Minister Mal Brough met Commonwealth officials to map out the first stage of the intervention.
The top priority is the restoration of law and order.  The communities concerned must be stabilised and given a breathing space.  Additional police will be on the ground within 10 days.
I welcome the promise from both New South Wales and Victoria of more police; the other states should follow suit.  Giving the women and children of these remote Northern Territory communities a greater sense of physical security is essential before our initiatives in health and education can be implemented.
Mr Brough is assembling a talented taskforce to oversee the Government's plan.  Already included are Doctor Sue Gordon, a magistrate from Western Australian and chairman of the National Indigenous Committee.
Shane Castles who led the AFP operation in the Solomon Islands and Doctor Bill Glasson, a former federal president of the Australian Medical Association have also agreed to join the taskforce.
This is most encouraging.  Equally heartening has been the spontaneous response of the general public.  There have been numerous offers of help right across the spectrum of Australian society.
Throughout our nation there is a genuine desire to make sure that we respond effectively to this national emergency.  Our obligation to the vulnerable children of the Northern Territory is absolute.  We must not let them down.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.62Mb - 108secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Gerard, ladies and gentlemen. I thank the Sydney Institute for the opportunity of this platform to speak on the subject of the Government's response to the challenges facing the indigenous communities of the Northern Territory.
I do welcome the fact that the Sydney Institute continues to provide for people of all political persuasions a forum for significant thoughtful addresses and as a result make a very big contribution to public policy debate in our country.
Tonight, in our rich and beautiful country, there are children living out a Hobbesian nightmare of violence, abuse and neglect.
Many are in remote indigenous communities in the Northern Territory.  To recognise this is not racist.  It is a simple, empirical fact.
If anything, our duty of care is greater because of who and where they are.
We can debate root causes until the proverbial cows come home. Governments and NGOs at all levels can consult and search for a cherished consensus on what to do and the order in which to do it.  We could all declare with abject timidity that by 2020 indigenous and other Australians should all be equal.  
Frankly, that would be the easiest thing in the world to do.
We can do all this in the sure knowledge that without urgent action to restore social order, the nightmare will go on - more grog, more violence, more pornography and more sexual abuse - as the generation we're supposed to save sinks further into the abyss.  Even worse, believing that what is happening to them is quite normal.
There comes a point where the obligations of national governments take over.  Action cannot be delayed by concerns that it's not 


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very, very much Mr Mayor. Paul and Margaret Neville, Lyn representing her hard working husband who is doing great things for Australia overseas, promoting our trade interests, members of the Hervey Bay Council, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you very much for having me in your home, having me at this retirement village to share a few thoughts with you about our wonderful country, to say how wonderful it is that we are now experiencing some rain. I've got to say that the thing that impresses me unfailingly about Australians in all parts of our country is that they never lose their sense of humour.  
You may remember a few months ago, about two months ago, when I announced that unless it rained there might be zero allocations for irrigators along the Murray-Darling Basin. And I said to the news conference that, without any hint of irony, we should all start praying for rain. And I meant it. Anyway, I visited the Hunter Region of New South Wales a couple of weeks ago in the wake of the enormous floods and I visited a little town called Morpeth. And Morpeth relies very heavily on a passing tourist trade. And I went into one shop and I said to the lady how are you and she said I'm fine, I haven't lost any stock. You know, the water didn't affect me, etcetera, etcetera, but, she said, I don't have any customers because it was Queen's Birthday weekend and I rely very heavily on the Queen's Birthday weekend and we've had all this rain and it scared all the customers away. And she looked straight at me, and she said: and who was that fool who asked that everybody pray for rain? And I thought well there you go, you can't win them all, but we parted in very, very good humour.
But one of the greatest things about the immense, unbelievable privilege of being Prime Minister of this country is that you get an opportunity to travel around, you get an opportunity to meet a lot of people. Not all of them like you, not all of them agree with you, but most of them are good humoured and you go away with an understanding of how they think and how they feel about particular issues.
We are, at the present time, if you look at the country as a whole, we are going through a very prosperous period of time. We've got fewer people out of work than at any time for the last 33 years. I now find whenever I talk to employers that they are complaining not about the fact that they have too many people on their payrolls, rather they are complaining about their inability to get suitable people to fill all of the positions they have on offer. And in many parts of Australia there is a huge shortage of workers. 
I was at a function in Sydney last night and I was talking about this issue with a couple of people; one of them whom is that very talented lady Gail Kelly who runs the St George Bank, one of the most talented female business executives in Australia. And she was saying how hard it was to get enough good people and I said isn't it a terrific problem to be having to complain about our inability to get the right staff or enough staff whereas most of my political time we've been worried about finding enough jobs for the people who want them. So we would like to keep it that way. But it is important when we look at the strength of our economy, you look at the mining boom, we look at the low unemployment, we look at the stability with interest rates and all of those things; and the general optimism in the business community particularly the small business community, I think its very important to remember that amidst all of that there are still people in Australia who are missing out and who are doing it hard. And it's part of my job to make sure that the Government never forgets that, that there are people missing out.  
And there is one particular group who are missing out very badly at the present time and has been very much in the news recently and that is that group of indigenous children in the Northern Territory and other parts of Australia who, on all of the available evidence, are undeniably suffering the most unacceptable levels of abuse and neglect. And I think we have a situation where we should all collectively feel a sense of shame and disgust that that is happening in our country. This has got nothing to do with the colour of anybody's skin. It's got to do with the most basic of all human emotions that we all share, whatever our views are on other things, and that is the greatest obligation we have in a civilised society is to protect vulnerable children. And that is far more important than any doctrine of how you treat the indigenous people or how the white and black in our community relate to each other. 
And we have been driven to announce some unusual steps, and I don't make any apology for those unusual steps. They are a bit dramatic, they are interventionist, they will require, in effect, the Federal Government telling people for a period of time how things are going to be, not permanently, because unless we establish some conditions of basic law and order, unless we get basic policing facilities into these communities we have no hope of stopping the abuse. And if you can't have law and order, you can't hope to establish a situation where people are properly cared for with their health and properly required to go to school; and unless children go to school whether they're Aboriginal children or they're other children in the Australian community they don't have any hope of getting a job, they don't have any hope of being a part of the Australian community. And my view very strongly is, and always has been, that the best thing that we can do for the Aboriginal people of Australia is to give them a slice of the bounty and plenty of this country and to make them part of the mainstream of our society, by all means respecting their own particular traditions and their own culture and their own pride in their indigenous heritage, which we should respect and they have every right to preserve and cherish, but in the end the objective of all policies in this area has to be that everybody who is part of that community have an opportunity to share to the full the plenty and the bounty that this country has to offer.
Can I just say one other thing, and that is that I know that I am addressing a group of people who are in the, how shall one phrase it, in their advanced middle years. I think that's a good way of putting it. Their more mature middle years. And I want to say to all of you that the contribution that you have made and continue to make to the Australian community is immense. I have never believed in automatic retirement ages for anybody. I think people should decide how long they remain in a job or an occupation according to what their health is like, according to their own disposition. I think one of the great untapped resources of the Australian community over recent years has been people who in so many ways have put a lot into the community. And whilst they're not wanting to continue working flat out, full time all of their lives they still have an enormous amount to give back to the community and we are changing our attitudes on this very, very rapidly. 
I have seen in the last 10 years indeed even in the last five years, I have seen a tremendous change in the attitude of companies and the attitudes of governments towards the employment of older people in our community. And it's a process that is gathering pace because people realise what an untapped resource in many parts of the community is represented by people in the older section of the population. And it's very important that we have policies that encourage people who want to remain in the workforce, the paid workforce for as long as they wish to do so. Those who don't; also respect that choice and as many of you will know one of the big changes that we have introduced in recent times comes into operation on the 1st of July and that is the new arrangements applying to the taxation of superannuation benefits where, in relation to people over the age of 60, if you've made a superannuation contribution to a taxed fund, any payment from that, be it a pension or a payout will after the 1st of July be free of taxation levels. And, of course, in September we're also making a number of other changes that are going to be of enormous benefit to self funded retirees.  But I haven't come here to give a policy speech, I've come here to say hello to you.  I've come here to say what a terrific local member you have in Warren Truss and what a fantastic replacement you will find in Paul Neville.  
They've been colleagues and friends of mine for many years.  They both identify with their local communities, they both work very hard, they both fight very hard for the interests of their local constituents and Paul mentioned my coming to Bundaberg a couple of years ago to announce some Government assistance for the sugar industry.  At that particular time the sugar industry was on its knees and you all know how important the sugar industry is to many cities and towns in Queensland. And we decided to inject a lot of money into the sugar industry and, I mean, he must have a, you know, very, very twisted sense of humour Paul Neville because he said how desperately we needed all of this assistance and no sooner had I announced it than it rained and the sugar price went up. But I nonetheless say that we continue to honour the package and honour it in full because we know how hugely important the sugar industry is to many, many people in Queensland and how important psychologically the sugar industry is to people in Queensland.  But my friends, thank you very much for allowing me to talk to you this morning.  I hope to have the opportunity to meet as many of you as possible, I've already swapped a few yarns about the relative performance of the English and Australian cricket teams and, you know, there seemed to be one or two barrackers or former barrackers for England here.  Well that's alright, we're very broad minded in this country and we make all allowances for that but as long as you barrack for the Wallabies against the Springboks and the New Zealanders you'll be alright; that is tremendously important.  
So my friends, thank you for coming.  My very good wishes to all of you and when, I'll make one, you know, dangerously political comment, when it really matters remember what a good bloke Paul Neville is.  Thank you.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Lyn. My parliamentary colleague Mal Brough, the Minister for Family and Community and Indigenous Affairs, ladies and gentlemen. I want to thank Pine Lodge for making its facility available for this very important announcement. Today I am announcing that the Commonwealth Government, commencing immediately, will make available an additional $1.8 billion over a period of 5 years to address many of the deficiencies that now exist in the provision of services and assistance to families caring for Australians with disabilities.  The announcement falls into a number of categories. By far the major change in policy direction contained in this announcement is that for the first time, the Commonwealth is going to move in a significant way into the area of providing supported accommodation for families with disabled members who they are caring for. 
In the past, as you know, there has been a division of responsibilities. The Commonwealth has accepted responsibility for income support and employment services for people with disabilities and the states have had a responsibility in relation to supported accommodation. We think in relation to supported accommodation there is a huge unmet need and the Commonwealth has decided to inject significant additional money into meeting the areas of greatest need in that category of unmet need. And that applies to carers, parents normally who are themselves getting older who have been caring for a significant period of time for family members who themselves are reaching their middle years. And typically of this category you have a parent or parents over the age of 65 with children over the age of 40 and they've been caring for them for a very long period of time. And their worry is not only their declining capacity to look after them because of their advancing years but the terrible worry of what will happen to their children when they die and there is nobody left to care for them. 
And that is a need that we feel very keenly and we are going to provide assistance in three areas. We are going to provide some $562 million over five years to introduce for the first time high quality Commonwealth disability supported accommodation. In other words, we are going to provide some supported accommodation for this category. We're also going to spend $270 million over five years to introduce respite services for older parent carers to provide access to in-home and centre based respite care for their adult son or daughter with a disability. We are going to introduce in-home support services including assistance with personal care, home help, home maintenance and home modification, aids and equipment to enable people with disability to stay in the family home for as long as possible; and that is going to involve an expenditure of $113 million over five years. 
Now in order to collate all of this and to make sure that the assistance is directed to and is received by those cases that we believe to be in the most dire need of additional assistance, we're going to introduce what is, in effect, an assessment and consultative process. We're going to directly telephone and get in touch with the caring parents and to assess which people are most in need of this additional assistance.
Now when you add all of that together, that is an expenditure in the area of providing help for older carers, particularly with older children, of a very, very significant amount of money; $560 million, $270, $115 and $13 million, which adds up to some eight to nine hundred million dollars. Now in addition to that, and this has received some publicity in the papers this morning, which is always good so people know what we are doing, we are going to introduce a tax free payment, I emphasise a tax free payment, of $1000 each year for every child with a disability under the age of 16 who qualifies his or her parent or carer for the parent allowance. And that involves about 130,000 children throughout Australia and the cost of that is some $721 million. That money is completely at the discretion of the carer. We thought at one stage that we would say you can only spend it on this, and this, and this, but we came rapidly to the conclusion after about 10 minutes discussion around the Cabinet table that of all the carers in the world, those that care for children with a disability know what they need to spend the money on, and they don't need the Government telling them. And obviously it will go on extra devices in the home, extra things that you need in order to care for your loved one, and we're going to provide $23 million over five years for existing specialist services for children with a disability which both support the development needs of children and also provide suitable care so that their families can have a break or in some cases can work.
Now, in addition to that we're going to provide some more help for business services, these are businesses that provide work for people with disabilities. They do a wonderful job, they're a very important pathway into more permanent work for many people and they, of course, provide not only wonderful support and stimulation for the people who work in them, but also terrific form of respite for their carers. So we're going to provide an extra $100 million over five years for additional support to people in disability business services which employ people with a disability. There will be 500 additional supported employment places in disability business services, continued support for people participating in non-vocational activities, increased funding to disability business services and temporary assistance to disability business services facing short term financial difficulties in regional and rural areas. And there is quite a number of them in that category.  And we also want to do a bit of an inquiry; you always have inquiries with these things, a bit of an inquiry to see if we have got the balance of our priorities right. 
Now I want to emphasise that this is a major injection of Commonwealth money into an area of the disability sector which has historically been the responsibility of the states. Now I haven't come here to criticise anybody. I have come here to make a positive announcement and to say that we're going to put a lot more money into this area. But I do want to appeal to the states, as we are taking over one part of what has traditionally been their responsibility, I would appeal to them, I'd plead with them, to put more money into the other areas of their traditional responsibility. I mean we've always looked after employment services. We've also naturally looked after income support and what we're doing today is we're moving into accommodation. And we're going to provide a lot of extra money for the really dire need, that is the older carers with middle aged children who they have been caring for for a very long time. And we're asking the states, because of the extra money that we're putting in, could they at the very, very least put some extra resources into those areas that we won't be able to cover with the extra money that we are putting in.
I do want to emphasise that the $1000 that I am announcing today is not a permanent replacement for the yearly bonuses that we have paid out of the Budget over the last few years. What that means is that if our financial position remains strong, we will continue to pay bonuses but they have to be decided on an annual basis according to our financial position. This $1000 payment which is available to the 130,000, the families of 130,000 Australian children, will go on a continuing basis. The first payment will be made in October of this year and it will thereafter be paid on an annual basis in July of each year. 
This is an area of great need. I have been touched by the numerous examples that I've heard of, families I've spoken to in my own electorate and all around Australia. I have to say that the most heartbreaking circumstances I've come across as Prime Minister have been, well amongst the most heartbreaking circumstances, have been of elderly parents who've cared for often decades for an adult child and in the most very stressful and difficult circumstances and I think that is the area of greatest need. There is need throughout the whole sector, but that are is of enormous need. And I have been determined, as has Mal as the Minister, have been determined to put some extra Commonwealth money in. 
We had rather hoped that we could have got a better response from the states. We did ask them to give us a list of unmet need and we said we'd meet 50 per cent of it. We got only a firm response from one jurisdiction and an expression of general interest from another two, so we decided that we couldn't really wait any longer and we've put this extra money in and we're appealing to the states to follow suit, to match it at the very least in those areas that we won't be able to cover.
Can I finally say to all of you that the Minister in this area has taken an immense personal interest in it. He's been a busy boy in a couple of other areas recently, but he hasn't lost his interest in and commitment to this sector; and we've talked about the need for this program now for several months. I did indicate after the Budget that if we hadn't received a positive response from the states we would act ourselves and deal directly with the sector and provide the additional money. So that is what today's package is all about. It's a very big injection of additional money but the nation should do it. The nation can afford to do it. The nation should do it because it's an area of crying need and I hope that it will be seen by people who have carried the burden of caring for a disabled loved one for so many years, will be seen by them as at least a token, perhaps more in practical terms than a token, of our understanding of their great contribution and the wonderful things they do in very difficult circumstances.
I commend it to you. I've had to go through it at a fairly rapid pace but it's all going to be there in the pamphlets and it will be on the website now and you will be able to get all the information you want. But it is a very big policy initiative of the Commonwealth Government and I hope it will make a contribution. And again, to you Mrs Eagles, thank you so much for having us at Pine Lodge and can I express my admiration to you and your colleagues on the wonderful work that you've done over the years in caring for those in our community who have suffered terrible disabilities.
Thank you.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.51Mb - 101secs)
Good morning,
Yesterday I announced a big increase in funding for disability support services that will help address a growing need in the Australian community; and that is the issue of caring for disabled Australians as their parents and carers age. 
This is an area of great need. I've been touched by the many families caring for disabled adult children who are concerned about their ability to provide ongoing care as they themselves grow older.
Under the $1.8 billion program, more than half a billion dollars has been allocated to supported accommodation for disabled adults. Parents over 65 who have been caring for their adult disabled children for many years will have priority access to these new services.
Supported accommodation is traditionally provided by the states and territories, but there is significant unmet demand for places in Australia at present. Our strong economic position has enabled the Commonwealth to move into this area for the first time. I hope the states will increase their funding for services for other disabled Australians.
The disability package will also include a new annual payment of $1000 for disabled children under 16. This will assist about 130,000 Australians and is on top of the one-off bonus provided in the May budget.
Disabled Australians are amongst our most vulnerable citizens and the Government has a responsibility to ensure they are properly treated, particularly as the population ages. The policies I announced yesterday will help and this is yet another example of the social dividend from our current economic prosperity.
   [ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.51Mb - 101secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Peter, to your father, Bernie, the father of Ballymore and a great player in his time, Paul McLean, John O'Neill, George Brandis, Michael Johnson, David Crombie, many others who are part of the great Australian rugby family. I am delighted to be here this morning to announce that the Federal Government will contribute $25 million to the development of the Australian National Rugby Academy here at the spiritual home of Queensland Rugby Union, but of course this will be the headquarters and an academy for rugby union across the nation.
I have an undisguised passion for the game and I've been a keen follower of the Wallabies over the years and join everybody in wishing them well tonight and then again against the Springboks a week later in Sydney. Rugby union needs a central focus and I believe that the contribution of this $25 million towards the building of this Academy will provide it with that central focus. 
I've been shown the plans and they're very exciting. I've spoken to the Queensland Premier who's assured me, and I don't think I'm misquoting him, I've always got to be careful when I quote other fellow political leaders, but I don't think I'm misquoting him in saying that he welcomed what the Federal Government was doing and he would see to it that a suitable secure title arrangement was developed for the ARU so that it would feel genuine ownership of this site and therefore a confidence and a capacity in dealing with it. 
We are all immensely proud of the way in which rugby has progressed in Australia over the last quarter of a century. We acknowledge the extraordinary contribution of people like Paul McLean to the game and it is fitting that Paul's here, not only in his capacity as President of the Australian Rugby Union, but of course this is the ground he knows and loves best and he's made such a wonderful contribution to Australian rugby union as a player and as an administrator. It's a great family Australian rugby. They keep links with each other and I've been enormously impressed over the years of my association with people in Australian rugby of that great sense of camaraderie and that great sense of fellowship and teamwork, not only amongst the current players, but amongst the former players and the game's impact on the Australian nation today is extraordinary.
There'll be close to a sell out crowd at the Melbourne Cricket Ground tonight. Now that would have been unthinkable when I was....when I remember going to watch the Wallabies play Fiji in 1952 on the rain-soaked Sydney Cricket Ground when Nick Shehadie was the captain of the Wallabies and to think that you were struggling then sometimes to get crowds, big crowds, and routinely playing against New Zealand the result was moderately depressing to say the least. But all of that has changed and there has been a wonderful revolution and that's been contributed to enormously by players and administrators and it's great to see John back as the CEO, he commenced duties on Thursday and it's wonderful to see him back in that position.
But I could go on, but I won't, about what the game means to so many people. But to have a headquarters, to have an Academy, to have a place where young players can be brought on, to have a centre of activity that will in appropriate ways be available to other sports, to AFL and to the National Rugby League, I think that is all part of the, the way in which we have adopted a truly national approach to football in this country. It's an amazing thing that you have a Bledisloe Cup in Melbourne and you have NRL matches held in AFL territory and of course the extraordinary success of the Brisbane Lions here in Brisbane and of course the Sydney Swans in Sydney. But they're other codes, we're here as passionate first and foremost supporters of Australian rugby this morning and I think this is a wonderful day. And I wish the game well. I know the money will be used wisely and it'll be available just as soon as all the usual paperwork, and there's always paperwork associated with these things, but you know the money will flow, we've got it in the bank and I can truly say, 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Bishop Anthony Fisher, Archbishop Dew, Archbishop Wilson, Mr Premier and Auntie Elsie, thank you for your wonderful welcome to country, ladies and gentlemen. The very moving ceremony which we have just witnessed as the young people of New Zealand passed to the young people of Australia, the cross and the icon, is a reminder that next year on World Youth Day will be a magnificent opportunity for the young in their thousands, not only from Australia, but around the world to reaffirm their faith and to remind the world and to remind this nation of the enduring relevance and resonance of the Christian message, not only to the young of Australia and the young of the world, but also to all generations in Australia.
The commitment that has been shown by young people around the world, as the cross and icon has gone on its journey, is a reminder of that faith and of its continuing relevance and strength in our daily lives. This will also be of course a great opportunity for the people of Australia to welcome his Holiness the Pope on his first visit to Australia. We reminder with affection the visit of his great predecessor on two occasions and this will also be an opportunity to extend to him the enormous respect that is felt, not only in the Catholic community of the world, but in the broader Christian community and indeed in the nation generally.
World Youth Day coming to the beautiful city of Sydney and to our nation Australia is an enormous credit to the Catholic Church in this country. I pay tribute to all of those who worked so very hard to make this event a reality. And I know in my personal discussions with Bishop Fisher, with Cardinal Pell, with Danny Casey and with many others just how hard you have worked to bring this about. But the people who have worked just as hard and are just as important to the achievement of World Youth Day, and I know are looking forward to it with great enthusiasm, are the young of Australia who represent....they represent every Catholic diocese  in this country and it's great to see them here. And can I say on behalf of all of your fellow Australians that we will join with great enthusiasm in this magnificent celebration. We are supporting it materially but more importantly we're supporting it with the spirit. And it's an occasion not only for Catholics but for all who profess the Christian faith and the Christian belief to celebrate the marvellous message of the Christian religion, its continuing importance to our country and to the life of all of its citizens. 
I wish you all well. It will be a wonderful occasion, World Youth Day 2008. Thank you.
[ends]   


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 93secs)
Mr Rudd has now confirmed what many of us knew to be the case. The union bosses will not allow a Rudd Labor government to keep Australian Workplace Agreements in any shape or form.
The opposition leader has categorically ruled them out. Under a Labor government they or anything like them will be gone lock stock and barrel.
This has followed an elaborate pantomime in which Mr Rudd has been the principal villain.
The union bosses forced Kim Beazley, when he was leader, to promise that he would tear up AWAs. Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard duly repeated this pledge.
But when the mining industry, in particular, pointed out how much damage would be done to Australia's booming resources sector by such an approach the opposition leader commenced a pattern of deception.
He pretended to consult. With a serious face he said he would listen to the mining industry, hinting that the anti- AWA policy would be softened at the edges.
It is now clear that this was all a charade, a hoax to encourage the Australian public to believe that Labor supported a more balanced and moderate policy on workplace agreements.
The union bosses brought the curtain down on all of this. They forced Mr Rudd to retreat publicly from any flirtation with moderation.
He has done their bidding and completely scotched any possibility of Labor weakening its hard line opposition to Australian Workplace Agreements.
And this has happened while Labor is still in opposition. It is but a taste of what life would be like under a union dominated Rudd Labor government-egged on by eight state and territory Labor governments.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 93secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 98secs)
Mr Rudd has now confirmed what many of us knew to be the case. The union bosses will not allow a Rudd Labor government to keep Australian Workplace Agreements in any shape or form.
The opposition leader has categorically ruled them out. Under a Labor government they or anything like them will be gone lock stock and barrel.
This has followed an elaborate pantomime in which Mr Rudd has been the principal villain.
The union bosses forced Kim Beazley, when he was leader, to promise that he would tear up AWAs. Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard duly repeated this pledge.
But when the mining industry, in particular, pointed out how much damage would be done to Australia's booming resources sector by such an approach the opposition leader commenced a pattern of deception.
He pretended to consult. With a serious face he said he would listen to the mining industry, hinting that the anti- AWA policy would be softened at the edges.
It is now clear that this was all a charade, a hoax to encourage the Australian public to believe that Labor supported a more balanced and moderate policy on workplace agreements.
The union bosses brought the curtain down on all of this. They forced Mr Rudd to retreat publicly from any flirtation with moderation.
He has done their bidding and completely scotched any possibility of Labor weakening its hard line opposition to Australian Workplace Agreements.
And this has happened while Labor is still in opposition. It is but a taste of what life would be like under a union dominated Rudd Labor government-egged on by eight state and territory Labor governments.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 98secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr Stianos, Dr Nelson, Minister for Defence, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, the Chief of the Defence Force, Chief of the Navy, Chief of the Army, Mr Abigail General Clunies-Ross, ladies and gentlemen.  I thank ASPI for the opportunity of presenting an overview of the Government's take on our strategic look and also congratulate the organisation on the contribution it has made to a better informed debate on strategic policy since its formation three years ago.  My main message today at the outset is a simple one, although the challenges I talk about are anything but.  Well that message is that we do face a complex and challenging strategic environment but one that we believe we can face with confidence as the result of the Government's national security policies. 
The recent Budget provided $22 billion for defence - an increase of 10.6 per cent on the previous year and a 47 per cent increase in real terms over the levels of more than ten years ago. As a result we will have a larger, better-protected, more mobile and harder-hitting army which can be deployed more readily.  A navy capable of establishing sea control in key areas and operating confidently within our region and an air combat capability, second to none, in our region.
The task is, however, a continuing one. We have committed to a 3 per cent real increase in annual defence spending out to the year 2016. These are very large sums of money and represent serious, long-term decisions about capability. But based on the latest strategic assessment of our intelligence agencies and the advice of our military experts, they are necessary.
I recently remarked to the Defence leadership group that the ADF's current operational tempo is greater than at any time since the Vietnam war, but also that the complexity and global character of the security challenges we face, make them even more serious. No-one would claim to know precisely what our strategic future holds. But based on what we know now and on the analytical work of our intelligence community we can perhaps sketch some of its outlines.
Nation states will be challenged by terrorist organisations and other non-state entities. Most conflicts now involve non-state groups, which are becoming more and more adept at using and you foresaw it Tom,  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 110secs)
Good morning,
Keeping the nation safe and secure is the prime responsibility of any government. 
Australia faces a challenging strategic environment, particularly since the 11th of September 2001. The global threat of terrorism, the emergence of instability and potential state failure in our region all affect our defence and national security. 
Our defence personnel are busy, with 4000 Australians currently involved in operations in 10 countries. The tasks include counter-terrorism, humanitarian relief and stabilisation operations as well as more conventional military activities.
These demands, and the possibility of further strategic surprises, mean the Australian Defence Force has to be flexible and ready to quickly adapt to new challenges.
Thanks to our sound economic management and the strong strategic relationships we have built with our partners, we can confront the broad range of tasks with confidence in the Government's national security policies. We have boosted defence spending by 48 per cent in real terms.
Australia is rebuilding and rebalancing her  Defence Force to meet contemporary threats.
We will have a 21st Century military tailored for a 21st Century security environment; larger, better-protected, more mobile and harder-hitting army; a navy capable of establishing sea control in key areas and operating confidently within our region; and  an air combat capability second-to-none in our region.
We will continue to build the size and scope of our Defence Forces. Personnel recruitment drives and new retention measures are being accelerated and acquisitions will continue apace to ensure our military is equipped for the demands of contemporary security challenges.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 110secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you, thank you very much Ken, Jim Lloyd the Federal Member for Robertson and Minister for Local Government, Roads and Territories, Michael Gallacher, Chris Hartcher, the Mayors of Gosford and Wyong, ladies and gentlemen.  It is great to be back here in Mingara, I think it's the third or fourth time I've visited this wonderful establishment.  I first came here in its old manifestation, I think I've been here on two or three occasions since the new enlarged club which is a wonderful gathering place for people on the Central Coast.  Ken, I do understand the separate sense of identify of people on the Central Coast, I do understand that.  You're not looking for statehood are you?  No?  No, I think we have enough states and territories at the moment and I think what you do want though is to recognise, it to be recognised, that it's a very distinct community.
Well one way of recognising that it's a very distinct community is to have a very distinct source of water supply for this community and that is one way in which we can do it and I did have an opportunity out at the Mangrove Creek Dam this morning to have pointed out to me by Ken and Jim and the local engineers just how this new pipeline was going to work and what an enormous difference it was going to make and that's what we need to do all around Australia.  
We have some people saying look what you've got to do about water is this one big thing.  There's no one big thing that you have to do about water, there are a whole lot of different local solutions because every local community is different and just as a solution here on the Central Coast, the solution that is going to benefit probably 300,000 people, which is a very big community, the solution is to, in large measure, build this pipeline that will supply 22 kilometres of a missing link and to be told this morning that the Mardi Dam is full and the other dam I visited the Mangrove Creek one is what, 17 to 20 per cent tells the story.  If you can put a pipeline between the two of them, it's commonsense that you're going to make a very, very big impression on the water supply problem and it really is heartbreaking whenever we get an enormous downpour and you've had what, 16 inches using the old language that we all understand very, very well, I certainly do.  I understand the new language too but I mean...  But look, it sounds more 16 inches and it really does drive home to you and all so much of it is just sort of lost and we really do have to as a country learn that that drought is something that's always been with us.  I mean, the old, the wonderful Dorothea Mackellar poem talked about droughts and flooding rains.  Now that was something that was part of Australian life when she wrote that wonderful poem, it's not something that we've discovered in the 21st Century and the problem with this country on occasions is that we have a drought and then it rains a bit and people say well you beaut, that's fixed and then we go on to the next thing.  Well we're not making that mistake on this occasion. In so many local communities around Australia we are doing things locally which are suitable to local communities and just as a pipeline is wonderful for the Central Coast, something else will be valuable for another part of our wonderful country but now that I'm talking about drought and flooding rains I do want to join all of you in paying a heartfelt tribute to the men and women of our emergency services who are here today.  They are fantastic, let's give them another clap.
They're here in their different manifestations, the SES, the Rural Fire Service, the volunteer service and of course there are police officers and ambulance officers obviously in the audience and to all of those who volunteer or do extra special things when there is an emergency they demonstrate that wonderful Australian characteristic of mateship in a time of crisis.  I use that word quite a bit and people ask me, 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.95Mb - 87secs)
Since December 27, 2002, when the National Security Hotline was activated, it has received more than 96,000 calls.
The number of calls increases whenever an incident occurs. Sometimes people are simply seeking re-assurance, sometimes looking for information, and critically, sometimes they are passing on information.
There is no doubt the Hotline - 1800 123 400 - has become a valuable tool in the fight against terrorism.
Not everybody remembers that number, but people certainly know it exists because they ring directory assistance to ask for it, particularly in the wake of widely publicised incidents.
Calls to the Hotline, which is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, are answered by trained operators.  Reports from the public are passed on to relevant police or security.
About half the calls received by the Hotline are referred to the Australian Federal Police, ASIO, and relevant State or Territory police.
We cannot guarantee there will never be a terrorist attack on Australian soil.
No one can ever do that.
But we are doing everything in our power to try to prevent one occurring, and we rely critically on ordinary Australians to help us in that very important task.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.95Mb - 87secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.95Mb - 87secs)
Since December 27, 2002, when the National Security Hotline was activated, it has received more than 96,000 calls. 
The number of calls increases whenever an incident occurs. Sometimes people are simply seeking re-assurance, sometimes looking for information, and critically, sometimes they are passing on information. 
There is no doubt the Hotline - 1800 123 400 - has become a valuable tool in the fight against terrorism. 
Not everybody remembers that number, but people certainly know it exists because they ring directory assistance to ask for it, particularly in the wake of widely publicised incidents. 
Calls to the Hotline, which is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, are answered by trained operators.  Reports from the public are passed on to relevant police or security. 
About half the calls received by the Hotline are referred to the Australian Federal Police, ASIO, and relevant State or Territory police. 
We cannot guarantee there will never be a terrorist attack on Australian soil. 
No one can ever do that. 
But we are doing everything in our power to try to prevent one occurring, and we rely critically on ordinary Australians to help us in that very important task. 
[ends]   
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.95Mb - 87secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Dale. To Will Hodgman, my Federal and State Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Let me start my remarks this morning by paying tribute to the revitalised nature of the Tasmanian Division of the Liberal Party. I find with the Liberal Party as I travel around Tasmania, I find a renewed commitment, I find very strong organisational leadership and I pay tribute to Dale and Damien for the wonderful leadership of the organisation that they have brought. I find a renewed interest in and support from the business community of Tasmania and I also find emphatically very strong, determined, different leadership provided by Will Hodgman. So congratulations to all of you.
The cornerstone of our efforts in Tasmania must be the retention of the two seats we hold in Northern Tasmania of Bass and Braddon and victories in the seats we don't hold, in the seats of Franklin, Denison and Lyons. And I want to pay tribute to the Division for the quality of the candidates chosen in those seats and also the quality of the Senate Team. Tasmania will be crucial to our prospects of retaining office. If we can deny Labor gains in Tasmania and better still, if we can take seats from Labor in Tasmania, we will make their task of winning across the nation well nigh impossible. And just as in 2004 the early news from Tasmania was a harbinger of a great victory and let us again plan for the early news from Tasmania once again to be the harbinger of victory in 2007.
This morning I want to make a couple of announcements about the very important area of welfare reform. But before doing that, can I say something about an issue that affects all Australians, it affects all nations that share the ideals, the values and the way of life that we Australians hold dear. And that is the constant threat of terrorism. I know people would rather not think about it, I know people would wish it away. I know people would say why should we concern ourselves with this? Why can't we just get on with our lives? Well we should and will get on with our lives and that's one of the ways you fight terrorism, a very important one.
But this will be a long fight. It will go on for years and it is an international fight. It is not something that you can cherry pick your fields of combat and battle. The fight against terrorism is a global contest because terrorism is a threat to the global ideals of free societies built on the principles of western liberalism. Make no mistake, Islamic fanaticism hates the way of life that we have. Islamic fanaticism is dedicated to the destruction not only of freedom of religion but freedom of the way of life that we believe in so strongly. And you can't pick and choose where you fight terrorism. I say to Mr Rudd, you can't choose to fight terrorism in Afghanistan and not fight it in Iraq because the battleground chosen by the terrorists is everywhere. Their enemy is the free way of life that we hold dear. Their weapons are unprecedented, they involve a borderless assault on the way of life and the beliefs that we hold dear and it requires western societies, whilst preserving at all times the rule of law which is a cornerstone of our way of life. It requires western societies to adopt new and more effective measures such as we have done in Australia with our anti-terrorism laws in order to fight this new and long threatening menace. 
I wish I could say to you that the fight against terrorism would be over in five years, or ten years, or fifteen years. I wish I could lay down precise markers. Unfortunately it is not that kind of enemy. And just as we seem to be taking our mind off the issue and seem to be relaxing into a new and different era, we are reminded of the ever constant threat. And it behoves all of us to understand the nature of it, and to understand that it is insidious, it is based on principles of religious fanaticism which have no place in our society and should have no echo in any part of the Australian nation.
  We are a government of reform, we're proud of our record of paying off government debt and tackling much-needed economic reforms in areas such as workplace relations and taxation. I've often said that Australians will support bold reform if they believe it is in the national interest and if it passes the basic test of fairness.  And I want to use my speech today to announce two important reform measures in the area of national welfare provision.
No reform agenda that this Government has pursued has been more significant than the quiet revolution in Australia's welfare system in the last decade to tackle the scourge of passive welfare and to reinforce responsible behaviour. Beginning with Work for the Dole in 1997 which the Labor Party derided as a Mickey Mouse response to the challenge of unemployment, continuing through major reforms in 2001 and our latest Welfare to Work measures which came into effect on 1 July and which the Labor Party opposed in Federal Parliament despite what they now say is their support for these measures, we have progressively overturned much of the thinking that had become encrusted around our welfare system over recent decades.
Against sometimes virulent opposition, we have put the principle of mutual obligation at the heart of Australia's social security system - the principle that all Australians are entitled to income support when their personal circumstances demand it, but the community can expect those who receive support to help themselves and to meet basic obligations to society in return. In my view, this principle is the only sustainable and just compact between the individual and the state - where entitlements and responsibilities are in balance.
And only the Liberal Party could deliver this reform.  Where Labor mouths platitudes about social justice and snipes from the sidelines, only the Liberal Party has had the ticker to genuinely reform our welfare arrangements to achieve a better balance between support, incentives and responsibilities and to help break people free from welfare dependency. Not because of any desire to cut welfare benefits or to punish people.  But because we as a Party believe in our bones in the virtues of work, of personal responsibility and of social mobility - where what you become is a product of your talents, your work and your effort.
No society should rest easy while ever there is welfare dependency or the spectre of intergenerational joblessness or poverty.  Which is why our record in driving down unemployment to a 33 year low at 4.3 per cent has been so vital to Australia's social health today. The long-term unemployment rate - those who have been out of work for a year or more - has now fallen to its lowest level since the series began to be collected in 1986.  There is no better testimony to the human dividend of strong economic management than the fact that seasonally adjusted long-term unemployment now comprises just 0.7 per cent of the entire labour force.
It reflects a broader social policy reform agenda built on three pillars; firstly a policy framework that is unambiguously pro-work; secondly a view that well-functioning families are the building blocks of a good society. Indeed mankind has devised no better social welfare system than a united, caring, loving family, providing not only the mainstream of moral compass that people have during their lives but also a means of sustenance and support. And thirdly, a recognition that consistent with a strong safety net, there is a place for targeted policies and incentives to reinforce responsible behaviour and community standards, not least when it comes to the care of children.
In a moment I will outline two new reforms to extend the principle of mutual obligation to target child neglect and school attendance. Our philosophy is very simple.  Governments must never be neutral when it comes to the virtue of work, to the special responsibilities that families shoulder in our society, and to the importance of parents and carers providing basic essentials like food, clothing and shelter and ensuring that children attend school. None of the measures we have taken or will take are inconsistent with a strong social security net or a compassionate society.  And none of the measures I announce today will deny income support payments to people.
As a Government, we have consistently tilted the playing field very deliberately in favour of low and middle income families.  Recent ABS figures confirmed this, showing that household income in Australia became more evenly distributed between 1998-99 and 2003-2004. From OECD research, we know that Australia directs more support in relative terms to the poorest 20 per cent of households than just about any other developed wealthy country.  And because of the last budget, in 2007-2008 a single income couple with two children will pay no net tax until their private income exceeds $50, 813 a year. Can I repeat that for the benefit of those in the Labor Party and the community who say we don't care about the battlers and the low income people of this country. Can I repeat that because of the last budget, a single income couple with two children will pay no net tax until their private income exceeds $50,813 a year.
At the same time, however, our great Party has been instrumental in Australia rediscovering the original purpose and principles on which the welfare state was founded. The welfare state was never intended to be a substitute for work, it was never intended to be a substitute for work.  Indeed, to its original architects - both here and in similar societies - the greatest of all social evils was idleness. The welfare state was never intended to let people evade their personal or social responsibilities, especially when it comes to the care of children. No one has a right to have the Australian taxpayer fund their irresponsible behaviour.   
The modern welfare state was really a product of the Great Depression and the post-war Keynesian consensus on the need to cushion severe and lasting downturns in the economy.  Today the big social challenges we face in Australia are somewhat different in that they tend to be more concentrated and localised and less narrowly economic. Australia today offers a vista of unbelievable opportunity for those who are beneficiaries of a virtuous circle of caring families, strong learning environments, good jobs and healthy lifestyles; all allowing them to succeed in a competitive world.   The role of government, in these cases, is to reinforce this virtuous circle, to do no harm and to offer people legitimate choice when it comes to responsibilities like child care and education.
For a small minority of people, however, governments need to contemplate a more activist and in some cases interventionist approach in order to break the vicious circle of poor parenting, low levels of education, unemployment and health problems, which together can rob Australian children of a bright future. The challenge for social policy is to reinforce the virtuous circles of the many and break the vicious circles of the few.  And it's on this basis that we must continue to reform the welfare state in the 21st Century.  
I spoke about this on the occasion of the Government's 10th anniversary in March of 2006.  I said then that the reforms that have yielded today's strong economy have 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 155secs)
Australia is continuing to address the global challenge of climate change through practical and balanced responses.
Without action, Australia's greenhouse gas emissions would have reached an estimated 125 per cent of 1990 levels by 2010. Instead, we are tracking well towards our Kyoto target of 108 per cent of 1990 levels for the period from 2008 to 2012.
As a result of our policies, there will be some 87 million tonnes of climate-changing carbon no longer entering the atmosphere by 2010. 
We must continue responding to the threat of climate change and position ourselves for the world beyond 2012. The range of predicted impacts from climate change warrants prudent risk management. 
There are two key decisions facing the Government as it continues to tackle climate change - the design of an emissions trading system and the setting of a long-term emissions goal. These will be among the most important economic decisions Australia takes in the next decade.
Shortly I will further outline the detail of our response to the task group on emissions trading, in particular the key elements of an emissions trading regime specific to Australia's economic circumstances.
The scheme will be developed to deliver environmental outcomes but also to ensure our continued economic competitiveness and to protect jobs in emissions-intensive industries. These two goals can be delivered with a balanced approach.
We will be seeking to maximise opportunities from our response to climate change, such as a regional carbon trading hub in Australia and the further development of low emissions technologies for key sectors such as coal.
Amongst other features, the scheme will include maximum practical coverage of emissions sources and sinks, and all greenhouse gases. There will also be incentives for firms to undertake abatement in the lead up to the commencement of the scheme.
For any climate change policy to be effective, action must be taken not just nationally, but internationally and locally.
Australia is using its regional status to encourage an international approach to addressing climate change. I put the topic high on the agenda at the forthcoming APEC leaders meeting in Sydney. We have also promoted the Global Initiative on Forests and Climate, the Asia-Pacific Partnership of Clean Development and Climate and clean coal initiatives to encourage other nations, including developing countries, to contribute to efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
By contrast to our practical approach, Kevin Rudd has an irresponsible plan to set an emissions reduction target without any understanding of its economic impact. He is happy to risk damage to the economy in the pursuit of Green voting preferences at the next election.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 155secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr President, my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  Today I want to address the issue of climate change in the hope of striking the right balance for Australia.  Climate change is a large, complex and serious global challenge that will occupy the world for decades to come.  Over time, the scientific evidence that the climate is warming has become quite compelling and the link between emissions of greenhouse gases from human activity and higher temperatures is also convincing.
Australia has long been an active player in the search for an efficient, effective and equitable solution to climate change.  Today amongst other things I outline some new measures costing $627 million over the next five years that reinforce our commitment to tackling global warming.  Of all the inhabited continents, Australia already has the driest and most variable climate.  Climate change means our water security problems will likely intensify, which is why my Government has invested so heavily in national water reform.  Our great and unique natural ecosystems, like the Great Barrier Reef, are potentially threatened and many of our major industries, not least agriculture, are highly sensitive to changes in the climate. 
Because of our natural abundance of fossil fuels, Australia's economic prosperity is also threatened if our response to climate change is misguided and driven by ideology.  All the good intentions in the world are worthless if we wreck our economy for no environmental gain.  With so much at stake, we must not confuse panic with virtue.  Australia's climate change policy must reflect our unique vulnerabilities and particular economic strengths.  It needs to be global, regional, national and local.  This challenge, I believe, is best met by a blend of prudent conservatism and economic liberalism.  A prudent conservative knows we are but temporary stewards of the environment.  The Burkean sentiment that society is a partnership between those who are living, those who are dead, and those yet to be born, is second nature to us.
In the face of risk, a prudent conservative takes insurance.  We should, in the words of Rupert Murdoch, give the planet the benefit of the doubt, given the dangers of climate change.  A blend of prudent conservatism and economic liberalism has other things going for it.  It is realistic about human nature and the pursuit of national interests.  It values the power of the market as well as the value of local decision-making, and it knows the limits of state planning and why flexibility must be built into policies and institutions.  This mix of prudent conservatism and economic liberalism has steered Australia through more than a decade of successful reform. 
Now we must position Australia for a low carbon future.  We face a major new reform challenge in designing an emissions trading system and setting a long-term goal for reducing our emissions in the absence of a global carbon scheme.   These decisions will be amongst the most important Australia takes in the next decade.  They need to be taken carefully and rationally with a clear eye to maintaining our economic strength.  Reducing carbon emissions will mean higher energy and petrol prices.  Australians need to understand that.  Glib calls for drastic, immediate cuts in Australia's emissions might be easy rhetoric but they carry real and potentially large costs.  The best way to combat global climate change is to progressively tighten the screws on emissions while encouraging clean technologies for an energy hungry world.
Notwithstanding some of the fear and loathing that has crept into this debate, four fundamental realities remain.  First, climate change requires a truly global response.  With Australia's contribution to global emissions at less than 1.5 per cent and falling, nothing we do alone will materially affect our climate.  Second, we must accommodate demands for economic development, energy security and environmental sustainability.  Without all three you are left at best with a two legged stool.  Third, different countries will choose different policy approaches.  National diversity must be both respected and harnessed.  And fourth, the Kyoto Protocol is not an effective blueprint for future action.  It provides no pathway for meaningful commitments by the very countries which will account for the bulk of future greenhouse gas emissions.  Without a framework that includes all major emitters, we lack a genuine global solution.  
There is an acute irony here.  The loudest voices on climate change, not least the Australian Labor Party, tend to be those who invest almost mystical powers in multilateral institutions.  Yet on this issue they are wedded to an instrument, namely Kyoto, which only 36 of 175 nations are required to do anything to reduce emissions.  Clearly, climate change is an immense international challenge.  That is why Australia is leading on practical steps like our Global Forests Initiative and the Asia-Pacific Partnership for Clean Development and Climate.  The good news is that mankind has powerful tools for the task ahead, none more so than the spirit of discovery inspired and channelled by rational science and free markets.
Australia brings formidable assets to this challenge: an educated, can-do and adaptable people a modern; flexible economy; world class scientific expertise; deep global engagement and an enviable reputation for institution-building and reform.  We have mobilised these assets before and will do so again to help build a new global climate change framework and to facilitate Australia's transition to lower carbon emissions.  No great challenge has ever yielded to fear or guilt.  Nor will this one.  Human ingenuity, directed towards clean technology and wise institutional design, remain our best weapon.  The false prophets are those preaching Malthusian pessimism or anti-capitalism.  They are the real climate change deniers because they deny rational, realistic and sustainable policy solutions.  The moralising tone of utopian internationalism is also not helpful.  Institutions will only work and endure if they harness national interests.  The world needs less Woodrow Wilson and more Adam Smith to effectively tackle climate change.  
Let me remind you on this point that in 1997 the United States Senate voted unanimously 95 to nil against any treaty that did not include major emitting developing countries.  Indeed, when the Clinton Administration signed the Kyoto Protocol, it was then Vice President Al Gore who said that the United States could only ratify once and I quote his words, key developing nations participate.  The United States has never ratified because the Al Gore condition of that ratification has never been fulfilled.  This is a global problem he said that will need a global solution.  A decade later nothing has changed to alter that view.  I believe that we have reached a new moment of opportunity in this debate after a decade of inflated rhetoric and modest results under the Kyoto protocol.  There is now what I regard as an emerging pragmatic consensus on a way forward that includes all major emitters and Australia is helping to forge this consensus.
It is clear that the Kyoto model provides neither a global solution nor a lasting one and that is why Australia supports negotiations on a new global framework.
A successful Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Bali, Indonesia in December, will be crucial.  We also support international efforts to set by the end of next year a long-term global goal for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  This is in line with our setting a long-term emissions reduction goal for Australia.  We will continue to encourage all relevant international efforts to arrive at a lasting global solution.  Last month I outlined Australia's plan to use this year's APEC Meeting in Sydney.  I see APEC as a major opportunity to bridge continued gaps between developed and developing countries.  A comprehensive global mechanism will take years to develop and Australia has decided not to wait for this to emerge and last month I announced that the Government will establish an emissions trading regime for Australia based on a cap and trade model.  Our goal is to begin in 2011 subject to relevant design issues being properly completed.  One of the first in the Asia-Pacific region, it will be world's best practice.
Today I announce key design features and administrative arrangements for this crucial piece of national economic architecture. The scheme will include maximum practical coverage of emissions sources and sinks, and of all greenhouse gases,  a mixture of free allocation and auctioning of single-year dated emissions permits, a safety valve emissions fee designed to limit unanticipated costs to the economy and to business, particularly in the early years of the scheme and recognition of carbon abatement by firms in the lead-up to commencement of the scheme.  The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet will be responsible for implementing this system and it will consult widely with industry and others.  Before selecting a long-term emissions goal in 2008 the Government will commission careful modelling of the impact of various targets.  We will not do as the Opposition has done, set a target with no analysis of the consequences for Australia and then scramble around ex-post for a study to justify it.  This encapsulates Labor's economic inexperience and the risk this poses to Australia's economy.
The Government will establish a team in the Treasury to oversee this modelling and using a range of Australian economic models Treasury will advise the Government amongst other things on the macroeconomic, sectoral and distributional implications for Australia of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  It will examine the effects of different abatement targets over selected time periods and thirdly model the effects on key economic indicators including growth, employment, income, and prices - particularly of electricity - with special regard to the impact on households.  Australia's long-term emissions target will be both environmentally credible and economically achievable.  We will build in flexibility to re-set the emissions trajectory if new scientific information or technologies become available and as the international framework takes shape.  This is the smart, sustainable way to set targets.
The Government will also introduce legislation this year for a comprehensive and streamlined national emissions and energy reporting system.  We will legislate for a new purpose-built monitoring, reporting and verification system and we will work to remove duplication in reporting requirements on business.  Governance will be critical to the integrity of the emissions trading scheme, in particular separating policy functions from operational aspects.  From 2009, an independent regulator for emissions trading will be established in the Treasury.   Its responsibilities will include allocating and auctioning permits, certifying offsets and ensuring compliance.  This emissions trading system will be world class in its coverage and governance.  It will avoid the political fixes and economic failures that dogged the initial phase of the European Emissions Trading Scheme.  In the years to come, it will provide a model for other nations to follow.
Being among the first movers on carbon trading in this region will bring new opportunities and we intend to grasp them.  The Government will examine how to ensure that Australia becomes a carbon trading hub in the Asia-Pacific region.
Of course, an emissions trading scheme is only one part of a comprehensive long-term climate change policy framework.  There is no magic green bullet.   Low-carbon technologies remain the key to an effective response that minimises the costs of limiting emissions.  This in turn demands a comprehensive portfolio of clean energy solutions.  Removing any one technology from the mix increases the costs of action and makes stabilising global emissions that much harder.  Ultimately, technologies must meet the test of the market.  There is, however, still a role for government to support research, development and demonstration of low emissions technologies.  
Australia has the physical resources, the human capital and the technological strengths to be a global leader in key low emissions technologies.  We can be an energy superpower in a carbon constrained future, but only with the right policy settings and only if we draw on all our national capabilities and resource advantages.  Abundant reserves of coal, gas, solar energy resources, geothermal potential and the world's largest low-cost uranium deposit provide a natural strategic focus for Australia's clean energy technology policy.  Under our Low Emissions Technology Fund the Government has already funded major projects which together involve investments of approximately $3 billion.  These include the world's largest and most efficient photovoltaic solar power station and the Gorgon CO2 Injection project which will be the largest geosequestration project in the world.
As a major producer and exporter, Australia has a crucial role to play in clean coal technologies.  Renewable energy sources, and our relative strengths in solar, wind and geothermal energy will also be important but the Government also believes that Australia, sitting on almost 40 per cent of the world's low cost uranium reserves, cannot stand aloof from nuclear power.  This would be an act of economic and environmental folly in the extreme.  Nuclear power has no direct CO2 emissions and is already a significant part of the world's energy system.  New generation nuclear energy systems known as Generation IV, promise further advancement in fuel utilisation, cost competitiveness, safety, waste minimisation and ensuring technology and products do not fall into the wrong hands.  Today I announce that the Government will invest $12.5 million in a Nuclear Collaborative Research Programme between the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, ANSTO and Australia's university sector.  This will augment Australia's ability to participate in the global Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems Initiative.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we all have a role to play in reducing greenhouse gas emissions which goes beyond the easy morality of gestures.  As I've said earlier, our actions must be local, as well as global, regional and national.  A strong climate change policy requires a community response, in the same way that water security demands the widest possible community engagement.  The Government is committed to encouraging local communities and households to take their own practical action both to lower carbon emissions and to better manage our nation's scarce water resources.  We are currently providing up to $12,000 to schools that install solar electric panels and under the Community Water Grants programme at least 1,600 schools have received funding for rainwater tanks.  Today I announced that in addition, the Commonwealth will provide up to $50,000 to ensure every Australian school can install a solar hot water system and a water tank.  These Green Vouchers for schools will help lift awareness of the challenges future generations face to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to better manage our water.  Clearly, the more people change and adapt their own behaviour, the less reliant governments will be on blunt instruments that carry a heavy cost.
Under our Small Business and Household Action Initiative all households will receive information about climate change actions that they can take.  They will be able to calculate their carbon emissions and seek to become carbon neutral by purchasing offsets through the Government's Greenhouse Friendly programme.  More than 22,000 homes have received or will receive direct support under our Photovoltaic Rebate Programme.  The rebate currently available is up to $8000 per home.  We have already supported the installation of solar hot water systems in more than 170,000 Australian homes.  These Renewable Energy Certificates can be worth up to $900 towards the cost of the solar hot water system.  Today I announce some further steps to bring solar hot water within the reach of Australian families.  We intend to provide an additional $1,000 per household so that up to another 225,000 homes can upgrade to an energy saving solar hot water system.  Water heating is the largest single source of greenhouse gas emissions from the average Australian home.  Now more Australians will have access to Australian solar technologies with the capacity to reduce carbon emissions and to save households about $300 in annual energy costs.
The policies I have announced today bring to $3.4 billion the Commonwealth Government's investment in tackling climate change since 1996.  Earlier this year, I described myself as a realist on climate change.  Increasingly I'm also an optimist because of the sheer dynamism of 21st century capitalism and the new momentum emerging for a more comprehensive global framework to succeed the Kyoto approach.  Stabilising atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases will require a deep transformation of the world's energy systems.  It will be hard, but it is possible.  We do not have to sacrifice economic prosperity.  We do not have to rethink capitalism, but we do need to engage the community.  We do need massive investment in low carbon infrastructure and we do need a far-reaching new phase of economic reform here at home to establish a world-class emissions trading system.  One thing is for sure.  The world will only unleash the clean technologies of tomorrow and successfully tighten the screws on greenhouse gas emissions against a backdrop of economic strength, and it is only against that backdrop of a strong economy that we can deliver the best environmental outcomes.  On that basis Australia can more than play her part.  Thank you.
Further Information: Australia's Climate Change Policy - our economy, our environment, our future
[Ends]


E&amp;OE...
Good morning,
Australian action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions since 1990, led by my government, will prevent about 87 million tonnes of climate changing carbon a year entering the atmosphere by 2010.
That's a massive reduction and a tangible example of the Coalition's commitment to the climate change challenge.
Today I am announcing a further $627 million in practical new measures to tackle global warming, bringing total spending on climate change initiative since 1996 to about $3.4 billion. 
This will include $336 million for green vouchers for schools to improve energy and water efficiency.
Every school in Australia will be eligible for a voucher of up $50,000 to help install solar hot water systems and rainwater tanks.
Not only will this help reduce energy and conserve water, but it will provide students and our school communities with a first-hand lesson in how we can act locally to preserve the environment.
I will also be announcing a 'cap and trade' emissions trading system that will help Australia substantially lower our domestic greenhouse gas emissions at the lowest cost.
Stabilising atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases will be difficult, but not impossible. We do not have to sacrifice our economic prosperity to tackle the problem.
Australia will more than play its part to address climate change, but we will do it in a practical and balanced way, in full knowledge of the economic consequences for our nation.
Thank you.
  Australia's Climate Change Policy - our economy, our environment, our future


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Kerry for that very warm introduction.  Geoff Selig, the State President, Graham Jaeschke and Barry O'Farrell the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales who is already doing a very, very fine job in taking the fight up to the Iemma Government and can I say how much I echo the remarks of Kerry Bartlett.  If you want a glimpse of what federal Labor would be like in western Sydney have a look at what state Labor is like in western Sydney.  
My friends, I want to come here and say to all of you who've been such wonderful and loyal supporters of the Party and of me and of our federal team over a long period of time that in the next few months we do face a tremendous fight in order to retain office.  But it is a fight that we can enter with enormous conviction and enormous confidence and we don't enter it with enormous confidence and enormous conviction merely on the basis of what we have achieved over the last 11-and-a-half years.  We are entitled to look back over the last 11-and-a-half years and point to a remarkable record.  We are entitled to look at the strengthening of the economy, we're entitled to look at the increase in living standards, we're entitled to look at the fall in unemployment, we're entitled to look at the fall in interest rates.  But all of that belongs to the last 11-and-a-half years.  The reason why I will say to the people of western Sydney and the reason why I will say to the people of Australia that they should elect the Coalition at the end of this year is that the Coalition can offer the Australian people a better future and I want in my few moments available this morning to examine some of the areas where I believe the future that we offer the Australian people is brighter and better than that offered by the Australian Labor Party.  
The foundation of any future for any country has to be of course the strength and the vitality of its economy and this is an area where nothing that I have heard from the Labor Party would indicate that it can offer the Australian people a better and brighter future than we can.  Labor's principal economic alternative policy is in fact to roll back one of the great areas of economic reform that this government has undertaken in the last 11-and-a-half years.  If a future Labor government rolls back the workplace relations reforms of this government that will do immense damage to the Australian economy and that's not a mere flight of rhetoric, it is a statement of reality.  If you bring back the unfair dismissal laws you will slow the growth in jobs.  You will stifle the enterprise of a lot of small businesses.  You will be rolling back for the first time in a generation a major economic reform.  You'll be saying to the Australian community as well as to the rest of the world that this country has lost its stomach for economic reform.  That to me does not constitute a brighter future than the one that we offer.  We've heard a great deal about the affordability of housing.  We all know that buying the first home is the most difficult purchase that most people undertake in their lives.  It has long been the case, it's not something that has suddenly arrived in the last couple of years.  It has long been the case that assembling the deposit and raising the money to buy your first home is an enormous challenge.  That challenge of course would be made infinitely greater if interest rates were to go up.
We hear a lot of debate about interest rates in the Australian community.  Let me remind you that over the last 11-and-a-half years housing interest rates have averaged about 7 and three quarters per cent.  They averaged a full five percentage points more in the 13 years of Labor government and they reached a height of 17 per cent in 1989.  Does anybody imagine that a brighter future of higher interest rates under a Labor government would be a recipe for a better future for the Australian people, for the Australian home buyer?  I can think of nothing more calculated to make housing affordability more difficult in the future than a significant rise in interest rates and you might ask that what's the evidence that interest rates would be higher under a Labor government than under a Coalition government?  Well there are two pieces of evidence.  The first piece of evidence is they're always been higher in the past and that's a pretty good piece of evidence.  I mean, 12-and-a-half, 12-and-three-quarter per cent versus 7-and-three-quarter per cent.  According the maths I learnt at Earlwood Public School that's higher, not lower.  Now that's the first thing, piece of evidence.  The second piece of evidence is that Labor's industrial relations policy would increase inflationary, I'm sorry, would increase wage pressures and therefore inflationary pressures which would lead to higher interest rates because Labor will take you back a centralised wage fixing system. 
At the moment we have the best of both worlds.  We have those sectors of the economy which can afford to pay higher wages, like the mining industry paying higher wages, but those higher wages because we don't have a centralised wage fixing system don't flow through to the rest of the economy and exert upward pressure on wages in areas of the economy where those higher wages cannot be afforded and that is the reason why we have this modern miracle of rising real incomes yet low inflation and relatively low interest rates.  But that would disappear under a Labor government and when I argue they will always be higher under Labor than under us I am supported by the past and I'm also supported by a future projection of the impact of their alternative industrial relations policy because if you force unaffordable wage increase on firms there are two outcomes.  One outcome is that employment growth slows and unemployment rises and the second outcome is that there is general upward pressure on wages and that leads to higher inflation which in turn produces higher interest rates.  So it is no empty rhetorical gesture when I say to you that interest rates would be higher under a Labor government than under a Coalition government. 
And the second area where I believe this government offers the Australian people a better and a brighter future is in the crucial area of national security and defence.  The Labor Party only believes in spending a decent amount of money on defence when it is in Opposition leading up to an election.  The Labor Party has never really believed in high levels of defence expenditure.  We inherited in 1996 a defence force that was not run down in morale because the morale of the men and women of the Australian Defence Force is always truly magnificent, but we inherited a defence force that had been badly neglected by the previous government, so badly so that I said to the Treasurer and the Finance Minister in 1996 the one area that they had to put a circle around and they couldn't touch for expenditure reductions was the area of defence and I'm very proud of the fact that in the 11-and-a-half years we have been in government, in 11-and-a-half years we have lifted defence expenditure by 48 per cent in real terms, that's 48 per cent over and above the level of inflation and with the capital acquisitions that we have planned we are now in a stronger and a better position than we've ever been to fulfil the goals and the responsibilities of our defence forces.  The defence, obviously of continental Australia, partnership with our coalition allies in various operations around the world and importantly a leadership role in stabilising the region in which we live.
In the area of national security Mr Rudd of course poses as somebody who always supports what the Government is doing to tighten security and to deal with potential terrorist threats, although you get the impression sometimes that he's playing a double game.  He's out there saying I support the Government but he's got some of his underlings out there like the Queensland Premier trying to undermine what the Government is doing and I haven't forgotten that in 2005, the last major revamp of the security laws of this country, when they were introduced Mr Rudd said the purpose of the Government introducing these laws was to divert attention from the political difficulties it was suffering at the time in relation to the sale of the final tranche of Telstra and I also haven't forgotten and I know Philip Ruddock hasn't forgotten that the Labor Party is still pledged to repeal the new sedition laws which make it a criminal offence to incite many acts of violence by terrorist organisations.  So you often have to look below the surface when you come to Mr Rudd's declarations regarding his total support for everything that this government has done in relation to national security.
In a third area that's so important to people in western Sydney and people all around Australia and that is the job prospects of the young, the job prospects of their children, we also offer a better and a brighter future.  We have of course had a stunning degree of success in reducing unemployment.  Kerry spoke of the reduction in unemployment in the electorate of Macquarie.  In the electorate of Greenway unemployment has fallen from 8.8 per cent in 1996 to 4.5 per cent now in 2007.  In the last year the long term unemployment rate in Australia, that's the people who've been trying to get a job for more than a year, the long term unemployment rate has fallen by 28 per cent.  Now that is a remarkable achievement.  Is Mr Rudd seriously suggesting that bringing back the unfair dismissal laws is going to accelerate further the fall in the long term unemployment rate?  Because one of the reasons why long term unemployment has fallen so sharply over the last year is that many small firms emboldened into taking on more staff have in fact given the hope of a job to many people who've been struggling for more than a year or two in order to find work.  
If I could move to a fourth area, the area of health, now this is an area where the Labor Party's always said it could do better than us.  Always, they take it for granted that the public regards them as better on health than the Coalition, but the facts and the experience suggest otherwise and they suggest that Labor would not offer a brighter future in relation to health.  Labor is still committed to repealing the Medicare safety net.  Labor's commitments to retain the tax subsidy for private health insurance must be taken at a very heavy discount.  One of the very first things that the Leader of the Opposition did when he entered federal Parliament after the 1998 election was to vote against the introduction of the 30 per cent rebate for private health insurance because that was part of the election commitment we took in 1998 and it was only the vote of Senator Brian Harradine in the Senate that secured the passage of the 30 per cent private health insurance rebate.  So therefore anybody in western Sydney who seriously wants to retain their private health insurance and who wants to keep that 30 per cent rebate, don't trust Mr Rudd.  Don't trust the Australian Labor Party, they have never believed in private health insurance, they don't believe in that great partnership between the public and the private which is so important to the health of Australians that they should not be believed.  In a very, very fundamental area to western Sydney and indeed to all Australians, let me move to bulk billing for medical consultations.  Only a few years ago the Labor Party was saying that there was a crisis in bulk billing in this country.  Let me remind you that the national bulk billing rate, that's the rate across Australia in 1996 was 71.1 per cent, it is now 77.4 per cent.  In other words in this most basic of areas relevant to the maintenance and the success of Medicare, this Government has been more successful in helping and strengthening Medicare than was the Australian Labor Party.  And can I tell you that the bulk billing rate in the electorate of Lindsay is 91.6 per cent, 91.6 and in the electorate of Greenway not to be outdone it is 96.3 per cent.  Now is Mr Rudd, is anybody in the Labor Party seriously suggesting that they can offer a better and brighter level of bulk billing than has the Coalition?
And the final area I want to touch on is the area of climate change and this is an area where we offer a better and a brighter future for the Australian people because we will do it in a way that is balanced, we will do it in a way that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions but not at the cost of jobs or at the cost of a reduction in economic growth and economic output and we'll also do it in a way that puts on the table every alternative energy source.  You cannot have a sensible debate about Australian's climate change future without admitting that the possibility that over time nuclear power will become a source of base load power generation.  It is unrealistic of anybody to pretend otherwise and what we offer is a balance.  We offer the introduction of an emissions trading scheme that will be suitable for Australia's conditions.  We will not be part of an system imposed on this country by an approach that is essentially Eurocentric and does not take full account of the fundamental differences between an economy such as Australia which depends very, very heavily on the resource sector both for energy consumption and also for its exports and countries around the world that have a vastly different economic structure.  
I've chosen those five areas my friends to make the point that we on this side of politics offer a much brighter and better future than do our opponents and this election is overwhelmingly about which Party can offer the better and the brighter future.  Much and all as we are proud of our record, much and all as we are entitled to point to the progress that this country has made over the last 11-and-a-half years, politics has got nothing to do with entitlement.  Every election represents an application by a political party for another job and in presenting your job application you're entitled to present your resume and our resume is strong, our resume is something of which we can be proud but it is nonetheless a resume and what really matters is the crucial question, which side of politics can better guarantee our economic prosperity, our economic growth?  Mr Rudd talks about the end of the mining boom, I talk about the continuation of the mining boom.  Mr Rudd talks about winding back economic reform, I talk about maintaining economy reform.  I talk about, or rather Mr Rudd talks about an approach to employment that doesn't respect the contribution of small business to employment growth, I talk about a future Australian economy where the continued growth of the small business community is central to the maintenance of our economic expansion. 
Mr Rudd will lead a Cabinet 70 per cent of whose members are former trade union officials, I talk about an Australian society where the union movement like any other gathering of people is entitled to an honoured place but not a monopoly of power.  There is some grievous contradiction in a situation where at time when only 15 per cent of the private sector workforce in this country belongs to trade union movement, yet 70 per cent of the members of a Rudd Labor Cabinet would be former trade union officials.  There is something wrong not only because of that comparison, but because of the recognition that there are now more self-employed Australians than there are members of trade unions.  Ours is a society that has changed dramatically over the last 30 or 40 years and the representation in parliament and the representation in Cabinet has got to reflect that change.  Where are the small business men and women in the Australian Labor Party?  Where are the people other than trade union officials?  Where are the people who represent the broader aspects of the Australian community?  
I am intensely proud of the broad mix of people - people like Louise Markus who had a background as a social worker, somebody like Jackie Kelly who had a background as a legal officer in the Royal Australian Air Force, Kerry Bartlett who was a school teacher and somebody who had a strong background in economics.  The last election brought in policemen, it even brought in a bloke in Tasmania who had been both a policeman and a funeral director, albeit at different times.  It brought in a few medical practitioners, it brought in people out of business, but wave after wave of those coming into the Parliamentary Labor Party now have only one distinguishing feature, and it's the same distinguishing feature, and that is they've had a career as a trade union official.  It's okay to have 10 per cent, even 20 or 30 per cent, but 70 per cent of your Cabinet who've been trade union officials speaks to me of an unrepresentative group of people, and if you are unrepresentative you can't represent the entirety of the Australian community.  
And finally can I say that you should observe very carefully the behaviour of my opponent, because often it's not quite how it appears.  Often the case is that we make an announcement which is clearly in the public interest and the Leader of the Opposition immediately says 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 127secs)
The charade of Labor's zero tolerance to union misconduct will be exposed this week when Kevin Rudd goes to Tasmania.  Earlier this year the Labor leader touted a get-tough approach to union misbehaviour when the Dean Mighell affair became public.  But since then he's simply turned a blind eye and this week instead of punishing bad behaviour by union officials, Mr Rudd will be supporting it.  
During his visit to Tasmania Mr Rudd will be campaigning for Kevin Harkins, a senior Electrical Trades Union official running for the Labor Party in Tasmania.  This is despite the fact that Mr Harkins faces charges over alleged illegal strikes and will appear in court shortly.  He's even been condemned by the sitting Labor member he's replacing.  Mr Rudd refuses to invoke the so-called zero-tolerance policy, notably after threats from Mr Mighell.  
Mr Rudd wants to be the next prime minister of Australia, yet he's not tough enough to respond to calls for action against unsuitable members of his own Party.  It is clear that Mr Rudd cannot determine nor control who joins his Party, even those facing court, because he will not stand up to the unions.  
The unions control pre-selections, they provide the election campaign funding and they determine the union-friendly policies.  This is one of the great threats of a Rudd-union government.  While union members make up just 15 per cent of the private sector workforce, 70 per cent of Mr Rudd's frontbench are former trade union officials.  This lack of balance is a worry for the Australia public and will be a key consideration later in the year when voters go to the polls.  There will be a choice between continuing our economic prosperity or handing over government to the union-controlled Labor Party.  Warning signs about the influence of unions under a Rudd-union government demonstrate that Labor cannot hope to offer the Australian people a better and brighter future.  Only the Coalition can provide a good government for all Australians.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 127secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Senator Ellison, Senator Mathias Cormann, a newly chosen Senator from Western Australia, Senator Alan Eggleston, my other parliamentary colleagues and most particularly, your outstanding, energetic and highly performing local member Michael Keenan. Michael was one of the new boys of 2004 and in the short time he's been in the Parliament he's demonstrated to be a person who can make a great contribution to our parliamentary party meetings, but even more importantly, he's become a very thoughtful and sincere and dedicated local representative. 
This morning I don't want to spend a lot of time addressing you, I am going to do something that I think is very valuable at large community gatherings such as this, and that is after having said a couple of words I am going to come down on the floor and answer any questions that people want to put to me because I do think that politics could do with a re-injection of a little more direct interaction between Members of Parliament and those who pass judgements on them. 
Now I get the impression there will be a few people in the audience who are broadly supportive of the policies of the Government, but I don't take for granted that everybody agrees with everything that we've done. And one of the things that I do bring to the weeks and months that lie ahead as the Australian people decide whether they're going to return the Government or risk the Labor Party, one of the things that I do have very much in my mind is that I bring no sense of entitlement or no sense of right to the position I hold. It's an incredible privilege to be the Prime Minister of this country and every day I wake up thinking to myself what extraordinary good fortune and what a great privilege it is for me to have the opportunity. And at the end of the day, we are all at the service of the Australian people and they will make their judgement, and whatever judgement they make will be the right judgement because the Australian people have a great capacity to get things right. 
I am conscious, of course, of the particular significance of this election here in Western Australia. Western Australia is growing faster than any other part of Australia and one of the reasons why it's growing faster than any other part of Australia is the mining boom. And one of the principal reasons that we are enjoying such a large benefit from the mining boom is that we have changed the industrial relations structure of this country. The present industrial relations system is properly crafted for the mining boom. It supports it, it facilitates it, it encourages it, it has expanded it. And if we turn our back on that industrial relations system as Mr Rudd has promised he will do, that will do damage to the mining boom, it will damage Western Australia and it will damage the entire nation.
One in four Western Australians are employed under AWAs. One in four. Twenty five per cent. That is way above the national average. And most of those people are earning many tens, in some cases hundreds of dollars more a week than they would be earning on a common law contract or under the award system, yet the Labor Party is determined to destroy the AWA system. Let there be no bones about...any doubt about it. They are determined, despite all the requests of the mining industry. Even the arguments of their Labor Premier in Western Australian Alan Carpenter have been ignored and there is a reason why and the reason is that AWAs don't include unions. 
Now we have no arguments with unions bargaining on behalf of their members. We have no argument with employers and unions reaching collective agreements. We do not argue against union membership. We legally guarantee the right of every man and woman in this country to join a union if that is their wish. That is not the argument. The argument here is whether people in this state and around Australia will have the right if they choose to bargain directly with their employers to their benefit and advantage and financial reward. That's what's involved. And the removal of AWAs which is at the heart of the Labor Party's industrial relations policy will do enormous damage to the economy of Australia and enormous damage to the economy of Western Australia and inflict great injury on the tens of thousands of Western Australians who are employed under AWAs.
This issue alone is crucial to the judgement that is made by the people of this state when the next election comes. And Michael Keenan as the Liberal Party's standard bearer in this state and all the other members in this state, both the sitting members and the aspiring candidates, will be arguing for the long term future of Western Australians when they argue to defend the current industrial relations system. Because without that the mining boom will not be maintained to its full force and we will not be able to realise the full potential of what providence and good hard work has given us. We used to be a country many years ago that the rest of the world was a little suspicious about because of our industrial disputes and our bad work practices. Now they are all things of the past. We are now regarded as reliable suppliers. And I remember at the closing stages of the negotiations several years ago for the natural gas contract in the Guangdong Province from the North West Shelf; I remember the Chinese officials and leaders saying to me that what they'd liked about dealing with Australia was that we were reliable and dependable and predictable, that what we said we would do we did and we did it on time and we did it without any additional cost. 
Now that is our reputation in 2007 and it's a reputation that has been hard won and it's a reputation we must fight to preserve. And you can't take it for granted and you shouldn't be beguiled by smooth words that everything will be the same. Everything will not be the same if there is a change in the area of industrial relations. The world will change very dramatically in that area because union domination will come back and individual contract making will be outlawed. And that essentially is what is involved and that is why there is so much at stake.
 But my friends, there are many other things I know that are on your minds. In asking the Australian people to give us another go, whenever the election may be towards the end of this year, we're not arguing that we've been a perfect government, we're not arguing we're a government without criticism, but we are arguing that we're a government that has seen Australia's unemployment level go to a 33 year low. We've led a country now that is widely and warmly regarded around the world as a stable and predictable bastion of democracy and free enterprise and that is a reputation and that is an attitude that I will fight very, very hard to preserve because it's something that is very important to all of the Australian people.
Can I just say again how much I appreciate the tremendous work that Michael has done as your member. He works hard, he fights hard, he argues hard and he achieves a lot for your electorate and I do hope that come the end of the year, whenever that may generically be determined electorally-wise, that you not only remember him in your prayers, but you also remember him at the ballot box because I think he'll take both the prayers and the votes all at the one time. Thank you.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much John for that warm introduction.  To Peter O'Brien, the President of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Peter Hendy, the Executive Director, my many state and federal parliamentary colleagues and I particularly acknowledge the presence of Paul Omodei, the Leader of the Liberal Party here in Western Australia, Danielle Blain and Mark Neeham, the President and State Director respectively of the Western Australian division of the Liberal Party. I particularly mention them because I know what an important role they're going to play in the making of political history at the end of this year here in Western Australia.
Whenever I address a gathering like this here in Perth I always get my priorities right.  I start by acknowledging the fact that Western Australia may only have 11 per cent of Australia's population, but is contributing something in excess of 40 per cent of the nation's export income and it's something of which, it's something of which Western Australian audiences are justifiably proud and as Prime Minister of the Commonwealth I don't mind acknowledging it. The extraordinary economic times in which we are living are dramatically exemplified on a visit to Western Australia.  I'm very familiar with this state, I'm very familiar with the people of this city and I've admired all my public life the distinctively different entrepreneurial approach that so many Western Australians take to business.  This mining boom, and I wish in a sense that we could find a different expression because whenever you say boom you think of something that's only temporary; I happen to hold the view that if we manage things correctly this resources surge or somebody described it to me last night as a long term resource readjustment, that we can maintain it for many years into the future.  There is no shortage of product and I can assure you there is no shortage of customers.  My view is that the Chinese economy in particular will continue to grow for many years into the future.  There is a lot of capacity yet to be utilised in China. There is a degree of resurgence in the Japanese economy, the Korean economy remains very strong and India which has long looked towards the Middle East for much of its resources, is an economy that's also growing at a very rapid rate and that is not to mention the extraordinary growth that's occurring in the smaller economies of Asia. 
So the message out of all of that is that we shouldn't see it as something that's about to come to an end, but nor should we take its continuation for granted and that is really a metaphor for what I want to say about the general strength of the Australian economy because although the mining boom has contributed mightily to the strength of the Australian economy in recent years, it's not the only cause. And it would be wrong to simply say it's due to the mining boom because the strength of the Australian economy is more broadly based than that.  The falls in unemployment have been more dramatic in Western Australia, but they've also been evident in other parts of the country. We do live in wonderful economic conditions.  That is not to deny that there are some in our midst, some of our fellow Australians who through no fault of their own have not enjoyed the same level of prosperity as the rest of the citizenry and we should never forget that. And we should also always look to the great human dividends of economic prosperity and the greatest human dividend of all has been the dramatic fall in unemployment. The fact that we have a 33 year low in unemployment, and astonishingly in the last 12 months the number of people who are counted as long term unemployed, that is people who've been out of work for more than 12 months, has fallen by no less than 28 per cent.  Now that's an astonishing figure, but it's also a very heart warming figure because these are the people who've really struggled to be part of the bounty of our present generation. I can't prove this but I have a strong suspicion that one of the reasons the long term unemployed level has fallen so sharply in the last 12 months is that freed of the burdens of the old unfair dismissal laws thousands of small businesses in Australia have taken on more staff, safe in the knowledge that if unfortunately in some cases it doesn't work out, people can be let go without the past insidious practice of having to pay $30 or $40,000 go away money rather than waste endless days in some kind of litigation regarding unfair dismissal.  I think that is very much at the heart of the extra spurt that we've enjoyed with the fall in unemployment.  
Although we live in great economic times, we also have pressures, all economies have pressures.  Fortunately the pressures we have the moment are the pressures of prosperity.  They're not the pressures of recession, of stagnation and they're pressures nonetheless, but they're the best sort of pressures to have.  As always, our economy is finely balanced and the pressure of prosperity creates a sharpness to that balance that is sometimes absent when conditions are not so good.  Some of the pressures, of course, you are very well aware of.  The shortage of workers, particularly those with the requisite skills; and I was saying to a group of business men and women from Perth last night that it's my universal experience now and for the first time I've had it in 33 years in public life, of travelling around this country and being told in every part of the nation that the biggest challenge people have is getting the right staff and more generally getting enough staff.  I want to tell you that I'm acutely aware of that.  We have done a lot in that area but there's more that needs to be done.  There is no simple solution to it, it does represent a time in our history when because of demographic and generational changes there are fewer people traditionally available in the workforce for the jobs that are available. And although it is great to have too many jobs for the people available, I'm conscious of the challenges it does represent particularly but not only in the resource industry.  But the message that we enjoy the pressures or suffer the pressures of prosperity; that has two messages for governments and these are messages for both the Federal Government and also for state governments around Australia.  
The first of those messages is that governments by their own behaviour should not add to the pressures.  We have a low inflation environment, we have still very low interest rates.  Fortunately we haven't had a wages breakout which would put at peril both our low inflation and our low interest rates and overwhelmingly the main reason why we don't have a wages breakout is that we have decentralised our wage fixation system.  The last time we had a mining boom in this country the high wages paid in the resource sector spread relentlessly and inexorably through the economy so that firms that couldn't afford to pay those high wages had to lay off staff in order to survive.  Now that is not happening now and we are containing wage inflation now because we have a decentralised wage fixing system; and you'll understand the next point I'm about to make without my even making it but I will nonetheless, and that is that if we are so foolish as a nation to return to a centralised wage fixing system much of that stability and prosperity can be put at risk.
So governments shouldn't add to pressures by changing policies that are going to underwrite higher inflation.  The other pressure that governments should add to is through their own borrowings.  We used to have an economic expression in Australia and it was a real sort of jaw breaker and that's probably why we don't have it any more, called the public sector borrowing requirement and that used to collectively describe the aggregate borrowings of the Commonwealth and the states.  Perhaps the reason we don't have that expression now is that there is no aggregate any more of the Commonwealth and the states, there's only an aggregate of the states because the Commonwealth doesn't borrow in competition with you any more, you of the business community, because we have eliminated the net debt of the Commonwealth.  But the states still borrow, the states still borrow and they borrow in a way that is adding pressure to interest rates and I address this very directly because we all have an interest in containing pressures on interest rates.  We can contain them by having a wages policy, an industrial relations policy which is decentralised and therefore sees only affordable wage increases paid by firms.  We can also have a practice by governments around the nation, including the state government, somehow or other when you talk about deficits nobody ever mentions the debts and they're now something in the order of $50 to $60 billion accumulated of state government debt, and the more state government debt there is the greater the pressure on interest rates.  That may be an old fashioned well understood theory of economics but in practice it is still very much the case.  The Commonwealth has entirely vacated the field of adding to pressure on interest rate through its borrowings and I think it is a matter of great regret that at a time when we are well and truly out of the business of adding to upward pressure on interest rates, state governments around this country, not all of them, but a lot of them are doing the complete opposite.
The other pressure, of course, that governments shouldn't add to is to turn their backs on economic reform.  The great economic conditions we have the present time are a combination of circumstances.  They're of course a combination of the extraordinary energy and ingenuity of the business men and women of this country and the employees of this country.  The egalitarian character of our society has worked greatly to our advantage in the early years of the 21st century.  Our willingness to absorb people from the four corners of the earth and to judge them on their character and their willingness to work and contribute and not on their race or their colour or their background or their social status has also helped to underwrite the performance of the Australian economy. But fundamentally the other great contribution that has been made apart from the ingenuity of our people and the great endowment of providence of our resources has been the willingness of governments over the last 25 years, and I include in that a couple of the reforms of the former government and I've never been unwilling to acknowledge that, the willingness of governments over the last 25 years to undertake necessary reforms. And I often say to audiences like this that if you are thinking about the Australian economy 25 years ago you would think that it needed a number of great reforms.  It would need financial deregulation, it would need tariff reform, it would need tax reform and it would certainly need industrial relations reform and it would also need a fiscal reform that embraced the government getting out of running business enterprises because governments are notoriously incompetent at running business enterprises. And if you think back over the last five years you can actually remark that we have achieved all of those reforms.  
Two of them were carried out by the former government with strong support from the then Coalition Opposition.  The other three have been carried out by the government I have led and on top of that we have historically returned the Budget to very healthy surplus and paid off $96 billion of Government debt. I have to report, of course, that in those endeavours, so far from receiving any assistance from our political opponents they have not repaid our compliment in our Opposition years, they have in fact opposed every single one of the major economic reforms that this Government has carried out over the last 11 years. They opposed industrial relations reform, the first time around they opposed the reform of the waterfront, they opposed taxation reform, they opposed the privatisation of Government businesses although they in Government themselves had privatised such bodies as the Commonwealth Bank and Qantas which they had said previously they wouldn't do, and of course they have opposed very strongly bringing the Budget back into surplus. But that is the past, what matters to me is the present. And what matters most to me, not only as Prime Minister and leader of the parliamentary Liberal Party and somebody wanting to again enjoy the favour of the Australian people at the ballot box at the end of the year, but what concerns me even more than that is the long term implications to the Australian economy if any one of those major reforms is to be reversed.  What the Labor Party proposes to do if it is elected is to reverse lock, stock and barrel, and don't anybody be in any doubt about it, lock, stock and barrel, the industrial relations reforms that we have painfully, in a political sense, undertaken over the last few years.  It's not easy when you are advocating and implementing a reform of that magnitude in the teeth of populist Opposition, but we have done it because we believe it is good for the Australian economy, it's good for our future and the evidence is in that it is.  That we've seen 365,000 more jobs created since WorkChoices was passed.  We've seen a continued rise in real wages, you have one in four workers in Western Australia on an Australian Workplace Agreement and overwhelmingly, and in many cases, they are hundreds of dollars better off a week as a result of those workplace agreements.
My great concern of course is that if those reforms were to be reversed it would be the first time in a quarter of a century that this country had turned its back on a major economic reform and if you believe as I do that today's prosperity is a product of yesterday's reforms and that necessarily tomorrow's prosperity can only be built on today's reforms, the implications of a major reversal of a significant reform are enormous.  They would send a signal not only to Australians, but they'd send a signal to the rest of the world that this country had lost the zeal and the commitment for economic reform.  That having put in what can only be described as a stellar performance as a nation over the past few years it had decided that it was all too much effort and that somehow or other we had to down tools on it.  So in this area of industrial reform the choice is a very stark one.  Let me put it to you this way, that if we are defeated at the end of the year, if the Labor Party wins, then the industrial relations laws will be reversed.  Those reforms will be buried with all the damage that involves for Western Australia and for the rest of the country, for large companies especially but not only in the resource sector but generally, and also for small business, those reforms will be buried and they'll be buried lock, stock and barrel.  But worse than that, they will never come back because if they are reversed as a result of a Coalition defeat at the end of this year no Coalition government in the future in my view will want to revisit the reforms.  It will become part of the conventional wisdom of Australian politics that you can't reform industrial relations, that that's a no go area for any government and that any governments taking leave of its sense if it endeavours to undertake it. Now, I say that very deliberately to you all because I believe it. I believe it based on my observation of Australian politics, what I judge to be the mood of the Australian community. If, on the other hand, the Coalition is returned of course the laws will be retained and what is more even if there were to be a change of government in the future they will never be repealed because they will become so entrenched that they will not be capable effectively of repeal without enormous dislocation. And that some future Labor government will be forced to adopt the approach that was adopted by my friend Tony Blair, the former Labor Prime Minister of Great Britain, when he was elected. And he said one of the very first things he told his movement was that Britain would need to retain the industrial relations reforms of the Thatcher era.
Now I know how important workplace reform is to this Chamber, I know how important it is to the business community of Australia. And I don't pretend that every single thing my Government has done has met with approval in the business community and nor it should because although we are close to the business community unlike our opponents we are not owned by any section of the Australian population. No business organisation sends delegates to the floor of Liberal Party conferences and we genuinely do represent the entire Australian community. But there is a lot at stake on this issue and very dramatically this morning the Australian Building and Construction Commission released a report carried out by Econtech, a very reputable economic organisation based in Canberra, that has done good work for both sides of politics. And it indicated just how dramatically industrial relations reform through a combination of the Cole Commission inquiry and also WorkChoices, what a dramatic impact it had had on the construction industry. The $15 billion boost to the industry, the 9.4 per cent rise in productivity, the dramatic contraction of the differential between commercial construction costs which for about a 10 year period were running some 10 per cent ahead of residential construction costs to a differential of about 1.7 per cent in January of 2007. But even more heroic than that has been the extraordinary transformation in the industrial scene on building and construction sites around this nation where the number of man hours per thousand, or whatever it is, has fallen by something like a factor of 35 to a factor of two or three in the space of about two years. And wherever I go in the country company after company will tell me that the transformation in the industrial relations climate brought about by these changes has been dramatic. And once again the choice is very stark. The stay of execution has been granted for 2010 but if a body is slated for execution its authority drains away once that announcement has been made. And it's quite within the capacity of a newly elected government to deny funds to the body before it is formally abolished. 
Now I have spoken very directly and with feeling on these issues because I regard them as enormously important to the nation's future. The implementation of our industrial relations changes has not been easy but it has been necessary and it has been beneficial. And the benefits of it are beginning to be more and more apparent to the Australian people. I welcome the fact that the Chamber is running a public information campaign on these laws and I look forward to seeing and learning about that campaign. Because it is important that we explain to our fellow Australians the importance of maintaining the gains of this legislation and the gains are there to be seen. The lower unemployment rates, the continued rise in wages, the much greater flexibility, the capacity of employers and employees if they wish to bargain directly with each other, the proper maintenance of people's right to join unions and to have those unions bargain on their behalf if that is their wish. It is not the goal of this legislation to destroy the union movement in this country. It is the goal of this legislation to enhance the right of choice of the employees of this country and the employers of this country to bargain directly with each other without the intervention of a third party if that is their joint desire.
Can I finish, ladies and gentlemen by returning to the point I made at the beginning of my remarks and that is that we are living in, historically speaking, quite remarkable economic times. This is the strongest economy Australia has had since World War II. We had high rates of growth and very low unemployment in the 1960s but then we were a very protected and cloistered economy. We are now an economy that is open for business around the world. We are part of the global economy forever and we have only one way to go and that is to continue to remain competitive. I often use the metaphor of economic reform being like participating in a foot race towards an ever receding finishing line - you never reach it but you have got to keep going knowing nonetheless that you are never going to reach it because if you don't keep going the other blokes in the race are going to go past you and that's the nature of the world in which Australia is living. And although we are entitled to feel pleased about the good economic times we have we should not complacently imagine that the economy is on auto pilot. We should not imagine for a moment that if we just ease up it will all keep going because there are others seeking to grab our market share. Even in the fabled resources sector there are competitors in other parts of the world, and those in the industry will know this only too well, whose governments don't require quite the same standards in relation to a lot of other things and they can grab a market share as quickly a possible if we drop our guard and allow them to do so. That requires of us a modern sophisticated humane western society which does require appropriate standards in relation to so many things. It requires particular vigilance to retain our competitive edge. 
So my message very simply my friends is, we are living in most remarkable economic times but we can't be complacent. As always economic management is a finely balanced challenge. But to come here again to Perth is a source of great energising for me. The spirit of this great city, the spirit of Western Australia, its entrepreneurial flair, its desire to look to the future is quite remarkable and I compliment it and I finally compliment the Chamber on the way in which it has led debate on so many important economic issues. I haven't always agreed with you and you haven't always agreed with me but we have always been working together to build a more prosperous Australian community. And we both know that you can't build and maintain that prosperity unless you are prepared to carry out reforms and unless you are prepared to argue and advocate those reforms to the broader Australian community.
I thank the Chamber, I wish it well and let us all remember the challenge of prosperity and that is to work hard to maintain it for future generations. Thank you.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Brigadier and the CDF, Ambassador, my fellow Australians and our New Zealand friends and those from other parts of the world who may be gathered here. Can I start by paying a very warm tribute to Brigadier Rerden for the wonderful leadership that he has given to the forces here over recent months. He really has done an outstanding job. His tour of duty ends on the 31st of July and he has really brought great credit to the Australian Defence Forces, he has brought credit to his own service and he has brought most importantly of all great credit to the name of Australia and the cause of the International Stabilisation Force. So I want to thank you Brigadier and wish you well in the next stage of your military career in Australia.
I have just come here today to express my gratitude and admiration to all of the men and women of the three services of the Australian Defence Force, the Australian Federal Police which are in turn composed of men and women of the AFP and men and women of the various police forces of the individual Australian states.
I want to welcome our friends from New Zealand. I have already done penance and congratulated them on their retaining the Bledisloe Cup but we'll sort of pass over that very, very rapidly. But it's great to have our friends from New Zealand present.
I do want to pay tribute to the work of the Ambassador, the way in which she has related not only with the Government here but also with the International Stabilisation Force has been first class. And it's a great example, if I can put it this way, of Team Australia doing a wonderful job, contributions from the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the police and from the civilian side of our Government.
Australia's association with East Timor goes back a long way. There are many older Australians, those of World War II vintage who remember with enormous affection the comfort and support they received from the people of Timor during the war against Japan. And those memories have never faded from those older Diggers and they were amongst many sections of the Australian population that in 1999 said something had to be done to help the people of East Timor. And that something was done and it began the modern association, in a vastly different form, the modern association between Australia and East Timor. And the way in which all of you have put the name of Australia very high on the pedestal, the name of Australia in this part of the world is something of which I am deeply grateful as Prime Minister and something of which all Australians are immensely proud.
And I said to the CDF coming up in the aircraft that the story of our engagement with East Timor in modern times reflects great credit on the Australian Defence Forces. But importantly the Defence Force has done it in partnership with the police. In these kind of operations you need both soldiers and police. If you try and do it with one without the other it doesn't work. And the way in which the two have blended together has been terrific and the way in which the Australians have worked together with their friends from New Zealand and other countries and of course the association with the United Nations has been very important because we are here with the support and the sanction of the United Nations.
All of you have gone overseas in the name of your country, in most cases Australia, and in the case of our Kiwi friends, New Zealand. You have all brought great credit to those two countries. And I want to thank you. I hope you find the experience here stimulating, I hope it adds to your experience not only of life but also your service careers or your police careers because overseas service is an increasingly important component of those careers. And these kinds of operations are not going to disappear quickly. We are not going to be leaving East Timor tomorrow because the job is not completed but we work for the day when we can hand over to the people of this country which is, I hope, one that has a brighter future than the immediate past. It has got quite a lot going for it. It has got some oil and gas revenues that a lot of developing countries don't have and properly helped, properly advised, properly supported but also properly required to accept their share of responsibility, it can have a bright future.
But to all of you, thank you for what you are doing for Australia and I can say to all of the New Zealanders here, thank you for what you are doing for your country but importantly both of you are doing wonderful things for the future of a tiny country for whom many millions of Australians have a very deep affection. Thank you very much.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.95Mb - 82secs)
Good morning,
The Federal Government's Budget is in healthy surplus due to the Coalition's economic policies. We have paid off Labor's $96 billion debt, saving taxpayers about $8.5 billion a year in interest payments.
This has allowed us to deliver important social programs, cut taxes and maintain a generous family assistance system.  
It has also relieved pressure on interest rates. When governments borrow money they compete with private borrowers putting upward pressure on interest rates. 
While the Federal Government is not in the borrowing marketplace, state Labor Governments are going into deep debt across the nation. Over the five years to 2010-11, state debt will increase by about $70 billion.  
This will place significant upward pressure on interest rates and is a glaring example of Labor's double game with the Australian community. While Federal Labor pretends to be fiscally responsible, state Labor Governments are anything but.
If you want a true insight into how Labor would run the economy nationally, look no further than how Labor runs the state finances.
The national economy is strong courtesy of the Coalition Government. A Rudd Labor Government would put all of that at risk.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.95Mb - 82secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 153secs)
Our job in Government is all about making the best country in the world even better.
It requires tough decisions to be made and plans for the future to be laid out.
Summits and stunts are no substitute for real policy alternatives.
The Labor Party expresses concern about housing affordability but offers no policies to make houses cheaper.
The Opposition Leader talks frequently about the prices of grocery items but has admitted he doesn't have any special plans that would reduce costs for consumers.
The irony is that the policies Mr Rudd does have would make things worse for families - and it's not just the Government that's saying that.
Respected economic forecaster Econtech says the Government's changes to industrial relations laws have reduced residential housing construction costs by three per cent. This equates to almost $10,000 on the cost of a $300,000 family home. 
Mr Rudd wants to change these laws and neuter the powers of the building industry watchdog, the Australian Building and Construction Commission. It's clear that Labor's policy would increase the cost of building a home and lower housing affordability.
In the same vein, Mr Rudd's plan to return to a centralised wage fixing system would not help consumers. A report released by the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Western Australia says the flexible workplace laws we now have are providing a greater take-home pay packet for Australian workers.  
Similarly, unemployment stands at a 33-year low but Mr Rudd wants to turn back the clock and re-introduce the unfair dismissal laws even though small business thrives under the present system and wants to keep it. 
It's hard for the Labor Party to argue the fact that if fewer people are in work, more families won't find it harder to pay for their weekly shopping bills.
Australians will face a critical choice at the federal election later this year between a Government with a proven track record and an inexperienced, union-controlled Labor Party.
My Government is determined to lock in our current economic strength, keep unemployment low, maintain wages growth and share the bounty of our current good fortune with as many in the community as possible.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 153secs)


E&amp;OE...
Hello there,
Recently there have been suggestions that Federal Government intervention in traditional areas of state responsibility is a power grab by Canberra.
Let me make it clear, my government only intervenes in those areas where state or territory governments have not fulfilled their obligations and local communities feel let down, or where a co-operative approach having been patiently tried has clearly failed.
We intervened in the Northern Territory to help indigenous people because the Northern Territory Government had not met its responsibilities.  This intervention will clearly benefit the Aboriginal community.
The historic $10 billion plan to save the Murray-Darling Basin was conceived because the cooperative approach between the Commonwealth and the Murray-Darling Basin states had failed.  The states had repeatedly ignored the water-use caps voluntarily imposed under that co-operative arrangement.
We had tried the co-operative approach for years but it simply hadn't worked.
The Australian people are not especially concerned about theories of governance when it comes to the delivery of basic services such as health and education.
They want good outcomes and are not particularly fussed about which level of government delivers those outcomes.
Overwhelmingly they want more rather than less Commonwealth involvement especially where a state government has not delivered an adequate service.
In this spirit I will visit Devonport in northern Tasmania today to announce Federal Government funding to keep open a public hospital which services a community of some 70,000 people.  This is not something the Commonwealth has normally done in past, but action was needed.
The Tasmanian government has announced plans to downgrade the existing hospital which has left the local community deeply unhappy.
The Commonwealth's true role in this case is one of direct intervention to help the local community.
Thanks a lot for listening.   


E&amp;OE...
Hello there,
Every year about 34,000 young Australians take a gap year between finishing Year 12 and embracing a long-term career or starting tertiary education.
Some head off on a working holiday, take a short term job or volunteer their time to a charity. 
We'd like to offer them another choice - a gap year in the Australian Defence Force to see if a career in the Navy, the Army or the Air Force is something they'd consider.
Serving the country through the ADF is extremely rewarding and one of the most respected career choices a young person can make. The gap year program provides a great opportunity for 17 to 24 year olds to do something very worthwhile for their country while gaining new skills at the same time.
From tonight we'll be screening new television advertisements to promote the new program.
Later today I'll officially launch the new Defence Gap Year with more detail about the generous conditions and incentives we're offering.
If you're interested in finding out a little bit more about it visit defencejobs.gov.au or text GAP to 13 19 01.
Thanks a lot for watching.


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.42Mb - 92secs)
Mr Rudd wants to be Prime Minister of Australia, but he has no plans of his own for Australia's future.
He says that he has the same economic policy as that of the Government. That raises two questions. If our economic policy is so good, what is his argument for changing the Government?
Secondly, how does he explain his past opposition to all of those reforms which helped produce the very economic policy which he now says is so good?
Mr Rudd opposed tax reform and tax cuts. Mr Rudd opposed putting the Budget into surplus. He voted against measures, such as the sale of Telstra, which helped pay off Labor's $96 billion Federal Government debt. He also opposed industrial relations reform.
The Leader of the Opposition wants it both ways. Now that the economy is strong, our debt paid off and the budget in healthy surplus he pretends to the public that he has always supported the policies which have brought that about.
The truth, of course, is completely the opposite.
In Government Mr Rudd would be neither strong nor experienced enough to maintain the economic policies of the Government, which he says are so good.
He would do the union's bidding on industrial relations thus putting at risk our 33 year low in unemployment. And six Labor Premiers would demand and get what they wanted.
To be Prime Minister of Australia you must have your own plans and the courage to argue them to the Australian people.  It is not enough to echo the policies of others, be they the Coalition or the unions.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.42Mb - 92secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr Trevor Carroll, the President of the Australian Industry Group, Mrs Heather Ridout, the Executive Director, my parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I've had the opportunity on numerous occasions since becoming Prime Minister, and previously, of addressing this gathering and its predecessors and I always enjoy the occasion and I take the opportunity on this occasion in 2007 in expressing my thanks and that of the Government for the excellent relationship that we have maintained with the leadership of the AI Group and your members in the development of public policy. I appreciated very much the reference to the development of the skills for the future package which was excellent example of how over a period of months in close consultation with many industry groups the Government was able to bring forth a number of policy changes which have made a practical impact on dealing with one of the continuing and quite chronic skills problems of the Australian economy, and that is the very large number of people in the workforce whose education qualifications have not reached year 12, and the extraordinary take up of the $3000-a- year vouchers is testament to the relevance of that particular initiative and I want to mark my gratitude to your group and your organisation for the advice that it injected into the discussions. 
We do meet of course at a time when it's right to record again the great strength of the Australian economy. It is a wonderful human dividend of good economic times and good economic policy that we are now enjoying our lowest unemployment rate for almost 33 years. And some figures that came out last week reminded us that in the 12 months to either June of July of this year there was a fall of no less than 29 per cent in the level of the long term unemployed in Australia. And a long term unemployed person is somebody who's been out of work for more than a year. I can't help but reflect what a wonderful metaphor that particular figure is for the remarkable strength of the labour market in 2007. I am also encouraged to make the observation that it must have quite a lot to do with the greater willingness of small business in Australia to take on more staff without the fear of the old unfair dismissal laws. 
Ladies and gentlemen I want to say a couple of things about the economic climate in which we operate. The strength of the Australia economy, the stability of our financial institutions, the prudent state of fiscal policy in Australia, the investment of past budget surpluses in the Future Fund and the credible commitment of the Government to maintaining strong budget surpluses into the future. All stand this country in particularly good stead at a time when there are some concerns on international financial markets. And they are a reminder of how important it is at any time in the economic experience of a country to maintain very strong economic fundamentals. And just as they prove their worth on earlier occasions, so they prove their worth at the present time.
The prudent way in which institutions are run and regulated in this country is something we tend to take for granted but we should remind ourselves on an occasion such as this of just how valuable that regulation and that administration really is and it's important as we look at some of the difficulties that are occurring in the United States to understand that pleasingly the incidents of what they call sub- prime loans here Australia is quite miniscule compared to what is the case in the United States. 
In his remarks your president talked about the support within the business community for the Governments' approach to climate change and most particularly the introduction of an emissions trading system. It's fair to say that there has been a very big change in the attitude of the business community towards this issue over the last few years. When the Government put together the energy white paper, what, four to five years ago, there was near universal opposition in the resource sector of the Australian economy to the introduction of an emissions trading system. 
But some years on that attitude has changed and the development, through the work of the task group chaired by Dr Shergold, the Secretary of my Department, the development jointly with the business community of a structure of the emissions trading system that I announced that the Government would adopt on the 3rd of June, was as good as an example of Government business cooperation on an important public policy issue that I have seen in the time that I've been Prime Minister.  We brought together leaders of the resource companies and the secretaries of five of the Commonwealth Departments of state. And within a period of less than six months, what I regard as a world class trading system was put into a framework, an excellent document advocating its adoption was published and within a few weeks with very wide public support, the Government was able to embrace the recommendations of that report.
History I think in the future will record that along with the Campbell Report into the Australian financial system, released almost 30 years ago, the Emissions Trading Report could well have one of the most lasting impacts on the Australian economy because the adoption of an emissions trading system and its orderly and sensible and measured introduction will have a tremendous impact on the Australian economy and the target that we embrace in relation to the operation of the scheme will be amongst one of the most important economic decisions that this country will take during the next decade. And I agree very much with your president's exhortation to make sure that we get the settings right and we understand the implications of the target we embrace and that we do it in an orderly and not overhasty fashion.
The Government is moving to implement the emissions trading system. The scheme is being designed by a task group within my own Department. The Treasury has started the modelling work for targets and legislation will be introduced this week for the emissions trading reporting system. Our aim is to have the trading scheme commencing in 2011 and we're very keen to maximise incentives for abatement in the lead up to 2011. We don't want to disadvantage any firms for abatement measures already taken and we want to reward extra abatement before the trading commences. 
I want to confirm tonight that compensation for firms adversely affected by the trading system will apply to those assets that were in existence on the 3rd of June 2007. That is a logical decision to announce but because there has been some ambiguity in the minds of some firms it is important that it be confirmed. And that date has logically been chosen to avoid windfall gains for investments made in full knowledge of an impending price on carbon. It is important that we get the details of the trading scheme right and my Department is preparing a discussion paper to be released in September, to be followed by some structured consultations. I invite the Australian Industry Group to be an enthusiastic participant in that consultative process.
I would now like ladies and gentlemen to direct a few remarks to an issue that will bulk very large in the forthcoming election campaign. No issue will be more keenly argued in that campaign than the fate of the Government's reforms to Australia's workplace system. No issue is more central in that campaign to the future of the Australian economy than whether or not those reforms survive. I have said on a number of occasions in the past that this country has had the wit and the genius if, I can put it that way, to embrace five great economic reforms over the last quarter of a century which have laid the groundwork, have been the foundations of our great economic prosperity at the present time. The deregulation of the financial system, tariff reform, taxation reform, strong fiscal consolidation including the privatisation of government business enterprises and importantly industrial relations reforms.  And speaking very generally, if we are to maintain the prosperity that we now enjoy, it will be quite counter-productive, indeed, potentially fatal to maintaining that prosperity if we were to turn our backs on any of those major reforms.  It would, of course, now be unthinkable to unravel the introduction of the GST; it would be unthinkable to turn back the clock on tariff reform.  It would be unthinkable, difficult though I know, a high exchange rate is for some import competing industries, to go back to the days of a regulated and fixed, or a managed exchange rate.  And in current economic circumstances it would be unthinkable to walk away from the strong Budget position we now have, and yet we face the real possibility that if there is a change of government, industrial relations reform will be dismantled.  
Let us understand without any ambiguity and without any polite words, but there is a very clear choice.  If the government changes, the industrial relations reforms of recent years will be dismantled.  We will go back to the old days of forced collective bargaining; we will see a return of the nightmare of unfair dismissal laws for small business and we will see the re-imposition of a union monopoly over the bargaining process in this country.  Australia will be the loser and Australia will be the poorer. But to put it in proper context, that if the Government is returned, then I confidently predict that the reforms that have been made over the last few years will never be dismantled.  Because by the time of the next and subsequent elections, they will have become so much part of the economic and industrial fabric of this country, that will be quite impossible. But I can say with equal conviction that if the Government is defeated and the reforms are over-turned, I do not believe a future government of my persuasion will again be able to re-introduce those reforms.  
I put it starkly because I believe that to be the clarity of the choice.  Elections are about choices; elections are about change or the maintenance of progress.  We have come a long way; I don't claim for a moment that I lead a perfect government; I don't claim for a moment that my Government is without blemish.  But we have committed ourselves to a reform process.  Today's prosperity is the product of a quarter of a century of economic reform and many people in this room have been part of that debate and part of that process and they have seen the achievements, they have helped shape those achievements and what is at stake in relation to one of those vital reforms is nothing short of a very, very crucial decision as to whether those reforms will be maintained.  
I find it truly astonishing that a set of reforms that has help generate some 365,000 jobs in about 18 months, that has maintained a steady growth in real wages based on non-inflationary productivity gains and has created the lowest level of industrial disputes since a year before the outbreak of the Great War in 1914; I find it truly astonishing that anybody should argue with passion and conviction that those reforms should be rolled back. They have played a vital role in shaping the prosperity that we now have. Jettison those reforms, we send a signal to our own people and we send a signal to the rest of the world that this country has lost the stomach for reform and that this country has been fatigued by reform. I don't believe that that is an option that the Australian people will want to embrace.
Finally can I return to my opening remarks and to thank all of you for the cooperation with the Government over the last year, to wish your members well. I know that there are many challenges, despite the great prosperity of the Australian economy but the great energy and ingenuity that businessmen and women have brought to the growth of the Australian economy over the last decade or more is something that I very greatly admire. I wish you well and I look forward to a long and fruitful continuation of past associations in the years ahead. Thank you.  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.29Mb - 84secs)
Good morning, 
The Coalition Government's uncompromising approach to illicit drugs is working.
Our law enforcement agencies have prevented more than 14 tonnes of hard drugs reaching the streets, drug deaths are declining and cannabis use among teenagers has dropped significantly.
Despite these successes, the battle continues. Drug traffickers are always looking for new ways to penetrate our borders and new, more menacing drugs are appearing.
The latest is the deadly pyschostimulant Ice which is causing havoc in communities across Australia. This highly addictive drug is destroying lives and placing an unnecessary strain on our health system. 
The Government has launched a hard-hitting advertising campaign warning of the dangers of illicit drugs including Ice. It will leave young people with no doubt about what these drugs can do.
We will also be sending an updated booklet to all households to provide parents with practical, up-to-date information to help them talk about the dangers of drugs with their children.
With so much misinformation about drugs in the community, it is important that young people don't hear the wrong messages from others first.
The Coalition's tough-on-drugs approach will continue and the government is committed to working with Australian families to combat the drug menace.
[ends] 
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.29Mb - 84secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Mr President. Mr Martin Hamilton-Smith, the Leader of the Liberal Party in South Australia, my many federal and state parliamentary colleagues, fellow Liberals. It's a great delight to be back here in Adelaide, not only to address this State Council but also to make a very important announcement about the Southern Expressway and to end the idiocy of a highway that doesn't know in which direction it is heading. Something of a world first and I am delighted to have made the announcement of a $100 million commitment by the Federal Government to address that, as well as of course the expanded commitment of up to $1 billion to 2020 of the main expressway. 
But ladies and gentlemen, I am particularly here to pay tribute to the contribution of the South Australian Liberal Party to the great success of the Federal Government. And there are many people I'd like to mention. I'd particularly of course like to recall with sadness, the loss since we last met of the wonderful Jeannie Ferris who we all loved dearly. We all admired her courage and we all mourned her death and felt very keenly the loss of a wonderful warrior for the Liberal Party cause. On a brighter note I am happy to have welcomed since the last election two wonderful new Senators in Simon Birmingham and Mary Jo Fisher and I know both of them will make a wonderful contribution to the Senate, replacing Jeannie and the wonderful, likeable Amanda Vanstone who is now of course doing yeomen service for the Commonwealth in a completely non-political way, as our Ambassador in Italy.  But I also take this opportunity of congratulating Alan Ferguson as he's been elected President of the Senate. He is a great colleague, Alan, and he's been a great servant of the Party in South Australia and it is a well deserved promotion and a proper recognition of his great human qualities and great human skills.
We will of course be going to the next election without the services of two long serving Members, Barry Wakelin and Trish Draper, both of whom have decided not to recontest the election. And although I will have an opportunity between now and then to thank them for their contribution in other fora, I do want to take this opportunity at the State Council Meeting of thanking them for their service to the Party. And to, he's no longer a new state Leader, he's a well established state Leader and I think Martin has done a first class job in taking up the fight to the Rann Labor Government here in South Australia.
And to you Mr President, I want to thank you for your service over the last two years. It's never easy leading the organisation, it's a thankless job and I record my gratitude for the work that you have done. And I take this opportunity of congratulating Sean Edwards on his election as the new President of the South Australian Division of the Party. 
Now my friends I don't need to remind a gathering such as this of just how important the state of South Australia is to our federal fortunes. South Australia has always been pivotal to the winning of office and the maintenance of office by my Government over the last eleven and a half years. At no time since Federation has South Australia had a greater influence through its membership of my Government than it has over the last eleven and a half years. The influence of South Australians, led of course by Australia's longest serving and in my view best Foreign Minister Alexander Downer. To be Foreign Minister of Australia for eleven and a half years is a tribute to his skill and a tribute to his qualities and his understanding of the vagaries of our international relations.
But he's been ably assisted over the years by other senior Ministers, and particularly of course the Leader of the Government in the Senate Nick Minchin, who has kept a steely eye on the nation's finances and protected the resources of the Australian Treasury from unreasonable and illegitimate claims on its largesse and its always very, very necessary to do that. And to all my other South Australian colleagues, I want to extend my gratitude and my thanks for the work that you have done. South Australia helped save the Government in 1998 when we held our marginal seats, and South Australia, at the last election; although we lost a couple, we gained a couple and it now of course has this remarkable situation of having five seats on fine margins on both sides of the pendulum. So the emphasis on, and the resources committed to the campaign in South Australia will be very significant.
We will go to this election against the backdrop of significant financial turbulence on the international markets and it's important we understand the context in which this is occurring. It is important we understand that it is not a result of any weaknesses in the Australian economy. Indeed, it is despite the fact that the Australian economy is now probably stronger than it's been at any time since World War II. 
What is now occurring on the world financial markets is a direct result of the delinquent way in which home borrowing has been allowed to grow in many parts of the United States. The prevalence in many parts of the United States of what are called in the jargon of the trade 


E&amp;OE...
Australia Rising to a Better Future
It's a great pleasure to be here for this Millennium Forum function, supported by the Menzies Research Centre.
The global financial volatility of recent days simply underlines why steady, reliable, safe economic management is the bedrock of good government.  
It reminds us that economic management can never be put on auto-pilot.  There is no room for complacency.  And prosperity can never be taken for granted.
Fiscal conservatism is a long-term governing philosophy, not a label you pick off the shelf for short-term political purposes.  And future-oriented government is about not just managing the good times, but also providing prudently for inevitable uncertainty and adversity.  
This, Ladies and Gentlemen, goes to the heart of why the Australian people put their faith in the Coalition 11 and a half years ago.
They wanted a government prepared to take the long view; and to govern with the needs and aspirations of mainstream Australia upper most in mind.  They also wanted us to bring renewed ambition to our national life.  
Today we can see the fruits of a great, yet unfinished, transformation in Australia.  An Australian renaissance, with a new synthesis of aspiration and fairness, has taken shape off the back of the strongest economy in our nation's history.
More people are in jobs than ever before.  The number of Australians on welfare is down.  Household wealth has more than doubled.  Business investment is strong.  
Australia is working again - moving ahead after decades of falling behind.  
The contours of national debate have changed too.  We've shown:
   * how to slash unemployment without blowing the lid off the economy;
   * how real wages can grow by more than 20 per cent without union bosses calling the shots in the workplace;
   * how income taxes can be cut without sending the budget into deficit;
   * how welfare reform can go hand-in-hand with a strong safety net and record support for low income families.
We've shown how to strengthen Medicare while supporting private health insurance.  We've shown how to expand school choice while investing record amounts in government schools.
We've demonstrated how to protect our borders while running a large and welcoming immigration program.  We've illustrated how Australia can build closer ties with Asia while also strengthening relations with traditional allies.
Australians can now see that many of the choices under the old Labor narrative are really false choices.  
That's why Australia's choice at the next election is so important.  It's not just about who will govern this country for the next three years.  It's about how Australia chooses to define its ambitions in the next decade and beyond.  
People have asked me: Why do you want to be prime minister again?  Surely you've achieved all you set out to achieve.
I want to lead this country again because I believe Australia can now set its sights even higher.  Because the new Australian synthesis of aspiration and fairness is everywhere in progress, but nowhere complete.  
Because in the face of big challenges - like the ageing of the population, climate change, new pressures on families and communities - the task is not simply to preserve today's prosperity but to build tomorrow's.  
And because a strong, resilient Australia could quickly disappear at the hands of an inexperienced Labor outfit, dominated by former union officials and hand-cuffed to the Labor states.
Now more than ever the economy needs strong, experienced and careful management.  
And let no-one in this room be in any doubt about what is at stake on industrial relations.  If the Coalition wins the next election, our reforms will never be lost.  They will be so much a part of Australia's aspirational culture that no future Labor Government will be able to dismantle them.
Equally, however, if Labor wins they will throw out our laws and bring back a veritable camel train of workplace rigidities - unfair dismissal laws, union monopoly bargaining, new right of entry rules and, of course, the abolition of Australian Workplace Agreements.  
And I confidently predict that no future Coalition Government will see political merit in reinstating our reforms in the years to come. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, today I want to talk about my priorities for a fifth term in government.  Not out of any false sense of entitlement or complacency.  But because the Australian people deserve to know what will be front and centre of my mind if the Coalition is entrusted to govern again.
My five goals for a fifth term are these:
 * to keep the nation strong, secure and united, engaged in the world and at ease with itself;
   * to build a new era of growth, prosperity and opportunity here at home;
   * to embrace a sense of aspirational nationalism to guide relations between different levels of government in Australia;
   * to ensure a rising tide of prosperity lifts all boats, with every child getting a solid start in life; and
   * to get the balance right on the big challenges around climate change, energy security and water scarcity. 
I'll be talking more about these goals in coming weeks.  I'll be spelling out policies to secure them.  And I'll be reminding my fellow Australians that all our goals and hopes for the future - as individuals or families; as communities or as a nation - rest on keeping our economy strong and competitive.
It's no accident that today our economy is experiencing the longest economic expansion in our history.  Or that unemployment has now been below 5 per cent for 17 consecutive months.  Or that Australia's trillion dollar economy has clawed its way back up the international economic league ladder.
But we are entering new territory.  Australia can move further forward, but it's not inevitable.  The challenge is to keep the economy growing with full employment while keeping inflation and interest rates low.  
Our willingness to go the extra mile on economic reform is crucial.  
I take the old fashioned view that someone who wants to be Prime Minister should have worked out beforehand some core economic convictions.  I defy anyone to identify Mr Rudd's.  Leadership is about more than printing some t-shirts and calling yourself an economic conservative.
A strong, secure and united Australia
Nowhere is the need for strong leadership more vital than in securing and defending the nation - my first goal and the first duty of government.
My government is committed to protecting the national interest and ensuring Australia remains an anchor of peace, stability and prosperity in a turbulent world.  Equally important, we must remain a cohesive and united society in an era when national security begins at home.
A strong, secure and united Australia is a nation engaged in the world and at ease with itself in the 21st Century. 
In 2007, Australia confronts a mix of old and new security challenges.  Globalisation means the range and number of events affecting our security and prosperity will continue to grow.  
Shifting power relations will bear heavily on our security environment.  Islamist terrorism will remain a threat to Australia and her interests in the next decade.
Under a future Coalition Government, Australia will stay on the front foot to ensure threats to our security are met before they reach our shores.
This year's Budget provided $22 billion for defence.  Our commitment to increase annual defence spending by 3 per cent in real terms out to 2016 will guarantee Australia's leading-edge military capability in the next decade.
A clear strategic vision for the Australian Army - lacking under Labor's old defence doctrine - has been a signature commitment of this Government.  Our initial $6 billion investment in an Enhanced Land Force means we now have a larger, better protected, more mobile and harder-hitting army.  Our recent decision to acquire new amphibious ships and air warfare destroyers means the Army will be able to be deployed more readily.  
In August last year, I announced an increase in the Army from six to eight battalions.  Strong recruitment means that we are well advanced to forming the first of these two battalions.  Today I can announce that the 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 104secs)
Later today I will deliver the fourth of the Australia Rising speeches focussing on the nation's future and the need for us all to continue aiming higher.  
Much has been achieved in the past 11-and-a-half years, but the Australian people are entitled to know our plans for the future.
I will use today's speech to outline the Government's goals for a fifth term in office.
One of the issues I will touch on is the relationship between different levels of government in our country.
So much of the debate about Commonwealth-State relations concerns the respective roles of the two levels of government as if an appropriate balance between the two were an end in itself.
That is the wrong approach. We should be focussed on outcomes, not systems.
We should be neither centralists, nor believers in states' rights.
We should be aspirational nationalists.
We should want and aspire to achieve the best possible outcomes for Australians wherever they might live and through whatever method of governance which will best deliver those outcomes.
Sometimes that will involve leaving things entirely to the states. Sometimes it will involve carefully put together cooperative federalism. On other occasions it will require the Commonwealth bypassing the states altogether and dealing directly with local communities. 
My near universal experience of regularly travelling this great country of ours in the past decade has been that local communities want good services and good outcomes. 
They care little as to which level of government delivers them as long as they are delivered. That inherent pragmatism of the Australian people should be a clear signpost to all governments.   
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 104secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 100secs)
Labor's dishonest double game with the Australian public is on display again.
Labor's shadow treasurer Wayne Swan - who would manage Australia's one trillion dollar economy in a Kevin Rudd-Union Government - attacked the Coalition for its post-Budget expenditure when appearing on the ABC Insiders program.
While Mr Swan fails to acknowledge that Labor's own post-Budget commitments exceed $4.6 billion, the weekend attack raises an obvious question.
If Mr Rudd has now decided to oppose the Government's commitments, which of them will be axed if Labor wins Government?
The Government has, for example, set aside $1.8 billion for disability support services, $627 million for climate change programs, $629 million for new drugs to deal with macular degeneration and just over half a billion dollars for the national indigenous emergency.
There have been outlays on important water projects, school chaplaincy services and even money for the Red Cross Blood Bank.  
Will one or all of these important initiatives be axed?
Mr Rudd and Labor cannot simply attack the Government's initiatives without setting out which programs would be cut.
The reality is that Mr Rudd and Mr Swan would not dismantle any of these initiatives.
They would have the Australian public believe they oppose the aggregate of the Government's spending, but this is a cynical deception because they have offered specific support for the individual programs.
If Kevin Rudd and Labor believe they are ready to govern they should take the Australian people into their confidence and start telling the truth about their policies and positions.
The Australian people deserve nothing less.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 100secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 100secs)
Labor's dishonest double game with the Australian public is on display again.
Labor's shadow treasurer Wayne Swan - who would manage Australia's one trillion dollar economy in a Kevin Rudd-Union Government - attacked the Coalition for its post-Budget expenditure when appearing on the ABC Insiders program.
While Mr Swan fails to acknowledge that Labor's own post-Budget commitments exceed $4.6 billion, the weekend attack raises an obvious question.
If Mr Rudd has now decided to oppose the Government's commitments, which of them will be axed if Labor wins Government?
The Government has, for example, set aside $1.8 billion for disability support services, $627 million for climate change programs, $629 million for new drugs to deal with macular degeneration and just over half a billion dollars for the national indigenous emergency.
There have been outlays on important water projects, school chaplaincy services and even money for the Red Cross Blood Bank.  
Will one or all of these important initiatives be axed?
Mr Rudd and Labor cannot simply attack the Government's initiatives without setting out which programs would be cut.
The reality is that Mr Rudd and Mr Swan would not dismantle any of these initiatives.
They would have the Australian public believe they oppose the aggregate of the Government's spending, but this is a cynical deception because they have offered specific support for the individual programs.
If Kevin Rudd and Labor believe they are ready to govern they should take the Australian people into their confidence and start telling the truth about their policies and positions.
The Australian people deserve nothing less.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.91Mb - 100secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Frank for your very warm welcome and before I address the subject of my speech, can I say on behalf of many people what a wonderful contribution you personally have made to a greater understanding of foreign policy and strategic issues in Australia. It's yet another demonstration of the wonderful exemplar of Australian citizenship that you and your family represent Frank. I do welcome this opportunity to outline the Government's priorities for APEC. It is, the largest, in terms of clout if I can put it that way, by far international gathering that Australia has hosted in her history. 
APEC economies account for more than half of global GDP and nearly half of world trade.  And around 70 per cent of Australia's total trade is with the other 20 APEC economies. Eight of our top 10 trading partners are within APEC.
Shared prosperity in APEC helps underpin jobs, living standards and security for Australians.  And as economic and political power moves inexorably from the Atlantic to the Pacific in the 21st Century, APEC will become even more important to our country.
Australia's role in the development of APEC is very well-known to all of you.  And as well as showcasing Australia to the region, the Sydney meeting provides us with a fresh opportunity to shape APEC's agenda and ambitions as it approaches its 18th birthday.  
But before turning to my specific objectives for APEC 2007, I'd like to touch very briefly on the broader question of APEC's role and its value in an uncertain world. There is a common view that the only global institutions are the ones that matter and which are based on international treaties.
Yet to approach global politics from this singular frame of reference is in my view very mistaken. It also misunderstands the aspirations of many APEC economies.  Especially in this region, more flexible, less legalistic processes are often better equipped for achieving concerted action on certain issues, at certain times.
There is no reason why different approaches cannot reinforce and complement each other.  A good example is trade.  Australia, like other countries, has a major interest in strong, multilateral rules in the World Trade Organisation.  A good outcome from Doha is still our highest trade priority.  But this does not mean we should ignore less structured forms of economic cooperation.
Indeed APEC has long been a useful forum for economies making voluntary undertakings, short of binding commitments.  APEC provided a context for China to undertake important liberalisation in the 1990s, prior to its entry into the World Trade Organisation.
The sheer diversity of different economies in APEC means that it works best by not trying to turn itself into a rigid negotiating forum.  We should avoid the mindset where 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.84Mb - 120secs)
My Government has been a strong supporter of Australia's welfare and charity groups.
They have made and continue to make an immeasurable contribution to the well-being of many Australians - particularly the less fortunate in our community. They often catch those falling between the cracks in our society.
Their practical understanding of life's challenges and the adversity confronting some Australians is unrivalled and that is why the Coalition continues to nurture and encourage these vital groups.
We have not only provided substantial financial assistance and tax concessions but the Government has directly involved charities and welfare groups in important social policy programs.  
The successful Family Relationship Centres and the Job Network program are good examples of major programs where the contribution of welfare organisations has helped deliver a better service.
The telephone counselling service Lifeline is also an important element of the Government's commitment to Australians in need.   Lifeline was established in 1963 by the late Reverend Dr Sir Alan Walker after he received a call by a distressed man who three days later took his own life. Soon after Sir Alan launched a crisis line which has expanded into a national service answering more than 500,000 calls a year.  Later today I will announce a new Government commitment to Lifeline Australia, helping the organisation answer more calls than it ever has before. The new funding will also help Lifeline as it starts to explore new ways of providing counselling using the web and text messaging.   I would also like to take this opportunity to encourage the community to continue to support Lifeline. Sometimes we take organisations like Lifeline for granted, but we should never do so.
Like any charity or not-for-profit organisation, they face the continuous challenge of needing financial and volunteer support to sustain their important services. I applaud their work, they have saved countless lives.
[ends]  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.84Mb - 120secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Dawn, Mr Tony Eviston, the Chairman of Lifeline Australia, ladies and gentlemen.  Lifeline is a great Australian institution.  I remember as a young person when it was founded by the late Alan Walker when he was Superintendent of the Central Methodist Mission in Sydney, at the time it was regarded as a revolutionary concept, the idea that people in distress would pick up the phone and ring somebody and ask for advice over the phone.  
We look back on it now and we wonder why anybody regarded it at the time as being unusual or revolutionary such has been the change in attitudes to communications and such has been, I suppose, the falling away of the inhibitions and barriers that prevented people then and still prevent people from sharing their difficult emotional circumstances and their tragic family and personal circumstances with total strangers.  I think it's a wonderful organisation and I'm really proud on behalf of the Commonwealth Government to announce today that we're going to provide $8.2 million funding over four years to help Lifeline cover the technical costs of answering the growing number of calls that they receive.
Lifeline now operates from 60 locations nationally and it's also operating overseas in many countries.  Now there are more than 10,000 volunteers, 4000 of whom work as trained volunteer telephone counsellors and somewhere in Australia there is a new call to Lifeline every minute.  It has saved countless lives. The counsellors have persuaded hundreds, indeed thousands of Australians over the 41 years of Lifeline's existence to think of an alternative other than taking their own life and that is a wonderful thing.  
There are 30 calls each day from people who are contemplating suicide and there are three people each day who are at imminent risk of suicide. And the human contribution that people make overwhelmingly as volunteers to prevent people carrying through those desperate intentions is something that we as a society should be profoundly indebted for.  
What this funding is going to do is to cover the day to day operational and technical costs of Lifeline's new national call system which is currently being implemented and it will mean that calls will first of all go to their nearest local centre but if they are busy the call will be answered by the next available telephone counsellor within Australia. And the whole idea is that all the calls that are made can desirably be taken.
This Government funding will assist this new technology. I do want to make it clear that this Government funding is not designed to replace other funding. Lifeline deeply values the sponsorship and support that it receives from the private sector and I would ask the private sector to go on supporting at the existing and hopefully an even larger degree into the future. But the Government takes the view that this service is so fundamental and so important a service to the Australian community that it should be supported in this fashion.
I have taken a strong personal interest in the operations of Lifeline over the years and I want to make it very clear on behalf of the Government that this is a vital human service to the Australian community and we would be a poorer community without it. It needs help, it will continue to get Federal Government assistance and I hope that the announcement that I have made today is a demonstration of that. 
I want to record again my admiration for people in Lifeline, to pay tribute to the vision of the late Alan Walker in founding it and to thank the staff of Lifeline and all the volunteers. I know on a personal basis a number of people who volunteer their time to work as Lifeline counsellors. They derive enormous personal satisfaction from it and I think it is a wonderful example of Australian volunteerism and a magnificent organisation that does a great deal to help people with profound difficulties, people who aren't as fortunate as the rest of us who have loving and supporting relationships through our families. 
And it's a reminder that there are a lot of people in our community who don't have that, and it's through no fault of their own. They're alone, they need help, and to think that they can pick up the phone and get someone on the end of it who will give them a bit of hope is a magnificent thing and the value of that, not only in saving lives but in transforming lives, is enormous.  And I hope today's announcement will help that wonderful cause. I wish it well and I thank you for the privilege of being here.
[ends]  


E&amp;OE...
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to inform you that arising out of the first Leaders Retreat, leaders of the APEC economies have endorsed, and I am releasing simultaneously with this announcement, the Sydney Declaration dealing with climate change and energy matters. We all recognise that meeting energy needs and development priorities, while addressing climate change, represents a major international challenge. I'm pleased to report that in the Sydney Declaration the leaders have moved to forge a new international consensus. We are serious about addressing in a sensible way, compatible with our different economic needs, the great challenge of climate change.
Each of us comes to the APEC table with different perspectives, reflecting both our diversity and our strengths, and yet in the Sydney Declaration we have agreed on three very important and quite specific things. Firstly, the need for a long term aspirational, global, emissions reduction goal, and that is enshrined in the Sydney Declaration.
Secondly, the need for all nations, no matter what their stage of development, to contribute according to their own capacities and their own circumstances to reducing greenhouse gases.
Thirdly, we have agreed on specific APEC goals on energy intensity and forestry and we've also agreed on the important role of clean coal technologies. This demonstrates the relevance of APEC, it demonstrates that APEC is very much alive and kicking, it does illustrate again the strength in consensus based diversity, and informal meetings and this Declaration does transcend a number of international divisions, in particular I note, that is the first such gathering which has included both the United States and China in coming together regarding the aspirational goal.
This meeting will add to the momentum which will be continued at the meeting being convened by President Bush in Washington, at the end of this month of major economies, to deal with climate change issues and also the very important United Nations meeting which is to take place in Bali in December, which will be hosted by Indonesia. The Sydney Declaration has been adopted. I thank leaders of the APEC economies. It's a very important milestone in the march towards a sensible international agreement on climate change, which recognises the need to make progress, but also recognises that different economies bring different perspectives to addressing the challenge of climate change.
I will be issuing a Leaders Declaration tomorrow, and will as I've already indicated, be conducting a full scale press conference at the conclusion of the APEC Meeting. And I'm releasing simultaneously with this statement a detailed outline of the Sydney Declaration and the Declaration itself. Thank you.
[ends] 


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.65Mb - 108secs)
The horse flu outbreak has had a devastating impact on horse dependent industries in New South Wales and Queensland - with Sydney's Spring Carnival scrapped, racing halted in Queensland and equestrian events on hold in both states.
My Government has been working closely with the industry to ensure that the people it supports - the vast bulk of whom earn modest incomes and work very hard - are supported during this difficult time.
This started with an initial $4 million assistance package which was increased by a further $110 million yesterday in recognition of the seriousness of the horse flu outbreak.
The new financial package includes business assistance grants of up to $5000, income support payments for workers who have lost their job or much of their income and special payments for those who have horses that usually compete or work but cannot due to quarantine restrictions.
A public inquiry into the cause of the horse flu outbreak has been announced and Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran will remain in close contact with the horse racing and horse-dependent industries to ensure the Australian Government is doing all it can to support this important industry.
It is disappointing that the New South Wales and Queensland Governments - who derive many millions of dollars from the horse racing industry - have so far refused to provide any meaningful help to those affected by horse flu.
The Federal Government's strong financial position enables it to provide generous assistance to industries affected by natural disasters. It is a dividend of our strong national economy.
I would hope that in the coming days the New South Wales and Queensland Governments are able to provide assistance packages of their own.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.65Mb - 108secs)


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much.  Major General Bill Crews, and I congratulate you Bill on your re-election as national president of the RSL, you've done a great job representing this magnificent Australian organisation.  The Leader of the Opposition, Mr Kevin Rudd, Bruce Billson, the Minister for Veterans Affairs, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm delighted to have the opportunity again of briefly addressing this dinner of the national congress of the RSL to pay tribute to the way in which the league continues to represent the interests of returned men and women in this country, the way in which the league advocates persistently for their welfare and also the extraordinary interest that the league takes in affairs that are important not only to the welfare of veterans but also to the long term security and defence needs of this nation. And before saying a few words about some particular benefits that the Government has decided to revise, I do want to just take a moment of your time to say something of the incredible contribution that the men and women of the Australian Defence Force are making in various theatres around the world. 
One of the great privileges that comes the way of a Prime Minister of this great country of ours is the opportunity to visit the men and women of our defence forces in their various locations of duty. And this year I've had the chance to visit our forces in Iraq, in Afghanistan and very recently in East Timor and I'm always humbled, and there's no better way of describing it, by the remarkable sense of dedication of compassion and humanity and also, of course, that endearing and enduring Australian sense of humour.  Better than I believe the forces of any nation, and apologies to our visitors, we mean no offence, can I say Australians combine a fierce capacity to fight when that is needed with a great ability to work with a local population in a country where they may be on active service. And I've not forgotten the experience I had in Afghanistan earlier this year where not only did I learn about what our forces were doing militarily but I was also shown their wonderful work in teaching the local population the rudiments of the electricity trade and developing through that activity a wonderful bond with the local population.  We as a nation should be proud of our modern diggers.  We should be proud of the work they've done, we should admire their service and I know all in this room will do that. It's been a very strong commitment of my Government, I'm very proud that in the time I've been Prime Minister expenditure on defence in this country has risen by no less than 47 per cent in real terms, that's after allowing for inflation, over and above inflation, and we remain committed to regular increases in defence expenditure of at least three per cent a year through to 2016. 
I'm also happy to report that we have made a very good start in raising the two new battalions for the Australian Army that I announced some months ago. And notwithstanding the fact that we are living in a time of record, well not record low unemployment but the lowest for the past 33 years, notwithstanding that because of a revision upwards in the benefits and conditions of employment of our service people we are doing very well in recent months on the recruiting front. And the recent innovation of the introduction of a gap year allowing young Australians to sample for a year as far as possible on the same terms and conditions of the full time regular services what service life is like with the hope that they might through that decide to make a longer term commitment, the early indications are that that innovation has been a remarkable success and it will make a very important contribution to recruitment.  I think you will be aware of a number of the changes that this government has made in recent years, the extension of the gold card eligibility, the enhancements of that were announced by Bruce Billson at your congress in Perth some two years ago.  I announced recently the world first study into the intergenerational affects of war service, particularly Vietnam, hoping to learn from the experiences of more than 200,000 parents and children, and in the last Budget we provided $50 and $25 a fortnight increases in the special and intermediate rate pensions respectively from July 2007.  
But there are a couple of other announcements I want to make tonight.  I want to assure you that the Government will continue to maintain to the fullest extent a separate, independent Department of Veterans' Affairs.  We regard that as indispensable to providing the services that veterans are legitimately and properly entitled and the Veterans' Affairs network offices will continue to operate across Australia.  Can I also announce that with effect from March of 2008 all Veterans' Affairs disability pensions will be indexed with reference to both consumer price index and male total average weekly earnings and this enhancement will benefit some 140,000 disability pensioners including those on the special rate, intermediate rate and extreme disablement adjustment.  We also intend with effect from the same date a $15 fortnightly increase to the more than 13,500 veterans who receive the above general rate of the extreme disablement adjustment and that will maintain the equity of the EDA payment with other above general rate payments that were increased in the Budget. And also the Government will increase by 5 per cent the entire general rate table for non economic loss compensation for the pain, suffering and loss of function resulting from an accepted service-related condition with effect from March 2008 and that will deliver above and 100 per cent general rate recipients, including EDA veterans, a fortnightly boost of $20 from March 2008, adjusted by the more beneficial indexation method.  The initiatives announced tonight involve an additional expenditure of some $330 million from March 2008 through to June 2012.  They represent a further earnest of the Government's ongoing commitment to the proper support and care of veterans in the Australian community.  Could I also indicate that my Minister, Bruce Billson, about whom I will say something in a moment, will be addressing the annual congress of the Australian War Widows Guild in a fortnight's time and at that meeting he will be saying something about benefits for Australian war widows.  
Ladies and gentlemen, it is important that the veterans' community have ongoing, intensive contact with the Commonwealth Government.  I'm always as Prime Minister available, ready and keen to maintain that direct contact with your president and I've had the opportunity in recent years of having a number of gatherings with your president and the state presidents of the various braches of the RSL throughout Australia but on a more regular basis the commitment of the Veterans' Affairs Minister is very important to the links between your organisation and the Government of the Commonwealth.  I want to thank Bruce as the Minister for Veterans' Affairs in recent times,  I want to thank him for his industry, his energy and his indefatigable commitment to the cause of veterans in Australia.  I can assure you that your organisation has no keener advocate or supporter within the councils of the Government than it has in Bruce Billson and I warmly record my thanks to him.
My friends, let me conclude by placing on record my immense admiration through all of you to the men and women of Australia who in so many cases, far too many cases, laid down their lives to defend this country and to give us the wonderful life that we now have.  Those generations of Australians who benefited from their sacrifice can never repay the debt that they owe them and to you who continue to represent their cause in a general way and act as a great organisation, not only concerned about the welfare of your members and properly so, but also concerned to ensure that fairness and justice prevails for people who've served this country.  And also I want to thank you for the warm interest you continue to take in matters relating to national security and defence.  The first obligation of any government is the defence of this nation.  The armed forces of this country have been required to carry heavy burdens in recent years and as a result we have significantly increased our provision for defence and are continuing to build up our armed forces. And that is properly so because the world in which we live is challenging.  The security we have is precious, but it's a security that can never be taken for granted.  You meet, of course, on the sixth anniversary of the terrorist attack on New York and Washington in 2001. The enemy we confront in the war on terror is a different enemy from the enemy that you in this room fought against in World War II or in Korea or Vietnam or in the Middle East or elsewhere.  That was a vicious enemy, a dangerous enemy and an enemy that was ultimately overcome.  Terrorism represents a different kind of threat.  You don't have declarations of war, you don't have armies rolling across borders as used to be the case but you nonetheless face and we all face an insidious threat from terrorism and it's a struggle which is designed to destroy the values, the threat of terrorism is designed to destroy the values that all of us hold so dear. And the struggle in which our forces are engaged in different parts of the world, in Iraq, in Afghanistan and other places against terrorism is a struggle that is important and just as crucial to our future as other struggles have been
My friends, thank you for the honour of asking me to come to your national congress.  I wish the league well, I thank all of you for your contribution to Australia and the wonderful contribution the league makes in representing the cause of the returned men and women of our nation.  Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.98Mb - 64secs)
Good morning,
Australia is experiencing the longest unbroken period of economic expansion in its history.
There are more people in work than ever before and business - both big and small - remain optimistic about the future.
While not everyone is enjoying the benefits of our current prosperity, the economic outlook is very positive. 
The International Monetary Fund yesterday handed down a special report on the Australian economy describing it amongst the very best in the world.
Despite this, I believe we can do better.
I believe that Australia can have a full-employment economy - where anyone who wants a job and is able to work -  has a job.
And not just any job, but one that leads to a lasting career.
The Labor Party - by reversing the Government's workplace reforms - would make a full-employment economy an unattainable goal.
Their plan to abolish laws that encourage small business to take on more staff would have a damaging impact on the job market and lead to higher unemployment.
The Coalition has a plan to maintain Australia's prosperity - Labor has a plan to wreck it.  
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   0.98Mb - 64secs)


E&amp;OE...
Ladies and gentlemen, my colleague and friend Tony Abbott and I are here today to make a very important announcement about providing further choice and an additional pathway for Australians who want to become nurses. Can I start by thanking the management and staff of the St George Private Hospital for allowing us to come here to make this important announcement and to take the opportunity of saying that both of us regard providing good health services in this country as being a partnership between the public and the private hospital systems. We don't see public and private medicine as being in competition but we see public and private medicine being in partnership to provide good health outcomes for all Australians. And I salute the contribution that the private hospital sector is making to providing good health outcomes for Australia. 
Can I also say that with all of the criticisms people from time to time make about our health system, the Australian health system is still better than any health system anywhere else in the world and we should never lose sight of that reality; and it is greatly sustained by the men and women, the nurses, the doctors, the administrators and the other paramedics who are so important to it.
But this announcement I have today represents the provision for the future of a new stream of training and opportunity and choice for people who want to become nurses. We are desperately short of nurses and we need to provide new opportunities for people, practical, on the ground opportunities for people, so that that shortage can be addressed. 
I stress that the announcement I make today in no way represents any withdrawal of Federal Government support for the training of nurses through the university stream, and I will come back to that matter later. It represents an additional opportunity for people to become nurses.
What we are going to do is to provide $170 million over a period of five years to create 25 Australian Hospital Nursing Schools and essentially what that means is that the Federal Government will fund individual hospitals, either public or private, we'll adopt the same approach irrespective of whether it is a public or a private hospital; for them to provide training facilities within the hospitals themselves for people training to become enrolled nurses. 
And that will mean that the people who want to train to become enrolled nurses will go straight into on-the-job, practical training from the very time they show a desire to become a nurse. It will be available for any young Australian who has completed year 10, that is essentially from 16 years onwards. The Commonwealth Government will provide by way of financial support to the participating hospitals the money provided to help the hospital establish the infrastructure either by turning an existing facility into effectively a lecture or classroom, or perhaps in certain cases adding an additional building to provide the training.
We will fund four full-time clinical training staff at the participating hospitals, in other words, we will fully pay for four people who will assist with the training of the trainee nurses from the moment they enter the hospital. In addition, for the first three months of a trainee's time at a hospital, the Federal Government will provide funding by way of a wage subsidy of $500 a week, recognising that in the early months of somebody working in a hospital without any previous experience of a hospital, some subsidy is necessary. And that will be for a period of three months so that people during that initial period of time can be supported in their decision to take on the trainees.
We're going to provide a $1,500 commencement bonus for each person who decides to be a trainee in this system to become an enrolled nurse, and a $2,500 completion bonus per student paid to each hospital nursing school. And then we'll have the, plus the direct payments to the students, and these are a tax free bonus of $2,000 after the first six months and a further tax free bonus of $3,000 on completion. 
Now the whole aim of this scheme is to provide an additional choice stream opportunity for people to become nurses. It is not designed in any way to undermine the existing university system. It is to provide an add-on, an extra opportunity, a different way, a way in which people can immediately, if when they leave school they say I want to be a nurse, they can go straight into a hospital through this stream and be supported immediately. And they'll get the training, and what the participating hospitals will do is to enter into a training arrangement with a training provider and that can be a TAFE college, it can be a private provider, it can even be a university, and they will provide the training for the diploma or advanced level diploma courses and they're expected to take about 18 months. And nothing will stop a person who might enter this at the age of 16 or 17 completing the course and then, of course, going on to do other qualifications. But the beauty of this is that people can go straight into a hospital and get some practical on the ground experience and get it over an intensive period of time and if they then decide well I don't want to be a nurse after all, well they don't. But on the other hand, they will get a taste very early of what it is like, and some of the experience with the existing system is that the retention rates are not quite as high as they might be. But it's adding another stream. I saw one report in the paper that said it was going to replace the university system, that's not right. It's not replacing anything. It is an additional opportunity. 
And I think it is a very practical response to the shortage of nurses, and I have lost count of the number of people who have sort of buttonholed me as I have gone around the country, I go to the morning teas all over the country, I was bailed up in Western Australia recently by a lady who had been in the nursing profession all her life, she said why don't you go back to having nurses full time trained at hospitals? So I listened very carefully to what she had to say. Now this is not everything that she recommended to me, but gee, I think she'd be pretty close. I think I have still got her name and address somewhere, in Western Australia. I think I'll send her a copy of my press release. But it is one of these cases where I think we made a bit of a mistake in moving away entirely from the option of having immediate on the job training and on the job experience. And just as we made a few mistakes with technical education some years ago I think we probably made a bit of a mistake. 
But this is an extra stream, it in no way is designed to undermine the existing university system and could I just point out to you that since 2005 my Government has provided support for 3,700 additional nursing training places at universities and that's going to grow to 10,000 by the year 2012. So in no way are we going to withdraw any support for that. But I think this is a beaut addition. It will I am sure be very popular because it provides and immediate opportunity for people to get on the job experience and training. And it is, I stress, available for both public and private hospitals. It's a matter for the state governments to decide whether any public hospitals are involved. I hope they do because we're not discriminating, we want to provide these 25 to start with, my suspicion is that they will be very popular and we'll end up providing more than 25 as time goes by because I think this is an option a lot of people will pick up. 
But that's it ladies and gentlemen. My friend here might want to add something to it. But I'm quite enthusiastic about this, I've been thinking about it for some time and it's a practical plan for the future of nursing. It gives people immediate opportunities, additional opportunities and greater choice and that's what I think will be attractive about it. Tony.
ABBOTT:
Well thanks very much PM and also I'd like to thank the hospital, the management and particularly the staff for making themselves available and giving us the opportunity to make this important announcement here at St George. You know nurses are the heart of our health system, certainly they're the heart of our hospital system and we wouldn't have the great health system that we do have in this country without the 200,000 nurses who make it work. Now we do have some problems at the moment. Not enough people want to stay in nursing and part of the difficulty is that there aren't enough nurses who want to be nurses, and that's what this course is about. It's for nurses who really want to be nurses. You'll be in the nursing world from day one of your course and everyday of your course will be in a hospital surrounded by other nurses. So it's traditional in one sense but it will be the most modern training in good hospitals, well rewarded and resourced thanks to the Commonwealth Government. So I'm really pleased to be part of this and like the Prime Minister I've certainly had any number of people say to me over the last four years, it's very, very important that you get our nurse trainees back in to the hospitals and that's what this is all about.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard can we just ask you, what sort of consultation was there with the nursing profession before this plan was unveiled?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well there was a lot of consultation with health professionals. There wasn't consultation with the nurses federation, but....and I'm disappointed that they've come out against it, although I noticed that the AMA has expressed its support and also the private hospitals have expressed their support. But I believe there's been quite a lot of consultation over time with people involved in the medical profession and I think those consultations have indicated that there's quite strong support.
JOURNALIST:
This is not something that the nursing profession itself has been asking for is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well individual nurses have. When you talk about the nursing profession I think you can only be talking about the nurses federation, the union, well they don't always talk for all nurses, any more than any other union talks for all its members and as I think you know there are issues in just relying entirely on what a union says about the attitude of people working in an area and there are plenty of individual nurses and many health professionals over the years that I've spoken to who have expressed very strong support for this. So when I talk about consultation...I'm talking about the, union, but as for the broader profession, yes, there has been and there has been a lot of support expressed.
JOURNALIST:
Prime Minister after all the issues of the last couple of days, speculation, you've often talked about setting out a direction for the country, that's one of your goals for the way forward, this is one of those key planks is it?
PRIME MINISTER:
Well this is very much a practical way forward for nursing in this country. This is a way of providing a new choice for people who want to be nurses. It's a proposal that's been in contemplation and germination for some time and it seems to me that the proposal that I've outlined, it adds an option. See I talk often about a full employment society in this country, and I think full employment is within our reach over the next three years, but when I talk about full employment I don't mean people, just everybody who wants a job getting a job, but it's everybody who wants a job getting a job of their choice. And the great thing about this is that if somebody in the last years of being at school decides they want to be a nurse, the great thing about this is that they can start being a nurse from day one and at the same time get training on the job, and get good support from the very beginning, good financial support to undertake and to exercise that choice, they don't have to spend a large number of years without that immediate on the job experience. I'm not saying that under the existing university system you don't have some on the job training, but it's a lot less than what is contemplated by this. Now that might suit some people, and that's good and we're not going to touch that, but this will suit other people and we're introducing it as an option. And I would regard the number of options that are now available through this as being very, very effective.
JOURNALIST:
Mr Howard looking at your own job prospects, are you happy with your personal approval rating at the moment?
PRIME MINISTER:
Look I haven't come here to talk about me, I've come here to talk about nurses and the health system.
JOURNALIST:
Do you think your constituents understand the commitment that you're offering to them for the next term?
PRIME MINISTER:
I think they do, particularly those who understand the commitment I've delivered over the last three years. But I'm quite happy to talk about other issues a bit later after we've had a cup of tea because I'd like to talk to the folk here for a minute, thanks. 
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Father Monkerud, Mrs Hingerty, the Major of Ryde, the President of the Parents and Friends Association of St Charles and my fellow Australians.  I simply want in opening this spring fair to pay tribute to the extraordinary contribution of the St Charles community to the strength of the Catholic faith in this area.  The contribution over that 150 years that successive members of this parish have made to the spiritual life of the community and also take the opportunity of paying tribute to the strength of the Catholic education system here in Ryde in 2007 and looking back at the strength of that contribution over 150 years.  
This is a community that I've had quite a bit of contact with over the years and I've shared a number of very important occasions with you and I'm delighted to have the opportunity of being here to open your spring fair.  You certainly attract a large number of people and that is an illustration of the strength and the vibrancy of the community and this parish represents the modern face of Ryde.  It represents people of many different ethnic and cultural backgrounds but united as Australians and united as people committed to the influence of the Christian faith and the importance of parents having the right to educate their children according to the choice which is always been a cornerstone of my personal beliefs in relation to education. 
I admire the strength and resilience of the Catholic education system, it hasn't been easy over the years and I'm delighted that as the years have gone by it's been possible for governments to give more and more assistance because the education that your children receive according to your choice of faith is very important in the exercising of your rights as Australians. 
I want to pay tribute to you Father and all the teachers here.  Could I say to all the children, after your parents there are no more important people in your lives than your teachers.  I know on occasions you may not think that but please believe me, it is true, and what you learn at school, what you are taught, the values you imbibe from your teachers are absolutely priceless as the years have gone by and I guess like any other parent I'm very grateful for the quality of education that my children received in both the public and private systems of Sydney and I'm, I want to take this opportunity of commending the principal and commending all the teachers of this wonderful school for the guidance and the education they give to their children.
And finally what a beautiful Australian spring day this is.  It's a great day to be alive, it's a great day to give thanks for that and it's a great day to share this extraordinary privilege that we all have of living in the most wonderful country in the world and that of course is Australia and in that spirit and with those good wishes I have great pleasure in declaring this fete open.  I hope it's a huge success, thank you.


E&amp;OE...
Hello,
Eating well and exercising regularly is important for all Australians and especially for children.
Up to a quarter of kids aged between 7 and 15 are considered to be overweight or obese and this makes them more likely to get sick as they get older.
Australia's top science agency - the CSIRO - has developed a quick an easy guide for healthy eating and living for kids.
It recommends water rather than sugary drinks for thirsty kids, plenty of fruit, vegetables and wholegrains and healthy snacks like an apple over chips and lollies. 
Children should be encouraged to get out and about - they should be active for at least an hour a day and every morning should start with a healthy breakfast. 
It's good advice.
Later today I'll be promoting the CSIRO's new guide which sets out 10 easy steps to follow.
It's part of the government's range of measures to tackle childhood obesity. 
Working together, we can all help our kids have a better life.   
Thanks.  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.06Mb - 134secs)
As the drought continues to bite, the plight of Australia's rural communities remains at the forefront of the Government's mind.
Last week I announced a significant extension of drought assistance funding, lifting the Government's overall level of support for rural and regional areas since 2001 to more than $2.8 billion.
Without a strong economy, of course, this kind of vital relief for our iconic and economically important farm sector would not be possible. And because our Budget remains in such a strong position, the Government is able to look at further help.
Tomorrow the Government will be examining what more can be done for drought afflicted regions.
We are mindful that a significant percentage of Australia's current crops are expected to fail in the coming weeks and that many farmers have taken out extra loans and signed forward contracts on a harvest that may not eventuate.
Feed levels for grazing stock are also dwindling and the outlook remains bleak. Water inflows into storages in the Murray-Darling Basin are worse than at this time last year, affecting both the horticultural and livestock industries.
I can assure everyone in rural and regional Australia that drought assistance like income support, interest rate subsidies, counselling services, special taxation measures and small business help will remain in place for as long as it is needed.
Last week I foreshadowed a liberalisation of both the off-farm income test and the off-farm assets test for drought assistance and the Cabinet will be examining the extent of the relaxation tomorrow.
The Government has received representations from the National Farmers' Federation and individual farmers arguing that these tests are too restrictive given the harshness and prolonged nature of the drought.
I want all farmers and regional communities to know that the Government is determined to help them get through the drought and that there are other relief and support proposals that will also be considered tomorrow.
The current drought is a national crisis and my Government will do all it can to help rural and regional Australia get through this extremely difficult time.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.06Mb - 134secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Anthony, my other parliamentary colleague Greg Smith, the local mayors, I thank all of them for coming, Sue Hoopmann, Ivan Petch, Nick Berman, ladies and gentlemen.  This morning brings together a gathering of people who represent and are part of the life and the varied community of the electorate of Bennelong. And I want to thank the Ryde-Eastwood Leagues Club for the venue that's been provided and the opportunity we have to gather and to exchange some views.  What I'd like to do this morning after a few words about what I believe in about the future of this country, I want to do something a little different.  Rather than spending half an hour talking to you I would like to invite you to ask me questions about issues that you think are important not only to the way the country is being run at the present time but also important to the way in which the country should be run in the future.  
I know there is a lot of debate, and it's proper that there should be, about where we have come from over the last decade and Anthony was good enough and accurate enough in his inimitable style to outline some of the changes for the better that have occurred over the last decade. But my very strong view ladies and gentlemen is that Australia's best years lie ahead of her, that no matter how strong you may think Australia is at the present time, no matter how favourably we might compare Australia with the Australia of a decade or 20 years ago, the truth is that if we get things right, if we consolidate the gains that we have made, if at a time of some gathering of storm clouds on the international economic horizon we leave Australia's economy in strong and experienced hands and we don't experiment with people who've had no experience of running a trillion dollar economy, that there is no reason why Australia's best years do not lie before us. And that is my very, very strong view.
And we should be thinking about that future.  We can reflect with some pride on the achievements of the last 10 years but we should spend more time reflecting on what is needed to make the next 10 years even better than the last 10 years and that, of course, is the role that...the responsibility that this government has and it means communicating to the Australian people a sense of belief about the kind of Australian nation we want. We want an Australian nation that is proud of its history, we want an Australian nation that believes in itself and believes, as it is, that it's unique amongst the family of nations.  There is no country like Australia anywhere in the world because it's got everything. It's got a great heritage from Western civilisation, it's here in the Asian-Pacific region of the world which is the most dynamic and fastest growing. By the year 2025 there will be 800 million middle class citizens in this part of the world and the economic centre of gravity of the world is shifting to our part of the globe. And we have strong links, of course, with the most powerful nation in the world, the United States. And over the last decade we have managed the remarkable achievement of having built simultaneously closer relations with both the United States and with China. People said you couldn't do that. People said there was a natural conflict. Well there is, in fact, as we have demonstrated, no natural conflict and that we have been able to work very, very closely with both of those two very significant nations. 
And of course here in Bennelong you see played out the reality of modern Australia. You see a diverse community, a wonderful contribution made by every section of the community and so many of those organisations are represented here today. So I have a great sense of enthusiasm and excitement about the next 10 years in this country. And they can be better than the last 10 years. We can have an even lower rate of unemployment. We can have even stronger businesses. We can simultaneously, if we take the right decisions, we can have a cleaner environment, but not at the cost of a weaker economy. Those two things ought never to be in conflict. We should always seek to reconcile both of them. And the last thing that I want to say about this gathering this morning is that it demonstrates the tremendous sense of community that is so important in all parts of Australia. I look around this room, I see people I have known for years, I see a lot of people who I haven't met before and I am very pleased that they have come along. But represented in this auditorium are all the organisations that make the community of Bennelong operate and work together so very, very effectively.
So my friends, welcome this morning. It's very, very good of you to all come.  I want to keep quiet now. I want to thank you and I want to invite you to ask me any questions you want. If you want to give me some advice, free or otherwise, I don't mind. If you've got a bit of advice you want to give me about running the country, you please go right ahead and give it to me because nobody has a monopoly of wisdom here and we've got a great cross section of the Australian community and we've got some roving microphones and I'll be very, very happy to do my best to answer your questions. Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
Well thank you very much Stewart, Bev McArthur, to the Leader of the Opposition Ted Baillieu, my fellow Australians.  I'm a little disappointed the crowd here is not quite as big as it is Kardinia Park but I think that's very, very understandable and I have of course gone for the double of Manly and Geelong.  Manly in the rugby league if you sort of remember that other code and Geelong of course in the AFL but it'll be a wonderful thing for the people of Geelong and I understand it will be the first time in what, 44 years which will be a wonderful thing for the people of this district and I think I could understand a lot of Victorians feeling that it's about time the flag came back to the state of Victoria.  Today I just want to say a couple of things to you before throwing the meeting open to anybody who wants to ask me questions.  I find these sorts of gatherings are most productive when people have an opportunity of questioning me and putting points of view, giving me any advice, friendly or otherwise they want to provide but I'd like first and foremost to ask you to endorse and support when the election comes around and it will be sometime between now and early December, when it comes around I'd like you to emphatically re-endorse and re-elect Stewart McArthur as your wonderful, energetic, hardworking member for Corangamite.
I was reading the Melbourne Age this morning, and I know some people recommend against that but I was reading the Melbourne Age this morning and I came across a remarkable story.  It was a story about an interview conducted by the Melbourne Age with Mr Kim Beazley, the former leader of the opposition and now retiring from parliament and he was predicting that we were going to lose, I mean there's nothing surprising about that, you'd expect him to predict that, but buried in the article was this remarkable statement which sort of drove home to me one of the problems the Labor Party has with the major political debate at the present time and buried in this interview was a statement by Mr Beazley when he said the current climate in Australia is just like it was in 1996.  He said the economy is terrific now and he said it was terrific in 1996 and I thought to myself, they just don't really get it.  In 1996 the Australian unemployment rate was 8.5 per cent.  The accumulated national debt was $96 billion.  We were paying about $6 billion a year then to service that debt.  We inherited an Australian economy which was weakened by the recession we had to have and we inherited a dispirited mood in the Australian community and you compare that with now and you find a vast difference.  You find a nation that is confident, that is hopeful, that is sure of itself, that believes in itself and believes overwhelmingly that the nation is headed in the right direction and the decision that the Australian people will make at the coming election is of course a decision about the future. It is not a decision about the past. And I believe very strongly that this country's best years lie ahead of it. We may have done well over the last decade, we may think that our nation is strong and prosperous, but if we get a number of things right, there is no reason why we can't over the next ten years, have a nation that genuinely provides a full employment economy. And a full employment economy is an economy where every person who wants a job, can get a job. 
That we can have a nation that provides an education system built on two principles, the principles of excellence and choice. Putting more resources into education is important, but making sure that the quality of the education provided by our schools and our universities is even more important. That we can have a health system that not only places an emphasis on caring for people who have ill health but places a greater emphasis on preventing the ill health in the first place.  That we can have a defence system that provides appropriate protection for Australia and an appropriate capacity in conjunction with our allies to act in this country's interests in other parts of the world. And I am exceptionally proud of the fact that defence spending now in 2007, after allowing for inflation, is 47 per cent higher than what it was in 1996 and that we have the resources and the capacity to establish two additional battalions for the Australian Army.  And that we can have an approach to the environment that balances the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to preserve our scarce water resources with the imperative to maintain the strength and the direction of our economic growth. We don't want an approach to environment that stunts our growth. We don't want an approach to growth that ignores the importance of caring for our environment.
Over the past couple of weeks there have been a number of announcements made that have greatly affected the Corangamite electorate, that have been of importance to the Corangamite electorate. There was the announcement made by the Treasurer last Friday of $14 million for the upgrade of Skill Stadium at Kardinia Park. And yesterday some $400,000 was announced towards after hours GP services at Lorne, Port Lonsdale and Winchelsea.  And today, I am pleased to announce that some $240,000 will be made available for 8 Enviro Fund projects. And they include some $45,000 for the creation of wildlife corridors in the East Otways, $33,000 for the revegetation of Bells Beach Reserve and $14,000 for the protection of native vegetation at Lorne.  Now you may well say, and quite properly, 


E&amp;OE...
Thank you very much Your Excellency, the Governor, the Premier of Victoria, the Premier of South Australia, the Lord Mayor of Melbourne, Mr Graham Duff, the Leader of the Opposition, my fellow Australians.  This breakfast, which has to be the biggest football breakfast anywhere in the world, is a celebration of a number of things; it's a celebration of the importance of sport in the life of our nation.  It's a reminder of the fantastic national cement that sport really represents.  It does bring together people of otherwise diverse backgrounds and diverse views, and it's a tremendous annual reminder of how much sport means to us, and how much sport has contributed to the building of this wonderful nation of ours.  It's also more specifically a great tribute to the people of Melbourne.  I think this is the only city in Australia that could put on a breakfast that brings together such an enormous gathering of people.  I say that as a life-long resident of Sydney, I pay tribute to the great capacity and the great cohesion of the City of Melbourne, to get behind things and to do things in a civic way, in a quite remarkable fashion. 
It's also of course, a great tribute to the one indigenous football game that we in play in Australia - Australian Rules. And the way in which over the last 20 years or so it's gone right across the nation from its traditional support base in the southern states; And I know that there is many a Victorian heart, understandably, wanting to see the return of the trophy after this afternoon's game to Victoria, But the fact that for the past few years it's gone to another state is a reminder of the great success of Australian Rules, and the great success of the way in which the game has been run, and an extraordinary tribute to the capacity of the players and the coaches. 
I think there is another thing about this afternoon's game; it's a reminder of the importance of tribalism in the following sporting teams.  I have said that I hope Geelong win, I think it would be wonderful, if after 44 years, the City of Geelong could have a premiership again.  And there is nothing quite like the feeling of local patriotism and tribalism in a provincial city around a sporting team, and I know just how much this will mean to the people of Geelong; they've had a few ups and downs over the last little while, and I know how much it will mean to them.  But to all of you, thank you for displaying once again, that great Australian spirit, that great love of sport that is so tremendously important to all of us, whatever our football code may be and whatever our other sporting passions might be. 
Could I just say one other thing to you, ladies and gentlemen, and that is that over the years the Australian bush has produced some wonderful Australian Rules footballers. Wonderful players for all the clubs around Australia, and I think it's therefore appropriate at the moment when our fellow Australians in the bush are going through such a difficult time to remember their contribution to this nation; to think about them; to stand shoulder-to-shoulder to them at a time of tremendous tribulation.  I salute the players, and the coaches, and the administrators of the great Australian football game.  Long may they prosper and represent their best values of our nation.  Thank you. 
[ends]


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.11Mb - 138secs)
A skilled workforce is vital if Australia is to maintain its current prosperity into the future. Workers with the right training and technical ability are critical to the future of our economy. 
My Government has overseen a genuine revolution in skills and vocational training. We have provided more than $22 billion for skills and $12 billion to the states and territories for TAFE and vocational training since we came to office.
We have set about restoring the place of technical skills training in Australia, in doing so we are reversing one of the biggest mistakes this country has made - the devaluation of the status of a technical qualification.
While we have invested heavily over the years, our skills revolution is still a work in progress. Over the next four years, we have plans to spend a record $11.4 billion on vocational and technical training.
 Our future plans include funding for 28 Australian Technical Colleges, subsidies and grants for apprentices and cash vouchers to help people obtain new qualifications.
It will help to further restore the role of the traditional trades into the future.
Today I am pleased to announce that the Government is rolling back another outdated impediment to a better skilled Australia.
Arrangements initiated through COAG have been finalised to allow electrical contractors to now move or work interstate using their current state-issued licenses.
Prior to this, electricians were required to obtain a new license if they wanted to work outside their home state.
That was an absurd 19th century system that had no place in 21st Century Australia.
  To support the new arrangement, the Government has developed a website to help trades men and women check to see if they are able to work in another state or territory. You can look it up at licencerecognition.gov.au.
The Coalition Government is able to invest heavily in skills because our economy is strong and our Budget is healthy. It is another example of the human dividend of our prosperity for the future benefit of all Australians.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.11Mb - 138secs)


E&amp;OE...
Well Kay I want to thank you very, very warmly for that welcome and can I also acknowledge the presence of my other parliamentary colleagues, Mal Brough the Minister for Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, my parliamentary colleagues in Margaret May and David Jull; I hope my future parliamentary colleagues in Wendy Creighton and Stuart Robert; and very particularly I acknowledge the presence of Adrian Ford, the CEO of Autism Spectrum Australia, Mr Bob Buckley, Autism Aspergers advocacy group and representatives of many autism groups around Australia and particularly from the Gold Coast and from the Brisbane area. 
I am taking this opportunity this morning along with a number of my colleagues around Australia simultaneously to announce a major policy initiative in relation to autism. It has been developed over a period of time. It has been developed after discussion with a lot of groups, a lot of parents, a lot of people who have an understanding of the autism condition; who have had first hand experience and I have been reminded of that this morning, in my discussion with parents, the challenges that are involved. And this is a range of policies which we believe will make over time a difference. 
We don't pretend that it's the one and only response. We acknowledge that more can always be done and will be done but it does address in a very direct way after a lot of discussion and based on the knowledge that we have accumulated, the principal challenges in this area. And I want to thank Mal in particular, and my other two Ministers involved in it, Tony Abbott, the Minister for Health and Julie Bishop, the Minister for Education, both of whom as I speak are also involved in similar forums in other parts of Australia.
This group more than any would understand what autism is all about. I don't think the rest of the community though understands that it affects one in every 160 children aged between six and 12. It represents over 10,000 children in this age group and probably more than 20,000 children in the age range of 0 to 12, although many of those will not yet have been effectively diagnosed.
The number of children diagnosed has increased quite dramatically over the last 10 to 15 years and it's fair to say that our understanding of this problem is much greater now than what it was even five years ago and certainly 10 or 20 years ago. You all know the stress that autism can cause, the sibling difficulties, the family breakdown, the marriage breakdown, all of the stresses and strains that are placed upon the parents of children with autism and there are some major gaps in the community services that are provided for people with autism.
I think you also know that it doesn't respond to any one intervention. You can't have a one size fits all. You can't say well this is the policy that will fix autism. You really have to have a whole range of policies because the degree, the intensity of the condition varies enormously and you need some very, very graduated responses. 
Above all, early intervention is critical. All of the research tells us that early intervention is absolutely fundamental. I want to say before I announce the details of our plan, I want to say that we will continue to work very, very closely with advocacy groups and with health professionals. And I want to acknowledge before I announce the details of it that it's not a complete answer and I am not representing that it's a complete answer or that it's the final word, but it is a carefully thought through significant beginning in tackling the problem.
The policy has five elements. The first of those; and we'll hand out all sorts of documents and everything so you'll know all about it, but the first of those is the introduction of new Medicare-funded services to diagnose autism spectrum disorders and to provide follow-up services. And that will increase the early and accurate diagnosis of autism. It will support the development of treatment plans by paediatricians and child psychiatrists. It will open up access to allied health services including speech pathology and occupational therapy to enable children's development needs to be addressed and it will provide, under this category of service, it will provide health services for up to 8,000 children in the first year and 3,000 in subsequent years.
Now the second component of the plan and by far the largest is in the introduction of early intervention services for approximately 15,000 families of young children aged up to six years who are diagnosed with autism. This will allow the creation of 200 new autism specific playgroups for 8,000 children with autism to encourage learning and development. And that playgroup interaction is so important because there is a sharing of the burden and a sharing of the experiences and a sharing of the responses.  And we all know from our experience, whatever it may be with our children, that interaction through groups, and in this case playgroups, is so tremendously important. 
It will also involve intensive and structured programs for up to two years for up to 4,000 eligible children with moderate to severe autism. You all know that there are gradations for autism from the not-very-severe to the moderate to very severe. This plan has been graduated to deal with those particular levels.
Moving on and moving further up the scale, so to speak, there will be subsidies of up to $20,000 over two years per child, $20,000 over two years per child, for intensive early intervention from approved centres for up to 1,200 children with severe autism. Now that is at the top of the scale of intervention recognising that children with severe autism need very intensive moving to one-on-one responses and that, of course, requires, on a per-head basis, a much larger financial commitment.
There will also be 20 new childhood autism advisers to help families find the best services available to meet the particular needs of their child and there will be funding for autism groups to help them support families.
Now the third element of the plan is training and support for parents of young children with autism. I sometimes think the expression training is a little patronising and I apologise to the parents for using it. I think we should just say extra support. I think it is others who need the training rather than the parents. This will involve education support services and a website to help families and carers better cope with and undertaking early intervention activities.
Fourthly, we'll have workshops and information sessions for parents with school age children with autism. Now that can be a further element of help and also, and I realise the great relevance of this in some of my discussions with parents a few moments ago, professional development courses for 1,800 teachers over four years to improve learning outcomes for school age children with autism.
Now all of that amounts to an expenditure of some $190 to $200 million over a period of two* years. Of course, I mean,  there's money involved in everything but it's the scope, I hope, of the plan that will be seen as positive as much as the allocation of the money.
I just want to go back to what I said at the beginning. I don't pretend that I don't represent to you, and neither will the Minister, that this is all that a Government can do and that this is going to solve the problem and it's going to meet all of the unmet need, I am not arguing that for a moment. But what I am arguing is that it touches what we are advised after a lot of consultation are the important bases. It recognises the critical importance of early intervention. It recognises the critical importance of helping people who interact with children with autism more effectively. It recognises the tremendous value of group sharing of the burden and the challenge and that is why we have this emphasis on developing the specific playgroups.  I think to have 200 of them catering for about 8,000 children, that will be a wonderful medium, a vehicle through which people can share the burden and in that process develop greater insights and greater understanding; and it has been put together after a lot of discussion. 
We have learnt a lot more about autism. One of the great things about modern Australia, I know it gets criticised by some, unfairly, but one of the great things about modern Australia is that we talk more directly and openly about challenges such as autism and we're more candid and frank and upfront and in the process, those of us who haven't had the experience with our own children get to understand in a more direct way, the enormous challenge that people have in relation to this. 
My heart, as a man, as an individual, as a father, as a grandfather now, really does go out to the parents and I have known many who have to grapple with this. I admire their love and their compassion and their stoicism and they need recognition. They also need help. They need advice but we also need their advice. So this package I hope will go a significant way towards meeting some of the immediate needs but, and it is targeted it is directed in areas that we regard as hugely important. 
You'll understand my saying this, but it is important, thank heaven we're in a financial position as a nation to do this. Thank heavens our economy is strong enough that we can afford it. And I want to say that this is not the end. It is a significant and important and meaningful beginning and I want to wish those involved, the parents, all the best that I can of good fortune. I admire you very greatly, you are wonderful people and you deserve every last drop of assistance that comes out of this policy and out of this package and can I echo the expressions of thanks that Kay expressed to the community centre for allowing us to use it for this very important policy launch.
Thank you.
*5 years  [ends]  


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.07Mb - 135secs)
One of the most important challenges facing any government is to provide jobs for as many people as possible.
When my Government came to office in 1996, the economy was recovering from a devastating recession and the number of people out of work was stubbornly high.
In March 1996 there were 45 electorates with double-digit unemployment - some had a jobless rate in excess of 16 per cent. Only seven seats had an unemployment rate below four per cent.
Now there are more Australians in jobs than ever before.
New figures show there are no longer any electorates in Australia with a jobless rate higher than 10 per cent, not a single one. Just as significantly, the number of seats with unemployment at four per cent or lower is 59. 
These fantastic figures and the current 33-year low in Australia's national  unemployment rate represent one of my Government's proudest achievements. It is not just about statistics as, more importantly, each new job helps offer stability and opportunity for individual Australian families.
But I believe more can be done.
I want Australia to become a full employment economy where anyone who wants a job and is able to work, has a meaningful job that leads to a lasting career.
The upcoming federal election will be a referendum on which party is best equipped to achieve this goal.
When last in government, the Labor Party had a shameful record on unemployment that included a period when one million Australians were out of work. It is reminder that when Labor pronounces its concern for working families, it is nothing more than slick public relations spin.
They should be judged on their record and their lack of any plan to keep producing jobs and careers for Australians.
Labor's promise to abolish laws that encourage small business to take on staff and their plan to re-insert unions into workplaces will drive up unemployment. The human reality is that more Australians will be out of a job. It is a clear demonstration that Labor has learnt nothing about economic management during its time in Opposition.
The Coalition has a plan to maintain Australia's prosperity, keep producing more jobs and preserve the current low unemployment rate. Labor has no plan to keep the economy strong.
[ends]
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   2.07Mb - 135secs)


E&amp;OE...
PRIME MINISTER:
Ladies and gentlemen on behalf of the entire nation I want to say how saddened I am by the news of the death of an Australian solider in Afghanistan. We send our love and sympathy to his family. We know it is a time of great grief for them and we offer our prayers and our support to them and to the other loved ones of this soldier. It's a reminder to all of us that the men and women of the ADF who go overseas in our name put their lives on the line to preserve our way of life. 
The operation in Afghanistan involves resisting brutal terrorism, it's a just cause and this soldier was part of an Australian contribution to that just cause. But that in no way lessens the loss and the bereavement and the grief that would be felt by his mates in his unit, other members of the Australian Army and the broader Australian Defence Force family. It's a close knit family, they look after their own, they care for their fellow soldiers and sailors and airmen and at a time like this the solidarity that they all feel towards each other will be very strong. 
The Chief of the Defence Force has outlined the brief circumstances and I won't add to what he said. The family has requested that the details not be made known at this time and that wish must naturally be respected. Another soldier was seriously injured but the injuries were not life threatening and he is being well cared for. As to arrangements regarding the repatriation of the body and the like, that is being handled by the Defence Force and it will answer details concerning it. But can I simply say again this is a sad day for the Australian Army, it's a sad day for the Australian community. Somebody who loses his or her life on service for our country is owed a special respect and a special debt of gratitude that can never be fully repaid. Thank you.
[ends]   


E&amp;OE...
PRIME MINISTER:
Ladies and gentlemen on behalf of the entire nation I want to say how saddened I am by the news of the death of an Australian solider in Afghanistan. We send our love and sympathy to his family. We know it is a time of great grief for them and we offer our prayers and our support to them and to the other loved ones of this soldier. It's a reminder to all of us that the men and women of the ADF who go overseas in our name put their lives on the line to preserve our way of life. 
The operation in Afghanistan involves resisting brutal terrorism, it's a just cause and this soldier was part of an Australian contribution to that just cause. But that in no way lessens the loss and the bereavement and the grief that would be felt by his mates in his unit, other members of the Australian Army and the broader Australian Defence Force family. It's a close knit family, they look after their own, they care for their fellow soldiers and sailors and airmen and at a time like this the solidarity that they all feel towards each other will be very strong. 
The Chief of the Defence Force has outlined the brief circumstances and I won't add to what he said. The family has requested that the details not be made known at this time and that wish must naturally be respected. Another soldier was seriously injured but the injuries were not life threatening and he is being well cared for. As to arrangements regarding the repatriation of the body and the like, that is being handled by the Defence Force and it will answer details concerning it. But can I simply say again this is a sad day for the Australian Army, it's a sad day for the Australian community. Somebody who loses his or her life on service for our country is owed a special respect and a special debt of gratitude that can never be fully repaid. Thank you.
[ends]   


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.34Mb - 87secs)
Good morning,
Providing jobs for as many people as possible is one of the most important challenges for any government; and governments should be judged on their capacity to create the right economic environment for job creation.
Yesterday's unemployment rate - a 33 year low at 4.2 per cent - is hard evidence that my government is doing just that.
2.2 million jobs have been created since 1996 and more than 430,000 people have found work since our workplace reforms were introduced last year.
There are more Australians working than ever before and their wages after inflation are also rising. Working families and individuals are enjoying the stability and confidence that comes with employment.
It's good news, but more can be done. My goal is for Australia to become a full employment economy where anyone who wants a job and is able to work, has a meaningful career.
When last in government, the Labor Party had a shameful record on unemployment that included one million Australians out of work. 
The Coalition has a plan to maintain Australia's prosperity, keep producing more jobs and preserve the current low unemployment rate. Labor has no plan to keep the economy strong.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.34Mb - 87secs)


E&amp;OE...
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.34Mb - 87secs)
Good morning,
Providing jobs for as many people as possible is one of the most important challenges for any government; and governments should be judged on their capacity to create the right economic environment for job creation.
Yesterday's unemployment rate - a 33 year low at 4.2 per cent - is hard evidence that my government is doing just that.
2.2 million jobs have been created since 1996 and more than 430,000 people have found work since our workplace reforms were introduced last year.
There are more Australians working than ever before and their wages after inflation are also rising. Working families and individuals are enjoying the stability and confidence that comes with employment.
It's good news, but more can be done. My goal is for Australia to become a full employment economy where anyone who wants a job and is able to work, has a meaningful career.
When last in government, the Labor Party had a shameful record on unemployment that included one million Australians out of work. 
The Coalition has a plan to maintain Australia's prosperity, keep producing more jobs and preserve the current low unemployment rate. Labor has no plan to keep the economy strong.
  Listen to this Speech (MP3 -   1.34Mb - 87secs)


